TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, PAUL KEATING, INTERVIEW WITH JANA WENDT ( A CURRENT AFFAIR) 20 JAN 1991
E&amp; OE
PROOF C: OPY
JW: One month ago Paul Keating snatched from Bob Hawke the job he had always wanted, Prime Minister of Australia. But for the 1 million people who can't find work because of the recession Keating engineered it was an ironic achievement. The man they loved to hate promised to always tell Australians the truth and do his bes&nbsp;t to boost employment. But in his first opinion poll, Paul Keating got the thumbs down with only 25 per cent of: voters approving of his leadership. The worst honeymoon ever for an incoming Prime Minister. I spoke to Paul&nbsp;Keating as he settled into his new home at the Lodge in Canberra.
JW: Mr Keating thank you very much for joining us.
PM: It is a pleasure Jana.
JW: The phrase ' Prime Minister Keating' still comes with difficulty from my lips, have you come to grips with the title?
PM: No, not really I don't think, no. But titles never mattered really, its the task which come with them. So you really don't listen to the titles.
JW: The night you won the Caucus vote, you looked if not overwhelmed then certainly humbled by what had happened to you.
PM: Yes, I felt humbled about it I must say. I think that it is a very big issue of trust any party puts in as leader.
JW: But in the lead up to that Caucus vote, whatever else background to it all was, you must have said " soon, soon this will be mine". When it finally happened what went through your mind?
PM: Well it was a bit of an anti-climax I think. It's the truth, I mean when it finally happened it was a bit of an anti-climax because it had been on my mind for a number of years and I thought it was coming my way anyway by virtue of the arrangements I had made with Bob earlier.
JW: You were privy to a deal, a private deal in the past, which was withheld from the rest of us, can you say now honestly, that there are no private deals in operation?
PM: Oh yes, no private deals anywhere I am happy to say.
JW: Anywhere at all?
PM: Well, certainly not about positions and leadership and all those sorts of things, no.
JW: What about then, if not about those? PM: Well, I have lost my faith in them, if nothing else.
JW: Because you were dudded on the first one.
PM: Exactly.
JW: Since you became Prime Minister it seems that your style has been noticeably subdued. Is there a reason for that?
PM: Well, I&nbsp;used to carry a lot of the fight in the House of Representatives and what people always assumed was my style was the evening T. V. news and the segments out of the Parliamentary Question Time.
JW: But the bits where you call the Opposition "mangy maggots", I mean are they the things that you are proud of now..
PM: But I only said that once in 22 years.
JW: But it was memorable wasn't it?
PM: I know these things you can never, they never drop away but I did say it once in 22 years. Well it depends what they were up to at the time. They weren't always on their best behaviour. But I
JW: And neither were you?
PM Well, I've often not been on my best behaviour.
JW: But you are telling me that there is no degree of relish in what you do there, in what you did there?
PM: No, I did not relish it, no. When I was younger I used to, when I was in the ' 70s I used to regard it as sport.
JW: Do you think that it's true that people perhaps Australians particularly, spot a phony a mile off?
PM: Absolutely, in a fog 3 miles off. JW: So, would you agree that refashioning yourself, restyling yourself could be dangerous in terms of the Australian public?
PM: But I will not restyle myself or refashion myself that's the point. I mean I don't think one should be into cosmetic packaging of oneself. I just think it is terribly phony and useless. So I will be as I am.
JW: I mention this whole issue of remaking because in some people's eyes during that six months on the backbench, you wer7e prepared to refashion yourself, even sell yourself to people who could help you to the top job. How do you respond to that?
PM: Oh a little bit, but you do have to say to yourself, are there segments of the Labor movement or segments of the society I have passed over a bit, and should I be listening a bit more to them?
JW: Like members of the extreme industrial Left in Victoria?
PM: Well, I always had the Left with me, the industrial Left by and large in the 8 years I was Treasurer. I had a lot of loyalty from the Industrial Left.
JW: But we saw&nbsp;you during that period sidling up to Wally Curren for instance, one of the most hardline members of the industrial Left, a war-horse if you like, comfortable with that?
PM: Well I think that I can only take him as I found him and that was
JW: But you had known about him. For years you knew his speed didn't you?
PM: Yes but his speed he has been faithful to the people he has represented.
JW: Sure, but let. me&nbsp;put&nbsp;it&nbsp;to&nbsp;you that in the past you would not have helped Wally Curren out of a fire if you fell over him.
PM: Oh no that's not true, it is just that he never particularly came my way.
JW: But are you telling me that I am making an illegitimate point?
PM: Well semi-illegitimate. To put it nicely and kindly, semi-illegitimate.
JW: It's not meant to be nice and kind it really in some terms it was seen that you failed a significant test of your political morality.
PM: Oh no I don't think, I rejected it entirely. I mean it's not a test of my political knowledge for me to be talking to trade unions on the Left. I did it all my life.
JW: What promises did you make to the Left in return for their delivery of their votes?
PM: No promises at all because I never got any votes from them, other than the people who wanted to vote for me.
JW: Well did you promise anyone from the Left that Brian Howe would retain his position despite the fact that he'd bungled his attack on the Opposition's GST?
PM: No.
JW: Did you promise to abolish his Medicare co-payment fee?
PM: I said I would examine it, but I did not promise the Left that.
JW: Well they say you did.
PM: Well I don't think so. No, there were other people who had spoken to me about it, like from the Centre Left.
JW: to whom you promised?
PM: Rosemary Crowley and people like that, but not a Victorian Left if you know what I mean. Basically, let's make this very simple, the Victorian Left, the organisation from their cell delivered me no votes, not one.
JW: On the night of your victory, you pledged honesty to the Australian people, can you honestly say that your supporters, your proxys, did not wage a debilitating campaign against Bob Hawke in those six months that you were in the backbench?
PM: No. I think that after I was defeated in that ballot and I was up in my backbench room, Bob had lightly seen me off a lot. If he could have changed the Government's stance in the face of changing events, he'd still be Prime Minister. I am only back because basically the events overwhelmed them?
JW: You are saying that Hawke failed as Prime Minister in that period?
PM: Well I think, let me put it this way, that had he been doing his best for himself, it would have been to be more alert to what was happening in the economy in general&nbsp;and society and more dextrous than in fact I think in the end he was. I mean, in the end the GST, came along and it was the straw that broke the camel. s back.
JW: So he was asleep on the job, is what you're saying?
PM: Well it meant that while ever there wasn't the view, there was an effective counter to it, the Party was saying, should we go somewhere else, I mean that's what I am saying was the practical reasons why this changed not because of any campaign. Look, at one stage I called this thing right off for real. In a sense I was sort o: E brought back, and I was brought back because the view in the Party was that they were not going to make it.
JW: Because Of the weakness in the Government at the time?
PM: Becauset Of the Government's apparent failure to be as relevant as it should be.
JW: Apparent and real in your view.
PM: Real in my view, apparent outside. All I'm saying, if it was a show that had any real horsepower they would not have had to worry about me. I would of remained in room 101 up in the backbench. I was only sort of brought: back because it had basically run out of puff.
JW: Alright: but there is still a perception, I wonder do you agree, that you ruthlessly killed, in a political sense, Labor's most successful Prime Minister.
PM: No it is not true, it is just not true.
JW: But obviously there is a whole lot of people who are listening to you now saying " come on, come on he instigated a campaign, he thrived on it, he encouraged it, now he's got the top job". There is a lot of bloodshed.
PM: Not a lot of bloodshed that's the truth, I mean the truth of the matter not much bloodshed at all. From what we've seen, from&nbsp;what&nbsp;I've seen, 22 years, it was a relatively smooth change of power inside a party that knows all about power.
JW: Here we are at the end of this struggle, however you describe it between two men, and we have a Prime Minister with a popularity rating of Billy McMahon in his bad days. Do you deserve the job?
PM: Well, the incumbent was within a stroke of having the same popularity. But in the view I think of the Caucus not the capacity to turn the thing around.
JW: So in terms of public opinion you are just about as unimpressive as each other?
PM: Well, I don't think that either one of us would deny the fact that we were, have been governing Australia in difficult times, and the difficult times impact very, very, very much on the leader. It impacted on Bob and it impacted on me.
JW: Bob Hawke said recently that part of the qualities of leadership or one of the qualities of leadership is to give Ministers free reign. That is not quite the way you see it?
PM: Well I profoundly disagree with that, you see. This is where Bob and I have a totally different view. Bob's view was the essence of leadership, he said, was to let others lead, while I think the essence of leadership is for the leader to strike out and make the opinions, make -the decisions, the directions and take the responsibility. I just think it is the antithesis of leadership to invite others to lead for you. It worked for Bob because others made it work and I just profoundly disagree with that view of leadership. It is a no risk view.
JW: Given that's your view, tell me honestly how much respect: you had for his alternative approach?
PM: Well it worked for him.
JW: Did it work for you?
PM: It wouldn't have worked for me, I don't think. It wouldn't have worked for me but by any measure Bob was a good leader of the Party by any measure Bob was a good leader of the Labor Party.
JW: Despite the fact that his view of leadership is diametrically opposed to you?
PM: Well he was very lucky to inherit a very committed and I think conscientious and reasonably clever Cabinet, and, . I. think, that if it&nbsp;arrived at a different moment in time with a different Cabinet it would not have worked for 5 minutes.
JW: There is little doubt I think that when you resigned from the Ministry that Bob Hawke's political effectiveness was undercut, diminished. Do you think that it's possible that you too are weakened now, that you don't have the support of the second member of that double act?
PM: Well these things can't&nbsp;go on forever. We were an eight and half year old group or act, and events overhaul you. Really what was being asked of me that I should be Bob's Deputy, supporter, policy pal for a decade and a quarter, well that's just not a reasonable ask. In the end you have to say, " look fellas, I think you better get somebody else.
JW: Yes but here you are now, Ginger without Fred.
PM: No. It's very hard to make, I don't think the analogy sticks.
JW: Why not?
PM: Because Fred was at his best alone.
JW: Are you&nbsp;Fred?
PM: We'll see, we'll see. But I will be trying to be.
JW: You're Prime Minister, your family has no official title, but in a sense they are drawn into the of fice. Is there anything about that that you regret?
PM: I think that it was only my name on the ballot paper in then end And while its a fact of life that families give some indication of how you live and what your relationships are and where your loyalties are and all the rest of it, by a large we are all assessed individually and that's as it should be. So I don't really think families should be part and parcel of the purse owner.
JW: Except that your son today, I noticed, has a full page spread in a Sydney newspaper saying that he'Is a new pin-up.
PM: He'Is not saying it though. I have told him you know that he should understand that he got sort of people on a desk looking after page 33 of the newspaper and they have got to put a bit of nonsense there to sort of fill up the space, and that he ought to distinguish between things of value and nonsense.
JW: You said once that you did not owe the media all that much, you certainly did not owe them open heart surgery. Does that stand?
PM: Well I like the media, and I think I have been given a fair go by the media. I am not a media basher.
JW: What about the open heart surgery?
PM: I think that they are entitled to certain things but beyond that they are not. You know I am sort of pretty private about those things, I think. Whether they let



THE HON PJ. KEATING, PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
19 DECEMBER 1991
E OE PROOF ONLY
PK: Could I begin by saying that I'm very greatly honoured and more than a little nervous
at the great responsibility the Labor Party has entrusted to me tonight. -Thie first thing
I'd like to do is pay tribute to my predecessor, Bob Hawke, who has been a great
leader of the Labor Party, who has won an unequalled, unparalleled, four consecutive
election victories an electoral record I will never match, and few of us could ever
hope to match; and who, in partnership with me and our party, has changed the way
in which Australia is and the way in which it works. I speak on behalf of the whole
of the Parliamentary Labor Party today, in thanking Bob for his leadership for the way
in which he conducted himself today, with the dignity and the pluck in the House and
at his press conference; and having lead Labor to victory, he's lost a ballot in the
manner of his choosing in the Caucus of the Parliamentary Labor Party and he's
shown great credit, I believe, to himself in the way in which he's conducted himself
as Prime Minister and to the Labor Party as a Government. Could I, in my first
words as Prime Minister elect, Leader of the Labor Party elect, to you, the Australian
people, say that I want to make three commitments to them. The first is I pledge to
give everything I've got to the job and the country. The second is to deal honestly
with the people, to tell them the truth. In tough times, of course, the temptation is
always to gild the lily. I'll be resisting that temptation as much as is humanly
possible. I'll speak honestly with them, to them, and realistically, and I'll listen
accordingly. The third commitment is I pledge to fight the battle against
unemployment and for economic recovery with all of the energy I can muster. I
promise never to turn a blind eye to the suffering that some are enduring and never
to agree that it is acceptable for some Australians to be written off or sacrificed in the
so-called national interest. I want each Australian to have the opportunity to pursue
with dignity and hope a fair share of our national prosperity. So there are the three
commitments I give. In the next few weeks, I've got these important tasks. To
restore unity and harmony to the Government, because it would be futile to deny that
the recent past has been a somewhat traumatic experience for all of us. It's imperative
that we're now all pulling in the same direction, and for my part of course, need I say
there'll be no recriminations whatsoever, no raking over old ground, but only a
commitment to get on with the task of governing this country. Over the holiday
period, I will spend time talking to my colleagues and working on proposals I want
to put before the Cabinet in the early new year. I would like to start 1992 with a
cohesive and comprehensive plan to push Australia ahead. I've got a good idea
already of what should be in that plan, what should be done, but I want to tie it all
together and make sure we have it right. With that and above all that, the thing that
the Government, I and the Government, must do in the immediate period ahead is get
confidence in Australia going again, to get the country moving, to try and engender
confidence in the community, confidence in the business community, and get the
country cracking. While the economy is now much too weak and unemployment 
2
much too high, I believe we can emerge from this recession a much stronger economy
than ever before. This period gives us great opportunities and the 90s hold for
Australia very great promise, very great promise indeed. So, could I conclude on this
point, by saying that I will need the help of the Australian people, their understanding
and their patience as indeed I will need it from you. In time, I hope, that I can earn
their trust and their patience and their support both as leader of the Party and for and
on behalf of the Party and the Government. Thank you.
J: Mr Keating, do you expect a Cabinet re-shuffle?
PK: I do not believe that there should be any spill of positions in the L-abor Party. I think
it's very important for harmony that that not be so, and I'd like some time to think
about portfolio responsibilities, the Ministerial arrangements, that should obtain and
naturally, the people who should fill them.
J: What about Ralph Willis, the Treasurer?
PK: Well, that goes for everybody.
J: How can you respond to speculation that people now seek a mandate from the
Australian people and take Australia to an early election?
PK: I've never heard that speculation. I've got to give you marks for trying there, though.
J: Mr Keating, unemployment figures, what are you going to do to get their
confidence?
PK: Well, along with Bob and the Government, I spent seven and a half of my eight and
a half years trying to engender employment growth into this economy. We inherited
10.5 percent unemployment in 1983 and we brought it down sharply through the
eighties, and it's a matter of profound regret to me that that employment was
overtaken by a rise in unemployment, and the result is that there's been a substantial
level of misery in the community as a result. I want to go back to doing what we do
best, that is creating jobs and making the Australian economy grow but doing it in
a way which preserves the great gains on inflation, doing it in a way which
advantages all Australians.
J: Mr Hawke spoke a few minutes ago on the need for new directions in economi
policy. Do you think that's right?
PK: I think governments have a substantial pride in the authorship of their policies, and
we're entitled to be proud of the great change of Australia to an international country,
and all of the things which are part and parcel of it. I suppose it is probably a human
failing if nothing else that governments then spend time defending their structure,
defending their policy, and not be as alert to the shifts which they ought to be making.
I think policy dexterity and keeping alert to those shifts is going to be important. I
agree with Bob about that. But again, we're not talking about putting policy on its
head. We're not talking about taking Australia back to the closed days of the 
and 70' s. We're talking about policy which is going to make Australia fairer,
better, with more growth and more employment, but at the same time keeping that
great historic change into an international society.
J: Are you worried about blowing out the deficit and boosting interest rates? Are you
talking about massive jobs requiring a lot of money?
PK: Part of the framework of my views were sketched out in a speech I made at the
Collingwood Football Club a month or two ago, and I have got a framework in my
mind, but I'd like to put that to the Cabinet and the Caucus. I think that's the right
place to put it. So, rather than get into any detail, that's what I'd prefer to do.
J: Mr Keating, what about the recession Australia had to have?
PK: It's one of the statements I made as Treasurer I regret, because it did not reflect the
Government's policy, and it was a statement which seemed too uncaring at the time.
The Government was never after a recession. Policy was only about a slowdown.
You remember at the time, we were spending twice what we were producing. The
economy had to be slowed and I had the job as Treasurer, of inducing that slowdown.
We never wanted a recession. It's a pity that the recession we now have is deeper
than any of us would have wanted it to be, or needed it to be. So, it was a shorthand
way, on my part, of trying to describe the slowdown, but I think an inadequate one.
You can never consign Australians to the misery of unemployment, believing there's
a higher purpose to it. There can be no higher purpose, and therefore it's important
to get the economy growing again so that what we thought policy was about back then
in 1988, which was a slowdown and became a recession, quickly becomes, as quickly
as we can make it happen, a recovery.
J: Mr Keating, you spoke of feeling humble today. Have you learnt a new humility on
the backbench?
PK: I must say I think that public life is a humbling experience for anybody who has had
major responsibilities, it's a humbling experience. Can I say that I said in the Caucus
tonight, I enjoyed immensely the six months on the backbench. I found the
camaraderie, the wit, the open-mindedness, the fun of many of the people there to give
me a great charge. It's one of the nicest things that's happened to me in public life,
is having that time there. I think that as a result, I will be determined, as a leader of
the Party, to be more in touch with the Caucus than I ever was. We all commit the
sin of moving into the Cabinet processes, not consulting the Caucus enough, and
invariably we miss a step somewhere. So, it only reinforces me in my view that that
experience, which I had a very pleasant one, means that the Government must be
closer to the Caucus. Cabinet must be closer to the Caucus.
J: Did you have time to look at the GST package while you were on the backbench?
PK: I've had a look at it.
J: What do you think of it? 
4
PK: Dr Hewson has proposed what he believes is a plan for Australia. But it's the wrong
plan. It's the wrong plan. It's a plan which is about making a tenth-order issue,
about whether you tax income or expenditure, as a first-order issue, when we know,
all of us, that the first-order issues are employment, growth, investment, maintenance
of low-levels of inflation, further production, change in the workplace, enterprise
bargaining, national economic efficiency. T'hey are the furst-order issues. Whether
you tax income or expenditure is a tenth-order issue. What Dr Hewson has done is
said ' look, I'll take a tenth-order issue and I'll bring it up here and try and solve it as
a first-order issue'. Well, franikly, basically, his proposition amounts to no more than
a shift of income to the wealthy at the expense of the low-paid.
J: A vote of 56/ 51. Is that a strong enough base on which to rebuild harmony in the
Labor Party?
PK: I think so. I took considerable heart from both what Bob said and the tone of what
he said, and also what colleagues in the Caucus said to me, who voted for Bob. I
think so. From my part, the Caucus will not find me lacking in any goodwill towards
them. My Cabinet colleagues won't. I think we have the prospect of being a unified
force. I said in the Caucus that we can only succeed on a basis of friendship. And
basically without that friendship, we just won't get the cohesion, I think, we need to
come from a very long way back in the electoral stakes.
J: Mr Keating, why do you feel better equipped to lead Labor to the election in 1993
than Mr Hawke?
PK: Well I think, look it is the issue of generational change. I think I could say Bob and
I conducted a government which contained two leaders. And we worked as a good
team for a very long period of time. Probably a record period in Australian politics
for two people to work as closely and as effectively as we did. But, time tells. I
think it told on both of us in our work, in our relationship and I think that the need
for policy shifts, that dexterity I mentioned earlier, and generational change is
important. I think it is important for a political party to change itself. Afterall, this
is a very long period. Bob is the second longest serving prime minister by a very
large margin. It is a long time and, therefore, I think that every person who leads a
party comes to it with different views and perspectives and I believe the Australian
people are looking for both hope and direction for the 1990s and this country can be
in a very good position in the 1990s, notwithstanding the fact we've got a recession.
Notwithstanding the fact we've got a recession we can be well set up in the 1990s and
I believe I can play a role in that and that's why I believe that I will serve the Labor
Party well.
J: You've just admitted that the recession was a mistake. How can you inject confidence
in the community that you won't make another mistake as momentous as that?
PK: Well, when I say it was a mistake, it was not.., the policies we adopted were intended
only to slow the economy. It unfortunately became a recession, but there were
substantial contributing factors. Those factors now don't exist and I think that if one
looks at the record of the Government from 1983, we engendered twice as much 
growth in the Australian economy in our first seven or eight years as in the previous
seven or eight years. So, while we've certainly had a recession, there is an enormous
shift of employment and wealth there as well. So, certainly, the recession we didn't
need, but what has come in these years of change is enormous strength and change
to this economy. And I think the Labor Party and the Government can be relied upon
to continue that ambition for change.
J: Mr Keating, when can we expect you to throw the switch to vaudeville as you
promised some months ago?
PK: Well, if you'd have been here for many years, as some others were, you'd have
known I've thrown it often, often, and, I hope, well.
J: What will you be telling George Bush about U. S. trade policy? And how's your golf
swing?
PK: Well, my golf swing? That's not good. The last time it swung well was when I was
a teenager. But. I've known George Bush since 1970, and there is a lot in him that,
a lot about him where you see the good, the very good side of Americans. I'm sure
he will forgive me my golf swing. And we can discuss, when he arrives, issues of
moment, and of substance to both countries, and to the world.
ITeh money markets, Mr Keating, are expecting interest rates to come down to about
that's the 90 day rates. Is that part of your economic program ( inaudible) a sharp
cut in interest rates?
PK: No, I don't want to start speaking now about what the Government may consider. But
all options, including monetary options, would be on the table. I'd like to consider
those in the freedom and privacy of the Cabinet room, in the first instance.
J: ( inaudible) any shifts in the emphasis of the Australia/ U. S. relationship?
PK: Well, the Australian/ U. S. relationship, I think, is a longstanding one. It's been
improved, I think, by the Government, by Bob Hawke's Government, by Bob's
relationship with President Reagan and President Bush. And I can only hope that I
can maintain a relationship of the quality. I would certainly make that an ambition
of mine.
J: which suggested that you thought that Mr Hawke had been a little too subservient
to the Americans. Will you be reflecting that in anything you say ( inaudible)?
PK: No, I didn't say that. I said that, I made some reference to telephone calls. I think
that, I don't think American Presidents, not someone of George Bush's experience.
I've met him on about four or five occasions since 1970 in various jobs. I don't think
they expect any nation to do other than consider its own interests. And that's what
we must always, sensibly do. I mean, you've got James Baker, at the moment, talking
to the leaders of the former Soviet states. I mean, I'm sure, the Americans are very
wide-eyed about national interest. 
6
J: ( inaudible) next year. And more generally, ( inaudible) relationship with the
Asia/ Pacific region?
PK: Well, I think, Australia is an Asia/ Pacific nation. And, as time goes by, as we are
seeing the central focus of our trade and our foreign policy is going to be more to the
Asia/ Pacific area. This is obvious with the APEC arrangements which Australia has
championed, which have been adopted now by all the Pacific Basin countries, or most
of the Pacific Basin countries. So, therefore, I regard the Asia/ Pacific area as our area
of interest, as our backyard, as the principal focus of economic trade and foreign
policy.
J: will you be going to Jakarta?
PK: Well, I haven't thought about that.
J: Are you concerned about your unpopularity with the Australian public?
PK: Well, its a matter of what popularity is about. I think when we had some, if you like,
dissection of polls, I think there was a great discernment being shown by the public
about what they expect in leaders. They expect leaders to do things, they expect
leaders to lead, to strike out. The essence of leadership is being out there, in front,
and I think that this community has a very realistic view of their situation in the
1990' s, that they hope and expect for a decent life, and physical and economic
security. And they want governments to provide that for them, they don't want* more
than that I don't think. I mean, I think they've got reasonable expectations. And I
think if any leader can provide policies to meet those expectations, he or she will be
approved of. And I hope in providing those I could be approved of too.
J: A year ago you said Australia had never had a great leader, I presume you think that's
about to change. I just wonder what qualities of greatness you might bring to the job?
PK: Well, that's for you to make judgements about over time, isn't it. One would always
hope one could bring any quality of greatness to such a position.
J: ( inaudible) that this leadership challenge has taken place at a time the people think the
Government should have been concentrating on the recession?
PK: Well, I think we were concentrating on the essentials, its a matter of how we
concentrated on them. I wouldn't try and say that there wasn't, that the first challenge
wasn't a distraction for the Party, but a relatively short one, and the Government's
largely gone about its business. And this resolution today is a couple of weeks in the
making, but until then I don't think there has been that great a distraction. I know
that the Party will be glad that the distraction is behind it, whatever distraction there
was is behind it, and I'm glad of that too, as Bob said he was.
J: How great do you think the resentment is in the community?
PK: I can't judge that. You're a better judge of that than I am, I think. 
7
J: Would you have mounted a challenge this week if Bob Hawke hadn't made the move
he did today, for the sake of the Party?
PK: Well, Bob made the move, that's the point. Bob declared his position vacant which
was, I think, the right gesture for somebody of his statre, as a Prime Minister of
longstanding, a leader of longstanding, and in the position of that vacancy I
nominated.
J: Mr Keating you didn't attend Question Time today, why was that?
PK: Well, I don't... As Treasurer of course, I always had to attend it as a rule. I've not
been entirely punctual as a backbencher and I was less punctual today.
J: ( inaudible) embarrassing for ( inaudible)
PK: No, but I thought in the circumstances it was best I wasn't there. I think it's probably
right.
J: ( inaudible) given your position in the Parliament, I know what you've just said, and
given Mr Hawke's legendary ability as a campaigner, that Caucus has in fact taken
something of a gamble today in an electoral sense?
PK: I think they've picked up on the view in the community that the community is looking
for change. If a party says we don't think we'll give you any more change, they say,
well thank-you we don't need you anymore. And I think they, but as I said, not the
right kind of change, not the right kind of change. I think he's picked up on sentiment
but not responded to it properly, Dr Hewson, I mean.
J: So what's the right kind of change ( inaudible) You've said that there are some
decisions that you might, sort of treat a bit differently these days, having been out in
the community, you sense a different set of priorities, perhaps. I mean, do you
believe that the basic structural changes that the Government started should continue,
for example. There is a lot of resistance in the Labor movement to those changes
now.
PK: Well, the basic change is one from a closed to an open society. And I don't think
there is any dispute about that within the portals of the Labor Party. And in any
recession there will always be questioning about policy stances, but I don't think
anyone would now believe that our security could be enhanced in the way in which
it has been in a closed place. So, we can always discuss and debate how the opening
of this economy and its continuation goes into the future, its meeting the challenge of
international efficiency, you can always debate those things. But I don't think the
basic thing is being debated.
ITeh pace of change is going to be a very important issue at the next election isn't it?
PK: I've always believed that. I think if you offer the public sensible change, we have in
this country, very fortunately, a very conscientious community. 
J: When will the abolition of the Medicare co-payment occur? And have you discussed
it with Mr Howe?
PK: Well, I think most of you know my views about this. We considered it many times
when I was Treasurer, in the Expenditure Review Committee. But I will be speaking
first to the Ministers involved, and putting my views to the Cabinet, as the appropriate
place to consider the matter.
J: Are you happy for Mr Howe to remain as your Deputy?
PK: Delighted. I think we can both help each other make the Party stronger and better.
J: Mr Keating, the changes you are proposed require a mini Budget?
PK: Well, I said, I hope in 1992 to present a plan for the ongoing, a plan for change for
Australia as we go through the 1990' s. That will be obviously something of
substance, and whether you want to give it a mini Budget tag is up to you.
J: Mr Keating, Mr Hawke was planning a Cabinet meeting tomorrow to start producing
a new plan to boost employment. Will you proceed with that?
PK: No, I don't think any of the Cabinet think tomorrow would be an appropriate day to
start.
J: ( inaudible) was a couple of weeks in the making. How much responsibility do you
bear, personally, for the turbulence that has virtually crippled the Government over the
last couple of weeks
PK: Well, until a few minutes ago I haven't made a public comment since the 8th of
November. And I think I can say that if the Government had been able to respond
more fulsomely to the Opposition's consumption tax package then the likelihood of
this matter being debated before Christmas would have been remote. I can say to you
that in the last session of Parliament when it finished, my expectation was we would
go away for Christmas and we would come back here on the 25th of February. And
those events changed though, I think.
J: When do you expect the recession to end?
PK: Well, I'll be taking some advice on that, but I think it will end during 1992. But it's
not very wise of me to try and be precise about the point, or to be clever about it,
because I don't think it's easy to be clever about picking the turning points in any
economy.
J: If the Government's attack on the GST unfulsome, why didn't you help them over the
last few weeks?
PK: Well, it was up, I think, for. It's not really, I think, an acceptable argument for a
backbencher to say that in the initial phases of the presentation of such a package, and 
9
the requirement on the Government to respond to it, that I should have been out there,
if you like, putting a view. And also one without the support that comes with
Ministerial office. So, it was properly the job of the Government, of the Prime
Minister and the Treasurer, and I recognised that.
J: Do you believe that ' Fightback' has carried you to into the Prime Ministership?
PK: Its caused a debate in our Party about our direction and our leadership, which may
have led to the events of today. So what, in terms of the package.
J: The Party, under Mr Hawke, came under fairly heavy criticism for pandering to
sectional interests and lobby groups. Do you see any shift in emphasis there?
PK: Well, I think the Hawke Government, one of its hallmarks was a consensus approach
to Australian society. And it's because of that approach we were able to do many
more policy things and changes more rapidly than could ever have been undertaken
by a Government taking a confrontationist approach. In the course of those
discussions people may say we're subject to lobbying. Well, if a Government is
listening, and a Government is responsive, I don't think the public can complain about
it. I think it is a very good sign, and I think it changed the way in which Australian
politics worked.
J: Is there any other decisions such as the Medicare co-payment policy that you would
be looking to review quite soon?
PK: None that comes to mind.
J: Mr Keating, will you be asking Mr Hawke for any advice?
PK: From time to time I may well do. He made me the offer, very kindly, and I'll very
happily take it up.
J: Would you like to see him remain on the backbench?
PK: Well, it's a matter for Bob. He can remain there at his own pleasure.
J: Is he a future Governor-General?
PK: You should have asked him that. That's a question for him. Before I go, again
thank-you. I want to just conclude on this point by thanking the Parliamentary Labor
Party for supporting me today, those who did, and those who didn't. And I also thank
my wife who has supported me through these years, and through these times of
difficulty, and my family. Without that kind of support it is not possible to do a
public job like these, under this sort of pressure. Most particularly, I thank the
Australian people for having the forbearance to see the Labor Party change its
leadership, and I hope the patience to see us change owr policies, as needs be, to take
Australia to a better future in the 1990' s.
ENDS 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, PAUL KEATING, DOORSTOP
22 DECEMBER 1991
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: When will you be announcing the new Ministry?
PM: As soon as I can, but I want a chance to talk to my
colleagues and that will be afforded to me in the next few
days.
J: Do you plan big changes?
PM: There's no point in speculating about it let's just wait
and see. But between Christmas and New Year, I'd say at
the latest.
J: Who'd make the best Treasurer?
PM: Well that's something the whole Ministry will be
announced at once.
J: Will people see a return to high airfares now that Compass
has dropped out of the race, Mr Keating?
PM: I think you're going to see a competitive airline system.
I'm not sure whether the Compass targets could have been
sustained. It looks as though probably they couldn't have.
But we will see a competitive airline system, which we
never had in the old days of regulation.
J: And what about Mr Grey? He's blaming the Federal
Government.
PM: Well I think that's unfair, but our principle interest now
is the Compass passengers and their families. And we've
arranged now for, I think, another seven or eight thousand
Compass passengers to be taken up today by the two airlines
which have now chartered new capacity. Qantas is also
involved in a 767 charter, and Ansett and Australian
Airlines have chartered large aircraft from Qantas, and
we've got the Airforce's 707s on standby if we need them.
But we think that most passengers will be able to be
lifted, -and if they are taken to their destination before
the 15th of January, we pretty well guarantee they'll be
taken back at the same deep discounts.
J: Just on another issue, are you happy at the level of
pressure that Senator Evans put on the Indonesians on his
visit thiLs week? 
2
PM: Well I have got to speak to Senator Evans. I did have a
brief conversation with him the other day, and before I
comment on that I'd prefer to speak to him directly.
J: Can we expect a bit of a reshuffle at the top level of the
public service, as well as the Cabinet?
PM: I'm looking at the Departmental structures as well as the
Ministry.
J: When do we expect an economic statement?
PM: Well, that you'll have to wait for. We've got to decide
our schedule on that. Thank you.
ends. 



TRANSFORMATION OF THE SO) VIET IN
Australia has decided to recognise as independent states the
eleven co-founders of the Commonwealth of Independent
States. I know that the recent momentous events in the former Soviet
Union are cause for great celebration for many Australian
community groups as cherished dreams are, at last, realised.
Their excit~ ement and joy is shared by all Australians.
I warmly welcome the new community of nations to the
international stage. The cooperation between the newly
independent states and the peaceful and orderly transition
to the new Commonwealth is to be commended. This harmonious
beginning augurs well for the future of the Commonwealth and
its relations with the international community.
This new revolution would not have taken place without
Mikhail Gorbachev. His role in the history of the late
twentieth century has been decisive and he will undoubtedly
be seen as one of the great figures of modern times.
The people of Eastern Europe were the first to benefit from
Mr Gorbachev's reforms and to experience freedom. Now the
people of the former Soviet Union are also charting their
own social, cultural and political course.
Mr Gorbachev's foresight and courage also greatly
contributed to the world becoming a safer place for
everyone. The arms control agreements negotiated under his
presidency will greatly reduce nuclear arsenals in both east
and west. As a result, a spirit of goodwill and trust now
prevails around the globe and the hands of the doomsday
clock have been put back. I applaud Mr Gorbachev for his
role in this transformation.
I wish the leaders and people of the members of the new
Commonwealth well in the tasks ahead as they welcome this
historic new year.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Evans,
will issue a statement on the arrangements for Australian
recognition.
Canberra
4Q78December 1991 



-An
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. PAUL KEATING,
27 DECEMBER 1991
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
PM: Thank you for coming. You by now have a copy of the
press statement announcing the Ministerial arrangements and
changes. The first point I'd like to make to you is that
we've got a very experienced and intelligent group here and
each has been aligned to an area of natural expertise and
experience, so that in the places where Ministers are I
believe as a Cabinet, as a Ministry, we'll be able to hit
the ground running and not have Ministers spend six months
or so learning an entirely new area or policy. Each person
there has either had some experience, contact of, natural
association with an area of policy, and I believe it's a way
of maximising the efficiency, in an efficient way, the
natural capacities of the Ministry and the Cabinet. The
principle objective here, of course, is to promote a
recovery and to restart growth and employment as quickly as
possible. Now the key changes are:
Mr Dawkins will be Treasurer;
S Mr Willis will be the Minister for Finance;
S Mr Beazley will be the MInister for Employment,
Education and Training;
Dr Blewett will be Minister for Social Security;
Senator Richardson will be Minister for Transport
and Communications;
Mr Kerin will be Minister for Trade and Overseas
Development; Mr Griffiths will be Minister for Tourism and brought
into Cabinet; and
Senator Collins will be Minister for Shipping and
Aviation, and also brought into Cabinet. 
Now, Of cour7se, there are other consequential changes, but
they will be very evident to you as I know all you
specialist Ministry watchers will understand very quickly.
So I'd be happy to take questions at this point.
J: Mr Keat~ ing, what is it that recommends Mr Dawkins' as
Treasurer? PM: That was a very hard decision for me to make. I spent
eight and a half happy years with both Mr Willis and
Mr Dawkins, and each have their strengths. Mr Willis is a
technically very well-equipped person who has shown great
service to the Government. Mr Dawkins has been very
creative in the portfolios he has had. And it's an on
balance judgment which I made in Mr Dawkins' favour. But
I'm very pleased that Mr Willis has agreed to vest
Government writh his experience and ongoing knowledge as
Minister for Finance.
J: Mr Keating, why did you decide to take Mr Kerin from
the Cabinet?
PM: Well, it was always somewhat of an anomalous position
in the sense; that we had the Trade portfolio represented in
the Cabinet by the portfolio Minister, Senator Evans, and
formerly by Dr Blewett. That was principally to do with the
GATT Round, which is now drawing to a close, and with the
Dunkel Package the issues are now encapsulated in that
package. And as we found, whenever the issue needs to be
considered it will be considered by Senator Evans, but
naturally Mr Kerin will come to Cabinet whenever the matter
needs to be discussed. So in practical terms, it leaves him
free to take part in the balance of the Round and the bilateral
trade negotiations which are a permanent part of the
international landscape, and not to be burdened with the
other Cabinet responsibilities which don't go to this
external position.
J: Prime Minister, do you anticipate any changes to this
line-up before the election, and have you given guarantees
to Senator Button and to Mr Hand that they will retain their
positions until then?
PM: I don't have to give guarantees. Senator Button and Mr
Hand have both said they won't be contesting their positions
at the next election, but both said they wanted to continue
as Ministers in their respective roles until then, and
that's the position I'm entirely at ease with.
J: So this Ministry will stay as is until the next
election? PM: Yes, unless somebody left of their own volition.
J: There's no value in the New South Wales argument that
they should make way for new faces in the front bench? 
PM: There are two new Cabinet Ministers here, and they are
among the younger Ministers. They are Mr Griffiths and
Senator Coll~ ins. And both have very heavy and senior
responsibilities. I have, in this arrangement, created a
Department of Tourism, taking it away as a branch, or
division, of DASETT and made it into a Department and given
it Cabinet status, which befits its position as one of the
fastest growing industries in Australia, which will then be
attended to by a Minister of Cabinet rank. And for Senator
Collins, he has Shipping and Aviation and there will be an
area of grea~ ter discretion available to him than there was
as Aviation Support. And because a lot of the micro debate
is still in that area of transport and communications, and
shipping and waterfront, and aviation in particular, then I
think it is entirely apposite that he joins the Cabinet too.
So we have two younger Ministers of the Ministry joining the
Cabinet in two senior and important areas of policy.
J: Mr Keating, why was Codd moved from PM&amp; C?
PM: Well, hie wasn't moved out. That's not right. He said
look, quite forthrightly to me, I've been here for six
years. Mr Codd and I were party to the guidelines and
arrangments years ago where there was a view that after
about five years a Permanent Head's position should be
reviewed either by himself or herself or by the
Government. And he had had six years there, and the head of
the Government had changed, his Ministerial head had
changed, and I thought it was both considerate and sensitive
of him to ra~ ise it, and I thought it would be an opportunity
to make a change. But can I just record my appreciation to
Mr Codd as a most professional public servant someone who
has brought great professionalism to the Department of Prime
Minister and Cabinet, to the Cabinet Office and the
efficient working of the Cabinet system. And it is with the
Government's blessing and good graces that he resigns, but
not only that, that in doing so it appoints him to the Board
of the former Telecom and also Qantas. And I think given
the fact that he is still a relatively young man, Mr Codd
has the opportunity to make another life for himself, but
also still serving the public in those important positions,
and giving u~ s in the Government the opportunity of a further
change for the value of change in itself in the management
of this very onerous administrative area.
3: Mr Keating, could you explain why Senator Richardson
has gone to the Transport and Communications portfolio?
PM: Well it's a n area firstly that he has always liked.
It's an area. which he had in the past asked for. It's one
which, I think, given the balance of arrangements Mr Kerin
was better doing the Trade job, given the fact that he comes
to it with a natural background, particularly from the
agricultural negotiations, and the fact that agriculture is
still very much part and parcel of the debate around the
Dunkel Package and the completion of the round. And for Mr
Kerin it meant climbing over a domestic portfolio, learning
that issue, whereas Senator Richardson had had a reasonably 
long-standinrg interest in much of the subject area of
Transport anrd Communications. The other thing is, Senator
Richardson hiad completed a couple of years of Social
Security Minister, a difficult and onerous portfolio, with
distinction, as he had before that propogated the Labor
Party's policies in relation to the environment. So he has,
I think, an impressive track record and one thing he has
proven is thrat he can raise the public consciousness about a
subject, he can reform an area, and in an area where
microeconomic change will continue to need reform I thought
he was the most appropriate person to employ.
J: Mr Keating, will you be having any discussions with Mr7
Hawke about his future? Do you have any thoughts about what
you might like to see him doing?
PM: No, I haven't. I had about an hour and half with Bob a
couple of days after the leadership changed, and we were
just talking about the future together, what he might do,
and about thie country generally.
J: Prime Minister, no Queenslander is in the Cabinet Mr
Beazley, I t: hink, is taking responsibility for that State.
Will you continue that system?
PM: What I would like to do, and will do, is ask Mr
Humphreys to represent Queensland and be co-opted to the
Cabinet whenever a matter affecting Queensland is debated.
And he has ( liven me the assurance that he would be pleased
to co-operat~ e in that arrangement. And also, in the
Parliamentary Secretaries I have appointed Mr Johns also as
a Parliament~ ary Secretary from Queensland. Now,
Parliamentary Secretaries, of course, don't have Ministerial
status or the responsibilities of a Minister, but I think
where issues of material interest to Queensland arise, and
they will form time to time obviously, then Ben Humphries is
I think well. placed to represent Queensland's interests in
the Cabinet.
J: Mr Keating, do you expect now that with Mr Dawkins as
Treasurer, hie will be seeking to put in his policies, some
of things hEt's been pushing this year, such as, export and
development schemes or measures to have more influence over
the exchange rate?
PM: No. I'm sure Mr Dawkins will be as a Treasurer very
much in the tradition of the Cabinet system of Government.
That is, his: views will matter but the Cabinet views will
always matter too, as they did with me when I was Treasurer.
And some of things which Mr Dawkins has spoken of have in
one way shape or form been addressed over the last few
months, others perhaps not. But, again, he has got to make
his own decisions as Treasurer, rather than somebody from
outside the Treasury portfolio without the advice of the
Treasury abo'ut some of these subjects. But I have found him
to be a most careful, creative and competent person in
assessing issues and giving them their appropriate weight 
and responses. And I've got no reason to believe he won't
be at his best as Treasurer.
J: ( inaudible) March.
PM: Well, I can't give you anymore advice, Michelle, than I
gave you last time. It will be sometime in the early part
of the New ' Year.
J: Should Cabinet review the Coronation Hill decision?
PM: Well, this is not an agenda item for me and hasn't
been. I don't see it being a matter for review. Its not
been something to which I've addressed myself.
J: Do you believe there is any role for the Government in
the Compass affair?
PM: In terins of a corporate financial role, no, but I
thought a role in relation to the passengers and the
families of those passengers, and that's why the Government
was at pains to make sure as many people were uplifted and
taken to the~ ir holidays and returned, and that will happen.
But the future of Compass will depend upon the shareholders
and the creditors of Compass, not on the Federal Government.
J: Do you expect Mr Hawke to leave Parliament very soon?
PM: No. I think that's a matter for Bob, not for me. And
I can only repeat to you what he has said himself, that is,
he intends -to stay around until such time as he advises
otherwise. J: Mr Keating, on Sunday Dr Blewett announced the GATT
position for Australia, and said he hoped to be meeting with
President Bush. Because of his previous expertise will he
still be involved in these meetings, and also do you plan to
set any new trade agenda in Australian relationships with
America, at these meetings?
PM: Well, obviously, the GATT round is going to be
important to Australia and to the United States. There has
probably never been a greater lift in wealth than that which
has come from the multilateral trading system in the past
war years, ] particularly in manufactures after the Kennedy
round, and Australia has regarded this round as being
particularly important because it broadened the field into
agriculture, interlectual property rights, services and
other things in which we had an interest as a commodity
trader and a trader in services, and which the United States
of course has had an interest. And the United States
interest goes even beyond the questions of market access; to
its own fiscal policies and the burden which it's bearing
itself by virtue of the European agricultural subsidies.
So, the United States has a great stake in the GATT round
and the importance of it was always evident to me by the
Ministerial attention it received at GATT meetings, at the
OECD, at the IMF etc. Now, we are reaching the end of the 
round and while we are very much encouraged by Mr Dunkel's
package, as Dr Blewett said, the devil is in the detail and
we'll have to go through the detail to see where we stand.
We've got some, the European Commission have said that parts
of it are unacceptable, although the British and the Germans
have said some favourable things about it. We have not
said, and won't say at this stage that we accept it, we want
the right to examine it, but we'll certainly be raising it
in its context with President Bush during his visit to
Australia. J: Are you taking any kind of a hard line with Mr Bush on
the EEP subsidies and the effect they are having on
agriculture in Australia?
PM: Well, I'll be having, I hope, a productive discussion
with the President, and that will obviously be an issue
under discussion.
J: Are yolu satisfied with the outcome of the inquiry into
the Dili massacre as a credible one?
PM: Well, .1 think the preliminary report was much more
credible than that which we've seen before, and I think we
regard it as an encouraging document. The Foreign Minister
said it was very encouraging and better than expected. I
think the important thing isthoughwhat the final report
says and what the Government of Indonesia's consideration of
the report will produce.
J: You didn't have any more consideration to when you
might visit Djakarta?
PM: No I haven't because it wasn't the scheduled visit
which Bob Hawke had was very inopportune for me, that is,
becoming PriLme Minister of Australia at this time. So
that's some-thing which I can consider in the future.
J: Mr Keating, at one stage you were interested in having
a Minister iLn charge of competition policies. I notice you
haven't done that in this reshuffle. Why did you decide
against that?
PM: Well, was interested in competition policy rather
than a Minister for Competition Policy. And competition
policies have been coming together under the Attorney-
General. We have brought the TPC and the PSA together, and
I think that: that has been progressing in my absence from
the Ministry. And I think that given the time-frame I have
now, and the fact that I wanted the Ministry in place as
quickly as possible, to get policy changes moving this year,
I didn't have the luxury of a long time to debate whatdepartmenta.
l structure might best suit the competition
issue. But I've been prepared to accept at face value that:
it has been progressing, and has been progressed, by the
Attorney-General within the Attorney-General's portfolio. 
-7.
J: Mr Keating, Senator Walsh this morning called for the
immigration intake to be slashed. Do you think there are
grounds for this to be reviewed?
PM: Well, look, I don't want to go round the world for
sport, Peter. I'm essentially here to talk about the
Ministry and the Ministerial arrangements. It's obviously
an issue in public life in Australia, and it has been an
issue within the Government, and Senator Walsh's views on
this issue are well known to everybody. And he raises it
with some regularity.
J: Why have you increased the number of Parliamentary
Secretaries? And are these effectively people who are
Ministers in waiting? I mean, can you see them being in the
next... PM: Not necessarily, no. But I think it is a very good
basis for experience for members of the backbench of the
Government, and in some Parliaments all Ministers have
Parliamentary Secretaries. In the British Parliament, the
British Government, I think most Ministers have
Parliamentary Secretaries or numbers of Parliamentary
Secretaries. And I think it is a superb way of giving
backbench members or former Ministers in other Governments
some experience of the Commonwealth realm and its
administration. As you know, a Parliamentary Secretary is
not paid anymore than a backbencher. It is essentially
volunteering a greater effort in the interests of the
Government and the Commonwealth, and I think it's a
particularly good thing to do.
J: How long would Senator Bob McMullan be expected to
remain a Parliamentary Secretary, if you are talking about
experience and developing new talent?
PM: Well, you are really asking me for a pecking order for
changes to -the Ministry, and I can't give you that. But,
Senator McMullan has brought a lot of experience to taxation
policy, and it is an area of great complexity and I know
he's earned the respect and trust of the Taxation
Commissioner and his office, the Australian Taxation Office,
as also the Tax Policy Division of the Treasury. So, I
could say when I was Treasurer I was very happy to have Bob
in that job, and because he is now so full bottle in this
area it was,. I think, entirely sensible to leave him there,
and he likes it.
J: ( inaudible) some people might suggest that you have
rewarded people who were your closest supporters for your
campaign. What do you say to that? And secondly, can you
say that didn't play a part?
PM: Well, by the same logic you would have to say I
rewarded those who played a key role in Mr Hawke's campaign.
J: Mr Keat~ ing, you've left Senator Evans in the position
as Minister for Foreign Affairs. Does this indicate that 
you have no particular plans to change any foreign policy
issues? I mean, in particular, the Middle East where Mr
Hawke's special interest had a great influence, I think, on
attitudes towards Israel?
PM: I think Senator Evans has been a particularly competent
Minister for Foreign Affairs. He has reflected glory upon
the Government, and it would have been, he is the obvious
choice for Foreign Minister. And I would expect, naturally,
because the Prime Minister has perogatives in foreign policy
that other Ministers don't have, to discuss those, as needs
be, with the Foreign Minister bearing in mind his
specialisation and his primary responsibility for foreign
policy. J: Prime Minister, could I ask a question, perhaps in two
parts? Prime Minister Whitlam's first visit, on becoming
Prime Minis-ter, overseas was to New Zealand. Prime Minister
Hawke's first visit was to Indonesia. Where will your's be?
And secondly, the vitally important environmental mission to0
Rio, that Mr Hawke was going to take us all along on, is
that still happening?
PM: Well, if you are enquiring about your travel itinerary,
I can't really help you. I don't think there is any
protocol here, it's a matter of when people inherit these
positions, and what issues are on at the time. Much of the
debate aboult the trade and investment in the industrialised
world has taken place in the northern hemisphere, which has
occasioned Ministers of Australia to be travelling to the
northern hemisphere. But, in the last decade there has been
much greater focus on the Asia/ Pacific, as I believe, there
should be. We are an Asia/ Pacific power and it is in the
Asia/ Pacific that our primary focus should be. So, while I:
couldn't say what my travel plans would be, certainly, this,
area will be receiving the priority.
J: Mr Keating, why did you decide not to have a spill to
get some new blood in. And given that you decided that, do
you think there will be uncontrollable resentment amongst
some of you3r backbench supporters about that decision?
PM: No, it's not for the Leader to decide whether there
should be a spill. If there is a view within the Caucus
that it's ti~ me for all positions to be declared vacant they
generally are declared vacant. But, there was in the Labor
Party, the Parliamentary Labor Party's rules for one
Parliament only, between 1975 and 1977, a rule which said,
in the middle of the term all positions be declared vacant,
that rule only lasted one Parliament. And that was removed,
and there has not been any clear view coming from the Caucus
or any part of it that there should be a spill of positions.
And therefore, I am doing what all Leaders have done in the
past, and that is, to allocate portfolios from the people
chosen by the Caucus, and this Government has won four
elections, and won them well, with personnel some of whom
are still members of the Ministry, others of which have been
added after our third and fourth elections well, second, 
third and fourth elections, and it has made us stronger and
better. We: kept the changes coming through, the Cabinet
personnel has dramatically changed from the Cabinet of 1983.
And obviously, as time goes by it will change further.
J: Mr Keating, Mr Willis has been Treasurer in waiting for
almost 9 years now, and has only had the job for 3 weeks.
Do you think you've been a bit rough on him? And how do you
think he will take this decision?
PM: Well, it was not an easy decision for me because we all
grow close to one another in a Government, particularly, a
reformist Government like this one has been. In the
expenditure review rounds we sat in each other's company for
or 12 hours a day, sometimes for 2 and 3 months at a
time, over years. I mean, I can't imagine any other Cabinet
effort, Cabinet level effort, where line items of the Budget
are reviewed twice a year for eight years, in any other
country. We did that as a group of Ministers and, of
course, it has produced a great bond between us all. So, : Lt
is very difficult to make these choices, and it is, I think,
to Mr Willis' great credit that he has done, not only not
taken his bat and ball, but decided to put his shoulder to
the wheel to one of the toughest jobs in the Cabinet which
is Finance, which he knows well, which he's proven he knows
well. J: Mr Keating, it is often said that Mr Hawke saw the
Prime Ministership as a sort of Chairman of the Board role,
and Mr Fraser in a much more interventionist sense. Can you
tell us something of how you see the role, and particularly,
how activist you see yourself being as Prime Minister in
economic po: licy Are you inclined to leave a fair bit of
initiative to your Treasurer, or because of your background
do you see yourself being more activist in that area than
say Mr Hawke was when you were Treasurer?
PM: No, I'd say the former rather than the latter. That I.
would be inclined to leave policy to Ministers, but I think
it is the Pr-ime Minister's duty, the Leader's duty to sketch
out the dire ctions, and where we are not certain of those
directions, to debate them within the Cabinet to make
certain thait the directions are right and clear, clear and
correct. Now, that is a responsibility of leadership.
Beyond that, I think, Ministers should have a particular
freedom to creatively develop the work within their
portfolios but within the Cabinet system. The Cabinet
system does work well. I mean, it is an efficient
mechanism, i~ t has worked well for this Government and for
Australia. And ' there is always that nice balance between
the perogatives of the Leader and the Prime Minister and the
Ministers. Now, all Prime Ministers will be different, all
Leaders will be different, some will have a more hands on
approach, an~ d some less, some chairmen of the board, some
more managing directors, if I can use that, some with a more
executive bent. But I think time will tell how any one of
us react to these circumstances. 
J: So, are you more inclined to the chairman of the board,
or the managing director?
PM: I'd say I'm somewhere half way in between, if there is
such a position.
J: Mr Keating, will you be sharing your thoughts on urban
development and so forth, which you've expressed fairly
strongly in the last few months, with Mr Howe? And does his
Better Cities program carry on as he sketched it out?
PM: Well, Brian and I. I'd like first of all to find out
about the Better Cities program exactly what is happening
within that area. But, as you know, I regard urban
development issues very importantly. I think how we live,
the cities we live in, how they develop, the choices in
housing, the beauty of the places we live, are very
important issues. And Brian, I think, has also regarded
them, for sometime now, as importantly as I have. But, it
is true that we don't have an urban facility within the
Commonwealth bureaucracy. What we had in the seventies is
largely rundown, and we are constructing something from the
ground up, and that task has fallen to Brian Howe, and it's
not easy. But, to the extent that he has begun it with the
Better Cities policy, I'll be taking an interest in what in
practical terms that policy entails, implies, and I look
forward to having a chat with him about it.
J: Mr Keating, did you give any consideration to moving Mr
Howe from H-ealth given his association with the co-payments
scheme? PM: No, Mr Howe expressed every willingness to continue as
Minister for Health and Community Services. And, of course,
as Deputy, ' Deputy's have a sort of acknowledged right in the
system to decide what they think is in their best interests.
J: Prime Minister, will you be getting out and about
tripping over the camera cables in supermarkets?
PM: Well, I'll live principally in Canberra, as I think all
Prime Ministers have done since the Parliament moved to the
Capital in .1927. But I've always got about Australia as
much as I could and I've always done a lot of shopping.
I've seen many of you at the Fyshwick markets, as you know.
I might have been an ungainly box carrier, but I've done it:
with might and main, and with good grace. For years I've
bought the bird seed and I've bought the fish, and the odd
record. ENDS 



FOR MEDIA 27 December 1991
SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF PRIME MINISTER AND CABINET
The Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and
Cabinet, Mr Mike Codd, AC, will be retiring from the Public
Service, after nearly six years in that position, and I wish
to record here -the outstanding service he has given to this
and previous governments.
The Government will be appointing Mr Codd to the Boards of
AOTC and Qantas, which will enable him to continue his
distinguished contribution to the public sector of this
country. The Government will be recommending to the Governor-General
the appointment of Dr Michael Keating, AO, as the new
Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet. Dr Keating has been Secretary of the Department of Finance
for almost six years and before that was Secretary of the
then Department of Employment and Industrial Relations.
His earlier career included two periods of work for the OECD
in Paris, as wel. l as periods in the Australian Bureau of
Statistics, the then Department of Urban and Regional
Development and the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet.
4084 



PRIME INISTE
FOR MEDIA 27 December 1991
KEATING MINISTRY
I have today recommended to the Governor-General a number of
changes to the Ministry. The swearing-in is scheduled for
today.
Details of the Ministry are attached.
It is a talen~ ted and experienced team which is well placed
to undertake the task of building confidence in Australia
and getting economic recovery underway.
The Governmnent's key tasks, will be jobs and economic growth.
As I said on becoming Prime Minister, I believe that we can
emerge from the recession with a much stronger economy than
ever before. The nineties hold very great promise for all
Australians. Mr Dawkins will be Treasurer.
Other key changes will be the appointment of Mr Willis as
Minister for Finance, Mr Beazley as Minister for Employment,
Education and Training, Dr Blewett as Minister for Social
Security and Senator Richardson as Minister for Transport
and Communications.
I am pleased to welcome two new members to Cabinet Mr
Griffiths and Senator Collins.
Mr Griffiths will be sworn in as Minister for Tourism in
charge of a new Department of Tourism, which is to operate
as a separate portfolio in recognition of the importance and
special needs~ of that industry to the economy and regional
Australia. tie will continue as Minister for Resources in
the Primary Industries and Energy portfolio.
Reflecting the importance of micro-economic reform, Senator
Collins, as Minister for Shipping and Aviation, will be a
second Cabinet Minister within the Transport and
Communications portfolio. 4079 
U-'
2
Mr Kerin will become Minister for Trade and Overseas
Development within the Foreign Affairs and Trade portfolio
reflecting the importance of trade matters to rural and
regional Australia. The portfolio will be represented in
Cabinet by the portfolio Minister, Senator Evans.
Other changes are: Mr Simmons will now be Minister for
Local Government and Minister for Family Support; Ms Fatin
will be appointed Minister for the Arts and Territories;
the Minister for Higher Education and Education Services, Mr
Baldwin, will in addition be Minister Assisting the
Treasurer; tho Minister for Science and Technology, Mr Free,
will now be Minister Assisting the Prime Minister generally
in addition to science matters.
The appointment of Parliamentary Secretaries provides a
means of assisting Ministers in the administration of their
departments and developing new talent. I have decided
therefore to appoint four additional Parliamentary
Secretaries: Mr Laurie Brereton, Mr Peter Duncan, Mr Gary
Johns and Stephen Martin. Details are included in the
attached Ministry list.
Public Services Changes
I have kept or ganisational changes to departments to a
minimum, the only changes recommended to the Administrative
Arrangements Order being the movement of responsibility for
Tourism, from the Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and
Territories portfolio to a new separate portfolio.
4080 
* Commonwealth Government 27 December 1991
KEATING MINISTRY
Title Minister
Prime Minister The Hon P J Keating, NIP
Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services The Hon Brian Howe. MOP
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Social Justice ( Deputy Prime Minister)
Minister Assisting the Prime Mitni ster for Commonwealth -State Relations
Minister for Aged. Family and Health Services The Hon Peter Staples, MP
Minister for Veterans' Affairs The Hon Ben Humphreys, MP
Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce Senator the Hon John Button
( Leadier of the Government in the Senate)
Minister for Science and Technology The Hon Ross Free, MP
Minister Assisting the Prime Min ister
Minister for Small Business. Constiruction and Customs The Hon David Beddall, MP
Minister for Foreign Affairs anid Trade Senator the Hon Gareth Evans, QC
( Deputy Leader of the Govarnmetit in the Sente)
Minister for Trade and Overseas Development The Hon John Kerin, NIP
Treasurer The Hon J S Dawklns, MEP
Minister for Finance The Hon Ralph Willis, NIP
Attorney-General The Hon Michael Duffy, MOP
Minister for Justice and Consumer Affairs Senator the Hon Michael Tate
Minister for Employment, Education and Training The Hon Kim C Beazley, MP
n ader of the House)
Minister for Higher Education and Employment Services fe Hon Peter Baldwin, MP
Minister Assisting the Treasurer
Minister for Aboriginal and Tories Strait Islander Affairs The Hon Robert Tickner, MY
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Aboriginal Reconciliation
Minister for Social Security The Hon Neal Blewett, NIP
Minister for Family Support The Hon David Simmons, MIP
Minister for Transport and Communications Senator the Hon Graham Richardson
toie-Presidoent of the Executive Counci)
Minister for Shipping and Aviation Senator the Hon Bob Collins
Minister Assisthigthe Prime Minister for Northern Australia
Minister for Land Tansport The Hon Bob Brown, MIP
Minister for Defence Senator the Hon Robert Ray
Minister for Defence Science amd Personnel The Hon Gordon Bilney, NIP
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs The Hon Gerry Hand, NIP
Minister Assisting the Prune Minister for Multi cultural Affairs
Minister for Local Government The Hon David Simmons, NIP
Minister for the Arts, Sport, the Environment and Territories The Hon Ros Kelly, NMP
Minister for the Arts and Territories Thbe Hon Wendy Fatin, NIP
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women
Mi1nister for Industrial Relations Senator the Hon Peter Cook
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Servce Matters
Minister for Administlrative Services Senator the Hon Nick Bolkus
Minister for Primary Industri~ es and Energy The Hon Simon Crean, MP
Minister for Resources The Hon Alan Griffiths, MIP
Minister for Tourism The Hon Alan Griffths, MIP
Portfolio Ministers all of whotm am an tht: Cabinet ae shown in bold type. Senator Collins is also a Cabinet Mintister.
A Department with a title reflecting the pmxtfolio Minit~ er's title is administere by the Ministiers within each grouping, with one exception: within the Health,
Housing and Community Services portfol io. Mr Howe admbvisters both the Depatmenat of Health. Housing and Community Services and the Department of
Veterans Affairs; Mt Stsple. administers the Department of Health. Housing and Community Servce and Mr Humphreys administers the Departmet of
Veterans Affairs. Mr Griffiths athuinwsera the Department of Tourism,. as portfolio Stinister and both Mr Czet, as portfolio Minister, Ad Mr Griilithi
administer the Depuent of Prism y nckas and Energy. Mr Simmons a&amp; difisu both the Deptmitn of Social Securfity, with Dr Blewto an ponjoiu)
Nitster, and the Department of lmmsigrmor. LWcal Govetwuet and Ethnic Af air with Mr Hand as portfolio Miniister. 4081. 
0 0
Parliamentary Secretaries
Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Health, Housing and
Community Services
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer
Parliamentary Secretary to the Artorney-General
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Security
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Transport and Communications
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Defence The Hon Laurie Brereton, MP
Mr Gary Johns, MP
Mr Stephen Martin, MP
Senator the Hon Bob McMulla
( Manager of Government Businmss
m the Senate)
The Hon Peter Duncan, MP
The Hon Con Sciacca, MP
The Hon Warren Snowdon, MP
The Hon Roger Price, MP
4082 
KEATING I ISTRY REPRESENTATION OF MINISTERS IN THE OTHER CHAMBER
MINISTER Prime Minister
Minister for Health. Housing Community Services
Minister for Aged, Family and Health Services
Minister for Veterans' Affairs
Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce
Minister for Science and Technology
Minister for Small Business, Construction Customs
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
Minister for Trade and Overseas Development
Treasurer Minister for Finance
Attorney-General
Minister for Justice and Consumer Affairs
Minister for Employment, Education and Training
Minister for Higher Education Employment Services
Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
Minister for Social Security
Minister for Family Support
Minister for Transport and Communications
Minister for Shipping and Aviation
Minister for Land Transpori
Minister for Defence
Minister for Defence Science and Personnel
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
Minister for Local Governmtent
Minister for the Arts, Sport., the Environment and Territories
Minister for the Arts and Terri tories
Minister for Industrial Relations
Minister for Administrative Services
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy
Minister for Resources
Minister for Tourism REPRESENTED BY
Senator Button
Senator Tate
Senator Tate
Senator Tate
Mr Free
Senator Button
Senator Button
Mr Kerin
Senator Evans
Senator Button
Senator Button
Senator Tate
Mr Duffy
Senator Cook
Senator Cook
Senator Collins
Senator Richardson
Senator Richardson
Mr Beaziey
Mr Beazley
Senator Richardson
Mr Bilney
Senator Ray
Senator Bolkus
Senator Bolkus
Senator Richardson
Senator Richardson
Mr Willis
Mr Beddall
Senator Cook
Senator Cook
Senator Collins 4083 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON PAUL KEATING MP, PRIME MINISTER,
ADDRESS TO ) PARLIAMENTARY DINNER
JANUARY 2 19391
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Twenty years ago when I was first introduced to you by
Alexis Johnson I could not have forseen that I would have
the honour of receiving you as President of the United
States, and that the honour would be compounded by welcoming
your wife.
Your visit to Australia is a manifestation of a friendship
between our two'countries and underlines the importance you
attach to Australia as an Asian Pacific country.
There is, of course, much that binds our friendship a
common culture; a common language is another reason.
Churchill, of course, said that the United States and the
United Kingdom were two nations divided by a common
language.
Marshall Green, a former distinguished US Ambassador
maintained t: hat much the same could be said of Australia and
the United States, and I think there is a lot in that.
Indeed we have different spelling for different words, and
of course di~ fferent accents. One of our great long-standing
Parliamentarians, a person by the name of Fred Daly, used to
tell the story of a visit he made to Alabama just after
World War Ill.
In those days, of course, calls were put through by operator
and an international call was a very big deal indeed. He
wanted to call his wife in Sydney personally. He told the
operator he wanted Mrs Daly and a certain number. And she
said " certainly Sir, Mrs Dily". He said, " no, Daly". She
said, " yes Sir, Dily". He said, " no Daley, She
said, " yes Sir, " No, no", said Fred, A as
in Alabama". I After a brief pause she came back politely,
but quite firmly, and said, " ain't no i in Alabama, Sir". 
An Australian friend of mine living in Washington escaped
from the Beltway for a weekend in West Virginia where he had
a conversation with the Park Ranger about bears and about
deers. The Ranger, curious about the funny way my friend
talked, said, " where's you from?". And my friend said,
" Washington". And the Ranger nodded and said, " Knowed you
had an accent".
There are a lot of similarities, Mr President, a lot of
similarities. The phone book is one. Our directory is like
yours. The Canberra phone book is only about this thick.
But there's a column of Bushes, there's a solid set of
numbers there for the Bush Fire Brigade, but there's no
mention of Pennsylvania Avenue. There are some Scowcrofts
and Keatings. But, of course, there's a couple of columns
of Lees, and a few of Kims, and a few Italian, German and
Dutch names, also Jewish and Muslim names. Our societies
have both come to include many different cultures, but they
started in the same place.
We were both called upon to choose, in the words of one of
our poets Henry Lawson " between the old dead tree of the
countries we came from and the young tree green of our new
countries". We both received what your poet, Robert Frost,
called " the gift outright", the continent, or in your case a
pretty good share of it.
We were given it. And as Robert Frost wrote, " at first we
were still England's colonials. In time we gave ourselves
to our new countries and the people and the land have now
become one.
These diffe: cences of languages to one side, you have flown
14 000 miles to see us. American leaders have had a tough
time in our part of the world, but they are rarely
discouraged. Lyndon Johnston was attacked by flying in the United States
Airforce in the Pacific, John Kennedy's torpedo boat was
sunk in the Solomon Islands, Richard Nixon was a naval
officer in fighting around Bouganville, and you, Mr
President, flew fifty eight missions in the Pacific War and
was shot down once. But you came back. And I can assure
you I breath a sigh of relief when Airforce One touched down
safely on New Years Eve.
You arrived in 1991 just over fifty years to the day when
our wartime Prime Minister, John Curtin, published his
appeal to the United States after Pearl Harbour. He said,
" I make it quite clear", he declared, " that Australia looks
to America free of any pangs as to our traditional links or
kinship with the United Kingdom. 
It was a bi~ g change. Though Australian and American ties
have a much longer history. And you yourself referred to
the Bicentennary of the first ship visit today from the
Philadelphia. Prime Minister John Curtin's 27 December 1941 appeal for US
support in the Pacific war built on a history of economic
and cultural ties, but it began a much closer, strategic tie
which was consolidated by ANZUS, signed as a treaty on 1
September 1951, which underlines our commitment to joint
facilities. Since John Curtin's appeal, we have since fought together in
three conflicts, most recently in Desert Storm, making five
military engagements together in all, and without including
the silent war the cold war over the end of which you so
nobly presided.
Mr President, this visit, through the Asia-Pacific was the
first in a long time for an American President through a
region of peace. We can now take stock and plan the future.
I've learnt quite a deal on this visit, both about the
President and about his policies.
We have an American President, a dominant Western Leader, I
believe who cares about the world. A leader who not only
cares about the world and America's role in it, but knows
about it. A leader who, having triumphed over the West's
opponents, now wants to make the world a bigger and better
place for everybody.
This world -was last like it was in 1914, as we now see the
old Russian States rejoining the world economy, as we see
Central Europe, India, China, and the countries of South
America, provides a new opportunity to shape up the world's
trading system. And as Bretton-Woods provided that great
historical opportunity for the economic system post-1945, a
new opportunity exists for the world trading system post-
1992, not just for now but for the next century.
In the end it was the economic superiority of the West that
defeated Soviet Communism, not military superiority. And it
is that economic superiority that has to be expanded and
buttressed. Only in this way can it be a bigger and better
place for everybody.
The vehicle for' this is trade, and the vehicle for that is
GATT, and the key to GATT is Uruguay, and the key to Uruguay
is agriculture.
An open trading system is the way to go, which I think is
what we all wish.
I 
We also, Mr President, took comfort from your words today.
You said we know that our security is inextricably linked to
stability across the Pacific and we will not put that
security and stability at risk.
We want the US straddling an open system in both oceans for
the benefit of all. That means we need GATT and we need an
US economic involvement in the Pacific.
Much of the policy between our two countries has been
likened to a fan with spokes, with the hub of the fan in
California and the spokes going to the treaties of Korea,
Japan and Australia. We'd like to put some fabric on that
treaty to make the weave tighter for a lot of bilateral
conversations between the countries, conversations which are
conversations between non-Americans which, in such an
arrangement, a country like Australia has independence while
keeping and strengthening bilateral links with the United
States. Mr President, on behalf of all Australians, thank you for
coming to Australia. Thank you for accepting the
responsibilities of global leadership. And we wish you well
for the balance of your journey and the greater task ahead.
With those words it now gives me great pleasure to call on
another good friend of the United States, the Leader of the
Opposition. 



TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE CONDUCTED BY THE HON GEORGE
BUSH, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE HON
PAUL KEATING MP PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
2 JANUARY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Prime Minister:
President: Prime Minister: Could I now invite the President to make
some introductory remarks and then I'll
follow him.
My remarks Mr Prime Minister will be very
brief and I simply want to once again thank
you, thank all of our official hosts and
thank the people of Australia for the
warmth of the reception on this visit. We
have enjoyed it, it has been a busy time, I
hope that we have made progress on the
issues, for we may have differences, I
should say issue, because I think there is
only one area of difficulty and we have
talked about that very frankly with you
Sir, with the Opposition, with agriculture
leaders and I feel it has been very
fruitful in terms of the US on all of this.
But otherwise I would simply say to you, we
are very pleased to be here and thank you
for your hospitality and I would be glad to
take my share of the questions.
Mr President can I thank you for those
remarks and say what an honour it has been
for me to represent the Government and
people of Australia in welcoming you and
Mrs Bush to Australia and having you here.
You have had a warm reception from the
Australian public which I think has been
evident to everybody and we have been most
pleased about that and it is true that we
have had broad discussions which I think
have increased 
Journalist:
President: the bonds of friendship between our two
countries, and certainly given me as Prime
Minister a chance, an opportunity to get to
know the President and his views and -to
also make a couple of what we think are
important points to him. And that was the
importance that Australia places on having
the United States engaged in a political
and economic framework in the Asia-Pacific
and the importance of having won the CoLd
War and in setting up an institutional
framework of a Bretton Woods style but in
trade. And we see this best being accommodated
with the GATT, a successful conclusion to
the GATT round, as a framework for the reentry
of countries re-entering the world
economy for the first time in either half a
century or most of a century. So on those
very broad fronts we have had extensive
discussions as the President said on the
other issues we dealt with them in a
working like way and he has very kindly met
our farm representatives and I think we
have a reasonable understanding of our
positions on those issues.
So could I now invite questions.
Alan Sunderland, SBS Television. My
question is in relation to the EEP. I
understand following your discussions with
farmers you have agreed to have some sort
of consultative process operating in future
before decisions are made. How exactly do
you envisage that consultative mechanism
will work and do you envisage that it will
have the effect in future of stopping EEP
areas that have in the past affected
Australia? Well we discussed having some consultative
arrangement and I suggested it would be
very useful to the farm leaders if they
come, they have been to the States several
of them, if they come again and consult on
this EEP. There were some factual
differences presented at the meeting by our
expert and by them and so I think we ought
to just try to eliminate differences where
possible. And I made very clear to them,
and I'd like to say it once more, that the
EEP legislation was not aimed at Australia.
It was aimed to try to get the EC, who are
subsidising 10 times as much as the United
States, to come into line and to get on
board on a sound GATT agreement. So we 
Journalist: President: Journalist: will see how that works out but we didn't
set up any procedures in any exact threepoint
program for eliminating differences
that we might have. The answer though,
that they do agree with me on, and I'm sure
the Prime Minister does is to get a
successful conclusion to the GATT round and
I told him that we are pledged to that end,
and I know they have tried, these farm
leaders have travelled to Europe and they
have been to England and, I believe, France
and Germany and so they are fully engaged
with private sector. I think now it is
important given the Dunkel Report that I as
President, the Prime Minister as Prime
Minister, engage to the fullest to try to
get the one answer to EEP that's going to
make the most sense and that is a
successful conclusion of the GATT round on
agriculture. Mr President, last week your Commerce
Secretary Bob Mosbacher said that Japan was
partly responsible for the recession in the
United States. Was he reflecting official
policy in saying that?
Well Mr Mosbacher always reflects official
views except when I disagree with him and
that is very, very seldom and on this one I
haven't heard his statement so I would only
want to see it in full context. But look,
we have got tremendous imbalance with
Japan, tremendous, and one of the reasons
we are going there is to see if we can't
find ways to sort that matter out. But we
are enduring sluggish times and not
enjoying them very much and Prime Minister
has impressed on me that Australia is
having difficult economic times and the
answer to all of this, whether it is in
Japan-US or Australia-US it is to get
these economies going through expanded
trade and so I want to know in context what
Bob said but any time you have an
extraordinarily big trade imbalance I think
you would say that that would be
contributing to a lack of economic growth.
And so if that is what he said, I certainly
couldn't find a way to differ with him.
Don Woolford, Australian Associated Press
Mr Bush are you able to give a commitment
that irrespective of what might happen in
other sectors of the Eurogray rounds the
United States Government will accept
nothing less in agricultural trade than has
been proposed by Arthur Dunkel and Mr 
President: Prime Minister: Keating how satisfied you are with Mr
Bush's response both to our EEP submissions
and to our concerns that NAFTA could under
some circumstances develop into a tri-polar
trading block?
Let me answer, we see some very positive
elements in the Dunkel paper. We certainly
don't want to accept less if that was your
question and there is some things there
that we would like to see improved. But I
do think that there has been a lot of good
work done there and we will be working
closely with the Europeans to try to get
agreement, and I'd leave it right there
because I don't want to indicate that we
think that we've gotten everything that the
United States wants nor do we think that
the Cairns Group has gotten everything that
the Cairns Group wants out of the Dunkel
paper. All we're saying is its a good
position from which to finalise the
agricultural part of trade and the rest of
it too. We have got some difficulties with
some parts, agriculture we see has moved
fairly well.
Can I add to that, I think that the thing
which is most comforting to Australia I
think in answering the question, I make
three points. The first is it is a matter
of great comfort to us that we have an
internationalist as President of the United
States, someone who has committed himself
to an open trading system, multilateral
trading system, that resisted protectionist
pressures and is committed to seeing the
GATT round successfully concluded. Now as
the President has said, there are elements
of the GATT round that can't be, it's a
package, some parts all countries would be
more satisfied with than others but it is a
package and it is a package about around
I which we believe discussions can take
place. If there is a successful conclusion
of the GATT round many other things will
change and including that would be, of
course, mandatory windbacks under EEP which
you asked me about and the President has
agreed this morning that we will have an
information exchange on EEP. That is, at
least we will now more about the operation
of EEP and as well as that we have asked
him that where the US has not engaged in
sales in markets where the European
Commission is engaged in sales, that is in
non-EEC markets would he examine those
markets with a view to keeping the 
Journalist: President: Journalist: President: subsidisation of EEP f rom them. He can'It
obviously, at this point, give a clear
commitment on the markets, but he has
agreed to look and to examine them and we
are very happy about that.
So on the general point, we believe that
the GATT offers the best opportunity on
trade generally that the Dunkel package is
just that, a package, and if adopted would
lead to significant improvements in the
trade and agriculture and including the
impact on EEP.
CNN. Mr Bush, what do you see as the
consequences if Europe does not buy into
Dunkel' s proposal?
Well, I see that it would be very, very bad
if we don't get a successful conclusion to
the GATT round and we have not discussed
here in Australia fall-back positions, we
are not prepared to give up on the
successful conclusion of the GATT round but
without trying to predict disaster I can
simply say I think it would be a very bad
thing because I think you would see more
protection, more selfishness in the trading
system that would inevitably shrink markets
and cost countries jobs and so we must go
forward and we must try to get a successful
conclusion. I feel more strongly about that since I've
had the benefit of several long
conversations with this Prime Minister, who
is very knowledgeable on these
international financial matters, and also
with the agricultural sector in this
country. I really had my, I'Im more highly
attuned even than I was to the importance
of getting this done so I don'It want to
worse case it but I can just say that it
would be totally unsatisfactory to see that
GATT round fail to come to satisfactory
conclusions. Do you see the possibility Sir, of three
world trading blocs as the Prime Minister
has discussed?
Well, we don't want any trading blocs that
don't include Australia and I went out of
my way to say that as we're negotiating for7
free trade agreement with Mexico and Canada
for example, I want our Australian friends
to know that that would not be detrimenta.
to our free trade with them and one of the 
Journalist: President: Journalist: President: things the Prime Minister and I discussed,
and I'll clearly defer to him on this, : Ls
the fact that we don't want to see Asia and
Australia kind of pushed aside into some
separate bloc so you might have an European
Ntroardthi, n g Sobulothc , anadn CAmareirbibceaann tarnadd inagn bAlsoica, n'
bloc. That is not the way you get more
jobs. The way you do that is to have broad
expanded trade between them so I don't want
to predict and suggest that this would be
an outcome, but it would be an outcome that
we certainly would not find satisfactory.
Jeremy Thompson, The Canberra Times
The United Nations seems to be dragging its
feet a little bit on the Cambodian peace
plan, there is no concrete plan in place,
no budget being put forward. Have you been
asked or do you intend to urge in the
United Nations that more speed be taken on
these matters? Certainly Mr Hun Sinn,
Prime Minister of Cambodia, is extremely
concerned about this matter.
Well I wasn't asked to accelerate anything
on this visit. I was told by the
Australian leadership of the importance of
this. We feel that way. Secretary Baker,
as you know, has been involved in it and we
strongly support this concept that the UN
acting in this peace keeping role but I
wasn't asked to take on a specific
assignment in that regard. But it is
important with agreement having come this
far that it be followed up on now, that it
not be allowed to fall apart.
Mr President, Democratic leaders and
Congress this week said that the success or
failure of the trade mission will depend on
whether you obtain any major concessions
from Japan. Do you agree, and at this
point are you at all hopeful that you will
be hopeful to obtain any major concessions.
In the first place, I don't take much stock
in what the Democratic leaders and what the
Congress say, setting up goals for a trip
or knocking them down, I'm just not
inclined to run the foreign policy of the
United States in that regard. It's been
happening for three years and they're
entitled to their opinion but that won't
influence how I conduct myself on this trip
and I certainly am not going to accept
their standards for success or failure of a
mission. Having said all that, I want to 
Journalist: President: Journalist: President: see us get more jobs created in the United
States, eventually by concessions made or
by positions taken in Japan. I think it is
very important and we need more access to
their markets, we need to have more content
in autos that are made in the United
States, have US content there, have a fair
shot at it, but I don't think that I should
let the agenda be set by some political
challenge in an election year. That is not
the way one conducts sound foreign policy.
I saw all kinds of crazy, well if he
doesn't get this or that were going to
throw in this legislation. We know
political posturing when we see it, and I
know what's good policy and it is to stay
involved internationally and it is to
create more jobs at home, not by trying to
protect and pull back into some
isolationistic fear but by expanding
markets and that is what this trip is
about. offer concessions that you consider
inadequate. Are you prepared to
It's too hypothetical a question, let me
cut it off right there, I cannot go in'to
hypothetical we haven't even gotten to
Japan yet. We're still in Australia
remember!
Kim Griggs, Knight Ridder Financial News
Mr President you refer to the sluggishness
of the US economy, do you feel the recent
cut and discount rate to 3.5% is sufficient
to stimulate your economy and if you think
extra measures are needed when would you
expect to announce these?
No question that it will have a stimulatory
affect. It takes a while for that to get
through something as complex as is the US
economy but it has been very, very well
received at home and I think that it is
well known at home that I plan additional
stimulatory measures to be announced in the
State of the Union Message which comes at
the end of this month and they will not be
counter-productive, they will not be on the
cheap politically, something that has a
nice political ring to it but then would be
counter-productive in terms of interest
rates but I do think that the US economy
could use a sound fiscal stimulation and I
will be proposing that kind of a program in
our State of the Union Message. But yes,
this is very, very important. 
Journalist: President: Journalist: President: ABC News. President Bush, doesn't this
whole flap in Australia about agricultural
subsidies in the United States, which you
indicated you are not in a position at this
time to abolish, undermine your
credibility, Sir, when you get to Japan
wearing the mantle of a free trader asking
for concessions there?
No, because nobody is pure. We have
differences with Australia on this. I
don't want to necessarily bring them up : Ln
front my Australian congenial host here,
but I had a chance to tell him the things
I'd like to see Australia do, which we
might feel could be a little less
protection. He was very clear and very
forceful in telling me his. I don't
consider it a flap, incidentally, when you
discuss an issue where you have
differences. I think it's very important
that the American people and the President
understand how the agriculturalists in this
country look at this Export Enhancement
Program. And so I don't think it's
contradictory at all. We've never said
we're totally pure. We are working for
freer and fairer trade. And certainly the
Japanese should be working for freer and
fairer trade. And if one country could
hold up its hand and say we have never had
any protection of any kind and
subsidisation of any kind, that country,
then, should be holier than thou, be able
to make the point. We are going there into
Japan and asking for equity, fairness, fair
play. And so I don't think a discussion, a
healthy discussion of an export program
that is causing great concern in this
country is either a flap or diminishes my
credibility as I go into a market where we
are getting real problems in terms of
access.
Dennis Grant, Mr Bush, from the Australian
7 Network. We of course welcome you,
perhaps with the observation that it only
took 25 years for the White House to find a
map of where we live since the last time a
President visited. Following on from that
question, isn't there just
I'm not sure that I got that point. 
Journalist: President: Prime Minister:
President: Journalist: President: Journalist: President: Journalist: President: Prime Minist~ er: Twenty five years since we last saw an
American President here.
Oh, President.
Held like you here more often, I think he's
trying to say.
Sorry, I misunderstood.
Wondered if you lost the map, perhaps.
Oh, I see.
So, fo llowing on f rom that last question,
is there not just the faintest whiff of
hypocrisy here that you are demanding of
the Japanese that they lower their barriers
so that you can sell more motor vehicles * to
them, but you impose and extend barriers on
our meat and sugar in particular?
No, I don't think SO. We were
extraordinarily helpful in opening the
Japanese markets on meat. And indeed the
agricultural leaders I met with today
thanked me for that. Similarly for citrus.
So, besides that, I love coming to
Australia so I take your point that if
somebody takes that as a matter of neglect,
that's too bad because this relationship is
very very strong. But I'm glad to be here
now and I was glad to be here as Vice
President, glad to be here earlier on as a
private citizen, and undoubtedly will come
back. Mr President, President Miyazawa in honour
of your trip, a few days in advance of your
trip anyway is urging his auto makers ' to
buy more US auto cars and urging consumers
to buy more American cars. Do you consider
that already a success for your mission, or
do you think the Japanese still need to do
more? Well I want to f ind out exactly what all
this means, how it's going to be
translated. But clearly we welcome
statements of that nature. I think that's
very very good, very heartening. But I
have not had a chance to sit down with Mr
Miyazawa and talk about that in some
detail. Perhaps a couple of more questions. One on
this side Michelle ( Grattan). 
Journalist: President: Journalist: President: Prime Minis-ter:
President: Journalist: Michelle Grattan, The Age. President Bush,
could you just clarify this matter of
consultations for us. The farmers seem
very convinced you have given an
undertaking to have consultations before
subsidised sales. That doesn't seem -to
square with what you said early in this
press conference. If that's not right, you
haven't gone as far as that. How does your
undertaking about consultations differ from
those given by your predecessor?
Well I'm not sure if I understand I'm
not sure what they said publicly. What
they said is they, the farmers would like
to come over and consult and I said come
on, let's go, this would be good. And I'd
like to have some American farmers there as
well as Government officials. It wasn'It
tied in, as far as I know, to any specific
pending action under the export program.
and not in relation to any future
actions? They asked that there be consultation on a
whole array of things. I think we're
getting it mixed up a little bit with
I think it's a mix up between information
and the Government and also with thiLs
private sector group. These farmers were
there not as Government officials but
wanting to come over and talk to our
agricultural experts and to our farmers
themselves about this whole program, and I
said come on, we would welcome you. But
that's where that one was left. Now the
other one, I've not been able to make I
think the Prime Minister let me put it
this way I subscribe to the way hie
phrased it.
Change of pace, if I may, Sir. John
Cocheran from NBC. There's a new movie
called JFK which has not wafted its way
down here yet, but it casts some
dispersions on the findings of the Warren
Commission's reports, and also it raises
some questions about possibly the CIA's
role in this. You're a past CIA director7.
I wonder, I know you possibly haven't seen
the movie, are you concerned about movies
like this which may trouble people who
weren'It even born at the time of John
Kennedy's assassination? 
President: Journalist: President: Journalist: President: Prime Minister:
Journalist: President: Well I don't know much about the movie. I
haven't seen it. And there is all kinds of
conspiratorial theories floating around on
everything. Elvis Presley is rumoured to
be alive and well some place. And I can't
say that somebody won'It go out and make a
movie about that. I have seen no evidence
that gives me any reason to believe that
the Warren Commission was wrong. None
whatsoever. And so if it is helpful to
reassure the American people in this way by
saying that, fine. But I don't, it
wouldn't lead me to suggesting that Mr
Stone be censored or something of that
nature.
As a former CIA director, did you ever go
back in the CIA's findings during that
period to satisfy any of your curiosity?
About this subject?
Yes. No I didn't have any curiosity because I
believed that the Warren Commission, which
acted what time was that finding? When
was the Warren Commission finding? Was it
' 63, which was about twelve years before I
was out at the Agency I saw no reason to
question it. Still see no reason to
question it.
One more, this gentleman here.
AFP. You say to the Prime Minister again
today to maintain a military presence in
the region at an appropriate level. People
in the region are not so sure. What does
appropriate mean and for instance, is the
ANZUS Treaty in fact dead?
Well the appropriate level of security
depends on conditions at the time. What I
was addressing myself to was the fact that
some felt that at the closing of Subic,
that we would withdraw and pull away back
from any possible security commitments.
And I think one has to know, I can't tell
you what that means in terms of keeping our
security interests alive here, or keeping a
military presence here. It depends on
events, it depends obviously on deployments
of various naval groups. But all I wanted
to do was reassure the people of this area
that we are not, because of the closing of
Subic, that we are not pulling back from 
Journalist: President: Journalist: President: Prime Minister: future security considerations. We are a
Pacific power, we think, we know we are a
Pacific trading power, and we are going to
stay involved with the security concerns of
our friends. I can't tell you exactly what
that means in terms of troops, where
they'll be, vessels, where they'll be.
That depends on the situation that might
exist at the time. We had a very different
security deployment in the Middle East a
year ago than we have today. And so things
can change dramatically. But all I'm just
doing is giving proper assurances that our
military as well as our economic interests
are still housed in the Pacific to a large
degree. Do you still need the ANZUS treaty with the
countries of the region?
Do I what?
Do you still need the ANZUS treaty?
Well we still need the treaty that exists,
that we refer to as ANZUS. As you know
there's been some difficulties with that.
There's no point in going into that now as
much as this is the last question. But,
nevertheless, the concept of the ANZUS is
very very important to us.
Important to both of us. That will do us.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen. Thank you
Mr President.
President: Thank you very much.
Minister. Thank you Prime
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 31/
FIRST KEATING CABINET MEETING ECONOMIC STATEMENT
The Keating Cabinet met for the first time today to begin
work on an Economic Statement to speed the recovery and job
growth. The Prime Mi~ nister told Cabinet the Statement would detail a
plan to deliver a much-needed boost in confidence to
business anti the wider community.
It would contain specific measures to encourage investment
and provide greater certainty in business planning as well
as measures for industrial development and work on major
infrastructure projects.
The Prime Minister stressed that the community was looking
to the Government for leadership and that the Statement
would providle that leadership and articulate a clear,
practical plan to get Australia growing again.
He told Cabinet a major task facing the new Government was
to get out cf Canberra to listen to business and community
leaders.
This would involve the Prime Minister and senior economic
Ministers meeting with small and large business, unions and
community leaders during the next few weeks to hear their
ideas for recovery.
As an initial step the Prime Minister, the Treasurer, the
Minister for Finance and the Minister for Industry,
Technology and Commerce would meet key business and union
leaders from. different States in Melbourne and Sydney over
the next two weeks.
The PM and Ministers would also be in touch with State
Premiers and Territory Chief Ministers as work developed.
The Treasurer, Mr Dawkins, reported to Cabinet on current
economic conditions and said the most up-to-date information
from Treasury confirmed the view expressed by the Prime
Minister over the past few months that the economy has been
weaker than official data suggested at the time.
Mr Keating said the timing of the Statement was yet to be
decided but he expected to deliver it in the Parliament in
late February or early March.
7 January 1992 



PRIME MINISTER] 2/ 92
PRIME MINISTER MEETS RURAL REPRESENTATIVES
The Prime Minister and minister for Trade, Mr Kerin, met
rural representatives today to discuss the implications for
trade following President Bush's visit to Australia last
week. The PM told the meeting that talks he and the National
Farmers Federation had with the President had ben extremely
successful for Australia and had left the President with a
much greater understanding of the need to reach a successful
outcome to the Uruguay Round.
The meeting resolved to follow up commitments made by
President Bush during his visit, chiefly the undertaking by
the US to examine not extending the ExportEnhancement
Program to new markets which may imp56 adversely on
Australia. Issues arising from the Bush visit will be taken up by
Australian officials when they meet their U. S. counterparts
in washington early next month.
The PM also told the group he had personally written to key
European leaders to seek their support for a successful
conclusion to the Urugay Round.
Letters were sent last night to the German Chancellor Dr
Helmut Kohl and British Prime Minister, Mr John Major as
well as the chairman of the EC Member States, Portuguese
Prime Minister Dr Antonio Cavaco Silva.
In the letters the PM told the European leaders that the
views of the European Community countries would be critical
to any assessment of whether negotiations could be
successfully concluded in the coming months.
He said that during his visit to Australia President Bush
had a displayed a positive attitude to the ' Dunkel package
and that the United States, as well as Australia, believed
the Uruguay Round could not be allowed to fail.
The Prime Minister's letters stressed the importance of a
successful outcome for the Round and said the immediate
economic prospects of the international economy as well as
the longer term strength of the international trading system
would be significantly worsened by a collapse of the
negotiations. January 8 1992 



PRIME MINISTER] 3/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
MEETINGS WITH BUSINESS, UNION LEADERS
Over the next two weeks I will be meeting chief executives
of some of Australia's largest companies as well as
representatives of small business and trade unions to listen
to their ideas for bringing forward the economic recovery.
I will be joined in these meetings by the Treasurer, Mr
Dawkins, the Minister for Finance, Mr Willis and the
Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce, Senator
Button. The national meetings are the first step in what will be a
concerted effort by my Government to hear the ideas of those
who will play a major role in getting Australia back to
work. I
The first meetings will take place in Melbourne next
Wednesday ( Jan. 15) and Thursday ( Jan. 16).
Further talks will be held in Sydney the following Monday
( Jan. 20) arid Tuesday ( Jan. 21).
As the Economic Statement is developed I and other Ministers
will consult more widely with business, unions and other
groups throughout Australia.
Those involved in the talks are people from some of our most
dynamic enterprises, large and small, and many executives
have made special efforts to be available to meet with
Government at short notice.
There is a growing sense of purpose and enthusiasm being
directed to our national economic problem and these meetings
will do much to encourage that enthusiasm.
The speed of the recovery and our ability to create jobs
quickly wil. l be greatly influenced by these companies. 
2
For that reason it is important the Government has a clear
picture of what their plans are and what is happening across
the economy as a whole.
The meetings will be with individual chief executives and in
some cases with small groups.
All Melbourne meetings will be held in the Prime Minister's
office in Treasury Place, starting about 9.30 a. m. on both
Wednesday and Thursday and finishing about 3.30-4 p. m. each
day. Media will be notified of further details for the Melbourne
meetings ( p: cfacs, list of participants etc.) early this
week. Arrangements for the Sydney meetings will be finalised later
in the week,
12 January 1992 



PRIME MINISTER] 4/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
SMALL BUSINESS COALITION
I have today asked the Minister for Small Business,
Construction and Customs, Mr Beddall, to convene a meeting
with the Small Business Coalition at the earliest
opportunity. I will attend the meeting which will follow talks with small
and large business and unions already arranged for Sydney
and Melbourne over the next two weeks.
The Small Business Coalition, which represents more than
organisationts, traditionally meets the Minister for Small
Business and other Ministers twice a year at a Small
Business Forum to put an agreed position to the Government
on small business issues. I last met the Coalition as
Treasurer in, April last year.
As the largest employer of the Australian workforce it is
important the Government seeks the views of small business
in the lead-up to the Economic Statement.
Although business people from all States will be involved in
the meetings in Sydney and Melbourne the Small Business
Coalition has a much broader representative base in the
small business sector.
It includes small business organisations such as COSBOA
( Council of Small Business Associations of Australia) and
ASBA ( Australian Small Business Association). Other members
include the Australian Federation of Business and
Professional Women, the Motor Trades Association, the
Australian Tourism Industry Association, the Retail Traders
Association and the Master Builders Construction and Housing
Association. Larger business organisations such as the Confederation of
Australian Industry, the Australian Chamber of Manufactures,
the Metal Trades Industry Association and the National
Farmers Federation, which have large numbers of small
business members, are also represented.
January 13 1.992 



1;
z
PRIME MINISTER 5/ 92
ARRANGEMENTS FOR MEDIA PRIME MINISTER'S MELBOURNE MEETINGS
Meetings with business and union leaders will take place in
the Prime Minister's office at 4 Treasury Place.
A media room has been made available on the ground floor of
Treasury Place. Tea and coffee facilities will be provided.
Media must carry identification for entry into Treasury
Place.
Media will not be permitted on the First Floor except for
organised picfacs.
Media will be advised of details of picfacs and availability
of Ministers by the Prime Minister's office at 4 Treasury
Place tomorrow ( Wednesday).
14 January 1992 
2
The following is a schedule of meetings with Mr Keating,
Mr Dawkins, Mr Willis and Senator Button on Wednesday and
Thursday this week in Melbourne.
WEDNESDAY 15 JANUARY
9.30am Mr John Prescott
Managing Director Chief Executive Officer
BHP Mr Bob Foster
Manager, Government Affairs
BHP
10.45am Mr Don Argus
Managing Director Chief Executive Officer
National Australia Bank Limited
11.45am Mr Will Bailey AO
Group Chief Executive
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited
1.00pm Working Lunch
Mr Doug Shears
Executive Chairman
ICM
Mr Stan Wallis
Managing Director
AMCOR Limited
Mr Ross Wilson
Managing Director
SA Brewing Holdings Limited
2.45pm Dr Jim Fox
Managing Director
Invetech Limited
Mr Denis Hanley
Executive Chairman
Memtec Limited
Mr Chris Thomas
Managing Director
Amskan Limited
3.45pm Mr Bob Nordlinger
Managing Director
John Hollad Group 
3
THURSDAY 16 JANUARY
9.30am Mr Norman McCann
Managing Director
Ferntree Computer Corporation Limited
Mrs Lindsey Cattermole
Joint Managing Director
Aspect Computing Pty Ltd
10.30am Victorian Unions ( with Senator Cook)
12.00pm Committee for Melbourne ( see Attachment A)
2.00pm Mr Philip Brass
Managing Director
Pacific Dunlop Limited
3.00pm Mr Jac Nasser
President and Managing Director
Ford Motor Company of Australia Limited
Mr David Fewchuk
Government Affairs Manager
Ford Motor Company of Australia Limited
4.00pm Graham Ogilvie
Managing Director
Australian Newsprint Mills Limited 
4 ATTACHMENT A
COMMITTEE FOR MELBOURNE
Mr John D. Elliott
Mr Bernie Delaney
Mr Ivan Deveson
Mr Lindsay Fox
Mr Malcolm Graham
Mr Gil Hoskins
Mr Steve Howard
Mr Bill Kelty
Mr Richard Meldrum
Mr Gary Morgan
Prof Sir Gustav Nossal
Prof David Pennington
Mr Richard Pratt
Ms Elizabeth Proust
Mr Fergus Ryan
Mr Ron Walker
Mr Garry Weaven
Joan Kirner, MP
Jim Kennan, MP
Tom Roper, MP
Evan Walker, MLC
David White Chairman BHP Seven Network
Linfox Australian Timber Union
National Mutual
Committee for Melbourne
ACTU Lord Mayor
Roy Morgan Research
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
University of Melbourne
Pratt Group
City of Melbourne
Arthur Andersen
Hudson Conway
Committee for Melbourne
Premier Deputy Premier
Treasurer Melbourne Province
Manufacturing, Industry 



PRIME MINISTER]
DOORSTOP B~ Y THE HON P. J. KEATING MP, PRIME MINISTER
WEDNESDAY 15 JANUARY 1992, !-ELBOU:. NE
PM: The discussions have been very productive and
enthusiastic. I think that people want the economy to
get back to growth, they want growth planned, they want
things which imporve and build on the general
improvements in the economy over the last decade. many
believe that there are a lot of fundamental strengths in
the economy that will come out quite strong when we can
come out, but they want leadership on the real issues
and the real issues are growth, restoration of growth
and employment, a recovery, and adding to our
fundamental structural strengths and there have been
some good ideas proposed. I think I~ f anyone listens
well, and in public life you have to be a reasonable
listener, that there is a lot of obvious stuff said but
there is always the odd little jewel that falls out end
if you're alert you can find it.
The Government is working in this statement in a
framework, obviously the framework we have worked in
from the 80s was to internationalise Australia, to
globalise our markets but what we want to do now is
engender a ' recovery but do it in a way that adds to our
structural strengths and so even though we are working
in a framework and we have our own ideas, those ideas
can be complemented and added to by the practical.
experience of people in Australian business and that's
why this process has occurred and I think it is going to
be a very valuable one.
J: Mr Keating, any jewels today?
PM: A couple of things. A couple of good things.
J: Mr Keating the business people all seem to be prepared
for extra spending, does that fit in to your framework?
PM: Let's be clear about this, there was not spending
greater than the tax cuts we provided in the 1980s,
middle 80s and late 80s, to hold the inflation rate
which we succeeded in doing. We went through a boom
without wages taking of f via the 1989 $ 6 billion tax
cuts. In other words, the surplus was not ñ mnmutible.
Likewise, nor is the deficit depending though upon what
is responsible and sensible, what is cyclical and what 
-2
is structural, these are the qualitative things both
quantative and qualitative, that the government will
keep its eye on. I mean this is the most experienced
fiscal group in Australia's long constitutional history.
Nearly a decade of the one group of people stewarding
Commonwealth fiscal policy and we are going to do it
very carefully.
J: Will you be seeking any of f-setting savings Mr Keating
towards spending
PM: Well, they are all policy choices for the Cabinet, and
for the specialised gruop of Ministers these matters
have not been determined at this stage.
J: But spending cuts are a possibility?
PM: Well, everything is a possibility.
J: Mr Keating will tomorrow's meetings be a mirror image of
today, or does it move on a notch flow?
PM: Well they will be different people from various
different other walks of life including the trade
unions.. But there is a tremendous amount of pride in
what woh have achieved as a structural change, I mean
most of' these pople today have remarked about that,
about how their business is now more productive, even
though the squeeze has made them more productive, that;' s
unfortunately led to lay-off s by many of them, but the
outcoinw has been more productive companies ready to
pick up on any roll that comes through the economy, they
want the economy to spring back into activity, so do we,
it's about trying to find the beat way of doing it.
J: Do you think they are relying too much on wanting the
Government to kick-start the economy, they are not doing
enough themselves?
PM: No I don't think so. A decade ago such a conversation
would have been complaints about protection not enough
of it, complaints about wages. What we saw Is what I
think is what we predicted. valuable contributions by
people who are wide-eyed and constructive and trying to
put sensible and constructive proposals which the
Government ' can do. I mean it is a very nice
constructive quality to the discussion.
J: Mr Keating, what is the prospect of a wage tax trade of f
being included in the statement?
PM: Well it is too early to say, and the hard news game
which I know you are all in, it's too early to say. The
Government will just have to consider its position on
all these matters on inflation, the inflation proopects,
activity, therefore wages, wages prospects, etc. 
-3-
J: Mr Keating, are you disappointed that two major opinion
polls show your approval rating to be a record low?
PM: Well, I had not expected to be bouncing out in this
climate with a gaggle of polls sort of announcing my
entrance to the Prime Ministerial stage, but I've
always been best fighting from behind, I've always felt
uncomfortable out in front. It generally slows me down
and while I don't want to be obviously too far behind,
being behind for me is a positive stimulus.
J: Does it surprise you that your
PM: Not really, I don't think. Not really.
J: Mr Keating, is the Government prepared to reconsider
the Coronation Hill decision?
PM: No we have not. The general view of the Cabinet was
that it should not be reconsidered.
J: Mr Keating, the upturn has now been delayed. When is
it your hope and expectation that we'll see reasonable
signs of the economy coming good?
PM: Obviously, the earlier the better in 1992.
J: What are your expectations?
PM: Well, it would be foolhardy for me to be nominating
turning points and then you would be scoring off the
days and weeks. You know I've been around for too long
for that sort of stuff. We'll be trying to engender a
recovery as quick as possible. One thing is for sure,
nobody believes, as far as I know, certainly no one
said to us, that what Australia needs to help itself iLs
a new tax. I mean it would be a novel twist of
priorities if we thought what Australia needed now in a
recession Was just to give it something to go on with,
it was a tax on its food, a tax on its clothing and to
belt up its inflation rate. No one, of course, was
advocating that.
J: Is there a sense of desperation from the talks today at
all?
PM: I think a sense of well placed and good natured
optimism but with cautious optimism.
J: In reality Mr Keating, did you actually hear anything
that you hadn't considered before in all your years
Treasurer?
PM: Yes, a couple of things.
J: special treatment for the States? 
PM: Well no, all States will be treated we will be
treating the Commonwealth as a Commonwealth and all
States: equitably. But I do think that Victoria has
taken a large brunt of the recession and confidence
levels, and activity levels are lower in Victoria. I
have said this often. This is still true.
J: Does this justify some special help?
PM: Not particularly, but it justifies consideration about
the State of the economy and Victoria in particular.
J: How about tarriff levels, is there a need to wind back
PM: No, I don't think so and they are phased. They are
predictable and the change in the exchange rate of late
will only, if you like, soften the impact of the
reduction.
J: There is no question of hurting
PM: Well, that might be true but the fact is it is not
hurting the export industries who have got the monkey
of protection off their back. It's not hurting, it's
helping them.
J: Prime Minister, can you give us some scope of
responsible fiscal stimulus might be?
PM: No I can't, and that's something it is very early
days but it was very important for us, I think, to take
the opportunity to say to people who are at the
coalface, what do you think about this?, what's your
view?, give us some of your thoughts. We are working
in this framework, if you have got general ideas about
where we want to go but if you can add to that we would
appreciate it particularly if it fits into our
framework and I think it has been well worth doing.
J: Was the anecdotal evidence you got today generally
gloomier than official forecasts?
PM: No. People think the economy is flat, not falling
further, but flat off a generally low base and they
want to see a pick up in a domestic economy as quickly
as possible as we do. They are not into ideology, they
are in-to a practical purposeful shift of activity in
employnent.
J: Do you have any problem with the risk of over
stimulating?
PM: Not off these low levels of activity I don't think but
that's within reason, of course. But again, I remind
you of eight years of fiscal stewardship by this
Governent, I mean it is without 
J: How soon will we see
PM: Well that's one of the things we will be considering
obviously in the course of these approval processes.
J: Jewels more regularly during that period?
PM: Well I did, I was always a good listener. You have to
be in public life to be a reasonable listener. I have
met a lot of people in business, in fact at my luncheon
meeting two of them were reminding me of a discussion I
had a year earlier with a very similar group, two of
the members of which were common around the same themes
at a dinner I had at Pacific Dunlop.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: I did a lot of it. I saw a lot of business groups,
interest groups while I was Treasurer. But that's to
say I thought it was my responsibility to develop these
ideas myself within frameworks from things I heard and
within the general framework the Government was working
in.
J: What's the theme of today then, you have your own main
framework and they'll just add to it?
PM: No, the Government is obviously working in a framework,
but the framework is now the one most Australian
businesses are working in and therefore they are not
coming at you or looking for increased protection, they
are not: coming at you with complaints about wages.
There's a commonality in the framework now so therefore
we are very receptive to things which are put.
J: Prime Minister, where most business you spoke to today
mentioned depreciation and some mentioned special
investment allowances. Are you disposed towards
measures like that?
PM: Well I can't say I am. It's entirely reasonable they
should mention them and therefore their things will be
considered. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT 01? INTERVIEW WITH NEIL MITCHELL, 3AW, 16/ 1/ 92.
E E 0 PROOF ONLY
MITCHELL: With~ me the Prime Minister, Mr Keating, good morning
to you
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Mr Keating, who are you?
PM: Well if you don't know now after eight and a half years of
me being in the Government I don't suppose I can enlighten you
much further, but
MITCHELL: But something's been discussed though. I mean eight
years of an uncompromising tough man with an image of somebody
who doesn't ' Listen, a bit of arrogance even, and now, to use a
Bob Hawke term, a bit of consensus about you, which is the. real
you? PM: I've always been a good listener. I think in public life
you have to be a good listener. If you're not you can't form
ideas and I -think the hallmark of the last eight years of our
office was -that we did basically consult people, and that's not
to say you shouldn't develop your own framework in which you're
thinking, but part of the development of that is to talk to
people. Now I've always done a fair bit of that but when I
decided on policies, I mean people I'm quite sure have seen me as
direct, confident, this sort of thing
MITCHELL: Arrogant?
PM: Well even maybe, but they wouldn't have thought I wats too
arrogant when I was agonizing over those decisions. I mean they
wouldn't have thought that when they'd seen me privately
agonizing over which direction to go or the other. 
MITCHELL: so that image over those eight years is probably
wrong, is it? I think particularly the time when you were being
criticized for saying there is no recession and everywhere around
the streets people were saying look at the closed shops, look at
the people out of work, there is a recession.
PM: Well a recession was technically when you get negative
growth and we didn't have negative growth in those days, but
later came of course. But I think that one has to assess things
and then make decisions and do things. You see the trouble with
Australia was, before the early eighties we had the post-war
economic policy and it went on from 1945 or 1950 in the days of
post-war reconstruction to 1980, and by that we were a country
almost dependent on commodities which were then letting us down.
SO if you want to hide your light under a bushell or not be firm
about your obligation to changing policy, well you would be like
all the rest of them. So that's why I think you've got to-listen
but then once you decide go for it.
MITCHELL: But you agree that you now face a credibility problem
because of this image. I mean can YOU see that they're two
polls with a very low personal popularity rating. I mean is our
credibility problem people saying well if he can throw the switch
to vaudeville that's now been thrown, why should we believe you?
Why should we believe this new image of a man who wants to
listen, who wants to hear people's ideas when previously you just
wiped them off?
PM: No I didn't, that's the point. I mean I never
MITCHELL: That was the perception wasn't it?
PM: Well maybe, but in terms of consulting, if you look at all
the business group discussions, discussions with the -trade
unions, the various community groups through the eighties, I
turned consultation into an artform. I never stopped it. I kept
meeting them all this time to try and keep them involved with the
policy and keep the thrust Of it together. But you see in the
Treasury job it's the sort of the hard man job. You've got to
make sure that budgetry policy of the Government runs from the
Treasurer and the Treasurer's office.
MITCHELL: Are you a hard man?
PM: I don't think I am, no. That switch to vaudeville hasn't
been thrown. 
MITCHELL: This is the real you, is it?
PM: I think ils Prime Minister you get a chance to be probably
more of what you are, people see you more as you are than you
would say in -the Treasury post, which is basically about keeping
discipline on the whole structure of the Government.
MITCHELL: Is it difficult to expose your family to all this? I
know, and I understand entirely why there was a pri. vacy
beforehand and I'm sure people respect that, although there were
some classic examples when they didn't, but is it difficult. now
to have to expose the family?
PM: Well no, I think in this sort of natural course of things it
isn't, but we've chosen basically a private life and to keep my
children largely as children removed from the process of the
politics. Now you can't do that absolutely of course but I think
my wife and I have done it as near as you can do to doing it, and
the result is we've tried to keep the kids with the same outlook
as the children they go to school with, the same sort of
experience levels.
MITCHELL: Things like security must go through your mind though,
because you'd have to say Paul Keating polarizes opinion.
PM: That's probably right but I travelled around for well nearly
a decade without any security.
MITCHELL: I noti ' ce you don't have a flag on the car. Is that to
do with security?.
PM: No, I just think that I don't really think I ought 1to be
sort of pointing, saying here I am, there's the flag flying, here
I am. I just don't think that
MITCHELL: But you're Prime Minister, I mean
PM: Yes I know, but I still don't think that driving around
saying here's a motorcycle outrider and a flag saying here I am,
aren't I important, I don't really think that's on, and I think
we've just got a job to do and you try and do it and do it as
effectively as you can but as inconspicuously on occasions as you
can. 
-4-
MITCHELL: Does it worry you being unpopular? Those popularity
ratings are very bad. Is that personally disappointing?
PM: I was as popular as any Treasurer was for many years and
then when the recession came that disappeared. I've had my highs
and lows, when I introduced all the tax changes in the middle
eighties my popularity went down again and after that it came up
and it went down again with the recession. I think you can't
worry too much but providing... look you've got to be able to put
your head down at night and say well look, I gave whatever the
issue of the day was, the best shot I had. I did what I thought
was right and I either got it through or I didn't but at least I
did my best. And I think that's the most important, being at
least consoled about what you've been doing and being satisfied
with what you're doing rather than seeking the approbation of
everybody. MITCHELL: How does it feel to put your head down at night when a
member of your Government says you're a dead loss? Laurie
Ferguson, Martin's brother and a member of the Parliament.
PM: Well you can't win them all, and I mean the thing
about.... he's such an urbane and charming fellow, Laurie, that
it's a very stinging criticism.
MITCHELL: Did you speak to him about it?
PM: No, oh God no. You know the old saying, the dogs may bark
but the caravan moves on. I mean you can't worry about them.
MITCHELL: Speaking of dogs and caravans, have you spoken to Bob
Hawke since he's departed?
PM: A couple of times.
MITCHELL: How's the relationship?
PM: Okay.
MITCHELL: Do you want him to stay until the next election?
PM: That's entirely up to him. I think many people in the
Government would like him to stay till the next election.
I 
MITCHELL: Hav~ e you asked him to?
PM: No, because it is up to him basically.
MITCHELL: But: you'd rather not have a by-election one would
assume. PM: No, that's why it is a matter for him, but again it's not
for me to be expressing views about his own you know, he's got
the right to do as he wishes after all these years and it's not
for me to say otherwize.
MITCHELL: Is it fair to say you were good mates or was that..?
PM: Oh yes, no no, Bob and I were good mates and I think we got
a lot done. : 1 don't think there was any Prime Minister/ Treasurer
team that was longer serving than the two of us.
MITCHELL: And that mateship obviously has finished now.
PM: Well we're not mateship in the sense that we certainly don't
live out of each others pockets and we're not exchanging
confidences, but', in terms of the camaraderie of a working
relationship through a long period of time and under the stress
of a great change in public policy, I mean whatever people think,
in the eighties this Government globalized Australia, took
Australia to the world and it's changed it forever.
MITCHELL: Haire you seen people already are talking about a Bob
Hawke comeback. Not Bob Hawke in fairness.
PM: Well only, I think only the fellow you mentioned wasn't it?
MITCHELL: They've been a few others who' re not Baying it
publicly. PM: That's a) lright, it's a free world, they can say what they
think. MITCHELL: Is there any chance?
PM: I don't think sO. I don't think Bob would think that
himself. 
-6
MITCHELL: The economy and thats why your here, Senator
Button on this station yesterday supported investment
incentives for business do you?
PM: Well, I could do and have on occasions the biggest
incentives, . r gave them two very large incentives, I cut the
personal tax rate, the corporate tax rate from 49% to 39%
and I removed dividends from the taxation system. We
removed the double tax on dividends so at the right moment
incentives matter and this may well be a moment that I think
is something to be considered against our sort of budgetary
backdrop. MITCHELL: Well has John Button pre-empted it?
PM: Well no.
MITCHELL: Well he did. You have in the past pointed out
there should be more restraint.
PM: Well no, John was entirely in order. What he said was
this is some-thing he thinks he favours but it has to be
considered in the totality.
MITCHELL: As Prime Minister you move around, you go
through more of the consultation process. Are you surprised
by what your finding? The level of suffering?
PM: Well, can I just say of yesterday I was very pleasantly
not surprised but confirmed what I thought and that was that
the business community members who came to see us were very
enthusiastic and positive. Such a discussion a decade ago
would, there would have been complaints about tarriffs,
requirements of more protection, the government do this and
that and whi'Le that was certainly part of the order of the
day yesterday, it was put in the context of all of these
people and institutions trying to help. There is much, sort
of, heightened level of awareness about what the government
can do and can't do, what the private economy should do and
shouldn't do and I think it really couldn't of been more
responsible, more optimistic, more enthusiastic.
MITCHELL: That doesn't say much for the unions because you
are now gettiLng that very pressure from the unions for more
protection. PM: Well, I don't know whether we are or not, seriously I
don't think.
MITCHELL: Isn't that the basis of a document they put to
you? PM: Well I haven't seen a document as yet. But can I say
from the ACTU, which is a peak union body in this country,
they are not really out there arguing for more protection. 
-7
MITCHELL: What about Wally Curran?
PM: Well Wally might but he hasn't yet. Not to me.
MITCHELL: Do you perhaps regret the involvement of Wally
Curran, he has copped a hell of a lot of flak?
PM: No.
MITCHELL: What's your relation with him?
PM: He is a good fellow Wally.
MITCHELL: Is he? some say he has destroyed the meetings
around this state.
PM: He is a self taught working class intellectual type of
fellow and I think he stands for a lot of what's good about
the Labor Party, and a lot of its values and getting to know
him has been one of the recent pleasures in my life.
MITCHELL: Is it politically wise? His image in this state
is about on par with Norm Gallagher.
PM: I don't think that's fair to him. Norm did plumb a few
depths. MITCHELL: Well is it still politically wise to be involved
with him?
PM: Well I'm involved with a whole lot of people down here.
MITCHELL: But Bill Kelty was so moved as to ring you and
say you had better distance yourself, its going to hurt
Paul. PM: No it didn't, no.
MITCHELL: That didn't happen?
PM: Bill has a very high regard for him as well. But I
talked to trade unions in this state across the board and
have been doing. I've been coming to the ACTU now for a
decade down here but Curran is not a rank and file member of
the ACTU executive. He is a leader of a state union. So I
made it my business in the last year or so to get out and
see some of those state unions.
MITCHELL: So regardless of political damage does that
relationship with him continue?
PM: Absolutely.
MITCHELL: Risk?
PM: I don't sort of walk away from friendships because of
risk. 
8-
MITCHELL: Bob Hawke said the same thing about Kerry
Packer. PM: Well, good on him.
MITCHELL: Joan Kirner, one of your supporters here, says
there's been too much delay already in getting things going.
How much damage was done in the time between you left as
Treasurer and when you took over as Prime Minister? Seven
to eight months?
PM: Well, I t~ hink there were opportunities lost and I said
some things at the time which I would have done had I been
around but I've got the chance to do that now so I can only
do, take up -the opportunities I've been given.
MITCHELL: Whose fault was that?
PM: I think gfenerally the government was advised that a
recovery was coming through much more strongly. It's only
about a week ago that I released Treasury's new estimates of
growth through the year, which are one per cent lower than
they were at budget time and I think because I was getting
around the place probably more than members of the
government were I could see that basically those stronger
growth number7s through the year were not going to occur. So
I was saying that they should drop interest rates further,
in the end they did, and that basically they should shift
policy in favour of growth because there wasn't going to be
enough. But the official advisings of the Treasury, the
Reserve Bank, the Department of Finance, the statistician,
the group that make up the forecasting group was saying to
government look that will be ok, our numbers are basically
right. Well it turns out they weren't.
MITCHELL: Its interesting you say you saw more when you
went to the backbench, you were able. to be more in touch.
Do you feel that in retrospect you were out of touch as
Treasurer? PM: Well I did as much as you can I think as Treasurer to
get around and stay in touch but when I was on the backbench
I saw a lot of groups and people that I wouldn't have seen
as Treasurer, you know I just went out of my way to do that.
And I had the: time to do it. I think this is always a
problem for ministers, you just can't see as many people as
you should see.
MITCHELL: Do you feel you failed as Treasurer?
PM: No I don't because the Australian economy will now have
a future as an externally-oriented economy in the
international world of trade and commerce which it wasn't.
MITCHELL: We' re in a pretty deep hole at the moment
though? 
9-
PM: Yes we are in a recession, but we will emerge from the
recession an~ d what we will look at in the 90s is a low
inflation country, with low rates of interest, with a
structural budget surplus with a big shift in export and
manufacturers. I mean this is the future, there is a good
underlying long term future for Australia in the 90s, the
short term is the recession and the problems it has brought
but again, that followed eight years of growth.
MITCHELL: So you set that up in your period as Treasurer?
PM: Well I was the one who set up the institutional
arrangements to internationalise the place and I think had
we not done that Australia wouldn't have a future it would
be just a low growth country relying on a few commodities
with a very large current account deficit and therefore sort
of a permanent recession, a permanent low growth mode. And
that's what would have happened, you talked orginally about
making decisions, standing up and pushing your way through
had I not pushed through things like the float, the removal
exchange controls, cutting government spending all of those
things in the 80s Australia would be now doomed as a low
growth place.
MITCHELL: Mrs Kirner says she is looking for direct help
for Victoria, will she get it?
PM: Well I thinkVictoria has taken a great burden of the
brunt of the structural changes in Australia, that is the
changes in protection, the fall in the cycle in the
recession in manufacturing, its borne the brunt of that and
a large part of the low level of confidence in the country JC
think is coming from the experience of the people of
Victoria of -this recession. So I have said now for nearly a
year, that ViLctoria is a problem and has to be dealt with by
the government in those terms.
MITCHELL: Are we still a basket
PM: Well I think it's bottomed. It's probably bumping on
the bottom and may pick up but it won't pick up without
help. MITCHELL: Does that mean pump-priming in inevitable its
just a matter7 Of where?
PM: Well its not a good term pump-priming because mostly it
has been in a budgetary spending which has picked the
economy up and often we have squandered that which we have
spent. What we would like to do is to try to give the place
a stimulus but the things we do to do it are ones which
structurally help Australia in the future. So in other
words, rather than just having a sort of a big quick bang
which sort of goes into thin air but costs a lot of money.
Do things which are structurally good while at the same time
pick the place up. So I have been to Victoria a lot in the
last two years, a lot, sometimes a couple of times a week
and I've seen a lot of Joan Kirner over this period as well 
10
and Joan's prepared to make decisions, get things done and
where I can help her I will.
MITCHELL: Some say, in fact the reason you're Prime
Minister is the support of Victoria
PM: No, I got two Victorian votes only.
MITCHELL: Just going back to Wally Curran, one suggestion
he is putting forward and I wonder about what you say about
structural change is screwing up the super funds and now
you'll look at it?
PM: Well I think one of the options which the trade unions
is talking about is letting younger members of super funds
have some sort of draw down on the funds for their housing.
And this is a concept which has been around a bit and which
is worthy of consideration. There are issues here and that
is the question of preservation, and these superannuation
benefits are to be preserved not to be touched till age
So that the sort of policy conundrum is how can you have
them preserved and not touched until 55 but touch them for
certain, if you like, approved things such as housing and
that we are prepared to have a look at.
MITCHELL: A couple of quick things and we are running out
of time, you once described........ as the media nut, I think
Michelle Grattan said you were a media nut. In that
background are you comfortable with the Conrad Black
PM: they seem to run a decent newspaper organisation
around the world, most particularly in Britain where the
weight of it is and I'm quite sure that what Fairfax needs
mostly is a sort of a caring owner. I think the business
has sort of suffered as a result of this ownership and
I don't think newspapers can have a dozen years of being
uncompetitive. MITCHELL: Do you think they might be more fairer to you, I
mean the Fairfax press traditionally give you a bit of a
hard time, apart from the leadership
PM: No, Fairfax newspaper has been pretty fair to me I have
to say, pretty fair to me I can't complain, I mean
occasionally I have had a row with them but its been
occasional. MITCHELL: Still on media, the TV and radio political
advertising ban its not your legislation do you support it?
PM: Well it h-as been amended in the Senate and it's I think
seen as a solution to the problems of political advertising
and its scale and cost and the pressure of the parties I
think we can have, certainly not perfection I don't think we
should just now, perhaps it was not perfection in its
original form its certainly not perfection now.
MITCHELL: Can we get it right? 
11
PM: I don't know but is something I am prepared to have a
look at.
MITCHELL: Also prepared to back away from if necessary?
PM: No
MITCHELL: Refine?
PM: Refine I'd say but again the Bill is now back in the
House of Representatives and we can examine it.
MITCHELL: Collingwood Football Club, does your support
continue? PM: Yes I'm a Sydneysider because I live in Sydney and I'm
not a member of the Melbourne community but I get down to a
few games a year.
MITCHELL: End of the year, not the Collingwood Football
Club, where will we be? Any better off or still a lot of
pain ahead?
PM: I think wie will promote a recovery I hope Australia will.
be growing significantly a year from now and I hope most
particularly that the fortunes of the people of Victoria and
the mood of -this community has changed from a negative one
to a positive one. I think that would be great for
Australia and great for the State and I think it is
encumbent upon all of us in national politics to make sure
that happens.
MITCHELL: Confidence is a key?
PM: Confidence is a key and at the moment confidence just
isn't there, you still have tremendous problems with falls
in asset prices.
MITCHELL: This is what baffles me, the confidence isn't
there and the people say to me it's because of Paul Keating,
because of when he was Treasurer, we can't wipe that eight
year memory.
PM: Just remember this, in the seven years before 1983 we
have 1.9% economic growth a year, in the seven years after
1983 we had 4.1 twice as much.
MITCHELL: unemployment
PM: In the eight years between 1983 and 1990, seven years in
between, seven to eight years we produced one and a half
million jobs so in 1983 we had 10% unemployment and in 1992
we have 10% unemployment. But in 1983 we had
unemployment in a workforce of six million, we've now got
unemployment in a workforce of 7.5 million so we have
kept largely the 1.5 million jobs we created in the 80s. So
I don't think people are entitled to say that they have bad 
12
memories of my stewardship over the eight years, they might
have bad memories of the last eighteen months but the
previous seven years it was one of the highest growth,
highest income, highest wealth producing periods in
certainly our post war history.
MITCHELL: Final question, you and your mate John Laws now
you launched his book in February but Melbourne radio was
bland in fact your having a cup of tea now but you had time
for a cup of tea in between questions, I assume that there
are exceptions to bland radio in Melbourne or do you still
think that is right?
PM: As I general rule I think it was bland I think, I mean
Laws is blessed with this, I think, a great radio career, a
great radio manner, a very easy touch with what I think is
the view or the feeling of most people, a common touch, his
great ease of manner, his great skill I think is to develop
a very conversational tone and in that out comes all of the
little truths which are often hidden in a more racy
interview and the other thing about him is that he must have
the best radio voice ever.
MITCHELL: Is normal radio bland?
PM: its one of your colleages saying I saw him in the
United States, I said well there wouldn't be someone in the
Unites States who has a better radio voice than him, it is a
knockout radio voice. In other words some of that is Godgiven
so it is no one's fault if you don't have a voice that
good.
MITCHELL: Even if it is bland will you come down and take
some calls with us one day, and talk to the public?
PM: Pleased to, thank you very much
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, we have ratings ahead of John
Laws I should tell you, I've good a crook voice but better
ratings. PM: I know but you have to make sure that you get the
cheques out of the company that he gets out of his.
MITCHELL: That would be a real achievement, thanks for
your time.
I 



6/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, PAUL KEATING
Australia has decided to recognise as independent states the
former Yugoslav republics of Slovenia and Croatia.
Slovenia and Croatia have met the conditions set out by the
EC on 16 December 1991. These include respect for United
Nations and Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
( CSCE) principles, including regard for the rule of law,
democracy and human rights, guarantees on minority rights,
observance of international obligations on security and nonproliferation,
respect for the inviolability of all
frontiers, and recourse to peaceful means for the settlement
of disputes.
But much remains to be done before the people of the former
republics of Yugoslavia are able to enjoy the peace and
prosperity that is their right. I strongly urge the leaders
of all the parties to the conflict to demonstrate the
strength of will and political determination to resolve
their differences peacefully. Nor does the act of
recognition bring to an end the responsibility of the
international community to help resolve the conflict. The
international community must continue to promote and support
efforts to ensure that minority rights, territorial disputes
and succession questions are settled peacefully and justly.
I warmly welcome the establishment of these new states, and
wish the leaders and people of the nations of Slovenia and
Croatia well in the tasks ahead. My Government will seek
discussions with the new states on establishing diplomatic
relations. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Senator Evans,
will issue a statement on the arrangements for Australian
recognition. CANBERRA 16 January 1992 



PRESS CONFERENCE THE HION P J KEATING MP, PRIME MINISTER
THURSDAY 16 JANUARY 1992, MELBCUPNE
E OE PROOF ONLY
PARTIAL TR~ ANSCRIPT ONLY LAST QUESTIONS MISSING
J: Well how did the talks go?
PM: Well I thOught it was a very productive day, which makes
two very productive days. Very interesting talks this
morning with the unions and the Committee for Melbourne at
lunch time and there has been a lot of cross dlussion
between the various industrial sectors and industrial
groupings here on Melbourne and Victoria and the Committee
for Melbourne has got now a reasonably clear agenda. Of
course the Premier attended that meeting 8nd I think -it was
a very good meeting where we had a chance to discuss the
impact of the recession upon Victoria, structural things
about Victoria, ways in which Victoria might play a part in
the recovery.
J: So you're thinking of making special offers to help
Victoria in t'Ais structural process?
PM:. I'd like t: o think that anything we might be able to do
can be, whilst national in character, be also usefully
4mployed in Victoria. But I've said and I will say again
that Victoria, confidence levels are down in Victoria more
than they are in other parts of Australia and to generate a
recovery, I believe a substantial recovery has to be
generated in -the state of Victoria, and that the national,
if you like, aconmic conditions is in part itself
conditioned by events and circumstances in Victoria.
J: Do you shisre Mr Elliot's view that Victoria is the key
to Australia's3 economic recovery?
PM: Well I thl~ nk that is an important part, I wouldn't say
key. But a ve~ ry significant part and probably weigh~ er than
most of the other states.
J: Did you hear anything from the Victorian unions that
particularly interested you?
PM: Well a 101: of the themes and threads thread through
Committee for Melbourne's own agenda which has now all been
reasonably widely discussed institutionally here, in the
unions, by the unions with business via the various people
within that Committee and the Government, of course.
J: What about: this submission on changes to the tarriff
policy? PM: Well there wasn't very much said about that. 
J: They did actually present you with a written submission?
PM: Yes I knowd. There was not strong advocoacL of that ina
the meeting./
J: The Opposition today in light of the record unemployment
numbers is calling for an imumediate cut in immigration and
for a of any national wage rise.
PM: Well I haven't seen any of what the opposition said. I
saw today's employment numbers, Itt still records a very high
unem loymnent rate, marginally up only than last month but
thata not the point. The fact is that itse still too high
and thats the whole point of the statement, to try and get
it down and to get a recovery going but I think thatA what
we are basically focussing on, thats the very point of this
exercise. J: Do you rule out any cut in immigration within the next
month or so?
PM: Yes because we'll review immigration, the normal cycle
of the Cabinet review which will be about April of this
year. J: ( inaudible3)
PM: Well I presided over an economy which grew at twice the
rate of growth in seven years as it did in the previous
seven before I became Treasurer. So for seven and a half of
my eight and a half years as Treasurer, the Australian
economy grew at twice the speed as it did in the previous
seven years. And the fact that there is a recession was not
of the Goenet wishes and, of course, is part of the
English speaking world-wide recession, which has come of the
globalisatioi of financial markets, the collcqp. in asset
values and the belief that inflation will no longer cut the
mustard in in-vestment, that people have got to invest in
things which are income producing. You just can't buy a
building and ' hope to make a profit from it. And now that
realisation has sunk in, asset prices have fallen. This is
not a phenomena which is peculiar to Australia. Now it is
two years ago this month that I first reduced interest
rates. Official policy should not be promoting continuing a
recession at this point. While it had a role, certainly in
inducing the recession the fact that interest rates came off
two years ago, came of f in earnest eighteen months ago,
would by all -other measures and reckoning mean we would be
into a reasonably firm recovery. We are not because of
factors which are not peculiar to Government policy and this
is true of the United States, true of Britian, true of
Canada, true of New Zealand where recessions are in fact
deeper and gloomier in some of those places than they are in
Australia. So I'm going back to doing what I did mostly,
that is, gene-rate faster rates of growth and employment.
J: fastest possible sustainable rate of growth.. 
PM: What the late ) 80s proved is that once the Australian
economy went over four per cent growth a year~ it. spilled
into imports, but the countries around us, th~ e so called
newly industrialised countries, the tigers, could grow at
six and eight per cent a year before they spill into
In other words they add so much industrial capacity they
could handle six to eight per cent growth before they
started to rely on imports. We can only get just above four
before we start to rely on imports. That's why the Liberals
should hang their heads in shame after 30 years of running
Australia. The best the place could do when it got a bit of
speed up, was get to about four per cant growth then spill
to imports. And this is what this government has been
about, trying to rebuild our capital stock in our productive
sectors which we've had substantial success in from the
sloth of most of the post war years.
J: Where is this point now?
PM: Where is it? We hope its going to be in the longer run
where this is sustainable you're asking?-well it's
obviously sustainable under four and a half per cent, 4 per
cent or something. But I'm not suggesting and your question
does not require me, I don't think to indicate that that's
the desira-l speed because we can't at the moment get
back, get out of negative growth, so we want to get back to
a sustainable growth troJectory, one which is sustainable
for inflation and sustainable for Australia in the longer
run, adding to the capital stock and producing more goods
and services. I mean it needs to be remembered, because
there is a perception that you know we tried some in the 0
and we sort of lost it now. I notice some people are saying
our manufacturing base has been deci'mated it is worth
recording these facts; manufacturing production is twice
today what it was in 1980 twice. Manufacuturing exports
are 300 per cent greater than in 1983, we have exported our
heads of f all through the 1980s and are doing more of it
now. So the fact is that we have got to continue though to
build that capacity and that's what it is all about now,
going back to a-recovery, but a recovery which builds that
productive capacity.
J: Mr Keating, do you believe that with the economic policy
you have been pursuing in your statement, that you'll be
able to bring the unemployment down from it's present 10.6
per cent level, this year?
PM: Wel. l I'm not going to be making estimates about what the
rate will be. But the aim will be to stabilise unemployment
quickly and to turn it around,, which was our objective in
1983, which of course we accomplished in 1983 and we would
be hoping to' do something of the same during the course of
1992. J: Prime Minister, talking about sustainable growth, that's
in terms of the ecological sustainable also? 
The environmental aspects of this growth is there now a
readjustment towards 7
PM: Well we are part of the international discussion about,
which will take place next year in Brazil about greenhouse
gas emissions, about the whole ecological sustainable
development questions and that conference will be of some
significance in determining how the rest of the world, the
Northern Hemisphere economies approach these questions. But
at the moment: we have got a lot of spare capacity laying
about and theirefore, what we are about are employing current:
capacity, current in-store capacity and that capacity has
been installed at times when it has been operating at
optimum level. s in the past', So it's not a matter of any new
policy in thait sense, I mean we are aboutfor a start, just
getting that existing capacity working.
J
PM: Wall it's too complex to give a simple answer to.
J: Mr Keating, how do you react to the President of the
ACTU's comments, Mr Martin Ferguson, that it's now time for
the Governmen~ t to get it's house in order on Industry
Policy, but basically the Government's industry policy over
the last few years has been a disaster?
PM: Well it's wrong. Because, manufacturing production is
200 per cent greater than in 1980-83, 200 per cent
improvement. Manufacutring exports are 300 per cent
greater, they are Just simply facts. They just have to pick
up any statisticians release and have a look through it.
J: So you think you have a fundamental difference of
opinion.. PM: No, let6 be clear about this. The ACTU have had a focus
on industry policy for years. What I said was wrong, was
that the policy has been a disaster that's obviously,
plainly wrong. Now I don't know whether Martin said that or
whether you concluded that.
J: What he specifically said is it's time for the
government to get its house in order.
PM: Well that's part of the ACTU claim, and it has been for
a number of years. And that's a continuation of that and
that's fair enough, and we're doing all that we can to
induce better industry policy in this country with the
statement which we made in March of 1991 and to the extenW
that what we might do in this statement, which will be
focussed on a recovery, as I said yeste , also hopefully
will have good structural elements to it which would also be
improving of and improvement to the general industrial
structure of Australia.
J: Mr Ferguson is obviously concerned that the March
industry statement and the later job statement didn't go far 
enough so will you say that your coming statement will go
further in terms of industry policy?
PM: It will have a number of objectives the first will be to
promote a recovery, but to promote it in a way which adds to
the common wheel, makes the place structurally more strong
and that will. be around, obviously the structure of
industry. Now whether in the end what we do is a approved
of by Mr Fercruson time will tell.
Does it concern you that the ACTU might not approve of
the industry policy?
PM: They don't approve of everything we have done over the
years, nor doi we approve of every view they have.
J: They have given you a lot of support over the years?
PM: And they have got a lot in return.
J: Mr Keating superannuation funds. What is you view
on the ( inaudible)?
PM: It's not so much for wvzJ~ housing, I think it is for
housing. There is a view that benefits preserved could be
used by some people in a way which preserves, largely keeps
the preservation about it, that is if it were used for
housing being returned to the pool of preserved benefits at
some stage. It's. something we are prepared to have a look
at. One of the difficulties with superannuation is
encouraging very young people in the workforce to be as
enthusiastic about it as older members of the workforce and
I think the view may be that if younger members of the
workcforce could draw down preserved benefits or at least use
them in some-way for housing it gives them more immediate
rationale for superannuation rather than simply the benefit
which comes at age 55. That's rational and that's why we
will have a look it.
J: Mr Keating is there anything that you have heard from
the last two days that apart from change., foreshadowed
changes in economic policy in terms of Victoria, giving
Victoria some sort of assistance..
PM: No they are not asking for assistance for straight
federal funding. The Committee of Melbourne proposals, for
instance, and the ones the Government of Victoria
are associated with go to the infrastructure of Melbourne.
It's not been a claim, by Victoria upon us for funds to
administer itself..
J: There has been talk within the Victorian government of
accelerating f ederal f unding f or housing, f or example.
PM: That hasn'It been mentioned.
3: Mr JKeatinr the dollar dropped again a level today
according to t~ he market it was a report going through 
the markets t~ hat the Financial Review tomorrow is reporting
a budget deficit blow out of 8-10 million dollars. I'm not
expecting you to comment on what a newspaper may or may not
be going to print but can you tell us what the lastest
estimate on the budget deficit Is?
PM! I don't know Don. I don't know off the top of my head.
J: Could it possibly be anything within that figure range?
PM: Look I simply don't know and I would doubt that very
much and there's no point in me speculating on what
newspapers might say about numbers I don't know about,
J: ( inaudible)
PM: I think that is very unlikely, but no one has talked to
me about it.
J: Mr Dawkiniqs aid just a couple of days ago that..
PM: Yes, well that would be right. If he said that that
would be right.
J: ( inaudible)
PM! No I thought that it may be prudent on our part to see
how the application of legislation goes in respect of the
Tasmanian election and the ACT election and the by-election
in NSW and just see whether the Bill which was itself a
compromise of discussions in the Senate as one that actually
does fill the bill so to speak. With some practical having
been applied.
J7: Are there any circumstances in which you would scrap it?
PM: No. Let me at least reserve a right to have a look at
it. See how it has worked in these particular instances.
J: ( inaudible)
PM! There's no, point in me giving a cheek by jowl commentary
on elements of the Bill. I will have a look at it in total.
J: But your aim in that review would be to refine and
streamline not: to get rid of it?
PM It passed the House of Representatives the day I was
elected Prime Minister. Within a couple of days we had to
swear in new Ministers, a couple of days after that I had
President Bush~ here, a couple of days after that I had a
Cabinet meeting, a couple of days after that I had this. It
has not been on the top of my agenda the Bill I am
speaking about.
J: On a totally different subject Mr Keating I believe
tomorrow's your birthday, is that correct? 
PM No its not. Saturday I think it is.
J: Wall what are you doing on your birthday on Saturday?
PM: Not very mouch I don't think. Have you got any ideas?
3: Are you shouting yourself a present.
PM: No, I think once yourtpast the Pour-O, on does have a
diminished opinion of birthdays. And I'm heading for the
Ff've
J: On the mretings of the last couple of days, there seems
to be a lot of people coming out with a lot of enthusiam,
barely negat~ ive. How important do you think it is?
PM: If people come and say that they were positive and
enthusiastic-about the discussions I think thats how they
found them, not for cosmetic effects at the fran door, or
for effects beyond that but because that's how they found
them. I mean, that for instance that the Federal Government,
certainly al: the level of Prime Miniater and senior
Ministers would have consulted the Victorian trade union
movement, probably the first time in our period of office.
The Committee for Melbourne which is represented by the
Premier and the Government as well as senior people from the
business community and the trade unions have also enjoyed a
deep, relatively deep, discussion about various points of
interest which they think are important to Melbourne. and
Victoria. The business community, the BHPs, the banks etc.,
today Pacific Dunlop, Ford, are talking about their industry
perceptions about the economy in general, what they think
might be worth doing, what they think is sensible and
practical to do and they have a chance of having a serious
discussion with the members of the Government who are likely
to have the greatest impact on the statement. So, I think
that's a good process for them, but it'Is very good process
for us. So we said we'd come and listen and try and learn
and pick things up and I think we have, we have picked
things up and it is worth talking to people in this vein.
3: tha public, that there's these sort of talks going
on? PM: I should, think so. I think the public would probably
believe thait a spirit of co-operation, the Government
earnestly looking for ways to improve the way in which the
economy can now function and then the longer term augers
well for the economy. That is, that we are interested in
promoting a recovery and getting one as quickly as possible
and doing it: in ways which are deemed sensible and
reasonable by these various representative segments of the
community.... end of tranuicript 



PRIME MINISTER 7/ 92
ACTING SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Mr Stephen Thomas Sedgwick will act as Secretary to the
Department of Finance from 20 January 1992.
Mr Sedgwick has been Chairperson and Commissioner of the
Industry Commission since July 1991.
He is a senior Commonwealth public servant with a record of
achievement in economic policy, including industry policy.
His earlier career included a period as Deputy Secretary in
the Department of Finance, positions in the Treasury and the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, and a period
as Senior Economic Adviser to the former Prime Minister.
19 January 1992 r
~ E~ P; Cts~ 



PRIME MINISTER 8/ 92
ARRANGEMENTS FOR MEDIA PRIME MINISTER'S SYDNEY MEETINGS
Meetings with business and union leaders will take place in
the Prime Minister's office at 70 Phillip Street ( ANZ
McCaughn Building) on Monday 20 and Tuesday 21 January.
A media room has been made available on the 11th floor of
the ANZ McCaughn Building.
Media must carry identification for entry onto the 11th
floor.
Media will be advised of details of picfacs and availability
of Ministers by the Prime Minister's office at the ANZ
McCaughn Building tomorrow ( Monday).
19 January 
The following is a schedule of meetings with Mr Keating,
Mr Dawkins, Mr Willis and Senator Button on Monday and
Tuesday this week in Sydney.
MONDAY 20 JANUARY
9.30am Mr Norman Fussell
Executive General Manager and Director, Commercial
Mount Isa Mines Holdings Limited
10.30am Mr Robert Johnson
Chief Executive
Toyota Motor Sales Australia Limited
Mr John Conimos
Managing Director
Toyota Motor Sales Australia Limited
11.30am Mr Brian Finn
General Manager
IBM Australia Limited
12.30am Working Lunch:
Mr Richard Warburton
Group Managing Director
Du Pont ( Australia) Limited
Mr Michael Nugent
Chief Executive
Goodman Fielder Wattie Limited
Mr Kevin Kirby
Chairman James N Kirby Pty Limited
2.30pm Mr John Farrell
Managing Director
Oceanfast Pty Ltd
Mr Don Johnston
Chairman Oceanfast Pty Ltd
3.30pm Mr John Ralph AO
Managing Director/ Chief Executive
CRA Limited
Mr Gary Pemberton
Group Managing Director
Brambles Industries Limited 
TUESDAY 21 JANUARY
10.30am Sir Eric Neal AC
Chairman Westpac Banking Corporation
Mr Frank Conroy
Chief Operating Officer
Westpac Banking Corporation
12.00pm Mr Carlo Salteri
Chairman Transfield Holdings Pty Ltd
1.00pm Working Lunch:
Mr Bernard Power
Executive Chairman
Power Brewing Company Limited
Mr Daniel Smetana
Executive Chairman
Joyce Corporation Limited
2.45pm Labor Council
3.45pm The Hon N Greiner MP
Premier of New South Wales
5.00pm Mr Robert Ferguson
Managing Director
Bankers Trust Australia 



PRIME MINISTER
E OE PROOF COPY ONLY
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, SYDNEY, 20 JANUARY 1992
PM: I'm doing today what I did last week and that is going
out into the community and listening to what they have
to say and I think it has been a good process. I notice,
by the way,, that Dr Hewson said in Tasmania last week
that I shouldn't be listening, that the business
community were only after handouts and obviously what he
believes one should do is hand down tablets from on
high, don't ask or don't speak to anybody and then slap
everybodly with a 15 per cent tax on their food and then
regard that as reform. So what we're doing is going to
business, all sectors of business, and to the trade
unions and saying, well, what do you believe should be
the steps of reform7. How do you believe a recovery ought
to be promoted? And that is what I have been doing. Now,
on the wreekend we had a very interesting episode in
politics: in Australia where in a by-election, upon which.
the balance of the State Parliament was held, the Liberal
Party lost the seat and Dr Hewson said in the course of
the by-election campaign that " let this be a test of the
GST". Well to the extent it was a test to the GST, it
was a slap on the face of Dr llewson. Now it was a State
by-election, I didn't involve myself in it. It is a
great compliment to Bob Carr and the NSW Labor Party.
And it was a slapping down for the Coalition. But the
extent that Dr Hewson and John Howard campaigned in the
by-election, and Dr Heweon said, " let this be a test of
the CST' a very flat refusal to the politics of
GST and all that came with it. So I just want to say
this to Dr Hewson: I'm not taking his advice. That is,
to not talk to people. I am going to talk to people
. ome of our largest and smallest companies, some of our
largest and smallest trade unions and I'm going to See
that at least the people's views are listened to,
weighed -and sifted through carefully.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
-E &amp; OE PROOF COPY ONLY
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING PILJ
PRESS CONFERENCE, SYDNEY 21 JANUARY 1992
PM: Well thank you for coming, look I have got to keep it
brief because I have still got a meeting in progress
which I have to go back to, so just to give you a few
thoughts about processes to date. I think it is fair to
say our discussions with the business community and the
trade union have been exceptionally encouraging. I
think most Australians will be pleased to know, it will
be music to their ears to know, that most business
community' representatives w've met all in fact want to
get Australia moving again. There is not a lot of
ideology in these conversations. If we were having them
a few years ago there would be a lot of ideology being
spoken thats now been almost completely removed and
businesses and their representatives are basically
saying what have we got to do to get the place moving
again,' putting ideas, ideas which we will consider and
which a group of ministers I mentioned to you a week or
two ago will be sitting to consider in the next few
weeks., As I said to you we have been working in a frame
work ourselves, much of what has been said to us have
been complementary to that framework some things
haven't. They have been new and different and we are
going to consider them as well. So it has been a very
refreshing process. Government always believes of
course that they get to hear about it some stage or
another well, sometimes you don't. There are some
things that just don't filter down through the
ministerial system or the bureaucratic system and I have
found, I am sure my colleagues have as well found, the
process very engaging. So I1 would be happy to take
questions. 
Can : you clarify with us a wage tax trade
PM: Well nothing is off the agenda, we are looking at
everything and prepared to but nor are we about to try
and, if you like, push funds on the trade union
movement, we are not about to be doing that either.
Fundii are to scarce to be trying to give them away
witho~ ut some results. So again, it is something worthy
of cansideration but it Is not something which the
government at this moment in time plans to do.
J: Mr Keating Westpac today seemed to echo what was said
last week to you that the market could live with fis; cal
stimulus to the value of about $ 2 billion. is that your
view?
PM: Well I don't have a view that precise, I think, about
banks and their economics and their econometrics
departments, they can get down to these nice precise
numbers but, at least they are making it clear that they
believe that as a major institution and representing I
think a lot of market view that some fiscal stimulus is
appropriate beyond simply that coming of f interest
rates..
J: Mr Keating what you were saying before does that mean
that you are unlikely to looking....... the tax deal in
the lead up to the economic statement but you could be
looking at it in the lead up to the Budget?
PM: Yes it could be either, that's right.
Could it be on the agenda at the forthcoming
PM: It could be that the unions are prepared to take their
chances in the market place, or in the longer term with
a comm: Lsison, it is up to them really.
J: PM:. No, I think there was a certain similarity actually in
their demeanor and their content I couldn't assume much
but the one thread running through it was that they all.
want to get the place moving.
J7: Mr Keating what happened to the ideology?
PM: Well T think the ideology was regarded as superfluous
and maybe a luxury for better times, and now they take
the view that times require a close asosement of what
the traffic will bare, you know whats possible and the
ideology has sort of disappeared. 
J; Mr Keating there is still talk of a second quarter rate
cut. If the economy hasn't started to recover by then
do you see room for another cut?
PM: I am not speculating about interest rates.
own opinion?
PM: About ideology well I don't think this has been an
ideological Government at any stage in its history. It
was, after all, a Labor Government that introduced a
market economy to Australia. I mean again I think it
has ahown the fact that it is not ideological. It has
intorests and it has probably, in many respects,
permanent iinterests, but it has not been subject to that
sort; of craven ideology, and I think this has been
largely true of the business community in the last
decade. It is certainly true of themi now.
J: Mr Kenting there was a fresh report today
What is your current view on sectoral policy?
PM: The trouble is they all mean different things to
different people. The word ' sectoral' means different
things to different people I think, and I think, in
certainly my view, and I think it is the view of many
meinebers of Government, that Australia does have
particular strengths and we ought to cater for those
strengths. We ought to support those strengths, but not
by way of production subsidies and some of the elements
abounded of protection which in years gone by. So it is
a mfatter of whether you think that some of the general
directions we take are the ones we ought to be taking,
whether we take impediments out of the road, whether we
do things which progress the lot of those industries or
those sectors as destinct from doing much more
particular and direct things which we have turned our
back from. 
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well again, you know if you think minerals and minerals
processing is something for Austraiia to be in, then
generally policy should accommodate it. We generally
have. Generally policy has, for instance. But there
is a whole lot of difference I think between that and
production subsidies or particular, if you like, export
related subsidies and all of the other things which are
generally GATT unfriendly and which are protection of
the! old variety.
J: Mr Keating, Dr Hewson says your comitints on immigration
today relating to the Liberal Party were a slur. He is
calling on you to withdraw them and to apologise. Will
you do that?
PM: Well he shouldn't be running on these Issues if he
doesn't mean them. I mean, he had Mr Howard up the
other day saying we ought to cut the migration program
to pieces. it was Mr Howard who was addressing himself
to this. subject in 1988. 1 mean, they are bacX onto it
now, not in the same vein, but I didn't say they were.
So there is nothing to apologise over.
J: But you did accuse them of a sub plot, a racist sub
plot?
PM: No what I said was, there is a sub debate, there was a
sub debate in Australia. Whether it is quite in
evidence that it was in 1988, 1 don't know. But the
fact of the matter is the program, governments have got
to make a judgement of what is in the best interests of
Australia as a nation in the short and medium term.
AndT-that is where the right judgements and how the
judgements should be made in relation to migration.
J: But isn't there room for a debate on immigration given
the recession?
PM: I think there is. Yes there is. But a debate and
Jingoism are two different things. And craven appeals
by Mr Howard to rip the program to shreds is jingoism.
J: Mr X'eating, just getting back to tax cuts. Do you
think that tax cuts ( inaudible) in terms of a wage
incr~ ease would La~ a good idea and direct the
( inaudible) 
PM: Well anything which reduces fiscal surplus or increases
the deficit as the case may be is stimulatory of the
economy, that is true. but whether that is the path we
choose will depend, or whether it is one of the chosen
paths, let me put it that way,. will depend upon what
attitude we have to the Budget, what attitude the trade
unions have to those arrangements etc. And right now
we don't intend to have one.
J: Do you think that the
implemented over the next financial year that you will
be stimulating import . following our
picking up
PM: I dLon't know that is right. Because there is not a lot
of evidence from anybody that says that there is a pick
up going on out there. No evidence in reality. And
therefore I think that there is therefore not a great
attendant risk that we will over-stimulate it. So,
even in the terms which have been spoken about in the
public debate. These are not things I think which are
going to over-stimulate the economy. But the lag point
is right, anything happens with the lag of course.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well we are not being deluged with evidence that there
is a recovery under way.
J: Mr Keating, you are going to meet Mr Greiner. A few
days ago he attacked you for, he said, for rewarding
Victoria which he described as an economic basket case,
how do you react to that?
PM: Oh--well that was a bit of State chauvinism. That is
all. that is. We are not going to reward Victoria but
it has to be borne in mind that Victoria has carried a
large part of the burden ot structural change in
Australia by virtue of the character of the city of
Melbourne and its manufacturing base. So I don't think
that that is, it certainly won't be my intention to
reward one state, to use his word reward any State
above another but to look at Australia as a nation and
say what can we do which in the short term is
sensible and for the long term, structural.
j; How would you treat his request for $ 100 million for
capital projects?
Well he hasn't made them yet, but he probably will. He
can make them for himself rather than you.
J; Any ideas from the business leaders so far that have
grabbed your attention? 
PM: Yes. Quite a few, but I don't want to run acorss them
here.
J; How do you enjoy exposing yourself so much as Prime
Minister, it must have different when you were
Treasurer.
PM: did a lot of this when I was Treasurer. I did a lot
of these sorts of meetings. In fact, for eight years.
It is just that I didn't normally have four television
crews accompanying me and this great phalanx of
journalists. But I still did them.
J: What other differences are there apart from increased
television crews?
PM: Well I think one is required to listen to as broad a
range of views as you can avail yourself of. Which we
have tried to do. we have had representatives or
small, medium, large business, unions, all sorts of
organisations, and it is very good.
J: Mr Keating, where would you expect the Special
Premiers' Conference to and and
what sort of measures do you
PM: Well there are obviously on-going issues between the
Commonwealth and the States, particularly about
national efficiency. And they were not either seeking
or swimming, so to speak, on the fiscal question, even
though that is important to the States. so I should
believe that much more can still be achieved in those
areas and we will take that process up.
J: And when will that be?
PM: Probably, it will be well after the Statement and it
will be probably before the middle of the year.
J: Mr Keating, the latest Morgan Poll taken in November,
shows that the majority of Australians blame the
. overnment for unemployment. 75 per cent complained
saying the u. overnment was not doing enough to relieve
unemployment. Does that justify the decision taken by
caucus to dump Bob Hawke for you as leader?
PM: That is a judgement for you to make. Public
perceptions about the recession are important. But the
mnost important thing is to get out of recession and
have the conversation about a recovery.
J; Are you concerned about the prospect ot a brawl with Mr
Hawke? 
PM: Well look, in a change of public office of this
dimension, there is always the interview that is done
where the hard questions are asked and I tried to
answer them honestly and sensibly and I can only repay
Bob again, the compliment I paid him last night. That
its to say, by any measure he was a good Prime Minister.
He had eight years of office. I have had, sort of
eight minutes of office. And I think therefore, his
record is in that sense very free trom any swipe by
anybody, but, better than that, subject to much
compliment which I am very happy to pay him.
J: HaS he contacted you about last night's interview?
PM: No. I think you are all more interested than he is.
Now, look, I have got to go now really,
J: One m~ ore question. what is it like to tell your son
about how to handle media?
PM: Oh I haven't got time for that.
J: Is there ( inaudible)
PM: I don't normally qive daily commuentaries on the
exchange rate. Do you work for a financial
J: Yes. Dow Jones.
PM: Oh do you. Good on you.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
E OE PROOF COPY ONLY
TRANSCRIPT OF THE' PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
JOHN LAWS PROGRAM, 2UE, SYDNEY 21 JANUARY 1992
PM: Good moriLng John.
JL: You are running close to time.
PM: I'm right on time. Never been so early.
JL: Absolutely right on time. Is that part of the deal when
you are Prime minister you have to be on time?
PM: I generally try to run on time.
JL: Tell me other ' things about being Prime Minister that
come as a surprise to you.
PM: I Con't thiink any of it is a surprise but it is a
different job than the one I have done for a long time.
You know, it has got many other bits and pieces to it
policy issues which are new and varied. Above all else
I think taking responsibility for the direction of the
thing.
JL: Yeah. Well we saw the pre-recorded, heavily edited
dress rehearsal last night so let's get into the real
thing now. Can you really sit there in front of me this
morning and insist as you did last night and look
Australia in the eye, of which you are quite capable of
doing, and tell us you didn't do any deals with anybody
to get the top job. 
PM: No. I didn't do any deals with anybody. It Was a
matter of choice for the Labor Party and it is like most
of these t: hings, I mean you make alliances, friendships
and thinga;. But they are not deals. Deals go to people
getting positions and policies and what have you.
JL: Are they fair dinkum friendships or are they friendships
of convenience?
PM: Oh well, think, you know, you do end up with a certain
core group of supporters in this game and you get a few
added on along the way and sometimes there is more of
them or loss of them, and it just depends on the
circumstances I think.
JL: But you diLdn't do any deals with the left?
PM: No.
JL: What about: the centre left?
PM: No. Nor ' the centre left. The centre left were
substantial supporters of mine.
JL: Not that it really matters mind you.
PM: No.
JL: One would expect to swing it around the way it was swung
around would require a bit of engineering, a bit of
manipulatiLon.
PM: I understand that, but no, nothing which you would call
a deal. rhey know what I generally think about things.
To that exitent they needed to be sure of what I thought
about things. But beyond that, no.
JL: Did you have to alter you attitude to certain things in
order to accommodate them.
PM: I don't think so. I think that the fact that I thought
the economy more recessed than maybe the official family
was telling the Government, the bureaucracy was telling
the Government, struck a cord with some people in the
Caucus and it was that in which they were interested.
And as time wore on they believed that that was true and
therefore a number of groups were interested in what
they thought I might do about it. But beyond those sort
of generalised things, that was about the main.
3L: Anyway, I imagine one of the prime requisites for the
job is to be reasonably flexible. 
PM: At least keep your mind open. I think to have an open
mind about things is important. You can get a closed
mind in this game I think. That is, you know,
particularly when you have been the author of policies
and where you are not just putting them in but defending
them. You have got to know when to stop defending
things and when to move on.
JL: Tell me this. The general consensus at the moment seems
to be, and I only came back last Thursday, that you are
not yet looking comfortable in the role of Prime
Minister. Do you think that is a reasonable
observation, again it would be understandable.
PM: I don't know. I think some of the commentators want me
to come out sort of fighting every time they see me. I
think they think I'm on the floor of the House of
Representatives all the time at Question Time. Well
you're not, you're not, and therefore to be thoughtful
about what you say and to be not smothering people in
argument iLs, I think, appropriate for the moment. I'm
feeling my way. I'm listening. I'm trying to get a
grip on where I think the place is going and that is as
I think it should be at the minute.
JL; You say that you are feeling your way again, that is
understandable. is the whole thing a bit overwhelming?
FM: Not really, no it is not overwhelming, I don't think.
JL: It is just another job.
PM: It is another job, but it is a different job, and it's a
job where the ultimate responsibility is yours, with the
direction of the place. I think it is like, the great
burden of these jobs is never the hours or the time, it
is always the responsibility. The responsibility is
what weighs upon you. That is what I find the
difference, but as far as the job, I mean a lot of
people I'm sure that have had this job in the past have
wondered well what should we do. Well that is really
not my problem. I mean, I have got a reasonable idea of
what we should do. But what I think is important is to
tap other people's ideas of what we should do now.
JL: That is a~ n interesting observation People say what
should we do, that is really not your problem. I would
have thought it was absolutely and totally your problem. 
PM: No what we do though is our problem, but I'm saying
knowing what to do, that is having an idea of what to
do, and what I'm doing with these round or meeting
which we have had with the business community anid the
trade unions and others last week and this week is to
tap into community opinion about how they see the
economy and society and what they believe the remedy
should : be.
JL: Ok, you've got in round terms, 12 months to get the
place mDving again. is it possible to do it in 12
months?
PM: I think so. I think that a is a possibility.
JL; Only a possibility?
PM: More than a possibility. Provided the Government takes
the right policy steps.
JL: well you are the Government, aren't you?
PM: That's right. And that is why it is very important to
see what people think. I mean, we tend to think that
most of the various interest groups, they come our way
at various times and what they have to say is pretty
much on record, or pretty much been said to us a month
ago or we nave some idea of it. but it is nice to hear
their contemporary view and hear it direct. And you
can pick things up which you haven't heard before, and
I think we have done quite a bit of that in the last
week.
JL: Ok, well you say providing the Government takes the
right steps. From that we could glean that in the past
the Government hasn't taken the right steps.
PM: well I think, all governments can only feel their way
through a situation and with this recession, I mean we
have felt our way, we rely upon the statistics as they
come in, you rely upon anecdotal evidence, you are
generally just trying to reel your way through.
JL: Ok, well the same people got it wrong before. What
kind of assurance that they won't get it wrong again?
PH: Well I think the only way now is up. And therefore
what the Government will do will be to take the economy
up, to take the place up. So one should hope that we
get the general direction right.
JL: When you say the only way is up, does that mean that
anybody could get it up now, it is so flat that it
wouldn't matter who was there it would go up? 
PM: Oh no, I think it will require changes to bringing it
up faster than it might otherwise naturally do, and
leaving it to its own natural devices, I don't think it
is good enough right now. I think we have to do more
and assessing what to do is what we are about now.
JL; Yeah. What did you do wrong, or what did they do wrong
that needs to be changed?
PM: it is not they, it is me. I was the Treasurer for a
long time. I think that there are two things, I mean,
there was first of all the boom in 1988 had to be the
spending spree and the rise in activity in imports had
to be slowed down. We lifted interest rates to do it.
I think we have left interest rates on probably too
long, -they didn't come off quickly enough through 1990
and 1991. Remember this, I took interest rates off for
the first time in January 1990, exactly two years ago
this month, to avoid this recession.
JL: Ok, but you didn't succeed.
PM: but I don't think we took them off quickly enough. And
secondly there was what the Americans call the asset
price overhand.
JL: Let's keep away from that stuff.
PM: I know, but let's off, but let's say what it is. It is
a belief in inflation. A belief that if you bought a
couple of shops, or you bought a flat, or you bought
another house, that inflation would kick it along and
over a period of time without any effort on your part
you would be more wealthy. And that belief in
inflation was there while inflation was high. But now
inflation is low and we have seen asset prices fall it
is that fall in asset prices which has knocked a lot of
business confidence around and I think as properties
have been tipped to the market both here and in the
United States and in Britain and in Canada and
countries like us. we have all got recessions now at
the same time that it is that fall in asset prices
which I think has really knocked confidence about at
least to unemployment. When unemployment starts to
rise, people then start to worry about their spending,
so they cut their spending and so the thing generally
winds down. So it is a combination of the two things.
The interest rate rises and the speed of the decline in
them and this big belief in inflation and the collapse
or inflation or expectations which has seen asset
prices fall and
JL: Well all of that is very natural. I mean, if inflation
exists you can understand people who want to invest,
wanting to capitalise on the tact that inflation is
there. So the public can't really be blamed for that.
You say that you didn't take interest rates of f early
enough, are you going to take them of f now? 
PM: Well we have, we just took them of f another 1 per cent.
JL: Are you going to do more?
PM: Not at the moment. we are at 7 1/ 2 per cent and I
can't remember how long it was ago that we had, if you
like, bill rates at 7 1/ 2 per cent. So they are down a
long way. They are down ii percentage points from
1990. They are a long way down. I mean, I suppose
what I'm trying to say, John, is this, that if it were
not for a long running belier in inflation and asset
values and the rest, the recession wouldn't be as deep
and if the banks who went into a basically a very big
lending spree in the late 1980s because of collapsing
asset prices they've pulled their head in. They won't
be lending as they were lending. And the combinations
of the two has produced a recess ion of greater depth
than any of us believed.
JL: There are 23,000 people in this country waiting for
refugee status which can take a long time. The other
day some more arrived in the West as you know, claiming
to be refugees and even called refugees by some, there
is no guiarantee that they are in fact that. Why should
we continue to allow these people to stay in our
country when our country is economically unstable, it
needs all the help it can get and we have unemployment
running at a dangerous level and we import more people
into the place that we can't employ. Now are you going
to do something about that?
PM: Well this is where our border was breached by a group
of people who arrived by boat unannounced.
JL: well so did the other 23,000.
PM: Well somie of them have come in all sorts of ways. But
we are now assessing those to see what their real
status is.
JL: And if -they are not refugees, are you going to send
them back?
PM: Well I will see what the report says. I don't want to
pre-judge it. We have got people now up there speaking
to them. But on the general point about migration
which I think is what you were directing your remarks
to, we ] iave seen the program change over the last half
a dozen years to rise rather sharply in the late
particularly when we saw a need to bring in skill sin
demand, one of the things which was in evidence between
1985 and 1990 was skills shortages in the economy, and
we had a large complementation of skills coming from
the migration program. In a slower economy, you don't
need that skills supplementation and what the
Government has been doing has been slowing the program 
up, and. it has slowed rather considerably now from its
peak of say about 1988.
JL: Why don't you stop it until the place is right
economically?
PM: well I don't think that is the right thing to do. I
think that you can't just turn these programs on and
of f.
JL: Why?
PM: Well because there is a whole system of people being
assessed over a period of time, being interviewed
between the various categories of migration whether
they be business migrants, skills in demand, family
reunion. The operation of these various categories
which are different than each of the other and to just
simply wind the program off and try and wind it back
up, you won't be able to wind it back up. And it is
not very easy, and it is very harsh often to wind it
right back.
JL: Harsh on whom?
PM: well it is harsh on. I think, the people who have been
part of the process to date.
JL: Well maybe it is, but surely your first responsibility
and our collective first responsibility is to this
country, and you know that politics is all about
perception and if we are perceived to be in such a
condition that we have almost I million unemployed
people, it seems to some extraordinary that we continue
to import people from other parts of the world who,
too, ar-e likely to become unemployed.
PM: Well some will, no doubt. But it has been a long term
program, a long term program to complement the natural
growth of our population and governments in their
wisdom have increased it and decreased it as things
have changed, but they have never cut it out.
JL: Governments aren't always wise. Because the Government
did it in its wisdom, there might be a limit to its
wisdom as indicated by the situation in which this
country now, finds itself.
PM: But I think they have been wise, I mean it has kicked
our population along, the place is a more interesting
vibrant place because or the migration program.
JL; Yeah, but I fail to see what value there is in having a
whole lot of interesting unemployed people around the
place.
PM: Well it won't be all unemployed. 
JL: But there are a lot of unemployed. There are a million
unemployed people in Australian seeking work and we
continue to bring people in from other parts of the
world. Now the perception is that that is stupid and
unfair to the people who, really are the responsibility
of the Government.
PM: But it is a medium term program, well it is a long term
program with a medium term perspective and I think that
the thing about it is, you have got to decide whether
you think this country can take a share of people from
abroad. Is advantaged by a more diverse and larger
population and if you believe that, a program should
exist, and perhaps it should change in its quality and
its quantity as time goes by, but most governments have
changed it at various times. We had huge numbers come
into Australian and then it dropped off to much smaller
numbers and it has picked up as prosperity picked up,
and whEtre there have been difficult times it has
dropped back. Can I say the more general point is by
and large I think it has been accepted by most
Australian. The migration program has been good to
Australia, has made it a more interesting place, made
it a more economically robust place. And it has been
very important at various times to complement skills,
the business migration program is now bringing quite a
lot of people from various parts of the world.
JL: Ah yes, we saw what a rort that was being turned into
by people coming here from Hong Kong and other places
buying real estate and going home, saying they were
unable to make their business investment and yet that
was part of the package.
PM: But thEre is a lot here though, John, there is a lot
here.
JL: Of course there are and when you say that it has been
accepted I agree with you I think that it has been
accepted. I'm not sure that it is accepted now,
because! it-has been accepted doesn't mean that it is
going t~ o continue to be accepted.
PM: Well there has always been a debate about the numbers
whenever the economy goes off the boil and that is fair
enough. And I think the Government has taken note of
that and that is why the program has been scaled back
in the last few years and we have got a review of the
program underway now. And then in April, or about
April, which is the normal cycle of these reviews, we
will cconsider the intake again for the coming year.
JL: What is your recommendation?
PM: Well I will wait and see what the review turns up. 
JL: Well assessing it at this stage, you see, you say that
most people accept it. Most people that I talk to
don't accept it and I think that, with respect to you,
I speak: more of the population of Australia than you
do.
PM: You certainly speak to them, whether you speak with
them I'm not sure about that.
JL: Well they speak to me.
PM: Well that's true, that's true.
JL: They pick up the telephone and dial the number.
PM: That is right. I don't doubt that you have a
perception, and probably a correct one, that people
think the program should respond to difficult times,
and I think it should.
JL: Shouldn't you respond to the people?
PM: Yes, but I'm not going to pre-judge what is a
reasonably sophisticated process of review every year,
and then the Minister, in this case Gerry Hand, will
bring a recommendation to the Cabinet.
JL: But on the information you have know, what would your
recommendation be?
PM: Well I'm not going to make a recommendation. I won't
be recommending. It will be Gerry recommending to the
Government rather than me recommending to him. But the
program has been coming back and I would be surprised
if there was a discernible trend in any other
direction.
JL: But down?
PM: But down? But when I say that, I don't mean down the
way some of our colleagues in the Opposition mean down
because I think from them we will see a repeat of what
we saw in 1988 which was basically about how we
shouldn't have more Asians here, we shouldn't have
Asians in this country. I mean, if you scratch most of
these characters what you get is a little bit of that
sort of talk from them and that won't be motivating us.
JL: No. Well of course it is not specifically Asians, its
people that we have to employ, that is the problem, it
doesn't matter where they come from.
PM: I know, I understand that but from the Liberal Party's
point of view the sub-plot in the late 1980s was about
Asians. 
JL: OK, prior to my going away in December, I read a story
about * a pie manufacturer who warned us that the great
Australian meat pie might soon ship to China, tasty
products, warned that high labour costs, high taxes
expensiLve food ingredients would force lots of
businesses off-shore. Now it didn't seem very
important at the time, but when you look into it, in
china's Xnandung Province they will give you the land
to build your factory. They will provide you with
labour at $ A160 a month and offer a flat company tax
rate of 16 per cent. Now the $ A160 a month is nonsense
in this country. But why don't we consider doing
things like they are doing in China. We have got
plenty of land why don't we give it to people in order
that they can create enterprises and businesses here.
And why, don't we offer them a special company tax to
come in. from other parts of the world instead of us
going off-shore, bring them here give them the land we
have got plenty of land?
PM: Well the thing is, they are a developing country and
they are re doing all the classic things which
developing countries have done. you know, Korea was
doing that some time ago, and now they are doing it.
I'm sure it happened in Taiwan.
JL: Do we ever give land away, I never heard it was giving
land away?
PM: No we don't, I don't think. I mean, certainly the
Commonwealth doesn't. But I mean, the States have
industrial parks and they let people have access to
them.
JL: When I say giving away, I don't mean give it away
forever. Give a lease arrangement to these people, but
at a proper rate to encourage business to come here,
why don't we do that?
PM: Well, because I think it is important to understand
what we are. This is a developed place. We run a
sophisticated society and public sector. services here
are in evidence wherever you look, whether it be
hospitals, roads, or railways, or what have you. And
we finance this public sector with the second lowest
rate of tax in the world bar a decimal point. We are a
decimal -Point higher than Japan. We are the second
lowest tax country in the 27 countries of the OECD.
now you can't provide this sort of public sector with
these sort of services and this standard of living with
the tax rate very much below that. So if you want to
give big tax breaks to developing companies, what you
have got to do is put tax hikes on ordinary people. 
JL: Why can't it be done for a short period of time?
PM: Well it: all costs and once you do these things, that is
it. you set a new benchmark. I mean, you can't
compete with them because you see
JL: Why can't you?
PM: Well let me just give you an example. Now I was
talking to a company last week. They went to Malaysia
because it had a tax holiday for 7 years so they said
we set up a business in Malaysia unfortunately they
said the 7th year is up so now we are going to Sri
Lanka which promises a tax holiday for 15 years. That
is no tax for 15 years. Well if we try and run this
country on a basis of no tax for 15 years, you won't
keep this sort of society of ours together.
JL: No, but this is a more attractive place to be so surely
with somae sort of incentive.
PM: But we don't need to do the things which those people,
in other words, rely upon wage rates and labour
conditions that those companies rely upon in those
countries. We produce different things.
JL: But we need to do something.
PM: We are doing it. We literally exported our heads off
all through the 1980s.
JL: You can't say that because we are developed country
that we don't want to continue to develop.
PM: No, but -all the developed countries, we have got a
corporate tax rate of 39 per cent with full dividend
imputation. In other words, you don't pay tax on
dividends twice. Germany has got a corporate rate in
the ' 50s.. Most of the countries we compare ourselves
with have got corporate rates like us, Britain, the
United St~ ates, what have you. They don't have 15 per
cent tax rates. Or zero tax rates as business
incentivets because they are developed places and you
can't runk your developed society on zero tax rates.
JL: OK, well if we can't do that for people who want to
create businesses from other parts of the world, what
sort of incentive could we offer to the people who are
one by one going to the wall, and they are one by one
going to the wall, here in Australian. Surely at this
time, we should be offering them some kind of incentive
to keep their business instead of taking it to Sri
Lanka or Singapore. 
PM: Well the best incentive offered to them is growth, is
to get back to rates of growth and that is what the
point of the Economic Statement will be about. to
restore growth to the economy, to get the economy out
of the recession.
JL: How do you do that?
PM: Into recovery. Well it won't be long before you will
see. EBut we are now assessing how best to do that, but
one of the things which we have obviously done in the
last two years is reduce interest rates, which
themselves will have their effect upon the economy and
we will be doing other things which we think are
sensible in the short term but are also supportive, if
you like, of the structure of the place over the long
term.
JL: Like what sort of thing?
PM: Well I don't want to go through..
JL: Well just give me an idea of what sort of thing?
PM: Well some of the public infrastructure, for a start,
which wets left to languish in the ' 80s as we cut the
public sector back, and which can take the place of
some of the private investment we're now not getting.
In some of those areas we're looking closely now.
JL: Does that mean increasing the public sector?
PM: Not particularly, but it means for the moment in areas
of public infrastructure where there are needs, and
where they are an important part of the efficiency of
the economy, then they are areas I think which we can
look. But the main thing is to provide growth to the
economy and that's the best thing we can give the
business sector, small, medium and large. And there's
not much point in saying well here's a low tax rate,
but sorry there's not much growth around, because if
you look at the small business community in particular,
both them survive on growth.
JL.-. By-growth, you-simply mean that somebody who has,
they're making matchboxes, you're going to make the
place so efficient that people are going to want to buy
more matchboxes?
PM: Well we're finding, firstly to lift activity and demand
so theres a demand for product in Australia and people
start hiring people again to produce product.
JL: How do you do that? 
PM: Just by lifting activity. We did it after 1983-4,
JL: Well if' it was that simple why wasn't it done before?
PM: Well in. 1983-84, when we came to office after that
recession, we turned it around within about 12 months.
And I hope that in the same way we can do that now.
JL: We'll have to do it quickly because from what I hear,
and correct me if I'm wrong, but from what I hear from
business people we are not in a position to be able to
trade competitively with other countries, we are
disadvantaged here in Australia?
PM: I don't think that's true. Because what is happening
and has happened, we are now running a very large goods
and services surplus, we are running a huge merchandise
trade surplus. A lot of Australian companies I have
spoken t: o in the last two weeks have said, we've made a
shift, because the domestic market is down we've made a
more rapid shift to exports and we'll stay in exports.
Now we aire doing that because the place is largely
competitive, its competitive in wage rates, its
competitive by the exchange rate, its a generally
competitive product that I'm will to support.
JL: Well, why are we in recession?
PM: Well we are in a recession in the domestic economy,
while the international economy is also not doing well,
the truth is we can eat a bigger share of it and that's
one of the things which is at least holding employment
where it is and keeping the place growing where it is
is the fact that we have a thing which we never used to
have called net exports. In other words we are now
exporting a large part of our product, particularly in
manufactures.
JL: OK that's fine, and I understand it is very important
but its very hard to convince people who haven't got
any money and have got kids, and they haven't got any
clothes and they are flat out having a house, that
because somebody is selling something overseas its
going to be to their advantage, its not to their
advantage now. Surely the domestic economy, as you
refer to it, is at this stage in your career and in the
history o'f this country the most important thing?
PM: Absolutely.
JL: Well what do you do about that? It's all very well to
talk about the exports 
PM: Well, exports are what give you production and there
would be a lot of people employed in factories out
there now, probably listening to us, who are doing so
for products which are going to be exported, and if
they were not going to be exported their jobs wouldn't
be there. So exports have filled a very large void in
this cycle and that's why these export growth numbers
and the merchandise trade surplus is very important to
us, they are complementary to domestic growth.
JL: Well its not working
PM But it doesn't invalidate your point and that is that
the domestic economy has to grow more, we can't have
the thing, if you like, in the negative, that is
contracting which is what its been. It's contracted by
about three per cent in the last year and a half or so.
And that:' s what's produced the angst and produced the
unemploynent. We have got to get that back to positive
rates of' growth.
JL: OK well how do you do that domestically?
PM: Well a combination of I think, a change in confidence
which comes from a willingness on part the of the
Government to let the economy grow. That people in the
business community know now that the Government wants
the economy to grow. Where in 1988 and 1989 and 1990
they thought the Government wanted the economy to slow
down which we did. We now want it to grow, and we have
now provided one of the instruments of that growth,
much lower interest rates, and we can provide a more
direct stimulus to the economy coming from the
Governments own policies, and that's what we are now
examining with the business community as to how best to
cast those so they complement, if you like, interest
rate reductions. To try to induce and engender a high
degree of business confidence to get people out there
spending again and to pick the place up.
JL: Prime Minister Paul Keating back to the subject of
Australia and its immediate future domestically, and I
think that you agree that that's what matters at the
moment. Certainly that's what matters to the people
listening to this radio program around Australia.
PM: Exactly. To get back to growth and to get the place
moving again, to get employment shifting and to do it
as quickly as possible. That's got to be our first
priority. 
JL: OK you can understand the frustration of people and
confusion of people when you can go into a supermarket
and yout can buy imported canned tomatoes, I think from
Italy, cheaper than you can buy the Australian product.
So here! we have the dilemma of the people who are doing
to tough having the opportunity to buy the product
cheaply but we also have the converse situation of
those producing the product here in Australia not being
able to compete. Why do we import canned tomatoes?
PM: I think a number of reasons. I mean it makes me
furious as it does you I'm sure. It does make you
furious because its just absurd but I think we really
haven't developed as well as we might agriculture
businesses which extend beyond the agriculture into
canning and into promotion and into the efficient
production of canned products often particularly in the
horticulture/ agriculture sort of fruit and
vegetables.
JL: Is that because we are not smart?
PM: Well I don't know. I think it might be the fact that a.
lot of these were done through co-operatives in the
past and the co-operatives flourished well enough
before the trade in these things world wide, there's
now a greater trade in food products and that we
haven't seen the sort of efficiency and competitiveness
coming from the canning of these sort of foods and
their marketing.
JL: OK, well what do you do about that? I mean why
PM: Its a sort of breakdown of entrepreneurship. I mean
there should be in that particular industry more
entrepreneurship I think than there is and its a pity
that people say well its not a pity you saying it but
its a pity its being said, you know what can we do
about the fact that we have got sort of canned tomatoes
from the United States or Italy or Israel or somewhere
like that and you know, I think one of the things we
can do well in Australia is food and food processing.
JL: In order to let us do that, and I know that this is a
simplistiLc point of view but most of mine are, why
can't we put some type of moratorium on non-essential
imports?
PM: Well beca-use what happens then is that people put a
moratorium on our non-essential exports. The trading
world is a very nasty place and once you get into sort
of trade reprisals everybody gets into you. I mean we
are still shipping great stacks of meat to the United
States and Japan and if we were to say 
JL: But why are we doing that, because Japan needs it,
that's why they're buying it.
PM: Yes but they can buy it from other places and
JL: And because America needs it
PM: But again it has got other options. I mean if we get
into the trade reprisal business so will they and
that's rnot a goer and the fact is we have got to do
better. It's not their fault that we are not doing
better, in some of these areas we have just got to do
better. Now its happening. You can see it, I was
talking to one chap last week in these rounds of
consultations who has brought together a whole lot of
food products and is now marketing them much more
efficiently in Australia. These were formerly brand
names which had sort of been left by the way-side,
business which were not running efficiently but making
largely food stuffs. Now that's changed for that
particular person and his business and for those
products. And that general change is what we need. In
other words you see an opportunity and go and exploit
it, not just to say well look we can actually import
compete, compete against these imports but actually
export them ourselves.
JL: But are you going to encourage people to do it because
the number of people that come to me directly and
indirectly to tell me that they have had a wonderful
idea that they've wanted to start a business doing
somethin~ g here in Australia, and have been unable to
get co-operation from the Government and they end up
doing it: elsewhere and successfully. Now what are you
going to do about that?
PM: Well I think it's happening I mean you know and again
another company I spoke to last week has just taken
over Petersville, this is Pacific-Dunlop has just taken
over Petersville which is a big food producer and that
includes Edgell and all those business Edgell, you
know, peas and beans and these things
JL: and tomatoes
PM: and hopefully now with a larger company, a greater
understanding of the value of the product it produces,
its capacity~ to sell into the largely growing South-
East Asian market, we will see now the marketing of
those products but we haven't seen enough of the export
opportunities being obvious to people, investing in
them, getting an existing business and making it more
efficient, marketing the things better in Australia, I
mean its often true of the large supermarket, they have
often sa: Ld to me you can't get people to quote the 
supply a lot of the food lines that just don't quote
because they think they will get too tied up to Coles
or too tired up to Woolworths so they don't quote and
so what: happens they end up taking stuff from Italy or
from Po'rtugal or somewhere like that.
JL: Would the Government be in a position to subsidise
producers of those kinds of products that have unfair
competition if it is considered unfair from overseas?
PM: Well, we don't subsidise agricultural produce in
Australia.
JL: I know we don't, but why don't we?
PM: Well because when we do it becomes a cost on the rest
of us. In other words, you know, I mean we are getting
the very thing we are complaining about in the GATT. 1
mean the reason why our wheat producers are not being
able to sell now as profitably in the markets is
because of subsidies from the European Commission and
the Unit~ ed States. Now if we get in the same game the
thing is they can outplay us at that game, theres no
point in us getting in.
JL: Then we can't compete?
PM: We don't have a deep enough pocket to go into an export
subsidy war and wouldn't want to.
JL: OK well let's get back to..
PM: And that's why, can I just say in the GATT in the
Uruguay round, the General Agreement on Trade and
Tariffs where all this is being discussed at the
moment, we're saying keep the markets free from
pollution, keep them open, keep them free from this
export subsidies, give the honest producer a chance.
Now if we were to say well look, forget all that
rhetoric we didn't really mean that what we are going
to do now is start subsidising canned tomatoes and
canned this and something else then the whole game goes
bad and I think it will work against Australia over the
long terra.
JL: So what do we do? Stop canning tomatoes and do
something else?
PM: No. Do it efficiently. What we should do is someone
say look I've got a tomato here which is as good as any
other tomato, I can put in a can for this price
providing I have an efficient business
JL: Yes but then you have difficulty doing it because of
work practices and all sorts of added tariffs here 
PM: Well the good management smooths all those things out.
I mean the huge shift in productivity which we are
seeing in businesses today is coming from the fact that
good Managers getting rid of work practices which are
bad. See, a good management which actually make any of
these businesses competitive.
JL: Despite the trade union movement?
PM: Not despite them, with their support. I mean by and
large the trade unions are knocking out restrictive
work I mean if there's one thing which has come
through four to three days of very intense meetings now
is the almost every hour declaration by managers of
major companies and small companies of the changes in
enterprise bargaining and workplace reform.
JL: Because the union movement is becoming more cooperative?
PM: Yes absolutely because they are saying lets not only
keep our jobs lets make the place better.
JL: What about the 17.5% holiday loading which is a laugh,
and laugrhed at all over the world?
PM: Well a lot of other places in the world have got it to,
its in the United States
JL: Not at 17.5% its not.
PM: Well its every higher I think in some places.
JL: But that doesn't make it right?
PM: Well you know why its there, because most people
earned, often earn in their normal working week more
than the standards weekly wage because they get a bit
of overt: Lme
JL: Some, sorme not all
PM: So when t~ hey go on holidays there is a compensation.
JL: Yes
PM: This is a. feature of many, many economies.
JL: But the mian who introduced it even says its stupid now.
A bit late now but he even says its stupid now.
PM: Who said that?
JL: Clyde Cameron. 
PM: Clyde, well I didn't know he said that but look the
main thing is labour costs in total and labour costs in
total i~ n Australia now by OECD standards are low. I
mean it~ s another thing that has been said over and over
again in the last three or four days in the last week
by people running businesses, look this is now
basically a low labour cost country. John that is the
truth, this is a low labour cost country which includes
holiday leave loading.
JL: Well it is and that's why Japanese motor companies and
others want to set up large factories here because it
is becoming a low labour country.
PM: And that includes the holiday leave loading on these
things.
JL: Yes, it would be better still if we didn't have the
holiday leave loading though wouldn't it?
PM: Well I don't necessarily think that's right. I mean I
think, you know, if someone goes off on their annual
leave they don't take a big drop in pay.
JL: What abcout penalty rates on the week-end though? For
working Saturday's, whoever said that Saturday is
different from Friday or Thursday?
PM: Well, now this is an old hobby horse one of yours I
know, I know.
JL: Its a good one
PM: You're like a dog at a bone on these penalty rates.
Look, they are changing, they are changing over time,
they perhaps should change more slowly in some places I
agree particularly in the hospitality industry but I
think a bit of that is changing.
JL: Are you going to encourage the change?
PM: Well part of my job now is to make this a competitive
labour cost country and I did that across the board, it
was part of my job in the 1980s to get inflation down,
we have now got a 3% inflation rate instead of a
inflationL rate and that was in a large part
accommodated by shifts in wages so its not my job to
run bull-at-a-gate at one particular thing
JL: But nobody wants you to do that, but could we receive
some sort of guarantee that you will give your careful
consideration to penalty rates?
PM: Your a great one on guarantees you are. 
JL: Yes its: very important its very important to me
and penalty rates stop people getting work.
PM: Well look, I can see that the structure of penalty
rates are not always conducive to employment and
productivity but changing them is not a simple matter
the Government particularly can change overnight.
JL: No but You've got friends.
PM: Yes well I hope I've got a few.
JL: Have a quite talk to Bill.
PM: Poor old Bill, you'd get him to do everything.
JL: Well I maean he is the man to do it because by having
those.
PM: Well you get him in, next time you get him in you put
it on him.
JL: OK I wil. l but in the meantime you might put in a word
for me because you're keeping young people out of work
and the same thing in the United States. If you want
to go to a restaurant in the evening or at lunch time
you drive up the to the restaurant, get out of your car
somebody parks it.
PM: Look the whole service sector in the United States is
far more
JL: Fantastic?
PM: Sophisticated than here.
JL: That's right.
PM: And we have got to learn to be like that.
JL: Ok and people are doing it Saturday nights, Sunday
nights and their lunch time and they're doing it for
what they get in tips. No you couldn't do that in
Australia because you would have to join the Transport
Workers Union before you could drive the bloody car.
Now that's stupid isn't it.
PM: Well I think that the proof of the pudding is in the
eating. They have a service sector which is a vast
employer, I mean we do to but theirs is greater and the
services are more varied and more sophisticated.
JL: But you see a bunch of young kids could set up valet
parking as they insist on calling it in America, and be
contributors to the economy but making money and 
keeping them gainfully occupied instead of hanging
around sticking needles in their arms, but they can't
do it because of some stupid work practice or having to
belong to some union and pay union fees.
PM: Well that's not necessarily true. I mean a lot of
people are working in places which are not unionised.
It doesn't stop people working.
JL: How long do you think it would take before the TWU
wasn't down on people who set up valet parking outside
restaurants? About a day and a half?
PM: No, no I don't think its going to worry the TWU very
much. The truth is as long as it doesn't happen
because it hasn't occurred to people. I mean we Just
don't have these sort of services here. I mean in the
US
JL: It has occurred to me.
PM: I know because you travel and you experience it. But
you can see there was a time when there wasn't
propriety car parks, you know car parks operated as
businesses in Australia that happened in the United
States many, many decades ago, its been with us a
couple of decades only and I think, you know, we will
see a much greater sophistication in services, personal
care things.
JL: Ok but you can only do that with the co-operation of
the trade union movement?
PM: John don't underestimate the co-operation. I mean we
are seeing, this is not rhetoric, we're seeing now such
mammoth changes in productivity and work place reform
the likes of which most businesses could not have
contemplated a decade ago, could never have
contemplated and it is why Toyota is coming to
Australia. Toyota motor company, probably amongst the
most efficient in the world and which is going to set
up a $ 400M state of the art plant in this country.
It's not doing it because it thinks labour relations
are bad, they know that productivity is good, they know
that.. the-trade unionsare . co. operating and we are
making great strides.
JL: That's right, but I have watched the progress of that
from fairly close quarters and its been interesting to
note the reaction of the trade union movement who have
been more than co-operative. Now obviously they are
smart because Toyota obviously are going to employ a
lot of people in Australia, now that kind of cooperation
is the sort of thing that will help to get
the place back. But it means that the unionists, the 
trade union movement has got to co-operate with the
Government doesn't it?
PM: It does and what I'm saying to you is that it has, and
that's why the inflation rate is 3% and that's why
interest rates are
JL: Ok but tell my why.
PM: If inflation was 10% interest rates would be 13/ 14.
JL: Its great to have 3% inflation. One of the reasons it
is three per cent is nobody is spending any money and
one of the reasons is nobody's got any money.
PM: The main reason is wage change in the 80s and the
second reason is, in part, the deflation coming from
the recession. But its only a part, a very large part,
the largest part was a decline in inflation coming from
wage changes.
JL: Yes, but: obviously inflation is going to be low if
nobody has got any money to spend.
PM: Well, that's not true. We came out of the 1982-83
recessio~ n flat on our backs with a 10% inflation rate.
JL: That's true. What about the engineering company that
can buy Australian made BHP steel cheaper in Singapore
than it can buy it in Australia? That's slightly
bigger than tomatoes.
PM: True and I think we need competition in steel like we
do in everything else and I think it is a great pity
that we have to import certain varieties of steels
because they are not available here.
JL Yes but this is Australian made BHP steel which can be
brought cheaper in Singapore $ 700 a ton in Singapore,
$ 1000 a -ton here. Now how can you allow that to
happen? Not-that its your direct responsibility.
PM: No its not my responsibility, but look obviously, I
don't know that the numbers are actually right I can
only.. take.. your. word-. for.. those..
JL: Well do.
PM: It may be! its been part of an export deal, a package
deal which BHP has done a sort of shop deal for steel
to some supplier in South-East Asia which they are now
supplying back. But I'd be surprised, well pretty
surprised. if you could buy BHP steel cheaper abroad
than you buy it here. 
JL: Well you can, you can buy it in Singapore for $ 700 a
ton as opposed to $ 1000 a ton here.
PM: Well no doubt that someone in BHP will hear this
conversation and give us an answer.
JL: If the answer is yes that is a fact, what can you do
about it?
PM: Well I -think BHP would say it seeks to be competitive
inside -the Australian economy and supplying product.
The complaint against it is it doesn't supply enough
product, enough of various types of product that it
should, but there is no doubt the export markets are
very competitive and if you've got people saying, well
look you can have an Australian job at BHP we export
steel but we've got to export it cheaper than we have
been exporting it then BHP will probably taken the view
that we want to keep that employment and we want to
keep those exports. So its losing profitability and
margin exporting but better to have the product export
and have the jobs than not have it all and that's
probably the position right now.
JL: Yes except they are paying the price here in Australia
and obviously they are going to suffer long term
because people are simply bringing it back from
Singapore cheaper than they can get in Australia.
PM: Well look, I mean the international steel market is now
becoming over supplied, it is very competitive out
there and there is not there is probably price falls
and theres discounting in all markets.
JL: There's a dreadful expression that has come into our
language and that I hope you'll never use, when people
talk about a level playing field which seems to be all
the go, why are we doing that with a level playing
field when nobody else seems to be?
PM: I don't -think we are. I mean, I think anyone who
believes there's a level playing field off-shore
outside of Australia is basically deluding themselves,
I mean its catch as catch can out there and survival of
the. fittst..-and-the . smartest . and I think that if anyone
believes it is fair and reasonable and above board and
level they are having themselves on.
JL: Ok well we are about to run out of time and I know you
have got a lot to do with your day jut to rap it up,
the illegal immigrants, these boat people, apart from
costing us a fortune in searching, if we find out that
they are not what they claim to be will you send them
home? 
PM: Well I -don't want to pre-judge that.
JL: Would that be your desire?
PM: I don't want to pre-judge that let's wait and see how
they interview, where they're from, what their claims
are and there's a very clear process there in dealing
with people who cross our borders and there is no
reason -why that process won't work just as well on this
occasion as on any other occasion.
JL: So it would be likely that if they are not what they
appear -to be that they won't stay in this country?
PM: Well again that is pre-judging them and I don't want to
do that because to do it in the position I hold,
prejudice is their position, and the processes are such
that they shouldn't be prejudiced.
JL: Ok the other point, when you assess immigration in
April it won't rise?
PM: Well I'm not saying that
JL: No I was asking.
PM: The trend has been down, the trend has been down but
that is not the dissimation of the program which some
people wish and it won't be and it won't be motivated
by crude political instincts like we have seen from the
Liberal Party in the late 1980s and which we are seeing
a bit of now. In other words we will be looking at the
long run future of the Australian population, its
growth, a contribution of the migration program and
looking at the labour market and the capacity to absorb
people : Ln that market, to house them and making a
judgement about the intake for the following year.
JL: OK but in the present circumstances being as they are,
would it be reasonable to say that it is unlikely that
it will rise?
PM: Well it hasn't for the last couple of years. It's
unlikely to rise this year.
JL: Ok something else that I think we should touch upon
briefly. Will you be doing something to restore
confidence for the job getters in Australia quickly?
PM: Well that this the whole point of what I'm doing now,
that is trying to make sure whatever the Government
does that is what we announce, when the statement is
announced, that we have assessed as fully as we can
with business and with other groups in the community 
the likely measures to have the greatest and earliest
impact upon activity and employment.
JL: Will the dole rise?
PM: Well that's not an issue which we are examining right
now but the question I think is not a matter of the
dole rising its activity rising is what we need. We
need basically more people being employed and that can
only come from producing more product and that means
getting confidence going, getting people confident
again about the economy that they think there is a
future out their. We actually face a good 1990s in
many respects low inflation, lot of good structural
things there's no reason why this country can't get
back to decent rates of growth and more satisfying
levels of employment.
JL: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time and
let's hope we can talk again very soon.
PM: Thank you John.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
ADDRESS TO ] LAUNCESTON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, JANUARY 23 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much for that kind welcome Michael ( Field),
Robin Holyman, Mrs Holyman, the Chamber of Commerce, my
distinguished colleagues, including the Mayor, Alderman
Graham BeanEts, and my Parliamentary colleagues, Senators
Tate, Aulich and Sherry, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much for arranging such a substantial
gathering at: such short notice. It's a compliment for me,
Robin, that the Chamber of Commerce was able to invite so
many distinguished people tonight to come for dinner and
that they've agreed to come. And I'm particularly pleased
to be here in the company of Michael and Jan, particularly
in election campaigns. We have partisanship in all of usmost
of us barrack for our own side and I have great
pleasure to be barracking for Michael.
Over the years a lot of Premiers and Treasurers came my way.
I must say I always have a soft touch for Michael, always a
soft touch for Michael, because he had that disarming
frankness about him, no nonsense about him. And there was a
great change occurring in the fiscal basis, particularly
with the States, there was a great funding gap between fixed
revenues and discretionary spending, and no Treasurer in the
Commonwealth of Australia had a greater, more difficult task
than making -the books of the Government of Tasmania adjust.
And as Premier and Treasurer Michael has done a sterling job
for us, the public here. I don't know whether they quite
understand what he has done. But he had to have a heart as
big as Western Australia, big in size, to actually take the
job on and to do it, and he's done that while at the same
time balancing all of those industrial interest which have
been important to the State's continuing progress and
development. So I not only regard him as a pal and as a friend but as
somebody who has really faced up to really rutted-in
problems of the State he inherited, and didn't gloss over it:
or take the cosmetic job, but to do it the right way. 
At the last: Premiers' Conference I attended as Treasurer, he
made a speech I would have been very proud to have made
myself. It: was about fiscal policy, and his achievements
were quite profound. So I was delighted to be in Tasmania
with him today in the course of his election campaign and to
be on his side.
Now you've asked me tonight to talk about the agenda of the
Federal Government and how we see Australia and where we're
going now, and where we're going from here. And this will
be important, not just for Tasmania, but for Australia as a
whole. And I think that the main objective that we have to keep
before our eyes is a commitment to growth and to adaptation.
To growth and to change. That may sound like an
unexceptional objective, but there are not too many
governments around the world who have committed themselves
as positively as this Government has over the years to
growth. Andl that means taking a macro economic risk, taking
the forward economic risk on inflation and the current
account by : letting the place grow more quickly rather than
taking the safe course which would put less pressure on
prices, less pressure on inflation, less pressure on the
current account to grow slowly.
And during the ' 80s we ran Australia quite quickly, quite
fast. In the first seven years of this Government the rate
of economic growth was twice as fast as the previous seven
years under the Fraser Government. And that was a
deliberate policy. And that employment that came from it,
which took the workforce from 6 million to 7.5 million, a
per cent increase in the workforce, came expressly from that
policy. But we've lost that growth with the recession, we've lost
some product, and while we've kept largely those 1 1/ 2
million jobs, we've lost some and we're adding to the
unemployment pool because the labour market is not growing
quickly enough to take up the new entrants into the
work force.
And so our commitment to return to growth, the commitment to
return to equity and to prosperity, where all Australians
have a share of the national cake through their capacity to
get a job. And this is no more true than with our young
people. So the Government will be committing itself to a recovery at
the earliest opportunity, a sustainable low inflation
recovery, andi to commit itself further to building on the
successes of change in the 1980s in what was broadly the
internationalisation of the Australian economy. 
And so we are not embarking on an economic statement, the
point of which will be to get a recovery going as quickly as
possible, to restore employment back to the labour market,
to check unemployment and then bring it down, and then to
continue the structural change which we had, the momentum
which we had up in the 1980s.
And that Statement will be looking to further
internatiortalise the economy, to pin in our success with low
inflation, to bolt it in, to continue the changes and
efficiency of each place of commerce and each workplace
around the country, to change work practices, to change
management practices, and to generally improve efficiency,
to expand further our manufacturing exports, which have
already expanded substantially in the 1980s, to improve the
infrastructure of Australia, particularly some of the public
infrastructure to make that process happen more quickly.
And we can ( do some of that by building on the great fiscal
position that the Government secured for Australia and for
itself by having structural Budget surpluses, which in the
cycle of the recession are now in deficit, but as the
economy starts to grow and revenue starts to pick up will
move back into surplus, to use some of those carefully
husbanded changes in fiscal and budgetary policy to now
stimulate the economy to lift it back to growth and
activity.
Now, much ha~ ve changed in Australia, but the ' 90s have to be
a decade of productive investment because we're now paying
part of the price of actually knocking inflation and
speculative investment out of the system.
That may not sound, again, a profound statement, but much of
the 1980s was not simply about producing a taxable income,
it was about having an inflation bet on the side. And often
that was in property. Often a lot of companies or
individuals w~ ho had reasonable productive businesses decided
that because they were doing so well they'd have a little
inflation bet on the side with an office block or a set of
shops or an office car or something else or a factory, and
it is that asset price problem, that is the fall in asset
prices coming from washing the inflation out of the system,
which has not threatened many of those businesses because
they relied upon the inflation pump. And it's that change,
the washing of two decades of inflationary expectations and
inflationary culture out of that system, which has produced
a recession of greater dimension than official policy ever
wanted or probably would have caused.
And when you had 20 per cent credit growth per year in the
late 1980s, financing a production of about half that, we've
now seen credit go back to about 4 or 5 per cent and the
banking system has taken losses and is keeping to itself and
is now abstemiously funding only productive cash flow
investments. 
In other words, the inflation psychology has gone. It is
the going of that inflation psychology which gives us a
chance of being a low inflation country where the premium
again is on lower cost of money, low interest rates,
permanently low interest rates through the ' 90s, a lower
cost of capiLtal and a more productive place. That is
putting the premium on building productive investment rather
than simply investment in the non traded goods side of the
economy. And that wil. l help us continue to grow the place in the
and to become more self sufficient, less reliant on imports,
and therefore less reliant on overseas savings and overseas
debt. It's just worth recalling some things. Because I notice in
the public debate we've had a few people say the policies of
the ' 80s have destroyed manufacturing and our manufacturing
businesses are closing down, and our agriculture is down,
beef is down, wool is down, non-ferrous metals are down
zinc, lead, etc, and therefore the economy is in
difficulties. But the fact of the matter is that we had a
very great success in manufacturing industry in the 1980s,
and between 1982-3 and 1990-91 non metal manufactures rose
by 200 per cent ' in that period, when total manufacturing,
that is all manufactures including metal manufactures, rose
by 125 per cent in the period. They more than doubled. And
most of that occurred in the last five years of the 1980s.
So the growth in manufactured exports is now 17 per cent per
annum, whereas rural export growth was 2 per cent down. So
if we were the same country today as we were in 1982/ 3
relying on wheat and wool and other grains and minerals,
then this country would be a country which wouldn't be able
to afford to import, which would have a very low basis of
exports, and the international market place would have
sought to recess it probably in perpetuity.
Now we've beaten than dismal legacy, that dismal prospect,
by making the changes to internationalise the place in the
1980s. But " the challenge now is to keep the process up.
And they are the first order issues to get people back to
work, to get a recovery going, to make sure the inflation
rate stays low in a structural sense, to lift investment in
productive plant and equipment, to get the investment up to
get the produce, to get the produce to import compete and to
export, to get the current account down and hence our
reliance on overseas debt.
And to do that to make the place set a premium and focus
back on those parts of the economy long forgotten like the
public infrastructure, the transport system, the airports,
the airline system, all the things that are going to matter
in whether Australia is a truly international place or a
place which h7. as settled for second-best and which just
doesn't have a national will to carry itself off as a first
rate economic nation. 
Now these are the challenges the Statement the Government is
putting together will address. In other words, they are
what I call the first order issues. And they are about
guaranteeing a place in the world for Australian commerce,
in the Asian Pacific area, the fastest growing part of the
world, which we have been now very closely integrating
ourselves through the 1980s and now the early 1990s.
And it's very interesting to know that 15 per cent of our
trade went to Asia in 1983-4, 15 only, and between 1983-4
and late last year, that has shifted to 28 per cent. So
it's a very dramatic shift in the orientation of Australia's
markets and trade with the Asia Pacific area, which is the
fastest growing part of the world, which has got the fastest
growing demand and which will need the things for which
Australia has a natural comparative advantage such as food,
agricultural products in general, metals, other finished
products, which we can supply to this part of the world for
either further fabrication or specialised high technology
things which Australia can do like telephones,
telecommunications, medical services and of course all the
services which we never had in the ' 70s such as tourism,
financial services, again medical services, education
services, and all the sort of sophistication of the service
sector a country like us should have.
So we are part way through the largest structural post war
transition and what we want to do is to finish the job, to
set Australia up in the ' 90s, to get back onto those things
recovery, jobs, inflation, investment, the capital stock,
exports, the current account and our debt.
Now they are the first order issues. And what I have to do
as Prime Minister and as Leader of the Labor Party is to
make sure Australians understand they are the first order
issues. And that basically we are not going to be dealing
with those issues like inducing a recovery, creating
employment, locking in low inflation, a lower cost of
capital, adding to the capital stock and producing exports,
we're not going to do all of that by simply taxing our food
and clothing. And this is where I have to deal with my
friend and colleague, Dr Hewson, and his proposal for the
GST. Now I often get the question, and I've had it in the last
few weeks, when are you going to get stuck into Hewson and
the GST? Well, I'll tell you this. The politician in me
wants to get stuck right into it but I'm not going to
indulge myself. I'm going to do it when the time is right
after I've put together Labor's plan for the 1990s. 
And I don't doubt, I don't deny Dr Hewson the fact that he
has a plan for Australia. But it is the wrong plan, it is
the wrong pl. an. Flghtback is not a package, it is an excuse
for a new ta~ x and there's more camouflage on that new tax
than any tax: in the history of this country. Never has a
new tax been so disguised by the ons and of fs and shifts in
revenue and the changes to policy, but when you pull all the
bits away, Underneath there what there is simply a tax which
will tax thE, basics of most Australians.
And the question will be whether Australians really want a
tax that will go right to the heart of the Australian
lifestyle, or whether they will want policy changes which
will deal with the true problems of Australia that is
taking us from an agrarian society which produced a bit of
wheat and wcool and minerals to a sophisticated industrial
place which provides employment to the cities where people
live, where the bulk of the population is, and where we can
have interesting jobs and be part and parcel of the rest of
the world.
Those are the issues for the ' 80S. AS usual the hard ones,
the difficult ones, the ones which are not easily sold and
won't be done in five minutes. But we are so far through
now, we are so far through the transition that we've
actually licked a lot of the big problems. We've got the
problems of the recession, but we'll come out of this
recession not with a 10 per cent inflation rate, like 1982-
3, but with a 3 per cent inflation rate. Not with a
structural budget deficit but with a structural budget
surplus, a cyclical deficit but a structural surplus. With
a high profit share because as soon as any growth occurs in
the economy it will go straight into profits as the extra
production moves straight into the profit share, which will
mean we will be set up reasonably well to carry on our
ongoing investment.
So now we're running a current account deficit of about 4
per cent of GDP. Our debt has stabled at about 2. The
difference is about 2 per cent of our national production.
That's about $ 8 billion. We've got to produce import
compete or export to the tune of about $ 8 billion to turn
our current account deficit into a surplus and to guarantee
Australians -their sovereignty over their affairs from now on
into the future. And to do it living in the most exciting
part of the world.
So in structural terms, if you look at the future, the solid
bits, coming into the ' 90s is nothing like coming into the
We came into the ' 80s with the wage share up and the
profit share down, with inflation in double digits and mass
unemployment, with investment smashed, with virtually
manufacturing closing down, with no tertiary sector to speak
of. And yet now we have such great opportunities,
notwithstanding the fact that we repair from the recession
to pick them up. 
Now the recession is part and parcel of events world-wide
there's a recession in the United States, there's one in
Canada, there's one in Britain and there's one in Australia
and in other. countries. And they're for roughly similar
reasons. But be there or not, our policy must be to get out
of it because it is not acceptable of us, simply for the
Labor Party to say we will adjust Australia into a more
productive place by letting the burden fall on the
unemployed, they can carry the adjustments. That's not been
the Australian way, it's not the Labor way. And that's why
we must go back to positive rates of growth and do things
that have quick mechanical effects inside the economy, to
get the place back into growth and recovery, and to get that
unemployment: down, so that all Australians can share in the
fruits of our economic wealth and our economic prosperity.
So they are the real challenges. To recognise that we've
come a very long way, that we have come from a place which
was slipping down the international income league table and
which is now, coming back up that table in terms of its basic
foundation of its wealth, and to realise that it is that
which will give Australia it's future into the 1990s. By
only being competitive, by only being productive, only being
efficient can you make it, and we will not solve our
problems by slashing our essentials of life with a very
heavy flat tax, believing that that will cure all of those
very specific and practical difficulties which the country
is now facing.
Now, the other problem about the GST is simply the fairness
of it. Can I just make this point. I think it is fairyland
for the Coalition to believe that they can basically market
a tax which affects the poor the same as the wealthy, which
is a flat tax, the same nominal tax on all goods regardless
of income. And ' if you're on $ 20 000 a year and you spend
all of your : money, all of your income and all of your
outgoings are taxed. But if you're on $ 100 000 a year and
you spend $ 40 000, only the $ 40 000 is taxed, and not only
that, not only is the $ 60 000 not taxed, but there's a tax
cut in stall for you as well. And that sort of disparity in
distribution and that sort of unfairness is not what is
required to keep the Australian community socially cohesive
and looking at the same issues in recovery and production.
Now, in the last few weeks we have had the pleasure of
meeting many members of the business community in this
consultation process which the Government has run. And
three of my colleagues and myself have seen a very
representative group of people from Australian business,
unions and other walks of life. And I can say the most
clear and obvious thing that came from that is a lot of the
ideology has fallen away from the public debate. But the
business commnunity was not in there saying, as they would
have said a couple of years ago, look first thing is we
want is the labour market deregulated; second thing is, we
want a change in the tax system with a certain agenda. 
Basically people are saying now let's put all that to one
side, let's get the place moving again, let's pull together
and let's get the place moving again.
There's a great spirit of cooperation out there and which I
hope the Government can use fruitfully to get Australia
moving again. But I don't think that spirit will obtain if'
we try to tear the consensus up and we rip away at the
fabric by a profound change to the tax system, which leaves
the low income people worse up and the higher income people
better of f and we have a transfer of wealth from the poorest
people to the wealthiest people in society, while at the
same time wet try to lock in a low inflation rate and start
rebuilding cur productive sector for the long run through
the 1990s.
It won't wash. And it's my job to tell people why the GST
is not a policy, and I'll be doing it fulsomely, but when it
suits my Government to do so. And it will suit it after, we
will address it comprehensively after we've addressed our
own fightback, the real fightback that is to get the
economy moving again, back into recovery, and back into
growth. So I look forward to working with the business community, to
bringing down an economic statement which is relevant to the
things that really matter, that really matter, about
engendering that recovery, about sparking that employment,
about pinning that inflation rate down, about keeping that
lower cost of capital, about getting investment going,
building the capital stock, watching that production grow
and seeing those current account projections come down.
That's where Australia's bread and butter is. That's where
its future is. And isn't an ideological obsession about tax
rates, which might have their place in Western Europe but
don't have their place in Australia.
So, I conclude on this point that the Government has
listened and is listening to what Australians say. I'll be
very interested to hear from some of you tonight your views
about how you see affairs in your own State of Tasmania and
we will be enideavouring, we will put together a policy mix
which keeps on the main gain of Australia's competitiveness
and its future, and keeps the fairness of Labor stamped upon
it, but the product of which we hope can be accepted by
broad sections of the Australian community as fair and just
and in time. And I hope from the presentation of the
Statement we can get confidence moving again so that we can
actually get that confidence log jam broken and let people
know that the Government wants the economy to grow, and the
Government isn't sitting back there trying to keep the
economy recessed or slow for inflation or current account
reasons. 
9
It actually wants the economy to grow and will do the things
to get that growth and activity. And we can go out, leave
this trough, leave this period behind us and go back to the
great changes through the ' 80s, build on them in the
and find ourselves in a very, very significant position in
the world and most particularly in the Asian-Pacific region.
That has to be our great objective and that's what we will
be committing ourselves to. Thank you very much for coming.. 



E OE PROOF COPY ONLY
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, HOBART, 23 JANUARY 1992
( inaudible)
PM: I think they have to stick with a Government which has
given Tasmania an industrial future and given Tasmania
a reasonable decent set of financial accounts. I think
it needs to be remembered just how far the
discretionary gap, the gap between discrete spending
and revenue was under Mr Gray's Government. It was 30% 6
and th:-Ls community pays, I think, a real trauma in that
which Premier Field and the Field Government have very
largely now overcome and so in terms of really the
hardest sort of work which is keeping a State within
its capacity to spend and afford it, that sort of hard
grinding work, while at the same time keeping all the
industrial facilities going. That hard grinding work,
Premier Field has done and the message I give to
Tasmanians is hang on to him.
Why didn't you stay longer? Why are you flying in and
flying out not meeting the people?
PM Well, ' I've come down at the first opportunity and I'm
seeing quite a lot of people tonight, 170 I think, and
the Chamber of Manufacturers in Launceston, they're
people as far as I know.
the capital Prime Minister?
PM: And I know about this Hobart/ Launceston thing and I'm
quite happy to visit the Premier here in Hobart and
speak in Launceston tonight and I think people
( inaudible Michael Field and he should stay
( inaudible) 
Mr Keating do you suggest that the GST played a part in the
Liberal loss in the NSW by-election? I assume you think
that Federal issues have been postponed?
PM: Well, Dr Hewson's goods and services tax package, apart
from putting his hands into every pocket of every
person in the country for everything they buy, is also
about a 5 per cent reduction in the Commonwealth
payments to the States. That's a $ 40 million reduction
in the income of Tasmania and that's a very large
impost on the State, that would have to be made up by
taxes and charges. This is a State with a relatively
small population and it will mean a very heavy impost
on most Tasmanians. I'm really at a loss as to why the
Leader of the Opposition here, Mr Groom, is supporting
the Figlatback, the Hewson Fightback package when it is
going to rip $ 40 million off Tasmania.
Yes, you would think that Tasmanians would understand that
they would be voting on those Federal issues and...
PM: Well, they certainly will to the extent that the
Coalition has been asking people to endorse the policy
which the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Groom, supports
of taking $ 40 million off the State.
So we had to have a recession, don't we have to have a
fightback?
PM: I don't deny that Dr Hewson has a plan but it is the
wrong plan. A plan that says if we can't really get
honest suggestions that all the things that matter to
Australia, like jobs, recovery, growth, investment,
exports, national efficiency, all of that would be
fixed by tax on your Wheat Bix and your clothes. Does
anyone really think that can happen? While at the same
time blow out the inflation rate/ interest rate out with
it. I mean that's what people have got to understand
what this really means. I mean this is a very nasty
package, wrapped up, a very nasty tax wrapped up with
some tax give-aways which are not as large as the tax
burden which will fail on most Australians.
of Immigration, Graeme Campbell came to say that you
have made a blunder in comments and suggested that anyone
who now knows his
PM: I don't think that's right. I think that it's
important that people understand what population growth
is all about and what it means in national growth and
national demand and on my part I welcome Dr Hewson's
assurance that he will debate this issue, rationally,
sensibly and not return to the sort of themes which
were running in 1988. 
any comments you have made?
PM: No, because no, I think this is an important subject to
Australians. People can't pretend that this has
economic: implications and then address them in a throw
away line in a doorstop in a by-election.
How embarrasing has it been, the Solicitor-General's
PM: Well I don't think embarrasing, but the Attorney's
office has made a decision about that and he did not
speak to me nor did he need to.
Did you ever
PM: None whatsoever, I've not spoken to the Attorney about
it either directly or indirectly.
Given that the Opposition hag been pushing the GST so hard
in Tasmania, would this election have been a qood chance for
you to come down?
PM: Well, I. ll be saying some things tonight at quite a
large meeting and talking about what I think are the
real issues of Australian that is, to be on the
recovery, to return to higher rates of employment, to
maintain a low inflation rate and low interest rates,
to build our capital stocks and build more production,
to produce more and therefore reduce the current
account deficit, to make all the factories of Australia
work effEiciently, tLo make sure the transport system
works efficiently, these are the real issues, and the
consumption taxes they put in relation to those
issues -is a tenth order issue. And so what Dr Hewson
has done is taken a tenth order issue and tried to
manufacture it into a first order issue and then sold
it. Well the fact is it is a very nasty number. It is
very nasty for most Australians but worse of all that
it is not about the real thing, it is not about the
issues -that matter. It is not about the things which
will remedy Australia's economic difficulty.
But 62% of Australia say that Dr Hewson is doing it well?
PM: Well that's OK, but I mean again we will make our
point, this-Government has been about reducing the tax
burden of Australians. This is now the second lowest
taxed country in the OECD. And it is a very strange
debate when you have got people believing you can be
popular in saying that Australia has long term
fundamental difficulties, what it needs to remedy all
this is a new tax. And you say really? What we really
need is a new tax? Well it is a novel twist of the
debate and as the issues are opened up, I'm quite sure
Australians will come to weigh much more carefully than 
what is your position here?
PM: Well we put a Bill in the Parliament and I think
there is only one issue here, will the Liberal Party
agree to the package of resource security legislation.
in the Senate of the Commonwealth. If they do there
will be an Act. A Bill for an Act, and it will be an.
Act of~ Parliament. If they don't the Resource Security
will go down and its Mr Groom, who I think, and the
Liberal Party, who the questions should be directed to.
We have got our Bill in the Chamber.
Has the Premier asked you to do anything to pave the way for
his gas proposals and the steel proposals for the North West
Coast? PM: He has and I ( inaudible)... . which I think would be good
for Tasmanians and I'm sure he will be pleased to say-a
few words in
Can't we get from you Prime Minister part of this..
PM: He is the PremierletA tell you. It's his proposal.
What did he ask you to do?
PM: Well hie's asked the Commonwealth to share in the costs
of a feasibility study for the Steel mill and I have
given certain undertakings which he'll reveal to you.
Is this the way Tasmania should be going with these 2
proposals? PM: Well at least I think the fundamentals seem to be there
and the way of testing the fundamentals is in the way I
think government to. Tasmanians are always going to
have play to its naturals strengths and these projects are
about draw:' Lng those strengths together and enhancing them
and the Government I think has been very sensible about
doing it, about supporting it.
And so you support
PM: Well -: have done my best to
So totally insignificant in the national picture, are we,
Tasmania'? You consider it an insignificant part of your
Commonwealth picture?
PM: How do come to that point?
I'm asking thequestion, are we important in your plan of
Australia? PM: Absolutely, I mean it is an Australian State, the
population is small but that just means that all we are 
seeing is basically the same. I think all of the publi. c
policy and development issues are difficult regardless
of size. In the other States, the numbers might be
larger, but problems are much the same. And all of
Australia is going to have to play to its natural
strengths. In other words, comparative advantage. And
Australia will, as we are doing now, lifting the growth
in trade, playing to our natural advantage. And I
think Tasmania will continue to do more of that in the
future. Because in the end it's natural advantage and
comparative advantage which gives any trading entity a
chance and that is what the Premier is trying to do in
seeking possibilities here for projects which are
comparative or natural advantage.
What are Labor's changes in the next election?
PM: Well I think that the Premier has taken on just about
the toughest: job of any of the States. The fiscal task in
Tasmania was greater than any of the States. And when I was
Treasurer, I can tell you this, the fiscal difficulties of
Tasmania was greater than any of the States and Michael
Field has done more than anybody could ever have imagined to
reoair that yawning gap which Premier Gray left him and the
people of Tasmania. And not only that, been able to balance
the issues and balance the forces in politics so that the
place keeps on developing. I think he has got a very
natural touch in balancing competing issues and demand and
at the same time, a good economic manager. And what the
Opposition are proposing is for the Opposition leader,
somebody who Mr Fraser thought wasn't competent enough to
be a Federal Minister and who is supporting a policy which
claws a heap of money out of the States.
prospect of another hung Parliament?
PM: Obviously I'm not here to give you a cheek by joul
seat by seat opinion about which seats would be won, but the
Government has performed strongly, this is the right answer
for Tasmanians, the Field Government, and I think if ever
there was a Premier who on the basis of sheer hard work and
courage has took, on the tough issues and got on top of them,
has asked for another mandate, it is Michael Field.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER ] 9/
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PROGRESS ON ECONOMIC STATEMENT
I will convene the first meeting of the co-ordinating
committee of Ministers f or the Economic Statement for next
Tuesday and Wednesday.
The group comprises myself, Mr Howe, Senator Button, Senator
Evans, Mr Dawkins and Mr Willis.
The primary aim of the first meeting will be to consider
which ideas promoted by business and trade unions during the
recent round of meetings are worthy of further
consideration. Departments will then be directed to examine these proposals
in more detail.
The Government regards the series of national meetings in
Sydney and Melbourne as an unqualified success.
Business and unions from each State were represented and the
meetings were conducted in a spirit of co-operation with a
clear focus on getting the recovery underway.
As I have already announced, the Minister for Small Business
and Customs, Mr Beddall, will convene a meeting of the Small
Business Coalition, which I will attend on Thursday 6
February. I have already made it clear that I and senior Ministers
will be visiting other capital cities at various times
before the Statement is delivered.
It is my intention to visit each State capital Adelaide
next Thursday 30 January, Perth on Friday 31 January and
Brisbane on Monday 3 February.
Senior Ministers will also visit regional centres. Details
will be announced when finalised.
I consider it important to develop a sense of national
purpose tcowards this Economic Statement and to that end I
and my Ministers will continue to make every endeavour to
seek positive contributions from around Australia.
24 January 1992 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
REV. HOLLINGWORTH, AND SIMON BAILEY
DOORSTOP, AUISTRALIAN OF THE YEAR, ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SYDNEY
26 JANUARY 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: I've been a good listener. I've met him a few times,
this fellow, over the years. But I was particularly
pleased with Peter, that someone representing the
softer values of Australia was up there as Australian
of the Yfear. Which is a nice thing for this country.
J: What are you planning to do this year?
REV: Well apart from running a diocese I am doing something
about renewing the life of the church and finishing off
a cathedral, I want to get into raising money to help
young people who can't get into the workforce, who
can't get traineeships. And already with the support
of the Federal Government through our employment action
centres, we have a got a very good program going in two
States of Australia, and I hope we can extend that.
And I hope we can get some money in to help young
people who would otherwise take advantage of all that.
J: How do you feel about winning the award?
REV: Overwhe: lmed mostly. I think you can only accept it on
behalf of other people, not on your own behalf.
J: Well, Mr Hawke told you that you to butt out, that you
didn't know' what you were talking about. Is that the
case?
REV: No, he didn't quite say it as directly as that. He
suggested that I should stick to my area of
responsibility and he would stick to his.
J: Will you be sticking to your area of responsibility? 
REV: Well I think we are all concerned about the building up
of a just, efficient, caring, participatory Australia,
and we will work together in partnership, I'm sure.
PM: Absolutely
J: Will this be shown in your economic statement Mr
Keating?
PM: Well, as I see it that will be essentially the essence
of it because a country without fairness and equity is
a count-y that does not understand itself well. And we
will be continuing to keep a focus on those values.
J: Mr Keating, will traineeships be a specific be part of
the Economic Statement?
PM: Well I can't say what is in the Economic Statement, but
the labour market area has traditionally been an area
of concern to us and most particular at this time,
including and especially for young people.
J: Simon how do you feel?
SB: Overawed, actually. I'm very honoured. I'm sure there
are many young people in this country who are equally
deserving of this honour.
J: What do you plan to do now?
SB: Get back to training if I can. After I start the
National. Championships in early March I go to Arizona
to perform there, so I have got to get back into peak
condition.
J: Does this vindicate your statement from last year,
Archbishop?
REV: I think this has nothing to do with my statement last
year.
J: You're nriot, you're certain you're not
REV: No I do not. I think it's to do with a long term
commitment to justice and the care of the poor over
many, many years. I think that's the issue really.
You don't achieve these things, flash in the pan
activities. Because it is those who are the long-term
stayers, that ' are going to achieve something.
J: But surely perhaps some of those statements, that at
the time were a little controversial, are major step in
campaign to actually get things done? 
3
REV: There is nothing wrong with controversy as long as it
speaks the truth, and as long as it keeps the issues
before people who are in a position to make decisions.
I don't resile from any of that and I'm sure that the
Prime Minister and everybody else would expect me to do
it.
PM: If there are issues of substance, then controversy can
often bring light to a subject. So there we are.
ENDS 



2
EMBARGOED 7Z30am SUNDAY JANUARY 26
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA DAY ADDRESS
AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS BREAKFAST
ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SYDNEY, 26 JANUARY 1992
This last year has been one of unprecedented global
upheaval: of change so rapid we f ind ourselves having to
confront international realities that were inconceivable
twelve months ago. We have witnessed the disintegration o~ f
the second most powerful nation on earth, and the re-birth
of nation states and national movements dormant f or
generations.. We have seen the face of Europe change. We
have seen the emergence of a dictator in the Middle East;,
and unprecedented international cooperation to defeat him.
Few eras have been so uncertain or so promising. The
world is being re-made, not just in Europe but in our own
immediate region in Asia where economic growth is faster
than anywhere else in the world, where no one yet knows what
the future political landscape will be, and where Qlux future
substantiall. y lies.
We cannot hide from these realities. We must be ready and
able to adapt. We must be strong enough and independent
enough to bEt a constructive political and economic player in
the new ordetr. In one sense we have never been so alone: in
another we have never been so much a part of the world.
In facing these challenges we ought to take both courage and
pride in what we have already achieved. Because it is true
to say that, if the changes here have not occurred with the
same astonishing speed, they have been profound.
Only a generation ago we lived as an isolated outpost of
Europe largely protected from the wider world by high tariff
barriers and a cosy but increasingly unrealistic
relationship with Great Britain. We have moved a long way
from that: our course is now fixed towards a robust
internationally competitive economy based on not just our
great natural wealth but our human skills and energy in
manufacturing and services. 
Only a decade ago our workplace relations and our wages
system were governed by an inflexible code of hostility, a
conventional wisdom that the interests of employers and
employees were naturally opposed. That is emphatically no
longer the case.
Less than a generation ago we still lived in fear of Asia
we regarded our near neighbours with a mixture of ignorance,
hostility anad condescension. We are now much more a part of
the region, much more at home economically, and as the
Cambodian peace settlement so dramatically testifies,
politically. Without sacrificing social cohesion, we have become a much
more complex society. Where for so long we were notorious
for the White Australia Policy, we now enjoy a large measure
of respect for the tolerance manifest in our immigration and
multicultural policies.
Perhaps we should not be surprised if these and other
profound cultural and economic changes have made many
Australians wonder if the traditions of their country, the
values for which they have worked and fought, are not under
attack. I suspect there are many Australians who are
wondering if their Australia will survive the changes i
there will b~ e a place for the " old Australia" in the new.
I have no doubt that the best of Australia will survive
in fact it must. The hard-won traditions of democracy, of
fairness an~ d equity, individual opportunity and personal
security, our way of life and those institutions which
guarantee our freedom, will remain the guiding principles cof
Australia. Indeed it is becauise we want these values to survive that we
must re-make Australia. There is no question about it if
the good society we all want is to become reality we have to
become a more dynamic, more efficient and cohesive society.
We have to become a nation with a more truly natin U
purpose. With other ministers in recent weeks I have spoken to
representatives of Australian business all kinds of
Australian business. I've spoken to state premiers and
their senior ministers, and I've spoken to trade union
leaders. The spirit of cooperation and endeavour, the good
will, the unanimous commitment to economic recovery, and the
idleas which emerged from these discussions re-affirmed my
belief that we can successfully respond to the two great
imperatives: the immediate one of stimulating economic
growth and -getting people back to work, and, in the longer
term, completing the task of creating a revitalised and
vigorous Australia. 
One hundred years ago the colonies which were soon to form
the Australian nation were deep in the worst depression and
the worst drought Australia has ever experienced. Yet the
1890s was remarkable for the sense of nationhood which
emerged. It was the first great flowering of the Australian
spirit. Much of the old Australia was born in that decade.
The new Australia, I firmly believe, can be born in this
one. We can build on those great traditions and that spirit
to meet the challenges which face us now.
I believe we need have no doubt about the future of our
nation no doubt that we can come out of this recession
much stronger, with a much firmer basis for full employment
and long term prosperity, and with a clearer vision of our
common goal.
So in presenting these awards for the 1991 Australian and
Young Australian of the Year we are honouring, I think,
people who exemplify the spirit of Australia: that means,
among many things, courage and enterprise, faith in
ourselves, pride in our past but with eyes firmly fixed on
our future.
On behalf of the government and people of Australia I
congratulate you all, and thank you for the example you have
set us. 



is.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7: 30 REPORT, JANUARY 29 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
LYNEHAM:
program. PM: Prime Minister Paul Keating welcome to the
Thank you Paul.
LYNEHAM: Are you getting used to the title?
PM: It takes a while I think, it takes a while.
LYNEHAM: Is it enjoyable still?
PM: Vezy I think.
LYNEHAM: Why?
LYNEHAM: Well for a start it's the greatest honour I think
any Australian could be paid, to be Prime Minister of the
country and the power of the job means that all of those
options one looks for in public life are available to you.
LYNEHAM: How does it compare to being Treasurer?
PM: I -think the workload's are about comparable but
its a different sort of work. It is more of an overview of
all the responsibilities of the Government and also an
overview of society.
LYNEHAM: Of course your critics would say you'd love to be
the boss wouldn't you?
PM: My critics say I'd love to be the boss?
LYNEHAM: Yes
PM: I mean I have spent 22 years as an apprenticeship
which is reasonably a long time. 
3
LYNEHAM: DoCes it make you more interested in a wage tax
trade-off?
PM: Well a wage tax trade-off is the principal reason
why Australian inflation is where it is. The 1989 tax cuts
which were $ 6 billion, I might add, just on $ 30 a week and I
might add without a consumption tax, those tax cuts stopped
Australia from coming out of this recession with inflation
at 8-9%.
LYNEHAM: Well are you interested in another one?
PM: Well they have been very effective but again
there's got to be, time has to be precocious for them.
First of all everyone has to want to do it, including the
trade unions.
LYNEHAM: Have you been on the phone to your mate Bill
Kelty? PM: No, and the other thing is the capacity has got to
be there, the result has got to be there. I mean they were
always done, I hope with a lot of aplomb, all the bits
fitted together at the right moment and the result was we
have now got the lowest inflation in the western world
thanks largely to the Accord with the trade unions.
LYNEHAM: Well thanks largely to the fact that the economy
is in intensive care.
PM: No that's not true. The recession has certainly
deflated prices, but we came out of 1982-3 with a
inflation rate, we are coming out of this recession with an
inflation rate at 1.5% with an underlying rate of about 3%.
The difference is wages policy, the difference is the
Accord, the thing the Liberals don't want and the thing
which has put Australia up the front in the inflation race
world wide.
LYNEHAM: Presumably 1.5% inflation does give you a lot more
room to move now as you contemplate how to prime the
economic pump a bit.
PM: Well obviously with the recession the way it is
the economy can stand some stimulation before we see demand
take off and reach a position where it is beyond where we
would like it to be. So if you are asking me is there scope
to stimulate the economy the answer is yes.
LYNEHAM: If you wanted an immediate boost to business
activities some would say why not let the dollar fall gently
to around 70 cents. Why have the reserve in there propping
it back up from 74 to 75 all the time?
PM: WeL1 I'm not here to give you commentary on the
exchange rate. 
-2
LYNEHAM: Do you think getting it in a caucus spill gives it
the legitimacy that you get by going to the people and
actually getting their endorsement though?
PM: I think there's only three Prime Ministers who
have ever become Prime Minister at an election. Bob Hawke
did, Malcolm Fraser didn't, Cough did, Bill McMahon didn't,
John Gorton didn't..
LYNEHAM: Are you really fair dinkum now unless you have
gone to the polls?
PM: Harold Holt didn't, I mean as far as I know all
Australian Prime Ministers bar three became Prime Minister
other than a general election. This is true of Curtin, true
of Chifley.
LYNEHAM: Inflation at 1.5% does this mean we should all
expect lower wages outcomes than the 4.5 5% that's in the
current Budget?
PM: Well, the fact is we have had a better performance
on inflation than was generally believed and while I'm not
sure what the wage outcome for this year will be, obviously
there will be a real increase in wages, that is, with
inflation lower for any given nominal wage, that is, for any
given wage outcome there will be part of that wage outcome
will be a real increase in wages.
LYNEHAM: But should the outcome be so far ahead of the
annual inflation rate?
PM: Well success breeds success, it's the old story,
that is if you can do better you end up with the benefit, if
inflation is low the benefit is higher real wages. If at
the time whenr forecasting that and putting wages together we
believe we'd have inflation down to 1.5% obviously the
nominal wage outcome, or the nominal wage target would have
been lower.
LYNEHAM: But you don't feel inclined to try and ratchet
them down now?
PM: Well it's too late to do that now. The year is
halfway over.
LYNEHAM: It would make a wage tax trade-off a lot less
costly.-though-. wouldn't it?
PM: We" Ll there's no guarantee they will come out at
four and a -half, I mean it just depends on what, I mean
there is a recession out there, wage costs have been held,
the labour market deteriorated for the getting of wages,
even the enterprise bargaining slows up, so we are not
certain what the wage number will be yet. It could be lower
than that. 
4-
LYNEHAM: Buat wouldn'It you get a lot of economic bang for
very little bother?
PM: Well the thing is the foreign exchange markets are
quite deep and I think now over the years quite smart, that
is, what they have there is a lot more depth and
understanding than there was in 1984 or 1985 and the
fundamental! 3 will always remain important, I think, for that
market and iLt's a mechanism to keep Australian commerce, thle
Australian economy competitive and what you are talking
about is that the recent depreciation of the exchange rate
has made us more competitive and that's obviously true.
LYNEHAM: But then the Reserve has gone back in and pumped
the dollar back up again.
PM: Well no I mean if a market wants to set a rate,
central banks, I don't believe can resist that rate, this
bank hasn't, and the result is that the place is more
competitive but again part of that has been the interest
rate changes in the period but it also has an attendant
inflation risk and that's got to be borne in mind as well.
LYNEHAM: Butt yesterday's NAB survey for example, suggested
that Australian companies who are operating now at about 76%
capacity wa-s a fair bit of slack in there before you have to
start to worry too much about inflation isn't there?
PM: Well exactly. You are making my point for me.
You asked me before is there a risk' on inflation and on
demand if we stimulate the economy and the answer is minimal
risk given the state of the economy, the state of capacity,
the very point you make.
LYNEHAM: So the dollar could come down, boost our exports
without too much immediate danger of inflation as long as it
is done gently and
PM: Let's leave the dollar out of that. Let's
just say..
LYNEHAM: Well the farmers don' t want to
PM: There is room f or a stimulus. I noticed today
that Dr Hewson, by the way, said there was no room for a
stimulus and. he came up the gobbledegook, yes well if you
want to do structural things which can improve investment
you -have gal: to make savings -somewhere else, but if it is
Budget neutral, in other words if you save what you spend it
has not stimulus to the economy. Now he was trying to brand
that as irrE-sponsible, of course it isn't irresponsible he
is the only one that shares that view, Westpac, Bankers
Trust, Citibank, a whole stack of institutions have made the
point that the economy can stand a stimulus and the
Government's now considering that.
LYNEHAM: But isn't there a balancing act that you have got
to make here. On one hand you have got warnings that there 
is a distinct possibility that a dash for growth ahead of
the next election could precipitate a further currency
decline, I mean you have got to do something but do it very
delicately with aplomb as you say
PM: Well we have always done that. I mean I think,
look this Government has husbanded over the years a fiscal
policy which has been the envy of most countries and John
Dawkins and Ralph Willis and I and others have sat in that
room for seven or eight years cutting outlays to get the
size of the public sector down. We have earned ourselves
the room and the judgement to decide how we ought to treat
fiscal policy in a recession and we don't need to be told by
some jock from Citibank or somewhere else that they'll be
watching us if we do that. I mean, frankly, the Government
will be makiLng the judgements around here, we're the best
place to make them. Not only that, we have earned the right
to make them.
LYNEHAN: Yes, but you didn't do too well with the recession
bringing the economy in for a landing at 90 degrees.
PM: Well you might make the same point about the
United States which is in a recession where I'm told that
pessimism about confidence is at lower levels in Australia
about the same as Britain and New Zealand. I mean there was
a stock market crash in 1987, monetary authorities world
wide for a crash larger than 1929 avoided the depression
like 1933 but the result was a recession, but a recession we
will emerge from to a recovery and the main emphasis now has
to be on a recovery.
LYNEHAM: Well you spoke recently of taking economic risks
on inflation and on the current account.
PM: No what I said was in the 180s I always tried to
run Australia faster so that Australians had more jobs than
they would in a place where we were running it more slowly
and with the attendant inflation and current account was
being lower. I said the trick is not to be running the
place slowly with high unemployment and lost opportunities,
the trick : Ls to be running it with faster rates of
employment growth and at the same time lower inflation and
lower current account. In other words doing the hat trick,
and that's basically what the 80s structural change is
about, restructuring in the context of growth. Now in other
countries, such as New Zealand, they restructured in the
context of very. low growth or no growth or contraction.
There result is there is a much higher level of social.
misery. LYNEHAM: But: you have also got the political imperative,
you have got no time at all to spare have you? You have got
to perform the equivalent of the economic loaves and fishes
by the time of the next election?
PM: What I would like to see is a recovery coming
through as eEarly and as strongly as possible. 
-6
LYNEHAM: How daring can you be though?
PM: Strong in the sense that it is sustainable in
terms of inf lation and demand and the current account.
Which it can be. I mean we have come a long way, remember
this we have got a cyclical problem with the recession, a
problem with the cycle. But in terms of the structure the
long-run structure, is low-inflation, structural Budget
surpluses, a competitive exchange rate mechanism, all of the
other changes, the wage and profit shares, the changes in
enterprise bargaining, all those competitive, efficiency
things are still there in the structure, for the ' 90s for
Australia, and they are put there by this Government.
LYNEHAM: A lot of it has not rung the bell yet. I mean
waterfront reform. When are importers and exporters going
to see the waterfront companies actually lowering their
charges? PM: That will happen because we have now reduced a
cost for themn substantially.
LYNEHAM: But not for the users.
PM: Let's understand this Paul, the Liberal Party left
us an industrial museum, they left us an industrial museum,
a country of industrial archaeology, from the Rip van Winkle
years of Menzies, we're the ones that had to
internationalise the place and we are the ones who are going
to finish the job. There is a limit to how much macro
economic policy, that's Budget policy, and interest rates
can change thie country and the tax system. We are now into
the micro economy. There are things like ports and wharves,
you know, airlines, telecommunications. They're the things
which are the constraints we are now pushing it through.
Now in contrast what are the Liberals talking about? They
are having a. debate whether we tax income or expenditure.
Well big deal. Big deal! Whether we tax income or
expenditure, not how you get a container between Sydney and
Melbourne, not how you get it across the water..
LYNEHAM: For all we've heard from your Government, if I ant
an importer or an exporter I am still not paying less on the
waterfront? PM: Wel. l you may well be but I mean, that will come
through. Wea have made the -changes. . Whether stevedore
companies have yet passed them on is a moot point, I'm not
sure. LYNEHAM: It's a bit academic unless its...
PM: There is a 40 per cent improvement in the wharves
and we are FLot f inished yet. But I'm just trying to say
this. We're the only ones that have ever tackled the
rutted-in, deep problems. The waterfront issue did not:
arise since we were in office. It's been there for 
-7
years. How come the Liberals had 7 years of fice and did
nothing abolut it? How come when Dr Hewson was advising
Treasurer Howard, he said, listen Treasurer, what about that
waterfront and micro reform, what about those airlines,
Treasurer, what about the two airline agreement? What about
Telecommunications reform, what about the structural budget
deficit, wha~ t about the 10 per cent inflation.
LYNEHAM: What about we talk about
PM: These are all the things which we had to tackle.
LYNEHAM: What about we talk about the Morgan Poll. I mean
I know you said you would prefer to operate from behind.
PM: No, I. said I have always enjoyed coming from
behind. LYNEHAM: Well you certainly are aren't you. 28 per cent is
just about terminal isn't it? How can you get from 28 per
cent? PM: Look, I have never been out there chasing
popularity. I have always thought it was important to earn
one's regard, one's respect, and as Prime Minister I will do
my best to earn it.
LYNEHAM: But since the last poll, 7 out of 10 of those who
undecided then have gone against you. That's hardly a trend
you can afford to see kick along is it? 7 out of 10 of them
have given you the thumbs down and gone in for your
disapproval slot.
PM: And which poll is this?
LYNEHAM: Morgan Gallop.
PM: Since the last poll.
LYNEHAM: Yes, since the one before.
PM: Well I-don't know how you read that statistic into
it. LYNEHAM: You~ r approval went up 3, your disapproval went
down 7 and ycour undecided's went down
PM: Well. it. is a . very large. undecided group, and I
hope they decide in my favour.
LYNEHAM: Well 7 out of 10 of them gave you thumbs down.
PM: And I will be doing my best to earn their respect
and regard. And' I will not be picking up shabby policy, I
will not be making decision I am ashamed of, I will not be
selling the place out for a bit of cheap cheers. Now the
point is, I was part of the structural change from
Australia, to take it from that industrial museum to a 
-8
country which is part of the modern world and will continue
it, and I'm not going to go into bribes, you know tax
options, and other tomn foolery a la the Liberal Party, i~ n
the process of trying to garner some regard.
LYNEHAM: Are we seeing a new Keating style emerging here as
Prime Minister? I mean you're certainly haven't called
anyone a perfumed gigolo, or a mangy maggot in recent
months. PM: Well I mean again, you use those points Paul, but
you've seen me in Question Time, basically in an educational
role for nearly a decade. Educating the Opposition to
policy and I hope the Press Gallery with forensic answers
which were wrapped in a bit of politics to paint the
picture, and it's always it'Is always the lolly in the
wrapper, its always suited the media to run the wrapper and
drop the lolly. Now the fact is I've used some of those
expressions once or twice in 20 years. Now if you want to
drag out Dr Hewson' s record already you will find something
there. You will find it from..
LYNEHAM: So you have been misunderstood?
PM: No you will even f ind it from John Howard, who I
know wants to keep policy as high or low up about all these
things. But the fact is, this is a clearing house of public
pressures. The House of Representatives. It's where we do
our national business. Now in some countries people decide
issues by shooting themselves across footpaths, or other
kinds of violence. We don't have any of that in our
political scene, fortunately. But we do have a vigorous
debate and I really don't think the media has a right to
score of f it all, report it all with all the colour and
verve and vivacity and technical accomplishment is often the
stock in trade of the Parliament and then pick up the odd
word to say, Oh now, isn't this dreadful. Well of course it
isn't dreadful and you know that in terms of, there is not a
Parliament in the world that takes a nswers without
questions. There'Is not a Government in the world required
without any notice for three quarters of an hour or an hour
a day to answer questions on each subject. That's the level
of general co~ mpetence which obtains here day in and day out,
and it is that which with lif ts the tone of the debate, but:
unfortunately it's not that which is always reported.
LYNEHAM: Well let's talk about one or two of f the cuf f
things . you -have.. said-since you. became Prime Minister. Your
suggestion that Bob Hawke's style was to let others lead for
him which was the antithesis of leadership. Why kick him
like that when he was already
PM: Oh look, I was not seeking to kick him. He made a
point to me, he made a point of trying to say to me that I
should change what he perceived to be my style. I was only
making the point that his style worked well for him, mystyle
is dif ferent and I hope mine works well for me. But 
9-
LYNEHAM: that's not just a neutral comment?
PM: I just made that point about Menzies. Menzies put
Australia in the cooler for 30 years. Bob Hawke was the
Prime Minist~ er who took it out and I had the pleasure of
doing a lot of that work with him.
LYNEHAM: He wasn't too pleased by your remark?
PM: Well he might not have been. But his record will
survive that remark and many others.
LYNEHAM: Do you think he is going to retaliate? Do you
expect him to?
PM: I shouldn't think so because I don't think it was
a remark calculated to secure a retaliation or that warrants
one. LYNEHAM: Your other piece of outspokenness was accusing the
Coalition of an anti-Asian bias in wanting the immigration
intake cut. Do you really believe that John Hewson or
Phillip Ruddocc are racists?
PM: No.. I was saying I hope we don't have a repeat of
some of the 88 shenanigans and that I thought that some of
the remarks which have been made in by-elections ran that
risk. Now I didn't refer to any remarks, I didn't name
anybody, I just made that point and I was very pleased to
have Dr Hewson' s assurance that this debate, important as it:
is, will be conducted properly.
LYNEHAN: You don't regret stirring the possum?
PM: Wel. l I have just told you what my motives were.
LYNEHAM: The Statement you are planning will be March now
presumably will it?
PM: Well the timing is yet to be decided.
LYNEHAM: These things usually later than early aren't they?
PM: Well, there's a lot to be done, and there's not,
by any measure, a long time to do it.
LYNEHAM: What's-. the danger that. expectations are starting
to become unrcealistically high and that it could end up a
bit like an anti-climax?
PM: Well it's always a danger with any Government
announcement which is foreshadowed. But you know we've
been, I per~ sonally introduced 8 Budgets and 7 May
statements, -that was 15. About 15 years of Budgetary
presentation crammed into 8. So we have got an idea of
managing expectations and also what a package should
contain. 
10
LYNEHAM: And how risky can you afford to be in such a
package? PM: I don't think we need to be risky at all and won't
be. The f act is the Government can do two things here at
once. It can do things to induce a recovery, it can do
things which are of a stimulatory nature to the economy but
which add to a long-term productive capacity of the nation.
In other words, not costly Budget bangs which go up in smoke
but things which have a long-run benefit to the productive
base of the country. We have always got those things right.
And from the Government which produced the first structural
surpluses ever in the nation's history, the first huge
structural surpluses. From that Government you will see no
risky things but well thought through, sensible things which
will serve the nation well.
LYNEHAM: There's a danger isn't there that even if you can
get the economy going again reasonably well many voters will
give you very little thanks because many of them blame you
for causing -the recession in the first place.
PM: Well we also had 8 years of almost unprecedented
growth. We took the workforce from 6 million to currently
to this very day
LYNEHAM: With a million out of work.
PM: No, well we always had 600,000 out of work at any
stage. But -the fact is we created 1.8 million jobs, we lost
300,000 of them. Now that's a great pity, but we had 10 per
cent unemployment in a workforce of 6 million in ' 83. We
have got 10 per cent odd now in a workforce of 7.5 million.
The trick is now to get the economy growing again to take
those new entrants to the workforce. And the increment in
wealth, the wealth of this country which changed between ' 82
and ' 91, has been quite profound, I don't think we have
every seen anything like that in our post-war history. So
they have go-t to see us in the context of the 8 or 10 years
and not just in the context of the stock market crash fall
out, the boom of ' 88-89 which was induced by sharp lifts in
the terms of trade etc.
LYNEHAM: Amazing what not having a job and no opportunities
for your kids can do to the lapse of your memory how
Paul Keating used to be.
PM: . No no. Look the Government regrets the fact that;
there is a recession but if we were now growing as strongly
as we were in ' 88 we would be copping America's exportable
surplus, we would be copping Britain's exportable surplus,
we would have a current account which would make Australians
never forget any of this for the next 20 or 30 years. Now
what I'm hoping is that as we get out of this recession we
can get on wiLth it, recovery and not be burdened down for a
generation as we would be with an irresponsible policy which 
11
never made those changes. Now the fact is, the recession is
to be regretted, but let's get out of it.
LYNEHAM: Finally East Timor Prime Minister, isn't it simply
humbug for the Government to be expressing concern f or the
human rights for' the East Timorese, while ruling out one of
their most fundamental human rights, which is the
opportunity for some sort of senseless self-determination?
PM: Well, I think that matter would have been
appropriately taken up perhaps in the middle ' 70s and that
matter, I thiLnk, largely passed Australia by then.
LYNEHAM: Haire we dropped the ball then, and they are then
condemned to suffer now?
PM: We" Ll, I hope not condemned to suffer. That is
that we have deplored the events in Indonesia but at least
we have seen disciplinary action taken by the Indonesian
Government against the people in the military who were not
responsible but who presided over as commanding officers of
the groups of soldiers involved. And we've seen remarks by
President Suharto and the presentation report and the action
which he took upon that presentation which gives us heart to
believe that the final report will be a report of substance
and where clear action will be taken. So in other words we
will see some change of behaviour or light or future
behaviour as a result of this unfortunate occurence.
LYNEHAM: And should it worry our national conscience that
they are ther7e, our northern neighbours without any right to
determine their own future?
PM: Well I mean this is always a problem, I think
Indonesia came at this issue in the ' 70s from what ii;
believed was the post-colonial arrangements in this part of
the world. That's what I think spurred their action at that
time. Rights of self-determination are obviously something
which we have fought for. In fact we f ought for the right
of self -determination for Indonesians themselves in the
1940s. But a lot of water has flowed under the bridge since
that time, and I'm not sure it's a realistic expectation
that Indonesia will surrender control of Timor.
LYNEHAM: Even to the East Timorese?
PM: Even to the East Timorese.
ENDS 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AND SA PREMIER JOHN BANNON,
DOORSTOP, JANUARY 30 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
PM: Well the Premier and I have had a meeting this
morning about the forthcoming economic
statement of the Federal Government. We have
also had a chance to speak to the business
community and one of the Social Security
organisations in SA we'd like to do things
which would encourage a faster recovery in
Australia, but at the same time are good for
the structure of the place. W listen to views
put to us by the business community about a
range of things, about how they see the
economy, about what things the Government might
do and also we discussed some of the
infrastructure questions. And we've decided to
come and just look at the interface between
water, road and rail which exists here and
that's the main point of the visit.
J: What do you think of Mr Bannon's shopping list
Mr Keating?
PM: Well it's extensive, I would think ill of him
if it wasn't, but I think we will have to sift
our way through those things. But the common
theme, I think, the Premier and I are on common
theme about strengthening the infrastructure of
Australia. We do have real problems now in
the micro-economy that is. There is a hint to
how much Budgetary and monetary policy can
change Australia. If there are physical
problems they have to be overcome, and that's
why we are considering some of these subjects.
J: Mr Keating, a lot of the Premier's suggestions
are those things based on micro-economic 
2
reform, things like the transport how well
do you receive them?
PM: Well I think in this sense that this is the
period when we need the states concentrating on
the things which they do mostly and that is
transport and a lot of the infrastructure
questions which are not directly Commonwealth
issues but because of the national economy and
because of our financial arrangements with the
States they've become a matter of co-operative
issues between us. So I welcome the fact that
the Premier is focussing on these problems.
J: So a good chance of some money coming that way?
PM: Well, we like to treat all of the States fairly
and equitably and do things which have a theme
to them, which improve the productive focus of
the country and therefore, obviously, some of
these things will fit into that picture.
J: Dr Hewson says a real increase in wages will
cost more jobs.
PM: Well I thought that was a very shabby comment
from Dr Hewson. He has oppossed every wage
increase in the last ten years and when this
Government has got inflation down to our
lowest level in a quarter of a century, and he
is walking around with a consumption tax which
is going to add 15% to prices, you've got to
have a lot of front and a lot of hide to be
talking about inflation when you are walking
around with the inflation detonator in your
hands. A consumption tax, and if Dr Hewson's
consumption tax were to go into place
Australia's inflation would go back to double
digits and we would be back where we started
twenty years ago and not where we are now. Yet
he has got the hide to address the Government
about low inflation and, worse than that, the
hide to say to Australians who actually made
the sacrifice and now, because inflation is
low, have higher real wages, to say that he
should take it off them.
J: He also says that an increase in real wages
means an increase in unemployment and
you're buying votes
PM: Yes, I mean that is the sort of inane comment
he makes that a real wage increase which comes
by way of the fact that the underlying level of
inflation is low, therefore making any nominal
wage increase of more real value, of greater
real value, that that success is described by
him as the Government buying votes or creating 
-3
unemployment when he is walking around with
something which is going to add f ive or six
percentage points to the price system from a
per cent tax on all goods and services. I mean.
it is an amazinag comment from somebody who
must have a hide as thick as an elephant.
J: Isn,' t George Campbell right from the ACTU and
the metal workers saying the jobs are the
priority, you really ought'nt to be offering a
real wage rise in the current circumstances
should you?
PM: You have got to understand some technical
competence in this debate is required, even by
the ABC. We are not offering a real wage rise.
But: if wages come out this year at where
the Government expected earlier inflation to be
but: inflations coming out at obviously
there is a real wage increase in there. So
what do we say to people, well you've made the
sacrifice, we're wearing the recession, we're
wearing unemployment but the good side for you,
the up side, Dr Hewson wants to take it away.
Its like the comment he made about business,
the Premier and I have been keen to meet the
business community to speak to them and to pick
up their views. Not all our views, of course,
are views which we accept or that we can
contemplate, but some are he said we shouldn't
be meeting them. He said that's business
looking for a handout, that I shouldn't be down
here talking to them, that's his view. I mean
its this sort of strident view that the only
thiLng that you do is inflict people with some
pain, stick a new tax on them, don't meet with
them or talk to them, oppose any increase for
workers while at the same time saying that
their bread, their milk, their clothing, their
housing, their dry cleaning, their taxi fares
all carry a 15% tax.
J: Has Bob Hawke told you that he will be leaving
Parliament sooner rather than later, not going
to the end of the term?
PM: No he hasn't but we're not here for
J: Mr Bannon, now you keep this
infrastructure project for almost a year now,
have you finally got through to Mr Keating?
Bannon: I t~ hink that there is a general acceptance that
providing projects deliver long-term value to
our economy, now is a good time to look
seriously at doing them. I guess anyone can
say well perhaps we could have started earlier
or the conditions might have beepi better a 
-4
while back I really don't think that is the
point. The point is that there are projects
which have been identified, they have been
refined, they are ready to go and providing
they can deliver that long-term value, and they
are not just making work, they have got a f air
chance of acceptance I think.
J: Mr Keating, what has happened to make you
change you mind on these infrastructure
projects, they didn't get a very warm reception
when they were officially floated?
PM: In the 1980s we were cutting Government
spending because we had a hugh current account
problem and one of the things which suffered
was public investment, but if private
investment is down in a recession it does
fol~ low that this is the appropriate time to
lif* t public investment somewhat. So, you know,
it's not a matter of any religious conversion
on my part, its simply a matter of being, you
know, wise to the current circumstances but it
is, I repeat, the point is it was true that
when we needed to lift public savings and cut
the size of the public sector a lot of
Government capital work suffered.
J: Mr Bannon have you won any commitments from the
Federal Government today?
BANNON: Wel~ l only in so far as I think we have had a
very good hearing following our submission and
the! bu ' siness people and others who have been
abl~ e to speak to the Prime minister, I think,
have had in turn a very good reception. The
fact that the Prime Minister is personally
inspecting some of the areas where we propose
things to happen is also very positive but I
wouldn't expect him to be announcing here and
now that, yes, he agrees. So obviously he's
got: to then consider it in the national context
and as part of the statement. But this is as
much as I think would be reasonable f or any of
us to ask at this stage of consideration.
J: Mr Bannon you say that South Australia is a
special case, how has the Prime Minister
responded to some of the special considerations
that you have outlined?
BANNON: Wel. l you can ask him. But the f act that we
have been able to put before him, the
su bmissions are there in detail, they obviously
don't get considered in a day. They need to be
tak en back, assessed. He may have further
quiestions or qudries. We'll respond to -those
in the course of the preparation of the 
statement.
J: long term commitment from the Federal
Government?
PM: Well it's one of the issues the Premier
addressed us on. I think it has had the
character of a national project to this time
and I think it will keep that character.
Arrangements between us, as the Premier said
eloquently a moment ago, has got to be
considered in the context of the statement in
our financial capacity and across the States.
J: Do you think SA is a special case?
PM: We SA has got some unique difficulties that the
more populist States don't have. I've always
recognised that and as we drove over here we
came past the submarine project which the
Premier pointed out some pertinent features
about. That is here by virtue of the fact that
this Labor Government in Canberra recognises
the fact that SA does have particular
circumstances and difficulties which in part
the submarine project itself, in its time, was
designed to address. Now of course
difficulties remain and that's why we are now
examining other things.
J: What sort of long-term inflation rate is the
Government looking for?
PM: Well we're not here to give you long-term
inflation rates
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AND WA PREMIER CARM'EN LAWRENCE,
DOORSTOP, JANUARY 31 1992.
( PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT)
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: I have had a most enjoyable discussion with the
Premier, I say she has very positive and
optimistic view of the future and we have had very
useful talks.
Premier: We did yes, We are all very pleased that Mr
Keating fairly understood the importance of
Western Australians economy to a national
recovery. We're export oriented, we're strong
and we need the tax consensus and infrastructure
development to make this recovery really go.
J: Mr Keating, the increase in rural crisis, what can
they expect from the economic statement?
PM: Well they've been in crisis because of
international market prices and conditions largely
which the economic statement cannot change. But
we will be considering carefully the interests of
rural Australia and you will have to wait and see.
J: Mr Keating just how much impact will today's talks
have on your forthcoming statements?
PM: Well I find every time one takes the trouble to
listen what people have to say, you invariable
find something new or a number of new thoughts
come from it. That's happened in again today, and
it is very useful. Each of the States have a
different complexion about them, obviously there
is a great difference between Western Australia
and Victoria, which is a largely manufacturing
state. Western Australia is a primary export
state, it has different interests and therefore
different concerns and frankly you don't pick them
up in written submissions you pick them up in 
conversation. That's why I had this conversation
with the Premier this morning, and also the one
with the business community which we both had
later.
J: Then what do you understand to be our particular
problem here in the West?
PM: Well they are problems of competitively,
maintenance of competitively and opportunity as
well as continuing to develop Western Australia in
a way in which it has been developing itself now
for a long period of time, because it has taken up
opportunities which come along, and be in a
position to do so.
the spending proposal which....... what
commitments have you given to What ones are
you actually going to give?
PM: We are not about to announce things here and now
to the media. But there is a proper process of
consultation between the Commonwealth Government
and the State Government and we will draw these
things together on a national basis for the
statement. So the communications we have had with
the Premier and her Government, and that which we
will have between now and statement time will
allow us to fabricate a statement which I think
will have a very clear and good national
complexion to it.
J: Can you tell us the day of the statement?
PM: No I can't.
J: Mr Keating, the National Railway Authority is just
about to begin operation. How will it effect rail
state operations in Western Australia?
PM: Well I think, Western Australia does have an
opportunity in land-bridging freight into the
eastern states and it can be an important part of
the service sector of Western Australia. But it
will never be that competitive if the rail system
in general is not competitive. But it is beyond
Western Australia and that's an important issue
not just for Western Australia but for the rest of
the country.
J: Did Western Australians shopping list
PM: Well, I have to say, as the Premier, that she
definitely provides with an extensive shopping
list, that's quite a number of things sensibly
were common to the things which were said to us by
other Heads of Government around Australia. 
3
PREMIER: The important thing was in the infrastructure in
the capital works program is that we provided a
list of opportunities. We haven't suggested for
one moment that they should be all attended to,
but they are ready to go and there are some other
ideas that we can obviously develop jointly which
can have important effects on industry
competitively particularly.
J: Mr Keating, the Premier's view is that the economy
should, the national economy should the
program of infrastructure expanding is that
PM: Well that's obviously part of our view. That some
of the things which we can do in the short term
for activity, ought to be things which have a
longer term productive focus about them and the
extent that the Premier nominates infrastructure
projects, she is right.
J: Are you getting a different message from the
business community here?
PM: No.
J: Was there a back down on the wage tax
PM: Oh no, lets understand. Look this is all a
generated by Dr Hewson who claims himself to be a
Professor of Economics, and if Dr Hewson doesn't
understand yet the difference between nominal wage
outcomes and real wage outcomes, that is the rate
of wage increase is less inflation and the fact
that this year inflation is lower than forecast
and that there is an unexpected increase in real
wages, if you can't understand that, the simple
point, he must of escaped a very large part of his
economic training.
J: Mr Keating the..
PM: Well, I don't think you understand it either. Do
you?
J: What will you tell workers?
PM: I'm just trying to make this point. We are
talking about the current year's wages. The
current years wage increases forecast in the 1991
Budget. They are of the order of four to four and
a half per cent. But inflation happily is at one
and a half, so therefore there is a real increase
in there of two plus percentage points on the
current year but on the future year, the
Government has not decided that in can support a
wage increase before the National Wage Case.
That's the point. But that's not new matter. 
J: Mr Keating the Australian dollar
PM: Pal listen, I have been asked questions about
exchange rates by the best of them.
J: Mr Keating our State Government seems very keen
for the Irons Marino project to go ahead. How
keen is the Federal Government
PM: I think it will an important part of Australians
national infrastructure and an important addition
to mining capacity in Australia.
J: Do you think Mr Hawke will leave the Labor Party
that will cause a by-election surely?
PM: Well, I was asked that by a lady this morning.
J: Wouldn't it be, do you think Mr Hawke should stay?
PM: Well, I was asked by a lady on the radio, just
check the transcript the answer is there.
J: Dr Hewson on the flag... Do you
( inaudible)
PM: I don't think it is a matter of timetabling it,
but I made my position, well I was asked about it,
I gave a view about it.
J: Do you have any personal preferences for the flag.
Do you see it changing Australian
PM: Do I see it changing in the immediate term? No.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW/ TALKBACK WITH PETER KENNEDY, ABC RADIO
31 JANUARY 1992
E AND OH PROOF ONLY
KENNEDY: Six weeks in the job* what's it like?
PM: I have been around this for a long time but it's a place
where the ultimate responsibility is and where the fashioning
Of Policy and the government message probably occurs first, so
it's an interesting# challenging job.
KENNEDYI You were Treasurer for 8 years and obviously a high
profile position but I just wonder is there a major difference
taking that step from being Treasurer, high profile to being
Prime Minister? I mean is it more of a fish bowl existence?
PM I think so it's more of that, it's definitely more of
that but the Treasury is a more specialised area but because
we were reforming so much of commonwealth policy in the
the Treasury portfolio had you virtually a finger in nearly
all the other pies. The prime ministership in different
because one has to think more in conceptual terms about the
place as a whole rather than the economy and I think it is
that part of it and plan all the-ceremonial things which one
didn't have to involve oneself as Treasurer does make the
thing different.
KENNEDY: Do you f ind that a bit of a chore being involved in
those extra ceremonial activities?
PM; No I find it a pleasure but it is a different sort of
Job. Some of the topics are similar and you are ranging over
often similar ground. It's just a wider responsibility.
KENNEDYs You have moved into the Lodge and as you said before
you have been around for some time but I wonder what ' is your
impression of the Lodge as a place for a family, a relatively
young family as yours is, what's it like to live in? 
PKI It's a bit of an institution, I think it's become a bit
of an institution obviously. It vas originally made as a
private house for the PM. it's really no longer that, the
rooms which were the famil~ y rooms are now sort of public rooms.
' they are not public when there is no one else there obviously,
but they sort of can't be strewn with the family goods because
they have to be cleaned out quickly if someone arrive.. So
it'sa Sort of got a dual function now, a private house and a
sort of public house, much more public house than say in the
But it's got nice grounds and the kids like it.
KENNEDY: I wonder if it puts extra pressure on them, doesn't
it to keep the place tidy.
PM: That'. right but they get a bit of help as well you see,
There was none of that in the old place. My wife had to clean
it up basically at least now she can do a bit, as well she
gets a bit of a-hand.
KENNEDY: Let's look At the issues. I mentioned some of them
in the introduction, they are pretty awesome aren't they, some
of the challenges that you are facing?
PK: It is r think the challenge to get the economy Into
recovery phase is important and it is a challenge and that is
what we have been directing our attention to. I think we can
do it and the quicker we do it the better.
KENNEDY: Unemployment is the real problem, the real issue. I
mean the growth in jobs was the big plus of Labor the f irst
two terms of Labor in government and a huge number of job.
created but all that has been lost hasn't it over the last 18
months or 2 years?
PM: No it hasn't been lost there, for what it's worth I mean
in 1983 we had 10% unemployment and we have got
unemployment today, lot plus. But in 1983 we had a workforce
of 6 million today we have got a workforce of 7.5 million so
we have kept 1.5 million jobs we created in the 80s, in other
words the labour market is now 25% bigger in this very day
than it was in 1983 but we are not keeping up the growth in
employment, growth in the labour market so unemployment is
again 10 odd percent. But the labour market itself is. a
quarter bigger than it was in 1982/ 3 so in those years we
created 1.6 million jobs and in the recession we lost 300,000
so we have kept 1.5 million. So it's a more fully employed
society than it would have been without all that growth but
that is not enough, what we have got to do nov is make the
labour market expand so that we take up the school leaver. and
the new entrants to the workforce to get the unemployment rate
down. KEVNEDY: That's the key the unemployment rate I guess has
doubled in the last couple of years 
PM, It's gone from about 6 and a bit to 10 and a bit.
KENNEDYs So how do you got that economic growth to ensure
that the economy is growing fast enough to absorb not only
those school leavers who you mentioned are coming onto the job
market but also absorb those people who have lost their jobs
in the last 12 or so months?
Mli It's basically called growth. You have just got to get
the economy growing again, get people investing again, get
spending happening, that is investment spending and consumer
spending moving again and that is a confidence Issue I think.
So the 80s was a great phase of spending and lending we have
never seen anything like it since the 1920s and it was like a
very big party and left a hangover and this in the hangover we
are going through and I think that coming out of that is more
than a glass of Alica Saltzer you know it's going to take
because it was such a long spin. The 80s, the great growth in
credit, the growth in Investment, the growth in the stock
market, the speculation, the rest, the hangover has been
longer than I think we would have expected. This has been
true of Canada, the USA and Britain for the same reasons and
we now have to get confidence going again here and In those
countries as well and that's what President Bush was trying to
do a day or so ago at his State of the Union message, that's
what we will be trying to do in the next few week.
KENNEDY: obviously one of the few plusses I suppose to come
out of the growth and unemployment has been the decline in the
inflation rate and that 1.5% national inflation rate obviously
provides you with something of a base to sort of bounce of f
with the recovery phase but it is important to keep inflation
down isn't it?
PM8 It is. It is because, look inflation is the most
pernicious of all the diseases, For the elderly who have a
stock of savings it tears it away and you take a lot of people
who are, they might have had a retirement lump sum in the
early 80s it's worth only a proportion of that today or the
709. But worse than that, it robs a country of
competitiveness it pushes up interest rates, it generally
retards your economic growth,, it makes you uncompetitive.
This government has broken the back of Australian inflation
for the first time in a quarter of a century and it's a great
achievement and we have got to keep it and do everything to
keep it and so that when we go through the 90s, see we came
out of the 82/ 3 recession with 10% inflation, we come out of
this recession with 1.5 to 3,
KENNEDYs Earlier this week you made reference to the fact
that workers could expect a real increase in wages this year I
think were your words and this of course caused enormous
debate. What is the position? 
PM: It wasn't what I said. No, it was basically
misunderstood. What I said was, I was asked, well if you have
a Budget forecast that's the August 1991 Budget forecast, of 4
odd percent f or wage. growth but inf lation is only 1. 5% isn't
there a real increase in wages there. And I said, yes well
of course there is and I said success breeds success. That is
if you can get your inflation down the real income about
inflation will be present and in the August 91 Budget we had,,
I can't remember the exact forecast I think It was about
or 4.6 for wages it would come in about 1.5 or naybe an
underlying rate a little higher, there in still a real
increase there. That is not to say that the government in
1992 will necessarily be supporting an increase that it a
national wage case. That's a matter that has got to be
considered. KENNEDY: There has been speculation of course that a further
real increase could be looked at in 1992/ 93 but possibly
through the form of a tax cut.
P1( 3 That's been an option for us for a number of years and I
made the point the other day that it was the 89/ 90 tax cuts
which basically gave us the low inflation rate and it was the
platform we moved into recession with was a wages outcome of
around 6% 1. Without the 89/ 90 tax cuts that platform would
have been 12 or 13 so today instead of looking at
inflation we would have been looking at something 6. 5 or 7.
So the Accord with the trade unions has been a very usef ul
instrument and that is something which of course the
government can always consider. But there has been a view
about in the unions that they would rather take their chances
in the market place or with the commission. Well that's fine,
they can make their mind up about these things we are not
going to be pressing money on them obviously. But again, the
government would have to decide whether it would support a
national wage case in the commission and that would take a
careful judgement. But I mean some of the papers have gone
of f on the basis that you know, I have said we are going to
soupport a national wage increase, I didn't. What I was
referring to was the Budget forecast for wages of 1991. 1
heard Dr Hewson jumping up and down saying this is shocking
for inflation, crocodile tears, while he is walking around
with an inflation bomb called a goods and services tax which
is going to add 15% to everything. So I mean, in terms of the
inflation fighting we ought to forget him. I mean at least we
have brought inflation down. He was John Howard's adviser,
economic adviser, he left us in 1982/ 3 with an inflation rate
of 10% we are coming out of this recession with an inflation
of 1.5% so to all the hand wringers who have been putting
columns In the newspapers about this issue just let me say
this, that we have yet to decide what we do about wages in 92.
Yet to decide.
KENNEDY: But it's possible that workers will experience a
real wage increase in 1991/ 92 and that doesn't mean any
further 
PH: The point I was making there is if people are wearing the
burden of the recession they are entitled to wear some of the
joy and some of the joy 18 the loy inf lation rate which means
lower interest rates. That's part of the joy and it means
higher real wage. by virtue of the fact that the inflation
rate has fallen sharply. Now what are we to say to people
it's now fallen sharply so we are going to grab another
off you that you thought you were getting this year, the
Budget was set up on a wage inflation trajectory of about 4%
in that order and it's come in at 1.5 and that's good news for
Australia, very good news.
KENNEDYt But looking ahead to 92/ 93 the possibility of real
wage increase but not necessarily through the tribunals,, not
necessarily through increase in the pay packets.
PH: The possibility of a wage increase, not necessarily a
real wage increase, a wage increase but again it has to be
considered by the government and the government is not
committed to supporting a national wage increase before the
commission in 1992.
KENNEDYs You mentioned earlier that those ceremonial
functions that the PH gets involved in is not always a chore
and of course we have just come out of Australia Day when
there has been a lot of debate and attention given to the
origins of the country and whore we are going and of course we
also had the launching of an alternative flag by former
arbitration chairmen Sir Richard Kirby. Just wondering what
your thoughts are on the flag and the possibility of changes?
Pill I think the f lag has to be the emblem of the united
country. iIs been that but I think there is probably some
ambivalence in our message as we go into the international
f orum. and the international marketplace draped in a somewhat
ambivalent garb with a f lag which has obviously the f lag of
another country in its corner and I should think that
Australians would think they were advantaged in the world, in
the international marketplace where kie are now trading much
more than we ever were in the past something which was the
emblem of a country which unambiguously has a flag which
represents it and nobody else.
KENNEDYt Do you see Canada providing something of a model on
this? They went for the maple leaf more than 20 years ago and
seemed to have survived.
PM Exactly, I think Canada probably is a model and exactly
they did survivethe place didn't fall apart, there wasn't any
expunging of their history, I think that is true they didn't
have into anarchy. It gets back to this question also about
the national anthem. We are not singing God Save the Queen
any more, we are singing Advance Australia Fair. it would be
almost strange now to go back to singing God Save the Queen
and I think those people who quite rightly are proud of the 
PM: ( cont'd) f lag and have fought for it as they would have
years ago stood up and sang God Save the Queen don't feel
as though their view of history is offended by singing Advance
Australia Fair any more than I think their view of the f lag
would be of fended if we had a new one. Time Will tell, this
debate has come and gone at various stages and it's coming
again. KENNEDYt Do you see any time when a decision might be made on
the possible changed flag for the country?
PM: It doesn't surprise me this debate is around. I suppose
people around the world are entitled to say we look at your
flag you have got the flag of another country in the corner, I
mean are you a colony or are you a nation? They are entitled
to ask the question. The Canadians gave them an answer. They
said no, we are one country, we are ourselves. We are
independent and we look like we are. We represent ourselves
as an independent country.
KENNEDY: Is it a change you would like to see while you are
PM? PM: I think it is something which ought to come in its turn
as the community feels such a change is warranted then I think
that's when it will come, not necessarily when I am P. or
because I am PM.
KENNEDY: It's good morning to our first talkback caller.
CALLERs Not a lot of questions to ask you Paul I just wanted
to run a f ew things by you and give you a couple of jabs in
the rib to get going in the morning.
PM: I always need to be attacked my boy to get me on my form
so do your best.
CALLERr Alright Paul. Thanks to the ABC, these lines are a
great opportunity to speak out about what is going on but what
infuriates me Paul is that political people treat these access
lines like the Morgan 4wallop poll and that sort of thing and
try arnd ignore what is being said by the local people like
daylight savings etc and that sort of thing. Now the daylight
savings seemed to have got through how the comunity didn't
want it to and what I am wondering about is these boat people
that keep coming in on the WA coastline. Why don't you get a
boatload party of the Labor Party and send them under cover
over to Indonesia and see if they can emigrate over there and
see how well they are treated? I am sure they wouldn't be
treated like Australian people are treating the boat people
coming in over here.
KENNEDYs is that the question Ken.
CALLERs That will do. 
7.
PM.: i think we try and have secure borders we don't always
succeed In that and we haven't obviously succeeded in this
case. That is not to say we should treat people indecently
when they arrive. We have to access them, people can be here
for all sorts of reasons, catastrophies as well as simply a
desire to come here for some reason and we have to assess
those reasons within the context of our immigration Act and
the administration of it.
KENNEDYt Prime Minister, It does raise the matter though of
the security of the coastline i suppose and the recent case
where 50 or so Chinese people were able to land on the
Kimberley coast apparently without surveillance.
PM: I think we do survey the coast and surveillance is
something which the government has focussed upon in the last
half dozen years. But I suppose to do it absolutely would be
a coat which would not be acceptable and it's a matter of
trying to balance the cost against the effectiveness have a
cost of fective surveillance system. Nov on this occasion
someone has got through it, but generally we think it's been
adequate and this will cause us to at least consider whether
it's adequate. But to go from the sublime to something else
where we actually have got very secure cover of every inch of
the coastline would probably cost more than it was worth.
CALLER: I am in small business and it's not so much of a
question it's more of a statement. Small business used to
employ 70% of the workforce in Australia back in the days when
Australia had a full workforce, small business was booming.
Labor in my opinion is the enemy of small business because in
the last 8 years they have stripped all the so called lurks
and perks from small businesses which are there to protect the
businesses from the bad times such as we are experiencing now,
a depression. I don't use the word recession, now the bad
times are here and small businesses are dropping of f like
f lies and they are taking all their jobs with it. All the
incentives have been stripped for small businesses, introduced
a killer tax for companies which is actually causing a lot of
you know marginal companies just throw their hands up in grief
PM But what killer tax are you talking about?
CALLER: The killer tax with the new company tax where it all
has to paid by December in a lump sum rather than split over
quarterly PM: Just remember this, when I became Treasurer the company
tax rate was 46%. it's now 39%. The rate of tax of
distributed income wasn 78 cents itfs now 47 cents so don't
talk about killer taxes it's not correct.
CALLERs about killer tax because I have to pay them you
don't. 
PZ' 1 You are paying a lot leas than you used too. Can I just
make the point about small business. Small business , there has
never been a greater growth in the small business sector than
through the 1990a the growth in the economy, the economy is
growing 2.25 times faster than it was in the previous seven
year. and it's growth that small business basically lives from
and let me just make your point about the depression. In 1933
the USA and the world was in depression in that country its
GDP fell by 40% that year, this year in Australia it's fallen
by 3 so you can't call a recession a depression. Certainly
the recession is there and it's a pity that it is but small
business lives of f growth. This government has given more
growth to small business than any government in the post war
years and what we want to do now is go back to giving it more
growth again and that's the point of getting back to a
recovery. CALLERs I was just wondering if you give me your attitude or
ideas on the indebtedness we are now in as a nation. I know
it's easy to say that there is not much federal and all the
rest but I do believe a lot of the f ederal debt has been
of f loaded back to the state and a lot of the states are
running terrible debts. It concerns me that our indebtedness
since early in the 80s was very very low it's now quite high,
maybe you could tell us what the f igures are there. If that
continues what will happen to us as a nation?
PH: I think the number that matters, we have got about 100
billion on private on shore debt, in other words the debt we
owe abroad on the private sector is about 100 billion. But
importantly it is private sector debt it's not sovereign debt
and let me explain the difference. When the New York city
banks decided to lend furiously in the 1970s to lend to
countries, I think to South America, to various countries in
South America believing if you lent to a country you could
never be defaulted upon. Well the truth was they were
defaulted upon because that debt borrowed by governments was
not able to service itself it was debt for consumption and in
some cases for investment. The character of our debt is
largely private so it's borrowed against investments that
actually service themselves and let me make another point to
you. In the 808 we built up a substantial stock of debt as I
said there was about 100 billion of private debt but in the
same time we built up 63 billion of private assets offshore,
private assets in Europe and North America as Australian
companies went out opening Australia up have gone and invested
in Boral, largest brick and tile manufacturer in the USA,
Brambles runs one of the largest transport companies in Europe
etc* We have got 63 billion over there and 100 billion
onshore so in other words we are getting some balance into our
assets and our liabilities. But the main cause f or debt isa
the current account deficit because we don't produce enough
goods and services and that is why we have got to go back to
investment to produce more goods and that's the only way to
beat it. 
CALLERt Would you be able to help us with the state debt
problem? Could YOU just elaborate what the
PM: I don't think the state debt problem is an acute one.
The states have always had soma debts but again a lot of those
have been borrowed on income producing businesses like the
electricity supply, like the ports and wharves authorities,
like the water authorities, in other words it has the
character of what is in many other countries private
investment. See electricity is provided privately in many
countries, water is provided privately. The fact that they
are government owned doesn't mean to say they are not
businesses and can't pay their way but it's always important
for state governments to keep an eye on their debt but the
commonwealth debt is very low. In fact the commonwealth has
net assets abroad we don't have net debts we have not assets.
CALLER I just think that it is a very serious problem if
we PM: It's a serious problem if it grows inordinately but by
and large the public sector has been repaying debt in the last
few years. 
to.
CALLER: My question is totally different it's more a
personal one regarding Mr Keating's attitude to Israel.
KENNEDY: Well he's listening to your call.
CALLER: Mr Hawke was well known for supporting Israel, how
does Mr Keating stand?
PM: Well I don't think you could say of Bob that he had
an unbalanced view of the Middle East, I think he had a very
balanced view and was critical of Israel on occasions for
certain policies. But he thought Israel had the right to
exist as a nation, as I do, and he promulgated that view
quite vociferously in the 1970s but I think as Prime
Minister, as problems became apparent in the Middle East he
had, I think a balanced and appropriate view of the area and
I don't think it is true to say that it was sort of one eyed
pro-Israel view. I mean he kept the view that Israel was
entitled to exist as an entity, as a nation, and that drove
his view I think of that state but I've always found it to be
largely a very balanced view of which I have a similar view.
KENNEDY: Are you happy Ellen?
CALLER: Thank you.
KENNEDY: Mr Keating you mentioned Mr Hawke's name, there has
been speculation that he might be quitting Parliament as
early as February 24, has he spoken to you about that?
PM: No, it's only speculation as far as I know, I
haven't spoken to Bob about it.
KENNEDY: How would you react to a by-election in March?
PM: Well it's a matter for him, it's a matter for any
Member when they believe that their career has peaked or for
some reason they should contemplate leaving public office for
them to make their minds up. Bob may choose to stay, if he
does that is fine with me.
KENNEDY: Do you expect that he would consult with you about
his decision whatever it might be?
PM: Well he might, it is up to him. I mean it is
basically a matter of personal choice.
KENNEDY: And a test for the electors in March wouldn't be a
major problem?
PM: Well that is anticipating him leaving. I mean a
test for the electors shouldn't be ever a problem for a
democrat, and I'm one of them. You can'It always win but
giving the electorate a chance to make decisions has always
been something that I have, of course, found great favour
with. KENNEDY: Are you suggesting that the seat of Wills could
possibly change hand in the by-election? 
PM: Well I'm not suggesting anything. You are
suggesting more than I am I think Peter.
KENNEDY: Talking about meetings with the electors, Tasmania
goes to the polls tomorrow. There is speculation that the
Field Labor Government might be defeated, in fact the
Australian editorilised this morning saying a Field victory
is unlikely but deserved. How do you think it will go?
PM: Well it is deserved. I don't know of any Premier
that inherited greater financial problems than Michael Field.
They are just unbelievable. I mean if you were the head of
that Government you wouldn't have known where to start and
yet by sheer doggedness he has actually brought the accounts
of the State of Tasmania to the point now where they can
actually pay their way and deal with their debt and
restructure their State finances and I think it would be a
great pity for somebody who has conscientiously taken that
sort of task on thanklessly, and earned a few problems in the
doing of it to then suffer a penalty for doing it.
KENNEDY: How do you think you will go?
PM: Well I think he will win because I think he
deserves to and that's sort of sure footedness, the
leadership he has shown and the conscientiousness of the last
couple of years, you know deserves him a victory.
KENNEDY: We will all be wiser tomorrow night. Bruce you
are through to the Prime Minister.
CALLER: Good morning Peter, I was just wondering you want
ideas for getting the economy going again
PM: Certainly.
CALLER: I have put an idea through to the Royal Commission
because of our trouble here over WA Inc and the projects
and all the rest of it, the troubles that have gone on here
and the idea was because of our vastness here in the West I
want to cut West Australia into three states.
KENNEDY: What do you think Mr Keating?
PM: That is too tough for me. I think you ought to put
that to Carmen. I think our constitutional arrangements and
our boundries have presented us enough problems to this stage
and we shouldn't be proliferating States in my view.
KENNEDY: Ok Bruce thanks very much. Morning to Owen.
CALLER: I want to talk about AUSTUDY. I'm a student and at
the moment I have just enrolled for TAFE and my book list is
about $ 160 which is relatively small compared to what some of
the university students had and on top of that we have got to
pay fees and everything else and I don't think students,
especially who happen to be living alone can afford that sort
of money.
KENNEDY: Prime Minister. 
PM: Well do you recieve AUSTUDY?
CALLER: I do at the moment yes.
PM: Well we have over the course of the
dramatically improved AUSTUDY, particularly away-from-home
and any government can only make choices about the level of
subsidy for people on incomes within the income taper
arrangements to support them and no doubt some people will
find the levels to be insufficient. I can only say they are
much better than they used to be by a very large factor.
CALLER: Well that's little comfort to a whole lot of people
who I happen to know simply because it is as far as people in
the lower class goes it's better, it's more economic if you
like to go on the dole at the moment than it is to study.
PM: I doubt that because, that used to be true but when
we changed to what we call the Common Youth Allowance and
improved AUSTUDY away-from-home, what are you getting awayfrom-
home now?
CALLER: Well I'm not living away from home, my concern is
my father is probably going to end up losing his job in a
couple of months and I seriously doubt that I will be able to
support myself and my father certainly won't be able to and
I've talked to people who have lived away from home and apart
from being very difficult to get living-away-from-home
allowance it's really not enough.
PM: Well it's double, I think from memory, double what
it used to be and it was very sharply doubled. I can't
remember the numbers off-hand but that and AUSTUDY-at-home
was also increased substantially in the late 1980s. So
again, all governments can be asked for more support for
various categories of people in the community, we think by
increasing the retention rates in schools, remember when we
came to office only one-third of children went on to complete
years 11 and 12. That's now between 66 and 70% and then
funding extra places in universities and in TAFE and
increasing student allowances we have made education a great
priority in these years and successfully so, but again there
is only so much a government can do.
KENNEDY: Thanks Owen we will have to move on, last caller
for Mr Keating, Paul.
CALLER: How do you do Mr Prime Minister?
PM: How are you Paul? With a name like that you have
got to be a reasonable fellow.
CALLER: Right, I'm taking on something that you might like
to take on to try and generate cash flow for Australia, I see
a great gap. Too many Australian inventions go overseas.
PM: That's true.
CALLER: Suggestion particularly private investors, number 
il.
one granting inventors tax exemptions on royalties income.
Every inventor to receive one-third share employment and
I could go on, giving f ive years moritoriun on tax of any
description for infant industries that is dependent on
inventions. Now we have spent over $ 50,000 on patents
overseas etc but we don't get the necessary help, we have had
no research grants and if it'Is good enough to give research
grants to big companies, it's good enough to give tax
exemptions to the individual.
KENNEDY: Ok Paul, in essense what you're asking is what's
the Prime Minister's attitude towards encouraging private
inventors?
PM: Well the flagship of the Government's policy was to
allow businesses who invest in research and development to
write-off 150% of the costs, now that means you've got to
have a taxable income to do it and some people who, I mean
that's for research and development which occurs in
bussiness, there will always be the people who are not yet in
business but have an idea and they may have other taxable
income, if they do they can certainly write those costs off.
The problem is always getting them to market. That's the big
problem and I think, you know, this is a difficulty for us,
it's a difficulty for other countries that we are not
exploiting a lot of the technological improvements which do
come our way.
KENNEDY: A lot of the inventions go overseas for development
don't they?
PM: A lot do, a lot stay too, but a lot do and that's
why the co-operative research centres which we set up in the
Budget of two years ago between universities and business * Is
trying to deal with that very thing, trying to apply research
to commercial activities and having business involved in the
doing of it. Now that will not, obviously, cover all people
and I think Paul who I was speaking to is probably not in
that category. He has got something which he's patented.
But it is a difficult issue. How you encourage them
commercially without the Government simply just writing
cheques for companies hoping something will come of it.
KENNEDY: Thank's Paul and thanks to everyone who called in
this morning with their questions to the Prime Minister and
apologies to those whose calls we were unable to take but we
are beaten by time. Prime Minister you're heading up the
Terrace to speak to the Premier, Dr Lawrence, and your also
meeting with the WA State Economic Strategies Council.
PM: I have intended to speak to each State Premier to
talk about their particular problems. We'd like to do things
which bring on a recovery but which at the same time is
structurally good for the economy, for the thing to have a
sort of productive focus. And the best way of getting a view
of a government about its problem is talk to them directly so
that's what I intend to do with Premier Lawrence this morning
and with the business community of each particular State to
try and get a feel of what they think is the problem, are the
problems, and how the Government can remedy them or help. 
Now my colleagues John Dawkins and Kim Beazley met members of
the business community in Western Australia last week and
they had a successful round of meetings with them. I will be
meeting some different people today for lunch just to discuss
these subjects and put it in the context of what the Premier
says to me.
KENNEDY: And when will you be announcing your Economic
Statement? PM: Well the timing is not settled yet, I think for
Australia the earlier the better but I can't be firm at this
time, we have still got to put it together.
KENNEDY: Obviously there is a lot hinging on it both from
political point of view and an economic point of view.
PM: Well I found the consultation process very
encouraging, it is worth talking to people, they do say
things you don't expect them to say often, they come up with
ideas that you haven't thought of. We are working in a
framework obviously, the Government had a general idea of
where it's going, a clear idea in the broad, in the general,
about where it's going but in that matrix often things can be
fleshed out in these discussions which are very useful so
I've found them quite valuable.
KENNEDY: Well obviously the results of those talks and the
contents of the economic statement are going to be crucial
for a lot of people around Australia who want to get back
into work.
PM: Well we won't be letting them down Peter.
KENNEDY: Prime Minister I hope you're right. Thanks very
much for coming in and talking to 6WF and ABC regional radio.
PM: Thanks for having me.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP,
DOORSTOP, CANBERRA, 2 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF' COPY
J: Prime Minister, is it a body blow to Labor the
overwhelming defeat of the Field Government?
PM: I don't think that it is any more, to Federal Labor,
any more than the near loss of the New South Wales
election was a body blow to the Federal Liberal Party.
We nearly Won the New South Wales election and that
result was confirmed in a by-election two weekends ago
and we won't at pains be drawing Federal implications
from that. I don't think you can from this. I think
the important thing to say about Tasmania is that, most
Governments are defeated doing the wrong thing. This
one's being defeated doing the right thing. If ever
there was a Government which deserves, I think, to have
its work recognised, it was the Field Government. He
took on a State which was nearly bankrupt and radically
altered its finances where the Gray Government just
threw the fight for quite a long number of years and he
was two thirds of the way through it. So I think
history will judge Michael Field and his Government
perhaps better than the Tasmania public. But Field
accepts the result of the Tasmanian people as all
democrats have to and do.
J: But that doesn't say much about the maturity of the
Australian voters, does it?
PM: At least the Government did what it had to do. It did
not shirk the fight. I don't know of any Premier in the
years I was Treasurer who took on a more difficult
financial landscape and actually made a very great
headway through it.
J: Had Michael Field been able to advertise on TV and
radio, he would of had a better chance?
PM: Well that's a matter for judgement, but I'm sure these
things will be ragged over by the rest of you.
r-
J: Are you worried about the threats by some MPs in South
Australia to resign, and the fact that there could be
an election there as well?
PM: I have not heard of those.
J: They are calling for Federal intervention in South
Australia. Would you be interested?
PM: Over what though?
J: Faction brawling.
PM: Well these things happen whenever pre-selections are
on. You can't be a wide-eyed innocent about these
things.
J: unemployment had nothing to do with the result in
Tasmania?
PM: I think it has got a fair bit to do. I think it is
very diLfficult for Governments in recessions to win
elections. It is difficult and I think it has been
part of the difficulty in Tasmania. The other part oil
the difficulty, I think, for the Field Government was
that there's a great polarity developed between the
Liberals who have developed or say they would develop
anything, and the Greens who won't develop nothing and
the Labor Party is sort of sitting in between trying to
get the right balance. Often getting the right balance
is not appreciated, and I don't think it was on this
occasion.
J: Mr Keating have you any dates for your talks with the
ACTU about wages and any further thinking on the
wage/ tax trade-off issue?
PM: No, we have not set any timetable as yet.
J: What dco you think of the New South Wales Goverrnent's
offer to Bob Hawke
PM: I thought it might have been speculation. I don't know
whether it is true or not.
J: Well they have confirmed it.
PM: Have they? Well I'm sure Bob will do a good job.
J: Do you have any more detail as to his plans since
you've spoken to him in the
PM: None whatsoever. No. 
J: Mr Keating there are a lot of reports at the moment of
the po~ ssibility that Nissan might close its car
manufa~ cturing plant in Australia. How keen is the
Goverrnent to see Nissan stay here and what might it do
by way of convincing them that they should stay here?
PM: That's a matter for the company I think. I saw that
report today, I don't know that it's correct. But it
is a miatter for the company to decide, the Government's
laid down a plan over a long period of years and made
out that the downtown of the cycle for car
manufacturing would not have helped any of the
manufacturers, including Nissan, but in the end
Nissan's future is basically up to Nissan.
J: to adjusting the car
PM: I don't think the company has been in touch with the
Governent at this stage.
J: But in general terms given the severity of the
recessiLon difficulties they are having and the number
of people they employ, are you giving any thought to
altering the schedule for tariff cuts to the car
industry?
PM: No, we hadn't been. But again we have had put to us by
a number of car manufacturers what they see as shorter
term remedies for the current cyclical downturn. And
we have been considering those.
J: Is it possible that having fewer car makers in
Australia will eventually leave an industry in better
shape for the
PM: Well, the aim of the plan in the ' 80s was to arrive at
a number of competitive models in Australia. Time
alone will tell if that's to be achieved.
J: Mr Keating, resource security was one that you should
talk about in Tasmania, you were very critical of the
resource security legislation when you were still in
the Cabinet as Treasurer. What's your view now and
will any changes be made?
PM: Well we have got a Bill in the Parliament and that's
the fact of the matter and if that Bill passes, well
then the legislation will be established.
J: Would you think to be making any amendments to that as
it goes through?
PM: Not at this stage, no.
J: If the Bill fails will you be seeking to put any 
PM: Let's wait and see. I think the best thing is to wait
and see.
J: Does the Tasmanian result show that there is a need for
you and your Government to redress the perception that:
the Greens are against all development, and that
Labor's been a supporter of them?
PM: Well we won the election on our policies in 1990, and
in 1987 Green issues were part and parcel of the
campaign. So I think the balance we brought to the
envirorunment in the context of growth has been an
appropriate one. This is an election which has got
many state complexions about it. I notice Dr Hewson
who has; always marketed himself as a wide-eyed
political innocent saying, well Government should just
do the right thing and things will look after
themselves. Well this Government did do the rights
things and things didn't look after themselves, so I
don't know if Dr Hewson can take any comfort from this
result.
ENDS 



IPRIMI MIVNIIST IR 10/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
I have today completed my national round of talks with
business and unions in Brisbane and will deliver the
Economic Statement in the Parliament at 7.30pm on Wednesday
26 February 1992.
I will attend a meeting of the Small Business Coalition on
Thursday 6 February and senior Ministers will continue
discussions with other peak organisations and regional
representatives before the Statement is finalised.
Media arrangements for the Statement will be similar to
previous Budgets/ Economic Statements.
Media will be notified of details of lock-up arrangements
next week.
3 February 1992 



PRIME MINISTER, DC) ORSTOP BRISBANE, 3 FEBRUARY 1992.
E OE PROOF ONLY
PM: I might just begin by saying that I've just
completed the last of a national round of discussions. I've
got to see one or two more peak industry groups but by and
large that completes, today's discussions, completes the round
of national talks; and now the Government will sit down and
largely from here on construct this economic statement which
we expect to deliver on 26 February. So the real fightback
for Australia, not as I said earlier the phoney one, the
pretend one, il1 begin when the Government announces its
statement of economic changes on 26 February.
QUESTIONs Mr Keating why bring the statement forward, it
was anticipated it was going to be March?
PM: No, no, it's not coming forward, no there'e
been no, the Government's been thinking about this, presenting
it in it's initial week of sittings and that's what we're
going to do.
QUESTION: Prime Minister what particular case did
Queensland make today? was there anything that particularly
grabbed your attention?
PM: A number of things but they are again, there
is, the Premier had, well firstly I had discussion with the
Premier about the State, the State's needs, about
infrastructure and other issues in particular, and then he
convened a meeting of the various sectors of industry and of
course they addressed things which were sector specific.
Some of them Queensland in general, in the main sector
specific, and like all such industry discussions some of it
we'd heard before, some of it new and it's the new bits that
matter. QUESTION: Were you impressed with what you heard up
there? PM: Oh I thought it was a very good discussion... I
couldn't have hoped for more, I couldn't have hoped for a
better discussion. 
QUESTION; So it was worthwhile coming?
PM: Absolutely.
QUESTIONs what do you mean sector specific?
PM:. Well they were talking about tourism, farmingf
manufacturing, mining, these sorts of things.
QUESTION: inaudible
PM: Well they are things to note, things for us to
note and think about....,. no, no, because you might talk about
them when we might not in the end decide on things but it in
important for us to get a frame of reference, a framework of
reference which you can only get from discussions. I might
add by the way Dr Heweon said we shouldn't have been doing any
of this. He said businessmen and business women are only
looking for a handout and that we shouldn't talk to them.
Well that's not been my view. The process of consultation was
conducted quite ambitiously through the 1980s and I think
Australia has advanced accordingly much faster as a result of
the fact that the Government did keep contact with the
community in general.
QUESTION: Mr Keating the balance of payments figures
today does thet latest figure give you greater room to move
in this looming statement of February 26?
PM: Like I said last month, last month's figures
didn't contract our room to move and this month's figure
doesn't improve it. This is a good number by any measure,
imports have fallen away quite sharply and the result is the
current account for the month is down. One of the again,
good factors, good things there was manufactured exports
continued to grow strongly which has been the trend of the
last half dozen ears and that's of course our saving grace
getting that balance between the primary export sector,
manufacturing and services.
QUESTION: Well today's figure won't see you loosening the
purse strings any more than you've been prepared to do up
until now? 
PM: No, no because it'Isa, again we make the point
about balancel of payments figures monthly, they're up one
monthI down the next, if you average them it's where, it's the
three and six month averages where you see the trends and the
trend in this one has been the right way.
QUESTION: Spending about two billion in the package?
PM.&amp; Well that's for us you'll have to wait and
see what we spend.
QUESTION: Prime Minister are you talking about one-off
measures as weill as policy changes or..... inaudible...
PM: well the package will be measures aimed at
inducing a recovery and lifting employment, getting back to
creating jobs which is the principal thing it's about. But
it's about also having a structural and productive focus as
well as having an effect on the cycle. In other words we
want to do something more clever than simply have a budget
bang that costs money and doesn't do much in the long term.
We want these changes to be productive and structural as well.
QUESTION: Are you still of the view that some States
deserve a leg up over others, such as Victoria?
PM: No, but each States have different problemi,
Victoria carried the great ballast of manufacturing industry
and manufacturing protection and the fallout from a lot of the
economic changes have been greater in Victoria t~ an they have
in other places. Similarly other States have been affected by
downturns in other sectors, obviously what happens in rural
commodities affects Queensland more than it affects Victoria.
QUESTION: The Queensland Government is of the view that a
leg up say to Victoria would be rewarding them for bad
economic managament. what's your reaction to that?
PM: Well they didn't put that view to me today.
QUESTION: a Mr Keating are you sympathetic to the plight of
the farmers for urgent land finance or special assistance in
order to assis~ t them to plant a winter crop in the coming
weeks? 
PM: Well I'm not here to debate specific measures
about QUESTION: You did mention the rural downturn in
Queens land.
PM: Yets I know, but you must also remember that in
terms of commodities, the Government has got a guarantee
of three billion in there under wool, we spent a couple, we've
got a couple of billion of cover on wheat, and I think, you
know, in the face of these international difficulties the
Government's done about as much as you can possibly do to
generally insulate the various sectors of rural Australia from
international declining prices. But fortunately wheat prices
are picking up, and that's the most important thing.
QUESTION: A lot of these f armers are still going to need
pretty easy access to plant a crop.
PM:* But part of it was uncertainty about prices and
wheat prices have picked up.
QUESTION: Prime Minister Mr Goss said this morning if any
State deserves special attention it should be the big growth
States like Queensland and Western Australia because of their
capacity to lead Australia out of recession through the
resource and tourism sectors. Have you got any sympathy f or
that view?
PM: I have, I have, but other Premiers will say
they have got the big populations and the big problems and
what do you say to that?
QUESTION: Wel~ l what do you say?
PM:* Well I think they've both got a case and that's
why I think one has to have a decent balance in one'Is view
about things and do things which are to the national good,
that have national effects and that have a commion thread
running through them. 
QUESTION: Queensland will be happy though do you think
when you bringr the statement down?
PM4, Well I should hope so, I mean as Treasurer I
often defended the fact against the Premier of NSW and the
premiers of victoria of my support for federal funding for
Queensland -the adoption of Grants Commission formulae which
they always regarded as a travesty. I still defended it and
Queensland got the money.
QUESTION; Should these measures you are looking at be
population driven or should they be industry driven?
PM:. Oh that's too simplistic a question.
QUESTION: But were you criticised today for giving
Queensland too little priority, in fact getting here too late
in the exercise?
PM Not at all I mean I arranged this weeks ago
and it's just a matter of sticking to an itinerary. No I
think, look, this notion about which I noticed in some of
the newspapers about Queensland not getting attention, is
really not on. I mean I notice the Courier Mail today is
attacking us because there are not enough company directors on
company board~ s in Queensland. This is a Federal Government
sin apparently and then it said also it was not getting enough
super fund money, so apparently this is a F'ederal Government
problem. The fact is this sort of State-centric view of the
world I think does not do Queensland justice, Queensland is
better than that, it's doing better than that and the fact is
obvious in the fact it's got so much growth which has occurred
in the State.
QUESTION: Mr Keating can you assure Queensland electors
that they an. not going to suffer as a result of Queensland's
ALP largely firm backing for ex-Prime Minister Hawke?
PM: Oh well I, look, you know, I'm here to talk
about jobs, recovery, the future of the economy, not the
Queensland Labor Party's view about particular things
including that.
QUESTION., QUESaIrOeN : wYooruk ing with the Premier Closely? 



A4. A I,
A
PRIME MINISTER 11/ 92
PRIME MINISTER TO MEET SMALL BUSINESS COALITION
The Prime Minister has asked the Federal Minister for Small
Business, Construction and Customs, Mr David Beddall, to
convene a meeting with the Small Business Coalition.
The Coalition will meet with the Prime Minister and
Mr Beddall tomorrow ( Thursday 6 February) in 2R3 ( 2nd floor
Reps Committee Room 3) at
The Coalition is a representative body of more than 30 smal.
business organisations that meet at least twice a year with
Mr Beddall to discuss small business issues with the Federal.
Government. Tommorow's meeting is part of the Prime Minister's
consultation with business before he presents his Economic
Statement on 26 February.
Attached is a list of members of the Small Business
Coalition that will attend the meeting.
CANBERRA FEBRUARY 19192
Details of picfac opportunities will be posted tomorrow
( Thursday) 
SMALL BUSINESS COALITION ATTENDEES
Confederation of Australian Industry
Ian Spicer Chief Executive
John Martin Executive Director
COSBOA Paul Greenwood President
Ian Baldock-Vice President
Rob Bastian-Chief Executive
Australian Chamber of Commerce
Graham Byrne President
Brent Davis Chief Economist
Australian Chamber of Manufactures
John Paterson Chief Executive
Graham Chalker Executive Director
Australian Tourism Industry
Peter O'Clery Executive Director
Australian Small Business Association
Peter Boyle Executive Director
Australian Federation of Business Professional Women
Mary Kellaway President
Di Manning Director 
Law Council of Australia
John Stumbles
Master Builders Construction and Housing Association
John Coghlan President
John Murray Executive Director
Motor Trades: of'Australia
John Rickus President
Mike Delaney Executive Director
Metal Trades Industry Association
lan Booth Assistant Director
National Farmers Federation
Graham Blight President
Rick Farley Executive Director
Pharmacy Guild of Australia
Colin Johns President
Stephen Greenwood Chief Executive
Printing Allied Trades Employers Federation of Australia
Gavin Hewton Chief Economist
Australian Bankers Association
Allan Cullen Executive Director
Retailers Council of Australia
Jim O'Shae President
Laurie Eakin Executive Director
Real Estate Institution of Australia
Phil Roberts President
Bryan Douglas Executive Director
I 
Institute of Chartered Accountants
Gail Freeman
Victorian Automobile Chamber of Commerce
Don Armstrong President
Bob Davison Executive Director
Victorian Employers Chamber of Commerce Industry
David Edwards Chief Executive
Stephen Shepherd Director
South Australian Chamber of Commerce Industry
David Edwards Chief Executive
Stephen Shepherd Director
South Australian Chamber of Commerce Industry
Ian Harrison Chief Economist
Employers Federation of NSW
Garry Brack Executive Director
Confederation of'ACT Industry
Bill Monaghan President
Mike Alves Executive Director
Prospectors Miners Association of Vic
Bill Billinghurst
Australian Federation of Airfreight Forwarders
David Williams Executive Director
Australian Equiptment Lessors Association
Ron Hardaker 



PRIME MINISTER J12/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
HONORARY AWARD TO GREEK PRIME MINISTER
I wish to record my delight at the appointment of the Prime
Minister of Greece, Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, as an
Honorary Companion in the Order of Australia ( AC) for
eminent service to Australian-Greek relations.
Mr Mitsotakis has had a long and honourable career in Greek
politics, first becoming a member of the Greek Parliament i~ n
1946. He was appointed Prime Minister in April 1990.
Mr Mitsotakis has demonstrated over a long period of time
strong personal commitment to furthering the bonds which
exist between our two countries. Such bonds are further
strengthened by the family, cultural and economic links
which have been developed by both the people of Greece and
the many thousands of Australians of Greek background.
In taking such a personal interest in the recent
commemoration of the Battle of Crete and Greece,
Mr Mitsotakis has contributed to a strengthening of the
special relationship between Australia and Greece which was
forged in th~ e comradeship of the Second World War.
This award serves to underline the importance and strength
of these ties, which I and Mr Mitsotakis are committed to
maintaining and developing further in the years ahead. I
warmly congratulate Mr Mitsotakis, and look forward to
working with him in the future.
6 February 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
PRIME MINISTER MEETS RURAL TASK FORCE
The Prime Minister today met representatives of the
Government's Rural Task Force as part of talks in the leadup
to the February Economic Statement.
The Chairman of the Task Force, Mr Brian Courtice and
Mr Harry Woods, raised a number of issues with the Prime
Minister incLuding the drought, the decline in farm incomes
and adding value to Australian agricultural products.
The Prime Minister also asked Mr Courtice to direct the Task
Force to investigate ways of adding value to Australian
agricultural products and to continue liaison with rural
communities. He also stressed that the Economic Statement would include
specific measures aimed at addressing current problems in
rural Australia and that the national recovery would bring
more widespread benefits to Australian farming communities.
Canberra 7 February 1992 13/ 92 



. AT( 0# 4AL 9 NE~ TWORK( CA# 41% RRA nUI&amp; CAU
VS ALI RY PARtIANHCNr EEOUSE CANGERRA
4-140# 44-: ( 06) 273 4300 VAX: ( 06) Z73 3079
Date: 9 February 1992 Time: 0900
Source: National Nine Network Program: Sunday
JIM WALEY: Tim Ie is fast running out for Labor to dig
Australia out of recession. New Prime Minister, Paul Keating,
has very few shots left in the locker. His first will be the
economic statement to be delivered on February 26th. Mr
Keating is nowr sifting through the wish lists of business and
union leaders lists that include large increases i~ n
government spending, investment incentives for industry, arid
superannuation reform. In the Prime Minister's latest catchcry
he will be trying to do the hat-trick of creating jobs
while keeping inflation down and lowering the foreign. debt.
Mr Keating is with us this morning. To talk with him Sunday's
political editor, Laurie Oakes. Laurie-
LAURIE OAKES: Thanks, Jim. Mr Keating, welcome to the
program. PAUL KEATING: Thank you, Laurie.
LAURIE OAKES: On our last program last year our guest was
also the Prime Minister a different Prime Minister. Has the
change at the top made any difference for ordinary
Australians? PAUL KEATING: Well, I mean this is a Labor Government; there
will be a continuum in the policy but there'll obviously be a
change in direction of some substance and there'll be a change
in style. So, yes, there will be a difference but there will, 
from front to back, be a continuum in the general direction.
LAURIE OAKES: Well, if that's the case what's in it for
ordinary Australians? They've seen you squabbling for the job
but now you're there what's in it for them?
PAUL KEATING: When I say ' the continuum' the change is one
of internationalising Australia; making Australia an
externally oriented country and making that change, completing
that change, arid in this case bringing Australia out of a
recession and into a recovery. It is that, and the speed of
that change and the quality of it, which I'm addressing myself
to now and which will be different than what obtained in 1991.
LAURIE OAKES: So you are better equipped to do that, in your
view? PAUL KEATING,: Well, I think in the Party's view. That was
what basically the election was about.
LAURIE OAKES: The former Prime Minister is obviously planning
to jump ship fairly soon. Can Labor win a by-election in
Wills? PAUL KEATING: I'd like to think we could, but that's a matter
for Bob. It's always been. It's a matter for anyone who's
served this long in high public office is entitled to do as
they please, I think, and if it's Bob's view that he's better
out of the place, that's fine. If it is his view that he'd
like to stay there, he can certainly stay with, I am sure, the
support of everyone in the Caucus and certainly mine.
LAURIE OAKES: The Party is very pessimistic, though, -about
Wills. If you lost that it would obviously be damaging and
presumably it would be seen as a rejection of your economic
statement, wouldn't it?
PAUL KEATING: Well, I should look, let's not jump hurdles
before we come to them but let's also not kid ourselves we're
in a recession. We've been doing badly in the polls. If we
lost Wills last month, this month or next month, in a sense it
would be simply part of what the Labor Party would have to
face whenever it sticks its head up electorally ahead of
getting a recovery going; ahead of putting its changes into
place and having its changes work. So I'd like to think we 
could win Wills if it was if it is a vacant position. If it
isn't, well there's no it's only speculation. If it is,
then I'd like to think we could win it. But, by the same
token, were we to were we not to it would be part of the
price we paid for the recession and our general tardiness in
coming out of it.
LAURIE OAKES: If unemployment is still in double digits at
the time of the next general election, can you win that?
PAUL KEATING: Well it depends where the direction is, I
think, Laurie. If the direction is unemployment is
stabilised and coming back, the answer is yes. If
unemployment is still rising, much more difficult. It's a bit
like interest rates in the 1990 election. The convention
wisdom was, with interest rates, if you've got high interest
rates you can't win a poll. Now I used to contest that often,
and we did win the 1990 election and I would contest the view
that a win is not possible with high unemployment but I think
the direction of the economy becomes then terribly important.
LAURIE OAKES: So if unemployment is still at 10 or 11 per
cent you can win if the public sees that it's coming down?
PAUL KEATING: If they think the direction if it's
stabilised and heading down and the direction's changed. That
is, the place is coming out and we've preserved all the big
benefits, low inflation, that we've got the exports still
running strongly and Australia will have a secure place in the
LAURIE OAKES: It seems that
PAUL KEATING: The worst thing would be to have a recession
and then find yourself in the 1990s in a terrible long term
economic hole. That we can avoid and I think if the nation
know we've avoided that that we're not going to go the way
of Argentina or some of these other countries that just can't
pay for their imports, that just can't deal with their
inflation rate, that just can't deal with their structure. If
we do all those: things and we can because we're going to
come out of this recession in much better shape than 1982-
83---
LAURIE OAKES: But it's unlikely, isn't it, that unemployment
will be below 10 per cent when you go to the polls or much
below that?
PAUL KEATING: Well, let's wait and see.
LAURIE OAKES: You've got no projections on that?
PAUL KEATING: Not at this stage, no.
LAURIE OAKES: The last time you were on this program was back
in June on the clay before your first unsuccessful challenge---
PAUL KEATING,: M~ m.
LAURIE OAKES: And in that interview you promised a touch of
excitement. What's happened? It's been more hesitancy and
uncertainty than excitement, hasn't it?
PAUL KEATING: 1' don't think so, Laurie. I think that Let
me repeat what one Cabinet Minister said to me last week. it
was said to me that the Cabinet meetings are again exciting
are again exciting and I did say at the time that I thought
we lacked a bit of esprit de corps and a touch of excitement,
and I think that's coming back. I mean, I've seen this sort
of You've ju[ st mentioned this line about me being nervous.
I mean you can't win with the journos. For years I was too
arrogant. For years I was insufferably arrogant and for six
weeks I've had me head down working out what we should do with
the place, and how to do it, and now I'm too demure. I mean
now, Laurie, my job is to produce a statement which gives hope
to the Australian people but I'm not going to be doing sort of
bird calls on tele while I'm at it. I'm not going to be in
there cooing around the television sets while I'm doing it. I
mean, it's a serious job of work and it has to be done. One
has to find one's way through it. I'm trying to do in six
weeks what would normally take us six months but the
enthusiasm within the Cabinet, the good will, the focusing on
the job is more than I could have expected.
LAURIE OAKES: Do you think that excitement will spread to the
public when the stateament emerges?
PAUL KEATING: Well Laurie, look, this Government taught
Australia about economic change. I mean in the decade up to
1983 there was no economic change in Australia. . It's this 
Government which produced the economic change. It taught the
press gallery about change; it encouraged the public into
change; and now what's good for the system is the public's
pushing the political system for change. Now, I want to keep
that change going but now we're in the harder parts of the
changes. We're past the big macro changes. We're into all
these areas of the micro-economy wharves, ports, airlines,
telecommunications where you're dealing with States; you're
dealing with p) rivate companies. It's not just things which
are in the Commonwealth exclusive realm. You're dealing with
others so you can't do it as quickly. But I'm trying to do
now things which induce a recovery, but at the same time
provides a long term plan for Australia, that's actually a
long term plan which means we've got to comprehend a lot of
these issues, and to do it in six weeks is hard work that's
going to be difficult to do and we're trying to beat the clock
in a sense. Australia needs it; it needs it now and that's
what I'm about and I mean this is the sort of inter regnum
over Christmas and in the parliamentary period and things
always go down a bit and the journos are always looking for a
story a week and the answer is they can't have one.
LAURIE OAKES: Before we go into detail on domestic issues,
you said on that Sunday program back in June that Australia
had to have a better idea about the region we live in. You
said we didn't pay enough attention to New Zealand and, more
importantly, to Indonesia, and certainly not to Japan. Well
now you're the Prime Minister what are you going to do about
that situation?
PAUL KEATING: Well I hope a bit quite a bit. And I've
already had the benefit of two very long discussions with
President Bush about the Pacific. I've already put to him our
view that we need a better political and institutional set of
arrangements in the Pacific and the United States should be in
them; that Japan should be playing a key role in trade
liberalisation in the region and itself. And I'm also
interesting myself in issues which affect us, such as New
Zealand. 
LAURIE OAKES: Are you going to visit Indonesia and Japan, for
example? PAUL KEATING: I may well do, Laurie. I think if I for
any visits I'll be having they'll be to the Asia-Pacific area
before anywhere else. But my job at the moment is to focus on
domestic issues and to get the domestic issues right.
LAURIE OAKES: You're not going to make the ritual trek to
Washington and the capitals of Europe? Wouldn't that be the
normal thing for a new Prime Minister to do?
PAUL KEATING: Well, maybe, but I don't think In fact I've
had the benefit of an American president coming here which
is unusual for us and obviously saves me the time of going
there in a useful exchange of information and views. So I
won't be doing the northern hemisphere thing but I'd like to
be doing the Asia-Pacific thing but I'll be doing the
Australian thing first.
LAURIE OAKES: Prime Minister, we'll take a break there and
get on to the detail of the economy in a moment.
PAUL KEATING: Good, Laurie.
( Short commercial break)
LAURIE OAKES: Mr Keating, ACTU President, Martin Ferguson,
says that when you deliver your statement on Wednesday
fortnight you will be on the mat. Is that how you see it?
PAUL KEATING: I don't think so, but I think if he means that
there's an expectation that the Government will deliver a
statement for a recovery and a longer run program of change
for Australia, a plan for Australia, to that extent he's
right. That is, not that we're on the mat but much will be
required of us.
LAURIE OAKES: But if it doesn't get a good reception you're
just about dead politically, aren't you?
PAUL KEATING: Well I think it will, that's the point, because
we are doing things to accelerate the recovery but at the same 
time doing it the way which does provide a long term for this
place; a plan for the long term. So we're not going just to
have a big fiscal bang that goes up in a puff of expensive
smoke but things we'll be doing will have a long run benefit
and form integrated parts of a long term plan.
LAURIE OAKES: How wide, how broad is it going to be? Is it a
mini-budget in the sense that you'll be looking at pensions as
well as things to create jobs?
PAUL KEATING: It'll have a productive focus, Laurie. I mean
the great need of Australia is to continue to lift its
domestic capacity so it'll have a productive focus.
LAURIE OAKES: Does that include things like pension
increases, though? Or will that have to wait until August?
PAUL KEATING: Not necessarily, no, and---
LAURIE OAKES: That won't have to wait?
PAUL KEATING: No it doesn't not necessarily include them
and they are things which more particularly are confined to
budgets but the Cabinet hasn't completed its consideration of
all these issues but I just say it will have a productive
focus about it.
LAURIE OAKES: Just while we're on that. What's your view of
welfare? Do you think there's room in a recessed economy for
pension increases at the moment? Can they look forward to the
Budget with some optimism?
PAUL KEATING: This Government increased they extended
increased outlays through the ' 80s which was quite strong but
we had spending failing as a proportion of the total economy
because the economy was growing so fast in the ' 80s. That's
not to say we didn't spend and we spent Every spare dollar
went in either tax cuts or transfer payments. So we lifted
all of those social security benefits and payments and
targeted the system. So we've now got a very closely targeted
system, but as generously applied as fiscal policy in this
country could permit, and I think that still remains our
policy. We'd always like to be improving the system where we
can but budgetary policy matters.
LAURIE OAKES: Well ' what about tax cuts? Could they be within 
the scope of the statement? Or are they also budgetary
matters? PAUL KEATING: There's a lot been said about them but what
motivated the tax cuts in the past? The answer was
inflation getting inflation down, reducing nominal wages
growth in lieu of tax cut for inflation control, for
inflation. We" ve now broken the back of Australian inflation..
We've got a statistical rate of 1 and an underlying rate of
about So we're down there with the best of them. So I
think that the focus and the target now has to be inflation
and everything else has to fit into that. I mean that's got
to be maintained and we won't, for our part, be doing any
inflation-wrecking, like Dr Hewson with his 15% tax on
everything everyone spends goods and services. Having
broken a 20-year problem we won't be letting that genie out of
the bottle again. That is, we'll be trying to keep it there
and wages our wages policy will be tailored to our policy
on inflation. Tax cuts will simply fit into that context.
Now, whether or not we provide tax cuts, whether or not they
can be useful, what positions we take before the Commission,
will be governed by one thing inflation.
LAURIE OAKES: And when do you decide this? Negotiations are
this week, aren't they, with the ACTU on that---
PAUL KEATING: We're going to meet them in a week or so's
time. LAURIE OAKES: So, is a wage-tax trade-off one of the options
still? PAUL KEATING: It's an option but the primary option is
maintenance of low inflation levels. There's got to be a sort
of a change in attitudes here. In the ' 80s we were always
about aggregate wages growth, aggregate wages growth,
aggregate wages growth targets. Now we're about maintaining
pinning that inflation number.
LAURIE OAKES: There's been a lot of confusion about your
wages policy, partly because of misreporting, I know, but I
guess the key question is, ' Will the Government support an
application for a general wage rise this year?'. 
PAUL KEATING: Well, we'll see.
LAURIE OAKES: Bob Hawke committed the Government to do that,
didn't he?
PAUL KEATING: But I'm committing the Government to low
inflation rates.
LAURIE OAKES: So a Hawke commitment is not necessarily a
Keating commitment?
PAUL KEATING: It's subordinate to the commitment to low
inflation subordinate to the commitment to low inflation.
LAURIE OAKES: What about the speculation about a likely shake
up in the aviation industry? That's caused more excitement
than anything else, I think, in the run up to this statement.
Are we going to see an open skies policy?
PAUL KEATING: We're looking at options in aviation, Laurie,
again, can I say, the first government in a quarter of a
century to do so. But one thing we are determined about and
that is Australians had a taste of deregulation with Compass.
They had a taste of the low fares and they liked it because
they had mobility which was formerly denied to them. Compass
failed essentially because it was badly managed but one of the
issues in that is ease of access of entry into competition..
So one of the things we are looking at is the provision of
common user terminals by the Commonwealth so that entrants are
not carrying that burden and don't have to squeeze themselves
into the Ansett or Australian terminals to start. In other
words, they're in a competitive environment which is their
own. Now, there's a line between where the Government's role
in this starts and finishes and where the private sector role
starts and fini. shes and we'd like to try and get that line
right but at the same time we want to give Australians the
benefit of the opportunity of competitive fares---
LAURIE OAKES: And these would be new terminals?
PAUL KEATING: New terminals. But not letting the two major
airlines drift back into old habits of higher prices. In
other words, with the competitor out of the way seeing the
fare structure drift back up. We'd like to see room for
competitors but obviously the Government can't be providing 
competition. We can't have two, three, four airlines owned by
the Government. That's not going to be on any more than
trying to fix Compass's financial problems were on. But we
can do things which make for ease of entry and ease of
competition and competition will be important to us.
LAURIE OAKES: Does that mean you don't want Qantas running
domestic services?
PAUL KEATING: Well that's another issue and that is on the
big canvass of policy and that's something which, you know, we
may or may not get around to.
LAURIE OAKES: And will all this affect the privatisation of
Australian and the partial privatisation of Qantas?
PAUL KEATING: The whole environment matters because we've got
these things up for sale. Obviously a bidder is going to say,
' Look, what's on here? What's going to happen after the end
of this year? What's the environment going to That's
for Qantas and Australian and obviously that's on our mind,
too. LAURIE OAKES: In the run up to the leadership challenge you
promised Senator Rosemary Crowley that the Medicare co-payment
would be dumped if you became Prime Minister. Now that's a
Keating commitment., Are you going to stick to it?
PAUL KEATING: My private views about this have been well
known. Over the years, as Treasurer, I never supported copayments
and I wouldn't have supported one in the Cabinet
discussion but there is one and what I've said is we'll debate
this properly in the Cabinet, and we will.
LAURIE OAKES: But if you go into Cabinet and say, ' I want
that dumped; it will be dumped' is that what you are going
to do?
PAUL KEATING: I don't think I should be saying to the Cabinet
you must do this or must do that, but---
LAURIE OAKES: You made a commitment.
PAUL KEATING: But my position is that I don't believe the copayment
was the right way to go.
LAURIE OAKES: And you accept it if Cabinet takes a different
view they make a liar of the new Prime Minister? 
PAUL KEATING: Well, let's wait and see, Laurie. Let's wait
and see. I mean, the Cabinet's sensible. They look at all
these things. They've had some chance now to weigh up the way
in which this is working and also to get a greater level of
public reading. So let's wait and see.
LAURIE OAKES: Do you agree with some of those committed
royalists, who've changed their mind recently, that this royal
visit's going to cost too much money and it's a ridiculous
extravagance in a recession?
PAUL KEATING: Well, no I don't. The Queen is our Head of
State. She visits here I suppose regularly, but in a sense
irregularly, and I don't think those costs matter. Can I just
say, from my part, this visit was arranged well before I
became Prime Minister, anyway, but any request by the Queen
for a visit would ordinarily be approved of by the Government.
LAURIE OAKES: But it's $ 1.6 million that you could spend on
helping the unemployed creating jobs in your economic
statement. PAUL KEATING: But $ 1.6 million is not going to change the
world and I don't really think that's an issue. I don't think
it's an issue, Laurie.
LAURIE OAKES: What's the ball park for you, looking at
business representatives where some have told you the country
can afford $ 2 billion to kick start the economy. Will you
accept that figure?
PAUL KEATING: We'll make our own judgment about it. We've
been doing that in the 16 or 17 statements we've introduced
since 1983. We've made our mind up about what we thought was
appropriate and what we thought the Budget could stand and
we'll come to the right figure. The public debate's
interesting and it's always interesting and it's relevant.
LAURIE OAKES: Do you accept there's some concern about the $ 2
billion figure on the money markets?
PAUL KEATING: Oh;, there could be but I mean money markets are
a bit smarter than I think the media gives them credit for.
They've been around. We turn over $ 40 billion a day in the
dollar. They're not bunnies. They've been around for 
nearly a decade.
LAURIE OAKES: We're just about out of time but I suppose the:
overall question people want to know from Paul Keating is have
you abandoned you level playing field philosophy? We've got a
new interventionist Paul Keating who's put all that stuff
behind him.
PAUL KEATING: I just know it's a bit of the program about
level playing field and clothing, textile and footwear. I
mean there was nothing level about asking Australians to pay
300% duty on shirts and 320% on shoes and the rest. The fact
is let's get this clear there is no concept of a level
playing field outside of Australia. Outside of Australia you
just cross the low water mark it's catch as catch can
everywhere. They all cheat. They all muck about. They all
play favourites. But inside you're only cheating yourself if
you run policies which have scarce national savings going to
the wrong places. Now, what we've tried to do is make sure
that our scarce savings go to the most productive places and
the most productive places are not necessarily putting
buttonholes on shirts or collars, which are highly labour
intensive, where we're never going to be competitive, compared
to a very productive place which can actually add to our
national wealth employment in the current account.
LAURIE OAKES: Well what about the 30-xxx ( tape failure)
jobs in textile, footwear and clothing industries?
PAUL KEATING: This change was on from 1988. We had a vast
rate of employment growth through the ' 80s. A lot of those
people were taken up and hopefully they will be taken up
again. At the moment we are in a recession but, again, now is
not the time to change structural policy. So if you are
asking me, which is really what you are saying, ' Is there any
revisionism on the vision splendid?' which is to
internationalise Australia emphatically, no, but---
LAURIE OAKES: Mr Keating, we're out of time.
PAUL KEATING: But let me say this, Laurie, that that's not to
say that we are going to be taking an absolutely hard and fast
attitude to every single issue that comes along; that where a 
bit of latitude is important and useful that's what we'll be
about. LAURIE OAKES: Thank you.
PAUL KEATING: Thank you, Laurie.
LAURIE OAKES: Back to you, Jim.
JIM WALEY: The Prime Minister there, with Laurie Oakes.
aI 66 no Legal or other responib 11it tV-1ta k6eri(* rerrors aid:! ssSn.
,( Trans Opt by NJP I ntar
1nquiries tAo Peter H~ arvey, ? ress cat' 



PRIME MINISTER 14/ 92
JOINT STATEM: ENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
MP, AND THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH, HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
SERVICES, THE HON B HOWE MP
CABINET REMOVES MEDICARE CO-PAYMENT
Federal Cabinet today agreed to remove the Medicare
co-payment of $ 2.50 and restore the $ 3.50 rebate reductions
announced in the August 1991 Budget.
These changes will take effect from 1 March 1992.
This decision was made to remove uncertainty about the
health system and to address concerns about a decline in
bulk billing.
Today's decision will restore the Medicare benefits
provisions for GP services to exactly how they were before
the change was introduced.
The improved safety net provisions, introduced on 1 January
1992, will remain. These give families higher Medicare
benefits once they exceed $ 246 per annum in gap payments.
GPs are expected to pass the full benefit of the change on
to patients.
In this way the decision will ensure that Medicare will
remain a truly universal health insurance system for all
Australians. A viable, efficient universal health system is essential if
people are to get proper care and support regardless of
income. This is particularly important now when so many people are
already experiencing difficulty because of the recession.
The core of the 1991 Budget health changes involved measures
designed to deal with growing health costs and the overuse
of medical service, directly by making reforms to how
general practitioners operate. These reforms will be
retained. 
In this way the Government will be dealing with the
structural problem of overservicing at source.
These changes are aimed at reducing the numbers of GPs,
reducing the extent to which GPs are dependent on the
current open-ended fee-for-service system, and encouraging
GPs to become more cost-effective in their use of services
such as pathology tests and pharmaceuticals.
The Cabinet agreed that in current circumstances the
co-payments and the previously announced reduction in
rebates were not needed and were a burden on the health
system.
Given the crucial importance of keeping inflation low, the
substantial inflationary impact of the co-payment and the
cut in the rebate was also a concern.
The inflationary impact would also have increased indexed
Commonwealth outlays on social security and payments to the
States by more than $ 200 million in a full year.
Removing these health charges will remove around 0.4
percentage points from the CPI.
These changes to the health system will directly add around
$ 51 million to the Budget in 1991-92 and $ 239 million in
1992-93.
11 February 1992 



QKi-PRIME MINISTER 16/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
The Commonwealth Government's offer to fund half the costs
of a feasibility study for the Bell Bay Steel Mill stands.
There has never been any doubt about the willingness of the
Commonwealth to allocate $ 500,000 to fund the study.
It is uncertain whether Premier elect Groom is committed to
the project. As late as this morning, in the Launceston
Examiner, it was unclear whether Mr Groom was committed to
State Government funding.
Mr Groom should make it clear that his Government is
committed to funding the study and put the interests of
Tasmania ahead of attempts at political point scoring.
All Mr Groom has to do is to indicate his unequivocal
commitment to his Government funding its share of the study.
13 FEBRUARY J. 992 



PRIME MINISTER 15/ 92
FOR MEDIA
FEBRUARY ECONOMIC STATEMENT LOCK-UP DETAILS
The Economic Statement will be delivered by the Prime
Minister in Parliament at 7.30pm, Wednesday, February 26.
Lock-up arrangements will revert to the old Budget-style
lock-ups.
There will be three lock-ups one in Parliament House,
Canberra and one each in Sydney and Melbourne. These will
commence from 2.00pm on February 26.
All venues will be ' media only' lock-ups.
The Parliament House venue will centre around the Main
Committee Room. One committee room will be set aside for the
PM's press conference to be held during the lock-up,
probably about 5.00pm
Access arrangements to the Parliament House Committee Rooms
( including for installation and testing of equipment etc.)
will be the responsibility of individual attendees and/ or
organisations. Access will generally be available from
Tuesday, February 25, 1992.
Access to Sydney and Melbourne lock-ups will be similar.
Media are reminded of the terms and conditions for entry to
the lock-up. A sample Form of Undertaking is attached for
information. Any breach of the undertaking may result in the
journalist and/ or organisation being banned from future
lock-ups.
A note will be posted on the Press Gallery notice board.
Organisations should nominate those seeking access to the
lock-ups, which venue they wish to attend. This note will
be collected every few days. 
Those unable to advise in this manner can contact Peter
Jackson on ( 06) 271 5328. All names of those intending to
attend the lock-up must be received by February
Normal telephone equipment for use at the end of the lock-up
will be arranged locally if requested. Specialised equipment
will need to be initiated by individuals/ organisations
direct with Telecom ( after details have been cleared through
the relevant Government official).
Further to this note, I have written directly to major media
organisations about more technical details.
For the Canberra venue, a plan of the Committee Rooms with
designated space allocation will be displayed in the press
gallery as soon as possible.
Attendees should make their own arrangements for
refreshments. For any gencal information about lock-up arrangements
contact Peter Jackson ( Department of Prime Minister and
Cabinet) on ( 06). 271 5328.
For information about the Canbrra lock-up contact Ralf
Bandte ( 06) 263 2794
The Melbourne lock-up will be at the World Congress Centre.
For details about the Melbourne lock-up contact Julie Toms
( 03) 641 885! 5.
The Sydney lock-up will be on the 1st Floor, Palsonic House,
4-16 Yurong Street, East Sydney. For details about the
Sydney lock-up contact Paul Collins ( 02) 361 9602.
Please note that only bona-fide media representatives will
be granted access to the lock-ups. No provision can be made
for other groups or individuals.
Copies of the Statement will be on sale at all Government
Book Shops at 7.30pm ( EST) on February 26.
Mark Ryan
Senior Media Adviser
Prime Minister's Office
February 13 1.992 
FORM OF UNDERTAKING as an accredited
( PRINT FULL NAME)
representative ( PRINT FULL NAM4E OF ORGANISATION)
and deriving the main component of my earned income in the
media industry, accept the courtesies extended to me in
relation to early perusal of the Prime Minister's Economic
Statement and other related documents in full understanding
of the conditions under which they are offered.
These are that I will not:
allow the documents or their content or any part
thereof made available to me to find their way into
hands other than those of my principals and my
immediate assistants before 7.3Opm AEST on Wednesday
26 February 1992;
make or permit any publication, written or by other
means, of any facts, statements, opinions or the like
contained in the Statement or related documents prior
to the Prime Minister completing the delivery of that
Statement on the night of Wednesday 26 February 1992
with the exception that radio and television stations
may broadcast progress news bulletins ( as distinct from
commentary), provided that none of the contents of the
Statement is revealed until the Prime Minister himself
has conveyed it to the Parliament or otherwise
disseminated its contents; and
brinqj into the lock-up any equipment capable of
transmission of information to outside the lock-up
other than that specifically approved in writing by the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. or its
authorised agents.
I have taken all reasonable steps to ensure that my
principals are Imade fully aware of these conditions. 



24
, J e
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, TREASURY, 17 FEBRUARY 1992
E&amp; EO PROOF COPY
PM: The discussions were held in the friendly environment
of the Accord. We have been doing this for now nearly
a decade, and it has changed Australia. It is one of
the reasons we have got a low inflation rate, it is one
of the reasons why we have got a big emphasis now on
productivity, it's one of the reasons we have been so
successful on exporting, manufacturing and we are now
using these processes to induce a recovery and create
jobs. We think we will get there. And that the Unions
have put their positions, and we will be talking about
wages after' the Statement, when they get a chance to
read it. It was a very useful exchange of views.
Which is as the Accord processes should be.
J: Is the Government prepared to support a general wage
increase sometime this year?
PM: Well you will read about that. But we know where their
views are, where they're going, and they know where we
are going I think, and I found the whole meeting very
satisfactory. Thank you.
ENDS 



Embargoed Against Delivery ( 12.3Opm AEST, 19 February 1992)
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
BATTLE OF AUSTRALIA COMMEMORATION SERVICE
BICENTENNIAL PARK, DARWIN, 19 FEBRUARY 1992
Today we pay tribute to those who died here in Darwin in
1942 Australians and Americans who gave their lives in the
defence of this country and freedom everywhere.
The raids on Darwin, the loss of life, the great destruction
of this and other northern communities, the tragedies of so
many Territorians forcibly expatriated from their homes
these things we Australians have not properly acknowledged.
Today we acknowledge them.
Today we pay tribute to their courage, and recognise the
debt we owe to the people of Northern Australia.
No nation should fail to honour those who have given it
devoted serviLce. No nation should forget its past.
This and subsequent raids on Australia's northern ports were
acts of unwarranted aggression, yet it has to be said that
there were worse-actions during the Asia-Pacific War.
The Japanese conquest and occupation of the region involved
unspeakable suffering for large parts of the population, and
for Allied prisoners of war, including many thousands of
Australians. These events cannot and should not be forgotten.
Indeed, among the countries of the region a common awareness
of the history we share will strengthen the basis of' trust
and cooperation in our relations.
In Japan's case, more candid recognition of responsibility
for past actions will enhance the wider acceptance and
legitimacy of its emerging leadership role in the Asia-
Pacific region. 
Yet we would certainly be wrong to think that only Japan has
lessons to learn from those events fifty years ago.
The attack on Darwin was a striking symbol of the
uncertainty of our position in the region.
It was also unmistakeable proof of the inadequacy of our
responses. Fifty years later, of course, there are still
lessons to be learned.
A lesson in strength and independence of mind, for instance.
We might remember the folly of relying so totally, for both
policy and defence, on Great Britain.
Increasingly we had been living in a fantasy land of an
exhausted Empire. We treated Asia with a mixture of
condescension and fear or worse, we ignored it altogether.
Yet there is a positive lesson to be learned as well we
adapted. Australians, accustomed to regarding themselves as
British, resolved to turn to the one country that could save
the day without prejudice to their British origins they
forged a friendship with the United States which endures to
this day.
It will do us no harm to reflect on the virtues of changing
old preconceptions and being ready and willing to respond to
new realities.
To the generation of 1942 it was quite unthinkable that we
might voluntarily become a part of Asia. That we might ever
be friends with Japan was entirely out of the question.
Yet we have made those changes. We have built friendships,
trust and understanding. We are playing a creative role in
the region, and the opportunity is there to expand that
role.
The bombing of Darwin was a tragedy. But it was also an
awakening. And there is no doubt that we have learned from
the experience.
Yet there is much more to learn, and a good deal of it, I
think, concerns our own society, our own attitudes.
I
It is significant, for instance, that it took 49 years for
an Australian government to recognise the role that
Aboriginal people played in the defence of Australia.
During the war, groups of Aboriginals, including special
Army units, patrolled areas which spanned almost the entire
Arnhem Land coast. They were involved in the rescue of
Allied airmen and the capture of enemy airmen. 
Yet they received very little recognition and until last
year little or no remuneration for their services.
I am very glad that on this 50th anniversary we can at last
pay tribute to all those Australians who served their
country. The bombing of Darwin brought home to us how isolated and
vulnerable so much of Australia was how difficult it was
to make and defend a nation on such a vast continent.
Today we might remind ourselves that we will do that so much
better if we include in all our national goals, and all our
national pride all our people.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the hour of peril in 1942
Australians responded as you would expect a free people to
respond they found in themselves and each other untapped
resources of strength and purpose.
They learned the value of cooperation.
They made an all-in, national effort.
Today there is, of course, much to learn from that as well.
We must find in ourselves that same resolve and spirit which
helped to turn the tide.
If we do this we will be able to speak to the world about
those things which Australia cherishes about freedom and
fairness, about tolerance, and independence we will be
able to have some influence, we will be able to pay our own
way and we will be able to say that the memory of those
people who died here in Darwin has been truly honoured. I
L 



TRANSCRIPT OF' THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, DARWIN, FEBRUARY 19 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, what did you discuss in your meeting
with Mar-shall Perron?
PM: We discussed a number of things including the railway
and I toild him of the railway that if there is a
project developer of substance, if the economics of the
line change with low inflation and higher potential of
freight usage from the last study we did in the middle
of the 1980s, then the Commonwealth would look at it.
But it has to be more than good intentions by the
Northern~ Territory Government to put in a modest amount
of money, good intentions by the Commonwealth and good
intenticons by a railway builder. There has to be a
project financier developer, and at this stage we can't
quite see one. So in other words if the Northern
Territory community can't carry the cost of the
railway, which of course it couldn't, if there is no
serious project developer the Commonwealth would simply
be picking uip the cost of it, which of course the
Commonwealth isn't prepared to do. But it is prepared
to look at a commercial project. So if the economics
of the project has changed materially, if there is a
company of substance or a consortium of substance,
other than someone simply wanting to build a railway
line, that is other than railway builders, then we will
look at it.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Considering the history of 50 years ago, obviously very
well. Japan is now Australia's major trading partner.
We are now seeing a lot of Japanese people coming to
this country. Australia is much more part of Asia than
it was then and therefore the transformation has been
quite remarkable. But I think Japan has also got to
acknowledge, candidly, its past and in that sense come
to terms: with its neighbours as well as it has
commercially and industrially.
J: Northern Territory in the February Statement?
PM: Well you'll-have to wait until the February statement
for that. I
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 17/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
MR HAWKE'S RETIREMENT FROM PARLIAMENT
Mr Hawke's retirement from Federal Parliament today marks
the end of an unparalleled period of success and achievement
for an Australian labour leader.
Moreover, it marks the end of a political career devoted to
uniting Australians for the common good.
Only Sir Robert Menzies served longer as Prime Minister, yet
history will judge the Hawke era as contributing much more
to Australia.
Bob Hawke led this country during a period of historic
change, a period of awakening in which Australians chose to
join the world as a modern, diversified economy.
This change was profound and difficult but the price of not
making it would have been to deny Australia a future.
Bob Hawke and I served as a team for eight years. It was a
privilege to serve with him. We shared beliefs and goals and
worked together to achieve to them.
It is clear that the past year has been a difficult one for
both of us but that does not diminish the camaraderie we
shared nor the pride in our achievements together.
I wish Bob and Hazel well. All of us in the Labor Party, and
all Australians, owe them a debt of gratitude.
CANBERRA February 20 1992 



SPEECH NOTES: BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
TO THE INAUGURAL MEETING: COUNCIL FOR ABORIGINAL
RECONCILIATION, CANBERRA, 21 FEBRUARY 1992
Mr Chairman, members of the Council I have taken this
opportunity to welcome you here for this inaugural meeting
and to say one or two things which I think ought to be said.
There is a big challenge ahead of you a challenge which
has pretty well defeated us for 200 years.
But I think this is a good time to take it on. I think there
is a new willingness among Australians to embrace change,
and there is certainly a willingness in this government to
make changes.
You'll see some of that in the economic statement next week.
As long as I'm in this position you're going to see changes.
And one of the big changes I want to see is change * in the
status of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders. At
present it is awful. For many Aboriginal people it's a
tragedy. It debilitates our nation it debilitates our
culture, our reputation and our self-esteem. It undermines
our ambitions to be a good society.
I'm one of those people who think it can be fixed.
I think most Australians these days recognise that having
come here and taken over the place from the Aboriginal we
can't now sneer at those of them who have ended up
demoralised and destitute.
These days most Australians recognise that and if they
forget it from time to time, it doesn't mean that they can't
easily be persuaded to the cause of improvement. That's one
reason why we can make changes.
Most AustraliLans I think also recognise the unarguable fact,
the big fact the fact that Aboriginal Australians and
Torres Strait Islanders were the first Australians and
that they are no less Australians for that.
That's the fiLrst building block. That's a strength. it
means that ifE other things were equal there would be no
question about the status of Aborigines. They have an 
absolute status, and an absolute right to be in the
mainstream, not the margins. The thing is to make the other
things equal.
The government is open to suggestion about the best way to
make this happen. The door's open. You're the best people to
judge, and we want to hear from you.
But, let me tell you, as a politician there are always
those who are happiest spending their time arguing the toss.
On these sorts of bodies you can spend your time debating
fine principles and finer points. You can talk about ideal
outcomes from now until the end of the century. You can
spend a decade in debate and deliberation.
Or you can do something.
I suggest you aim at doing something. Something real.
Make real improvements. Concrete improvements in health
and education for instance. Building blocks of change.
I believe in fact I'm quite certain that the best way to
improve relations between Aboriginal Australians and non-
Aboriginal Australians and the best way to provide a basis
for reconciliation is to close the gap in living conditions.
At present the gap is huge. It has to be closed in the end
it has to be diminished to the point where no one can point
to someone and say the reason for that person's poverty, or
illness, or alcoholism is that he or she is Aboriginal.
I think most: Australians want that to happen. And I think
they also recognise that it will only happen if the energy
and commitment is coming from the whole community non-
Aboriginal and Aboriginal. There's no question that the
Aboriginal community has got to deliver a lot of the
initiative, and be active players in this.
I said before that I think there is a shift in the mood of
Australia that people are open to change. I think that's
true in their attitude to your concerns.
I don't mean. that they simply want to see a problem solved.
They do want to'see that: but I also think non-Aboriginal
Australia is now much more sympathetic and much more
knowledgeable. We're generally much better educated about Aboriginal
culture and history, much more aware of the civilisation
which existed here before Europeans came, much more
knowledgeable about what has happened since and much more
concerned about what is happening now. 
It's not true of all non Aboriginal Australians of course
there is still a certain amount of ignorance and prejudice
in this country, but, like I said, there's no future in
dwelling on the negatives, no point in dwelling on the
people who find it harder to see. Concentrate on the ones
who see best and the rest will be persuaded by the things
they see you do.
So again, if you'll forgive a little political advice
that's what you've got to work on, your strengths, and the
strengths which are waiting to be tapped. It's about
creating and catching a wave.
For my part, I am absolutely committed to this. It's a huge
challenge, and hugely significant in the determination of
Australia's future.
But if we the government, ATSIC and this council if we
set ourselves progressive goals and work towards them
urgently, we can begin to destroy that gap in living
standards, we can begin to make life better for Aboriginal
people and Torres Strait Islanders, and if we do that it
will be a lot better for non-Aboriginal Australians as well.
And when people see what is being done, more and more will
come to believe in what can be done and they'll want it to
be done.
Mr Chairman I have the greatest faith that you and your
Council can do it. I look forward to seeing you regularly
and seeing the signs of your progress. I wish you well. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PARLIAMENTARY RECEPTION FOR HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN AND HIS
ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH
24 FEBRUARY 1992
Your Majesty, your Royal Highness, Your Excellencies,
Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and
Gentlemen.
Your Majesty, on behalf of the government and people of
Australia it is with great pleasure that I welcome you to
Canberra. I know that on this visit it is your primary purpose to
participate in Sydney's sesquicentennial; but today it is my
primary purpose to congratulate you on the 40th anniversary
of your accession to the throne.
Your Majesty, we have all changed in that time. The men who
sat in the Australian parliament on your first visit they
were all practically men in those days had memories of
Empire. Not a few of them saw the world through imperial
eyes. Many of them had been born in Queen Victoria's day
and remembered the several monarchs in between.
But I daresay a good many members of this parliament are
like the majority of Australians and have known only one
monarch, Queen Elizabeth II.
This is an altogether different generation, reflecting the
profouncL. change. in our two-countries and the relationship
between them.
As our constitutional relationship has evolved so have the
circumstance! s of our economic and political lives.
These days we must both face the necessities of a global
economy and global change of often staggering speed. and
magnitude. We must also face regional realities. 
Just as Great Britain some time ago sought to make her
future secure in the European Community, so Australia now
vigorously seeks partnerships with countries in our own
region. Our outlook is necessarily independent.
That independence in part was reflected in your becoming, in
1973, Queen of Australia.
In 1992 it is reflected in our growing sense of national
purpose: in our conviction that we must move quickly and
vigorously to make the most of our human and material
resources and seize our opportunities in the world.
We must do this so that Australians will be assured of the
same freedom and security in the next century as they have
enjoyed in this.
I thank you for your visit, and ask you to accept a gift
from the people of Australia as a token of our affection and
esteem. CANBERRA 



PRIME MINISTER 18/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ECOLOGICALLY SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT REPORTS ON GREENHOUSE
AND INTERSECTORAL ISSUES
The Ecologically Sustainable Development ( ESD) reports on
Greenhouse and intersectoral Issues were tabled in
Parliament and released publicly today. This follows, and
complements, the release of the ESD Working Groups' sectoral
reports on 2 December 1991.
The Greenhouse Report was commissioned in November 1990
following the Government's decision to adopt an interim
planning target to limit greenhouse gas emissions.
At the time, the Government observed the need for additional
work to assess the costs and benefits of possible greenhouse
response measures, in line with its undertaking not to take
actions that would have net adverse impacts on the economy
or on Australia's trade competitiveness, in the absence of
similar action by major greenhouse gas producing countries.
The ESD Greenhouse Report draws together the work of the
nine ESD Working Groups in identifying options for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and provides the Chairs' advice on
a range of cost effective options which could be implemented
by governments in seeking to achieve the interim planning
target. The Intersectoral Issues Report was prepared separately by
the ESD Chairs, drawing on the expert input from ESD Working
Group and wo: ckshop participants, consultants and other
interest groups. It highlights the importance of an
integrated, system-wide approach to the successful
implementation of ESD policies. Many of the issues dealt
with are inherently complex but nevertheless fundamental to
consideration of ESD policies. 
The presentation of these two reports marks a milestone in
the ESD process the completion of the Working Group phase.
The challenge now for governments, and the wider community,
is to examine and build on these reports in developing new
policies and processes which will move us towards
ecologically sustainable development.
The Government intends to develop effective mechanisms for
ongoing community consultation as a key element of its
response to the ESD process. These mechanisms will include
further roundtable meetings to discuss implementation of ESI)
policies. The Government considers that, as with the ESD Working Group
reports, the two reports released today will contribute
significantly to the initial national strategies for
Ecologically Sustainable Development and Greenhouse response
which are in the process of being developed.
I thank the Chairs, Dr Roy Green, Professor Stuart Harris
and Professo David Throsby, for their efforts throughout
the ESD process and for these reports. I also wish to thank
the many individuals and organisations who devoted their
time and expertise to the ESD process at every stage.
CANBERRA FEBRUARY 25 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
SBS DATELINE WITH PAUL MURPHY
26 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: You are asking Australians to take you on trust aren't;
you that your projections tonight, in this document,
are goiLng to be right?
PM: Well Paul, the economies generally respond quite
favourably and rapidly on the way out of the recession.
Nearly a decade ago, when I picked up Mr Howard's
recession, ' in the first year we had 6 per cent growth
in GDP, growth in the economy. We have got it here
4 3/ 4 per cent. It is really quite a modest
assumption.
J: Every 1year?
PM: We did that in the 180s. We ran about 4 1/ 4 per cent a
year a. 11 through the ' 80s and we believe that given the
strong profit share that exists basically in the
economy, the fact that there are no structural budget
deficits over-hanging it, that we have basically good
productive1 wage arrangements, that the benefits of the
economy now can produce a 4 per cent growth through
this period.
J: OK Prime Minister, as you say when you came out of the
last recession that you inherited from your
predecessors, you have got good growth, you've created
jobs, -then the economy overheated, then you had to take
the action you did.
PM: It over-heated Paul, with the globalisation of financial
markets, growing credit at 10 or 20 per cent a year
through the satellite shifting of funds, the
fundabiLlity of money. That's gone. The financial
institutions have pulled their head in. That sort of
credit growth is not on, and we are not going to have
any of that overheating. What we want now is
sustainable low inflationary growth and we are the only 
Party that can deliver it. We are the only Party that
broke inflation, and we are the only Party that can
deliver it.
J: OK, and yet I think by your own admission you will go
into the next election and what, you have got 15, 18
months time with an $ 8 billion deficit and still 10 per
cent unemployment?
PM: Coming clown. Coming down to 7 3/ 4 over the period and
with a clef icit turning into a surplus by 1995. In
other words, as the cycle picks up growth, activity,
receipts, salaries, supplements etc. and as
unemployment benefits come down, the budget goes back
into surplus in ' 95 with very large tax cuts.
J: But will enough happen in the next 15 months for you to
leap the enormous political hurdle that faces you at
the moment?
PM: Well, there's no way that a switch from income to
expenditure, as Dr Hewson proposes, will do anything
for recovery. In fact his own economatrician
demonstrated this week that it will actually contract
employment and contract GDP.
J: There is some disagreement about that
PM: No, no. I
J: the argy bargy in Parliament.
PM: There will be no disagreement about the computer model
printout which says, under any scenario, Fightback will
reduce growth and lift unemployment. So this
proposition, a stimulus from a budget which can afford
a stimulus, to get the economy moving but which comes
back to surplus is sensible, and I believe, the only
thing to do.
J: Now, Dr Hewson has criticised your tax reforms and the
big ones as being hogwash?
PM: Well, let me put this to you. When I sat back and
said, ' what should we do here, what can we do to make
Australia move now, what can we do which at the same
time is productive, like rebuilding the railways, the
ports, the roads, TAFE, all of these things at the same
time produce low inflation, we produced this document,
One Nation. What Dr Hewson did was sit back and say,
not what does Australia need, but how can I be
differEtnt from Labor? What can I have that they won't
have? He said, a consumption tax. And if he thinks
that taLxing your food and your clothing and your drycleaning
is going to change the railroads, the roads,
the ports, the wharfs, the airlines, get growth going,
it's not. The fact is, Paul, it's a sterile exercise 
in accountancy. This is the only proposition that will
get Australia cracking.
J: Alright, if I can take you to the one-off payment at
between, I think I'm right in saying, $ 100-200 for
families which really says, OK, we know you are
hurting, isn't this what some commentators have most
feared, back to the old Hawke bout.
PM: But in a program of $ 2.3 billion, it is $ 300 million.
It's 0.3 of the 2.3. And why is it there? It's there
so that at early we can get a stimulus in the economy,
because the rail projects and the road projects will
take 6 or 9 months to build up. We don't want to lose
6 or 9 months. So we want to give money to the people
who can use it best, and that's families.
J: Now unemployment is, by your own admission, will still
stay at 10 per cent but coming down. But how many jobs
will you create, meaningful jobs from this package?
PM: In the period, about 880,000, in the forecast 4 year
period 880,000.
J: That's almost close to the million that was achieved
last time.
PM: Well, we achieved a million in about, I think, about 3
years last time, 3 1/ 2 years.
J: Now, if you can't get that 4 per cent growth, and if
something goes wrong with the indicators, you've had it:
haven't you?
PM: Well, we'll get the growth this coming year, which is
the year that matters to the economy, and of course,
politically matters to the Government. 4 3/ 4 is a
conservative assumption for an economy this well off
coming out of recession, low inflation, low interest
rates. Coming out of the last one we had 10 per cent
inflation. Coming out of this one, we have got 1 1/ 2
per cent.
J: And you think the back, as you put it, the stick of
inflation will stay broken?
PM: With the wage arrangements we have concluded with the
ACTU, yes. But it will not stay broken
J: Can you tell me more about that, Prime Minister, by the
way.
PM: Well, the ACTU are saying we will look at, we'll make
the inflation rate of our trading partners, our yard
stick in wage claims, if you give us a reasonable tax
environment. That's the sort of proposition that's
been put. That's what we'll accept. But of course,
there'll be no reasonable wage environment with the GST 
doubling the inflation rate. Dr Hewson by his own
admission, doubled the inflation rate. So, that means
interest rates go up, the economy is slower. In this
economy, low inflation, the budget in good fettle, a
high profit share coming as soon as the economy picks
up, the place will grow quickly.
J: Are you going to attract back all those ALP traditional
supporters whom you've lost?
PM: Well, I think, this program is very much a traditional
Labor program. It's building Australia. It's the kind
of reforming building which Labor was always famous
for. A national rail highway, a national electricity
grid, taking over Commonwealth funding of technical and
further education, an international airline policy, a
change to the depreciation to make the private economy
stronger. These are all the things, and of course,
support for families, Labor market reforms. This is
very much a Labor package. But a Labor package at the
right time to pull the nation together and not divide
it, not to cut it up, interest group against interest
group, under some sort of Thatcherite ' survival of the
fittest' strategy which Dr Hewson has adopted.
J: Well, perhaps you are treading this careful line, you
say it is very much traditional Labor but also you give
them the banks that they wanted, there is every
indication that business is going to be pretty happy.
What about the markets?
PM: Well, I think the markets will probably expecting a
package of about $ 3 billion and this is And a
lot of it is on long term productive things, like the
Brisbane-Sydney-Melbourne-Adelaide railway line, like
ring roads around the capital cities. Like support,
infrastructure programs for schools. These are things
which will be there in 5 years from now and in 20 years
from now. In other words, it is not going up in a puff
of smoke, so I should think the market would regard
this as responsible and sensible.
J: And the micro economic reform that business has been
screaming for?
PM: Well, it has taken all the big ones on, Rail, road,
ports, airlines, we are knocking over electricity, we
are knocking over that micro agenda as we knocked over
the macro agenda.
J: Prime Minister, on a completely different subject, the
British Press has gone rabid about you and your
welcoming address to the Queen in Parliament a few days
ago. Are you a rabid republican or a realist setting
up the changing conditions facing Australia and
Britain? 
PM: Well look, I have got the Age editorial here, it said
this today, and it's very sensible, it said, ' when the
Prime Minister addresses the Queen, he addresses her as
the Queen of Australia, and its entirely appropriate
for him to articulate independent Australian
attitudes'. I was not addressing the Queen as Queen of
Great Britain, I was saying to her, we've changed, we
are in a. changing part of the world. We are in a part
of the world that's growing rapidly and we are more
independent of Europe, but she is the Queen of
Australia, our Queen. So of course, in that sense, it
is not understood by the editors of the British tabloid
press. An editor of a British tabloid newspaper is a
particularly low form of human life, and no doubt we
will see other similar distorted headlines from them.
J: OK, I hope they don't see a tape of this program, but
Prime Minister, thank you very much indeed for coming
on to Dateline.
PM: Thank you.
ENDS 



WU 0-ww w w w w w 1 26/ 92
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP CANBERRA, FEBRUARY 26 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I think the Statement will be a turning point in our
history. It's about bringing on recovery in jobs but
it's also a Statement which will demonstrate very aptly
the vast: gulf between the Labor Party and the Liberal
Party, between the party of believers, the party of
builders, the builders of hope, the party of the big
national projects, the party which has always pushed
Australia forward. Between the Labor Party and the
Coalition it wants to tax the food you put in your
mouth and the clothes you put on your back. I mean,
that's what the vast difference will show tonight.
J: Mr Keating, how can people take much comfort when
unemployment is still expected to rise at least in the
short term?
PM: Wait and see what the Statement says, but we will be
back to a recovery and will see the 1990s come as a low
inflationary period of growth for Australia.
J: Do you concede you got the Murphy analysis wrong
yesterday?
PM: I'll handle that in the House today.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT Oil THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL BONGIORNO, FEBRUARY 26 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
BONGIORNO: Thanks Mr Keating for coming.
PM: Good Paul.
BONGIORNO: The big question seems to be tonight is where's
the money coming from?
PM: It's coming from a hard won, tight fiscal
position which this Government took eight years
to put into place. All those huge structural
surpluses that I produced in the late 1980s are
sitting there, that structure is sitting there
now so when private spending is down, when
private investment is down the sensible thing to
do is to lift public spending, public investment
uip. And we can do that and bring the budget back
into surplus by 1995.
BONGIORNO: But how do we re-pay that $ 2.3 billion?
PM: I: t will be repaid by the growth coming off the
economy, as receipts pick up, as growth picks up,
as employment picks up, the budget swerves back
iLnto surplus and basically cover those funds. In
other words it's the time when other people are
not spending in investment, now's the time for
-the Government to be spending in investment and
particularly on long-run investments like the
rail system, the ports, the highways, the roads,
-the electricity grid. They're all the long term
things that can only come from government
investment.
BONGIORNO: But haven't we seen here tonight Paul Keating
' the gambler'? You're taking a big risk, even on
your own projections three years out spending and
demand will be powering along and imports, for
example, will be well ahead of exports. To deal 
-2
with that in the past you had to up interest
rates.
PM: You saw what the Treasury said in tonight's
document, that they expect the debt to stabilise
in about 1994-95, that this is no gamble. It's a
$ 2.3 billion package in a budget of $ 100 billion.
It's a package from a budget which has got a
structural surplus underneath it. There is no
gamble, this is just a sensible thing to do and
it's part of a plan, it's a four year plan to
stimulate growth, employment, private investment
and public investment, a partnership between the
public and the private sector. And two years
from now we provide tax cuts to Australians to
take their tax rate to 30 per cent while the
budget goes back to surplus, and 30 per cent
without Dr Hewson's 15 per cent consumption tax.
BONGIORNO: See, the suspicion is that the Statement tonight
is; to get you over the hump of the next election,
that it's really very cleverly politically aimed.
PM: Well it's got to get Australia over the hump. We
don't want to be in a recession for any longer
than we need to be and it's about getting us over
that. It's a quarter of a century since we've
invested in the rail system, we need a national
rail highway, it's absurd for it to be breaking
up highways with trucks carrying bulk
commodities, we need a sensible airline system,
we need ring roads around the cities. These are
things that are needed and now is the time to
build them when the economy needs activity.
BONGIORNO: On your own projections tonight we still have
unemployment running above 9 per cent for the
next three years. When will Australians begin to
feel confident again about their jobs, about
employment?
PM: Once the trend is going down. It's the trend
that matters, I think, rather than the rate.
It's now at about 10.3 10.4 per cent, we expect
it to go 10 9.5 8 and at the end of the
period, four years, to have a 7 in front of it.
BONGIORNO: Why is it that you gave families a boost in
spending, the $ 125 boost to the family allowance?
What about the pensioners, they've been hit very
hard by the recession?
PM: Pensions have been adjusted for inflation fully
right through the 1980s, but wages were cut less
than the inflation rate. So it's tax payers with
children who have had less support than the full
adjustment for inflation under the pension
system. This is about recovery. We've tried to 
3
see how we could spend quickly, put some stimulus
into the economy quickly before the rail and road
projects build up, and we can make this payment
in April and it will go to tax payers with
children-families, it will go to where it's
needed. If it was Dr Hewson he would have thrown
it up the top end of town, it would have been the
high income tax payers or the wealthy companies.
We haven't done that. We've given it to the
people who need it most.
BONGIORNO: Is this a vote winner? Can it help you win the
next election?
PM: First of all it is a job winner. It's a plan for
Australia, it's not a miserable change of the tax
system from income to expenditure, taxing the
food you put in your mouth and the clothes you
put on your back, it's not that. It's a typical
Labor thing, it's building Australia, it's doing
all the big projects like we always have the
rail system, the roads, the ports, the airlines.
We're the only ones that ever done these things,
Paul, and it's obviously a plan with vision and
with vista and it gets beyond the miserable
accountancy of Dr Hewson's tax package.
BONGIORNO: OK, thanks very much Prime Minister. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
7.30 REPORT WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, CANBERRA
26 FEBRUARY 1.992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Well Prime Minister aren't you being too modest, you
talk of $ 2.3 billion but when you look at the revenue
forgone and everything over the full four years it is
$ 16.6, surely?
PM: It is a cyclical kick to the economy, a stimulus the
economy, which then basically is spent over $ 2.3
billion over this financial year and next financial
year and then tails off, and as the economy picks up as
receipts grow, as employment grows, as business grows,
as profits grows, as unemployment benefits recipients
come off the Budget, as the Budget strengthens we pay
tax cuts. And it is a four year program at the end of
it we have the Budget back into surplus. We have tax
cuts at 30 per cent without Dr Hewson's 15 per cent
consumption tax. We have one of the biggest national
infrastructure programs in our history, rebuilding the
rail system.
PL: Which a few years ago, you were telling us all that we
had to realise we were a poor country we couldn't
afford all these flash infrastructure projects.
PM: In the ' 80s when private investment was running very,
very strongly, the thing to do was to pull the public
sector back, which we did, we produced these large
Budget surpluses. But because we did all that hard
work, we did what the Americans didn't do for instance,
that is pull the big deficit into surplus in the good
times. Now with a recession we are able to open them
out to provide some of the stimulus that we need, and
yet not leave it to lay there in the Budget, to see it
wash out and see the Budget come back to surplus. 
PL: Well let's separate this discussion a bit in terms of
the short term kick-start things and the longer term
things. I mean your most immediate thing is that $ 317
million to families. Why did you decide a one-off gift
like that?
PM: Well, because the infrastructure programs of rail,
ports, roads, will start from now, but they will only
build up really this year. So for most of this year we
won't get a stimulus unless we can find a way of
injecting one quickly into the economy. And the best
way to inject it, is into people who can use it
families including of course the unemployed, but all
families, and there is particularly a long going
program there for low income families. But that
stimulus will lift the activity and spending, profile
the economy before and during the time when we build
the rai. and road programs up.
PL: Is it a form of Paul Keating saying I am sorry for the
recession?
PM: No, it i~ s a sensible thing to do. But it is spending
it on the right people. I mean, if it had of been Dr
Hewson hie would have thrown it to the top end tax
payers, who would have thrown it to the big companies.
We have given it to the people who can use it
families, tax payers with children.
PL: Alright, and the family car about $ 800 cheaper as of
tomorrow?
PM: Yes, I -think we have been producing the same number of
cars this year as we were twenty years ago. We have
got a car fleet, which on average is 17 years old.
PL: Yours isn't too new is it, your old Mercedes?
PM: Well I am part of the same syndrome. So this is to
encourage people to buy new cars, to give a fill-up to
our biggest manufacturing industry and a change. Make
travel safer, make the environment cleaner with lead
free cars, and to kick that again, another sector of
commerce along.
PL: What do you think it is going to do to car sales? You
must have some ideas what it is going to do?
PM: Well obviously, it is a substantial saving, and it is
permanent. It is a permanent change to the car
industry.
PL: Is it going to produce sales though? Can you be sure
of that?
PM: I am pretty sure. When the car industry executives put
advice to us about a change in tax rates, that was
their certain belief. 
PL: Industry assistance and development, that's fairly
modest isn't it? I mean $ 31 million this year, $ 125
million next year.
PM: The biggest industry assistance is the revolution to
depreciation rates for business. We are changing the
depreciation schedules so that a twenty year asset, can
now be written off in seven and a half years, or a
forty year asset in fifteen years.
PL: Which encourages me as a factory owner or company
director to go out now and buy that new lathe?
PM: Well, you will have the benefit of greater cash flows
earlier because of the faster write-off, and it is the
major change in the Statement for business. But of
course as you say there are many others. I mean, we
are going to produce by a tax change, private provision
of public infrastructure. We are producing equity
development funds for small and medium business that
can't get equity, they can get debt, but they can't get:
equity, they can't get it on the stock market and they
can't get it anywhere else. We have got a quite novel
concessionary change in the tax system for that, and
also for big projects. So, this is a partnership
proposition. Government and business, moving forward
cooperatively, discursively, cooperatively to produce a
recovery and change Australia.
PL: And we end up in ' 92-' 93 with an $ 8 billion deficit, in
' 95-' 96 we are suddenly $ 2 billion in surplus. How do
you perform this?
PM: Because as the economy grows, the receipts are very
sensitive to pick up in growth profits and employment.
If GDP kicks so do Budget receipts. And we expect GDP
to change from zero, that's growth in the economy, to
change from zero this year to 4 3/ 4 next year, and to
on-go. So we are running at that sort of rate through
the early ' 90s. Those estimates are put together by
the Treasury, the Reserve Bank.
PL: The team that brought us the Budget estimates for the
last five years.
PM: Well look in the 1990s we had huge growth, it was all
forecast. The Budget is very sensitive to growth. If
you get the growth, the revenue that's why this is
a responsible package, it is a cyclical, it is a cycle
to stimulate the economy, which then drops away and the
Budget comes back into surplus. 
PL: But I mean we look at these forecasts you have got in
here going up to ' 95-' 96, I mean surely they are so a
wish and a prayer by then that we should take them with
an enormous grain of salt?
PM: Well did you take Dr Hewson's with a grain of salt,
which were not done by the Treasury, or the Reserve
Bank, or the Department of Finance? I mean the fact is
it is possible to give a reasonable indication of
activity levels that far out.
PL: I wish they had been that good in the last few years,
Mr KeatLng.
PM: Well they were good in the main on growth, but the boom
of course of ' 88-' 89 was simply too great.
PL: And wages and inflation? What's the ingredients here?
PM: Well as the Party which broke the back of inflation
from 10 per cent for nearly twenty years, to now 1 1/ 2
per cent, we're not going to be letting that particular
genie out of the bottle again. So unlike the Liberal
Party, unlike the confrontation of Fightback, unlike
the accountancy of the GST switch, we are not going to
try to abolish trade unions, we're sitting down and we
have a commitment from the trade unions that they won't
claim, that their wage claims will be consistent with
keeping our inflation rate and our trading partners
average.
PL: You got that commitment a few days ago, did you?
PM: I did. And we had it through the
PL: Is this you on the phone to Bill Kelty?
PM: No, this is a meeting with the Wages Committee, with
the whole 40 of them. As it always was, and that's why
we have got a 1 1/ 2 per cent inflation rate. It is
worth remembering, Paul, out of the last recession when
Mr Howard was Treasurer and Dr Hewson was his adviser,
inflation rate was 10 per cent on the way out. On the
way out this time it is 1 1/ 2 per cent. The reason for
that is the Accord and the trade unions and we will do
it again. But this time part of that sympathetic
environment is tax cuts for low to middle income tax
payers, that 30 per cent tax rate, as I say without
taxing the food you put in your mouth, or the shirt you
put on your back, or your dry cleaning or anything
else.
PM: You reckon this will win you two elections on the trot? 
PL: Well what this will do, this is a policy where we have
sat back: and said what's best for Australia? Dr Hewson
has sat back and said how can I be different to Labor?
I will have a consumption tax. That's not what we have
done, we have sat back and said what's best for
Australia? How can we induce a recovery? How can we
look after the Budget? How can we invest in the long
term? How can we re-modernise the railroad, the roads,
the ports, the airlines, how can we do all these
things, and give Australia a long term productive
focus? That's what this is about.
PL: Prime Minister thanks very much. I know you have got a
lot of other commitments so we will let you go now.
PM: Thank you Paul.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 19/ 92
EMBARGOED 7: 20PM 26 FEBRUARY 1992
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING MP, AND THE PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES, THE HON
NICK GREINER MP
GLEBE ISLAND BRIDGE
Following today's announcement by the Prime Minister of
the broad range of transport and other infrastructure
initiatives which will benefit the State of New South
Wales, the Prime Minister and Premier Nick Greiner, today
announced that work on the Glebe Island Bridge can
immediately move ahead with a view to completion of the
project by 19395.
In light of -the implications of the Economic Statement
initiatives for the longer term road funding
responsibilities of the Commonwealth and the States, New
South Wales ' has been assured of the fiscal capability to
proceed with the 4 year Glebe Island Arterial Project.
The Prime Minister also re-affirmed that the Commonwealth
would contribute $ 65.85 million to the Project in the
life of the existing Commonwealth roads program which
ends in 1993.
In making the announcement, the Premier explained that
the new bridge, which will remove a major bottle-neck in
traffic flow between Sydney and its western environments,
will carry six lanes of traffic. It will have an overall
length of 800 metres and a main span of 345 metres across
the entrance; Blackwattle Bay. The bridge deck is to be
suspended by cable from two towers of 120 metres height.
Mr Greiner announced that the contract for construction
of the bridge will be awarded to Baulderstone Hornibrook
in conjunction with the French company, Campenon Bernard.
The tender price is approximately $ 69 million in 1990
dollar terms. The total Glebe Island Arterial Project,
which is approximately 2 kilometres in length, will have
a final cost, in out-turn dollars, of approximately $ 160
million. 
2
Work on the site will commence virtually immediately,
with the creation of new jobs expected to reach
approximately 200 by the end of the year. An additional
800 jobs are likely to be created off-site by the new
Project. The Prime Minister and the Premier look forward to the
benefits that this link, together with the City-West
Link, will provide as an east-west route from the City to
the F4 at Concord. The Glebe Island Bridge will also
enable better access to Sydney's inner ports and is an
important project in the context of the infrastructure
required for the Olympic Games in Sydney.
Canberra 26 February 1992 



2.1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, FEBRUARY 26 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'll just say a few introductory things. One Nation Is
basically a four year plan for Australia, it's a
Statement which I think will lead to a turning point in
our economic history and our social history, it will
help us bring on a recovery to lift employment to deal
with the problems of jobs, the creation of jobs and it
will continue to produce a gulf as it has, as to date
has been the case, but I think an even wider gulf
between what the Government stands for and what the
Coalition stands for, that is the Party which has
reformetd Australia, taken it out of the Rip-Van-Wrinkle
years of Menzies that made Australia an international
place and which will continue to do that, that is, the
Party which has reformed and built Australia will prove
tonight: it is going to continue to go on doing just
that. So I think it will contrast with basically the
sterilEi approach the Liberal Party has taken, but most
importantly what it does, it will accelerate the
recovery, it will bring Australia back into growth, it
will bring it back into growth in a cyclical sense, in
the cycle, but improving the long-run structure for the
productive base of the economy. So it has a lot of
long-run portents and will set Australia up well for
the 1990s. So I'll take questions from there.
J: Prime Minister what extent do the tax cuts you
foresha~ dow merely off-set bracket creep?
PM: Well thie important thing about the tax cuts is that
Labor has in the 1980s given back more than bracket
creep, more than bracket creep, but certainly fully
off-set: bracket creep. In other words the real
incidence of taxation wasn't rising. But we did it in
the context of precuring agreements about real wage
restraint and producing lower inflation and as you know
the tax cuts of 1989 are one of the principle reasons
why we now have a low inf lation rate. In part of our
discussions with the ACTU, while we are not in a wage 
-2
tax trade-of f like we were in the 1980s where we had a
reductiLon in nominal wage outcomes in return for taix
cuts for particular people within certain decile income
groups,. what this is is creating a tax environment
which will be conducive to the maintenance of sensible
wage outcomes. So it does two things. It will help us
maintaiLn that low inflation performance which, of
course,. will be a great boon to Australia and as well
as that, it will provide an incentive for a great
categor7y Of tax payers with a lower marginal rate of
tax, that is, an incentive to earn more, to do more
overtime for instance, create more income without
loosing it at the marginal rate step of now 38%
reducing that to 30. But I make the point it is
it's a structural change, it's 30% but need I hasten to
add without a 15% string attached, without a
consump~ tion tax attached to it.
J: Is it as off-setting as
PM: It off-* sets the bracket creep in the period.
J: Mr Keat~ ing, don't you loose the leverage that tax cuts
will give you to bargain with unions?
PM: Well we needed a lot of that leverage when we had
inflation running to 7-8% t. It'Is very hard to run a
system at but it'Is much easier to run a system
with low inflation and because we are now moving into a
decentralised wage structure where productivity
opportunities will present themselves, the most
important thing is to shift from aggregate wage
outcomes to inflation so the guiding light in looking
at our wages system and affordability of wages will be
keeping our inflation rate comparable without trading
partners. That will be the yard stick which governs
what the Government says before national wage hearings,
in its relations with the ACTU and the unions and in
relaticon to taxation.
J: Mr Keating, is the message from the unemployment
forecasts that the worst is over, it was not quite as
bad as you thought and it's going to decline in time to
come?
PM: Well we have got unemployment coming back to 10% in
1992-93 and then to 7 3/ 4 in 1995-96, but of course
with very high participation rates, with very high
participation rates. I mean if we were looking at the
participation rates of the early 1980s and comparing it
to these we would have much, much lower unemployment
numbers.
J: Prime Minister, if that is the case then why is it that
things like JobSearch, NEWSTART, Jobstart etc are
being cut back? 
3-
PM: No, JobStart is being increased, Jobtrain is being cut
back, only one. Because we didn't think there was any
point in training people for jobs that were not there.
There : Ls a net addition to those labour market programs
which are all described in the document.
J: Just looking at the document here it shows 3 specific
figures that are a reduction
PM: No, there it is, JobStart 15, $ 85M, 10; Jobtrain is a
re-education; Jobskills $ 30M, $ 15M extra, and when you
look at apprentices, the assistance retention of
indenture to apprentices is $ 3.2M in $ 1.6 in 1991-92,
$ 3.2 in 1992-93, and of course need I say that in terms
of vocation training it's a total revolution in
education here. A $ 720M program over three years to do
for TAFE what the Commonwealth did for universities
back in the 1970s and 1980s and so these vast retention
rates which Labor has presided over giving children the
opportunity of completing, in very large numbers,
secondary school has been not only accommodated now in
many p: laces in higher education and universities, but
as well. as, that now in future in technical and further
education, a national system of technical and further
education.
J: Mr Keating, high retention rates and also the fact
that in the first year Dr Hewson 50,000 people off
the dole queues, is it f air to say that you are using
he training system to disguise the level of
unemployment?
PM: I don' 11: think you can say the revolution in education
and whatever else you can call it, I think you can ca] ll
it that is about basically changing the unemployment
numbers. I mean high cynicism I understand but that is
getting beyond the pale.
3: What convinced you that Australian families deserve
this very generous one-of f allowance gesture and what
would you like them to spend it on
PM: Well it: is' up to them but I think that the categories
of people who will receive it, Australian families will
spend it generally. And the point of it is that it can
happen early, it can happen in this budgetary year',
it's not a matter of waiting until the next Budget. So
before the profile of the stimulus comes from the
public works programs the railways, the roads, and all
the Other great initiatives which are there which will
build up through the course of calendar 1992. This, in
terms of fiscal stimulus, will provide a much earlier
profile to that rise. And so it is going to the people
who I think need it and spend it, that is, families and
of courcse, for low income families it is on-going.
There : Ls a $ 250 million a year on-going expenditure
under the Family Allowance Supplement. So there's two
parts, there's a family allowance payment which is one-
-4
off and the one-off of course doesn't have a cyclical
it's a cyclical matter of its essence. There is no ongoingness
there on the Bugdet in 1993-94, but the vast
part of it is a permanent $ 250 million improvement.
J: Mr Keating, the financial markets have been skimpish
lately and the dollar has been bouncing around a bit,
do you see this package steadying the markets?
PM: Don't ask me to pour over them. I don't know what they
think of this. I can only say this, I said we would do
a responsible and a constructive thing. This brings
the surplus, this produces a fiscal surplus in 1995-96.
It has a cyclical profile to the spending and it drops
away and as the economy recovers and the receipts
recover, as the outlays drop away, as you see in those
profiles, that the Budget balance goes from a peak of
$ 8 billion, dropping back to $ 4.6 billion deficit, then
$ 600 miLllion and a surplus of $ 2 billion. So, I don't
know. I think the financial markets would regard that
as sensible, a sensible thing to do for a recession and
a recovery, and a sensible thing to do f or the long
run.
J: Prime Minister, what do you say to Opposition criticism
that the growth projections to deal with this deficit
are too heroic by half?
PM: I don't think they are heroic at all. We'Ive got in
there for GDP 4 and 3/ 4 per cent. We had, I think, In
' 83-4 Something like 6 per cent growth in that year.
And if you look at this economy compared to the economy
then, we've got a much better position with the profit
share in the economy, we are much better aligned in the
factor shares, you don't have these huge structural
deficits overhanging the economy, you've got a stimulus
there coming from, for a start, a competitive exchange
rate and more recently, depreciation, the obvious
changes; which are going to occur from a change i~ n
international trading conditions and the breaking of
the drought, and stocks. So I think it's very
conservative, 4 3/ 4 is a conservative number.
J: Mr Keating, in this 4 year plan, in the scenario you
don't say anything about what will happen to foreign
debt over that period. Won't it be higher in the end
and have an effect on the current account?
PM: No, on page 126 you'll1 f ind some text there on the
current: account. It says, talks about it coming back
to 3 3/ 4. This would be consistent with a slight drift
upwards in the ratio of net external liabilities to
GDP. As a ratio of debt to equity financing however,
returns: to'levels which existed prior to the excessive
leveraging of the late 1980' s, the net external debt to
GDP ratio could stabilise or decline slowly. 
J: So you are saying we can sustain the growth we had in
the 1980s which we now have a blow out in debt?
PM: Well obviously we had a lot of leveraging, we had a lot
of equity displacement with debt. They're saying go
back to more normal levels of debt to equity in the
financing of the Australian current account and that
the, to read it to you again that a slight drif t
upwards in the ratio of net external liabilities to
GDP, but then they say the net external debt to GDP
could stabilise or decline slowly.
J: To what extent is that helped by the easing for foreign
investment rules?
PM: Well it: might be because there has been a big shif t
from debt to equity in the last couple of years as you
well know and the easing of foreign investment will
obviousl] y facilitate more equity investment in
Australia and therefore less equity is not attracted to
interest rates where debt does obviously.
J: Mr Keating is the payment to families some sort of
compensation to the bitter blow of the recession?
PM: Well it is obviously a help for families. It's a help
for families and obviously some will do it tougher than
others, but it is a help for families and it's a way of
inducing some stimulus to the economy and I think an
efficient way.
J: pensioners and they are worse off than families.
PM: Well they were adjusted with full indexation right
through the 1980s and wage earners were not.
J: How much willingness do you think there is on the part
of the private sector to fund public infrastructure
projects?
PM: Quite at lot. What is in here is a very innovative
change. As you know there is a very innovative change
in the tax system here for private provision of public
infrastructure, but the key is that it has to be
private. In other words we are not changing those
sections of the Income Tax Act where a business would
claim deductions under these measures while the income
of the business was guaranteed by a state government or
a state instrumentality.
J: How are they going to turn a profit over 30 years?
PM: Well it depends on what they do.
J: Are we going to see toll roads in Australia?
PM: Well you may well do. I mean you will see, you have
seen some already, but you will see I think a number of 
6
projects in the land transport area which can be taken
on as private ventures, and if they are they will get
the benefits of these concessions. I mean it is a very
attractive arrangement for a shift into private
provision of infrastructure. Can I make this example,
if we separate, as we propose here, power generation
from power distribution and we have a grid company
which breaks up the monopolies of the electricity
commissions which is entirely possible under these tax
concessions, the next major power station in Australia
would be privately built, for instance.
J: Mr Keating why did you single out the sales tax on
cars?
PM: Because I think the rate's been too high. We're
producing the same number of cars now we were in the
early 1970s, we have got a car fleet with an average
age of 17 years which is inefficient, which is
polluting the environment, which is costing motorists a
lot in keeping them roadworthy which has obviously
safety considerations about it and is not as a one-off
but as a permanent change for the car industry. We
reduced the sales tax up to the limit where the tax
rate changes. For luxury vehicles we reduced it from
to 15% and hopefully that is about $ 800 on a
Commodore or Ford and hopefully it will stimulate the
motor vehicle industry which needs a stimulus at this
time and hopefully change over time the age profile of
the Australian vehicle industry.
J: When do you look at finishing the wholesale sales tax?
PM: Well it has this virtue that you can actually decide
whether cars, passenger motor vehicles, the cars most
people buy are at 20 per cent and whether the luxury
cars are at a higher rate.
J: suggest you might wait to the August Budget?
PM: Well a Budget is a Budget, you can do all those sorts
of things, this is about a recovery, a stimulus and a
recovery a continual change though on the production
side of the economy through such things as
depreciation, the vast change I mean the big business
change in here, a vast change of depreciation
arrangements, other innovative changes and the
rebuilding of all the infrastructure so long left
neglected. It's a quarter of a century since we put
investment to rail, a quarter of a century and, of
course, it is always Labor that builds the big
projects, it's always Labor that takes the lead and
it's Labor again which is going to give Australia a
rail highway, it's Labor again which will give
Australia a national electricity grid, it's Labor for
the first time to give Australia an internationally
competitive system. 
-7
J: And will this alone win you the next election?
PM: I think it contrasts, does it not, with the sterile
accountancy of Dr Hewson's package.
J: Mr Keating with going to win the election campaign
with 10% unemployment and $ 80 million debt economy
to turn out right by 1995-96, what can you say to the
Australian people
PM: If you have sat here for any years we have got a
structural budgetary position which is so tight that
once the unemployment starts to drop back and the
receipts start to pick up the budget swerves back into
surplus. I mean we didn ' t sit there for seven and a
half years cutting structural budget outlays to achieve
other than a very tight budgetary system at the moment
which has expanded because of the natural stabilisers,
the recession, but which will close back. So it is not
a matter of having any f aith, I mean that is simply a
mechanical matter a mechanical matter, but I think the
more general point is the point, I mean the Opposition
are about shifting the tax base from income to
expenditure, that's essentially it. This is about
continuing the micro changes, it will not change the
travelling time for freight between Sydney and
Melbourne, to pay you tax on your food, your clothing
or your dry cleaning, it won'It change that and there's
nothing in Fightback that changes. It won't change the
interface between the ports and the railways, there's
nothing in Fightback which will change that. The sort
of proposals we have here for electricity or the
airline system or to give our children a change of a
decent technical education. I mean the breadth and
magnitude of this package, the imagination of this
package: compared to the accountancy, the sterile
accountancy of a shift in tax f rom income to
expenditure and of course the damning review which its
principal econometricists paid it to say it will
actually reduce GDP. It will actually increase
unemployment, it will actually increase inflation.
Compare that to this!
J: How did you come up with a figure of $ 800,000?
PM: Well that'Is part of our modelling. It's simply about
where wre see employment growth and we've got $ 150,000 I
think in 1991-92, $ 200,000 in 1992-93 and about a
quarter of a million each year thereafter.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well : Lt's the package overall I think which is
important, the impact on the economy, the depreciation,
all of the other things. They have to in the end be
about growth, GDP. The linkage between employment and
GDP is pretty clear. 
8-
J: In your 3 projections you've got demand outstripping
supply iLn a big way, imports up on exports, GNE higher
than GDP
PM: Paul ( Bongiorno) we have trained you well you would not
have known, you poor old thing, what GNE was. It
gladdens my heart. You have warmed me up, you could
have paid me no greater compliment.
J: how will we get better results after the 1994-95
election without slamming on the brakes, higher
interest rates?
PM: What will happen is that, the economy will respond to
the investment. It will respond to a higher profit
performance. It will respond to more demand. It will
respond to a better depreciation schedule and demand
for investment will rise. Therefore that will be
reflected in imports. But it will taper off, obviously
after that surge and we have it tapering off through
the periods. We have been very conservative, I think,
estimates on exports. Quite conservative on exports
and if that's the case, we will do better. We will do
better on the merchandise trade balance than we've got
here. But even here we have got the current account
coming back to 3 3/ 4 per cent.
J: But will it taper off without the use of interest rate
cuts? Will we revert to the late
PM: Where are you? Oh Don ( Woolford).
J: in the late
PM: Well, in the late ' 80s was a period of unprecedented
boom in. credit growth. 20 per cent a year for the last
couple of years by a global financial market system
which was funding credit often unwisely, chasing asset
prices around the world. I mean that's the sort of...
We had demand running at twice the product growth.
This is not the case here. So that sort of monetary
regime which we employ, to try and pull our demand, our
spending back in line with our production, is not the
sort of.-thing which is in here.
J: Mr Keating do you have the ( inaudible)?
PM: Well, i~ t says the Government wants the economy to grow.
It's providing a stimulus to help it grow. We've got
low interest rates now feeding into the system. We've
got depreciation and a competitive exchange rate
feeding into the system, a competitive exchange rate
system which we've had since 1983. If we are comparing
this to other recessions, we have got those changes.
We've ( jot the corporate sector now running very tight.
The first shift in volume will go straight into
profits. Straight into profits, so the profit share
will rebound quite sharply. I think all these things 
9-
are great boosts of confidence and we are doing the
work. We're not asking the private sector to spend,
even though we do that through the depreciation
allowance. We're doing it ourselves. We're going to
spend. We're the people who are going to remodel the
railway lines and build the ring roads, and do these
other we are doing it ourselves. So all of that
kick-start, that stimulus, will go into the economy and
I think it will be a bull point for conf idence and it
should be a bull point for consumer confidence. And we
are helping consumer confidence by putting money into
families who we think will spend it.
J: Does your strong confidence in inflation mean that you
have got the unions in your pocket now?
PM: Well, it is not a matter of having the Unions in my
pocket. The Unions have been the most cooperative
institution in the 1980s haven't they? They took
reductions in real wages, they saw inflation come down.
But what we are doing is we are keeping the place
together. The difference between us and the
confrontation of the Liberal Party is we're bringing
together a partnership between Government and business,
between Government and Unions, to maintain sensibly a
hard won victory over inflation. We're not doing as
Dr Hewson is doing, doubling the inflation rate with a
per cent tax on everything people spend and consume.
We are not taking that risk. We're keeping inflation
low. We've broken the back of a 20 year problem and
we're keeping it broken and the Unions have the good
sense, -and the national spirit. We have got a very, we
have had a very responsible trade union movement.
J: Back onto consumer confidence, will there be another
interest rate cut?
PM: There has been an 11 percentage point cut in the system
now and rates are at very low levels and I think, we
are seeing some change in confidence levels in the
recording of confidence levels and we have seen some
improvement, notable improvement in employment since
December. So I think the thing is starting to work. I
think -this document will do it. It will. get it
together. And it will get it together because we're
tackling the problem as a nation, one nation, pulling
it together business, Government, unions keeping
the social wage, keeping the safety net, helping the
families, helping the low paid, helping the people who
will dco things with a depreciation allowance, helping
the people who want to invest in public infrastructure.
It's these common goals which I think will help induce
a better ambience and confidence in the community.
J: Do you think interest rates have reached bottom?
PM: Well, that's what you say. 
10
J: allow foreign banks a licence?
PM: Because I think that foreign banks are likely to
provide competition in the business area, that they'll
be innovative, that they'll cash flow finance, that
they will assess credit risk, probably provide
competition to business lending and the assessment
credito: cs, and I think they'll be a good competitive
force and can be a good competitive force for our big
banks.
J: Treasury-like document. Does this mean that you
are going to hold a much firmer view about Treasury
PM: Where are you from, you keep asking me questions?
J: American Press Association.
PM: The thing is it is not a Treasury document, it's a
social document.
J: But it has the old Paul Keating trade mark from his
Treasury days.
PM: Let me just tell you, it's a social document, a
document of social and economic change, and I think
that's what's important about it. But it is, of
course, laden with innovation and change. And to the
extent that you think I've brought you other things
laden with innovation and change, I'm please you think
this is the case again. Thank you one and all.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH DEAN BANKS, 3AW
27 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF ONLY
J: Good morning. Are you happy with the initial reation
to the package?
PM: Yes I think so. It is a reasonably good response.
People believe, I think, that now is the time for the
Government to lift activity in the economy, to spend some
money, after all we, were very abstemious in the 1980s,
turning these huge deficits into surpluses and when private
spending was strong in the ' 80s we pulled the Government
back. But now private spendings weak, this is now the time
for the Government to spend and do a lot of sensible things
like railways, like roads, like technical and further
education etc.
J: Reaction is all important for you and I suppose
economics is supposed to be a fairly clinical matter that is
easy to work out, yet you have the situation where someone
like Robert Gottliebsen comes out this morning and says that
he basically likes it, whereas your old sparing partner
Terry McCrann comes out and gives you a right old bucketing.
PM: But he always has old Terry, he's to the right of
Ganghis Kahn, but it wouldn't be fun if he wasn't there
would it? That's the point, I mean if he came and gave the
package an endorsement I would have to have a good hard look
at myself.
J: It would be the kiss of death do you think?
PM: The fact is it is a great package for the community in
general. For the business community it is a revolutionary
change, it's depreciation for business, and for the
community in general, apart from the payment to families, it
is rebuiulding a lot of our basic infrastructure and getting
employment from it. That is, in rebuilding the whole
railway system, in doing the ring roads around the capital
cities, in a new electricity grid, all these things are long 
term things for Australia and they can only be done by the
Government, t~ hey can't be done by the private sector. The
private sector is not going to rebuild a Sydney-Melbourne
railway, the private sector is not going to put a standard
gauge rail from Melbourne to Adelaide, it's not going to do
any of those things, so if you get John Hewson on the
program he won't be doing them. Nobody of that ilk
believes, that McCrann doesn't believe it, but we know that
it's crazy to be carrying around our merchandised freight on
trucks between Sydney and Melbourne, crashing into each
other, killing people on roads, breaking up highways, these
are the things that Government should be doing.
J: Prime MiLnister, Dr John Michael Hewson as we dub him,
has been talking about paying by bankcard and also where
there's a will there's a way.
PM: Yes that: is an absurd simile. Look, in the 1980s I
cut, as Treasurer, the public sector back by $ 30,000 million
a year, 7 per cent of GDP, $ 30 billion a year. We have got
a structural surplus laying under the current account
deficit, as soon as the economy starts to pick up it jumps
back into sur7plus and it does under this package by 1995.
So all this stuff about bankcard and that is simply him,
exploiting what he thinks is the ordinary persons lack of
understanding of the national budgetary accounts. The fact
is, this is hialf a per cent of gross domestic product, half
a per cent of the size of the economy. The economy is about
$ 400 billion in size, this is $ 2 billion, it's half of a per
cent. When : 1 became Treasurer, I picked up John Howard and
John Hewson who was his adviser, I picked up their deficit
and it was 9 per cent of GDP, nearly $ 9 billion, about 5 per
cent of GDP. This thing is half a per cent of GDP. Talk
about bankcar: d, he didn't leave me bankcard, he left: me a
mountain of debt to scramble over in the ' 80s and then
tottled off to the private sector and came back when the
dirty work had been completed.
J: We all : Look for deals in this grand economic statement
and we all wonder whether there will be some pay-back to
Victoria. You've no doubt, just done an interview on Sydney
radio with A: lan Jones, is there significant whining from NSW
about special treatment to Victoria?
PM: No, NSW has done exceptionally well. The big projects
are the same in most of the capitals. For Sydney and
Melbourne, for NSW and Victoria the principle project is the
rebuilding of the Sydney-Melbourne railway line. To get the
efficiencies of that up and giving quick access out of
Sydney by re--buiiding a line out of Enfield and re-building
that whole structure at Dynon in Melbourne and for Victoria,
then the standard gauge rail from Melbourne to Adelaide
which will do a great deal for Melbourne as a transport hub.
It's the place where freight can be shifted north to Sydney,
west to Adelaide, west to Perth and south to Tasmania and
what we are doing in this package is giving Melbourne the
chance to really have a new industry, that is a service
industry in freight. 
J: How are you going to sell it, are you going to spend
time now out of Canberra and across the country?
PM: I will be doing a bit of that, but I will also be doing
a bit of this. The good thing about communications is you
can be in Canberra and talk to you this morning here and not
on a telephone, also with voice quality radio.
J: What about this extra couple of hundred dollars that
families are going to get. Is that enough to kick start the
economy? PM: Well what we tried to do, because the big projects like
the ring roads, for instance that ring road around
Melbourne, we are re-building another sector of that between
the Hume Highway and the Calder Highway. Now those sorts of
projects are important for the city of Melbourne, it takes
traffic out of the city, but it takes a while to build it
up. It will take a while now to get that cracking. We
wanted a way of being able to inject some fiscal stimulus
and spending power into the economy early and we thought the
best way of doing that was a payment to families. So
they'll actually start spending and lift consumer spending
and it will lift it early, we can do that in April, whereas
the other things will take more time. So we wanted
something in the spending profile to happen earlier and
that's why we think the best way to do it is to inject some
money into the economy and the best place to do it is into
families. J: This country isn't the only country that is suffering
from a recession, as your old mate Max Walsh observed last
night, aren't you being a little ambitious trying to lead
the world out of recession?
PM: No because we are in the fastest growing part of the
world. We are not sitting waiting on the European community
to tottle along at 2 per cent a year or the United States at
one. We are in the Asia-Pacific which is growing at 6-8 per
cent a year and the other thing is because for 40 years we
were in the Rip-Van-Wrinkle years of Menzies, and as a
result we missed the whole post-war trade in goods and
services. We are now picking that trade up in tourism, in
manufactured exports. In other words we are getting a share
of something that in the past eluded us, so that is why we
can actually grow our merchandise trade account faster than
say a comparable country could if it were part of the
northern hemisphere or part of Europe or part of North
America. We are in the fastest growing part of the world.
So Max ( Walsh) was carrying on last night about how we
shouldn't be spending any money does anyone really believe
with Australia in a recession as we are, trying to get out
of this hole that we should do nothing, do nothing? To
spend $ 2.3 billion in a budget of $ 100 billion? 
4
J: Dare I say it., we're not waiting for the world.
PM: No# we're getting cracking.
J. Were you concerned when they came to you, or somebody
advised you, that this package needed a name called One Nation.
I mean we've had all these names, Priority One, Fightback and
Clever Country and all these....
PM: What I want to do is to give the sense that this is a
partnership proposition between government and business. The tax
concessions there for depreciation are really quite profound.
They put Australia back in the big league, in terms of tax
provisions for business, and the big capital works programs are
also about trying to get employment going and use parts of the
business community to supply those goods and services employed in
those programs. We're also involving the trade unions who have
given a committment to keep Australia's inflation rate at our
trading partners' average. In other words, we're bringing the
place together, One Nation, and that's why I thought, well look
we are bringing i. t I'm not Hewsoi, I'm not saying we'll wipe
unions out, I'm not saying there'll be no national wage cases,
I'm not saying, as he said, don't talk to business, they're only
after handouts. Hewson criticized me for talking to the business
community in those consultations. He's about dividing and
splitting the place up and I wanted to make the point that
Labor's about saying look, we can do this but only do it together
as one nations
j: T. get a strange sense of deja vua, Prime Minister, about One
Nation because it was vaguely reminiscent of the basic approach
that your predecessor took when he took over in 1983, about
ending divisiveness.
PM: I think we proved in the eighties that a country that talked
to itself, where unions talked to government and government
talked to business and unions talked to business and particularly
now with enterprise bargaining, you end up with a better economic
outcome. You see we grew every year for eight years at twice the
pace in the eighties than we grew for the previous eight years in
the seventies. We had five times as much employment growth in
the eighties as we had in the seventies and we had that because
we had a more cohesive society. Consultation, talking to people
and getting their support for things is the way governments
should run the place, and this idea that you're governed by a
press statement, that some Liberal Cabinet sits in a locked up
room then puts a statement in the press boxes and the nation
springs to attention is a bit of old nonsense, because they did
that In the seventies and what we had was 1.8% growth a year
instead of 4.2. And we had three hundred thousand jobs tn seven
years instead of 1.5 million as we did. I mean it just works, it
works. 
J6. Prime Minister, we get locked into all the terminology when
we talk about economic statements. Can you help us with the
estimate,, the forecast and the scenario?
PM; Look what we try and do in these things is we have these
things called national forecasting models and we try and forecast
activity some years out, and what we believe is that we'll have a
reasonably strong pick-up in activity in ' 92-3 of about four and
three quarter percent through the year, and we believe that over
the forecast period which is four years that we'll be able to
produce about eight hundred thousand jobs. In other words,
reducing and not just finding enough jobs to take up new entrants
to the workforce, the school leavers etcetera, but to actually
then cut into unemployment, the pool of unemployment.
J: Your colleague John Dawkins has said that some of the
figures are based on scenario. How close does scenario get t~ o
rbak guess?
PM: There's 9L fair bit of science in all this but these models
picked the turn in ' 84-5. when I first became Treasurer we
forecast a through the year growth phase of six percent and
people said oh this is terribly optimistic Treasurer, thin is
only a bit of greenhorn stuff because you're new in the job. But
the six percent turned up. I mean we're not always correct as
you know. I mean these estimates are done by the Treasury and
the Reserve Bank and the statisticians, in the main. They're not
always correct but they're the best summation that can be put
together. is We were ta: lking about the theatre of the moment earlier this
morning Prime Minister. I mean is it the same for you as Prime
Minister of a nation, the reaction of the newspapers around the
country this morning, those headlines, the critics'
observations. I mean are you happy with the response there?
PM: I think so. From our point of view it couldn't be any
fairer than it:' s been. You'll always have the McCranns of this
world who say don't give anybody an even break, just make it hard
and tough, survival of the fittest, if you haven't got a quid
you're a bludger, if you're not a millionaire you're a bum,
that's the McCrann view of the world, that's fine. I just reject
that absolutely. 
6
3: Well today is sort of make or break day for you in a sense,
isn't it, because you are out selling it today, and I note with
interest that you are doing a television interview tonight with
Derryn Hinch. At which precise moment did you two kiss and make
up? PM: It's not a matter of kissing and making up but just that the
sort of form-at of his program he had in the past has never quite
suited me, the time Blot and everything else and I never did much
with him. But the fact is I'll be pleased to talk to him. The
main thing is, look this is a four year plan for Australia. The
main paint about this is it's Labor doing what it does best and
that is the b. Lg building programs of Australia. It's only ever
been the Labor Party that's built the big railways and did the
big road developments and the ringroads and the rest, that's what
we're doing again, a national electricity grid. The Liberals
gave us a two airline policy and high airfares, we're junking it.
We're letting Qantas fly internally, we're letting the domestic
airlines fly outside of Australia. It's only Labor that picked
up all those kids and gave them university places in the eighties
and gave them places in school. We're going to do it again now
in technical and further education. This is not a miserable
exercise in accountancy like Dr Hewson's Fightback , you know,
changing the tax system from income to expenditure I mean
essentially an irrelevant change. Apart from being an unfair
change, an irrelevant change, because that change is not going to
improve a railway line, it's not going to improve the airports or
the seaports. It can only be done by governments and that's what
this huge package is about.
Jo: Small business in the country has been crying, naturally,
you've made some changes there as far as small business is
concerned. Could you outline those changes as far ats the banks
are concerned?
PM: The ban): change is quite important. At the moment a bank
can't write off a debt unless it sends a business into
receivership. J: Does that apply to all banks or is the Commonwealth exempt
there? PM: No, all banks. Now what this means is that a bank can now
write off a partial debt. So let's say somebody owed a million
dollars for instance, and the bank decided to put them into
receivership and they wrote off the million. What they could do
now is write off half a million and let the business remain
viable. Do yo'u understand? 
J: Yes.
PM: It's quite a big change.
J: And somebody could've been caught in that position by say the
mortgage on their house and the valuation of their property today
to be a lot less which is worrying the bank.
PM: Well it could be that somebody says look this person's been
good, I don't want to sell them up, what we'll do is we'll take a
partial write-off here and we'll keep them going. Because peopl. e
might be able to service half a debt or two thirds of the debt
but they can't service it all. So it's a big change for the
banks and the Treasurer met the banks and said look we're doing
this for you, we want you to do something for the community. We
want you to start opening your pockets up again. We're tired of
this sort of conservatism where you've pulled your head in,
you're turning everybody away, you're withdrawing lines of
credit, cut it out, let's get cracking again, help people that
need help, that's what the banking system's for and we'll hel. p
you. J: Look at you personally, your image. There have been some who
say that the wimp, lever has been operated too strongly on you and
that you in the past have been a mongrel and they wouldn't mind a
bit of the mongrel back.
PM: Well look, the problem I've always had is that in the press
conferences I had over the years as Treasurer it was always ray
job to entertain the'press gallery, crack the funny, to educate
them to do all these things. But the bit that always got run on
television was the -hard comment about the day's balance of
payments or something else. But in my normal life, my dealings
with the Cabinet. with the Caucus, with the media, it's always
been discursive, and I think people are starting to see a little
bit of that as me as Prime Minister and they think there's a
change. There really has been no change, that's as I really am.
They're starting to see now me as I really am and not really
through the ofle minute grab or the thirty second grab on the
monthly balance of payments.
Jt On that note, Minister Ros Kelly broke Cabinet
confidentiality with us not so long ago. She told us that you
responded to her in Cabinet by singing the Billy Joel song
Allentown. 
PM: Oh yes, that's right. When we were doing some of the
railway discussions and we were talking about some of the
investment allowances for the heavy plant and equipment, you
know, some people Bald well let's not forget some of the short
life things like the computer industries and these sorts of
things. I said look it's not all going to be the Billy Joel
number, it's not going to be the field town, it's not going to be
Allentown, you know, and I gave them a little song, you know.
J: Is there a song for One Nation?
Pm: well it doesn't spring to mind but Advance Australia Fair
will do because this is about advancing Australia. This is about
a bit of vista anti vision and faith in the Australian people.
It's not about basically sticking your hand in their pocket,
taxing the food they put in their mouth, the shirt they put on
their back, and of course, look let me just make this point to
you. If you're earning twenty or thirty thousand dollars a year,
everything you earn you spend, so whether you tax the income or
the expenditure is immaterial, you're taxed a lot. But if you're
earning a hundred and fifty thousand a year, you spend maybe
sixty and you save ninety. IHewson's package -is very unfair to
the low paid and a big' break to the high paid and as well as that
he puts on a tax cut. we've got a tax cut in there of thirty
percent for people from twenty and a half thousand to forty
thousand, a thirty percent rate, but with no fifteen percent
consumption tax. we've got the same rate as he has, thirty, but
no fifteen percent consumption tax. so this package is a package
that helps the average person, the person in the street who's
doing it a bit tough or hasn't got a Job or who's got a job, is
paying a higher marginal rate than they ought to be. This
package is about ill that and it's about building a better
Australia, a more competitive Australia.
J: It's also a very political statement in a sense and you've
got to face an election within fifteen months. Do you
realistically suggest that we be popping down to the TAB and
backing federal Labor?. 
PM: Well get on early, that's what I'd say to you. While you're
being offered good odds, hop on. Because look, Dr Hewson's been
terrific while the games's been running his way. For two or
three months he's had a dream ride, but he got a little bit of
criticism in the House on Tuesday from me and he was up yesterday
with a censure motion saying how dare I criticise the economist
who did his Fightback package. The economist who said it will
actually reduce gross domestic product in the economy, it'll
actually increase unemployment, it'll actually increase
inflation, under the three scenarios the economist had proposed
and examined. So what does Dr Heweon do? Get up and move a
censure on me for it. I mean what a shocking thing. I've
actually pointed Ithat his package reduces the size of the
economy, it reduces3 employment and lifts inflation. So as
sensitive as one can be, bang, in he goes with a censure motion
and of course we cleaned him up in fine style.
J: Airight Prime Minister, you've been most generous with your
me this morning. When will you be in Melbourne next?
PM: Well I think tomorrow, I think tomorrow.
J: Alright, we obviously won't be catching up then but maybe
PM: I don't think: so' but I'm there a lot these days. Anyway
thanks for your time.
J: No worries, and you'd be pretty happy with Collingwood's preseason
form.
PM: From what I read l am, yes.
J: Apart from being beaten by the West Coast Eagles...
I'll be seeing Alle= n McAlister soon, he'll bring me up to
J: Alright Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you again.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PAUL J KEATING MP
ABC RADIO 27 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF ONLY
McKEW: Mr-Keating, you've given us $ 2 billion in goodies. Have you suddenly
become Mr Yes. You used to be Mr No?
KEATING: I was Mr No when the private economy was so strong, the only sensible
thing to do was withdraw public spending and any public stimulus. But now the private
economy is so weak-and investment is so weak, the sensible thing is to lift public spending and
public capital works.
McKEW: We had two statements last year: a March industry statement and a job
statement in Novembe-r. On both occasions we were told that recovery was on the way, these
statements would boost confidence. Now, that didn't happen. Why is this statement different?
KEATING: It's got larger fiscal effects, and it's also got, I think, confidence-bearing
effects. Given that a lot of the funding is going to go in long-term infrastructure, in building
a national rail highway, in connecting the ports of the rail system, building roads, highways and
ring roads around capital cities. This is all basic infrastructure for Australia which Australia
now, as a trading country, desperately needs.
McKEW: But is business finally going to get the message: to start investing itself?
KEATING: There is a landmark change to depreciation in the package. It allows
business to write-off plant and equipment more rapidly. For instance, an item of plant and
equipment with 20-year life can now be written off over seven and a half years. Or a
life over 15 years. It gives business a cost of capital regime, a depr-eciation rate competitive
with any country you'd like to compare us with.
McKEW: Yoa made the point in the Parliament the other day that a lot of the
investment in the ' 80s. was frittered away. Where is the guarantee this time around that the 
investment goes into the right places?
KEATING: Because we don't have a global financial market spreading credit around at
per cent a year. The fact of the matter is that banks will be more abstemious with credit.
McKEW: Are you sure about that?
KEATING: Well, they are. They've taken the loss. They've taken the hit. The fact is
though, that businesses now are changing their spending equity in these areas, and if they do
we'll reward them with a very, I think, efficient depreciation schedule and a better cost of
capital regime. What we've got here is a partnership of Government and business together.
Government spending at a time when private spending is low, using a fiscal situation which
it took this Government 8 years of painstaking work to put together. We didn't do as the US
did, and that is not take the big budget deficits back in the good times, we took them to a
strong surpluses. That now gives us the capacity to be able to spend Government money. It
is, after all, only about half a per cent of GDP. I mean, it's not extravagant, but it's sensible
and it's well directed and it's in time.
McKEW: What is ambitious is your forecast for growth: 4.75 per cent by the middle
of next year. How is that going to happen with the recovery so sluggish?
KEATING: I don't think that's ambitious at this stage. After the 1982/ 83 recession,
after John Howard and John Hewson's recession, the first year of recovery we had growth
running at about 6 per-cent or better. 4.75 per cent coming off this economy, the fundamentals
of which are much better: low inflation, a much better budgetary situation where we are seeing
a turnaround in the drought, an improvement in international prices, a change in the stock
cycle, 4.75 per cent is; I think a reasonably conservative estimate.
McKEW: Whiat we're not seeing though is any improvement in the global economy.
If we were to race ahead with that level of growth, wouldn't that cause us problems with a
sluggish global economy?
KEATING: We're not racing ahead. Also, as we pick up, so will they. They'll pick
up over time. But it's worth recording that the recession in Australia is met with the recession
in the US, Canada, Britain and France and the recession in those countries is deeper and the
malaise is greater than Australia.
McKEW: Indeed, you would have heard Alan Greenspan's point in the last 24 hours
or so. He's talked about a very faltering recovery in the US?
KEATING: You can't have the sort of roaring ' 80s, the financial blow-out at 20 per cent
credit growth a year, displacing equity with debt all over the place, with banks lending as they
were; and when it collapses, when asset price inflation collapses to come out the other side sort
of dancing along without any cut in GDP, without any recession. It was not likely to happen.
The thing to do was to get out of it, to get back to recovery. What we have come up with is
a 4-year plan to get us out of recession and into recovery, but built on improving our long-term
infrastructure for our trading future, and at the same time offering tax cuts which take the tax
rate to 30 per cent without Dr Hewson's 15 per cent string attached without the 
consumption tax, while at the same time bringing the budget back to surplus.
McKEW: MT Keating you've talked about one nation. Could I put it lo you that it's
really a divided nation? Ten per cent who are unemployed and the rest who have jobs?
KEATING: Nothing like as divided as it would be with the consumption tax, where the
people on low incomes spend it all, so whether you tax their income or the expenditure is
immaterial, it's all one and the same. And where at the top end of the income system, where
they spend only some of their income, they not only don't wear the burden of the consumption
tax, but they get a tax. cut as well. That's the sort of division that will break Australia up, or
where the Liberal Party tries to wipe out trade unions. This is not what we're about. We're
about a partnership with business. There is no depreciation schedule like this in the Fightback
program. They are in fact going to put the company tax rate up to 42 per cent. There is no
partnership with business there. In fact Dr Hewson said I shouldn't have been talking to
business. He said they were only asking for handouts. There was no discussion with unions
about keeping the inflation rate low. Dr Hewson wants to blast it back towards 10 per cent.
So that's the sort of division. We call this One Nation, because we're pulling Australia back
together again, in a cohesive fight against the recession, back into recovery, using all of these
various areas of the community to come together.
McKEW: But over the next year or more, there's a whole group of people who will
be left out? Your forecasts say that we'll still have 10-10.5 per cent unemployment in the
middle of next year. If that's the case, electorally you're done in, aren't you?
KEATING: No. We're saying 10 per cent providing the direction is right, providing the
direction changes. We've got to stabilise unemployment and bring it down. It's the direction
which matters.
McKEW: 800,000 jobs. When will we see them?
KEATING: You will see them over the forecast period. As you saw over the first four
years of our Government, something like about 800,000 from memory. With these sorts of
growth rates, which Australia can afford, we can basically bring unemployment down.
Employment is entirely sensitive to product, the growth in the economy, the GDP. GDP is up,
employment is up.
McKEW: Aren't you asking people to have a lot of faith, though? You are basicaL~ y
saying re-elect us, say about May next year and the recovery will come later. They have been
hearing this for a long time, haven't they?
KEATING: That's why we've got spending going to families in April this year. That's
why we've got the rail, road and other infrastructure programs beginning as quickly as possible
to get that spending going, so we get out of this recession as quickly as we can.
McKEW: Why not more assistance to specific industries to help promote value-added
production? KEATING: KWEAeT'IvNeG : got a number of quite innovative tax measures here. We've got a 
tax measure for pooled development funds that provide funds for small and medium business,
that can't get equity on the stockmarkets. They just can't get equity privately. As well as that,
we've got a proposal for pre-start industrial arrangements, for large investments which put
together large mineral projects or large resource projects, there is a development or investment
allowance available b4-yond the depreciation rates to encourage them to do that. There is a tax
provision for private provision of public infrastructure. So we will see in the future, private
provision of roads, rail, ports, electricity generation. They are the sort of things that will make
Australia stronger, and one of which actually rewards winners. If you get your major project
together, you get an investment allowance. So rather than picking winners, we are rewarding
winners. McKEW: You have attempted to diminish the Hewson Fightback package as nothing
more than an exercise in accountancy, as you've called it. But when that package was
released, it was seen aLs being very impressive in its boldness and in its scope.
KEATING: By whom, though?
McKEW: I think it was general acclaim.
KEATING: It's. basically a very nasty tax camouflaged, wrapped with a. whole lot of
changes. As you take the changes away, what's left underneath is a rapacious 15 per cent
consumption tax which will raise $ 28 billion. Dr Hewson proposes to give back only a small
proportion of that $ 9 billion in tax cuts.
McKiEW: Mr Keating, I haven't heard anyone as yet describe your package as bold
and sweeping?
KEATING: Well, if you don't think rebuilding the rail highway of Australia isn't bold.
If you don't think opening up the airlines for the first time ever, from the Liberal's two-airline
policy, to let the domestics fly internationally and Qantas fly domestically is not bold, I don't
know what is. If you don't call taking over technical and further education like we took over
universities, to change for our children, to give them an opportunity, bold, I don't know what
is. But if you think it's bold to tax the food you put in your mouth and the shirt you put on
your back, well good ( in you Maxine, if you think that's bold, then you've got a very different
definition of bold than I have.
McKEW: You'd argue then, there's now a much clearer ideological divide between
yourself and the Opposition?
KEATING: Look, Dr Hewson had an opportunity as Opposition leader to stand back and
say, what should I do for Australia? What he stood back and said is what can I do to be
different to Labor? Oh they won't have a consumption tax, I'll have one. That's where he
started. Where we started is we sat back again and said what can we do now? We've made
the big changes to macr~ o economy, let's keep pushing the micro economy in rail, road, ports,
airlines, electricity generation, TAFE, training, it's Labor doing the usual reforms. It's alway's
us doing the big changes. What's he about? Instead of sitting back saying well I can use my
opportunity to make Australia better, oh no, I'll be different, I'll have a consumption tax. I'll
tax the low-paid and give a tax cut to the high-paid. Well, big deal! As I said some time ago, 
it was a tenth-order issue. The first-order issue is jobs, recovery, growth, efficiency, the micro
changes, getting a container between Sydney and Melbourne, crossing the ports, being able to
run a decent tourism industry by flying in and out of Australia, training our kids. They are the
first-order issues, not whether you tax income or expenditure.
McKEW: Things are getting pretty personal between you and John Hewson, aren't
they? KEATING: Not with me. But you can't dare criticise him without him calling me. a
cheat, a liar, a distorter. He's very nasty. He's had such a dream ride for a couple of months,
if you dare criticise any of his things, he reverts to this sort of language, this sort of nastiness.
Now, he camne into the House yesterday with a censure motion of all things, because I dared,
he said, misquote the econometrician who put the modelling together for his GST package.
McKEW: He says you've got your facts wrong?
KEATING: I didn't. I produced the computer print-out of Dr Murphy's model which
showed that Dr Hewson's package actually reduces GDP, actually increases unemployment and
inflation in the 3 scertarios in the model. I gave him the computer print-out. The fact of the
matter is, here it is after labouring so long, his own econometrician says that Fightback actually
reduces GDP, increases unemployment and increases inflation. There is nothing more damning,
and I can understand why he was so hurt. But I can't understand him. He's so sensitive. He's
such a delicate little petal. He had to get in there with a censure motion of all things because
I misrepresented his econometrician. Tut, tut, naughty me. I won't do it again.
McKEW: John Hewson also, the other day, tried to suggest that you had no class,
because as he saw it, you were disrespectful towards the Queen. If he keeps that sont of thing
up, will that rattle you?
KEATING: That was just devastating. It really devastated me, that little comment.
McKEW: But you see what he's trying to do? He said well, we both come from the
same sort of backgrounds, but I have respect. Paul Keating doesn't?
KEATING: He has respect for old traditions but no regard for Australia. No respect for
Australia. McKEW: How can you say that?
KEATING: If lie believes that I cannot say that this is a more independent country, that
we're not tied to Britain's coat-tails, and I say it to the Queen of Australia not the Queen of
Great Britain, as The Age pointed out. If he thinks that we ought to be basically into British
boot-strapping, forelock tugging, and he calls that respect, it's not respect for this country.
McKEW: I think he was talking about being respectful towards the Queen?
KEATING: I was. I said that Australia had changed from a country the Age said
it, in fact I've got the editorial here, it said this: " when the Prime Minister addresses the 
Queen, he addresses her as the Queen of Australia, and it is entirely appropriate for him to
articulate independent Australian attitudes." She's part of our change. She took the royal style
and title of Queen of Australia in 1973. She's part of that independence. She is not here as
Queen of Great Britain. But John Howard is talking about going back to 1950s. The fact is,
if we develop a constitutional museum in Parliament House, John Howard and John Hewson
ought to be the first two exhibits. Back down the time tunnel to the ' 50s to forelock tugging
and British boot-strapping and all that nonsense. Apparently we had some House of Lords
character on " AM" saying if they cut their ties with Britain, Australia will give up all of their
cultural inheritance. Well, Hewson and Howard believe that stuff.
McKEW: What about the British press? They sound as if they want to lynch you?
KEATING: As I said, when you look at a British tabloid editor, it's a particularly lowform
of human life, a British tabloid editor. So let's take no notice of them.
ENDS 1 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
RADIO 2UE WITH ALLAN JONES
27 FEBRUARY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF CO: PY
AJ: He has reinvigourated his Party, that was obvious on
television, but he has thrown down the gauntlet to Dr
Hewson, and injected a feeling amongst Australians that
he must fight to preserve, that there is hope and
vision around, which we need to both generate and
exploit. Put simply he seems to be saying that
currently the private sector is unsure of itself and
therefore weak, so the Government will jump in and fill
up that void' with a massive capital works program.
They will change Australia's road and rail and ports,
and in this way he says, aid exports. He seems to be
saying that he knows that families are in trouble, so
he is going to give them money from April 2 to help
alleviate some of their problems. He seems to be
saying that tourism and the motor vehicle industry are
in strife, so he has provided tax relief for both of
them. He seems to be saying the same things about the
banks. And he seems to acknowledge, though not to the
extent that I would have liked, the crisis in
education. And he said the Commonwealth Government
will fund entirely a $ 720 million program in technical
and further education.
But most importantly he is saying to Australians, and
this is going to be the election issue, you can have
tax cuts but you won't have to pay for it with a 15 per
cent GST. By election time this is going to be a
powerful point as Mr Keating bids to hang onto the job
that Dr Hewson wants. 
But some would say there are omissions, Australia is
more than an economic entity, if we are to become ' one
nation' as he called it last night, our 15-19 year olds
have got to be treated as a critical resource and
University structures may have to change. And if we
are to be one nation you've surely got to be able to
walk the streets and be free from being bashed up or
made victims to violence and drugs. The dissolution
within -our society isn't just a function of the
economic downturn, but a function of emotional,
psychological and attitudinal concern about where
Australia is heading. Are we asking then too much of a
Government to provide the answers to all of this? The
Prime Minister is with me, Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Allan.
AJ: Could I just take that last point first, that we are
not just an economic entity are we? What about the
psychological and attitudinal problem of families, in
relation to violence and drugs and those sorts of
things?
PM: The structure of our family relationships have changed
over the years, there is no doubt about that. One
can't explain the drugs phenomena well, but one thing
is certain, that is if people have gainful employment
it certainly helps their view of the world, it lets
them believe they are part of society, they don't feel
cheated or jilted by society. And I think that is why
it is important, particularly for young people, for
kids to give them an education and find them job
opportunities, and you mentioned TAFE, it is one of the
reasons, you see at the moment we have got now the very
high retention rate in Year 12, we have got about eight
children in ten completing Year 12, and while the
university places have increased enormously in the
not all kids can go to university and that's why
we want to bring TAFE, up at least to give them
technical and vocational training so they have got that
practical training to get a job.
AJ: But you have got a young son that might want to go to
university and you will say to him, work your backside
of f, and suddenly he doesn't make the numbers. Why
couldn't you say, well we will re-orient our spending
priorities of family and pay to send you, because we
think at 21 you might be university material? We still
can't do that yet in Australia can we?
PM: As a private show you mean? Well we have got the Bond
university, it's about our only private university, I
think, but Allan can I just say this, that since about
1987 the Government has created 120,000 university
places. And the average university campus is about
10,000, it is the equivalent of about 12 universities
and we are pretty well on track for the proportion, 
what we believe to be the optimum proportion of' kids
coming into university from school by the year 2000, we
are on track for that. But we are not on track for
technical and further education.
AJ: Well let:' s come to that question, you projected last
night 80) 0,000 new jobs, 4 per cent growth rate and an
$ 8 billion Budget deficit. If there is a critisism
today of' those three figures, it may well that when
consumers and business attitudes change, so to do the
economic: models, lose their ability to predict. What
if somet~ hing comes a stray and one of those doesn't
come to pass, I mean your growth is going to pay for it
you say, but what if the growth rates don't reach those
levels?
PM: Well it is a very conservative assumption. The year
after the ' 82-' 83 recession, we had growth running at 6
per cent over the course of the year. We have got to,
in this forecast, 4 3/ 4, but there are so many more
fundamentally good things around today than there were
in 1983-84, for instance the inflation rate at 1 1/ 2
per cent, not 10. The profit share will rebound
rapidly as soon as volume and manufacturing and
business picks up. We have got a competitive exchange
rate, which we didn't have in ' 83-184. I mean, there
are lots of things there, now which I think will
indicate to me that the economy will respond more
quickly than it did in ' 83-' 84, and therefore 4 3/ 4 is
a reasonably conservative consumption.
AJ: Could I just take two of those points, your arguing
strong points, and they are technically inflation and
interest rates. There are many who are listening to
you now who know that because you have now committed
yourself2 to keeping inflation low, that the value of
some of their assets, either in shares or real estate
or whatever, will be significantly eroded over what it
once was.
PM: Well not: really. You won't see the dash in real estate
prices ' Like we saw between say, 1986-87, but the time
before that was when 1979-80. So what happens is if
you look at real estate prices you have a flash in
prices and then nothing for six or seven years, another
flash up in prices. What you will see I think with low
inflation in Australia is a steady, generally inflation
related increase in prices. So I don't really think
people are going to find deflation as a problem.
AJ: May inf: lation place money in more productive
investments than the real estate industry has often
been responsible for?
PM: Well I -think what will happen is, low inflation, a
proper ' tax system as we now have, and particularly with
these very large depreciation rates for business which
I announced last night, and the banks having being 
burnt with real estate, I think you will see banks
rationing our scarce national savings into the most
productive places in the economy, and that's business,
plant and equipment, the things that will actually
provide the jobs you mentioned earlier, and make people
wealthier. You can't draw wealth from sitting looking
at a building built in the 1960s increasing in price,
it is not doing anything for anybody, and in the end it
doesn't do anything for the country.
AJ: What about interest rates though? Many people
listening to you right now say, he has cut interest
rates, but in so doing that benefits the bloke in debt,
not the bloke like me who has actually saved, he has
actually cut my income in half.
PM: Well the interest rates were up for a purpose, and that
was to cut some of the crazy spending of the late
1980s, -they couldn't always stay up there obviously.
Lenders have not always had such rewards, but I think
what has happened Allan, we have brought interest rates
down at the same time inflation has come down rather
sharply so, there is a bigger impact there for lenders
than there was, but the real rate of interest, that's
the rate of interest above the inflation rate will
remain pretty constant. And the other thing is that
people who are living on fixed incomes, or who are
lending their money will find because of low prices,
they don't need the higher income to survive.
AJ: Can we say thought that we have enough incentive to
save given that spending was one of our problems and
that debt, is one of the issues facing us, is their
enough incentive to save?
PM: Well I think the big disincentive to save was inflation
because it simply ripped away at the value of some
monetary asset, but that has now changed, it is at very
low levels and I think, sort of inflation and the tax
system the reaction will actually now reasonably
encourage people to save, and it means that people are
not going to be desperate about running out to buy a
property because they think the price is going to go
sky rocketing tomorrow morning.
AJ: Dr Hewson would say a consumption tax is a disincentive
on spending and an opportunity for people to exercise
their own decisions about concessionary income.
PM: But they don't. But the fact is it's a discipline on
spending it will lift the price of products, but there
is not et commensurate return in the tax cuts, so
therefore people are going to be worse off, therefore
in my view they won't save. The savings device the
Government is supporting is occupational
superannuation, we have actually got in a way a
mandatory savings system developing now. 
AJ: Now are you going, I know there was nothing said about
superannuation last night, I mean that given that debt
and savings are two of the biggest issues, I mean how
are we going to wind back a debt of about $ 135 billion
which has to be stopped before it can be wound back,
how are we going to do that?
PM: Well, two ways. The first thing is to put a suture on
it by making sure that our merchandise trade account
performs better and that that current account deficit
is lower. As we say in the papers we expect the debt
to stabilise about ' 94-' 95.
AJ: What will it be by then though?
PM: Well it will roughly in the region where it is, maybe a
bit morie. But the other thing about it is that it is
private debt, it is basically debt which is financed
upon projects and businesses able to service it, it is
not sovereign debt of the South Americans variety where
Governments borrowed the money without any basis for it
being serviced. This is borrowed by the private sector
of Australia, on plant and equipment, businesses,
projects etc. And the other thing can I say, we have
got $ 60 billion of private assets now off-shore. So
that $ 130 odd billion of gross debt would be only
had we n-. ot borrowed $ 60 billion to put $ 60 billion of
assets abroad. In other words we are counter-weighing.
PM: Well let's come to that counter-weighing then, the
other counter-weighing is saving. We seem to have a
very significant pool of national savings that you're
building now through compulsory savings, which is
called superannuation. You made concessions last night
for busiLnesses under half a million to be 3 per cent by
July 1 and progressively increasing that to the end of
the decade. but Australians I suppose are saying, if
this is our only national savings is it right that it
should be invested in Texas oil wells and exporting
jobs overseas, why shouldn't there be a commitment, not
volunteering Government intervention here, but it is a
Malaysian scheme which has really regenerated business
by using those funds for the benefit of the
superannuant and for small business.
AJ: Well the savings come from three places, household
savings, corporate savings, that's the savings of
companies, and now superannuation. And we expect
superannuation to be running at about $ 6-800 billion by
the year7 2000, which is about 4 or 5 times our nationa.
debt. So that savings balance and superannuation is
critical. to Australia getting its sovereignty back
completely over that debt situation.
AJ: But you're not going to let the insurance companies and
banks manage that are you? They made a mess of the
other st~ uff. 
PM: Well you have given them a decent old bagging there.
Well what is happening we are seeing a lot of
proliferation of funds management organisations now,
managing that superannuation dollar, but you ask about
money going off-shore, the tweak in the tax system we
have to keep the money invested in Australia is a thing
called dividend imputation. What is simply means is
that we don't pay a tax credit to super funds if they
pay tax to a foreign treasury, so if super funds want
to invest in Germany or Britain or the United States
and they pay tax to the German or British or American
Treasuries, we don't give the super fund back here a
tax credit. Therefore they balance very carefully,
their investment in Australia, where they get tax
credits and their investment out of Australia where
they don't. That will guarantee that not too much of
those superannuation savings are spent abroad.
AJ: Yes I just wonder whether it prevents the double
dipping though, I mean the purpose of your compulsory
saving is that those people won't be dependent upon
welfare in retirement. Can you be absolutely certain
we are not going to be paying twice?
PM: Well there will always be an interaction between, the
basic retirement element in the system is the age
pension, but there will be a more sympathetic sort of
interface between superannuation earnings and the age
pension. But the result will be that people will be
better off and the Government will be able to afford
the baby boom generation which will double the number
of retired aged people.
AJ: Just on that you are making compulsory a business payup.
I am sure you are aware that Governments around
this country have phenominal unfunded superannuation
liabilities. My information is that the figure is
about as high as $ 80 billion, in other words they
aren't paying as they go. That doesn't appear as part
of our national debt. But what are you going to do
about making sure that Government continue to pay-up
annually as indeed business must?
PM: Well the award superannuation, or cumulation schemes
where companies pay, some of the older superannuation
schemes which existed before then, what you say is
correct some of them are unfunded.
AJ: So the Government is the employer?
PM: The Government is the employer.
AJ: And when it is the employer it sort of uses that money
for something else, as an unfunded provision.
PM: Government does not normally fund the provision, but
again I don't think it is a problem for us. 
7
JONESts Just as many of your critics would have you believe
that you're the person, that you're the reason that
Australia is in a mess and, therefore, as I've said
many times, perhaps you've been though we haven't
known it -President of the United State., Prime
minister of Britain, President of France and Prime
Minister of Japan, because they're all in a moss.
Equally given that you can't really be blamed for the
economy entirely because the world problem has
existed, how then can you say we can get out of it at
a time that General Motors are saying.. shedding
74,000 jobs, closing 21 plants, when Germany, Japan
and France are all in strife. How can you say: " Well,
I can quarantine Australia, what I've said last night
is to pitch-fork us on to a recovery.* But so far it's
been elusive for them?
PM1 Well1, we missed the post war trade in goods and
services. I meanf what happened to us was that we
istayed with commodities f or 40 years too long. Now
we're out there,' picking up our share of tourism, our
ishare of manufactures the things we should have been
doing. While it may be true that the rest of the
world is growing slowly and, indeed, right now so are
wfe, and they will pick up as we will. The fact of the
matter isf we will get a bigger share of that trad in
goods and services and, particularly in our region
which is the f astest growing in the world. I mean,
they're growing at in the countries around us
where most of our trade is. I mean, we're not -trading
most of our trade with the United States or Germany or
Britain or France. We're trading it in the ASEAN/ Asia
Pacific area.
JONESt You've got a bit belted over the head for making that
observation when the Queen was here. oc you have afty
comment about that? You seen to be saying that we
belong in the Asian region, and I'm not sure the Queen
objected as much as some of your critics, but what
essentially were you saying?
PM: Well, I'm saying that 80% of our exports and I think,
just off the top of my head, I think it's about 83% of
our exports go to the Asia Pacific area and 70% of our
kmports come from there. in other words, we're now a
country trading with the Asia Pacific area. We're not
a country trading with the European community or in a
way of great substance with North America. we're
trading with that part of the world but that does
include North America. So, I'm simply making the
point that we're lucky to be in the fastest growing
part of the world. And that's why Australia can grow 
a
as little faster and that's why, I believe, we can do
that and at the same time still run a healthy
merchandised trade account.
JONES: Well,, yesterday there were some good figures out on
tikilled job vacancies. Now, do we have a capacity to
fill those vacancies as they arrive or do we have to
rely on migration. I mean, someone rang this morning
and said: " Well, what is your view about migration?"
If growth is something you're predicting, does this
mean growth in migration number., where from and what
sort of people?
PM: Well, Alan, T think Australia.. migration generally
has been good for the Australian economy, good for the
Australian nation. That's the general policy.
Governments have always reserved the right to raise or
lower the quotas, as the intake, as economic
conditions have dictated. we peaked at about 2.40,000
migrants a couple of years ago. This year we're down
to 111,000 and I think when our review comes in in
April we'll be going lower. But the most important
thing' is, Australia can grow faster and particularly
with a larger population.
JONES I Yeas, sure. Well, now, employers sometimnes say when
they rcing heres " Why its it that the Government pays an
unemployment benefit to a child or young person that
its out of a job and gives us such limited incentives
to employ them?" I suppose what they're saying is why
would you pay the unemployment benefit to an employer
and use that as a subsidy f or taking on an apprentice
or: giving a kid a job?
PM:. Exactly, and that's what we've done last night with
Jobstart.
JONES: Dcoes it go that far?
PMe Yeah, it does. Because we pay it to employers, we got
another 44,000, another 44,000 young people likely to
pick up a Job under Jobstart and well,, young, young
and old, we've increased funding to create additional
job opportunities for up to 44,400 through wage
subsidies to employers and to apprentices.
JONES% But, see, the same thing applies to apprentices,
doesn't it. I mean, if a kid wants to sort of do Arts
or Pharmacy or Architecture, he gets automatically
paid for by the Government via his entry to
university. But if you're an appentice, you've got to
fin~ d a willing employer to start with. And the 
balance seems to be stacked ahead of the kind of skill
that we need.
PM: That's true. So, what we've done here, we've got
funding in to assist the retention of indentured
aipprentice.. That is, apprentices at risk, people who
have already been indentured but might be put off in a
recession. We've got funding there to keep them
cn..( inaudible).. assistance to training groups
schemes and reallocations of entry level training
programmes. We're also trying to generally support
that pre-vocational
JONES&amp;. But the principal of what I'm saying you understand,
don't you?
PM: Oh, absolutely.
JONESS If you want to do architecture, that's going to be
funded for by the taxpayer. if you want to be a
construction apprentice or an electrician, you've got
to find a willing employer.
PM: Exactly. And we've also got Jobtrain and Jobstart and
these other labour market assistance progrannas which
are about job skills. For instance, we've got another
million on Jobskills which will provide 6 months
of employment and training to young people. But in
terms' of apprenticeships we've got this programme
there to keep people at risk and, also, provide a
further 10,000 pre-vocational training places from
July, 1992.
JONES: Just -on jobs: you saw in the Tasmanian election a
diminution in the environmental vote, the green vote,
by about 25%. This surely means that the public want
jobs before I mean they want the environment as well
but ' some sort of balance. I noticed that you seem
to be resistant to Coronation Hill. Why is that when
Gareth Evans said it was just a piece of clapped-out
buffalo country and Bob Hawke found a spirit up there.
I thought that you might have come in and said: " Look,
this is nonsense, really." We gave a commitme~ nt to
BliP, when yoU Were Treasurer, why not sort of got on
with it and create some jobs and export income?
PM: Well, it's a small mine. It's in the East Alligator's
RiLver region. Look, that's the whole.. there's so
much made of Coronation Hill. The concern of
Coronation Hill, when you got to the bottom line, it
wits in the Kakadu National Park area, catchmfent area.
That was the big concern. It was a very small deposit 
this small mine. Now we, as a Government, sort ofp
you know, argued ourselves ragged over it and, finally
decided to say And I think there's not point in
c,. ontinuing that sort of debate for us. Therem's no
point for the country, no point for us. it's better
1to say ' that's it, a decision's been made, the
Aboriginal commuunity has again written to us saying
' please don't change your mind'. So, as far as I'm
concerned, until the Aboriginal cozmuunity up there
i: ake a decision themselves and they took expressly the
opposite decision to say that they didn't want this
area mined. And I think that's the end of it, I'd
r: ather get on.. see, Alan, it's not stopping the bid
projects being built. Look at Marandoo which is a
large iron ore deposit. I mean, a real minep not a
thimble-full of minerals. A real mine. We've let it
go0.
JONES: Just a quick one, before you go and we've got to
take a newsbreak: you've given the banks, behind
closed doors, a bit of plain speaking about what you
expect from.. they were very significant inhibitors to
continuing business recovery, if you could put it that
way. we've had several callers here to say ' I've
heard Mr Keating say this many times but I can tell
you, it's not happening out there. We're not getting
the money at the kind of price he thinks we're getting
i~ t at'. Now, you've given very significant
concessions to the banks in the Statement last night
about bad lending and bad debts. How can you be sure
that small business are actually getting what you
think they're entitled to get?
PM: Well, we've got.. the Treasurer had the banks in, said
to them we want them to be sensible in their lending
policies, we want them to be more ambitious than
they've been they've got too frightened, too
careful, too backward and we have put a very
significant concession in there so they can partially
wrrite off debts. So they don't have to send a
business to the wall.
JONES: But they'vd got what they wanted from you now..
PM: They can partially write them off and what ure want
them -to do is go back to lending to people, to those
who need support.
JONES2 And if they don't, will you withdraw, wi. ll you
withdraw this thing which you've given them last
n~ ight? 
PM: Oh, I don't think we can withdraw it. But what we'll
do is, we'll keep the pressure on them. But we've got
a co=' tment from them that they'll do it. That
they'll be easier with their lending. I think what's
happening to them, Alan, is their books are running
off too quickly. Their books are getting too small
too quickly. I think they've overdone it themselves
and they now realise they have.
JONES: And then got frightened, do you think that?
Pm: I think so. I think they know that the business they
had in the Eighties, which might have been a bit
hairy.. hairum scarum at the edges, is now actually
contracting and they are concerned about the pace
they're running off.
JONES: There was a show you just cancelled a very quick one
about Paul Keating and how tough he is. I moan, out
there they actually think there's a whole heap of
money being wasted. Taxpayers money. And we saw this
project the other day, $ 200,000 to funld a
revolutionary booklet. And Brian Howe withdrew it,
and you had something to say about that sex diary, and
so on. How tough is Paul Keating? He must see these
anomalies out there: a waste of taxpayers' money on a
range of fronts. Are you going to kick, continue to
kick a few heads?
PH: Well, in the Eighties we cut this place back by
$ 313,000 million a year. And that's why in this
package, that's why this package is affordable. I
mean, when the times were good, we cut those big
deficits back to a surplus. And now that times are
dif ficult, this is the time to actually spend some
money., So don't let John Hewson or anyone else
says" This is not the time to give the economy a bit of
the spend." it is.
JONES: Good to talk to you. Thank you for your time.
PH: Thank you, Alan.
JONES: Prime Minister Keating.
ends 



.4
A
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING MP
HEWSON " RESPONSE"
Dr Hewson stands alone as the only person in Australia who
thinks the Government should do nothing about the recession.
Tonight he said the Government should not spend one cent to
get the economy moving.
His response to the One Nation plan for the future was
nothing more than a litany of reasons why Australia could
not succeed.
Labor believes Australia can succeed.
CANBERRA February 27 1992 20/ 92 



. o
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH HOWARD SATTLER, RADIO 6PR 27
FEBRUARY 1992
E AND OE PROOF ONLY
SATTLER: Good morning Prime Minister.
P14: Good morning Howard.
SATTLER: Does it apply, the statement I just read?
PM: Absolutely. I mean there is no point in being
in this game buat trying to move the common wheel along to make
things better and this is a time to try and get the economy
out of the recession into a recovery and we have done it I
think in a way which adds to the productive f ocus of the
place, by the big rail, road and port infrastructure
development programs which will provide work and make
Australia stronger and better.
SATTLERi But are you doing it for us or are you doing it
to save your own bacon?
PM: Obviously we are doing it for the country.
There is no election campaign on now,, it's 15/ 18 months away.
SATTLER; You are kidding. The election campaign is
underway it got underway when Dr Hewson delivered his
atatement, surely.
PM: Let Dr Hewson go for his life. The fact of the
matter is this government has continually moved through these
large economic changes in the economy and now we are on to all
these so called micro. changes like airlines, ports, wharves,
rail, road and it is these things which we think we can do
more with and we have now as a result of this package, for
instance you will be able to bring freight into Perth and take
it right across on a standard gauge railway to Melbourne arid
Sydney, and vice versa. We will be building ring roads around
the capital cities so that the cars are not driving right
through the middle. 
SATTLER: But i have to ask you why have you waited till
now, just one year out from the election?
PM: We have been doing a lot of this over time.
The rail freight corporation we did a couple of years ago.
What we are doing now is quite dramatically adding to the
stock of capital which that will have and its charter to do
more things. Airline deregulation we started on a couple of
years ago we are now completing it by letting Qantas f ly
inside Australia and the domestics f ly out. I mean this is a
continuum of change but again it's the difference between
Labor, the party of builders in this country, it always had to
build the bicr national projects and do the big national things
and the coalition which is basically about a miserable
exercise in accountancy.
SATTLERt But Prime Minister we have had eight Keating
budgets and we have had a series of economic statements
inbetween and we have had with all of that the worst economic
slump since the Great Depression.
PM: Yes but you also had eight years of phenomenal
growth and phenomenal employment growth.
SATTLER: well what went wrong then?
P14: well what went wrong was that in the end there
was too much lending and spending.
SATTLER: You were the government why didn't you stop it?
PM: But this was an international thing. Banks
create credit. We had credit growth running at 20% a year in
1988/ 89 and 1987/ 88 and this was happening also in the USA, In
Britain, Canada and Europe and that is why now they are in
recession for the same reason we are.
SATTLER: So you are saying Australian banks included are
out of control, out of government control?
PM: Well they were. We are now down to credit
growth rates of about 1-2% a year, we were running at 20 and
that's what happened. I mean in 1989 we had spending running
at twice the capacity of the economy to produce. Now if I had
been any Treasurer worth his or her salt the only thing to
have done was to try and pull it back so that is was
affordable and that's basically what we did. But the reason
it got there was not because of any extravagance by the
government. Remember this/ Howard in those years I cut the
public sector back to produce large surpluses, this spending
happened in the private sector. But the main point is that we
had f ive timeB as much job growth in the first eight years of
this government as we had in the last seven years of the
former government, the Fraser government, we had twice as much
economic growth in the 80s as we had in the 70s. Now we have 
PM: ( cont'd) had an 18 months to 2 year slowdown, a
recession, what we are now doing is getting out of it to get
back on with the growth which Labor has always been committed
to.
SATTLER: You are talking about producing 800,000 jobs
but what is the good of that if more than 800,000 fall out the
other end of the pipeline, that's what has been happening in
the last 2 years hasn't it?
PM1 No what we are saying is that unemployment will
stabilise and fall and with
SATTLER: I hope so because it's 11.3% over here at the
moment. PM: Well ok but the fact of the matter is we have
got to do two things. You have got to have the economy
running fast enough to take up the jobs of the new entrants to
the workforce, that's the school leavers as they come on and
also take up some of the unemployment which is now pooling in
the economy so you have got to be running the economy at some
speed. SATTLERi Ok, but what about immediately for instance
cutting immigration because how can we keep bringing people
into Australia and putting them on the dole queues?
PM: Migration is a long term program for this
country. Migration has made Australia bigger, stronger, it's
grown faster, it's wealthier as a result of it.
SATTLERt In the good times.
PM: No, in all the times. What the program does is
that we lift it and lower it to look in terms of the economic
cycles and that's why we lifted it in the good times of the
and we have been lowering it ever since.
SATTLERt Well doesn't it need to be lowered even more at
least in the short term?
PM: I think it will be lowered more.
SATTLERs When?
PM: When our annual review is completed in April.
SATTLERi In April and you will make an immediate
decision? PM: We do it every April, we make a decision every
April. 
SATTLERa So we can expect you think to see some sort of
reduction in immigration in the short term
PM: it was 140,000 at its peak about 18 months or 2
years ago. This year it's down to 111,000, it's down to
111,000 and we have got the review procedures on now looking
to business. The people that mostly argue for higher
migration intake is the business community who look for the
skills they need and skills in demand and it's the skills in
demand and business migration program which has been part. of
the general ' buoyancy in the migration issue.
SATTLER: But surely you would want young Australianst to
take up those positions. I mean you are creating all sorts of
new positions in technical and further education to train
young Australians. Surely you would want business to take
them before migrants?
PM: The answer to this is economic growth and
that's why in this year we forecast at ' 92/ 3, that's from July
1 this year for this 12 months following. July 1 this year we
have got 4.75% growth a year. Now f or this year we have had
zero growth, the economy has just stayed where it is but we
will have wa think a conservative 4.75%. If you look at any
of the graph of this over the years, employment and growth
in the economy are tied almost together. When growth in the
economy goes up employment goes up, when growth goes down it
goes down so if we get growth in GDP up and we get growth in
the economy up we will get growth in employment which will be
enough to take up the school leavers, chop into unemployment
and handle what comes from the migration
SATTLER: Yes but Prime Minister not surprisingly tha
economists are jumping out of the woodwork today and one of
them a Chase Manhattan economist reckons your forecast for
growth in the first year out of a recession are too
optimistic. PM: I was Treasurer in 1983/ 4 coming out of John
Howard and John Hewson's recession and we forecast 6% growth
through the yea~ r and we got it, we got 6.1% in fact.
SATTLERt ' And you will get it again.
PM: No we are not even seeking that much we think
we will get 4.75, that's what I say
SATTLER: I mean you will get your prediction?
PM: Yes I think we will get our prediction, yes I
think 4.75 is a conservative number. Look, a bank economist,
understand this Howard about these fellows it's off the top of
the head
SATTLER: SATTLaEreR : nYootu a big wrap for the banks are you. 
PM: I They don't have an econometric model, this is
put together by the Treasury, the Reserve Bank,, the
statistician,~ it's the most complex national income
forecasting model in the country, no economic commentator in a
bank has such servicing available. It's just an opinion, just
basically ignore them.
SATTLER: Can we talk about the easter egg worth $ e317
million to people on family allowance supplement. The cynics
are saying lie is doing this just before the by-election for
Bob Hawke's old seat of Wills
PM It's got nothing to do with Wills, look this
was decided a couple of weeks ago before Bob even announced he
was retiring.
SATTLERi Only a couple of weeks ago?
PM: In the Cabinet process a couple of weeks ago
when we decided this for the Statement.
SATTLER: What do you expect people to do with that
money, go and have a good time for a week?
PM: I think they will basically spend it. What we
needed to do before the big railway, road, port projects build
up through 1L992, we wanted to get the profile of spending up
in the early part of the year. Now how can you put money into
the economy to give a stimulus to it in a sort of one of f way
and do it early. It's not very easy. See if you do a tax cut
it's very slow it comes out per week and it's very slow.
SATTLER: But what do you want people to do with the $ 125
or maybe $ 250.
PM: They will do with what they like but the people
who are getting it, families, people on family allowance and
people on the family allowance supplement, both groups,
generally what they will do Is spend it.
SATTLER: What in one hit?
PM: I don't know but I think so.
SATTLER: Have one big week.
PM: They will spend it in one hit or maybe little
hits I don't know but they will certainly spend it. we took
the decision we needed a fiscal stimulus early in the year and
we said who will' we give it to and we said people who can use
it and need it, families. NOW if it were John Hew-son he would
give it to the top end of town he would throw it to the
business community or the millionaires, we are giving it to
families. 
SATTLER: But it's pretty short term thinking isn't it?
P14: No it's about trying to get spending moving in
the economy. It's simply about that task, it's about an early
injection of funds to get spending moving, that's the point of
it. Now if you say to yourself well look that has to happen,
and I believe it does, how do you best inject some money into
the economy and the best thing is with a one of f payment. if
you make it per week it's too little it doesn't have the
impact, it takes 12 months. V'ou are doing over 12 months what
you can do in a day.
SATTLER: Apart from the consumption tax what is the
difference between your policy and the Liberals?
PM: First of all". the main thing is this is a big plan to rebuild
the basic infrastructure of Australia. Taxing income or
expenditure a la Dr Hewson's consumption tax, taxing it as
income or whether when you spend it will make no difference to
the Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth railway line,
it will make no difference to the ports around the capital
cities, will make no difference to the roads, will make no
difference to the national highways, will make no difference
to technical training for children, for kids, will make no
difference to' any of these things it is basically an exercise
in accountancy to tax the low paid to give a tax break to the
high paid. It's got no national vista about it, that is the
difference here and he offers, you go and pay this 15% slug on
everything you put in your mouth, everything you put on your
back and he offers you a 30% marginal tax rate. We are
offering the same 30% marginal tax rate but no consumption
tax, no 15% string attached.
SATTLERt But you have got a hidden sales tax?
PM1 What do you mean hidden?
SATTLER: We go to the supermarket and there are sales
taxes on goods like soap and we don't know what it is.
PM: But not on food, not on food, not on clothing.
I mean the f act, is that wholesale sales tax has been there
right through the Commonealth's history from the 30a and the
fact of the matter is it works and it works efficiently and
you can decide what's low taxed. Like last night we decided
to reduce the tax on motor cars we took it from 20% to
SATTLERs To save Joan Kirner in Victoria?
PM: No no to give the car industry a f illip, to
give the car industry a fillip. Do you realise that the
average age of our car fleet is 17 years. We have got one of
the oldest vehicle fleets in the world because people find the
price of cars too expensive and they are belching out leaded 
PM: ( cont'd) fuel emissions, they are expensive for people to
run and so we are trying to give the motor vehicle industry a
bit of a f illip. But you can do that if you have got a
wholesale sales tax to change and that's why the wholesale
sales tax has been useful. But the main point is we will be
saying to the great body of Australian taxpayers from $ 20,000
to $ 40,000 we will give you a 30% tax rate the same as Dr
Hewson but no 15% consumption tax.
SATTLER: Prime Minister the last Budget, John Kerin's
Oudget was a. disaster and is now largely irrelevant. T just
wonder whether this Atatement will obviate the need for a
' Budget in August?
PM: No no,, and it wasn't a disaster it wasn't a
political success but it was in economic termsr it was a very
carefully crafted Budget. No we will still do another budget
this is not the be all end all.
SATTLERs You are saying it was as the budgets that you
produced? PM: Politically it never had the impact but in
terms of its's economics. I mean the judgement was that the
economy was recovering and their judgement was wrong,
therefore the Budget
SATTLER: Who judged it was recovering?
PM: The government at the time. I wasn't part of
that process.
SATTLER: Well the government at the time was not much
different to the government now, the sanme advisers. Have you
got rid of them?
PM: Well there is a different Prime Minister there
is a different Treasurer and different views are being taken.
SATTLERs And different advisers?
PM1 In some cases yes abesolutely, in some Ca13es,
but not in the key departments. But the point is simply, but
that doesn't make much of a point though Howard. The fact; is
Australia does need a stimulus. Now I notice Dr Hewson
running around saying this is a, he is using some ridiculous
expression like-it's a Bankcard proposition it's sort of you
know-SATTLERs That's the one, Bankcard.
PM: We can't afford this. When he and John Howard
cleared off, cleared their desks out in 1983 and left me that
wreckage to pick up they left me a $ 10 billion budget deficit 
PM: ( cont'd) at the time, just on $ 10 billion when the budget
was about $ 50 or $ 60 billion. Now the budget is over $ 100
billion this is 62 billion, two in one hundred compared to ten
in fifty or sixty. Now the fact of the matter is this is the
right thing f or the government. I mean he is the only parson
in Australia saying nothing should be done. The banks said
the government should spend about $ 2 billion,, the ANZ Bank
said it, Westpac said it, the business community have said it.
The business community have said they want faster depreciation
rates, Hews-on said don't talk to them, don't talk to the
business community, the Prime Minister shouldn't be talking to
the business community they only want a tax break, nothing
should be happening. He would prefer to see the country sink,
live in more troubles, stay in trouble than see the government
do something about it lest it reflect well on the government.
SATTLER: How long before any of your plan will start to
work. Will it start to work before the next election because
it if doesn't
PM: That was the point of the payment to families
it will start to work from April.
SATTLER; Yes but will it reduce unemployment before the
next election?
PM: We think so.
SATTLER; Because if it doesn't you are in deep trouble
aren't you?
PM: I think our job is to stabilise Lhe rise in
unemployment and to see the trend head down.
SATTLER: And do you think that will happen before the
next election?
PM: I think so, yes.
SATTLER: Why don't you just call an election now. I
mean all the major policies are out in the open, why don't you
just let the people decide now who is best and then you can
get on with it?
PMt W4hy, the parliament doesn't expire until June
93.
SATTLERt Would you be afraid to go to the polls now?
PM: It's not a matter of being afraid. The point
is we won an election just on two years ago and this
parliament has got a long way to go and I think the public
would take et dim view of parties going to elections at their
whim and caprice. 
SATTLER: Why won't you debate Dr Hewson publicly on the
respective packages now they are both out?
PM1 I debated him in the House yesterday. He came
in yesterday petulantly and moved a censure motion on me for
having dare, point to the fact that the principal
economitrician who examined his GST Fightback proposals
pointed out that under all of his scenarios GDP or the product
of the economy falls, unemployment rises and inflation rises
and of course having been stung by that revelation from one of
his own authors he then jumped in petulantly yesterday and
called me a . iar, a cheat, a distorter
SATTLER: He didn't, did he?
PM: He did.
SATTLER: He used words like that?
PM: And did just exactly what I said a day or so
ago, it would take him a day to turn nasty once there was a
bit of pressure on him. This guy has had a dream run he has
been wandering around, see he actually thinks that politics is
a very easy caper. He dropped Fightback on the table, there
was no response from the overnment, he has wandered around
for a couple of months with people saying well yes, what is
your views about this Dr Hewson, what is your views about that
Dr Heweon, all of sudden I turn up and say your principal
economic author says this reduces GDP, increases unemployment
and increasen inflation. What's the point of Fightback and he
said this is a shocking thing to say so he moved a censure
motion on me.
SATTLER: Sounds like he has pinched your acid tongue and
you have become contrite.
PM: No what he has done is run true to form and
that is he is a very sensitive, brittle little petal and once
you go and touch him or say anything about him or criticise
him, I mean the old jaw locks and the face gets mean, well
it's going to get a lot meaner before I am done with him.
SATTLERt You are back are you, are you back?
PM: What do you mean am I back?
SATTLER: The real Paul Keating, not this one that is
sort of is wandering around the place acting contritely.
PM: No no don't give me that stuff about acting
contritely. Look I always
SATTLER: I couldn't believe what I saw after you got
elected. 
PM." No no but the thing is you don't see me up
close, lioward. I mean at the press conferences here in
Canberra I have always been the one that had to entertain
them, teach them, cajole them, but what always got run was the
second grab on the balance of payments or something. But
the discursive Paul Keating, the talkative, the one that sort
of you know has to sort of get a result out of the Cabinet and
the government and the press gallery and what have you, thatoften
is never in my case very rarely been shown to the
public, What you have seen of me of the last few months is me
really as I am. Well a broader side of me, a broader view of
me rather thian simply the 30 second grab on the monthly
balance of payments.
SATTLERs An all round nice guy.
PM: Well I would like to think so dear boy, I would
like to think so.
SATTLER: Now while you are there i have to ask you one
question, you can tell me to go to hell or whatever, but over
in England i have to tell you and you know that the gutter
press over there are saying you are an awful person who
breached protocol when you laid your hand on the royal
personage's waist. Did you know you were breaching protocol?
PM: I was not really laying a hand on Hler Majesty I
Was Simply guiding her from down a long corridor to the people
I knew that she knew like Dame Patty Menlzies on one side and
there was John Gorton on the other side and she wasn't
expected to know where they were or who they were and I was
trying to sort of, which I succeeded in doing I think, that
was point her along and I think she had a very interesting
morning, she enjoyed it immensely.
SATTLER: I have to tell you that as a result of that
calls to this radio station overwhelmingly said Paul did the
right thing.
PM: Did they
SATTLER: You got more votes yesterday for that little
act than all of the economic statements and budgets over the
last nine years.
PM: Come on.
SATTLER: True, true.
PM: That's a bit of hyperbole there, a bit of
hyperbole there.
SATTLER: SATTLEwRe: Tdriude , p olls on it. 
11. P? 4: You did.
SATTLERt Yes.
PM: Well anyway the thing is I think Her Majesty
had an interesting visit to Australia and the point I made to
some of the sort of forelock tuggers and British bootstrappers
around here like Dr Hewnon and Mr Howard and others is that
Her Majesty is the Queen of Australia and in fact The Age said
it very nicely in an editorial yesterday. It said when the
Prime Minister ' addresses the Queen he addresses her as Queen
of Australia And it is entirely appropriate for him to
articulate independent Australian attitudes. I mean she is
not visiting here as the Queen of Great Britain she visits
here as the Queen of Australia and to be saying that Australia
is now more3 independent of Europe, that 80% of its trade is
with the Asia Pacific area, that we are a country making our
own way in our part of the world is of course a message she
understands well. It's only all these sort of people that
would like to be up there sort of you know doing business in
Whitehall and trotting down to the city and picking up their
sort of knighthoods and things. It's all that brigade who are
Baying isn't this shocking the Prime Minister Just actually
talked abouit Australian independence from Europe, isn't this
terrible. I
SATTLERS You will never be Sir Paul Keating.
PM: Never, If you ever see me, for a start
knighthoods are not permitted any more
SATTLERI Good.
PM: But if you ever see me take an award you suay he
has had it, he's gone, forget him, it's all over.
ENDS 



44.
2L~:
I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH HINCH, CANBERRA
27 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
H: And tonight it's good evening live, as you can see
behind me, from the marble foyer at Parliament House.
We are here for a special broadcast tonight, to follow
up the release last night of Prime Minister Keating's
Economic Package, ' One Nation'. A package that he
says, is the best hope to kick-start a sick economy out
of a recession he once said, we had to have. A program
he says will generate 800,000 jobs in the next 4 years.
If, and the polls show it's a big the Australian
voters elect a Keating Government at the next election.
Tonight my special guest in the exclusive interview
after a torrid and controversial day in this House, if
we can ignore the bells, Prime Minister Paul Keating.
That's coming up next. I'm Derryn Hinch.
H: In this House this afternoon I heard you in full
flight, I thought you might not have a voice by the
time you got here tonight.
PM: Oh no, just a cup of tea gets me going again.
H: I should say, welcome to day one of the election
campaign, shouldn't I?
PM: Not really, I think that the Government took the view
that the economy was not recovering quickly enough. We
had to do something to try and induce, to put a
stimulus in it, to get a recovery going and to do some
sensible productive things while we are at it. Now,
there is no doubt it will have some impact on the state
of the parties, but an election is so far off that,
it's far enough away not to be able to say what
influence it can have.
H: Well, after all these budgets, all the Mini-Budgets,
the Summit, the J curves, whatever, why should the
Australian people believe Paul Keating this time? 
PM: Well look, the recession has marred what was a fairly
unblemished record for growth and employment for the
Government. From 1983 to 1990 we had very fast rates
of growth and very fast rates of employment. But the
recessicon has knocked that off. It means that we are
now not growing fast enough to take up school leavers
and other entrants to the workforce, but what we wish
to do is: to go back to doing what we were doing in the
that's growing Australia, pulling that employment
out of the economy and finding jobs for people.
H: Now, yout have said recently, that you regret using the
expression, ' a recession that we had to have', and it
has come to haunt you hasn't it?
PM: Well, it: was a slow-down we had to have. You see, we
were spending twice the capacity the economy could
produce, so it was slow-down we had to have. When you
knock 0.1 out of GDP, it is a recession. And the day
that happened I said it was a recession we had to have.
Now as the recession got deeper it seemed like an
H: Cool, Callous
PM: an uncaring thing to say. But it was really
shorthand for the slow-down.
H: When youL talk about the recession we had to have,
initially you did not mean it, but did you think it?
PM: It was aL slow-down we had to have. You see, we had,
it's as simple as this, we had spending running at 9
per cent: growth and we had product, the economy,
running at 4. So 5 per cent was coming as imports, so
we had t~ o take the 5 out. Now, if you can do it
precisel~ y and take the 5 and none of the 4, you are
set. But what happened we cut into production and
that's cut into employment, that's where the recession
comes.
H: But your Government, you, the then Prime Minister
Mr Hawke, kept saying there wasn't a recession, there
would not be a recession. You went into an election
saying there would not be a recession, and there was
and you personally, whether it was right or wrong, you
personally are blamed for it.
PM: I know that, I think every Treasurer is. But there is
a similar recession in the United States, Britain,
France, Canada and they are all deeper than Australia.
And I think the thing we did not figure upon was the
big coll. apse in asset values world-wide. When the
world-wide financial market system decided that low
longer funds, asset values of properties, of stocks, as
that dropped out of the system, we were bound to have,
as it turned out, a recession. Now we thought here we 
could avoid that, we could fine tune it down so it
didn't quite happen, but it did happen.
H: But you are the experts and Joe Blows like me, we all
seem to know, and our bank managers certainly knew, and
small businessmen seem to know and the guys whose home
loans jumped when you lifted the ceiling, jumped to 18
per cent, they seem to all know long before you did,
that thiLs recession was hurting like hell all over
Australia.
PM: We knew it was hurting. We knew the slow-down would
hurt, but it was whether it would cut into production
and employment was the issue. And whether we could cut
the excess spending out, but without cutting GDP,
without cutting the economy. But the collapse in asset
values, the fact that we actually pulled inflation.
See, in the last two years Derryn, we have taken
Australian inflation down from 7 per cent to 1 1/ 2. As
that's come out, it's had quite traumatic effects
inside the economy, that is the reliance upon property
prices continue to rise, and all other asset prices.
With that gone so was the confidence that you could buy
an asset; and sit there do nothing and the rise in value
went with it. So the banking industry decided not to
keep funding these things and that's where basically,
the dept~ h of the recession has come from.
H: But also, apart from the non-funding, the interest
rates went through the roof, and for a while there you
did not mind that.
PM: No, that: knocked the spending out. But remember this I
knocked interest rates down, in January ' 90, over two
years ago. It shouldn't have given us a recession of
this depth. It's a combination of interest rates and
the coll. apse of asset values, and the fall in
inflation, of expectation.
H: Does it scare you, we'll come and talk about jobs after
a break, but does it scare you that you have this image
as the grim reaper, because of the recession, because
of the collapse of the small business especially,
because of people out of work, how can you go on to win
an election when you have that reputation?
PM: Well, I will just make this point, that in the years
that I wras Treasurer and including to this day, we
producedt in Australia 1 1/ 2 million jobs. We actually
produced 1.8 million and we lost 300,000 in the
recession.
H: How many of them were in the Public Service?
PM: Virtually none. They were all private sector jobs,
million. In the previous 7 years, under John Howard
and John Hewson, that period, including their
recessio'n, they created 350,000. That is, 1/ 5 of the 
jobs that the policies associated with me created. But
what I say is, don't look at our 1 year or 18 months,
look at the whole 8 years.
H: Unless you want the people out of work?
PM: Well OK. People are entitled to take the bat to you if
they are out of work. I accept that. But again, what
I want to do is get into a recovery and get cracking
again.
H: Mr Prime Minister, we'll take a break and come back and
talk about jobs from Parliament House.
H: And back with the Prime Minister. Mr Prime Minister,
800,00 jobs in 4 years. Got good headlines this
morning, very ambitious and sounds great. But most of
the 800 surely will be 3 years down the track when you
may not be Prime Minister?
PM: No, no, we would have about the first 150-200,000 in
the first year.
H: And therefore, 600-700,00 when you might not be Prime
Minister?
PM: Well, that's a possibility, but they will still be
there, whatever the outcome of the election, they will
still be there Derryn. I mean, the fact is, that these
are not phenomenal. Employment and the production of
the economy are very closely related. If the economy
grows, employment grows. If we get the economic
growth, the' employment comes through.
H: What scares me about these figures is, you've ( lot in
1996, 800,000 jobs, you say, that means 4 years from
now, unemployment will still be over 7 per cent.
That's your projection?
PM: With a very high level of participation. Very high
level of people looking for work.
H: And of -those people, anybody who have been out of work,
long term unemployed, unemployed for more than 12
months, there could be between 300-400,000 of those in
that number?
PM: There could be good quarter of a million in that
number. That's a lot.
H: What worries me is that you and I, believe it or not,
are exactly the same age virtually. We are 48, we've
both got jobs at the moment. But what of the guys of
our age who look in the shaving mirror in the morning
and know they will never work again. What do you say
to them? 
PM: Well, I think that they will, because you see, the
velocity... Let's take the late ' 80s, when we had
unemployment down to 6 per cent, because the change is
about 4 per cent, it is not 10, it's about 4 because we
never ever got the below 6. But it's like a pool.
People come into one end and go out the other. It is
the time they spend in the pool of unemployment that
matters. The velocity of movement through the pool,
and if we can speed economic growth up, the movement
through the pool, there still may be 9 or 10 per cent
unemployment in the pool, but the time through it and
out the other side is quicker. So that's what matters..
If you can get the growth up, you can get the
employment. And we should get growth of the order...
Look, if we can't grow at 4 per cent a year Derryn,
which is what I have got in these forecasts, we ought
to give the game up, the whole lot of it.
H: People are saying that you can't grow at 4 per cent.
So what happens if you don't?
PM: Well, we have always grown at 4 per cent through the
anti we can grow again. If we can't run the
Australian economy... You need 3 per cent a year to
simply -take the new interest of the workforce uip, not
to touch unemployment, just to take the new ones. You
need 3 per cent growth. If we can't do 4, we should
pack it in me, the bureaucracy, the Parliament, the
lot of us.
H: Would you?
PM: Well, I mean the place can do 4. It should be able to
do 5s. All of the countries around us can do 6, 7 and
8 per cent a year growth. The reason we can't do
better " than 4 is that we've had this lousy equipment
stock from the ' 60s and ' 70s. We can't run faster than
4 without spilling into imports. So what we are about
now, is trying to run it at 4 and gather the capital
stock back.
H: Coming back to the credibility thing where back in the
you said, ' hang on, we are setting our sails'.
PM: But we dlid, we had more growth than they have ever
seen. The trouble is it wasn't sustainable.
H: Then you would have had about as much chance as setting
your saiLls as Australia in the next Americas Cup?
PM: But no, we did 4.2 on average. The previous 7 years
was 1.8 on average. The last 7 or 8 years was 4.2 on
average. It ran twice as fast. The problem is,. it was
a spendiLng spree at the end. I mean, we had every
punter, sort of buying property and shares and stocks
and taking over companies. We never had the savings to
go around and the Government said look, we can't go on 
borrowing from the rest of the world, we have got to
pull it all back to something we can live within.
That's what it was about. Now, when we go out of this,
what are we going to go out with? Low inflation, 1 1/ 2
to 3 per ce ' nt. We are going to go back with a good
profit position in companies, we are going to back with
a good level of investment, with now a new tax regime
which is also going to help investment and with it will
come good employment.
H: Let's move on to GST because I was in the House this
afternoon and obviously, that is going to be the major
issue you will stick to John Hewson over in the months
ahead leading up to the election.
PM: It is such a dull idea.
H: Well, if it is such a dull idea, do you recall, back in
1985 in the economic summit, that was your preferred
option, 12 1/ 2 per cent wasn't it?
PM: Yes.
H: You fought like tooth and nail for it.
PM: I did.
H: You got rolled and looked shocked when you got rolled,
by the deals that where made. Do you know what you
said about GST after that? At the press conference?
Have a look at this for a few seconds.
" It's a bit like Ben Hur. We've crossed a line
with one wheel off".
H: What's your campaign now?
PM: Well, I will tell you what it is. The direct tax
system the income tax system, was then like a bag.
You've seen these bags of water which you see in the
bush, it: was like a bag of water with holes in it. The
holes were the tax avoidance that dripped all the water
out of t~ he bag. So when governments get desperate and
they can't fix their tax system, they say, look don't
worry, we will get it when they spend it. So you pull
a plastiLc bag under the bag, that's the GST. When the
GST was refused to me, I fixed the holes in the bag. 1'
made the Australian income tax system totally secure.
It didn't need..
H: So you now say the GST will now work?
PM: It doesn't need another thing receptacle underneath it
to collect it from
H: I watched you in the House today, and you are saying,
taxing the clothes on kids backs, taxing their food on 
their table, and I recall in radio days criticiLsing you
for using that exact same language.
PM: But we h-ad massive compensations in that package. This
is not true of this thing. And can I also say, in
Italy for instance, Governments there couldn't run the
tax system, it was just haemorrhaging away. So I said,
' don't worry, let's not try and fix it, we will collect
it when they spend it'. But in Australia we did fix
it. In the
H: Sorry Mr Prime Minister, it is live and we have got to
put the plastic bag on the water, bush bag, we will
take a break, we will be back.
H: And back in Canberra live with the Prime Minister.
PM: What I was saying before we went to our break Derryn,
fringe benefits tax, capital gains, removing credit
cards, free lunches, all those things plug the tax
system. We ' made the direct tax system totally secure.
So now, to build a consumption tax is simply to shift
income around. It is not to repair the tax system.
That's why now we don't need it. And it always had an
inflation risk and the reason I was refused in the
middle ' 80s is we could not guarantee wage reduction,
that is, wage changes to get the inflation rate down
and John Hewson can't get those wage agreements either.
H: Alright, speaking of John Hewson, you don't personally
like him do you?
PM: Well, they're opponents, it is a professional matter.
H: But you can, have professional matter, but you don't
personally like him?
PM: Well, I don't think he stands for much. He is sort of
a boy from the wrong side of the tracks who has sort of:
gone to the other party to look after the wealthy
people : Ln this country. He has given up on his own
people and I don't admire that, you see. I think if
God has given you enough brains to do anything you
should at least represent people that need help.
H: Well, people around here today, some people on both
sides, t~ ell me that you and Hewson are virtually
obsessed with each other?
PM: Oh, no, no, no. Well, he might be with me, I'm not
with hima.
H: Because watching you today, and some of the brawls
earlier this week, it's like two school teachers
brawling, while the school is burning down. 
PM: Oh, no, no, no. I mean, last night I produced a
statement of substance that changed the way Australia
is. Look, all those great big things, rebuilding the
railway lines, the ports, the roads, a new airline
system for Australia. This is real reform.
H: Yes, but the road recovery one worries me a bit,
because we had this huge bicentennial roads campaign
all over the country, it didn't stop the recession
hitting us?
PM: But the point I am making is, what we are about here,
always been about here is reforming the place and
making it better. Now the Parliament and theatre of
the Parliament is part of all that. It is part of all
that. People should not mistake the substance for the
shadow. The substance will always be the changes. Bul:
that's not to say that in the theatre of ideas, which
is the Parliament, you won't have a joust about: ideas
and about arguments.
H: So a lot of it is just show-business.
PM: No, no, it's about how you debate things out. It's how
the psychological balance of politics changes. That's
what the House
H: Alright., today's effort, are you going to get a caning
probably from a lot of people, especially royal. ists
tomorrow, about your outburst today about the Brits,
about people getting knighthoods, you really went full
flight on that didn't you?
PM: Well, I hate this sort attitude you still get from John
Hewson and Howard and others, that we should be still
sort of tied up with Britain and that we don't have own
cultural identity and some way we are not as entitled
to be as proud of where we stand independently in the
world wiLthout this sort of connection. I mean this
sort of foggysm held Australia back for generations.
H: I eavesdropped on a couple of politicians in the lift
today, -just after you had said that in full flight, and
they saiLd, ' it is his Irish Catholic background'.
PM: No, no, no. I can't stand that sort of pomp and
nonsense and this idea. Both of them went on so
anxiously on the radio after I addressed the Queen in
here.
H: The respect line got to you didn't it?
PM: No, no, I thought it was said so much about them, that
we should be sort of forelock tuggers, that I couldn't
say to the Queen of Australia, that Australia had made
its way independently in Britain and Europe. What a
shocking thing for me to say. These people are from
the tribe, the team, that gave us all of the Rip Van 
Wrinkle years of the ' 50s and most of the ' 60s, and
they are sort of still back at it.
H: Are you a republican?
PM: I think Australia will probably end up a republic at
some point, but certainly not while I am Prime Minister
of Australia.
H: That could be next year?
PM: I don't think it will. I think that as time goes on..
H: No, I mean about you not being Prime Minister?
PM: That's right, that's what I am saying. So this is a
matter which has been, this debate has come on and of f
and it will probably head that way.
H: Would you like to see Australia a republic by the end
of 2001?
PM: I think that's a matter that should run its course in
the public discussion, in public debate.
H: How did you feel when the Fleet Street papers all said,
' Hands off Cobber' and ' Hands orf Cobber' and
PM: Well, you used to run a tabloid, you know what it is
like. But I mean, I must say, the Sydney tabloids were
a cut above those London ones.
H: So is the New York Times compared to...
PM: The New York Times is better, I know.
H: I defended you actually on my program, when you put
your arm around the Queen. It seemed to be just a
guiding gesture.
PM: Well, that's right. Because you see, we were zigzagging
across a corridor, and there were people I knew
that she knew, like Dame Patty Menzies, John Gorton,
Gough Whitlam, I was moving here around to see people
she knew and other people and she is engaged in
conversation and there are people trying to crowd on
her, so you are trying to both be guiding and
protectiLve of her. And I thought it was a very nice
morning for her. She seemed to enjoy herself
immensely. And of course, she is right across all the
issues. She is very well briefed and
H: You were helped a bit by the fact that the Duchess of
Kent was saying similar things in Queensland at the
time.
PM: The Queen is a very gracious, conversationalist and
very we. 11 informed, very well informed. 
H: We will take a break.
H: And back live with the Prime Minister. Mr Prime
Minister, Richard Nixon, I'm not comparing you to him,
but Richard Nixon fought and scraped and clawed and
plotted to get himself to the White House, and when he
finally got there, it didn't quite sink in for a little
while that he had made it. Did you have a feeling like
that in the first few weeks of being Prime Minister,
after the way you got the job?
PM: Not really, but just trying to find where all the bits
and pieces were. Where the weights were within the
country, within the Government, how we could sort of
put the two together. It took a while for me to find
my way -around the job.
H: But personally it did take you a while to find your way
and say, I've made it, after all these years, I've made
it.
PM: No, not really. I have been that close to it for so
long. ' rhe scales have long fallen from my eyes about
it. So I didn't really have that, it was about saying,
where is everything, what can we do here now. It was
all that sort of thing.
H: After being in the job for a month, or six weeks of it
when it happened, were you surprised by the manner of
Mr Hawke's departure and the way he did it on
television?
PM: Not really no. I thought there was an even chance Bob
would quit and
H: That way?
PM: Well, it didn't matter. He announced it, then went on
television, that didn't worry me.
H: If you got beaten in the next election, and you
resigned, would you take $ 10,000 from a TV show to
announce it',
PM: Probably not but that is not to reflect on him.
H: Did it offend you?
PM: No, no, I just probably would do it privately.
H: Do you -talk?
PM: Occasionally, we spoke the other day a bit. Yes.
H: Is it friendly? 
PM: Oh yes, yes, it is still friendly. Sure.
H: I presume you talked when his wife was ill, something
like that?
PM: We are niot all over each other. But it is friendly, it
is cordial.
H: When YOU made the run, I would broadcast from there
last year, you missed by the numbers. You knew you
were not going to get the numbers that time, didn't
you?
PM: Yes, I dlid.
H: So therefore, it wasn't the one shot you fired, it was
your first shot?
PM: I mean, I did by the end. I wasn't sure a bit earlier.
I thought I'might have, but as they faded away I knew I
wasn't going to win.
H: By the t~ ime you walked into the room, you knew you
wouldn't: win?
PM: Yes, that's true.
H: So it wasn't the one shot you said?
PM: Oh yes it was. In the end, Bob did actually resign his
position and I had not decided to challenge him, so it
might well have been just the one shot, as it turns
out.
H: But you would have stuck around
PM: Not for long. I will tell you this quite honestly, had
Bob taken questions at the beginning of this week, I
would not have stayed to have given the Labor Party or
him any difficulty.
H: Is that right?
PM: Absolute-ly.
H: If he would have stayed on, in this building for
Question Time, you would have quit?
PM: That was the end of me. That's it.
H: Why?
PM: Because I don't think it would have fair to himt or the
Party and probably
H: Would you have taken such a kick-in? 
PM: No, no, just to have me around, it wouldn't have been
fair to him. And I think it is probably the same
reason in part he's decided to go, which I understand.
H: So one of you had to go.
PM: I think so. It got to the stage after 8 years, and it
got to the point where either one of us was going to
leave the place. Whoever had it, should have kept it
by that stage, that is February.
H: You said that you would have walked away?
PM: Absolutely, I would have packed my bags and said, ' give
my regards to Broadway', or something like that.
H: That's a good note to go out on. Thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you.
ENDS
I 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA
27 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Ken ( Randall), members of the Press Club, Ladies
and Gentlemen. Well, Ken it is always a pleasure to be back
and when you are back here, you have generally been invited
because yout have got something to say. And on this
occasion, I hope I will not disappoint you.
Last night on behalf of the Government I offered a plan for
Australia, a 4 year plan. A plan for recovery, a plan for
growth, a plan that will create 800,000 jobs over the next 4
years. A plan that will make us stronger, more productive,
a better economy, a plan that will provide a partnership for
government and business, a plan where the unions have a
place in the scheme of national affairs. And this morning,
that plan was met with reactions from various sectors of the
community, some of which I would like to just read to you if
you haven't seen the reactions, and one which I think are
generally approving.
From the Managing Director of BHP, the largest industrial
company, has ' welcomed the initiatives to facilitate a
restoration of growth and employment in the Australian
economy and to regenerate our industrial base. He said, the
improvement that depreciation regime and the introduction of
a development allowance would encourage investment in
productive -capacity and efficiency. We need both the
recovery and sustainable future growth. He said, these are
much needed changes. The efforts to lift capital investment
in Australia will benefit the whole economy, including major
industrial companies, such as BHP. He said, BHP believed an
issues upgrade and modernise Australia's infrastructure, in
particular, rail, road and port networks, will contribute to
the nation's efforts to become more internationally
competitive. We also applaud the encouragement of
participation by the private sector in new infrastructure
investment projects'. And he went on to say some r1ather
general supportive things. 
The Commonwealth Bank said, ' in an overall sense, this is a
clever document, this is something, there is something in it
for everyone. Yet with the cost of the Budget, that is
within expectations and therefore unlikely to create shockwaves
in financial markets. In the real world, it should
also have a mildly favourable impact on business and
household confidence. From the perspective of a restrained
fiscal shat in the arm, with favourable medium term and
effects irL building the economy's capital base, the
Statement therefore rates well.'
The National Rail Corporation Chairman, welcomed the
Statement and said ' it is an opportunity to upgrade the
national network and to finally complete the standardisation
of the inter-capital city rail links and port connections
will be a great boost, to firstly, the community, rail
clients and rail employees. He said, for the first time in
Australia's history, we are seeing the opportunity for
balanced development in national rail and road networks.'
ACOSS said, ' the one-off boost to family allowance is a well
targeted way of stimulating economic activity whi'le also
relieving significant financial stress. The ongoing
increases in assistance to low income families, will be
welcomed by many struggling families. The removal of most
of the remaining waiting period for rent assistance is also
an important reform.
The Housing Industry Association said, ' the Economic
Statement -targets confidence. A commitment to sustain low
inflation : Ls welcome. Additional spending, thankfully, is
more modest: than earlier speculation suggested, might be the
case, and r-uns off quickly by the time private business
investment, hopefully, will be responding to new incentives
and improved investment. Additional of funding for training
and retraining programs will be valued to the long-term
unemployed. The Motor Traders Association. There are significant
welcome initiatives. The measures for reform depreciation
will be welcome, the capital gains tax exemption, the
firming of company tax for small business by up to 9 weeks
and including the taxation measures'. And of course, part
of that reference would have to be to the change of sales
tax on motcr vehicles.
But all of that, can I say, was not good enough for the
Leader of the Opposition. He said, ' it was one of the most
irresponsible packages that I've seen contemplated in
Australia'. The fact is, when you look at our opponents,
when I listen to their reactions to the Statements., I think,
they haven't changed, they never change. What has to be
understood about the ' One Nation' statement is this, it
addressed thie future as Labor always does, and the
conservatives never do. It's a statement of Government
engagement and not Government withdrawal as his policy is.
It is a statement of inclusion, not exclusion. It's a
statement about making this country strong and self-
respecting. In other words, it is a statement in the
traditions of Labor. It is nation building, governmentally
active, socially inclusive, it's about a greater degree of
social and economic cohesion. It's about giving greater
meaning to the idea of Australia. All these things are the
traditions of Labor. The idiom has changed. It is a modern
economic idiom, but as fits the tradition, it is we as
always who are doing it.
When I look at the others, I am amazed at how familiar the
pattern is. They want to fight an accountancy solution.
They want -to leave the draw bridge up. Don't include the
unions, don't include business, just gallop around the
country every now and then, and collect the tax on the food
they eat and the clothes they wear.
Don't kick--start the place with a payment to families.
Don't build rail highways. Don't do the macro things, or
the micro things. They think we shouldn't do anything about
the recessiLon. The fact is, there is a great philosophical
gap. We can close a lot of the gaps in this country, but
I'm sure we can't close the gap between us and them.
Dr Hewson says, this is one of the most irresponsible
packages he has seen. He said he's disappointed by it. But
the question I have to ask is, where is it irresponsible?
And why is he disappointed? Does Dr H-ewson think we should
not build a national freight highway from Brisbane to Perth?
That we should not rebuild our national road highways? That
we should riot create a national electricity grid, and
introduce competition to that system? That we should not
improve our ports or waste treatment centres or schools?
Does he think we should not transform technical education in
this country? ' That we shouldn't put it on a equal footing
with universities and colleges? Does he think that it's
irresponsible and disappointing to do those things? Does he
think we should not offer a better depreciation schedule to
business? That we should not help business with long-term
investment? Is he disappointed that we have a tax cut on
cars? Does he want that to stop too? Is he disappointed by
the equity funds for small business, by the new bonds to
help private business build electricity grids? This man is
very hard t~ o please, but I might say, easy to disappoint.
Does he think we should not help farmers and families and
particularly, one-off payment to families, to help their
spending? Will he try to stop that in Parliament, when we
introduces the Bills, or the Bills giving help to crop
growers and wool growers? What does unfunded mean? Does it
mean we should hold on to fiscal drag? And if it does mean
that, is it the same fiscal drag which is funding his
proposed tax cuts? Is it unfunded for us but funded for
him, on the same things?
The fact is, Mr Chairman, Dr Hewson has reacted to this as
he has reacted to most things. But basically, the
conservatives are always as they have always been-the
conservatives. They just simply are not about the kind of 
changes which Australia needs. They are not about the kind
of vista and program which Labor has provided.
We had John Howard talking this week, and Dr Hewson, who
said, I did not learn respect at school. And John Howard
said, I was disgraceful, and that the ' 50s was a good period
and a ' golden age'. These are remarkable statements coming
from people who fancy themselves as a Government for
Australia in the ' 90s. Nothing could better illustrate the
difference between us and between them. About John Howard's
' golden age'. The ' golden age', for instance, when GDP per
head was half in the ' 50s what it is today. When 85 per
cent of our exports where commodities, instead of 68 per
cent today. When telephones where only available to half
the community. When there were only half the number of cars
available to Australians. When pensions where half of what
they are in real terms today. When only 10 students per
thousand, and not 30 went on to university. This is their
' golden age'. But as we know, it is the age when the
Liberals put the country into neutral. When many
Australians didn't get a look in. When women didn't get a
look in. When migrants were factory fighters with no voice.
When AborigiLnes were excluded from the system. When the
Liberals were zenaphobic and provincial. This was their
' golden age'. The year of the awful cultural cringe, which
stifled our spirit and ate away at our self confidence.
This is the ' golden age'. And I mentioned on AM this
morning about the Old Parliament House becoming a
constitutional museum or a museum of Australian artefacts,
and household utilities, a sort of Smithsonian, and I
suppose we could set up John Howard and John Hewson down
there as the exhibits, with the Astor TV set, and the
radiogram, and the Morphy Richards toaster, and the Qualcast
mower. And the kids could come and look at them and say,
' Gee Mum, is that what it was like then?' And John and John
can say, ' no kids, this is the future, this is the future'.
John Hewson said I didn't have any self respect when the
Queen was here, I didn't have respect for the Queen. But I
said to him the other day, and I will say it again but I
have self respect, and self respect for Australia and self
respect for Australia' s interests which are not about
bringing the draw bridges up, about locking Australians out
of the process, about trying to banish unions of not talking
to business, of not getting the partnership together, of not
keeping Australia one nation. He is about breaking it up,
fracturing it, abolishing Unions, not talking to business,
not helping business. There is no depreciation schedule in.
his program. He's got, in fact, an increase in the company
tax rate to 42 per cent. And what have we got, we've got
what we havet always had from the golden ages a sterile
exercise in accountancy. Taxing completely the low and
middle paid, who spend all of their income, so whether you
tax their income, or expenditure is immaterial. All you do
is make the tax burden heavier on them to make it lighter on
people up the scale. No vision, no vista, no rail highways,
no ring roads, no new national road highways, no electricity 
grids, no creativity as there is under Labor, no changing of
the airline system as we propose it, no thought for the
hundreds of thousands of kids who can't get technical
training. No,' no, that's irresponsible. But his proposals
which do nothing more than simply flatten and attack the way
of life of every Australian family, well they have great
vision. Well, we'll let the Australian people judge, and I
will be happy to take questions about it all.
ENDS 
Questions and Answers
Q: Bruce Juddery, Prime Minister, freelancing courtesy of
the recession we had to have.
PM: You were freelancing before.
BJ: Don't tell Mr Packer, he was paying me at the time.
Prime Minister the Tuesday of the week before you
ascended to your present eminence you spent two hours
in your office with Senator Terry Aulich. The next
morning he went out and held a doorstop, curiously
coincidential with a speech/ talk be given on radio in
Adelaide by Peter Duncan set the hares running by
saying; that we had to settle this leadership business
quick smart. Then he upped the anti and said it before
Christmas. He set the hares running, now he has been.
dumped to number five on the Senate ticket for Tasmania
and even with Federal Executive intervention, it is
unlikely that the Federal Minister will even get up to
number three. What are you going to do for him, is the
double disillusion a useful solution?
PM: Well, the point of this one does escape me Bruce, and I
wouldn't want to say Kerry was too hard on you, but if
he heard you put that question, you know what a TV
junkie: he is, if he saw you put that question, you
certainly would have gone today if not earlier. Now
could I just say, Terry was a late convert, but better
later than never as far as I was concerned. I don't
like what has happened to sitting Senators in Tasmania
and I've made my position clear about that and it's a
matter then for the Federal augurs of the Party as to
whether they believe that is a satisfactory situation.
That will be resolved in due course.
Q: Tom Connor's from the Canberra Times Prime Minister, I
don't care if Kerry Packer is watching or not.
PM: No he sold your thing didn't he?
TC: Yes that's right. I was wondering if I could ask you
about last night's Statement. Was there a possible
alternative to do nothing on this occasion, I mean so
lot of your Minister's have kept telling us that the
economy was on the road to recovery if you did little
last night or just a little bit of fine tuning, would
we not keep more in touch with what's happening in the
real world rather than possibly head for some uncharted
waters with the current account deficit?
PM: Well I don't think so Tom, I don't think so. We have
got in there for demand 5 per cent through 1992-93 from
minus one this year and I think the place did need a 
-2
stimulus, it did need a break in this cycle of gloom
that's been around the place, it did need a spur of
confidence and this is a sensible way to do it, to
provide a stimulus while doing two things helping
families, but principally re-building a lot of this
basic infrastructure. Now it is important to Australia
now where a lot of the big macro-economic challenges
have been defeated, and we have been now, for a number
of yeEars moving into the micro-economy. It just does
matter how quickly you can get a container through a
port. Whether you can develop a block train with
containers to go from city to city, it does matter to
Australia. And that's not going to be changed by
taxing someone's food or clothing, I mean it is just
not going to be changed. It's not going to be invested
in by the private sector. It can only be changed by
government, it can only be improved. We've got the
rail system run down over a quarter of a century and we
have an inadequate highway connections in the country
and we've decided to do these things and other
efficiency things like electricity etc which I think
are both productive, long term and fit the bi. ll in
terms of the stimulus.
So as you know there was a lot of mixed reaction today
to all of these various issues, we had a few quotes
here somewhere, I don't know where they are now, but we
had for instance people saying it was entirely
appropriate, I won't go through them all, others saying
not, but by enlarge there was I think an acceptance
around the commentators and the papers that the
stimulus was worthwhile and sensible and that it will
help the economy into recovery and that's what we need,
but doing i. t in a way which adds to the basic
productive strength of the place. So when we believed
in the end of the first quarter of 1991 that the
recovery would come through under its own steam, under
the power of lower interest rates and the automatic
stabilisers and that's fine. But that's not the case
and was not the case later, certainly not the case now
so I think it was a timely package and the size of the
package and the way in which it's spent is, I think,
good for fiscal policy, good for the economy, good for
confidence, good for activity, and most importantly
good for jobs.
Q: Randal Markey from the West Australian Newspaper,
according to the tax scale released in your package
yesterday, people earning up to $ 350 a week seem to
miss out on any tax cut, yet under Dr Hewson' s tax
packagE! people on $ 350 a week will get a tax cut of
$ 14.30 according to the scales. Why should middle and
high irLcome earners gain at the expense of the lower
paid?
PM: Two answers to that question. The first is as
Treasurer I devoted enormous fiscal wealth to -the low
paid. When I become Treasurer that bottom rate above 
-3
the ta. K free threshold was 30 per cent, it is now
per cent. So I did all of the tax changing for the low
paid years ago, years ago. The ACTU style of tax cuts
always were about directing money to the low paid. As
well as that in this Statement we've got a substantial
increase for the family allowance supplement which is
$ 250 million a year ongoing on top of what we have
already done, which is now substantial payments to low
income families. The people who I think deserve the
concentration of the tax cuts now are the people
between $ 20,700 and $ 40,000 and we'll cut their rate to
per cent, which is the rate which is in Dr Hewson's
package but without a 15 per cent consumption tax.
Even the people you speak of below $ 20,000, they'll pay
per cent consumption tax. Now down there are all
sorts of tax payers, income splitters etc in terms of
people on full award wages, full-time award wages,
there would be very few now below about $ 20,000, very
few below about $ 20,000.
So the point is having spent 6 or 7 years directing
money " to that under $ 20,000 area. This time we are
going -to direct it to the $ 20-40,000 and we'll do it
without a 15 per cent string attached, without a
consumption tax.
Q: Peter Reece from the West Australian Mr Keating. This
morning your Treasurer said the Government was
considering a youth wage to encourage employers to take
on more youzng unemployed. Isn't this an
acknowledgement that the Government has been wrong on
this issue? What have you got in mind? Have you
discussed it with the ACTU, and further to that why did
you pass up the opportunity to reverse the Coronation
Hill decision last night?
PM: Well I don't think it's an opportunity at all. It's a
small raine that had a lot of national publicity because
it suited a lot of people on both sides of the argument
to give it to it. But in terms of the mineral
industr-y, in terms of it's volumes it was
insignificant, it's in the catchment area of the East
Alligat~ or Rivers region of the Kakadu National Park,
that was its principle problem, and also the
development was of difference with the opinions of the
Aboriginal people in the area. Now the Government went
through a very long debate about this, decided against
it and as far as I am concerned that's that. There is
no major mining project being held up and this hides
the sort of self flagellation that some people in the
mining industry are giving themselves is not bourne out
by the fact that Marandoo, for instance, is a huge, a
huge deposit. Coronation Hill is a thimble full of
mineral. s compared to Marandoo, is going ahead, is going
ahead. So I am not just going to be part and parcel of
this debate about Coronation Hill. There are bigger
and bet~ ter things to get on to and to get onto them
quickly. 
4-
Now the training wage is an issue which has been around
a long time. We've had conversations with the ACTU
about it, I believe we are still having conversations
about. But again we've got in this package a lot of
suppor7t for, if you like, young workers particularly
through the labour market programs, we have got $ 44,000
going in there under Jobstart and under Jobskills
another $ 45 million over the next two years. These
will be important influences, I think, in the labour
market but the training wage question is a longer term
issue and something which we have got to look about, I
think, in a longer term context.
Q: Brad Crouch, Sunday Telegraph. Prime Minister you
outlined some of the warm reactions from your Statement
from some of the large organisations at the start of
your speech, a lot of the benefits from it will take
time t~ o flow through. In light of that do you concede
that there might be a large body of people out there
who maty simply say we've heard these big promises
before! we have heard the rhetoric and you still steered
us into a recession so why should we believe you this
time?
PM: Well the whole world has been steered into a recession.
The United States is in a much deeper recession than
Australia., Britain is in a deeper recession than
Australia, the world went on the most enormous spending
spree in the ' 80s and when the spending stopped, when
the music stopped and the party finished, did everyone
really think that property prices, stock prices,
activity, employment would stay where it is? We did
our best to fine tune that decline. We wanted a slow
down, it turned, unfortunately, into a recession. But
what did the Government do? Was it the Government
priming the economy in the ' 80s. No. We had
surpluses, we were pulling the public sector back. We
actually handed the private sector $ 30 billion a year.
It was not the Government that kicked all the activity
along by running big budget deficits. We're the people
that actually pulled the budget deficits back into
surpluses. The fact is the globalisation of markets
produced an explosive mixture world wide and this was
just as true of Australia as the terms of trade pickedi
up in 1988-89 and we did our best to knock the top off
it, to get' back to where we could afford spending
within our savings and that has unfortunately lead to a
recession.' But again, you say why should we be
believed? Were we entitled to be believed when we said
in 198: 3 we created half a million jobs but in fact
created 1.8 million? Were we entitled to be believed
when on all of those 15 other occasions I've stood up
with these Statements and delivered everyone of them t~ o
the letter, in Bills for Acts of Parliament, or
Appropriations, this is not a sham? These are a set of
proposals which will be acted upon, payments will be
made for projects to the States and you'll have these 
kind of consequences from it. It will pull Australia,
I beliLeve, out of this recession and into a recovery.
That's the important thing, getting on with it. But
the fact of the matter is, just remember this, that in
1983 ' the total size of our economy was $ 170 billion,
it's now $ 400 billion, it's doubled in nominal terms
and in real terms has risen by about 25 to 30 per cent.
Now that's what Labor gave Australia in the ' 80s and
five times as much employment growth even to this date,
even t: 0 this day including the recession and the
unemp: loyment, five times as much employment as there
was in the 7 years of John Howard and his adviser John
Hewson, including their recession 1982-83. Looking at
their 7 years and our 7 or 8 years, five times as much
employment. So why shouldn't we be believed? We tried
to produce a slow down not a recession, that wasn't
possible so what do you say, forget the previous 8
years, well come off it!
Q: Tim Dodd, Financial Review, Prime Minister. Last night
you outlined a four year plan to return the Budget to a
surplus but it crucially depends on you achieving
strong growth over these years and the magical
combination of low inflation and a stable current
account. Last time, in 1988, you told us that you
brought home the bacon and your forecasts were blown
out of the water by a swing in the terms of trade, how
sure can you be that another shock of that nature is
not going to upset your forecasts and if the shock
occurs where will it leave your plan to bring the
Budget: into surplus?
PM: Well the terms of trade are always unpredictable, let's
make that clear and after the presentation of the 1988
Budget: when I stood here, the Financial Review of that
day said Governments factored in a 9 per cent rise in
the terms of trade, this is terribly optimistic and is
unlikely to happen. It turned out it was 16 per cent
rise Zand gave the economy a huge boon. So the leader
writers and the journalists of the Financial Review in.
those days were not more perspicacious about the terms
of trade than of course anyone else was. But be that
as it may, the point is still worth making that the
terms of trade are unpredictable, but what we've got in
here is 4 3/ 4 for GDP for 1992-93, 4 1/ 2 for 1993-94,
4 1/ 4 for 1994-95 and 3 3/ 4 for 1995-96. Now frankly,
if you. can't do 4 per cent in this country, if our
thinking is oh that is a high rate of growth, if we
can't do 4 per cent, we ought to pack it in the lot of
us. We ought to pack it in. What sort of country do
we want to live in? You'd need about 3 per cent growth
a year, just to take the school leavers up. So let's
say we say oh look 4 per cent is too ambitious, we'll
go back to 2 3/ 4, that means that we won't even take
the new entrants to the workforce so we'd have a
continuing rise in unemployment. I mean that is not a
possibility for Australia. All the countries near us 
-6
are gr7owing at 6 and 8 per cent, 6 to 8, and their
economiy is not spilling into imports. In other words 6
to 8 per cent they can afford and we've got in here 4s
basically and we've got the sort of debate oh that's
too fast. I mean frankly if we can't do 4 we ought to
give i~ t up, the lot of us, the commentators, the
politicians, the public service, the lot and say let's
get a whole new bunch to try and run the place at a
decent: speed. So I don't regard 4 per cent as being
outrageous.
Q: Alan Thornhill, A P Dow Jones News Services Prime
Minister, Australia has never had the great
polytechnics such as Britain and the continental
European countries have had, do you see Australia's
TAFE colleges taking that application and at last in
Australia registering inventions being applied in this
country?
PM: I shouild hope that the development of TAFE with the
funding of the National Government can develop a system
as sophisticated and as strong as we have in higher
education. That must be our objective. Now in higher
education since the middle ' 80s we have created the
equivalent of 12 universities, about 120,000 extra
places: in higher education to take the kids coming out
of tha~ t very high participation, retention rate now in
secondary school. But, of course, the great gap is in
vocational education, technical education and training,
and it. is that offer which we have made to the States
to turn TAFE into a properly funded sophisticated
systemi of vocational education and it may well be,
Alan, that the polytechnic type development is
something which the Australian TAFE system in the
future emulates. But again can I make the point it's
Labor making another vital change in our society,
giving our children a change to train themselves for
practical work and useful jobs. And I contrasted again
with the sterility of the Coalition, where you will see
Dr Hewson and his economics spokesman saying they ought
to have private places, let their parents pay for them.
If they want to go to university let them pay full fees
and what are full fees for a course of substance?
$ 12,00? $ 15,000? What does a private university wish
to charge?, And what have you got to earn pre-tax to
pay $ 12 or $ 15,000 for your child in university
$ 30,000 a year, $ 25,000 a year? So how does a two
income family earning $ 40-$ 50,000, $ 40,000-$ 45,000 go
when $ 30,000 of their gross income goes to keep one
child in university? That's the incentive and freedom
to achieve Hewson style. That's the nasty, vicious
sting of the Hewson rhetoric and ideology. Where were
saying we'll fund these places in tertiary education,
when you get a job pay us back part of the fees, part
of the fees, but what we're saying with no strings
attached we'll fund TAFE into a decent system. Dr
Hewson says it's irresponsible. Well I'll leave you to
judge about the irresponsibility of it. 
7
Q: Martin Hirst, SBS Television, Prime Minister. You'eve
invited a comparison between your One Nation package
and the Fightback package released by Dr Hewson late
last year, one area where a comparison, I think, needs
to be made in talking about infrastructure is with
immigration because there is a debate at the moment
about, for example, Sydney and Melbourne the
infrastructure cannot cope with any more migrants into
those communities. Dr Hewson's package claims to have
what he describes as a sensible immigration policy,
they're talking about a cut of between 50 and 70,000.
You have not really made any comment about this in your
package, can you just today make some comments about
that?
PM: It was not something I thought a recovery package was
about. I made it clear that in the normal annual
reviews of this program, which occur each year after
the consultation process with the various States, the
institutions, business etc, that we will debate the
matter and produce a program, composition again, this
year as usual in April and that's, I think, the
appropriate way to do it and the appropriate -time to do
it. The real issue is that migration has made
Australia bigger and stronger than it would have evexr
otherwise been, but the program has varied from over
time. Both Governments have varied the intake from
time to time. It peaked when we needed skills and
demand at about 140,000, about two years ago. That's
now down to 111,000, and it will probably go lower.
But if you take Dr Hewson s 50,000 number it would
simply mean that there would either be no family
reunion or no skills in demand or no business
migration, it will be one or the other. And what he
has never faced up to is the compositional consequences
of those kinds of utterances. So you might have heard
a ball park figure from him and you didn't hear it in
his policy statement, you heard it about a week ago,
rattled of f on a radio station, vague, vague and no
compositional details. Well that's not what we are
about, we are about a proper review and we'll do it in
time, but it has been the case that the program has
come back and will probably come back further.
Q: Don Woolford from Australian Associated Press, Mr
Keating. You have said a lot about the need to make
our transport system more efficient. When will the
Government be doing something about cabotage,
particularly on the trans-Tasman group which is causing
difficulties with our New Zealand friends?
PM: Look, we are the ones who have had to crack all of the.
difficult ones in the micro economy. By about
Christmas this year there will be a 50 per cent
reductiLon in water front employment within about two
years, the last eighteen months to two years we've seen
a 50 per cent reduction in waterfront employment. 
8-
Australian ships now have below OECD level crew manning
about them, crew sizes. So a lot of that is behind us,
in adopting that shipping package we have free entry
onto the coast for new trades and even for other tied
trades onto the coast, foreign ships have been brought
onto the coast and are now going around the coast in
various trades. So there has been a substantial change
and single voyage permits have been issued frequently
now for various trades. Again, can I say waterfront,
shipping, aviation, road, rail, electricity, I mean
who's in there breaking the barriers down? And who for
years was confident with this creaky structure? The
boys from the golden age of the ' 50s. It was always as
it was in Ming's day, no company hiring on the water
front, big pools of labour, very high manning levels,
companies and unions getting together to rip off
shippers, very high crew manning levels on ships, no
conversation from the Coalition Government, you never
heard John Howard talking about it. Don't remember
John Hewson advising him to do something about it,
don't remember even talking about the rail system,
about the fact that we couldn't even shift a container
between cities without changing gauges and bogies at
various places along the way, don't remember any
conversation about that before I sent the Industry
Commission a reference on electricity generation and it
came down with its recommendations. I didn't hear
anything from the Coalition about electricity grids. I
mean tiale fact of the matter is these people have no
imagination, no imagination and when it's all said
what's the best they can come up with well they'll
tax the food you put in your mouth and the clothes you
put on your back. That is about the long and short of
them and that's what they call real reform as Dr Hewson
Australia, real reform for Australia, real reform for
Australia. Well I don't call it real reform for
Austra. lia I call it simply praying on people who can't
protect themselves from the ravages of a sort of
Thatcherite ideology of survival of the fittest. if
you're not a millionaire you're a loafer, if you're not
a millionaire you're a loafer, and freedom to achieve
means freedom to send your kids to a university
providiLng you can pay the bill, freedom to achieve, to
look afEter yourself means you can have private health
cover and if you're low paid or you've got a large
family or you're sick too bad for you. I mean this is
what this is about, it's the same stuff the other day
we should have been polishing the British boot straps
up, tugging the forelock, I mean this is them, they
have always been the same, Menzies put the country to
sleep for 15 years. For 15 years we had this cultural
cringe that we never had an identity, I mean all this
talk of Australia returns to Britain as an infant,
growing up and now wants to be included in the
fellowship of European countries, I mean the craven
cultural cringes of it all and we have still got it
with these relics, these ideological relics like Dr
Hewson and Mr Howard. 
9-
Q: Laura Tingle from The Australian Mr Keating, you've
clearl. y drawn a distinction last night between yourself
and the Coalition in terms of the role of government in
Australia in the next few years, but I'd just like to
ask if you could define that a bit more clearly for us
in ter7ms Of government policy. First of all what is
the limit on fiscal expansion as far as Labor is
concerned? What are the factors which limit how far
you can go? Will you rule out any further expansion in
fiscal. policy for either economic reasons or to make
reforms to other parts of the tax system or for the
socia. welfare system in the Budget or in the lead up
to thet election? And third could you just clarify for
us your anti-inflation strategy because the Coalition
is nowr making this a major election issue and your
basing yours on a somewhat still undefined new
relationship with the trade union movement?
PM: Laura come off it. Ours undefined? At 1.5 per cent,
an inflation rate second lowest in the world undefined?
Undefined with an Accord process which has taken
Australia's inflation down from the 10 per cent they
left us with after the last recession and all through
the ' 7' Os, through the early ' 80s and after a big
depreciation of the exchange rate in the middle
we've got it down from 10 per cent to 1.5 with a
combintation of tax cuts through the Accord and monetary
policy and they are by their own admission about to
double it with a consumption tax and we're the ones
with an ill-defined inflation policy. I mean their's
is very highly defined, they are going to double it.
They'll take inflation from an underlying rate of at
least 3 per cent to at least well over 6 or 7 per cent
and as Dr Murphy the econometrician that Dr Hewson
bragged about on the day he launched his Fightback
proposal had to say the other day, if any of it goes
into wages, that is if the price effect of the GST, the
per cent on bread and milk and food and clothing and
dry cleaning and everything else goes into wages, then
inflation rates are likely to go back to 10 per cent.
And what can they do about it? Other than draconian
interest rates which will simply slow the place down
and produce a continuing recession. I mean they don't
have any discussion with the unions, I met 40 people
from the Wages Committee of the ACTU last week, they
gave a commitment to the Government that their target
will be with the Government's, keeping an inflation
rate around the average of our trading partners and
making their claims accordingly and their activity in
the labour market accordingly. What commitment could
Dr Hewson secure from the unions? He wants to destroy
the unions,. He said he wants to wipe them out, he said
there will not even be a national wage case, I mean
they have no anti-inflation policy other than to get
the Governor of the Reserve Bank to jack interest rates
back up to very high levels to try to squash activity
to cut inflation. That's their sole policy. But fancy 
10
breakiLng the back of Australian inflation after two
decades and getting it at a statistical rate of 1.5 per
cent and then let someone let it out of the bag again,
let it out again by willfully adding substantially to
prices and to inflation, that's what Fightback is
about. It's a vast macro-economic risk, but it's more
than a risk it will be a disaster because they have got
no possibility of keeping it out of wages, none. Why
would a wage and salary earner who's been dudded under
their tax cuts say oh yes I'll give you a wage
discount. Why? Of course they won't. They're not
going to cop a bar of it, if there was a GST it would.
go straight into wages, bang, in a decentralised
bargaining system, bang, straight into wages. And what
would Dr Hewson do about it? Put a press statement out
in the press boxes, attack the ACTU on the steps of
Parliament House, have Peter Reith do a doorstop? I
mean compare that to the proven success of Labor in
getting inflation down and by using the mechanism of
bringing business, unions and government together as I
say acrain, ' One Nation', to get over a major impediment
inflation, which we have done and which they could
never hope to do.
Q: Glenn Milne from the Australian Mr Keating, if I could
continue on the inflation and wages theme, you've
secured agreement from the unions to keep inflation in
line with our major trading partners, could you give us
an indication on what the upper limit of that rate
would be and what would be the sort of broad across the
board wage increase that would underpin that number?
And taking the wages and taxation question a . little
further, does this mean the statement last night, that
you've got no room left to move on personal tax reform
in the August Budget or is there still some scope for
that?
PM: The Government is governing, is going to have a Budget
in August. It always has policy prerogatives available
to it, I mean we have never seen Australia's change in
the post war years and the possibilities of reform has
been all tied up in one statement and while this
statement ' One Nation' is about taking Australia back
into recovery with reform it will not be the end of
reform under this Government, we will do other things
and we will do them as needs be and as opportunities
arise. Now you are asking about wages this year,
average weekly earnings are running about 3.5 per cent
and depending on what productivity is and can be, and I
think we have got a great opportunity for high
productivity growth in the 1990s. It's entirely
possible that you will see sectors of the workforce
getting wage increases with quite low inflation rates,
with quite low cost consequences because of that
productivity, so the yard stick will be not aggregate
wages but trading partner inflation rates, and as you
know that will be the competitive inflation rates of
the developed low inflation OECD countries. 



N( O.
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE
28 FEBRUARY 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: and the States can't do it alone, and that's why
we've had a co-operative discussion with the Premier of
the State of Victoria and the other States to try and
get Victoria going. And it won't happen by taxing your
bread and milk and clothes and your dry-cleaning. That
will only happen with money. That will only happen
with government money brought to where it can be most
effective, rationalisation of facilities like this, to
make Australia a more efficient place. So, can I just
say this, that what I put to our opponents is, do they
oppose these sorts of changes? Do they want reform?
Do they want change of this variety? Are they going to
be in the partnership with Australians, with business
to change? Are they going to be whole-hearted
Australians or only half-hearted Australians? Are they
going to be confident Australians? Are they going to
make Australia different and better? Are we going to
get on with making this an efficient country? Because
if they are, they have got to pass our legislation.
They have got to agree to it, and they have got to
agree, that these are the basic first order issues for
Australia to get a container through a port quickly,
to trade of the world, and of course the world in which
we live: the Asia-Pacific.
So, this is a very graphic example of Governments
working together. Joan ( Kirner) and I have been
working{ on this for some time now, and she has with her
Government for a quite a long time now, as we have with
the Governments of the other States, and with business
which can make these things work.
J: Prime Minister, aren't you backing a loser the Kirner
Government? 
PM: I'm backing progress, change for Australians, a
stimulus for the Victorian economy, and a lift in
confidence in Victoria and in other states of
Australia. And if I might say, the Premier has been
able to get more done in a short period in these vacant
areas and get an agenda running which can really make a
great difference and provide to the city of Melbourne
and the State of Victoria a new industry, a new service
industry, a modern efficient freight industry for
Victoria.
J: Is this going to be enough to win the Wills by--
election?
PM: Well, leave' that to one side. The real question is,
what have we got to do make Australia better? What
have we got to do to make Australia more competitive?
These are the things that have to be done. Equipment
which is 20 years old, running at 40 per cent capacity,
it's got to go. Roadways which take a circuitous route
to try to load a container train, it's got to change.
And it can only change with Government support. These
are Government facilities basically. They are not
going to be privately invested in, they will only be
changed if Government spent money on these things.
They will not be changed by taxing some low income
earners' bread and milk.
J: Mr Keating, what measure will you have what will
you say to the ACTU about the real cut in wages? What
can you say to them?
PM: Well, the ACTU know about these things and they are
part of the process of change. On the waterfront this
year, by the end of this year, waterfront employment
will have fallen by nearly 50 per cent in the last two
years. Enormous rationalisation, but now we have got
to rationalise the businesses that those people work
in. So the ACTU is right up to speed on efficiency and
it's up to speed on the other great objectives, the
national inflation rate keeping it low, and keeping
wage claims competitive, so we can run and keep that
core issue in competitiveness, that is a low inflation
rate.
J: can you tell us exactly what is in regarding
the wage claim this year then?
PM: I think, this afternoon, they probably will.
J: not just the tabloid press.., what you said about
British Do you regret the intensity to which you
made your point? 
PM: No. The fact of the matter is, this country does over
three quarters of its trade, both in imports and
exports, with the Asia-Pacific area. We are no longer
tied to Europe, and we're certainly not tied to
Britain. Britain gave Australia up when it joined the
European Community. And Ministers got a polite " I'm
sorry" and " no thanks" in the 1960s and the 1970s. I'm
just simply making that point. And I'm making the
point to Australian politicians on the conservative
side who I say are half-heartedly Australian, who want
to keep doffing their lid to an old apparatus which we
have shaken off. We signed the Australia Act in 1986
which cut all of the links with Britain. And while
they will always remain friends of ours, and I'm sure
British people in the Government today don't share the
views, and understand really the world as it is, don't
share the views of Dr Hewson and Mr Howard and all
these other people who want to trek back to the 1950s.
The fact of the matter is, for us the way is clear. We
have to be aggressively Australian, whole-heartedly
Australian, proud of it, and go and trade with our part
of the world and forget this stuff about tugging the
forelock, and be more than about MBEs and Knighthoods.
J: They say you' 1ve got history wrong.
PM: Don't worry about I noticed some Englishman said
oh, Australia wasn't attacked. I noticed that was an
interesting bit of history.
J: Bruce Ruxton calls himself Australian and he says
you're a, in his words, a ' ratbag'.
PM: Well maybe Bruce is still looking for an MBE or a
Knighthood, ' I don't know.
J: So no apologies, Mr Keating?
PM: Just understand this simple point. This is about
Australia calling its own shots in the Asia-Pacific
running its race, living its life, and not having
Australians proposing themselves as leaders of the
Dr Hewson and Mr Howard looking back with
melancholy to the 1950s and all of the imperial bits
and pieces that came with it. It's all over.
J: No apologies?
PM: Absolutely not.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: I'm talking about the old links with Britain, the
Britain of the ' 50s and ' 60s, the thing which Menzies
and the other people tied them to in the past. I'm not
criticising the British Government or modern Britain. 
J: You said they sold Australia out during the War.
PM: Well, I'm not going over the history. The fact of the
matter is we were left to defend this place for
ourselves.
J: real issue?
PM: Look, there's only one real issue in Australia to get
a recovery going. To get a recovery going. To do the
things which have to be done, Government and business
together, to get a recovery going. And that's what
this is about, it's about getting a recovery going,
it's about changing the basic infrastructure of the
place, and it's about Australians being whole-heartedly
Australians and coming together one nation to make
the place tick. It's not about regressive policies,
taxing ] ow income people, the food they put in their
mouth and the clothes they put on their backs, calling
it refor3m. It's not reform, it's savage regressive
taxation. The reform has to be in these places, in the
cranes, in the wharves, in the facilities, in the
airlines, the electricity grids, in the technical and
further education, in the inflation rate. These are
the first order issues, not a consumption tax.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
THE PRIME MInITERM WITH JOHN LAWS ON 2U3, FEBRUARY 28, 1992
8 3O PROOF ONLY
LXWS: We]. l, you promised us excitement and vitality when you
moved into the top job. You've certainly given us excitement.
PM: Well, I just. I mean it's really our friends in the
Opposition whio've picked up quite un.. on quite unremarkable
remarks by me when I spoke both to and with the Queen last week.
What I was Baying was, simply, that as Britain moved more
towards a Coimon Market in Europe, we were moving independently
of Britain and Europe more towards the Asia/ Pacific. Andi, of
course, I waon adding, and I had already said before I said that,
that the Queen was part of this independence when she became
Queen of Ausjtralia. So, it was quite unremarkable but I'm
afraid our friends in the Opposition have this sort of
propensity to so rt of bow and scrape and that one can't even
sort of express Australia's independence without it being a
matter of some coimment.
LAWS: Well, now the British people have reacted in what I
consider a most defensive way to the comments that you've made.
They've been critical of you: we have one gentleman who
suggested that you've ' mauled' the Queen, we have another one
suggesting that your wife was less than courteous. And, as I
was just sayiLng, -we have a lot of British migrants in Australia
who must shudder at the attitude of their countrymen in light of
what happened. Now, while you were saying that we were moving
towards independence, I have never heard you at any time want to
rush the issUe Of this place becoming a Republic. And while you
were saying what you were saying, the delightful Duchess of Kent
was in Brisbane saying precisely the same thing. You were not
aware of what she was saying because she was saying it about the
same time. And she said that Australia's grown up, they can get
by without the help of other people and, obviously, she said if
I was an Australian, I would be thinking about becoming a
Republic too. But, of course, we'll always be good friends,
won't we. And she said it as nicely as that. Now, in essence
that's what you were saying, wasn't it?
PM: Yes, except I did not., no, I wasn't even saying that
much. I was just simply making the point, John, that Australia 
naturally.. I was remarking about the fact that she had been
crowned 40 years earlier. It was a speech of congratulations on
her coronation 40 year. ago, and to say that in the 40 years so
much had changed. That Britain had become a much more European
country in terms of its outlook and its arrangements. Australia
had become a more Asia Pacific country. That was all I was
saying. LAWS: i That, of course, what you're saying is undeniably
true, isn't it?
PM: And the Queen had herself recognized this change that
years after her coronation she adopted the royal style and
title of Queen of Australia. She doesn't come here as Queen of
Great Britain, she comes as Queen of Australia. And that was
the point I made. But of course, Palace authorities, when
questioned about this who were travelling with the Queen,
thought it entirely unremarkable and couldn't quite understand
what the kerfuffle was about.
LAWS: Well, why did John Hewson and John Howard, in
particular, and Tim Fischer not that it matters a great deal
what he think. but they seem to consider it is remarkable.
PM: I know. Because, you see, it's all part of this point
I made yesterday, the sort of torpor which Menzies put the place
in, a sort of forelock-tugging business. I mean, if it was left
to these people we'd still have knighthoods and we'd still have
all these sorts of things. And we'd be still tied up to a
country 12,000 miles away. It wasn't until 1986 that the Queen
signed and gave royal ascent to the Australia Act.
LAWS: Yes, in fact, it's next Monday, will be the exact day
that in 1986, 2nd March, 1986, that she did that.
PM: Yes, that was the thing which finally severed the
links between Australia, the Constitutional links or the
Parliamentary and Appeal links to their Privy Council and where
the British Parliament could change the Australian Constitution
by Act of the British Parliament. She severed that link as
short a time ago as 1986. So, it took us all that long to
actually cut the knot. But our friends in the O) pposition who
want to tell us that they're the people of the Nineties keep
extolling the virtues of the 1950s, And now they Ire in there
telling us what a great period of tranquility and progress it
was in the 19~ 50a and sort of saying ' isn't it a pity, really,
we've got to change from all of that'.
LAWS: The opposition will say,. and have suggested that the
whole thing, -the outburst and it was an outburst because you
were very firmn, did you lose control? 
PM: Oh noI no. It was the very essence of control, I'm
quite clear about what I wanted to say.
LXWS: i YOUL said it very loudly.
PM: I wanted to make it quite clear that Dr Hewson and Mr
Howard would. be better in the Constitutional Museum we're
thinking of creating at the Old Parliament House an a sort of
pair of Fifties relics. And not anybody who'll likely be
leading Australia in the 1990s, given that they're quite happy
to still dof f the old hat, you know, tug the forelock to the
British Establishment, which is what they're about.
LAWS: Wha~ t you said, you said with a great deal of
strength you did it say it with some venom and you obviously
meant it. They are going to say it was a deliberate ploy to
bury John Hewbon's reply to your Economic Statement.
PM1 well, he was going to get his reply and that'll give
us both the same amount of press attention, it was just to make
the point. They say that they have concern f or the position of
the Monarchy and the Queen but they did their best to score from
it on the day in question and score in a way which paints them
back into thel sort of fogey corner of the 1950s. And I mean it
just is remarkable that two relatively young men, relatively
young men, should be such ' old' young men. You know what I
mean? LAWS: Yes, I understand what you're saying.
PM. That they are trying to say, well ' we're the people
from the Nineties' when, really, they're harking back to the
Fifties or Sixties and isn't it a pity that we don't have all
these arrangements just as they were between us and Britain and
the Monarchy. I presume they'd be quite happy for the Queen to
be still Queen of Great Britain and Australia and to be playing
' God save the Queen', instead of ' Advance Australia Fair'.
LAWS: In your reflective moments since yesterday, do you
regret any of the things you've said?
PM: Oh, God, no. Oh no.
LAWS: You obviously don't mind upsetting the British.
PM: No, look, those British tabloids I mean, God,
they're the pits. I mean, the fact of the matter is Australia
has every right, we have every entitlement for Australia to be
aggressive about ' its own future, about its independent place in
the world, about its culture and not to be seen by our leaders,
Hewson and H~ oward, as Some sort Of cultural derivative of
Britain. It's finished. It's over. 
LALWS: i Can we af ford to alienate the British# and do you
think we have or you have alienated the British?
PM: I'Im speaking about a period past. I'm speaking about
a period in the Fifties and Sixties which in past as far as I'm
concerned with Britain. The people who operate Britain today
have a very clear idea about all this. The British Government
have a very -clear idea about all this. The only people here
that don't have a clear idea is the Leaders of the Liberal
Party, the Leader of the National Party and former leaders like
Mr Howard.
LAWS: PM: So you don't regret anything that you said yesterday?
Not a bit.
LAWS: Do you regret any of the comments you made about the
Second World liar?
PM: Oh, no. That was entirely true. I mean, here we were
in the 1960s, as Menzies had us in this sort of time warp and
torpor, as Britain was trying to break through and sign the
Treaty of Romre and join the Common Market and leave all our
agricultural exports behind, all the former markets of Australia
and New Zealand leave them behind, as we had to beg to get our
own troops ba~ ck to defend ourselves after the attacks by the
Japanese. After all that period they were still plugging the
forelock and bowing their knee.
LAWS: And you are aware I imagine, that when we did try to
get our troops back af ter the f all of Singapore, Churchill said
that Australians who wanted to go back to the South Pacific were
like rats auaee~ ing a sinkJig sip,
PMg Wel2l, I wasn't quite sure abc
history of all this is quite clear and
when Menzies bec'ame Prime Minister thi
history behind us, and then by the Si
attempting to join the Common Market th
have said ' Australia is entitled to an
its own and we'll have to trade it. we
region. But instead of that, it waited1
Minister came along to change the nation
Whitlam in 1973.
LAWS: Yeah. And prior to that, of
ref erred to ZJohn Curtin, who was a fin
' wretched second rate man' and now
critical of you as Australia's Leader bec
you have made about them. It's a littJ
the kettle blatck, isn't it? rnt the words but the
one would have thought
Bre in ' 49, r with that
xties when Britain was
at then, even he would
independent position of
iy in the world in its
: ill another Labor Prime
al tempo and that was
course, Churchill had
e Prime Minister, as a
Britain chooses to be
ause of comments that
Le like the pot calling 
PM: Not the sensible people in Britain, not the sensible
ones that I run into at international meetings or the people
that run the major business institutions. It's not them they
understand it. all, it's just these sort of ' throw-backs' that
still inhabit. some of the cracks and crevices of the British
Establishment. LAWS: Well, am I say, you promised us excitement and
vitality, you certainly gave it to us yesterday.
P14: I tell you what I 1ll give you always,# John. I'll
always give you a pro-Australian view. And we'Ire not going to
be doffing ou~ r lid or tugging our forelock to anybody.
LAWS: Well said. Thanks for your time, good to talk to you.
PM1 Thanks, John, good-bye.
LAWS: LPArWiSl: n e Minister of Australia, Paul Keating. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
TOYOTA PLANT, ALTONA MELBOURNE, 4 MARCH 1992
1
Mr Toyoda, Premier Kirner, Mr Yamaguchi, Mr Johnston,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a great day for our motor vehicle industry. It is
also a great day for Australian industry.
The people gathered here are representative of the new
direction in Australia progress in partnerships.
Increasingly in Australia we are recognising that there
is strength in partnerships between government and
business, business and unions. Between Commonwealth and
State governments.
We are recognising how much there is to be gained from
being a nation with unity of purpose.
It is for the same reason that we seek partnerships with
business in other countries, particularly in countries in
our region.
We seek them because we know that is where our future
strength substantially lies in integration with global
markets, and integration especially with Asia and the
Pacific. Japan, of course, is one of our great partners and
there is no better example of the partnership than that
with Toyota.
Toyota came to Australia thirty years ago. It was a very
different place. We were more insular, dare I say more
British, in those days?
Certainly there was a great deal more apprehension about
the region in which we lived, and a failure to comprehend
the change that was about to occur there.
Given the speed and the dimensions of that change, it's a
failure we might be forgiven but when we failed in that
we also failed to understand much of our future reality. 
-2
Last year Toyota sold more cars than anyone else in
Australia. Today the one millionth Toyota will be driven off the
assembly line.
On a day like this there are a great many things which
could be said in praise of the Toyota company.
Not only in regard to its world leadership in the motor
industry and the role of Dr Toyoda, but its faith in this
country and its people.
It is the commitment to quality which has made Toyota the
number one car manufacturer in Australia in 1991.
But, given Toyota's legendary determination to look to
the future, it is more appropriate to talk about this new
plant this: new investment in the Australian motor
vehicle industry.
Toyota's decision to build this new plant is a very
welcome show of confidence.
It is a major turning point in our manufacturing
industry. It's no less significant for the car industry
than the decision of General Motors to build Holdens in
Australia in. the 1940s.
For with this new plant Australia will enter world
markets with a world product for the first time.
It's worth remembering that this was the first country
outside Japan in which Japanese companies established
vehicle manufacturing facilities.
It is pleasing to have Toyota say again loudly this is
a good place to manufacture.
We are delighted to have Toyota demonstrate that they
share our belief in the industry's ability to be
competitive in the world.
It demonstrates that our intention to cut tariff rates to
and end quotas has not only not meant the end of
investment, but ' a renewal of it.
Indeed, a new car industry is being built.
Above all, this new plant is proof that Australia can do
what it hiust do build an internationally competitive
manufacturing industry.
And to do that we must do a great deal more of what has
been done here.
The creative workplace agreement between Toyota and 6000
employees reached here last December sets a new benchmark
for industrial relations in this country. 
-3
All concerned will benefit and that means all
Australians. It's the kind of workplace agreement which will
increasingly characterise business in Australia.
Mr Toyada, ladies and gentlemen, you may take this
ceremony today as signalling the emergence of a much
stronger Australia in the 1990s.
Stronger through partnerships like this through
creative workplace environments such as this one will be.
Stronger through greater incentives for business to
invest in worthwhile long term projects. With low
interest rates, low inflation and low cost of labour
giving us a cost of capital regime at least competitive
with other countries.
You will see us stronger through a vastly improved
infrastructure. Through more efficient ports, new and
better roads and, at last, a highly efficient,
competitive rcail system. Through cheaper electricity
under the National Grid Corporation.
Above all you will see a stronger Australia emerging from
a clearer sense of direction, a robust and mature
national identity.
I believe you will see that manifest in countless ways:
from the new commitment, creativity and purpose of
Australian workers to the willingness and determination
of government to venture forth and strike new
partnerships in the world and in our region.
You are going to see in future an Australia of much more
independent mind and of wholehearted belief in the
future.
We Australians may take great heart from this ceremony
today. It is a landmark in our history a very
significant step forward.
In this context I want to take the opportunity to
congratulate my colleague and friend, the Minister for
Industry, technology and Commerce, Senator Button, who
has done more for Australian industry than perhaps any
other politician'this century and who will be regarded as
one of this country's greatest reformers. This ceremony
today might well'be seen as being in part a tribute to
his efforts.
It remains for me to congratulate the Toyota Company, the
unions and workers, and everyone else associated with the
project. I wish you all well with this great enterprise. 



031
P RIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, BANCKSTOWN COLLEGE OF TAFE, MARCH 2 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, ACOSS has described part of your
tax/ economic statement as unf air and dangerous. Does
that concern you?
PM: Well I didn't hear ACOSS barracking for the low paid..
When I became the Treasurer the low paid were on a taxc
rate of 30 per cent, we cut them to 20 per cent over
those Eight years, introduced the Family Allowance
Supplement ' which never came from ACOSS. There are
bigger constituencies than ACOSS worrying about the low
paid. In the main the organisation which has most
represented the low paid in this country is the ACTU,
which it still does well and with great concern.
J: Will you ignore ACOSS?
PM: No, ACOSS is entitled to its view but it's only a view.
But thiLs area is the area I am interested in
technical and further education. And it's good to be
back at this school, I actually went to school here.
This is the area of education, beyond school, closest
to the community and it's the area which the
Commonwealth is going to take over, it's the area which
we are going to make again a strong part of the
education system by Commonwealth funding. All of the
courses which we saw here today, literacy, computers,
computer literacy, fitting and turning, carpentry, all
of those things are things which are important to the
community, important for basic jobs skills, important
for getting a chance to work and making Australia a
more capable country. And my colleague John Hewson
says, it's not affordable, we shouldn't be doing this.
This building right behind, you the Commonwealth has
just completed, $ 14 million. We will be doing more
TAFE technical and further education capital and
recurrent spending as a result of the One Nation
package. 
-2
J: But are you spending enough money on TAFE?
PM: Well, we are going to spend more than has ever been
spent. That is we are going to lift it up as we lifted
universities up. But Dr Hewson says that it's unfunded
and unaf fordable, so he wouldn't be spending any money
on TAFE. He says it was irresponsible and extravagant:
to spend money on the TAFE system, to spend money on
Australian kids and adults who want to lift their
skills, give themselves opportunities in the workforce
and make Australia a more capable country, not just a
more clever country, but a more capable country. And
it is in places like this that people have got to know
what Dr Hewson's sterile policies are about. It's not
about helping these people. His education policy if
your par: ents can afford $ 13,000 you can go to a private
universi: Lty, but if they can't afford that and you can't
get into university well you are on your own. There is
no TAFE college for you, there's no computer course,
there's no literacy, there's none of these other 1200
courses which are available in TAFE which help people
find their way into the workforce and make Australia
better. I
J: Is you coming here today part of your remodelling your
image?
PM: It's not a matter of remodelling my image. I've been
coming here since I was a kid. I went to school here.
You have got to get better questions son, you've got to
chop those silly things out. The thing is, it's only
the Labor Party that's ever been interested in these
things, in trying to bring people up who don't have a
lot of opportunities, to give them something extra and
valuable. And that's what TAFE's about.
J: Mr Keating, how do you feel about Britain's response to
your republican push and your war history?
PM: I wasn't talking about republicanism. My views on all
this are well known.
J: Mr Keating, are you happy with the way the Statement
has been received so far?
PM: Exceptionally well received by the business community,
exceptionally well received, I think, by the community
in general. Because it is a plan for Australia, it's a
plan for the next four years, it's about rebuilding the
basic infrastructure, the rail system, the electricity
system, giving Australia a different airline system, a
competitive airline policy, letting industries like
tourism flourish, about rebuilding the TAFE sector to
give students, children and adults alike, a better
opportunity in life. It's about all those basic things
thfat are not going to be done by taxing your Weet-Bix.
I mean the GST on your Kellogs is not going to build
that TAFE ,' college, it'Is not going to rebuild the 
-33-
Brisbane-Sydney-Melbourne-Adelaide-Perth railway line,
it's not going to change the ports, it's not going to
change the way in which the airline system works. You
can't get that sort of vision and change from a sterile
policy which taxes your Weet-Bix and your shirts.
ends. 



PRIME MINJISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
ADDRESS TO ELECTORATE OFFICE STAFF, WORKERS CLUB, CANBERRA
MARCH 3 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much for that very nice welcome and thank you
Bob ( McMullanr) for the introduction and for warming up the
crowd. It is always important, I think, for people at the coal face
of the Labor Party and its representation to know what the
Government is doing and to be aware of the general direction
and detail of the policy, and so therefore I thank you for
coming today and I thank the National Secretariat for
organising it.
It is important that when people, phone your offices and
enquire about details of the various policy changes that you
are in a position to know about the details and fit them
into a bill of context. And so it is very useful, I think,
for you to bother to come and to get that perspective and
get the perspective right.
The interesting thing about the ' 80s and early ' 90s was that
it was Labor that taught Australia change. It was not the
Liberal Party. The Liberal Party put Australia to sleep, in
policy terms, for a generation. And when we became the
Government, -the public of Australia were not used to change
and they never had change. The fact is we taught them
change, we taught the media change, we taught the whole
political system change. And the thing about it is, the
public now wants ' change. It's now become a driver in
change. So instead of the Government tugging along with the
community, the Opposition and everyone else, what's happened
now is that -the public are actually interested in change and
they are forcing' change and they're requiring change. And
when they thought in the last year or so that we were not
introducing change as quickly, they looked elsewhere for
change. And whenever anyone else proposed something which
was solid, then they lifted their eyebrows and looked. And
when of course the Opposition came with its GST camouflaged
as a policy change, they even looked at that. 7. 
-2
But the fact is, it is we who have made the great changes.
We are the people who have decided that we can no longer
live shearing sheep and growing wheat, that would no longer
pay for our imports, and it would no longer produce jobs
where we needed-them in the capital cities, that would
consign a generation of Australians to the unemployment
scrap heap. These were the problems we faced when we came
to office in the early period of the 1980s.
We decided -that we had to re-modernise the Australian
economy, revitalise it, and we had to start investing in our
people. Anti we started investing in our school children by
keeping them on at school by putting them through
universities, investing in the aged as well as young peoplE.
and middle aged people. So we covered the spectrum, decided
to invest in our community, to talk to it, to operate a
policy of consensus, to get a better national resul~ t which
has totally changed the way in which Australia now operates.
That is, we have now become an international country. For
the first tiLme ever in the last twelve months the value of
manufactured exports exceeded rural exports. The big
service sect~ ors we developed in the ' 80s, like tourism and
financial services, are new to Australia and providing jobs
all over the country.
And so we have had this very big change running through the
1980s interrupted by the boon of 1988-89 and the recession
which followed. But, nevertheless, with a clear direction
out the other side to a low inflationary prosperous future.
Now the chal~ lenge to us was to keep those changes going, to
show that we were the people that stood back and said now
what should we do now, what changes are best from this point
on? And we had ' a process of consensus, we talked to people
in the business community and in professions and across the
community generally, the trade unions, the welfare
organisations and said we think we have a fair idea where
we're going, giv e us your views about where you think we are
now and we'l~ l see where that fits into our scheme of things.
And we produced ' One Nation'. And One Nation is the policy
of Labor from the ' 80s in the continuum. It's taking it
down into those areas of the micro-economy after the great
policy changes of the macro-economy have been left behind.
That is, as we now have the challenges to make Australia
more efficient and more competitive it matters greatly then
that we dea. with the States, particularly in these
instrumental. ities which have such a great impact on the way
in which the! country functions.
So we have said these things. How do we make Australia more
efficient? How do we make the rail system more efficient?
How do we get a container through a port more quickly? How
do we have FU competitive airline system? How can we supply
power at competitive prices? How can we train our kids? how
can we give capital support to do more in terms of
investment which is the sole generator of employment? These 
3
are the things we did. We sat down and said what can we now
do for Australia which is best?
And what marks us out different to the Liberal Party, when
John Hewson had to sit down as Opposition leader and say
what can I now do as leader of the Opposition, what should I
now do for Australia, what is best for Australia? He sat
down, rather, and said what can I do that makes me different
to Labor? Not what's best for Australia or how do I keep
these great policy changes going or how do I make the place
more efficient, but how can I be different? And then, of
course, he then decided on his goods and services tax, the
Hewson Consumption Tax. And he camouflaged it in all of his
other changes so that the nastiness of the tax wouldn't
become immediately apparent.
But the contrast is that's not what we did. We sat down and
said what is the next thing we should do, and we decided on
these things. We decided at a time when private investment
was down to lift public investment, not a leap of logic, not
a change of policy, though we have had some commentators
saying that the change of policy is an entirely reasonable
thing. When the economy was booming in the ' 80s we withdrew
all, or as much as we could, of the public stimulus by
producing budget surpluses. And now that private investment
is weak we've decided to lift public investment, and we've
lifted it where it matters. It matters entirely whether the
port of Brisbane is connected to the railway line to Sydney,
it matters entirely whether the travelling time between
Sydney and Melbourne on the railway train can take trucks
off the road and deliver us an efficient, competitive,
relatively cheap freight service. It matters. It matters
that Melbourne can ship freight north to Brisbane and beyond
and west via Adelaide to Perth. It matters, it matters to
Australia. It matters that a ship can dock in Adelaide,
load cargo and deliver it within a day to a factory in
Sydney or Melbourne. It matters that a ship can come into
Fremantle and land bridge freight across the continent to
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane as the case may be.
These things are the basic machinery of trade, let go by two
generations of Liberal politicians. Two generations of them
decided to invest nothing in rail, two generations decided
to let that thing go, two generations decided simply to
respond to Country Party pressure for roads and to not think
about the way in which our highway system was developing.
To not plan for trucks mauling the domestic roads of our
capital cities, to not put the ring roads in, to not do the
things which even were part and parcel of their own
strategy. So these things matter. It will matter that a
business looking for electrical power can ask for bids and
have a bid from a Queensland power station, a New South
Wales power station, a Victorian power station and have that
power station fund the grid and supply that power. And that
power price might make all the difference to whether that
investment is undertaken, whether that business succeeds and
whether the product of that business in internationally
competitive. 
4
We have a great natural advantage. Countries should play to
their competitive strengths. One of our competitive
advantages is a coal seam right down the east coast of
Australia. One of things we should be able to produce
cheaply, very cheaply, is electricity. But while ever we
run these state-bound systems with over-capacity, undercapacity
all these other problems, we will never actually
realise that potential.
Now is this going to happen by taxing your Kelloggs
Cornflakes? Is the railway line going to improve itself?
Are the bridges going to be lifted? Are the roads going to
be straightened? Are the dedicated freight lines out of
Sydney going to be created? Are the electricity grids going
to be created? by taxing the old Weet-Bix or the socks and
shirts and shoes or the dry cleaning or the other services
which make up part of daily life. And, of course, the
answer is it won't. It won't, and what we've found now with
this Treasury study is that the Treasury has blown even the
distributional features of the so called Fightback
Fightbackwards is a better name for it, Fightbackwards, the
Fightbackwards program, the backward program of the Liberal
Party, the distributional features of it actually make most
Australian families worse off, most Australian tax payers
worse off.
So not only do they not tackle the big things which are now
the next phase in our changes, cracking all of these
problems in the micro-economy, railroads, ports etc. Not
only do they not tackle those, but as well as that they
actually retard the economy with a tax which lifts the
inflation rate, slows down domestic product and lifts
unemployment so says the chief modeller associated with
the Hewson Fightback package.
Now, that's what it's all about. I mean, again here is
Labor sitting down, taking its breath, thinking, talking,
deciding and getting another great raft of changes going,
including a big tax break for capital, with a new
depreciation rate. I never minded giving capital a tax
break in this country. We're the people that brought the
corporate rate from 49 to 39 per cent. We're the people
that gave them dividend imputation. We're the people now,
giving a world ranking, competitive depreciation schedule.
Because it's capital that creates the jobs. It's capital
that puts that basic investment in. But if you look at the
Fightbackwards program, they have got the company rate going
backwards, from 39 to 42 per cent, nothing for depreciation,.
nothing that will actually change the way in which
investment operates. And with the inflation rate rising,
the inflation rate doubling on Dr Hewson's own submission
and with it a consequent rise in interest rates.
So just as a Government is providing a very low cost of
capital regime, via interest rates and depreciation, just as
we are really setting the place so the investment can really
start rolling again, here is the Liberal party saying, no, 
no, no, what we ' think we are is higher inflation and higher
interest rates. The Coalition will actually stick the
company tax right up. And just while we are at that, we'll
have a confrontation with labour, we'll try and wipe the
unions out, we'll knock out national wage cases, there will
be no concensus under us, and if there is any inflation
moving I will just say to the central bank, stick the
interest rates up further, so says Dr Hewson. And we just
slipped back into a low growth mode. Not the 4 per cent in
our program that will deliver 800,000 jobs in 4 years, none
of that, but much lower rates of growth as they hit the
monetary brakes.
Now, in ' One Nation', we've tried to bring the community
together. To bring the unions together with business, a
partnership between government and business. We're trying
to get Australia going. No ideological approach, simply
looking at the problems and trying to get a result. And the
business community basically took the same view when they
were meeting us. There was no ideology. People said, look
forget all that, we are not here to say we want this, we
want that, we just want to get cracking again. We want you
to do this and do that, if you can do it. And we have
undertaken those, things.
As well as that we've done a couple of other very
interesting things. We're going to take the TAFE system,
the weak breed of Australian education, and make it a strand
of equal strength with the universities. We are going to
take that system closest to the community, beyond school,
TAFE, where people train themselves for the first time, and
retrain themselves and give it a status and a place in the
Australian education system of substance and importance. In
other words, we said its just not good enough to be A clever
country, one has also got to be a capable country. And that
means getting that capability up across our workforce, and
so we will see a revolution in TAFE and we will do for it
what the Commonwealth was able to do for universities.
Now John Hewson says, its irresponsible and its
unaf fordable. It's irresponsible, the package is
irresponsible and it's unaf fordable. He does not want to
invest in those children. when we came to office 4 children
in 10 only completed secondary school. They weren't worried
about the other 6 in 10 that were left to wander off and try
and find their way around, untrained, uneducated around the
labour market, drifting into all the problems that young
people drift intb in that sort of state. They were never
ever interested in lifting the retention rates in secondary
school after we did it. And at the same time we lifted the
intake in the universities creating the equivalent of a
dozen universities' since the middle ' 80s, 120,000 places
in higher education. They will embeace that, but their
feeble policy to that is, it should be freedom to achieve,
so that if you have $ 12,000 or $ 13,000 to send your child to
university, -that's as it should be. Places provided if you
pay for them. But to earn $ 12,000 or $ 13,000 after tax, you
have got to earn $ 20,000 or $ 25,000 pre tax, and for even a I 
6
two income familys it's half their income to send one child
to university. That's what they call ' equal opportunity',
that's what they call ' freedom to achieve'.
And so, they're quite happy to embrace our reforms... out of
the universities, having done nothing about themselves about
it themselves, but criticise it. But on the outside we'll
take the rest of those kids who can't find a place in
university because of their marks, or the available places,
or the inavailability of places, but who can have
interesting and fulfilling lives in a myriad of places in
the economy. They are now saying that it's irresponsible
and it's unaffordable, but they won't invest in our children
in this respect. And this is unbelievable, unbelievable for
a party which claims of itself to be interested in the
freedom to achieve and the right to excel and all the rest
of it.
The fact is, as always, it's only Labor that's ever really
interested in the great body of the Australian population.
They are about basically a tax break for the wealthy, and
what the Treasury study will show you, is the Liberal party
policy at its usual, that is, Fightback is not a package of
reform and change, it's an excuse for a tax. It's simply an
excuse for a tax. And a tax which shifts income from the
low paid to the high paid. And on the way through, make
sure that all the things that are worth doing, like giving
kids the technical education, like lifting the capacity for
capital investment in Australia, like fixing up the
industrial archaeology of the railways, like making certain
that the power system operates for Australia competitively.
No, no it is: all subsumed in the barren ideology, the barren
accountancy of the ons and offs of the so called ' Fightback'
package. And that's why we are different and we're better. We've
always been better, and we're still better, because we are
the people who have decided what the change for Australia
was when Mr Howard and his then adviser, Dr Hewson, left in
despair in 1983. And Dr Hewson waddled off into private
life, and Mr Howard sat mute and chastened on the frontbench
looking at his handy work all around him. And we
said, this is the way forward, let's remove exchange
controls and float the exchange rate, let's open Australia
up, let's internationalise the place, let's cut the tariffs,
let's get the deficit down, let's produce a surplus, let's
get the tax system tidied up, make it fair, let's put our
kids through school, let's get to the point where we train
people, let's change the labour market, let's do all these
things.
Then we move onto the later phase, let's fix
telecommunications, let's fix the motor industry, now the
railways, ports, railways. I mean we are the people that
have the big vista, the big vision. And what's his big
vision? What his big vision is basically to go and tax your
Weet-Bix and your Cornflakes, and the shirt on your back and
your shoes, and to call this reform. And of course, in 
7
there the sleight of hand, he pretended to people that he
was going to give them a big tax cut, we will give you this
consumption tax, we will tax your expenditure but we will
give you a big tax cut.
And what we found was, that the GST was not going to give a
tax cut at all. The GST simply paid for a removal of pay
roll tax, cuts in petrol excise, and customs duty. In other
words, here we have this tax which is going to attack the
way of life of every Australian family which is going to
assault the low paid and the middle incomes, which is going
to totally change the way in which commerce is conducted in
Australia, which is going to lift our inflation rate, and
ought to remove pay-roll tax, cut the excise of petrol, and
reduce customs duty because the personal income tax cuts are
funded by what's called, fiscal drag, the impact of
inflation on the tax system. And so he says, aren't we
making big fellows of ourselves, we are going to give you a
per cent tax rate at 20,700 onwards through the middle
income ranges and that will give you an incentive to work,
but of course you pay a 50 per cent consumption tax. And we
said, hang on there is nothing remarkable about that, we can
give back the fiscal drag too. We always have. We have
more than given back fiscal drag from the period that the
Government came to office in 1983, with those vast tax cuts
through the 1980' s.
So we have done the same. A 30 per cent tax rate from
$ 20,700 but no consumption tax, no 15 per cent string
attached, no 15 per cent sting in the tail. A 30 per cent
tax rate by virtue of the fact that Labor can use its hard
won fiscal inheritance from all those years of producing a
structural Budget surplus and doing it with the Budget
whirling back in to surplus in 1995-96. In other words,
having produced $ 18 billion of surpluses, Labor can adopt
the ' One Nation' package and yet despite that and the
recession, and the costs of ' One Nation', seeing the Budget
come back into surplus in 1995-96.
So that's what we stand on. We stand on a package which is
about Australians working together, which is about
restarting growth and producing employment, 800,000 jobs
over a 4 year period. About breaking through other log Jams
in the economy in the micro area, underiding further
investment in our children, giving lower middle income tax
payers a tax break without a consumption tax and bringing
business back into that partnership by giving Australian
business one of the lowest costs of capital regimes in the
world. Now that's what we are for. And if that is not a
big view, if that is not the view that Australia needs to
continue to take it into the trading world, particularly the
Asia-Pacific, which is the fastest growing area of the
world, where you have got 6 and 7 and 8 per cent growth
rates where we can sell our produce into those markets, if
that's not the way forward, compared to this miserable
approach of taxing people the basic necessities of life and
then taking the proceeds of it and tipping it into the 
8
highest tax payers in the land, that's what he is about, but
that's what they have always been about.
I repeat, Fightback was never a package of reform, it was an
excuse for a tax and in Australian terms, it is simply a
backward step. ' Fightbackwards' is the right way to view
it, it is the right mind set in looking at their policies.
So, I will be happy to take some questions from you, but be
assured about this, that this Government has been the
motivator of change in Australia, it's been the agent of
change, the party which has taught the Australian people
change, has now encouraged them in change and it is the one
continuing still to make the changes, still with the big
view, the big vista, the big builders of Australia, is still
the Labor party, still this Government. And that's why we
are better, we always were better, and we will always be
better than this sort of Opposition which we now face.
Thank you. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
PM: Now don't be shy, who wants to be first? Now you can't
have read the documents that well.
Q: I was just wondering if you could comment on Dr
Hewson' s solution to what he sees as no progress in
waterfront reform and his proposal to send in the
troops.
PM: By Christmas this year waterfront employment will have
fallen by 50 per cent over the last two years. That
is, the same task being produced half as many people, a
per cent improvement in productivity. On the coast
our ships now have crew levels below OECD crew manning
sizes. And we have got to a point now where we have
got to wait for a pooled labour on the waterfront, to
waterfront employment by the stevedorian and companies.
In other words, with all the changes they could have
done in their years of sloth, in the Rip Van Wrinkle
years of Menzies, and the years which followed, we
never heard from Mr Howard or Dr Hewson when they were
running the place for seven years saying, oh look we
have really got to get into this waterfront it's a
problem, I mean low efficiency levels on the waterfront
are going to retard our national growth, going to
impede our competitiveness, never heard any of that.
The only response, and the first response we got from
him is the one you identified, we'll put the troops in.
Isn't this a classic view from somebody who does not
know about this sector of the workforce, does not know
about the change, does not know about society. As I
said, Dr Hewson would require a military map to find
his way west of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Once you
take him ou t of the comfort station of the inner
Eastern Suburbs to where the people mostly live,
whether it be on the waterfront or in the suburbs
around it, or to the west where all the problems of
housing, pollution, educational opportunities and
health, and all those other things are, this is a
matter of which he is not conscious. That is, out of
sight and ou't of mind.
So waterfront reform has been a great triumph for the
Government and is now reaching its mature point of that
change. And it will improve, as a result of these
changes, by making the rail and port interface all
around the country, more efficient. So it won't be
just a matter of having an efficient waterfront, but
having an efficient interface with the rail system so
we can actually shift. Afterall, most of our
merchandise trade now comes up in bulk commodities by
containers and they're bulky, and every 1 1/ 2
containers you see on a train is one truck off the main
highways. It's a transport system which makes sense. 
Basically rail carrying a greater proportion of
containers between cities and then the trucks doing
their distributional role in the cities. And this is
the way it should be, rather than the trucks racing the
trains up and down the highways.
Waterfront reform will be something basically the
Government has made enormous changes in, and where the
sterile, I mean, he is still on about the criticism, he
probably doesn't know that by Christmas waterfront
employment will have fallen by half. He probably
doesn't know. He still talks about it like he did
three years ago, before these reforms were undertaken.
So the fact is, they don't know what to do and wouldn't
know where to start, and they just take the changes
we've got, put it in their pockets and say oh yes we
will do better. I was making that point a year or two
ago, when they were talking microeconomic reform, I
said it was like building the Empire State Building,
and then having someone race up in the lift to put a
brick on top and say, ours is bigger. And that's the
Liberal Party they adopt all of our things and say we
will go one centimetre further, but never having the
wit or the courage to build the edifice in the first
place.
Q: Could you explain the reason for taking the 50 per cent
ownership controls off foreign investment in the coal
mining industry?
PM: One of the great concerns in the ' 70s was that we
wouldn't be able to reap appropriate national rewards
from the ex tractive industries in the hands of
foreigners without a substantial level of Australian
ownership. That's now, I think changed. There's been
a substantial change in the way in which some of these
industries are configured, we have had great change in
the ownership of the coal industry, and we now believe
that the 50 per cent rule was an impediment to further
investment in coal mining. In other words, we weren't
able to get new mines up while ever there was this
requirement that there had to be 50 per cent Australian
equity when the Australian equity paths were not really
available. And given the fact that we have now got a
much tighter income tax system, and we have got foreign
source legislation and all other sorts or capacities to
audit companies and to look at transfer pricing and the
rest, and given the fact that our big bulk commodities
have traded' into an international trading system, and
are not really in vertically-integrated companies where
you can transfer price, we thought the transfer price
risk was down, but the risk in terms of investment was
greater to us by having that rule there, so we removed
it. Which will make Australia freer for investment,
more attractive for foreigners to invest, and the more
equity and the less debt we get the better that debt
and current account scene is. 
0: Does this also apply to the tourist industry?
PM: Foreign~ ers always could invest 100 per cent in a
tourist: related investment, that is the case now. It
was onl~ y ever in mining that this 50 per cent rule
applied. But we have done a lot for tourism in the
packagE!. As I said in the Statement, tourism was one
of the great performers of the 1980s and one of the
stars I~ n 1990s. It provides a tremendous amount of
work and particularly for women, particularly and
especiEll1y for women. So for the industry we have
increased promotional budget of the Australian Tourist
Commission for simply advertising Australia abroad, we
have dramatically increased the depreciation rates for
structures, hotels, integrated tourist developments
etc, fo'r investment. And we've changed the
depreciation rates for all the things that go inside,
like carpets, kitchens and bedroom furniture and all
the other things, it is a much faster acceleration. As
is often the case, hotels are refurbished every seven
or eight years, it will mean a faster write off for
them, a. greater capacity, better cash flows, and a
greater capacity to do it. And the tax rule supporting
the development of a bigger level of tourist
accommo'dation in Australia, which will be our need. As
Australia becomes a more popular inbound tourist
destination, we will need more capacity and
accommodation then we have got now. And these rules
will greatly enhance the ability of people to add to
that capacity.
Q: I was wondering if you could explain the reasons and
timing of the tax cut.
PM: The Government has always given back more than fiscal
drag. Because it lowered the size of the public sector
from 30 per cent GDP to 23 1/ 2, it cut the public
sector back before the recession by 7 per cent of GDP
which is 30,000 million a year smaller. It meant we
didn't need a revenue share as large as we had, So
therefore we were able to finance the Australian public
sector with a smaller tax base. Therefore we were able
to give real income tax cuts in the ' 80s. So not only
do we give back the effects of inflation on a tax
system, but as well as that we're able to actually give
back some of the real level of taxation which was
formally holding a bigger public sector together,
financing a bigger public sector. Now, what we are
proposing here is because there is a cyclical effect
from the recession which has turned the Budget from a
surplus to a deficit, and because we now wish to add to
that deficit, to provide a stimulus to growth, recovery
and employment, we don't want to be making the deficit
larger by tax cuts now. But as a cycle turns and the
Budget comes back towards surplus, where those tax cuts
* become affordable, we're going to pay them at the
earliest opportunity in 1994-' 95 and ' 95-' 96, and they
will be paid from $ 20,700 upwards. So I make two 
points to you, that in the 1980s the area of employment
that we concentrated those tax cuts in most was below
$ 20,000, to the low paid. Where I lifted the tax free
threshold from $ 4,900 to $ 5,400 and cut the first rate,
the rate from $ 5,400 to $ 20,000, from 30 per cent to
per cent, providing enormous tax cuts to those people
down the bottom, and of course we introduced the family
allowance supplement, which we added to substantially
in this Statement with another $ 250 million. And it
will remain again that low paid families will get
targeted and valuable support from the family allowance
supplement and from these changes. So the tax cuts are
being paid when the Government can afford it, when the
Budget can afford it, and even paying them, the Budget
will stiLll come back to surplus. I might just take one
more, then I have got to go back to a Caucus meeting.
Q: How soon will the job creation aspects of ' One Nation'
lock in'?
PM: They will start quickly I think, particularly the road
programs which can be built up quickly, the rail
programs will take sometime to start. But one of the
things we wanted to do was to inject some funds into
the economy to get spending going in the retail areas
and through, business generally, and that's why we've
made the one-off payment to families of between $ 125
and $ 250) so that families would spend it, and that
would generate activity and start to get business
going. So there is that happening in April. And as
that happens we will have the build-up from the
infrastructure program. And no doubt the depreciation
changes will bring forward investment and cause
investment to occur which otherwise wouldn't occur with
slower rates of depreciation. And of course we have
got the stimulatory effects of the low interest rates
which I reduced first in January 1992, over two years
ago, as they become an 11 per centage point reduction
interest rates, starting to really have their impact
inside the economy. So those things, that is the
general stimulus coming from lower interest rates, the
stimulus coming from the change from the Budget from a
surplus to a deficit, the one-off payment to families
and the build-up of the infrastructure program and
depreciation from investment, should start to get the
economy cradking again, and we will start to see those
growth numbers come through 4 3/ 4 per cent through
the year in 1992-3 which will get Australia back to
growth. Employment and growth are so tied together.
If you look back right to the 1960s every time you see
a lift in GDP you see a lift in employment. Where it
trails of f you see one following the other. If we get
activity up and GDP moving we will get it employment
moving and I believe we will. 



PRIME MINISTER 21/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
YUGOSLAVIAN REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
The Australian Government is acutely conscious of the
sensitivities that are involved in relation to the question
of the recognition of what is presently known as the
Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia.
From the point of view of the people living in this and
other parts of the region, and their friends and relatives
abroad, we understand and symnpathise with their struggle to
fulfil their legitimate aspirations for democracy and
independence. We are concerned at the continuing human
suffering which exists in the former Yugoslavia, and are
totally supportive of the efforts within the EC and the UN
to bring about a lasting peace.
From the point of view of Greece, and the Greek community in
Australia, the question of the recognition of the
Yugoslavian republic known as Macedonia creates a number of
problems which do not exist in relation to other present or
former Yugoslavian republics.
Greek concerns include:
the use of the name " Macedonia", with all its
historical and cultural associations with ancient
Macedonia; doubts about Skopje's commitment to accepting the
scovereignty and inviolability of the whole of
present day Greece; and
the question of the protection of minorities, in
particular the Albanians who boycotted the 1991
independence referendum. 
Australia will not proceed to recognition until these basic:
outstanding questions are resolved:
the use of the word " Macedonia" being settled in a
way that does not cause further tension with
Greece; Greece's concern about possible territorial claims
or aspirations being fully met; and
the international community's concern about the
protection of minorities being fully satisfied.
We are aware of divided opinion on these issues in Europe
and of efforts to find a mutually acceptable outcome between
Athens and Skopje.
Australia is firmly of the view that the recognition issue
should be determined in a way which avoids creating new
tensions in a region already undergoing such rapid change.
CANBERRA 3 March 1992 



PRIME MINISTER22/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
HEWSON HIDES FROM QUESTION TIME
Today Dr Hewson revealed his new strategy for Parliament
he intends to ask me no questions and have his deputy move
frivolous censure motions.
He is under pressure and cannot handle the Parliamentary
forum.
Dr Hewson should appreciate that the Government is not bound
to accept frivolous censure motions sooner or later he
will have to front.
When he does he will be subjected to the same scrutiny I
have subjected him to over the past two weeks.
When he accepted the job of Opposition Leader he said he
would restore Question Time to its rightful place.
Suddenly, the man who used to ask the questions doesn't like
the answers.
CANBERRA March 4 1992
I 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE
4 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: this morning, do you take any heart from the fact
that the majority of Australians polled would seem to
support the concept of a republic?
PM: Well, I think it is a reflection of a growing sense of
independence in Australia, and that independence is
again shown here today. This is a very important
milestone, this plant, in Australia's industrial
history, its development, indeed its independence.
This is a first state of the art, world ranking plant
which will be developed under the Government's car
plans. If you like, part of the renewal of Australian
manufacturing in the 1990s and beyond. A plant that
will service in the 21st century. It is part of the
reason why Australians can make it. We can trade
successfully and of course, into the area of the world
we live in, the Asia-Pacific, where all the growth is.
And it is that, I think, independence and capacity of
independence with Australians are feeling. And you are
seeing that reflected in polls.
J: On another issue, would you like to see an early
election here in Victoria?
PM: Not for me, that's a matter for Premier Kirner.
J: Do you know if members of the ALP are pressuring Mrs
Kirner to go early?
PM: Look, I don't know, I don't know.
J: What advice would you have for her?
PM: Look, I've got no advice for Mrs Kirner, she can look
after herself in these respects. But I am pleased to
see her here today. I am pleased that the Victorian 1 
Government has so supported this project as it has. I
mean thiLs is a real thing. I mean often newspapers are
talking about things that don't matter. This does
matter. This is part'of Melbourne's future into the
next century. That's what this thing stands for today.
This is about, the great change outward to become a
sophisticated industrial society and a great vote of
confidence by a world ranking company, the Toyota Motor
Company, in this country, in Australia, in Australian
workers and in the Australian nation, in our
competitiveness.
J: Mr KeatLng, how do you rate your chance in the Wills?
PM: Well, I think the Liberal Party has got a 15 or
point lead, that ought to be shoe-in for them, but we
will be fighting them all the way.
J: When can those electors expect to go to the polls?
PM: Well, that's got to be decided by the Speaker, amongst
other things.
ENDS
I 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
7.30 REPORT WITH PAUL LYNEHAM
MARCH 1992
E&amp; EO PROOF COPY
PL: Your battle with Dr Hewson, it's getting pretty
personal isn't it?
PM: No
PL: No?
PM: No, no. It's about exposing fightback for the fraud
that it is.
PL: So you don't really dislike him as much as it appears?
PM: and proposing Labor's program for the next four
years.
PL: It is pretty personal, you call him spiteful and
vindictive and wicked and all sorts of things.
PM: Well he has made a few brutal assaults on us, but
that's all part and parcel of it all.
PL: Well if you're such good mates tell us about his good
qualities. Has he got any?
PM: Well I am not good mates with him, but I don't have any
personal problems with him.
PL: Unlike your problem with Mr Howard, for example.
PM: Well he stepped over the line, and I had to show him a
lesson.
PL: So we are not to believe there is any personal animus
here across the chamber. 
PM: We are fighting over things worth fighting about. He
thinks we can fix the nation's troubles, he has told
us, by putting a 15 per cent tax on everything we buy,
and everything we use, food, clothing etc. I know
that's wrong, I have been round this game a long time,
around the Treasury a long time, that's wrong. What we
propose is something which I think has vista, vision,
which will lift recovery, employment, improve our
nationa. efficiency, and basically give Australians a
real chance in the 1990s.
PL: You said today that Dr Hewson's Fightback package was
already finished, sinking in the water. I mean, I
would have thought the latest polls were saying it was
about neck and neck, with roughly a quarter of the
population waiting to see.
PM: Forget the polls, there has been a sea change here this
week. The Government in two weeks of Question Time and
the Treasury and its analysis of the Fightback Package
it's basically holed, it's taking in water and it is
sinking. Now Dr Hewson had two days notice, he had the
National. Press Club to come back and rebut the
Treasury's findings, that 4 out of 5 tax payers will be
worse off, and 7 families out of 10, 7 households will
be worse! off. He couldn't, he didn't, and we found
today in the Financial Review, " Hewson vows to top up
the tax cuts". From what was just the be all and end
all with, Fightback is now gone.
PL: To be fair, it wasn't the be all and end all. I can
show you. quotes of his some weeks ago, where he was
saying those tax cuts were merely an indication of
where he; was going.
PM: Look, basically he knows that he has been caught out.
He was trying to say that this was a great package for
business. He spent $ 6 billion cutting payroll tax and
$ 6 billion removing petrol tax, which is largely paid
by business. If you are going to transfer that to
business where does it come from? It comes from
households, and the Treasury had the temerity to point
this out, that most households will be worse off. So
straight away the be all end all program is now back to
being, hang on don't worry, I will top it up with more
tax cuts, I will find more money, it doesn't matter if
I blow the Budget deficit, I will buy my way back to
power. In other words the great stitched together,
knitted together, tight little package, is basically in
bits, and he had a chance to defend it, to attack the
Treasury ana lysis and he couldn't, and to beat off the
Government.. He couldn't do either.
PL: But look, y6o'u can still make fine tuning to you~ r
proposals, you have got the August Budget, perhaps even
a small statement in the new year before the election,
and you're not going to take those chances, to -tweak it
up a bit here and there? 
PM: But I have never said that this was the be all and end
all, thiLs was the package which will change all.
PL: But neither has he.
PM: Yes he has, now come on Paul, yes he has. The
Fightback was presented as a package of reform for
AustraliLa. In reality it was an excuse for a t; ax, a
very nasty, very large consumption tax on food,
clothing and services. It was a transfer of wealth to
business and the high paid. That's what it was. It
has been exposed for what it is by the Government and
the Treasury, he has no comeback to it and now his only
comeback is don't worry I will conjure up a new trick.
Fightback mark I is dead, that's now throwback,
dieback, Fightback mark II will be unveiled as the
electoral pressure comes on. I mean the question is
what will Dr Hewson do to buy his way to office, how
much damage to the national economy and fiscal policy
will he undertake?
PL: Haven't you appeared, though, to have made a tactical
blunder with your proposed tax cuts by appearing to
neglect those earning less than $ 20,000 a year?
PM: Oh come on Paul look, when I became Treasurer the
lowest r. ate of tax on low incomes was 30 per cent.
PL: Yes, but: that's all history now.
PM: No, it Jis not history. It has to be paid for, and it
is paid for every year, it's now 20 per cent, it was
reduced by 33 1/ 3 per cent, the lowest tax rate. At
the same time we introduced a family allowance
supplement, which is a tremendous boost to low income
families, at the same time we are supporting a national
wage adjustment, still, for the low paid.
PL: Yes, but thait is not the tax system.
PM: Dr Hewson is now saying, he won't have a national wage
adjustment for the low paid, and he is now looking at
his tax cuts under $ 20,000 which don't even cover the
cost of the consumption tax.
PL: But why should people on $ 30,000 get a tax cut and not
people on $ 20,000?
PM: Because the people below $ 20,000 got tax cuts all the
way through the ' 80s, when people above $ 20,000 and
between $ 40,000 didn't get as large a tax cut.
PL: And you have still got the Budget and the Statement
next yeEar perhaps. 
PM: And in the ' One Nation' Package a tremendous fillip for
families and another $ 250 million for the family
allowance supplement.
PL: Twice today you seemed to duck the question of whether
you will give back the proceeds of bracket creep from
now on. Any chance of a direct answer on that?
PM: Absolutely, this Government has given back more than
the proceeds of bracket creep, that's the impact of
inflation on the tax system, over the course of its
Government and it will again.
PL: And it will again?
PM: And it will again. But it won't be doing it with any
automaticity, it will be doing it as we say in the ' One
Nation' Package in 1994-95 and 1995-96. In other words
we will return to tax payers the impact of inflation,
even low inflation on the tax system.
PL: Look, if you are really so confident, and Fightback,
you betray the Opposition as, what was your phrase,
handcuffed to the black box while the Exocet missile
came down.
PM: Well Dr Hewson basically handcuffed them all to this
thing. A lot of them didn't like it you know, they
were very worried about it. It's blown up, they all
know, look around these corridors, in the Parliamentary
corridors, they know it's as dead as a doornail.
PL: Look, if you're on such strong ground why not accept
their challenge instead of just having the Wills byelection,
have a general election?
PM: But why should we short-change the public with a short
Parliament, a Parliament which we fought over in 1990
and where the Government secured a majority, where the
public expect you to run your full term, where the
Government should go on governing, why would I
recommend to the Governor-General that we dissolve this
Parliament to do what?
PL: So in the public interest, reluctantly relinquishing
what you: see as a winning position?
PM: Dr Hewson and his party came second at the last
election, and the price of coming second is that you
wait for the next one. The next one is about 15 months
from now.
PL: The republican issue, when you raised it were you aware
that within a few days that Saulwick poll would come
out showing 57 per cent of Australians in favour of a
Republic? 
PM: I never raised a republican issue, I talked about
Australians having a confident position about
themselves, about our independence.
PL: You gave the Poms a good kicking didn't you?
PM: Well, with the point in mind, of saying to some of the
Anglifiers in Australia, some of the people here who
present themselves, I mean, less confident Australians
who seek to lead the nation and call the tune for our
destiny, who still want to attach themselves to
something, which is now finished for Australia, that is
an old relationship with Britain, where Britain had the
cultural. and political hand in the relationship it is
over.
PL: Well should we be a Republic Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I am not certain of that, I think we probably
will eventually. When that will be Paul, I don't know.
PL: Well ALI' policy is a referendum aimed at the year 2001.
PM: Look, I was certainly not arguing that case, but the
fact of the matter is, I do certainly argue that we
should be whole-hearted Australians and not halfhearted
Australians. Not forelock tuggers to anybody,
and certainly not tugging the forelock while trying to
present themselves as leaders of the
PL: And an independent, confident nation forging those
links in with Asia, that's the scenario isn't it?
PM: Exactly..
PL: But we are not really part of the Asian club are we?
Do you think we ever will be?
PM: Well we have got 73 per cent of our exports going
there, and 67 per cent of our imports. That makes us
pretty mauch part of the club.
PL: Yes, but we'are different aren't we, we are not: really
in the middle of it are we, we are just sort of that
funny mob down the bottom of the map?
PM: Well no--one is in the middle of it, the middle of it is
the PaciLfic Ocean basically. The Asia-Pacific is a
basin, we are around it, the same as everybody else,
and we are having our share of that growth, and we are
becoming a competitive country, an open competitive
country, and the increments to wealth, and employment,
living standards which can come from that trade, are
obvious: ly coming from the Asia-Pacific' I mean the
days when most our trade was with Europe or wit~ h
Britain are gone. 
PL: And finally, in terms of the fine art of Parliamentary
debate, what does burble, burble, burble mean?
PM: Things worth fighting about are worth exposing the
issues on, There is a contest for ideas in this
Parliament between a package which basically puts a
heavy tax on people's way of life. Well let me just
make this clear, Dr Hewson was saying in a barrage that
there was a conspiracy between the Treasury, the
Government, the ABC, and I was simply making the point
that it was gibberish. If you can think in a second
what the physical manifestation of gibberish is and do
better, good on you, but that's what I was trying to
say. To say of our national broadcast, that it has
sold out to the Labor Party, to say of the Treasury
that it has been operated for and by the Government is
of course a dastedly attack upon those institutions and
I was saying so. And to say, if you want to defend
your package, defend your package, but don't shoot the
messenger, Dr Hewson.
PL: That's all we have got time for, thanks a lot.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
The following is the text of a message from the Prime
Minister sent to HE Mr Suleyman Demirel, Prime Minister
of the Republic of Turkey.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Australia I wish to express to you my condolences
over the recent mine disaster near Kozlu.
News of this terrible disaster has deeply shocked
the Australian people and has brought particular
sadness to our large Turkish population. We
sincerely hope that it may yet be possible to find
more survivors.
I pass on to you and the relatives of the victims
the deepest sympathy of the Australia people.
March 1992 24/ 92 



PRIME MINISTER 23/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PUBLIC SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
The Government will be recommending to the Governor-General
the appointment of Mr Michael Costello as Secretary to the
Department of Industrial Relations. He will take up this
appointment early next week.
Mr Costello, 43, has held a number of senior positions in
the foreign affairs portfolio, including Ambassador to the
United Nations. He has been Deputy Secretary of the
Department of~ Foreign Affairs and Trade since 1989.
Mr Graham Glenn, ' who has been the Secretary to the
Department of Industrial Relations since 1 March 1989, is
retiring fron the Australian Public Service. On behalf of
the Government, I express appreciation for the very
considerable contribution made by Mr Glenn during his career
especially in recent years when he has served as a member of
the Public SEtrvice Board, as Secretary of the Department of
Administrative Services, and most recently as Secretary of
the Department of Industrial Relations.
The Governmen~ t wishes to be able to continue to draw on Mr
Glenn's abilities and is exploring avenues of making the
best use of his wide-ranging skills and experience. The
Government i: recommending to the Governor-General that he
be appointed to the part-time office of the Chairperson of
the Commission for the Safety, Rehabilitation and
Compensation of Commonwealth Employees and, with effect
later in the year, as a member of the Australian Heritage
Commission. CANBERRA MARCH 1992 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CANBERRA
6 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: What chance do you give the Party in Wills, now that
you have set a date?
PM: Well, the Liberal Party have a 20 point lead in the
polls. I mean for them, they ought to be regarding
this as a shoe-in. So we always knew it would be a
battle : for us, but we'll fight it out.
I
J: How much time will you spend fighting it?
PM: Who got you up this early Laurie ( Oakes)? Early bird
catches the worm.
J: Why are you talking your chances down in Wills?
PM: Well, for the simple reason that the Labor Party's
stocks have been reasonably low in the State of
Victoria, and we have been 20 points behind, that's
why. It is not a matter of talking it down, it's fact.
But again we've got a bit of a margin there. But the
by-election swings have been larger generally than our
margin, notwithstanding the general situation in
Victoria.
J: Will you be there very often yourself?
I
PM: Well, enough Laurie ( Oakes), whatever that turns out to
be.
J: Will you do a Bob Carr and go to the supermarkets?
PM: I don't know whether that is the thing to do, but I
will do what I think is best.
J: How big a threat are independents in Wills? 
PM: I don't know. I don't know. But we will fight Wills
hard. We will fight Wills hard. The Labor Party
stands for something. We stand for changing the State
of Victoria. This statement, ' One Nation', will vastly
improve the business base of Victoria, the commerce,
trade, freight, new businesses, a whole new industry
for Victoria and it beats taxing your Weeties and your
Kelloggs at 15 per cent.
J: No tax cuts for low income earners...?
PM: We are not here for open heart surgery Paul,
( Bongiorno).
J: What do you think about the cricket loss last night?
PM: Oh well.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 25/ 92
The following is the text of a message from the Prime
Minister sent to the Hon Dr Edward Fenech-Adami, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Malta.
On behalf of the Australian Government and people
I would like to extend my congratulations to you
on your re-election as Prime Minister of Malta.
During your premiership over the last five years,
Malta has taken an active role in European and
world affairs, with your contributions to
activities in the United Nations and the
Commonwealth. In the relationship between our two countries,
your visit to Australia in August 1990 was a
landmark event and is well remembered by
Australia's large and active Maltese community.
Historical and community links continue to be an
important factor in our relationship. We are
fortunate that so many people of Maltese origin
have chosen to make this country their home. The
Maltese community has made an important and
lasting contribution to Australia's political,
economic and cultural life and will, I am sure,
continue to work towards building a prosperous and
harmonious multicultural society.
6 March 1992 



EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE~ PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF RODNEY HALL ' S NOVEL THE SECOND BRIDEGROOM
ADELAIDE FESTIVAL OF ARTS, 4.3OPM 6 MARCH 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I'm pleased -to be here today at one of the world's great
arts festivals.
My purpose is both to launch Rodney Hall's book and to
celebrate it.
It's a pleasure to be here because I know Rodney Hall, I
know some of his ideas, I know how much he cares about this
country, and I know he is going to make a great contribution
to our national life as Chairman of the Australia Council.
I also know that this book, which was published in hardback
last year, was never officially launched.
And any book which has enjoyed such magnificent acclaim as
this book has, deserves to be launched deserves to be
celebrated. I doubt if any book by an Australian has received better
reviews than this one.
Some of them are modestly repeated on the cover the
Financial Times calls it a modern classic
Rodney will forgive me for mentioning that the Financial
Times also gave me a good review recently, for a speech I
made in the presence of Her Majesty, and another I made in
the presence of Her Loyal Australian Opposition.
This does not mean the Financial Timesq is easy to please
it means they are discerning.
On the same cover you will see that Dinny O'Hearn says the
book is evenL better than the one before it, and the one
before it was a masterpiece.
This is the sort of language I have always liked. 
In Frankfurt: they said Rodney Hall ranks with Garcia
Marquez. In New York they compared him with William
Faulkner and Flannery O'Conner.
In the Sidney Morning Herald Stephen Knight ranked him with
Patrick White.
And back to London where the Sunday Time-, said " in Rodney
Hall Australia has produced another great novelist".
For this extraordinary critical reception Rodney Hall
deserves our congratulations although I know he won't mind
my saying that you haven't really been reviewed until you've
been reviewed in the London tabloids.
" Hands orf our language, cobber!", they would have said.
Given the ex;. pert and international literary judgements that
have been made on Rodney's recent work, it would be
presumptuous of me to pass any judgement.
But I can saLy that I enjoyed The Second Bridegroom and
that it's a novel of great interest to anyone who has
thought about European civilisation in this country.
Anyone who has ever wondered what it means to be an
Australian. The novel rang a Celtic bell in me. Like most Australians of
Irish extraction, Celtic mythology and the Celtic
temperament has always seemed to me a powerful force in our
make-up, and in the creation of our legends and traditions.
This is a book with any number of political and cultural
implications for Australia.
For instance! it's a very powerful reminder that we have to
come to terms with Aboriginal Australia pre and post
European.
Until we do this until we start to make some real progress
towards closing the gap in both attitudes and living
standards I think there will always be a feeling among us
that maybe wre don't quite belong, that we're not serious,
that we're simply here for the view.
Or just here! to make forgeries of the Old World.
These are old themes in Australia: the Celticry and
Aboriginality, the business of being what Manning Clark
called Austral-Britons.
Or as Rodney, Hall puts it Australians became a race with
one foot in the ' air.
If I might tie allowed to use that phrase for my own
purposes, Rodney, allow me to say that I would like to see
Australians put the foot down. 
These cultural cross currents are no bad thing, of course.
They have produced a lot of our intellectual energy. A lot
of our difference in fact.
And, contrary to the Les Paterson stereotype with which
someone recently branded me, I don't have any time at all
for the view that it's no good if it's not authentically
Australian. You're looking at someone who has a great affection for
Europe. Whoi counts among his greatest pleasures European
architecture and European music.
But I am not: British or French.
I'm Australian. It's the land I know, the people I know,
the resonances I feel, and my commitment to it happens to be
unequivocal, unambiguous and absolute.
If Australians are encouraged to think about it, I don't
think any of' them will want the cobwebs to remain. I don't
think they want their identity compromised.
These things really should not have to be said in a nation
which in truth is not so young any more.
But, as we've discovered in the last couple of weeks, when
these simplEt, unexceptional things arp said, they produce
responses Which are quite extraordinary.
They've been said, of course, by writers and artists,
they've been~ said on the stage and on film for years since
the turn of the century and before.
That, of course, is one of the great virtues of the arts and
why a country is healthier when they flourish. They can
provide us writh a truer vision of ourselves than politicians
or anyone else can.
That is one of the principle reasons why my government will
support the arts in this country.
It is also cone of the reasons why we are in favour of
appointing more artists to arts bodies, putting more of the
focus of arts policy on artists, and doing all we can to
improve the professional standing and income of our artists
and why I'm very happy to be able to announce today that
two great Australian artists, Carl Vine and Nanette Hassall
will shortly be reccomended to the Governor General for
appointment to the Australia Council.
There is no doubt that their knowledge and expertise will be
an enormous benefit, and their presence, inevitably, a
boost to the! Council's standing. 
4
The arts of course play a variety of roles in this country
but the most significant I think is making us believe in
ourselves. I don't mean that patriotism is a prerequisite I mean that
books like the one that we're celebrating today helps define
us to ourselves and to the world, and that is very
important. I may as well tell you now, however, that I will not be
leaving it up the artists to do this you are going to hear
a lot more in the way of uncompromising belief, including
uncompromising reference to our history.
As I said there are some among us who intend to put the
nation's foot down.
Let me once again congratulate you Rodney, thank you for the
metaphor, and all of you for having me here.
ADELAIDE/ CANBERRA 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP ADELAIDE, MARCH 6 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Sir, if I may ask a question of a cricket nature, Ian
Botham has come out today and said that your comments
last week spurred him and England on to greater things.
You have taken the wrap for the recession over the past
months, will you now take it for the cricket?
PM: Oh well, we, have got four games to go, I think, let's
wait and see what happens.
J: Well, Australians can stand perhaps a recession, but
they really, can't stand losing the cricket.
PM: Well in that case tell that to our crew.
J: What about Mr Botham, what about his comments?
PM: Well if it spurred him on to greater heights, it's good
for spo: ct, good for cricket.
J: Mr Keating, were you further annunciating your
republicanism remarks within that speech?
PM: Well I ' have never made republican remarks so-called, I
was just talking about Australia's independence and its
cultural identity, and the fact that Australians should
be whole-hearted Australians, and not half-hearted
Australians.
J: Have they been that in the past, under the previous
Prime Minister perhaps?
PM: Certainly under conservative Prime Ministers, and I
think that this is all part of Australia's continuing
transition. 
2
J: But there is'a difference in your sort of
Australianess, and Bob Hawke's sort of Australianess,
isn't there?
PM: Well I don't know, that is for you to make a judgement
about. ' rhe ABC keeps a sharp eye on all these things,
I know.
J: Is Dr Hewson off the pace of the republican debate,
Prime Minister?
PM: Well, the republican debate is very hard to pin down
isn't it, don't you think so?
J: How long do you think it will be before it will happen?
PM: I don't know, but I think we will probably see that
happen in Australia, but I am not sure when.
J: Will you be maintaining the pressure on the general
debate Prime Minister?
PM: Well I am not putting any pressure on the debate, I
just sort of made a few simple points about Australia's
independence from Europe, the fact that we are now a
country trading our way in the Asia Pacific, and Dr
Hewson had pains to point out. I didn't have enough
respect. And I said well maybe not for you, but for
Australia I have.
J: Do you like the flag Prime Minister, or would you like
to see it changed?
PM: Well I do think it is a curiosity to have the Union
Jack in the corner, I mean it is a bit of a corner.
J: Should : Lt be in the middle?
PM: Well the question is, should it be there at all?
J: Do you -think we should take it off?
PM: Well that's again another debate. It is no doubt, I ami
sure, that plenty of people in our neighborhood wonder
about us, whether we are as we describe ourselves as
being, a nation, while there is so much ambiguity about
our flag.
J: How are we all together different? You are quoted in
the Guardian this week as saying Australians are all
together different. How are we all together different?
PM: Well we are all together different in knowing, I think,
what we feel about the place, and different certainly
to Europe.
J: But how, does an Australian be more Australian? What
are you. saying about that? 
PM: Well for a start, not tugging the forelock to the
British establishment, that's a place for starters.
The Liberal Party are yet to learn about this, well
most of them. I
J: What's the essence of being Australian today?
PM: Being proud of the country, proud of our achievements,
wanting to see it be independent and successful, and
identifying with its independence and success, and not
hankering for something else.
J: What is going to be done about the Aboriginal questions
you mentioned in your speech?
PM: Well the Government is going to be attending to that in
the Aboriginal Deaths and Custody recommendation to the
Royal Commission, and which is one of the longest
running Royal Commission, probably ever. It is a very
serious set of recommendations which we are going to
respond to seriously.
J: Have you given some assurance to the, Premier of Western
Australia, Carmel Lawrence, that you will be looking at
perhaps modifying the fringe benefits tax in the
Budget? L
PM: No, I don't know why have you
J: There has been a report today along those lines.
PM: Well no I haven't.
J: What's your reaction to certain businessmen asking for
a lower dollar thinking that will fix their ills?
PM: Well you know, the Australian Foreign Exchange Market
is very deep, we turn over $ 40 billion a day, and if
they wish to make plaintive pleas about the rate, they
should make it loud and with feeling to the market, and
maybe someone will listen and take notice.
J: Mr Keating, what are your views on Bill Hayden being
Australia's first President?
PM: Well you should ask him that, I am not sure he has
volunteered for that role yet.
J: Mr keating, on a lighter note, Domingo is in town at
the moment and he wants to catch up with you, will you
have time?
PM: Well I am around but the thing is, I have got things to
do too.
ENDS 



43.
PRIME MINIISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, BRISBANE, MARCH 9 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, could we get your response to the ANZ
bank forecasts, no signs of a recovery for the economy'?
PM: It's a job Vacancies series, it goes up and down a bit
but it's been running the right way for quite a while
so I wouldn't be focusing too much on that. SiLgns of
recovery are ambiguous, that's why the Government did
introduce the Statement it did to try and accelerate
the recovery. And, of course, it will take some time
for that to have effect. The first payments are not
made until April, s0 it's going to take a while to have
an affect.
J: What about banks suggestion another cut in interest
rates?
PM: I'm not sure. Banks are sellers of money, they're
always suggesting lower interest rates.
J: So you're not considering that at all?
PM: No.
J: Are you confident figures due out later this week might
be a bit more optimistic?
PM: I think we are seeing, as I said, ambiguous signs.
Some signs seemed as though recovery is underway,
others don't. The popular interpretation is that we're
at the bottom of the trough, that may well be -true.
J: The job advertisements are a pretty good indicator, and
they're showing a drop..
PM: Yes, but they have been showing a rise for a few months
now, so there may be some correction to the statistics. 
2
J: This drop puts it back to the amount it was in
November, so really you haven't made any progress at
all.
PM: Again, I think it is patchy, it is very hard to tell.
J: The report this morning says that during the last 12
months the number of jobs has dropped.
PM: Employment has risen, it's the job vacancies.
Employment has risen in the period, but so too has
unemployment and the job vacancies were showing signs
of improvement over a period of time. But apparently
in this month they have dropped again. What does that
mean? It is very hard to say what it means.
J: What do you think the figure will be later today?
PM: I don't know, let's wait and see.
J: Do you have any comment to make on the distribution of
that speech you made in 1970?
PM: No, it's only the Liberal Party doing what it normally
does. In the 1970s they were still arguing for capital
punishment and militant about the fact that God Save
the Queen should still be the national anthem. They
were then raving reactionaries and a lot of them still
are now.
J: Your attitudes have changed a lot since then,
obviously?
PM: I worked out that, in the period, women deserved a
greater go and I tried to give it to them in the
and I catalogued that today in the speech. I think
this is yet to dawn on the Liberal Party.
J: Mr Keating, you admitted that you're not widely
regarded as a feminist. Have you got a lot of work to
do until the next election?
PM: As I went through some of the things I had done when in
the 1980s I tried to do everything I could to give
women an opportunity, mainly with employment. With
things like access to superannuation, which they were
formerly not given, they had no preserved benefits,
with a child maintenance agency so that husbands who
had responsibilities to them, faced them, the Family
Allowance Supplement to low paid families, mostly of
course supporting women. But one of the greatest
burdens that we'll see on women in the future, were it
ever to come to pass, would be the goods and services
tax. I can think of no other issue which will put such
a burden on women as the GST and that whole problem
about income exchange within families, about transfers
within families would have to be part and parcel of a
per cent impost on food and clothing and all the 
3
things that women are, in the main, responsible for in
the family.
J: Prime Minister on another matter, do you intend to
reignite the Special Premiers Conference agenda?
PM: I'm not here to go around the world for sport. That's
an issue, but the Premiers will be speaking to us about
the Premiers Conference round. Some are supporting the
reconvening on issues that were formerly part of the
Special Premiers Conference agenda. Many of them of
course have been adopted and I have, in the One Nation
Statement, moved that debate along with some of the
issues which were on the agenda. So I have got an open
mind about it.
J: Do you see a need for another Special Premiers
Conference?
PM: I think Australia has to be run co-operatively and it
means I think, therefore, that the Commonwealth and the
States have got to work together. What the processes
are in that working together is a moot point, but the
most important thing is that we should be working
together and will be working together.
ends. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH SALLY BEGBIE, 7.30 REPORT
9 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
He belives himself as passionate, thinks the recession was
unfortunate and sees the arts spiritually uplifting. You
might be forgiven for confusing the identity of this person,
it's Prime Minister Paul Keating. And this is the line he
is now adopting. And our arts reporter, Sally Begby, talked
with Paul Keating during his visit to the Adelaide Arts
Festival. PM: A few of the troops back home, back in Canberra query
the wisdom of coming among arty types. Well, I have
done it before. And they said, ' are you sure you know
the protocols, make sure you put your arm around
everyone'. So I decided to risk it, I decided that one
cannot stay forever in the conformity of the
Parliamentary burrow.
' The result is that by 5 to 4 majority, they have
awarded the 1991-92 Archibald Prize to Brian
Westwood for his portrait entitled, The Prime
Minister'.
He prefers the sound of the classics to the thard of leather
on willow. Less than 3 months into office, the Bankstown
boy with a VFL ticket is tailoring his image on the Arts
wicket. PM: I think that the Arts always gives any society that
chance to push out the boundaries of the temperal,
grasping for the spiritual and it's important for our
souls, it is important for our inner being. So the
Arts not only helped define who you are and what you
are, but they also spiritually uplift you, and I think
it is terribly important for a country to, and for
Governments of countries to sort of understand that.
J: The Arts are also about passion. Do you see yourself
as a passionate man? 
PM: I absolutely run on passion. That's why makes me tick.
That's what makes me tick. Absolutely, I mean, if you
are not passionate about things, I don't think you can
enjoy life to the fullest. And I am very passionate
about things.
J: Keating's affair with the Arts has been long-standing.
As Treasurer he implemented the most lucrative Arts
awards in the country, possibly in the world. The
creative fellowships, affectionately known as ' The
Keatings', give established artists between $ 150
$ 200,000 over a three to four year period to pursue
their ideas.
J: Will the Arts get a higher priority in your Governent?
PM: Well, I thought about taking the Arts portfolio myself
actually. But the problem you have with it is that
then every element of the Arts believes they should
have access to the Minister and be able talk to him or
her, as the case may be. And in the job I am doing,
you don't really have the time to do that. So it has
to be with another Minister, I think. But I am keeping
an interest in it and I am now thinking about what, in
the longer run, what our Arts policy should be.
J: Do you think that as we move towards a republic that
the place for the Arts will have increasing importance
and therefore deserve more funding?
PM: Well, the Arts are part of the reason why people are
even thinking about it, I think. So it's a case of the
chicken and the egg. I think, the Arts will be first,
and if there is further political change in this
country, it will be part due to the sort of ambiLence in
the national psyche of the national debate that's come
from, in part, the Arts.
J: The Australia Council, the major body for the Arts, has
seen it's funding cut by $ 20 million since 1974.
During the last decade of Labor it has had no increase
in real -terms. Still, Paul Keating is promising, only,
to look at funding levels.
PM: It's how you spend it, and whether the policy of
thinning the' butter on to the bread or dropping it on
in dollops or lumps. Whether you actually make one
area of -the Arts more significantly funded, better, or
whether you spread the joy widely, I think that's a
question, a teal question for policy.
J: Do you think it's a bit dangerous for you hanging your
hat on the Arts banner and moving away maybe from the
sports banner? I mean, Mr Hawke was seen at yacht
races and you are seen at writers festivals. 
PM: I used to sail an 18-footer in Sydney Harbour and I
will stay up for a good fight, or a good tennis match,
so it is not as if I am sort of one or the other. I am
interested in sport and I think sport is very good.
But I am also interested in the Arts, I think the Arts
are terribly important and the crowds that now come to
the Adelaide Arts Festival or the major galleries and
museums, theatre, dance, speaks for itself I think,
does it not?
J: It's ironic that Paul Keating who loves the music of
Mahler and the art of Turner, finds himself leading a
land a hemisphere away from Europe, a country he
stopped short of saying, is pushing towards a republic.
PM: Well, it's changing and it's part of that. I think the
political system has had the sense to let that change
percolate through the nation over time. And that is a
sensible position to take.
J: But you -have enjoyed a great momentum on this debate in
the last couple of weeks. Do you think that we will
be...
PM: I think one is entitled to say that we have an identity
of our own and ought to be confident about ourselves
and independent of people who wish to keep us tiLed to
another Apoc. You can say those things and be entitled
to say them. It is entirely another matter to be
saying, now we ought to move therefore from this point
to that, in sort of constitutional terms.
J: But do you see that perhaps we will have a referendum
before the turn of the century?
PM: I don't know, I don't know. It just depends how this
debate goes. It is a feeling, it is not a debate is
it? It is a feeling.
J: But it is a growing feeling Prime Minister?
PM: I think it is.
J: Paul Keating denies that his tilt towards republicanism
as John Rewson describes it, is just the reaction of an
Irish Catholic larrikin.
PM: Be clear about the fact that not only can we do it, but
we will do it, will be doing it, will be controlling
our own affairs, will be making our own place in the
world and saying, here we are, we are Australians, take
us as we are, we are different, we are from certainly a
country with European origins, but we are not European,
we're Australian. And I think if the country feels
that, we will make the economic change more quickly and
better. We've had the misfortune of the recession but
it will be simply a period and a longer run, I think,
period of success and change. And I know that change 
is occur: cing. I know that cultural change is in, in
commence and in trade, and I think it is in in societal
terms as well. So I think one has every reason to be
confident about Australia.
J: Where do youlget your confidence from? You are talking
that it's important for Australia to have confidence.
Where have you gained your confidence? Some people
said you got off to a shaky start as Prime Minister,
you're clearly confident now?
PM: No, but I always like the sort of, I was reconnoitring
for a couple of weeks, you see.
J: Did you have a good look around?
PM: working out where all the bits were. And once I
worked that out, away we went.
J: Just two months ago he was Mr 25 per cent, but there
were moments in Adelaide where you could sense that
even an undertaker can find a heartland.
I
Do you think that there will be more votes for you if
you fixed up the Australian Cricket Team than if you
fixed up funding to the Arts in Australia?
PM: Well, I don't know. One does not think in those terms.
I know that this may come as a great shock and
surprise, but there is still some substantial altruism
in a way in which a Government functions. And to do
what is right and best is what's important, and I think
it is important to get the Arts right, to get the
policy about the Arts right.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER]
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT FUND FOR WOMEN ( UNIFEM) BREAKFAST
HILTON HOTEL, BRISBANE 8.00 AM, MONDAY 9 MARCH 1992
Premier and Mrs Goss, Lord Mayor Soorley, my Minister
Assisting, Wendy Fatin, the President of UNIFEM Australia,
Beverley Perel and our esteemed guest, Ms Teresita Deles,
and friends.
It is a great pleasure to be here this morning to join in
your International Women's Day celebrations.
Sometimes the d enomination " women" obscures the reality of
women in society.
Because of the special needs of women many of them caused
or compounded by generations of prejudice and neglect it
is easy to get into the habit of thinking about women as a
minority group.
The truth is, of course, women are more than half of the
population and all government policy has an effect on their
lives, whether it is a specific measure or a broad one.
In Australia today it is not always easy to separate
policies for women from policies for society at large.
But you may be assured that this government is determined to
ensure that all government policies are assessed in regard
to their impact on women.
And we will go on making the specific changes necessary to
improve the conditions under which Australian women live and
to increase their opportunity and choice.
We will continue what has been a steady advance.
But before I talk about the government and Australian women,
I would like to make a few remarks about UNIFEM.
In recent years UNIFEM Australia has done much to heighten
public awareness of International Women's Day through
hosting a number of successful breakfasts like this. 
UNIFEM is one of the major international organisations
devoted to improving the status of women. It plays a vital
role in the developing world, giving assistance to women to
exercise control over their lives and to participate more
fully in making decisions.
These occasions provide the opportunity to highlight the
critical role that women play in development.
It is also a chance to consider the changes that still have
to be made if women are to find equal places, and equal
access to them, in the world community.
The government takes an active interest in the improvement
of women's status in the world.
At the current meeting of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, Australia will be calling for
gender equity issues to be incorporated into that body's
work. This meeting is a lead up to the major United Nations
Conference on the Environment and Development in Rio de
Janeiro later this year.
As I'm sure many people here are aware, this conference is
of great importance in the world's quest for sustainable
development. Because women have a major part of the responsibility for
growing the world's food and play a significant part in the
management of the earth's resources, Australia's own aid
program supports UNIFEM's efforts to highlight the role of
women. The integration of women into development programs is both
more equitable and more effective.
It makes better use of the talent and energy residing in all
those women at the heart of economy and society.
For the sake of equity we have to acknowledge the
contribution of women both paid and unpaid. For the sake
of efficiency and commonsense, we must harness their skills,
their ambitions, their energy and their genius.
What is true for the world is true also for Australia.
And I can say with confidence and pride that in the nine
years so far of the Labor government, women have made great
advances and their contribution grows in proportion to
their advance.
I have a feeling, an inkling, that I am not widely regarded
as a feminist:.
This may be because I am regarded rightly as that most
conservative of creatures, a family man. 
It may be because my ancestry is Irish.
It may be because ideological denominations have always
worried me a. great deal less than doing things.
My view has been that women will benefit most if the
material circumstances of Australian life are progressively
improved. That I think. is the starting point. As Treasurer I took the
view that if I succeeded in expanding the economy, making it
more robust and secure then I was expanding opportunity,
expanding thme government's ability to undertake programs of
reform and build essential services, increasing employment
and making it possible for people to plan their lives with
confidence. In doing these things, I believe I was doing things of great
benefit to Australian women.
As Prime Minister I continue to take that view, but with
more windows on to it.
As Prime Minister I would like to see less of the nuts and
bolts and more of the world outside.
I incline towards inclusion. I want to lower the
drawbridge. I think we should be looking for ways to increase the
influence of women in national policy and social development
in the culture of Australia.
We will know we are making progress when on both sides we
hear voices which are less adversarial and ideological and
more authentically the voices of Australian women and men.
I think I will feel that we have succeeded when women are to
a greater extent partners in the development of Australia,
shaping much more of the policy for the country as a whole.
I have always thought that the crime in politics was not
thinking the wrong thought, but not doing enough.
Not making the changes which your times demanded.
I have a building block model of reform. I think that if you
put one block down you create the logic and the impetus for
another.. and another.
In time the public sees the shape of your vision becoming
concrete and they actually help you finish.
As I said, my big effort in politics has always been towards
improving the material conditions under which Australians
live. 
At a time like this, in a recession, I know that might have
a hollow ring to it.
I can only say that it distresses me that there is so much
distress in Australia at present.
It distresses me all the more because in the l980s we
created jobs, we boosted business, we introduced many
measures which have improved the conditions of life for
Australians in substantial and enduring ways.
But bemoaning it won't solve it. Ideology won't solve it.
My big effort is still towards reform, improvement and
these days that means recovery. I do not know of any other
way. Recovery means jobs for women and men.
Of the 1.5 million jobs we created since the early eighties,
per cent have gone to women.
Women's wages in the same period increased to 84.5% of the
male average, which is very good by OECD standards.
We supported the women who went to work with the Women's
Employment Strategy.
We trebled the number of child care places available, and
250,000 funded places will be created by 1995-96.
In the past two years the number of families receiving fee
relief for long day care has increased by more than 200 per
cent and average, payments have increased by 60 per cent.
These initiatives which increased opportunities for women to
work, were matched by measures which increased the equity
for those who stayed at home to care for children.
Family Allowance was increased and indexed.
The Family Allowance Supplement was introduced for the low
paid and their dependents.
Supplementary payments were introduced for low income
workers mostly women.
I could list a great many other measures which have made
Australian policies in regard to women, in many cases, a
model for other countries.
We established the Child Support Agency, addressed the
poverty traps3 that sole parents face; introduced a
retirement incomes strategy which improves women's access to
superannuation while guaranteeing maintenance of the age
pension; we've trebled rent assistance; introduced the
National Women's Health Strategy; set up the Office of
Indigenous Women to work towards the elimination of 
discrimination and disadvantage among Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander women; established the National Committee on
Violence Against Women; introduced a Sex Discrimination Act
and an Affirmative Action Act.
These specific initiatives have been no more or less
important than general measures we have taken to extend
opportunity, strengthen the social net and modernise our
economy and society.
When we doubled the school retention rate, women benefited
more than two out of every three girls now finish secondary
education. More than half of all higher education places are now taken
by women.
Medicare benefited and continues to benefit women.
And of course it would be a travesty if Australian women
felt excluded from our fundamental objective and the
landmark reformsi we have made to achieve it the effort to
build a strong, internationally competitive society for on
our success in this, our future and our children's future
depend. The jobs, the opportunities, the security, social justice,
the quality of our society depend on this.
So then do women depend on it. And it depends on women.
The Economic Statement, One Nation, we released on February
26 builds on our reforms more than that, it sets the scene
for recovery.
One Natio~ n is about strength through partnerships:
partnerships between government and business, the
Commonwealth and the States, employees and employers,
communities. It's a statement of inclusion the idea is to include
everyone in the productive processes, in education and
training, in the social safety net, in the ability to make
the most of and enjoy this country.
It is aimed at creating a greater sense of belonging, a
greater spirit of cooperation, a much greater degree of
social cohesion.
As it closes gaps between people it closes distances
with a national rail freight highway which makes the
country economically much more efficient and the
highways safer for cars
city ring roads which have a similar effect: 
an electricity grid which, by combining our resources
and building in an element of competition, will make
electricity cheaper
by deregulating the airline industry which will make
travel cheaper.
The idea behind One Nation is to build Australia's strength
to build a recovery which will carry us well into the
future. The idea is to set common national goals and create a
stronger sense of national purpose.
It is to pull this vast and sometimes divided country
together. I would like to think that everyone in this room will read
the One Nati,= document.
In conjunction with the National Agenda for Women which lays
out the government's objectives through the next decade I
think it lays out real and achievable reforms, reforms which
wi1ll hP undertaken, which will benefit all Australians.
This year we will be reviewing our progress in the
implementation of the action plans of the National Agenda
and setting our goals for the rest of the decade.
One Nation will create 800,000 new jobs.
Areas of particular benefit to women include the Textile,
Clothing and. Footwear Industry which will receive
$ 51 million to help the industry adjust, become more
efficient an~ d sd create secure jobs in manufacturing.
The tourism industry, which employs a high proportion of
women, will benefit enormously from deregulation of the
airlines, the improvement to our roads and new depreciation
allowances on tourist related buildings.
One Nation also ' contains substantial new incentives to small
and medium business, many of which, of course, are owned and
run by women, and in which many women work.
Reforms to Australian workplaces which will make Australian
business and industry much more efficient will have also
have a profound effect on working women's lives.
Enterprise bargaining will make it possible to negotiate
flexible working-time arrangements and other improvements to
make workplaces more compatible with family life and
responsibilities. We have also established a Work and Family Unit in the
Department of Industrial Relations to explain to employers
the advantages of having family friendly practices in the
workplace. 
Meanwhile the government will continue to guarantee that the
wages system is equitable and protects those with little or
no bargaining power.
The government emphatically does not believe in the
" survival of the fittest" among Australian workers.
The $ 720 million we have allocated to vocational training
will be a great benefit to women, particularly as this
massive funding increase goes hand in hand with the specific
direction in the National Agenda to improve training and
employment outcomes for women.
The One Nati. n statement increases assistance to families on
low and medium incomes.
It makes rental assistance immediately available to people
in need.
This is to name just a few of the measures One Nation
contains. The statement combines, I believe, a mix of the bold and
enduring nation-building projects Australia needs, and
measures which will help people through the hard times.
The point of One Nation is the point of my government get
the economy moving, get people back to work.
Do it the only way it can be done: do it by calling on all
of our strength our resources, our institutions, our
people. Do it in partnership. Build the partnerships.
At the start I said that it is increasingly difficu Lt to
conceive of women as a distinct social or economic category.
There is a long way to go before we reach the point when
discrimination has been eliminated, the extra difficulties
for women in the community, in the workplace, the home and
in business have vanished, and we don't so frequent~ y
include women among the disadvantaged.
But I think one can read in the signs evidence of social
progress. We're getting there, we've made more headway in the last
nine years thian we made in the previous hundred, and we' re
going to make a lot more in the next nine.
I am sufficiently proud of what has been achieved and
confident enough of what can and will be, to say that I can
help. I think we can build a very good society in Australia and
its key element will have to be the opportunities, the
chance to participate and have a voice, the options of work 
and home, the security, and the centrality of women in this
one nation.
I must conclude by congratulating UNIFEM on the great work
it is doing.
I trust that my comments today were not taken to mean a lack
of interest in the condition of women in the developing
world. Far from it the government will continue to support UNIFEM
and remains committed to its objectives.
But today, I have taken the opportunity to tell Australian
women that, of all the partnerships we seek in the
One Natin Statement, none is more significant than that
between the women and men of Australia. Here, no less than
in the developing countries, Australia needs their skills
and energy and we' will only reach the goal of the good
society we want by continuing to extend their influence.
Thank you for having me. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
COMMONWEALTH DAY
Commonwealth Day is an occasion for reflection on the
continuing international relevance of the Commonwealth of
Nations. The strength and durability of the Commonwealth lies in its
diversity and. size 50 countries representing a quarter of
the world's population together with mutual respect for
each other's national sovereignty, traditions and culture.
These characteristics have enabled the Commonwealth to
remain relevant to its member countries in rapidly changing
times. In keeping with the pace of developments on the
international scene brought about through the collapse of
communism and resurgence of democracy, the Commonwealth
itself has undergone significant change.
The Heads of Government meeting in Harare last October
marked a turning point as leaders sought to build on
Commonwealth achievements in working for an end to apartheid
and the establishment of a free, democratic and non-racial
South Africa. Like other countries represented at Harare,
Australia also pledged to work with renewed vigour for the
protection and promotion of democracy and the rule of law,
the independence of the judiciary, just and honest
government and fundamental human rights. This presents a
challenging agenda for the 1990s, but it is one which the
Commonwealth is well qualified to address.
9 MARCH 1992 



A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP MELBOURNE, 10 MARCH 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What are your chances of winning the Wills by-election?
PM: Well it's going to be a difficult election for us, we
don't underestimate our difficulties, but we will be in
there trying'.
J: Do you think the Opposition's letters to the electorate
of late are going to swing that
PM: I think the debate in the last few weeks has shown the
difference between the Government and the Opposition.
The Opposition is pretty sterile, it doesn't want to do
anything about an Australian recovery, it only wants to
tax your WeetBix, and your Kelloggs, and your clothes
at 15 per cent. I think everyone has got that message.
When the Opposition have their way, the great burden of
the GST will fall on Australian women, in the
management of their households, and it will fall on the
business people of this country, the small business
people of this country, who will no longer have a
Sunday afternoon off, they will spend Sunday afternoon
calculating the GST and remitting the proceeds to the
tax office. This is a small business community we are
in, a shopping street, all these people will be tax
collectors, ' all will have to spend their Sundays
collating and reconciling the GST papers and the
collections. That's the new world Dr Hewson has
available to them. On the other hand, the Labor Party
is trying to run Australia cooperatively, bring
Australians together, induce a recovery, have the
Government riot sitting on the sidelines, actually doing
things to lift recovery and employment, and to make
society better and more efficient on the way through.
J: Do you think it helps our relations with Indonesia to
have confidential documents and conversations from the
Department of Foreign Affairs being leaked? 
2
PM: Well these are old conversations are they not, as I
understand, 1988 conversations. And this debate was on
back then and I think the Indonesian Government
understands that.
J: But is it fair, do you agree that the Soeharto family
is constraining the growth in the Indonesian economy?
PM: I wouldn't endorse those conclusions, no.
J: Do you agree with the protest of Lusitania Expresso
going to Deli at the moment?
PM: We have given appropriate warnings to the dangers of
people involved in going on that vessel and I can only
repeat those warnings.
J: Do you agree with their right to protest?
PM: Well, people have got to weigh their right to protest
against the consequences of them doing it, and I am not
sure that anything that they may be involved with can
materially alter what has happened, or the response by
Indonesia.
J: Prime Minister, given yours and the Governments good
form, are you thinking of an early election?
PM: Well, I answered that the other day. No, the people of
Australia are entitled to get value from this
Parliament, it's got 15 months to run, and that's why
we take the view that people are entitled to
representation and that's why we've brought an election
on, on the llth of April, so that the electors of Wills
can quickly have a representative in the Parliament.
We believe that people should be represented, and that
therefore that in this electorate, the electors here
have the opportunity to send Bill Kardamitsis to
Canberra.
J: Is that a commitment then to not hold a general
election until after this time next year?
PM: No, they are not commitments. It's just simply that
the Parliament has got a long way to run and it's our
intention to see it run on.
J: But no general election before the end of this year?
PM: I'm not into the commitments business, that's absurd.
J: On the question of the Indonesian protest, do you
believe that that leak from the Foreign Affairs
Department plus this protest is going to sour relations
with Indonesia?
PM: I don't know, you should ask them. 
3
J: Mr Keating, is the campaign here going to be all local
issues as Mr Kardamitsis said or will it be a test of
One Nation and Fightback?
PM: I think it's a combination of local issues, the fact
that we've got a candidate who is part of the
community, who stands for Labor values as well as the
fact that it has been an area represented by Labor very
abley by our former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, as well
as some discernment on the part of the electorate about
the policies of the Partys. That is, between what the
Government stands for and what Dr Hewson stands for,
and I think that's the important thing. The important
thing for us is to have our candidate elected to the
seat of Wills and to get back on governing Australia.
It is the most important job at the moment
government, getting a recovery going, making certain
that all the One Nation Statement's elements are
adopted and put into place, that we see that impact on
the economy and we get down to the job of governing and
not be too distracted by the business of politics.
J: governing Australia, your Aboriginal Affairs
Minister wants to spend several hundred million dollars
in the wake of the black deaths inquiry. How hard to
you think it's going to be to get the States to keep up
their side of the bargain on this question?
PM: Cabinet is considering this matter soon and I think
it's best to talk about that after its consideration.
J: Do you expect the States to be fulsome in their
response to the inquiry too? There have been
difficulties there in the past with Aborigines.
PM: I think it has been a very long running Royal
Commission and I think all the parties have taken its
recommendation seriously so I will be surprised if the
States don't respond seriously and well.
J: Prime Minister, last week you said that Wills should be
a shoo-in for the Liberals, have you changed your mind
in the last few days?
I
PM: The fact: is ' that the Liberal Party has got a very large
lead in the polls. To deny that is to deny the
undeniable. But as Bill said, we are going to be in
there trying, we'll be doing our best and I hope we can
win.
ends 



PRIME MINISTERI
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF CAMPAIGN OFFICE FOR BILL KARDAMITSIS, WILLS
ELECTORATE, MARCH 10 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Bill, Haroula, ladies and gentlemen, we know this will be a
difficult el. ection for Labor but we believe we can win it.
We believe we can win it because it will be a test, in many,
respects, about the way Australia runs whether or not the
Government should be involved in a recovery, the Government
should be inLvolved in the economy, or whether it should be a
policy of Government withdrawal as our friends in the
Opposition wish. That is, that the Government sits on the
side lines and lets the economy just simply move at its own
pace, to not accelerate a recovery, to not try to make
things better for Australia, and then to not try to make the
economy more efficient and society better.
So this contest is going to be one where the style and
policies of the Labor Party, the policies about partnership,
about people working together, about co-operation, are in
the vogue or whether it is policies which are about
confrontation, about survival of the fittest and loser take
the hindmost.
And it is about those issues that I think we will be
campaigning. And Dr Hewson should tell us, as he called our
One Nation Statemnent irresponsible, he should tell us why he
is opposed to the Western Ring Road around Melbourne, why he
wants traffic running through these suburbs, why he is
opposed to the expansion of Tullamarine Airport, why he is
opposed to the building of a standard gauge railway line
between Melbourne and Adelaide to lift the commerce of this
city, why he is opposed to putting our young childre~ n into
technical and further education so that they have the
opportunities in TAFE that others have had in universities
why he is opposed to these things. Why he is he opposed to
one-off payment to families, why he is opposed to on-going
payments to ' the low paid and the families of the low paid.
These are the things that he should tell us. And he. should 
-2
tell us how Australian women are going to wear the burden of
the goods and services tax. He should tell us how they are
going to carry that 15 per cent impost in their grocery
bills, in their dry cleaning, in their clothing, in all of
these other things. He should tell us about transfers
within famil'. ies and how women who run households will get
that 15 per cent transfer in their household budget to make
the system work. He should tell us those things as well.
And he shoul. d tell us particularly about why he believes a
tax on our Kelloggs and our clothes and our shoes and our
newspapers and our dry-cleaning and everything else is going
to really make a dif ference to the way we live how it'Is
going to fix: the railways, how it's going to fix the ports,
how it's going to make the factories more efficient, how
it's going to change the enterprises. These are the things
which, of course, he hasn't been able to say because he
knows that a goods and services tax won't fix these things.
So, Labor will stand again for the sort of society it has
always stood for progress, bringing the nation together,
co-operation, looking after the disadvantaged, looking after
low paid families, looking after families in general,
looking after children and giving them their chance in
secondary school, and beyond. These are the things we have
always stood for and the things we will continue to stand
for. And particularly now, inducing the recovery, having
the Government get off the sidelines and into the action to
promote a recovery in Australia, to bring employment and
jobs to Australians, rather than sit on the sidelines
offering tax cuts to the wealthiest people in society.
That's what this battle is about and that's why I'm glad
Bill is at my side in this by-election, as a person of
substance in the electorate of Wills, a person of the
community of the electorate of Wills, that people will
relate to himi, people will relate to him as someone who has
taken an active role in this community and as somebody who
stands for al~ l of those ideals of Labor which we think are
going to be important to Australians, now and always.
ends 



~ o.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
NATIONAL ART GALLERY, MELBOURNE, 11 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: It's very obvious that my parliamentary colleague, Dr
Hewson, is exceedingly rattled. Today he has forgotten
where his candidate's factory is, but worse than that,
in his -terms he is now apparently deciding that: all of
the things that we have done, that he has described as
unfunded in the One Nation package of the Government on
the infr-astructure side, may be things he can adopt and
add to. So, the ideological model which he has given
everybody with the Fightback package is now unravelling
with the first sort of pressure in a by-election
campaign. This is faster than even I would have
expected it. That is, that Dr Hewson is now grabbing
for the fiscal lever, whether it be further give-aways
off the Budget or adopting Labor's infrastructure
programs, that is building ring roads around cities
which hEt described a couple of weeks ago as grossly
irresponsible and unfunded. So he doesn't know where
he is standing in Budget terms or in ideological terms
and it just means that the first time someone said to
him look, hang on what's wrong with the ring road
around Melbourne, it means the trucks aren't running
through our suburb, he straight away said maybe I can
give you that, maybe I can do that. It doesn't auger
well for his program, and of course in government what
you see is Just a run-away of our fiscal policy.
J: But he does say that he will be able to fund it fromgrowth
in revenue?
PM: Yes I know, but that's just gibberish because we've got
the growth forecasts there which he says were too
optimistic. And at the same time he adopts our growth
forecasts and then takes the revenue from them. He
doesn't know' what he's doing.
J: But isn't that sort of adoption the great tradition of
Australian politics? 
PM: You mean he poses a compliment by adopting our
policies? It's a backhanded compliment. I'd prefer
him now to stick to his last, that is to stick to his
dry, un: imaginative last of Fightback.
J: Prime Minister, will you make a visit to Indonesia a
priority?
PM: Not a priority, but I would like to go there at some
time this year and that's a matter of trying to see
when I can do that.
J: Do you have a date in mind?
PM: Not really, no.
J: Do you also consider going up to Papua New Guinea for
their celebrations on ANZAC Day?
PM: I've been asked and I'm thinking about that now.
J: Prime Minister, the Opposition seems certain you're
going to drop the political ads legislation coming up
to the Wills by-election.
PM: The Government has not made up its mind about this.
What I said was that we needed sometime to see just
what impact this sort of legislation was having on a
number of elections and that's what we're doing.
J: What's your feeling about that ban?
PM: I'll tell you after we've had some time.
J: Mr Keating, is the fact of the matter, according to Mr
Hogg anyway, that just as much money is now being spent
as before?
PM: Mr Hogg is an authority on this matter, I'm not. I'm
not really able to comment about that.
J: Would you be upset if the High Court ruled the
legislation out?
PM: We're always upset if any of our legislation has
unconstitutional features.
J: One of the concerns that emerged in the wake of the
Tasmanian election was that Labor down there lost a
chance to put across a rather complex message through
television advertisements in a way which would have
simplified the issue and made the choice clearer. Is
that sort of concern something that's worrying you know
about the ad legislation? 
PM: We're moving into a period where the political contests
maybe fought without the capacity to produce the
arguments, and that needs to be thought about. But by
the same token, the cost of producing the arguments has
become prohibitive for the parties.
J: Would you like to have the opportunity to attack the
GST on radio and television in an election campaign?
PM: I think the'GST is such a stationary target we can
attack it fulsomely, effectively, through the normal
processes of the media.
J: Mr Keating, is there any chance that your consideration
of this topic would create any changes this side of the
by-election?
PM: No, of course not.
J: This side of the next federal election?
PM: That's for us to make a judgement about. We're still
looking at it.
ends 



EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY ( 1O. 3OAM, 11 MARCH 1992)
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF " LET'S GO AUSTRALIA" LIFE BE IN IT CAMPAIGN
MELBOURNE, 11 MARCH 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I'm more than pleased to have the opportunity to launch this
Life Be In It Campaign, which has the entirely appropriate
slogan " Let's Go, Australia!".
It's appropriate not just because we need to get going, but
because we can get going.
The opportunities' are there for us to make sure that the
great qualities of our society are preserved within a
dynamic new Australia.
We have natural advantages that most other countries can
only dream of.
Think of them: the ones that nature provides mineral
resources, wilderness, space those things which are at a
premium in virtually every other advanced country.
And think of the ones that Australians made a robust
democracy, freedoms unsurpassed in the world, highly
developed social ' services, a tolerant multicultural society
with, by any measure, one of the highest standards of living
in the world.
These things were made by Australians with bold ideas,
courage and E-nergy.
They didn't drop from the sky they were imagined, worked
for, made to happen.
Just as our resources have been developed and our land
farmed by the enterprise of men and women, it is Australians
who have made a good society. 
And we can make a better one.
I take the view that if we can achieve these things, we can
achieve much more.
If we can make one of the world's most free and democratic
societies, we can make a more dynamic one.
If we can make a society as fair and tolerant as this, we
can go much further towards eliminating injustice and
intolerance, and engaging more and more people in the life
of the nation.
If we can create one of the highest standards of living in
the world, we can make it higher, and we can do the things
which are necessary to guarantee the future.
And if we are able to develop our resources, and farm our
land as efficiently as we do then we are able, surely, to
manufacture and grow new products and export them to the
world. I have no doubt that we can do these things because I have
seen so much. done in recent years.
In 1992 we are much better at working together than we have
ever been.
We are much more competitive than we were a decade ago, by
far.
We are much more aware of the need to develop our strengths,
to become a nation of entirely independent mind, to make our
own destiny. I
We know much more about the things that we have to do, and
the figures show that we are much better at doing them.
The fact is that the progress we have made can be the basis
for recovery from this recession, and more than that for
building a great Australian society in the nineties.
To do it we need the whole-hearted effort of Australians.
Our recovery and growth must come as our past achievements
have come from the efforts of Australians, for the benefit
of Australians.
It must be a recovery in which all Australians share.
As a government we want to open ways for Australians to play
their part.
Our plans are calculated to include them, and we want to
develop new plans, new programs, new ways of calling on the
energy, ambition and imagination of all Australians. 
That is why I am so pleased to support Life Be In It this
year's program called " Let's Go, Australia!", hits the mark
perfectly. As I said, we have these great natural advantages, we have
this fantastic country but the trouble with a country so
well-endowed is that it tends to make us complacent.
It has given us a tendency to cruise, and watch the world
pass by.
Now we know that we can't cruise that was the message of
the eighties.
The message of this decade is that we can look to the future
with confidence: as we engage the gears of recovery we
should remind ourselves that our great achievements did not
fall to us by chance.
We got this far by calling on the greatest of all our
natural resources our people. Ourselves. Our ambitions,
our abilities, our energy, our care, our faith in each
other and in ourselves, our love for this country.
That is what: we ' must call on now our whole-hearted belief
in this enterprise of Australia.
I congratulate everyone involved in this " Life Be In It"
campaign. Your efforts are calculated to give inspiration, confidence
and pride, at a time when Australia needs those things.
On behalf of the government, I thank you.
And thank you for having me here today.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE. PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, ' LET'S GO AUSTRALIA' LIFE BE IN IT CAMPAIGN, MCG,
MELBOURNE, 11 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: I don't know whether you might have seen him, but Ian
Botham is training with the rest of the squad down on
the ground. Do you have a mind to go out and discuss
certain matters with him?
PM: I'll sen~ d Norm down to see him, he's about his weight.
J: YesterdEay Dr Hewson accused you of phoney jingoism. Is
that what we've been hearing?
PM: Well, the thing about " Let's Go Australia", the thing
about this campaign, it is about getting away from the
negative! s. And Life Be In It, I think, has chosen the
right theme for this year, " Let's Go". There's nothing
to hold this country back. Basically we can come out
of the recession into a recovery, and see the place go
into a better decade than perhaps we've had for a long
time. So, there's much to be cheerful about, including
pride in ourselves. If Dr Hewson thinks that's
jingoism, that's his problem.
J: What do you do to keep fit, Mr Keating?
PM: Well I ( lid 25 laps of the Lodge pool this morning. I
was ' be: Lng in it'!
J: How often do you do that?
PM: Every day or so, if I can do it.
J: Is fitness important to the economy, then?
PM: Well it's important to keep the old respiratory system
moving, to keep the blood circulating, keep the mind
sharp. 49. 
J: Do you think on the issue of sport, that perhaps
Australians concentrate too much on sport and not
enough on business, on the economy?
PM: Oh no. We've got a nice mix, we've got a good mix in
this country. We have a nice balance between what's
sensible and good for us, what's serious. And we've
built all this ourselves in 200 years, what we see is
what's been built by only a few generations. So we
have had it together for a long time, and we can keep
it together.
J: You said this country was on cruise during the 1980s,
does that include the Government?
PM: No, the country was in the Rip Van Wrinkle years in the
and ' 60s and early ' 70s, and I think it probably
got on the cruise in the ' 80s, and we've now in the
late ' 80s and early ' 90s got it focussing on the need
to be competitive, the need to nurture our growth
resource our people, our kids to produce innovative
products, to sell them to the world, and to understand
the quality of our lifestyle here, and to preserve it.
These are the things, I think, we have to be clear
about to make a success of in the ' 90s pulling it all
together, getting Australia moving, getting Australia
cracking.
J: It has been reported that you are going to visit
Indonesia, do you have
PM: I'll do questions to all that stuff later. OK.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ALP BUSINESS LUNCHEON, GREAT HALL NATIONAL GALLERY MELBOURNE
12.3OPM, WEDNESDAY 11 MARCH 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
Your experience over the years has probably led you to
expect today the familiar post-Budget urge. The old gee-up
speech, in which I tell you what the Budget means and why
it's good for you, and urge you to get out there and do what
you do best.
This time is different.
Today I want to thank you. I want to thank you for your
contribution to the Government's Economic Statement the
commitment to this country that you displayed, your
willingness to offer constructive ideas.
It was a much better Statement for it.
And I want to thank you for your endorsement of it because
the general response from business has been terrific.
That's very important for everyone' s confidence.
I think there is a general opinion now that there is only
one way to go and that is towards growth and recovery.
There is most certainly a . general conviction that we have to
create jobs.
And we have to start doing that now.
Of course the Economic Statement was not a Budget speech
it was much bigger than a Budget. 
It ranged very widely across the Australian economy and
society. But its target was very specifically Recovery.
We called it: One Nation with that in mind.
When, after all the discussions, we looked at the measures
we'd come up with the measures we decided would do most to
bring on recovery, we realised that there was a very strong
theme running through them.
And the more we thought about it the more we realised it was
no accident.
We realised that almost every significant measure was
calculated to give us greater strength by harnessing more
efficiently our human and material resources.
I
One Nation aims to close the gaps on a vast continent
where population centres and markets are separated by
great distances
where our political evolution has frequently been out
of tune with our economic development and potential
where, at least until very recently, our industrial
culture has contained its own great distances
and where, if we are to emerge from this recession
stronger than ever and make the great leap into the twenty
first century, at this moment in our history we need all the
social and economic cohesion we can muster.
We called it One Nation because its aim is to forge
partnerships, create efficient cooperative workplaces,
involve more people in the life of the nation and include
them in the : recovery, educate more people and link our
cities and hinterland and ports by the greatest one-off
overhaul of infrastructure for generations.
I believe it is the combination of elements which makes the
Statement strong it is not just an economic package, it
has a certain chemistry to it.
It calls up the resources of our people as well as our
economic. resources. It addresses our weaknesses and calls
up our strengths and one of those strengths, I believe, is
our passion for this country. 
In tough times, in historic times as these are, that belief
in our country is very important. A sense of purpose is
very important.
That's why Dr Hewson is so wrong about what he describes as
the nationalist diversion.
He is wrong to think I intend it as a diversion.
He is wrong to think that it could only be a diversion.
He is certainly wrong to think that calling on Australians
to take whole-hearted pride in themselves and their country
is the action of a scoundrel.
Dr Hewson's problem is that he can only follow the textbook,
only obey the ideological reflexes there is no heartbeat
in either of them.
Ladies and gentlemen,
One Nation is a four year strategy designed to get things
moving. To produce jobs and reduce unemployment.
And to do so in a manner that contributes to a stronger,
more productive economy for the 1990s.
It stimulates business investment and provides a more
efficient and reliable transport system.
It encourages large projects and small business enterprise
alike. It further opens the economy to competition, while providing
enterprises with the ability to respond to the challenges of
competition by encouraging improved work practices.
It improves skills and career prospects, while providing
greater incentives for individuals to take on added
responsibility. And it does this while reinforcing a low inflation culture.
While producing a fairer Australia.
In total, One Nation is a comprehensive and integrated
strategy that will provide the platform for a stronger
Australia, an Australia better able to grow in an
increasingly competitive world. 
RECOVERY Our first task is to generate growth.
The high level of unemployment is bringing great hardship to
many families.
We have to bring it down.
And we can bring it down.
Australia is much better placed now than it has been coming
out of earlier recessions.
Inflation is low, profits are high for this stage of the
cycle, and the benefits of past structural reforms are
coming through.
In addition, our, sound underlying Budget position allows us
to provide a fiscal boost now.
We have not stood back and left the economy solely to market
forces as the Opposition would have us do.
Their prescription to get us out of this recession is to
wait and hope.
Instead we have a sensible program of spending and tax
incentives amounting to 1/ 2 per cent of GDP over the next
year to get us moving again.
Coming on top of the stimulus of lower interest rates, the
cyclical unwinding of the budget surplus, and a turnaround
in farm product,, this should see GDP grow by around 4 3/ 4
per cent in : L992-93.
A MORE PRODUCTIVE ECONOMY
Lifting employment and restoring confidence is the immediate
priority. The strength of One Nation is that it does this at the same
time as providing the foundations for a sustained lift in
Australia's productive capacity.
Such a lift in capacity will only be achieved with a private
sector able to respond to today's challenges.
The Government can and will help.
We will provide appropriate incentives, skills and the
infrastructure to support enterprise. 
We will not prop up inefficiencies, but we will help
adjustments and direct our limited resources to the areas
where they can be of most use.
Equally, we will not be relying on the hope that market
forces alone will deliver the goods.
It is the Opposition's policy to withdraw from the problem.
Ours is to engage it.
The boost from the Budget will help the recovery get
underway, but as the private sector picks up, we will wind
the Budget back and bring it into surplus by 1995-96.
We will not give away the sound underlying structure of the
Budget we have worked so hard to achieve.
Nor will we let the gains on inflation slip.
Our agreement with the union movement will keep wages
growth, on average, at a rate consistent with keeping our
inflation rate comparable to that of our major trading
partners. This is the key to achieving a low inflation culture.
To making the 1990s a low inflation decade.
Economic recovery, a sensible fiscal policy, and low
inflation will provide the basic environment for renewed
private sector enterprise.
One Nation does this and much more.
I
It will improve the structural or micro elements of the
economy that are so important to private sector decisionmaking.
We need: workplaces that are responsive to change;
a skilled and motivated labour force;
a reliable and efficient infrastructure;
an appropriate tax regime; and
a competitive environment where the best are
rewarded.
One Nation addresses each of these factors. 
WORKPLACE REFORM
Ladies and gentlemen,
We all know that inflexible workplaces have harmed
performance in the past.
To deliver lasting change in industrial relations we need
employers, unions and government working together.
In this we have made quite remarkable progress. A
centrepiece of Labor's strategy is working.
The Opposition claims that Industrial Relations reform is
also a centrepiece of their strategy.
Yet curiously they devote just three quarters of a page to
it in Fightback.
And what they say there is ill-defined and potentially very
damaging. Predictably it is about confrontation, strengthening the
Trade Practices Act and providing no support for the weak.
It is all very familiar to those who remember the early
1980s.
Confrontation and inflation.
For on top of the GST slug, the Opposition industrial
relations policy will be very inflationary.
What we need a wages policy that will entrench a ' Low
inflation culture and reform the workplace is increasingly
what we have.
More than 40 enterprise agreements have been ratified by the
Industrial Relations Commission since the implementation of
the enterprise bargaining principle last October.
This process will accelerate and we will help it by amending
the certified agreements provisions of the 1988 Industrial
Relations Act to make them more conducive for parties to
negotiate at the~ workplace.
ASKILLED WORKFORCEFlexible
workplaces with a skilled workforce will make the
1990s a more prosperous decade.
We have already done a lot in this regard. 
School retention rates have almost doubled since 1983.
The number of Commonwealth funded places at universities
will have increased by 50 per cent by 1994.
These dramatic changes will now be matched in technical and
vocational training.
With an extra $ 720 million of Commonwealth money over the
next three years, and by working with the States, we will
create thousands more places and lift the quality of
vocational education.
One Nation also directs more resources to improving
training, both for those entering the workforce for the
first time and for those currently unemployed:
* we have substantially raised the incentives for emplo
yers to take on apprentices and trainees.
we have increased funds for JOBSTART and JOBSKILL, two
programs that are well targetted to assist long-term
unemployed back into employment.
I NFRASTRUCTURE
For business to compete effectively in Australia and the
world, we need reliable and efficient transport.
We have built up the National Highway System in recent
years, and now, with One Nation we will set aside $ 600
million to upgrade roads over the next two years.
We will thus create jobs quickly, and create a better system
in our cities and on the long hauls between Adelaide,
Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane.
Strategic investments to straighten rail lines and
strengthen br7idges, and to provide more passing loops, will
see rail transit times reduced and made more reliable 12
hours, reliably, between Melbourne and Sydney by 1994.
We will final~ ly have a standard gauge line connecting our
capital citiE&amp; s from Brisbane to Perth.
Here in Melbourne we will put $ 20 million into upgrading the
terminal at South Dynon and a further $ 5 million connecting
South.. Dynon to. Swanston and Appleton Docks.
The end result will be a rail system able to compete with
road, and a rLetwork of competitive capital city ports. 
We are very much aware that upgrading the infrastructure in.
rail will only produce the necessary improvements with
better work practices.
Accordingly, our spending is conditional on commitments by
unions to a Greenfields enterprise agreement with the
National Rai~ l Corporation.
A COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT
For the money spent on public investment projects to yield
the maximum benefits, not only are flexible workplaces
required, bu~ t a competitive environment.
Management must perform; the best will be well rewarded.
Labor's reforms over the past 9 years have opened Australia
up to greater competition.
For example, our exporters of manufactured goods have made
remarkable inroads into overseas markets, with manufactured
exports increasing at an annual rate of 10.5 per cent since
1982-83.
They have increased by over 20 per cent in the past two
years. We will continue to integrate the economy into the
international economy with phased reductions in tariffs.
We have exposed other sectors, such as telecommunications
and banking, to competition at home.
One Nation takes this process further.
It introduces revolutionary change to aviation, and the
transmission of electricity.
Among other measures to make the banking sector more
responsive to change, additional foreign bank licenses will
be permitted, subject to prudential standards.
SMALL BUSINESS
This government places a very high value on the small
business sector.'
Small-businesses employ, more.. than 2 million Australians, or
nearly half of the workforce in the private sector.
They are a powerful source of employment, of innovation, and
of rising living standards. 
Small business is often the way in which Australians can
improve their lives, and improve their country at the same
time. In our One Nation program, we have taken concrete steps to
strengthen small business not with handouts, but with real
incentives to grow, to innovate, to export and to create
jobs.
We have: substantially increased the capital gains tax relief
for small and growing businesses, to increase capital
mobility and flexibility in the sector.
granted. a three month extension for 1991/ 92 company tax
payments for small business.
tripled the funding to $ 12 million for helping small
businesses ' into export markets through our " Export
Access" program.
provided for the establishment of Pooled Development
Funds which will be able to channel equity capital into
businesses with assets of less than $ 30 million.
In addition, small business, like all business, will benefit
from the other measures in One Nation such as a more skilled
workforce and the new depreciation rules.
All these measures will help small business perform.
We are about helping business succeed, not adding burdens as
the Opposition proposes.
Dr Hewson's new tax will create more than 800,000 tax
collection points.
Business people can forget their Sunday afternoons with his
consumption tax-Sundays will be spent doing the books.
It is a small business nightmare, but an accountant's dream.
No wonder six large accountancy firms are funding Mr
Hewson's GST planning and co-ordination office in Sydney!
A FAIRER AUSTRALIA
Ladies and gentlemen, a healthy efficient economy is a means
to an end that end is a good society.
One Nation builds on our very proud record on social
justice. 
Fundamental to making Australia a fairer society is to
create jobs and reduce unemployment.
We did this in 1983 and we will do it again.
Despite the recent declines in employment, we have created
an additional 1 1/ 2 million jobs since 1983.
This has allowed many new entrants, especially women, to
establish themselves in the workforce.
Indeed, female employment has risen by more than 900,000
over this period.
The measures: introduced in One Nation will see strong
employment growth restored.
Over 800,000 new jobs will be created over the next 4 years.
One Nation also will help many of those jobs go to the longterm
unemployed who currently are facing particular
hardship. The successes we had in the ' 80s in lifting employment and
investment and bringing down inflation were achieved in
large part through restraint by the bulk of full-time wage
and salary earners.
Their wage increases were responsible while many of the
benefits flowing from tax cuts were largely directed at
lower incomes.
As a result, many workers are now facing undesirably high
tax rates on. their additional earnings.
One Nation will ensure that the great bulk of workers will
face a maximum marginal rate of 30 per cent.
Those on incomes below $ 20,700 face a marginal tax rate of
cents in the dollar, a rate that was 30 cents when we
came to office.
In addition, for many on low incomes, Government support is
very important.
Labor has targetted social security and welfare spending
effectively so that those in genuine need are now receiving
much more substantial support.
One Nation will preserve these gains and in some areas
extend them.
i 
Ladies and gentlemen
I could conclude by saying a great many things about Dr
Hewson's Fightback package, but today I shall mention just
one curious and salutary point.
In it he says that he will privatise Australia's ports.
This is very curious.
The Commonwealth of Australia does not own any ports
except ports in the Antarctic, the jetty on Cocos Island,
the port on Christmas Island and the defence jetty at Jervis
Bay. Is this the one he means? Will he also privatise the navy?
Will all shipping on Lake Burley Griffin be sold to
privateers? I mention this because it is an example of our opponents'
ideological blinkers, the obsessive and rigid nature of
their thinking.
Nothing not even facts or common sense will get in Dr
Hewson's way.
You will find significant differences in One Nation. Not
just significant policy differences.
*-like we will upgrade infrastructure but they think
that' s irresponsible.
-we will expand TAFE but they think that's irresponsible
too. Etcetera etcetera., whatever does not fit with
Fightback is per se irresponsible.
But you will see more than these differences. You will see
a fundamental philosophical difference.
One addresses social and business reality, the other
addresses an. ideology.
One is a living and breathing program for Australia, the
other says cur future can be best determined by a sterile
exercise in accountancy.
One recognises people as significant factors in recovery, as
significant.. f actors in an-economy.-the other does not.
One does not want a Recovery.
We do.
Thank you. 



i~ 9~ KL
' I Q
JOD
bo 



PRIME MINISTER 27/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
MOCKERY OF ABORIGINAL DEATHS A NATIONAL DISGRACE
The scene on television tonight of two police officers
mocking the death of Aboriginal people was sickening.
Their behavior brings disgrace on themselves, on their
police force and~ on Australia.
I think every decent Australian tonight will feel anger and
shame at this incident.
The Aboriginal Deaths in Custody report should have made
Australians reconsider their attitudes to Aboriginal people
and their circumstances.
The episode iLn Bourke, and recent evidence of similar racist
behavior in Sydney, suggests that for some Australians
nothing has changed.
Two weeks ago I told the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation that I didn't want talk, I wanted changes,
real changes.
I told them -that we had to close the gap in living standards
and we had to change attitudes.
These incidents show how much the onus is still on white
Australians to make that change.
Whatever economic and material progress we make, whatever
progess we make towards what we think will be a good
society, wil. l be nothing if our attitudes to Aboriginal
people contin-. ue to be no better than those of the 19th
century. CANBERRA March 12 1992 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP,
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW LUNCH, HILTON HOTEL,
SYDNEY, 12 MARCH 1992
A little over two weeks ago I announced in the Parliament a
plan designed to bring us out of recession, and also to set
us up as a stronger and more prosperous society for the
decade ahead. We called it the " One Nation" plan to
emphasise the idea that it is not only about jobs and living
standards. It will create 800,000 new jobs over four years.
It will raise living standards. It will strengthen our
economy for the long haul. But it is also about educating
and training our kids, and about the kind of country we want
them to grow up in. Its about linking the country together,
and linking people in the workplace together. Australia
works best when we work together when employees are
involved as well' as employers, when those who have lost out
are brought back in, when we take care of our future
generations as well as our own. That is what One Nation is
all about cooperating at home to compete abroad.
Today I want to ' share with you some of the thinking behind
the One Nation plan. By and large the plan has been well
received but in the question period that follows I'd be
delighted to respond to any concerns you have about the
plan, and the direction it charts out for Australia.
It is a forward-looking plan, but it is mindful of our
experience of the eighties. In the distress of recession it
would be easy to panic and forget just how far we have
already come on the path to reshaping Australia and how
much we would have to lose in turning back. We are going
into the nineties with inflation lower than it has been for
thirty years, and with every possibility of keeping it low.
Because we have cooperated in setting wages and we have
allowed the dollar to find its own level, we are going into
the nineties: 17 per cent more competitive internationally
than we were a decade ago. We have succeeded in increasing
our exports, so that today we export twice as much as we did
a decade ago, and at the same time we have succeeded in 
diversifying them through tourism and manufactures. We have
increased the profit share, and over the eighties we so
greatly cut taxes and government spending that our outlays
today are three per cent less as a proportion of GDP than
they were in the last recession. Even when the deficit
reaches it maximum next financial year, it will still be
less than half the size of the deficit we inherited in
1983/ 84, both compared to GDP. Above all, we have cut
import protection and opened all our markets to foreign
competition, so the successes we have are real successes,
hard fought and hard won against the best the world can
offer not the phoney successes of the fifties and sixties
when we built an industrial museum and called it
" development".
From our successes in the eighties manufacturers have
learned they can put their products onto world markets and
win. Employers, employees and unions have learned that they
can work together to change tired old rules which hold back
change and diminish the value of work. They have learned
that, working together, they can transform the workplace in
ways that increase pay, profits and the enjoyment of work.
We have all learned that tourism is winner for Australia
so much so that it is now our largest and fastest growing
industry. We have learned that we can reform big government
businesses, making them charge properly for their services,
run themselves efficiently, and pay a profit back to us. We
have learned that we can control government spending, we can
cut taxes, and we can eliminate deficits in our federal
budget.
We came a long way in the eighties, but there is no doubt
the recession has set us back. We have lost a tenth of the
economic expansion of the eighties. We have lost an eighth
of the new jobs we created in the eighties. We have lost a
fifth of the gains in average incomes we made in the
eighties. The worst thing, however, is that in recession we
lost some of the confidence we gained in the eighties some
of our sense of direction.
One Nation is designed to get us back on course.
Work on the One ' Nation statement began the day after I
became Prime Minister. Right from the beginning we wanted
to link two purposes in the plan. We wanted to bring
forward the recovery, create jobs and encourage confidence
but we wanted to do it in a way which also strengthened us
for the long haul which set us up as a more competitive
economy in the nineties. We wanted things that created jobs
now and also helped us later. This basically meant
increasing public investment now while private investment 
was weak, so we could generate growth while building
something worthwhile. Right from the beginning we thought
that our public investment should help goods transport,
which is directly linked with the productivity and
competitiveness of our economy. Many of our consultations
encouraged us to think that was the right way to go. We
also knew that for the long haul we should be doing
everything we could to encourage business investment. We
have brought from the eighties low inflation, an increased
profit share, a sharply reduced cost of capital, and a
cooperative industrial relations system. The one thing more
we felt we needed to strengthen investment was a business
tax regime which overall would compare favourably with those
of other advanced industrial countries. Again, our
consultations in the community demonstrated strong support
for investment incentives.
Of course our plan had to be made in some kind of financial
framework. The last thing we wanted to see was all the hard
won fiscal cains of the eighties, all the hundreds of hours
of weary work in budget committees, blown with an
irresponsible spending spree. We had brought federal
spending under control, and we didn't intend to let it go
again. If we were to spend more now, we should wind it back
as the recovery proceeded. So we imposed three rules which
are embedded inthe projections of One Nation. We required
outlays to fall as a percentage of GDP over the next four
years. We required the deficit to fall in each year of the
planning period, from its peak next financial year to
surplus by .995/ 96. And since a surplus can be easily
achieved by letting revenues rise as inflation increases
personal income taxes, we decided to commit ourselves to
returning fiscal drag as income tax cuts beginning in
1994/ 95. A surplus built on what would effectively be a tax
increase was unacceptable to us, and I think would be
unacceptable toyou.
These three rules defined the amount of room we had to
stimulate recovery over the next few years, and the size of
the persona. income tax cuts required in the last two years
of our four year program.
I can tell you now that there were many moments in the
period from Christmas last year to February 26 this year
when I wondered whether we could meet our deadlines. We were
preparingat: least the equivalent of a budget, starting from
scratch. Throughout the whole process the Commonwealth Public
Service, and most particularly my own Department of Prime
Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, and the Department of
Finance, performed a spectacular job helping us get out
right on schedule, a 200 page document detailing over 
programs and containing projections for the economy over the
next four years.
We began implementing it on the night of the statement by
cutting sales taxes on cars by one quarter. We will
continue in three weeks with a $ 317 million fillip to
consumer confidence, delivered as a one off payment to
families with children. At the same time we are beginning
work on a massive program of public investment which will
cost $ 2.3 billion this year and next, and which will see the
creation of a national rail freight highway from Brisbane to
Perth, the creation of two new national highways, better
ports, better air terminals, and better training centres.
That is part of our public investment program but the
private investment part of the plan is just as important.
We are bringcring in a new competitive depreciation regime
which halves the write off time for longer lived assets. We
are increasing the depreciation rate on industrial and
tourism buildings. We will allow private companies to issue
tax advantaged bonds to finance land transport and
electricity generating projects. We will offer a ten per
cent development allowance to encourage major projects.
A just completed EPAC study confirms that our changes have
made Australia a world leader in business tax reform.
We will increase both public and private investment, and at
the same time create a more competitive economy. We are
dropping the separation between domestic and international
airlines to create more competition and we want to bring
New Zealand in to a single aviation market with us. We will
help the states create a national electricity grid which
serves all of eastern Australia and separates electricity
production from electricity distribution and sales.
Australia's success depends on the quality of workforce and
the cooperativeness of its workplaces, and we will improve
both. We will expand and transform the TAFE into a high
status vocational education and training system, immediately
increase the places for trainees and apprenticeships, and
substantially expand programs to help the long term
unemployed regain their skills and return to work.
We will encourage and entrench a national shift to workplace
bargaining as the major focus of industrial relations over
the next decade. It is from workplace changes that most of
our productivity increases will come, and most of the wage
increases which sustain a higher living standard in the
nineties. 
Finally, we built our whole structure on the objective of
keeping low inflation. To that end we sought and obtained a
commitment from the ACTU that wage claims would be
consistent with keeping inflation no higher than the level
of our major trading partners. I have to say in all due
modesty it was not a hard commitment to get, because
Australia's -contemporary trade union movement is as strong
on the goal of keeping low inflation as any section of the
community. The income tax cuts in two years time are designed to
promote both our inflation goal and our productivity goal.
They are focussed on reducing the middle marginal rate to
per cent, underpinning the Accord at the same time as they
increase the incentives to work and save.
Turning the -plan into reality is the top priority of the
government. Cars are cheaper already, and I saw in Financial
Review yesterday a report that sales are expected to pick
up. Two days after the statement was delivered, I went to
Melbourne where the ACTU executive unanimously committed
the trade union movement to the principle of wage outcomes
which allow us to keep inflation to a level no higher than
the level of our trading partners. And as I mentioned,
early next month qualifying families with children will get
one-off payment to help them meet their needs, and kick
the economy along a little at the same time.
Meanwhile, we are moving rapidly on our public investment
program. My colleague Bob Brown, the Minister for Land
Transport, has already approved " black spot" road
improvement projects in the Paramatta area of Sydney, where
the need for better roads is great, and unemployment is
high. South Australia has now sent in a proposed black
spots program, and the programs for NSW and Victoria will be
along in a week or so. Discussions with the states on the
national roads strategy, funded from the One Nation program,
are scheduled to commence today.
The National Rail Corporation is now convening working
groups to develop programs for improvements to the
Sydney/ Brisbiane corridor, the Sydney/ Melbourne Corridor, the
Melbourne/ Adelaide corridor, and the Perth/ Adelaide corridor.
Throughout the system, skills assessment groups are setting
out to collect the information required for a greenfields
industrial agreement, which we have made a condition for the
project to go: ahead.
My colleague Kim Beazley, the Minister for Employment.,
Education and Training, has begun discussions with his state
counterparts on our TAFE program and the Treasurer, John 
Dawkins, is pressing ahead to introduce legislation to give
effect to our business tax changes in this session of
Parliament. So that is the essence of One Nation plan for Australia. It
builds on our strengths of low inflation, the Accord,
stronger and more varied exports, fiscal reform, improved
competitiveness, and a better balance between profits and
wages. It builds on them by increasing public investment in
services directly related to economic growth, and by
increasing the incentives for private investment. Far from
being an old style Keynesian program to boost consumption
spending, the direct effects of the program will
predominantly be on investment. It's a supply side program.
Certainly we are doing something substantial to help
consumer demand over the next few months, but over the next
two financial years three quarters of the One Nation
spending will be on public investment programs and private
investment incentives. And most of that additional spending
will be finished by 1994/ 95, when we begin to return fiscal
drag to taxpayers at the same time as we sharply restrain
outlays and bring the budget back to surplus. Our goal is
to enhance our capacity to produce for home and abroad, not
just our capacity to consume. 
TRANSCRIPT OF~ THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
FINANCIAL REVIEW LUNCHEON, QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS, SYDNEY,
12 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Q: role of Australia in the Asia-Pacific?
A: I think our future is in the Asia-Pacific state.
Already 70 odd per cent of our export goes to the APEC
area and about 67-68 per cent from memory, of our
imports come from there. We are all really largely
integrated with the region, but, of course, more will
happen. It's the fastest growing part of the world and
we are now well set up to participate in that growth.
Whereas because of our reliance upon border protection,
tariffs, quotas, and the fact that we had a largely
uncompetitive financial system back in the ' 50s and
the trades in goods and services passed Australia
by. Now we have removed exchange controls, broken the
tariff wall down and now where national savings will be
funding productive things. Our exports this Year, for
the first time in our history, our manufacturing
exports are, larger than our rural exports. We're now
set up with a low inflation rate and with flexibility
now coming into the labour market on an enterprise
basis, we're really set up to participate in this
growth which formerly we were not. So, we've got to
the point for our exports again in the Asia-Pacific
area, the gr~ eat bulk of our imports come from there,
obvious: ly we are now better positioned to take our part
of that trade and to share in that growth than we ever
were. That's why I think it is important that we continue to
improve our competitiveness, and we break down all
these areas of inefficiency. These are the first order
issues. The first order issue are continuing the
change : Ln the micro-economy that we formerly were doing;
and successfully in the macro-economy, that is ports,
wharves, railways, airlines, power generation,
training, enterprise bargaining these are the things,
not whether we tax our Kelloggs or our income. It is
an tenth order issue. The first order issues are 
those, and if we concentrate on the first order issue
that One Nation concentrates on improving the capacity
of containers through our ports and onto our rail
system, on our roads, training our kids and
underwriting a tax break to capital, to investment.
These are the things which will set us up more
adequately to participate in that growth which is where
our future must be.
But again we have got to be confident about our future,
confident about Australia and look as though we are
confident. I think that is terribly important to the
chemistry of the region, that at least they think we
know who we are and what we are and what we're after.
Q: Mr Keating, my question is about inflation. One Nation
predicts inflation at 3.75 per. Will this blow out due
to enterprise bargaining in wages and higher growth
rates than predicted?
A: No, because it is no accident now that for 9 successive
years we brought wages, the average weekly earnings
forecast, which was put together by the Government with
the ACTU under the Accord, we brought it in under
target. We brought it in because of that
understanding. I said in my speech that the ACTU as a
constituency was at least as interested in lower
inflation as any constituency in the country. The
truth is it has been much more interested in low
inflation than any constituency in the country.
Because interest is between it being prepared to
cut demands back where most other sectors haven't. And
it is because it understands how pernicious inflation
is to the low paid, to the retired, to people trying to
buy a house and carry large price increases in
properties, but most importantly retarding investment
and with it employment. It's been about knocking
inflation down and the fact that on the large booms as
we've seen in the post-war years, 1988-89, when
employers were offering wage increases of 12-15 per
cent. But the year AWE number came out at 6 1/ 4 shows
just how entirely committed in the face of that
enormous demand for labour the ACTU has been.
I
Now we are not focussing on average weekly earnings.
Because we have got inflation down, the thing to do now
is keep it down and we are now focussing on major
trading partner average inflation and imputing in that
a wage number which is consistent with that, that is to
which the ACTU is committed. But if you take the view
that we can't open the labour market up, that we've got
to remain with the Arbitration Commission for all
adjustments in relation to the economy, then I think
what you'll end up with is a colony of losers-out on
The economy just won't be as competitive as it
ought to be, it won't be as clever in managing itself
and remember this, we are not the New Zealand Labor
Party, there is no blunder and stumble here into 
deregulation. We've actually broken the craft system
up. The craft system of industrial organisation meant
that if someone on the metals construction award on a
Sydney building site paid an increase, that went
through the whole of the metal industry in Australia.
That's now been broken into much more discrete
elements, and by going at it on an enterprise basis if
a union wanted to claim and use its industrial muscle
to claim an increase which destroys the business, it
takes responsibility for it. Where formerly this was
happening with the Arbitration Commission, who had no
great relationship with either the business or the
union. Now a union can sit down with the company and get it
managed better. And you've got the metals industry for
its unions groups talking about advanced manufacturing
technology. They now go and say what's your long-term
corporate plan, what's your long-term investment plan,
and how can we help the business grow. That's the sort
of mindset of maturity, not the confrontation. The New
Zealand trade union movement never spoke to the Labor
Government in all the years it was in office, and the
Government didn't speak to it, there was no accord.
They had a sort of cold turkey system that Dr Hewson
will give you, you go and have a punch up over wages
and the national interest invariably loses out. That's
why whe~ n David Lange or Roger Douglas come here to
listen Politely but take no notice of them at all. I
mean good intentions, but good intentions were never
enough.
Q: Why are you waiting to give tax cuts for two years.
Are you holding a carrot for the election?
A: To not do it would definitely see the tax burden
That is, even with low inflation, the effect of low
inflation on the tax which will see the real tax
burden ' And this Government has been pursuing a
policy of handing back fiscal drag from the system and
more. So the reason we are not doing it this year is
because we think fiscal policy can't afford it and at
this point the build up is simply not there to return
but over the next couple of years there will be a build
up in the revenue, particularly as growth picks up and
as more time goes by, with inflation even at low
levels, to have an impact on the tax scales.
And by that stage, as the, if you like the hump of the
deficit starts to decline as the economy comes back, as
revenues pick up and unemployment benefits and the
other things start to diminish and the deficit starts
to come back towards surplus, that's the point then
that we can make these tax cuts. All of Labor's tax
cuts, every single one there's been many of them
since 1983 have all been honoured, every one of them
has been honoured. It won't be a repeat of the John
Howard, John Hewson and Malcom Fraser show in 1977, 
remember that campaign they had, ring up and find out
how much your tax cuts were. Well 3 months later they
took it back, they legislated them away. There won't
be any of that. And they'l11 be there as they've always1
been. I think they will create a very good climate in
the labour market. People will think they are getting
a fair go out of the tax system by creating employment
and it will provide a certain per cent rate of tax for
people between $ 20,000 and $ 40,000. People on medium
incomes where the incentive is to work and do more at
per cent rather than 38 in the dollar. But I hasten
to add 30 per cent, the same as Dr Hewson's but without
a consumption tax, without 15 per cent.
That's -the point and I don't know how you are going
with your businesses at the moment but what's going to
happen -to you is that in the nostalgia area as you give
your Sundays away filling in, as you'll be a tax
collection point on the GST, you'll give your Sundays
to remitting money to the tax office, you will be
nostalgic you will be nostalgic for a Labor
Government if it were to ever come to pass
Q: Will an international increase in interest rates affect
One Nation forecasts?
A: We've based it on what we think is a, in part, the
trading environment over the forecast period. And the
trading environment we are tied up to mostly is the
Asia-Pacific environment which I think is growing at
per cent in forecast to 92-3 and 4.5 the following
year. I don't see that sort of change, I don't see now
the prospect of that changing with some shift in
interest rates. It needs to be borne in mind that
we've still got a tighter monetary regime applied now
than ever applied from the 82-3 recession. In 1982-3
interest rates came down by about 12 per cent and
same in this recession. By then we had inflation
running at 10 and now we've got inflation statistically
running at 1.5 or a trend to 3. So there is a 7
percentage points difference with inflation and yet the
fall in rates has been the same, ie therefore this
regime haas been as it remains, much tighter than 1982-
83.
Q: current account deficit/ foreign debt?
A: It says in the text that systems stabilisation, the
Treasury says that. This has been consistent with a
slight drift up in the ratio of net external debt to
GDP. And the ratio of debt to equity financing have a
return -towards levels which existed prior to the
excessive leveraging of the late 1980s. Net external
debt to GDP ratio could stabilise or decline slowly.
In other words we shouldn't take as the comparable
period, the high leveraging phase of the ' 80s, but
something more sensible when that balance between debt
and equity is more of a guide to how the economy will 
be in the ' 90s. So any 2-3 percentage points the
current account forecasts, will forecast by other
people looking at the performance of the ' 80s. Now
that has changed markedly, I can't remember the numbers
exactly but I think we went from about 90 per cent debt
in 89-90 to 90 per cent equity in 1990-91. One has to
assume, I think, more sensible behaviour in financing
levels assume that this is consistent with the
stabilisation of debt and GDP or a slow decline.
Q: In regard to the Monarchy and your comments about
Australia, if Australia becomes a republic what form
will it take, will Bill Hayden be president for
example?
A: Well just remember what I said. The remark which was
objected to by our conservative friends, forelock
tugging mates, was that I said in the presence of the
Queen, I was congratulating her on her 40 years as the
Monarch and to make the point that in the 40 so much
had changed. In 40 years, I said to her, Britain had
joined the European Community and Australia's largely
devoted itself to the Asia-Pacific, we were necessarily
more independent of Britain than Europe, but that she
was part of that change. She was part of that
independence by taking the royal style and title of
Queen of Australia in 1973 a thoroughly unexceptional
remark. But our friends in the Opposition had to jump
all over it. Dr Hewson said I didn't have enough
respect for the Queen of Britain outrage, he'd like
to slip right back to the torpor of the 1950s. As I
said he would be our first candidate for an exhibit in
the constitutional museum down there at the old
Parliament House. Like I said in Parliament, we are
going to put him in there with the Morphy Richards
toaster and the qualcast mower and all the other bits
and pieces that we all remember affectionately and
well. That's what I was saying. I was just saying that
Australia isn't necessarily more independent and needs
to be clear about itself, needs to be confident about
itself. It's very bad for these people who wish to
lead us in ' the ' 90s, but who harp back and want to be
part of the ' 50s. What I'm saying is they are not the
people to lead us. The people to lead us are people
confident about Australia, confident Australians,
people that know that we are good enough to make our
way in the world and know that we are entitled to and
have indeed an identity of their own. If one of our
national leaders in the 1990s thinks that we shouldn't
have an identity of our own but we should in some way
not even be referring to changes in constitutional
arrangements with Great Britain, then I say well thank
you but we don't need you.
That was one of my remarks, I was not talking about a
republic or what sort of republic we ought to have or 
what constitutional arrangements should be. That's
something for the public debate to comprehend as time
goes by.
Q: When can we expect announcements on the simplification
of superannuation and the clarification of pension
rules?
A: Well when the Government has adequately considered the
area. It's a complex area and when you take any system
like superannuation, which is again, part of the torpor
of the ' 50s and ' 60s, it was a gift from Mr Howard and
Mr Hewson when we had only a very small proportion of
workforce accessing the superannuation concession. And
when we've opened it up more generally the workforce
and then more sensibly taxed superannuation earnings,
to do that and not disrupt the expectations of
Australians who are near retirement, at retirement,
some proximity of retirement, has meant that
necessarily we've had grand provisions what have
you, to protect them. This is a matter of
inconvenience I know to the industry, but there is more
than industry inconvenienced in all this. There is
reasonable expectation by those who believe they've
grown up in the system which gave them certain
entitlements. And it's not easy therefore to change
superannuation, arrangements for tax computation
without having due regard for those things.
We've tried to do that. We've tried to make the system
more simple but at the same time make it fair. There
is probably areas where simplification can occur but
they have to be proposals which we can adopt
confidently and that will take examination and
we've done more than any government in history.
Q: Can you explain what assistance there is to small and
medium business in the One Nation Statement and what
does it do for women?
A: I'll deal with the second part of the question first.
The thing that I've had most in mind for women in this
country since I've been a Minister was jobs,
participation, choice, opportunity and of those
million jobs we created between 1983 and 1992, 60 per
cent of those went to women. In terms of my own direct
responsibility beyond employment, a number of
significant things which the Government did for women
in the ' 80s and that is opening up child care
opportunities for women to go to work if they choose,
which didn't exist formerly. The child support agency
where women are supported by their husbands or former
husbands, as the case may be, in support of their
children, in supplementary payments for low paid women,
in medicare which is an obvious support for women
because women mostly have the burden of worrying about
children and regardless of their circumstances are
covered for health protection. I mean it is just one 
thing after the other, equal opportunity legislation,
affirmative action legislation and we're continuing
that tradition and of course access to superannuation.
Before we came along there was no preserved benefits
and women who entered the workforce, left the workforce
to have children and came back and had no preservation
of benefits. They were effectively chopped out of
superannuation.
These are quite milestone reforms. I notice the
Opposition talking about pay rates for women, Dr Hewson
said he will oppose national wage cases. A lot of
women are in the low paid sector of the economy
process workers, shop assistants who rely upon national
wage adjustments for maintenance of their incomes which
they say they are opposed to. So, as usual, it will be
Labor who provides, again, for Australian women.
c ( 2&gt; t' 3 N3 U dW
I I 
In relation to small business, waive got a number of
changes in there which I think are important. The
firist thing is growth. That's the most important
thing small business lives of f the growth in the
economy. And we've got growth through the year
forecast at 4 3/ 4 per cent. The secon~ d thing is,
there has been claims by the small business
community about the mobility of capital between
businesses. We've now decreased sharply,
dramatically, the concession for good will, the
taxation of good will under the capital gains tax,
exempting up to 50 per cent of the value of good
will up to the value of a business of $ 2 million,
which should help, at least some people rolling from
one business to another. We've also changed the
rate at which smaller business meets the
sueanuto guarrantee levy. We've also changed
the timing of the taxation payments for small
busiLness. So, there Is a fair bit there for small
business. Let me say that I am not advocating any
enviLronmental vandalism or scorching the earth, but
what absolutely escapes me this time is that we
desparately need to create jobs, we desparately need
to create foreign revenue, but we persist with the
poliLcy which allows some projects which have got
potential to create lots of jobs and earn lots of
money for this country to just sit on the back
shelves. And it looks to me as if you are just
pandering to a small political minority group as we
persist with the uranium policy, which makes this
country a laughing stock, where we are allowed to
mine this mine but not allowed to take uranium from
that: mine. I don't understand why we do that, why
we don't use all of our resources and why we don't
stand up to this vocal minority and get on with it.
PM: I don't think that a vocal minority is holding major
projects back. The only uranium mine which has ever
been an issue in Australia is Pan-Continental In the
East Alligator River's flood plain. And, for
exactly the same reason that the former Coalition
Government did not agree to this development is the
same reason why this Government concerned with the
prospects of mining uranium, building a retaining
dam In the middle of a flood plain. And it's a real
livel issue, in terms of the environment. But that
is niot a new issue, it's not something that has
risen in the last few years, it's something which
has been there in the last 15 to 20 years. Now,
Roxby Downs is larger than three or four
conventional mines put together. So there's no
prohibition to the actual export of uranium, it's
only about the development problems of particular
mining sites. And the only one that I know that is
a problem is basically Jabaluka and Pan-Continental.
And that's because of the flood plain problems, it's 
right in the middle of the flood plain. If you had
seert the escarpment and the flood plain, you know
what: the problem was. The latest, largest project
to tie, if you like begun, in terms of quantification
and preserves is the-monster out in Western
Australia in the Pilbara And whij--there were some
objections to that this last week, it is now
proceeding. And one of the reasons we put this
per cent development allowance in is to say to
people who are running companies, that are not
certa~ in about their timing or whether they should
enter the market and are Bitting on the Bide lines
waiting and looking at particular commodities and
market opportunities, and then sort of blaming the
Government, to say look there is a 10 per cent
investment allowance in there, so if you
procrastinate now you have got to really want to
procrastinate, because if you do you will lose the
per cent. In other words, it is a carrot sitting
out there, and if they don't take it they will lose
it. It is time limited. So if you are here now,
getting up and saying we are being held back, you
know either they really are, because if they're not
they are simply going to do their company a
disservice by losing a very important component in
their cash flows in their early years. So that's
why it's there. It's basically there to support the
ones who have got bigger projects together which are
which go through all these various states and
what have you, and get environmental assessments and
the rest. It's to support them and to at the same
time encourage them. Now, in the one Nation
Statement we have announced a one enviornmental
process, intergovernmental agreement, environmental
assessment which will now take place between the
Commonwealth and the States in one process, which Is
a very great change. And also, the coordination and
acceleration of projects which will now be conducted
under the agis of the Prime Minister's Department,
supported by my Parliamentary colleague,
Laurie Brereton, to try to hurry and bring the
projects through these approval processes. So don't
believe that minorities are holding up major
projects. The one major project that has been a
problem ' for years is basically the pulp mill in
Tasmania.. Now, the pulp mill in Tasmania was not
held up because of wood or forest resource issues.
It was held up because the company said they could
meet the organo-chloride emmission targets of the
Government, but they wouldn't be required to meet
them. And that's why it didn't proceed three or
four years ago. And part of that was because of
Naranda,, the Canadian company, who wouldn't be
required to do things in Australia who might then be
required to be done in Canada. So, just a Little
bit of guile helps here, sorting out what is true,
what is ' fact and what is fiction. There's no doubt
there is environmental differences in this country 
a legitimate one, but again I believe they can be
balanced of f in a sensible balance for development
in Australia, and that there shouldn't be a
preoccupation or a view that major projects can't
start in this country. I just don't think that
that's true.
0: Actually, Mr Hunter is being a little coy since he
has two questions and I'll save him the trouble by
asking it. Is the Prime Mininister of Australia
being trounced in cricket, yachting and boxing.
Does this reflect on the new leadership as the
previous incumbent has had no such problem?
PM; I'll let that go to the keeper. We might have
spurred the English team on, I'll take some
responsiblity there.
Q: Prime Minister, you've already referred to the
avia-tion' policy in the One Nation Statement. Can I
take it a little further and ask your predictions
for the likely outcome of the 1992 round of the CER, 1
and secondly if you could give us guidance on your
thoughts for the longer term direction for both
countries under a CER-type agreement.
PM: Well I think it is important that Australia and New
Zealand are more integrated as economies, and
particularly in things like aviation where there's a
group of people who are closer to Sydney then indeed
to Perth is, and where it makes sense to run an
airline system in Australasia. And a lot of the CER
arrangements be concessioned by Australia to Now
Zealand, letting a country with a smaller market
access to a larger market. And that mostly costs
us. I've never minded the cost because I think it
matters politically and strategically in the long
run -to keep New Zealand as a country which is
economically strong and able to have access to
larger markets. But I think it is important to get
the airline agreement into piece and we've got some,
now absurd, blanket claims like Air New Zealand who
want 50 per cent of the on-carriage rights Out of
Australia to Air New Zealand, which is of course
absolute nonsense, absolute nonsense. I don't mind
helping the New Zealand aviation industry, but i-f
they think help means scraping more of our plate
onto theirs in absurd arrangements, then they are
cracking jokes. So, we'll be in a good negotiation,
a meaningful, sensible one, but we're not about to
be pillaged in the interests of bon honmie and the
fellowship of man in the South Pacific.
0: Primea Minister, just on one aspect of your One
Nation Statement, do you think that the electricity
grid will overcome State rivalries that currently
exist, and are you hopeful that there will be more
competition in the industry.? 
PM: Are you from the industry?
Q: Yes.
PM: well, one of the problems is, one of the great
comparative advantages Australia has is that it can
produce cheap electrical energy. We have a
colosseum all the way down the East Coast of
Australia and therefore it is one of our
comparatives strengths. It is nevertheless true
that we are not able to fund cheaper power in the
important industries who rely on it because of the
control of the State Electricity Commission in
particular states. The sensible thing is to set up
an interstate grid company which is owned by the
Commonwealth of the States which will be the
distributer of power and the electricity commission
will be the generators of power and that they will
then tender a price to supply power to the grid, or
that if a company wishes to use power, in the use of~
that power, they can get a tender from Miraring or
Loyang or somewhere else and then that power station
funds the grid and we can get competitive power
price3s to businesses around the country. That's the
point of the grid corporation and which I think will
be a very healthy thing for business and
competitiveness and for consumers in the Eastern
Coast of Australia, Queensland, New South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia. Now the opportunities
which I think will manifest there and it is
important to bring them home and that is another
important change. But can I just say, these are all
the changes which Australia really does need. I
mean, putting a national grid corporation together,
or building a railway highway from Brisbane to
Perth, or tying the ports to that railway highway,
or extending the road highway system, are all things
that can only be done really by Governments. And
they can't be done by taking money away from Budget
in these respects, which is what the Opposition
wishes to do. It is not going to happen by simply
taxing your Weet-Six or your clothes or your shoes.
I meein it will not matter if you tax your clothes,
your shoes or your Weet-Bix, it will have no impact
on the curves and gradience of the Sydney-Melbourne
railwray lines, or the ridsheights, or whether one
has t~ o follow a route from the Port of Melbourne
or the East Swanson dock to the railway yards.
Whether a truck can only take one container not two
because it cannot go onto the railway line, because
it isn'tr mean these are all physical
practical things that need to be done to make the
country efficient where it matters most. Moving
goods and around and being able to trade. Dr Hewson
calls that irresponsible. He calls that spending
irresponsible, he knows that no private company is
ever going to Invest In the railway system in terms 
of the permanent wave, he knows that. He knows that
without Government action we will not get a better
electricity distribution system. He knows without
Government spending we will not invest in our
children in technical and further education, and we
can't have now as Labor has, 7 out of 10 children
completing secondary school, but not enought uptake
in-the TAFE system, to take them up and train them.
But we can't have a clever country without a trained
worklforce in this area. He knows all these things,
and yet we are given only the ideology of the GST as
the solution to Australia's problems. In other
words, we are supposed to say, well look, we've now
reformed the macro-economy largely, we are now
producing competitively, we've now got our inflation
rate down, now is the time to crack all these other
areas, ports, wharfs, rail, road, training. All of
these things. But we will not do that, what we will
do is we will go and tax expenditure but not income
and that will solve the whole problems. That will
solve the whole thing. But of course it is
nonsense. It is a tenth order matter, and
regardless of what everybody things about t: axing
expenditure, nobody is going to accept that: someone
on $ 20,000 who spends all of their income, that is
in material whether you tax their income or
expenditure because it is one of the same, they
spend the lot and mostly more, they do save, whereas
some~ thing on $ 150 or $ 200,00 who is spending half
their income and saving the rest, not only is not
taxed fully on that income, but as well as that,
receives a very big tax break. Nobody is going to
wear that, nobody is going to wear that. And so not
onlyr is it going to be, is it a focus on things
which ate not material to improving Australia's
competitiveness, but it will actually be divisive.
And as we add 4 percentage or 5 percentage points to
the price system, and inflation rate doubles, more
than doubles and goes back towards double digits
agaaln, Dr Holwson will require the workforce
undorcompensated to take a real reduction in income
by a discount to wages which will preserve the low
infl~ ation rate, which of course they won't, they
will. just go and recover it in the market. And
there wil be a lot of buzz in the news then
about inflation. A lot of buzz about inflation
rising.-And what will he do then to repair it, lift
the interest and slow the economy down, so you will
end up with structural high level and structural
unemployment, lower levels of economic activity and
that is supposed to be a solution. The fact is you
can't run Australia without an agreed basis of
income determination. Whether you call it Accord,
or conVeWTsation with the Government and the unions,
or aL partnership with business, a partnership with
the unions, you can't run this country without some
agreed basis of income determination. And to throw
a sort of hand grenade at the system with the 
doubling of the inflation rate throught GST when we
have the unions now prepared to make our enterprise
efficient, committed to low inflation, wanting to
train our children and prepared to come to into,
agree with enterprise agreements on things like
rail. ways, ports, power generation and the rest, and
say oh no, we don't need that, we can have the
luxury of not worrying about those things which have
bedeviled us for half a century and will go for Dr
Hewson's GST. And then when the system is inflamed,
with higher inflation and lower growth, and the
whole micro-economic change stalls, people might
then say, well that was a mistake. It is a mistake
becaiuse, it is a mistake for this reason, Dr Hewson
had exactly the same opportunity as I had when I
became Prime minister, and that was to sit back and
say well, what needs to happen to Australia next,
what: is the logical thing to be doing now? He sat
back and said, not what should happen for Australia,
or what is logical, he said, how can I be different?
What can I do that marks me out to be different?
And he said, I got it, it's a consumption tax. So
then he has put this consumption tax and wrapped
around it other policies on the basis that its
canioflauged and hidden and disguised for all to say,
oh that's clever Dr Hewson, that is terrific,
terrific little result. He is going to double the
inflation rate, blow the wage system out of the
water, derail micro-economic reform, just what we
need, just what we need. But he had such a dream
ride for 3 or 4 months, that he actually believes
that the policy brought down actually has some
quality to it. I hope that I have punctured that
dream.
ENDS 



P M
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, HILTON HOTEL, SYDNEY, 12 MARCH 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What's your reaction to the latest unemploymentfigures?
PM: Well, I think it shows there is no further
deterioration taking place in the labour market. Now,
over the last few months we've seen a reasonably
stronger trend in employment that was interrupted
this month, but the unemployment rate is marginally up
on last month, that one would have to say that the
trend rate is about the same. So, overall, happily, no
further deterioration in unemployment.
J: Is there brighter news around the corner?
PM: Well, we expect the economy to grow over the course of
1992-3, because employment is so closely tied to GDP,
the product, to the economy, as the economy grows, so
too will employment.
J: Mr Keating, will next week's GDP figures show that the
recession is over?
PM: I don't know, let's wait and see. I've not really been
in the business of predicting National Accounts, as you
know.
J: Prime Minister, John Hewson's campaigning style,
particularly his challenge to you last night to debate
him 
PM: I think he is rattled, as I said to you yesterday, I
think he is rattled. He is now willy-nilly adopting
our infrastructure proposals, which a few weeks ago
were irresponsible, he is now going to use the proceeds
of our growth which he said was unlikely to happen, and
I think he is not sure what model he is working in. I
think more power to him, let him continue this way.
J: What's your response to his challenge to a debate?
PM: Well, I wouldn't want to do to him in public what I've
been obliged to do to him in the privacy in Parliament
House, in the House of Representatives. So, you know,
we can't be too unkind to him.
J: Mr Keating, you had a go at Dr Hewson's fiscal
discipline. In the Budget, would you undertake to
offset extra spending by spending cuts to keep your own
fiscal discipline?
PM: We're the people who brought fiscal discipline to
Australia, we're the first people to produce surpluses,
structural Budget surpluses, we're the people who spend
7 years cutting government spending, and we will do
that which we think is sensible and reasonable to the
economy. I made it clear in the One Nation Statement
that the deficit will come out probably beyond that
which we have, in forecasts there, as the Government
considers other unavoidable new policy over the course
of the Budget preparation. Now how much of that we
offset will remain to be seen. But I certainly don't
believe it should necessarily be offset.
J: In that case your deficit figure would blow out?
PM: No, no, just understand. We've got a ball-park number
there, and that's fine as far as we're concerned. But
it's really gilding the lily for Dr Hewson who left me,
in the last recession the one who he advised Mr
Howard on with a deficit twice as large as we have
now, the GDP, twice as large, to be giving us little
homilies about fiscal discipline. I mean, anyone else
with any self regard would crawl off into a cupboard,
and never mention the word " Budget" again.
J: Is the $ 6.8 billion forecast on the deficit immutable
or is that
PM: I think if you read the One Nation Statement you will
find there that we say that this is the outcome of
these changes as it is. But again, there is always, in
every Budget, a round of considerations on the outlays
and savings side. And, you know, there will be in this
Budget again.
J: Should Mr Willis have spoken out in public on his
demise as Treasurer like he did? 
PM: Well, I think he was asked a perfectly reasonable
questions, and he gave, I think in the circumstances, a
perfectly reasonable response. I wouldn't blame Ralph
for being disappointed. But the measure of him is he
has put his back into that One Nation Statement as few
Ministers would. And he has been one of the principles
in it. The three principles were myself, the
Treasurer, and Mr Willis.
J: What do you think he meant by his being dismissed for
reasons other than his ability'?
PM: Prime Ministers have the difficult task of making
judgements about Ministerial places, and I can assure
you it would be a moot point who was hurt the most in
the decision me making it or Mr Willis with the
change. I mean it came as no pleasure to me and I had
to make a judgment and I did, and he, in a most I think
responsible way, has taken up again the Finance
Ministry duties with great relish and fervour.
J: How long do you think it will be before you know for
sure that the Australian economy is on track, and we
have reached the bottom of the interest rate cycle?
PM: Well, we'll just see what happens with the National
Accounts, which come out soon, and then the quarter
after that. The best guide to how we are going is the
official data.
J: Prime Minister, should the markets read anything into
your comments about the future of interest rates, vis a
vis your comments today about the relatively tight
stand in monetary policy?
PM: I was just reminding people that at this stage in the
cycle of the last recession, inflation was at 10 per
cent. Inflation now is at 1.5 and an underlying rate
of about 3 per cent. So we are 7 percentage points
lower, but the shift in interest rates has been 12, the
same as in ' 82-3, which means, necessarily, that
monetary conditions have been, if you like, less
relaxed now than they were then. And that's why I
think the markets ought to appreciate that and
understand that that the Government is intent upon
keeping inflation down, and we are about a sustainable,
low inflationary recovery.
J: But the markets have been speculating about the
possibility of another interest rate cut. Do you think
they might draw upon what you've said that there is
some flexibility in monetary policy?
PM: Well, that's up to them. That's what they're paid all
that money for to make those judgments.
J: Do you think there is that flexibility? 
PM: Well, that's what you just asked me. As I said that's
for the markets to make those judgments.
J: Prime Minister, what about immigration? The numbers
are out, what are you going to do to combat that?
PM: What do you mean, combat?
J: Dr Hewson says that it is out of control.
PM: Well, that's a comment which is basically made in
satisfaction of that part of that debate which is
cranky about the migration program. It's not a comment
which pays due regard to the difficulties of running a
program like this.
J: But 35 per cent of recent immigrants are going on some
sort of government benefit because there is no work.
PM: The thing is, look, migration programs are for the long
run good of Australia, of its economy, of its
population, and of course the program goes up and down
during economic periods in boom times when we need
more labour it goes up, in recessions it goes down.
That's what's been happening now.
J: But it's not going down.
PM: No, what he wants to do is basically destroy. He wants
to basically destroy the program. And we'll be making
a Judgement about this in April. In April each year we
make a Judgment about what the numbers should be for
the following year.
J: Can we expect a cut?
PM: Well, you can just expect the statement in April.
J: What's your reaction to the East Timor peace trip, the
way that's turned out? Are you satisfied we didn't
step on any toes?
PM: Well, I'm very pleased about the fact that there was no
overt problem there and that the matter was, in many
respects, dealt with sensibly by the people operating
the vessel.
J: You said the unemployment trends remained much the
same, in Victoria in fact it hasn't, the participation
rate has slumped. Is that indicative of how the
employment rate will go for the next few months?
PM: Participation rates jump about, it's very hard to make
a judgment about them, they dance all over the place.
The main thing is, the trend in employment is for this
month no deterioration, no deterioration over the last
2 or 3 months. 



Al
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
FINANCIAL REVIEW LUNCHEON, QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS, SYDNEY,
12 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Q: role of Australia in the Asia-Pacific?
A: I think our future is in the Asia-Pacific state.
Already 70 odd per cent of our export goes to the APEC
area and ab6ut 67-68 per cent from memory, of our
imports come from there. We are all really largely
integrated with the region, but, of course, more will
happen. It's the fastest growing part of the world and
we are now well set up to participate in that growth.
Whereas because of our reliance upon border protection,
tariffs, quotas, and the fact that we had a largely
uncompetitive financial system back in the ' 50s and
the trades in goods and services passed Australia
by. Now we have removed exchange controls, broken the
tariff wall down and now where national savings will be
funding productive things. Our exports this year, for
the first time in our history, our manufacturing
exports are larger than our rural exports. We're now
set up with a low inflation rate and with flexibility
now coming into the labour market on an enterprise
basis, we're really set up to participate in this
growth which formerly we were not. So, we've got to
the point for our exports again in the Asia-Pacific:
area, the great bulk of our imports come from there,
obviously we are now better positioned to take our part
of that trade and to share in that growth than we ever
were. That's why I think it is important that we continue to
improve our competitiveness, and we break down all
these areas of inefficiency. These are the first order
issues. The first order issue are continuing the
change in the micro-economy that we formerly were doing
and successfully in the macro-economy, that is ports,
wharves, railways, airlines, power generation,
training, enterprise bargaining these are the things,
not whether we tax our Kelloggs or our income. It is
an tenth order issue. The first order issues are 
those, and if we concentrate on the first order issue
that One Nation concentrates on improving the capacity
of containers through our ports and onto our rail
system, on our roads, training our kids and
underwritting a tax break to capital, to investment.
These are the things which will set us up more
adequately to participate in that growth which is where
our future must be.
But agaiLn we have got to be confident about our future,
confident about Australia and look as though we are
confident. I think that is terribly important to the
chemistr7y Of the region, that at least they think we
know who we are and what we are and what we ' re after.
Q: Mr KeatiLng, my question is about inflation. One Nation
predicts inflation at 3.75 per. Will this blow out due
to enterprise bargaining in wages and higher growth
rates than predicted?
A: No, because it is no accident now that for 9 successive
years we brought wages, the average weekly earnings
forecast:, which was put together by the Government with
the ACTU under the Accord, we brought it in under
target. We brought it in because of that
understanding. I said in my speech that the ACTU as a
constituency was at least as interested in lower
inflation as any constituency in the country. The
truth is it'has been much more interested in low
inflation than any constituency in the country.
Because interest is between it being prepared to..
cut demands'back where most other sectors haven't. And
it is because it understands how pernicious inflation
is to the low paid, to the retired, to people trying to
buy a house and carry large price increases in
propertiLes, but most importantly retarding investment
and with it employment. It's been about knocking
inflation down and the fact that on the large booms as
we've seen in the post-war years, 1988-89, when
employers were offering wage increases of 12-15 per
cent. B~ ut the year AWE number came out at 6 1/ 4 shows
just how entirely committed in the face of that
enormous demand for labour the ACTU has been.
Now we are not focussing on average weekly earnings.
Because we have got inflation down, the thing t~ o do now
is keep it down and we are now focussing on major
trading partner average inflation and imputing in that
a wage number which is consistent with that, that is to
which the ACTU is committed. But if you take the view
that we can't open the labour market up, that we've got
to remai n with the Arbitration Commission for all
adjustments in relation to the economy, then I think
what you'll end up with is a colony of losers out on
The economy just won't be as competitive as it
ought to be, it won't be as clever in managing itself
and remember this, we are not the New Zealand Labor
Party, there is no blunder and stumble here into 
deregulation. We've actually broken the craft system
up. The craft system of industrial organisation meant
that if someone on the metals construction award on a
Sydney ' building site paid an increase, that went
through the whole of the metal industry in Australia.
That's now been broken into much more discrete
elements, and by going at it on an enterprise basis if
a union wanted to claim and use its industrial muscle
to claim an-increase which destroys the business, it
takes responsibility for it. Where formerly this was
happening with the Arbitration Commission, who had no
great relationship with either the business or the
union. Now a union can sit down with the company and glet it
managed better. And you've got the metals industry for7
its unions groups talking about advanced manufacturing
technology.' They now go and say what's your long-term
corporate plan, what's your long-term investment plan,
and how can we help the business grow. That's the sort
of mindset of maturity, not the confrontation. The New
Zealand trade union movement never spoke to the Labor
Government in all the years it was in office, and the
Government didn't speak to it, there was no accord.
They had a sort of cold turkey system that Dr Hewson
will give you, you go and have a punch up over wages
and the national interest invariably loses out. That's
why when David Lange or Roger Douglas come here to
listen politely but take no notice of them at all. I
mean good intentions, but good intentions were never
enough.
Q: Why are you waiting to give tax cuts for two years.
Are you holding a carrot for the election?
A: To not do it would definitely see the tax burden
That is, even with low inflation, the effect of low
inflation on the tax which will see the real tax
burden And this Government has been pursuing a
policy of handing back fiscal drag from the system and
more. So the reason we are not doing it this year is
because we think fiscal policy can't afford it and at
this point the build up is simply not there to return
but over the next couple of years there will be a build
up in the revenue, particularly as growth picks up and
as more: time goes by, with inflation even at low
levels, to have an impact on the tax scales.
And by that stage, as the, if you like the hump of the
deficit: starts to decline as the economy comes back, as
revenues pick up and unemployment benefits and the
other things start to diminish and the deficit starts
to come back towards surplus, that's the point then
that we! can make these tax cuts. All of Labor's tax
cuts, every single one there's been many of them
since 1.983 have all been honoured, every one of them
has beEtn honoured. It won't be a repeat of the John
Howard, John Hewson and Malcom Fraser show in 1977, 
remember that campaign they had, ring up and find out
how much your tax cuts were. Well 3 months later they
took it back, they legislated them away. There won't
be any of that. And they'll be there as they've always
been. 1: think they will create a very good climate in
the labour market. People will think they are getting
a fair go out of the tax system by creating employment
and it will provide a certain per cent rate of tax for
people between $ 20,000 and $ 40,000. People on medium
incomes where the incentive is to work and do more at
per cent rather than 38 in the dollar. But I hasten.
to add 30 per cent, the same as Dr Hewson's but without
a consumption tax, without 15 per cent.
That's t~ he point and I don't know how you are going
with your businesses at the moment but what's going to
happen to you is that in the nostalgia area as you give
your Sundays away filling in, as you'll be a tax
collection point on the GST, you'll give your Sundays
to remitting money to the tax office, you will be
nostalgic you will be nostalgic for a Labor
Government if it were to ever come to pass
Q: Will an international increase in interest rates affect
One Nation forecasts?
A: We've based it on what we think is a, in part, the
trading environment over the forecast period. And the
trading environment we are tied up to mostly is the
Asia-Pacific environment which I think is growing at
per cent in forecast to 92-3 and 4.5 the following
year. E1 don't see that sort of change, I don't see now
the prospect of that changing with some shift in
interest rates. It needs to be borne in mind that
we've sItill'got a tighter monetary regime applied now
than ever applied from the 82-3 recession. In 1982-3
interest rates came down by about 12 per cent and
same in this recession. By then we had inflation
running at 10 and now we've got inflation statistically
running at 1.5 or a trend to 3. So there is a 7
percentage points difference with inflation and yet the
fall in rates has been the same, ie therefore this
regime has been as it remains, much tighter than 1982-
83.
Q: curr-ent account deficit/ foreign debt?
A: It says in the text that systems stabilisation, the
Treasury says that. This has been consistent with a
slight drift up in the ratio of net external debt to
GDP. And the ratio of debt to equity financing have a
return -towards levels which existed prior to the
excessive leveraging of the late 1980s. Net external
debt to GDP ratio could stabilise or decline slowly.
In other words we shouldn't take as the comparable
period, the high leveraging phase of the ' 80s, but
something more sensible when that balance between debt
and equity is more of a guide to how the economy will 
be in the ' 90s. So any 2-3 percentage points the
current account forecasts, will forecast by other
people looking at the performance of the ' 80s. Now
that has changed markedly, I can't remember the numbers
exactly but ' I think we went from about 90 per cent debt
in 89-90) to 90 per cent equity in 1990-91. One has to
assume, I think, more sensible behaviour in financing
levels assume that this is consistent with the
stabilisation of debt and GDP or a slow decline.
Q: In regar~ d to the Monarchy and your comments about
Australia, if Australia becomes a republic what form
will it take, will Bill Hayden be president for
examplel
A: Well just remember what I said. The remark which was
objected to by our conservative friends, forelock
tugging mates, was that I said in the presence of the
Queen, I was congratulating her on her 40 years as the
Monarch and to make the point that in the 40 so much
had changed. In 40 years, I said to her, Britain had
joined t~ he European Community and Australia's largely
devoted itself to the Asia-Pacific, we were necessarily
more independent of Britain than Europe, but that she
was panl: of that change. She was part of that
independence by taking the royal style and title of
Queen of Australia in 1973 a thoroughly unexceptional
remark. But our friends in the Opposition had to jump
all over it. Dr Hewson said I didn't have enough
respect for the Queen of Britain outrage, he'd like
to slip right back to the torpor of the 1950s. As I
said he would be our first candidate for an exhibit in
the constitutional museum down there at the old
Parliament House. Like I said in Parliament, we are
going to put him in there with the Morphy Richards
toaster and the qualcast mower and all the other bits
and pieces that we all remember affectionately and
well. That's what I was saying. I was just saying that
Australia isn't necessarily more independent and needs
to be clear about itself, needs to be confident about
itself. It's very bad for these people who wish to
lead us in the ' 90s, but who harp back and want to be
part of the 150s. What I'm saying is they are not the
people -to lead us. The people to lead us are people
confident about Australia, confident Australians,
people that, know that we are good enough to make our
way in * the world and know that we are entitled to and
have indeed' an identity of their own. if one o~ f our
national leaders in the 1990s thinks that we shouldn't
have an identity of our own but we should in some way
not even be referring to changes in constitutio~ nal
arrangements with Great Britain, then I say well thank
you but we don't need you.
That was one of my remarks, I was not talking about a
republic or what sort of republic we ought to have or 
what constitutional arrangements should be. That's
something for the public debate to comprehend as time
goes by..
Q: When can we expect announcements on the simplification
of superannuation and the clarification of pension
rules?
A: Well when the Government has adequately considered the
area. it's a complex area and when you take any system
like superannuation, which is again, part of the torpor
of the " 50s and ' 60s, it was a gift from Mr Howard and
Mr Hewson when we had only a very small proportion of
workforce accessing the superannuation concession. And
when werve opened it up more generally the workforce
and then more sensibly taxed superannuation earnings,
to do that and not disrupt the expectations of
Australians who are near retirement, at retirement,
some proximity of retirement, has meant that
necessar7ily we've had grand provisions what have
you, to protect them. This is a matter of
inconvenience I know to the industry, but there is more
than industry inconvenienced in all this. There is
reasonable expectation by those who believe they've
grown up in'the system which gave them certain
entitlements. And it's not easy therefore to change
superannuation, arrangements for tax computation
without having due regard for those things.
We've tr7ied to do that. We've tried to make the system
more simple but at the same time make it fair. There
is probably areas where simplification can occur but
they have to be proposals which we can adopt
confidentlyand that will take examination and..
we've done more than any government in history.
Q: Can you explain what assistance there is to small and
medium business in the One Nation Statement and what
does it do for women?
A: I'll deal with the second part of the question first.
The thing that I've had most in mind for women in this
country since I've been a Minister was jobs,
participation, choice, opportunity and of those
million jobs we created between 1983 and 1992, 60 per
cent of those went to women. In terms of my own direct
responsiLbility beyond employment, a number of
significant things which the Government did for women
in the ' 80s'and that is opening up child care
opportunities for women to go to work if they choose,
which diLdn't exist formerly. The child support agency
where women are supported by their husbands or former
husbands, as the case may be, in support of their
children, in supplementary payments for low paid women,
in medicare which is an obvious support for women
because women mostly have the burden of worrying about
children and regardless of their circumstances are
covered for health protection. I mean it is just one 
thing after the other, equal opportunity legislation,
affirmative action legislation and we're continuing
that tradition and of course access to superannuation.
Before we came along there was no preserved benefits
and women who entered the workforce, left the workforce
to have children and came back and had no preservation
of benefits. They were effectively chopped out of
superannuation. These are quite milestone reforms. I notice the
Opposition talking about pay rates for women, Dr Hewson
said he will oppose national wage cases. A lot of
women are in the low paid sector of the economy
process workers, shop assistants who rely upon national
wage adjustments for maintenance of their incomes which
they say they are opposed to. So, as usual, it will be
Labor who provides, again, for Australian women.
C c&gt; tj T'g E= N U 
In relation to small business, we've got a number of
changes in there which I think are important. The
first thing is growth. That's the most important
thing small business lives off the growth in the
econtomy. And we've got growth through the year
forecast at 4 3/ 4 per cent. The second thing is,
there has been claims by the small business
community about the mobility of capital between
businesses. We've now decreased sharply,
dramatically, the concession for good will, the
taxation of good will under the capital gains tax,
exempting up to 50 per cent of the value of good
will. up to the value of a business of $ 2 million,
which should help, at least some people rolling from
one business to another. We've also changed the
rate at which smaller business meets the
superannuation guarrantee levy. We've also changea
the timing of the taxation payments for small
business. So, there is a fair bit there for small
business. Let me say that I am not advocating any
environmental vandalism or scorching the earth, but
what absolutely escapes me this time is that we
desparately need to create jobs, we desperately need
to create foreign revenue, but we persist with the
policy Which allows some projects which have got
potential to create lots of jobs and earn lots of
money for this country to just sit on the back
shelves.-And it looks to me as if you are just
pandering to a small political minority group as we
persist with the uranium policy, which makes this
country a laughing stock, where we are allowed to
mine this mine but not allowed to take uranium from
that mine. I don't understand why we do that, why
we don't use all of our resources and why we don't
stand up. to this vocal minority and get on with it.
PM: I don't think that a vocal minority is holding major
projects back. The only uranium mine which has ever
been an issue in Australia is Pan-Continental in the
East Alligator River's flood plain. And, for
exactly the same reason that the former Coalition
Government did not agree to this development is the
same reason why this Government concerned with the
prospects of mining uranium, building a retaining
damn In the middle of a flood plain. And it's a real&amp;
live issue, in terms of the environment. But that
is not a new issue, it's not something that has
risen in the last few years, it's something which
has been there in the last 15 to 20 years. Now,
Roxby Downs is larger than three or four
conventional mines put together. So there's no
prohibition to the actual export of uranium, it's
only about the development problems of particular
mining sites. And the only one that I know that is
a problem is basically Jabaluka and pan-Continental.
And that's because of the flood plain problems, it's 
right in the middle of the flood plain. If you had
seen the escarpment and the flood plain, you know
what the problem was. The latest, largest project
to be, if you like begun, in terms of quantification
and preserves is the monster out in Western
Australia in the Pilbara And whiJthere were some
objections to that this last week, it is now
proceeding. And one of the reasons we put this
per cent development allowance in is to say to
people who are running companies, that are not
certain about their timing or whether they should
enter the market and are sitting on the side lines
Wait ing and looking at particular commodities and
market opportunities, and then sort of blaming the
Government, to say look there is a 10 per cent
investment allowance in there, so if you
procrastinate now you have got to really want to
procrastinate, because if you do you will lose the
per cent. In other words, it is a carrot: sitting
out there, and if they don't take it they will lose
it. It is time limited. So if you are here now,
getting up and saying we are being held back, you
know either they really are, because if they're not
they aresimply going to do their company a
disservice by losing a very important component in
their cash flows in their early years. So that's
why it's there. it's basically there to support the
ones who have got bigger projects together which are
which go through all these various states and
what have you, and get environmental assessments and
the rest. It's to support them and to at the same
time encourage them. Now, in the One Nation
Statement we have announced a one enviornmental
process, intergovernmental agreement, environmental
assessment which will now take place between the
Commonwealth and the States in one process, which is
a very great change. And also, the coordination and
acceleration of projects which will now be conducted
under the agis of the Prime Minister's Department,
supported by my Parliamentary colleague,
Laurie Brereton, to try to hurry and bring the
projects-through these approval processes. So don't
believe that minorities are holding up major
projects. The one major project that has been a
problem for years is basically the pulp mill in
Tasmania. Now, the pulp mill in Tasmania was not
held up because of wood or forest resource issues.
It was held up because the company said they could
meet the organo-chloride emmission targets of the
Goverament, but they wouldn't be required to meet
them. And that's why it didn't proceed three or
four years ago. And part of that was because of
Naranda, the Canadian company, who wouldn't be
required to do things in Australia who might then be
required to be done in Canada. So, just a little
bit of guile helps here, sorting out what is true,
what : Ls fact and what is fiction. There's no doubt
there is environmental differences in this country 
a legitimate one, but again I believe they can be
balanced of f in a sensible balance for development
in Australia, and that there shouldn't be a
preoccupation or a view that major projects can't
start in this country. I just don't think that
that's true.
0: Actually, Mr Hunter is being a little coy since he
has ' two questions and I'll save him the trouble by
asking it. Is the Prime Mininister of Australia
being trounced in cricket, yachting and boxing.
Does this reflect on the new leadership as the
previous incumbent has had no such problem?
PM: I'll lot that go to the keeper. We might have
spurr~ ed the English team on, I'll take some
respansiblity there.
0: Prime Minister, you've already referred to the
aviation policy in the One Nation Statement. Can I
take it a little further and ask your predictions
for ' the likely outcome of the 1992 round of the CER,
and secondly if you could give us guidance on your
thoughts for the longer term direction for both
countries; under a CER-type agreement.
PM: Well I think it is important that Australia and New
Zealand are more integrated as economies, and
particularly in things like aviation where there's a
group of people who are closer to Sydney than indeed
to Perth is, and where it makes sense to run an
airline system in Australasia. And a lot of the CER
arrangements be concessioned by Australia to New
Zealand, letting a country with a smaller market
acces; s to a larger market. And that mostly costs
us. I've never minded the cost because I think it
matters politically and strategically in the long
run to keep New Zealand as a country which is
economically strong and able to have access to
larger markets. But I think it is important to get
the airline agreement into place and we've got some,
now absurd, blanket claims like Air New Zealand who
want 50 per cent of the on-carriage rights out of
Australia to Air New Zealand, which is of course
absolute nonsense, absolute nonsense. I don't mind
helpi. ng the New Zealand aviation industry, but if
they think help means scraping more of our plate
onto theirs in absurd arrangements, then they are
cracking jokes. So, we'll be in a good negotiation,
a meaningful, sensible one, but we're not about to
be pillaged in the interests of bon homi-e and the
fellowship of man in the South Pacific.
Q: Prime, Minister, just on one aspect of your One
Natio~ n Statement, do you think that the electricity
grid will overcome State rivalries that currently
exist, and are you hopeful that there will be more
competition in the industry.? 
PM. Are you from the industry?
0: Yes.
PM: Well, one of the problems is, one of the great
comparative advantages Australia has is that it can
produce cheap electrical energy. We have a
colosseum all the way down the East Coast of
Australia and therefore it is one of our
comparatives strengths. It in nevertheless true
that we are not able to fund cheaper power in the
important industries who rely on it because of the
control of the State Electricity Commission in
particular states. The sensible thing is to set up
an interstate grid company which is owned by the
Commonwealth of the States which will be the
distributbr of power and the electricity commission
will be the generators of power and that they will
then tender a price to supply power to the grid, or
that if a company wishes to use power, in the use of
that power, they can get a tender from Miraring or
Loyang or somewhere else and then that power station
funds the grid and we can get competitive power
prices to businesses around the country. That's the
point of the grid corporation and which I think will
be a very healthy thing for business and
competitiveness and for consumers in the Eastern
Coast of Australia, Queensland, New South Wales,
Viocria and South Australia. Now the opportunities
which. I think will manifest there and it is
important to bring them home and that is another
important change. But can I just say, these are all
the changes which Australia really does need. I
mean, putting a national grid corporation together,
or buildl~ ng a railway highway from Brisbane to
Pertra, or tying the ports to that railway highway,
or extending the road highway system, are all things
that can only be done really by Governments. And
they can'. t be done by taking money away from Budget
in th~ ese respects, which is what the opposition
wishes t6 do. It is not going to happen by simply
taxing your Weet-Bix or your clothes or your shoes.
I mea~ n it will not matter if you tax your clothes,
your shoes or your Weet-Bix, it will have no impact
on the curves and gradience of the Sydney-Melbourne
railway lines, or the rida-heights, or whether one
has to follow a route from the Port of Melbourne
or the East Swanson dock to the railway yards.
Whether a truck can only take one container not two
becauLse it cannot go onto the railway line, because
it is: n't r I mean these are all physical
pract~ ical things that need to be done to make the
count~ ry efficient where it matters most. Moving
goods and around and being able to trade. Dr Hewson
calls that irresponsible. He calls that spending
irresponsible, he knows that no private company is
ever going to Invest in the railway system in terms 
Of the permanent wave, he knows that. He knows that
without Government action we will not get a better
electricity distribution system. He knows without
Government spending we will not invest in our
children in technical and further education, and we
can't have now as Labor has, 7 out of 10 children
compl. eting secondary school, but not enought uptake
in the TAFE system, to take them up and train them.
But we can't have a clever country without a trained
workforce in this area. He knows all these things,
and y; et we are given only the ideology of the OST as
the solution to Australia's problems. In other
words, we are supposed to say, well look, we've now
reformed-the macro-economy largely, we are now
producing competitively, we've now got our inflation
rate down, now is the time to crm. ck all these other
areas, ports, wharfs, rail, road, training. All of
these things. But we will not do that, what we will
do is we will go and tax expenditure but not income
and that will solve the whole problems. That will
solve the whole thing. But of course it is
nonsense. It is a tenth order matter, and
regardless of what everybody things about taxing
expenditure, nobody is going to accept that someone
on $ 20,000 who spends all of their income, that is
in material whether you tax their income or
expenditure because it is one of the same, they
spend the lot and mostly more, they do save, whereas
some-thing on $ 150 or $ 200,00 who is spending half
their income and saving the rest, not only is not
taxed fully on that income, but as well as that,
receives a very big tax break. Nobody is going to
wear that, nobody is going to wear that. And so not
only is it going to be, is it a focus on things
which are not material to improving Australia's
competitiveness, but it will actually be divisive.
And as we add 4 percentage or 5 percentage points to
the price system, and inflation rate doubles, more
than doubles and goes back towards double digits
again, Dr Hewson will require the workforce
undercompensated to take a real reduction in income
by a dis ' count to wages which will preserve the low
inflation rate, which of course they won't, they
will just go and recover it in the market. And
there wil be a lot of buzz in the news then
about inflation. A lot of buzz about inflation
rising. And what will he do then to repair it, lift
the interest and slow the economy down, so you will
end up with structural high level and structural
unemployment, lower levels of economic activity and
that is supposed to be a solution. The fact is you
can't run Australia without an agreed basis of
income determination. Whether you call it Accord,
or conpeftation with the Government and the unions,
or a partnership with business, a partnership with
the unions, you can't run this country without some
agreed basis of income determination. And to throw
a sort of hand grenade at the system with the 
doub: ling of the inflation rate throught GST when we
have the unions now prepared to make our enterprise
efficient, committed to low inflation, wanting to
train our children and prepared to come to into,
agree with enterprise agreements on things like
railways, ports, power generation and the rest, and
say oh no, we don't need that, we can have the
luxury of not worrying about those things which have
bedeviled us for half a century and will go for Dr
Hewson's CST. And then when the system is inflamed,
with higher inflation and lower growth, and the
whole micro-economic change stalls, people might
then say, well that was a mistake. It is a mistake
because, it is a mistake for this reason, Dr Hewson
had exactly the same opportunity as I had when I
became Prime minister, and that was to sit back and
say well, what needs to happen to Australia next,
what is the logical thing to be doing now? He sat
back and said, not what should happen for Australia,
or what is logical, he said, how can I be different?
What can I do that marks me out to be different?
And he said, I got it, it's a consumption tax. So
then he has put this consumption tax and wrapped
around it other policies on the basis that its
camo: Elauged and hidden and disguised for all to say,
oh that's clever Dr Hewson, that is terrific,
terrific little result. He is going to double the
inflation rate, blow the wage system out of the
water, derail micro-economic reform, just what we
need, just what we need. But he had such a dream
ride for 3 or 4 months, that he actually believes
that the policy brought down actually has some
qualiLty to it. I hope that I have punctured that
dreata.
ENDS 



IPRIME
MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH STAN GRANT, REAL LIFE
13 MARCH 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
SG: Prime Minister welcome. It makes your job of pursuing
a one Australia vision pretty difficult, when people
have attitudes like those displayed by the two police
officers doesn't it?
PM: I think that is true. There can't be any concept of
' One Nation' until we are, non-Aboriginal Australians
are, at peace and come to terms with Aboriginal
Australians.
SG: I might be a little bit cynical here Prime Minister,
that although what I saw last night disgusted me, and
it certainly did, it didn't surprise me, did it really
surprise you?
PM: It did actually. I thought these characters were
throw-backs. I think Australians have now come to
understand more about Aboriginal culture, are more
sympathetic now than perhaps they've ever been, more
prepared to see change, good change to better
intergrate Aboriginal Australians into the broader
society. So I actually thought this was something one
would expect from another period.
I
SG: So you don't accept the view put about by a lot of
people that what we've seen, not only last night, but
the week before with the Redfern police, they're
attitudes simply mirroring a deeper attitude felt right
through the Australian community. You don't accept
that?
PM: I don't think so. No, obviously what we saw the other
night on television is there now, this is a year or two
ago. The fact is, I think these are still minority
attitudes, but the fact that they existed is disturbing 
and the whole point of the reconciliation process is to
come to terms with those things.
SG: On the mat~ ter with the two police individually, do you
think they have a right to remain as members of the
police for-ce?,
PM: Well, I was heartened by the fact that the police
Minister i. n New South Wales told the Aboriginal Affairs
Minister this morning that they were going to take some
action, I can't remember exactly what they had in mind
against the two officers, I think they are standing
them down from active duty. And that they would
respond setriously to the recommendations of the Royal
Commission on Aboriginal Deaths in Custody. So I think
New South Wales Government and the New South Wales
Police force is taking this very seriously.
SG: There is a. greater problem here though, isn't there?
Aboriginal Aus9tralia tends to lurch from one disaster
to another. The Black Deaths in Custody Royal
Commission is just one. What is going to happen
eventually to improve the loss of Aboriginal
Australians, because certainly throwing money at it
really hasn't worked, has it?
PM: No, it is much about attitudes that what's in our minds
as it is about money. And that's why the Government
is taking the Aboriginal Deaths in Custody Royal
Commission recommendations seriously. We think this is
an opportunityperhaps to last in this decade to do
something again in material, to materially improve the
lot of Aboriginal Australians. And this is our
opportunity I think, and we are going to, we are now
seriously looking at this, and also enjoining the
States to -be in it. But it is an attitudinal thing and
the poverty of Aboriginal Australians only makes the
whole country poorer.
SG: I think back to my childhood, and I look at the
situation Aborigines were in then, and you would recall
it as well, it, hasn't really improved and yet as I say
money has been thrown at the problem. And is it fair
to say also do' you think, that the more moeny that's
thrown at Aborigines causes more resentment in the
wider community?
PM: If it does, it's unfair. I mean we spend a little less
than $ 5,000 per head on the Aboriginal population, and
most of it goes into things that matter. I've got: a
chart here now'showing where the money is spent. only
a third of it goes into labour market programs, the
rest goes iLntoeducation, health, housing and community
services, i -ndustry assistance. I think it is a great
shame if Australians believe that this area has been
indulged. It isn't. There has to be more done here. 
SG: But you would accept that there is that perception,
and there is also the perception that a lot of money is
wasted by Government agencies and also by Aboriginal
groups?
PM: Well, I'd like to think that's not true. One can not
be certain about the delivery of any program, but this
has been tightened up over the years. But the fact is,
we've now as a Government got another chance to look at
the delivery of Aboriginal programs in response to the
Royal Commission, and we're doing that. We'll be
engaging the States as well. And, through the broader
process, the reconciliation process, that we can
actually come to terms with it attitudinally, as well
as in program delivery.
SG: On the issue of the Royal Commission, now $ 500 million
was recommended by the Royal Commission to be put into
that area. What is being done there, because only half
of that money has actually been approved by the
Government hasn't it?
PM: Well, the Royal Commission didn't recommend an amount
of money. It's a matter for the Government to respond.
What we'll be ' doing, in the first instance, responding
to the law and justice recommendations of the Royal
CommissionL, and adequately funding those changes to
make sure those recommendations are met. But if we go
beyond that and look at the underlying causes and
reasons inl poverty or opportunity, or lack of
opportunit~ y which exists, lack of employment
opportunities ' which exist for Aboriginal people, if we
look at those issues, they'll be the subject of a
second statement to Parliament. And we're now looking
to make sure that that statement is right that what
we do does, when I say right, as best we can, design
those programs to be of most assistance to Aboriginal
people.
SG: Prime Minister, just finally and fairly quickly, has
what you've seen over the last week, has that spurred
you on to any greater heights to really finally do
something about this? Can you now set some sort of
timetable where you can say in 18 months that these
attitudes that now exist are now going to be gone?
PM: Well, I don't think I can say that, but we've got to
continue to work at it. But the fact is that non-
Aboriginal Australians must come to terms with the
poverty of Aboriginal Australians and the inequality of
their opportunities. And until we do, we won't be able
to claim the name, the notion of ' One Nation', and
therefore it is a matter of great urgency for us as a
society. And, I for one will be taking this
opportunity we have with the Royal Commission's
recommendations seriously, and this very untimely
incident only encourages me in that exercise. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH! PAUL LYNEHAM, 7: 30 REPORT, 13 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY'
PL: Prime Minister, welcome again to the program.
PM: Thank you Paul.
PL: At your news conference this morning you talked
directly to the Australian people and you linked race
relations with the question of our national identity.
What were you getting at there?
PM: Just that I don't think that we are going to be certain
who we are and be able to describe ourselves as ' One
Nation' until we come to terms with this problem of the
relations between Aboriginal Australians and non-
Aboriginal Australians.
PL: Why not? Surely white Australia has got a pretty good
idea who and what it is.
PM: It hasn't got a good enough idea to understand that the
indigenous people of this country still live in
poverty, still lack opportunity, still feel aggrieved
and that I think does permeate Australian society and
unsettles: it as it ought to.
P: But isn't it uncomfortable but true to say that
Australia was in fact founded on the basis of racism?
We snatched this land off the Aborigines, we raped
them, we murdered them, we pushed them into the back
blocks and we haven't given them much of a go ever
since.
PM: I think there has been a conscientious view amongst
Australians from the time, at least of the adoption of
the Constitutional Amendment back in the late
that there should be, at least the financial power of
the Commonwealth, ought to be brought to bear upon this
problem. I think what's happened since is we've seen a
greater level of understanding by Australians about
Aboriginal culture, about the problems of Aboriginal 
-2
life and a willingness on the part of the Australian
community, in general, to try to solve it.
PL: Yes, but which part of the Australian community? I
mean changing attitudes in Balmain or Carlton may be
one thing, in a lot of the out back towns its quite a
different thing isn't it?
PM: Probably that's true, but it's not as different as it
was. I think we ought to use this opportunity again,
this exercise as a turning point and just reflect upon
what this; must mean to the families of the people
involved and to ponder if that were the position of
anyone el~ se's family.
PL: A turningr point, you have also suggested that this was
a criticaLl time in Australian race relations. Why is
now so critical?
PM: It comes at the end of this long Royal Commission, 3 or
4 years of Aboriginal deaths in custody. It is, I
think an opportunity, probably the last opportunity in
this decade to come to terms with this problem. That's
why the Government is now working its way through these
recommendations and will respond fulsomely to them.
But again., it's as much in the mind as it is in
Commonwealth Budgetary programs or program delivery.
It has to be a willingness, I think, on the part of the
country of non-Aboriginal Australians to come to terms
with these problems, to give Aboriginal people
opportunities to take away this kind of attitude which
this incident has evoked.
PL: I heard that you said in Cabinet that this was a last
chance to get it right this decade?
PM: I did and I think it is. I think it deserves careful
and serious consideration and as well as that,
consultation with the States because I think the States
have got to be in this. A lot of the delivery of these
programs are with States and State governments. While
we will be responding to the law and justice issues of
the recommendations of the Commission in the first
instance, and they will be substantial, the underlying
causes of the problem about lack of job opportunities,
lack of fulfilment and the general living standards of
Aboriginal people, is an opportunity I think which the
second part of our response will provide.
PL: But if it's as much attitudes as money, what of the
argument that; despite all the fine words and the tears,
Federal Labor has basically failed the Aboriginal
people since 1983?
PM: We have dramatically increased funding to the area. 
3-
PL: There are still people without taps, without basic
health services, all that money, all that rhetoric, all
that drama and you still have to walk 100 yards to get
cold water.
PM: Well this in some places is obviously true. But there
has been progress made and part of that has been while
we've been cutting the Commonwealth Budget back
dramatically through the ' 80s. We dramatically
increased funding to Aboriginal programs.
PL: We saw a hell of a lot of hair-brained schemes too
didn't we in recent years?
PM: I don't -think so.
PL: Properties failing, Aboriginal motels failing.
PM: No, what about the Community Development and Employment
Program CDEP I think that has been a very good
program, it's working, it's working well, we will
probably expand it when we respond in the second part
of our response. There has been, in terms of education
opportuniLties, there has been I think a lot of
successes in the 1980s.
PL: Still no treaty though or anything like it?
PM: No, but the reconciliation process is I think
important. The work of that body will be both in
attitudes and in program delivery, I think will be
important:. Again, ATSIC is now set up so that that
distribultion'is made on the basis of the priorities of
Aboriginal people and management by Aboriginal people.
So I think there has been quite a lot of progress, but
again not: enough.
PL: Even the latest submission to Cabinet in response to
the Deaths in Custody Royal Commission, can you
honestly say that it contains this sort of creative
vision with programs that really are going to stand a
change of breaking through, of breaking the cycle?
PM: I think you will have to wait and see what the
Government produces, Paul, and when it does it will
have that: creativity.
PL: But many Australians with the best will in the world
think there has been a lot of money shovelled at this
problem cover the years with very disappointing results.
PM: Well, there has been in absolute terms a lot of money,
but it is: still less than $ 5,000 per head of the
Aboriginal population. I mean, it is not as many
Australians imagine it to be. And therefore money is
still rather thinly spread and has to be sensibly
spent, and programs have to be well-designed and well-
-4
delivere-d. ' Where we are guaranteeing, I'll guarantee
you this: that at least in the response by the
Governmetnt to the recommendations of the Royal
Commission, the program design and delivery will be
carefully thought over, carefully evaluated, and
therefore our response, I hope and believe, will meet
many of these problems.
PL: You talk about the need for attitudes to change, Prime
Minister, what about the argument that it is about time
the Aborigines took stock of themselves as well?
Charlie Perkins says they should be doing a lot more to
look after themselves in terms of personal health,
skills, opening up more opportunities on their own
behalf. I
PM: Part of that comes with opportunity. It comes with
being part of society, having ones own wealth level and
the self est ' eem which comes from having that self
provision, if you like. I think one thing feeds upon
another, and obviously success in this area must
improve the lot of Aboriginal Australians. So, as they
become as individuals more self reliant, these things
will occur, rio doubt. But this is not generally true,
there is not the private provision by Aboriginals for
themselves as, say, commercial operators and ventures,
although this is true in some places. It is not
widespread. And giving them the opportunity to do
things in their own right, successfully, I think is
going to be Very important.
PL: But you said' the other day you were a conservative
family man. IHow would you like to be, say, walking
with your kids through an outback town to find the
local park fiill of drunken Aborigines, screaming abuse,
smashing bottles? A lot of people who watch this
program have' rung up with those sorts of stories. Now,
they've got as much right to tell us what's happening
in their community as anyone else, and it's not a
pleasant sight.
PM: No, but why are they like that? Because quite often
they don't know who they are, that society has cast
them off,, it doesn't want to know them, doesn't want to
employ them, they don't have a serious role in life.
PL: So they justispend the welfare checks down the pub?
PM: They just won der who they are. So that's why I think
it is important to get education there. On the basic
things education, health care, and the opportunity
through employment, employment experience, and wider
employment opportunities in enterprises which are run
by Aboriginals.
PL: But if we can still say this in ' 92 after Labor has
been in power for nearly a decade, it does suggest that
Labor has~ n't grasped the nettle on this doesn't it? 
5
PM: This has been a long standing problem. We've tried to
grasp it in terms of a monetary way, whether we've
succeeded in grasping in an attitudinal or an effective
way, I don't think we'd claim that. I think the Royal
Commission recommendations make that pretty obvious,
but what we will be doing is trying to meet those
recommendations and to measure up to the expectations
of the Aboriginal community in these respects.
PL: How much of a racist do you reckon the average Aussie
is these days?
PM: There are many Australians that are not racist at all
and racism I think is a diminishing thing in Australia.
I think this is a tolerant country and racism in this
country is I think less than other countries and there
is a willingness I think in this country to get along,
to understanding other peoples attitudes and problems
and to have regard for their ethnic backgrounds.
PL: Those who support the police in this situation, they
say they're the ones that have to pick them up off the
streets every Saturday night and fight them into the
cells and have a very unpleasant time of it, that it's
understandable perhaps that they should feel certain
negative attitudes towards black people in some
communities.
PM: It's not understandable that somebody who died the way
that David Gundy did or Lloyd Boney out of abject
depression should be depicted in the cruel way that
they were and in a way which must have brought
tremendous sadness and grief to their families. I'm
not sure many non-Aboriginal Australian families would
like that done to them.
PL: And should those two policemen still be in the police
force do you think?
PM: That's a matter for the NSW Government. The Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs told me this morning that the
Police Minister in NSW and the Commissioner of Police
in NSW were taking action against the 2 officers
concerned and they will make a judgement about it. But
they also told Robert Tickner that NSW will be
responding seriously to the Deaths in Custody Royal
Commission.
PL: And will the other States do you think?
PM: I think so, I certainly will be engaging them on the
problem.
PL: Urgent and top level talks?
PM: That was decided a week ago in Cabinet here, before
this matter arose. 
6
PL: And what if they say look, the Keating recession,
you've been squeezing us, we haven't got the money for
this?
PM: Well it's a matter of priorities. All Governments have
got monies, it's a matter of where their priorities are
and there can be, I think, no greater priority than
coming to terms with this real problem for us.
PL: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you Paul.
ENDS 



52
.4
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, CANBERRA
13 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: Ladies and gentlemen, I just thought that I'd give you
a few preliminary comments and then you can address
questions to me. I thought I'd begin by just asking
Australians to reflect upon how the families of Lloyd
Boney and David Gundy must feel this morning at seeing
these depictions. And I ask them to reflect on what
all Aboriginal people must feel at this disgrace, at
this treatment of them. And I ask Australians how can
we hope to have pride in ourselves when we debase our
values in this way? Because these people in doing what
they have done, have in fact been disloyal to the whole
concept of Australia and the way non-Aboriginal
Australians should relate to Aboriginal Australians.
And I ask to let this incident be a turning point, a
turning point in the way we view this country, and that
is a turning point in us vowing to eliminate racism
from every corner of Australian life.
J: Prime Minister, what do you say further to Australians
who like one of the police officers involved in this
incident, describe it as ' a bit of harmless fun'?
PM: Well, I think it is the most disgraceful taunt I have
seen. The notion of someone mocked up as an Aboriginal
with a rope around their neck is just about the most
disgraceful taunt of a race of people as I can imagine.
J: Doesn't it, though, reflect a more pervasive attitude
within the community, it's not simply two police
officers doing this, this is actually an attitude which
is quite widespread in Australia isn't it, this
attitude to Aboriginals?
PM: There may be, that could well be true, but it has never
in my memory manifested itself quite in this way. But
I think, as I said, we should make this a turning
point. We should decide that we should expunge racism 
of every corner of this country to decide that the
notion of Australia, the notion of this country, what
Australia is about is not about this kind of behaviour,
it is not about this kind of racism and to do this is
actually being disloyal to Australia.
J: Prime Minister, is there any suggestion that these men,
whom you've described as a disgrace to Australia, a
national disgrace, have done anything other than with
bad taste? Is there any suggestion they have assaulted
an Aboriginal, responsible for the death of an
Aboriginal, assaulted anybody else, committed any
criminal behaviour?
PM: Well, they have held, I believe, at a critical time in
the history of relations between non-Aboriginal
Australians and Aboriginals they've held Aboriginals up
to ridicule and contempt.
J: Prime Minister, you've been talking a lot about
identity recently. Do you think this is one problem we
have with our own identity, that we often don't like
what we see in ourselves?
PM: Well, I think many Australian have not come to terms
with Australia, not come to terms with the place. And
part of coming to terms with it is a genuine
reconciliation between Aboriginal-Australians and non-
Aboriginal Australians. And that's very much what the
process of reconciliation is about to try and remove
these attitudes to let non-Aboriginal Australians know
that we can't live in this way and can't behave in this
way.
J: Prime Minister, Michael Tate this morning said that
this video would make Australia a laughing stock
whenever we tried representing other countries with
human, or other people that are suffering human rights
abuses, and that the regimes responsible for those
abuses would simply toss this video back in our face.
Can you see it damaging our reputation?
PM: Well, it is certainly not going to help us. And even
though I think most Australians are very conscientious
about this problem and Governments have sought to do
much about it, the issue is as much up here as it is in
the government expenditure or the programs. It is an
attitudinal problem, it is an attitudinal problem,
let's hope this incident will shape the attitudes of
Australians about it.
J: In the statement that you released on this issue, you
said that it was incumbent effectively on white
Australians to close the gap in living standards and to
change attitudes. How does that sit with your
Cabinet's decision to slash quite a considerable amount
of the amount of money that Robert Tickner, the 
Aboriginal Affairs Minister, was seeking for
Aborigines?
PM: Well, we've only announced part of that package and
that is the law and justice component of the response
to the Aboriginal Deaths in Custody Royal Commission.
But I think it is very important that all levels of
Government concentrate on this and one of the things
which I will be doing is also talking to the States
about their role in this, their response to the
recommendations of the Royal Commission, their response
to the ongoing problems of living standards of
Aboriginals and in part the, if you like second part,
of what will be presented by the Government in relation
to the response to the Aboriginal Deaths in Custody and
ongoing underlying causes of the problem will be that
which is concluded between the Commonwealth and the
States. We don't want simply minimalist efforts on the
part of the States in response to this problem. And
for the Commonwealth to take the view that it's going
to accept simply a minimalist effort on the part of the
States, both attitudinally and in programs, is I think
not doing the problem of justice. So that's why the
Government will be engaging the States as well as
looking itself more comprehensively at whatever package
we finally announce.
J: So we can expect the full $ 500 million plus
PM: You can expect a statement of substance from the
Government at the time the Government wishes to deliver
it.
J: Mr Keating, won't this damage Australia's international
reputation?
PM: Well that's what you just asked me.
J: Mr Keating, will this engagement of the States be after
the 31 March statement?
PM: It will be between now and then and probably beyond
then, because this is a problem of some complexity in
terms of particularly programs and other issues, other,
if you like, causal links to this problem. So we will
be responding the first instance to the law and justice
elements to the recommendations.
J: Mr Keating won't you require on national response,
though, from the Federal Government, because we have
got problems like this in New South Wales and also
similar problems going on in Western Australia? State
Governments don't see capable of dealing with it?
PM: This is a very long running Royal Commission, its
recommendations are very comprehensive, I think they've
been taken up seriously by the States, and I spoke to
Robert Tickner this morning and he's spoken to the New 
South Wales Police Minister and Police Commissioner and
they have indicated they will be responding seriously
to the recommendations of the Royal Commission.
J: Mr Keating, what sort of things do you expect the
States to do to show the bonafides that they are
responding in more than a minimalist way?
PM: The whole living standards, sort of attitudinal issues
involved here are complex, and there is no way I can
just reel off in a second or in a minute of in
minutes responses which I think the States should make.
But we will be talking to the States about it. But
again, there is a heavy responsibility here on the
Commonwealth This will probably the Commonwealth's,
certainly I think last opportunity in this decade, to
do something really substantial about this problem and
we are determined to think about it and get it as right
as we can get it.
J: Do you believe that the electorate, the fact that it
may present, the enormous amount of money that
successive Governments have spent on Aboriginal Affairs
and seemingly to no effect?
PM: I don't believe it is to no effect, but certainly we
haven't dealt with the problem adequately. It is as
much about attitude as it is about money, as I think
this incident demonstrates. But again program helps,
good program design helps and obviously comprehension
of Aboriginal problems helps and trying to bring that
coincidence of a delineational problem and program
delivery is obviously going to help. I don't think
Australians share the view that too much has been spent
here. When the referendum came in 1967, I think it
was, then non-Aboriginal Australians made their
position quite clear about the welfare of Aboriginals
and where they saw constitutional responsibility as
being. And I think governments in the past, and
certainly this Government, this Government has very
strongly increased funding to Aboriginal programs over
the period and I don't believe that non-Aboriginal
Australians should or can take the view that the money
that has been spent has been spent unwisely or in any
way in terms of its volume and size, in a way which is
inconsistent with the problem.
J: Mr Keating, Charles Perkins agrees that we have an
attitudinal problem with Aborigines and he says the
only way we can start to solve that is to look at a
treaty. Do you think these sorts of events add any
weight to that argument?
PM: Look, I think the Reconciliation Council process is
going to be terribly important here. To actually get
down to some of these attitudinal issues, to discuss
them, to find ways of dealing with them, to think about
bringing living standards of Aboriginal people up and 
their opportunities, it is closing that gap between
living standards and opportunities which will do more
than anything else to relieve this problem. And that's
something which can be a function of the Government
through ATSIC, it can be a function of the States, it
can be a function of the Reconciliation Council. These
are the things I think we've got to work on.
J: So you still don't think a final document would make an
PM: Well, with the attitudes which are bound in evidence
today, I think that is correct. And that's why I think
the role of the Reconciliation Council is going to be
important and I want to see some material change in
living conditions, bringing up the opportunities in
living standards for Aboriginals and because I believe
that will do more than anything else to relieve the
notion of the burden of this problem.
J: Isn't there a danger in spending more money,
particularly in the time of high unemployment that all
you'll achieve in fact is to bring greater resentment
within the white community, as indeed happened to a
certain extent say in the United States with the
greater spending on the black community there, and the
polarisation between black and white?
PM: I think look, I'm simply relying on my memory, but I
think the programs amount to about $ 5000 per head of
the Aboriginal population of Australia, something of
that variety. I mean I just don't accept the analysis
that that's spent thrift, extravagant, and to be
resented by a non-Aboriginal Australians. I just don't
think it is true. But as I say, the problem is as much
up here as it is in the programs and the living
standards and we have to, I think, come to terms with
it and deal with it before we will ever understand what
Australia is and can be.
ENDS 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
CEREMONY TO MARK THE COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OF
STAGE I OF THE ASSISI HOME FOR THE AGED
MARCH 1992
Your Grace, Mr Valmorbida, Ladies and gentlemen
Each time we welcome to this country people who have been
bold enough to move their homes, their affections and
their allegiances across the world, I think we are the
bolder for it.
When people start a new life here they give new life to
the nation as a whole.
That is the history of this country. Migration has been
our lifeblood and our strength.
The energy and initiative migrants bring is vital to our
economic health.
The cultural diversity they bring makes us richer in
countless ways.
They open our eyes and our minds to the rest of the
world. Quite simply migration makes Australia a better place,
and better in the eyes of other nations.
Italians have been migrating to Australia for a century
and a half.
There were Italians on the Australian goldfields. It was
an Italian who wrote the classic account of the Eureka
Stockade in 1854.
Italians were pioneers in our horticultural and
agricultural industries before World War II.
Since World War II, of course, Italians have been perhaps
the major players in transforming the cultural life of
our cities and towns: while their hard work and
PRIMIE MINISTER 
initiative in all sectors of the economy has been of
inestimable value to the nation's growth and wealth.
But Italian people have been more than agents of change
in Australia.
They have been important in renewing old and essential
values values which have at times shown signs of
weakening. Italian people have been models for all Australians in
the community spirit they have brought, their religious
values, their7 commitment to family values and in their
care for the aged.
The Assisi Home for the Aged bears witness to all these
things and I am therefore honoured and very grateful
for your inviLtation to become your patron.
The government is conscious that we must do all we can
for the gener: ation which did so much for Australia.
Obviously the Italian Australian community is aware of
its responsibility, and I'm pleased to say that the
government has matched this by providing $ 3.7 million to
enable this great project to begin.
Today I can assure the Italian community and all
Australians, whatever their national origin, that we
remain committed'to encouraging that climate of cultural
diversity and freedom, tolerance and mutual respect,
which are the true aims of multi-culturalism.
We also remai~ n committed to caring for the aged to
further expanding programs already much expanded in the
1980s.
As we undertaEke this essential work over the next few
years the Assisi home is certain to be a model of what
can be done by communities, and how they can work
together With government.
For their vision and dedication, I congratulate all those
people who have taken on this project, and wish them well
in the future! stages of its development.
And thank you. for inviting me here. 



A
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, ST PATRICK'S DAY BREAKFAST, MELBOURNE
17 MARCH 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well that's a moot point. We can only be ambiguous
about ourselves and how we represent ourselves for just
so long.
J: Mr Keating, you have spoken about the flag now on a
number of occasions, what action would you choose to
change the flag?
PM: Well it's not a matter of what action I think the
Government: would wish to take. It's a matter of, on
these matt~ ers, what feeling there is in the community,
and that feeling being prompted, tested and thought
about.
J: But mustn't you now do something about it? Doesn't it
require a constitutional change or anything like that?
PM: No, we all, understand the constitutional things,
Michelle ( Grattan).
J: You said rLOt too long, is 2001 too long?
PM: Well let's wait and see.
J: Why won't you tell us how long?
PM: Well I have given you an answer.
J: How do you assess the community's feeling about this?
PM: Well I think it is changing, don't you? I mean, .1
think that it is changing, I think that it is important 
to talk about these symbols and people are now thinking
about them, that's good.
J: How do you know when the debate is ended, that it is
time for a change?
PM: We all know, those of us who have got our fingers on
the pulse know these things.
J: What will happen if the community want to keep the
flag, will you be happy with that decision?
PM: I would be very surprised if in the long run that is
their view.
J: Mr Keating, yesterday's big fall on the Tokyo stock
market, what are the implications for Australia?
PM: There has been a correction in the Tokyo stock market
now for quite a long time. The fact that it has
dropped under 20,000 is probably not that remarkable,
it has been hovering around there for quite a while, it
has come off the very high prices of the late 1980s,
and this is the reason why most countries are now in a
recession. We' had to come off this high spending, high
credit growth, great speculation of the ' 80s. And as
the stock market, the forces of the world deflate, come
down, it's produced a recession world wide.
J: There are now major fears of a recession in Japan,
given the Nikkei is at a 5 year low. What are the
implications of that
PM: I don't think there will be a significant recession for
Japan, but certainly a slowing in growth, that will
have an impact on Australia. But again, we are luckily
in the fastest-growing part of the world, which is now
growing between 5 and 7 per cent most years. So while
the world growth is slower, our part of the world is
quite fast, Japan notwithstanding.
J: How great an impact on Australia is it likely to have?
Could it in fact slow down our own recovery?
PM: Well it could have some impact on our raw material
supplying industries, but again they have been
diversifying their markets, and where once Japan was
entirely critical to the extracting industries, it is
still important, but we have the diversified
substantially.
J: Is there any danger that it could put us back into a
recession?
PM: No. The thing is we have been in recession, and we're
in recession for largely the same reasons the United
States, Canada, Britain, New Zealand, France and many
other countries are, and that is that we couldn't come 
off the hiLgh speculation of the 180s without a thud,
without some skin off ourselves.
J: Conrad Black wants more then 15 per cent of Fairfax,
would you let him do that?
PM: Look, we are not here to go round the world for sport.
J: Do you have any expectations for National Accounts?
PM: Well I donL't say expectational things about the
National Accounts. They are notoriously difficult to
predict and now for this time, there will be for the
first time three measures of national income. So that
may change one's compacity to predict, whatever that
compacity was. So we will wait and see this morning
when it will all be revealed.
J: What are your thoughts on South Africa?
PM: Well it's not a matter of thought, it's a matter of
what happens.
3: Mr keating, if, the GDP outcome is as expected, do you
agree with some commentators who say that in fact it
wouldn't be that Australia is in a recovery, because of
the change in the way that they are going to calculate
it?
PM: Well let's wait and see what happens. The Statistician
is looking for what he thinks is a more reliable
measure of product and growth and he is entitled to
those interpretative changes. So we will see what
today's figrures reveal.
J: Do you think we need to accept more Japanese investment
in order to trade?
PM: Two years ago our capital inflow was about 90 per cent
debt and about ' 10 per cent equity, now it is about
per cent equity and 20 per cent debt. So it has
changed dramatically and part of that change has been
from Japan. 11
J: Do we need to accept more investment, though? Ralph
Evans said
PM: Well we've just, largely taken away a large component of
the foreign investment policy for that simple point, to
encourage more investment, we want to encourage more
investment for Australia.
J: What if the Japanese don't invest here?
PM: Well others do, it is true that Japanese do and others
do, and the fact is that's changed in character now
enormously i~ n two years. I mean it is a huge lift in
equity. 



1.6.
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH TO THE IRISH-AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
ST PATRICK'S DAY BREAKFAST, MELBOURNE
17 MARCH 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Gerry, Padric Flynn, Your Grace
Archbishop Little, Joan Kirner, Martin Burke, the Irish
Ambassador, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here this morning on
St Patrick's Day. I stayed last night in the Windsor Hotel
in Bob Menzies' old suite, contemplating St Patrick's Day,
and I thought I heard the chandelier moving, and I certainly
saw the wall-paper curl from the walls revealing a sort of
1950s look and beyond it. And I thought of that remark that
was passed so long ago when another famous person was lying
in his deathbed, another Irishman's deathbed in a Paris
hotel, and hie said either something has got to give here,
either the wallpaper or me. And of course, it was him. And
the wallpaper reminded me of that particular occasion in the
Windsor Hotel. But the temptation on St Patrick's Day is, I
think, always to trivialise the Irish. I'm not having a
shot at you Brian, not having a shot at the comedians, but
it is nice to0 be here with the Irish Chamber of Commerce for
the breakfast because it does reflect upon what Ireland does
export. And what Ireland exports to the world is nothing
trivial. It: is everything that counts, its Guiness, poetry,
passion, prose, and politics, and of course people, people
who have shaped nations. And as Padric said, and as Gerry
said, Australia without the Irish, a reflect on it would be
unimaginable!. In fact Australia without the Irish would be
unthinkable, Australians without the Irish would be
unspeakable. For the Irish in Australia have been the fount of Australian
nationalism. It is a bit like Oscar Wilde himself in that hotel room,
that rare combination of folley and mobility, are the Irish.
The jokers in the pack, but also the adventurers, the
lifeblood of the place, the people who know all about
I 
independence and its importance. And it is one of the
reasons why ZIll value that history of Ireland by the
Keatings, Padric, that you've given me this morning.
Indeed, my remarks a couple of weeks ago which Gerry refers
to about independence from England, struck a cord with the
Irish press and in Ireland, which I was very surprised at.
I doubt if any two cultures were more fundamentally opposed
than the Irish and the English, in religion, in tradition,
and more part~ icularly in history. Irish history, once you
got passed the Celtic legends, was the history of never
ending resist~ ance to England. In Australia, as Robert
Hughes put it: in his recent work, ' The Fatal Shore', he said
the Irish felt twice colonised, doubly aggrieved.
The remarkable thing is that an Australian identity emerged
from these two broad streams, the English and the Irish, and
of course I t~ hink we must say three, put the Scots in there
as well. In other words, even before post-war European
migration, before we regarded ourselves as having presided
over a multicultural triumph. We in fact pulled off a
multicultural triumph ourselves. An idea that Australia had
been formed out of a traditional difference in hostility.
And it is an amazing to think about that, that Australia as
a nation before our post-war program was formed out of these
peoples with traditional differences and hostilities. An
idea that suggested that Australia was a country wit~ h a
separate destiny, a separate future, and of course a
separate past:.
In 1992, I think two lessons present themselves to me. The
first, that is to turn our multicultural society into an
Australian strength which is becoming, which it will. become.
In second, to recognise that our destiny is separate. That
ours is bound to-be a destiny which is separate. Being
clear to ourselves and the world that we mean to make our
own way, a feeling which will be very important, the
harnessing of national will, reviewing our confidence and
pride in ourselves, including that sort of pride which lifts
us beyond social ' hatred against the original Australians,
the Aboriginals-That manifestation of a feeling which will
give us a much more powerful identity in the world as well.
I said a few things recently about the flag, but let me say
this. We've got to be certain of who we are to take our
place in the world, and we can't fly two symbols wit~ h our
nation for much longer.
A nation is eternally uncertain about its representational
image is of course a nation uncertain about itself. I spent
a decade trying to transform the Australian economy, Brian
remarked on it earlier, to make it a country with an
international economic ambition. It became increasingly
plain to me lthat'another kind of transformation is
necessary, a social transformation, a mental transformation,
because we ar. e not going to make it simply by getting the
nuts and bolts together, by getting the macro-economy right,
or Joan and me getting the railways right, or something else 
right, we won't ever get it right until we get that mental
transformation that Australia is a country of its own
character. Australia is a country which will make its own
way in the world. That's the transformation we need to
really pull off our internationalisation, our true
independence. Recent events have made that quite clear to me. The uproar
when I made those quite unexceptional remarks to Queen
Elizabeth on her recent visit. The same sentiments which
have left this country always hesitating, always drawing
back, always missing the main chance, never seizing our own
history. Well that's the one thing the Irish can teach us,
their history and their destiny is forever their own and as
always remains forever Ireland's.
But when it said in Australia that the contribution we made
to Britain in World War I was not returned in full in World
War II when an Australian view is expressed scandal and
outrage. Yet those who care to consult the histories, even
those written by Englishmen, will find that it's not wrong
or even indeed those who recently consult the Financial
Times or the Guardian or the London Times, will find that it
was not wrong. Yet my dissatisfaction and disaffection is
not with Britain or the British, it is with those who cannot
find it in themselves to speak with an unashamed and
wholehearted Australian voice, who not only fail at the
essential task to grasp the future but will not even grasp
the past.
The Irish can teach them something about honouring their own
history and their traditions. But nor am I much impressed
with the new tack of those conservatives, those conservative
Australians, the idea that if we are not tugging the
forelock to Britain, we must be tugging it to Asia. It is
possible, you know, not to tug the forelock to anyone.
Padric, we have got to be in this country like the Irish
are, proud without being silly, parochial without being
unworldly, culturally secure without being culturally
arrogant. This is the great Irish legacy to Australia and
we thank your country for it.
Thank you.
I 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH NEIL MITCHELLJ, 3AW, 17/ 3/ 92.
E &amp; EO0-PROOF ONLY
MITCHELL: The building I assume is open and with me the man who
opened it, the Prime Minister, Mr Keating, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: The deed is done, is it?
PM: Yes, I was just saying, it's a change from the sort of
patina of the old radio station. You know they always have a
comfortable feel, those thirties radio stations. 3AW here and
2KY in Sydney was the same. You walked in and it was like
stepping back into the old days of radio, the days of the great
radio personalities, all that history came back over you.
MITCHELLL: A bit like the old Parliament House.
PMs Yes, a bit like the old Parliament House.
MITCHELL: Ninety days today.
PM: Somebody told me that.
MITCHELL: Ninety days, now we've had-the Sixty Minutes thing,
the family barbeque, we've had the bash the Poms, savage John
Hewson, the switch to vaudeville it strikes me has been thrown.
is it working?
PM: Well I think' we are the important thing is getting
Australia working again and I think that confidence is returning,
slowly but surely, and the statement the Government put together,
One Nation, was about pulling that together, and I think also a
sense of confidence about ourselves helps. That is not just the
mechanical things in economy but Australians knowing about
themselves and being certain and confident about themselves
helps. So in the full bloom of the statement and rhetoric, I
think, I hope, that Australia's going to be better. e a 6 / 2 
-2-
MITCHELL: But obviously as a politician it's also about getting
the personal rating up and about being seen as the competent
leader and about regaining government. Is it working in that
sense do you think?
PM: Well I can only... if the polls are responding somewhat, but
I think the main thing is that whatever ambitions I have for
myself, they're greater for Australia and if I can engender
recovery, bring it on, we've got the national accounts out today,
I'll be surprised if they don't reveal Australia on the turn, the
economy on the turn, and I think and hope that the One Nation
statement will drive that on, power that on and consolidate a
recovery. I
MITCHELL: You do think then that we're coming out of recession.
I mean you took a long time to be convinced we were going into it
but you' re now, you're one of the first to say we're coming out.
PM*: I'd say that the economy has been on the turn and we have
given it an impetus, some added momentum by the package we
introduced into Parliament a few weeks ago, so I think that
should guarantee~ a recovery.
MITCHELL: When will we feel it? When will we get jobs? When
will people i3top having trouble eating?
PM: Jobs aria tied up with production. If you follow any
measures of production over the last thirty years, in our
national accounts you find employment running right with them.
So if we can lift production we lift employment, so the aim of
the game is to lift production and I think that will happen.
MITCHELL: But short term are we going to have more jobs or have
we got to wait for a year
PM: Oh no, well we've had quite a reasonable spurt of employment
growth in the last three months but it's just been that the
labour force has been growing by a greater amount than employment
growth. We've not been losing employment over the last three or
four months, we've actually been gaining employment, but
unemployment has gone up a jot because the labour market is still
growing. Tho point is trying to get that employment growth ahead
of workforce growth so that unemployment comes down. So we've
been seeing that growth coming through in employment, well we've
got to see more of it. ./ 3 
-3-
MITCH-ELL: Your friend, or I think he is, Tony Sheehan, talks
about eighty thousand jobs here in Victoria, and a lot of that is
spinnfinlg out of the One Nation policy, but when will we see some
of them?
PM: I think you'll see them over the course of this year, you'll
see a fair bit: of'that. We think that we can produce about eight
hundred thousand over four years on the sort of forecast which
we've put together for the One Nation statement which are not
remarkable. They've got the economy growing at about four
percent a year and if we can't do four percent a year you'd have
to give the game up.
MITCHELL: It's based on confidence still, about international
recovery, isn" t it, both the United States and Japan, and I
noticed the Nikkei figures are very bad overnight.
PM: That's right Noil, the international economy does help us
obviously, or hinder us, and it has been hindering us. We've had
a recession really worldwide in the fallout of the stockmarket
crash of 1987 and I just made the point downstairs at the opening
of the station, thinking about Roosevelt's talk to the nation on
radio in the United States in the thirties. Four years after the
stockmarket cr7ash of 1929 American production had fallen by forty
percent, but four years after the stockmarket crash of ' 87 which
was bigger than 1929, American production had fallen by three
percent and ours had fallen by three. In other words we've
avoided an international depression but we've ended up with a
recession and that's a problem that we've got to try and pull our
way out of, and it will help us if those other countries come out
too.
MITCHELL: I'd argue though that we led the world, or one of the
first countriets in the world, into recession. Are you saying
we'll be one of the first out?
PM: I think we all went in about the same time and we probably
will emerge at-out the same time I think, but growth in America is
slow. But fortunately for us we're tied up with the fastest
growing part of the world, the Asia-Pacific, and growth rates in
this part of the world are now around five to seven percent.
That's Indonesia, Thailand, Japan, Hongkong, Phillipines, Taiwan,
in this area most economies are growing at about five.. . the whole
area's growing at about five to seven percent which is qtiite
fast, about twice the speed of the rest of the world. So we're
caught up in that fortunately and that helps tug us along as
well. / 4 
-4-
MITCHELL: Yiou mention confidence. What do you base your
assessment on, that confidence is returning. I mean the latest
poll, the Morgan Poll in the Time today says quite the opposiLte.
PM I think that the economy has bottomed, is on the turn, that
it's on the turn for the better and that the One Nation statement
will consolidate that recovery. I think the banks are probably
seeing the end of their well at least they can see the bottom
of their own -problems and losses and with interest rates down
low now for quite a long time, deals can be made again, people
can do things again and they're starting to do them. So I think
there is Just that feeling coming, that people think things are
better, they're starting to see some light around and they're
starting to pick up assets and use them....
MITCHELL: Is it a gut feeling... Unaudible)..?
PM. Well a bit of well... people say things to you, you
know, there's an anecdotal view about the work that people have
in their place and how they see the next three months and this
sort of thing, and my impression is things are better than they
were three months ago.
MITCHELL: You mentioned interest rates. Room for them to come
down further?
PM: Not for the moment I don't think, but again, the Government
does regard low, inflation as a great Australian achievement.
We've broken the back of inflation now to one and a half percent
for the first time in twenty years and we want to make sure the
recovery is a low inflation recovery. But again we've tried to
get that balance right and that is at the same time engender a
recovery while holding inflation. We've taken interest rates
down about twelve percent, then our bill rates are now about
seven and a half, they're quite low by our standards, but of
course inflation's low. So there's scope there for lower
interest rates with a longer run, good inflation performance.
MITCHELL: End of' the year? I mean you're painting a pretty
optimistic picture about the end of the year if we're turning and
there's still room for interest rates.
PM: We have through ' 92-3 in that one Nation forecast growth at
four and three quarter percent through the year, and I think as
the stock cycle ' turns, as we're seeing better prices for
commodities, for wheat, wool's picking up, some of the non-ferris
metals, and we're seeing buildings starting to shift and
retailing starting, to modestly shift, I think you can see that
growth starting to come together. 
MITCHELL: Good time for an election?
PM: Well I'm sure the public want value out of the political
system and out of the Parliament, so the best value they can get
is a Parliament that runs longer rather than shorter and from our
point of view the best thing to do is to get on governing.
MITCHELL: Would you be willing to say there will not be an
election this year?
PM; There's no point, X don't think, any government cutting its
options off about elections, but my intention at this stage is to
see the Parliament run through into 1993.
MITCHELLt Have you talked to Joan Kirner about election
strategies? P14: Never had a conversation with her about it ever.
MITCHELL: Because you'd want her presumably it'd be better for
the Victorian, Government to go first.
PM: I think that'll probably happen, didn't she say something
about the end. of the year?
MITCHELL: Certainly at this stage you wouldn't be looking at
this year?
PM; No.
MITCHELL: Might be tempting, if popularity keeps going up
and.... PM: No no no, I think the main thing is that the most tempting
thing for all of us is to get that growth going and get people
back feeling confident about the place and get commerce spinning
again. MITCHELL: Aborigines. Now you've taken a high profile on this
over recent weeks. Would you revive the treaty? 9 / 6 
PM: Well I think the process which we have in place is a good
one, the reconcilliation council and its processes. I think what
last week's events reveal, that there's a long way to go in that
reconcilliation and it's important that non-aboriginal
Australians feel good about their support for the aboriginal
community and we see a material shift in the living standards of
the aboriginal community, I think that's the most important
thing. The shift in living stanldards and opportunities for the
aboriginal community is more important than treaties or any other
things which do not expressly or directly go to those issues.
MITCHELL: So the treaty is down the track, once you sort out the
other problems?
PM: I would think that. I think the work of the reconcilliation
council plus the work of ATSIC and the fact that the Government
will be responding to the Royal Commission into Deaths in
Custody, on law and Justice issues and the underlying things
which produce! the problem. The underlying problems in living
standards and opportunities, I think they're the things to be
addressed and, if they can be addressed as the reconcilliation
council addresses'the broader run attitudinal things, I think
that's the way for us to go.
MITCHELL: rs it time to put politics aside from it? Is there a
bipartisan approach here?
PM: I would always hope that was the case, that it is a
bipartisan matter and that the aboriginal community can therefore
enjoy that political support. We think this is the last
opportunity this decade to again make another material
improvement and advance in the conditions of aboriginal society
and that's why we'll be using this opportunity with the Deaths3 in
Custody response.
MITCHELL: I notice the reports today about vilification laws.
is this essentially a racist country do you think?
PM I don't think it is Neil. I mean you'd have a fair idea of
this as I would because you speak to many people here in the
station, but I don't think it's a racist country. This is a
tolerant place. We've made multiculturalism work here as well as
any country in the world could work. I just made the point at a
St Patrick's Day breakfast. a./ 7 
-7-
I mean no two countries have, well if you like, eyed each other
off so sharply over such a long period as England and Ireland,
but yet a lot of Australian nationalism has come from those two
streams working together. I mean Australian multiculturalism, has
worked, I don't think this is a racist country though there'll
always be I suppose some racist attitudes. The issue is to be
rid of them.
MITCHELL: I was a little surprised by the passion with which you
reacted to the videos or that issue. Do you think the AH3C
should've shown the, videos?
PM: I think the ABC's entitled to reflect in its news issues in
Australian life, and it did, and it's important I think those
issues are on the table, that people know they have to be dealt
with. MITCHELL: Why the passion from you?
PM: Because I think it's time that that sort of racism one would
expect to see In the American South of the 1930' s and 40' s was
expunged from our society here in the 1990' s. I mean it was a
very, I think, nasty experience for that to happen, to have those
families, the families of those two people mocked in this way and
I think we have to be entirely resolute. Those of us who have
charge of government and in a sense some influence over
attitudes, it's entirely important I think that we set the
standard, we make the stand.
MITCHELL: There are some who say that your statement in
Parliament about the English was encouraging racism, or about
England was encouraging racism and was bashing Poms.
PM:. No no, it was not a complaint against the British or
Britain. It was only a complaint against those people in
Australia who don't have it in them to be wholeheartedly
Australian in their attitudes.
MITCHELL; But you were suggesting that the British had perhaps
deserted Australia at a certain time.
PM$ Oh yes, absolutely, I Baid it again this morning, that our
sacrifice in world War One for Britain was not responded or
reciprocated in kind in World War Two. a / 8 
-8-
MITCHELL: The historians perhaps debated a bit.
PM: 6 Well London Guardian gave me a big tick and so did the
London Times. I mean I didn't get it in the tabloids but I got
it in the broadsheets.
MITCHELL: The Lizard of Oz.
PM: Yes well that was in the tabloids but the broadsheets, the
serious papers were good and the fact is that's past, but my
complaint is with people here, Australians, who can't not only
grasp the future but can't grasp properly and sensibly the past.
Don't understand enough about the past to let that influence the
future.
MITCHELL: But can you see that it may have been, for whatever
reasons, divisive. Certainly, I mean I've received all sorts of
abuse and threats because essentially I supported a lot of what
you said. But can you Bee it can be divisive in a community
which is essentially British?
PM: Well I don't think it is essentially British.
MITCHELL: well historic.
PM: I think it is now essentially Australian and I think
Australians are tired of this sort of ambivalence and they
want it's going to be very important to our economic future in
the region, to the way we portray ourselves to the world in
commerce, if the res~ t of the world knows we are clear about our
identity. Who we are, what we are and that we're proud of
ourselves and that we're not a derivative culture, that we don't
belong to somebody else.
MITCHELL: The Malaysian Prime Minister says that we tell lies
and we're hard to (; et on with. Don't they understand this
country? PM: Well I think there's probably, certainly in media terms, a
cultural difference in the way in which these countries relate to
their media, and that's a case of them understanding us and us
understanding them I think.
MITCHELL: How do we get the message across? It seems to have
been going on for a long time and still...
PM: I think that'sB right but I mean time will work that out I'm
sure. 
MITCHELL: Are -you comfortable with this sort of pride that wetre
talking about in Australia, that we don't perhaps kowtow a little
to people like m4alaysians Or the Indonesians?
PM: I don't think we should kowtow to anybody.
MITCHELLt Do you think we do or we have?
PM: I don't think so, no.
MITCHELL: We seem to apologise whenever our media does
something.
PH: No, what we've said is we disassociated ourselves, the
Government disassociated itself from things which were
inaccurate, but I think it's also important for these countries
to understand that a free press is important, important to this
country and important to them and to understand the morays of a
free press. So I don't think it's a matter of we won't be
tugging the forelock to anybody, Britain or anywhere else,
Malaysia included.
MITCHELL: How Izish are you?
PM: Well my great grandfather was Irish.
MITCHELL: I noticed Conrad Black last night on Four Corners
suggesting that T1onyO'Reilly had been lobbying the Irish rump in
the Labor Caucus.
PHI And he did it pretty well.
MITCHELL: And he did it with you?
PM: Oh he did, he's a very charming fellow, Tony. Very
charming.
MITCHELL: Conrad Bla , ck also said that he believed that you would
be receptive to expanding his holding beyond fifteen percent. Is
that correct? too 
PM: That's a matter of I think the Labor Caucus and the
Treasurer, before I became Prime Minister decided on these levels
and made a declaration, about them, made a public statement and
let Mr Black's company buy fifteen percent of John Fairfax and
Sons and said that would be as far as the Government was then
prepared to go. I mean that's our position. I mean we're
prepared to keep an open mind about it, to think about media
policy, to think about print and to think about ownership, but
not to be making any declarations about it.
MITCHELL: So it could be reviewed, the fifteen percent?
PM: Anything can hie reviewed on the application of a company to
the Foreign Investment Review Board or to the Government. I mean
in a sense that's always open but whether it'll be
sympathetically responded to is a matter for our decision, and at
the moment I think that's premature.
MITCHELL: Across t~ o South Africa, what happens if there 18 a no
vote in South Africa, what happens from Australia's point of view
then? The referendum's being conducted this very minute.
PM: Well let's wait and see I think, that's the best thing to
do. I mean there's been great progress there. Let's hope that
progress reflects itself in a Yes vote.
MITCHELL: just quickly because I know you have to go, the
performance in Parliament, your first week, you must've been
pretty pleased with that.
PM: Well yes but I mean the Opposition, Dr Hewson' s had an easy
ride of it, for now two or three months he's become the easy
rider in Australian politics and I'm sure he believed that
because his Fightback package was not subject to attack,
legitimate attack, that therefore the thing was beyond attack,
and the fact is it's very vulnerable. Anything that wants to put
a fifteen percent tai on the way in which Australians live has to
be subject to examination and some of that examination started a
couple of weeks ago.
MITCHELL: But it was the same colleagues who failed to attack
it, your colleagues. 
-11-
PM: Be that as it may, the fact is the Government'. now making
it very clear whait's wrong with Fightback and the fact that it's
basically limited, and when the Government brought down the One
Nation statement which is now going to basically rebuild a lot Of
the basic infrastruacture, which can only be done with government
money, the railways, the ports, the national electricity grid,
building up a TAFE system, all these things Australia needs but
Dr Hewson says they're irresponsible. I don't think it's
irresponsible to put kids that come out of year 12 and give them
a technical and further education. I don't think it's
irresponsible to build a standard gauge railway line from
Melbourne to Adelaide, I don't think it's irresponsible to be
able to carry freight from Brisbane to Perth, and this can not be
done by taxing your Weetbix.
MITCHELL: Graham Richardson says that you've exceeded his
wildest dreams.
PM: That's good, I'm pleased, very pleased.
MITCHELL: He says that all he can find in the Caucus are
backbenchers who claimed to have voted for you and he doesn't
know why the vote was as close as it was.
But there's two thiLngs I wonder whether you might've regretted.
One is the burble burble burble.
PM: No no, it was a sort of manifestation ! I mean that day Dr
Hewson was Baying that the ABC was in conspiracy with the
Teachers' Federation and the Labor Party and the Government to
sort of undermine his party. As well as that he'd given the
Central Bank Governor a bash on the way through, so I'm saying it
was gibberish.
MITCHELL: Yes but it's hardly very prime ministerial.
PM: No but the fact that it was a physical manifestation of that
gibberish, I was trying to demonstrate to people he may as well
have been strumming his lips as saying what he said.
MITCHELL: The other thing is mocking John Hewson' s speech
impediment. is that sensible?
PM: It's all part of the rough and tumble of politics, it's all
part of the theatre of-it all. I've been mocked uphill and down
dale, uphill and down dale. / 1 
-12-
MITCHELL: How have they mocked you?
PM: Over the years, mocked, I've been mocked forwards and
backwards. MITCHELL: What for?
PM: Well there's a great littany of things there, a great
lit tany.
MITCHELL; what sort of things do they mock you for? The suits
and the rest of it?
PM: Oh anything, your lifestyle things and all sorts of things.
You know, I collect French clocks and this sort of stuff,, you
know. MITCHELL: Does that irritate you?
PM: It doesn't really, no.
MITCHELL: You see I don't think John Hewson's objecting but 1:
think the public's said well that's a bit rough. Do you think
you'd do it again or it might be time to back off?
PM: Oh no, look -the fact is he has the most sterile campaign of
taking Australia back down the time tunnel to late seventies
politics a la Margaret Thatcher. Don't worry about the elderly,
don't worry about the sick, don't worry about the weak, don't.
worry about the young, don't give them a place in TAFE, don't
change the infra: 3tructure, what we'll do is tax our Weetbix and
our Kellogs and our clothing and our drycleaning and that's going
to change the woarld, shifting income from the low paid to the
high paid. It's not a solution for Australia, he's not entitled
to portray it as a solution for Australia and if he wants to push
hard policies like if you're unemployed and you're on the dole
after nine months you're on your own, you go down the soup
kitchens, you go to the voluntary agencies. If he wants to push
those sorts of vicious policies then I think the whole complexion
of the policy
MITCHELL: But we've got the soup kitchens now, I had in the
studio yesterday a kid who sleeps in the boot of the car. Now
this is from the ( Government that said no child in poverty by
1990. -/ 13 
-13-
PM: Yes, but you've still got an unemployment benefits system
that you don't have in the United States. in the United States
aft * er three months you'd huddle over a railway grate under a
newspaper to keep warm. This is not true of Australia but it
would be true under, Dr Rewson. Under Dr Hewson after nine months
they're out so anyone who's unemployed, nine months the
Government leaves you. Then its St Vincent de Paul, the Smith
family or your relatives. Now we say that's not the sort of
country Australia should be.
MITCHELL: Mr Keating I know you have to go. Are you enjoying
yourself? PM; Generally I ant Neil,, yes.
MITCHELL: What don't you enjoy?
PM: Not much about the Job really. I like most of the things.
Like this morning I had the St Patricks Day breakfast and the
opening at 3AW, now talking to you.
MITCHELL: You have to get up early though.
PM: That's okay.
MITCHELL: Are you used to that yet?
PM: I must confess I'm a late starter generally. I'm a nocturnal
character, I perform better later but one bends as the breeze as
the case may be. But look the prime ministership is a great
opportunity for anybody. It's in a sense the greatest compliment
anyone can be paid to be given the job and therefore I am going
to do my best with it; and my interest has always been trying to
push Australia along, to change it from the sort of post-war
torpor we're in to become an international place, to keep that
change going and in this case get out of the recession and keep
that big structural change coming through.
MITCHELL: Going to win the next election?
PM: Well we're going to give it a good shot. We're behind but
we're going to be -trying.
MITCHELL: I keep saying one last thing. Bob Hawke, is he a bit
of an embarrassment now?
PM: No, no. 
-14-
MITCHELL: Doesn't worry you when he goes to the Logies and goes
overseas and does interviews?
PM: No, good on him.
MITCHELL: Would you let him interview you?
PM: Well I don't: think he'd probably bother, given then fact
that
MITCHELL: I've suggested it to him on this program.
PM: Have you? Well he's got this international retinue of
people to interview.
MITCHELL; But you're on the international stage.
PM: Oh well here, I mean he's been the former Prime Minister
and given the fact that I've replaced him he wouldn't be rushing
to interview me I wouldn't think. But the fact is, I look
forward to his in. terviews with other people because he's known
them over the years and he'll have a good opportunity to get
their views on important matters.
MITCHELL: Have you seen this tombstone in Queensland? Is it one
of your ancestors, 1884.
PM; Someone sent me a picture of it about a year ago.
MITCHELL: M4r Keating, thanks for your time.
PM: Good Neil, thanks for having us in.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister, Mr Keating.
ends. I 



PIRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OP THE ] PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE, 17 MARCH 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well there have been plenty of reasons i~ n the last 12
months why people could have been pessimistic and
entitled to be pessimistic and gloomy about the economy.
But that's not true today, not true of these numbers in
the National Accounts. We are entitled to be confident
that the economty is on the turn, that there's hope
there, and that' every person who is interested in a
recovery should. welcome the numbers today.
J: Is 0.3 enough?
PM: The fact is that it's turning and it's positive and It's
coming off the previous couple of quarters so it looks
as though there is every reason, as I say, to be
confident and to be. hopeful about the economy.
J: Dr Hewson says that there aren't improvements in the
areas that count such as business investment.
PM: Anyone who doesn't welcome these numbers today,
including Dr Hewson' is not saying things which will
welcome or induce a recovery.
J: Is it possible that' we could Blip back into a negative
situation?
PM: I think the trend ovrer the period and the fact now that
interest rates have, been down low for a very long period
of time will help and, as well as that, now, of course,
we've got the added' chemistry of the One Nation
Statement. These changes reflect the December quarter.
We believed when we brought One Nation down that we were
going to add to the impetus coming out of the December
quarter and spur growth in the economy over the course
of the year. I think now the chemistry of the One
Nation Statement will have that effect. it will take
that momentum and push it on and have its own impact on
the economy. People should remember that while One
Nation was presented a few weeks ago, and in terms of
the newspapers has gone into the history of the writing
of it, its impact is yet to be felt, and will be felt 
-2-
through the course of this year and, in particular, in
the next half year.
J: Business inves~ tment is still poor, when are we going to
see atn improvement there in terms of broader recovery?
PM, It's confidence that matters and it is GDP and growth
which will bring confidence around, and it's that which
will change the whole ambience of the economy. These
numbers are a cause now for some confidence and some
hope.
J: Is there need for further stimulus to get a more rapid
effect on unemtployment?
PM: No, I think the Government has judged it about right
with the One Nation Statement, the impetus which we
thought it needed, the stimulus which we thought it
needed and I think these numbers make that point for us,
that it will push activity along, push growth along and
push employment along. The people who were saying that
it was overdoing it at the time, have now got some cause
for reflection.
J: any hope thaet unemployment won't hit 10.75 per cent,
the forecast high?
PM: These numbers would be consistent with the forecast
which are included in the One Nation Statement and let's
hope we do better than 10.75.
J; Dr H-ewson is talking about 11.25.
* PM; Dr Hewson has got to be very careful about hie gloomy
comments. I mean does he want a recovery or does he
not? Does he weant to spoil the game for all
Australians?
J: But does he havea a point that perhaps the growth isn't
in the right areas?
PM: Come on, growth is growth. GDP and employment are tied
together, if GDP picks up, growth picks up and
employment picks up.
J: Mr Keating, is the recession over?
PM: The economy is -obviously turning. It's clearly turning
now and that's -the important thing. It is its
direction, and, as I say, with the extra impetus of One
Nation, that fiscal package and those changes coming
through, plus the bulilt-in momentum from the changes to
monetary policy., all of that is going to have its
positive impact on the economy.
ENDS 



28/ 92
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AID FOR TURKISH EARTHQUAKE VICTIMS
All Australians were distressed to learn of the tragic loss
of life and property which occurred as a result of the
recent earthquakes in the eastern Turkish city of Erzincan.
On Monday I conveyed to Prime Minister Demirel of Turkey the
deepest sympathy of the Australian Government and people.
As a contribution to the international relief effort, the
Australian Government will contribute $ 250,000 in financial
assistance to help the victims of the earthquake.
This assistance will be provided through the Australian Red
Cross and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, and will be used primarily for the
purchase of emergency shelter and blankets.
In view of the urgency and the distance involved, the best
way for Australia to help is through financial assistance.
The funds will be provided by the Government's overseas aid
agency, AIDAB, the Australian International Development
Assistance Bu: ceau.
CANBERRA 17 March 1992 



PRIME MINISTER 29/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING MP
VISIT TO INDONES2: A AND PAPUA NEW GUINEA
At the invitation of the Governments of Indonesia and Papua
New Guinea, I shall be visiting Indonesia from 21 to 24
April, and Papua New Guinea from 24 to 26 April.
My visit to Indonesia, the first by an Australian Prime
Minister since 19383, will provide an opportunity to discuss
with President Soeharto and his senior Ministers the scope
for establishing a firm basis for the long-term development
of Australia-Indonesia relations both in the bilateral
domain and as partners in the Asia-Pacific region.
Australia and Indonesia have in common major political,
economic and strategic interests. In 1990-91 Australian
exports to Indonesia were worth $ 1.4 billion, making
Indonesia our ninth largest export market and the second
largest in ASEAN. Indonesia is a key member of the Asia
Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC) process, which Australia
helped establish.
I am also pleased to have an early opportunity to visit
Papua New Guinea, a country with which Australia has a longstanding
and close relationship, and to meet Prime Minister
Namaliu and members of his cabinet.
In Port Moresby, I shall take part in a special program on
Anzac Day to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Papua
New Guinea campaign of World War II. That campaign, an
important part of the Pacific War, holds great significance
for all Australians.
Media arrangements will be advised separately in the near
future.
CANBERRA 18 March 1992 I1 



TEL 30/ 92
STATEMENT 13Y THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. MEATING MP
SOUTH AFRICAN REFERENDUM
I welcome the positive outcome of the South African
referendum and hope the result will add fresh momentum to
the process of political reform in that country.
I congratulate President de Klerk on receiving a clear
mandate from the white community for his reform program.
The referendum result is 8 boost for the forces of democracy
and Australia hopes that this will be the last racially
based poll in South Africa. It is important that the
victory won by whites in favour of genuine reform serves as
a catalyst to a ccelerate the development of a non-racial
democratic constitution.
I look forward to further positive developments in
negotiations. Further progress in the Convention for a
Democratic South Africa ( CODESA), the forum created for allparty
negotiations, will enable countries such as Australia
to review remaining sanctions against South Africa.
The level of violence in South Africa during the referendum
campaign is a cause for serious concern and I urge all
parties to redouble their efforts to bring a stop to the
senseless bloodshed.
The referendum result should speed the process of
democratisation, and I call on all parties to accept the
will of the people and move without delay towards the
establishmnet of a truly non-racial constitution in South
Africa. 18 MARCH 1992 T1E8L:. Mar. 92 21: 43 No. 023 P. 01/ 01 



PRIME MINISTER
EMAICOED UNTIL DELIVERY ( 8.30 PM, 19 MARCH 1992)
ADDRESS BY Tffl PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRIME MINISTERIAL WOMEN AND SPORTS AWARDS
THE REGENT MELBOURNE
Thank you very much. It's my great pleasure to be here.
You will have probably heard me say on the odd occasion that
I want to see Australia become more competitive in the
world. It has been one of my ruling passions for the past decade.
More recently you may have heard me utter the words " One
Nation" this is -set to become a ruling passion for the
next decade.
Competitiveness is an essential part of the concept behind
One Nation.
Early in the statement you can read the following.
" The Keating government's goal is an internationally
competitive economy that continually strives for world best
performance and provides equal opportunities for all Its
citizens one nation, co-operating at home and winning
abroad". Read in one context, you might take this to mean that I am
about to give you another one of those boring economic
speeches. And shudder. Or yawn.
. aut I-ask you-to read those words in the context of this
gathering tonig.; ht.'
The values we are honouring tonight are those of
competition. rhey, are also the values of participation and
equity. Tonight we are paying tribute to people whose personal
ambition and personal effort lifts the national ambition and
the national efEfort.
~ JT7JLR1l( O 
These awards are a measure of the value of the competitive
spirit. But the value of participation is equally reflected.
For the achievements we honour here tonight, it has to be
said, have bee~ n made against the odds.
Take the Olympics.
The Olympic hockey competition which the Australian women's
team won in Seoul was only the second to be held.
The women's marathon was not introduced until 1984. The
men's was first run in 490 BC1
Unfortunately we can't blame it all on the International
Olympic Committee.
Of the 76 national sporting organisations in Australia, only
14 have women in the top administrative position.
Of the 6.5 million members of sporting organisations in
Australia only a quarter are women.
It has to be said, therefore, that to some extent our women
athletes have -cone it against the odds.
Their achievements, of course, are outstanding.
For a very long time Australian women athletes have been at
the absolute pinnacle of international sport.
Their successes are measures of ourselves of our
confidence, of our' values. They are cultural measures.
Sport is one area where women can be numbered among the
Australian lege~ nds I mean the likes of MarJorie Jackson,
Heather McKay, Dawn Fraser, Betty Cuthbert, Evonne
Goolagong, Shane Gould. These names mean more than sporting
success: each of them stands for character for something
which we identify as Australian.
The list, of course, is much longer than that.
And it should be said that any list of Australian sporting
greats would have to include the hockey team, who recently
-beat . the Geirmans, the cricket -team who beat the English, and
the netball team wh~ o beat New Zealand in one of the great
sports highlights of last year.
Now a government cannot make people competitive we cannot
insist that our athletes become the best in the world, any
more than we can insist that Australian companies become the
best in the world.
But we can do a lot to create the conditions which will give
us the best chance. 
3
That's what wet're doing with the economy and the industrial
culture. That's what we want to do with sport.
We want to broaden the base of the pyramid.
That means giving every Australian, regardless of gender,
every opportunity to participate in sporting activities.
There is no better way to increase the numbers who reach the
top no better way to increase the chances for women to
realise their highest ambitions.
But it will be Just as important for those women and men
whose sporting ambitions are more modest.
I mean those who want to play sport at anW level of
expertise or exertion and I am not merely thinking of my
own tennis those who want to play sport for its social and
recreational value.
Beyond all this, of course, lie the physical, communal and
spiritual values which every nation needs and which sport is
uniquely capable of supplying.
We should remember that, when we exclude women in any way at
all from sport, we exclude them from sharing in the
expression of -those values and, what is more important,
from shaping them.
The idea of One Nation is the idea of inclusion.
The idea of closing gaps between places and people. Of
building partnerships. Of making the most of all our
resources and Australian women surely number among the
greatest of thom.
In sport, as in every other aspect of our national life, it
is our intention to lower the drawbridge and let all
Australians in.,
There is more 1to do there nearly always is but in a
number of ways, from broad social and economic reforms, to
specific programs like the Women's Sport in Media project,
the Gender Equity Guidelines and the Active Girls campaign,
mo~ nrore women are finding the! r -aif ntth e niaional
life, including the sporting life of Australia.
In this the efforts of my colleagues, Roe Kelly and Wendy
Fatin, should riot go unacknowledged. Both have been and will
continue to be great contributors, great encouragers great
at creating opportunities and openings.
By recognising those individuals and corporations who
encourage women in sport, and who create the opportunities,
these awards play their part in the goals of excellence and 
4
participation which is in essence the goal of national
growth. I said that we want to see partnerships: tonight we see them
between government and corporate sponsors, between
community, medlia and sporting organisations, between men and
women. I want to thanxk and congratulate all those who have played
such constructive parts in women's sport, and take this
opportunity to express the hope that these awards will
rapidly come to play their part in advancing the cause.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME HINSTR, TH% HON P. J. KEATING MO
DOORSTOP MELBOURNE 19 MARCH 1992
E&amp; O PROOF COPY
PM1 Well, z thiNt that it is a very significant victory for
the processes of democracy, for President de Klerk in
particular, a nd we hope now that we will see a
reconvening of CODESA, and that work will proceed to a
new constitution, and I think upon those things
happening, the rest of the world, the Commonwoalth In
particular, -o look further at the sanctions.
J: When do you think those sanctions realistically could be
lifted?
PM: I think as wea get through those processes, when we see a
reconvaning of CODESA, to look at the working parties
work, and to se then what adoptions there are of that
work, I think that is the time. A lot of sanctions of
course, have already been lifted, people to people
sanctions and transport. But in the area of trade and
finance I thLnk we will follow generally the
Commonwealth's pliCy which was to watch what happens
inside South Africa, and look at the movement towards a
new constitution.
J: Have you sent the message to Mr de Ilerk?
PM: I will be youi.
J: What will you be saying?
PM: Well, congratulating him on his important win, that the
referendum result will see which he has been pursuing.
That is for a change and to be able to negotiate on
behalf of the white community, to establish new
constitutional arrangements. we will also be wat | iing
for what is s; aid In South Africa about the events over
the last 24 hours, and what they think from the ANC and
other* about prospects for the future.
0: Mr Keating you have been suggesting we should get away
from the Commonwealth and not be caught by the British
cringe. Why are we waiting for the Coaimonwealth to
move? 
2
PM: Wel1 we are not waiting for th6 Commonwealth to move, it
is matter that we have been part of the Commonwealth
policy, an international policy, you can't read
Commonwealth, Feed Britain as you know, for a very long
period in this, Margaret Thatcher was the one not
involved in this, but Australians * played a leading role
in these negotiations and discussions over a
considerable period of time.
J: Senator Evans said he thought sanctionB could be lifted
vary soon.
PM: Well we will see what progress is made, and there is
going to be, I think, a reconvening of C0DESA probably
in early to mid April.
J: Mr Keating Phil Cleary said he probably won't stanld as a
candidate for Will&amp; now, where does that leve the ALP,
and what a. re your chances for succeoe7
PM: Wall our ch'ancp-s of success I think, are good Bi1l
Kardamitais is a person of the community, a people
person, somebody who truly reprsents this place, is
interested in it, and while the going has been tough for
the Labor Party in victoria, we hope we can win, but it
will be decided by a small margin.
3: But you won't have those preferences from Mr Clery..
PM: Mr Cleary is entitled to make his own mind up about
those things, but the Labor Party will campaign on its
policy, whiLch has been to induce a recovery, to come out
of the recession, induce a recovery, create jobs and
emlployment and get Victoria working again. A very large
part of the One Nation stat~ ieet was concentrated in
Viatoria,. that is trying to rebuild the Victorian
infrastructure, provide it with now industries like
transport, like tourism, even though they exist here
now, to develop them properly in Victoria, for ViLctoria
to got its share of those things. And TAFS, we have
just comes out of a TAFE collage, and we will make, as I
said in thea St~ toment, TAFE one of the strong reeds of
Australian education, And a significant proportion of
that $ 750 mililion is going to be spent in Victoria.
J: in airing t; he Delacretat letters hasn't there been a
serious breach of parliamentary tradition?
PM: No. Look the Liberal Party is entirely embarrassed
about this. I mean, overnight apparently, Dr Howsonl end
Mr Kroger had to have a meeting about whether they would
pull their candidate out of the race. And they decided
to laave him in. And I notice that Dr llewson said he is
happy with Mr Kroger's report. That is, he is happy
apparently with Mr Delacretez saying that social
security should be cut by 30 per cent, that pension*
ought to be, out by 30 per cent, that we ought to send
6O/ ZO'd OZO* ON ~ I W: 3 
migrants home. that we shouldn't fund sheltered
workahops for the disabled If they compete with any
business of which their candidate Is involved. You
know, I WRLs quite interested to see Dr Howson say he was
happy with Mr Kroger'su report, and the report, of
course, haid to comprehend the policies which their
candidate has proposed.
J; Some would say that airing the letters was a dirty
trick.
PM: Look, the thing is, I don't know where the letters came
from. I was shown them by a Channel 10 journalist and I
gave a comnunt on the spot. But the f act of the matter
Ls, I canl understand the Liberal Party is embarrassed.
They have got a candidate in the field who wants to cut
social security payments by 30 per cent. Who wants to
cut pensiolns back, who wants to send migrants home, who
wants to cut payments to sheltered workshops.
J: You don't thirik you have breached tradition at all?
PMt: I haven't, no, anyway this is a public debate. I moan,
what is the Liberal Party of raid of They are af raid of
the policies of their candidate. I mean, here they are
now fomenting, going on about privacy. This is a public
debate. It iv a by-election. And they don't want the
public to know that their candidate believes in a 30 per
cent out in social security and sending migrants home.
J: Mr iKeaving-, will you avcept that this by-election is a
mini-referendum on the One Nation versus Fightbacc
packagos?
PM: I don't accept that, no, but a victory for the Liberal
Party here, would certainly make the goods and services
tax at 15 per cent impost on the lives of all
Australians onie step closer. And that is why I think
that the electors of Wills have a heavy responsibility
here to make certain that that impost, that shift in our
lifestyle which the OST would bring is rnot endorsed here
in Wills.
J: Housing finance figures show the big drop in housing
finance approvals today, does that mean we should be
reducing interest rates yet again?
PM; I haven't seen the figure.
J: They are down to 7 per cent, does that surprise you?
PM: Well they move, they were up a month ago as I remember.
They move but you can't take one month's figures on any
Of thace things.
Jt Mr Keating, after your strong statement of racism how do
you feel about the call by Aboriginal leader in Brisbane
today, Bob Weatherall, for a referendum?
-CIA -Ale" AA 
PM, I haven't seen it.
3: to establish an Aboriginal nation in Australia....
PMI I Just haven't seen it. We have got those
reconciliation processes in place. I think they ore
good processes. I think Australian'@ are conscientious
about their relations and the tolerance which is part
and parcel in this country in, I think, evidence to
that. I mean, look inside this TAFE college, how many
various people of different ethnic origins are here,
part and parcel of this community. It just speaks for
itself.
J: Mr Keating, what is your reaction to Peter Reith's
comments about Bernie Fraser in front of the
international banking community that he is a political
stuge?
PM: Well I mea: n, this is the sort of irresponsibility of the
Liberal Party trafficks in. One of the great pleasures
of my professional life was working with Bob Johnston,
the former Governor of the Reserve Bank who was
appointed by John Howard. But the Liberals have no
respect for conventions. They want to tear and rip at
people and institutions. Mr Reith was saying a day or
so ago that he wanted to knee cap the public service,
now he wants to be disloyal to Australia and again in
front of a large and significant audience of business
people from South East Asia to say that their central
bank is politically interfered with, which it isn't.
And the Governor rebuked him instantly, apparently.
J: You were the one who was saying the Reserve Bank was in
your pocket?
PM: No, I have said very clearly in the Parliament the
balance between the Government's prerogatives and the
Bank Board's prerogatives and the Reserve Bank Act. The
Bank was supporting the policies of the 0overnauent at
the time.
J: One of your own cupporters, Mr Punch, has recently been
very critical of the public service. Do you endorse
that sort of sentiment?
PM: The public service has served this Government
particularly well as I think It has served most
governments well. And to have someone like Mr Reith
Crudely putting about essentially blatant untruths for
sort of cro ss political purposea, but taking that
crassness ' to a meeting of international bankers in
irresponsible and disloyal to the country.
J: What about Mr Punch's commente?
an, sn'. n~ n'ON ) q: ZT Z6JPW6T: 131 
PM: He didn't talk in those terms. He didn't direct him
remarks about the government.
J: His point wall that the Government last year got captured
by the publigz servie.
PM: Well I don't believe that.
J: It seems Mr Ca4rr has backed Mr Hewson's thoughts on
immigration
PM: I think we will just and it there.
ENDS
I C17fl flu IT 



TEL 20. Mar. 92 17: 34 No. 032 P. 01/
PRIME MINISTER ] 30/
MESSAGES8 TO PRESIDENT DE KLERK AND DR NELSON MANDELA
The following are text$ of messages sent today by the Prime
Minister to President F W De Kierk and
Dr Nelson Mandela following the recent South African
referendum con political reform.
Message to President De Kierc
I would like to express to you personally my pleasure,
and that of the people of Australia, at the outstanding
result in the March 17 referendum. The overwhelming
' yes' vote, as well as the unprecedented voter turnout,
put beyond doubt the wish of white South Africans
to see the reform process continued,
The vote is, also a singular tribute to your own courage
and perseverance and to that of the others on all sides
of South African politics who have been involved in
initiating and pursuing the historic reforms which are
now underway in your country.
Australians have been watching with great interest
and not a little dismay given their winning form the
exploits of your cricketers in the World Cup series.
It has -been a welcome reminder for us all of the
benefits of South Africa's return to full participation
in the intercnational community.
I am sure the referendum result will have greatly
improved the prospects for progress at the next meeting
of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa. I am
confident that continued progress towards the adoption
of a democratic non-racial constitution will permit
further early moves towards the full restoration of
commercial and economic relations between our two
countries. 
2
Message to Dr Mandela
I shared your relief and satisfaction at the result of
the March 17 referendum. It is encouraging to know
that the great majority of the white population in
South Africa appreciates the urgent need for reform,
and supports the historic process on which you,
President de Kierk and other South African leaders are
embarked. I am sure the referendum result will have greatly
improved the prospects for progress at the next meeting
of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa. I am
confident that continued progress towards the adoption
of a democratic non-racial constitution will permit
further early moves towards the full restoration of
commercial and economic relations between our two
countries. I wish you' and your colleagues well as you enter what
we all hope will be the final Stages in the dismantling
of apartheid and the establishment of a truly
democratic and non-racial South Africa.
CANBERRA March 1992 



ILL ZU Mar. IJ 1u : 64 NO.-UU? -~ UI/
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P j KEATING, MP
OPENING OF T14E GMX' S ENAMEL FAINT FACTORY PROJECT
ELIZABETH ADELAIDE, 20 MARCH 1992
Mr Smith, Premnier Bannon, ladies and gentlemen.
This ceremonvy marks another significant investment by GMH
in Australia, and further entrenches its commitment to
this state and this nation.
It is a $ 120 million re-affirmation of confidence in the
future of car making in Australia.
More than that, it demonstrates the company's confidence
in the industry's ability to be world competitive.
It is an investment which recognises not only the need to
embrace international best practice in quality and
standards, but our ability to do it.
I congratulate GMH on their confidence and vision.
I also believe the union movement has reason to be proud
today. The success of this investment is assured by their
recognition of the need for an effective partnership with
management. Such partnerships are at the heart of the government's
strategy for our economic future, which is embodied in
the One Nati~ on statement.
In recent years there has been a great change in the
industrial cultu re of Australia, and that is what we are
going to build on.
There is a new understanding, a new recognition of what
can be done. 
101 -2
With it comes new confidence and, with that, most
importantly, new jobs.
And there are more grounds than this for confidence.
The productivity and export competitiveness of our
efficient manufacturing industries is growing year by
year. In the motor vehicle industry exports have increased by
more than 1.50% since 1984; from $ 369 million to over
$ 950 million i-n 1990.
The figure for 1991 is expected to be in excess of $ 1.1
billion, and by the end of the century our automotive
exports will exceed $ 2 billion in today's dollars.
Ladies and gentlemen.
Just as we are witnessing the emergence of a new car
industry, so w-e will see the emergence of a much stronger
Australia in thie 1990s.
The fundamentals are being put in place.
Low interest rates, low inflation, lower labour costs and
the new industrial culture are making us more competitive
on world markets.
The initiatives taken in the One Nation document will
take us further -much further.
This new emphasis on partnership, on pooling our energy
and ideas, on shared national goals, combined with the
great infrastruCture projects, higher quality training
support, greater incentives to investment -when One
Nation begins to work its chemistry we will see just how
strong Australia can be.
Ladies and gentlemen.
General Motors H-olden has long been a household name in
Australia, and this new project says very clearly to the
country that It will continue to be.
We welcome that and congratulate the Company and all
those associated with this project.
And we wish it: well in the future.
Thank you. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J7 KEATING, MP
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN FOOTBALL LEAGUE LUNCHEON
FOOTBALL PARK, ADELAIDE
MARCH 19912
Ladies arnd gentlemen.
This is my fourth visit to Adelaide in as many weeks,
and it is a. lways a pleasure to be here.
This is a remarkable city by any standards, I always
think of it as a brave city a civilised and cultured
place at tha bottom of the world between the desert and
the deep blue sea.
The Adelaide Festival is the great measure of that of
course. It is one of the great arts festivals of the world.
It's a statement of confidence in ourselves the kind
of confidence which looks outward to the rest of the
world and welcomes the world in.
I came over for a couple of days a fortnight ago and
while I was here I spent an hour in the Adelaide Art
Gallery which is probably the best small gallery in
Australia. Look around in there and you will see how the idea of
Australia, and ' what it is to be Australian, has
developed over thi past two hundred years.
You can see howj this place was first seen through
European eyes, and how those eyes steadily opened. You
can see the vision grow stronger and our regard for the
place grow deeper.
Until you see in those fantastic canvasses of Roberts
and Streeton 100 years ago an image of Australia which
could only be Australia.
The image continues to be our own today. 
Keep looking in the gallery and you will see twentieth
century images-of Australia and Australians all of
them Influenced by European styles and taste, but all of
them ultimately, expressing something quintessentially
Australian. It might seem strange to begin this little speech by
talking about art, but I think there are a couple of
broad contemporary lessons in there for us.
To begin with, the Adelaide Festival and the Adelaide
gallery both tell us that it is futile to be parochial,
to close ourselves of f to overseas influence. We need
to keep the windows open so we can see out, and the
world can see in.
Broaden the vision. Don't be frightened of the light.
That's how we grow.
The second lesion is the other side of the coin.
You know what the critics said about the first Roberts
and Streetons. They said they were awful a " pain to
the eye".
They said as their predecessors had said, and even as
their successors were saying well into the twentieth
century, that Australian subjects were basically not fit
for great paintings, and that the modern way of seeing
things was horrible and to be resisted at all costs.
I could point to many other examples of this ancient
cultural cringe but I will attempt to put it in a more
positive way.
There was bound to be a tendency in Australia to shrink
from our owin reality, from the uniqueness of the place
just as there was bound to be an equal tendency to
exaggerate our virtues and achievements.
Both jingoism and cringing are debilitating
afflictionst. I
But in the quest for national growth in the effort to
realise all our potential and make this country as great
as it can and should be I would prefer to err on the
parochial side.
I'd be the last to say that we should reject our
European heritage.
But I do have a complaint against those who have allowed
themselves to become less than whole-hearted in their
commitment to this country.
The fact is that over the years we have been damaged by
the people who have talked us down, who shrink from the
Australian reality, who resist change even when change
I tvr) J TCO OKI t7 7 , t7T 7 r _ IV~ LI'(-170 1 
is imperative, who hesitate who say, but what will our
old masters think?
There will tie chaos.
You know, mayhem and anarchy like an Australian Rules
Football match.,
It's a peculiar game, Australian Rules to an English
person or a Sydneysider, very peculiar at first.
As it evolved from the marriage of the British and Irish
to Australia there have always been those who despised
it as a rude colonial thing.
Many of these disparaging types, I confess, lived in
Sydney. But you're : looking at a convert.
It is a definitive Australian game the unique one.
Mainly skill but with an element of chance and all
played out on a great broad slice of turf of
indeterminate dimensions.
It's a measure of our character, our spirit and our
capacity for invention.
I like the hip and shoulder in Australian Rules Football
-I like it because I do like to keep my own shoulder
against the door keeping the pressure on for change.
I believe we need to do that in Australia.
In our post colonial culture there are still a lot of
people whose instinct is to resist change who would
watch opportunity, even necessity, pass them by rather
than make the changes necessary to grasp it.
In 1992 we have to grasp these opportunities.
That is why-, as we continue with the changes we started
in the eighties, as we implement the strategies for
recovery and growth in One Nation as we take these
necessary structural steps, I have also been arguing for
a more robuist independent outlook.
Dr Hewson is wiong when he says that this is a
distraction. He could not be more wrong.
He is also wrong when he says that the drive for an
Australia which speaks with a mature and unambiguous
voice will not create jobs.
Not one job, he says.
I do not believe that business people will agree.
I/ Od ITO00N t7Z: tT Z6JWO : 131 
Unless they believe that ambition, confidence, pride,
common goals; firmly held, cohesion and cooperation,
enthusiasm unless there are business people in
Australia who think these things are not important to
success, Dr Hewson will not find many people to agree
with his assessment that I have been creating a
distraction. These things are essential in business, as they are in
football. They are essential to the success of
Australia. To speed the recovery, to make the most of our
strengths, to come out of recession stronger than ever
before and we can do all these things we need
confidence iLn ourselves.
We have every reason to look forward to the future in
this country but we won't make the future as good as
it should bia if our view is obscured by a patina of old
protocols, and our energies dissipated in reflexive
salutes to other countries before we salute our own.
We must not let the faint-hearted, or the knockers, or
the whingers and the cringers, get in the way of the
future.
One Nation is aboutñ the future.
One Nation is a program for recovery which calls on
Australians to pool their resources, to enter into
partnerships with each other, to commit themselves to
cooperative enterprise.
By investment in major infrastructure projects,
particularly road and rail, in the reform of aviation
policy, in seeking cooperative relationships between
business anid unions, the states and the commonwealth,
the private! and the public sectors in these various
ways it seeks to close the gaps between Australians.
It seeks to stimulate the economy, and to make
investment in the sorts of businesses Australia needs a
much more attractive proposition.
It seeks and will deliver low inflation growth over the
next decade,. It will deliver tax cuts equivalent to
those promised by Dr Hewson but without a consumption
tax.
One Nation is a document of inclusion.
For instance, huge amounts will be invested in technical
training to bring this third strand of education into
line with the other two that is to say, giving more
kids many more kids life opportunities by
participating in education. This same step will of
course be of great long term benefit to business and
industry. 
There is a certain deliberate chemistry to One Nation.
We consulted with business so that we could find the
most practical solutions, the most effective ways of
getting the recovery going and seeing that it was
strong.
We consulted with unions, states and the community for
the same reason and to maximise the level of national
commitment. It is a social document as well as an economic one it
recognises ' how essential it is that everyone contributes
to the recovery and everyone shares in its rewards.
Ladies and -gentlemen.
South Australia will share in the benefits of one
Nation. It will share in the programs designed to bring benefits
to all Australians programs like the overhaul of TAFE,
the reform of aviation, labour market programs and in
specific programs in this state.
To mention three of the major ones:
As I am sure by now you are aware, one of the major
undertakings in the infrastructure program will be the
conversion of 775 kilometre Melbourne-Adelaide railway
to standard gauge.
As you also know, we have offered to take over
responsibility -for substantially upgrading the Sydney
Adelaide road link, which, together with the Melbourne
Brisbane link will provide a high quality highway
network between our four largest cities.
We have provided SO million for the construction of the
rail loop at Outer Harbour, as part of a $ 100 million
upgrading of the port directed at handling timesensitive
cargo between East Asia, Sydney and Melbourne.
All these projects, along with every measure in the One
Nation document, are designed to bring on recovery,
create jobs, build our strengths and deliver to all
Australians hope arnd opportunity.
With low inflation locked in, with a vastly improved
industrial culture, with manufacturing exports rapidly
growing, with a much more competitive and efficient
financial and business culture we can come out of this
recession much stronger than we have ever been.
In* J I Tn, nNi " 17 +, T 
One Nation is designed to assure us that the recovery
will be faetter and stronger.
That our economy will be strong, and not least because
the nation will be strong.
it's appropriate on this occasion to borrow an image
from football the strongest team is the one which best
uses it strengths, which develops its skills to the
highest level and deploys them most effectively, which
works cohesively with a common desire for success, and
which does not let the bumps and misfortunes along the
way, knock them of f their stride.
That is the aim of One Nation. To make us stronger
within so we can be strong in the world.
Ladies and gentlemen.
It seems to me that there are two broad models of
society of how a society best operates.
The first one I believe broadly describes the way
Australia has for too long been conceived and operated.
It is the castle with the drawbridge raised the few
inside attempting to extract by various deceits and
stratagems enough energy from those outside to make the
place economically viable.
Now and then some new measure occurs to them you know,
inviting a few select ones into a garden party to get
them on side: or now as Dr ftewson proposes, they go
galloping out into the provinces to collect a tax on the
food they eat the clothes they wear, and the services
on which they rely.
The other way -and I believe it broadly describes one
Nation lowers the drawbridge.
It's principle is inclusion. It broadens the social
base pool~ s our energies and talents, aims at growth,
encourages wholehearted loyalty and commitment,
cohesion, natio3n building.
It assumes that a popularly elected government is
elected to govern not to pull out of the social
equation.
That is my philosophy. It is the philosophy of One
Nation. If this is more of a republican philosophy than my
political opponents then I am more of a republican.
But that is not the key word: the key word is Australia,
the future of this country and its people. 



TEL: 24. Mar. 92 19: 38 NO. Ui0 r-ui'v7
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE VICTORIAN STATE ALP CONFERENCE,
MOONEE PONDS, MELBOURNE, SATURDAY 21 MARCH 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Comrades, delegates, thank you very much for that warm round
of applause and reception, Paul ( Slape) Victorian Party
President thank you for your kind words, Joan the leader
of the Labor Party and Premier of Victoria, our candidate
Sill Kardaitsis and his wife Haroula, Jenny State
Secretary and friends one and all.
Well these are challenging times and it's nice to be amongst
friends, and I haven't always been amongst friends this
week. But in engaging times like these one needs to know
where one is;. We need to know where we are and what we are
and where we're going. We have to have a very good fix on
what our political policy and strategy is because parties
lose their way and many parties in the past have. But
fortunately that has not happened to us. Not in recent
times. But you might have heard me say that we've been working in
this century between two competing ideas in politics. One
has been that private reward and private initiative was the
main spring of all endeavour and human progress, and on the
other hand, state socialism and government intervention was
the way forward. We have seen these philosophies, Adam
Smith on the one hand, Marx on the other and various shades
in between become the polarity of public life in the
twentieth century, the tug and pull from the poles of those
two competin~ g ideas.
We saw it in the United States with conservatives like
Calvin Coolidge, articulating the policies of reward for the
wealthy and the owing to the reaction against it in the
depression, to the need for governmlent involvement which
came with Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal. And we saw the
swing back t~ o the years of Eisenhower, where again, we saw
the same conservative incantations ran out. And then the
swing back as Americans wanted better with Lyndon Johnson's
New Deal and, support for blacks. And then again back to the
years of greed is good, and that private initiative and 
private reward is all that matters in the years of Ronald
Reagan. And we saw it in Britain, with Churchill after the
war and the swing to the government of Clement Attlee, where
government involvement and government initiative was
regarded as being important. And then the swing back to the
dry radicalism of Margaret Thatcher where basically again
the strong prospered and the weak were left in their wake.
We came to office in 1983 against that tide. When we came
to office the political tide was away from government
intervention, government involvement, government engaging
problems in society and the economy. Blut we stood against
that tide, against the tide of Reaganism and Thatcherism,
which was then the international trend. We stood up against
it and we pulled the pendulum back. We dragged the pendulum
back, not to state socialism which we knew was not working,
never worked, and wouldn't work, or to massive central
planning, but to a peculiarly and proud Australian policy.
one that-you would expect from the oldest Labor Party in the
world able to make its own policy and not be caught up in
the fashion of these two competing political ideas.
And we camne up with a policy which was about opening
Australia up, about economic restructuring, of letting
markets have A role in the country, keeping a focus on
efficiency, but at the same time looking at the needs of
people, trying to fashion a social wage which made the lot
of Australians better.
So Labor in the 1980s had a growth model. When I used to
stand up as the Finance minister or the Treasurer at the
OECD and say we have an employment objective, a specific
employment objective, people would look at you as if you had
a sort of case of rabies or something, and they would say
they thought there was something wrong with you. Because
then, employment for those people, for those countries,
employmnent: was the residual, it's the thing that dropped out
the bottom~ f. And if what dropped out was 10 per cent
unemployment or 15 per cent unemployment, so be it. That
was the price, they said, of giving the wealthy t~ heir go, of
letting the goers go and leaving the other people in their
wake. Now, of course, we had big objectives, we had to come out of
a recession, we had to bring Australia back up, we had to
restart investment, we had to get employment going, we had
to overcome inflation and put a suture on our debt. But we
did all of that within a growth model, in partnership with
the trade unions under the Accord. In other words, Labor
included people in. We brought in the unions, which have
always been a strength of Labor and said let'-s to this
together, let's devise a policy which is Australian, which
deals With Australian problems which does not see us as a
government: with a slosh of the pendulum from one side to the
other, being drawn around by these international trends.
Let's decide our policy and let's do it our way to make
things better for Australians work, but with reform. That
is, a role for government but without suffocating 
. a L4-' 1 k V
3
creativity, without suffocating the role of the sensible
operationa of the market and with a focus on the things we
knew it had to be on economic efficiency, getting
companies going again, restructuring our old industrial
structure, turning our industrial museum back into a modern,
sophisticated industrial society and getting on with it.
We never accepted the Thatcher view that employment was a
residual, that if the rich got their go what would fall from
the table the crumbs would go to the working anid middle
classes. We never accepted that view. Nor did we accept
the market puritanical view of the New Zealand Labor Party,
of Lange and Roger Douglas. We wouldn't cop them either and
Paul is quite right to make the reference to New Zealand.*
They've basically disseminated a generation over there. In
fact, we had'more growth in the Australian economy in the
1980s than there is total GDP in New Zealand. We had
actually more growth here than there is total product in the
New Zealand economy.
We in fact absorbed Thatcherism and Reaganism, took it in
our stride, used those precepts about markets and efficiency
as we warited to use them in the Labor way, in the Labor
context in the Labor model and followed a Labor policy and
talked to our fellows in the trade unions, our friends in
the trade. unions as the New Zealand Labor Party didn't, and
as the British Labor Party couldn't.
And that's what made us different.
in the 180s we freed up savings for investment, but we
developed this enormous social wage which started caring
about things like:
Health -with Medicare the right to health insurance
whether you were sick, sore or sorry, rich or poor,
single or with a large family, you had health
protection under us. That was an important part of the
social wage.
Women's issues which we promoted strongly all the way
from the 1980s, whether they be equal opportunity, or
affirmative action or access to superannuation, or what
have you.
Pensioners and lifting up the unemployment rate, which
had fallen in real terms under Fraser, as had the age
pensiLon, which we improved dramatically through the
180S.
Income support for the low paid with a family
allowance supplement directed to low paid, low income
famil~ ies, or support to families generally with a
family allowance.
Increased retention rates in school because we knew
that not only was it unfair to our children not to give
them the opportunity to complete secondary school but 
4
we would never make it as an advanced country while
ever we took the view that 3 kids in 10 completing
secondary school was good enough. It is now 7 in
and wo then created the equivalent of a dozen
universities to take them as they left the secondary
systemi. And now of course, we're pulling TAFE up
behind it.
Aged care where we're the first government to develop
a comprehensive policy towards the aged. That is from
geriatric assessment, through to home and community
care, through to the hostel program, right through.
Child care giving women the opportunity to go to
work, and giving those who are at home relief with
occasional day care in the course of the day or week.
Superannuation giving Australian workers a chance to
have a standard of living in retirement greater than
that than can be provided by the Commonwealth through
the age pension. Building on the age pension, but
something better, and at the same time develop a pool
of savings for the nation to employ in terms of its
capital re~ tructuring.
We made in fact, a smaller public sector, a better
public sector, by focussing the need, and of course
smaller as a per cent of GDP but with large increases
in spending where it needed to be.
So that was our ' 80s model. We rejected all these
international fashions, we rejected the half hearted view
from the Right. We took our policy, we still opened the
economy up., wellet the market forces take over in many
respects, that is through the exchange markets ae, but we
had a Labor stamp on it.
And now we've developed it further with ' One Nation'.
What ' OneNotion,' does is build on that experience. It sets
out a ole-ar f6le for the public sector beyond the social
wage and income support. It gives the public sector a
further role, a policy of engagement of national problems
not a policy of Withdrawal. Not the policy of withdrawal of
Professor Hewson who wants to tear everything out of the way
to let again the wealthy push their way through the economy,
but basically using and declaring that the public sector has
a role in shaping the fortunes of Australia, particularly in
a difficult period coming out of recession, making that
recovery faster, providing the stimulus we need, getting the
focus back on employment and jobs and recovery, and doing it
in a way which again has Labor leaving its mark and its
stamp on Australia, using the public sector to declare
change in the country, things which only the public sector
can do. Like for instance, rebuilding our national rail
network because we know no-one else is going to build it, no
private company is going to rebuild the Sydney-Melbourne
railway line, no private company is going to standardise the
j j I u u. Lu r ud4/ v 
1
gauge from Melbourne to Adelaide, no private company is
going to tie the ports together. It has to be done by the
government, by the public sector. It's not going to be done
as proposed in the Liberal program of withdrawing money
from the rail system, but rather injecting money into it.
To bring u. p, to give us again a choice in transport.
Because wis know we can't carry bulk commodities on our
roads, we know that we can't continually grow in the economy
with road transport alone which is breaking up our highways
and causing congestion and road accidents and the rest on
our roads. We know, as a modern country with vast
differences between our cities, we must have a rail system
and only the public sector can provide it.
' One Nation' makes that declaration, as It does about roads.
Building ring roads around the capital cities, supporting
the states, supporting the Victorian Government in a ring
road around Melbourne and around Sydney and Brisbane and in
the other capitals. Building national highways.
making a decision about our children, again, with technical
and further education. We're not saying leave them out to
make their own way, as Professor Hewson recommends that
people take opportunities in tertiary education by paying
full fees, $ 12,000 a year, so if their parents can afford a
pre-tax income of $ 25,000 to pay for $ 12,000 after tax or
thereabouts, which for most two income families is half
their income to send one child to university that's what
they think is freedom to achieve. They're not interested in
those hundreds of thousands of other people, children, kids
who can't find a place in university, for academic or other
reasons, but who need to be trained, who want to be trained.
Bill ( Kardamitsis) and I went through TAFE a couple of days
ago in the electorate of Wills, just seeing what people are
doing, with very important courses which let them into the
workforce like English literacy, expression, basic computer
literacy, advanced computer literacy, graphic design,
programs to care for the aged, administration for aged care,
administration for child care. All these sorts of things,
and of course the trade courses which can be such an
important part of not only providing employment opportunity
but making Australia a better, more clever, more capable
place. The Government must do it, not by withdrawing but by
engaging ii: which is what ' One Nation' is doing.
As we are assisting big projects with a development
allowance. We're supporting the private sector to go and do
it, but we're doing it in a way which we think maximises
advantages to Australia. Establishing development bonds so
we can see private provision of public infrastructure
nothing wrong with it, nothing wrong with seeing a private
company in transport infrastructure, say the fast transit
line from Tullamerine to Melbourne, no problem it is a
private com~ pany. No problem if we see the electricity
industry of this country change the private provision of
public infrastructure. The main thing is that the services
are there. And setting up pool development funds for
i ial a. v -j o ii u Q LQ r v. o 
equity, for the small and medium businesses that just can't
get any support with equity. We're in there doing that.
So ' One Nation' is about those things but it's also about
making markets work sensibly for the nation. It's Labor
deciding that certain markets should work better and looking
at areas of market failure and it's again an ascertain, a
declaration that the public sector has a role in further
designing Labor's grander redesign of Australian capitalism,
which we've undertaken from 1983 onwards. In such things as
the aviation market, we think it is important to create a
market, to. provide services, to get away from a two airline
policy with fares so expensive that an Australian worker
can't fly from Melbourne to Perth, or Melbourne to Sydney
and return, to create a market which serves Australians well
with cheaper fares and destinations outside of Australia.
A national market for electricity with an interstate grid,
so that businesses that need cheap power can get it, because
this country has got a coal seam all down the east coast of
Australia. If there is no other thing we can do well it's
provide cheap electricity. But we're not getting it always
were we need it, in the companies that can be competitive
with cheaper power, and we're creating a market to let that
happen. The most general creation of a market, a more flexible
labour market which is coming now again under the Accord
with enterprise bargaining, where we're seeing a market
exist in the thousands of enterprises across Australia which
was formerly never operating as a market. International
competitiveness, preserving our low inflation rate.
Inflation w~ hich has ripped Australian workers savings to
pieces and put heavy mortgages on peoples backs and made t; he
country uncompetitive. We're basically in there protecting
and pinning that low inflation rate. We're enhancing bank
competition by again bringing more emphasis to banking
system and trying to make the banking system work better.
In other words, ' One Nation' is about making markets work
sensibly. It's not about deciding, as was the case in those
polls I mentioned earlier, of trying to set up state
socialism or government planning but sensibly letting the
creative elements of people and organisations work, but with
Labor, the government, the public sector leaving its stamp
upon it. And that's what ' One Nation' is about.
it's a poliLcy of inclusion, of bringing people together, as
I've said, lowering the drawbridge, letting people in, to
participate, to become more cohesive. And the concept
encompassesJ the Accord where Australia's workers are part of
the process, part of the conversation of government with a
Labor gover7nment. The consultation with business who are
part of the consultation, the inclusion, under ' One Nation'.
The partnerships for progress between government and
business, government and unions, business and unions, the
Comnmonwealt~ h and the States, political government and the
public service. Bringing people together with common goals
41-1-J. 
a&amp; Policy Of inclusion with the drawbridge down, not the
drawbridge uip. ' With the elite sitting inside with the Power
and the money looking at the others outside that is flot
our model. Our model is the drawbridge down and the people
-in as part of it, Common goals, working together, making
Australia better.
The only way we can prosper as a nation is working this way.
Having respect for our Institutions, the arts, the public
institutionil like the public service, our central bank with
its balanced objectives of employment and development
against inflation and price stability. All in the sense of
civilised design in the central bank act ought to have the
respect of t: he political system. Or the public service
which carries out the functions of government. Or as I say
those other institutions. The policy of inclusion goes to
those institutions.
And it is about having a national identity. About
understanding that we are able to make our own way, that we
are Australians and we're whole hearted about it and the
policy is ark Australian policy. It's not an American policy
or a British policy, it's not like Professor Hewson's who is
borrowing from the late ' 70s of Margaret Thatcher. It's not
like Labor In New Zealand. It's ours. It's Australian
Labor, it's Aust ralian and it's ours. It's ours because
we're clear about our national identity and we are not half
hearted about it and we're not hesitating about it, we're
declaring it end we're going for it, and we're moving with
direction and purpose in doing it.
go as one nation we are pooling these things for recovery in
jobs, 800,000 jobs we expect over the next 4 years by
government involvement and infrastructure, making markets
work, partnerships f or progress between government and
business, busines's and unions, bringing institutions
together and having an identity, being clear about who we
are and therefore having the confidence to push our policies
and nation forward. In other words we're about, basically,
building on the successes of the 1980s in this way.
Now comrades, I ask you to contrast this with the Liberal
Party, now a party of primitives. A party of primitives,
the throw-backs to the 19th Century robber-baron capitalism,
the Adam Smiths and those who believe that what we should do
is make way for the wealthy because in their slip stream the
rest will pick up something on the way through. Survival of
the fittest if you're not a millionaire there is something
wrong with you and therefore those who have got money
should, be given the opportunity to make their way best.
it's called in Liberal parlance, ' freedom to achieve'.
Justice and opportunities for the wealthy. I notice the
opposition spokesman on education, Mr Kemp, last week
complaining about lack of opportunity for the wealthy. No
role for government, they want government out. Now this is
the party that offers itself as the next government of
Australia. It wants no role for government, it distrusts 
the bureaucracy. In the last week the Deputy leader said
they'll ' knee-cap the public service. It distrusts the
central bank who it says doesn't properly focus on the twin
objectives under its acts of employment and price stability,
it's politicised they said by the Government. It distrusts
the Australian taxi office and wishes to compromise its
Commissioner with a board from the accountancy profession,
the same accountancy professors who are now funding the
Fightbacc research centre, the GST research centre, the
major accountancy firms who would send a representative on a
cord to manage the tax office.
And, of course, business is distrusted. They've been
described as bludgers coming for handouts from the
Government. Dr Hewson attacked them again last week. lie
said the saddest thing about them is they turned up and
asked the Government for favours. So these are the people
who want to run us, these primitives. No role for
government, don't trust the bureaucracy, don't trust the
central bank, don't trust the Tax office, don't trust our
institutions, don't trust business. And what the want to
give us as part of their philosophy? Well they want to
lower the drawbridge and run out with the GST and levy it on
everyone's food and clothing and then run back in. That's
their idea of inclusion, that's their idea of cohesion,
that's their idea of making Australia one nation. Go and
put a flat tax on everybody regardless of income, don't
compensate them, let the wealthy get the big break, clean
away all of the other impediments to profitability and then
maybe the rest of them will pick up something on the way.
And when Mr Reith was asked about his inflation forecast of
o to 2 par cent, meaning as it must higher interest rates,
he denied the journalist the words he had given her, not
having the courage to face the consequences of their own
policy, 1: heit own policy meaning higher interest rates and
higher unemployment, all in the manic determination to
simply ideologically serve this rhetoric about Inflation.
A barren, sterile, ancient view of managing a modern
society. The selfish, nark view of the world. The nark
view of the world, the drawbridge up, the wealthy inside,
the government withdrawing from the social equation. That's
their policy. Their fundamentally different from us, but
they always have been. We imagine Australia's future,
determined by imagination, opportunity, inclusion,
togetherness, co-operation, cohesion, pride. They imagine
it determined by cost accounting and privilege. That's
them. Now Professor Hewson is totally limited in his thinking.
Ideologically hamstrung, ideologically divisive, politically
barren, ak cold fish washed ashore by the recession, but a
primitive species we have seen before. And we've Seen it
right through this period whether it's Thatcher, or whether
it's Reacran or Coolidge or any of the others, we've seen
these peo) ple before. We've seen their barren ideology
before. 
9
Australia can't afford Professor Hewson or his party or his
policies. Look at their candidate in Wills who our
candidate Bill Kardamitsis is opposing, who says there ought
to be a 30 per cent cut in social security, who said that
pensions should be out and migrants should be driven back
home if they haven't got a job and if someone dare pay money
to the disabled in a sheltered work shop they should chop it
out. These are the sort of primitive views and wasn't it shocking
that that got into the public debate. I mean it was a real
incursion into privacy. Here is somebody running for public
office that's embarrassed by the fact that they actually
believe in cutting pensions and payments under the social
security system by one third, who believe pensioners ought
to be cut back and migrants sent home. Have the disabled
disadvantaged further by withdrawing the support that they
have already from the Government.
Dr fewson is always about saying that I create diversions.
We're saying as a big matter of news for the day that he was
going to the Privacy Commission about letters written by a
political ca ' ndidate or political person in office about
matters of public policy. What a hide they have. This is
revealing of them, very revealing of them. And in fact all
that's happen is that their candidates reveal the policies
they really have, because even though he wrote that in the
middle ' 80s it is still their view. They want to cut
billion out of Commonwealth outlays. They want to levy this
very heavy tax on Australians, they want to heavy this goods
and services tax on all food, clothing, services etc and
that's the limit of their creativity and ability.
Now on the other hand, we offer something better and
brighter. We offer breadth, as we always have, vision,
opportunity, we are as we've always been the builders. And
whether it be the rail network, or the highways, or the ring
roads, or the electricity grids, or the ports, o~ r the TAFE,
or the universities, or the Family Allowance Supplement, or
family a: llowance, or superannuation or Medicare, it is
always Labor doing the building. And we will be the
building. We are the reform party in this country. We're the creators
of the new concept. And we're the people holding our hand
out in friendship to workers, to business, to minorities, to
blacks and to anyone else that needs a hand. in friendship
and in expectation, and hope, hope for Australia, hope for
one nation, one proud nation, one independent nation.
Thank you very much. 



I32/
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P 3 KEATING, HP
MEMBERSHIP OF CABINET COMMITTEES
Attached are details of changes to the Cabinet Committee
system, designed to better reflect the Government's
priorities. Membership changes take account of Ministry
change. The number of Cabinet Committees has been reduced from nine
to seven, wit~ h the abolition of the Public Service Reform
Committee anti the General Administrative Committee. The
broad issues of public sector efficiency and reform will be
picked up by Structural Adjustment Committee; general issues
not falling within any of the new committees' terms of
reference wil. l go direct to Cabinet.
A new committee, Sustainable Development Committee, will
become a full committee of Cabinet, with an enhanced role on4
major project.
In summary, the Cabinet Committee system now consists of:
Structural Adjustment Committee;
Sustainable Development Committee;
Social Justice Committee;
Expenditure Review Committee;
Security Committee;
Parliamentary Business Committee; and
Legislation Committee.
Membership details are set out in the attachment.
CANBERRA 27 MARCH 1992
Zo/ T0 d 900 ON j -' ZT W -11eW -Z:-131I 
MEMBERSHIP OF CABINET AND COMMITTEES
CABINET Prime Minister*, Mr Howe, Sen Button, Sen Evans, Mr Dawkins, Mr Willis,
Mr Duffy, Mr Beazley, Dr Blewett, Sen Richardson, Sen Ray, Mr Hand,
Mrs Kelly, Sen Cook, Sen Bolkus, Mr Crean, Mr Griffiths, San Collins
Expenditure Review
Prime Minister*
Mr Howe
Sen Button
Sen Evans
Mr Dawkins ( D)
Mr Willis
Mr Beazley
Sen Richardson
Dr Blewett
Social Justice
Prime Minister*
Mr Howe ( D)
Mr Dawkins
Mr Willis
Dr Blewett
Mr Hand
Sen Cook
Mr Crean
Sen Tate
Mr Staples
Mr Simmons
Mr Humphreys
Mr Baldwin
Ms Fatin
Mr Tickner.
Mr Snowdon** Chair Deputy Chair
( CD) Co-Deputy
Chair
Parliamentary Secretary Parliamentary Business
Prime Minister*
' Mr Howe ( D)
Sen Button
Sen Evans
Mr Duffy ( CD)
Mr Beazley
Dr Blewett
Sen Ray
Mr Griffiths
Sen Collins
Mr Free
Sen McMullan**
Mr Brereton**
Structural Adjustment
Prime Minister*
Mr Howe
Sen Button ( D)
Sen Evans
Mr Dawkins
Mr Willis
Mr Beazley
Sen Richardson
Mrs Kelly
Sen Cook
Mr Crean
Mr Griffiths
Sen Collins
Mr Kerin
Mr Beddall
Mr Bilney
Mr Free Legislation Prime Minister*
Sen Evans
Mr Duffy ( D)
Mr Griffiths
Sen Tate
Mr Simmons
Mr Tickner
Mr Free
Sen McMullan**
Mr Brereton**
Sustainable Development
Prime Minister*
Mr Howe
Sen Button ( D)
Mr Dawkins
Mr Willis
Sen Richardson
Mrs Kelly
Sen Bolkus
Mr Crean
Mr Griffiths
Mr Kerin
Mr Brown
Mr Free
Mr Brereton**
Security Prime Minister*
Sen Evans ( D)
Mr Beazley
Mr Duffy
Sen Ray
Mr Kerin
26 March 1992
CAB09572
ZO/ O'd 900ON 9T: T Z6'-. ewN'Z:-131 



PRIME MIN15TER 31/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. 3. KEATING MP
ECONOMIC PLANNING ADVISORY COUNCIL
Today I will be chairing the 41st meeting of the Economic
Planning Advisory Council since it was formed nine years
ago. Looking back on those years I think few would question
that the kind of thinking which the organisation has
encouraged in Australia has fundamentally changed our
economic debate. In 1983 it was 8 dramatic departure to
discuss theb economy, as we did in the Economic Summit, in
terms of a three or four year scenario. Today, three or
four year scenarios are part of the budget process, and most
importantly are at the centre of One Nation. The community
now expects political leaders to be able to relate policies
and medium term outcomes and defend their scenarios, in a
way which timply did not occur in past decades.
There is no doubt that the work of EPAC has contributed tothis
extens3ion of our political and economic time frames.
In its studies of the current account, growth prospects, the
labour market, investment and other key economic variable3
over the years the work of EPAC has broadened and
strengthened our national economic debate. Over nine years
it has produced 160 papers, including nearly 50 council
papers and as many discussions papers covering most of the
difficult issues we need to address in managing the
Australian economy.
We owe a debt of gratitude to Geoff Miller, the director of
the staff from the foundation of EPAC to September 85, and
to Don Challen, who succeeded him as acting director until
the middle of 1986. I know everyone who worked with him with
recall with admiration the work of Fred Argy, the director
for over five years until his retirement last August if we
can describe Fred's busy schedule these days as
' 1retirement". And I want to commend Richard Whitelaw, the
current acting director, for his capable administration of
the staff since Fred left. 
2
EPAC and its staff have much to be proud of, but like any
other institution of government it benefits from periodic
reassessment. The Council meetings claim the time of a
great many busy people from state governments, from business
and unions, and there have been suggestions that the time is
not always well spent. We sometimes discuss staff studies
which could just as well be read in our own offices. We
often find ourselves discussing short term issues, like the
current state of the economy, when we should be focusing on
medium term issues, and structural rather than cyclical
problems. Because the meetings are scheduled well ahead, we
often find there is no special problem to consult upon when
we do meet, or no EPAC meeting scheduled when we have a
problem which might benefit from wider consultation.
To enable the EPAC secretariat and the Council to
concentrate on medium term issues I propose that the Council
should have one scheduled meeting early in each year. This
will enable Council members to discuss concerns about the
medium terin problems facing the Australian economy, and draw
up a work program for the staff to explore the issues.
Normally these studies would be published, as they have been
in the past, and EPAC would also continue to encourage the
discussion of working papers in academic and specialist
seminars before the final study was put together. The full
Council need not meet to examine these studies as they are
completed -instead the Council should deputise a steering
committee ' to oversee the work program of the staff and the
publication of' reports.
CANBERRA 27 March 1992 a It~. i H 



TEL: 7 . tl&amp; r I Nci. C' 1~ F .: i
~ 4P
K~ X
~ 33/ 92
STATEMENT BY' THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING MP
SUMM* ARY OF R. EMARKS TO EPAC TARIFFS
on 12 March 1991 path breaking changes were announced to the
Parliament uphic6 altered forever Australia's dependence on
the tariff.
In greeting these momentous changes I said in the
Parliament: " The package or measures announced today ends forever
Australia's sorry association with the tariff as a
device for industrial development."
I also said at the same time:
" Today's statement completes the program announced in
the Economic Statement of May 1988.
It puts an end to the high tariff culture which did so
much to dimninish Australia's potential in the post-war
period. But the decisions announced today do more than complete
the transition to an open economy."
The 1991 tariff changes completed the process of tariff
adjustment and were not the stepping stone to further
downward adjustment.
As I have alway ' s said, the Government's policy has been to
wean Australian industry of f protection and to make it
competitive with world industry.
And this has been absolutely essential if we are to develop
secure industries capable of generating wealth for Australia
and permanent jobs.
But the Government has always sought industry restructuring
and adjustment rather than industry elimination.
As I said in the Parliament on 17 September 1990, this
Government has never believed in the mindless pursuit of
zero tariffs without regard to the impact that it would have
on industries. 
TEL: I~ 9 1 Cj I. Mr Il C F
2
Ina the House on 17 September 1990 1 said:
" we make decisions about whether we want industries.
For instance, we want a car industry. We know that a
car industry will not function at zero protection
levels, but apparently those opposite believe that at a
zero level of protection a car industry will remain
viable. It will not. The Opposition is really saying
it does not want a car industry.
The car industry Is willing to invest with a tariff phasing
down to 15 per Cent by the year 2000.
Evidence of this is the commencement of the new Toyota car
plant announced a few weeks ago and the decision by GMII to
commence a new paint plant which I attended last week In
Adelaide. Mitsubishi is also commencing a new paint shop in Adelaide.
The key point is that these investments would not have taken
place with a zero tariff and this is the key policy
difference between the Government and the Opposition.
Phasing down tari~ ffs5 to zero on motor vehicles and parts,
such as passenger car tyres, would mean that these
industries could no longer exist in Australia.
The same is true for textiles, clothing and footwear.
With a tariff of 25 per cent in the year 2000 these
industries can adjust and restructure and will continue to
exist. With a zero tariff they will simply disappear.
This is the policy difference between the Government and the
Opposition, and the Opposition should admit it.
This is not to say that the textile, clothing and footwear
and motor vehicle industries will not be competitive in the
year 2000.
At present, textile and clothing imports into most developed
countries including the US, EC ( UK, France, Italy, Germany),
Canada, Sweden and Japan are covered by the multi Fibre
Arrangement ( MFA) which places quantitative restrictions on
imports through Voluntary Restraint Arrangements.
And quantitative restrictions are the ultimate form of
protection extending beyond any tariff.
Notwithstanding what happens under GATT, Australia will end
up with a textile industry more internationally competitive
than all of these countries with the tariff levels decided
in March 1991. 
3
The motor vehicle industry around the world is also
protected by voluntary restraints and quotas.
By the year 2000, when the tariff on motor vehicles phases
down to 15 per cent, Australia will also have a motor
vehicle industry which will be competitive and able to hold
itself up in world terms without quantitative restrictions.
CANBERRA 27 March 1992 c F 1" 



PRIME MINISTER9 2
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA RECOGNISES GEORGIA
Australia has decided to recognise Georgia as an independent
state.
Australia recognised the eleven co-founders of the
Commonwealth of Independent States ( CIS) on 26 December 1991.
At that time, the Government decided not to recognise Georgia
because there was not a government exercising effective
control. moreover, unlike the co-founders of the CIS, Georgia
had not given the undertakings on observance of democracy and
human rights that had been sought by the international
community. Georgian authorities have now indicated their acceptance of
internationally accepted democratic and human rights
standards. This has been accompanied by a welcome
stabilisation of the situation within Georgia.
Australia is delighted to welcome Georgia into the
international community. In particular, I am very pleased
that such an able and respected statesman as
Eduard Shevardnadze has decided to return to his native
Georgia to head the interim state council. I am confident
that Mr Shevardnadze will make 8 significant contribution to
solving the formidable challenges faced by his country.
I warmly welcome the commitments made by the Georgian
authorities to respect internationally accepted democratic and
human rights standards. I also welcome the announcement that
new and democratic elections will be held in the near future.
It is Australia's hope that these elections will go 8 long way
to resolving the tensions created by the recent conflict in
Georgia.
Australia has also decided to establish diplomatic relations
with Georgia. The minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Senator Evans, has instructed the Australian Ambassador in
Moscow, Mr Cavan Hogue, to make the necessary practical
arrangements. CANBERRA 29 March 1992 



TEL: 30. Mar. 92 16: 27 No. 013 P. 01/ 0 2
34/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J1 KEATING NP
MEETING WITH PREMIERS AND CHIEF MINISTERS
I am writing to the Premiers and Chief Ministers proposing
that they meet on it May in Canberra to advance a range of
measures for imptouving national economic and structural
efficiency, including measures announced in my recent
Statement, " One Nation", and other issues of concern to the
States. It is important for the nation as a whole that the States
and the Commonwealth work co-operatively on the matters that
are of concern to them and join forces to advance the reform
agenda. I very much welcome the indication from all Premiers and
Chief Ministers of their willingness to work co-operatively
with the Commonwealth to progress urgent reforms,
particularly in the areas of training, transport and
electricity, that were given prominence in the " One Nation"
Statement.
Premiers and Chief Ministers will be advised of arrangementt
for the annual financial Premiers' Conference in the near
future.-
CANBERRA 29 March 1992 



TEL: -30. Mar .92 18: 25 No. 623 P. 01/ 04
AQ AL
PRIME MINISTER]
EMBARGO AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P , J KEATING, MP
1991 NATIONAL LANDCARE AWARDS, GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA MARCH 1992
Thank you very much. It gives me great pleasure to be here.
This Landoere program is the product of the irresistible
force of common sense.
It is an example of what can happen when groups when
partnerships are forged in the national interest.
The average Australian would probably tell you that the ACF
and the national Farmers Federation were sworn enemies.
Not so. They have come together in the interests of the
country, formned a partnership of real strength.
That's why I say it gives mes great pleasure to be here tt
a ceremony where people who have made the national interest
theLir conumon interest, receive acknowledgement.
At another function recently I spoke about the way in which
the first,-Europeans to paint Australia painted it in the
image of the~ ir own countries.
It took a century of experience for the vision of the
Heidelberg school to emerge end with it, in the paintings of
Roberts and Streeton and others, en image of Australia which
could only he Australia.
The significant point is that the scenes they painted were
those of Eurpgean occtipation they were populated with
Europeans, their animals, their work, their architecture,
their values.
They were scenes of European Australians making this country
in their own image exploiting its resources and altering
the landscape to suit their needs and fancies. 
TEL 0. Mar-40 -T ' 6Y15 No. 023P. 02 / 0 4
2
This produced wealth and comfort and gave us an enviable
standard of living. It also produced terrible damage to the
original environment and gave us problems which threaten
to umdo-rminn those achievements.
Before the New Right cry foul and call me an enemy of
progress and a defiler of the memory of the pioneers, let me
say that we are not about saying mea culpa we are about
rectifying the mistakes and finding new and better ways to
go forward.
We know better these days and we've got to build on that
knowledge. Like the painters of the 1890s we now have a clearer vision.
We know we cannot literally do what we like with the land.
We can't make it alien to the prevailing environmental and
climatic conditions.
We can't put it outside the boundaries of ecological and
economic sustainability.
We must set about restoring the land, rebuilding its
productive capacity, and its sustainability, and returning
it to a state of ecological resilience.
I have never been one who subscribes to the theory that
economics and environmental protection don't mix; the theory
that it is matter of jobs versus the environment, green
growth versus economic growth.
We do not need to lower our environmental standards to gost
greater production and greater economic growth.
It is not a case of us being unable to afford to protect the
environment. In truth, we can't afford to degrade it.
This is crystal clear in the case of land degradation:
0soil erosion,
6salinisation as a result of tree clearing, irrigation
and unsustainably heavy grazing,
so8i1 acidification,
* and changes in vegetation species in rangelands
these have all cost us dearly, and continue to do so.
Land degradation has Cost Australia billions of dollars in
lost production, and ruined millions of acres of land.
The environmental losses have been economic losses. The
environmental costs have been environmental costs. And for
some time now, the environmental imperatives have become
economic imperatives. TEL: 
TEL:~ 30. Mar. 92 18: 25 No. 023 P. 03/ 04
3
So allow me to say with pride that the nine-year strong
Labor Government has been the first to develop a
comprehensive policy to tackle this problem, and it is doing
so with significant success.
Landcare has been a central part of this success. It is
exciting, not merely because of its style, its broad base
and its concept, but because of its results.
And it is not a static program.
It had a suitably co-operative, partnership-oriented
beginning. It began with a joint approach to the Federal
Government by the National Farmers' Federation and the
Australian Conservation Foundation.
The National Decade of Landcare Plan has been developed to
provide a framework for action to achieve sustainable land
use and rehabilitate degraded lands.
Concern has been expressed that there were problems for
Landcare groups in getting access to Landcare grants
programs. So my Ministers Simon Crean and Ros Kelly worked in
partnership to introduce simplified grants program
arrangements. And instead of having to approach a large range of
Commonwealth agencies handling such programs as the National
Soil Conservation Program, Save the Bush and One Billion
Trees, groups can now get advice from a single location and
fill in one form for one, community-based assessment
process. In the early 1980s, there were no Landcare groups. Now,
there are more than 900. By 1995, there is likely to be
another 300.
They are getting involved in a range of activities, and now
recognising that they need to think beyond simple issues,
and consider overall land use in an integrated way.
This trend to integrated management of our vital natural
resources is recognised in the growth of catchment groups.
In the Landcare scheme we have something very Australian
partnership, protecting something very Australian our land
something economically and ecologically vital, something
centred on Government engagement and community spirit.
That all appeals to me greatly, and we all owe those
involved a hearty thanks.
To the members of the Landeare groups throughout Australia,
I say that you are all winners. You can't lose doing what
you are doing. 
. TEL: w ^ ar. 32N. 3 P. 04/ 04
4
In a sense, the winners of the 1991 National Landcare
Australia Awards are representing all the other winners
throughout the rural communities of Australia.
I hope the award winners here tonight, and other Landcarers,
get great encouragement and incentive from these awards, and
I congratulate them all for their achievements. Australia is
the richer for them.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGO: AGAINST DELIVERY
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
CAMBODIA PEACEKEEPING
Mr Speaker
it LB appropriate that the House focus today on the subject
of Cambodia, and on the prospects for 8 lasting peace in
that long-suffering country.
Great crimes have been committed against the Cambodian
people. The tragedy of the conflict has been brought home
to us all through the personal wItness of many Cambodian
Australians. On 28 February, the United Nations Security Council passed a
resolution formally creating the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia or UNTAC, the body responsible for
implementation of the historic Comprehensive Political
Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict.
In response to the UN Secretary General's request for
contributions to UNTAC's operations, Australia has agreed to
provide 495 Defence Force personnel to form the Force
Communications Unit..
This total includes 65 communicators already deployed as
part of the UN Advance Mission in Cambodia.
If conditions are rigpt in Cambodia, the Government expects
. that-thainsin Australian contingent will begin deploying
during this month.
They will be joined in the field by 40 signallers from the
New Zealand Defence Force.
Furthermore, Australia has provided UNTAC'S military
commander, Lieutenant-General John Sanderson, who commenced
duty in Cambodia on 15 March.' Australia will contribute six
staff to his headquarters unit. 
LL* 2
The Government also expects to contribute to UNTAC's
civilian component, whose composition is still under
consideration by the United Nations.
As part of. this, we have decided to provide ten police
officers. in addition, Mr Michael Maley, an officer of the Australian
Electoral Commission, has taken up duty in Phnom Penh as
Deputy Electoral Commissioner for UNTAC.
Mr Speaker
The creation of UNTAC is the Culmination of years of complex
and difficult negotiation.
The peace plan embodied in the remarkable agreements signed
in Paris on 23 October 1991 provides a way of ending the
nightmare of Cambodia's recent past.
The main objectives of the settlement are to end the civil
war, and to allow the Cambodian people to choose a new
government through genuinely free arnd fair elections.
Reflecting the complexity of the Cambodian conflict, the
Paris agreements provide for an unprecedented and ambitious
role for the United Nations In the implementation of the
peace plan.
UNTAC will have a peacekeeping role supervising, monitoring
and verifying the cease-fire, partial demobilisation of
armed forces, and the cessation of external military
assistance.
UNTAC most definitely will = t have a role enforcing or
imposing the peace if hostilities break out.
In the civilian sphere, not only will UNTAC have a role in
organising and conducting the elections, it will also play a
role in monitoring and supervising the interim
administration of the country to ensure a neutral political
environment for the elections.
in addition, the United Nations will be responsible for
coordinating and assisting the repatriation and resettlement
of some hundreds of thousands of Cambodian refugees and
displaced persons.
Mr Speaker
The Cambodia peace settlement is a striking demonstration of
the fundamental changes that have occurred in the
international System.
Unprecedented cooperation between the Permanent Five members
of the Security Council has greatly enhanced the scope for
resolving regional conflicts. The UN system has been able
to harness broad-based support for its peacekeeping role.
i n p I 4 L L, 14 ci u u r u z,, 
1. FHpr. 92 13: 33 No. 005 P. 03/
3
The subtle and dynamic balance of interests in the Cambodia
peace agreements reflects the close involvement and
cooperation of the Permanent Five members of the Security
Council in the negotiating process.
The efforts of the Indonesian and French governments deserve
special mention. Their initiative, courage and persistence
were essential to the success of the peace plan.
Great credit must also go, of course, to the Cambodians
themselves. Those of us who have not known their suffering,
or seen the evil they have seen, can only wonder what human
qualities it takes to sit down and talk about the future,
about peace, and about national reconciliation.
Mr Speaker
Australia played 8 significant role in the long process
leading up to the Puris agreements.
In the mid 1980s, former Foreign Minister Hayden was active
in regional diplomacy which sought to identify a basis for
dialogue between the parties to the Cambodian conflict.
In late 1989, Senator Evans played a key role in breaking
the impasse following the first Paris Conference on Cambodia
in July anid August 1989. The Core of Senator Evans's
proposal, which was taken up by the Permanent Five members
of the Security Council, was an enhanced role for the United
Nations in the transitional period preceding elections in
Cambodia. Senator Evans's resourceful and energetic pursuit of peace
in Cambodia has earned him nomination for the Nobel Peace
Prize. It has also earned international respect for
Australia. Mr Speaker
in moving this resolution today I pay regard to the
achievement of Senator Evans and his Department.
In light of our diplomatic contribution, it was appropriate
that Australia was the first country to establish
accreditation to the Supreme National Council, the interim
body in which Cambodian sovereignty has been vested during
the transitional period.
Australia was also among the first to supply troops to carry
out the vital task of establishing communications and
infrastructure in preparation for the deployment of the main
UNTAC force.
It is appropriate that we now help to see the process
through.
I 
4
The return of Australian soldiers to Indo-China in the cause
of peace is a matter for us to reflect on with justifiable
pride. With peace secured in Cambodia, we shall be able to welcome
the countries of Indo-China back into the mainstream of
regional activity.
We can confidently expect them to become part-of the
dynamism of Asia.
Vietnam will now be able to emerge from its isolation and,
with Cambodia, play its part in regional and international
affairs. in parallel with the improved prospects for peace in
Cambodia, Australia will resume direct bilateral aid.
The minister for Trade and Overseas Development announced
today that, over the next four years, Australia will provide
approximately 49 million Australian dollars in development
assistance to Cambodia. This total includes 23 million
dollars for new bilateral aid.
In addition, during this financial year, we are providing
approximately 7.7 million Australian dollars in disaster
relief and assistance to displaced Cambodians.
Mr Speaker
Aspects of the comprehensive settlement have been criticised
by some observers.
it is suggested that it would somehow have been better to
exclude the Khmer Rouge from the peace process because of
their responsibility for the atrocities committed by the
former Po1 Pot regime.
Involvement of the Khmer Rouge in the process does Dot
ref lect a judgment by the Australian or other governments
that the Khmer Rouge can now be trusted. Rather, it
reflects a realistic assessment that the only available
aff~ etivA way of containing the military threat they pose,
and of ending the civil war, was to involve them and their
main backers China as parties to the agreement.
Put simply, a peace settlement without the Khmer Rouge and
China would not be a. peace settlement at all.
It has also been suggested that the settlement could have
been improved by providing for 100 per cent rather than for
at least 70 per Cent demobilisation of the armed forces of
the Cambodian parties.
obviously such a provision would have been preferable, but
the outcome set out in the Paris agreements is the best that
could be negotiated. I--1 
it is the judgment of the United States, Russia, China,
France, Britain, 811 significant Asian states and Australia
that the Paris settlement represents the best available,
realistic basis for a just and durable peace in Cambodia.
Mr Speaker
UNTAC Will be the costliest, as well as the most
comprehensive peacekeeping operation yet undertaken by the
United Nations.
It is expected to involve approximately 15,900 military
personnel, 3,600 civilian police and 3,300 civilian
administrators. More than 50 countries have been requested
to contribute to this complex undertaking.
The initial UN estimate of the cost for a duration of 18
months is 1.9 billion US dollars. Australia's share of
assessed contributions for this amount is 1.51 per cent or
28.7 million US dollars.
I should also advise the House that Cabinet agreed in
October 1991 to provide supplementation to the Defence
Budget of 49 million Australian dollars to fund the
estimated costs involved in making our contribution to UNTAC
and the United Nations Advance Mission in Cambodia. This is
separate from our assessed contribution to UNTAC's budget,
described above. We expect this will eventually be
partially offset by reimbursements from the UN of some 19.7
million Australian dollars, but this will take some time to
materialise. The final UNTAC plan and budget are now being scrutinised in
New York by representatives of major donors including
Australia. It will be some weeks before the final budget is
approved.
Along with other donors, Australia hopes that, as
implementation of the settlement proceeds, an increasing
habit of cooperation among the Cambodian parties will allow
savings in UNTAC personnel and costs.
Mr Speaker
Generally speaking, the settlement is working.
In the five months since it was signed, the remarkable thing
has been not the number of violations or the number of
disputes, but the way in which the Paris agreements have
held firm, and the way in which the parties have repeatedly
reaffirmed their commitment to the settlement in all its
detail. Of course, there have been incidents Which threaten the
whole process, and the Government has viewed with particular
concern the recent fighting in Kompong Thom province. But
we must look beyond these hurdles without in any sense
trivialising them. 4" 
Implementation of the peace plan may well prove more
difficult than its negotiation.
There are bound to be further setbacks.
We should expect them and not be disheartened when they
occur. The Government's decision to commit Australian forces to the
Cambodian peacekeeping operation was not taken lightly.
The UN forces will face risks from mines, from disease, from
banditry, and possibly from fresh outbreaks of fighting.
The Government has assessed these risks and has weighed them
carefully. It does not underestimate them, or the need to
take every prudent precaution to protect our troops.
We have made this commitment, however, because the
opportunity to help restore peace to Cambodia is one which
the international community cannot lightly let go.
The UN commitment to help Cambodia also serves Australia's
direct interests, and those of our neighbours, by helping to
create a more peaceful and prosperous region.
But it is important to emnphasise again that Australian
forces will n= a be participating in the UN operation in
order to 2nñ DXsu or impose~ the peace in Cambodia.
That is a task beyond the UN mandate.
Rather, the Australian forces will be in Cambodia to help
keaep a peace on which the Cambodian parties themselves have
agreed. That is the condition under which UNTAC is being deployed.
it is the whole basis of the Paris peace accords. It is the
condition under which Australian troops have been offered to
the United Nations.
if we conclude that there is no longer a peace to keep in
Cambodia, the Australian and other UN forces will have to be
withdrawn. But we do not expect that to happen. All sides in the
conflict have invested so. much effort in the peace process,
and the Cambodian people have so much to gain from its
success, that we think the prospects for a successful
outcome remain promising.
If we turn our backs on this opportunity to help consolidate
the hard work of the peace-makers, we shall be sentencing
the Cambodian people to further years of cruelty and
suffering. 
I LL. 7
Mr Speaker
As I already mentioned, UNTAC'S primary military functions
will be supervising and verifying the cease-fire, partial
demobilisation of armed forces, and the cessation of
external military assistance.
UNTAC will also assist in the clearance of hundreds of
thousands of mines.
Australia's contingent will provide the crucial
communications network for the UNTAC military operation.
Our service men and women will be operating in a difficult
and sometimes dangerous environment.
Already Lieutenant-Colonel Russell Stuart has been wounded
in the course of his duty with the UN Advance Mission in
Cambodia. That incident underlines the risks which the
peacekeeping personnel face.
But Australians can be proud of the skill and
professionalism which Australian Defence Force units have
brought to UN peacekeeping and other operations around the
world from the Sinai, Iraq and the Red Sea, to the Western
Sahara and the Afghan border.
Their reputation is reflected in the UN Secretary-General's
decision to appoint Lieutenant-General Sanderson commander
of UNTAC'S military force.
I am sure all members of this House will join me in
extending congratulations to General Sanderson on his
appointment and in wishing him well in his assignment.
I am equally sure members will want to express their
confidence in and support for the Australian Defence Force
men and women deployed in Cambodia.
There is no more honourable duty than the one they will go
to perform to preserve the peace.
We know they will serve Australia and the cause of peace
with distinction, and we look forward to their safe return.
Mr Speaker, we hope that return will not be long delayed.
The aim of the United Nations presence in Cambodia is not to
oversee developments there Indefinitely but to manage a
transition from war to peace, from factional distrust to
national reconciliation.
May 1993 has been set as the target date for the UNorganised
elections. The UN Secretary-General intends
withdrawing UNTAC about six months after that date.
I rip C jz-I'D , DD 140 U" r u 
8
I know it is the earnest desire of all members of this House
that the Cambodian people will seize this opportunity to
establish a j~ ust anld lasting peace in their country.
I commend the motion to the House.
CANBERRA 1 APRIL 1992 
CAMBODIA PEACEKEEPING: PARLIAMIENTARIY RESOLUTION
That this H-ouse
recalls the long suffering of the Cambodian people
notes the remarkable diplomatic achievement enshrined
in the Agreements on the Comprehensive Political
Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict signed in Paris on
23 October 1991.
zre cognises the difficult task ahead of the United
N-ations Transitional Authority in Cambodia ( UNTAC),
affirms Australia's commitment to assist the Cambodian
people to take control again of their own affairs and
return to peaceful and productive lives
affirms Australia's support for the United Nations in
its new arnd enhanced role in promoting world peace and
solving long-standing regional conflicts
affirms its support for Australia's positive response
to the request made by the UN Secretary General for
support in implementing the Cambodian peace accords
expresses its full confidence in, and support for,
Australian Defence Force men and women deployed for
peacekeeping in Cambodia and looks forward to their
safe return
congratulates Lieutenant-General Sanderson on his
appointment as UNTAC military commander and wishes him
well in his assignment n 1. 1 L. I I W F 



TEL: Ir 9 17 7
PRIME MINISTER'-.
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, CANBERRA, APRIL 2 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'll. just start by making a Couple of points. In the
House this afternoon the Leader of the Opposition in a
motion which apparently the Opposition had planned this
morning and was not spontaneous, that was a censure of
the Speaker, in a premeditated, careful and deliberate
way tried to suggest and link me and my role in public
life with some_ crim-inal behavio -ur which is now part and
parcel of the-NSW prion _ system..
Dr Hewson promised to make our public life and elevate
the parliamentary debate when he became Leader. The
Opposition has not been travelling well in Parliament
House for a number of weeks. But there are ways for
them to remedy that, that's lift their game and not try
to suggest that the NSW Labor Party is a criminal
organ isation.
I rang Dr Hewson a moment or two ago and I said to him
that I was very disappointed that he should have
stooped to such a tactic. Very much more in sorrow
than in anger, I said to him that I thought he should
reconsider his position, that he should either make a
withdrawal of what he said or repeat it outside the
Parliament where it can be adjudicated upon in the
appropriate manner, of course in the courts. He said
' 1 heard what you said', iand I said in that case you'd
better go and think about it. So I've left him on that
point. But I simply say this, that the contest of the House of
Representatives should be as it's always been about
policy and occasionally, of course, in the heat of the
moment personal remarks are made. But premeditated
remarks which reflect and try to put a criminal slur on
the one branch of the Labor Party which more than any
other has been pivotal the Federal Labor Party's
federal success and suggesting that it's a mafia which
runs from the prison system to the Prime Ministership
is a deliberate slur, totally without foundation, 
THL: 9Hp 1 7. r. i
2
unjustified and can do nothing but lower the esteem of
the Parliament in the eyes of the public.
J: Do you think Leo McLeay's performance might have lead
Dr Hewson to exasperation?
PM: No. Because the Opposition were considering this
morning moving a Censure of the Speaker and you notice
it was moved not after in a raucous part of the debate
or a raucous answer, it was moved as Question Time had
come to Its natural end. it was a premeditated
movement to attack the one person who is not able to
attack in the Parliament. They have attacked the one
person who can't fight back, I mean if he wished to
attack anybody he should attack me. But as you know
the Question Time didn't go well for the Opposition end
hasn't done for weeks and they've decided now that they
should attack the most defenceless person in the place
which is the Speaker.
J: Prime Minister, what about the performance of the
Speaker, what do you really think?
PM: I think all Speakers are put under pressure whenever
the contest of ideas is being fought out. We've got
now two packages, we've got the ' One Nation' Statement
and we've got the GST tax of the Opposition, the goods
and services tax, and the debate is willing as it
should be in the national interest. And I think it is
very unfair of the Opposition to try to make an assault
on the speaker. If they wish to attack anybody, let
them attack the Government and we can handle their
attacks with consummate ease.
J: Mr Keating, does the Speaker enjoy your unqualified
support?
PM: He does enjoy my unqualified support. But the point is
not movement of 8 motion against Mr McLeay can for one
second absolve the Leader of the Opposition from what I
think is a sort of detraction which was only last seen
in the Parliament when a former Opposition Leader, the
former Opposition Leader called the former Prime
Minister a ' little crook'. This is the last time the
Parliament has got down to these depths and I think Dr
Hewson should repair the position.
ENDS. 



PRIME MINjISTE. 37/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
REPORT OF THE RESOURCE ASSESSMENT COMMISSION'S FOREST AND
TIMBER INQUIRY
The Resource Assessment Commission has presented the final
report of its Forest and Timber Inquiry. The report has
been tabled in Parliament today.
The Prime Minister said that he had referred the report to
the Minister for Resources, Mr Griffiths, and the Minister
for the Arts, Sport, the Environment and Territories, Mrs
Kelly, who will examine the recommendations of the report,
particularly in the context of the proposed National Forests
Policy Statement. They will prepare 8 joint Cabinet
submission which addresses the recommendations of the
report. CANBERRA 2 APRIL 1992 I T A I 14'. I r 1. 1 



I L-L; W--A I
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA ANM ASIA: KNOWING WHO WE ARE
LECTURE TO THE ASIA-AUSTRALIA INSTITUTE
SYDNEY 7.15PM, TUESDAY 7 APRIL 1992
In 1935 the magazine, Autralian Quarterly-, Carried a long
article entitled " Australia's Place in the Empire." It was
the text of an address delivered in London by Robert Gordon
Menzies. An address delivered in the circumstances he loved, to the
audience he loved.
Menzies love the English. Five years later in a speech
to the British and Foreign Bible Society he said that he
believed the English had " never., wilfully broken [ their]
word." Never.
The virtues of the English race and Australia's filial
loyalty were themes of his 1935 address. " The thing which
sticks firmly in the mind of the average Australian is that
he is British.." he said.
He told them that they should recognise our rel. ationship was
a " blood relationship" before it was a mercantile one.
And he asked themn a question which he said would determine
our relationship with Britain not merely for the next five
years, but for the next five hundred.
" Does Great Britain keel that its sons and brothers.. are its
own flesh and blood, or does it regard them as remittance
men?" Now, in my view, Winston Churchill gave Menzies the answer a
few years later. " Australians", he told Lord Moran, " come
of bad stock." I L. L. * nr. 
1 T E L 00 04 p r 9 1 9 I4 N oI2 u z z
2
It is also my view that Churchill answered in more concrete
ways: in the abject disaster of Singapore and Malaya and in
the attempt to prevent the return of Austral. ian troops from
the Middle East to defend this country the country which
lost 60,000 under the Union Jack in World War 1.
But what I say is not what some people have called Ponbashing.
Nor is it Paul Keating's idiosyncratic view of
history. It is a view corroborated by any number of
respectable Australian and British historians whose
references I am happy to provide.
It is a view corroborated by fact.
Nothing I say tonight, and nothing I have said in recent
weeks, can reasonably be interpreted as criticism of the
British people, and least of all those British men and women
who fought and suffered and died in the war against Japan
and Germany.
My criticism is directed at those Australians or, more
accurately, that Australian attitude which still cannot
separate our interests, our history, or our future, from the
interests of Britain.
It seems to me an attitude which still exercises at least a
subliminal influence on our thinking persuading us that
someone or something will do it for us.
just as we went on believing that Britain would, long after
it should have been obvious that Britain would not.
I say that this attitude has long been, and remains,
debilitating to our national culture, our economic future,
our destiny as a nation in Asia and the Pacific.
I spent the last decade attempting to make the necessary
changes to the Australian economy facing it toward the
world and opening it up, to make us more competitive and
give us a chance.
I know just how entrenched conservative Australian thinking
can be on both sides of politics.
we're talking about cultural changes, new ways of thinking
and new ways of doing things.
I know how hard it is to change Menzeen attitudes. And don't
forget their economic manifestation: M4enzies believed in
what he called a " balanced economy."
In Britain the balance was between manufacturing and
protected agriculture. In Australia the balance had to be
the reverse. TEL: 7. Apr. 92 19: 48 No. 024 P. 02/ 12 
TEL: 7. p TO R;. 024 P. 03/ 12
3
It was all terribly simple and cosily interdependent: and
the cost to us was in the sort of inefficient manufacturing
which threatened until very recently to place us among the
world's economic museums.
We've altered a lot of the practices and habits of mind
which emanated from that way of thinking at least as far
as the economy goes.
We've also gone a very long way towards getting rid of the
industrial Culture of hostility.
But altering our political perspective, which includes
regenerating our spirit, pulling us together as a nation,
focussing our sense of ourselves all these things, I
believe, remain tasks for the nineties.
These things, I assure you, are not meant as a distraction
as some people have~ suggested. They are central.
They are centrdl to our developing relationship with Asia
and the Pacific.
I am pleased, though not surprised, by the positive reaction
in South-East Asia to the recent surge of independent and
republican thinking in Australia.
Let me go back to Winston Churchill for 8 moment and ask a
simple question of the people who say my talk of nationhood
is a distraction: Why should we have expected Winston
Churchill to have acted in our interests? Why, despite his
foresight and courage, should we have expected him to
perceive the world through our eyes?
Because of blood?
Now the truth is, Churchill has been, if not a hero, a
favourite historical figure of mine since boyhood. Menizies
preferred Chamberlain. I admired the Churchill who stood up
every week in the House of Commons and told those myopic
equivocating cowards in his own party that Hitler was a
criminal. That Churchill, and the Churchill who inspired his people in
World War II, wa~ s a hero.
But that does not mean, and should never have been expected
to mean that he would automatically act in Australia's
interest. John Curtin acted in Australia's interest when he insisted
against the wishes of Churchill and another man I've always
admired, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, that Australian troops
be brought home not left in the_-Middle ast, nor diverted
to Rangoon where they would have been killed or captured.
Curtin insisted and won. He turned to America. 
Robert Gordon Menzies called this " a great blunder."
All this, of course, might be called ancient history. it
might be called irrelevant. It might be said that Menzies
was a man of his time and should not be judged with
hindsight. But Menzies is a man of Q~ time too.
His unnaturally long political era made possible by the
split in the Labor Party his endless, and almost endlessly
rgeasia-~ gye era sunk a generation of Australians in
Anglophilia and torpor.
The Menzies attitudes are still with us, as we sew when a
few weeks ago I delivered a speech in the presence of Her
Majesty the Queen of Australia.
The sentiments I expressed then were nothing more then
thoughts on behalf of Australians who valued their
independence, appreciated the fact of our separate destiny
and our need to grasp it, and who esteemed the Queen.
The response from some prominent Australians indicated how
far we still have to go before we can say that we do have
the necessary independence of mind, the necessary
appreciation that we have to make our own future, or, for
that matter, the necessary mature esteem for our Head of
State. These things we need in the next decade if we are to take
our place in the region and in the world.
My point is that we can no longer be Australian in the way
Bob Menzies was Australian. And in making that change, like
John Curtin, we can say that it is without prejudice to
Britain. It is equally without prejudice to those generations older
than my own, whom I know regret the passing of the old
Australia. I know there is apprehension among them about the change
some of it takes the form of very vocal opposition to all
suggestions of reform or new directions.
I think their position should be respected but
conservatism has had its day, and, in truth, it was too long
a day for the country's good.
My responsibility is to this generation and succeeding ones,
and these echoes of Menzies cannot be allowed to get in the
way.
We cannot pretend to ourselves that we are insulated from
change in the world.
11 ONOMMUmm 
In any event, the ol0 traditions of Australia will remain
with us.
We are not about disloyalty but its opposite. We are about
nationhood, and the democracy which is at the centre of it.
That is something I think Australians must realise: that we
don't go to Asia cap in hand, any more than we go, like
Menzies went to London, pleading family ties.
We go as we are. Not with the ghost of empire about us. Not
as a vicar of Europe, or as a US deputy.
But unambivalently. Sure of who we are and what we stand
for.
If we are to be taken seriously, believed, trusted, that is
the only way to go.
Sometimes, perhaps it's necessary to state the obvious:
facing Asia we do nothing more or less than face reality
and that is what Asia does in facing us.
We might learn something from the geophysics of the
situation. Geophysically speaking this continent is old
Asia there's none older than this. It's certainly not
going to move, and after two hundred years it should be
pretty plain that we're not going to either.
in 1992, we shouldn't think that we're anything less than a
rightful presence In the region.
It is sometimes argued that Australia's democratic
institutions and traditions of tolerance and open debate
somehow disqualify us from forming successful relationships
in Asia.
My starting point is that Australia's democratic
institutions and traditions are non-negotiable.
Many things have changed and will change in Australia our
ethnic composition and, with it, our culture; our economic
and industrial practices; our world view a great deal will
change. But traditions of democracy, fairness and personal liberty
which we have fought wars to defend, will remain this
country's guiding principles.
Sacrifice and achievements of Australians will not be
forgotten in the new Australia indeed in a less ambivalent
Australia their memory will grow.
We recognise that it is thanks largely to our British
heritage that we are a stable and mature liberal democracy
of long standing. -W g7-1T -4g-024-P. 05/ 12 
Il j* i ~ 4o i4o U24 t' Uo'
6
I cannot accept that this deeply rooted democracy is a
disadvantage in dealing with Asia. it is a region, after
all, which contains stable democracies like Japan and
India, and a number of societies whose economic advance has
opened the way to political liberalisation. South Korea and
Taiwan to name just two.
Given these developments in Asia, along with the democratic
revolutions of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, I
find it hard to accept that our going into the world will
mean compromising our democracy.
I incline very strongly to the view that, on the contrary,
Australia's democracy is an advantage.
In other words, In the growing political liberalisation of
Asia we're not an aberration, but a natural fit.
We don't need to be intrusive, but we have nothing to shrink
from and plenty to give.
What is true politically is also true economically.
It is important for Australians to realise that this
country's economic weight is considerable.
Our GNP is third In the West Pacific and equal to the
combined GNP of all the ASEAN countries.
We have much of what the countries in the region need
resources, space, a skilled work force, education services.
We have the English language, adn a rapidly increasing
number of young Australians who are competent in Asian
languages. In 1990, 53,000 Australian students were
studying Japanese in high school: this year the figure is
95,000. The success of multiculturalism in Australia, and increasing
immigration from Asia, have stimulated our awareness of
Asian societies and improved our standing in the region.
Recent changes in Asia are perhaps not so dramatic as they
have been in Europe, but they are greater than is commonly
understood. During the 1980s, North-East and South-East Asia constituted
the fastest growing region in the world, expanding at
approximately twice the world average growth rate. Together
these countries account for about 1.7 billion people.
That is change on a grand scale.
we do not yet know what the shape of Asia geopolitically,
or economically will be. But we do know that the key
question for Australia is how to position ourselves to take
maximum advantage of the changes. 
The Cold war strategic structure of Asia is fading.
The Cambodia peace settlement is a Striking example of the
benefits that derive from more relaxed relations between the
great powers in Asia.
We also welcome the two Koreas joining the United Nations,
and new openings in South Korea's relations with Russia and
China. Set against these positive developments, of course, there is
continuing concern about the possibility of North Korea
developing nuclear weapons.
Although Russia retains formidable nuclear end conventional
military capabilities, its projection of power in the
Western Pacific is constrained by economic pressures and
greater priorities nearer home.
Considered overall, the risk of military confrontation
between the great powers in Asia is now significantly
reduced. The economic dynamismn of Asian countries also contributes to
regional stability. So too do the related processes of
economic interdependence.
As we seek the Strategy most likely to succeed in this
generally favourable environment, three key questions
confront us.
First, what level of strategic and economic engagement with
the Western Pacific will the United States sustain over the
medium to long term?
Second, what quality of international leadership will Japan
achieve in the period ahead?
Third, depending on the outcome of the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations, what type of trade
alignments are likely to evolve in the Asia-Pacific region
over the next decade?
The questions are obviously inter-related. The issues have
been much discussed and I don't wish now to add to the
available body of analysis and speculation.
Let me offer. instead, some comments on Australia's
OrAf~ rannc. 1 in each case.
1. The Bush Administration has announced a series of
phased reductions to its military presence in East Asia.
It is also currently withdrawing from the Subic Say
naval base in the Philippines.
At the same time, the United States has emphasised its
determination to remain a strategic power in the Western
Pacific over the long term. 
I-
8
Even in a post-Cold War environmient, Australia
considers that US strategic engagement in the Western
Pacific, and the maintenance of existing US bilateral
alliances, make a vital contribution to regional
stability and confidence.
Maintenance of a close security relationship between
the United States and Japan is especially important. It
provides not only assurance for Japan itself, but sets
out a framework which helps legitimise Japan's defence
posture in the eyes of other Asian countries.
Despite increasing Japanese influence in the region,
the United States remains a key economic partner for
most Asian countries. The United States is still Asia's
single most important export market, though it has been
overtaken by Japan as the main source of aid and
investment. in recognition of the United States' continuing
importance as an economic partner of the Western Pacific
region, Australia welcomes its active involvement in the
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC process.
2. Japan's impressive economic achievements are widely
recognised, but their translation into international
influence has been uneven.
Given the perception that overall US influence in East
Asia may decline over time, there is lively interest in
whether Japan will fill the gap by assuming more
international leadership.
Our firm preference is for a more active Japanese role
internationally. We are pleased to be working closely
with Japan in the Implementation of the Cambodia peace
settlement. We would support Japan's participation in United
Nations peacekeeping. I am not talking here about a
wider regional Japanese military role, which in any case
is not sought by Japan.
3. Against a background of frustratingly slow progress in
the Uruguay Round, concern is often expressed that the
international trading system will gradually degenerate
into three trading blocs one in Europe, one in the
Americas, and the other in East Asia.
As is widely recognised, Australia has a considerable
stake in a successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round.
An unsatisfactory outcome to the Round would
undoubtedly Increase pressure on the multilateral
trading system. The GATT framework would remain in
force, but there would be increasing resort to bilateral
and regional approaches to trade problems. 
T C. Z -_ 7-7 77. NO. VU 4 v ' L
9
In the modern globalised trading environment, it is not
inevitable that the Americas and East Asia would
separate into rival trading blocs if the Round failed.
Even if they did, Australia would still have viable
trade policy options though undoubtedly inferior ones
to those a multilateral system offers.
Looking at our relations with Asia more generally, we are in
fact more successfully engaged with the region than we
commonly appreciate.
Vindicating the efforts of Australian business to expand our
commercial relations in the region, more than 60 per cent of
Australia's merchandise exports now go to Asia.
Those Australians who continue to doubt that this is where
our national interests truly lie should take note.
Those who know this but are still inclined to recoil from
Asia should, I think, take heart.
Every year our interdependence with Asia increases in
proportion to the rest of the world.
In 1991, the ASEAN countries became our second largest
export market, taking 12 per cent of our exports, and moving
ahead of both the United States and the European Community.
With levels of growth in most Asian economies well above the
world average, this upward trend in our exports to the
region should also hold good.
The opportunities for Australia cannot be overstated.
Asia remains a major market for our traditional commodity
exports, and these remain vitally important to our economy.
But the Asian market has broadened. Over the period
1983-91, Australia's manufactured exports to Asia grew twice
as fast as the traditional areas of our trade.
Exports of services grew even more rapidly. There was also
expansion, albeit less dramatic, in Australian investment in
Asia. It is all reason to believe that we can live and prosper in
the Asia-Pacific.
Most pleasing of all has been the emergence of new business
links between Australia and the countries of South-East
Asia. I look forward to seeing examples of this first hand when I
go to Indonesia later in the month. 
TEL:
Just as Australia's economic engagement with Asia is more
advanced than is sometimes realised, so too we have more
scope to contribute to regional political affairs than is
commonly appreciated at home.
We start from the best possible position, having no
historical or fundamental conflict of interest with any
country in the region.
We have institutional strengths to draw on. We have
well-developed foreign policy expertise in the government
and academia.
We must be careful not to overplay our hand, but if our
timing is good and we choose things which genuinely serve
the wider interest, we can help shape the regional agenda.
Our role as a catalyst In the Cambodia peace process is one
good example. We have also played a useful role in launching
and helping advance the APEC process, and in encouraging
regional security dialogue in Asia.
As I see it, the quality of Australia's future relationship
with Asia very much depends on what happens with regard to
trade alignments in the Pacific.
The scope for Australia to achieve its broadest aspirations
in the region will be that much reduced if the countries of
East Asia see themselves as an economic bloc in rivalry with
Europe and North America.
That is why, without any illusions about the bad effects of
US trade policies on Australia, when President Bush was here
in January I put the case vigorously for continued US
engagement in the Western Pacific.
I mean a strategic presence and an economic presence and a
presence in our regional institutions.
The United States will be better for that, so will Asia.
All this points to the wisdom of Australia's effort since
1989 to establish and develop APEC.
The general virtue of the process is its promotion of
regional economnic cooperation within a framework which
embraces North America and East Asia.
A particular virtue is that it also provides a convenient
framework within which Japan and the United States can work
out their respective regional roles, without increasing
pressure on their bilateral relationship.
Regardless of the outcome of the Uruguay Round, APEC's value
will grow considerably if a process of non-discriminatory
regional trade liberalisation can be carried forward with
conviction. T7EL.: Rpr. 92 19: 48 No. 024 P. 10/ 12 
TEL: 7ARpr. 92 19: 48 No. 024 P. 11/ 12
The objective should be to promote an open regionalism which
is compatible with a wider Multilateral trading system.
Another way of promoting cooperation in the Asia-Pacific
region would be to establish a process of periodic
heads-of-government meetings, say every two or three years.
The absence of such a process is conspicuous in a region
whose weight in global affairs is steadily increasing.
Various formulas for participation are possible, but I
personally would find most attractive a mechanism based on
APEC membership, because it embraces the most important
economic linkages throughout East Asia and across the
Pacific. I discussed this general idea with President Bush when he
visited Australia. I hope to pursue it as opportunity
allows with other Asia-Pacific leaders.
Without doubt the appropriate note on which to conclude is 8
positive one.
We have come a long way In the last decade: there is every
chance of a quantum leap in the next.
We won't make that leap in the way Bob Menzies might have
tried to make it. Blood will not determine it.
To do it, we need to recognise that we have become a player
in these affairs and have a stake in them not by
accident, but by initiative.
The key to our success now rests with ourselves. In
initiatives we have taken abroad. And in the ones we have
taken at home.
Sometimes it seems to me that Australians have ceased to
believe that we got here largely under our own steam.
In truth we did. in truth we've not done badly.
But we'll do best when we've removed all signs of our being
a branch office.
We'll never get anywhere but into trouble if we drift as
we did in the fifties.
In the eighties, we took hold of the rudder and set about an
essential economic transformation which leaves us able to
hold our own in Asia in the nineties.
We can confidently expect further success to follow in the
course of recovery and from the major Infrastructure
projects, investment incentives, huge investment in
vocational training, and continuing micro-economic and
industrial relations reforms announced in the One Nation
statement last month. 
TEL 12
AS I said earlier, I have spent much of the past decade
engaged in structural reform.
That has also meant something equally as difficult perhaps
more difficult. I mean cultural reform, the reform of our
outlook. Success at home depends on this change. Success in Asia
depends on it too.
It depends on the individual and collective faith of
Australians: It depends on establishing beyond doubt
S that Asia is where our future substantially lies;
S that we can and must go there;
S and that this course we are on is irreversible.
What John Curtin said in 1942 is right for us in 1992: " On
what we now do depends everything we may like to do."
7: Flpr. 92-19: 48 No. 024 P. 12/ 12 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY US PRESIDENTIAL REPRESENTATIVES
I am pleased to announce that the United States Secretary of
Defence, Richard B Cheney, and the Secretary of Education
Lamar Alexander will visit Australia in May as guests of the
Australian Government. They will be coming as President
Bush's personal representatives to celebrate Australian-
American Friendship Week and will participate in the Battle
of the Coral Sea 50th anniversary commemorations.
As a mark of the importance of these celebrations I too will
be participating in several of the key events including the
entry of Royal Australian and US Navy ships into Sydney
Harbour on 1 May and a special wreath-laying ceremony at sea
off Townsville on 10 May.
The Battle of the Coral Sea was not only one of the most
significant battles in the Pacific theatre but has become a
symbol of Australia's enduring relationship with the United
States. The visits by Secretaries Cheney and Alexander
further serve to strengthen the bonds of friendship and
alliance that were forged between our countries during those
perilous years.
CANBERRA April 1992 6299 



I CLL.;
SPEECH BY THE PRIKE MINISTER, THE HON P. J. 1CATING
OFFICIAL BANQUET GIVEN BY PRESIDENT SOEHARTO
ISTANA NEGARAt JAKARTA, 21 APRIL 1992
1 am very pleased to be here in Indonesia on this my first
visit abroad as Prime Minister. As one of the new Heads of
Government in the region, i appreciate the warm words of
welcome from the region's undisputed elder statesman.
I wish to congratulate you, Mr President, on your election
as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement. The Movement's
summit in Jakarta this September will demonstrate once again
the leading role Indonesia plays in important international
forums.
Mr President, more than forty years ago, the political party
which it is my privilege to lead the Australian Labor
Party lent its support to the people of Indonesia in their
struggle for independunce.
We in the Australian labour movement have always respected
Indonesia's determination to pursue an independent course in
the world. Indeed, that same independent frame of mind in
something which my government is Meen to foster in
Australia. It is important to our strength as a people and as a nation.
Mr President, at a time of rapid economic and strategic
change, Indonesia and Australia have more in common than our
dirrerent histories and cultures would suggest.
We both understand that Our ability to participate fully in
the rapid economic growth of the Asia-Pacific region depends
on more than the natural resources with which our countries
are so richly endowed.
Nations need more than this. Success also depends on what
you, Mr President, have long referred to as " national
resilience". We recognise this in Australia. 1i Hpl J i NO U 1-Ui/ 
TEL: 21. Apr. 92 19: 41 No. 017 P. 02/ 1
We know that to reach our full potential we must work
cooperatively, combine our talents and energy, harness our
human and material strength, and lua~ e Australia more truly
one natio~ n.
I think you will understand some of the challenges we see
ourselves facing.
Australia is a vast continent. It is also a sprawling
federation. The great distances, and the cultural gaps which emerged
over time, have consequences for economic and political
efficiency, for national cohesion for our ability to
pursue and achieve national goals.
in the 1990s I believe you will sea Australia face these
long-standing realities am never before. I think you will
see us pursue our goals as never before with an
unparalle). ed sense of purpose and efficiency.
Under your leadership, Indonesia has undergone an economic
transformation which has dramatically improved living
standards in your own country, and contributed to wider
regional stability,
You have made the difficult Judgements, the tough decisions,
required to turn your economy towards the glal economy.
We have * ought the same goal of international
competitiveness end, in the past decade, we have rollowed a
very similar path towards it.
As our two countries have become more outward looking, our
trading relationship has become more significant.
Australian exports to Indonesia are nearly four times
greater than they were ten years ago. Indonesia, which was
Australia's 17th largest export market ten years ago, is now
our loth largest export market.
Our trade has diversified in much the same degree as it has
grown. minerals and primary products remain important but they no
long3er dominate.
Much of the increase in exports to Austr~ alia in recent years
has been in manufactured goods.
Australian exporters have found in Indonesia now markets for
manufactures, machinery, computers, and telecommunications
products, as well as in education services, engineering
consul. tancies, construction, banking and finanae,
14r President, our countries also share rundamental interests
in the stability and security of our region-
Both governments were active in the long negotiations
leading up to last October's signing of a comiprehensive
political settlament in the Cambodia conflict.
Australian and Indonesian armed forces are now serving
together in Cambodia as part of the United Nations
peacekeeping force.
Let me also take this opportunity to applaud the active and
substantial role that Indonesia has played in ASFEAN, I
ASEAN's creation in the 1960s, and its success and maturity
today owe much to you Mr Pros ident. The recti-on owes much to
you. We are very conscious of the benefits which flow to
Australia from Indonesia's positive contribution to regional
affairs. we also welcome the ASEAN countries' recent decision to
create an ASEAN Free Trade Area.
Hr President, your country's role in ASEAN has been
complemented by the active role you have played in APEC. We
both understand the contribution which APEC can make to the
development of the broader Asia-Pacific region.
As fellow members of the Cairns Group, we are also united in
our appreciation of the need for a successful conclusion of
the Uruguay Round,
An open multilateral trading system with strong, clear rules
covering all areas of international trade including
agriculture is in our interest, just as it is in the
interest of the other members of the GATT.
In the post three years, our two countries have begun t6
build a network of connections and institutional links which
has given greater substance to our bilateral relationship.
The hallzark of these growing connections has bean practical
co-operation and substantive dialogue.
Of particular importance has been the 1989 Timor Gap Zone of
Co-operation Treaty, which establishes a system for joint
exploitation of petroleum resources in the Timor Sea.
Xn 2.989 our two countries also established the Australia
Indonesia Institute in order to promote greater mutual
unddrotanding, especially in the fields of culture and
education. The growing web of bilateral connections has also been
strengthened by the greatly increased numbers of ministerial
visit. These substantive links have enabled our GovernmeUnts to
maintain a frank and constructive dialogue, especially
Hpi' I j 4j 140 V. L I r Q. L, k 
4.
during the past few montne, following the tragic events in
East Timor last November.
The signing of a number of bilateral agreements during my
visit is an important demonstration of the sorts of l. inks
which we would like to see developed.
We are especially keen to expand bilateral commercial links,
and to encourag e vur private sectors to take advantage of
the opportunities created by the reform of our economies.
Mr President, a hundred years ago, in what becaue known as a
Golden Age, th. infant Australian nation forjel an identity
and political system which still very largely defines us to
ourselves and to the world.
It was a reflection of the country's origins and the
imperial values of the day that the identity and the system
were often, in both spirit and substance, anti-Asian.
In the 1990s I~ believe the AU~ tralian identity is being reshaped
in a way which is consistent with the multicultural
realiLy of our society, and the final paesing of the
vestiges of our colonial past.
Much will not be changed. Much we would defend AUjj
change. But the new identity Will be emphatically different in this
it will. positively. engage with the region in which we
live.
Mr President, it is my Toat sincere hope that we shall
continue1 1U make our relationship broader$ deeper and more
stable, in an important sense, each of us is the other's best test
of how effectively we will be able to deal with -the social
and political diversity, and the rapid change, which will
mark our region and the world in the 1990s.
My visit may be seen as a signal of Australia's
determination to pass that test#
Mr President, I am very glad to be here. I look forward to
our discussions tozqorrow on important bilateral, regional
and international 4evelopments.
Your Excellencies, Distinc5Uished Guests, Ladies and
Gentlemen, I would now like to ask you to join me in a toast
to the health of His Excellency the President and Mrs
Soeharto, to the prosperity or the Republic of Indonesia,
and to further progress in friendship and co-operation
between our two nations. 



TEL: 22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 01/ 13
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
JAKARTA WEDNESDAY, 22 APRIL 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I have come to Indonesia, on this my first overseas visit as
Prime Minister, because Indonesia is in the first rank of
Australia' s priorities.
As our close neighbour, as the fourth most populous country
in the world, as a rapidly growing economy in the most
rapidly growing part of the world, as a key player in this
region where our future lies, Indonesia commands Australia's
attention. It Is often said that no two neighbours could be so
dissimilar as we are.
Culturally we are very different demographically,
historically. It is not surprising that we have sometimes been at odds:
or that relations have occasionally been strained.
But our relationship is changing.
in recqrat years we have built substantial links diplomatic
links, cultural links and in particular, commercial links.
it is remarkable how a relationship can grow when concrete
common interests are found and we determine, jointly, to
pursue them.
Very different we may be, but we have found, I think, that
the destinies of our two countries are joined.
I should like this visit to signal that.
in fact the threads of our relationship are long and strong. 
TEL: 22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 02/ 13
2
The Second World War brought Australians arnd Indonesians
into extensive contact with each other.
After the war there was widespread Sympathy among
Australians for the cause of Indonesian independence.
The sympathy found concrete expression when, in the Course
of the Indonesian struggle, the Australian labour movement
imposed boycotts and black bans against Dutch shipping.
In 1947 it was Australia, together with India, which brought
the matter of Indonesian independence before the UN Security
Council. Shortly after, Australia was nominated by Indonesia to sit
on the three-nation United Nations Good Offices Committee..
As one commentator said, this display of confidence in
Australia by Indonesia was the high-water mark of relations
between our countries in the early post-war years.
Australia co-sponsored Indonesia's admission to the United
Nations in 1950.
The achievement of your independence was thus one of the
proud moments in the history of Australian diplomacy.
But of course the historical threads go well beyond the lost
fifty years.
Australia, after all, was once called New Holland.
Not many years after the Dutch established themselves in
Indonesia, one of their number, named Abel Tasman, sailed
from Jakarta or Batavia as it was then known along the
west and south coasts of Australia.
He left Australia, rather ungraciously remarking, " there is
no good to be done here"
And he sailed on to trade with places in the north,
including Japan.
Asia hdS long been a theatre for trade between dissimilar
societies, and Australia and Indonesia have long been a part
of it.
Before Europeans traded In the region, fishermen from the
M'akassar area in what was then called the Celebes, were
trading with China in trepang gathered of f the northern
Australian coast.
This was Australia's first export commodity; and a valueadded
one at that for, with the cooperation and assistance
of the Australian Aboriginals, the trepang was cured and
smoked on Australian shores for export to China. 
.22Apr. 9129 : 23 NO. U25 e. U3'/ 10
3
The cultural influence of this trade can still be seen in
the language and culture of the Australian Aboriginals who
came in contact with the peoples from the Makassar area.
In the era of colonial Australia and colonial Indonesia,
Jakarta was a refuge and source of supplies for British
ships beginning with James Cook's Endeavour.
In the first half of 1790, the infant British colony at
Sydney Cove, cut of f from home, terribly alone, and as yet
incapable of making the new environment yield food, sent a
ship to Jakarta for supplies.
By the time it returned, British ships had arrived and the
colony was saved, but the ship from Jakarta was very welcome
nonetheless. Ladies and gentlemen, as we plan our strategic, trading and
cultural relationships in this last decade of the twentieth
century, it is worth bearing these historical threads in
mind. Together they suggest a pattern of interdependence.
They hint at what can be done.
Today we believe a great deal can be done not merely in
response to immediate needs, but in pursuit of 8 worthwhile
and enduring relationship between our two countries.
In quite different ways we have both emerged from a colonial
past. We have both committed ourselves to the kind of
radical economic reform which will give our nations a secure
place in the world.
The Australian government believes that all we do in the
world, in Asia and the Pacific, all we do in Indonesia, we
will do best as a nation of independent and unambivalent
mind. We have long been independent.
But, perhaps because we are a European country living
alongside Asia, the residues of colonialism have tended to
persist i.
There is a conservative element in Australian society not
so strong as it was, but influential just the same which,
through its attachment to the past and its anxiety about the
Asia-Pacific future, tends to resist the full expression of
Australian nationhood.
It is the same element which opposed Indonesian independence
in the 1940s.
Attitudes are often the last things to change. 
TEL* 9 92 N&amp; o. 23 P. 04/ 13
4
As I'm sure it affected Indonesia long after independence,
the colonial legacy still affects us, arnd we still face
questions about what part of it we should retain and what
parts cast off.
A great deal of our British colonial heritage underpins our
political and legal institutions. It remains a defining
element in our culture.
We do not seek to change these things.
But our population is no longer the overwhelmingly British
one it was.
Contemporary Australia is multicultural the old
Australians of English, Scots and Irish stock having been
joined by large numbers of people from all the countries of
Europe, the Middle East, the Americas and Asia. By that
measure alone we are very much part of the world.
Multi-culturalism has Cone much to break down our fear of
cultural difference, and therefore our old fear of Asia.
We are substantially changed in this.
We are more worldly, more mature.
So should we be.
By most measures we are not a young country. The
Commonwealth of Australia is almost 100 years old.
Australian democracy, founded in the 1850s, is much older
than most democracies in the world.
There should be no question about our identity or where our
loyalties lie.
For far too long we have measured the strength of our
society, the level of our sophistication, the worth of our
achievements, against Britain and Europe and against the
United States.
At times we have done this while clinging to such vestiges
of the pid imperial power and culture as will, we think,
earn us respect in the world.
We think the time has come to step out of the colonial
shadow and make our position clear:
we are Australian
we are engaged with Asia.
We are different -culturally, historically, politically
but we can handle the difference. 
TEL: 22. Fpr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 05/ 13
We believe we can contribute something to what is already a
diverse region. The Asia-Pacific, as well as Indonesia, can
achieve unity in diversity.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Australian government is actively
and unequivocally committed to this region and to
developing, in particular, a relationship with Indonesia.
In significant ways we have shared the past. If we are
prepared to put in the effort, we can share a much more
substantial future.
In the forty-two years of our diplomatic relations, there
have been substantial achievements as well as periodic
setbacks. If we reflect on that experience, I think we will see that
we have made progress when we have been realistic.
we have achieved things, end been able to protect those
achievements, when we have found a tangible basis for our
work. We have been disappointed, I think, when we have failed to
take sufficient account of our different outlooks.
We are very different countries. We will always see some
things differently.
What we need for a successful bilateral relationship is the
firm ground of tangible achievements, and real incentives to
see us through the times when good will is not enough.
We need to identify our shared interests and create the
institutional links which will consolidate our progress.
We need to create the conditions in which new shared
interests will emerge.
To point the way towards a more secure relationship, let me
say where I think some of our most important common
interests lie.
Most obviously we share an interest in success.
More, probably, than most Australians appreciate, our
country has benefited enormously from the success of yours
in recent years.
Our experience of nation-building has not followed the same
path as yours.
As a consequence, we are inclined sometimes to underestimate
how difficult it is to achieve orderly development in a
nation as vast as Indonesia, and as culturally, ethnically
and religiously diverse.
The achievements of President Soeharto's New Order are very
great. 
TEL 6
Between 1966 and 1991, Indonesia's real GDP rose 450 per
cent. Its real growth rate over this period has been one of the
highest among developing countries.
Structural change has been rapid: agriculture's share of GDP
is half what it was a quarter century ago.
in the late 1970s Indonesia was the world's largest importer
of rice. In 1984 Indonesia became self-sufficient.
The people of Indonesia are now better fed, housed and
educated than ever before. Infant mortality rates are
approximately half what they were.
These are triumphs.
But the achievements of the Soeharto Government spread wider
than this.
In establishing political stability and economic progress in
Indonesia, your government has contributed to stability and
prosperity In the wider South-East Asian region.
Australia is among the beneficiaries.
We gain commercially, of course; but just as importantly,
our national security benefits from 8 benign environment
where not so many years ago there was great uncertainty and
volatility. We share with Indonesia a fundamental interest in the
strategic stability of our region, and in limiting the
potential for external powers to introduce tension or
conflict. Recognising this shared strategic interest, we are keen to
work with Indonesia as equal partners to strengthen
bilateral defence relations.
There is scope for building closer links between our armed
forces and defence organisations. We can do this with more
high-livel visits and consultations, combined exercises,
training and other exchanges.
Earlier I referred to those seamen from the Makassar area
who for hundreds of years made annual calls to harvest the
trepang from the shores of Aboriginal Australia.
Plainly, for hundreds of years a commlon Interest was
recognised and practical arrangements devised.
So now our practical interactions as neighbouring countries
create another category of shared interests.
our maritime border is the most obvious of these.
TE2L2: . Rpr. 92 19: 23 No. 026 tF. Ub/ l1. 
TEL: 7
Most of the sea-bed boundaries were formally delimited
twenty years ago, but there remained important areas where
agreement had not been reached.
The most extensive of these was the Timor Gap, covering
potentially rich reserves of oil and gas under the Timor
Sea. Rather than attempt to reconcile different legal
interpretations of rights over the continental shelf, the
two governments established a joint development zone for the
cooperative exploration and exploitation of the area's
petroleum resources.
The Timor Gap zone of Cooperation Treaty, which entered into
force in February 1991, is a triumph of creative cooperation
between our two governments. It is the most substantial
bilateral agreement we have concluded.
It demonstrates conclusively that we can find imaginative
solutions to bilateral problems when we recognise the common
interest and apply to it the necessary political will.
Ladies and gentlemen, earlier today three more bilateral
agreements were signed.
They deal with double taxation, extradition and fisheries
cooperation. in practical ways they each expand and strengthen the
framework to improve the bilateral interaction between
Australia and Indonesia as outward-looking neighbours.
Ladies and gentlemen, as everyone here is aware, the
situation in East Timor has been a recurring and sometimes
divisive issue In ou relations.
I should take this opportunity to explain that the
disproportionate attention East Timor receives in Australia
does not mean that we are not interested in the welfare of
the 182 million people who live in Indonesia's 26 other
provinces. The atl~ ention East Timor receives, internationally and in
Australia, is a natural consequence of the territory's
uniquely troubled history, beginning with its neglect under
Portuguese rule.
We carry no brief for the Portuguese occupation of the
territory, or for the manner of their leaving or their
recent diplomatic manoeuvres.
Australia's outlook has been shaped by the additional
factors of our proximity to East Timor, the fraternal links
we had with the people of East Timor during the Second World
War, and the sizeable East Timorese community which now
lives in Australia. T2E2L:. fRpr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 0( 11.5 
TFLL 8
Australia made it clear that it did not condone the manner
in which Indonesia acquired East Timor, but since 1979 we
have accepted Indonesian sovereignty over the territory.
The Australian Government has made clear its views about the
tragic events in Diii last November.
We consider the subsequent actions of the Indonesian
Government, including President Soeharto's public statements
and the measures announced by the Army Chief-of-Staff on 27
February, to constitute a credible response.
Our continuing concern is with what practical help we might
be able to give to the people of East Timor.
Our aim as concerned outsiders is to assist where we can in
measures for their welfare, and to support a process of
reconciliation between them and the Indonesian authorities.
I am pleased that during this visit our two governments have
been able to sign a memorandum covering an 11.5 million
dollar Australian aid project to improve water supply and
sanitation in parts of East Timor.
Ladies and gentlemen, in coming to terms with a more fluid
political environment in Asia, Australia and Indonesia have
ample scope to cooperate in helping shape the regional
agenda. Indonesia.' s regional credentials are very clear.
it is a leading member of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations ( ASEAN), which is a focus of wider dialogue
and cooperation.
I should like to think that Australia, too, has demonstrated
an ability to contribute usefully to regional diplomacy in
recent years.
Our two countries have invested considerable effort in the
long negotiations leading up to last October's
comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia conflict.
our arrqed forces are now serving in Cambodia as part of the
United Nations peace-keeping presence.
We have also worked closely together to encourage a regional
dialogue on security issues, centred on the ASEAN PMC
process. Ladies and gentlemen, I said at the beginning of this
address that it is remarkable what can be achieved when
common interests are identified and pursued. And they will
be pursued the harder if they are material common Interests.
ZZ MfJF V4 A7 LV I I U I 
TEL 9
It is one of the happy coincidences of the history of our
two nations that in recent years we have adopted economic
strategies which greatly multiply our common interests.
We were both overly dependent on commodities. We have both
sought to correct our external Imbalances. We have both
liberalised our economies.
Since coming to office in 1983, the Australian Government
has removed exchange controls, floated the Australian dollar
and made it a more competitive currency, deregulated banking
and radically reduced import protection.
We have cut back the government Sector and cut taxes. We
are now encouraging an historic shift from industry-wide
labour relations arrangements to workplace bargaining.
In the same period Indonesia has transformed its economy by
implementing strikingly similar policies.
Banking has been deregulated and monetary policy changed so
that it now relies on interest rates instead of credit
restrictions. Indonesia has cut protection against imports, increased
manufacturing production and reduced dependence on
commodities. You too have cut back on government spending, rationalised
taxes and created a competitive exchange rate.
Both our economies are now much more open and outward
looking. Both are more competitive and more diverse I would venture
to say, more creative.
I would 81s0 go so far as to say that what we have done has
given our countries a better chance in the modern world.
Our own success might be seen in the growth of our economy
by more than one third in the past decade, in the fact that
we are exporting more, that our trade is increasingly with
our regional neighbours, and the contents of exports now
includds a significant proportion of services and
manufactures, in addition to our traditional strengths in
food, minerals and other raw materials.
Indonesia's success might be measured in those dramatic
improvements in living standards I referred to earlier, and
in average real GDP growth of about 6 per cent during the
1980s. Ladies and gentlemen, this common strategy of creating
liberal market-oriented economies produces, as I said,
common interests.
Concrete common interests. TL! 22. Hpr. 2qz 1Y: ZO riO. VZ 
TEL: 22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 10/ 13
It has taken longer than it should have, but in recent years
Australia and Indonesia have discovered each other
commercially. We have discovered that we have goods and services to
exczhange and investments to make.
Between 1989 and 1991 two-way trade increased by 66 per
cant, to be worth approximately 2.4 billion Australian
dollars. Australian investment in Indonesia has increased markedly.
Indonesian companies are now also starting to invest in
Australia. The trade in services is also growing in tourism,
education, medicine, and support industries for the major
mining ventures.
There are many other areas in which Australian expertise
should be able to find niches in Indonesia. Pleasing as the
trend of recent years has been, we know that we have the
potential to play a much bigger part.
We have much to offer in the way of raw materials, capital
equipment and technology.
Australia's experience in coping with similar climates,
extensive coastlines and long distances has produced
technology and solutions well-suited to Indonesia often
much better suited than the products of, say, Japan, Germany
or the United States.
Our experience and expertise in many other other areas is
second to none in the world in forest management, solar
technology, food processing and coal-fired power stations
for instance.
We can assist as exporters, but just as readily as joint
venture partners.
I'm confident that we will find the larger role we seek.
As both countries expand along this liberal economic path we
can expect the trade to grow. We Can expect the range of
shared interests to grow.
We can expect, I believe, a much more productive and durable
relationship between our two countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, in recent public statements in
Australia, I have emphasised the need for us to come to
terms with the economic vitality of the Asia-Pacific region.
Our external policy reflects the interest we share with you
in maintaining a sound multilateral system for international
trade. 
ILL: L LL. Hpr JZ Z Pflu.'
Indonesia and Australia have worked together within the
Cairns Group in order to achieve the result we both need
from the Uruguay Round the liberalisation of international
agricultural trade.
We have also both given strong support to the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation or APEC process.
I do not believe it Is in the interests of either of us to
have the international trading system degenerate into rival
blocs. We would both lose in a situation where the countries of
East Asia saw themselves as an economic bloc in rivalry with
those of Europe and North America.
The central idea of APEC is to build on existing networks of
economic interdependence throughout the ASia-Pacific region.
I believe we should continue to work through APEC to promote
an open regionalism which is compatible with a wider
multilateral trading system.
Regardless of the outcome of the Uruguay Round, APEC'S value
will grow considerably if a process of non-discriminatory
regional trade liberalisation can be carried forward with
conviction. Australia has assured Indonesia that our vigorous support
for the APEC process in no sense qualifies our recognition
of the achievements and potential of ASEAN.
We appreciate the great value of ASEAN.
We share its members' belief in the advancement of political
end economic cooperation.
We admire its contribution to wider stability and harmony in
the Asia-Pacific region.
The adoption at lost January's ASEAN Summit of a proposal to
establish an ASEAN Free Trade Area highlights the continuing
vitalitX and significance of the organisation.
Australia particularly welcomed Indonesia's strong
endorsement of APEC at the ASEAN Summit.
Your position underlines the compatibility of the ASEAN and
APEC mechanisms.
Ladies and gentlemen, we who live in this part of the world
live in dynamic times.
Our two countries which, on the face of things, are so
different have these times In common.
We have shared much in the past. We now share the future. 
TEL: 12
We need not compromise the integrity of our cultures or our
beliefs arnd values to work fruitfully together.
We know that we will each be stronger for the other's
success. -In coming years I think you Will notice that there has been
a change in the way Australia does things.
in the 1980s some of us were struck with the thought that,
if we did not change, the Society we had built would not be
sustainable.
We had to change direction: and in the past decade that is
what we have done.
Australians have taken up the challenge of economic reform.
They have made the cultural leap necessary to change the
industrial culture the culture of work and management.
Just as we have learned how to build a tolerant and fair
multicultural aociety, where once we were fearful of
difference, we have learned how to build a competitive
economy, where until very recently we were less than
Competitive. These days few Populations are so economically aware as
Australia's. It is the sharpened awareness one has when a
disaster has been narrowly avoided.
We know what has to be done.
If these have been dramatic changes, so too-has been the
change in the way Australians perceive themselves in the
world. It has taken longer than perhaps it should have, but I think
it can now be safely said that most Australians see Asia
and the Pacific as holding the key to our future.
This thought is not new. There have been Australians saying
it for ' fifty years.
The difference is that this time we have not only recognised
that our future belongs in the region, but we're engaging
with it as we never have before..
Along with our efforts to build our economic strength, the
talk now is about nationhood and being Australians of
independent mind.
It requires a considerable conscious effort to overcome all
the effects of even a relatively benign colonialism.
TEL: 19~: 22235. FNlOp. rV. Z9O2 r'.ñ izi 
TEL: 13
As I said earlier, attitudes are often the last things to
change. Among the other lessons we have learnt in recent years is
that, like the colony at Sydney Cove as it waited for the
ship to return from Jakarta, we really are on our own.
That is why more than ever before we have to think for
ourselves, be sure of ourselves be, without a trace of
ambivalence, one Australian nation.
We urge you not to think of Australia as the place it was
twenty years ago, even a decade ago.
Think of it as the place it is now, and as it intends to be
a partner in the dynamic new world of the Asia-Pacific
region. Increasingly, that is how we Australians are thinking of it.
22. Apr. 92 19: 23 No. 023 P. 13/ 13 



TEL Ap 17 4 tNo F 39/ 9.'
PRIME MINISTER
MAJOR AGREEMENTS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND INDONESIA SIGNED TODAY
The following is a brief description of the three major
agreements between Australia and Indonesia signed earlier
today.
The Fisheries Co-operation Agreement will help in the
management of the fishery resources, and in the conservation
of stocks which straddle the waters of both countries. The
Agreement will facilitate the exchange of information and
fisheries personnel and co-operation across a wide range of
fisheries related activities, including developments in
fishing gear, training, agriculture, surveillance, marketing
end post-harvest technology.
The Agreement will also encourage closer co-operation on
research and management of fishery resources of mutual
interest, including straddling stocks, shared stocks and
highly migratory species. it will provide a consultative
mechanisin under which issues such as illegal fishing in the
Australian fishing zone ( AFZ) and overfishing by foreign
fleets in waters adjacent to the AFZ can be discussed. The
Agreement does not itself provide for any new access to each
others' fishing zones, although it does provide a framework
for possible future access should the state of fish stocks
permit. The Double Taxation Agreement will clarify the taxing rights
of Australia and Indonesia over income flows between them. It
contains provisions for the avoidance of double taxation and
the prevention of tax evasion. The Agreement allocates taxing
rights in respect of various categories of income flowing
between Australia and Indonesia. Certain classes of income
are to be taxed only in the country of residence of the
recipient. Other classes of income may be taxed in the
country of origin, with the country of residence of the
recipient. Other classes of income may be taxed in the
country of origin, with the country or residence, If it also
taxes the Income, allowing a credit in respect of the tax paid
in the other country. In addition, the Agreement places
limitations upon the rate of tax that the country of origin
may impose on dividend, interest and royalty income and
pensions, Including government pensionB, paid to residents of
the other country. 
TEL: Aipr D: U
2
The Second World War brought Australians and Indonesians
into extensive contact with each other.
After the war there was widespread sympathy among
Australians for the cause of Indonesian independence.
The sympathy found concrete expression when, in the course
of the Indonesian struggle, the Australian labour movement
imposed boycotts and black bans against Dutch shipping.
In 1947 it was Australia, together with India, which brought
the matter of Indonesian independence before the UN Security
Council. Shortly after, Australia was nominated by Indonesia to sit
on the three-nation United Nations Good Offices Committee.
As one coymientator said, this display of confidence in
Australia by Indonesia was the high-water mark of relations
between our countries in the early post-war years.
Australia co-sponsored Indonesia's admission to the United
Nations in 1950.
The achievement of your independence was thus one of the
proud moments in the history of Australian diplomacy.
But of course the historical threads go well beyond the lost
fifty years.
Australia, after all, was once called New Holland.
Not many years af ter the Dutch established themselves in
Indonesia, one of their number, named Abel Tasman, sailed
from Jakarta or Batavia as it was then known along the
west and south coasts of Australia.
He left Australia, rather ungraciously remarking, " there is
no good to be done here".
And he sailed on to trade with places in the north,
including Japan.
Asia has long been a theatre for trade between dissimilar
societies, and Australia and Indonesia have long been a part
of it.
Before Europeans traded in the region, fishermen from the
Makassar area In what was then called the Celebes, were
trading with China in trepang gathered of f the northern
Australian coast.
This was Australia's first export commodity: and a valueadded
one at that for, with the cooperation and assistance
of the Australian Aboriginals, the trepang was cured and
smoked on Australian shores for export to China. 
TEL:*: Ir r&gt; i-
3
The cultural influence of this trade can still be seen in
the language and culture of the Australian Aboriginals who
came in contact with the peoples from the Makassar area.
In the era of colonial Australia and colonial Indonesia,
Jakarta was a refuge and source of supplies for British
ships beginning with James Cook's Endeavour.
In the first half of 1790, the Infant British colony at
Sydney Cove, cut of f from home, terribly alone, and as yet
Incapable of making the new environment yield food, sent a
ship to Jakarta for supplies.
By the time it returned, British ships had arrived and the
colony was saved, but the ship from Jakarta was very welcome
nonetheless. Ladies and gentlemen, as we plan our strategic, trading and
cultural relationships in this last decade of the twentieth
century, -it is worth bearing these historical threads in
mind. Together they suggest a pattern of interdependence.
They hint at what can be done.
Today we believe a great deal can be done not merely in
response to immediate needs, but in pursuit of a worthwhile
and enduring relationship between our two countries.
In quite different ways we have both emerged from a colonial
past. We have both committed ourselves to the kind of
radical economic reform which will give our nations a secure
place in the world.
The Australian government believes that all we do In the
world, in Asia and the Pacific, all we do in Indonesia, we
will do best as a nation of independent and unambivalent
mind. We have long been Independent.
But, perhaps because we are a European country living
alongside Asia, the residues of colonialism have tended to
persist. There is a conservative element in Australian society not
so strong as It was, but influential just the same which,
through its attachment to the past and Its anxiety about the
Asia-Pacific future, tends to resist the full expression of
Australian nationhood.
it Is the same element which opposed Indonesian independence
in the 1940s.
Attitudes are often the last things to change. 
T EL: P9
4
As I'm sure it affected Indonesia long after independence,
the colonial legacy still affects us. and we still face
questions about what part of it we should retain and what
parts cast off.
A great d eal of our British colonial heritage underpins our
political and legal institutions. It remains a defining
element in our culture.
We do not seek to change these things.
But our population is no longer the overwhelmingly British
one it was.
Contemporary Australia is multicultural the old
Australians of English, Scots and Irish stock having been
joined by large numbers of people from all the countries of
Europe, the Middle East, the Americas and Asia. By that
measure alone we are very much part of the world.
Multi-culturalism has done much to break down our fear of
cultural difference, and therefore our old fear of Asia.
We are substantially changed in this.
we are more worldly, more mature.
So should we be.
By most measures we are not a young country. The
Commonwealth of Australia is almost 100 years old.
Australian democracy, founded in the 1850s, is much older
than most democracies in the world.
There should be no question about our identity or where our
loyalties lie.
For far too long we have measured the strength of our
society, the level of our sophistication, the worth of our
achievements, against Britain and Europe and against the
United States.
At times we have done this while clinging to such vestiges
of the old imperial power and culture as will, we think,
earn us respect In the world.
we think the time has come to step out of the colonial
shadow and make our position clear:
* we are Australian
* we are engaged with Asia.
We are different culturally, historically, politically
but we can handle the difference. 
2&gt; Iipr
We believe we can contribute something to what is already a
diverse region. The Asia-Pacific, as well as Indonesia, canl
achieve unity in diversity.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Australian government is actively
and unequivocally comm~ itted to this region and to
developing, In particular, a relationship with Indonesia.
In significant ways we have shared the past. If we are
prepared to put in the effort, we can share a much more
substantial future.
In the forty-two years of our diplomatic relations, there
have been substantial achievements as well as periodic
setbacks. If we reflect on that experience, I think we will see that
we have made progress when we have been realistic.
We have achieved things, and been able to protect those
achievements, when we have found a tangible basis for our
work. We have been disappointed, I think, when we have failed to
take sufficient account of our different outlooks.
We are very different countries. We will always see some
things differently.
What we need for a successful bilateral relationship is the
firm ground of tangible achievements, and real incentives to
see us through the times when good will is not enough.
We need to identify our shared Interests and create the
Institutional links which will consolidate our progress.
We need to create the conditions in which new shared
interests will emerge.
To point the way towards a more secure relationship, let me
say where I think some of our most important common
interests lie.
Most obviously we share an Interest In success.
More, probably, than most Australians appreciate, our
country has benefited enormously from the success of yours
in recent years.
Our experience of nation-building has not followed the same
path as yours.
As a consequence, we are inclined sometimes to underestimate
how difficult it is to achieve orderly development in a
nation as vast as Indonesia, and as culturally, ethnically
and religiously diverse.
The achievemen~ ts of President Soeharto's New Order are very
great. 
6
Between 1966 and 1991, Indonesia's real GDP rose 450 per
cent. Its real growth rate over this period has been one of the
highest among developing countries.
Structural change has been rapid; agriculture's share of GDP
is half what it was a quarter century ago.
In the late l970s Indonesia was the world's largest importer
of rice. In 1984 Indonesia became self-sufficient.
The people of Indonesia are now better fed, housed and
educated than ever before. Infant mortality rates are
approximately half what they were.
These are triumphs.
But the achievements of the Soeharto Government spread wider
than this.
in establishing political stability and economic progress in
Indonesia, your government has contributed to stability and
prosperity In the wider South-East Asian region.
Australia Is among the beneficiaries.
We gain commercially, of course; but just as importantly,
our national security benefits from a benign environment
where not so many years ago there was great uncertainty and
volatility. We share with Indonesia a fundamental interest In the
strategic stability of our region, and in limiting the
potential for external powers to introduce tension or
conflict. Recognising this shared strategic interest, we are keen to
work with Indonesia as equal partners to strengthen
bilateral defence relations.
There is scope for building closer links between our armed
forces end defence organisations. We can do this with more
high-level visits and consultations, combined exercises,
training and other exchanges.
Earlier I referred to those seamen from the Makassar area
who for hundreds of years made annual calls to harvest the
trepang from the shores of Aboriginal Australia.
Plainly, for hundreds of years a common interest was
recognised and practical arrangements devised.
So now our practical interactions as neighbouring countries
create another category of shared Interests.
Our maritime border is the most obvious of these. 
? Eu iI:-I* N. K
7
Most of the sea-bed boundaries were formally delimited
twenty years ago, but there remained important areas where
agreement had not been reached.
The most extensive of these was the Timior Gap, covering
potentially rich reserves of oil and gas under the Timor
Sea. Rather then attempt to reconcile different legal
interpretations of rights ever the continental shelf, the
two governmients established a joint development zone for the
cooperative exploration and exploitation of the area's
petroleum resources.
TheTinmor Gap Zone ofCooperation Treaty, which entered into
force niVFebruary 191, ii~ triumph of creative cooperation
between our two governments. It is the most substantial
bilateral agFreent we have concluded.
It demonstrates conclusively that we can find imaginative
solutions to bilateral problems when we recognise the common
Interest and apply to it the necessary political will.
Ladies and gentlemen, earlier today three more bilateral
agreements were signed.
They deal with double taxation, extradition and fisheries
cooperation. In practical ways they each expand and strengthen the
framework to improve the bilateral Interaction between
Australia and Indonesia as outward-looking neighbours.
Ladies and gentlemen, as everyone here Is aware, the
situation In Last Timnor has been a recurring and sometimes
divisive issue in our relations.
I should take this opportunity to explain that the
disproportionate attention East Timor receives in Australia
does not mean that we are not Interested in the welfare of
the 182 million people who live in Indonesia's 26 other
provinces. The attention East Timor receives, internationally and in
Australia, is a natural consequence of the territory's
uniquely troubled history, beginning with its neglect under
Portuguese rule.
We carry no brief for the Portuguese occupation of the
territory, or for the manner of their leaving or their
recent diplomatic manoeuvres.
Australia's outlook has been shaped by the additional
factors of our proximity to East Timor, the fraternal links
we had with the people of East Timor during the Second World
War, and the sizeable East Timorese community which now
lives in Australia. 
TEL:* 1 : i tic,' F
Australia made it clear that it did not condone the manner
in which Indonesia acquired East Timor, but since 1979 we
have accepted Indonesian sovereignty over the territory.
The Australian Government has made clear its views about the
tragic events In Dili last November.
We consider the subsequent actions of the Indonesian
Government, including President Soeharto's public statements
and the measures announced by the Army Chief-of-Staff on 27
February, to constitute a credible response.
Our continuing concern Is with what practical help we might
be able to give to the people of East Timor.
Our aim as concerned outsiders is to assist where we can in
measures for their welfare, and to support a process of
reconciliation between them and the Indonesian authorities.
I am pleased that during this visit our two goverrnents have
been able to sign a memorandum covering an 11.5 million
dollar Australian Bid project to improve water supply and
sanitation in parts of East Timor.
Ladies and gentlemen, in coming to terms with a more fluid
political environment in Asia, Australia and Indonesia have
ample scope to cooperate in helping shape the regional
agenda. Indonesia's regional credentials are very clear.
It is a leading member of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations ( ASEAN), which is a focus of wider dialogue
and cooperation.
I should like to think that Australia, too, has demonstrated
an ability to contribute usefully to regional diplomacy in
recent years.
Our two countries have invested considerable effort in the
long negotiations leading up to last October's
comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia conflict.
our armed forces are now serving in Cambodia as part of the
United Nations peace-keeping presence.
We have also worked closely together to encourage a regional
dialogue on security issues, centred on the ASEAN PMC
process. Ladies and gentlemen, I said at the beginning of this
address that it Is remarkable what can be achieved when
common interests are identified and pursued. And they will
be pursued the herder If they are material common interests. 
9
It is one of the happy coincidences of the history of our
two nations that In recent years we have adopted economic
strategies which greatly multiply our common interests.
We were both overly dependent on commodities. We have both
sought to correct our external imbalances. We have both
liberalised our economies.
Since coming to office in 1983, the Australian Government
has removed exchange controls, floated the Australian dollar
and made it a more competitive currency, deregulated banking
and radically reduced import protection.
We have cut back the government sector and cut taxes. We
are now encouraging an historic shift from industry-wide
labour relations arrangements to workplace bargaining.
In the same period Indonesia has transformed its economy by
Implementing strikingly similar policies.
Banking has been deregulated and monetary policy changed so
that it now relies on interest rates instead of credit
restrictions. Indonesia has cut protection against imports, Increased
manufacturing production and reduced dependence on
commodities. You too have cut back on government spending, rationalised
taxes and created a competitive exchange rate.
Both our economies are now much more open and outward
looking. Both are more competitive and more diverse I would venture
to say, more creative.
I would also go so far as to say that what we have done has
given our countries a better chance in the modern world.
our own success might be seen In the growth of our economy
by more than one third in the past decade, in the fact that
we are exporting more, that our trade is increasingly with
our regional neighbours, and the contents of exports now
includes a significant proportion of services and
manufactures, in addition to our traditional strengths In
food, minerals and other raw materials.
Indonesia's success might be measured in those dramatic
improvements in living standards I referred to earlier, and
in average real GDP growth of about 6 per cent during the
1980s. Ladies and gentlemen, this common strategy of creating
liberal market-oriented economies produces, as I said,
common Interests.
Concrete common Interests. 
TEL:-
It has taken longer than it should have, but in recent years
Australia and Indonesia have discovered each other
commercially. We have discovered that we have goods and services to
exchange and investments to make.
Between 1989 and 1991 two-way trade increased by 66 per
cent, to be worth approximately 2.4 billion Australian
dollars. Australian investment in Indonesia has increased markedly.
Indonesian companies are now also starting to invest in
Australia. The trade in services is also growing in tourism,
education, medicine, and support industries for the major
mining ventures.
There are many other areas in which Australian expertise
should be able to find niches in Indonesia. Pleasing as the
trend of recent years has been, we know that we have the
potential to play a much bigger part.
We have much to offer In the way of raw materials, capital
equipment and technology.
Australia's experience in coping with similar climates,
extensive coastlines and long distances has produced
technology and solutions well-suited to Indonesia often
much better suited than the products of, say, Japan, Germany
or the United States.
Our experience and expertise in many other other areas is
second to none in the world in forest management, solar
technology, food processing and coal-fired power stations
for instance.
We can assist as exporters, but just as readily as joint
venture partners.
I'm confident that we will find the larger role we seek.
As both countries expand along this liberal economic path we
can expect the trade to grow. We can expect the range of
shared interests to grow.
We can expect, I believe, a much more productive and durable
relationship between our two countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, in recent public statements in
Australia, I have emphasised the need for us to come to
terms with the economic vitality of the Asia-Pacific region.
our external policy reflects the interest we share with you
in maintaining a sound multilateral system for international
trade. 



1r "
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATIN, HP
TO THE EAST JAVA CHAMBER OF COMMC] C AND INDUSTRY
SURABAYA, THURSDAY, 23 APRIL 1992
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address you this
evening here in Surdbaya where the great success of
Indonesia's economic transformation is perhaps most obvious.
Where the newly liberalised Indonesian economy is serving to
restore a city to its historic commercial pre-eminence.
Ladies and gentlemen, Australia is also in the process of
transformation.
our perspective on the world is changing.
As never before in our history we recognise that our future
substantially lies in our own region. In Asia and the
Pacific. in Indonesia,
That is where the great opportunity is.
we know that seizing that opportunity will be no easy thing
to do.
It involves something like a revolution in the way we do
things, and the way we think about ourselves and the world.
When you have been for so long a branch office of empire
there is tendency to go on expecting special treatment long
after head office stopped opening the mail.
If this were characteristic of Australia once, it is not
true now.
We do not entertain the notion that someone else will do the
hard things for us.
or to us. we do not accept the idea that we are forever at
the mercy of the major economic powers. I.. r P I V) I IU VI II W 
2
In 1992 we k~ now that we need a degree of national energy,
inventiveness and purpose which we have not had before In
peacetime. You will see evidence of this emerging attitude in AUStralia
now. In the near future, I believe, you will see evidence of it
in the Asia-Pacific region. You will see evidence of it in
Indonesia especially, perhaps, here in Surabaya.
These days to the majority of Australians the-need to
integrate our economy with that of the region is selfevident.
we long since ceased to believe that we could sustain
ourselves by exporting commodities, and manufacturing for a
tiny market behind tariff walls,
The seventies and the early eighties showed us we had to
change. As a result of the economic policies of thei Australian
Government since 1983, Australia is now a m~ ore efficient,
productive, competitive, and outward-lookipg nation,
It is more geared to exports, more receptive to foreign
investment, and more resilient in the face of external
economiic pressures.
Like Indonesia, Australia reformed its economy in the
eighties. We floated the dollar, and allowed a more competitive
exchange rate to be determined by the market.
We reformea our indmstrial relations, so that we have far
fewer strikes, greater flexibility, and lower labour costs.
We reformed our financial system, so that interest rates and
not quantity controls balance supply and demand for funds#
and moot financial business can be transacted free of
government control.
We reformed spending and taxing, so that we now have one or
the lowest tax regimes and one of the most disciplined
government sectors of any OECD nation.
We adopted industry policies to lower the crippling level of
protection we inherited, so that we are now one of the most
open economies in the world.
The results of reform have been spectacular in Australia, as
they have been here in indonesia.
Over the eighties Australia's economy expanded by more than
one third. Today we export more than twice the quantity of
goods we did at the beginning of the eighties. 4 H p I-' LC , 1,4C j ij i I 
i LL 3
Led by tourism, we have more than tripled exports of
services. We export nearly four times the val~ ue of
manufactures we did in 1980.
The meazures introduced in our One Niation Statement in
February will build upon these earliñ er ref orms and entrench
the trend towards a more open and outward looking economy,
while at thie same time stimulating growth.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the change in your own economy has
been no les3 dramatic or fundamental. The economic
transformation of Indonesia over the last 20 years has been
nothing short of astonishing.
Between 1966 and 1991, your economy expanded 450 per cent.
Over the last few years growth has averaged around 7 per
cent and growth rates of 5 to 6 per cent are expected to the
end of the century.
Indonesia has gone from a commodity-based economy to on6
geared to industrial expansion and manufacturing exports.
Through a sound policy of encouraging foreign investment,
bureaucratic reform, financial deregulation, support for
manufacturing, and lifting of trade barriers, you have
emerged as a dynamic and competitive economic force.
Today, our very different countries are changing in ways
which will enable us to find much more ' common ground the
economies of Australia and Indonesia are beginning to
complement each other.
Certainly, I see the strengthening and broadening economic
relationship between our two countries * as representing the
direction-in which the AuStralian economy must go.
Towards the world. Toward greater diversity in our exports.
Above all, toward stronger connections with our region.
The developing economic relation with Indonesia shows the
way we must go.
our exports to Indonesia are rapidly increasing, as are our
imports from Indonesia.
The trade is also demonstrating greater diversity, with
Indonesia manufactured goods joining timber and petroleum in
sales to Australia, and Australians construction, banking,
telecommunication, engineering and legal services joining
wheat and metals in our exports to Indonesia.
Manufactured goods, machinery, computers, telecommuunications
products, power generation equipment and motor vehicle* have
all grown to form a larger proportion of Australia's exports
to Indonesia. H pf-IlL, : Uv i1o ul I r 
I L 4 H I. 1 C * U H i~ J i r
4.
Ten years ago, Australian exports to Indonesia totalled
$ 356 million.
Today they are worth nearly $ 1.5 billion.
Over the last two years imports from Indonesia have nearly
doubled.
Just as trade has grown in recent years, invest" Ont between
Australia and Indonesia has also diversified and
consolidated. Australia is now the Sth largest foreign investor in
Indonesia, accounting for about billion in assets.
There are more than 120 Australian companies with
Significant interests in Indonesia. In the areas of coal
mining, and to a lesser extent gold mining, Australia is the
dominant source of investment.
The number of companies investing in manufacturing
industries is also rapidly increasing.
In services too, such as business and engineering
consultancy, Australian companies are becoming a significant
presence. Ladies and gentlemen, one area which has enormous economic
potential for both our countries and where Australia is
already making a significant contribution is right here in
East Java.
For many years novr, Australia's development assistance
program in Indonesia has had a strong focus on the special
needs of eastern Indonesia,
East Java is the fastest growing commercial area in
Indonesia. Already home to key agricultural industries, it
is quickly becoming a major industrial and manufacturing
region with activity in petrochemicals, shipbuilding,
cement, metal processing, machine tools, and
pharmaceuticals. The manufacturing sector has already attracted significant
foreign investment, including from Australia. Ready-mix
concrete, plasterboard, roofing tiles and medical products
are areas in which~ Australian companies have existing or
planned investments.
Infrastructure development, such as in natural gas
production and processing and bulk water supply, is also a
major area for investment, and one in which Australian
companies are already or potentially involved.
Tourism 13 a growth area, as is evidenced by the presence of
aQNTAS office here in Surabaya. 
24. Apr. 92 16: 09 No. 017
S
Now Australian business is beginning to realise the
potential of the area in such fields as dryland farming,
tourism, mining and manufacturing.
Through your introduction of special tax incentives to
encourage foreign investment in eastern Indonesia, this
potential can be more easily realised.
Ladies and gentlemen, as our commercial relationship
continues to grow, institutional arrangements will need to
be developed to manage the relationship at all levels.
On thio visit we have concluded five important bilateral
agreements ranging from taxation to science and technology
collaboration. -I
We have agreed in principle to conclude four other
agreements from investment protection to maritime
boundaries.
And most significantly, we have agreed to explore the idea
of setting up a regular ministerial meeting, chaired by our
foreign ministers, and including economic ministers, which
will give a more coherent framework to the multitude of
ministerial exchanges now taking place.
Just as such institutional arrangements can assist bilateral
commerce, regional institutions can and do play a critical
role in regional economic development.
in the regional sphere, Indonesia's active participation in
ASEAN and APEC have been crucial in ensuring the success of
these forums.
since its formation in 1967, ASEAN has proven its value as a
vehicle for economic growth in the region. The cohesion and
stability it has provided has enabled Australian business to
develop links with the region with confidence.
Today, the fastest area of growth of Australia's exports is
to the ASEAN Group. It has now displaced the EC as our
secon? lairges-t export market after North-East Asia.
As the largest member of ASEAN, Indonesia has played a
pivotal role in providing clear direction and stability
within ASEAN itself.
Jutt as ASEAN has provided the basiS for long-term growth
and stability in South-EaSt Asia, APEC will, I believe, form
the foundation for economic cooperation throughout the Asia
Pacific region. The 15 members of the APEC group accounts
for half the world'a GDP and 40% of world trade.
APEC provides us with the first ever opportunity to harness
and direct the powerful economic forces at work around the
Pacific Rim. TEL 
iLL Z4.. rip' jz it IO. U r. UO/
6
By bringing Japan and the US, the two most powerful
economies in the Pacific, together with the other economies
of the Pacific Rim, APEC can work to ensure that these
forces develop to the benefit of Us all and to the benefit
of the open, multilateral trading system which has
underpined the economic dynamism of the region.
Indonesia's response to the APEC initiative has been one of
the most positive and construtlv-e of all the APEC nations.
Your strong endorsement of APEC at the recent ASEAN Summit,
and your offer to host the 1994 APEC Ministerial Meeting,
signal your continuing commitment to this very important
initiative. In the multilateral sphere, Indonesia and Australia have
worked together in the Cairns Group in suppbrt of a
successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of negotiations
in the GATT.
As we have discussed with our Indonesian hosts, Australia
and Indonesia are now concerned that a protracted stalemate
in negotiations may jeopardise a successful outcome of the
Round. The open trading system has been a key factor in the growth
of countries liXe Indonesia and Australia, and it is
important that the major economies continue to work to
strengthen and develop wurld trade.
Ladies and gentlemen, Australia is changing. Our economy is
emerging from a recession in more competitive shape than it
has ever been.
We are casting aside the baggage of the past and directing
our energies towards greater integration with our region.
And within this region we look especially to our
relationship with Indonesia our largest and most important
neighbour as a material and symbolic example of the way
our two countries are resolving themselves for the 21st
century. TnTQ1. P. P* 



27'. Apr .92 1-: C Ho . ic' 1 F .11'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP HYATT HOTEL, SUR. ABAYA, THURSDAY APRIL 23 1992
EELQE PROOF COPY
PM: I just thought I would give you a few remarks on the
visit. I am very happy with the visit, I think it's
gone well, it's been a very friendly and I think a
successful one. We came here to make it clear that
Indonesia is in the top order of Australian priorities,
to say that we are serious neighbours, that we have
obviously the longer term to live together and that we
want to concentrate on issues of substance. But I
think we've got the balance right in talking about
those issues and at the same time making clear our
views on some of the matters which have been
controversial in the past. So we said we come as
neighbours, we've got much to do together, we can
develop each others economies, we can come more closer
together culturally end as well as that, we've been
able to say the things that we feel strongly about and
put a point clearly.
So I think that has been both understood and received
well by the Government of Indonesia and hence I regard
the visit as a successful one.
J: Should Prime Ministers and Ministers come here more
often?
PM, Obviously one should be visiting one's neighbours more
than one visits distant parts. We've had I think now
16 Australian Ministers here in the last couple of
years so there's a great exchange and a substantial
number of visits by Indonesian Ministers to Australia
in the recent past. So there is a lot going on, and of
course getting the Governm~ ent's agreement to a
ministerial Forum will also help because it means we
will have regular dialogue with a range of ministers 
TE7 L i 2, 1 7: 03 N0 i. CIc: F
2
both foreign and economic ministers about that which is
happening. Now I met eight Economic Ministers for
lunch the other day and they're terribly interested in
Australia, they're pleased Australia is investing in
this country and I think they will welcome a greater
frequency of official exchanges.
J: Prime Minister, what should we be expecting, maybe that
is the wrong word, what should we be looking for from
the Indonesians to put the flesh on the bones of this?
PM: I think from my point of view, I came here to make this
a visit which would bring us basically closer together,
to focus on the fundamentals, not to come here looking
for any particular support for initiatives or ventures,
but simply to say we are here as friends, we take you
seriously, we want to be part of your development, we
want you to be part of ours. They've responded In kind
and I think the interest in Australia and the fact that
they accept the fact that Australians are now looking
at the Asia-Pacific seriously, it is no longer
tokenism, that it really is a serious engagement by
Australia with the region, makes us I think a very
serious force here and I think they are the things of
substance, all the other things follow.
J: Have you considered inviting President Soeharto to
visit Australia?
PM: I extended an invitation to President Soeharto this
morning, saying if he would wish to Visit Australia we
would be delighted to have him.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: The response that I normally give when I'm invited is
to say thank you very much, if I have an opportunity
I'll think about it.
J: Would you expect to see him within a year?
PM: No, he's got an election on this year.
J: Foreign Minister Alatas yesterday indicated that It
might not be productive for the relationship for
President Soeharto to visit, he seemed to be indicating
that President Soeharto could face some hostile
reception in Australia due to the East Timor issue. Do
you share that view?
PM: That's a possibility but again it would be the
substance that matters. I would certainly believe that
but again it's a matter for him and his own schedule.
J: Going on to Papua New Guinea, are you aware of the.
Herald Sun's report of the internal Australian defence
industries memo alleging that Australian aid Is being
used to buy guns and American guns at that?
TEL 
TEL: 27. Apr .92 1: 0 jo .018 F*. 0351
3
PM: I was told about it, that was all. I haven't seen the
report.
3: Will you be asking about the direction of aid to Papua
New Guinea.
PM: we fund budget aid to the Government of Papua New
Guinea, what they do with their aid is a matter for
them basically.
3: Prime Minister, you say you've got the balance right,
You feel you've got the balance right between the
economic push and the human rights movement, how do you
respond to those critics back in Australia who say that
you haven't, that in feet you've been too soft and too
apologetic?
PM; I've put my views firmly, I repeated them at a press
conference, everything I said to the President you know
because I've said it to you and I made our position
clear where we stand on human rights questions. But
again the balance has got to be there, and the
appropriate balance is to recognise, I think the
stability which the Soeharto Government has brought to
the region, held the Indonesian archipelago together,
bounded together as a nation, lifted its material
standard of living and in the process given Australia a
quarter of a century of peace of mind it would not
otherwise have had, and to say that we appreciate that,
that the Government Is a feature in our stability and
that we want to do more with it. Now that's the issue
of primary substance, that and economic development in
the relationship and one's got to get the balance
right, governments have got to get the balance right.
J; Mr Keating, any disappointments In your trip to
Indonesia?
PM: None, as I said yesterday I couldn't have had it any
better I don't think.
J: Will you be taking any further steps to promote your
proposal about APEC heads-of-government meetings?
PM: Well, I've written now to President Soeharto, I've
spoken with him and to Prime Minister Miyazawa and
President Bush after a conversation I have with
President Bush in January. This is something which, as
I said, I've got no deadlines on. I think over time it
is going to happen and the earlier, the better.
J: But what is your next step? 
TEL: .7. pr 9' lb .1
4
PM: I've got no other next steps to fulfil. As I said
yesterday, I'm not beating a drum about it. I didn't
come here, you know, on the basis that I had to produce
some sort of support by President Soeharto for this. I
came f or the other reason -to build the relationship,
that is why I'm here. And he said himself that he
thought it was Inevitable that it should happen, it is
only a matter of when.
3: Mr Keating, do you think the Papua New Guinean carriers
that helped Australian troops in World War 11 are
entitled to compensation?
PM: That is not an issue I've thought much or know much
about to be honest.
J: Could I ask you a very related topic, what significance
do you think Kokoda has for Australia?
PM: Well I think Kokoda has enormous significance for
Australia. in 1942, Australia was threatened with
invasion for the first time arnd that invasion force was
repelled by Australian troops alone in Papua New
Guinea. When I say alone, of course after the battle
in the Coral Sea, but in terms of the land war, alone.
And while much of the Anzac tradition has been
developed in World War I and around Gallipoli and
Flanders, Austral. ia was never threatened with invasion
in World War I It was in World War II. But the Anzac
tradition has in fact really enhanced itself in world
War II. But that is not reflected much in our
contemporary treatment of the history. So what I would
like to do if nothing else, in visiting Kokoda is to
pay tribute to the Australians who fought for our
liberty and for those who died there and to remember
them.
3; Should a IKokoda day replace Anzac day?
PM: Well I don't think that is at all appropriate.
3: Mr Keating, Dr Hewson will be there for the Anizac Day
celebrations as well. Will you be prepared to put
aside the political differences while you are outside
the country as the former Prime Minister did when he
went to Gallipoli?
PM: Well he is coming, so therefore it is pretty obvious
that we have. But, again, Opposition leaders and Prime
ministers have always been involved in Anzac Day
ceremonies.
3; Does the study of the strategic and technical
imperatives of the Kokoda campaign incline you in any
way towards the policy of forward defence nowadays? 
T EL: jF. 9 17: C c C1~ F
PM: I don't think the bar room here is a time to discuss
the defence policy of Australia, Dennis, but a1l good
will towards you, I mean, I think probably on that note
I should leave.
ENDS 



P. M~ s FE. OFFICE 2. Apr. 92 9: 48 No. O05 F. 0I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THL PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, IO
PNG OFFICIAL DINNER, PORT MORESBY
7: 35PM FRIDAY, 24 APRIL 1992
Thank you for inviting me here. I am very grateful for the
welcome you have given me, and for the opportunity to
speak to you tonight.
It is 20 years since I first v4sited Papua New Guinea. I
was an Opposition backbencher in the entourage of an
Australian leader who was to leave his mark on the history
of both our countries, Edward Gough Whitlam.
Cough Whitlam was one of those Australians Who had no
difficulty rec6nciling his love of classical European
civilisation and institutions, with a passionate
Australian nationalism and genuine excitement at the
prospect of the countries of this region emerging Into the
world independent and strong.
one of the places he was excited about, of course, was
Papua New Guinea. He was a great believer in this country
and so much that you have done since independence
Justifies his faith.
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to visit Papua
New Guinea again.
The occasion of this visit, the commemoration of the
sacrifices made by our countrymen and women during the PNC
campaign of World War II, adds to the privilege.
Australia and Papua New Guinea are close neighbours,
enduring friends and partners involved in and benefiting
from the world's most dynamic region.
During the past decade, the economies of North and Southeast
Asia have been expanding at approximately twice the
world average.
Australia and Papua New Guinea are strategically
positioned at the southern reach of this dynamic Asia-
Pacific region.
We both know that we must seize the opportunity. 
F FF: E2F5~ .3 ARpr .92 9.: 4 tl . C'Cii F'. CJ0"
2
We both know that we Must engage in the region as never
before. This is why, on my first overseas tour as Prime minister,
I AM Visiting Indonesia and Papua New Guinea.
In Indonesia my object was to restore and enliven the
relationship with a close neighbour which is destined to
play an increasingly dynamic role in the region and the
world, It soems to me that. the degree of our success in building
bridges into Asia and the broader Asia-Pacific might will
be the measure by which future generations will Judge us.
That is Why I say strengthening our regional linkages,
initiating dialogue, multiplying our common interests
through widening our trading relationships these
mneasures will stay true to the interests of the new
generations of Australians.
It will be hard work. it will require imagination and
tenacity. There will be setbacks.
This is an historic opportunity and that for any~
responsible government is the same thing as a necessity.
Like the region around us, both Papua New Guinea and
Australia have changed profoundly since 1975, when you
became independent.
Papua NeJw Guinea has made remarkable progress in building
a nation. You have hold fast to the principles of
parliamentary democracy, social justice and human rights,
which you established for yourselves under your
consti tut ion.
It i* a tribute to thie people of Papua New Guinea, that
the democratic process, in which you are now engaged
again, remains so vigorous and competitive.
But even with your relatively Short constitutional
history, you, like othors of us, have recognised that
constitutions can always be improved. You have
introduced important constitutional reforms designed to
make Papua NeW Guinea's democracy work More effectively.
Your economy has grown and diversified. And you have
taken some difficult decisions under your structural
adjustment program to make your economy more competitive
and to help it cope with the stresses imposed by the
consequence of the Bougainville rebellion.
As a result, real GDP grow by 9 per cent in 1991, an
impressive achievement by any measure.
On the Bougainville situation, I should restate here 
Frfs FRE"-i:' OFF ICE c. ipr 92 9 4 tN o. 0C' 55'. CI3
Auttralia's fi. rm belief that the problems on that island,
which is an integral part of Papua Now Guinea, can only be
reeolved by Papua New Guineans themselves.
We hope that that resolution will be achieved peacefully,
because it is only through discussion that reconciliation
Can take place.
Australia has made it clear that we are willing to help
with the reconstruction that will be needed on
Bougainville. In the meantime we have been glad to assist with the
provision of urgently needed medical supplies. We
believe it is important that humanitarian asgistance
continue to reach the people of Bougainville. We want to
worX with the P'apua Now Guinea government to facilitate
such help.
Like Papua New Guinea, Au~ jtralial too, has changed
greatly since you bu~ came independent.
We have shaken off our cultural and 4tconornic torpor.
We have had to undergo sometimes painful economic
restructuring. we have had to transform our industrial and labour
practices.
We have had to overcome our complacency and our
prejudices, and to recast our view of the world and
ourse lves.
Such fundamental changes have had profound implications,
not only for the structure and competitiveness of the
Australian economy, but for the way we engage with our
neighbours. There is perhaps no more telling example of this than the
changing nature of ) Xustralia's relationship with Papua New
Guinea.-That relationship is no longer based on the persistence of
old ties with the colonial past. It is based instead on
the fundamental principles of political and economic
sovereignty and mutual respect articulated in the 1987
Joint Declaration of Principles.
Since the signing of the Joint Declaration of Principles,
our two countries have reached other agreements on trade
and comiiercial relations, security co-operation and
development assistance.
All these agreements share a commn theme: they recognise
the right and need for Papua N4ew Guinea to ta)~ e
responsibility for its own problems, with its own
resources, while signalling Australia's tustained 
06 2732923
FFE$$ OFFICE 25 Rp r 99~: S ; D-t4 o0 0 PF. 1
4
commuTitment to assisting in the development of Papua New
Guinea's national self-reliance.
One Cf the relationship's strengths is the " habit of
contact" which has developed between us.
Prime Minister* Namaliu has visited Australia twice since
taking off ice, and I am pleased to have so early an
opportunity to visit Papua New Guinea.
The Australia-Papua New Guinea Ministerial Forum has
becom~ e a valuable mechanism for contact between Ministers.
Its broadening agenda now covers regional and bilateral
economic relations, development co-operation, internal and
regional security and the environment.
Our respective Parliaments hiave worked to develop contacts
anld exchanges.
But parliamentary, mininterial even Prime Ministerial
contact is not the sole measure of a relationship.
Contact between Australia and Papua New Guinea has most
importantly been a story of contract between people.
That contact has left on both sides a most important
legacy of understandSng and goodwill.
As I began by saying, one particular aspect of that legacy
is the main reason I am here. I have come to mark the
achievements of Australia's forces in Papua New Guinea
durin7 World War Two, and of the Papua New Guineans, both
in uniform and out, who assisted them.
That asbistance hats left an enduring mark on our
relationship. Quite literally, Papuians and New Guineans
helped to save Australia in 1942.
The Australian and PNG media have recently carried reports
about unresolved compcensation claims for some of the PNG
carriers who assisted Australian forces in the PNG
campaign. I under~ tand that. this issue was discussed by the
Australian~ and PNG Governments during the 1980s.
Australia agreed with the PHO proposal that the PNG
Government be responsible for handling any outstanding
claims. The Australian Government, therefore, feels it should not
intrude unilaterally into this issue. At the same time,
considering the invaluable contribution the PNG carriers
made to tho war effort, we are not happy if genuine claims
for compensation have not been dealt with.
We suggest the best approach Is for the P140 Government to
advise us if there are any outstanding aspects of this
issue that we need to reconsider together. 
r . M's FPRESS OFFICE 25 Apr .92-9i tNCoJ. C3L5 F. C'
The Australian Government's basic position is that all
worthy claims for compensation should be treated
Sympathatically on their Perits.
I will be discussing this issue with Prime Minister
N&amp; maliu tomorrow.
Ladies and gentlemen, even now, over 11,000 Australians
live and work in Papua New Guinea, helping to contribute,
like many before them, to Papua New Guinea's development.
Many Papua New Guineans, including Several ministers in
the present Cabinet, have received part of their education
and training in Australia.
This people-to-people contact underpinis an expanding
economic partnership. Two-way trade in 1991 reached a
record $ 1.7 billion, or more than 1.2 billion kina. This.
was a 48 per cent incroase over the preceding year. Our
trade is now roughly in balance.
Investment is another im~ portant dimenuion of the economic
partnership. Australian investment in Papua New Guinea
now exceeds $ 1.5 billion. A further $ 3 billion in
investment is in prospect over the next 5 years.
Continued economic growth in Papua New Guinea will bring a
further expansion of two-way trade as the demand for
imports to underpin productive investment accelerates.
T believe there is a need to look again at the framework
of our bilateral economic relationship.
Although partially revised in 1991, the Papua New Guinea-
Australia Trade and Commercial Relations Agreement of 1977
has become increasingly limited and anachronistic. We
need to examine wider, more reciprocal arrangements which
would more accurately raflect the changing nature of our
economic relationship and the economic realities of our
region. Thre n ore. Eressin? groblem for Papua New Quinea
GIORLI~ ULE~ ihU LII U alJilii a
it so well, Prime Minister, without security, economic
development cannot proceed, and without development,
security cannot be guaranteed.
Austral. ia remains committed tv security and defence cooperation
with Papua New Guinea. The Agreed Statement on
Security Co-operation signed last year by Prime Minister
Hawke underscores that commitment.
out more work needa to be done Le ensure this cooperation
is fully effective. In particular. Papua New Guinea needs
to develop an integrated and comprehensive approach to
security force reform and rosource allocation.
The nature of Austraulia's development assistance to Papua
Now Guinea is also evolving. 
ut16 c*. iqr C4 1 tic * K00i. F * CIF
F, . i's FEiOFFICE
Our two Covarnments are agreed that by the year 2000, all
Australian aid currently worth around $ 300 Million a
year will be jointly programmed to meet specific needs.
Our aid program~ will assist Papua New Guinea develop
effective and long-lasting solutions to its problems. it
is designed to help you strengthen the institutions upon
which your country's future depends.
Ultimately, however, the solutions will have to be your
Own.
A self-reliant Papua New Guinea will be better placed to
realise its aspirations and potential as a nation.
We in Australia are confident that the people of Papua New
Guinea have the will and the capabilities to meet the
challenges before you. Those challenges will demand
adaptability, patience, careful planning and
determination. But your country has already demonstrated
all those qualities.
Augtraliant, to an unprecedented degree, have begun to see
their interests and their future as lying in the region.
Papua N~ ew Guineans are doing the same.
Without abandoning your l. inks to the South Pacific, you
have become an observer at ASEAN meetings. You have
consolidated a close relationship with our mutual
neighbour, Indonesia. Your economic ties with Asia are
becoming closer.
You are well placed to act as a successful bridge between
ASEAN and the South Pacific Forum.
I am convinced that neither of us need fear the effects of
greater engagement with the region around us.
The snore we are able to open up our economies, and our
minds, to the outside world, the 1better and more rewarding
will be the quality of our own enduring links. 


Today marks the 77th anniversary of the most famous battle in Australia's history.
And in New Zealand's history.
On this day through all those years we have repeated the words "Lest we forget".
And we have not forgotten.
The message has always been - remember their bravery and sacrifice, their willingness to lay down their lives for their country, and for their friends.
Gallipoli and the history of the Australian nation are indissoluble. It is inscribed in legend.&nbsp;
The legend was cemented in the terrible battles in Europe and the Middle East between 1915 and 1918.
It was sustained between the wars when the monuments were built and the rituals of the nation born at Gallipoli were defined.
The spirit of Anzac became the canon of Australian life: the ideals to which we aspired, the values by which we lived.&nbsp;
The legend was re-visited in 1939 when Australian troops again left for the Middle East, again fought heroically, again with New Zealanders&nbsp; - and again, some might say, too often against the odds.
Sixty thousand young Australians died in the First World War; 30,000 in the Second.
The great majority of them lie buried on the other side of the world.&nbsp; In France and Belgium, Libya, Syria, Turkey, Greece, Crete.
They also lie in Singapore and Malaysia, Burma, Borneo and other countries of this region, including of course, Papua New Guinea.
Countless others died prematurely as a result of war, or had their lives and the lives of their families scarred by war.
War has shaped Australia's history in the twentieth century like nothing else.&nbsp; Shaped and twisted it.
At times it has stifled it.
We will continue to hold the memory of those who served and died as inextinguishable and sacred.
We will continue to remind ourselves - "Lest We Forget".
Legends bind nations together. They define us to ourselves.
But they should not stifle us.&nbsp; They should not constrain our growth, or restrict us when we have to change.
Anzac is a commemoration of the most universal human values.
But it does not confer on us a duty to see that the world stands still.
The Australians who went to two World Wars, or to Korea, Malaya, Vietnam, went to secure a place in the world for their country and its ideals.
The world moves on. Our country must move with it.
Today I think we should remember that.
Today we would do well to remember the two great dramas which were played out fifty years ago.
We all should know the story better than we do.
We should remember not only the battles which were fought here in Papua New Guinea, or in Malaya, or at El Alamein, Tobruk, or Greece and Crete: or those who suffered and died in prison camps in Singapore, Burma and elsewhere in the world.
We should remember all those, but we should also remember the battle fought out in Canberra and London and Washington - for in large part it was that battle which made success here in Papua New Guinea possible.
In that battle John Curtin defied those people Australia had never before defied.
He insisted to his counterparts in London and Washington - his friends, our friends - that Australian troops then serving in the Middle East should return home and defend Australia.
Shortly after, he defied them again.&nbsp; And he defied those in Australia who criticised him for his defiance - those who said it was a great blunder to defy the British and Americans.
He defied them, and insisted that the returning troops not be diverted to Burma, but come home and fight the Battle for Australia.
John Curtin was right.
Just as he was right when he declared that in the hour of crisis, after the fall of Singapore, Australia looked to the United States - free, he said "of any pangs as to our traditional links of kinship with the United Kingdom."
"We know that Australia can go and Britain still hold on", he said. "We are therefore determined that Australia shall not go.."
In doing this he took the Anzac legend to mean that Australia came first - that whatever the claims of Empire on the loyalty of those who died in the Great War, the pre-eminent claim had been Australia's.
The Australians who served here in Papua New Guinea fought and died, not in the defence of the old world, but the new world.&nbsp; Their world.
They died in defence of Australia and the civilisation and values which had grown up there.
That is why it might be said that, for Australians, the battles in Papua New Guinea were the most important ever fought.
They were fought in the most terrible circumstances. One correspondent wrote:&nbsp; "Surely no war was ever fought under worse conditions than these. Surely no war has ever demanded more of a man in fortitude."
They were fought by young men with no experience of jungle warfare. By the very young men of the militia with no experience of war at all.
They were fought by airmen of outstanding courage, skill and dedication.
They were fought against a seasoned, skilful and fanatical enemy.
At Milne Bay the Australians inflicted on the Japanese their first defeat on land.&nbsp;
Sir William Slim, who was then commanding the 14th Army in Burma, wrote:&nbsp; "It was Australian soldiers who first broke the spell of invincibility of the Japanese army: those of us who were in Burma have cause to remember."
On the Kokoda Trail it was again the young and inexperienced militia men - this time of the 39th and 53rd battalions - later reinforced with soldiers of the 7th Division, who fought gallantly - and eventually won.
When it seemed that Papua New Guinea would fall, when it seemed it would be another Singapore, another Rabaul, these troops gallantly held out and finally drove the enemy back to the sea.
These were the heroic days of Australia's history.
It would be wrong to let this day pass without paying tribute to the people of other countries whose bravery and selflessness helped win the day - including the British and other Commonwealth servicemen and women who fought in the war against Japan.
While Australians fought the enemy here in Papua New Guinea, the United States forces held them out at sea and on Guadalcanal.&nbsp;
What they did then created the enduring bond between Australia and the United States.
Today we must also pay tribute to the servicemen of Papua&nbsp; New Guinea who fought and died under Australian command.
And, perhaps above all, we should honour and express our profound admiration for the Papua New Guinean carriers whose stalwart support was crucial to the final victory.
The support they gave to Australian soldiers, the terrible conditions and dangers they endured with the soldiers, the illness, injury and death many of them suffered, constitutes one of the great humane gestures of the War - perhaps the great humane gesture of our history.
It has never been forgotten, and never will be forgotten. It is the best possible reminder that these battles were fought, not for the glory of war, but for humanity.
And it, too, created an enduring bond - between Papua New Guinea and Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, these days there is a relatively new memorial to the Anzac legend in Australia.
Sitting on the hill near the new Parliament House, it is a modest monument inscribed with these words: "Look around you - these are the things they believed in."
In the end they believed in Australia - in the democracy they had built, in the life they had made there, and the future they believed their country held.
Not all generations are called on to risk and sacrifice their lives for their beliefs - but all generations need to believe.
On this Anzac Day it seems appropriate to remind ourselves of our responsibility to renew that faith and loyalty.
There can be no better way, surely, to honour those who so gallantly fought and died here.



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESENTATION OF AUSTRALIA PRIZE, GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, MONDAY, 27 APRIL 1992
It gives me great pleasure to host this second presentation
of the Australia Prize.
The Australia Prize honours outstanding achievement in
science and technLology.
It honours the intelligent, commercial application of
science to develop the technology essential to create wealth
and human welfare.
It celebrates Australia's place in the world as an advanced
and enlightened nation.
We Australians are inclined to underestimate our
achievements in science and technology or, rather, we do
not know enough about them.
We learnt at school that innovation and invention were
essential to our success in conquering the land and the
great distances which separate us from the rest of the
world. So we came away knowing about the MacArthurs' development of
Merino sheep, Farrer' s experiments with wheat, MacKay's
Harvester, Mort's development of refrigeration, the stump
jump plough and myxomatosis.
There was a certain romance to these developments by virtue
of their being part of the rural pioneering legend of
Australia. They were presented to us as principal reasons for our
success in building a good society here.
Our successes in industrial technology have not attracted
the same attention.
Nor have our efforts in the field in which tonight's awards
are made physical sciences related to mining or processing 6441 
Nor have our efforts in the field in which tonight's awards
are made physical sciences related to mining or processing
of mineral resources.
It is safe to say that very few Australians are aware of the
Isasmelt process for base metals which Mt Isa Mines and the
CSIRO developed.
It's doubtful if many know about CRA's technology for the
rapid sorting of diamonds, or the " Jameson cell" flotation
process for the separation of minerals.
These technologies are not well known, and the effort and
ingenuity that went into them are not widely acknowledged.
Yet these sorts of successes in research and development are
as vital to our future as any of the legendary ploughs and
wheat breeds were.
So in presenting the Australia Prize tonight we hope that,
over and above reward and acknowledgment for the winners, we
are signalling recognition for all the workers in this field
past and present.
You will be aware that last week I was in Indonesia.
I went there to consolidate our relationship and pave the
way for a great expansion of our economic relationship.
The opportunities are enormous we are talking about a
rapidly developing, resource rich country of 180 million
people.
We have much of the technology, the processes and the
experience Indonesia and the wider South-east Asian region
needs.
The application of our skills in these countries has more
than a commercial significance, of course. Very often it
means that people there are healthier and better fed and
housed, that they have better lives and more
opportunities. Tonight I can say to the winners of the Australia Prize, and
all those others engaged in the field the work you do is
at the very heart of our future in the region and in the
world. And, of course, what we do there will determine, to a very
large extent, the sort of the society we can build here.
In a real sense our solutions to the problem of
unemployment, our ability to sustain our way of life and our
standard of living, depend on our success in Asia and
Pacific and our success there depends largely on our
scientific and technological skills and the selling of them.
6442 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Australia Prize is an
international award and this year it demonstrates that our
science and technology are among the best in the world.
The four winners in this year's field have put Australia in
a position of world leadership in developing and making
commercial on-line instrumentation in the coal industry.
The work of tonight's winners is a contemporary example of
the impressive record of Australians in mining and mineral
processing technologies.
For in fact much of the innovation in the mining industry
worldwide is the result of the work of Australian
scientists, technologists and engineers.
It is important that this aspect of ' Australian development
be more generally known, to provide perspective gn the
benefits available from science an * d technology and to
establish an environment that nutures intellectual
achievement. We need to build on our past achievements. In particular,
we must improve our commercial acumen.
We must sharpen our ability to develop Australian ideas and
adapt the ideas of others to gain competitive advantage.
The importance of the Australian Prize is that it places
Australian science in this international context.
Globalisation of technology is not just a concept, but an
important part of Australia's new outward looking culture.
Science and technology can be of great benefit to Australia.
They hold the key to solving many economic, social, medical
and environmental problems.
The Government has recognised this, and is committed to
maintaining a vigorous science and technology system.
Our initiatives in stimulating industrial R&amp; D, strengthening
the public sector research base and enhancing linkages
between researchers and research users, are directed to
providing the strong and vital innovative capacity that is
needed for sustained economic growth.
It is a mark of this commitment that Government support for
science and innovation has grown by 29 per cent in real
terms since 1982-83.
The Australia Prize is a small but important part of this
support, and the work of tonight's winners a tribute to the
national science effort.
I would like to record the Government's gratitude to the
Australian Prize a Committee. 6443 
4
This panel of distinguished Australians has again brought
wide knowledge and experience to bear on a challenging task.
Our Master of Ceremonies, Sir Rupert Myers, has chaired the
Committee for the last two years.
Ladies and gentlemen, tonight we honour Australian
endeavour. We congratulate the winners individually and
collectively for their outstanding achievements.
They are achievements of which Australian should be proud.
It is equally true that we should be grateful and I hope,
inspired.
6444
zr; e r; u~ i~ ce~ b~ 



A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PETER CAVE MONDAY 27 APRIL 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PC: Prime Minister, you described the trip to Kokoda and
Lae as one of the most moving experiences in your
public life. Why was that?
PM: Because it was the place where the sovereignty of
Australia was fought and decided by young conscripts in
the main, the AIF was there too, but in the main young
conscripts, boys 18, 19, 20 years of age who just died
there in one of the most vicious campaigns of the war,
and on the 50th anniversary we were there to remember
it and to say thank you.
PC Why did it move you so much personally?
PM: I think it was probably the location, the ground where
the commemoration was, was actually fought over, people
had actually died there and that and the village, the
village hadn't changed very much in the years and the
mountains in the back, it was as though you could have
been there. I'm sure if I'd have had a son there you
would not be composed and stand there, you could not be
composed and stand there. I felt as the Prime Minister
an obligation to express appreciation on behalf of the
nation to those families who left their sons there.
PC: Is it fair to say that this whole trip has really been
about nationalism away, for maybe finding our place in
history in Papua New Guinea, finding our place in the
world in Jakarta?
PM: No, it's about two things. It was about the
neighbourhood, making our place more certain in the
immediate region, trying to put the Indonesia
relationship into its proper context and at the same
time accepting the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea's
offer to be there for the 50th anniversary of the Papua
New Guinea campaigns on Anzac Day. We lost 2000 boys
in that campaign and this was the appropriate time, for
me anyway, to remember them and say something about it. 
PC: In Indonesia did you feel you had to make a point that
there were more important things in the relationship
than human rights?
PM: Well I thought I got the balance right. That was being
able to say and having said that we thought the events
in Timor were a tragedy, that the military was too
tough, that there had to be a better basis of dealing
with the problem. Essentially one of a process of
reconciliation, while at the same time saying that the
whole relationship is important to Australia. And not
only important, that the whole relationship the
Government of Indonesia had brought to Australia and
brought to the region 25 years of stability. If the
Indonesian archipelago were fracturing or breaking up,
Australian strategic policy would be completely
different and the Timor debate would be set in an
entirely different context.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN' S TV FOUNDATION " LIFT-OFF"
PARLIAMENT HOUSE WEDNESDAY, 29 APRIL 1992
1 am delighted to be asked to launch what is a marvellous
venture in every regard.
Lift-Off is the product of a great initiative: from the
Australian Children's Television Foundation under the inspired
leadership of Patricia Edgar..
Patricia Edgar has made an unequaled contribution to
children's television and children'q education in this country
and I take this opportunity to congratulate and thank her.
In all she has done, of course, she has also made a great
contribution to Australia.
There are many others I should mention.
The late Robert Holmes a Court made a vital initial
investment. Janet Holmes a Court has played a major role. So
has Don Edgar odf the National Outreach Committee.
Yet, in a sense, it would be wrong to stress the contribution
of any individuals for the outstanding feature of this
enterprise is its cooperative nature.
The ABC, the Film Finance Corporation, Penguin Books, Octopus
Publishing, Text Media; various education Ministries and other
educational bodies; teachers from right across the curriculum
and curricula des'. gners, experts in children's education and
child psychology; writers, directors and technicians; actors,
musicians, mimics, puppet-makers and puppeteers.
There is an exLraordinary boldness and breadth to the
conception, and plainly great skill in the execution.
if the children who watch Lift-Off, and read the Lift-Off
spin-offCs, develop the same skills of communication,
cooperation and execution as producers have displayed, we will
really be able to say that this country is pretty clever.
Among other things, the project suggests to me what we are
collecLively capable of I think, almost as much as the
program itself, we are celebrating that today. 
ILL 2
Lift-off also suggests what television is capable of which
is to say much more than we and our children are generally
given. I think most of us feel that, despite some illustrious
exceptions, television has never really lived up to its great
promise as a medium of human growth and enlightenment.
Our children, particularly, deserve much more than they are
given in the way of intellectual stimulation.
So, quite frankly, do we adults both as consumers of adult
entertainment, and as parents.
Parents in the contemporary environment need whatever help
they can get with the task of parenting.'
This is an extraordinarily complex, largely artificial,
rapidly changing world.
The information we anO our children are required to absorb is
infinitely greater, more complex, and, In many senses, more
elusive and ephemeral than it was a generation ago or half a
generation 890.
The need for new channels of learning, over and above parents
and schools, seems to me to be greater than it has ever been
before. The need to develop the capacities for learning and creativity
and the ability to enjoy them has never been greater.
Television is one obvious answer. But it has been for forty
years. The truth is, television, which first presented itself as such
a marvellous new learning medium, has always been an
infuriating mixture of cause and cure.
Lift-Off is most definitely in the Category of cure.
I am also excited by it for this reason: it is a two way
window on the world.
it means that we will go to the world as well as having the
world come to us.
We are good at these sorts of things.
Perhaps not enough Australians know it but we are good at
education. We export it.
We are good at making films and television; good at
entertainment; good at the arts. We export all those things
too. P 114 N 0 U U 0 UZ 
3
We are also good at looking after those who need looking
after. Not perfect by a long shot, but better than most.
No Australians are more deserving of our attention meaning
the investment of money, energy and expertise than our
children. That is why Lift-Off is a truly great Australian venture. I
congratulate all those who have been associated with it, and
on behalf of all Australians, wish themi all the success the
project deserves.
Thank you. 



29. Plpr. 92 17: 46 No. a r. uiuv
PRIME MINISTER40/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
RADIO STATION 2HD
During Question Time I was asked a question about Senator
Richardson's participation in a Cabinet decision in 1991
regarding-radio licence fees which implied that Senator
Richardson-had pecuniary-interests in conflict with his
Ministerial responsibilities.
The imputation is untrue.
Sonator Richardson had no pecuniary interest as he was not
paid for his directorship.
The real issue is whether Cabinet colleagues were aware he
was a director of 2HD and whether that directorship
constituted a reason for Senator Richardson not to
participate in any particular Cabinet discussion.
Senator Richardson's directorship was common knowledge.
In any case, according to Cabinet Office records Senator
Richardson did not attend either the relevant ERC meeting or
the Cabinet meeting that decided televison and radio licence
fees. Senator Richardson has apologised to me for his oversight in
not meeting the full technical requirements of declaration
and I accept his apology.
CANBERRA
April 29, 1992 TEL i 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
FollowIng the Opposi~ tion's preoccupation with declaration -s
of interest I have today asked the Government Leader in the
Senate to seek leave to reintroduce a resolution providing
for the registration and declaration of Senators' interests.
In doing so, I challenge the Leader of the Opposition to
instruct his party in the Senate to support the passage of
the resolution.
The Government has sought to have the resolution passed on
three previous occasions in 1983, 1986 and 1987. on each
occasion this reform was blocked by the Coalition.
If Dr Hewson fails to instruct his party to accept the
resolution in the Senate it will prove his protestations
about propriety in public office to be without substance.
my advice is that the earliest opportunity for the
Government to reintroduce the resolution would be Monday,
May 4.
I attach a copy of the resolution as put in 1987.
CANBERRA April 30, 1992 ntj, j-L 1 : 44 uico r U I I 
SENATE JOIRA ~ 7Mrh18
No: 169 Page: 1680
REGISTRATION AND DECLARATION OF SENATORS' INTERESTSPROPOSED
RESOLUTION
The Manager of Government Business
( Senator Evans) at the request of the Leader
of the Government ( Senator Buttoni) and
pursuant to notlce, * moved-
That the -Senate adopt the following
resolution relating to the registration and
declaration of Senators' interests, such
resolution to continue in force unless amended
or repealed by the -Senate in this or a
subsequent Parliament:
1 Declaration of Senators' interests
That, within 28 days of making and
subscribing an ' oath or affirmation as a
Senator, each Senator shall provide to the
Registrar of Senators' Interests a statement ofthe
Senator's registrable interests; and
the registrable interests of. which the
Senator is aware of the Senators' spouse,-
and ( ii) of. any children* who are wholly or
Mainly dependent On the Senator for support,
in accordance with the resolution adopted by
the Senate and in a form'determined by the
Committee of Senators' Interests from time to
time, and shall also notify any alteration of*
those interests to the Registrar within 28 days
of that alteration occurring.
Any Senator whoknowingly
fails to provide a statement of
registrable interests to the Registrar of
Senators' Interests by the due date;
knowingly fails to notify any alteration of
those Interests to the Registrar of Senators'
Interests within 28 days of the change
occurring; or
knowingly provides false or misleading
information to the Registrar of Senators'
Interests, shall be guilty of a serious contempt of the
Senate and shall be dealt with by the Senate
accordingly. 2 Registrable interests
That the statement of a Senators registrable
interests to be provided by a Senator shall
include the registrable interests of which the
Senator is aware of the Senator's spouse;
and of any children who are wholly or
mainly dependent on the Senator for support,
and shall cover the following matters:
shareholdings in public and private
companies ( including holding companies)
indicating the name of the company or com panies; m t an no i e
c( ii) family and business tut n oie
* cnPartiesin which a beneficial interest is held,
indicating the name of-the trust, the nature of
its operation and beneficial interest, and
in which the Senator, the Senator's
spouse, or A child who is wholly or mainly
dependent on the Senator for support, is -a
trustee ( but not including a trustee of an
estate where no beneficial interest is held by
the Sen~ ator, the Senator's spouse or
dependent children), indicating the name of
the trust, the nature of its operation and the
beneficiary of the trust;
( iii) real estate, including the location ( suburb
or area only) and the purpose for which it is
owned; ( iv) registered directorships of companies;
partnershiips, indicating the nature of the
interests and the activities of the partnership,,
( vi) liabilities, indicating the nature of the
liability and the creditor concerned,
( vii) the nature of any bonds, debentures and
like investments;
( viii) saving or investment accounts,
indicating their nature and the name of the
bank or other institutions concerned;
( ix) the nature of any other assets ( excluding*
household and personal effects) each valued at
over $ 5,000;
Wx the nature of any other substantial
sources of incomie;
( xi) gifts valued at more than $ 250 received
fromn official sources, . or at more than $ 100
where received from other than official
. sources, provided that a gift received thy a
Senator, the Senator's'spouse or dependent
children,-from family members or personal
friends in a purely personal capacity need not
be registered unless the Senator judges that
an appearance of conflict of interest may be
seen to exist;
( xii) any sponsored travel or hospitality
received; ( xiii) membership of any Organisation; and
( xiv) any other interests where a conflict of
interest with a Senator's public duties could
foreseeably arise or be seen to arise.
3 Register and Registrar of Senators' Interests
Thatat the commencement of each Parliament,
and at other times as necessary, the President
17 March 1987 
17 March 1987
shall appoint ' an officer of the Department of
the Senate as the Registrar of Senatori'
Interests and that -offcer shall also be
Secretary of the Committee of Senators'
Interests; Pb) the Registrar of Senators' Interests sha
in accordance with procedures determined by
the Committee of Senators' Interests,
maintain ak Register of Senators' Interests in a
form to be determined by that Committee
from time to time;
. as soon as possible after ' the
commencement of each Parliament, the
Chairman of the Committee of Senators'
Interests shall table in the Sonate a copy of
the completed Register of Senators' Interests
and shall also table from time to time as
required any notification by a Senator of
alteration of those interests; and
the Register of Senators iterests shall be
available for inspection by any person under
conditions to be laid down by the Committee
of Stenatoru Interests from time to timne.
4 Declaration of interest in debate and other
proceedings That, notwithstanding the lodgment by a
Senator of a statement of the Senatorts
registrable interests and the registrable
interests of which the Senator is aware of
the Senator's spouse; and of any children
who are wholly or mainly dependent on . the
Senator for support, and the incorpor-ation of
that statement in a Register of Senators'
Interests, a Senator shall declare any relevant
interestat the beginning of his or her speech if the
Senator should participate in debate in the
Senate, Committee of the whole Senate, or ' a
Committee of the Senate ( or of the Stnate and
the House), and*
00i as soon as practicable after a Division is
called for in the Senate, Committee of the
whole Senate, or a Committee of the Senate
( or of the Senate and the House) if the
Senator proposes to vote in that Division, and
the declaration shall be recorded and indexed
in the Journals of the Senate or inutes of
Pro~ eedings ( as applicable) and in any
Hansard report of those proceedings or that
Division: Provided that it shall not be necessary for a
Senator to declare an interest when directing
a question seeking information in accrdance
with Standing Order 98 or 98A.
Debate ensued.
Senator Mackin, by leave, moved-That the
Senate resolve itself into Committee of the
Whole for the consideration of the motion.
question put and passed.
The Senate, ' accordingly, resolved itself Into Committee for the consideration of. the
motion. In the Committee
Motion, by leave, taken as a whole and
debated. Senator Vigor ' moved an amendment, viz:*
Leave out all words after " Parliament" ( first
occurring), insert:
() That a Senator, before speaking in any
debate in the Senate or Committee -of the.
Whole or participating in any, proceedings of a
Committee appointed by the Senate or by both
Houses of the Parliament, and before voting
in. any Division in the Senate, Committee of
the Whole or such a Committee, declare any
interest of the Senator, or of any person
associated with the Senator, of which the
Senator is aware, which may be relevant to
that debate or Division or those proceedings.
That a declaration under paragraph ( 1 be
made orally to the Senate, Committee of the
Whole or such Committee, or by writing
delivered to the Clerk of the Senate, where the
declaration relates to the Senate or a
Committee or the Whole, or to the secretary of
the Committee, where it relates to such a
committee, and reported to the Senate,
Committee of the Whale or Committee.'
That a declaration under paragraph. be
recorded in the Journals of the Senate and
Hansard where the declaration is made in the
Senate or Committee of the Whole, and in
Minutes * of Proceedings where the declaration
is made in a committee.
That,* fo r the purposes of paragraph
an interest of a Senator shall be taken to be
relevant to a debate or Division or to
proceedings if the interest is such that the
interest may influence the conduct of the
Senator in the debate, Division or proceedings..
That, for the purposes of paragraph a
person shall be taken to be associated with a
Senator if an association between the person
and the Senator is such that the Senator may
have regard to an interest of that person in
determining the Senator's conduct as a
Senator. That the Senate will regard as guilty of a
serious contempt any Senator who knowingly
fails to comply with this resolution.".
And it being 10.30 The Chairman of
Committees ( Senator Hamer), under Sessional
Order, put the Question-That he do leave the
Chair and report to the enate.
Question put and passed.
ILL.
SENATE JOURNALS n P I 1 11 U 



TEL: 4. May. 92 11: U9 NO. UU4 r '-Ul/
REMARKS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
BATTLE OF THE CORAL SEA COMMIEMORATION, TOWN HALL, SYDNEY,
2 MAY 1992
This week we celebrate the Battle of the Coral Sea the
first battle of the Pacific War in which the enem~ y suffered
a strategic setback, the first to check the tide of his
advance, the first to give us respite.
Because it restrained Japanese military expansion in our
region, and helped make possible further victories in Papua
New Guinea, the Solomon Islands and at Midway, the Battle of
the Coral Sea was a turning point in the War and in our
history. Because it saw Americans and Australians joined in common
purpose, defending not only Australia and the region but the
ideals we share, it was a turning point in our relationship.
The Battle of the Coral Sea was the first test of our
alliance. The bravery and sacrifice of our sailors and
airmen gave it the strength to last.
Fifty years later that bond endures, the friendship is as
strong as ever.
We owe a great deal to the American, Australian and allied
servicemen who fought in the Battle Of the Coral Sea.
In particular we owe much to the United States, then and
still, the greatest liberal democracy in the world.
The might of the US Navy and the courage of American and
Australian fighting men won the day. Australians have never
forgotten, never ceased to express their gratitude.
But in this coming week it should not be so much the might
of arms we celebrate, as the might of an idea.
I mean the idea of freedom. The idea of democracy.
That, I think, is what the Battle of the Coral Sea should
mean to us now. 
TEL: 4. May. 92 11: 09 NO. 004 P. 02/ 0
2
if we are properly to honour those who fought and died, we*
must stay true to those liberal democratic principles which
they defended, true to the ideals of justice and fairness,
true to their faith in what they had built at home and what
they aspired to build for their children.
True to the humane principles at the root of our
democracies. In welcoming you back to our country, Secretary Cheney, you
may be sure that we Australians have rnot forgotten either
the debt we owe, or the principles which were so bravely
defended. You and Dr Cheney, all those Americans on board the ships of
the US fleet, and all those who are visiting Australia to
join in these great celebrations, may be assured of a very
warm welcome.
We have looked forward to your coming. We look forward to
your stay, and trust that it will be a very happy one.
Thank you 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING MP
CORAL SEA RECEPTION, GREAT HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
4 MAY 1992
It is my great privilege tonight to host this reception in
honour of those American and Australian servicemen and
women whose courage and sacrifice fifty years ago did so
much to keep us free.
The Battle of the Coral Sea was the first major check to
Japanese miiay expansion in our region. It forced a
seemingly invincible enemy to rethink and reconstruct
their plans for domination of the area.
Plans which, after the battles of New Guinea, the Solomon
Islands and Midway they were forced to abandon altogether.
in stemming the tide of Japanese aggression, the Battle of
the Coral Sea had great consequences for the war.
It also had great consequences for the peace: for it
forged a bond between Australia and the United States
which will endure for as long as the cause of democracy
endures with us.
The bond has its most obvious manifestation in the
alliance between our countries.
The war in the Pacific was the foundation of that
alliance. But its resilience derives from more then our experience
of World War II.
It derives principally from our long friendship.
Americans have been coming here for 200 years.
They came to trade in the earliest days of European
settlement. In 1840 the united States Exploring Expedition
came in the course of their remarkable scientific survey
of the Pacific. 
in 1908 the Great White Fleet came and received a
stupendous welcome.
Austra liens have always recognised something of themselves
in Americans as well they might.
We are both countries of the New World as one great
Australian patriot of a much less complex age exclaimed
Christopher Columbus and James Cook were the saviours of
mankind. These days we don't imagine ourselves, or even the two
explorers, in such exalted terms.
But we do remainz countries whose strength has been the
strength of those who not only imagined a better life, but
who had the courage to seek it.
And who sought it and made it in the New World, in our
countries. We both derive our strength from individual effort and
initiative.
We derive it therefore by enshrining those values which
encourage and protect the rights and opportunities of
individuals I mean tolerance, freedom and justice.
Our strength, and the strength of our alliance, is derived
from our shared liberal, democratic and humane values.
These remain, I believe, our common aspirations: they
are, I have no doubt, our areatast aspirations.
It follows that It is our common duty, our duty to the
heroes of the Coral Sea, to see that those values are not
eroded. Nor can we say that we have fulfilled our duty, if we fail
to create in this generation faith and hope of the kind
which inspired those men and women of 1942 to risk
everything for the cause of their countries.
That is why it is not enough on this fiftieth anniversary
of the battles which decided our future, to merely pay
homage to the past we will most truly honour the Coral
Sea heroes when we find the ways to guarantee the future
of the next generation as they guaranteed ours.
if we are to r. eiuain countries of hope and faith, it seems
to me that we must be countries of renewal. We must be
prepared to move on.
While taking care to preserve those great democratic
values and traditions on which our way of life is built,
and for which so ma~ ny fought and died, we must change. 
3
That is why Australia seeks a renewed sense of national
purpose. It is also why the Australian government now directs so
much of its attention to its economic transformation and
its trade and political focus to the Asia-Pacific region.
For us, it is the direction of the future: a rapidly
changing reality which Australians are now accommodating.
For the same reason Australia would like to see the United
States reaffirm its role in the region.
We would like to see a US institutional and investment
presence to match the trade and strategic one.
We think it would be in the Uinited States' interests, and
very much in the interests of the region, if the world's
greatest liberal democracy were integrated with Asia and
the Pacific to a degree at least equivalent to that
obtaining with Europe.
A greater US presence in the Pacific can on ly help the
region fulfill the promise of its name as an ocean of
peace and stability.
We would like to see the friendship so manifest fifty
years ago renewed and regenerated in this year of
cornmemioration and in the years to come.
I take this opportunity to welcome Secretary Cheney and Dr
Cheney to Canberra.
And to welcome all of you particularly, of course, those
veterans to whom we are all so indebted and in whose
honour tonight's reception is held. 



PRIME MINISTER 42/ 92
FOR MEDIA
STATEMENT FROM THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
The Prime Minister regrets not being able to attend
Saturday's celebrations in Townsville to mark the
anniversary of the Battle of the Cofra-l Sea.
There have been several Coral Sea commemorative events, some
of which the Prime Minister has attended.
Unfortunately, he is unable to attend all of them.
Some time ago the Prime Minister was invited by the
Australia-United States Coral Sea Council to attend the
wreath-laying ceremony on Sunday, May 10 which has been
designated an Event of National Importance.
He agreed to attend this event.
Contrary to some media reports the Prime Minister did not
" promise" that he would be able to attend Saturday's events.
When this office declined the invitation to Saturday's
events it was explained that the reason for this was the
need for the Prime Minister to prepare for the special
Premiers' Conference to be held on Monday May 11.
It was also stressed that the Prime Minister deeply
regretted not being able to attend the Townsville ceremonies
but that this was unavoidable.
CANBERRA May 5, 1992 10-' e\ 5 V, L4 C"_ 



TEL:~~ J: I) F 1
4 3/ 92
MEETING WITH DALAI LAMA
I expect to have a private meeting with His Holiness, the
Dalai Lama, on Friday 8 May. The meeting has been arranged
in recognition of the Dalai Lama's position as a prominent
religious figure an~ d distinguished Nobel Laureate. may 1992
TEL A ZL
11" qw 4111 



EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
PARLIAMENTARY STATEMENT ON INDONESIAN AND PAPUA NEW GUINEA
VISIT, 7 MAY 1992
Mr Speaker,
I take this opportunity to provide the House with
information and observations arising from my visit to
Indonesia and PNG between 21 to 26 April.
I visited these two countries to emphasise the Government's
determination to make Australia's place in the region more
certain. Indonesia and PNG are close and important neighbours.
Both have rapidly growing economies and hold great promise
as destinations for Australian exports and investment. Both
are vital to our regional security.
To a very considerable extent it is on what we do now in
these and other countries of the region that the future of
Australia depends.
In going to Indonesia it was my intention to demonstrate to
the Indonesian Government and the Australian people that
Indonesia is in the first rank of our priorities. It is in
many ways the best test of our ability to do the things we
must do in the wider region.
Indonesia naturally commands our attention.
It is the fourth most populous country in the world. It is
a leading member of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations ( ASEAN) and a key player in regional affairs.
As our close northern neighbour, Indonesia has an important
bearing on our security environment. 
More than is commonly appreciated in Australia, we have
benefited very directly from the achievements of President
Soeharto's New Order Government over the past 25 years.
Between 1966 and 1991, Indonesia's real GDP rose 450 per
cent. Over the last few years Indonesia's economic growth has
averaged around 7 per cent. It is expected to be around
or 6 per cent until the end of the decade.
Through a sound policy of encouraging foreign investment,
bureaucratic reform, financial deregulation, support for
manufacturing and lifting of trade barriers, Indonesia has
emerged as a dynamic and competitive economic force.
Political stability and economic advancement in Indonesia
have not only led to dramatic improvements in the standard
of living of the Indonesian people. They have also
contributed to stability and prosperity in the wider South-
East Asian region.
Australia gains from all this commercially.
In 1991, our two-way merchandise trade with Indonesia was
worth $ 2.4 billion. Exports to Indonesia were worth $ 1.4
billion making it our tenth largest overseas market.
But just as importantly, our national security benefits from
a benign environment in the region to our north where not so
many years ago there was great uncertainty and volatility.
Mr Speaker
In describing the stake Australia has involved in
cooperative relations with Indonesia, I readily acknowledge
that our relationship with that country has sometimes been
strained. Since 1975, East Timor has been a recurring and
sometimes divisive issue.
My firm conviction is that the only realistic way for us to
approach our relationship with Indonesia is to start from
the assumption that, as neighbours, each side wants to deal
with the other seriously and constructively.
We can build a worthwhile relationship if we work on the
firm ground of shared interests and develop institutional
links which consolidate our progress.
We must recognise continuing differences in our cultures and
outlooks without allowing ourselves to be obsessed by them.
Mr Speaker, this was the basic approach I followed in
Indonesia, both in discussions with President Soeharto and
his Ministers, and in public statements. 
The centre-piece of my program in Jakarta was a very cordial
two-hour discussion with President Soeharto. He explained
at length the aspirations of the Indonesian people in regard
to their independence, their progress in nation-building,
and his own concern to nurture stable political
institutions. In turn, I described the Government's commitment to lead
Australia into whole-hearted engagement with Asia.
This led us to agree to look for ways to strengthen the
institutional framework of the bilateral relationship, to
reflect better its growing maturity and diversity, and to
guarantee its overall resilience in times of difficulty in
specific areas.
The President agreed to my proposal to establish a
Ministerial Forum which will meet at least once every two
years to review the bilateral relationship and set an agenda
for cooperation, especially in economic areas.
The Forum will be co-chaired by the two Foreign Ministers
and involve at least two economic Ministers from each side.
The President and I witnessed the signing of three bilateral
agreements which add further shape to the formal framework
of the relationship. They cover double taxation, fisheries
cooperation and extradition.
The Indonesian Government agreed to conclude further
bilateral agreements, covering investment protection and
promotion, copyright, the delimitation of outstanding
maritime boundaries, and mutual assistance on criminal
matters. My discussions with President Soeharto were complemented by
very useful separate-meetings with Foreign Minister Alatas,
six economic Ministers whom I met jointly and Defence
Minister Moerdani.
I was impressed by the calibre of the Ministers in the
Indonesian Cabinet, and by their confident determination to
continue the process of economic development and nationbuilding.
I made a point of thanking Foreign Minister Alatas for the
friendly and creative relations that he and Senator Evans
have cemented for our joint benefit.
With Defence Minister Moerdani, I repeated what I had said
to President Soeharto about Australia's satisfaction with
our bilateral defence relations with Indonesia, and our
interest in expanding contacts such as high-level
consultations, joint exercises, and training exchanges.
General Moerdani supported the current approach of
proceeding step by step and expressed confidence that our
defence relations would continue to grow. 
During my visit I was also glad to have the opportunity to
lend the Government's support to the activities of
Australian business in Indonesia.
I opened offices for AOTC in Jakarta, the West Australian
Government in Surabaya, and addressed an Indonesian and
Australian business audience organised by the East Java
Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Mr Speaker
There has been some comment in the Australian media to the
effect that, in my discussions with the Indonesian
Government, I did not give sufficient weight to Australian
concerns about East Timor and human rights issues.
Let me repeat what I said about this publicly in Jakarta.
While recognising the importance of the media in both
countries, I believe it is not up to them but to the two
Governments to set the agenda for the bilateral
relationship. The Indonesian Government responded positively to our
putting first priority on the establishment of a basis for a
long-term cooperative relationship.
Having established a constructive basis for dialogue, I took
appropriate opportunities to raise with President Soeharto,
Foreign Minister Alatas, and Defence Minister Moerdani, our
concern about the killings in Dili last November and human
rights in East Timor.
I registered firmly our view that the unhappy situation in
East Timor detracts from Indonesia's otherwise impressive
achievements, and said it is likely to continue to attract
close public attention in Australia.
I repeated the Australian Government's view that the
Indonesian Government's response to the Dili killings had
been a credible one.
I underlined our continuing concern for the welfare of the
East Timor people and emphasised three points:
the need for a more benign, and therefore constructive,
approach by the armed forces.
the need for long-term reconciliation, taking account
of the economic aspirations of the people of East
Timor, and
our concern about using the criminal code to deal with
non-violent political protest. 
I explained that our aim as concerned outsiders was not to
challenge Indonesian sovereignty over East Timor, but to
assist where we could in measures for the welfare of the
people, and to support a process of reconciliation between
them and the Indonesian authorities.
As a practical example of how Australia can help, a
memorandum was signed during my visit providing for an 11.5
million dollar aid project to improve water suppy and
sanitation in parts of East Timor.
Mr Speaker
In advance of my visit to Indonesia, I had written to
President Soeharto about the possibility of establishing a
process of periodic Asia-Pacific heads-of-government
meetings, preferably based on the APEC mechanism.
I was encouraged by President Soeharto's response. He
endorsed the proposal and underlined the need for proceeding
carefully, a view with which I entirely agree.
Since returning from Indonesia, I have received a letter
from President Bush welcoming the proposal for periodic APEC
heads-of-government meetings.
He encouraged Australia to promote the proposal in a way
that takes account of separate moves to develop the
institutionalisation of APEC.
The suggestion of periodic APEC heads-of-government meetings
is not an initiative being pursued against a specific
deadline. But it is intrinsically a worthwhile idea and is
now finding its way on to the regional agenda.
Mr Speaker
A recurring issue in Australia's relations with South-East
Asia is whether our free media is an obstacle in the path of
constructive relations.
In fact, this issue arose at the end of an address to a
large audience in Jakarta. I made a point of saying that I
believed the Australian media and a free press in general
need not be feared in Indonesia.
Indeed, rather than wish us to constrain our media from
disseminating what they might regard as unfairly critical
views, they should themselves take advantage of the
opportunity always available in our media to respond to the
criticism. Mr Speaker
it may be of particular interest to Members that the
heightened interest in Australian identity and nationhood
has struck a positive chord in Indonesia. 
It is not really surprising that a country like Indonesia,
which had to fight so hard for its independence, should be
interested in the emergence here of a more clear-cut view of
Australian nationhood.
Let me emphasise that our purpose is not to ingratiate
ourselves with Indonesia or any other nation, as some
Members seem inclined to imply.
Australia's nationhood, its re-generated sense of identity
and purpose, will be determined by Australians, on
Australian terms and as suits us best as a people.
At the same time, there is no harm in observing that
indications of a less equivocal sense of Australian
nationhood actually help our foreign policy.
Mr Speaker
My visit to Indonesia achieved all its objectives.
It accelerated the building of a network of connections and
institutional links: diplomatic, cultural and, above all,
commercial links, which have given greater substance to the
bilateral relationship.
I amn satisfied I struck the right balance in underlining our
commitment to a positive relationship with Indonesia, while
firmly registering our views in areas of difference.
There is now a basis for the expansion of relations with our
largest close neighbour, a key country in a region vital to
our security and prosperity.
Mr Speaker
It was with great pleasure that I visited another close
neighbour and important partner in the region, Papua New
Guinea. That the visit was occasioned by the commemoration of the
heroism and sacrifice of Australian, Papuan, New Guinean and
Allied servicemen in the most crucial battles of our
history, made it a privilege.
It is a tragedy of our history that there are a great many
places in the world where Australians died in battle and lie
buried.
The stories of their gallantry are legion, and the monuments
and rituals we have constructed to their memory ensure that
we will not forget.
It is not surprising that the First World War which killed
60,000 young Australians, and the first great battle in
which Australians took part, Gallipoli, should have come to
dominate our national legend in this century. 
Yet it is ironic that our knowledge and appreciation of the
battles which were truly in defence of this country and the
civilisation we had built here are less well known.
It is my earnest hope that the fiftieth anniversary
commemoration of the terrible, yet ultimately triumphant,
battles of the Kokoda Track, Milne Bay and other places in
Papua New Guinea will re-awaken our regard for them, and in
time fix them at the centre of our tradition.
It is certainly to be hoped that the story of the campaign
in Papua New Guinea, and the-story of the Battle for
Australia in 1942, will become known to all Australians.
Mr Speaker
It was one of my great privileges to pay, on behalf of
Australia, due homage to the Papuan and New Guinean war
carriers whose assistance to our troops was arguably the
greatest humane gesture in our history.
Arising from my discussions with Prime Minister Namaliu and
my visit to Kokoda, I was happy to announce various steps
the Australian Government will take to show our appreciation
of past sacrifices for Australia and Papua New Guinea.
I offered Australian assistance to establish in the Waigani
district of Port Moresby a memorial to commemorate the deeds
of the PNG war carriers.
As I said in the House last week, I warmly welcome Prime
Minister Namaliu's announcement that the KokodaTrail and
Kokoda village will be declared a nationalf heritage area to
preserve their historical significance.
While in Papua New Guinea, I announced that the Australian
Government would be happy to help establish rest facilities
for people walking along the Kokoda Trail, improve local
welfare facilities at Kokoda, and improve the local war
museum. The cooperation between Australians and Papua New Guineans
in defence of their countries left a profound friendship as
its legacy.
That it endures was plain in the reception we received
everywhere we went, and in discussions with the Prime
Minister, Mr Namaliu and other officials.
Papua New Guinea's democracy remains vigorous.
Through a difficult period of structural adjustment, the
economy has become more competitive and resilient.
Notwithstanding the effects of the Bougainville problem and
falls in commodity prices, in 1991 real GDP grew by 9 per
cent. 
Driven by developments in the mining sector, that growth
rate presages a resources boom which, if it is managed
judiciously, promises to lay a sound basis for the country's
economic future.
PNG has also become more outward looking.
Like Australia, it is working to make the most of the
opportunities generated by growth in the Asia-Pacific
region. Without abandoning its ties with the South Pacific, it has
developed new links with ASEAN.
It has consolidated a close relationship with our mutual
neighbour, Indonesia.
Australia's economic relationship with PNG continues to
expand. Two-way trade last year reached a record 1.7 billion
dollars, an increase of 48 per cent over the previous year.
Opportunities for our exports should rise as demand is
generated by the anticipated resources boom.
The principal problem for PNG remains the one which its
Prime Minister defined so precisely without security,
economic development cannot proceed, and without
development, security cannot be guaranteed.
Mr Speaker, during my visit I reaffirmed Australia's
commitment to security and defence cooperation with Papua
New Guinea, as set out in the Agreed Statement on Security
Cooperation of September 1991.
But more work needs to be done to ensure that this
cooperation is fully effective. In particular, I stressed
the need for Papua New Guinea to develop its own integrated
and comprehensive plan of action on security force reform
and resource allocation.
During my talks in Port Moresby I stressed the need for a
peaceful solution, through dialogue and reconciliation, to
the continuing problems of Bougainville.
I made it clear that Australia was willing to help with the
reconstruction that will be needed on Bougainville.
At the same time I stressed the need for the PNG government
to keep up regular supplies of humanitarian goods and
channels of communication with Bougainvilleans, and,
equally, our desire to facilitate such aid.
we can be confident, I believe, that the people of Papua New
Guinea have the will and the capacity to meet the challenges
which face them. 
Australia stands ready to give what help it can on the path
to greater stability and prosperity.
As partners in a changing world, a self-reliant PNG, and
thus a PNG better placed to realise its aspirations and
potential, will be in both our interests.
Mr Speaker, the world is undergoing profound changes and
nowhere is this more the case than in our own neighbourhood.
During the past decade the economies of North-East and
South-East Asia have been expanding at approximately twice
the world average.
They will continue to grow.
Through our strategic location and expanding links with the
region, Australia stands to benefit greatly.
It will not happen without an effort. It will require
imagination, initiative and persistence. It will require
belief in ourselves.
It will require these things from governments, Federal and
State. It will require them from business.
It will require them, I believe, at a truly national level.
By this, I mean that to seize the opportunities and assure
our long-term security, without prejudice to our
predominantly British and European origins and our
continuing affections for those places, we must determine as
a people to think of Australia as a place whose history is
its own, whose traditions and values are its own, whose
future is most definitely its own.
In going to Indonesia and Papua New Guinea I sought to
strengthen our regional linkages, to open dialogues, and to
help to lay the foundations for relationships which will
enable us to contribute to and share in the fruits of
regional growth.
I sought to demonstrate the importance Australia attaches to
its growing integration with the Asia-Pacific region, and
the importance we attach and must attach to increasing
the breadth and depth of our understanding of those
countries. Mr Speaker
I do not think we should be surprised if we find that in
coming to know our neighbours as never before, we come to
know ourselves as never before. 



EMBARGO: 8.00pm, 8 May 1992
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
PRIME MINISTER'S OLYMPIC DINNER
NATIONAL TENNIS CENTRE, MELBOURNE
FRIDAY, 8 MAY 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
It is my pleasure to be here tonight, to welcome all of you,
and to have the opportunity to briefly speak on behalf of a
great cause.
We have a love affair of long standing with the Olympic
Games. Perhaps a little conceitedly, we tend to see our Olympians
as a measure of ourselves.
It is therefore only just that as a nation we make a
collective contribution. It is not too much to ask that we
pay for the privilege of basking in the glory.
I think it's of some significance that the idea of the
modern Olympics was born in the 1890s, the decade in which
it might also be said that the idea of Australia was born.
The history of our nation and the history of the Olympics
have run remarkably parallel courses.
The 1890s saw the birth of the Commonwealth of Australia.
More than that, it was the period when Australian men and
women writers and artists, politicians, visionaries of all
kinds, ordinary Australians talked about what sort of
society they might build under the Southern Cross.
They celebrated what was here. The virtues of the great
outdoors. The light and the space of Australia and the
distinctly Australian way of life which evolved from that. 
They celebrated the pioneering virtues of mental and
physical endurance. And the great virtue of freedom.
They celebrated a distinctly Australian way of life.
They used words like " mateship", " solidarity", and a " fair
go for all" to describe what they believed were the
essential principles of life and what, therefore, were the
essential principles of a good society..
The ethos in Australia was different to that which evolved
in another pioneering society, the United States we
tempered their rugged individualism with a much stronger
belief in social equality. In the fair go.
The principles which evolved in this country in those years
sat very happily with the creed of the modern Olympics.
Australians, still in the pioneering phase of their history,
still in competition with nature, young and determined to
prove themselves against the world, relished the idea of
Olympic competition.
But there are other elements in the idea of the Olympics
which I think also appealed.
I mean the idea that the important thing is not to win but
to take part. That it's not the triumph but the struggle.
That it's not to have conquered but to have fought well.
Above all, the goal is to quote the Olympic Charter to
contribute to building a peaceful and better world by
educating youth through sport practised without
discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit, which
requires mutual understanding with a spirit of friendship,
solidarity and fair-play.
If you substitute the word " mateship" for the word
" friendship", you have some very familiar Australian values
there at the end.
Mateship, solidarity, fair-play.
It seems to me that the idea of Olympic competition as it
was originally conceived, and as the Charter still insists,
has much in common with our own traditional aspirations as a
nation. And perhaps that has something to do with the fact that
Australia is one of the very few countries in the world to
have participated in every Olympic Games since their
foundation in 1896.
It has something to do, perhaps, with all of us being here
tonight. From the very beginning, we have been highly successful
participants. 
Australians have always been famously good at sport.
Here in Melbourne in 1956 we did so well I suspect we
thought that there was none better in the world, and never
would be.
It has not been so easy since of course.
Other countries, in particular those in what used to be
called the Eastern Bloc, overwhelmed us until the awful
day came when we went to an Olympic Games and came back
without a medal.
Our collective misery after this might have produced a panic
reaction. We might have lost sight of the main game.
But twelve years later I think we can say with some pride
our response has been the right one to my mind the very
best one.
We responded with vigour and determination and, dare I say
it, money.
In 1980 the team which went to Moscow received a Federal
Government grant of $ 800,000.
The teams for Barcelona and Albertville received a Federal
grant of $ 10 million.
Before the govbernment came to office the sports budget was
$ 6 million.
In 1983 we increased that to $ 36 million.
Last year it was $ 68.4 million.
Let me say at once never, I believe, has Commonwealth
money been better spent.
Among many other things it enabled the completion of the
Australian Institute of Sport, which is now pretty well
universally considered to be the best of its kind in the
world. The money we have spent has enabled us to produce a whole
new generation of young Australians to dedicate themselves
to becoming world class athletes.
And many of them have become world class athletes and that
includes sports we never excelled before.
I think we can take the greatest pleasure from the fact that
we have broadened the base of sport in Australia. 
More Australians many more Australians play many more
sports than they ever did before.
There was a paradox about sporting performance in the past
those golden years when Betty Cuthbert was winning gold
medals on the track and Dawn Fraser swept all before her in
the pool, the years when our athletes turned in consistently
spectacular performances were years when most Australians
were spectacularly unfit.
Spending on sport has played a major part in seeing our
national health levels, particularly among children,
immeasurably improved.
As I said, we have broadened the base.
We have done this through a large and strategic
encouragement of sport of f the Commonwealth budget, which
has made sport and sporting facilities much more generally
available to Australians.
The establishment of the Australian Sports Commission has
been a boon.
At the same time Aussie Sports adapted traditional sports in
ways which allow everyone to take part.
These steps have not only broadened the sports base, but
improved the quality of our society.
They represent further progress towards the land of the fair
go towards both the Olympic ideal and the Australian
ideal.
Such achievements don't thrill us in the way that Betty
Cuthbert and Dawn Fraser did in Melbourne, or the sight of a
Keiran Perkins or a Tim Forsyth winning in Barcelona will.
But as a country we should be proud of these acheivements in
the last decade. They are very much in the tradition of the
Olympics. I was impressed by a speech Shane Innes formerly Shane
Gould gave at the Prime Minister's Women and Sports Awards
in March.
She spoke about the terrific pressure sports people were
under, especially because of the philosophy that says " if
you don't win, you lose."
True as that might be in politics, it is not true in the
Olympics. At least it should not be: though we all know that too often
too many countries, too many athletes, have taken that as
their motto. 
I think we can take great pride in the fact that it has
never been ours.
Every athlete wants to win every Australian wants to.
But the real aim is participation: it is to strive to do
your best.
In the Olympics it is very simple if your best on the day
is the best in the world, and only if it is, you win.
And your country will be proud-of you.
If it's not enough to win, you've achieved what few others
will ever achieve you've competed with the very best.
And your country this country will be proud of you.
I think we should work to keep those principles in
Australian sport.
They will serve our country very well. Our youth very well.
I think they're the key to a good society.
They will serve both the Olympic spirit very well, and the
spirit of Australia.
I am also one of those who believe that they will see their
benefits on the victory dais in Barcelona.
I thank you all for coming. For your contribution to what
is a great national cause.
And most of all I congratulate those members of the
Australian Olympic team whose hard work has earned them the
privilege of meeting and competing with the best athletes
from 170 nations of the world.
I wish you all the success and the fun you deserve. 



T1EL2:. May.' 92 17: 24 No. 025 P. 01/ QE
TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THX HON P J KEATING, MP
7: 30 REPORT WITH PAUL LYNEHAN, MAY 11 1992
E QE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us again. The blow
out in the budget deficit, if a Coalition government
had done this you'd be screaming for their blood
wouldn't you?
Pm: No, the blow out is not because of an expenditure blow
out, it is because receipts have fallen and the
receipts have fallen largely because of our success on
inflation, lower interest payments in the economy and
also because certain categories of provisional tax
payers are assessing themselves with lower returns.
PL: But how come this has only emerged over the lost ten
weeks?
PM; Because this is within the time frame that the
Australian Tax office can make a judgement about
receipts at this time of the budgetary cycle.
PL: And we're not entitled to wonder if your forecasters
are really worth feeding with this sort of performance?
Pm: well it's always better to have the forecasts on
receipts obviously right than not right.
PL: This is very wrong with respect.
PM: It's a two billion extra financing task, but part of
the reason is the better than expected inflation
performance. The low inflation which is, of course, an
enormous bull point for Australia.
PL: And surely the low economic activity.
PM: Yes, but hang on, but breaking that inflationary cycle
of 20 years, one of the first impacts of that, even
though its a beneficial force, one of the first impacts
is actually on receipts In the budget.
TEL 
TEL: 12. May. 92 17: 24 No. 025 P. 02/ 06
2
PL; Peter Reith says higher interest rates are just around
the corner.
PM: Just when the lowest interest rates in 20 years just
came around the corner last Thursday. on these things
Dr Hewson and Mr Reith are the doom sayers, they're
both saying today interest rates are rising they are
at their lowest level in 20 years. Last week we took
interest rates down to 6 and 1/ 2 per cent.
PL; Yes, but what goes down goes UP.
PM: But it's not going to go up because of this. It's a
two billion extra financing on the Commonwealth's debt.
The Commonwealth's debt is one of the lowest of the
developed countries its 16 per cent of GDP.
PL: But what else In ' One Nation' should we now have a
second look at. What other forecasts there were dodgy?
PM: This is the Budget. It's not to do with ' one Nation'.
PL: But you told us in ' One Nation' you said 6.8 billion
deficit.
PM: That's a forecast for the budgetary outcome. ' One
Nation' is a package of measures to re-start the
economy and today we had a Heads of Government meeting,
a most successful meeting of the Commonwealth and the
States for the implementation of the ' One Nation'
measures and there was more decisions taken at that
meeting, from that package of measures than one used to
see under Coalition governments, more progress there
than you'd see in 10 years of normal progress around
Canberra from Coalition governments. Such things as
adopting the elements of an electricity grid,
separating power generation from distribution a
milestone change, a milestone acceptance by States
establishing a new Council of Australian Governments
today.
PL: HOW Will that work, this council of Australian
Governments?
PM; It will mean that instead of just the Financial
Premiers Conference every June, the Premiers Conference
and Loan Council, we've now got another body to discuss
national agenda issues such as electricity, such as
Technical and Further Education.
PL: And railways and roads?
PM: Yes, railways and roads that's right.
PL: Getting back to your budget problem, you haven't got
much room to manoeuvre in August have you, or indeed at
any time between now and the next election you're 
EL: 12. May. 92 17: 24 No. 025 P. 03/ 06'
3
locked in as tight 8s a drum aren't you? Politically
locked in too.
PM: The budget deficit is larger than we forecast but it
will still come in under 3 per cent of GDP.
PL; But you've given away the opportunity for any more
goodies haven't you?
PM; Well we're not intending to be in the goody business.
The ' One Nation' statement was about rebuilding the
rail network, getting the roads program moving again
and the progress reports we are getting from Premiers
today on that package is very, very satisfactory.
PL: Given the fact that your receipts of tax are down so
much now, given the fact that the first instalment of
those tax cuts you've promised if you win the next
election will be coming in in July 1994, can we still
afford those?
PM: Absolutely. I had the pleasure of presiding over 6
marks of the Accord and under 4 of those we provided
tax cuts and they were always provided on time as we
said and they will be again. I know Dr Hewson is
running around saying oh now this is a11 of f, take no
notice of him, he's now trying to grab at straws. It's
been a good news couple of weeks, low inflation, low
interest rates, the good news is nearly suffocating
him, it's more than he can stand.
PL; When do you think there will be a submission before
Cabinet on the flag, what's the timing of that at the
moment?
PM:. The issues I'm on at the moment are jobs and the
economy and growth and this meeting of Heads of
Government today is about driving home all of those
' one Nation' packages and including Technical and
Further Education, we're determined that kids are not
going to come cascading out of secondary education,
those that can't get into university cascading into
milkbars and to railways stations and to shopping mall
plazas, we want them taken up in vocational education
and we're moving today to create those things and it is
to those things I've got the principal focus not the
matter you Just mentioned the flag or similar
matters.
PL., Have you been told you'd be wise to play that one on
the back burner for a while? You clearly don't want to
talk about it tonight.
PM; No, but At's not on the top of my priorities, I'm
entitled to say to you, I've just come within an hour
from one of the most successful meetings of Premiers
and the Commonwealth I think I've attended.
TEL: 
T1EL2: . May. 92 17: 24 No .025 P. 04/ 0&amp;
4
PL: But we haven't had a chance to speak to you for a few
weeks, there's been a few things bubbling around. You
said about the flag that you would take very much into
account the will of the people.
PM; Yes.
PL: 81 per cent of the people in one poll I saw recently
said they want a referendum on this.
PM: That could be true and they may well get one.
PL; may well get one?
PM: Yes, but we'll have Cabinet consider the matter in due
course. Again, issues are ranked. we have the happy
knack, I hope, of ranking issues appropriately and the
big ranking for us at the moment is getting the economy
going. We are In a recovery now, consolidating that
recovery, pushing those low interest rates through and
getting all these ' one Nation' things into place.
PL: On the design, do you favour the idea, just personally,
of throwing it open to a national competition or
commissioning a group of designers to it?
PM: Paul, it is just not worth my while to discuss those
issues with you. That's something that the Cabinet
will have to consider. But, again, I can't tell the
media its priorities, but I will just remind you an
hour ago I was attending one of the most successful
meetings of the Commonwealth and the States we've
probably ever held.
PL: And a few days ago you were advised to play down the
flag issue a bit.
PM: You're sort of waving the flag and asking what the
designs are it's a very interesting subject and an
important one about how we represent ourselves but
there are other important things too.
PL; Let's try another important issue. Have you spoken to
Graham Richardson recently to try to ensure that there
is no more embarrassing revelations in store for the
Governm~ ents?
PM: I spoke to him over the weekend, yes.
PL: Are you happy?
PM; Yes and from what he has told me it is as I said to the
Parliament a relative of his had difficulty, he
intervened to see whether this person could come back
to Australia to prepare their defence -it's as simple
as that. TEL 
TEL: 12. May. 92 17: 24 No. 025 P. 05/ 06
PL: Now I know he has not been well, but are you at all
concerned about his grasp of detail and his memory over
this incident?
PM; He has done pretty well through all the years of
travails of public life.
PL: He wouldn't win Pick-a-Box at the moment though would
he on his recent performance?
PM: The opposition is on to it because they had the most
shocking week in Parliament you can imagine. The
conversation now is that the Opposition front bench is
concerned about the QST, they can't market it, Dr
Hewson's lost control of the House of Representatives,
the Government seized that back and now we're seeing
the familiar behaviour, the mafia claims of a couple of
weeks ago chasing Senator Richardson down about
relatives and phone calls. Where does that rank with
putting a new vocational education system in place like
today? Where does it rank with the separation of power
generation from distribution?
[ PL: Are you fully and absolutely satisfied with Senator
Richardson' s integrity?)
PM: They are the things and the low interest rates and the
low inflation are driving Dr Hewson batty. The good
news and he can't stand it so he's out there chasing
Senator Richardson.
PL: Are you fully satisfied with Graham Richardson's
integrity in regard to this matter.
PM: Yes.
PL: But you'd hardly be thanking him though for the way its
been handled would you?
PM: I think, with these things, if the receive notoriety it
means they can and should be handled better.
PL: A lot of people are talking about it across the
country.
PM: I don't know, a lot of Journalists are talking about it
I don't think it's a heart stopper out there.
PL: How much damage do you think it has done to the
Government?
PM: if there are any negatives to It, it camouflages the
fact that the opposition leader and his Party had a
woeful week in Parliament. our front bench hammered
them into the ground like tent stakes on Inflation,
interest rates, superannuation and a whole range of
issues and by Thursday they were looking very, very
poorly. This issue as it turned out arose and they
TEL 
TEL: 12. Mray. 92 17: 24 No. 025 P. 06/ 06
6
seized upon it and given the faot that this sort of
stuff is the stock and trade of the Canberra scene they
know they'd get at least a weekends run out of it.
Well, we'll be there waiting for them when they turn up
again.
PL: Paul Keating, thankcs for your time.
Good, thank you Paul.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
AND THE TREASURER THE HON J S DAWKINS MP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE, CANBERRA, MAY 11 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: We thought we would give you a run-down on the meeting
we have just concluded with the Premiers. The first
point I want to make is, there's an agreed communique
and it's now in the course of being published so we'll
have that available for you soon but it was written in
the course of the afternoon as we went through subjects
so there was no pro-forma communique drafted before
hand so that's why it's a bit slow in coming but it
will more than adequately reflect what was discussed at
the meeting.
The first thing I would like to say about the meeting
was that it was a very co-operative one and the
outcomes were, I think, exceedingly good. We in terms
of the broader discussions, we agreed to establish a
Council of Australian Governments to meet at least once
a year on non-financial issues. So where we have the
Financial Premiers Conference to discuss financial
assistance grants, Commonwealth payments to States,
this is about all the other national agenda issues in
the micro economy, education, all the other subjects,
the Commonwealth will be the Chair, the venue will be a
rotating venue around the States where the respective
Premier will be the host, and the Commonwealth and the
States will jointly provide a Secretariat.
The first meeting of this body will decide the protocol
relationship between the Council and the Ministerial
Council, that is the Councils of Ministers of each
particular discipline of the Commonwealth and the
States. So where we now have education ministers and
transport ministers meeting with their counterpart
ministers in what's called Ministerial Councils, the
protocol between those Councils and the Council of
Australian Governments will be decided at the first
meeting. 
So it's quite an historic event and, I think, a good
outcome from a succession of meetings discussing
various issues and it will be a useful forum for
debating matters of national moment beyond the
financial discussion. That's not to say that this body
itself can't have a general financial discussion it
can, but by and large the Annual Financial Grants
Arrangements and Loan Council will still be the subject
of the financial meeting.
On the broader topic of federal finances, we've spent
considerable time this morning discussing that subject
and we have agreed to a joint treasury study joint
meaning Commonwealth and State Treasuries to look at
the underlying financial trends in state budgets,
that's on the receipts and the outlays side, and likely
budget balances in the future, the impact from the
recession and the recovery, and to get some idea of how
State budgets will look ahead of the financial meeting
coming up in June.
The States will be deciding this week whether they
require of the Commonwealth a one-year financial
arrangement in 1992-93 or whether-they would prefer to
seek an on-going relationship, financial arrangement,
over say a three year period. It may suit their
purposes to make a one-off arrangement with the
Commonwealth at the financial meeting in June, it may
similarly suit their purposes to make an arrangement
with the Commonwealth over three years because the
Treasurer and I indicated today that we are prepared to
discuss with the States certainty of funding and
questions of adequacy including the prospect of growth
in Financial Assistant Grants and it is with that
background they have now, themselves, withdrawn to
consider their positions as to whether they say to the
Commonwealth we want to now consider a one year
arrangement or a three year arrangement.
The States presented a paper to us of financial trends
and some claims which have been published by some of
you. I think it's fair to say that when we pointed out
that a reference to historical shares, that is to take
Commonwealth payments to the States back to the
proportion of Commonwealth payments which obtained in
the early 1980s would involve an addition of about
billion in the coming year rising to $ 9 billion by
1995-96 which we rejected out of hand and said it was
not possible and reminded them of our own budgetary
position and the fact that we spent the 1980s pulling
the public sector down for national adjustment and
national savings purposes and there was no point now to
try to reverse that to make it easier for State
officials to put their budgets together.
While we said we will examine longer term trends in
State financing we are not accepting of the notion that
we return to some share of payments back in the 1980s. 
Certainly we're not the implications of sort of $ 5-9
billion, those sorts of numbers. That was I think
accepted. There were number of other things decided. Mutual
recognition of standards were agreed and the States
agreed that the Commonwealth should fully participate
in the setting of those standards. This was an item
which had been on previous Special Premiers Conference
agendas and has been decided today.
On Technical and Further Education there was an
agreement to resume discussions with a view to
advancing the outcome by the June Financial Premiers
Conference meeting. That is, States at this stage are
not entirely certain of what the dollars and cents of
such an arrangement will mean because some States have
a bigger effort in TAFE, some have a smaller effort and
again, if there's a change to Financial Assistance
Grants, the Grants Commission formula re-allocates
funds on a different basis of distribution than that
which we pay now to TAFE or to that which they spend.
So we agree that we continue discussing this, but we
also said that as John, as Minister for Education, had
discussed with the States some time ago, that if we are
about re-sorting, functions with the States doing
things which they think they can do best and us doing
other things, that in the symmetry of them handling the
compulsory education area, the Commonwealth may handle
Technical and Further Education, vocational education.
But consistent with that would be that the Commonwealth
removed some of the conditions under Specific Purpose
Claimants which we now attach to payments for
education. In other words, what's called in the jargon
the ' tags on the FAGs' that's the Financial
Assistance Grants, the tags we put on them the
requirements of policy which we put on the Financial
Assistance Grants if they were to be removed and we
paid this over to them as Financial Assistance Grants
free of any requirement by us in terms of their
expenditure, meaning that the compulsory area of
education was handled exclusively by them, though with
conversations with us but not legislation,
conversations about general policy that we're
contending and they are considering that a Commonwealth
take over of TAFE funding provides that symmetry. Now
again, we've agreed to continue discussing these issues
and we'll resume discussions on that at official level
soon. There was an emphasis upon the importance of youth and
youth training and TAFE being an important part of that
whole equation. Training young people, those people
who have left school beyond compulsory education who
are not getting tertiary places, and having an
important place for them. 
But on the main change, on the Commonwealth assuming
financial responsibility for TAFE, Victoria was
supportive of that, NSW is examining and considering it
in the context of the change I mentioned in relation to
Financial Assistance Grants for compulsory education
and other States are similarly considering their
position, though there is a propensity on the part of
the smaller States to wish to have a joint funding
model. Moving now to electricity generation, which was another
' One Nation' topic we had on the agenda, we did secure
agreement in principle to the separation of power
generation from transmission. This is the key point in
this issue that the providers of power are not the
transmitters of power with a view to establishing an
East-Coast electricity grid, a network which would be
represented by a structure yet to be agreed, upon which
the Grid Management Council will give us advice by the
end of the year. In other words, that the transmission
assets of the East-Coast States would be part of an
East-Coast grid, a body, a corporation, the design and
structure of which we are yet to be advised upon. But
the principle of separation is agreed.
On roads we've agreed to untie $ 350 million of
Financial Assistance Grants of a Specific Purpose
Payment for Roads which were formerly paid for, well
the specific purpose of road funding. We have yet to
agree on how that untieing is distributed because, if
it is distributed by way of Financial Assistance
Grants, the weighting of the distribution is different
to the weighting of the road monies which were formerly
paid under an SPP a Specific Purpose Payment. You
understand, under the equalisation formulas, money is
basically, on the horizontal equalisation, shifted off
to the smaller States, but given the fact that the old
Specific Purpose Payments for roads were concentrated
where the roads were required, more of the money went
to NSW and Victoria under the Specific Purpose Payments
than would go under Financial Assistance Grants. So
naturally, whenever these positions arise there is
always an argy-bargy about which distribution formula.
We are going to have another one of those between now
and the next Premiers Conference.
The other important point was, I think, we had to seek
to agree on the delineation of road funding
responsibilities which is the Commonwealth
Government's and which is the States so that we can
define. Now that the Commonwealth is going to move
$ 350 million out of identifiable roads spending and
give that to the States we want to be clear that we
don't have constituency interest coming back to us to
say, you are now not spending enough on roads. We say,
well hang on, we were spending it, we've just untied
it. It's not shown, so it will be important for us to 
get that delineation of what's a Commonwealth function
and a what's a State function clear.
On Aboriginal affairs we endorsed the report of the
AAAC and agreed to, I will just check with John this,
to examine the operation of Section 18 of the Act the
funding powers of ATSIC. The States have had some
difficulty relating to ATSIC as the primary negotiating
point for the expenditure of Commonwealth funds and so
therefore Section 18 of that Act and its financing
function is going to be examined. But the States have
acknowledged that ATSIC is the body they have to deal
with where formerly they were seeking simply a deal
with the Commonwealth.
On rail, several Premiers' expressed satisfaction with
the way things were going in the ' One Nation' rail
program and we are moving to try and negotiate an
enterprise agreement for the National Rail Freight
Corporation but while that's happening, we're in the
process of getting contracts together for the provision
of passing loops, extensions, bridge heightening and
all the other things and Premiers told us that they
were satisfied with progress on that score.
I think that's about it in terms of resume, the
communique will go more expressly to the points but I
think we can conclude by saying that it was a good
meeting and there was an atmosphere of co-operation and
we've now formalised, if you like, this discussion by
the Council of Australian Governments so in the future
there won't be just simply a Financial Premiers
Conference but there will be as well another forum for
national agenda discussions.
I think I will leave it at that and just invite the
Treasurer and see if he wants to add anything to my
remarks in any way.
J: On 1 May the Minister for Finance said that the revenue
collections were moving towards the February budget
deficit target of $ 6.8 billion. What has happened in
the last ten days to so dramatically change that
outlook?
T: Well let's go back a bit further. I mean there was
some suggestion back in January/ February that the
revenue estimates wouldn't hold up. We undertook some
specific enquiries as far as that was concerned and we
were reassured at that time that the revenue estimates
were likely to be sustained during the rest of the
financial year. It wasn't really until the December
quarter National Accounts figures came out in the
middle of March that we began to realise that there may
have been an error in estimation, or the estimations
may not hold up because of the lower growth in earnings
because the higher level of unemployment that then was
anticipated at the time, the fact that you had lower
interest rates. All these things only became a
question after that and that coupled with the actual
experience of collections in, I think, April and May
really revealed the scope or the nature of the
deficiency because it was confined largely to this area
of provisional tax paying individuals, which is of
course based on their 1991 income and what had happened
was that there was an over-estimation of that inc~. e at 
T: I think the point is that the deficit, you said that we
were back to where we started. i mean when we started
we had a budget deficit of some 4 per cent of GDP.-
Even with this position it is about 2 1/ 2 per cent of
GDP. So, whilst the numbers, the absolute numbers
might look large when compared back to 1983/ 84 we are
talking about a budget sector which has grown from
about $ 40 billion to nearly $ 100 billion, so it is a
much different equation than we were dealing with back
in 1983/ 84.
the time of the budget. But that wasn't actually
revealed in terms of payments until those provisional
tax payers started actually paying in April and May.
So it was really of recent origin. I was first alerted
to the fact there may be a problem only a matter of a
couple of weeks ago and I indicated that at the time.-
I sent the Tax Commissioner back to confirm his figures
in the context of the May review because we don't give
running commentaries of the revenue side of the budget.
We have a normal process in the context of the May
review. I brought forward the May review, asked for
the revenue figures to be tightened up as much as
possible for the May review and decided that that
should be released in the context of this Premiers'
Conference so that they had an understanding, not only
of our budgetary position this year but also our
prospects for next year as well.
J: You were scathing at the time about those private
estimates which now turn out to have been pretty spot
on, at least in the total. Are you concerned that the
collection of official data or the making of official
estimates is not perhaps what it should be?
T: Well this area which has been the subject of the
greatest volatility has an experience at being
volatile. I mean on this occasion it is down by a
figure of $ 1.8 billion; a year ago it was down by
$ 300 million; the year before by $ 1.1 million; the year
before by $ 1.5 million; the year before by
$ 300 million; but the year before that it was an underestimate
by nearly a billion dollars. So there is a
high degree of volatility in this provisional taxpayer
area. of course, it has been covered up on other
occasions because revenues have increased under other
categories. As far as the Access estimate or
prediction in January, I think, of a $ 9 billion
deficit, they may have got it right but for all the
wrong reasons. The components of their estimates were
wrong, they under-estimated the size of this deficiency
and they wildly over-estimated the size of what they
predicted was going to be a massive deficiency in the
PAYE area. So they got it right by accident.
J: What's the difference Mr Dawkins of getting it wrong
for all the right reasons?
T: Well what do you mean by that? 
J: Well you said that Access got it right for all the
wrong reasons.
T: Look there is a world of difference between a budget
deficit blowing out because expenditure is out of
control that is not the case. Expenditure has hardly
contributed to this question at all other than the
planned expenditure that we made in the One Nation
context. This has been a deficiency for all the right
reasons. For the reasons in the way in which the Prime
Minister has described it. We have had lower
inflation, lower earnings growth, lower income from
investments because of lower interest rates and a range
of those kinds of things.-So this is not something
which could have been accurately predicted at the time.
The other point is that the Tax Office' s estimates of
company tax are made on the basis of a private survey
that they make, I think, in June of a particular year,
helping them to estimate for the next year and it just
turns out that survey happened on this occasion to
overstate the company tax collections.
J: Mr Dawkins these ficures were last updated in February,
not so long ago, surely they should be more accurate?
T: At that stage they were all on track and it wasn't
until the later evidence came in, and I am telling you
I actually asked the question before that, I asked that
these matters be confirmed and they were at the time.
It was only when the National Accounts figures camne in
in March and when we had the record of the actual
collections being made in April and May that the
magnitude of this problem became clear.
3: Prime Minister, can you still deliver the One Nation
tax cuts?
PM: Yes. They are solid as they were when they were
published. And again, we will have the Budget back
into surplus in 1995-96.
3: But doesn't that imply that you are going to have some
spending cuts, Mr Keating?
PM: We've, the Treasurer and I, have been involved with
putting together of more budgets just about, certainly
more economic statements, than any other pair of
individuals in the history of the Federation, 17 of
them in fact, and we always have been able to meet our
objectives, and we will again.
J: Does it throw any of the one Nation measures out of
kilter?
PM: No, it just means that the financing task is bigger,
and it means the starting point next year is larger.
But again, there is a lot of volatility in these
revenue estimates, and you can see this in the election
by provisional taxpayers to obviously self-assess
themselves. That will change. 
J: But isn't the point about these figures today that
while they might be only just emerging, you are arguing
that their source is from low inflation, what you argue
is that there is a structural change in the economy.
If that's the case, shouldn't we be assuming that
there's not going to be any huge surge again in revenue
if low inflation is locked in?
PM: The revenue will come from growth/ activity profits etc.
Business is now in a position where it is moving to a
mode of higher productivity. The high level of
unemployment is evidence of that. So as soon as there
is a pick up in volumes, the prof its will go straight
on the bottom line. They will all be picked up under
tax collections a year later.
T: Of course with higher levels of employment as well.
PM: With higher levels of employment and activity. But the
initial effects of low inflation are going to be,
obviously, some burden to the budget.
J: Your tax cuts are based on bracket creep, but if
inflation is lower how are you going to fund your tax
cuts?
PM: Well the brackets will be creeping less, won't they?
J: Yes that's right and you'll have less money to pay
back.
PM: And therefore, well we'll see. We've got forecasts in
there. At the moment we've been undershooting those
forecasts with inflation, which is a good thing.
T: Of course the other point to bear in mind is that with
lower inflation you've got the prospect of maybe
growing a little faster.
PM: That is, the confidence effects.
T: Mr Keating, do you reserve the right if those forecasts
turn out to have to be revised to revise the tax cuts?
PM: All governments automatically have a right of
discretion, but we've made our position clear on this.
J: Is that position absolute?
PM: Yes, absolute. Because we have in the past delivered
very large tax cuts over quite long time frames and
they've all been delivered. At every point, the ACTU
has always said the Government has always delivered on
its commitments. Never have we made arrangements which
we backed away from. 
J: Mr Keating, in the past you've said it gets harder
every year to keep cutting and there's less and less to
cut. How tough an assignment will it be to actually,
in the past you've been able to cut expenditure, how
tough a task will it be now?
PM: That assumes one has to cut expenditure.
J: Well, didn't you say earlier that you would be looking
at that to reign in the deficit and to deliver the
promised tax cuts?
PM: We'll look at the production of a budget which has got
lots of things to it. We've now got a relatively small
public sector in OECD terms, not withstanding the rise
in unemployment benefits and the outlays coming from
the natural stabiliser in the budget. But invariably
when we put the budget together we've always had a
housekeeping task on outlays, and we probably will
again.
T: And the best way to deal with outlays is to not let
them grow too fast. So what it really means is that
our colleagues might have a dent or two placed in their
new policy proposals.
J: Do you think a $ 10.5 billion deficit is an acceptable
level for next year?
T: Well that's the starting point deficit. This is the
kind of beginning of the budget process. We all have
our discussions about what we think the appropriate
parameters are for the budget and obviously we'll bear
in mind the starting point deficit in that context.
J: What impact is the Government's bond raising program,
now that this deficit figure has appeared, likely to
have on interest rates?
T: Not much I wouldn't have thought, if the response from
the market is anything to go by. The Treasury put out
a statement today talking about, I think, another $ 1.3
billion borrowings in June, and I think we'll wait and
see what the reaction to that is but I think the market
will take it in its stride.
J: All this indicates, despite the spirit of cooperation
today, the States next month clearly cannot expect
anything much in the way growth in real funds, surely.
T: Well interestingly they didn't put in a bid for any
lavish claims. They recognise that, certainly after I
revealed the state of our Budget, they acknowledged the
fact that this was not going to be the year in which 
they could get a major correction in what they consider
to be their budgetary circumstances.
J: Someone said it was a role reversal.
PM: Normally they come with a tale of woe, this time they
came to find that there was a change in the
Commonwealth Budget, a deterioration of the
Commonwealth Budget balance, which may have taken some
by surprise.
J: Who said that?
PM: Well I can't remember exactly which one.
J: It was certainly very fortuitous timing, wasn't it
Prime Minister?
PM: There was nothing organised, it was a natural time to..
T: We actually brought it foreword.
PM: Good point.
T: We thought it would have been particularly odd for us
to send the Premiers away from Canberra and then a week
later make this revelation. And that's why I brought
foreword the announcement of this position. Because
they had been making the point frequently and loudly
that their budgets were knocked around by the recession
and ours was not. That's what they said. And it was
important for them to be advised that in fact our
budget is much more knocked around because our budget
is more dependent on income taxes and with fewer people
in the workforce, that affects the revenue, and it also
affects the outlays as you have to pay those people
unemployment benefits. Because ours is the budget that
provides the kind of stabilisers to the economy under
these circumstances.
PM: The States revenue this year is still growing. I think
on average it is about 1.5 per cent. Commonwealth
revenue is declining by about 3.8 per cent.
T: Now more.
PM: Now more.
J: Are you as confident about the growth and investment
forecasts in One Nation as you were two months ago,
particularly for 1992-3?
PM: I think there is a mood change coming from the
consolidation of those low inflation numbers and the
interest rate reduction, which the Treasurer announced 
last week, had 1 per cent taking cash rates at 6.5 per
cent is starting to take a substantial effect upon the
outlook for growth activity, investment. We're
starting, I think, to see people really accepting the
fact that inflationary expectations are down, inflation
is down in a trend way and we are going to have lower
interest rates for the foreseeable future. That's an
important part of the investment equation and it is
coming good for Australia.
J: Did the question of the Superannuation Guarantee Levy
come up with the Premiers?
PM: Only in passing.
J: Prime Minister, in the deficit figure today, do your
growth forecasts in One Nation have to be exceeded for
you to meet your timetable of a return to surplus
without spending cuts?
PM: We're talking about 1995-96, we're not talking about
tomorrow morning. We're looking at, obviously, the
economy now moving into a recovery phase on the upswing
and we've, in the past, set ourselves sort of medium
term outcomes for public policy, for fiscal policy, and
I don't really think that, notwithstanding that $ 1.9
nearly $ 2 billion shift, that is an insurmountable
problem for us.
J: Mr Dawkins, can you explain how the Tax Office got its
estimations on the impact of the tax file numbers so
wrong? Is it the case that there is fewer dishonest
people out there, or are they just more clever than the
ATO?
T: I'm not absolutely sure about that. They made some
predictions particularly about interest income and the
effect of having the tax file number as a means of
having a more accurate record of interest income. I
think it was more partially a fact that people probably
anticipated this and made their own arrangements ahead
of the TFN. It was also a fact that interest rate
payments were lower than anticipated. But I can get
you a more detailed response to that if you want one.
J: Mr Keating, do you still think the States are basically
irresponsible financial managers?
PM: The States have pulled back on their spending somewhat,
but between the period 1985-6 and 1991-92, that is in
the period when fiscal consolidation became a national
imperative, Commonwealth outlays rose by 5.9 per cent
and State purpose outlays rose by 12.9 per cent. So if
one takes outlays growth as a measurement of restraint,
the Commonwealth's 5.9 per cent real over that period 
1985 to 1991-2 is an indication of fairly stringent
levels of restraint. The States did have bigger
spending programs. These in part were camouflaged by
the big pick up in receipts coming off the boom,
particularly in property and stamp duties, that's
declined a bit. But the underlying level of their
outlays and expenditure programs are obviously not as
tight as the Commnonwealth's.
J: Mr Keating, in terms of their confidence as financial
managers, though, given some of the things that have
happened in Victoria and in South Australia, I mean
they're really fundamental problems that need to be
addressed. what sort of things can the Commonwealth
do?
PM: Well they've certainly got problems with management of
financial institutions and PTEs, and I think they're
are obviously now painfully aware of those.
J: But is there some sort of stamp that the Commonwealth
can put on
PM: I don't think so. In the end if you want own the State
Bank the buck stops at the shareholder's door. You can
have all the independent boards you like and you can
have everything else, but in the end you've got to take
an interest in it.
J: Was the position of hospitals discussed?
PM: Only briefly.
J: What about the implementation of the Aboriginal Deaths
in Custody Royal Commission?
PM: Well again they will be responding to that and relating
their response through ATSIC.
T: That was the significance of the endorsement of the
AAAC Agreement that that's the thing that underpins
these mechanisms for the future. So we made progress
on that.
J: So what's the effect of that?
T: It now means we've got a mechanism, a Commonwealth-
State mechanism for dealing with the response to the
Commission' s report.
3: While the Premiers were meeting with you, their
officials were telling the Senate Committee on Super
that they basically rejected what the Federal
Government's been saying about the effect of the SGL on
wages outcomes, on jobs, and on national savings. This 
13
SGL looks like it's in a fair bit of trouble with the
Senate. Are you prepared to modify it dramatically or
change the date of its implementation?
T: No. I don't think it is in trouble. I've been having
discussions with the Democrats, they haven't given me
the impression that they're about to reject it. What
would you expect the States to say. I mean, the States
see this as a bit of an inconvenience because it's
going to cost them money. But the alternative is that
they would be up for higher wages costs. The fact of
the matter is that the States have been major
beneficiaries of wage restraint. Wage restraint has
been achieved at a great cost to the Federal budget
through tax cuts, wage-tax trade of fs, and the like.
And this was a point that the Prime Minister made to
them today. So you don't expect them to be throwing
their hats in the air about this arrangement, but it is
basically an arrangement whereby people who don't have
superannuation, or who have very little of it, will get
access to it to improve their prospects in retirement.
J: They're making the basic point which is that the SGL
means that for a lot of people there will be what is
effectively a wage increase on July 1, in terms of the
cost to employers, which would not otherwise flow
through with the economy in the state it's in.
PM: Yes, but the superannuation 3 to 5 to 6 per cent
outcomes are the product of wage restraint from 1985-
1991/ 92. And the years when we've had falling real
levels of wages, the States have been given an enormous
bonus for years in succession. Look at their wage
costs wage costs are 60 per cent of their outlays and
what's average weekly earnings this year? 3.5 per
cent. I mean, they've been the major beneficiaries of
the Accord processes. They can't take all of the
benefits and then say sorry, but the bit at the end of
the section, the superannuation, we're not going to be
paying that. You know.
J: Do you envisage that this new Council is actually going
to be able to make decisions and reach agreements, or
is it just purely as you've put in your Statement for
discussion?
PM: No, if you look at today today is really a precursor
for this, a forerunner for this. It was a decision
we ' ye made today on a whole range of important things
such as mutual recognition of standards, what we're
deciding to do about electricity. It is a very large
principle getting the States to agree,
notwithstanding the presence of electricity
commissions, for the principle of separation of power
generation and transmission assets is a very large one 
to get at a meeting like this. I've always said to you
I've thought these Premiers' Conference meetings were
very efficient. And they have been by and large.
Whether they be in the financial guise or in the nonfinancial
guise. And I think this Council could do a
great deal.
J: Mr Keating, in terms of the way you see these
Federal/ State relations going, is there a particular
theme you can point to as to where the reform is going,
I mean through that Council?
PM: All of the areas where national policy, since the time
of Federation there has been a more national outcome.
Be it in terms of the economy, macro-economic policy,
education, roads, the Commonwealth Government has been
involved and there has been a national movement of
policy. Having a place to discuss those things other
than simply Ministerial Councils where it is the
preserve of the respective Minister and not the broader
discussion between States and the Commonwealth, has
been a limited factor. I think to now be in a position
to discuss these issues in the longer haul, that is to
find this sort of delineation between State and
Commonwealth responsibilities and to talk about them in
the broad, so that Premiers in all States at the one
time are all part of the same conversation and know
which way the system is moving, is I think important.
The cooperation in the last few years has been quite
profound and a lot has been achieved. A great deal.
And I think this Council does hold great promise.
Thank you.
ends 



HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING
CNBFRRA 11 MAY 1992
COMUIQUEz
INTRODUCTION The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers and the
President of the Australian Local Government Association
held wide ranging discussions in Canberra today on
national issues of mutual concern. These issues included
Commonwealth-State financial arrangements and a range of
measures for improving national economic and structural
efficiency, including measures in the areas of road and
rail transport, the electricity industry, mutual
recognition of regulation and vocational education and
training.
COMMONWEALTH-STATE FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Heads of Government discussed the immediate and
medium-term outlook for their respective budgets and
intergovernmental financial relations.
In discussing the paper prepared by the States on
Commonwealth-State financial relaticns, the Commonwealth
acknowledged that the States needed to be adequately
resourced and that the predictability, flexibility and
growth of State funding were agreed objectives. The
States will decide later this week whether the June
Premiers' Conference should consider financial
arrangements for 1992-93 only or also for a longer
period. The Conference agreed that a Committee of Commonwealth,
State and Territory Treasury officials would prepare a
report on budgetary prospects and issues for
consideration at the forthcoming financial Premiers'
Conference. It would take account of both cyclical and
structural factors at both the Commonwealth and State
level in the context of a national budgetary strategy for
all governments. This report could provide a basis for
considering general purpose funding for the States in
1992-93 and, if necessary, longer term financial
arrangements. If the June Premiers' Conference decides only on 1992-93
funding arrangements, a report on longer-term
arrangements will be prepared by early 1993.
MEETINGS OF HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
Leaders and representatives agreed to establish a
" Council of Australian Governments" as a permanent body
for on-going consultation between the Prime Minister, 
Premiers, Chief Ministers and the President of the
Australian Local Government Association.
Leaders and representatives have agreed that there will
be a meeting of the " Council of Australian Governments"
at least once each year, in addition to the financial
Premiers' Conference, and that the Prime Minister will
chair the meetings.
The role of the " Council of Australian Governments" is:
increasing co-operation among governments in the
national interest;
co-operation among goverrnents on reforms to achieve
an integrated, efficient national economy and single
national market;
continuing structural reform of government and
review of relationships among governments consistent
with the national interest; and
consultation on other major issues by agreement such
as: international treaties which affect the States
and Territories and which have not been
resolved through the agreed processes;
major initiatives of one government which
impact on other governments;
major whole-of -government issues arising from
Ministerial Council deliberations.
The venue for meetings of the Council will rotate between
the States and Territories and there will be joint
Commonwealth and State/ Territory involvement in providing
secretariat arrangements.
Leaders and representatives agreed that the first meeting
of the Council should consider broad protocols for the
operation of Ministerial Councils. Heads of Government
noted the significant cooperation and consultation
between Governments which now occurs through Ministerial
Councils of Commonwealth and State Ministers. However,
there are now more than 40 such Councils, many meeting
several times a year.
MUTUAL RECOGNITION
The Heads of Government of the Commonwealth, States and
Territories signed a final Agreement to introduce
legislation to eliminate regulatory impediments to a
national market in goods and services. It is expected to
greatly enhance the international competitiveness of the
Australian economy and is recognised by Heads of 
Government as a vital initiative in the achievement of
microeconomic reform.
The Agreement provides for all jurisdictions to enact
legislation so that goods that can be sold lawfully in
one State may be sold freely in any other State or
Territory. The legislation will not apply to certain
products, such as firearms, prohibited and offensive
weapons and pornography.
Similarly, with occupations, if a person is registered to
carry out an occupation in-one State or Territory he or
she will be entitled to be registered to undertake the
equivalent occupation in any other State or Territory.
The States and Territories agreed that they will request
and empower the Commonwealth to pass a single Act which
will apply equally throughout Australia and will
automatically override any State or Territory laws or
regulations which are inconsistent with the principles of
mutual recognition. The Commonwealth will be a full
Party to the Agreement.
The Agreement also provides a mechanism for achieving
negotiated uniform national standards, where necessary in
the interests of public health or safety or environmental
protection. States and Territories reaffirmed their
agreement to be bound by the decisions of two thirds or
more of Commonwealth, State and Territory Ministers
voting within Ministerial Councils to develop a national
standard when the need for such a standard becomes
evident as a-result of the operation of mutual
recognition. The Commonwealth has agreed to be bound by
recommendations of the Commonwealth-State Consumer
Affairs Product Safety Advisory Committee, approved by
Commonwealth, State and Territory Ministers, with respect
to standards for goods under the Trade Practices Act.
Heads of Government agreed on a revised timetable for
implementation of mutual recognition. It is proposed
that States and Territories enact their necessary
legislation by 31 October 1992; and that the Commonwealth
legislation be enacted by 1 January 1993, with
proclamation by 1 March 1993.
Heads of Government noted a report on progress in the
development of national competency standards for
professions and occupations. They expect that where
these are available, national competency standards will
do much to facilitate the smooth operation of mutual
recognition in respect of the occupations. They also
noted work done on the development of uniform standards
in relation to occupational health and safety and
dangerous goods. They reaffirmed that a national
solution to the treatment of partially regulated
occupations is a matter of high priority. 
Heads of Government also endorsed the other
recommendations contained in the Report of the
Commonwealth-State Committee on Regulatory Reform.
ROAD TRANSPORT
Leaders and representatives noted the Commonwealth's
decision to provide an additional S25 million in 1991-92,
$ 437.5 million in 1992-93 and $ 140 million in 1993-94 for
augmenting and rehabilitating the National Highway
System, accelerating selected National Arterial projects
and expanding the Black Spots program. They also noted
the positive employment effects of this expenditure in
the period up to 1993-94.
Leaders and representatives agreed to the role and
functions of the National Road Transport Commission. An
Agreement has been signed by the Commonwealth, New South
Wales, Victoria and South Australia to this end.
Queensland indicated its intention to sign.
The Commission was established after the July 1991 Heads
of Government meeting to develop national road transport
legislation and regulations and to recommend on charges
to apply no later than 1 January 1993 for vehicles over
tonnes. It will now also be responsible for
developing regulations for all other road users.
In addition, the Commission is to assemble and publish
comparative information on the funding and management of
roads, performance indicators for the road system and the
efficiency and effectiveness of road authorities.
Leaders and representatives agreed that it was important
to delineate clearly Commonwealth and State road
responsibilities. The Prime Minister indicated that he
would shortly be advising the States of the Commonwealth
position on the National Highway System.
It was confirmed that $ 350 million of the Commonwealth
roads program would be untied. The Prime Minister
indicated that he would be writing to other Heads of
Government soon on an appropriate basis for this
distribution, including continuing the distribution
currently applying to the road funding being untied, with
a view to settling the matter before the June Premiers'
Conference. RAIL REFORM
The Commonwealth's readiness to provide $ 454 million over
the next two years to complement the National Rail
Corporation's 10-year $ 1.7 billion investment program was
noted. Leaders and representatives agreed that further rail
reform is required if the significant potential economic
gains are to be realised. 
They noted that a number of the reforms were consistent
with measures already adopted by the States, but that
there was still considerable scope for increasing the
efficiency of the rail sector.
Acknowledging this and the importance of early reform,
the New South Wales, Victorian, Queensland, and Western
Australian Premiers agreed to continue to pursue and
accelerate reform of their rail systems over the next
three years.
ELECTRICITY GENERATION, TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION
It was agreed to develop an interstate transmission
network across the eastern States and that the National
Grid Management Council would report on the precise
nature and operating guidelines of the structure by the
end of 1992. To achieve this, Heads of Government agreed
to the principle of separate generation and transmission
elements in the electricity sector.
Western Australia, while not part of a national grid,
supports the above. South Australia wishes to look
further at the implications for its system. Tasmania's
participation in a national grid will be dependent on the
development of a Basslink proposal.
Heads of Government agreed to finalise the draft national
grid protocol prepared by the National Grid Management
Council via correspondence by the end of June.
VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Heads of Government agreed on the necessity of achieving
a major increase in the level of vocational education and
training opportunities across Australia, consistent with
the national participation targets arising from the
recent report of the Finn Committee.
In line with this objective, Heads of Government resolved
that: governmental responsibilities for the funding and
resourcing of vocational education and training
should be settled as a matter of urgency;
there was an urgent need also to advance the agreed
agenda of national training reform, including
consideration of the proposals for reform of entrylevel
training flowing from the recent report of the
Employment and Skills Formation Council ( Carmichael
Report); governments should work further to clarify issues
for the June Premiers' Conference on funding and
administrative arrangements under the Commonwealth
model and the National Partnership model for 
vocational education and training, with particular
reference to:
the detailed financial implications;
responsibility for decision making; and
the relationship between proposals for
government schools and TAFE and training.
Heads of Government agreed that the issue of youth
employment and training is. one of national priority and
will be further progressed at the June meeting.
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Heads of Government endorsed the document " Achieving
Greater Coordination of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Programs and Services". This establishes a
framework of principles and a plan of action for improved
intergovernmental relations in Aboriginal affairs.
Heads of Government recognised the role of ATSIC, but
noted that its creation had introduced complexities into
the relationship between governments. These would be
addressed in the period ahead, in particular the
operation of section 18 of the ATSIC Act in relation to
grants to States and Territories.
The great majority of the 339 recommendations of the
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody had
been accepted by governments. Heads of Government were
committed to continuing to address issues of Aboriginal
disadvantage. The Prime Minister reiterated the
Commonwealth's commitment to announce an additional
package of measures by mid-year and Premiers and Chief
Ministers indicated that they would continue to give
Aboriginal needs high priority in their 1992-93 budgets.
ENVIRONMENT Intergovernmental Agreement on the Environment
Leaders and representatives noted that the Agreement has
now been signed by all parties and affirmed their
commitment to co-operating on its implementation. It
provides a framework for co-operation in this area to
achieve better environment protection and greater
certainty of government and business decision making.
E~ fl/ nrPenhouqA
Leaders and representatives noted progress on the
development of national strategies on Ecologically
Sustainable Development ( ESD) and Greenhouse. In the
light of the range and complexity of issues involved and
in order to facilitate effective public consultation,
leaders and representatives agreed that the draft 
7
strategies should be released by the end of June as
officials' discussion papers. They further agreed that
officials should bring forward proposals for the
definitive strategies by the end of October with a view
to agreement being reached in time for the release of the
strategies by the end of 1992.
Leaders and representatives emphasised the importance of
linkages between the ESD process and other relevant
Commonwealth environmental initiatives and activities. 



TEL: PRIME MINISTER1
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON 1' J KEATING, MP
ACCESS TO TAX FILES
The Government's decision to maintain the confidentiality of
taxpayers' files despite a request from the West Australian
Commission _ intoCommercial Activities of Government
wasbaed en-ti-relyi on--dice from the Australian Taxation
office. The principal solicitor assisting the commission asked me in
a letter dated April 15, 1991, for an amendment to the
income Tax Assessment Act to enable the commission to
investigate taxpayers' files.
As Treasurer, I sought advice from the Australian Taxation
Office. The Commissioner's reply was received in my office
on May 3, 1991 and is attached to this statement.
Mr Boucher advised that a similar request for access from
the Gyles Royal Commission in New South Wal -es had been
denied some months arlier_, anrferdt hismiueo
that subject.
He was also of the view that the WA commission should be
denied access to income-tax information.-
He wrote that, for reasons of good tax administration, he
was strongly of the view that the current level of secrecy
of income tax information should not be disturbed.
" The decision by the Government to allow the Fitzgerald
inquiry access to income tax information in 1987 was taken
to meet a special need of the time. I would be most
concerned if that decision is seen as a precedent to allow
access for all future State Royal Commissions," he wrote.
This " special need" resulted from the fact that the
Fitzgerald Inquiry preceded legislative measures to allow
State police commissioners to seek tax information from the
Taxation Commissioner within the framework of existing law.
The Commissioner conellided with his recommendation, " that
the Government not support the WA Commission's request for
access to income tax information." T1EL3: . May. 92 18: 43 No. 022 P. 01/ 04 
TEL: 13. May. 92 18: 43 NoD. 02_ 2 P. U2/ U-
2
Mr Boucher's advice and irecommuendation were accepted, anld I
signed a letter, dated May 21 and embodying his advice, to
the Royal Commission.
I stressed in that letter that there was a capacity for law
enforcement officers to obtain tax information pertaining to
specific cases.
Any suggestion that there was a party political motivation
in my decision is ludicrous.
I not only accept but I support Mr Boucher's recommendation
because the Income Tax Assessment Act states that tax files
should remain confidential.
The oflus is on those who want access to them to establish
why they should have it, not on the Treasurer or the
Taxation Office to establish why they should not.
Finally, I refuse to accept Mr Templeman's excuse that any
inadequacy or failings of the Commission process are a
result of the view of the Tax Commissioner. I find that
implication both offensive and self-serving.
As I have made clear, If the Commission believes there are
outstanding matters which would be assisted by the
availability of more tax information there is a mechanism
available for these issues to be raised with the Australian
Tax Office.
Indeed, if any authorised law enforcement agency were to
seek tax information to assist them in any investigations or
prosecutions prompted by the report of the R~ oyal Commission
then the Tax Commissioner is empowered to provide such
relevant information under the amendments to the secrecy
provisions of tax law made after the Fitzgerald Royal
Commission. CANBERRA
May 13 1992 
TEL: 13. May. 92 18: 43 No. U22 uo/ u4
No.
CONFIDENTiAL
AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE
MINUTE PAPER
NT Q oo
Treasurer
1 Comria Ave G n 0It
0\ Access to income tax information by the WA Royal Comm nto
Commercial Activities of Government 6
You have received a request from the West Australian Royal Commission into
Commercial Activities of Government ( the WA Commission) that they be
allowed access to income tax information ( copy attached). The WA Commission
would like access alone similar lines to the access given to the Fitzgerald Royal
Commission in 1987. A similar request for access for the Gyles Royal
Commission of New South Wales was recently rejected by the Government ( our
minute No. 177 of 19 December 1990 refers relevant papers also attached).
2. I am also of the view that the WA Commission should be denied access to
income tax information. For reasons of good tax administration, I am still
strongly of the view that the current level of secrecy of income tax information
should not be disturbed.
3. As I said in my minute of 19 December, the continued confidentiality of
income tax information is important to the gathering of such information from
taxpayers and other persons. Those people are, I believe, more likely to disclose
information voluntarily where they can be confident that the use of the
information, other than for tax purposes, is limited.
4. The omnibus provisions for Royal Commissions are longstanding ones
limited to those Commissions established by the Commonwealth, and our
consistent position has been to advise against any widening of them. The
decision by the Government to allow the Fitzgerald Inquiry access to income tax
information in 1987 was taken to meet a special need of the time. I would be
most concerned if that decision is seen as a precedent to allow access for all
future State Royal Commissions. It is our experience that once a Royal
Commissioner makes the claim that he needs information for purposes of his
enquiry, we cannot look behind the request even though it is of a wide ranging
( even " fishing") nature.
I should also point out that we already help certain State ( and other) law
enforcement agencies, within the framework of the existing law, wherever
possible. For example, income tax information may be communicated to State
Police Commissioners in certain circumstances, either on my own initiative or in
response to a request by an authorised law enforcement officer. In the latter
case, the request could be made in the context of an investigation subsequent to
the completion of a Royal Commission, provided the information sought relates
to a particular offence by a specified person " fishing" exercises . l. e not
permitted. INF1 J EtA L 
TEL: 13. May. 92 18: 43 No. 022 P. U4/ U4
-2-
Recommendation 6. It is recommended that the Government not support the WA
Commission's request for access to income tax information. A draft reply to the
Commission is attached for your signature, if you approve of the
recommendation. Boucher)
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION c 



TEL: 14 : 141 * b' iF
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON. P. J. KEATING, NP
MR GREGORY SYMONS
In the light of today's reports of Mr Gregory Symons'
alleged financial status I have asked Senator Richar d son to
provide me with a cvniprehensive report on his involvement
with this matter and provide it to me by Monday.
I continue to accept the Senator's assurances that he sought
and received advice from the Minister for Foreign Affairs
that he would not be behaving improperly to contact Marshall
Islands officials and that he sought no more than to enquire
as to the possibility of Mr Symnons returning to Australia to
collect documents and. prepare his legal defence.
However, in the light of today's reports I believe the
public interest would be beat served if a full report of
these matters is provided by the Senator to mnake clear that
he has behaved In accordance with his Ministerial
responsibilities. Further, I understand that Senator Kerry Sibraa sent a
letter last November through normal channels-to the
Australian Embassy in Washington. That letter requested
assistance in arranging, where possible, meetings for Mr
Symons with appropriate US Governmnent officials and elected
representatives. I believe that given the publicity surrounding this episode
a report from Senator Sibraa is also warranted.
While I am not in a position to require Senator Sibraa to
furnish me with a report he has agreed to do so, also by
Monday. He has told me he intends to report to the Senate on the
same issue on its first day of sitting.
CANBERRA May 13, 1992 
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ZANS ERRA
May 1992
The Hon P J Keating MP
Prime Minister
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
Dear Prime Minister,
As I agreed in my discussions with you please find attached my report concerning
my involvement with Mr Greg Symons.
Yours 
REPORT TO THE PRIME MINISTER ON MATTERS RELATING TO MR GREG
SYMONS BY SENATOR KERRY SIBRAA, PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE
On the 12th November 19911I was contacted by Senator Graham Richardson who
asked me whether I could meet a Mr Greg Symons, who he hoped I may be able to
help with some contacts in Washington for his forthcoming business trip. As I was
free at the time, I agreed. Senator Richardson brought Mr Symons around to my
office, introduced us and left.
We exchanged pleasantries for a few minutes and when he mentioned the general
nature of his business I asked my Senior Adviser, Mr Fred Peppinck, to join us. Mr
Symons told Mr Peppinck and myself that he was an Adviser to the President of the
Marshall Islands, and that he had a brief from the Foreign Minister of the Marshall
Islands to discuss business migration to the Marshall Islands when he was in
Washington. He had with him a pile of documentation, some of which he showed
us. The nature of these documents was impressive and confirmed that he had been
given the highest level of authority to negotiate on behalf of the Marshall Islands
Government. In particular, he produced a letter from the Foreign Minister of the
Marshall Islands and the Minister of Resources and Development. He said that he
had no contacts in Washington and he wanted to contact either officials or
Congressmen who had an expertise on Pacific matters.
Mr Peppinck suggested that the best way to assist would be for him to speak with
Mr Chris Lamb, Congressional Liaison Officer in the Australian Embassy in
Washington. We were in frequent contact with Mr Lamb over the matter of
internships for Parliament House, and Mr Peppinck said that next time he was
speaking with Mr Lamb he would mention Mr Symons visit. Mr Symons said that
that would be helpful, and asked that I also write to Mr Lamb. I said that I would
do so.
The next day ( November 13) Mr Peppinck had cause to telephone Mr Lamb in
Washington, and as promised, mentioned Mr Symons visit. Mr Lamb said that he
would be prepared to meet with Mr Symons in Washington and see if he could assist
him. Mr Peppinck then telephoned Mr Symons to let him know of this conversation, and
gave him Mr Lamb's telephone number so that he could ring and arrange an
appointment.
As had been requested by Mr Symons, a letter was drafted which was based upon
the information provided by Mr Symons at the meeting and then again to Mr
Peppinck.
The letter was not a reference. I did only that which I promised to do, that is,
arrange a meeting through the normal channels. I had no reason to doubt his bona
fides. I did not approach any member of the US Government or any other person
on his behalf.
On the morning of the 20th November, upon my arrival back in my Parliament
House office, the letter was given to me to sign along with other routine items that 
had accumulated since the preceding Friday.
I signed the letter and it was faxed to Mr Lamb the same day.
From that point on there was no further contact between myself or my office and
any of the parties involved.
I was not contacted by Senator Richardson to see whether I had been of any
assistance, I was not contacted by the Department of Foreign Affairs, nor Mr Lamb,
nor was there any further contact with Mr Symons. Because of my absence from the
country it was not until Question Time on Monday 4 May 1992 that I became aware
that Senator Richardson's association with Mr Symons was being questioned. I
recalled having met him at some stage, but thought no more of it.
The question to the Foreign Minister at Question Time on Thursday 7 May
concerning " ithe nature of any dealings between Senator Richardson's friend, Mr
Greg Symons, and the Australian Embassy or consulates in the United States of
America", prompted me to ask my office whether we had done anything for Mr
Symons as a result of my having met him. My staff began checking immediately.
That afternoon and evening was a very busy one. After question time I had guests
to meet, then various meetings, the 9th Anniversary of the Opening of the
Parliament House Reception at which I had to speak, and a private dinner in my
suite. I left Canberra early the following ( Friday) morning.
Late Friday afternoon Mr Peppinck contacted me to let me know that a letter from
myself to Mr Lamb had been located, and a copy of it was sent to me the following
Saturday morning.
My reaction to reading the letter I had signed was that it was something I do all the
time, however in retrospect, and with the benefit of hindsight I believe it may have
been worded more carefully. The letters he brought with him convinced both myself
and my Senior Adviser that he was genuine. As said previously, the contents of my
letter were as told to myself and Mr Peppinck, and I had no reason to doubt Mr
Symons' credentials.
I might add, had a Senior Opposition Senator asked me to do so, I would have done
exactly the same.
This is the first time I have ever provided any assistance to Mr Symons, and it
consisted of simply referring him to an Australian Government official. 
MINISTRYOF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
IIrIUriLIC. OFTHF MAIKHAITI M ANI)
MAJUKO. MAKSI IAII 1I1 ANos October 1991
This letter confirms that Hr. Greg Symons and Mr. Paul Finch
are appointed as consultants to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs and the Ambassador of the Republic of the Marshall
Islands to the United States of America for the purpose of
advising and negotiating with representatives of the United
States, on the clarification of and amendments to the Compact
of Pree Association. This appointment is solely for the
purpose of the establishment of a Business Migration Program
In the Marshall Islands, whereby investors granted citizenship
in the Marshall Islands would receive no less favorable
treatment than native-born citizens of the Republic for the
purposes of entering into the United States of Anerlca.
Mr. Finch and Hr. Symons shall at all times consult with and
be responsible to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Ambassador, and are not authorized to conclude any agreement
or to bind the Government of the Republic of the Marshall
Islands. DD. y ij rlirs.
ilnlster OreTn lial* 1rr
l-. hunc 3181 \ hVAi0.-42 MW AMR I 02 363S 92 349. 
Office of the Cabinet
REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS
RO. Box 2
AL majuro, Marshall Islands 96960
June 28, 1991
Mr. Gregory B. Symons
Managing Director
GBSI International ( Hong Kong) Limited
9th Floor, 18 Ice House Street
Hong Kong Central
Dear Mr. Symons
We refer to your project to establish a Technology Park in the
Republic of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, supported by
the Business Migration Investment Trust to be known as the
Marshall Islands Investment Trust (" the Trust") The trust would
be responsible for the marketing, development and management of
the Technology Park including value added and transhipment
activities and a University Study Centre known as " 1UNIPAC
International".
As you know the Republic of the Marshall Islands Revised Code
allows the grant of citizenship to a " class of persons" where
there is a substantial benefit deemed to accrue to the Marshall
Islands economy.
We recognize that the development of a technology park would have
benefits for the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the
investors may apply for citizenship pursuant to the provisions of
the Code.
The following program for the marketing, development, financing
and management will be supported by the Government of the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, subject to formal agreements
incorporating the concepts below, and subject to the formal
agreements the parties agree that they will work together to
implement the same:
1. Your company is to establish the Trust and representative
offices in Sydney and Hong Kong to market the project and
undertake the development financing and management of the
project. Such offices will support the work of the Trust and its
representatives. 
Mr. Gregory B. Symons
Page 2
June 28, 1991
2. The Government will assist the Trust in the leasing of
approximately 20 acres of land in proximity to the Airport for
the development of the project.
3. The Trust and the Republic of the Marshall islands Government
will work together to secure the optimum use of land and
provision of utilities.
4. The Government will provide a Sovereign guarantee to the
Trust in respect of monies advanced to the Republic of the
Marshall Islands.
The first stage of the development of the project is to cost
$ 13540 million, and Multiplex Constructions Pty. Ltd. will be
appointed by the Trust as project managers/ contractors for the
project. 6. In respect of Business Migration the parties will work
exclusively together on the Trust and Technology Park and will
ensure quick processing of applications for business migration by
investors in the trust. The Trust, after consultation with the
Government, will be responsible for processing applications
including design of the forms for submission to the Government
for the grant of citizenship for approved persons.
7. The parties will work together to ensure concessions under
the Compact of Free Association and tax and duty concessions are
available to users of the Technology Park and to ensure employees
of subsidiary corporations of the Trust ( and users of the
Technology Park) in the U. S. A. are able to work and reside in the
U. S. A. pursuant to the laws and statutes and treaties of the
U. S. A. and the Republic of the Marshall Islands governing such
employment. S. The Government will ensure that plant, equipment and
personnel are admitted to the Technology Park with duty tax and
other concessions as are available elsewhere in the Pacific rim.
9. The Government agrees to do all things necessary to support
the marketing development and management of the Technology Park
and Trust. 
Mr. Gregory B. Symons
Page 3
June 28, 1991
The Airline of the Marshall Islands ( the National Carrier)
shall be used by the Trust and clients of the Technology Park for
carriage of cargo and passengers and the trust and the government
shall work together to ensure an efficient and competitive
service is available and that the interline arrangements with
other carriers are competitive.
11. To promote and develop the role of the Trust with the
National Carrier the trust shall act as a general sales agent of
the National Carrier on the usual terms of trade basis as agreed
between the National Carrier and the Trust.
12.* The Government and the trust shall work together to ensure
procedures for the development and operation of the technology
Park and Uhiversity Study Centre are fast and efficient including
the issue of visas, work permits, foreign investment approval and
corporate registration.
To facilitate a thorough review of the proposed program and
execution of formal agreements, to be negotiated, your company is
requested to submit a formal detailed proposal including
marketing, financing, management, and implementation of such
scheme. I hope to receive your proposal in the next six weeks,
and to commence formal negotiations soon thereafter.
Brenson S. Wase
Minister of Resources
and Development 
Pwiut@ rm U t8S S 002911
Mr Chrlhopor Lamb
Congrssiona isisun OffIcer
AuseUlian Zmbmiy
Wuhin# t DC
UNITED STATES OF AMEfICA
DW Cbdai
I uniiOMitd that you have already spoken with Greg Symons, an Austrlian
eommmrcial lawyer and bucineuuman, who as you know, Is an advisor to tIo
erudent of ths Ropublic of Lii Marsha lulands.
AR ym will be awom Australia ha a ound4 eoprative relationship with the
Roqmhge of the Marshall Islnda, and as a spoomr of their reentu applicato for
adrnduion to the Unlted Nations. Against the backpinm d of this regional
poerastio, President Kabua bee sought the asiftnes of the Australian
Govsrnment in pvtditing dimuseaions in Wasblngon with key US Goovernrent
offircl and electod reprosentotfves on the developmant of a Buuiness
Milgntionflnucsint program in tbo Marshll slands. The progrm h aoeu as
having substantial economic benefit to the Republic as a vehicle to provide
muatainable businass investmcnt.
You wi see from tho attached copy of a lettar fom tho Foreign MinIdSU of the
Reubllc, that Mr Symonx, and bi coilcague Mr Paul Finch, have bes rtppoinled
advinr to the Republlo for the purposas olthe nocmV7 ncgot1leaora with the US
Govemnt within the frimework of the relevant treaty between the Islands and
USA.-the Compact of Free Association.
Mr Symons will be in Witbington in the wek commencing November 25. 1 would
b most apprcative If you extend to him the coutay of you offlo, as won us
facilitate, where posaluie. meetisP with the apprvpriate US Govornment oficals
eM eected representativ#*
Years sincerely CZ! lr
" Itv t I tj V I Vr aum It-' A I 
AS AN ADJUNCT TO MY STATEMENT I HAVE BEEN AWARE SINCE 7 MAY
1992 THAT ON THE RECEIPT OF MY LETTER IN WASHINGTON, IT WAS
FORWARDED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE IN
CANBERRA. I AM AWARE THAT, A WEEK LATER ( ON 29 NOVEMB3ER), BY ROUTINE FAX.,
THE DEPARTMENT SOUGHT INFORMATION FROM ITS POST IN POHNPEI
ABOUT THE MATTERS RAISED BY ME IN MY LETTER TO LAMB.
THE POST, BY ROUTINE FAX, ADVISED ON 3 DECEMBER THAT IT WAS
NOT AWARE OF THE MATTER RAISED IN MY LETTER BUT AGREED THAT
IF POSSIBLE SOME ASSISTANCE SHOULD BE PROVIDED ( TO SYMONS). IT
SAID THAT IT WOULD CONTINUE TO FOLLOW UP ON THE MATTER. ( I
ATTACH COPIES OF RELEVANT CORRESPONDENCE)
TO MY KNOWLEDGE THERE HAS BEEN NO FURTHER RESPONSE FROM
THE POST OR THE DEPARTMENT ON THIS MATTER. I AM NOT AWARE
THAT THE MARSHALL ISLANDS AUTHORITIES HAVE OBJECTED IN ANY
WAY TO THE CONTENT OR TENOR OF MY LETTER. 
Facsimile Message Cover
W tmMM Of Foreign Affsi
94' Trtaa
U N C L A SI F I I O
Thnsmijon In MMi1oW ( POMt rUG this firso
Ult all mWiving Ga6' 9Sm h" t
Age ge Iriatw AR PP. PPP or U Should be used
Pt I ASCA iiiiii
ftrI I
j PoI. WASMINGON . c/ LPrA
Flieb o File: Fom Ff:
Numbers rcm'Usp 001YU~
The nuffbf Of 0a9" n itU" Ing this
covet to 1u1tw mttsE
Comms Use Oniv
PCIou. Aeersna Number
itls or Syollc of the Dc= WtAddlt1Onaj Comments:
AumtrtliRc, A C Ql" Itnt tO ths RMT Q6ver" Omen1 0. asuut for uugigtsnne
As discussed in telecon Marchant/ Gr sham. attached is a copy of the
letter from Senator Sibras requesting that this Embassy provide
assistance for two Australian consultants to the RM. Government who
will be visiting Washington shortly to assist in negotiations with
the VS Government on the establishment of a Busineuu Migration
Program in the Marshall Islands.
We have not yet been able to contact the RmI Zmbasiy in Washington
to determine whet they might know about the visit. In the event we
are contacted by Messrs Srmons and Finch next week* however, and
they seek the use of office space or other assistancetwe propose
suggesting that they approach the RM! Embassy in the first
instance. We will keep you infomed of any developments.
Olrbution Otails To be Com1tetd by Odinalor.
asp
Aft. eA CJW'i A14i'&amp; S* f*
Authorisea Details ( PIGiU Pfiftl
Authorised y . PAA14AF
OSoeocttfBranct h) t. s CAt.
Date .2.114
NOUN OU22-3 1 I-5 AuthOtlSa GofCfi
ulgioature ftone NumoerV~ Z9 P9
I 3) fFA' GE. lagI 
TmSIM b~. hmd ow wed WAeE" U
* N 0....... 0.. 0000S00 s 09* w eS S0 4
S* gooa T0.000.00000O0 0 0 00 0 S o4 d~ vA~
p . I~ mMiw* wY&amp;-~ w I~
09~~ 0 0 0 00
00000' I'll * 000000
U
I lre, CA N3ERA/ Ft
tofot To 337, q ft
Ties W subject sf the O" anVAddittnat C61nefU
A~. TO&amp; AL~~ JN~ ~ TA7S r rME : MT ' yv4ovs Ref ~ Si NvmhP.
Cd1~%~~
LWL Co l b is
&amp; tV. boL C4-dAS
mmAkr. 3'~ 3 Q
Otlibutlon Octala To be comYpie4 by OtIgqnAsto:
P B0P
œ uthoalsadon Osten&amp; a ( Please Pvq
Auilhottsedby 6' LIi OAKES(
Date. l i i pwofts Nuumb" 34+-Q owls GO-0
pm VrC k I 
Tog RY604 e4Kd$ Irw 6r e4wAA4
ls 6* b. u' 20444
It R FL. Y ov .4itov0&amp;% m5&amp; bwv008
? ATIA R3 dstil 1 ^ 1 yt W4 rX ( ie clV ^ d O
RUUUY' # r OS As~ LCOr w dti
t. WE t~ wm. r Faw~ a* our mae4L Asovr Syr
L yw0 ' e 10IdO4 LwuIltd4e b* &gt; 0.
3. 09 # Tta v; 04 I SUP. r# ~ opvp
wa4I1is% Alcr TAy""' ' DP iwaa,.+ . J -7
AA y # VA ^, 6! rk-vwe . ji0or ro
rOMJ ie ctiar 7dOVgeJe gfo o
OFAtsmt 46f-." oovA" s 691 325 5449 PAGE. SSI
3 DEC 191 15: 26 



6do1&amp; I9
JoQ lu 



cc
\ SKB1K9 OG7 



It TEL: PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
WA ROYAL COMMISSION
Recent statements by Mr~ Templeman and today's statement by
the WA Royal Comimission chairman, Mr Kennedy, that the
Commonwealth Government has impeded the ability of the
commission to obta~ in tax information are incorrect.
In particular I draw attention to the final paragraph of Mr
Kennedy's press statement of today.
I have received advice today from the Commissioner of
Taxation that 8 WA police unit is working with the Royal
Commission and that this unit is empowered to seek tax
information from the Australian Tax Office.
Further, the Commissioner of Taxation has advised that " we
stand ready to assist the Royal Commission by supplying
information to Its police unit, as authorised by Section 3E
( of theTaxAdministration Act)."
At this stage, I am Informed that no use has been made of
this facility.
If this has comie about because of friction between the
police unit and others associated with the Commission, as
some have suggested, this is not an issue for the
Commonwealth Government.
The central issue is to ensure that the public interest is
served arid that guilty parties are brought to account.
I am therefore disturbed by the implication that I and
subsequent Federal Treasurers have sought to obstruct this
process in any way.
That this Is not the case is made clear by successive
documents provided to me and to other Treasurers which I
have released with this statement. : D 
-1 EL
Finally, I ami concerned that
suggesting that it is unable
successful conclusion. the Commission seems to be
to bring this matter to a
I am particularly concerned given the view of the chairman
of the Australian Securities Commission that his ability to
prosecute has been severely hamperedi by the existence of
this and other Royal Commissions.
CANBERRA May 14, 1992 141L18: Y I ! A0 1 U 



TEL PRIME MINISTER]
TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J7 KERTING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, 14 MAY 1992, CANBERRA, WA ROYAL COMMISSION
E Ot PROOF COPY
PM: Well thank you for coming. I have issued a statement
to you today saying that recent statements by Mr
Templeman, a Barrister servicing the West Australian
Royal Commission, and todays statement by the West
Australian Commission Chairman, Mr Kennedy, that the
Commonwealth Government has impeded the ability of the
Commission to obtain tax information. Both of those
statements are incorrect.
The Commonwealth Governent has been seriously and
wilfully maligned on this issue. Now today I have
received advice from the Commissioner of Taxation, or
the Treasurer has, and he has passed it on to me, that
a Western Australian Police Unit is working with the
Royal Commission, and that this Unit is empowered to
seek tax information from the Australian Tax Office.
And that minute which you have in front of you with the
number 4 at its top says, that en amendment to the act
in 1989, Section 3( e) was inserted to the taxation
amendmnent act to allow Controlled access for nominated
law enforcement agencies to tax information. Provision
authorises me, that's the Commissioner, to provide tax
information if I am satisfied the information is
relevant to establishing whether a serious offence has
been, or is being committed. And he goes on to say
over the page, " It's my understanding that the Western
Australian Police have a Unit working with, and
assisting the Royal Commission in that State. Section
3 allows us to provide tax information to that Unit for
the purpose of its investigation of a serious offence"
" In other words, as to serious matters there is
potential for us to assist the Royal Commission, says
the Commissioner. This facility was explained by my
office in Perth, to the Royal Commission staff erly in
the process, and we would have supplied available
information had the Police asked for it. In fact there
have been no Police requests for information". He goes
14 2 1 t-lo F 
TEL: 14rl1 1a: iL4Ic ' 4
2
have been no Police requests for information". He goes
on to say he understands hie Deputy Commissioner in
Western Australia and his staff are maintaining close
liaison with the Commission. And importantly in the
last paragraph, last sentence he says, the
Commissioner, Mr Boucher says " We stand ready to assist
the Royal Commission by supplying information to its
Police Unit, as authorised by Section Now the
fact is that was explained to the Western Australian
Royal Commission in February in 1991 and the Commission
has not availed itself of the use of that provision.
That provision was inserted after the Government agreed
to give tax information to the Fitzgerald Royal
Comnmision. Now what the West Australian Royal
Commission sought, was not the power of information
about of fences and the prosecution of of fences, or
information on specific of fences, serious of fences, but
a broader power to require of the Commissioner, that
any information requested be provided to the Royal
Commission. In other words, what the Commissioner calls a " fishing
licence", that is, to be asking for information
broadly. So any Western Australian, any Australian,
associated with, in any way, with any person under
investigation by the Commission can have their tax
returns made available to the bevy of Queens
Councillors and Commission staff, as the Commission so
decides. And the . Commonwealth has always taken the
view this is unwarranted invasion of the secrecy
provision to the Tax Act and the privacy of
Australians. And that for serious crime there were no
practical impediments to the Commission seeking
information. Now the Commissioner has made his position clear on
that point. Again in the minute number 4 he says,
" Again I indicated previously the type of access which
the Fitzgerald Commission enjoyed was a wide one. It
was to Information needed for the purposes of the
inquiry, if and when the Royal Commissioner asked for
tax files I was in no position to gain say his claim.
That release of the information was authorised by the
enabling provision". In other words, that is the broad
form of the provision will allow requests of even a
fishing kind.
In other words, the great phalanx of Tax Lawyers and
Barristers who fill up the first class compartments of
Ansett and Australian, from Melbourne, to Sydney, to
Perth every week and to go back with their brief cases
bloated with papers, can go back bloated with the tax
returns of West Australians and Australians generally.
And the Government quite correctly said no to that, no
to that. But we a1so said that we would facilitate
Information. Now it Is not just simply a matter of me
agreeing with a recommendation of the Commissioner, so
to did Mr Willis for the same reasons. And the 
TEL: 1 jr . C
3
Commissioner put his view again forcefully in the
minute headed 2, which I have given to you. on my
advice the Western Australian Commissions request for
access was rejected, he told Mr Willis. And he went on
to Say " I would like to reiterate my view that the
confidentially of income tax information is important
to the administration of the tax laws. I do not
consider this position should be further eroded by
giving access to the Western Australian Commission".
And at the bottom he goes on to say, " I again recommend
that the Government not support the Western Australian
Commissions request for access to Income tax
information". And he makes clear in ' the letter headed
2, that the granting of access to information for the
Gyles Royal Commission in NSW was also refused on the
same basis.
Now, can I just say a couple of other things about Mr
Templemn and his remarks the day before yesterday.
And I refer to the Transcript which I think we have
included in the papers I have given you, It is the
document headed 5. At the bottom of the page under
exhibit 3147, about 1/ 3 down the page, at the last
paragraph Mr Teinpieman says, " The Treasurer then
referred to the existing law, and concluded by saying
that in the present case any request for pacific
assistance could be made In the context of an
investigation, subsequent to the completion of the
Royal Commission, provided the information sought
relates to a particular offence by a specified person,
and there in of course, with respect, lies the
difficulty of identifying the particular offence or
specifying a person at this stage of the inquiry.
How could their be any difficulty at this stage of the
inquiry? At this stage the inquiry's reaching Its
final stages. And is Mr Templeman asserting that even
after 210 days of sittings, 497 witnesses, 31,000 pages
of transcripts, 3200 exhibits, a staff of 15 to 18 and
6 senior counsel, at a cost so far of $ 16 million, that
he couldn't even talk about a specified person, and
there in of course with respect he said, or a
particular offence or specifying a particular person at
this stage of the inquiry. I mean, doesn't it strike
you as strange that at this stage of the inquiry, that
this Commission having run this period, can't put a
request through its Police Unit to the Tax Commissioner
for information about a specified offence, concerning a
specified person. Because that's in fact, what is
being said.
Now as I said yesterday, I am not interested in the
apologia, or excuses by highly paid Barristers,
counsel, Servicing Commissions, in giving us some for
taste, or portending, the progress of the Commission.
I am interested only In the possibility of serious
crimes being dealt with, and being dealt with in a
conclusive way. 
TEL: 14 11' F. CL
4
And I refer you in that respect to Mr Hartnell, who on
3 may 1991, the AuStralian Financial Review, had this
to say, he said he did not think very kindly of Royal
Commissions at this time, " I am merely saying that the
public has to understand every time you have a Royal
Commission it delays trials. The Royal Commission are
ensuring that the bloodlust doesn't come to early
fruition. When there is an investigative force
professionally set up to Investigate an agreement and
charged with bringing actions under lawful
investigations, I am frankly not in favour of Royal
Commissions. At the present time obviously there are
huge criminal actions being brought which we are
bringing through the Office of the Crown Prosecutor in
Western Australia". And he went on to say that certain
trials could be deferred by up to two years because of
the Western Australian Royal Commission. Now Mr
Hartnell's Security Commission is one of the Parties
provided with access to tax information, and I might
add if you look again at minute 4, so is the NSW
Independent Commission against Corruption and the NSW
Crimes Commission.
So those elements of the media who yesterday published
or telecast Dr Hewson's mealy mouthed statement that
the Government had acted in a preferential way, So as
to protect so called " Labor Mates", might indicate to
the public that a commission which was set up
supposedly to investigate corruption under the former
NSW Labor Government, was given access to the Tax
Office explicitly by an Act of Parliament. So that
should at least demolish that argument.
Could I just make a couple of other points. In a note
for file by an Australian Tax Commission officer on 19
February 1991, he said this, I also outlined Section
3( e) of the Tax Administration Act as a possible
alternative means that the Commission could use to
pursue access to ATO Information. However,
reservations were expressed as to the many problems
that could be encountered", wicks stated that they
would not consider this option.
Now this is a very high handed approach by Mr Wicks.
When a tax officer explained that an avenue of tax
information is available, they said well thank you for
the explanation and the offer, but thank you, but no
thanks. Thank you but no thanks. The Commissioner is
again repeating the offer today in his minute to Mr
Dawkin's where he says, the Tax Office stands ready to
assist the Royal Commission by supplying information to
its Police Unit as authorised under Section 3. And I
refer you also to the introductory note for the
legislation of Section 3( e) which says this: " broadly
proposed Section 3( e) provides the Commissioner of
Taxation with the discretion to disclose taxation
information to an authorised law enforcement agency 
T1E L a. 4rLia ' q 1-r 1. No C' 19 F-1 T
officer. Such disclosure is conditional on the
Commissioner being satisfied that the information Is
relevant to the investigation of a serious Crime or
post convictions, confiscation and restraining order
proceedings. The information may be disclosed by the
Commissioner either on his own initiative or in
response to a request by a low enforcement agency
officer," m and it goes on but they're the main points.
" Such disclosures are conditional on the Commissioner
being satisfied that the information Is relevant to the
investigation or a serious offence". I should of
thought the whole point of the investigations In
Western Australia were the investigations of serious
of fences.
But if the notion is that the Commission only needed a
fishing licence approach to the tax system, to call up
tax files of all citizens in this country at the behest
of the Commission or councils before the Commission and
that the question of serious of fences was not an
important consideration in that request by the
Commission to the Government, but begs the question
what does a Commission see as its purpose.
I think I'll conclude on this point, the commissioner
of Taxation has deemed Section 3( e) available to the
Commission as an Investigation process or serious crime
that's the bottom line.
And I just want to make one final point, though not
related to this but related to the debate a Mr Bevan
Lawrence today on the radio program ' AM' criticised me,
I want to brand Mr Lawrence as a hypocrite and I do so
because he campaigned under a banner along St Georges'
Terrace in Western Australia against the Australia Card
on the base is it was incursion into the privacy of
Australians and is now arguing that peoples tax files
should flutter from the Tax Office at the request of a
Royal Commission or its Council even though it may not
be for a serious offence. Now that sort of hypocrisy
and humbug, I think, we can all do without.
J: Prime Minister, what do you think the priorities of the
Royal Commission..
Pm: I remind you again of these factors, Peter, the
Commission sat for 210 days, its issued 859 summonses,
and 497 witnesses have been called, its now taken
31,000 pages of transcripts in its proceedings and
3,200 exhibits, It has 6 senior council and 15-18 legal
staff and its cost to date $ 16 million. You've got to
ask the Western Australian Government what's Its
purpose was in establishing the Commission because
there's one thing that's entirely clear, in terms of at
least some serious of fences committed in Western
Australia or alleged serious of fences, the appropriate
TEL 
TEL 6
prosecuting agencies already had prosecutions In hand
as Mr Hartnell amongst others makes clear.
J: Mr Keating, why was it justified even though the
Fitzgerald..
PM: Well, you'll notice in the minute which is at Number I
that the Second Commissioner, Mr Nolan makes it Clear
that the amendmients should be seen as a one-off
relaxation of Section 16 because of the dividend in
uncovering tax evasion, that is it does not establish a
precedent for the disclosure of tax records. Now it
turns out, I think, that the Tax Of fice was itself
mounting prosecutions in this area independently of the
work of this Commission and this Commission could have
been seen to be helping in those prosecutions. In
other words, there was a revenue dividend from it, but
again that note which was written In 1987 made it quite
clear that it does not seek to establish a precedent.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: No but it's not convenience, the Tax Office has been
given a charter by the Parliament to collect the
revenue. I mean efficiency in the collection of
revenue and costs and prosecutorial processes matter,
it's part of the Commissioner's responsibilities to
Parliament.
3: Prime Minister, $ 500 million has disappeared from
Rothwells it's a very serious Investigation, it
goes to the very top of the list in Australian
Government and indeed the Tax Office tried to make it
out as asking for people to flutter bits of paper out
the Tax office window.
PM: if they are seeking a fishing licence that is for a
broad ambit capacity to seek tax information of
Australians, then that does not go to specific
individuals or particular cases.
3: You said for the purpose of the enquiry that it's the
same criteria for the
PM: No that's what you say, that's what you claim. No not
at all, that's not correct. It is as the Commissioner
says, he cannot gainsay. In other words, once you
provide this you can't say, oh look you can have this
and not that. It's a case of you can have what you've
asked for.
J: Do you regret the decision to grant Mr Fitzgerald a
fishing licence?
PM: I think, in the out-turn of it all, no and I didn't
regret it then, but we made amendments subsequently
which have been appropriate and which have obviously
worked and we have similarly denied, as we have the
TL14 . M~ t .92 19 : 1i 6 ' 1 F. 
TEL: 14 M~ ayC l. 1. F . C7
7
West Australian Royal Commission, access to the Gyles
Commission in NSW, but the agencies are there and the
Police Units are attached to this Commission.
Apparently the Commission doesn't which to use the
Police Unit.
Why didn't we know this yesterday?
PM: Why didn't you?
3: Yes.
PM: Because one doesn't know what's been said in the course
of the day or what one should be responding to.
3: How do you respond to the request by the Premier of
Western Australia to release information and the Deputy
Speaker Ron Edwards?
PM; I reject them, I reject those requests for the same
reason that the Commission has recommended now to a
succession of Treasurers that they reject the request
to the Commission generally.
3: ( inaudible)
PM: There most be a vote of confidence by the Government in
the secrecy provisions of the Tax Act. That
Australians do have a right to privacy and that if
Commissions which to pursue particular investigations
with some specificity the avenues are available as a
Commissioner of Research for those investigations to
take place. But the notion that the tax office is
going to be ripped open with a can opener, like a can
with a can opener so that anybody can request
information about any particular persons without the
Commissioner having a discretion is, of course, not
acceptable.
J: Couldn't the Commissioner use his discretion, couldn't
he just make sure that it's not a complete fishing
exercise, so that the Commissioner can ensure that it
applies in terms of reference?
PM: The only way we believe that was possible, was-an
amendment to the Act in relation to the Fitzgerald
Commission and that amendment was made, but as the
Commissioner said in the terms of that amendment he
didn't believe he could gain say his claim that the
release, that he could then make judgements.
J: Couldn't he pass an amendment for this Commission to
make it a little bit tighter than the Fitzgerald one so
that the Commissioner could ensure that it was within
the West Australians Terms of Reference?
PM: I think the fact Is that the prosecuting agencies are
established under legislation and one of those happens 
TEL: 1-: 1 tN4C P l.
to be the Western Australian Police Force and they are
attached to the Commission.
J: Mr Keating, do you agree with Mr Hartnell that the
Royal Commission is simply getting in the way of the
real issue?
PM: I'm not in Mr Hartnell's position and that's a
judgement he has made. Royal Commissions hays produced
findings of value but as to prosecutions I think that's
a matter for judgement in Mr Hartnell's terms
obviously.
J; Mr Keating, the Commission has been prominent up
until now in protecting these of fences and individuals
and that the reason for them seeking this wider power
Is because it has been incompetent up until now.
PM: I don't think, if the implications of Mr Templeman's
remarks are that after all this time and expense that
he's trying to establish some apologia or foretelling
the Commissions progress or its processes on the basis
that a succession of Treasurers in the Commonwealth
Government and the Tax Office have not allowed them tax
information that in floating that notion, as I said
yesterday, I think that is disingenuous.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well that was 8 conclusion I drew yesterday.
3: Costigan and Fitzgerald proved that you have to follow
the money trail and following the money trail has
people showing income and that's the whole point.
PM: The powers this Commission has enjoyed, its terms of
reference and those who've been brought before it are
very, very extensive.
J: Mr Keating, with the nature of this advice from the Tax
Office was pressure put on the Tax Office in the
Fitzgerald case which was commenting obviously
fairly late in the piece on the proposal the next
day by the Attorney-General looks as though it would be
more reluctantly whereas the later advice is much
more robust.
PM: If you look at the minute it says, ' we retain our
concern that the widespread availability of taxation
information for non-tax purposes may lead to a reading
down of our information gathering and access powers by
the judiciary'.
J; In other words, is it going along with government
reluctantly for good reasons.
PM: No, I think it recommended this advice, this is a note
to me I was then Treasurer, from Mr Nolan 
TiE. L r1. i.; 21~ 1RNo Ci F I-1'
9
3: ( inaudible)
PM: The Tax Office has never been full bloodedly accepting
of the notion that its resources should be available to
all law enforcement agencies or Royal Commissions.
3: What about the case of Fitzgerald?
PM: No, because in Fitzgerald's case, I think, for the
reasons they say in the minute, they saw sufficient
reason to agree.
3: Surely, there is much more money available from
potential tax evasion from this Commission than the
Fitzgerald Commission, I mean that's more time compared
to the West Australian Commission.
PM: Is that a qualitative judgement by you?
J: .0 projection of revenue issues involved with WA shows
( inaudible)
PM: There may well be, but I'm not aware of them.
3: Surely that's a very relevant piece of policy because
that was a key turning point in criteria on which you
madees
PM: It was a turning point, but since then we've had those
amendments. That's what I'm saying to you in Section
3( s).
J: 3( e) is useful if you are positive this is en
investigative thing prosecuting agency, WA Royal
Commission is not a prosecution..
PM: No you don't. For a start it's got it's own
investigative powers,. its power to call witnesses and
to question to them and they have been extensive have
they not? And beyond that If they are focussing, where
Mr Templeman talks about a number of players in Western
Australia, surely they are not that extensive the
numbers of players that they can't In specific terms
ask the Australian Tax office through their Police Unit
for assistance and advice.
3; Does the saying about a stringent protections of the
privacy imply to Royal Commissions set up by the
Commonwealth Government as implied to ones set up under
the States?
PM: I think it depends upon the letters patent and the
terms.
3: Mr Keating, inaudible At what stage does it
have to get before it can actually require from the Tax
office specific information, does it have to have a
TEL 
TEL: 1 a~ . r 1 .1:
specific charge in front of it? In other words from
the Royal Commission?
PM: No, it's got to be relating to an offence which Is
serious.
J: How do you establish the offence?
PM: It's described in the legislation it Says anld I'll find
it " it can be punished by imprisonment of up to 12
months or more".
J: MY point is who establishes the offence, does the Royal
Comm~ ission have to establish the offence before the
enforcement agency can ask for Tax Office information?
PM: It's a matter of the qualitative thing whether it's
serious or not.
J: Well is an alleged offence, possible offence or
whatever
PM: obviously where the consequences of the offence are
serious and if they're not serious one would wonder why
they would want information.
J: What's the onus of proof, who establishes that it is a
serious offence?
PM: I think that would be fairly apparent, would it not,
from both the police agency and the Deputy Commissioner
of Taxation.
J: Doesn't that extra situation apply. If the
Commissioner suspects something but can't prove the
PM: Yes, but this is on the notion that you think an
offence is only visible within the information provided
on the Australian Tax Office's computers. This
Commission has been able to follow the transactions at
their source legally and by inquisitorial process of
witnesses.
J: Mr Keating have you met Greg Symons?
PM: I'm not here to discuss the Symons issue, Senator
Richardson or any matters associated with it. I've got
a report coming from Senator Richardson and Senator
Sibra and I'll deal with that when I receive it.
That's it, have you got any more questions on the
Commission?
J: WA Inc inquiry may not be used to capacity. The
minute says there is a friction between the Police Unit
and others associated with the Commission as some have
suggested, who suggested that? 
TEL: I4 i: C~
PM: Well I'm reasonably, reliably informed that there Is
some antipathy between the Police Unit and the other
bureaucrats in the Commission.
3: Mr Keating, I sorry I'm still not clear on the answer
to Glenn's question. Can you give us some more
information please on the question of how far the
allegations go before it's able to..
PM: It has to be, I think, demonstrably an allegation that
there is a demonstrable serious offence.
J: There only has to be a reasonable allegation?
PM; Absolutely.
3: Mr Keating, how much damage will your refusal of Carmen
Lawrence's approach today do her politically and to
Labor?
PM: Frankly, with all due respect to Premier Lawrence and
anybody else, politicians asking plaintively by press
release for broad access to the Tax Office and its
resources are not to be taken seriously by the
Commonwealth.
J: Should her promise then to the West Australian people
not to leave a stone unturned when the Commission began
also hold as much weight as that then?
PM: I think in terms of the serious underlying issues
involved there, I think that that promise can be made
good and it's important that It is.
J: With this friction between the Police Unit and the
Commission is stopping the Police Unit
PM: Well that's part of your occupation, why don't you try
and find out. These are the things which journalists
should enquiry about.
3: Mr Keating, are you entirely satisfied form of
bankrupt.
PM: I told you I'm not answering, Tom don't play silly
games with me, I'm not answering questions on it. Have
you got any further questions on the West Australian
issue?
J: Mr Keating the two reports on the Symons issue will
they be publicly received?
PM: Wait until I get the reports. Thank you
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 47/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. 3. KEATING, MP
ACCESS TO TAX INFORMATION FOR ROYAL COMMISSIONS
As I made clear yesterday the Commonwealth has always been
prepared to make relevant taxation information available to
the WA Royal Commission.
However, I remain strongly of the view that such access
should be limited to relevant information of a specific
nature and not constitute a broad " fishing licence" approach
in order to protect the right to privacy of Australians.
It has been the consistent view of the Commonwealth and the
Commissioner of Taxation that there is a mechanism by which
relevant tax information can be obtained by the Royal
Commission under Section 3E of the Tax Administration Act.
The Royal Commission appears not to accept the Taxation
Commissioner's interpretation of that Act.
To put beyond doubt the Commonwealth's preparedness to
assist the Royal Commission in seeking relevant tax
information the Commonwealth will propose an amendment to
Section 3E, nominating Royal Commissions as agencies which
can seek such information.
This would give Royal Commissions the same authority to seek
tax information that is available to law enforcement
agencies specified under the Act.
To this end, I have asked the Treasurer, Mr Dawkins, and the
Taxation Commissioner, Mr Trevor Boucher, to consult the WA
Royal Commission as soon as is practicable on how best to
structure the amendment to Section 3E.
I trust this will satisfy the Commission's need for access
to relevant tax information.
Further, I seek the support of the Opposition to allow a
speedy passage of the proposed amendment.
CANBERRA May 15, 1992 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
SENATOR SIBRAA'S REPORT
I have today received the attached report from Senator
Sibraa on matters relating to Mr Gregory Symons.
I will examine the report and await Senator Richardson's
report on this matter which will be presented to me on
Monday. CANBERRA May 15, 1992 



PRI M'E'MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL 8.00 PM SATURDAY 16 MAY 1992
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
TO THE 35TH BIENNIAL CONFERENCE OF
THE ZIONIST FEDERATION OF AUSTRALIA
GRAND HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE 16 MAY 1992
AUSTRALIA. ISRAEL AND THE MIDDJLE. EAST
Thank you for inviting me to the 35th Biennial Conference of
the Zionist Federation of Australia.
I am very pleased to be here.
The fact that, as Acting Prime Minister, I spoke at your
last conference in 1990 can only be read as proof of the
constancy of both of us.
In those two years extraordinary events have occurred,
extraordinary changes have taken place.
So it is important that some things are constant.
It is important that we talk together and understand each
other. The Zionist Federation of Australia and the Australian
Government have enjoyed a long and mutually productive
relationship, and I havd no doubt that we will continue to
do so.
You can be sure that the Australian Government values the
Federation's opinion just as you can be sure of our belief
in the Federation's cause, Israel.
This is a commitment of long standing. It is as old as the
state of Israel, and it is as strong now as it was in the
beginning. -AIAW 
2
We are also well aware that very often issues of concern to
the Jewish community properly concern the Government on a
broader front.
We are conscious of the role the Zionist Federation plays in
keeping policy issues before the Government and the public
and we admire you for it.
The Jewish community, of course, has long been in the
forefront of Australian public life.
In business, academia, science, arts and letters, politics
and the law, the Jewish contribution to this place has been
remarkable. The Jewish connection goes back to the First Fleet. It is
present throughout the last two hundred years.
Shortlists of the greatest Australians of this century
always number among them two Jews John Monash and Isaac
Isaacs and others could easily be added.
Jewish Australians have played such a leading role in
shaping this country in a sense it is not appropriate to
distinguish them from other Australians.
Beyond their individual contributions, there is a broader
cultural influence I might even say, a civilising
influence. By that I mean not just the obvious contributions of Jewish
Australians to the life of the mind in Australia, or their
enrichment of Australian culture by the traditions they
brought with them.
I also mean the lesson in tolerance which, by their presence
here and their tragic history elsewhere, Jewish Australians
have taught Anglo and Celtic Australians.
As an outpost of British civilisation on the other side of
the world, Australia was always prey to xenophobia and
intolerance. Jewish Australians and intending Jewish settlers sometimes
felt that before the War.
During the War, when many of them were shamefully interned
as enemy aliens, they felt it even more strongly.
Australia was then a narrow, insular society.
It is therefore one of the more amazing features of our
recent history that we have become a nation which rightly
prides itself on the diversity of its cultures and the
tolerance of its outlook. 
I might say in parenthesis that, of all the lessons to be
learned from this transformation, none is more important
than the capacity of Australians to embrace change.
We are not as conservative as we sometimes think.
We have achieved more in nation-building than we sometimes
think. The Jewish community has played no small part in this in
widening our horizons and keeping our minds open.
They have been great settlers. Great Australians.
Their success underlines the wisdom of committing this
country to the principle of tolerance, and actively
supporting cultural and religious diversity.
I might say that I am very much of the view that, in
pursuing these multicultural policies, we should in no way
be compromising the principle of loyalty to Australia.
Both the vitality and the cohesion of this society
substantially depend on the right of all to express their
cultural heritage and to receive equal treatment, regardless
of race, culture or religion.
But its essential strength must derive from an overriding
loyalty to Australia, its interests and its liberal
democratic values.
In the end it is only this which will guarantee tolerance.
Our strongest weapon against discrimination and racial or
cultural vilification is the idea of Australia itself.
While recognising that a great deal remains to be done to
combat all the forms of exclusion which confront Australians
of non-English speaking backgrounds, and that Aboriginal
Australians still contend with discrimination, we can say
that we have made great progress.
Last year's Report of the National Inquiry into Racist
Violence showed that Australia's experience of racist
violence, intimidation and harassment is well below the
levels of most other countries.
But we must be vigilant, and we must actively promote the
cause here and abroad.
Domestically we are now examining possible terms of
legislation to proscribe acts of racial vilification.
Australia was the first country whose Parliament passed a
motion in support of rescinding the infamous United Nations
Resolution 3379_ which equated Zionism with racism. 
And Australia was a co-sponsor of the UN action which led to
the recission of the Resolution.
The overwhelming vote in the General Assembly to overturn
3379 sent a clear signal that the UN will not be used as a
vehicle for propaganda, or for the promulgation of doctrines
which are racist or unjust.
Our support for the UN action sent a signal that Australia
will express publicly its abhorrence of racism in all its
forms, and will actively support international action to
focus attention on the unacceptablity of racist doctrines.
The UN decision was particularly timely, in view of some
worrying political developments in Europe, where right-wing
groups with anti-Semitic platforms appear to be growing in
influence. I think it was also evidence that there is a new
determination in the international community to take a more
balanced approach to the problems of the Middle East.
Above all, recission of Resolution 3379 was a positive step
towards removing the obstacles to peace in the region.
Partly to mark the overthrow of the Resolution, we were
visited this year by Mr Simcha Dinitz, the Executive
Chairman of the World Zi-onist Federation and the man
responsible for organising the emigration of over 400,000
Jews from the former Soviet Union.
Mr Dinitz explained to me the importance of continuing
migration to Israel, bringing as it does highly trained
people to contribute to the development of Israeli society.
Naturally we found common ground on this we too depend on
migration to stimulate economic growth and add vitality to
society. Mr Dinitz and I also had the opportunity to frankly exchange
views on current developments in the Middle East peace
process. Ladies and gentlemen, it is important that the Australian
Government continue this valuable dialogue with the Zionist
movement. It is important for the specific reason that Israel is a
great cause.
It is important for the general reason that we recognise, as
a principle of tolerance, the right of ethnic groups to take
a close interest in the affairs of their cultural homelands.
We expect of all Australians an unequivocal loyalty to
Australia, but we do not expect the bonds of culture to be
cut, or old sympathies to disappear. 
We know that for Jewish Australians those bonds are very
strong. Israel is a cherished place, a natural focus of attention.
The Australian Government takes the view that these
sentiments are natural and, in any case, inescapable and
irreversible. We expect from Jewish Australians some active lobbying on
foreign policy issues, particularly now as Israel faces a
fluid international outlook and is reinvigorated by a
massive influx of Jews from the former Soviet Union.
We are attentive to your representations.
But of course we have to decide Australian policy on the
basis of a wider view of Australian interests.
As you are all aware, the Australian Labor Party has been
consistent in its commitment to Israel.
This dates from strong links between the Australian Jewish
community and Labor Party in office through the 1940s.
Like many others, my party saw the establishment of Israel
in moral terms. As international redress of the shameful
horror of the Holocaust.
The Chifley Government and Dr Evatt, as Chairman of the UN
Committee on Palestine, gave important political support to
Israel at the time of its creation at the United Nations.
Since Israel's achievement of independence and modern
statehood in 1948, Australia has been proud to support its
fundamental right to security, territorial integrity and its
freedom to pursue its national development in peace.
Let me assure you, in unequivocal terms that Australia
remains, as we have been over the past 44 years, wholly
committed to Israel's independence and territorial
integrity. In commenting on contemporary Australian policy towards the
Middle East, I should say at the outset that our approach is
tempered by realism.
Australia is not a major player in Middle Eastern affairs.
We do have significant trading interests in a number of
Middle Eastern countries.
The region lies across some of our principal communication
routes. Like other responsible countries, we are concerned at the
implications for global security of conflict in the region. 
But we do not have any illusions about our influence in the
region, or any pretensions to assume anything other than our
traditional support of international stability and efforts
to find a just and lasting peace.
Australia's policy towards the Israel-Arab dispute is a
balanced one which takes account of political realities in
the region.
As a non-participant, our broad policy objective is to
encourage all parties to recognise that long-term peace and
stability in the region can only be achieved through
negotiated settlement.
This must be based on mutual respect of the national
interests and aspirations of both Israelis and Arabs.
As we see it, Israel's independence and security are
ultimately dependent on its being able to find a stable
accommodation, a modus vivendi, with its Arab neighbours.
Australia is not only committed to Israel's security, but
also recognises the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination.
This allows, logically, for the possibility of their own
independent state if they so choose.
The Australian Government seeks to encourage, wherever and
whenever possible, dialogue which offers hope to all those,
Israelis and Arabs alike, who have a genuine desire to live
in peace.
Over the years, Australia has been willing to play its part
in a number of peacekeeping operations in the Middle East.
We have also been consistent in raising concerns about human
rights violations throughout the region.
During the two years since I spoke to you at your last
conference, there have been momentous changes in
international relations.
The end of the Cold War has provided an opportunity to
restructure international security arrangements, to define a
new approach towards collective security.
This was demonstrated forcefully by the international
community's response to Iraq's aggression against Kuwait.
For the first time, the United Nations functioned
effectively in enforcing international law, as it was
originally intended to do nearly half a century ago.
The unprecedented international consensus and cooperation in
responding to Iraq's invasion were only possible in the new
international climate created by the dissipation of the
superpower rivalry between East and West. 
For its part, Australia recognised the wider international
ramifications of Saddam Hussein's criminal actions.
I was part of the Australian Government's decision to make a
substantial commitment to the multinational naval force in
the Gulf.
During the Gulf War, Australians were horrified at the
indiscriminate targeting of Israel's civilian population by
Saddam Hussein.
The Australian Government expressed at the time its
condemnation of the brutality of the Scud missile attacks on
Israel, and of the crude attempt by Iraq to undermine
international efforts to expel it from Kuwait.
We were impressed most of all, however, by Israel's
restraint in not becoming involved in the conflict, despite
direct attacks on its territory and people.
The aftermath of the Gulf War has provided a rare
opportunity to start on the long road towards peace in the
Middle East.
The new environment of international rapprochement has
encouraged Israel and its Arab neighbours to take a fresh
look at the issues dividing them.
The Australian Government's sincere hope is that the Middle
East peace talks which began in Madrid last October will
enable the parties to the dispute to take full advantage of
this historic opportunity, and negotiate a truly just and
lasting peace.
We recognise that progress on substantial issues is not
likely to be rapid.
But the process itself of dialogue and negotiation should,
incrementally, improve the political and security climate
between Israelis and Arabs.
This, the world still hopes, will gradually build mutual
respect between Israel and its neighbours, without which no
permanent trust can ever be established.
It is only upon such trust that a lasting peace can be
built. We have been disappointed that much of the peace discussions
so far have been taken up with procedural wrangling, and
that violence has continued, especially in Lebanon and the
Occupied Territories, while the peace talks have been
underway. The Australian Government has consistently called on all
parties to exercise restraint, to give the negotiations a
chance. 
One encouraging aspect of the peace process so far has been
a degree of moderation on the part of the Palestinian
negotiators. We have also observed that the Palestinian Liberation
Organisation has played a more positive role in encouraging
the peace process over the past six months.
In recognition of this development, the Australian
Government recently announced that we would restore our
policy on official contact with the PLO to what it had been
before the Gulf War.
In response to the PLO's support for Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait, restrictions were imposed in January 1991 which
barred Australian Ministers and officials from initiating
contact with the PLO. Those restrictions have now been
lifted. The restoration to our earlier policy on contact with the
PLO is consistent with our long-established aim of
encouraging the forces of moderation rather than extremism
within the PLO.
I am aware that this issue is one of considerable
sensitivity to your Federation, and one you will no doubt
want to continue discussing with us.
Let me assure you that the Government's recent decision is
neither an endorsement of the PLO, nor an absolution of the
organisation's past actions.
Nor has there been any change in the government's basic
policy towards the PLO.
We do not accept the PLO's claim to be the sole
representative of the Palestinian people, but we do accept
that the organisation represents the view of a significant
proportion of them.
Accuracy of the record also requires me to mention another
issue on which our views may differ.
Along with many other countries including the United States,
Australia has long expressed its opposition to Israel's
continued settlement activity in the Occupied Territories.
As friends of Israel, we have to say that we regard such
activity as an obstacle to peace.
I discussed this question at some length with Mr Dinitz
during our meeting in Canberra last March. He acknowledged
there is a range of opinion on settlement policy in Israeli
political circles. 
9
As an outside party, Australia respects the complexity and
sensitivity of the various questions involved in the Middle
East peace talks.
We simply urge all parties to exercise the courage and
resourcefulness necessary to make the most of the current
relatively favourable international environment.
The Australian Government has taken a strong interest in the
plight of Syria's Jewish population.
Australia has been making direct representations to Syria
for several years on discrimination against Jews.
It is pleasing to note recent reports that the Syrian
Government has lifted restrictions on travel abroad by
Syrian Jews, and on the disposition of property by the
Jewish community there.
The Government will, of course, be monitoring the situation
closely to see whether in practice whole Jewish families are
able to leave Syria.
I should add here that the Syrian Government's decision
represents a significant confidence-building measure in the
context of the Middle East peace process.
It is exactly the kind of step Australia has been urging on
all parties to the process to follow in order to promote a
spirit of moderation and flexibility in the current
negotiations.
One of the subjects your Federation has actively pursued
with the Australian Government is the Arab economic boycott
of Israel.
Australia has consistently opposed the boycott, and has
repeatedly urged Arab governments to dismantle it as a
gesture of goodwill.
The boycott, apart from being morally untenable, is a
barrier to progress in the Middle East peace process.
Earlier this year, the Government reminded Australian
Chambers of Commerce that they do not have, and should not
claim to have, any official authorisation for issuing
certificates which effectively comply with the Arab boycott.
We are not persuaded that legislation against the boycott is
appropriate, but the Government is keeping that possibility
under active review.
As I noted earlier, Australia and Israel are nations built
largely on immigration.
We each grapple in our own way with a constantly evolving
process of reconciliation among different cultural, social
and political groupings within our societies. 
It is characteristic of immigrant nations, that we draw
strength from our diversity, from our need to be conscious
always of new perspectives and new ways to achieve our
national priorities.
We draw strength from exercising tolerance.
Nations such as ours are uniquely placed to be receptive to
change, to embrace it and profit from it.
This is why I feel it appropriate to speak to you about the
need now for Israel to make the most of international
change, and to persevere in dialogue and negotiation with
its Arab neighbours.
Equally, Australia urges Israel's Arab neighbours to come to
terms with Israel and recognise its right to exist as an
independent state.
My comments have been offered in the spirit of frank and
vigorous dialogue which characterises the Australian
Government's close relations with your Federation.
We have a long relationship, and a productive one.
You can be sure the Government sets a very high value on it.
Thank you once again for having me. I wish you well with the
conference. 



TEL: No 9.. M0a 0.922 9P: 1.20 1/ 07
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, CANBERRA, 15 MAY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I amt here to advise you that as Senator Richardson
has said somewhat earlier this afternoon to you,
that I have received his report and accepted his
resignation. Naturally, I accept hi. s resignation
with regret, because as a Minister he has made quite
a profound contribution to this country in all of
the portfolios he has held, let alone his greater
contribution to public life. The issues were about
Senator Richardson, his Ministerial style and his
relationship with Mr Symons and the state of his
knowledge of Mr Symnons' business af fairs at the time
he gave him references and introductions. His
relationship with Mr Symons' was for Senator
Richardson, I believe, an unfortunate one but not an
improper one. I think the politics of the issues
were 6uch that there was going to be damage
somewhere, that was either going to be to the
Government's time and its standing, or to Senator
Richardson's position. He took the admirable step
of deciding the matter himself, by tendering his
resignation to me. And in so doing, allows the
public debate again to focus back to the main issues
which will decide the future of the country, its
economy, its society, and of course the next
election. I will be pleased to take questions.
a: Mr Keating it was said on the news today that if he
hadn't resi~ gned you would hee forced his
resignation.
Pm: Well the fact is, he did, he did resign. And I
would have been required to of considered the
report, and -ts ramifications, including its
political ramifications. AS it turns out I didn't,
I wasn't required to, I didn't need to. As I say,
TEL 19. May .92 
TEL: 19. May. 92 9: 12~ No
2
Senator Richardson decided the matter himself in an
admirable way.
3; of* Senator Sibraa.
PM: Well my Judgement on Senator Sibraa was very much
the same as the utterances to date from the
Democrats. That was, that he was asked to do
something, which he did, he didn't approach any
foreign Governments he went through the channels of
the Australian bureaucracy abroad, iio further
reference was made to him about the matter.
J. Prime Minister, Attachment 5, this memo, can you
tell us anything more about that?
PM: No, just that it was uncovered in an investigation'
by the Departments at my request, and having
discovered it I thought it was important that
Senator Richardson know that it was in my
possession, and given the fact that he was about to
give me a report, to report upon it.
When did you discover it?
PM: On Friday afternoon.
J: And where was it discovered?
PM: The Department of Foreign Affairs, I understand.
3: Where abouts? Was it the Washington Embassy?
PM; I don't know.
Prime Minister you'll need now to reshuffle the
Cabinet, will you take the opportunity to make a
wide ranging change?
PM: Well I haven't given that matter any thought, at
all, at this stage.
J: What will happen to the package of broadcasting
legislation the Senator was going to take to Cabinet
on Wednesday?
PM: Well it will obviously have to be delayed.
J: When will that reshuffle be made, Mr Keating?
PM: Well I will have to think about it from now on, this
evening and obviously in the course of the week.
J: Having seen Senator Richardson's report do you still
accept that he did not misl. ead the Senate?
FM: Well I think that's in a sense academic. I am sure
the Opposition would say he did. My view was that .002 P. 02/ 07 
TEL: 19. May. 92 9: 12 No. 002 P. 03/ 07
3
he didn't, but it is about him and his Ministerial
Position in the Senate, a position he has now
resigned.
J: Mr Keating do you think you should have asked
Senator Richardson questions earlier about this
affair?
PM: I asked him the question that mattered. That is I
brought the matter to a head requiring him to
produce a report to me when X first learned that Mr
Symons had a scheme of arrangement with creditors.
That is, the moment I knew that Senator Richardson
may have given a reference to somebody who he may
possibly have known was in this circumstance, I
thought required me to ask of him that such a report
be given. And that's when I did, when I found out.
J; Prime Minister are you now convinced that Senator
Richardson did not know anything about his cousin's
business affairs?
PM; Well as I say, I think that the relationship was,
obviously Senator Richardson believed that with
years of background in this relationship he could
with confidence provide a reference, it turns out to
be confidence misplaced, but as I said I think the
relationship has for him been an unfortunate one,
but not an improper one.
3: Mr Keating, have you ever met Mr SymorVand has he
ever asked you for any favours?
PM: I met Mr Symon3when he was at the Youth Council
Labor Party, twenty odd years ago, X have not met
him since. In fact, I couldn't recall his face
until I saw an early picture of him in the Sydney
Morning Herald.
J: Not a bad scalp for John Hewsori, it it?
Pm: Well the issue is, always the big issues, and Dr
Hewson always talks about distractions and moving
away from the main issues, but it suited the
Opposition to engage in this issue as a distraction
from the main issue. He now knows, as I know, that
selling the Australian electorate on consumption tax
adding 15 per cent to their goods and services is
unpalatable, disruptive, and he will not like us
returning to those issues.
J; ( inaudible)
PM: Well that was what I was asked earlier and I gave an
answer.
3: Could you have continued to 
TEL: 19. May. 92 9: 12 No. 002 P. 04/ 07
4
PM: well, I mean, I would have considered the report now
much more closely after having read it carefully
this morning, its ramifications, including its
political ramifications, In political, terms this
was always going to be a grey matter and as Senator
Richardson himself said, impossible to be settled in
black and white terms. And that would have been as
Much a matter for me as for him.
J: Prime minister can I just ask you two questions
about Attachment 5. First of all given that it came
from Foreign Affairs and that Gareth Evans had faced
questioning in the Senate about Mr Symons'
activities, particularly in relation to Washington,
shouldn't he have known that Attachment 5 was
residing within his department? And secondly,
Senator Richardson says he was unaware that he had
received this letter, it is unsigned and it seems to
trail off in the middle. Are you convinced it is a
bonafide document?
Pm: I can't comment on the status of the document and I
don't want to be drawing judgement about the
document because Mr Symons himself was in the
invidious position of having to face charges about
other documentation in another place.
Would you like to see Senator Richardson returned to
the front bench at some stage?
PM; Well, Senator Richardson made his position clear, I
think, to the public, to you today, by saying that
he wouldn't be seeking a return to the front bench
in this Parliament. That's all that matters I
think.
3: senator Evans, Prime Minister, should he have known
that this document was In the Department of Foreign
Affairs?
PM: We asked the Department to provide any reference
whatsoever to any associations or dealings with Mr
Symons. That turned up upon that extensive check.
That's obviously taken some time and Senator Evans
couldn't be aware of all these things from the
moment the issue arose. I mean, the Senate has been
up now well over a week.
J: Wasn't Senator Evans cavalier initially though, Mr
Keating, in telling the Senate that he wasn't
prepared to investigate this issue?
PM: I em not aware of every utterance Senator Evans made
upon the subject, but in the initial phases of this
I think his responses have been appropriate. And as
time has gone on we have discovered these documents.
But again, the process was there for the discovery:
a) that Senator Richardson and the Government and I 
TEL:
set up the process, that he should report to me.
And this is what has in fact brought these events to
a head. And also it was upon my initiative that
Departments were asked to go back through their
files.
J: Prime Minister you referred to Senator Richardsons'
Ministerial style. Do you think it ha8 always been
an appropriate style?
PM: Well, everyone has a style in public life. I
suppose some people display more reserve, caution,
guile perhaps, in their dealings with people, don't
take them at face value as he has believed he can
take a long-standing personal relationship at face
value. They are very tough Judgements. But I think
it is important for ministers to be always aware of
relationships in relation to the kinds of issues
which Mr Symons has raised with Senator Richardson.
J: Do you regret being so strongly supportive of
Senator Richardson in the initial phases and not
asking him for a full report earlier in the
controversy?
PM: No, because in the House of Representives the
questions were about his call to the Marshall
islands which were about not going to the issue, but
which were about him seeking for Mr Symons a right
to prepare himself a trial.
J: 0.6a meeting with Symnons and Finch on the Marshall
Island Scheme?
PM: First let me deal with this and in that sense,
and his inquiry to Senator Evans, and Senator Evans
specifying the terms of his phone ca~ ll I found to be
no problem.
J: Mr Keating, do you support the practice of Ministers
giving letters of introduction to business friends
or personal friends? Do you do so? And in the
light of what's happened, if you do support it do
you think maybe you might take a different attitude
from now on?
PM: All Members of Parliament, House of Representatives
and Senate are all the time required to provide
references to people. Now some people they know
exceptionally well, others by association. And I
think a reference of that variety always carries
with it, at least the knowledge, certainly in this
country I think, that people in public life are
prevailed upon to provide references.
J: Do you do it? T1EL9:. May. 92 9: 12 No. 002 P. 05/ 07 
T1EL9:. May. 92 9: 12 No. 002 P. 06/ 0?
6
PM: Yea, I do. Have done but not extensively, but I've
done it.
J: Is there a need for guidelines in this area?
PM: I don't know, I think commonsense is the beat
guideline.
J: Senator Richardson said you were surprised by his
decision. Did you try and talk him out of it today?
PM: He was fairly clear about his intentions. He
arrived, he gave me the report, I read it. Upon the
completion he said he intended to resign and he had
the letter of resignation there, and we discussed
the issues and later in the conversation I actually
opened and read the letter itself.
J: Do you see any prospect of Senator Richardson
returning to a senior role in the Government
sometime in the future?
FM: It's not sensible or politic for any of us to
contemplate our positions, unless in the course of
each Parliament. The Government will be seeking its
re-election at an election and then, and only then,
after the public have supported the Government again
in a poll is a question of any persons prerogatives
within the Ministry or within the Caucus open of
discussion. I don't think it's relevant and it's
not open for discussion now, as I think Senator
Richardson himself has indicated.
J: What were your personal feelings about seeing a
close colleague's demise?
PM; As I said, I accepted his resignation with regret.
Graham and I go back now to our youth, in reality,
certainly to our early 20s and he has made a
tremendous contribution. He will be remembered for
his quite milestone performances in the environment
portfolio in this country, for his substantial
stewardship of the Department of Social Security.
And, while less so for his work now because he's
only in the course of doing it in his current
portfolio, but across that period and, need I say,
as a rank and file Senator and member of the Caucus,
his involvement in many issues of substance, good
things for Australia. Good things where he went
through that Caucus with people raising with them
issues to support the Government and~ the Cabinet on
matters of substance which have certainly moved the
debate along. He has been a very positive force for
good Government, good policy, social change in
Australia.
J: Did Senator Richardson do anything wrong Mr Keating?
TEL: 
TEL 7
PM: Senator Richardson, 88 I said, decid~ ed the issue
himself. He decided, as he said I think to you,
that there would be a protracted debate about his
role, that the Opposition were not prone to believe
him saying that he provided this reference free of
any knowledge that the person who he was providing
the reference for was subject to a scheme of credit
arrangements et cetera and that there would be a
protracted debate, and that there would be damage to
either himself and the Government or both. So in a
sense he did decide the issue.
J; Mr Keati~ ng to you believe that this issue has done
long term damage to the Government?
PM. I don't thInk so. I agree with his assessment of
the damage. These issues have come and gone over
the years. In the Fraser ministry, this was the
fate of very many Ministers and yet that Government
won successive elections.
J: Mr Keating would you expect pay TV to be considered
now?
PM: I don't know, but obviously it will not be managed
under the stewardship of Senator Richardson
therefore which ever Minister is managing it will
have to immerse themselves in the issue and be in a
position to competently take the matter forward to
Cabinet. That's obviously not nlow.
J: When will you plan to start considering
replacements?
PM: Well I will from now on.
J; Prime Minister, are you disposed to keeping the
reshuffle relatively minimal?
PM: Well I'll consider the issue myself for the moment.
If you've got any tips Glenn ( Milne), you can ring
me down or leave them on a note and Mark ( Ryan) will
bring them into me, but in the meantime I'll just
think about them myself. Thank you very much.
ENDS T1EL9: . May. 92 9: 12 No. 002 Id. U(/ U( 



18. May. 92 15: 49 No. 011 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER 49/ 92
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AND THE MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE MINISTER
FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE HON ROSS FREE, MP
THE SIXTH MEETING OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S SCIENCE COUNCIL
The Prime Minister's Science Council met today for the sixth
time. The Prime Minister, who chaired the Science Council for
the first time, recognised it as an important peak body for
considering science and technoloLgyssues of national
significance. The Prime Minister announced the retirement of the Chief
Scientist, Professor Ralph Slatyer AO FAA FRS, at the end of
his three year term. This will become effective after the
completion of the White Paper on Science and Technology in
August this year. on behalf of-he Government, fiie-Prime
Minister expressed appreciation for Professor Slatyer's role
in the establishment of the science and technology policy and
coordination mechanisms which were announced in the May 1989
Science and Technology Statement.
The Prime Minister also acknowledged Professor Slatyer's
reputation as one of Australia's outstanding scientists. The
importance of Professor Slatyer's standing in both the
international and national scientific communities has been
reflected in his provision of high quality and objective
advice to Government. The Government wishes to continue to
draw upon Professor Slatyer's expertise and has asked him to
chair the Cooperative Research Centres Committee until the
completion of the third round of the Program.
The Prime Minister welcomed two new members to the Science
Council Mr Mal Bryce, Chairman of the Western Australian
Technology and Industry Advisory Council and Professor Michael
airt, recently appointed Chairman of the Australian Science
and Technology Council.
The first major item considered by the Science Council was a
presentation on the manufacturing technology industry in
Australia given by Mr Jac Nasser, President of the Ford Motor
Company in Australia, and Dr Peter Robinson, Chief of the
CSIRO Division of Manufacturing Technology. The paper was
TEL 
T1E8L:. May. 92 15: 49 No. 011 P. 02/ 01
2
prepared by an independent working group consisting of senior
people from industry, research organisations, higher education
institutions and Government. It notes that if Australian
manufacturing is to become internationally competitive, it
needs to focus increasingly on value-adding on elaborately
transformed manufacturers. it argues that to do this,
industry must focus on product differentiation and will
require appropriate highly skilled teams and a well
coordinated national research and development and education
and training infrastructure.
The second major presentation focused on the information
technology and telecommunications industry. This paper was
also prepared by an independent working group, and was unusual
in that it considered the information technology and
telecommunications industries under one umbrella. The Report
found that both industries formed the essential infrastructure
of modern economies and were vital for increasing productivity
across all industry sectors. The presenters were Mr Roger
Allen, Science Council member and the Managing Director of
Computer Power Group, Dr Greg Clark, Director of Science and
Technology for IBM Australia and Mr Bill Page-Hanify, Managing
Director of Alcatel Australia.
Reports from both these working groups will be released today.
The final major presentation examined the scientific aspects
of major environmental topics. There were three presentations
prepared and presented by Australian scientific experts in
these fields. Dr Graeme Pearman, Assistant Chief of the CSIRO
Division of Atmospheric Science spoke about the status of
scientific knowledge on climate change, and Dr Brian Walker,
Chief of the CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology and Dr
Peter Bridgewater, Executive officer for the Australian
National Parks and Wildlife service, spoke about aspects of
biodiversity. The Science Council discussions ended with consideration of
issues relating to the White Paper on Science and Technology
being developed and presented by Mr Free in his capacity as
Minister for Science and Technology and Minister Assisting, in
the context of the 1992-93 Budget.
CANBERRA May 18 1992
Attached: Current membership of the Prime Minister's Science
Council Reports considered by the Science Council ( available from
the Office of the Chief Scientist 271 5462)
" The CIY.. nging Role of Manufacturing Technology"
" Information Technology and Telecommunications
Looking to the Year 2000"
TEL 
18. May. 92 15: 49 No. 011 P. 03/ 04
MEMBERSHIP OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S SCIENCE COUNCIL
The Prime Minister ( Chair)
The Hon Ross Free, MP ( Deputy Chair)
Minister for Science and Technology
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
Thc Hon Kim C Bcazley, MP
Minister for Employment, Education and Training
Senator the Hon John Button,
Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce
The Hon Simon Crean, MP
Ministcr for Primary Industries and Energy
The Hon Brian Howe, MP
Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services
The Hon Ros Kelly, MP
Ministcr for the Arts, Sport, the Environment
and Territories
The Hon John Kerin, MP
Minister for Trade and Ovcrseas Development
Mr Roger Allen, Managing Director, Computer Power Group Ltd
Professor Brian Anderson, FAA, TS, FRS
Head of the Department of Systems Engineering, Research School of Physical
Sciences, Australian National University
Professor L M ( Michael) Birt, AO, CBE
Chairman, Australian Science and Technology Council
Mr Mal Bryce, AO, Chairperson,
Western Australian Technology and Industry Advisory Council
Profcssor David Craig, AO, FAA, FRS
President, Australian Academy of Science
Mr Trevor Eastwood, Managing Director, Wcsfarmers Limited
Mr Denis Hanley, Chairman, Memtec Limited
Mr Keith Harvey, National Research Officer,
Federated Clerks' Union of Australia
Professor Ken McKinnon
Prcsident, Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee
Sir Rupert Myers, KBE, FTS
President, Australian Academy of Tecimological Sciences and Engineering
TEL 
18. May. 92 15: 49 No. 011 P. 04/ 04
Sir Gustav Nossal, AC, CBE, FAA, TS, FRS
Director, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research
Professor Cheryl Praeger
Professor of Pure Mathematics, University of Western Australia
Mr John Ralph, AO
Managing Director and Chicf Executive, CRA Limited
Dr John Stocker, FTS
Chief Executive, CSIRO
Professor Ralph Slatyer, AO, FAA, FRS
Chief Scientist ( Executive Officer)
April 1992 TEL: 



PRIME MINISTER 50/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
The Federal Caucus of the Labor Party will meet in
Canberra next Tuesday to elect a new Minister.
Following that decision by Caucus I will announce new
Cabinet and Ministerial arrangements.
The Minister for Aviation and Shipping, Senator Bob
Collins, is acting Minister for Transport and
Communications. CANBERRA May 19, 1992 7059 



VU LL iNu. vu.) r ui I
9-I VU 1 5VUI IIUVJE1 1 1 51/ 92
VIOLENCE IN BANGKOK
Now that the full extent and character of the recent
violence in Bangkok has become cl ' earer, I take the
opportunity on behalf of all Australians to express our
horror at the actions which have led to this needless
loss of life.
We are appalled at the widespread use of excessive force
by the Thai military..
The Thai Ambassador is being called in today to the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to be told of the
strength of Australia's concern over the situation in
Thailand. Our.-Ambassador to Thailand is under
instructions to repeat these concerns at senior level in
Bangkok.
Our Embassy In Thailand is closely monitoring
developments in particular the tense stan~ d-off between
pro-democracy demonstrators and troops at Ramkhamhaeng
University. I urge the Thai Government to ensure that
the troops act with maximum restraint to avoid further
bloodshed. Footage of troops firing on unarmed demonstrators outside
the Royal Hotel, and the harrowing scenes depicted in the
hotel lobby and elsewhere, are in tragic contrast with
the great strides Thailand has made in recent years
towards prosperity and stability.
I hope that the Thai Government will do all in its power
to restore conditions whereby political differences can
be resolved peacefully.
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr
Kerin, will be closely following developments in
Thailand. We will be looking at our relations with
Thailand in the light of how the situation unfolds.
May 1992 I C_ L_ 



TRAN~ SCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P Ji KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE BANGKOK, CANBERRA, 20 KAY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I have just got a few minutes so I want just to give
you a comment on the situation in Thailand. I would
like to begin by saying that I take this opportunity
on behalf of all Australians to express our horror
at the actions which have lead to this needless loss
of life In Bangkok. We are appalled at the wide
spread use of excessive force by the Thai military,
and our Embassy in Thailand is monitoring the
situation. And I urge the Thai Government to ensure
that the troops act with maximum restraint to avoid
further bloodshed. Could I also say that as a
result of the actions that have been taken to date
by the Thai military, the Government is, in response
to that action, withdrawing 20 Australian soldiers
from the Special Air services Regiment and 11 C130
Aircrew which were deployed to Thailand on May 5 for
training with the Royal Thai Special Warfare
Command. We think it is incongruous that in these
circumstances Australian military personnel be
training with Thai personnel while the Thai military
are taking this action against their citizens. So
we are withdrawing that Special Air Services
Regiment and the air crew that accompany them.
Could I also say that the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade, John Kerin, will be
closely monitoring developments and we will be
looking at our relations with Thailand in the light
of how the situation unfolds.
Does that mean, Prime Minister, that you are
prepared to downgrade our diplomatic relationship
with them if necessary? 
PM: Well I think we will just put the Whole relationship
under review. I think one can see the tragic
contrast between the developments in Thailand over
the last period, the recent years of prosperity and
stability, with what's happening now. We have
sought, through both aid and advice, to make
Thailand a better place for the Thai people to live
and we take that responsibility seriously. But
because of this violence we will examine the whole
relationship.
J: Prime Minister are you considering suspending
economic aid as well as military?
PM: Not at this stage. I have made clear in the past
that there can be a linkage to State-sponsored
violence, but the aid is, after all, humanitarian
aid and economic aid. It is aid for the people of
Thailand, it is not for the Generals. And again,
the aid tap can't be turned just on and off over
night. It's projects, and it's goods and services,
and so in our examination of aspects of the
relationship we will examine the aid program as
well.
J: Has any thought been given to bringing the
Ambassador back for consultations?
PM: Well I think it is important that there is somebody
there who we can speak to and who is also in a
position to address the Government, and so I think
the Ambassador is in an important place at the
moment.
J: There have been some allegations by commentators in
Thailand that the violence has been premeditated
rather then just a response of a volatile situation.
What's your reading of the situation?
PM: I don't think I can give you a reading on that.
J: How do you respond to the Oppositions claim that the
Government's response has been slow?
PM: Look, Dr Hewson jumps on everything these days. Any
event and he has a silly press statement out five
minutes later dictated over 8 portable phone
somewhere. I mean the fact is, Dr Blewett issued a
statement yesterday, it was not clear until late
yesterday what the general situation was. Our
Ambassador was not in a position to give us an
indication, and I think our response will be both
timely and firm.
J: Mr Keating what sort of political pressure can we
put on to Bangkok to stop 
Pm: well I think international opinion, including the
opinion of neighbours, is going to matter io all
countries. And the fact that I am saying that we
are appalled by the violence, that we express our
horror at the action of seeing the military of this
country shooting down citizens is about as strong a
position as we could say or take.
J: Does it concern you that very few, if any, of
Thailand's ASEAN neighbours have publicly criticised
the Thai military over its actions? Is it an
indication to you of just how hard it is going to be
to enmesh Australia in the region?
PM: Well I think, I have said this to the House and I
will say it again, we will be giving our views about
violation if we see a violation of human rights no
matter where it occurs or how it occurs. One of the
things I have been saying in recent times that our
traditions, and our respect for these things will
not be diminished by any wish we may have to become
more closely enmeshed with the region. But again,
you can't tar the region either with these sorts of
problems.
J: Are these the only Australian troops in Thailand?
PM: yes.
J: The Thai Officers in Australia at the moment could
that be a second level of response, to send them
home?
PM: well there is a clear incongruity about Australian
Military Officers in a country where these
violations are occurring and in training with the
service which is actually perpetrating. This is not
the case here, and I think that widely fits into a
general thought, or review of the relationship in
the broad.
J: What was your personal reaction when you saw the
footage on TV?
PM: Well I couldn't be anything but appalled by it. You
really hardly believe it is happening.
J: Will you support an international arms embargo
against Thailand?
PM: Look, this has happened 24 hours ago, so before you
start getting declaratory about all these things, we
will have the whole relationship looked at.
J: Do you accept the arrangement which gave the Left
the next vacancy in your ministry? 
I -t.
4
PM: Look, I didn't come here for a general press
conference, my friend, I see enough of you, not as
much 88 I am sure you would like me to Bee Of YOU,
but I have got an ERC Meeting that should have taken
place 35 minutes ago, so I better go.
J: Prime Minister will you be sending your views direct
to the Thai Prime Minister?
PM: Well our view has been communicated already by our
Ambassador and any amplification of that view will
be sent directly, exactly.
J: ! If the killing stops will the military exercises
resume?
PM: They are not going to be resuming because they have
been brought back to Australia. And before any
other military exercises obviously will take place,
the whole relationship will have to be changed,
clarified, and settled.
J: I8 the information you're getting suggesting that
the military may be prepared to compromise, or is
your information suggesting that the crack-down will
continue? I
PM: Well it is not clear as to whether or not more
violence will be perpetrated in the course of this
day. I can't give you an answer. But nor can I give
you the view that it won't be. It was sporadic, and
has ceased. That unfortunately may not be true.
ENDS 



T2EL6:. May. 92 18:. ao No. 015 P. 01/ 02
IPRIME MINISTER 52/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING M?
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
I welcome Caucus ' s election of Jeannette McHuAg to the Ministry.
I am particularly pleased to welcome her as the third woman in the
LaborMnisry a significant achievement not only for Ms McHugh
but a signal, I hope, of greater representation by women at the
highest level of government in the future.
Following Ms McHugh's election I am recommending to the Governor-
General a number of changes to the Ministry.
The swearing-in is sch~ eduled for 10 a. m. tomorrow.
Senator Collins will be Minister for Transport and Communications.
Senator Cook, the Minister for Industrial Relations, will also
be'come _ Minister for Shipping and Aviatfon'giipdrt -in the Transport
and Communicationsportfolfd.
Mruphes the minister for veterans' Affairs will become a
member of the Cabinet and take over from Senator Collins as the
Minister assisting the Prime Minister for Northern Australia.
Ms McHugh will be appointed as Minister for Consumer Affairs
taking over this function from Senator Tate, who will assume added
responsibilities assisting the minister for immigration.
As Minister for Consumer Affairs, Ms McHugh will have particular
responsibility for focussing attention on the impact on families
of the Opposition's proposed consumption tax.
Mr Willis is to be appointed Vice-President of the Federal
Executive Council.
The Parliamentary Secretary to the minister for Transport and
Communications, Mr Snowdon, will become Parliamentary Secretary to
the Minister for Employment, Education and Training, Mr Beazley.
A revised Ministry list reflecting my recommendations to the
Governor-General will be released shortly.
CANBERRA 26 May 1992 TEL 
TEL: 26. May. 92 18:, gO NO. Ul1o r. uzlve
COMMOSuwca3111 Oovernsnent
KEATING MINISTRY Prqond for 2 7May 1992
Thie ministr
Lut" MwooatrK The PAS 11 % eua
For aoelw Sec" rery ( 0 she Priftre Minimp The moo Laurie Oftepiu UP
Minister for Huhi, Havoig amd, Commuwnity service 11w BoU IlS jime WI
Miiser Aus # ing she Fdrote Min ister fur Socla I Jutic qewyP" M Ir
MMhiur Anlning doe M~ me ACrintrfor Cofe momwealib -$ wge Rcidoiu0p~ ie Nhe
MW9iCr fOr Veteai' Atfabn The lion Den lmphroy. my
Miniser AssistLi, st h Pf'im Mnisferfow Northen AwSPallaT HPM
Mialoter for Agd, e~ mily vAd Ilealth Mgrce. si O e S&amp; 8IlUP
y o the Minie, jb, teak 1lnusing and INE menY GyryAI~
Minister fbr ladot~ ry, Teebooo and Corn m Smster tup Han jaw SUN"
Witfot 9de * ad Technolov I 4lion Rm Free, MP ~~ Sw
k~ nisterAjtA vs w e AMm nr
MAW"' e for Smallusintm, Conswtlon And Custom Ile Hon David Betida, MP
binlter for Tot dln Affidn and Trade 3Snator ohs Moou Gareth Evan%. Q
Ministry foe Trade and Overse&amp; s Deivslapmet ~ 1IJFN h job Keit
P~ rlidmnauwy Secetry to t Minister for Fmsign 4ffulrjp ed rad Thefioft slfpA mdrd MP
Parhamewtoy Secrctary to the Treaurer t a the1 ub " ASM V11
( 1611089C o MnmU buwl.. in t 3601011)
Minster fbr Flsace The Has Ralph WOU16e NF?
( Viix-l'tpiam, d fto rzfteU Couum
Attorne-Generl Is10 ihdDfy
minis., for iuswce eao h o mkwaetm
Ml~ avriAsivinSt ( he Afinfefr forfImmiorafon, ltoca! Oowjrnmentaasd lrhn ( c Affairs
101MiCiTe fog Consiame Affair$ ' no lion IeAnis CUcLkuh 14
Phrhameuta&amp; Secretary to thAtavny-Oentral 7hu Hanu Pe Dumasm, Mr
Minister for Fimplayrnent, Edricailco anid Truinhig The Boo Kits C. BCA$ Y, UP?
Minister for Higfr Pdueaioii and Employment Services 11i 10" MV
Miniert-daing the 7rcnsureronPtrBlw, 14
Mneley for Abouraal and Tomm Strait Islander Affalmh in oetTtieM
Kuliser Asiting the rime nser fqrAbori inat Reonciliatio rh o octTb~, M
ParllamentirY Secrerary to Se Ministrer fur Empoyment; P~ ca( h a and Tralmins The Hon Warren &amp;, owdo UP
Wrtrfor A~ yS~ r IVe Boa David Simnmn M?
Piawieiwary Stcrtary to the Ministerki Social Security The HaOCNs ctacCa UP
Kitler fair Defence Secatoc the liN Robert R" y
Miitrfor Defence Science and Personsnel Th Hon Gotin* AN M
biniser for NwImmltlon1 Local Coeenm sW EF Atik Aflbiv The Ron Gerym 3 MI"
AKuIster Actuint die Prime Ai ser for Itksue f1r
Muuluet for Local ( lovenwuui no lion David Simmons, M?
Miniter for the Arts, Sport the Eainwrarmeifl ad Tenitortes Mwe Ran, Res Kelly MP
Minim&amp; e fOr the Arto and 1' eurts Th Ilon Wendy Wa, NI
MinisterAsssting the Pr'ime Ministr/ for the Srugs of Wonmert
MIuiser ( hr Industrial Relations Smidor the Han Pooer Cook
Minister Assiaii: 8 die Prime Afutister for Puiblic Servce Matters
MWilester Wr Adnialistrut ive Set~ im Senator the Hao Nick Balhau
Ministew ftr Primmet Industries and Eoerg The He" n Sigson M?
in iver N otrs Rrcts ra a lmO~ hM
Miniuter for Tonurn The Hoc Alan GrIMUn, M?
Ministr for Taport wAd Commnrcations Ilenietor the Hoan b Colins
MWInit fix ShiIng and AviationSu. pport Sonator tb* Hop Peter Cook
Minixes for LAfi Tompn T o tBbBoWwIFn,
ptio ROkluNW, Q of whome ame In Ibw CWite atae shftm in bold lye. U, Hampimysis 11so* 4 Cohine Mhilum.
ALD awith aUdc NOif Te rti~ o mirdtesa tit( eai ls fntd by the inimtaes wuthn cub grp41~ wit o gzceptlm* w4" t Hgalt,
rilwnd oniSe uniyW pini lMt lw* adnsitts both the Trkwmawl Of ldth. Hous and Ciuwm* b Saevle and Os Depstint of
VCgaawu Affais; MI Staupcs admlnhtrrs t DcpatMeni of MC91hh, Bwdijaqnad nC omimnfy Sacvk and Mr Ilampbiuys aeulassr the Depwnmea of
Vesra.' Alahi. 



8 0 1 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P. J. KEATING MP
RECEPTION TO COMMEMORATE THE 25TH ANNIVERSARiY OF THE
REFERENDUM, 27 KAY 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
We are here to commemorate a highly significant event in
Australia's history.
In 1967 the Commonwealth Government asked the Australian
people to give it the power to legislate for Aboriginals
and Torres StraitIslanders,. and the Austral 1an peopl-e--
reso-uEdfingly answered " Yes".
Australians do not readily give assent to _ referendum
proposals. Of forty two questions which have been put to referendum
since Federation, only 8 have been passed.'
In 1967, asked if Aborigines should at last be counted in
the census, if they should be counted equally with all
other Australians, and if the Australian Government
should have responsibility for legislation relating to
their affairs, more than 90 per cent of Australians
answered " Yes".
It was en unprecedented result and one wh4ich will
probably never be bettered.
It is a result well worth commemorating today.
But, as with many commemorations, our celebrations are
tinged with regret.
The truth Is we have not succeeded in meeting the
challenge which the triumphant referendum result required
us to meet.
The inequality, the injustice and the racism remain.
The memory and the consequences of injustices done in the
past continue. 
2
We cannot erase these facts.-nor should we seek to.
We should remember them. All Australians should know'the
facts of conquest, of dispossession, of the brutal
treatment and equally inhuman neglect, and they should
recognise the attitudes and motives which inspired them.
As I said, we cannot erase the past but it is our long
overdue duty to erase the attitudes which informed it.
If we wish to lay claim to being truly 8 decent,
civilised advanced nation, the arrogance, intolerance,
ignorance and complacency which for so long characterised
the attitudes and policies of White Australia has to go,
Today I think we white Australians should consider how
much it will do for our own self-esteem if we can
eradicate the prejudice and injustice.
We have made some progress in the last twenty years.
Young Australians are better informed than anly previous
generation about the extraordinary pre-European history
and culture of their country.
Through the education system, but equally through the
achievements of Aboriginal artists, writers and
musicians, we have learned to value the culture and
history of Aboriginal Australia as never before.
We now know much more about what happened on the pastoral
frontier, on the missions and reserves, and in the towns
and cities of Australia.
We know about the crimes committed in the name of white
supremacy, enlightenment and progress, including perhaps
the most shameful of all the removal of Aboriginal
children from their families.
But I think we are also learning to recognise the
contributions Aboriginal Australians have made to this
country and to the contemporary Australian identity.
The Aboriginal story, including the heroes of their
resistance to the European invasion, has become very much
a part of the Australian story as Europeans understand
it. in the past the profound Aboriginal knowledge of this
land was essential to the survival of European
Australians on the frontier.
Today through their art, music and writing, they deepen
our understanding of the Australian environment and point
the way toward a proper relationship with it.
They deepen our understanding of what it is to be
Australian. tj 14W VV_ I Q4.1 
3
Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders have served this
nation in peace and war,
In sport and other fields they number among our legends.
In the 1990s there can be no excuse for failing to
recognise either our debts or our duties to Aboriginals
and Torres Strait Islanders.
In this decade all Australians should come to recognise
that there is no true loyalty or affection for this
country which does not include them.
in all this, it becomes very clear that those people who
fought for more than a decade to see the 1967 Referendum
proposed arnd passed were doing all Australians a great
service.
Some of those people from the Federal Council for the
Advancement of Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders
are with us tonight and I think we should acknowledge
their achievement.
The passing of the Referendum was the prerequisite of
change. It was also a necessary tool of conservation and
protection. It was the mandate-to act in Aboriginal interests given
the Commonwealth in 1967 which just last week made it
possible to protect sacred sites near Alice Springs.
It is appropriate tonight that we acknowledge the many
positive achievements since 1967.
In addition to that broader awareness of Aboriginal
history and culture, there are concrete indications of
change for the better.
Last year we established the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation. Its creation, by unanimous vote of the parliament, is
itself evidence of the feeling in Australia that this
must be the decade of change.
I have great faith in the Council I think it offers us
our best ever chance.
The ground for its success has been better prepared than
at any time in the past.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders are~ increasingly
participating in the mainstream of sociezy. 
4
There are more graduates. In 1979 just 8 per cant
completed secondary school in 1991 that figure was
thirty per cent.
Perhaps the most outstanding achievement is the extent to
which Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders have been
given power to decide programs and policy directions.
Having an Aboriginal head of a statutory authority in
1967 was unthinkable beside me tonight are Um such
people. Having an organisation like ATSIC, all of whose leaders
and decision makers must be by law Aborigines or Torres
Strait Islanders, was unthinkable.
Having Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders in
positions of real power was unthinkable.
Today they have such positions it is unthinkable that
they should not.
There is another development which is I think the most
heartening of all.
It Is that more and more Australians are identifying
themselves as Aboriginal.
There is a growing pride in being an Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander, in being descended from the first
Australians I-holieve that is a good sign for all of
US. it suggests the pride we will all need to have in
ourselves if we are going to overcome those inequities
and attitudes which shame us.
I believe that this year can be a turning point, as 1967
was. We can change attitudes through education, through all
manner of interventions and support, through our own best
efforts. But we will not change them satisfactorily and for all
time until we begin to bridge the great gulf in living
conditions. In pursuing our goals we should adopt as our guiding
philosophy the achievement of real and measurable
results; on establishing the building blocks of change,
those concrete improvements in living conditions which in
the end will be the surest guarantee against prejudice
and discrimination.
In 1992 you can be sure that the Australian Government
does not regard these issues in the way they have s0
often been regarded as marginal. 
They are central. They are central to the notions of
democratic justice and human progress which are at the
heart of our traditions.
They are central to our identity and self-esteem.
They are central to our reputation in the world.
They are central to the debate about what kind of society
we want.
It is the issues which are central now. It is the people
the Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders who must
be central in the future. Central, I mean, to Australian
society, the Australian nation.
And I firmly believe that if we pursue our goals with the
same determination which brought about the Referendum
twenty five years ago we will do that.
Thank you. 



X
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, SOUTHERN CROSS HOTEL, SYDNEY 29 MAY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
J: Mr Keating, two and a half years jail for Alan Bond
any sympathy for him?
PM; I'm not here to comment about Mr Bond, that's for
the appropriate authorities to make 8 judgemnent
about.
J; Do you have any concerns, as Treasurer, about the
closeness to the Prime Minister at the time to Mr
Bond?
PM: I've got no discussion. Mr Bond ñ 81 obviously
subject to these proceedings in We~ tern Australia
and that's a matter for the authdrities involved.
J; Could you elaborate a bit more on the pamphlet
released by the Coalition?
PM:, I think this pamphlet shows just how desperate John
Hewson is and it will also reveal to the Australian
people that while he's pretended he's been thinking
about thoughtfu' policy, that when it gets down to
the bottom line it is just 8 bit of shabby politics
that he's on about. The notion that he's going to
first of all ascribe to the Commonwealth Labor Party
the violence in AuStralia and the Australian states
since 1983 and say this has happened under Labor,
and then to make the unbelievable leap and
distortion that a consumption tax can do any-thing
about it, must reveal to all Australians that this
man is bereft of any decent strands of serious
policy and he ought to be dismissed by serious
people of having any answers to Australia. This is
a very shabby piece of politico.
0 
J: Mr Keating, what are you going to do about the NSW
factional fight that's going on at the moment?
Pm: we've just been watching the Liberal Party factional
fight last week. Mr Fife, the Leader of opposition
business in the House of Representatives was in a
position of being defeated in his seat and he's had
to stand down as had Senator Durack in Western
Australia, the Shadow Attorney-General. Dr Hewson
has had to replace both of them in the last week.
obviously pre-selection battles are not something
which the Labor Party alone has a problem with, so
does the Coalition. For my part, the best thing my
party can do is resolve these quickly.
J; Is it about time the Labor Party in fact changed the
nature of its factional politics?
PM; You may as easily direct the question to the Liberal
Party, why is the Leader of Opposition business in
the House of Representatives now required to stand
down and not contest his seat? Mr Fife, who was a
serious and senior person, Is now obviously on the
back bench. Senator Durack will be a Senator for
not much longer. There are factions he was a
victim of the Crichton-Browne faction of the Western
Australia Liberal Party. There are points of view
in all parties and one of the healthy things about
Australian-democracy and Australian politics is
there are such views and that people can actually
get their opinion heard and can secure public office
as a result. The important thinq I think for us as
a Party, for the Labor Party as a party, is to get
these selections over with.
J: Are you going to stand by and watch Mr West go, when
he says he has worked very hard for your party?
PM. it's not a matter of me Standing by any one person.
The best thing in all of this for us is to have them
resolved quickly. But I just make the paint to you
that pre-selection battles are obviously always a
matter for both major parties whenever an election
is within some proximity.
J; Could his boycott undermine the ' One Nation'
Statement?
PM: Come on now, don't be absurd.
J: It's being claimed it can.
PM; Oh well yes, yes. 
I juñ iHu uu-r~ v)
J; What about the question of Ministerial
responsibilities Mr Keating. What are you going to
do about, in particular, Roo Kelly?
PM: It's a matter of the orders and gravity of things,
that's the thing that matters. These are the sorts
of things which hardly get a line some weeks, but in
other weeks do. I've spent my week on the big
issues including, as I've just come from the tourism
industry looking at, at the Cabinet level, a
national strategy for touriam. So the Government
was in its Cabinet room looking at serious policy
while the opposition was throwing silly questions in
the Senate.
ENDS 



&amp; OBTRALIA~'
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING, MP
BREAKFAST FOR SYDNEY OLYMPICS, SYDNEY, 29 MAY 1992
Premier Greiner and Mrs Greiner, Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for the invitation to speak to you this
morning. A couple of weeks ago ! addressed a huge number of people
gathered at the Meicourne Tennis Centre to raise money
for theAustralian X-' ympic Team bound for Barcelona.
If their support tcr th~ e cause is any measure, Sydney's
-bJi. for the Olympics. in the year 2000 will ride a huge
wave. I have to say in passing that it was a great pity that
Melbourne's quite superb _ bid for the 96 Olympics was
Ariusucessful the people associated w ith that effort and
the people of Melbourne deserved much better.
But I have no doubt that all those who put their energy
into that effort will now put their energy into Sydney.
Just as Melbourne's was, this is a nat~ ional. bid an
Australian bid.
It requires a national effort.
In many ways Melbourne's bid provided a solid foundation
for the Sydney bid.
Many of the strengths of the argument for Melbourne can
be translated to Sydney.
Their bid made the point that it would be only the second
time in the history of the modern Olympics that the Games
have been held in the Southern Hemisphere.
The point was made so well by Melbourne it need not be
emphasised by the Sydney Committee.
Sydney can concentrate on the other compelling reasons
why the Games should come south. 7 2 



OOm
NATIONAL 9 NETWORK CANERRA OUReAU
' IKtS GAI. LEKY PACLIANFeT HOUSE CANOERRA
rIOQH: ( 061 Z7) 1300 FAX: ( 061 213 3079
Dite: 31 May 1992 Time: 0900
Source: National Nine Network Program: Sunday
JIM WALEY: After a bold start to his bid to catapult Labor to
a fifth election victory, Paul Keating has lost some of his
momentum of late. The forced resignation of Senator Graham
Richardson, continuing revelations over the Marshall Islands
affair, factional brawling and a Massive budget blow-out all
helping to rob the Prime Minister of the political initiative.
With an election looming it's imperative he get it back
quickly. Time is a luxury Mr Keating simply doesn't have.
The Prime Minister is in our Canberrastudio this morning
and here to talk with him, Sunday's political editor, Laurie
Oakes. Laurie
LAURIE OAKEn: Thanks, Jim. Mr Keating; welcome, back to the
program. PAUL KEATING: Thank you, Laurie.
JLURIE OAKES: Almost a year ago to the day you said on this
program there would be a touch of excitement if you became
Prime Minister. But presumably the sort of excitement you had
in mind wasn't allegations of scandal, ministerial
resignations, factional brawling?
PAUL KEATINQ: We've had, I think, more than a touch of it.
We've taken Federal Labor's stocks from a 28 per cent in the
polls, to around 40, and the One Nation package has totally
re-launched the Federal Labor Party, in terms of issues,
running up to the next election and I wouldn't pretend like
anyone else any other real person in public life that 
every week goes swimmingly for you. obviously it doesn't but
the main thing is in this last week we in the Cabinet have
been working on the big issues.
And I might say that the issues we've been working on,
while the opposition have been rabbiting on in the' Senate
about letters and correspondence, we've been looking at a
revolution in aviation and telecommunications and also we've
had on the stocks a long term consideration of the technical
and further education system.
LAURIE 0AKES: I'll ask you about those in a moment but do you
accept that the Government has hit a wall? As you said, you
were going well for a while but you've fallen in a hole
haven't you?
PAUL KEATINjG: I think, Laurie, you've got to make an
impression of these things outside. I believe that a party's
progress builds cumulatively. I think a week of these sort of
things doesn't knock the cumulative effect down. It may
retard one's progress but in terms of the broader sweep I
think the public are a bit smart about all these things.
Look, last weekend -we had Wal rife, the Leader of
Government opposition Busine~ ss in the House of
Representatives, knocked out of his seat under protests by
John Sharp, the Country Party member. We had Durack, Dr
Hewson's shadow Attorney-General, defeated by the Crichton-
Browne faction in Western Australia. We've got similar
problems in the New South Wales selections at the moment. I
mean all parties have these running up to a poll and I think
the media. sort of put a big discount, through the public's
intelligence about these things.
LAURIE OAKES: But you haven't got much time. Do you have a
strategy to get out of the hole, to get back on track?
PAUL KEATING: I mean the strategy for me has always been,
throughout my whole ministerial life, and publ-ic life for that
matter, keeping on pressing on to the structural and major
policy changes. That's~ what I've been doing. This week, when
the journalists ran out of the Senate after each question to
Senator Evans, and out of the, House'. of Representatives, and
2 
back to f ile their stories we went back to the Cabinet Room
working on issues of substance.
I didn't spend my week rattling through Senate Hansards.
I spent them going through the policy discussions around the
issues I mentioned to you earlier and looking at ' Cabinet
material around that.
LAURIE OAKES; Let me ask you about some or those issues? You
mentioned aviation. Are we to see a merger of Qantas and
Australian Airlines?
PAUL KEATING: What we're contemplating is the building of an
international competitive aviation market in Australia so that
the interface between international aviation and domestic
aviation is not the broken one it is n6w, but one where the
domestic players are international players. -That'll mean
building at least two international carriers, maybe more.
One of the options we're looking at is the merging or
Qantas and Australian Airlines but, as you know, the
Government intends to sell 100 per cent of Australian and 49
per cent. of Qantas. If we roll the two ifito a meryed entity
it would mean one of the options for us is to sell the value
of 100 per-cent of Australian and 49 per cent of Qantas in the
merged entity, which would probably run out to about 7 0 per
cent of Qantas, which would mean that Qantas would then have a
domestic arm in Australian.
we are setting up a commission by legislation this week
to award routes to other carriers. The other carrier, of
course, in that context would be Ansett. That is to
internationalise another domestic player.
LAURIE OAKES: And where ' does: Air New Zealand fi~ t into this?
Part of your original plan was an integrated aviation market
with New Zealand, was . it not?
PAUL KEATING: That's still part of the plan apd very shortly,
I believe, we'll secure an agreement with cNew Zealand to
create one Australasian airline market and in that we will see
Australian planes and. New Zealand planes more frequently
flying across the Taeman. The question of on-routes outside
of Australia will also be resolved. 
so what you'll see, Laurie, is the capacity of
Australians to have a better airline system, cheaper fares and
a rational development or the airlines away from that terrible
two-airline policy, the Liberals saddled us up with for
years and, I might say, which they renewed three weekd before
the 1983 election. Again, Labor's been the only party to
break these arrangements. up and now try and thread its way
through to a really decent, tremendously. competitive
structure. LAURI E OAKES Let me get this straight. You'll sell
something like 70 per cent of a merged airline. why not the
whole lot?
PAUL KEATING:. The options are these: that we have Qantas
acquire Australian; that we sell 49 per cent of the merged
entity. That would mean nothing for the Budget. That would
mean all of the proceeds going back into the recapitalisation
of the merged entity.
The alternative would be to sell down the value of 100
per cent of Australian and 49 per,-cent of Qantas, which -would
be about 70 per cent of Qantas. We could do that by a f loat
to the , Australian peo6ple, as we did with the Commonwealth
Bank, and maybe reserving in that f loat substantial sections
of the shares for other major internAtional airlines who might
wish to take a piece of it and manage it because part of the
weakness of Qantas is-its management structure.
LAURIE OAKES: The two things that arise out of that, of
course, if you're going to sell 70 per cent -why not 100?
You haven't got control, anyway.
PAUL ' KEATING: That is again an. option, but it's. a matter for
the Party then. We have to I think then consider that at a
conference level, whereas we have authority from a year or so
back for 100 per cent of Australian and 49 per cent of Qantas.
LAURIE pARES: The second thin4 " that arises: at that
conference you talk ed About the argument was there's no place
for a government-ow ned, airline in domestic aviation. Now
you're stepping away from that.
PAUL KEATING: well, the point is the synergies which arise
4 
from the purchase of Australian by Qantas are quite profound
and if we were to sell down the stock of the value of 100 per
cent of Australian and . the 49 per cent of Qantas, to all
intents and purposes that point I made then would be well and
truly satisfied.
LAURIE OAKES: You also mentioned broadcasting. What's going
to happen to pay television? That's on the Cabinet agenda for
tomorrow as well, is it not?
PAUL KEATING: it is.
LAURIE OAKES: Are we looking at the Richardson plan being put
up by the new Minister?
PAUL KEATING: Graham Richardson was basically moving along
with the policy as it obtained before h6 become the Minister.
what I've said is I've been quite uncomfortable about the fact
that we're about to exclusively nominate satellite television
as the only vehicle for pay television between now and the
year 1999. Particularly when other technologies are
available, like fibre optic cableand MDS -that's local radio
transmission of television into homes. So what I've said to
Bob Collins, and he agrees, is we should look 4t the option of
taking away the e~ eclusivity of satellite transmission of pay
television. In other words, the satellite will still be the
forerunner because it's got a number'of ye~ cris head start
LAURIE OAKES: Yes.
PAUL KEATING: -But there's no particular reason why we ought
to make it exclusive. There's -no particular * reas-on why
Telecom, who has cabled up most of the Australian suburbs at
least to the street corner, if not to the home, that anyone
else ' that wants to be in the pay business shouldn't be able to
be in it.
LAURIE OAKES: Immediately?
PAUL KEATING Well they can't because they; haven't got it
wired up to the homes. so . the' only' immediate, one will be the
satellite and because the satellite is immediate, the
Government is going tQ put on it ownership limits that it
would be less likely to put upon cable-or the local radio
transmission style MDS style pay TV. 
LAURIE OA1XE8: So ir you get your way it won't just be a f ourchannel
satellite pay Tv consortium. That will exist, but
anyone else -can get into the business as well once the cable
is there?
PAUL KEATIN4G: There'll be a four-channel consortium.' There
can be another consortium for the separate transponder the
fifth transponder; another one for the sixth transponder;
and anyone else who wants to come with any other technology,
including cable. This of course, Laurie, would virtually
create a revolution in Australian telecommunications and give
Australians You see fibre optics has the capacity to put
200 channels into a house and also to answer back. You could
deal with your bank or deal with your supermarket. Whereas
the satellite can at this stage put only four channels into a
home , and even though there's a thing called digital
compression rattling down the road which may increase that,
it's not going to do in the long run what fibre can do.
I don't believe, having kept the sla te clean can i
just. make this point: We kept, the slate clean on colour
television for years so that Australia in the latter part
chose the right technology. It chose Pal-D. We've kept the
slate clean on pay but at the eleventh hour-. 1 believe we look
like choosing a very limited technology and denying to
ourselves the right to at least choose alternative and maybe
superior technologies. So, you know, I've said to collins I
don't think. this is on. I think he agrees and we're now
trying to construct
That's what I've been doing this week, Laurie. Not
reading Senate Hansards.
LAURIE OAKES: Will that go to Cabinet tomorrow?
PAUL KEATING: it'll go to Cabinet Monday and Tuesday.
LAURIE OAKES: Mr Keating, we'll pause for a commercial break.
PAUL KEATING: Thank you. ,( Commercial break)
LAURIE OAKES: welcome back. Mr Xea~ ing, just to finish off 
the pay television issue. what role will the networks have in
this? will there still be a place for them in the consortia?
PAUL KEATIN~ G: They're going to be thrown a difficult
entrepreneurial Choice. They always tell us how good they
are. we'll now see how good they are and they can' make a
decision whether they actually bid for the rour transponders
of f the satellite; just go for a movie channel on the fifth,
or a * sports channel on the sixth; or wait and do something
else on pay.
The one thing is, Laurie, obviously with that diversity
it'll be a case of many are called but few are chosen. The
public will choose few, as has been the case in many other
countries. But at least we shouldn't be locking these
technologies out, which I think the sort of restrictive
approach we had, did. AS you know, we're going over a bit of
old history but I never liked that.
LAURIE QAKES; No. If the networks can get involved, 1 what
restrictions will there be to minimise concentration of
ownership? 4
PAUL KEATINGQ: in terms of the satellite, because there will
now be other technologies the case for restrictions
diminishes. so I think Senator Collins is proposing 45 per
cent all up for the networks and any one level of 20. But
then if the networks of course don't choose -I mean it's very
likely the networks,-or a network, would not choose the
satellite and just let it go to somebody else. and just try
their hand three or four years later, on cable.
LAURIE OAKES; The big issue, though', is still obviously
economic policy and the' big issue in economic policy is
unemployment. I gather Bill Kelty gave you the rounds of the
kitchen on Thursday night about that and told you you couldn't
win the election unless you did something about-that.
PAUL KEATING: No, that sto1ty is' untrue. That'Is j ust a
furphy. We had a debate there about tariffs and the impact of
tariffs but not about''--Bill Kelty knows as well as anybody
what the Government. s done about employmnent. He's on the
Reserve Bank board. He knows we're npw looking at bill rates 
of 6k per cent because he's been party to the decision which
reduced interest rates by one per cent. He knows we'Ive got
$ 2.3 billion in the one Nation spending and, as part of the
discussion with the trade unions last Thursday, I went through
the progress of the implementation or One Nation in fhe rail
programs, in the payment to families, in the various other
changes. So I think the ACTU is well aware of that but the
textile, clothing and footwear industries have been beating a
drum about tariffs now for some time. That was picked up by a
few other people but-
LAURIE OAKES: Did you promise to look at some way to cushion
industry's hurt by the lowering of protection?
PAUL KEATING: No. What We said was where we think there have
been maybe unfair trade practices on the part of others, we
would look at that. or, maybe in some areas where better
adjustment programs can be put into place, that perhaps we
could examine that.
LAURIE OAKES: What about youth unemployment? Are you
planning any initiatives there? That's clearly the most
worrying aspect of the whole problem.
PAUL KEATING: I think the most significant thing there is in
technical and further education. live spent the last couple
of weeks with Kim Beazley and John Dawkins and others talking
about this. You see, Laurie, Labor took the participation
rate of kids in secondary school f rom 3 ' in 10 to nearly 8 in
Now, 40 per cent of those or just on 40 -35 to 40 are
now finding tertiary places. The others are. cascading, not
into ' technical and furthe . r education -only some are. They
are just not being trained. I think that's a tragedy and
that's Why in one Nation we try to lirt the whole, if you
like, level and profile of the training institutions through
TAFE. We put this proposition to the St. ates that the
Commonwealth take over TAFE. Frankly, some of the states have
been quite. obstructionist' about this. we're getting
cooperation in Victoria; quite a bit from New South Wales; 
virtually none from anyone else.
LAURIE 0AXES: What do you do about that?
PAUL KrATING: Well, I think we have two options: that is
that we will maintain our recurrent effort for the existing
TAFE system. We won't take the dog and the manger appfoach of
pulling out but we will wind our capital program back and the
Commonwealth will itself build a new system of vocational
education. We will build new institutes or vocational education
which have a much closer focus on the labour market and
industry and perhaps do it with industry in areas which are
going to be important. In other words, as we have lifted up
the quality of tertiary education with'the universities, we
can so too do that with a new system of vocational education
while at the same time continuing the recurrent effort but
having a greater grip over the policy the States employ for
the recurrent funding we provide them.
LAURIE OAKES: So you'll run a parallel system to TAFE?
PAUL4 M~ TING: That's one of the olptions. We're still in this
discussion-LAURIE OAKES: A serious option?-
PAUL KEATING: A serious option. We're stii2. in discussions
with them but it is* a serious option because a lot of the
people providing TAFE training are trades persons who stopped
actually practising their trade 15 of 20 ye ars ago. The whole
world's moved on. TAFE's a system provided by the providers.
it's not necessarily a system that looks after Australian kids
trains them for jobs and trains them for things to do. So
we're focussing on that ' and -if we could get a breakthrough
there it would totally revolutionalise education from the
tertiary level down that is beyond compulsory education.
LAURIE OAKES: If we could just finish on general politics, mr
Keating. The Government has been taking a pasting. You've
had Gareth Evans talking about documents going astray in his
office; Ros Kelly blaming her Department for a terrible mess
up. You can't be-very happy with the way your Government's
performing. 
PAUIL KEATING: We've had a better week than we've had in the
last couple of weeks, Laurie, obviously, but the day that
Senator Evans's office apparently received these documents was
the day of the attack on the Xranian Embassy. Senator Evans
was himself abroad. I mean requiring of his staffC, weeks
ahead of this becoming an issue, that all of these matters are
referred to referred to. the minister abroad putting him on
notice with it for Issues which then were seemingly of modest
relevance, at the time, is being unfair after the event.
This is what Oppositions are about but the Senate's
trying to behave like a court and the silly notion is that the
Government has actually got an obligation to help Senate
Ministers provide information. I mean we don't, and we won't.
LAURIE OAKES: But aren't you concerned that the Government
looks sloppy?
PAUL KEATING; Yes, but-
LAURIE OAKEO: What do you do about it?
PAUL KEATXNG: * You tell people about the; issues I've just
spoken to you about. You tell people that in the real changes
which the Federal Liberal Party of Australia and the
Country Party and the -National Party never ever contemplated
in television; in airlines, from their a lousy regulated
systems; in education, which they were happy to leave 3 kids
in 10 only complete secondary school, never cared about TArE.
In those things, -again, it's always Labor down to the
substance and that's what we're about.
I mean, the point of me coming on your program the
point of the dissemination of news of public affairs is to
tell Australians ' that on the substance rather than the thim
f lam I mean I'm not the one publishing pamphlets saying that
a GST will stop someone breaking into your house. That sort
of low political nonsense is coming from' Dr Hewson.
The notion that the reason that there's been break-ins is
because of nine years -of Federal Labor Government or, worse,
that you can actually stop a break-in or your house by putting
per cent on your Weetbix. This is the sort of low politics
that this fellow's trafficking in . while the Government's 
looking at a revolution in television, aviation and education.
I'll leave it to you to judge, Laurie.
LAURIE OAKES: We're out of time but thanks very much, Prime
minister. PAUL KEATING: Thank you.
LAURIE OAKES: Back to you, Jim~.
JIM WNALEY: The Pri-me m~ inister there, talking with Laurie
Oakes. t JO! 



PRIME MINISTER 53/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO IMPOSITION OF MANDATORY UN
SANCTIONS
Australia welcomes the decision by the United Nations
Security Council in Resolution 757 to impose a range of
mandatory sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro. These
sanctions include a trade embargo excluding food and
humanitarian items but including oil, restrictions on the
movement of financial assets, a ban on cultural, sporting
and scientific cooperation, a ban on air links and a
reduction in Belgrade's diplomatic representation.
The UN has taken this decision in view of the failure of
Serbia and Montenegro to abide by earlier Security
Council demands to cease interference in the internal
affairs of Bosnia-Herzegovina. The international
community has been appalled at the senseless loss of life
and suffering resulting from those actions.
The Government is moving expeditiously to implement the
UN decision. Ministers and departments are now working
on the details of implementation, with decisions to go
before the Executive Council tomorrow.
The Yugoslav national airline, JAT, which flies out of
Australia twice a week, will have its services suspended
from this week. Australia has already downgraded its own
diplomatic representation in Belgrade. Cuts to the
Yugoslav diplomatic and consular presence in Australia
will be introduced.
Since the beginning of the break-up of the old Yugoslav
federation last year, Australia has consistently called
for all the disputing parties to exercise maximum
restraint and work towards a negotiated settlement.
Regrettably, the fighting has continued. The attacks on
civilians in Sarajevo have led to the further tragic
loss of innocent life. 
The imposition of sanctions is intended to make Belgrade
and its allies modify their behaviour. We hope this will
open the way to a resolution of territorial and communal
differences, thereby bringing to an end the suffering of
all involved in the conflict, including the Serbian
people themselves.
The Government is aware of the anguish and uncertainty
felt by all those in Australia who have relatives and
friends in the areas affected by the fighting. The
Government commends the restraint shown by local
communities in Australia, and urges them to maintain
their patience. I assure these communities that
Australia will continue to work with other countries
towards a lasting and just resolution of the Balkan
conflict. CANBERRA 1 June 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF YOUTH TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT FORUM
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, JUNE 2 1992
Thank you for the opportunity to open this forum. I am
very grateful to the organisers for giving me the chance
to speak.
The issues of education and employment for our yon
people are issues of national concern. 2n
The cliches, of course, are easy but they are no less
true for that.
Young people are the nation's future. Our success as a
nation depends upon their skills and resources and the
degree of their commitment to this society.
At one level, providing employment, education and
training for our young people is a real test of our
ability to create an efficient modern economy.
But we won't do that without a social ethic. Our
economic success is inseparable from our social successwe
will succeed best in Australia if we raise the level
of our care for each other.
To a very considerable extent our success depends on the
degree to which our young people believe in this country.
It is perhaps another cliche to say they they won't
believe in it if we don't.
And it is hard to think of a truer measure of our belief
than the investment we make in them.
By any reasonable standards we have a duty to train and
educate them, to prepare them for the future, to give
them every possible chance.
We have a duty as a community and a nation.
If these are cliches, they are no less true for that.
But we won't get anywhere by simply uttering them. 
Understandably, with an issue which goes to the very
heart of communities, we often end up with more heat than
light.
We need heat but we need more light.
What we need from this conference, and in the press in
discussions about unemployment and youth around the
country are rea itic and effective ideas and
strategies. When I became Prime Minister I gave a commitment to speed
economic recovery and do everything we realistically
could to reduce unemployment.
The measures in One Nation were the first step to doing
this.
We introduced a $ 100 million package to boost new
employment and training opportunities, save existing jobs
and strengthen the economy. The package will provide
assistance for nearly 40,000 young people.
Young people will also benefit from the substantial
increases in funding for labour market programs and for
TAFE places. WVe provided an extra SlOOD iioT~ n in the
November Economic Statement and a further $ 40 million in
One Nation for an additional 50,000 places in TAFE.
In the first ten months of 1991-92, almost 75,000 young
people have been involved in vocational education and
training placements.
But clearly this is not enough. We need to work on long
term solutions.
In tackling the next stages, we need to be clear about
the impact that the fundamental restructuring of the
labour market has had on opportunities For yo'ung people.
Major changes to industry structure and new technology
are substantially changing the type of jobs available.
In manufacturing, the old production line approach which
produced a large number of the same standard item and
which employed a large number of unskilled labourers is
fast disappearing.
It is being replaced with new, computer-based design and
production techniques which place a high premium on both
highly skilled and multi-skilled staff at all levels of
the design, production and marketingprocesses.
Similarly, in key service industries such as retail,
hospitality and tourism, the quality of our skills will
influence the standard of our service and hence our
ultimate success. 
These changes are common to all industrialised nations.
They cannot be turned back.
The challenge is to develop the means by which young
people can gain the skills and experience they need.
The challenge is made more critical by the fact that
young people with little education and training are most
disadvantaged in the labour market.
There is one unmistakable fact about the modern labour
market: those who do not complete school or a postschool
qualification are twice as likely to be
unemployed, and are unemployed for much longer.
I can tell you. that the Goverrnent has accepted the
challenge. And I have to say that we're not at all interested in
John Howard's non-solution of dead-end jobs for young
people, jobs which don't involve any training.
As Ross Gittins wrote if we can't do better than that
there won't be much hope for the rest of us.
" An economy in which there is a great demand for
unskilled workers", he said, " is an economy at the
bottom of the pile in the international division of
labour; one with a low standard of living, producing low
value, labour-intensive goods and watching the nations
with cleverer, better-equipped workers pass it by."
The plain fact is that a competitive economy needs a
highly skilled workforce. And surely we can muster the
will and the resources necessary to create one.
We have already made substantial progress.
There has never been a group of school leavers in
Australia with higher levels of formal education than the
group now entering the labour market. In the last decade
the proportion of young people completing secondary
schooling has doubled from 35% in 1981 to 70% in 1991.
Our higher education system compares well with the OECD
average. In 1992 around 500,000 Australians are
participating in higher education, an increase of over
120,000 students since 1987 or the equivalent of 12 new
universities. By 1994, we will have increased the total number of.
Commonwealth-funded university places by 50% since 1983.
Over the 1992-1994 triennium, the Government plans to
spend a total of $ 13 billion on higher education. 
We can see these changes reflected in the education and
labour market profile of young people. In the mid 1960s
nearly six in ten 15-19 year olds had a full-time job; by
the early 1990s, this stood at less than one in three.
Less than one in three were full-time students in the mid
1960s; now six in ten are.
In April 1992, 117,000 of our 1.3 million teenagers were
seeking full-time jobs. One in ten young people is
unemployed which is actually 32,000 less than the
number seeking jobs in April 1983 in the last recession.
Our goal is not simply to keep young people busy and off
the streets. In conjunction with business and industry
we must develop education and training systems which
ensure that young people receive skills that meet their
needs and the economy' s needs.
Successful economies are characterised by high education
standards; a strong emphasis on vocational preparation
for young people; and close links between education
institutions and employers.
Plainly, in Australia the weak link is vocational
education and training. It is the sector which most
clearly falls short of the standards of our main
competitors such as Germany and Japan and the emerging
tigers like Singapore and South Korea.
Australia must begin to value vocational skills as highly
as academic skills, and expect excellence from both.
This is why we are moving as quickly as we can to reform
and expand entry-level training arrangements and the TAFE
system.
The most striking feature of Australia's vocational
preparation system is that it is small. On one measure,
only around one in five places occupied by a 16 or 17
year old is in vocational preparation. The OECD average
is one in two, and in Germany it is eight in ten.
In Australia, apprenticeship is the largest form of
vocational preparation, accounting for 60% of
participation. But there are weaknesses with the
apprenticeship system.
The occupational and industry coverage is too narrow.
There is little vocational preparation for the service
sector which provides two thirds of employment for 15-19
year olds.
Young women, whose employment is concentrated in the
service sector, are greatly under-represented in
vocational preparation. 
And there is a tendency for programs to rigidly separate
general education from vocational training.
The Carmichael Report proposes major initiatives to
significantly increase the flexibility and quality of
vocational training, as well as the number of work-based
training places available to Australia's young people.
Broadly speaking, in my view these are not options, but
imperatives. And we need to move on them now.
Expanding the industry and occupational coverage of
structured training arrangements will provide greater
training opportunities for all young people. We must
work with industry, unions and training providers to see
that it happens as quickly as possible.
So far, there has been strong in-principle support for
the thrust of Carmichael's proposals from the ACTU and
peak employer groups including the BCA, CAI and the MTIA.
There is also general support from the States, and the
Minister, Kim Beazley, will be commencing detailed
discussions with his State counterparts this week.
The Commonwealth Government is committed to reforming
entry-level training. I will be giving this a high
personal priority over the next months.
To accelerate the process, I will convene a series of
meetings of peak business organisations, employers and
the ACTU to advance the development and implementation of
the pilot projects which will test the new approach.
For the reforms to entry-level training to be successful,
they must be backed up by a greatly expanded and improved
vocational education and training system.
I am convinced that the best way to achieve a truly
national system of vocational education and training is
for the Commonwealth Government to assume a key role.
In One Nation I proposed that the Commonwealth enter into
a partnership with the States, with the Commonwealth
assuming full responsibility for the funding of the
system, while the States retained responsibility for its
administration, management and planning at a local level.
To date we have been unable to reach agreement on this
proposal. One option, which has many attractions, is for the
Commonwealth to go further and assume full
responsibility, not only for the funding, but also for
the administration of TAFE.
It would ensure an efficient and effective national
vocational and educational training system. 
It would allow a closer integration of TAFE and
higher education policy.
It would enable the Commonwealth to pursue its
fundamental objectives of raising the system' s
quality and diversity, and achieving across
Australia a better match of training and the needs
of young people, industry and the labour market.
It is a step we are prepared to take.
I recognise that we could not achieve such a system
overnight. In the meantime, it is critical that the pressing demand
for more places in TAFE be addressed. I would therefore
propose for the 1993-1995 triennium that the States
maintain their current effort on TAFE and, where
necessary, lift their effort from their own resources to
reach an agreed national standard of provision.
For its part, the Commonwealth would commit additional
funding for the growth and improvement of the vocational
education and training system.
As part of the arrangements for the triennium, we would
seek an inter-governmental agreement at Heads of
Government level to raise the quality and responsiveness
of the mainstream TAFE system.
In order to steer the system towards national objectives,
the Commonwealth would use part of its growth funding to
purchase courses directly from institutions and industry
to encourage an active involvement by the private sector.
Whatever happens, we must settle matters as soon as
possible. The Government is determined that Australia will have a
world class vocational education and training system and
we will not be deflected from that objective.
The Commonwealth will therefore support the development
of a network of high profile institutions, catering for
the advanced technical training needs of specific
industry sectors.
In this way the Commonwealth would also be in a position
over time to build institutes of vocational education in
connection with industry, as well as maintain our
recurrent effort for the existing TAFE system.
I have spoken today about the far-reaching reforms of the
education and training systems for young people. But
more can be done to help those young people who are
unemployed now. 
I In addition to the initiatives I have already mentioned,
the Government is considering some measures in the Budget
context. I am not convinced that more of the same is needed. This
is why I was keen to address you today. One of the aims
of this forum is to hear ideas from different sectors of
society. I trust you will take my presence here as an
indication that I want to hear the views of young people
and others who are grappling with the issues.
There is no one answer.
I know from some initial discussions with business and
industry that there are a lot of good ideas around many
of them are already being put into practice.
Business is saying that it has a role to play in
addressing youth unemployment: that it is not the
Government's sole responsibility.
We need, I believe, a national effort to find solutions.
In some cases, business is linking up with community
organisations for example, by developing training and
work experience programs for homeless kids.
They are working in partnership with Government for
example by employing young people through the
Government's Jobstart program.
In many other cases they are going it alone and employing
unemployed kids above their normal requirements.
In addition to considering our own initiatives on youth
unemployment, I see a role for Government in
consolidating and promoting the good ideas of others.
I think we can encourage other businesses to consider
what role they can play.
I will be holding a national meeting of business people
and others who are taking a lead in this area with a view
to developing a national response to youth unemployment.
A national initiative.
I believe we can learn from each other. I believe we
have to.
This forum today will make a considerable contribution to
the debate. Thank you again for inviting me.
I wish you well in your discussions and I will be
interested in your conclusions. 



PRIME MINISTER Tuesday 2 June 1992
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RON PAUL
KEATING, MP; THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, THE EON RALPH
WILLIS# MPl; AND,* THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS, SENATOR THE EON BOB COLLINS
The Government has approved the sale of Australian
Airlines to Qantas.
It has also endorsed sale of 100 per cent of the combined
airline, subject to approval by the Australian Labor
Party. The Government has also decided to establish an
independent Tribunal to allocate international aviation
routes.
These decisions where taken by Cabinet last night and
agreed by Caucus this morning.
The decision to sell Australian Airlines to Qantas
follows detailed examination by the Department of
Finance's Task Force on Asset Sales of initial indicative
bids for Australian Airlines.
The main factor bearing on the Government's decision was
the increased value placed on the synergistic benefits
which will result from operating the domestic carrier and
Qantas together.
A sale agreement will be signed tomorrow between Qantas
and the Government under which Qantas will pay $ 400
million for 100 per cent of Australian Airlines.
Settlement of the sale will be finalised by the end of
September after which Australian Airlines will become a
wholly-owned subsidiary of Qantas.
The acquisition will allow for significant synergistic
benefits and operational efficiency gains which will
increase the ultimate sale value of Qantas as well as
benefiting the travelling public. 
Taken together with the new aviation regulatory changes
also announced today, this transaction will ensure a
strong and viable aviation industry in Australia in
future.
As part of the transaction the Chairman of Qantas, Mr
Bill Dix, and the Chief Executive, Mr John Ward, will
Join the Board of Australian Airlines as soon as
possible. In proposing to sell 100 per cent of Qantas the
Government will retain a " golden share" providing a
number of national safeguards.
These will include requirements that:
no more than 35 per cent of voting equity be
sold to foreign interests;
the trading name " Qantas" be retained for
international air transport passenger services
provided by the company;
the head office of Qantas remain in Australia;
and a majority of Qantas' Board be Australian
citizens.
The trade sale of Qantas will continue contingent with
settlement of the acquisition by Qantas of Australian
Airlines. The Government expects no diminution of interest in
Qantas by prospective purchasers as a result of this
acquisition. In fact, a number of prospective purchasers have
indicated that this acquisition would strengthen their
interest in the combined entity.
Prospective purchasers already approved for access to the
next and final stage of the trade sale of
Qantas/ Australian Airlines are being advised.
The Government will also seek expressions of interest
from new bidders attracted by the proposed revised
ownership arrangements.
The parties concerned will be permitted to conduct their
own detailed " buyer due diligence" investigations into
the combined entity prior to submitting binding bids.
The trade sale process is expected to be completed by the
end of this calendar year. 
Significant resources are being allocated to preparing
for a public float of the remaining eguity in Qantas
which will be undertaken in the period immediately
following the trade sale.
With the decision to sell 100 per cent of Qantas, this
will involve a major equity raising, recapitalisiig the
airline on a competitive commercial basis and returning
well over $ 1 billion to the Commonwealth Budget.
INDEPENDENT TRIBUNAL:
An independent Tribunal will be responsible for assessing
applications by domestic carriers for international route
and capacity entitlements on the basis of criteria to be
determined by the Government.
Licensed airlines will be eligible to seek the right to
fly international services to the many countries where
multiple designation is provided under existing bilateral
air services agreements.
Until the Tribunal is established, Qantas will continue
to be Australia's designated international airline, other
than on trans-Tasman routes.
The Government has decided to clearly separate route
authorisation and carrier selection procedures from its
continuing regulatory and administrative functions, by
establishing an independent Tribunal. This separation is
consistent with practices in a number of major aviation
countries. The Government's objective is to introduce a process
which will be clearly seen as being open, transparent and
accessible to all parties and the Government will be
legislating to give this effect.
At the same time, the Government has ensured that such
matters as tourism and trade, route economies, incumbent
airlines' rights and entitlements, the interests of other
Australian carriers and broader national interests are
adequately reflected in the criteria to be considered by
the Tribunal.
The combination of existing unused capacity and
additional capacity, arising out of bilateral
negotiations, will provide the opportunity for the
commencement of operations by competitive Australian
carriers on international routes.
The new approach provides for the gaining of potential
benefits and exposure to competition for all airlines
under a timetable where access to new markets is aligned
with competition in existing markets. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF A JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE PRIME
MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP, THE HON RALPH WILLIS MIP,
MINISTER FOR FINANCE, AND SEN THE HON BOB COLLINS MP,
MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS, CANBERRA 2
JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: My colleagues and I are here to announce a little
bit of history. It's always Labor that makes the
history and it's making it again.
The Government has approved the sale of Australian
Airlines to Qantas. It's also endorsed the sale of
100 per cent of a combined airline subject to
approval by the Australian Labor Party. These
decisions were taken by the Cabinet last night and
agreed to by the Caucus this morning.
The main factors bearing upon the decision are that
the Government believed that selling the two
airlines separately, after we'd moved from
expression of interests to indicative bids, that
there was not substantial recompense to the
Commonwealth in selling Australian Airlines alone or
selling 49 one hundredths of Qantas alone, and that
the benefits to each company of joining them making
Qantas a more complete carrier with a domestic and
international base substantially revalued, up-valued
the value of the merge entity.
So what will happen now a sale agreement will be
signed tomorrow between Qantas and the Government
under which Qantas will pay $ 400 million to the
Government for 100 per cent of Australia Airlines,
and then subject to the processes of the Australian
Labor Party the Government will then propose to sell
100 per cent of Qantas by a trade sale and a public
float, retaining a golden share for the national
safeguards which we think are appropriate for the
dominant national carrier.
As well as that, the Government will be establishing
an independent Tribunal by legislation, which we 
will introduce shortly, to allocate routes to the
other domestic carrier Qantas. it would have been
in terms of the ' One Nation' statement to the two
domestic carriers Australian and Ansett, did I say
Qantas I meant Ansett. As now the international
routes associated wi-th Australian will be those of
Qantas. Ansett or any other domestic carrier may
apply to the Tribunal for international routes, and
we would require as part of the legislation of the
Tribunal the task of building a competitive
international market for aviation from Australia.
So that would see a second international carrier
established and based in Melbourne.
In all the Government is breaking down another
micro-economic reform barrier to give Australians
cheaper seats, better service, a better
international airlines system, adequate financial
compensation to the Commonwealth and the important
and substantial recapitalisation of
Qantas/ Australian of a very large sum and should
return to the Budget over $ 1 billion.
Again I make this point to you. Whether it be in
the waterfront, in telecommunications, in road
transport, in rail, in aviation, the only party that
has made the micro-economic changes is the
Australian Labor Party this Government.
The last Government, the Government Dr Hewson
advised, signed the two airline agreement in
indecent haste, three weeks before the 1983
election. We had to rely on this Government to
deregulate that system in the late 1980s to now be
able to put us in a position to produce a mature
airline structure for Australia. So not only did
the Coalition not take the moves to make the airline
system better, it actually positively obstructed it
by signing again, after the writs had been issued
for an election, a two airline agreement. So I put
to you, those of you who tend to write us off every
three weeks because we haven't done hand stands,
triple somersaults with pike, broken down fifteen
other micro-economic barriers which no other
Government did in 50 years, that again only this
Government is changing Australia, only this
Government knows how, and only this Government has
got the courage to do it.
J: Prime Minister, how quickly do you expect the Labor
Party to respond to this fait accompli that you've
presented them with?
PM: It's not a fait accompli, but we are using the due
processes of Caucus Committee, Cabinet, Caucus and
then Party considerations and I'll be taking the
issues up with the National Secretary forthwith. 
3: Should there be another special party conference
like there was last year?
PM: Well that's a matter for judgement for us. Can I
just say that any questions you'd like to put to
Ralph who has overseen the assets sales process now
for some time and Bob, who while just now Minister
for Transport and Communications, was Minister for
Aviation for some time and-has been wrestling with
these issues for some time, both of them of course
being entirely material to bringing this matter to a
head.
J: Mr Keating will the funds from this sale be
earmarked in any special way, I think there was a
resolution to that affect, wasn't there, at the 1990
conference?
PM: No, they are not earmarked, but again it would
obviously give the Government more budget
flexibilities than it would otherwise have?
J: Is that billion dollar figure the net figure?
PM: That would be net. Would you chaps like to say
anything?
RW: Just on recapitalisation, the billion dollars plus,
which is referred to in the press statement, is
after recapitalisation of the airlines. So in other
words, that's all to us that the new owners will be
in charge of the recapitalisation of the airlines,
that's all cost to us.
3: Didn't you have a figure written into the forward
estimates already for an estimated sale, price for
the airlines?
RW: No, we had some figures in this year's budget, $ 500
million for assets sales which included the
airlines. That's obviously slipped. Now the amount
that will be in the Budget for next year from asset
sales will obviously be much higher.
J: Isn't this in reality making a virtue of necessity
that the asset sale program can become bogged down,
frozen and this is really a text book case of how
not to privatise. You've been changing policy I
think 4 times now since you started this process.
This is the sort of the inevitable conclusion of a
lot of confusion.
PM: The Sydney Morning Herald can always put the most
negative connotation on the most positive outcome.
If you didn't fly the flag Tom, ( Burton), of the
sell of professional narks, I'd be disappointed in
you. But could I just make the point that we have
through this sought to see which is the best way we 
could get flexibility in policy and at the same time
maximise values. Now we've had these expressions of
interests, you've got to ask people what they think
they'll pay, not what some adviser thinks but what
they'll actually write a cheque for, and then see
what options are available to you. The main thing
is getting the mail through, getting the job done.
This is a substantial and large micro-economic
change. In national political terms it beats the
hell out of frightening old ladies, which is what Dr
Hewson is about with his pamphlets.
3: Prime Minister, it will carry through into-pay
television as well?
PM: We considered that last night, we are going to
consider it again in the Caucus processes over the
next day or so and then take it to the Caucus
probably tomorrow.
J: Are there any changes re some of the other areas
such as foreign ownership, such as local content?
PM: You'll hear about all those at the right moment.
3: What's your assessment of the Caucus' view this
morning Mr Keating, of selling 100 per cent of the
merged entity?
PM: The Labor Party has got a great attachment to the
various Government Business Enterprises it has, but
it also has a mature view about their long run
benefits. Long run benefits for-Australia, and the
long run benefits of them being properly set up.
Qantas has been an undercapitalised business for a
long time it's got 90 per cent debt and 10 per
cent equity. This simple notion that people feel a
warm inner glow about it, but give it no money is
not doing it justice. And if we sit around the
Cabinet table I think Ralph would bear this out
because he and I have sat through all of the Budget
rounds bar one for me over the years but if we
said to any of them look social policy takes second
place to a Qantas recapitalisation, there wouldn't
be one element of the Caucus support it. Now there
may be people fairly dewy-eyed, getting dewy-eyed
about Qantas, everyone who is in that predicament
had there cheque books shut as far as the Government
was concerned, and Qantas they thought could live on
implicit guarantees and debt. And in the end equity
doesn't attract an interest rate and debt does, and
in the lean times you've got to pay the interest
rate.
J: Will the name Qantas be retained?
BC: Yes, by way of the golden share and Tom. Can I just
say this about those policy changes. It's 
absolutely true that there have been policy changes
and you would have to acknowledge that every single
one of those policy changes has enhanced the
aviation environment, there is no question about
that, and the tourist industry. And I have to say
I'm personally delighted with Caucus support this
morning for this latest one because it is going to
further enhance the environment for the travelling
public. I mean, these changes have been painful,
there is no question about that. They've been
difficult to make and a lot of people have felt the
pain from it. They haven't been made for the
benefit of the airlines, they've been made for the
benefit of the national economy and the national
good. Now I might also add this stands in very stark
contrast, and I invite you to have a look at it, at
what's been proposed by the Opposition in what has
now become the most important export earner this
country has got that's tourism, $ 7 billion a year.
We've just provided a number of policy changes that
have substantially improved the results that that
industry is going to get. By contrast, " Fightback"
have proposed an outrageous policy, and it is
outrageous, where they are going to provide
extremely valuable rights for a whole mass of
international carriers with no reciprocal rights
being negotiated for Australian carriers under the
guise of this so-called open skies policy. Now this
Is an outrageous aviation policy when you consider
the value of these assets and how every aviation
nation on this earth negotiates in this part of
bilateral arrangements, but on top of that if that's
not enough to kill of f our aviation industry,
they're going to stick a 15 per cent GST tax on the
best export earner the country's currently got, the
only export industry that is not exempt from this
tax. Now that's a great way for encouraging
Australians to take their holidays overseas and
providing a disincentive for people to come here.
J: The view though you've ridden over party's own
policy how do you explain that to traditional
Labor voters?
PM: No, that's not right. This Government doesn't usurp
the prerogatives of the Labor Party. Now if you go
in my case, when I needed to change the policy in
relation to foreign banks I went to a Labor Party
conference. When we needed to change the policy in
relation to telecommunications we went to a Labor
Party conference, to its procedures, to its
Executive, to its forums. This will be the case
now.
J: Given that fact, Prime Minister, when do you expect
to this process to be complete? 
PM: Well early enough for the sales process to complete
so as to tabulate and collate the proceeds into the
figuring for the 1992-93 Budget.
RW: So the trade sale which has been in place for some
time will go on to the end of this year, it should
be completed by the end of this year for the 49 per
cent, or some part of that 49 per cent, by the end
of this calendar year, and then there will be a
float in the first half of next year of the 51 per
cent, which is not in the trade sale and any part of
the equity in the trade sale, which isn't sold as
part of the trade sale.
J: The next step, Mr Keating, that you go to the
National Executive and determine whether you can bypass
a special conference or you need a special
conference, is that how you now proceed?
PM: We'll open discussions with the National Secretary
and the National Executive.
J: Will the proceeds from this sale be used to reduce
the Budget deficit Mr Keating, or to fund additional
spending?
PM: You're asking me is it to be devoted. We couldn't
say now what the Cabinet's spending priorities will
be. Whatever the proceeds are they will diminish
the budget deficit in the final analysis by that
figure. That's not to say though that the proceeds
themselves, if one were to look at the actual block
of funds, would be devoted exclusively to lowering
the budget deficit, they may not.
J: Mr Keating what would you say to members of the
public who think this Government had a $ 2 1/ 2
billion deficit blow-out a few weeks ago? Now we
have got all this sudden urgency to sell-off the
airlines.
PM: Well, I would say that if they had followed the
debate and the process from the last National
Conference of the Labor Party in late 1990, they
would know that this process has been running at
least since then.
3: But why the sudden urgency? You were talking 70 per
cent on Sunday.
PM: Well the sudden urgency is that the expressions of
interest period has ceased, the indicative bids have
been lodged, the Government has now got to make a
decision about moving to the next stage which is a
due diligence on the part of the bidders of the
assets in question, and then for binding bids to be 
made. I mean, the urgency is the process which is
now at that point.
J: But why did you have 70 per cent on Sunday?
PM: Well that was an option, 70 or 100.
J: Why didn't you annunciate the 100 on Sunday?
PM: I did. I said 70 or maybe more, 100.
J: What's a golden share, and how does it work?
BC: It's a standard provision that's found around the
world in a whole different number of aviation
environments. It is well understood by the business
community now, I mean Malaysian Airlines, Singapore
Airlines, KLN, a whole range of airlines have been
sold. Fundamentally it is a contractual condition
which is placed on the sale by the Government with
whatever conditions attached to it, the Government
determines appropriate to preserve the national
interest provisions. But at the same time, not so
onerous as to depress the price.
J: On the Paye TV issue, are you prepared to stick to
the 45 per cent proposal
PM: Well we have considered this matter last night and
we will consider it today and tomorrow, and I think
then is the appropriate time for me to speak about
that.
3: Senator Collins won't the State of Qantas' business
value be subsumed by the international interests
within the trade sale?
BC: Well that's not possible because for a start, in
terms of foreign interest, we are constrained not
simply by our own rules, but by the I. C. A. O. rules,
as you know, which means that an absolute maximum of
per cent of the airline can be owned by foreign
interest, otherwise it loses its designation as an
Australian national carrier. And by process of a
trade sale, and a public float, I think that
ultimately the lion's share of the airline, in fact,
is going to rest with the public.
PM: Before you continue, we have got question time on at
so we have only got time for a few more.
3: Won't then Qantas lose some routes?
BC: No, in fact, under the proposals that are ancillary
to this, in terms of the Aviation Tribunal
legislation, which Caucus I might add approved this
morning, and it will be introduced into the Senate
this week. All of Qantas' existing entitlements are 
protected, arnd of course they are public assets, arnd
as you know those entitlements are very valuable
assets, as the way it should be. So Qantas doesn't
stand to lose anything by this deal, it in fact
stands to gain considerably.
J: What measures have been put in place to create a
competitive market? You indicated you wanted to try
and grow..
BC: Yes, those matters are layed out very thoroughly and
Tom ( Burton) I am happy to show them to you later,
they are contained in some detail in the
Government's policy statement which is enforceable
under the provisions of legislation. They are the
things that the Tribunal has to have regard to in
making decisions, and it is a pro-competitive set of
criterium that are being used.
J: How can you be sure fares will be cheaper, if you
talk about domestic and international? Can you put
any sort of figure on it?
BC: Well I personally haven't even raised the question
of cheaper airf ares.
3: The Prime Minister has.
BC: Well it will inevitably have the same result, you
can never put a figure on it, that's determined by
the market. And in fact, it was interesting
watching in the early hours of this-morning, the
Chief Executive of American Airlines talking about
the situation that does exist in the deregulated
market where he said that the whole market is
basically hostage to any irresponsible operator. I
mean, these are the down-sides of a deregulated
market, but the up-sides are enormous. And if you
doubt that just have a look at the tourist figures
in what has been a booming market in the face of an
otherwise flat economy. There have been enormous
benefits from domestic deregulation, the same
benefits are going to be delivered by opening up the
international area. But I will just make the
obvious point, that is already a highly competitive
market of course, we are talking about additional
Australian carriers in what is already a very
competitive international market.
J: And the second international carrier will have to be
based in Melbourne?
PM: No, but if it's Ansett it is based in Melbourne, and
Sydney Airport is of only limited size and the
Qantas Jet Base is there, and its headquarters are
there, and it simply couldn't stand physically
another major carrier as a base. 
BC: I might also add while this has been going on we
have of course been advancing negotiations with the
New Zealander's. The New Zealand Minister for
Transport was over here last week for a second round
of negotiations. Those discussions are proceeding
very positively and both Governments are confident
we will be making a joint statement in the near
future about that.
J: What's more likely to be the second international
carrier, Ansett or Air New Zealand?
BC: That is why we are establishing a Tribunal, which
will be a publicly accountable process. So that it
won't be the Government picking winners in this
sense, it will be a process which is open and
accountable.
PM: Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW ON ABC PM WITH MAXINE MCKEW
CANBERRA, 2 JUNE 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Prime Minister thank you for coming in.
PM: Good Maxine.
MM2: How much money, your most optimistic figure, how
much money will a merged _ Qantas Australian, attract
do you think?
PM: I think the net proceeds for the Budget will be
about $ 1 billion, now that is Important and it's
quite important, but I think the most important
thing is that it is the best result for Australian
aviation. That is, Qantas has long lacked the
capacity of operating as a full airline by not
having a domestic carrier, a domestic compacity. It
would have that by the Government'Is decision today
to acquire Australian Airlines, and the Government
will now approa'ch the . Labor Party in its federal
structure for the sale of 100 per cent of the merged
entity. But the synergy, so-called, much over the
years termed, but the benefits and efficiencies that
could arise from the operation of the two companies
is quite substantial and as a result of the change
Qantas will pay the Budget $ 400 million for the
purchase of Australian Airlines which is much more
then we would have been offered at sale.
MM4: I was Just going to ask you that. Has the trade
sale process revealed that Australian by itself
would have attracted very little?
PM: For the reeson that the last couple of years have
been very tad in terms of earnings they have run
losses becauise of the pilot strike in 1990, in 1991
Australian had the problem of the very heavy
discounts from Compass, discounting is still on,
profits are low, and I think probably the price
would have been too low, it would have been selling 
have done another one today in the national
interest.
MM: Just one other question, Prime Minister, if I can
about that $ 1 billion, you have announced ajqt
summit today to look at you~ th unemployment. Would,
for iristance, you consider pouring some of that
money into programs for young people?
PM: Well it may not be the money that comes from there,
but that is certainly a Budgetary option in the
course of the Budget preparation.
MM: To what extent has this course of action been forced
on you by the realities of that $ 9 billion deficit?
PM: Not at all. What's happened to us is that we have
reached a stage in the sale process where we had,
first of all, the exploratory processes, then
indicative bids. The indicative bids have now been
lodged and the Government would have to then embark
on what's called a due diligence of the bidders
looking through the assets and then confirmed bids.
We are at that point of decision, that's what has
brought us here.
MM: But Ralph Willis has been promoting this concept of
a merger for some years. Why has it taken until now
to get to this point?
PM: I don't really believe that Australian and Qantas,
even though Qantas might have wanted Australian, I
am not sure Australian wanted Qantas. I think it
probably does now, and I think that is part of the
reason, but the efficiency gains, the since socalled
synergies, are so apparent that now it is the
obvious and sensible thing to do. And of course
part of this is the Government is now going to
introduce legislation this week to set-up a
Commnission to allocate international routes to a
second carrier, and that carrier in the first
instance will be Ansett Airlines. So we will be
developing an international market from Australia,
so the sole designated carrier will not be Qantas.
In that case it makes sense to have Qantas and
Australian together and have then juxtaposed against
that, Ansett Airlines as a domestic carrier but with
international routes. So it becomes an
international carrier as well. And of course that
will operate from the city of Melbourne.
MM: You said today to your Press Conference that this
had been a painful decision, which would indicate
that if you had a choice you wouldn't be selling the
family silver?
PM: Painful for some, not for me. 
MM: Does the rest of the Party appreciate the synergies
that you are talking about?
PM: I think so. A lot of people in the Labor Party have
had the warm inner glow about Qantas and they can
get dewy-eyed talking about some of these public
authorities, but nobody will put any money into
them. On the Left, the Right, or the Centre, no one
will commit a budgetary dollar to them, because they
always have their social and infrastructure programs
ahead of them. Qantas is 90 per cent debt and
per cent equity, it has limped along with Government
guarantees and not enough capital. And you will get
lots of expressions of interests at Labor Party
Conferences f or it, but no one really cares about
it.
MM: What do you think the mood is beyond the Caucus,
have you any concept of that?
PM: I think a lot of Labor Party members would think we
shouldn't sell these, but if you say to them, well
look we have got high unemployment, we ought to be
looking at labour market programs and other
structural changes in the economy, but look we need
$ 1 billion to recapitalise Australian and Qantas.
Will we put it there? They say no, no. I mean a
lot of people pass a motion at the State Conference
but they wouldn't commit a discretionary dollar to
it. Well we can't take that approach, I mean,
Qantas can't limp along in this way. If we are
going to be part of the Asia-Pacific airline market,
it's got to be set up properly and this is the best
way. And of course by a public float all
Australians get a crack at this. I mean in a sense
its not just Government ownership it's private
ownership by the men and women of Australia.
MM: You are faced at the moment of course with the fact
that your policy takes you beyond the limits of
current party policy, is the most likely resolution
at this stage a postal ballot of all delegates?
PM: I don't know, but due process demands that we have
the Labor Party's authority to go beyond the
conference set limits. And we've done that. We did
that, in the first instance, two years ago when this
was last considered as you say. I mean I did it
when I was Treasurer with foreign banks, when we
took it to the Labor Party Conference here in
Canberra.
MM: What you're saying that the National Executive could
perhaps make a recommendation to the next Special
Conference?
PM: The national organs of the Party have got to decide
how best to handle this, but the Government is not 
trying to side step them. It understands that due
process is important particularly where high policy
is concerned.
MM: Prime Minister just a few more details, would you be
happy for say a single international carrier to buy
the full 35 per cent of voting equity that is
available?
PM: That's a matter, I think, of who the carrier is and
what Qantas would see for itself in that, or whether
it would be advantaged by a couple of carriers.
From a theoretical point of view it wouldn't worry
me. It may well suite Qantas to tie up with a large
European carrier for instance like British Airways
or a regional carrier like Singapore. Whatever can
best advantage it, I think is the important thing.
And of course, with private stock in the company,
when people have got their own dollars on the line
rather than what they see are the quiet dollars of
the Commonwealth, they'll be voting them much more
carefully.
MM: What are the implications of a merger in terms of
retrenchments?
PM: None at this stage because we are not merging the
companies in that sense. We are merging them but in
a technical sense it will be Qantas acquiring the
stock of Australian Airlines. So Australian
Airlines will still trade as Australian Airlines and
operate as a business.
MM: Sure, but what we've already seen though, in say the
telecommunications area with the new AOTC, they will
be looking at a much reduced work force, and that's
the trade of f for a more efficient organisation
isn't it?
PM: But that is already happening with Qantas. Qantas
has already lost three thousand employees just to be
more efficient. You can never stop efficiency
gains. But this is not a pure merger in that sense.
You're seeing now Telecom and OTC put together in a
merger, it's not just simply Telecom owning OTC, but
that is exactly what the situation is here. Qantas
will actually own Australian Airlines, they still
remain two separate entities for the time being.
MM: one question about Ansett, you've already talked
about them as the second international carrier,
surely they will have to sell down their level of
foreign ownership to 35 per cent. At the moment
Rupert Murdoch, a foreigner, has 50 per cent.
PM: No, I think under the Foreign Takeovers Act,
Newslimited is still classified as an Australian 
company because of the level of Australian
ownership.
MM: The proprietor though is not an Australian citizen.
PM: No, but he doesn't own most of the stock. I think
he is now down to 32 or 33 per cent. That is, the
Murdoch interests and even many of those are
Australian, such as his mother, his family. So one
couldn't be certain that's true. Can I say that the
purity squads who live in the broad sheet newspapers
have been alleging the Labor government is sort of
biased in favour of Ansett. They can't say that
now. They can't say that about this position.
MM: Prime Minister, what about the process, I gather
there were some comments in the Caucus this morning
about you're reversal of the usual process, if I can
put it like that going on national television
first to announce the policy then going to Cabinet
and then to Caucus.
PM: Well if one were to go to the Caucus, Caucus
Committees here we all live in the one building,
you live in the same building as the Caucus, you
know members of the Caucus, the Caucus Committees
leak, people know when the meet, there are
discussions later. There is no advantage for the
Government in me going to the Caucus and having a
discussion and that being trafficked around the
corridors.
MM: So is this the way it is going to be in the future?
PM: The Government's advantage is at having been told
Remember this, I made those statements on last
Sunday after weeks of consultation with Bob Collins,
Ralph Willis, before that when Graham Richardson was
in his ministerial chair.
MM: Would you still have taken the same tack had Graham
Richardson still been Minister?
PM: Again, Graham and I never got down to some of the
details which we have now.
MM: Except you say you had been working on this for
weeks, and a couple of weeks ago Graham Richardson
was still the Minister.
PM: Yes, but in terms of airline policy Bob Collins had
it as Minister for Aviation even though Graham was a
portfolio minister. Graham basically had pay
television and I really hadn't settled that with
him. But Ralph Willis, Bob Collins, myself, John
Dawkins and our Departments have been discussing
this now for some weeks so I made my statements on
Sunday after a long process of discussion. We then 
took it to the Caucus Committee, then to the Cabinet
and then to the full Caucus and beyond that to the
Labor Party. So due process will be observed.
MM: And in doing so though, you challenged the Party
haven't you, you've taken it to the brink and said
look you have just got to face these realities?
PM: We are the custodians of Labor's fortunes and the
public purse for the moment, and you'Ive got to do
what you think is right by the institutions, and
also by public policy, and also do it with a Labor
heart. But it doesn't mean that you can change
these things without rolling the dice. I mean I
don't ever mind rolling the dice.
MM2: If you don't mind rolling the dice it does raise the
question, I suppose, of why you selectively
challenge. I mean you were prepared to challenge on
big policy issues like this, why though weren't you
prepared to say, intervene in the ministerial
process last week?
PM: Because I just don't think it was proper.
MM: Do you think we now have the best system, the
Government has the best system for selecting the
best talent for the Ministry?
PM: There's not much point in me debating it, it's not a
point that I want to be wasting time on. The fact
is I've got more important things to expend my
energies on than running a selection system from my
office.
MM: But it's a question of the best team to run the
country, what could be more important than that?
PM: The best people I believe that were on offer when
this Government came was selected to be in Cabinet
and the Ministry and there has been a lot of change
since. There's only nine of the twenty seven
original ministers from 1983 now there.
MM: Are you really saying you wouldn't prefer to have
Senator Bob McMullan in the Ministry?
PM: There is no point in me debating personalities,
factions, I know the ABC loves these things and so
does the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age and all
these navel gazers good on them.
MM: Well finally Prime Minister, you expressed
frustration yet again today with the Opposition for
not asking any questions about either aviation or
communications, but surely they are going to pursue
this course until you agree to either a judicial
inquiry which is what has been passed 
PM: Why should I take any notice of them. Richardson
has done nothing improper, but becaus6eewasunguardedly
associated with this person and we knew
this would go on, he resigned. What moral basis
does the Opposition have to pursue this and what
moral basis do journalists have in pursuing it for
the Opposition? Now the truth is John Hewson has no
views, he's got a GST tax. What the last two days
have shown in Question Time we've had the National
Accounts out today which shows the economy in
recovery now for the third quarter, great news for
Australians, low inflation, low current account
deficit, higher profits. Not one question, not one
question about aviation, not on question about
telecommunications, not one question about technical
and further education, all the issues of the week.
MM: Well they're not playing to your agenda they're
playing their own.
PM: Yes, but they are playing to the low grade agenda.
MM: And that's surely a legitimate political strategy.
PM: As long as people understand they're playing to the
base agenda. It's just another version of ' Reds
under beds', ' The Chinese coming to get us in their
sampans', old Senator Currack's ' Red arrows from
China' when he used to run the party, I mean it's
the same stuff. These people are always bereft of
any good instincts in public policy or the public
good.
MM: Prime Minister, it maybe a base agenda but surely
politically it is going to continue to dog you until
there is some sort of agreement to either a Senate
or judicial enquiry?
PM: Why should it?
MM: Because as we saw today, and as we saw yesterday in
the Senate and in the House of Representatives,
question after question.
PM: If they persist, regardless of any moral basis for
the questions we should then say oh well this is
going to persist therefore we should let the
Opposition have an enquiry. Look, we'll stand them
right up on this and you shouldn't be helping them,
nobody should be helping them. The issue has
nothing going for it and the public are entitled to
high policy, good policy and they can see Dr Hewson
for what he's worth a shallow character who has
drifted into politics from a merchant bank and
outside of a computer driven model developed by some
accountancy firm with a GST what has he got to say
about trade training, young people, about TAFE, 
about transport, about infrastructure nothing,
what is it? He is now telling us now we should not
let unions negotiate with employers. The Burnie
dispute is what we would see across the whole
country, the country lit up in one dispute after
another under the industrial relations policy he
has. He wants to explode the wage system and
inflation rate with a crazy industrial relations
policy while introducing a GST and what's his
literature talking about frightening old ladies by
saying people are going to hand hand-guns to them,
putting pamphlets in letter boxes saying you're not
going to be safe unless there is a GST. How is the
GST on your Weetbix going to stop someone marching
through your front door?
MM: Prime Minister, we'll have to end it there. Thank
you very much for joining us this evening.
PM: Thank you.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 55/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AND THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS, THE
HON SENATOR BOB COLLINS MP
PAY TV
The Government has opened the way for a competitive new
industry in subscription broadcasting.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Transport and
Communications, Senator Bob Collins, today announced a
package of legislation which will enable a diverse range
of operators, and technologies to develop programming and
programming services for Australians.
There will be no exclusivity attached to programming and
all licences will be able to compete fully.
The Government has decided to allow from the-outset the
widest possible range of services using a variety of
technologies, including satellite, cable and microwave,
Senator Collins said.
Over the next few years, the establishment of Pay TV
should see some 4000 new jobs created. Australian
manufacturing and service industries will directly
benefit. Australian content rules will ensure the film and
television production industries gain a new outlet for
creative programming.
All satellite subscription television licensees will be
required to spend at least 10 per cent of their annual
programming expenditure on any predominantly drama
channel, such as a movie channel, on new Australian drama
programs.
A four-transponder satellite service is expected to be
available within two years, delivered by an Optus
satellite. 
The Government will use a competitive, price-based
process later this year to allocate a licence for this
service. Licences to use the other two available Pay TV
transponders will be sold individually within one year of
the sale of the first licence.
A year's breathing space on other satellite services
gives the multi-channel operator a chance to establish
itself in the marketplace.
A number of ownership conditions will apply to the fourtransponder
service which will ensure the emergence of a
new force in the Australian broadcasting industry.
There will be no free-to-air television equity allowed.
Telecommunications carriers and large newspaper groups
will also be excluded.
Foreign ownership will be restricted to 35% aggregate
with a 20% limit on any individual.
Licensees operating on the fifth and sixth transponders
will also be subject to the 20/ 35% foreign equity
constraint. However, the networks, the national broadcasters such as
the ABC and telecommunications carriers such as AOTC will
be able to bid without restriction.
No one will be able to control more than one satellite
licence. This will mean that the licensees of the fifth and sixth
transponders will be in a position to compete sensibly
with the initial licensee and be in a position to develop
cable technology as it becomes available.
To ensure that the ABC can participate in the bidding,
the Government is willing to fund part of its equity
commitment in any consortia. The Commonwealth will do
this only when it is satisfied with the overall level of
Commonwealth liability involved.
The Government has also agreed to investigate ways of
improving and expanding free-to-air services in regional
and remote areas where early access to Pay TV will be
difficult. CANBERRA 3 June 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH MAXINE MCKEW ON ABC PM
CANBERRA, 3 JUNE 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MM4: Mr Keating David Hill obviously feels that you
effectively excluded the ABC..
PM: Well we haven't. We have explicitly included them
in the fifth and sixth transponders.
MM: But they are out of one to four?
PM: Well they are out of one to four, because I think
everybody is tired of the old faded and jaded
players, they want some new entrants in the
Australian media. That's what the Caucus wanted,
they wanted a new media player who has not had its
antecedents in the newspapers, or an existing
television networks, but a new set of players. And
the arrangement the Government has now introduced,
or will be introducing, is for the first four
transponders, we'll see in a new medium of media, a
new set of players.
MM: Mr Keating, you weren't talking about faded, jaded
players on Sunday when you said that they could have
a 45 per cent level of ownership in the first four
channels. What has made you change your mind?
PM: Well nothing. What I have done, Mr Hill said that I
had somersaulted, yes I have somersaulted upwards, I
have taken 45 per cent higher to infinity.
MM: That's one way of looking at it.
PM: Well it is the only way of looking at it. 45 per
cent has now become 100. 
MM: But two days ago you were quite specific, 45 per
cent when the Caucus hadn't been even imagining
that, they talked you down, did they not, to 35 per
cent yesterday.
PM: We have all got to play the game in whatever field
of endeavour we are in, in these'sorts of issues, in
organising our bargaining positions. Now, I was
quite prepared, frankly who is going to be in a
network, in a four transponder system, probably with
a sunk cost of $ 4 500 million for 15 per cent
equity. That was 45 overall for the networks,
individually, who is going to be in it, who would
bother taking on the management?
MM: Well fine, I mean you changed your mind, you were
talking about new players for five and six on
Sunday.
PM: No, no, I have changed my mind.
MM: Now you have twisted that around.
PM: Yes for a superior outcome. A superior outcome,
because what we have got now is the best of all
worlds, we can have satellite and plastic dish
technology for the four, let's call it the
entertainment segment, but we can go to the
sophisticated fibre optic and other sophisticated
technologies on five and six. So Australia gets the
best of all worlds instead of closing of f. David
called it exclusivity, he thought it was a wise
course. Well the beneficiaries of regulation always
say regulation is wise, but that would have closed
off to Australia the higher technology of fibre
optics and MDS in favour of plastic dishes and
satellites for a decade. I was never prepared as
Prime Minister to shut that technology of f.
MM: Alright, does it mean that one to four stuck with
the old inferior technology?
PM: No, it stuck with a limited technology, but an
immediately applicable technology.
MM: But does that mean then it will be a less viable
option for those people who are interested in
channels one to four?
MM: No, no not in the things that they want to do with
it. That's blockbuster movies, sport, news. But
five and six can get into interactive-services
that is taking your banking to your house.
MM: That's a long way off isn't it?
PM: No, no. 
MM: 1 People are saying that that sort of technology is
say 15 years away?
PM: No, no it is only as far off as the cable under the
fence, under the front fence, and if somebody can
af ford to do it on the basis of an entertainment
dimension, as well as then going beyond interactive
services like banking, like buying your household
goods and what have you, or the capacity for fibre
to put many more channels into a house for
educational channels, or the arts, or a voice for
the trade unions or whatever it might be, they are
in the higher orders of much greater capital
intensification because the cost of wiring up the
capital cities is probably $ 3 5 billion. So the
channels five to six can be a very high cost option,
or if the ABC for instance were to be successful in
bidding for either 100 per cent of, or part there
of, of transponders five or six, it can find itself
in a very advantageous position in the media.
MM: Well you are making $ 12.5 million available, but
David Hill would argue that they are not in the race
with Kerry Packer, surely having the.-foot in the
door, with say all of channel five or channel six.
PM: Yes but David speaks before he understands the
policy. Packer or any of them can't bid for five
and six, only for one of the two of them. So if the
ABC bids for one, for instance, it may be the one
that one of the other networks are bidding for which
leaves another one to be open to be capable of being
bidded. Do you understand?
MM2: Well, yes, but you surely haven't introduced that
many new players at the moment, as you say Kerry
Packer could have either five or six, he has already
got to free to air, and he will have the five or
six, which as you say is the superior technology.
That's greater concentration isn't it?
PM: No, no. How could you call it greater
concentration, we are going to have four channels
which is going to have no current media operater in
it.
MM: OK, well David Hill's further point there is. to say
that will be dominated by the Americans?
PM: OK Maxine, look I know, let me say this. The game
has moved to fast for David today, I mean he is
having trouble catching up with the detail of this.
I don't mind noisy, voluble quango leaders good
on them. But let's not think there is any
revolution out there for the ABC having 15 per cent
of a satellite Pay television entertainment
operation. I mean there is no great revolution in
that. Whereas in five and six there is a capacity 
4
for real innovation, clever technology, and for
thoughtful people. And that's what the ABC should
do now get the thinking cap on and get the
sticking plaster out and come up with a policy, and
then maybe the ABC will realise that the Government
has done it a favour in giving it a chance it
basically didn't have to give it. Under the ABC's
national charter there is no cause why the
Government needed to be persuaded that the ABC had
any role in Pay television. We have given it the
benefit of the doubt.
MM: Alright. Who are the new bidders do you think
outside the current players, who are the new bidders
who will be interested in channels one to four?
PM: Well I think, obviously the people who run the
picture theatres, you know the Village Roadshow type
companies, people in radio, suppliers of product.
MM: They won't be put of f do you think by the lack of
exclusivity?
PM: No, I mean it's a great opportunity for them, they
have removed the other strong bidders, the networks,
they're gone, we have taken them away.
MM: And there's no chance you would increase the level
of foreign ownership if say the level of Australian
interest was less then you expect? You wouldn't go
beyond that 35 per cent?
PM: No, that's 20 for any single interest and 35 over
all. So there is no worry about it being spooked by
foreigners, I mean you know.
MM: Well it's just that the Democrats already fear that
the next step, maybe we will have to have more
foreign ownership?
PM: Well I mean, David Hill I am sure would like people
to believe the ABC is enlightened, but what it really
wants is a home town clubby decision where there are no
foreigners and they can sit under a bit of regulation and
find themselves a niche market provided by the
Government. Well things are just not that easy in 1992.
MM: Prime Minister thank you very much indeed.
PM: Thank you.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
INTERVIEW WITH STAN GRANT ' REAL LIFE', 3 JUNE 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
SG: Prime Minister, welcome.
PM: Thank you Stan.
SG: John Howard thrown out of Parliament today, but
isn't-hiiessentially right, that politicians should
stay out of the APPM issue?
PM: He got thrown out for being duplicitous. He was
telling us that we should not be involved in an
industrial dispute while he was around the back door
talking to the owners of the business to APPM.
This is the sort of industrial mayhem that Dr Hewson
and Mr Howard would give us if there industrial
relations policy were to be the policy of the
country. That is, the ' battle for Burnie', as it
has been called, would be a feature of the
Australian landscape.
SG: But you could hardly say the policy at the moment is
working. I mean the Industrial Relations Commission
ordered the workers back and that's been ignored.
PM: By the company doing Hewson and Howard's bidding in
terms of their policy. This has been the quietest
period in industrial relations probably in 20 years.
Industria] di-pu-tes aie--a-fraction of what they were
in the early 1980s and the Accord model, the
consensus model has worked like a charm. These
silly fellows want to wreck it all by refusing
unions the right to talk to employers, only an
ordinary worker they say can talk to the employer.
What chance has one working person got with an
employer? None.
SG: It doesn't help Prime Minister does it if your own
Minister, PeterCook, starts talking about blood on
the streets tSouli7 dBoes it?
PM: Well they have got picket lines, it's all because of
this confrontationist approach. The truth is what's
Dr Hewson got to present the Australian public with?
A GST tax a 15 per cent tax, on their goods and
services, their food and clothing and an industrial 
relations policy which cancels federal awards,
knocks of f their holiday pay, cuts their rates of
pay and conditions and the only recourse they have
is that they individually can negotiate with the
company, not the union. This is what APPM is about.
SG: On another issue Prime Minister, your failure to
lodge a company fax return, a company return in
time, that's not ideal is it? Shouldn't we expect a
bit more from the Prime Minister?
PM: Well that's right. It's a company information
return and they should be on time. But as I made
the point today Dr Hewson again, who has promised us
supposedly a higher order politics in a day when the
Government has just revolutionised television in
this country and yesterday revolutioniseid the
airlines system, he spent the night having a
S9enator, senator Baume, up talking about my company
return. And what did I find today? That Dr
Hewson's company return was late for three
consecutive years and so was Mr Reith's.
SG: You're talking about your moves in policy though
Sir, but today you were not talking about policy,
you were more interested in attacking the man.
PM: Come on you weren't there. The first question
during Question Time I announced the Government's
new revolutionary television policy to allow Pay TV,
to allow all Australians a chance to pay andwia-tch
blockbuster movies and sport, Hollywood and world
movies the moment they are released on television.
That change was announced today at Question Time and
what did I do I got a question from Mr Peacock for
Dr Hewson asking me about my company return and the
questioner, Dr Hewson, has actually not put his in
for three consecutive years.
SG: Yes, but two wrongs don't make a right.
PM: No, but the duplicity of him, the double standards,
and the conceit of it is he has Senator Baume
raising this lousy issue in the Senate last night,
he has Mr Peacock do his dirty work today and what
we find is on the very topic he's asking me his
returns have been late for three years. Meanwhile,
what was I doing last night? Putting together a new
Pay TV policy for Australia.
SG: On that issue of Pay TV, you announced it on Sunday,
today there has been a big change to the policy that
you announced on Sunday, making policy on the run is
that the right sort
PM: No, come on Stan. This is an area where there's
been a policy mess for twenty years. What we saw
today is a policy where we'll have a new entrant 
into the media of Australia in Pay TV who does not
belong to the newspaper groups, the television
groups or the telecommunications group.
SG: But clearly what you outlined on the weekend has
been changed today.
PM: It has changed today, but today is better. What I
outlined on the weekend was a way where the
television networks were to be included in the first
round of the Pay TV satellite transmission company.
It's much better with them out of it and them having
the option of going 100 per cent into a network of
their own, and that's what we came up with today.
SG: The image here though Mr Keating, over the last
couple of weeks you must have been squirming as you
saw the Marshall Islands affair, Ros Kelly signing
something that she hadn't even read.
PM: We had a couple of bad weeks, but again look at the
Government ' s recovery. Look at the vast change in
airlines yesterday. Qgantas acquiring Australian
Airlines and it being sol-d to the publric. Ansett
becoming a duel domestic and international carrier,
a total revolution in Australian air travel.
SG: So as far as your concerned there wasn't so much
damage done over the last couple of weeks, it seemed
to be going from one bungle to the next.
PM: You know the policy here, the dogs, may bark, but the
caravan moves on and the caravan moved on to a
revolution in air travel and, really, a revolution
in television. I mean we've adopted today a policy
which will allow fibre optic cable, cable television
as well as satellite pay television, to be
distributed to the people of Australia. That will
mean that Australians over time, will not only be
able to see blockbuster movies at home, sport, news,
but as well as that they will be able to operate the
system back. They will be able to deal with their
bank at home, they will be able to order their
shopping from home, they'll be able to get
information through the fibre optic cable. All of
those technological possibilities were opened up
today in this policy while reserving for the
satellite pay television, a system to give
Australians good entertainment without having the
networks involved.
SG: Mr Keating, just finally, the polls, is the gap too
great?
PM: No, not at all. You'll notice also yesterday Stan,
again on the substance, the National Accounts came
out. The economy has now been growing for three
consecutive quarters. 
SG: Sure, but it's a matter isn't it of getting that
across to the people. Now the polls.
PM: Yes, but they see the news. Don't underestimate
them, they see the news, they hear programs like
this, they know the economy is back into recovery.
SG: And you see the polls.
PM: And as that changes it will change the political
perception. As Dr Hewson is sort of playing the man
and not the ball, taking our political system down
to worry about company returns and the rest instead
of worrying about the big issues like technical and
further education, like television, like airlines,
like the economy, as he traffics in that low order
politics you'll see the polls switch around.
SG: Prime Minister, it hardly seems like you to be
complaining about playing the man?
PM: Well who asked me today the lousy, dirty question?
Mr Peacock.
SG: Who called Dr Hewson a fraud and a cheat?
PM: I did. Do you know why? Because he was telling
Australians in the House of Representatives that
politicians shouldn't be in an industrial dispute
when he's been talking to them privately. What else
would you call him?
SG: So as far as your concerned you're prepared to get
out of the gutter?
PM: That's not the gutter. Use your sense Stan, that's
not the gutter. When a major political leader says
to its constituency, the public, we believe that the
political party shouldn't be involved in this
dispute and yet we catch them having dealt with the
principles of the APPM company in secret, don't you
think that is sort of double standard and duplicity
should be referred to by me? Of course it should.
That's not the gutter, that's just simply making
clear. But who asked the lousy personal question,
as always the Liberal Party. In this case Dr
Hewson didn't have the decency to do it himself, he
had Mr Peacock do it. And then what do I find on
the very same issue he hasn't put his company
returns in for three years, well.
SG: OK Prime Minister we'll leave it there. Thank you
very much for your time.
PM: Good Stan.
ENDS 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, 2UE, 4 JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
JL: I think it might have been weary.
PM: Well we had a week of Parliament and then I had a 7
o'clock breakfast for the Olympic Committee on
Friday, and a lunch time speech to the Tourism Task
Force and a speech at 3 o'clock for the TWU, and
then at 6 o'clock at Parliament House.
JL: You are a stop out aren't you?
PM: Well I can't stay away from it.
JL: I didn't know you were a big party goer like that.
PM: That was just a fund raiser, but by the time Friday
night was over I was just about pooped, and then I
had all this policy stuff which I talked about on
the weekend and which we done this week.
JL: Listen, you realise that the object of this
interview has got nothing to do with the important
running and operation of Australia, it's simply to
let these half-wit journalists know that you and I
are still talking to each other.
PM: We are certainly doing that. Yes, the last time I
had a bit of tucker with you was after that
Balmain/ Canterbury game.
JL: Yes, didn't I do you a favour that night? I
introduced you to Tim Storrier.
PM: You did too and he gave me his tie.
JL: He gave you more than that. He told you how to run
the country.
PM: I know, Yes that's right. I used his tie, but it
camne up so bright green, when I saw the TV play-back 
k
2
I thought well that's got to be the last time I use
it.
JL: It's been an amazing few days in Canberra, you must
have made a conscience decision to gain the
initiative?
PM: I had all these things on the go. It's just that we
had all these problems in the Senate a few weeks
ago, but the policy things we had like the
reconstruction of the airlines, that was the merging
of Qantas and -Australian and its sale, the
establishment of a commission to award routes to
another carrier -in this case it will be, amongst
others, Ansett -to build a proper airline system.
And then pay television was something we had on
under debate. During that week you talked about, we
had Parliament sitting and then that busy Friday, I
had all this stuff in the night you see. So we were
already to do it. So I said on Oakes' program on
the weekend this is what we're going to do, and then
this week we've done it.
JL: Yes, obviously you didn't consider it a risk. I
know you like to take the odd one, but you didn't
consider it a big risk to announce it on television
before you talked to Cabinet or Caucus?
PM: It's because we had such extensive ministerial
discussions about these things. None of us can take
it on ourselves and just say we are going this way
or that way. We'd worked all these options up. And
even so, like anybody else if you want to say
something early you've always got to take the risk
of someone not agreeing. But the fact is, the
Cabinet agreed to this and the Caucus. But the
Caucus didn't agree easily and on television we came
to a very good solution in the end one which will
be great for Australian consumers of entertainment,
that's movies, sport, news, and good for the
technology as well.
JL: The airline thing is pretty important and when you
say you've had it on the boil for a while, it hasn't
been there all that long, and I was talking to some
people early this morning, the reaction I get
incidentally from people in the airline industry
that it's absolutely fantastic. But they were
saying to me this morning six months ago Qantas
couldn't even buy one share in Australian that's
how tied up they were. So how were you able to turn
it around so quickly?
PM: We came to the conclusion that selling Australian on
a stand alone basis and selling 49 per cent of
Qantas meant that the Commonwealth of Australia, the
public purse basically was treated pretty poorly
there, we just couldn't get the good prices for 
them. But put together the synergies so called, the
operating efficiency gains of the, two companies
running together were quite profound. So Qantas
will now pay the budget $ 400 million for Australian
Airlines and we will float Qantas to the people, and
it will be owned just as we did the Commonwealth
Bank. Remember I did the Commonwealth Bank float?
JL: Yes.
PM: And the shares there?
JL: Yes.
PM: That was one of the most successful floats in our
history. The largest float in Australian history
and the most successful.
JL: How will the average Australian benefit from this
Qantas deal?
PM: For a start Qantas becomes a real airline with a
domestic base and an international base rather than
just a ring fence around Australia so it drops
people at Mascot or Melbourne and it can't fly
domestic routes. That's all finished. Australian
will now be a domestic route flyer and it will than
have that connection to Qantas. And what will
probably happen in the sale process, one of the
world airlines like British Airways or maybe
Singapore, will also buy a piece of the equity so
we'll get an international ' set of linkages out of
it. So you'll be able to go from Wagga to Sydney,
from Sydney to where ever and then link up with BA
or Singapore or whoever bids for Qantas. So Qantas
is going to end up now a major regional carrier and
a world player.
JL: How did you manage to convince those funny fellows
in the Left, and you've got a few funny fellows in
the Left, that this was a right and proper thing to
do and the way a Labor Party should behave?
PM: We are a very plural show John, we're a very plural
outfit. I think they think that we were going to
basically receive very low prices for them, no one
is going to pay you much for 49 per cent of the
company. Australian, you remember, had two bad
years of profit. It had the pilot strike the year
before last and then last year it had the heavy
Compass discounts which cut its profits into loss.
So anyone who could see the blue sky, the upside in
Australian, could see a higher price some years out.
But right now you wouldn't get a high price for it.
But putting the two together the value to Qantas was
quite profound. The other thing is, Ansett which
has been a domestic carrier will now be able to
apply to this new air routes Tribunal, and it will 
4
have international routes awarded to it. So we'll
end up with two carriers, two international carriers
not just one. So there will be competition in
international as well as domestic and as well as
that trans Tasman. You will be able to hop on at a
domestic terminal in Sydney and hop off at a
domestic terminal in New Zealand.
JL: Yes all these are very positive things that have all
happened very quickly and I mean it has been an
extraordinary few days. It's been more than a break
through it's been a crash through and you've
convinced people that I would have thought would
have taken a lot of convincing to do things that you
believe are going to be better for Australia. But
it all comes out of a pretty bad period doesn't it?
PM: We got caught up with this problem in the Senate and
Senator Richardson. Look, Richo did nothing
improper. He was unguarded with somebody who was
prepared to prey upon his best instincts, put it
that way. But you see this sort of kangaroo court
routine they do in the Senate these days means it
just gets dragged out, so Richardson said better for
the Government I go. So we put that behind us. But
understand this John, all of this was going on while
all of that was on. It'Is not as if the Government
had stopped, the thing is the Government was going
Or&amp;. The main point is this, there's been more change
since I did the ' One Nation' statement the
rebuilding of the railway system, it's now going on;
the total rnvto-nof the airlines; now our
discussions with the States to rebuild and make a
new technical and further education system for our.
kids. K
JL: Yes, I want to talk to you about that because I
think that's a great idea and obviously it is
required. When you think that there are 50,000 kids
who had the qualifications to get into university
and couldn't because there wasn't room, I mean
that ' s disgraceful.
PM: You see there's more changes in that package than
there was in 15 years of Liberal governments. I
used to sit here for years and nothing like this
would happen. Just on airlines, remember this the
former Liberal goverrnent signed the two airline
agreement, the cosy high fare, high priced two
airline agreement after the writs had been issued
three weeks before the 1983 election and it was
binding on us for 8 years.
JL: Yes, but tell me this why would they have done
that? What was in it for them? 
PM: Just a home town decision, just playing to their
mates. One of their mates in those days was Ansett
Airlines.
JL: I see, so really it was jobs for the boys on a grand
scale.
PM: Yes, these guys never broke through the micro
changes. They never did the right things for the
airlined, never did the right things in
telecommunications, never did the right things in
fiscal policy, never tried to internationalise
Australia, sat there like slugs for years. We come
along and in the last 8 years we've totally changed
Australia and we internationalised the place. Now
with low inflation, the lowest inflation rate in
years, and the lowest interest rates.
JL: Just back to the Graham Richardson thing, because
you know my thoughts on that subject. it must be
unbelievably aggravating to have to allow something
like that to happen because of the niggling in the
Senate which really was based on very little, and
proved very little except that I believe as you
believe that he's done nothing untoward. You can't
afford to waste fellows like that can you? Whether
you like him or dislike him, or whether or vote
Labor or whether you vote Liberal, you can't afford
to do without fellows like that.
PM: No, because you see the public system is not
producing enough people of decision making quality,
people who will break the system through. Now in
the Labor Party I think it is true we've been
finding the people, but it's certainly not true in
the Coalition. And the whole political system know
this because the people in it cop so much and wear
so much, so that a lot of the talented people won't
go into public life. The ones that are there having
a go just cop it in the neck all the time.
JL: Ok, well what happens to a bloke like Graham
Richardson? He can't be lost from public life.
PM: No he'll stay as a Sentor. If we win the next
election he'll probably bob up again.
JL: As a Minister?
PM: As a Minister yes.
JL: Would you put him back where he was? He was good.
PM: We'll have to see then where all the positions are,
but he liked the job and he was good at it. He had
the work well in hand at the time he left. Bob
Collins has now taken it up and doing a good job
with it. He was his assistant Minister anyway, and 
had aviation for a number of years, and was
representing Kim Beazley in the Senate when Kim had
telecommunications. Bob was across both areas and
was able to take the job quickly.
JL: The job is really too big, both areas?
PM: It is a bit too big, it was part of the ministerial
changes of about three/ four years ago. But it's
become a huge micro-economic reform department and
actually it works well as a micro-reform department.
I've now come to the view that actually if we did
separate them we'd end up with two more conservative
departments than we have in, I think, a department
which is prepared to reform things.
JL: Ok, but when Senator Richardson returns as a
Minister, if you're re-elected, it wouldn't be
unlikely that he'd go back where he was?
PM: It wouldn't be unlikely no. It wouldn't be
impossible. I don't know what he'd like to do. He
might like to do something else. But again, let's
wait and see what happens, he may not exercise that
option.
JL: Yes, you might make him Minister for Sport.
PM: Well.
JL: It's about time we had one.
PM: He might decide being a private member is much nicer
than being a minister. I wouldn't be surprised if
he camne to that conclusion.
JL: I don't know, there are a few advantages.
PM: I had six months on the grass and I enjoyed every
minute of it.
JL: Yes, but a bit tough on the house keeping isn't it?
PM: It's a bit weighty on the house keeping.
JL: When are we really going to get a Minister for Sport
who understands sport? When we had John Brown there
it was fantastic and sport was up high and talked
about and enthused about, that's not happening now.
PM: I don't know. The people going to the Olympics -will
go of f with a $ 10 million budget. Ten years ago
when they went to the Olympics Malcolm Fraser gave
them $ 800,000. So $ 800,000 to S10 million. We're
spending $ 68 million a year on sport this year, in
1983 that was about $ 6 million. So from a
government's point of view we are still pouring a
lot into sport. 
JL: Yes, but it's a piddling amount when you think of
the amount you take out in tobacco levies which you
now won't let sponsor sport, and they were doing a
wonderful job sponsoring sport.
PM: Yes, but they were also doing a wonderful job
teaching young kids to smoke, have a drag on a fag,
and that wasn't doing anyone any good either.
JL: No, but you see the evidence in that area is totally
incorrect
PM: You are a beaver on this one.
JL: I mean, you know, it's the opportunists who get in
the ear of people like Roslyn Joan and tell her that
it's naughty to smoke c~ aetss she hangs her
hat on that one, only tell her half of the figures.
The fact Is that those brands that were involved in
sport do sell a lot of cigarettes, but cigarette
increase in older people is greater and they're
buying those brands not young kids, that's all
nonsense.
PM: Well that's not what the data says.
JL: Yes it is. You only see half the data, she only
shows you half the data.
PM: You should sign a nomination form. We could make
you Minister for Sport, in the game.
JL: OK, I thought you might put me in charge of the
Broadcasting Tribunal.
PM: Well Roslyn is flying down to Rio, you know it's
like that old Fred Astaire film ' Flying Down to
Rio'. I don't know whether she'll be tripping the
light fantastic there or not.
JL: Well I don't know. I think a lot of people wouldn't
mind seeing her jump on the wing of an aeroplane.
Remember in ' Flying Down to Rio' when they all stood
on the wing of the aeroplane?
PM: That's right, yes.
JL: Fantastic. Back to more important things, she does
take $ 3 billion out of the revenue excise for
tobacco, so what goes back into sport, really by
comparison, is not a great amount.
PM: Can I just say though, excise revenues the
Commonwealth has got to make up it's revenue whether
it's by income tax, company tax, excises, petrol,
crude oil, whatever. It doesn't mean where it comes
is where it goes back, it never did. That's called 
hypothocation, we've never had that. And John until
the Labor Party came along the sports budgets were
no work. I mean everyone in professional sports
knows that.
JL: I agree with that, but we had a good fellow set that
up, John Brown, he sadly got lost to public life as
well. And you see that's the point that people
don't understand. It's the same with you. Like you
or dislike like, vote f or you or not vote for you
the f act is that you'Ire there and all the Australian
people should do their best to get behind you
because you are the Government.
PM: Well at least we try and make things happen, we
don't sit down here on our hands. Australians, I'm
not sure they understand that in the last decade
there has been more change than the previous
years, in terms of the way Australia will function
in the long run. We have set Australia up now as a
low inflation society. Two days ago the Current
Account deficit came out, it's 2 and 3/ 4 per cent of
GDP, it's down to the debt stabilisation point from
6. We are winning now dramatically the current
account battle, we've won the inflation battle.
These were the two scourges on Australia. Sure,
we've had the pain of the recession to go with it,
part of it. But it wasn't just the recession that
pulled inflation down because after the last
recession inflation was 10.5 per cent in early 1983.
After this recession it's 1.5, mainly because of the
Accord and the tax cuts of 1988/ 89 and the wage
outcomes.
JL: Yes, but what about the huge problem of unemployment
particularly with youth?
PM: That's exactly right and I addressed myself to that
subject a day or so ago, and that's why technical
and further education is important. Let me just
give you a little picture about education and kids
and participation. In 1983 John, 3 kids in
completed secondary school. Now how in the hell can
we hope to be a technologically advanced country,
how could you say that you cared for your kids if 3
in 10 only completed secondary school? That's now
nearly 8 in 10 as a * result of this Governments
policies. Forty per cent of those kids then get
into university places.
JL: Yes and can I say this to you, there will be many
who will say, and quite correctly, that a lot of
kids are now staying on longer at school because
they are absolutely aware of the fact that if they
were to leave they wouldn't get a job anyway.
PM: That may be true, that may in part be true, but the
thing is they'll come out with qualifications and 
find jobs which are not what John Howard calls dead
end jobs, jobs with low skills.
JL: But how can they do that if 50,000 of them can't get
an education when they are entitled to it by their
qualifications?
PM: Look, let me just say this about tertiary educatin_
about the universitiep. Since 1985 the Government
has added 50 per cent of places to universities.
We've added 120,000 places or the equivalent of 12
universities. Twelve universities with a campus
size of 10,000. That's just a phenomenal rate of
growth in tertiary places. For a country like
ourselves
JL: But it's obviously not enough. I mean you were
there for eight years before?
PM: No, this is from 1985. We were there for two years
before. These other characters who have proceeded
us, 3 kids in 10 completed secondary school. You
can't go to university if you can't even get through
school.
JL: No, but even if these kids are completing secondary
school they still can't get into university.
PM: I'm just saying we added 50 per cent of places. We
put 120,000 extra places into universities and the
proportion of Australian kids going to universities
is now about the average or better than the average
of the OECD. We are at the stage now where our
proportion of the school leaving population going to
university is about right. The problem is TAFE.
The problem is we've got 60 per cent of kids
cascading out of high school, and if the don't go
into technical and further education they go into
sort of milk bars or shopping mall plazas or railway
stations or something.
JL: I suppose somebody has got to do it.
PM: I'm not saying the jobs, I'm saying they just hang
about. The fact is we have an immature technical
and further vocational educational system, that is
people who want to do basic courses to find jobs.
And we're not catering for it, and that's why in the
' One Nation' statement and now Kim Beazley is now
negotiating with the States to develop a mature
technical and further education system. So we end
up like countries like Germany where most kids go
into TAFE and the people who run the big German
companies BMW, Mercedes, Seimens, come out of their
vocational education system, they are not coming out
of universities. The people who actually run those
shows come out of the vocational education area. 
JL: Ok, well that's what's got to be rectified here
obviously, but the cry is, and why not, I mean you
rushed through the airline policy and the TV, why
not the initiative on youth unemployment, why not
the TAFE problem being rushed?
PM: Because we've got the dear old States haven't we,
six of them. You know what they're like dragging
them along, you get pulling teeth.
JL: Yes, but you're the boss.
PM: No they're sovereign you see. Under the
Constitution the Commonwealth was not given express
powers over education. The powers reside with the
States. We can only do it through our Financial
Assistance Grant power, it's all carrot and sticksthis
sort of stuff, it's all carrots. So we don't
have a clear power.
JL: But can't you set up, I mean there is talk of you
setting up a form of TAFE to rival the States
anyway?
PM: What we're basically saying to the States is look,
you handle compulsory education, primary and
secondary, we'll handle post compulsory, we'll
handle TAFE and universities. And I made the offer
two days ago that we'll1 not only take over the
funding of TAFE we'll actually take over its
administration. In other words, we'll take from the
States if they wish, the whole burden of technical
and further education and do for TAFE what we did
for university build a solid, mature, high quality
system.
JL: Well when are you likely to get a reply from the
States?
PM: Kim's seeing them within the next day or two again.
But you see, some of them dig in and say look, it's
TAFE one day, what's next? In other words there's
more aggregation of central power they say, we're
against this. And you say well hang on, we're only
a nation of 17 million, there's only one of us so
what's wrong with that? What's wrong with building
a national system of TAFE? And they so oh well,
it's just a further incursion to States rights, and
we say well hang on, that ' s only a line drawn on the
boundary by a bureaucrat in a colonial office in
Britain, let's not get too hung up about it. But
they are hung up about it, so we've now gone one
further than we did in ' One Nation'. In ' One
Nation' we said we'd take over the funding of TAFE
and share the administration. What I said to days
ago is we'll take over the funding of TAFE and the
administration, we'll take the whole burden. Some
States might find that attractive. 
JL: But does that mean they all have to find it
attractive?
PM: No, if Victoria gave us a system which I think they
would,, if NSW gave us a system and one or two of the
other states, then we'll just continue to fund them
as we do now, that is joint fund them. But the
growth, if they want to keep it, they'll have to
handle the growth. Not all of it, we'll handle some
of it ourselves, but they'll also handle growth.
JL: This fellow-Arch Bishop Peter Hollingworth, who
didn' t get on too well wf-tK! -F-idiCiEssior
PM: He is a good fellow.
JL: He is a good fellow and he came up with some good
ideas, he reminded us that 30 per cent of the 18 to
year olds who are unemployed often for more than
12 months are out there and they should have
something done with them. He also talked about the
15,000 other young people that you and I have just
discussed, but he also talked about a form of
national service, non-military national service,
voluntary nationaI~ i36 6eet kee-f these'
people up to date with the work ethics so that they
don't sit around doing nothing, so that they are in
fact gainfully employed and making this place a bit
better. Is it not a bad idea?
PM: I spoke at the conference Peter spoke at, his plane
was late so I didn't see him there but he came into
see me yesterday with some other members of the
organisers of that conference and he's given me the
paper he presented with this proposal. I haven't
look at it yet John, but I will.
JL: But there are a lot of unemployed. There are a
million unemployed people in Australian seeking work
and we continue to bring people in from other parts
of the world. Now the perception is that that is
stupid and unfair to the people who, really are the
responsibility of the Government.
PM: But it is a medium term program, well it is a long
term program with a medium term perspective and I
think that the thing about it is, you have got to
decide whether you think this country can take a
share of people from abroad. Is advantaged by a
more diverse and larger population and if you
believe that, a program should exist, and perhaps it
should change in its quality and its quantity as
time goes by, but most governments have changed it
at various times. We had huge numbers come into
Australian and then it dropped of f to much smaller
numbers and it has picked up as prosperity picked
up, and where there have been difficult times it has 
dropped back. Can I say the more general point is
by and large I think it has been accepted by most
Australian. The migration program has been good to
Australia, has made it a more interesting place,
made it a more economically robust place. And it
has been very important at various times to
complement skills, the business migration program is
now bringing quite a lot of people from various
parts of the world.
JL: Ah yes, we saw what a rort that was being turned
into by people coming here from Hong Kong and other
places buying real estate and going home, saying
they were unable to make their business investment
and yet that was part of the package.
PM: But there is a lot here though, John, there is a lot
here.
JL: Of course there are and when you say that it has
been accepted I agree with you I think that it has
been accepted. I'm not sure that it is accepted
now, because it has been accepted doesn't mean that
it is going to continue to be accepted.
PM: Well there has always been a debate about the
numbers whenever the economy goes off the boil and
that is fair enough. And I think the Government has
taken note of that and that is why the program has
been scaled back in the last f ew years and we have
got a review of the program underway now. And then
in April, or about April, which is the normal cycle
of these reviews, we will consider the intake again
for the coming year.
JL: What is your recommendation?
PM: Well I will wait and see what the review turns up.
JL: Well assessing it at this stage, you see, you say
that most people accept it. Most people that I talk
to don' t accept it and I think that, with respect to
you, I speak more of the population of Australia
than you do.
PM: You certainly speak to them, whether you speak with
them I'm not sure about that.
JL: Well they speak to me.
PM: Well that's true, that's true.
JL: They pick up the telephone and dial the number.
PM: That is right. I don'It doubt that you have a
perception, and probably a correct one, that people
think the program should respond to difficult times,
and I think it should. 
JL: Shouldn't you respond to the people?
PM: Yes, but I'm not going to pre-judge what is a
reasonably sophisticated process of review every
year, and then the Minister, in this case Gerry
Hand, will bring a recommendation to the Cabinet.
JL: But on the information you have know, what would
your recommendation be?
PM: Well I'm not going to make a recommendation. I
won't be recommending. It will be Gerry
recommending to the Government rather than me
recommending to him. But the program has been
coming back and I would be surprised if there was a
discernible trend in any other direction.
JL: But down?
PM: But down? But when I say that,' I don't mean down
the way some of our colleagues in the Opposition
mean down because I think from them we will see a
repeat of what we saw in 1988 which was basically
about how we shouldn't have more Asians here, we
shouldn't have Asians in this country. I mean, if
you scratch most of these characters what you get is
a little bit of that sort of talk from them and that
won't be motivating us.
JL: No. Well of course it is not specifically Asians,
its people that we have to employ, that is the
problem, it doesn't matter where they come from.
PM: I know, I understand that but from the Liberal
Party's point of view the sub-plot in the late 1980s
was about Asians.
JL: OK, prior to my going away in December, I read a
story about a pie manufacturer who warned us that
the great Australian meat pie might soon ship to
China, tasty products, warned that high labour
costs, high taxes expensive food ingredients would
force lots of businesses off-shore. Now it didn't
seem very important at the time, but when you look
into it, in china's Xnandung Province they will give
you the land to build your factory. They will
provide you with labour at $ A16O a month and offer a
flat company tax rate of 16 per cent. Now the SA160
a month is nonsense in this country. But why don't
we consider doing things like they are doing in
China. We have got plenty of land why don't we give
it to people in order that they can create
enterprises and businesses here. And why don't we
offer them a special company tax to come in from
other parts of the world instead of us going of fshore,
bring them here give them the land we have
got plenty of land? 
PM: Well the thing is, they are a developing country and
they are re doing all the classic things which
developing countries have done. you know, Korea was
doing that some time ago, and now they are doing it.
I'm sure it happened in Taiwan.
JL: Do we ever give land away, I never heard it was
giving land away?
PM: No we don I don'It think. I mean, certainly the
Commonwealth doesn't. But I mean, the States have
industrial parks and they let people have access to
them.
JL: When I say giving away, I don' t mean give it away
forever. Give a lease arrangement to these people,
but at a proper rate to encourage business to come
here, why don't we do that?
PM: Well, because I think it is important to understand
what we are. This is a developed place. We run a
sophisticated society and public sector. services
here are in evidence wherever you look, whether it
be hospitals, roads, or railways, or what have you.
And we finance this public sector with the second
lowest rate of tax in the world bar a decimal point.
We are a decimal point higher than Japan. We are
the second lowest tax country in the 27 countries of
the OECD. now you can't provide this sort of public
sector with these sort of services and this standard
of living with the tax rate very much below that.
So if you want to give big tax breaks to developing
companies, what you have got to do is put tax hikes
on ordinary people.
JL: Why can't it be done for a short period of time?
PM: Well it all costs and once you do these things, that
is it. you set a new benchmark. I mean, you can't
compete with them because you see
JL: Why can't you?
PM: Well let me just give you an example. Now I was
talking to a company last week. They went to
Malaysia because it had a tax holiday for 7 years
so they said we set up a business in Malaysia
unfortunately they said the 7th year is up so now we
are going to Sri Lanka which promises a tax holiday
for 15 years. That is no tax f or 15 years. Well if
we try and run this country on a basis of no tax for
years, you won't keep this sort of society of
ours together.
JL: No, but this is a more attractive place to be so
surely with some sort of incentive. 
PM: But we don't need to do the things which those
people, in other words, rely upon wage rates and
labour conditions that those companies rely upon in
those countries. We produce different things.
JL: But we need to do something.
PM: We are doing it. We literally exported our heads
of f all through the 1980s.
JL: You can't say that because we are developed country
that we don't want to continue to develop.
PM: No, but all the developed countries, we have got a
corporate tax rate of 39 per cent with full dividend
imputation. In other words, you don't pay tax on
dividends twice. Germany has got a corporate rate
in the ' 50s. most of the countries we compare
ourselves with have got corporate rates like us,
Britain, the United States, what have you. They
don't have 15 per cent tax rates. Or zero tax rates
as business incentives because they are developed
places and you can't run your developed society on
zero tax rates.
JL: OK, well if we can't do that for people who want to
create businesses from other parts of the world,
what sort of incentive could we offer to the people
who are one by one going to the wall, and they are
one by one going to the wall, here in Australian.
Surely at this time, we should be offering them some
kind of incentive to keep their. business instead of
taking it to Sri Lanka or Singapore.
PM: Well the best incentive offered to them is growth,
is to get back to rates of growth and that is what
the point of the Economic Statement will be about.
to restore growth to the economy, to get the economy
out of the recession.
JL: How do you do that?
PM: Into recovery. Well it won't be long before you
will see. But we are now assessing how best to do
that, but one of the things which we have obviously
done in the last two years is reduce interest rates,
which themselves will have their effect upon the
economy and we will be doing other things which we
think are sensible in the short term but are also
supportive, if you like, of the structure of the
place over the long term.
JL: Like what sort of thing?
PM: Well I don't want to go through
JL: Well just give me an idea of what sort of thing? 
PM: Well some of the public infrastructure, for a start,
which was left to languish in the ' 80s as we cut the
public sector back, and which can take the place of
some of the private investment we're now not
getting. In some of those areas we'Ire looking
closely now.
JL: Does that mean increasing the public sector?
PM: Not particularly, but it means for the moment in
areas of public infrastructure where there are
needs, and where they are an important part of the
efficiency of the economy, then they are areas I
think which we can look. But the main thing is to
provide growth to the economy and that's the best
thing we can give the business sector, small, medium
and large. And there's not much point in saying
well here's a low tax rate, but sorry there's not
much growth around, because if you look at the small
business community in particular, both them survive
on growth.
JL: By growth, you simply mean that somebody who has,
they're making matchboxes, you're going to make the
place so ef ficient that people are going to want to
buy more matchboxes?
PM: Well we're finding, firstly to lift activity and
demand so theres a demand for product in Australia
and people start hiring people again to produce
product.
JL: How do you do that?
PM: Just by lifting activity. We did it after 1983-4,
JL: Well if it was that simple why wasn't it done
before?
PM: Well in 1983-84, when we came to office after that
recession, we turned it around within about 12
months. And I hope that in the same way we can do
that now.
JL: We'll have to do it quickly because from what I
hear, and correct me if I'm wrong, but from what I
hear from business people we are not in a position
to be able to trade competitively with other
countries, we are disadvantaged here in Australia?
PM: I don't think that's true. Because what is
happening and has happened, we are now running a
very large goods and services surplus, we are
running a huge merchandise trade surplus. A lot of
Australian companies I have spoken to in the last
two weeks have said, we've made a shift, because the
domestic market is down we've made a more rapid
shift to exports and we'll stay in exports. Now we 
are doing that because the place is largely
competitive, its competitive in wage rates, its
competitive by the exchange rate, its a generally
competitive product that I'm will to support.
JL: Well, why are we in recession?
PM: Well we are in a recession in the domestic economy,
while the international economy is also not doing
well, the truth is we can eat a bigger share of it
and that's one of the things which is at least
holding employment where it is and keeping the place
growing where it is is the fact that we have a thing
which we never used to have called net exports. In
other words we are now exporting a large part of our
product, particularly in manufactures.
JL: OK that's fine, and I understand it is very
important but its very hard to convince people who
haven't got any money and have got kids, and they
haven't got any clothes and they are flat out having
a house, that because somebody is selling something
overseas its going to be to their advantage, its not
to their advantage now. Surely the domestic
economy, as you refer to it, is at this stage in
your career and in the history of this country the
most important thing?
PM: Absolutely.
JL: Well what do you do about that? It's all very well
to talk about the exports
PM: Well, exports are what give you production and there
would be a lot of people employed in factories out
there now, probably listening to us, who are doing
so for products which are going to be exported, and
if they were not going to be exported their jobs
wouldn't be there. So exports have filled a very
large void in this cycle and that's why these export
growth numbers and the merchandise trade surplus is
very important to us, they are complementary to
domestic growth.
JL: Well its not working
PM But it doesn't invalidate your point and that is
that the domestic economy has to grow more, we can't
have the thing, if you like, in the negative, that
is contracting which is what its been. It's
contracted by about three per cent in the last year
and a half or so. And that's what's produced the
angst and produced the unemployment. We have got to
get that back to positive rates of growth.
JL: OK well how do you do that domestically? 
PM: Well a combination of I think, a change in
confidence which comes from a willingness on part
the of the Government to let the economy grow. That
people in the business community know now that the
Government wants the economy to grow. Where in 1988
and 1989 and 1990 they thought the Government wanted
the economy to slow down which we did. We now want
it to grow, and we have now provided one of the
instruments of that growth, much lower interest
rates, and we can provide a more direct stimulus to
the economy coming from the Governments own
policies, and that's what we are now examining with
the business community as to how best to cast those
so they complement, if you like, interest rate
reductions. To try to induce and engender a high
degree of business confidence to get people out
there spending again and to pick the place up.
JL: Prime Minister Paul Keating back to the subject of
Australia and its immediate future domestically, and
I think that you agree that that's what matters at
the moment. Certainly that's what matters to the
people listening to this radio program around
Australia.
PM: Exactly. To get back to growth and to get the place
moving again, to get employment shifting and to do
it as quickly as possible. That's got to be our
first priority.
JL: ' OK you can understand the frustration of people and
confusion of people when you can go into a
supermarket and you can buy imported canned
tomatoes, I think from Italy, cheaper than you can
buy the Australian product. So here we have the
dilemma of the people who are doing to tough having
the opportunity to buy the product cheaply but we
also have the converse situation of those producing
the product here in Australia not being able to
compete. Why do we import canned tomatoes?
PM: I think a number of reasons. I mean it makes me
furious as it does you I'm sure. It does make you
furious because its just absurd but I think we
really haven't developed as well as we might
agriculture businesses which extend beyond the
agriculture into canning and into promotion and into
the efficient production of canned products often
particularly in the horticulture/ agriculture sort of
fruit and vegetables.
JL: Is that because we are not smart?
PM: Well I don't know. I think it might be the fact
that a lot of these were done through co-operatives
in the past and the co-operatives flourished well
enough before the trade in these things world wide,
there's now a greater trade in food products and 
that we haven't seen the sort of efficiency and
competitiveness coming from the canning of these
sort of foods and their marketing.
JL: OK, well what do you do ' about that? I mean why..
PM: Its a sort of breakdown of entrepreneurship. I mean
there should be in that particular industry more
entrepreneurship I think than there is and its a
pity that people say well its not a pity you saying
it but its a pity its being said, you know what can
we do about the fact that we have got sort of canned
tomatoes from the United States or Italy or Israel
or somewhere like that and you know, I think one of
the things we can do well in Australia is food and
food processing.
JL: In order to let us do that, and I know that this is
a simplistic point of view but most of mine are, why
can't we put some type of moratorium on nonessential
imports?
PM: Well because what happens then is that people put a
moratorium on our non-essential exports. The
trading world is a very nasty place and once you get
into sort of trade reprisals everybody gets into
you. I mean we are still shipping great stacks of
meat to the United States and Japan and if we were
to say
JL: But why are we doing that, because Japan needs it,
that's why they're buying it.
PM: Yes but they can buy it from other places and
JL: And because America needs it
PM: But again it has got other options. I mean if we
get into the trade reprisal business so will they
and that's not a goer and the fact is we have got to
do better. It's not their fault that we are not
doing better, in some of these areas we have just
got to do better. Now its happening. You can see
it, I was talking to one chap last week in these
rounds of consultations who has brought together a
whole lot of food products and is now marketing them
much more efficiently in Australia. These were
formerly brand names which had sort of been left by
the way-side, business which were not running
efficiently but making largely food stuffs. Now
that's changed for that particular person and his
business and for those products. And that general
change is what we need. In other words you see an
opportunity and go and exploit it, not just to say
well look we can actually import compete, compete
against these imports but actually export them
ourselves. 
JL: But are you going to encourage people to do it
because the number of people that come to me
directly and indirectly to tell me that they have
had a wonderful idea that they've wanted to start a
business doing something here in Australia, and have
been unable to get co-operation from the Government
and they end up doing it elsewhere and successfully.
Now what are you going to do about that?
PM: Well I think it's happening I mean you know and
again another company I spoke to last week has just
taken over Petersville, this is Pacific-Dunlop has
just taken over Peteraville which is a big food
producer and that includes Edgell and all those
business Edgell, you know, peas and beans and these
things
JL: and tomatoes
PM: and hopefully now with a larger company, a greater
understanding of the value of the product it
produces, its capacity to sell into the largely
growing South-East Asian market, we will see now the
marketing of those products but we haven't seen
enough of the export opportunities being obvious to
people, investing in them, getting an existing
business and making it more efficient, marketing the
things better in Australia, I mean its often true of
the large supermarket, they have often said to me
you can't get people to quote the supply a lot of
the food lines that just don't quote because they
think they will get too tied up to Coles or too
tired up to Woolworths so they don't quote and so
what happens they end up taking stuff from Italy or
from Portugal or somewhere like that.
JL: Would the Government be in a position to subsidise
producers of those kinds of products that have
unfair competition if it is considered unfair from
overseas?
PM: Well, we don't subsidise agricultural produce in
Australia.
JL: I know we don't, but why don't we?
PM: Well because when we do it becomes a cost on the
rest of us. In other words, you know, I mean we are
getting the very thing we are complaining about in
the GATT. I mean the reason why our wheat producers
are not being able to sell now as profitably in the
markets is because of subsidies from the European
Commission and the United States. Now if we get in
the same game the thing is they can outplay us at
that game, theres no point in us getting in.
JL: Then we can't compete? 
PM: We don't have a deep enough pocket to go into an
export subsidy war and wouldn'It want to.
JL: OK well let's get back to..
PM: And that's why, can I just say in the GATT in the
Uruguay round, the General Agreement on Trade and
Tariffs where all this is being discussed at the
moment, we're saying keep the markets free from
pollution, keep them open, keep them free from this
export subsidies, give the honest producer a chance.
Now if we were to say well look, forget all that
rhetoric we didn't really mean that what we are
going to do now is start subsidising canned tomatoes
and canned this and something else then the whole
game goes bad and I think it will work against
Australia over the long term.
JL: So what do we do? Stop canning tomatoes and do
something else?
PM: No. Do it ef ficiently. What we should do is
someone say look I've got a tomato here which is as
good as any other tomato, I can put in a can for
this price providing I have an ef ficient business
JL: Yes but then you have difficulty doing it because of
work practices and all sorts of added tariffs here.
PM: Well the good management smooths all those things
out. I mean the huge shift in productivity which we
are seeing in businesses today is coming from the
fact that good managers getting rid of work
practices which are bad. See, a good management
which actually make any of these businesses
competitive.
JL: Despite the trade union movement?
PM: Not despite them, with their support. I mean by and
large the trade unions are knocking out restrictive
work I mean if there's one thing which has come
through four to three days of very intense meetings
now is the almost every hour declaration by managers
of major companies and small companies of the
changes in enterprise bargaining and workplace
reform.
JL: Because the union movement is becoming more cooperative?
PM: Yes absolutely because they are saying lets not only
keep our jobs lets make the place better.
JL: What about the 17.5% holiday loading which is a
laugh, and laughed at all over the world? 
PM: Well a lot of other places in the world have got it
to, its in the United States
JL: Not at 17.5t its not.
PM: Well its every higher I think in some places.
JL: But that doesn't make it right?
PM: Well you know why its there, because most people
earned, often earn in their normal working week more
than the standards weekly wage because they get a
bit of overtime
JL: Some, some not all
PM: So when they go on holidays there is a compensation.
JL: Yes
PM: This is a feature of many, many economies.
JL: But the man who introduced it even says its stupid
now. A bit late now but he even says its stupid
now.
PM: Who said that?
JL: Clyde Cameron.
PM: Clyde, well I didn't know he said that but look the
main thing is labour costs in total and labour costs
in total in Australia now by OECD standards are low.
I mean its another thing that has been said over and
over again in the last three or four days in the
last week by people running businesses, look this is
now basically a low labour cost country. John that
is the truth, this is a low labour cost country
which includes holiday leave loading.
JL: Well it is and that's why Japanese motor companies
and others want to set up large factories here
because it is becoming a low labour country.
PM: And that includes the holiday leave loading on these
things.
JL: Yes, it would be better still if we didn't have the
holiday leave loading though wouldn't it?
PM: Well I don't necessarily think that's right. I mean
I think, you know, if someone goes of f on their
annual leave they don't take a big drop in pay.
JL: What about penalty rates on the week-end though?
For working Saturday's, whoever said that Saturday
is different from Friday or Thursday? 
PM: Well, now this is an old hobby horse one of yours I
know, I know.
JL: Its a good one
PM: You're like a dog at a bone on these penalty rates.
Look, they are changing, they are changing over
time, they perhaps should change more slowly in some
places I agree particularly in the hospitality
industry but I think a bit of that is changing.
JL: Are you going to encourage the change?
PM: Well part of my job now is to make this a
competitive labour cost country and I did that
across the board, it was part of my job in the 1980s
to get inflation down, we have now got a 31
inflation rate instead of a 10% inflation rate and
that was in a large part accommodated by shifts in
wages so its not my job to run bull-at-a-gate at one
particular thing
JL: But nobody wants you to do that, but could we
receive some sort of guarantee that you will give
your careful consideration to penalty rates?
PM: Your a great one on guarantees you are.
JL: Yes its very important its very important to me
and penalty rates stop people getting work.
PM: Well look, I can see that the structure of penalty
rates are not always conducive to employment and
productivity but changing them is not a simple
matter the Government particularly can change
overnight.
JL: No but you've got friends.
PM: Yes well I hope I've got a few.
JL: Have a quite talk to Bill.
PM: Poor old Bill, you'd get him to do everything.
JL: Well I mean he is the man to do it because by having
those.
PM: Well you get him in, next time you get him in you
put it on him.
JL: OK I will but in the meantime you might put in a
word for me because you're keeping young people out
of work and the same thing in the United States. If
you want to go to a restaurant in the evening or at
lunch time you drive up the to the restaurant, get
out of your car somebody parks it. 
9
24
PM: Look the whole service sector in the United States
is far more
JL: Fantastic?
PM: Sophisticated than here
JL: That's right
PM: And we have got to learn to be like that.
JL: Ok and people are doing it Saturday nights, Sunday
nights and their lunch time and they're doing it for
what they get in tips. No you couldn't do that in
Australia because you would have to join the
Transport Workers Union before you could drive the
bloody car. Now that's stupid isn't it.
PM: Well I think that the proof of the pudding is in the
eating. They have a service sector which is a vast
employer, I mean we do to but theirs is greater and
the services are more varied and more sophisticated.
JL: But you see a bunch of young kids could set up valet
parking as they insist on calling it in America, and
be contributors to the economy but making money and
keeping them gainfully occupied instead of hanging
around sticking needles in their arms, but they
can't do it because of some stupid work practice or
having to belong to some union and pay union fees.
PM: Well that's not necessarily true. I mean a lot of
people are working in places which are not
unionised. It doesn't stop people working.
JL: How long do you think it would take before the TWU
wasn't down on people who set up valet parking
outside restaurants? About a day and a half?
PM: No, no I don't think its going to worry the TWU very
much. The truth is as long as it doesn't happen
because it hasn't occurred to people. I mean we
just don't have these sort of services here. I mean
in the US
JL: It has occurred to me.
PM: I know because you travel and you experience it.
But you can see there was a time when there wasn't
propriety car parks, you know car parks operated as
businesses in Australia that happened in the United
States many, many decades ago, its been with us a
couple of decades only and I think, you know, we
will see a much greater sophistication in services,
personal care things.
JL: Ok but you can only do that with the co-operation of
the trade union movement? 
PM: John don't underestimate the co-operation. I mean
we are seeing, this is not rhetoric, we're seeing
now such mammoth changes in productivity and work
place reform the likes of which most businesses
could not have contemplated a decade ago, could
never have contemplated and it is why Toyota is
coming to Australia. Toyota motor company, probably
amongst the most ef ficient in the world and which is
going to set up a $ 400M state of the art plant in
this country. It's not doing it because it thinks
labour relations are bad, they know that
productivity is good, they know that the trade
unions are co-operating and we are making great
strides.
JL: That's right, but I have watched the progress of
that from fairly close quarters and its been
interesting to note the reaction of the trade union
movement who have been more than co-operative. Now
obviously they are smart because Toyota obviously
are going to employ a lot of people in Australia,
now that kind of co-operation is the sort of thing
that will help to get the place back. But it means
that the unionists, the trade union movement has got
to co-operate with the Government doesn't it?
PM: It does and what I'm saying to you is that it has,
and that's why the inflation rate is 3% and that's
why interest rates are
JL: Ok but tell my why.
PM: If inflation was 10% interest rates would be 13/ 14.
JL: Its great to have 3% inflation. One of the reasons
it is three per cent is nobody is spending any money
and one of the reasons is nobody's got any money.
PM: The main reason is wage change in the 80s and the
second reason is, in part, the deflation coming from
the recession. But its only a part, a very large
part, the largest part was a decline in inflation
coming from wage changes.
JL: Yes, but obviously inflation is going to be low if
nobody has got any money to spend.
PM: Well, that ' s not true. We came out of the 1982-83
recession flat on our backs with a 10% inflation
rate.
JL: That's true. What about the engineering company
that can buy Australian made BHP steel cheaper in
Singapore than it can buy it in Australia? That's
slightly bigger than tomatoes. 
PM: True and I think we need competition in steel like
we do in everything else and I think it is a great
pity that we have to import certain varieties of
steels because they are not available here.
JL Yes but this is Australian made BHP steel which can
be brought cheaper in Singapore $ 700 a ton in
Singapore, $ 1000 a ton here. Now how can you allow
that to happen? Not that its your direct
responsibility.
PM: No its not my responsibility, but look obviously, I
don't know that the numbers are actually right I can
only take your word for those.
JL: Well do.
PM: It may be its been part of an export deal, a package
deal which BHP has done a sort of shop deal for
steel to some supplier in South-East Asia which they
are now supplying back. But I'd be surprised, well
pretty surprised if you could buy BHP steel cheaper
abroad than you buy it here.
JL: Well you can, you can buy it in Singapore for $ 700 a
ton as opposed to $ 1000 a ton here.
PM: Well no doubt that someone in BHP will hear this
conversation and give us an answer.
JL: If the answer is yes that is a fact, what can you do
about it?
PM: Well I think BHP would say it seeks to be
competitive inside the Australian economy and
supplying product. The complaint against it is it
doesn't supply enough product, enough of various
types of product that it should, but there is no
doubt the export markets are very competitive and if
you'ye got people saying, well look you can have an
Australian job at BHP we export steel but we've got
to export it cheaper than we have been exporting it
then BHP will probably taken the view that we want
to keep that employment and we want to keep those
exports. So its losing profitability and margin
exporting but better to have the product export and
have the jobs than not have it all and that's
probably the position right now.
JL: Yes except they are paying the price here in
Australia and obviously they are going to suffer
long term because people are simply bringing it back
from Singapore cheaper than they can get in
Australia.
PM: Well look, I mean the international steel market is
now becoming over supplied, it is very competitive 
out there and there is not there is probably price
falls and theres discounting in all markets.
JL: There's a dreadful expression that has come into our
language and that I hope you'll never use, when
people talk about a level playing field which seems
to be all the go, why are we doing that with a level
playing field when nobody else seems to be?
PM: I' don'It think we are. I mean, I think anyone who
believes there's a level playing field off-shore
outside of Australia is basically deluding
themselves, I mean its catch as catch can out there
and survival of the fittest and the smartest and I
think that if anyone believes it is fair and
reasonable and above board and level they are having
themselves on.
JL: Ok well we are about to run out of time and I know
you have got a lot to do with your day jut to rap it
up, the illegal immigrants, these boat people, apart
from costing us a fortune in searching, if we find
out that they are not what they claim to be will you
send them home?
PM: Well I don't want to pre-judge that.
JL: Would that be your desire?
PM: I don't want to pre-judge that let's wait and see
how they interview, where they're from, what their
claims are and there's a very clear process there in
dealing with people who cross our borders and there
is no reason why that process won't work just as
well on this occasion as on any other occasion.
JL: So it would be likely that if they are not what they
appear to be that they won't stay in this country?
PM: Well again that is pre-judging them and I don't want
to do that because to do it in the position I hold,
prejudice is their position, and the processes are
such that they shouldn't be prejudiced.
JL: Ok the other point, when you assess immigration in
April it won't rise?
PM: Well I'm not saying that
JL: No I was asking.
PM: The trend has been down, the trend has been down but
that is not the dissimation of the program which
some people wish and it won't be and it won't be
motivated by crude political instincts like we have
seen from the Liberal Party in the late 1980s and
which we are seeing a bit of now. In other words we
will be looking at the long run future of the 
Australian population, its growth, a contribution of
the migration program and looking at the labour
market and the capacity to absorb people in that
market, to house them and making a j udgement about
the intake for the following year.
JL: OK but in the present circumstances being as they
are, would it be reasonable to say that it is
unlikely that it will rise?
PM: Well it hasn't for the last couple of years. It's
unlikely to rise this year.
3L: Ok something else that I think we should touch upon
briefly. Will you be doing something to restore
confidence for the job getters in Australia quickly?
PM: Well that this the whole point of what I'm doing
now, that is trying to make sure whatever the
Government does that is what we announce, when the
statement is announced, that we have assessed as
fully as we can with business and with other groups
in the community the likely measures to have the
greatest and earliest impact upon activity and
employment.
JL: Will the dole rise?
PM: Well that's not an issue which we are examining
right now but the question I think is not a matter
of the dole rising its activity rising is what we
need. We need basically more people being employed
and that can only come from producing more product
and that means getting confidence going, getting
people confident again about the economy that they
think there is a future out their. We actually face
a good 1990s in many respects low inflation, lot
of good structural things there's no reason why this
country can't get back to decent rates of growth and
more satisfying levels of employment.
JL: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time and
let's hope we can talk again very soon.
PM: Thank you John.
ends 



4
4I. .. 1.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7: 30 REPORT, 4 JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, thanks for slowing down long enough
to speak with one of the faded and jaded players.
PM: Well that's a pleasure. If that's how you want to
describe yourself.
PL: Well that's how you described the established media
outlets yesterday.
PM: Well I think they are. As I said a bit of fade on
all of them.
PK: So you can't wait for those American quiz shows with
all the custard pies and the plastic compares?
PM: I don't think you'll see those.
PL: You won't see them on Pay TV?
PM: No, I think what you'll see on Pay TV is blockbuster
movies, the movies you see as first releases at the
movie theatre, you'll be able to turn it on and
watch it at home. That's what you'll see in the
main.
PL: But apart from that though, do you think there's a
whole lot of terrific TV programs out there that the
established networks are, for some perverse reason,
not showing people? Is all that product waiting to
burst on the screen?
PM: Are you making a case against Pay TV?
PL: I'm just wondering if we need this sort of
investment in this time in our nation's history. I
mean, what about a bit of productive export
production?
PM: I think information technolo y is going to be one of
the important industries in Australia. And we have 
the satellite, we have the technology available, and
it's a matter of choice I think for Australians, I
think if they want to lay out what is the equivalent
of the price of a VCR they can beam into their home
four channels of movies, sport, news etc.
PL: Done by somebody who's not been in the industry
before?
PM: Well done by somebody who's been in the
entertainment industry, not necessarily the
television industry.
PL: And someone who is going to bid up a lot of money to
get these first four channels of f the satellite then
twelve months from that, while they're still trying
to get us to buy the dishes and sign up, everyone
else gets in on the act and it's open slather.
PM: No, but the others have got one channel only, one
channel not four.
PL: Yes, but one of the others could be Kerry Packer, or
anyone.
PM: Kerry, even though I know he would regard himself as
a radiating force, I don't believe he could beam
four channels for himself when there's only one
available. So he's got one channel even if he were
to succeed. Whereas the first player is in the box
seat. They get four channels.
PL: It's only in a year.
PM: More than that. Four channels on an existing
technology as a new group removed from television,
removed from newspapers, removed from
telecommunications. As a new group, new players,
diversity, which I think is what the public is
looking for, they can go for their lives in signing
households up to Pay TV. On transponders five and
six, the single ones, that's where you're likely to
see fibre optics, what's called interactive services
where you can talk back to your bank or order your
shopping and where you'll have block buster movies
as well, news. But it's on one channel at this
stage so they can't do it on one channel.
PL: But you've got all this rival competing technology
coming. I mean we going to have aerial and black
boxes everywhere you look aren't we?
PM: No, because I think the one black box we'll have
will be common to them all. That is, that part of
the legislative framework is that the black box you
have in the house will be able to deal with any of
the technology so you won't have to re-invest in it. 
PL: It's going to be a hell of a black box.
PM: No, you know how minaturised things are these days,
this is as clever as anything. So it means that
Telecom, which has made a very large decision to
wire up the Australian suburbs years ago with fibre
optics as very few telecommunication carriers around
the world have done, it could then profit from that
decision and Australians could profit from their
foresight in having interactive services which the
satellite can't provide. So we get the best of all
worlds early, satellite provided, quality Pay
TV, blockbusters etc, and also the fibre optic
option or a hybrid between the satellite and the
cable.
PL: And only 10 per cent of it by value Australian
product.
PM: That's right and I think that that will still take a
fair bit of doing.
PL: Now I know you have got this speedy, eat my dust
style running this week, but..
PM: Well we've had it running for eight years really.
PL: Yes, but its been metal on the floor since Sunday
though hasn't it? Slightly speedier since Sunday?
PM: What did you say? Metal on the floor?
PL: Yes.
PM: Yes.
PL: But doesn't it all look like policy making on the
run though? I mean this Pay TV thing was turned
around in a couple of hours wasn't it?
PM: I think the policy dexterity of the Government, the
fact that you've got and you have in this
Government, at least a good third to half that
Caucus as technologically well informed about
telecommunications, frankly as anyone in the
bureaucracy, and people can sit down and discuss
variants and options, in what is after all a limited
discussion, and work their way through to the best
option. I think we are able to do that and we did
it with expedition.
PL: Expedition is an understatement. I mean you say to
Chris Schacht I dare you to take on this option and
he says right-o, I mean its almost like a poker game
isn't it. 
PM: This is a subject which has been around for donkey's
years and if we were to allow the plodding rate
we'ye had through the bureaucratic
PL: But suddendly you're talking about giving networks
per cent of the action. Yesterday they get none.
PM: No, yesterday they get 100.
PL: Oh well the tail end of the game.
PM: That's right. No, you've got to understand. You
see your not up to what it means either. Do you
understand? I mean this policy is moving awfully
quickly.
PL: Has it moved again since yesterday has it?
PM: The thing is we went from 45 per cent, we went
upwards to infinity to 100, but not on the first
four channels. On the first four..
PL: You went down to zero?
PM: We went down to zero and that way we do get a new
player. I mean this is a very strong case for a new
player in the media so we are not dealing with the
Newslimiteds, or the Consolidated Press or any of
the other established players, or TCN 9 or 7 or any
of these other people. Alt's basically a group that
will be new to the media, as we've seen new people
to radio come, as we've seen new people to regional
television. It will make Australia more diverse in
media and that's got to be good.
PL: And there's all that talent out there is there that
we've not spied before, that's just eluded us up
until now, all that programming talent, that
networking expertise.
PM: We have been able to run a picture theatre business
for fifty years in this country.
PL: Yes, but that's nearly gone broke recently.
PM: I don't know why some of them and the providers of
television and movie products can't run a Pay TV
station. It's basically a video shop tubed into
your house.
PL: We'll find out won't we? For the moment at least
you appear to have left the Marshall Islands affair
behind in your slip stream, but what if the
Democrats decide after all to join the Coalition in
demanding a Senate inquiry?
PM: I think that would be an abuse of the powers of the
Senate. 
PL: Why, they've got every right to do that?
PM: No, I thinkc this is a matter where obviously Sentor
Richardson. he person first involved in this, had
made an unguarded connection with someone who was
prepared to fight ruthlessly to prey upon his good
instincts and goodwill. But there was never any
notion of anything improper being there and for this
to be dragged out for political reasons is not to be
applauded.
PL: But all those former associates of Mr Symons, the
public servants, all giving evidence, I mean it
could look a bit messy after a while.
PM: But what former associates and which public
servants. I mean who are Mr Symons contacts.
Millions of Australians deal with the Commonwealth
Government, why should they be the subject of
inquiries other than the entirely appropriate ones
which are done in the normal course of bureaucratic
investigations.
PL: Whatever you think though they can do it, can they
not?
PM: You see the Opposition, this can only happen with
the support of the Liberal Party.
PL: And they're red hot for it aren't they?
PM: And in these two weeks when we've been recasting the
airline system of Australia, remodelling the airline
systei and establishing for the first time pay
television, and at the same time working on a
rejuvenation of TAFE, technical and further
education, Dr Hewson is there publishing pamphlets
frightening older people about the prospects of them
being burgled, but they won't be if they introduce a
consumption tax.
PL: Which might be good politics, elderly people are
afraid of crime.
PM: We've got to have a proper moral basis to our
politics and if it gets down to it, this is the
Liberal Party
PL: You're saying he is immoral?
PM: I think that style of argument of immoral, yes I do
and when the Government is so obviously on the
tangible issues in public life and while the Cabinet
is sitting at night doing these things, they're
sitting at night working out ad campaigns they've
taken from the worst elements of American
electioneering. 
PL: Well let's talk about another real issue, the Mabo
jdgpision in the High Court yesterday. You said
you'd welcome it, why?
PM: Because I think the whole notion of dispossession is
put down by it.
PL: Galarrwuy Yunupingu says the Government must either
move quickly to negotiate a treaty now and implement
comprehensive national land rights or face a barrage
of litigation as a resul t o s decision.
PM: I don't think that's right. I don't think it's wise
for Aboriginal leaders to take that position.
PL: There's a lot of crown land out there they could lay
claim to.
PM: Many have not, but the Court itself stressed that
there wouldn't be a threat to private property as a
result of the decision. It's just we're recognising
the fact that even though the Aboriginals have not
had our traditional association and ownership with
the land, or have not worked the land as Europeans
have worked the land, that did not entitle us to
take the view they were dispossessed of the land.
This is what this decision means.
PL: Training in general and TAFE in particular, what's
the latest stage of the game? I mean the ministers
are meeting tomorrow aren't they the State and
Federal Education Ministers?
PM: The latest stage of the game is I would like very
much for the States to accept the Commonwealth offer
for the Commonwealth to take over TAFE in total.
PL: Why do you think..
PM: Just understand it, funding and administration.
PL: Why though? Why do you have to take it over to make
it work?
PM: Because it has not been developed as a national
system, it is not adequately providing certainly not
enough places for kids as they leave school, but
more than that it is not adequately reflecting the
training profile of the labour market as it should.
PL: But what if the Premiers so no again?
PM: Well let's see what they say.
PL: But you've suggested if I read you right earlier
today, that some of them might start missing out on
some money? 
PM: No, we're saying that if in the event that they
don't accept that offer, if we look at a joint
funding model, the Commonwealth will provide growth
to it providing we get commitments from the States.
Obviously we will not be providing our funds, or
certainly growth in our funds, to States which don't
give the commitments.
PL: So the ones that don't join in could miss out to
some extent?
PM: Again, we may maintain our recurrent funding but the
growth factors, why should we support a system which
is not growing as it should.
PL: What do you think of the idea of a youth wage. Many
people say that that's a good idea, do you agree?
PM: We are now looking at the Carmichael-Rep~ t.. and
entry level training wages, and I think the whole
notion of getting young people into work, into
companies and at the same time have a training focus
to it is important and there is a great possibility
there of doing something good. It is therefore
doubly important that the TAFE system provides that
training place and on that basis I think the
Carmichael recommendations can succeed and the, if
you like, the trials we will now fund the models
we're looking at within that, those pilot programmes
will be I think important precursors to the
development of such a system.
PL: And you have talked of helping comnpanies that are
offering a fair bit of work based training to
youngsters, haven't you?
PM: Yes, a number of companies have expressed to me an
interest in taking up many thousands of young people
and we are seeing how that might be accommodated.
And I am going to hold a meeting with a number of
the significant companies.
PL: Many thousands?
PM: Many thousands, yes.
PL: What ten thousand?
PM: Well maybe not in any individual company, but
certainly multiple thousands in individual
companies. And certainly, probably many more then
ten.
PL: But if their giving these kids a genuine go and
teaching them things on a trainee basis, you might,
the Government might help them? Is that how it
might work? 
PM: That's right, that's right. But again that is to be
looked at and negotiated under the pilot programs.
PL: The APPM dispute, Prime Minister, if the ACTU
targets other operations of North Broken Hill Peko
this dispute could go national very quickly.
PM: Well I have said in the House and I will take the
opportunity of saying here, this is the sort of
industrial mayhem John Hewson would give us if he
was Prime Minister. This is exactly the approach
that the Coalition are following say to the
company don't deal with the union, only deal with
the individual employees.
PL: But how can we stop it? How and when is it going to
end?
PM: Well it can only end when the company comes to its
senses. In this one you have got the Tasmanian
Liberal Government, the Commonwealth Labor
Government, the Industrial Relations Commission, the
Commnonwealth Minister for Industrial Relations, the
Tasmanian Premier, all saying to the company don't
sack people, take them back as per the agreement.
PL: But they started sacking them today and your
Industrial Relations Minister says the IRC doesn't
have the power to force the companies hand.
Meanwhile it threatens to go national, we have got a
current account to worry about, I am sure you worry
about it more then most people.
PM: Well I think, and can we say the current account is
now down to a very low level as we noticed two days
ago
PL: We don't want to start importing too much more paper
though do we?
PM: in the national accounts, no we don't. This is
a matter of great disruption for the people of
Burnie and I could only enjoin the company to take
the advice of the Commonwealth, the Commission, and
indeed, the Liberal Premier of Tasmania Mr Groom, in
saying take the people back on and re-start the
business in terms of the agreement made last week.
PL: Bob Hawke would have stepped in about now wouldn't
he?
PM: Well maybe he might have, but the fact is this is
exactly the kind of industrial relations policy that
Dr Hewson has been enjoining us to adopt, a la New
Zealand. See APPM said they will not deal with the
union, they will only deal with the individual
workers. Well, Australians should contemplate what 
prospects they would have as individuals in dealing
with a business or a company. Not as a group as a
union, or as a collective group, but as an
individual. And of course that is what the dispute
is about, this is the policy Dr Hewson and Mr Howard
are championing.
PL: Why does the Reserve Bank want to get rid of
Caroline Chisolm from the $ 5 note? What have they
got against her?
PM: We are dancing around the topics.
PL: Around the world for sixpence.
PM: I don't know. I think that Caroline Chisolm was
probably the most significant women, in certainly
our early history, and her effigy was on the five
dollar note.
PL: They want to put the Queen there do they not?
PM: The Board has decided it should have an effigy of
the Queen. Now I wrote to the Board when I was
Treasurer to say that I disagreed with this and that
I thought that Caroline Chisolm's effigy should be
maintained, or retained. But the Board in its
wisdom have decided otherwise, and in this respect
the Board has a clear power given to it by the
Parliament under the Reserve Bank Act.
PL: So what the Prime Minister thinks is irrelevant, is
it?
PM: I think in this subject it may not be irrelevant,
but the prerogative is that of the Board's.
PL: So she could go, Caroline Chisolm could go?
PM: I think that is a possibility but the Board, in its
wisdom, may at the eleventh hour choose otherwise.
PL: But the Queen is still going to be on the coins is
she? No problem about that?
PM: No, none whatsoever.
PL: You were asked today in Parliament, when will we see
your submission on changing the flag?
PM: Well we have had so much on at the moment, airlines,
there the ones you see, and there's all the other
things that go through Cabinet, we have had such a
program, and particularly with the Parliament
sitting for the last two weeks. I will get round to
bringing a submission about it.
PL: A few weeks, or months or what? 
PM: I think probably a few weeks, maybe a month, where
we can sensibly think about the flag and its future.
That would be within the context of not changing the
flag, whatever the Cabinet decides, and however it
may approach a change in the design of the flag.
Not actually changing the flag in its official
designation without a plebiscite of some kind. Not
a referendum because a referendum has States
majority questions, what have you. But a
plebiscite, a vote.
PL: So something a bit better then what an opinion poll
might say?
PM: Well, I think that on this it is important that the
public believe they have a right to say what they
think about the flag. But I certainly take the view
that we can't go on flying the flag, our flag, with
the flag of another country in the corner.
PL: Would you be unhappy with linking this plebiscite to
the next federal election?
PM: Well it depends what I take to Cabinet, and we we'll
see.
PL: My last topic Prime Minister. What we discovered
yesterday was that you, Dr Hewson and Peter Reith
have all reported late on the affairs of your
private companies. Not a very shining example by
the nation's leaders to the corporate sector,
surely?
PM: Well I wasn't upbraiding Dr Hewson.
PL: No, but nevertheless you were all in the wrong as it
turned out.
PM: But the interesting thing is while I have been
beavering away on these various policies in the last
two weeks, Dr Hewson, the fellow who said he would
bring some decent politics to Australia, is down at
the companies office digging out my company return
to find out whether the information return was
lodged on time, and had the gall to go on about it
and have Mr Peacock ask me about it, having failed
himself for three consecutive years to lodge his
return on time, and Mr Reith the same for two
consecutive years.
PL: And both have conceded their embarrassment, and
there is lots of egg dripping of f face. But
nevertheless, you were all in the wrong and are you
happy to cop it sweet and pay a penalty if that's
what happens? 
PM: There is a late lodgement fee and a penalty, and
that has already been paid in my case. And
obviously they will get theirs in on time now too.
PL: You know if you keep on making investments though,
like half a million dollars in a piggery, you are
going to have to stop taunting John Hewson about
being wealthy though, aren't you?
PM: On that's not the value of one of his Ferraris. I
mean, he has got more in toys, in his garage, in one
toy, than I have invested in a simple primary
industry.
PL: It's a lot of money though half a million.
PM: Do you think it is today, in terms of investments?
PL: Well I tell you what, if you would like to leave it
somewhere in a paper bag I'll pick it up.
PM: The thing is Dr Hewson has a vast collection of
assets, which if you turn up the pecuniary interests
of the Liberal front bench you will find a plethera
of companies and trusts, reflecting of course the
wealth which these people have traditionally had.
PL: The truth is you are all pretty wealthy these days
aren't you?
PM: I don't think that is true. I think you will find
most members of the Government have one house and
probably a mortgage. That's certainly my position,
one house and a mortgage, and an interest in a farm.
PL: What do you know about pigs? What is so good about
pigs?
PM: I never found how anyone was so interested when Mr
Anthony had a similar interest, no one ever
questioned him about his interest in a piggery.
PL: There seems to be a political link here. I mean,
Rodger Douglas in New Zealand went into pigs.
PM: Yes they are very much the vogue. I have got to say
that.
PL: What's so good about them?
PM: I don't know, I don't know. But Howard asked me
yesterday about it, I said I wouldn't take you there
because I would then have to find you again, and
that would be a problem.
PL: Thanks for your time and I hope we haven't
interrupted for too long this feverish pitch or
policy change. 



PRIME MINISTER 56/ 92
GOLD COAST RAILWAY SITE INSPECTION
The Prime Minister, Mr Keating, the Queensland Premier,
Mr Goss and the State Transport Minister, Mr Hamill,
today conducted the first site inspection of the $ 300
million Gold Coast Railway.
They inspected earthworks at Helensvale, north of the
Gold Coast, where the track bed for the new railway is
being prepared.
The new Brisbane-Gold Coast link is scheduled to carry
its first services in 1995 some 30 years after the
original rail link was closed by the Coalition State
Government.
Mr Keating and Mr Goss announced that preliminary works
worth more than $ 20 million were progressing or about to
commence. Included in this figure are:
earthworks at Lake Coombabah, next to Helensvale
($ 2.75 million of works on a 2 kilometre site);
a road-over-rail bridge on the Pacific Highway at
Staplyton, near Beenleigh ( valued at $ 2.5 million);
earthworks on a 20-kilometre section of the railway
between the Albert and Coomera Rivers ( valued at $ 7
million); a rail bridge over Main Street, Beenleigh ( valued at
$ 2.3 million);
a road-over-rail bridge contract at Nielsens Road,
Carrara ( valued at $ 560,000);
earthworks on a 5-kilometre section at Merrimac,
near the site of the Robina station ( contract to be
awarded shortly, valued at $ 6.2 million).
The establishment of the new rail link, at a total cost
of $ 330 million, is being funded jointly by the
Queensland and Federal Governments. 
The Federal Government will contribute up to $ 58.5
million under the Building Better Cities program and a
futher $ 15 million will contribute to the Kuraby
Beenleigh section under the Commonwealth's Urban Public
Transport program.
Mr Keating said his visit to inspect work on the railway
underlined the Federal Government's commitment to the
project. " The decision to close the original rail link was
extremely short-sighted.
" The Gold Coast-Brisbane region has been growing into one
of Australia major urban agglomerations, yet this
development has had to take place without appropriate
public transport.
The environmental benefits of this major public transport
facility will be considerable.
" The Federal Government sees the benefit, as I outlined
in the One Nation statement, of using rail links to unite
the nation and helping it to work more efficiently and to
better environmental effect.
" There is no better place to start than replacing the
valuable infrastructure on the Gold Coast which was, in
effect, vandalised 30 years ago by a short-sighted
coalition government."
Mr Goss said the project also represented a huge capital
investment in urban public transport infrastructure which
is generating major employment and income for the region.
" This project has provided hundreds of jobs at a time
when those jobs are truly needed," Mr Goss said.
" We are not just making work for the sake of work. We are
building a major project to benefit Queensland well into
the next century."
Mr Hamill said the Gold Coast railway would restore a
vital transit link between Brisbane and the Gold Coast.
" This project will resurrect a link built with foresight
more than a hundred years ago, and the ripped up
unceremoniously by the National-Liberal State Government
three decades ago," he said.
" We promised in 1989 to rebuild this important rail link,
and that promise is being fulfilled."
Helensvale, June 5, 1992. 



TEL: I. L Ju . i : 41~ I: C1,-
MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
TO THE BAKKSIA ENVIRONMENTAL FOUNDATION AWARDS 1992,
MELBOURNE, ON WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY, 5 JUNE 1992
welcome to this gathering on world Environment Day.
Today we might reflect on any number of environmental
issues. In 1992 the most important task is perhaps less one of
recognising the challenge than arriving at an effective
way of meeting it.
To do that we need to overcome the sort of polarisation
which too often debilitates the debate.
No doubt there have been faults on all sides, but the
first principle is protection.
It is no longer acceptable to cast those who believe in
ecologically sustainable development and environmental
protection as spoilers opposed to everything, and
without viable alternatives.
Sustainable development La a viable alternative it may
well be a viable imperative.
Those who are charged with being_ anti-joqbs, because they
want strict controls on pollution,_ greenhouse ga! s
emissions, production aiid disposal of-waste material, or
certain development proposals controls, might well reply
that they are In fayntir of a higher standard of living.
It is simply not a matter of jobs versus environment.
We do not need to lower our environmental standards to
get greater economic grow Lh.
As business is discovering, the environment is an
economic growth area.
It is not a case of our being unable to afford to protect
the environment. Rather, we cannot afford to degrade it.
This World Environment Day is an appropriate time to
remind ourselves that our huge environmental losses in
Australia have been economic losses, with economic costs. 
TEL: S J un It -31 NO' -Li I-
2
For the benefit of this generation and those to come, we
have to develop a new sense of common national purpose, a
new willingness to work cooperatively towards national
goals and national solutions.
There is no greater goal than developing a now
relationship with the environment.
That, I think should be the message on this World
Environment Day -that, and our congratulations to the
winners of the Banksia Awards.
Thank you. 



TEL: 3uri ji i: 111C4
SPEECH DY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KCEATING MP,
PRIME MINISTER' S NSW BRANCH ALP STATE CONFERENCE
SYDNEY TOWN HALL
SATURDAY, 6 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
In this next year, if we are bold, if we are astute, arnd
if we are united, we can retain government.
If we retain governmnent, we can do many of the things
which, in the last one hundred years, the men and women
of Labor have dreamed of doing.
Which Australians have dreamed of doing.
We can come out of the recession stronger and more
independent more truly one nation.
We can make the Australian community strong and cohesive.
We can inspire a sense of common national purpose.
We can ingrain more deeply in our society that
characteristic of all good societies the degree to
which we care for our fellow Australians.
We can make it the model of individual opportunity and
social security which it should be -and which in the
eyes of the world it was, in the first decade of this
century. We can re-kindle an Australian democratic spirit.
We can set those goals.
And so long as I am Prime Minister they will be pursued.
We will go for them.
And we will achieve them. 
TEL: u c C) 4 F. C
2
We'll do it by building on our strengths, and I mean much
more than our economic strengths.
I mean our care for this place and our fellow
Australian. I mean our traditions, our strong social f abric, our
democratic spirit.
I mean our willingness to embrace change.
I mean harnessing the energy and aspirations of all
Australians by extending opportunity and encouraging in
all Australians an intelligent belief in the nation and
its national values.
We will do best if we do all these things.
Our economic strengths, of course, will continue to be
crucial. And we can say that, for all the problems along the way,
and even despite the recession, we hAve laid the basis of
a stronger economy.
A manifestly more competitive and robust economy and a
much more internationally integrated economy.
That is one reason we can do it economically speaking,
we have given ourselves a chance in the world, and thus
given the next generation of Australians a chance.
We have great strengths and should not forget them: we
are rich in resources, we have things the world wants to
buy, in our'unequalled natural environment we have things
which they want to see; we are making great strides in
manufacturing and services.
We shouldn't forget how dramatic the changes have been
manufacturing and services now earn more export revenue
then raw materials and agriculture. it was unthinkable
ten years ago.
We have more than doubled our secondary school retention
rates. We have created the equivalent of twelve
universities. We have quadrupled our child care.
We have developed levels of social security with few
parallels in the world.
Under Labor we won't lose them we will build on them.
We have learnt things we had never heard of in the 1970s.
Like how to run a tourist industry from the ground up. 
TEL: Ju. 2 10 : 10 No 004 F 0'
3
Like how to work to a cooperative ethic rather than an
adversarial one.
We are a nation capable of change.
Remember we have gone in the space of a generation from
being a country notorious for Insularity and xenophobia
to a country which earns the admiration of the region and
the world for the tolerance and openness manifest in
* ultioulturalism.
Similarly we have learned come economic truths:
we've learned that we must be less dependent on
commodities. we've learned about the historic opportunity that
exists for us, the historic necessity of our
economic integration with Asia and the Pacific.
we've learned terms we had never heard of in the
1970s: like value-adding and downstream processingterms
which describe economic imperatives. Things
we must do.
We are in 1992 what we most certainly were not in 1982-
one of the more economically literate countries of the
world. These things our economic and social base, our capacity
for change, or willingness to change -give me great
confidence in our future.
Our opponents are weak.
The Coalition is a coalition in name only. It papers
over large cracks in some very old and mouldy plaster.
Admittedly there's some new plaster there these days but
most of it's as flaky as the old stuff.
Fightback. is a sterile document informed by a
reactionary ideology whose principle characteristic is a
loathing of ordinary people.
It was built on the discredited and generally repugnant
philosophy of the New R~ ight.
Fightback is a throwback to the late seventies. it's an
anachronism in the nineties. Like the dodo or the
Hindenburg. It won't survive.
They stuck an exclamation mark on the end of it in an
attempt to give it life but if you take it away it
turns up its toes.
Our opponents have no heart. Their Australia would have
no soul. 
TEL: ~~ 6. Jun .2 i. 0l: F.
4
These days in Parliament they sit in their desks, like
schoolchildren, with bunting beside them to prove that
they are Australian.
Because they think that you can win in politics by
resisting history rather than making it, because they
think that the people of Australia have no more spirit or
faith than they have, they send me letters saying what an
abomination I am because I think we should not have the
flag of another country on ours.
They gather In Town Halls to sing God Save the Queen, and
tell each other that Australia must not change, must not
grow towards its separate destiny.
They spin tales about the idle pleasures of the past
the Menzoid Golden Age, when the country dozed, and the
best minds left along with the minerals and wool, and the
world largely passed us by.
They always want to go back. While the people of
Australia, with hope in their hearts, march bravely
towards the future, John Howard gallops about urging them
to retreat to the rear.
Back to the fifties, he shouts. Back to the dead end
jobs. Back to the massive inefficiencies. Back to the
quarries. Back to the sheep's back. Back to Britain.
John Howard leads the national reverse thrust.
But the rest, including his Leader, have engaged the same
gear. Back they go.
They are regressive by nature.
Anid nothing is so regressive as Fightback.
Fightback, as Ralph Willis put it, is socially regressive
and economically perverse.
Fightback is not a policy. it is an excuse for a tax.
A tax that we will re-ignite Australian inflation.
just as we get inflation out of the system the Tories
want to put something in the region of 6 percentage
points back into it.
out the vandalism doesn't stop there.
After a decade of unprecedented peace and cooperation in
industrial relations they want to back to the jungle.
And in a society with one of the most sophisticated and
effective social security systems in the world, the 
-TEL: I '* ur n~ 110 Nc i C'' 1J4 P 1DS
Tories want to introduce measures characteristic of
societies in decay.
they will push Medicare towards the American system
which offers care to only 80 per cent of the
population end at 50 per cent greater cost. They'll
cut the rebate from 85% 75t and they'll abolish
bulk billing except for those on benefits.
the unemployed are to be knocked off benefits after
nine months.
the waiting for sickness and unemployment benefits
will be increased from one week to three.
the job placement services of the CES will be
contracted out. Effectively CES will be abolished.
they ' 1l throw 40,000 people off supporting parents'
benefit by cutting off the pension when the youngest
child reaches 12, not sixcteen.
they'll make migrants wait two years before they can
claim benefits of any kind.
Everyone will be a winner under Fightback, the propaganda
says. if you want to send your kids, or yourself, to
university It will cost you an estimated $ 24,000 for
an arts degree up to $ 150,000 for medicine.
families with Income levels about $ 7000 under the
present limits will lose the Family Allowance.
That's 100,000 families.
they'll cut $ 10 million from legal aid. The
cumulative effect of funding cuts and the GST will
mean more than fourteen thousand cases will not be
funded by legal aid. Those cases of course will
involve the most vulnerable In the community.
Fightback compounds injustice.
they'll cut overseas aid by nearly 16 per cent in
real terms, making Australia number 14 of the OECD's
18 donor countries. Emergency refugee programs will
be slashed by more than half.
they will abolish the Youth Bureau and the Youth
Access Centres which provide information and advice
to more than 200,000 young people each year, and
which a recent evaluation shows are successful in
delivering employment, education and training.
despite the findings of the Royal Commission on
Black Deaths in Custody that a substantial increase
in funding was necessary, and despite the feelings
of all decent Australians that this must be the 
TE6 Juri .92 1C: 1C No .004 F . C
6
decade when we end the national disgrace, the Tories
will cut $ 90 million from outlays on Aboriginal
programs.
Yet they say, everyone's a winner under Fightback.
Under Labor, working women have made significant steps
towards achieving parity with men. We have legislated to
protect women against discrimination in the workplace,
and our affirmative action policies are encouraging
employers to promote women to a wider range of Jobs.
Under our equal pay strategy the gap between men's and
women's earnings has narrowed to from 33 per cent to 17
per cent.
Our National Agenda for Women reaches out to women of all
ages and vocations, including women in the home.
We are committed to constantly evaluating our overall
policies to ensure fair and equitable treatment of women.
There is still a lot to do, but we are proud of our
record and you will see us build upon it.
But the struggle to improve the status of women in
Australia would end with Fightback.
the Affirmative Action Agency, the Equal Pay Unit
and the Work and Family Unit will be abolished.
the Human Rights and Equal opportunity Commission
which includes the Sex Discrimination Commissioner
will have its expenditure cut by an unspecified
amount. the public sector will be cut back, privatised,
abolished, contracted out or " rationalised" in the
areas where women work in service delivery areas
like nursing and caring. And in clerical, cleaning
and catering services.
Dut everyone, they insist, is a winner under Fightback.
Fightback will unpick the social fabric. It expresses
that sentiment of selfishness that loathing of the
unfortunate and vulnerable which characterised the
regimes of Reagan and Thatcher.
In Australia it was resisted in the market-driven years
of the eighties. We held it of f.
It would be tragic if now It were to take hold In the
form of a Hewson governments
it is repugnant to Labor. And we will fight it to
extinction. 
TEL 7
The Treasury analysis of Fightback under which everyone
is supposedly a winner shows that 70 per cent of wage
and salary earning households will be worse off under a
Howson government.
It shows that 60 per cent of farm and self-employed
person households will be worse off.
I haven't yet mentioned the consumption Tax. The jewel In
the crown of Fightback.
Treasury estimates that food would rise by 8.9 per cent.
Clothing by 11.2 per cent.
Electricity by 10.7 per cent
Health services by 22.6 per cent
Newspapers and magazines 10.5 per cent.
Urban public transport 6.6 per cent
Post and telephone 8.1 per cent.
A Ferrari will cost $ 15,000 legs.
Everyone's a winner, Dr Hewson reckons, under Fightback.
Like smell business. Consider the remarks from Mr
Cedric Stanford, a leading British authority on
value added taxes. He did a detailed study of the
costs to business and found
The compliance costs of the small firm were 260
times those of the largest firms. Where small firms
are competing in the some market with large firms",
he found, " they are being put under a state-created
disadvantage."
Indeed, he found that " compliance costs.. became a factor
in helping to push small firms out of particular
markets". Or take the comments of a New Zealander, Mr John Marine,
in the January issue of Australian Small Business and
investing. He gave Australian small business people an
explicit warning based on experience about, the GST.
your personal stress level will rise sharply.
Sunday at the beach will be a thing of the past.
You should consider how you will cope when you lose
one day a week to OST, whether your business will
survive and what you are going to do about it."
To small business GST stands for a Great Shrinking of
Time but what Is time to a man in a Ferrar17 TELj: u6n .92 11-t: i F''. YJ 
TEL: Ln; r~ I cn1 o'.: 4 4 F
Everyone, Dr Hewson says, Is a winner with Fightback.
But not if you happen to be at the vulnerable end of the
labour market.
Perhaps the most insidious and potentially the most
devastating aspect of Dr Hewsonus program is his
Industrial Relations policy.
Nothing reflects so well the right wing ideology at the
Core of Fightback. Nothing is so perfect an expression
of their contempt for the weak.
Industrial relations policy is the policy which most
generally defines the relationships between one
Australian and another.
We have seen In the last ten years that relationship
reach a new level of intelligent cooperation.
In Burnie we are seeing the Tories'I idea of how
Australians should relate to each other.
Their industrial relations policy is a policy of social
intimidation. There is only one thing to be gained from the dispute in
Burnie it has exposed the philosophy of John Howson
and John Howard, and it has given Australians a glimpse
of what life would be like under a conservative
government. The gains which flowed from the development of an ethos
of cooperative workplace reform, the spirit which has
seen disputation fall by 60 per cent in a decade, the
increase in productivity experienced by companies where
agreements have been negotiated with unions and
management, the inflation gains brought about by the
Accor all these gains will be killed stone dead.
The Opposition plans an assault not just on the unions
and the principles of unionism they plan an assault on
the principle of the Umpire, of social and industrial
justice.
They want to drive Australian workers on to contracts
where they will then be exposed to what John Howard is
calling a " floor wage"
The " floor wage", John Howard says will be somewhere
between the dole and the existing minimum award.
Now they introduced an Employment Contracts Act in New
Zealand last year it is the same Idea.
It's Hewson and Howard's safety net. Australian workers
especially the most vulnerable, including women,
migrants, the unskilled these workers should know that 
TEL: U Tr
9
the " floor wage" in New Zealand has been set at AS175.0
a week, or A$ 9153.00 per annum.
For employees under 20 years of age there is na minimum.
There are many questions which should be put to Mr Howard
and Dr Hewson about their industrial relations policy and
over the next six months we will be putting them.
For instance: How will you prevent workers being forced out of the
protection of the award stream by an employer who
wants to put the employee on a contract?
How will scrupulous employers compete with the
unfair advantage that is offered by Dr Rawson to
uinscrupulous employers?
With no more National Wage Cases, how will workers
in weak bargaining positions ever get a wage rise?
If industrial disputes are to be dealt with under
common law instead of the Industrial Relations
Commission, how will ordinary workers have the time
and the resources to take their employers to court?
How long will it take the courts to hear the cases?
N ow will the Hewson and Howard model of industrial
relations protect living standards?
How will It make everyone a winner?
We should ask these questions. All Australians should
ask them and I believe they should ask themselves if
this policy is the hallmark of a civilised society?
Does it express our values and goals? Is it a social
advance to drive the weak down?
Is Burni our industrial and social model for Australia?
For John Hewson and John Howard It is.
As John Howard said himself, on 23 May, the right being
exercised by APPM " is basic to the new industrial
relations system the Liberal and National Parties will
bring to Australia after the next election"
I say, like hell they will.
I said Fightback will unpick the social fabric. It will.
The Tories you know are very big on values and traditions
they're big on holding on to what is there. Like the
Union Jack and their interpretation of our history. 
ILL-L
They get very cranky if we say they don' t have a mortgage
on our history any more than they have a mortgage on our
future.
The truth is that their blueprint for the future
Constitute$ the most savage attack on our traditions we
have ever seen.
Xt attacks the tradition of fairness anid equity.
It attacks the tradition of progress towards civilized
social goals.
It attacks the tradition of care for the underprivileged
and vulnerable for protecting the weak against the
strong. These traditions are built in to our society -they shape
the way we think, the way we go about our lives.
In large part they derive from the last decade of the
last century from the rise of the Labor movement and
the emergence of a new national spirit.
But they were values shared by liberals by non Labor
Australians. They were widalm shared.
They are not shared by today's anti-Labor forces.
Don't let them tell you that this government is hostile
to tradition, or that it's re-writing the past.
It's the future we're concerned with and we're building
it on the best of Australian traditions.
We are determined to equip Australia for the next
century. To do that we have to make bold policy decisions. We
have to be willing to meet the challenges head on.
As I said at the beginning, we are building on solid
foundations laid down in the last decade of Labor
government. And as I said, we are also building on the foundations of
our best traditions our best sympathies.
our social goals are equitable ones. Our aim is fairness
as well as strength.
The strength will not only come from economic policy, it
will not only be measured by economic success.
Our national spirit, the degree to which we identify as
Australians and declare our first loyalty to Australia
wherever in the world we have come from; the degree of
care for each other as Australians; the degree to which 
TEL: IC t. -1U I I V J I I L'
we are prepared to take a national view and pursue
national goals all these will give us strength.
And in the coming years we will measure our success by
how truly we can say that we are One Nation.
The Tories don't understand this. WJe will have to teach
them. We'll teach them by the sorts of bold Initiatives we took
this week by our example.
Revolutioniuing the airline industry is a major Labor
breakthrough it has profound implications for the
tourist Industry, and therefore profound long term
Implications for our economy and employment.
Introducing Pay-TV on the basis that we have, getting
optimal outcomes from the new and available technologies,
was a milestone in the transfer of information technology
to Australians.
The decision we made this week will be the key to what
Australians will be viewing in their homes, businesses
and schools, and how they will be commuunicating with each
other over the next quarter century.
we also gave the ABC an historic opportunity to break
from its national free-to-air charter into the almost
limitless realm of sophisticated information transfer.
Getting TAFE into the high quality, high status shape
that it should be will be a profound reform, with
profound benefits to our economy and society for
generations to come.
Extending occupational superannuation to all is a
fundamental reform, an imperative if we are to achieve
our goals of better incomes for the retired aged and
greater national savings.
Infrastructure spending on rail, road, airports, ports,
electricity is essential, not only to recovery and to
employment in the short term, but to the long term health
of the economy. It's essential to our keeping up with the
world. Moving, as we have this week, to develop strategies for
youth training and employment in conjunction with our
TAFE reforms and our existing labour market programs, is
essential if our young people are to have the
opportunities they deserve.
Our goal is to involve business, unions and the wider
community in creating a national response a national
effort. 
TE L: . u3rn .92 1C 11.1 No0 . C' 4 F 1I
12
These initiatives must be taken if we want young
Australians to believe in this country and it is no
exaggeration to say that, without that belief, we will
never be the nation that we can and should be.
We are doing the things Labor governments must do.
The Tories never do them. They'll never understand.
What you will hear from them are the sounds of scare
campaigns. And smear campaigns.
They will call urn traitors for wanting unequivocal
symbols of our nationhood just as they so often called
u~ s traitors during the Cold War.
They'll grub around looking for dirt like they have been
doing for the past few weeks just as they have so of ten
done in the past.
They'll rush outside and shout " anarchy" and " mayhem" and
accuse US of not having respect and they will go around
the homes of elderly Australians with bizarre, vicious
and entirely inappropriate propaganda they knocked of f
from the Republican Party of the United States.
Propaganda which was fomented in the prejudice sheeted
homes to black America and in the gun culture of that
country. Propaganda whose use here constitutes a dramatic lapse In
standards of political behaviour, and, I believe, a
serious misjudgement. of Australian values.
Yet this is just a variation on the things that they have
always done.
But they will fail.
They will go on being what they are spoilers.
And we will go on being what we are builders.
And we will win. 



PRIME MINISTER 58/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
STATE VISIT BY PRESIDENT OF IRELAND
I am pleased to announce that the President of Ireland,
Mrs Mary Robinson, will make a state visit to Australia
from 22 to 28 October this year. The President will be
accompanied by her husband, Mr Nicholas Robinson.
During her visit President Robinson will visit Perth,
Sydney, Canberra, Brisbane and Melbourne, and will be
meeting the Governor-General, myself, and Ministers.
Australia and Ireland have a close relationship based on
a common heritage and strong ties of family and history.
President Robinson's visit will mark an important
milestone in this relationship, and the Government looks
forward very much to her visit.
CANBERRA 12 June 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF TaX PRINZ MINISTER TRZ RON P J K= ATIM UP,
AND THI TRZASURWR, TIM RON JOHN DAKINS UP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCZ, CANBNRPA FRIDAX, 12 JN 1992
z 6 0 z PROOF ONLY
PM: I would just like to make a few introductory remarks.
I might then invite the Treasurer to do the same.
The first thing I would like to say is that, as I
said this morning, our deliberations are now broken
into two parts. That is one part being non-financial
matters, the other being financial matters with
some of the carry over from the non-financial things
in the financial meeting, that happened today. But
you know that I have always said to you in contradistinction
the prevailing wisdom that Lhis has
always been a most efficient meeting. The fact that
we can allocate $ 17 billion of funds in the course of
an afternoon and resolve a lot of national issues
quickly, which are not capable of being resolved in
Ministerial Council meetings, even though they have
taken months, sometimes years, always made the one
day Premiers' Conference meeting a terribly efficient
meeting. Now the past popular conception of these
was that it was a sort of undignified scrabble for
money, where in fact we had made this a very
dignified process. The formal offer is now conveyed
to the Premiers a couple days before the meeting, but
that doesn't detract, it has only added to the
efficiency of the day and being able to resolve
issues and I think today we have had a good day. The
Commonwealth and the States and the public of
Australia have had a good day from this meeting and
it has been again a most efficient day where very few
countries would be able to get as many issues
resolved as we have. Firstly, we have resolved on
the Financial Assistance Grants disbursements to the
States over the course or 19z9r23. As you know we
have added to the pool by $ 150 million, now
$ 170 million, as we varied the offer in the course of
the day so that New South Wales and Victoria received
what they would have received per capita, even though
the rest of the States received what they did on the
basis of the Grants Commission relativities. You
understand the relativities. The pool is allocated 
on the 1992/ 93 relativities. But the top-up of
$ 150 million, on those relativities, would have
detracted from New South wales and Victoria and that
distributioelarrangement comprehends the boom period
and stamp duties of a couple of years ago. So
today's Grants Commission formula is not adequately
reflecting the contemporary condition of the economy
and as come little modification of that, we let
Victoria and New South wales take their share on a
per capita basis and basically the Commonwealth added
million in the pool to do it. So we have that
agreed and that was going to be the most difficult
issue of the day, the distribution of the pool. The
second thing was we decided that we would try owdfa
effectively and genuinely do something about the
whole fiscal equalisation and distribution question
and in the course -o-f thedd icussiong, we raised the
issue as New South Wales and Victoria had raised
it, the smaller States resisted because the formulas
were working in their favour and we said that we
would have, as you see in our Press Statement, that
we needed to look at the sustainability or the
horizontal fiscal equalisation in the long term
that is looking at the principles and the
methodology, the principles underlying fiscal
equalisation and the methodology and the
Commonwealth, for our part, made the offer that les+.
the sma. ll States fear any such inquiry and their fear
in the past has thwarted any such inquiry, what we
would do is we would allow the introduction of a
Grants Commission benchmark relativity for 1993/ 94,
upon which they could judge whether any new
relativity would cost them money and if it did the
Commonwealth would meet the adjustment costs over a
three year period. In other words, to encourage the
smaller States to agree " to an inquiry into this
issue, we would carry some of the burden of any
subsequent adjustment. The result was a degree of
equanimity around this proposal to have this inquiry
by Treasuris and heads of Treasuris and to make the
information available to the Premiers'
Conference/ Loan Council before next year, was I think
by all me~ asures a breakthrough. The Treasurer and I
think we did pretty well and I think the States have
a sneaking suspicion they did too. Now the other
issue that we move to is the question or TAFE~ and as
you know there has been a reluctance on the part of
the States to do much about TAFE. For our part we
wanted to build, we think it is entirely important in
this country to build a national Technical and
Further Education system of substance and stature.
Something that kids will want to go to and would be
proud to have a diploma from and where the training
profile or these institutions more adequately
reflects the labour market. That we don't have at
the moment. We do have some quality, in varying
degrees, in some of the TAFE areas in some of the
States, but we don't have that. Our proposal in one 
3
Nation was for commuonwealth control of the funds, but
joint control of the policy. Now Mrs Kirrner put a
proposal this morning which is essentially that,
except that instead of it being administered by DEET,
the Department of Employment, Education and Training,
it would be administered by an authority, members
of which would be appointed by the Commonwealth.
Well let's say for the purpose of the discussion
which we then had that, and concluded, this proposal
the proposal of Mrs Kirner would be at least a
starting point proposal for a subsequent discussion
by the central agencies of the Commonwealth and the
States, with Kim Beazley and his Department to design
up a new system around an authority rather than a
department. Administering the TATE system in a
national structure, where the Commonwealth would be
accountable for the funding and for the appointment
of people to operate it and therefore the people
operating it to establish its policy, but the day to
day administration would largely still be the
bureaucracies which exist in the States. Gradually
that would shift over to the authority. Now we
started with the support of Victoria and then New
South Wales, Western Australia then came on board for
a consideration of this. I think beyond that South
Australia had indicated a willingness to look and
they wanted to keep the momentum going, go we are
going to start next week and try and roll it on under
the chairmanship of the Secretary of the Prime
Minister's Department, but under the * leadership of
Mr Beazley and we will try and push this thing
through so we can develop a model. it may rnot be the
model Mrs Kirner proposed today, but a model which
reflects the need to develop a national TATE system,
which has got joint Commonwealth and industry
participation. So on those issues, as you know, we
are concerned about youth unemployment and in about a
month from now I intend to hold a meeting on this
subject and we would like this thing, as a very
important part of it, if we can have it up and ready
to go by then, if possible. If we can get agreement.
So I regard that as a breakthrough and the fiscal
equalisation as a substantial breakthrough in terms
of getting agreement to a study which is real, not
just a study which has a States' opinion and a
Commnonwealth opinion or disagreed opinions and put
then, in a pigeon hole, but that one that is real,
that is going to make a difference and we have got
the distribution as well. Would you like to say
anything John.
T; Oh, except to say that I think the major bone of
contention when the States arrived here was ot the
extent of the Commonwealth offer in respect r
1992/ 93, but rather the distribution. That was
clearly an acrimonious issue during the last couple
of days and I think the fact that that has now been
resolved amicably I think is a tribute to the sense 
4
of cooperation which existed throughout the meeting.
You will see also that the Loan Council agreed to a
program of borrowings by the States and by the
Commonwealth. Some other more minor matters were
dealt with by the Loan Council as well and I think
that, generally speaking, it was a result which left
everyone pretty well pleased.
J: Prime Minister, today the two biggest States upped
their taxes and clearly are hanging these rises
around your neck.
PM: No let me just say this. Whatever States do about
receipts can not be hung around our neck. We are all
responsible foz* A'udgets in this country. We have
given them in these Financial Assistance Grants more
of a go then they would have thought they would have
got. That is not just the maintenance of a real
terms guarantee on this year's funding, but
population growth added in $ 150 million, in fact,
$ 170 million. More than population growth. Now
given the fact that our budgets have deteriorated
much more rapidly than theirs because our receipts
have fallen away more sharply, in our circumstances
it is a concession on our part to be providing a pool
of this size in addition to a real terms guarantee.
T: The point is that all of the States got very close,
not only was the pool more than same real, except for
Victoria, New South Wales and the ACT, and in
relation to New South Wales and Victoria they were
only just short of same real., * 7en you combine the
other payments that they received along with the
general purpose payments. So whatever point the
States are making about the need for tax increases,
it can't be left at our doorstep because of the
changes we have made. To some extent New South Wales
and Victoria don't think they get enough of the funds
that come from the Commonwealth, but that is a
separate issue.
PM: Letl. me just run down these figures. The deflator we
are using here is 1.7 that is general revenue
paymients and other net payments, that is specific
purpose payments total Commonwealth payments to the
States and not through the States is for: New South
Wales 6.7, so it is 5 per cent real; Victoria 5.3,
which is 4.5 per cent real; Queensland 7.1, which is
per cent real. I mean they are all 4 and 5 per
cent real numbers. Because remember this, there is
$ 800 million of One Nation infrastructure spending in
Commonwealth payments to the States this year.
Table 1, if you look at that, 1992/ 93 the outside
line.
T: I was referring to the next table. 
PM: Yes, John is referring to the Financial Assistance
Grants, but if you look at the total Of the payments
or even if you look at the Financial Assistance
Grants, they are all rising in real terms, but
remember that One Nation is largely spent on State
infrastructure spending which would have to be spent
by them anyway, at some point roads, rail, etc. So
there is $ 800 million going their way as a result of
One Nation, plus $ 170 million today on top ofareal
terms guarantee. There is nearly a billion dollars
of extra money. I mean they can't lay any problems
at our door.
J: So N4ew South Wales and Victoria have got no excuse
for raising these taxes in so far as today's meeting
is concerned?
PM: I don't think there is any doubt that their revenues
have declined in the recession, but that either means
that they cover it by cuts in Government spending or
debt.
j Mr Greiner estimates that the inflationary impact of
his taxes will be between 0.5 and 0.7 and Mrs Kirner
says she hasn't done these sums, but she thinks that
sounds about right. What do you thinkbtkie
inflationary impact of the two of the most densely
populated States putting up these taxes?
PM; I have got no idea. I have got absolutely no idea at
what they have in mind. But the point is in terms of
total Commonwealth payments, they are very strong and
in terms of their recurrent payments, I mean, here we
are we have got a large budget imbalance and we have
just added $ 170 million to it basically to ease their
budgetary position. 
J: Did you urge Victoria and New South Wales at today's
meeting not to undertake these tax and charges
rises?
PM: We said so publicly, I think.
T: You would have seen what I said at the beginning of
the public session, arnd the offer document was
provided on the basis that there would be no undue
recourse to tax increases which had an adverse
inflationary consequence. Now I haven't seen the
details of what the two governments want to do, or
propose to do, I haven't obviously had an
opportunity to check the inflationary impact of them
and I don't know the basis on which they've made
those calculations, and what impact they would have
on the national CPI figure. So we'll have to
obviously have a look at that.
3: Did they make It clear to you, Treasurer, as they
walked out of the meeting that they were intending
on doing this because Mrs Kirner said that in fact
she and Mr Greiner conferred previously that they
had taken these steps?
T: They hadn't conferred to us, or not with me, and
what they said In relation to the chances of them
driven to tax increases was said In the public
session. So you know as much~ about that as I do.
3: Haven't you Seen what they've put out since?
T: No.
J: Do you think as well as cutting services that
cutting public service salaries might be an option
for the governments at thstmIt as done in the
1930s in the time of depression.
PM: we're not in a depression, though. I mean in a
depression, in the United States depression I can't
remember the numbers for Australia, but in the
United States GDP went down by 40 per cent. In the
United States in this recession it's gone down by 3
per cent, and over the course of the period probably
by a cumulative 3 to 4 per cent. I mean, these are
just not comparable periods, and that's not I don't
think a reasonable question, a reasonable solution
to problems. The wage share and GDP are still at
historically low levels.
3: Mr Dawkins, in your statement you say the states and
territories indicated they should not increase state
taxes and charges other then a lest resort, in the
last sentence of the last page. Before this had
actually come of f the photocopier both New South
Wales and victoria had announced their Increases.
At the very least this sounds like bad faith. 
-7
7
T: Well, I think they may well have raised these
matters with a little more candour with us during
the course of the discussions if they were going to
announce them before they had even got home and had
an opportunity to properly assess the outcome of the
meeting. But obviously we're not responsible for
their actions.
3: Mr Dawkins, they say one thing to you in the meeting
and then in halt an hour do something else.
T: No, no, let me make it clear. in the context of
your allegation that there wasn bad faith, what they
said to us In relation to tax increases Is what they
said during the public session. Now Mr Greiner did
say during that session that in the context of the
current situation they would have to look at tax
increases.
3: out they obviously had a clear plan worked out
because they've got very precise figures here in
both their releases, and coordinated.
T: Well, what do you expect us to say? The fact Is
they didn't discuss It with us.
3: Well it's a question of faith, Isn't It? They sat
through the whole day and they had it in the shot
and ready to pull the trigger.
PM: They did say that they thought they would have to
increase charges. They didn't say by how much and
where.
3: Didn't you expect themi to at least give you a copy
of the press release before you came in here?
PM: It would have been a reasonable courtesy, I think,
yes. But again, can I just say, It's all about
level. The fact is very rarely have we seen any one
year where the states have not increased charges.
So we're not going to hold our breath and gasp at
that. But it's about level, about how large it is.
3: Prime minister, you say that it's been a good
outcome, Nick Greiner says he's angry, Joan Kirner
says she's disappointed, and the two major states
have raised taxes.
PM: Well we expect you to have at least the standard
level of journalist guile to understand when someone
is angry or not angry, moderately pleased or quite
pleased. And I think~ a modicum of scribe's guile
would lead you to the conclusion that they were
quite pleased with the outcome. 
8
3: You say that it Is an achievement today that the
states have agreed not to bring on any undue tax
increases. This financial year the tax Increases
for New South Wales and Victoria will be $ 370
million, in a full financial year it will be half a
billion. Is that due or undue?
PM: We'll have a look at the numbers. But again, I
can't give you off the top of my head effects about
inflationary Impacts.
T: It they've decided to raise taxes before they left
Canberra they must have had also decided that
publicly, at least, they'd be unhappy regardless of
what happened today, in order to justify such a
decision.
PM: They certainly left the meeting quite happy. Let's
say that. Between the meeting and here I'm not sure
what happened. But they left the meeting quite
happy, they all thought there was a bon homie of
national achievements and everything alse.
J: But forgetting their happiness or unhappiness we
still have two statements that are quite at odds
one the offer document and second, the two Premiers'
announcement*.
PM: What things are at odds?
J: On the one hand the offer document Is saying that
they'd not raise taxes and charges. On the other
hand they had done just that and haven't told you.
T: Leave aside the fact that they haven't told us,
which is I think a defect, but they did not promise
not to put up taxes, nor did we seek such an
undertaking. We said that they should assume, I
think the words of the offer document were that they
should eschew any undue increases, and the words of
my statement say that they should only do it as a
lost resort. I am a little surprised that they got
to the last resort between the Cabinet Room and up
here.
PM1: And they probably think that in the low inflationary
culture provided by this Government that whatever
increases they slipped through would subsumed in the
culture somewhere.
3: Would you agree with that, Prime Minister?
PM; I don't know that that was what motivated them.
3: Would you agree that the low Inflation we have at
the moment will subsume these increases, or might? 
PM: I don't know, one has to see. But we' ve been doing
better on Inflation than I think most people would
have expected.
J: Mr Dawkins, Is the 1.7 deflator you've used Is
that essentially your inflation forecast or 1992-93?
It It Is then that's quite an Impressive figure.
T: No, it's the March to March figure just passed.
J; So you can say that roughly It equates to 2 except
that ? 7
T: From March to March, it's the CPI figure though,
it's not the non-formi deflator or other. The basis
of the deflator that's used for the purposes of
these grants, the same rule undertaken that was
given a couple of years ago, was based on the
prospective increase on the CP1 March to March.
PM: We used to use the non-farm GDP deflator but when
commodity prices were coming down it was, they
though, unduly lower, and therefore they wanted the
CPi. So they've now got the CPI and the CPI is the
measure we use.
3: In your overview of the economy, Mr Dawkins, you
only refer to Australia doing better than the 3 per
cent OECD average. And also I'd like to ask, why is
It that you haven't kept up with the precedent set
by your predecessor Mr Keating and release the JEFO
forecasts?
PM; No, no.
J: it was a precedent.
PM: Not much of a one.
T: it was a precedent, but it was a precedent not worth
following, I think. And the fact is that we had the
federal estimates In the One Nation statement. I
mean we don't go about making these renewed
forecasts month by month. The JEFG process, as far
as I know, hasn't finished. And even If It has I
wouldn't release the figures anyway. We will be
releasing those estimates in the context of the
Budget because they'll probably move around now and
then anyway. And we don't make month by month
forecasts on growth in the year ahead. We will
provide you with, you seem to the one who is most
anxious about these things, will provide you with
our latest forecasts of growth in the context of the
Budget in the normal way. 
TE:
PM: That was only a purple pen to sign the books of f at
the time.
3; Mr Dawkins, today you were saying that you were
concerned about the uneven economic performance
between the states and between some of the regions.
What implication does that have for your policy?
Will you be looking at more specifically targeting
assistance to particular areas that seem to be
suffering while states such as WA seem to be doing
mnuch better?
T: I made the point this morning that there are these
very great regional differences and state by state
differences which, exist not only In respect of
unemployment figures where you've got in some states
jobs still being lost and in other states job growth
being quite clearly in evidence. Now what I've said
is that I think the objective of policy on the part
of both the states and ourselves should be directed
towards those areas where the job market is still
deteriorating. And I don't Intend to say anything
more about that now, just to reiterate that point.
3: Mr Keating, Mr Greiner said that at one point during
today's proceedings you described the current system
of fiscal equalisation as unsustainable. 1s that a
proper reflection of your views?
PM: No, I said it will not be sustainable while at least
the two large states believe that the system Is
patently unfair to them and the principles
underlying it, and the methodology which accompanies
it Is no longer appropriate or a reflection of
contemporary conditions. Now there were years that.
the Fraser Government just didn't accept Grants
Commission recommendations, just ignored them. The
Grants Commission and its recommendations are
relevant only to the extent that a Loan Council
Premiers Conference wants to adopt them. If we
don't the Loan Council is irrelevant to these
processes. Therefore, if you have the two large
states in there not continuing to be part of the
compact, a wise manager of the system says there is
something wrong here, So let's go through and see.
whether the principles are right and whether the
methodology is right. And that's what we sought,
but every time we've sought to do that the smaller
states the beneficiaries of the current
methodology, always object. So as a way, if you
like, of greasing the tracks for a real evaluation
of this thing, we said we'd carry some of the
adjustment burden in the event that there was a
marked shift away from the relativities of 1993-94
from the Grants Commission. 
J: Mr Keating, have you any doubt that a fair end
proper review of the methodology would result in an
advantage to New South Wales and Victoria?
PM: To the extent that there is structural change In the
economy and that the structure of the states like
QVuiecetnosrliaan d iiss chcahnagnignign. g anIdn tteher mss trouf cttuhre e roefl ative
decline of manufacturing then there may be some
change, but to the extent there is we will help In
the process of adjustment.
3: Is there any way of making the methodology more
understandable. I mean I'm sure you've looked at
the algebra in the Grants Commission updates they
are incomprehensible.
PM: The thing Is I think the most Important thing is
that whatever they say should be a contemporary
reflection of circumstances. Whereas now what we're
getting is a retrospective reflection of
circumstances. I think that's the problem. Whether
you can simplify It Obviously if it is more
transparent the better, more understandable, more
transparent the better. Whether we can get there I
don't know.
3: Mr Keating, has it taken the gloss your day at all,
that you've come In here and been told about halt a
billion dollars of extra taxes in two states?
PM: No, in the sense that we thought they were going to
lift taxes and charges, we've said to them be
restrained, be sensible about It. But I think from
our point of view the longer run issue is, can we
out of this establish a better basis for fiscal
relationships in the Commonwealth of Australia? And
the answer to that will probably be an unambiguous
yes. And have we made progress today in the
establishment, on a long term basis, of a national
technical and further education system? And I think
we can say yes. I mean we will know soon. These
are things which were never attempted in the last
forty years.
3: Prime Minister, Mr Greiner has come out with a
statement saying " Mr Keating kicks his own state and
then announces changes". what effect to you think
this will have, the electoral impact, the rising of
tobacco and beer prices?
PM: I don't know what he said, today or when?
J: Yes, today.
PM: I think he's probably written that before the
meeting. You gee the meeting has gone better than
they expected and I think they've got to live with 
those remarks, not me. Mr Greiner could not
complain that the Treasurer and I have facilitated
an inquiry Into fiscal equalisation which stands at
least to clarify the New South Wales position, where
New South Wales has claimed now for some time now
that the methodology runs against them. That's an
unambiguous benefit for New South Wales. I don't
think Mr Greiner could say that when the smallest
states were not prepared to see New South Wales and
Victoria get the benefit of per capita funding out
of the pool today, the Treasurer and I agreed to top
up the pool for New South Wales and Victoria. I
don't think It's sustainable that anything I've done
has been other than doing things which are sensible
to keep the federation moving, and also happens to
be coincidentally beneficial to New South Wales.
T: What the Premier of New South Wales said in the open
session, and it's the only time he said It, was that
we should have doubled our offer from $ 150 to $ 300
million. Had we doubled our offer he would only
have got an additional $ 50 million at the most as a
result of doubling the offer. So to the extent that
he is trying to fit us with the responsibility for
his own tax increases, all he ever asked us and I
might say he didn't repeat the request, and he made
it perfectly clear that he didn't expect to get It.
So I mean, heavens above, you've been around here
for enough Premiers Conferences to know that what
they try and do is have an unhappy outcome so that
they can justify tax Increases. I mean It wouldn't
be the first time Wlally ( Brown) that this has been
tried. And some of them are nice enough to get home
first before they announce it, but they've obviously
decided a new little trick to announce it here
before they leave.
PM: Can I just say that Premier Greiner said in his
opening remarks that these arrangements are the best
arrangements we've had for the five years he'd been
coming, a lot better than they have historically
been. And I don't think he came with any real
expectation of walking away with a fair dinkum
inquiry Into fiscal equalisation or walking away
with anything better then the of fer document. But
he did on both accounts.
J: Just on the labour market, Mr Keating in your
comments you mentioned that the growth in the
unemployment was yet to impact on the job market,
end your comments, Mr Dawkins, you said that the
growth in output was more likely to be transformed
in higher productivity rather than higher job
growth. That's quite a bleak assessment, does that
suggest we are going to have the sorts of
unemployment rates of 10.5 per cent for a lot longer
than is implied by the present forecasts? 
T: No, it's only making the obvious point that there is
a trade off between productivity growth and
employment growth and as a result of the fact that
the economy has been through a restructuring, the
fact that there is a fair bit of unutilised capacity
out there, Is only making the point that we're
likely to see In the first instance as the economy
picks up, as demand increases, that that demand will
be satisfied in the first instance by an Increase in
output without a commensurate increase In jobs. But
as the economy picks up more rapidly and during the
Course of the next twelve months we will see job
growth. I'm not saying there will be no job growth,
I'm not saying that we're stuck with these levels of
unemployment* I was making an historical comparison
between this period in the cycle and say a similar
period in the cycle nine years ago, when you saw a
much more rapid growth in the economy than we are
now anticipating, and also a very much more rapid
growth in employment growth.
So I was only saying that it's rather different this
time than it was last time.
J: Under that scenario does It mean that it's going to
be much harder to drag down the unemployment rate
from say 10.6 where it is now to even
T: The ether point to bear In mind, that to the extent
that the economy becomes Increasingly export
orientated and this Is a point that I've been making
Increasingly, the labour market Is only dependent on
what happens within the domestic economy, but it
depends on us getting a larger share of the world
economy as well. if you've watched, as I'm sure you
have because you are a diligent chap, if you've
watched what's happened in terms of manufacturing
exports you've seen that there's been an inexorable
increase in manufacturing exports over the last ten
years, an increase which we think will increase and
we will do whatever we can to ensure that it does
increase. And when I'm saying is that I'm
emphasising the importance of policy which directs
itself towards those particular areas of the economy
and in ways which can Improve job growth, that's one
of the things which I'm talking about.
PM: And of course as the economy picks up and more
confidence comes in people might hire more people.
That Is, that as the recovery cornes through the
employment is not lineal but sinusoidal, parabolic.
J: Mr Keating, this morning you mentioned a training
wage being Introduced, I'm wondering how you see
that wage actually working.
PM: That's all for another press conference. 
14
J: Mr Keating, the Issue of APEC, Washington has made
It pretty clear that the idea of a summit is
premature.
PM; I don't think that that's right because the terms of
the letters from President Bush to me have been most
supportive of the proposal. But the US and
Australia are basically on the one wave length an
this, but the letter which the President sent to me
was most supportive of It. Whether anyone's miffed
in the State Department, I don't know, but certainly
the administration I think they would regard It as a
good advance. But they see difficulty in doing it
themselves or doing it alone.
J: So when do you think the first Summit might be?
PM: That's not for me to say. it's never been a matter
of urgency, never. We've never put a time table on
it, I've said that often.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRAN~ SCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, WORLD CONGRESS CENTRE, MELBOURNE, 15 JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Js Mr Keating, do you support the Democrats' idea of a code of
conduct for Ministers?
PM: I don't know that it's the Democrats' idea. It's only at
this stage as I understand it, floating around in
dis cussion
JS Do you support the principle?
PM: We've always supported the principle. It is the Senate
which has . voted against disclosure. Every House of
Representatives Member discloses interests and the previous
Prime Minister and myself have insisted that ministers
behave to a code, if not one chiselled in stone.
J: Mr Keating, on superannuation, the Democrats remain
unconvinced that the superannuation guarantee levy won't
cost jobs; what else can you dQ to persuade them otherwise?
PM: The thing is it is the Government which has taken over the
years primary carriage of macro-economic policy.. We started
with superannuation to give workers a decent standard of
living in retirement. We started with that in the middle
19809. Today we are looking at an inflation rate of 1.7 per
cent. We're the ones to best make the judgement, we're the
ones most competently placed to make that judgement. And we
assert, and I think assert without fear of contradiction,
that we can afford payments by employers to superannuation
without a macro-economic risk. That is, without the
inflation rate rising.
J: The employers themselves, the ones who will be making the
payments, they also insist that they will have to shed jobs. 
You don't give their concern any credence?
PM: No because what the Government is asking of them would mean
the devotion of even just about roughly 30 per cent of the
productivity improvements which are likely to come through
the economy. So it's a relatively small, affordable,
manageable colt which will give Australian workers a decent
standard of living in retirement and build a pool of
national savings. That's what I think is important, but if
we had taken the view that superannuation would upset the
inflation rate and the future prospects of the economy we
wouldn't have done it in the 1980s and we wouldn't be
sitting now with an inflation rate of 1.7 per cent.
J1 Mr Keating, do you support another interest rate cut?
PM: I'm not here to discuss interest rates.
J1 What do you think of the Herald-Sun campaign Mr Keating?
PM: The Herald-Sun is obviously pamphleteering for the Liberal
Party. Last week they editorialised against the Government
and today they have as their front page lead a story which
comes from the Liberal Party's policy of six months ago on a
prediction about employment. growth which Mr Hewson has
himself disowned. He said it was only a guesstimate,
Fightback wasn't a model, in fact he said in the House of
Representatives, ' repeat Fightback wasn't modelled'. in
other words and when asked on radio about the two million
job., Dr Howson said well it's not real world. So for a
story which is six months oldt not real world, denied in the
House of Representatives, is the front page lead in the
Herald-Sun. I think Victorians ought to reasonably assume
that the Herald-Sun is no longer carrying news to them but
carrying the political views of the Liberal Party of
Australia and that this newspaper has decided to phampleteer
and editorialise for and on behalf of the Liberal Party of
Australia.
Jt Is this coming from the proprietor do you think?
PM: I don't think so. I think it's coming basically from the
Editor and the editorial staff.
J: Mr Keating, if the Democrat's push for a 4 per cent
superannuation levy instead of a 5 per cent, will you accept
that?
PM: I'm not here to discuss that. Now why would I respond to
that in a stand up news conference in a hotel?
J1 Would a ministerial code of conduct Marshall Island
affair.. 
PM: No. no we have had that, I've answered that before for you.
Are there any others?
Ja There are mixed signals about the economy and whether it's
recovering, do you think it's time for a cut in interest
rates?
P11: Well you asked me that a minute ago. Look the economy is
recovering, we had the Blusiness Council of Australia
yesterday saying a recovery was one That in the
organisation which speaks for our largest companies, they
said a recovery is on. We've had the national accounts show
2 per cent non-f arm growth for the past three quarters. A
recovery is definitely proceeding. While the recovery is
not proceeding evenly around Australia and it is much to the
lament that it is not proceeding as strongly in Victoria,
the fact is that it is still proceeding and the Government
will just make judgments as time goes by about what things
it should do in the macro-economic settings to maintain that
recovery and strengthen it.
ENDS A. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME HINISTERr THE, R( ON P J KEATING, XP
TO THE INSTITUTE OF COMPWIE DZIECTORS r MELBOURNE,
OUNZ 1992
Z KO PROOF ONLY
Well thank you very much Brian ( Loton), ladies and
gentlemen. it is a pleasure to speak to the institute
again, I have now had a happy association with It over
nearly ten years and I used to assiduously atteand your
funotions at Lenader, I think is the name of the place, when
I was Treasurer, and I always found miembers at the Institute
to be interested and enquiring and open to argument, and
when you are in public life that Is the only audience that
you basically warm to. So I appreciated, first of all you
asking mes and for coming in much numbers.
I thought I would, today, talk to you about Australia In the
broad, about the economy, about our-society adstart with
making a few refierence to Victoria. You don't need to be
an economic analyst to know--that Victoria has been in a
severe state of recession, of down-turn and on the
unemployment figures we saw last week, Victoria and South
Australia are the two states where unemployment is
continuing to rise. This is not so around the rest of the
country. tn the graphic illustrations of employment, in the
statisticians release lost weak, we saw New South Wales with
the rise of unemployment, and then it coming of f, the same
also In Western Australia, in Queeneland plateauing but in a
much lower level than In any of the other states. And one
could reasonably assume that it, Queensland will feel the
recovery again earlier and more strongly than some other
places. And so the pattern In that in New South Wales,
Queensland and Western Australia we are seeing a recovery
more evident than we are seeing in Victoria and South
Australia and we are seeing a deoline in unemployment arnd a
pick-up in employment growth in those three states, but not
so here and not so in South Australia. 
Now, what is the reason for that? Well it is very hard to
say and I know many people have sought to ponder that
question, but I think the answer is that we are seeing
structural change and cyclical decline, we are seeing a
decline in the Victorian employment base coming from the
cycle, and we are seeing a structure shift as the whole
economy changes from what It was, and that was en economy
where which was largely protected and where w6 hadn't the
kind of Sophisticated Industries which we are now starting
to soo emerging.
I think there are a number of other reasons why Victoria is
languishing. I shall just go through them. I think the
first is, the 1980s notion that you could build employment
off public sector spending, which In the end of course is
unsustainable, secondly the debt hangover, which you may
say, well it hangs over other states, I think I would bay it
hangs over here moru particularly and even some of the
businesses which may be known to headquarter themselves
elsewhere, but financed out of Victoria, the problem of
Stat, Banks, the problem of State Banks In the Institution
of banking these days, end seeking to find themselves a
place by being bankers, if not of last resort, near last
resort, and the problems which has come from that; and the
cyclical movement away from mfanufacturing, as I mentioned
earlier; and the labour hoarding which wa6 promoted by
lower labour costs in the 1900s. 1 think the combination of
l@ ovur ' hoarding from low labour cost* in the 1960a and also
public sector spending In Victoria ink the 1980s, had
unemployment here in victoria, to its lowest levels in the
Commonwealth in 1988-89. Levels that many of us thought
were unsustainable and that I think because of the fact that
Victoria was primed, pumped primed and then supported by a
very ambitious financial sector, that the decline in the
economy which hbucU ome from the recession, plus the
structural shift, meant that the Correction in Victoria has
been more pronounced and more profound than it has been in
other states.
well I suppose the question Is where do we go from here.
Well I think the first piace we go from here ise the recovery
In general. And we are seeing the recovery, in the three
quarters to March we have had Just upon two per cent of nonfarm
GOP growth. Now the budget has a forecast of 2.7 per
cent, which would mean we would need .7 In the June quarter
we may get It, we may not. flvt the economy is clearly
growing again. And I notice today that the business Council
of Au~ tralia or yesterday made a release which didn't rate
that well in the newspapers, but It said; the Business
Council considers that the economy is recovering, employment
opportunitias well improved as a recovery becomes more
broadly booed, this will only happen If the Government
continues to lock-in low inflation and pursues microeuonomio
reforms. The Business Council seem a consistent
pattern of signals for recovery and economic activity over
the next six months In its survey of member companies. And
it goes on, signs of recovery and economic activity over the
next six months are indicated in the 6urvey. in particular, 
the majority of respondents expect Increases in Volume of
sales, exports and revenues, there hag been a signif icant
increase In the number of responbdents Intending to Increase
stocks and nearly half of the Manufacturing respondents have
upgraded pilans for capital expenditure. I think we should
believe, reasonably, that a rooovery of substance to coming
through. go that is the first thing about where do we go f rom here.
As that general recovery comes through it is going to pick
up, in part, Victorian commerce and Victorian activity the
same as It is the rest of the economy.
2 think secondly, we have got to push the restructuring on
but get the volumes up. The now efficiencies which are
coming in to industry, because the downside of those new
efficiencies iS higher unemployment, the upside Is of
course, greatly enhanced productivity. That from those new
efficiencies we should be seeking to build volume and
employing people in businesses with a greater volume base,
albeit businesses which are more efficient* And Instead of
seeking, as some people do in the debate, entrenched
inefficiencies, In the belief that volumes will be held
constant, but where in reality volumes will be slated to
die. Now perhaps an example of that is in the motor
Industry in this State. We are seeing the Ford Capri
exported to the United States, work for people at the Ford
Plant that would not exist In the old motor Industry. We
are socin? the Toyota motor company establish a $ 400 million
stae-f-e-rt plant, in part to export that vehicle, that
Is the Toyota Camry. And we are seeing now engine
praduotion, for export we would not have seen some years
ago. in other words, the plants may not be employing the
number of people they were employing in the 19809 but they
now have an economic future, both at home and abroad that
they would not have had, We are still producing In the last
12 to 15 months or even in the highest times, a year or so
ago, two years ago the same number of motor vehicles we
produced In 1973, because there is simply buyer resistance
to price, people won't pay the price to turn their car
over. So if we are seeking to maintain an industry, built
on a high-cost, low-efficiency basis of production and hope
that by some, if you like, staging of that, come pause in
the structural shift, that that will maintain employment in
the State of Victoria, don' t think that is true. So the
new efficiencies have got to be pressed on with, but we have
got turn it into bigger volume$, And that simply meant
focussing again on exports as well as tha domestic market.
The third thing I think about where we go from here; Is
defitiliq the role for Government In making markets work.
And I put that in contradistinction to the 1980s Victorian
view, which was for the Government to be a market itself,
because It Is no stcret to any of you, that I argued over
this point in the 1980s. There is a role for Governments in
making markets work, we have seen it in the One flation
eatement, which Brian referred to In his introduCtory
remarks. In estab. lishing a new national rail highway, which 
can Only be done by Government, trying to make the transport
market, or the transportation market Work, LA~ a better
interface between the ports and rail. Or separating power
generation from distribution, tojproduce a true market for
electricity. This is the thing abut the role of Governmrent
and the DCA retor&amp; to it yesterday in its release talking
about micro-oonomic reform, that Is keeping the changes
coming through, again in contradistinction to the New
Zealand approach, now adopted by my political opponents,
where you basically turn the œ lam-thrower on the Industry,
we have some sort of gigantic national funeral pyre, " n
from the ashes emerges some phoenix even though we know that
market force@ alone won't change the rail system, because no
private Interest will Invest In it, or the ports or the
power generation, etcetera.
So I think those things: press on with the recovery; press
on the with structural change In the efficiencis; get the
volumes up; get the Governmient in there to break the lo-g-
Jame in the market to get the efficiencies moving; anid try
and keep the economy together and the community together in
a sort of commitment to the change In general.
Now we have heard a lot said about comparative advantage,
and there is a lot of literature published In recent years
about it. But It seems to me we have a number of
comparative advantages In this country. There are at least
five that one can think of: there is resources and food;
there is space; there Is a trained workforce; a high
quality Government R&amp; D base, if not a private ML bse; and
proximlity to the Asia-Pacific: they are all things which we
hove. Of these we all know about resources and agriculture, we
have all been brought up on those industries, that is
knowing about them. We know about a trained workforce, but
we are only just learning the value of It, how to use it,
and how to build it. Because In the post we have put too
low a premium on that training and our trained workforce is
in a stote of decline. It Is now changing, rapidly. This
is good for us. In 1983, only three children in ten
com~ pleted secondary school, this year that is nearly eight
in ten and we have now created In since the iniddle-1980a
120,000 univerbity places, or the equivalent of twelve
cnpuses to take 40 per cant, just on 40 per cent of that
stream of kids out in to universities. we are just a jot
behind the United States In university places, as a
proportion of the schooling, those finishing compulsory
education and way ahead of most OECD countries. But we have
been poor at the next stratum of our educational system,
which is training and vocational education. Where we have
got ki~ ds cascading out of school into the milk-bars, railway
stations, shopping mall plazas, instead of In to a properly
structured vocational education end training system.
we have always though of trade, I think trade and vocational
training as something not really going on beyond
apprentIceships or riudiimentary skills. The notion that 
adding value and sophisticated manufacturing or
sophisticated services, required Sophisticated skills and
that you couldn't develop one without the other, Is really a
late development in our national thinking, but a development
we nkow have to press on with. And It is not the answer to
go back to dead-end jobs, as John Howard would have us do,
but to leave that behind and continue with a ski lls based
workcforce, an education system that takes kids beyond that
sort of unskilled area we had In the 1960a and 1950s, In to
skills jobs which we have shown they have been able to got
when the economy Is growing.
Go : think we have to take the view that It there In any
resources boom in the future, It is not the resources boom
that Malcolm Fraser and John Howard had in mind, of digging
up) enother mound of minerals, or growing another paddock
full of wheat, but a boom in intellectual resources, which
we have at our hand, but have been, to date not fully
prepared to utilige. And that is of course using the skills
of our children.
Now the legacy of the lost year. of opportunities Of the
1970s was a nation unable to pay for its imports, and a
nation with disappearing dead-end jobs. And so we have seen
a rise in structural unam.. 2oye-t, which has been cis most
apparent in this state as it has been in any other state.
The lament should not be to go back to It and try and hang
on to it, but again to press ahead with the skills based
Change of new efficiencies in industries and to get the
volumes going.
Now I wanit to put this % heme to you because I have got now a
very aggressive opponent and there was a time when I was
very genteel at these sort of meetings, and If it is just
after an election I think you are entitled to a couple of
years of a very haughty diet of thoughts, but with in
proximity of a poll I think some political factors ought to
be brought to mind. But I want to put them in this
important eo~ ial and economic context. I don't believe that
we can produce the kind of country we are now in the course
of developing; that to one with an external orientation,
where a premiiumi is going on skills and research and
development, in product innovation, in exports, in import
competiLloa, exploiting the proximity of the Asia-Pacific, I
don't believe that you can develop that sort of country from
the stale mineral, agricultural reliant, low training, low
levels of participation education base from the 1970s we
have come from, without getting basically national
commitments to these things. So what I am maying to you is
I don't think you can run the place without some sort of
consensus approach. Now whether you want to call it
consensus or consultation or co-operation or tripartite
commitment, uall it who% you like if we want to take
ourselves from the industrial museum, the Coalition were
happy to leave us In tor the better part of a couple of
decades, an~ d take us to being what we should have always
mainained our~ zlves as; a sophiaticateO economy, where the
premi~ um wos on higher value products and services ani more 
interesting jobs, then I believe you have got to have
basically Agreements about those things. Now as you know,
People have said well you have had that With the Accord
process, with a conasensus model developed f rom the 1983
Economic Summit, and the answer to we have. The claim then
made is, It is these processes which have slowed structural
change, economic change. my claim is a counter-claim, that
the change we have been through Is quite profound, " n quite
rapid and could only have been dons In this context. In
other words, the consensus model, the co-operative model hats
allowed change that we would not have had, but I bslieve
change which he@ come more quickly. And that our opponents
view, which is now the sort of New Zealand view or the
Thatcher view, that you basically expose the place to markest
forces and the devil will take the hind-moot, that there
Isn't a job for Government moving to the creations markets,
that there isn't of the Government lifting the participation
market rates in echools, that there Isn't a job for
Government remodelling the training of the skills-based
system of the country, that there Isn't a job for Government
with management pulling that together In to a competitive
whole, I think without that kind of approach we won't be
abla to do it.
Now we have seen It under the Accord, with national income
determination, with the share of national income going to
profits and the share going to wages, with the wage
flexibility we have developed In recent years and are still
now developing, with the anti-inflation consensus, where for
the first time in our miodern history, we have had the
workforce of Australia committed to anti-inflation, low
inflation objectives, the consensus to open the economy up,
to take down the board of protection, to out a competitive
exchange rate mechanism, to live with all the adjustment.
pressures which were implicit in that shift, to a floating
exchange rate and a policy position of positive
discrimination In favour of employment which we saw In the
1980s, when we were doing three times the OECD average in
emiployment growth, is I think the kind of model Australia
needs, and one in which It will prosper.
we are now at the position where inflation, we have beaten
the 20 year legacy of high infladiin, Wi -ooksd at the last
quarter zero Inflation end 1.7 per cent for the year. At
the Premiers' Conference last Friday, when we looked at the
nominal payments to the States and calculated the real level
of payments, the deflator we used, the Inflation forecast of
the CPI for the coming year, was 1.7 per cent. I mean it is
eons since Australia had that position and the maintenance
of those low inflation rates and the attendant inflation
rates that come with it, bill rates of 6 1/ 2 per cent, which
we haven't seen ina a couple of decades, can power on the
next phase of Australia's development. Paul Volker broke
the back of American inflation in 1980, and gave America a
decade of prosperity as a result. But American fiscal
policy and ierican public policy in micro-economic change
did not accompany that kind of shif t, and they have run in
to bottle-necks in their society. That Is the nistekG we 
II:;
7
are trying to avoid. But I believe, we will emerge from
this recession to recovery with inflation at a sasinably
low level, with basically a structural budget surplus, even
though It is In cyclical deficit, but returning to surplus
by the middle 19908, with now large changes at the
enterprise level with enterprise bargaining, a willingness
on the part of the organised workforce to change work
practices, and on the part of management, management
practices, and a focus again not on the easy resort to
inflationary profits, but the generation of income, gives . us
a unique opportunity to soore from this shift the recession,
and to take Australia through the 1990a on a sustainable,
reasonably high growth, low inflationary path.
Now, what I put to you is our opponents put all that at
risk. what they are saying, let's have an APPM approach to
industrial relations,
Where an employee an Individual person and a company will
have to agree themselves to opt back into the Industrial
relations system to maintain the benefits of awards
protection. So es federal awards excpire so to does our
holiday pay, working conditions, rates of pay and the rest
and there signed up under common law contracts for
industrial relations purpoases. That will produce industrial
relations mayhem and the anti Inflation consensus we now
have will go out the window as surely as it comes in and s0
therefore I believe this sort of confrontation approach that
ts the simple motion that market forces will fix the place
when we know a lot of the problems are inaccessible like the
rail system, the interface with ports the
telecommunications, electricity, roads in all of these areas
where basically market forcea haven't operated and can't
properly operate without governments being involved or in
training or in changing the nature of TAFE, lifting the
status of our vocational education system, looking at
training wages as we are now doing to employ more young
people than we've employed in recent times. All of these
things can only come by a process of involving employers,
unions, State Government's and Federal Government's because
the State 0overnmuents run most of the instrumentalities the
Federal Government has got macro-economic management, Of
It's essence It is consultationery as we saw last Friday at
the Premiers ConfereefC In trying to got TAFE back on the
table again to look at the national approach. it has to be
a discussion and if we rely on market forces market forces
won't do it because there is not a market working so I think
that 5nlashing the coneensus or smashing a cooperative basis
of working together to confrontationist and a product of
political primatives who don't know how to make the society
tick, that don't know where all the bits of power are and
how to strand it together into a common thread which can
work for Austrelia and its future. So what I think about Dr
H! owson is he is offering no eocial consensus, he is offering
you 8 funeral pyre, he doesn't understand keeping the
society together, he says there to no role for government
and the social consensus In things like the right to
effcrdable education not the right to pay what your parents 
can pay for a university piece not the right to go and put
twelve thousand on the table to buy a place In the
university but the right to a university education If you
are smart enough and ommitted enough. The right of access
to medical treatment, a universal right to health protection
a right too often in this country denie4 to the poor who
couldn't afford to worry about their health, Income support
for families of particular low Income families the families
in people in low skilled jobs with children; naturally
income support for the unem~ ployed not tipping them offœ after
nine months and sending them down to St Vincent de Paul
Society or the Brotherhood of St Lawrence or somebody else.
Provision for the aged as the population &amp; ase providing for
them in nursing homes, hostels se-oommodation home and
community care for support at hoaie a decent standard of
living in retirement by national savings put away to produce
a retirement income. These are all the things that can
deliver a more cohesive society a more responsive workforce
and with It a commitment a low inflation enhanced
productivity wage flexibility enterprise bargaining and
basically Autralia coming together in a very cooperative
way. So the Coalition doesn't haye the sophisticated view
and on top of that it wants to add 6 7 percentage points
to the price system from the goods and services tax which
will lift the Inflation rats accordingly. which will not bs
discounted for wages which In large part will go Into
onigoing inflation and then straight away into interest
rates. Because we all know if the Inflationary floor under
Interest rates rises the nominal Interest rate rises and we
are back to those sort of double digit interest rates which
for eo long have retarded our investment and economic
growth. So I conclude on this point and I am happy to take questions
on these points. That basically we thinkc there is role
for goverulit but it Is not the role of the government
being Market. The role for government is to do the things
I mentioned; re-build a national rail network, build the
arterial roads, to establish a decent market for electricity
to exploit that huge comparative advantage of a coal seam
right the way down the east coast of Australia, to give
Australia a decent tourist Industry, to have a rational
airline policy, to develop a vocation and education system
or In even the things which are government In the tax systea
the providers we did In the One Nation statement. Private
provision for public development bonds, accelerated
depreciation for investment in this country, pool
development funds. All of these things I think augur for a
role, an interested sophisticated role for governmnent in
society and rejecting the view that if business people want
to deal with goveriviients want to create a better society,
went to do something good and sensible that basically in
some way they are offending some sort of tenent of economics
of sort of Adam Smith Economics or so john Hewson put it
when the busineas community spoke to us in the One Nation
consultation's he said they were bludgera looking for a
handout not that they were people intereuted In Australia
looking for better national outcomes but bludgers looking 
9
( Or a handout. He said he was appled that business was
asking for things, what I say to you Is what business has
asked for in the last decade Is a rational set of policies
the right to a Sensible discussion with Labor the goverrnent
to take notice of the separations of these two principal
groups in the economy and In doing eo while doing so
building a social framework which people in this country
believe will look after them regardless of their eoonomie
circumstances. Now that's the sort of model I think will
pull AUStralia through and while Victoria has languished in
this recession those who want to take us back to those
stultifying days of the early 8os or late 708 of* inefficient
Industries of companies that can never hope to compete and
Just watch even the dead end jobs disappear will be doing
Australia a great disservice and the people that ought to be
listened to are the ones that want to keep a structural
change going who are not frightened by the consequences of
some of the structural change and will keep driving on until
we end up with a society which Is re-modelled wearing some
of the adjustment costs on the way through but coming out
the other side Into a low inflation competitive culture
which will stand Australia Ina good steed, provide decent
levels of employment, higher level of income and more
Interesting jobs. it's basically out there but It Is not
out there If we faltere It is not out there if we doubt it
and it is not out there It we are not sure of our place In
Asia, we are not sure Who we are and what we are and if we
go and exploit the neighbourhood we live Ina and go out there
as a proud competitive people not selling a second hand bill
of goods but something now and Innovative and clever then
there Is a placa for us.
Than~ k you for listening, I will be happy to take questions. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE DEATH OF BRETT WHITELEY
I was saddened today to learn of the death of the great
Australian artist Brett Whiteley.
Brett Whiteley was probably Australia's most significant
contemporary artist. I had a high personal regard for him
and for his work. His immense contribution to our
nation's art and culture will be remembered.
CANBERRA 16 June 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH GERALDINE DOOGUE, ABC RADIO, 16 JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
GD: Goad morning and welcome to ' Life Matters'. This
morning my special guest is ith-ePii-ea-RKister, Mr
Keating, a man about whom many people apparently
have fixed opinions. He's hardly cut a bland image
over the years he's been having a relationship with
the Australian public. And if opinion polls are any
guide Mr Keating does still have an image Problem in
that he continues to record high disapproval ratings
and his transition from Treasurer to Prime Minister
doesn't appear to have significantly altered
people's perceptions. Mind you, 30 per cent of
people polled in The Australian newspaper's Newspoll
that was just published this morning said they were
undecided between Mr Keating and Dr John Hewson, and
that was the highest ever recording. Though the
state of the parties put Labor a full ten points
behind, just pretty well stable. Now these polls
are an effort, of course, and effort only to guess
the public mood at any one time so they are not
definitive, but several of them do show he has a
particular problem with female voters. Last month
he brought out veteran feminist and bureaucrat Anne
Sumr from the United States to help him turn that
around. There would be a very definite view of
course, for any man who presides over an
unemployment rate of 10.6 has a real problem with
voters not one of perception. But Mr Keating must
persuade people that whatever they think of him, the
alternative is worse. And the dilemma for him is
how to go on the attack to present that-issue as
well as present a subtly different image to the
sorts of voters, many of them women but not all of
them, or are a little less fascinated by the game of
politics and moved more by impressions of people's
biases and predilections.
So with all that in mind, I spoke to Mr Keating
yesterday afternoon when he was visiting Melbourne
to speak to the Institute of Directors. So Mr
Keating, welcome to ' Life Matters'. 
PM: Thank you Gerry, it is lovely to be here.
GD: What do you think of the way President Bush and Dan
Quale used the word family in their campaigning
strategies? They talk about a return to family
values and they talk about the break down, the moral
order, do you think that appeals to the Australian
voter?
PM: No, because I think the notion of famil is
different now to what it was. There are all sorts
of families and public policy has got to comprehend
that. We sought to do that in the 1980s, to support
all kinds of families. A couple of years ago John
Howard had a set of ads where he had the cottage and
the white picket fence and that'Is the sort of 1950s
view of the Australian family. Well, John is a
person, he would want to take us back there, but
life has moved on. I don't like double speak in
politics. I think if any government wants to claim
an interest in families the policies have got to fit
the bill. That is, don't tell us what you think,
tell us what you're going to do.
GD: But you say John Howard is a man of the past, but in
many ways you and he share the fact that your
families are part of the 23 per cent who live in
that traditional style ' Chat used to operate when the
white picket fence was more the norm, in that you've
got the man going out to work, the woman staying at
home and the kids at home. So you are not that
different in that sense at all.
PM: Except that I don't want to squeeze every other
family into the model. That is I except the view
that we're looking at a family structure which is
greatly different to that.
GD: Do you regret that?
PM: Not at all. That's why I think that government
policy should be basically supporting families
regardless of their character.
GD: I mean I notice that you often describe us as a
nation in transition, but usually you refer to the
public face of Australia and its financial
community, its trade and so on, there is very little
reference to its private face. What do you think
about the changes that hove occurred between women
and men in households, and between parents and their
children? Do you like the general thrust or do you
have real reservations?
PM: I like the thrust. Can I say from the 1980s, the
vast employment growth we had in the 1980s most of
it went to women. I regard that as an unambiguously 
good thing that women were given a choice could do
things, had more fulfilling lives I don't lament
that at all. I think that's part of the social
change which we are seeing and should see. That is,
that women are not squeezed into a particular mould.
GD: But a lot of people say that, it rolls of the
tongue, it's the thing to say these days, but you
haven't had as a man to go through the transition in
your own household of having two people working.
PM: No, but the difference is though that I went through
the policy consequences of it, I didn't resist it
like John Howard did. For instance, I was the
Treasurer that provided for a five-fold growth in
child care places, I was the Treasurer that had to
fund and help design the Family Allowance
Supplement. Whatever my own experience wias I took
the view that there are other sorts of families and
that the women in those families want to do other
things and I've sought to have public policy
accommodate that change.
GD: Why then are you perceived as having a problem with
women?
PM: I don't think I do. Can I just say, in the
portfolio I had as Treasurer in the 1980s, I had
many things to do with women's policy, but it was
invariably under another portfolio heading and so
these things were always announced by their
Ministers. But some of the things I was involved
with were, for instance, the child support agency.
Now we could never have established one of those
without using the Australian Taxation Office. There
was no agency of the Commonwealth that could
actually go and set that system up and make it
operate. I made that thing operate. Superannuation
before we moved into superannuation policy women
just couldn't get preservation of superannuation.
They'd hop into the workforce at 17, maybe disappear
in their middle twenties to have a family, come back
in, and have no preserved benefits for them. I
introduced all those in legislation the
supplementary payments for low paid workers, mostly
women, shop assistants, process workers, again
women. Bill Kelty and I worked that into Accords Mark V and
VI. These are things which haven't sort of hit the
light of day. I notice Carmel Niland said the other
day in a piece in the Sydney Morning Herald that I'm
just discovering social equity for women. Well the
truth is Carmel hasn't yet discovered me. I've been
through these issues before properly Carmen was
beating a drum about them. That is, the Child
Support Agency, supplementary payments,
superannuation, massive increase in funding for 
childcare, the Family Allowance Supplement and all
the other things like how I supported Susan Ryan in
discrimination policies, positive discrimination in
favour of women. Yet these were all sort of Cabinet
room things I did. The things which are exclusively
mine were superannuation, supplementary payments,
the Child Support Agency, although I did that with
Brian Howe, but without the Tax Office it wouldn't
have happened.
GD: Yes, but I suppose you could say you've also
presided over a recession in which now 680,000
children have neither parent working at home. And
you yourself say that the most important policies
you can do for women is to get the economy going
properly, you've said that all through the 1980s so
that they can be the beneficiaries of it. So that
has also occurred and maybe it is a stylistic thing,
maybe your style is more playing the game of
politics with a perception of the predator and the
ruthlessness which women just distrust
fundamentally.
PM: I think they ought to look at what we do as well as
what we say. You mentioned about the jobs in the
1980s we went from a work force of six million to
seven and a half million, a 25 per cent increase.
That slowed down of course in the recession, it
stopped in the recession. But about 65 per cent of
those jobs went to women.
GD: But was that the plan?
PM: The plan was a positive discrimination in favour of
employment. Employment wasn't residual, it dropped
down in numbers and we went after employment. The
whole Accord process of agreed income determination
was to devote the proceeds of that restraint to
growth and we had very low participation rates
amongst women and that rose quite sharply. Can I
say also on education, we've taken participation
rates in schools from 3 in 10 in 1983 to now nearly
8 in 10 and lifted university places by 50 per cent.
The great part of that has gone to women, to girls,
and I don't know of any better way of giving women
in the economy a change to participate than through
education.
GD: But then there's a collolary to that which is child
care, which is the other major thing that does
preoccupy women. If you're going to have more and
more women not taking full responsibility in those
early years someone's going to have to do that.
Will it be the State in your view?
PM: We have taken, I think I said to you earlier, child
care places from 50,000 to 250,000 by 1995 and no
doubt when we get there we will continue on. That 
has made a major contribution to participation for
women by women, to have that facility, to have the
support. And now there is work la ce child care,
which again we pioneered, and now naving companies
involved. The tax office, can I say as a
Commonwealth agency under me, the first place where
the Commonwealth agreed to have child support at
work was the Tax Office. Trevor Boucher and I
agreed we'd do it. That is, the first Commonwealth
agency that had child care support at work. This is
also now true of the private economy and private
business.
GD: I suppose it is a question of degree. At the inner
city child care centre in the building in which I
work in Sydney, there is an 18 month waiting list
for children under the age of two and they told me
that that's true basically of all inner city child
care centres. That's a lot of people whose lives
are being affected because they can't get child care
places. Maybe we've just got to think on an
altogether difference scale about childcare. Do you
think that?
PM: I think the cost of running a full day care centre
is such that you can't build it at a speed beyond
which we've gone. But in shared costs, in work
place accommodation and in other child care services
particularly at home, that is beyond the long day
care centre, that gives us a chance of opening the
system up at a more marginal cost. I think it will
be a combination of the two.
GD: And are you talking about a blend of private and
public?
PM: Largely I think yes.
GD: Right.
PM: But that's not to say that the core program which is
being for the long day care centres, we don't regard
as anything other than the core.
GD: This is the fee reliefsyste..
PM: The fee relief system for the low paid. Can I just
say these are all the things John Hewson would put
the cleaners through, he makes that abundantly
clear. And so again, just going back to your point,
don't judge him by the mild-mannered doorstop, judge
him by what he says he'll do and what we've done. I
think that's the point.
GD: I wonder, I'll come back to that in a moment, I
wonder whether just as all Australian parents expect
the government, as a basic provision, to provide
primary school education, can you see a time when 
the government also expects to provide pre-school
child care, just an item of consolidated revenue?
PM:. I think universally no, because of its size and
vast cost, but in principle, yes because we've
already crossed that rubicon. We crossed that
rubicon by providing the various categories of child
care and by carrying the cost of private provision
for child care. So it will happen, but again like
all other social change and reform it will take
time.
GD: How long do you imagine? I mean what sort of
process do you think we're presiding over as a
country, this transition to a quite new way in which
we take responsibility for children, the way in
which we order our households, the way in which we
all work?
PM: I think that's going to change. I think we're going
to see people trained and re-trained and shifting
the style of their work, the retiring age in reality
has probably come down as people have in fact, not
retired, but taken on other forms of work. The
workforce is changing and patterns of work are
changing and this is also true with women. I think
that child care has become part of the expectation
of mobility for Australia women and this government
has done its best to make as many places available
in the various forms.
GD: A lot of the market research that's done by good
market researchers say that underneath it all, men
in particular, are very concerned about this. Again
they know that the trends are there, but underneath
it all are anxious and they are resentful about
these changes. They sort of say I don't know
whether I ever joined the debate, it's happening
despite me. Can you honestly say you're not like
that?
PM: Resentful about what?
GD: Resentful of the fact that the households they
thought they'd inherit are not there to inherit.
That their children are looked after by others other
than their immediate family, that their wives are
going out, they maybe have to cook the meal at night
and do the ironing.
PM: I'm certainly not resentful about it.
GD: Do you ever do the ironing?
PM: No, I don't do the ironing very often.
GD: Do you do the cooking? 
PM: No,* I don't do that much ' either. I'll be honest
with you I haven't, but I've done my bit when I
think it has mattered. But again, I wouldn't take
the view that one should be resentful. The barriers
to women's participation in the workforce have been
quite profound and where-ever I can give the system
a nudge to help open it up I have. Whether it's in
the Commonwealth area or in the Treasury itself or
where-ever its been I've tried to give them a break
that the system is sort of not prone to give, that
it needs again that positive push. And I don't
think you can take that view and at the same time be
resentful, it's a dichotomy view. I regarded the
right to an interesting life, job, as a primary
right of Australian women.
GD: But there is a cost to that, isn't there, in terms
of who looks after the children? In the next
generation who is actually going to come through and
be responsible, absolutely? And, there is
increasing evidence that because we can't rethink
work we've got rigid work structures contributing to
family dysfunction. What role do you see government
playing in trying to, both by carrot and stick
methods, get companies to change the way they allow
people to work?
PM: I think it is changing, I think households are quite
efficient at working these things out. I wouldn't
be as gloomy as I think you think some are about
working these things out and we all know, I'm sure
you do Geraldine, I do, of families that are in
exactly this situation and they work it out very
well.
GD: Dare I say that I have actually been through this
and you have not. I think a lot of women look on
and say look there he is with his neat home and
everything is very orderly for him and basically
because by either by choice or by need I'm there
living in this sort of turmoil and there is a lot of
evidence about that. Why would you understand what
thousands of people are going through?
PM: Whatever understanding I have of it, I have used to
shift public policy in favour of that variation in
the style of the Australian family. It's not
necessarily a matter for me to say well I have to
function that way too, otherwise good policy can't
be made.
GD: You've sat in the Cabinet room and I suppose you've
had an incredible vantage point there, you have seen
the toll that politics and ambition have taken on
families of your colleagues. Do you often reflect
on that, I wonder? 
PM: Public life is very hard, because it is so intrusive
it wears away at any family situation. But all the
same, there's no point particularly in looking at
ourselves, it all gets back to we've got the policy
levers so what are we going to do with them? Do we
do progressive things with them or do we take
reactionary positions? For my part, I hope I've
always taken progressive positions.
GD: Maybe it's no longer enough to assume that people
understand where you're coming from with the way the
world is changing nowadays. it's almost like people
have to make a statement about their attitudes to
the changing roles between men and women, there's
almost an acceptance that things are not as they
once were. And maybe that's an area where you
haven't bought into this very much at all in the
past. I wonder why you're doing it now?
PM: Because now I am Prime Minister, then I was
Treasurer and social policy would have been
announced by Brian Howe who was then Minister for
Social Security, or in the case of women's policy,
by Susan Ryan and her successors. The things which
you have primary carriage, the announcement impacts,
the announcement affects were basically not in the
Treasury portfolio. But in the Treasury portfolio
certainly all of the capacity and grease on the
tracks which put these things into place, obtained.
That is I was able to use that job to do many of
these things which wouldn't have otherwise been
done. But I wasn't the one announcing them and I
think what happens in this country is synonomous
with your own announcements. People sort of type
cast you. It's the same with women in the
government, can I say this, that after the 1987
election the factions of the Caucus decided that
they would have no women. And I said to Bob Hawke
at the time this was an outrage that we've just been
returned to office and the notion was that Susan
Ryan was in risk of being defeated in the Centre
Left and she was the only woman member of the
ministry, and I suggested that Bob should say that
we insist upon at least each grouping providing a
woman. And that's where the three places camne from
in 1987.
GD: So it was you and not him? We heard it was him.
PM: No, it was me. I put the view to him, and can I say
it was a view that Bob was sympathetic with. I
wanted to see at the time that Susan was maintained
there, I was trying to get Ros Kelly up from the
Right of the Party and it was also. I felt it
important that one of the women on the Left got a
place as well. So I argued this and I didn't have
to argue it hard to him because Bob always had, I
think, a similar view to me about this, but at least 
he then put to the factions that this is as it
should be.
GD: And why the opposition to them? How do you
determine..
PM: Jobs, simply jobs about who was able to win them and
who was vulnerable. Nothing more than that, you
know what sort of scramble takes place after a
general election. Amid the scramble a lot of these
things get trampled upon. So I went out there
barracking for that and I was quite happy and of
course, I've always had a lot of loyalty from the
people who I've helped, Susan and Ros et cetera.
GD: I think we need a little music break before we
actually come back and discussed the vexed issue of
unemployMent. We happen to have a Mahler here,
knowing that you're a fan. Just last Friday the ABC
brought out a CD of Stewart Challender's conducting
the Sydney Symphony Orchestra in Mahler's
Resurrection Symphony. Which is the part which you
like most of that?
PM: If you're listeners can stand it the last five or
six minutes.
GD: As good as you hoped?
PM: The orchestra was a bit thin. That's a very hard
thing to do well, but it was good enough.
GD: Maybe you need Mahler to listen to when you consider
unemployment.
PM: With the conversation we're having it would have
been better with the slow movement from the third
because to belt your listeners with that is..
GD: The triumphant Mahler, not quite the tone with which
to..
PM: No.
GD: There does appear to be finally, I suggest to you,
rising indignation about youth unemployment in
particular and the way it's setting us up to reap a
sort of whirl wind of misery in the next ten years,
just leaving aside this recession altogether. Even
the AMA is urging you now I notice to spend money
and set up a national task-force. Can people look
forward to anything practical on this issue in the
next twelve months?
PM: It's a problem, a real problem, but I don't think we
should be unduly gloomy about it. Great strides
have been made to take our 15 to 19 year olds and
educate them and provide interesting job 
opportunities for them in the new order economy we
developed from the 1980s. Now certainly we've been
through the period of the recession which is both
unfortunate and disappointing for many people, but
we've also changed from the sorts of jobs we had in
the 1950s, ' 60s and 170s the so called dead-end
jobs. There are fewer of them out there for 15 to
19 year olds because, as a cohort they've moved on
to the more interesting trained jobs, and I think
the statistics are not that well understood. Only
about 2 or 3 kids in 10 in that group, 15 to 19 year
olds, are in the work force and only about 1 in
of them are unemployed.
GD: Yes I understand.
PM: Now that's a problem.
GD: Indeed.
PM: But it's not 46 per cent of them. This notion that
half of them are unemployed, that's not right.
GD: True, but even so there's a tragedy in those 2 in
anyway and there's a great deal of debate about how
many more we should be adding. But even if we look
a few years down the track as people have pointed
out, we've got so many kids staying on now, what
about the log jam when they actually come out into
the workforce with high hopes and expectation that
education is going to deliver them jobs, and the
jobs aren't there and in the next few years there's
not a lot of evidence that there's going to be jobs
there.
PM: The 1980s proved the jobs were there, that was the
point.
GD: Then they vanished and the restructuring is underway
and it suggests they've gone.
PM: No, they haven't vanished. We started off with a
workforce of 6 million in 1983 and we've today,
notwithstanding the unemployment got a workforce of
seven and a half million, so it's 25 per cent larger
than it was. Those jobs have been held. In the
sort of economy we are now developing, a much more
sophisticated one where we are adding value to both
manufacturing and to services, young people trained
for that kind of economy will find jobs. The key
for us is to lift product, to lift GDP because
whenever one looks at a graphic illustration of
unemployment and GDP you find whenever growth rises
so too does employment. The key for us is to get
growth up.
GD: Yes, but haven't we also known that out of every
recession since the 1961 credit squeeze more people 
have emerged unemployed at the end of that recession
and that is a very unpleasant cyclical trend we
haven't escaped?
PM: Because of structural change. The kind of economy
that we were in coming into each recession was
different from the one we have coming out and it
leaves people untrained for the change and we have
what's called structural unemployment. Now the aim
for us is to get that structural unemployment down
and to deal with the long-term unemployed, the
people who end up being unemployed for 12 months or
more and to get them into labour market programs and
get them trained, get them out, get them moving, get
them job experience and get them going. But what
we're seeking to do now is to look at those 1 in
to 19 year olds who are unemployed and try and
find through a change in entry level training wages,
that is a training wage, a wage we pay to those kids
in skilled or semi-skilled jobs, let them in and
then train them. That's currently what we're
looking at, that is trying to take them and say look
alright the deadend job has disappeared, the ones
which were there in the thousands when I was a kid
are now not there. There are jobs but they're
trained jobs, you're not trained, what can we do to
help you. First of all we'll give you a job, we'll
give you job experience..
GD: Who is going to pay for that?
PM: I think that is going to be done by a combination of
the government and employers and this meeting I'm
having in a few weeks is about that very thing, that
is, what will employers contribute, what will the
Commonwealth contribute to taking kids up, giving
them work experience, and training them while they
are getting it.
GD: Are you talking about a grant scale thing? How much
money are we talking about?
PM: We're not down to dollars and cents, but something
which is going to make a significant difference to
the problem.
GD: In the next six to twelve months?
PM: Geraldine, people should understand that there is
something good happening here. what's happened in
the 1980s is that we've lost a lot of those jobs
which had no future, which were deadend jobs, were
not interesting and were low paid
GD: No, but they got people into the community, they got
them out of their homes. 
PM: Yes, and they never got them anywhere else. That
was as far as they'd ever got them. The jobs you
are sort of seeing, we've seen in the last half a
dozen years, people can start of f quite young in the
job and find themselves in London for six months or
find themselves in Tokyo back into Australia. It's
now a more interesting economy than it was in the
1960s or 1970s, and even though its stopped growing
for the moment, it's now growing again. The fact is
that they are more interesting jobs and they're
taken by trained people and that's why we have
lifted the number of university places sharply in
the 1980s, we've added 50 per cent of places to
universities and I'm now trying to get technical and
further education going so that the 60 per cent of
kids who cascade out of school come into a
vocational education system if they can't get into
university. And again they get trained to be taken
up in those jobs. So it's not as if the jobs are
not there for them, it's just they are different
sorts of jobs. They are trained jobs not untrained
jobs.
GD: Yes.
PM: Skilled jobs.
GD: Yes, but you say yourself you have got to create
jobs, you've got to make jobs. Those jobs on the
sort of scale we are talking about are not there yet
in Australia are they?
PM: In the 1980s they were there. They came through
very, very fast. That's why what the Government's
got to do is get all the structural impediments
down, get inflation down, get the competitive
influences running through the place.
GD: Are the unions an impediment in this case? Are they
going to accept a wage that maybe undermines their
entire award structure?
PM: We will get agreement with the trade unions about
this particular problem because I think they feel
that there is not enough accommodation for kids of
this age group in the labour market.
GD: Julian Disney addressed the press club earlier this
year and he said that our current level of spending
on work creation programs which is quick-fix
PM: Labour market programs.
GD: Is one third lower per unemployed person than during
the 1982-83 recession, and much lower than in most
other developed countries. 
PM: I don ' t know whether that'Is true, but the f act is
there are 40,000 fewer 15 to 19 year olds unemployed
now than there were in 1982-83 40,000 fewer.
GD: And there is a real assertion particularly down in
Victoria that the sense of demoralisation is more
acute now despite those numbers, than it was in
1982-83. If you're a kid in Broadineadows you
perceive that there is no hope in the future.
PM: I think that the mood in Victoria is different to
the rest of the nation. Unemployment is falling now
in NSW, it's falling in WA and it's falling in QLD,
but its rising still in VIC and it's rising in SA
and there's no doubt that people will be gloomy
about it and perhaps it is an entirely reasonable
reaction. My job in that respect is to try and get
the economy in general growing and that's the best
way of taking employment up. But at the same time,
make the training places available for these people
so that the job they had searched for at age 19 or
is not the job they might have searched for at
age 16.
GD: Say if this gets of f the ground, say if this summit
produces the best possible result you can imagine,
what firms might collaborate with you? And are we
going to see people actually to be able to be
employed in say September?
PM: I think so yes, I think those firms which tend to
employ quite large numbers of people and don't
necessarily require them all to be skilled could
take people up. And that would be the aim of this,
to take them up.
GD: You know BHP say, the railways like state government
instrumentalities, things like that?
PM: The big retailers. The ones you mentioned and the
large retailing firms, any of the f irms which employ
large numbers of people have the capacity of taking
up, providing that the price and conditions are
right.
GD: And they will bill the government?
PM: In part yes, for the training component of it. So
in other words it's a way of getting that part of
the cohort of 15 to 19 year olds, those who are in
the workforce, as I say that 2 or 3 in 10 who are in
the workforce because the other 7 or 8 are in
training in education, that 2 or 3 in 10 and that 1
in 10 who can't find a job. It's that 1 in the 2 or
3 who can't find a job, they're the people we've got
to pick up and this is what I hope we can do. 
GD: Dr Hewson is saying today that he will provide $ 2
billion if he comes into government to create a
youth wage and he claims this will create 500,000
jobs.
PM: The fact is he claimed his Fightback proposal will
create two million jobs. When we pressed him about
it he said his proposals were never econometrically
modelled, that two million was a guess and he since
said on radio two million is not a real world
estimate, don't pin me to that. The truth is that
what he will do is tear most of these social
programs down, he's going to cut about S7 billion
out of outlays and the things that will cop it will
be the labour market programs and the training.
We're going to put $ 700 million in three years into
TAFE, he proposed I think to put S50 million into
it. Well it wouldn't touch the sides. The fact is
he believes in the survival of the fittest policies,
if you're not a millionaire you're a bludger, if you
haven't got a decent house and trail of expensive
cars to show for it then what have you been doing
out there? Telling people after nine months of
unemployment benefit you're down to the St Vincent
de Paul Society or the Brotherhood of St Lawrence is
not the kind of policies, I think, Australians
should have or will accept. So when Dr Hewson
starts talking about opportunities, training you can
take it with a grain of salt because just turn up
the Fightback policy and you'll see where he's put
his money and his money is not in those areas.
GD: I'd like to close by bringing it back to the
personal and I'm wondering in terms of thinking
about the way family life unfolds and looking at the
future, most of us who are parents reflect on the
way we have parented and probably believe we'd dosome
things differently if we had our time over
again. This is something that you never really talk
about a great deal, your concept of yourself I
suppose as a parent, as a father, would you do
things differently if you had your time again? Have
you learned over these years and have you changed?
PM: You must learn. Life experience, I think, teaches
you things and I do wonder what my children will do,
How they'll grow up, what jobs they'll have, how
their lives will be. I have three girls and a son
and I do think more about the girls than I do my
son.
GD: Why?
PM: Because I think the job opportunities for women have
been constrained for a very long time in Australia,
it's only more recently they have opened up and
getting the training one needs and finding the 
opportunities is I think, quite a challenge for
them.
GD: I wonder whether with him, he is the man, ironically
he is the young man who will be inheriting this
totally different world from what we hear where
there's actually going to be much more of a demand
upon him, ironically the onus will be on him to be a
different sort of man to you in the way he sets up a
family life. So it's possible that he is the one
who's more deserving of your sympathy.
PM: That will happen I think rather naturally, because
the person he's likely to share his life with will
have different attitudes than our generation and
therefore he's likely to grow up comprehending that
attitudinal change rather than being confronted by
it, that is providing for it rather than being
confronted by it. I think there's a sort of
naturalness about all that, but women still have a
tough go of it in employment. It's not easy, I can
see this in the bureaucracy, you can see it in the
companies, it's not easy to crack through. Many do
of course and do well, but there still needs to be I
think, on the part of all of us to open those
opportunities up.
GD: And if you had to describe one of the main issues
that makes it difficult for them, how would you
characterise it?
PM: Just the sort of I think the sort chauvinist view of
the world that men are just, employers are not
making the adequate adjustment and yet the education
system is now churning out thousands of trained
women so it is going to change, it's changing and
fortunately it's changing fast and it's going to
keep on changing. But it's got to change a great
deal.
GD: I wonder in terms of the people you employ do you
see yourself developing a different relationship
with professional women because it is hitting a lot
of people at work now in ways it hasn't done in
their home.
PM: I have a large complement of professional women on
my staff, but this is less true of commerce in
general. But again, like everything else it's
changing, keep knocking on the door, leaning on the
door it will change. But you've got to do it,
governments have got to do it, governments have got
to be aware of it and try and facilitate it and in
the things I spoke to you about before whether it be
preservation of superannuation benefits, whether it
be a child care provision or whatever these are all
things which are going to make it easier. That is
higher retention rates in schools, places in 
universities, they're all going to make that
transition easier and quicker, faster.
GD: . Is there any country you'd like us to be modelled
on, that offer us some possibilities?
PM: I think we are way ahead of most OECD countries. In
terms of, if you like, positive support for women's
participation in the workforce and policies which
support that notion, I think there are very few OECD
countries we can learn that much from. But again,
whereever you see a good idea, take it up and do
something with it. But like a lot of things
Australians are not that aware that so much has been
done like the things I mentioned earlier and are
still being don.
GD: So if we have a feeling, if women have a feeling or
an inkling that you're not a feminist because you're
rightly regarded as you said recently as that most
conservative of creatures a family man, is that a
wrong assessment is it?
PM: I'm a family man and very much in the traditional
sense, but in terms of the policies which I have
either pushed through myself or I've done in the
company of others they are entirely progressive in
that sense and whenever I've seen an opportunity to
advance the cause of women I have effectively, if
often quietly, pushed the policy through and if you
don't believe me ask some of the ones I've been
associated with. Ask Ros, ask Susan Ryan because
they were all around when that all happened.
GD: Alright, thank you very much indeed. It's been good
to speak to you. We've been asking you for quite
some time so thanks for joining us.
PM: Thank you Geraldine, good.
ENDS 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P 0 KEATING, HP
ADDRESS TO THE ' NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION -YOUR BUSINESS IN
THE ' 908 SEMINAR', BANKSTOWN* 17 JUNE 1992
R OK PROOF COPY
can I say I amn very pleased to be invited to speak to you
about the subjects which flEET specialises in. And can I
again firstly congratulate DEEtT on holding this discussion
meeting and I'm particularly pleased to be talking to you in
Bankstown. It's always good to come back to the old town
and to be talking about issues which are relevant to people
and the way they live and how they'll work and what they'll
do in the future.
We are going through a very large Industrial transition and
the fact that a meeting like this is taking place is itself
a revelation because many years ago the whole notion of
training was simply trade training, apprentices,
apprenticeships and what have you and the comprehension of
many areas of business, the importance of education and
training was, not so many years ago, comparatively low.
In the early 19809 we had three children in ten completing
secondary school and one of the things that the government
wanted to do and has done over the period is to increase the
participation rate of kids in school.
That is now nearly eight in ten, three in ten in the early
19809 to nearly eight in ten now, is one of the basic things
one had to do to improve the skills base of Australia. And
if we are to be indeed a clever country or a capable
country, a clever and capable country, then education and
training are of course, the keystones of such capability.
All this comes from the great roll back of protection under
which Australia existed in most of the postwar years, and
began with the removal of exchange controls in 1983, with
the float of the Australian dollar and then more latterly
general changes to the external orientation of Australia
reductions in border protections, reduction in tariffs,
opening Australia up to competition and getting the focus
onto productivity, lower costs, lower inflation, import
competition, exports and a better current account
performance and with it more jobs, more interesting jobs and
better paid jobs. 
We came through the 19809 with a growth strategy built
around those particular ideals. And we had a lot of
success. We had a lot of growth in the 1980s and we had a
lot of employment growth. We started of f with a work force
of six million and we ended up with a work force of 7.8
million which is nearly 30 per cent larger. We've lost now
in the recession unfortunately, 300,000 of those jobs but we
still held 1.5 million which means the workforce today is
about 25 per cent larger than it was in 1983, built around
the objectives of growth and lower costs and growth
efficiencies. Now we have come a long way, and I think Australia has
crossed the rubicon where now the country does look to be
Competitive. The whole notion of competitiveness is not
something which is just a lip servicie -thing but-omething
people mean. As well as that we've crossed a rubicon whore
we are now interested in exports and imports competition in
a way we were never interested before. One can see in this
period of recession we're emerging from now that the growth
which does obtain in the economy, a large part of it in
coming from the export markets or net exports, import
competition and exports. So it's holding up production and
employment. Whereas if we had a focus simply upon domestic
demand that wouldn't be the case.
I think now a lot of industrial companies who are now
exporting will continue to export when domestic demand picks
up. That is they won't say well look, the export market was
handy when were in a bit of a squeeze and we've got an
exportable surplus and is there someone to take it yes
there is, good, we'll let them have it, but now that
domestic demand Is up we won't bother any more.
I think many companies are now finding a great success with
exports, they're finding markets and they're finding them in
the Asia-Pacific, they're finding them close to Australia,
they're finding them in the area of the world economy which
is growing the fastest and the Strongest which is the Asia-
Pacific. This discovery if you like, by Australian
companies of these markets to our north and north Asia as
well, has I think, produced a cultural change which is going
to stand us in good stead.
The other great cultural change is the purging of
inflationary sentiment from the Australian economy. This
was the thing, of course, we could never seem to be able to
do. For nearly twenty years we had high inflation and
despite persistent attempts by all sorts of governments it
could never be conquered. It has been conquered now by
commitment on the part of organised labour and the
government and more latterly the deflationary influence of
the recession which has pulled inflation down, but the
important thing is it's stripping the culture, it's purging
the culture of Australia that people could do unproductive 
things, do speculative things and try to seek from thoue
speculative things real increments to wealth and employment.
I think we have crossed a very important rubicon. And I
don't know whether some of you might have noticed Weutpaa
taking a $ 2.6 billion hit on its accounts a couple of weeks
ago. In doing so it was basically saying, I think in a very
mature decision, look we won't moon around waiting for
inflation to pick property prices up, we won't do as we've
normally done, sat back and waited for a bit of inflation to
correct yesterday's decisions, we're now in a low
inflationary environment, let's basically reoognise it,
let's cut the ' 808 adrift and let's take our medicine on the
chin and go on and build our business. That was a pretty
hard thing for them to do, they've got to approach the
market again, they've got to get stock which dilutes the
rest of the stock in the business, to make the key decision
that they were not going to mess around with inflation any
longer.
That means that that institution and many others are now
going to look at productive investment. And the culture of
Australia is shifting away from speculation and passive
investment, mooning around waiting for inflation to reappear
so that those with assets can end up being more wealthy than
those without them and to transfer from the poor to the
wealthy by way of inflation. That culture is dying and the
culture that has come in its place is one of productivity,
of production where our focus is on adding value, employing
people and looking at businesses which produce goods and
services. Now that's a mighty change for a country which was taught to
believe that it was a lucky country, that it could do
unsmart things, that it could lock itself up behind a tariff
wall, that it could only educate three children in ten
beyond secondary school, that it could speculate its head
of f with double digit inflation rates, that the wealthy
could grow wealthier and the poor could go poorer, so that
young people would start with very big mortgages around
their necks paying for inflated values in property and that
the elderly would have their savings ripped to bits by
inflation. This was the sort of culture that this
government inherited in 1983. As you know by then, the
current account deficit in 1980 was already 6 per cent of
GDP. Already twelve years ago we could not pay for our
imports to the tune of 6 per cent of GDP a year. Now GDP
this year is $ 400 billion, 6 per cent is about $ 24 billion,
so we were $ 24 billion shy of balancing our trade accounts
twelve years ago.
Those who look for the resources boom twelve years ago, the
so called ' 80. resources boom, it was not a boom in reality,
it didn't answer the questions, and the real resources we
should have had burning were the intellectual abilities of 
our people and of our children. They were the resources We
didn't worry about while we believed digging up another
mound of rocks and growing another paddock full of wheat was
all that was needed to be done so that the People in the
lucky country could go on in their torpor, in their mental
fog, not facing the real world outside and understanding the
simple fact that the post-war trade in goods and' services
had passed Australia by. That the policies of the Country
Party and Coalition governments preaching free enterprise on
the one hand and dolloping out dollops of tariff protection
and bounties end subsidies on the other, while seeking to
have an efficient primary export sector, wasn just a
dichotomy of policy that was bound to fail.
So in the change we've gone through, these important
psychological shifts, and as we had to move down aggregate
wages and rechange the level, that is restore the levels of
national income going to wages and profits and the ' 80s as a
result of the mad-wage mayhem of 1979 and 1980, the wage
share in CDP warn too high and the profit share in GDP was
too low and therefore profits fell and investment fell with
it, and when investment fell employment fell.
In the first seven years between 1983 and 1990 we had five
times as much employment growth as the last seven years of
the Fraser government five fold, because we got back to
rates of economic growth which could take people up out of
the workforce. That change of focus-, to going back to
fundamentals and being competitive, to letting the exchange
rate find its right level, living with the inflationary
consequences coming from it, then buying down wages so that
that inflationary surge was taken out of wages and then
through five Accords with the ACTU, build ourselves an
inflation rate down to two or three per cent, is a great
national achievement. It means that after the great shift
in aggregate wages we had to get around the wage
flexibility. Because between 1983 and about 1988-89 we did
succeed in getting aggregate wage flexibility, we did
succeed in lifting the profit share and we lifted investment
with it.
The problem about aggregate wage flexibility is that one
builds pressures within groupings of employees for what they
think is salary justice which can't be provided by a system
of-rigid aggregate adjustment. So we then started looking
in Accords Marks V and VI for flexibility, productivity
based flexibility which started with a 4 per cent case under
Accord Mark V where 4 per cent was paid on productivity
adjustments, not that everybody took the productivity
adjustment opportunity up, and then in Accord Mark VI which
the ACTU concluded with the government just at the beginning
of the 1990 election, we moved then to the first time into
enterprise bargaining. And while we were doing that, moved
into a system of fewer unions, larger unions and more of an 
industry union structure which could more accommodate the
shifts In fortunes of particular industry.
Now many of you know that enterprise bargaining has had a
pretty hard road to hoe, the Abtiiioziuionl told us
in the first instance we were not mature enough to handle
it, that if they weren't checking everybody's industrial
agreement then it wasn't worth having, and as everyone of
you running a business knows, if you're going to increase
the productivity of your business by changing the way in
which you operate it and the way in which your employees
operate within it, that can't be done through a central
bench in Melbourne, 0 it can only be done at the enterprise
level. That's why it was Incompatible to have the
Industrial Relations Commission vetting enterprise
agreements-and because the government and the ACTU took the
view they shouldn't be vetting them, they thought we were
perhaps not mature enough to have them.
As it is, the ACTU stood the Commission up and the result
was that in the reconsidering of these things, enterprise
bargaining is now a possibility and the great productivity
opportunities are there. I've never known a time when
unions have been more prepared to find wage increases from
genuine improvements in productivity an in these last few
years and particularly now.
But what went hand in hand with enterprise bargaining was
award restructuring. The problem we have with the award
system, the whole problem that we've had with the labour
market in Australia generally was that we inherited the
British craft union structure of industrial orgenisation.
There was no General Macarthur here, sweeping the system out
and building a new system and there was no General George
Marshall. So after the war we were left with what we began
with a system built on the craft structure and within the
Craft structure we had this very rigid awards system. So if
you got yourself to a place as a tradesman or a particular
worker and you secured a spot in that particular scale of
classification that was your spot for life. The only
negotiations that ever matter to you were whether you got a
national wage adjustment and if you worked a bit of
overtime. The notion of moving out of that rigid system and
retraining themselves into a multi-skilled position was
something which of course, was alien to the craft based
Oystem.
So to create a better market for labour, what the government
has sought to do is to move away from the rigidities of that
craft union structure to one where we're looking at. We're
looking at either enterprise agreements between employees,
unions and employers or we're looking at much more of an
industry based model. And in an industry based model one
can take account of different levels of prosperity and
different requirements 
and imperatives for change. The employees of an industry
can respond accordingly.
So award restructuring is producing fewer but larger
categories of multi-skilled persons and the opportunity of
training and moving through those categories is now an
opportunity available to people where they can, if they
wish, do more things and do them productively, more
efficiently, earn more money and actually produce lower
coats for business.
So there has been a great change from a multiplicity of
unions down to 8 smaller number of larger unions, much more
industry based, and an enterprise arrangement between unions
and companies f or enterprise agreements about the way in
which they function and beyond that award restructuring to a
system which takes much more account of productivity in the
business and of course, in the economy in general.
This ha. always been the argument we've had with the
Coalition. What John Howard tried to do in 1980 was pretend
there was no craft structure so if you turned your back on
it you deregulated it. Well of course, he turned his back
on it and wages went to 16 per cent that year and the
inflation % ate went to 12. You can't deregulate, you could
never turn your back on that system, you had to change it
and that's what we've sought to do. Change the way in which
it works and get down to a much more flexible labour market.
So that national wage cases will now look after basically
the low paid who are not in positions where obvious
improvements in productivity are available, where their
bargaining power is weak, but most other people will secure
wage increases through enterprise bargaining and lifting
their skills and improving the opportunities within
businesses. So much of that opportunity resides with managers. Whenever
you see a well managed business you'll see generally a cost
conscious, competitive business. Whenever you see good
managemnent you'll mostly see good labour relations. I've
never known an opportunity as now for the manager with a
sharp eye and a keen sense of relations with employees to
produce lower costs and make a business run more
productively and more efficiently. So enterprise bargaining
creates opportunities but it also creates greater challenges
because it will sort the wheat from the chaff as far as
managers are concerned and it will also do the same in terms
of employees and their willingness to make a business tick.
in the end it focuses on the ability of the business to
prosper and that focus is what's important in getting those
productivity agreements and improvements.
The training which is part and parcel of award restructuring
is taking place in the economy now, there is a much greater
emphasis on training and the government is now seeking to 
improve that emphasis further.
Again, and let Me just say a few words about in the f irst
instance, about tertiary levels. We've added since the
middle 198s 120,000 places for universities. That in the
equivalent of twelve universities of an average campus size
of 10,000. That means that about 40 per cent of school
leavers, 3S-40 par cent find places in universities. That's
very high up the OECD average scale. We're just behind the
United States and the Unites States are miles ahead of
anybody else. So the growth path now, the trajectory for
university places will naturally find its own level now that
we've lifted the level so dramatically in the 19509. We've
got that retention rate from three kids in ten to nearly
eight in ten end about 35-40 per cent of them finding places
in university.
The next challenge is to improve vocational education and
it's more the pity that we've never had really a national
system of vocational education. Some of the TAFE systems
around the Commonwealth are more efficient than others, some
better reflect the requirements of the labour market, some
understand better award restructuring and what all that
means and making the country more clever and capable, some
are more client driven than provider driven. But one thing
we do know is as a system they are not fulfilling adequately
their national charter.
So at the Premiers Conference lost week I sought again, to
try to bring together prospects of the development of a
national system of TAFE, a national vocational and
educational system. I think with a bit of good will and a
bit of elbow grease in the right places we can do that, we
can build a national vocational educational system.
Not only is that important for education, cleverness, being
capable and all the other things that I've talked about the
country today, but it will be important to get that system
working and to provide people that come through it with
diplomas which have status in the community, which the TAFE
system to this point has not ever really enjoyed and we can
get to a system which is much more similar to the European
vocational education systems, where a status of a diploma
coming out of one of these institutions m~ eans more to
employers. If you look at countries like Germany and
companies like Mercedes Benz, Semens or BMW, the people who
run those companies are basically people with diplomas from
their TAFE system and not from their universities.
That's the sort of TAFE system I think Australia should
have. That will mean that 60 per cent of kids cascading out
of secondary school are cascading into some form of training
and it will mean that the sort of unskilled or low skilled
jobs that most of us grew up with as kids are disappearing 
these people will be taken up into more trained, more highly
paid more interesting jobs. We did a lot of that in the
19808, it's stopped for the moment with the recession anid
with unemployment but as it resumes what we'll find Is that
job opportunities will not be dead-end jobs but they'll be
live-end jobs. Jobs which have training and skills about
them anid which will provide more interesting jobs and better
pay and conditions. So it In important therefore that the
TAFE system fulfils its role and plays its role ini getting
that focus back on education.
Australia has about it many comparative advantages, but the
more I go through Asia and other parts of the world the more
I'm convinced that one of those is education and that you
can't build a clever country or a capable country without
it, you certainly couldn't do It with three kids in ten
completing secondary school, you can't do It with a TAFE
system that isn&amp;' t working properly, you can't Go it without
that kind of national focus that I'm talking about.
I think we do have a great chance not only to do it for
ourselves but also to provide a service. That is, sell
education services to the rest of the world and particularly
to our near North, but more particularly to build our
industrial base upon that sort of a skills base a truly
clever and competent country. That means of course, a focus
on research and development as well which must go hand in
hand with training. And that's why the Commonwealth's
contribution to research and development in this country is
important so that we start to make up f or the fact the
private sector of Australia Isn't spending a lot on research
and development and hasn't traditionally. The Commonwealth
in a number of ways will be doing that.
Can I also say in TAPE one of the things we want to do is
build specialist training institutes and we want to do more
things with business. One of the great hang-ups in
Australian education is that everybody interested in it
wants to have a new building. The f irst thing they want Is
a big mausoleum to make themselves feel important with,
where in fact the place is strewn with schools, some of
which are unoccupied as the demography changes and where we
ought to be focussing on people rather than bricks and
build ing institutions.
One of the things I think we should do is in certain sectors
of industry, where industry can play a much bigger role in
training, the government and national TAFE training
institutions get together and develop courses which are
designed on a client-driven basis, in particular sectors of
industry. And where industries predominate in certain
suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne, in those pieces one could
see a specialised thing. Up at Bankstown TAFE for instance
there's an arrangement with Kaznbrook, the appliance
manufacturer, and the Benkstown TAPE to do special things 
there. In the northern suburbs of Melbournhe, recently I
visited an automotive TAFE college which specialises in
automotive&amp;. I visited, in the course of the sme period,
two tyre factories in Melbourne which are now doing very
competent things in technology but Can't find enough trained
people. There is no reason why a TAFE Institute and the
companies concerned couldn't put together a training
regiment, courses for that industry and in areas of advanced
manufacturing technology which are not being catered for
often in technical and further education. I think there In
also a case for specialist Institutes that focus on those
advanced manufacturing technique.
So I'd like to think that wee're not just building a national
Institute of TAFE which has common denominator features
about it, but we're also reserving the right to clever
things but not necessarily In the building of business as so
much focus as often been in the past. So TAFE is important.
The other thing which I think is important also and we are
talking about two things here, we're talking about the
training of young people and we're talking about the
retraining of older people, but youth unemployment is a
problem and it's got to be dealt with. It's a problem that
needs to be kept in perspective nevertheless. I notice some
headlines the other day saying that 46 per cent of young
people are unemployed. That's a distortion of, in fact, the
position. Seven or eight out of ten young people are in
education or in training. Two or three out of ten young
people in the 15-19 year age group are actually in the
workforce looking for work and about a third of those people
are actually out of work, that's one in ten. So seven to
eight in ten 15-19 year olds are in education and training,
two to three in ten are actually in the workforce and one in
ten is actually unemployed, that's 10 per cent of the age
cohort 15-19 not 46 per cent. in fact there are 40,000
fewer young people 15-19 unemployed today then there was in
the 1982-83 recession.
With that said It is still a problem and we have to deal
with it and we're going to try and deal with it by looking
at the whole question of entry level* training wages which
was addressed by the Carmichael Report, Laurie Carmichael
who you've known and read about in the Australian Vocational
Certificate Training system. We're looking at a new
vocational certificate training system with work-based
training places in industry, where we've got the opportunity
of taking many more young people up and at the same time
giving themt training opportunities.
So I think it is a very exciting prospect and one I'm
focussing on now. And we're hoping to have a meeting with
national employers and other people from various
institutions in the next little while to see if we can focus
on some of those problems and to see if we can do something 
about streaming kids into work and training opportunities
under that Australian Vocational Certificate Training
system.
That will help deal with that one in ten young person who
doesn't have a job and to give them work experience and to
give them training. So I think It is of course, obviously
terribly important to us.
Like many things you can't change everything over night. We
started on higher participation rats back in the 1980s, we
started lifting the places in tertiary institutions, we
changed the way in which the tertiary system functions,
we're now focussing on TATE and while all that's been on
we've gone off aggregate wage movements to a more flexible
labour market, to award restructuring to change the basis of
the craft system to enterprise bargaining to lift
ef ficiencies out of companies and give managers a chance of
managing instead of being caught in simply a wage structure
which drops out of an Arbitration Commission decision which
takes no account of the capacity of business to produce, to
make profits or to run. So the opportunity there for
improvements in efficiency is quite profound.
Now, let me just say a couple of things about our opponents
while I'm at it. They have got two policies, one is to put
a 15 per cent goods end services tax on everything. This
will put 6 to 7 percentage points into. inflation and take
the inflation rate from 1.7 per cent, where it now is, to
around about 7 or 8 per cent. And with it the bill rates,
now at 6. 5 per cent, will have the same 5 to 7 percentage
points added to them and they will be going back to 13 or 14
and then you will have all the add ons after that.
They have no policy of wage discounts. They don't want to
talk to the unions. They have no mechanism whatsoever of
securing a wage discount for a consumption tax. A
consumption tax is simply a device which will explode the
national inflation rate and put us back where we were two
decades ago with high levels of Inflation.
And the reason I dropped the proposal in the middle 1980s is
that I couldn't guarantee the wage discounts then, I didn't
have the right to blow the national inflation rate to pieces
anymore than John Howson has that right today. it won't remake
Australia, it is just another tax. And another tax
which will very heavily impede business, and I don't know
whether many of you have read experiences from Britain or
New Zealand, or any other countries with a goods and
services tax, but the great burden of the goods and services
tax in terms of compliance cost falls on small business.
And it is the small business sector which will carry the
great burden of this and the result is that most people Will
spend the better part of one day per week accounting for the
system and seeing that there is a responsibility beyond them 
to account it and to remit to the tax offtice the proceeds
all in the name of the ideological shift of taxing
expenditure Instead of Income.
Secondly, the other policy in the policy we saw at APPM, but
two weeks ago. That is, that employees shouild not have a
right to group together and be represented by a union in
dealing with their company, or employee, that they should
only have a right to deal with them individually. And of
course once that happens and you have common law contracts,
all the things which Australian workers have built up for
themselves over the period, their annual leave, sick leave
and other rates of pay and terms of conditions of employment
will be swept away as each individual person will deal with
their employer.
Well of course organised labour in Australia would fight
that one to the bitter end. And as the f ight went on, the
national inflation rate would go up beyond that of a goods
and services tax, and the sort of mayhem and picket lines
and police pushing and shoving that we saw down In Tasmania
two weeks ago would be the order of the day. We are now in
a period of industrial peace which has been unprecedented.
We have now got average weekly earnings for the year to
March at 3.1 per cent, the inflation rate is at 1.7 per cent
and industrial disputation in. I think, is probably at an
all time low.
To jeopardise that system and go back to' the sort of
industrial confrontation chaos is about the last thing
Australia needs, but that Is all, I'm afraid, Dr Hewson has
to offer. Two very sterile ideas. Belt everything with a
per cent consumption tax and try and to push people of f
federal awards or state awards and let them into
commonwealth contracts where they can only do It
individually with their employer.
It is not much of a solution, it Is not going to do anything
about training. In fact they will add S50 million onto the
Fightback proposals for TAFE. Well big deal, big deal. The
kind of responsibility that TAFE is going to have in the
system and the labour market programs like iobskill and
Jobstart, will all be chopped to pieces as Dr Hewson trys to
cut $ 10 billion out of outlays to pay his tax cuts.
With us, there will be focus there on training and retraining,
on labour market programs, upon award
restructuring, upon productivity based enterprise bargaining
by agreement, about working to a national consensus with the
Government, the employers end employees working together for
a low cost, low Inflation, high productivity country. That
is where we are going now.
Now we have paid a price for some of that in the recession,
but the benefits are going to be quite profound as we go 
12
into the ' 90s with a low Inflation culture and with a high
productivity culture and being truly competitive for the
first time in probably, on a long term basis, in the postwar
years. That is the importance of having a consensus basis
to national policy and that is the importance of having a
focus on educational training so that when we start selling
those products we are not at the bottom of the international
division of labour, doing dead-end jobs at dead-end prices,
but further up the international division of labour doing
clever things, clever prices, with clever people.
Thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER 60/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
APPOINTMENT OF PROFESSOR GLENN WITHERS AS DIRECTOR OF THE
OFFICE OF THE ECONOMIC PLANNING ADVISORY COUNCIL
I am pleased to announce the appointment of Professor
Glenn Withers AO as Director of the Office of the
Economic Planning Advisory Council.
Professor Withers has made significant contributions to
the development and analysis of public policy in a number
of areas. He has been Professor of Economics at La Trobe
University since 1986 and has held a number of positions
on Government and academic boards. He has been a
consultant to both private and public organisations,
including the OECD. He brings strong research abilities
and valuable experience to the Office of EPAC. Professor
Withers has published extensively, concentrating mainly
on issues affecting the structure and efficiency of the
Australian economy, and the economic implications of
social policies. In the 1992 Queen's Birthday Honours
List he was appointed as Officer of the Order of
Australia for his services to applied economics.
At the last EPAC meeting on 27 March 1992, 1 emphasised
the need for the Secretariat and the Council to
concentrate its research and analysis on medium term
issues. Professor Withers' appointment as Director of
the Office of EPAC will contribute importantly to
strengthening this focus of EPAC's work.
I would like to thank and commend Richard Whitelaw for
his capable administration of the Office of EPAC since
the departure of Fred Argy last year. The Office is well
positioned to complete EPAC's 1992 work program under its
new Director.
Professor Withers will take up his appointment on 8 July
1992. I am confident that under his leadership the
Office of EPAC will continue to make important and
constructive contributions to the economic debate in
Australia, and strengthen our understanding of many of
the important issues we need to address to meet the
challenges that face us in the 1990s.
CANBERRA 17 June 1992 
SUMMARY CURRICULUM VITAE
GLENN ALEXANDER WITHERS
Personal Date of Birth: 27 August 1946; Melbourne, Australia
Academic Degrees PhD, Harvard University, 1975
AM, Harvard University, 1974
DEc, ( 1st Hons) Monash University, 1968
Awards and Distinctions
Officer, Order of Australia
Fellow, Academy of Social Sciences of Australia
Frank Knox Fellow
Robert Gordon Menzies Scholar
Fulbright Scholar
Faculty Appointments
1986-Professor of Economics, School of Economics, La Trobe University
1982-85 Senior Research Fellow, Institute of Advanced Studies,
Australian National University
1979-82 Associate Professor in Public Economics, School of Economics and
Financial Studies, Macquarie University
1975-78 Research Fellow, Institute of Advanced Studies, Australian
National University
1971-74 Teaching Fellow, Economics Department and Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University
Other Positions Held
1987-91 Chair, Commonwealth Government Inquiry into Population Issues
Chair, Advisory Committee, Bureau of Immigration Research
Chair, Migrant Skills and Qualifications Board, Victoria
Member, State Training Board
1986 Member, Official Australian Delegation, Ministerial Conference
on the Future of Migration, OECD, Paris
1981-82 Principal Economic Adviser, Commonwealth Department of
Employment and Industrial Relations 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
TO THE HONG KONG AUSTRALIA BUSINESS ASSOCIATION
SYDNEY, 18 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I'm pleased to have the opportunity to address the Hong
Kong Australia Business Association.
As this country increasingly looks toward Asia for its
future we will need organisations like this one.
We'll need you to promote business.
We'll need you to establish the networks of
communication, trade and investment essential to our
integration with the region.
We will also need you to promote the id~ a of Australia
engaged in Asia.
And it's not jiz= a in Asia that we need to promote it.
We need to promote the idea he=: because Australians,
by and large, have yet to fully grasp the dimensions of
our opportunity in Asia, or the imperatives which
accompany that opportunity.
We simply haet seize the time in Asia and, quite
simply, we can.
But it is one of the lessons of the success of the Asian
Tiqers indeed it is a lesson to be learned from
successful countries around the world that there has to
be a conscious, concerted, national effort.
The nation has to know what the goals are, what the
rewards will be, and what is required.
Your example will help in that educationnl process. 
And I hope you will take every opportunity to
proselytise. Asia is where our future substantially lies, but we won'It
secure the future without effort.
We can't assume that our presence on the margins of the
most rapidly growing economies of the world is an
historical accident to replace that other one, called the
British Empire Asia will not serve as a substitute for
the imperial security blanket.
It is not like a reef of gold or a mountain of iron ore
which needs only to be mined. It's not just a matter of
sending in a railway line and some earth-moving
equipment.
We won'It wake up one morning and f ind ourselves riding on
Asia's back as we used to ride on the sheep's.
It will require, as I said, a conscious national ef fort.
We will have to adjust our thinking and increase the rate
of our work.
We'll have to think of ways into these markets, which
means being clever as perhaps never before, bold as never
before, tenacious as never before.
At this stage we are not doing badly.
If our economy is not yet so international and open as
Hong Kong's, it is much more so than it was a decade ago.
We have radically opened it up in the 1980s.
If we are not yet as competitive and dynamic as the
Tigers, the floating of the dollar, reduced protection,
wide ranging micro-economic reforms, the transformation
of our industrial relations system and a responsible
fiscal policy have given us a chance to play in the same
league. We now export more than twice the volume of goods we did
at the beginning of the eighties.
And the composition of those goods has shifted markedly
to manufactures and services.
It can also be said that if our economic imperatives are
still imperfectly or inadequately understood, they are
much better understood than they used to be.
I think perhaps the economic education of Australia has
been one of the more remarkable developments of the last
decade. 
In 1992 Australians know that we cannot prosper by a
policy of exporting commodities and maintaining
inefficient industries for a small domestic market behind
a tariff wall.
They know the realities including, in principle, the
reality of Asia.
What they need, I think, is the confidence and your
association can be an important supplier of that.
These have been hard times revolutions of the kind we
have been going through are bound to be.
But the reward will be contributing to and sharing in the
prosperity of Asia where in the last year the Newly
Industrialising Economies grew by 7.1 per cent, compared
with the OECD average of 1.1%
The reward is nothing less than the maintenance of our
standard of living and our way of life.
The reward is the future of Australia.
And there are reasons for confidence.
Already nearly 55% of our exports go to the Asian region.
We are in a position of considerable strength.
Our GNP is equal to the combined GNP of all the ASEAN
countries. We have a skilled, well educated and flexible work force.
We have a high degree of political and economic
stability. We have things which the region wants like raw
materials, but also technologies and manufactures, skills
and services, and space.
Our trade with Hong Kong is a good measure of how well we
are doing.
Our bilateral trade with Hong Kong has grown three-fold
in the past decade and Kong Kong is now our seventh
largest export market.
Hong Kong has become an important investor here.
Last year it was our second largest source of migrants.
As the centre of the " Greater China" growth triangle,
Hong Kong now offers Austral-an buis-i ies-a new frontier
of opportunity.
There have been significant recent changes in the region. 
4
As wages have increased in Hong Kong and Taiwan,
manufacturing has shifted to the coastal provinces of
China especially the Guangdong and Fujian provinces.
I'm sure you are familiar with most of the facts and
figures, but they are worth recording in an Australian
context. They speak eloquently of the challenge which we
face. Up to three million workers in Guandong province are
employed in factories owned by Hong Kong manufacturers.
With the aid of Taiwan's and Hong Kong's capital,
technology, management and marketing skills, Guangdong
has built a dynamic economy with real GNP growing by
12.40 per year from 1980.
Hong Kong, of course, is a gateway to China, its 1.1
billion people, and its increasingly vibrant private
sector.
China is now Australia's ninth largest export market.
Hong Kong's growing role as a financial and services
capital for China represents major opportunities for us.
Again, there are reasons for confidence:
in the example, for instance, of AOTC which has been
granted one of the licenses to operate a second
generation mobile telephone network in Hong Kong.
-Or in the new airport and port development there,
where Leighton Industry is tendering.
Ladies and gentlemen-
What is presently happening in Hong Kong and China is
happening in other parts of Asia, and the opportunities
for Australia are replicated throughout the region.
Intra-regional foreign investment has rapidly increased.
The NIEs are now important foreign investors in their own
right. Intra-regional foreign trade has expanded.
Major developments are underway or being planned to
improve the infrastructures.
Economic growth in Asia is increasingly being driven by
demand within the region itself.
That is why, as everyone here knows, we mnust become a
part of it. 
There is no doubt that this dynamic progress in Asia will
continue into the next decade.
But there a= a uncertainties.
The greatest of them continues to be the risk of a
breakdown in the Uruguay roundj of the GATT.
A breakdown in the Uruguay Round has the potential to
create regional trading blocs in North America and
Europe. We face the prospect of revisiting a world with
a fortress mentality. I
Hong Kong and the other Asian economies have shown the
benefits of a free trade policy.
We in Australia share their beliefs, and we have a common
interest in voicing these beliefs in international
forums. It is not only because of enlightened self-interest, but
also because we share a common conviction that
unrestricted bilateral trade is the best way to foster
economic development in the developing countries.
The APEC process is one forum where we can pursue these
goals. We should remember what the reality of APEC is:
over the past twenty years the share, of our total
exports to APEC countries rose from 54 per cent to
73 per cent.
in the same period the EC's share fell from 21 per
cent to 12 per cent which, as from last year, is
less than the volume of our trade with the ASEAN
countries alone.
in fact our trade with ASEAN is now greater than our
trade with the United States.
APEC has become the major regional economic and trade
forum and it will became an increasingly important
instrument for promoting regional trade liberalisation.
That is why I have proposed a process for periodic APEC
Heads of Government meetings.
Ladies and gentlemen
As part of the continuing process of internationalising
the Australian economy an essential undertaking if we
are to succeed in Asia in the One Nation statement I
announced that we would issue more foreign bank licenses,
and allow foreign banks to operate as branches for
wholesale banking and acquire smaller banks. 
By these measures we intend to more closely integrate
Australia with the Asia Pacific economies by taking on an
increasingly substantial role as a regional financial
centre. In One Nation I also announced that we would allow the
taxable income derived from pure off-shore banking
transactions by an authorised off-shore banking unit in
Australia to be taxed at the reduced rate of 10 per cent.
The Government realises that if it wants to facilitate
the development of the industry in Australia it must
broadly match the concessions in other major centres.
Our concession will be generous. For example, it will
apply to the profits from trading with non-residents in a
large range of financial instruments ( including foreign
currency) and to the fee income received from credit
support activities.
We intend to introduce the legislation next week. I
think you will see then that the Government has provided
tax measures conducive to the development of a viable
off-shore banking centre, while taking measures necessary
to protect the domestic revenue base.
These initiatives, I believe, recognise the unique
character of off-shore banking as a highly specialised
activity distinct from the core business of the banking
sector. They number among the fundamentals we have to get right.
They demonstrate our commitment to the long term.
Hong Kong, of course, has been enormously successful in
establishing itself as an off-shore banking centre.
Our stable economic and political system, our location in
the right time zone, our skills, our increasingly close
links with the region, and our competitive taxation
arrangements mean that we have the potential to make a
success of the same business.
I think it is appropriate also to note that the
Government will continue to support the high degree of
autonomy promised in Sino-British Joint Declaration for
this autonomy is the key to maintaining stability,
prosperity and human rights in Hong Kong after 1997.
Australia and Hong Kong have initialled an agreement
which will protect Australian investments in Hong Kong
until at least 2007.
China will formally approve this agreement before it is
signed. Ladies and gentlemen 
The Government recognises the important role played by
small and medium sized businesses, and we have
implemented a number of reforms and programs designed to
address the structural impediments which face them.
Our aim is to promote the creation and growth of
competitive enterprises by removing regulatory and other
impediments and providing appropriate assistance at
critical stages.
The reforms, which address priority issues such as
taxation, export development, access to finance, and
business skills and enterprise development will help
small business to take advantage of new opportunities as
the economy recovers.
We have recently taken a number of other steps to promote
our economic integration with the region.
The National Trade Strategy which the Government launched
last November established an integrated and consistent
framework in which to pursue trade and investment in East
Asia. Austrade's overseas resources have been re-allocated to
reflect the high priority we place on supporting
Australian business in the region.
In One Nation we announced a further increase in their
funding. In February the Government issued a follow-up to the
Garnaut Report which seeks to anticipate future
developments in South-east Asia and so prepare us to take
advantage of the opportunities they present.
We are undertaking in consultation with the private
sector and state governments a major study of trade and
investment in Asia.
It also serves our economic purposes that an increasing
number of Australian students are studying Asian
languages at secondary and tertiary level.
There are now 34 centres or institutes of Asian studies
at Australian universities, and there is a growing number
of educational exchange programs between Australian and
Asian universities.
Our schools are changing the curriculum to reflect
changes in the community, the evolving requirements of
government and business, and the ground-swell of interest
in the societies of the region. 
8
All these things bear testament to our commitmentthough
they do not, as a few critics have suggested,
reflect any willingness on our part to compromise our
social and political values.
As I said in a speech in Sydney early in April, and as I
re-iterated while in Indonesia, our traditions of
democracy, our notions of social justice and personal
liberty are not negotiable.
Indeed, the more confident we are of what we stand for,
the better we will do in Asia and, I believe, the rest
of the world.
To be ambivalent about identity will only weaken us.
Part of that identity these days comprises our nondiscriminatory
immigration policy and the principles of
cultural tolerance enshrined in multicultural social
policies. This of course is a significant change: not so long ago
we were known in the world for discrimination and
intolerance, particularly towards Asia.
The change we have made, which now sees us known in Asia
for our openness, seems to me a proof of our ability to
make the other necessary adjustments.
Because the nation's future quite literally depends on
it, few things press so urgently on the Australian
Government as the need to create the right environment
for Australian trade and investment in Asia.
But the Government's capacities stop short of meeting the
ultimate challenge.
That responsibility falls to business itself.
Australian business ii making considerable progress, and
it's really not for me to tell those who are making it
what else they might do.
But it does seem to me that our cultural diversity equips
us extraordinarily well, and we can probably turn it to
greater account than we are presently doing.
our Asian migrant community, through small business
networks, is making considerable progress in opening up
new avenues of trade and consolidating commercial links
with all parts of the Asia-Pacific.
Personal familiarity with the linguistic, cultural,
religious, geographic and national differences of these
markets constitutes a genuine advantage for the
Australian economy. 
It follows that Australian firms might do well to draw
upon the wealth of language and cultural skills in their
own workforces not just in Asia, of course, but in
Europe and the Middle East.
I think it will become very clear in the next few years
that there is a greater reward to be reaped from our
immigration and multicultural policies than we have
hitherto imagined.
And I think it will be all the greater if we recognise
and ensure that nothing in those policies compromises
our identity or our loyalty to this place.
As we become more Asian in our economic and geopolitical
orientation we will do well to become more undividedly
Australian in our thinking and in the image we project
abroad. That, I believe, will herald not a more parochial
Australia but a more sophisticated one a more confident
and a more successful one.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I congratulate the Hong Kong
Australia Business Association for the initiative they
have shown and for the vanguard role they are playing in
Asia, not only on behalf of their members, but on behalf
of Australia.
And I thank them for inviting me here today. 



TEL:
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME INIUZTER, THE HON P J KEATINOe KP
DOORSTOP, MILTON INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, SYDNEY
18 JUNE 2992
X G OZ PROOF COPY
0: lIn't the real point about un plmolmant, 10 per cent
regardless is unacceptable for yuu and the adult
population?
PM: Absolutely, and I think ABC radio have done me a
disservice in nvt running my full quotation which was to
explain that these sort of gloomy projections of 46 per
cent youth unempoyinunt are not correct, that aDout
per cent t-ttrv u high and that's why I'm focussing On
this national meeting to see what we can do to get young
people back to work. That i, open up job and training
opportunities for them and at the same time open up
training opportunities by the modernisation of the
technical and further education system. There are two
chances for a young Australian, that ls, to train
themselves or tv find work in places where other people
are prepared to train them so that the sort of dead-end
job whioh come people, particularly In the Liberal Party
are now lonqiziq for, in a thing of the pest * nd that
Australian kids leaving school, it they train
themselves, can find work in the new kind of Order we
have in the sognomy,
J3 Don't you think the fact that high unemployment and the
youth factor is just one Of the painful results of the
structural change that you are talking about?
PM; No, I don't think that is true. Zn part It Is. When I
was a teenaVec there were plenty of unskilled jobs, but
in the economy we have today the unskilled jobs are
disappearing ano skilled jobs are appearing and that's
why the emphasis must now be on treining and skills,
But for those kid* who did leave school and have not had
trilntng, what I'm opsiig from national discussions is
that we can open up opportunities for kids to get on the
job training so they can get work experience an*
training, give them that hope. They need to feel that
1 ' u F 9 4 
TEL: u. 1: r
2
they are wonted, they're in the work force and as well
as that they can move on to other things.
J: Training is not a substitute for wages is it?
PM; We are looking at training wages. The Chsrmichael
report Is about that very topic. That Is, what we can
do to encourage employers to take on people who have
left school, pay them wages, but at the same time give
them training opportunities. And it holds great
promise.
J: Now I&amp; it that these figures are exaggerated?
PM: Just the simple misunderstanding that people don't
understand that when they refer to exaggerated claims
about the likes of 50 per cent youth unemployment.
They're talking not about the age cohort 15-19 as a
grouping, they're talking about those actually in the
work force looking for work and that's a different
vategorioation.
J; They are still out of work though aren't they?
PM: Absolutely, and that's What we're trying to do move
them back into work, give them work experience and
training. But that won't be done at the moment simply
letting market forces decide it.
Js there could be an over-educated work force?
PM: No, that was the way the Liberal Party thought in the
and ' 70s, that what we neetd to an under-educated
work force. In the early 19808 three children In ten
completed secondory school, that is now eight in ten,
35-40 per cent or those are now going to universities
in the 120,000 university places created by this
government. Now in the 1980. when the economy was
growing those kids were taken up in trained jobs an they
will be taken up in the 1990a, but they won't be taken
up unskillod.
J: What's your reaction to Mr Crean's proposal that the
youth unemployed should be utillsed on the land?
PM: It's not Mr Crean's proposal exclusively, but he has
looked at some options in land cars which may be useful
in reglonal or urban environments whefe industrial
opportunities are not available. That Will be one of
the subjects we will be looking at, at this national
discussion.
0: Pr me Minister, Is the inflation culture now reaching a
stage where it may be conduced to another reduction in
Interest rates?
PM: I don't discuss interest rates at doorstops. 
TEL: j 1. u n. I: J Ho'. 019 F. C' 17
3
J; Is the high unemployment rate jeopardising the ' One
Notion' growth forecast?
Pm: 2 No, I CQfl't think so. The economy I@ picking up as I
think you heard at this business lunch. People ore
saying that thero to a feeling about growth returning,
there is more confidence around in the business
community. it is regionalised, admittedly, it's m'oe
prevalent In NSW, QLD and WA then perhaps it Is In VlIC
or Indeed in SA. But it is returning I think, and as it
does we will see the economy gather speed through the
course of the year 192-93.
is Westpoo consumer confidence survey released today shows
that consumer confidence has fallen nine points in June
wipingV out all the gains of ' 92, What's your reaction to
that?
PM-. 1 1 nuva to have a look at It to see what It Is, when It
was taken and what circumstances it was taken in, but
these thtings move up and down. sy end large I think
we've had reasonably strong retail sales figures
recently and they're the best indication of the lot.
3: at 5.2 per cent In that westpto survey are you
worried about that?
PM: Again, I would need to have a look at It. If it was
taken after the Premiers' Conference when the Premiers
of NSW and VIC annou1nced price increases, tax increases
that could hove well changed the sample by that degree.
But I think it's the trend declines which matter and the
Inflationary expvvtotions trend series over the last
twenty years shows inflationary expectations of
Australia now at Its lowest levels since the 19609.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J KEATING, NP
DOORSTOP, DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY, 22 JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
3: Prime Minister, one criticism of this is that's it nlot
backed up by legislation.
PM: X think this Government has obviously, this is not a
claim it is a fact, a second to none environmental
poiyi Australian politics. We're the people who
have made all of the running on the environment in this
country, preserved great areas for Australians the Wet
Tropics in Queensland, the Southern forests and Gordon
below Franklin Antarctica there's a long list of
things which the Government has chalked up successes and
we will in this. That is3we'll get Australians to change
and know that waste is a huge environmental problem and
that they just can't be putting out the garbage can
thinking it disappears. The land fills are not there
any more and that we're going to have to be more careful
about how we dispose of waste and if we do it carefully
we can have a better society, a cleaner place and a more
profitable place and it just requires some care. 9ut it
involves the whole community. Again it gets back to
this inclusive approach, we say let's get the community
involved. Our friends in the Coalition say let the
Government do it and make decrees from the mount. The
truth is with all of these programs you can only do them
with community support and nothing needs that more than
waste management.
Ji Do you have any recycled paper in your office?
PM: I do, yes. Most of the time.
J: Was the speech on recycled paper?
PM: I don't know, have a look.
J: Prime Minister, what's your response to Premiers Kirner
and oannon's call for a slow down in tariff _ eutin
PM: I haven't seen their document. 
J: But what do you think about their call for a slow down?
They are not the only ones, they join the ACTU and
business.
PM: Let's see what they have got to ay?
J: Do you think it's the right time to be talking about the
environent when we've got such high unemployment?
PM: I think this is a very labour intensive industry. with
paper recycling, for example a high proportion of the
newsprint of Australia picked up and recycled, that's a
very labour intensive thing to be doing. It is true,
because it is community based it requires a substantial
amount of labour, so it is a very labour intensive thing
and I think what's going to happen is that the whole
waste management and better environment movement is
going to be, if anything, labour intensive and job
creating.
J: Are the unemployed going to be invited to the youth
summit?
PM: There will be representatives there yeu.
J: What's your reaction to Mr Greiner not accepting the
findings of ICAC?-
PM: Mr Greiner and the NSW Liberals have a political rather
than a criminal matter on their hands. Obviously it
will have to be resolved politically.
J: Will it have an impact federally?
PM: Obviously, I don't think it will.
J: what's your reaction to an ANZ Bank studjy which suggests
that interest rates may be forced up if you persist with
the 4 per cent compulsory?
PM: There are studies and studies aren't there. We've all
seen those.
J: Prime Minister, on another matter there were reports
f rom ENO that Australian helicopters over there are
still being used as 9unehips.
PM: That's a claim, we're investigating that claim. People
who operate those helicopters are entitled to carry
weapons to defend themselves, but they are not entitled
to use the weapons in an offensive manner. So we are
making the appropriate investigations.
3: Prime Minister, consumer confidence in the polls this
morning has slumped in that the poll was taken even
before the high unemployment figure last month came out.
What are you going to do about that? 
3
PM: These things have been up and down over the course of
the last twelve months so I think there's no doubt in my
mind the economy in terms of output is recovering. The
problem we are seeing is that the output is leading
employment and we're going to see growth and production
pick up, but not commensurate with employment, not for
the moment that always lags production and it's doing
the same thing now.
ENDS 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF WASTE MINIMISATION AND RECYCLING STRATEGY, DARLING
HARBOUR, SYDNEY 22 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
The Government's Waste Minimisation and Recycling Strategy is
more than it seems.
This environment strategy is also an industrial strategy, and
a social strategy.
In this way it goes to the heart of some of the key questions
facing Australia today.
For instance, it is concerned with industrial modernity and
efficiency. It will play a part In determining how
significant our role will be in the modern world.
Increasingly this can be said of all good environment
policies: they are not regressive, as the critics used to like
to say, and as some of the more uncouth ones still do.
Strategies like this one do not advocate a more primitive way
of life, but a more sophisticated one.
They do not deny development, but they say it should be
intelligent. They look forward not back indeed, in the long term, they
can put us ahead of the international competition and keep us
there. We are encouraging a more efficient use of resources which
means less demand on our primary materials, and just as
importantly, more emphasis on the productive or creative
process. Firms which engage in successful waste minimisation schemes
have focussed on best practice. They are more likely to be
more efficient in other areas, and more likely to recognise
opportunities to create new ways of doing things and new
products. 
2
They are more open to change, and much more able to compete
with the best firms internationally and domestically.
A commitment to waste minimisation and recycling commits
government and industry to technology in ways we have not been
committed before.
By way of example, in recent years Australia has become a
world leader in-waste. water treatment and recycling for paper
packaging. There have been some outstanding technological advances in the
recycling of other materials: in paper for instance.
The collection and recycling of waste paper has meant that:
-the pulp resource base of the country has been increased,
which has helped us to replace imports.
-jobs have been generated, particularly in the labour
intensive practice of recycling.
-exports have been generated, both through greater
production and in the development of expertise in recycling
technology. Or take the classic example of slag from Australia's
steelworks. There is hardly a more a striking symbol of industrial waste
than a slag-heap.
But slag is now recognised as potentially high quality cement
or aggregate, and new processes are now being put in place to
exploit what was once the stuff of universal monuments to the
ugly side of industry.
Ladies and gentlemen
This strategy is another policy o
imagination. It will help put Au
realm of the creative.
Imagination in the area of waste
can mean new industries, new expo
Waste minimisation and recycling
environment with competitive, eff,
and a culture of creativity and a
This particular strategy, then, i
compliments, our progress towards
development in Australia.
It does not stand alone, even on
deals with. There is a breadth t'
matters. f imagination, f= r
stralian industry in the
minimisation and recycling
rt markets and new jobs.
combines protection of the
icient, expanding industries
daptat ion.
s a key development in, and
ecologically sustainable
the particular issues it
o government actions on these 
Our comprehensive Land Care program, involving $ 320 million
over the decade of Land Care, is helping to make agriculture
and farming sustainable and is reducing waste and pollution of
water and air.
In regard to protection of the ozone layer we have been ahead
of the pack in eliminating CFC's. Ozone depletion is a
particularly insidious result of waste generation. And our
strong and ongoing policies on the greenhouse effect will also
lead to a reduction of waste production and pollution.
This waste minimisation and recycling strategy also goes to
the heart of questions of annial PquIy.
Environmental costs, after all, tend to be borne unequally
across the community.
The better of f can generally make sure they don't suffer from
waste disposal problems. Poorer people often don't have the
means to move away.
A national strategy like this one positively discriminates in
favour of those who, since the beginnings of
industrialisation, have borne an unequal share of a national
burden. It is a classic reform in the interests of the nation and in
the interests of all Australians a classic L-ahnr reform.
Though conceived in advance of the February One Nation
statement, it projects both the same broad national goals and
the same means of pursuing them.
As I said, it is a strategy for the universal benefit of
Australians. It also seeks to In-111ad all Australians.
We want, and indeed the strategy depends upon, the active
participation of industry and the community.
It depends on partnerships between business and local, State
and Territory governments.
It sets out ways in which the bodies responsible for creating
household, industrial and commercial wastes can minimise them,
and recycle them when they are unavoidably generated.
It follows that every Australian is responsible for seeing
that the strategy succeeds. The most important partnership of
all is between Australians and their country.
If we all participate in recycling schemes, if we all seek out
goods made from recycled materials, if we all take a care to
minimise the amount of waste we produce, we will all share in
the success. 
We are seeking to change attitudes.
If we change attitudes we can not only improve the environment
and the economy and the quality of our lives, I think we can
help create a regimen of care for each other and the land we
live in.
That, I think, is a majnr objective and ghmid~ a be a major
objective of all government policies.
Of course, in launching this strategy today, we should also
recognise that what we do for the environment here we do for
the environment globally.
Those wastes we call greenhouse gases, for instance, present a
challenge to the whole world. We share the world's
responsibility to limit them.
As a developed country we also have a responsibility to put
ourselves at the leading edge of environmental problemsolving.
As the developing countries industrialise the scale of the
problem is bound to grow finding solutions, we can be sure,
is a growth industry.
Ladies and gentlemen we are accustomed to hear of the
balance in nature, or the ecological balance, the delicate
arrangement in nature which assures its continuation.
An equally crucial arrangement, and the one we urgently have
to find, is the integration between the environment and what
we make of it.
The integration of our respect for an environment unspoiled,
our spiritual and physical need for such an environment, and
our need for economic development.
We do nPPA one as much as the other.
We need economic development for our survival as a nation, for
the maintenance of our standard of living and, with that, our
values and institutions.
We also need it, I believe, because it is in our nature to
create and invent.
But in the debate about achieving the right balance, in
searching for the inevitable and necessary compromises which
will enable us to grow without degrading the world we live in
ultimately we come down on the side of the world.
I mean not just that we come down on the side of ecological
imperatives, like breathing clean air, or reducing greenhouse
gas emissions. 
I mean that we should come down of the side of conservation
rather than degradation, care rather than neglect, beauty
rather than ugliness.
This strategy I think is notable for making those choices.
And I think it is consistently the case in good environmental
policy that it advances the level of our sophistication when
we decide about these balances.
When for instance, on balance, we decide against mines in
Kakadu; or drilling on the Barrier Reef; or accepting a crude
and environment-degrading pulp mill at Wesley Vale, when more
intelligent applications of technology would make a better
one. So I welcome environmental debate in this country I think it
advances our level of civilisation.
We have been notoriously destructive of the natural
environment out of ignorance, carelessness and greed.
Nor have we cared as much as we should for the aesthetics of
the environments we have built.
In a remarkably short time we have gone from being a country
where space seemed limitless, and the environment incomparably
beautiful and clean, to one in which landfill sites are
becoming scarce and pollution of all kinds threatens the
quality of many urban, rural and natural environments.
It's good for us now to think carefully about how we can not
only make amends, but lead the world in strategies for the
future. What we have tended to take for granted in the past we must
now take as responsibilities.
And again, I think it will do us no harm to be thinking about
the future and about the solutions the future will require.
It will be good for us to think about the way we should be
developing our cities, for instance.
And it's good for us to be thinking along the national lines
which environment policy demands.
And as we go about finding national solutions I think we
should take a great deal of heart from our recent
achievements. Look back on the last ten years and you will see that we have
done remarkably well in achieving that balance between
development and the ecology ecologically sustainable
development that I spoke of earlier.
For we have increased our levels of production GDP has grown
by more than a third. 
And we have increased our manufacturing our exports of
manufacturing and services now outstrip mining and
agriculture.
But we've also doubled the size of the protected wilderness
area in Tasmania; trebled the size of Kakadu National Park and
protected it by banning mining; protected the Wet Tropic area
of Queensland; saved the Northern New South Wales rainforests;
extended the Marine Park of the Great Barrier Reef region from
14 per cent to 98 per cent.
We've been international leaders in legislation to protect the
ozone layer and led a world campaign to prevent mining in
Antarctica. We've developed a comprehensive energy conservation program
and a ten year program to protect endangered species.
In the area of the environment, as in much of our social
legislation, we are ahead of the world, and we should be proud
of it, and encouraged by it.
We certainly shouldn't be tempted. to wind back our commitment
either because they are too hard, or as some would have us
believe, because in these difficult economic times we can't
afford them.
The truth is we can't afford not to protect our environment,
or to let future generations pay for our neglect and
expediency, or to miss the opportunities which environmental
imperatives offer to us industrially.
In 1992 nearly a tonne of solid waste will be produced per
person in Australia.
This particularly ugly and potentially depressing fact has one
thing going for it we know it can be changed.
This strategy shows the Government has the will to change it.
By many of its recent actions industry is showing it has the
will to change it. By their responses the people of Australia
also give every indication that they have the will.
We will change it.
Within the next few years that tonne of waste will be much
reduced, and we'll develop both better technologies and better
ways of living on this continent in doing it.
Perhaps within a decade or less the tonne of waste will have
become a tonne of confidence in ourselves, and a tonne of
faith in the nation.
Let me conclude by congratulating the people who by dint of
good ideas and conscientious effort have come up with this
plan for Australia. 
7
Ros Kelly, of course, deserves much of the credit and much of
the congratulations particularly for the extensive
discussions with industry which she held in 1990, and which
went a long way toward establishing a common understanding in
government and industry.
I congratulate alU those who have been involved, and urge all
Australians to take up the challenge.
This is a major step towards a better Australia.
And it is with great pleasure and pride that I now declare it
launched. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISrER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE, 23 JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, what are the details of the youth summit?
PM: We've given you the date and it will be a private meeting, one where we are
trying to I think, do something material and substantial about youth
unemployment and provide opportunities for young people. A large part of
the initiatives in these respects have been led by my colleague Kim Beazley
who has had the responsibility of picking up the Carmichael Report on
training and entry level wages and all of those very complex issues, and
putting together a discussion with business and with community groups and
with young people to see what we can do in terms of a permanent change to
the employment of young people in Australia. Can I say that I think the
meeting can be a very useful one and Kim's leadership on the issue has been
quite profound.
J: Prime Minister, many of the people going to the job summit will be going to
the Opposition's jobs forum three weeks before, have you been pre-empted?
PM: It will be all there, all shadow and no substance. There is nothing in the
Fightba k proposals. This was originally going to be a jamboree for
Fightback. There is nothing in the Fightback proposals which would give
anyone either money or confidence about labour market programs or training.
In fact the great training initiatives the Government had in ' One Nation' for a
new national TAFE system are not even comprehended under Dr Hewson's
GST Fightback proposal. Now they were supposed to have a fair, a jamboree
where they were to sell the consumption tax. They now realise that the going 
2
on that is going to be very tough so now they're going to try and move into the
youth unemployment issue an issue which they have to date shown not the
slightest interest. The difference between that and what we're proposing is
this is real. This is about a real change in the way the labour market works
and about trying to take young people up in employment and to give them
training so that they can find jobs in the economy, particularly as the economy
recovers which do have those skills which they just won't be able to get
without them.
J: Will young jobless people be invited?
PM: They will be represented by the Australian Youth Policy and Action Coalition
which is the premier group representing young people.
J: So they won't be there?
PM: They will be there yes.
J: How many unemployed people are you going to have?
PM: That group which will have its own consultations over the next couple of
weeks prior to the summit and will have some young people also included in
their own delegation.
J: How many full-time jobs do you think the Carmichael Report can actually
achieve?
PM: The Carmichael Report is a report about the long-term and the long-termi is
portending a change for access to young people and the opportunities for them
to get on-the-job training and to be employed on an affordable basis for onthe-
job-training and to moving into the economy then with some skills. Now
this has not been the case in the past so it's a very long run policy.
J: How many sustainable jobs?
PM: I will see what we can do, but we'll have substantial businesses represented. It
will be many thousands.
J: Kim Beazlcy seems to think that young jobless people aren't needed at the
summit.
PM: No, you asked Kim about organisational arrangements, some of you, for the
summit and you should have asked me because I'm the one putting the
arrangements together. Kim's role has been the policy role. Kim has, as you
know, come from an educational background to public life and he regards the
Carmichael Report and its implementation as being a path breaking and an 
important area of policy and to date he has done very well in getting, in a
practical way, the debate to this stage and we're all going to try and move it
along a bit further.
J: Were Premiers Kirner and Bannon grandstanding if they say the 50,000 jobs
in the TCF could go in the next five years?
PM: I'm not sure.
J: Prime Minister, on South Africa, Arch Bishop Tutu today called for the
reimposition of s qn~ cions. Does Australia support that call?
PM: I haven't seen what Arch Bishop Tutu has said. We can only hope that the
CODESA process continues, that the parties there can see their way clear to
resolve the current problems and get back to the discussions for a democratic
South Africa.
J: Do you believe the All Blacks should continue with their tour?
PM: Look, we have lifted sporting sanctions and I'm not going to pre-empt or prejudge
the situation at this distance. We'll see what the future holds and there
are still some other sanctions which are applying and they will continue to
apply.
J: Do we need another cut in interest rates to help employment.
PM: Again, I'm not going to give forecasts about interest rates at doorstops.
J: Prime Minister, are you at all inclined to link the ' One Nation' statement with
tariff changes in the way that Premiers Bannon and Kirner suggested on
Sunday?
PM: You always ask the hard questions. You always come at us about
employment and the gloomy aspects of economic life and because I know you
are a supporter of the Liberal Party. But the fact of the matter is..
J: That's an absurd proposition.
PM: It's not absurd, you are a supporter of the Liberal Party. The fact is that the
Government has over the 1980s sought to make Australia a newer country, a
country which can trade its way in the world and where jobs are real and
sustainable. And that's what is happening in Australia now. There has been a
great fundamental transition to exports, the country is exporting its head off, it
has been since the 1980s and it's still doing it. What we need is more growth
because as people are displaced, and they have been displaced as the 
4
efficiencies of certain companies and industries have changed, we need to take
them up with higher levels of aggregate growth and aggregate employment.
J: What about the tariff changes suggested by the Premiers?
PM: Like everything else, they will be considered.
J: Prime Minister, why if Kim Beazley as Employment Minister, why wasn't he
let known that you were going to have youth unemployed?
PM: There is a process, and the process is that the arrangements were being settled
and have been settled over the last couple of days. The summit has been
organised by me and my Department and not by Mr Beazley and his.
J: Why didn't you notify him?
PM: Don't concentrate on the negative. It's always a problem with you people,
we're about to make a break through on youth unemployment and some of you
just harp on pointless negatives.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL MEETING TO BE HELD JULY 22
A national meeting on yihtrnngand_ employmenlt will
be held in Canberra on Wednesday, July 22.
I have invited about 40 representatives of business,
community and youth organisations and unions to consider
a range of proposals to increase work and training
opportunities for Australia's youth.
At the core of these proposals are several Government
measures which I am keen to address.
These include:
a quality TAFE system, responsive to the needs of
young people and industry;
consideration of the Carmichael Report and the
proposed youth training wage;
the funding of local employment opportunities for
young people on community, rural and environmental
programs.
Participants in the meeting will include representatives
of companies which have already shown an innovative and
enthusiastic approach to the employment of young
trainees. The Government will be seeking ideas to assist and
promote these efforts and encourage more businesses to
follow suit.
Young Australians will have a voice at the meeting
through the Australian Youth Policy and Action Coalition
as well as through discussions I will have with young
people over coming weeks. 62/ 92 
The meeting will also be attended by the Treasurer, Mr
Dawkins, the Minister for Employment, Education and
Training, Mr Beazley, the Minister for Industrial
Relations, Senator Cook, the Minister for Primary
Industries and Energy, Mr Crean, and the Minister for
Higher Education and Employment Services, Mr Baldwin.
CANBERRA/ MELBOURNE
June 23 1992 
Those invited to participate in the national meeting on
youth training and employment include:
John Prescott
Solomon Lew
John Ralph
Richard Pratt
John Haddad
Mr Eric Mayer
Mr John Bell
Mr Alex Hamill
Ms Liz Hassack
Mr Hugh Davies
Mr Lindsay Fox
Mr Bert Evans
Mr John Murray
Mr Richard Sweet
Mr Peter Wilkinson
Business Council of ( BHP)
( Coles Myer)
( CRA)
( Pratt Industries)
( Australian Tourism Commission and
Federal Hotels)
( Business in the Community for Young
People) ( Esprit)
( George Patterson)
( Bodyshop)
( Mayne Nickless)
( Linfox)
( Metal Trades Industry Association)
( Master Builders' CHAA)
( Dusseldorp Skills Forum)
( Retailers' Council)
Australia
Confederation of Australian Industry
Life Be In It
Mr Bill Kelty
Mr Bill Mansfield
Ms Belinda Woods
Mr George Campbell ( ACTU)
( ACTU)
( ACTU Youth Committee)
( MEWU)
Mr Laurie Carmichael ( chairman, Employment and Skills
Formation Council)
Mr Rick Farley
Premier John Bannon
Premier Joan Kirner
Mr Paul Turley
Mr Graeme Frecker ( National Farmers' Federation)
( chairman, Australian Youth Policy
and Action Group)
( Australian Local Government Assoc.)
Ms Alison McCleliand ( Brotherhood of St Laurence)
Archbishop Hollingworth
Bishop Michael Challen
Ms Merle Mitchell ( ACOSS)
Mr John Freeland ( ACOSS)
Media arrangements:
The meeting will be held in private at Parliament House,
Canberra, but media will have an opportunity to gain
overlay footage and record the Prime Minister's opening
remarks. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF LIFE BE IN IT PROGRAM " ACTIVATE"
MELBOURNE, 23 JUNE 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very glad to be here today to launch this Life Be In
It program called " Activate".
Life Be In It is an Australian phenomenon. I doubt if
many who were there when the organisation was founded in
1975 imagined it would still be going strong today.
Alex Stitt who drew the original Norm and continues to
draw him and who is here today, might know the answer
to that.
It has lasted because it is a great idea, and a selfsustaining
one. It includes people, it works on the idea
of partnership with the community and for this reason
it has been able to consistently come up with more ideas
along the way.
This idea " Activate" is surely one of the best, and
the Government is delighted to be a part of it.
Dr Ian Bennett has explained the details of the program,
but I do want to say this:
This program draws its strength from the strength of
Australia itself.
It draws on the energy, ideas and skills the force if
you like of strategic partnerships between government,
industry and the community itself.
That is the beauty of the idea. That's what will see
this program succeed. And that's why I hope and believe
that the same principle will be brought to other programs
for the unemployed in coming months. 
It will most certainly be brought to next month's
national meeting on youth employment and training in
Canberra. Recovery from the recession, the problem of long term
unemployment, the need to re-structure our industry and
seize the opportunities which await us in the world all
these things critically depend on forming these national
partnerships, in substance and in spirit.
In the 1980s we unleashed an enormous amount of economic
energy, not all of it well focussed.
This must be the decade when we re-direct that energy
toward productive investment in competitive industries.
We will do that the incentives are there.
Ultimately this is what will solve the problem of
unemployment this and our determination to train
Australians for the jobs of the future.
Because there is nothing more important to most
Australians than the right to a job.
It is the principal means by which our self-esteem is
built. It is the way we advance ourselves. It is the
way we advance Australia.
For those who have nothing to sell but their labour, it
is the only means of security.
The right to work has always been central to our idea of
what constitutes a fair go.
That is why the Government is making such an effort to
secure jobs for the long term by transforming TAFE into
an education system of status and quality.
It is why " Activate", which is funded under our Jobskills
program, has our unqualified support it provides both
work and training, which means that the people who emerge
from it will have valuable, transferable skills and
that means they will have a future in the modern world.
These are the essentials of any useful response to the
problem of unemployment industries with a future,
training the future.
As I said, we can do those things. We can do what is
necessary to encourage productive investment. We can
renovate our vocational training system.
It will take time and it will not be without difficulty,
but we can do it.
But, even as we do these things, I believe we must do one
thing more. 
3
We have to restore faith in Australia.
I think we have to invest the nation with the same degree
of hope and meaning it had for my generation and the ones
before it.
The generation before mine lived in much harder times
than these, and they had, on the face of it much less
reason for hope.
But they did believe in this country. They believed it
had a destiny to fulfil.
That faith played no small part in seeing them through.
And in seeing Australia through.
I'm not sure that this country has quite that meaning for
Australians today.
I don't think for a moment that we will re-kindle faith
and hope by looking backwards, or by standing still.
We won't do it either by paying old obeisances or talking
about the good old days of dead end jobs.
Nor will we do it, incidentally, by cutting into the
advanced and comprehensive social programs we have built
and maintained over a century, and which are today the
hallmark of Australian civilisation.
I think we will best restore that faith and confidence
in fact we will only restore it by confronting the
future.
Confronting the future means finding solutions now.
Solutions like this one which do what we in the
Government have been trying to do since we began the
national program called One Nation.
Get the directions right. Address the imperatives.
Consolidate our strengths. And as we develop ideas and
get them working, keep building that regimen of care for
each other and the nation, which is always the best
measure of a successful society.
I believe we have to make a truly national effort, and
that is truly what we have been doing these past six
months. The national meeting we will hold on 22 July will be a
major step along that path.
That meeting, I believe, will deliver new hope and
opportunities to Australians, particularly young
Australians. 
We can do much to solve our problems if we have the will
to do it.
In Australia we have much in our favour. Among all our
human and material resources there is one as valuable as
any other that is our belief in fairness, in the " fair
go", of individual opportunity tempered only by social
justice this is an ethic as old as the nation itself.
We should call on that belief now and in the future.
It will serve us well.
It has served Life Be In It well in this program.
I want to congratulate everyone associated with
" Activate" and thank them, and wish them success.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
COMM( ONWEALTH RESPONSE TO THE ROYAL COMMISSION INTO
ABORIGINAL DEATHS IN CUSTODY, 24 JUNE 1992
Mr Speaker
I seek leave to make a Parliamentary Statement on the
Commonwealth's response to the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
Mr Speaker
On 26 February, I presented the One Nation Statement. In
it, I announced measures to help close the gaps which for
so long have separated Australians.
I said then that all our efforts should go towards
uniting the country. I also said we should combine a
more efficient economy with a fairer and more equitable
society. 27 May was the 25th Anniversary of the 1967 referendum to
give the Commonwealth the power to legislate for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
On that occasion I said that, as a nation, we have not
yet succeeded in meeting the challenge set by the
triumphant referendum result.
Today, there is no more central issue to our national
identity and self-esteem than the injustices brought home
to us all by the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths
in Custody.
There is nothing more central to our reputation in the
world. Or to the kind of democratic, just society to which we
aspire. Mr Speaker 
2
The needs are clear.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have about
half the average yearly income of other Australians.
Participation by Aboriginal young people in post-school
education is around a fifth of the rate for
non-Aboriginal young people.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in all age
groups have mortality rates almost three times higher
than for the overall population.
The custody rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people is 29 times that of the general community.
These few statistics give some idea of what the Royal
Commission called " the disadvantaged and unequal
position" of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
in all aspects of Australian society.
The Commonwealth sees the Report of the Royal Commission
into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody as a national
opportunity for genuine change in the lives of
Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
On behalf of the Government, I would like to say again
how much we appreciate the work of the Royal
Commissioners and their staff.
Their work documented a tragic waste of life.
The Royal Commission investigated the deaths of ninetynine
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in
custody. But at least thirty more Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people have died in custody since the Royal
Commission finished its investigations.
I know that nothing can remove the grief, anger and loss
felt by the families, relatives and friends of those who
died. But it is fundamentally important that the Royal
Commission found the real killer.
The responsibility lies in large measure with entrenched,
institutionalised racism and discrimination.
Those who died were victims of over two centuries of
dispossession, prejudice and neglect.
We cannot evade these harsh truths. Nor should we.
But we can work to change them. 
On 31 March this year Robert Tickner, the Minister for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, tabled
responses by the Commonwealth and all mainland State and
Territory Governments to the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody.
This kind of cooperation is a truly national achievement,
crossing boundaries of jurisdiction and politics.
Its importance cannot be minimised.
In our response to the Royal Commission, the Commonwealth
supported all but one of the Royal Commission's
recommendations.
We allocated $ 150 million over five years for law and
justice initiatives and to assist Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people in their own efforts to overcome
alcohol and substance abuse.
Today I am proud to announce the second stage of the
Commonwealth's response a concerted attack on the
economic and social disadvantage which is reflected
nowhere more starkly than in the numbers of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people in custody.
And a renewal of our commitment to empower Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islanders.
These measures entail an additional $ 250 million over
five years, taking the total Commonwealth expenditure in
response to the Royal Commission, over five years, to
$ 400 million.
In difficult times, this level of funds is not easy to
find. But the need must be faced.
Mr Speaker
The Royal Commission's report described the efforts,
initiatives and dedication of Aboriginal people and
communities and organisations across Australia to protect
their culture, restore self-esteem and achieve real
equality. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are taking
control of their lives and communities.
They are demonstrating the will for renewal and for selfdetermination.
Today the Government reaffirms its support for these
Australians. The concepts " self-determination" and " renewal" are
increasingly a reality. 
The structures are there to ensure both their effect and
their survival.
Elected Commissioners of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Commission now make national decisions in
Aboriginal Affairs.
Sixty elected Regional Councils now make decisions on
priorities, needs and funding for their areas.
The knowledge and expertise of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander organisations are now vital. in developing
and delivering important Commonwealth programs and
services. Mr Speaker
From the beginning, the ATSIC Commissioners had a major
role in shaping the responses by Governments to the Royal
Commission. I would like to express the Commonwealth's gratitude to
the Chairperson of ATSIC, Miss Lois O'Donoghue, and to
the Commissioners for their dedication.
I would particularly like to thank the Commissioners and
Regional Councils of ATSIC for their efforts over many
months of consultations and negotiations to ensure the
best possible responses by Governments to the Royal
Commission. The ATSIC Commissioners were closely involved in
developing the measures I am announcing today and
endorsed this package of measures before it was
considered by Cabinet.
I would also like to recognise the energy and dedication
of the Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Affairs, Mr Robert Tickner.
His contribution has been extraordinarily valuable and
central in responding to the Royal Commission.
The initiatives I announce today constitute a renewed
attack on economic and social disadvantages among
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
These are initiatives with a difference in that they
are firmly based on the notions of empowerment and selfdetermination.
No real change is possible without the energy and will of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
Imposed solutions will not work.
This has been the fundamental flaw in many previous,
well-intentioned policies. 
We are focusing on the future on economic development
and on Aboriginal young people.
We are working for increased income in Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities and organisations,
thus reducing dependence.
We have balanced this strong emphasis on economic
development with equally strong initiatives in social and
cultural self-determination.
These initiatives will mean more jobs, enterprise
opportunities and more training for Aboriginal people.
They will raise community and individual incomes.
They will improve community living standards.
They will increase community self-reliance.
They will address the needs so clearly set out in the
Royal Commission's report.
Mr Speaker, I turn now to the detailed economic
development aspects of this package.
million over five years will be provided for a land
acquisition and development program.
It will provide the capital resources and training for
better use and sustainable development of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander land.
$ 6.6 million over the next three years will be directed
to an Aboriginal Rural Resources program to encourage
enterprise, particularly in managing pastoral properties.
A Community Economic Initiative Scheme, costing $ 23.3
million over five years, will foster local enterprises.
The Australian National Parks and Wildlife contract
employment program for managing natural and cultural
resources will be expanded at a cost of $ 10.6 million
over five years.
ATSIC will develop long-term Aboriginal industry
strategies in the pastoral, arts and tourism industries.
million over five years will be provided for these
strategies, to draw together and build on existing
initiatives.
The Community Development Employment Program will be
expanded at a cost of $ 43.9 million over five years. 
This will ensure an increased emphasis on incomegeneration
and will enable CDEP to better meet the needs
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and young
people.
A Young Peoples' Employment Program will be established,
at a cost of $ 21.9 million, to provide work placements
largely within Aboriginal organisations and linked to
TAFE training.
The total cost of these economic development initiatives
is $ 181.1 million over five years.
They will make a difference because they ARE different.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people will shape
and control them.
Mr Speaker, I now turn to the youth aspects of the
package. A Young Peoples' Development Program will be
established, at a cost of $ 23 million over five years, to
encourage planned community action to meet the specific
needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young
people.
We will set up an Aboriginal Youth Sport and Recreation
Development Program at a cost of $ 9 million over five
years. This initiative will provide Aboriginal sports
development officers to work in communities.
million over five years will be provided for 200
additional Aboriginal Education Workers from 1993.
million will be provided for 600 more pre-school
places for Aboriginal children from 1994.
We will also work for better Aboriginal access to preschools.
These measures respond directly to the strong views of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people that their
children are their future.
All Australians can understand and share this view.
Mr Speaker
We will also provide $ 6.9 million over five years for
measures to improve cooperation between the Commonwealth,
States and Territories and to assist them to monitor
initiatives arising from the Royal Commission.
We have already announced that ATSIC will monitor
progress by Governments in implementing the Royal
Commission' s recommendations. 
These processes will be public and will continue our
commitment to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
participation. The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission will
also report annually on the human rights situation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in
Australia. The Commonwealth Government cannot, alone, eliminate the
disadvantage of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people.
Aboriginal affairs is the concern of all Australians and
their Governments.
For real change, Commonwealth, State, Territory and Local
Governments must work together with Aboriginal
communities and organisations.
We are making progress. On May 11, Heads of Government
endorsed a framework for intergovernmental cooperation in
Aboriginal affairs.
The Commonwealth is working with State, Territory and
Local Governments to put this cooperative framework into
action. We will develop, with the States and Territories, a
National Aboriginal Policy Statement and negotiate joint
responsibility agreements in specific areas.
These arrangements will take some time to put in place.
However, our discussions with the States, Territories and
Local Government on the response to the Royal Commission
have emphasised the need for real cooperative planning
and delivery.
Among the measures I have announced today, the Rural
Resources, Australian National Parks and Wildlife
Contract Employment, Sport and Recreation and education
initiatives all involve funding or delivery through the
States and Territories.
Local Government is also actively involved in the
intergovernmental cooperative framework now accepted by
Heads of Government.
It would confer a great advantage on our efforts if local
government were to actively participate in our
initiatives. We will continue to encourage practical cooperation
between Local Government and Aboriginal communities and
organisations particularly the sixty ATSIC Regional
Councils across Australia. 
8
Mr Speaker
Last year, by Act of Parliament supported by all
political parties, we established the Council for
Aboriginal Reconciliation.
In itself, this is evidence of the desire for justice
among Australians.
I have great faith in the Council and its Chairperson,
former Royal Commissioner, Mr Patrick Dodson.
I think the Council offers Australia its greatest chance
of learning that there is no true loyalty or affection
for this country that does not include respect for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians.
Mr Speaker
These issues are central to our nation and its future.
They are also urgent.
As a nation, we face the challenge of the consequences of
dispossession, conquest, brutal treatment and equally
inhuman neglect of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people the first Australians.
As I have said more than once in recent months, in this
last decade of the 20th century there is no greater goal
for Australians than the delivery of long overdue justice
to Aboriginal people.
The Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
reminded us of that.
This year should be the turning point: the year when as a
people we decide that if we are to be truly one nation,
true to our traditions and ideals, then by the year 2000
justice wil have been delivered, and the shame removed. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. PJ. KEATING, MP
AUSI'RALIA'S SECOND REPORT TO THE UNITED NATIONS
COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
WOMEN ( CEDAW)
This morning I had great pleasure in formally presenting Australia's second
CEDAW Report to Her Excellency Mrs Mervat Tallawy, the chairperson of the
United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
Present at the ceremony in the Prime Minister's sitting room were the Hon. Wendy
Fatin MP, Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Status of Women; the Hon.
Justice Elizabeth Evatt, President, the Law Reform Commission and former member
and Chair of the CEDAW Committee; Quentin Bryce AO, Sex Discrimination
Commissioner, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission; Kaye Loder,
chair, National Women's Consultative Council; and Helen L'Orange, First Assistant
Secretary, Office of the Status of Women.
Australia is obliged to report every four years to the United Nations as part of our
responsibilities as signatories to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, a convention the government ratified within
months of taking office in 1983. By ratifying CEDAW we committed ourselves to
developing policies and programs to improve the status of women in Australia. Thie
Government quickly responded to this responsibility by using CEDAW as one of
the constitutional underpinnings for the Sex Discrimination Act which was passed
by the Parliament in 1984. Ratification of CEDAW also obliges us to report
periodically on our progress in improving the status of women, and the Report I
presented this morning is Australia's second such report. The Report was prepared
and coordinated by the Office of the Status of Women ( OSW) in my department,
with input from all departments of the Federal Government, the State governments
of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia and
Tasmania, and the Governments of the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory. Non-government organisations' views were also formally canvassed for 
the first time. The National Women's Consultative Council ( NWCC) held a
consultation between key NGOs and members of the federal bureaucracy to explore
views on Australia's progress in implementing the Convention.
Australia's achievements in the course of nearly a decade of implementing the
CEDAW Convention have won us international acclaim. My government is very
proud that Australia is now considered a major player in international forums
concerned with status of women issues, and we are committed to continuing the
process of implementing the Convention and other measures to improve the status of
women. Australia's First Report, considered by the CEDAW Committee in 1988, was
commended for its scope and frankness. Our Second Report to CEDAW continues
this tradition of openness about what remains to be done to fully implement the
Convention. The period since our first Report has been one in which a number of
important achievements have occurred.
Those achievements include the following:
Establishment of 30,000 new child care places under the 1988-92 Child
Care Strategy
Child care fee relief increased and indexed
Fee relief for child care places extended to commercial centres
Child Support Agency established
National Agenda for Women launched
Sole parent rebate and dependent spouse rebate substantially boosted and
indexed All family payments for children ( Family Allowance, Family Allowance
Supplement, Child Disability Allowance, Mothers Guardian Allowance)
indexed to maintain real value
National Committee on Violence Against Women established
National Program for Early Detection of Breast Cancer established
Early Detection of Cervical Cancer Program established
Ratification of JiO Convention 156 on Workers with Family
Responsibilities 
Work and Family Unit established in Department of Industrial Relations
Equal Pay Unit established in the Department of Industrial Relations
Introduction of the Jobs, Education and Training ( JET) program for sole
parents
Our Government was the first in the world to issue a comprehensive policy
document for raising the status of women when it released the National Agenda for
Women in 1988. Each year the annual implementation reports on the National
Agenda have provided a public measure of our progress, as have the annual reports
under the Australian Women's Employment Strategy and the National Policy for the
Education of Girls in Australian Schools. The second phase of the National Agenda
is presently being designed and a renewed document will be released later this year.
Similarly, Australia was among the first countries in the world to set in place a
mechanism to evaluate the impact of Federal Budget decisions on women. The
Women's Budget Statement has been tabled in Federal Parliament as a Budgetrelated
paper every year since 1984.
One of the most important elements of Australia's response to CEDAW has been the
establishment of a specialised bureaucratic machinery in Federal, State, and
Territory government departments to monitor, evaluate and advise on government
policies and programs as they affect women. OSW in my department is part of this
machinery.
Australia has also been in the forefront in the range of government-funded services
for women. Many are run by women, for women. For instance, Women's
Information and Referral Services operate in all metropolitan and some regional
centres as an access point to government services for women. A national network
of 313 services exists for women escaping domestic violence. Under our National
Women's Health Policy, a wide range of special early detection and preventative
health services are provided for women, including Alternative Birthing Services, the
Program for Early Detection of Breast Cancer and the Cervical Cancer Screening
Program. Labour market reform and the processes of award restructuring have improved
women's position in the paid workforce; the gender gap in wages has narrowed with
the ratio of women's to men's earnings having reached 84 per cent. By international
standards this figure is high, though the government remains committed to the goal
of equal pay.
Women's participation in the workforce continues to grow, especially that of
women with children. 61 per cent of Australian women with children aged 5-12
are in the workforce as are 45 per cent of all mothers of children aged 0-4, so the
government is especially proud of its achievement in ensuring the continued growth
in child-care places. When Labor came to office in 1983 there were 46,000 
community-based child-care places; there are now more than 134,600 and I have
committed the governmnrt to providing 250,000 places by 1995. In just the past
two years the number of families receiving fee relief for long day care has increased
from 44,500 to 135,800 and the average weekly fee relief payments have increased
per cent from $ 22 to $ 35 per week. Sole parents participating in the Jobs,
Education and Training ( JET) Program have been major beneficiaries of the
expansion in child care. Participation of sole parents in the workforce has increased
from 36% in 1983 to 45% in 1992.
The government has placed particular emphasis on consolidating and improving
payments to families. We have indexed all family payments and, as of January
1993, all will be payable to the parent most responsible for the care of the children,
usually the mother.
The ratification in 1991 of the International Labour Organisation Convention 156 on
Workers with Family Responsibilities was another landmark for women. It
committed the Government to develop policies and programs to minimise the
pressures on people with jobs and families, and in particular address the double load
carried by working women with domestic responsibilities.
In the legal arena, the Sex Discrimination Act has been amended to improve and
extend coverage, and the effectiveness of the Affirmative Action ( Equal
Employment Opportunity for Women) Act 1986 has recently been reviewed
through a process of community consultations which revealed a high level of
acceptance by business and the community for these measures which aim to
increase women's job opportunities
The government recognises that to achieve our ultimate goal of full equality for
women all levels of government still have a long way to go but the presentation of
the CEDAW Report provides an opportunity to restate our commitment to that goal,
and to say we welcome the comment and advice of the highly respected CEDAW
Committee in its consideration of Australia's Second Report.
CANBERRA June 1992 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN BOOK PUBLISHERS AWARDS, SYDNEY 26 JUNE
Ladies and gentlemen.
It's a pleasure to be here tonight on one of the big
occasions in the Australian literary year.
And to be here with an Englishman of such courage and
grace that he is prepared to share the stage with a
notorious Pombasher.
I assure you, John, that I am not.
It is only my enemies who say that I am my enemies, the
British tabloids, and a certain type of intractable
colonial which I'm sure you'd never come across in the
Australian publishing industry.
I'm pleased to be here because I want to congratulate the
industry for holding this first international book fair
in Australia.
It's a very welcome development.
Similar events are held around the world; in fact the
international reputation of some cities is to a
significant degree built on book fairs.
There are book fairs in Frankfurt and Bologna. A US book
fair, and Pacifica in Canada.
They are held in Asian countries.
Until now they not have been held here.
Yet, per capita, Australians read as many if not more
books than any of these places. They buy at least as
many. They depend on books as much. 
We are an important market for English language
publishing and, increasingly, for books in other
languages and in translation and it's a vigorous
competitive market.
We gholid celebrate books and their authors.
And their publishers.
And we should do what we can to focus the attention of
Australians on an industry which is a vital supplier of
their cultural needs.
If the word cultural is off-putting, let's say education,
information, communication, entertainment, ideas,
politics, history, stories the skeleton, heart and mind
of a community if you like.
And an essential underpinning and partner of film and
television and many other industries.
And still probably the best measure of who we are, what
we are about, and how well we are doing on the scale of
civilisation. There we have a few reasons why I am pleased to be
associated with the Australian Book Fair and with these
awards. There is another one books offer us a window on to the
world. Just as they do much to define us to ourselves, they can
define us to the rest of the world.
And quite frankly, I think we could do with a bit of redefining.
Visitors like John Mortimer could be forgiven for
wondering why we are so pre-occupied with questions of
identity.
Not only visitors my political opponents describe it as
a distraction, or an obsession, depending on their mood.
But it seems to me a fundamental concern.
In the 1990s we need to be confident in ways that we have
never been, independent in ways that we've never been.
Why? Because all the old supports that gave us both
confidence and a vicarious identity have been pulled
away. The old imperial supports contrived to make the matter of
our independence a secondary concern: for long periods of
our history political expediency made it an illegitimate
concern. 
The same reflex governs the conservative knee Jerk today.
As my opponents are inclined to believe only certified
historians, or RSL Presidents, on such matters, let me
quote one W. J. Hudson, the pre-eminent historian of
Australian foreign policy.
In an article published this year he writes:
When independence from Britain came piecemeal in the
twentieth century diplomatic independence 1923,
executive independence in 1926 and legislative
independence in 1931 it came unsought by
Australia. The independence campaign was waged by
Canada, South Africa and the Irish Free State, and
Australia unsuccessfully opposed them. Australia
became independent not by her choice, not when she
wanted it, not as a result of her own efforts and
not because Australians sought freedom to fulfil
their own alternative visions. From the Australian
point of view, Britain abdicated and Australia was
thrust into an independence which she did not want
and which, lest a potential aggressor might think he
had only Australia to face and not the might of the
British empire, she pretended had not happened.
Some Australians some influential Australians still
pretend. Some symbolic vestiges and some attitudes
suggest that thenat~ ion is still pretending.
I don't think that we can pretend anymore in any form.
We will go into the world independent or we will not
succeed, we will go by our own efforts because there is
no one else to help us, we will fulfil our own visions
because no one is going to lend us theirs.
We have always been ambivalent about who we are. Robert
Menzies of course resolved the dilemma by saying wie we
like a child that is we were not so much two people at
once as one caught between childhood and adulthood.
He imagined us in our relationship wi:: thBri4, tain as being
like a youth returning to its mother, the old family as
if back from a spell at Timbertop, or jackerooing.
Hudson uses a similar metaphor but puts a different spin
on it.
When Britain formalised her withdrawal into Europe, he
says, Australians " felt bereft and betrayed".
Australia was like an adult son having affairs
( economically with Japan and militarily with the
United States) but still living at home and, worse
than kicking him out of the old home, mother was
moving house and not taking him with her. 
In the 1990s without the slightest disrespect to a
country for which I have the greatest admiration, and to
whose language and institutions I am a very grateful
heir, I want to see us leave home.
Of course, we do not remain there in any substantial
material way but we are there emblematically and to a
degree psychologically, and it would be much better for
us in the real world that we now inhabit if we removed
the emblems and excised the doubts.
We need very badly that spirit of independence and faith
in ourselves which will enable us to shape a role for
ourselves in the region and the world.
I mean a faith that is deeper than the mix of chauvinism
and expediency which has tended to shape our political
culture: and a degree of confidence which will allow an
image of us to form that is both more helpful and much
closer to the truth than the lingering stero-types of
gormless men, and shrimps and barbecues.
In this connection I might tell you that yesterday I
presented Australia's Second Report to the Chair of the
UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against
Women. The Chair, Mrs Mervat Tallawy, pointed out that, in
legislation to protect and improve the status of women,
Australia was a model for the rest of the-wo'rld,-
surpassed by none, and equalled perhaps only by the
Scandinavian countries.
Nowhere in the image we present to the rest of the world
nor, I suspect, in our self-image is there a
reflection of that fact.
It would do us good if Australians did know that, and if
the rest of the world knew it.
It would do us good psychologically.
And because we have learned things in getting there and
so have skills and experience which other countries need
it would do us good materially.
I think our ignorance of these things comes from that
same abdication of responsibility for our own destiny,
and our own history.
Let me quote another historian, Professor Stuart
Maclntyre of Melbourne University, who said recently: 
Australian history lacks a civic dimension that
would record how it established its forms of selfgovernment
and the values for which the polity
stands. Just as a survey revealed that more
Australian schoolchildren knew of the Constitution
of the United States of America than the
constitution of their own country, so Washington and
Martin Luther King are more celebrated figures than
Wentworth and Catherine Helen Spence. Our interest
in the past is an interest in family history but not
civic history.
How else could we consider removing Caroline Chisholm
from our currency the most signif1fit woman of our
colonial history, and one engaged in the most significant
phenomenon of aiL our history immigration.
The fact is that for a very long while the focus of our
historical interest was not our own history.
In the age of multicultural Australia we have not by any
means entirely replaced the old sentiments with
unequivocally Australian ones.
Indeed, in a sense, multiculturalism combined with the
lingering Britishness of the place to circumvent the
emergence of a singularly Australian identity to replace
the old imperial one.
As Professor Maclntrye says, " at the very moment when
Australia asserted a more forward-looking and pluralist
identity, the public culture lapsed into inarticulacy."
Again, it seems to me, the questions of identity, image
and our place in the world are linked.
We have very rapidly transformed ourselves from a
notoriously xenophobic and insular society to one which
has the beginnings of a reputation for its remarkably
successful multicultural experiment.
But that success does not form a significant part of our
image abroad, and we do not take much pride in it here.
Nor do we take sufficient advantage of the skills,
experience and cultural insight which our multicultural
population offers us in international business.
The Japanese will tell us that their success is built on
their uniquely monocultural society.
The fact that we can't do that should not concern us
the United States achieved phenomenal success from a
multitude of cultures.
I believe we can too. 
But I think we have to make clear that our belief in
liberty, tolerance, equity and the encouragement of
ethnic diversity in no way compromises our expectation
that the first loyalty of all who make their home here
will be to Australia.
In the 1990s I think we should make it clear.
As a simple step in that direction, I believe the Oath of
Allegiance sworn by new citizens at naturalisation
ceremonies should proclaim unequivocally their loyalty to
Australia and the things we believe Australia stands for
including liberty, tolerance, social justice those
very beliefs which underpin multiculturalism.
As Professor Maclntrye says, there is at present " no
doctrine of citizenship.. The new citizen swears an oath
to abide by the laws of her or his new state, but these
laws are not spelt out, nor is there any elaboration of
their guiding principles or the ethos they encompass."
My own feeling is that the truth about us is more
profound than we are accustomed to admit.
We are still very often described as a place which is
" 1new" or " young". But Australia is n= young.
The truth about the continent is that it is the oldest in
the world and the continent shapes our culture.
The truth about the Australians who were here before 1788
is that they lived in the oldest continuous civilisation
in the world and they have shaped our culture.
The truth about the people who have come here since is
that they brought cultures as old as Europe's, Asia's,
the Middle East's.
The truth about Australian democracy is that there are
few older.
The truth about the first few years of our nationhood-is
that we were in the vanguard of social and democratic
progress. Just as it is true that we are once more.
We are a mature social democracy in need of more
direction and cohesion than we have so far had, and more
confidence than we have presently but mature and robust
nonetheless. A mature social democracy, ladies and gentlemen, with a
remarkably active publishing industry and literary
culture. 
7
A mature social democracy in which the people read books.
And involve themselves in the arts to an extent at least
equivalent to other cultures. And seek to make civilised
lives. And think and invent.
And they write books they win Nobel, Booker, Pulitzer
and other international prizes.
They win Au tralfan prizes. Many Australian prizes.
I wonder if any other country has more literary prizes.
Increasingly they have an international profile in the UK
and the USA.
I hope that increasingly they will be read in Asia that
this book fair will mark a turning point in the
internationalisation of our cultural industries, and that
the book world will do all it can to develop export
markets in our region.
I cannot stress too much how important that task is.
That answer to our biggest contemporary problem
unemployment the answers about our economic future, are
bound to our success in Asia.
And our success there, like our success at home, is bound
I believe to many of the issues I have talked about
tonight. Books already play a vital role in carrying the message
of who we are: the message that this is a culture of
imagination and sophistication.
It is also a culture like the nation itself of vast
unrealised potential.
No industry will play a more significant role in
realising it than the publishing industry.
None will do more to shape and project our identity.
I hope that tonight I have made reasonably clear why I
think this task is so very important.
So I congratulate the industry for this week's great
convention. I also congratulate all those who have been short-listed
for these awards and, of course, all those who have
won.
And I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity
to speak.
a I 



PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE PRIME XINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING NP, TO A FUNDRAISING DINNER FOR
PER DUNCAN NP, CANPANIA CLUB, HODEURY NORTH# ADELAIDE
28 aLW 1992
JrUNE
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Peter ( Duncan), Julie, my Cabinet
colleague Neal Blewett, distinguished parliamentary
colleagues in Federal and State Parliament, distinguished
members of local government, ladies and gentlemen, boys
and girls, there are a few of them here too.
Well it's lovely to be here and its nice to be here with
Peter. It's always a measure of a colleague when you go
to his or her electorate to see how much real and support
they have and how much genuine affection with which they
are held, and if tonight's 700-odd is any demonstration
of that then Peter Duncan is held in pretty high regard.
And that great humanity of him comes through, and that's
why he has got so much support. I'm glad I've had his
support as he is glad he's said to have supported me. I
didn't win by many so I needed it. So thank you Peter,
thank you for the faith, and I hope I won't let you down.
When I was coming here tonight I said to my staff who
will be there? They said the Left will be there, and I
said I'm a bit of a ' Leftie' myself so I'll get on
alright with them. I said all the Left Wing things we've
done like capital gains taxes, fringe benefits taxes,
occupational super, I've been in all those. And they
said there's a few Poms there too, and I said I'll be OK
with them too, It's only the ones in tabloids that I have
a problem with. It's not the local ones, they know what
I'm saying. And &amp; part from that, they said there are a
good supporters of the Labor Party and other people in
the community who are interested in public life and
interested in a fair go. And I said, in that case we'll
do well. 
I am very pleased to be in this part of Adelaide and it's
nice to be back in South Australia once more. Peter said
I'll be coming to South Australia more, and it's true I
will because Australia these days does have some
disparity in prosperity between States, and that's why it
is important to get around the States. South Australia
has its share of troubles which are not exclusively of
its own making, just the way in which the nation has
changed. And it is important, I think, for all of us in
national politics to come through you to understand about
the place and to try to focus things the right way.
I think the most important thing for us to know is that
Australia and Australians have a great opportunity in the
world. That's the most important thing to know. Not
many people, in fact we are unique in the sense that we
have a continent to ourselves. No other nation on earth
has a continent to themselves. And not just any
continent, but the oldest continent. The oldest
continent where we came to a place with the oldest
civilisation. The High Court, in a very land mark
decision a week or two ago, made that clear when they
rebuked the doctrine of Terra Nullius. That this was an
unclaimed place when the British arrived.
And we know that we are in a subtle country, an old
country, where the residences of the country changed the
way we all are and make us unique. Even though we may
have European antecedents, we are a unique country
because of the way in which Australia is unique. And
most of us in the Labor Party know that we'll never come
to terms fully with this country until we come to terms
with the original Australians, the Aboriginals.
One of my staff was in a group that climbed the Himalayas
and somebody said to him ' you don't have mountains like
this in Australia'. He said, ' no, ours are fifty times
older than this and they've since worn down'. And that's
a fact this is an old place and the subtleties of the
landscape and the nature of the place have changed us and
mad us unique, uniquely Australian. We're not British,
we're not Dutch, we're not Italian, we're not Lebanese,
we're not Vietnamese, we're not Chines, we are
Australians. And it is time for us to declare that we are Australians,
to make that declaration. It's psychologically important
to us the more often we make it. And it's economically
important.
Our colleagues in the Coalition parties believe that talk
about our nationalism, our Australianess, is a
distraction, thfey say, from the economic facts and
economic life. But there are enough facts around to know
that there can be no distraction from the recession and
unemployment and other things. 
It is important to know, and important to our economics,
to * our future, to our trading future, to assert ourselves
economically as we assert ourselves psychologically and
nationally. It's an important link to make.
The great national spirit of one hundred years ago in
another recession, in 1890, put the Australian Labor
Party together and drove the forces of our Federation.
And that nationalism, that high-spiritedness of
Australia, ran until it was snuf fed out in the first
World war. And in that great radical act, where so many
young Australians went and fought, and 60 000 in 4
million died, that radical act was then by our
conservative opponents wrapped in the flag and turned
into a conservative thing. And it has remained a
conservative thing, and the great nationhood and
nationalism of the period died with it.
Then, of course we had the ' 20s under the conservatives,
the 130s in the recession, the ' 40s largely in the War,
the Rip Van Wrinkle years of Menzies until the end of the
160s, and then the do-nothing years of Fraser, and then
finally a chance under Labor to get back to those goals
and threads. To get back to the sense of Australia being
a nation and claiming the place as being a unique place,
a derivative of no other place, and a place where we can
make our way in the world and hold our head up in the
world. Now it is an accident of history that a largely European
country has been developed in the bottom of Asia. That's
now changing as we see people from the Middle East, and
from the Asia-Pacific coming to our shores and being part
of our community. But the fact is the we are now in a
unique position to make Australia part of the Asia-
Pacific, part of the fastest growing region of the world,
and truly define our place in the neighbourhood.
Because at least now we are saying to people in Asia we
want to be here, we want to be part of you, we want to
part of our local community. We don't want to fly over
you to Los Angeles, or fly over to you in London, or pay
lip service to the region, we want to be part of it. And
they are basically welcoming us with open arms.
So this is our great chance to find our place in the
region, in the neighbourhood, to be part of it, to be
relevant, and to share in the wealth and growth of this
very prosperous area. That more than anything else is
what will change the face of Australia, change the race
of South Australia, and change the face of Adelaide.
That single fact. 
Now I know, and you all know, that the most important
thing for us now is to get back to recovery. Because the
Labor Party has never believed that unemployment is a
residual that drops out of the policies. This is not the
British conservative government, it's not the US
Republicans, it's certainly not the Liberal Party of
Australia. We don't believe the unemployed are the
people at the end of the queue, the shock absorbers who
take the shock out of the system to protect the economic
viability of everybody else.
And we know that this kind of society cannot tick over
with unemployment rates of 10 per cent, or 10 per cent
plus, or higher in some places. And so we want to get
back to remaking Australia so we can have product growth
and better rates of employment.
But that can only happen by looking forward. It won't
happen by looking backwards, as John Howard would have us
do looking back to the dead-end Jobs, looking back to
the 1950s where he thought things were fine. well they
might hove been, but they won't provide the increments to
growth and wealth that we have today.
The things that are going to put us up the international
scale are technological qhange and education.-And it is
to that withwh ich thisa Government has committed itself
to open Australia up, to make it internationally
competAiive find Australia doing the interesting, novel
things, which add value to products and let us find
places and niches around the world, which give us that
external orientation that we never had. That is, selling
the most valuable resource of all the creativity of our
people. And not the resources which Malcolm Fraser had
ready for us in the mineral boom of the late 1970s,
because that was just another mound of minerals that
somebody found. Or, not another paddock full of wheat,
or even wool, as important as those things are, but the
most important resource of all our creativity and, of
course, our children.
In 1983, three children in ten completed secondary
school. Seven in ten were left untrained. That's how
much regard the Liberal and National Parties had for
Australia's youth. They were happy to see seven in ten
spill out of school on the labour market untrained. That
retention rate today is not eight in ten eight in ten
children now complete secondary school. And between the
middle 1980s and now this Government added 122 000 places
to universities, we've created the equivalent of twelve
new universities, or added 50 per cent extra places to
tertiary education. So that as those kids stay on in
school, 35-40 per cent of them go onto tertiary
education. 
And now as a result of our One Nation statement, we are
working on building up the-sy-stenM-6that sits below that
technical and further education, or TAFE. So that the
six to seven out of ten who come out of secondary school
and don't go to university are not cascading into
shopping mall plazas, railway stations, or somewhere, but
they are cascading into training and education. So if we
want to move Australia up the international division of
labour, we move it up with education, creativity, and
skills. And that's the sort of society we're trying to build.
One that has a f ocus on research and development, product
innovation, staffed by a clever workforce with creativity
and ideas. Selling those ideas around the world which
will make Australia a better place. And not staying in
the industrial museum, the industrial archaeology, which
the Liberal and National Parties left us in the late ' 709
and the early 1980s.
and the opposition's policy is basically to let the
unemployed carry the weight of the recession and the
recovery so that those who are in comfortable positions
can carry on.
I said today in another place, that if we take the view
that the Federal Director of the Liberal Party
articulated this morning on television, supporting his
leader John Hewson, that people on unemployment benefits
should go off them after 9 months and find accommodation
in the St Vincent de Paul Society, or the Smith Family,
or any other similar organisation the voluntary
agencies which are already stretched to capacity the
notion that somebody with a spouse and children, or a
single person, should find themselves after 9 months cut
of f from support by the government, stigmnatise the
unemployed, and basically told they're on their own, they
can go down to the soup kitchen, or they can go down to
some other voluntary agency to get some basic modicum of
assistance, or if they don't have accommodation to huddle
under a carton, as you the people huddling all around the
United States looking for warmth in the winter, we'll
have a Los Angeles on our hands in this country at some
stage. That it, the social strife which has racked the
United States is basically generated by poverty.
And in the Labor Party, we won't sign up to those sort of
policies. We're not going to tip the unemployed of f
unemployment benefits after 9 months. We're not going to
be running heartless policies like that. We're not going
to let the unfortunate carry the stigma and shock of
economic policies and economic adjustment. Yet they are
the policies of the coalition. 
And then on top of that they want to introduce a 15 per
cent consumption tax, which is a very large level of tax,
when one considers that the average rate of income tax in
this country is just over 23 per cent, is an enormous
addition to the burden of taxation in Australia. And as
the Governor of the Central Bank said during the week, it
will add 6 to 7 percentage points to inflation. It will
take our inflation rate to the record low levels of 1 1/ 2
per cent where we have it at the moment, to around 7 or 8
or maybe 9 per cent once more. And with it will go
interest rates as well, and guess who pays the piper
the low and middle paid people who will see a transfer of
wealth from them to the higher paid.
These are the policies of unfairness which our colleagues
in the coalition are offering Australia. That is, if
you're not basically well-off you are a bludger, if
you're unemployed it's your fault, if you go down looking
f or the job search allowance or unemployment benefits
then you are only sponging on the system, that you are
basically to be swatted off the system after 9 months.
On medicine, Dr Howson stood up a couple of weeks ago at
the AMA and said we'll let the AM set the common fee,
not the government, the doctors. Hie's opposed to all of
the unions except the doctors union, where he'll let the
AMA set the fees for medical consultations.
Then he'll cut Medicare to pieces and say you can
privately insure yourself. And you'll go and privately
insure yourself, which will cost about $ 22-23 a week
extra for the average family so that doctors can charge
what they like, and charge what the traffic will bear
under a privately insured system.
And we'll end up with a position like the United States,
where if you're in an accident or you're critically ill,
you'll go up to a hospital door but if you don't have the
blue cross card in your pocket they don't admit you.
They just turn you back, sick, sore, or sorry. That's Dr
Hewson's Australia.
These are the spiteful policies of the current coalition.
These are the policies which would make Menzies and
Malcolm Fraser look like Bolsheviks. Who would roll in
their graves at this approach to say that if you can't
help yourself you're kicked out. If structural change
has made you unemployed, you're stigmatised and you bear
the burden of it, if you're sick you can only get medical
protection if you can afford it, and if your children
want a place in university it's OK if you pay it for them
full fees and then there's a place for you, but beyond
that, if you're a child of the low paid or middle paid,
there's no place for you in universities or other forms
of training unless you pay full fees. 
They call it opportunity to succeed, freedom to achieve.
Freedom to achieve providing your parents have got
$ 12 000 to $ 15 000 for university place per year.
That's an income of $ 30 000 before tax to put one child
through one university course for one year.
And let me take their industrial relation policies.
They're now saying they'll let federal awards expire.
They will let the industrial relations system turn down,
so that an employee cannot band together with his or her
brothers or sisters and make an industrial agreement with
an employer as a union, but only can we see negotiations,
says Dr Hewson, between an individual person and their
employer. That is, no role for unions. And we'll all
have to say, what hope in the end does an individual
person have with an employer? The whole balance of
society which has come from the right to organise, and
collaborate in industrial negotiation would disappear.
And to add insult to injury they want all the federal
awards to expire, and all the conditions under them
rates of pay, conditions of employment, annual leave,
sick pay all go with them. And you only get the award
back if the employer and the employee opt back into the
system. But if the employer doesn't agree to opt back
into the system, the award expires. So all the things
that people have fought for a century holiday, sick
leave, rates of pay go out the door and you're left
tied up as an individual person with a common law
contract between yourself and your employer.
This is the tough world which Dr Howson has ready for
people. Slipping back to early Thatcherite policies of
the late 1970s, or the ' greed is good' policies of
President Reagan's America. if you're not a millionaire,
you're a bludger, you're a layabout. Well we've seen in
that country the extremes widen between the wealthy and
the poor, that finally the poor took to the streets of
Los Angeles and said something about it.
These are the sort of un-Australian policies that the
Coalition are seeking to introduce into Australia. No
sense of togetherness, no sense of community, no sense of
inclusion, no sense of cooperation, no sense of
kindliness to one another, no softness in policy, no
concern for the weak, the sick, the aged, or the young.
Just a hard computer model that comes out the Federal
Liberal Party's Fightback! proposals.
Their Federal Director today brazenly said that the
taxpayer shouldn't have to put up with you if you're
unemployed for 9 months. You can go to a voluntary
agency, which John Hewson has been around making sure
that they're equipped to look after these people. That
is, they're equipped to receive you and hand out someone
else's clothes, or blanket, or food, or throw you on the
mercy of your family because there will be no support
from the state. 
They are the things we are opposed to. We want to put
Australia back together. We want it to grow. I can grow
and succeed to become a smarter place while we have the
focus on education, upon technology, upon product
innovation* But in the context of a nice society one
that looks after you when you're sick, one that looks
after you when you're aged, one that looks after you when
you're infirm, one that looks after you when you're young
and gives you an education and a future, one that looks
after You when you're in the middle of your life's work,
and retrains you, or as a woman gives you a child care
place to let you go and work. This is the sort of
society which we believe in.
Ifm always told by John Howson that I'm wearing a Zegna
suit the same as he is, and who am I to say he has
crossed the tracks. So I said to him the other day in
Parliament last night in the Senate we put our hands up
for occupational superannuation. We voted for the
Superannuation Guarantee Charge ( SGC) which will see 9
per cent paid by employers go to employees to give them a
standard of living in retirement which is now twice the
current age pension. All Australian working men and
women. That's what we put our hand up for in the Senate
last Wednesday night. I said to him, where was your
hand? Your hand was down. You had the boots into
ordinary working people again. They might get themselves
an advantage by building up a pool of savings to provide
for a decent standard of living in retirement, they might
even help put together a pool of national savings which
will help with investment and the current account deficit
and our overseas debt. But you and the Liberal Party
voted against it, as you always do.
And that's the difference between us. The boy from
Welfare Avenue crossed the tracks to vote down
occupational superannuation, to vote down Medicare, to
vote down the right to unemployment benefits when you're
unemployed, to vote down the right of education to
children of working class families. These are all the
things that I believe Australians will not tolerate. And
that's why our party stands for the innovators in
Australia and the party which will draw people together
to declare for Australia proud, unique and to hold our
head up in the world.
We know that we have to get the economy cracking again to
get employment going. And we recognise that too many of
our young people are not finding jobs. It is a problem,
a real problem. We're having a national meeting with
employers in a couple of weeks to get to a basis of
agreement on wages, terms and conditions of employment,
and training, that will help provide many thousands of
new jobs for young people, particularly in that 5-19 year
category. 
Dr Hewson criticises us for holding a meeting behind
closed doors. Well, does anybody think that the
industrial practices of 40 or 50 years are going to be
traded away under the glare of television cameras, that
there is going to be a real discussion about these
problems other than the genuine one where people can
discuss things and talk genuinely to one another in
private? That can only happen privately. That's what
we're going to have soon. And that will also help on the
employment front, particularly with young people.
So ladies and gentlemen, can I say this. I thank you
very much for coming to support Peter tonight. This is
the start of his campaign for the next election. And I
can't say it's the start of ours because it's going to
start later than this I think. But we're campaigning, in
a sense, all the time. And we're campaigning for the
right to make Australia an interesting country, a country
with economic promise, a country where people are not
left behind, be it the unemployed, the sick, the aged, or
the young, but one where we take the view that everybody
has the right to inclusion, and we sit down cooperatively
as a society and come together and make this country a
greater place than it is already, find our place in the
Asia-Pacific, declare ourselves to be as we are unique
as a nation and to take our place in the world, which
will lift up the prosperity of Australians.
That's what the challenge is about. That's what we're
going to be working to, and are going to be keeping those
Labor principles in mind, for the greater benefit of all
Australians, not just the wealthy, or the well-to-do, but
all Australians, young and old alike, to give them a
decent, prosperous economy, but in a society which is a
soft, nice society where we care for one another, and
where those great humanitarian values of Labor are not
forgotten in the rush to make a quid.
That's what we stand for and that's what we're going to
be fighting for.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH HOWARD SATTLER, RADIO 6PR 29
JUNE 1992
E AND OE PROOF ONLY
SATTLER: PX1 Can we start at the top, in the toilet?
where?
SATTLERs In the toilet. I have learned today that the
federal government has put a 20% sales tax on rclepaper
products. Now it says to me that the earth sumi was a waste
of time, why have you done that?
I don't know, I would have to just check about
that. SATTLER: PM: SATTLER: Can you got it off?
We encourage recycling of paper and
That's not much of an encouragement is it.
PM: IIt's happening though. We have got now quite a
lot of investment going into recycling of newspaper and
newsprint and I think, I am not sure about it in Perth but
certainly in the eastern states most of the newspapers are now
being picked up and recycled which is a good thing.
BATTLERs Will you have a look at that? That seems to
run contrary to what the earth summit was all about.
PM; sky that one. I will see. That is one f rom out of the blue
SATTLER: Right out of lef t f ield. Lot's talk about a
couple of other issues. I want to get the republican one out
of the way first because people may why do you preoccupy
yourselft talking to people like Paul Keating about the
republic. I say because Paul Keating keeps bringing it up all
the time. You talked I think on Friday night it was at a
literary dinner about the oath of allegiance and you sort 
SAT ' LZRs ( cont'd) of alluded to the f act that we should not
be swearing allegiance to the Que we should be swearing
allegiance primarily to our own country. But if I am not
wrong you swore allegiance to the Queen when you became Prime
Minister, didn't you?
PX: Yea, but I served an a minister
SATTLERt A touch hypocritical.
PM: No not at all, Australians don't serve her as a
minister. I am appointed by her representative, the Governor
General. SATTLER: How does that sit with you?
PM: There are lots of other people who would like
to be appointed Prime Minister, so it sits reasonably well
with me.
SATTLERs Wouldn't you just rather be appointed by us.
PM: I think that's the point, that in that the
average person who takes citizenship swears an oth, should
swear it to Australia. They are not dragooned into
ministerial service and don't need to swear it to the head of
state.
BATTLERi So you mean if you had your way you would
eliminate swearing alleoiance to the Queen and just leave it
swearing allegiance to Australia?
PM: That's as I think it should bev desirably for
Australians taking citizenship. That is that we have a s~ t of
values which Australia represents o2and we have that
encapsulated in a statement and people swear allegiance to
Australia and those values.
SATTLERt When are you going to do something about it, a
lot of talk, a lot of rhetoric, when are you going to do
something about it?
PM: Again these things take a bit of thinking about
and I think it helps to have in the public debate an
understanding of the issues. You said Howard that you keep
coming back to these things and I think that's good. I think
people do got
SATTLERt But people think you are beating around the
bush, you are not quite game to go the full step and take the
Queen out everywhere.
PM: I am not being about taking the Queen out as
you put it.
SATTLERtSATToLfE Ro: uOru to ath, right. 
PK: Out of the oath but no, I think again these are
matters which are of community interest and they take people
awhile to understand.
BATTLERs You are going to wait until the polls show that
view as the majority, aren't you?
PM: No not nocessaril y~ but I think the debate
matters and it valuable. A Ptralians ought to be clear
about themselves and about some of these issues.
BATTLER: What about this amazing statement that if the
Liberals got into power we could have Los Angeles style riots.
I mean that is surely stretching the bounds of creduld)#
beyond belief.
PM: No I don't think so, i don't think so at all.
You see we had the f ederal director of the Liberal Party on
yesterday confirming yet again that under a Liberal government
people on unemployment benefits will be on the streets after 9
months, no support from the government.
BATTLER: How did he confirm that?
PM: He was on TV yesterday, on the Sunday program.
SATTLERs Me actually said those words?
PM: And he confirmed that after 9 months, well it's
in theEi~ ghtbck document, it's in Dr Howson's document and Dr
Hewson has said it over and over again
SATTLER: that they will put people on the streets
after 9 months.
PM: After 9 months unemployment benefits finishes
and then they go to the voluntary agencies. Now the voluntary
agencies are St Vincent de Paul, the Smith Family and what
have you so you can imagine a person with a wife and say a
couple of kids who is unemployed, no fault of their own, after
9 months they rely on their family, their extended family for
support or they go down looking f or food and in some case
shelter from the voluntary agencies. In other words we
dismantle the social security system we have which picks up
responsibility and pay. unemployment benefits to people
unemployed. if that went on for 5 or 6 years f or instance
under a government, the sort of civil unrest that would
produce would be profound.
SATTLER: But isn't that inciting people?
PM. No it's telling them, Just may read the
document and you will find in there that in what must be one
of the most spiteful policies ever to say to people. See this
is the Liberal Party's view, stigmatise them, say they are 
PM: ( cont'd) bludgers, they don't want to work. What the
federal director of the Liberal Party said yesterday was a lot
of theme people are out there, some of them are actually
enjoying it on the public purse not making the effort to find
a job and the taxpayers shouldn't have to fund them, it's
unfair to taxpayers he said.
BATTLER: So is there no strong safety net for the
genuinely disadvantaged as Mr Robb would have us say?
PM: I None, none. There is effectively none, no, so
what happens to them is they go out there and you Just imagine
if you are 45 years of age and you have got a wife and a
couple of kids or you are 40 years of age and you are
unemployed and you have boon unemployed 9 months, that's it.
No money, no money into the household, down you go, down to
the Salvation Army or St Vincent de Paul or the Smith Family,
that's the Liberal Party's policies and if that sort of thing
over a period of time wouldn't produce a different sort of
Australia than we have today, one where there is a lot of
unrest and the same unrest which produced those problems in
the USA.
BATTLERs Why are we having a youth unemployment summit,-
when you reckon the level is only i' 10.6% right
across the board, that would indicate to me and there is an
article in the Financial Review today that Indicates that the
group in the worst trouble are sort of middle aged or adult
blue collar workers. Why don't you have a summit for them, or
are there no votes in them?
PM: What we are doing with the older if you like
unemployed is to try and get the economy growing as quickly as
possible. But the problem about the 15 to 19 year olds is
that the jobs have shrunk, the economy has changed and a lot
of the jobs which were done by young people in the past which
were clerical jobs, or jobs in retailing are now being done by
computers and basically the jobs have disappeared and we, when
I say we, this government has changed the whole retention
rates in schools and the training that follows it but there is
still about 122,000 people out of the 1.3 million.
SATTLER: But haven't you just put them into all these
training schemes to mask the real level of youth unemployment,
they are training for jobs that don't exist, surely.
PM: No that is not true no, no. When we became
the government three children in ten finished secondary school
and when our Liberal friends left the place they were quite
happy for seven children in ten to finish their education
before they completed secondary school.
SATTLER: SATTLEaRr: eW htahte se people training for? 
PM: Let me just make this point to you now. Now
nearly eight in ten complete secondary school, 35-40% of those
get university place. and what I am working on now is for the
rest of them to find support in technical and further
education. in other words we are now keeping kids you know
eight out of ten children through secondary school into
universities and to TAPE so that the training they get
qualifies them for the sort of job which the economy has to
offer. it doesn't offer any more the unskilled so called dead
end job and that is what we are basically trying to f ocus on
for the untrained people trying to basically come to terms
with what wage or training wage can be paid to them so that we
get a break through on this and that would encourage employers
to take young people up without skills.
SATTLERo In the Sydney Morning Herald there is a story
this morning that says " stop going it alone', and this is a
message to you from Senator John Faulkner who is on the
national campaign commuittee, he is on the national executive
no well and he is a Left Wing member I think of the NSW Labor
Party. His message to you is stop going it alone and start
consulting a few people, and he cites the summit, the youth
summit if you like and apparent lack of communication between
you and Kim Beazley.
PM: That's not true o there is no lack of
communication between Kim and me.
SATTLERs Kim would never know when you are going to
announce it.
PM: Well he shouldn't have been asked, I should
have been asked.
SATTLERs But he is the employment minister.
PM1 He has the policy but not the arrangements for
the meeting. The meeting is to be conducted by me and we made
the arrangements on it.
SATTLER; He didn't want young people, you did.
PM: and I did and I met a group of young people
last night in Adelaide, young unemployed people and I am
meeting a group today in Perth just to try and get an
understanding of their problems and get the issues ready for
this meeting when we have it. But in terms of consultation I
ma n this government has turned consultation into an art form,
Wekeep consulting.
SATTLERs What is your message to Senator Faulkner?
PM1 If you look at the One Nation statement I set
up a round of consultations for that which went for about
weeks in every capital city, including Perth and that has been 
PM: ( cont'd) the same f or all of our policy changes and I
think within the party I try and do the same as veil.
SATTLERt Is it because Senator Faulkner is a Left Winger
and7h is just trying to fire a few sort of guarded shots at
you. You don't always get on with the Left Wing, do you?
PM: These days they have become quite supportive of
me. SATTLER: When did this start?
PM: Years back, they realised a lot of the things
we did in the 70s, social policy and that was very good
policy. SATTLER: I don't know whether you have been keeping a
handle on this major strike we have got in our north west at
the moment. Around about $ 50 million has been lost already
all because the unions up there reckon we should have
compulsory unionism. One man has used his legal right and he
decided he doesn't want to be a member of the union and that
has caused an almighty strike which is now in its third week.
Do you believe in compulsory unionism?
PM1 I believe in the arbitration system and I think
that the parties should accept the decision of the WA
industrial commission
SATTLER: That was go back to work.
PM: Return to work that's what should happen.
SATTLER: What about this man's decision he doesn't want
to be a member of the union. Should he be allowed to
PM: I don't know the issues well Howard but I know
that there was a return to work ordered by the commission and
that's what I think should happen.
SATTLER: They are probably Labor Party supporters up
there and they are listening right now no your message is got
back to work.
PM: Absolutely.
SATTLER: And sort it out somewhere else. You threw
another $ 250 million at the Aboriginal problems the other day
and a large slab was targetted at jobs, that's fine, but how
do you reckon other Australians, unemployed Australians are
going to feel about all that money going to one@ group for
jobs? 
PM: I don't think that anybody should feel any envy
towards Aboriginal Australianu, they were in the first place
dispossessed and-th-en as time has gone on they have not had
the opportunities which most other Australians have, and we
have tried to remedy that by their response to theAboginal
Qqt-inQtqy---RQyAl.-Coiuuission, by improving the law and
justice access for them and at the same time trying to improve
the underlying basis of Aboriginal social problems and that
gets down to you know things like education, housing, work
etc. BSATTLER: Prime Minister how do you know it's going work.
You know Malcolm Fraser used to throw money at the problem and
it never seemed to work.
PM: I think it's a matter of trying to get a better
handle on the administration, the policy, design thorn better.
We have tried our best in this statement to do that and I
think, I hope with some success. But we are trying to provide
a more of a sort of a commercial focus to some of the things
which Aboriginals are involved in.
SATTLER: Will someone from the government who has
control of our money be watching over the shoulders of the
people who actually are allocating the money in variou, areas?
It's our money.
PM: Commonwealth funding is administered by ATBIC
which is the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
which is made up of representatives of the community all over
Australia and it dispenses and manages the funding which is
provided by the Commonwealth under the tutelage of the
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs.
SATTLERi So you just give them money and they do with it
as they please?
PM: What they have done I think is develop a very
good system of administration and recently ATSIC was put under
some scrutiny in the Senate and passed with I think f lying
colours. BATTLER: Your predecessor Bob Hawke has been on radio in
our sister station 2UE today in Sydney saying that Nick
Greiner has been hard done by, he is not a corrupt bloke, he
made a stupid decision maybe. He says that if the sort of
rules which have been applied to Nick Greiner forced him out
of office, we won't get good peo-ple -goingi-nto politics. Do
you agree with that him?
Px: Nick Greiner set up these rules for the
Independent Commission Against Corruption. He set the
criteria and the criteria in the end tripped him up. The
Liberal Party in NSW used the corruption issue for all it was
worth, alleging at the time that the Wran government was 
PM: ( cont'd) corrupt and of course the ICAC never found one
thing against the Wran government and all it's done ever since
is find things against the Greiner government.
SATTLERs Ioist on its own petard?
PM: Absolutely.
SATTLER: Do you fael sorry for Nick Greiner? You rang
him didn't you?
PM: I rang him, yes.
SATTLERt What did you say?
PM: I just said, just to wish him well and to say
that SATTLER: hang on this is a Liberal man, you are
ringing him up
PM8 Well he is going back into sort ofas a private
member, I had worked with him as Premier/ We got quite a lot
of things done together over the years and I try and work
with, as Treasurer or as Prime Minister, with the Premiers and
get the best thing we can for the place from themznbetween us,
and it was in that context I called him. But I agree with Bob
about this point, it's not making politics any easier for
people and it means that anyone who is public spirited is
interested in public service but who has got ability and real
job opportunities, these things they will find very
discouraging and it can't make the political system better and
stronger. SATTLER: So what is he? Is Nick Greiner naive or
stupid, is he not corrupt?
PM: These are all judgements which are made by the
Commission and I don't want to be drawn into that argument but
the fact of the matter is that the Liberal Party in NSW tried
to set a standard it couldn't live with and I don't think it
has got anyone else to blame for this but itself.
SATTLER: So the rules are too tight, is that what you
are saying?
PM: Well they are their rules, and they were
basically designed to catch a past government, they were
designed as a piece of sticky fly paper for the Wran
government and what happened was of course the Wran
government. I mean the Sydney Morning Herald ran this campaign
for years saying ihe NSW Labor government was corrupt and in
the end the ICAC found nothing against it. All it found
against was the current Greiner government. 
SATTLER: Poor bloke. What are you doing in Perth today
apart f rom trying to get a f ow people to vote f or you at the
next election because the Morgan polls and other polls would
indicate you need a bit more support to get up there next
year. PM: Yes but they go up and down Howard, you can't
let the two week polls throw you
SATTLER: But you need to get ahead, you have sort of
been behind for
PM: It's a problem. Unemployment, the recession,
coming out of it and unemployment is a problem but I am happy
to say the trend. in Western Australia are quite good. That
is western Australia, Queensland and New South Wales are doing
more strongly than say South Australia and Victoria and they
don't have the heavy manufacturing base which Melbourne has.
Western Australia is an agricultural and mining state and
services tourism and the rest and it seems to be coming out of
the recession into recovery stronger and faster than some
other places.
SATTLER: You have got to write of f Victoria at the next
federal election surely. It must be a Labor disaster. area at
the moment.
PM: We are not travelling well over there and
obviously the reason for that, there is a couple of reasons
for that but one of them of course is unemployment and the
recession and the fact that Victoria is I think going through
a structural change. That is the nature of its manufacturing
activity is changing and it is producing problems in that
change. BATTLER: I have heard from your strategist that you have
written of f Victoria at the next federal election.
PM: You can never write anywhere of f, only a fool
would write a place of f and we haven't done that but
SATTLER: And you would have loved Nick Greiner to have
stayed in office right up to the next election.
PM: yattd sItk hma hycm. i
they -Myattd isItk thma thycm. f
BATTLER: but wouldn't it have been great if he had
stayed there and tried to fight this corruption thing, you
would have had a field day.
PMT The Liberal Party wouldn't have let him I don't
think. SATTLERtSATTLEHeRw: aJoonh nw ouldn't have let him you mean. 
PM: Yea, by and large. Well him and the State
Liberals. Whether the Labor Party there moved no confidence
in the istate government or not, I don't think he would have
stayed because for the reason you say I don't think the
Liberals would have let him stay. So you can't write anywhere
off and the important thing is that Australia is coming into a
recovery, growth is coming back
SATTLER: Hang on, how can you say that. Our deficit, if
I have got it right at the end of May had gone f rom a budget
forecast of $ 4.7 billion last August to now $ 11.2 billion, and
you reckon we are getting better.
FM8 I don't mean the deficit, I am talking about
growth, the deficit is a lag response to growth in the
economy. In other words if activity is down and employment is
down, receipts are down, the deficit gets bigger.
SATTLER: But you reckon our growth will be around about
4.75 and then 4.5 in the next couple of years and the OECD
says no, 2.6 to 3.7. Who has got it right?
PM: The OECD are trying to do a forecast in
Australia from a long distance and I don't think, it's never
been eavy for them to forecast Australia well, but we still
think Australia can grow quite fast through 92/ 3. The problem
in that what happens in all recoveries is that in the first
instance employers work people overtime before they put extra
people on. So there is a lag response for employment and one
of the interesting things that is happening at the moment in
that overtime being worked is getting back to the levels of
the boom year of 1989. That is we are now starting to see
those sort of classic signs of recovery where employers are
working people overtime, the next step being to put an extra
person on. So growth picks up as it will pick up but there is
this lag in between, this lag response to employment as the
overtime phase gets worked first and then after that an
employer starts saying, look I can't work someone more
overtime than I am working so I will add another person,, and
it's that adding of another person which starts to see the
employment start to grow. But there is always a lag.
BATTLERs Would your recent investments indicate we are
going to have a pork led recovery?
PM: I don't think no, no.
SATTLER: Why did you put the money in for?
PM: In the 6 months that I was out of the
government I thought that I should do, I mean I have always
preached don't put you money into property, don't speculate,
don't rely upon inflation. If you want to invest in something
don't buy an apartment or a flat or a house, or
SATTLER: SATTaL EcRl: oOcrk ? 
11.
PM: or a c1ocki do something which employs people,
acids value, plays to Australia's comparative advantage and I
thought why don't It I have been preaching this for years, why
don't I put my money where my mouth is.
SATTLERi I have got the slogan f or the Labor Party f or
the next election, home on a pig's back.
PM: I hope that in true, I hope it comes true.
SATTLER: Thanks for joining us on the program today
Prime Minieter.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH SUSAN MITCHELL, RADIO SAN, 29 JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PRESENTER SUSAN MITCHELL.... Well, I did manage yesterday., I
was lucky enough to get the Prime Minister of Australia. Paul
Keating, to have a few words with me about himself and about his
vision for Au5tralia. Because it Was at a public function there
Is.. there might be just a bit of background noise and my voice
isn't necessarily studio qualltW but his is loud and clear as
you' I I hear now.
Welcome to Adelaide, Prime Minister.
PAUL KEATING. Thanks you, Susan.
MITCHELL. Most Of the PIOPle that l've spoken whir l've said.
" Well, now what's the question YOU Most was want mu to ask the
Prime Minister?", thew say. " Ask him If he's for real",
KEATING. What do they mean though?
MITCHELL.... . Well, I think they want to know whether sometimes
when you flick the Vaudeville switch, or you flick other
switches. they want to know the real person that's behind all
those kind of roles that you play I suppose.
KEATING.. . Well. I mean my philosophy is that the place has for
too many years been kidded along by the Political system. In
other words a lot of People In public life knew bitter but
wouldn't say. and they played the silly and : lvil gaine, being
Silly and being civil at the tame.. Same time. and because the
place had so much natural wealth it Sort of muddled through andi
thosc sort of sins of oimission were Sort of forgiven. But when
the world stopped wanting to paW us the prices we thought they
owed us for the things we did in the normal course of events.
like wheat and wool and all these other things. all the sins
became obvIoi4S, and so It's a matter of whether one wants to be 
2
civIl and silly and not say, or be a whistle blower and try and
change the place. and I believe that the thing to be is a
changer. to change the place and to call the.. call the tune as
it is.
So. there's not much more to me than that really. I mean I.,
I've done what I mean I work the swstem, the bureaucratic
System, the political system to get the changes. It doesn't
matter whether the' re in. you know, airlines or recent things xwe've
done. pay television. I'm now working on technical and
further education, a national system there. Whatever it might
be at the time trying to break another log Jam. So it's.. I
have some.. over the Wears, like anyone who's been in It a while.
I've developed certain political skills and I trW and use them
and I employ all the tricks of the trade in getting decisions up.
Nothing more, nothing less,
MITCHELL There's a commonly held belief among the Liberals
that If they give you long enough you'll go too far, You know
how you get carried away, they believe, with your rhetoric. and
that Richo's not there to hold you back now.
KEATING No, but RIcho never held me back. I mean I mena
we're at the stage in life all of us where you call your own
tunes. I mean I call.. I've heen calling my own shots for years.
and I mean the Liberals Just sat on their tails for sort of
thirty years and let the place become an Industrial museum.
Anyone that does anything always runs past them. I mean anyone
that wants to exert themselves at all runs past them, and it's
always the case that anyone that does want to change the place
and push It along, in our case make It more relevant in the
world, will always run Into all of these sort of crustW
Conservative characters who don't went to do anythingWell,
that's fine but.. but the system.. the political system owes the
Public something better and so I push and shove and try and get..
get our way on policy and change. an it's mot been easy but
again It's not.. who was It said. " Life was not meant to be
easy" 7
MITCHELL... .( laugh] Well, he certainly wasn't one of your
mentors but one of Uour mentors did saw at some stage, " Don't
forget. Paul, that you're here to hate the Liberals",
KEATING No, no. No. that was Rex Connor who said, " No, no.
We're here to bash Libs". Bash was the word he.. " You're here to
bash Libs". And.. and he meant that for Sort of Sociological
reasons and political reasons. I mean, look I couldn't care less
about them. I mean largely they are largely Irrelevant to the
process and have been for a long period of 
time and anybody who wants to. Wou know, to drag the cart along
to sort of get Changes knows that they have to drag them along as
well, that they won't help. Vou know, they won't help, they're
always In therm trying to do something to sort of slow the place
back, and I suppose. you know. you* ve just got to regard that..
You've got to regard that as just part of the sort of general
inertia of the place, that you've got to tug the Show along end
them as well.
MITCHELL... ut whem you look at Dr Hewson acro5s the chamber I
mean do you feel any genuine antagonism for him or is it..
KEATING. Oh no. Look.. look, no. I mean he's here to do a
pal.. he's there to do a political jot and that's fine. I mean I
understand that, but hi doesn't understand about society. He's
come to public life not prepared. This is a society that one
seeks to operate for its betterment and improvement. He thinks
soCiety finishes at the Sydney Harbor Bridge and it starts at
Watsons 9aoj in Sydney. it finishes at the Sydney Harbor Bridge.
anything west of that. Including. you know, Adelaide or, anywhere
else, in a sense doesn't matter..
MITCHELL,... Well, he has close ties with Adelaide. I mean his
family live here.
KEATING. Min. Well, I mean the thing is. you see, is this sort
of view if you haven't got a million you' re a bludger. If you
haven't made a million by the time you're sort of thirty five
well there's something wrong with you. Like his federal director
was saying yesterday. " if you're an the unemployment benefits for
nine months that's the end of you. After that it's not a fair
deal for the taxpayer". In other words if the economic system
has made you unemployed you can go down to St Vincent do Paul's
Society or the Smith Family and get yourself looked after that
way because it'd be unfair to ask the taxpayer to look after you.
I mean this Is the same spiteful view. They.. they're always
trying to sort of penalise somebody, There's no generosity of
spirit amongst them and that's what I find about the Liberal
Party in generally. and also Dr Hewson, therm is no generosity of
spirit. And If.. I1-but beyond that. I mean I don't have any
more contempt for hin than I do hiS party.
MIrCHELL.-. Is he a class traitor?
KEATING. Well, I think so. I think anyone that comes from.. I
Won't say a class traitor. let's not run that too far. He says
to me, " Look there you are standing In a Zegna suit". and 
I Say " Ye5. and SO are you. The difference is last night I put
my hand up to give the workforce of Australia occupational
superannuation for the lest., rest of their lives. Last night
you voted t hem) down You put your hand up so they couldn't get
it, That's the difference. It's not how we look. or what sort
Of Suit we've got, or what sort of car we drive. What matters is
where your vote is, where you heart Is, and my vote and my heart
has been always with the great body of the population who happen
to be working people". But that's not to say that people who've
got a quid haven't got a right to Play their role in the system,
and we've also supported them. you know. by such things as
removing the double tax on dividends. which the Liberals never
did. Cutting the top marginal rate fron sixty to forty nine.
You know these are things.
I mean our policies are policies for the whole of Australia, but
sort of there they wire lust Wednesday might in the. in the
Senate voting against a retirement incomes plce to gi1v e
Australians when th~ ey are areient gewCSthe Current age
pension. they voted no. We voted yes, and that's the difference
between us.
MITCHELL.... . Now. there's a rumour that there's going to be an
eleven billion budget blowout.
KEATING. . Well, they're always., I mean this time of year the
estimates for the Commonwealth budget are notoriously unreliable
but we've already published a starting point of ten point five
and no doubt it'll be around that, It could be a little., little
greater than that.
MITCHELL.... And how does that make you feel?
KEATING Well, If It wasn't that there'd be a lot of very..
very., you know, very poor, people out therm because you see only
for the fact we had these huge surpluses.,. you see I was the
first person In Australia to produce as treasurer a budget
surplus. the first ever. We ran those vast surpluses through the
Wears, three or four years. and now because of a fall in
receipts. fall in activity, a fall in company tax Collections.
a pickup in unemployment benefits, the natural.. what's called
the natural stuhilisers in the budget are now producing a deficit
but that will swing back Into surplus when the economy picks up
because thE Lund.. the underlying structure of the budget Is very
good as a result of our work in the 1980s. So it's a cyc. it's
a structural Surplus but a cyclical deficit. 
Now l91 me just de.. decode that. It means when the good times
Comne it goes back Into surplus but during the bad times It's in
deficit as It should be to help all those people with
unemploymen~ t benefits who the Liberals would chop off after nine
mom ths. I mean they want to cure the def Ic it -by cutting~.
aUI ng 9 " Look woo've got a wife and three kids have youTM
" Been employed after nine months have you " Yes".
" Sorry. Soup kitchen for you. Soup kitchen for you". That's Or
Hewson's view.
MITCHELL. What ever happened to the J curve?
KEATING. Weli. It.. It worked Its head off, We've been
exporting our head of f allI through the 1960S. We' ve now
manufacturing., manufactured exports are three hundred percent
greater than 1963 and the current account deficit is now down to
two and a half Percent of GOP three from six, six and a half. So
you know, there's been.. in fact if the export sectors now were
not working for us manufacturing would be in much poorer shape
than It is. That i s as domest ic demand's Sone down what ' s taken
the productive place Is exports.
I mean If! you look at the city of Adelaide a lot of firms which
are now associated with.-with the car industry and manufacturing
and those things are now finding export opportunities which they
woulIdn' t heive f ound i n the earlIy I1980s.
MITCHELL,.. They're saying that your emphasis om the flag and now
the oath of allegiance to Australia rather, than the gueen,
Liberals are saying this is a stunt.
KEATING. Oh yeah, well. they always say that don't they. I
mean If there's any.
MITCHELL.~ In fact it's something close to your heart, isn't it?~
KEATING.... It Is, because I think that it we are not.. I mean if
we want to be clear about oursellves, that 15 be strong enough to
say that we want to represent ourselves unambiguously we'll be
strong enough to do things economicaI1w and politically but while
ever we go around in a sort of twilight Zone not knowing whether
we're Sort of someone else's creation or whether were sort of
just an out. Outreach sort of camp f rom another show we' I I never
have that sort of inner strength and confidence that other
countries have got. 
I noticed on the Sunday program on Channel Nine yesterday,
Auberon Waugh, there was a program an Britain and the monarchy
and It had Auberon Waugh, who's supposed to be a commentator of
note In Britain, and someone asked him about Australia ard the
remarks I'd made. he said. mOh yes, I think it's a terrible
shame", he said, " that Australia's going to cut this., these
links with Britain". And he said,. " Look. the Americans did and
look what happened to them. They're an overfed fat, garrulous
lot", he amid. The fact that they became the greatest nation on
earth just totally mi. totally went over his shoulder, totally
missed the point. Here he was sitting up saying. MIt's a pity
the Americans turned us down because look what happened to them".
What happened to them Is they became the greatest country an
earth, ( laugh] SO, I mean but.. I mean how do you cope with
these characters. Now the Liberal Party's sprinkled with them,
they're all over the place.
MITCHELL.... . Now. you also Say that it's really important that we
break away from lingering stere. stereotypes of gormiess men
with barbias and shrimps.
KEATING. Mm. well. I think that the.. the great sublety of
Australia.. I mean this Is.. this is the oldest continent on
earth. and we are all caught by the resonances of Australia. all
of our personalities are different than they would otherwise be
were we not exposed to this country. and to.. and also, you know.
the long.. Its history and the history of the Aoiginal pople
and the Impact of that on our society and all the things that it
Is to be Australian. and to have us.. to have all the serious and
subtle things about Australia represented as putting a shrimp on
the barbecue, as important as that may be to those who want, you
know, fun in the sun and all the rest of it, is I think to
undersell us. That IS the serious things about Australia, its.,
Its sort of.. it*% true cultural base. the fact thiat. you know.
we pick up Nobel prizes for literature and Prize and
all sorts of thing.. and that, you know. we have a highly
qualified scientific basis to the country, that In terms of dance
and theatre, in composition, this country has really got big
statements to make. and I think It's a pity we sell ourselves too
short by saying to. you know, the Japanese. the Americans, or
anybody else. " Well, if you Coma here you Can put a shrimp on a
barbecue", as good as that IS, you know, the sort of Hogan image,
what have you.
I mean AuStralia is.. is.. this is.. this is a nation of people
Changing all the time in an environment of a very old continent.
but a continent. We don't share the continent with 
anybody and it's a terribly Interesting place for other people to
see and I think that the imagJe that Australia projects abroad
should be an image which., which truly reflects the Subtletlil
and qualities of Australia and not just sort ot,. you know.
basically sort of Wobs with cans In their hand and say. MCome anid
see one of our lor. a1 yobs". Well, who wants to do that?
MITCHELL.... I1 was talking to your minister of tourism, Alan
Griffiths, lost week and Saying that so far most of the images
that the.. certainly t he Australian Tourism Commission have
presented have been images of men and that it's about time that.
you know, Instead of Paul Hogan and Greg Norman we had a woman up
there. because let's face It if we're talking about Tourism there
are a lot of women with money in their pocket who are interested
In coming to Australia and seeing It and those images aren't
necessarily going to attract them here.
KEATING. Well, and a lot of women of accomplishment who.. who
we would do well to have as part of Australia's Image and
representational image abroad, and you know, I could do nothing
but agree with you entirely.
MITCHELL.... So we can look forward to a bit of a change in this
directlIon? KEATING. . WelI I think we 5hou Id. Wherever., where.. I mean
wherever we have the chance to do.. I mean I made the point
during the week that Ambassador Taliwee ( ph spl from the United
Nat ions ceme and received our second report on discrimination.
anti-discrimination In reality against women. and she was making
T he point that Australia's clone much more than most Countries,
and in many respects Is second to none, But this is not known.
not appreciated here. And not only 16 It not appreciated abroad
generally, but not appreciated here that in terms of sort of
opportunities for women. policy in respect of women. Australia
has really been at the vanguard of change. And one hears that
from anyone of international stature who knows about policies in
respect of women around the world. and Opportunities for women,
and.. whether they be. whether they be In things like
participation rates In school or opportunities in terms of
employment, or you know, government policies like child care, or
the family allowance supplement. or preservation of occupational
Superannuation. all of these things which this government has
dome in the last ten years have been important to women and It's
not known, not known abroad. and It's not that well known here. 
MITCHELL.... Prime Minister, perhaps just finally, a lot of people
are suffering In this country, which I'm sure Wou're aware of, a
lot of people find It hard to get up in~ the morning and have any
hope about the future, not only for themselves but for their
chilIdren,
KEATING.., Mm.
MITCHELL. Could you perhaps say something from the heart to
give them some hlope?
KEATING.... Well, what I Can say from the heart and from the head
Is that the new Australia will be an externally oriented
relatively efficient trading country which has an economy made up
of the Primary sector. manufactures, and services. It'll be a
relatively sophisticated country tham the one we had in the
or early 80s. that the 80s transition will be entirely Important
to It, it'll have a low inflationarU future, it can stand
therefore much gr-eater levels of growth and with am employment
growth. But it'll.. the difference will be it* iI be sustainable,
and instead of running a large current account deficit, which
means the Government's got to pull the place back to low growth
levels. it'll be able to grow on and maintain its trade while at
the same time maintaining employment. But the interesting thing
will be that the jobs will be Interesting, they won't be the dead
and jobs that were around when I was a kid but more interest ing
jobs for people in the higher orders of., you know. of
manufacturing services and the like.
So the future. I mean, Is very good but you see we're taking
Australia now from the old Australia of the post war years to the
new Australia, end in-. In the transition there is both cyclical
and structural unemployment and business Is languishing but as we
leg them up with growth, as there is.-as a recoverW comes
through. as Is now doing. and employment will be lagged In that.
there's no doubt about that, employment will be logged but it
won't be logged for that long. As the economy grows and these
people are Pulled up into employment then the vista through the
0SO is the vista of a country looking up and out and not looking
down and in as we would have been had we let John Howson, John
Howard. or Malcolm Fraser run the game In the Bos.
Now the rOession we could have done without avoidably. It would
have been good to have avoided It but..
MITCHELL.... . But you sald we hid to have it. 
KEATING. Well, we had to have 8 Slow down. We cidnt have to
have as recession, we had to have a Slow down because Wou
couldn't keep Spending twice as much as you produce and putting
it on.. an credit. which is what we were doing. But what we're
going to have now Is a longer run period of growth with low
inflation. more activity. and better jobs, more interesting jobs.
and most particularly many jobs for women, and that will be the
nature of the 90s. So in fact Australia's going to join the
fastest growing part of the world, the Asia Pacific and be able
to join it In full with full membership rather than join it as we
would have in the early 80s as mendicants with no real future In
the sort of higher growth, higher technology of the area. We'll
now be able to join up with full membership which we wouldn't
have been had we listened to the sort of marcs of the Liberal
Party like He.. Howard. Hewson and others.
MITCHELL So you're really saying. " Hang on in there"?
KEATING. It's the most.. this IS the fundamental post war
transition. Now there are problems in the transition but out the
other side it's going to be nothing like the country.. It'll be a
much better country than anything.. any Wou and I have livid
through.
MITCHELL,... Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
KEATING.-.. Thank you.
MITCHELL.... That was an interview that I did with the Prime
Minister of Australia. Paul Keting and I think YOU probably get
somec idea of what kcind of vision he has as we are in. he says,
this transition from the old Australia to the new Australia. I'm
sure you found it very Interesting.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH PETER KENNEDY, ABC RAD~ IO 29
JUNE 1992
E AND OE PROOF ONLY
KENNEDY: Are you trying to frighten people into
supporting the governmnent?
PM: We had the federal director of the Liberal
Party yesterday saying that people on unemployment benefits,
after 9 months under a Liberal government they will be kicked
of f un~ lye benefits, so somebody may 40 years of age
with a wife and a couple of children will be stigmatised by
them as being unemployed,, unworthy of government assistance
after 9 months you are down to the voluntary agencies, and I
made the point that if we run a country like that for a
considerable period of time the social unrest it will produce
will make it an outcome which this country has never seen
before. That is you can't say to people sorry there is no
sustenance and support for you, you are on your own, you are
down to St Vincent de Paul or the Smith Family or the
Salvation Army and that is the end of you. I mean that sort
of spiteful policy is what I think will bring Australians
socially unstuck.
KENNEDY: But do you really think we have that record of
social volatility, that emerged in Los Angeles for instance?
PM: We have never had that sort of spitefulness in
policy but can I just say, today Gerard Mtenzies, the director
of the Anglican Community Services said on radio and he was
asked by the questioner. Can I just pick up your word, he
said you are using the word I think that the Liberal Party is
abusing the agencies, that's the voluntary agencies and Mr
Menzies said, well I think they are abusing the agencies. To
think that we can come in and pick up their responsibility, I
mean we do it of our own accord but to have to actually be
demanded of us as in this policy I think is really quite
unacceptable# and he goes on in a similar vein to may that 
PM: ( cont'd) elsewhere in the interview. These are the
policies that Dr Hewson is pushing and if anyone says look if
you do that you will end up creating not only social misery
but social strife his response then is that the Prime Minister
is trying to scare you. What the Prime Minister is trying to
do is just tell people what sort of spiteful policies Dr
Hevson is actually presenting.
KENNEDY: The key to all this is obviously employment
isn't it, is jobs. If there are jobs for ordinary Australians
then this problem won't occur.
PM: Exactly, but to say that in both the cyclical
impact of a recession and the unemployment which comes from it
and the structural change going on in the economy and the
unemployment that comes from that, to try and brand people as
Mr Robb, the federal director of the Liberal Party did
yesterday,, has some sort of people sponging on society not
giving taxpayers a go as he put it and therefore just being
wiped off all government support and sent to a voluntary
agency, as Mr Menzies says quite clearly we couldn't possibly.
See the Liberals have, they have got $ 50 million in there for
the voluntary agencies and Mr Menzies said when you consider
that the Anglican Church alone spends $ 100 million nationally
and you mulitply that with all the other churches, you see
million is really a drop in the ocean. This is the
million that comes from the great soft heart of the Liberal
Party, peanuts when they drive people into misery and poverty.
KENNEDY: Let's look at the government's position and the
government policy and this morning we read that the chief
executive of BHPI John Prescott said One Nation was a failure,
that the money had which had been designated for
infrastructure projects for instance had not started flowing.
PMI Well some of the railway work hasn't. I had
lunch with the board of BHP last week and I made the remark
myself that we had not succeeded yet in getting a green fields
industrial relations agreement with the rail unions so as to
facilitate the building of the standard gauge between
Melbourne and Adelaide etc and we were trying to speed that up
and I think what's happened is that, I think Mr Prescott
repeated my own remark back to me. But the twist I think the
media put on some of it, this is just a part of the One Nation
package, what is also in One Nation is the tax changes for
business and depreciation, the change to the airline system,
the change in technical and further education, the adoption of
a national electricity grid, all those things are proceeding,
the national highways, the arterial ring roads, the one bit
where we are now trying to break through is on this now
industrial agreement for the -National Rail corporation which
will mean that we can start pouring money into the system and
developing these standard gauge rails and improving the Sydney
Melbourne railway line etc. 
KENNEDYs That's crucial isn't it f rom the point of view
of employment and that really is the achilles heel so when do
you think we will see a real improvement in employment and
getting that jobless rate down?
PM1 A large part of the One Nation spending has not
been spent yet but it wasn't meant to be spent until the
financial year 1992/ 93 which begins on 1 July, that soon. So
the fact of the matter is that then we will start to see the
One Nation spending coming through and that will help. But
unemployment is a problem, it won't be dealt with easily or
quickly, we never proposed that it would be but we want to
have it trending in the right direction and we have got now
interest rates have come off substantially, down to quite low
levels, we have got the budget deficit playing its own role in
supporting the economy, that is acting as a shock absorber,
that is promoting spending and activity through the deficit
and we have got these programs like one Nation coming on
stream. KENNEDYi When we spoke 5 months ago here you had boen
Prime Minister for I think six weeks and you were lagging the
Opposition, the government was lagging the Opposition in the
polls and your approval ratings were down. During that
months both the government's position and your own position
shot up, topped the Opposition and now it's moving down again
according to the latest polls. That's a fair degree of
volatility there how do you arrest that decline?
PM3 I think it's the trend that matters Peter,
these polls are taken every two weeks and the levels one can't
rely upon the levels, it depends how they are taken, the
quality of the material that is taken from them rather than
just a production of raw numbers. So the trend is what i
think we are interested in rather than the level and the trend
has been okay for us, we have been picking up slowly across
the course of the year. These are difficult times I don't for
a second make light of that, it's not easy to at the one time
be continuing micro economic change, changing the airline
syst~ em, as I say trying to rebuil te national rail highway,-
trying to change all these things, while at the same time
dealing with the end of the recession and trying to deal with
employment. KENNEDY&amp; You haven't got much time to do it in have you?
PM: I have got the better part of 12 months and we
believe the economy will be growing quite strongly through
92/ 93. It's just a question about productivity, if
productivity is higher rather than lower for a given level of
production, it produces less growth in employment. if
productivity is not so high therefore if more people are
employed in the process that growth will produce higher levels
of employment. So the quandry will be what, if we look at
this in a year from now, what will have been the level of 
PM: ( cont'd) productiivty on the way through. we will get
the growth but exactly what level of employment we will get
from the growth is the moot point.
KENNEDY$ So it's a catch 22, we really need that
efficiency to be able to compete internationally but in
getting that efficiency it might not be reflected in
significant reduction in unemployment.
PM; That's right. We have got businesses now which
are quite productive, they are going to produce more output
but for a lower level of employment. So therefore to take
employment up and unemployment down we have got to produce
more growth, more output. Now I think the economy will
produce quite a lot of output in this coming year but the
little productivity equation in the middle will determine how
many more people are in involved in that process and how much
a given level of employment will produce in output by way of
higher productivity.
KENNEDY: So on that basis though it's going to be a hard
slog to get that unemployment rate down, isn't it?
PM: We do want a more efficient country, we want
slimmed down efficient companies, we want them to be
competitive but at the same time we don't want to see the
product of that being higher levels of unemployment. We went
to see that taken up in more employment which means you must
have more output, therefore the economy must grow, and that's
the point we keep making to the Liberal Party and Dr Hewson.
You can't have an economy grow without inflation juping out
of the box, without an incomes policy, without an Accord,
without some basis of letting that growth be devoted to
employment and not spilling over into wages and prices and so
that's why we think with the Accord mechanism and the
commitment from the unions that inflation will be held near
our trading partners, we can let the economy grow and
hopefully pull employment up.
KENNEDY: on the point of employment you would be aware
that one of your former ministers, Stewart West, said today
that the government could not afford to be sanguine about
employment and talked about Thatcherite policies and
Thatcherite advice that you were getting on economic matters.
PM: I am not sanguine about it and I don't think we
are getting Thatcherite advice. The One Nation document was
the essence of a Labor Party document, it was a building
document, building on the traditional infrastructure of the
public sector as I said in rail and road in other areas and
while we are doing that we are trying to make the country more
efficient. Now look what we are doing in training and youth
policies they are the antithesis of Thatcherism. That is we
are trying to train people back into the work force, we have
now got these very high retention rates in schools, we have 
PM: Ccont'd) now got this big throughput into universities,
we are now trying to fix up technical and further education to
take kids into a trained position in the workforce, those
things are not Thatcherite they are the antithesis of
Thatcherite. KENNEDY: with regard to youth, you met uepoe
Iguth today and one of those young people told an ABC reporter
t the talks had been in fact a failure. Is that your view
of them?
PMt I thought they were quite successful and I saw
a report, I am not sure if it was the West Australian or the
Advertiser of similar discussions I had yesterday with a group
in Adelaide where the group were very praiseworthy of the
nature of the discussion and my willingness to listen to their
problems and take on board things and today we had a f irst
class conversation. Mr Beazley was there, the Premier was
there as were members of the business community and one
listens to the problems and also the views that some young
people are putting, how they practically find themselves, the
circumstances they find themselves. Although today's group
were not all unemployed some were at work, some were at
university, some were at TAPE and some where unemployed and
the people having most of their say today were actually at
university. But last night the people I met were all
unemployed and I came away with some very useful impressions.
KENNEDY: The report that our reporter picked up was that
while one of the people who attended, a girl, said that she
was flattered that the Prime Minister wanted to talk to them
that another opinion was that they didn't achieve very much.
PM: I don't know what they call achieving very
much. I said we are trying to get a breakthrough with entry
level training wages for young people at this national meeting
we are holding next month, because the problem is that I think
we could have arrived at the position where we have priced a
lot of young people out of the labour market and we are now
trying to break through on that to get to a situation where
young people can afford to be taken up by companies where the
companies don't have to carry the cost of the training. The
Commonwealth will carry the cost by extra places in technical
and further education and other institutions but the employer
carries the cost only of the non training component. Now such
a breakthrough would be important but if anyone of the group
there today were at university and feeling comfortable about
their circumstances, maybe the unemployed ones are more
interested in that than they were.
KENNEDY: on another matter, you returned to the question
of the Australian identity the other day. Why does the
Australian identity need redefining in your view? 
PM: Because if we go to the world uncertain about
ourselves and ambiguous in our signals we won't have the
response we ought to have to make a success of ourselves
particularly in the Asia Pacific area and I think countries
around us have taken the view does Australia want to deal with
us, does it regard itself as a country of the Asia Pacific,
doss it regard itself as a European country, does it see its
ties with North America. These are the questions which I
think are of ten put and part of the reticence of many of our
close neighbours in dealing with this is they are not sure we
want to deal with them. Now if we say we are a unique nation,
we have got a continent to ourselves the oldest land mass on
earth, it's made us different the kind of society we now have
is different, it's unique, it's not European, it's not North
American, it's Australian and we are happy to declare it and
be unique and be part of this part of the world. That is an
important I think economic change as well as an important
social change.
KENNEDY You started the debate on the flaa here on
January 31, you were also talking about the oath of
allegiance the other day and how that needed to be reworded in
your view. What other things do you have in mind?
PM1 I think the oahof aLlegallme is important
that people actually, there-is a sort of a civic oath that
people take, swear allegiance to Australia and it's values and
I think that is important rather than to the head of state and
that is psychologically important for themselves and the
country. But I think that Australians are proud of
themselves, they want to see themselves independently of
independent spirit and attitude and I find it most
particularly amongst young people. This morning at Perry
Lakes stadium I met the country senior high schools, there
were 3,000 kids there for a week of sport but the enthusiasm
of them was to be seen to be believed and again in some of the
young people I met at the youth fat project later, that's
where our f uture is, it's with the kids who are now going
through school into university who will take up the cudgels,
take up the responsibility for this place and are proud of it.
KENNEDY I wonder if the Australian identity is being
diluted bymulticulturalism?
PM: No, but I think we have to be careful that
multiculturalism doesn't replace the old sort of imperial ties
we had in the past, but rather be a binding thing in the new
Australia. KENNEDY&amp; So no winding back on multiculturalism?
PM: No but all of it's subordinate to a commitment
to Australia and it shouldn't be a commuitments to other
places, commitment to Australia and I think if that comes
through clearly and it's come through most clearly with young 
PM ( cont'd) people all this stuf f about paying sort of lip
service to our sort of history and as important as that is but
letting it have too much of an impact on the shape of it now,
they are quite smart about this I think and they are quite
determined to declare for Australia, to declare the place to
be a unique place to be out there doing it around this part of
the world and wanting to do it.
KENNEDY: You started the f lag debate here at the end of
January. PM$ We did indeed Peter.
KENNEDY; What stage has it reached?
PM: It's become an important debate, people are now
focussing on it as they have never focussed before but I have
said and I am quite happy to repeat that before we would
contemplate any change to it we would have a plebiscite of
some kind so people will have their say, the government won't
be changing the thing without there being some very clear
support for such a change and that manifesting itself by way
of a vote of some kind. But there is no doubt we can't go on
with a representational image of ourself with a flag of
another country in our flag.
KENNEDY: No early decision?
PM: There will be a process and we have got to
agree, we have got to talk about that but certainly we won't
be seeking to do anything other than by giving the public a
say. ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING MP, TO ALP BUSINESS BREAKFAST,
QUALITY LANGLEY HOTEL, PERTH, 30 JUNE 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
NOW, we've got our One Nation package out there working,
really in earnest -froi-thi6-financial year beginning
tomorrow. A lot of it we've got into place. We're now seeing the
road programs, the arterial roads in the capital cities,
the airline policy, the movement to a national
electricity grid in the Eastern States, the vast changes
to depreciation of the tax system.
There are a few bits we've still got to move along. And
we are now in the concluding phases of a greenfields
agreement on the rail system for the National Rail
Corporation. And when we get that into place, and we
hope we can have that into place in the next month, we'll
start to see the building of the standard . gause rapway
between Melbourne and Adelaide,-and the upgrading of the
-Adinaide,-and the upgrading of the railway line between
Melbourne and Sydney, and Sydney and Brisbane.
And that will mean that a whole new industry springs up
in Western Australia, as people landbridge across the
country into Melbourne, which they now can't do without
changing bogies in South Australia. And it will lift the
efficiency of the rail system and create the kind of rail
network which Australia needs as a trading country.
Now that's all on the cards. And I'm going to try to
push that spending along in the next few weeks, as we get
that agreement concluded.
So, most of the One Nation spending will start to hit its
straps in the coming months, the next month or two, and
that will itself start to pull the economy up even
faster. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, FREMANTLE PORT AUTHORITY, PERTH
JUNE 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What about Federal Opposition claims that the One Nationp icy safo eas
of the larger deficit, you don't have the necessary money
PM: Well that is just rubbish, because every dollar this Government has spent now over a
decade has been accounted for. The Federal Liberal Party when they were in
Government didn't even publish forward estimates. All of our Budgets are, the
figuring's there, the reconciliation tables. And the One Nation spending, which has
started, but in the main starts tomorrow, it starts in the new financial year, and it was
never intended to be spent before the new financial year. Thiat's the. first point, the
second point is, the one area where we have had a difficult negotiation is in putting
together a new greenfields agreements on thejai syster. But I mean there was
never one for a hundred years, so of course it had taken us a few months to do it.
That is, to try and build a national rail highway, which the lazy Liberals never
bothered with for most of the 40 post-war years. We expect that we will have that
greenfields industrial relations agreement to build a new national rail highway, we
should have that in place hopefully by the middle of July. And that will mean then
that all of the One Nation spending on the national rail network, the national rail
highway can begin then feeding money into a new system where we can lay new
track, lift the bridges, straighten the rail lines, and give Australia the kind of rail
system it should have always had.
J: Prime Minister your criticism of the Hogan image overseas, you don't withdraw
from that? 
PM: No, it's not a criticism of the Hogan image, I am just saying it is just one of the
images. I think people should understand what I am saying. Australia is a subtle
country with lots of varying appeals for overseas visitors. That image appeals to one
group of visitors, but there are other images, and I am just saying that we need to let
people know about Australia, our successes, and the subtlety of Australia, and not to
be just encapsulated in one image. It is certainly no criticism of the Hogan image,
or its campaign which was eminently successful.
J: Mr Keating, Mr Dawkins is seeking a meeting with you because he is concerned
One Nation is not spending enough, quickly enough, or enough to get the economy
going.
PM: That is not true. The Treasurer does not have to seek meetings with me, and I don't
need silly questions like that put to me by journalists, frankly. The spending is all
provided for and it will go ahead but we are not pouring money into rail systems
where we don't have greenfields industrial agreements in place, but the rest of the
spending, the roads, the main arterial roads around the capital cities have already
started, as you know the airline part of One Nation has already been enacted, that is,
a new airline system for Australia, Qantas flying in and the other airlines flying out.
We are setting up the Commission to provide those routes in the next week or two.
The payment to families was paid in April and that is already behind us. And the
tax changes to depreciation, and all of those things are already enacted. So a lot of
the One Nation policy is in place, but while they are difficult nuts to crack, with a
new industrial relations framework for a new rail highway, and of course it is
difficult to crack, it has been laying there with different gauge systems for a hundred
years. I mean the Liberal Party which governed Australia for most of the post-war
year were just happy to leave it lay as an industrial museum which we have had
to bring back to a modern rail system.
J: If you can't get that agreement will you reallocate that railway money?
PM: If we don't get the agreement of course we would reallocate the funds to road or
something else but I am pretty confident the agreement is coming through. Can I
just say while we are talking about packages that yesterday the Anglican Church
came out and attacked Dr Hewson spiteful policy of knocking people off
unemployment benefits after nine months and sending them down to voluntary
agencies. And I noticed Mr Gerard Menzies, of the Anglican Church, said it was an
abuse, that was the word he used, an abuse of the voluntary agencies for Dr Hewson
to offer them a paltry $ 50 million, and then load upon them the unemployed after
nine months, hundreds and thousands of people and their families on a system that
couldn't possibly cope with it. And as Mr Menzies himself made clear the Anglican
Church already spends $ 100 million in its own right, let alone the Catholic Church
and the Brotherhood of St Laurence and the Salvation Army, to add $ 50 million is
an insult, but I agree it is an abuse of the voluntary agencies to turn people off
benefits after nine months and say well you are on your own, go down there and see 
the Anglican and Catholic church if they can help you good on them, if they can't
too bad, you lay in the street, or look after yourself, or go to your extended family,
or do what they do in the United States: huddle over railway grates to keep warm, or
lie under cartons of a night. This is the sort of world that John Hewson wants to
build. These are the spiteful policies he has championed and the Anglican Church
has thrown it right back at him saying that the views of the Federal Director of the
liberal Party, Mr Robb, and articulating Dr Hewsons Fightback package is an abuse
of the work which is voluntary carried out by the voluntary agencies.
J: It has been reported that Senator Button wants the measures in One Nation fast
tracked, do you agree?
PM: Well look, we are going to fast track all we can, the main thing is most of the
spending is to be spent in the financial year 92-93, if you read the document that is
what you will find, 92-93 starts tomorrow, and will be spent over the 12 months
from tomorrow. It was never intended to be spent between February and July, only
a part of it and the parts that will be spent this financial year, I believe, we'll spend,
we'll spend the $ 1.8 billion we said we'll spend over the course of the financial year.
J: Given the Budget deficit situation is there any extra money around for more
targeting coming up to the Budget?
PM: Well they are all just Budget matters to be considered.
J: Is there any extra money though?
PM: Well to be considered, that's what a Budget Cabinet is for, to sit down look at
priorities, look at policy.
J: Mr Keating just getting back to your comments about Australia's image overseas,
what sort of image would you like to see the country portraying to overseas visitors?
PM: Well I would like to see it first of all as a place with interesting tourist destinations,
but a country which has got a unique identity and culture. That has flourishing arts,
that excels in dance, and theatre, that has a developed society, a country with a good
education system, a country that has made much provision for women, and
advanced the cause of women. I mean this is a place that I think many Americans
for instance, the Japanese people, would find aspects of Australia most interesting.
But I think it is a multifaceted country, and the multi-faces of Australia need to be
shown to the rest of the world, not just one face.
J: Are you critical of that so-called Yobbo image?
PM: I am not critical of it, it just needs to be complemented by the other images which
we all know exist. 
J: Mr Prescott, the head of BHP, said the $ 2.3 billion in One Nation wasn't enough to
get the economy moving, it is far more sluggish then forecast and he actually
suggested that there was room for another $ 2 billion, do you agree?
PM: Well that's a view. At the time I think Mr Prescott thought, and so did Mr Bailey
and others that $ 2 billion was about the ticket and we spent $ 2.3 billion, but a great
bulk of that spending is yet to happen as it was planned to happen in 92-93 and we
will make a judgement about that as we go through the Budget processes. But one
thing is clear the economy is going to grow reasonably strongly over the course of
92-93 it may not grow uniformly across Australia but there is a patchiness about it,
but overall it is going to grow quite strongly through 92-93. The issue is how
quickly will employment respond to that growth, in other words will productivity
depress the growth and employment as growth in the economy proceeds, well that is
a matter for judgement and we will make judgements about that in the course of the
Budget.
J: So it is becoming more efficient as a two-edged sword as you see it?
PM: Of course it is, productivity growth means a given level of output from fewer
people, that just simply means you have got to have more output, that means the
economy has got to grow faster and the only policy framework which allows the
economy to grow faster is the accord structure between the trade unions and the
Government. Under the Liberals policy the start would grow faster and when
inflation and wages started to grow they would just simply raise interest rates.
J: So do you stand by your employment growth figures in One Nation? By stating this
concern do you think there is some question mark about the
PM: Well employment has been slower, there is no doubt about that. But the growth will
still be pretty much as we forecast.
ENDS 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT THE FREMANTLE PORT AUTHORITY, PERTH
JUNE 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Pam ( Bcggs), Prcmicr Carmen Lawrence, ladies and gentlemen.
I am very plcascd to be here today. I have taken an interest in at least coming to
the port site of the various ports around Australia to get a better minds cyc vicw of
exactly what is happening, where developments arc, where they need to bc and
how to make our port system more cornpctitivc. And because wc have as a theme
of thc ' Onc Nation' package, linking the ports to the rail systcm and as Pam says
creating a rail highway around Australia, a standard-gauge highway and the big
link of course in that being from Adelaide to Melbourne and then improving the
track from Melbourne to Sydney through to Brisbane. That such a system does
provide opportunitics for Western Australia, for Frcmantle for a landbridging
operation across Australia through Melbourne and up through to Sydney or if you
like, as well through Broken down to Sydney.
We're still going through an important phase of the great post-war change In
Australia which began with the removal of exchange controls and the floating of
the exchange rate in 1983. The things which started to pccl back the layers of
management and protection of Australia so that the areas of comparative advantage
were able to excel themselves in this economy and where the focus was taken off
the areas of comparative disadvantage.
I've said over the last day or so in Western Australia and I'll say again, that in the
areas of comparativ. e advantage inmining and agriculture and services in
commodities where we clearly have an advantage, national economic policy has
favoured those areas so it's therefore not a surprise that the two states which have a
great preponderance of thesc industries Western Australia and Queensland arc
7. iul. 92 11: 23 No. 005 P. 01/ 03 
TEL 2
now recovering more quickly and growing more strongly than some other regions
of Australia. But to really make it all work, we've got to break the major economic
barriers down and improve the efficiencies of the country and that includes from
the port side right through to plants and services and it mcans in this case, trying to
lift the valuc of the port/ rail interface, the quality of thc port, the efficiency and
productivity of ports and at the same time try and rejuvenate the rail systerns'so
we've got a better balance betwccn sea freight, rail and road so that there's a more
mature system out therc to servie the country as a trading entity.
I'vc said before and it's worth saying again, we are always criticised by the
-Coalition for the speed at which these changes were occurring and T make the
obvious point, if they were so urgent why did they leave them for forty years? My
colleague John Hewson who was advising John Howard, I don't remember him
running any rear guard actions along port productivity or Port reform or manning
levels or ship crewing levels or fixing up the run-down rail infrastructure of
Australia or repairing and putting competition into the road trade system with rail
or In the telecommunication system or any of these things. It has been left to thc
Labor Party to try and crack all these micro-economic nuts and we're In the
process of trying to crack this one now. And in relation to the rail freight system,
that is the national railway, we are trying to conclude ageenficids industrial
agreemcnt with the trade unions for the National Rail Freight Corporation so that
we can start to see the ' One Nton' money flow from next week. From the
beginning of the financial year in the course of the next couple of months, to start
to see the rail improvcments around Australia in a system which is fundamentally
going to be more competitive and where we can see the yield coming from those
efficiencies as we improve the infrastructure that wherc we have efficiency in
staffing across the rail system of Australia.
So that's why I think the. Fremantle landhridgc projpct-study Is Important. That is
the government of Western Australia has undertaken the study as to the prospect of
landbridging in thc new rail system across the continent and particularly accessing
Melbourne and Sydney via Melbourne as well as via Broken Hill. This study is
conclusive in the sense that it believes that such a systcm that Fremantle can
succeed as a landbridging port and a landbridging policy can operate cffectively
from Western Australia across Australia as the first port for much traffic from the
region near Western Australia and where for cargoes in demand that have time
constraints and the rest on them that thcre is a real possibility of cutting down sea
freight times and also port clearance times in the larger ports by landbridging out
of Frcmantlc.
One of the things that Western Australia is now doing and will continue to do is
get that. balanc into its primary exports sector with a larger scrvicc sector. And
the city of Perth largely is a service city and it serves the grcit agricultural and
mining industries of this State and we want to see it develop and proliferate as a
service centre also in things like freight. And in doing so it provides more ballast
to employment in Perth and hopefully by getting an efficient transportation system
TEL.: Jul. 92 11: 23 No. 005 P. 02/ 03 
TEL: 7. Jul. 92 11: 23 No. 005 P. 03/ 03
3
it will mean that Western Australia can play its role as a service centre to South-
East Asia, to Indonesia, to Malaysia, to Singapore and all the countries in the
region where the sophistication of Australian services can be provided from thc
city of Perth and from Western Australia generally.
FIn hoping that as we pull the threads of this great change in the rail system
together under the ' One Nation' package and get the greenflelds agreement in place
and start the reconstruction of the Adelaide-Melbourne line, cleaning up the
access through the hills, lifting the bridges out of Fremnantle all the way to
Kalgoorlie so that we can put double stacked containers on rail, that wc Can start to
bring up the efficiencies that makes the rail system competitive with other forms of
transport, shipping included. That may not be designecd to gladden the heart of
shipping companies, but at least it will mean that there may be opportunities and
probably be more opportunities for shipping and landbridging across Australia for
cargoes in demand.
So, can I say that I'm very pleased that the Wustcrn Australian Government has
taken the issue up and now have plans in place to spend the ' One Nation' money to
fulfil the commitment to landbridging and that this study which is part mid parcel
of that which concludes in favour of landbridging that we will see it come to pass
and that the efficiencies which we are seeing coming from thc changes to the
waterfront productivity levels to crew manning on the coast to improvements in
the efficiency of the rail system will lead to a kind of transportation system In
Australia which reflects what it should have always been a more cfficient one for
the kind of trading country we are.
So it is with much pleasure that I launch the project, announce the study, publish
the study and conclude by congratulating Pain as the Minister, but particularly the
Premier for the farsightedness of the Western Australian Governmecnt in finding a
place for Western Australia in the great freight network of Australia and calling
Fremantle first in the great long run across the continent.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER 64/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
RELEASE OF DRAFT NATIONAL STRATEGIES FOR ECOLOGICALLY
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND GREENHOUSE RESPONSE
The Prime Minister released today draft National
Strategies for Ecologically Sustainable Development and
Greenhouse Response.
These companion documents are designed to promote
discussion and debate in the Australian community.
Given the complexity of the issues, the Government
believes that public discussion and response will be
essential in helping all Australian governments determine
their final policy directions.
Without public involvement and commitment, government
efforts to achieve ecologically sustainable development
( ESD) and to respond to the possibility of an enhanced
greenhouse effect will face serious difficulty.
Public comment on the draft strategies will be accepted
until August 21.
Officials will be holding a national round table meeting
of key interest groups in September, while members of the
original ESD working groups and nationally based
organisations will be invited to community consultation
forums in August.
The outcome of these meetings will be a key element in
the setting of final directions taken in the strategies.
In May 1992, Commonwealth, State and Territory Heads of
Government noted progress on development of an
intergovernmental response, in the form of national
strategies on ESD and greenhouse, to the reports of the
nine ESD Working Groups and two ESD Chairs. They agreed
that in light of the range and complexity of the issues
addressed, and in order to provide adequate opportunity
for effective public consultation, the draft strategies
should be released at the end of June as officials'
discussion papers. Heads of Government also requested 
officials to bring forward proposals for the definitive
strategies by the end of October.
The Prime Minister encouraged interested groups and
individuals to participate actively in the public
consultation process. It is hoped the community will
take this opportunity of open discussion with government
officials and other interest groups on the proposed
actions and initiatives outlined in the strategies.
A broad range of measures for achieving ESD and
responding to the greenhouse effect are recommended in
the draft strategies.
The Prime Minister noted that the ESD Working Group
process has already had a significant impact on
government policies and processes. A large number of
initiatives have already been developed and put in place
by all levels of governments, and in a wide variety of
agencies, to help move Australia towards an ecologically
sustainable future. Together, the draft strategies
outline a number of the actions that governments have
taken in response to the ESD Working Group Reports.
All levels of government will be involved in finalising
the strategies for Heads of Government agreement of
specific actions and initiatives by November.
Copies of the draft strategies are being widely
distributed to libraries and peak interest groups. They
can also be obtained free of charge by contacting one of
the nominated agencies in each State or Territory.
Contact addresses for these agencies are attached.
CANBERRA June 1992 
CONTACT LIST FOR DRAFT NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ECOLOGICALLY SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT AND NATIONAL GREENHOUSE RESPONSE STRATEGY
Commonwealth ESD/ Greenhouse Discussion Papers
Locked Bag 14
Oueen Victoria Terrace
BARTON ACT 2600
Ph ( 06) 241 6523 or 241 4841
New South Wales
Mr Eric Sondalini
Natural Resources Branch
The Cabinet Office
Level 6
State Office Block
Macquarie Street
SYDNEY NSW 2001
Victoria Ms Kaye Hegstrom
Dept of the Premier and Cabinet
2nd Floor
1 Treasury Place
MELBOURNE VIC 3002
Queensland Dr Brian Head
Office of Cabinet
Executive Building
100 George Street
BRISBANE OLD 4000
South Australia
Mr Andrew Lothian
Dept of Environment Planning
Lower Ground Floor
New Zealand Insurance Building
Grenfell Street
ADELAIDE SA 5000 Western Australia
Ms Dorina Ion
Department of the Cabinet
15th Floor, Capita Centre
197 St Georges Terrace
PERTH WA 6000
Tasmania
Mr Alan Sann
Dept of Environment Planning
160 Collins Street
HOBART TAS 7000
Northern Territory ESD
Mr Rhett Marlowe
Department of the Chief Minister
4th Floor, NT House
Mitchell Street
DARWIN NT 0831
Northern Territory Greenhouse
Mr John Llewellyn
The Conservation Commission
of the Northern Territory
Gaymark Building
Francis Mall
PALMERSTON NT 0831
ACT Ms Karen Wilden
Environment Conservation Div
Dept of Environment Planning
1st Floor, Homeworld
TUGGERANONG ACT 2901
Local Government
The Australian Local Government
Association
8 Geils Court
DEAKIN ACT 2600 



PRIME MINISTER,
TRANSCRIPT Or INTERVIEWfTALKBACK WITH GERRY GANNON, 6W F ABC
RADIO 30 JUNE 1992
E AND OE PROOF ONLY
GANNON: At your breakfast this morning you were talking
about economic growth of 4.5% A market analyst I have just
spoken with said a bit optimistic, he reckons may be 2/ 2.5%
PM: I think most of the private forecasters think
as we do. The economy in picking up and it's picking up in
the first instance in Western Australia and in Queensland in
the two large agricultural and mining states. Part of that is
because national economic policy has preferred now for most of
the last decade the things we do comparatively well, where we
have a comparative advantage and we have a comparative
advantage in minerals and we have it in food and the
structural change which has been on now for nearly a decade
has Buited very much western Australia and Queensland and as a
result they are recovering now I think more quickly than the
other states, but we expect across the year quite reasonable
rates of growth.
GANNON: But despite that forecast for growth you don't
see any great joy in the unemployment front?
PM: Employment is picking up in Western Australia,
the trends here an Tin Queensland are quite good and NSW
employment has picked up as well but it is patchy across the
country. See what's happened is businesses have become quite
lean now they are much more productive. That is they are
producing a similar sort of output with fewer people and that
is called productivity. Now as the economy grows they will
reach a point where they have to put more people on. That is
they won't be able to go down their productivity mine any
further looking for efficiencies and they will simply just
have to engage more people and it's that lag between growth
and employment which pulls up behind, it is the lag we are
living through now. 
GANNONs So productivity is helping keep some us out of
work in fact?
P~ t That's exactly right.
GANNONs Let's go to some calls and a couple of
listeners who couldn't hang about ask you, what can federal
and state governments do to encourage the planting of
harvestable timber forests and what impact might this have on
unemployment? PM: I think we do have great opportunities in
Au * stralia with forest products and plantation hardwoods and
sof twoods are going to be I think part of our future and some
of the large companies are now into plantations and see this
as a way out of native f orests but I think it is going to be
one of the things we can do well. How much we need to do
beyond the sort or general incentive we have got there for
write of fs and depreciation and low interest rates and the
rest I don't know but, so far there has been no inhibition to
the planting of plantations.
GANNON; Mnother, question Prime Minister, you made some
comments I think it was at the weekend concerning the image of
Australians and the ocker image. A male listener wants to
know what about the image of some of our politicians who sort
of tend to sport an ocker image f rom time to time. Do you
think that might need addressing?
PM: I think the subtle things about Australia I
made the point the other day f or instance the United Nations
representative on the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination Against Women, I presented Ambassador Tallaway
with Australia's second report and she made the point that
policy in relation to women in this country is really second
to none around the world the changes through the 1980s.
That's not known around the world, a lot of our cultural,
scientific, technological achievements. For instance in aged
care policy we are now leading the world, that's not known. I
would like other things to be known about Australia other than
we put a-shrimo on the bar0! beqqe you know what I mean.
GA1NNONs But that has served us well.
PM: That served us very well, it served us very
well with an important audience, important market,
particularly in the USA and it does very well and
appropriately typifies the outdoor image of Australia but
there are other images as we know. This is a subtle country
and it's got a lot of texture about it and if that is exposed
to some of the big markets you will get the people who are
interested in those things coming here.
GANNONsGANNON: Let's take some calls. 
TERRYt I am not going to complain about anything which
is probably a let up for you. I just want to assure you of my
support I think you are probably in my lifetime, I am 47, the
first really Australian Prime Minister we have had.
PM8 Thank you for saying so.
TERRY: And you are a leader, you are leading us, the
people might not want to go where you want to lead them at the
moment but I think in time they will look back and I think you
will be looked upon kindly.
PM3 Can I just respond and just say this to you,
thank you for the remarks but what I am trying to do in this,
that the old Australia the Australia of the 1970s which was in
the end a piece of industrial archaeology, old smokestack
industries that couldn't survive the competitiveness of the
area we live in or the rest of the world. We have opened it
up so that the areas of comparative advantage which for
instance western Australia enjoys can give Australians higher
levels of growth and wealth and at the same time as we are
doing that structural change which is still continuing despite
the fact that it has been overlaid in the last couple of years
by a recession, when we come out we will come out with a low
inflation recovery and a lot of productive economy into the
1990s which can employ lots of people and as we are doing that
I want us to declare for Australia, to say we are a unique
country and we want to advertise ourselves as unique and
present ourselves as unique. So if I can do some of those
things I will be very happy.
MARIE: I would like to ask Mr Keating why can't the
dependent spouse rebate be substantially increased?
PM: We have increased it a couple of times Marie
over the period of time but most particularly we have put
support into support for children by way of the family
allowance supplement where most of the growth has gone and
into the family allowance. The dependent spouse rebate is for
generally a taxpayer with one dependent and it's mostly for
taxpayers whose family are of f their hands who may have a wife
at home and the DSR is some tax compensation for that
dependency but the main dependency of life is children and
that is why we have always focussed that into them.
MARIE: I just feel that the $ 1,300 or round about that
mark isn't enough incentive for one parent to stay at home and
be a parent and there is too many families where both parents
are going of f to work and if there was more, if that rebate
was a lot greater like triple it or even greater there may be
more incentive for one of the parents to be at home.
PM: It's not meant as an incentive to stay at home,
it's a tax trade off against the tax free threshhold which if
you are in the workforce is $ 5,400, that is before you pay a 
PM: ( cont'd) dollar of tax you have to earn $ 5,400 and the
tax payable on that in some way the dependent spouse rebate
goes to compensate for the benefit which is bestowed on a
taxpayer of being able to earn $ 5,400 free of tax. it's a
sort of an offset but it's not an incentive to stay at home.
ROB; I would like to ask if you intend to introduce
some sort of tax break on income earned from interest because
it's a great worry to retirees particularly since the interest
they are getting is pretty low anyway. There is a good
article in yesterday's West Australian on page 5 by the An~ I
Bank which doesn't mention retirees specifically but it says
there of course it would help to boost the national savings.
I wonder if you have any plans to do that within perhaps the
coming Budget?
PM: A lot of the problem about interest income was
a large part of it was inflationary. If you look a couple of
years back you had 6 or let's say you had a nominal, a
real rate of interest of 4 on top of an inflation rate of 7,
you had a nominal interest rate of 11, but on that 7, the 7
was taxable. in other words we were collecting tax on that
inflationary component as well as on the real rate of in
other words we were collecting tax on the 7 and the 4, well
that 7 is now 1.5 and so as that inflation rate has come down
the distortion of tax upon interest has greatly diminished and
so we are at a position now where the economic system is
working much better than it was in the taxation of interest
income when we had this inflation distortion there, so I know
the rate. are low but so too is the rate of inflation.
GANNON: Do you anticipate some trouble in this area for
instance with self funded retirees who a couple of years ago
when interest rates were like 13, 14, 15% putting their money
in and being able to live of f it, now many of them are finding
they can't live off it.
PM3 Those same high interest rates slowed the
economy down and they were only a -tempo6rary thing. It's the
long run thing that matters and a few years before that the
interest rates were lower again but again then the inflation
rate was around 10%. So if you are inflating around 10 and
your interest rate is around 11 or 12 you are not as well off
as you are inflating around 1.5 or 2 with interest rates of 4
or 5. You are actually better of f now than you were then.
GANNONs So it balances out you think?
PM: Well it's the point I made a moment ago Gerry
that is when we had interest rates of 11/ 12% we had 7 or 8% of
that being inflation and yet we were collecting tax on that 7
or Whereas now we are only collecting tax on the real
interest rate mostly which is 1.5% plus 3.5 or 4 real, so it's
actually better now because people, the prices they face
outside are only of the order of 1 to 2%. 
GAN4NON: Someone who is about to saddle themself with a
now mortgage Prim. Minister, have you ever considered giving a
tax break on mortgages?
PM: Well the break we have given on mortgages is
low inflation and we have now got mortgage interest rates
running at around 10% and we have got an inflation rate which
is now still low and coming down and it may be, I am not sure
exactly how the banks housing books look but I think long term
lower interest rates for housing look a pretty strong thing
and that in the best thing. But if one starts tax preferring,
every country in the world that's had mortgage interest
deductability has rued the day it got it because their whole
national savings pattern gets skewed to putting money into
houses instead of into investment and production which gives
people jobs. So there has got to be that nice balance or
neutrality between commercial investment and housing, but once
you tax prefer housing there is not much point in sitting in a
house without a job.
GANNON: So 10% you reckon it's going to go lower?
PM: I don't know, when I was Treasurer I used to
know pretty well the balance of the banks housing books. I
don't off the top of my head now know that, but given the fact
that inflation is low, inflation and trend ways about a
interest rate in housing is quite high now even though it
is historically low. You understand it's low but in relation
to the inflation rate it's still relatively high.
LEWIS: On 19 September 1985 as Treasurer you
disallowed entertainment expenses as a tax deduction. What
about possibly a tax break for the hospitality industry
because if we are getting more clients we can entertain more
people and engage more staff, buy more stock and get the
wheels of hospitality turning.
PM: I don't think in hindsight that the removal of
the deduction for entertainment did the hospitality industry
any harm because what they did they grew then. What happened
restaurants that were charging high prices for lunch time
meals and the rest started charging proper prices and that
attracted a greater level of clientele I think. The other
thing is that what this government has done is open Australia
up to a service economy it never ever had bef ore. before we
removed exchange controls, floated the exchange rate, made the
place more competitive that produced for the first time a real
tourism industry in Australia.
LEWIS: But Prime Minister if more people are using
restaurants and hotels surely that is going to create more
staff and more jobs and more money for the government. The
restauranteurs and the hoteliers are not going to cop all the
lolly and over the years I have seen many many high powered
people and very few of them are putting the snouts in the
trough. 
PM: The trouble is the Tax Commissioner can't be at
every table deciding whether a lunch is for business or for
pleasure and that is the problem and the other thing is there
is no reason why lunches should be tax preferred. In other
words restaurants should be tax preferred because if we then
decide that buildings should be tax preferred, mortgages
should be tax preferred, everything else tax preferred there
is no preference for anybody. one industry only gets a
preference at the expense of another but if every industry
gets the same preference there is no general preference, so
once you start, I mean the hospitality industries have had a
boom in Australia in the 80&amp;, an absolute blow out and they
have done it with a neutral tax system but if we go back to
the days of preferring lunches and trying to basically give
those people who can spend time at lunch, particularly a
business lunch and make it deductible I think it is unfair the
rest of the people who are having sandwiches at work and
paying for it etc. It's one debate which I can say happily in
Australia virtually disappeared but when it disappeared it was
in the middle 80. and in the 5 or 6 years since the
hospitality industry have literally expanded as no one in
those industries would have ever believed they could have.
LORETTA: I would like to know why when you were
Treasurer you put gold tax on the gold industry because this
caused a lot of hurt and a lot of unemployment.
PM: It was not we put a tax on it we just removed
the exemption. You see every other mineral is taxed, iron ore
is taxed, nickel is taxed, lead, silver and zinc are taxed,
why not gold.
LORETTA: They put that money back into more research to
do more and make more employment here and a lot of people have
been hurt.
PM: As the point I have just made to the gentleman
before you asked me about -free-lunches and restaurants. Any
industry which is tax preferred will grow faster than ones
that are not but the question is why should they be tax
preferred, why should someone digging gold, mining gold be
preferred over someone mining nickel.
LORETTA: Because that money went back into making more
PM: A lot of went into foreign mining companies and
was shot back overseas and the point is in a country like this
the business corporate savings of Australia should go where
they naturally should go best not where they go by way of tax
preference. LORETTA: But you went to Indonesia and stood there and
really called your own play in front of the whole world. 
PM3 Not what I said was that Australians, I was
asked a question about it and I said that Australians need a
representational image of themselves which is unambiguous that
is having a f lag of our own which doesn't have the f lag of
another country in the corner. Just understand this, I don't
have any problems about Britain or with the British
government. I have got the best of relationships with John
Major and the current British government and I have had over
the years with Nigel Lawson before him when ho was the
Chancellor in all the year. I was Treasurer. It's not a
problem at all about Britain# Britain has sensibly acted in
its own best interests. Britain has gone into Europe and
joined the Common Market as I-it sould. We have got to go into
Asia and join the market around here and you have got to go
there looking like yourself, not someone else.
GANNON: Why is all of this so important at this
particular time Prime Minister. People say to me every
morning here on talkback we have got over 10% unemloment a
sluggish economy yet Keating is going arudbgigthe
f lag, the Queen_ and now the oath of alleiance. why are all
these things so important right now~
PM: I am not bagging the Queen, because they are
important in an economic sense. My conservative opponents say
it's a distraction but frankly as you say Gerry, every day you
are talking about the economy, unemployment on radio, there is
no way other than addressing that issue. I don't ever try not
to address it directly but to say you have got to address
that, only that and that nothing else matters, I mean the fact
is that we have a great opportunity now to tie in with the
Asia Pacific. When I was in Indonesia Ian Taylor was up
there, the Deputy Premier opening a representative Western
Australia office in Surabyu and that is the kind of
relationships which we are going to see Western Australia grow
as it links into that part of the world and the rest of
Australia generally.
GANNON i Do our near neighbours in Asia really confuse
us with a British identity because I mean they live next
PM: No they think we are not certain whether we
want to deal with them. They are not sure whether our mind
set is basically in Europe or North America, is it just the
place we fly over, do we really want to deal with them, they
think we are ambivalent about that. But if we actually go and
say to them we are here we do want to deal with you, but we
deal with you as a independent country, we deal with you as a
country with its own traditions, it's own culture, it's not a
derivative of some other place. I mean the best reaction to
all of this stuff has come basically from the Asia Pacific,
from Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and that where they are
saying thank God Australia is starting to sort of call its own
tune and that will make an enormous economic difference, not
just social dif ference, "' ut economic dif ference, particularly
to places like Western Australia. 
GANNONs Yesterday we discussed on talkback, because you
made some comments about it at the weekend, changing the oath
of allegiance for migrants so it's better to reflect their
commitment to Australia. What brought that on?
PM: Because I think it's time that it happened. We
have tried to do it twice by legislative amendment in the
past, in the 70s and 80s. That is when someone makes a
commuitment, they make a commitment to Australia and its
values, that is the commitment In fact they are making. When
someone goes to a naturalisation ceremony they are making a
commitment to Australia, they are saying I want to be an
Australian, I am committing myself to the values of this
Society. If that is what they think let's say it.
GANNON: There are some people who called us yesterday
who said that they didn't become citizens because of having to
take out the oath of allegiance to the Queen. Are you
conscious that there is a great number of people like that?
PM: You mean they became citizens
GANNON: They didn't become citizens because they were
not prepared to take an oath of allegiance to the Queen.
PM1 There must be a few like that I don't know. I
have a great regard for the job the Queen has done in the
heavy constitution of ceremonial tasks which have been her lot
now for so many years, 40 years. But in this respect in terms
of naturalisation and taking citizenship, the people who do
that do it to become citizens of Australia and pick up the
values of this country, this continent. All I am saying is
let's say so.
GANNON: There was a question too put to me yesterdaty
about MrsKeating. She is Dutch born, is she an Australian
citizen? PM: Yes she is, yea.
RON: I am a 59 year old unemployed person, been
unemployed for nearly 3 years now and Mr Keating's figures on
unemployed with the kids, 15-19 year olds doesn't he trust his
statisticians or does he have to mess about with the figures
because the February figures which I have gone over because I
have got plenty of time because I am unemployed, for females
15-19 40% of them were seeking full time work and with the
boys, 35.7%. The whole thing about this unemployment issue
there is too much money being spent on people like JoblJink all
it is is jobs for the boys, they are a hangover from when they
had JET which was a pretty good thing they had out for getting
women back in the workforce.
PM: Let me just come to the point. There is what
we call the age group, the age cohort 15-19 have 1.3 million 
PM: ( cont'd) young people in it, that is the total population
15-191 122,000 of those are actually In the workforce looking
f or work that's about 9.8% r that's the number. Now that is
getting confused with the notion of those in training and
school and those out of training and school. In other words
there in about 7 in 10 in training and school and 3 in 10 not
in training in school but only 1 in 10 are looking for work.
GANNONi But a great number of those
PM: Even that is too many, that is the point I am
making, there is no point people arguing whether it's 1 in
or 2 in 10 or 3 in 10. The fact is even 10%, 122,000 is still
too many and that is why we are trying to find now a
breakthrough on entry level training wages for young people so
that companies are not bearing the cost of the training but
the Commonwealth will pick up the creation of a training place
in TAPE and that the employers should be picking up simply
that wage component. Now that is a matter which is going to
be and has been disagreed by the workforce and the trade
unions over a long period of time. It's one of the things we
hope we can sensibly discuss and get a breakthrough on it at
this meeting I am holding next month.
CANNON: A great number of those young people who are in
training are unskilled, are only there sheltering from the
harsh reality of unemployment.
PM: 1 don't think that is right. There may be some
but look in 1959 when the economy was booming when there were
a lot of jobs around we still had 7 in 10 staying on in the
secondary schools. That was 3 in 10 in 1983, the Liberal
Party of Australia were quite happy to see only 3 kids in
get a secondary education and 7 in 10 go untrained in the
workforce. That is now 8 in 10 are completing secondary
school and we have added 50% of university places to the
system. That is since 1985 we have added about 120,000 places
to university that is the equivalent of a dozen full
universities and about 35 or 40% of the kids leaving secondary
school now go into universities. A weakness in the system is
now technical and further education and that is why I have
been discussing that with the Premier and with the States to
try and pick up TAPE and make it a better system so as that
now 8 in 10 kids come out of secondary school they either go
into universities or into a much more developed TAPE system.
So they come out with a trained position and they are not
looking for jobs as unskilled people.
JACKs Other than your prowess in parliamentary
slanging matches and your fluency in economic jargon, your
recent investment in a pig farm, have you any qualifications
or experience to justify your Labor Caucus appointment as
Prime Minister? If so what are they? 
PM What they are vas and I was one of the feow
people in Australian public life prepared to blow the whistle
on the industrial archaeology which the Liberal Party left us
with. old smokestack industries that were going out
backwards, an uncompetitive exchange rate, not enough jobs
ever to pick up the kind of growth that we are likely to have
in employment and basically trying to turn the place into a
modern industrial state. That's basically what I did as
Treasurer and one of the reasons I think the party elected me
as Prime Minister. Can I just say about the piggery, I have
always practiced, I like to practice what I preach, I have
always said don't go investing in buildings, don't get into
speculation, don't punt on inflation, we don't want the
country buying office bocks, they should be doing productive
j~ sensible things. Now to walk as I did out of the Treasury in
June and the first thing to go and do is buy an office
building in a depressed market and do exactly the thing I have
told everyone else not to do was not something I was going to
do. So I thought what can I do which is productive which will
employ people which will to our comparative strengths,
which will add value, which will do the very thing that I have
been preaching, that is building on comparative strength in
food or in agriculture using high technology, value adding and
exporting. So I decided in the 6 months that I was out to
turn my hand at the things I have been asking other people to
do. GANNON&amp; Why pigs though, why not charollais cattle?
PMI Because I happened to know a f ew people in the
industry and I thought Australia is well placed in the Asia
Pacif ic to do something good about this industry, about the
production of protein and the weakness we always have is in
technology and marketing and I thought I would do that. John
Hewson who said a few words about this or the Liberal Party,
he invested a couple of million dollars in Bellevue Hill. Now
I would rather put an investment in a productive business than
in a piece of real estate playing the old rich game of a bit
of inflation looking after your wealth. That is not the game
I have been playing, it's not the game I have been asking.
Australians to play.
GANNON: So the future looks good for pigs in Australia
does it?
PH$ it looks good for agriculture, adding value and
exports and if you look at the growth of the Asia Pacif ic
market in protein I think the opportunities are profound.
GANNON: Do you know much about the day to day operation
of running a pig establishment?
PM:. No mine is really just a passive investment.
GANNON iGANyNoOuN : tDaok e any active interest at all though? 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MPENTOMBING
CEREMONY, CANBERRA, 2 JULY 1992
On behalf of the Australian government and people it is
my pleasure to welcome you here.
I extend a particular welcome to those who are veterans
of the Vietnam War, and to the many relatives d~ d-fr-en-s
of those -who died in Vietnam and whose memory we are
honouring today.
I thank you all for coming to this historic ceremony in
the life of our nation.
The men to whom we pay tribute gave their lives for their
beliefs. They believed in Australia.
They went to Vietnam as their fathers' generation had
gone to Europe and the Middle East and Asia and the
Pacific; and as their grandfathers' had also gone to
Gallipoli and France and other foreign battlefields.
They went in defence of their country and the things they
had been raised to believe in.
Like those previous generations, they saw no incongruity
in travelling far from home to defend their country's
freedom. They saw their duty.
They went believing that in defending democracy in
Vietnam they were defending democracy everywhere and,
most particularly, Australian democracy.
Today we do not judge the political wisdom which sent
them there, or which-delivered Australians to other
theatres of war throughout this century.
These people gave their lives for Australia.
We pay tribute today to their bravery and sacrifice. We
pay tribute to their love of this country and their faith
in its traditions and its future. 
2
And in commemorating them we hope and trust that this and
future generations of Australians will find in themselves
the same love of Australia, and the same faith in its
future.
The Vietnam War cut deeply into Australia's soul.
By comparison with the two World Wars the list of names
recorded here is small.
Yet this is somehow a measure of the burden the veterans
of Vietnam had to bear and have borne ever since.
Vietnam touched us all: it went deep into Australian
politics, Australian life, Australian thinking.
It divided the country to an extent unequalled since
1917. It did great damage. It did some good.
Its effects are still with us.
They always will be.
But no Australian knows these effects half as well as
those who fought and suffered there.
And no others paid the price that these 504 Australians
paid. In honouring their valour and sacrifice today, we
acknowledge that in this most debated and disputed of all
wars, the first war to be televised, the real burden
remained where it has always been in war on those who
fought and on their families and friends.
I think it can be said that the passionate debates at
home contrived to obscure this fact: as if the war was
really being fought here.
It was not. As these 504 Australians knew. As the
veterans of this and all other wars know. As their loved
ones know.
In fact I think it is true that our forgetting this was
an extra burden, an extra pain, for the veterans of
Vietnam and their families and friends to bear.
That is why today those words " Lest We Forget" have a
profound meaning.
The memorial will be henceforth the symbolic resting
place of all those who died serving Australia in Vietnam. 
3
Those who visit the memorial in future years will know
that Australia did not forget.
They will know that these Australians were heroes of the
same order as the Anzacs, as those who fought in France,
the Middle East, New Guinea and every other place where
Australians have gallantly fought and died.
From now on Australians will know that and they will
know it better if our hopes today are realised:
I mean our hope that now we are putting aside for all
time the differences and the bitterness which the Vietnam
War engendered in our community.
Our hope that such faith and courage as these Australians
had will not be found wanting in this and future
generations. Our hope that this commemoration of those who died will
be taken as a symbol of the gratitude which the nation
owes them and their loved ones.
And our hope that we will succeed in building in
Australia a fair and just democracy, faithful to our best
traditions and brave enough to embrace the future.
For there can be no better way to honour the memory of
those whose names are recorded here.
Thank you. 



I ' A
A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DEPARTURE DOORSTOP, FAIRBAIRN RAAF BASE, CANBERRA
7 JULY 1992
E &amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: You know that the practice of Australian leaders is when they leave
Australia they don't comment on domestic affairs, but as I'm leaving I can
comment and I want to just put a few things on the record about Dr
Hewson and Mr Howard.
What Dr Hewson showed over the weekend with his heartless policy
towards young eople, leaving them in a deadendjob without training is
that he's not a Liberal leader with traditional Liberal values he's simply a
clinical technician. A clinical technician who wants to make everybody
wear a penalty, the young wear a penalty and now Mr Howard has let the
cat out of the bag by telling us that adult wages will also be slashed and
he'll be announcing a new low wage structure for adults. The wage share in
our economy this year is at 1960s levels, how much lower do these people
want it to go? For the 90 per cent of Australians in work, how much
greater penalty does Dr Hewson and Mr Howard want them to wear?
Everything that Dr Hewson does is about a penalty, a penalty for young
people on wages, leaving them in deadend jobs without training, a penalty
on middle aged workers, a penalty on the community with a 15 per cnt
Goods and Services Tax, everything is about wearing a penalty.
I know Australia has got its troubles at the moment and the recession has
been a problem and we've got to work our~ way out of it, but this
Government will not abandon Australia's social values Australian
values. To take the 90 per cent of people in work and slash their wages or
to leave our young people destitute of an education and without hope in the
future of a decent job and training. 
I said in the past that Dr Hewson was a wolf in sheeps clothing and I think
on the weekend he reveals himself to be just that a clinical technician
without any understanding of the human equation or Australian social
values.
J: What figure are you looking at for a youth-? age
PM: We've got a different approach all together. We're saying that mostly those
in the 15 to 19 year age bracket have largely unskilled jobs, and they've
largely disappeared and that 15 to 19 ought to be a period a period of
vocational preparation. We're the Government that got the retention rates
up in school, we're the Government that made the places available in
universities, and we're now the Government trying to reconstruct the
technical and further education system to give young Australians jobs and
hope in the future and not leave them and say we're not training them, we'll
leave them in a deadend job and we'll pretend we can expand the number
of jobs by cutting the price of their labour.
J: Will your plan ensure that older workers, experienced workers don't get
sacked for younger workers in training?
PM: Interestingly I notice Mr Howard today refused to confirm that they would
be protecting older workers from displacement by younger more
inexpensively paid workers a la the Liberal proposal. The fact is that
per cent of Australians are still in work and Dr Hewson and Mr Howard
want to savagely cut their wages. As I say the wage share in GDP, the
wage share in the economy this year at that 1960s level. What do they
want to do to the public of Australia? Make them destitute? Why must
they wear penalties? Why is Dr Hewson so penalty prone? Penalties for
young people, penalties for middle age workers, penalties for the
community with the GST, penalties, pain, sacrifice. What about some joy?
Growth, jobs, rise in living standards and jobs for young and older people
alike.
J: Mr Keating, what do you hope to achieve from this Forum?
PM: It is a chance for the leaders of the South Pacific, the Pacific area to talk
about problems of the area. I think what I'd like to achieve, I don't go there
with any particular agenda, just to participate in the discussions on
development and environmental issues in the Pacific. I've got a few
bilateral meetings arranged with Mr Bolger and the Prime Minister of Fiji
Mr Rabuka and I expect it will be a vexr' interesting meeting.
J: Will you be talking with Mr Carlot about the crisis with Vanuatu? 
3
PM: I will be talking about it I think yes. Senator Evans met him, Senator
Evans told me that they still intend that they should expel our diplomat,
we've made it clear we don't take very kindly to that so we've cancelled our
ships visit for this week. I'll be taking the opportunity to discuss this with
Mr Carlot while I'm there.
J: Mr Keating, do you think a drop in interest rates would be enough to
stimulate the economy?
PM: At a doorstop or a fencestop I don't think we should go through macro
economic settings. Thank you.
ENDS 



rC l uuv uivi u I I &amp; n 65/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
I shall attend the 23rd South Pacific Forum in Honiara
from 8 to 9 July, leaving Australia on 7 July and
returning on 10 July. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Trade, Senator Gareth Evans, will represent me at the
South Pacific Forum Leaders' Retreat on 6 July and at
Solomon Islands Independence Day celebrations on 7 July.
The Forum provides an opportunity for the countries of
the South Pacific to discuss regional cooperation on a
wide range of important issues, including economic
development, the environment and regional security. I
look forward to the opportunity to discuss these matters
with my regional colleagues.
In addition to the formal proceedings of the Forum, I
expect to have bilateral meetings with the Prime
Ministers of Solomon Islands, New Zealand and Fiji.
CANBERRA 3 July 1992 



P'RIME MINISTER
PAUL KEATING WITH KEL RICHAIW3, 29B, JULY 3, 1992
3 OR PROOF ONLY
RICHARD$.' KEATINGi RICHARDSI KEATINGs RICHARDS; KEATINGi Yes, indeed, according to the Opposition Leader,
John Hewson, Prime Minister Paul Keating is going
through Oa three-month remedial coaching to
overcome a lifetime of male chauvinism". It was
quite a blast. " Afterf aiIreaiid Hewson, * the
Prime Minister is a man who, in his maiden speech
in Parliament, demanded that the Government do
oomething to put the working wife back in her
home." well, is the man who-ledi the nation a
male chauvinist, or is he not? He joins us now..
Paul Keating, good morning.
Hello, Kel, how are you?
I'm fine. Male chauvinist guilty as charged?
No, not guilty. I mean, Dr Hewson's got to go
back to 1969 to find a quotation. You understand,
Kel, thm Liberal Party have comibed everything I've
ever said. You've got to go back to 1969 to find
a quotation from me about the right of a woman to
stay at home, ignoring all of the great changes of
the 1980. and then.. he's on the record.. but I've
only got to go back two years to find him saying
about these things for the ideal woman. He said.
" I look for three things in--an iaeal woman, good
teeth, good health and good cookery."
In other words, you're saying the boot is entirely
on the other foot?
I mean, he is the chauvinist. I've never spoken
of women In this country an Dr Hewson has as
though they were sort of, horses. yoU have a look
at their teeth and the sort of health they're in
and give them a poke and a prod., you know, to
feel how their general condition is. I mean, this
is the sort of stuff he deals in. And then, in
references to me, he said what X need is " a very
I 
RICHARDSt KEATING: attractive, blonds, leggy nurse that is thawing
him out.' I mean, it's all sexist. Or his quote
that our airline policy is run " an the number of
sandwiches,, or how attractive the hosties
are". I mean, this guy is your classic chauvinist,
And here he is up at the Liberal Party's
convention trying to tell them about how he is
going to add to childcare places, not telling them
that he's going to put a 15% GST on childcar,
services and that there willbe no additionaI7
money for childcare. And the rest of his
policies.. adopting the policies of the Labor
Government which he is quite happy to continue, he
says# On the subject of women and politics though, the
longest-serving prime minister in Australia, Sir
Robert Menies, once said he just didn't
understand women Would you claim to understand
women? Nell, what I've tried to do is to even up the
social field in Australia. When I was Treasurer,
and let me just run through a couple of things
which I was personally involved and responsible
for as -Treasurer, one was, first of all, the
supplementary payments for low-paid wom~ en which we
do in the work~ force for th eo ~ ple process
workere and women working in sort of process 3obs
in retailing where a great number of women are
employed, we arranged through the Accords Mk V and
IV for supplementary payments, In superannuation,
women in Australia can't preserve benefits.. they
come into the workforce for a number of years, go
out to have children and then lose all
preservation. Benefits are now preserved and a
woman can come in and out of the workforce and, at
retiring age, have this occupational superannuation
pension or lump -he child I@ Uy-pport
agency I established in the Tax office with the
Tax office chasing maintenance dodger$ who l6ft
women behind and were never prepared-often to
support them. We now chase them and support their
wives and families with funds. The fily
allowance supplement % or low-income families which
most, of course, helps women.. what's Dr Howson
going to do for women? Putting 15% on everything
they buy and then they've got to try and get the
transfer within the home household income from the
husband or the breadwinner to pay f or the 15% on
food, clothing and all of the essentials of lifethat's
what he's doing. 
RICHARDS1 KEATINGI RICHARDSS KEATING: RICOWDS8 KEATING; Hm.. mind you, he did tell the conference last
night that he now understands women beeause he had
this, he said and I'm quoting from hime " a
blinding flash whilst he was ironing his shirt".
He said " he now understands that women have the
same hopes, aspirations and values as us", he
says.
Well, in 1990, in the Australen Women's Weekly,
he was saying he looked for good teeth, good
health and good cookery.' In October, 1990, at the
Adelaide Chamber of Commerce he's referring to
leggy nurses and st the Liberal Party Convention
on ABC Radio in August, 1990, he saids " We really
have to deal..", this is the Liberal Party, " have
to deal with women's issues in a more deliberate
way in the Liberal Party, I tend to think there is
a lot of rhetoric and not a lot of detail in some
of that policy." The fact is, the Liberal Party
has never cared less in terms of the great
advances for Australian women, which this
Government has concentrated on in the 1980sstarting
with childcare, taking it from 50,000
places to 250,000 places by the middle ' 909. An I
say, the Child Support Agency, occupational.. all
those things.
Maybe it's not a matter of policy, maybe he wants
us to be impressed by the fact and just noticed
the fact that he was, indeed, ironing his own
shirt.
Well, I don't think that is a qualification for
having what I think is a progressive view, an
enlightened view towards the role of women in
society in general. And making opportunities,
that is, expressly, the Government expressly,
doing what it can to make natural opportunities
for women to find their way in society and in
work. While we're talking, can I ask you about the e
incident last night in Newcastle. I meanTis
tat-. o you read thit-1iicfefnf, an egg being
thrown at you, as being any sort of reflection of
the way the public feel about you, or think about
you? Oh, no. Look, I had my reception in Newcastle
last night was the best I've ever had as Prime
Minister. At two clubs, the Phoenix Club and the
Newcastle Workers' Club, I had the warmest 
RICHARDS: KEATINGt RICHARDS: KEATING., RICHARDS: KEATING: reception I've ever had. I would have signed last
night, on the back of the invitation cards, maybe
300 of them. People coming up to me, writing for
thei~ r families, their children, thamselves.., you
know, ' beat wishes, warm regards', all the other
things that one does. I mean, I was inundated
with good wishes. And there was, sort of, one
nark, you know., the way one regards it. I mean,
I've never had.. I said last night that the spirit
in Newcastle.. the attitude of those people, the
senae of -cohesion in adversity, arnd the general
bonhommie and optimism of the place, and the goodnaturedness
of it, was profound. And I've had..
in no place I've visited in the six months I've
been Prime Minister have I ever had a warmer
reception. 11mm.. Just a ' one off' bloke just being odd..
yeah, Yeah, that's all..
The other question that has to be asked..
and he missed, anyway.
. which is the important thing, I suppose,
particularly when you're wearing an expensive
suit, The other question that has to be asked is,
Nick Greiner ha. gone in New South Wales. Now,
can on ransi lift the.. the general support for
the Liberal Party in NSW and make it harder to win
seats or you here in the next Federal Election,
Well, look.. I don't know. it's very hard to make
political Judgments. What I try and do is work
with each Premier and try and got the beet result
for each State. That's.. I mean, I think, when
one get's so tricky that one's regarding the
progress of another party in office as a detriment
to oneselfI in the end, the national good gets
overlooked. And I tried, with Rick Greiner#
always to try and find a constructive basis Of
getting along and doing things. And, in the ' One
Nation' package for instance, I mean, he asked me
things, ho asked me to extend offshore banking
units to austra. ial particularly Now South Wales,
by changing the tax system we did that. He
asked me to sort out the f unding on the Glebe
Island Bridge to provide funds there I did that.
in other words, we run a co-operative, I think,
relationship anid I'd hope that the same co-
RICHARDSI KEATING: RICHARDSt KEATINGi RICHARDSo KEATINGo RICHARDS: operative relationship could exist between the
Gove... nment of John Fahey and this Government, my
Government, and that we can do some things for New
South Wales as we've done for other States.
well, yes, he's got that of working class sort of
feelinq to him, John Fahey. I mean, there is the
possibility he could erode some of your support,
isn't there?
Well, I wouldn't regard a lift in the fortunes of
the people of New South Wales as any other than
a'nr ouunnda, m baisg uIo utshliyn kg oDord Htehwisnogn. doAensd, ih odpoinn'gt thgeo
place will be sort of in trouble so that one.. you
know, gloomy environment sort of advantages one's
political cause. I mean, we're all in politics
and we're in politics to win. But, by the same
token, one has got to move the commonweal on. You
know, you've got to got progress and you've got to
get development.
Yeah, because there are people who need that
support$ Go there are people who need it. And I mean,
that's what I was so absolutely encouraged by in
Newcastle yesterday. I mean# the sense of
sticking together up there, the fact that the
place is I mean, everybody on the tablewhether
they be from the various authorities, the
Education Department, or whether it be the Police
Department or wherever it might be, they all sing
the same song: " We want to advance Newcastle, we
want to get more growth in here, we want to do
more clever things on the technological side, we
are interested in productivity, you know, we want
to train our kids properly". I mean, it's a
comunity view.
And, in the end, that's the Australian spirit, in
the end that's what will make us, as a nation,
win, That's right. I think., but, I think Inarkism',
you know, from ' narks'.. the nark's view of the
world, we're all ' rooned', you know, we are all
ruined. Yeah, " we'll all be rooned, said Hanrahan, before
the year is out". 
KEATING RI CKARDS; I
KEATING: RICHUADS:
KEATING; RICKARDS; K( EATING1
RICKIARDS: That's right. Wells that sort of view which gets
around the recear ion just does nobody any good.
And the fact is, we won't be ruined and we wlill
see a recovery come through this year and the
economy in the 1990s will be able to hold its head
up in the world as it never was for the last 20 or
years.
Quick final question, Paul, whAt's your tip for
the outcome at Lang Park tonight?
Well, r I'm not a great tipster on.. on the
footy. I mostly end up.. mostly and up making a
mesa of it..
Confident tip..
But I just.. you've always got to barrack for the
home side.
We'll win?
Well, I hope we will.
Okay, Paul, thanks for your time.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P 3 KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRANCINE CHINN, 333, 6 JULY 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
C: Over the last couple of weeks we ' ye asked listeners
to fax the PM and tell him what they think of our
current massive unemplovment levels. He's agreed to
reply and is now speaking with JJJ national affairs
reporter Francine Chinn.
FC: Mr Keating first of all of course, welcome to JJJ.
PM: Thank you.
FC: We have been asking our listeners to either fax,
write or phone in their concerns about youth
unemployment so what we might do first of all is
play you a very short montage to give you an idea of
some of the main questions that have been asked.
Fl: I think the thing is that people can see that we are
under a recession at the moment and that there's
growing numbers of unemployeqdyeople in this
country. They feel lost and their life is
meaningless, there's nothing to look forward to.
R: Do you think training is an answer to some of the
problems?
F2: I don't know because then we're going to have really
well trained unemployed people. Maybe the gap
between the unemployment benefit and the lowest pay
is a little bit too large. Because if you see a job
that is only marginally more than the unemployment
rate, you don't go for it anyway.
R: So do you think it's necessary once you leave school
to go on and do more training?
Ml Yes certainly, you won't get a job otherwise.
M2: I'd just like to ask Mr Keating why the Austudy
independent age cannot be lowered to 22. How can 
2
you say that there's incentive there for anyone to
retrain to make themselves more employable. I just
don't understand
FC: Prime Minister, you've just heard some of the
concerns our listeners have raised on youthisu
unemployment. First of all though the iq~ su
today is the Opposition's proposed youth wage. * Dr
Hewson has announced a scheme to r-duce award wages
which would mean an income of $ 114 per w-jeek for
under 18s and $ 133 a week for those 18 to 20 year
olds. Can we just get maybe you comments on that
proposed youth wage.
PM: Well I think the main thing to understand about that
is Dr Hewson said to them, well I know what's good
for you, that is basically to slash your wages.
That is for those who actually have a job would have
their wages cut and for the low wage you would then
propose rather than regard years 15 to 19 as a
period of preparation for life or as a period for
vocational preparation, that is providing the
opportunity of vocational training for work in the
rest of their lives. Dr Hewson is simply proposing
to go back to the dead end job, he provides no
training, but proposes to cut their wages. So in
other words, anyone who has a job ought to be very
nervous about his proposal. For instance, somebody
an apprentice, 19 years of age would be on at the
moment about $ 312 a week, they'd go back to $ 133,
less than half their current pay and it won't create
any new jobs. He talks about training by talking
about seventy million for technical and further
education, it's just a drop in the ocean. In other
words, he's not going to train anybody, he said
you're in the dead end job and you're staying there,
we'll just simply cut your wages. So all those of
you who have got a job will have your wages cut and
those of you who might get a job will have it cut to
$ 117 or $ 130 and no training and that's it. That's
all the government is going to do for under me, says
Dr Hewson you're on your own.
FC: But surely this kind of idea of a youth wage is
something that you yourself are tossing around.
Isn't that the type of incentive that small business
has been looking for? Surely it's enough incentive
to create more jobs?
PM: But we are not tossing that around. Understand
that, the Government is not tossing that around.
It's talking about entry level training wages, in
other words provid-ing tfhe -place66 in-te -hical -and
further education as we provided the places in
university and have a wage where people have jo2b
experience, where they are productive on the job,
but where they are also trained. In other words,
they are prepared vocationally for life. Dr Hewson 
has no such proposal in mind, it has nothing to do
with training, this is simply a way of slashing
wages for young people. As the Coalition has tried
to slash wages for everybody for all of its
history.
FC: On this issue of training Prime Minister, you heard
in one of the concerns earlier, in the montage we
played you, Kicki from Melbourne who wants to know
what's the use of training when the jobs still
aren't out there when you finish your course?
PM: The jobs were out there in the 1980s, when the
economy was growing quite strongly the jobs have
been taken up for trained people. The kind of
untrained job, the unskilled job, the so called dead
end job that might have been around in the 1960s and
early 1970s is largely now done by computers in
clerical work, in retailing, they are just not
there, those jobs simply do not exist any more at
any price. This is the problem with Dr Hewson's
proposal at $ 117 or $ 130 the job is not there at
any price, so what do they think they are doing for
people? Whereas what we're saying is the Government
has lifted the retention rates in schools, lifted
enormously the through put through universities, and
is now proposing that in technical and further
education so that people come into the new economy
which has got skilled jobs and where they can take
their place in society over the long run.
FC: Prime Minister, Craig Mackee from Hawthorn in
Victoria was a listener who says, it's now time for
a bipartisan approach to be taken on the issue of
youth unemployment. Isn't it a serious enough issue
for you and the Opposition to stop playing politics
and get together on this?
PM: No you can't cheapen this issue by the easy resort
to the call for bipartisanship. This has been a
problem issue, entry level training wages and
training for the last couple of decades. The
Liberal Party ignored it. They had every change of
bipartisanship when they were in government, didn't
do anything about it. We're as always the only
party that will get these breakthroughs. They were
happy to leave 3 kids in 10 complete secondary
school, that's what there was in 1983, 7 in 10 they
were happy not to be trained. That is now 7 in
completing secondary school, 35-40 per cent of them
going through to universities in places we created.
We're the ones, the Government, the Labor Party are
the ones interested in taking the whole employment
and training prospects, education, vocational
education for young people into life and at the
meeting I intend to hold on this subject will try
and get breakthroughs in these areas. But it is Dr
Hewson who has chosen rather than wait and see what 
the government was able to produce at the meeting,
to jump in and have a meeting where we heard a lot
about the problems and nothing about the solution.
And the solution is a slashing of wages with no
training.
FC: Well what's your solution Mr Keating? Real jobs for
young people, what's your solution?
PM: The solution is to regard 15-19 as largely a period
of vocational education, both in school, university
an~ d technical and f urther education. The problem
I'm working on is the group who are, if you like, in
the middle of that transition, the ones who are now
looking for full time work, who will not be part of
that long term transition envisaged by the
Carmichael recommendations. How do we help them
n-owi-That's -what I'm trying to do. How do we help
those people, to get them training so that they are
not caught in the dead end job in the dead end
street of life and work. That's what I'm focussing
on. Dr Hewson is not focussing on that at all.
He's just simply saying, look, cut their wages and
maybe someone will pick them up. Maybe someone will
pick them up cheap, but don't invest any national
effort in their lives, don't invest any national
effort in their vocational education, or their
academic education, just see whether there is a job
for them, when he knows as I know the dead end job
have just about disappeared.
FC: Mr Keating, again we received a lot of questions
about the proposed job summit. I'll give you just
one as an example. Damon from Perth asked why
should a group of politicians who have no real idea
or concept of unemployment, let alone youth
unemployment, be discussing it? Where are the young
people and the young unemployed people at your Job
Summit?
PM: The young unemployed people will be well represented
at this Summit.
FC: How?
PM: The Youth Action Coalition is going to be there, and
they re-present young people, and they represent a
coalition of young people. And as well as that, I
myself have taken opportunities in Adelaide and
Perth to meet substantial and representative groups
of young people in these positions. And what
they've said to me has been quite interesting. But
again, it's going to require Government action.
FC: Do you agree with Kim Beazley that you know what
young people want, and that's jobs and don't
necessarily need to talk to them? 
PM: The first thing they need is vocational preparation,
first and foremost, and job experience, that we
know. I think what we're finding out in our
consultations is the difficulty they have in getting
it, or even in the preparation period to get it, the
costs and problems in getting it. That is why the
government and the political system must function
and get changes in society, in business, to let the
unskilled person get out of the rut. But the
difference between us and Dr Hewson is he wants to
leave them in the rut, cut their wages and leave
them untrained.
FC: Prime Minister, what's your jobs growth prediction
now for the next Budget year in the light of some of
the grim news and the bad economic figures we've
been hearing?
PM: We're now redoing them for the Budget, and the
Budget is a month away.
FC: OK. Just on the_ Budet, since 1987 we've been
hearing lots of promises, especially as far a jobs
for young people are concerned. What are you going
to offer Australia's youth in your Budget coming out
in August.
PM: I was Treasurer for eight and a half years. When I
became Treasurer we had a work force of 6 million.
Even today, with the unemployment we have, we have a
work force of 7 1/ 2 million. It's a quarter larger.
New Zealand across the way, which Dr Hewson points
to, has fewer people in work than they had in 1983.
So we had a lot of growth, it stopped in the
recession, we want to restart it, we believe that
will happen, and the growth prospects for young
people in that kind of an economy as we had it in
the late 1980s, was very good. It will be very good
again, particularly for people who are trained.
Because of the nature of the economy has changed
the old industrial archaeology, bequeathed to
Australia by the Liberal Party, was put asunder in
the ' 80s for a newer, more technically innovative,
product-innovative economy. And it is in that
economy that people will have to find their place,
and they'll find it basically by being prepared for
it and not forgotten by governments.
FC: So you're still optimistic that by the time that we
try to get the huge amount, that you admit, of
unemployed that are there through training courses,
which we hope to hear more about from the result of
your Jobs Summit, the economy up will be
sufficiently enough to provide the jobs for them?
PM: We're not saying we can eradicate unemployment in
this area overnight. I'm not saying that. But
understand that we are dealing with two streams of 
problems here. We're looking at the long run, which
is about high retention rates in schools, capacity
for people to go through university and technical
and further education, to prepare themselves for an
ongoing job, and for life. That's the ongoing
agenda that the Carmichael Report, amongst other
things, addresses. The short run agenda is the
people who are not streamed into that, because we
haven't got that all up and running now, as yet.
We've got part of it up and running we've got
higher retention rates in schools and universities,
we're about to try to lift TAFE more. The secondrun
problem is to try to get the people who are, in
a sense, in the middle, the ones who are not
trained, haven't stayed in school, and don't have
Job prospects. That's what the meeting is focussing
on, both the long and the short run. What our
opponents in the Opposition say is forget the long
and the short run, let's just slash their wages and
leave them, see what happens to them.
FC: The other issue is, of course, Mr Keating, there are
a lot of young people out there who are hurting, who
are trying to survive on what amounts to very
little, on the dole. Will you be addressing those
questions of what AYPAC has also called a living
income? Will you be addressing that kind of issue
at your job summit?
PM: We have, over the ' 80s, dramatically lifted the
dole, as you put it, and AUSTUDY, and we've
dramatically lifted the number of people in work,
notwithstanding what's happened with unemployment.
And the main thing I think now, and we have aligned,
we ' ye produced a sort of common level of payment for
youth, which now does not discriminate in favour of
one kind of payment or another, encouraging people
onto the dole, or encouraging them into something
else. And I think what we'd like to do now is to
see if we can overcome this problem I speak to you
about, about the people caught in the middle between
the higher participation and training opportunities
of the new order economy, and the people in the dead
end areas of no training in the old order, the
remnants of the old order economy.
Q Mr Keating just to move along a little bit more, we
as a signatory to Agenda 21, the environmental
agreement that Ros Kelly signed at Rio, your
Government has agreed to incorporate consultations
with young people in decisions made on the
environment. How are you going to institute that
process, and would you be prepared to to the
similar process when it comes to dealing with youth
unemployment?
PM: Well I think Mrs Kelly will come back to the Cabinet
as required on that subject in fulfilment of that 
commitment. We accept and welcome the fact that
young Australians have a very keen view about the
environment, which is wise of them, and it is a good
thing for the political system that they do. I only
hope that those of us in the higher echelons of the
system can live up to their expectations about the
environment and keep the environmental changes
coming through. But consultation has been part and
parcel of the way this Government has functioned, we
believe you can't change Australia without getting a
consensus on subjects, whether it be on wages, on
inflation, on fiscal policy, on trade, on anything
and the environment is part of that. And the ESD
discussions we have been having are basically about
that ecologically sustainable development, it is
basically a process, a consultancy process, a
cooperative process to look at environmental issues.
Q: So Mr Keating you are a strong believer in consensus
way of running your Government?
PM: Well we have done it now for a decade just on, and I
think if one wants to hand down the tablets from on
high, govern by press release and administrative
fiat you won't get the changes that we were able to
get through the accord with the trade unions, I mean
the great changes of the ' 80s in policy support for
women, for the aged, childcare, aged care,
occupational superannuation, medicare, all these
things form a cooperative program, and I don't
believe that you can break structural impediments,
road-blocks in an economy like this without
harnessing community support. When a Government
wins an election it gets the keys to the kingdom,
but it doesn't get the kingdom, it has got to draw
the power down from the community and you can only
draw that down by some sort of cooperative,
discursive framework.
Q: Well Mr Keating just on an election, will we have an
election Budget first of all? A-n-dsecondly any tips
on when we can expect an election, and why should
young people vote for you in the first place?
PM: Well the reason young people, I think, should vote
for the Government, whenever an election is held is
that we have been the ones to tackle the fact that
Australia did become an industrial museum that gave
them no hope and no participation, that has made it
into a more interesting country, a more interesting
economy, now with low inflation and long term low
inflationary growth prospects and with a better
chance of being able to pay for our imports, and
hence pay for ourselves. In doing that we set up a
new economy with a decent social wage, where we are
not hopping into the unemployed, kicking them out
after nine months as Dr Hewson would, where we are
not going to make those who are sick pay through the 
nose particularly if they are low paid. We have
tried to change the economy to a modern order
economy but do it with a Labor heart. I think that
is why they should vote for us and on issues like
the environment we have been the only party to break
the big barriers on the environment with those big
brush strokes, big milestone changes of the
the last, including one that I was involved with,
that is the preservation of the Antarctica as a
wilderness park was a great achievement.
0: Well Mr Keating it sounds like the main reason that
young people should perhaps vote for you is because
rather then all the positive things that you are
achieving it's perhaps all the negatives of what
could happen under Dr Hewson?
PM: No, no. We have given young Australians a future.
We have given them a place in the fastest growing
area in the world, the Asia-Pacific, in an economy
which is now externally oriented and has a potential
for a lot, over the longer haul, vitality at lower
rates of inflation and where we can see lots of
interesting jobs created in the manufacturing and
services sector of the economy which is providing
employment in cities and regional cities of
Australia where most people live. That's why they
should support the Government and in doing it in a
way which is socially accommodating. Our opponents
are basically in a survival of the fittest
mentality. If you are not a millionaire you are a
lay about, if you want to work we will slash your
wages and then you might get yourself a job, we
might be able to find you a job, you won't be able
to live on it but it doesn't matter we might be able
to find you one if someone is good enough to give
you one. If you want to put yourself through
university you have got to have parents who can
provide $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 a year for a university
place. This sort of hardhearted approach won't do
anything for Australia, and Australian young people.
Q: Do you understand why so many of Australia's young
people are disillusioned with policy, with what they
see in Question Time do you understand why so many
of them think well neither of these people really
understand what's going on outside, they don't
understand me and how I live on the dole?
PM: Well we try and understand them and we try and
remedy their position, I say we the Government. But
what we have certainly done we have done as no other
Australian political party has done and taken on the
big problem of Australian politics, that is a change
of the Australia economy from a dead-end economy to
a live-end economy in the Asia-Pacific, which in the
long-run gives them a life long chance, now everyone
else laid down on the job in the ' 60s and ' 70s and 
early ' 80s and this huge structural transition to a
better place with more interesting jobs and higher
incomes is the thing we have done. And we have also
said three kids in ten completing secondary school
not good enough for us, can't have a smart country,
a clever country with only three people completing
secondary studies, that's now as I say seven going
eight nearly in ten and we have added 50 per cent of
places to universities we have created the
equivalent of twelve new universities since 1985,
120,000 places, we have got about 35 or 40 per cent
of students coming out of secondary school now going
through universities and we are now trying to pull
up TAFE. No-one else did this the Liberals were
happy to leave it and say seven in ten of you, we
are quite happy for to drift out of school and not
even complete secondary school and untrained,
unskilled left in the furrows of the old Australian
economy, I mean we didn't do that, and that's why I
think that if young Australians want to look at the
process they are entitled to be questioning about it
but they are not entitled to be cynical about it,
because if ever there is a group of people have
taken on the structural change that no-one else
would tamper with because it was just to hard, we
have, but we have included them in it by saying it
was totally unacceptable to just leave them, seven
in ten of them leave school unprepared.
Q: Mr Keating it sounds as though an election might be
in a lot closer then some people are thinking?
PM: Well you keep talking about an election, there is no
election imminent anywhere.
Q: Well do you think, I mean a lot of people are
saying......
PM: This has got nothing to do with elections
whatsoever.
Q: But still a lot of people are saying that it seems
that the young jobless are becoming the latest
political football with an election in mind?
PM: No, no. I took this issue up, youth and entry level
training wages with my colleague Kim Beazely, the
Government has been looking at this question now for
a few years, we are the ones that took up high
participation rates in school and in post compulsory
education. I am the one holding the discussion to
try and get some of these areas broken through. The
football comes from Dr Hewson jumping on the band
wagon, not with a solution to the problem but just
trying to slash their wages and leave them, so don't
mix him up with us. I mean we are about a long run
change here of quality and we are the only people 
who have initiated it and as usual will be the only
people to complete it.
0: Prime Minister we have a whole stack of letters and
things we will pass on to you that outlines the
questions that have been asked, just to try and wrap
this up though the environment has been a big one,
it is something which we get quite a lot about, can
you just tell us can the Government in some way
match up caring for the environment with jobs for
young people?
PM: Well I think so, one of the things we are looking at
is a proposition in employing young people in land
-care type jobs and training situations whereth
environment, where they can do something that is
related directly to the environment. It is one of
the options that we will consider for this meeting,
but it has its complexities in establishing it, in
managing it, but it would directly be of value.
0: Well just finally, of course music was another thing
that is very strong as far as Triple JJJ is
concerned we would like to ask you if you have, are
you aware of much contemporary music?
PM: Well not as I used to be, I am an old rocker not a
young rocker.
0: Well we were wondering if you have a particular
track that you might like to suggest that we can
play for you?
PM: Well anything from INXS, I have had a bit to do with
them over the period, I like them.
0: And they are probably quite an appropriate one as
well, Mr keating also we have a gift set for you
celebrating the ABCs 60th anniversary we have a CD
set from the Sydney Symphony Orchestra and for your
son
PM: What's in it?
Q: That's something you would have a much better idea
than I.
PM: Let's have a look.
Q: Any good stuff in it?
PM: I can't see the title, but there is a lot I
recognise here. Dance Russian Spectacular, Romance
overtures, but I am afraid the titles are buried in
the box.
Q: Well that's something which can be a surprise later
on, we also have for Patrick your son who we hope is 
a bit of a Triple JJJ listener we have a couple of
things for him including a T-shirt, cap etc we just
interviewed John Hewson, I believe he has sworn that
he is going to wear his Triple JJJ T-shirt whilst
jogging, so maybe we can see you wearing Patricks a
bit later on. And also or course the letters that
we have received from our listeners and we hope that
you will actually read these in the lead-up to your
PM: I do, I read a tremendous amount of correspondence
that comes through and particularly things which are
topical as the jobs meeting is, and where young
peoples views are to be considered and considered
carefully. So we will do our best with it, but the
main thing I would say to you in conclusion, and
thanks for having me on, is to say that we are here
for a long run change and a short run change, two
streams here for people, but basically to repair
themselves, a vocational education for later on in
their life, to give them a real life with an
interesting job and good pay.
Q: Well Mr Keating there is a lot of young people out
there hurting so we just hope that you are right.
And again just thank you, at the risk of sounding
like John Clarke, Prime Minister thank you for
talking to me and Triple JJJ will always welcome you
back if you would like to talk to us in the lead-up
to the next election at whatever stage that may be.
PM: Thank you Francine.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIMkE MINISTER TIHE BON P. JT. KEATING M?
AUTSTRALIAN SUPPORT FOR SOUTH PACIFIC ENVIRONMENT-AL
ACTIVITIES During the South Pacific Forum metinp, I reafirmed Australia's o~ pPQZ foor programs
aimed at protecting the enviroximcnt of the South Pacific. I announced a number of new
meaaurs which will serv to strotngthen our existing envirornental activities.
Australia is already funding a $ 6.7 million Sea Level and Climate Monitoring Projec. in the
Pacific. In order to increase our support for the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Chzg I announced that Australia will provide a further S1.3 illfion for new progr~ ams
which will enhance the capacity of the region to monitor climate change:. The new funding
will be used to help upgrade meteorological equipment. train climnate-monitoring personnel
and provide spcialist back-up services.
Recognising that South Pacific island biological diversity is among the most threatened in
the would, Australia will provide $ 5 Ailion for a biodiversity conservation and management
project in the South Pacific as part of Aus6a4a S' 30 millon conmmitnent to the Global
Environment Facility of the World Bank. The project will be part of Australia's support of
the effective implementation of the Biodiveit' Convention.
Both the sea level and biodiversity projects will bc daclopod in close consultafion with
islad countries and the South Pacific; Regionial Environment Program ( SPREP).
1 also underlined the importance that Australia attaches to maintaining a balance between
development and environmental protection. Other environmental areas where Australia is
prorviding support include tropical forost conservation, waste management and an
enwomentprogram on Radio Australia.
Australia cont zws to be a strong supporter of SPREP. Under its auspices, Australia helped
Pacific Wsands prepare for, and attend, the UNCED metn in Rio do Januiro.
I also hope the South Pacific will play a leading role in one of the key area of follow-up to
UNCED, the conference on sustainable dvlopment for small islad developing states. In
recognition of the special environmental nteeds of small, vlnerable statci Australia wouild
be prepared to contribute towards the costs of holding the conference in the South Pacific.
Hoztiara I July 1992
l~ r 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OP THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING M P,
PRESS CONFERENCE, AUSTRALIAN HIGH COMMISSION, MONIARA,
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM, 9 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well I might just give you a few introductory
comments. I think that's the order of the day. The
first thing I'll say is I found my attendance for
the first time at the Forum a worthwhile experience.
This is the main mechanism for high level dialogue
in the Pacific, and I think it provides a sense of
community to Pacific Island countries, indeed to all
the countries of the Pacific, but there is a place
to rome to talk, and therA is a clear and dAfinablA,
not only sense of community, but community, and that
we've got a forum for sensible discussion of
important political and stratcgic intcrcts.
There was a strong sense at this meeting that the
South Pacific in not immune from rocont dramatic
ohangoo in the world. The environment ic obvioucly
an aro of oonoern here, global warming worrica are
concerns to a number of -Torl m ' cour--ias,
particularly where some don't rise much more than
about 4 metres above sea level, and that's an issue
of concern to them. I was able to announce
yesterday new environmental assistance measures,
which I outlined in a press release, I think that
you have. And that was a matter of great interest
Lv uu mum vC Lheu vumun! Ly hare becauu tley
know thai the things that Australia has already been
doing, in terms of monitoring patterns in tides and
sea patterns and further climate change monitoring
which we'll do by yesterdy-' announcement, was I
think regarded well.
The Forum also welcomed the moratorium on French
nuclear testing in the Pacific. I suggested that
Forum members write formally to President Mitterand.
That suggestion was taken up. The Cook Islands then
suggested that other nuclear powers be written to in
similar terms over nuclear testing, as the French
have said that the longevity of their moratorium
will in part depend upon what other nuclear powers
do in relation to testing. So it was, I suppose,
appropriate that we write not simply formally to the
French but to others. 
Today I will sign, on behalf of Australia, the Niue
Treaty on Fisheries Surveillance, which is the
treaty which will provide a cooperative relationship
between countries in surveillance of fisheries, and
means that each will come to the aid of the other in
protecting those fisheries, and in that sense is I
think an i1Wpurtunt treaty.
We expect the Forum to approve a declaration on
regional law enforcement, that's a pledge of
cooperation to address* such issues as drugs, money
laundering and tourism, by improving cooperation in
legal and law enforcement areas.
I've had a number of bilateral meetings with Mr
Bolger yesterday, in the evening I arrived with
Prime Minister Mamaloni, and this morning with Mr
Rabuka, also late yesterday with Mr Tofilau EtifE
Western Samoa, and I may have another one orEWobefore
I leave.
You've already covered, I think, some of the
substance of the meeting I had with Mr Bolger. You
mig~ ht be iini~ tL huwwLilay I had withl Prime
Minister Rabuka this morning. I told him that
Australia welcomes the restoration of representative
Government in Fiji and the continued effort towards
constitutionar1Y-eorm-As a result I told him, and
I am prepared now to be able to tell you, that I
think it is now appropriate to resume defence
cooperation with Fiji. Initially that renewed
defence cooperation will concentrate on maritime
surveillance and training, and will include a
resumption of operational Royal Aukstralian Nvy_
ivisits to Fiji, resumption of aerial maritime
surveillance patrols in and through Fiji's exclusive
economic zone, and also offering Fiji training
places in the joint services military college in
Canberra for the traininzg of Fiji itillLay force
personnel. Prime Minister Rabuka indicated to me that he was
intending to visit Australia privately in September.
I have extended to him an offer to visit Australia
as a guest of the Australian Government, which he
was ver'y ylad Lu 4vuept. So lie shall come in
September. I think Senator Ray is planning a visit
in October. So other defence cooperation can be
discussed on those two occasions.
I think I might leave my introductory remarks at
that.
3: How do you now view the relationship with Fiji, just
summing it up? 
PM: I think there is an opportunity for Prime minister
Rabuka to open up a dialogue with the whole Fiji
community about its future, about its constitutional
future, about giving everybody a place in
representative government in Fiji. And one gets
that sense that an opportunity is present. I'd like
to see us maximise that opportunity. And now
they've returned to representative government and he
has made clear his commitment to constitutional
reform and dialogue that this is the time for a
restoration of full relations and cooperation
between us, and can I say, good will.
J: Are you confident that the racial weighting in the
constitution w411 be done away with?
PM: We didn't discuss the constitution in detail, but
sure he believes there is some historic
opportunity to consider Fiji as a community in a
broader sense, as a result of the events of the last
five years. And we in Australia would certainly
welcome that opportunity.
J: Will you be pushing for Fiji to be allowed back into
the Commonwealth?
PM: This is a matter for Fiji, I think, as much as for
anyone else. It's not particularly a matter for
Australia, but naturally we would be sympathetic.
J: Were you able to meet with the Vanuatu Prime
Minister?
PM: No, not yet. I'll probably see him later today I
think.
J: Any change of the position there, Mr Keating?
PM: No, not that I know of, but I'll speak to him later.
J: Prime Minister, how much is the resumption of
military links with Fiji worth in dollar terms?
Pm: I don't know. But I think its worth goes beyond..
it's assessed by the Prime minister and the
Government of Fiji, I'm sure, beyond simply the
monetary value or monetary cost of any operation.
J: Should the review of their constitution not result
in changes, will we change our attitude towards
Fiji?
PM: Why jump to those sort of conclusions? Let's wait
to see what happens.
J: Mr Rabuka's visit in September, is there anything
planned for while he is here? 
PH: Well it was for him a private visit, but I'm
extending the offer, the invitation to con* as a
guest of the Government, which he has accepted, So,
no doubt the visit will widen and he will do other
things. I should hope he would.
J: Do you have any concerns about the situation in
ELougainville, even though it was not formally on the
agenda?
PH: Well one always has concerns, naturally, about these
things. I mean there is an armed cessationist
movement on Bougainville which the Papua New Guinean
Governmient is trying to deal with. It's a matter of
concern to us, to the neighbourhood, but I think the
Forum regard it as internal problem for--Papua New
Guinea, as we did.
J: What about the allegations of Australian weaponry
and bullets being used against civiliansT
PM: The Papua New Guinean defence minister and defence
commander have stated publicly that the conditions
under which we provided Iroquoi helicopters have not
been breached. Now we are seeking to establish
whether this is so. Were it to be so, of course, we
would make plain our objection. But I've already
said, and so has the Foreign Minister, that we
expect the conditions under which those equipments
are being provided to be maintained, and adhered to,
and honoured.
3: How are we seeking to establish that, Mr Keating?
PM: The position there is unclear and it's not going to
be easy for it to established, but as quickly as we
can, we will.
3: Will that be through intelligec encies?
PH: Let's say we will try to establish it.
3: How concerned are you about reports of abuse of
human rights in Bougainville?
PM: We've sought an official response to the allegations
made the other day, collected on Bougainville by the
Australian lawyer, Rosemary Gillespi, and it is to
that which we seek a response from the Government ot
Papua New Guinea, a considered response.
J: Doesn't there come a point where it stops being an
internal situation, as we have seen in Dili for
example? 
pM: We're hoping that a political settlement can be
arrived at, and in my discussions with Prime
MinisterMamaloni I urged that the quicker a
dialo-cguje e -re-etablishedb etween the Solomon
islands and Papua New Guinea the better, as well.
And I think that when the Government settles down in
Papua Now Guinea after next week's sitting then it
might be possible, and that could help as veil.
J: Isn't it clear that machine gun fire from our
helicopters is consistent
PM: I don't think it's clear, no. The claims may be
made, but whether the aircraft is responding to fire
against itself is not clear. But were it to be
clear that these gun ships are being used in a
offensive manner, this would be contrary to the
conditions under which we have provided them to
Papua New Guinea, and we would then be suggesting to
the Papua New Guinean Government that they be
withdrawn from the service area.
J: Is there anything Australia can do? They can't take
them back?
PM4: No.
J: in your meeting with Mr Bolger did you assure him
whether the New Zealand economy wouldn't be an issue
in the run up to the next election in Australia?
PM: Of course not, he didn't ask for that assurance and
I didn't give it. We're all grown up, and we are
all in the position I thinX, as mature nations, to
discuss issues of substance and political and
economic ideas, whether they have said to emanate or
be part of New Zealand's economic policy or anyone
else's. I mean, this sort of ' thought -police'
routine on our political debate is immature and
silly.
J: Is that what Mr Bolger was suggesting?
PM: No, I don't think so. What he was suggesting, he
thought that some of our Ministers had taken New
Zealand's name in vein. I notice in one report this
morning that he thought I had. I don't think I had,
well I told him not to regard that at all very
seriously, but he might have regarded it more
seriously than I did.
3: The issue of policing arrangements in the region.
How serious a threat are criminal activities, or is
this just a preventative measure? 
PM: It's a preventative measure and a cooperative
framework to deal with the problems. These are very
open borders, naturally, and the more willingness
there is on the part of member states to cooperate
with one another in these areas the better.
J: What impact does it have on Pacific tax havens?
PH: Nothing, not in that sense. Our national
governments have laws which cover tax havens, as
Australia does with its Foreign Source Income
Legislation, so that's how we treat income as a
matter for us.
J: Mr Bolger has written to the Governor General of the
Solomon Islands to apologise for being late. Will
you?
PM: No. This is a very small issue. I know some of you
have been sold a line on this by some of the local
journalists on a day short of news. This is
standard tact for the Australian press corps to go
back to irrelevancies.
J: Just domestically, interest rates
PM: I'm not here to discuss this. As I said before I
left, I'm not discussing domestic policy issues.
J: Can you clarify the position on the aviation
agreement that you discussed with New Zealand
yesterday, and to abolish visa-free entyUinto New
Zealand?
PM: Australia would like to arrive at a position where
we have an Australasian airline market. And that
would invol-ve fl-ying domestic terminal to domestic
terminal, rather than through the international
terminals which have always got pressure on them,
and where movements of passengers is delayed by the
processing time, and where generally movements of
aircraft through international terminals can be
delayed by all sorts of extraneous factors. So,
given the fact that New Zealand is closer to the
East Coast of Australia than other parts of
Australia it makes sense, therefore, that we should
have an Australasian airline market. That
necessarily involves being clear about our
emigration procedures, and will inevitably involve
consideration about a common border. So therefore
we would insist that our border not to be a porous
one, or made porous by concessions provided to
people of other countries for access to New Zealand.
And we're saying, I made this point to Prime
Minister Bolger, that I think that there is a lot of
value in, if we are talking about closer economic
relations between Australia and New Zealand, this
must go to services as well as goods. 
. Ad one of the most basic services is transportation
of people, obviously. And the more that this can be
regarded as one market, the better, but ipso facto
means that we need to come to some agreements about
the way in which our migration processes are and how
they work. we're just saying that if New Zealand is
considering extending, in a concessional way, non
visa access to New Zealand from other countries then
this would need to be viewed against the backdrop of
what I think would be a huge benefit of an
Australasian airline market.
J: Did Mr Bolger give any undertaking on the issue?
PM: No, but he took the issue on board, I'm sure.
J: Is this the first time this has been raised?
PM: I shouldn't think so. I think that Senator Collins
has probably raised this.
J: Is this an indication that New Zealand has been
moving slowly?
PM: I notice some report in today's Australian about how
this process has been moving slowly. It's gone more
distance in three months than it's gone in forty
years. If some of you had been around a bit longer
you'd know how long this paralysis has been there.
J: Will Australia yield at all with any of the visa
requirements?
PM: Not unless there is a proposal put to us which is
sensible and reasonable. But at this stage I don't
think any have. And we try to run a rational,
sensible, 1i-gigra-inA-policy, and if we were trying
to extend this for the purpose that I mention then
obviously we've got to get some agreement as to how
we extend it.
J: New Zealand has been aware of your concern about
this for some time, there has been a letter to Mr
Hand.
Pm: I don't know whether they have had this process in
hand, or in mind over time. It's not that long ago
it's February that the One Nation Statement was
made, and it was some time after that before we got
down to some of these issues. So, New Zealand is
entitled to consider this sensibly.
J: How did you feel when you saw the plethora of union
Jacks on the flags at the Forum?
PM?. I just make the point that I've made in Australia
that one can't claim to have a unique symbol of
oneself when others have the same symbol. 
J: Has anyone raised the issue with you about what
you've had to say on th. flag?
PM: Yes, a couple have said to me that they were very
encouraged about what I had to say, and that this
has praood debato in their own countries about
their own constitutional arrangements, symbols,
standing, et cetera.
J: Did Rabuca give you any tips on setting up a
-Rpubl ic?
PM: I think he's interested in constitutional
government.
J: Can you say which leaders raised the issue of the
flag?
PM4: They're all entitled to their private remarks, I
think.
J: Radio New Zealand, Mr Kfeating, did Prime Minister
Bolger over-react by apologising to the Governor
General?
PM: Look, it's so trifling an issue that it's hardly
worthy of further comment.
J: On plutonium shipments, the Forum has expressed a
view-, what is your own bOpinion about that?
PM: I think that general international safe-guards are
important, particularly with these sorts of
commodities. And I think that Japan, who envisages
having the traffic in this, would be aware of the
concerns of Pacific Island countries, both directly,
communicated bilaterally, and also from the Forum.
And that's how it should be.
Now do you see this region fitting in with
Australia's push into Australasia?
PM: I've said before, and I said yesterday in my opening
remarks, that Australia will always reserve its
right to deal with issues in world forums and play a
role as appropriate, subject to subject, on the
world stage. But the focus of its attention will be
the region in which we live, the increasing focus.
This is true now of our trade, where nearly three
quarters of it, both imports and exports, are with
the Asia-Pacific area, and where we can be I think a
useful influence in this area of the world, and at
the same time give Australians a more secure place
in the region for themselves. And the various
things that Australia does in the Pacific, whether
they be, as you saw yesterday, the Pacific patrol
boat program, or the wharfs program here, or the
climate and sea monitoring programs, or whatever it 
might be, I think we can play a useful role, and
that is above simply our bilateral aid arrangements
to various countries. And it's important that they
have an influence on us. So i think you'll see
Australia and Australian foreign policy directed
more expressly to the region, notwithstanding
obvious and genuine concerns and other issues in the
world context.
J: Are there concerns about Australia's relations~ hip
witJh Ja~ pan, as Australia has backed the Forum's
protest to Japan over its plan to ship plutonium?
PM: I don't think the Japanese will be unduly of fended
by press reports from Australia.
but a letter will be signed by the Forum Secretariat
including Australia.
PM: That's right, that's true.
J: How do other nations see Australia as a bully or
as a help?
PM: We're obviously not a bully. How could anyone
sustain the remark that we're a bully. That's a
gratuitous, I know that you don't mean it
gratuitously, but it is a gratuitous remark.
Australia looks for obviously no territorial gain in
its foreign policy. It has, I think, altruistic
objectives in its foreign and aid policies generally
and in the region, and I think its role has been
generally regarded well and appreciated by countries
of the Forum. Just as I was leaving, what delayed
me was Sir Robert Rex from Niue was making what was,
in a sense, his farewell speech, and he reflected
over forty years and said some complimentary things
about Australia and New Zealand in that context.
And I think that would be the general view. There
will always be some matters of difference, I'm quite
certain that some countries think that our treatment
of Papua New Guinean development aid is too
generous, and would prefer some of that to be spread
more widely across the Pacific. You'll find some of
those issues often given vent, but in term~ s of the
general standing of Australia, its motivation, and
thA gonri will tnw~ rds it, I think that's pretty
clear, and pretty much in Australia's favour.
J: we've had one of the closest relationships with
Japan. will you use it to take up the Forum's
protest with them?
Pm: You keep coming back to this like a song. There is
a statement there, and the statement is by the
Forum. it's not for Australia to bilaterally take
the matter up. 
J: Some countries have raised it bilaterally, will we?
PM4: I don't think so. I wouldn't be certain of it, I'd
have to ask Senator Evans.
J: Are the resumption of military links with Fiji
immediate or contingent on the September meeting?
PM; No, as far as I'm concerned it's from here out. But
obviously the talks in September and October will
help round out cooperation between us.
J4. We've moved much further than New Zealand in this
relationship. Did you talk about that with Mr
Bolger?
PM: No. New Zealand is free to make its own mind up
about the issues, obviously, and it will.
J: Are you satisfied with the progress that Rabuka has
made?
PM: I think there is a real opportunity here for
improvement for the community of the Fijian people,
and I think there is a lot of good will on the part
of the Prime Minister towards that objective, and I
think it would be counterproductive for Australia to
maintain the position which we have previously held
in the circumstances of five years ago. OK? 7 Thank
you.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J REATING, PIP
PRESS CONFERENCE, CANBERRA
JULY 1992
EGOE PROOF ONLY
PM: A few of you have asked me for comments, as you know
I have just returned, you have asked me for comments
on the unemployment numbers yesterday and I thought
I would give you a few introductory remarks and then
take questions.
The first thing I will say is that the Government is
very disturbed by yesterday's numbers. While we
could see some employment growth there the number of
people joining the workforce meant that the outcome
was entirely unacceptable to us and I think we
understand entirely clearly what that means in human
terms. The pressure that this condition puts on
individuals and on families is profound and
therefore the Government's priority will be as it's
been, certainly since I became Prime Minister, and
that is restarting the economy, getting growth
coming through and getting employment growing more
strongly. The one thing we won't do in any of this is panic,
because there is no point In doing so, the
structures the Government have in place, I think,
mean that we will be having more of the One Nation
money coming through, which was announced in
February and remember we announced about $ 500
million of it to be spent in the last financial
year, the bulk of it to be spent in this financial
year, and I have got every expectation we will spend
every cent of it. And as well as that we have got
the natural stabilisers in the Budget working, with
a shift in the Budget balance from Y surplus of $ 8
billion to a deficit somewhat above $ 10 billion, a
substantial shift of $ 18 billion plus, whatever it
might be, which is of course cushioning the impact 
of the recess ion. We have got the cocks fully open
on interest raiteis. So on the monetary front, on
fi; C-al 0Policy, on the One Nation spending coming
through, the next thing will be, as the Treasurer
said yesterday, that the Government is determined to
make the Budget an employment Budget, and we will be
spending money there but directly on the unemployed
rather than indirectly, for a fiscal boost to the
economy directly on the unempyq0. And that will
also include naturally whatever spending
consequences may emerge from the meeting on youth
unemployment and the measures and policies which
emerge from that gathering as well. Some of you
will recall, of course, that when I announced the
One Nation package I had said in the context of the
period I had spent in the backbench that the economy
was very weak and that I thought that it needed
stimulating, and I think that what yesterday and the
recent period reveals is that it was weaker then we
thought. But there was some general criticism of
One Nation on the basis that we provided a fiscal
stimulus for an economy which was already growing.
And that, therefore, I had inherited an economy
already on the up-swing and I had found myself
caught with the rhetoric of slower growth, and that
it was convenient therefore to pursue the One Nation
spending. It is now obvious that the One Nation
spending was entirely necessary and some of the
comment around at the time about how it was going to
blow fiscal policy, how the Government had given up
on responsible economic management, 811 of that can
now be seen for what it is, a misjudgement. Now the
fact is one Nation was necessary and will be coming
through for the economy at the right time. But I
think what all of this means is that the economy has
to start growing again, and we do believe it is
growing to grow in the 4 per cent area over the
course of the year. Now that being the case,
obviously employment is going to lag, and employment
has been lagging, and now additional people have
joined the workforce, the participation rate has
risen and therefore the unenpomntr rate has gone
up. So the growth comes t hrough slower, the
atructure is in place to bring it through, that is,
the general shift in the Budget balance, the
interest rate structure and the additional spending
of one Nation, and for those caught in unemployment,
now 8 substantial group of people, we will address
them directly in the Budget with Labour market
programs and with the programs which emerged from
the Youthj MetngSummi~ t and also with some industry
assist'ance measurer, and possibly some measures also
designed with a regional focus, where regional
unemployment is having an influence. So I think I
will leave my introductory remarks and invite
questions. 
J: Prime Minister today John Haf y of the Trades
Hall Council in Victoria _ suggested one way to
overcome any fiscal difficulty would be to abandon
the promised tax cuts. George Campbell of the metal
Workers Union says that the Government should
seriously be looking at raising tIaxes in some areas.
Have you any sympathy with these causes?
PM: The tax cuts are not the issue for this year or this
year's Budget. I mean this year's Budget will be
about focussing first of all the spending of the One
Nation money, and then focussing any additional
support on those directly affected by unemployment.
So again I repeat, the change in the Budget balance
which is the better part of $ 20 billion, plus the.
low interest rates, plus the One Nation spending is
going to hit the economy at the right time in terms
of that response. Now if the economy grows as we
expect it will, I have got no reason to doubt it
won't, then we are living with the lag of
employment, unfortunately.
J: When are you expecting unemployment to start
moderating, Prime Minister?
Pm; I can't give you a quarter by quarter view on that,
but there is obviously going to be substantial
employment associated with growth of any order in
the sort of 4 per cent area. Now, where the
unemployment rate will then rest will depend upon
the participation rate, that is the number of people
out there looking for work.
J: Have we bottomed out yet?
Pm: in terms of employment?
J: Unemployment, yes.
PM: It depends on where participation goes. As the
Treasurer said yesterday, this is a statistically
uncertain measure, and the trend rate is the one to
look at. The trend rate is at 10.8 per cent. Now
the Government did forecast in the Budget 10.75 per
cent as the peak, the trend rate yesterday on the
numbers was 10.8 per cent. So it's very hard to
say. But what we saw with employment was employment
actually grew in the month by 26,000.
J: Mr Dawkins avoided saying the worst had passed
yesterday. Are you now prepared to say the worst
has passed?
PM: It's not a matter of being prepared to say that at
all. I'm not going to make a forecast about next
month's participation rate. 
J: Mr Keating, would you say you'll spend directly on
the unemployed in the Budget, can you be more
specific about that. Is it dangerous not to spend
on productive things?
PM: When we did the One Nation package we found it
impossible to get more programs into place and spend
more money in the public sector. At the time there
were no more State programs that we could use or
Commonwealth programs. That is, no programs that at
the time the States said they could reasonably get
up in the required time frame. As well as that, we
thought that the balance in the One Nation spending
at about $ 2.3 billion was correct. So for the
programs that we had in place we thought that was
well and good. But what we were envisaging now,
rather than simply rely upon the employment effect,
either direct or indirect of that spending, what
we'll be seeking to do in the Budget is to support
those people who are actually affected. Support
them personally and directly. And I think that's
the qualitative difference in seeking any remedy for
the unemployed in that way, as distinct from adding
a bigger fiscal stimulus to the economy in general
or the public sector in particular.
J: When you say it's support personally do you mean
higher benefits, or do you mean short term make-work
schemes, or training?
PM: Labour market programs the design of which will be
revealed in due course.
J: With these disastrous unemployment rates are you
prepared to accept that your policies to date have
failed?
PM: Which policies do you mean?
J: Economic policies.
PM:. Do you mean the ones that have taken Australia from
an industrial museum to give it a future, or do you
mean the cyclical ones?
3: In fairness, Mr Keating, you've been Treasurer,
you're now Prime minister, you're facing
catastrophic unemployment figures. I'm asking you,
do you now accept that your policies have failed?
PM: No. What we are seeing here is a largely cyclical
response in the economy to the cycle of change. But
to make a judgement about the Government's policies
over the last nine years, the measure of failure
would be to have the same size labour market as
then. And the labour market is 1.5 million larger
than it was, or 22 or 23 per cent larger than it was
in 1983. Now what one desirably would like is to 
come off the boom of the late ' 808, having been
through a period of adjustment on the current
account and inflation, without profound employment
effects. We've not been able to do that. But
again, what I say is that the structure of the
policy that we have in place is the best one for
pulling the economy out.
J: How much worse does it have to get before you're
prepared to accept that it's not just a cyclical
problem, that you've got a structural problem in
your policy, that you have failed?
PM: I'm not sure you understand what the word structural
means. Structural means that if you're trying to
compete with countries nearby with labour rates of
$ 7 a week, if you think that you don't need to
adjust yourself to those kind of structural changes,
I think you're mistaken. The fact of the matter is
that Australia has been through a very profound
structural change, but the largest part of the
unemployment we are experiencing now is cyclical.
And the quicker the economy starts growing again,
the better, and everything we've done on the macro
side and on Interest rates and on fiscal policy, I
believe, will pull it out more quickly than any
other prescription around.
J: Mr Keating, you're the Prime Minister now because
you believe you could fix this, and you've simply
failed to date. You've made it worse, not better.
PM: I said i would commit myself to getting the economy
restarted and providing jobs growth. We are saying
in forecasts that the economy will grow through the
year, and employment is already growing. It's not
growing as much as we would like, but it's already
growing.
J; Do you believe in the next six months we'll see the
unemployment rate up about where it is or getting
worse? In other words, the forecast you've just
made now may be a long time coming, in fact it may
not even come before the next election Is due.
PM: There are two factors. If the growth comes through,
there will be an employment response. The magnitude
of the employment response will depend on two
things. Firstly, productivity how much
3roductivity there is there? That is, how much of
the growth will translate into productivity vis a
via jobs. And secondly, where will the
participation rate go? And it may be that in the
economy picking up, people will be encouraged to
rejoin the workforce so their participation rate may
rise. on the other hand, it may not. So I think
you'll have to wait till the Budget till we give 
you, again, forecasts about employment and
unemployment.
J: Mr Keating, you said that the deficit will be
something over at $ 10 billion. lIfbow-iiuch more over
billion?
PM: Well we're not certain. As Mr Dawkins said to you
yesterday, there's been a fall away in the revenues
in part built upon the success we've had with
inflation. Lower inflation means ipso facto lower
revenues, and lower revenues mean that the Budget
balance shifts further into deficit in the short
term. The important thing is the structure that
sits underneath the Budget is a sound one, and I
contend the ' 80s provided for Australia a lot of
youthful work on fiscal policy which does leave us
in the position where now you can contemplate the
spending we have in One Nation, and what we may do
in the Budget and the impact of the natural
stabilisers, the natural decline in the Budget
balance, at the same time seeing it by the middle
come back into surplus.
J: On the labour market programs that you mentioned
earlier for the older unemployed, exactly what do
you have in mind make work schemes, red schemes
revisited?
PM: I think, Russell ( Barton), you'll have to wait till
we settle the design of those programs, of which
work is proceeding. But again, the Budget is not
that far away.
J: I'm just talking about the concept. Will it be
direct Government spending to higher unemployed
people, is that the Idea?
PM: It will be Government spending on labour-market
programs, We are contemplating at least two issues
here. That is, the youth unemployment issue which
I'll be directly addressing at that meeting on youth
unemployment, and the labour market more generally
in the Budget.
3: Mr Keating, despite the decree as to whether the
unemployment is cyclically caused or not, do you
accept that there comes a time when rising
unemployment becomes politically fatal to any
Government and aren't we at that point?
PM: The political fatality would rest in whether people
think an addition of 15 per centage points of the
consumption tax which would be an anti-employment
thing would be better. Whether they think tighter
monetary policies, higher interest rates, a cut in
fiscal policy, a 15 per cent consumption tax, a
massive addition to inflation and to interest rates 
would be better. Now I contend it wouldn't better
and all that we would do is simply endanger the
recovery for a prolonged period of time. So
Australia had to come off the spending levels of the
late 1980s, the questions which are being put to me
today as directly as they are were being put to be
about the current account deficit two or three years
ago, and it was then all about imports and the
Government took remedial action to bring our demand
within our product growth. But in a recovery phase
the structure which is there, which the Government
has put into place, is the appropriate structure.
To go now to a massive impost upon spending through
8 consumption tax, a massive addition to inflation,
a massive addition to interest rates, a $ 10 billion
cut to fiscal policy is going to do what? It is
going to murder employment. The Coalition's
policies would murder employment.
J: With the increase in the deficit, does this mean
that the ' One Nation' tax cuts are still
deliverable?
PM: Yes, I think so. Fiscal_ poli~ gy in Australia in the
1980s became exceptionally strong and is standing us
in good stead now.
3: So the undertaking that the budget balance would be
restored in five years, is that still in tact?
PM: Yes, I think so.
J: Prime Minister, earlier you said that the Government
understands enti~ rely clearly what it means in human
terms, do you think it would be appropriate to offer
an act or at least an indication of contrition to
those nearly one million Australians who are
unemployed?
PM: What have you got in mind?
3: Well it's up to you, you are the Prime minister.
PM: We all get these sort of questions and I have said
over and over again that the Government understands
the damage caused by unemployment, it's disturbed by
it, feels it very poignantly, has done all the
macro-economic, broad economic things it can
possibly do to set the system up for growth again,
and in the meantime try and look after those who are
directly disadvantaged. That doesn't mean cutting
their unemployment benefits after nine months, it
doesn't mean producing an underclass of people who
are off unemployment benefits after nine months, or
employed people who are working at employment rates
near the dole. This has never happened in
Australia. 
J: Does it mean saying sorry?
PM; Look Dennis ( Grant) don't try silly drama with me.
I've made my position on this clear for years.
J: Do you accept responsibility for the 953,000 people
out of work?
PM: I take responsibility on behalf of the Government
yes. But remember this about the private sector of
Australia, I don't take responsibility for the
massive crude spending of the late 19809 and I take
responsibility also for getting our imports under
control and getting our inflation rate back into the
best order in the world and these were all joint
responsibilities on a responsible Government.
J: Mr Keating, do you accept that whatever may happen
to the exact employment figures, we face the
probably permanent situation of a large body of
probably permanently unemployment people who will
end up being a sort of underolassed, making the
traditional notions of fairness and equity really
disappear?
PM: I think the answer to that is in the negative. I
don't think we need a large or will see a large body
of permanently unemployed people, I don't think we
should accept it, I don't think that structural
unemployment means that at all because I think a lot
of it is cyclical and the Australian way has always
been to pull everybody along, give them a job, to
give them a place in society, to look after them
when they are down, when they're unemployed or their
sick and that's what this society must do. it
shouldn't chop them off after nine months, it
shouldn't turn our young people into an economic
subclass. It should pull Australians along, give
them their proceeds of the growth, give them their
share of the growth. The traditional way Australia
has divied out the share of the growth is through
employment, and that's why in the 1980s the
Government committed itself absolutely to employment
as indeed it's doing now, but it's waiting for the
response in the economy.
J: But after each of the cycles over the last twenty
years we have been left with a larger body of
permanent long-term unemployed.
PM: That's right, but it's not at 10 per cent levels.
it's at something much below that, probably less
than half that. At the peak of the cycle in the
1980s we had unemployment under four per cent in
some capitals.
3: Yes, but it's still a lot higher than it was twenty
years before that. 
PM: True, but again twenty years before that We didn't
have the countries of the Asia-Pacific making
manufactures and other things In competition with
us. Australia, like many industrial societies is
going through a change and a technological change.
We didn't have jobs being displaced by computers and
it simply means that one has to commit oneself to
more growth. If technological Change means there's
more Output with smaller employment, the answer is
to have more output. That's what we tried to do
through the 1980s, that's what we're trying to do
now.
J: Would you comment please on the much higher growth
-in yA-m work than in full-time work and what do
you see as the implications of that both in economic
terms and short term and longer term?
PM: It's been a feature of the whole of the 1980s a
shift to part-time work, and although the work force
grew in aggregate there was a shift in the
competition between part-time and full-time
employment. Partly this is in consequence for the
higher participation rate by women in the workforce,
It may also be a consequence of the change to a more
service-oriented economy, or also a consequence to
the change to an economy which is now living with
higher technology and technological capacity. So I
don't think one can be profound about the change.
J; Can you see it skewing the statistics as we've been
used to knowing them?
PM; Maybe, but I think if the economy does growth
sufficiently strongly, if we've got low inflation in
place and Australia's well resourced with a
technological able workforce, it can grow strongly
particularly in the 1990s and it will pull up a lot
of employment both full and part time.
J: Mr Keating, Mr Dawkins said yesterday that
Australians who do have jobs are quite well of f now
because of the drop in interest rates. Do you think
that in the light of that and in the light of
yesterday's figures that we should delay the
national wage case that's coming up?
PM: He made the point for those in employment and
particularly those who have mortgages, their
positions improved quite sharply as mortgage rates
have come down to quite low levels. This may not
have come by way of disposable income because some
people have chosen to repay their mortgage faster,
I'm not sure banks have actually offered, I think
only the Commonwealth Bank has offered to reduce
repayments, I'm not sure the other three have.
Perhaps they should if people want that weekly 
relief rather than paying a mortgage off more
quickly. Where we go on wages will be a matter for
judgement, but obviously the labour market will
condition our thinking about it and that's something
to think about. But again, generally economies with
no wages growth are economies with no demand growth.
ENDS 



TEL ( 0-1 2..
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE HON P J KEATING MP
KELVIN COE
With the tragic death of Kelvin Coe, Australia has lost one of its, greatest performance
artists. That his death coincidcs with the triumph of the Australian Ballet in London is an ironic
testamcnt to his great contribution to Australia's cultural life and achicvement.
CANBERRA July 1992 E0. Jul. 92 19: 18 No. 014 P. 01/ 01 



TEL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 01/ 09
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING, MP
AWGIE AWARDS PRESENTATION DINNER
MELBOURNE, 10 JULY
Ladies and gentlemen
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address you
tonight at Australia's most prestigious awards for
_ playwrights and qcriptwrit-ers meaning the people who
work at the creative edge of the arts and entertairnent
inuty value-adders to the nation's life.
I think you will understand me when I say that in view of
the economic setbacks of the last couple of days and the
human cost which those unemployment figures spell, this
occasion might not seem on the face of it a place to
address national issues.
And I can tell you without reservation that for the next
couple of months or for as long as it takes, every
government effort has to be directed at turning the tide
of unemployment.
Fundamentally that means turning the economic tide and
getting investment and growth back and with It, newlos
It also means making new jobs and making the best
possible provision for those without Jobs.
This is not to say that the arts and entertainment
industry does not have a role to play in creating jobs
and generating wealth,.
On the contrary, the arts and entertainment industry is
one of the industries that Australia always has been good
at and which has an excellent future.
But your role is broader than simply generating income
and employment. 
TEL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 02/ 09
2
You are engaged with the fundamentals of Australian life
the way we see ourselves, the way we are seen, the
things we value, the things hope for.
Just as these things are at the centre of our lives, they
will be at the centre of reoery because, as much as
anything else, recovery depeias n our confidence, our
faith In ourselves. It depends on our spirit.
In no small measure the future of Australia is a cultural
Issue.
so I'm pleased to be here among those who work in one of
Australia's great industries and one of the industries of
the future.
I like to believe, some occasional evidence to the
contrary notwithstanding, that those who work in the
realms of Australia's culture and identity continue to
recognise that the Australian Labor Party is their
political ally.
My faith In this was reinforced by the letter which came
from your President.
In it he talked about the way in which the writers
gathered here express in their work some of the qualities
we badly need which any nation needs from time to time
namely a heightened sense of identity and a revival of
spirit. He also said that these writers had achieved significant
levels of excellence, and that excellence was important
to Australia.
I have a feeling he thought that I would be moved by
these sentiments and beguiled into coming and I suppose
my presence here, after a flight from the Solomon
Islands, is evidence that his instincts were right.
Although I am always a little bit cautious about
discussing such things.
Over the years I have come to accept a bit of
sensationalism and distortion.
Although even I was surprised at the media's recent
response to my remarks about Australia's image abroad and
my supposed slight on Paul Hogan.
All I wanted to say on that occasion was that we should
be increasingly building our image overseas on the
subtleties and diversity of Australia, on the wide band
of our achievements as well as that easy-going, droll
and likeable side of our character and lifestyle.
TEL 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 02/ 09 
T1EL0: . JuI. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 03/ 09
3
My point, of course, was never the ludicrous one that the
Paul Hogan campaign was somehow damaging: it was that we
need to broaden the canvas which really means nothing
more than doing justice to the reality.
In truth, as Treasurer in the 1980s, there can be few
people who know better than I the value of the Paul Hogan
tourism campaign, anld I doubt if anyone is more
appreciative of Paul Hogan's role in it.
If Abraham Lincoln gave the Gettysburg Address in 1992
the chances are the journalists wouldn't report the
speech but the so-called " doorstop" interview that
followed it.
And the first question they'd ask is, " how come you're
talking about democracy and freedom when there's a war
on? And there'd be learned articles at the weekend about
whether it had been 8 lapse of political judgement for Mr
Lincoln to deliver the Gettysburg address in Gettysburg
instead of Philadelphia.
It is not easy to assert principles or ideas in the
Australian political culture.
It's certainly very difficult to express more than one
idea at a time.
It is not easy for politicians to have views on history,
even if it is their own history.
One historian said recently politicians shouldn't
meddle in history giving those of us in politics the
impression was that he was content for us to make history
but not to discuss it.
That is why your President's letter of invitation was
welcome. it is good to see that Australia's writers want an
enlivened and enlarged public intellectual life.
I hope so because those of us in politics who want to
see Australia fulfill its very old hopes of being a great
society and a great democracy, and who are determined to
have a go, need the support of all good hearts and minds.
And good hearts and minds I think will recognise that to
solve our social and economic problems we'll need a
renewed sense of national purpose and new levels of
national cohesion.
To go successfully into the Asia-Pacific and the rest of
the world we'll need new levels of confidence and mature
self-esteem. TEL: 
T1E0L: . Ju1.92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 04/ 09
4
But despite the enticement in David's invitation, that is
not what I want to talk about tonight. Not specifically.
I want to talk about the arts or, perhaps more
accurately, the arts and our-cultural development.
I'm starting from the proposition that if we are to make
those economic, political and social advances I have just
spoken of, we have to make a parallel cultural advance.
I think the time has come to recognise that however we
define it narrowly or broadly our cultural
development cannot be left to merely follow in the wake
of the nation's economic progress.
I think It might be the best way to develop a better
understanding of ourselves and the rest of the world. It
might help give us the direction we need.
The truth is that ideally we should not need to have
these debates about identity and nationhood.
They are understandable historically, but they are
regrettable. It's regrettable that we lack to some extent a knowledge
of our history and our political and social system an
unselfconscious cultural dimension.
Those who still reach for their gun when they hear the
word culture, might be more easily persuaded if they
think of it as an extension of the argument for valueadded
industries.
Value adding to bauxite creates aluminium and adds dollar
value to it. But the process also adds cultural value.
You've made something something useful which adds
more depth and a self-esteem.
The economic imperative and the cultural one are not
capable of separation they have the same conclusion.
We need to make things. And we need to export them
whether it's a ballet troupe, or an Olympic Team or a
brand of tennis shoe.
We need to send these things of excellence out into the
world with our imprint on them.
That's why in the 1990s I think we should be seeing our
cultural development as an integral part of national
development. Resourcefulness, prizes in achievement and identity woven
into a strand of national endeavour.
What I say tonight, however, remains a general view.
TEL: 
TEL
I'm in no position to say just now what specifically the
government should do to best help the development of our
culture. Nor is it up to me or the Government for that matter to
prescribe how Australia should develop culturally.
That is something that has to grow naturally from within
our society.
The role of the Government is to ensure that that process
happens and is not left to wither in isolation.
As you probably know, the Department has published a
discussion paper on " The Role of the Commonwealth in
Australia's Cultural Development".
There are already in motion a number of review processes.
Submissions have been received. Wide consultations are
about to commence.
I don't intend to pre-empt the expert opinions these
discussions will produce.
But we know that Somewhere between the receipt of this
advice and the creation of policy a great deal of sifting
and judging will have to be done.
And the best way to do it is not, I believe, by the
Government. Bureaucratic assistance will be essential, but to do the
work of assessment, to gather the necessary additional
information which will inevitably be required, to help
the Minister shape and finally formulate policy, Wendy
Fatin and I have decided to establish an Advisory Panel
drawn from the arts and the wider cultural environmentincluding
film, television and broadcasting.
Wendy Fatin will be announcing the composition and terms
of reference of this Advisory Panel shortly.
We want to treat all these submissions in the context of
a Commonwealth strategy.
As far as simple principles are concerned all I want to
establish tonight is that the Commonwealth government has
a clear and very important responsibility to maintain and
develop Australian culture.
This means, among many other things, that on a national
level, innovation and ideas are perpetually encouraged;
that self-expression and creativity are encouraged; that
our heritage is preserved as more develops, and, Just as
importantly, that all Australians have a chance to
participate and receive that we invigorate the national
life and return its product to the people. EL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 
TEL 6
1 think these sorts of questions cabou1. d engage us now.
I think good policy in this area needs to both set goals
and re-assure us of our achievements.
The last is as Important as the first in a prolonged
period of radical change I think people need to be
reminded of achievements as often as they are reminded of
those things which have still to be achieved.
That seems to me a function of culture it provides both
the stimulation that comes from the new and the
reassurance that comes from the familiar.
Now, however we decide to go about doing it, what we need
is a Commonwealth strategy for cultural development.
Put one way that means establishing the best way for the
Commonwealth to deliver funding and other forma of
assistance to all those activities which presently come
under the aegis of the Australia Council, and the film
and television bodies, and all those which are placed
under the heading of " Cultural Heritage" Including the
National Library, the National Gallery and the National
Museum. In that way we can throw in such cultural organisations
as the ABC and its of fshootsf the orchestras; and the
Australian War Memorial.
We need to know what is the best way to fund these
organisations, and what is the proper relationship
between the Commonwealth, the States and Local
Government. That will be the kernel of the task for the Review Team
over the next year.
Put another way, it is to find the best way to gather in
our heritage and our ideas and deliver them to the people
of Australia.
Until now, of course, we have adopted a European model
meaning our ideas about delivery have come from
relatively geographically small and much more populous
nations. if we are serious about a national cultural policy, we
need an Australian model one which takes account of our
geographic and demographic peculiarities.
Obviously, establishing those relationships between the
tiers of government io an essential component in this,
but there are others as well. E: 1J0u. 1 .92 18: 30 No .009 067) i 
TEL 7
I mean it might lead us to place a very strong emphasis
on touring. A principal component of a national cultural
policy could be touring.
We might decide that we have to be very good at taking
excellence to the provinces delivering the nation's
arts and heritage to people remote from the big cities.
Visiting the nation's life upon them, if you like.
It should be, after all, as much a right as a railway
line or a road.
There is nothing unnatural about drama or orchestras
performing in Mount Isa, Broken Hill, Kalgoorlie or Alice
Springs. On the contrary there should be more of it.
The much mooted National Museum is also a case in point.
I cannot conceive of a way to justify building another
expensive mausoleum filled with inanimate things under
glass. But a museum housed imaginatively if unpretentiously, a
uniquely Australian museum, has a certain appeal.
I mean uniquely Australian in that it would tell the
Australian story by taking the ideas and heritage it
houses out to the people.
A strategy which obeys these imperatives geography and
demography, access, education, stimulating public
discussion, developing national networks, encouraging
Ideas and intellectual life.
This is something I would expect the Advisory Panel to
address. Perhaps something like the American Endowment for the
Humanities, or a second Australia Council for the
Humanities, or as Donald Horne has suggested, a
Foundation for Australian Cultural Development might also
have its place.
The name we call it by, like the eventual shape it might
take, is not as important now as our thinking about a
national cultural policy and what role such a body might
play. It might, for instance, be the principle vehicle of
Australian cultural diplomacy: for promoting Australian
culture including Australian science and education
overseas. T1E0L:. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 P. 07/ 09 
TEL: 10. Jul. 92 18: 30 No. 009 7P. 0,69
There is no doubt that we need to do this. How do we
measure the Importance to this country of a Booker Award,
or a tour of the Australian Ballet, except, perhaps, to
say that it is immeasurable?
We can say the same about film and television including
those soaps which we now so successfully export or indeed
the popular music industry of which we are the third
largest producere.
I'm not talking simply about image, but about income.
I'm talking particularly about the services we can
provide in Asia and the potential that exists for such
industries as publishing, arts and entertainment.
In all this we are talking about a role for the
Commonwealth, and by implication for State and local
governkments$ Yet I believe that one of the keys to our cultural
development will be a new culture of non-government
funding. I would expect that in the formulation of a new strategy
we would want private individuals and companies to invest
more In the creative life of the nation that generally
has been no case to date.
In summary, I think the overall object should be to
create a role for the Commonwealth government which at
once stimulates our national creativity and returns it to
the people.
I imagine a cultural policy which raises both the level
of participation and the level of excellence.
I see this policy as an integral part of building a
better and more secure Australia.
Indeed I believe the essence of our cultural policy
should essentially be interwoven with the philosophy and
spirit of the nation.
This country is poised on the edge of extraordinary
opportunity. We have unparalleled advantages.
We must not let the recession cloud our awareness of
that, or of the great strides we took in the eighties.
There is no doubt that we can get back to economic growth
and general prosperity that must be the overriding aim.
But the prosperity will be more secure and the effort to
secure it more worthwhile if we also realise our culture
is tied in with it and becomes part of it. 
TEL: 10. JuI. 92 18: 30 No. 009-P. 09, Qg
9
I mean that creating things, all manner of thingsincluding
of course the things that people here createshould
be the nation's commnon purpose.
Creativity should be a word we value above all.
It is because I know that you value it so highly that I
ami grateful for the chance to speak tonight, and honoured
to pay tribute to your work through the presentation of
these awards.
Thank you. 



I.
4 i
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
7.30 REPORT, 14 JULY 1992
PL: You've said you're not going to panic about unemiployment, but many Australian
families of course now are panicking, especially when they..
PM: No, I said the Government's not going to panic about remedies, that is, being
panicked into remedies which don't help that unemployment. That's what I said.
Not that the Government isn't entirely and utterly concerned about enploVment
and unemployment, but it's not going to be panicked as to remedies.
PL: All right but when y ' ou're in the dark, when you're in that tunnel and say Dad's lost
the job, or Mum's lost the job, or they've both lost the job, surely if the
Prime Minister's even unable to say that we're passed the worst of it, surely that
just makes panic more likely doesn't it?
PM: Well we did see in last week's figures, notwithstanding the higher number of
people looking for work which threw the rate up. In terms of unemployment, in
terms of employment there was 28,000 jobs there for the month. That's the first
very, reasonably strong sign we've seen that employment is starting to come
through.
PL: A lot more people came into the jqb Market, didn't they?
PM: A lot more people came back looking for work.
PL: And ended up with 11.1. I
PM: That's what threw the rate up. That's right. If we'd had the same number of people
looking for work as the previous month, the unemployment rate would have gone
down.
PL: Yeah, but..
PM: Yeah but so what. 
PL: There's still an enormous under-employment throughout the whole community.
PM: Absolutely. The truth is, I think Paul, the~ p nvyis recovering. It's recovering
but not as quickly as we believe, but still it's going to recover solidly. The
problem for the unemployed..
PL: When?
PM: Well over the course of the next 12 months. We saw some quite strong retail
figures this week, private consumption is picking up, we've seen housing starting
to improve
PL: But you've been saying this for the past 6 months haven't you, at the very least?
PM: But the growth to date for three-quarters is 1.6 per cent. When we get the June
quarter in, there's a reasonable prospect it'll be around 2 per cent for the year. So
that's not a claim, that'll be a fact. Let me just say, and in the following year, that's
from July 1, in the financial year we're in now, we expect it to be around the
4 per cent area, in other words twice as fast again.
PL: As distinct from the 4 3/ 4 in One . Nation.
PM: That's right. A bit slower than then, but still reasonably strong. The problem with
it is it's productivity laden. Or put another way, we're getting more output for
fewer people employed. In the first instance there's more output for fewer people
in employment. And it will take some time for those people in employment and
the output to grow so that employers start to put on extra people.
PL: Well that raises the question surely of what percentage of those jobs lost in recent
years are now gone for good? And what percentage will be there in the future
when the economy picks up?
PM: Well I think it's largely a cyclical employment effect.
PL: That's because of the recession?
PM: I think so.
PL: Not structural?
PM: There's obviously some structural qualities to it. But again what you lose in one
sense you pick up in another by the fact that the economy in the course of
restructuring is now doing things it wasn't doing 7 or 8 years ago. 
PL Such as?
PM: For instance, manufactured exports, have gone up 300 per cent since 1983.
PL: What of the argument, though, that to keep on cutting tariffs at a time of such high
unemployment is really putting political ideology ahead of common sense?
PM: It's a very phased and gradual reduction. It started in 1988 and it will end in 1997.
And I think it would be to dupe people to give them to believe that any pause in
the tariff changes would protect their job. It won't change the way in which
investors or business look at the Australian economy, it won't change their long
termn plans for the economy. All I think it will do will be basically to kid people
along in their jobs.
PL: It wouldn't save some jobs in the next few years?
PM: I don't think so no. Because I think if anyone thinks that the tariff levels of a
particular commodity are coming down they're coming down notwithstanding a
pause, a phasing or what have you. I think that's there. The economies in a state
of change, and it's a change which will produce stronger rates of employment in
the ' 90s, but in a part of the world market where we can survive. You see, if we
want to change Australia, that is recede into the old economy, to compete with the
economies around us, you've got to take your wage rates back to the wage rates of
Indonesia and Malaysia and these countries. That's $ 8 a week, A$ 1.30 a day.
PL: Or we've got to get smarter?
PM: We've got to move up the international division of labour. And you can only
move up basically by new products, new processes and new skills.
PL: There's also the idea around there, isn't there, of increasing the top marginal tax
rate by a couple of cents to provide some money forob_ creation-schemes. What
do you think of that idea?
PM: Well it's promoted by people who understand the Government's natural concern
about the deficit, and they're saving to us look for years you have been
competent fiscal managers, you are worried about the deficit, we'd like vou to
spend more money on labour market programs, would it help you if we said you
should collect this on the receipt side and then spend it on the outlay side?
PL: And what's the answer?
PM: Well the answer is if y'ou want to give the economy a net stimulus. taking on the
one hand and giving on the other, basically doesn't do that. 
PL: But it might take from some of the so-called ' fatcats' and give to some of the kids.
There's a certain sort of Robin Hood fairness about i?
PM: But then as you call them, the ' fatcats', won't spend.
PL: A couple of hundred bucks a year isn't much, is it?
PM: No, but in terms of the net change of the economy from the budget. At any rate, a
couple of percentage points onto the personal tax rate will only raise I think of the
order of $ 3 350 million.
PL: It would help.
PM: It would help but it's not going to dramatically change the order of things. The
Government can worry about fiscal policy, we have over the ' 80s, we're the only
Government to ever produce strong surpluses. Those strong surpluses in the late
are now, we're now enjoying at least the fact that we reduced commonwealth
Government debt in the ' 80s so that now that the natural swing in the budget is into
deficit, we can accommodate it more easily.
PL: But you look like starting off in this budget with a deficit of $ 13.5 billion. That
doesn't give you a lot of room to move, does it?
PM: Well the starting point is not settled. Low inflation is a good thing, but the first
impact of low inflation on the budget is to increase the deficit because if all
payments to the Commonwealth are growing more slowly as inflation is growing
more slowly, the receipts collapse
PL: Your tax takes over.
PM: That's right, therefore the deficit widens. So it's widening but in some cases
wholly for good reasons.
PL: Yes, but it does give you less room to move does it not?
PM: Well I don't think it's going to seriously constrain the Government in focussing on
the things I think it will need now to focus on in terms of directly supporting and
helping those who are actually unemployed.
PL: There's talk tonight of this billion dollar job creation scheme, presumably in the
budget.
PM: Yes well that's got no basis to it, that story. I saw that on the news, that's a total
furphy. 
PL: Well it is being put to you, isn't it, that you should run the deficit up to as high as
$ 16 billion. Would that be imprudent?
PM: Well I don't know who's putting that to you.
PL: Well John Langnore says it.
PM: Well there are always big budget deficit bangers all round the place here. I mean
they were arguing that back in the early ' 80s, they're still arguing it. I mean there
will always be same people..
PL: You dismiss this?
PM: Well I'm not picking numbers on the program this distance from the budget. I
mean this Government will focus its effort on those people who deserve support
and where we can materially help.
PL: But will you be spending more to help them Mr Keating?
PM: Yes, we will be spending more to focus assistance by way of direct assistance on
labour market programs, as well as doing the things as we've been doing:
lowering interest rates, again, watching the natural recovery come through, and
with it hopefully some employment.
PL: Thiere's also talk around at the moment of sort of work for the dole youth corps
schemes _ Lan-dcpre, Working with local councils, that sort of stuff. What do you
think of those ideas?
PM: We're working through those. Some of those things have got something going for
them. But we're looking at a menu of things in the labour-market area. But the
one thing we won't be trying to do, we won't be employing the policies of the
Opposition who's got a two pronged policy approach, and that is making prices
dearer and wages lower. Prices dearer with the consumption tax, and wages lower
by cutting youth and adult wages. We won't be having a bar of those sorts of
things.
PL: Do you think the se sort of youth corps schemes are worth trying if only to give
kids a sense of purpose?
PM: Oh I think so, I think it's very important particularly that young people have the
opportunity of work experience, and where possible, training. And these will
obviously be the issues we'll be focussing on it at the meeting next week cm -youth.
train ing, youth wages etc. 
64
PL: How much do you worry about the personal damage this is doing to a generation
of young Australians because we've got thousands of kids out there who don't
believe this country gives a damn about them, haven't we?
PM: Well I mean of course it worries me, it worries the Government, it always has. I
mean, in the 1980s, we committed ourselves absolutely to employment, that's why
the Australian labour market is 25 per cent larger in size than it was in 1983.
There's 7.6 million people in work today, there were 6 million in 1983. We've
always as a Government tried to focus that effort onto employment. But the
economy is growing slowly. I mean, just in the Financial Review a day or two ago
which I have here with me, it says European Community faces worsening slump in
confidence. And they've got 1991 growth at 1.1 per cent, 1992 for Europe as a
whole at 1.7, 1993 at 2.5. Now most of the developed world is growing very
slowly. We're trying to beat the rap. We're trying to make the Australian
economy grow at least at a pace which will pull employment up. So this problem
is common to Western Europe, North America, Britain, and most economies like
ours.
PL: Meanwhile you're running out of political time and you face the prospect of going
to the polls with unemployment at 10 per cent plus. How can you hope to win
with that around your neck?
PM: Well I think the issue has to be, people have got to say to themselves if the
Australian economy has slowed in growth and is now starting to accelerate, but we
have not yet got the employment effects, and we have a human problem of
unemployment, who best to deal with those problems? Is it the Labor Party, which
believes in picking people up, training them, giving them job opportunities, or
supporting them, giving them at least the benefit of unemployment benefits, the
benefit of Medicare, the benefit of these sorts of protections, or a Liberal Party
which says we'll throw them out after 9 months, if you're sick you can insure
yourself like the United States, if you don't carry your blue cross card in your
pocket you don't get admitted to a hospital.
PL: So you reckon y'ou're still in with a chance do you?
PM: Well the economy's got problems particularly in the labour market and the Labor
Party, the Labor Government is best suited to deal with it and its problems.
PL: Prime Minister, we'll have to leave it there. Thanks for your time.
ENDS 



68/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
The Prime Minister has sent the following message to His Holiness, Pope John Paul II:
It is with deep concern and regret that I have learnt of your illness and the need to be
hospitalised. That concern is shared by the Government and people of Australia.
You can be assured of the prayers and support of the people of Australia for a speedy
recovery to good health. You are much loved and admired in this country by Catholics
and non-Catholics alike and our wish is for your health and strength to be restored as
quickly as possible.
CANBERRA July 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, REGENT HOTEL, SYDNEY, 15 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: The first thing I'd like to say to you is this argument inside the Liberal Party is a
real blue. It's a genuine dinky-di fight. And the reason it's there is because most
people in the Liberal Party doubt John Hewson's commitment to the Liberal. Party.
Some of you should inquire, but I don't think he joined the Liberal Party until
about the early to mid 1980s. It's not a life-long commitment to the Liberal Party,
it's a transitory commitment. And people like Mr Fife, who gave Dr Hewson
loyalty and support when he became leader, and in the process of him becoming
leader, had none of that returned to them when these challenges came up for these
seats in New South Wales. You heard much about the Labor Party Conference and
about pre-selection wrangles. None of ours are like this. T'his is a real one. And
at the heart of it, the reason why M r King has thumbed his nose to Dr Hewson, and
to some extent Mr Fahey, is because the Liberal Party organisation is asserting its
prerogatives, particularly to a Federal leader, it doubts it has commitments to it,
and where the old guard faithful members of the Party, whose commitment has
been long shown, people like Mr Fife, have given loyalty and yet not had it
returned, they are saying well we have Party prerogatives here which we're going
to insist upon and we're not going to have the National Party push and decide,
even if it is with the support of our leader who himself only has a transitory
commitment to us. That's what this is about. It's about old guard faithful
committed Liberals and their interests, and the interests of the professional
careerists like Dr Hewson, who want to use the Liberal Party for their own
purposes. That is point one. The second point is this. This is about policy on the run. We've
now seen today the third variation of Dr Hewson's youth wage scheme. Two
weeks ago he had the shocking temerity of accusing me ofmaik-ing policy on the
run in relation to television. He had announced a youth wage out of nowhere.
Within a week he has now varied it and tried to stick on a training voucher. As I
pointed out, if you take these kids on $ 3 an hour, or $ 120 a week, and then take
them out for two days for training, they actually end up on a wage lower than the
dole. So, that bit of policy on the run is now again up this morning for review. 
This Party has no serious policy structure for employment, for the employment of
young people, or older Australians alike. It's basically in their sort of policy one
the run, trying to make the day fit the moment, as their gab-fest a week or so ago
was supposed to be about the GST and then became a discussion on youth policy.
And that was very clearly dealt with this morning by Archbishp Hopllingworth
who said that the whole Liberal Party approach to youth and youth wages was
inadequate, and that we didn't need to prey upon people, and all that Dr Hewson
would do, and Mr Howard with him, is not only to press youth wages but also to
press the wages of older Australians, so for the first time ever we end up with a
different class of people in this country. That is, those that are kicked off
unemployment benefits after 9 months are left to be begging, so we have a
begging class we've never had, and people are pushed into depressed levels of
wages while other Australians can enjoy the fruits of this country.
That sort of break with the past, that break in not pulling Australians along, that is
giving people at the bottom end of the income ranges a share of the national cake,
and giving them a piece of this country, that notion, that putting asunder of that
egalitarian quality of fairness is a peculiar mark of Dr Hewson's leadership. And
they would create for the first time in Australian a genuinely and true underclass,
which can only do to this country what similar policies have done to other
countries.
J: Mr Keating, are you expecting something of a blue yourself with the unions, the
ACTU, over the employment prospects?
PM: No. We had a very good discussion last night with the ACTU. I've said all I want
to say to you today, I don't want you to ask me any more questions so I'm leaving.
ends. 



69/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING MP
APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY OMBUDSMAN ( DEFENCE FORCE)
The appointment of the present Deputy Ombudsman ( Defence
Force), Air Vice-Marshal ( retd) Roy Frost AO, expired on
8 July 1992.
Air Vice-Marshal Frost served with success for five years
in this position, which demands a combination of judgement
and discretion.
on behalf of the Government, I would like to express my
appreciation for Air Vice-Marshal Frost's contribution
during his term as Deputy Ombudsman and to wish him well
in his retirement.
The Governor-General today appointed Mr Richard Mills for.
a three-year term as Deputy CommonwealtKi Ombudsman. Mr
Mills will be designated as Deputy Ombudsman ( Defence
Force). Mr Mills was previously the Head of Office of the Resource
Assessment Commission.
The Chief of the Defence * Force, General Peter Gration, AC
OBE, has welcomed Mr Mills' appointment notwithstanding
that he has not been a member of the Defence Force.
Mr Mills served for fifteen years in the Department of
Defence, including periods as Secretary to the Senior
Defence Committees and as Senior Private Secretary to Mr
Beazley when Minister for Defence. He was for a time
Assistant Secretary Service Personnel ( Army).
Mr Mills' background in the Public Service and in major
investigations of the kind conducted by the Resource
Assessment Commission will fit him well for involvement in
major investigative work.
CANBERRA July 16, 1992 
CUlRRICULUM VITAE
PERSONAL DETAILS
Name Date of Birth
Address Telephone 1959 1963 1970 Richard Hamilton Mills
27 December 1942
13/ 15 Charles Street
Queanbeyan NSW 2620
W: 271 5250
H: 2994513
NSW Leaving Certificate
B. A-( Hons) Sydney
B. A. ( ANT)
1978M. A. ( Lancaster) Honours in History and English
History, English, French
Political Science
Public Administration
International Relations
Australian Literature
Politics/ Strategic Studies
Fellow of the Australian Institute of Management. 
1989
July 1988-
Dec. 1988
1987-1988
1985-1986
1983-1985
1982-1983
1981-1982
1979-1980
1990-1992 1971978University of Lancaster
Resource Assessment Commission
Head of Office
Policy advice, mnange the RAC Secretariat
Ansett Airlines ( on Executive Interchange)
Principal Adviser, Aviaion Policy
Relations with Government, route performance
analysis, corporate planning, pilot recruitmuent
Department of the Prime nidster and Cabinet
Acting Deputy Secretary
Bicentenary and community relations,
multiculturl affairs, status of women
Department of the Prime inister Cabinet
First Assistant Secretary, Bicenteniary and
Community Relations Division
Bicentennial matters, cultural and welfare services,
ceremonial and hospitality
Department of the Prime Minister Cabinet
First Assistant Secretary, Cabinet Office
Manage the Cabinet program
Senior Private Secretary to the Minister for
Defence Policy advice, Departental liaison, public
information, manage the Minister's office
Department of Defence
Assistant Secretary, Army Personnel
Ministerial liaison, personnel management
Department of Defence
Assistant Secretary, Information Policy Branch
Freedom of Information, Archives
Department of Defence
Chief Executive Officer, Policy Co-ordination
Division Ministerial liaison, public relations, Freedom of
Information, Archives
1977-1978 
4
Department of Defence
Chief Executive Officer, Committee Secretariat
Secretary of Defence Committee, Chiefs of Staff
Committee, Defence Force Development
Committee
1975-1976 Department of Defence
Chief Executive Officer, Policy Secretariat
Information Policy and Archives
1972-1974Department of Defence
Senior/ Principal Executive Officer, Strategic and
International Policy Division
Defence aid, Defence relations with Indonesia,
strategic policy
Department of Defence
Secretary, National Intelligence Committee
Commonwealth Public Service Board
Administrative Trainee/ Assistant Inspector
Personnel policy, research into pay and conditions
of service.
1976-1977
1970-1971
1964-1969 



PRIME MINISTER 70/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
The Prime Minister has sent the following message to H. E. Bernard Dowiyogo, MP:
On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I would like to express my sorrow
at the news of the death of former President Hammer DeRoburt. By leading Nauru to full
independence in 1968, and remaining President of your country for over two decades, he
secured an important place in Nauru's and the region's history.
I would like to express my condolences to you and the people of Nauru. Please convey
my deepest sympathy to Mr DeRoburt's family.
CANBERRA 16 July 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, CANBERRA
JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Earlier I published a document to you, a background
statement, for the meeting on Youth Training and
Employment, and a few of you expressed an interest
in me making a few introductory remarks about it and
taking some questions, so I am quite happy to do
that. Perhaps I could begin with these few points. I
think what the paper shows is that the problem with
yo-uthunemployment has arisen from changes in the
labour market over a very extended period of time,
the 1_ i960s onwards, over the last thirty years
economic, social and-technologi~ cal changes have
fairly radically altered the types of -õ bs which
young people are now competing for. On Wednesday
the National Meetina on Youth Training ! ad
Emplovment will bring together young people,
employers, unions, community groups and the
Government, and those at the meeting will benefit
from the different perspective being put, and will
tackle directly the two key issues. The two key
issues are; the longer term issue of assisting young
people to make the transition from school to work,
and the immediate issue of how best to help the
current group of young unemployed obtain employment.
So the purpose of this statement is to set out a
framework for-~ understanding and-tackling the issues
surrounding the training and employment of young
people, including of course, the problem of youth
unemployment. The ideas contained in this paper will be discussed
at Wednesday's meeting, as well of course the ideas
and proposals of other proponents. Following the
meeting on Wednesday the Government will carefully
consider the views canvassed at the meeting, that's 
in the period subsequent to the meeting, and I will
announce specific measures in these areas in the
following week.
I think you will agree the Statement does contain a
lot of interesting information and perceptions on
the problems. It stands, might I say, an obvious
and stark contrast with the efforts of the
Opposition, who without serious thought have
dismissed technological and compositional changes to
the labour market for young people. They have now
approached the training issue as an afterthought and
piecemeal at that, and who crudely believe a massive
slashing of yquy h_ wages will solve the problem.
Well unlike the Opposition, the Government will be
viewing the later teenage years as a period of
vocational preparation and will be doing all that is
sensible, all that can be done to put arrangements
and resources in place, to allow that vocational
preparation to be undertaken. There is a distinct
and truly marked contrast between the way in which
the Government is approaching the issue, both on a
long run basis, in respect of the transition from
school to work, and for those in the shorter run who
are unemployed before that transition and pathways
are established. That's what the paper is about,
and of course as I say, it is in marked contrast to
the Opposition who for training, their policies,
their fightback proposals have virtually nothing for
training and they have now tried to tack training on
as an afterthought, when training is part of the
essence of such a structural shift. So I am sure
the paper will be interesting to you and if you
would like to put questions to me I will try and
deal with them.
J: Prime Minister arguing that there is in fact no
quick fix. In fact, it says by the year 2001 at
least 95 per cent of nineteen year olds should have
completed year 12 or postschool qualification,
that's a long way off from solving today's problems,
isn't it?
PM: No, no. There are two problems here. The proportion
of children completing year 12 now is over 70 per
cent, that was only 30 odd per cent in 1983. So if
we had of taken that approach in 1983 saying this is
a long-term problem that is too hard there would
. still -be 30 per cent-of kids only completing year
12. Well there is now over 70 per cent of kids
completing year 12. Getting up to the nineties is a
very desirable thing to do. So that's the longer
run transition, the school to work transition, the
pathways, the things which are mentioned in the
Carmichael Report. But there are those, as we say
in the statement, who will have lived through their
later teenage years before this transition is in 
full swing and who are now currently unemployed, and
we will be focussing on them as well.
J: Prime Minister, will you have by Wednesday a form of
agreement between the States and the Federal
Governments on the TAFE, or the future, the shape of
the TAFE system?
PM: Well that remains to be seen. I have been working
on this problem now for a couple of weeks, so has
Kim Beazely, and we have had, I think, quite long
and we hope fruitful negotiations with the States,
and getting a break through here is a very tall
order, this is a system which is essentially managed
by the States, and most of the resourcing comes from
the States. The fact is they can't keep the growth
up to the system, and that's why we think there is a
case for national leadership, national policy and
national funding. But it has to be run
cooperatively, obviously, because the Commonwealth
has not been the TAFE manager, and it is trying to
construct a new system which would be a very
revolutionary change and of course an entirely
important change in the history of our federal
arrangements to be able to bring such a system
together and make it work. Now, we are still
working on it.
J: The TAFE system hasn't been that efficient in the
past, how is it going to be made more efficient by
superimposing yet another level of bureaucracy on
it?
PM: Well I think that, when you say that it has not been
efficient, the truth is it hasn't had the throughput
which the nation needed of it. As we say in the
paper we have had a 43 per cent increase in
university graduations but in terms of TAFE exits
there has been a decline. So it has not been
keeping up. What we need is national training
profiles, we need training profiles related to
industry and we need volume, we need resources, and
that can't be done without the Commonwealth, nor at
this stage can that be done without the States.
J: It is envisaged, I think, isn't it over time that an
increasing amount of the money would come from
Commonwealth sources? In that case does that imply
increasingnational control?
PM: Well the arrangement we are working on is about that
control being somewhat more diffuse between the
Commonwealth and the States, but national control we
have as an objective, certainly. Not Commonwealth
controlled. I don't know whether you meant
Commonwealth or National. 
management will always be the hallmark of the
Government, and we've made that clear in recent
times and will continue to make that clear.
Q: Mr Keating out in the community there's a great deal
of, there seems to be an increasing amount of
scepticism about Government statements of various
types and the community seems to think the
Government is trying to be seen to be doing
something but not having much effect. Are you
worried that the Youth Statement could be seen that
way as well?
PM: You think that we want to be dealing in
anti-intellectual policies, that is that we don't
actually articulate policies and we don't try and
solve things lest people think we're trying to do
something. Well is that the state where our
journalism is really, where our public comment is?
Q: Mr Keating you've talked about two aspects of the
problem in the paper, the long-term one and trying
to get people into that frame of mind where they
stay in education and training opportunities longer,
it talks about the immediate short-term problems
for kids who are caught in transition at the moment.
In that context how important are the kind of youth
corp land degradation projects?
PM: You're now asking me to look at various proposals
and responses. The paper is basically there
to paint an overview of the whole problem. I mean
this has been a problem which has developed over a
long period of time and which will now only be
solved by clear paths and policies designed to make
that transition from school to work, and at the same
time, for those as I say, whose latter teenage years
have arrived now before that transition, the fine
policies which get them back into a labour market.
As we say there's some figures there about the
generation about the current young unemployed people
are actually in that unemployed pool, and the role
of labour market programs. Obviously we want to try
to get those people back into work, back into work
experience, but it's the longer run transition of
the great bulk of young people who are currently in
school that we want to see go into the labour market
with training, in properly formed paths, and if we
can do that, and if part of that can be, a
substantial change in the way in which the TAFE
system functions and works in Australia it will be a
milestone reform.
Q: the immediate problem are you tempted then by
suggestions of the kind from Peter Hollingworth
about youth corp, job corp projects? 
PM: Everyone attending the meeting including
ArchbishopHollingworth will put those propositions
and weilc onsl1Wi-fhose in the course of the week.
Q: But they're out there now?
PM: Well, wait for the response.
0: Prime Minister are you keeping a very careful eye on
the row between the Liberals and the Nationals of
New South Wales?
PM: Well I've been keeping an eye on it for weeks, I
mean if you go to the country newspapers of the
areas of Hume and the other surrounding Federal
seats you'll find there's been a very bitter war
being conducted by the Liberal and National Parties
on each other, but the clear point in all this was
that the New South Wales Liberal Party is not going
to let its political imperative slip or be talked
down, in the interests of the National Party, by the
Federal Liberal leader. They say the Party's got
prerogatives, our commitments are long term, that of
the Party, and involving other long term people,
people committed long term to the Party like Wal
Fife, and they object to the fact that this sort of
careerist approach, which Dr Hewson has to his
political life is one that basically sells down the
drain the Liberal Party, long term Liberal Party
structural interests. So this is an argument of
some proportions.
Q: Sir how has that differed in keeping Leo Macleay in
his job?
PM: Sorry
Q: How does that differ then from the careerist point
of Leo Macleay?
PM: A great deal. If I said to my Party that I wanted a
change of policy and my Party said no, you would all
write, Prime Minister no longer in charge, Party
decides for him. Dr Hewson has said to his Party
that these contest s ought to be decided to favour
the National Party and his Party has said no. And
as Mr Murray said yesterday anybody who can't make
their Party deliver on such important fundamental
things if they're that weak, said Mr Murray, they
shouldn't be seeking to be the Prime Minister of the
nation.
Q: Liberals are too democratic are they?
PM: I don't think democratic would be the word for it.
The fact is the Liberal Party's got long term
organisational interests, which Dr Hewson does not
identify with, and they're reminding him of his 
responsibilities, but reminding him in a very sharp
way.
Q: Can you guarantee young people that at the end of
the day we won't simply have a much better trained,
better educated group on unemployed?
PM: Absolutely, look at the ' 80s experience, people who
are training themselves were taken up in employment
and if you look at the information contained in
there about the responses by industry, lack of
maturity, school levels too low, lack of relevant
training, all those numbers, those very high 87%,
83% indicate that the absence of training is a real
impediment to getting a job. So, hankering for
untrained work in a labour market which is
technologically been subjected to great
technological change is basically hankering back to
the 1960s, in their past, the labour market of those
days is a thing of the past.
Q: But orders decide unemployment or decide employment
levels
PM: Yes, sure, orders of what products? What products?
Services. All the sort of things we now have in the
economy we didn't have in the 1960s.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTERI
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
GLOBALISM AND REGIONALISM: AUSTRALIA'S TRADE POLICY
AGENDA 70R THE 90S KEYNOTE ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURERS' CONFERENCE ON " ASIA 2010"
MELBOURNE, MONDAY 20 JULY 1992
You have been talking at your conference here today
about our region, and how we the people of the region
will fare over the next couple of decades.
This evening I want to talk about how Australia and
our region may change over this time, and how the
choices we make today will decide what kind of world
we and our children will find in the new century.
You'll notice that I have already taken Australia to
be part of the Asian region, which is in itself
something of a change in our thinking. We are
geographically part of it, and much of the change in
Australia in recent years has been a process of
cultural attitudes somewhat reluctantly accommodating
themselveg' to geographical facts.
As Presid'ent Soeharto and I agreed during my recent
visit to Indonesia, it is hard to change attitudes,
but not as hard as changing geography!
our economy is also increasingly integrated into the
region, and the visitors here this evening will have
seen in our cities evidence that the fastest growing
migrant population in this country is from Asia.
In the last decade or so the Asian region has been
transformed into the most rapidly growing regional
economy in the world, with a high share of exports in
output, and a high degree of trade within the region. 
If we include Canada and the United States irn the
wider region, as we do in APEC, then of course we are
talking about the preponderant grouping in the world
economy, with half the world's output and almost half
the world's trade. Of that trade, nearly two thirds
is with other members of the group.
Australia has been a full participant in these
regional changes, and over the next few decades we
intend to integrate ourselves into our region even
more closely.
But I think that we will soon have to make important
choices in our region. We will soon have to decide
how we as a region, and Australia as a member the
region, will respond to the emerging new pattern in
world affairs which follows the collapse of the Soviet
Union-.. one of the powerful realities we must recognise is
that economic regionalism is shaping the post Cold War
order. As the era of the Cold War ended, we discovered that
we were already entering the era of Maastricht and
NAFTA. In our own region Asean has said it will form
a trade area, and all the countries of the region have
created the 15 member APEC grouping with an agenda of
discussions on trade liberalisation.
But paradoxically another powerful force encouraged by
the of the end of the Cold War is globalism.
The market economy model is now nearly universally
accepted in industrial countries. The former
communist countries are rapidly being integrated into
global institutions like GATT, the IMF and the World
Bank. We are seeing issues like the environment and
weapons proliferation dealt with in global forums.
And in Ki. wait and Cambodia we witness the United
Nations play a role it has not been able to play for
decades. Though they appear to be contradictory, these two
forces of regionalism and globalism are in fact
complementary. They are the two economically unifying counterweights
to the forces of nationalism, ethnicity and religion
which have also been released by the end of the post
war ideological battle.
Certainly I regard them as complementary, and
Australia's international economic policy-embraces
both a global and a regional strategy. 
3
The job for governments everywhere is to fit these two
forces of regionalism and globalism together at a time
when, for better or worse, the Uruguay Round of the
GATT is coming to a conclusion.
This recognition that economic regionalism is a
dominant force in the world economy does not for a
moment mean we have lost faith in GATT. It does not
mean that we will cease doing whatever we can,
whenever and wherever we can, to entrench through the
GATT a stronger set of principles of fair trade to
which all countries subscribe.
But we do recognise that trade and investment growth
today is predominantly within regions, that Europe
from the Atlantic to at least the Urals and perhaps
beyond is firmly set on a course of deep economic
integration over coming decades, and that in all
probability we shall be dealing with another free
trade area from Canada to Mexico by the end of this
year. We might not like this evolution, but whether we like
it or not we cannot stop it. The only question is how
we should respond to it.
That is a theme to which I will return later, but let
me set the scene for the next few decades by telling
you about how Australia has changed in the last decade
to prepare itself for the changes to come.
For the decades following World War Two we in this
country hid behind tariff barriers, creating what by
the early eighties had become an industrial museum.
The economy was highly regulated and unable to adjust
to the explosion of growth which was then occurring in
Asia. Over the l~ st decade we have radically reformed.
We tloated the dollar and deregulated financial
markets, replaced conflict with consensus in
industrial relations, set in place a program of tariff
cuts and industry modernisation, and pruned the
government sector
More recently we have encouraged a wholesale shift
into enterprise bargaining as the principal means of
deciding wages, and pushed forward a program of
industry reform which has dramatically increased the
productivity of our ports, and changed the face of our
aviation and telecommunications industries.
We are beginning now on vast new improvements to our
railway~ s and roads. 
4
In our One Nation statement earlier this year, we made
changes to our business taxation system which make it
one of the most competitive Among industrial
countries. And I am glad to say that the results of this reform
process have shown up in the transformation of our
trade a transformation in volumes, composition and
destination. A decade ago Australia exported less than one sixth of
our production.
Today we export over a fifth, and it has been steadily
climbing over the whole period.
A decade ago we more often than not imported more
goods pnd services each month than we exported.
Today, we export more than we import. Most Australians
would probably be surprised to know that we have a
stronger goods trading balance than many other
countries in the region, including Singapore,
Thailand, Malaysia, and Korea.
A decade ago Australia had one of the highest
inflation rates in the industrial world.
Today it is one of the lowest, and lower than most of
our regional trading partners.
A decade ago our cost structure made it hard for
exporters to compete.
Today we have increased our competitiveness by a
tenth, and entrenched our competitive advantage with
low inflation and high productivity growth.
As the sheer volume of our exports increased, their
compositi-, on and direction changed.
Both our services exports and manufactured exports
have tripled over the last decade. Last year for the
first time we exported more manufactured products than
rural products. Manufactures earn us more than metal
ores and minerals, or tourism or coal.
Nine out of ten of our largest export markets are now
in Asia and the Pacific.
Today, more than half of our merchandise exports go to
Asia. The countries of. ASEAN are today collectivrely a bigger
export market for us than either the US or the EC. 
Ou~ r aim is to be at home in the region, with a highly
competitive world class manufacturing sector,
exporting a diverse range of commodities, manufactures
and services to the region and beyond.
The slow growth we and most other industrial economies
are now experiencing as we recover from recession
obscures the very real change in the economy. But
even with slow growth, we have found that far from
destroying our manufacturing base in this country our
structural reforms have nourished it.
Our manufacturing output today is nearly a tenth
higher than it was a decade ago and nearly a third
higher than it was twenty years ago, the so-called
" golden era" of protected Australian manufacturing.
And as I have explained, we are exporting more of our
manufdoturing output than ever before.
The range and pace of our structural reforms over the
last decade demonstrate our recognition that whatever
happens in the world trading environment we will cope
with it best if we ourselves are as nimble, fleetfooted
and adaptable as possible.
Both the region and this country have profoundly
changed over the last decade. What will happen in the
next two?
I spoke earlier about the strategic choices we face as
the Uruguay round comes to an end, as Europe continues
on a deeper and more comprehensive integration, and as
the United States creates its own free trade area with
Canada and Mexico.
The choice is between entrenching the prosperity of
the region through increasing global openness, or
being forced onto second best paths which restrict
trade and ' Ieave us all worse off.
if governioents make the right decisions, if the
Uruguay Round succeeds and the countries of our region
continue to liberalise, then over the next two decades
East Asia will continue to be the fastest growing area
of the world economy.
Growth of Asian markets will continue to exceed that
of other markets, including the EC and North America,
as population grows and incomes rise.
Japan will be an even stronger, better balanced
economy, while the smaller Asian market economies will
increasingly be concentrating on services and of fshore
manufacturing. 
Some, like Korea will have joined the OECD and other
industrial3i-sTd-cuntry organisations. There will be a
new pack of " tigers" in South East Asia, benefiting
from political and strategic stability, and more
outward-looking economic policies.
With a new generation of leaders, China is likely to
commit itself increasingly to the market model, taking
the lead from its thriving coastal trading economy.
Korea may perhaps be reunited, ultimately bringing to
the North the economic prosperity that is transforming
the South.
If all goes well, the three nations of Indochina will
also be growing market economies.
APEC will evolve into an outward looking regional
trading group, with the participation of both Japan
and the United States.
Australia will be changed, too, with an even larger
trade sector, more exports of services and
manufactures, and a-still sharper focus on markets
within the region.
The realisation of this world depends upon increasing
trade within the region, which in turn depends upon
countries' being as willing to buy other countries
exports as they are to sell their own.
It depends on making the right decision to lower
regional trade barriers at the same time as we
entrench fairer global rules.
But if we make the wrong decisions, or if they are
forced upon us, we face another possible future by
2010 a future quite different to the one I sketched
earlier. If the reD~ ion cannot continue to open its own markets,
and still worse if we begin to encounter difficulty in
markets of Europe and North America, then the forces
now underpinning the region's success will be
reversed. We would see a weakened world trade system, with GATT
rules increasingly flouted.
We could see an inward looking North American Free
Trade Agreement, possibly extended throughout the
Americas, edging out competitors from its markets.
We could see Europe going its own way, placating a
multitude of domestic constituencies at tfie expense of
foreign competitors, and of its own future prosperity.. 
We could see Japan defensively creating a regional yen
bloc, based on preferential trade and investment
rules. Lesser developed areas, like China and Indochina,
stunted in growth.
And Australia, its exports markets restricted, forced
into difficult economic and strategic choices between
the United States and Japan.
As I said earlier, the choice between the bright
scenario and the gloomy scenario will depend on how we
fit together the forces of regionalism and globalism
in trade policy.
For my part I think the best fit is attained when we
work towards the strongest set of universally agreed
minimwft standards we can on a global basis, and at the
same time attempt to do better on a regional basis.
Given the large and diverse membership of GATT, it is
inevitable that an agreement which is universally
acceptable must leave plenty of opportunities for
regions and subregions to improve on the benchmark
without violating its rules.
And given the fact of propinquity, it is inevitable
that regional arrangements which are GATT friendly
will nonetheless be of greatest benefit to the region
concerned. So we will be seeking constantly to strengthen
international trading rules through the global
institution, GATT, at the same time as we seek to
build regional trade and economic arrangements which
take us beyond what we have been able to achieve on a
global conpensus.
We remain* committed to a successful Uruguay Round
because i~ t can bring us substantial benefits, not just
in agricul'ture but also in manufactures, services,
intellectual property rights and many other areas.
According to one cautious Canadian study, the package
now before us would, if agreed, increase global income
by something of the order of 120 billion dollars a
year. As you know, no breakthrough came about during the
Munich Summit of the G7. I do not pretend to be other
than disappointed at the failure so far to bridge the
remaining differences. We will be pressing hard for
the G7 leaders to make good their commitmqnt to reach
a balanced agreement before the end of the year. 
8
Stalling the round indefinitely would be a failure of
political leadership on a grand scale. It would
represent a shameful capitulation to the self ish
forces of economic protection.
But while successful GATT outcome is important it
won't begin to exhaust the trade growth possibilities
in the region.
According to a study by the Centre for International
Economics, the Asia Pacific region would gain the
equivalent of $ 300 billion if the countries of the
region were to agree to liberalise with a fifty per
cant reduction in tariff and non tariff barriers.
APEC holds great promise in this next phase of trade
reform. Institutionalisation of APEC will signal a
new area in regional economic co-operation. APEC
members have committed themselves to reducing barriers
to trade amongst themselves in a GATT-friendly way.
Already APEC working groups are hard at work in
different sectoral projects. In the next 12 months we
are likely to see substantial outcomes from various
projects which will yield significant practical
benefits for business. These include customs reforms,
changes to administrative barriers to market access,
development of tariff databases, and others.
in some areas it will be possible to move forward in
smaller groups of economies say like-minded groups
in the Western Pacific and then extend agreements
later to take in all APEC members, or even economies
not yet in APEC.. The Trade Minister, John Kerin, and
I will therefore be asking our senior trade officials
to explore some of these options with regional
countries before the end of the year.
One possibility is to look at the potential offered by
the. growihg aviation market in our hemisphere. on
current trends, by 2010 Asia will have consolidated
its place hs the world's pre-eminent international
aviation market. -This process could be enriched
through an expansion of regional aviation rights.
Other possibilities include regional agreements on
investment and on services, including
telecommunications, banking and insurance.
As a steel exporter, and also as a supplier of raw
materials to the steel makers of north Asia, Australia
would also be receptive to discussions on a regional
steel agreement, if the global talks remain stalled. 
9
over coming months we will be reexamining trade policy
options in the light of the Uruguay Round outcome and
regional developments. Some of these options are
reviewed in discussion papers commissioned by the
government and prepared by Professor Richard Snape,
which will be released by the Minister for Trade on
Wednesday. The papers will contribute to the debate on our
national trade strategy which will be capped by a
comprehensive Ministerial Statement by Mr Kerin in
October. I have no doubt that regionalism will become
increasingly important to us in coming decades. That
is why I have this evening suggested a few regional
trade initiatives we will pursue. But we should
always bear in mind that the region has founded its
development on trade and, more than any other, enjoys
the benefits of the principles of interdependence and
openness. Over the next two decades we must continue
to demonstrate that the best outcome for all economic
regions is attained when we have strong global rules
while maximising regional trade opportunities. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
GLOBALISM AND REGIONALISM: AUSTRALIA'S TRADE POLICY
AGENDA FOR THE 905 KEYNOTE ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURERS' CONFERENCE ON " ASIA 2010"
MELBOURNE, MONDAY 20 JULY 1992
You have been talking at your conference here today
about our region, and how we the people of the region
will fare over the next couple of decades.
This evening I want to talk about how Australia and
our region may change over this time, and how the
choices we make today will decide what kind of world
we and our children will find in the new century.
You'll notice that I have already taken Australia to
be part of the Asian region, which is in itself
something of a change in our thinking. We are
geographically part of it, and much of the change in
Australia in recent years has been a process of
cultural attitudes somewhat reluctantly accommodating
themselves to geographical facts.
As President Soeharto and I agreed during my recent
visit to Indonesia, it is hard to change attitudes,
but not as hard as changing geography!
our economy is also increasingly integrated into the
region, and the visitors here this evening will have
seen in our cities evidence that the fastest growing
migrant population in this country is from Asia.
In the last decade or so the Asian rpgion has been
transformed into the most rapidly growing regional
economy in the world, with a high share of exports in
output, and a high degree of trade within the region. 
If we include Canada and the United States in the
wider region, as we do in APEC, then of course we are
talking about the preponderant grouping in the world
economy, with half the world's output and almost half
the world's trade. Of that trade, nearly two thirds
is with other members of the group.
Australia has been a full participant in these
regional changes, and over the next few decades we
intend to integrate ourselves into our region even.
more closely.
But I think that we will soon have to make important
choices in our region. We will soon have to decide
how we as a region, and Australia as a member the
region, will respond to the emerging new pattern in
world affairs which follows the collapse of the Soviet
Union. One of the powerful realities we must recognise is
that economic regionalism is shaping the post Cold War
order. As the era of the Cold War ended, we discovered that
we were already entering the era of Maastricht and
NAFTA. In our own region Asean has said it will form
a trade area, and all the countries of the region have
created the 15 member APEC grouping with an agenda of
discussions on trade liberalisation.
But paradoxically another powerful force encouraged by
the of the end of the Cold War is globalism.
The market economy model is now nearly universally
accepted in industrial countries. The former
communist countries are rapidly being integrated into
global institutions like GATT, the IMF and the World
Bank. We are seeing issues like the environment and
weapons proliferation dealt with in global forums.
And in Kuwait and Cambodia we witness the United
Nations play a role it has not been able to play for
decades. Though they appear to be contradictory, these two
forces of regionalism and globalism are in fact
complementary. They are the two economically unifying counterweights
to the forces of nationalism, ethnicity and religion
which have also been released by the end of the post
war ideological battle.
Certainly I regard them as complementary, and
Australia's international economic policy embraces
both a global and a regional strategy. 
The job for governments everywhere is to fit these two
forces of regionalism and globalism together at a time
when, for better or worse, the Uruguay Round of the
GATT is coming to a conclusion.
This recognition that economic regionalism is a
dominant force in the world ecoomy does not for a
moment mean we have lost faith in GATT. It does not
mean that we will cease doing whatever we can,
whenever and wherever we can, to entrench through the
GATT a stronger set of principles of fair trade to
which all countries subscribe.
But we do recognise that trade and investment growth
today is predominantly within regions, that Europe
from the Atlantic to at least the Urals and perhaps
beyond is firmly set on a course of deep economic
integration over coming decades, and that in all
probability we shall be dealing with another free
trade area from Canada to Mexico by the end of this
year. We might not like this evolution, but whether we like
it or not we cannot stop it. The only question is how
we should respond to it.
That is a theme to which I will return later, but let
me set the scene for the next few decades by telling
you about how Australia has changed in the last decade
to prepare itself for the changes to come.
For the decades following World War Two we in this
country hid behind tariff barriers, creating what by
the early eighties had become an industrial museum.
The economy was highly regulated and unable to adjust
to the explosion of growth which was then occurring in
Asia. over the last-decade we have radically reformed.
We floated the dollar and deregulated financial
markets, replaced conflict with consensus in
industrial relations, set in place a program of tariff
cuts and industry modernisation, and pruned the
government sector
More recently we have encouraged a wholesale shift
into enterprise bargaining as the principal means of
deciding wages, and pushed forward a program of
industry reform which has dramatically increased the
productivity of our ports, and changed the face of our
aviation and telecommunications industries.
We are beginning now on vast new improvements to our
railways and roads. 
In our One Nation statement earlier this year, we made
changes to our business taxation system which make it
one of the most competitive among industrial
countries. And I am glad to say that the results of this reform
process have shown up in the transformation of our
trade a transformation in volumes, composition and
destination. A decade ago Australia exported less than one sixth of
our production.
Today we export over a fifth, and it has been steadily
climbing over the whole period.
A decade ago we more often than not imported more
goods and services each month than we exported.
Today, we export more than we import. Most Australians
would probably be surprised to know that we have a
stronger goods trading balance than many other
countries in the region, including Singapore,
Thailand, Malaysia, and Korea.
A decade ago Australia had one of the highest
inflation rates in the industrial world.
Today it is one of the lowest, and lower than most of
our regional trading partners.
A decade ago our cost structure made it hard for
exporters to compete.
Today we have increased our competitiveness by a
tenth, and entrenched our competitive advantage with
low inflation and high productivity growth.
As the sheer volume of our exports increased, their
composition and direction changed.
Both our services exports and manufactured exports
have tripled over the last decade. Last year for the
first time we exported more manufactured products than
rural products. Manufactures earn us more than metal
ores and minerals, or tourism or coal.
Nine out of ten of our largest export markets are now
in Asia and the Pacific.
Today, more than half of our merchandise exports go to
Asia. The countries of ASEAN are today collectively a bigger
export market for us than either the US or the EC. 
Our aim is to be at home in the region, with a highly
competitive world class manufacturing sector,
exporting a diverse range of commodities, manufactures
and services to the region and beyond.
The slow growth we and most other industrial economies
are now experiencing as we recover from recession
obscures the very real change in the economy. But
even with slow growth, we have found that far from
destroying our manufacturing base in this country our
structural reforms have nourished it.
Our manufacturing output today is nearly a tenth
higher than it was a decade ago and nearly a third
higher than it was twenty years ago, the so-called
" golden era" of protected Australian manufacturing.
And as I have explained, we are exporting more of our
manufacturing output than ever before.
The range and pace of our structural reforms over the
last decade demonstrate our recognition that whatever
happens in the world trading environment we will cope
with it best if we ourselves are as nimble, fleetfooted
and adaptable as possible.
Both the region and this country have profoundly
changed over the last decade. What will happen in the
next two?
I spoke earlier about the strategic choices we face as
the Uruguay round comes to an end, as Europe continues
on a deeper and more comprehensive integration, and as
the United States creates its own free trade area with
Canada and Mexico.
The choice is between entrenching the prosperity of
the region through increasing global openness, or
being forced onto second best paths which restrict
trade and leave us all worse off.
If governments make the right decisions, if the
Uruguay Round succeeds and the countries of our region
continue to liberalise, then over the next two decades
East Asia will continue to be the fastest growing area
of the world economy.
Growth of Asian markets will continue to exceed that
of other markets, including the EC and North America,
as population grows . and incomes rise.
Japan will be an even stronger, better balanced
economy, while the smaller Asian market economies will
increasingly be concentrating on services and of fshore
manufacturing. 
Some, like Korea, will have joined the OECD-and other
industriallid co6untry organisations. There will be a
new pack of " tigers" in South East Asia, benefiting
from political and strategic stability, and more
outward-looking economic policies.
With a new generation of leaders,_ China is likely to
commit itself increasingly to the mariket model, taking
the lead from its thriving coastal trading economy.
Korea may perhaps be reunited, ultimately bringing to
the North the economic prosperity that is transforming
the South.
If all goes well, the three nations of Indochina will
also be growing market economies.
APEC will evolve into an outward looking regional
trading group, with the participation of both Japan
and the United States.
Australia will be changed, too, with an even larger
trade sector, more exports of services and
manufactures, and astill sharper focus on markets
within the region.
The realisation of this world depends upon increasing
trade within the region, which in turn depends upon
countries' being as willing to buy other countries
exports as they are to sell their own.
It depends on making the right decision to lower
regional trade barriers at the same time as we
entrench fairer global rules.
But if we make the wrong decisions, or if they are
forced upon us, we face another possible future by
2010 a future quite different to the one I sketched
earlier. If the region cannot continue to open its own markets,
and still worse if we begin to encounter difficulty in
markets of Europe and North America, then the forces
now underpinning the region's success will be
reversed. we would see a weakened world trade system, with GATT
rules increasingly flouted.
We could see an inward looking North American Free
Trade Agreement, possibly extended throughout the
Americas, edging out competitors from its markets.
We could see Europe going its own way, placating a
multitude of domestic constituencies at the expense of
foreign competitors, and of its own future prosperity. 
We could see Japan defensively creating a regional yen
bloc, based on preferential trade and investment
rules. Lesser developed areas, like China and Indochina,
stunted in growth.
And Australia, its exports markets restricted, forced
into difficult economic and strategic choices between
the United States and Japan.
As I said earlier, the choice between the bright
scenario and the gloomy scenario will depend on how we
fit together the forces of regionalism and globalism
in trade policy.
For my part I think the best fit is attained when we
work towards the strongest set of universally agreed
minimum standards we can on a global basis, and at the
same time attempt to do better on a regional basis.
Given the large and diverse membership of GATT, it is
inevitable that an agreement which is universally
acceptable must leave plenty of opportunities for
regions and subregions to improve on the benchmark
without violating its rules.
And given the fact of propinquity, it is inevitable
that regional arrangements which are GATT friendly
will nonetheless be of greatest benefit to the region
concerned. So we will be seeking constantly to strengthen
international trading rules through the global
institution, GATT, at the same time as we seek to
build regional trade and economic arrangements which
take us beyond what we have been able to achieve on a
global consensus.
We remain committed to a successful Uruguay Round
because it can bring us substantial benefits, not just
in agriculture but also in manufactures, services,
intellectual property rights and many other areas.
According to one cautious Canadian study, the package
now before us would, if agreed, increase global income
by something of the order of 120 billion dollars a
year. As you know, no breakthrough came about during the
Munich Summit of the G7. I do not pretend to be other
than disappointed at the failure so far to bridge the
remaining differences. We will be pressing hard for
the G7 leaders to make good their commitment to reach
a balanced agreement before the end of the year. 
8
Stalling the round indefinitely would be a failure of
political leadership on a grand scale. It would
represent a shameful capitulation to the selfish
forces of economic protection.
But while successful GATT outcome is important it
won't begin to exhaust the trade growth possibilities
in the region.
According to a study by the Centre for International
Economics, the Asia Pacific region would gain the
equivalent of $ 300 billion if the countries of the
region were to agree to liberalise with a fifty per
cent reduction in tariff and non tariff barriers.
APEC holds great promise in this next phase of trade
reform. Institutionalisation of APEC will signal a
new area in regional economic co-operation. APEC
members have committed themselves to reducing barriers
to trade amongst themselves in a GATT-friendly way.
Already APEC working groups are hard at work in
different sectoral projects. In the next 12 months we
are likely to see substantial outcomes from various
projects which will yield significant practical
benefits for business. These include customs reforms,
changes to administrative barriers to market access,
development of tariff databases, and others.
In some areas it will be possible to move forward in
smaller groups of economies say like-minded groups
in the Western Pacific and then extend agreements
later to take in all APEC members, or even economies
not yet in APEC. The Trade Minister, John Kerin, and
I will therefore be asking our senior trade officials
to explore some of these options with regional
countries before the end of the year.
One possibility is to look at the potential offered by
the growing aviation market in our hemisphere. On
current trends, by 2010 Asia will have consolidated
its place as the world's pre-eminent international
aviation market. -This process could be enriched
through an expansion of regional aviation rights.
Other possibilities include regional agreements on
investment and on services, including
telecommunications, banking and insurance.
As a steel exporter, and also as a supplier of raw
materials to the steel makers of north Asia, Australia
would also be receptive to discussions on a regional
steel agreement, if the global talks remain stalled. 
9
Over coming months we will be reexamining trade policy
options in the light of the Uruguay Round outcome and
regional developments. Some of these options are
reviewed in discussion papers commissioned by the
government and prepared by Professor Richard Snape,
which will be released by the Minister for Trade on
Wednesday. The papers will contribute to the debate on our
national trade strategy which will be capped by a
comprehensive Ministerial Statement by Mr Kerin in
October. I have no doubt that regionalism will become
increasingly important to us in coming decades. That
is why I have this evening suggested a few regional
trade initiatives we will pursue. But we should
always bear in mind that the region has founded its
development on trade and, more than any other, enjoys
the benefits of the principles of interdependence and
openness. Over the next two decades we must continue
to demonstrate that the best outcome for all economic
regions is attained when we have strong global rules
while maximising regional trade opportunities. 



TEL: I j ~ ij 3 1
PRIME MINISTER ' 72/ 92
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, MP AND THE MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION
AND TRAINING, THE HON KIM BEAZLEY, MP.
A new national vocational education and training system
will be established following an historic agreement
reached between the Commonwealth, State and Territory
Governments today.
The Prime Minister, Mr Keating, said the new system would
give vocational education in Australia a truly national
focus. It will centre on a Council of Ministers and a new body
the Australian National Training Authority ( ANTA).
The Commonwealth and all States and Territories will
channel their funding for training through ANTA, creating
a genuinely national system.
The system will provide assured funding arrangements, a
consistent national approach to training, close
involvement of industry, and a high quality network of
training providers.
There will be more opportunities for young people, and
higher quality training for industry.
On the basis of the agreement reached today, the
Commonwealth will provide, over the next three years, the
additional $ 720 million for vocational education outlined
in the One Nation statement in February.
The States have agreed to at least maintain their current
level of effort for vocational education and training.
The five member board of ANTA will be made up of
acknowledged independent experts, appointed by the
Ministorial Counicil. ANTA will be a Commonwealth statuory
authority. 
2
Its key functions will include: formulation of a national
strategic plan; provision of advice to the Ministerial
Council on funding levels and distribution; and direct
planning involvement with State agencies to ensure
efficient and high quality service.
A document providing details of the new arrangements is
being released with this statement.
CANBERRA 21 JULY 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AND THE MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION TRAINING,
THE HON K. BEAZLEY MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, 21 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY ONLY
PM: Well over the years I think some of us have come to
you and said that we have used the term " truly
historic agreements"' but on this occasion it is an
entirely true description that what we have
completed with the States in a very cooperative
manner is truly a historic agreement which will
change the nature of vocational education in
Australia forever anai hil' give9at least half of the
school leavers of this country a third route to
education and training. That is, after high school
and universitf-s, another route to education and
training. And we have come from a position where
three years ago the Commonwealth virtually knew very
little about TAFE or about the training and
vocational education paths and we have come from a
position where we have been, as a Commonwealth, a
Government topping up State funds for TAFE to now
building on the One Nation p~ roposals thfirou~ gh this
mechanism to build a truly national training
authority where the States manage the operational
basis of the TAFE systems, but where national policy
is set by a Ministerial Council and where funding
both State and Commonwealth is paid at a national
training authority to be funded by interstate
training authorities. And I think what will happen
is that as a result that we will be able to build
proper training profiles for State TAFE institutions
to reflect the needs of the labour market and the
young people of this country. I would like to pay
tribute to the cooperative approach of the Premiers.
This had to be of its essence, a cooperative matter.
The States spend upwards of $ 2 billion a year on
technical and further education. The Commonwealth
spends a comparatively small amount with the States,
but that will now grow as the One Nation money is
committed to it. And that is why there was never a 
possibility of the Commonwealth taking over the
system as to funding and as to policy. There always
had to be a cooperative arrangement in running the
system with national objectives and national focus.
And even though this negotiation has not been easy
it has been cooperative and can I say that as late
as last Friday, Kim met with the NSW Premier and
came to an agreement which was ratified today by the
NSW Cabinet and that was the last and the major
State to come to the agreement and he gave me the
cheery news by car phone on Friday, hurtling back
from Mr Fahey's home. So it has been quite a long
process, but on the part of all the States, a degree
of good will to arrive at something good for the
country, for the nation, for the young people of
this country and for those adults in the community
who wish to extend their own training and open up
vocational opportunities for themselves. So I would
with those few opening words, invite Kim Beazley. to
address himself to the issue in general -anid some of
the more detailed issues which flesh out some of the
powers of the body, etc.
KB: Could I say at the outset this is the sort of
agreement that can only be negotiated between Prime
Ministers and Premiers, it is not an agreement that
you would ever reach by a decision making process
involving directly the line departments. And that
is fundamentally because it is a substantial shift.
It is of a piece, I think, with the decisions by the
uCnoimvmeornswietailetsh. to Iet ffise ctoif veal yp ietcaek e wiotvhe r t funddeicnigs iofon by
thidbmmnweaith to become the principal funding-_
source of the private school system in the country
were both essenilly initfiativesg-taken some
considerable period of time ago. And like those
initiatives in their different ways, this outcome is
essentially the sort of outcome that you would
expect to see in a Federal system, and a Federal
system which awards the principal role in decision
making on education matters to State authorities.
This is the general point that I make, and
appropriately the running on this as far as the
Commonwealth side of the issue was concerned was by
the principal officials in the Prime Minister's
_ department and in the Prime Miftiste'-s' offie-bon
Russell. As far as the material that is before you
1Is cocerned, I draw attention to these features.
Firstly, it establishes a meaningful process to get
in place a set of national strategies, national
objectives and national planning, is the first point
that I would make. The second point that I would
make on it, it establishes a process of
accountability which ensures when we go through with
each of the States from the training authority
profiling on the needs of the totality of their
vocational education and training systems, it is not
just about TAFE, it is broader than that. As they 
establish those profiles they will do so in
accordance with policy set, in the first instance by
the Ministerial Council advised by ANTA, and they
will have an accountability also frithe operations
of the system not just to ANTA but also to their own
State ministries. Thus also will proceed the
activities of the State Training Boards and I think
that, as I said, the complexity of this as well as
the elements of its simplicity reflect the nature of
our federal system. I think another point that I
would make on that is the question of effort, which
I think is terribly important. In here there is a
guarantee from the States that they will maintain
effort as far as their training activities are
concerned. Now exactly how that is defined in terms
of both outcomes and financial arrangements will of
course be discussed through with the individual
States via the Ministerial Council process and via
ANTA, but that is a very important first commitment.
What it means is that the additional Commonwealth
resources which come in over the years are not
dissipated and there will be, therefore, genuine
growth in the system as a result of the decisions
taken here today. There is also an agreement that
once those definitions are arrived at on effort that
States which are not performing to that effort will
from their own resources, not from the resources
that are coming through from the Commonwealth, will
meet those from their own resources any inadequacies
as far as that effort is concerned. As far as the
Commonwealth is concerned, we are agreeing via this
to put all the sorts of long-term training funds
that we have been operating on our own to this
point, for various purposes sometimes cajoling
industry into an effort, sometimes cajoling the
States into an effort, using the sort of seed money
method of the Commonwealth trying to have an
influence over a national agenda, we do effectively
surrender those positions and the Commonwealth
resources are put into the National Training
Authority. And we will seek in the main though we
maintain our own labour market programs, in the main
we will seek, as the States will seek, to exercise
policy influence in this area via the processes in
the Ministerial Council and the National Training
Authority. Finally, the National Training Authority
is to be an authority which is biased in its
decision making processes very much towards the
needs of industry in terms of the training outcomes
and requirements that operate both on the State
systems and private providers who are assisted. It
is also an Authority that is there to be an
authority of people with substantial expertise. And
I would believe that over time the Ministerial
Council will find that it is readily accepting of
the sorts of propositions about what ought to be
happening in our national training system that
emanate from this body. There is obviously an 
absolu . te requirement on those of us who are
participants in the Ministerial Council to make sure
that we get the personnel to serve on that Board
that delivers that sort of outcome.
PM: Why don't we leave it to you to put questions.
J: Prime Minister, if all were to go well, what would a
TAFE look like in say, ten years from now. Would it
be of the European polytechnic style?
PM: Well I think the objective would be to lift it to a
status which is the kind of status enjoyed by the
urpajpolytechnics. That is, as the national and
State traihing-pi6if. s are implemented, as the
resources are committed, as the status and quality
of the system rises, that must inevitably be the
outcome. Because we can't truly create a third path
in there without such a system. I have said before,
that Australia in a sense faces a training emergency
if it wants to be the kind of clever country it
needs to be and this has started, of course, by this
Government lifting those retention rates in
secondary school from three in ten to seven in ten,
making the tertiary places available and now picking
up the other system, TAFE, and giving it some
national structure and status. And that is why I
think that this body is a historic change, I mean,
Kim has compared it to the Commonwealth funding of
universities or the funding of the private schools
system, it is of that status. But again, it will
have that can-do quality about it where the States
and State Minister will still have the touch on the
system at the local level but where the bigger
national priorities are being brought to the policy
of the institutions.
J: Prime Minister, you said in your opening remarks
that Commonwealth takeover of TAFE was quote never a
possibility. Isn't that exactly what you proposed
in your Sunday Program appearance?
PM: Yes. I put the proposition to them that we take it
over as to policy and as to funds. They wouldn't
have that. They wouldn't accept that. That is, for
the growth money that we were adding to the system,
they thought it was not reasonable for us to subsume
funding and control for the vast block of funds they
put to the system. The One Nation proposition was
Commonwealth growth funding, joint control. The
Sunday television performance proposition was an
offer of total Commonwealth control. Now Victoria
wanted to agree to that, for instance. One State
wanted to agree to that, Commonwealth control of
Commonwealth funds. We may have ended up with two
States in it, but we wouldn't have got all the
States. Whereas I think what we have here is
something which everybody can sign up to and where 
we are going to get those national objectives down
into the system and where the States feel they have
got a legitimate role in it and where the balance of
roles is played out in that Ministerial Council.
J: Could you just elaborate a bit, Mr Keating, on what
the balance of roles will be in the Ministerial
Council between the Commonwealth, the States,
employers and unions and so forth?
PM: Well, first of all there is a simple majority in
decisions on the Ministerial Council. Each State,
each Territory is represented with one vote
regardless of size, so the ACT has a vote as against
NSW, and the Commonwealth has two votes and a
casting vote. So it gives the Commonwealth a fair
bit of leverage in the system. But again, that is
pretty much as we have it in some of the other fora
we meet the States in. But invariably votes are
never taken. Most of these things run by agreement.
This, as Kim said, will be run by a professional
body of acknowledged experts, they will be the
people largely making the policy and the Ministerial
Council is relevant in a sense in the event of a
dispute between a State Minister and the Authority,
then the Ministerial Council prevails. Now this may
happen, but the likelihood is that the body will run
by agreement.
J: Mr Keating you said that the Federal money is
channelled through this Authority. If in the event
the Federal Government did not agree with the
Ministerial Council's decisions or priorities, if
the States jacked up against it, does the Federal
Government keep to itself the right not to put in
that money?
PM: It puts in money for its commitment, the growth
money of vocational education.
J: you mention the -la-bour market, Commonwealth
labour market programs, will you be maintaining your
existing funding and putting it on top of the One
Nation funds or will it come out of the One Nation?
KB: Basically those aspects that are concerned with
vocational education and training arrangements of a
long term nature directly, like for example the
funds which we will ultimately commit to the
Carmicheal processes will go through this Authority,
as well as what we specifically put down for
vocational education and training. But where, for
example there is a requirement to immediately meet a
particular problem which emerges from the recession
for example, the sort of job training type
activities, then the Commonwealth keeps those
resources-discrete. The objective here is not to 
put through the process what the Commonwealth has to
do from time to time to address a particular labour
market problem is to put all the long term money
through that process. So it will at the end of the
day be more than just the funding that's been
committed for training in regard to TAFE. Now of
course there are a series of issues that are likely
to arise from this, and the nuts and bolts detail we
will have to discuss through with the States at the
same time for example we are discussing through with
the States the actual fine detail of the term
effort, the maintenance of effort. But our
disposition is, and indeed our agreement is, that
effectively all the training money for long term
activities will go through this way.
J: How much money are you looking at there to give the
KB: Well, those are budget matters that I'm talking
through with my colleagues at the moment and I'm not
going to foreshadow. But it will end up at the end
of the day over the 18 months before this finally
gets up and operating you'll see in this document
here there are particular elements of a timetable in
it. Now it will end up effectively at the end of
the day more than the growth money that we're
talking about.
J: Is there any particular formula for dividing the
Commonwealth component of the funding between the
States or could that change from year to year
depending of perceived needs?.
KB: It's basically in the first going to be divided per
capita, but subsequent propositions will from the
States, will of course be entertained by the
Ministerial Council and the Board and be subject to
their recommendations.
J: Mr Keating you said in your statement there'll be
more opportunities for young people. Can you
quantify that? How many extra job training places
or whatever would emerge in the decade?
PM: Well there's roughly half of the school leavers do
not undertake further training. In part this is
because the system is not geared up to take them.
It's 130,000. Now obviously no system comprehends
taking everybody up, but this system over time
should take a large proportion of them up. I mean
this is a route and branch change of the education
system of Australia.
KB: Some time ago a shortfall of I think it was,
identified a shortfall of about 150,000 places in
TAFE, some of that has been addressed by things
already done but by and large that shortfall 
remains. It would be our intention over several
triennials, in accordance with the Finn timetable,
to eliminate that.
J: Mr Beazley process of what you call effective
training market does that
KB: I can't hear you
J: You contemplate the process of what you call an
effective training market, I wonder whether you
could explain what you mean by an effective training
market. Does that take into account some sort of
voucher stem or some sort of provision of funding
so that both private and public sector institutions
can battle for the public purse?
KB: No, not a voucher system, you'd be aware that we do
provide resources now, and so do the States, for
training activities, in fact we buy places for
training activities in private providers. Now we
would want to leave ANTA and indeed if you read
through the materials here it is suggestive of it,
we would want to leave ANTA with, and the States
want us to do this too this is no big deal as far as
we're concerned, leave room for them to make
recommendations about where the location of
particular training activities ought to be. And
this in-part reflects the industry bias that I said
at the outset was associated with this. It is quite
obvious now that a large number of industries are
beginning to get themselves very active in providing
facilities and opportunities in training programs
and to develop a view about what should actually be
provided indeed there fund skills centres in TAFEs
conform precisely to what their needs would be. So
what this does basically is give this body authority
to operate across the board and put their money into
the profiling process into any particular process
they like. It doesn't mean that we're going to
introduce voucher systems, I think that's a terribly
old fashion way of talking about education and to
carry over from the'way in which people used to talk
about what ought to be done in the secondary school
system, I think what this does is give us
flexibility for more active industry involvement.
J: One of the criticisms that industry makes of the
existing TAFE structure is that the products, if you
like, of the TAFE system are not geared or cannot
dove tail with industries expectations. How will
that improve under this new system?
PM: Well part of the point of this is to construct a
training profile which does reflect labour market
realities and demands and the demands of industry
and that's why on ANTA itself we should hope to have
people who have that industry perspective and 
experience so that the body does function to look
after the needs of clients to the system rather than
perhaps service providers. Which has been one of
the criticisms of the existing TAFE system.
J: Has industry been sufficiently specific about what
it actually wants, where it wants to end up?
PM: Well in some cases, in some cases to the point where
we are actually currently contributing to joint
training arrangements with particular companies or
industry sectors. I mean I think industry is very
much attune to the needs of the training market and
what such a body could do and I'm quite sure that
they will be very clear in putting a view as to what
ANTA is capable of doing.
KB: ITAB the Industry Training Advisory Boards are to
some degrie subsumed by this process. The pilot in
process is associated with Carmichael are going to
heavily involve industry in defining in what it
needs in terms of the non-industry training
provision and all of that over time is going to be
effectively overseen by the processes entailed in
this document.
J: Just on Carmichael Mr Keating's statement yesterday
indicatea' tat _ the Carmichael scheme would take
quite some time to get up and running. Could you
give us some idea of the scopes that you see to get
that started say next year how many people
would be involved say in one year or three years
out?
KB: I think you should let us reserve something for the
Youth Summit and the employment package in the
budget.
PM: In my view it might be worth while just walking you
through a couple of the key points in here which,
just to focus you in, the first the objectives are
the objectives which we committed ourselves to in
the statement yesterday in terms of national
training authority objectives, the first lot of
objectives. If you turn to page 2 you'll see under
State training agencies, with responsibility for
vocational education training within their own
borders consistent with the agreed emphasis on
agreed national strategic plan on training policy
and the agreed State planning profile, not the
relevant or something but the agreed State planning
profile. State training agencies will be
accountable to State Ministers and Parliaments for
the operation responsibilities of their agencies and
accountable to the Ministerial Council on matters on
National policy. Now that link re-appears on page 3
at the bottom, Ministerial Council, the last dot
point, to determine national goals, objectives and 
priorities for vocational education and training, on
page 4, the fourth dot point, to agree planning
parameters and profiles for delivery of vocational
education and training nationally and the sixth dot
point, to resolve any dispute between ANTA and a
State training agency or any other issue raised by a
Minister. So in other words the Ministerial Council
resolves a dispute between ANTA and a State training
authority and a State Minister, and of course in the
resolution of that dispute the Commonwealth sits
there with two votes in the casting vote. Page
one, two, three, four, fifth dot point, to develop
in conjunction with State training agencies an
efficient and quality service provision, so even in
an operational sense ANTA has a specific power to
develop in conjunction with training agencies and
efficient and quality service provision, that is the
quality of operation the distinguishing feature
between operations and policy where that may be
blurred as we all know in public administration, in
any administration it can be blurred that while
primarily operations resile with State training
authorities ANTA is in there expressly in relation
to efficiency and quality of the delivery of
services, so it has again an express role. On
page 6 at 11, dot points one and two, to provide to
ANTA policy advice, so State training agencies
provide policy advice and develop in conjunction
with ANTA detailed State training profiles. And on
page 8 at point 31 under Funding Arrangements, the
States will at least maintain their effort for
vocational education and training on an ongoing
basis, in other words there's the maintenance there
of State effort, but when we move to outcomes on
page 9 we say any state which is demonstratively
under-achieving would agree to increase its efforts,
so it's not as if the Commonwealth then picks up the
under-achievers, as we did with Universities, with
Universities what we had to do was when they were
flagging behind the Commonwealth had to pick them
up, this is not the case here. And they're the main
points.
J: Prime Minister, I mean for example, if the
Commonwealth decided that in order to rebuild
Victoria's manufacturing base you needed to up their
contribution to their TAFE system and the smaller
States decided this was unfair for whatever variety
of reasons isn't it conceivable that national
objective could be overturned by a combination of
the smaller States?
PM: I don't think so.
KB: At the moment now this has enormous focus because it
really has required the Prime Minister and Premiersto
break it all through. There's just no question
about that. You can't make a shift like this 
without the heads of the Governments of this country
being involved. This program as it builds up with a
very authoritative Board, well supported by
industry. We'll sink back, not sink back that's a
bad expression to use, we'll return to the
activities of the line Departments, and they just
basically don't operate that way. I mean I've had a
couple of experiences now of so called MOVIC
ministerial meetings which will effectively be the
Council the Ministerial Council and we rely very
heavily on the advice of our officials in an
organisation called VTAC which supports MOVIC.
There'll obviously in this particular instance be a
lot of discussion around the funding formula and
it's quite possible the funding formula will
continue from time to time to be of very direct
interest, but the way in which the profiles are
developed, over time, more and more expertise will
come to play in this. The idea I think of the sort
of States ganging up to roll the Commonwealth and
another couple of States I think is just outside the
framework of how those operations take place, it's
just not a people can invent sort of thin edge
of the wedge arguments about anything associated
with any part of our federation but I think the
practicalities of life mean that on a day to day
basis that sort of thing just won't happen.
PM: The reason I walked you through the document a
moment ago was just to demonstrate the sort of
tension, the creative tension that's in the design,
that is that prerogatives of the States and the
Commonwealth and the national interests here are I
think, set nicely in balance. I noticed in the
Australian newspaper today someone was sold a pup.
You can sell people pups easily around this
building, on the basis that this was a sort of walk
over for the States. Well if you just go through
those points you'll see where the national
where ANTA's powers are clear and where the
ministerial powers are clear in resolving disputes
between States, training agencies, ministers and
ANTA, where States have to maintain their financial
effort, where the Commonwealth will not be bringing
up under performing States.
J: Will this do anything for the jobless?
PM: Who wrote the Aus story, by the way? Sorry, my
apologies.
J: In the short term could this tell us the number of
unemployed young youth places will be
available next year when it becomes...?
KB: Well, yes I think it will. I think that the growth
money, given that it is going in on the basis that
the States maintain effort, will allow a pretty 
substantial addressing of those sorts of
requirements. I think Dave Phillips 100 million
provided about 30,000 places, 30,000 to 40,000
places from recollection. So, that came through in
the last set of money so you can, on the basis of
that, start calculating what 70 million next year
will do, what 140 million the year after will do and
being able to plan with 70 million knowing you are
getting 140 million. I think that what this will
provide is a very substantial ballast to back up
other elements of the labour market program, which
we will be bringing forward as short-term measures
to deal with the unemployment problems, where they
require a TAFE element to the resolution. An awful
lot of Commonwealth training programs, not just TAFE
but also private provider elements. An awful lot of
Commonwealth short-term labour market programs
require access to TAFE provision. Now this will
massively increase the compacity of TAFE and the
private providers to back those programs up. So,
without wishing to identify, because you can't place
by place, a resolution, the capacity to support
other elements to the labour market programs put
people in training, take them out of an area of just
hopeless unproductive unemployment. It is a massive
effective back-up to that.
J: ( inaudible)
KB: Well it will have its own act, we will have to
legislate to establish a separate Commonwealth
training authority in conformity with the conditions
that are laid down here. There will be, of course,
a requirement for us to also pass, as we always do,
a vocational education and training act with
what we don't do now but will do next time, is
with a triennial funding base in it and then there
will be a cross-over between those two Acts. Now
the one act will give the Commonwealth Minister
authorities to dispense funds and the other Act
would oblige the Commonwealth Minister to dispense
funds in accordance with this agreement.
J: bodies in terms of accountability will go to, for
instance, the Senate Estimates Committees?
KB: Yes, as with all areas of my portfolio, and indeed
as the statutory authorities have found from time to
time they will find themselves explaining life to
the Senate Estimates Committees.
J: Prime Minister you nominated the Finn Committee
yesterday in your background paper o-n take-up rates
for TAFE, 15-19 year olds, have you any idea about
how much additional spending over and above the $ 720
million that will require to achieve that sort of
objective? 
PM: No, I mean you could have a stab at it, but I think
the point was the Finn and Deveson Committee smoked
out what the Commonwealth needed to have smoked out
about the way the TAFE system functions in this
country, and to focus on long term pathways for the
transition from school to work. Now, that's where
we started it, we then got into the act with capital
and recurrent, we then added to that with the One
Nation money and we have now taken it up for this.
So, all the things which Kim ( Beazely) is doing now
with Carmichael, those long lines of transition
between school and work really couldn't be, I don't
think, over time anyway, successfully accomplished
without ballast in this system. That's going to
cost money and the growth is obviously going to come
from the Commonwealth, I mean, the Commonwealth over
time will be spending more then the One Nation money
on vocational education.
J: interface between employers and training,
getting people trained for jobs. Obviously an
important part of that is going to be on the job
training and related to that the issue of a training
wage. Is it your objective, in the discussions you
will have tomorrow, to get a broad agreement on the
structure of
PM: I think Kim made the point earlier we are not here
portending tomorrow's outcome, or trying to secondguess
them, that's for you to do.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well that is just another way of asking the same
question. Which I got on to in about 3
milliseconds. And I hope within 5 milliseconds to
put an answer back to you saying that is what he
asked.
J: could have a role to play in whatever is decided
in the context of the Carmichael?
PM: Look, let's face this fact, the truth is that in the
growth of the labour market in the ' 80s a lot of the
problems of the transition from school to work, for
untrained people, was overlooked in the great sweep
of employment through the ' 80s. Not by us in terms
of getting the stock of trained people up, obviously
through participation and in the first instance in
tertiary where we had a clear Commonwealth financial
responsibility. But we are taking that further, to
make that transition between schools and work
through vocational education and the pathways which
are comprehended in the Carmichael recommendations,
which Kim has been trying to work through to some
sort of conclusion, that is transferring a report in
to policy. It is there that this matters, it is
there that we will look immediately beyond, as I 
said yesterday, in the two things, the first is that
big transition from school to work, and the other
for those teenagers whose later teenage years will
have preceded as fundamental change, those who
are currently unemployed. Now, that's the problem
we will be focussing on tomorrow, and also those
people where with this in place or not in place will
just never take up structured training there will
always be a proportion of people who will never take
up structured training and trying to find a role for
them as well, that's in a sense what Geoff was
asking me about earlier, and which we will be trying
to at least focus upon tomorrow.
J . I mean if it was a long term structural
decline in those types of jobs, I mean how
PM: Well I don't want to go through all that today,
that's for tomorrow.
J: ( inaudible)
KB: Yes, I agree with you that there is a problem there,
but I think it is changing, I think there is a
growing realization that technical and further
education does provide you with a type of education
most likely to be directly related to employment.
Now, as I think as other elements of the agenda
start to impact like the Carmichael proposals, like
the increasing involvement in, for example, of
industries and creation of things like skill centres
of which there have been some forty odd created over
the last few years. As this all begins to come
through what a young person looking at their life
after secondary school has before them is the
prospect of some very highly relevant, well
structured, certificated forms of training open to
them and many may well chose, I think, presented
with that and with a qualitative improvement that
always invariably comes with more money, will look
at a really genuine choice. I think you will find
parental attitudes change, and I think you will find
young peoples attitudes change when confronted with
that, but it will take a couple of years.
PM: And the hobby courses have been stripped out of the
system and the focus only with apprenticeships is
changing and that's why the State training profiles
are going to matter enormously. Because that's
where the status will be, it is with them that will
come the status, but the point I made earlier is the
key point I think, that is it is the bigger issue of
the transition from school to work, which Kim is
working on, which is the issue. This is part of the
facilitation mechanism of that.
J: Why did you describe it as a training emergency? 
PM: Because I think that the nature of the economy we
are going to have, the nature of investment in the
1990s is going to be not chasing inflationary gains
but chasing production, that is, we will be looking
at product, product innovation and exports, import
replacement, and it is going to require, that
structure, more trained people than we have been
able to provide in the past and particularly more
jobs for people who are trained as distinct from
those who are untrained.
KB: My department estimates that 80 per cent of the jobs
which will come into our commnunity between now and
the end of the decade will require year 12 standard
of education or above, in order to fill it. We are
not yet at a position where we could say that we are
necessarily meeting those targets, and in those
circumstances that requires activity on our part.
PM: I think one of Australia's great comparative
advantages has been education. In the last 25 years
we let that slip, and to climb back up the
international division of labour we have to reassert
again that comparative advantage. And this
is about some of that re-assertion.
J: Is it your intention to have a national
certification system for TAFE?
KB: Well, of course those sorts or issues are going to
be the life blood of ANTA, the attitudes and the
views that they develop on that over time will be
very important. And as in virtually all other areas
of education, people looking at issues of national
certification, I think in this circumstance industry
is so diverse that you are more likely to sort of
get national recognition of forms of certification,
as opposed to national certification that's more or
less what we are aiming at at this stage, I think
the other objective would be, as they used to say in
the Indian newspapers when I worked there, in
its tendencies.
PM: That will send everyone back to the dictionaries.
J: any of the logistics, like where this is going
to be headquartered and those sort of things?
KB: We haven't worked out headquarters yet, that will be
a matter for the board, the authority.
J: How big a constraint is the fact that the TAFE
systems have a lot of people in them who are
permanent staff who are teaching things of less and
less relevance?
PM: Well that's part of the system, isn't
it, I mean that is what it is about, in part. 
J: So some of the money can be used to redundancy
packages etc, etc?
KB: Well I am not sure about that. I think that
basically what is happening in the States at the
moment is a serious addressing of those problems
now. That is happening all over the country, it is
not a problem which has been ignored hitherto,
people have got on to it. I think there is
obviously going to have to be as curicula as changed
as a result of all these investigatory processes and
this process itself. Then there is going to have to
be a considerable amount of re-training for some
teaches and all of them to be able to deliver the
outcomes that people want. But it is premature to
talk about the resources being used in any specific
set of programs to address any individual teachers
problems at this point.
PM: Look, can I just say it is always a pretty good
indication when some of you leave you have had
enough, so I think we will leave to.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P* J KEATING MP
REVIEW OF AUSTRALIA ' S INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
In the light of the fundamental changes in the world since
the end of the Cold War, the Government commissioned
earlier this year a review of the overall impact of changes
in international circumstances on the roles and priorities
of the Australian intelligence agencies and of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade as a provider of
reporting.
The review examined how Australia's interests have been
affected by the rapid and significant changes in
international circumstances, whether Australia still needs
the intelligence structure it has and, if so, whether the
roles and pRiorities of our intelligence agencies need to
be adjusted. It also looked at how changes in
international circumstances would affect management and
coordination arrangements between the Australian
intelligence and security agencies, and Australia's
partnership and liaison arrangements.
The review was conducted by the Secretaries Committee on
Intelligence and Security, the principal group of officials
advising Ministers on security and intelligence matters.
It includes the Secretaries of my Department, Foreign
Affairs and Trade, Defence, Finance, and the Attorney-
General's Department; and the Chief of the Defence Force
and the Directors-General of Security and of the Office of
National Assessments.
The agencies subject to the review were:
the Office of National Assessments ( ONA);
the Defence Intelligence Organisation ( DIO);
the Defence Signals Directorate ( DSD);
the Australian Secret Intelligence Organisation ( ASIS);
the Australian Security Intelligence Organization
( ASIO); and
the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade as a
provider of reporting on overseas developments.
The Government considers that global and regional
relationships, freed from the rigidity of the Cold War
ideological and strategic divide, will become more complex
and diverse. A more fluid international environment will
require a sharper appreciation of Australian interests and 
2
priorities, of the resources available to pursue our goals,
and of the need to allocate those resources effectively.
As with our defence policies, our approach to the
collection and assessment of intelligence will need to be
increasingly self-reliant.
The requirement for accurate, informed judgments about the
issues and regions of most importance to Australia will not
diminish with the end of the Cold War. The intelligence
community, whether by collecting information which is not
available elsewhere, or by providing high-quality analysis
and assessment of political, economic and strategic matters
important to our national interests, will continue to have
a vital role to play.
The Government has decided not to alter the basic structure
of Australia's intelligence community which was set in
place after Mr Justice Hope's comprehensive reviews, for
reasons of enduring concern relating to efficiency and
effectiveness. Essential to that structure is the
separation of the assessment, policy and foreign
intelligence collection functions -a philosophy which the
Government continues to embrace.
The Government endorses the judgment in the review that,
since the completion of Mr Justice Hope's first Royal.
Commission on Intelligence and Security, the priorities of
the Australian agencies have been properly focused on
regional areas and issues of most relevance to Australia's
national interests. The end of the Cold War, therefore,
does not call for a fundamental reordering of priorities.
In general terms, political and strategic questions will
remain the first priority for Australia's intelligence
agencies. Economic issues will, in relative terms, become
more important in the post-Cold War era of the 1990s, but
assessment in economic areas generally depends less on
intelligence sources than is the case for political and
strategic subjects. Issues relating to transnational
criminal activity, the mass movement of people, and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction will also
warrant higher priority.
Consistent with the philosophy of a separation of the
assessment, policy and foreign intelligence collection
functions, the Government considers that the existing roles
of the individual agencies remain valid in the 1990s. The
rationale outlined by Mr Justice Hope for ASIO as a freestanding,
non-executive, advisory intelligence security
agency remains relevant in the 1990s and the Government has
therefore decided that ASIO should continue to have the
roles and responsibilities laid down in existing
legislation. The Soviet threat certainly informed an important component
of ASIO's activities, but threats from other sources of
foreign interference and politically motivated violence
have been important to ASIO for some time, and will remain
so. However, the implications for ASIG of the changes in 
the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe are more farreaching
thian for the other agencies.
The Government has therefore dec ided that, while ASIO's
capacity to meet its responsibilities must be maintained,
there is scope for resource reductions.
The Government has also decided to pursue important changes
to management and coordination arrangements.
A new medium-to-long-term planning mechanism is to be
established. This mechanism will, for the first time,
embrace both overt and covert intelligence collection,
recognising the centrally important role of the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade in keeping the Australian
Government informed about developments abroad.
The new mechanism, to be called the Foreign Intelligence
Planning Document, will provide for the integration of
judgments about changes in the international environment
with decisions about resources and the balance and mix of
skills across the intelligence agencies.
The Government has also decided to revise the agencies'
annual reporting requirements. Henceforth, the agencies
will be required to present advice to the Government
concerning the allocation of approved resources against
strategic priorities and program objectives.
The review stresses the need for a self-reliant
intelligence capability in those areas and issues of
highest priority for Australia, but recognises the benefits
which continue to flow to us from the long-standing
partnership agreements with the United States, United
Kingdom, New Zealand and Canada. It also recognises the
importance of developing and strengthening regional
intelligence liaison arrangements.
Because assessments and judgments made now about the
implications of changed world circumstances need to be
monitored to ensure their continuing validity, the
Government is taking steps to ensure that the review just
completed does not constitute a one-off exercise; rather it
is the starting point for a process of change with specific
issues being addressed in an on-going way, ensuring
Australia's intelligence and security agencies remain able
to meet our needs in a rapidly changing world.
Given the sensitivity of the issues involved, a public
version of the review report will not be prepared. But in
accordance with established practice, I have provided the
Leader of the Opposition with a copy of the full report
which informed the Government's decisions.
CANBERRA 21 July 1992 



PRINIMISET E
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH DERRYN HINCH, CHANNEL SEVEN
22 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
DH: Prime Minister Keating, good evening.
PM: Good evening Derryn.
DH: You called it, did it work, or should I say will it
work?
PM: Well it was as good a meeting as I think we could have
had, all the people who are material to this issue
being resolved, that is the two issues, the long run
traini , ng from school to work, and picking up those
jyoung people-for whom that transition will come to
late. Thiat is, those who are currently unemployed,
all the people that need to be talking about that were
at the meeting today and it was a very good meeting.
DH: The instant criticism you will get from people is
where are the jobs, we have to have them now.
PM: Well that's in terms of the current younguemlyd
that's about 125, 000 of them. But we are doing two
things, yesterday as part of this I announced a very
big breakthrough with the Commonwealth and the States
forming a National Training Authority. Now what that
will do is put into place along side the universities
a technical and further education system of substance,
and quality, and status to take kids from school to
work, to train them in school to work in the long
transition, which we have been trying to arrive at for
many years.
DH: With this $ 720 million for TAFE__ I remember some
months ago you were sort of bullying the States and
saying if you don't come along with me we will start
our own system and freeze you out of the money, right?
PM: That's right. Well you have got to push and shove to
get anything done Derryn, and we said to the States, 
look, we don't mind this being cooperative but it has
to happen. We can't leave kids, half of the school
leavers about 150,000 each year untrained, we can't
let this happen. Because the jobs for untrained
people which were around when you and I were kids are
not there now.
DH: But you have said recently that we are the first
computer generation that's hurting the job pool etc,
we can't train kids for dead-end jobs. But there are
people out there now who will take even a dead-end
job.
PM: But the job doesn't exist Derryn. What was your first
job in journalism?
DH: My first job was as a cadet for a newspaper.
PM: Well mine was a clerk. Yours may still be there, but
mine certainly isn't. I think most of those jobs are
not there at any price, they are gone. Because
basically the jobs are done by machines, by computers,
by facilitation. So, the trick now is for the jobs
that are there, the trained jobs, they are only going
to be taken by people who are trained and yet we left
so many young people untrained. So what today was
about, and yesterday, is getting the kids out of
school who don't go to university to train them for
these jobs.
DH: There is an irony here that Malcolm Fraser, when he
had high unemploymenRt figures, he would say things
like stay in school, keep them in the schools longer.
Now you are saying, it didn't work for him, you are
saying stay in various training courses, stay in
school as well.
PM: But it has worked for us. When we became the
Government three kids in ten completed school, seven
left untrained, not even at secondary level. Now that
is seven in ten completing secondary school. We hope
soon it will be nine in ten, and they will go into
university in the 50 per cent extra places we have
created and they will go into a modernised technical
and further education system. In other words, in a
period of seven or eight years Derryn, in Australia we
will have made a twenty year educational change in
about six or seven. And it is those people, young
people forgotten in the days of Malcolm Fraser, seven
in ten not completing even secondary school, let alone
university or TAFE, they are the ones to be picked up..
But the ones for whom that transition have left
behind, that's the 120,000 who are unemployed now.
DH: There's nothing for them.
PM: Well that's what today was about as well, that was
trying to set up traineeships and work experience and 
training opportunities to have business take those
people up.
DH: Whenever you give business a hand it looks like you
are handing just more profits to business even when
times are tough. But why don't you bite-the-bullet
and do things like get rid of the 17.5 per cent
holiday loading which would make factories and other
businesses, take a lot of pressure off them come the
Christmas holidays? Why don't you do that?
PM: Well because in this, I think someone made the point
today that holiday leave loading represented I think
four cents an hour for the employment of a young
person. I mean compared to the rates we are talking
about it is an infinitesimal change.
DH: And yet small businesses and factories they tell us
that come Christmas they dread it because they shut
down for five weeks and they have got to find all that
money, that 17.5 per cent for every employee all the
time.
PM: The people who are likely to be picked up in
employment here are people who would not be largely
commercially employed. That is, we will be offering
as a result of this meeting, young people the
possibility of work experience and training and
possibly linking that to a job later. Linking that to
an employment opportunity later. That is, training
with employment and going on to work experience. Now
that is the way of getting people back into the
workforce, many indeed for the first time into the
workforce, and that will mean we will have to agree to
a structure which business will take people up in.
DH: And that's for stopping the rotten future, but it's
not helping now.
PM: No, no that's for now. This if for the current group.
You see a lot of today's discussion was about how we
settle on a set of wage arrangements which fix the
current group of unemployed, while at the same time
being part of the longer run transition.
DH: This is the $ 3.00 something an hour training issue?
PM: No, that was John Hewson's thing, we rejected that.
The meeting rejected that today, and the young people
rejected that. They won't live on $ 3.00 an hour.
DH: No, I am saying the $ 3.00 in addition to whatever they
are earning, if they are in training they may be
earning $ 4.00 or $ 5.00 an hour, but then if they are
doing some other work they will get extra?
PM: Well we are looking at a minimal level of pay, but
with training involved. Whereas, under John Hewson's 
proposal if you pay someone $ 114.00 a week, which is
less than $ 3.00 an hour, and then they work three days
a week and have two days training they are only
getting three fifths of $ 114.00, they are getting
$ 65.00 a week. In other words, under our proposition
we are looking at propositions where we give people
work experience and training. So they are not just
getting some work experience and then it dies and
finishes but they get an accredited training to go on
and transfer their skills to some other place.
DH: Mr Prime Minister, what about payroll taxes, now
that's a State issue I know, but why not put pressure
on the States to say wipe your $ 5 billion in payroll
taxes around the country on the condition give say,
per cent of it back to people who hire new young
staff, and may be 25 per cent or some figure to people
who invest the money that they save in new equipment,
what about those sorts of plans?
PM: I don't think that's the real problem. For a start I
don't think that State budgets could stand that kind
of loss in revenue, but I don't think that's the
problem. The problem here is that the jobs for young
people untrained have largely disappeared. And people
will put them on, provided that it suits them, and we
say we only want to see them put on if they get
training experience to give them accredited training
to take to another job, in other words we give them a
future. The Government doesn't mind therefore coming
to the party with a job subsidy, to be in there to
encourage an employer to put them on, to give them
that work experience and that training, and that I
think is going to matter. Now if States wish to give
relief on payroll taxes, a matter for them Derryn, but
most of them can't afford to.
DH: I think Joan Kirner who can afford it less than
anybody, has said she'll consider it.
PM: Well, and good on her, but I think that won't be the
key thing. Even if they said look the payroll tax is
off, employers are not going to hire unskilled young
people for jobs that are not there. They'll-only take
them on as part of dealing with this problem, that is
from an Australian fairness point of view, trying to
do something useful to take these kids up and give
them experience, and where we can train them and give
them a future.
DH: Now all is obviously going to cost you money, may be a
lot of money, have you been tempted to renege and to
wipe the promised tax cuts? 
PM: No, no, the tax cuts are further out and these kinds
of changes can be made without any problem in relation
to the tax cuts. There's also propositions been put
to us to raise income tax levels. But the revenue
consequences, the revenue benefits are so small as to
not matter in the general run of the size of these
budgets. We can do this, but what we want t o do is
something good and sensible and structured and
planned, that does something real about this group of
current young unemployed people but at the same time
fits it into the longer run transition.
DH: What about some of the other things that have been
floated recently, and I don't necessarily agree with
them, like youth_* corps1 orpeace corps or consc~ zjpin1._
PM: That got a run today and had a lot of support at the
meeting. That is had support of the National Farmers'
Federation the ACTU, Archbishop Hollingworth, people
looking at rural employment schemes, 2rovincial
-mp-1Qy! Jint slemes, regional-employment schemes.
DH: Are they a chance?
PM: They're a chance. Yes, they've got a place, I think
they've got a definite place in the scheme of things.
DH: that didn't they, with tree planting and things
like that?
PM: Particularly in regional areas, where there isn't the
urban industrial base and in provincial areas, in some
the provincial cities where local government can do
things immediately and well. As well as the States,
in regional areas. So I think that is something which
did have a fair degree of support today and which I
think we can usefully do.
DH: Have you ever been unemployed?
PM: I was for a while, yeah.
DH: What happened?
PM: Well it's a pretty lousy feeling. I actually know, I
think I know what people feel, because you do feel as
though the doors are all shut, that no-one wants you.
It's a terrible feeling. I think its got to happen to
you to know what it's like.
DH: One of the biggest criticism of Canberra, and you get
it all the time, you're in your ivory tower, you're
too far removed, there is that famous quote from
Margaret Whitlam once who said that inflation was a
lot of hooha. Do you wear any of that, do you accept
any of that? 
PM: Well I was unemployed at one stage for about six
weeks, and it's a pretty unpleasant experience
knocking on doors trying to find a job and sort of at
the time no-one wants you. You get the feeling
awfully quickly there's something wrong with you.
DH: Now I say to you, people who talk about the Summit
that's been on the news tonight and people talk about
it all this week. Say you Paul Keating, as a father,
not as a Prime Minister have a teenage son who hasn't
worked in six months and has a mate who hasn't worked
and maybe a girlfriend who hasn't worked. What do you
say to him to keep his spirits up, or get them back
up?
PM: Well I think you've got to say something real, and
that is the government's got to do something that
defies the commercial judgement of a business that
would otherwise not hire them.
DH: But if you say that the Government's got to do
something you're son's going to say that bugger
Keating in Canberra, I mean what do you say to your
son to get his spirits back up and to say to him, OK
this is how you can get through it.
PM: Well the main thing is _ growtecho, n omic growth, as the
thing gets going, the main thing is to train people.
That's why the higher retention rates in school is the
right thing. They then get training in universities
or technical education and they find the trained job.
It's the untrained jobs that's the problem. And it's
the ones who are now untrained, that have fallen out
of school, that where trying to pick up. When I say
that the Government are doing something, I mean in the
context of business and the unions and community
groups to find these employment experience and
training.
DH: One last quick question, we are running out of time.
This was the Youth Summit. What about the 400,000
though, the lonfg term unemployed, who will be
unemployed some of them through 1995-96?
PM: Well that's where in the budget we will look at labour
market prq. ams for the mature aaed unemplpyqd people.
The big remedy to unemployment Derryn, is obviously
economic growth. The economy is already growing, we
probably will clock up the better part of 2 per cent
for the year June. That's faster than Europe's
growing, it's as fast as North America's growing.
We'll probably grow faster next year. But there'll
still be those people, who you correctly identify who
are unemployed, and the labour market programs, that
is the work experience and support programs of the
Commonwealth, this year already, are handling about
400,000 people. And we intend to look at that further
in the budget. 



STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
BACKGROUND STATEMENT TO THE MEETING ON YOUTH T RAINING
AND EMPLOYMENT 22 JULY 1992
INTRODUCT[ ON
Youth unempLoynient is too high. It is unacceptable in a society like ours which prides
itself on adherence to values of equality and opportunity. It is why I have committed
myself, and this Government, to the fight against unemployment. And in this discussion
it is important to remember that our economic success is inseparable from our social
success. Indeed, any economic measures we take must be a means to an end, that end
being a fairer society.
Any lasting solution to this problem must take account of the broader changes to thejyouth
labour market which have been occurring since at least the 1960s. Over the last 30 years
economic, social and technological changes have radically transformed the types of jobs
for which young people are competing. But the manner in which we prepare our young
people for employment has not kept pace with these changes.
We must put in place new arrangements which better prepare young people for the world
of work. Fundamentally, the ages of 15 to 19 must be seen more as a time of vocational
preparation. The National Meeting on Youth Training and Employment, which I am convening on
Wednesday 22 July, will tackle both the longer term issue of assisting young people to
make the transition from school to work and the immediate issue of how best to help
young people who are currently unemployed obtain work. The calibre of the participants
in the meeting, and the quality of the submissions which have been received, bodes well
for a fruitful discussion.
As I have said before, youth unemployment is a national problem, and the solution will
require commitment from all. T'he value of Wednesday's meeting is that it will bring
together young people, employers, unions, community groups and governments. We will
all benefit from the different perspectives and the opportunity to discuss the issues
together. 
This background statement sets out a framework for understanding and tackling the issues
surrounding the training and employment of young people, including the problem of
youth unemployment. These ideas will be discussed at Wednesday's meeting along with
the ideas and proposals of other participants. I will announce specific measures in these
areas next week after the Government has carefully considered the views canvassed at
Wednesday's meeting.
Although this statement and Wednesday's meeting focus on youth unemployment, the
Government recognises that the problems facing other unemployed people are just as
important. The problems of the long-term unemployed are particularly pressing. We are
currently considering ways of addressing the general unemployment problem and
measures wilbe announced in the Budget next month.
The Changinir Nature of the Youth Labour Market
There are 1,317,000 young people aged 15-19 years. Of these, 857,000 are in full-time
education, 240,000 are in full-time employment and 124,000 are unemployed and
looking for full-time work.
It is important to understand that the structure of the youth labour market has changed
dramatically over the last 30 years. During the 1960s, only about one-third of young
people completed 12 years of schooling. Most teenagers left school early, and obtained an
unskilled job. These early school leavers received little formal vocational training unless
they were able to obtain an apprenticeship in one of the traditional trades.
However the number of jobs suitable for young, unskilled workers has been falling
continuously, from around 600,000 in 1966 to around 240,000 now. In the mid 1960s,
nearly six in ten 15-19 year olds had a full time job. This now stands at two in ten. On
the other side of the coin, thirty years ago only one in three 15-19 year olds were
attending education full time, compared to almost two in three now.
The shrinking of the teenage full-time labour market is associated, primarily, with
changes in technology, changes in the way in which work is organised and changes in the
industrial structure of our economy. The occupations in which the largest reductions in
job opportunities for young people have occurred illustrate this point. They include
clerical workers, typists, telephone operators, postal workers, bookkeepers and cashiers.
Most of these tasks are now handled by computers or advanced communications
technology. In other occupations, such as nurses, draftspeople and technicians, rising qualification
levels, often associated with technological change, mean that these jobs are no longer
open to early school leavers. 
Greater use by employers of contractors to provide specific services has also had an
impact on the number of unskilled jobs available for young people. For example the
growth in courier services means that there are fewer ' messenger boys' hired.
It is important to appreciate that these changes are associated with improvements in
productivity. Thecy have been necessary for Australian industry to compete on world
markets and to provide high quality services to Australian consumers. But new
technologies and structural change create new, more interesting and more highly skilled
jobs. The challenge is to ensure that young people receive the education and training that
they need to be able to perform these new jobs.
A more highly trained workforce can also encourage technological change and
productivity growth. Workers with higher levels of skills are better able to implement and
adapt new processes in the workplace.
While the loss of full-time jobs for young people has been occurring since the 1960s, the
decline has been particularly acute during the recessions of the early 1970s, early 1980s
and now. In understanding the reasons for this, it is interesting that the Reserve Bank
Bulletin states The recent deterioration of the youth labour market does not seem to be
due to any change in their relative wage levels, which have been declining steadily since
the mid-1970s'.
it is apparent that, while the number of jobs increases slightly during the recovery, the
previous employment levels are not regained.
During a recession, the need to cut costs becomes even more pressing and employers
introduce measures to enhance productivity. For understandable reasons, employers are
more likely to lay off more recent recruits than long-standing employees. These factors
impact across age groups but invariably reduce youth employment opportunities. During
the recovery, employers are looking for skilled employees who can operate effectively in a
more productive environment. The unskilled, young job seeker is not sought out for
hiring. in this context, it is important to note that the number of young people employed as
apprentices have actually regained pre-recession levels during the mid 1970s and mid
1980s. It appears that these structured training arrangements which combine employment
and of-h-o -training, and which have the strong support of employers, offer protection
against the long term decline in teenage employment. If these structured training
arrangements are extended into a wider range of industries, more young people will
receive this protection.
A Period of Vocational PeWaration
We must understand these trends and build on them in developing our response to youth
unemployment. 
The ful-time unskilled jobs for young people are fast disappearing and, in any case, they
consigned young people to a life without stimulating work and without high levels of
remuneration. We need our young people to become our brightest and best workers, capable of
mastering new technologies and applying them in innovative ways which will give
themselves and Australian industry an edge.
To meet this challenge we now must view the later teenage years as a period of vocational
preparation. Vocational preparation means that young people, through their education and training
experiences, acquire the knowledge, the self-confidence, and the proficiency in both key
employment competencies and specific vocational skills, to find interesting employment
and be in a position to upgrade their skills throughout their working life.
In the world of work which Australia's young people are now entering, skill acquisition
will be a life long process. Over the last 30 years we have seen some skills become
obsolete. We have also seen many new areas of knowledge and skill become common
place. All indications are that the pace of such change will become more rapid.
Thec education and training of young people must prepare them for this change, in part by
a strong emphasis on generic comnpetencies and skills, rather than skills specific to a
particular technology. Further, their training must be formally recognised and accredited
so as to facilitate future skills upgrading and mobility.
There has already been a substantial shift of 15-19 year olds from employment to
education and training. When this Government came to office, 36 per cent of young
people who started secondary school stayed on to complete Year 12. That proportion has
steadily increased and last year over 70 per cent twice as many as in 1982 completed a
full secondary schooling.
This is a dramatic increase in the proportion of young people staying on to Year 12.
Because of an equivalent increase in Commonwealth funding, a large proportion close
to 40 per cent of these Year 12 graduates currently make the transition from school to
university. In 1983 there were 335,000 Australian students attending universities. Last year there
were about 500,000, an increase of 165,000, the equivalent of 17 new medium-sized
institutions in 8 years. Commonwealth funding for higher education places is expected to
increase by 50 per cent between 1983 and 1994. We will be spending a total of $ 13
billion on higher education over the 1992-94 triennium.
However, each year around 130,000 young people, about half of all school-leavers, leave
school and enter the workforce without undertaking any further education and training; 
only 15 per cent of girls go on to training, in part because of the narrow range of
occupations which offer apprenticeships. This group receives virtually no formal
vocational preparation. They face limited employment prospects and are more likely to
experience unemployment. It is this group, to date largely ignored by the post-school
education system, that we need to focus on.
The increased participation in secondary and higher education cannot be explained as
young people ' in retreat from the recession'. The increases have occurred throughout the
boom years of the 1980s.
These are dramatic figures, testimony to the Government's commitment to education and
representative of a fundamental social change to the way in which Australians participate
in education.
Some sceptics regard the increased emphasis on education and training merely as a means
of ' keeping the kids off the streets'. This is not so.
In ' The Competitive Advantage of Nations', Michael Porter of the Harvard Business
School argues that ' Education and training constitute perhaps the single greatest longterm
leverage point available to all levels of government in upgrading industry'.
He goes on to say that while ' improving the general education system is an essential
priority... as important is setting policies that link the education system to industry and
encourage industry's own efforts at training'.
clearly we have a long way to go in getting industry and educational institutions together
to produce the type of education and training which will maximise the opportunities for
young people while meeting the needs of business. The Government's emphasis in recent
years on reform of vocational education and entry level training reflects the urgency of
this task.
in response to this increased emphasis on training, some people ask ' training for what?'
They do not see the link between training and a job. A recent CAI discussion paper
provides a very clear answer to this question. Among the most important reasons given by
employers on why they are often reluctant to employ young people, three factors stand
out: lack of maturity
skill levels too low
lack of relevant training
Each of these barriers which employers see to employing more young people can be
addressed by ensuring that high quality vocational preparation, developed by and in
conjunction with industry, is available to young people who do not attend university. 
High levels of vocational training give young people a much better chance of obtaining
employment. In May 1991, the unemployment rate for those aged 20-24 years who did
not complete the highest level of secondary school was 21 per cent. In contrast, for those
aged 20-24 years who had a trade qualification the unemployment rate was 9.2 per cent
and for those with a degree it was 7.6 per cent.
Reform of Vocational Education and Traifing
The education and training systems in successful industrialised countries include the
following characteristics:
high educational standards;
the majority of students receive education and training with some practical
orientation; there are respected and high quality forms of tertiary education in addition to the
universities.
Australia's schools and universities offer education of a high international standard. The
level of participation of our young people in universities also compares favourably with
that of other nations. However, the weak link in our system is vocational education and
training, especially in terms of the limited size of the sector.
While school retention rates were rising and higher education was undergoing sustained
growth, participation rates in TAFE the major public provider of vocational education
and training actually fell slightly between 1983 and 1990.
While the number of young people ( 15 to 24 years old) with university degrees rose by 43
per cent between 1983 and 1991, the number with trade qualifications fell by eleven per
cent. The limitations of our existing vocational education and training system, particularly
compared to that of other countries, is also stark. On one measure, in Germany around
per cent of immediate post-compulsory education and training places are represented by
vocational preparation. In Australia it is only 20 per cent.
Apprenticeships dominate the existing vocational preparation options for young people in
Australia. They accounted for around six in ten vocational preparation places in the late
1980s. Full-time attendance at TAFE represented slightly less than three in ten.
Although the current apprenticeship arrangements have the advantages of effectively
combining work and vocational training and providing some protection against the
decline in teenage jobs, they also have a number of shortcomings. In particular, the 
close interaction between industry and vocational education and training
providers, to ensure that the training system operates within a strategic plan that
reflects industry's needs and priorities;
an effective training market, with public and private provision of both high level,
advanced technical training and further education opportunities for the workforce
and for the community generally;
an efficient and productive network of publicly funded providers that can compete
effectively in the training market;
increased opportunities and improved outcomes for individuals and target groups,
including school Icavers, to enhance their employment outcomes; and
improved cross-sectoral links between schools, higher education and vocational
education and training.
To achieve these objectives, the Commonwealth has been working with the States to
develop a new national model for vocational education and training for this country. Only
through a national approach can a country of just 17 million people hope to equip its
young people with the skills necessary to make their way in an increasingly competitive
world economy. Skills and education along with our great natural resources are what will
bring secure prosperity to this country.
Upgrading vocational education and training requires national leadership and direction.
And it must also be cooperative because the States and Territories are the main providers
of TAFE services.
That is why the Commonwealth and States set out to progress a national approach to
vocational education and training with such urgency after last month's Premiers'
Conference here in Canberra.
Turning to the third area where reform is needed, entry level training, the Carmichael
Rport provides an approach which has been broadly endorsed by governments, unions
and business.
The Report outlines a simpler and more coherent system of entry level training which is
based on competence achieved rather than time served; which builds on the strengths of
the current training arrangements, while discarding their inefficiencies and rigidities; is
flexible in its organisation with an expanded range of options; and is relevant to and
substantially delivered by industry itself.
The Report proposes that a number of distinct pathways be developed between school and
work with each pathway giving students the opportunity to acquire the knowledge which
all young people need to participate effectively in life and the workplace. These so called
' key competencies' include language and communication, using mathematics, scientific 
occupational and industrial coverage is very limited. Compared to countries like
Germany, there is a substantial absence of structured training arrangent for young
people in the service industries. Yct these are the strongly growing industries in which
two-thirds of teenage employment is concentrated.
Concern has also been expressed about the quality and relevance of training provided
through apprenticeships, particularly in terms of the on-the-job training and its
integration with off-the-job study. Certain rigidities also mean that the arrangements do
not always best meet the needs of either the apprentice or the employer.
it is generally agreed that Australia needs to expand its vocational education and training
system so that all young people are assisted in making the transition from school to work.
We also need to improve the quality, so that training places are in strong demand from
both students and employers. In order to improve access, we must provide more flexible
pathways which meet the varying needs of different groups of young people. In this
context, it is necessary to look at schools, TAFE and entry level training arrangements.
There is an emerging interest, both here and overseas, in building structured learning in
the work place into the later years of school. In Australia, with the great increase in
participation to the end of secondary school, educationalists, employers and young people
are recognising the importance of developing a wider range of options in the final years of
school, and in particular, the building of stronger linkages between school and work. A
pilot of this type of arrangement, the TRAC program in the Hunter Valley, has been
operating for some time, organised by the Dusseldorp Skills Forum. The model ' combines
accredited learning in school, in work places, in TAFE and in off-the-job training and
occurs within a broad State-wide curriculum and certification framework.' I understand
that a number of State and Territory school systems are considering introducing programs
based on these principles in the near future.
For too long, TAJFE has been considered the ' poor relation' of the education system. It has
suffered from reduced State Government funding in times of budgetary restraint; image
problems in the wider community where it is often viewed as a last choice option; and
barriers to the accreditation of its courses into higher education.
The Government agrees with the recommendations of the Deveson and Finn Committees
that the time has come to revitalise vocational education. The Government is determined
that Australia will have a vocational education and training system which would promote
the following: a national vocational education and training system, with agreed objectives and
priorities, assured funding arrangements, consistent national strategies and a
network of providers delivering high quality, nationally recognised programs at
the State and local level; 
and technological understanding, cultural understanding, problem solving and personal
and interpersonal skills.
The new system would include structured training arrangements for the transition from
school to work, including a part-time work and part-time study option for those who
leave before completing Year 12. It would also provide structured training for those who
complete Year 12 and do not proceed to higher education. Schools, TAFE, private
training providers and industry would all have a role in the new system.
Apprenticeships and traineeships would be merged into the new system, allowing for
more flexible arrangements.
The Report also proposes a new approach to training wages and allowances. Unlike youth
wages, which are based solely on age, trainee wages would be based on the level of
competence attained, the amount of time spent on-the-job in structured training or
productive work and the value of the competencies demonstrated by the trainee on-thejob.
For trainees who are in part-time work and part-time formal training, and whose
wage is below the level of the independent AUSTUDY rate, currently $ 117 a week, the
Report proposes that a top-up allowance be provided by government.
This new proposed system offers many benefits to young people. More flexible pathways
and a broad industry coverage would ensure access to vocational preparation, even for
those who have traditionally missed out, namely young people who leave school early and
especially females. Accredited training would guarantee that skills acquired would be
widely recognised and transferable. The shift to competency based training would mean
that the length of training reflected the abilities and prior learning of the individual.
Finally, the close involvement of industry in developing and implementing the training
package would mean that young people would be in strong demand because their training
would reflect employment opportunities and the needs of industry.
At the same time, the Carmichael proposals offer many potential benefits to employers.
Their close involvement would ensure high quality training responsive to the needs of
industry. The suggested training wage would mean that the costs of training was shared
among the trainee, the employer and the Government in a way which reflected the
productive value of the trainee at any point in time. Most importantly, the new system
should produce young employees who are well trained in key competencies and
vocational skills, and who would form the basis of the skilled work force.
Implementing these new arrangements would require the commitment of all parties.
Governments would need to provide the additional places in formal training, accelerate
the development of the national training system and provide income support. Employers
would need to be closely involved in developing training plans for their industry or
enterprise and would need to offer training jobs. Young people would be paid training
wages which took account of competencies attained and time spent in accredited training.
And unions would need to be involved in developing the wage and training packages. 
The changeover to the new system of entry level training will take place through a series
of pilot projects to be implemented across a broad range of industries as well as in TAFE
and upper secondary schools. The pilots will form the basis of the new system.
There is a high level of interest in participating in these pilots. A range of industries and a
number of State and Territory Governments are currently developing proposals.
The finalisation of new entry level training across all industries will take time. In the
inteimn, there is the possibility of putting in place improved training arrangements which
would represent progress towards the implementation of the Carmichael proposals. The
Government is keen to discuss this possibility.
While the reform of entry level training is a substantial challenge, the rewards can be
enormous. The provision of vocational preparation through closer links between
schooling and the world of work, the expansion and upgrading of TAFE and the
introduction of the Carmichael proposals would mean that we, as a nation, could meet the
target set by the Finn Committee. That is, by 2001, at least 95 per cent of 19 year olds
should have completed Year 12 or an initial post-school qualification, or still be
participating in formally recognised education or training.
TraInInif nd Employment Assistance for Unemployed Young People
The medium term solution to youth unemployment lies not only in economic growth but
also in the expansion and upgrading of vocational education and training and in the
implementation of the Carmichael proposals. However, the Government also wishes to
focus on the lot of those young people who are currently unemployed and whose teenage
years have preceded the transition proposed by the Carmichael recommendations.
Currently, 124,000 15 to 19 year olds are looking for full-time work. Just over half of
these unemployed teenagers are looking for their first job. The teenage unemployment
rate is highest among 16 year olds ( almost one-halo and progressively decreases with age
( among 19 year olds, around one-quarter).
While the youth unemployment rate is higher than that for adults, young people
experience relatively shorter spells of unemployment. The median unemployment
duration is 19 weeks for 15 to 19 year olds compared to 26 weeks for all ages. Among the
124,000 teenage unemployed seeking full-time work, around 27,000 have been
unemployed for more than 12 months.
Commonwealth labour market programs assisted around 60,000 unemployed teenagers in
1991-92 or around 17 per cent of total labour market program approvals. This compares
with their share of CES registrants of 15 per cent. Another 10,000 teenagers were also
assisted through Commonwealth funded TAFE prevocational courses. 
The main types of labour market assistance for young people comprise community-based
assistance and training through SkillShare ( 30% private sector wage subsidies under
JOBSTART and short-term vocational courses through JOBTRAJN The
success rates in finding jobs after participation in these programs is generally similar for
young people as for adults and in both cases are well above the experience of nonparticipants.
The proportion of young labour market program participants in unsubsidised
employment or further education and training three months after the end of their
placement is highest among JOBSTART participants followed by SkillShare
and JOBTRAIN
in addressing the problems of unemployed young people, it is important that measures are
consistent with the strategy of equipping young people with the vocational and general
skills necessary for a productive and satisfying life. Unemployed young people should
not miss out on mainstream training and vocational preparation.
The recession has seen a sharp decline in the number of apprenticeship and traineeship
commencements. Policies which address this decline, including those announced in One
Nation, provide young people with a job and recognised training and minimise the
possibility of skill shortages during the recovery. The special measures in One Nation
have already succeeded in bringing traineeship and apprenticeship commencements back
towards their levels for the same period in 1990. But there is still further to go if we are to
avoid skill shortages as the economy recovers.
it is also important that the most disadvantaged young people do not miss out on
vocational preparation opportunities to improve their chances of getting a job. In
particular, special attention should be given to long-term unemployed young people to
ensure they have access to training and assistance into employment.
The Government realises that unless training is followed by, or integrated with,
employment, the skills acquired quickly atrophy. This problem would be lessened if
vocational training were more closely linked with employment possibilities at the end of
the training course. This would also increase the interest of the young unemployed in
undertaking training.
It is also important to provide a range of measures to meet the differing needs of
unemployed young people. While some will be attracted to longer, more formal TAFE
courses, other will prefer shorter courses, particularly where these are provided in a
community based envirornent such as SkillShare.
Other young people will prefer more hands on work experience as has been suggested by a
number of conservation groups and State governments. There is a great opportunity here
to address two areas of need. Young people would be able to obtain work with relevant
training and through their endeavours contribute to creating a better environment, for
example by tackling the problem of land degradation. 
Homeless young people are among the most disadvantaged of unemployed young people
and will require substantial assistance which links accommodation, counselling, training
and work experience in order to bring them into mainstream employment opportunities.
Some successful projects which provide this integrated assistance are operating ( eg the
Brotherhood of St Laurence/ Body Shop project) and, with additional assistance, could be
expanded and other projects commenced.
Disproportionately high unemployment rates exist among Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander young people. The Government's recent response to the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody includes a five year package of measures, costing $ 54
million, to assist Aboriginal young people in personal development, employment and
sport and recreation.
Young people from non-English speaking background communities, particularly the
more recently arrved, also experience relatively high unemployment rates. On the other
hand, I am pleased to see that they achieve proportionally high placements on labour
market programs and achieve relatively high positive outcomes from this form of
assistance. Our disability reforms have brought significant breakthroughs for young people with
disabilities. There has been a particular focus on school to work transition. Through the
Disability Services Act and initiatives such as the 1990 Disability Reform Package and the
forthcoming Disability Discrimination legislation, the Government has been acting to
remove barriers to participation by young people with disabilities in employment,
education, training and community life.
Initiatives have been introduced to provide increased opportunities for students with
disabilities to participate in tertiary education, especially in professional and vocational
courses, with a target of doubling commencing enrolments by 1995.
CONCLUSION This background statement outlines the changes which have occurred in the education,
training and employment profiles of young people. Thiese changes have given rise to both
opportunities and problems for young people.
Addressing these issues requires reform of the vocational education and training systems,
as well as measures to tackle the immediate problem of youth unemployment.
Wednesday's meeting will discuss ways of responding to these concerns. The
Government is keen to hear the views of young people, employers, unions and community
organisations.-We are committed to taking action. I will announce our detailed response
next week after the Government has carefully considered the views canvassed at the
meeting. Canberra 20 July 1992 



" C
PRIINMISET E
TRANSCRIPT OF OPENING REMARKS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING, MP TO THE NATIONAL MEETING ON YOUTH
TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
22 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much, I think we might call the
meeting to order. Could I begin by saying that I have
already had the pleasure of meeting most of you this
morning, as have my colleagues, but could I say formally
on their behalf and mine welcome to this meeting. It is
very gratifying to see you here and it is a reflection
of, I think, the concern that Australia feels at the
moment for unemployment, the problems which come with it
and particularly as the problem attends our young people.
We all know, I think, that unemployment in the kind of
society we have is not the shock absorber in the economic
system. We don't regard it as a buffer at the end of the
station, we don't believe that a group in a society
should carry the adjustment burden of any economy, in a
transition no matter how important or fundamental, that
that kind of policy approach is unacceptable, and that
the fairness and sense of equality and egalitarianism of
Australia as always deigned that everyone should have a
right to a job regardless of age. And it has been on
that basis that we have as a country operated.
Structural unemployment is of course not a new phenomena
for us or many other countries, but in the last ten or
fifteen years of quite rapid world change, change in
trade, and change in the structure of economies we have
seen this appear. And it is difficult to deal with it,
and we now have compounding that problem unemployment
coming from the cycle of the recession. We are now
emerging into recovery, but thie unemployment is still
with us. It is a social evil and we have got to do what
4e can to beat it, and as a Government, may I say, for
the years 1983, certainly up to 1990, we took the view
that unemployment had to be dealt with and that
employment should be an express outcome of policy, that
employment should not be simply a residual which falls
out the bottom of the growth numbers, but was an express
objective of policy. And that's why I think we have
progressed so far. That is, in the .' 80s we were able to 
grow our labour market at about three times the pace of
most comparable countries, and why today the labour
market is still 25 per cent larger than it was in 1983.
But the fact is that growth stopped, unemployment has
risen, and we have now got to do all in our power to get
it down. Yesterday in respect of the fortunes of young
people and youth unemployment, we took I think a great
leap forward in what I think one can conscientiously
describe as an historic change. We arrived at an
agreement, the Commonwealths with the States, to
establish a National Training Authority, that is to make
another path-waayi n e-: idu6fii5ii-eh-Ybid-thit which we have
now through the tertiary system and through compulsory
education. Arnd as all of you who are interested in this
subject know, almost half of the kids who live school are
untrained. And part of the reason for that is that we
have never really had the structures in place to train
them. So, at least from the Governments' perspective,
Governments plural, we put our heads together and I think
came up with a cooperative model which will allow the
Commonwealth and the States to work together for the
benefit of Australian young people, and those mature age
students who will also find themselves in vocational
education. But I think today, that was yesterday, but
today I think we can do more. But we have to advance on
three fronts. Obviously growth is key to whatever we
might do and the economy is now growing again and we
shouldn't be too forlorn about its prospects, there's
every chance that in the year to June the economy will
grow by about 2 per cent. This compares with growth over
the same period in Europe of about 1.7. So we're doing
as well or better than comparable countries. We're not
growing as fast as parts of Asia but we are growing
certainly as fast or faster than Europe or North America.
In the coming year we expect to be growing much faster,
of the order of 4 per cent. And it is, as we all know,
GDP, growth, which pulls up employment. And when one
sees any graphic illustration of employment and growth,
they go together, one line with the other, whenever we
see a lift in GDP, in growth in output, we see a lift in
employment. The problem for us now is we're living with
the lag, the lag which comes from higher productivity,
more output being produced by fewer people, in the first
instance, to see employment pick up later. So growth is
the key, and no matter what we do here today, no matter
how clever we think some of our solutions may be, if the
growth isn't there of course it will retard our progress.
The second front, I think, is education and training.
And that goes right across thie -gammi-t oif the -' Estiem, ffr om
school, primary to secondary education, retention in
secondary education and as we've been prone to say
lately, we've taken that participation rate from 3 in
in 1983 to now 7 in 10 and we want to see that get to
9 in 10 before too much longer, and we've now very
rapidly and dramatically expanded higher education with a
per cent addition of tertiary places since the middle
1980s. 
3
The key now is to get that school to work transition into
place and to look at struciured training which can only
really come with the notion that the later teenage years
are years of vocational preparation, and where it's now
up to us to see that there are pathways between school
and work and that it's no longer acceptable for those of
us who are involved in society to take the view that half
of the school leavers can just meander their way through
a labour market untrained to find that opportunities are
denied them. So education and training, I think, is the
second front.
And the third front is to help the unemployed now. That
is, particularly those young people whose later teenage
years will precede the more fundamental transitions from
school to work, the more structured training arrangements
which are portended in the Carmichael Report and in other
places those people who are disadvantaged now, that's the
other front we have to work on to deal with the
unemployed now.
So we've invited you here today, each of you, because we
know you've already done things, and are doing things,
about these problems, about unemployment generally. And
particularly about unemployment for young people and
we're particularly gratified that we've had many young
people themselves participate in the process and give us
the benefit of their views which we will also see again
today, with further expression by them of their opinions.
For the Government's part, we will listen attentatively
to what's said. The process of national meetings on
points of difficulty in society, has been I think a good
one over the last decade or so, and it does give
governments a chance to listen to what the community has
to say and fashion policy accordingly. So we will
listen, we'll take note, we've got a reasonable structure
in our own ideas already, as would be obvious, but we
want to try and assimilate some of the views which are
put today with those ideas and to produce a structure of
value. So the Government will not be responding today, because
to do so would be to not take the views of people
seriously because obviously they can't be considered at
the same time as they're being put. But we will respond
next week, after we digest what has been put today and
when we have the time, the thinking time and the time to
structure a response, a sensible response and to
structure a response sensibly.
So could I just say, I conclude on those remarks again by
saying it's very gratifying to see you here.
Thank you very much for coming. We'll be having an open
session this morning of about, I think, five speeches
including my own, two from two young people representing 
4
the Australian Youth Policy and Action Coalition
Delegation, one from the ACTU, from Bill Kelty and
another from Eric Mayer the chair of the Business in the
Community for Young People and following those speeches
we will then move into closed session, where we can have
a general discussion, and I think, take other
presentations. So with those few words I think we'll move the agenda on
and I might ask now Miss Belinda Cant to address the
meeting. ENDS 



NATIONAL MEETING ON YOUTH TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT
WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 1992
AGENDA AND LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
This meeting is being structured to allow as much time as
possible for open discussion.
10. O0am: opening session, introductory remarks
* This session is open to media
Prime Minister
Representative from Australian Youth Policy and
Action Coalition ( AYPAC)
ACTU Eric Mayer, Chairman of Business in the Community
for Young People
lO. O0am 12. l5pm: Reform of Vocational Education and
Entry Level Training
* This session is not open to media
Minister for Employment, Education and Training
Laurie Carmichael, Chairman of Employment and Skills
Formation Council
Premier of Victoria
Bill Mansfield, ACTU
John Prescott, Managing Director, BHP
Discussion
12. l5pm 1.30pm
Luncheon 
1.30pm 3.45pm: Training and Employment initiatives to
address the immediate problem of youth unemployment
* This session is not open to media
Prime Minister
S Paul Turley, AYPAC
Merle Mitchell, President, Australian Council of
Social Services
S John Bell, Chief Executive, Esprit Australia Pty Ltd
S Discussion
3.45pm: Closing remarks by Prime Minister
This is a draft schedule. Times are as accurate as can be
predicted but may vary slightly as discussions continue.
July 21, 1992 
NAT7IONAL MEETING ON YOUTH TRAINING AND
EMPLOYMENT
Parliament House, Canberra
Wednesday 22 July 1992
List of Participants
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT
THE HON PAUL KEATING MP
Prime Minister
THE HON JOHN DAWKINS MP
Treasurer
THE HON KIM BEAZLEY MP
Minister for Employment, Education and Training
THE HON NEAL BLEWETT MP
Minister for Social Security
SENATOR THE HON PETER COOK
Minister for Industrial Relations
THE H4ON SIMON CREAN MP
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy 
THE HON PETER BALDWIN MP
Minister for Higher Education and Employment Services
THE HON WARREN SNOWDON MP
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Employment,
Education and Training
DR MICHAEL KEATING AO
Secretary Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
MR GREG TAYLOR
Secretary Department of Employment, Education and Training
DELEGATES
MS KAREN ALEXANDER
Acting Director
Australian Conservation Foundation
MR JOHN BELL
Chief Executive
Esprit Australia Pty Ltd
DR LAN BENNETIT
Chief Executive Officer
' Life. Be In It' Australia
MR LAURIE CARMICHAEL
Chair Employment and Skills Formation Council 
THE RIGHT REVEREND MICHAEL CHALLEN
Executive Director
Brotherhood of St Laurence
MR JOHN CLARK
President Confederation of Australian Industry
MR HUGH DAVIES
Director Personnel and Corporate Affairs
Mayne Nickless; Limited
ENVOY DAVID ELDRIDGE
Program Development Officer
Social Service Department
The Salvation Army
MR A C ( BERT) EVANS AM
Chief Executive Officer
Metal Trades Industry of Australia
THE HON JOHN FAHEY MP
Premier of New South Wales
MR RICK FARLEY
Executive Director
National Farmers' Federation
MR MARTIN FERGUSON
President
Australian Council of Trade Unions
COUNCILLOR GRAEME FRECKER
President Australian Local Government Association 
MR JOHN FREELAND
Employment, Education and Training Policy Adviser
Australian Council of Social Services
MS WENDY GILLET
Australian Womens Education Coalition
MR PAUL GREENWOOD
Chairman Council of Small Business Organisations of Australia
MR JOHN HADDAD AM
Chairman Australian Tourist Commission
THE MOST REVEREND PETER HOLLINGWORTH AM OBE
Archbishop of Brisbane
THE HON DR DON HOPGOOD MP
Acting Premier of South Australia
MR W ( BILL) KELTY
Secretary
Australian Council of Trade Unions
THE HON JOAN KIRNER AM MP
Premier of Victoria
MS ALISON MC CLELLAND
Director Social Policy and Research
Brotherhood of St Laurence
MR W ( BILL) MANSFIELD
Assistant Secretary
Australian Council of Trade Unions 
MR ERIC MAYER
Chair Business in the Community for Young People
MS MERLE MITCHELL
President
Australian Council of Social Services
MR JOHN MURRAY
Executive Director
Master Builders'
Construction and Housing Association Australia Inc
MR JOHN PATERSON
National Chief Executive
Australian Chamber of Manufactures
THE MOST REVEREND PATRICK POWER
Chairman Bishops' Committee for Social Welfare
MR RICHARD PRATT' AO
Managing Director
Pratt Industries
MR JOHN PRESCOTT'
Managing Director Head Office
Broken Hill Pty Ltd
MR JOHN RALPH AO
Chief Executive
CRA and Executive
Business Council of Australia 
MR RICHARD SWEET
Research Director
Dusseldorp, Skills Forum
MR DAVID THOMPSON
Chief Executive Officer
National Skillshare
MR PAUL TURLEY
Chairperson Australian Youth Policy and Action Coalition
( Plus Youth Representatives)
DR JOHN WRITE
Managing Director
Australian Marine Engineering Consolidated Ltd
MR PETER WILKINSON
President Retailers Council of Australia
MR GRAEME WISE
Director The Body Shop 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE RE: THE NATIONAL MEETING ON YOUTH
TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
22 JULY
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'll just begin by saying that we had an
exceptionally good meeting, the atmospherics of the
meeting were good, the contribution by the
participants was good, and it started of f
exceptionally well. I think everyone left with a
good feeling about the meeting and I think that
Yvette Varco, one of the young people from theYouth
Action Group, this morning, talked about sharing,
that picked up some of the theme of the day and I
think set a good tone.
I might, if you like, just make these general points
that everyone recognises that there are two
problems here. That is, the fact that Acbs in the
to 19 year area have since the 1960s largely
disappeared, that is the untrained jobs and that we
needed this transition from school to work. That
being one of the principle subjects under
consideration, the second being the immediate plight
of the unemployed, those for which the Carmichael
Report and the transition and the rest wiflbe too
latfie. Those people who are already unemployed and
whose faith and hope in this community has been
diminished as a result, and whose self esteem-has
been diminished as a result. That was the other
great issue under discussion.
So there was an atmosphere of co-operation at the
meeting. The views put by people from various
segments came with a lot of good will, and I'd be
very surprised if any of the participants who you've
seen as they'd left don't corroborate what I've
said. I might just give you an idea of what I think
emerged from the morning and the afternoon session. 
There was a general concern in the morning by many
speakers to get the economy moving. That is a
commitment to growtfi7AiiAM that's a commitment
across the board, from the business community, the
trade unions, welfare organisations, conservation
groups, womens groups, all the groups there wanted a
commitment to_ 9rwth. Now this may not sound
exceptional, but it is indeed quite profound,
because we know for the economy to grow and to take
up the workforce growth of this country means that
it needs to grow reasonably fast, and to have it
grow reasonably fast means that the checks on
inflation and wages do not see the growth spilled
away in a price and wage round, requires national
agreements about incomes. So all the people
endorsing a higher growth strategy are implicitly
endorsing a co-operative way of running the economy
and rejecting explicitly having the central bank
strap the economy down to protect inflation and
letting employment become a residual. The meeting
rejected that path and supported the economy moving
back to growth. A recognition that jobs must come
through that growth, and through micro-economic
reform. There was agreement that 15 to 19 years
should be seen as a period of vocational
preparation. And the need to expand and upgrade our
vocational education and training system so as to
provide high quality, accredited training for our
young people, and for technical iid vocational
education to have the samie status as higher
education. And there was some discussion about
accreditation from a national training authority
certificate back into university, whichi we can't do
today, because of the fragmentation of TAFE one
can't get a certification process to come back and
re-enter the university stream.
In this context there was wide-spread support for
the establishment for a national traininsyte
along the lines announcF66 yiesterdy, participants
feeling that a real milestone, a real break through
had occurred in the arrangements which we're able to
announce yesterday, and strong support for close
industry involvement in the National Authority.
The broad thrust of the Carmichael Report and the
principles underlying that were embraced by
everybody, there wasn't one demur, and there was an
exceptional degree on unanimity of opinion around
the Carmichael Report and its principles and
appreciation of the fact that the new entry level
training arrangements should be ind * ustry-driven and
responsive to the needs of individual industries.
Everyone was also very keen to fast track the
implementation of the Carmichael pilots, the pilot
schemes which will set up this school to work 
transition. And this was very gratifying for the
Government to hear, coming from employers, who have
to provide the places. And we'll take the cue, and
I indicated that the Commonwealth was willing to
fund all quality proposals for pilots which come
forward, because what was said to us today is that
the number of pilots that will come forward will be
much greater than we had ourselves, in the first
instance, expected.
So that was this morning. Agreement about 15 to
19 year being a period of vocational preparation,
the need to expand and upgrade vocational education
and training, a recognition that a lot had already
been done in lifting the participation rates in
secondary schools from 3 in 10 to 7 in 10 and that
already a lot had been done in creation of tertiary
places, but now seen to need that complemented by
vocational education and training, and unanimous
support for the broad thrust of the Carmichael
Report to give young people a clear pathway and a
clear transition from school to work, and very
strong support for the pilot schemes and a
willingness on the part of the Government to fund as
many of them as we possibly can.
Now in the afternoon we discussed the question of
unemployment and particularly unemployment for those
people who will not have the advantage of the
transition set up by the Carmichael type changes,
and who have been unemployed now for some time. And
there was general support for community based job
schemes. And this came from organisations such as
the National Farmers' Federation in Landcare type
JOBSKILLS programs where they indicated they could
take up to 5,000 people. The Local Government
Association which indicated that local government
stands ready for infrastructure works of a regional
and local variety. FromBishjop Holjlingrworth who
talked about his concept Serving Australia which is
a variation of theYouth Corps concept, which is
again a variation of the Land'care JOBSKILLS
programs. And from the ACTJ, the National Farmers'
Federation, the Australian Conservation Foundation,
support for Regional Employment Schemes to establish
an arrangement so that we can see employment go into
some of these areas beyond the capital cities.
There was general support for decent income levels
for young people. And from people such as Espirit,
. and the Body Shop, the view that $ 3.00 an hour was
not adequate, was not an adequate level of income.
The ACTU, for it's part, said that the unions would
need to be flexible if industry is to be flexible,
if people in business will make the commitment to
put more young people on, that there was a
requirement on the trade unions to be flexible but
the jobs also need to be, because they are not often 
4
commercial jobs, need to be subsidised by the
community, and that is by the Government. ACOSS in
its concluding remarks said it would be leaving the
conference where they were quietly confident, they
said that most people will leave with a commitment
to do more. And I think the general attitude of
participants at the conclusion of the meeting
States, business, unions, business groups, Farmers
Federation, the ACF, womens groups, the young people
felt that it was a very good meeting and worthwhile
things had been said, and that worthwhile changes
could well come from it. Now, the task for the
Government is now to consider what has been put
today, to weigh the balances of some of the things
said because many specific things were debated. For
instance, the trade unions talked about supporting
traineeships and a JOBSKILLS award, which would go
some distance to seeing a rapid expansion of the
JOBSKILLS program. And those things will need to be
considered by the Government between now and next
week when we will announce a set of conclusions, a
policy outcome coming from the conclusions of today.
So, I think that if I could some sum up this way and
say that people know that the Australian economy has
been in a long run transition, that the work which
was formally done by young people in an unskilled
way, in a very broad way, doesn't exist as it did.
That which mostly exists, will exist for those who
are trained. We are now establishing, and there has
been recognition for the fact that we have
established already important transitional
arrangements by participation and universities
towards a better trained workforce, and that the
National Training Authority was a milestone change,
and that on the particular problem of those who are
young and currently unemployed, that we need to
focus on labour market programs, both of a regional
and an urban variety, and which take people up in
employment, where employers are prepared to hire
people if in fact they think the arrangements are
flexible enough, and that means flexibility from the
unions and flexibility from the Government.
J: Mr Keating will you announce specific pilot projects
under Carmichael next week. And secondly what
happens to the negotiations with the ACTU on the
training wage? Do you want to try and finish those
so that you get across-the-board agreement, or will
they now go to project by project negotiations?
PM: Well some may be across the board, for instance if
we were to agree to a JOBSKILLS award, but the rest
of it would be probably in many respects enterprise
by enterprise.
J: ( inaudible) 
PM: No, I am talking about in relation to immediate
employment.
J: I am talking about the Carmichael pilots.
PM: In relation to the Carmichael pilots, again I think
it is probably to early for us. I can say now we
will be adopting in principle quality Carmichael
pilots.
J: But you won't be announcing specific pilot policies?
PM: Well I don't know that we will have the pilots
proposed to us by Monday. I think many of the
participants today were themselves surprised how
much general support there was for it, and that now
I think many more will come forward. Some involve
twenty people, some involve fifty, some involve
hundreds of people. So they will have to be looked
at, and provided that the proposals are quality
proposals we will fund them.
J: Are you attracted to the JOBSKILLS award concept?
PM: I need to examine that and see what it means. There
is always this tension between moving to a more
enterprised based system of wage fixation, including
for young people, and yet the advantage which comes
quickly from being able to spread, say a program
like JOBSKILLS by virtue of having all the
industrial bases covered in one go, in one way.
J: What about the negotiations that have been going on
on the training wage and that outstanding difference
between the Government and the ACTU? What happens
to that now?
PM: There was, as I said today, a lot of support for
decent income levels and when there was some debate
about $ 117.00 for forty hours being the proposition
of the Coalition, being $ 3.00 an hour, or $ 117.00
for five days, but if you work two days training
it's only three fifths of $ 117.00, there was no
support for that in the room. No support for that.
So, I think there were a number of references to a
set of structured arrangements which are basically
going to be sound, sensible and long-term.
J: So Carmichael should be more adequate?
PM: Well Carmichael is a long run transition. It's the
change through TAFE and through universities,
through TAFE particularly, which will finish of f
that the big participation rates we have now got
coming through secondary schools. But the people
who are in their late teenage years now, it's too
late for them, the Carmichael transition, it's too
late for them. 
J: Well that been the case Prime Minister, that leaves
the policy weight, the brunt to fall on immediate
measures, doesn't it?
PM: Well that was what I was just talking about.
3: But what out of this conference in terms of
immediate measures attracted you?
PM: Well that's the thing I was just saying to you.
That in talking about the extension of JOBSKILLS,
say to regional programs, or urban businesses, or
other genuinely structured training type paths, I
think we can arrive at a structure which will do
some of them good and material for employment of
young people.
J: What sort of timetable do you envisage for
Carmichael ( inaudible)?
PM: Well it means, for a start they have got to have
training places and that means how quickly we can
build a TAFE system up. Already we have many
unfilled places in TAFE, that's a point I made to
you yesterday. I thfink we will be able to build a
Carmichael type transition quite rapidly, certainly
as fast as business wants it to go, we will be able
to accommodate it.
J: Just in relation to the youth training wage, or the
training wage issue Mr Keating, I am not clear. Are
you intending in the statement you make next week to
indicate the Government's view of how you develop a
training wage structure?
PM: Well I think we will probably do that, yes. There
is a simplistic view in the media that there is
going to be a sort of training wage and there then
has to be therefore some sort of concession on the
part of the trade unions that in some way cuts a
very large hole in the rates of pay of people who
are currently employed as young people. This is not
the view of most of the people at this meeting. So
they want something which is structured and
sensible.
J: So that rejects Carmichael?
PM: No, no that doesn't reject Carmichael. But
Carmichael is talking about award wages at the end
of the transition, so we could be talking about some
variation on that on the way through. But again, it
depends on how much is on-the-job training,. how much
is off-the-job training, and what the nature of that
training is, whether it's generic training, or
whether it's key competencies or what. 
J: But how are you going to solve those issues?
PM: I think that we have had already concessions made by
the unions, a willingness and a stated willingness
on their part to be flexible, and we will try and
design some programs ready for announcement
comprehending these things.
J: Isn't the issue who picks up the training tab over
and above the $ 117.00, the Government, the
individual, or the employer?
PM: No, not the only issue because in JOBSKILLS we
already pay a substantial subsidy, so however that
subsidy is paid, whether it is to meet a guaranteed
minimum or to top up is a matter for negotiation.
J: Taking you back to the start, there was no doubt
that everyone embraced the concept of the Carmichael
training wage, embraced in principle?
PM: Unanimously.
J: So funding for the Carmichael pilots. Were you
saying that it won't be restricted to just pinning
wages to $ 117 a week, and that you may be willing to
negotiate for subsidies to bring wages above that
level?
PM: The ACTU is talking about $ 117 as a sort of
guarantee minimum. But again, they are not talking
about it necessarily for a 40 hour week, a la
Hewson, they are talking about part week work and
part week training.
J: It will still be a 40 hour week from the
individual's point of view, wouldn't it, if you took
their training and their work.
PM: Yes, that's right.
J: Do you have any in principle position on who should
foot the bill for training under that scheme?
PM: Yes I have thoughts about it. But again, I'm not
going to try to design the thing here.
J: What do you define a decent living wage?
PM: I'm not here to define that either. We've got now
the 18 and over independent rate, Austudy away from
home. We put together, thoughtfully, in the 1980s a
common youth structure which has been one of the big
factors which has lifted the participation rates in
schools, and it has worked. 
J: If the Coalition's $ 114 wage is too low for
individuals to live on, do you concede also that the
$ 117 may well be too low?
PM: Just understand this, the Coalition's propositions
have no relevance in the industrial world of
Australia whatsoever. Nobody is interested in it.
There's no training about them, you get $ 117 if you
work a full week, if you get trained you get less
than $ 117. If you work three days work and two days
training you get three fifths of $ 117 and no
training. Left dead! Nobody is interested in that.
Not a sole. Not any segment of that meeting was
interested in that. I mean we are talking about
something real, something long term, something that
is part of a structured transition from school to
work, and which at the samre time fills the bill for
those who are unemployed now.
J: Is there a need for the Government to review the
level of unemployment benefits, though, for young
people $ 117 being for an independent?
PM: We were not there today to have a debate about the
adequacy of pensions or benefits. I'm not here to
have a discussion about adequacy.
J: Is the Government and the ACTU satisfied that there
won't be a serious displacement problem?
PM: These are obviously all additional people, people
who business wouldn't otherwise be taking up.
J: So what happens to them at the end of the day? That
has always been one of the ACTU's concerns, hasn't
it, when they graduate to an adult wage?
PM: Well if they're valuable to the business and the
scheme is cost effective, then businesses will carry
it beyond the naked commercial considerations.
Because on a naked commercial basis they wouldn't
employ these people. That's the problem now. They
are telling you now that they won't employ them.
That's obvious in the figures.
J: You said a moment ago that the level of benefits
wasn't an issue at today's meeting. One of the
unemployed teenagers has told us that they mentioned
to you that the financial support for young people
isn't enough, especially in an aboriginal family.
PM: That is true. But the purpose of the meeting was to
look at remedies for jobs and training.
J: Well what's your response to that teenager? 
PM: My response is that the Government did not go there
today to debate adequacy of levels, and is not going
to be debating them now.
J: You also talked about funding any quality program
under the Carmichael pilots. What cap has the
Government got on the total amount of money for
these?
PM: I think at the moment the pilots are very modest in
number. We started believing they would be modest
and finished the day thinking they would be much
more than modest. That is, by the decision
yesterday on the National Training Authority, which
was a milestone change, that plus an acceleration of
the pilots will accelerate the transition of the
Carmichael variety from school to work by years. By
years. So the more pilots that can come through,
the more likely we are to be funding them.
J: Would you imagine next calender year, Mr Keating,
you'd have 5000 people in these pilots, or 500?
What sort of
PM: There's no point in trying to put a number on them,
Michelle ( Grattan), there's no point at all. It's
the quality that will matter and setting them up
right, so we're setting up a long road.
J: Do you have some specific proposals before you
already?
PM: Yes, already.
J: Can you give us some examples of the sorts of
pilots?
PM: Kim Beazley can do that, I can't from the top of my
head. We have a number but they are not great in
number, but they will be greater in number as a
result of the meeting.
J: The ACTU has called for programs to the value of
$ 750 million a year. Is that sort of thing out of
the question, or a possibility?
PM: Again, that's only asking me what we're going to
announce next week. Just give us time to do that.
Let me just make this point about the general change
in education and the transition. John Dawkins made
the point in his concluding remarks, that a decade
ago in the United States they were debating the
inadequacy of the US education system to deal with
the responsibilities of the United States economy,
and nothing has changed in a decade. In a decade in
Australia we have come from three kids in ten
completing secondary school to seven in ten, we're
on our way to nine in ten, we've added 50 per cent 
to university places, we are now going to totally
modernise and lift in status and volume technical
and further education, vocational education, and
make secure pathways between school and work. It is
a transition within six or seven years that
countries take decades to put into place. And what
yesterday and today will do will simply truncate
that transition down further.
J: Mr Keating, you said at the outset that there was
consensus about the need to get the economy moving.
Was there any consensus about how much needs to be
spent to do that?
PM: There was no debate really. The ACTU in a very
routine way mentioned the fact that we should spend
x and we should put marginal tax rates et cetera, in
a sort of recital of its earlier announced
proposals, but there was no debate about that. But
there was from a number of people, the business
representatives like John Prescott, the MTIA, Bert
Evans, people saying expressly that the big solution
here is growth, they want a growth economy. Well,
everyone who understands this debate knows that the
Liberal Party could never give them a growth
economy, because if it grows even moderately quickly
then wages and inflation will grow with it and
they'll check it with an interest rate rise. So
they're really putting their hand up for a policy
difference than that of the Opposition.
J: were they putting their hand up also for you to
spend big in this Budget?
PM: No, the business community I don't think were, no,
not. But again, I think they want to see those
things that we have done spent and brought to
fruition.
J: Did they say explicitly that they didn't belive the
Coalition could deliver growth for them?
PM: No, but everyone around the room knows, all the
participants are long term players, some attended
the 1983 Economic Sumnmit, a couple at least, so they
know what the word growth implies. It means a
higher rate of economic growth to pick up
Australia's quite high workforce growth, and it can
only be done by having national agreements on income
determination. The thing which holds inflation and
wages in check will not simply be monetary policy,
because if it is simply monetary policy you end up
with a pool of unemployed. That is, if we are in an
economy where we are getting more output from fewer
people, that is a more productive show where we're
getting more output from fewer people but we still
have a pool of unemployment, what is the obvious
conclusion? To have even greater output. So that 
if we have an economy where we're getting more
output per unit of employment, we need therefore
even more output. That means rates of economic
growth and an economic management system which lets
grow. Like we had in the ' 80s that is we had
decelerating inflation while we had high rates of
growth. Now you can't deliver that with a
traditional monetary response. The monetary
response a la the Liberal Party means you hold the
economy in check to hold wages and inflation in
check and that the pool of unemployed actually acts
as a break on wage demands. In their model the
unemployment is a permanent feature, and a feature
which helps in the management of inflation and wage
control. This is a model we reject absolutely.
J: Mr Keating, have you set a target on the number of
people you want to get out of the unemployment pool
by the end of the year?
PM: No.
J: Can you set a target?
PM: Well wait till next week, I'm not here to play games
about targets and things with you.
J: Was the ACTLJ's push for a national wage claim
brought up at the meeting?
PM: No, not mentioned.
J: Mr Keating, you had business people there today
discussing what the Government can do to create
employment to get the economy growing, but you had
the Chairman of the National Australia Bank in New
York only a week or so ago advising international
investors not to come to Australia, saying that
Australia's industrial relations and labour market
systems mitigate against investment. What is your
reaction to those sorts of remarks?
PM: Well it certainly wasn't Mr Prescott's view. As he
represents the largest industrial company in this
country, he said much of the growth will come from
the international market place. And he went on to
talk about that, the need for competitiveness,
focus, management of businesses, et cetera. There
was very great acceptance around the room today, or
mentioned a number of times net exports growth,
import replacement, exports, to carry some of the
real load of production in Australia. And one only
has to state the obvious two thirds of our exports
and our imports are with the Asia-Pacific.
Thank you. 



TEL: PRIME MINISTER]
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING* HP
MESSAGE TO THE OLYMPIC TEAM
The following message was read out by John Coates,
President of the Australian Olympic Committee, on behalf
of the Prime miiei-W ae~ p n esrla
Olympic Team in Barcelona on Wednesday evening ( Thursday
morning Australian tiMe) FLet
me take this opportunity to extend to you my
very best wishes for the great challenges which lie
ahead of you in Barcelona.
You can be sure that all your fellow Australians
are hoping that your talents, your hard word and
your dedication will be rewarded.
In representing Australia at the Olympic Games you
have already brought a great honour on yourselves.
We all now hope that your Olympic dreams will be
fulfilled. I know that you will live up to the great
traditions of Australian Olympians and represent
your country with dignity, spirit and we hope
success. I only ask that in Barcelona you pass on the word
that Sydney would be a great place to hold the
Olympics in 2000!
All Australia is behind you. All Australia is
wishing you the very best of luck.
23 JULY 1992 T2EL3:. Jul. 92 11: 38 No. 0135 P. 01/ 1 



PRIME MINJISTER
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister the Hon P J Keating MP
and the minister for Employment, Education and Training, the
Hon K C Beazley MP
A National Employment and Training Plan for
YOUNG AUSTRALIANS
The Federal Government has laid the foundations for a strong
revival in job opportunities for young people with a
comprehensive package of new training and employment measures.
The Prime Minister, Mr Keating, and the Minister for
Employment, Education and Training, Mr Beazley, today finalised
the details of a new national employment and training plan for
all young Australians.
It builds on the historic decision last week in co-operation
with the States and Territories to establish the'Australian
National Training Authority and on the broad indti-stry and
community support demonst~ rated so effectively at the successful
National Meeting on Youth Employment and Training.
Mr Keating and Mr Beazley detailed the plan which will see
government expenditure of $ 297.2 million in 1992-93 and $ 767.2
million over three years and will help almost 100,000 young
people during the course of 1993..
The plan is driven by the Government's desire to lift the
burden of unemployment from the shoulders of Australia's youth
and to eliminate it as much as possible from the national
economy.
To that end the Government will provide every long term
unemployed teenager with the opportunity to find a place in the
job market. Support for other young people will also be
expanded. And in addition to programs outlined in One Nation,
in the Budget the Government will address additional specific
measures for all unemployed. 
The key features of the package are:
. An offer to all long-term unemployed young people of a six
month vocational training course, with a JOBSTART funded place
on completion, giving _ employrs a wage__ subsidy to employ a
young person, with funding provided for 35,000 places;
. A milestone change for flexibility in pay and training
arrangements for young people with the creation of a new Career
Start Traineeship, designed by the government and the ACTO and
set up under a single Federal award to target early school
leavers, amongst the most disadvantaged of job seekers;
An expansion of SkillShare and JOBTRAIN and their link to
a wage subsidy for a job beyond training;
A new Landcare and Environment Action Program offering
young peo'l emplbyment experience in environmental and
conservation projects;
Increased subsidies to additional traineeships and support
for apprentices;
A further 12,000 pre-vocational TAFE courses in 1993;
$ 43.6 million over three years to underpin the development
of the new-entry level training arrangements for the
Australian Vocational Certificate recommended in the
Carmichael Report;
$ 48.6 million over three years to fund places in
Carmichael pilots and the new Career Start Traineeships.
The measures in the package, combined with the existing labour
market programs and the opportunities now available in
universities and vocational education, provide a positive
option of employment, education or training for young
Australians. Details of the package are set out in the attachments.
Mr Keating said the plan was the most comprehensive ever
assembled by any government and confronted the fundamental
concerns facing Australia's young people.
Firstly, it provided young unemployed with jobs NOW and also
increased significantly opportunities for immediate training.
Secondly, looking to the future, it provided the infrastructure
by which young people will acquire the skills, competence and
confidence they will need to succeed in tomorrow's workplace.
He said one of the keys to a sustained revival of job
opportunities for young people was in the implementation of the
new Australian Vocational Certificate ( AVC) and its application
to employers across the country. 
" The move to the new system will be undertaken through a series
of pilots. All pilot schemes of sufficient quality put to the
government will be funded. We are already impressed by the
willing response of so many of Australia's leading employers
and trade unions to this offer," he said.
Mr Keating said the Government, in cooperation with the ACTU
and employers, will develop a new Career Start Traineeship
( CST).
" This new form of traineeship will enhance the flexibility of
the existing Australian Traineeship System and provide a bridge
in implementing the Carmichael Report. A new national award
will be established to assist in providing quick access to the
new and more flexible arrangements," he said.
Mr Beazley said the CST, the pilot programs and the development
of the AVC training system will transform the approaches to
vocational training in Australia.
" Together, the measures will better prepare our young people
for the rapidly changing world of the workplace and are
essential to create the more highly skilled workforce we
require to increase our living standards," he said.
The employment and training plan for young Australians also
includes a range of immediate measures to assist unemployed
young people into jobs and training courses designed to lead to
jobs. The Prime Minister said that all teenagers who are unemployed
for a year or more would be offered an accredited training
course in either a TAFE or similar training institution. Upon
completion of the course, young people will be able to use a
JOBSTART card to find employment. The JOBSTART card will
inform employers of the subsidy they can receive if they employ
that young person.
This subsidy presently ranges from $ 70 a week up to $ 230 a week
depending on age and duration of unemployment.
" This offer will provide the key to a job that many young
unemployed are looking for," Mr Keating said.
" In contrast John Hewson offers only a wage cut for all young
people," he said.
Today Mr Keating also announced the establishment of a new
Landcare and Environment Action Program to provide young people
with vocational training while working in land care,
conservation, environment protection and cultural heritage
activities. Such a program received strong endorsement at the
Youth Meeting. In 1993, this program is expected to involve at
least 6,000 young Australians. 
The Plan also includes the expansion of existing programs such
as JOBTRAIN, SkillShare and JOBSTART to provide for wider
access for young people to integrated packages of training and
wage subsidy. These programs will assist an extra 15,800 young
people in 1993.
Mr Beazley said existing measures that have been successful in
halting the dramatic decline in apprenticeship and traineeship
numbers will now continue to be available to employers until
the end of June 1993. New measures, including extra incentives
to employers hiring additional trainees and a package of
measures to allow group training schemes to take on additional
apprentices and trainees will also assist young people into
jobs and avoid the possibility of skill shortages developing as
the economy recovers.
The Government will also provide an additional 1,650
traineeship opportunities for young people through expanded
intakes into the Departments of Social Security and Employment,
Education and Training, as well as ensuring that the target of
trainees constituting at least 25 per cent of all base grade
recruitment is achieved in other Commonwealth agencies.
Together these range of apprenticeship and traineeship measures
will assist some 24,700 young people in 1993.
Finally, the package includes a range of measures designed to
assist particularly disadvantaged young people who are at risk
of either failing to complete school education, or simply being
unable to take advantage of the opportunities made available by
the Government.
CANBERRA 27 JULY 1992 



uuum~ uvuuu~ I F= r 76/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
The Prime Minister has sent the following message to KathrynWatt of the Australian
Olymnpic Team in Barcelona, Spain:
Congratulations, Kathy, on your magnificent ride to win the gold medal in
the women's individual road race.
In winning our first gold medal at the Barcelona Olympics, you have
achieved the further honour of gaining Australia's first ever medal for
women's cycling in Olympic competition.
All Australians are thrilled by your victory and you can be immensely proud
of your performance a fitting reward for your training and sacrifice.
Once again, congratulations from us all.
27 JULY 1992 759 



ThN~
I
Cl.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
BUILDING BETTER CITIES PROGRAM
The Prime Minister today announced that the Commonwealth would support $ 10 million
of Commonwealth funding to speed up the revitalisation of the South Townsville area.
The funding would be made available under the Commonwealt' Builin BetrCte
Program. In announcing support for the project, he congratulated the Townsville City Council and
the Queensland Government on the considerable work carried out to ensure the success of
the submission.
Under the " One Nation" statement, the Commonwealth is already providing $ 20 million
towards the upgrading of the Port of Townsville.
" The South Townsville proposal demonstrates many of the principles of the Building
Better Cities Program," the Prime Minister said.
" The area is already well serviced and is capable of a twofold increase in population with
only modest upgrading of roads, water supply and drainage infrastructure. And this can
be achieved without destroying the area's historic character."
" The completed scheme would also add to the already considerable tourist attraction of
this region."
" This is a much more efficient and environmentally sustainable way of managing the
growth of our cities rather than encouraging expensive, car dependent sprawl.
" Also one of the keynotes of micro-economic reform in Australia is to use more
effectively the enormous capital investment Australia has made in established urban
infrastructure. South Townsville project can be a significant demonstration project in the
way to revitalise inner area land in Australia's regional cities," the Prime Minister said. 
Under the proposals, industrial activities which are incompatible with residential land uses
in South Townsville would be encouraged to relocate to more suitable sites in the city.
Residential and freight traffic will be separated as far as possible and landscaped buffers
will be constructed between residential areas and the rail and road freight routes which, at
present, cause noise nuisance. A number of housing projects are planned to demonstrate
how increased densities and greater housing choice can be achieved whilst reinforcing the
distinctive and historic character of the suburb.
The Prime Minister also emphasised that the Building Better Cities Program was about
demonstrating better ways of co-ordinating the various agencies involved in town
planning and the provision of infrastructure.
" Townsville has the opportunity to provide leadership to many other regional centres on
the issue of integrated planning," he said.
" The co-ordination of planning for the residential areas with that of the adjacent Port area
is also important because the rapid development of the Port is a key to the industrial
development of Townsville. I'm looking forward to the Council's and State Government's
proposals as to how integration will be achieved especially on freight routes and the
location of bulk storage areas."
Once planning for South Townsville is properly integrated with the planning for the
adjacent port area and the railway yards then this important addition to the Queensland
program will be signed, sealed and delivered.
TOWNSVILLE JULY 28,1992 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, JOHNSTONE SHIRE COUNCIL CHAMBERS, INNISFAIL,
29 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, what's your reaction to Opposition claims
that you are deliberately avoiding Cairns in the lead
up to the election?
PM: I was in Cairns two weeks ago on a private visit, and
you can't be everywhere at once, can you? I was in
Townsville this morning and Innisfail today with Rob
J: So Mr Gayler hasn't told you to stay away?
PM: Mr Gayler is always wanting me to come there, and I
will whenever I can. But as I say, I was there two
weeks ago, that's reasonably recent.
J: So why visit Innisfail?
PM: Well, why not is the question. It's an important
district in North Queensland. It's not only important,
it's a very pretty district, I might say. And one gets
a feel of the local community, the agriculture. I've
just been to the Northern Iron and Brass Foundry and
presented some awards for aprentf gshlps'. -With ' the
focus this week onyouth trainnn arnlolrmentL, ntdh is
was a good thing to be doing. And Rob ( Hulls) and I
are going to be meeting representative members of the
community. I've Just been out to see some of the
structural adjustment things we funded with the Shire
here, Warrina Lakes, which is a lovely thing.
J: How would you gauge the Far North's response to your
visit?
PM: Well, I had 1 think a reasonable reception last night
in Townsville, a very warm visit to Townsville. While
there I opened the reclamation on Townsville Harbour,
with a $ 20 million program from the Commonwealth under 
the One Nation package, and announced a further
million under the BetrtiJrOrD for Townsville.
And that, of course, was exceptionally well received,
as has been the funding which the Commonwealth has
spent here in Innisfail in the structural adjustmenit
package. The Commonwealth is relevant to North
Queensland. And in the spirit of One Nation, no place
in Australia Is not part of it all.
J: Prime Minister, the 0.3 per cent fall in the cost of
living, is there any case at all for a national wage
increase this year?
PM: Well, the Treasurer will be talking about this today,
but it's a marvellous result minus 0.3 per cent. It
gives us 1.2 per cent inflation for the year. It Means
Australia is pinning in, bolting in that low inflation
rate. And most particularly, the survey of
inflationary expectations has come down yet again,
which will give Australians interested in Australian
competitiveness, I think, a very clear view that we
have broken the inflation stick. That is, that
inflation is down, to stay down. This is a great
national achievement.
3: What about the implication for wages, though, Prime
minister?
PM: The Treasurer should answer this.
J; What about monetary Policy. Obviously this beds down
the easing
PM: Again, that's for the Treasurer to handle.
J: Mr Keating, superannuation, what's your response to
employers using a-looph-o Tto cut 10 per cent
PM: These are the people who should have paid the 3 per
cent in the late 1980s. When the economy was booming
and when they should have paid the 3 per cent, they
didn't. And some of them are now complaining about
needing to pay it when it should have been paid in the
past. And it's for them to pay it. Basically it's a
sort of red-neck response. The fact is, occupational
super is a great reform for Australia, it will give all
Australians a chance to a better retirement income, it
will build a pool of national savings, and It's the
shortest of the short sighted who can't see it.
J: So the employees will just have to bear it?
PM: No, the employees won't. By and large this will be
paid in accordance with national wage arrangements by
the employer as part of the national wage settlements,
without deductions from employees.
J: The Liberal Party says the seat of Leichhardt is 
unwinnable for Labor In this next election. What's
Your response to that?
PM: Well, we've won It I've spent 23 years ini the House
of Representatives and I've seen changes take place in
the Parliament, but we've always had a good grip in the
Beat Of Laichhardt, and we will In the future. Look.
this Government has changed North Queensland. I
remember North Queensland in the early 1980.. I
remember it when the coal development stopped in the
sort of middle of Queensland. There was nothing
happening here. We had businesses closing. You've got
now the tourism industry which was developed by this
Government only, which has basically changed the labour
Position and the prosperity of Northern Queensland.
And the competitiveness of other products, be it beef,
or minerals, or sugar, has been guaranteed by the low
inflation, better wage outcomes, competitive exchange
rate. I mean, Labor has changed the face of North
Queensland, and that's why there are Labor members all
the way down the coast. That's why Rob Hulls has taken
his place in the seat of Kennedy in the Federal
Parliament for the same reason that in an area which
the National Party and the Liberal Party could do
nothing with, we've brought back, we've given it
economic life and a future.
J: Are you happy to see John Gayler not standing again?
He's been an opponent o6f your, in the past.
PM: He has not, no, no, he's been a good friend and a good
member. A good member. And somebody who's won the
seat of Leichhardt for Labor, and flown the flag
through the period. It you compare Cairns and the
Leichhardt region in 1983 and look at it today, it's
totally transformed. John Gayler can take a lot of
credit for that.
J: Mr Keating, Innisfail's unemployment has increased
three-fold. What will you be telling unemployed people
this afternoon when you visit Skillshare?
PM: Skillshare is one of the programs which we've now
decided to fund more of in this package during the
week, to try to give people that counselling and work
experience, which is important to them. But the main
thing is growth, the economy is starting to grow again.
when we get the June Quarter accounts, as we've just
had the June Quarter inflation rats, when the June
Quarter National Accounts come out, I think the year to
June will have grown by about 2 per cent. In the year
we are in now to June next year, we expect it to grow
by around 4. This will be about twice as fast as
Europe is growing. Most of the world is in recession
and we're actually growing faster than most places. So
with it will come the employment, and the more we see
the labour intensive industries continuing to grow,
particularly tourism and some parts of agriculture and
service, well we'll see the employment prospects coming
through, as we had them in the 1980.. Thank you.
ends 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VIETNAM-VERTERANS MEMORIAL DEDICATION ATTENDANCE BY
NEXT-OF-KIN
JULY 1992
I am pleased to announce today that the Government will
assist in helping next-of-kin of those who died in
Vietnam to travel to Canberra for the dedication of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in October.
The Government will contribute the cost of a return air
fare to one next-of-kin of each of the 504 men and women
who died in Vietnam during the War.
The Government has strongly supported the building of a
Vietnam Veterans' Memorial. We have contributed $ 250,000
towards the cost, and provided administrative support and
accommodation in Canberra for the organising Committee.
However, we are seeking now to make a more personal
contribution. The Memorial is dedicated to all those who
served, suffered and died during the Vietnam War. There
is no doubt, though, that its dedication will have a
special significance for those who lost a family member
during the War.
The offer is limited to next-of-kin because they have
suffered more than most through the loss of their loved
ones. The Vietnam War was traumatic for Australia and
those who lost next-of-kin suffered doubly.
I observed the emotion of the Welcome Home Parade in 1987
and the entombment ceremony early in July. I want now to
ensure that at least one family member of the 504 who did
not return home has the opportunity to attend the
Memorial dedication perhaps the final symbolic welcome
home." 833 
Details are as follows:
The offer covers travel to and from Canberra for the
Weekend of the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial
Dedication, but neither accommodation nor movements
in Canberra over the weekend will be covered.
Where airtravel would be the most appropriate form
of transport, the Commonwealth will provide economy
travel from the airport nearest the next-of-kins
home to Canberra and return, or, alternatively the
equivalent of the Commonwealth negotiated fare will
be given to the next-of-kin on the basis that the
money will be spent on travelling to and from the
dedication. the offer applies, in the first instance, to those
people originally nominated as next-of-kin. Where
this person is unable to accept the offer, the
family of the next-of-kin will be asked to nominate
a replacement.
Next-of-kin who wish to accept the Government's
offer of travel assistance should contact Department
of Veterans' Affairs on 06-289 6541, before 18
September.
834 



joint statement by the Prime Minister, the
Hon P J Keating MP and -the Minister for Land
Transport, the Hon Bob Brown MP.
TWO BILLION DOLLARS FOR AUSTRALIA'S
ROADS WILL EMPLOY 50 000 PEOPLE
Funding from the Federal Government's One Nation spending pa ckage for Australia's
roads began to flow today. The $ 600 millon out-lay will generate 15 ooR
The additional funding from One Nation will boost total Federal Government spending
on land transport this financial year to $ 2 billion. The program will prrieemployment
for 50 000 people.
Overall, the Commonwealth will spend about $ 6 million a day on Australian roads in
1992-93.
To emphasise the effects of the package on regional Australia, details of the spending
were unveiled in Gladstone today by the Prime Minister, Paul Keating and Federal Land
Transport Minister, Bob Brown.
Mr Keating and Mr Brown said the Commonwealth roads spending, including the One
Nation money would be targeted at rural areas and roads carrying primary produce,
minerals and components for manufacturing to ports and railheads. In the cities, priority
would be given to ring roads, -routes carrying commercial traffic, access to ports and
roads serving freight distribution centres.
" The Commonwealth will contribute S39 million to the joint government upgrading of the
Pacific Highway in New South Wales, while $ 138 million has been set aside for-works
on two new National Hhwy links-from Adelaide to Sydney and from Melbourne to
Brisbane. This will increase the length of the National Highway to more than
18 400 km.
' More than $ 370 million of the total will be spent on a maintenance program for the
National Highway System linking all state capitals and major provincial centrs. 835 
2-
This essential maintenance will provide work to road gangs in widely dispersed regions
throughout the counuy. Additional employment opportunities will be created', Mr
Keating and Mr Brown said.
They said the land transport spending was directed at meeting the needs of the transport
industry and at increasing Australia's international competivenss through improved
roads and reduced travelling times.
' Because transport accounts for about seven per cent of the total value of goods and
services in Australia today, even small gains in road transport efficiency will be reflected
directly in a more dynamic economy', they said.
' The importance of achieving these savings is underscored by the fact that the Federal
Government will spend more than $ 6 billion on road and rail infrastructure
improvements during the next few years'.
Mr Keating and Mr Brown said the $ 2 billion allocation for 1992-93 represented the
largest ever annual land transport budget ever committed by a Federal Government in the
post-war era.
' The program was fully costed and has been taken into account when framing the Budget
estimates. Normally, the Federal land transport budget is not known until the Budget is
brought down.
' By revealing the extent of the roads program spending now, states, territories and
councils will be able to proceed confidently with large projects that would otherwise
have remained on the back-burner until after the Budget in August', Mr Keating and Mr
Brown said.
The package approved today does not include One Nation spending on rail.
Mr Keating is expected to announce details of Federal funding for a national rail network
soon. Gladstone July 30, 1992
FEDERAL LAND TRANSPORT PROGRAM, 1992-93: STATE ALLOCATIONS
NSW VIC OLD WA SA TAS NT ACT
$ 574m $ 345ri $ 374m $ 161m $ 107m $ 56.3m $ 46m $ 2.6m
( Excludes $ 350 millon pai as Financk AssisanceO Grants to councis and to Soe and
Ternitory Governments for spending on local roads.)
836 
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT LAND TRANSPORT
PROGRAM AND ONE NATION SPENDING
1992-93
S5$ 46.2m
S1 $ 373.7m
$ 161.2m $ 106.6m I 5737m
Excludes grants to councils and States
for local roads 0 s $ 345.2
c s$ 56.3m 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING HP,
QUEENSLAND STATE ALP FUNDRAISING DINNER, GREEK COMMUNITY
CENTRE, 30 JULY 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Ian McClean, the Lord Mayor, and of course the Premier,
Ladles and Gentlemen.
Well thank you very Much for those kind words, Wayne, and
for so many of you coming along tonight. I don't know
about the Canberra Raiders, I'll be gone by then, but I
hope at the Grand Final when it really matters I can do a
Lazarus too, and be there when it matters.
But as Wayne and I came tonight into the building with
the demonstrators outside, I thought of that remark
passed by a predecessor of mine also in Queensland, I
thought if I knew Wayne was that unpopular I mightn't
have come with him. But jokes aside it's great to share
a platform with him, the most popular Premier in
Australia, a clean cut guy in every way. Clean cut
personally, clean cut politically, given hope and heart
to the Queensland Labor Party and restored it to its
position in Government as the oldest Labor Party in the
world, a real achievement.
For some reason there's a great empathy between the New
_.. ZuhWales Labor Party and the QueenslandLabor 95i-ty.
When you go __ to a___ 07eensland1 Labor Party' ConTerne-yralways
feel at home, there's always working people there.
it has not been middle-classed, and it's always great to
be amongst the Labor Party in Queensland, it feels like
there just isn't a boarder between us.
But ladies and gentlemen, I've had a wonderful week in
Queensland and I must say that in the six odd months I've
been Prime Minister no better reception and nicer time
have I had than Townsville, Innisvale, Rockhampton,
Glandstone and now in Brisbane. And the thought occurred
to me today and yesterday as we talked to those
communities, and also recently when I was in Newcastle in
New South Wales, not long after recovering from an
earthquake, and in Geelong in Victoria which of course
has had more than its share of economic woes. But the 
one thing I found in all of these places is a great sense
of purpose as communities, cohesion, common sense, social
partnerships and of course spirit, and I found that
yesterday in Townsville, I found it at lunch at the Civic
Reception given for us in Innisvale, in Rockhampton last
evening, and in Glandstone, when a few years ago and I
use to go there as a Shadow Minister for Minerals it was
a small community of a few thousand, now grown to over
23,000 and an international port city of Australia.
And it just makes the point that these communities
understand better, than perhaps Some in the major cities,
about how to make Australia work, how to work together,
how to achieve things, how to have pride and have that
spirit and go out and grasp the future. Because that's
what I found around Queensland, that great spirit of
optimism, that spirit that says we're not going to let
anything defeat us and we're going to get out there and
grasp the future.
We're pretty lucky in this country, we're the only nation
in the world that has a content to itself. We've got
what a lot of countries don't have and that is clean air,
clean water, a lot of space and a great future. You know
what they always say about real-estate ' position,
position, position', well we've got the best real estate
in the world. And that is, a continent in the South
Pacific and the Asia Pacific area, which is the fastest
growing part of the world, where we can carve out for
ourselves a lifestyle and an existence which is unique
amongst nations. That is a multicultural country,
inheriting a continent, coming to terms with it, coming
to terms with the resonances of Australia, the old
continent of Australia, coming to terms with the first
Australians, making a life for ourselves in this country,
locking ourselves in with the Asia Pacific, and giving
ourselves a style of living and an income which I think
can be the envy of the world. Very few countries have
those possibilities now, Australia still has it, and that
great spirit I found in Queensland today is the thing
that will capture it for us.
Now ladies and gentlemen, It's a case of working
together, of partnerships. And if you look at that
tremendous community spirit in those towns and cities
I've mentioned, it's all about partnerships, the
community comes to you as a whole. They don't come to
you as factions or with divisions, they approach you as a
whole. And that's the great strength, and must be
strength in pulling Australia together.
Now we've had good times and we've had some tough times,
we've been in a recession we're now into recovery, we've
got unemployment as a result. But we've still come a
long way. Our labour market today is 7 1/ 2 million. it
was 6 million in 1983, even with the unemployment it's
per cent bigger. In 1983 the size of the economy was
worth $ 200 billion, GDP was $ 200 billion, today it's $ 400 
billion. And sure, the economy has not grown in the last
18 months very much, ityVgr-owng again now. But as a
result we've not had enough employment to take people up
into the labour market and _ 4npeiR_; oYment has risen. But
we'e arglyettTe jobs of the 1980s and we-had three
times the employment growth of the western world then, we
had very high work force growth coming from our natural
population and migration, and we succeeded in taking
those people up and bringing unemployment down and
doubling the nominal size of our gross domestic product,
not a bad achievement in that period.
But now that we're in a position where we've been in a
recession, again we've got to make it clear there's a
role for government in directing Australia to the future.
It's not simply a case of relying upon the old question
of private initiative and private reward, as important as
they are, it is not a matter of relying on those alone
but having government create markets, making markets work
and governments doing the things in infrastructure, the
building which we know has made Australia great.
Now I was at the South Johnstone sug9Ar mill yesterday and
interestingly it wai W fff by-Fthe-6ueeniii Government.
It's no longer owned by the Queensland Government, it's
very competently managed now by the people who produce in
the region. But it's another example of how Government
can kick a community along when those resources don't
exist. That's the attitude we've taken in the One Nation
program, which Wayne mentioned, and where today Bob Brown
and I announced a $ 2 billion road program for Australia
and one of the biggest infrastructure spending programs
ever 45 per cent increase in Queensland this year over
last year, $ 600 million extra dollars from the One Nation
package in roads.
It's just another example of Government playing its
proper role, in roads, in rail, in airlines, in all of
the things we know a private company can't provide. A
private company can't build a highway. A private company
is not going to build a ring road around the capital
cities. A private company is not going to build a
railway line down to Robina. A private company is not
going to restore the National Rail Highway of Australia.
These things can only be done by Government. And there
is a role for Government in providing that public
infrastructure and kicking the economy along at a time
when private spending is down, so when private spending
picks up it can play its role as we know it has to.
there is a real role there for Government, and part of
that, of course, is even beyond those great building
programs for which the Labor Party has always been proud
and had a great history, but as well as that in the areas
of social policy.
Now Wayne mentioned earlier the fact that we're now an
externally oriented country. This is true. We've thrown
off the Menzold, Menzian era of believing that we were a 
lucky country, and that we needed to nothing more clever
than dig up another mount of minerals, grow another
paddock full of wheat, grow a bit more wool and Bobs
you're Uncle. Well Bob wasn't you're uncle. And we
found by 1980 that we could no longer pay for our
imports. And that the so called ' lucky~ county. was not
really a very clever country, that the post war trade in
goods and services had passed us by, that we were still
buying things from the shelves of the world, computers,
colour televisions, video tap recorders all the rest, we
expected to have those things but couldn't pay for them,
and then started to borrow to be able to maintain our
standard of living.
Now this Government said we can't go on like this, we'll
end up like some of the South American economies, and how
could you tolerate a position where you claim to be a
smart society but only three children in ten completed
secondary school, where the university system was falling
to pieces, underfunded and under utilised. And so we
started on that long road of getting from three kids in
ten completing secondary school to seven in ten, now
moving to nine in ten, we rebuilt our university system
added 50 per cent of places, and in a great historic
decision of two weeks ago, in which your Premier played
an historic part, we're now going to build a National
Training Authority to do for technical education what we
did for universities.
Now what we want to be is smart soclety. A smart society
where kids are given an opportunity for training and good
jobs. And we regard those years of 15 to 19 as a period
of vocational preparation and we stream them through to
the sort of clever jobs, the high quality jobs that we
know that this country needs. Because what we don't want
to go sell is selling our labour cheaply, we don't want
to compete in the international division of labour in our
neighbourhood in the world. I don't want to see
Australians working for $ 1.30 a day as is the lot of the
workers of Indonesia. That is not the league we want to
be playing in, we don't want to be pushing wages down and
selling our labour cheaply, we want to be selling our
brains, our creativity, our ability and become as we've
always been, a smart society which is capable of research
and development, producing innovative products and going
getting a premium for them and selling clever goods out
there. That's Australia's role, that's Australia's
future, not downgrading our people saying that they are
incapable of it and that they've got to cut their wages
to be competitive. That's not the society we want.
in this great transition where we've lowered the tariff
walls, where we've floated the exchange rate, where we've
restarted Australian manufactuxring sotathsyr
elaborately transformed manufactured exports where
greater than rural exports or mining exports. That sort
of important transition, the transition to services
industries like tourism, which are now helping the 
Queensland economy, didn't exist a decade ago. And which
have come along because of this great transition, this
great external transition. And it's that transition
which is going to underpin our standard of living.
So I put to you that a Labor Government, it took a Labor
Government to introduce a market economy into Australia.
A Labor Government to itouearemrkteconomy
into Australia. But we did it with a Labor heart, we did
it with a Labor heart. Because we grafted onto that
economic policy a social policy which we think is the
kind of policy that sticks with the central tenants of
Labor's thought and philosophy, and keeps that
egalitarianism and fairness of Australia together. And
such things and the right of access to medical services
is a basic right and we have it there with Medicare.
Equal access to education, as I mentioned, giving all
children the right to secondary education or tertiary or
vocational education. Access to education is a basic
Australian right, a right of everybody. Or the right to
support women with childcare, or the aged with age care,
decent pensions, geriatric assessment, the Home and
Community Care program, the Hostel program, the Nursing
H~ ome program. These are all the great reforms of Labor
in the
And of couree, no greater than access to occupational
superannuation for the whole workforce, a right to a
decent-r4t ement income. And it's that right to a
decent retirement income which will do these two things:
not only when my generation, when the baby boomers turn
and there are twice as many retired aged people in the
community as there is today, we won't put that terrible
burden on our children to pay for us, that tremendous
inter generational transfer which will occur as a huge
aged population relies upon their children to provide for
themi in later years, now's the time to provide for
ourselves by saving and producing a decent retirement
income. But in so doing, build 8 pool of national
savings which will fund our development, fund our
investment and fund our growth into the future.
Because the problem we're all going to face in the 1990s
is that the world economy of today was last like this
before the first World War. This is the first time since
1914 that the old Soviet States have rejoined the world
economy, since China is now rejoining the world economy,
India, the Americas, South America. And they'll be all
out there in the ' 90s bidding for savings, bidding for
investment capital, to rebuild Russia to rebuild eastern
Europe, East Germany, India, China, South America, and we
don't want to be out there with the savings begging bowl
trying to fund our current account deficit. We've made
the step already to do it with occupational
superannuation, to put those savings into place.
we'll have there by the end of this decade about $ 800
billion, $ 800,000 million which is about five times our 
6
national debt, and we'll be in that comfortable position
of being able to fund our investment programs and with it
bring on the employment which is entirely necessary for
giving us the kind of society that we've always believed
we should have, one where a right to a job is a basic
Australian right.
So ladies arnd gentlemen, these are the things that Labor
has done. We've introduced a market economy, we've
opened Australia up, we've started to produce clever
things again, we've opened ourselves up for services, but
we've done it with a decent social policy. We've done it
with a social policy that looks after the sick, the aged,
the young, the poor, women, migrants. We've done it to
keep Australia together. We've done it the Labor way.
We've not been, as somebody said of Dr Hewson the other
night who described him as a feral abacus, we are not a
feral abacus. We're not about simply ticking of f numbers
as though people don't matter, counting beads as though
people don't matter. We're about developing Australia,
interlocking it with the Asia Pacific, having an
efficient economy but at the same time having a decent
social policy.
And we all know we're going through a phase where we're
getting more output from fewer people. And it's
producing unemployment. We're getting more production
from a smaller workforce. Loads of productivity, it's
called productivity, and we need it to be efficient.
That is, we're getting much more production from those
who produce it. So what does that mean if we're going to
get unemployment down? What it means to get unemployment
down is that we've got to produce even more output. if a
given level of output produces only so much employment
and it's not enough, the only thing to do is to produce
even more output, and that means that the Australian
economy has to grow at a reasonably fast pace. And to
have it grow at a fast pace, and still control inflation
can only be done with an incomes policy. It can't be
done with interest rates, it can't be done with a central
bank jumping on the economy because to do that it cuts
the speed down and therefore cuts the employment growth
o f-f.
We've always had employment as an express objective of
Government policy. It hasn't been a residual that fell
out of the numbers. And when I used to stand up in the
OECD in the 1980s and talk about employment being the
express objective, some of those European Finance
Ministers would look at me as though I had a case of
leprosy. Because they are interested only in their
current accounts and inflation.
We on the other hand have always had employment as a
c~ lear and express objective. And that means you must run
with a high workforce growth of this country, even with
modest immigration growth, without natural population
growth, with workforce growth of 1.6 per cent a year, you
n % A J L V L I I U V 1 11 F V Q I A 
have got to run the ecoinmy at a reasonable speed. Every
time we have done that before our incomes Policy, before
the Accord, that speed spilled Into 8 price and wage
round, and we ended up with higher inflation, lower
growth, and higher unemployment. We beat that dismal
legacy in the 19809 with an incomes policy. We ran the
economy at quite a speed but still had decelerating
inflation. So much so, that yesterday we chalked up the
lowest figure in just on thirty years with 1.2 per cent.
So, having the mechanism in place to let the economy grow
and not kill it with interest rates to save inflation,
and tolerate a pool of unemployment, means that you must
have a conversation with organised labour and with
business. Now, whether you call it cooperation, or
discussion, or an Accord really doesn't matter. There
has got to be a discussion about national income
determination how much national income goes to wages
and how much goes to profits. And it is in that model
with the ACTU we have been able to run Australia quite
fast and still have decelerating inflation.
In contras4t D~ r niewson's model has unemployment as a break
upon wage increases. In his model unemployment is
actually sitting there as a tool, to actually moderate
wage claims and to moderate inflation, but of course you
will have no conversation with organised labour, and the
central bank would simply be in instructed to lift the
interest rates to sit on the economy. And so in his
model, not only is employment not an express objective,
unemployment becomes a tool of government policy. We
reject that absolutely, totally.
In the end the difference between the Labor Party and its
opponents is a matter of heart. The Labor Party has it
and they don't. The Labor Party grew with the soul of
this country and the Liberal Party has tried to graft
itself onto it, all these years. But this was never
plainer then now, as Dr Hewson and that rotten remnant of
the New R~ ights agenda, Fightback, comes-as the creed of
the new conservative parties. But in the end, the proper
end of economic policy is social improvement, and the
notion we have heard him speak about in the last day or
two about cutting wages, taking kids to $ 3.00 an hour,
getting rid of awards, rates of pay, and conditions of
employment to go to three quarters of average weekly
earnings, or some such figure for the average person, is
not social improvement.
The point of economic policy is to lift people up, not
push them down. Dr Hewson thinks it's a crime for me to
say I want to see Australians with higher real wages. Dr
Heweon I do. And I make no apologies for it. And we can
do it by the sort of economic policies that Australia can
have. But you won't get anywhere economically by destroying the
country socially. So don't my word for it, ask all of 
those people who fell through the social trap door in
Britain and the United States. All those people, You can
almost draw a line in Britain for the people who are
lucky enough to enjoy the best of the British economy
living South of London, arnd all the rest living in the
North, broadly living in the North, who don't have that
social improvement. Or in the United States, if you are
unemployed there, like or Hewson after nine months, after
six months your out with no support, no income support,
no unemployment benefits, and if you are cold you huddle
over a railway grate and try and live in the warm
exhaust. That's not for us, and we are not having it.
Or, in the United States if you are sick and you get
admitted to a hospital and you get to the door, even if
you are acutely sick, if that blue cross card isn't in
your pocket they turn you away. Now you couldn't
comprehend anybody with medical training turning someone
acutely sick away because they are not insured and they
don't have the card with them. That's what happens in
the United States. We will never let it happen here.
They get to this position where Dr Hewson is so down on
-unions, but he is not down on the -DoctoruFn'aio n. He
turned up to the AMA about six weeks ago on a weekend and
said he will let the AMA set the common fee. Not the
Commonwealth Government, which is now paying a large part
of the health bill, but the AMA. And he will let doctors
basically generate the incomes they think the traffic
will bear. But If you are a working person three
quarters of your pay for you and $ 3.00 an hour if you are
a kid. That's his policy. And we are not copping that,
policy, and we are not copping it for this reason that
people will not be able to afford medical insurance. we
are not having a position where low income people, or
even middle income people with children, can't afford to
insure themselves when they are sick and get access to
medical insurance. Because under Medicare now you can be
on an income in the $ 20,000s with a coul of children
and pay no levy whatsoever, and society gives you that
right to medical treatment because those of us who are
earning the higher Incomes pay it for you under Medicare,
which is an equitable policy.
These are the things which are important. The same with
education, Dr 1fewson has a voucherpoigy. Voucher
policies have never worked anywhere in the world. You
get virtually a bus ticket which has so many dollars
written on it, you go and check it in at a university, or
someone else. And he says this puts incentive into the
system and the freedom to achieve. It costs $ 120,000 to
train somebody for a Medical degree. What freedom does
an ordinary working persons child have if they don't have
the $ 120,000 for the full fee place, or the child of a
working family that might want an Arts degree which is
going to cost of the order of $ 20,000 to $ 30,000? They
haven't got it. When we get as a society where the
bright kids get jammed out of the education system
because their parents can't afford it, that's the time to 
pack it in, that's the sort Of policy he wants to put in
education. These are the things that the next election will be
decided on. It will be about bringing a recovery on,
consolidating the recovery, having a role for Government
to lift that spending, to be the catalyst in a recovery,
to bring private Investment back up, and to see it go on.
And at the same time to build on all of the social
advances we have made and the things I have been talking
about health care, education, childcare, age care, all
of the other things, support for Aboriginals, migrants,
all of these areas are the things which we will continue.
But he has basically one policy with two prongs: higher
prices end lower wages that's the policy. 15 per cent
addition to prices, which will blow our inflation rate to
pieces in an exercise in economic vandalism, that would
be entirely culpable given the fact that we now after
twenty years have the inflation rate under 2 per cent, to
add a net 6 or 7 per centage points to the price system
to take it back to double digits would be unconscionable.
That's what he wants to do. And while he lifts those
prices he cuts people's wages. Now you all know If you
are on $ 20,000 to $ 30,000, whether you tax someone's
income or their expenditure is entirely beside the point,
because they are one in the same. An ordinary person
spends every cent that they earn, so whether you tax it
as income or as expenditure it is all the same. But the
person on the high income spends only a proportion of
their salary and saves the rest, and those people have
the benefit of the proposals put by Dr Hewson and the tax
benefits for them are paid for by the low income and
middle income people who spend all their income in the
supermarket or in their daily living.
The OST will blow our inflation rate to pieces and with
it d6r~ 1nterest rates. It will effect a huge transfer of
wealth from the low and middle income earners to the high
income earners. It will essentially derail Australian
investment while at the same time the consensus we have
had for a decade now about wages, profits end national
incomes will be put asunder as he tries to abolish
centralised wage fixation, the only thing in national
wage cases which protects the low paid, as he tries to
knock them off, knock of f federal awards and cut people'ss
wages. This is what he holds. We don't need lower
wages, the wage share and GDP at the moment Is in the
1960s, at 1960s levels. We don't need to sell cheap
labour to the rest of the world, we need to sell our
brains to the rest of the world making smart products and
educating people, and lifting our people up. And that's
the difference between us.
So, ladies and gentlemen I say this, I think as a Party
we have been very fair in this sense. We have never said
to Australian business, look we believe it can be all
done on the public sector. When I became Treasurer the
-4 
Commonwealth public Sector was over 30 per cent of the
size of the economy, it is now about 24. It is 6 per
cent of GDP smaller, or about $ 25 billion a year smaller.
Ipso Facto the private economy is $ 25 billion bigger. We
shifted the profit share so that people in business can
af ford to invest by a higher level of profit, which we
effected in the late 1980s and is fundamentally still
there. As the volumes pick up the profits will go on the
bottom line and the profit share will come up as we saw
in last quarter's National Accounts. we have got that in
place, we have got a 39 per cent tax rate in place for
companies, we have got full dividend imputation, we are
one of the few countries in the world that only tax
equity and dividends once where most other countries tax
them twice. We have got all of that sitting in place and
a stock of savings coming down the pipeline of
superannuation to fund the investments this country is
going to need. We have given business a fair break, and
as we come out of the recession into a strong recovery
all of those benefits and low inflation will count for
Australian business.
But while we have done that we have understood the real
traditions of Australia and we have stuck to them.
Unlike the Coalition who say we are the tradition
breakers, they're the people who attack the tradition,
and the tradition is equality, egalitarianism, and
fairness. That is, we don't have an under class left
behind, we pull everybody along. We have business
pulling along, tugging along, and with it the workforce
and with it the aged, the sick, the poor and the young,
with proper social policies. And if some group drops
back we lean our caring arm out and pull them up, pull
them up with us, and move along as a community and a
society. And that's the basic difference between us and the
conservative parties. The Labor Party is a true
political party, it has feelings, it has a soul. it is
not simply an organisation committed to getting votes
like some sort of business group, or some sort of
business organisation, it's a political party with
feelings, with substance, with loyalties. And our
political party demands that as we progress ourselves we
take Australian society along, all of us along, and we
produce the sort of country we have always had but a more
prosperous one.
So ladies and gentlemen, that's what the contest is about
in Australia. Never before have we seen such a contrast,
well we have, but not recently between the parties,
between the philosophy of the Coalition and the
philosophy of the Labor Party. And we say to
Australians, you're in a fundamental transition from the
old Australia locked up behind a tariff wall, which
disfavoured the big agricultural and mining States like
Queensland and Western Australia, to the advantage of the
industrialised areas, locked up behind a tariff wall and 
TEL: 3. Aug. 92 18: 09 No. 018 P-11/ 1
basically becoming uncompetitive. That's not the sort of
position we want to see. we have taken it, we have
changed that, but we have changed it in a way where we go
forward. We don't need to smash the place socially to
advance ourselves economically. And we won't, that's
what the basic contest will be about.
So when we go to the election sure we will have had the
aftermath of the recession and the attendant
unemployment, and we are doing everything to be rid of
that. But as that goes down we say to Australians, stick
with the change, stick with the basic historic transition
to a modern society, to a modern Industrial state locked
into the Asia-Pacific, one with a great bountiful
continent with fresh air, clean water, space and a decent
environment, loyal to our original Australians, and at
the same time giving ourselves a decent standard of
living. i don't think they will take the hard-hearted
alternative. I don't think they will take the clinical
technician, because in the end I don't think he has got
much to of fer. Pain for pain's sake, misery for misery's
sake, cutting ordinary people back and disadvantaging the
poor never did anything for anybody. And that's why we
have all got to move together as a group, and that's why
it is important for Labor Governments to stick to their
guns, have faith in their creed, and see the difficult
changes through. And that's what has put this Government
of yours together in Queensland under Wayne Goss, that's
what will restore and retain us in the national arena
because we are basically better, we basically can think
better, and as importantly as that, we think with a heart
and 8 soul.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very much for coming,
you have done me a great honour, and the Queensland Labor
Party has done me a great honour in inviting you and
assembling such a large audience of people, arnd I thank
the members of the business community who have come along
tonight. I will just say, you have always been part of
us from the 1980a onwards, as the whole constituency of
Australia is part of us. Whether it is the rural
community, or the business community, or the poor, or the
sick, or the aged, they are part of the Labor family.
And we will go together as a family, and we will stay
together as a family.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OLYMPIC MEDAL TALLY
I am disturbed by recent reports in some sections of the media which suggest that the
Government intends to withhold fup= ding for Olympic sports if our athletes fail to win
sufficient medals.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Indeed, in speeches to our Olympians, and all sporting bodies, I have expressed the
very opposite sentiments.
I have been at pains to stress that the fact the Olympic ideals of friendly competition
and comradeship are very close to Australia's own and must surely help explain why
we are one of the very few nations to have competed in every Games since 1896.
The Olympics do not idealise winning so much as striving. Nor do they make a virtue
of national glory so much as individual achievement and excellence.
In truth, to have earned the right to compete with the best in the world is a rare honour:
to participate in the greatest of all sporting events a singular reward for talent and
immense dedication.
Inevitably and justifiably Australians will share in the pride and the triumph of
those athletes who win medals. There is no greater achievement in sport.
But for those who do not win, we will be happy if they have done their best, and
honoured the spirit of the Games and our Nation.
T'his, I believe, is the view of the vast majority of Australians.
For these reasons I make it clear that win, lose or draw, not a cent will be cut from our
Olympic funding as a result of Australia's position in the so called " medal tally".
CANBERRA 31 JULY 1992
920 



EM' 9.
.41 USRLI
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGO: AGAINST DELIVERY ( 8. l15PM)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
CEDA SYMPOSI4UM, MELBOURNE, 3 AUGUST 1992
Ladies and Gentlemen, many of you here tonight will have
heard me go through my paces as Treasurer many times.
I can still do a passingly good imitation of a Treasurer
when I'm asked.
But these days I prefer to leave that thankless task to
John Dawkins.
Tonight I thought I might stand back a bit and outline
what we see as great possibilities for Australia in the
future. I want to talk about the philosophy_ of the Government,
our ideas and priorities.
I'm told there's a rumour going round that the government
is run by fanatics, pointy-heads and zealots.
Those who have observed us over the years as you have
will know this is a long way from the truth.
These people do exist, it is true but they are not our
people. And, contrary to another related rumour, we have never
been of the New Right view that the way to economic
success is through a mixture of rationalisation and hope
and only a hope that new competitive industries will
miraculously rise to replace the old inefficient ones.
We are wiser than that. We take the view that there is a
role for government to clear the decks for business
to create a market and sometimes where appropriate do
business with business.
We believe in competitiveness. It has been the linchpin,
the guiding philosophy a'nd the one great goal since
we came to office nearly a decade ago. And it remains so.
You and we both know that an economically competitive
Australia is the only Australia which can survive as a
healthy social democracy into the twenty-first century. 955 
As a Labor Party whose primary commitment is always to a
healthy social democracy, we have taken the business of
competitiveness more seriously perhaps than the
conservative parties were ever able to.
Indeed it is an irony that it took a Labor Government to
give Australia and open market economy.
For us economic policy is the servant of a greater goal
which is prosperous society, but, more than that, a fair
and just society.
I think that is why we took up the task of restructuring,
renovating and radically reforming the
Australian economy when the Opposition, over seven years,
had failed to.
For us, nothing we wanted to do could be done without it.
We could not think of social reform without facing the
fact of economic reform.
You should remember that, I think as all Australians
should: strange as it may have seemed at the time to both
Labor and conservative observers, we grabbed the
initiative on these changes for the same reason that
Labor has alw~ ays grabbed the initiative they were
necessary to realising our traditional ambitions for
Australia. I say you should remember it because there is an
immutable lesson there that is, if you want to see the
necessary change in this country, Labor is your best, if
not your only, bet.
We have a much bigger incentive. Change is our reason for
being. Change is our business.
Our opponents might do a bit of this and a bit of thatthey
will do some slashing and some burning and you can
be fairly sure that they'll do a lot of hoping.
But you can't be sure they'll follow through.
And they won't take the country with them.
What they will do is alienate a lot of people and a lot
of important organisations.
They'll raise the temperature of industrial relations,
for instance.
Some of you might not like trade unions.
Some of you might not like environmentalists either.
That I do not share that view is not the point.
q 7,1 
The point is that, if you weigh the record, you'll see
that it's better to come to terms with them, better to
show a bit of subtlety, a bit of give and take, a bit of
understanding, than to trigger guerilla warfare across
the country.
Not just a bit better fundamentally better, more
profitable and productive.
The consensus approach has accelerated reform, and not as
our opponents assert, retarded it. Many of the things
that have been achieved would never have been achieved by
their confrontationist methods.
The fundamental improvements in our industrial relations
system. which have seen strikes reducd-to thir lowest'
levelfor 30 years, wages at competitive levels, a decade
of growth and now inflation reduced to an historic low,
simply would not have been achieved by the policies of
our opponents.
Rancour is not a creative condition. We've got a lot of
it out of the system out of the most important
relationship in the economy, the workplace relationship.
And, as you know, we're still pushing towards a more
rational, effective and competitive workplace.
To take just a couple of examples:
in shiping, in the last three years crew sizes have
fallen by a quarter, to equal the average crewing
for OECD ships visiting Australia. As a result ship
owners have spent nearly $ 2 billion on 28 new ships
about a third of the fleet.
on the waterfront, by October this year the
stevedoring workforce will be half of what it was
three years ago. Our reforms have doubled the
number of containers handled per man.
I said on the night we delivered the One Nation statement
that our reforms to industrial relations have been the
most constructive step we have taken in this country
since the war: that a nation cannot be strong if at the
very point where wealth is created the people are locked
in conflict; that modern industry has to be a
cooperative process.
I say it again, in part to remind you of the government's
philosophy and achievement, but more importantly to
remind you of Augtralia'Ls achievement.
I mean the degree of the change and it's a continuing
change should not be underestimated. It should give
all of us confidence. -957 
For there ha be remarkable change in Australia in the
past ten years. Australians have recognised necessity
and adapted. They've proved both their willingness and
their capacity.
I believe we should recognise this as an important
factor in the nation's favour.
At the same time I think we should recognise that there
are costs~ for people in this process social and
psychological costs and they must never be left out of
the economic equation.
That's why I say it's important to take the country with
US. It's why I say that it is always a government's
responsibility to play a role, and those who still argue
that the market, unfettered and alone, should determine
national outcomes do not understand good government, good
economics or what is good for people.
Ladies and gentlemen
We take an eclectic view, not an ideological one.
We have not gone willy-nilly into industry plans, but
where we have thought it sensible to intervene we h~ ave
intervened.
Where we think our responsibility stops at getting the
business and industrial environment right, we will stop
there.
Which leads me to another rumour presently doing the
rounds. Don't believe this one either.
If people ask what good the great reforms of the last
decade have done, tell them heaps.
When we opened up the Australian economy with a. floating
dollar, open financial markets and and phased dbwn
industry protection, we were aiming at making Australian
industry more internationally competitive.
And today it is.
When we set out to replace conflict with cooperation in
industrial relations, to restore profit share, encourage
workplace bargaining, and dramatically reform the
waterfront, aviation and telecommunications industries,
we were determined to give our industries a chance.
Today they have a chance.
o~ o 
When we put foreign policy to the service of Australia's
trade, with thei-amal-ja-mat ion of the Foreign Af fairs and
Trade departments, when we created Austrade and this year
expanded it, took the initiative in tihe formation of the
Cairns Group and APEC, we sought to integrate Australia
with the fastest drowing economic region of the world.
Today we are integrated as never before.
Don't believe the claims that it hasn't worked.
Both our service exports and our manufactured exports
have tripled over the last decade.
Last year, for the first time, we exported more
manufactured products than rural products.
A decade ago we imported more goods and services than we
exported. Today we export more than we import.
A decade ago we did not have a tourist industry
deserving of the name. In the eighties it was our
fastest growing industry. In the first four months of
this year, foreign arrivals were nearly twenty per cent
higher than in the first four months of last year.
A decade ago, as we came out of recession, we had double
digit inflation. Today we have entrenched our
competitive advantage with one of the lowest inflation
rates in the industrial world.
I'm inclined to think this is not well enough known.
I'd also venture that the fact that Australian
manufacturing has grown by 10 per cent since we came to
office is -not' well known.
People who talk and write about Australian manufacturing
as if it were without hope should look at the evidence.
So should those who want to tear the place apart in
search of what they think will be economic progress.
Look more closely at the evidence. Look at the growth in
Elaborately Transformed Manufactures, for instance.
We're all aware there is still a lot more distance to be
travelled, but it does not hurt to remind ourselves that
we are on the right path and that we've already come a
long way.
Elaborately Transformed Manufactures, of course, are
generally characterised by high levels of value adding.
They include motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts,
computers, scientific equipment, industrial machinery,
telecommunications equipment. 959 
Australian exports of ETMs have recorded the fastest
growth of any export category since 1981.
Exports of minerals in that period increased by 104 per
cent. Rural products increased by 38 per cent. ETMs
increased by 211 per cent.
In 1981 ETM exports were worth 2.1 billion dollars. Last
year they were worth $ 10.1 billion.
Motor vehicle exports increased from $ 20 million to S414
million. Motor vehicle engines increased from $ 28 million to $ 351
million. Office machines and computers increased from $ 19 million
to $ 415 million.
Telecommunications equipment increased from $ 27 million
to $ 226 million.
Industrial machinery increased from $ 235 million to $ 799
million. Asia was the fastest growing market: between 1981-1988
averiage annual growth rates of 30 per cent or more to'
Korea, Taiwan Japan: between 1988-91 growth of 40 per
cent or more to Thailand and Indonesia while maintaining
strong rates of growth in the North Asian countries.
That's to name a few.
Significantly, ETMs have sustained their export
performance through the recession: indeed, in most of the
cases quoted, the greater part of the increase has been
recorded in the last two or three years.
The performance can be put down to a number of factors:
our increased competitiveness is obviously one of them.
The much more competitive environment which the opening
of our economy has created has been complemented by the
adoption of international best practices in many
companies. Those who say there is no light on the horizon should
look at Toyota in Melbourne, or Email in Orange,
Henderson's Automotive in Adelaide, ICI at Yarwun in
Queensland and more than 120 other companies whose
radically overhauled workplace arrangements have been
ratified by the Industrial Relations Commission and who
are now enjoying improved productivity and
competitiveness. 960 
Our increased concentration on Asian markets is plainly
another reason for the improvement. That is where the
greatest growth has been in North Asia, and in the last
three years, in South-east Asia.
And, while a few people are making a lot of noise about
foreign investment in Australia there is no doubt that
our export performance has benefited from the increased
integration of Australian manufacturing into world
productions processes which companies like Toyota, Ford,
IBM, Mitsubishi and Erricson have brought to this
country. As I said, we take the view that what is best left to the
market place should be left to the market place but,
equally, where government can play a role it should.
It's not the simple position to take. It involves
judgements difficult judgements which can prove both
socially and politically costly.
It's a position which requires skill and subtlety.
To my mind it is simply part of a government's
responsibility. But it is also logical.
We could demonstrate the logic in any number of ways
but one of them is that a sizeable part of the growth in
exports of elaborately transformed manufactures is coming
from areas of the economy and where the Government has
shown an interest.
We will continue to phase down tariffs which have
rendered Australian industry so uncompetitive, but we
will not leave good viable industries to fail for want of
a fair chance.
We believe Australia should have a sugar industry, so
while we have reduced tariffs, there will be no further
reductions without consultation with the industry.
We believe in a motor vehicle industry, so we are
reducing tariffs, but not to zero.
And we believe in textile clothing and footwear
industries, so we have established a Textile Clothing
Development Agency to help the TCF industries make the
adjustments which must be made if they are to have a
future. For workforce and industry adjustments we have provided
$ 250 million in assistance.
Government action through the Parnerspfor Development
Progran has played a subs tanti1al role 7in the g rowth of
' the Computer industry whose exports alone have more
than quadrupled in the last four years. 961 
It is estimated that the 21 participating companies in
the Partnerships Programs will generate over 400 million
dollars on Research and Development and produce exports
worth b[ li-on by -1997.
It's projected that the* Factor F _ Pro ram will have
generated 1.13 billion diollars in pharmaceutical exports
between 1988/ 89 and 1993\ 94. By 2000 it is expected
that, through Factor F programs, exports will be in the
vicinity of 2 billion dollars per year.
Just two weeks ago my colleagues the Minister for
Industry, Technology and Commerce, Senator Button, and
the Minister for Industry and Commerce, Mr Crean,
announced a $ 12.7 million 4 year program to encourage
greater efficiencies in food production, more cooperation
between producers, processors and marketers, and a
sharper focus on international markets.
This is a great country for food for growing it and
processing it. All kinds of food.
We can grow the kind of food that the people of Asia
traditionally eat.
We can also grow food that, as the region changes, the
people of Asia will increasingly eat.
Food processing is an industry with enormous potential
for Australia 7 billion dollars' worth, we estimate, by
the end of the decade.
Without doubt, there are more industrial opportunities
in the construction industry for instance. And in the
tourism and finance industries.
We are looking for others.
We want the Industry Commission to find the impediments
to industries * which should be doing better than they are.
We are getting moving on those programs for
infrastructure development we announced in One Nation.
The 2 billion dollar road works which are about to begin.
The beginnings of construction of the national rail
highway. If you want to understand our philosophy One Nation is
the place to look.
You will see there, beside the great capital works which
will serve industry well into the next century, programs
and initiatives designed to further improve the
environment for free enterprise
-accelerated depreciation
9 G2 
the development allowance
special arrangements to encourage private sector
participation in infrastructure developments
All of which have given us a business tax system
competitive with the best in the OECD.
You will also see in One Nation a commitment to training,
and the reform of the training system, which just a
fortnight ago was realised in the creation of the
Australian National Training Authority and the Young
Australians Plan for Employment and Training.
We haven't stopped with One Nation. Ninety two years
after Federation, in March next year we will create a
national market for goods and occupations under an
agreement in which all the States and the Federal
government recognise each others standards and
regulations.
After March 1993, if it can be sold in one state it can
be sold in any other. If your occupation is recognised
in one state it will be recognised in all states.
All these programs are aimed at building a successful
industrial nation for the twenty first century.
It is for that reason that we are prepared to support
industries with a future.
It is for the same reason, of course, that we have
introduced the Superannuation Guarantee Charge we will
need savings.
They will give ordinary Australians a chance. They will
give business a chance and Australia a chance.
It is necessary change as necessary as those changes we
made to internationalise and open up the economy in the
1980s. And as necessary to our ambitions for a great
Australian social democracy.
I said earlier that there were costs associated with the
radical changes Australia has undergone in the last
decade. I believe good government demands that we take account of
them. While most of the current high level of unemployment is
due to the downturn in the economy some is a consequence
of restructuring.
But we cannot cry success while we have such high levels
of unemplomment. 963 
In the coming budget we will be doing what we can to
create jo; bs, extend the reach of training and retraining,
and soften the blow for those who have dropped
out of the work-force.
We will do everything we can to attack unemployment.
But we do not believe that an assault on the living
standards and security of those in work constitutes a
sensible or proper approach.
We don't believe this any more than we believe that an
inflationar-y consumption tax, cutting award wages, or a
return to an adversarial industrial relations culture,
constitutes a useful approach to unemployment.
We don't think that a policy of putting up prices through
a consumption tax and cutting wages is the answer to our
problems. I don't think untrained men or women whose jobs have
disappeared should alone bear the burden of structural
change or the burden of recession.
I think the nation should share it.
If we all want our industries to be efficient, and we all
know that this means jobs will be shed, then we all have'
a responsibility to the unemployed and their families.
Caring for them is as much a part of the process of restructuring
as anything else we have done.
We saw at the meeting on youth unemployment how willing
Australians are to take on this sort of responsibility
Australian trade unions, governments, communities, and
business. But of course everything we do to ease the pain ot:
unemployment, every effort we make to reverse the trend,
must occur within the context of economic growth.
And it seems to me that here again we need a national
effort. We need it from those same groups who were so
enthusiastically represented at the meeting on youth.
We need leadership, ideas and commitment from the private
sector. We have the lowest interest rates and the lowest
inflation in a generation.
We have radically transformed the taxation sys tem, added
incentives and removed impediments to busiiness.
964 
We have the fastest growing economic region in the world
at our doorstep.
With our vast natural resources, our climate and
environment, our standards of education, our experience,
our incentive surely we can find a profitiable future
in the region.
Last week I was in Queensland.
In Innisfail I visited the Northern Iron and Brass
Foundry. Not a big plant, but expertly managed, clear
goals, very keen on training I presented a dozen or
more awards to their apprentices. They supply local
industry and they export to Asia and the Pacific.
I went to the South Johnstone Sugar Mill. Expertly
managed, the right technology, clear goals, keen on
training. They're exporting.
I went to Townsville and officially launched the harbour
devlopment there funded by One Nation. It's a harbour
for exporting.
I went to Gladstone where nearly 20 million tonnes of
coal was exported last year 60 per cent of it to Asia.
And, among other things, nearly 180,000 tonnnes of
aluminium all of it to Asia.
I went to Yarwun nearby, where ICI have built a chemical
plant to supply local industry state of the art in both
technology and management.
Gladstone was a town of 6000 people a few years ago.
It's now 23,000. It's built on exporting. It's future
is substantially Asia.
Recently I read of how a decade ago Australian winemakers
had made a thorough re-assessment of their industry a
" technological re-assessment". They knew they had a good
product. They knew that Australia had a future in wine.
They now have expertise second to none in the world.
They're growing the right grapes, making the right wines.
And they're exporting. In May they sold as much wine
overseas as they sold in twelve months a few years ago.
Last year they sold 100 million bottles, for S234 million
in income. With the export drive they plan they expect to
raise that figure to Sl billion.
And every time they sell a bottle of course they do more
than earn income they project the name Australia in the
world, as a country which makes things. Very good
things. 9 
As taste changes in Asia the winemakers can expect to
increase sales there.
Today's announcement by Cadburiy that they will be
investing $ 28 million in Tasmania makes the point.
They're investing the money because the M~ arket for
chocolate is growing in Asia.
These seem to me to offer glimpses of Australia's future
string them together for a moment and you see a clear
horizon. In each of these recent cases the common threads appear
there has been earnest investment in the right products,
technology, the right management, the right training, the
right marketing.
The truth is, if we invest in what we have here, if we
invest in ourselves, there can be no doubt about the
future of Australia.
There are very good reasons why business should now
respond. Very good reasons in particular why the bankseven
allowing for the burns they received in the boomshould
now be lending.
You can be sure we will go on looking for ways to
encourage the growth we need.
Where we can remove obstacles we will remove them.
In the last few months we have managed to make some break
throughs in things like aviation, pay television, and
technical and vocational training.
Where we can, we are prepared to break through log jams
in industrial development.
And where we can inspire or engineer a national effort
such as that which emerged from the meeting on youth we
will also do this.
Because it has become increasingly clear to me i. n-the
past few months there are vital intangibles in this
recovery, which go under such names as spirit, and hope
and purpose.
As modern business people you will understand their
importance.
As Australians I believe you will want to join the
Government in attempting to deliver them to the nation. 



V TEL: 4. Rug. 92 18: 23 No. 030 P. 01/
PRIME MINISTER
TRASCIIPr OF THE PRIME MINISTR, THB HOH P 0 KEATING P,.
DOORSTCP, CLARENCE CAMPUS OF TAFV, HOBART, 4 AUGUST 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PH: I' 1 just say a few words about this tor you. I
tti what we've just seen here, you followed me
axo d this TAFS college, is the value of vocational
eau tion. That is, teaching basic skills to people
a t er in securing employment or in the traineaeships
wich you saw, people who have employment but who
ae getting further training to be of more value to
a mployer and as well as that those who are just
d i trade certificate courses as well. So we've
6( sort of the three streams those who are
g9t ing basic support, that is learning basic
sli Is, those who are adding to skills for work
t e recurrently doing and those who are getting
t a e training certificates and of course there are
1 v -in facilities here as well. The capital for
t i building behind me is supplied by the
aonwealth. The capital for the new building
t a es school will be supplied by the Commonwealth,
te machines you saw in the printing office, the
p 1 ting graphics division was supplied by the
C onwealth. fo vocational education is important
ad that's why we've now developed a National
T aning Authority so that we can grow this system
add grow it in a way which has consistency of
qa ity and application across the country and
t a ' s why it was such a vast reform.
J: One of the significant visits I thought during that
to u was an inapection of Aboriginal designed
A s ralian flags with the Olympic Games. Do you 
4. Pug. 92 18: 23 No. 03t P. 02/..
2
t ink this will be the last Olympic's when we'll se
the resent flag!
PMH: I I't know, but we'll wish the graphic artists
we11, I'm sure we'll see many more designs.
J: T is some concern that Tasmania Is not going to
g n adequate share of the funding under your
Y t Package or under ' One Nation'.
PM: T nia will always get Its share. Z made the
in earlier today that fiscal equalisation Is
e red; that the out-lying regions from the larger
st ais of NSW and Victoria have been given funding
tc give their communities levels of services they
migh not themselves otherwise afford. When I was
Te aurer I supported equalisation for eight years,
I t ll1 support It and similarly I support a fair
st rlng of any Commonwealth program.
J: Mi Kating, can you give any guarantees that the
Mq I are levy won't be increased before the next
e cion?
PM: I' ot here to discuss budget changes at curb-side
dc tops.
3: Tc row you are going to Burnie, the Company
y at rday held a press conference and blamed the
r uctions in tariffs as one of the reasons they'll
hve to cut jobs.
PM: I don't think there is any basis for that. If the
Copl y rRm s to b4t moe provctive thst's flt", If
te have an investment program, apparently another
$ 2 0-30 million I'm told, the Company is itself today
a r ncing a new project in NSW indeed, not in
T a nia but still expanding the business. But
here, if they want to make the business more
piductive and competitive and they believe they
mist do that by greater output for fewer people
piov ded that the transition is handled with the
Wri s, with the staff, either by natural attrition
o suitable redundancy arrangements well that's
hew t should be. They should discuss these things
wit the unions and with the workforce.
J: Bit Is It reasonable for them to walk out of
ne otiations on productivity with unions which Is,
well they haven't walked out, but in the midst of
ne otiations to then announce 400 jobs are going?
PM: I'B ot in a position to be familiar with the
clrn t state of their negotiations or arrangements.
T I sCompany did not have a tip top reputation for
Ird trial relations and I just hope it can improve
i self. TEL: 
4. Rug. 92 18: 23 No. 030 P. 03/ C
3: Mr K4
! olI(
by p1
PM: I dol
anyol
3: Mr K
Gove the in 3
a ing, do you think the Victorian Government is
M ng the intent of the law by allowing those or
Sucing those New Zealand commercials?
i' know, I mean a law is a law and no doubt If
ie flouts it someone else will blow the whistle.
la ing with resource security, what's your
: nent doing about resource security, I mean if
o lition did vote it down in the Senate you are
rnment, what Is your Government doing about
it ih the mean time?
PM: What very legi
Nat I
J: Will
PM@ And putt POO6 a you asking me? We put up a Bill which is a
i ternally consistent, competent piece of
i1 tion which we couldn't get the Liberal and
rn Il Parties to agree with.
y u revive it before the next election?
it this stage we don't have any intention of
Lnr it back because the Senate has made its
: 1 n clear.
Mr Meeting, Mr Hewson has called for you to back an
apo2oy to New Zealand, are you going to do that?
PM: LooK
evelz Mr Hewson makes strident calls on the hour
hour, you could just ignore most of them.
J: Do gol endorse though the sentiments of those ads?
PM; I hive
con es
and r
J: A 1(
rtd;
on i
PM: Not that resi
Envi nevo resa
3: On 1
did
PM: No, not pro,
J: Can Sup sus n't seen them. If there is any matter in
t here it is between the Victorian Government
yone who takes exception to the ads.
of projects perhaps it could be said are
in mining and as well as for-e y are riding
ource security.
mining. The mining industry is a bit smarter
he forestry inductries I think in this
t. They don't want the Federal Department of
niment lamouring all over them and they have
called for resource security in these
ts. Medicare levy you said that you wouldn't
s Budget changes out in the street, does that
t is a Budget change?
I was asked about Budget changes and I said
prepared to discuss Budget changes or any
pective likely, rumoured, written about. I'm
Ijust ask you then about the meeting you're
0o ed to be having as part of the ecologically
: a nable development process, the ACF are
TEL: 
TEL: 4. Aug. 92 18: 23 No .030 P. 04/ 0,
4
the t! n to pull out of that meeting because they
sa t atrhe commendations that have gone off the
ra 1 because of Intervention by State and Federal
bu e ucrats. Are you concerned that they may think
so
PM: I oj' 41t think so, the ACF's a grown up organIstion
t t knows what the tooing and froing is In any of
th 8 sorts of things and they found themselves able
to d al with the bureaucracy and the political
pa t es quiite effectively over the lost couple of
yr
J: Yeit rday APPM for some reason mentioned freight
eq 6 isatio-nof that as a threat to their business
as tO whether it would continue or not. Have they
got ny worries about that?
PM: I Po~' t think you ' could ever do a Tasmanian press
c farenco or a doorstop and I haven't done one
WIlth~ utusomeone asking we about freight equalisatlon,,
S ~ could just give you the sort of prize for the
d* nd say no we're not thinicing about freight
e sT on
J: M i0* ating, what went through your mind when you saw
ti ian with the chain saw this morning7
PM: St 0' Id something have gone through my mind? No, he
wcs~ ouncing around and someone told me there wera.
nc Ilades In it, Is that right? I don't know.
J: TMe burning question Is when will you bowl against
Adziw Denton?
PM: Ililke to play my own weight, I don't want to do any
thilg with Andrew.
3: Tal)~ ing about games, what do you think of our
pr ormance with the 23 medals now at theLOlIip~ ca.
How do you feel?
PM: I tt~ ink it is a great tribute to Australian sport,
t; Oports men and women, to dedication, to endurance
ad'also I think Commonwealth funding hae helpe.
W4 pent $ 11 mifllion on-the preparation of the team
I vosted this year in something which I think has
rtainly helped the Australian Olympic Team prepare
Is~ 1f and It's a tribute to them all that they
cm do so well In the face of the worlds best
3: Th State Government I* planning changes to the
ind~ strial relations act here which the opposition
a yo is similar to those plans that Dr . Howson has
f r Australia generally 
TEL: 4. Aug. 92 18: 23 No .030 P. 05/ 0.
PM: 1' Vrry, 1ve missed the first part of your
J! T first part of the question woe that the State
GO etmment Is planning changes to the industrial
To ations act which &amp; llowscontracts witho~ tuEn.
-n olveme-n Do you think that is the right way to
go fr Australia?
PM: I oft't know that they're planning that. I don't
th nk, look we have come so far through a proceSs of
Co SUltation and consensus in Australia In economic
ity change and in Industrial relations. The
p of the pudding was In the eating, I think in
t 980s we had decelerating inflation even though
W had high economic growth and we've now got
tent Inflation which shows that the wage claims
h a, been entirely moderate. I think average weekly
Ing$ for the year was around three per cent so
tIdea that this sort of straw man proposition
t t'thers's something wrong with unions and pay
r es when In fact we're looking at an inflation
r e of 1.5 per cent and we've got a wage share In
t ' economy at around 1960s levels, what are they
t king about? To inject such rancour as we saw
a mouth or so ago at Burnie and to the Industrial
r lapiens system of Australia will do nobody any
g The thing GOvernments have to do is talk to
ple anid people who want to be In Government but
n t take the responsibilities of Government of
d c~. ssing complex Issues with interest groups
Uld not bother, leave it to the rest of us who do
w t to talk to them to run the place. And if they
d ' t want to talk to people and engage unions or
plioyees about matters of industrial relations or
w geis or conditions, It they think they can simply
d it by trying to throw people out under common law
c ntracts and take benefits away that have taken a
c nt~ ory to put together well You'll have Industrial
d $ harmony and we can do Without that.
J: it t~ is a message you are going to be taking to App1I
t m~ row?
PM: Wi11 it's a message I made last night, it's a
sgeI'd give any where. The thing Is this sort
a strident -It's a very funny thing about Dr
If Wson and people like him, they want to run the
vernment but they don't want the Government doing
Ythiing. They want to be in Government but don'It
at Wi but they don't want the thing to do anything.
Tt ey want to step back and let the sort of meyham of
t1 a market take place where the worst excesses and
iras tincts of People will have free reign. 
TEL: 4. Aug. 92 18: 23 No. 030 P. 06/ C
V
J: Are ypu going to have any specific advice to APPM
co lidering its industrial relations problems?
PM; No.
3: Mr Ketilng, how do you rate Joan Kirner's chances at
the pblls?
PM: Well, how do you? I don't know, I will wait and
see. It's not far away the election) one way or the
otler, October is not that far off.
3: 1 hink what he was asking was why have you chosen
to gJ to Burnlie tomorrow to speak to APPM workers?
PM We 1 I'm down here and I think that I have every
re son to visit Burnie as any other place and the
di pdte is now over, the place is now starting to
ti iover again and I thought that was a reasonable
th n4 to do.
J: ndustrial relations system a major difference
be wden yourself and the Liberals?
PM: Ab olutely, look Dr Hewson's got one policy with two
pr ngs, he wants to lift prices and cut wages. Lift
pr ces with the consumption tax by 15 per cent and
cu wages. That's his policy, he thinks that will
ch ge Australia. The fact is that the wage share
in Avstralla is not high. The profit share has been
ve -yhigh and will be high again as soon as some
vo uRe coMes back in the market. There is no need
to g6 slashing wages, we will not improve
Au tralle's prospects by ripping away at people's
wa t or trying to give them a peasant wage economy.
Th s is not a sensible thing to do.
J: Is New Zeland doing better than us
PM: W ell its immaterial whether they're doing better
than us. The fact of the matter is we had in the
19O a lot of growth in this country and a lot of
eloyment, many countries didn't and we've got to
g back to that growth and back to that employment
a the way toA it will be always with a consensus,
getting the business community end the unions
t gether and not this silly sort of sterile view
t at you can stand back and let people just have
teix wages cut, award conditions thrown away and in
t at sort of injustice people will accept it and
t en do sensible things in the economy, they won't.
J: Gtting back to your visit to Burnie tomorrow, you
a e going under fairly unusual circumstances in that
B rnie has been in the lime light, your visit is
g ig to be seen as quite significant. Why are you
g9 ing there?
PM: I'd I k to think whenever I visit anywhere it's
significant, and if I didn't think that you wouldn't
be h rel would you.
ENDS 



TEL 5. Aug .92 1
-4 PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIM k; MINISTER, THE HON PAUL KEATIN~ G MP,
DOORSTOP, BERNIE, 5 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
3: For a town that has been so knocked about, how did you find thc wood in there
today?
PM: I thought it was profoundly good and optimistic, and amnongst each other kindly,
and willing to be part of the changes which will have to take place here to keep
this town in the pulp and paper Industry.
J: What's your response to their suggestion to set up a task force?
PM: Well, we'll cxamine that. I think the main thing is to guarantee that these plants
here are viable, and that means the company and thc employees being involved.
Onc thing is clcar that towns which have had adversity do stick together, and this
Is true as I said, whether It be Bernie In Tasmania, or Newcastle In New South
Wales, or Gcclon~ in Victoria, one does find that -spirit of cooperation which is
encouraging.
3: You've been fairly scathing of APPM since you've hit Bernie. They'vc suggested
they are willing to negotiate with unions..
PM: No, not scathing, It's good if they are, but on their announcement they should be
talk ing to peoplc rather than announcing it. That's the way to get things donc.
3: Is there a chance of slow down or a drop in tariffs, which the unions 11aVe
requested?
PM: The problcms of this mill is not to do with tariffs, it's to do with lack of investment
ovcr a quarter of a century, and not keeping up with the thing in competitiveness
termns. It's a slow phasc down In tariffs, thcre's hardly any daiagc to date from
tariffs, It's a slow phase down over the next 6 or 7 years. But already, in the last 3
months, the exchange rate has fallen by morc than the tariff change. So, it's not
7: 49 No. O3O ? ffj 
TEL: 5. Fug. 92 17: 49 No. 030 P. 02/ C
2
tariffs it's management and it's having a willingness on the part of the company
to make the plant tick, and on the part of the employcs in making the town and
the business tick.
1: Prime Minister, in there you spoke about mateship. In that regard, can I just ask
you about the OST. If in Victoria it's not proven that the ads bite, where does that
leave your Govrment when you go to the polls?
PM: Look, State election campaigns come and go. They have even done so in the past
through major federal issues. I think people separate the issues out.
J: Today a survey of Chief Executive Officers has shown that about 54 per cent could
support a fomi of consumption tax.
PM: Well, so what, so what. It will blow the inflation rate to pieces, it will add 6-7
perceulage points to the price system, it will take bill rates from now under 6 per
cent to around 14 per cent, it will break two decades of effort of lowered inflation
rate. Look, Dr Hewson has got one policy he wants to lift prices through a
consumption tax and cut wages. It's a pretty heartless policy, and worse than that
it's a dumb policy. It will do nothing for Australia and nothig for Australia's
Industrial dcvelopnent.
J. says that the Federal Government has asked the State Government not to
campaign against the OST.
PM: It's no good trying to ask me questions about the Statc election, forgct about it.
I: Mr Keating, what was that last meeting about in there?
PM: They were just discussing the industry and the town, and factors in
competitiveness.
J: They are fairly keen on regional security.
PM: Well I think anyone in the industry here is, and it's a pity the Liberal Party voted
against the legislation in the Senate. We had the Bill there and they voted it down.
J: What did they seek specifically at the meeting?
PM: Nothing in particular, not one thing in particular.
Thc survey of Chief Executive Officcrs also showed that they were willing to
Invcst money, but that Investment Is not going Into jobs but capital equipment. Is
that really one of the major problems? 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 17: 49 No .030 P. 03,
3
PM: No. no, look, it was the same In the 1980s. Whercvcr you see growth in the
economy, you see employment. They go together like Bib and Bub. if g2owth
goes up, employment locs up. So anything they do to get growth up will get
employment up. Now at the momecnt we're going to have a bit of a lag there
becausc we'll have more output from fewer people in the first instance, but as
activity picks up so too will employment. But It always takes a while to catch up.
But It will be there, as the economy starts growing as it's now doing, as I believe it
will in the course of this year, employment will come up with it.
J: Would you like to say anything about the death of Sir Robert Muldoon?
PM: I put a statement out. alrcady saying that he was obviously a leadcr of significancc
of the people of New Zealand and for the conservative party in New Zealand, and
he has made a substantial contribution to Nzw Zealand over a period of time, and I
expressed sympathy to his family, and to his party.
ends 



83/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED EUCALYPTS
I am pleased today to congratulate the CSIRO on the
development of a genetically engineeredi~ hucailyptus tree.
CSIRO scientists successfully transferred a gene from a
bacterium into cells from red gum. Each " 1transgenic" cell
has already re-generated into a young river red gum,
growing in sterile conditions in a laboratory.
Genes have been transferred successfully into other plant
species, but this is the first scientifically confirmed
genetic transfer into the river red gum.
The harmless bacterial gene transferred into the gum tree
by the CSIRO's Divisions of Forestry and Plant Industry
is simply a " marker" to show that the technology works.
Next, the scientists plan to repeat these experiements
using two temperate eucalypts ( Eucalyptus nitens and
globulus) both of which are important commercial
plantation trees in Australia.
As an environmental safety measure, the next step is to
genetically engineer sterile plantation trees. Once this
has been achieved, there will be no risk that unwanted
genes might spread into native forests. The CSIRO's " gene
shears" technology, which switches of f unwanted genes,
will be used as part of the sterility program.
The development of transformation systems and sterility
would then allow for changes in important economic
properties, such as pest resistance and high density
wood. The genetically engineered trees will not be able to
breed, so they will have -YEo-propagated by laboratory
cloning. Scientists will be able to choose the best
plantation specimens and produce large numbers of these
elite trees.
The transformed trees are growing under secure laboratory
conditions, and it will be some time before plants are
available or officially approved for field testing.
1056 
I am also pleased today to declare open new laboratories
for the CSIRO's Division of Forestry, and to launch the
Co-operative Research Centre for Temperate Hardwood
F-6rstry in Hobart.
The new research centre, one of 50 such centres
throughout Australia, brings together scientists from
several institutions and from the forestry industry to
tackle common research problems.
HOBART AUGUST 5, 1992 1057 31 



TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 01 V~ O/
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JUDY TIERNEY, ABC RADIO, HOBART
AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
IT: The Prime Minister is with me now, and welcome to Tasmania Paul Keating.
PM: Thank you very much, Judy, it's nice to be here.
JT: You lose marks for being late around here, you know.
PM: Well, as I just said to you, if you are an announcer and you're late you don't come
back, but if you're the Prime Minister and you're late, you can get away with it.
Fr: Well I don't know about that. First question today to you, and I think I'll go right
into It because therc are a number of things I want to put to you, and I hope you
can stay with us for the half hour, can you?
PM: I can) yes.
JT: Terrific. Increase in the -Medicare levy, is that the first move to taking over all
health insurance in Australia?
PM: Well that's speculation. This time at each year before the Budget there is always
speculation about Budget measures. But there is a bit of focus on Medicare now,
and It's because the Opposition propose to force people into private insurance.
Whereas this scheme has worked very well now for just on a decade, all
Australians can get medical protection regardless of income. and we have been at
pains over the years to keep the scheme relevant and good, but an increase in the
levy Is at this stage just simply speculation.
iT: Just speculation, no more substance to it than that? 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 R. 02/.
2
FM: Well, as I said to you, every time this year we always get asked about Budget
measures.
IT: Well is it going to happen?
PM: The only reply I can give you is that there is no point in mne speculating about
rumoured Budget measures.
IT: Yes, but you know about it already. Is there, just to extrapolate that ther, even
further, is there a plan to take over all health insurance in Australia?
PM: No, there's never been a plan to take over all health insurance in Australia. We let
Australians privately insure if they choose, but the great majority don't because
Medicare covers them for medical and hospital protection. And one of the things
which people do is insure themselves privately, for private hospitals or private
treatment in hospitals, quite often when they don't have to. And I think the one
point to get across about that is that many people arc privately insured and they
don't have to bc.
JT: Still on health, on June 2 the AMA wrote to you asking if you'll establish a
national task force to look at and act on the health effects of the uncmploye. Now
you haven't responded to that, why?
PM: Well, I mean all sorts of bodies write to us about all sorts of things.
IT: It's a pretty Important issue right now.
PM: Oh yes, but governments can't spring to attention the moment some lobby group
writes to you about something. I've got no doubt that unemployment produces
stress amongst sonic people.
IT: Can I give you sonmc of the figures then, that were collected by the Institute of
Health and Welfare: 17 per cent higher death rates for unemployed males; 50 per
cent higher number of visits to the doctor if you'rc unemployed; 37 pcr cent higher
number of admissions to hospital if you're unemployed; 3.6 times more likely to
have a serious stress-rclated illness if you're unemployed, but you haven't even
addressed that letter from the AMA.
PM:. The way to address the problem is to get people back to work. And we've
addressed it in a substantial way because there's about 120,000yung poplec,
15-19, who are unemployed. When I announced the Youth Package a week ago I
announced 170,000 places, that is an additional number of places to bring the total
to 170,000. So there are 170,000 places in those programs for 120,000 people. So
the likelihood is that most young people who wish to have training or some job
experiene can and will now be taken up under those schemes. So, if we're going 
T5EL.: Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 P. 03/
3
to the AMA's concern at source, It is to actually give young people job
opportunities.
IT: Most of these figures, though, would relate to people perhaps who have taken
redundancies, thirties, forties, fifties, can't get back into the workforce.
PM: I think you're talking about the young unemployed, generally.
JT: No, this is overall, these are the overall figures. I mean you're not going to get a
high death rate with people who are very young. I mean, stress-related illnesses
that come with being out of work in your forties and fifties, it's pretty tough then.
PM: Absolutely, absolutely. But in the first instance, young people are a real problem
and we've tried to deal with those by simply creating enough places in the labour
market pM1onams to take thenm up, and to train them, and to push home the skilled
work transition. For mature aged people, we've also got now a substantial program
of labour market support. We turn through about 400,000 Australians through
those programs a year. And, as I said, we're looking at those in the Budget as well
to see how we can Improve them so that we may be able to more. As well as that,
the primary inmprovemenh would bc a discernible pick up in employment in the
economy, that starts to create opportunities for people. But there's no doubt, I
think, that people do lose self estccni and they worry.
JT, Do you blame them?
PM: No, not at all. And that's why thc quicker we get back to growth the better. But
the only way to long tcrm jobs is simply growth. Now the economy is growing
now. We've had 1.5 per cent growth for the three quarters of the last financial
year. We're just waiting now on the Junc Quarter accounts, so that will give us a
picture for the full year to June, that's last financial year. And I think it will
probably bc growing somewhere around 1.7 2 per cent. That being the ease,
we're growing as fast or faster than West European economies. And in the coming
year, this is the finiancial year we're now in, we expect to be growing of the order
of about 4 per cent. Now that being the case, we'll actually be growing faster than
the United States, Western Europe, Japan, and most other places. But the problem
with a lot of this is that you get'more output for fewer people. In other words, in
the first phase of a recovery there is more productivity, the system is more
productive.
iT: And fewer jobs,
PM: -And fewer jobs. So, there's a lag before employment catches up again with the
growth. That's the position we're In now, we're living through that lag.
IT: OK, just still on health, though, and just a quick aside really, but why have you
doubled the price of the pill for pensioners?
TEL: 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 R. 04/.
4
PM: Which pill?
iT: ' Me contraceptivc Dill.
PM: rye got no Idea about it. 11ms things are donc by the National Health and
Medical Research Council.
JT': $ 2.60 to $ 5.08, it's doubled in price.
PM: Well, in the end drugs have somc reflection of their cost. We have a free list of
drg for pensioners, that Is a diminished price way below the commercial price.
Of course, everyone argues that every drug that ever came Into existence should be
on that list. What goes on that list is recommended to the government by I think
the National Health and Medical Research Council.
IT: OK. Getting onto wider issues, Joan Kirncr is she going to win the next election?
PM: Well I don't know, but we'll soon see though, won't we?
IT: Do you think she's got a chance?
PM: She's got a battle, I think she knows that. But she's doing her best.
JT:. What support are you giving her, though? I mean she's not too happy about fiscal
equalisation remaining, is she?
PM: Yes, she kicked a goal at thc Premiers' Conference. She said that the money that
was being paid to Tasmania, South Australia, and Western Australia was unfair on
Victoria. That the reason fiscal cqualisation in part was there was because New
South Wales and Victoria enjoy the protection of the tariff. As the tariff has come
down, the argument therefore for fiscal equalisation had enieliarated, and therefore
It was unfair that Victoria should subsidisc everybody else to the tune that they
were now doing. We said, wcll there is no doubt that the formula, as Is now
constructed, is working to increase the payments out of Victoria and New South
Wales, and We'll examine it. So we've now got a rcvicw on the methodology, not
the principle because I actually believe in the principlc of fiscal equalisation.
JT:. As you said yesterday, Tasi is not miqsing out. It's a good thing to say while you're
in Tasis, isn't it?
PM: Well, I've spent 8 years paying the chequcs over, so I did put my money where my
mouth was as far as Tasmania was concerned. But, think the principlc is right,
that people in the outlying States, outlying from the main population centres,
should have the opportunity of services comparable with those that you obtain in
New South Wales and Victoria. Joan Kirnr's complaint is that the formula, the 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 NO. 013
current methodology is exacerbating the trend when in fact Victoria's capacity to
pay Is weakening. That's fair enoughi, so we're examining that.
JT: Still when you look at what Joan Kirnier, she may miss out this time, she may go
down In a scivaming heap after this election. What will that do to you, will that
have any bearing whatsoever on when you go to an election?
PM: No, we'll make our mind up. I think the public want value from these Parliaments,
they don't want us all going carly, so to speak. And we've got plenty to do, and
we've been trying to do It as quickly as we can and as effectively as we can, and
we'll just keep doing that. There are a number of State elections that are going to
be on, and that's just the coincidence of Parliamentary terms expiring.
JT: Any likelihood of going in March?
PM: T7here's no point In me speculating about election dates either, it's just pointless.
IT: The climate would be right though, wouldn't it? It's summer, everybody feels
pretty good, school leavcrs figures havcn't come out yet.
PM: It's still summery in most of Australia way past March.
JT:. Not down here it's not. Any chance of it being March, though, early in thc year?
PM: No, T don't think so. My thinking would be we would take the Parliament to its
logical conclusion, and we'vc done that a number of times. I mean it's a very
chequcred history, Australian Parliaments, they don't run their full three years
often but It Just depends on the conditions.
iT: Well, conditions are pretty grim, it's going to be tough for you to go any time, isn't
it?
PM:. But the economy is picking up, growth is coming through.
JT. You're going to Bernie later today, thcre's been a suggestion that if you ease back
on tariffs for APPM, because tariff cuts alone between 1989-1997 will cost APPM
more than $ 300 million, that's $ 6U million a year. Now, is there any way of giving
Bcrnie a break, because it's on its knees at the moment?
PM: I think everybody, the whole country has paid through the nose with tariffs. I
mean, people forget that. And we've reduced tariffs since 1998, gradually. To
give an example, a standard Falcon car today is $ 23,000, it would have been
$ 33,000 had the tariff cuts not come through. Tariffs are basically a tax on
ordinary Australians. In the public dcbate it's not as brutally understood as that.
It's essentially a tax everyone pays for the protection of these industries. Now, to 
TEL: 5. Rug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 P
6
make Australia more competitive we have reduced It. But I shouldn't believe that
APPM's problems are tariff problems, or tariff problems exclusively.
iT: $ 600 million, though, that could go Into buying quite a lot of plant and equipment.
PM: Well, who's number is that? That's their number. The fact of the matter is, some
of these companies have been not as well managed as they should have been, not
as productive as they should have been, and they're now making productivity
changes as the market requires them to make, and a simple explanation that this is
all because of tariff changes Is, I don't think, correct.
JT: Where then has APPM gone wrong in Bernie?
PM: I don't know, but Australian Newsprint Mills is reforming itself just In the same
way as APPM is required to reform itself, but without the brouhaha and the
heartache which has accompanied changes at APPM. So, I mean they're both
doing the samec thing, one's doing it obviously more successfully than the other.
JT: You've given tariff breaks, though, for the sugar industry and other industries like
that. Isn't there a chane that just to help out thc people in Bernie, that this time
APPM needs a break?
PM: We're not dispensing tariff breaks, but what wc're not doing is taking tariffs to
zero. What my friend Dr l-ewson is about is taking the whole structure to zero.
Now we've still got in there 35 per cent, even at the end points, and that's 1997,
per cent for clothing, textile and footwear, 15 for motor cars, 5 for general
manufacturing. He is arguing for zero for everything. So I don't think that for
Instance, a car Industry would survive at zero, it will survive at 15, sections of
clothing, textile and footwear, which is well represented in this State, won't
survive at zero but may survive at 20, 15 and 35, and the end point on papcr
products is also not zero, I'm not sure what it Is but it's not zero. Can I just say that
the largest change In tariffs in the last year in the phase downs came in clothing,
textile and footwear. It changed by 3 per cent. But the exchange rate has
depreciatcd this year by 8 per cent. So the protection afforded by the exchange
rate, that is when the exchange rate depreciates then it adds extra protection, the
protection afforded by the exchange rate changed at 8 per cent is more than 2 1/ 2
times the reduction In the tariff. So complaints by paper manufacturers that at the
moment the tariff is actually hurting them is nonsense because the exchange rate is
more than compensating for a tariff change.
IT: OK, so you're going to Bernie today empty handed?
PM, Well I'm not going out there to dispense goodies, no.
JT: So there will be no relief at all for Bcrnie, no special dispensation, nothing that you
can do for Bernie? 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 P. 07,
7
FM: It's not a matter of relief, rm just visiting the town. As far as I know the company
has said that to get to a level of competitiveness thcy believe Is important, they
think a number of people, a couple of hundred people have got to be either over
time not replaced..
JT: 400, actually, 400 in a year.
PM: Well they said 400, which would either be through non replacement or
redundancies, or maybe that number doesn't need to go if in some way they can
run the plant more productively. So obviously think there is a point of discussion
there for the employers and the unions about how that plant can run more
productively to obviate the need for people to leave,
IT: 0OC, so Bernie can expect an empty handed PM to visit today?
PM: I don't think Prime Ministers should be running around writing cheques out. I
mean, wandering around saying what Is your problcem, please sit down and I'll
write you a cheque. That's not the way goverrnent in this country runs.
if: So you won't give $ 4 million to a footy club?
PM: Well, leavc that to one side, and thc fact is one has to, I think as a government,
articulate rational, sensible, long term policies and we're doing that. And all the
Issues In competitiveness which affect this company, likc wages, and we've got an
Inflation rate now of 1.5 per cent, we've got a competitive exchange rate
mechanism, we've had a depreciation of the exchange rate recently.
if: If people haven't got a job then they're not interested in those figures.
PM: But it's for the company, you're making a claim on behalf of the company that it
needs support. ANl I'm saying to you is that it's had morc support than it could
have likely expected from the Government in the hardest thing to dcliver low
inflation, a competitive exchange rate. For a company like that they're the things
that It needs, and they're the things that wc've given It.
JT: Anothcr issue here is Benders Quarry. What are YOU going to do about that, close
it down?
PM: I'm not surc. I think that our view is tha~ t there should be no more damage to the
cave structure of this area by explosions and the rest, and we've been assured by
the Premier, by the Government of TFasmania, that they won't permiit any further
detonations or damage, and that what we're looking at in thc short term in some
relocation assistance for the company.
IT: So the last blast will not take place? 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No .013 F'. 08/ 1
PNS Well, that's what Wre told.
JTs Will the funds, though, to relocate it come out of world
heritage funds?
PI: I'm not sure what the funding source will be, but I don't
think we've talking about gigantic amounts here. Some of the
relocation assistance we can handle one way or the other.
MT Just move on now to listeners' questions and we asked'
listeners to phone in yesterday with some questions so that we
could sort of go through them and sort out the wheat from the
c7hva e ffr. meAnndt soc oinf sidI ecreodu ldd egcor etaos inthgo steh en owam. ouFnitr sot f onuen emisp, loyhmase nty oubry
ntroducing national service?
PX; Sorry, decreasing?
MT Decreasing the amount of unemployment by introducing
national service,
PM Well the question implies that there'sa some sort of a
penalty, that people are unemployed because they don't want to do
anything. That is if one threatens them with national service
they might get themselves employed. And I think that's very
unfair. I mean Australia is going through a cyclical, has been
through a cyclical recession and is going through structural
change. And we've got cyclical unemployment and we've got
unemployment coming from the structure of change in the economy.
This is not the fault of the people who are unemployed. And it's
unfair I think to say to them that they can quickly employ
themselves otherwise we'll shove them in the army. I mean I don't
accept that. I think society has got a responsibility to support
people who the economic system has made unemployed or redundant.
And the way to help them is to teach them new skills so they can
go back into the labour market. And that's exactly what the
government is doing.
JT: No more nasho then?
PM: No. No more nasho.
JTs Another fellow phoned in and said I'm sixty one, I have been
unemployed for twelve months, I've been hassled by the CBS and
the DSS during this period. I would like to know is there a
future policy in respect to the age group fifty five to sixty
five being able to take earlyr_ retirement and get an _ gLnsioq_._
Pi'i well to get an age pension, no. But fifty five is the age
where superannuation benefits are treed under the preservation
rules. But it is harder obviously for older people to when they
are unemployed to get back into the workforce. And obviously 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 P. 09/.'
I
there needs to be some real buoyancy in the economy and the
labour market before that can ha ppen. But we are seeing just in
the various technical and further education colleges, I was
yesterday at the TAPE at Clarence, and we are seeing quite a
number of mature age people going back to learn new skills so
they can f ind their way back into the labour market. But it to
harder. JTt Wihy do all parties still speak of growth when everyone knows
that our world is finite?
PM: Well this comes from so~ ebody who's never had to handle a
low growth economy. And it's very difficult I think to well
almost at this stage impossible to run an economic s ystem with
employment without growth. Otherwise we've got to find new wiya
of distributing wealth and obviously the wealth will be
diminishing as the growth is diminishing. Now I believe that you
can have growth and you can at the same time protect the
environment which I think is the point of the question. And you
can have it by the sort of services which are now proliferating,
which are environment friendly. Tourism for instance which is a
large employer, a labour intensive industry, is an
environmentally friendly industry, it's not a smoke stack
industry. it's not a polluter. And all manner of other services.
I mean I noticed yesterday at the same TAFE college I was talking
about students coming in from abroad paying full fees. Solling
education services is growth. But again it's a non-polluter. So
we're having, and even in the industrial production we're seeing,
you know, a much cleaner sorts of Industrial structures today
than we saw years ago. so one shouldn't assume therefore that we
have to go to zero growth or to contract to sort of save the
environment. I think what we've got to do is keep that happy
balance between the environment and growth and the needs of
people for a job.
MT How serious are you about keeping our land, our companies
and our assets in Australian hands when you have taken all the
teeth out of the foreign investment r. eview board and the
Australian Securitiei7 Commission?
PM: Well teeth implies that you've got to bite people you see.
And the question sort of has the penalty notion. You've got to
exact a penalty on people. We've developed this place, this
country of ours in the last two hundred years by relying on
someone else's capital. Capital we never had. In the first
instance it was British capital and British industry which
invested here and gave us the chance to develop this country. And
this is still true. This is a large continent. We don't have a
savings base and an investment pool adequate at this stage to
fund our needs, and so foreign investors come and buy assets and
they bring technologies and often they bring businesses. This I
think's a good thing.-And you know you see this ebb and flow. Z 
a aa
TEL 5. HU9.' J 10Q-j nu n~ II.. 3 P,. 10
mean there wag A time, let Me give YOU An OXAMPle, not int
Australia but there was a time when during the OPEC one and two
oil rice shocks when the income of the Arab states rose sharply,
so they then amongst other things bought a stack of real estate
in Britain, in London, and what have you. It's largely now all
been sold. Similarly the Japanese in the eighties bought real
estate all round the world. They're now largely selling it.,
.7Ts Well they have to.
PX1 Well that's right. So I mean I don't know why people worry.
I mean we've got to fund the current account deficit some way. So
it either comes with debt or-It comes with equity.
So if you say no to equity and no to foreign investment it just
means that Australians somewhere have got to borrow more debt.
JTs Have YOU any idea though how much land is owned by foreign
investors? IPM: No there's no land register. But in my eight, years as
Treasurer the amount of purchases by foreigners of Australian
open space land wae quite small. I don't think it's a problem at
all. JTs NOxt question. With the differing wage stru~ cturea between
Australia and South Cast Asia our main manufacturing competitor,
the COst of production in Australia, the cost of production is I
should say, nkneteen times greater than those in south east Asia.
How then does the PM expect Australian manufacturers to become
competitive with this millstone around their necks. Are they to
slash wages or move production off shore and import?
PM Neither. They are to produce the right forts of things. That
is we should be investing in our creativity, in our brains and
selling innovative products that would attract a premium and not
trying to compete with the countries that make things, employ
people at seven and ten dollars a week. Now that's what Dr Rewson
wants to do. What he wants to do is cut the wage of Australians
so that we can compete with these low-wage countries for lowvalue
products. What we're trying to do is to educate
Australians, take them through secondary school, tertiary
institutions, TAFE, so that we can produce innovative products
that sell in--teee markets at a premium. And that's now
happening. You know we're seeing the likes of Telecom Australia
moving strongly through Indonesia, Malaysia# all these countries
to our near north. We're seeing lots of companies in the service
area, civil engineering construction services going there because
they don't have them. Education, educationalists and education
services. These are things which you don't have to compete seven
dollars or ten dollars a week for, So the clever thing to do is,
to make certain that the comparative advantage Australia now has
in education is continued. And not to do the dumb thing which as 1. 4 
~ P* D si* I 4 d
* TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 P-11/ 1
I say the only way we can compete is to slash your wages which Is
Urhat Dr Hewson is saying to young people, three dollars an hour#
to mature people, we'll out you back to three quarters of average
weekly earnings and then you might be able to compote making
shirts with the Indonesians or somebody else. The truth of the
matter is we ought to be making things that attract a premium
Where we put our creativity and our brains into the product and
Where we invest in our greatest resource which is our own people.
JM If we are concerned about four hundred job looses at AP?) I
that is less than two days of imiLgration. I don't know if those
figures are right actually. Should we not be taking in only
Immigrants with guaranteed job tenure?
PM: Well the migration program has been a source of great
strength to the' Austrailan economy. We've had workcforce growth in
this country with migration of about one int six to two percent
a year, Which means if you're an Austrafioan business if you do
nothing but grow your business naturally it should be growing one
point six or two percent a year as the population grows. Whereas
if you're a European business and you ve got static population
growth you've got to actually take someone else's market share to
grow, You've got to take the market share of another business.
You've got to take it of f themi to grow. So migration has been a
source of economic growth and strength to Australia. And the
Srogram is essentially a long-term one. Now we can vary it and we
ave quite substantially. we were taking a hundred and forty
thousand people a year in two years ago. We're now taking about
eighty thousand a year in. Just over eighty thousand a year in.
And that I think comprehends the fact that the labour market is
under stress and it's therefore more difficult to accommodate
migrants as well as Australians. But the problem is if you wind
the program down less than that it'd take years to wind it up
And if you look at the late 1980s when we had shortages of skill;,
in demand, tradesporsons, qualified people where the labour
market threatened to blow inflation apart again, the migration
program helped to complement our labour market, 6o one has to
take a medium term view of it. And governments should basicly
keep the program and adjust it for the contemporary condition of
the economy. Which is what we've done.
JTs Do you think Bob Hawke will ever rue the day he said that
all those Chinese students could stay here? And nlow you've had to
clamp down on them bringing in families and going Into the
marriage arrangements.
PM1: Oh I don't know what his view of it is now. It's just one of
those things, a contingency which arose because of the Tianenmen
Square thing.
JT: Do you think emotion though took priority there instead of 
T5EL.: Rug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 P.. 12/.
12
rational thought?
PM1 Well it was considered. It was considered at Cabinet level.
Oh, it's something we can handle. We can handle it. I mean you'll
always got People trying to * xploit the system I Suppose. And
whatever they try we try and check them.
JTs Quickly then on to another couple of questions because we ' ve
got a very short amount of time. Given the youth job summit will
the PX be making money available to the community groups ' that
Work with and on behalf of the unemployed?
U1s ' Well we try and support certainly the volun~ tary agencies. We
gave them the One Nation package a substantial increase to the St
Vincent de Paul, the Salvation Army and those sorts of people.
But I think this question Is a question from the welfare industry
employees, the people who work In it.
Well and again we ye treated them well over the period. But T
think the primary concern now is with their clients# not with
them, You know, with the unemployed themselves. I mean it should
be remembered, people tend to think with unemployment now that
sort of the gains of the eighties have been lout. That's not
true. You see in 1983 when 1; became Treasurer we had a work~ orce
Of Six Million, Today we've got a workforce of seven point five
million. It's a quarter bigger.
JTi Yes but there was two hundred thousand roughly unemployed
When you came in and now it's a million.
PM. N4o no. No no, No that's not true. There were six hundred
thousand. Six or seven hundred thousand. It's just not growing.
But we've largely kept the employment. The place is twenty five
percent larger in size. The economy itself when I became
Treasurer In 1983 the total size of the economy# that's gross
domestic product, the production of the Country was two hundred
billion. This year it's four hundred and twenty five billion. So,
and inflation was ten and a half percent and now it's one and a
half. Imean thera are great gains there. We've had a great shift
to manufacturing which we didn't have in the early eighties. But
with the slow growth, the negative growth of the last year or so
we've lost the growth in employment and we've got to get that
back, But as we get it back we can just consolidate those
eighties changes and gains and move them into the nineties. So
people shouldn't be too forlorn about this. It's a matter of
trying to get the economy growing again and once we do we will as
I said there'll be a lag in the first instance and then that
employment response should come through.
M~ And talking about being forlorn the last question, tongue in
cheek I would imagine from a listener. Are you any relation. to
the Hobart undertaking firm of Pearce and Keating?
TEL: 
TEL: 5. Aug. 92 13: 49 No. 013 P. 13/ 1
PM. Never heard of them. Never heard of them. But they must, the
Keating family are spread all round the place buit I rarely find
any of us related, We or* obviously somewhere back there. They're
a&amp; I black Irish of course.
JTs i thinkX it might be through come of the caricatures making
you the undertaker. I don't think it was really a serious
question. It was interesting to read Laurie Oakep today saying
ou're becoming the now warm and fuzzy PM now to try and got away
from Hewson's what has been depicted as a fairly cold image. Axe
you becoming a new warma and fuzzy PM?
MK in the 1980# one of the probleme about the Treasury and the
Treasurer's job is that the social policy we're all involved with
becomes the product of someone else. But all the things which I
vas involved with such as Medicare, the family allowance
supplement, the provision of occupational superannuation in the
workforce, childcare, aged care, the home and community care
program, the hostel program, the changed basis of geriatric
asesment, increases in basic rate pensions, the child support
agency through the Tax Office these are all things I was well
involved in. But that's not comprehended I don't think in the
debate. And people tend to think now when I'm out there
supporting those things that in some way I've changed my tune.
Many of those are there because I was involved with them. And to
I've always believed that society can only move along together
that we can't have a thing which is a survival of the fittest
policy. If you're not a millionaire you're a layabout, you know
this is the sort of iNewson deal. If you're not a millionaire
you're not working and the state owes you nothing. Well I think
people have got a right of access to health care. They have got a
right of access to education. They've got a right of access to
support in their old age. And those policies I've supported and
I'm not going to be cast in a position where people say well
because you introduced an open market economy into Australia in
the 1980s you're like Dr Hewson. I'm~ not like Dr Hewson. I mean
he is a clinical technician and good on him. If that's what he
wants to be fine. I'm not. I'm in there looking after the broad
group of the community as I always have.
JT: Paul ) Xuating thank you very much indeed for your time this
morning. PH: Thank you very much.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SIR ROBERT MULDOON
I sent today the following condolence message to the New
Zealand Prime Minister on the occasion of the death of
Sir Robert -Muldoon:-
I was saddened today to learn of Sir Robert
Muldoon's death.
Sir Robert will be remembered as a significant
national leader who played a prominent role in
regional affairs. He also contributed greatly to
our important bilateral relationship. He was a
strong advocate of the Closer Economic Relations
agreement, which has been of such benefit to both
our countries.
I should be grateful if you could pass my
condolences, and those of the Australian
Government and people, to Lady Muldoon and Sir
Robert's family.
The Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Howe, will represent the
Australian Government at the funeral for Sir Robert which
will be held on Friday morning in Auckland.
CANBERRA August 1992 84/ 92
1058 



PRIME MINJISTER
joint statement by the Prime Minister, the
HoD P J Keating, and the Minister for Land
Transport, the Hon Bob Brown MIP.
FEDERAL GOVERNMIENT APPROVES $ 47.4 MILLION
FOR SOUTH AUSTRALI[ AN RAIL PROJECTS
The Federal Governument today approved the $ 47.4 million first instalment in its One
Nation upgrading program for South Australian railways. The funding will create about
1200 new jobs.
The largest single expenditure item is a $ 45 million contribution towards converting the
Adelaide-Melbourne railway line to standard gauge. A further $ 2 million will be used to
increase the height of eight bridges on the Adelaide-Kalgoorlie route to facilitate, in the
long term, trains carrying double-stacked containers to operate with safe clearances.
Design work for the rail loop to be built adjacent to the Adelaide Outer Harbour No 6
container terminal will proceed following the release of S400 000 of One Nation funding.
Eventually, the $ 8 million facility will help create an integrated ship, road and rail freight
transfer facility.
The Prime Minister, Paul Keating, and the Minister for Land Transport, Bob Brown, said
today that the combined effect of the Federal Government investment would be to
enhance Adelaide's reputation as a transport hub serving much of Southern Australia.
' It is estimated that the Outer Harbour improvements alone will mean that 50 000
additional containers could be shipped through the Port-of Adelaide, which will become
an international terminal specialising in high priority containers under the One Nation
strategy', Mr Keating and Mr Brown said in a joint statement.
All three projects announced today support the interstate freight operations of National
Rail, the organisation which the Federal Government and the governments of New South
Wales, Victoriai, Queensland and Western Australia agreed to establish last year.
National Rail will take over and manage all interstate rail freight services throughout
Australia. 2
1101 
-2
Mr Keating and Mr Brown said the effects of this decision on the residual r., leinents of
Australian National would be announced within the context of the Federal Budget.
They said the $ 45 million to be spent on converting the line between Adelaide and
Melbourne would meet the cost of supplying and installing concrete sleepers on the
section from Adelaide to Kiki, track and crossing loop conversion and some work in
connection with acquiring STA track.
' From Kiki to the border, existing timber sleepers will be replaced with gauge-convertible
concrete sleepers under an existing Federal Government project. Concrete sleepers have
the advantages of reduced maintenance costs and fewer speed restrictions'.
Mr Keating and Mr Brown said that following installation of gauge convertible sleepers,
one rail on the line would be moved inwards to conform with the standard gauge
measurement of 1435 mm. T7his would take place over a two and a half week period
early in 1994.
' Rail clearances will be increased between Adelaide and Kalgoorlie by raising the height
of bridges or lowering the track at eight locations in the long term. Ibis will facilitate
trains carrying double-stacked containers in well wagons while maintaining safety
clearances'. Mr Keating and Mr Brown said the revitalisation of rail transport under One Nation were
supported by other government initiatives, such as waterfront reform and more
streamlined administration of the road transport industry.
' All these measures will have far-reaching effects on transport efficiency and Australia's
ability to compete effectively in world markets, particularly in those commodities with a
high transport cost component', they said.
Sydney 6 August 1992
For more information, contact Richard Desmond ( 06) 274 7306
1102 
ONE NATION EARLY START PROJECTS
PERTH TO ADELAIDE ADELAIDE
FREMANTLE ISLINGTON UPGRADING
To faclltate clarances for continer stacking $ 2.0m PURCHASE OF MATERIALS FOR
USE ON THE NATIONAL SYSTEM
Manufacture of concrete leepers
Purchase of rail $ 2.7m 



6.
I.
PRIME MINISTER
joint statement by the Prime Minister, the
Hon P J Keating, and the Minister for
Land Transport, Hon Bob Bro wn, MY.
ONE NATION RAEL FUNDS FLOW TO NEW SOUTH WALES
The Federal Government today approved a $ 28 million instalment of One Nation funding
for ' early start' rail improvement projects in New South Wales.
The money will generate 700 jobs.
The funding targets rail projects on theSydney-Melbourne and Sydnev-Brisbane
interstate lines to be used by National Rail formerly the National Rail Corporation.
The Prime Minister, Paul Keating, officially opened National Rail's Parramatta
headquarters today and announced that S$ 181 million of One Nation money would be
allocated immediately to upgrade the network of track over which NR interstate freight
trains will operate.
Overall, the Federal Government has promised $ 454 million from One Nation for
upgrading major interstate railway lines throughout Australia.
Of the $ 28 million initial payment approved for New South Wales today, bridgeworks,
sleeper replacement and minor track repairs on the North Coast account for the
$ 9 million to be spent between Sydney and Brisbane
Nineteen million dollars will be spent on the Sydney-Melbourne link.
Included in this sum is $ 2.2 million for the design of a $ 71 million freight railway line
between Campbelltown and Enfield, where National Rail will construct a new
million state-of-the-art rail freight terminal in two years. NR will be able to consign
freight from its own Sydney terminal without encountering delays caused by having to
use the Cityrail passenger network. / 2 108b 
2
' By reserving this route for NR operations and upgrading the Melbourne-Sydney railway
line, fast " Superfreighter" trains will travel between Sydney and Melbourne in just 12
hours by 1994', Mr Keating and Mr Brown said.
' The Federal Government will provide $ 15 million for Sydney-Melbourne track
upgrading and rehabilitation in New South Wales. A $ 50 000 allocation will pay for
design work as a prelude to curve realignment on the 35 km between Moss Vale and
Exeter. ' Almost $ 2 million will be spent on design of four bridges to replace the Menangle
Viaduct ( near Campbelltown), the Joppa Junction bridge ( near Goulburn), and viaducts
at Wagga Wagga and Albury.
' Replacement of the bridges will reduce transit times considerably on the Southern
corridor, thereby enabling rail to increase its market share on the route. A superior
railway line is also expected to reduce costs', Mr Keating and Mr Brown said.
' On the Sydney-Brisbane link, the aim is to reduce interstate freight train travelling times
by two hours to 16 hours, about the same journey duration as road transport. Rail's share
of the freight task is expected to increase to 45 per cent in the long term'.
Bridge replacements are planned near Casino, Grafton and Macksville. New structures
will be able to withstand the 25 tonne axle loadings of trains running at speed'.
Sydney 6 August 1992
For more information, contact Richard Desmond ( 06) 274 7306
1090 
ONE NATION EARLY START PROJECTS
SYDNEY TO BRISBANE STANDARD GAUGE LINK
TO FISHERMAN ISLANDS
QUEENSLAND C
1 Lai
Graft
Nama G
Kara
Bony
TH WALES Macksville Tamban i on REPLACEMENT OF
TIMBER BRIDGES
II$ 3.27m
Macquarle 1091
NEW SOU PURCHASE OF MATERIALS FOR
USE ON THE NATIONAL SYSTEM
Manufacture of concrete sleepers
Purchase of rail $ 2.7m 
I GLENLEE-ENFIELD DEDICATED
FREIGHT LINE DESIGN $ 22m
BRIDGES AND STRUCTURES
o io 4 fpsiCur b dp SIAum NSW
I VICORIA Wa116 ACT
' I PURCHASE OF MATERIALS FOR
USE ON THE NATIONAL SYSTEM
M anufacture of concrte sleepers
P urchase o rail S2 lm
MELBOURNE RAIL TERMINAL SlOm
. D oywn4 Fr* gVmTsmb m
Connetlon t NsftMm. OocDs " m UPGRADE AND SLEEPERS
SI6.05m Mos Vale-Exeter prelm desIgn
Track ugraing Sydnl-Victorta
boedsr $ I
SDe0n sind iveslgalon of upgoade
wrkr Abury-Mam~ m IICSM
O
CC n= ONE NATION EARLY START PROJECTS
SYDNEY TO MELBOURNE 
r
BRIDGES AND STRUCTURES
D" 0 0o4 MVW1 bhwoe 91 46m N.
VICTORIA ONE NATION EARLY START PROJECTS
MELBOURNE SYDNEY BRISBANE STANDARD GA%
TO FISNbERMAN
S30f0
QUEENSLAND -UPGRADE AN
USEPOWTHAN
1MELSOURNERWALTERMIIEALS. EII 1093 SLEEPERS go"-dewI
pSo4 0
womoSI bt
SATERJLS FOR
TXWEALfY STE U
ssm 



J0
PRM4MIISE
EARLY START TO PORT OF BRISBANE RAIL LINK
Brisbane will become a major sea freight transfer centre serving much of eastern
Australia and the South Pacific within five years, Prime Minister Paul Keating predicted
today. Mr Keating's statement was backed by Federal Land Transport Minister, Bob Brown,
who said tbat a major study had estimated that a standard gauge rail link to the Port of
Brisbane would generate new business employing 3100 people and would inject more
than $ 224 million into the Queensland economy over 10 years.
Mr Keating and Mr Brown were commenting on the Federal Government's decision to
release $ 30 million of One Nation money immediately as a Commonwealth contribution
to the 21 km link from the Port at Fisherman Islands to the existing standard gauge
railway line at Dutton Park.
The new National Rail Corporation will contribute $ 10 million to the project, with the
Queensland Government meeting the remainder of the $ 90 million estimated cost.
Mr Keating and Mr Brown said the Commonwealth contribution was conditional upon
the link meeting stringent environmental standards.
The Commonwealth would also allocate $ 9 million as an initial payment towards the $ 82
million upgrading of the Brisbane-Sydney railway line. The One Nation money will be
used to replace several bridges and place new sleepers along deficient sections of the
standard gauge track in Northern New South Wales. Proposals would be submitted soon
for the remainder of the $ 82 million earmarked for this corridor.
' The aim of this spending is to encourage shipping lines wanting to minimise steaming
times and shorten costly port delays to choose Brisbane as a regular stopover,
particularly if goods can be transferred interstate by a more efficient Australian rail
freight network. / 2
1098 
-2
The Port of Brisbane rail link will connect Brisbane directly into a rail grid running to all
mainland state capitals, while improvements on the Brisbane-Sydney line will reduce rail
travelling time to about 16 hours, the same time as road transport takes to make the
journey', Mr Keating and Mr Brown said.
' Ukely national benefits include increased speed and reliability of freight transfer, lower
costs to freight forwarders and consumers and greater competitiveness in Australia's
trade-exposed sectors through the major ports.
' At present, the port is served by a Queensland Rail narrow gauge freight line. Interstate
freight traffic to or from the port. must be trans-shipped to or from the standard gauge
line the Acacia Ridge goods yards using either road or narrow gauge rail.
This is an inefficient method of operation, as interstate freight transported by rail beyond
Brisbane must be double-handled'.
Mr Keating and Mr Brown said the One Nation investment in the Brisbane-Sydney rail
corridor and Port of Brisbane link would increase rail's share of the transportation task
down the New South Wales coast from 35 per cent to 45 per cent.
The Dutton Park-Fisherman Islands standard gauge link is planned to follow an existing
suburban rail corridor through Brisbane's southern suburbs. Construction is expected to
generate employment for about 750 people in 1992-93 and 1993-94. The line is
expected to be completed in 1995.
For more information, contact Richard Desmond ( 06) 274 7306 1099 
ONE NATION EARLY START PROJECTS
SYDNEY TO BRISBANE
QUEENSLAND
NEW SOUTH WALES ' SYDNEY
1100 STANDARD GAUGE LINK
TO FISHERMAN ISLANDS
Grafton
Nama GlenREPLACEMENT OF
TIMBER BRIDGES
$ 3.27m
PURCHASE OF MATERIALS FOR
USE ON THE NATIONAL SYSTEM
* Manufacture of concrete sleepers
* Purchase of rail $ 2.7m 



PRIM MINSTER86/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING MP
VISIT TO JAPAN, SINGAPORE AND CAMBODIA
As the guest of the Japanese and Singaporean Governments, I shall be visiting Japan from
to 24 September, and Singapore from 24 to 25 September. If circumstances allow, I
also propose making a one-day visit to Cambodia on 26 September.
The primary purpose of my visit to Japan will be to exchange views with Prime Minister
Miyazawa, his Ministers, and senior financial and business leaders on Australia-Japan
relations and the wider outlook for our two countries' interests in an increasingly fluid
international political and economic environment.
Japan has been Australia's leading trading partner for many years and is a major source of
investment into Australia. In keeping with the mature relationship between our countries,
the two governments maintain a vigorous dialogue on a wide range of regional and
international issues of shared concern.
In Singapore, I shall have an opportunity for detailed discussions with Prime Minister Goh
ACbpk Tong and his Ministers. Singapore is Australia's fourth largest export market and a
longstanding regional partner of considerable importance. My program and discussions
will reflect the range of interests we share with Singapore including in the commercial and
defence areas.
My proposed visit to Cambodia is intended to underline Australia's firm support for the
peace process at a time when serious difficulties have been encountered. I shall have an
opportunity to meet His Royal Highiness Prince Sihanouk, other members of the Supreme
National Council and senior United Nations representatives. I also look forward to
reaffirming the Government's appreciation of the efforts of the Australian military and
civilian personnel serving with the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia.
CANBERRA 7 August 1992 



TEL: 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 No. 009 P. 01.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON Pi J KEATING MP,
ADDRESS TO THE SA ALP ANNUAL CONVENTION, TRADES HALL,
ADELAIDE, 9 AUGUST 1992
6 09 PROOF COPY
Delegates, ladies and gentlemen.
Can I perhaps start by saying In times of difficulty the
ALP In often more maudlin than the community at largo and
it's so used to progress on all fronts whenever the
progress is thwarted or blunted It has a propensity to
become Introverted and reflective, There's an old saying
that when the going gets tough the tough get going and
that's basically what the federal Government has done.
We're ploughing on, we're making changes, we're
Instituting remedies and we're certainly not looking
back. The economy has been In recession, this we all know is
true, but the Government's doing everything possible for
us to emerge from it as quickly as possible.
Unemployment has risen we are doing everything we can
to get egiplqym~ ent going again, but we say that we must
move together, that economic progress and social progress
must be as one, moving in tandem, moving together. We
nay that economic change Is Imperative, but we won't let
the unemployed carry the burden of the adjustment of that
change, we say society must advance togpther, that we
have to look after those who are left behind and we say
that the great Australian and Labor traditions of
egalitarianism and fairness and decency. can only be
preserved In this way, moving together. The Government
using the power of Government, drawing down community
support, engaging in dialogue with various interest
groups, finding solutions, acting in concert, acting in
friendship. Real social change can only be assured in
this way, with the Government playing a role. That is,
not the Government withdrawing from society, but the
Government engaging society and playing a role
particularly when that role L3 necessary to make changes.
For many of the years that this Government has been in
office 41l of Its years we've used a consensus model
and much has been achieved. And don't let anyone tell
you that a consensus model has slowed change. Ln fact it 
a~ 0" Q* 1: 09 No. 009 P.. 02/
TEL: 2
has facilitated Change, it's facilitated economic change
and It's facilitated social change, that is talking to
people, talking to Interest groupa. understanding their
Positions, encouraging them to do things they mightn't
otherwise do and getting progress as a result,
In the 19808 Labor reletyed the foundations or Australia,
be totally certain of that. We ga~ ve Australia a new
external orientation, we developed for the first time an
open market economy, but we did it grafting on to it a
comprehensive and progressive social policy. We went and
put together something which I think has been unique
amongst nations, that Is a very rapidly changing economic
scene and policy wrapped together with a social policy
which ha. basically let the country move forward.
In other words we took the steps as all Labor Governments
are required to take thp steps, the tough steps to give
Australia an open market economy, but the difference Is
we did it with a Labor heart, we did It differently to
the way many other countries did it. And we made great
strides and it's worth recalling those strides.
In 1983 we started with a labour market of six million.
Today, despite the unemployment, it's a labour market of
million, It's twenty five per cent larger. We've
largely kept the gains of the 1980E it's just that it's
not now growing as rapidly although we saw 85,000 Job
growth in the last two months. But those. large gains,
that focus on employment we had in the~ 1980s has been
largely preserved.
GDFP, the total size of the economy in 1983 was 200
billion, this year It's over 400 billion. Expmrts whichl
we sought to provide for ourselvet from the industries In
the places where people live, In manufacturing industry
this~ year for the first time in our post-war history
we've seen manufactured exports outstrip mining and rural
exports for the first time. We defeated inflation,
wo've got the lowest Inflation rate in the OECD, we
defeated the thing which robs working pepople of their
savings which puts big mortgages on their backs which
makes us uncompetitive and gradually drains our economic
life blood away. We change the labour ifiarket with
enterprise bargaining in a way which will see trade
unions and business work together to Product productive
Industries and companies in a way we've never had under
the old centralised structure before. And of course,
we've revolutionised training, trade training and tertiary
education all In this period as well. We've set up
Medicare to give Australians the right to medical access
regardless of Income. We've improved participatioll in
education, as you know only three kids In ten completed
sde-coindary'school in 1983, that's now seven in ten and
we're heading for nine In ten. We've set up one of the
boat income support systems in the world with the Family
Allou; 2g Supplemnent. W.' vo Increased Waic rates of
pen~ lon, We've estab11chod eomiulsorj oc urat19qtj 
TEL: 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 No. 009 P. 03,
3
auperannuation for the whole work force and we've
revolutionised aged care with home and community care,
the hostel and nursing homes programs an~ d we've
revolutionised of course, Childcare by Multiplying by
five the number of places which existed when we came.
But as good as that is, it Is important as 41l that is we
want to build upon these things and make Australia a
country I think, that can be the envy of people abroad, a
society which has pride in itself and does things
together and does things with comprehension and
understanding. Australians I think, have got a great and unique
opportunity. We're the only nation in the world that has
a continent to itself arnd accordingly we have space, we
have clean air and we have good housing. There's not too
many countries like this, not now and as well as that we
have a good aocial Policy to look after people as well
and these possibilities are possibilities which I think
few have. Few in this room would exchange those things
to live~ in Tokyo or to live in Los Angles or to live in
New York. They are not possibilities which exist In
those places. But here if you are sick you get access to
Medicare. in the United States t you rolled up to a
hospital without that blue cross card In your pocket you
get turned away, whether their acute or otherwise.
Where In this country, aR I said a moment ago, seven kids
In tan complete secondary school and soon we hope to be
nine in ten, we've created fifty per cent of additional
places for universitios to give Australian kids access to
education, not fee paying, full fee paying like in many
countries like as Dr Hewson would have it but acceag
regardless of income and woe support you you're on a
low income with Austudy arid we even support you in years
eleven and twelve with it.
Or vocational eucation. In the last Couple of wooks tho
Government with the States has revolutionised vocational
education. We'll see In a policy in which your own
Premier played a substantial and key role the development
of a national training authority whIeb will dofor
vocational education what the Commonwealth was able to do
for universities and give working class kids the great
bulk of kids who come out of secondary school or earlier
that change of participation in life in that training
through to a Job.
So whether It be in the sick or in education or the aged,
if you're old you get support with the basic pension or
as I said all the other things that are added on to thnt
rent assistance, home and community care, the hostel
program etc and If you're unemployed you get benefits,
you're not tipped out after nine months as Dr Howson
would propose or in the United States loft to yourselves,
youJ get support again rent assistance, 1he Family
Allowance Supplement, labour market prolrams to rntrain 
TEL 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 No .009 P,. 04/,
4
you to get you bank In the workforce and of course,
generally training after that and now as we have throuuh
the 19800 jobs and as we want in the 1990s jobs, hot
interesting jobs.
go, we can guarantee a good existence for ourselvots with
an economy which serves us, which provides jobs where we
lI ve In the capital cities and interosting jobs, but
importantly doing the clever things. NJow a deleqate a
few moment. ago mentioned this term the clever country
and that's what we want to be and indeed that's what wo
must be, but remember what the Liberals did to tie. They
left UID as an Industrial muSetum. They thought the lucky
country only had to dig up another mound of rocks or grow
another paddock fuall of wheat and that's all we needed to
do and if you went to find a job you found it at a mining
site, in the rural areas of Australia, in South
Australian or Queensland or Western Australia, If youi
wanted a job you went there. But it wasn't enough. We
had to find the jobs In the capital cities and the
provincial cities where people live, doing clever things.
They provided us with no research and development, that
had pretty well collapsed. As I said there was no
training in school, how could you have a clever country
when only threp kids In ten completed secondary school?
and fewer completed tertiary qualifications. Our terms
nf trade were slipping: in the 1950s a bag of wheat
brought you a truck load of manufac~ tures by the 1980s it
brought you virtually nothing, yet these were the staples
we were selling and of cotirse, the service sector as we
know it today barely existed. This was the thing which
the Coalition Left us.
But of course, what they want to do is do the unclever
thing again. They now want us to compete in the
international division of labour which will do
Australians no good and they now want to drive wages
down, drive down the wages of young people and-p6-t-
Australians onto three quarters of their award pay to try
to make the place, as they put it, competitive. But
competitive with who? Competitive with the IndnnesiAn6?
I was In Surabaya abouit two months ago, Surabaya has hid
billion US of investment for iwoe consecutive yearn.
It's basically a modern Industrial region. Its proceso
workers are employed at $ 1.30 Australian a day, $ 7 a
week, for semi'. skilled process workers. That's the
division that Dr Hewson wants us to compete in.
The same people in Australia are paid $ 375 per week. So
even if you cut the pay In half you wouldn't be
competitive and yet to try and embark Upon such a policy
iz nnt only cruel, but a hoax driving Australians to ao
the things which other people are going to do more
cheaply. The unclever things that we should be out uf
and Into the things which we can do well and we know woe
can do well. 
TEL: 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 No. 009
6
But this Idea of $ 3 per hour, or three quarters of your
current pay, no awards, holiday pay, all the other
conditions of employment to go under common law
contracts, the law of the jungle to provide to obtain in
the Industrial relations area, rancour, division,
confrontation R1l for what? To do something more
clever? No. To try and do the old things that we're now
trying to remove ourselves from to do the more clever
things that give us a future.
We made a decision for instance, to have a car inut. r.
We believe the role of Government says that you decide
what you want to do and to decide what things and In
which Industries people employed. In this State, In this
city the car industry Is Important, Labour decided we
want a car Industry, we've had it, we continue to want
It, we want an efficient lower cost industry, but we want
a car industry. We're not going to wipe It out with a
zero tariff. We want a chemical industry through our
Factor F program. We want a computer industry. We want
strong parts of tie textile, clothing and footwear
industry to remain strong and viable for AustraliA. We
want to do the clever things, but we don't want to be
doing the things that we can't and haven't been able to
do well in the past and can't do competitively in tho
future. In elaborately transformed manufactures, we've.
now seen about thirty per cent growth a year, they've
literally trebled since the early 1980s and are now
leading the charge in our manufactured exports. We want
to be Fielling our brains not our brawn and how can you
hope to sell you brains if you're happy for kids to leave
school untrained at sixteen to wander around the labour
market looking for dead end jobs that have long since
disappeared and not putting the effort into vocational
education or not putting the support Into universities or
to say that freedom to achieve to a kid is to go and buy
a full fee paying place in a university if their paronts
can afford the $ 15,000 or $ 20.000 a year after tax to put
one person through liniversity.
That's their idea of opportunity anid freedom, their Idea
of adding value, their Idea of Osoing the clever thing,
their Idea of the clever country.
Now of course, as we know stmple ideas were never the
stuff of Government. Government is a complex matter and
it's a difficult matter and everybody who has any
axperience of it knows this to be true. But we're now
being fed this diet by the Conservatives that a simplo
thing-and simple Ideas will change Australia, where we
know that Australia is * a complex, like every other
country in society, a complex thing where complex
policies need to be bought to bear. And Dr Heweon's
proposing that we should have a consumption tax as a way
of solving all of our evils. As If another Primary tax
is going to change Australia or change it for the better
or solve all of the problems, long stonding problems
which Australia has had. 
TEL: 9. Pug. 92 19: 09 No. 009 P. 06,'
6
Ito basically has one policy with two prongs, Putting
prices up and cutting wages. Putting prices up with a
fifteen per cent CST and cutting wages by cutting awards
and letting the award system expire and going to common
laiw contracts. And tho view Is that that simple policy
will change the way the country works. As if, for
instance labour rates in this c~ ountry are axceedingly
high, it's untrue. The wage share in the economy is at
1960s levels, the profit share wilt spring back to Its
highest level ever once there's some volume back there on
the bottom line of companies. It's not true that we need
a cut in wages. The average rate of income tax In
Australia Is 2 . S per cent. A 15 per cent consumption
tax Is a massive addition to taxation, a massive addition
to prices, a percentage point addition to prices
which will add 6-7 percentage points to Inflation which
will 6-7 per centage points to interest rates. And that
higher interest rate will buy more support for the
exchange rate, the exchange rate will appreciate, the
country will be less competitive.
These are the policies which they're supporting. They
think simple policies which they think will change
Australia. Or the view that medical protection goes,
that you got a health voucher, it basically Involves
reople Insuring themselves for health. And all the
people now who don't pay any Medicare levy, people up in
the $ 20-30,000 range with children who pay no levy at
all, will then he required to insure themselves through
private insurance. And of course, in education the
notion that the right of a working class kid to move
through secondary school and then stream into university
or into a high quality TAFE, that's a notion which Is
totally foreign to them, they're saying basically, the
places in universities will be left for those who can
afford the fees. This ts the sort of view they have and
of course, if you're unemployed it's because you
basically don't want to work and if you're unemployed,
you can go and took after yourself, go down to the St
Vincent de Paul society or the Smith Family after nine
months because you're on your own. And If you develop an
underclass in Australia, a group that slips behind,
something which for the first time In our life as a
society we would tolerate and all the divisions which
come with that, don't take any notice of that, they can
fend for themselves because If the wealthy are doing well
somp crumbs will drop from the table and they'll get
tugged along.
Now the tact is life in not simple, life is complex and
Government is complex. Since February this year, if you
lock at the things we've done as I've Said in the ' One
Nation' statement we set up the start then and just
completed the National Training Authority to lift up tho
one great weakness in our education system which is
vocational training. We're going to rebuild the rail
highway of Australia with a standard gauge between 
TEL 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 NO. 009 P. 07/
7
Adelaide and Melbourne so that Perth and Brisbane are
linked via Melbourne through Adelaide for the first time
a ribbon of rail around the country that a competent
trading nation should have. That Is, an option in rail
for the carriage of heavy goods and light goods If they
are to be carried competitively and efficiently against
road it's something a trading nation needs.
And can I say while I'm on that, that today I've written
to John saying that we're going to spend $ 12 million
refurbishing the Indian Pacific-rail We going to
spend $ 4 million iitiona I to the $ 3 million we
announced In ' Onle Nation' to spend at Islington, that's a
furthor $ 4 million to try and improve the quality and the
service and the maintenance facilities of this part of
the national rail system. We'll develop a better
interface between the ports and wharves of Australia
because we need it. And whether it be Port Adelaide or
Port Melbourne through Dynon or Fisherman Islands at
Prisbane or better access across the continent across the
Nullabour from Fremantle, all these things we need
because a private company is not going to do it, a
private company Is not going to build a national rail
highway of Australia, a private company I' not going to
put together a new national training authority, a private
company 18 not going to put together the new airline
system we're currently in then position of putting
together, a private company is not going to build the view
road highway between Adelaide and Brisbane, a private
company Is not going to build those arterial ring roads
around the capital cities which we need to take traffic
out of the contre of the cities arnd to allow better
streaming of traffic~ around the continent.
All these things we have done in the last couple of
months, reshaped national training and developed am well
this great transition from school to work, the Carmichael
pilots which we~ had support for at the national meeting
on youth which we're now funding and with the National
, Training Ath) r-ity will concertina down by yiais tj
important transition to regard those 15-19 years as a
period of vocational preparation. That we'd done in the
last couple of months, established a flew airline system
in the last couple of months, if we can glet the Senate to
agree a new pay TV system in the last couple of months, a
refurbishment of the national rail highway and the two
billion expenditure this year on roads.
We'vie done these things because they need to be done.
They're not going to be fixed with a simple Idea of a
consumption tax. How's a consumption tax going to change
the way in which the rail system works? Or a consumption
tax change the way in which trade training works or the
slrlinet? Government io complex and it's got to be dealt
with with its complexity and the Government has to deal
with talk to each of the groups In the community to see
what can be done and to draw down that strength which
we'va always been able to entwine together to produce 
TEL: 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 NO .009 P. 08/-
8
something stronger and better for Australia. Th~ at is,
giving Australia and giving the Government a proper role
and understanding what that role Is.
N~ ow with Dr Hewson-of course, we have simple ideas,
ideology always penalties. Everyone has to wear a
penalty. There's no notion that it ahould be an
objective of Government in Australia to actually pay
people more money, that higher incomes Is an objective of
Government policy, that a better social system is an
objective of Government policy. Their view is no, lower
wages Is an objective, l* Ss of a system Is anl objective,
penalties. Dr Hewuon wants to run the government so the
government can do leass. The ILtberals want government in
Australia so government can withdraw, so that government
can get out to let the private economy do these things.
There's no country in the world where this is vogue
anymore, wher~ e the greed is good syndrome iR the vogue.
It might have been tn the United States, in Reagan'R
republican America of the 1980s or in Thatcher's Britain.
It is no longer in the United States, it Is no longer in
Rrttaln, it's not longer the theme of Prime Minister John
Major for instance. It's no longer the themes you see
running at the deumocrati~ c convention or In the US press.
Rut here in Australia Heweon believes that greed ia good,
survival of the fittest, simple Ideas, pushing people
down iA the way forward and thinks he can get the jump
all because the recession has meant employment has
stopped. That Is because employment has not been growing
in the last eighteen months like it did ferociously
through the 1980s that this It his chance to impose this
sterile drab ideology upon the rest of us.
Well the fact In we've still got news for him and we'll
be fighting him on that philosophy right the way throuigh,
H~ is view is Government without consultation, talk to
nobody, don't talkt to unions, don't talk to businese,
he's attacked the unions won't have anything to do with
them, he's attacked business for talking to the
Ahovernment and supporting us, every week he lectures them
on not supporting him enough with his barren ideology and
this week we see that not only Is It going to be
government under him, would It bO government without
consultation, but it will also be government without
bureaucracy. Because now he is going t~ o have the five
major accountancy firms In there Crafting the tax laws,
in an improper policy that no major party worth its sait
would dare utter, which no Coalition government in the
past would dare embrace, having the five accountancy
firms in there sitting drawing up the taic laws of this
country.
This is the sort of stuff he is: turning theResorwo
Rank o~ n its head and as the Governor of the Reserve Bank
said eloquently " I'm not going to sit by why some
dIckhead minister puts Attila the Hun in charge of
monetary policyo. 
TEL: 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 NO. 009 P. 09/
9
The Liberals say we're always the ones, we're the people
who break the traditions. We don't break the traditions,
Labor always abides with the traditions mainly beanse we
mae most of it. But the traditions of fairness, Aqutty,
fair go, pulling people along, not having an under claiss
of deprived people who can't find a job who don't got
benefits, who don't get 8 right to treat themselves when
they're sick, who don't get a right to educate their
kids. That sort of thing is busting the traditions of
Australia. This guy's a wrecker, he want's to come in
with an ideology which is not only barren but entirely
strange to the rest of us. Strange to the Labor Party
Indeed, strange to the Coalition and a lot of the
mainstream people In the Coalition would regard this
stuff As poison, but sitting-there because ostensibly he
has a lead In the polls, but not Bitting there with any
comfort at this sort of policy.
So we say thete Is role for government In Australia. If
you want to run the government of Australia It's to let
the Government do things. And whether that Is creating
industries or supporting industries or leading structural
change or continuing with a social policy which is
spreading the joy. which is making the place fairer or
more decent or finding our place in the world or coming
to terms with the original Australians living at peace
with the landscape, worrying about the environment,
making Australia a better, nicer, fairer place to live to
what government Is all about. It's not about government
getting out, about government withdrawing, about leavinU
It only to the wealthy to do well and leaving the rest
fall behind,
Now these are the things the next election will be fought
over. Because I think at the next election we're going
to see an ideology divide like we haven't seen in a long
time. Now I know all Labor party leaders say that
there's them and tin, but this time there really is themn
and us,. Tt's them with an ideology which is barren and
now forgotten In the northern hemisphere, being given its
last trot in Australia in the 1990s, by someone who has
had virtually only a cursory association with public
life, who doesn't understand the society of Australia and
has never listened to the resonances of Australia, Wh~ o's
come in wit~ h a doctrinaire ideological policy which has
the market being the sole arbiter of all that is good.
the note device upon which all change is produced and
where the role of government Is basically to get otat.
Now we may it's wrong and we say It's wrong because we're
continuing the changes. We're not sitting by maudlin
saying well isn't It a pity we've had a recession and
employment has stopped. We're saying look, we started
with six million jobs, we've job seven and a halt still,
7.6 in fact.. We've put this great social change int~ o
place and we're going to improve it, we'll be improving
It we improved it in ' One Nation' and we'll improve it
in the coming Budget. We're going to continue with the 
TEL: 9. Aug. 92 19: 09 NO. 009
big nocial chaiges and economic changes, whether It be
the development of a proper vocational education system,
giving AustraliAns the right to travel by air at
reasonable prices, developing back our rail system which
hasi fallen into disrepair, pulling the States outlying
from Sydney and Melbourne closer in through these rail
and road highways and making Australia truly, as we said
In February, one nation.
These are things that show Labor is the great building
part~ y of Australia and we're still in there doing it, we
haven't lost our way, we haven't lost our faith and we
haven't lost our heart and we haven't lost the will to
drive the changes on. And they can attack us about the
recession, but to make the point here is to make the same
point about Britain, the Unites States, Canada, Germany,
France, Japan, they are all in the same boat, growing at
tinder two per cent this year, we-re all living with the
debt~ hangover of the 1980a, but we'll soon shake it off.
But as we do we.' ll keep pride in our achievements and
keep making them, adding one achievement to the next and
not looking back, not wondering about the past, but just
comprehending the future and giving Australiane that
unique place In the world as t said. A continent to
ourselvesc situated in the fasted growing part of the
world the Asia-Pacific, looking to that area of the
world PxternAlly, having our orientation shifted out not
In, developing smairt and clever jobs, producing smart and
clever things to give Australians good work and good pay,
doing interesting things and looking after those who've
not been able. to look after themselves as well as we
would like.
Thene are the things we stand for and that's still
currency in the life blood of Australian politics,
That's why we're still In there with a chance, a biq
chance. So don't be Introspective or reflective or
aiaudltn, just get on with It and understand that we are
the only great party of change in Australia and we're
still the ones who will make the changes Australia neFeds.
Thank you. 



TEL: 9. Aug. 92 18: 25 No . OO62 1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, TRADES HALL, ADELAIDE, 9 AUGUST 1992
9 On PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, can we ask you about the opposition
by the Left to the sale of gantas, are you expecting
problems getting It through?
PM: Well the Federal Secretary of the Labor Party has
got that matter in hand, it's a process there and I
expect we'll get a reasonable result from it. It's
not eay making changes in Australia, it's the point
I keep laking to Dr Hewaon. The reason we've had
this closed domestic two airline policy which the
Liberals gave us and Oantas flying outside of
Australia and not being able to make it into one
company and then sell it is basically becauae of the
fact that nobody's ever taken these issues on In the
political parties and we are and it's the right
thing to do and I expect that the Labor Party will
respond accordingly.
J; Are you prepared to over-ride the wishes of that
segmet of the Party?
PM: We've got proper processes, we' 12 see where they go.
J: Prime Minister given the disastrous standing of the
Bannon Government in the polls, are you concerned
about how that uvud impact on a Federal election
result?
PM: Political fortunes come and go. people have written
John Bannon of f in the past and he's got up and won
again and I think he will next time. These are not
easy times, the 1980s were a period of growth right
around the world, the 1990s haven't to this stage
been and It's not easy living in an international
environment with low growth and that's a problem for
everybody. But again as I said in the Convention
today that this Government is still making changes,
we've just made revolutionary changes to vocational
education, to airline%, to transport, to television
all within the last couple of months. So we're
pressing on and I think that initiative brings Its
own reward and the Bnnon Government is doing the
same. 
TEL: 9. Aug. 92 18: 25 No. 006 ' P. 02,,
2
J: On the -' Sunday' program this morning Mr Blewatt said
that reiterated that there wouldn't be an Increase
in Medicare levy this term of your Government,
however he didn't rule out that one could be
announced before the next term should you win reelection.
Is that the story at this stage?
PM: It's very close to Budget now and I'm not here to be
basically running through things which people
comprehend to be Budget m'atters.
3: The $ 12 million for-the Indian Pacific, that
guarantees the future of an important passenger
service?
FM: Well It means we are going to rofurbish that
service, it will guarantee Its future. That
refurbishment is going to take place in South
Australia. we're putting another $ 4 million Into
Ilnton on top of the $ 3 million which was
announcein~ the ' One Nation' statement which will
mean that those workshops can undertake and fulfil
that work and so It will be good for South
Australia, but as wall as that provide a first class
passenger seice and therefore hopefully growth
between Western Australia and the East coast. But
of course, AN successfully ran it to date and AN Is
based In South Australia, It will be a good thing
for South Australia.
3; Two key Initiatives that you've flagged, you've
spoken a lot about today the youth summit and olso
the Infrastructure spending, -the two-areas which the
Bannon Government highllghted long ago and which the
Federal Government seems Blow to take up. How much
ground have you lost by wasting that time?
PM: It's not a matter of westing time, it's only
recently that we proposed that there should be a
national training authority and by getting all the
states by c-operation and not by confrontation as
Dr Kewson would do It, we've got the States into a
landmark change. We will now build a vocational
eduatonsystem with TAPE, with technical and
further education, whic h 1 hope will be as good as
any In the world and we'll be able to sit beside our
universities as a alternative system of education
for many kids that just can't get access to
university and it's a good Labor thing to have done.
And we've done it as well with non-Labor States
which is more to their credit. In terms of
Infiastructure, it's always been a cry In South
Australia to provide a standard gauge railway to
Melbourne. I'm happy to say that this Government
Will be the one to have done it, that I wan able to
push that propiusdl through at the right time and as
a result will not only build a new track from 
TEL: 9. Aug. 92 18: 25 No. 006 P. 03
3
Adelal4e to Melbourne but refurbish the line from
Melbourne and Sydney and from Sydney to Brisbane so
that from Brisbane to Perth via Melbourne and
Adelaide we'll have for the first time in 100 years,
the first time in a century a standard gauge
railway. Thank you.
ENDS 



T1EL0: . Aug. 92 9: 20 No. 004 P. O1iL
PRIME MIISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MION P 0 KEATING MP
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO REFURBISH THE INDIAN PACIFIC
The Federal Government has agreed to refurbish the Indian
Pacific passenger trin-at a cost of about $ 12 million.
This will allow the existing transcontinental service to
be marketed as a first class tourist attraction. The
refurbishment will occur at the Port Augusta wvorkshops
over the next two years, providing Significant employment
in that region.
We will also upgrade South Australia's Islington rail
workshops. at a cost of $ 4.4 million. Thie--Isilgt-o-n
workshops will be connected to the national Standard
gauge rail highway being created through the One Nation
package announced in February.
with the $ 3.5 million already being provided through One
Nation for the Port Augusta workshops, these South
Australian rail workshops will be well placed to compete
for NationalRail Corporation work.
These initiatives follow a number of measures for the
rail industry in South Australia which are being
implementeid through One Nation and other Federal
programs. These include redevelopment of rail land no
longer required by Australian National, and $ 8.4 million
f or labour adjustment and regional employment
initiatives. The Australian National Rail Commission has also been
asked to provide the Government with a detailed business
plan outlining an appropriate structure for AN in future.
This will provide for an orderly transition to its new
role with the establishment of the NatilonalRail
C~ orporain
The South Australian Government will be consulted on
those aspects of this plan which affect South Australia.
TEL: 
I TEL: 10. Aug. 92 9: 20 No. 004 P. 02/ C
2
In addition, the NSW Government has agreed to guarantee
AN access to the Broken Hill-Parkes line until September
1997 to allow the Indian Pacific continued use of that
routs after standardisation of the Melbourne-Adelaide
line. ADELAIDE 9 August 1992 



Joint statement by the Prime Minister, the
Hon P J Keating, and the Minister for Land
Transport, the Hon Bob Brown MP.
PRIME MINISTER ANNOUNCES START TO $ 181 MILLION
OF ONE NATION NATIONAL RAIL NETWORK PROJECTS
The reality of ' One Nation: one national rail freight system' came a step closer today.
Prime Minister Paul Keating and Federal Land Transport Minister, Bob Brown,
announced Federal Government funding of $ 181 million as an initial instalment in a
program of mainline rail tmprovements around the country as part of the One Nation
jobs creation and economic package.
The release of One Nation rail fundmg coincided with today's official opening by Mr
Keating of th e ational Rail Corporation headquarters at Parramatta. The Corporation
has adopted the business name ' National Rail'.
Mr Keating and Mr Brown said formation of National Rail with participating states as
shareholders, and the massive reinvestment planned for the national railway network was
a response to Australia's need to re-equip and restructure its institutions to meet the
future economic and social needs of the Australian community.
' A responsible acceleration of infrastructure investment can directly boost employment in
the short term, while improving the economy's long-term growth potential', they said.
The projects announced today are the first stage of the $ 454 million national rail network
investment program contained in the Federal Government's One Nation economic
statement, which aims to generate more than 6000 rail reconstruction jobs directly in the
next two vears. A further 6000 jobs will be created indirectly.
A total of 18 projects and groups of projects has been approved. A list of these is
attached. Detailed planning is continuing on other projects, which are likely to be
approved during the coming months. / 2
1031 
In addition, the NSW Government has agreed to guarantee
AN access to the Broken Hill-Parkes line until September
1997 to allow the Indian Pacific continued use of that
route after standardisation of the Melbourne-Adelaide
line. ADELAIDE 9 August 1992 1135
I 
-2
These projects, together with establishment of National Rail to take control of all
interstate rail freight operations, will help remove the physical and parochial barriers that
have long inhibited the efficiency and competitiveness of the national rail network', Mr
Keating and Mr Brown said.
' Federal Government approval for the initial projects has been subject to a commitment
by the ACTU, rail unions and the Corporation to a greenfields enterprise award under
which NRC employees would work.
' The enterprise award will provide the basis for a new, more productive work
environment where all company employees can focus on quality customer service.
National Rail's first corporate plan, approved recently by the company shareholders,
targets unit cost reductions of 45 per cent.
' It also targets a market share increase of 10 per cent during the next five years', they
said. Mr Keating and Mr Brown said the One Nation rail program would, for the first time in
Australia's history, provide a uniform gauge rail track linking all mainland state capitals
and Alice Springs.
Projects on the Sydney-Brisbane and Sydney-Melbourne corridors comprise the design
and replacement of bridges, track upgrading and new sleepers. Melbourne-Adelaide
gauge standardisation will involve design work for the section between Melbourne and
the South Australian border, conversion of broad gauge track from Ararat to the border
and construction from the border to Adelaide.
Connections to ports include a standard gauge connection to the Port of Brisbane at
Fisherman Islands, upgrading of the South Dynon ship-rail container terminal and a
direct road link to the Port of Melbourne, and design of the Outer Harbour terminal in
Adelaide. Overall, crossing loops, track upgrading and gauge standardisation over rail corridors
from Brisbane to Perth will require the purchase of significant quantities of rail and
concrete sleepers from local manufacturers. Initial contracts for the supply of some 3000
tonnes of heavy 60 kg rail and one million concrete sleepers are being let.
Sydney 6 August 1992
Media contact Canberra: Richard Desmond ( 06) 274 7306
NRC: Fred Affleck ( 02) 685 2555
ATFACHMENTS ( 3)
1082 
3
ATFACHMENT 1 APPROVED ONE NATION RAIL SPENDING
The initial national rail projects approved by Prime Minister Paul Keating today are:
track upgrading along the Sydney-Melbourne rail corridor, including
replacement of sub-standard bridges;
Sydney rail container terminal improved access Glenlee/ Enfield design;
Port of Melbourne improved access to rail terminal and expansion
of the South Dynon container terminal;
Melbourne-Adelaide mainline standard gauge conversion;
Port Adelaide Outer Harbour rail access improvements;
track upgrading along the Sydney-Brisbane rail corridor, including
replacement of sub-standard bridges;
partial contribution towards a Brisbane port standard gauge
link ( Acacia Ridge to Fisherman Islands), subject to the findings
of an environmental impact study;
the manufacture of one million concrete sleepers and 3000 tonnes of
rail for track upgrading.
(* SEE MORE DETAILED LISTAT ATTACHMENT 2) 1083 
-4-
ATTACHMENT 2 ONE NATION
RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE STAGE ONE APPROVED PROJECTS
APPROVED
PROJECT COST
( millions)
PROJECT NAME AND LOCATION
PORT OF BRISBANE
Standard gauge link to Fisherman Islands
( Subject to environmental assessment)
SYDNEY-BRISBANE CORRIDOR
Replacement of six timber bridges
Tamban Macksville ( 3 bridges)
Karagi Nana Glen
Design of six replacement bridges
Wauchope Pembroke Tamban Bonville Coramba Grafton
Track and sleepers ( 7.4 km)
Macksville Lzeville Casino Cougal
SYDNEY-MELBOURNE CORRIDOR
Track and sleepers Exeter to Medway prelim. design ( curve realignment)
Track upgrading, Sydney-Victoria border
Design of tack upgrading, Albury-Melbourne
Design and replacement of bridges
Wagga Bridge
Albury Viaduct
Menangle Viaduct
Joppa Junction 30.000 3.270 0.477 5.293 0.050
15.000 1.000
1084 
APPROVED
PROJECT NAME AND LOCATION PROJECT COST
( millions)
GLENLEE-ENFIELD FREIGHT LINE
Design work 2200
MELBOURNE-ADELAIDE GAUGE STANDARDISATION
Detailed project design 3.000
Ararat-South Australian border track conversion 9.060
SA border to Adelaide track conversion 45.000
MELBOURNE RAIL TERMINAL
Upgrade South Dynon Terminal 5.000
Access Road, Dynon to Swanson/ Appleton Dock 5.000
OUTER HARBOUR IMPROVEMENTS PORT ADELAIDE
Design of Outer Harbour rail terminal 0.400
ADELAIDE-KALGOORLIE CORRIDOR
Increase clearances, Adelaide-Kalgoorie 2.000
PURCHASE OF MATERIALS ALL CORRIDORS
Purchase 3000 tonnes of 60kg rail 2.700
Manufacture of one million concrete sleepers 50.000
GRAND TOTAL $ 180.940 1005 
6
ATTACHMENT 3
ONE NATION RAIL SPENDING TOTAL PROGRAM
Port of Brisbane standard gauge link ( Acacia Ridge/ Fisherman Islands)
Sydney-Brisbane corridor track and bridge upgrading $ 82m
Sydney-Melbourne corridor track and bridge upgrading SIlOm
Construction of freight line $ 71m
between Glenlee and Enfield
Melbourne-Adelaide line conversion to standard gauge $ 115m
Melbourne Rail Terminal
upgrade South Dynon freight container terminal
access road, Dynon to Swanston/ Appleton Docks
Port Adelaide Outer Harbour rail terminal $ 8m
Adelaide-Perth corridor $ 13m
TOTAL: $ 454m
1086 
ONE NATION EARLY START PROJECTS
PURCHASE OF MATERIALS FOR
USE ON THE NATIONAL SYSTEM
Manufaclum of concrle sleepers
SPurchase of eln1t 2.7m STANDARD GAUGE
PORT CONNECTION $ 30.0m
IFREMANTLE ISLINGTON
Line upgrade SYDNEY BRISBANE
Line upgrade $ 9.04m
KWINANA PICTON
Line upgrade $ 13.5m MELBOURNE ADELAIDE
STANDARDISATION $ 57.06m MELBOURNE SYDNEY
Line upgrade $ 17.54m
DYNON FREIGHT TERMINAL
UPGRADE
A decision on route selection between Melbourne
and Ararat Is expected soon. 
ONE NATION MAINLINE RAIL PROJECTS
0 00 



TEL: 10. Aug. 92 18: 27 No. 023 P. 01/.
PRIME MINISTERA
TR-ANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MIN1STER* THE HON P J KFATING MP,
INTERVIEW WITH KEITH CONLAN, RADIO SAN, ADELAIDE,
TO AIR 10 AUGUST 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
KC: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time.
PM: Good Keith.
KC: I guess there are only two things that matter in a sense at the moment for all of us
-Ih and the economy, and the recovery. But first could I just pass by some of the
topics of the day, so to speak. We've all been troubled as I'm sure you have, by the
news from Yujoslavia, the holocaust as it is now being called. Is there a role for
Australia? Do we have a position as the United Nations?
PM: We've had an immediate role in the peace keeping force and opening up the airport
in Sarajevo to essential goods and medical supplies, and we've had people
Involved In that. That service I think Is coming to an end, either has come to an
cnd over the last day or two or will be in the next day. I think we regarded it as
largely an European matter, wc thought that European forces would make the
difference there, but they haven't to date unfortunately. But I'm not certain
whether any diplomatic solution is capable of being achieved or weather another
course of action will be sought, but military action is being proposed by some
people and resisted by others.
KC: Do we have a position on that?
PM: No, not at this stage. We're not being asked to get Involved in any such thing. To
see, I think, from our point of view is to sec what approaches are made to us.
We've played I think a good citizen's role in the thing to date, but it's not in our
area of influence, it's not In our sphere.
KC: Well, back to local matters, you've been at the ALP Convention privatisation
means Sagasco in South Australia at the moment, it mcans internal disruption,
cries of traitor over tradition, industrial embarrasment perhaps in the future for 
TEL: 10. Aug. 92 18: 27 No. 023 P. 02/
2
John Bannon. It means Qantas to you on this weekend, does the Qantas
privatisation mean potentially the same sort of problems for you?
PM: I don't think so, I think that people are getting much smarter about all these things.
I mean Qantas is a company which is debt laden and it doesn't have enough equity,
it's been left to trade outside of Australia, not inside Australia. ' This Government is
the first Government ever to actually give it rights within Australia by letting it
acquire Australian Airlines. We can't recapitalise it, it would cost too much
money off the Budget to do so and we're not, I don't think, getting the sort of
management culture Into the thing that it deserves. I think there's got to be a
distinction in the minds of people, including people in the Labor Party, about the
value of an instit ution for its institutional value itself as distinct from Its value as a
government entity. The important this is are we building a better Institution.
Institutions are very hard to create In a country like Australia and when we lose
institutions, for instance in the last decade or so th; eBank of Adelaide disappeared,
we've seen the Elders Pastoral Company almost fold, I mean they are both sort of
Adelaide based institutions. All too often Australian institutions evaporate and go.
What we're trying to do hcre is to take one and build a new one. I had the
privilcge of doing so with the Commonwealth Bank. T'he Commonwealth Bank is
now the largest domestic bank, it was largely an Institution that flew on one wing,
it flew on its big deposit base in NSW, it didn't have the big deposit base In
Victoria. We've now acquired the State Bank in Victoria and sold down 30 per
cent of the stock. Now this was resistcd in the first instance, but it's now worth
150 per cent, 70 per cent of it is worth 150 per cent of what wc started with, we've
created something biggcr and better, we've created a new institution, a better bank.
In the same way this will be true of Qantas. Owning Australian Airlines, giving it
the rights to fly domestically and to make those links to its ongoing carriage to
international services will make Qantas a company that it could never have been.
And the other thing is, I think a lot of people have got a very romantic view of
Qantas. It's got about forty odd aircraft, companies like British Airways have got
400. It's a relatively small carrier but we can make it a successful one, a
reasonable carr ier and a successful one for Australia, Australasia. But it needs
money, it needs capital and I think It needs some private ownership.
KC: ' Prime Minister, the John Bannon Government is looking to the NFP as an entity
which will rise from the swamps at Gillman, it will rise in a lot of other places too
it hopes as a national body. Is it dead in the water nationally as Ian McLachlan
says?
PM: No, I made it clear that we were supporting it by nominating it for funding in the
, one Nation' package, to give it that national support.
KC-But is that tided up or was that really just a little bit of better cities diverted off into
Gillman? 
T1EL0:. Aug. 92 18: 27 No. 023 P. 03/(
3
PM: No, it wasn't. The fact is had we chosen to make purely a South Austraian matter
we wouldn't have so nominated It. Now there is all sorts of things that will cross
the trail of the development ovcr time of the NFP, but I think it Is a very good
opportunity for South Australia and it's one of the best sites in the country. I don't
know a site like this in any capital city with this proximity which Is capable of
being developed. So we've played our role we provided the funds to get the
basic developments started so that there Is an infrastructure there of which the
Government of South Australia can use with private investors developed further.
KC: Finally before we got on to some of the very big ongoing Issues, the Olympics.
John Major's one to bat for Manchester, why not Paul Keating going to bat for
Sydney in 2000?
PM: Well I've just had more pressing things here to do. In the weeks the Olympic
have been on rve been able to put together fortunately, with the help of some of
my coleagues in the States, a ncw National Training Authority, a national
vocational education system to sit up there beside universities for ever, so to speak,
a revolutionary route and branch change to our education system. Those things are
on the go and to leave them and go to the Olympics was not really a possibility for
me. But I did support NSW, we gave NSW $ 5 million to support the bid, and
better $ 5 million now than $ 5 million later, and I think we have at this stage kept
our options open. I'm told by those who wcrc there that they think that if there was
a poll taken now we'd be in front, that is Sydney would be in front, but it's another
year to go so a lot of water will go under the bridge. So I don't think too much will
be lost in me not being there and I don't know at any rate whether the International
Committee is going to be persuaded by Prime Ministers whoever they are.
KC: Prime Minister, to one of the big on going issues the health issue. I'm not going
to ask you if you're going to raise the -Medicare levy because you won't tell me, but
in South Australia now we have less than half the people we used to have on
private medical benefits and they are flooding the hospital system, we do have a
crisis. What's the equitablc way out of this? Is Dr Hewson right that we ought to
give some sort of tax relief to those who look after themselves?
PM: No, 1 think if you take on the Hewson approach which is to say remember Dr
Hewson went to the Australian Medical Association one Sunday about eight
weeks ago and said you csttecommo~ n e. Now that was a direct way of
saying to the doctors you can charge what you tle, you can add to the national
health bill as you sec fit and the rest of us will pay to cover ourselves. We either
pay directly or we'll pay indirectly through Insurance. This Is not a way of holding
down the national cost of health, this is what happened in the United States. The
United Statcs health care is now so expensive that if you're taken acutely sick to a
hospital, if you don't have that blue cross card in your pocket they turn you back.
They just won't deal with you, they will not support you, they will not care for
you. Now I would hope wc never have that in Australia, that the System we have
gives people access to medical protection, that is consultation with doctors and
TEL: 
TEL: 10. Aug. 92 18: 27 No. 023 P. 04/
4
access to hospitals regardless of income. And the Medicare levy which you Asked
me about is for a husband and wife and a couple of kids, I forget exactly the
threshold where the levy starts, but I think it's about $ 24,000, you don't pay any
levy under that, tUnder the scheme proposed by Dr Hcwson Is people would pay a
set price for pfivate insurance regardless of Income, so the low Income family, the
low income person pays as much as the high income person. There is no capacity
to pay augmentative, you pay flat and basically you're paying to keep the Incomes
of doctors how doctors think It should be. Now on the other hand the Gove rnment
has kept the national health cost, the cost of medicine at a very low proportion of
national GDP by largely making certain that over use, abuse, fraud, but most
importantly the fces charged by doctors are reasonable. And so It's on that basis
that the system hangs together, that people can have that affordability and in terms
of public hospitals I think Statcs have got to decide that they should more
adequately and effectively stream people through the hospitals without accruing
waiting lists, only to be answered with the hollow charge well if you're all
privately insured you'll be ok. They wouldn't be ok, they'd just pay much more.
KCC: What about public hospital patients being fed Into private hospitals where the beds
are waiting?
PM: I'm not sure whether they're waiting, but there's no reason why the States cant
accommodate public patients in private hospitals if they so choose.
KC; There's not philosophical divide for you?
PM: In the end, what does a private patient have, for instance in a public hospital? You
can have a private patient sitting in a room, multiple person room, the idea once
that you had your own private room, as a private patient and doctor of choice.
Essentially the way the medical profession operates the system these days, if you
go to a specialist and that specialist is accredited for services the public hospital
and you admit yourself. The greatcr possibility Is in the majority of cases that
specialist will serve you. So people are going needlccsly insuring themselves and
because fewer arc Insuring themselves it means that those who are left privately
insured and in some cases sicker people arc paying a bigger premium because the
other healthier people have left the system. Now this concerns us, it concerns the
Federal Government and we'll be in signing new agreements with the States later
this year, that is renovating the Medicare agreement, to try and deal with this
problem. We will try and deal with it and talk to the States sensibly about it, but
we don't want to throw the baby out with the bath water, say well look there's a
problem in the efficiency of streaming people through public hospitals, therefore
what we'll do is we'll take every Australian person and family and charge them
through the nose for health protection so that in the end what we're really doing..
I mean this is what really gets me about l-cwson, he's so savage on unions, he
wants to cut young peoplc's pay to $ 3 an hour, he wants to cut workers to three
quarters of their incomes, he thinks unions are an abomination except the doctors 
* TEL: 10. Rug. 92 18: 27 No. 023
union which he goes to on a Sunday and hands over to them the check book of a
nation and says write your own check.
KC: When It comes to those agreements later in the year, will be there some relief for
what is now a public hospital crisis here. We are talking about going backwards
by several per cent, closing hundreds of beds. Is there relief In sight?
PM: Keith, the Commonwealth is prepared to talk sensibly to the States about
improving that position, but it Is going to be in negotiation and if I were to say to
you look, this is what we are prepared to do, the States would simply put that
straight in their pockets and come and ask us for something else. T1hey've got to be
in this too, it's no point in them simply weighing In the Commonwealth for
inadequacies in the management of the health system across the country, rm
talking about South Australia, but across the country. So there is a role I belief for
private hospitals, there is also a clcar role for the public hospital system and I think
the thing that worries people most and particularly the aged, that is for elctive
surgeryy which is necessary like hip replacements for instance.,
KC: It's really a crime to call it elective isn't it?
PM: T7hat's right. It's necessary surgery, it may not be acute, immediate, but it still is
necessary and those things I think we would like to try and deal with.
KC: Prime Minister to the economy and ' One Nation': we know about now the pluses
for tax payers, we know about the tax deductions to come, we know about big
national projects, some more announced on the weekend in Adelaide, the Indian
Pacific project and so on. That's all based, is it not on money coming Into the
Federal coffers which would be as a result of healthy growth in the economy over
the next three years. You've had to back off some of those projections, so what has
to go on the give away side?
PM: Keith, in the 1980s when growth was strong and privatc investment was stronger
than the nation could stand and the demand for goods and labour was higher than
we could afford and we were satisfying a lot of it by imports. When we didn't
need a public stimulus, this Government turned the Commonwealth's budget into a
surplus. In other words we withdrew the fiscal stimulus from Commonwealth
spending and we've put about $ 20 billion away In a surpluses, In the savings
account of the country. We're now using them for when we nccd to use them.
KC: Didn't we pay off the foreign dcbt with that? Isn't that what we said we were
doing at the time?
PM: No, not the foreign debt, we just rcduced the Commonwealth domestic debt. But
we've got it now down to v'ery low levels, in fact if we were to produce surpluses
for three more years we will have no Commonwealth debt whatsoever. Tuat is, no
bond would have been outstanding from the turn of the century onwards. What 
T1EL0: . Aug. 92 18: 27 No. 023 P. 06/
6
we're saying now Is with the private economy slow with private Investment down
this Is the time for public Investment, but not only In a stimulatory sense, but In a
micro-economic sense as well. It just matters to Australia to have a standard
gauge railway from Perth to Brisbane via Adelaide and Melbourne, I mean as a
trading company it simply should be therc for large containers or heavy items that
need to be carried around the country or even light ones which can be carried well.
There is a case for developing an electricity grid, it's not going to be done by a
private company, the railway is not going to be re-established by a private
company. This notion that Dr Hewson has with the that it's all private Initiative,
private reward all we will.
KC: But these arc arguments for maintaining the Infrastructure side and so on.
PM; It's not just maintaining them but doing them when private investment is down.
KC: Ycs, and maintaining these projects within your ' One Nation' package. But now
that the growth figures aren't there, thc critics say you could drive a truck through
it because you won't have thc income to do It.
PM: No, what we're saying is thc deficit will be larger than we envisaged in February.
KC: And that's dangerous because the overseas markets look at it and say..
PM: I don't think its dangerous because in this sense, I mean it's there naturally, the
Federal Budget's a shock absorber, it's a cushion, it's a buffer at thc end of the
station that when the economy is languishing and you want that extra stimulus, it
cushions things by lower reccipts, higher unemploymecnt benefits, higher outlays,
higher spending. In other words in cushions the shock. That's what it should be
there for, it should be there doing. Now we'll carry a bit more debt,
Commnonwcalth debt than we envisaged in February, but again, our debt to GDP,
to the Commonwealth is very low by world standards.
ICC: Some want you to go further, some including traditional Labor voters who phone
say we don't want tax deductions now, this country nceds so much of what
you're talking about that we'll forgo those. What's your response to that?
PM: think you've got to find a balance betwecn those things. Two weeks ago we set
up this National Training Authority. As I said earlier that will revolutionise the
education system of this country. We will develop a system which we'll set beside
the univcrsities for a root and branch branch change to the education system. It
will cost us some money, but it is money well spent and It Is the role for
Govenrncent. This is what find curious about the Librals. Dr Hewson Is saying
' I want to run the Government so the Government can do less, so the Govcrnment
can withdraw from the problem'and will hide behind this sort of ideology, if you
throw enough money to the wealthy and to the companies they'll all get out thcre
and do things and in the doing of it pull the rest of us along. It won't happen,
TEL: 
TEL: 10. Aug. 92 18: 2? No. 023 P. 07/
7
companies wouldn't rebuild the rail highways of Australia, they won't build the
road highways, they won't refurbish the ports, they won't build a national training
authority, it will only be done by Government. So there Is a role for Government.
What I think the Labor has done this decade, it's done two things. It's for the first
time and the great irony of all this it's taken a Labor Government to get Australia
an open market economy, but it's done it with a social heart, it's done It with a
heart, theres a social policy grafted on to it: access to health protection, access to
education, aged care, child care, occupational superannuation. We've taken the
place along together, forwards together and the notion that therm's no role for
Government, that you drop out and if there isn't a quid in It for somebody then it
shouldn't be done, will mean that most of the social and micro-economic things
we talk about, rail, road, air just wouldn't be done. I don't believe we can be the
sort of country we need to be, that is an efficient trading country with an educated
workforce, without that public investment and all those things.
KC: Prme Minister, you're talking about the heart around the country, that's the
difference you're telling us between you and the Hewson alternative, but to the
mature adult full time workers or the ones who would like to be who are out of
work at thc moment, some 60-70,000 of them in South Australia, wheres the heart
for them? Where's the heart for the kids who go through your smart country Idea,
who go through the training authority only to come out the other end to find that
the job that is offered, if there is one, is part time, is casual, Is not Career orientated.
What's in it for them?
PM: This may be true in some cases Keith right now, but if you look at the 1980s it was
not true, the kids who qualify themselves in the 1980s found themselves jobs. I
think a lot of Australians look the unemployment is sad, it's to be regretted, that
we haven't been able to keep the growth in employment going. We are sharing
this position with just about every other comparable country, Britain, United
States, Canada, Japan, Germany, France, they are all in the same position, all
growing less than two per cent for the current year as we've been. We kept most of
the gains of the 1980N, people I think just focus on the fact that in 1983 when this
Government came to office the work force was six million In size, today It Is 7.6
million, it's over twenty Five per cent bigger. We've largely kept those jobs, gross
domestic product the size of the economy In 1983 was 200 billion. Today it is
over 400 billion. T7here has been a huge impetus to growth and wealth In the
1980s. What's happencd is that the growth for the last 18 months has stopped. We
haven't been topping It up, we haven't been taking up the ncw entrants to the
workforce. By and large we haven't lost most of what we created in the 1980s and
we've kept all the social policy up there as well, the childcare, the Medicare and
the child support agency and home and community care for the aged, 25 per cent
AWE for the pension, occupational super, all those things are there industry
policy, award restructuring all those great advances have been theme, what's
stopped is employment g. owth. But once we gct that started and in the last two
months we've seen 86,000 job growth and certainly unemployment has risen in the
period because more people are looking for work, but at least we are starting to see 
% b sje.. S. Pointaa.
TEL: 10. Aug. 92 18: 27 No. 023' P. 08.'
that employment come throush now and if it comes through more strongly as I
believe it will over the course of this financial year then Australian will be going
back on the road to being aspin, a more fully emiployed society, but one where
we're not letting anybody fall behind. We're not taking the view that Dr Hewson's
saying, if you're on unemployment benefits after nine months, sorry you're out,
down to the St Vincent de Paul or Salvation Army. We're not taking that view, we
believe that a whole country has got to move together and stay together.
KC: Prime Minister, when It finally comes to the campaign, we are on about the image
it's you versus the Doctor and it's going to be that way until you the name the date
until you come to the election. Is really the best chance of this Federal Labor
Government that the Liberal Opposition will once agan shoot itself in the foot and
that's why you're there now really, they shot themselves last time. Is your only
hope that Dr Hewson won't hold the troops together, won't hold his vision
together,
PM: No, I think these days and it has been for many years now that people basically
vote on the parties. I don't think matter all that much in the way in the end the
national tally is taken. I think people see the parties for what they institutionally
stand for. Dr l-ewson has basically one policy. It's got two prongs. One is to
increase prices, higher prices through a consumption tax and the other is lower
wages, abolishing awards, cutting rates of pay. I don't think that making people
poorer, making them pay more is a policy. It's not going to change education,
health, you just mentioned hospitals, not going to change that, not going to change
enterprises, not going, to make thc place more efficient, it's going to produce
rancour, division, disheartening and for what? To guarantee that those who've
already got a buck get more and those who haven' t or who are unemployed gct put
to the back of the queue.
KC Or is he offering the short term pain that would see us go into the same ranks as
New Zealand which is now on very high, if not at the top of the competitive list
according to some of the world forums?
PM: Let's just make this clear. We had more growth in Australia in the 198N than
there is total GDP in the New Zealand economy. When I was Treasurer we
provided more growth than there is total product in their economy. They have
about the same number of people in work today they had in 1983, we have 25 per
cent more people in work today than 1983. Forget New Zealand as a comparison.
It doesn't matter to me New Zealand. If Dr Hewson wants to run over there fine,
but let everyone understand what happened over there. A generation was left
behind, this didn't happen In Australia.
KC: Prime Minister thanks for your time today.
PM: Thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP TO
THE FEDERA! Z; ON OF ETHNIC COMM4UNITY COUNCILS
SYDNEY, 12 AUGUST 1992
Ladies and Gentlemen
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address so many
distinguished members of the Australian community tonight.
It is something that I have looked forward to since I became
Prime Minister.
I want to particularly thank the Federation of Ethnic
Communities Councils of Australia and the New South Wales
Ethnic Community quncil for organising this occasion, and
Carl Harbaum. and Edna AcGill for their involvement.
Ladies and gentlemen
Like most Australians I have spent a small part of the last
three weeks watching, listening to, or reading about the
Olympic Games in Barcelona.
Amid all the drama, the thought occurred to me more than
once that what the world achieves every four years Australia
achieves every day which is a quite extraordinary measure
of cultural diversity and tolerance.
If we were inspired by the scenes in Barcelona, perhaps we
can also draw a little inspiration from our achievement
here. The economic troubles we are going through along with the
rest of the world are cause for grave concern.
But we have made social advances in Australia superior to
virtually anywhere else in the rest of the world,-and we.
should take pride in them, value them, preserve them.
The rich, diverse and tolerant society Australia's
multculura policies have produced is among the greatest
of these advances advances which many other countries envy
and admire. 1223 
And you can be sure the Government will preserve and improve
upon that society.
Perhaps the most moving and symbolic moment in Barcelona
occurred at the end of the women's 10,000 metres: when we
saw the embrace between the Ethiopian winner and the South
African who finished second.
This seemed to me more than an advertisement for the
transcending capacity of sport to bring people together.
It was a reminder, in a technocratic era when the icons of
success are predominantly economic, that the greatest
aspiration of humanity and of any society is to live
together in peace.
It is also, then, a reminder of how well we have done this
in Australia.
A reminder that we should, in no small way, measure our
success in these terms.
And, perhaps, count the fact that we live in a society
relatively free of ethnic strife as one of the great
blessings of being an Australian.
Pe ter Robinson made the point very well a couple of weeks
ago In-i7t1cle in the Financial Review.
It was an article against the nihilism which many
Australians, including young Australianis, these days
frequently express.
Comparing Australia to other countries around the world, he
pointed out the rare privileges of living here.
And he stressed the degree to which these privileges depend
on the spirit of the people.
" Nations are not created, evolved or fully represented by
governments", he wrote. They spring from, and grow because
of, their people's sense of community".
On the other side of the world, in an article appearing in
the New York Review of Books, the President of
Czechoslovakia, recently made a remarkably similar point.
In re-building his nation, he said, it will be essential to
develop among the people a sense of confidence and pride, a
feeling of " co-responsibilty for public affairs".
He stressed how much his hopes depended on " what we
understand as the human spirit".
1224 
I might say that increasingly I feel that Australia's future
as a nation depends in large part on these same things.
I have been stressing them not just in talking about the
organisation of government, but in cultural policy, where we
are attempting to put questions of Australia's cultural
development in the mainstream of national development:
in Aboriainal affairs, where we are attempting to make
this the decade of breakthrough so that we might all
feel more pride and confidence as Australians:
in various aspects of socialpol * icy, in industrial
relatipns, in policies for Australian wompn and in
eiducation where we have increased participation rates
and set up aNational Training Authority to provide for
all our young peopleand
not least in economic policy where our efforts are
aimed at a truly national effort involving all
Australians in recovery and growth.
This is the idea of One Nation.
It applies also, of course, to our multicultural policies.
For ethnic communities give much and have much to give, to
our economic, social and cultural goals.
They have always given much of course.
Imigation is the central fact of this country's history
it's how we all got here. All those who arrived in the last
two hundred years at least.
It has been the source of our energy in the frontier eras
of pastoralism and mining, in industrial and postindustrial
Australia. I need not reel off the names of
Australia's most successful entrepreneurs past and present
to make the point to this audience.
Nor need I mention the outstanding professional people, the
writers, artists and performers, the sportsmen and women,
and no less those vast numbers who invested not only their
labour but their life in Australia and gave it life in
doing so.
The waves of post-war immigrants have helped Australia
define itself' helped u -s see -ourselves, raised our selfawareness,
made it easier for us to judge what to build on
and what to change.
In this way they have made Australia much more dynamic. 1225 
4
And of course, each wave of immigrants has invested
Australia with new ambitions, new skills, new energy.
And, of course, new cultures, new ways of living, new ideas.
So Australia has been made stronger, richer in every sense,
more worldly and outward-looking and, because Australians
have trusted to their. faith in the principles of fairness
and democracy, they have also been made more tolerant.
A better country without doubt.
There are some . who say that Australia cannot be strong
because of our cultural diversity.
The Leader of the Opposition is one of them.
Dr Hewson says that our multicultural policies are " the
politics of division."
The innovative and compassionate policies which have
produced a society remarkable among the nations of the world
for both diversity and peace he sees as " absolutely a
fundamental mistake."
All we do", he says, " is elevate a few professional
ethnics." I say he is wrong.
Australia is no less one nation for the diversity of its
heritage, than is a house less stable and strong for the*
diversity of the crafts and materials which go into building
it. The trick is to work from a few sound principles, while
allowing enough flexibility to solve problems and encourage
innovation. Those principles have been given expression in the
multicultural policies of the last decade the ones which
Dr Hewson describes as " absolutely a fundamental mistake"
I said that one of those principles is tolerance. ' In the
last forty years or so Australians have much ' to be satisfied
with in this regard.
The country has been transformed -from an insular and
xenophobic society, to one widely admired in the world for
its openness.
With that openness has come perhaps an unexpected benefit
that is, more confidence and, I think, greater levels
of mature self-esteem.
1226 
We need those things now. We will need them in the coming
years. They are essential components of success.
We will = QZ need some of the more negative perceptions which
can emerge.
I mean the belief, that our identity is derivative; or a
poorly knit patchwork of other identities, or one to be
hidden behind an imperial cloak for fear that we might be
exposed as second rate.
In otherw4ords we will want to obliterate the cultural
cringe . and with it both the servility and the jingoism
which have sometimes characterised our behaviour.
What we want to preserve and enhance is the sense that
Australia represents an opportunity to build something new,
something better.
It is from this that the lasting contributions to our
national life have come: from those who have said this
Australia is my home. This is where my loyalties lie.
So long as those basic principles are there, so long as the
common ambition is there, there will-always be strength in
our diversity.
It seems to me that just now Australia is rather like the
great port cities of old Europe and Asia which got their
material wealth from trade, but their greatness from being
at the cross-roads of cultures from the people and ideas
which flowed about them.
In the challenging and competitive world that we now live in
that we now face Australia, I believe, can draw strength
from the same human sources.
As I said before, tolerance will continue to be one of the
essential principles in this.
I think I should also say that tolerance is a two way
street. It is essential to a multicultural society to welcome
newcomers, accept and learn to enjoy difference.
It is equally essential to respect the traditions of the
Australian nation.
Australia is not a new place or a shallow one. It is one of
the oldest democracies in the world. Its political
institutions are a unique blend of the British, American,
European and home-grown Australian. 4227 
Its traditions derive from hard and unique experience on
this continent and from battles in defence of it, as much
as they do from the varied cultures of the British Isles
or any of the other countries from which Australian settlers
have come.
These traditions deserve and must. receive respect. No
country taking itself seriously would demand less.
I think it is also true that just as the newer cultures of
Australia should enjoy tolerance and support, so should
those who see a threat to the old Australia in the emergence
of the new.
You will know that I believe in change when change is
necessary. You will know that I don't believe any group of
Australians can claim a monopoly on our past or on our
future.
But I also believe in maintaining the best traditions of the
culture from which I came.
The same principles which lead the Government to hold the
enhancement and preservation of social harmony as an
imperative, leads us to build on the old traditions as well
as the new.
Ladies and gentlemen
A little earlier I mentioned Australia's cosmopolitan
potential. I said that there is more than trade to any great city or
state. But there is nothing like trade to attract people. Nothing
like trade to give them energy and ideas. And there is
nothing like it to encourage liberty and to transcend
cultural differences.
Trade or let us say a healthy vibrant economy is the
surest guarantee of general prosperity, of healthy social
democracy, = nd of our multicultural society continulaig to
flourish. Just as it creates common ground between nations, it creates
common ground within them.
So when I say that our attention to the social and cultural.
concerns of Australiat are central ones, I do not for a
moment cease to regard the economy as the framework on which
all our hopes ultimately hang..
1228 
My point has been that it is pointless and self-defeating to
separate our social ambitions from our economic ones.
And nowhere is this more clear, surely, than here in this
audience. Because, as I have said, it is people like yourselves and
those you represent who have done much to drive the economy.
And I believe it is becoming increasingly apparent that our
diverse and open society may well yield us economic benefits
we really did not expect.
The langu. ae skills of multicultural Australia, the personal
knowledge of other countries and their markets, the
international networks which so many Australians maintain,
all offer unique trading advantages.
There is quite clear evidence, for example, that the small
businesses of Asian Australians havebeen succeeding to an
unparalleled degree during the last few years, including the
recession. One reason is their ability to operate effectively in Asian
markets. Given that we have the same facilities of language and local
knowledge, there seems to be no reason why we cannot enjoy
more success in Middle Eastern and European especially
Central European markets.
The Government will be seeking to encourage these
advantages. They will be the focus of a special conference the Office of
Multicultural Affairs in my department will be co-sponsoring
in October this year.
In talking about the real and potential commercial
advantages which the ethnic communities have conferred on
Australia, you can be sure that the Government has not
forgotten its particular responsibilities to those
communities. I mean we must work to see that there are genuinely equal
opportunities for new and better jobs when they are
displaced by restructuring; that there is adequate English
language training as well as vocational training.
There is more than fairness involved in the discharge of
these responsibilities: there is the recognition of the need
to encourage talent and ambition and energy in the process
of restructuring. 1229 
F 8
Migrant groups have been at the forefront of every major
industrial step we have taken in Australia.
Just as they were in the vanguard of the industrial readjustment
after the war and the sustained surge which
followed, so they will play a leading role in the restructured
economy of the nineties and beyond.
Ladies and gentlemen
Perhaps some of the things I have said tonight could be
interpreted as overly optimistic or complacent.
I do not mean to be. I do believe that there is much to be
proud of.
But there is also much to do.
The government is aware that the need to manage our diverse
society is not one which appreciably fades with time.
We need to go on taking those steps necessary to keep the
barriers down the difference flourishing but the barriers
between Australians down.
There are times when this is acutely necessary when, for
instance, overseas wars impact directly on Australian ethnic
groups. I take this opportunity to congratulate those communities
who have so ably done this over the years; most notably in
recent times during the Gulf War, and the tragedy now
occurring in Yugoslavia.
The Government acknowledges with gratitude and admiration
the restraint that has been shown.
There will always be times when specific communities are
under particular stress. The government will listen and do
what it can.
The more usual but no less necessary task is to listen on a
regular basis through formal consultations, like those
conducted by the Minister for Immigration and E * thnic
Affairs, Gerry Hand, and through channels like'-the Office of
Multicultural Affairs.
I say " listening" I mean " including".
I say " ethnic communities" I mean all Australians.
I mean what we do is part of this Labor Government's
commitment it's historic commitment to social
improvement, to social justice.
1230 
Access and equity policies are an essential part of this.
They ensure equitable access to government programs and
services for all Australians regardless of their background.
Those who argue that multiculturalism divides the community
should consider the~ alternatives.
Providing programs which some Australians could not use at
all because of language or cultural barriers; or of
providing one set of programs for the majority community and
another for those whose backgrounds are not English speaking
these are divisive, these would create two classes of
Australians.-' The multicultural policies of the Government are intent upon
not creating ghettos strife, or special treatment, or
" professional ethnics".
They are intent on managing diversity for the good of every
individual and for the good of the country.
It is for these reasons that we have, for example, sought to
remove the barriers to participation in the media and the
arts through that uniquely Australian institution, the SBS
and more recently through traineeships designed to ensure
that young Australians of non-English speaking backgrounds
have a chance in the media.
We don't do these things to support particular cultures for
their own sake.
We do it to keep the barriers down.
As I said, we take the view that these policies are an
extension of our democratic traditions.
They require good faith on all sides.
For our part we stick to the principle that all Australians
have the right to express and enjoy their cultural identity
as they choose, provided they do not infringe the rights of
any other Australians.
It's as true for a recent arrival from Vietnam as it is for
an Austral-Celt from Bankstown with half a dozen generations
born here.
We expect all Australians to observe these rights and
liberties. Australian governments have also included in their
responsibilities, the provision of the basics for survival. 1231 
Since the days of Arthur Caiwell the Australian immigration
policy has taken a share of the responsibility for
settlement after immnigration.
Today's government continues that tradition and, indeed,
through access and equity policies, extends it.
Our continuing success depends on that unspoken partnership
between Government and the community.
In this context I pay tribute to the work done by FECCA and
its many affiliates.
It has been an immensely useful task a crucial task to
bring together Australians from so many backgrounds, and to
foster among them a sense of belonging to this country.
So it is with pride, not complacency, that I address you
tonight.
Australia's immigration policy and its multicultural
policies have been one of the great undertakings of our
history, one of the great achievements.
Also, one of the great risks.
It involved trust in our people and our traditions to manage
the sort of diversity which in so many other countries has
led to tragedy.
Just in recent times look at Los Angeles, Bradford,
Saraj evo, Boipatong.
We have managed it. We are determined that we will continue
to manage it.
The pride comes not merely from the sense that we, the
Australian Government, has done well, or we the old Anglo
and Celtic Australians.
It comes in large part from seeing how well the peoples of
the world have done in Australia.
In that, as an Australian, I take great pleasure and pride.
The achievement of Australian governments, and ministers
like Gerry Hand, has been to match in imagination, ambition
and courage, the imagination, ambition and courage of the
people who have left their homes to come here.
They are the qualities we need now. Indeed they are the
qualities a nation always needs.
Tonight I am grateful for the opportunity to meet you, to
express my thoughts and feelings, and to pay tribute.
1232 
It is a very appropriate time. All those great moments at
the Olympics could not disguise the fact of world events.
Events which make clear that working and living with
cultural difference is one of the great global challenges of
our time.
I do not believe it is overstating the case to say, then,
that--in Australia we have some lessons for the world.
Thank you. A' 1233 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P 3 KEATING, MP
PRE-RECORDED INTERVIEW WITH ALAN JONES, RADIO 2UE
18 AUGUST 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
AJ: Prime Minister welcome.
PM: Thank you very much Alan.
AJ: Prime Minister, first thing I must just say is
congratulations on the presentation. This certainly
is the best presented set of Budget papers that we
have had. Something has changed has it?
PM: Well we try and improve them over the years, but I
think we have made a quantum leap in the
documentation this time, what are otherwise quite
complex concepts and numbers are presented simply in
graphic ways which I hope will just make, again, the
continuing improvement in the literacy of
Australians and economic policy.
AJ: Yes well people are frightened by the Budget papers,
but I can just say to our listeners if you are
interested in reading it, it is intelligible. Can I
just take the first point then, it did seem to me
that when you and Mr Dawkins opened up and said the
Budget was about jobs, jobs, jobs, that it was a
focus on 11 per cent of Australians, rather then the
89 per cent out there who are working.
PM: Well it's basically about getting employment and GDP
going again and as you know we have just had the
growth numbers from the national account for the
year, they have showed us 1.6 per cent, now that's
good, we are growing but we need to grow faster.
This Budget is about lifting the speed of our
growth, and that affects all Australians not just
that 11 per cent. 
AJ: No, but I mean business out there really feels
constrained doesn't it? It doesn't feel any room
yet to manoeuvre, to employ, your wanting jobs. It
really is the most productive sector if we can get
it going. How has this Budget relieved some of the
burden from business?
PM: Well I think they are being relieved in a number of
ways, Alan. One is the low interest rates. Two,
the profit share as you -wilsle e in the Budget
papers is quite high, as high really as the 1960s.
We have got the big tax changes which came through
in One Nation, a very fast depreciation rates for
new investment, and we have got in the Budget itself
an outcome on wages which is really very, very
supportive of more activity.
AJ: But not a word here, you mention in the One Nation
$ 8.6 billion in tax cuts, where are they?
( PM: The tax cuts are here, they are repeated.
AJ: But are you going ahead with that?
PM: Yes.
AJ: Is it affordable?
PM: Yes it is affordable, and it should be because
basically, I mean we say here we shall introduce our
announced personal tax cuts, income tax cuts. But
they start in a couple of years from now.
AJ: So you will go to an election without them?
PM: Well they were never to be delivered this year.
AJ: So you can't be tested on that?
PM: No, no. But we have delivered lot's of tax cuts
since 1983 and all of our promises have all been
kept.
AJ: But is it an election statement when you say we aim
to have zero unemployment which is totally
unrealistic internationally as well as here, when a
growth rate of 3 per cent is really just going to
mop up the school leavers, isn't it at best?
PM: No, we are saying unemployment in this year will be
around 10 per cent. We are not trying to pretend to
be otherwise, but we think it is the right thing to
do in a country like this to keep a focus on
employment. In the ' 80s we achieved so much with
employment, and we have largely kept those jobs. We
started with a workforce of 6 million in ' 83 and we
have still got today a workforce of 7.5 million,
that's a quarter bigger. So, but keeping that focus 
on employment as an objective I think is important,
and we should keep it.
AJ: Righto. What a lot of the people listening to you
now don't understand is the $ 742 million has been
allocated here f or training for the unemployed, yet
in the same Budget papers just the Commonwealth
alone has provided $ 2.7 billion for schools, $ 4.2
billion for higher education, $ 900 million for
vocational training, total $ 8.4 billion. Now we are
providing this money for education, is the education
system failing when we find that a whole heap of
people are untrained for the workforce?
PM: No it is not failing, Alan.
AJ: It's double expenditure isn't it?
PM: No, a lot of that is paying for the growth and
participation which we have been able to secure. In
1983 only three kids in ten completed secondary
school, that's now over seven in ten and is now
rising to nine in ten. And then of course, there is
no point in them completing secondary school if a
large proportion are not then streamed into
university, so we have paid for all those extra
places. So, a lot of that expenditure of growth
money taking Australian participation education to
the levels it should have always been but fell back.
We are now well up and above that OECD level, and
that's where a lot of that growth money is going.
AJ: See, people worry about the expenditure don't they?
$ 109 billion, $ 109 thousand million out there,
almost 1/ 3 of it on welfare. Now, are we becoming a
dependent rather then independent society? For
example, you say you are pitching towards out of
work teenagers, but a child now seventeen, or a
young person of seventeen, can leave home because.
they don't like the discipline of the family and get
$ 255.30 a fortnight because they call themselves
homeless. Four of them can go into one home and be
on $ 1,100 untaxed a fortnight. That's more dough
then you can get working. How can we create
incentives to get them into the workforce when it is
so attractive to be unemployed?
PM: Well we created the incentive of keeping them in
school and study, and that's why we extended Austudy
which is the same set of rates as the Job Search
allowance and paid that to university students and
we have now extended into years 11 and 12 for people
at school. And that has had the effect of lifting
participation in school.
AJ: But for the people who don't want to work, and there
are people out there, is the welfare too attractive? 
PM: No, no.
AJ: $ 255.30 a fortnight.
PM: Yes, but you have got to be over 18 to get that. I
don't think anyone over 18 is going to say that at
those rates, which are just sustenance rates, that
anyone would want to stay there.
AJ: Well can I just come back to business, because I
mean that is the concern, you have seen, and the
Prime Minister is right beside me so I can show him
rather than talk about it, but that is the tax,
that's the Hewson adjustment that he says he is
going to make, to taxes on business, you are going
to abolish the wholesale sales tax, abolish the pay
roll tax. How politically do you compete with that,
with business when he is saying he will relieve a
burden of $ 20 billion? Independently what burden is
he going to add by the GST, let's just take that
issue there, how do you compete politically with
that?
PM: Look, the income tax in this country is only S50 odd
billion, John Hewson wants to put a $ 30 billion
goods and services tax on the whole Australian
community. I mean it is a monstrous level of
taxation.
AJ: But he is going to take a lot off?
PM: And that is all going to be spent on taki ng away
pay-roll tax and cutting the excise on petrol. So,
if you say to Australians well this is the deal, you
will have 15 per cent on all of your clothing and
your food, and the deal for you is that by and large
the business community would benefit from a
reduction in pay-roll tax and you get lower and
cheaper petrol in a country which already has cheap
petrol. And I think most Australians say that is a
rotten deal.
AJ: But see you move around the business community so
you know this. You have now got the superannuation
guarantee levy, the training levy, pay-roll tax, you
have got a whole range of taxes there, they are the
sector that you have got to get going haven't you?
You have got to get investment in business moving.
PM: Well, Alan, the profit share in these accounts which
in these Budget papers, which you said were graphic
illustration, I am just trying to find the profit
share measure. It's as high as the 1960s. As soon
as there is any voltdme in production it is going to
spring back to higher levels in the 1960s. With
interest rates, bill rates at 5.75. 
AJ: Are business getting that though? We have been
through that before.
PM: Yes, some are.
AJ: You see, business are not getting it. What have you
said to the bank about seeing
PM: Bills plus The fact is, if we say to the
business community you have got a competitive
dollar, you have got a competitive exchange rate
mechanism in place, you have got a bill rate of
3/ 4 per cent, you have got lower prime rates, you
have got higher profit share.
AJ: Is the exchange rate competitive yet?
PM: Let me just say all these things. If the business
community says in the face of all that, well I don't
know whether that is enough, you have got to say
well what is enough? I mean what is enough, if a
high profit share, low interest rates, low
inflation, good wage outcomes, good exchange rate
what is enough?
AJ: Well they will tell you though that they are under
pressure. For example, you keep saying here, which
is true, that I think manufactured exports have
doubled, which is an excellent result. But we will
never ever be able to replace the contribution that
the rural sector makes.
PM: No, but we don't want to, we just want to add to it.
AJ: They are in an awful mess aren't they at the moment?
I mean NSW 75 per cent, 75 per cent of them are
drought stricken. There are 70 farmers in one count
of mine, $ 30 million they will never be able to
repay it. Now in a Budget of $ 109 billion, isn't
there room for a greater assistance to the rural
sector?
PM: -We have got funding for drought in there, drought
relief.
AJ: Marginal.
PM: We have got the rural adjustment scheme fundin,
RAS. -Which we also topped up in One Nation as well
as now. I mean the point is Governments can't take
account of the seasons. Look, agriculture has made
a great contribution to Australia. The trouble is
we relied upon it too much. The good thing now is
we now have manufactured exports growing like topsy.
AJ: But you will never be able to replace the
contribution that rural sector makes to our wealth
will you? It has got to be sustained. 
PM: It has got to be complemented, Alan. See, what
happened in the ' 60s and ' 70s is that the great post
war trade in goods and services past Australia by.
We were still growing wheat and wool and digging up
minerals. Good as that is, it wasn't enough.
AJ: No.
PM: And you can't employ people in capital cities or in
provincial cities, say get a job in the back of
Queensland or Western Australia, you have got to
have the jobs in town.
AJ: But when rural Australia is strong, Australia is
strong isn't it? That is still true.
PM: Yes that is true.
AJ: It is not strong at the moment.
PM: No, but that is because in a way, in prices the
wheat markets were polluted by European and American
subsidies. The wool industry shot its own toes of f.
AJ: And they were crippled by interest rates.
PM: Yes, but that is gone now for quite a while.
AJ: But it hasn't gone they have still got the debt.
PM: Well some have.
AJ: A lot Paul, a lot.
PM: Alan a large proportion of Australian farms have no
debt.
AJ: What have you said to the banks, I don't agree with
that, but what have you said to the banks though
about passing on any number of reductions in
interest rates that have been generated from the
Reserve Bank, which the business community are not
getting?
PM: Well they have passed on a lot. But I am not going
to be here defending banks. They have passed on a
lot, but they have stuck to too much.
AJ: Yes.
PM: And that is they should have passed on
AJ: To recover some of their debt.
PM: Recover some of their losses from the ' 80s. I mean
they have lent willy nilly, they have suffered
losses. 
AJ: And we are all still paying for it.
PM: And made others pay for it.
AJ: And it has effected our economic well being hasn't
it?
PM: It has. We have now seen it come with housing.
Housing rates are now 10 per cent or below, and they
were 17 per cent, so there is a big pass on there.
The prime rates have come down so there is a
substantial pass on there. But the fact is, it is
for the marginal person, who is on a farm, who is a
small business person, is being charged 12 or 13,
14. It is too much. And they should come down
further.
AJ: Right. Have you said that to them?
PM: I have said it and so has Bernie Fraser.
AJ: Just in terms of paying for this, any sleight of
hand here?
PM: No, no.
AJ: Big dividend from the Reserve Bank, $ 2.6 billion.
PM: Alan, You must of have been in the lock-up with the
pointy heads.
AJ: No, I just know which pages to go to.
PM: Look, what happens, these things go up and down.
AJ: $ 650 million up?
PM: Reserve Bank profits go up when they sell the
currency down.
AJ: $ 650 million.
PM: Yes, but it was $ 2.5 billion a couple of years ago,
then it dropped to $ 900 million, then I think it
dropped to $ 400, now it is up again by a billion.
That is just the on's and off's of the Budget.
AJ: -And your asset sales, are you going to get that
though from Qantas and the Commonwealth
Labourites, Australian Airlines $ 1.6 billion, are
you going to get that?
PM: I think so. Well I mean we have this funny debate,
people say you should sell the airlines so they
operate efficiently, and when you put them into the
Budget to sell them they say you shouldn't include
the receipts in the Budget. Look, it is a tight 
clean set of numbers, and we started with a starting
point deficit of $ 13.5 billion and we have produced
a Budget of $ 13.4. In other words, most of the new
spending in here is largely paid for by savings
methods.
AJ: Do you thinkc you are hamstrung though by certain
ideological limitations? For example, I know that
John Dawkins has talked about us being a clever and
smart country, everyone has talked about that. But
I have mentioned to you before if your son does not
get the marks that are needed to enter university,
he can't pay to go there. How long can we shut
000 people out of universities, although I noticed
tonight a welcome initiative in relation to open
universities, and studying from television and so
on?
PM: Can I just tell you what that's about Alan. Open
universities means that people who never got into
university, couldn't get the pass mark, but who want
to study away from university and then have a couple
of successful years at that can stream themselves
back into the campus complement on the university.
AJ: It's the only way they can educate university
students in India for example, or the United States
of America.
PM: That is away from the university and, of course, the
way we've got modems available to send back, you
know essays from computers and television and
generally, videos and the rest. It is possible now
to run an education system like that, away from the
actual campus.
AJ: But why should a Chinese student be able to pay to
go to an Australian university and not your son?
Why can't Paul Keating pay to send his son to
university when in fact a Chinese parent can?
PM: Well, I take the view that most kids have a right to
an university edupatio-' regardless of the parents
income. That's the view that John Hewson doesn't
take.
AJ: Right.
PM: I say a kid from a working
AJ: We're not giving them that.
PM: Yes we are.
AJ: No, 50,000 get locked out every year.
PM: Yes but look there's half a million kids today
in tertiary 
AJ: More than ever. But shouldn't you be able to say i
you wanted to sell the family car and forgo a
holiday that you can do that and send you kid at
cost to university. For example in your own
electorate we've got that SRA training authority
with that most magnificent assistance apprenticeship
scheme which could be fully facilitated. Now there
are many places there that can't be used, why
shouldn't parents be able to say well look, it
trains them in the best possible skills at Chullora
I'll pay to have my kid go in there.
PM: Look, there's a certain amount of places that are
available for fee paying if you like clients, some
of the universities can now lift their income
independently of the government payments by getting
full-fee paying students. Getting some of those
services sold around South-east Asia is a good thing
for us to be doing. But what we've done is lifted
by 50 per cent the number of places in tertiary
education. We've created the equivalent of twelve
universities since 1986, that's 120,000 extra places
in universities. And the other thing is in
technical and further education Alan, in that great
milestone change of a couple of weeks ago, we are
now with an agreement between the Commonwealth and
the States going to build for the first time a
vocational education system of substance to sit
beside the universities so all those kids that may
not get the university pass mark, but who want a
good diploma or vocational education can get it.
And that's going to matter to those hundreds and
thousands of kids, particularly from working class
areas who mightn't get into university because many
hundreds and thousands will, but those who don't
will now be able to go into a system of substance
and status that just now doesn't exist.
AJ: Alright, one other thing on money in the Budget
papers which upsets people out there, and I don't
think people are as racist as they are accused of
when they make this kind of criticism, but the total
allocation and I've only had a quick chance to tally
it up for Aborigines again, 240,000 Aborigines, over
$ 1 billion. That's a lot of money, that's just the
Commonwealth, now there's a whole range of state
programs as well. Can you understand how people
really get a little upset when there is not money
for other things, but there's an awful amount of
dough for 240,000 every year?
PM: Oh yes, but it's for largely dispossesed people
who've basically had the butt end of what society
can hand out to themi and pull them up to give them
an education and housing and support.
AJ: Do you think they're getting it? 
PM: Well..
AJ: Or is it going to a white bureaucracy who is
administer it?
PM: No, well it's now being administered by the
Aboriginal community, A&amp; TSIC is a program, a
Commission where the Commonwealth's funding. You
realise we don't have a Department of Aboriginal
Affairs.
AJ: No, I found it in Prime Minister and everywhere
else.
PM: It doesn't exist you see. The money is paid..
AJ: You hide those figures somewhere where we can't find
them.
PM: No, we pay it straight to ATSIC. We pay it straight
to the Commission, there's the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Commission and indigenous people run
that.
AJ: But if it is successful, shouldn't each year there
by progressively lesser need? If it was successful,
progressively there should be less need, therefore
less money. We just seem to each year be requiring
more and more money.
PM: But I mean, I don't think when you say successful I
mean, at what threshold level? I mean these are
remote communities often, they've had tremendous
health problems, housing problems. No, I think it
is money well spent and I don't thing we're spending
we've tried to spend as much as we can and we've
increased that by about $ 500 million three months
ago which will be spent over the next four or five
years.
AJ: Just finally, a lot of money for consumption here as
opposed to production in the Budget and there's an
election coming up
PM: Well I'll tell you what there is money in for and
that's for health. I think this is going to be a
very important issue in the election. We've put in
billion, nearly $ 250 million a year for
six years for greater access of public patients to
public hospitals, so elderly people
AJ: I wish we could debate that on another day.
PM: who might have an elective thing like a hip
replacement, they'll be able to get in there and
they won't now be j umped in the queue by a private
patient and I think getting that public hospital 
system working properly with full access to doctors
gives a real choice between Medicare and the thing
that Dr Hewson has which is go and pay for yourself
regardless of means.
AJ: Come back to the election, when will there be an
election?
PM: Well when the Parliament runs it course. I think
from our point of view, the longer the Parliament
goes the economies fortunes I think, are on the turn
and for us I don't thing there's any value in short
changing the public..
AJ: You'll go the distance?
PM: This is my intention at this stage, we'll go the
distance yes.
AJ: one final thing which has nothing to do with the
Budget, Mr Kenny, there's outrage out there that a
bloke who could have served for Australia in the war
can be finding himself in the courts defending his
right to certain
PM: Well I think if you live here for 40 years and
you've been part of this community notwithstanding
the fact that technically he didn't have a passport
and the rest that that should be fair enough.
AJ: But see you're a tough guy and that's your
reputation. Why wouldn't you say listen this is
nonsense, will we get this thing out of the courts,
a country that I'm Prime Minister of, no bloke of 68
is going to be put through this.
PM: No, well that's fine. But you see what happened the
Parliament decided about four or five years ago that
there shall be no ministerial discretion in these
matters. There's an Act of Parliament stands
between me and me saying that, that's why. But this
matter is before the AAT, the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal and given the fact that this fellow looks
as though he's got a pretty good case, he's probably
got every chance of getting out.
AJ: So you're confident he's not going to be booted out?
PM:--Well I should hope not. -I mean I think anyone
that's been..
AJ: You wouldn't want that in a country you were running
surely?
PM: I would not, not someone's who's been here for that
long. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRE-RECORDED INTERVIEW WITH MAXINE MCKEW, ABC tAM
PROGRAM, AUGUST IS, 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
MM: Prime Minister, we seemed to have come a long way in six months from the
pretty heady optimism of ' One Nation'f to I suppose, what you could say the
realistic qualifiers in this Budget.
PM: We've certainly reduced the growth forecast, but I think the important thing
is the economy is growing again and then we had the National Accounts for
the full ycar just a wcek ago growing at about 1.6 per cent. That's the same
as western Europe, but this coming year, the year we're in, this financial
year we're in, wc'rc going to be growing at a round 3 per cent on average,
nearly 4 through the year and in fact, faster than Europe, but about on
average the same as our trading partncrs if you include the North Asian
economics as wcll. So it is a reasonable rate of growth and it will start to
pull employment up.
MM: The task of ecoAver is obviously proving a lot more difficult than you ever
imagined it could be after you took ovcr as Primc Minister.
PM: I think it has bcen harder to ignite the growth that we now have and we
hoped we'd have more, but in the same period the OECD has now twice
revised down its forecasts for OECD arca growth, so has the IMF. This is
now pretty much a phenomenon that is a world wide one, but the main thing
is there is a role for Government, the Government has a job to do in kicking
growth along and protecting the people who have been hurt along the way,
the uncmployecd and also moving our social agenda along by such things as 
2
improvement of public hospital access under Medicare. increasing the_!&amp; O
-pension, support for caters et cetera.
MM: You mentioned the unemployed, I suppose you never imagined six months
ago that you would have to face a press conference as you did, what a
month or so ago, and explain a figure of 11. 1 per cent.
PM: No, because that was occasioned by thc number of people looking for work
and one can never make judgements about this participation rate. If we had
thc same participation rate today that John Howard faced, we'd have
unemployment at 8.5 per cent or thereabouts. The fact is we were very
successful in the 1980s in employing Australians. The Australian
workforce is a quarter bigger than it was in 1983, we've kept most of the
1980s jobs and people not unreasonably had the expectation of finding
work. So when things start to look better they've obviously gone out there
looking and that's shoved the unemployment rate up to around I I.
MM: As you see it, it's obviously become a political and a social necessity, a
matter of social justice as you say to spend money on job creation schemes,
but does that go against the grain a little bit in that the jobs you're creating
arc not the new clever jobs that you talk about, they're not the sort of jobs
that will give us export income, that will make us hold our heads high in the
international arena?
PM: No, but in thc 1980s when I was Treasurer in this phase in 1983 we had the
Community Employment Program doing some of those things, we were
then developing the labour market programs which had more of a training
component to them and wc'vc now sophisticated those ovcr the period. So
those labour market programs will reach over 400,000 people this ycar so it
gives all those people a chance of having work experience and training and
that means that they're likely to get back into the full time workforce much
earlier, more quickly.
MM: And are you ready to go into top gear with thesc programs straight away?
PM: They're all programs largely which have bccn developed and which we're
adding to. The new ones were announced a couple of weeks ago in the
youth initiatives which I announced, that is the Career Start Traineeships et
cetcra, but the ones which arc here; Jobtrain, Jobskills, Jobstart arc all
existing ones which wc can wind up quickly. 
MM: If you accept that a substantial element of that unemployment is structural,
job creation schemes won't do much about that will they?
PM: There is a ncw Budget initiative there for open universities, open learning
and that means that many Australians will be able to get access to tertiary
education who can't now, that is in addition to the 50 per cent addition to
places we've already put there, the 120,000 extra university places we'vc
created and the total remodelling of TAPE. So if we are, as wc have been
for most of the 1980s now developing a much greater skills base in the
conomy, producing more sophisticated products, it simply follows that the
sort of workforce who'll be producing those products will be a trained one.
We're putting the institutional things in place, I mean there's been a
rcvolution in the change and the participation rate in schools, in universities
and in technical education, and in technical education it's going to be
improved, so of most OECD countries there can be none making such a
transition so rapidly as wc are.
MM: Despite those efforts, some of our employers are saying that the growth we
are likely to see will come via higher productivity meaning they will do
more with fewer employees.
PM-That's true and that means if you want to get unemployment down, you'eve
got to run thc economy fastcr., This is what I keecp saying to the OppositIion.
They want a policy where they have a pool of unemployment as a natural
check on wage growth. They're saying don't open the accelerator up, don't
let the place grow quickly, because a pool of unemployment is actually
handy to keep wages down; that's the Hewson model. Our model says if
you've got more productive businesses with a given level of output bcing
produced by fewer people, to produce more employment you've got to have
even more output, that is even greater growth. And how do you do that
without it spilling into wages and prices? Answer: a wages policy, an
Accord.
MM: But business is not investing in the first place.
PM: It's starting to pick up in these forecasts and part of that pick up we saw in
thc National Accounts for last year, investment starting to stir. But the
notion that we shouldn't be growing and that we should hold it down and
with some sort of miserable view that a pool of unemployment is actually
something that has a depressing effect on wages which ic is a good thing,
thc sort of nark conservative view is a view we won't accept. 
pt. pfl,, b.." J~ a. e
4
MM: What of the growth figure of 3 per cent though? That is not likely to make
much of a dent in unemployment, I mean the Budget forecasts say well
we're still looking at 10 per cent by the middle of next year.
PM; Down to 10 that's true, but again it's the direction which I think is important
and the psychology of the country, the direction Is important particularly
where those labour market programs picking up 400,000 of those people
unemployed. And through the year that's 3 3/ 4, in other words a 3 pcr cent
for year avcrage but the actual speed across the year is nearly 4 per cent.
That will totally change the psychology of thc country and I'm quite surc
that the public expenditure programs now, that is the highways, the $ 2
billion on roads, the national rail system, the ' One Nation' spending, last
week we ordered 3,000 tonnes of rail steel, a million concrete sicepers, that's
all starting to happen. I think as that happens and the Budget spending
happens and this regional policy of spending in the regions all that will kick
the growth along right at the right time.
MM: But Prime Minister there was another chilling commcnt in thc Budget
papers and that was that as wc see the recovery coming through there will
be a kick up in the current account. N~ ow what has the 1980s been about if
not trying to got that currcnt account under control?
PM: Yes, but ' We're now in the last few years ninning a large balance of trade
surplus, we're now running a balance of trade surplus of about $ 4 billion.
Thc current account debt came from the tact that we were running a trade
deficit, we were importing more than wc'rc exporting. This has not been so
of the last two or three years so we've still got a current account deficit that
is true, because of the interest payments on the old debt. But as invcstmcnt
picks up imports will pick up and slow that progress down, but again it's a
pretty modcst increase from 3 3/ 4 per cent of GDP; 3.1 to 3.7.
MM: But docsn't it worry you that we're seeing the growth in private
consumption, in housing?
PM: But again what's the answer? Demand management, sit on the ceonomy,
don't let it grow. the only thing to do is to add to supply, that is be ablc to
produce more goods and services, I mcan the grcat thing about Australia is
we have made this vast transition to elaborate manufactures and
manufacturing exports. Manufactured exports have trebled since 1983,
elaborately transformed manufactures have done the same and all we should
do is continue to add to supply and that's the way we'll beat the current 
account. We won't beat it by trying to sit on the economy, that is kill the
imports by killing thc growth and killing employment.
MM: Our pcrformance, of course, Is depcndent on a stable international climate,
and again the Budget papers refer to the fact that if we see a further
contraction in Japan, then the forecasts are at risk.
PM: Well we've got ourselves growing In this, our trading partners arc growing
at 3 per cent on average, that's exactly as we see ourselves growing.
MM: Mmm, but that growth is again dependent on Japan, is it not?
PM: The bulk of it depends on the United States', and some of it on Japan's, some
of it on Westcrn Europe's, and some of It of course in the South Pacific and
North Asia areas. Thcy'rc growing much fastcr than we are, but taken as an
average group it's about 3. Even if there was a shift in Japanese growth it
wouldn't change thc forecast much.
MM: You mentioned the US there. What of the possibility of a Clinton victory in
the US say in November? Now cven thc prospect of that is making the
markets a bit nervous at the moment.
PM: Could be, but one of the things I think Australians should understand, that is
the United States didn't fix their budget deficits in the 1980s, and iii the
good times thcy didn't produce surpluses. We did. And now thcy've got a
budget dcficit this ycar of 6 per cent of GDP, wc'vc got onc of 3.3. Ours is
going to come back towards balance, theirs isn't. And that's now why they
can't use fiscal policy as we can usc it to lift the stimulus and let growth
move in the economy. These are now options Australians have because of
good management in Budget policy.
MM: But if you had a Bill Clinton in the White I ouse next year, he'd be worried
about winning re-election four years hence, not so much worried about the
economy and getting that down from 6 per ent.
PM: Thc US political system has not been able to manage this cconomy, and
there's been this dichotomy between the power of the President, the
Congress, and the Executive. And they've not been able to manage fiscal
policy, and that's why they took no precautionary action in the salad days of
growth, and now why they're basically hoisted with these very high deficits
and no capacity to actually stimulate the economy. 
6
MM: Indeed, but if it's bad there it could be bad for us.
PM: It could, but I mean again, they're in a cycle and they'll pick their way out of
the cycle as well as we are. I don't think it's going to change our forecast
much at all.
MM: Well, just to some local comment. Business leaders here have cast doubt on
the 3 per ccnt. Thcy say it could be less optimistic than that
PM: I mean, you'd have to have a huge contraction in growth off our national
account numbers of last year that's the actual growth we've rncasured, the
statisticians measured, for the year to June 30 this year. For the last
financial year you'd need a contraction to produce some of those numbers.
No, we've got here I think conservative numbers, a conservative forecast at
3 per cent for year average growth, and 3 3/ 4 through the year.
MM: Is this Budget a plan for the future, or is it a palliative?
PM: No, no, it keeps the structural progress going, that's the point, and the social
progrcss. That big change to Medicare for hospitals, the change to the
social security programs, the 150 per cent for R D to keep that research
and dlot) cnt component coming through, on top of the huge change in
depreciation rates in the One Nation Statement in February the pooled
development funds, all of the other innovative tax changes which obtained
then and for the general business environment, low inflation, low interest
rates, a competitive exchange rate, a very high profit share and about to go
higher, a set of wage arrangements in place which will hold the inflation
rate below our trading partners. It's a-pretty good scene coming up.
MM: You referred bcforc to the training programs that are in place, and certainly
in the last month you've gone to a lot of trouble to gct a comprehensive
training program in place. Kim Beazley said on this point that what wc will
see in the future is the marr iage of training with national economic goals.
Now, some might say well that's only half the picture, why not go ahead and
marry industry policy to national economic goats, and much more
directional industry policy?
PM: Well it basically is. I mean look, we're saying sell your brains, train your
kids, keep them in school, put them through universities and TAFE, sell
innovative products, sell your brains. John Hcwson is saying don't do that,
let's sell the dumb products, let's cut thc wages to $ 3 an hour, let's cormpetc
in the low orders of the international division of labour, let's compete with
1 w 1 I. 
7
the people on $ 15 or $ 20 a week in South East Asia, let's try to make the
things that we shouldn't bc making, and let's keep in the game by cutting the
wages of low paid Australians. We're saying, give that up, let's have a
trained work force doing clever things.
MM: To what industries would you like our young people to sell their brains, in
what areas should we be competitive and getting the exporting going?
PM: Well, all the ones we're doing now elaborately transformed manufactures,
services, education services, health services, tourism, financial services, and
in those clever parts of, you know, computer software programs.
MM: But are we doing enough? We've got the manufactured exports up, but
they're only up to about 25 per cent of our total exports.
PM: Well they're higher now than rural or mining exports for the first time ever.
I mean the Liberals should have hung their heads in shame that for 310 years
the whole post war trade in goods and serviccs passed us by, we were just
basically into producing a bit of wheat and wool and a few minerals. As
important as they are, and remain, they are not enough and they don't
employ people in cities. You can't say get a job at the back of Queensland
or in Wcstern Australia if you live in Sydney or Melbourne. So we had to
re-establish, we had to rebuild the basis of our manufacturing and our
services because this community didn't have its share of intcmnational
services.
MM: Prime Minister, in terms of the political battle you gave a bit of a chestthumping
speech to the Caucus the other day along the lines of ' you ain't
seen nothing yet'. What have you got in mind?
PM: Wc're going to paint Dr Hcwson and his policies, which are basically about
survival of the fittest, the Gordon Gecko view of the world, you know
' greed is good' and if you're not a millionaire you're a layabout stick a
consumption tax on everybody, make the low paid people give tax cuts to
the higher paid people, mnake people pay for their health care regardless of
their income, no Medicare, you have a right to go to university if your
parents can afford full fees 12-15,000 a year. We're saying that's not the
view, that the mix we've got, the blend between an open market economy
introduced by a Labor Government, ironically introduced by a Labor
Govcrnmcnt graftcd together with a really comprehending and
compassionate social policy, with a role for business and a role for the
unions, in an evolutionary change in the labour market. That's the model for 
8
Australia. Not some sort of late " 70s. Thatcherite model which is basically
built upon the greed syndrome if there's a quid for you go and get it, and if
there isn't there's no point to you. And that's the difference between the
parties. And that ideological difference is going to become more apparcnt
as the months go on.
MM: Don't you think the electorate, though, with reservations might say we might
as well go for that because we want to punish Labor, they have given us I1I
per cent unemploymcnt?
PM: Look, we get New Zealand thrown up to us as a model by Dr Hewson.
There are the same number of people in jobs in New Zealand today as there
was in 1983, in fact fewer. In fact, by a modest amount, fewer. In Australia
there is 25 per cent more people in work. When I became Treasurer the
work force was 6 million, it's now 7.6 million. We had more growth in
Australia in the 1980s than there is GDP, total product, in the New Zealand
economy. We've madc thc great transition to an externally oriented society,
we've built onc of the best social security safety ncts in the world. 1 mean,
why should the community punish us to reward a set of coalition layabouts
who got us into this hole in the first place, a person who was advising the
then Treasurer for 7 years, who left us with a massive current account
imbalance, ballooning foreign debt, a 10 per cent inflation rate, nearly I1I
per cent unemployment, 10.5 per cent uncmployment, and a hopeless sort of
outlook? Why should that group ever be rewarded by the electorate vis a
vis a government which has taken all the courageous changes and tried to
make something of Australia, to give it a place in the world,
notwithstanding thc fact that the game got overheated in the late 1980s and
the result is the rcecssion. It has been the recession, but the same recession
that we see in Britain did you know that Britain has just slipped back into
negative growth. I mean, we're now growing at 1.6 for the year to June,
they arc actually contracting 1.5. The United Statcs is in a recession, Japan
is in a recession, France is in a recession. This has been part of the dcbt
hangover of the ' 80s and the collapse In asset prices. And to say lct's throw
the baby out with the bath water, let's take the Governmcnt that really made
the post war changes, that made the courageous change to an externally
oriented society, that made all the social changes, the structural changes,
and what will we have back? The Gordon Gecko of Australian politics, to
give us the ' greed is good' syndromc. Thatcher, 1979, who wants that?
MM: Prime Minister, I suppose you're not holding your breath about a Kirner
victory in Victoria. Isn't thcre the same sentiment about the Federal
-7-
9
Governmcnt, to a certain extent, as t~ cre is about the Victorian Labor
Government?
PM: I'd hold my breath for a Goss victoi.* in Queensland, though. What point's
that make?
MM: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you, Maxine.
cnds 



* TEL: 20. Aug. 92 18: 33 No. 018 P. 01/ C
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINIS1' ER, THE HON P J KEATING MPP
STRICTLY BALLROOM PREMIERE RIECErrlON, THE MUSEUM OF
CONTEMPORARY ART, SYDNEY0 19 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, Ita ( Buttrosc), Annita and I are delighted to be here. We have seen
the film, so the pleasure you had here tonight we had a littlc earlier about a week ago.
And In fact my whole family saw the film and T must say they loved it, all of them.
There are a lot of peoplc to be congratulated the producers, the actors, the director, the
choreographer. I think it is going to havc a marvellous reception and Strictly Ballroom
deserves It for the faith that everyone has had in it., right from its conception.
It's a light hearted film, but of course it springs from deep traditions of Australia which
those who arc old enough to remember would remember. And there's a few of us around
here tonight.
It comes from that old music and dancing tradition of Sydney. And therc was a namesake
of mine called Jack Keating who used to run a ballroom studio in Newtown. Some of you
herc won't remember it. He was really an institution. And whencver you walked in there
it was always thc same sort of hail with thc same sort of trusses across the ceiling, the
same sort of posters on the wall, and the steps and the rest. And old Jack would sidlc up to
you to see what you were made of and you'd do a couple of things, and if you weren't any
good he'd just dismiss you quietly, and if you showed any promise he'd follow you for
five minutes and he would then turn one of his trusted former pupils onto you and they'd
take you on to learn dances.
And T can see a lot of Jack Keating in Barry Fife. The only thing is when Jack was going
he had receding hair, where Barry had a very bad rug on. And Bill reckons he's still got it
on. I think the way rm going, I'm going to need it. But the thing was, I think it came
from that old tradition, and as a rcfugee myself from many a ballroom dancing show, the
scrublands at Marrickvlle, or over at the HurStville Civic Centre where a couple of
thousand would line up every Saturday night with the girls on one side and the boys on
the other, everyone eyeing each other off, not knowing whether one would cross the 
TEL: 20. Rug. 92 18: 33 No. 018 P. 02/
2
divide and actually ask the question, and often get a refusal. All of that was in the great
tradition of ballroom dancing. And the great competitions that my own father and mnother
were ballroom dancers and comnpctitors at these various things the Trocadcro, the onc at
the Sydney Showground that's the Harden Pavilion now, and at various othcr places where
It was all done, the old Calais, and all the various spots around Sydney. And it came from
that tradition.
And what I think is wonderful, that wc had that supported by a family which has a great
tradition in Australian entertainment and radio, the Albert family. But it also camne from
NIDA which was another payoff for that long teiiin-vestxnent In the nation's cultural
devclopment. And I think the same can be said of the Sydney Dance Company, with that
brilliant performance by Paul Mccurio and Tara Morice, which of course has sprung again
from the equally brilliant Graham Murphy and his Company. And other Australian
cultural institutions like the Sydney Thcatrc Company, thc Film Finance Corporation, who
benefited again in the Budget last night well if you don't gct a clap for $ 60 million,
you're ncvcr going to get one. T'he Australian Film Institute, the New South Wales Film
and Television Offie.
So therc are many Institutions involved in this. The real heart of Australia is involved
here. And the concept is a peculiarly Australian thing, and it's great to revive that sort of
thing In this year 1992, when not so long ago it was all the vogue. But as we all know,
ballroom dancing has come back, I won't say it has come back into its own because I don't
think It has, but it is coming back as a form of dance, and it's obviously attracting many
peoplc again.
it's a lovely film, a happy film, and a lovely ending, a nice happy ending. The nasty old
bugger who was running the show ended up being sidelined, and Mum and Dad, Dad
came good at thc cnd, and Mum, you could have chokcd her couldn't you? But in the end
be picked hcr up, she decided to bc in it as well, which is a really quite a marvellous thing.
But it's a sweet, sweet show. It's also of course a charity event tonight. And I do need to
say the AIDS Trust in Australia, M A Film Corporation and Ronin Films, thank y'ou for
organising this evcnt. Just as we congratulate those people who made the film, we also
would like to give credit and thanks to those whosc efforts helped so much to restrict the
spread of AIDS in Australia. The Bobby Goldsmith Foundation, to whom the funds from
this event will go, is one I want to pay tribute to.
I also mean those In thc gay community where ALD_$ jemnains largely confined, who, in
the midst of the tragedy, have worked hard to provide education and support, the
Government has been in there helping them. I would like to pay tributc tonight to those
people from the scientife and medical professions and other walks of life who have given
so much time and skill to deal with the complex scientific, social and legal issues which
the epidemic has raised. 
TEL: 3
I might also take the opportunity to thank those on both sides of politics who have set
aside differences to deal constructively with the threat of AIDS.
We've done well in Australia, I think, to contain it and better in fact indecd than In most
countries. I know that's very small comfort for those who have lost friends and relatives,
and for those who are suffering from the disease. I doubt if there's anyone here whose
lives have not In some way been affccted by AIDS. Of course, with It the nation's life has
also been affected. We've lost some of our best people.
And tonight I think Is the best possible response-the celebration of an artistic triumph, as
a way of helping the ight to deal with AIDS.
So this is quite an event. It's always an event in Australia to produce a feature film which
has that peculiarly Australian quality to it, and at the same time Is commercial and
attractive and successful, and restoring, bringing ou~ some of the old Australia while we're
doing It, entertaining ourselves with the work of an enthusiastic cast, producers, director,
and backers, and while wc do, help in one of the worthier causes of the nation, fighting
this terrible epidemic.
So congra ul at ions to everyone involved. Thank you very much for having me along.
Arinita and I loved thc film, so did our kids, and I hope it's a huge success for everybody
involved. T2EL0:. Rug. 92 18: 33 No. 018 P. 03/( 



EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY ( APPROX. 7: 30 PM)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEAING MP,
TO THE AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW DINNER, SYDNEY,
19 AUGUST 1992
My long experience of this forum is that many of you will have questions to put to me
about our economic strate y, and I want to leave as much time as I can to answer them
after dinner. But I do want to say something now about the thinking behind the Budget,
and what it means for our future.
All Budgets are significant, but this one is uniquely so, because it marks the beginning of
a new phase of economic reform in Australia.
Certainly the Budget is our annual financial statement and our annual forecast for the
economy. It does the things Budgets always do, and no doubt you will be quizzing me on
the forecasts and other numbers later.
But this Budget is also a declaration.
It is a statement of some of our principal policy goals for the nineties and what we will do
to attain those goals.
If I can put it in the most general way, I would say that our policy and material resources
as a government will be focused on enhancing the value of the work we do in our shops,
offices, factories, mines and farms throughout Australia, now and into the future.
We want to improve the quality of our workforce, and the way in which it is used.
In this next stage of reform we have four priorities:
1400 
to create good jolbs and get the unemployed back into productive work
to improve the training opportunities for people new to the workforce, and
retraining opportunities for those already in the workforce.
to encourage a wholesale transition into w aieargainingb etween the parties
as the principal industrial relationship in this country.
to continue the redesign of Australian indiustry so it provides the right jobs for a
more highly skilled and productive workforce.
The priority today is uremploymrent, not only because it is good economics but because it
is the right thing to'do.
It is the unemployed who are disproportionately bearing the cost of changes like
disinflation, productivity improvements and a more diverse industrial composition from
which the rest of us benefit.
It is the unemployed who are bearing the consequences of the world wide asset price
unwinding of the late eighties.
So we do this because it is our responsibility to the unemployed, because as Australians
we want to move forward together.
But as unemployment comes down we will continue to invest in ourselves, because
improving the quality of the workforce is the best investment we can make in meeting and
beating global competition.
It is at the heart of our economic strategy for the nineties and beyond.
Over the next two years we will give the young a better chance and Australia a brighter
future. We offer every teenager who has not found a job within a year a vocational training
course of at least six months, with a job subsidy at the end. By the end of next year we
plan to have given learning and job chances to at least 100 000 kids who might otherwise
be the long term unemployed adults of tomorrow.
We will enhance the skills of young Australians now, and we are putting in place the
programs to continue to enhance them through the decade.
Through the. new. Australian National Training Authority, through pilot programs to
inrouihe e uaiy rinn i ndsry, Throug a higher level of funding we will
entrench the commitment by creating a stronger and better vocational training system.
1401 
We have already increased the number of young people staying on to the end of secondary
school from three in ten when we came to office to seven in ten. The number of
Commonwealth-funded university places will have increased by half between 1983 and
1994. Ten years ago 349,000 people were participating in university and college
education. Today the number is 559,000.
Now its time for vocational training.
We will give young Australians a better chance, and we will give adult Australians a
second chance.
This year we will offer around 200,000 training places unemployed adults, targeted
especially at those who have not found a job within a year. We have doubled the number
of places under our wage subsidy program to over 100,000 in 1992-93, to help in the
transition between retraining and a job.
In regions that have been particularly hard hit by the downturn, we will create jobs as well
as offer training programs. We will spend $ 345 million with 411 Local Government
Councils, funding a refit of regional and community facilities. We will also create jobs in
a program which combines training and paid work experience for unemployed adults.
Young unemployed people will receive direct job assistance in programs to improve the
environment. We will enhance the skills of adult Australians now, and continue enhancing them over
the decade.
As our industry becomes more complex, training and retraining throughout our working
lives will become as customary as repainting the house.
What we do in workforce training will be complemented by changes in work practices and
job design.
Over the next two years we will encourage the proliferation of workplace bargaining to
cover more than half of the workforce, while asking the AIRC, the employers and the
ACT1J to confine the exercise of the compulsory arbitral powers of the Commission to
general adjustments in minimum rates.
Those of you here from industry will know that more changes have taken place in the
workplace in the last few years than took place in several decades before, and that there
really is a new spirit of cooperation and willingness to change. You may say its not
enough. You may say we can do more. And let me tell you right now that I agree with
you. We must do-more, we can do more, we will do more and the workplace
agreements at GMH, Toyota, ICI, ITT' Sheraton, and the oil industry are showizig us the
way.
1402 
Our goal is not merely to improve on what we have done, but to match the international
best. Let me say in passing that I regard our tax rate changes planned for 1994/ 5 and 1995/ 6 as
quite crucial to our success in transforming the workplace and enhancing the quality of the
workplace. The cuts, you might recall, are targeted at bringing the current 38 cent second
bracket to 30 cents. It is this rate which most affects work incentives for middle incomes
earners, and the rewards from productivity bargains.
Finally, we,% yill continue to encourage the transformation of Australian industry to match
the supply of better trained and more productive workers with smarter products for them
to make. We are making permanent the 150 per cent tax deduction for research and
development and increasing export incentives, all on top of a One Nation program in
which we legislated more generous depreciation rates, a development allowance for major
projects, tax benefits for private companies in public projects, and pooled development
funds for medium sized business.
The government makes the economic policy, but it is the private sector which produces
the goods. Of the growth we forecast this year, less than one third will be contributed by
government spending and most of that additional spending is anyway in the private
sector. It is the private sector which is now making the concrete sleepers and steel rails for
the national rail freight highway, it is the private contractors who are out pouring the
concrete and spreading the bitumen for our national highway system, and private
businesses which are taking advantage of more generous tax rules to invest in new plant
and equipment.
And it is the private sector which realises the gains from our new emphasis on workforce
jrigigg, and on workplace bargaining.
The shift in priorities in this Budget and in our long term economic strategy will help get
unemployment down now, and our workforce quality up over the long term.
After all, there is no greater economic waste in the economy than the waste of
unemployment, there is no resource more valuable which is used more unproductively
than the unemployed, and no change we can make in the economy which has as much
impact on growth, prosperity and living standards as bringing the unemployed back to
work. And for the longer term I wholeheartedly agree with the view of Michael Porter of the
Harvard Business School, who writes that " education and training constitute perhaps the
single greatest long-term leverage point available to all levels of government in
upgrading industry".
Over the last ten years we have deregulated the financial system and floated the dollar,
restored the profit share, cut your marginal income tax rates and sliced the share of
national income we take as taxes, put in place a program of tariff changes which is
1403 
changing us from a frightened inward looking economy into a competitive outward
looking economy, and entrenched an Accord with the union movement and created a
cooperative industrial relations environment.
It was the decade of reform in which we transformed government authorities into business
enterprises, began to reform our wharves and coastal shipping, opened up our aviation and
telecommunications industries to competition, and changed our business taxes to give us
one of the competitive systems in the OECD.
More recently we have rebalanced the share of investment made by government to
improve our airports, roads, railways, ports and electricity distribution, while enacting a
supErannuation scheme which will increase national savings for investment in the future.
We have begun to see some of the results of that decade of reform.
We now have one of the lowest inflation rates in the OECD. We have tripled both
manufacturing exports and services exports, and increasingly we are finding our growth
markets in our own region. Commonwealth Government business enterprises are in the
black. We have a strong profit share, but also strong productivity growth and rising real
wages. The result is that Australia is emerging from the recession with an economy that is
fundamentally stronger than it has been for a generation.
We are directly creating jobs, and we are enhancing the employability of the currently
unemployed, but we all know that putting people into good jobs in coming years depends
on steady economic expansion.
Certainly our growth forecasts have been clipped back since we last analysed the outlook
in our One Nation statement. But I am by no means pessimistic about either the
immediate outlook, or the likelihood of reasonable growth through the nineties. The
Economist magazine reported recently that Australia is set to have the highest growth and
the lowest inflation of any of the 13 largest Western nations, according to a survey of
forecasters. We are looking at inflation of 2 per cent this year, about the same as our
record low this year. We are looking at 3 per cent year average product growth, which
means we will be doing better than most, if not as well as we would wish. We are looking
at some acceleration in the years beyond that to give us a good show of creating around
800,000 jobs over four years in an economy in which low inflation is normal, in which we
have successfully internationalised, and in which we have strong proiuctivity growth and
rising living stan~ dards.
We are seeing results, but at the same time we are beginning a new stage of reform.
A stage when the emphasis will be on people.
1404 
The great and durable gains of the nineties are not going to be made by shuffling around
the tax burden.
They are not going to be made by slicing government, when government spending here is
already one of the lowest in the OECD.
They are not going to be made by turning our industrial relations into a blood sport, by
hurling business against their employees and trade unions, with government as spectator.
They are not going to be made by totally eliminating tariff protection, when our program
of reductions is already making us one of the least protected countries in the world, and
one in which the discipline of readjustment is already strict.
They are not going to be made by telling the Central Bank to run the place as it sees fit.
They are going to be made by creating a top quality, fully employed and adaptable
workforce. They are going to be made by business people taking decisions in a tight, disciplined,
stable framework.
A framework in which government does well the things governments do best in which it
makes sensible rules, funds sensible things like roads and railways, and enhances the
quality of the workforce. 1405 



a-6. j i P. I
TEL: 20. RU9.92 18: 03 No. 012
' Il PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KDTINO MP,
O&amp; A SESSION, AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL RErVIEW POST BUDGET
DINNER, RECENT HOTEL, SYDNEY, 19 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Q: Prime Minister, last week the Treasurer in
consultation with the Governor indicated that there
would be no more cuts in interest rates in this
cycle, yesterday that position was reported to be
qualified. Could you please clarify that?
pm: You mean, would you like me to make your job easier?
what we say is that given that the inflationary
performance that we've been able to secure, that's
with inflation rates, the statistical inflation
rates below 2 per cent, and 2 per cent again in
forecasts for this year, that it will be our
performance on inflation and inflationary
expectations which generally governs what we do on
monetary policy, and also the conditions within the
economy. I think we would say that at this point
rates have fallen far enough, but if you want me to
say they won't be falling any further under any
circumstances I won't be saying that, won't be
saying that.
Q: Prime Minister, with regards to theFBT proposal on
car spaces could I ask firstly, who will supply the
car spaces where the person using the car requires
the car for his or her business? And secondly, will
it apply to car spaces at Parliament House in
Canberra?
PM: I don't think so, but you know the Departments of
State pay'to the Treasury. We make the appropriate
adjustments in terms of fringe benefit payments.
And I know things like this are dear to the hearts
of many here, but the fact of the matter is that
fringe benefits tax is a tax so that cash, or
substitutes for cash, for goods taken in kind are
appropriately taxed. Now when the fringe benefits
tax was established In ' the middle of the late 1980s
some concessional treatment was given, particularly 
77TEL: 20. Aug .92 18: 03 No .012 P. 02/ 1
2
with relation to motor cars and other things, and In
this case in parking, and I think all we are
essentially doing is tidying up an anomaly in the
design of a tax.
Q: Treasurer, it's9 how I remember you Paul.
PM: Loyalty, even after they leave us.
Q: A bit of a statement, you've been associated with
all but one of the past ten Budgets, end a quick
count this afternoon was six mini Budgets, and over
this period the Budget balance was moved from
substantial deficit back to surplus, then back into
deficit. Was this experience and your views changed
by the role of fiscal policy and the economic
adjustment proes na -wth respect to influencing
income net distribution?
PM: I don'It think so. No, I think that in the early
1980s it was appropriate to expand fiscal policy for
the Government, with private investment down, to
substitute for public investment and public
spending, and as then the recovery came through and
we saw boom conditions for most of the ' 80s, fromi
the middle to the late ' 80s, it was then also
appropriate to withdraw that stimulus and produce a
surplus, or surpluses. But now in these conditions
where the economy is finding it difficult to grow
with the sort of speed we would like, although for
the public sector I think, and the Government and
the Budget and fiscal policy, in promoting that kind
of recovery is I think important. That is, that in
terms of the shorter term movements in the cycle of
the economy, fiscal policy has an important, I
think, balancing role to play. That is, where in
the past people have believed that moeaY 0i
was the instrument most quickly to cpal of
this, I mean people have often said, commentators of
fiscal policy, the lags are too long, and the lead
times are too long, whereas the monetary levers were
available at the hand of the Central Bank. But as
we know the monetary impacts take quite some time to
come through and it may well be, I think it probably
is, the case that fiscal policy may be a more speedy
remedy in some cases to the national economic
condition. And so I think that the trick is to use both
instruments together, and of course with it wages
policy as well. And that is why we take the view
that in a complex society, a complex economy,
reliance upon simply one instrument isn't enough and
that's why we differ with the Opposition in
believing that, for instance, now where we have got
a Budget deficit of $ 13, billion or about 3.3 per
cent of GDP, that it would be an entirely
inappropriate thing to do to cut that in half, to 
TE: 20. AU9.92 18: 03 No. 01* 2 P. 03/.
3
withdraw 07 billion from public spending and
stimulus. That is, to take 2 per cent of GDp from
it would simply kill the recovery stone dejad. That
is entirely the wrong thing to do as our friend Dr
Hewson, is urging us to do. The wrong thing to do.
So I think fiscal policy has got a sort of medium
term role about it, and it is a role which we played
through the ' 80saend we are still playing now. But
those who simplistically believed that I believed
only in surpluses and that now I should continue to
believe in them even though the economy has been
much weaker and that private spending and private
investment has been lower, then of course that's
wrong. I don't believe that and I never have. I
think fiscal policy has a very useful role to play
and a Government which wants to play it well, that
Is to design measures carefully and be cognisant of
the stimulus and the lags which can come with it,
can be using a very a useful device in the economy.
So I think fiscal policy is an exceptionally useful
thing and it ought to be used sensibly, and can be,
and I think we are using it sensibly. We have
produced now in this year Budget outlays of 4.1 per
cent of GDP real. The population is growing at 1.6
per cent so we have got about 2.5 per cent of the
outlays grove as part of, if you like, the stimulus
in this year's Budget. It is entirely the right
thing to have.
Q: Mr Prime Minister, what resources or assistance is
the Federal Government prepared to contribute to
actively promoting the Sydney Olympics 2000
campaign? And more importantly, howoes the
Government view the prospects of success for this
campaign?
Pm; Well I contributed on behalf of the Commonwealth
million to the campaign at a breakfast. They
must have had something in the Weetbix, I don't know
what it was but it was something there. And I have
coughed to the tune of $ 5 million on behalf of the
rest of us, and 5 now is better now than 5 later.
And as well as that the Commonwealth is going to
underlie a substantial proportion of the cost in the
event that the bid is successful. And at this stage
it seems that were the matter be decided now, I'm
told that Sydney has been faring very well. I can
only hope that remains into a year ahead, in
September next year when the decision is taken. But
the Federal Government is behind the bid, we think
it would be important to Sydney and Australia and
that's why we've put our money on the line in the
early stages to help the bid succeed.
0; Prime minister, is the Government concerned that the
change in tax status of limited partnerships may in 
TEL: 20. Fiug. 92 18: 03 NO. 012 P. 04/ i1
4
fact discourage investment, equity Participants in
infrastructure projects? And is this In fact in
conflict with the Government's -agreed agenda that
these projects are in the national Interest?
PM: I don't think so. I think one has Just got to makce
decisions about these sorts of devices before they
start running. I think that is exactly what we have
done now, to think about all of the regulatory
structure we have established for companies. ' There
is no real point in letting people get their way
around that, all in the meaning of development. We
have given Australians, anyone who wants to invest
in this country, a choice of instruments, either as
sole traders or as single investors, or as trusts,
or as partnerships, or as companies. In many
countries of course equity is taxed twice, companies
are taxed twice, a tax at the compony level and the
distribution of their dividends are taxed as income.
This is not so in Australia. With dividend
imputation, largely we tax company income once. So
therefore there is complete neutrality between the
of companies as a vehicle and these other
things. Now the States to try to, I think, drag some revenue
their way have tried to interest investors in
setting up as limited partnerships, and the
attraction for many people is it means they walk
around in a regulatory structure which we have for
companies. Now I don't think that we want to
develop another stratum in investment in a way which
permits that to happen. That is, the mature thing
to do is to basically keep the company structure
such that all the cheques and balances we have now
developed, often learning lessons painfully, some of
the ' 80s lessons, mean that we should keep that
company structure in place. Before these things
start running away on us now is the time to act, and
I think we have.
Q: As a large section of the older unemploy d are
retrenched people from the finance sector, what area
of retraining do you recommend for these people?
Pm: well if you're a former Treasury officer, come back.
Q: And before you dismiss me, I live in Barton.
PM: Yes, but are you one of ours? Look, we are seeing
rationalisations, we have seen them now really from
the late ' 80s onwards, as the heady days of
financial deregulation and high salaries for all
sorts of people, have bought companies, financial
intermediaries to their knees and they have had to
make adjustments. ' And5 part of that has been in the
business they have been doing and the staff they
have been hiring. I think I can only say that as 
1% Ir* economy grows again more strongly over the
course of this year, and banks start lending again,
and when the financial system starts to work again,
then some of those natural employment opportunities
are going to open up. Now I wouldn't think it would
ever get back to the sort of levels of employment of
the mid to late but again that remains to be
seen. I em not certain where the surfeit of people
from the financial industry should go. But I will
say there is a Commonwealth program for you all
somewhere.
Q: Mr Keating, in the early 1980s you were a very
fervent supporter of a broad based consution-taxthrough
your own option C. Could you please explain
what lead you to discard a policy that you obviously
so strongly believed in?
At Because I couldn't get the wage discounts that
should have come with it. That is, I didn't have a
right any more then anyone else did to blow the
national inflation rate to pieces by manicly
pressing on and adding 5 or 6 or 7 percentage points
to the price system and then letting it drift into
wages. So I tried to use those processes to secure the wage
agreements that would see us accommodate such a
change with decelerating inflation. That was one
reason. The second reason was that the direct tax
system, the income tax system was so severely
hemorrhagi. ng that really most people in the off icial
family gave up on this repair. That is they thought
it was so badly neglected and had so many conceptual
holes that the payment of income tax became entirely
an elective matter. And with support of the then
High Court that many people in the bureaucracy
believed that it wasn't capable of repair. So we
decided that one thing we would do is catch them
when they spend them. That was if it was sl. ipping
through income tax net to tax expenditure and
collect some of it there.
Now when the consumption tax proposal under Option C
was then denied to me for the reasons I just gave
you, we then went and repaired the income tax base
so much so that compliance levels came back up, we
put a capital gains tax into the system, fringe
benefits, all these other various devices to tax
income properly. And the end result is we've got
now one of the most secure, complied with tax
systems in the world.
So there was now no point in taxing expenditure.
But to go taxing expenditure now, to blow the
inflation rate back into double digits from the low
2 per cent we have after 20 years of wearing the
blight of inflation,* to., do it Simply in the name of 
TEL: 20. Aug .92 18: 03 No .012
6
some ideology with no prospect Of wage discounts,
but worse believing and selling it as a cure eli to
all the nation's problems, not just a simple tax
switch which Option C was, but selling it as come
sort of elixir or remedy is, of course, simply naive
and dishonest in the extreme. And that's why now a
switch to expenditure from income is a tenth order
matter, and at this stage this nation has got more
to do with its time and its attention with things
like enterprise bargaining, workplace reform,
training end education and the reel structural
transition issues, it's got more to do than worry
about a dangerous tax shift which will simply blow
the inflation rates to bits.
So if It can't be done with low inflation it
shouldn't be done. And at 15 per cent with poor
compensation for low paid people and a very big
burden as Dr Hewson proposes 15 per cent on all
people to have the proceeds driven by way of a
reduction in payroll tax and excise on petrol. You
understand that cleans the proceeds of the
consumption tax out. The tax cuts don't come from
the consumption tax, they come from cuts in
government spending. The whole of the proceeds of
the consumption tax comes are devoted to the
abolition of pay-roll tax and the reduction of
petrol excise.
So with when you put forward a proposition to
working Australians of low income that they should
have their food taxed, their clothing taxed or their
services taxed so that pay-roll tax should be
abolished but petrol made cheaper, it'. a rotten
deal, a rotten deal, and it's a deal that I think,
Australians in the end won't wear. Now the
Coalition wanted to be different, to propose
something different. What they're really doing is
proposing something extraordinarily dangerous. And
the trouble is even if they know it, they're not
obviously letting on, but they can't but help know
it. The obvious point also is that if someone is on
$ 25,000 a year or $ 30,000, whether we tax their
income or their expenditure is immaterial. They are
one in the same thing because someone on that level
of income has no savings. So whether you tax their
income or their expenditure it is one in the same.
But the person on $ 150,000 a year has savings and
yet you are only taxing their expenditure. So what
you'll see is a huge transfer of wealth from the low
paid to the high paid. And does anyone thinks that
with such a transfer on, they'd all have the support
they are now getting in the labour market for low
inflation, wage restraint,, high profits,
productivity bargaining, productivity increases all
of that will simply be under assault as a 
TEL: 20. Aug. 92 18: 03 No. 012 P. 07/ 1
7
conservative government tries to shift wealth from
the lower orders of the income ranges up to the
higher orders by a very unfair and regressive tax.
And that's why I think it won't wash. And even
properly compensated would be a total extravagance
at this time in our economic history, but
uncompensated it's a piece of barbarism, fiscal
barbarism which I think would be rejected.
0: Prime Minister, if you go back over the Budget
papers for the last four years or so, it appears
that the main objective of monetary 20lic? has
shifted from the current account, or equivalent the
excess domestic demand, to inflation. Was this
shift because the current account actually increased
as interest rates were raised and declined as rates
were eased? Has this experience of the late 1980s
influenced official thinking about the role and
impact of monetary policy following the floating of
the Australian dollar? And finally, if faced by
widening current account deficit in the future, will
the government again raise interest rates to try and
reduce it?
PM: Where did the current account debt come from? It
came from the fact that we were running a balance of
trade deficit, that we couldn't pay for our imports.
The Liberal Party after 30 years of office was so
bereft that it basically left us with a position
where they relied on commodities, and commodities
let us down. Above all, in 1980s we were running a
current account surplus of 6 per cent of GDP, it
was from trade or the absence of it that the current
account debt developed and started to derail rapidly
under an uncompetitive regime, and rose to about 38
per cent of GOP by the middle 1980s. Now it was
that growth in the trade deficit which produced the
current account debt.
At the moment we're now running a strong balance of
trade surplus. In other words, if we were not
dealing with the accumulated debt and the net income
deficit Australia would have made one of the
substantial economic adjustments to a higher level
of exports and import replacement and a better trade
balance. But that's not the position because we've
still got the net income deficit to deal with.
So it means, I think, that we've got to produce more
goods and services. That is that the correct
response for Australia is a supply side response.
That is, we've got to put in more productive plant
and equipment and produce more value added, which
we are doing of course in elaborately transformed
manufactures end all ! sorts of manufactured exports,
as well as in agriculturg, and as well as in
minerals. 
V 4qt~ Ilpow. fte W S~ D,
TEL: V. 20. Aug. 92 18: 03 No .012 P. 08/ 1.
go while monetary policy will always have a role in
demand management of some kind, so too does f iscal
pD9l4cy. But in terms of the current accountT
think Australia has to press on until its Supply
capacity starts to catch up with the net income
deficit. And that's going to take time but that's,
I think, our only course. Because to try and sit on
the place and hold it down, this sort of double
digit unemployment, if that were seen to be the
remedy for the current account deficit, will I think
be a mistake because socially it wouldn't hold and
wouldn't last and it wouldn't deal with the problem
anyway. So I think monetary policy has its role to play,
it's obviously got a role to play in price
stability, it's got a role in demand management anid
again as Bernie Fraser said so eloquently during the
week, it's got to be done with all of the
instruments together. And that's why running a
complex economy is a complex matter where complex
judgements have got to be made, and some simple
resort to some draconian monetary policy to try to
deal with demand and inflation is, of course, only
the view of simpletons, and of course that's exactly
where I put Dr Hewson.
Q; Mr Prime Minister, could you please comment on the
economic performance of New Zealand and your
forecast for New zealand for the current financial
year?
PM: Look, I know that there is a bit of a sport
developing in the media about New Zealand and
frankly it's not a sport I like. I don't like it
and I think it's a great shame that the Liberals
have decided to try to come back to Australia and
push New Zealand down our neck, our throat. But let
me make a couple of points because I have never
accepted, never, that one introduces structural
change like economic change, but not in the
transition with growth and activity.
Now in the 19809 In Australia, we had an enormous
structural transition from an inward looking closed
economy to an outward looking one. We had such
things as the removal of exchange controls, floating
of the exchange rate, the opening up of the
financial system, the reduction in tariffs. But it
was all accommodated with an employment related
policy. That is, with the agreement we had with the
trade unions we sought to run the economy faster and
to turn the proceeds of growth to employment rather
than to see them spill away in a price and wage
round, or worse, not havq that growth at all
believing only that micro-economic or structural 
TEL: 20. AU9.92 18: 03 NO. 012 P. 09/ 1
change should be accommodated at the Cost of higher
levels of unemployment.
I never accepted that view. I never accepted the
Lange/ Douglas view, never. I thought it was an unf-
Labor thing to do and I think it today. And I said
in the House yesterday and it's worth repeating that
when I beca&amp; me Treasurer there were 6 million people
in the Australian labour market, there is now 7.6
million; it's over 25 per cent larger. ina New
Zealand, the labour market today Is exactly the same
size, in fact it is a little smaller than it was in
1983. That is, a decade on it's labour market has
actually fallen or got smaller. The other
Interesting point I think is that we had more growth
in the Australian economy then the 1980a than there
wasn total product in the New Zealand economy. That
Is, more growth in the Australian ecznomy than there
was total GDP in the New Zealand economy. And I
think those two facts speak for themselves. That
Is, a generation were left behind in New Zealand by
a Government that should have devoted itself to them
all in the name of microeconomic change,
microeconomic change which in the end let down those
people. Now it may be that New Zealand is picking
Itself up and growing, and I hope it is, but it is
certainly about time it is, it's a decade too late.
Q: Prime Minister with the forecast to 10.5 per cent
unepl~) Metrate for this financial year, which is
the same as what it was on average for last
financial year, how are you possibly going to win
the next election?
A: Well It makes it difficult for us. I don't think
anyone but a fool would deny that. But the
elections in this country should be decided by the
governments who have been prepared to change
Australia. And this Government took Australia from
a backward frightened economy, inward looking
economy, to an outward aggressive economy where
structural change and change in the nature of our
industrial base became the order of the day. And
those changes continue apace to this very day. And
in the speech i gave you earlier I talked about the
quite revolutionary change in vocational education,
which I was able to announce in an historic
agreement between the Commonwealth and the States to
create a structure to sit beside the universities in
vocational -education, and as well, in the huge
number of places which have been added to our
tertiary capacity in education over the last half a
dozen years.
Those sorts of changes are the things which will
remake Australia. we'should be out there selling
our brains, selling innov ative products, getting a
margin on clever things, not going out there to 
. RUS92 18: 03 No. 1
compete with low cost countries doing basically the
things they are doing In cutting the wages of
Australians whil~ e trying to do it. That's not the
clever thing, that's the dumb thing. That's the
thing that Raewson wants to do, go back to 3 bucks an
hour anid put people on basically low wages, to
produce products we should be long out of, rather
than go into the products which require education,
and which require research and development,. and
product innovation. They are the things we need.
This Government has been the Government which has
given Australia an open market economy. It maybe a
great irony that it took a Labor Government to give
Australia a true open market economy, but in doing
so grafted onto it one of the finest social policies
in the world access to health, access to
education, reformation of the social security
system, reformation of education system, and
occupational superannuation, long term savings in
retirement. It's been basically a social revolution
at the same time accommodated with the opening up in
a modern way of an economy.
They're the things in which the Government will seek
re-election and why shouldn't it seek re-election
and why shouldn't it be re-elected? And as we go on
through the period when that unemployment comes
down, we'll go into the 1990s with a low
inflationary period, historically low levels of
inflation, lower interest rates, a more productive
country, national savings being rationed to the
right places and not the wrong places by the banking
system after having been through the first phase of
deregulation, the learning phase, and where we'll go
with a smart society to do clever things in the
Asia-Pacific.
I mean, that's the vista that Labor holds up. What
does Dr Hewson hold? Basically, it's the Gordon
Gecko view of the world, greed is good, survival of
the fittest, if you're not a millionaire you're a
lay about, if you want health protection go and pay
for it, if you want to put your kids through
university let your old man cough up 15 or
thousand bucks a year to put you through. That's
his view. That's why I don't think he is going to
win.
0: if I can just follow up, does that mean you think
you can win the election with 10 per cent
unemployment?
PM: Of course I do, of course I do. Why would I waste
my time on some of you jokers if I didn't?
Q: Mr Keating, lastinight I listened quite attentively
to Mr Dawkins explain the need for Australia to 
TEL: 20. AUg. 92 18: 03 No. 012 P-11/ 1
develop our manufacturing Industris Could you
please explinto me how an extra $ 335 million of
local government expenditure will assist our
manufacturing industries rather than just
contributing to the number of council workers I see
propped up by shovels?
PM: That's not a very clever question, I've got to say,
not a very clever question.-So If you're looking
for marks I'd reward you low marks. Now let me give
you the answer. Unlike you, there are people out
there unemployed. And they're unemployed through no
fault of their own, they've been denied the
opportunity society can offer them. And one of the
great tragedies of unemployment is that people lose
their melt esteem, and they think society doesn't
want them and that they are of no use. And they get
locked out of doing some of the very useful things
the rest of us can do with the right of keeping
their self esteem up. And as well an that they lose
the opportunity to go and take on full time
employment, because as they are more stigmatised by
unemployment their opportunities wane. That's why
labour market programs, exist around the world.
That' 1s why we'll put 400,000 people through the
Commonwealth's labour market programs this year.
And that's why $ 345 million to regional areas of
Australia, which is particularly hard hit by
unemployment, will be a useful thing to do, to give
those people work experience, and also to do work on
projects for which there's obviously always a
pressing need in local government, often and
invariably underfunded as it is. it's always
struggling for revenue because rates are the basic
areas of its income &amp; part from direct payments from
the Commonweal. th. And therefore, financial support
for these sorts of projects in local communities is,
I think, important. You made the point about, and
of course need I say necessarily, it means that in
societal terms those people are getting a go and
they might not otherwise, which makes things just
better generally.
Now, you made the point about how are we going to be
a more clever country? The answer is, by doing
clever things. By putting more kids through
university, by getting retention rates up in
schools. I mean, how the Liberals could have ever
thought we could have been a clever country with 3
kids in 10 completing secondary school, God alone
knows. With 7 out of 10 children basically
untrained, how we could have ever been approaching a
very smart country. Those retention rates in
secondary school are now 7 in 10 and they are now
heading for 9 in 10, and the appropriate proportion
of them will go through university, and the balance
of them will now 6~ e picked up in a mature vocational
education system. 
TEL' 20. Rug. 92 18: 03 NO. 012 I?. 12/ I
12
That's how we're going to be producing the sort of
things, and the focus on research and development,
the focus on product inno-vaton, then higher prof its,
the competing exchange rate all are of that enormous
story of exports through the 1980s. We've literally
exported our heads of f through the ' B809 producing,
in many respects, elaborately transformed goods.
And there's no, the link that you make, which is
basically saying look, if they're not producing
something smart forget them, if they're out there
unemployed in Fairfield, in Bankatown where I'm
from, or Western Melbourne or Northern Melbourne,
forget them. That's the view that says you don't
really want a society like this, that you're putting
no premium on social value and no premium on
harmony, and not taking responsibility, but in a
country with large structural change and
particularly where demand is falling, that there's a
responsibility on the Government to deal with
unemployment. That's a responsibility I accept, and
particularly where demand is falling, a
responsibility on the Government to deal with
unemployment. That's a responsibility I accept and
one which I think society accepts. That'. why I
think your link between smart goods and smart
products and 335 million local councils is not a
proper link and not an appropriate link and one
which I think would be a great mistake for
Australians to believe should be made.
Q: We've seen a lot of deregulation and rationalisation
in the period of your Government. I wonder if it's
time now for the next step in that, to remove one
layer, or to give Australians the opportunity to
remove one layer from the Government structure
within Australia, move to a two tiered structure,
and possibly to elect you as our first President?
PM: Thank you for the compliment, thank you but no
thanks. Look, can I just say this. It is a fact of
our constitutional life and history that we have
States and local government, and if we were going to
the drawing board Australia would probably be more
appropriately governed regionally. That's not the
case. That's not the case today.
So I think the thing to do is to work cooperatively
as a nation. And the work which we've done with the
States in recent years is, I think, quite profound
in terms of success we've been able to bring in the
last 12 months in such things as a National Rail
Authority, and beefing up the development in
national rail in this country, in the development of
an East Coast Electricity Grid, where we separate
power generation fronfi distribution to create for the
first time a real market for electricity that could
only be done by cooperation between States and the 
TEL: 20. RU9.92 18: 03 No. 012 P. 13/ 1
Commonwealth Government, in the creation of the
National Training Authority where formally the role
of the States in technical and further education
became a dual role between themselves and the
Commonwealth. These sorts of areas of cooperation,
I think, can mean that in Australia, in things like
uniform regulation and uniform standards which we've
now agreed upon, are a good way and I think the only
way to be running Australia.
Now, one ca never be entirely overtaken by with
that bonhomie end give the States taxing powers and
let them split the Commonwealth Budget up and the
rest, because the Commonwealth Government should run
the nation's economy and run fiscal policy. Within
that, though, there's no cause why we can't have a
cooperative structure. And in doing that we have
the best of Australian governments, and the best
coming out of Australian governments and the
Australian people, I think, have been really well
served. Now, what our constitutional history holds in the
future only the young among you will know, but I
don't see it changing radically, not in my political
lifetime. And so the other view is to make the
existing structure work, and I think we're making it
work and I think Australians are getting value from
the relationship between the Commonwealth and the
States.
0: My question relates to something I read recently in
the weekend newspapers, and it relates to your
tastes in music. I think you were quoted that at
times you liked Tom Jones, which I certainly do, but
also opera, but both at full volume. And I wondered
if either one of these or both combined contributed
to your political acumen?
Pm: my political acting?
Q: Acumen.
PM: Acumen?
0Q. Not acting, no.
Pm: We're all actors, I don't resile from that. Well,
it's not a Budget matter, let me say. But I think
if one is passionate about things and in politics,
and in political life, one has to be to do it, then
it's entirely likely one would be passionate about
other things. And one of the things I happen to be
passionate about is music, and I think that at times
when my spirits have flagged, and over the years
that's every now and again, not too often, then the
Resurrection Symphony'I of Mahler's or something
appropriate to the story like that, or even one of 
TEL: 20. Aug. 92 18: 03 No. 012 '. 144.1
Strauss' songs or something of that order, does
revive one's flagging spirits. And if I feel
perhaps a little more uplifted I can actually turn
the clock back to the ' 608 and listen to a bit of
twelve bar blues, a bit of good ' 01 rock In roll and
all that. But I must say that I'm basically on the
classical end of the spectrum these days, even
though I keep the old library at hand.
0: Mr Prime minister, this question will be very simple
because you've virtually answered it earlier in the
evening. Do you think the Australian manufacturers
have the product range and capacity at competitive
prices to meet the rise in demand which will occur
when~ the economy recovers without a blowout in the
balance of payments?
J: Well I think probably in the first instance it
always takes a while to get that full capacity
utilisation levels back, because in any system where
it's running at part capacity it takes a while for
that response, for people to start rehiring people,
and to meet demand, which may in the first instance
be met in some part by Imports. But as we get our
wind back and start to pull full capacity out of the
system, I think that will be less the case. And
there was a lot of capacity installed in the 1980s,
I think people forget this. There was a terrible
lot of capacity installed and it's now not being
fully utilised, it's being seriously underutilised,
and as we build back I think we will find a lot of
domestic demand is satisfied by that. I think it
would also be the case that the investment
environment in the ' 909 will be so good in terms of
inflation, interest rates, the tax system, cost of
capital, depreciation, productivity, labour
relations, and with the highest levels of
profitability going to the traded goods sector of
the economy. That we will see more investment
instilled in plant and equipment, in productive
capacity, when we saw in the ' 806 that some of the
investment went into real estate, construction,
office towers, shopping centres, at cetera. And
given the fact now that the old belief in Australia
that inflation in property has waned substantially,
the next phase in investment, I think, will go into
income producing businesses and into plant and
equipment to add to Capacity.
So, I think there's a lot of capacity there
underutilised that will go up to, always it goes up
to the full hundred per Cent when demand starts to
really pick up in a consolidated way and a sustained
way, and I think then people will see the profit
potential of putting in more capacity and growing
more quickly. Notq you may always have this problem
of capital goods And capital imports, a surge of
capital imports to accommodate more capacity, in the 
and that's of course what we must do, And I Gont
think that'sa ever been a problem carrying capital
goods on the current account providing you're going
to get a return on them down the track.
The only way out of Australia'I5 long term Current
account and indebtedness problems in with
production, and~ pouction is only going to come
from investment and t nly thing therefore to do
is go for it. Get all the conditions Into place to,
and they are coming into place now, as I say low
inflation, low interest rates, a competitive tax
system, big depreciation rates, 150 per cent for
R D for instance which we've just reaffirsed, a
pool of savings through occupational superannuation,
there's a tremendous stack of good points for
Australian investment in the 19909, and they're in
the end all the things which are basically going to
deal with our production problems and imports. And
it's more the pity that we had to end up with a
stock of debt to learn the lesson that you can't
simply do the unclever thing, and let the creativity
of your people fall by the wayside and not invest in
income producing things, things which add value,
believing that only the primary export sector was
our salvation. We've paid a very high price for
that mistaken belief, and with the price paid and
the lesson learned, I think we can now look forward
to much higher levels of production and in the end,
of course, dealing with the current account deficit
at source.
ends 20. Aug. 92 18: 03 No. 012 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE HON P. J. KEATING MP
VISIT BY PRIME MINISTER OF FiJl
The Prime Ministcr of Fiji, the Hon. Sitiveni Rabuka, will visit Australia on 29 August 4
September as a guest of the Government. Prime Minister Rabuka will be accompanied by
Mrs Rabuka, Foreign Minister Bole and officials.
Fiji and Australia have longstanding ties. Fiji is one of our important partners in the South
Pacific and serves as an economic and transportation centre for the region.
I met and held discussions with Prime Minister Rabuka at the recent South Pacific Forum
in Honiara. During the meeting we agreed to resume defence relations between Australia
and Fiji. That move completes normalisation of bilateral relations following Fiji's return
to representative government after elections in May this year.
Prime Minister Rabuka will visit Brisbane, Toowoomba, Sydney and Canberra. He will
have discussions with me and other ministers on bilateral, regional and international issues
of shared concern.
CANBERRA August 1992 .8J -1&amp; AWA IfLt
ARITU 1401 



. J A R LI
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY: APPROX. 6.3OPM
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
THE AGE OF ANGKOR, AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY,
21 AUGUST 1992
The Honourable Lionel Bowen and Mrs Bowen, Mr Pich Kec,
Ministerial Colleagues, Mr and Mrs Hoare, distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I am honoured to be invited to open this exhibition.
It is a very significant exhibition an historic one.
I know what imagination, hard work and persistence have
gone into it.
And part of my duty this evening is to acknowledge the
debt we owe to those who conceived the idea and worked
intensively through the past year to make it a reality.
In particular Mr PichKeo, the Director of the National.
Museum in Phnom Penh.
Mr Keo welcome to Australia; on behalf of the Government
and everyone here, I thank you for your part in this.
Your staff and many others in Cambodia also deserve our
thanks. Mr Hun Sen, I know, gave the project his personal
backing. I look forward to the opportunity to personally deliver
our thanks when I visit Phnomn Penh next month. While I
am there, I hope I will have a chance to visit the
National Museum.
I also want to congratulate Michael Brand,. the curator of
Asian Art here at the Australian National Gallery, both
for his vision and his stamina.
I know that in such things as this there is a long way to
travel between vision and realisation: I know also that
it takes a lot of team work to get there. 1485 
So, for the sake of brevity, I congratulate the people on
the team including the RAAF who took them to Phnom Penh
along with the empty packing crates, and brought them
back with the exhibition.
I must also pay tribute, of course, to my colleague, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Gareth Evans.
Gareth's outstanding contribution to the implementation
of a peace process in Cambodia is well known to everyone
here. His support for this proposal is a measure of his
admiration and affection for Cambodia and its people.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Cambodia, rightly I believe, sees the protection of its
cultural heritage as a vital part of the current
reconstruction. The culture of a people unites them. I always think of
it as a great healer.
And Cambodia has tragic wounds to heal.
Just as a nation's cultural heritage unites its people,
so can cultural exchanges such as this one bring people
of different cultures together.
It is because we want to expand our understanding of
Cambodia and other countries in the region where we live
that Australia seeks to develop cultural, as well as
economic and political, relationships.
Much has changed within a generation: among Australians
today there is an awareness and appreciation of Asian
cultures which was unimaginable twenty years ago.
Travel, migration, trade and communications have played
their parts in bringing us closer together.
So will cultural exchanges and in this context the
Australian National Gallery is to be congratulated for
for its efforts to raise the profile of Asian art in
Australia. There is still a long way to go, but the Australian
Government and its agencies are actively pursuing
programs aimed at heightening the level of mutual
understanding through culture and art.
This, then, is an exhibition of great consequence.
Not only does it comprise magnificent and unique works of
art, but it is the first time these works have left
Cambodia.
1486 
We are delighted that Australia should be the first
country in the world to have that honour.
Yet the significance of the exhibition goes well beyond
that. It strengthens the bond between our two countries,
our two peoples.
Australians have been shocked and saddened by the
terrible crimes and suffering inflicted on the Cambodian
people. This exhibition might be taken as a symbol of our hope
that Cambodians are at last succeeding in their struggle
to regain the opportunity for better lives.
As we admire these works, I think we should also pause
for a moment to recall that the peace process on which
these hopes depend still faces severe difficulties.
Along with many others who are contributing to and
supporting the United Nations presence in Cambodia, the
Australian Government is committed to doing all it can to
help the peace process succeed.
In addition to our significant contribution of military
and civilian personnel to the United Nations Transitional
-Authority in Cambodia, this financial year Australia will
provide approximately 15 million dollars in humanitarian
assistance to Cambodia.
We have much to gain from coming to understand the
societies of Asia and we have much to give.
This evening I am happy to annouce a small contribution
we may be able to make towards the rehabilitation of
cultural life in Cambodia.
In an effort to help preserve the important symbol of
Khmer culture and unity which these works of art
represent, the Australian Government and the Australian
National Gallery have agreed to contribute towards a
public appeal to raise S700,000 for urgently needed
repairs at the National Museum of Cambodia.
To help launch the appeal, which will be run at the
Gallery in the course of the exhibition, the Department
of Administrative Services will provide S250,000 in
technical assistance, the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade will provide S50,000, and the Gallery will
provide $ 25,000.
Our aim is to raise the remaining S375,000 through a
public appeal, with the Government matching public
contributions on a two for one basis. 1487 
I understand that a promising start to the public appeal
has already been made, with Qantas offering to pay the
cost of flying 12 specialists involved in the Museum
project return from Australia to Bangkok.
In addition to this appeal, theAustralianInternational
Development_ Assistance. Bureau has agreed to ' provide
training and development for the staff of the Museum at a
cost of $ 150,000 over two years.
This training will concentrate on developing skills in
the conservation and restoration of stone and bronze
works, as well as photographic exhibits.
Further assistance will also be possible within
Australia's established sponsored training program for
Cambodia which will allow Museum staff to study in
Australia in conjunction with the Gallery.
Ladies and gentlemen
As I said, it is a privilege to be present at this
opening as it is to see these works.
I sincerely hope we are the first among a multitude.
Once again, let me congratulate all those who have worked
so hard to bring this great project to fruition.
It represents, as I have said, a significant moment in
our cultural history.
I wish it every success.
And I hope in years to come it will be seen to symbolise
peace at last in Cambodia.
Thank you.
1488 



TEL: 24. Aug. 92 18: 08 No. 018 P. 01/ 0.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB, 24 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Kcating, is this the first of many regular occurrences in the State election
campaign by you?
PM: Well, there will be many and they will be rcgular, probably, yes.
J: How often to you intcnd on coming here?
PM: Well, I don't know, I havcn't got the itinerary straight out of my pockct, but short
of that it will be a few.
J: Do you bclicve you're an asset In the Victorian election?
PM: Wcll tbc national economy is on the risc, we saw that with the National Accounts
a wcck or so ao. Wc'vc just brought down a Budgct which I think most
Victorians should feel happy with. I mean, wc'rc expanding the public sector at
the moment, wc're expanding spending, we're lifting spending on pensions and
Medicare and jobs, in particular. Our opponcnt, Dr Hewson, wants to cut the
Budget by $ 7 billion, so he will send the rccovery into a flat spin. It would go
down and of course Victorians would hurt as a result.
3: Are you worried about being associated with Victorian Labor, which is historically
unpopular at the moment?
PM: Well rm happy to be here, I can answer that.
I: But do you think the Victorian Labor Party dcscrvcs a full tcrrn in Govcrnmcnt?
PM: Yes I do, of course I do. 
TEL: 24. Aug. 92 18: 08 No .018 P. 102/ C
2
J: The Victorian economy is not going very well at the moment, and the Government
Is rather tarnished. Are you worried that this may have some rub off on your
Image?
PM: The fact of the miatter Is this elction will come and go long before a Federal
election, so I'm pleased to be involvcd. But most particularly pleased to be in
Victoria propagating Labor's message.
3: So this election Is suitably distant from your going to the polls.
PM: No, no. you're seeking to nmake an implication that this will have some sort of
Implication for the Federal election, Well, fpso facto it can't because it's separated.
3: Mr Keating, taxes.
PM: Well, wc're the people who are offering tax cuts in 1995-96 without a
consumption tax, and we went out of our way to make it clear that fiscal policy
could afford thosc tax cuts to be paid. On the other hand, Dr Ilewson can only
provide tax cuts with a consumption tax. We're offering exactly the same tax cuts,
same rate 30 per cent at $ 20,500, no consumption tax. He Is saying 30 per cent
at $ 20,500 with a consumption tax.
J: Well why would the explanation of the withholding tax only become clear today?
PM: No, thc thing is thcsc arc nmcasures which we may not need to adopt, or only somc
thereof. It just depends on how fiscal policy is. But I just make this point,
whatever point fiscal policy may be at in 1995-96, whatCVCr things the
Governmnnay need to do to make fiscal policy tighter in 1995-96. so too does
the Opposition. So, Dr Hcwson has a 10 billion funding task for his tax cuts
which hc says hc'l cut from public spending. You can just imagine how
Commonwealth outlays, particularly in the social arca, will look with a $ 10 billion
Cut, and he's got to ind another couple of billion for the starting point because
whatever is our starting point, would he win an election it would be his starting
point as well. So how is he going to find a couplc of billion?
J: You have told us how you arc going to makc a decision whether the adoptions arc
needed by the time of the election. Is that practical? Surely you won't know that
until 1994 or ' 5 or whatcvcr.
PM: We can make thc details of it clear at any time that suits us. But again, we've
taken a conservativc approach, that is wc want fiscal policy to be tight. Thc
Opposition is urging, also having a tight fiscal policy so if it docsn't like thesc
measures, what measures does it have in its back pocket, that Dr Hewson and
Mr Reith have not told us about, where they will reign in fiscal policy In 1995-96? 
TEL: 24. Aug. 92 18: 08 No. 018 P. 03/(
3
I mean, it's not good enough for them to say look, this is the Government trying to
tighten up the Budget for 1995-96 with tax cuts, and say wc don't have to do it.
Well of coursc they have to do it.
J: How will you be in a position to judge by the time of thc next election whether
you want to keep these options on the table?
PM: Well, look we have thc option of explaining what they would be in the event of us
adopting them.
J: But if It's appropriate to be conservative this year in your forecasting, why not next
year?
PM: Because, well the conservatism is in the fact that wc want what we're making
clear to everybody Is we arc determined to pay thcse tax cuts, that they'll be paid
without a consumption Iax. But at the same we want fiscal policy in good shape,
we want the Budget in good shape. So what we've Contemplated hcre, what we've
flagged here is tidying up basically existing taxes, existing compliance measures.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well, I'm not here to be
3: Are you annoyed about the political advantage the Opposition seems to have
gained in thc post-Budget period particularly over their campaign on secret tax
which have only been explained today?
PM: The thing Is, if it was secret you wouldn't know about it would you? ipso facto if
they were secret you wouldn't know about them. T'hey are not secret because they
arc In the Budgct papers. Now It's not for you to be parroting the Opposition's
mindless phrases. Thicy wcrc written in the last paragraph of onc of the relevant
text from thc Budget, I mean it's been quite clear. But the point about it is this,
people don't senm to understand this point, the consumption tax will equal half the
revenue of thc currcnr income tax half; 15 per cent on food and clothing and
services is actually in terms of revenue half of the current income tax. Dr Hewson
want's to put a tax equal to half of the current income tax into place and at the
samec time still then have to cut $ 10 billion out of social security, health and
education to pay tax cuts. we're doing none of those things, we're saying we can
afford a 30 per cent tax rate, cutting thc middle incomes without a consumption
tax, but we'll need to do a few sensible house keeping things to make it happen.
J: Mr Keating, if you want to keep [ 1isca0lj c ii . ht, does that mean you're prepared
to loosen monetary policy to boost the economy if it looks like it needs boosting?
PM: Well we've been looscning, haven't you noticed? We've been loosening monetary
policy on 13 consccutivc occasions since January 1990. Rates are now, let me 
TEL: 24. Aug. 92 18: 08 No. 018 P. 04/ 0
4
remind you, 5.75 pcr cent for 90 day bills, or haven't you beard? They arm down
from 18.5.
J: Can they go lower?
PM: Here we go, there's one in every group, isn't there. You know, doorstop monctary
policy. OK, wcll if they can I won't be telling you.
J: Why not?
PM: Because you're not entitled to know at a doorstop.
J: Mr Kcating, what chancc do you giveMr'sKinier at winning this election given
the polls?
PM: Well look, I think the alternative with this sort of mindless, ideological, sort of
heartlessness of the current Liberal Party, where nothing matters only but the
market, nothing matters where rich people, other than to allow rich people to
succeed, where we now throw the rights and protection of workers via awards,
holiday pay, sick leave, all the rest, out the door, I think a lot of Victorians will
start to think twice about that sort of policy approach. And given the fact that they
saw Dr Hcwson's rabid, almost frothing, uncontrolled Budgct reply last Thursday
night, which had no substance and was all about idcological rantings, I'm sure a lot
of people arc quite frightened of him. And they ought to be.
ends 



/ g'
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP,
COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB POST-BUDGET LUNCHEON,
MELBOURNE, 24 AUGUST 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much Allan ( McAlister), distinguished members of the Collingwood
Club, supporters, ladies and gentlemen.
Well I was at 4,539 not so long ago, that's where I started, he told mc no ones good
enough to hold number one in Collingwood so I've advanced from 4,539 to 101; 1
regard that as a real complement indeed. Thanks very much Al and can I say that it
is nice to be associated with Melbourne again and to be sharing the table, not just
with Allan by with my colleague and friend, the Premier Joan Kirner.
Ladies and gentlemen, Allan just mentioned Tony saying now he knows what it's
like to be a beetle, I spend my time these days between football clubs; Canterbury-
Bankstown in Sydney and Collingwood in Melbourne and I was up in Cantcrbury-
Bankstown last week launching a biography of another tough little player, captain
Terry Lamb, captain of the Canterbury-Bankstown side and at the end of the
biography, the biographer who wrote the book said put a question to him, he said
how would you like to be remembered? He's a little short guy about 5" 5 and he
said tough as nails he said, how would you like to be remembered Terry? He said
tall. And they said you're a streaky, long lank, what were you doing in rugby
league? I said I was on the wing, they said well why didn't you continuc in the
league? I said well I wanted to do something tougher, so I joined the ALP. And
here I am.
1 / 10" d V700" ON' 17 V 6 6nu-s -13 
And that's why I suppose I like the organisations which have a great sense of
tradition and particularly in the clubs who involve their players and also involve
their supporters. And whether it's Collingwood or Hawthorn or Canterbury-
Bankstown or St George the thing that's common about those sorts of club is it's the
old values of the community, the family and the club that holds the show together
where the players are part of it, where the supporters are considered, Allan was just
talking about the 40,000 at Vic Park on Grand Final night where everybody has a
piece of it and where the values go on from year to year and are held down. I mean
even though football clubs are apolitical in Victoria, it's well known in the dark
recesses of Collingwood's history it's had associations with Labor figures and to
have a Labor Prime Minister again associated again keeps that traditional value
their, that old link which has been there.
But despite the values the community and the family and the links with the players
and the traditions, the clubs can also be dynamic and modem and innovative and
we can see that with an old club winning the flag with one of the best
managements of any club in the AFL which is innovative as Allan says, he carries
the weight, they cross the four million mark because Collingwood's past the one
million, they fund the clubs 350,000 or something to the other clubs. They can be
innovative and modern and strong and still be traditional. So they're held together
by tradition and strong values and the same can be said of successful countries.
That is at the end of the decade of the ' 80s, the decade which finished off
monetarism and finished off communism, where we had those two competing
ideologies dead in the water, in the case of one after 70 years and the case of the
other after about 15 or
What we've seen emerge as a successful model, world wide around the world are
the social democracies and just a couple of weeks ago I had a breakfast with
Michel Rocard who was a former President of France and the likely contender for
the French presidency from the Left of politics after Mitterrand. a moderate person
from the Social Democratic Party of France and he was talking about the success
today, the complexities of running a modern society and the clear role for
Government that there has to be in government being involved in making a society
tick, no eschewing a role for government suggesting that there's some sort of pure
market approach where private initiative and private reward is all that needs to be
there to make a society to tick. But one where there's a happy mix between
efficient economies and at the same time a comprehensive social policy married to
it and this is the role of the Social Democratic Parties which are now I think,
becoming clear in a way the model in this sort of post-monetarist, post-communist
era and where people arc brought in and are made to become part or \\ wihai
TT/ ZO'd VOO* ONVO: VT Z6' 6nUSG:-131 
happening in the nation where it works at its best where we're not wasting talent
and where we can see people really feel as though they are part of the whole thing.
I think rather than to speak about the Budg~ et directly and I will in some respects, I
just thought I'd address these values, that is that ideology today is a luxury. The
difficult thing in any society today is gctting that economic growth, getting the
employment and at the same time distributing the wealth. We've always
distributed the wealth in western societies through employment, by and large
through employment. But we're coming to a period where as we are now an
external ly orientated country the focus is on eroductivi1X and it's on efficiency and
that means producing more output for fewer people. A given level of output is
produced by a smaller workforce and if that doesn't mean a pcrmanenft pool of
unemployment, it must mean more output because if we are going to be producing
a greater lcvel of output with fewer peoplc, how are we then to take the people up?
How are we to hold a society together, to not develop for the first time in our
history an underclass of people who are not wanted by society. How do we keep
them in? And the answer is by just growing the thing faster. But how do you grow
it faster and not have wages spill over into inflation, demand spill ovcr into
imports, all the other problems which come with high growth and these are the
complex things that we have to deal with.
This morning I had the pleasure of presenting the -Best -Practice Awards which
were recommended by a Committee set up under a Commonwcalth program
chaired by the Managing Director of BHIP and in there we saw a stack of
companies Toyota, Du Pont, BlIP ct cetera presented with awards for introducing
best practice into divisions, into their companies in general, in divisions of their
companies. And you could see these people all wading through how to produce
and efficient business, how to gct the right investment in the right place, how to
reduce your costs, how to improve the management structure, how to make it
leaner, more efficient, how to get hetter work practices, how to relate to the
employees. Nearly cvcry company that was there had the shop steward or the
union person from the division reprcsented with them today and you can sce that
co-operation moving, the efficicncies growing as thosc companies, many of which
now actually have divisions around thc world, are bringing best practice from their
overseas subsidiarics back into Australia to benchmark against for the way in
which their Australian division operate% or the companies that are wvell and now the
international leadcrs. We've got a couple there today who are international leaders;
one a maker of spectacle optics which is actually the world leader so who does it
benchmark against but itself? But all this sort of quest for efficiency which is what
it has to be about for a country trying to build a new position for itself in the world
as a tradcr of manufactures and a trader of services, the Sheraton Hotel for instance
TT/ MOd V700ON I VO: LT Z6' 6nb&amp; SZ :-131 
was presented the same because they are trading a service and in their hotels they
picked up a Best Practice Award.
So it's a case of trying to do these things so societal advance in the era of mi -cro
processing, robotics, where so much which was done formcrly by people are now
done -by machinesis going to be complex and it's going to be difficult and there's
going to be no one simple solution. Yet the notion that some ideology whether it
be Adam Smith or whoever, or survival of the fittest, or the market knows best or
some simple solution where government is assured and where we are not together
working as a society as the club works, to the players and to the supporters as we
work to the players in our businesses, to the workers or to the customers or
however it might be, if we're not running as a whole wc are not going to make it.
We're not going to be able to do this by some resort to ideology or some simple
view. We need in this country more output. That means more investment. -How do you
get more investment if you're not competitive? What's the key ingredient in
competitiveness? Basically the inflation rate. How do you keep it? Basically by
co-operation, consensus and agreement. You can't keep it by a draconian money
bank with a flame thrower burning business off the pavement, you can only keep a
low inflation rate by agreement, you can't do it basically by regarding the
workforce as enemies of the management and if that's the view, we certainly won't
make it. If the inflation rate is low, the interest rates will be low, and we've now
got bill rates in this country at 5 and 3/ 4 per cent, that's not all flowed through for
those who borrow, but as time goes by, as those margins come down it will, but
we've already seen lower reductions in rates and we can now go through with
lower interest rates. The same in that investment equation for more out put is
depreciation, you've got to have a tax system that works, a depreciation schedule
which is competitive with the rest in the world. Profits have to be good to spur
investment. How do we get a high profit share good enough to refire investment?
Answer: by national agreement about the division of national income. What
proportion of national income goes to profits? What proportion goes to labour?
And just last week I opencd ncgotiations up with the ACTU where for the first time
in our history, nearly three quarters of all wage settlements in this country in the
coming twelve months will be done by enterprise bargaining, by enterprise
agreements and not by a national wage case where we're seeing another leap in our
maturity so that we can negotiate and bargain our way through. But underlying
that, in the end result is a profit share which is high enough to kick investment over
again. And then of course, we can't do all these things if we don't have the savings. So
what are we going to do0? Be out with the savings bowl in the 1990s when China,
Tt/ t7O* d 17QO* O N17O: VT Z6* 6nU' S-131 
the old Soviet states, India, South America rejoin the world economy and look for
savings to invest in their industries, because no matter how competitive we are, no
matter how low our inflation rate, no matter how great our expectations, if we don't
have the savings we won't be able to develop as quickly as we might otherwiise and
we'ye now put into place through occupational superannuation a savings pool
which will stand Australia in great stead through the 1990s, so that can happen.
And the same with rcsearch and developmcnt, and with education. We're not going
to be able to produce more output and run the current account deficit down and
pick up more employment in an economy where only 3 kids in 10 complete
secondary school. That's as it was in 1983, that's now 7 in 10 this year, it will 9 in
In a few years from now and by now not only reforming tertiary education, but
by now recently reformed technical and further education, a role in the which the
Premier played a leading role producing a new national training authority to do for
vocational education what we've been able to do for tcrtiary education, picking up
the advantage of those higher participation rates will actually produce the kind of
educated workforce that you must have to produce the output in the goads we want
to produce in.
We want to play in the international division of labour which brings wealth to
Australia and that means selling product innovation, it essentially means selling
our brains. We don't want to be playing in the international division of labour in
the countries nearby, I don't want to see Australians compete with Indonesians, in
cities like Surabaya where the wage per week for a scmi-skilled process worker is
$ 7ust a week operating state of the art equipment. We can't compete in those
products and to try and push Australian living standards down to try and make it
compete is the wrong way to go. The thing to do is sell the product they can't make
and that's the product which has the natural advantage of our education system,
because even though we wish these countries well in their development it will take
them 50 years, even if they wish to try to catch up to us in education, research and
development, scientific application, applied research and the sort of things we are
capable of doing.
So it's going to be complex, so today when you see the Du Pont's and the BHP's
and the Toyota's and I was at Ford a couple of weeks ago, climbing up those
efficiency levcls and producing products which are bcnchmarked and proccsses
which arc benchmarkcd around the world, it's all part of an inflation, interest rates
depreciation, profit, savings,_ R&amp; D education equation; it doesn't happen with some
ideology, it's not going to happen with a consumption tax and our opponents are
saying put in a consumption tax,-all that-will hc solved. That is we go from a
simple change from taxing income to expenditure, all of a suddcn thc inflation,
interest rate, depreciation, profits, savings, R&amp; D education equation changes
tOOON'VO: VI Z6* 6nU* S132:-131 
overnight. Well of course it doesn't and we're now on the way to actually make
those changes.
I think many Australians forget how far we've come. In 1983 GiDP in this country
was $ 200 billion, this year it will be $ 430 billion. In 1983 there were 6 million
people employed in the Australian workforce, this year it's 7.6 million, it's over
per cent larger than it was in 1983. We often hear people telling us about New
Zealand and how we should adopt their policies. In 1983 when I became
Treasurer, and compared to now the workforce of New Zealand is actually smaller
than it was in 1983. There are fewer people employed in New Zealand today than
there were in 1983. In Australia there's 26 per cent more people employed than
there was in 1983. We had more growth in the Australian economy in the 1980s
than there is total product in the New Zealand economy, that is we had more
growth in our economy than there is total product in that economy across the
Tasman. That's not to belittle them, it's just to make the point don't deprecate what
we've done, people should not deprecate the great successes that we've had and the
same in manufacturing, it's doubled. Manufacturing exports have tripled, exports
of elaborately transformed manufactures have tripled, manufacturing exports this
year are greater than rural exports or mining exports for the first time in our
history. Services have tripled since 1985.
These arc great changes, all important changes in those milestones along the way
of moving along. Now, we believe in this country you can't produce the sort of
society that gives you those sorts of outcomes where there's access to cducation,
whcre you're producing a workforce which is educated to a high standard, where
there are opportunities for employment, where there is high profits, where there is a
decent basis of our productive wealth without having a safety net in there. That is,
decent social policies as well, access to hospitalisation and medical care, as a right.
Not if you can pay for it, as a right. Acccss to education, If you are a kid from a
poor family but you have got it upstairs and you want to do something with
yourself, you get the right. You don't get the right only if your parents can afford
$ 20,000 a year to pay for a fee paying place in the university.
These arc the sort of policies which will crush off the consensus, that view where
the players and the supportcrs have a role in running the club. Because I think if
the players and supporters think that it is only for the club executives, and for the
Captain and the Coach, and the rest of them arc on the outer then what will happen
is that club will diminish very quickly. And the club of Australia will diminish
very quickly if that h ard-hearted-view -that therc is no place to look after people, a
view which was expressed by my colleague, the Opposition leader, thc other night.
When I said a week ago we have got to lean down and pull thosc who arc weak and
poor behind us, hc said if you lean down you will go back with them, you will end
t700" ON'L70: tT Z6SfluVsz 131 
up mediocre like they are. That's not the view that will hold Australia together.
What will hold Australia together is saying we have an egalitarian spirit in this
country, a spirit of fairniess, a spirit of sharing. Not everyone is going to be equal,
but there is a place for everybody. You can put a roof over your head. If you are
sick you get looked after. If you have got kids they go to school, and opportunities
are going to be there for you.
John Hewso n promised us in his Budget reply the other night, a Hong Kong tax
system. But what he didn't tell us is what you get with it, it is a Hofng K-ong social
security system, a Hong Kong housing system, a Hong Kong health system and the
rest. That's not to deprecate Hong Kong, we should admire the success that colony
has had in changing itself to become one of the tigers in the world.-But the fact is,
I don't want to see people on Australian unemployment benefits on $ 32.00 a week.
I don't want to see Australian pensioners on $ 50.00 a week, as they are in Hong
Kong. And by the way, Hong Kong doesn't have a consumption tax, it's kicking
along without one, I don't want to sec that happen to Australians.
We are, bar a decimal point, the lowest taxed country in the OECD. There is only
a decimal point that separates Australia from Japan as the lowest taxed country in
the OECD. We have now got one of the smallest public sectors in the world, but
one of the best. A rcally efficient public sector that looks after people and so this is
the way I believe that we have got to keep thc social wage together, if you want the
high profit share, you want the low inflation rate, the better levels of productivity,
the social wage has got to be there. Medicare, aged care, child care, occupational
superannuation, access to education, these are all part of the fabric of thc place we
as Australia. And to get that fabric and teat it, and rip it, will produce a social
reaction the likes of which we have not experienced.
And the great gains of the ' 80s, and coming from a closed l ittle frightened economy
to an open aggressive thing that is out in the world trading, that must trade on its
inflation rate, its exchange rate, its competitiveness, its tax system, its profit share
-all of that is put a risk if people take thc view that survival of the fittest, if you are
not a millionaire you arc a layabout, and if the system is not for you a few crumbs
fall of the table, that's for the others. If that's the view then I don't think there is
very much left.
Now, in the Budget we put in a couple of important changes. We spent another
billion over the course of the year onigbs-Now, John HeIwson says they are
ntot-real jobs, -they are jobs that have come -off the public sector. But at atime whcn
privatc investment is down, as it is in the State of Victoria, and where thc Budget
deficit is now $ 13.4 billion, Dr H-ewson is advocating that we should cut it back by
$ 7 billion, 2 per ccrit of GDP. You just imagine what that would do to this State.
TT/ e . O'd V0OOON VO: L7T Z6.-6flt-sz 
What it would do to the recove. y2 it would kill it stone dead to take $ 7 billion out
of those natural stabilising in the Budget. That is, the payment on unemployrpncpt
benefits, the general Commonwealth spending, the loss receipts, and'the spending
on labour market programs. This year those lahour market programs will take 400,
000 people through them. 400, 000 unemployed Australians will get training, and
or a job as a result of those programs. And why wouldn't we take those people who
have been unemployed for six or nine months, get them the training and give them
the job experience, and the Job Start support, wvage subsidy provided to them so
they can go and get that work experience and then go on to keep that job? Why
wouldn't we do it? Why wouldn't we do it when the national economic condition
demands we should do it?
Also we made a substantial change to Medicare. We are going to spend $ 2.6
billion over six years on Medicare to make it easier for public patients to have
access to public hospitals. So that elective surgery, but important elective surgery,
particularly for the elderly like hip replacements and things which are not acute,
but which are vital, but are in a sense elective, can be catered for without long
waiting lists and so that Medicare is working bettcr. Medicare is running at 8 per
cent of-D . it is one of thc most cost efficient health systems in the world. The
American system is running at over twelve per eent of GDP. In thc United States if
you arrive at a hospital door without your blue cross card in your pocket they turn
you away. Even it you have got a cardiac condition, or whatever it might be, if you
don't have the card, out.
That's not Australia, that's not what we are used to. And that's not what we are
going to have.
So, we havc got a big change in there which will mean that Medicare is a universal
system that gives you medical consultations, 85 per cent rebate, no cost if it is a
hulk billing doctor, and better access through the public hospitals of Australia for
public patients. And also utilising the privatc hospital system better, and also a
program in there to look after waiting lists and bctter distribute the demand for
services betwecn hospital by a computer booking systemn and the rest. As well as
that we have got an incecase for pensioners, singles and married, $ 6.00 and 10.00
a fortnight. We have offered fringe benefits to all pensioners, including part
pensioners, which is a mile stone change in the Budget, rent assistance, improving
rent assistance by better targeting it which will affect 70, 000 people who are often
not well off, who are basically in thc lower income orders who are sitting in there,
in our social security system, and who can deal with that support.
Now thcse arc the sorts of things the Budget has cast I think exactly right for the
time, exactly right for the time. That is, we have got the deficit out at a time where
11/ 80' d VOO'ON VOV :. 131 
private spending is down, wc are trying to inject activity, and all the One Nation
spending is starting to come through. Two wecks ago we ordered 3 million tonnes
of rail steel to build that railway line between Melbourne and Adelaide. We
ordered a million concrete sle~ epers, we have announced a $ 2 billion road program,
$ 400 million then last year and Australia is starting to move again. We had 1.6 per
cent economic growth for the year to June and we are forecasting 3 for this current
financial year ending the 30 June 1993, so the economy is starting to move along
again. In fact, we are now moving faster then Western Europe and the United
States. I mean, I think a lot of people don't understand this is a very large, worldwide
recession we arc experiencing, and a colleague of mine came back from the
United States last week and said, in Australia it is not to be compared with the
atmospherics of the United States in the business community and the community in
general. And in Britain, for instance this year, we finished the year to Junc with
1.6 per cent growth, they finished the year to June with -1.5 per cent growth.
T'here economy contracted by 1.5 per cent over the year to June. So, we are
starting to grow and we have got it going.
Now, we had this debate the other wcek, we said that our starting point, we are
proving tax cuts in 1994-94 and 1995-96, but because the receipts fell away this
year our starting point deficit out there is around the order of $ 5 to $ 6 billion, and
we said we will introduce some compliance measures to improve the starting point
deficit if needs be, if in the end as forecasts the starting point is weaker. Dr
Hewson ran round saying Labor has got secret taxes, these wcre taxes which we
revealed in the Budget paper. Nothing secret about them, but were revealed in the
Budget papers. But of course what he didn't say was this, that the income tax of
Australia is $ 49 billion, the revenue for the income tax system is $ 49 billion. He
wants to introduce a consumption tax at $ 27 billion, it is over half the income tax.
It might be 15 per cent on all goods and services, but it is actually 50 per cent plus
of the current income tax. None of that consumption tax revenue is going to be
paid for, is going to pay for the tax cuts. It is spent wholly on the abolition of
payroll tax and cutting cxcise on petrol, and paying for the lost customs duty which
somes from zero tariffs, and abolishing the wholesale sales tax. None of it goes to
tax cuts. He has got tax cuts in there worth $ 13 billion that have got to be paid for
by cuts in Government spending. So, he is going to cut into, into a Budget of
around $ 110 billion, he is going to cut $ 13 billion out of outlays and that is all
going to happen basically in the welfare area, in the social security and health area.
So, wc are going to hop into all of that to give people tip the top end a tax cut and
try and hold the show together, and at the same time his starting point is exactly the
same starting point we are starting with. That is, wcrc he to win the next election,
and we think that is an unlikely prospect, not withstanding our relative positions at
thc moment, the starting point in 1994-95, 1995-96 is still going to bc as we have
it. That is, ahout 1 1/ 4 per ccnt of GDP and deficit. So, not only has he got to find
t00O0N tO: VT7 z&amp; 6nu~ sz 131 
$ 13 billion for tax cuts, but he has also got to find a couple of billion as we have to
find it out there to start with the same strength in fiscal policy from when the tax
cuts are paid. So, hc has got a sort of $ 12 to $ 15 billion Budget cutting task on his
hands which to date has sort of been hushed up in the media, but once that big
consumption tax hits the economy, the inflation rate, the interest rates, and they
start then ripping away at Medicare he is going to abolish that he said, basically
let the Doctors sct there common fee and charge what they like and you can all
privately insure yourselves which will cost you $ 20.00 to $ 30.00 a week at least to
do that when he starts ripping away at money in the education system, and things
like child care and age care, home and community care, the hostel program,
nursing homes, they all get hopped into and we then wheel out the survival of the
fittest ideology and say this is the way forward, people then turn around and say,
listen mate that was a way forward in 1979 when Thatcher was becoming Prime
Minister; that was the way forward before monctarism was discredited in Europe;
that was the way forward before the social values of social democracies around the
world re-established themselves in the late ' 80s and early 1990s.
So that's what I think all this is about. We have introduced a Budget which is about
right for the economy at this time, letting the shock absorber of the Budget take
some of the strain of the economy, until the economy picks up. Still making those
social changes, national training authority, building the rail highway, f&amp; Xing up the
airline system, creating a proper market for electricity down the East Coast of
Australia by separating power generation from distribution. Repairing Medicare,
getting that strength in there into the public hospital access. Getting those higher
participation rates coming through in schools. These are the social advances we in
the Labor Party continue with, because we want you in the business community to
feel as those you are playing for a club whcre everybody matters: where the
players matter, and where the supporters matter, and whether it be the employers or
the employees, whoever it is, they have all got a role in Australia; that this is a
society where we have a role. So, those values of egalitarianism, as I mentioned at
the start, the family valucs, the traditions of the club are important traditions, and
nonc of us in the political system put them asunder without putting society as we
know it, and the mores as we know them, at risk. And that's why this Budget is
very much a traditional Labor Budget. Very much in the groove, very much about
doing the right things now for Australia. And I just hate to think of the State of
Victoria with a federal Budget with $ 6 to $ 7 or $ 8 billion cut out of it. Watching
their recovery then plummet back into a recession and see the then secondary wave
of damage go through the place, and the secondary wave of despair and gloom.
We're getting out of it, the thing to do now is to come out of it, and don't belicve
that there are simple ideological solutions for the complex task of building a new
industrial socicty for ourselves. We can do it, but wc will only do it the hard way.
And that's all those changes we were talking about at the Best Practice Program 
this morning. All those efficiencies things, getting the workforce to work better,
bettcr management, better barmonisation, making it all come together. So, that's
what the Budget is about, it is a scrious attempt, I would like to say to you by
serious people, about seeing Australia through a difficult transition into a very
bright 1990s. A low inflationary environment, with low interest rates, high level
investment, a banking system which has learned its lessons about asset prices and
inflation, a stock of savings, and living in the fastest growing part of the world the
Asia Pacific, with a society all committed to the one goals. So, in the big club, the
club that matters most, Australia, in the Premiership we are after is for the high
income shares around the world in the Asia-Pacific. And not scrabbling down
there in the prelims after a low income share scrabbling with someone else about
the sort of goods we shouldn't bc producing anymore. T7hat's the Australia we want
to produce in, that's why the Budget is simply part of that wholc ethos of playing to
the traditions, the well establishcd traditions of this country.
Thank you
I/ Tld VO000N V'Q: tT Z6' 6flUSZ 3 



/ 74
TRANSCRIPT OF THZ PRIME~ MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATINGt MP
BEST PRACTICZ DEMONSTRATION PROORAH
SHERATON TOWERS, MELBOURNE 24 AUGUST1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: 046 would say that when we have a wall attended mid
morning meeting where award for best practice, with
benchmarking against the world's boat, It is sometbing
which Australian business is pleasad to be in. Because
if there is, I think, any demonstration of the maturity
and coming of age of the now Australian economy, it is
gatherings ouch as this and evonts such as this.
It wasn't that many years ago when worse practice was
rewarded. if you are actually slick at getting into
Canberra, twisting Its arm up its back, getting more
border protection, 8 bit more Bubsidies, bounties, if
you are in the worse preatice program you're regarded as
one of the good slick people around town. Well now of
course those people are discredited and they left us an
industrial museum and it has fallen to the lot of the
new managers of Australia to give us something better.
One of the interesting thi~ ngs in all this is that when
comoanies -do well in Australia and they reach the
lgCal end point of their market share, where they are
only squabbling over half per cents and costing
themselves a lot to do it, the obvious thing to do is to
go and do what you do well somewhere else, go and grab
someone's market share, but not where you are running
against the outer edges of your own possibilities in 8
domestic market like Australia. This has happened of
course, when we removed exchange controls that whole
sort of pent-up, propensity, buoyancy, willingness on
the part of Australian business to get out there and
find other markets where they could do well occurred.
And of course our overeas investment went from about $ 4
billion in 1983 to around $ 65 to $ 70 billion today,
which is * a very large proportion of our international
debt. And It is through the operation of these
companies abroad that people and companies are importing
best practice back into Australia from the international
companies which they bought and operated around the
world. And so, you have got companies automatically
banch-marking between themselves and their foraign
:-31 
subsidiary as to the sort of practice which is being
undertaken, and the of fioiency levels which are the
standards of those businesses, and of course making both
the better for having been together by doing the things
that Australia does best abroad anid doing some of the
things which are done beet abroad and having them
brought back into Australia.
I mean it is all part of growing up. It is all part of
getting out of the cort of crazy restrigtions we had
upon us where you couldn't invest -abroad without some
clerk in the Reserve bank giving you a tick, and of
course most people never bothered. or in the sort of
regulated economy we had, where there was really not the
prem~ ium on eff ici-ency because of people drawing down the
economic red from protection and the other natural
protections which come from the non-traded goods sector
of the economy.
We have decided that we want to be in the leading edge
of the world and not in the rear edge. And that means
that we have to smarten ourselves up acroas the board
with our investment, our research and technology, our
Industrial relations practices, our work practices, our
management practices, our best practices. And so the
beat practice program is, as John said, I think a novel
way, a way in which we require companies who are
involved in it to demonstrate to other companies what
they have been able to do. So it is not just something
in which they have excelled privately, and it remains a
private matter for them, but where they are tharing with
others their success, and their innovation, and their
ingenuity and their willingness to make Australia better
and smarter.
This is, I think, a good program and therefore, it's
part of the fact that to become an international
economic society one hag got to do all these comipl. ex
things. They are not going to be done with single
policies, big bangs or consumption taxes or anything
also, they are going to be done the hard way. That is,
reforming industrial relations quletly, slowly,
sensibly, your management practicP, the way the
business operates, getting down costs, all the things
that go, all the smart things, the complex things which
go into that word efficiency and productivity.
We are going to be 4 more productive country, we are
already. But that word in itaelf implies fewer people
producing a given level of output. And if we don't want
a permanent pool of unemployment in this country we have
got to continue to expand output, so that we take more
people up for that given level of employment to each
unit of output and that means the whole climate has got
to be one which is cast towards beat practice and where
all the bits and pieces ofjjnvestmen, be it the
inflation rate, the interest rate, the taxc eystem, : 131 
depreciation, wages, profits. The rest has got to flow
naturally, as it has.
We have come long way already, in the early 1990e
there were very few manufacturing businesses which one
could speak of as being world claas busineesee. This is
not true today. Fortunately, the success of the whole
change, thet is the whole change, the external
orientation of Australia has changed all that. And the
Government itself likes to think it is pretty good ot
best practice to. We benchmark ourselvee against other
Governments around the world. We are, bar a decimal
point, the lowest taxed Country in the OECD. Japan is
below us by a decimal point. We have got one of the
lowest level of outlays to GDP of the OECD countries,
our public sectOr is one of smallest yet it delve
services of a very high standard. So, in terms of the
macro measures best practice this Government has taken,
beat practice on international Government scale on, as
seriously as I know many of you have on a commercial
scale. And we are continuing to make tremiendous changes
in the sort of regulatory regimes for which we ore
responsible, which will help invest practice to in
things like aviation, telecommunications, where we are
awfully good In the world league, banking and finance,
and in things like industrial relations, enterprise
bargaining, where we have really presided now over a
revolution in wage fixation in the last decade, where we
have seen more wage flexibility than perhaps any
comparable country, where the profit share in high, and
whether inflation unit labour costs are low, where
inflation is low, and now we are having this big shift
to enterprise agreements, enterprise bargaining, where
we have now got twice as many people in Australia
working under enterprise agreements, as for instance,
there are in New Zealand under employment contracts,
which we hear so much about, there are twice * s many
Australians working under enterprise agreements all
ready, and just last week Peter Cook and I have opened
discussions with the ACTU in a wa @ e effj. where now 2/ 3
to 3/ 4 of all Australians will have their wages adjusted
under enterprise bargaining and not under a centralised
wacqe fixina system, not under a national wage ease.
These are all I think significant things in this whole
quest for best practice and the same with training, retraining,
skilling, and we saw recently at the youth
meeting the announcement I was able to make of an
agreement with the Commonwealth and the States to put
together a new national vocational education system. I
mean it won't be too many years before we are up there
with best practices, as we already nra, with best
practice in relation to the tertiary sector, the
proportion of our kids going into tertiary institutionfs.
So, whether it be in shipping where we have achieved
crew levels comparable with other OECD countries, or in
the waterfront where we have Just doubled productivity,
0O/ 0" d 800ON' 2: 9T Z6'" nuBp7 : 131 
or In electricity where we ate now starting to create a
market for the first time by separating power generation
from distribution, or in railways where we are
developing a flew national freight highway, rail highway,
under an enterprise agreement. Again, where best
practica is going to be the focus. So, we have taken it
on and of course no more particularly than in the public
service, Peter ( Cook),, started nagotitationB a week or
two ago with the Public Service Union in relation to an
enterprise agreem~ ent, industrial agreement, enterprise
bargaining in the public service where we are seeking to
yield productivity gains, further productivity gains
from our own employees, in our own service. Just as you
are, those of you In the beat practice program in your
own companies.
So, this is in a sense this day isn't just another
manifestation, but an important manilfestation, of people
reaching for those high points, those pinnacles of
achievement which must be the norm for an economy in a
country that wants to do wel. l, that wants to employ its
people, want@ to have rising living standards, not
declining living standards, risling wages not declining
wages, rising profits not declining profits, all these
things one must do and we all know one must do to be in
the international league, and climb that international
league table of efficiency. So, I congratulate all
those associated with the program, from John Down who
has chaired it, and to those companies who have been
Interested enough to apply, and who have signed the
contractual arrangements with the Commonwealth to
demonatrate their best practice and who have received
Commonwealth financial assistance In so doing. But are
whom, on nearly all occasions, the companies themselves
spent much greater level of funding then that which is
paid to them by the Commonwealth.
I congratulate you, all of you, for being in it, for
trying. This Is what Australia must be about. This is
how the clever country becomes more clever, how we
become a smart sooiety doing the clever things well.
Thank you very much.
t7n./ t7rflA AOON2gi9 7--n-z: 73 



zo
PRIME MINISTERj
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
Not for the first time, John Howard has hijacked the
Opposition'a immlgration olicy and called for an intake
" dromatically lower" than both the Government's target and
the Coolition'a.
The Coalition wants 50,000 70,000 nett. Mr Howard wants
next to none if that is what " a virtual moratorium" can be
taken to mean.
The Opposition has a spokesman on immigration and ethnic
affairs, but it is 3ohn Howard who does the talking.
I
And there are signs that neither his tone nor his obsessiOns
have changed much since his notorious outbursts as Liberal
Party leader in the eighties.
While Mr Howard and Dr Hewson cannot agree over the migrant
intake figure each believes to be appropriate, they seem to
be more united in their aversion to multiculturaliam.
John Howard made his position clear a few years ago.
Dr Hewson is firmly on the record since his extraordinary
outburst at the State Conference of the Liberal Party of
Western Australia on July 25 this year.
He said then that multiculturalism was " absolutely a
fundamental mistake in this country."
He said: " We are a multicultural society yes. But we
should never have multlculturalisrm." In his view
multiculturaliem amounts to nothing more then the
" elevation" of people he describes as " a few professional
ethnics..." This is Dr Mewson's view of one of Australia's great social
achievements a peaceful and cohesive multicultural
society. It reflects his loathing not only of the goals of fairness
and equity at the centre of multicultural policy, but his
deep disdain for ethnic community leeders. 
2
In a world torn * part by ethnic divioions it seems
extraordinary to mount such an attack on what is surely an
enviable hustgalian evooees.
I note that the Oppoestion's official spokesman on
Immigrrtion matters, Mr RuddocX, is trying now to
reconstruct Dr Hewsur'e remarks to make them more socially
p'tlatable. The fact le that with Dr Hewson dealding multiculturalism,
despite Its manifest BCi1 and economic advaitages, and Mr
Howard weighing In with hMv own obsessive and regressive
views on immigraLion, Mr RuCOock has nowhere to turn.
Australians should be Aware of the threat to the harmony and
cohesion of their avuiety in the attitudes Of Dr Hewson and
Mr loward.
SYDNEY August, 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY APPROX 8: 00 PM
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
TO THE OLYMPIC TEAM DINNER SHERATON WENTWORTH, SYDNEY,
AUGUST 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
An honour to be here In such illustrious company -the
most successful Australian Olympic team-in thirty years.
Twenty seven medals. Fifty two medallists.
Any number of personal bests. High rankings in events
where Australians have never before excelled.
A performance which gives us grounds to believe that
we're entering another golden age of Australian sportand
the performance of the Rugby Union side In Capetown,
and the cricket team in Sri Lanka is further evidence.
I have to say that in those two cases, as in Barcelona,
there was some thing more than winning attachedto the_
per forman~ ce.
There was character.
In the last two months Australia's sportsmen and women
have been outstanding ambassadors for their country.
There have been ample measures of both brilliance and
grit. A terrific sense of purpose and, awareness of what the
spirit of sport is all about.
It's a truism that Australians love their sport.
. In fact-I think-it goes further then -that I think
Australians see in sport the things they value.
Like courage, comradeship competition. Winning.
We value winning when Kieran Perkins swam that
magnificent 1500 metres, Kathy watt, Matt Ryan, Clint
Robinson, the Equestrian Team, the Double Sculls, the
Qarsome Foursome when they won, Australians won too. 
4:. rHU9 1( b NO. 01 P .02/
2
We shared their triumph.
All thos e medallists did us 8 bit of good.
So did some of those terrific fourths like Michael
Murphy. And so did a lot of other great performances, including
some desperately unlucky ones like David Green's.
The point is, I think, that it is not the winning which
really moves us.
It beats losing, there's no doubt.
But what really moves us I think is the kelieñ that the
athlete embodies.
The belief we know you had to have to go so far.
We are moved by your faith in yourselves.
Your spirit.
The fact that you are Australian and you have this spirit
this world-conquering spirit moves us.
it's why we honour you tonight.
You have been great ambassadors. You have done us proud.
More than that, you have set us an example.
You remind us of the spirit in this country that made
it a great country, that will assure our future.
So I know I Bpeak for all Australians when I congratulate
you and thank you, and wish you the very best of luck
in everything you do.
SYDNEY AUGUST 1992 



STEL: 25. Rug. 92 17: 42 No. 016 P. 01/(
3 7
PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TfRANSCR1PT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J.
KEATING, MP DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, POWERHOUSE MUSEUM, SYDNEY,
AUGUST 1992
Q: We're having a bit of problems here trying to understand
how Chineae boat people are getting into AuStrala and it
Seems Auutralian journalists have a better Intelligence
service then Foreign Affairs and the Indons. Can you explain
that a bit more?
PM: Well I don't know. I think obviously we have a widely
spread news service that is going to pick up information in
other countries and that may reach here before local
Surveillanco produces these things.
Q: Mr Keating, are you concerned about the level of the
Australian dollar?
PM; I'm not out here for a comment about that, one of you
saold something about the Liberal's immigration policy.
Q: Are you happy with the immigration level or would you
like to see a out?
PM: We think that the immigration program's important. We
think that in reducing the level in recent years to around
80,000 we have taken account of economic circumstances and
we've appropriately taken account. But I'm very very
ooncerned about the attitude the Liberal Porty has taken. I
think Mr Howard's hijacking of the immigration polloies of
the coalition that is pushing Mr Ruddock to one side and
demanding that the intake be cut is I think confirming the
general contempt that Dr newson holds for the ethnic
communities In this country. That is he says
multioulturaleim is a mistake. He thinks, Mr Howard thinks
that the intake should bo out dramatically. Wlhat they're
saying, not even subtly, Is that they don't believe in the
migration program, they think multioulturalism is a mistake,
and they basically have nothing but disregard for the ethnic
communitiee.
Q; Why don't you want to talk about the dollar or the
finoncial markets?
PM; ecause I just don't talk to doorstops about the
exchange rate ever, and at doorstops in particular. 
TEL: 2
Q: Prime Minister, on the interest Withholding-tax, is that
definitely on the agenda or Is this Just a toing and froing
because there's a problem with your Budget, Belling it?
PM; Well what is on the agenda is that John Hewson's got a
billion tax hike. That's over half the existing income
tax revenue. Revenue raised is $ 49 billion; he wants to
raise nearly $ 30 billion from a consumption tax. We'll give
the Australian people a thirty per cent tax rate without a
consumption tax, and we'll do It from a strong fiscal
policy. The things we announoed last week are basically to
keep the tone on fiscal policy. Now he's got exactly the
same problem. You understand if fiscal policy in 95-6 is
difficult for us, It would be similarly, were he to be in
office, difficult for him. So it We've got to 90y where
we're goiig to raise two billion, so to must he. He must
voy how he would make fiscal policy more receptive to the
tax cuts, that is more able to carry the tax cuts. Aud so
the responsibility is for him not to keep secret his 9genda
for tightening fiscal policy in 95-6, but most particularly
to tell us how in the hell ho' going to fund $ 13 billion
worth of tax outs when all the consumption tax money's spent
on payroll tox and petrol.
ENDS 25. Pug. 92 17: 42 No. 016 P. 02/( 



TEL: 26. Au9.92 13: 20 No. 009 P. 01/ 04
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
MP, lAUNCH OF P40 KITI'YHAWK PUBLIC DISPLAY, AUSTRALIAN WAR
MEMORIAL, CANBERRA, 26 AUGUST 1992
( Additions to prepared text)
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Ladies and gentlemen.
I think you will know that I am keen to see that the story of World War II, and in
particular the Pacific War, is told to Australians with thc same intensity and understanding
that characterised our telling of the legends of Gallipoli, France and Palestine.
For this reason I hope that we will be able to find the means of helping the Memorial
develop its Pacific War Galleyj.
And as Dame Beryl said, they arc now allocating $ 150,000 a year to the collection. And I
don't think it would unravel the Budget numbers if I were to say to you we'll double that. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF P40 KITTYHAWK PUBLIC DISPLAY, AUSTRALIAN WAR
MEMORIAL, CANBERRA 26 AUGUST
Dame Beryl Beaurepaire and members of the Council of the
Australian War Memorial, my Cabinet Colleague Ben
Humphreys and other parliamentary colleagues, veterans of
the Milne Bay campaign, representatives of the veterans
organisations, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you, Dame Beryl, for your warm welcome.
I am a great admirer of the Australian War Memorial it
is one of the great public institutions of Australia.
I'm very pleased that my first official function here
should take place on such an important anniversary, and
that I should be celebrating with you a marvellous
addition to the national collection.
There is a great romance attached to the Kittyhawk.
World War II invested them with certain almost humancharacteristics.
They were sturdy, reliable fighters.
Brave planes.
They earned that reputation in a number of theatres,
Milne Bay among them.
The one we are about to inspect is a pedigreed
representative of the breed it has a substantial and
documented history of service with the RAAF, including
service in the Battle of Milne Bay.
It was flown at Milne Bay by puster Brow who is with us
today. Later it was flown in New Guinea by-Wilf Arthur
whose exploits in it-earned him the DFC. Mr Arthur is
also here today.
This plane will put visitors in touch with one of
Australia's most important battles a battle which truly
helped to turn the tide against the Japanese advance and
secure victory in the battle for Australia.
All nations commemorate their war dead. But the
Australian War Memorial commemorates them quite uniquely.
1576 it
jrw
J% 
Here are recorded the names of all servicemen and women
who gave their lives for Australia.
To walk in the Memorial's courtyard is a sombre
experience yet it is one that I think every Australian
should make.
It is not an easy thing to comprehend the meaning of war
in Australia's history.
This Memorial testifies to enormous sacrifice. It also
testifies to a great tragedy.
It reminds us both of heroism and incredible folly.
There are 60,00 names on the first World War roll.
That is 60,000 young men and women who gave their lives.
But we can only begin to comprehend the loss to a young
nation when we know that they come from a force of just
300,000 and a population of just over 4 million.
The calamity of World War I can never be measured, but I
know that from its inception, and the great efforts of
its founders, Charles Bean and John Treloar, the
Australian War Memorial has helped us get it in
perspective. There is more than a list of names here.
The Memorial holds records which allow us to see these
young men and women in a personal light with the same
aspirations and hopes that we all share; with a love of
country from which we all can learn; with a hope for the
future that was denied to them, but which we have a duty
and a reason to maintain.
The Memorial contains the story of Australia at war the
story of the campaigns themselves, so vividly portrayed
in the galleries.
There are soldiers' uniforms here still encrusted with
the mud of the battlefields of France, still speaking to
us of the terrible winters that the first AIF endured.
The Museum also contains, I understand, such icons of the
national story as the boats used at Gallipoli to ferry
Australian troops ashore.
I gather that these boats and other large objects will
soon be accessible to the public at the storage and
display facility at Mitchell, for which, I am pleased to
say, funding was provided in the Budget.
I intend to see them one day. 1577 
3
This is truly a people's memorial.
Yet I think it can be reasonably said that the Australian
War Memorial bore the marks of its origins a Memorial
to the men and women of 1914-18 and there was not
sufficient attention paid to the Second World War and
subsequent wars.
It was not until 1971 that extensions were completed to
allow the Memorial to tell the story of those who served
in World War II.
I realise that because space had been limited for so long
there was not the same urgency in collecting as there had
been during and after World War I.
Ladies and gentlemen
I think you will know that I am keen to see that the
story of World War II, and in particular the Pacific War,
is told to Australians with the same intensity and
understanding that characterised our telling of the
legends of Gallipoli, France and Palestine.
For this reason I hope that we will be able to find the
means of helping the Memorial develop its Pacific War
Gallery. The 50th Anniversary of the key battles and campaigns of
the Pacific War has given us an opportunity to remind
Australians of the risk the nation faced in 1942, and the
debt they owe those men and women who defended it and I
mean both on the battlefield and of f it.
At Darwin and in New Guinea, Australians lost their lives
turning back the enemy.
The crucial battles of the Coral Sea and Midway, and of
Milne Bay and Kokoda made sure that Australia would not
be isolated and defenceless, but rather the crucial base
from which the Allies would drive back the Japanese.
Already this year it has been my privilege to take part
in ceremonies commemorating the battles at Darwin, the
Coral Sea, Kokoda and other places in New Guinea.
I count my visits to the memorials to Australian soldiers
in these places among the most moving experiences of my
public life.
I had hoped to visit Milne Bay but this proved to be
impossible it seems I would I have needed a Kittyhawk
to get there.
Milne Bay is perhaps the most significant battle of all.
1578 
Here, a combined operation of the three Australian
services resisted and repelled a powerful Japanese force,
inflicting on the Japanese army its first defeat on land
since Pearl Harbour.
The battle played a major part in thwarting Japanese
attempts to take Port Moresby.
Yet despite its importance in the defence of Australia,
despite the bravery and skill and sacrifice of the
Australians who fought there, it is a battle of which few
Australians have any knowledge.
The acquisition of this aircraft and the modest display
associated with it along with the dedication of the
Memorial's staff led by Brendan Kelson and Michael
McKernan will no doubt help to enlarge our
understanding of the Battle of Milne Bay, and through it
the battle for Australia.
It will also reclaim for those who fought there some of
the recognition they richly deserve.
Those of you who served and are present with us today may
not seek this honour, but it is yours.
Australia owes you a debt of gratitude. It owes those who
fell there a debt that can never be repaid.
I think we should all be grateful to the Memorial for
having the vision and the will to significantly improve
the way the story of Milne Bay will be told.
The experience of war lives on to haunt generations of
Australians who did not themselves take part. I know
this from my own family's experience.
By telling the story and paying due tribute, the
Australian War Memorial has played an indispensable role
in helping those who came after to understand.
In its way it makes us all part of the story, and that is
an essential comfort to any nation.
The Memorial has done Australia a great service.
So, Dame Beryl, I congratulate you, the Council and the
Staff. This aeroplane will help tell the story of the defence of
Australia in 1942.
It will remind us of the debt we owe to those who fought
and died.
And it will ensure that their names will live forever.
Thank you all for coming. 1 57 9 



TEL: 26. Aug. 92 13: 31 No. 013 P
1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF TIHE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, 26 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Given the AS situation at the moment, is there any need to change interest rates?
PM: The markets arc big enough and ugly enough to look after themselves. But I think
it's incumbent upon a few of you people in the media to reflect upon other things.
That is, what we've just seen there is one of the symbols of Australia at war, a war
which was entirely material in changing the course of Australia's history. And the
media has got a long term remit as well as the very day to day rcmit in reflecting
upon thesc things, the things that make up the nation and not just to be dismissed
in the daily hurly burly of picasing your producers or your news directors.
J: But the markets don't. Just how long can the Reserve keep propping up the dollar?
PM: Well obviously what I've just said has made no impact on you whatsoever. It's
gone straight over the shoulder, hasn't it?
J: Aren't wc fighting another sort of war though, at the moment a sort of financial
war to kccp our end up?
PM: Oh, I doubt it, I doubt it, I doubt it.
J: So you are confident that you won't have to take action on interest rates?
PM: Wcll the markets arc, as I said, big enough and ugly enough to look after
themselves.
J: And how long will the Reserve stay there propping up the dollar?
PM: Wcll, you know, I've got nothing more to say about that than that.
J: Should the gold pass system be modified to stop rorts? 
TEL: 26. Aug. 92 13: 31 No. 013 P. 04/
21
PM: I don't know. Look, nothing of MPs entitlemecnts should evcr be abused,
obviously. But to say that says it all. I mean it's not an issue of major national
momcnl, is it?
3: And is it being abused?
PM: Well, I haven't seen the report.
J: Will you be spending any time in Queensland hclping out Waync Goss in the
campaign?
PM: Well, as I go there in the normal course of my duties, yes.
ends 



TEL 13: 20 No. 009026. Rug. 92
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF P40 KIITYIIAWK PUBLIC DISPLAY, AUSTRALIAN WAR
MEMORIAL,, CANBERRA, 26 AUGUST 1992
UNVEILING CEREMONY
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Dame Beryl.
Well there are lots of symbols of any battle and there are many symbols of the battle for
Australia at Miluc Bay. But the Kittyhawk is a famous symbol and it's a great tribute to
the Memorial that you've been able to procure and secure this Kittyhawk and restore it,
one that's had its own associations with the battle and which will pay tributc to those who
flew Kittyhawks, and to the machine itself and its role in the Milne Bay campaign.
In the Battle for Milne Bay we really celebrate and remember the most highly successful
land battle in the battle for Australia. Because no doubt we have remembered, as we have
now, for most of this century those who served and the battles in the First World War. But
Austrabia was not threatened in the First World War, only in the Second World War, and
in the battle for Australia, a battle for the liberty of the people of this country, those who
served in Milne Bay should be appropriately remembered.
And the Memorial in bringing back, in recreating parts of the Pacific campaign in the
gallery behind us, and now with the Kittyhawk, serves the memory of those who fought
for Australia in the Second World War well, and balances up the presentation of the
Memorial and the remembrance of the First World War with the Second World War.
So it's a great pleasure for me to be here with those who actually flew this plane, and an
even greater pleasure to be asked to launch the exhibition, the exhibit of this famous
Kittyhawk. Thank you. P. .02/ 04 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
FAREWELL RECEPTION FOR PROFESSOR SLATYER
26 AUGUST 1992
Professor and Mrs Slatyer, Ministerial Colleagues,
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you all for joining Annita and myself tonight, to
farewell Ralph Slatyer and afford him the recognition he
deserves as he steps down from the position of Chief
Scientist. I might say that for one so used to being among
practitioners of the dismal science, it's a pleasure to
be among exponents of the real thing.
In fact I've spent a decade attempting to push Australia
in the direction of innovation, manufacturing, creatingmaking
things. Using our brains.
It's always seemed to me that in the end this is the best
measure of how far we have come. How civilised we are.
Both in his role as Chairman of ASTEC from 1982-198.7 and
then as Chief Scientist since 1989, Ralph Slatyer has
been a pivotal figure in providing advice on-cee and
technology matters to the Government.
There have been enormous changes in this period.
Industrial R&amp; D in Australia has had one of the fastest
' rates ofi growth of all OECD countries, and attitudes in
the business community to technology and innovation are
changing rapidly.
The universities are now increasingly involved with the
employers of their students and the users of their
science and technology.
The Government research agencies have developed strong
links with indusiitry and other users of their research.
There is a new spirit of cooperation between researchers,
and with research users.
Ralph Slatyer has been a key player in all of this.
1580 
I might say that the Government itself has been extremely
active. The recently released White Paper on Science and
Technology, called Developing Au~ trali an Id-Cass A
Blupfroinr theI is eience of7 our commitment to
the crucial role which science and technology can and
must play in shaping the future of Australia.
our belief in this was further emphasised by the decision
in the Budget to make the 150 per cent tax concession for
research and development a permanent feature of the tax
system.
So too, the establishment of the Cooperative Research
Centres Program testifies to the Government's
determination to strengthen our science and technology
system and capture its benefits in Australia.
Ralph Slatyer, of course, was involved in the creation of
this program.
He has also established the Prime Minister's Science and
Engineering Council and guided it successfully through
the early years to become a major national forum.
All of his work has been characterised by imagination,
professionalism and pragmatism. He has a flair for
creating mechanisms that work in practice.
At the same time Ralph has made important philosophical
contributions to our thinking on the roles of public and
private institutions in building a technologically
innovative and internationally-oriented Australia.
He has been a capable leader and coordinator.
He has been, first and foremost, an Australian determined
to help his country build its place in the world.
For over twenty years he has given exemplary service to
Australian governments of different political
persuasions. At the national level he has also been a leader in
developing environmental policy and in formulating
practical programs for ecologically sustainable
development. He has managed the not inconsiderable feat of gaining the
respect of both the conservation movement and the major
resource based industries.
At the international level, he was President of two
important intergovernmental environmental programs where
Australia has been influential in determining their
character and effectiveness. 1581 
He was also President of the International Council of
Scientific Unions, as well as being involved in one of
its important non-governmental environmental programs.
To do all this in addition to his full time and part time
commitments in Australia, both to the Government and to
the Australian National University, is remarkable.
Not surprisingly, Ralph has high standing in the science
and technology community. His research career led to his
election at an early age to the Australian Academy of
Science, and then to the Royal Society of London and the
United States National Academy of Sciences.
He is one of a very small number of scientists who have
been elected to both these famous national academies.
In closing let me just say that I have mentioned only
some of the highlights of Ralph Slatyer's distinguished
career and its outstanding value to the government. I
know there is much more to be told.
Ralph, your work has brought great credit to yourself, to
the institutions with which you have been associated, and
to your country.
On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I
congratulate and thank you and extend to you and June
every best wish for the future.
1582 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE HON P J KEATING MP,
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN SIIOVELAN, TIE WORLD TODAY, ABC RADIO
27 AUGUST, 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JS: Prime Minister, thanks for coming on Thc World Today. Despite the Budget, the
Government is continuing to get a lot of bad press. Indced as we just heard, the
Financial Review today is talking about the tide turning in favour of the
conservatives. What's gone wrong? Do you think pcople out there aren't believing
you any more?
PM: Well, I think that's just a bit of press gallery navel gazing. These introspective
pieces come and go frankly, they don't matter that much. I mean, if you look at the
objective evidcnce, in the last week the Government has in fact narrowed in that
poll, I think the Newspoll, the Government has actually narrowed thc lead with the
Opposition.
JS: But overall in terms of polls, you're still about the same distance behind the
conservatives to what you were 12 or 18 months ago.
PM: We're still within shooting distance of a victory. In difficult circums( anccs, but
within shooting distance of a victory.
JS: There has been a bit of a mood swing around the place though. I mean, only last
week In the Parliament you had the Opposition members telling you to sit down.
That's the sort of thing that would never have happened 12 months ago, 2 years
ago, 3 years ago.
PM: No, no, that always happens whenever people are on points of order. It's
happened, I used to do it with Malcolm Fraser, other people are doing it today.
JS: Yes, but they uscn't to dare to do it to you.
90/ TOd-" 000N i: VT 6* 66n ' 2 
PM: Yes they have. I've had people doing it all last year and early this year. When one
doe-sn't sit quickly on a point of ordcr they'll try to claim their rights. I don't think
that's got anything to do if you're trying to read into that some sort of thing..
Look, I was at thc Best Practice Program where we were handing out Best Practice
Awards on Monday in Melbourne for the major Companies, BHP, the likes of DUi
Ponts, Toyota, and thcy wcrc sitting up there at their tables with their employees
from thc unions, and the Chicf Executives were coming up to us and saying, look
Australia is now really on the verge of cracking it in terms of productivity, of
making all the sort of ' 80s changes come good, of seeing it all conmc to fruition.
And, you know, the people who are not onto that sort of play are the people who
don't attend those sort of functions.
JS-Is that the sort of reaction you think people are giving to the Budget?
PM: I think the Budget reaction was pretty good. It was about Ik, it was about
making Medicare stronger, fringe benefits for pensioners, 150 per cent for R&amp; D. I
mcan, that got the big splash for newspapers, the TV that night, the next day. I
mean, having a sort of sub debate in the Canberra columns about taxation doesn't
have the impact, T don't think, in the public debate as the big presentations have.
JS: Isn't there a big view out there in business, and generally in the community, that
the momentum that you hoped that wasq going to be there in the Budget hasn't
eventuated at all, and that those things have obviously impeded that.
PM: I don't think the community and business arc looking for big momentums for
Budgets. The average person who picks up the Daily Telegraph in Sydney on the
train going to work, or the Sydney Morning Hcrald who wants to wrestle with a
broadsheet, reads the Budget front page news, the big broad stuff, see it that night
on television, then it basically has a very short shelf life and flips into history. I
mean, I've done more of these than anyone in Australian politics, so I know more
about Budget reactions and what one cail expect fromn them politically. And we
got as much as we could get.
JS: What about the money markets, the money markets have been particularly skittish.
They seem to have, they certainly don't like the idea of the size of thc deficit and
possibly the effect that that's having on our overall debt levels.
PM: That's what you say, John. I don't think anyone in the markets would say the
reason there's been, as you say skittishness, in markcts is about the Budget deficit.
It's about terms of trade, it's about the US$ taking a battering, it's about the
Bundesbank playing the mindless game of breaking European prosperity in the
sort of quest for sort of German low inflation. That's what it's about.
JS: Aren't they, though, undermining your attempts to try to get the economy going in
the Budget to create jobs by tightenin&amp; monetary policy?
qn/ zn* Aynn* otj zc: yi 7r,-6nH-jz 
PM: We've got the things in place. Monetary policy is not tightening. It's not
tightcning.
JS: But interest rates are rising-
PM: No they're not, it's not tightening. Look, we've got in place now the One Nation
spending coming through. We just ordered 3 million tonncs of rail steel, a million
concrete sleepers. $ 2 billion road programn $ 400 million more than last year.
That's coming through, you've got the Budget spending coming through, you've
got the labour market programs. We are setting the economy up on a growth path
and we will grow as fast as our trading partners in the coming year that's around
3 per cent, and as you know also in the public debate a lot of people think that's
conservative. So that's what wc'rc about, wc'rc about growth and jobs and we're
getting it.
JS: But haven't we seen over the past 3 or 4 days interest rates slowly rising out there
in the market place?
PM: In the long term bond ratcs, on the long yields not the short yields.
JS: Well is there any chance or any danger that they might just flow over into the
housing market?
PM: They go up and down. They were nearly 10 per cent 3 months ago, they dropped
down into low 8s and they're now sort of high 8s. I mean, they shift around. but
the short stuff hasn't shifted around.
JS: So there's no danger in terms of your economic policy that what the markets are
doing out there is undermining your economic policy at all?
PM: No, no. Look, a budgct deficit of 3.3 per cent of GDP with Government debt to
GDP one of the lowest in the OECD, the market would regard that as vcry
acceptable.
JS: Have interest rates hit the bottom of their cycle as far as
PM: T7hat's a matter for judgment. But, basically I've comc on the program to talk
about the Liberal's car policy.
JS: But I couldn't let you come on and talk about that straight away, could I?
PM: Well you could of if you got onto the topic of the day rather than navel gazing
down the corridor here. Ile fact of the matter is, what we saw today was a
revelation for Australians.
IO n/ CnA't AtVON 70. ft1 7A,. 6nwHj7 ,-. IV3 1 
JS: Hang on, what you're talking about is the Opposition's policy to have 0-5 per cent
tariffs by thc cnd of the decade, Now they're telling us that means $ 1000 less per
car for Australians.
PM: It says this, " Libs Tell Car Firms Revamp or Perish", front page of the Australian.
It says this, ' Mr McLachlan says He got a question, ' do you honestly believe
those companies can exist under those circumstances?' ' It's a matter for them to
decide what changes they will need to make to exist'. In other words, we don't
care. We're not saying, this is the Coalition, the Liberal Party, we're not saying we
want a car industry and we'll keep it as Labor is saying. What he is saying is,
basically they can either survive or perish, it's up to them, we're just going to bring
the imports in, we're going to drop the barriers. I mean, that statement should send
shivers through the city of Adelaide, it should send shivers through the city of
Geelong, it should send shivers through the city of Melbourne. Here is the sort of,
what you're seeing here is the sort of primitive capitalist ideal. That is, just rip all
the barriers down and let them go to town. And on the %, cry same page as his
question and answer is a story, " Ford Formalises; Exports to Japan", where Mr
Nasser has just announced another 70,000 engine blocks going from Ford
Australia to Japan, and where McLachlan himself is talking about the. success of
the Labor Government's lxolicies in Il[ olden sending engines to Germany, Ford
selling Capris to the United States and the Verada Wagons which are about to
follow. In other words, the policies which arc working are ours but in the sort of
naive primitive view of T-ewson and McLachlan, they'll just take this industry and
rip it to shreds.
JS: But he is offering things like abolition of pay roll tax etc which he says will add up
to something like a cut in costs of around about $ 1,000 per car. Isn't his big
mistake is that he hasn't solved, some people would say hasn't solved the need for
some kind of revolutionary change?
PM: John, use your brains. Look you take off pay roll tax and go to basically a zero
-tariff on cars with the world with a glut of car production around the world where
they can sell them at marginal cost into Australia, it will just wipe the floor with
the Australian motor vcbicle industry. Dr Hcwson has attacked big business all
this week and last week, he says big business, he accuses thenm of having an
insidious relationship with the government dependent on hand outs. You see his
view is that he hates big business because he doesn't sec thcem as self made, he sees
himself as self made therefore they're to be opposed. Now hc's saying to BliP,
who were at the Be-st Practice Awards the other day, he's saying to Toyota who's
about to build a $ 400 million state of the art plant in Australia, he's saying to Ford
which is now producing the top selling car, I know better than you, like I'm the
sort of refugee from the financial market but I know better than you and the
great success Labor has had in revamping and renovating and remodelling these
industries basically look we'll throw it open to Imports and frankly if you
survive that's really up to you, we couldn't care less.
90/ t70d t700' ON Z2V Z6* 6flU2 :-11331 
JS: Are you sure that the Jack Nassers of this world arc going to say at the next
election that they think that you and you're government should be rececctcd?
PM: Well look, what thcy'vc said, let me just quote some people Mr Johnson from
Toyota said " if he had known fully what the Coalition policy was his company
may not have committed itself to a $ 420 million invcstnient". I'm going to Japan
in a few weeks time, I'm seeing the Chairnian of the Toyota company Mr Toyota.
What do I say to him? T7hat the alternative government of Australia would
basically wreck his investment. Do I repeat what John IHcwson says when he goes
abroad, that he's ashamed of Australia and Australians? That's what he says, I
mean he is grossldy disloyal wherever he goes. He says rm ashamed of Australia,
its lack of productivity, the attitude of Australians, I'm ashamed of them. I mean
do I smy that? Or do I say to him look, we've got a policy which has taken motor
vehicle protection from 150 per cent to 15, we think that you can live with that
level, but if it goes to zero you get wiped out and the alternative government is
going to wipe you out. I mean what do we say? Sec what McLachlan says today
on the front page of the Australian he says " you arc all too motor industry
orientated". The fact is the Motor industry is the base industry of Australian
manufacturing. He says we have no interest in it, if it c-an survive against a flood
of imports dumped from the excess production of thc northern hemisphere at
marginal prices, well go for it fellas. If you can stay there great, but we'rc not
going to make the claim that we want you there as L. abor says. Labor says, I say,
we want a car industry. Hcwson and McLachlan say we don't care.
JS: Just one quick one before you go Mr Keating, what's happened to your proposal to
take to Cabinet about the flag? Is that Finished, is that buried?
PM Well, I mean, everything in its turn and you know, at some point I will. But again,
rm not going to be operated by someone else's agenda. I mean we are at the stage
now in this country where we've got low inflation, low interest rates, where we're
now very competitive, where we've got a revolution going on in ( he labour market)
where all those Best Practice companies are turning out with inte~ rnational
benchmarks, where we're now cxporting our heads off, where we shipping car
engines around the world, fully built up vehiclcs like the Capri to the United
States. This is unheard of, and yet these mindless zealots who for seven years in
office, with Dr Hewson as an adviser, sat there and did nothing about it, there. now
saying look you don't know best, the country is on the verge of blossoming in the
as a low inflation productive environment as it never has before, but we know
better, we'll rip the lot down, there'll be no support for industry what so ever and
basically we'll let the northern hemisphere car makers and manufacturers rip the
guts out of Australia. I mean if you live In Adelaide you ought to be scared stiff
by this thing, I mean Mr McLachlan is a South Australian member he's going to
basically decimate his own state and Dr Hcwson from the sort of lofty vantage
point of Bellevue Hill, Sydney is going to wipe out the city of Geelong and
Broadmcadows and half of Melbournc in a sort of mindless quest for primitive
V~ OOOO* OONN Zi: V1 Z6' 56nUZZ1-13311 
capitalism, a sort of naive view that he has despitc the fact that the whole world
has a different view.
JS: Prime Minister, he must leave it there. Thanks for speaking to The World Today'.
PM: Thank you John.
ends
90/ 90" d 700ON œ: tVT Z6' 6ntu* z :-131 



ILJ
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THlE HON P J KEATILNG MP
INTERVIEW WITH MURRAY NICHOL" 5AN, 27 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MN: you're firing on the Opposition on this, you're saying that it's an irresponsible
attitude to the industry.
PM: They're basically saying we don't care whether we have a car industry. if
Australian car needs nccd to be satisfied exclusively by imports, that will do us.
Whcn Mr McLachlan was asked in today's Australian in a question and answer
session, hc said it's a matter for them to decide what changes they will necd to
make to exist. Now the fact is, that a zero tariff, given the fact that there's a glut of
motor carm In the Northern hemisphere, the big companics will just ship them into
Australia at marginal costs and thc Australian motor industry just won't exist, it
will just simply go out of business. These characters, that is Dr l-cwson and Mr
McLachlan, mean it. I mean they're not just mouthing cmpty rhetoric here. This
fellow McLachlan, who is a representative of South Australia, is rcally basically
saying that he and Dr Hcwson would wipe out the base manufacturing industry of
the State of South Australia.
MN: Is it that serious, can it happen?
PM: Too right.
MN: That simply wouldn't wipe it out, surely?
PM: Yes it would. Look, Toyoia is going to build a state of the art plant in Victoria, a
mioderm Japanese state of the art plant. Now when we made the judgements about
that, John Button, myself and others made the judgenment that a 15 per cent tariff
was as far as we could push tariff protection down and still keep a motor industry
notwithstanding the efficiency of that particular plant, and the renewed efficiency
of General Motors and Ford. What they're saying is It's zero. And a zero in a
small country like this, patrticularly with a glut of cars around the Northern
hemisphere, just marginally costing them, that is the marginal cost of production 
just shipping into Australia, there's no way the Australian motor vehicle Industry
would survive it.
MN: But from 15 per ccnt down to zero is really not much of ajump when you look at
how big the tariffs wcrc before.
PM: We're giving them a chance to adjust. For instane, I'm not quite sure of the
Commodore price but the Ford Falcon which now sells for $ 23,000 for a basic car,
under today's protection of 35 per cent, would have been $ 33,000 without the tariff
changes. We've introduced a regimc of change along with export facilitation
where the motor vehicle industry has now adjusted to lower levels of protection by
selling, in the case of H-olden, world class competitive engines to Germany; In the
case of Ford, Capris, sports cars to the United4 States; and soon Vcrada wagons are
to follow. Ford today announced, in the same newspaper, 280,000 cylinder blocks
going to Japan and 70,000 engines. All of this has conmc from our policy mix, and
we'd made the judgement of 15 per cent, and the car industry made the judgement
that at 15 they can stay in. Zero is just going to knock themn out of the ring. All of
this is sort of naive and primitive views about primitive capitalism. This Is Dr
Hewson's view he has attacked Mr Prescott from BIIP, Jac Nasser from Ford, he
has attacked Bob Johnston from Toyota. He is basically saying big business are
fat bureaucracies, if you haven't come up the hard way and you're not a self made
person and worked your way through a merchant bank, basically you should be
left to the vagaries of the market. It's that sort of thoughtless ideology which I
think we can do without.
MN: The State Opposition says that our vehicle manufacturing industry is slack and
inefficient and has not, in fact, fulfilled the requirements of what you laid on it.
PM: Look, Dr Hcwson advised the Fraser Government as its principal in-house adviser
for 7 years, and in those years tariff protection went up, quotas stayed for motor
vehicles, the motor vehicle price wcnt up, we were not selling any more cars, and
Australians were doing very poorly from it. We're the people who have had to do
the hard task of introducing the changes, but we've done it with some
comprehension. We've given them export facilitation which means they can go
and export things with support, which would disappear under a zero tariff. We've
done the things which will actually change thc industry for the better and of
course, the revolution in industrial relations, in enterprise bargaining, and the
improvements in productivity and efficiency of motor plants, and the willinigness
of the car unions, and the employces of the car industry to sit down with their
managements and make these companies better, Dr Hcwson says give all that
away there'll be no national wage case for them, awards go, annual leave
entitlements go, sick pay goes, we're getting out of the award system, you now
make an arrangement person to person with your employer. So all of that good
will goes out of the door and at the same time we're going to drop a zero tariff on
you. You see, I think a lot of Australians thought look, this is him banging his
gums. The truth is he means it. 
4z rif-Lu. y V-1-1-4 14LL. U I C r
3
MN: Of course, realistically it's always been said that our market is so small that we
have onc too many manufacturers anyway.
PM: Well one has disappeared recently, Nissan. Thiat's the point. I mean the policy in
this sense has worked in the sense that we're now Setting down to a smaller
number of viable units. But remember this, Murray, this is a small market, it
produces around about 400-500 thousand vehicles a year. There's always going to
be some diseconomies of that sort of scale. And the notion that it's almost
experimental sort of capitalism, this sort of view that you don't take any notice of
the biggest company, BHP, you just say they're asking for handouts. You don't
take any notice of General Motors, or Ford, you say they're asking for handouts. In
other words, you don't even try to comprehend the changes the Government has
introduced with them, sensible changes, to produce a decent motor vehicle
industry which will underpin thc manufacturing base of say citics like Adelaide.
They'rc just simply saying look, frankly it's zero, and if it's imports it's imports, if
you can survive good on you, don't expect any help from us.
MN: A recent examination of our motor vehicle industry by a UK expert, acknowledged
as an expert by thc motor industry, in fact he was brought out by the motor
industry or parts of it, said that our motor industry Is very out of date and behind
the times as far as processes and procedures go. Not necessarily industrial
relations, I don't think he was looking at that, but the plants themselves he said
were very out of date and a long way behind the hotshots.
PM: Well, for a start there's going to be a new state of thc art plant with Toyota. But I
had the pleasure earlier this year of flying down to Adelaide and going out to
General Motors and opening the new paint plant $ 230 million I think, for a state
of the art, world ranking paint shop. Now that sort of Investment Is going In, and
the quality of the cars has I think improved enormously. So, the companies
operating in Australia are getting it together. But We started this change In the mid
1980s. We firstly abolished quotas and started to move to tariffs, and then move
the tariffs down, with notice, with assurance, with support, down to a 15 per cent
end point whcre they can survive, where Australians gct dcent cars at a decent
price. Not good enough for our opponents. Our opponents say, not ideologically
pure here, this is not the way to go. The way to go is to basically slam them, cold
turkey them.
MN: Have you had a chance to cast your eye over our State Budget today?
PM: I haven't seen it, no, I don't know any of the details.
MN; Probably a lucky man. We're in serious trouble down in this State, I know you're
aware of that. How do you regard us as far as propping up the Federal
Govermcent in our coming State election?
ILL 
4
PM: Well look, in the ' 50s and ' 60s South Australia sold itself as having comparative
advantage by having cheaper labour rates than the rest of Australia. That brought
industry to South Australia. As labour rates and wage rates evened up around the
Commonwealth with federal awards and national wage fixation, that comparative
advantage disappeared. And what John Bannon has sought to do is to try to reestablish,
if you like, the efficiency of South Australian industry on a competitive
nmodel basis. And that's why whether It be the car Industry In our cooperative
discussions, or it is in the ship building area In the contracts which were lct to
South Australia, or in the Onc Nation package where I announced the building of a
standard gauge railway between Melbourne and Adelaide, all of that Is to basically
bring South Australia into nearer, effectively nearer and more Integrated into the
higher population, bigger market centres of Australia and keeping it a relevant
place. And that's what I think a comprehending Government has to do. But to
take some sort of ideological view, you know to go back to some text book is of
course not only nonsense, but a great shanic.
MN: It just seems that we're digging our way further Into the dirt. We've now got a
State debt of $ 7.3 billion and that's gigantic. And I'm quite sure South Australians
are infectcd with a sense of desperation here and helplessncss, because we just
can't see anything coming right. We can't see It coming right state-wise, we can't
see anything coming right federally.
PM: Let me just deal with federal first. We're going through the 1990s with low
inflation for the first time in 20 years; low interest rates; basically a structural
budget surplus, once the rcession passes through and the economy starts to pick
up ag ain the budgets will whirr back into surplus in the ' 90s; we've got a
revolution in wage fixation and enterpris bargaining and higher productivity;
we've got a remodelled tax system, a 39 per cent corporate rate, full dividend
imputation; we've got a superannuation savings system which is going to pump
national savings into equities into Australian companics, we won't be out in the
rest of the world bidding for savings, we'll have our own in adequate measure. I
mean, Australia is going to be In a very good position in the 1990s. There's been a
great change in productivity. I was in Melbourne on Monday presenting the Best
Practice Awards for a great variety of companies, a couple of them South
Australian, Solar was down there for instance, but there was BHP, Toyota and I
think General Motors, and some of the other car companies et cetera. And what's
happening is a revolution in the way in which efficiency and productivity is
happening in Australia. And at each table from each company were the employees
of the business, the union representatives sitting there. And people were saying to
me, look this is one of the best programs to get an International bench mark for our
business, and to get awards on the basis of reaching those benchmarks to give us
international efficiencies in a sensible, humane way Is the way to travel. Now, all
of that is happening, and it's happening for South Australian companies. See we
had great growth in the ' 80s. The Australian labour market today is 26 per cent
bigger than it was in 1983. In 1983 there were 6 million people in the workforce,
there's 7.6 million today. In New Zealand, for instance, which we hear a lot about, 
we've got fewer people in work today than there was in 1983. Now we've kept
most of that employment. All we've got to do is get that efficiency into place and
build those volumes, manufacturing and production volumes, and the employment
will come our way. So there's no reason to be looking gloomy about Australia
when we're now out of the recession and we're growing. Now as far as South
Australia goes, I think thc Bannon Government pursued a very sensible policy of
trying to find a solid, long term basis for South Australian industry, which by and
large it has achieved.
M N: Yes, well it didn't count on the performance or lack of by the State Bank. To you
now, and reports coming out of Canberra saying that you're in a quiet desperation
mode. is it like that?
PM: Well, do I sound like that?
MIN: No, you never sound like that.
PM: No I don't. Of course not, of course not, You know, there's always a bit of navel
gazing here along the press gallery corridor, people writing columns for the
weekend. But look, on the big brush things we're forcasuing growth in the
Australian economy the same as our trading partners through this financial year.
We just clocked up 1.6 for the last financial year, so we're out of the recession and
we're growing. We've got all the One Nation expenditures now coming through.
We've just Ict a contract for 3 thousand tonnes of rail steel. A lot of that will go to
Whyalla, BHP in Whyalla, to build that Adelaide to Melbourne railway line and
other railway lines. We've just let a contract for a million concrete sleepers. We
just announced a $ 2 billion road program for the year, $ 400 million larger as a
result of the One Nation package. All of this expenditure and the new spending in
the Budget is now coming at the time for thc economy to kick growth, activity and
employment along. So, from the Government's point of view we're putting the
blocks into place, the building blocks of a stronger economy Into place, and the
Budget just did that in fine style.
MN: Thanks for talking with us this afternoon.
PM: Good Murray, thanks again.
e nds 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P 3 VEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN NOMINATION FOR DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE UNITED
NATIONS FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORCANISATION
I am pleased to announce that the Government endorses
Dr Geoff Miller_ as Australia's official candidate for the
posfiion of D6i-rector -General of the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organisation ( FAO).
Australia was instrumental in the establishment of FAO in
1945, and has been active in its work ever since. The world
faces daunting food and agricultural problems including
escalating hunger and malnutrition, serious depletion of
natural resources and disrupted world markets. Given
Australia's role as a major exporter of farm products, we
are very conscious of these issues.
Geoff Miller has had a distinguished career in agricultural
economics, spending 14 years as head or associate head of
leading Australian Government agencies, including the ( then)
Bureau of Agricultural Economics; the national Economic
Planning Advisory Council; the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade; and the Department of Primary industries and
Energy. In each of his assignments he has demonstrated his
impressive analytical skills and administrative ability.
Geoff Miller has played a leading role in rural and economic
policy for almost two decades. He has a very strong global
orientation, having led numerous Australian delegations to
world food, agricultural and trade meetings and
negotiations. These included the FAO, the OECD and the
GATT. Geoff Miller is a product of rural Australia with a sound
practical background in agriculture. He also has strong
academic credentials. 
2
Australia attaches great importance to the work of the FAO,
and to the advancement of international co-operation through
the UN system. I believe Geoff Miller would make an
excellent Director-General.
Since the election will not be held until November 1993,
Dr Miller will retain his present position in Canberra as
Secretary of the Department of Primary Industries and
Energy. CANBERRA 27 August 1992
e 



I ~ PRIME MINISTERI
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
" IT'S TIME WH1TLAM GOVERNMENT DINNER"
RAND WICK RACECOURSE, 29 AUGUST 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Gough, Margaret, distinguished members of the Whitlam Government, supporters,
friends, one and all. Well this is a very lovely night for all of us who were members of
that Goverrnent, and a very important thing for our Party to be doing. It's a nice thing to
celebrate your successes and be proud of your achievements and it's an important part of
your history that you're doing it.
Fred talked about the true believers, we are the believers of Australian politics. We are the
people who believe, we make the system tick. But in celebrating this Goverfnent twenty
years ago, it was not just the election of another Government because we had our share
throughout the century, but we celebrated with the election of the Whitlam Government,
the coming out of Australia. Coming out of 25 years, a quarter of a century, of the torpor
of the Menzian age. That's what we really celebrated. And the re-sparking of Australian
nationalism, the re-sparking of Australian social experimentation, which was killed with
Gallipoli and Flanders at the end of the First World War. That's what we celebrate
tonight. We celebrate Labor coming of age again in 1972.
Of course none of this would have been possible without the leadership of the then darling
of the Fabian set, Fabius Maximus himself, not to be confused with Tiberius Telecom who
certainly had the odd run-in at the time, but he is the person who put Labor back together.
The two problems we faced in all of this century was in that great period, the 1890s, when
the Labor Party was put together in that terrible depression and drought, when we had the
Federation conventions when we put together the Federation, and that period of great
social experimentation where we led the world. All of that made Australia basically a 
Labor country until the First World War. And then the other great hurdle we faced was, of
course, the Cold War and the Cold War and the belief that many people had with the
collapse of robber baron capitalism in the United States in the ' 20s, that centrally planned
economies were the way forward, and our party -was divided on this very important issue
for a long time. And it was Gough who put the Labor Party back together, and this is his
great crowning achievement. He made Labor a relevant force again, when another part of
this century have disappeared, he grabbed us almost from the grave and brought us back
together. In truth he made Labor relevant again.
I am here tonight as the leader of the Labor Party, as the Prime Minister, as Bob was here
in the early 1980s and throughout the 1980s, we are here because of what Gough was able
to do in making Labor relative again. Gough understood that the ALP was like a bicycle,
it only stands up when you pedal; if you stop peddling it falls over, if you run out of ideas,
and you run out of push, and you run out of drive, it just sort of lays to one side. But the
thing is he understood the need to lift the national spirit.
And what's " Its Time" was about, it's when you read through the policy speech and the
caption, the records were in many respects quite tame when one compares it to today,
quite tame. But what it did in the epock of that terrible Menzoid, Menzian age, was lifting
the spirit of Australians. And if you were at the Blacktown Town Hall the hair was
standing up on the back of your neck because you know that you were in the presence of
something big. That's what Gough understood, lifting the national spirit, lifting the
national sentiment and exciting people. He taught us again that undiluted affection for
Australia, and a belief that the day might come when this country would not need the
emotional or institutional supports of old affections and old connections. That was what
he taught us, and that's what we started to understand back there in 1972. And that's why
there was so much hope and so much promise. Thiat's why we are able to carry on as we
were, as a Party, right through that period.
And so when we celebrate this Government, we celebrate the dreams of Fred Daly's
generation who came there at the end of the Second World War who have always such
difficult periods to deal with. Scullin arrived in office in the 1930s virtually days before
the collapse of the Depression, the stock market in 1929, Curtin arrived just a short time
before Pearl Harbour. We are always saddled with the tough things to do in this life. We
were denied the easy days of post war growth when people like Fred and others went to
the House, because in the ' 40s Fred was actually in our war time Government, but many
members came in ' 49 and by 1972 had just about given up. We nearly won in 69. Really
the Government of 1972 was mostly won in 1969 and then a couple of years later in' 72 we
pushed it over the line.
And what was put together was a tremendous program of social change and social policy,
*** which lead-Labor back to the-main stream of Australia, of the main stream views which
Australia had in the past, which it had given us the constitution, which had given us some
of the best social policy in the world, and which had taken us back there. 
And the fact of the matter is that, that great tradition which Gough and his Government
re-started has continued down through the period. And that is why I think it is a
delightful thing to be able to claim in your history, a continuum between the Labor
Governments, between the Whitlam Government, the Hawke Government and this
Government. This is a delightful thing to be able to do.
And all of the things which the Whitlam Government did, things like Medibank, we've
continued with Medicare. This is one of the great health systems around the world. With
pensions, indexation for pensions, which we have now brought to 25 per cent of average
weekly earnings where we sophisticated the whole of the aged care system. With Gough's
Schools Commission, which has now led to a continuation of these policies with now 7
kids in 10 completing secondary school, and now a new revolution in vocational
education, 40 per cent of kids going into university. We kept the whole policy going that
begun in 1972. In foreign policy, a peculiarly Australian foreign policy, which we now
make without reference to anybody else, thanks to that great period between 1972 and
1975. And even DURD, DURD is back with Better Cities. I don't know whether Tom's
here tonight, but the fact is at the time this was path breaking stuff and again with the
Better Cities we are back doing the same thing. With railways, Gough tried to take the
railways over and make the national system. There were only two clever States at the
time, Tasmania and South Australia, the rest said no. We are doing it all today, same
policies, same sort of Labor Party, same sort of people.
This Government adopted theWorld Heritage conventions, which has been so much a
basis for our environmental policy and all of our actions in Tasmania, or the wilderness
areas, or the wet tropics of Queensland, come relying upon that legislation. Or in
multiculturalism, which was again part of the vogue of the Whitlam Government bringing
Australians together, producing as we did an understanding between cultures and making
one society out of the many cultures of Australia. We are sticking to that, we are not
going to the miserable politics of Dr Hewson.
And in other great reforms like the family allowance supplement, which is one of the
world's leading family income support systems for low income families, or occupational
superannuation for the whole of the workforce, we have seen a traditional Labor
Government in the Whitlam Government, and a continuation of the tradition through the
current Labor Government from 1983 to 1992. And the fact is, Gough, I think we can say,
even though people say of us we're rationalists, no we're not rationalists, we're rational
we're not rationalists. We're not isms and we're not ists, we don't belong to the isms and
we don't belong to the ists. We are not Thatcherite, we are not Reaganite, and we are not
Rogernomic, we are Labor, we are traditional Labor.
We need to always rejoice in the things we have done, because we have got our troubles
and people now are finding the current recession difficult and people are looking
elsewhere for solutions to other Labor Parties in other places. We get told get about New
Zealand and the New Zealand Labor Party, and a few things worth saying. In 1983 we
had 6 million people in the Australian workforce, today we have got 7.6 million, that is 26
per cent bigger. Between 1983 and 1992 the workforce in New Zealand actually got 
smaller. And that is the difference between Rogernomics and traditional Labor
economics. And also, not just in that respect, the country is twice as large as its product
ever was.
The fact is, I think we can say Gough, that in the things which you did, started, that your
Ministers took pride in, and the policies you built, these were the foundation stones for the
Hawke Government in 1983 and the Government which I have the privilege to lead now
at this time. We kept them going. We had those dismal years with Malcolm Fraser, but of
course we now understand that compared to John Hewson, Malcolm -was a comparatively
good guy.
It is an interesting thing isn't it? In the 1980s which finished off communism and finished
off monetarism, the parties which have the comprehension and support worldwide now
are the So-cial Democratic Parties. The half hearted, Gordon Gecko Wall Street view of
the world that basically greed is good and survival of the fittest. And its the productive
economy, the efficient economy with the nice social policy grafted on, with a proper
safety net, access to health, access to housing, access to education, all of these things are
basically where societies are going to go and where we have taken Australia.
Now when you look at today's Liberal Party it does believe in isms and ists as we do not
where they've been raised literally on capitalist ideology. We used to say about Malcolm,
Mick and I when we were in the Parliament's Assembly, we would go out there on the
attack every night, we used to accuse Malcolm of just about being a capitalist raider and
all the rest. The truth is he was just a warm old regular. He was. Malcolm was really just
a trifle. Now we have got a leader of the Opposition who makes Malcolm look like a
Bolshie, who believes in all of that wall street eth. His view is that he wants the social
impoverishment of Australia so that everyone who rises out of it will be like him, that is
self made, rising from the ashes of the impoverishment which has produced a better class
of person, a better entrepreneurial type. His spirit is of course the spirit of the 1980s, of
the worst excesses of the 1980s. He is very much a product of the place he is from, it is
Thatcherismn ten years on.
So if your spirit ever flags, if ever you have got any self doubt, if any self doubt creeps
into your hearts and minds, or if you ever wondered whether it is all worth it, just read one
of John Hewson's latest speeches and you will understand, it is. You will understand that
we have got now a conservative, a radical conservative who is going to try and wipe away
a century of social change, a century of industrial progress, a century of social policy and
try to take Australia back to some level of social impoverishment where only basically the
fittest survive. This is what he is about. Never in the last 25 years, in my time in politics,
has there been a greater opportunity for Labor to show what it is made of, and to make a
difference to them that we believe, in essence, economies that can produce the goods, one
that can reduce employment, one it can produce wealth. But also we believe in having
the right to a hospital bed if you are sick, the right to a school and a university if you are a
poor kid, the right to support if you're aged. All these things we believe in, because we
are a tradition. 
That's why we come along here tonight. We've got our political difficulties, we know
that. But we are the people who make the Australian history. We are the ones who
nominate the heroes, we anoint the heroes of Australia, we set the ethos of Australia our
Party, our Labor Party. And we are here, we have got our troubles but we are not sad, we
are happy with ourselves, we sleep well at night, we know we always try to do what is
good and what is best. We are into good work and good things for altruistic reasons. And
we are as we are now because other good people did other good things, in our case
years ago. And those Ministers who are here tonight, that I had the privilege of serving
with for just three weeks Mick said he would have given a fortune just to be in there for
three days but to all of those who blazed the trail and took the blow torch on the belly
from the Conservatives, we owe them a debt of gratitude. It is a nice thing for us to
remember them, remember them well, appreciate them, take them to our heart and say
thank you.
And that is what we are doing Gough, we are saying thank you to your Ministers, and we
arc saying thank you to you. We are saying thank you to you because you did take us out
of the Conservative torpor. You did relight the fire of Australian nationalism You taught
neo-Australian's to be something different, to be something to be proud of, an identity of
our own and for that of course we owe you eternal gratitude. And this Government will
do all it can to keep faith with those great ideals. So it is with the utmost of pleasure that I
introduce you, although you need no introduction to this audience, as the person who put
Labor back together, who made Labor relative again, and gave us a chance to show our
social and economic paces of the ' 80s and ' 90s and to make Australia in our image, the
image of a caring party, of a caring society, but one which is productive enough to hold its
head up to the world in clothing, feeding and housing people. We owe you a great debt
and I am sure all of us here tonight appreciate what you have done, you and Margaret,
who fought beside you for all those years and put up with you all those years. We owe
you a great debt of gratitude and it is a nice thing that we have come together to remember
you, to appreciate you and to applaud you.
ENDS 



S TEL: 31. Aug. 92 10: 42 No .001 P. 01/ i
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING MI', TO
THlE INTERNATIONAL INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS ASSOCIATION
NINTH WORLD CONGRESS, SYDNEY, 31 AUGUST 1992
A NEW CHARTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS IN AUSTRALIA
It's appropriate indeed that Australia is ablc to host this ninth congress of industrial
relations experts, because we have quite an intcresting story to tell you about where
we have come from in our industrial relations, where we are now, and where wc are
going.. As you know, the way a country runs its industrial relations, the way the interests of
employees and employers are reconciled, the way in which a country handles
change in the workplace, tell you a great deal about that country.
The industrial relalionship is the key one in the working lives of most people. t can
be a great strength or a great weakness.
For well over a century Australia has attracted the interest and curiosity of
practitioners and theorists of industrial relations. In the great constitutional debates
of the 1890' s our founding fathers gave the proposed Commonwvealth a power to
settle interstate industrial disputes by conciliation and arbitration. When we
became a nation in 1901 one of the first things we did was to set up a
Commonwealth tribunal which could exercise this powver to settle disputes a
power which rapidly became one of setting wa~ ges and conditions directly or by
example for most Australian employees.
It was a system which served Australia quite well I think, but the news I have to
deliver today to those of our visitors who still think Australian industrial relations is
run this way, is that it is finished. Not only is the old system finished, but we are
rapidly phasing out its replacement, and have now begun to do things in a new way. 
EL: 31. Aug. 92 10: 42 No. 001 P. 02/ 1l'
2
When we arrived in office in 1983 the old system was clearly on its last legs.
Inflation was running at 11.5 pcr cent. We were exhausted by industrial warfare.
The profit sharc had been squeezed down. Manufacturing was being obliterated.
Unemployment was still rising, and of course thc economy was in thc trough of a
recession. All this was happening behind high tariff barriers and a fixed exchange rate, with a
current account deficit in the early eighties nearly twice the size as a proportion of
GDP it is today, and the starting point deficit we inhcrited for our first budget
heading towards 5 per cent of GDP.
So it was a rough time.
The Arbitration Commission was doing its best but it had just about run out of
possibilities. Every principle had got a run at one time or another basic wage,
total wage, relativitics, work valuc, absorption, non absorptions, flow ons, no flow
ons, indexation, no indexation, minimums and maximums, industry decisions and
national decisions.
Every principle, except the simplc and straightforward principle of working
together to find outcomes which left us all better off.
Every procedure, except the procedure of finding a national consensus, arrived at
with the full participation, the full authority and prestige of the national government
as well as the industrial parties.
The only thing we had going for us was that the trade unions and employers had
reluctantly come to see that it couldn't go on the way it had.
We also had a very enlightened central leadership in the union movement, and a
Prime Minister whose entire suite of talents developed during a long and eventful
career were ideally fittcd to the task of conducting a national summit to reconcile
the waring industrial parties.
So we entered an Accord with the national federation of trade unions, which in this
country is called the ACTU.
In one way or another the Accord has been essential to the favourable outcomes we
were able to make over then'ext dfecade.
TEL 
TEL: 3
Over the eighties the Accord agreements were frequently changed and renegotiated,
because the world changed rapidly around us, and there was good will on both sides
that allowed us to keep the agreement flexible.
By the end of the eightics we had agrccd on a principle of keeping wage
movements competitive with our trading partners. We had also agreed on the
principle of what we called a " social wage".
By this we mean that where the government puts in health care, family assistance,
quality education, income support for the disadvantaged and so forth, these too
should be considered part of the Accord compact part of the deal between the
Australian government and Australian cmployees.
This idea of the " social wage" is the key to understanding the way our Accord
works. While we focused wage movements on a central determination of the full bench of
the Australian Industrial Relations Commission, all the industrial parties the
unions, the government, the employers and thc Commission rapidly went about
the job of preparing the ground for far bigger changes to come.
We pressed for the amalgamation of unions. In the last six years we have halved
the number of federally registered unions. We pressed for the simplification and
renovation of awards, so that today there are fewer categories, fewer demarcation
disputes, fewer gradations. We urged unions to use a single bargaining unit in
negotiations, so that even where there was more than one union, all unions would
consent to one agreemcent. We encouraged a review of minimum rates, so that the
relationships between the minimum wages of different skills levels and so forth
were looked at again and brought up to date.
While that was going on in the industrial system, we were also changing the
structure of our economy.
Remember in 1983 we had a fixed exchange rate, high tariffs, high inflation, low
profits and a recent history of warfare in industry. But by the late eighties and early
nineties things were very different.
We had had years of experience with a floating dollar. We had deregulated finance.
We had put the government business enterprises on a commercial footing, so they
had to make commercial decisions about pay increases. We had begun to reduce
industry protection, and we had announced that protection would be reduced
through the nineties, so the pressure would remain on for increasing efficiency and
TELJ: A8-1. 9 10: 42 No. COO1-T. 2J 
TEL 4
competitiveness. We had seen that we had to internationalise our economy to
preserve and enhance our living standards, and we could only successfully
internationalise if we became more competitive.
You might say that the whole climate and culture changed.
We began to see results.
By thc latcecighties we had restored the profit share. We had increased
emplomentby one fifth the fastest cmployment growth in the OECD. We had
began to change the industrial composition, so that manufacturing output was more
than a third greater at the beginning of the nineties than it had been when we came
to office.
Wc also had evidence that we were beginning to successfully internationalise.
Because of very moderate wage growth our competitiveness against other countries
had increased by one tenth._ Exports had doubled, and manufacturing and service
exports had tripled. More and more of our exports were going to Asian markets,
locking us in to the fastest growing region of the world.
And while all that was going on, industrial disputes for which this country was
once notorious dwindled away. Last year we had the lowest number of disputes
for thirty years.
We did all this while also extending universal health care, child care, and funding a
great explosion in education opportunities. And we did it while bringing both
government spending and taxes down, so that we ended up with one of the lowest
ratio of both spending and taxcs to GDP in the whole OECD.
These were all very big changes, so big that we are only now beginning to realise
what has happened. As even one of our critics conceded on the weekend it has
actually happened. He wrote that it sounds like a lot of political puff, but the funny
thing is that it has actually happened. It's actually there. Exports really are at 23
per cent of GDP. Just shy of a quarter of everything we produce in this country is
now sold abroad. We really have tripled manufacturing and service exports. We
really havc had our greatest exporting successes in recent years with elaborately
transformed manufactures like motor vehicles, boats, electrical equipment and
industrial machinery. It's all there, it's all real, and if we don't throw it way it will
continue and get better. TEL: 1~ 03: 142. flNuo. gU. U912 '-U' 4/ 11 
TEL: 31. Aug. 92 10: 42 NcvUU1 F-. Ut' 171
These were the successful results, but more importantly for the way Australia
works was the fact that we had by the beginning of' thc nineties accumulated nearly
a decade's experience with the Accord. We trusted each other. The ACThJ has
always delivered on its commitments. We found that the Accord stood up not only
in hard times, but also in good times. In the early eighties boom money wages
increased 20 per cent. When we went through a boom in the late eighties money
wages increased by less than a third of that. We came out of the recession of
1982/ 83 with inflation at 11.5 per cent. We are coming out of recession this time
with inflation under 2 per cent.
All this meant we were ready for another change.
We had always recognised that we could not indefinitely focus all wage movements
in a uniform movement. We had always recognised that the price of bringing
inflation down and employment up through adjusting wages mainly in a single
national decision would be some loss of flexibility which we would later wish to
recover. So a few years ago we began putting in place a transition to a much more
flexible system, under which the vast majority of decisions over wages and working
practices would bc made at the workplace level, often within an industry
framework. Four years ago we amended the law under which the AJRC operates to
allow thc certification of agreements. In a speech in Melbourne in 1989, 1
foreshadowed the switch, and in our submissions to the national wage case in 1990
and 1991 we argued for the introduction of workplace bargaining based on
productivity increases. The AIRC queried us at first but late last year it cleared the
obstacle, and this year we have amended the act to encourage the making of
workplace bargains throughout the country.
So now we arc quite firmly entering a new era.
In the last couple of years we have had more change in the workplace than in
decades before. We have a couple of hundred agreements registered already, and
there are many more coming forward. We have now got some very good examples
of where we want the whole system to go agreements made by Sheraton, Toyota,
GMH Holden, Email, Concrete Constructions and Southern Aluminium, to mention
a few. All told we have many more people here working under registered
enterprise agreements than under registered employment contracts in the New
Zealand. We will about double that number when we bring the Australian Public
Service into workplace bargains, and the Minister for Industrial Relations Peter
Cook has already opened negotiations to do just that. 
TEL:--31. flug. 92 10: 42 No. UU1 I'-UO/ 11
6
By this timc next year wc will have half the workforce under workplace bargains,
and within a few years it will be the characteristic, the usual, the normal way in
which our industrial relations arc conducted.
Bargaining is the way, but arching over it we have an agreement with the ACTIJ
that wage increases will be consistent with keeping our inflation rate comparable
with our trading partners. This is a very important commitment, which entrenches
our very low inflation rate, and our competitiveness. It's an agreement we can rely
on one with teeth. The union movement has the ability to control the timing and
extcnt of claims. And we as a government have already said that our commitment
to superannuation increases over the decade, and to general minimum wage
inceases from time to time, would bc reconsidered if wages growth started to
outrun the level compatible with low inflation.
Frankly, I think we could run into big trouble if we press ahead with workplace
bargaining without an agreement on inflation.
Those who think workplace bargaining can be carried out without an agreement on
restraining inflation are, I think, naive.
Not only would we lose our very low inflation, but in the attempt to get it back
government then has to depend on high interest rates to counter inflationary wage
increases. This inevitably leads to higher unemployment.
In this new system there remains an important role for the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission in setting minimum rates in awards, and in so doing
providing a safety net below which employees cannot fall. It will also have an
important role in helping the parties to reach enterprise or industry agreements, in
vetting single cnterprise agreements to make sure the employees have not been
disadvantaged, and in vetting agreements which go beyond a single enterprise to
make sure they are based on genuine productivity enhancements and relate to an
industry rather than an to a craft or occupation.
As the Commission reviews its guiding principles this year, we will be putting to it
that it should adopt this role.
So we are entering a whole new chapter in the long story of industrial relations in
Australia. But sometime before May next year we will also have to make a choice.
A choice of great consequence for our future. 
T3EL1:. Ruy. 92 10: 42 No. 001 P. 07/ 11
7
1 have to get a little trenchant here, a little partisan, but I know you people in the
industrial relations world are quite comfortable with a spirited debate.
You have enough cxperience to know that industrial relations goes right to the heart
of what a country is about.
This decision will rnot be about whether we switch to a system where employers
and employees and their unions reach bargains in their workplace or industry.
That is something we are already doing.
It is not a dccision about whether wage changes should bc based on productivity
movements, and on the mutual exploitation of productivity gains arising from
changes in work practices.
Again, that is something we are already doing.
The real choice we must make in this country is between continuing a cooperative
approach which has brought important, tangible and unquestionable benefits, or
forcing employers and their employees into an industrial war from which neither
would gain.
The choice is whether we keep low inflation or throw it away.
Whether we have an Accord or not.
Whether we have a safety net for the poorly paid or not.
Whcther people are forced off current awards without having a say or not.
Whether they can count on their leave entitlements and their pay packet or not.
Whether we have a quick and casy means of enforcing agreements or not.
Whether we have ati umpire to make sure workplace agreements are fair and that
people are not coerccd into bad deals or not.
Whether employees are guaranteed rising superannuation contributions made by
employers on their behalf through this decade or not.
Whether we should accept a government responsibility to train the young and
retrain adults or not. TEL 
T3E1L : Rug. IO 4 2 N 0 0 1F UT5 I
8
Whether peoplc genuinely secking work should have incomne sport if they need it
for as long as they need it or not.
Whether we should press ahead with first order reforms like increasing productivity
at the workplace and enhancing the quality of our workforce, or whether we should
instead go the way of tenth order bogus reforms, like a consumption tax.
These are the choices, and today I want to state quite unequivocally where my
government stands.
I want to offer a charter for the new era in industrial relations.
In this charter I will make these undertakings on behalf of the Australian
govcrnment. We undertake to maintain the inflation agreement with the ACTU, so that inflation
in this country never again gets out of line with inflation in our trading partners, and
the products of Australian industry remain competitive in world markets.
We undertake to keep a safety net under the low paid and the poorly organised.
We undertake to make sure workplace agreements are fair.
We undertake to enforce agreements with simple procedures.
We undertake not to force employees off awards.
We undertake to allow employees to be covered by their unions.
We undertake to train the young and retrain adults, to enhance our skills and the
quality of our workforce.
We undertake to build secure and comfortable retirements for Australian
employees, and to build Australian saving, by increasing the superannuation
guarantee throughout this decade.
We undertake to provide an unquestioned right to income support to people who
are genuinely seeking work, and to provide training and restraining programs for all
who can benefit from them.
TEL 
TEL: 31. FAug. 92 10: 42 No. OU1 -U' 1
9
We undertake to not introduce a consumption tax, and wc undertake to fulfill our
commitment to dramatically reduce the marginal tax rate on the income of most
employees. And we undertake to take care of people to help working families with good child
care, goad education and quality health care.
What this charter comes down to is this.
We will not belittle Australians in their working lives.
We will not take away their rights in the factories shops and offices where they
spend at least a third and often well over half of their waking hours.
We will not cancel their say about how their work is organised and how it is
rewarded. We will not prcpare for the 2 1st century by reinvoking thc rules and relationships
of the 19th century.
In our pursuit of economic efficiency, of greater output, we will not lose sight of
the fact that we want greater output, greater efficiency, only as a means of
improving the quality of our lives not at the expense of the quality of our lives,
No doubt many of you who arrived over the weekend have had a chance to look
around our lovely harbour here, and see some of the splcndours of waterfront
Sydney. In a little while you'll be seeing a video of Sydney, which will show you more of
the glamorous bits.
But if you really want to see what this country is about, how we really live and
what we really aspire to if you want to understand why the choice we are going to
make will so important to this country I suggest you get on a train to a suburb like
Bankstown. Bankstown is where my family comes from, where I grew up, where I've spent
most of my adult ycars. I represent Bankstown in Parliament. 
T: 31. Rug9.92 1O: 42 No. UUI F-7I1JTP--
If you go therc you'll see it is very big suburb of simple family homcs, most with a
garden. You'll see people of Anglo and Trish descent like my family, but these days
you'll also see people from Italy and Greece, China and Vietnam, Turkey and
Lebanon, all getting on reasonably well. You wont see spectacular sights like the
harbour, but you will see churches and community centres, hospitals and clinics,
public swimming pools and playing fields.
This is suburban Australia, which is where most Australians live, but it is not
wealthy or privileged or clitist.
It's a good life out there for most peoplc, with good houses, good schools and good
medical care and access to good colleges for kids who want to go on. Thcre is child
care for working families, and quality treatment for everyone in public hospitals.
Thcre is more unemployment there now than we arc prepared to accept, but we are
rapidly expanding training schemes for unemployed youngsters, and retraining
schemes for unemployed adults, and we are funding projects in the local
community which can employ people quickly, while the economic expansion now
underway comes through to provide long term jobs.
It's safe by the standards most cities, and it's a neighbourhood where people still
look out for one another.
It's a world which has changed a lot over the last decade new factories being
built, old ones being closed.
Children moving off into new occupations in the -service industries, which their
parents would not have dreamed of. Much more pressure to compete and be
successful at school and at college or university. Much more pressure to match the
best the world can produce.
It's been a tough decade in many respects, one in which the economy has imposed
many new demands.
But part of the deal has always been that working people in places like Bankstown
have some control in their working lives, some predictability, some assurance that
their pay packets and conditions will be protected.
Some assurance that they and their families can rely on good health care, good
education and safe neighbourhoods.
These things are all part of what I said earlier was our " social wage".
TEL 
TEL: 11
They are all part of the compact the Australian government has made with
Australian employees.
As I say Bankstown is not a place for spectacular scenery, but what we have out
there are things we value very highly, things we are prcparcd to work hard for and
keep for our children.
Things we will not lightly throw away.
Things Australians have worked hard for, and which this government will fight to
protect. They are things the charter I have announced today is designed to safeguard.
351. Hug. 32 1U: 4z2 NO. UUI r. ii/ ii 



1. Sep. 92 13: 42 No. 003 P. 01/ 06
PRIME MINMISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH PETER KENN4EDY ON ABC RADIO 12
SEPTEM4BER 1992
E AND OE 1PROOr ONLY
KENNEDY,, Prime ' lnister, you needed yesterday's current
account deficit of sl. 4 billion for July like a hole' in the
head. unow much pressure is there for an interest rates hike?
FX: Commentators can't have it both ways Peter.
They can't say that the economy isn't growing and yet then
point to the growth in imports. If imports are growing as
fast as this it means the economy, demand in the economy is
stronger than anybody thinks, If the economy is responding
and sucking in imports there is a lot more going on out there
than the partial data has indicated, or alternatively this is
just an aberrant month,
KENNEDY: But alternatively it means that perhaps we
don't have the productive capacity at home to meet this
increased demand, either way there is a pressure on interest
rates. PM$ One of the features of the exchange rate of
late has been the fall in the terms of trade. That is the
value of our produce, the prices we are getting for minerals
and agricultural products are now very low. But export
earnings -are still rocketing along which means our volumese are
doing enormously well. That is not withstanding the fact that
export prices have come down our earnings are still up because
of volume, the amount of stuff we are selling is enormous. So
I think that explains some of the markets apprehension but the
current account has improved enormously in the last, it's been
halved in the last few years to around 3 odd percent of GDP
and we can't let one month's number set the scene.
KENNEDYs so you are Confident that interest rates
certainly can be held for the time being? 
TEL: 1. Sep. 92 13: 42 No. 003 P. 02/ 06
2.
PM1 There was a rumour around last week the
government tightened monetary policy, It hadn't, Lt hadn't.
XENNEDYt So no move in interest rates in the foreseeable
future? PM: That's a matter for the Treasurer, the Reserve
bank but from me, no.
K. ENNEMY You said the figures indicate that probably
there Is a lot more going on in the economy than has been
showing up in the figures.
PM: We have these sort of people, commentators so
called in Australia. They are either crying in their beer or
they are laughing, there is no sort of you are not getting
that sort of middle comment. We had some of the Sydney
commentators like Max Walsh today saying the ring of
confidence is going, we put to big a stimulus into the
economy, that is the fiscal budget changes are too great. Now
they are about just under three quarters of a percent of GDP.
Last week Japan has just announced a new f iscal policy of a
stimulus of -1.5 -percent of GDP and the whole world is hoping
that the Japanese stimulus pays of f for North America and for
Europe. That is that the Japanese economy will tug everyone
else along. Now the fact is the government has done the right
thing I it has got interest rates where it can induce a recovery,
it's got spending in the One Nation and the Budget which will
bring a recovery on, and that is as it should be.
They have been carefully judged; the stimulus is about the
right amount and~ if we didn't have commentators who think they
have got to be extravagant to be noticedobut basically making
comment in the national interest rather than against the
national Interest, then I think they would think that the
settings the government have in place at the moment are just
right for the economy.
KENNEDY: Nevertheless in the past you have described
Australians as import junkies haven't you. Are we still
import junkies?
PM': In the late 60s we were importing more than we
were exporting but at the moment we have bee6-n exporting our
heads of f. The shift to exports has been just a phenomena,
phenomenal, a phenomenal thing.
KENNEDY: if we can move onto another matter Prime
Minister. You yesterday, speaking at an international
industrial relations conference served notice that the
government would introduce an industrial relations charter to
I guess draw attention to the differences between the
government policy on Industrial relations and the opposition's
policy. What sort of things would you expect to see in the
charter? 
TEL: l. Sep. 92 13: 42 No. 0603 P. 03/ 06
P14: Like f or instance protecting the conditions of
employmient under awards. What Dr Hewson wants to do is go
back to the 19th Century' so that I think an individual person
gets called into the office by the employer and he says to the
person this is what we are going to pay you now, no holiday
leave, you won't be getting this and you won't be getting
that, your rates are going to change and the person says weill
hang on I am not going to cop that I will deal with the union,
no no we don't deal with the unions, there is no more union&amp;*,
you are not part of the award system, you are on your own.
Now that is the sort of world he wantsp that is 90 years of
industrial achievement to go out the door and what, forAn
economy where the wage here, the total cost of wages is now at
sort of 1960s levels, and where the profits here and the
economy is quite high are now going to skyrocket as any volume
comes through with business the companies are very stripped
down. The flip side of the unemployment is that companies are
very stripped down and many are now quite profitable and once
there is a bit of volume come&amp; or, that will go straig1~ t to
profits because their overheads are covered.
KENNEDYe But that is a pretty extreme view isn't it, and
if the Opposition is going to adopt a policy similar to' Now
Zealand the sounds coming out of New Zealand seem to be quite
favourable now.
PM8 We have now twice as many people covered by
enterprise agreements under this government's wages policy as
there are in New Zealand covered under these enterprise
contracts, twice as many people in Australia. We are now
presiding over a revolution in industrial relations where we
are seeing General Motors, Toyota, Ford, enormous increases in
productivity as a result of agreements with working people and
their unions which is giving them now higher paid but lower
cost for the company. I mean it's working as sweetly as it
has ever worked..( he whole of the 80s evolutionary change is
coming good. What Dr Hewson would propose would wreck the lot.
You pit employer against employeas you take them out of the
award systemthey have no protect ion at law for holiday pay,
sick leave, rates of pay, it's basically law of the jungle.-get
what you can, 1tt won't do Australia any good and it won't
protect that low inflation rate which has given us those low
Interest raLea.
KENNEDY: One of the big criticisms of the Australian
industrial relations scene has been that it's been far too
rigid and while you are freeing up the financial market for
instance in the mid 80s
PMS That was in the mid 80s though Petert Now, as a
result of this deal we did with three weeks ago or in the
course of itoing, three quarters of all wage adjustments this
year won't come from the centralised wage fixing system) it 
TEL: 1. Sep. 92 13: 42 No. 003 P. 04/ 0E
4. PM: ( cont'd) will come from enterprise bargaining. It's a
revolution but it is not one which is disruptiveit's been an
evolutionary change. That's the value, I mean one where
everyone has agreed, not an acrimonious vicious change.
KENNEDY: You are saying then that you are succeeding in
freeing up the industrial relations system without an
upheaval? PM8 obviously we are why do you think Mr Prescott
from BHiP and Nasser from Ford and all these other people are
coming out extolling the virtues of enterprise bargaining and
productivity change, they are really saying to Dr Hewson your
thing is too rough we don't want to go back to the 19th
Century we want to change it the way we have been changing it
and you have got to fit in with the rest of Australian
society. I mean at the moment Dr Hewson is the odd man out
everybody is out of step but him. The big business community
BHP, Toyota, Ford, they are all out of step with him the trade
unions are out of step, the welfare industry is out of step
everybody is out of step but him.
KENNEDYs Nevertheless in the industrial area there in
still a lot of criticism especially from small business about
some of those award conditions that have been piled on over
the years. Things like holiday penalty rates
PM1 Yes I know but Peter the wage share in GDP,
that is the cost of wages and the total economy is at 1960s
level, say noQ more put your glasses down, that is with
everything in, that is with everything bar the kitchen sink
thrown in. That is the point but Peter you were going to ask
me, I am running out of time, you were going to ask me about
these, you mentioned in your introduction these secret taxes
the Opposition have.
KENNEDY: Yes
PM1 I'll say some things about that,
KENNEDYs It's reported that the Opposition OST it's been
recommended that it should tax things like wheelchairs,
artificial limbs and local government rates. Now Mr Reith was
backing of f on that on AM but I am just wondering where that
leaves the Opposition?
P1; We had the Opposition and we had the media
running around a week ago saying the government had secret
taxes which of course was a total furphy. These were things
we mentioned ourselves in the Budget that we might do but what
we have here is that Mr Cole, Sir William Cole is the chairman
of a board of management looking at the GST and Dr Howson
wrote to him on 9 March saying under your leadership the
office will act independently to consult with the Australian
community on all administrative and technical features and he 
TEL: 1. Sep. 92 13: 4 No. 00
PM i ( cont'd) went on to Identify in the same letter,
Identifying the health and education goods and services that
will be zero rated. In other words those things in health and
education and services that will attract no tax. Now this
committee Is going to recommend that they tax because they
can't run the UST with all these exemptions that they tax
wheelchairs, artificial limbs, 15% on school boarding fees,
on local government rates and now we have got very
dishonestly Mr Reith this morning trying to run away from It
and say that's not our policy and he said the Cole committee
was given a brief to look at the broader policy issues but
that certainly was not one of them.
in fact it was explicitly one of them in Dr Howson's remit to
this committee. You see the fact is the GST is a monster the
Cole Committee has had now three hundred submissions from
business and private community groups about it. People hate
the thing and they have got this welling up in this GST office
they have set up and now when they want to make the
recommendations to Dr Hewuon and Mr Reith they say we don't
want to know about it, we don't want to know about all these
technical problems which are going to tax things like school
boarding and local government rates and wheelchairs and
artificial limbs and the rest.
This is going to be the most monstrous tax impost ever mounted
on the Australian people and they are trying to do it in
secret and worse than that when some of it leaks they try and
deny it even though they have set this committee up to do it.
KENNEDY: What tax do those items attract at the moment?
PM1 School boarding fees zero, local government
rates zero, and the same with the others. The fact is this tax
is,. oIee, people have got to understand this Peter: the total
income " tax raises $ 49 billion in this Budget it raises forty
nine thousand million, the GST raises $ 30 billion it's over
half of the total income tax of Australia. It's not just
it's 15% on all goods and services but it equals, it's revenue
equals over halt of the income tax because the average rate of
income tax is * only about 23.5% if you put all the high
salaries and the low salaries together they only come about
about 23.5%. You stick in a 15% tax on everything, food,
clothing, shelter, goods like we were just talking about
school fees, local government rates, it hurts, Lt's a
monstrous impost And of course It will add 6/ 7 percentage
points to inflation it will tip us back to a l0t inf lation,
it will put interest rates up by 6/ 7% because there is no way
the financial markets are going to lend at less than the
inflation rate and we will go back into a recession and stay
in there for what, an idealogical obsession on the part of Dr
Hewson to straighten all the low Lnccae people up and make
them pay their way as he puts it. 
I LL
6
KENEDY But isn't all the Opposition doing really
compiling a list so that we know before the next election
which items will be subject to GST and which items will be
exempt? PM: Yes but this committee is saying what will be
subject will be school boarding fees, local government rates
so if people are paying $ 3001400 a year on their rates they
will pay a further 15%, they will pay another $ 50 or on
artificial limbo and yet when the harsh reality of the
management of the OST is coming out. See as a matter of fact
in a newsheet in Canberra called Inside Canberra which is a
privately circulated thing the editor had this to say a week
ago that Messrs Hewson and Reith have decided on stalling
tactics, now the GST coordination office looms as a huge
emnbarrassment* It has received some 300 submissions, some 300
companies or organisations were dissatisfied, worried,
confused about Fightbacc, most about the GST and as well as
that they say Dr Hewson does not intend to spell out what he
intends to do about road user charges.
See at the moment he wants to abolish the tax on petrol and
excise but that is the way we pay for road user charges and
big trucks breaking up roads. If they travel more they pay
more, if you take the tax off who is going to pay for the
roads? He is going to try and slide past that issue too so
what Inside Canberra was telling us was that Sir William
Cole's GST committee set up as an independent unit under Dr
Hewson's GST policy Is basically sitting mum on 300
submissions of people whingeing, complaining and reasonably
about the GST.
I( ENNEDYs I gather Prime Minister we are going to hear a
lot more about that before too much longer
PM: your ears will be burning with it Peter, your
ears will literally be burning with it. These characters have
got so many hidden taxes ready for you it's just not funny.
ENDS I. Z) ep.' JZ 10; 4Z NO. uu,) r. uo/ uo 



TEL: 1. Sep. 92 14: 12 No. 009 P. 01/ 03
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LUNCH IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER SITIVENI RABUKA OF FIJI
CANBERRA, 1 SEPTEMBER 1992
Prime Minister, Mrs Rabuka, Foreign Minister Bole, Your
Excellencies, distinguished guests.
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you, Prime
minister, on your first visit to Australia as Prime
Minister. Mrs Rabuka, I am also delighted to welcome you.
The friendship between our two countries is a tradition.
It is a friendship of trust and cooperation.
The formal relationship goes back to 1964 when
Australia's first post was established in Suva. This
became our High Commission upon your independence in
1970.
Our commercial and business connections go back much
further, to the last decades of the nineteenth century
when we were all. British colonies.
As a close neighbour, over the years we have watched your
development as an independent nation and major player in
South Pacific affairs.
Strong ties have evolved between us in so many areas.
They have stood the test of time, and the test of
politics and the test of rugby.
Prime Minister we followed Fiji's recent elections with
interest and we were impressed with your conciliato'ry
statements after your appointment.
Your Prime Ministership marks a new beginning in Fiji's
political life, and with it the new hope that accompanies
a renewal of representative and responsible government. 
TEL: 1 . Sep .92 14 : 12 NO.-009 -P. 02/ 03-
2
It also marks the beginning of a new phase in our
relations. Relations between Australia and Fiji have been fully
normalised following our meeting in Honiara last July.
The final step in the process was our agreement to resume
defence links.
Australia looks forward to working with you once more to
strengthen the security of our region.
Security requires not only defence preparedness and
cooperation, but also internal security and domestic
stability.
We are greatly encouraged by the assurances you have
given that you are resolved to maintain dialogue with 811
communities in Fiji, and to further expand opportunities
and political participation.
Just as we welcome your commitment to national
reconciliation, we are impressed by your pursuit of
economic and trade reform.
We In Australia have been engaged in this process for a
decade. The effort to make Australia a more efficient and
competitive economy is not without its costs.
But the effort had to be made and we are now seeing
some of the benefits.
The Australian economy has been transformed: it is more
flexible, more open to the world, and much more oriented
to the Asia-PacifiC region where our future substantially
lies. Prime minister, in the last three years we have witnessed
a transformation in international affairs unequalled
since the end of World War 11.
Most nations are coming to realise that cooperation,
trust and closer integration provide the only sure road
to peace and prosperity.
Events in the Balkans, the Middle East and the Horn of
Africa confirm this by their tragic negative example.
Fiji has made an outstanding contribution to the cause of
international peace over many years and in many centres
of civil and international conflict.
Fijians have served witii distinction in peace-keeping
operations in Lebanon, Afghanistan and Pakistan, Namibia,
the Sinai and Iraq. 
TEL: 1. sep.' 92 14: 12 No. OU9 Id-. 6/ U~
3
On several occasions, Australian and Fijian troops and
personnel have served side by side.
In the United Nations and in other forumsf Fiji has
contributed as a responsible member of the international
community. In the Asia-Pacific region too, there is an opportunity
to constructively contribute to development and
prosperity.
We can only do so, however, in partnership.
After our discussions in Honiara and again this morning,
Prime Minister, I know that our relationship is renewed
on a basis of equality and respect.
In the years ahead it will be strengthened in such areas
as trade, development assistance and defence.
In whatever ways are practical, Australia is ready to
help Fiji achieve balanced, sustainable economic
development.
We will continue to cooperate in such multilateral bodies
as the South Pacific Forum, the South Pacific Commission
and United Nations.
Mr Prime Minister, let me say again how pleased I am to
welcome you and your party to Australia.
I trust that what remains of your stay will be pleasant
and productive.
I now invite Senator Robert Hill, representing the Leader
of the Opposition, to Join me in this welcome.
Thank you.
CANBERRA 1 September 1992 



TE: . Sep. 92 15: 23 No. 018 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTERt, THES HON 1' J KEATING
THlE RESIGNATION OF JOHN BANNON
John Bannon today took the courageous decision of taking the political responsibility for
financial losses associated with thc State Bank, and in so doing has given South Australia
the chance to overcome its difficulties and to grow with the rest of thc country.
John Bannon produced and maintained onc of thc most sound financial positions of any
State in thc Commonwealth. The State's finances wcre not put in difficulty by general
government recurrenh spendlng, but rather by losses generated by a financial institution
which the State owned.
Over thc past decade, John Bannon has effcctivcly presided over the redevelopment of
South Australian industry and commerce to produce a much more efficient and robust
economy. He has done all the things a good Premier should do to keep activities in his or
her State flourishing.
I have come to know John Bannon well over a pcriod of nearly ten years. He has always
bccn a person of substance and integrity, whose serv-ices as a leader in our political system
will be missed.
CANBERRA Septemiber 1, 1992 93/ 92
TEL 



TEL
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7.30 REPORT
2 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, welcome again to the program.
PM: Thank you Paul.
PL: Dr Hewson has been talking tough about the Japanese today. He says we have
opened our markets to them, yet they have not reciprocated. Do you agree with
that?
PM: Well they are our largest trading partner. They would have a fair point if they
made that point. We run a large balance of trade surplus in our favour with them,
so they are not that bad. Dr Hewson is out of step with everybody. This week he
attacked the nurses, he attacked the teachers, he said if you drive down an
Australian street you can pick all the houses where the renters are, he is into
renters. He is Into BLIP, Toyota and Ford, the Reserve Bank, the Tax Office, the
Treasury, thc Japancsc.
PL: And you're into portraying him as a cold hard ideologue, a frightening figure.
PM: No, no, I am just saying he is very strange. He is now saying the fcllow who drove
into Parliament House came to gct me, that's how important I am. Somcthing
TL: 2. Sep. 92 18: 56 No. 012 P. 01/ 08
t
I 
iLL: 2. Sep. 92 18: 56 NO. 012 P. 02/ U
2
which was violent and repugnant apparently amuses him. He is going to bury me
in thc flag, he is into rentcrs, nurses..
PL: What are you saying, hc is a bit odd, are you?
PM: He doesn't understand the limits of the political debate, where it sensibly starts and
fintishes. Hc is getting more thrill, more strident and more abusive of almost
everybody is out of step but him.
PL:-Well many Australians are going to think that his comments here about the
Japanese nmarkets strike a chord, won't they?
PM: Well would you prcfer, instead of running a large-trade surplus with them, we run
a trade deficit?
PL. But what about our access to their property market, for example. He says that they
have come in hcrc in mining ventures, they have got banking licences, foreign
exchange licenes.
PM: Let's not kid ourselves Paul, no Australian developers would have been in Tokyo
in the last half dozen years. They wouldn't have had the money to start in the
game, and would be now very glad about the fact that they were not because of the
crash in property values. Companies which can market, that take marketing
strategies and take their tiruc to develop distribution systems within Japan, can get
in there. And they have improved access for beef, reduced the barriers. Improved
access for beef and other commodities. Now, they have always hung back. Part of
our general criticism in the GATT round is-opening up markets and including in
Japan. But let's understand the weight of the relationship and let's not be abusive
to them like Dr Hewson is with everybody else.
PL: But he says he is going to run this line a lot more up to the election. He could end
up sounding like he is forging his own sort of nationalism here.
PM: I am sure the Japanese will be just absolutely frigiited to death by that. They will
be just trembling.
PL: What, we are such small fry we shouldn't speak our mind?
PM: No, no, have our say. We arc the ones who have run the structured case to gol the
GATT round into place. It is the Liberal and National Parties which want us to bo
closed out of Britain, closed out of Europe. They always took no for an answer.
We arc the people who do not take a no for an answer. But again, running around
abusing the Japanese Government in Australia, just like he abuses everybody cisc,
is not going to help. 
TEL 3
PL: All right. Burke, Cain, Dowding, Hawke and now John Bannon, are we seeing
more then simply a generational change of Labor leaders, or are we sccing the tide
turning against Labor across Australia?
pm: I don't think so. In each case the people wecaround nearly a decade. In this day
and age this is a very long period to serve in the political system.
PL: But you could have a situation by late next year, the Goss Guvcmment is the only
Labor Government left in the country.
PM: Well I don't think we will, but if there is a tide against Labor then presumably the
Goss Queensland situation denies that case.
Pb: You could hardly deny though, that Labor's house nationally is not in very good
repair at the moment?
PM: Obviously we have been in better shape in other times in Victoria arnd South
Australia.
PL: And after all those losses, people loosing life savings in some cases, won't some
voters agree very quickly with Dr Hcwson's claim that in the end-ILabor
Governments can't be trusted with rnoncy?
PM: How could you say that Paul? This Government has produced for the first time
ever Budget surpluses in Australia. Not one dollar was ever lost from a
Commonwealth supervised bank, not a dollar of a depositor's funds. And not a
dollar of depositors funds have been lost in the South Australian States Savings
Bank.
PL: Meanwhile, last night's Cabinet meeting pep talk suggests doesn't it, by its very
nature, that the Government has run out of puff a bit?
PM: No. It says we arc not going to havc distortions put across any more. This sort of
technique by Dr Hewson and Mr Reith when they get asked they won't do pres
conferences in Parliament House. All of us Ministers subject ourselves to
questioning by the press gallery for half an hour, three quartcrs of an hour.
PL: It has been a while since you have had a good sit down press conference..
PM: No it has not, it was only a matter of weeks. The last time Dr Hewson had a sit
down press conference in Canberra where he could be scrutinised by people that
have a memory of these things was last November. He does doorstops with the
fire engine chases who are covering television news, who arc not in a position to
ask him follow up questions, and the stock answer is it's in Fightback. Well the
answer is it's niot in FightbacX. T2ELS: ep. 92 18: 56 NO. 012 P. 03/ 08 
TEL: 2. Sep. 92 18: 56 NO-012 P. 04/ 08
4
PL: Well let me ask you a follow up question. if the Government is really on the ball,
bow could Bob Hogg have been urging Ministers to fill the political vacuum? I
mean surely a confident robust Government doesn't leave a political vacuum?
PM: Well until two weeks ago wc were putting a Budget together for six or seven
weeks. It is Budget time. We were as all Governments have to, governing the
place as well as represent our views and explain policy. But that phase is over and
now we will be out there telling Australians that the economy is picking up, that
the ' 9Ns do look good for us with a low inflation environment, that exports are
going gangbusters, that basically Australia is going to be trading its way out of its
troubles. And that a lot of the things which Dr Hewson is saying arc simply
doomsaying things, where he is trying to beat down the exchange rate, beat down
confidence and beat down the rest. We will be up there putting the right
construction on things and not simply sitting in the Cabinet room putting policy
changes together, as we were bound to do in the Budget process.
PL: You talk of high exports, and they were In July record level I concede, but
shouldn't wc-N5-Wofed about record imports so early in this recovery phase?
PM: Well it depends whethcr it is a spike or whether it is a trend.
PL: What do you think though?
PM: Let's just take the first thing. If it is a trend it means that the recovery Is coming on
much hotter and much stronger then we think.
PL: Worryingly so.
PM: Why would you think so?
PL: I would. Record imports at this stage, the economy is still groggy.
PM: No, no, no.
PL: Not up off the stretcher yet,
PM: No, no if imports are coming in a trend way, there's a lot more demand in the
Australian economy. So all Dr Hewson's rhetoric that we're ruined, that nothing is
happening, will bc dead wrong. Now if it's a spike it will wash itself out of the
system, if it's just one month's aberration or two it will wash itself out of the
system. The main point is that exports are as you say, at record levels by value.
Given thc fact that prices for commodities are now very low again, it just implies
that the volumes must be astronomic. We are going gang-busters In exports and
it's exports in the end which will save the day for Australia and its trade accounts. 
TEL: 2. Sep. 92 lb: bb No. U12
FL: But look, we imported $ 560 million worth of motor cars in July, Imports in the
first seven months of thiis year are up 25 per cent cars.-
PM: Dr Hewson says we ought to havc a zero tariff, so how many motor cars would we
have under his policy? That is, with tariffs at 35. per cent for cars and coming
under Labor's 15, he wants a zero tariff which you and I know would wipe the
Australian motor vehicle industry out, it would wipe the city of Adelaide, South
Australia out in ternms of manufacturing.
PL: But how bad docs it have to get before we start thinking about a pause in these
tariff cuts? Is it totally off your agenda?
PM: Hang on, you're jumping subjects here, are you worried about import volumes or
tariffs?
PL: rm worried about, for example, as tariffs come down on cars in come those
imports.
PM: If you're worried about import volumes, what I say to you is let's wait and see how
the trend goes, and secondly the markets already taken a decision, In the
adjustment of the exchange rate, in the face of those lower commodity prices and
higher import volumes. A large adjustment has already taken place in the
-exchange rate which will make imports dearer, exports cheaper.
PL: All of our Asian neighbours though have tariffs, quotas or in some cases closed
doors to protect their local industries. How come it's good for them and bad for us
this idea?
PM: What we have done is to take tariffs down in a measured, structured careful way
from 1988 to 1997 in a phase down and the result is, the proof of the pudding is in
the eating, we are exporting our heads off. The competitiveness in Australia has
risen, the efficiency of companies has risen, but there's got to be levels, end points
where an industry may survive. In the car industry, we've said when those tariffs
travel to 15 per cent, thcn at that point we don't believe that given the low volumes
of the Australian market and a glut of cars in the Northern hemisphere that
marginally priced imported cars, we believe it will simply wipe our industry out.
PL: How do you know 15 per cent is right though? Maybe that's too low.
PM: They are judgements which are made by John Button, me and others in 1991 and
1988 when we spoke to the car companies, when we tried to get the right.
PL: Does that necessarily mean they are right, these judgements?
PM: I think they are, Governments have got to make these decisions. Blut the notion
that it ought to be zero, that basically the economy, the country only bc-longs to 
TEL: 2. Sep. 92 1-8: 56 No. 012 P. 06/ 0
6
economic athletes, this is the sort of Hewson view, that you sort of socially
impoverish the place and you wipe industry out and what riscs from thc ashes is
athletic and strident and able to survive. He's been told and Mr Mc~ achlan has
been told by ' I'oyota, Ford, General Motors zero tariffs no motor industry. Yet
the city of Adelaide and the city of Melbourne would suffer enormously under his
policy which Mr Mc~ aehlan just reaffirmed last week. They arc serious about it,
they would in office take the tariff to zero and decimate the Australian motor
vehicle industry.
PU But what if even at 15 per ccnt our industry looked like it was getting swamped,
would you act then as Primnc Minister?
PM: I don't think it will.
PL: If they couldn't cut the mustard, to use a phrase you're fond of.
PM: Thc answer is I don't think that will happen because one's got to make a judgement
about whether Australians gct lower priced cars or whether The difference
between us and the Coalition, we've said we shall have a motor industry, we
believe we can't leave car demands of Australia to be satisfied by imports.
PL: That would blow out the current account if we did wouldn't it?
PM: Exactly and thc world car makers would charge what the market would bear.
We're saying there should be an Australian motor vehicle. Hewson and
Mcb-chlan are saying look it's a matter for them, if they can exist fine, if they can't
bad luck.
PL: Did you notice the State Bank of NSW has put up its three year loan rate a quartcr
of a per cent, longer term rates, wholesale rates soon to be locked in there now
about a point and a half up?
PM: I saw that ycs, that's for three year fixed. But on the short end nothing has
changed. That is, the variable rate mortgages, nothing has changed.
P'L: And nothing will change?
PM: The Government is not going to be tightening policy.
PL: What happens if the current account does blow out though between now and the
election? That's your big nightmare isn't it?
PM: The current account is half of what it was three or four years ago, it came in way
undcr the Budget target for last year, we got a spike in imports. I know you are
trying to go potty about it but let's wait and sec whcther it's a spike or it's a trend.
As long as those export volumes stay there but again, I remind you the market 
TEL 7
has already comprehended all this and made a quite substantial adjustment on the
exchange rate.
PL: And where do you come down in the middle of this slanging match now between
Gough Whitlam and Bob H-awke?
FM: I'm basically not an " AM" listener so I didn't hear it all, any of it in fact.
PL: Just to bring you up to date the story so far Whitlamn, says H-awke was a Prime
Minister with no purpose and no policies other than the Accord.
PM: That's for them, they are big enough to look after themselves and they will.
PU But it doesn't say much about you, you were the lieutenant there for all those years.
PM: That's right, I can look after myself.
PL: I mean only a few years ago you described the Whitlam years as a period of
failure, notable mainly for doling out funds in an economic collapse.
PM: I also said of Gough Whitlani and his Government, that he put the Labor Party
back together and made it relevant again and he did. After nearly a quarter of a
century out of office he put it back together. And it was that period, even though
there was Some confusion of means and ends in his period of office, the fact that
Labor was relevant again gave us a chance in the
PL: Do you agrce with John Hewson that this is going to be thc most important and
clear cut choice type campaign since the War?
PM: I do, because basically what Labor developed in Australia is an open market
economy and efficient economy with a nice social policy wraplied around it. Thlat
is, all the social balances, access to education, access to health, support for women,
women's policies, aged care, child care, occupational superannuation. What he's
saying let's turn hack a century of social advances, industrial advances, let's have a
policy of social impoverishment and the economic phoenixes, the self made
peoplc will rise from the ashes.
PL: He is saying this hasn't worked, you've got to change the whole game, that's what
he's saying.
PM: A whole bunch of little Hcwsons will rise from the ashes. He sees himself as some
sort of economic athlete. That's why he attacks large businesses, he thinks they are
not legitimate. If you haven't owned a restaurant and been an out-rider to a
merchant bank, you're illegitimate. If you happen to run the bilggest company in
the country and it makes steel or you make cars, you're a fat bloated bureaucracy
and you're illegitimnate. If you haven't made it yourself you're illegitimate. That's
T2EL.: S ep. 92 18: 56 No. 012 P. 07/ 08 
TEL 8
the hard-hearted view, harder than the Thatcherite views of the ' 70s. So yes, there
will be a choice between a party which is the Govcernt, which has had to, for
the frst time a Labor government, give Australia a true open market economy,
that's had both the pride and the pleasure of stitching together one of the best
social policies in the world. And we're about keeping it; Medicare, support for the
aged, pensioners, child care, aged care, the rest, and not taking the view that
survival of the fittest and devil take the hind most and if we havc a whole lot of
little economic athletes bouncing through there, self made people, well that's
Nirvana. It's not Nirvana, and that's the choice Australians will have.
PL: Is it going to be a dirty campaign do you think, personal?
PM: Not from me, but almost every remark Dr Hewson makes about mc is personal.
PL: But you call him Gordon Gecko and all that sort of stuff.
PM: No, but that's a mild blandishment on the scene. He'll say almost every day this
man will lie, deceive, do anything, it's all that vicious stuff. Well let people judge
him, if he wants to participate in that sort of campaign, that sort of debate, fine. In
the last month we've just set up a new vocational education system, In the last
month..
PL; So you're the gentle good guy are you Mr soft touch?
PM: In policy I am, certainly and in the debate. But he won't be having a free ride in
the debate, I won't be that gentle. But I don't need to get down to the level he's at
to articulate my policies or speak with pride of the policies of this Government or
its achicvcmcnts.
PL. Prime Minister, thanks for your tim~ e.
PM: Good Paul.
ENDS T2E. L: S ep. 92 18: 56 No. 012 P. 08/ 08 



I. TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEAING MP,
INTERVIEW WITH MAXINE MCKEW, " TALKS WITH THE PRIME
MINISTERS" SERIES, ABC " AM RECORDED 3 SEPTEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
MM: Primc Minister in 1967 when we were listening to rcports about Vietnam,
when we were singing songs like " Light My Fire" and " Friday on My
Mind", you were 23 years old, you were two years away from a career in
Canberra, what was on your mind in those days?
PM: I was then at that stagc pretty well devoted to securing myself a scat in
Parliament, but I was as mutch a product of the ' 60s as most other people
were at the time. I was interested in the popular music you spcak about, we
had this debilitating war going on in Vietnam which was an upsetting
background fcature to most people's lives, they didn't quite understand all
the issues involved. But for my part I was at that stage very heavily
committed to coming to the H-ouse of Representatives.
MM: What was i t in your background that propelled you towards a political
career?
PM: Public life offered a smorgasbord of things that so many things could be
achicved if one could A: know what should be donc and B3: how to operate
the system to do it.
MM: What was it you wanted to do? Was it an ambition for yourself, did you
have an idcal, a combination of both? 
PM: It was a combination of both, I think most people who come into public life
are well motivated, are altruistic, I certainly was. A lot of people have
asked about the influences on my political life, what excited me, thc only
two people that ever excited me in history was primarily Churchill and
followed a close second by Roosevelt, they were the two that I thought well
if that's the business they're in, that's the business I should be in.
MM: What is it about those two historic figures that excites you?
PM: lust that they would take positions and do things and they had that sense of
leadership about them where they would not always take the safe position,
not do the conventional thing and they had breadth about them and while
each made mistakes they were always exciting.
MM: It's interesting, you nominate two foreign leaders and you have said, of
course, that you feel Australia has never produced a great leader. Do you
still stand by that?
PM: I'm not sure the occasions arc there where one might have come through. I
made the point a couple of years ago in the United States they seem to come
through at the right time for them, with Washington at the time of the
Revolution, with Lincoln during the Civil War, with Roosevelt during the
collapse of robber Baron capitalism re-establishing the. social and economic
order and that leadership told on the United States, it became a very great
country as a result of those important turning points. We've never had a
Civil War and all those social stresses so I suppose the conditions produce
the people.
MM: If you haven't any local heroes you certainly had some..
PM: No, there were people I was interested in and had a great abiding interest in
and affection for like Theodorc and Curtin and Lang and people like that.
MM: Lang was an important early mentor was he not, or is that overstated
somewhat?
PM: It is very much overstated. I knew him well, very well in fact, but he was at
Henry Parkcs' rallies and he would give you a pen sketch of their
personalities, Parkes, Latham, Holman, Storey, Isaac Isaacs.
MM: Is that why you sought out his company? He was some sort of connection
to the past and you wanted to know about that? 
PM: Yes and he was intcrested in young people. He would always open himself
up to young people and hc gavc me a tremendous amount of lime, but he
used to think I was unimpressed with his economic and social views and by
and large I was, but he was always so good spirited and he could teach you a
lot. And so you felt you knew all these char acters, or you had some real
feeling about them.
MM: Has that been important to you throughout your career, that sense of being
connected to Labor's past?
PM: It gives you bearings, it gives you bearings throughout the nation so
certainly in the history of the Federation it gives you bearings.
MM: You came to Canberra in 1969 which was an election that Labor nearly won
and you came here I suppose as a pretty young impatient young man and
you came to..
PM: I wasn't that impatient, I like to think I was canny enough not to be
impatient.
MM, But you came to a parliamentary party that had a lot of older men who were
used to waiting for government. How did that strike you?
PM: Yes, that was a pity, the two forces which play against the Labor Party was
the First World War and communism. The First World War, Gallipoli,
Flanders snuffcd out a lot of the social experimentation and nationalism
which caused us to federate, where we formed the Labor Party and where
we did so many novel, social things in the first fifteen or so years of the
century and the conservatives wrapped the flag around it all and then made
quite a radical thing, young men walking off the land and serving abroad,
turned quite a radical thing and a conservative thing and of course a very
divisive thing for the Labor Party. The belief that communism in some way
centrally planned economics and the problems of the depression that
communism hcld out some sort of option which was taken up by the
intellectual Left in Britain, Australia and other places produced a lot of
division in the Labor Party as thc polarities of the party shifted towards
central planning as distinct from open markets and market operated
economies. And the Cold War, the expression of all that in the Cold War
and the stretched loyalties there were instnimental in Menzies having such a
free nin wvith the DLP to keep us out of office for a quarter of a century.
Without either Australia would have been a much more prosperous, more 
united place, a more progressive place and Labor probably would havc been
the dominating party throughout the history of the Federation.
MM: Did you find though that there were some people here in ' 69 who still had
paralysing views about the past?
PM: A lot of people here were here twenty years at that stage, came in ' 49, had
no office and were very jaded, not all of course, some were terrific, but
many were jaded and disappointed, but they used their opportunity and did
their best, just that they lacked that experience which would have come with
a more natural party of government, one that had been around more often.
MM: You came here with an immediate interest in economics which is very
unusual for the time.
PM: It wasn't, I wouldn't be too haughty about it Maxine, I wouldn't say it was an
interest where I had all the economic theories at my fingertips, but I was
intercsted in economic issues and in the creation of national wealth and I
always saw the creation of national wealth as the passport to most
Australians getting their share of income and all the other things. So my
focus when T arrived, just about everyone in the parliamentary party was
interested in foreign policy, the Foreign Affairs Committee was everyone in
the Caucus bar about two or three and in social policy.* I remember Gough
Whitlamn saying in the late ' 60s our job is basically to distribute the
abundance, that is to carve up the wealth and that was a pretty reasonable
view given the history of the ' 50s and the
MM: But would you say the problem was no one talked about creating the
wealth?
PM: T'hc basis of the wealth was falling apart, hut it was not apparent to people,
that is the terms of tradc post War had turned sharply against us, but it was
not apparent. It was only apparent in thc ' 70s and that's when of course, the
remedy should have been undcrtaken. As it turns out they were left until the
so it is very easy to say at this point with this hindsight, but back there
in 1969-70 ' 71-72 you had to be very perceptive to see the terms of trade
shifting so markedly, that is the former dependence upon commodities
being in a position to let us down.
MM: How did Gough Whitlam trcat you in those days, did he dismiss you
because you didn't have a tertiary education? 
PM: Yes, Gough and I have been on and off over the years. I liked him because
he was interesting, he understood that Australia had become a backwater
and that we were too much a derivative society and we needed to break out
of it and that's what really " Its Time" thing was about, but he said to me one
day I judge a man by the number of questions he puts on the Notice Paper
and I thought God, I'm going to fail here for sure because politically I
thought it was never a political thing to do to ask your opponent questions,
because they mostly give you the wrong answers.
MM: You were pretty socially conservative when you came to this place, your
maiden speech talked about the view of the family, women staying at home.
PM: That's the sort of society, the part of Australian life I grew up in and in the
quarter century that's passed, I've changed my views about that and not only
that, in the last decadc played, I think, I hope anyway a reasonable role in
facilitating some of that change.
MM: You think there'-, now a much broader role for women?
PM: One of the great changes in the last twenty five years since " AM" first
began is the role of women in Australian society. Today relations between
women and men are different than they were in 1967.
MM: Better?
PM: Absolutely, the sheer mode of address one would undertake at a political
meeting or a gathering then and now is totally different.
MM: It sometimes seems to many people though that men and women are at war
with each other.
PM: It's takcn some years for women to adjust to their new role, their greater
opportunities in society, in education, in thc work place and it's taken men
some years later to adjust to that. But it's a happy adjustment, I'm not saying
it is without friction, but the end result is a pleasing one.
MM: Have you consciously reinvented yourself over the years?
PM: In what sense do you mean? 
MM: Are we seeing something of a metamorphosis now from someone who
believed in classical economics to someone who perhaps could be
characterised as a born again Whitlamite?
PM: No, I've always believed that the ' 80s was the decade that finished off
communism and monetarism, it put them both asunder, that is the belief that
private initiative, private reward, chasing moncy supply targets and these
things were the salvation of everybody, no one believes that now anymore
than they..
MM: Didn't you embrace that to a certain extcnt?
PM: No, never and if you look at communism that the state and central planning
was thc answer is no longer an answer either. It has bcen the triumph of the
thoughts of the social democracies, the social democratic parties which I
think have emerged from the ' 80s best, that is what we've done; construct an
open market economy, but where a social policy has been stitched into it in
such things as access for health, which we began in 1983 or more equal
access to education which we began about the same time or better aged care
or child care to give women some freedom in life to pursue the things they
want to pursue, All those sorts of things occupational supcranntuation with
the work force, these are all early to mid ' 80s things. In talking about them
now, we're talking about them in the context that the great change of the
that Labor presided over and that I was involved with was employment, the
huge ratc of employment with a work force today 26 per cent larger than it
was in ' 83. It's in the context of unemployment that we arc focussing on the
social policy and in the context of the John Hewson view of the world that
you socially impoverish the place and thcn as I said a day or so ago a whole
lot of little Hewsons will rise from the ashcs; God help you if you don't rise.
And we're saying there's got to be something better than that, that is you
don't tear up cherished institutions and cherished institutional arr angements,
you don't sacrifice those things part of a country's soul and progress is
these social changes and we should keep them.
MM: Has there not been some evolutionary changes though in yourself? Gough
Whitlam earlier this week suggested that after you stopped being Treasurer
you took a long period to do some reflecting and you emerged with quite a
differcnt perspective. Isn't that correct?
PM: Only moderately, I haven't changed my tune much in my basic view of
things since I first came to the House of Representatives. I'm smarter and
wiser for the experience I hope, I've been just simply living through a lot of 
these changes has bccn important, but I think if you've got time you do
reflect on things. You and I wcrc just speaking about thc role of women,
but two of thc other great influences of the last twenty five years, certainly
the last ten years has been the education of the trade unions. Their role in
Australian society in thc last decade has been an exemplary one, that is in
making the place more competitive and being at the lcading edge of training
and productivity of social change, of getting up social programs; things like
the Family Allowance Supplement or occupational superannuation and the
leaders of the trade union movement can take great pridc in that. Another
thing which upon reflection makes apparent is that we are now investing in
our most valuable resource, if you look at the resources boom mentality of
the 170s, the most valuable resources of course our childrcn and we're now
being certain that seven in ten complete secondary school, 40 per cent go on
to universities, we're hoping that will soon be nine in ten; a decade ago it
was threc in ten.
MM: Having raised the trade union question and having talked to all the Prime
Ministers this week one can't help but look at this question and that is that if
Bill Kelty had behaved during the ' 80s with the H-awke Government in the
way that perhaps Bob Hawke behaved towards the Whitlam Government
when Mr Hawke was ACrU chief, things would have been very different.
PM: I think the unions were greatly dehilitated by the late ' 70s experience. The
profit share had been smashed to pieces, and with it investment and
employment, and they came to the conclusion that chasing nominal wages
growth was really leading to unemployment. And like a lot of very honest
people, when one honestly understands a fact one responds to it. And they
did en masse, and their leadership took the responsibility of telling them and
teaching them that. So, wc can he grateful that someone as conscientious
and as Australian, if I can say that, as Bill Kelty came along because I think
he had the intellectual grasp and the leadership and the courage to pull the
thing the right way. But again, even he couldn't have done that I don't think
in the 1970s. It needed that cathartic experience of the late ' 70s, that wage
explosion and the rest, to bring them along. But they have been, as an
institution, one of the leading institutional forces for change.
MM: Gough Whitlam made the point this week that the only thing that Bob
Hawke had going for him was the Accord, and beyond that he only had one
ambition, to be Prime Minister.
PM: Well I think that's unfair to Bob. H-e has understood more about the basis of
the importance of wealth and letting the economy be efficient, and to get out 
there and take our share in the post-war trade in goods and services which
passed Australia by. That was the terrible thing of the ' 60s, that we believed
in thc commodities absolutely. It was wheat and wool and minerals and that
was it. But the trade which made Japan strong and Germany strong had
passed us by, not just In goods but in services. And as a result our kids and
our people didn't have the interesting jobs thcy could have had. And
changing Australia to undertake that huge odyssey out into the world
economy was what the ' 80s was about. And I think Bob understood that, he
had a lot of helpers but hy and large he had enough wisdom about him to
understand that.
MM: Now that you're in the job, what is it do you think that defines good
leadership?_
PM: Leadership has always been about being out in front, striking out, and trying
to bring up support behind you if you're the Icader, making judgements and
taking risks, and encouraging people, exciting people to do things.
MM: Do you think the question of changing the flag is an illustration, though, that
you can't be too risky, you can't afford to get too far ahcad of public
opinion?
PM: All the more reason to just to make the point, truths are absolute. We can
never be so tricky that we move away firom truths. When you get around as
a country with the flag of another country in the corner of your flag, you are
not representing yourself as best you can. Now what that means in terms of
the attachment people have to existing emblems and the methodology and
the mode of changing them, that's a different matter. But I think it's
important for lcaders to speak about these things.
MM: Are you still committed to changing the flag?
PM: I've said it should only change with a plebiscite. I don't think any
government has got the right to just impress its vicw on the whole nation
about emblematic or constitutional things. But it's important to know, we
had this very day a Minister in the Thai Government saying if Australians
are more clcar about themselves, if they want to do business with Asia, if
they wish to he part of the regional community, we will welcome them with
open arms. I mean, wc'vc really been waiting for it. I think the important
thing is being certain about who you are and what you are. 
MM: Do you think that's one of our problems, we are too ambivalent, too many of
us love the country but it also drives us crazy? Arc you a hit like that, you
get frustrated with the place?
PM: I think you get frustrated with all every country has got its problems, but
MM: We do seem to have a particular identity problem, don't we?
PM: This was a derivative place, and still to some extent is, and shaking that off
has been what the last quarter of a century has been about. But migration,
multiculturalism, doing something new here in world terms with this
community, taking more pride in our own intrinsic worth and value and
what our own culture means and stands for, reflecting the fact that we are
living on the oldest land mass on the face of the earth in a continent, a
continent which was inherited by black people, coming to tcrnms with that
and them, is all part of making tip Australia and Australians. And we're
now much more clear ahout that, aren't wc? I mean, everybody is.
MM: If we are to know who we are and be confident about that, we need a new
flag, we need a republic?
PM: We need In the first instance to know that it is important to be yourself.
Now that is not universally known or accepted in Australia. It's important to
be yourself, to be proud of what you are and to be better than what you are.
MM: Any timetable?
PM: Let me just say this. Thc neighbourhood of this area, where we've got very
large societies, and old socicties, Malaysia and younger ones, Singapore,
and the rest there's a great opportunity for Australia. But taking the view
that they're the places we fly over to somewhere else and you look at Jakarta
from 35,000 fcet is not, I don't think, an option for Australia.
MM: Prime Minister, as we're reflecting historically, do you think we're still
bedevilled by the fact that wc tend to celebrate losers in this country, we
celebrate losers and losses?
PM: Yes, there's a great underdog syndrome in the place, which is a nice thing in
some respects, as long as it doesn't overtake us so that the best people are
draggcd down by it. And there's too much of that in Australia, there's too
much of the tall poppy problem, tall poppy syndrome. People think it's 
elitist and elitism is frowned upon. Well the elite people encourage others
and give them heart and inspiration. Look at this young group of
Olympians, some of who I met last night returning again to some of the
celebrations, and they will all be inspiration to Australian young people in
sport, and in many other respects, for years to come. And whether it be in
the arts, or business, or where ever it might be, we've got to get over this
notion that we drag people down, we hop into them because they've got
talent so let's nail them, this sort of view.
MM: You referred, last weekend at the 20th Anniversary of the Whitlam
Government at thc dinner, you said that what Gough Whitlam understood
was thc need to lift the national spirit and to excite people. We could do
with a bit of that now, couldn't we?
PM: Yes, you can always do with it I think. But thcre I was reflccting upon that
which I said to you a few moments ago, that the thing is in the ' 60s the place
was still very much a derivative place and we were not making declarations
about ourselves and what it was like to be an Australian or Australia playing
a more independent role for itself in the world, and I think Gough was very
much'associated with that ' coming out' after the 25 years of Menzies, the
Menzian age. And it was exciting. The ' 80s were cxciting too, for different
reasons. It was, I think, one of the most exciting decades. No doubt a lot of
silly things were done, but it was very exc iting as well.
MM: What silly things were done?
PM: Spreading money around, 20 per cent credit growth a year, and all that sort
of thing which was rather debilitating in the final analysis. But, still you
look at Australia comparing the end of the ' 80s to the beginning of the
and it is really to bc compared as a more exciting place, a more exciting
country. Tourism, for instance, didn't exist at the beginning of the
financial services, educational services, all of these various things we were
doing, films. There's always a place for excitement, but the problem we've
had recently is unemployment produces a pall over the economy and over
society and it's a bit hard to even if it was one's want to suggest to people
to throw that off and look beyond it, as I think there's a very exciting future
in the 1990s for Australia. For the moment people are dealing with our
condition with the gravity it deserves.
MM: So one can't be inspirational, particularly in 1992, it's a lot harder? 
PM: One can be inspirational, but one can't be I don't think frivolous, and
frivolity had its place in the scheme of things in the
MM: When you became Prime Minister you said it was a humbling experience,
and other Primc Ministers this week have referred to the constraints of
office. How have you found it?
PM: Constraints of office are obvious to any practitioners of this place. We all
know the li mitations of it. In terms of it being humbling, I think it is
humbling because in thc Prime Ministership is invested, in some respects,
the ideal of the nation and its aspirations, and that's quite a lot to invest in
any one office or person. And if you happen to be the person in the office, I
think it's humbling.
MM: Bob Hawke also said this week when you come to the job you lose your
private life, but you of course insist on a private life.
PM: Well one can never insist upon it, of course we have journos who upset it.
MM: Do you resent that?
PM: In a sort of good natured kind of way I suppose I do. I think you can have it
if you wish, or remain a sort of normal person. I still get about the place, no
matter where I am I always walk around by myself, or I go into shops or
buildings or into cinemas or into theatres, or whatever it might be.
MM: You don't feel self conscious about that?
PM: No, I think if you move about freely it tends to be accepted, but if you
believe that onc should not move without an centourage and what have you
then you're a victim of your own circumstances. I think it's very
encouraging for Australians to think that the people who are managing their
affairs are normal, live normal lives.
MM: Do you ever feel that in projecting yourself, as you have to do in this job,
that there's a fine line you tread? There's a public persona and there's the
private man, are you worried about the tendency towards, I suppose,
phoniness that might bc involved in that?
PM: YCS, I can't stand phoniness or humbug, I can't stand it. And that, in some
respects, tells against me. I won't do the tricks and stunts that perhaps those 
who've been more cynically advised might do. I can't naturally do them and
feel comfortable with them. If it's not real I'm not in it-
MM: Are you're minders telling you to do certain things that go against the grain?
PM: All minders will encourage you to do things which go against the grain, and
not that they are encouraging me or have they ever to do things which are
unnatural or which are phoney. I think you tend to attract the staff that
share your values. But every now and again you find yourself doing things
that you might not otherwise do.
MM: Such as?
PM: Whether it be..
MM: Tripping over the odd camera cable at the shopping mall?
PM: No, well I don't do that you see. If I go to a shopping mall I go there to
shop, I don't go there to accost shoppers.
MM: You must rcgret you came to the job as late as you did, that you didn't have
long to establish yourself before thc-election..
PM: Yes, I think that people should not try to stay on the stage too long. I think
there's a certain amount of perceptions, energy, horsepower, perspicacity, all
thcsc things that stay at the burn rate of this kind of change. Let's make this
clear, Australia has been through a decade of just phenomenal change, the
pace of change has been phenomenal. Anyone who had lived in the ' 70s or
knows that. In public life the burn rate is very high. And I think the
public also get disenchanted with the same personalitics doing the same
things, and they are right. They are right in saying look, we want you on the
stage for a while and give us your best and please quietly leave, hut a lot of
them want to hang on too long, and I think that's a shame.
MM: Would you leave if you lost the next election?
PM: Well I don't think I will ( lose), I don't think Australia is about to turn the
country over to somebody that doesn't really have any sort of institutional
respect for Australia for its institutions, its social fabric or its values. This
sort of hard hearted view that John Hcwson is proposing, that as I said
before, you socially Impoverish the place and In more spartan conditions
where economic athletes rise from the ashes, is; not I don't think acceptable 
to Australians. That sort of view, or if you're in large business you're a
bloated illegitimate bureaucracy, if you're not self made you're no good.
This sort of thing. It's immature and I think Australians will spot the
phoniness of that, the immaturity of it.
MM: Finally Prime Minister, as it's our birthday I wonder if I could ask you if you
wouldn't mind telling us a bit of a story against yourself about a particular
morning whcn I happened to know you didn't listen to AM.
PM: Well I'm not an AM listcner. I used to be, but I think waking up to the
Weetbix with a bus being hit in Jerusalem or something else, tends to shake
you too quickly out of your slumber. I like to start on the newspapers and
gradually if I see a story I don't like I turn the next page and gradually move
into it, rather than the shock therapy you get with AM. When I was young I
could stand it, I can't thcsc days. But the day you're talking about was the
stock markct crash of 1.987.
MM: That's right.
PM: And I came into Parliament House, and the day before, that's right, on the
Friday thcrc had bccn a bit of a shake in the markets, and I walked in
Monday morning and the journalists said to me, well what do you think
about the stock market, which had collapsed over night and I didn't hear it, I
didn't know. And I said ' it's a correction, it's not to be I don't think one
should be fazed by this', or words to that cffect. And of course AM had
carried the story because it was an over night story. So I missed it.
Therefore thcre may be an omen in all that, or a moral in all that, that is
listen to AM.
MM: I do hope so. Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you Maxine.
ends 



TL: 3. Sep. 92 8: 59 No. 00? P. 01/ 02,
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE NON P J KEATING,
EXPANSION OF UNITED STATES EXPORT ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
The Australian Government strongly objects to the increased
allocation of subsidised wheat under the US Export
Enhancement Program ( EEP) 7id the extension of the program
to new markets, as announced by the US Administration early
this morning ( Australian time).
With US wheat exports in 1992-93 expected to be around
32 million tonnes, the announcement of a 29.1 Million tonne
allocation of subsidised wheat means that export subsidies
will now be available to cover almost all US exports in this
commodity. We deeply regret that domestic political pressures have
overridden a US commitment to the pursuit of a less
corrupted international trading environment for farm
products. The latest measures are hard to square with
assurances by the US Administration that the EEP will be
implemented in a way that minfimises the effects on
Australia's interests. They also threaten to escalate
further the trade-subsidy war between the United States and
A major concern to Australia Is the inclusion of new markets
within the scope of the EEP. Australia has frequently
argued to the United States that it should not extend the
EEP to new markets or new products. The extension of the
EEP to South Africa and Pakistan is particularly
regrettable. In Australia's view an expansion in the quantity and
coverage of the EEP sends a very negative signal regarding
the US commitment to the key Uruguay Round objective of
securing an4 effective rollback on the use of export
subsidies. TEL 
TEL 2
Australia and the United States both recogrnise the critical
importance of the Uruguay Round to the liberalisation of
international trade, including agriculture, and Australia
urges the United States to recommuit its very considerable
political strength to the conclusion of the Round.
The Australian Government will register its concerns about
this announcement most strongly and at high levels with the
US Administration. The Minister for Trade and Overseas
Development, Mr Kerin, will take up these issues during a
visit to Washington later this month. The EEP will be a
major item on the agenda of the Australia-US bilateral
agricultural trade consultations which are scheduled to be
held in Canberra on 15 September.
Australia will use every available opportunity including
action in the GATT to pursue vigorously with the Units&amp;
States and the European Community its longstanding concerns
about the use of export subsidies in agricultural trade.
CANBERRA 3 September 1992 T3E. L: 5 ep. 92 r. uz'uz 



II-L: 6. ep. 92 1: 46 No. USI1 P. U1/ U,
53.
PRIME MINISTER 95/ 9
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING MP
AMBASSADOR FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
Australia's first Ambassador for the Environment. Sir Ninian Stephen, is to retire
from the post.
Sir Ninian, who has been Ambassador for the Environment since July 1989,
recently informed the Government that his responsibilities as Chairman o. lStrand 2
of the Talks on Northern Ireland were now absorbing his time and capacities to
such an extent that he believed it was no longer practicable for him to continue to
hold the important post of Ambassador for the Environmcnt.
In 1991, the Government agreed to a joint request from the Governments of the UK
and of Ireland that Sir Ninian chair Strand 2 of the Northern Ireland Talks. In May
this year Sir Ninian was granted leave of absence from his duties as Ambassador
for the Environment for the duration of the Talks. In August Sir Ninian returned to
Australia for consultations and the Government accepted Sir Ninian's view that it
would be preferable for him to relinquish his role as Ambassador for the
Environmcnt and for new arrangements to be made, consistent with the high
importance the Government attaches to the environment.
The Prime Minister paid tribute to Sir Ninian's significant contribution as
Ambassador for the Environment. He said that Sir Ninian had carried out his
responsibilities with great distinction, both overseas and in Australia. Sir Ninian
had worked assiduously, consistent with the mandate given to him by the
Government, to promote, both within and beyond Australia, the Government's 
TEL: 3. Sep. 92 17: 48 No. 031 P. 02/ 0-1
2
policies relating to matters affecting the global environment. He had represented
the Government in bilateral and multilateral conferences and negotiationq relating
to the global environment, including leading Australian delegations to the
preparatory conferences which preceded the June 1992 UN Conference on the
_ Environment and pcevel~ me~ it ( UNCED).
Sir Ninian believes and the Government agrees, that he has fulfilled his role as
Australia's first Ambassador for the Environment and it is now time to hand over to
others who are, and will continue to be, actively involved in the long and
dcmanding follow up to UNCED.
The Government has recommended the apj'ointmcnt of a senior career diplomat,
Ms Pennv Wensley, to succeed Sir Ninian.
Ms Wensley, who joined the then Department of External Affairs in 1 968, is
currcntly head of the Intcrnational Organisations and Legal Division of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and has spent the past two years working
on global environment issucs. She was leader of the Australian delegation to the
Inter-GovernmentalI Negotiating Committee ( INC) which negotiated the landmark
Framework Convention on Climate Change and participated in the Australian
delegation to the UNCED conference as Senior Forcign Affairs Adviser. Ms
Wensley is well known to community and business groups with an interest in
environment issues.
It is proposed that Ms Wensley be appointed as Australia's Ambassador and
Permanent Representative to the United Nations in Geneva in early 1993 where she
will be particularly well placed to carry out the principal functions of Ambassador
for the Environment of promoting Australia's policies on global environment issues
and representing the Government at international conferences and negotiations
relating to the environment, Many institutions and agencies handling thc rapidly
growing international agenda on the environment are based in or nLear Geneva and
a considerable proportion of the follow up work to UNCED will be handled by
Australia's Mission in Geneva.
Ms Wensley will return to Australia as appropriate to brief the Government and
interest groups on global environment developments.
The Prime Minister said that an important function carried out by Sir Ninian had
been that of liaison between the Commonwealth and non-governmental
organisations. The Government attached the highest importance to maintaining an
effective dialogue with intercst groups in this area, Accordingly, the Government
plans to establish new and enhanced formal arrangements for liaison with NGOs 
TEL: 3
on international environment matters. These new consultative arrangements will
be determined on the basis of full discussion with all interested groups.
In announcing these changes, the Prime Minister reaffirmed the Government's
strong commitment to the environment. Hc said that Australia has established a
reputation internationally as a country committed to progressive and forwardlooking
environmental policies and ready to play its part in international efforts to
address environmental problems and concerns. The Ambassador for the
Environment has an important role to play in securing this image and in promoting
Australia's interests in ongoing international efforts to develop and implement
effective environment policies and strategies. The new consultative arrangements
will ensure the views of the community will be well represented.
Inquiries: Brett Bayly
Dept Foreign Affairs and Trade
( 06) 2613117
CANBERRA 3 September 1992 3. Sep. 92 17: 48 No. 031 P. 03/ 03 


96/ 92The decision of the Queensland National Party abolish the concept of equal pay for equal work is a disgraceful example of overt discrimination.
By proposing a lower minimum wage for women than for men in their industrial relations policy, the National Party has proclaimed that it considers women to be second-class Australians.
Whether a woman is part of the labour force or works in the family home, she is an Australian as worthy as any other. For equal work, or work of equal value, she should receive equal pay.
The National Party's attitude belongs back in history with the caveman.
It is a further example of the determination of the conservative parties in Australia to wind back the clock in terms of social change and equality of opportunity.
It accords with comments by the Federal Leader of the coalition, who has denigrated nurses, teachers, people who rent their homes and, indeed, all Australians, whom he has branded as " lazy" in recent days.
It seems that many Australians would have to accept second-class treatment under the coalition.
But this appalling, prejudiced policy promoted by the Queensland Nationals is the most shameful example.
It shows a disregard for the status of Australian women, and is discrimination based solely on their gender, not on merit, ability or capacity.
It is a disgrace, and Dr Hewson should be asked at the first opportunity whether he supports his coalition partner.
SYDNEY4 September 1992&nbsp;&nbsp;



1 EL: 4. Sep. 92 14: 1U No. U12 F. 011065
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISITER, THE HON PJ KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, OUR LADY OF LEBANON SCHOOL, SYDNEY
4 SEPTEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'll just say a couple of things to you, yesterday Dr Hewson said the people
of Australia were lazy. In the nine years that I was Treasurer of this country
trying to induce structural change and work place reform and what have
you, never ever was thc willingness of Australians to work cvcr callcd into
question, that never came to my mind that there was any sense of lack of
national energy. I think Dr Hewson owes the public of Australia an apology
for a smear that goes across the work force and the business community
alike that people arc lazy. Australians can do anything that aity other nation
can do, as thcy've proved, and I think the great strides of the 1980s and early
arc evidence of that, and his vicw that he should offend cvcry group in
the community and now thc community at largc by branding them lazy is I
think, unbccoming of him and he owes all of us, and particularly the
working mcn and women of this country, an apology.
J: Do we have to work harder though as a nation?
PM: We've got to organisc our investment and our products as we arc now,
towards the world markets, doing sensible and clever things and what you're
seeing here today, that is a secondary school, greater participation for kids,
young men, young women, these are thc things which will carry us along.
J: Mr Keating on -wheat, do you believe we do need as Dr lIewson suggests to
up the ante with the United Statcs? 
TEL: 4. ep. 9 141 O-02.02/
2
PM:. We've made clear our position to the United States administration and we
are now going to subject the administration to the rigours of the GATT.
process, but the notion that abuse or upping the ante so to speak can play
any sensible role is of course a nonsense. And not only that, Dr Hewson is
already attacking Japan which is our largest trading partner where we have a
huge trade surplus and where the trade story to Japan has been one of great
success for Australia. So a little bit of modcration in thought and language
would help.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Wheat and aqricultural trade has been a matter which we've been arguing
about now for most of thc ' 80s. I succeeded in getting agriculture onto the
GATT agenda in 1986 and it's still being debated, it's coming to the end of
the round and that's what will matter most; knocking out subsidies
worldwide rather than responding to any one particular increase in
subsidies.
J: Is this catastrophic for our wheat farmers sales?
PM: We need to analyse it and see what markets they arc likely to be moving
into and how that will affect us.
J: Mr Keating, are you or the Labor Party embarrassed about the slanging
match between Whitlam and Hawke?
PM: I've got nothing to say about that, I was asked about that this morning.
J; are you embarrasscd?
PM: We're all grown people in this country, we can all say what we wish.
J: Just getting back to wheat, are you personally disappointed that Mr Bush
has done this and do you fear that he may have other surprises up his sleeve
in this clection year?
PM: I doubt it, but I can understand where it's come from. He was in the mid-
West in the wheat belt and he's made this what he thinks is a gesture. I think
that the best result here is for the United States to push through a conclusion
of the GATT round with the Europeans on agriculture and we see these
subsidies diminish. But I notice Dr Hewson talking about the alliance, I
don't know whether he thinks we should be dragging defence issues into 
ILL: 3
this, I think it would be most unfortunate if that were his view. Earlier this
year I was in Lae and some of those places in Papua New Guinca where
American families left thousands of their boys behind dead on those
beaches and all Australians should consider this when we try to link the
defence relationship into trade matters. rHwon is very intemperate
these days as his remarks on Japan show, as his claim that Australians are
lazy shows, as hc's attacked renters, teachers, nurses just about every group
in the community and I think a little bit of restraint on his part wouldn't so
astray.
J: Are you expecting any improvement in the unemployment figures next
week?
PM: Wait and see next week. Thank you.
ENDS I4 L. LS: ep. 92 14: 10 No. 012 P. 06$/ 06 



TEL V~ V.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF TIE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP CANBERRA, 6 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I want to say something about the Coalition's trade policy. The Coalition is
basically out of control on the question of trade and the reason it is, is because Dr
Ilewson was embarrassed in Queensland ovcr the issue of sugar tariffs. In an
attempt to divert attention from the divisions betwecn himself and the National
Party over tariffs he has lashed out at the United States and Japan, and in a most
erratic display he is now scking to line Australia up behind Mexico and Chile to
get a trade pact with the Americas while turning our back, as he would, our back
upon Japan, South Korea, Singapore, ASEAN, all the places where our trade is
grcatcst and where our trade is growing fastcst. There is no more important thing
that any Australian political party or leader can do then to orient Australia well in
the area of international trade.
But what we have hcrc is a basically a naive, primitive approach where Dr Hewson
is attcmpting to throw our lot, Australia's lo, in with a country, the United States,
which doesn't want us and for which the greater part of our trade is now managed
with quotas, voluntary restraints, etc. As well, I noticed Mr Hill attacking the
failure of APEC, the one body which keeps Australia trading and part of the Asia-
Pacific, certainly a trade-liberalising sense with Continental Asia, the Asia-
Pacific and the Unitcd States and Canada, APEC, the one body that the Opposition
is attacking. So wc have got Dr Hcwson saying he wants to attack the United
States, but at the same time be part of it. Mr Fischer yesterday said the United
States is trade enemy number one, but today they want to be part of it, and at the
same time line up behind Chile, Mexico to become part of an America's trading
block where we would have to get the consent of their Parliaments, the Mexican,
7. Sep. 92 e: 59 No. UU1 . uW/ U4 
TEL: ?. Sep. 92 7: 59 No. 001 P. 02/ 04
2
US and Canadian Parliaments, to be part of an area where a very nmodest volume of
our trade and certainly trade growth goes.
Now on top of all that, we have got Mr Lloyd and Mr Fischer wanting to subsidisc
Australian wheat. These are thc Coalition leaders of the Coalition with Dr
R-ewson', where-Dr Hewson says no subsidies, zero tariffs, no sugar subsidies, no
wheat subsidics, but they say, yes you should subsidlise Australian wheat. So you
can sce how erratic the Opposition now is. Once they fall away from the supposed
fall-back to the Fighitback document, which is itself full of holes and blown to
picces, they are entirely erratic, whether it is on trade, whether it is on industrial
relations, whatever It mightl be there is no dcpth and policy substance in them. So
Dr Hewson says no subsidies, Mr Fischer and Mr Lloyd say they want to subsidise
Australian wheat.
And then you have got the spectacle of Mr Johnston, from Toyota, saying that he
is fed up with the Opposition, their " no-listening thing" as he calls it, amiazes him.
He said that the notion that the Opposition want to attack this Government for
stopping the import of Japanese uscd cars, used cars, into our market was a matter
which of course he found complctely inexplicable.
So I make the point that it is entirely natural for Canada and Mcxico to be part of
the United States, nearly 70 per cent of their exports go to the United States. Only
12 pcr cent of our exports go to NAIA, yet our greatest trading partner, Japan,
whcrc we now run a huge trade surplus, Singapore our third largest partner, South
Korca, ASEAN, where the growth in trade has been at 1.51 per cent growth over I
think three years, I will give you the exact figure in a moment. Exports at
around over the past five years from $ 2.6 billion to $ 6.5 billion, we're
supposed to fly over them on the way to California.
J: Andrew Peacock, as far as he is recognised in this dilemma, was saying this
morning that you can't have the best of both worlds.
PM: What wc are trying to do is have the best of all worlds, the Government, wc are
trying to chart for Australia a country which is not naturally part of any bloc, to
have trade liberalising in thc Asia-Pacific through APEC, bilateral trade links with
particular countries like Japan, South Korea, Singapore, ASEAN and that group, as
well as continuing the press for market access into the United States and Canada.
That's the wise approach; thc dumb approach is to try and line up behind Mexico
and Chile to become part of a trading block where we are not naturally a part,
whcre they don't want us, and our exports are now managed by quotas and
voluntary restraints.
Fancy turning your back on the place wherc you live, which is growing the fastest,
where your success is the grcatcst. I mean isn't this the Liberal Party when it really
gets down to it? They've always have got to have some paternal hand on them, it is
the United Statcs in thc end. Mr Fischer may say they are enemy number one but 
TEL: r ep Iz z): 1Z I4U VUI r
3
they want to go back under the skirts of the United States because they are only
safc if they can taxi it round Washington. They don't want the alien markets, as
they see it, of Japan, Singapore, South Korea, Indonesia. No, that's too hard for
them. They arc not English-speaking markets, they don't know the culture there,
and for the dear old Liberal Party the only place they call home is either London or
Washington.
J: agricultural exports to Japan, I mean we can't get in there with rice for
example? I
PM: But we get in there in a pretty big way with coal, don't we? With iron ore, with
beef as they liberal ise those beef markets, and they are on a process of trade
liberalisation, and they have been doing it with pressure but again the big
stroke Is GAIT, the big multilateral stroke is GATT and that's where you get a
systemic opening up and that's why the Government has put its greatest effort on
it. Writing to an American President in the middle of an election campaign, hoping
that you will gct some redress on something for which they have taken a political
initiative, and which the administration is saying where they will seek to avoid
impact on markets whcre Australia exports its product, is futile. But no worse than
taking the mindless and unthoughtful step of saying we will be part of the North
American free trade area. The Government thought about these things in the
John Dawkins, Bob Hawke, myself, all discussed these subjects, North American
trade in the middle
J: On Friday Mr Dawkins did say we should be part of NAFTA..
PM: No, he didn't say that at all. lie said we are a trade with North America, the Asia-
Pacific is our area, APEC is the institutional body that we want to see develop,
which we have preposed which the US has adopted, with the whole of the Asia-
Pacific has adopted, an Australian initiative has been adopted in this area which is
going to be a trade libcralising force. Senator Hill, the foreign affairs spokesman,
says we don't want a bar of it, the fact is they are all over the place, Dr l-ewson is
slipping and sliding throughi the North Queensland cane fields, while Mr Fischer is
behind him saying we will subsidise it, while you have got the National Party
saying they will drop out of any arrangement on reductions in tariffs on sugar,
while you have got the car industry saying, don't attack Japan, you're not listening.
The fact is this man is erratic and he is all over the place and his trade policies are
a danger to Australia.
J: Mr Keatirng you mentioned GATT, what is your prognosis now for the outcome of
the trade talk%?
PM: Well this move by the Americans will put more spice into the round, obviously. I
think that there will be more pressure to gct an agreement so that these subsidies
wars, people will desist from them. Obviously the best international backdrop to 
TEL: u. ue r -4 v4
4
good and fair trade is to extend the GATT agreements of the ' 60s in goods into
agriculture and scrvices in the
J: Are you optimistic about a satisfactory agreement though, Or not?
PM: I remain optimistic yes, I think something reasonable will come from it.
do you think there Is any point in any US contact between us and the
Americans
PM: it is like two noisy neighbours, instead of yelling out over the back fence we have
basically gone and callcd the police, we have gone to GAIT and said look letes
bring the Americans under scrutiny here. It is the toughest thing we have done.
J: Mr Dawkins also said last wcek that there are a number of ways we could get back
at thc Europeans who are the true villains in this trade war. Do you agree with Mr
Dawkins?
PM: Well they started the trade war. They started the subsidies, by first of all building
production subsidies and then extending them into cxports, so they promote the
development of large quantities of produce and not content with simply seeing the
butter mountain, or the wine lake, or the rest of it obtained, they then want to
subs idise its exports, the US joined them in that to protect their markets. And the
bcst result in all of that is a general agreement in the GAIT about trade.
J; But how long can this GATT process keep going on?
PM: Well it Is coming obviously to its conclusion.
J: So In the longer run the US actions may actually be in our favour?
PM: The key phrase is to get a good backdrop for international trade, the great growth
in incomes postwar have come from the success of the Kennedy Tokyo round in
GATT and international trade, and a general agreement in that is what we need.
We don't want to be hiding under someone's skirts, and particularly someone who
doesn't want us.
ENDS 



PRIINMEI S6E
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING, MP
EMPLOYER OF THE YEAR AWARDS, 7 SEPTEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I em very pleased to be here for the presentation of the
Prime Minister's Employer of the Year Awards. Thank~ you
all for coming.
You will often hear from our side of politics the term
" 1social net" by which we mean the protection of those
who for any reason need protection or assistance, who
live and work at a disadvantage.
We think the " social net" is a measure of how civilised
we are.
I think the term is sometimes misunderstood.
It is not merely a social backstop. It is not socially
inactive or passive.
Increasingly in the last decade, Australians have
developed creative programs, which are valuable both to
the individual and society at large.
And I think we have come to recognise in Australia that
such programs are m~ ore than a measure of our progress
towards a good society they actively propel us along
that path.
They give us all a bit more strength.
We are here today to congratulate employers who have
given new lob opportunities to people with disabilities.
People who have been given these opportunities speak of
the enormous boost to their confidence and self-esteem,
the sense of independence and self-reliance they gain
things which are basic to all of us.
We're here to congratulate employers who have made this
possible but we also owe them our thanks. z&gt; tp -j' 6 10 -Uj Imu F V I, V_, 
TEL: (. bep., jz i,; UZ NO. uu' r. uLIuj
2
Because in doing these things, it seems to me, we j.
grow in self-esteem, and confidence, and self-reliance.
We make Australia a better place to live when we do them.
Ladies and gentlemen
1992 marks the end of the United Nations International
Decade of disabled pe~ rsons,' so it is appropriate, I
think, to briefly" outlfiie how the Commonwealth Government
has been living up to its responsibilities.
In 1987 we took an historic first step towards overcoming
the barriers faced by Australians with disabilities, with
the introduction of theDisabilityServices Act.
The Act has provided both a significant catalyst for
change and a set of principles and objectives to strive
for. it took the needs of people with disablities out of the
realms of protective charity and into those of social
policy. It made segregation in accomodation and employment a
thing of the past.
The Disability Services Act established two new
employment models:
competitive employment and training agencies which
enable people with disabilities to earn a full wage
and
supported employment services for those people who
require additional training and support.
I'm pleased to say that many of the employers who have
been nominated for these awards'have received assistance
from services funded under the Act.
The introduction late last year of theDisabilityReform.
Package extends our initiative to provide adequate
assistance for those who are unable to compete in the
labour market, while also providing opportunities and
encouragement for those who have potential for
employment. Ladies and gentlemen
Today I am proud to advise you that the Disability
Di~ scrimnration Bill has passed through the House of
Representatives.. Under the legislat. on, people with disabilities who
experience discrimination in employment will be able to
make a complaint to the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission. 
I LL 3
The Disability Discrimination Bill will complement
existing State laws in the area of physical, intellectual
and psychiatric disability, and extend to people with
disabilities similar rights and opportunities as are
enjoyed by Australians generally.
I am also pleased to say that, despite the tight fiscal
environment? in this year's Budget we announced a package
of assistance to address the additional costs of
disability. We have come a long way in this Decade of Disabled
Persons. But new challenges emerge.
We need to provide support for people commensurate
with their needs.
We need to address more comprehensively people with
psychiatric disabilities people who in the past
have suffered from very considerable neglect.
We need to generate employment and activity
opportunities for people currently in sheltered
workshops. We need to facilitate the successful transition of
young people with disabilities from school into the
workforce or further training.
The Government is committed to ensuring that young people
with disabilities obtain their share of access to the
employment and training places announced in the
Government's Youth Statement, Young Australians.
There are of course no easy or quick solutions but, in
view of what has been achieved so far, I am confident
that imagination and sustained cooperative effort can
take us a long way.
Our success has proved the value of cooperation between
the Commonwealth Government and its departments, State
governments, organisations representing people with
disabilities, service providers, employers and unions.
I am pleased that many of these bodies are represented
here and I welcome them all.
In particular, I want to thank Ian Spicer and Martin
Ferguson. Their presence acknowledges the work which employers and
unions have been doing jointly ani1 individually to raise
the awareness of their members about the capacities and
the largely untapped potential of people with
disabilities. &gt; ep ' JZ III U I %. IV I 
TEL 4
Ladies and Gentlemen
Today we can celebrate the achievements of many hundreds
of Australians who are turning our ideal into a reality.
Australia's achievements in the area of disability
legislation, programs and financial assistance have
placed us in the forefront of international development
in this area.
Australia received recognition and praise at the
Independence ' 92 Congress in Vancouver last year.
As I have said on more than one occasion in recent
months, these difficult economic times we have been
through, and the economic challenges we face, do not
constitute a reason for discounting our social
achievements or our social goals.
Ladies and Gentlemen
Let me thank on your behalf the selection panel who face
the difficult task of choosing the finalists from shortlists
from each State and Territory and the Comxnownwealth
and who also insisted on examining all the entrants, not
only those who were short-listed.
Finally, let me say something about the employers who
have been nominated for these awards.
Among the significant features of the nominations were
the full award wages and conditions under which
people are employed.
the willingness of employers to modify the workplace
the level of integration into the workplace of
employees with a disability, and
the expanding of job profiles of workers to allow
them the training and supervision necessary to
perform more complex tasks in the organisations.
A wide variety of occupations and industries are
The success stories include a customer service
operator, an apprentice upholsterer, a fast food kitchenhand,
a horticultural employee, and office work in
architectural and engineering firms to name just a few.
Ladles and Gentlemen
On behalf of everyone here I want to congratulate all the
employers nominated for these awards. TEL Sep 92 15: Ut) NO . UU3 r. u4/ uz) 
I LL: ñ. iii I'L
9
It might well be said, beyond the recognition we afford
them today, the most satisfying return on their efforts
lies in the words of some of those people they have
helped. For instance, one man with a severe physical disability
has said: " I feel proud of myself. Since becoming financially
independent, I have been able to help other people,"
Another said: " before, when I wasn't working I was more
frightened to go out but now I am more secure and
self-confident."
And a young man with an intellectual disability has
remarked on how much better the experience of working is
compared to social security:
" People still have the right to have a Job, he said,
to do things like other people. With 8 job you can
plan things you want to do with your life instead of
relying on other people."
Ladies and Gentlemen-
I now ask my colleague the Minister for Health, Housing
and Community Services, Mr Brian Howe, to Call upon the
State and Commonwealth winners to come forward and
receive their awards. 



TEL I97/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP'
UNITED STATES EXPORT ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Set out below are the texts of an exchange of correspondence
between President Bush and me on the recently announced
expansion of the US Export Enhancement Program.
Letter from President Bush dated 4 September 1992
" I know that you are concerned about the new multi-country
Export Enhancement Program ( EEP) initiative that I just
announced. This initiative, however, does not represent a
fundamental change in the program. We are Continuing to
take into account Australia's interests as a nonsubsidizing
exporter. The initiative was constructed as carefully as
possible to allow room for Australian sales.
" In announcing the multi-country package, I made a point of
emphasizing that it was aimed at countries which subsidize
wheat exports and not at those, such as Australia, which do
not. believe that the EC must be challenged directly on
this unfair trading practice. Our farmers are hurting, as I
suspect yours are too. I agree with you that a successful
conclusion of the Uruguay Round is of critical importance
for advancing global trade liberalization. I remain firmly
committed to reaching agreement on outstanding issues before
the end of the year. my G-7 colleagues agreed on this in
Munich, and I am working hard to ensure we deliver on this
commiitment. " I value highly Australia's close cooperation on the GATT
negotiations. I hope that we can continue to work together,
notwithstanding any differences we may have on the EEP
issue." Sep .92 14 oU4 Nu UUO I-U I 7VZ 
TEL 2
Mly response to President Bush dated 8 September 1992
" Thank you for your personal message offering your
perspective on your recent announcement on the Export
Enhancement Program.
" I appreciate your assurance that you remain firmly
committed to reaching agreement on outstanding issues in the
Uruguay Round negotiations before the end of the year. In
this you can count on Australia's continuing close
cooperation. " I was also glad to have your confirmation that you were
continuing to take Australia's interests into account in
constructing this latest EEP initiative.
" Nonetheless, I have to say that the issue of export
subsidies remains a major difference between Australia and
the United States. It will continue to have a corrosive
impact on public support in Australia for the relationship
between our two countries. This is something which should
be of concern to us both.
" After due consideration the Australian Government has
decided that the comprehensive nature of the
Administration's announcement last week leaves us with no
alternative but to take up the whole issue of agricultural
export subsidies under the appropriate procedures of the
GATT Council.
" Given the prime responsibility the European Community bears
for escalating the use of subsidies, my Government will
subject their programs to the same GATT complaint
procedures. " Let me assure you of my direct and personal support for
your wish that our two countries continue to work closely
together to finalise the Uruguay Round, which can alone
provide a long-term and sustainable solution to the problem
of agricultural subsidies. The stakes involved for all of
us in avoiding a trade war are very high. As I explained to
you here in Australia last January, I believe the United
States has a vital leadership role to play in completing
this important task.-
CANBERRA 8 September 1992 3. ; ep., 32 14: U4 t. UZ/ Uz 


The Australian Government was appalled by, and condemns unequivocally, the deliberate and unprovoked massacre of peaceful protesters by the Ciskei Defence Forces on 7 September 1992. About 28 people were killed and around two hundred more wounded. These people were legitimately demonstrating against the continuation of the apartheid structure of &nbsp;"independent homelands".
Australia conveyed its horror at these events to the South African Ambassador, who was called in to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade yesterday.
&nbsp;The South African Government, which, under international law is responsible for the actions of the Ciskei authorities, must take action to ensure that the perpetrators are quickly brought to justice. No other country in the world including Australia recognises the independence of the homelands.
This latest violence further undermines the prospect of an early resumption of constitutional negotiations through the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA). Ciskei is a party to the CODESA talks -and the military leader of Ciskei is identified as a close ally of President De Klerk. The President's failure to condemn the massacre puts in question his commitment to eliminating political violence and the structures of apartheid which Ciskei represents.
To establish an environment of confidence in which the constitutional negotiations can resume, the Australian Government believes it is crucial that all parties exercise self-restraint and that the South African Government exercise more effective control over the security forces.
These tragic events also demonstrate the correctness of the Australian Government's approach, in concert with its Commonwealth partners, of delaying further lifting of sanctions until concrete changes have taken place in South Africa. People-to-people sanctions were lifted last year under the Commonwealth's phased approach to removing sanctions, but trade, investment and financial sanctions will remain until South Africa is irrevocably on the road to non-racial democracy.
As Senator Evans and I have indicated previously, Australia stands ready to contribute to the international efforts to address the problem of violence in South Africa.
CANBERRA9 September 1992
&nbsp;


I am delighted to open today's roundtable discussion on the Commonwealth's National Electricity Discussion Paper.
The performance of the electricity industry is vital for Australia's economy. It is a very significant employer* of our labour, capital and financial resources. It is also a major cost input to many manufacturing and resource-based industries.
For the manufacturing sector, for example:

electricity costs are more important than road transport,
twice as important as communications costs, and
a five times more important than rail transport costs.

Electricity is equally significant in the mining and services sectors.
Because of its importance I welcome the programs of reform being undertaken by individual States, by the utilities themselves, and by distributors.
Considerable improvements in the productivity performance of utilities have been achieved.
We believe that a national approach to the future development of our electricity industry has big advantages over a single State approach.
For this reason I put forward a proposal in ' One Nation' to provide up to S100 million towards upgrading transmission interconnections in eastern Australia.
It was also with this national approach in mind that Heads of Government agreed in July last year to establish a National Grid Management Council to manage and develop the electricity industry in south and eastern Australia.
An important part of the Council's work to date has been~ the development of a National Grid Protocol to govern the operations of the industry, including rules for access to the transmission grid and competitive sourcing of new generation capacity.
Like other areas of industry reform which we have pursued vigorously in recent times, the key to continued reform is competition.

Competition for generators.
Competition for supplying large customers
Competition between States and within States.

A necessary condition for making a competitive system work is to ensure that no one competing in the market controls access to the market. And access to this market effectively means transmission.
We have put forward a model, the National Grid Corporation, for opening up access.
I want to emphasise that our model Is for a neutral entity controlling a natural monopoly in a national market for electricity.

Neutral, not Commonwealth or even necessarily government.
Controlling, not necessarily owning the transmission assets it manages.

If the grid operator can clearly stand as a neutral entity in the market, with full management control of the assets on a national basis, that's fine with us.
It's not enough to separate existing generation and transmission activities, while keeping them under the control of the same organisation.
It's not enough to establish greater transparency in transmission access charging.
The Chairman of British Electricity International, Graham Ha! dley, pointed out recently that from the point of view of a potential new entrant reviewing our market, he strongly supported the idea of genuine separation of generation and transmission, so that no incumbent operator had, or could be seen as having, an unfair commercial advantage.
The alternative, he suggested, involved special compensation effectively, subsidies paid by consumers.
This is not the way to go.
The point in clearly that all operators in the market place must be treated equally and be seen to be treated equally.
Perceptions of bias can greatly influence market outcomes and discourage competition.
The National Grid Corporation proposal would address this potential problem:

It would avoid potential conflicts of interest;
ensure that transmission pricing relates only to transmission assets;
and would not be influenced by financial performance in other parts of the electricity business.

It would allow arms &nbsp;length trading between generators, distributors and other customers.
I look forward with great interest to the outcome of the National Grid Management Council's work on a structure for the operation of the grid.
I should also emphasise a comment made by Alan Griffiths recently that is, that the National Grid Corporation proposal is not a smokescreen for the Commonwealth to take over the industry.
As I have said, the Commonwealth is not seeking ownership of the Corporation
Similarly, there are no evil intentions behind the Commonwealth's proposal to buy out New South wales and Victorian interests in the Snowy Mountains Scheme.
A reformed Snowy Scheme could have an important role in helping develop a more competitive generation market. The Snowy will, however, be only one of several players in the game and would ba subject to the normal anticompetitive safeguards.
I find it difficult to see the Snowy tail wagging the electricity dog as some have suggested.
And if the NSW and Victorian Governments are prepared to negotiate, we could have an offer on the table later this year.
The issues I have briefly mentioned are all addressed in the Government's electricity discussion paper and will be debated in further detail during the course of today.
The paper provides an outline of the Commonwealth's current thinking. It is meant to act as a catalyst for &nbsp;relevant parties to participate in the development of an agreed strategy.
From the already healthy written response to the discussion paper, we are obviously part of the way there.&nbsp;
CANBERRA10 September 1992


10 September&nbsp;1992
E &amp; O E PROOF COPY1
Journalist: 11.4 per cent&nbsp;unemplymcnt.
PM: It s a very&nbsp;diappointing figure, very &nbsp;disappointing and the only light we can see&nbsp;on that horizon is the Increw in vacancies which seems to be going&nbsp;on now quitc&nbsp;inexorably around the country. But the figures&nbsp;are volatile we had unemployment rising&nbsp;by one per cent in Queensland in a month and falling&nbsp;one per cent in Western&nbsp;Australia in a month , and obviousl that's not happened.
Journalist: The aggregate&nbsp;figure is still going up isn't it?
PM. But the aggregates are&nbsp;going up and they are&nbsp;notgoing to tum down unil the&nbsp;growth weve got now does accelerate.
Journalist:&nbsp;Do you think that you have missed an opportunity by not going early to an&nbsp;election? You've let the Coalition off the hook.
PM: No, no, the Coalition... just imagine, whatever probloma we've got today with&nbsp;unemplotnant, what would we have if ther was a 15 per cent&nbsp;tax on everything&nbsp;or a $7 billion&nbsp;cut to the Budget. They have got no policy&nbsp;prescriptions and what&nbsp;&nbsp;John Hewson's&nbsp;proven this week is they dom'l even have courage in the one they&nbsp;believed in.
Journalist:&nbsp; But they've&nbsp;got flexbility.
PM: Thy got fright&nbsp;that's it, they have taken fright, that's what has happened to them.
ENDS



/ 0
EMBARGOED: 6pm, 12 September 1992
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON V. 3. KEATING, MP
CHIFLEY MEMORIAL LECTrURE, 12 SEPTEMBER 1992
It is a privilege to be asked to speak to you tonight in
honour of one of the very great men of Australian Labor
one of the great men of Australian history.
It is a particular privilege to speak here in Bathurst,
the town with which the name Ben Chit ley will forever be
identified. It is a privilege to come after him, and it is with a
sense of some humility that I find myself standing here
in the town where an author of our ambitions lived.
Labor's ambitions. Australia's ambitions.
For me this occasion is the more momentous because Just
now we Australians face a decade in which the fate of our
ambitions hangs in the balance.
Ladies and gentlemen
Let me preface this address by saying something very
simple. I believe that Australia is a Country of extraordinary
achievements and equally extraordinary potential.
I believe Australians are people of rare quality.
And I believe that in the next few years, despite the
difficulties and the unc~ rtainties, Australia will
triumph. I feel the need to say this to counter the doomsayers on
the other side of politics who seem determined to
belittle both our achievements and our prospects.
That's why I feel the nead to say it at a time when wQ
have both a need and a right to feel confident, it is, to
say the least strange to hear our altern.. tive leaders
call Australians " lazy" and " embarrassing".*
That's why I feel the need to say it. 
74 2
And I know I am right whben I say it.
I will tell you why.
I have watched this last decade as Australia grasped the
nettle as no other developed country did.
I have watched Australians radically transform their
industrial culture, vastly increase their productivity
and pull the country up to levels of competitiveness
unimaginable a decade ago.
Internationally competitive levels.
I have seen them accept the necessity for structural
change. That is what has convinced me that we will succeed.
SU. cs is what convinces mne.
Never have we worked harder and made more progress
towards the reali-Sation Of our ambitions than we have in
the last decade.
Never have we had such an opportunity to reap the rewards
and deliver them to future generations than we have in
the next decade.
And never has all this work and all this hope been so
threatened as it is now.
I am talking about our ambitions for an enlarged and
enlightened social democracy.
An Australia in which energy and opportunity flourish,
where faith in oursslves and our country abounds, and the
nation's capacity to care for a11 its citizens is
paramount. It seems to me that if the last is not true the first two
must also be false.
These, Ben Chifley said, were the things worth fighting
for. The primacy of social justice, social cohesion,
equal opportunity the fair go.
They seem to me to be immutable facts of our nature.
Nothing has moved them in 100 years.
War, depression, booms and busts, outbursts of imperial
jingoism, cold war, cultural invasions of various kinds,
have all at times challenged these beliefs: but they hL~ ve
always re-emerged often in the shape of men like Ben
Chifley. 
The longer I stay in public life, the more Australians I
meet, the more I am convinced that the values of this
country were written by the people, by working people.
And that is their strength.
That is why they won't be sold. Those people who
presently want to change them will find implacable
resistance. As a Labor Government, we believe that so long as we
honour those principles, and push on towards our social
democratic goals, even in the face of this recession and
the damage it has caused, Australians will stay with us.
Whenever the duties of his office allowed him, Ben
Chifley used to drive up here from Canberra.
Modern Prime Ministers might envy him both the contact
with the natural landscape and the chance it gave for
reflection. If a man was ever going to see a Light on the Hill this
was the way to do it.
As he drove along and the sun set over the western plains
the " vision splendid of Australia Unlimited" must have
seemed as good as real.
Many things have changed. The Australia Chifley knew was
a vastly different country.
But moro than four decados on, Son Chifley's vision
remains, to a remarkable extent, our own.
He was a nation builder.
As we are nation builders.
His great projects in the national interest, like the
Snowy Mountains Scheme, are our One Nation: our $ 500
million National Standard Gauge Rail Highway linking
Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth, and
linking ports, rail and roads; our $ 2 billion dollar
development of the nation's roads: our reforms to
aviation: our National Electricity Grid.
The immigration policy developed in Chifley's time the
most profound social undertaking in our history is
continued in the multicultural policies developed in
ours, the most successful policies of their kind anywhere
in the world.
Chifley was a social reformer.
AS we are social reformers. 
His reforms to the health system and social security, are
our Medicare, and our broad network of social programs
developed in the past decade which are at least the equal
of the most advanced nations on earth.
Ban Chifley believed there was a role for government.
So do we we assert it.
His car industry is our car industry.
Much more modern, changing but the same one.
Ban Chifley saw an Australia which was too dependent on
its primary products, too dependent on Britain for its
trade, too short of capital and skills.
Like us, he believed we had to diversify our industry,
look to new markets for our products, raise our capital
and skills base.
We have done these things like no government before us.
Were he here now, in 1992, the Superannuation Guarantee,
the creation of the Australian National Training
Authority, the enormous growth in universities and
secondary education retention rates, would all be music
to his ears.
So too would be the rapid growth in the last decade of
our manufacturing exports which, for the first time in
our history, now exceed the volume of our exports of
minerals and primary produce.
Ben Chifley would be pleased to see that we are making
things for the world to buy, for he knew that this was a
great measure of our progress.
Chifley believed in the principle of gathering all our
strength and all our resources towards a common national
purpose. He had served in that wartime government which, through
cooperation with business and the unions, and through
calling on the best feelings of Australians, set and
achieved national goals.
One Nation is in that tradition.
The Accord is in that tradition.
The lowest number of strike~ s in thirty years is in that
tradition. 
In that tradition we have called on Australians to adopt
the principle of partnership between the various tiers
of government, between businass and unions and
communities so that all Australians may participate and
all their energies go toward the common national cause.
Our guiding philosophy is social democratic, by which I
mean democracy of the broadest kind: the maximization of
rights and liberties, the extension of both individual
opportunity and social justice.
In this we are right. Look at the world. The successful
countries are those which have followed this path.
The successful economies have been free market economies:
the successful societies have been those which have
combined this with democratic freedoms and sophisticated
integrated csniaI programs.
They have invested in their own ciuItura. 1 development.
They have cushioned the impact of economic change by not
losing sight of their responsibility to people.
Communism has failed. Less spectacular but no less
emphatic has been the failure of monetarism and laissez
faire economics: under all its appellations
Thatcherite, Reagan and Rogernomic.
It's no accident perhaps that they have both gone down
the same historical chute.
Both have a strain of fanaticism. Both are regressive
and both regress to nineteenth century pseudo-scientific
ideals. Both have failed and if the Liberal Party thinks that
it will succeed in the 1990s in the hands of a Social
Darwinist with new batteries they are wrong.
Desperately wrong. Again.
And we might ask ourselves why it is that the past has
such a magnetic attraction for our conservatives.
Why it is in their nature to frequently advance to the
rear. Why Bob Menzies was drawn to the British Empire long
after it had turned up its toes, and John Howard in turn
is drawn to Menzies and the torpor, wastod
opportunities and withering of our culture in the Menzies
era. 
Recognising that Menzies was a bit of a socialist by his
own radical right standards, John Hewson finds he must go
even further back for his ideals to the economic and
social thinking of early industrial capitalism albeit
re-constituted and disgorged in the textbooks of the
business schools of the late seventies.
Why is he attracted to these models which caused such
damage to the fabric of the societies in which they were
applied?
Why, for instance, in a society with one of the most
sophisticated social security systems in the world, does
he want to introduce measures characteristic of societies
in decay?
Why does he say that if we reach back to help the
underprivileged they will rdrag Lis down?
Why, in the last decade of the twentieth century does he
utter the sentiments of the first half of the nineteenth?
Why, if not because he holds ordinary Australians in
contempt?
Why does he paint the efforts of Australians as feeble?
Why do they embarrass him? Why does he paint our
progress as the opposite of progress?
Why does he attack successful Australian businesses as if
they were failures?
Why, as Australians march bravely toward the future does
Dr Hewson point back toward a wasteland and shout
There. Go therel?
Why, if not because he has no vision, only ideology?
Why, if not because he is fanatical?
I have always believed that the Labor Party and Labor
Governments should keep their shoulders against the door.
Reform is what we are here for.
But we are for change anid continuity.
We press forward, but we take society with us.
We build, but we don't destroy.
In the last decade we Australians have learned something
about the art of gathering our resources, about
cooperation, partnership, working together. Principles
which have been fundamental to the success of other
countries, and fundamental to the successas we have had. 
In this decade I think we must take those principles
further. I think that we owe it to this and succeeding generations
of Australians to see that an identity entirely our own
has a chance to flourish.
To see that we give these generations the opportunity to
choose those institutions and symbols which reflect their
sentiments and their reality, and not those of a bygone
era. To see that faith in this Australia this liberal,
democratic, tolerant, diverse, independent Australia
has a chance to grow.
I believe we would be derelict in our duty to the future
if we did not give the Australians of this post-imperial,
multicultural stage in our history the same opportunity
as those of a century ago.
I believe it would energise us, I believe it would give
us new faith and inspiration, I believe it would
guarantee the life of our best traditions and
institutions.
And I think we should have the courage to open the debate
on the institutions and symbols of our nationhood.
As I have said, many of the things we have done Ben
Chifley would have hoped to do.
But we have done more than that we've done things in
social, industrial and economic policy beyond the compass
of his imagination.
We have developed policies to benefit Australian women
which have put Australia back in the vanguard of
international progress where we used to be in the days
when Australia was regarded as perhaps the most socially
advanced nation in the world.
Labor has put increasing opportunity and choice for women
back in the centre of social reform.
For example, since 1983, of the 1.5 million new jobs
created 64 per cent or about two thirds have been filled
by women.
And Labor has supported them.
In the last few years our equal pay strategy has narrowed
the gap between men's and women's earnings.
On average women now earn 83 cents for every dollar
earned by men a marked improvement on the 67 cents when
we came to power. 
Our affirmative action policies are encouraging employers
to increase women's job opportunities.
Labor has supported women through a fivefold increasa in
the number of child care pieces; through improved access
to superannuation; improved access to education;
increased income Support for families; special programs
addressing women's health needs.
Labor has legislated to protect women against
discrimination. In fact, the United Nations Commission on the Status of
Women declared this year that Australia leads the world
in the implementation of programs to eliminate
discrimination against women.
We will build on these achievements we always build.
Our opponents want to undo them they always want to
undo thoem.
They will abolish the Affirmative Action Agency and the
Equal Pay Unit.
Through their consumption tax they will tax the household
budget for which women are generally responsible. it is
a tax on food, clothing and pharmaceuticals just for a
start. They will tax child care, and they make no commitment to
maintaining fee relief, nor to expanding the number of
places. And under the Coalition's enterprise bargaining system,
women in the workforce can expect their earnings to
erode. Without the protection of the Tndustrial Relations
Commission, which our workplace bargaining system
guarantees, women workers will see their pay relative to
men reduced to the levels existing when we came to
office. That is what happens in the United States, where a
decentralised wages system has kept women's earnings to
less than 70 cents for every dollar earned by men.
The Coalition will reduce support for women. They will
take away eligibility for their family allowance from
100,000 families. Stop paying wives' pensions where the
spouses of disability support pensioners are under
Take away the sole parents' pension when the youngest
child turns 12. 
I could say a great deal more about the differences
between Labor and the Coalition. They are as the last
few weeks have clearly demonstrated quite profound.
Week by week over the next few months you will see the
differences grow clearer in every field of economic and
social policy.
Dr Hewson's Fightback, is, after all, a comprehensive
document. The most comprehensive thing ever devised, he
says. It is the Bible of his brave new world.
Nothing escapes it with the possible exception of aged
care which doesn't get a mention.
I will refer to only a couple of areas tonight.
They didn't miss health.
Medicare a quality, affordable, universal system will
be pushed towards the American model which offers care to
only 80 per cent of the population at 50 per cent greater
cost. They will cut the rebate from 85% to 75% and they will
abolish bulk billing except for those with health cards.
Speaking of benefits, the Coalition promises to cut
unemployment benefits after nine months; cut employment
programs; privatise the CES; introduce longer waiting
periods for assistance; and pay young people $ 3 or $ 3.50
an hour for work.
Unemployment is the greatest social problems of our time.
It haunted Chif ley, as it did all those who lived through
the Great Depression.
The high levelu uf unemployment we afe now experiencing
are anathema to a party whose creed has always been full
employment. The disappointment is all the greater because we had done
so phenomenally well to grow 1.5 million new jobs in the
1980S. It is entirely unacceptable that a tenth of the work
force should basically bear all the burden of structural
change and the recession.
The principal aim of all our efforts in the past six
months has been to reduce un~. mployment, to get
Australians who have fallen out of the system back into
it. That is why this year we will spend S1.1 billion on
labour market programs. Why we've spent one per cent of
GDP or $ 4 billion to stimulate the economy and boost
employment. 
It's why we held the national summit on youth
unemployment, out of which came a universally applauded
package of employment and training programs for Young
Australians. It's why we established this year, in an educational
revolution, the Australian National Training Authority
to lift the quality and status of technical and further
education to the highest level: the level it must be if
Australians are to have the skills they will need for the
well-paid and interesting jobs, and if modern Australia
industry is to have the skilled workforce it will need.
That unemployment is also why we are determined on a path
of economic growth.
we must have growth. It's the only way we can sensibly
re-structure and~ create jobs.
To survive today as a well-employed nation we have to
trade. To trade we have to be productive.
To be productive means more product from fewer people.
The remedy to this redundancy can only be mnr
production. Our aim then is two-fold greater efficiency and greater
production. Both depend, we say, on mutual understandings on
national agreement about the direction of national
income. Growth of the order we require can only be achieved in a
framework in which business, labour and the Government
agree on these directions.
To an extent that would astonish Ben Chifley who lived in
the long era of habitual conflict, that framework has
been established.
It is generally agreed in Australia now that we can't
have hard-won growth frittered away in senseless price
and wage rounds.
You can't do it without the lower interest rates and low
inflation which an incomes policy alone can harmoniously
provide. Equally we can't have efficiency in a culture of
conflict. 
The speed with which this understanding has come to
management and unions alike has surprised even those who
promoted the idea.
The speed of the revolution in work practices has
surprised everyone.
The speed with which our export of elaborately
transformed manufactures has grown, even through the
recession, has surprised them too.
It is why I say that I believe in our future. I believe
in the capacity of the Australian people. I believe in
the path we are taking.
We have done the fundamental things, the brave thi ngs,
and the Australian people have responded bravely.
We have given Australia a chance to grow.
And Australians have seized it.
A decade ago, as we came out of recession we had double
digit inflation. Today we have entrenched our competitive
advantage with one of the lowest inflation rates in the
industrial world.
A decade ago our work and managerial practice was
notoriously bad. Today Best Practice is not just a
catchword, but increasingly a reality and its helping
us to export in ways we never thought possible. In 1992
Australia is exporting motor vehicle engines to Japan.
Both our manufactured exports and service exports have
tripled over the past decade.
A decade ago we imported more goods and services than we
exported. Today we export more than we import.
And increasingly we export goods with high levels of
value adding like motor vehicles atnd motor vehicle
parts, computers, scientific equipment, industrial
machinery, telecommunicati ons equipment.
These goods recorded growth of 216 per cent since 1983
twice the growth of mineral exports, nearly six times the
growth of rural exports.
In that period motor vehicle exports have grown from M2
million to $ 414 million.
Office machines and computers from $ 19 million to $ 41S
million. Industrial machinery from $ 235 million to S' 199 million. 
To name a few. And the greater part of the growth has
been in the past two or three years 57 per cent growth
between 1988 and 1991.
Most of the exports been into Asia where so much
potential for Australia lies.
We are making progress on all the important front&amp;
including the wharves where productivity has doubled.
We are developing a food processing industry, estimated
to be worth $ 7 billion by the end of the decade.
There are opportunities for similarly huge development of
our construction industry, our finance and tourism
industries.-These are the reasons why I say that even in these tough
times there is great reason for hope and confidence.
And why I say it is Australians who give us reason for
that confidence for these achievements are due to their
work, their skills, their imagination, their belief in
Australia. In recent days you may have noticed that the Opposition,
which for so long has been saying we are the antithesis
of everything they stand for, have begun to say that on
certain key issues there is very little separating us.
Well, as John Dlawkins reminded them the other day,
imitation is the sincerest form of flattery.
But it's a very poor imitation.
It shouldn't fool anyone.
They're doing the chameleon on tariffs but ask the car
industry if they're fooled. Ask the sugar industry.
There is a fundamental difference on tariffs.
Our starting point is that there shomuld be a car
industry. That there should be a sugar industry.
There's is simply " restructure or perish".
There's is to quote Mr McLachlan, " if we are wrong that
will be a tragedy."
Like I said tell that to the working people of
Adelaide, Geelong and Melbourne.
There's a also fundamental difference on the most basic
relationship in the economy industrial relationS.
Already we have 300 registered enterprise agreements. 
By early next year we will have half the workforce
covered. But we also have and this is the great difference the
Industrial Relations Commission setting minimum rates in
awards, and so providing a safety net through which
employees cannot fall.
There is a basic difference on education. It's expressed
most eloquently in these simple figures under the
Coalition, if you want to send your children, or
yourself, to university it's going to cost you $ 24,000
for an arts degree up to $ 150,000 for medicine.
There are basic differences on health policy, women's
policy, environment policy, policy on arts and cultural
development. There is a profound difference about what sort of
community and nation Australia can be.
It is a difference in philosophy we start from
different beginnings and seek different ends.
We start with the Australian people and they will get us
there. Really, no one ever put it better than Ben Chiflep.
" I try to think of the labour movement, not as putting an
extra sixpence in someone's pocket, or making somebody
Prime Minister or Premier, but as a movement bringing
something better to the people, better standarde of
living, greater happiness to the mass of the people. we
have a great objective the light on the hill which we
aim to reach by working for the betterment of mankind."
That is the base, the sentiment from which we begin.
But our ambitions are now greater and so are our
achievements. The light on the hill does not symbolise where we are
going any more. We are past that stage.
It does not symbolise where we have been. We look
forward, not back.
it symbolises why we have these ambitions, these goals
for the Deople, for the nation.
Thank you. 


14 September 1992
&nbsp;
The Federal Government is committed to supporting carers and recognising the valuable contribution they make to Australian society, the Prime Minister, Paul Keating, said today.
&nbsp;
Mr Keating joined with Health, Housing and Commnunity Services Minister, Brian Howe; Aged, Family and Health Services.. Minister, Peter Staples; Social Security Minister, Dr Neal Blewett; and Veterans' Affairs Minister, Ben Humphreys, to launch the Government's policy statement, " Commnitment to Carers". " 
&nbsp;
It is appropriate that the launch of this Statement coincides with Australia's first National Carers Awareness Week," Mr Keating said.
&nbsp;
"Commitment to Carers offers a comprehensive National response to the needs of our carers.
&nbsp;
"The Statement builds on the recent Budget announcement of a $ 93 million package to support carers and better meet their needs. " 
&nbsp;
Carers are the human face behind many of the Government's social welfare programs.
&nbsp;
"They make a tremendously valuable contribution to Australian society. 
&nbsp;
"We must recognise the personal sacrifices they often have to make in looking after the more vulnerable members of our society."
&nbsp;
Mr Howe and Mr Staples said the provision of support and assistance to carers was as important as support and assistance for those who actually need care.
&nbsp;
"Carers need to know that we are committed to looking after their needs that we are providing appropriate support," they said. 
&nbsp;
"Commitment to Carers will underpin the Government's objectives in this important area of social policy."
&nbsp;
Mr Howe said the Federal Government provided a comprehensive range of -health, aged care and disability services to meet the needs of frail -older people, people with dementia. people with long-term illnesses and people with a disability.
&nbsp;
"The provision of these services is important to the achievement of social justice in Australia," he said.
&nbsp;
"Social justice is about quality of life and providing choices and opportunities for all members of society."
&nbsp;
"One of the problems facing those ageing veterans who served this country so well in times of need, is the difficulty they face in continuing to live in their own homes," Mr Humphreys said. 
&nbsp;
"For this reason, I welcome this further initiative by the Federal Government in assisting veterans and their dependents to continue living secure, independent lives in the local community."
&nbsp;
Mr Staples said funding provided by the Government to run activities throughout the week were aimed at promoting community awareness of carers needs, and support for carers themselves.
&nbsp;
Activities include seminars and film exhibitions to raise the profile of carers and their efforts.
&nbsp;
"The theme for the Week is ' I support carers'," Mr Staples said. " I hope that more and more Australians will adopt this motto as they understand and appreciate the importance of the carer' s role in our community."
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



TEL: 15 c. ep. 92 15: 19 No. Ci2 F. C. 1
13
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGO: AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 15 SEPTEMBER 1992
This is the full text of the Press Club address.
Because of time constraints the Prime Minister will
deliver an edited version.
When Dr Hewson addressed you here at the Press Club on
September 25 last year, he said this:
" The fact is, of course, that nobody has actually really
tried rational economics properly".
The implications of these words were not clear then.
The zealot in Dr Hewson had not entirely emerged.
Neither had Fichbag-k
But we've seen both now.
We've seen the launch of Fightback and several direct
hits scored against it.
But it has become clear that for all the holes which have
appeared, Fightback has not been allowed to go entirely
under. It cannot sink just yet, because in a very real sense
Fightback is just another word for Dr Hewson.
I think that may be why he takes every criticism of his
policies as personal abuse.
It is a case of " I am the Word and the Word is
Fightback". The Coalition can't sink Fightback without sinking Dr
Newson. So, unless the Coalition suddenly bites the bullet and
sinks its leader, Fightback is going to be still bobbing
around at the next election. 
TIEL. S: ep 9 15 : 19 No .012 3.
2
Fightback is the alternative Policy package, the
alternative ideology, the alternative Australia.
It is only now that Australians are realising what the
full implications of Dr Hewson's Fightback are.
Of course a great many Australians have never accepted
the idea of the consumption tax at the centre of
Fightback. And it's true that a lot of business people have been
uneasy for a long while.
His own party has been uneasy.
The scrutiny we've subjected it to in the last six months
has made it, as I said, a pretty lifeless object.
But it's ticking. As long as the doctor's around it's
alive.
And I think in the last couple of months more and more
people have begun to wake up to the threat of the thing.
The nation I believe is coming to the rather chilling
realisation that Dr flewson has no intention of changing
his ways.
That he is utterly committed to all the policy
prescriptions of Fightback.
This is not a party platform in the conventional sense.
These are not broad objectives but detailed articles of
faith and collectively they will mean the most radical
uprooting of the Australian economy and society in our
history. Dr Hewson is not talking about building on what has been
achieved over a century, or even on those higher orders
of competition, production and social unity we have
developed in the last decade.
He's talking about doing it from Year One tearing it
down and starting again.
That's what I mean about the implications of those words
of his last year " nobody has really tried rational
economics properly".
Not Thatcher, not Reagan, not Fraser, not Roger Douglas.
None of them went far enough.
What does " properly" mean if not a more pure, a more
extreme version of what they did?
What does " tried" mean if not experimented?
TEL 
IEL Sep .92 15 : 19 No .012 P .03/.
3
Experiments with a theory. Experiments with society.
With people's lives. Experiments with industries.
if these experiments fail, too bad.
By the word " properly" Dr Hewson meant economic Darwinism
the survival of the fittest. Or the luckiest.
This m~ eans that the main role for government is to ensure
that the " price signals" are correct. Governments should
withdraw. But governing a nation is not about withdrawing from the
important decisions the nation must address; it is-,,
fundamentally about knowing how to act to bring about
genuine, lasting change.
Dr Hewson claims that his Fightback package will change
the Australian economy and Australian society for the
better. This cannot in any way be true.
At its heart Fightback is essentially a switch in the tax
base from income to expenditure, and a clumsy, regressive
one at that.
It's a tax switch which lifts the tax burden on low to
middle income earners to benefit higher income earners.
it claims to reduce the tax burden on employment by
abolishing payroll tax but then substitutes for payroll
tax a much-he-avie-rtax on employment. And that of course
is a much larger Goods and Services Tax on the value
added by labour at each step in the productive chain.
But Fightback is about more than a tax switch.
it also contains policies on tariffs, industrial
relations, cuts in government outlays and health amongst
other things.
Zero tariffs is simply a textbook objective that is not
grounded in the real world or the real problems faced
by particular industries.
It is naive and destructive.
The Liberals -industrial relations pfoli ' cy is under attack
from large and small companies aike, from one industry
group to another. All see it as confrontationist, and
uncomprehending or workplace realities.
Dr Hewson proposes the destruction of Medicare. the one
comprehensive and simple health system Australia has had.
And why? For no better reason than to improve the
incomes of medical practitioners, specialists, private
hospitals and the private health insurance industry.
TEL 
TEL 4
A significant proportion of the population would again be
under-insured. A significant proportion would again find
that they could not afford health services.
In quite unequivocal terms, Fightback is bad news for
Australia. The entire economy put at risk to deliver one political
objective a 30 cent marginal income tax rate for most
taxpayers. Yet the Government will introduce the same 30 cent rate
but no consumption tax.
Now let us look in more detail at Dr Hewson'* " tax
switch". THE MAGIC PUDDING
At the centre of the Liberal's Fightback is the switch in
taxation away from income to reliance on a goods and
services tax. This exercise involves shuf fling
billion in the name of assisting business at considerable
cost and disruption.
Fightback claims that business will be better off and
that every household will be better off.
Dr Hewsofl wants us to imagine that business can take its
slice without reducing the amount available to
households. It's a magic pudding policy!
Dr Hewson claimns that taxes on business would be cut by
billion.
But the revenue collected from the GST cannot be used
both to improve the prof itability5TbtiFusinesses to the
tune of $ 20 billion, and to pass on the benefits to
consumers in the form of lower prices.
Without the extra profitablity where is the benefit to
business? Without the lower prices where is the benefit
to consumers?
If business were to enjoy the $ 20 billion, the inflation
effect would not be 5 to 6 per cent, but much closer to
the full 15 per cent.
WINNERS AND LOSERSl,
A moment's thought should convince anyone that
rearranging taxes cannot make everybody better of f.
But it can make for winners and losers. 15 Sep .92 15 : 19 No .012 F* .04: 1. 
T: 15 iep 1 15 : 19 No. 01 2 P .05/ 1
And with Dr HewSon's GST there would be a massive
redistribution of income away from average families to
the wealthy.
Treasury has shown that 70 per cent of households would
be made worse of f to fund large gains for the rich.
For example, a family with children and both partners
working and earning $ 25,000 each would be up to $ 25 a
week worse of f. on the other hand, if that fam~ ily's
combined income were over $ 90,000, they would find
themselves up to $ 105 a week, or up to $ 5,460 a year,
better of f.
Fair go, Hewson-style. Incentive, Hewson-style.
MACROECONOMIC EFECTS
It is claimed that the introduction of the GST at the
expense of other forms of taxation would improve
incentives to work, to save and to export.
But there is no evidence for this. People don't work
longer and harder simply because their consumption rather
than their income is taxed. Changes to taxes have only
marginal effects on overall saving behaviour. And,
because the exchange rate is free to adjust, there is no
evidence to support the view that exports would lift.
The effects are simply too small to measure.
And certainly too small to warrant all the costs and
disruption to Industry and the community that would come
from a GST.
This is exactly what was found by Chris Murphy, the
economist who was asked by Dr Hewson to do the modelling
for Pightback. on the crucial assumption that workers do
not seek wage increases to compensate for the price
effects of the GST, Murphy's results show that a switch
from income tax to the GST has small effects on output,
the current account and employment. In fact, for the
first five years, he found that production would actually
fall and unemployment rise.
Professor John Freebairn from Monash University has
argued that a switch from a broadly based payroll tax
system to a GST would have a minimal impact on the
economy. Treasury's analysis of the major elements of Fightback,
and again on the assumption that the compensation package
was adequate, show the overall impact on the economy to
be very small. TEL 
TEL 6
The basic message coming from these studies is that there
is likely to be very little impact on employment, or
output or the balance of payments from the money
shuffling exercise.
a macroeconomics exercise, it simply doesn't rate.
Crucially, however, the GST would have a profound
negative impact on the economy if it disrupts prices and
wages. If firms used the GST as an excuse for raising
prices by more than the direct effect of the taxes, or if
employees refused to accept full discounting of their
wages for the effect of the GST on prices, then the
economy would be severely damaged.
But why would workers not seek compensation for higher
prices? After all, the great bulk of workers ls under Dr
Kewson's proposed compensation package. Of course they
will try to retrieve their position in the field.
And if this happens, Chris Murphy's results show that GDP
would fall by 4 per cent in the first 5 years. Prices
would be sharply up. The unemployment rate would be 2
percentage points higher!
When Dr Hewson Is pressed on the damaging effects of the
GST, his retort is that Fightback is more than the OST,
it's also about industrial relations, eliminating all
tariffs, microeconomic reform, health and so on.
INnDUsTAL CON4FLICT
Everyone agrees that we need to improve the
responsiveness of the workplace. Indeed, this Labor
Government has worked with employers and unions to
achieve just this. The results have been coming through
with agreements like those at Sheraton, Email, Toyota,
Concrete Constructions and so on.
In the media recently, we have seen how such agreements
have been reached in many successful businesses through a
spirit of cooperation. These stories have 81s0 touched
on the real fears that many businesspeople and workers
have about the opposition's approach to industrial
relations. The Coalition has an ideological aversion to the
cooperative approach now being generally applied to get
the best from our workplaces. The Coalition's textbook
offers the Darwinian prescription.
More Strength to the strong.
For there is no doubt that those in a strong bargaining
position would benefit from the free for all.
15 .113ep -9.2 1' 19 No .012 P OE--
T1EL5: Sep .92 15 : 19 No .0121 P .07,' It.
7
But most would lose.
The safety net for low income earners would be ripped
away. Those without long-established and firm links with the
labour force would lose out.
Women would number heavily among the losers. And young
people. Business would lose from a renewal of the discord and
uncertainty that was crippling industry a decade ago.
Australia would lose.
INLATQli
This Labor government has created industrial harmony and
low inflation through policies of cooperation.
Under Coalition policies, the risk of excessive wage
demands and higher inflation would return with any
strengthening in the labour market.
And the only instrument that the Coalition has to
maintain low inflation would be tight monetary policy,
higher interest rates. Australia would be condemned to a
long period of very high unemployment.
And we should reflect on this at the same time as he
introduces the GST price hike, Dr Hewson would abandon
the i ncomes policy which has so effectively reduced
inflation. IMPACT ON BUSINESS
The opposition says that jobs will be created because
Fightback is pro-business.
But are industrial conflict, high interest rates or
higher inflation pro-business?
Fightback is a massive and disruptive accounting exercise
for little worthwhile purpose.
According to the estimates in Fightback, the GST would
bring in $ 27 billion.
Although Fightback involves quite a few minor changes,
this money in essence is used for four purposes which add
up to $ 26 billion:
SFirst, compensation for the impact of the GST on
pensions, fami~ ly allowances and the States amounts to
about $ 4 billion. TEL 
TEL a
1Second, the CST replaces wholesale sales taxes at a
cost of $ 9 billion.
1Third, payroll taxes are abolished at 8 cost of $ 6
billion.
SFinally, petrol excise is abolished at a cost of $ 7
billion.
Essentially we have a new tax to be paid by business to
replace some existing taxes.
This is Dr Hewson's great bargain.
He likes to focus on the seven taxes that would be
removed to sweeten the pill.
But let us look briefly 8t the rationale for these.
Four of the taxes the training gua ranitee levy, the coal
-export levy, customs duE-es-, and the-tax on lIump sum
superannuation would only have a limited impact on
revenues and, indeed, on costs to business.
The remaining three are more significant elements of our
tax system. However, the supposed advantages of the OST
are illusory.
First, the wholesale sales tax. No tax is perfect, and
this one isn't. But the WST has distinct advantages over
the GST:
1Wholesale sales tax is levied at different rates for
different items which means that the great bulk of
basic necessities fresh fruit and vegetables, meat,
clothes, electricity bills, and so on are tax exempt.
1Compliance costs for the WST are low with very few
businesses required to pay.
Dr Hewson also says he will remove the excise on petrol.
But this is a sham because it leaves a very large hole in
road funding which will have to be made up elsewhere.
The National Road Transport Commission ( NRTC) has
estimated that the cost of running Australian roads is
around $ 4.3 billion while the GST applied to petrol will
only raise about $ 750 million. This leaves an amount
equivalent to 18 cents per litre of petrol that has to be
raised from Australian motorists.
So where will It come from?
A tax on kilometres travelled would be akin to the petrol
excise without providing any incentives for fuel
efficiency. 15 :-ep .92 15 19 No .012) P I 
TEL 9
Higher registration charges would have to be ve high
and extend to passenger cars.
All in all, the abolition of petrol excise is a poor
deal. It Is in Fightback largely as 8 sop to the National
Party. Even here, the farmers who already get the Diesel
Fuel Rebate get a lousy deal because they don't pay
payroll tax and they will be slugged twice by the GST
once as collectors and once as consumers.
Finally, the payroll tax levied by the States. This is
the proposal that probably attracts the most interest
from business. But, as Professor Freebairn has pointed
out, there is little difference between payroll tax and a
tax on the value that is added to products by labour.
The economic effect of the payroll tax is very like a
uniform GST and substituting one for the other will
contribute very little even if the inevitable problems
with the States could be resolved.
In summary, replacing some existing taxes with a GST is a
costly accounting exercise the nation can't afford.
And small business would pay dearly.
They typically do not benefit from the removal of current
taxes because of the relatively high thresholds.
But they would have to keep records to comply with the
GST. Overseas studies have found similar taxes to be
very regressive in that compliance costs can be over 250
times greater for small business than large business in
relative terms.
At present small business doesn't even pay most of the
taxes that Fightback promises to abolish:
I According to ABS statistics, there are currently
832,000 businesses in Australia. Most of these are
small businesses and almost all will have to fill out
their 09T forms.
I~ But of these, over 700,000 do not pay payroll tax.
I And only 20,000 are required to pay the WST while
perhaps twice this number will be in the WST system in
practice.
800,000 small businesses are destined to become the new
tax collectors for Dr Hewson.
To paraphrase a tax expert from New Zealand, they can
forget about Sunday afternoons with the family.
MICROFCONOMIr REFORM T: 15. SOep. 15: 1'? No Al12 
TEL
Dr Hewson also likes to argue that business will benefit
from other aspects of Fightback.
Like the conflict in his blueprint for industrial
relations. Like the application of his survival-of-the-fittest
philosophy to the car inldustry.
Indeed, like much of Fightback, just what Dr Hewson
intends on micro reform is poorly spelt out.
For " illustrative" purposes, Fightback sets out the
benefits that may flow from reforms examined by the
Industry Commission.
But what are these reforms?
They fall into two groups, reforms where this Labor
government has already made significant progress, and is
continuing to implement change, or reforms that are
primarily the responsibility of the States.
According to the industry Commission's list, reforms to
rail transport would have the single biggest impact on
GDP at 1.5 per cent. These reforms in part involve the
national freight system which is currently being
transformed into a National Rail Highway as announced in
One Nation. The rest of the IC's proposals centre on
suburban rail which, according to the IC analysis, would
be made more efficient with different pricing policies.
Would Dr Hewson take over this area of State
responsibility? Would he increase suburban rail fares by the 150 per cent
that the proposals imply?
The measure on the IC's list with the second largest
impact is assistance to the rural and manufacturing
sectors.
most of the benefits to be had here will flow from the
Government's measured reductions in protection,
reductions that will leave vibrant industries at the end
of the process.
Dr Hewson's crude approach to the car industry, to the
TCF sector or to sugar would in fact see less production
in Australia, not more.
in aviation, the waterfront, electricity and so on it is
this Government that has built the cooperation of the
parties involved so that genuine progress is achieved.
15 sep 92 1c-: 19 NL) 12 P 10/ 1 
Business is understandably sceptical that the benefits
claimed in Fightbeck can be achieved and have every right
to be apprehensive about the confronitationist approach
being advocated by Dr Hewson.
Quite simply, Dr Hewson's claims on the benefits of his
microeconomic reforms evaporate under scrutiny. They are
like his claim of 2 million jobs to be Created. This
claim was never modelled in Fightback and under
questioning it too diminished to a " guesstimate".
I said that the GST is principally about replacing a
number of existing taxes with a new one.
There are also the income tax cuts of $ 12 billion. These
are more than accounted for by bracket creep, the
increase in the company tax rate and, mainly, the cuts to
outlays. These cuts cannu~ ot and will not be funded by the GST. As
the tabulation earlier shows, $ 26 billion of the $ 27
billion proceeds of the GST are spent abolishing other
taxes and for the base compensation package. The $ 12
billion of tax cuts will have to be funded by cuts in
Government spending cuts that will decimate social
policy. The Treasurer and Minister for Finance have pointed out
there is a huge hole in Fightbeck's figuring to the tune
of $ 6 billion in the year of implementation.
it is a hole which removes most of the benefits Fightback
is supposed to provide.
The expenditure cuts that Fightback proposes deserve the
highest scrutiny.
Of course, many are not spelt out in any detail but rely
on inroads into fraud, inefficiencies and waste.
This is a noble objective indeed, it should be part of
any good administration's operations but to suggest
that billions of dollars can be found from such measures
after the years of cutting into outlays is totally
incredible.
what this emphasis does demonstrate is that the savings
in Fightback are shonky. In truth, if Dr Hewson is to
make the real savings upon which Fightback depends, he
will have to cut, into real programs.
SOCTAL, SECURITY 
12
However, there are a number of areas where substantial
cuts into programs are proposed up-front. These cuts,
ostensibly designed to stop people rorting the social
security system, would in fact seriously weaken its
integrity. Government has to be vigilant against those who attempt
to take advantage of the system and, indeed, through
increased resources for review teams and the like, we
have developed one of the most targeted systems in the
world. The fact that a few may secure benefits they are not
entitled to does not justify measures which seriously
hurt those in genuine need.
Benefits have been increased substantially for those in
need. For example, pensions have been increased by over 15 per
cent in real terms under this Government after falling by
2 per cent under the previous Coalition Government.
Unemployment benefits have been increased by over 25 per
cent under Labor after falling by almost 20 per cent
under the Coalition.
At the same time we have greatly improved the focus of
expenditure. At the ANU. Deborah Mitchell has found that while
expenditure on social security in Australia as a share of
GDP was the lowest of the ten OECD countries she
examined, it was very successful in achieving its
objective of alleviating poverty.
Fightback's contempt for the low paid and the dependent
ignores such conclusions.
It fails to recognise that, compared with other
countries, we spend a relatively modest amount on income
support. It fails to recognise the success in targeting that has
been achieved delivering substantial benefits for a
modest national outcome.
And most importantly, it does not recognise the damage
the expenditure cuts it advocates would do to the system.
The feature of many of the cuts to outlays is that they
would hurt groups in society which are least able to
avoid them.
Fightback would find $ 745 million by Cutting benefits to
the unemployed. TEL 15 Se p 9 2 15 1 N L-1 C, 12 F 12 I 
T: 15 Se 15 : 19 No 012 FP. 1 3: 1
13
It would stop the sole parent pension when the youngest
child reaches 12.
it claims to find $ 127 million from cutting access to
disability pensions.
It would increase the pension age for women to 65. Many
of these women have had no opportunity to accumulate
super or other forms of retirement income and it œ 8
totally unfair to suddenly introduce this measure.
EQUITY CONSIDFRATTONSq
All this simply reinforces the regressive nature of the
GST. Prices overall will rise by 5 to 6 per cent; but the
prices of those goods and services that are necessities
for everyday living for the less well-off in the
community will rise by much more.
The great majority of OECD countries with GSTs or VATs
have multi-rate systems precisely to allow food,
essential services and the like to be taxed more lightly.
Even John Major recently ruled out extending their VAT to
zero-rated items of gas, electricity, food, and
children's clothes and footwear.
Dr Hewson is too pure for that. Dr Hewson is going to
try rational economics properly.
But increasingly, Dr Hewson is coming under pressure to
exempt more items.
Education services are supposed to be zero-rated, but
what constitutes an education service? What books are
zero-rated and which ones attract the OST? What
constitutes a GST-free school lunch?
Medical bills are to be zero-rated, but does this extend
to wheel-chairs and sunscreens?
The building, tourism and financial Industries all have
legitimate concerns with their treatment under the GST.
it is a system riddled with inequities.
The key difference is that under wholesale taxes, we are
able to effectively quarantine the great bulk of
necessities fresh fruit and vegetables, electricity
bills, clothes, and so on.
The Liberals are not prepared to see a similar targeting
under the GST because it would interfere with the ideal
model in the accountant's mind.
TEL 
TEL 14
And the result is that it is precisely the necessities
that would face the largest hike in prices.
The price on milk up 9.61;
Fresh fruit up 10.1%;
Electricity bills up 10.7%;
Large hikes in rates, postal and telephone charges up
8.1t. Ladies arnd gentlemen
I haven't today covered all aspects of Fightback by any
means. Even though policies are frequently poorly
specified, it touches a wide range of issues.
And for so many of these issues, Fightback represents an
enormous step backwards.
Nowhere more dramatically than In policies affecting
Woman. Both parties talk about opportunities and fairness for
women, but only Labor has the policies and the track
record. Labor introduced sex discrimination and affirmative
action legislation. Labor has increased the number of
child care places five-fold and provided generous fee
relief. 60% of the 1.5 million jobs created since 1983
have gone to women. Labor has supported a wages system
that saw women's average wages increase from 67 cents to
83 cents for every dollar earned by men.
The Coalition cannot make the same commitments to
promoting equality for women. Its enterprise bargaining
system would certainly see a decline in their wages.
where our aim is to give women a choice about whether or
not to join the paid labour force, Dr Hewson would force
many women to work.
Older women would be forced to stay at their jobs longer
because of Dr Hewson' a rapid phase-in of an equal pension
age for women and men.
Mothers would also be big losers under Dr Hewson ' s
policies. The cost of child care would rise because it
would be subject to the GST. 10000 women would no
longer get their Family Allowances. Managing the
household budget would be made infinitely more difficult
as the necessities of life increase in price with the
GST. 1 t, e P I I Nu i i 
TEL: I e YUi IrL F
With Fightbeck, the agenda would be pushed back on the
environment, on young Australians, on education and
training, on policies relating to our ethnic communities
and to Aboriginals, on science, on sports, and the arts.
These are issues which require detailed responses in
their own right and my Ministers and I wvill be addressing
them in detail in the near future.
HiEALTZH I would like to finish on health policy because it ia
perhaps this issue that epitomises the blind application
of the ideology that underpins Fightback.
Australia currently uses about 8 per cent of its
resources on health. This is close to the OECD average
and well below the figure in the United States of 12.8
per cent.
With these resources, we are able to provide a first rate
health system.
-Medicare provides quality care based on the principles of
ef-ficiency and access for all Australians.
As with any large system it benefits from the sort of
periodic review and refinement that we undertook most
recently in the Budget.
It is a system that works and works well.
The Opposition's policies would effectively destroy
Medicare. The replacement would be expensive and
iniquitous, an alternative introduced in the name of
choice and market efficiencies.
The provision of health care is not like any other good
or service in Dr Hewson's economic rationalist model.
The unrestrained market will not provide effective health
services for everyone while keeping costs contained.
In fact, Fightback would see costs soar.
It would largely hand over responsibility for setting
health costs to the AMA. Dr Hewson said as much
explicitly to the AMA at its Council.
It would do this by firstly removing incentives for
doctors to bulk-bill by restricting bulk-billing to
health-card holders only.
At present, about 70 per cent of GP services are bulkbilled
at 85 per cent of the Medicare schedule, a
practice that is cost effective for the doctor and the
system as a whole. 
TEL: 15. Sep .9 15 : 19 N,. 1C12 P. 16
16
Moreover, Fightback would allow gap insurance for costs
up to 85 per cent of, not the Medicare schedule, but the
AMA schedule, the schedule set by the doctors themselves!
GPs would have little incentive other than to charge the
great majority of their patients the AMA fee and, because
the current AMA schedule is some 20 30 per cent above
the Medicare schedule, patients would be obliged to take
out private insurance to avoid hefty payments at every
trip to the doctor.
Without insurance, patients would be paying about half of
their medical bills. And these would be the people who
are currently benefiting from free health through bulkbilling.
Treasury has estimated that the overall impact on
household health bills would be an increase of 22.6 per
cent. The higher costs would affect everyone, but the hardest
hit would be those least able to afford it.
Dr Hewson would provide some tax credits for private
health insurance, but the amount being offered would be
less than half basic medical insurance Costs, let alone
supplementary cover or gap insurance.
Many would simply not be able to privately insure
themselves and their families.
Two classes of patients would result with doctors
returning to the days of taking on charity cases.
Fightback's health policies would see us move towards the
expensive US system where 35 million Americans have no
insurance or access to services.
And why does Fightback contemplate the change? Not to
improve national efficiency. Not to improve social
equity. Not to improve quality of medical services.
The change proposed by Dr Hewson stems from his
insistence that market forces be imposed on our medical
system. Bulk-billing is ideological anathema.
The doctors, the pathologists, the radiologists, the
private hospitals all stand to benefit. The low paid,
the frequent users of the system, including women and the
elderly, lose. The notion that a good society is
measured by the degree to which all are provided with
care and the necessities of life is abandoned.
Nowhere are the obsessions of Dr Hewson plainer. Nowhere
is Fightback more obviously regressive.
This is " rational" economics " properly" applied, 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP,
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS, NATIONAL PRESS CLUB,
SEPTEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Q: Don Woolford Prime Minister. According to figures released on Friday by
the Japanese Embassy, Australian direct investment in Japan amounts to
only 0.8 per cent of Australia's total overseas investment. I'd like to ask if
you arc happy about thcse figures and if you believe that to any extent at all
they are attributable to constraints thc Japanese put on our investment and if
so, will you be taking that up in Tokyo next week?
PM: Don, it's not on the theme of ' Fighthack' and I'd prefer the question was, but
I'm happy to answer it. The issue is that Australia runs a huge trade surplus,
with Japan and thank God it does because onc wouldn't know where our
balance of paymecnts would be without it, and as well as that they've been a
source of savings in capital to fund our currcnt account deficit and to take
large slabs of equity in Australia. And if Australiani businesses want market
acccss in Japan they've got to do the hard grinding work in a culture which
is somewhat diffcrcnt to Australia to create that market access.
But Australians don't want their leadcrs needlessly putting off our major
trading partner. I notice Dr Hewson saying yesterday, I'll stick up for
Australia. It's not sticking up for Australia, punching in the nose the country
with which we enjoy the largest trade surplus, that's not being good to
Australia, that's not bcing loyal to Australian interests, it's being absurd, it's
being immature. And I think Australians understand that we've developed
an important basis of trade with Japan and that they want that -trad ' e
relationship treated properly. That's not to say you don't argue for market
access. Tlhis Govermecnt has beeni arguing for it and getting it for a long 
time in minerals, in agricultural products, in meat, but Dr H-ewson has
been saying we've been letting the Japanese into Australia for investment
indeed we have. Who else is going to provide the capital? But would he
now say that we've done the Japanese a favour taking hotels off our hands at
$ 600 million which today are worth $ 400 million? Docs he regard that as
the sort of favour thcy should thank us for? These are all the comments of
someone who has basically wanted to be noticed, to get himself out of a
terrible problem with the National Party, that is, he has a zero tariff on sugar
and he'll wipe out the north Queensland sugar industry. And in the middle
of pressure on that, he decided to divert the attention by attacking the
Japanese. You notice the Japanese Embassy has stood its ground now over
the weekend and for a couple of days, and they're entitled not to have their
position misrepresented. It's doing Australia no favour behaving
immaturely, stamping your foot when you've got a very mature relationship,
and I hope to develop that relationship further when I go to Japan. I'm not
going for any particular purpose, for any particular initiative, but simply to
advance our understanding as trading economies and societies further.
0: Maxine McKew, ABC Radio current affairs. On a similar theme, in the
same way that President Bush is drawing international condemnation for
decisions such as extending the Export Enhancement Program and the sale
of F15 Fighters to Taiwan, at home thc same decisions are drawing
domestic applause. Do you not think then that perhaps similarly ! Dr Hewson
might be touching a domestic nerve with his comments about acccss to
Japan?
PM: You mean in the United States or in Japan?
MM: No, here.
PM: In Australia?
MM Yes.
PM: I don't think so, I think Australians are quite wise about these things, they
know that Australia has had to trade its way in the world, they know it's
been difficult for us, they know wc've now made a very large transition.
This year for thc first year in our history we exported more manufactures
than we did agricultural exports or mineral exports. They know that this
Government has made this transition. That is, we've taken Australia from
the Stone Age, without making a pun, to the age that is a Hlew. sonfloward
stone age where we basically went backwards in manufactured exports to 
a stage where we're now seeing manufactured exports being greater than
rural and mining exports. They know that's all hard tack, they've watched
those balance of payment figures now at least for six or seven years, at least
since the terms of trade crisis of 1986, and I don't think they take lightly to
silly people doing silly things, and Dr Hewson going on as he did,
needlesly attacking the one market where we enjoy a huge trade surplus, is
no good for him, no good for us, no good for Australia and I don't think it
rings any chords anywhere.
Q: Dennis Grant, Prime Minister, from the Seven Network, pay television if I
might.
PM: You guys have given the GST a sleigh ride for now nearly a year, there ' s
becn no real critical analysis of it by the press gallery and even when the
Government gets up to critically attack it, we're on to pay television.
DG: Thanks Prime Minister, pay television, pay television then.
PM: It takes some dexterity to shift subjects, I know that.
DG: What is your view of a mandated role for the ABC in pay television, what of
your previous position that the ABC should bc in the queue likc everyone
else?
PM: This question is not encouraging me to put Channel Seven in the queue, I
can tell you that. These arc matters for discussion, the Govermecnt came up
with a good model for pay television. In the big sweep of events, in the big
sweep of subjects this is not again like a GST, a first order subject, certainly
a subordinate order subject. But that said, we'rc hetter to get it right than
wrong. And I don't want to see Australia's pay television system shanghaied
to an inferior technology: that is I don't want to sce the satellite being the
sole delivery system of pay television. Not when we'rc seeing your sponsor,
Telecom, extending its fibre optic network across the country in a mile
stone investment decision in the ' 80s, which gives you the capacity to speak
back as well as to be spokcn to, that's for interactive services, I don't want to
see us simply relying on the satellite alone. As far as the ABC is concerned,
I think the ABC has a real question to ask itself whether, if it's sidelined a%
a pay TV operator, it doesn't see its frcc to air charter diminish. I think that
is a very great possibility and the ABC needs to think about that, and the
ABC Board needs to think about that. 
Q: Stephen Spencer, Macquarie News, Prime Minister with, thankfully, a
question about ' Fighiback'. -Many of your back benchers would like to see
you announce a 12-18 month tariff pause to further underline the
differences between you and the Opposition you've been making known in
re~ nt months. Is that somcthing you're likely to adopt before the ncxt
election or are you determined to stick to your previously announced tariff
policy?
PM: We've been the only government that has reduced tariffs in Australia.
Tariffs actually went up when Dr Hewson was advising Mr Howard. Under
the Fraser governmient tariffs rose, protection rose. The only governments
that have reduced tariff protection in Australia have been Labor
Governments; the Whitlam government in 1973-74 reduced tariffs by
per cent, they then rose under the Frascr government, under the advice of Dr
Hewson when he was advising them. This Government has studiously and
carefully put into place a discussion with Australian business and unions on
a phased reduction in tariffs. The big program ' 88-' 92 was completed on
July I this year where everything above 15 per cent went to 15, that's every
tariff above 15, that's the ones in the 50 and 60 per cents, went to 15 and
everything between 15 and 10 wcnt to 10. We're now phasing the 15 and
to 5 by 1996 and 2000. And for the plant areas we've got 15 per cent for
cars and 25 per cent for certain areas of textile, clothing and footwear. We
think we've got it about right, and, being serious ahout it, we're not about to
be buffeted by again the theoretical prescriptions of Dr Hewson, who did
not seek to join the consensus with thc Government and adopt the
Government's tariff policies, its phasedowns and endpoints, and say this
Government has done what we would never have done, it's done something
good for Australia, it's taken on a sensible thing that will actually stick, we
will maintain thc consensus, adopt the Government's phase downs and end
points. No, no he has a cheap onc up, we'll all go to zero. And we're
supposed to say, my God isn't that tough, isn't that strong where in truth it's
just silly and it is disruptive and that's why the motor vehicle industry and
other industries arc now so put out about it. And well they might be, the
whole city of Adelaide is put at risk by Dr Hewson's policy, a large part of
the state of Victoria is put at risk by Dr Hcwson's policies. So we've made
careful judgements about it in the 1980s and again in 1991 when we
announced the ' 92, ' 96, 2000 phasedowns. So they are all there and we think
wc'vc got the judgements pretty right.
Q: Keiren McLconard, Network Radio, Prime Minister, you spent a lot of your
speech bucketing ' Fightback' though you do admit it will be alive at least
until the next election. The Coalition admits that they haven't yct sold 
' Fightback' that it is still causing concern and trepidation in the community.
Given that they're not the underdog going into the election and you are, isn't
it quite possible that Australians want to take anything except a Keating
Government for three years and is it also possible that you won't be looking
to try selling anything positive to the community until the economy picks
up, that's your only strategy on positives?
PM: Kieren it's only that colour co-ordination of yours and that wonderful hairdo
that encourages me into giving you a very nice reply because you always
put the most charming questions, and that is that I can't see the Australian
public being at all attracted to a policy which says we will take $ 27 billion
off you and we'll give $ 26 billion back, but it will be largely going to
removing other taxes and replacing them. And the result of that is to add 6-
7 percentage points to inflation and for all of that they then go and pay for
private health insurance, they have their tariffs cut to zcro and thcy have
industrial confrontation. That's basically what ' Fightback' is it's a crude
tax switch which taxes expenditure rather than income and which basically
cuts tariffs to zero which makes people pay for their private health insurance
and is generally socially upsetting. Now, contrast that with the
Government's change over the ' 80s to a more competitive country, contrast
that with our evolutionary though radical changes to the labour market, with
low inflation, with exports rocketing along, with a strong trade surplus and
growing, contrast all that with low inflation in the ' 90s and say give all that
up, see the social net destroyed, see Medicare destroyed, see people tipped
off unemployment benefits after nine months as Dr T-rcwson proposes, see
the social security program knocked about, see all these things occur, but.
we're so enamoured of Fightback with its consumption tax that we take that.
I don't think thcy will Keiren, and that's the point. And that's why I think
that upon mature reflection that won't happen. Now, I saw your Mother and
Father over the weekend in Bathurst and they told mc that you would ask
me a nice question and I wanted to thank you for it.
Q: Lyndal Curtis, radio 2UE ' and 3AW Mr Keating, from thc consumption tax
onto Labor's taxes, was the report in today's Australian correct that you and
John Dawkins pulled out details of your tax increases from thc Budget? If
so was it a bad move considering the scare campaign the Opposition has
been running against it?
PM: No, the story is not correct. At any rate it is a bit academic because
tomorrow the Treasurer will be making a statcment and introducing
legislation on this very topic. The fact is not only was thc story not
withdrawn, but they werc left. explicitly in the Budget papers. That is, the 
measures that the Government might consider were actually announced in
the Budget papers,. but the notion that details had been considered by the
revenue committee and adopted to be then withdrawn was wrong, and I
don't know whether Laura is here, but shc was told it was wrong but she still
wrote it. One little chinik of it is right, but the general thread of the story is
not right. That is, the Government did announce that it was looking at these
things, the revenue committee never considered the prescribed payments
system or the WST, never. It did consider the FB3T but no decision was
taken as to its introduction leaving, that if it were desirable, to the Prime
Minister, myself, and the Treasurer. So wc then put in the appropriate text
saying we would consider some of these measures and if we thought it
necessary at a later stage adopt them or otherwise and wc have stayed true
to form. But you compare that with Dr H-ewson, the sleight of hand, here he
is the other day saying we'll consider in office what is the nature of the
charges for motor vehicles. In other words, he has a $ 4.5 billion set of
charges for roads which he is politely saying he will consider in office. And
he has also said on the record in Septcmber that charges ought to bc levied
on thc basis of mass of distance. So it is either going to come as a
registration fcc or as a tachymeter charge on trucks and on cars, and it is
huge. The fact of the matter is that hc has to he as accountable as we have,
but as always we are always thc accountable ones. As I have made the point
to you before it was Novcmber last since any of you insisted him doing a
press conference in Canberra, and as a result he is quite happy to deal with
the fire engine chasers and the rest where he knows there is going to be no
follow up questions. And on this qucstion there had ought to be follow up
questions, that is who and how, how will the $ 4.5 billion be levied and who
will pay for it?
0: Bruce Juddery, freelance, Prime Minister. You deplore Dr Hcwson's
penchant for experimentation of proposals. As I recall, as Treasurer and
now as Prime Minister, you committed yourself to an accord with the
Unions which effectively has emasculated the Government's capacity for
intelligently using fiscal policy to manage the economy, you have got
yourself locked into a situation, up until a year ago or so, where all you had
going for you was control of interest rates and wc seem to be in a pretty
pickle as a result of all that. When did you develop this abhorrence for
experimentation, Prime Minister?
PM: Bruce, occasionally you ask one that goes right over the shoulder, this one is
one of those. The fact is the Government has had total flexibility in policy.
Let me explain to you you write for a business magazine, this will be of
interest to your editor these arc the points; the first is that fiscal policy was 
so tight in the 1980s we produced $ 20 odd billion worth of surpluses. That
gave us the freedom to produce deficit-, is we needed to, which thc United
States does not have, in US Budget deficit% now sitting at about 6 per cent
of GDP and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Mr Greenspan,
told an audience in Wyoming three weeks ago fiscal policy in America can
not be used to stimulate the economy, it has run its race.
In this country it can be used, it is heing used now. Why? Because of what
we did in the 1980s. Total flexibility on fiscal policy.
On monetary policy we have had 13 reductions in interest rates since 1990,
total flexibility there.
And on wages, flexibility there, we are talking again about another wages
system where three quarters of the people adjusted are not going to be in the
centralised system, and yet we are seeing enterprise deals been done with
very low costs and low inflation portents about them.
So on wages, fiscal and monetary policy we have flexibility and we are
using it. What would Dr Hewson have? He wants no conversation with the
unions, no Accord, no flexibility on wages.
On monetary policy he would only stick intcrcst rates up because the
consumption tax would add to inflation and therefore the inflation effect
would obviously climb into interest rates.
And on fiscal policy he would be left with the same starting points we arc
left with. That is wc are contemplating changes to deal with the starting
point deficit in ' 94-' 95 and ' 95-' 96 so the samc problem would apply to him
werc he to be the Government. That is, because revenue declined by $ S
billion between June and August this year, that $ 5 billion dccl ines at the
starting point out therc at ' 94-' 95 and ' 95-' 96. If it is a problem for us it is a
similar problem for Dr H-cwson. What's hc going to do about it? Tomorrow
we are going to announce measures which will improve that in ' 95-96.
What is he going to announce? Or does hc get let off again, does he get let
off again, the no explainer? This reply you get from him and Mr Rcith ' it
is in Fightback read it' as if those of you are deficient and you have not
been able to read the thing. The truth is it is not in Fightback, and this guy
is not accountable and the starting point problems of ' 94-' 95, t95-'. 96 would
be just as much his as ours wcre he to bc the Government but he wouldn't
have the flexibility on monetary policy and on wages policy that we have
because he has no truck with an Accord and no agreement with the unions. 
So the confrontation is simply him saying we will kick you off awards,
your holiday pay, your rates of pay and conditions will all go, you will fall
out of the system, you have got to make a contract with your employer. So
the employee gets a phone call from the managers office come in you
have got to make a contract with us and the person says, I am not making a
contract with you, I have got an award. You make a contract or you are out.
Now that is going to produce a lot of confrontation. That's exactly what
some of the senior executives of this country have been saying the last three
week-, we don't want this confrontation.
We are now moving to a harmonious change in our industrial relations
systemn, a productive change to enterprise bargaining, we don't want
confrontation now and that's why Dr Hcwson's policies arc so out of kelta
with what is happening in Australia and thc mood of this country and its
needs.
Q: Glenn Milne from the Australian, Prime Minister. Two points; onc, the first
a clarification. Your previous answer on tariff policy, was that a yes or a
no? Are you ruling out any change to either the timetabling of tariff
reductions under your Government or the pause
PM: Glenn, we have made that clear in the past where we stand. We didn't think
about these things quickly or in an opportunist way, they were put together
carefully and we announced them carefully, and when a lot of people were
not awarc of all these issues the Government was doing a lot of careful,
consultative work with industry in putting those endpoints together. I was
one of them, John Button, myself, others making sure that the 15 per ccnt
end point for cars could be lived with. We belicve they can.
Q: And the second question, you raise doubts in the presentation of Fightback
in your speech about the economic value ot' incomc tax cuts. Why then did
you offer your own income tax cuts as part of the One Nation statement?
PM: No I didn't. What I am saying is all of this is supposedly to provide income
tax cuts, this whole nasty bag of tricks in Fightback, thc joy is supposed to
be a 30 per cent rate at $ 20, 700. All I am making clear is that the
Government will be doing a 30 per cent ratc at $ 20,700 with no
consiumption tax.
That is, we will be able to put into place, becausc of the fiscal policy we
have put there, tax cuts without a consumption tax and, in macroeconomic 
9
terms, an inflationary, disruptive change to the economy. That was always a
possibility, and why is it a possibility? Because of the strength of Labor's
fiscal policy in the ' 80s, because of the underlying strength of the outlays.
That is, because the outlays were reined in in the ' 80s we have the fiscal
flexibility to do these things. But what then is the point of having a very
costly and complicated tax switch which is going to hurt many Australians,
a socially disruptive change to provide the tax cuts which the Government
itself will provide with no consumption tax.
Thank you very much.
ends 


My attention has been drawn to the latest baseless allegations and imputations made against me by Senator Michael Baume, accusing me of some impropriety in relation to my private investment in a piggery.
All details of my entirely proper investment have been declared as required on the Parliamentary_ pecuniary interests register.
People should be wary of what is clearly an orchestrated and baseless smear campaign being waged against me in the Senate by Senator Baume and others, at Dr Hcwson's behest. This is Dr llewson playing entirely personal and cowardly politics at its worst. No Opposition Leader in my memory has had his agents mount such scurrilous and personal attacks.
Dr Hcwson has returned to these tactics chiefly because he has had such an appalling week in the House of Representatives.
Senator Baume in particular has made repeated allegations against me, all of which have been proved to be baseless. Not only were they wrong, but he knew they were wrong before bhe raised them.
CANBERRA16 September, 1992



4.. 104192
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ESD POLICIES
The Prime Minister today chaired another roundtable
meeting of major national interest groups to discuss the
development of Ecologically Sustainable Development ( ESO)
policies. The following is a precis of his opening remarks:
The ESD process has been very worthwhile. It has brought
together a wide range of Interests and groups, who have,
through the nine working groups and the intersectoral
reports, made a large number of recommendations which the
Government must now address.
The Government remains committed to the process and to
the timetable I made clear at the ESD roundtable in
March. Under that timetable, a national ESD strategy will
be in place by the end of the year.
Since the March roundtable, we have released a draft
strategy and are now taking into account the submissions
received regarding that strategy.
In the Budget, we announced a range of ESD measures,
including funding for climate change research, work on
energy efficiency, tax deductions for environmental
protection measures, and feral animal control.
During the year, we have also taken other actions, such
as the National Waste Minimisation and Recycling
Strategy, coastal zone tasks; the landcare and
environment action program, and the signing of the Rio
Contrary to some rep6rts, the ESD process has not
* stallIr, ' ayid -irr regard -to the -proc~ ess -and
recommendations, the Government now plans to:
Take into account submissions on the draft strategy
and comments made at today's roundtable
Continue negotiations and congultations, in
particular with the States, to develop a national
strategy and a firm set of policies and objectives.
The Council of Australian Governments meeting later
this year will discuss these issues. 
2
Pursue, through consultation, the positions of
States on ESD working group recommendations and the
recommendations of the intersectoral reports.
Determine the apportionment of responsibilities and
jurisdiction for policies on particular issues.
Detail the extent to which recommendations are
already being implemented or locked into place in
existing policy of the Commonwealth or States.
Make clear what policies and actions we will adopt
in relation to areas where we have sole
responsibility. Also make clear, through consultations, our
objectives on issues the vast majority of issues
which require discussion with States and local
Government, because sole or primary responsibility
for implementation of those policies does not lie
with Commonwealth.
Some of the most important issues not in order of
priority emerging from the recommendations and on which
we place a high priority are:
Land and water management, including salinity and
the Murray-Darlinjg__ basin.--
Feral animals-and other pests.
Remnant vegetation cover and soil degradation.
Marine protection systems, and multiple use of
coastal waters.
Industrial waste production and disposal.
Air and water quality.
Urban infrastructure problems.
The environment management industry.
Energy production, conservation and management.
They are just some of the issues on which we place a high
priority. 1 can assure everyone involved in this process that we
will keep at the forefront of our thinking the
recommendations of the working groups and the
intersectoral reports, and finalise our policies on ESD
by the end of the year.
CANJBERRA 17 September 1992 


The Government has decided to re-appoint Mr Roger Holdrich as Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security for a second term of three years.
The Inspector-Gencral of Intelligcnce and Security plays a pivotal role in ensuring the accountability of Australia's security and intelligence agencies. The Office of the Inspector-Gcneral of Intelligence and Security was established in 1986following one of the key recommendations of the second Hope Royal Commission on Australia's Intelligence and Security Agencies.
The Inspector-Gcneral assists Ministers oversee the activities of Australia's intelligence and security agencies the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, the Australian Secret Intelligence Service, the Office of National Assessments, the Dcfence Signals Directorate and the Dcfence Intelligence Organisation to ensure that these agencies act legally and with propriety, comply with Ministerial guidelines and directives and respect human rights.
Mr Holdrich's re-appointment has been supported by the Leader of the Opposition.
CANBERRA18 September 1992


I&nbsp;am pleased to announce today the launch of the inaugural - Australian Heads of Government Violence Prevention Award.
The Award will be given to outstanding practical projccts which clcarly contribute to making Australia a less violent society. It will be made on an annual basis and will bc for a total of up to $ 100,000.
The Award is one of a number of important Commonwealth initiatives supported by Premiers and Chief Ministers last year to reduce violence in Australia.
The Award is designed to encourage anti-violence initiatives and to assist governments in identifying and developing violence prevention programs. It represents a firm commitment by all Australian governments to makc Australia a safer society.
The Award is open to any individual or organisation making an exceptional contribution to reducing violence within Australia, or having the clear potential to make such a contribution.
CANBERRA18 September 1992&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, SEX DISCRIMINATION SEMINAR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
19 SEPTEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: I can just say this is a real world response from one of the world's major
motor companies to the unreal world policies of Dr Hcwson. Dr Hewson's
had an absolute sleigh ride for the last year with one of the most brutal
policy documents that's ever been proposed by an Australian political
leader. But now it's coming under examination and people think it's not just
a throw away manifesto but something that he actually wants to do. The
major companies, like Ford, like Toyota, and others are looking at what the
implications are, and what the Ford Motor Company are saying is that if
Tariffs go to zero there'll be no further investment by Ford in Australia. That
means no Falcon replacement. That means that cities like Gcelong and
places like Broadmeadows will suffer accordingly as that investment flags.
And the Toyota company has also made clear its view as have Mitsubishi on
six hundred million dollars of investment in South Australia. So, the careful
work that the Govcrnicnt put into establishing a set of policies for the
motor industry are just being brushed to one sidc by Dr . Hewson, who ' has no
icspectfor our work, or the fact that it was done co-operatively with
business over a long period of time. And all Australians should note that the
stridency is going to producc a lot of problems in Australia, and that's no
less true for the motor industry.
J: Isn't this just thc motor industry playing politics though prior to an elction?
1O/ Od 900' ON SZ: OI Z6* daStZ:-131 
PM: No, no. The motor industry played its politics before the tariff cuts and
changes were announced in 1991. That's when the politlaE,% e iplayed.
What they're playing now is they're making clear they don't play out their
death throes. Because at zero you don't have to be an economic genius to
know this is true with production runs in Australia only about as high as
40,000, when some of the production runs in the northern hemisphere are a
quarter of a million or more, that a glut of cars in the northern hemisphere
shipped into Australia at marginal prices will simply knock out the
Australian motor vehicle industry. I mean it is not simply as the Opposition
would have you believe the motor industry playing games, it's a reality.
And that reality's going to be just as true in industrial relations as Dr
Hewson's workplace reforms so-called pit one Australian against another.
It's going to be just as true in health as they smash Medicare and push
everybody back to private insurance. The fact is, this is a very strident,
crude sort of capitalist type policy which i. had thought that Liberal leaders
long ago had abandoned. But of course not so with Dr Hewson.
J: Do you think that this will encourage the Opposition to change its policies
to bring its tariff policies back in line with the Governmecnt?
PM: Well, it's the Government which has had the courage to make all these
structural changes and we're not going to bc running to the beat of Dr
Hewson's drum, who's come into these subjects as some sort of dilettante,
making declarations without consultation. Without knowing what makes a
car company tick, without undcrstanding industrial relat ions. That sort of
fanaticism, we're not going to have a bar of it. We're not going to be seeking
any sort of bi-partisanship with him. Not on these things.
ENDS
V7Q/ V7QJ 900* ON SZ: OT Z6* daSITZ 131 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATINGO, MP
INAUGURAL FORUM OF THE COALITION OF AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATING
ORGANISATIONS OF WOMEN ( CAPOWI)
It was with great pleasure that I accepted your invitation
to participate in today's seminar.
I have some important announcements to make concerning the
subject of this seminar, Australia's landmark antidiscrimination
legislation, the Sax Discrimination Act.
I will also announce changes to our Affirmative Action
legiglation. It would be hard to think of a better occasion to make these
announcements than the first event organised by Australia's
first coalition of women's organisations, called
appropriately enough CAPOW!
I am informed that CAPOW! aims to Increase communication and
cooperation between Australia's leading women's
organisations. Some twenty national women's organisations have indicated a
wil. lingness to participate in the coalition when issues
arise that concern their memberships.
This is an important new development in the political
evolution of women's groups in this country and r wish the
coalition every success.
I am very happy to be associated with your first public
event. I understand that six organisations participated in
arranging today's forum, among them such long-standing 
2
groups as the Women's Electoral Lobby, the-Australian
~ e~ raft oBn sinss nd roessional Wom-en and the YWCA.-
-Wendy Fatin, who assists me on Status of Women matters, was
a founding member of WEL, and I know she was also involved
In the formation of another of today's sponsors, the
National Foundation for Australian Women.
The remaining two groups involved today are the ' Australian
_ WomeA'sHeLalt h __ Net -work and the National Woman's Housing
Caucus, both examples of newer bodies representing community
interests important to women.
These are all groups with whom the Government has worked
closely, both through the Office of the Status of -Women in
my department, or through their periodic membership of the
-National-Women'sConsultative Council.
This partnership between women's organisations and the
Government is important.
It's important to us because we value your opinions and
your advice.
It's important to us because you help us communicate with
women in the community, and because your policy skills and
political hard work have contributed greatly to Australia's
proud record in advancing the status of women.
I hope it's important to you as well.
I trust that you value the access this Government has
accorded women's organisations in its policy making process,
including representation at such important national
gatherings as the 1985 Tax Summit and the recent Youth
Summit, as well as your involvement in various advisory and
consultative bodies.
This partnership between women and government has evolved
during the ten years of this Government.
It is our way Labor's way of working with
org anisat ions.
It involves mutual trust and mutual respect and a genuine
sharing of views.
We don't always agree with one another, but at least we
listen and we talk. It is a means of moving forward,
together, towards our shared goals. 
our partnership with you over the past decade has produced
an unprecedented program of reform.
integral to that program was the Sex Discrimination Act and
the Affirmative Action legislation but before I move on to
fay announcements in that area, I would like to take the
opportunity you have given me today to share with you some
of my own observations on the changing status of women.
I am sometimes accused of being " urcntutd when it
comes to the subject of women!
Well perhaps in the past there was some truth to that, but I
can assure you that no father of daughters these days can
stay unreconstructed for long and I have three daughters!
I watch them growing up and I worry for them sometimes, as I
know tho world can still be rough on women.
That alone would be sufficient motivation to do everything
in my power to make the world a better place for women.
But in fact my learning process started even before my girls
came along.
I have sisters too, and when I reflect back on when we were
growing up I realise that I had advantages that were denied
to them.
I see now that that was unfair.
I have learned, too, from the subsequent lives of some of
the girls I went to school with. One in particular had a
very hard time when her husband left her stranded with three
little kids.
I've also learned from women I have met in my capacity as a
politician representing a suburban electorate west of
Sydney. But I've done more than listen and learn I've acted.
The media would have you thinking that I'm living testament
to the joke that compares Australian men with Treasury bonds
the difference being that Treasury bonds eventually
mature! Well, as Treasurer, I did more than wait for bonds to
mature! I am proud of what I was able to do of benefit to women. 
As Susan Ryan _( who is here today) will tell you, I'm sure, I
gave her support in the Cabinet room for the policies she
brought forward including the sex discrimination
legislation.
My colleagues and I made sure we found the funds for
programs like child-care a program which, I don't have to
tell this audience, has expanded almost five-fold since
Labor was elected.
The one program where I did get directly involved and of
which I am immensely proud is the Child Support Agency.
I was instrumental in placing that Agency within the
Australian Taxation Office which, I can tell you, was not
exactly rapt in the idea back in 1988 when I proposed it.
But they accepted the idea in the end and now can take the
credit for overseeing one of the most effective methods in
the worl of collecting child support from non-custodial
parents. Since the Agency was established, we have gone from
collecting maintenance payments from only 30 per cent of
non-custodial parents to 70 per cent.
And few things have given me greater pleasure in government
than to see justice brought to these shirkers and for the
women and children they left behind to be able to improve
their standard of living through payments they are fully
entitled to receive.
During the past nine years there has been an Increase of
million jobs, current unemployment levels notwithstanding.
Women got 64 per cent of those jobs.
Bill Kelty and I arranged for supplementary payments to go
to low-paid workers the vast majority of whom are women,
and the Minimum Rates Adjustment progress which saw childcare
workers and others receive hefty and deserved
increases. I backed the portability of award superannuation which saw
women,, many for the first time in their working lives, able
to save for their retirement and not be totally dependent on
a husband's super.
And there have been other innovative actions. 
For instance, I appointed Anna Booth as the first woman
member of the board of the Commonwealth Bank and Hylda Rolfe
to chair the Prices Surveff-fance Authoriity.
As Prime Minister I have reminded Ministers of the
importance of appointing appropriately qualified women to
major boards and authorities.
Women now make up around 20 per cent of statutory and nonstatutory
appointments.
This is not a high number but it is an improvement on the
1988 f igrure of only 12 per cent.
We can do better than this and we will.
I was very pleased a few weeks ago when my colleague the
Treasurer, John Dawkins, announced the historic appointment
of Janet Holmes a Court to the board of the Reserve Bank.
Yet another milestone for women.
Under my Government, there will be many more.
I am proud to be part of a Government which has earned
Australia a reputation world-wide for its progressive
women's policies.
Several months ago, I had the pleasure of presenting
Australia's secondCE -DAW -Report to Mrs Mervat Tal la-wy,
chairwoman of the UN Committee on the El-imination of
Discrimination Against Women.
During that presentation, Mrs Tallawy told me she considered
Australia to be at the forefront of countries that had made
major improvements in the status of women.
Let me assure you today that my Government will continue
those progressive policies.
Even in the six months since I delivered the One Nation
statement we have been able to build on the achievements of
the 19809 and continue our programs of innovative change.
In addition to our major infrastructure reforms, In road and
in rail, in electricity and in aviation, we are continuing
our economic and social reforms.
The Superannuation Guarantee Levy, which will give lowincome
women for the first time access to retirement _ income. 
An extra 27,000 child-care places and an increase in fee
relief to reduce child-care costs for 135,000 families.
in health, major reforms to-Modicare, including $ 50 million
this financial year to reduce waiting lists, and a further
$ 1.23 billion over five years to improve access to public
hospitals. in women's health, a major new program was recently
finalised when 11l the States and Territories signed on.
As my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Health, Housing and Community Services, Brian Howe,
announced earlier this week, 5 million Australian women will
be covered by the cervical cancer program which will provide
screening via pap sm; earsi every two years for all women aged
between 18 and
We announced a S93 million package of support and assistance
for carers most of whom are women.
I know only too well how valuable is their compassionate
work in caring for elderly and disabled people.
And much much more.
Gone I hope forever are the days when women's
contribution to the economy, and to society as a whole,
could be ignored.
Gone as far as this government is concerned are the days
when women Is needs could be overlooked.
The transformation of women's lives over the past two
decades is one of the most dramatic social movements we as a
country have ever experienced.
Women have moved into the labour market in massive numbers.
From being just 33 per cent of the labour force in 1972,
women are now 42 per cent.
in 1972, 39 per cent of women were in the labour force.
Today 52 per cent are and Government projections suggest
that by the time we reach the next century, 61 per cent of
women will be in paid employment.
Around 40 per cent of adults in the workforce have dependent
children, and 45 per cent of women whose youngest child is
aged under four are in paid employment. 
women are entitled to economic independence and the figures
I have just quoted suggest large numbers of women are eager
to achieve it.
There are many rewards to being in the labour force, besides
earning an income and gaining an identity beyond one's
family roles.
But there are many stresses Involved in trying to reconcile
our working and family lives.
Women shoulder most of this burden, or should I call it a
" double burden", because women tend to be the ones who have
the unpaid job of managing the time-tables of family members
and who run family finances in addition to their paid job
outside the home.
But increasingly men are being cailed on to share these
responsibilities and this is a good thing. But I know
from my own experience the strains this can put on people.
As a Government we recognise the burdens on workers with
We ratified ILO Convention 156 in 1990 and we are currently
developing our policy responses to strongly promote the
implementation of this convention.
In particular, we will be encouraging employers to make
work-places more " family friendly" so that our private and
public lives can mesh more harmoniously than is often the
case today.
These kinds of stresses are not the only problems women face
in the workplace.
There is also sex discrimination. Being overlooked for
promotion. Sexual harassment. Barriers sometimes overt
and ugly, sometmsqieubl and even invisible that
stand in the way of women participating fully in the
economy. As a Government we are absolutely committed to identifying
and removing such barriers where we are able, or to
providing remedies to women to take action where that is the
appropriate recourse.
Pre-eminent in the latter category is the Sex Discrimination
Act and the Affirmative Action Act. 
These two pieces of legislation stand as one of Labor's
greatest achievements.
When the Sex Discrimination Act was enacted in 1984 it
became tangible evidence of our commitment to advancing
women's equality.
The Affirmative Action legislation, proclaimed in October
1986, was a world wide first in providing a legislative
framework to assist companies to identify and remove
barriers to equal opportunities for women in employment.
These laws served as a benchmark o f our determination to do
all we could as a Government to retrench attitudes and
practices that discriminate against women.
They provided legal remedies for women to use against those
who would deny them equal opportunities, and they ensured
that special programs for women to counter discrimination,
or recognise women's special needs, would be available and
lawful.
As a GovernmTent we are proud to have crafted such an
important reform.
And let me take a moment to pay tribute to Susan Ryan.
I'm sure Susan won't mind if I describe her as the " big
sister of the Sex Discrimination Act".
After all, as an Opposition Senator she first introduced
similar legislation as a private members bill in 1981 and
later, as a Cabinet Minister, made sure this legislation was
an early priority of the first Hawke Government.
The legislation has worked.
Women have used it to seek justice and redress.
It has helped change attitudes towards discrimination and
has made us understand how widespread and unacceptable
sexual harassment is.
But like most laws, these need to be scrutinised from time
to time to ensure that they are in tune with current
realities.
We have been given the opportunity to revisit this
legislation with the report of the Lavarch Committee on
equal opportunity and equal status for women in Australia. 
That report, entitled Half Way to Eaa. contains seventynine
recommendations,'-many of which deal with the operation
of these two law.
I expect to be able to respond to the report as a whole
later this year, but today I went to announce the
Government's response to those recommendations which refer
directly to that legislation.
Our full response is set out in considerable detail in the
statement which I have released today.
Copies are available to all present at today's seminar.
Since some of the responses are somewhat technical, I will
not mention themi all here but simply concentrate on those we
judge to be the most significant.
The Government has decided it will amend the Sex
Discrimination Act in the following ways:
6 by extending the Act to cover federal industrial awards
and certified workplace agreements made after the date of
the amending legislation.
This means individuals will be able to complain to the
Sex Discrimination Commissioner about the discriminatory
operation of awards and certified workplace agreements
and she will be able to refer the complaint to the
Industrial Relations Commission which will be required to
vary the award unless there is a compelling public
interest reason not to.
0 by prohibiting dismissal on the grounds of family
responsibilities. by strengthening the sexual harassment provisions of the
Act.
We will remove the need for a complainant to demonstrate
disadvantage; it will be sufficient for the complainant to
have felt offended, humiliated or intimidated by the
behaviour in question and that It was reasonable to have
felt that way.
We will make sexual harassment of students by other
students, and staff members by students unlawful, extending
the present provision which covers only the harassment of
students by staff. 
We will extend the operation of the sexual harassment
provisions to the provision of goods and services and to
other areas where discrimination is unlawful under the Act,
for instance to unions, club., employment agencies and
bodies deciding employment qualifications.
Women will gain greatly from this strengthening of the Act.
Imte as lanlords cannot harass tenantsfr, xmpe
We will further amend the Act:
* by allowing complaints of victimisation to be dealt with
by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner by conciliation.
Previously, people who complained of victimisation had to go
to the Federal Court and argue their case all over again to
seek redress; this Is an expensive and daunting procedure
and the Government was concerned that it may have deterred
women from making justifiable complaints.
* by ensuring that determinations of the Human Rights and
Egmal Opportunity Commission are registrb-e in the
Federal Court when they are made.
In the absence of an appeal, the determination becomes
enforceable as an order of the Federal Court, thus
increasing the effectiveness of determinations of the Sex
Discrimination Commissioner which at present are not binding
in responding to the Lavarch Report and following a
statutory review by _ my -colleagthuee Minister for
Industrial Relations, Peter Cook, we have also agreed to
significant amendments to our Affirmative Action legislation
in order to strengthen its effectiveness.
We have decided to adopt a policy of contract compliance,
whereby all Government departments will ensure that
recipients of Government contracts and industry assistance
have met their obligations under the Affirmative Action
-legislation. My colleague the Minister for Administrative Services,* Nick
Bolkus, has already announced that his Department would not
purchase goods or services from suppliers who do not comply
with the Affirmative Action legislation.
Other departments will follow suit as soon as the
operational details are worked out. 
We have also decided to extend the operation of the Act to
cover voluntary bodies employing 100 or more paid employees.
This will bring an estimated 60,000 additional employees
under the Act and will mainly affect the largest charities,
independent schools and the Catholic school system.
It is the Government's intention that these amendments to
the Sex Discrimination Act and the Affirmative Action ( Equal
Employment Opportunity for Women) Act will be passed before
the end of this year.
The Government has classified them as " essential for
passage" during this sitting of the Parliament.
We want to ensure these important and necessary reforms are
implemented as quickly as possible.
Our response to the Lavarch Report has been framed with
care. We wanted to be able to reply to the Report as quickly as
possible, but we also needed to be sure that the legislation
would be improved by any changes.
With some of the recommendations, we felt that more time was
needed to consider and consult before agreeing to amend the
legiselation. For instance, the Government is aware of the concern by some
women's groups that S. 33 of the Act be amended to ensure
that special measures to promote equal opportunity for women
are not unlawful.
We also know that many of you are worried about the test for
indirect discrimination.
Both of these are complex and difficult matters.
I note that you are holding workshops on each of them this
afternoon. I do ask that you convey your recommendations to
my Office or to the Office of the Status of Women because
these are among a number of Lavarch recommendations which
the Government has decided to accept in principle but wanted
more time to consider.
I have asked my colleague the Attorney-General, Michael
Duffy, who was responsible for framing the amendments to the
Sex Discrimination Act, to come back to the Government in
February next year with definitive responses on those
recommendations. 
There are two exception.
we as a Government felt we needed a longer period of time to
consider the implications of removing the permanent
exemption of the Australian Defence Forces in respect of
women in combat.
My colleague the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel,
Gordon Bilney, has agreed to re-examine that exclusion and
its legislativa basis after he receives the results of a
review of women employed in combat-related positions later
this year.
Similarly, it was the Goverrnent's view that the
implications of the exemption present enjoyed by religious
schools needed to be thoroughly examined, and widely
consulted, before a decision was taken.
In both these cases, the Government has agreed to reconsider
the recommendations in September 1993.
To sum up, the overall response I have been able to provide
today is comprehensive and very specific.
I have tried to avoid becoming too technical while providing
you with a flavour of the extent of our response.
I am satisfied we have been able to respond positively to
the vast majority of the recommendations and that where we
are not able to act immediately, we have signalled our
intention to do so after adequate investigation and
consultation. Finally, let me commend Michael Lavarch and the Government
members of the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs for their thorough and
constructive report.
They have led us through a complex set of issues with
clarity and vision.
But I'm sorry I can't say the same for the Opposition
members of that Committee who presented a dissenting report.
They took the view that some of the recommendations for
changing the legislation would have " the consequences of
diminishing rather than enhancing the equal opportunity and
the equal status of Australian women"! 
Well, let me say that this is just one more area where the
Government and the Opposition are poles apart.
We recognise and want to eradicate inequality, injustice and
unfairness. They want to create new hierarchies, new division., new
tensions and new antagonisms in our society.
We want to work in partnership with the important Australian
groups. We want to consult with and listen to women's organisationa,
business, trade unions, welfare groups, environmental
groups, young people.
Our one nation is predicated on reconciling the various and
differing elements of Australian society.
We want fewer tensions.
We want less aggression and violence.
We want to close the distances in our nation, be they
between cities, between sectors or between sexes.
We want accord and harmony.
These are our common goal.
We as a Government and, I am confident in saying, you as
members of women's organisations, are dedicated to improving
our society, to making it a fairer and nicer place.
I was criticised earlier this week by the press for devoting
my entire speech at the National Press Club to a critique of
Fightback!
But my main business at the Press Club was to analyse the
opposition's policy because I hold such strong views on the
damage that Fightbanki would do to this country were it ever
to be put into practice.
I hope you will forgive me for saying so in this forum but I
believe I would not be doing my job if I were not to alert
Australians to the fate that I am convinced awaits them if
Dr Hewson and his band of wreckers were ever to get their
hands on the levers of Government.
__ fjqhtback! is a damaging and destructive doctrine. 
It is especially unfair to women.
The Opposition is trying to peddle the fantasy that our
proposed tax cuts are of no benefit to women.
Low income earners, many of whom are women, would not
benefit from our policy, they allege.
well, let me set the record straight.
It is Fightback! and the CST that women should fear
Fightback! will tax the purse and compensate the wallet.
Give male earners an income tax cut while their wives are
slugged with a 15 per cent GST on every item of food and
clothing required by the household.
Is this the Coalition's idea of fairness? To leave women to
bear the brunt of the tax?
Under the Coalition's enterprise bargaining system, women's
wages are likely to fall back to the low levels of twenty
years ago when women earned on average only 67 cents for
every dollar earned by men.
Under Labor's centralised wage-fixing system, the earnings
gap between women and men has been reduced.
A recent ILO study noted Australia's record, showing that
award rates of pay for full-time, adult non-managerial woman
are now 90.1 per cent of the earnings of their male
counterparts, leaving aside overtime.
By extending the Sex Discrimination Act to industrial awards
and certified workplace agreements, as I announced earlier,
we are demonstrating the strength of our commitment to a
fair, award-based industrial relations system.
The barbaric survival of the fittest ( and the strongest)
policies of Dr Hewson would force women workers off awards
and into individual employment contracts where their wages
and conditions could be substantially reduced.
make no mistake about who would suffer most under Fightback!
women.
Child-care will be more expensive because of the OST.
More than 100,000 women would lose their Family Allowances. 
Health care would once again become an entitlement of the
wealthy. The Coalition would close down the Affirmative Action
Agency, slash the resources of the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission and, thus, the Sex Discrimination
Commioaioner, and generally reduce the role of government in
promoting fairness and opportunity for all Australians.
But most of all it would deny us our vision and our
determination to make Australia a better and a more
equitable society.
Imagine an Australia where women could pursue their dreams
and their ambitions, unfettered by discrimination, no longer
harassed or deterred by man-made barriers.
An Australia where women were not " half-way to equal" but
where we all lived in peace, harmony and equality.
I can imagine such a place.
It's where I want to live; it's where I want my daughters to
live. it is 8 place we can achieve by working together, the way we
do now.
I give you my solemn undertaking today that I will work
hard, do my bit to help us get there.
Together, in partnership, I am convinced we can make it.
CANBERRA 19 September 1992 



The Government's Response to the Lavarch Report
Statement by
The Prime Minister
The Honourable P. J. Keating. MP
19 September 1992 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Sex Discrimination and
Affirmative Action
The Government's Response
to Recommendations
of the Lavarch Report
Introduction
The Government's commitment to eliminating discrimination
against women is reflected in the Sex Discrimination Act 1984
' and the Affirmative Action ( Equal Opportunity for Women) Act
1986. The Sex Discrimination Act is the legal framework for
the Government's policies and programs for the elimination of
discrimination on the ground of sex, marital status or pregnancy.
It is based on the United Nations Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, which Australia
ratified in 1983.
The operation of the Act is based on the resolution of
individual and group complaints through conciliation by the Sex
Discrimination Commissioner. The great majority of complaints
are about discrimination at work, but there are also a large
number of complaints about sexual harassment.
The Act has been both a symbolic and a practical source of
support for women in their struggle for equality, especially in the
workplace. Several amendments to improve its operation and 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
widen its scope, including the replacement of the blanket exemptions
for insurance and superannuation with more limited
exemptions, have already been made.
The Act now has wide acceptance, even among many who
opposed it in 1984. Moreover, there is now a more general
understanding of the institutional and social factors which have
worked against equality for women. It is timely to review several
aspects of the operation of the Act, and this has been done in
part by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs ( the Lavarch Committee) in the
context of its Inquiry into Equal Opportunity arnd Equal Status for
Women in Australia. Other aspects of the Act h'ave been examined
by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner in her Review of
Exemptions, tabled in Parliament on 10 September 1992.
The aim of the Affirmative Action Act is to remove
discrimination against women in employment, with the emphasis
on positive programs to improve the position of women workers.
The legislation has been gradually phased in to cover all higher
education institutions and private sector organisations with 100
or more employees. Employers are required to report each year
to the Affirmative Action Agency on the progress of their affirmative
action programs. Those who do not comply face being
named in Parliament. There has been a very high level of compliance
with the Act.
In May 1991 the Minister for Industrial Relations announced
a review of the Act, with the aim of introducing
amendments to legislation in this Parliamentary sitting. The
Effectiveness Review of the Act conducted by the Agency's
Director revealed strong support for the legislation and this was
also reflected in the Lavarch Report, which makes a number of
recommendations to improve the Act.
The Government intends to pass further amendments in
the Budget sittings of Parliament to extend the scope and im-Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
prove the operation of these Acts. These, and the other measures
discussed here, are the Government's response to those
recommendations of the Lavarch Committee which deal with the
Sex Discrimination Act and the Affirmative Action Act. A number
of the recommendations do not require legislation. In regard to
the Sex Discrimination Act, some present complex or very sensitive
legal or social issues, and require full examination before
decisions can be reached on implementation. In these cases,
however, the Government has set out the process, including the
timing, it will use to arrive at a response.
The recommendations are reproduced for reference. 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmallive Action Sex DIscrlmlnation ond Affirmative Action
Extension of the
Sex Discrimination Act
to Industrial Awards
Recommendation 74
The Committee recommends that the
Pay Equity Unit in the Department of
Industrial Relations undertake investigations
into the impact on women of
removing the current exemption at
In particular they should
monitor the extent to which discriminatory
clauses are being removed as
part of the structural efficiency negotiations
and decisions.
The Government will introduce legislation in this session of
Parliament to extend the Sex Discrimination Act to cover federal
industrial awards, and variations to federal awards, made after
the date of the legislation.
At present, the Sex Discrimination Act does not apply to an
act done by a person in direct compliance with an industrial
award. Further, the Australian Industrial Relations Commission is
not bound by the Sex Discrimination Act, although it is required
to take account of the principles embodied in the Act.
When the Act was passed in 1984 there were many discriminatory
provisions in awards and anomalies in the rates paid
for work traditionally done by women. Since then, employers,
unions, industrial tribunals and governments have worked to-
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
wards eliminating discrimination, and most of the overt discrimination
has been removed. Under the Structural Efficiency Principle
established by the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
in 1988, minimum wage rates have been reviewed on the basis
of work value, and this minimum rates adjustment process has
resulted in re-evaluation of many women's jobs. The Government's
intention in extending the Sex Discrimination Act to
awards is to guard against the introduction of discrimination in
new awards, especially in the changed climate of dlecentralised
bargaining arrangements. This is consistent with the Government's
commitment to protecting the interests of low paid and
vulnerable workers.
The mechanism proposed will enable indiviiduals to complain
to the Sex Discrimination Commissioner about federal
awards. The Sex Discrimination Commissioner, if she is satisfied
that the complaint is not frivolous, will refer it to the Australian
Industrial Relations Commission. if it finds that the award is
discriminatory, the Commission will be required to vary the
award unless there are compelling public interest reasons not to
do so. The Sex Discrimination Commissioner will have a right to
appear before the Industrial Relations Commission in relation to
matters she has referred. The exemption in the Sex Discrimination
Act will be modified to take account of the extension of
the Act. Workers with-
Family Responsibilities
Recommendation 62
The Committee recommends that ILO
156 be attached to the SDA as a
schedule and further that the powers
of the Commissioner be expanded to
include responsibilities in association
with ILO 156. Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Recommendation 63
The Committee recommends that
the SDA be amended to include as
a prohibited ground for discrimination,
family, parental and carer
responsibilities.
Australia's ratification of the International Labour Organisation's
Convention No. 1 56 on Workers with Family Responsibilities in
1991 commits the Government to work towards enabling workers
with family responsibilities to be employed without discrimination
and, as far as possible, without conflict with their family
responsibilities. The Government is in the process of amending the Sex
Discrimination Act to prohibit dismissal on the grounds of family
responsibilities. The other recommendations are being addressed
in the context of the Government's plan for implementation of
ILO 1 56. Further consultation and investigations will be undertaken
as to whether family responsibilities will be incorporated
fully as a prohibited ground of discrimination, including consideration
of the definition of ' family'. Several States have already
incorporated family responsibilities in their anti-discrimi nation
legislation. The Attorney-General's Department has been given
resources in this Budget to complete this examination.
Sexual Harassment
Recommendation The Committee recommends that
Division 3 of the Sex Discrimination Act be
amended to:
remove the need for a complainant
to demonstrate
disadvantage by repealing
Sections 28( 3) and 29( 2) and
replacing them with a
definition of sexual harassment
similar to that in Section 58 of
the ACT Discrimination Act 1991 
Sex Discrimination and Aff irmative Action
amend Section 29( 1) to inlude
harassment of staff by students
as an offence; and
make unlawful sexual harass
ment in the provision of goods
and services and accommodation.
The Government will introduce legislation in this session of
Parliament to strengthen the sexual harassment provisions of the
Sex Discrimination Act.
Since the Act was passed, the level of ge) beral understanding
of the harmful effects of sexual harassment has increased
and sexual harassment is no longer regarded as a trivial matter. It
need no longer be linked to an individual suffering some detriment
in employment or education to be unacceptable.
A new definition will be used in the Act so that a complainant
need no longer demonstrate disadvantage; it will be
sufficient that she or he was offended, humiliated or intimidated
by the behaviour in question and that it was reasonable to feel
that way. It brings the prohibition closer to the now common
understanding of the term.
The operation of the sexual harassment provisions will be
extended to the provision of goods and services, and to other
areas where discrimination is unlawful under the Act, including
contract, commission and partnership relationships, bodies
deciding employment qualifications, unions, employment agencies,
clubs, land agents, and the administration of Commonwealth
laws and programs. Sexual harassment of students by
adult students and staff by adult students in educational institutions
will be made unlawful. Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Victimisation
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that
Section 94 of the Sex Discrimination
Act be amended so as to allow complaints
of victimisation to be considered
either through a court of law or
a process of conciliation.
The Government intends to amend the Act in this session of
Parliament to allow complaints of victimisation to be dealt with
by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner by conciliation. Section
94 of the Sex Discrimination Act provides that victimisation of a
complainant is a criminal offence and, as such, can only be
prosecuted in a court. The Government is concerned that such a
procedure, which may be expensive and daunting, could discourage
people from complaining of victimisation. The amendment
will not remove the right to court proceedings.
Group Complaints
Recommendation 66
the Attorney-General's
Department examine
of the SDA in the light of the
recent Federal Courts Amend
ment Act 1991 to ascertain
whether amendment is needed
to provide for a less cumber
some procedure for initiating a
group complaint and to clarify
the right to damages by way of
representative action. 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
The Government intends to amend the Act in this session of
Parliament to bring the provisions for representative complaints
into line with the model used in the Federal Court.
The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission has
power to inquire into representative complaints. However, the
Commission must first determine whether the complaint meets
seven criteria for a representative complaint. The cumbersome
nature of these provisions means that they have been rarely
used. Under the new procedure a person may bring proceedings
on behalf of a group of seven or more persons Where the claims
of those persons arise from similar or related events and a common
question of law or fact arises with respect to all of their
claims. The consent of a person to be a group member is not
required and a member of the class does not have to take a
positive step to be included in the proceedings, although he or
she has the right to opt out within a period specified by the
Court. Making Determinations
More Easily Enforceable
Recommendation 67
The Committee recommends that
HREOC determinations be registrable
in the Federal Court and that in the
absence of an appeal they automatically
become an enforceable order of
the Court.
In this session of Parliament the Government will amend legislation
to simplify the procedure for enforcing determinations of
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission.
Determinations under the Sex Discrimination Act will be Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
registrable in the Federal Court when they are made. A respondent
will be allowed a period to challenge the determination in
the Federal Court. If a challenge is brought, the matter will be
heard again by the Court. If there is no challenge, the determination
becomes enforceable as if it were an order of the Court.
This will increase the effectiveness of the Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission's decisions, which at present
are not binding. To enforce its decisions it currently must have
recourse to the Federal Court, which has to go through for itself
the process of establishing that unlawful conduct has occurred.
Operation of the
Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity
Commission
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that
Trade Union and employer organisations
in conjunction with HREOC run
ongoing campaigns amongst men to
raise awareness of the effects of sexual
harassment
The Government supports this recommendation. At present a
Commission training package and video entitled Eliminating
Sexual Harassment in the Workplace A Guide for Managers is
nearing completion. Aimed at private sector middle management,
it has been developed in conjunction with unions and
employer groups and should be available for purchase by the
end of the year. It could be used to supplement a campaign
targeting men. 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Recommendation 59
The Committee recommends that
without breaching the rights of privacy
of parties to a complaint, HREOC
publish more comprehensive statistics
on the nature of concluded complaints,
including those:
which did not proceed to
conciliation; those resolved through
conciliation; and
those requiring formal
determination by the
Commission or the Court
The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission has
developed a comprehensive database on complaints and matters
proceeding to formal inquiry. It has sought legal advice on the
boundaries and requirements of confidentiality, and could make
the statistics described here available subject to that advice. In
addition, the Sex Discrimination Commissioner intends to produce
a quarterly information sheet on developments in sex
discrimination issues, with particular focus on legal decisions and
conciliated complaints. Recommendation 66
The Committee recommends that:
the Sex Discrimination
Commissioner seek, through
arrangements with the ACTU.
to ensure that the union
movement is familiar with the
complaint handling processes
of the SDA and of the potential
for union involvement in
complaints under the SDA.
The Sex Discrimination Commissioner is developing a range of
strategies including meetings, seminars and workshops targeted
at unions, in order to inform them and their members about
rights and procedures under the Sex Discrimination Act. The
project is planned to cover two years. Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Recommendation 68
The Committee recommends that:
the Sex Discrimination
Commissioner be provided with
adequate resources to ensure
that the Commission's proactive
functions specified in Section
48( l) of the Act can be more
effectively carried out;
the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
determine separate budget
allocations for each of its areas
of responsibility in order that
the Sex Discrimination
Commissioner have access to a
clearly designated budget.
The Commission, an independent statutory body, has indicated
support for these recommendations. The Sex Discrimination
Commissioner has a separate allocation within the Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission's budget, but further discussion
will continue within the Commission on distribution of
resources. Areas Where Further Work
Will be Done on
Strengthening the Act
Recommendation The Committee recommends that:
a general provision stating that
discrimination on the basis of
sex, marital status, potential
pregnancy and family
responsibilities is unlawful
should be included in the SDA. 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
This recommendation will be considered over the next six
months. The Government understands the recommendation to
mean the addition of potential pregnancy and family responsibilities
as prohibited grounds of discrimination. It needs to be
considered in conjunction with Recommendations 61, 62 and
63, which also deal with potential pregnancy and family responsibilities.
The issue of adding family responsibilities to the Act is
currently under consideration ( see Recommendation 63). Adding
potential pregnancy explicitly might strengthen the Act, particularly
in regard to occupational health and safety issues. It is
discussed further under Recommendation 61. Consultations with
the States, and with business and employer groups, will be
necessary before any action is taken.
a provision allowing for ' equal
protection before the law',
similar to the provision in the
Racial Discrimination Act, be
adopted in the SDA.
The Government will investigate this recommendation further
over the next six months. If. as a result of the investigation, it
appears that the new provision would strengthen the Act, it will
be implemented. The proposal for equal protection before the
law, in conjunction with extension of the Act to cover new
' prohibited grounds', could involve a detailed process of searching
for inconsistent legislation. It could cause difficulties with
State legislation and will be discussed with the States.
Recommendation 61
The Committee recommends Section
7 of the SDA be amended by:
the inclusion of ' potential
pregnancy' as a ground of
prohibited discrimination.
the repeal of 701)( b). Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
The Government will investigate these recommendations further
over the next six months. If, as a result of the investigation, it
appears that the amendments would strengthen the Act, they
will be implemented.
It is not entirely clear where there could be discrimination
on the grounds of potential pregnancy which would not be
caught by the definition of sex discrimination already in the Act.
However, it could strengthen the Act, in particular with regard to
occupational health and safety issues. Consultation with States
and business and employer groups would be necessary.
Section 701)( b) provides a defence of reasonableness for
discrimination on the grounds of pregnancy. Even if it were
repealed, temporary exemptions could continue to be made
under Section 44, similar to those which have been made in the
past for the lead industry.
Recommendation 64
The Committee recommends that the
dlef inition of ' marital status' in Section
6 be extended to include discrimination
on the basis of the identity of the
spouse of the person lodging the
complaint.
The Government will implement this recommendation, and is
examining the best means to do so. It may be necessary to allow
for exceptions to the new provision, for example if an employer
wished not to employ someone whose spouse worked for a rival
firm. This might be dealt with by a ' reasonableness' criterion, but
further consideration and consultation are warranted.
Recommendation 72
The Committee recommends that the
Attorney-General's Department, in
consultation with HREOC. determine
if an amendment is necessary to 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Section 33 so that it ensures that
measures to promote equal opportunity
for women or to meet their
special needs are not unlawful.
The Government will investigate this recommendation fully over
the next six months. If, as a result of the investigation, it appears
that a new provision would strengthen the Act, the Act will be
amended. The Lavarch Report refers to evidence of a very strongly
expressed view in the community that the section of the Act
which allows for measures to promote equality' needs to be
reinforced. This concern has been expressed in the context of
extending the Act to cover federal industrial awards, a small
number of which contain provisions which discriminate in favour
of women. The Government recognises that recent cases have
caused concern. It has been argued that these cases have demonstrated
that the clause is adequate, but many women's organisations
would disagree with this view. On the other hand,
drafting a more satisfactory clause may be extremely difficult,
and there is a danger that a change would obviate the usefulness
of previous cases as precedents. Further consideration is
warranted. Indirect Discrimination
Recommendation 70
The Committee recommends that:
sub-sections 6( 2) and 7( 2)
paragraph be deleted.
a new sub-section be added to
Sections 5, 6 and 7 in the
following terms:
it shall be a defence for a discriminator
to show that the imposition of the Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
condition or requirement was reasonable
in order to pursue the least
discriminatory option available to the
discriminator in the circumstances of
the case.
The Government accepts the principle behind this recommendation,
but implementation warrants further consideration of legal
precedent and consultations with the States and Territories and
business and employer groups. This will be done over the next six
months. These provisions deal w ith the test for indirect discrimination.
If the recommendation were implemented, it might be
necessary to amend the test in paragraph to refer not only to
the least discriminatory option but also to allow for a test of
economic viability. Legal Aid-
Recommendation 69
The Committee recommends that the
Attorney-General investigate the criteria
applied by the Legal Aid Commission
in deciding aid applications
for assistance in sex discrimination
cases with a view to ensuring that
complainants and respondents are
assisted in appropriate cases.
Legal Aid is provided through State agencies, and the criteria are
decided at State level. Over the next six months the Government
will consider the issues, in the light of the scarce resources
available. 
Discrimination a~ ndc A~ ffiraaiienAatodteA firmative Action)
The Defence Force
Recommendation 71
The Committee recommends that
Section 43 be amended to include a
specified time period not exceeding
two years to allow the removal of
prohibitive and discriminatory provisions
from Defence Force legislative
requirements and administrative
procedures.
The Minister for Defence Science and Personnel will re-examine
the exclusion of women from combat duties and the legislative
basis of that exclusion after the Chief of the Defence Force
presents the results of a comprehensive review of the employment
of women in combat and combat-related duties later this
year. Women are at present excluded from serving in combat
positions. The Sex Discrimination Act also allows their exclusion
from combat-related duties although the latter exclusion has not
been applied since May 1990 when the Chiefs of Staff recommended
against its continued application and the Minister for
Defence announced a new policy based on this advice.
A progress review of the policy of employing women in
combat-related positions was considered by the Chiefs of Staff
Committee in June 1991. The Chiefs of Staff found that the
implementation of the new policy was progressing well and
without any major impediment. A further review of policies
relating to the employment of women in combat and combatrelated
positions, prompted by the Lavarch Report, is being
conducted with a report to be submitted by the Chief of the
Defence Force by 30 October 1992. Religious Schools
Recommendation 73
The Committee recommends that
Section 38 of the Sex Discrimination
Act be amended to add the requirement
of ' reasonableness'.
The Government will consult widely on this issue, and on the full
implications for religious schools of adding any reasonableness
criterion to the Act. It recognises the need to balance people's
right to equal treatment with the right to freedom of religious
practice. It will reconsider its response to the recommendation in
twelve months' time.
Implementation of the recommendation to add a criterion
. of reasonableness to the exemption of employment by educational
institutions established for religious purposes would mean
that a religious body could be called on to show that discrimination
in employment of staff was reasonable having regard to the
objectives of the organisation. The Lavarch Report expresses the
view that it is unacceptable to have a double standard between
men and women employed in schools established for religious
purposes.
Sex Discrimination and Aftirmative Action 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative ActionSex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Quality of Programs
Recommendation 76
The Committee recommends that:
the Affirmative Action Agency
be resourced to undertake
qualitative assessments of
reports received.
The Government supports this recommendation. In the 1992-93
Budget the Government has provided an additional $ 0.4m in
1992 ( and $ 0.25m in 1993-94) to the Affirmative Action Agency
for a new program of measures to encourage quality affirmative
action outcomes.
Submissions and consultations of the Effectiveness Review
of the Affirmative Action Act revealed wide ranging and strong
support for maintaining the existing general structure of the
legislation. There was concern, however, about the uneven
quality of employers' affirmative action programs and strong
support for focussing on improving quality in the next phase of
the legislation. The new measures will include development of performance
standards based on best practice benchmarks; and cooperative
research projects and training initiatives with employer
bodies and unions. Evaluation of reports and feedback to employers
will be integral to these measures.
the Agency encourages
companies to focus more
carefully on identifying and
addressing the particular needs
of groups of women with
special needs in the workforce. 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
The issue of how to encourage employers to focus on the
needs of particular groups of women workers was considered as
part of the Effectiveness Review of the Act. The Government
accepts the Director's conclusion that the most fruitful approach
would be for the Agency to develop models of good practice cooperatively
with interested companies ( including for example,
language and literacy training for women, and workplace design
facilitating employment of women with disabilities), rather than
provide legislative coverage by category for women with multiple
disadvantage. This will be taken up by the Agency in the next
stage of the legislation. Recommendation 77
The Committee recommends that:
those organisations consistently
recording good progress should
have the obligation of report
ing reduced accordingly,
reducing the workload of the
organisation itself and the
Affirmative Action Agency; and
The Government will implement this recommendation which was
also raised in the Effectiveness Review, by introducing legislation
in this session of Parliament to give the Director the power to
vary reporting requirements.
This amendment will enable the Director to alter the report
, format to permit, for example, detailed reporting in one year and
progress and exceptions reporting the next. It would also allow
the development of a scheme for exempting exceptional performers
from reporting requirements for a number of years,
similar to the ' exceptional trainer' status under the Training
Guarantee ( Administration) Act 1990. Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
the Affirmative Action Agency
to be charged with responsibil
ity to distribute reports to
relevant interest groups,
principally trade unions.
Submissions, consultations and research for the Effectiveness
Review suggest that the requirements of the Act for employers
to consult with trade unions and with employees about their
affirmative action programs are not well met. The Government
has decided that a tripartite advisory committee will be established
to address this issue as well as how to improve the quality
of affirmative action reports. A priority for the committee would
be to develop general principles for compliance with the eight
steps of an affirmative action program and codes to interpret
them. Early emphasis will be given to steps Three and Four on
consultation. Effective consultation by employers with their
employees and with unions would include providing them with
copies of their affirmative action reports.
Employers' affirmative action reports are available to any
individual or organisation upon request to the Agency. To improve
availability, from 1992-93 a full set of the most recent
reports will be made available on microfiche in each capital city.
Coverae
Recommendation 77
The Committee recommends that:
a further expansion of the
number of companies which
come under the Affirmative
Action Act to include those
employing 40 people and in the
long-term, all employees; 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
the resources of the
Affirmative Action Agency
would need to be increased
commensurate with the
increased work load;
In the Effectiveness Review of the Act, the Director estimated
that reducing the threshold to 50 would double the number of
reports to be handled by the Agency yet increase coverage by
only 8 per cent of private sector employees. Accordingly the
Government has decided that the objectives of the Act would be
better advanced through focusing on the quality of employers'
programs rather than reducing the threshold.
The Government intends, however, to legislate in this
session of Parliament to extend the Act to ensure the coverage
of elected union officials as employees and of trainees employed
through Group Training Schemes.
The Effectiveness Review highlighted * considerable community
concern about discrimination against women in smaller
companies. This issue is to be kept under review by the Agency.
As part of its program of new measures arising from the Effectiveness
Review, the Agency will also develop a strategy for
raising awareness of issues surrounding discrimination against
women in smaller companies. This could include cooperative
training with employer organisations and unions, preparation of
appropriate policies and guidelines, and pilot programs in industries
reporting particular difficulties.
Recommendation 78
The Committee recommends that: Sex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
The Government intends to legislate in this session of Parliament
to extend the operation of the Act to voluntary bodies employing
one hundred or more employees. This will bring an estimated
60,000 additional paid employees under the Act when the
amendment comes into operation and will mainly affect the
largest charities, independent schools and the Catholic school
system. Statutory Authorities
Recommendation 78
The Committee recommends that:
evaluative analysis be under
taken by DIR to ensure that
statutory authorities are
adopting effective
affirmative action programs;
and
The Government supports this recommendation. The Department
of Industrial Relations, in administering the Government's
industrial relations co-ordination arrangements, will analyse the
extent to which statutory authorities are adopting effective
affirmative action and equal employment opportunity programs.
and report to the Minister for Industrial Relations. The evaluative
criteria developed by the Agency will form the basis of the
assessments. The Minister for industrial Relations will negotiate with his
counterparts in State and Territory Governments to ensure
coverage of all government employees by EEO provisions.
work needs to be undertaken
by DIR in consultation with AAA
to establish how employers in
the voluntary sector can be
encouraged to adopt affirmative
action programs. 
Sex Discrimination and Affirmative ActionSex Discrimination and Affirmative Action
Contract Compliance
Recommendation 79
The Committee recommends that:
the Commonwealth Government
introduce contract
compliance for all Commonwealth
contracts so that all
corporations/ organisations
tendering for government
contracts should be required to
supply evidence that they
practice equal employment
opportunity; and ance for purchasing that occurs through the Department of
Administrative Services.
The Minister for Industrial Relations will raise with his State
and Territory counterparts the importance of the adoption of
similar contract compliance policies by State and Territory governments.
The Victorian Government has put contract compliance
in place and the policy is operating effectively with minimal
administrative costs.
as part of greater Commonwealth
State co-operation in
equal opportunity matters, the
State and Territory Governments
explore options such as
contract compliance to enhance
the effectiveness of sex
discrimination legislation.
The Government accepts this recommendation, which is also a
recommendation in the Effectiveness Review, as a means of
signalling the Government's support for affirmative action
through an additional incentive to employers to comply with the
Act. Those employers who fail to comply with the requirements
of the Act will not be eligible for consideration for government
contracts for goods and services and specified industry assistance.
This will encompass purchasing by all government departments.
Operational details of the policy are currently being
developed and the implementation date and operational policy
will be announced at a later date. The Minister for Administrative
Services has already announced the adoption of contract compli-



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP,
DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, RAAF FAIRBAIRN, SEPTEMBER 20,1992.
E OE PROOF COPY
J: ( inaudible).. result in Quecnsland?
PM: Well, let's say I think it's an important result for the Queensland Labor
Party, for Wayne Goss, and I think a bad result for the Liberal Party because they
spent just on a million dollars there, trying to berate the Federal Labor
Government. So there's no comfort for the Liberal Party in this. And, also, their
claim that this is the end of the decade of Labor, I think that's just a bit premature.
J: ( The conservatives) are claiming a swing of about four per cent against
Labor in marginal federal seats.
PM: Well, that's what they're down to. Next thing they'll be down to two and
three per cent swings in municipal wards. I mean, they're flat out finding some
comfort in this, and even that we'd need to analyse. The fact of the matter is, the
Federal Liberal Party spent a lot of money here trying to say that this should be
fought on Federal issues and, basically, I'm afraid, Dr Hewson and Mr Robb have
taken a big loss, a big L. O. S. S.
2/
VOT' 90 ' NGZ0 6' daSI 131 
1: ( inaudible)
PM: , Well, I'm going to J apan,. and to Singapore and to Cambodia but to
Japan and Singapore, not,-on any initiative or to address particular things but to take
the opportunity of a general discussion about development in the region, about the
bilateral relationship between Australia and Japan, about trade trends generally in
the world, and doing the same thing in Singapore. Now, I'm quite sure Japan has
not been pleased by the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition, but they are a
mature country, they're used to other countries arguing with them about particular
things, and that's why I won't have any problems, I don't think, making it clear that
Labor will maintain a good, working, friendly relationship with Japan and, of
course, absolutely, with Singapore.
J-( inaudible)
PM: Well, I said something about that yesterday. Thk motor industry is arguing
with the stridency of Dr Hewson. The fact is that with zero tariffs they'd basically
be wiped out. The Government's made the right judgment about tariffs, we've
brought tariffs down but not to the point where we won't have an industry.
Thank you.
tO/ OdJ 9000ON SZ: OT z6* d@ S* T .131 



/ 0/
THE HONOURABLE PAUL KEATING
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
and
HIS EXCELLENCY MR KUICHI MIYAZAWA
PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN
JOINT PRESS STATEMENT ON ASIA-PACIFIC PERSPECTIVES
At their meeting today Prime Ministers Keating and Miyazawa affirmed
the value of theAustralia-Japan relationship and their confidence in the future
benefits it will bring to both countries and to the Asia-Pacific region._
2. A major theme of the discussion at the meeting was shared recognition
of the momentous changes in the Asia-Pacific region following the end of the
ColdWar. The two leaders noted especially that new opportunities and
c hallenges also derive from the continuing dynamism of Asia-Pacific
economies and increasing moves towards regional t rading arrangements. They
confirmed their resolve to address the changes now unfolding in the region
from a long-term perspective, and in ways that further promote the cooperative
relations that have been nurtured so far in the region. They reaffirmed their
readiness to cooperate jointly with other Asia-Pacific nations in the furtherance
of peace and prosperity in the region.
3. The two Prime Ministers reiterated the view of their Governments that
the engagement of the United States is of fundamental importance to the peace
and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region, with the presence of US forces ' in the
Western Pacific serving as a stabilising factor. They noted that the respective
defence relationships of Australia and Japan with the United States, including
Japan's substantial host-nation support for US forces, made a significant
contribution to regional stability.
4. The two leaders affirmed that Australia and Japan are resolved to
cooperate where feasible in the resolution of regional issues of conflict. Prime
Minister Keating supported a more active Japanese international role and
welcomed Japan's decision to participate inUnited Nations peace-keing
activities. The two Prime Ministers reaffirmeid their'fu* lsupport for the role
played by the United Nations in Cambodia. They confirmed that Australia and
Japan would continue to cooperate closely in efforts to move the peace process
forward. 
They welcomed the improved diplomatic environment on and
surrounding the Korean peninsula,_ and expressed hope for a further reduction
of tension. They underlined their grave concern about North Korea's suspected
nuclear weapons _ program, and insisted on the necessity of the full
implementation of the IAEA Safeguards Agreement and of an effective
bilateral inspection regime.
6. Prime Ministers Keating and Miyazawa welcomed the valuable
contribution of the Association of South-East Asian Nations ( ASEAN)
towards regional cooperation. They noted the growing significance of the
ASEAN Post-Ministerial Conference process as a forum for dialogue on
regional security. They supported regional security dialogue in order to
improve mutual reassurance and stability, while recognising the importance of
existing sub-regional approaches for the resolution of specific disputes.
7. In discussing the outlook for the world economy and the implications for
the Australian and Japanese national economies, they noted that the Asia-
Pacific region contains some of the fastest growing economies in the world,
and * that its future prosperity would depend significantly on trade growth. They
also recognised that the region's economic success to date dem-onstrated the
benefits of the globalisation of economic activity through worldwide
integration of trade, investment and technology.
8. The two leaders reaffirmed the fundamental importance Australia and
Japan attach to the maintenance of an open, non-discriminatory, multilateral
trade systemq. They accorded priority to an early and successful conclusion of
the Uruguay Round, which will provide a significant and needed boost to the
world economy. They noted that a balanced outcome was within reach,
involving positive results for industrial and agricultural products, rule-making
areas, and new areas such as services. They stressed that a demonstration of
political will by all participants will be needed if these benefits for the world
economy are to be realised in good time.
9. In noting the increasing trend towards regional trading arrangements, the
two leaders emphasised the view of their Governments that such arrangements
should be open and consistent with GATT and other international obligations,
and should contribute to expansion of the world economy without adversely
affecting the interests of third countries in trade and other areas.
Both Prime Ministers reaffirmed their support for Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation ( APf~ g _ as an essential mechanism for open regional
economic cooperation. They also reaffirmed their intention to continue
promoting its role in the liberalisation of trade. 
11. The two Prime Ministers discussed the need for international and
regional institutions to reflect better the growing weight of the Asia-Pacific
region in world affairs. They called for increased attention to Asia-Pacific
issues at the annual G7 economic summits. Prime Minister Keating briefed
Prime Minister Miyazawa on the reactions so far of other regional leaders to his
proposal for establishing over the medium term a process of periodic headsof-
government meetings based on APEC membership. Prime Minister
Miyazawa said he regarded the proposal as very significant in view of the
rapidly changing international environment and the increasing importance of
the region. He welcomed Australia's initiative and agreed that the idea be
pursued further in consultation with other members of the region. Prime
Minister Keating affirmed Australia's support for Japan's permanent
membership of the United Nations Security Council so as to have the United
Nations better reflect changed international circumstances.
Tokyo 21 September 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRI1ME-NUIdSTIRR, l'E HON P J KEATrNG; MP
DOORSTOP, AUSTRALIAN EMRASSV, TOKYO, 21 SEPTEMBER 1Q92
E&amp; OK PR~ OOF COPY
1. Prime M$ nister, what'i your reaction, it I could, st to the MaatfichtL. vote in
France?
PM-I think, while a narrow mnajcuity, it'% a positive decision by the people of France.
which is of coUrse one of the major continental Furopean countries And it will
mean, T think. a more orderly sped, A more orderly transition to a unified Europe.
So it's very significant Wndit should be signiflant also In the finanCial markets for'
what is obviously a shorter termo upheaval of the last week or two, but in the long
run, this will have long run implications for the financial community.
i Was the decision rais. ed in discussions this morning with discussions with Mr
Watanabe?
PM. Yes. Ithink in Jlapan they would prefer to see this happen. They regard it as a
positive thing, and again I think they share my view that it will see a more rapid
and more orderly transition to a unified Europe.
J: Should it also help to unlock the Uraguay Round?
P\ 1M T think it will have good psychological influences worldwide, in Europe The
Round is diffierent It has other connotations anid effects about it, but the Round is
just as important orcourse as thuis decision by rthe F'rench. But it's got to be, I
think, a bull point in markets and people generally concluding that progress is
being made in the development of a unified European mark~ et, and this can
probably have good influences on the GATT.
I. Mr Keating, did you get any indication this morning about what the Japanese
would like to ee the Blundesbank do on monetary policy!
t7/ TOdJ 1200' N 617: 81 Z6* das'IT13:-131 
2
PM-No, I didn't. These things are all short term things and there's not a lot of point,
particularly, in me discussing short term movements in interest rates and things.
J. Comning to bilateral issues, this morning how did the talks go and what did you
discuss?
PM-I think the overwhelming impression one has is the relaxed nature and friendliness
of discussions. I've just concluded quite a long mneeting with Mr Watanabe, the
Minister for International Trade and Industry, and Mr Nod&amp;, from the Economic
Planninig Agency which puts the Budget together. They are very keen to get their
economy growing again, they are quite proud of their fiscal package, they think
they've done the right thing at the right time, and so do 1, 1 agree, as you know rye
made comments in Australia about that. There is a lot of flux in international trade
and international trade angements, and they're interested in our views, and I
think they're also interested in our cooperation and support which theyve just
experienced in the last week or so in APEC again, and they see us as a solid and
valuable friend.
1: What discussions about APEC. Prime Mnister?
PSI. There's an APEC meeting just corncluded. and again Australia and Japan have
played amongst others a leading role in those negotiations and discussions. I think
they attach considerable importance to APEC and to the role of countries in the
Asia-Paciflc area.
J: Did you raise any concerns about access for Australian products to Japan, Mr
Keating?
PM; Yes. I raised a couple of bilateral issues. The first was about the Japanese
economy, economic influences around the wovid. And the second, about somne
bilateral matters the kiFP for instance, for which I had a very positive response.
further collaborative lhirigs in' Japan, the cooperation orMIT! arnd developing with
us at consulate , iystem in Japan which can advance the distribution and access by
Australian companies to the Japanese market. And Mr Watanabe gave me very
strons assurances about the suppot-t of NGTI, and that's confirmed by our offcials.
But also a good, valuable. 1; eneral discussion about international trade influences.
mnultilateral issues NAFTA_. the Huh and Spoke% proposal of President Bush in
Detroit, for bilateral trade arrangemients and what they mean. what Japan thinks of
them, how we should respond to them. And T made it clear that Australia would
not be part of any pact which damraged Japan's interests, and that we're seeking the
general conclusion of the ( 1ATT Pound as the best way of getting the psychology
right. So just as the French vote on Maastricht was important in getting
psychology tight, a conclusion of the GATT Round will get i he psychology right
On trade, and hopefully diminish whatever interests some Countries may have in
making bilateral arransements
tO/ ZOdJ I2O'ON 6": 81 Z6' daS'TZ 3
I V :-131 
J Did they raise any concern about NArETA and the implivations that might have fo~ r
PM: No, except to say that they are determined to see that it is GATT friendly, that it
accords with GATT. and irt is truly a trade liberalising thing in GAIT terms, that
it accords with GATT, well then I think any objections Japan may have will be
diminished.
I; What about the R~ ush proposal, what's their reiponse on that?
PM, I think they want t know more about that and it will depend on the details It
depends on whether or not we aire talking about bilateral ar-rangemnents between
the United States and sonie countries. The problem is, what is not known about it
at the monieni is that it may well be so that the Ulnited States can make a bilateral
Rgreement on trade between itself and sonic cout; Iries, but At the end of the
Spokes, while the Spokes may emanate rrom the hub of the United States it may
not induce open trade airangemrcnts between those countries at the end of the
Spokes That is, it may be suitable to the United States but whether it is generally
beneficial lo a group ofi countries would be Of COUrse only obvious when the details
If Any pArticular trade arrangement were revealed. So they are ' let's look and see'.
J Have you done anything to seek clarification of what Mr Flush's proposal does
involve, what its implications are for Australia?
PM: The Amnericans have been thinking about this, Mr Baker has talked about it at
some length, but again it comes in the flurry of an election campaign, it will only
have Ntatus in the hands of a new administration, so the sensible think is to inquire
but to wait and see.
J Prime ' 14triiter, on bilateral issues, did you raisie the concern that Australian
automotive car part manufacturers have about acce's09
PM: Yes, I asked Mfr Watanabe for an assorance that in any third party arrangements to
dimni~ sh trade imbhalances in Japan's ravour, that Australia was not a casualty of
any third party arrangemente. in teiim% OfO011 trade. And that assurance was
generally freely given.
J Did you talk about the reports that the Japanese are keen to see an Asia-Pacific
leaders sumimit and would that be part of APFC?
PM Nn hitil I'll he iplkino tn the Primer Minivetr Ahnitt thiit ti Aflrnnon and ITl vv
T Are you encouraged by the signals that have emnergedl
t / 9 0* TMON 6P8 Z6da* 1 
PM-I've already had quite a positive leter from him about it, and ats you know there
haD alobun ionic other Adiv g~ v witlii jtt bul vutujay abut it which hats
cmanated in the prmit Ruit Again, on thete things what will matter is whait the
Prime Mirister says.
I. M1f T( g.-nuhgilict111 ' Ulis Lwvii : o b. it ulti; Y ruppuuu ) yuu uull it, In the debaic about
trade with Japait f mmiy in Australia. D~ id that come tip In any sense or in the
contexl of eiirli'r dkri~ aicnn% 7
PM. No it didnN~, and It was not for me to be raising that here. what matters here is the
continuity in the relationship and focussing on the things that mnatter rather than
any notes of discord in Australia.
J-But John Dawkins raised in Washington, he said that you notice that in Japan, he
criticised them in particular for their non tariff protection on trade. Did you
mention that at all in your talks?
PM-Nnn tariff harriers have been part of the debate for a decade or co, and thia wholo
proccio of uniffication ic an iscuo in the agriculture arcaof the CATT, and it willbe
one of tlie things that will need to, I* woidet vo ir we scitullny get a firm~
conclusion on agriculture.
When you gave your assurance that you wouldn't enter into any agreements that
would hurt Japan, was that in the contexct of the Huoh a" i Sjx-, kea?
PM: Generally.
3; And did the iapanmef. r ive any rri-. prewnl
PM. They take Australig nrml And they take Australia well. Tbcre'. i A lot of inter N
in this country in Australia and a lot of good will towards it find we should
undowotand that 4" d ' vatipe it. Th&amp; AA yeu.
1. Thank you Prime Minister.'
ends
t7Q/' O~ d TiO* ON 6L78T Z6' daS-Ij 13.1 


22 September 1992
I am very grateful for the opportunity to address you today on this my first visit to Japan as Prime Minister of Australia.
We - Japan and Australia - &nbsp;are friends and partners of longstanding.
Our economic destinies have been strategically linked for a generation.
Your industrial growth in the fifties, sixties and seventies and our development of minerals and energy went hand in hand.
But today I want to talk about the new generation: in Australia, in Japan, in Asia and the Pacific.
Most of you, I imagine, are familiar with the Australia of iron ore and bauxite mines, of sheep and cattle stations and of the vast outback.
The Australia of empty spaces, of nature largely unspoiled. Of sunny beaches, of clean water, of spacious homes with their own gardens.
The Australia of equal opportunity, of social equality.
The Australia which is a reliable and stable supplier of resources for Japanese industry. The Australia also of high tariffs on manufacturing, of powerful and combative unions, of administered wages, crippling strikes, sleepy corporations and steadily high inflation.
The Australia with inefficient wharves, highly regulated transport and telecommunications industries, and high taxes.
The Australia content to sell commodities to Japan, while it looked for its political and intellectual leadership to the United Kingdom and the United Today I want to tell you about a different Australia. The new Australia. The real Australia.
Still the Australia of sunny beaches, clean water and spacious homes and gardens.
Still the Australia where social equality is as important to us as it is to you.
Still a reliable and stable supplier of resources for Japanese industry
But also the country which last year recorded its lowest number of strikes for thirty years.
A country which has a low inflation rate, matching your own.
A country which has more than doubled exports over the last nine years, and now exports nearly onc quarter of its total product.
A country which has tripled services exports and manufactured exports in the last nine years, and whose exports of manufactured products now exceed the value of exports from the rural sector.
We now sell more manufactured products abroad than metal ores and minerals, or tourism and coal.
We now sell more to the ASEAN countries than to either the United States or the EC.
We now send nearly two thirds of our exports to East Asia, and last year sold more elaborately transformed manufactures in North East Asia than wool.
We still sell beef and wool, iron ore and bauxite to Japan.
And we have expanded our resource exports with liquefied natural gas and steaming coal.
But we now also sell wine and cheese and meat pies to Japan. Nearly one tenth of the processed food consumed in Japan comes from Australia.
We sell motor vehicles and motor vehicle engines to Japan.
And computer software..
An Australian company is selling environmental software for your mining industry.
Another sells computer aided software engineering tools.
Australian companies are selling to Japan prefabricated homes bionic ears for the profoundly deaf, sound systems, high quality aluminium wheels, and boats.
Australian manufactured exports to Japan have grown ten fold over the last decade &nbsp;- and we plan to continue to increase them.
And last year service exports to Japan were worth as much as our wool and iron ore exports put together.
We welcome Japanese tourists half a million last year, and many more expected this year.
But we also train Japanese pilots in Australia. We educate Japanese students at our colleges and universities nearly three thousand this year. We-supply medical services to Japanese in Australia.
This is the new Australia. The Australia that spent the 1980s restructuring its industies, and which continues to restructure today.
In the last decade we have opened our markets to the world.
We cut taxes and cut government spending to give us one of the leanest public sectors in the OECD. Indeed our rate of tax to GDP is virtually the same as yours.
We reached an Accord with the trade unions which saw wage restraint so effective that our competitfiveness improved ten per cent over the decade.
&nbsp;In the last year or so we have begun another phase of economic reform.
&nbsp;We have moved away from the centralised fixing of wages.
We have decided to make most wage settlements by negotiation, and at the enterprise leve). We are now completing enterprise bargains at such a rapid rate that we expect more than half the workfore tobcoere bythe middle of next year.
We have decided to encourage the pace of recovery by public investment in our roads and rail system to give us for the first time a national rail freight highway and national road highways equal to some of the best in the world.
We have greatly expanded training and retraining programs for the young, for the unemployed, and for all Australians who want to chance their skills through their working lives,
We are selling off government businesses, and introducing competition into previously controlled industries.
We have deregulated &nbsp;aviation, as well as banking and foreign investment.
We have brought competition into telecommunications.
We have reformed our ports and wharves. Crew levels on coastal shipping are now down to the OECD average. We have halved the stevedoring workforce and doubled productivity.
And in perhaps the greatest; of their structural changes, we have engendered in our workforce a commitment to productivity, competitiveness and quality.
There have been setbacks and hardship. Recession and restructuring have caused unacceptably high levels of unemployment. This year we have invested a great deal in measures to alleviate the human consequences of unemployment. We have also radically overhauled our national vocational training system to meet the demand for skills in a modern economy.
But we recognise that ultimately the solution is growth. More productivity, more competitiveness, more growth.
Australians understand these things. The experience of the last decade has made us remarkably literate in economics.
At the same time we have experienced what might be called a spiritual revolution. There is a heightened -sense of independence among Australians which reflects, I think, the aspirations which come from the change I have been talking about.
I think Australians are increasingly saying if we arc to have this change, let there be no doubt about who we are changing &nbsp;for. And, equally, if we are to be part of the region, let there be &nbsp;no ambivalence about who we are.
Change breeds change.
The change in our perception of what has to be done, has changed our perception of what can be done. The changes we have made suggest &nbsp;- and very often demand &nbsp;- more changes.
The horizon has broadened for Australians. The future is taking on a new and more exciting shape. And increasingly the shape is Asia.
I know you will understand mc when I talk about change, because Japan is a country where the people have accepted change almost as a constant of their lives.
You will know that there are stresses and that people require continuities as well. They need a degree of cultural certainty. cl Australian Government recognise the need to maintain our culture as we change our economic system - the more boldly we advance into the future, the more we need to keep the ties that bind us to our past and to each other.
Our culture derives in part from the many countries of the old world in which Australians have their origins. We are a multicultural society.. We see that as both a necessity and a strength.
But Australia's culture also springs from its 150-year old democratic traditions, from its unique history, with its paradoxical mix of frontier myth and urban reality, and from the equally unique landscape and climate. The land, the great spaces of Australia, and the sense of freedom they encourage, occupy a central pace in Australian minds.
We believe that we will change more effectively and more rapidly if we do not leave the people behind, our best traditions behind. And I think in this we have been vindicated.
The informal, egalitarian style of Australian life is unlikely to change much. Australians wil~ most certainly continue to demand decent social services, decent comfortable housing, and all their traditional freedoms.
And the government most certainly will provide them.
But we have discovered it is equally in our natures to consult and cooperate, and that these practices have great rewards in business and industry.
We're also learning; that our old frontier instincts for compromise and innovation can help us to work much more cleverly, and to innovate and invent, on the new economic frontier.
We've learned that those social services we have developed have a potential market overseas, that our skills in managing multiculturalism have a market and that cultural diversity has the potential to link us to international business networks.
We've also learnt that our experience with the land and climate has produced knowledge as well as products that we can sell overseas.
And the cleanness of our air and water and the beauty of our landscape has taught us that conservation is not only good for our environment but also for our tourism industry and ou agriculture, And for our economy.
So Australia will go on being Australian multicultural, international but Australian.
We will also go on changing as we have in the past decade, and I should hope at an accelerated rate.
Our goal in the next three years is to raise our bench marks. In resources and primary industry, but also in shipping and transport, in food processing and value adding in manufacturing, in energy production and transmission, in banking and &nbsp;financial services.
So Australia is changing~ and will continue to change, even though I think the image of the old Australia, the protected and unadventurous Australia, is still widely held by our friends overseas, including in Japan.
Perhaps even some of you here today &nbsp;- some of you who are now very senior in your own careers, and who had some direct experience of Australia earlier on in middle management &nbsp;- still think of Australia as it was earlier in your own career.
In the same way Japan has changed, but is often misinterpreted abroad as the Japan of the fifities, sixties and seventies.
T'he new Japan is a nation that encourages imports as well as exports.
A country which still protects farming industries more than wc believe it should, but which has made great strides in liberalising its markets for beef, coal, government contracting, and telecommunications.
A country where MITI is still important, but by no means the all powerful institution of the sixties and seventies.
A country which is still tops in motor vehicles and some consumer electronics but which is contracting the share of its steel, shipbuilding, chemical and heavy industries, in favour of lighter, clever products.
A country which is relocating much of its heavy industry offshore.
A country where the services sector continues to expand its share of output, and the manufacturing sector continues to reduce its share.
A country with a vibrant and exciting fashion industry, exporting to markets in the United States and Europe.
A country where leisure is becoming morc important, where young people especially young women are less inclined to accept the old ways.
A country now concerned as much about the environment as about growth.
And a country which after five decades of economic success is beginning to ask itself what its role in the world should be, and whom it can count on.
In a way, Australia and Japan have changed together. We began selling you iron ore in the sixties when Malaysia and India began to falter as your suppliers.
We supplied some of the sinews of Japanese growth in heavy industry in the sixties and seventies.
Later wc supplied bauxite for your smelters as the aluminium industry expanded, and coal to make steel and fuel your furnaces.
When we were the quarry, you were the factory.
As your economy has grown more diverse and sophisticated, so too has ours.
We have both changed a great deal in the last decade, in ways not always understood outside.
Today the prosperity of both us is highly dependent on world trade, and on the strength of economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region.
Both of us are allies of the United States, friends of Europe.
Neither of us is a member of closely integrated economic blocs.
Both of us have in recent years expanded the share of trade we have with our Asian neighbours, hut both of us continue to have important and irreplaceable trade with Europe and United States as do most Asian trading economies.
Both of us are wondering quite how the two blocs of the European Community. and NAFTA will develop whether they will enhance the growth of the worlds prosperity, or diminish it.
Both of us need to think about where we are going in the years ahead, and how we are going to get there.
That is principally the purpose of my visit. I think as old friends and successful partners of long standing we should have dialogues. I think there is much to be gained from working together.
Today I want to offer a few thoughts on how Australia sees things evolving over the next few years.
We think there are many possibilities to pursue in addition to the Uruguay Round. of GATT, but that the success of the Uruguay Round help's all of &nbsp;them.
If the Uruguay Round succeeds, we can build on it.
If it fails, the need for new thinking will be all the more urgent.
Our reading is that the differences now separating the European Community and the United States on the key questions of agricultural trade are minor compared to the extent of agreement. Yet it is these differences which are holding up agreement not only in agriculture, but in the entire round itself.
We urge Europe and the United States to recognise the gravity of their global responsibilities, their responsibilities to generations to come, and to get on with the job of sorting out their remaining differences.
If they do resolve their differences then I think Japan will have to ponder very seriously whether it would wish to stand in the way of a comprehensive agreement covering agriculture. Japan has gained as much as any nation from an open world trading system, and has more to lose than most from its collapse.
But even with a resolution of the Uruguay Round, we have no doubt that the politics of world trade are driving us in the dirction of regional, sub-regional and bilateral arrangements.
Europe is irrevocably on a path to closer economic integration of the existing EC members, and the inclusion of more and more European countries.
And from being an idea, a hope, a threat NAFTA has overnight become a reality. There are great uncertainties here, and in uncertain times we need our friends. In your thinking about the future you should at least bear this mind:
Australia is a friend you can count on.
There are over a hundred thousand Australians students learning Japanese right now. There are more students learning Japanese in Australia than in any country in the world outside of Japan. We have more Japanese language students than do Canada, the UK or the United States put together. So you can count on that friendship continuing, and growing stronger in the next generation.
We support a more active Japanese role in international and regional affairs.
We support Japan's permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council as a way of better reflecting changed international circumstances.
We have valued your partnership in the creation of APEC and in bringing peace to Cambodia. We have worked hard together to stop the spread of nuclear weapons in the region.
And on this key issue of the future direction of the world trading economy, let me say that Australia shares with Japan a fundamental interest in the maintenance of an open non-discriminatory, multilateral, trading system.
If, because of the actions of others, the multilateral system starts to weaken, Australia's core interests lie in maintaining the most favourable possible environment for our bilateral trade relationships with Japan and the other economies of East Asia.
In particular Australia would see no overall gain from entering into any trading pact which discriminates against Japan, or which in one way or another is directed against Japan. You arc our most important export market by far.
Nearly one third of our exports go to Japan. Your prosperity is essential to our prosperity.
Arrangements which disadvantage your trade disadvantage ours.
I didn't mean that we won't continue bilaterally and with other nations to press for greater trade openings to Japan. We will continue to complain about restrictions on agricultural imports. But I do mean that we are firmly opposed to multilateral or bilateral trade arrangements designed to hinder Japan s trade with the world.


Tuesday&nbsp;22 September&nbsp;1992
I am delighted to have this opportunity to appear before the Japan National&nbsp;Press Club.
This is the second time I have addressed this distinguished forum. I held a press&nbsp;conference here in 1986 during the first of three visits I made to Japan as&nbsp;Australian Treasurer.
In my opening remarks today, I should like to offer some observations from an&nbsp;Australian perspective on the process of far-reaching change now occurring in&nbsp;the Asia-Pacific region.
I shall also explain how I see thc Australia-Japan relationship fitting into this&nbsp;wider context.
The timing of my visit to Japan is most opportune, considering the character of&nbsp;the strategic and international economic policy issues now facing Australia,&nbsp;Japan and our regional partners.
The centre-piece of my program here in Tokyo is, of course, the extensivediscussions I had yesterday afternoon and last evening with Prime MinisterMiyazawa. My talks with Mr Miyazawa complement very nicely discussions I had earlierthis year with two other key regional leaders President Bush of the UnitedStates and President Soeharto of Indonesia.
As you know, President Bush visited Japan after his visit to Australia lastJanuary, and Presidcnt Socharto will visit Japan next week.
Prime Minister Miyazawa also made an important visit to Washington last July.&nbsp;An active process of heads-of-government diplomacy is entirely appropriate&nbsp;given the increasing degree of fluidity which now confronts us in regionalaffairs. The end of the Cold War has brought about a revolutionary era in international&nbsp;relations. The most dramatic changes are those we are witnessing in Europe, and&nbsp;throughout the former Soviet Union.
But it is also important to acknowledge that, in the Asia-Pacific region, we&nbsp;have entered a period of transition which presents regional governments with&nbsp;major policy challenges.
In strategic terms, the outlook is generally favourable, albeit loss predictable&nbsp;than it has been.
Althoush Russia retains formidablc military assets, its pasture towards the&nbsp;region is now much more benign than in any period wc have known throughout&nbsp;the post-war period.
The Australian and Japanese Governments both welcome an improved&nbsp;diplomatic environment on and surrounding the Korean Peninsula&nbsp;the normalisation of Russia-China relations&nbsp;an improvement in China-Vietnam relations&nbsp;and the opportunity we now have despite all the recent difficulties to&nbsp;he) thepeoleof Cambodia begin a process of national reconciliation&nbsp;an~ rehbilittion.
Against the background of these positive developments, I discussed with Prime&nbsp;Minister Miyazawa two important subjects.
First, we reaffirmed the view of our Governments that long -term strategic&nbsp;engagement in the Western Pacific by the United States is fndamental to the&nbsp;maintenancc of a&nbsp;stablc sccurity environment.-&nbsp;We agreed that Australia's and Japan's separate alliances with the United States&nbsp;each make a significant contribution to wider regional stability.&nbsp;
Secondly, Prime Minister Miy azawa explaincd to me Japan's aspirations to playa more active international role particularly in the Asia-Pacific region.Australia welcomes a more active Japanese role in international and regionalaffairs. We see that as a natural feature of an evolving regional scenc, wherc thecountries of the Western Pacific translate economic dynamism into increasingcollective weight in world affairs.We are confident that Japan's international role will develop constructively, andin ways that receive increasing legitimacy from both the Japanesc public andother countries in the region.I told the Prime Ministcr that Australia welcomes Japan's willingness toparticipate in United Nations peace-kceping activities.The Australian Government is pleased that Australian and Japanese militaryand civilian personncl will be working together in theUnitedNationsTransitional Authority in Cambodia.We should like this to be a model of the ways Australia and Japan can, wherefeasible, join forces diplomatically to help resolve regional disputes.These matters of foreign policy are important.9O/ ZOd ST0' ON L Z~ 6 daS :-11331
Generally they reflect a continuation of our existing policies.I think that so long as we can be reasonably confident of a favourable strategicoutlook, the single most demanding international question facing regionalgovernments is trade policy.It is now a high-policy matter of first priority.We all have a lot at stake in this issue.It so directly affects our future prosperity.Put simply, regional governments need to decide what nature of tradealignments and arrangements we want to operate in the Asia-Pacific region aswe move towards the twenty-first century.I know some commentators belicve that the multilateral trading system couldeasily degenerate into three competitive blocs comprising the EC, the Americasand an East Asian group led by Japan.The progressive globalisation of trade and investment flows militates, I think,against an outcome of this kind.It is also instructive to note that, for all the intensity of economic interchangewithin East Asia, the United States is still the biggest export market for mostEast Asian economics including Japan, South Kbrea and Taiwan.But, even with a successful outcome of the Uruguay Round of multinationaltrade negotiations, there could well still be-an increasing endency towardsbilateral, subregional, and regional trade arrangements.The North American Free Trade Agrment linking the United States, Canadaand -Mexico is n iib iitii-nga rcat iy.The United States is interested in concluding bilateral free trade arrangementswith countries in Latin America and clscwhere.In South-East Asia, the ASEAN countries are committed to establish their ownfree trade arrangement.What should Australia and Japan make of these developments?In my discussions with Prime Minister Mi yazawa, we reaffirmed the crucialinterest that Australia and Japan share in the maintenance of an open, nondiscriminatory,multilateral trade system.Both our Governments accord high priority to an early and successful outcomeof the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations.We accept that free trade agreements have the potential to bring benefits to boththeir members and external trading partners.
But we emphasised the view recorded in our joint press statement that sucharrangements should be open, consistent with GAIT, and contribute toexpansion of the world economy without hurting the interests of third countries.&nbsp;I attach importance to this seemingly straightforward coincidence of view &nbsp;because it means, in practice, that we should not encourage subgroups in the&nbsp;Asia-Pacific region which acquire an inward-looking or exclusive character.Prime Minister Miyazawa and I also underlined our support for Asia-Pacific&nbsp;Economic Cooperation ( APEC) as an essential mechanism for promoting openregionalism. We welcome the commitment made at the recent Bangkok Ministerial meetingto promote APEC's trade-liberalising role.
One of the most interesting policy challenges now facing the region is decidingwhat can and should be done to ensure that international and regionalinstitutions better reflect the growing weight of the Asia-Paci fR region inworld affairs.
I personally think that APEC has great potential in this regard.The organisation not only embraces the main economic linkages betccn theWestern Pacific and North America.
It also provides a benign framework in which the world's two largest nationaleconomies the United States and Japan can harmonise their approaches toregional economic issues.
The notion that there should be periodic heads-of-government meetings basedon APEC membership is a good one.
Such meetings would fill a conspicuous gap in regional relations.They would also invest APEC with greater political weight and status.I have been encouraged by the reactions so far to this proposal, including fromPrime Minister Miyazawa.
I believe it is a proposal which, if advanced carefully over the medium term andwith thorough consultations on the specific details, will bring a beneficialcohcrence to the region.
I should also say something about Australia's credentials for playing an activerole in the future affairs of the Asia-Pacific region.One of the points I want to stress is that Australia's bilateral relationship withJapan is a key element in the network of economic interdependence which hasbrought such benefits to the Western Pacific.Last year, Australia-Japan two-way trade was worth almost 20 billion USdollars. Japan has been Australia's largest trading partner for many years.In 1991, Australia was Japan's sixth largest trading partner, and third largestsource of imports.
The relationship is mature and longstanding.In the 1960s and 1970s, Australia came to occupy a key position as a supplier toJapan of industrial raw materials and cnergy.
Japan's decision to source its raw material inputs from the most commerciallycompetitive foreign suppliers was one of strategic importance for both ourcountries. Australia developed a close relationship with Japan's steel-making and powergeneratingindustries which themselves played a central role in Japan'sremarkable indUStri21 expansion.
And Australia's economic development benefited greatly as a result.These days the economic relationship has diversified well beyond thetraditional trade in farm products and minerals and energy.Later today, before a senior business audiene, I shall explain Australia'sachievements in making our economy more competitive and internationallyoriented, and our determination to go much further with this process.Australia now exports a pproximately 23 per cent of its total output comparedwith 14 per cent in 1983.
A shift to exports of 9 per cent of GDP is truly a landmark change.As part of this transition, we are now the tenth biggest supplier of manufacturesto Japan ahead of Canada, Hong Kong and all o[ ft he AS EAN countrics.The economic relationship with Japan has also shown exciting growth inrelativcly new areas such as tourism, supplying LNG, and Australian exports ofhigh-technology items suh as computer software and medical equipment.
A well--establiqhed economic relationship has provided a secure basis for theAustralian and Japanese Governments to develop an active dialogue on a widerange of international and regional issues of shared concern.Japan's position as the leading country in the Western Pacific region is beyondchallenge.
Australia's credentials in the region largely derive from its institutional stability,its sole tenancy of a continent, the strength of its economic relations withreginal neihours, most notably Japan. and many of the developing countriesofEst Asia.
Australia has demonstrated -the contributions it can make to regional diplomacyon issues such as Cambodia and the establishment of APEC.Within Australia itself there is increasing interest and confidence in our nationalidentity, an increasing willingness to confront the new challenges we face as anation, and increasing understanding that many of those challenges aresubstantially related to our placc in the Asia-Pacific region.Much more than ever before, Australians are now conscious of their place in theAsia-Pacific.
In this, our view of the region, Japan has a central position.It is apginst this background that I have come to Japan to develop an even closerworking relationship with Prime Minister Miyazawa and his Govermecnt.I am most satisfied with the quality and substance of our discussions yesterday.&nbsp;
T'hey have helped Australia psition itself to make optimum responses to the&nbsp;pro fund changes now unfolding in the region.&nbsp;Having made these opening remarks, I am happy to respond to your questions.&nbsp;



TEL o
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIM HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE NAGOYA CONStlATE
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
Welcome to the opening of the Austral ian Consulate in
Nagoya. The Consulate is a result of our decision to increase " on
the ground" resources in the regional economies of Japan.
By the end of 1992, in addition to Tokyo, Australia will
have representation in Sapporo, Sendal, Osaka, Fukuoka
and here in Nagoya.
This new office demonstrates the significance the
Australian Government accords the Chubu region as a
Xeystone for the development of the Australia-Japan
relationship. It is a very close relationship, built primarily in those
decades when Australia supplied much of the raw material
for J ' industrial expansion.
Our destini n the modern era have been inextricably
linked.
The partnership is continuing to grow and diversify.
We remain suppliers of raw materials and primary prqiuc,
but the composition of-our ex-p6rt-s is changing.
For the l8st four years Australia has been the tenth
largest supplier of manufactured goods to Japan well
ahead of many other industrialised countries.
We are determined that this trend towards manufactures_
will continue.
We are determined to do business with the world on a much
broader basis than before.
we are determined on our integration in theAija. PA= iic
region the most important part of the world, aa we see
it. 24. Sep. 92 10: 46 No. 005 P. 01/ 02 
ILL: 4. S~ p92 10: 46 No. 005 P. 0
2
Japan is central to this view of ours, and will remain
so-
Strong strategic alliances have already been rorged
between Chubu and Australia,
There is no better example than Toyota, which has
recently decided to build a new -6if-pIant in Victoria, to
invest ñ in a parts warehouse and distribution centre, and
establish a training centre in New South Wales.
We are well aware of Chubu. region's pre-eminence In
advanced technologies, such as industrial ceramics, and
we look forward to stronger exchanges in such areas.
This Consulate will help that process. it will be
staffed by a bilingual Austral an and Japanese team with
extensive business and cultural experience In bath
countries, We are sure that with their efforts we can expand our
relationship in unprecedented ways.*
Ladies arnd gentlemen, our economic relationship Is
dependent on the depth of-65ir cultural understanding.
significant cultural links between Chubu region and
Australia already exist, particularly through the Sister
city and Sister Port relationships.
Mayor Nishio has, I know, visited Australia, and Governor
Suzuki has made two visits.
There have been many cultural exchanges, including, I
understand, the presentation of koalas, ) ookaburras and
eucalyptus trees to the city of Nagoya.
Like the Japanese people, we are very fond of our native
fauna and flora they are symbolic of the unique
splendour of our natural environment.
This Consulate is also symbolic of our desire to deepan
our relationship with Japan, and Chubu in particular.
Fond as we are of koalas, we are fond of business too.
And culture. Very fond of them.
And fond of Nagoya and the Chubu region.
so I ask you to join re in celebrating the opening of
Australia's Nagoya Consulate and our friendship and our
mutual aspirations which it will symnbolise and serve.
Thankc you
NAGOYA 23 September 1992 



I0
N$ K INRVIIEW 22 Septombar 1992 Will be broadcast on 23
September 1992
ROUGH COPY
QLJES11ON: Mr Mrme Minister think you very much for coming here today,
( inaudible) yo~ u have been emphoolsln; that th6-futur. of AuxtTaUIIN
lies In Asia and specifically spakin$ what Is y'ourvision of future
Australla In Asia?
PM: Woll Australia's alretAy subsarntally locked into As[&amp; by way of
trade, 604 of our expiorts So to the region. And invemna between
Australia, Japan for instance is the second largest investor only by a
fraodon could be the lagest investor. In Japan, Australian
companies are invesino more ri~ ht throughout the AsluIMuclfic area,
South Bast Asia in particular as well un some places In North Asia
go by way of Its tradc substantially you know focussed upou tho
Auia/ Pa, ific arep and with to~ irtSM flowl AgaiII mkini that binding
even tighter, Australia Is olie of the principal destinations for
laPAntle touuist$ iad again being more, Austrsliaft tea travel to the
Pie( and the other principal faetors of course we live In the region.
Anitralla has dramatically ( inaudible) border protec~ tion. It's sn open
trading country and its mostly opn to trade with the resion.
QU~ mN
So that's why you Ame visiting bere to Japan and have you gained
much by it?
PM: Well lapans our laxrpat tradinS partner a great source of investmnt
and we õ ' ve developed now a tons term reladoanahip from the early
Wot was years ouwards.
We wera the principal supplius of raw~ materials to Japan w~ lf
Japan war. building It's economy in the G0&amp; and 70s. we as. " h third
SO/ TO'd 800* DN 6V: OT Z6' d@ S~ 2 :--1w31 
largest source of Imports to hapr this very year so we have a 1l1ng
standitg relatlonship and that relationship Is diversifying and now
hus of eourse many Personulties in It, many people that are
participating in it so there Are great Isdalities of people who
belong to Au~ tru1WaJapad BUsinSt Cooperation CoUnciT s and it hav
now Its own i1ndmnftum.
As well as that we aze joining with Japan~ In such things as P6110
kcepil Forces in Camnbodlg.,. so the relationship is deeply broadening
.11 the time and-It is appropriato for Prime Ministers to meW
accasinnally to discuss issues particularly at time of change.
Now I would like to ask about your views: How do you Set the
activities in Cambodia for which Japan Is going to sezid self doficnca
forces* iooos to Cambodia this coming ftill What do you IO ahout
this'? PA: Wall this is under the hospices of the United Nationx and iho Post
Cold War Rra of the United Nations hu it anything concentrated Its
Imfportance In tome od the reglonal trouble spots whore the overlay
of the suparpowe?% has diminished. And I think this Is in entirely
tespectable posiflon for the VArious COUNrie to tAke particulary SAY
ins the Cambodian context wher we Are Seeking to restore pmae to
that country,
Now. I understand the sensitivbies within Japan of 6mPloymnent Of
Japancie Self Defenc Forces in Any role beyond lapanis shores but
71is ts a cirtumscribo role, It's a definod role. it'. a role imi sare
with other countries Including Aostralia and can I say that we'r
delighted to have the Australian Detence Fores serve jointly,
together, side by side with the Porvis of Japan and I atn qntto SU'.
" ht with tUs exercise which happes to be under the commnand of
an Australian that the task Sivan to AI of us by the Uaited Nations
will be fulfilled and this Ix to leus true of Japa. I = i sure Japan his
doe entily the right thing In beIng thene.
QMI&amp; V1 4
Do you we thon any prospects for hope ur for -peace to be realisod In
that region?
PM, I think that Substantial prospets, I mcan we Wae seen a big change
In the strategic enonm01ent In the region.. but with the atrategic
environinent being now mora benign than It was before the decline
of the old Soviet Empirt but It's also none the less more complex.
benig but more complex 80 countries are deciding their own
postture now that ( sought) of bipolvity of the super powers hasa
diminished somewhat, But I think with the Cambodians Itis.
huportan: jlast for the Cambodin people If not for the region In
gene11ral tft Peace is restated thert, and this could only have a
settliot influenee em the whole ame. go, It's a worthy thing to be
theme and let's hope that both Australia and ] spa as active players
there are doing it well.
SO/ ZOd 800' ON 6V~: 01 Z6" daS'* 2 :-11331 
QL'EMfON
Now you have been proposingi that A PVC meetings hould be changbd
from a meatiftg on the miniserial level to political leaders or prime
miniter/ prime ministte' level. Is the group a small group
proposing the qhange?
Well unliko the North Atlantic area there is nn one foram where the
leadors of the Asia/ Pauffic, North Asia, South East Asia. the Witer
Pacific, Eastern Pacific, there Is no on@ forum where leaders am Meat
and talk about issues of subttance. Now one of thosc subjects and of
couras ff140 and economic policie, and Australia first propnoed APEC
a discusiioni point for trade and economic Issues, They have sine.
been adopted and Ito attended at mlalsiorlal 1. vel,., Zt now becoming
insttutinnalixed, the headquafters have been decided to be In
Singapore and it's starting to go at its ingtitjtlonal Pace@ and
strength but I think that Australia's strength&amp; and pae a going to
be Very greatly sthaned by the attendance of the Hea of
GQov. Ument of the constituent countries. So It has Incredible
authority and weight atid mass of weight to be able to not simply
debate things but decide things.
So I think in' the first instance we se a, fair bit of trade libetultaing
force, And the other thin$ I think it dnes. it Iiducees a more ativist
role by thai Ui~ ted Stutni in the Asian Pacific ame because whle@ the
proponderanca of US trade Is in the Pacific abc bulk of its
itietituIdonal armngemexns are in the Atltic and I thinlk i very
Much in the Intuerests of 111 of us in the Pucifi, Japan aspMislly, to
Wae a basis of dilogue where Issues xnd trad&amp; betwwo the Unitzed
States and Japan be discussed and worked out and worked out to the
mutual satisfaction of the rest at us in the are&amp; So it would serve
that Purpose nd the otber thins Is havieS the Influence in a libefil
democracy lie the United Stateg actively Involved ini ths would be a
good thins as Wall.
So I thinik APIC has come of ale at te Forum aiid ta reaka It even
more effective . representstI94 of the constituent countries and Ilsad
of Glovemment periodically will I tinuk do a great daal to enhance Its
society. As Our largest trading partner, we would like to atk about the
JapwA~ nldsai* relationships. Japan his boen undergoing deep
recession lately lad Japan is not investing as miuch us it used to In
your country so what will you exput of Japana?
PM: This may lentrally be true about Investment but we ine seeing now
a couple of very &amp; Sgnificsat Investmnnis inith e minufaetuting
industry. 7u Toyota Motor Company Is now JUst Investing. in the
COurse of Investing nearly $ 750 Million In a state of the art Motor
plant In Auatralia And Mltshishi Corpoadi is considering now
spenading another $ 600 million which by Intarnatioual stazdards is a
large Investment.
800* ON 6V7: 01 Z6daS2 : 3 
So the character of the investment It ch. mglng where In the late 801
It was in roil estate and tourist talatod vtnturos an~ d consmtruton,
ml. s is Isis true today but we are teeing now a shift to someo
substantial Investment in manufactwiog which we regard It as a
good thing.
Given the facE that soms of the products will feed the Intentational
distribution system fat those particular companies. Japan's growth Is
slow at the m1onlont, but I took tho opporwdty to congratulate 1ho
gOvernment Of JaPan On Its physical pakage. Which is I think both
tImely aond courageous, over 2* 6 of GDP is a very large package by
your Govermeint. and It om~ es I think at the right time$ for the
Japanese and the world economy to r am hoping It w', I1 do as your
Government thinks It will dO.. thal'i lift nativity In Japan and At Cho
SAMn time lift activity In the world because Japan is now such a large
player In the world economy.
QUEMfON:
Excuse me when you say million dollar# YOU mean Australian
dollars? PM: Sorry,. no for all Intents and purposes just say dollars because while
A$ 700 million aout UjSSoo mille.
Thank you.
Now with regard to~ the now Movement of Japan in Asia, there w*
Some voices that call for Japan, some people. are saying JSp* 1
should be noutin~ tod as a Permanent mfmber of te UN Secuiity
Council.. What do you think about thiS?
PM: Well. we Agree with that.. We're umotng Japan and ii IsObvious to
the Security Council. We think that JaPan can Play and Should play I
larger lnternatlonsl role, and a Security Council place Is In koepial
with the size of J&amp; pui in the world cconomy and Its Influaence on
World AttafS, SO we think the Governumnt of Japan Is ovwing the
cornot policy In lifting gradually, but clearly lifting Japa'.
iternational involvemniot In world affairs and given that the Vnit,*
Nations arm now applying an even greater role then it wu befor the
end of the cold war. 1111is a ntniely Sensible thin$ for JAPan t6 be
doing to secure a Seat at the Security Council and In that it will have
Australia's support,
SO/ VOd 800* 0N 6P: OT Z6* d@ S'~ i13-131 
Now tho last question is abnpt the Urzrn~ a, round OArr. Do you
think Itisi possible for the roucnyi to be co mpletely
. WZccafui by the end of this 3Y1r
PM; Well I think It has lead to time at the moment, because It to
Somewhat comnplicated by elections around the world. It's important
for It to be co~ ncluded successfully.
I think Itis very Importsnt. Because I think the psychological value
of the &amp; ucceqifN1 c0clusion of the round will do many great thing$
for the tpads slivironment and a lot of the., what we so* is apparent
movemnt towards bilaterallamn may diminish when people
understand there are, very nice International overlay or backdrop t0
world trade
So It Is linportan to too it completed. toe stallitig point has bcen on
alriculture in which Australia has a keen intefest, but the basis of
the Argument is one between. iurgeiy the E! uropemns and the United
States about agricultural subsfdka. T! hore'i an Issua for Japan In
here u. wall and its the tarrifficatloo Issue In respect of rice.
That'll be a difficul; issuo for you but the benefits of the round will
so outweigh any concessioo lsau may provide in this area to to
make a Succssuful completion to the round very much in All of our
Interolls amt particularly Japan which has a very large spac in an
open free muldisaeral home envlrontnent.
ENDS
GO/ SOd 8000ON 6V: OT Z: 6* daS* jZ: 131 



TEL: 24. Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 03/ 05
PRIME MINISTER
REMARK$~ BY 7THE PRCIME M4INISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DINNER HOSTED BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE,
MR GOli CHO1N TONG
Mr Prime Minister, distinguished guests.
Thank you very much for this generous reception.
F'or Auotralian Prime Ministers cominlg to Singapore has
alwaYe been a pleasure though it must be said that these
days it LB invariably business that we do.
The pleasure uonies fropi doing business with people who I've
always thought shared with Australians a certain personal
style. Some people say that we're both inclined to be a bit blunt
which I will accept on the condition that it doesn't imply
we're not sharp.
I would prerar to think that we're candid direct. We both
like to get to the heart of the matter.
Getting to the heart of the matter is what this visit of
mine to Singapore and Japan and Cambodia is all about.
I want to talk directl~ y to leaders in the region which
matters most to Australia.
As kyou and I both know, Prime Minister, these days we are
Seeking an wers to very large question*
ab Qut the future of the world trading sys tern
about Lhe institutional arrangements we need to cteate
in this part of the world
about thlk security consequences which flow from the and
of the cold war 
TEL: 24. Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 04/ 05
2
The frankness and frequency of the dialogue between
Singapore and Australia sets a good pattern for what needs
to develop more broadly in the region.
Prime Minister
No people are more conscious than Singaporeans that
economies are dynamic and constant change is required if a
country is to keep up with the pace.
The evidence of how well you know that is all around us here
in Singapore.
Australians are developing the same awareness with a speed
which muy ourpriuu yvu.
The last decade has been a great educators a deregulated,
less protected, much more outward looking economy, like
necessity itself, is a great edutiaor.
Being very much more engaged with the dynamic economies of
Asia has the same effect.
Not that our engagement in Asia is new.
The presence here in February of 1,000 Australian war
veterans and their families to take part in thecommemoration
of the 50th anniversary of the fall of
Singapore was a solemn and significant reminder of that.
But the form and extent of engagement has changed. More
accurately, it is changing. Radically changing.
Our two way trade with Singapore grew by 18 per cent last
year, to $ 4.2 billion,
You are our fourth largest export market, our sixth largest
trading partner.
The operative word is " partner's that 18 what we seek in
Asia partnerships.
It is why I am here.
One of the themes of the Business Seminar which I will be
addressing tomorrow is " strategic linkages'. We are seeking
ways in which business in Australia and Singapore can work
together, bltef ally and in the wider region.
As we found during our discussions this a[ fernoon, Prime
Minister, it is a good theme for this visit, and for our
Droader relationhship. 
24. Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 05/ 05
3
My visit tomorrow with Defence Minister Yeo to HMAS
Brisbane, which has been exercising with ships of the
Singapore Navy and other partners in the Five Power Defence
Arrangements is a reminder that we have important defence
ties.. The fact that 3000 Singaporeans aro studying in Australia
and, indeed, I understand four members of your C4binet
studied there is further evidence that our relationship
extends beyond pure trade.
But trade is the foundation of it; 80 long as we do all that
Is necessary for business to flourish, we can be confident
that the relationship between Australia and Singapore will
deepen and expand.
I am very confident about our relationship, Prime Minister.
I am very confident about the future.
I thank you for your hospitality tonight and for your
equally generous remarks and I propose a toast.
To you, Prime Minister, and Mrs Goh.
To the prosperity and well-being of the people of Singapore.
And to the friendship between our two countries.
SINGAPORE TEL
24 $ optember 1492 



T2EL4:. Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 01/ 05
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THERION P J MEATING NMP
DOORSTOP, AUSI-345 SOUYK CHNA SEA, 24 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Miristcr, are you hoping to get an endorsement fromn Singapore for a Heads
of Ciovernment Summit meeting In Jakarta?
PM I've had a very eniwouraging reply, and as you know. Singapore has flioc i
nomninated as thv bcaidquarters for the institution of APEC. So I will be telling
PrimeC Minister Goh of my discussions with Prime Minister Miyazawa of Japan,
and the fact that I think that the whole initiative is gaining somne momentumi and
that they may discuss the issue further with their-A SEAN partncrs.
7: I guess it would be impottant to havc a memiber of ASEAN Come out with a more
firm commitment towairds a Heads of Government aspect uf APEC?
PM-Therell be fttrther discussions with ASEAN and of course President Soeharto will
be seeing Prime Minister Miyazawa this very week. So it will be reasotiably well
discussed. Is it rno~ ing along faster than you expected?~
PM. Again, we haven't " et a deadline on it but it will be a bctter institution and better
for Australia to be in an organisation that's got real political power.
i You must be happy with the sort of momemnu of things being developing of its
own accord.)
PM: That's one Issue. but I'm very happy with the Japin leg of the trip in particular. T
think that I'v'e established an even closer workin$ relationship with Prime Minister
Miyazawa and other leaders in Japan. And we've consolidated many of the issues
between us, trade issues and regional issues, and f look forward to be able to do
the samne thin$ in Singapore with Prime Minister Goh and other Singaporean
leaders, and to advance some of the issues between us here as well.
TEL 
TEL 2
I Do' yoki think it's entirely proper f0r the heads of foreign corporations to becomle
directly, inolved in Autralittn political issues'
P M. I've been in politics for a quarter of i century, nearly, and it's nev-er restrained any
of them
I Y'ou'd have to discount some of their comments, thoueh, as commercially
PM. That', for companies to make their decisions about. It's not for me to particularly
be vetfing or commenting on their remarks.
3. There's one extremely important comment that we ried to get from Y'ou of course,
and that i--yso ur prediction for the Grand Finals this weekend. Let's start wvith the
most important onie, West Coast ' VelSMS GeelOtig,
PMA. That's Lin easy ( 7oritest for me, I'm on Geelong, I think Geelong will take that out.
it's a good side Oeelong, it's done. well right through the competition and I'd like to
see it do well and win the flag.
1: In Sydncy?
PM: In Sydney, much as my Canterbury-Bankstown background will permit me I think
I'd haive to be barreteking for St George against Brisbane. So we'll see what
happens, but of course we'll be back probably just too late for all that.
J: Is that a political or a league judgement?
PMI It's a tribal judgement. tribal.
J. Thank you Keating-san.
erids T2EL4: . Sep. 92 19: 33 No. 023 P. 02/ 05 



TEL: 25. Sep. 92 1 :. 44 No. UO P. U1/ u
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH PRIME MINISTER BY SHARMALA KANDIAM, FRIDAY BACKGROUND.
SINGAPORE BROADCASTING CORPORATION TELEVISION, FOR TRANSMISSION AT 9.30 PM
SINGAPORE TIME ON 25 SEPTEMBER 1992
YB r Int with Paul Xeating
Mr PM, you made it clear that you believe that
Australia's destiny ] ieas in Asia and the
Pacific. how are you going to make the
Auitralians believe that they're part of Asia?
A Well, most of our -rade is already with Asia
abt 60-70t of our exports are to the Asia
Pacific area. We have a lot of relations
already with the region tourism, travel,
investment. So it sort of happened naturally.
I think that what we want to do if anything,
ie simply concentrate the effort. We're still
running a current account deficit that is
our trade accounts arv in surplus but the
overall external accounts are not so if we
want to grow our export mktr, these are tne
places to do it and be more part of the
region in a cultural sense as well.
Q Do you see some difficulty in doing that?
A Not really. Australia is a very multi
cultural society We are providing a world
lesson in toleranoce and the settling of many
ethnic communities as part of our migration
programme in my own constituency, I have a
very large Lebanese-Muslim population, I have
a very large Vietnamese popn, communities
ar well as Greeks and Turks. It's a very
multi-cultural place and I think Australians
find relations with the region pretty easy.
Q They can't say there's no raciam in Australia?
A Well, there's less than in most countries.
There's always some in some corner. But the
tolerance with which Australians have settled
a large programme it is the largest
migration programme per capita certainly in
the Western world you can't do that without
a high deget of tolerance. ' 4 
TEL 2
Q So you feel there's a high understanding of
Asians and oC the Asia Pacific in Australia.
A The natural growth of tourisi and trade J9
taking Australiang into all the parts of the
Asia Pacific area, indeea all parts of the
world, So It's a vory International place
Australia and I think a lot of the parochial
character Australia had in say pro-war or
immediately poat-war has largely dissipated.
Q QQne thing that probably wd make AsiAn
countries real more kindly towards Austral. ia
is the idea of Australia becoming a republic
is that likely to happen you thinkl
A Inevitably, I think It will happen. It's like
all things it will change change comnes in
its own natural way. The country's now more
clearer abt itself, abt its destiny -it's not
a derivative of any other society -it was
once, it's not anymore. I tflirU that's the
impt thing.
Is this the majority feeling?
A Oh yes. The constitutional forms matter but
they don't matter as much as the inner being,
the inner feeling, the Inner confidence and I
think the Auatralians are very confident abt
themselves, abt their own identity and that
they are projecting and I think that's what's
impt.
Q Australia was instrumental in the formation of
APC do you feel that there's some tangible
benefit alroady?
A I think it's a bit early to say there's some
tangible benefit from it but I think it's a
good concept. There isn't the institutional
structurea in the Fa(; If ic tho A~ ia P area
that there aro in til N Atlantic, European
area. And one of the principal features abt
APEC one of the things it can do is to keep
the US engaged in the Asia P area, which I
think is a very inpt thing to do from a
strategic pt of view, Crom a trade and
cultural pt of view and as well as that,
provide a forum where Japan and the US can
work their problems out but a forum which
is also truly representative of the Asia P
area. So APEC I think has great promise. And
Sipore I might say mas done well in being the
inatitutional base for APEC, which I'm sure
will provide much more growth ag time goes on.
0 What shd be done to institutionialise it more
what kind of things do you aee happening?
T2EL5: . Sep. 92 17: 44 No. 026 P. 02/ 04 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 17: 44 No. 026 P. 03/ 04
3
A Well I think in time -tht Otattes represented,
shd be represented at head of govt
periodically so it has the politloal
horsepower that it needs to get what will be
essentially a trade liberalising job don.
Ministers And ministerial represontn is fine
as far as it goes. But the authority which it
will need, r think it can beat sought from
heads of govt.
Are You getting backinig for this plan?
A Pretty substantially, yes -but again, V ye
got no deadline on it Iust think it' o a
good thing to do and it will mean that we
can sharpen up the f ocus of APEC as we move
through itB history.
Q In torms of you'Ve talked abt how lot of
your trade now is with Asia. The Asian
countr. 1,6 in many ways, they're doing pretty
well what can Australia bring to them?
A It can bring a lot of technology. We havea
deep pure research baise, although that's now
being applied and I thinX you can start to
see that in the things we're doing
collaboratively now with S'pore investors,
with other countries, in areas where we have a
technological edge or where we khave a natural
advantage like food or food processing or
ininerals or minarals beneficiation, or metals,
or in some other specialist technologies like
waste management, telecoms these are all
areas.* For instance, we have a joint venture
with a S'porean company in milJk products which
are being distributed through the region
these sort of things we can do,
Q
Q You've just come from Japan? How do you read
your trip to Japan?
A Well, Jlapan has been a large invastor in
Australia. Japan is our largest trading
partner we have a $ 6 million trade surplus
with them. They've been large investorG over
a long period of time we're starting to
be,; oirte an investor in Japan and the two
countries ar-e getting closer together.
Q Is there any domestic resistance to Japan in
Australia? 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 17: 44 No. 026 P. 04/ 04
4
A Not very much. Obviously Aomo of the wartime
meiories as they do in S'pore but by and
large, Australians knQw that our balance of
trade has shifted many yrs ago from Europe and
N America even though we do still trade
Substantially with N America the weight of
the change has gone towards N Asia and SE Asia
and the growth really is in SE Asia.
Q Q Australia and S'pore have had a good defence
relationship do you see any new things
happening in that area
A I think like all good and close relationships
they tend to get better and we'll be doing
more things in fact, this very week we have
participated with 8 ahips in a joint exercise
and I'm visiting one or two of the ships
tomorrow. So it's Just another eg of the
continuing close cooperation, not just in
exercise but in personnel exchanges. in the
general sides Of derence I think this
defence arrangement will work well and
I think Australia and s'pore have been of
it.
Thank you very much. 



TEL: 25. Sep. 92 12: 53 No. 007 P. 01/ 08
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
THE AUSTRALIA SINCAPORE BUSINESS SEMINAR
Let me begin at a point, say twenty five ycars ago, and
at one divorced from the world of busines; and the
economy. Twenty five year&amp; 8ajo Australia was not known in the
world for its openness. In fact, two thirds of the way
into the twentieth century, for all our considerable
achievementt, Australia remained insular, inward-looking,
not a little xenophobic.
In so far as we looked out at all, we looked past Asia.
As your Prime Minister said last night, we " leap-frogged
over Asia" to keep the ties almost exclusively with
Britain, Europe and America.
It was a symptom of our lack of cultural developmcnt, our
unworldliness, It is a measure of Australians' capacity tor change that
the barriers are now down, and that Australia it a
complex, spirited, immensely varied multicultural
society. And it is a measure of how differently we see ourselves
that we now actively pursue our future in Asia and the
Pacific. Those who doubt that we can change should consider how
aiuQh wo Diay changed.
In a sense these two great changes we are undergoing are
one and the same.
As a nation we have opened up culturally and
economically. Economically speaking, we realisea a littLle less than a
decade ago, that our future way of life depended on
making ourselves relevant to the rest of the world and
especially relevant to the most dynamic region in the
world which lay at our œ ront door. 
TEL: 25Sp. 12: 53 No. 00? P. 02/ OE
Xn the past few years we have confronted this reality.
We have become, as a conseqluence, -more independent.
When I use the word " independent", I mean a sense of
responsibility as much as a sense of pride.
I nean taking responsibility for our own destiny; having
the will and the imagination, as Singapore had them, to
make the leap into the world of the future.
W~ ide in what we have done, in fact, is following only
slowly. In any event, there is a long way to go.
Yet the effect of realising that we are on our own, and
that to deny necessity would be an act of national selfdestruction,
has been remnorX-able.
More remarkablo, I suspect, than even most Australian&amp;
appreciate. M~ ore remarkable, I'm sue than many people in Asia
Uppreviate. That Is one part of my purpose today to explain to you
the changes.
The other is to convey the message that we are very much
open for business.
We believe Australia and Asia have much to gain from
thinking in terms of strategic alliances; that, once we
learn to enjoy commercial success together, the bonds
between us will reach a new level of mutual awareness and
respect# Now, I think it is a reasonable suppotition that most of
you are still inclined to think of Australia in terms of
empty space randomly populated with sheep. And cattle.
And mines.
I think it is reasonable to suppose that you nay still
think Of Australians as living on the cheap; riding on
the back of the country's natural wealth. And riding for
a fall.
You maight. also be continuing to think of us as a country
with heavily protected manufacturing industries, an
industrial relations culture of conflict and
inefficiency, inefficient management, inefficient
wharves, an inefficient transport and communications
system, high taxes and high inflation.
The truth about all these things is quite different. 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 12: 53 NO. 007 P. 03/ 00
J
Our inflation rate is the second lowest in the OECD.
Our proportion of tax to GDP is virtually the same as
Japan's the lowest in the OECD.
Our transport system is undergoing a radical overhaul.
We have deregulated aviation, bringing substantial
reductions in fares for both freight and passengers
We have invesLed heavily in a new National Rail
Highway and major road developments
We have brought competition to our
te] ecommunicationa,
And we've doubled productivity on our wharves
We are introducing competition into previously controlled
industries, selling off government businesses, and, of
course, we have deregulated banking and foreign
investmcnt.
Last year, in a continuation of a dramatic trend,
Australia experienced the lowest number of strikes in
thirty years.
We have cut tariffs.
but nothing has been so crucial in our quest for
competitiveness as our reforms to industrial relations.
In the 1990s, Australians discovered that conflict was
not a creative condition.
In a radical break with what had become a chronic
national disease, the Government reached an Accord with
_ Jheunions which not only dramatically lowered the level
of industrial disputes, but restrained the growth of
wages so effectively that our competitiveness improved
per cent over the decade.
More recently, we have begun another radical reform. we
are moving away from centralised wage fixing and we are
moving at an extremely rapid rate.
By the middle of next year we expect more than half the
Australian wor) force will be covered by enterprise
bargains. At the same time, there has been very considerable
improvement in workplace and management practices,
including a very successful " world best practices"
program international bencbmarking.
The concrete manifestation of these developments is to be
seen in, for example: 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 12: 53 No. 007 P .04/ OE
4
Du Pont's decision to re-locate production
-facilities to Australia to supply East Asia;
or ToyOta Australia winning export contracts
throughout South-Eaat Asia. Already Australia
exports more than $ 1 billion a year in cars and auto
parts; or Bremar-Woll-ammerei investing in a wool
processing p a'n-i eelong, Victoria under a single
union coverage and enterprise agreement.
We are also aware that successful competition in the
international marketplace ultimately requ-i-res a highly
skilled and flexible labour force, and for this reason we
have created the equivalent of twelve universities in six
years, doubled our vocational education and training
budget, and established a National Training Authority to
give Australia a system of high quality, high status
polytechnics. I could detail any number of other reforms we have made
in recent times.
Yet it is perhaps more important to make the point that
it is open cometition which is driving the essential
changes. In recent years we have learned that change breeds
change.
Recognition of what has to be done has changed our
perception of what an be done.
We do not believe for a moment that the process of
labour-management reform io complete.
plainly, we are not yet totally competitive.
But we are moving at a considerable rate.
We continue to produce and sell commodities in fact
more than ever before.
As a nation we now export more than twice as much product
as we did a decade ago and today our exports account for
over 23 per cent of total output.
That is gratifying enough.
But the really big change is this we now sell more
jg nufaqurj products overseas than metal oren and
minerals. In fact, Australian manufactured exports showed the
fastest growth in the OECD in 1990 and 1991. 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 12: 53 No. 007 P. 05/ 0
Our exports of manufactured products are as great as the
value of our exports of rural products.
The fastest growing export category is Elaborately
Transformed Manufactures ( ETMs); in recent years we have
had Chni9i Wif of ovei 50 pe cent.
In this same last decadt, Australia has also tripled
services exports.
My point is simple enough: there has been an economic
sea-change in Australia.
We still sell the minerals, the beef and tho wool, and
the liquefied natural gas and the coal.
But we arp also selling processed foods, motor vehicles,
computer software, ocean-going ferries, bionic ears and
education. And, what ig more, we increasingly sell them in Asia and
the Pacific.
The APEC region is the destination for almost 75 per cent
of Australian exports.
East Asia tokes almost 60 per cent.
Exports of ETMs to North-East Asia increased eight-fold
between 1981 and 1991.
Last year we sold more ETMs in North-East Asio than wool.
Seven out of the top ten Australian manufacturing markets
are in East Asia.
I trust you see what I mean by a sea-change.
To give you another example last year our oervice
exports to Japan alone were worth as much as our total
wool and iron ore exports.
Ten years ago we scarcely had a tourist industry worth
the name. in the eighties it was our fastest growing
industry, and the majority of tourists came from Asia.
This year, over 600,000 Japanese tourists will visit
Australia. More than I million are expected to arrive in
the year 2000.
There is no more striking example of Australia's new
economy and its new relationchip to Asia than in its
emerging trade relationship with ASEAN.
For the last five years, our exports to ASEAN have been
growing at an annual average of 30 per cent, to well over
$ 6 billion. 
TEL: 2 6 . e p .2 11 : 3: N3. N0 -0 .60
Last year ASEAN became our second largest regional
market, ahead of both the EC and N~ orth " 2~ erica: and
Australian exports to Singapore have grown by an average
of 31 per cent per annum over recent yars.
And while we continue to export food and minerals, 23 per
cent of our exports to Singapore are now -matnufactures.
Just as Singapore has trAnsformed itself, so is Australia
b~ eing transformed.
And our changing relationship with Singapore reflects the
speed of change and the kind of change which Australians
now agree is both necessary and right.
We have had similar objectives and we have changed in
similar whys.
And today this seminar of distinguished Australian and
Singaporean busineas people will be talking about the
opportunitie* for businesses in both countries to join
forces in roaching into the growing markets of Asia.
For oUr part, we have raw material resources, a depth and
variety of wor~ corce skills, a large base of
sophisticated services, o broad and well-developed
research industry, and a relatively affluent population
supporting a sophisticated construction, servicees and
distribution sector.
Singapore has a well-educated and flexible workforce, a
high savings rate and a current account surplus, a strong
outward orientation, and a geographical and political
positioh at the centre of one of the world't fast growing
regional suraomies.
Already we have the eXamele of the strategic alliance
between Australian and Singaporean buainess in Unilac, a
joint venture which processes Australian dairy products
for export through the rogion.
We have another example in Kinhill Tan, which undertaken
engineering projects in Singapore, M~ alaysia, Indonesia
and Thailand.
Other alliances are exploring projects for third country
market ventures in construction, engineering, energy,
teleom~ zmunications, refining, entertainment, and food
processing. in the future we may well find profitable cooperation in
areas in which AuStralla bas developed considerable
technioal expertise including infroetructure
development, environhment anid waste management
technologies, biotechnology, aerospace industries,
pharmaceuticals and various consulting services. 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 12: 53 No. 007 P. 07/ 0
So there are plenty of opportunities there for joint
ventures, and lots of things are happening.
but while joint ventures are fino, let me be quite clear
that we would not in any way wish to restrict our
partnership to joint ventures.
Singaporean businesses acting independently are welcome
in Australia, as I know Australian businessge acting
alone are welcome here.
Partnership can take many forms, and the Australian
Government's commitment is to the result, not the form.
It is not just Australian and Singaporean businesses
forming partnerships; in a sense, it is Australia and
Sihgapore which increasingly are partners.
Singapore will now be home to the first cuncrete
embodiment of the APEC process, which our two governments
contributed to oreating only a few years ago.
The Singapore location for the secretariat of APEC
modest though it is intended to be will put this
country at the very centre of what I believe will be
important trade policy choices in the years ahead.
we share with Singapore a commitment to the APEC process,
and to the overriding importance of securing a successful
outcome to the Uruguay Round of the GATT. We know that
the interests of open trading economies like ours are
best served by a strong and widely observed set of
International trading rules.
But With Singapore, we also recognise that there iv much
to be done on a regional basis which can build on the
benchmarks or GATT.
There is AFTA, which we believe can work to markedly
enhance trade between ASEAN countries; and, by increasing
their prosperity, increase their trade with non-ASEAN
countries.
And there is APEC, which has the potential to develop
into an open regional arrangement which enhances trade
between members without hindering trade with other
regions. Like Australia, Singapore shares a deep interest in the
continued involvement of the United States in the region,
both as the world's largest economy, and as its only
superpower. 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 12: 53 No. 007 P. 08/ 08
There is no nod for Australia, which shares a long
standing security treaty with the United states, to
re-emphasise its belief that the continued involvement of
US forces in the Pacifio region is a powerful stabilising
influence and a significant contribution to the
remarkable stability and growth we have witnessed in
recent decades.
But I do want to reassert Australia's belief that US
ecg-n imc Anvolvement in the region is also vital -both
for our prospeity; and for its own.
For this reason we supported the APEC concept which
includes both the western Pacific and the United States,
and have queried other regional concepts which omit the
US. And of course it is for this very reason to secure
American economic involvement with Asia that we have
expressed reservations: DoWh about the extension of
NAFTA to Central and South America, and the recent
proposal for the Us to create a set of bilateral trade
agreements in the region on the hub-and-spokes model of
its security relationships.
The extension of NAFTA might well lead the US into
thinking it could sustain its economic weight merely
through involvement in its own hemisphere to the negloct
of this region a notion which would I think be a grave
error. And the hub-and-spokes model in trade maximises some
bilateral advantages for the Us, but minimises the
multilateral advantages for its partners in the region.
On the face of things, our countries could not be more
different I need not go into the obvious
dissimilarities between an island continent and an island
city state.
But In 1992, I believe it is the commonalities which are
more striking. The complementarities. The potential for
cooperation for mutual advantage.
All this is only becoming apparent now, as Australia
makes the leap for change.
The potential can only grow.
Your deliberations today are both a manifestation of this
faCt, and an agent of the process.
Thank you all very much for your commitment to the cause
of our two countries. Thank you for coming.
SINGAPORE September 1992 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, HMAS BRISBANE, SINGAPORE, 25 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, is it the case you wanted to join the
Navy once?
PMS As I said, I walked into the wrony recruiting door and
joined the ALP instead, which iS probably a bit tougher
I think.
J: Prime Minister, you told a businessman today to put his
money on you in the next election. The Liberals have
already got some campaign ads out and thiey're focusing
on you, saying you're a good bet to help them win.
What's your rad ; lon to that?
PM: They can focus on me and that's where the money will be
as well I hope. But we'll leave the Liberal Party to
its own devices, I'm quite happy to proselytise on the
issues that matter to AUStralia, getting it reglonally
set up well, set up properly in the region in which we
live with the neighboure to whom we trade and the
places where people have a genuine interest in us.
That's what matters and not foresaking substance for
the shadow.
J: Are you concerned, however, that they're using your
comments that this is the recession we had to have?
PM; Who cares about them? I mean, you know.
J: Will the Labor Party be running negative ads?
PM: There's not an election campaign on. Let thum spend
their money now, good on them.
J. So itle still next year for the election, no election
beforo Christmas?
PMt It will be whenever it suits the Government.
25. Sep. 92 17: 18 No. 017 P. 01/ 03 
T2EL5:. Sep. 92 17: 18 No. 017 P. 02/ 03
2
3: speaking about the American defence presence in the~
Pacific. Do you thinkq there's any real dangor they are
going to pull them back any further? Does this worry
you?
P14: No, i think that the notion of American withdrawal from
, Subic Bay in the Phillipines means an American
withdrawal from the region is not correct. Americans
themselves have made the point about forward
projections from Honolulu, from the West Coast Of the
United States, from the deployment of its seventh
Fleet. All that's true I think, D~ ut wnat we want is a
closer commercial and institutional engagement by the
United states in the region. And that's what'$
Important, and I think that that brings automatically a
continuing strategic engagement in an area to a level
that people are comfortable with. because the United
States has provided a terribly stable environment for
this region, has given a composure to the region it
wouldn't have had. So that's why institutions like
. APECQ ax iaipvrtant to involve the United States to make
it confident about Itself in things other than defence,
and to be here as people want them here.
JS Primt, Minister, you repeated the message this morning
that you gave in Japan and that is you want Asian
business people in particular to update their image of
Australia._ Do you think that message is getting
through to business people here?
PM:. I think so. I think the people to people contact anld
the obvious business growth that Is already occurring
and most particularly the . gzwth in trade., the exports
to Singapore and the region and the imports to
Australia, people now understand that Australia is an
open place, that Australia made the change in the
It's saved Itself in the ' 80s from being an economy
that was basically unproductive and couldn't pay for
its imports. it has now made that change, it's now got
to consolidate the change and they want to be part of
the consolidation. They think we're stable, that we're
good-natured, that we do things cleverly and
productively, and we do, so this is the natural place
for us to be.
3: Prime Minister, are you going to be talking to any
Khmner Rouge representatives here?
PMt I don't think so.
3: How concerned are you about the peace process in
Cambodia? TEL 
TEL: 25. Sep. 92 17: 18 No. 017 P. 03/ 03
3
PM; I think the time to ask me about that is probably this
time tomorrow after I've had some chance to talk to
people there. But it's obviously a concern to us, it's
Ihe one great chance for a peaceful settlement in
Cambodia, and obviously the faster the Xhmer Rouge come
on board the process in an enthusiactic way the better
it will be accomplished, the better off everyone in
Cambodia will be.
Js Prime Minister, you are having talks later with
Singapote Airlines, and earlier this week Ralph Willis
announced that thK Govertment would be helping to buy
Up more of the debt, You're obviously concerned about
the sale price?
PM; These are oll commercial matters. Qantas is 4 great
franchise and it will command an important price. But
we want good strategic partnerships because we don't
want it simply being just a regional carrier, we want
to see it have a greater potential. So choosing one's
partner in this respect is going to be important. And
while the great budy of stock will be held by the
Australian people, the trategic airline partnerships
are going to be terribly important to Qantas' future.
So Singapore Airlines is interested, it's an obvious
suitor, if I could put it that way. And we'll seO what
it&amp; pitch is.
ends 



J4
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF TIlE PRIME MINISTER THE liON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP HMAS MELBOURNE
29 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
J: Prime Minister there are three days to go in this campaign, have you left the run a
bit late to campaign here?
PM: I have been down here earlier, but the thing is the future is about Victoria and I
think what you are seeing here today at this dock yard, which I might say the
Premier has had a very large interest in, is part of the new manufacturing of
Australia. I have just had the Navy tell me that this ship is a no fault ship. That is
it has been delivered without faults, it's probably the cleanest new vessel of its type
handed over surpassing American built same-class ships which says a lot about
manufacturing industry and it is done with cooperation bctween Govcrnment and
private business in Australia. It has been built by AMECON, a private company,
but it has been done in partnership with the Governnent, with the trade unions,
with the community of Williamstown and the atmosphere in this yard. The pride
in this yard is what has produced this ship under time, on budget, and with quality
which surpascs anything you could compare it with.
J: Will that translate into votes for the Kirner Goveruncnt, Mr Keating?
PM: Well the thing is I think it Is a matter of whether you take that view of the world,
which the Premier takes, or whether you say, look we don't want a ship building.
yard we will just leave it to the open market, we will let the Americans have this.
So you let the market work, absolutely: knock off Williamstown, kick the people
out of the ship yard, let the Americans build the ships; that would be the view of
the liberal Party. Now it is not a view we accept and it is the same with motor 
cars. As you know, I have been to the Toyota plant in the last week or so in Japan,
and with thc Premier 1 had the plcasure of officiating at the opening of the
construction phase of this plant, and I think it is thc difference between the Labor
Party which wants to bring the community with it to do good things for Australia,
good things for Victoria, as distinct from a Governnment and a Party which
basically believes in text book capitalism, which went out with straw hats.
J: Prime Minister that Mrs Kirner can not win this election?
PM; Well I think with every elcction you are in there with a chance right to the very
end.
J: You don't share the former Prime Minister's view?
I'm: No I don't. I think Joan hazs campaigned like a veteran in this and she has had a
hard road to hoe, it is hard governing States or any area of the country at times of
economic recession and with a difficult structural change going on as well, but the
changes which I think the Premier has been able to make in Victoria have becn
important in the long run for the public of Victoria and this is not less so than a
place like Williamstown.
So you believe shte has done thc hard work necessary to get back in on October 3?
PM: Well site has done the things within her power, that's the thing, and done it to the
bcst of her ability, and with style.
J: Primec Minister what abo~ ut Arvi Parbo's letter this morning, what's your attitude to
that?
PM: Well I think that he is making a point, that's fair enough. But I think probably Sir
AMv would be a little worried if policy changes in his area of industry were about
to wipe him out. You see it is all very well saying to the car companies, please be
relaxed as the Opposition contemplates working you out, pop your valium tablet,
be relaxcd as you go to the slaughter yard, I am sure they will take Arvi's advice
well, but probably won't accept it.
J: Prime Minister in 1990 you were saying that you were more prone to reductions in
tariffs then Senlator Button was, and yet now you seem to have changed
PM: No, no our line is totally consistent. That was the high tariffs, 253 per cent for
motor vehicles and these things couldn't obtain, the Australian people getting very
dear vehicles, the efficiencies of -the plants weren't there they had to come down.
But they can't come down to the point where they don't exist, it is a matter of
finding that nice balance and Siving industries time and giving themi consistency
and see the clear points made by Toyota, in the last week in Japan, is that they will 
build and comnpete and export from Australia with a modest level of tariff, but they
can't do it with nothing.
J: Isn't it correct though that Australian manufacturers havc had two decades
virtually to prepare for reductions in tariffs and there productivity hasn't increased
markedly?
PM: T'hcy had a Mlug of a Government that left themi the way it left them with these
high tariffs. I mncan tariffs went up under the Liberals, under the Fraser
Government, which Dr Illewson was advising, It needs to be remembered that
during the Fraser years tariff protection actually went up, the was no
encouragement from a coalition Government to improve thc efficiency of
Australia and as usual it has always got to be done by us. But again what we do is
the thoughtful balanced thing, not the unthoughtful ideological thing.
J. Premier, call I just ask you, would you have liked to have seen more of Mr Keating
in this campaign?
JK: I always enjoy working with Mr Keating bul his visit to Japan was very important
because what it did was illustrate the difference between ourselves and the
Opposition, and showed quite clearly that if you want a Government that is
committed to the future of manufacturing industry and partnerships with unions
and the private sector then you vote for a Kimer Government or later you vote for
a Keating Government. You do not risk the recovery that is coming with Kennett
economics or Hewson economics.
is there a liability to him or vice versa?
JK: We'll I don't think that is our view, is it?
PM: I don't think that, in fact with a very difficult brief Joan has coped with it, not only
as valiantly as any leader could, but with a confidence which I think has piade life
much bectter in terms of attitudes in Victoria then would havc necessarily obtained.
J Will Labor's performancc here determinc when you go federally?
PM: We have got plenty of time to work that out. State elections arc State elections ill
the end, mostly they are fought on State issues, we will make our judgements
about things, I think that iii this country the public expects to get value from the
Parliaments and they expect them to run their course.
J: Is there a chance that you will. go before Christmas?
PM: Ask silly questions and you get silly answers. 
4
J: Premiecr would it surprise you to bear that in one rcent poll apparently thc gap
between LAbo~ r and the Coalition narrowed to 7.5 pcr cent?
JK: No it would not in certain seats. But really the poll that counts is on election day
and I think there is a lot of change taking place, when you get, though I don't think
channiel 9 or 7 cov'ered it really well yesterday, the Oppositions spokesperson on
the audit group, that is Mr Des Moore, saying he is going to take 25 000 jobs out
of thc public setor people realisc that there will be no fun or future in a Kennett
run ccononiy.
J: what your own polling says thc gap is?
JK: No I don't talk about polling at this interviews, you know that. But the real poll
that matters is Saturday.
PM: There's onc thing for sure there will be 25 000 public servants at least voting for
Mrs Kirner, they're the 25 000 that face the chop under Mr Moore. I have bad Mr
Moore, he ha-. worked for me, you sec he worked for me, so I know allI about Mr
Moore and I know all about the 25 000.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
HOLEPROOF FACTORY OPENING, MELBOURNE
29 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
T'hank you very much John, Phillip, Allen, John and Robert, and ladies and
gentleman. It is a great pleasure to be here today John, for this opening of what
you say is probably the largest investment of its kind in the industry, certainly in
the State of Victoria, probably in Australia. And it is a celebration of true
entrepreneurship and true management, the entrepreneurship we used to know and
associate that word with, rather then paper shuffling which happened at the end of
the ' 80s, but the entrepreneurship to identified business, to say we can succeed in
it, we will be in it and we will be good at it. And the management which brings
the people, the design engineers, but most importantly the staff, the workers
together in a compact of pride and productivity to make it all work.
And I think that is the new era of Australia, that's the era that John Button and I
hoped for when we made those historic decisions back in the early 1980s to peel
away. exchange controls, to float the Australian dollar and to see the tariff levels of
Australia decline to produce a new wave of new industries. And we are pleased to
be able to say that has happened and is happening, and the term that your chairman
used, -international benchmarking is something which would have been basically a
foreign phrase a decade ago because nobody would have believed that many
Australian companies could actually benchmark themselves with the best of
international practice, which is happening today.
And so to see in this industry one of the most competitive in the world and
particularly one where there has been a high labour content in countries where
there has been cheap labour costs is a very tough industry to compete in. But it has 
been competed, competition has been competed with, and in competition we are
seeing the devel6p-ment of quite sophisticated machines and production processes
combined with obviously an enthusiastic labour force to produce a very productive
and competitive process. And I was again very impressed by the technology
which was so unique that the media were not invited to photograph it or to
demonstrate how it works, processes developed by Pacific Dunlop with some of
the best high tech engineering and electronic engineering firms of Australia.
This is a great tribute indeed again to the entrepreneurship of -Pacific Dunlop and
the interest of the production people in producing such a competitive product and
being able to do it so well. Now it is not often as you know I am always bagged
for my suits, you know that but it is not often I walk around with a product of the
factory on, but I have the Holeproof undies on today I can assure you. And I don't
like those little skinny briefs, I like the full ones, I like a bit of room. And when I
saw them going around today, one lady there was packing them and I thought well
I will just grab half a dozen of those because they will get me through the rest of
the year. But the fact is, and I have probably got the socks on as well, in the TCF
apparel stakes I am probably ranking quite well today. In saying so can say I am
very pleased to be so.
Now we are presiding in Australia over a very great change and I think that it is a
unique change, a great partnership between the Government and business, and
John was very kind enough to acknowledge John Button's efforts as the Minister
for Manufacturing Industry for a decade. This must make John just about the
longest serving Minister in this area of policy in the world, certainly in the OECD.
It is a great thing to see something from beginning to fruition, a cultural change of
the variety which John has presided over and which we are seeing in Australia.
Nine years ago in 1982 we exported 14 per cent of the total production of
Australia, today that figure is 23 per cent, that's nine per cent of GDP, nine per cent
of the total production, the difference. Today that is worth $ 36 000 million of
exports that we didn't have back there in 1982. And one can just imagine what our
trade and international debt, our trade deficit would be like, if in fact we didn't
have that $ 36 billion of exports that has occurred over the nine years, growth in
exports. And it is a great story for Australia because we are now exporting more
manufactured products than we export rural products or mining products and of
course a large part of the exports, a significant part, is coming from apparel and
clothing exports of which actually grew at an annual rate of 36 per cent between
1985 and 1991-' 92 when export earnings reached $ 122 million. And in the same
period textile yarn and fabric exports had an average growth rate of 23 per cent.
In other words not only are we making it at home but we are also making it
abroad. And it is that making it abroad which think is one of the things which
really does please all of us, that we are not just able to do it here, we can do it
elsewhere. 
Now John Gough mentioned the Textile Clothing and Footwear Development_
Authority, and the Authority is playing a wide ranging role in trying to re-
-establish key sectors of the TCF industries across Australia, but most particularly
in Victoria and they have had a role I understand in the development also of this
new facility, and they have across the whole industry in companies like Hilton,
King Gee, Yakka, Jamison Austechs, Tontine, and we are also giving assistance to
wool tops processing, a plant to be built at Geelong by BWK a project which will
add 35 per cent in the value of Australian wool. In other words we will be
exporting 35 per cent more value instead of simply exporting the raw product.
These are all phenomenal changes and they are happening across industry. This
morning I had the pleasure to join the Premier in visiting Williamstown Dockyard
to see the commissioning of the second frigate which the Navy told me is to a
higher standard than their American counterparts. A much higher standard, on its
sea trials, no faults, a much higher standard on a very highly sophisticated thing.
In the same way that higher technology is again in this plant here. So we are
seeing it across industry and that is the reason why there is so much hope for
manufacturing in Australia and so much hope around the world.
Now just spent a week in Japan and I have seen industry there, but there is
nothing that I don't think in certain sectors that the Japanese can do that we can't
do, or that we can't do things cooperatively. But in what's become a world class
business for Australia, Pacific Dunlop has gone out to the world and has
businesses around the Asia-Pacific area, are developing products which were first
developed here.
So John could I say again congratulations to the company, it has been a marvellous
result, but I think it just proves this point about the partnership between
Government and business, and we have had a debate about tariffs in this country
and while we all believe that we have got to get the tariffs down to levels which
give the consumer a better price and have more productivity, we still believe, we
have got to say we want industries. We just don't want to throw them to the wall,
to let simply imports take the hindmost. And that's why it has always been a fine
judgement about where these tariff levels stop, where the levels actually finish.
And in apparel by the year 2000 it will be around 25 per cent, it won't be around
zero. Which means this business will continue, and I doubt very much it would
continue at zero, as I doubt most other businesses which have got a limited
production run can compete with the huge production runs of countries in the
northern hemisphere. So as always some sense and some judgement and some
understanding of the business needs to be brought to bear by Governments in
determining where tariff levels fall, that's what John Button had the burden of
doing a couple of years ago, and I would like to say we see it as a partnership
between Government and business and if what we are seeing today here is
partnership it speaks volumes for the concept of partnership and getting along.
And the most important partnership is of course a partnership between the
management and the staff, the employees. If there is any lesson to be learned from 
4
Japan or any of the newly industrialising countries, it is wherever you see pride in
the product and pride in the value of what one is doing, you see a productive
business and that is part of management's wisdom and part of the goodwill and
wisdom of the staff.
That is obviously here, I congratulate you for it, I salute you for it, but most
particularly it is with very great pleasure indeed that I congratulate Pacific Dunlop
and declare this most modem marvellous plant officially open.
Thank you. 



A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATTNG, MP
DOORSTOP PACIFIC DUNLOP HOLEPROOF, MELBOURNE
29 SEPTEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: ( inaudible) [ BOP]
PM: It is a good figure for the month, it shows that imports are down by 11 per cent so
all the Jereniiahs who were saying a month ago that jmports are rising inexorably
again even as we were coming into recovery, all this proves again is that you can't
put that much store in one month's numbers. And at $ 903 million the , alancc of-
Payments figure for the month is in line with the Budget forecast, which is being
for an improvement over the recent period. A seasonably adjusted figure of 903
million is 39 per cent below a month ago.
J: You can't see any trends emerging then?
PM: Well I think it mcans that those so called trend setters, people who want to chart
us, people who want to draw these things out and graphically illustrate them and
then point a finger of gloom, will have to be les gloomy today.
J Does it raise the potential for interest rate cuts?
PM: No implications for interest cuts.
J: Mr Keating, on industry policy, in your coming here today this is a big
achievement, the sense of a ncw facility, but some months ago we were all out at
Wills and we saw the devastation of TCF industries out there and while your 
political opponents are talking greater doom then you are, you bear a lot of
responsibility don't you for pursuing the tariffs d * own to a level where many
thousands of jobs have gone in TCF industries?
PM: If you ask mc to I bear responsibility for creating new industries like this one, thc
answer is yes I do. And it is these Industries which will give people long term
employment, it is these industries which can stand..
J: What do you say to thosc employees who have. lost their jobs, when their
cmployers have gonc off shore because of that?
PM: Well only some. But it proves this point that clothing, textile and footwear in
efficient sectors does have a future as we are seeing in this plant, as we are seeing
in other fibre based industries across the country. And also in the primary areas
like wool where we arc now moving into tops production which will add value
again. So in the whole sector, that is from woollen tops, cotton, spinning which
some from inefficicnt companies that have had no investment for a long time. I
K. mean this plant proves the point.
1: the whole tariff debate.
PM: Well I think it is drawing a long bow on Sir Arvi's part to sy to the car industries,
please face extinction, gladly. That is don't mention it, don't compla7in about it. I
think it is not fair to say that it is politising the debate for a car company about to
invest $ 800 million in Australia, to say they can't survive at zero protection. I am
quite sure that any investments Sir Arvi would be associated with, he wouldn't like
to have it threatened and then have someone say, once you complain about that Sir
Arvi you are politicising. I mean the fact is industries have got a right to speak and
particularly world conmpetitive ones developing world competitive plants in
Australia. So the time for jockeying on cars was in 1988 and 1991 when the plans
were put together. What you are hearing now is basically the genuine views of car
companies that can't survive, they believe, at zero tariffs with a relatively small
Australian economy.
J: Mr Keating there is going to bc an election on Saturday in Victoria..
PM: inaudible
J. inaudible
PM: the answer is produce more products, run the economy at a greater level of GDP
and there's only one way of doing that without inflation spilling over, that's with
an incomes policy the thing the Liberal Party doesn't want. T7hat is an agreement
with the trade unions about where national incomes goes, so if you want to run
Australia at a speed fast enough to-create the employment to take most people up,
ccrtainly people who have been unemployed from industries such as the TCF 
industry or others then you've got to run the economy to speed, that can't happen
without an Accord and you can only havc an Acco-rd in some structured cooperation
which of course, Dr Hewson rejects absolutdfy. So his model is a model
for low growth, high unemployment which has been made clear today in fact by a
survey of economists published on the front page of the Melbourne Age.
J: Mr Keating, let me ask you about the election on Saturday. As you know the
Labor Party is not looking..
PM: I've done all these before at Williamstown.
J. No, hut I wasn't at Williamstown, rd like to ask you a question about the election
if I may.
PM: Where are you from?
J: The Agc, my nanmc is Pctcr Ell ingsen. Mr Keating, the whoic financial
mismanagement allegations made about the Labor Party in Victoria are being
rebutted by the Labor Party state politicians and their citing the Tricontential
Royal Comnmission as evidence of their varacity in that. Mrs Kirner is talking
about thec c ulture of the ' 80s as the culpable culprit in this whole problem that
Victoria has had and one key fulcrum in that culture surely was the deregulation
which you pursued as Treasurer.
PM; Let's not draw that..
1: But didn't you crcate a culture which is now come home to roost in Victoria?
PM: What are we into from the Age, Prc-Copemnican obscurantism? Is that what we're
about..
J: I'm reflecting the view of some of your colleagues.
PM: warm hcarted lcfty into obscurantist views. The fact is if you can't have frec
flow of money in this economy, don't blame the problems of Trico management
onto the deregulation of the Australian economy, it is absurd and the only place
that question would be asked today is in a newspaper which still has lingering
good will to the dark cave dweller age of the 1960s and
ends 



TEL: 30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 01/ 19
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP,
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2uE, 30 SEPTEMBER 1992
E 6 OE PROOF COPY
JL: How are you alright?
PM: Fine thanks.
JL; I suppose you've come dashing In here to tell me whon
the election is.
PM: No, I haven't.
JL: They rang me up last night and said, he and that's how
they said it with some reverence wants to come in, I
8ai it's obviously to tell me when the eletioni is8
going to be.
PMi JL; Really, couldn't you tell me when the election is going
to be, couldn't you give me a hint?
PMI I don't think it's going to be before Christmas, put it
that way.
JL: Would you like it to be before Christmas? I rather
fancied the sluond Saturday in December.
PM: NO, I tnink the public are entitled to value out or
these polls and this one goes until about the middle of
next year, so that's probably the most likely time.
JL: You want to give us value?
PM: Always.
JL: Mr Hogg certaIjnly gave us value yesterday in this " Poles
Apart" stuff that he released, trying to get to the
e-derly people, is that sporting?
PM; I think it's entirely legitimate for b political party
to respond to a program like this with if you like, a
manual ) n the various changes and what they mean
changes proposed by the Opposition.
JL: I think it's a bit tragic that in a way and I think
you'll probably agree, that the Opposition haven't, 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 02/ 19
2
because of lock of ability or lock of opportunity sold
the GST package properly, so we really don't quite
understand it and consequently we can't totally trust
what's in " Pole5 Apart" can we?
PM: Well it will make obvious points and that is, look
. Eightback" 8o-called iS bSi81lly a crude tax switch,
It'a a-wich from the taxing of income to a taxing of
expenditure with polloies grafted onto the edge. One is
to basically get rid of Medicare the other is to change
the industrial relations system. Now we think all that
iu going to be inflationary.
JL: Well Medicare is a bit of a monster and
PMt No, it's not, no.
JL: Well it's only not a monsteor because the good old tax
payers of Australia who were promised there wouldn't be
an increase in the tax levy by the afore mentioned
Dub", have increased the payment that they make
to Medicare and consequently Medicare hae survived. But
had the afore mentioned Prime MinIster bean truthful
when he said that he wusn't going to increase the levy
Medicare would be on its bottom.
PM: Not really, no. What Medicare succeeded in doing is
giving people universal access to health insurance, to
health cover, health protection at a national cost about
two thirds of that of the United States, about eight per
cent of GDP, eight per of the size of the total economy.
We've Rept that eight per cent constant all through the
despite the fact that people know there's been a
great proliferation of services. What you compare now
to say ten years ago, the number of diagnostic Imaging
and pathology and the varlous teats and services people
receive today are much reaterx then then, yet the cost
is still the same. So Medicare has been quite
successful.
JL: But the cost isn't the eome, the lev has been
increased.
PM: The national cost is the same. The Commonwealth always
paid muney intu health insurance, even before Medicare.
JL: The Commonwealth didn't, we did.
PM: The Budget did.
JL: Where did you get your money?
FM: Are we going to have one of these semantic arguments?
JL: No, you see you can't just brush it aside as that.
People have allowed charming politicians like yourself
to simply brush these things aside * TI make us feel
TEL 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 03/ 19
3
good; the Government did that for us, oh what a
wonderful our money.
PM: That's why I made the overall point, it's not a matter
of the tcansfers, the tax payers to the Commonwealth
budget to health because there are a whole lot of people
poying different things there. There are people who use
the health system more, some people pay less. The whole
question is what is the cost to the nation? And it's
about eight per cent of GDP, it's about two thirds of
the American cost and yet you still get doctor of
choice, universal access to heolth insurance. we won't
have a position in this #; ountry like they've got in
America where millions of people are walking around
uninsured, millions of people in America are sick and
can't afford to protect themselves.
JL: OK, let's not get too deeply Into Medicare, but let's
also be realistic about it, you don't pay anything, the
tax payers pay everything, your Government said that the
levy wouldn't increase, your Government lied, the levy
did increase and consequently Medicare has survived, but
only for thQSC roosons.
PM: The levy has increased, but what has it increased for
basalealy to give public patients better access to
public hospitol core. In other words it is a modest
increase, very modest, couple of decimal points on* it
is to make it beater tgr people to get access to public
hospital. Under John Hewson's proposal he says well
that's all gone, you go and Insure yourself, I'll let
the doctors set the fees, the common fee will be set by
the AMA not by Medicare schedules and then basically the
system will charge what the traffic will bear and if you
don't like the price go and Insure yourself, it will
cost $ 30 o wetA and we say don't you think that's a bit
unfair John, particularly for low to middle income
families to shell out another $ 30 a week for health
insuranc? He says well if they went health cover
that's what they'll hove to pay. Basically John's into
lifting doctors salaries.
JL: Has he said that?
PM; me told the AMA. You see John Oates unions, he'll tell
you on your program hQw uilaoi. s cs&amp; this and the unions
are that
JL: I think hate mignt be a bit hostile?
PM: No, I don't think so, but lets say he has no regard for
unons eloept the AMAunion, the doctors union. He
addreseed them on Sunday about four months ago and told
them that they could fix the fees for medical services
in Australia.
jL: Ie probably has about as much time fvr unions as Brian
Howe has for doctors.
TEL 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 04/ 19
4
PM: Brian I think ha* a greater sneaking regard for doctors
than John has for unions.
JL: He'd just rather die than let us know?
PM: Maybe.
JL: This document, 200 pages of It, there are not too many
people who are going to read OO pages.
PM; NO, it's basically a manual for anyone interested in it
the media, members of our own Party. " Fightback" was
a proposal which was dropped on the table about a year
ago, it had a dream ride in the media, the media didn't
take it to pieces; it's getting some scrutiny now and
this is an attempt, a manual of all the various
proposals and a cofwnentory on those proposals and a
reference to the toots.
JL: Yes, you're not including me in the media are you?
PM; No, I'm just saying the broadsheet media in the main.
JL: Because I took it to pieces, particularly in the area of
tariffs, I trust I woe right though.
Fm; You have, but from last NovemDer on this thing was at
the time, hailed as something new. I think people now
understand that what it is baeielly a crude switch in
taxations with a few other quite nasty policies grafted
one
JL: Yes, but you thought it was a good idea at one time, so
dd I think it was a good idea at the time you did in
1985 when you diecussed it with me. You thought It was
a good ideo,
PM: That was the only chance Australia hod basically to go
to a consumption tx, that was basically with a Labor
Government, that was doing it with a fully compensated
change, over compensation for people down the bottom
JL; Are you sorry you didn't do it?
PM; and discounts in the wage system for inflation.
That way you could have possibly accommodated such a
change, but again it wasn't 15 per cent and now I've
just been to Japan; they've introduced a three per cent
consumption tax and it seized their whole commerce up,
they had fights in the Diet, shop keepers brawling with
cuutu. n= ze, 15 per cent will just absolutely seize this
CounLry up.
JL: It seems very complex and as I say I don't Know whether
It's lack of opportunity or lack of ability, but they
haven't expldied it very well ana to many people it
does seem very complex and to the elderly people that
TEL 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 05/ 19
you have aimed this document of yours at seem very
confused by it, but best I don't ask you to explain it,
best I ask them to explain it and I think it would be
important that they do because I do believe that what
you've done lil this " Poleo Apart" document is be a bit
alarmist. Did you read it before it was released?
PM; I haven't read all of it, only bits and pieces of it,
it's a relatively biV document.
JL: Two hundred pages and 1 dO think It is a bit alarmist.
But listen just before we get away from the doctors,
it' seeme to me that Lebor isn't terribly good a
resolving white collar disputes and you would agree that
this is a white collar dispute, didn't have much luck
with those pilots. You're going to have your very Own
pilot dispute on your hands With this one unless you do
something.
PM; This is the doctors yQU mean?
JL: Yes.
PM: The proposal for this additional training came from the
AMA and the College of General Practicioners, it was a
yroopl thot came to us from them. The objection to it
s from a lot of younger doctorv.
JL: Yes, most of them a that additional training because
they want to.
PM; They don't have to and it they do it they eoUrs a
benefit from what's called the Family Medicine Program.
JL; Why are they having a fight with you?
PM: A lot of young doctors think that the system is
basically there, thw unes who are disputing this,
thinking the system Is there to give them the income to
which they believe they have become entitled and yet the
AMA itself I think, and the general Practicioners
society have said that a program which does have the
emphasis on deliverIng health care in ways which are
more affordable for the community at large does confer
upon everybody a benefit and if doctors undertake the
oours~, the extra two years; they'll secure an
additional income benefit from the so-called Family
Medicine Program. If they don't wish to, the don't have
to, so I can't quite see what the argument is about,
JL: I think it would be worth keeping an eye on, frankly
because I think it could be a hell of a mess.
PM: Probably.
JL: One you don't want.
PM: Worth keeping an eye on i'm sure.
TEL 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 06/ 19
6
JLz The. Asian.-trip; you've now been accused of tugging the
forelock of Japan which conjures up a fascinating
picture in one4 mind. What's your response to that, or
need I ask?
PM; I'm pretty happy with the results of that visit. I'd
like to put Australia in a position where we can respond
to the big chngees now unfolding in the region. About
sixty per cent of our exports now go to North Asia John,
about sixty per cent, so we are largely integrated with
the region. What I was seeking to do both in Japan and
Singapore was to eutablish Australia's position, to say
that we wont to trade with the region. TO say we want
to trade with the region, to bring the United States
into the region through APEC in a more institutionally,
commercially closer way thot is, to have them there not
just in strategic terms, but to have them there more in
invtutment and institutional terms and in so doing give
Australia a more secure place in the part of the world
that's growing fastest and the part of the world where
most of our trade is going.
JL: Yes, i know you'll be delighted to know that in your
absence it seemed that the biggest worry thaT Mr Fischer
and hui hat had was the fact that not one single
solitary grain of Riverina rice is SOld in Japan. Mr
Fisvher seemed to fail to understand that it wasn't Bold
in Japan because the Japanese wouldn't let it sell in
Japan because they were protecting their own markets and
yet he couldn't understand about tariff rates here in
AuVtralia. Did you get anywhere with rice for example,
have you broken down any trade barriers at all?
PM: I just made the point that if mhe GATT, this is the
General Agreement on Trude and Tariffs, the thing which
has been under discussion for a couple of years, this is
a world trading background which is the international
arrangement where we're now discuesing agriculture
insisting upon is so-called tarifflcation of
agriculture. That la the protective device not be
quotas, but only be price devices such as tariffs.
JL: What's the device that they have in Japan?
PM: At the moment they have 1uotas,
JL. Not tariffs?
PM: No tariffs.
JL: But it is protecting the industry?
PM: It is, but it's not a price protection, a quota is an
infiiity level of tariffs, in other wolds it doesn't
come in at any price, whereas a tariff has a price. So
the Europeans and the Americans want so-called
tariffication of agriculture which in Japan's case
TEL: 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 07/ 19
7
includes rice. I argued that case to the Japanese, but
again when you look at important as Mr Fiacher may think
rice exports are to Japan, they are nothing in
comparison to iron ore, coking coal, motor vehicle
engines, all the other things that give ve 8 $ 20 billion
trade with Japan and a $ 6 billion trade surplus. So I'd
be preLty cOazy to go up there and say look, you can put
all that asunder for rice, we are not
JL: Yes, but the thing I don't understand and you can
explain it to me is that we have Mr Fischer on one hand
or anybody else for that matter, It'u not fair to cite
him necessarily say¾ 1i that we can't eell rice in Japan,
we can't sell rice in Japan because Japan proteots its
industry and yet the same Mr Fischer and other People of
his ilk want to free up induatry in Australia so that
they can sell as many of their motor cars to us as they
like. Isn't he being a bit contradictory? I moan he
wants them to free up; What they're doing is obviously
protecting their industry, he's not prepared to protect
our induetry
PM: it's a big agricultural question, A lot of the ruling
pt&amp; L y tho LDP the Liberal Democratic Party of Japan
a lot of ita support comes from the countryside and
comes from rice growers and it's a political thing. In
a sense therY-r like the National Party of Australia In
some respects in teams of their rural component and
their protectitig rice. In my view they're fighting a
losing b ttle because rice will be as we said earlier
talIrfea, that is it will have price Mechanisms applied
JL; So they will have, just so we all understand, they will
have on rice what we at the moment have on motor cars?
PM: Exactly, but they'll have it at a level where people can
bring rice to Japan and jump the barrier because the
barrier will only be a price barrier, it won't be a
quota barrier as it is now. At the moment they say no,
no, no at any price. Whereas we're saying give us a
price to ae if we can better It.
JL; Ok, if they're prepared to protect their industry
understandably, and you are to a degree, prepared to
protect our industry, but only to a degree, why would it
be that the Coalition doesn't want to protect our
industry and yet they're complaining that we can't sell
our prodvQk, a particular product to Japan? Japan is
just doing what we should be doing.
PM: Tariffs have been a long running, as long as I've been
in public life John which is now twenty three years,
tariffs have been an issue. What the Menzies and McEwen
governmenuiL did was build a tariff wall around Australia
which bsicall. y rendered Australian Industry
uncompetLtLve, gave us the dearest cars in the world,
gave us very high prices and didn't give us the export
TEL 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 08/ 19
8
potential we should have had. What we did as a
Government, this Governament in 1998 we started to phase
tariffs down to 1992 and then a year ago in 1991 we
adopted a new phase down which will take us to the year
2000.
JL: Ok, but if the lowering of those tariffs from 57 per
cent or whatever they were in 1988-89 down to 25 per
cent or whatever they are now, that should have caused a
dreaoe in the cost of motor cars.
PM: It has.
JL: It hasn't,.
PM: Yes it has.
JL: No it hasn't, and the importation of motor cars has
increased by 50 per cent in that perlod of time.
PM: Can I say this, the Ford Company say that the basic Ford
Falcon vehicle today which is i think $ 23,000 before the
tariff cuts would have been $ 33,000, but the general
point is I don't accept Dr Hewson's argument that you
can keep a motor induotry at zero tariffs because I
went to Toyota lout week tn Japan, tney're producing on
the one run 300,000 vehicles. On the one run here, the
best we can produce is about 38,000, in other words
about one tenth.
JL; The best we could do in a whole year is 300,000.
PM: The best we can do in a year is 300,000 that is from six
monufocturere from six models. There's not any chance
In my view of the Australian motor vehicle industry
staying alive at a zero tariff. Why would Toyota for
instance, want to build a car in Australia with a morket
this amall when it can basically Just get better
economies out uC its existing lineg of production? I
don't accept the zero tariff and while the Government
has brought tariffs down from 253 per cent for motor
qoro down to an effective rate of 35 per cent by the
year 1996, it's that 35 per cent which will guarantee
the viability of the Toyota investment in Melbourne, the
Mitsubishi investment in Adelaide and I don't believe
that those car compnniea can survive at zero. I think
anybody and this includes in particular Dr Hewuun whu
takes the view that it's zero and if they survive good
on them, and if they don't bad luck. That simply means
we won't have a mutor industry and if we don't have a
motor industry we won't have a firm manufacturing base
in this country.
JL: So we should have a motor industry?
PM: Absolutely. TEL: 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 09/ i:
9
JL: Well if we should have a motor Industry and the tariffs
have been reduced at the rote they have been from 57 per
cent in 1988, the cost really hasn't come down of motor
care and the importation of motor cars has Increased by
per cent, then surely you can't take away any more
toriffe on thot.
PM; We had these discussions with the motor companies in
1990-91, I vaw the Executive Vle President of Ford, USA
who was then in charge of the non-continental USA Ford
investments and their export markets, I spoke to the
Toyota company, I spoke to all the people. With a bit
of whinging and moaning the long and short of it is they
indicated they would live with the Government'a phase
down and after we announced that in 1991, Toyota company
made it's announcements. But again that is for an end
point of 35 per cent protection.
JL: But you're talking about coming down to 15 per cent.
PM: That's 15 nominal, an effective rate of 35 per cent by
the time you throw in te export faclLitation and
everything else
JL: Ok, if next year and what I'm saying is right because
you would have known that I did te numbers, we have
increased the importation of motor cars since 1988 by
per cent, the small four door, four seat passenger cars,
increased by 50 per cent. If we continue to increase
the importation of motor cars then surely that's going
to self distruct, will you then sit down with the motor
industry and say look we don't seem to be selling more
local cars, if we're Impofting more surely we should
reassess this, are you prepared to reassess it?
PM; We're exporting now $ 1 billion worth of cars since then.
Since 1988 it's true that tariffs have come down and It
is true that imported care have come up, but we are now
exporting a billion aollars Worth of motor vehicles and
motor vehicle engine$ and components.
JL: I understand all that's true.
PM; It's all part of the run John. To say to a motor firm,
you make a new engine but you can export so many hundred
thjousand units of this to Japan or SOmewhere else makes
it viable for them. So it's the total package which
they're living with and the Indications we have is tnat
they are living. We've got no indication from any of
the companies; Toyota, Ford, General Motors, any of them
that even though this is putting structural pressures on
them that in the end they can live with it. What I'm
saying is they can't live with zero, they can live with
an effeotive rate of 35, a nominal rate of 15, but tney
can't live with zero and that's what Dr lIewson is
seying, r'be qayiI) g give them zero anO they should take
it like a man and know what's good for them.
TEL: 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 10/ 19
JL; Ok, if next year all indications are that it's not
working the way tt should work, are you flexible? Are
you prepared to sit down with the motor industry and
reassess it, that's the question?
PM; But we were flexible. The time to have asked me that
was two years ago in 1990 when basically we sat down and
said look where should this end point be? Should it be
an effective rate of 35, an effective rate of 50, an
effective rate of 20. That's when the flexibility was
displayed by the Goverinment and we put into place know
what we thinK, well it's a cnange from the year 1988 to
1996-97, it's a very long Change, it's nearly a decade
of Qhange. In other words it gives companies a decade
to adjust.
JL; Yes, you're telling me that you've been flexible, but
you're not answering the question, are you going to
continue to be flexible?
PM; We don't have to be beoause the things announced.
JL: So the answer ia no?
PM; No.
JL: That the decision is made and that's immovable.
PM: Absolutely, because we've got it right and the proof of
the pudding is the fact OLuat Toyota ie going to invest
$ 800 million in Victoria and it did it after we made the
announcement. But by the same token, the Government
should be user friendly to the industry and that is
where they do run into problems, we try and sort them
out for them and again we've done that in these export
facilitation plane, that's one of the reasons why now
the Japanese company are selling the motor vehicle
engines. For instance, can I give you an example John,
part of those imports of care are Mecedes cars, but
there is a credit for Australia; they are now one of the
biggest markets for Australian aluminium wheels out of
Adelaide. So we give them a benefit which allows them
to import more competitively, but part of the benefit is
a cost for them; that is they take loads of aluminium
wheels for Mecedee. You see Mecedee Benz cars running
around in Europe, but running around on aluminium wheels
made in Adelaidu.
JL: What about the rural sector, what help are you going to
give tho rural se0tor? What does the toriff policy do
for trhe gucal sector?
PM: tic McLachlan who is the Liberal spokesman on industry
was formerly the President of the National Farmers
Federation and the zarmers have said for years that the
tot. iff is a monkey on their back, it's a cost that they
as primary exporters have had to wear, that is largely
true. But it ia a case ( f tiever going to extremes,
TEL 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 11/ 19
11
taking the view that tariffs should go to zero, tO have
the farm lobby get square with manufacturers is not
wise, it's not sensible and I don't think It's
Australian. We've all got to git on in this country and
we've got to make sure people get their share of the
cake, but at Vhe same time there's got to be a bit of
give and take. Now if the farm community given
expression by people like Mr McLachian saying look we've
taking the high tariff medicine for years witn Mr
MOEwen, paradoxically was leader of the National Party
and Mr Fraser and the reeV of them, now's our chance to
get square so we'll chop into the car companies with a
zero tariff, whlln you've got the mining industry arguing
the same
JL: out how will that benefit the rural industry?
PM; The cost of tariff protection is the rural industry
are paid on an international basis for their products,
they get the international price for wheat,
international price for various products. Whatever
input costs they bear, tre higher input costs have come
by the protection which local industry Aave had by % ne
tariff. They've haa to pay the tariff yet not be
recompensed by the internatiOnal market. So they argue
they've carried the burden, too great a burden, and that
has been largely true. but with a tariff coming down
now they've really hod a very good the farmers have
kicked an enormous goal in the last six to eight yeazby
a reduction in tariffs. To go and try and drive the
nails into the manufacturing industry and into the car
industry by zero tariffs is on the part of soMe ex-farm
leaders like Mr McLachlan going right over the top to
try and extract a bounty or a penalty based on old 1970s
prejudices about how much the farm lobby paid in
tariffs. It shows no wisdom and in my view no
comprehenslon of the fact that the farm conmunity have
picked up an enormous benefit in competitiveness, now
lower tariffs and they should live with the Government
phase down.
JL: Getting back to the original question le what are you
going to do about the rural sector. The short answer is
nothing.
PM; No, that is a different thing. I thought you meant in
relation to tariffs. The problem with the rural sector
is not of their own making, some of thpir own making.
There ore three thiigs: the ones nor of their own
making Iiavo btuj) drought, the second has been wheat
prices noL of their own making, and the one of their
own making has been wool. They decided to double the
price of wool, and the world sai* ' thank you we don't
wnt; U it; tiiyinue'. So they let the atock pile build up
and finally we are to abandon the wool price scneme * no
that hurt farmer; s on the way through and it's now
starting to improve. But wool prices have started to
atabJlRSe again, wheat prices haven't been too bad* The
TEL 
30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 12/ 19
12
Government, we guaranteed $ 3 billion to underwrite the
wool stock pile, we spent about $ 1 1/ 2 billion in
national Interest cover or insurance on wheat sales in
the markets that might not have otherwise been
commercial. The Government has basically put about
billion on the line for the farm community. And alsO
things like structural adjustment, rural adjustment
schemes ( BAS), that is helping farmers who are really
nuver going to be viable to get off the lend and pay
them, help them leave, to pay their Gebts out and also
carry on financially...
JL: What happens to that land?
PM: Well some of it should never have been farmed, only some
Of it was farmed at a time when wheat prices were very
high, you could take eub-optimal farms and make them
work. But once the surt of cost of interest rose and
then the prices came down, it came, again, sub-optimal.
JL: So are you saying that the Government will buy these
people out of the farms?
PM: Well we help them, that is the people, there are two
parts of the yural adjustment scheme RAS so called. One
IS carry on finance, for -to'e who -re viable, but who
have just bud difficulties we give them concessionl
loans, but for those woo know they have got no chance,
we help them get out of it.
JL: And what do you do with the land?
pmt Well boeioally it goes back to, it ts either aggregated
into bigger parcels, or it is not farmed anymore,
JL: What happtv to it them, it just becomes Crown land?
PM; No, it probably ends up being privately owned, but it
may be farmed less intensively, See our soils are Often
not strong, and in some places people who have been
using land for agricultural purposes, which might work
in the very htgh paid seasons, but doesn't work in the
low paid seasons.
3L: By the lOOk of it you'll be going to the Polls with
unemployment at more than 10 per cent, it seems that the
argument concerni~ ig unemployment has shifted, that
rathor we've got involved in tariffs and your overseas
Vivit, wluoh was very important to us admittedly, but we
seem to forgetting about unemployment. Hopefully you're
not.
PM: No and that's why the Government has got all the
instruments at its disposal flat chat to try and do
something about it. We've got fiscal policy. We've got
$ 2 billion being spent in this year from the One Nation
statement, most of it being spent from 1 July. we've
got the additional spending in the Budget. We've got
TEL: 
TEL: 30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 13/ 19
13
interat rates at low levels. The whole thing Is geared
up now to basically see the economy rise, And we are
coming into recovery. In the year to June the economy
grew by 1.6 per cents By contrast in the eame year the
British economy contracted, declined by 1.5 per cent.
So we are actually now doing better in terms of growth
then most comparable countries, And this year we hope
to gee that strengthen to about 3 per cent.
JL: Some figures come out yesterday from the Bureau of
Statistics, that I imagine would have been brought to
your attention, showing unemployment amongst migrants at
12.5 per cent, with Australian born workers 9.9 per
cent. Now isn't that a bit crazy, I mean more migrants
are receiving dole payments than Australian born
workers?
PM; it's partly the problems that migrants have and that's
why we have considerably stopped up spending onEnglish
as a secondangu~ ago, that program, to deal with'
d id v a nt' e, whether the disadvantage be with migranta
Bi' 6i) ier workers, to give them a chance to get back Into
the workforce. But employment will grow as the economy
grows. The link between growth in the general economy,
growth in GDP and employment is such a tight link. Onoe
we start seting that growth in employment coming., But
John the other thing ie, Is the country is more
productive. Now yesterday I went to two places In
Victoria. I join Joan Kirner and went to the
Williamstown dockyard where AMECON have just handed over
the second frigate to the Navy, built under cost and
under time, and the Navy told me it's the first time
they have had a ship presented to them without faults on
its ship trials. Of higher quality of the same ship
built in the United States.
JLt OK, but we are rather &amp; hifting from the point.
Pm: I just want to make Chis point here. The same in
respect of clothing, textile and footwear. Now in both
companies, the productivity of that plant had gone up
800 per cent. That means we are getting more product
from fewer people, in other words we are now a very
productive oountry, businesses are stripped down, but
the flip side of that productivity; that is getting more
output from fewer people is that there are fewer people
in work. So the answer has to be that we've got to grow
the economy even faster to take those people up.
JLi Yes, wouldn't another answer be to stop bringing people
to this country if the can't get a job when they get
here? if we've got 12.5 per cent migrants unemployed,
12.5 per cent as opposed to 9.9 per cent of people who
were bqrn in Australia, isn't that a nonsense? That
we're simply briniging people from other parts of the
world in order to pay them money? 
'* TEL: 30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 14/ 19
14
PM: The qi~ jl atlon progromIs a long term program and we have
changed it over time.
JL: Not enough thoughe
PM: We'vQ cut it in half. It was 140,000 two years ago,
it's now at 801000.
JL: But it's still not enough is it if we've got 12.5 per
cent of them unemployed? Why would you employ a maid
who couldn't work? Why would you bring people to your
house who weren't going to benefit it?
PM: A part of it of course to family reunion, you have
people here then they can bring they're mothers and
fathers, brothers and sisters.
3L: And we tax payers pay for them.
PM: The thing to the level of unemployment amongst migrants
is admittedly higher than the general community, but not
that much higher. A part of that reason is basically
because they're disadvantaged one way or another and the
anlswer is to do two things. Deal with the disadvantage,
be it English or what have you or the teaching of
English.
JL; Why do we let people come here who can't speak English?
Pm; 60me vQmol, those who speak English
JL: If they've got a million dollars
PM; ThQose who speak English obviously do better in the tests
in comning in, but what you find with family reunion
programs a lot of thern can't speak English fluently and
if you go to a lot of technical colleges around Sydney
or Melbourne you'll find clauses full of people learning
English.
JL: Isn't that wonderful except we're paying for it all.
Why do we bring to Australia who can't speak English,
can't get a job and are going to be disadvantaged? It
doesn't seem to make much sense to me.
Pm; in 1987-88 we brought them so the labour market wouldn't
blow to bits. In 1987-88 when there was such an
* fsnious ahortage of labour 0
JL: Sure, but now we've got a million people unemployed,
PM: No, but you can't turn this tap on and off over night.
J L: Why.
PM It juat doesn't work. 
TEL 30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 15/ 19
JL: But why, if 12.5 per cent of the people who Come here
from other parts of the world are receiving unemployment
benefits, there's a million of us unemployed, 9.0 per
cent of Australian born peopie unemployed and those who
are fortunate enough to have a job of paying for the
12.5 per Cent of the migrants who came here and can't
get one.
PM; You've goL tv say to yourself, from 1949 onwards would
Australia be better off because of the migration
program. Is it a stronger better country?
JL: Yes, oE vvvrse it Is.
PM: The answer is yes.
JL: But not now?
PM: Yes it L9.
3L: of course it's a better country because of It, but fancy
saying we're thinking about making English a second
language.
PM; No, English as a second language, in other words people
who have as a primary language, the language of their
country of birth, English becomes a second language.
But in this country it isn't.
JLI wriy Isn't it their first language?
PM: Because they are from some othebr country,
JL: Why didn't they how to speak English in th'at other
country then come here speaking it?
PM: Because you'll find most other are not about teaching
English to those who migrate to Australia,
3L: That's up to the people who want to migrate to
Australia.
PM: It works, by and large it works and we've got a better
country and a more interesting country, a bigger
country, a richer country and what do is take the peaks
and troughs out of it by as needs be.
JL: Ok, but why don't you cuVt the intake now? Why don't you
just stop it?
PM: We have, we've cvt it from 140,000 to 80,000; we've cut
it nearly in half.
JL: aut it's not enough.
PM: I think it is.
JL: Now can it be enough? 
JO I L'J'
TEL: 30Se. 2 8e0uIN. O~
16
PM YOV'lJ. fin~ d that when the economy starts to grow again
and we have skills Shortages and the rest You can't wind
the damn thing up.
JL: Open the doors again. Everybody wants to Come here.
PM; lt'a got years of lead times on it, onoe it drops away
it falls away to nothing. It takes YOU yrears to build
it back.
JL; Something is very wrong with It when 12.5 per cent of
the people who come here can't get a job, it's apparent
that many of them can't even speak English when theY do
arrive here and we've got a million people out of work
and 9.9 per cent are Australians.
PM; Yq. u've got to think of all the ones who can speak
English, who do come from here.
JL: Well bring them if they've got plenty of money,
PM; who can make a contribution immediately, whose skills
ase in demand.
JL:. Why aren't we more selective?
PM: We are very.
3Ls How can you say we are selective when people come here
and can't speak English?
PM; Decouse in the Family Reu~ nioni Component the insistence
on English end all these other things, they get points
under the system for having a relative in Australia,
that is having a sister or a brother or a mother or
father.
JL: Why do we let that happen?
PM: Because it's part of the general regime of mnigration
around the world. Family reunion is a part of migration
programs world wide,
JL: You come to Australia, the land of opportunity, the land
of milk and honey, learn to speak English, get a job,
work very hard, save your money and then you can bring
your mum out. Seems to make. a lot of sense to me.
Pm: You take 1988 when the economy was booming and we would
have had wages blowing at 15 and 16 per Cent instead of
6, but for fact that we had trades persons and other
professions coming in to complement our labour market so
it was very good for us then, but you can't say well
it's terrific for us then, but it's no good for us now.
JL: But you can fine tulle it. ki noo C&gt; 1r,/ iQ 
TEL: 30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 17/ 19
17
PM: What I BOY is we have,
JL: flow have we when we'vQ got people here who Can't even
spook the language.
PM; I know, but look they're not a majority and those who
are many of them are women who were formerly at homne
and are nlow looking for work and they've gone to train
themselves and good on them. But of the reason that
unemployment iv In Australia over 10 per Gent is because
of the very high number of people looking for work. If
we had the same participation rate, that is the number
of people looking for work as say the United States has
got, we'd have an unemployment rate of about 5.5 per
cent or 6 per cent. In fact we had the same
participation rate today that John Howard had in 1982,
we'd have an unemployment rate of 6.5 per Cent. The
reason it's 10.5 is because the ' 80a were so full of
employment that people, not unreasonably, have raised
their expectations about getting a job and are looking
f or work and good on them.
JLs That's fine, but then we had that thing that was called
the recession we had to have which was announced by you.
Pm: it was certainly the slow down we had to have, we
couldn't go on importing.
JL: it wao your word -recession..
PM: I know, we couldn't go on spending twice our rate of
production and that's what we were doing. We had
spending running at 9 per cent end production at
john let's make this point and it's the point I made in
Asia Auritralia has made the great economic
transition, in 1982 14 per cent of Australia's
pcJuwtion went to exports, today it's 23 per cent.
That is nearly a quarter of everything the country
produces goes to exports, the difference in that is 9
per centage points of the total economy, 9 per cent of
GDP. That today is worth $ 36,000 million; $ 36 billion.
Could you imagine where Australia would be now had we
left with the old Liberal policies of the ' 809 with $ 36
billion out of our trade accounts? Yesterday we had the
Balance of Payment figure out, $ 900 million for the
month, about $ 14 billion for the year, imagine where
we'd be if there was a $ 36 billion gap in our exports
that now exists which didn't. exist a decade ago? I'll
tell you where'd we'd be, we'd be prostrate. We'd be
like South America, we would have been one of those
banana republics you and I talked about in the middle
180s. We saved ourselves in the 809; nlow sure we've had
a recession on the way through and we're now growing,
but now the place is much more fully employed, we had
phenomenal rates of growth In employment in the
when I become Treasurer the total production of
Australia was worth $ 200 billion, that woo in 1983,
todaiy it is worth $ 400 billion. And then we had six 
TEL: 30. Sep. 92 18: 00 No. 008 P. 18/ 1':-
18
milli on in employment, today even with unemployment
we've got 7,6 million In employment. We've mode the
huge switch to export, we've actually made the great
leap that we didn't think out of the tariff well, we
bounded over it right into Asia, right Into those
exports markets,
JL: All Qf that is fantastic and I'm quite Sure the job you
did when you were in Asia is going to make it even
better.
Pm: it just means you got more access.
JL: out It doesn't make life easier for those people who are
listening to us all over Australia now who haven't got a
dollar to go out and buy a loaf of bread.
PM; Look Johno we've got a decent sQoial security system.
We're not going to say what Dr Hewson's ay-Tfyoure
unemployed after nine months, you're out, you're down to
the voluntary agencies, down to St Vincent do Paul or
the Salvos, we're saying you still have a decent social
security system, we pick you up and carry you along if
you happen to be unemployed.
JL: I know you' re adying that, but there are still a lot of
people who are hungry and all the talk about overseas
trade might be tremendously important from a univeraial
point of view, but from a national point of view for
thos people who are hungry, the place doesn't look to
good. And look at the attitude of the place at the
moment, look at the attitude of Australia, a third of
the people like you, a third of the people like John
Kewson and a third of the people don't know who they
like so that means that both of have virtually got two
thirds against you.
PM: That's pretty well always been the case.
JL: No$ it's never been th'at clearly defined, one third of
the people.
PM: Have a look at Britain, here they are, they can't get
out of their technological troubles, they haven't made
the great leap, they tried to tie their exchange rate to
the German Deutschmark and French Franc, in the end they
couldn't got the productivity in their country out so
its busted out of the link, they've been in a chaotic
financial position. Look at us last week Britain
dropped its interest rates by one per centage point and
it was news all around the world. we've had 13 one per
centage points changes since 1990 accomplished with
total smoothness, we' vo had a 12 or 13 per cant decline
in the deprecation of the Australian dolla~ r, again a few
hea~ l~ neu, but basically total smoothneoss. Whot's
happened over there? They're growing minus 1.6 they are
actually contracting, they haven't made the 
19
technological leap, they can't jump into Europe; compare
with them say to us, we've made the great change.
JL: That's right, but we're here that's the point. it's ll
very interesting
PM: I'll make the point thot we're oioIg much better.
JL: You try end tell that lot out there that we're doing
much better. We might be doing much better on a world
* 0810,
PM: We are, on a world scale we are.
PM: But that doesn't help them buy a loaf of bread.
PM: There's still 90 per cent of people in employment,
there's 90 per cent of people in employment, they've got
lower interest rates by 8, 9 10 per centage points than
tWo years ago, the economy is now growing somewhere in
the order Of1.5, 2 per cent heading towards 3,
employment growth means Lhe country in much more
productive, we're exporting a quartor of everything we
proCuce, we're exporting our heads off, we're now making
techiologically innovative products which we weren't,
we're producing ships for the navy better than the
AmeriodnS can produce demonstrated yesterday.
JL: All of that is wonderful, but we're not seeing
unemployment drop ore we?
PM: you're seeing employment growth, you're seeing Job
growth, but the number of people joining the workforce
is bigger than the job growth therefore unemployment
Uteyed up.
JL: When is unumployment going to dvrop?
PM: As soon as we qeL back to stronger rates of economic
growth.
JL: I've got to go and I know you've got to go, thank you
for your time, it was good to see you and let's hope we
have the opportunity to talk to you again.
PM; Thanks for the nag John.
ENDS TFI An CPn 1q: An Nn Nnn P lq/ 1c 



TEL AF
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, ACOSS CONGRESS, CANBERRA, I OCTOBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, what have you been advised of the implications of
yesterday's High Court decision?
PM: I want to talk about a fcw other things and that is the Reserve Bank, Mr
Fraser said today in the contcxt of Dr Hewson saying that he would delete
the object of full employment from the Reserve Banks charter. IHe says hell
do this after it's been therc for nearly hai-fa century, when it's been part of
the Australian consensus that price stability, that's low inflation or inflation
control coupled with employment were the joint and dual objectives of the
Central Banik and all conservative and Labor Governmcnts of the last half
century. He wants to take it out, yet he has the hide to talk about
unemployment and as the Governor of the Reserve Bank said so eloquently
today, anyone who has opposed interest rate reductions and an expanded
fiscal policy has no right to talk about unemployment. I say that applies to
Dr Hewson and Mr Reith, both of whom have opposed interest rate.
reductions, both who now oppose trenchantly an expansion of fiscal policy,
yet they claim the right to talk about unemployment, yet they wish to
remnove employment as an objective from the Reserve Banks policy.
J: Prime Minister, is the Reserve sufficiently concerned about employment in
the last couple of years, pushing up monetary policy? TE. LO: ct. 92 16: 08 No. 013 P. 01/ 04 
TEL 2
PM: We had three times the rate of employment growth of the western
economies throughout the ' 80s and that is just proof positive of the general
balance in objectives, but again you can't go spending twice what you
produce and that had to be reined in, but the general commitment to
employment has been made so clearly by Mr Fraser speaking on behalf of
the Bank Board now on a number of occasions.
J: So what would be the implications of the..
PM: The implications are that a Liberal Government would ask the Bank to push
inflation below two per cent to zcro, by lifting interest rates and paying no
regard for the employment consequences what so ever. In fact they would
bc plcased probably, in their model to havc some unemployment around
because this would simply reduce pressure on wages and inflation. Can I
say the other thing is the question of the Catholic Social Welfare
Commission, they went to sec Dr Hewson and Mr Reith yesterday, they
were emptied out. They were told, barely politely that thcre would be no
change to their policy and Dr Hewson would right over the heads of the
Bishops to the Catholic community, not changing his policy, insisting that
he should -tax food and saying that he knows best, what's goad for them,
he'll tell them, Dr H-ewson will tell the whole Catholic community, the
whole community of Australia what's good for them and we'll have Mr
Reith doing a Goebel] like impersonation half making the argument that rich
people have got bigger bellies, that rich people actually eat more and
therefore it's goad for them that they tax food because it's fairer to the poor.
This is the sort of callous rubbish you're getting from these ideologues, so
when the Catholic Welfare Commission representing the Bishops of
Australia stand up and say this is unfair and inequitable to Australians to tax
food the ideologues push them to one side and say don't worry we'll right for
the community over your heads and tell the community what's good for
them. Dr Hewson knows what's good for everybody, a tax on everyone's
food is good for them he says.
J: Is the Reserve Bank charter much comfort to the unemployed at the
moment?
PM: It's been of enormous comfort to the unemployed right through the last forty
or fifty years, most particularly in the last decade and we've now had
thirteen one percentage point interest rate reductions, we've got bill rates
around the six odd per cent mark in Australia, under six in fact, in Britain
they're nearly twice that level. We've seen in Britain a celebration of a one
percentage point reduction in interest ratcs, we've had thirteen one
. Oct .92 16 : 08 No 011 3 P. 02/ 0. 
TEL 3
percentage point reductions from the Government and the Reserve Bank
and this is because the Government and the Reserve is committed to the
dual objectives of inflation control with growth in employment,
employment remains, and has remained a key objective and that's why
today, notwithstanding the unemployment wc have we've still got 26 per
cent more people in work than we had in 1982, that is the labour market is
now 7.6 million in size instead of 6 million as it was in 1982.
J: Mr Keating, let's talk about ACOSS, they said to you today that your tax
cuts should be reconsidered because of unemployment, are you just going to
push them to one side?
PM: Thcy've also said to mc a moment ago how regressive and unfair Dr
Hewson's policy is, that the tax cuts are not funded, Dr Hcwson's tax cuts
will only be funded by cuts iniGovernmcnt spending and that is what they
are afraid of; taking 12-13 billion of unfunded money, of tax cuts out of
the social welfare system as we now have today, out of the social welfare
system.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: They believc that you can increase the real incidence of tax, they are a
welfare organisation, they believe tax should rise to pay for more welfare. I
don't believe the real incidence of tax should rise and the Government by it's
tax cuts will not do that. But we're not putting a 15 per cent GST on
people's food and clothing as Dr Hewson is that's the dirence. * We're
reducing, maintaining the real incidence of tax, not letting it rise and I don't
think it's fair that it should rise. Can I make another point about petrol.
Yesterday we had Dr Hewson the bowscr boy, out there pumpinig petrol.
What he didn't tell people is that their registration fees will double or treble,
that they might save it on the tank, but they'll pay it on the front window
when they slap the next rego sticker on there, where they pay twice as
much. He did n't tell every truck driver who pulls up you notice there were
not trucks there that there would be a $ 17,000 registration fee on trucks,
so when he's at Mount Panarama watching the cars go round, the
registration stickers will be flicking through his mind as the millions roll up,
the billions roll up to pay for this squalid sleight of hand in reducing petrol
prices. Again everything he does is basically about helping people who
have got wealth.
1: Mr Keating, do you welcome the High Court's decision yesterday that
effectively guarantees the right.. TEL.: O ct. 92 16: 08 No. 013 P. 03/ 04 
TEL: 4
PM: It is a decision they took and announced a couple of weeks ago and I haven't
been through the fine print of the argument.
Do you think this is going to make politicians fair targets of any sort of
attack or criticism?
PM: We've had free advertisements now since time immemorial. So what?
J: Mr Kcating, you said recently that it's unlikely there will be an election this
year
PM: No more talking about that.
ENDS 1.0ct. 92 16: 08 No. 013 P. 04/ 04 



PRIME MINISTER 109/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
NORTH WEST CAPE NAVAL COMMUNICATION STATION
The Government is pleased to announce that an Australian,
Commander Cris George, assumes command today of the North
West Cape Naval Communication. Station.
Today's command change is part of a phased handover of the
Station to Australian control, which will see it become an
entirely Australian facility by the end of the century. The
transition in the Station's management is the result of
arrangements worked out between the Australian and United
States Governments, and the State Government of Western
Australia. Since the Station commenced operation in the 1960s to serve
the needs of US Navy submarines, it has been a fine example
of defence coopetration between Australia and theUnited_
States._ The Station has operated as a joint facility since
1974, enabling the Royal Australian Navy, as well as the US
Navy, to carry out vital communication with their
submarines. The Station's work under Australian control will continue to
be important in allowing the RAN to communicate with its
submarine force, a force whose effectiveness will be greatly
enhanced as the Collins Class submarines come into service
from 1995.
The Australian Government also welcomes continuing US joint
use of the Station until the end of the decade. The
Government values highly the continuing contribution that
our alliance partnership with the United States makes to
Australian and regional security.
The Government's defence policy has been focused on
achieving greater self reliance within the framework of a
strong alliance with the United States and effective
regional cooperation. 
The Government will be represented at the command handover
ceremony by the Hon Gordon Bilney MP, Acting Minister for
Defence. I join with Mr Bilney in assuring all Australians,
and the local community in particular, that the North West
Cape Communication Station will continue to play an integral
part in the defence of Australia well into the next century.
CANBERRA 1 October 1992
800" ON œ 2 : ST Z6* 0"* T: 7-31 



TEL. O: ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 01/ 10
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ACOSS CONGRESS, CANBERRA 1 OCTOBER 1992
Thank you for the invitation to open your Annual
Congress. I very much appreciate the opportunity to
address a major meeting of representatives of the
communit ywel fare sector.
The theme of this Congress Is ' Social justice in
_ Australia_-the way forward', drid that -is ' what I want to
talk about today.
How we go forward. How we continue to raise the level of
social justice in Australia.
And I can say " continue". Our plans for the next decade,
build on the last one the one in which we transformed
social policy in Australia.
I'm talking about sOcial security, health, housing, child
care, aged care, education, training the areas critical
to Australians' quality of life and opportunities.
of course there is more to do and each year we do more.
As I have said more than once this year, the final
measure of bow successful a nation we are will always be
how well'we care for ech other.
I think we can say with some pride that we have done well
over the decade of Labor.
And I think we can say with confidence that you will see
the progress continue.
You will see more programs and better delivery, more
building blocks of improvement. You will see the social
net made more secure, and the realm of opportunity
extended. Social justice remains at the centre of our approach to
the business and task of governing.
TEL 
TEL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 02/ 10
2
of course we say there is a role for Government and we
reckon it's a very strange philosophy to think that the
art of government is to find, not the means of
engagement, but the means of withdrawal from the life of
the nation.
We think that is quite perverse.
I have always believed that Labor Governments should keep
their shoulder to the door. We should always be pushing.
If you want to be the government of Australia, you have
to want to build things. And know how to build them.
The first principle, we say, is taking the people with
you. We learnt that in the eighties.
We consult with people and interest groups, such as those
represented here today. We act in partnership.
For a decade now this Government has used the principle
of consensus to achieve change, and to ease the passage
of change.
But it has been consensus with purpose and direction.
The Government hias -seen -what has had to be done and
worked with people to bring this about.
it has worked. Consensus does not slow reform it
facilitates it. It exposes the Government to wider
views, helps us see the way through. It alerts us to the
complexities inherent in all social situations.
We get better programs as a result.
The Labor Government believes that-.. social policy and
economic policy are inextricably linked. The point of
economic policy is to lift people up, not to push them
down. when this Government introduced a market ' econom~ y, when it
opened us up to the world, implemented programs of
microeconomic reform every step we took towards a more
Competitive Australia was a step towards a fairer
Australia. We have made hard economic decisions through the last
decade. No one would say that we have never put a foot
wrong but the essential changes, the ones that will
guarantee us a chance in the contemporary world, and
especially in this region have been made.
They are the same changes, of course, that in the long
run will give our young people a future, and the rest of
us security in work and in retirement. 
TL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 03/ 10
3
They are the changes which gave us the growth in national
wealth and the job growth of 1.5 million. Without those
changes a lot of the social policy we have implemented
and a lot of the programs we now contemplate would simply
not be feasible.
what we have done on the economic front, we've done for a
social purpose. For us, economic policy will always be
the servant of a greater goal greater opportunity,
greater care, greater social justice.
This is the recipe for successful countries.
The successful countries of today are the Social
democracies. Not the centrally planned economies. Not
the monetarist experiments.
The successful countries are those which recognise the
complexities of modern society and the clear, though
subtle and often difficult, role for government in
helping to make them work in the interests of the people.
The proper object is to find the right mix to Create an
efficient economy and a comprehensive social policy. The
proper starting point is the realisation that the two are
inextricably connected. Quite simply you can't have one
without the other.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The great aim for all governments now is employment and
proigowh You can't have one without hithro
those either.
We recognise our responsibilities to those who have borne
great hardship in the recession and in the process of
economic reform. It is wrong that they should bear the
burden of change alone.
Care, support and re-training for these people are
Integral parts of economic change, and the greatest
challenge to the advancement of social justice in
Australia. My first priorities as Prime Minister have been to assist
the unemployed and generate jobs and growth.
We began with Oj1e-NatUi. Tile One Nation Statement
included funding for major capital works to create jobs
and projects of permanent benefit to the nation. We
increased income support for families and expanded labour
market programs to assist the unemployed.
Following consultations with young people, community
organisations, business and unions, we extended our
efforts with theNational Employmnt and Training Plan
forYoung__' eople._ 
T1EL.: O ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 04/ 10
4
And I would like to acknowledge now my appreciation of
the discussions we had with organisations like ACOSS, the
Brotherhood of St Laurence, the Catholic Socialwelfare
Comtmission, and the Australian Youth Policy and Action
Coalition, all of whiich contributed to the development of
thEfe Government's initiatives for young people.
Assisting the unemployed was also the cornerstone of this
year's Budget. The Budget provided an additional $ 1.2
billion over four years for training, jobs and
investment.
we introduced a new 10081 infrastructure program,
providing employment and beneficial community projects
for regions hardest hit by unemployment. We improved and
increased our labour market programs.
A number of groups, including ACOSS, have supported
linking training programs with wage subsidies to improve
Job seekers' chances of finding work.
The Government has taken up this idea, f irst with the
offer of accredited training and wage subsidies for all
long term unemployed young people, and then in the Budget
with a program linking training arnd wage subsidies for
adults. TheJO8SKILLS program which has been so suc cessful was
also expanded. Overall, expenditure on labour market
programs has been increased in real terms by 86 per cent
this year compared with 1991-92.
But a government's responsibilities go well beyond
responding to urgent situations.
A lot of government is, or should be, about quietly
running things making the changes which improve the
quality of people's lives. Government is often about
good housekeeping and nurturing.
This is one of the satisfying things in governing for the
long haul you get to see government programs not just
established but developed and improved. You get to build
on the blocks you have laid.
A good example of what I'm talking about can be seen in
the development of theFamily Allowance Supplement or FAS
program. I'm convinced that FAS is one of the most successful
income support programs in the world for 3low income
families. It offers high levels of payment, additional
support for those in private rental accommodation and
subsidised health care.
TEL 
TEL.: O ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002
Since we have been in government, payments for low income
families have increased in real terms by 43 per cent for
families with two children under 13 years, and 87 per
cent for those with two children aged 13-15 years.
FAS is a program to be proud of.
But from January next year we will improve it even more.
Family Allowance Supplement, additional pension/ benefit
for children and family allowance will be integrated.
This low-key change will make the system simpler and
easier for families to understand. It will give about
37,000 families additional inczome. It will reduce
poverty traps. The payments will also be paid to the
main carer of the children, who is usually the mother.
These are not headline-grabbing changes. They are good
housekeeping changes which will make the lives of a great
many Australians better.
The FAS changes illustrate that often the way forward in
social justice is, as I said, by quietly building on the
successes of the past.
Sometimes,. also, the way forward comes about through
addressing problems that, ironically, have only surfaced
because of the successes of past policies.
An example of this is the Child Support Agency.
I strongly supported the establishment of the Child
Support Agency. It redressed a major wrong that the
burden of family breakdown was being overwhelmingly borne
by the custodial parent, usually the mother.
Before the Agency was set up in 1988 only 24 per cent of
custodial parents received child support. The average
level of maintenance was $ 26 per child per week.
The Child Support Agency is currently collecting 70 per
cent of the amount-on its books. And under the child
support formula, the average level per child is now $ 48 a
week. But with all this success came a problem that is,
there is an initial eight week delay in the Agency making
the first child support payments.
There are some very good reasons for the delay, including
the fairly lengthy process of determining the level of
payment and finding the non-custodial parent. But
understandably for parents dependent on the money, any
delay is very difficult.
TEL 
TEL.: O ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 06/ 10
6
It is interesting that the pressure to improve the system
comes mainly from parents who would not have experienced
the old maintenance system.
For parents who suffered under the old system, the Child
Support Agency can seem like a miracle. The other day I
heard that the Child Support Agency has caught up with a
father who had not paid support for his children for
eight years. For custodial parents in cases like this,
the Agency is more successful than they could have ever
hopod. But it is no good telling parents who are now facing a
delay in receiving their first payment, that in the days
before the Child Support Agency they would have been
lucky to get the most paltry amount on an irregular
basis. They just want a system that works. And this is what we
have to keep working to deliver the best.
I'm pleased to say that in this year's Budget the
Government announced that it would change the
arrangements so that custodial parents will receive their
first child support payment two to three weeks earlier.
And we will continue to work to improve the program.
So successes can lead to new problems and new solutions
to them. This is one way the social justice agenda moves
forward.
The work we have done this year on vocational education,
which will continue over the next few years, is another
example of this point.
Education has been one of our successes as a government.
when we came to office, only 36 per cent of kids finished
school. Today, 70 per cent do. A revolution in a
decade. we helped this revolution along with AUSTtJDY and ABSTUDY
which provide financial assistance foFsen1ii-67csecon-da-ry
students in low Income families. We have increased this
assistance and 50 per cent more secondary school students
receive it now than in 1987.
Again success has lead to other problems. Having stayed
to the end of high school, these kids now want a tertiary
education. But the system is not yet fully equipped to
take them the next education step, despite the 50 per
cent increase in Commonwealth funding for higher
education places between 1983 and 1994.
We now need to tackle our vocational education and
training systems to prepare young people for a life of
skilled and interesting work, a world of work which
requires training and retraining over a working life.
TEL 
T1E. LO: ct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 07/ 10
7
The new Australianl National Training Authority is a major
step forward in creating a genuinely national system to
deliver high quality training programs that better meet
the needs and priorities of both students and industry.
But we don't just respond to problems.
we review policy regularly. We want to be sure we are up
to date, responsive, responsible.
Since coming to office in 1983, we have done just this.
We have undertaken major reviews of aged care; social
security; retirement income; programs of support for
people with disabilities; and, more recently, health and
housing and the major review of government policies in
response to the IfoyEA-qommi ss ion. into Aborigirnal Deaths
_ in Cu4~ soy.
Such reviews can lead to fundamental changes to programs.
For example: the shift to support for elderly people to stay at
home through the introduction of the Home and
Community Care Program
the transformation of the unemployment benefit
system into an active program of assistance
and the creation of a new community housing program.
These reviews also provide an excellent vehicle to
consult with groups such as yourselves.
The recent National Health 5trategy is a good example of
this process. The Government Introduced Medicare in 1984
in response to the previous Government's policies which
left nearly 2 million people without health insurance.
_, mpedicarqeprovides a universal, equitable and efficient
system of health care for all Australians.
it is difficult to understand why the Opposition would
want to replace such a system with a policy which would
force people to take out private insurance such as in the
United States.
The Opposition policy would greatly increase the cost of
health care. it would hand over responsibility for
setting health costs to the AMA: to quote their own words
" Basically, our policy requires doctors to set their
own fees".
The Opposition's health policies would increase the total
cost of health care in Australia by over $ 2 billion a
year. The overall impact on household health bills would
be an increase of 23 per cent or $ 1000 a year for a
family with two children.
TEL 
TEL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 08/ 10
8
The Government's approach through the National Health
Strategy is to build on the strengths of Medicare and
ensure it is in good shape to take us into the next
century. Medicare will become more than just a health
financing system; it will become a comprehensive health
care system.
The Government has an agenda of reform to cover
Australia's health needs, including improved access to
public hospitals; better integration of the health and
aged care networks; and implementation of aNational
Mental Health-Policy.-
I have talked today about different ways of taking the
social justice agenda further.
We respond to the urgent problems like unemployment. But
we don't just wait for emergencies to act, we also look
for opportunities to make our programs stronger and
better.
And we don't rest on our laurels; we respond to the
challenges that our successes can give rise to.
Finally, we do not shun open and constructive fundamental
review of our programs, to ensure they are right to meet
the changing demographic, social and economic landscape
of Australia.
We have taken the view that social justice is at the core
of governing, and we have governed for the long haul.
The rewards come steadily and it is to those who most
need and deserve them that they flow.
It is not an approach predicated on the belief that there
is no role for government except to clear the way for the
market. It is not a residuallst approach which believes
social justice is about giving cold charity to the poor.
Dr Hewson's approach is dramatically different.
Dr Hewson does not talk about building on the strengths
of the Family Allowance Supplement. He talks about using
the social security system to compensate people for the
introduction of a highly regressive goods and services
tax. Dr Hewson does not talk about tackling the challenges of
the success of the Child Support Agency. He talks about.
privatising it, removing the one thing that ensures the
very success of the agency: its location in the Tax
Office. 
TEL: 1. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 09/ 10
Dr Hewsofl does not talk about advancing the social
justice agenda. He talks about getting out of the
business of governing for social change, selling off
public housing, tearing down the public health system.
Reducing. Limiting. Privatisinig. Wrecking.
The Hewson model of government is to get out of the
business of government. In his own words, it is about
less government.
Integral to this approach is the division of society into
the ' deserving' and the ' undeserving'; into those who can
legitimately claim government assistance and those who
will be shunned.
Two Nations instead of our one Nation.
Dr Hewson says he is all about giving Australians choice,
all about the government getting out of the way and
leaving people to it.
But can we call choice, abolishing unemployment benefit
for people after nine months and throwing them to the
wolves? Can we call choice, forcing sole parents into the
workforce when their youngest child reaches 12?
Can we call choice, giving young people a voucher for
training and telling them to get their own training
course? Can we call choice, selling off public housing and
leaving the elderly, Aboriginals and people with
disabilities to find their own way in the private rental
market? Dr Hewson doesn't understand about choice.
Real choice is not about stripping back support and
abandoning people to their own devices. Choice is about
people being able to take advantage of opportunities. At
times this will mean assisting people to the starting
line; at times it will be about running the race
alongside, helping out; and at times it will mean
intervening when the race is being run unfairly.
This is what governing for social justice is about it
is about being in partnership with people throughout
their lives and providing the support necessary to enable
them to make the choices and take advantage of the
opportunities. With this approach to government, we are committed to a
comprehensive social security system and to maintaining
the level of payments through indexation. 
TEL: l. Oct. 92 10: 25 No. 002 P. 10/ 1
we are committed to expanding the provision of quality,
affordable Child care for parents at home and in the
workforce. We are committed to a fair and equitable health system
and to tackling the problem of waiting lists in public
hospitals. we are committed to continuing to expand opportunities
for women, in education, in employment, in every area of
our national life.
we are committed to better housing options for people,
and to moving to more effective assistance for people in
private rental.
We are committed to giving older people opportunities for
an independent and dignified life.
We are committed to building a truly national vocational
education and training system.
We are committed to advancing social justice for
Australians. I think we should be very proud of our achievements. But
we know the process of reform is never over.
We go forward by adding one achievement to the next. We
do not dwell on the past, but strive to understand and
influence the future. 



3
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT FROM THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
MCARTHUR RIVER PROJECT MOVES AHEAD
. Mount 1I9a Mines' ( MIM) and its joint venturers' decision to
sei7 cooidinated board level approval for the huge
McArthur River Zinc ProJect was today welcomed by the Prime
MiniterMr Keating.
The Prime Minister's comments coincided with the
introduction into the Northern Territory House of Assembly
of the McArthur River Project Agreement Ratification Act.
This Act will provide a legislative basis for the Franchise
Agreement negotiated between HIM and the Northern Territory
Government. Introduction of the Act represents a milestone for the
McArthur River Project as all government requirements f or
i-ts commencement have now been fulfilled.
First discovered in 1955, the McArthur River
Zinc/ Lead/ Silver Deposit is one of the world's largest, yet
most remote mineral reserves. Its development will involve
capital expenditure of $ 290 million and at today's zinc
prices will generate annual export earnings for Australia of
$ 230 million.
Associated infrastructure development will provide a fillip
to the neighbouring township of Borroloola while a
Commonwealth Government training and employment strategy
will aim to ensure that local aboriginals benefit from new
job opportunities.
The mine's prospects were enhanced by initiatives announced
in the February " One'Nation" Statement. It is the first
major project to benefit from the " fast tracking"
arrangements announced in One Nation and will be one of the
first to receive the Federal Government's 10 per cent
special development allowance. 
Under the One Nation Facilitation Arrangements Commonwealth
environment an oeg netietapoaswere obtained a
mere six months after MIM's initial approach to the
Government, through the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime
Minister.
Obtaining all approvals for the project so quickly would not
have been possible without the total coordination of.
Commonwealth and Territory processes. It is testimony to
what intergovernment collaboration on projects of substance,
projects of real benefit to Australia, can achieve.
Indeed McArthur River has the potential to become a model of
cooperation under the One Nation framework.
There has been cooperation between governments on all
environmental and related approvals, cooperation between
governments and the project proponents, and cooperation
between an Australian company, MIM, and its foreign joint
venture partners in developing Australia's resources and
infrastructure. The foreign joint venturers, Nippon Mining, Mitsubishi
materials Corporation, Mitsui and Co and Marubeni hold
interests totalling 28 per cent in the feasibility study and
have options to acquire the same levels of participation in
the project.
The involvement in the project of these four Japanese mining
giants represents a significant vote of confidence in
Australia's future, and builds upon MIM's earlier commitment
to participate in the development of a new zinc smelter in
Japan. It represents another expansion of the mutually beneficial
economic relationship Australia and Japan have developed in
the post war period, a relationship I sought to further
encourage with my recent visit.
CANBERRA 1 October 1992 



TEL: 4. Jun. 93 9: 02 No. 002 P. 02
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, 1NP
AUSTRALIAN VIETNAM FORCES NATIONAL MEMORIAL DEDICATION
CEREMONY I welcome you all to Canberra. I know that many of you
have come hundreds of miles. And many years. Too many
years. Today is a great day in the life of our country.
This memorial will forever honour the Australians who
fought and died in Vietnam. It honours all those who
served.
We honour them for the same reason we honour those
previous generations of Australians who served in wars on
foreign soil.
For their sacrifice. For their faith.
These Australians believed in their country as those
earlier generations did. They believed in democracy and
freedom, and by defending it in Vietnam they believed
they were defending it everywhere.
They believed in duty.
They were brave.
Those whose names are entombed in this memorial paid the
ultimate price for their belief in Australia.
It is true that no war divided Australia like the Vietnam
War. It is true that often we remember those years more
for the protests at home than for the fighting abroad.
The years of Vietnam corresponded with a great social and
political upheaval in Australia. The war was itself one
of the catalysts of change.
There is no doubt that in all the turmoil we lost sight
of the reality of Vietnam. We lost sight of those who
did the fighting, and the waiting. And by doing that we
made their reality worse. 
TEL: 4. Jun. 93 9: 02 No. 002 P. 03
2
For all the drama in the streets, and parliaments and
public halls, the real war was, as always, on the
battlefields where young men and women died.
The real tragedy was in their suffering and death and, as
ever, in the loss which lives on in the hearts and minds
of those who loved them.
We cannot make good this hurt any more than we can undo
the war itself.
But, by this memorial, we can make good the memory.
It is the symbolic resting place of the 504 who died. It
means that at last they will join the exalted ranks of
Australians who died in other wars.
It is a memorial to all the men and women who served in
Vietnam. it is a memorial for all those for whom the war has meant
suffering and lose. All those whose experience of
Vietnam still haunts them. All those here today.
We should recognise, therefore, that it is a memorial for
all Australians; because, as a nation, we should all bear
the burden.
It is a great memorial.
I hope it will be taken as a symbol of the,-nation's
gratitude. I hope that it will remind us of our own duty, and that
this and future generations will find in themselves the
Same love of Australia, and the same faith in our future.
And I hope it will remind us always that we live in a
great country dedicated to freedom and peace.
Thank you.
CANBERRA 3 October 1992 



TEL: 6. Oct. 92 12: 51 No. 011 P. 02/ 06
PRIME MINISTER 110/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
NATIONAL COMPETITION POLICY REVIEW
I have today established a major independent inquiry into competition policy in Australia
with specific emphasis on areas currently outside the Commonwealth Trade Practices Act.
The inquiry will be chaired by Professor Fred Hilmcr, Dean of the Australian Graduate
School of Management in the University of New South Wales; Mr Geoff Taperell, a
partner in the law firm of Baker McKenzie; and Mr Mark Rayner, Group Executive,
CRA Ltd.
This inquiry is an important step in continuing the vital task of micro economic reform in
Australia. It will examine a number of significant axmas of economic activity not now
subject to competition policy, such as many government instrumentalities and the
professions. I have asked the Review team to cover issues including:
the best means of providing consistent, nationally applicable competition rules to
allbusijLesses-in Australia regardless of ownership or corporate status
transitional mechanisms necessary to bring businesses currently outside the scope
of national competition rules within those rules.
potential improvements to the Commonwealth Trade Practices Act in the new
environment of conietition-law to be recommended by the Review; changes to
related legislation, for example in relation to prices or consumer interests; and the
legal environment in which the Trade Practices Act is applied. 
T6EL. O: ct. 92 12: 51 No. 011 P. 03/ 06
2
Clearly the review and its recommendations will have major implications for the States
and Territories as well as the Commonwealth. As a rcsult, I and my Department have
consulted closely with the Premiers and State officials as well as with the Attorney-
General,, the Treasurer, and other relevant Ministers. The terms of reference attached have
been developed in consultation with the States. The principles outlined in the terms of
reference provide a very solid basis for the Review and were agreed at an earlier stage by
the Premiers and Chief Ministers. The membership of the Review team has also been the
subject of close consultation.
I have asked Professor 1-ilmer and his colleagues to undertake as a matter of priority
discussions with States and Territories. I have today written to State and Territory leaders
suggesting that Professor Hiliner is available to see them as soon as practical.
I am aware that the Review has thc strong support of the Business Council of Australia
and I believe other busiess groups also support the concept of consistent national
competition rules applicable to all parties in a market. The Review will shortly call for
Submissions and I ask these groups, and other interested partics, to put forward their views
as soon as possible.
Thc review is to report to me in May 1993. Premiers, Chief Ministers and I[ will consider
its findings prior to public release.
CANBERRA 4 OCTrOBER 1992 TEL 
TEL: 6. Oct. 92 12: 51 No. 011 P. 04/ Ub
REVIEW OF THE APPLICATION OF THE TRADE PRACTICES ACT 1974 TO
MATTERS CURRENTLY OUTSIDE ITS SCOPE
1. 1, Paul John Keatingo Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth of Australia, having regard to the agreement
between myself and the Premiers of the States of New South
Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and
Western Australia and the Chief Ministers of the Australian
Capital Territory and the Northern Territory that national
competition policy and law should give effect to the
following principles:
no participant in the market should be able to engage
in anti-competitive conduct against the public
interest; as far as possible, universal and uniformly applied
rules of market conduct should apply to all market
participants regardless of the form of business
ownership; conduct with anti-competitive potential said to be in
the public interest should be assessed by an
appropriate transparent assessment process, with
provision for review, to demionstrate the nature and
incidence of the public costs and benefits claimed;
any changes to the coverage or nature of competition
policy should be consistent with, and support, the
general thrust of reforms:
to develop an open, integrated domestic market for
goods and services by removing unnecessary barriers to
trade and competition; and
( ii) in recognition of the increasingly national
operation of markets, to reduce complexity and
eliminate administrative duplication;
appoint Professor Fred Hilmer to Chair the Committee of
Review of the Application of the Trade Practices Act 1974,
and Mr Geoff Taperell and Mr Mark Rayner as the other two
Committee members.
2. The Committee is to inquire into, and advise on
appropriate changes to legislation and other measures in
relation to: 
TEL 2
whether the scope of the Trade Practices Act 1974
should be expanded to deal effectively with anticompetitive
conduct of persons or enterprises in areas
of business currently outside the scope of the Act;
alternative means for addressing market behaviour and
structure currently outside the scope of the Trade
Practtces Act 1974; and
other matters directly related to the application of
the principles above.
3. in conducting the review the Committee should consider,
against the background of the nature of markets in Australia
and influences upon them:
whether the authorisation and exemption provisions of
the Trade Practices Act 1974 have sufficient scope,
flexibility and transparency;
the need for, and approaches to, the transition of
government regulatory arrangements -including any
associated revenue impact on States -to more
competitive and nationally consistent structures;
the best structure for regulation including price
regulation, in support of:
pro-competitive conduct by government business and
trading enterprises and in areas currently outside the
scope of the Trade Practices Act 1974; and
( ii) the interests of consumers and users of goods and
services; and
the past and present Justification for the current
exemptions from application of the TPA.
4. In performing its functions, the Committee is to:
take into account:
the principles stated in paragraphs 1( a) to ( d)
inclusive; ( ii) legislation other than the Trade Practices Act and
other arrangements that affect market behaviour and
structure; and TL: 6. Oct. 92 12: 51 No. 011 P. Ut)/ Uu 
TEL 3
( 111) the fact that some government business and
trading enterprises may operate in industries having
aspects, including pricing, of natural monopoly; and
( iv) current moves to reform government trading
enterprises; and
overseas experience.
take written submissions; and
consult interested parties where necessary.
The Committee is to report to me by May 1993.
6.0ct. 92 12: 51 No. Oll P. 06/ 06 



TEL: 6. Oct 92 1-Dj1; iNU
PRIME MINISTER 111/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
11cr Majesty The Queen has indicated her view that it is appropriate that Australian
citizens should be recogniscd exclusivcly by the Australian system of honours, of
which she is proud to be thc Sovereign. r
Accordingly I have consulted with the Premiers of all States and we have agreed
that Australian Governments, both State and Commonwealth, will henceforth cease
to miake recommendations for British honours.
Thc change I have announced does not exclude the possibility of TrheQueen, as
Queen of Australia, honouring her Australian subjects with an award within her
own personal Order, the Royal Victorian Order, nor those other honours which arc
wholly within hcr own gift, namely the Orders of the Garter, Thistle and Merit.
CANBERRA October 1992 


8 OCTOBER 1992E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister welcomie again to the program.
PM: Thank you Paul, it's good to bc here.
PL. Another 43, 800 Australians lost their jobs in September. Do you think they&nbsp;believe the recession ended a long time ago?
PM: Well the point about my making that point was to signal to Australia that the&nbsp;ncgative growth in the economy was over and that we can now work and look&nbsp;forward to, I hope, a long recovery.
PL: But it sounds callous, too smart by half, uncaring.
PM: I wore the opprobrium for the technical act of thc economy slipping into recession,&nbsp;that was two quarters of negative growth.
PL: You wouldn't wear that until you had no choice at all, would you?
PM: And for daring to note that we are now long, technically out of recession, in the&nbsp;lack of maturity in the debate, to make the point, and to tell the public that&nbsp;Australia can look forward to a low inflationary recovery and that the act of&nbsp;coming out of that negative growth signals a start, I hope, of a loqp, recovery for&nbsp;Australia.
PL: But there is a queue of community leaders Out there over the last 24 hours giving&nbsp;you the messge that it doesn't feel like it is over out there.
PM: And of course it is not, Paul, that is why the Government introduced the OnoNation statement, that's why we have expanded fiscal policy in the Budget, that'swhy we had the youth summit to produce the outcomes to ameliorate the effects ofunemployment and to -see the economy grow. Thc effects are not over, obviously,but the economy Is growing again, in the last year we have grown by 1.6 per cent.By contrast, Britain for instance, has declined, contracted by 1.6 per cent. It isImportant I think that the Australian public know that the economy is growingagain, notwithstanding the fact we are a long way away from ameliorating theproblems of unemployment which we have to continually attend to, but the bestway to attcend to it is growth.
PL: And while we have this considerable human suffering still across the community,we have this intense and growing bitterness between you and John Hcwson, don'twe? I mcan it is getting worse and worse everyday.
PM: Well you haven't seen the Labor Party run ads against him as he has me, which isseeking to personalise the debate, designed as some sort of spoof on people withdisabilities. I mean this is the sort of stuff he traffics in, and today I had thetemerity to get up and say that the Government has consulted all the way since1983 in the Economic Summit, the Tax Summit of 1985, in the One Nationstatement, in the Youth Summit recently, and listcned to criticism and taken it. Ihad the temerity to say that when his representatives, he and his representatives,hopped in to the Catholic Bishop and two Priests for daring to say a tax on foodwas Inequitable, and the general way in which he has responded negatively toevery interest group, whether it be BHP or the Reserve Bank, or the Japanese, orthe car makers, or the renters, or the nurses, now the Catholic Church, and thenhaving hopped into thcm in the most savage way, both by letter and by argument,thcn evoke an encyclical, the Pope, to support Fightback.
PL: But the Opposition has released thc Catholic Church's reply to Peter Reith talkingabout their deep and sincere appreciation for the meeting, saying at the end of theleitcr that they hope to maintain continuing the good relationship that existsbetwcen the Coalition parties and this Commission, the Catholic Social WelfareCommission.
PM: They came around saying they were attacked, this is what they said to them, this isSenator Alston, ' It is understandable that those untrained in the laws of economicsshould at times fcel uncomfortable about debating them, the crass attempt at moralintimidation is surely no substitute for a practical poverty alleviation dialectic', itgoes on this way, Christians who propose schemes for poverty relief have acommcnsuratc duty to know the laws of economics and do their homework, ratherthen childishly dismiss as unfair.
PL: And that's not just robust politics?
PM: No, no. This Government has pursued policies of inclusion, we always listen tointerests groups, in the Tax Summit of 1985 they were all arraigned around me asTrcasurcr.
PL: But there are 10,000 kids sleeping in the streets of Sydney, that's not inclusion Mr&nbsp;Keating.&nbsp;
PM: There was no savage response by the Government like this to any interest group,let alone a group of priests who have come to talk about the interests of thc poorand the low paid and maybe the regressive impact of taxes on the essentials of life.
PL: But how do the nicetics of who writes what to whom in a letter compare with thatenormous suffering that Dr Hewson alluded to in Parliament today? Thcre arekids sleeping in the streets, that's not including anybody in anything.
PM: And who's done more about the homeless policythan this Government? No othergovermecnt, in terms of the policies now abo-tyouth, to get all those youngpeople back into work. I had Dr Hcwson telling me I don't see anybody, I don'tlisten to anybody I go around this country all thc time.
PL: But you only talk to businessmen and people with suits on don't you?
PM: Hc's trying to tell me, as a life long member of the Labor Party which has its heartand soul in social policy, he's trying to tell me that I don't get around. He getsaround on the yacht on Sydney Harbour, up at the Panorama 500, they're the sortof occasions. My occasions are with working people and people with businesseswho arc trying to employ people.
PL. But there does seem to be a lot of political point scoring now, it's just going to get&nbsp;worse and worse as we go to the cletion.&nbsp;
PM: The Opposition has tried to focus on me and yet what we see, Dr Hewson's nowpresiding over the most spiteful Opposition party we've ever scen. Every singleinterest group is named and attacked. That is, whether they are nurses or teachesor renters or whoever they might be and as well as that they're taking their namesdown. He has told everybody there's a list of the Fightback supporters andantagonists. T" his is the sort of low morality to our politics which the Oppositionseems now to be trafficking In; taking the names of the dissenters to what? Ingovernmcnt? Have retribution against them? Is this the way our leadership in ournation should be? I believe that you take the criticism on the chin and you respondand change your policy accordingly. T'hey believe what you do is you hop intopeople and particularly a couple of Catholic priests locked away in a room, hop into them with all the political toughs and at the same time go and evoke the nameof the Pope in support of your policy.
PL: But doesn't an Opposition leader have a responsibility to oppose the Government&nbsp;and to offcr new alternatives and to be critical?
PM: Yes, but not to slap down any legitimate interest group which has problems with&nbsp;his policies which is what his stock and trade is.
Pl.. You don't like him do you? This really is personal this stuff now isn't it?
PM: I couldn't care less about him in an individual sense. But the fact of the matter is&nbsp;almost everyday in the Senate they're attacking me, almost every day he has his&nbsp;henchmen over in the Senate hopping about.
PL: About your pig farm?
PM: Everyday for the last two and a half months that's been on, he never leaves me&nbsp;alone personally, hc's got his ads on tclevision against me personally.
PL: While we're on this subject, how come thc book value of this pig farm increased&nbsp;ten times in six..
PM; Don't get up to his stunts Paul.
PL: Did it or didn't it? There's a lot of people curious about how this all works.
PM: The thing is you've got to know how to read a set of company accounts. Ile factof the mattcr is I've been in Parliament for twenty three years and to have anOpposition leader getting stoolies up in the Senate, hopping into me every daywhile going out as though he's pristine pure with all the understated comment atdoorstops, the understated voice, where in fact what we scc in the Parliament isvicious behaviour by him and his henchmen. Whether it's against me or theCatholic church or the representatives or the nurses or the teachers whoever itmight be. All rm saying is that this country is in a recovery, we have got a lot ofour problems; just this very day we've got Cathay Pacific announcing that it willccntre its computer operations, one of the largest airlines in south-east Asia, Centrethem in Sydney; Air New Zealand. saying they will put 10,000 jobs into Australiaflying out of Brisbane. Is this the country on a slippery slope to nowhere? Is thisthe country which has now doubled its exports to GDP, which is now integratingwith Indonesia and Japan on a slippery slope to nowhere? Is this the country weshould berate? I say no and I'm not going to see it disparaged in this way and theefforts of Australians disparaged in this way.
PL: Given the innocence ot this business venture of yours, why don't you prove it by&nbsp;opening the books then?
PM: What are you suggesting now? Don't tell me you'rc picking up this muck Paul.
PL: I'm suggesting that there have been qucstionis asked in the Parliament..
PM: I made a simple investment in a piggery, an income producing business which&nbsp;employs Australians. Dr Hcwson's spcnt twice that much on a weekender which&nbsp;he says he's visited twice, he's spent twice that much on a weekender. In other&nbsp;words I've gone and practiced what I've preached, invest in income producing,&nbsp;value adding exporting industries, I haven't gone out and bought a building, an&nbsp;office block, a weekender, I've gone and done the things I've preached for a&nbsp;decade; that is back Australians in in doing what they can do best, that's selling it&nbsp;to the world, innovative products, good things, valuable things, wholesome things.
PL-Thanks for your time.
PM: Good, thanks.



M.
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, MP, OPENING OF PRATT INDUSTRIES' NEW DE-INKING
AND PAPER RECYCLING MILL, MELBOURNE, 9 OCTOBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
I think it is true to say that we arc in a new culture and that culture changed in the
1980s, the culture of protection, seeing Australia ringed with a fence of tariffs, a
managed -exchange rate, cxcbange controls, a constipated financial market, there's
no way a business like this would havc been funded with them through the 1980s
without financial deregulation, but we are -seeing the great shift to a more supple,
fluid economy whcrc manufacturing is becoming the order of the day.
This is the first year in our history where manufactured exportsM have equalled rural
and mining exports. This is a great change for Australia, a great change from our
culture as an importing country, and as I said, John Button and 1, a week ago were
opening a plant, the Holeproof plant of Pacific Dunlop's. You might have heard
about my underpants on thc way through. But the thing was, here was another
busincss whcre Australians have decided to do something technologically clever
and produce a product which is compctitive and which will feed into the Australian
retailing industry and which will import replace. And not so many months before
that I had the honour again with Mr Toyoda to turn the first sod of the plant, an
$ 800 million investmcnt in a new motor vehicle plant which will be the ncw
denominator of the Australian motor vehicle industry; an enormous investment. Or
just a few weeks after that a new catalytic cracker for Shell over at Geelong which
is going to change our petroleum industry, going to sell into the Singapore oil
market and into south-cast Asia.
VO/ TO'd GIO'ON 91: ZT Z6' 30613:-131 
These are just in the space of a few months and there are more of them and as
many as I talk about John can double them because he gets more invitations than
me, most out there in the manufacturing industry, they like him more.
Last week I was at the AMECON plant, we were not opening it but we were down
there tyre kicking, looki~ ng around and there was the latest destroyer delivered to
the Australian Navy, a most sophisticated warship, state of the art, world quality,
navy accepted it it had no faults, which is almost unprecedented; at its sea trials,
no faults. They say it is a better quality product from similar plant ships from the
United States, a great Australian achievement.
And recently I was at the Pacific Dunlop tyre plant where we see again technical
innovation to turn a new export business out of tyres; or at theFord plaig. where
we're exporting the new model Capri to the United States. This is just in Victoria.
Last week I was atMitsubishi where we saw the new Magna wagon go 6,000 of
them around the world as a-new export market for Australia.
We've made the jump, we've made the cultural shift to a society which is putting its
focus on technology and ability and part of that is of course, bringing up the quality
of our education system because the greatest Australian resource was never the
next deposit of minerals or the next paddock full of wheat, but the Australian
people themselves. And that's why now in 1992 just over 7 out of 10 children
complete secondary school where it was just 3 out of 10 in 1982. How could you
ever hope to be a technologically smart country if only 3 kids in ten completed
secondary school? Forty per cent of those are now streamed into universities
where we have added 50 per cent of places, we created the equivalent of twelve
universities of an average campus size of 10,000 since 1986 and we're now seeing
a revolution in vocational education, in technical and further education with a
Na_ t ional Training Authority to do in vocational education what we've done in
tertiary education and participation rates in schools.
We're seeing all that fed into a much more conscious research an~ d deve lopment
culture with support for research and development and product innovation which
welre seeing come through in Australian business. We are seeing Australia
integrate itself with these products with our near neighbourhood with the rest of the
world. Just a week ago I came back from Japan and Singapore and not long before that a
from earlier in the year from Indonesia and Papua New Guinea and there's no
doubt in those countries Indonesia, Japan, Singapore et cetera that we are finding a
new place for Australia and we are building up conducive training and government
relationships and private relationships which is going to lock Australia much more
O/ ZO'd ST0' ON 95!: 2-T Z6* 430O6 :-1133.1 
into that Asia Pacific area. Already 70 per cent of our exports go to the Asia
Pacific area, 60 per cent of it goes to the south-east Asian area, 75 per cent goes to
the APEC area, Asia Pacific area as a whole.
We're already part of this region and we're integrating with it now rapidly. I
suppose the most important statistic one can quote is that a decade ago 14 per cent
of our produce was exported, this year it is 23 per cent; that is nearly a quarter of
everything we produce is exported. This is a phenomenal change which without
that our current account deficit would be double, our debt levels would be
astronomic and of course, the international financial markets would already be
inducing a permanent slow down of Australia so that our debt levels didn't
increase. So we've madc a very important change and part of the change is in the culture of
business and the culture of the workforce, it's not just entrepreneurship like
Richard's ( Pratt) display here or the marshalling of the capital or the technical
innovation in the management group, but also in thc great revolution in industrial
relations. Because we are now seeing enterprise agreements written across this
country where all sorts and manner of conditions, be they penalty rates or hours of
work or conditions of employment rolled into new innovative agreements which
give us all the flexibility in the world, higher productivity, better salaries, lower
costs and lower inflation and it is that sea-change in industrial relations which has
given us a period of unprecedented industrial peace and which is seeing us do the
most innovative things, introduction in plants across the country. I think that
consensus model, that bringing Australia together and holding it together and
giving people a stake in the business, giving people pride in what they are doing
and having management to include them, an inclusive policy is the one that's
obviously producing the goods for Australia and not a competitive policy in the
work place where one worker is pitted against another or an adversarial
relationship where the management is pitted against the employees. That's what
we want to avoid and if we want to take any lessons from Japan or any of the
cultures from our near north, if there's one thing in common they have is that peer
group pressure and the work ethic have come togethcr as a cohesive group is what
made those societies productively great in what is changing Australia.
So the spirit is there and the faith is there and that is what's going to matter to us
and the hope is there. The fact is, T said this week with some criticism that the
recession is over, technically it is true and as we know we are still living with the
effects of it and we will for some time. But the point is the recovery is on and it's
on in plants like this across the country and it will grow as we go through thc 1990S
as a low inflationary culture where we've got the emphasis on product innovation
and we're looking to add value and do good things for our employees.
tVO/ MOd G9100N 91: LT Z6* 13O613:-131 
But in every business they are all becoming more productive, Richard was telling
me at the table that in each plant of course there are fewer people producing more
products and that's true across the country. It has to be true to be competitive. So
what is the answer? What is the answer to the implied redundancy of having fewer
people producing more product; and the answer is to produce even more product,
even greater levels of product. There are just thousands of business opportunities
that will be taken up in the 1990s doing innovative things, producing more product
to let the country grow, hut you can't run this country at a speed which takes the
employment up without it spilling into inflation, without some agreement about
incomes. Whether you call in an Accord or you call it ca-operation or an
understanding, call it what you like, but there is no way sonme draconian Reserve
Bank on monetary policy is going to let Australia grow and at the same time keep
inflation down while we can take up the unemployed into productive jobs. If we
want higher rates of employment and more growth, we must have more production,
more speed in GDP, greater rates of growth, but if we want to lower intended
intlation risk and keep that competitiveness we've got to do it together. We'll never
do it banging people over the head with a vicious monetary policy administered by
some independent reserve or central bank.
So it's all about doing things together as things have been done here, doing clever
and complex things, but doing them well, seeing intelligence, entrepreneurship,
street smartness, good will, a bit of heart brought together to produce something
really new and innovative.
So Richard, I congratulate you on what you have done, I congratulate you on the
business you have developed which is a good thing for Australia, you're replacing
all of those imports which you would otherwise be taking as raw product, you're
doing things to employ Australians and you'll keep on employing because youll
keep on growing your business, notwithstanding the fact you need fewer of them in
the productive process and in doing so you are part of that great cultural change of
Australia, going out, meeting the world, engaging the world and doing it in a way
which earns Australia a place of repute, of substance, in the world of trade
particularly in the A-ia Pacific where we live.
This is a a great day for the industry of Victoria and of Melbourne and I salute and
congratulate every Victorian who has been involved with it, none more so than our
afcsbian entrepreneurial fricnd, Richard Pratt.
Thank you.
S910N 9 Z6' 430613:-131 



VflimiV miVIUUicf 112/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P J KEATING, MP
FORMER GERMAN CHANCELLOR WILLY BRANDT
I have sent today the following condolence message to the
German Chancellor on the occasion of the-death of former
Chancellor Willy Brandt.
I was greatly saddened to learn of the death. earlier
today of Willy Brandt, former Chancellor of the Federal
Republic of Germany.
Willy Brandt was one of the leading European statesmen
of the post-war period, Both as Chancellor and private
citizen, Wlilly Brandt played an important role in
Germany's period of post-war adjustment and
reconciliation. He was widely recognised as a
courageous fighter for democracy.
His term as Chancellor marked a turning point in West
Germany's relations with the former eastern bloc. His
efforts Were accorded recognition in 1971 when he was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
His concern for the people of the developing world
showed him to be a leader of great humanity and
compassion. He will be remembered as a statesman of great courage
and foresight and a leader of his generation. On
behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I
would like to pass to you and to his family my
condolences.
CANBERRA 9 October 1992 



TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO T1IE BARCALDINE COM M UNITY, BARCA LDINE,
OCT~ OBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Rob ( hulls), Lancc ( Norman), Pat (.) and Rob's wife
Petrina and ladies and gentlemen.
It's a great honour to be here and thank you very much for so many of you coming
out to see us, on this I'm sure another Queensland sunny day. My daughters are
telling me now I've got a bald patch up here I've got to watch and I should have had
the sun tan cream on it; I'm warming up for the Sydney summer. It is lovely to be
In such nice weather, but more particularly in nice company and thc nice company
being those of you who kept flying the flag of the L abor Party and the spirit of
Labor and thc spirit of Australia so known to be connected with the town of
Barealdine and the famous Tree Of Know. ledge under which the Labor Party Was
formed a century ago.
It is an interesting conjunction of events that in this decade, the last in this century,
that a century ago, in probably our worst drought and worst depression, the Labor
Party was formed and we went through that great time, that great spirit in
Australia, when Australia federated and became a nation. And that great spirit of
experimentation continued right until the First World War. And now a century
later, in what is not a general drought but one near by here, and a rcession we arc
now moving from, we are contemplating that spirit of Australia again because we
lost that sense of social experimentation which came in the 1890s and in the first
fifteen or so years of this century. And the problem was it was snuffed out at 
G9allipoli when all the conservative forces of this country took what was a very
radical thing, the contribution of the young men and women of Australia to the
First World War,-and wrapped themselves conservatively and all their conservative
mores around it.
And then, of course, we had the ' 20s, a period of economic expansion, the ' 30s with
the depression. the ' 40s with the war and thcn, under Menzies in those years, the
and ' 60s, we again kept focusing back on other countrics rather than our own.
So we lost that sense of nation, that sense of experimcritation, that spirit of
Australia which was kindled here a century ago.
That spirit has, I think, returned and there's now a greater sense of national identity
than there was at any time since just before the First World War. Anrd that_ has
been recovered, I think, across the countryside; people are much more clear about
their identity as Australians and Australia as a country is more clear about its
identity in the world as a nation.
The Labor Party has always been called upon to lead that national spirit and one
wonders today if we hadn't federated a hundred ycars ago would we fcderatc in this
decade. Given all the various rivalries between the States and thc Commonwealth
I don't know.
But yesterday we had another indication, I think, that that spirit is around. We
decided in June this year to form a National TrainingAuthority that's to take the
TAFE system and turn it into a nati-onal ratherthan a state-s-ystem and yesterday
the deision was made to put the headquarters of the national body in Brisbane.
So, for almost the first time, Brisbane has picked up a national authority in the
State of Queensland and that spirit of co-operation which will produce for
Australian kids a vocational cducation system to sit beside the universitics is
perhaps a glimpse of that great spirit that obtained in the 1 890s in this country and
in this part of Australia.
So the spirit of Australia, the spirit of Labor owes a great deal to Barcaldine, but
the Labor Party still carries the spirit on and in this century, in the latter half of it,
we've had to remake Australia in Labor's image. That is, try and take it from a
closed country to an open, robust country again one that is prepared to look at
some social experimentation like a century ago but this time go out to the world
in trade. And we have done this in the 1980s. We've made the great cultural shift
out, Instead of staying with'the cultural shift in which we had through all the post
war years. This is the first year that we'll export more manufactured goods than
rural exports or mining exports. Because the problem was, though the great rural
industries and mining industries have been such strong things for Australia, they 
weren't able to pay for our imports as long ago as 1980 over a dccade ago. So we
had to start developing our goods and our services, but you can't develop goods and
services, you can't develop sophisticated things, without developing the most
valuable resource and that's our young people our children.
When we came to office only three children in ten completed secondary school;
this year that's over seven in ten, and in five years' time we think it will be nine in
ten. And then we created enough places for 40 per cent of them to go onto
universities. But there was always a hole: those who couldn't get into university.
And we're now filling that by developing a proper vocational education system
under that so that wc end up with a trained workforce that can develop
sophisticated products and not only that add value to our rural product-, so instead
of selling beef and wool in an unprocessed way, wc start adding value to it and
selling it to those markets that really matter. That's what really is going to add
income to Australia, add benefits to the country and put a stable base in
employment right across the country.
These are the things which we've done, but as well as that we'vc picked up all the
social aspects of the people, the views of the peoplc who have met here a century
ago. And while there was drought here a century ago, now we have drought relief
courtesy of a Labor Government.
Where they were talking about unemployment a century ago in that depression,
we've got unemployment benefits. Now Dr Hewson, our Tory friend, wants to cut
them out after nine months) but we've got them there, we've increased them
through the 1980s and we've got a decent social security _ system. sitting there for
Australians courtesy of the fact that a Labor Party was formed -so long ago. And it
means now that access to health through Medicare, access to education, support for
the aged in retirement, a new scheme of support for the aged with occupational
superannuation for those who will be retiring in some years hcncechild care, as
well as all those aged care things, all that support in the education system, that
great social wage has come from a Labor Government that knows to keep Australia
strong, you'vc got to keep Australia together. And the notion that the rich should
prosper and they'll flick some crumbs off the table and the rest of the public pick
that up, is not our view of the world.
We say all Australians should come along together. So we want to build a strong
industrial base, but not just growing wheat and wool or even raising beef, but to
add value,-to make sophisticated products, to get into services like tourism as we
see tourism changing the whole of thc state of Queensland, an industry that
developed entirely under a Labor Government in the past ten years. And that trade 
4
in international services, whether they be tourism or medical services or financial
services or health services, have all come from a Labor Government.
The funny thing is, it has taken a Labor Government to give Australia an open
market econom~ y. In that great struggle between capital and labour here a century
ago, capital won, but capital has been tamed since so that now it works with labour
to make Australia stronger. We are working together. And now the great phalanx
of enterprise agreements across Australia, where unions and employees and
managers and businesses are sitting down making novel changes for productivity
and higher wages, is part of the growing up and maturing of Australia, part of the
maturing of Labor and the country.
There's always been a to-ing and fro-ing in this century between the notion of
private interest and private reward being the key to everything and government
intervention being the key to everything. We saw the robber baron capitalists of
the United States and Britain in the 19th century believing that private interest and
private reward was everything, and yet we saw the communist parties of Europe, of
Russia, and some of the other socialist parties, believing that government
intervention was everything.
In the Labor Party we've had neither one of those things. We've always had that
nice happy mix, that fair mix of saying not everything is going to be solved by
private reward or looking after yourself and it's not all going to be solved by the
government sector getting too big so let's render unto Caesar thc things that are
Caesar's, but let's get that nice balance in there.
We think we've got that balance in there, that is the rights of the individual, the
freedom to achieve, but at the same time this concept of nation and community.
And that's what I think our friend Dr I-ewson has forgotten. He's trying to tell us
basically that greed is good, if you go out and achieve for yourself that's all that
matters, but God help you itf you are not an achiever, God help you if you are not
on the top of the heap because in that sort of a world you get left behind. We heard
John Howard speaking at the Press Club during the week about industrial relations,
he wants to deprcss Australian working conditions. So it's the same old stuff. As I
said during thc week, Howard could have made the speech in Lancashire in 1895
and I'm quite sure the people arguing for capital could have made it here in
Barcaldine in 1890 or 1891. It's the same old argument, put by the same sort of
people, but wve're not having a bar of it. We're saying all Australia comes along
together, let's grow together prosperously, lct's rekindle the spirit of Australia that
came with the federation in the 1890s and let's do it with the spirit of Labor which
came from Barcaldine in 1891. 
Let's make the spirit of Labor in the 1990s as relevant as it was in the 1890s and
let's show as we did a century ago that Australia leads the world in social
experimentation and social change and economic change with it-We can do it
again, in fact we arc doing it again and while the recession has been a real problem
for us and brought a lot of suffering to people as we get out of it into a recovery, a
strong recovery, the basic breadth and depth of the country will mean that we've
got those balances right and that spirit and hope which the Labor Party has always
been able to provide will be there again in the last decade of this century.
To the people of Barcaldine can I say not only thank you for seeing Rob and me
here today, but thanks for keeping the faith, thank you for keeping the spirit and the
hope of Labor which has for nearly all of this century been the hope of Australia,
And a century later say that your loyalty has brought back that economic and social
change, that economic and social experimentation which this town and my Party
started a century ago.
T'hank you very much. 


PRIME MINISTER* EMBARGOED UNTIL 3: 00PMSTATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,THE HON P J KEATING, NPVISIT TO JAPAN, SINGAPORE AND CAMBODIA
Mr SpeakerI take this opportunity to inform the House of theoutcome of the visit I made to Japan, Singapore andCambodia between 20 and 26 September.This overseas visit was my third since becoming PrimeMinister.-All three visits have been to Asia-Pacific countries.All three visits have helped put a sharper focus onAustralia's relations with the region.A primary objective of each visit has been to talk withother regional leaders about how we can work together torespond to the fluid outlook in the region.But just as importantly, I have also wanted to underlineto both Australian and foreign audiences how much theAustralian economy has shifted towards an internationalorientation, especially an Asia-Pacific orientation; howmuch Australia has already achieved in the region; andhow much our future depends on successfully carryingforward this engagement.More than is sometimes appreciated, the Asia-Pacificregion is in the midst of a period of profoundtransition. The strategic consequences of the end of the Cold War arestill working themselves out.The regional security outlook is generally favourable,but less prodictabla than before.The peace process in Cambodia, which involves anambitious role for the United Nations, confronts aserious test of Its sustainability.
Fluidity in the international trading environment isincreased by uncertainty about the outcome of the UruguayRound. Whatever the outcome of the Round, we shall probably seean increasing trend towards regional, subregional, andbilateral trade arrangements.Regional governments are now required to develop policyresponses to what could well be a rapidly evolvingpattern of trade alignments.Asia-Pacific countries also need to consider howinternational and regional institutions can betterreflect the growing weight of the region in worldaffairs, and the increasing importance of intra-regionallinkages.Mr SpeakerMy visit to Japan was very worthwhile in consolidatingwith the Japanese Government the strong community ofinterest we have with them in responding to theseimportant questions.The Australian public understands very well Japan'ssignificance in our external relations.Japan is the world's second largest national economy,accounting for about 14 per cent of global output.It has been our largest trading partner since 1970.Perhaps more than is generally appreciated in thiscountry, Australia is also an important regional partnerof Japan.We are Japan's third largest source of imports and sixthlargest trading partner.The bilateral trade relationship, now worth around 24billion Australian dollars, is one of the principalsinews of economic interdependence in the WesternPacific. The close dialogue between the two governments onregional and international issues reflects the habit offriendship and cooperation that has grown up between thetwo countries in recent years.Certainly, the warmth of my reception by the JapaneseGovernment and the quality of my discussions withPrimeMinister Miyazawa and his Ministers attest to thematurity of the relationship that we now enjoy withJapan. The comments of Mr Miyazawa and his ministers reflected,I think, a realistic view of the international scene.
There was cautious optimism that the Japanese economywould return to a stronger growth path from the end ofthis year.There was a determination, which I supported, that Japanshould play a more active role in international affairs.I affirmed Australian support for Japan's permanentmembership of the United Nations Security Council so thatthe world body can better reflect changed worldcircumstances. I welcomed Japan's decision to participate in UnitedNations peacekeeping operations, and the opportunity thisprovides for our military and civilian personnel to worktogether in support of the Cambodia peace process.Mr SpeakerI discussed international and bilateral trade issues withboth Prime Minister Miyazawa and International Trade andindustry Minister Watanabe.They acknowledged an uneasiness in Japanese political andbusiness circles about the increasing trend topreferential trade arrangements.Prime Minister Miyazawa expressed the personal view thatan open and non-discriminatory multilateral tradingsystem could be maintained despite these developments.He made clear his government's deep commitment to acooperative relationship with the United States, and itssupport for an early and successful outcome of theUruguay Round.In underlining the importance of the bilateral traderelationship with MITI Minister Watanabe, I said thatAustralia would not be party to any trade arrangementwhich was directed against Japan.This commitment was reciprocated by his assurance thatJapan would conduct its trade on a commercial basiswithout discrimination against Australia's interests inany arrangements with third countries.He reiterated this undertaking in the particular case ofAustralia's exports of automobile-parts to Japan.in discussing the outlook for the Uruguay Round, I urgedJapan not to hold back on the rice tariffication issue,because otherwise it ran the risk of being portrayed byothers as a final obstacle to a settlement onagriculture. The Japanese Government acknowledged the responsibilityit faced.
My discussions with Japanese Ministers also covered theneed for expanded bilateral air services to cater for theexpected increasei in-tourist traffic, MITI's support forAustralia's trade promotion in Japanese regional centres,and Japanese involvement in the MFP project in Adelaide.In a general discussion of defence relations, I confirmedthe Government's satisfaction with the cuirent moderatelevel of activity which includes high-level visits anddialogue on strategic issues.Mr SpeakerThe Government attaches considerable importance to theAsia-Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC process as anessential mechanism for promotiing open regionalism.I explained to Prime Minister Miyazawa the thinkingbehind my proposal for establishing over the medium terma process for periodic heads-of-government meetings basedon APEC membership.Such meetings would add political weight and status tothe APEC process.They would fill a significant gap in institutionalarrangements in the region, enabling leaders to consulttogether in a way which has become familiar in Europeanand trans-Atlantic relations.I was encouraged by a mark~ ed firming of Japanese supportfor the proposal.Prime Minister Miyazawa welcomed the initiative andagreed that the idea should be pursued further inconsultation with other members of the region.Former Prime Minister Takeshita also firmly supported theproposal. A special feature of the visit was my agreement withPrime Minister Miyazawa to issue a joint statementsetting out for the public record an account of theregional perspectives which figured prominently in ourdiscussions. The statement demonstrates convincingly the extent ofparallel interests* ve share with Japan in regionalstrategic and economic issues, and the potential we havefor working together productively in the region.It also makes clear that the cooperative relationship weaim to pursue with Japan is by no means an exclusive one.Rather, it is directed towards broad-based cooperationwith other countries in the Asia-Pacific region,including especially the United States.
I now table the joint statement for reference byHonourable Members.Mr SpeakerMy program in__ Tokyo included an audience with the Emperorand Empress of Japan.On behalf of the Australian Government, I invited TheirMajesties to visit Australia whenever mutually agreeableto the two governments.The invitation was warmly received, but because of priorconsideration of other possible overseas visits, it maybe some time before the visit takes place.I am sure that an of ficial visit to Australia by theEmperor and Empress will be welcomed by the vast majorityof Australians.Mr SpeakerMy visit to Japan included substantial contact withsenior Japanese business and financial leaders, and withthe Japanese media.I impressed on these audiences the progress that has beenachieved in making the Australian economy morecompetitive and internationally oriented, and thecommitment of the Australian Government, private sectorand wider community to strengthening Australia'srelations with the Asia-Pacific region.These contacts were very useful in registering withJapanese opinion-leaders the changing nature and focus ofAustralia. Following my program in Tokyo, I made the first visit byan Australian Prime Minister to Nag~~, Jpnsfutlargest city and the centre of a-large industrial andtrading region.I took part in public ceremonies to mark the opening ofan Australian Consulate in Nagoya.This is one of four new consulates we are opening thisyear in Japan to strengthen our trade promotion inregional centres.I also visited the headquarters of theToyota Corporationand inspected technologically advanced productionprocesses at their Notomachi plant, which will serve asthe parent plant for the new Toyota factory at Altona inVictoria.
In his welcoming address at a lunch given in my honour,the Troyota President said his corporation's investment atAltona was predicated on the Australian Government's carindustry policy persisting into the 21st century, andthat consistent government policy and harmonious labourrelations were always important to the car industry.Mr SpeakerMy visit to Singapore on 24 and 25 September reinforcedthe longstanding partnership between our two countries.Singapore is Australia's fourth largest export market,and our largest trading partner among the ASEANcountries. Australia and Singapore maintain close defence relationsboth bilaterally and under the Five Power DefenceArrangements, which also involve Malaysia, Britain andNew Zealand.my reception in Singapore was very warm.I had extensive discussions with Prime Minister Goh ChokTlong, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, Deputy Prime Ministerand Trade and Industry Minister Brigadier-General LeeHsien Loong, and Defence Minister Yeo Ning Hong.Prime Minister Goh said our bilateral relationship wasin excellent shape and that Australia and Singapore werefollowing similar strategies in the region.He welcomed Australia's efforts to engage more closelywith Asia.My discussions with Singapore leaders confirmed a broadrange of agreement on regional issues including the needto maintain an open trading system and support forpromoting the APEC process.I congratulated the Singapore Government on theirsuccessful bid to host the APEC secretariat.A major feature of my program in Singapore wasparticipation in a very successful business seminar onthe theme of strategic linkages between Singapore andAustralian companies.The -seminar was well attended by sernior businessrepresentatives from both sides, including 28 very seniorAustralian business leaders who visited Singaporeespecially for the occasion.It provided an excellent opportunity for me and theAustralian business people to explain the important waysin which the Australian economy is becoming more open andcommercially integrated into the region.
Accompanied by Defence Minister Yeo, I visited HMASBrisbane, one of eight Australian ships which had Justparticipated in a large-scale maritime and air defenceexercise under the Five Power Defence Arranaeents.The Singapore Government made clear the value it placeson defence cooperation with Australia including ouractive role in the Five-Power Arrangements.Mr SpeakerMy visit to Cambodia on 26 September was the first by anAustralian Prime Minister since 1966, the first by aWestern head of government since 1970, and the first byany head of government since the signing of the ParisPeace Accords in October last year.My brief visit served two important purposes.I was able to underline Australia's firm support for thepeace process at a time when serious difficulties havebeen caused by the refusal of the Khmer Rouge toparticipate in the cantonment and demobilisation phase.I was also able to reaffirm the Government's warmappreciation of the efforts of the Australian militaryand civilian personnel serving with the United NationaTransitional Authority in Cambodia, and of the importantcontribution by Australian aid workers serving with nongovernmentorganisat ions.Other Members of the House have visited Cambodia sincethe signing of the peace settlement.I know they will support me in saying that all thesededicated and professional men and women are earning ahigh reputation for Australia in Cambodia.Australia can be truly proud of their contributiontowards peace and a better way of life for the Cambodianpeople. I had detailed discussions with Prince Sihanouk, the UNSecretary-General's Special Representative, Mr Akashi,and the UN'TAC Military Commander, Lieutenant-Cene-ralSanderson. Without underestimating the complexity and difficulty ofproblems-which lie ahead, I-was heartened by thedetermination of these key individuals to press aheadwith UN-organised elections by around May next year, withor without participation by the Khmer Rouge.I assured tinm that Australia remained firm in ourcommitment to support a peace process whose outcome is ademocratically elected government which can be recognisedand supported by the international community.
I said Australia wants to persevere so long as there is aresponsible way forward.Mr SpeakerI am confident that my visit to Japan, Singapore andCambodia has put Australia in a better position to dealwith the challenges we face in the region.I was pleased that my visit to Japan and Singaporegenerated considerable public comment about Australia'strade policy options.These are crucial issues for our country.It is important that Parliament and the public have aclear understanding of where our national interest lies.In recognition of Australia's position as a medium-sizedtrading nation with considerable diversity in thecomposition and direction of our trade, the Governmentattaches fundamental importance to maintaining andstrengthening the open, non-discriminatory multilateraltrading system based on the GATT.As part of this, we accord high priority to an early andsuccessful conclusion of the Uruguay Round ofmultilateral trade negotiations.The benefits of a multilateral agreement, which extendsinternational trade rules to cover agriculture andservices and which also strengthens the disciplines anddispute-settling procedures of GATT, are so overwhelmingfor a country like Australia that there is no need for meto describe them to this House.we are also firmly committed to promote the developmentof APEC as an organisation which embraces the maineconomic linkages between the Western Pacific and NorthAmerica. And we also remain willing to seize trade opportunitiesand solve trade problems whenever and wherever theyarise, whether bilaterally or plurilaterally, whether ina particular class of exports or with a particularcountry or group of countries.This kind of work is so constant and so detailed, soordinary And'unspectacular a part of the everyday work ofour trade officials and of the Trade Minister that wesometimes forget quite how much goes on.These three tasks the GATT, APVC, and the everyday workof facilitating trade remain at the core of our tradepolicy.
But as we enter this new era of uncertainty in thedirection of the world trading system and in thestrategic decisions of the major trading economies, Iwish to describe the Government's approach in decidingemerging trade policy issues.Mr SpeakerFor better or worse, the Uruguay Round is coming to anend. Whatever the outcome, this will free the energies oftrade policy makers and make clear the internationallyagreed benchmarks upon which bilateral. and regional tradeenhancement can be created.If the Round fails, there will remain a vast agenda ofreform in agriculture and services trade which should beaddressed by some other means.Even if the Round succeeds in one form or another, therewill remain plenty of room for further agreements whichimprove on its outcomes.As I said at the beginning of this statement, the trendtowards regional, subregional and bilateral tradearrangements will probably strengthen.The European Community will certainly spread eastwards,even if there is now soma doubt about the pace ofdeepening integration between the existing members.NAFTA has now been signed by the governments of Canada,the United States and Mexico, and we expect that in oneform or another it will be approved by the US Congressnext year.We expect further links will be established between theUnited States and various Latin American countries.In our own region, APEC has been institutionalised withthe creation of a secretariat in Singapore, while theASEAN countries are now moving to establish their ownfree trade agreement.There is plenty of evidence of increased regionalism intrade institutions.There is also evidence of increased regionalism in tradepatterns. Between 1970 and 1991 trade between West Europeancountries grew from 66 to 72 per cent of their totaltrade, and that between the APEC countries grew from 54to 65 per cent of their total.
So the end of the Uruguay Round is coming at the sametime as Australia is changing profoundly, as regionalismbecomes more important and also at a time of newuncertainty over the trade strategy of the world'sbiggest economy, the United States.Mr SpeakerIn his recent Detroit speech, President Bush raised thepossibility of negotiating trade arrangements withindividual countries, incl~ uding some in Eastern Europeand some in the Pacific.In the Pacific he instanced Australia, the ASEANcountries and K~ orea.No formal proposal has been put to Australia, but theissue is of such importance to our trading future that wecannot wait its full development before we make our ownviews known.Our overriding objective is to do all we can to preserveand enhance a trading environment in which our majormarkets remain as open to us as possible, and thesemarkets remain open to each other.We must never lose sight of the fact that most of ourtrade, and the fastest growing part of our trade, is nowwith other countries in the Western Pacific.We must also not lose sight of the fact that many ofthese countries are highly dependent on the US market.And finally we must not lose sight of the fact that manyof our trade partners are also our trade competitors inthird-country markets.Those considerations will guide us in what may well be afluid and fast-changing external environment over thenext few years.As to the institutional forms and arrangements into whichwe may be prepared to enter, we are open mninded.We certainly do not rule out bilateral agreements, orplurilateral agreements.Indeed, we may well initiate them, and we are of course amember* of a* strong bilateral arrangiement with NewZealand. But some bilateral agreements are better than others, andsome may deliver few bilateral trade benefits whilepotentially incurring substantial trade costs.The Government welcomed President Bush's Detroit speechin the sense that it demonstrated an interest in furtherpromoting trade liberalisation in the Pacific area.
The Opposition made an enthusiastic embrace of apreferential bilateral agreement with the United Statesdespite having a week earlier labelled the United Statesas Australia's number one trade enemy.The Government's approach is more calibrated.We have reservations about the specific mechanism of anetwork of bil~ ateral preferential trade agreementscentred on the United States.Mr SpeakerThe difficulty for Australia works at several levels.First, the Government would want to consider seriouslyany offer of a bilateral agreement with the United Stateswhich would reduce import constraints on those items ofmost concern to us particularly beef, dairy products,sugar and steel.But past experience suggests that such concessions wouldbe unlikely because of Congressional attitudes and otherdomestic pressures in the United Statas.Secondly, the perception in East Asia of any move byAustralia and the United States to conclude a bilateraltrade agreement would vary greatly depending on whetherit was seen as part of a broader, even-handed approachthroughout the region, or whether it was seen as part ofa strategy to put pressure on the North Asian economies,particularly Japan.In the latter case, Australia would be seen as turningour back on East Asia despite the fact that it accountsfor almost six times more of our exports than the UnitedStates. Thirdly, while we can understand why some Americansadvocate bilateral trade arrangements on a hub-and-spokesmodel as a way of improving US trade access, thecountries at the ends of the spokes may find that thisapproach does not help trade between them.A report on regional trade agreements prepared for theGovernment earlier this year by Professor Richard Snapeand others argues convincingly that a hub-and-spokessystem is a-relatively unattractive option for tradeliberalisation. Those considerations were reflected in my statements inTokyo about trade policy.As mentioned already, I told the Japanese Government thatAustralia would not be party to a trade arrangement whichwas directed against Japan.
12This commitment reflects a clear-sighted view ofAustralia's national interest.Mr SpeakerIt goes without saying that the Government attaches greatweight to our relationship with the United States.Australia and all other trading nations have benefitedenormously over the years from the enlightened leadershipthe United States has demonstrated in helping to maintainan open and non-discriminatory multilateral tradingByB tern.The Australia-US defence alliance remains of fundamentalimportance in the post-Cold War period.Our bilateral economic relations are of grAat value toboth sides.As made clear in the joint statement issued with Japan,the Government believes that US strategic and economicengagement is of fundamental importance to the peace andprosperity of the Western Pacific.For this very reason we have promoted the APEC conceptwhich embraces both the Western Pacific and the UnitedStates, and have queried other regional concepts whichomit the United States.An important objective of Australian policy is to avoidso far as we can situations where we have to choosebetween relations with the United States and relationswith East Asia. IWe also want to do whatever we can to encouragecooperative relations between the two.Mr SpeakerThe Government certainly does not rule out Australianmembership of regional trading arrangements.APEC is already evolving into a regional tradearrangement with a useful agenda of trade-liberalisingmeasures. If thinking and practice in the region evolves towardsthe idea -of a -trade pact, -we would very much prefer thatit be APEC wide, and of course that it did not raisebarrierg or hinder trade between members and nonmembers.we appreciate that such an outcome will not be achievedeasily and that, in the meantime, there may be proposalsfor plurilateral arrangements between subsets of the APECmembership.
133Australia stands ready to consider on its merits possiblemembership of any such arrangements that may evolve.As I said in Tokyo, we do not think a Western Pacifictrade area is a preferred arrangement, but we wouldcertainly seek to join one if the trade policy decisionsof the major players left us no better choice.So we remain open to forms and arrangements, but we dothink there are substantial disadvantages for ourselvesand for the entire region if the United States isencouraged to go down the path of seeking bilateralpreferential arrangements.Finally, an important principle which will guideAustralian policy is that we very much want to avoidbeing party to a process which has the effect of dividingthe Pacific into trade allies of the United States andtrade allies of Japan.Mr SpeakerWorking forward from the understandings reached during myrecent Asian visit, these are the sorts of considerationsthat need to be weighed carefully in defining newAustralian positions in this important policy area.CANBERRA 13 October 1992



TE: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 01/ 13T
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTERt, THE HON PJ. KEATING MP
Business Council Of Australia Annual General Meeting
Sydney, 15 October 1992
Our partnership with the Business Council is now almost a decade old.
It dates back to the heady days of the Economic Summit of 1983 and the realisation by
the business community at that time that there was a need for a ncw organisation to
meet the times.
There was a need for a sophisticated business viewpoint different from the narrow
sectional views of the past.
With the Government clearly interested in building a community-wide commitmecnt
for change and reform, business wanted to be part of that commitment, part of that
change. For the Government's pait, we welcomed this dcsire by the business community to be
included and we were pleased at the decision to establish thc BCA in 1983.
There have been the occasional celebrated squabbles over the years.
But we have continued to work together and talk together.
We have been able to co-operate with the BCA in a range of ways.
I am glad that we are keeping the lines of communication open because that is a
hallmark of this Labor Government.
I have always believed that a solid partnership with business should be a central plank
of a successful Labor Government.
Without a confident, profitable, expanding business sector Australia will not be able to
build the basis for a successful society or a successful nation.
TEL 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 02/ 13
2
Without it wo will not be able to generate-. b
Without it, we will not be able to cut unemployment and give hope to those who
would otherwise face a barren future.
Without a successful business community we will not be able to achieve a better
environment, or better social infrastructure,
Wc will not be able to look after peoplc as we would wish.
With this Government, success with business is the starting point of a virtuous circle
which underpins a successful society.
And all my public life I have been of thc view that building a successful business is a
complex and difficult matter.
This realisation came to me as I tried to help businesses in my electorate of Bankstown
cope with the debilitating years of the 1970s.
It was reinforced by my experience of the 1980s.
When I became Treasurer in 1983, the view at the time was that the key to building
successful businesses was for the Government to take steps to boost profits, get rid of
the so called " real wage overhang", cut back the size of the public sector, reduce
public borrowing and cut inflation.
At the time this hardly seemed enough to me and I added the need for more
competition by international islng the economy and deregulating the financial markets.
I also saw the importance In establishing and developing a dialogue with the Trade
-Uipflrnoveincnt and with talking to business and other groups at the Economic
Summit. This was not just to rebuild profits after the bleak Fraser years but to build a
commitment for workplace and community change.
Having made remarkable progress on these fronts, we then took on the task of
microeconomic reform.
We embarked on reforming aviation, the ports, shipping, land transport,
communication and the rest.
I mention all of this to make the point that thcre are no simple text book solutions to
building succesful businesses.
TEL 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 03/ 13
3
The agenda for governments must of necessity be a long one and must be addressed
with dexterity and with a feel for all thc inter-relationships that exist within a society.
Take for example the Government's commitment to boosting business investment in
research and development by maintaining the R D tax concession at 150%
indefinitely.
This is part of a deliberate strategy to accelerate the speed with which Australian
industry improves the sophistication of its products.
This Is what we must do if we are to make our way in the world.
The cost of the R D concessions is worth carrying on the budget to help structural
change and expand industries which will form the basis of tomorrow's job growth.
Ukcwise, the ooeaieRsac Centr&amp; es both a way of devcloping links
between government funded resarch outfits and business and a means of spawning
ncw industries.
And we are having success.
34 of these centres are now in place and this will increase to around 50 by the middle
of next ye~ ar.
Communications, agriculture, mining, manufacturing, medical research, the
environment and others arc covered by these centres.
Frequently it is industry that is taking the lead as is the case with Hawker de Havilland
and Asta which were instrumental in setting up the centre for Aero, Space Structures.
Also, the centres cut across a wide, range of industries BHP, Carlton and United
Breweries, Qantas and CAA are all involved in the centre for intelligent decision
systemns. The centre for waste management and pollution control is supported by many
companies including Brambles, ICI, BliP, ADI, the Water Board and so on.
The whole of Australian. inds is becoming much more focussed on innovation and
research. In 1990, for instance, Australians registered twice as many patents overseas as they did
in 1983.
Providing accelerated depreciation for new equipment investment is also part of a
deliberate strategy to boost investment and grow new industries. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 04/ 13
4
These new schedules announced in One Nation mean that our tax rules for investment
will be more than competitive with comparable countries.
Increasing the depreciation rate for tourist-related buldng from 2 1/ 2% to 4% was
also designed to play to our strengths.
The decision to fund a major expansion of vocational training. and to develop a new
national training system more relevant to industry, will help young people get jobs
and is also playing to our strengths.
It Is training, research and development and new investmnt which will create the
industries and the jobs relevant to Australian needs.
They will be industries and jabs which will enable us to take advantage of the growth
prospects in our region.
These are the natural, sensible, creative things that Governmnent should be doing.
And what this Government believes in.
We do not believe in Government withdrawing from its responsibilities.
Nor in simplistic solutions which deny a role for governmcnt.
in effect I am saying beware of those who come before you with simple nostrums
promising salvation.
At this point you probably think I am about to become a little political.
And you are right.
In the next six months or so Australia and Australian businesses have to make a
choice.
They have to decide whether they will embrace Dr Hcwson, and the doctrinaire
narrowness of the E!&amp; ghtback package.
Or whether they will continue to participate with a Government that has a clear reform
agenda but believes in developing partnerships with people.
T'hey will have to decide whether they will embrace the nostrums of Fightback with its
massive dislocating tax shuffle.
They will also have to consider whether they accept the simplistic belief that business
should deal with their employees through intimidation and not through cooperation. 
TEL: 15. Ot9 NoUUb~ 5 F U57'ñ
it is as if Dr HieWSon has been caught in a time warp.
it is as if he has learnt nothing from the succsss and the setbacks of the 1980s.
He remains committed to the text book ' Solutions' that he learnt in the 1970' s and
which Malcolm Fraser stopped him from Introducing.
Can business really be expected to believe, for instance, that it has been the $ 6 billion
state payroll tax and the $ 7 billion excise on petrol that has been the major factor
holding them back all thewe years.
Can they really believe that the removal of these two taxes would unleash a business
surge that would enable them to conquer new markets in Asia or develop a new
product. Life is rnot like that.
T7hey should also consider that the payroll tax is a State tax and that thc States will not
be properly compensated by Fightback for its abolition.
As a result of Fightback, the States will suffer a cutback of rno less than $ 1.4 bil lion in
Commonwealth funding.
Consequently they will be looking for new revenue sources, most of which are likely
to impact on business.
Business should also realise that Fighthack is committed to $ 13 billion of income tax
cuts it can't properly pay for.
Consequently any Coalition government at the Commonwealth level will also be
looking for extra revenue.
Doubtless through higher road user charges or some such.
It is an unplcasant fact of life that one way or another the books will eventually have
to add up.
People have to accept that Fightback cannot at the same time be a major benefit to
business without hurting households.
Some one is going to miss out.
But most Importantly, business should have every reason to disregard any benefits
from the changes to payroll tax and the petrol excise because they would be funded by
a $ 27 billion GST which is a tax on everything they produce. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 06/ 13
6
A tax equal to over half of the current income tax.
And why tax everything?
Why tax the output of an expanding industry like the tourism industry, which is where
the jobs and our future lies?
Particularly when a GST on domcstic tourism will make it relatively cheaper for
Australians to take thcir holidays overseas.
Why drive Australians offshore?
Why tax food?
It can only be an ideological obsession with the GST itself.
In 1985 believed in a GST.
But upon later reforming the income tax system I realised it was not worth the
macrocconomic dislocation.
I do not believe In a GST today and I haven't believed in one for many years.
It's too big a price to pay for too little return.
On the other hand, Dr M-cwson ploughs on regardless.
And it is not only the mirage and dislocation of the tax shuffle that business should be
concerned about with Fig~ htback.
They should also be deeply worried about the change that will occur in their
relationship with their employees.
Gone will be the developing commitment to change that the workforce has embraced
over the past decade.
And as many in this room today will appreciate, with that commitment to change has
come a degree of co-operation that has enabled a quite amazing transformation of
industrial practices in this country.
Every day I am being reminded of this by busincss leaders as I go around the country.
In its place will come suspicion, intransigence and a determination to Protect
entrenched entitlements. 
TEL: 15 . Oct .92 16 : 55 No0.00G6 0i1
7
With a l-ewson Government all subsequent progress on workplace reform will be
fought out in that same old culture of conflict which debilitated this country for so
long. Companies who have made existing arrangements work well for thenmselves and for
their employ= e, and who have seen major improvements to work practices and
productivity, will see all that progress dashed,
And for what?
To satisfy an inflexible, anachronistic dogma that refuses to accept that great progress
has been madc in the way Australians do business.
Fightback and Dr Hewson refuse to accept that co-operation can bring big rewards if a
Government accepts its responsibility to promote reform and make it happen.
And, as anyone who has tricd to run a business knows, it is the culture of management
and the employees who in the end determine whether a firm is successful or not.
Dr R-ewson threatens to destroy the great progress we have made over the past decde
in building a productivity culture amongst the workforce.
The successful economies of the world are those that have built up employee
commitment to productivity and invariably this has centred on a cooperative approach
with management.
Dr HewSon's approach to industrial relations will rip all of this apart.
The reform agenda that this Government has overseen is impressive but, most
importantly, it will continue.
It will continue because the Government has locked into place a process that demands
change. We have learnit all of us that change breeds change.
Australia can no longer stand still.
The system now demands that we all make progres.
This is not fully understood by those who believe that Governments should be
constantly inflicting change on the community in some self righteous frenzy.
Governments have to make hard decisions, and I can assure you all that I have
participated in many. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No .006 P. 08/ 16-
But it is better to also create a community commitment for change and to design a
system which rewards progress and makes it impossible to stand still.
This is what this Government has done by making co-operation and dialogue a key
factor in dealing with change.
But most importantly, by internationalising the conomy we have set forces in train
that are requiring all of us to be competitive with the rest of the world.
Firms that have to deal with the world are dez~ anding that their suppliers are
competitive and that their services are efficient.
The BCA itself has served a useful role in promoting the needs of business and in
being an agitator for reform.
And as I have said the progress is there.
To take a few examples:
On the waterfront, by October this year the stevedoring workforcc will be half of what
it was three years ago. Our reforms have doubled the number of containers handled
per man and the average ship turn around time has fallen by 39%.
Most importantly thc waterfront now works reliably.
We have more than achieved what we said we would do when we set out on this task
In 1989.
Our ports now compare favourably with best practice overseas.
Stevedoring charges for ncw business and contract renewals have fallen by 25% over
the last year, providing clear evidence that the benefits of reform are being passed on.
In shipping. the Govcrmcnt has also Introduced a new coastal voyag permit syster.
and the number of foreign vessels operating on the Australian coast has increased
rapidly with 48 such voyages in 1988-89 rising to over 200 in 1991-92.
in the last three years crew sizes have fallen by a quarter, to equal the average crewing
for OECD ships visiting Australia . saving industry $ 50 million per year. As a result
ship owners have spent nearly $ 2 billion on 22 new ships about a third of the fleet.
These important changes have been brought about with very little industrial disruption
simply because all parties the Government, shipping companies, the unions, the
shippers all worked together.
Of course more can be done and more is being done. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 09/ 13
9
Senator Cook has been working with all parties on the next stage in shipping reform
and we will be announcing that shortly.
By dec&amp; 4ain domestic aviation we cut fares by around 23% in the first eighteen
months; in the twelve months ending March 1992 airfares. fell by a further 14%.
In * 1991-92 a record 17.9 million passengers were carried by domestic carriers, a
massive 30% above the previous peak in 1990-91.
Lower fares have been critical to the success of the tourist industry and we have no
intention of letting competition in aviation wither away.
The Government has also orchestrated a revolution in Australia's international aviation
services.
Ansett will now be able to compete with QANTAS and other international carriers.
To ensure that Anscit has the opportunity to develop into a successful regional airline,
the Government is re-negotiating our air service agrecments with other countries to
provide for multiple designation and additional capacity.
The National Rail Corporation, incorporated in September 1991, will reduce the
average cost of providing rail freight services by 45% in real terms, and will improve
labour and rolling stock productivity by 35-45%.
The number of unions with coverage of national rail employees will be reduced from
over 20 to 2 and these unions are currently negotiating an enterprisc agreement with
thc Corporation to deliver these productivity gains.
National Rail will commence operations in February 1993, following completion of
the entcrprise agreement and the passage of all relevant State legislation.
The Corporation will turn around Interstate rail freight from losing around $ 320
million pa to financial break-even in 1995-96, and profitability by 1996-97.
Along with the One Nation spending on rail infrastructure, this will produce an
effective national rail network and create a national standard gauge system for the first
time in our histor-y.
All of this would have been unheard of a short time ago when most assumed our rail
system was heading for extinction.
On roads, all national road projects funded by the Commonwealth are now subject to
tender, doubling the level of funding put to tender since 1988. 
T1EL5:. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 10/ 1,
Heavy vehicle mass limits have increased, yielding large cost savings to Australian
industry. Conventional vehicles payloads and productivity have increased up to 20% since the
mid 1980' s.
All of this has led to an unheralded but major advance in transport efficiencies.
National introduction of B-doublcs ( a large artijculatcd vehicle) will allow further
productivity gains of up to 40% which can reduce national transport costs by up to
$ 200 million.
In co-operation with the States, we have established the National Road Transport
Commission to develop and maintain a national systcm of uniform regulations for all
vehicles and a fair system of heavy vehicle charges.
This initiative has been strongly supported by the Road Transport Industry.
And the Industry Commission has estimated that gains to GDP from reforms along
these lines to be in the order of $ 190 million each year.
T'here will be full competition In telecommunications in 1997. As part of this process
we have alrcady introduced a second network carrier with provision for three mobile
phone scrvicci.
The Government has also put in place price control arrangements on charges for
AOTC services to ensure that AOTC do not misuse their existing miarket power, and
that new technology and cfficiency gains are reflected in lower prices to consumers.
As a result, the average price for AOTC's main services has fallen by 4% per annumn in
real terms over the past three years.
For the next three years this price cap has been set at 5.5% below the rate of inflation.
The improvcd profitability and lower prices achieved by AQTC is illustrative of what
is now happening with many government business enterprises.
,_ gMznonwcalth GBE dividends have increased from around $ 100 million in 1987-88
to over $ 440 million in 1991-92 through improved productivity rather than higher real
pricm. But as I said earlier, the agenda moves on.
Ralph Willis will shortly be announcing mecasures that will see the Commonwealth
GBEs operate on a still more commercial basis with realistic relationships between
the GBE's and the Governuent, as shareholder, established.
TEL: 
TEL: 15. Ot9 1: 5N. Ub l-. 11' 1-, Y
And the State GBE's are also being subjected to,' and responding to, closer
examination. But the most interesting new development is the National Review of the Trade
Practices Act to be conducted by Fred Hilmer.
Following this review, we the States, Territories and Commonwealth will have the
opportunity to establish a national competition policy.
That is a policy which should support the development of Australia as one competitive
market for our industries, not a sct of divergent regulatory regimes.
Competition policy in the future will need to be consistent with removing unnecessary
barriers to comipctition and a reduction in complexity and administrative duplication.
The significance of these principles and their potential impact is great.
TFhe specific focus of the Review will bc on sectors and industries exempted from the
current Trade Practices Act.
Such as:
State business cntcrprises like electricity, gas ( in some states) and water
unincorporatcd bodies such as partnerships including professions
statutory marketing authorities such as Egg Boards, dairy marketing and fruit and
With the States we arc also committed to making major improvements in electricity
generation and distribution.
Because of our abundance of low cost coal and other energy resoures, electricity
should be a key part of any industrial strategy for this country.
With the States the Commonwealth will be working to make sure that the electricity
generating and distribution industries are efficient and that we make the best use of our
rcsourcc-S.
While the States have primie responsibility in this area we must work for a national
approach. Wo have already secured agreement to the development of an Interstate transmission
network and to genuine separation of distribution and gencration. 
TEL: 15. Oct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 12/ 13
12
Work is continuing on this subject through the National Grid Management Council
and will be taken further with the Premiers.
Customers and final users of electricity including members of the BCA also have
an interest in the reform process and I will be discussing with the Premniers how input
from these groups can be given greater prominence.
Let me restate. We value our partnership with you.
For example, in 1984, more than 20 BCA member companies participated in a pilot
program for thc Governmernt's Affirmative Action for women legislation.
More rcently, 5 BCA members have joined with the Governnien to develop practical
ways to address work and family issues in the labour market.
And following a request from your Equal Opportunity Council, I have asked the
Office of the Status of Women in my department to provide peak employer and union
bodies with access to Its Register of Women, which should assist you in locating
qualified women for appointment to boards and senior management positions.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a gentle irony I supposc that the Busincss Council of
Australia has never known a conservative govermecnt.
It's a bit like those of us who lived through the twenty three years of the Menzies
&amp; 0vcrnrncnt.
But this is no reason to believe that it is time for a change.
I think that, notwithstanding the ground we have lost in this recession, our
achievements Australia's achievements in the past decde have been remarkable.
Thc changes have been remarkable the structural changes and the attitudinal ones
We do things differently and we think differently.
And so long as we take the people with us on these things, so long as we involve
people In the change, so long as we stick to those principles of consultation and
consensus, the process will go on.
It could only bo reversed by throwing out the cooperative culture that has developed
over the past decade, and the institutional arrangements and supports which are at
once agents of the change and guarantees of continuity.
Ladies and gentlcmen, I believe we now have a great opportunity. It is one we have
earned all of us. 
TEL: 15.0ct. 92 16: 55 No. 006 P. 13/ 13
13
It has been hard won and we are still not there. But we would be very foolish to throw
it away. Very foolish to change the course which is changing Australia.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you this afternoon. 



TEL: 19. Oct. 92 11: 11 No. 003 P. 01/ 0!
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINis-rER, TIHE HION P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CANBERRA, 18 OCTOBER 1992
fi&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM; I just want to make a couple of comments about a few things Dr Hewson has said
and done over the weekend. HeI told us in the Alfred Dcakin lecture earlier in the
weck that policies of leaders should have a human touch and should be more
warmi-hearted. Well he was totally cold-hearted in his put down of the Australian
tourism industry on the weekend. That industry, which I think 14; now the largest
employer of Australians or certainly will become, particularly of young
Australians in the 1990s, and is really doing more that its share of any sector to
add to growth and to exports of services, that sector has asked that under a. OST it
be relieved. Not only did Dr Hewson say he wouldn't relieve them, but he has
actually upbraided them, he has hopped into them for daring suggest that they
should have relief. It is as if they have to apologise for even existing.
Now, Dr Ifewson's proposals provide no relief to these people. Payroll tax relief
will not go to any tourism operator who has a payroll of less than about half a
million dollars. So they'll wear the OST, it will actually put a hole right through
the industry, and there will be no relief for them, and to an industry which is really
making a huge contribution to Australia and is going to make a bigger contribution
in the future. Because you can't get a machine to make a bed, you can't gct a
machine to clean up someone's bathroom, you can't get a machine to serve a meal.
Thiis is a very-1abour-intensive industry, it's one of the service industries we are
going to rely upon in the ' 90s, and he is going to kick a hole right in it with the
goods and services tax. And Mr Jull, his tourism spokcsman, recognises and
understands that. But not only does he not recognise it but he has hopped into
them for daring suggest that they need relief.
J: The tourism industry will be helped by the industrial relations chaniges the
Opposition is putting forward when penalty rates are abolished.
PM: No. Under the Sheraton Hotels agreement already concluded, penalty rates have
all been rolled into a weekly rate. Thcrc's no thing, nothing In flexibility, that can't 
TEL: 19. Oct .92 11 : 11 No .003 P .02/ 05
2
now be done under Section 37 agreements. What Dr Hewson and Mr Howard
want to do is to actually cut the wages of Australians. They want flexibility
downwards, they dont want flexibility up, they don't want flexibility sideways.
Anything they want to do by way of hours, working time, working week, are all
now iii all these hundreds of varied agreements which are being made and have
been made over thc last 6 months, and quite historic ones in the case of Sheraton
Hotels. So, don't believe any of Dr Hewson's rhetoric about tourism and industrial
relations, the truth of thc matter is they just want to cut people's pay. And as I
demonstrated during the week, in an American survey of pay rates Australians arc
way down the scale. We're already hugely competitive, what does he want to hop
into Australians' pay for?
J. The Opposition Leader says that Fightback will quadruple the number of tourists
coming here by thc end of the decade. Given that, why do you think he'd be
insane enough to want to damage an industry as important as tourism to Australia?
Surely what he says is based on fact.
PM: No, I think the potential of the tourism industry is huge. It was the one great new
industry created by the freedoms of the 1980s introduced by this Government.
And its going to grow very strongly in the ' 90s, and particularly in the region, and
also not just inbound tourism but domestic tourism. But a heavy tax on every
service provided by it accommodation, meals, all sorts of scrvices will knock it
down and slow its progress back. So the fact is, the industry is entitled to say were
actually doing well and we're not going to get virtually any substantial relief from
payroll tax or anything else, leave us alone. And he has got into them for being
selfish.
1: Does that indicate, Prime Minister, inbound tourists face some sort of value added
tax in most competitive destinations anyway?
PM: But it's also a fact that we're running a current account deficit, arnd one of the
things we have going for us is a trade in international services tourism, financial
services, education services, et cetera, and tourism has grown like Topsy in the
1980s and has the potential to keep on going. People have got to understand this:
the GST is half as big as Australia's income tax. At $ 27 billion theGST raise
more than half the income tax. It's not just a mere bagatelle, it's a massive impost
on the nation and on any industry, and this industry, which is competitive, and
does has a lot to offer. One thing it has to offer is the potential to employ labour.
When productivity is reducing the number of people employed in factories,
tourism is giving us a real potential to employ people to take up labour and to set
this industry back as this would do, I think enormously, is a terrible pity. But not
only that, for them to ask for relief and then be shunned in the way that hc shunned
them on the weekend and then chastised them as being selfish) means it's just
nothing but inflexibility and cold-hearted responses from him. 
TEL: 19. Oct. 92 11: 11 No. 003 P. 03/ 05
3
J: He's just being consistent, isn't he? He's not going to give them anything he is not
givinp any othcr industry.
pM: The fact is, to be consistent, this industry is not consistently growing, it is
exponentially growing. If we want industries which are going to actually make a
bigger than average difference to the way in which we perform, you've got to give
them somc room.
J: If he zero rated inbound tourists you'd have say a tourist couple in a hotel room
paying a great deal less than an Australian couple in the next room. Isn't there
some inequity in that?
PM: I think there is, but the best thing he can do is relieve the whole industry. See, the
truth is a tax of this dimension will seize the Australian economy. A tax which is
equal to over half the income tax will seize the Australian economy. And his great
rationale for it is that it will relieve payroll tax. In fact it is four or five times a
larger tax on labour than payroll tax is. And in collecting equal -to-over-half the
income tax, it's too great a burden an inflationary and coernptive burden on the
Australian economy at this time. It's a luxury Australia can't afford.
J: Prime Minister, given there is an inequity on inbound tourists having a cheaper
deal in Australia, then isn't that a justification for what Dr Hewson is saying?
PM: Look, there's no justification for penalising, an industry which is now competitive
and growing like steam. None. It's a bad tax, the whole idea, and it's particularly
bad on high labour content industries like tourism.
J Jeff Kennett this morning said that he'd like to talk to you and you hadn't spoken to
you yet, and he said that the worst thing Labor had done federally was not to go far
enough with industrial relations reform, have you any response to that?
PM: We've changed the nature of Australia in the ' 80s. It's now an externally-oriented
competitive country. We're now clocking up bc-st practice awards with
international bench-mnarking with companies. Because of the huge changes in
industrial relations we've got an inflation rate of 11/ 2 per cent. So I don't think
there's any validity in Mr Kennett's claims at all. And as far as I'm concerned I'm
quite happy to see him. If he wants to discuss Victoria's troubles he'll be treated as
fairly and as decently and as openly as every othcr Premier is.
J Well does Mr Kennett have any other option than that he conceded hc was going
to do today, that is to raise taxes substantially?
PM: Well, that's a matter for him. But Victorians should take note that the Liberal
Party of Australia is a high tax party. Whether it's the State Liberal Party sticking
up taxes as Mr Kennett is, or Dr Hewson putting on a OST, they believe in higher
taxation. Whereas what Labor has done is produce one of the smallest public 
TEL: 19. Uct. 92 11: 11 No. 003 P. 04/ 05
4
sectors in the world and onc of the lowest rates of tax to GDP of any OECD
country. in fact we're the second lowest in the whole of thc 27 countries of the
OECD.
J: What do you make of Mr Hewson's comments on Mr Can in New South Wales?
PM: To be honest I was flabbergasted by that remark, that in some way he tried to Score
off the fact that Bob Carr had no children. And what we see here creeping into the
debate he said you've got to be suspicious of a guy that doesn't like kids. Well I
can tell you this, Bob Canr has climbed all over my children from the time they
were babies, and I think he's bringing in the worst of American politics. It's onc
thing to have people criticising us in the way we fight the issues out in Parliament
House, but at least they're issues. But this sort of stuff, and I should imagine that
Dr Hcwson, who has had his own family affairs paraded in the public debate,
would have been grateful for the fact that not one person in the Labor Party, not
one, on the Labor side of politics made a comment about them. Not one, He said
that Mr Carr wasn't as full-blooded as John Fahey because he doesn't have
children. Well I don't think Ben Chifley had any trouble being a full-blooded
Australian, and he didn't have any children. I think Dr l-ewson should withdraw
this renmark, apologise for it and never repeat it.
I, Mr Keating, speaking of issues, do you think that after the release of the
Coalition's IR policy that IR will be the biggest political battleground up till the
next election?
PM: It will be two. It will be the GST arnd industrial relations. But remember this,
we've now got industrial disputes at their lowest since we've been keeping records;
we've got an inflation rate of under 2 per cent, which you can only havc a with a
labour and wages system which is working; we've got all sorts of inventive,
ingenious and productive enterprise agreements, flexibly being written between
unions and employers across the country; we've got now one of the better labour
market systems in the world and it's growing and improving every year. But to
give it the cold, hard treatment of saying that awards arc finished, that people lose
holiday pay, maternity leave, rates of pay and other things, and that they can sign
up under a contract but only contest it in a court with their own legal
representation will see Australians' wages cut dramatically from what are already,
by world standards, competitive and low levelled. So industrial relations is
obviously going to be an area of great difference between the Government and the
Coalition, but I suppose most things are a great difference now between thc
Government and the Coalition.
J: khe fact is workers in Ncw Zealand havcn'I bceii chopped off at the knees, have
they?
PM: But they are being chopped off now. The rates of pay for New Zealanders now are
now declining sharply, people are losing conditions and living standards are 
T1E9L: . Oct. 92 11: 11 No. 003 P. 05/ 05
sitarting to decline. And we don't need to do it here. Weve got an inflation. rate of.
1 1/ 2 per cent, wc've got a profit share which is already reasonably good and will
go quite high the moment there's any, real volume going on the to the bottom line
of Australian corporate accounts. That is, when their overheads arc covered all
their extra volume is just simply cop, it goes straight to the bottomn line of profits.
So we're about to sce, as the economy really gets up a head of steam, the profit
share go to very high level, and why anyone would want to go ripping Australian
pay rates around and knocking ordinary people around in pay I've got no idea, and
at the samne time while they knock Medicare over and everything else.
J: Speaking of..
PM: OK, I think I'll just leave it at that. T'hanks. I know You're very enthusiastic,
Anmanda ( Buckley), it's that break it's done you the world of good!
ends TEL 


RIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIMIE MNISTE~ R,[' HE HON PJ KEATING NIP,NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS FORUM, Q&amp; A SESSION,RAMADA RENAISSANCE HOTEL, SYDNEY, 19 ocToIIER 1992E OE PROOF COPY0: Industrial relations and cntcrprise agrcmlents; regulation of business at national,state and local level.PM: I'll just take up your first point about allowing employees to negotiate. Threeweeks ago I was in Japan and went to the Toyota plant where they produce in onefactory 300,000 vehicles a year and every day, every niorniing the plant managerand the sub-plants managers meet with their employees to discuss thc days work,the week's work, to see how the business operates. The emphasis is on commongoals and harmony and being part of the one thing which I think is part of thesuccess of the productivity of those particular plants and the innovation in the wayin which thcy produce things, because a lot of the innovations conie from theernployccs. Nowhere in that Structure do you see any sense of fracture, where oneemployee on the line is negotiating with the company different to the one nextdoor to him or her. They negotiate as a group and therefore they take groupresponsibility and pressure within the group produces an emphasis on cooperationand working together and getting a better result. I think that is what I'dsay about the so called notion, it sounds well and good to say Ict all employeesnegotiate, hut we and the organised workforce know that when one employee isforced to negotiate by his or her self with a company, be it small or large, theirncgotiating position is vcry weak. And whereas if they are allowed to negotiate asa group, their negotiation position is better. The sign of the maturity of ourworkforce is that when the wage share in the economy had to decline in the 1980Sin favour of profits for higher investment and employment, it did doclinc. Andthat the whole emphasis on training, enterprise bargaining and productivity, a largepart of the impetus for that has comec from the trade unions themselves.No system is perfect and there will always be problems within any set ofarrangements, particularly one built on the multiplicity of craft structures whichwelye had in Australia, which we inherited from Britain so long ago. But it seemsto mc that all the flexibility which companies today wish to enjoy in industrial
organisation, be it in terms of rates of pay, or penalty rates or hours worked duringa day or week are now, by virtuc of all the agreements we've constructed in the lastsix to twelve months, capable of being resolved in favour of higher productivityand lower costs, and 1 don't see that co-operation being sustainable in a processwhere awards expire and where you see a fracturing amongst employees. All theflexibility which is required now in industry can come undcr S. 137 agreementsand the like, the only flexibility that there isn't in there is flexibility downwards.There's flexibility up, flexibility laterally, flexibility diagonally, but there's noflexibility down) the system is not geared to cut remuneration and, in the end, allof this talk about dealing with employees, letting people speak for themselves, isreally about cutting their pay. That's what it will be seen to be and the bonhomiewill cease the moment the activity starts, and the moment that happens thc greatleap forward to be. made in productive co-operation and emphasis on productivityand training and lower costs and sharing the benefits of bctter product, higherproduct will evaporate. That's why the Liberal Party is quite wrong about this; MrHoward is going to announce a policy along these lines tomorrow they are quitewrong about this, and it's we who have had to take Australia from the industrialmuseum of the late 1970s and early 1990s with 300 unions, a craft structure oforganisation, and evolve it in a revolutionary way to a modern system which ismore enterprise specific, more industry specific. and where you are gettingwithout any loss of time with industrial disputation, without major mayhem alongthe way a very large and important cultural change. And I say it's happenedbecause a Labor Government and the tr-dc union,; have qat down with businessand decided to make the country better and stronger by adopting a co-operativeeffort. Going back to that ' them and us', managers versus employees, pushingpeoplc onto common law contracts and asking some poor l ittle character on$ 16,000 a year to go and represent himself with a OC in the Supreme Court, is notgoing to help anybody. The Liberal Party have already ignited a wage fire oncc ortwice in 1979-80 with wages growth of 16 per cent. We've got now averageweekly earning growth of three. John Howard is desperate to return to the scene ofthe crime and get out and do it twice. We say ' pigs' to that and it's a rotten policy.On the question of regulation, could I just say this: I share your view and the viewof everyone around here that regulation, that the Federal system of six States andthe Commonwealth and Territories has been a problem for the national co-. ordination of business regulation -and by moving to a system of uniform standards,and now having a structure under the Council Of Australian Governments; wherewe have a meeting with the states which is not a financial meeting but a meetingabout issues and the micro-economy such as this, that we can resolve some ofthese issues and already some have been resolved and we'llI he able to do more. Sorather than giving you a commitment, that yes we'll have it on the next meetingagenda, I'm certainly quite happy to give you a commitment that we will keep thismatter very much under review, it's very much under notice, and wherever we canadvance the notion of a national basis of regulation, wherever we can remove themultiplicity of a State base of regulation, we'll do it and do it with might and main,because it is through no fault of anybody, just a nation of seven different
governments over the years, working on all these various issues has produced adesperate result which is no good to any of us. We are very aware of it willcontinue to keep our eye firmly fixed on improving the situation.Q: GST and Wholesale Sales Tax.PM: Well could I say that I think the wholesale sales tax is being verysubstantially maligned. It is not a perfect tax, but again it has a lot ofbenefits, one is it adds 20,000 taxingpoints not 700,000 taxing points. Oneis that you can have dissipate rates of tax, so you can tax things lightly ifyou wish or heavily if you wish. You have a discretion, luxuries are taxedheavily, other items are taxed more lightly. It raises $ 9 billion and thereforehas nothing like the sort of macro economic influences that a tax that raises$ 27 billion has. But let me just go and tell you, you mightn't get thisnumbers in the public debate, but let me tell you because they are correct,but this is how the GST breaks down. The GST raises $ 27 billion, it costs$ 9 billion to abolish the wholesale sales tax, that leaves $ 18 billion. It costs$ 7 billion to remove pay-roll tax, that leaves $ 11 billion. It costs $ 6 millionto diminish the tax on excise, that leaves $ 5 billion, and the package forcompensation of social security beneficiaries, it wouldn't need to becompensated without the GST, it costs $ 4 billion. So there is $ 1 billion leftfor the tax payers, $ 1 billion, and the tax cuts are going to cost John Hewson$ 13 billion, of which he has $ 1 billion from the GST to pay for it. Now hehas got to pay that $ 13 billion, which of course is nothing likecompensation, even if it were paid, from a package which the Department ofFinance says is $ 6 billion short of its savings, but even if it were intact itrequires a $ 10 to $ 12 billion cut in Government spending, and where is thatgoing to be cut obviously in education, social security and the like? So, thesocial upheaval which would follow that kind of change is going to be quiteprofound. So, that's why nobody is going to be paying $ 27 billion andgetting back less then full compensation and not making wage claims. So ifyou believe that you don't think the inflationary effects are there, I can onlysay to you that the Liberal parties modeller, Dr Murphy, in the wages upcase, that is, in the flow on to wages thinks inflation would be 10 per centand the Treasury thinks it would be 12. Well even if you put a discountthrough those numbers, even if you called it eight, I mean the vandalism oftaking Australian inflation from 2 per cent to 8 per cent is profound, towhat, get a tax switch from income to expenditure? And of course in thatservices will be taxed and a lot of the expansion of small business in aservice sector of the economy, which is now not taxed. So it will be taxedand the one great employing possibility we have, where we have got veryhigh levels of labour, is in tourism because you can't get a machine to makeit better, or a machine to clean up the bathroom, or a machine to serve ameal, and that industry which has been growing inordinately strongly overthe ' 80s and will continue in the ' 90s, will carry a 15 per cent flat tax uponits whole service base. So, I think the GST is an entirely dud idea, as I saidit is a tenth order issue in an economy where we are seeing a fast culturalchange to an export basis where we are now exporting nearly 23 per cent ofeverything we produce, nearly a quarter of all we produce, where we haveseen a huge shift in exports, where we have seen now a large shift inproductivity and now much more innovative things happening in otherenterprise agreements, a whole cooperative basis of organisation occurring,it is just not worth it to put that a risk i. my view for a tax on expenditure
verses a tax on income when the income tax now working very tightly. Wehave got now one of the most tight, direct tax systems in the world by virtueof the changes in the 1980' s' and I don't think it is worth the risk. On thequcstion of-sales tax and remittances, again, this is an issue in tax designand costs, and I suppose every Government would like to say, wve will seenobody out of pocket before remittances, but I think this is again just simplywhether or not we can afford it, and whenever it has been proposed to us tochange the timings or remittances we have not been ablc to do that. 1 thinkthis matter came tip at our last round, hut for the same reason we wercn'table to do anything for you.Q: Impediments to small business; payments of Provisional TaxPM; Well, Paul, on the last element of the question first, I wouldn't wat tocommit the Government to an inquiry on the matter but I am quite happy tolook at the issue. We have asked the industry Commission, under a numberof references, to look at impediments to certain sectors of activity in theeconomy, and if you think that something caii be &amp; ained by an examinationof impediments to small business employ mcnt activity then we can certainlyconsider looking at that, how best it ought to he looked and who by isanother issue, but we have the Industry Commission for such kinds ofreferences and it might he that it is something wc can think about. AnywayI am certainly prepared to talk to you about it, and to David of course.On the other question, look, this is a vexed question, I don't know whether Ican be profouind about it, Paul, that is in relation to provisional tax payersand comnpanies, there is always this question about incorporation and thecosts and benefits, there were always substantial costs for beingincorprated until we introduced dividend imputation, because if you were asingle tax payer you were taxed once, if you were a single enterprise youwere taxed once, if you were a partnership you were taxed once, if you werea trust you were taxed once, but if you were a company you taxed twice, andI never saw the sense of that and we took that away in 1986, so that nowwhenever cornp any tax is paid there is virtually a tax credit there againstpersonal tax. so, trying to get an equation between the tax treatment ofthose incorporated and those not has always been difficult to do, you havegot two yard sticks in this, the individuals pay PAYE as you earn taxation,whethcr they earn their income, those who are provisionally taxed enjoy atleast some concessions against the~ PAYE tax-. payer, whereas the companypays later and enjoys, in your terms,' a $ r eater concession against those whoare uncorporated Again, thcse are timing in revenue questions involved,we can always make this position more concessionary, I don't think I can beany more enlightening for you then I was with the previous question, I justdon't know to what extent we are able to change the tax timing ofprovisional tax payments so as to produce a ef-oser relativity to those whoae incoprated on the tax payments treatment, those who are incorporated,David menioned to me about these closed corp oration issue, which mayprovide some opportunity, that is a structure which provides someopportunity for a better equation, between those categories of individualsand companies, I am not sure about that because I don't know enough aboutit. But I am happy to look at that for David.ENDS


ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, T'HE HON P. 3. KEATING, MP TOTHE SIXTH NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS FORUM SYDNEY, 19OCTOBER 1992Mr Edwards, my coleague, the Flon David Beddall, ladies arnd gentlemen.Thank you for inviting me to talk to you today.I want to talk to you about what the Government is now doing, and what it intends todo to make sure that small business continues to play its part in the expansion of theAustralian economy which is now underway.But before I do that I want to spend a little time describing to you the quiteextraordinary sea change which the Australian economy has undergone In recentyears. We face many challenges over the coming decade, and the most important evidence ofour capacity for change is the change we have already made.We simply are a much morc competitive, productive, internationally-oriented, exportbased ccononiy.No one would deny that that is what we want to be what we must bc.Australians should be aware of these achievements because they arc theirs. Theyshould know, for Instance, that:we now export almost twice as much as we did a decade ago.that, exports now account for more than 23 per cent of total output.that we now sell more than manufactured products overseas than metalores and minerals, and, for the first time in our history they match ourexpotts of rural products.that in 199U-91 our manufactured exports showed the fastest growth inthe OECD, and fastest among them were Elaborately TransformedManufactures which have grown at a rate of about 45 per cent in recentyears. that our service exports have tripled in the last decade.that tourism is now our single largest export industry, accounting forover 10 Tper cer, of thc iotal. T1EL9: . Oct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 01/ 09
TEL: 19. Oct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 02/ 02that we arc exporting ETMs and services as well as mincral and ruralproducts to thc fastest growing economies in the world thc Asianeconomics. that we are exporting them through ports which have doubled theirproductivity in the past couple of years.that they are being generated in officesq and factories and mines whicharc increasingly working under enterprise agreements whose number isgrowing so fast we expect half the workforce to be under them bymidway through next year.There has been a great change in our economy and a great change in our attitudes andI think Australians deserve to be reminded of it, and encouraged to take heart andpride from what they have achieved.And it is for thesc reasons that I have to say that I willt passionately resist theOpposition's intentions to undo those achievements.And you shouldn't be surprised if I'm passionate about it because you know it wasthe L. abor Government which took the leap, against much more internal resistancethan you would expect the conservatives to have faced, and made the changes, andopened the economy up.And 1 believe very strongly that we wouldn't have made them, we wouldn't have thechance we now have, if we hadn't taken the people with us.if we hadn't built a consensus, encouraged negotiation and consultation andmaintained our commitment to social development.Unashamedly, I take the view that there is a role for government. We cannotresponsibly back away from maintaining the necessities of peoples lives, we cannotretreat from our economic role.I take the view that governments can make subtlc and sensible interventions in theeconomy and I think the facts of the last decade support me.I have no doubt about that and no doubt about the one great certainty in theeconomic life of this country that a great deal will depend on the continuing cnergyand initiative and skills and ideas of small business.It will continue to depend on the success of people like yourselves and those yourepresent. We recognise that small and medium sized firms employ much of the Australianlabour force over the past two decades small business has generated more thanper cent of the new jobs.We recognise that small businesses generate a lot of the new product, and that theydrive a lot of those very welcome developments I outlined earlier.We recognise that the potential of their enterprise s unlimited. When they thriveAustralia does.
TEL: 19.0ct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 03/ OS3We recognise that they form the basis of much of the future growth and prosperity ofthe Australian economy.We recognise that it is among them that a lot of the risk is taken. A lot of thenecessary risk.They know fear. They know frustration. They know hard work.But they also know hope, and excitement and fulfilment.Recognising all these things, the Government's role is to minimise the frustration, andmaximise the fulfilment.Small business has been an integral part of the consultative process of thisGovernment starting with the Economic Summit in 1983 and put on a more permanentfooting with the establishment of this very successful Small Business Forum.We have not always agreed with each other.And we have not always been able to do all we would have liked.But the results of the continuing consultation between Government and therepresentatives of small business can be seen in the measures introduced.Our assistance to business has ranged from the deregulation of financial markets tothe deregulation of aviation; reducing company tax to reducing wholesale sales tax onmotor vehicles; reducing the number of strikes to a thirty year low to reducinginflation to a thirty year low.We made tax reforms in One Nation specifically for business.the nine week deferral of company tax payments for instance.a new accelerated depreciation schedule which allows plant andequipment with an effective life of, say, ten years, to be written offover five years, rather than eight. A measure which in one year aloneconstitutes a peak saving to business of $ 1.25 billion.an increased depreciation rate for industrial and short term travelleraccommodation from 2.5% to 4%.an increase from 20 to 50 per cent of the capital gains tax exemptionood will, and a doubling of the eligibility ceiling from $ 1 million to2 million of net business interests.We have legislated to allow for the development of Pooled Development Funds tohelp firms obtain equity capital, and I am pleased to announce that the EquityInvestors Ltd has been registered as the first of many PDFs that will play a vital rolein assisting the expansion of small and medium sized Australian businesses.Ladies and gentlemen, with public discussion in economic reform directed largely atthe need to create internationally competitive industries, there is a tendency to feel thatlocally made goods and services are uncompetitive.This is a long way from the truth an increasingly long way.
TEL: 19.0ct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 04/ 094Our agriculture and mining industries are among the most competitive in the world,while the record of our manufacturing and service sectors in responding to thecompetitive challenge has been simply outstanding.Manufactured exports have grown at a rate of more than 14 per cent each year since1985/ 86 and now total nearly $ 13 billion annually.Exports of services such as tourism have been similarly impressive with a real 8.5 perCent average annual growth since 1985.And one of the reasons for the extraordinary growth has been the greatly improvedquality of the products Australians now make.And small and medium fixed businesses are a major clement of this success.Of course, the Government recognises the extra hurdles small businesses face if theyare to succeed in international markets.This is why we established the Export Access pogram that will assist 700 small andmedium enterprises over the next three years.These days we build cars and sell them into the most demanding car market in theworld, Japan the same country where Peters WA sells $ 50 million worth of icecream each year.Australian companies build the ferries that cross the English Channel. And some ofthe best luxury motor yachts in the world.I could list dozens of other examples, but chances are you will know about them,because it is companies like your own or your members' which are doing a lot of thesethings.The simple fact is that these days, across a whole range of products, you can't buybetter than Australian.All of us have an interest in telling Australians about it telling Australians thatAustralian made products are very often as good, if not better, than anything madeanywhere else in the world, and that when they buy them they are doing boththemselves and their country a favour.In a sense it is the return on their initiative, imagination and hard work. Buying goodAustralian products pays the dividend on the all the changes we have made.It is for this reason in this Australian Made month that I am pleased today toannounce that the iovcrnment will work with the Advance Australia Foundation tofurther promote the Australian Made symbol.We will put in $ 2 million in each of the next two years to ensure continuity and a highprofile for the campaign.
And a central element of the campaign will be the quality and reliability of productsmade in Australia.
It's desirablc for example for the Governmnt to regulate unconscionable conduct&nbsp;under the trade practices legislation, and we will introduce a Bill into Parliament forpassage this session to do just that.&nbsp;
It's certainly desirable to have clear and conmprehensive rules to encourage&nbsp;competition and fair pricing.
This is one reason the State and the Federal Governments agrccd to the need for anational competition p~ olicy which, as I recently announced, is the subject of anenquiry to be cha" ird y Professor Fred Hilir of the Australian Graduate School ofManagement. it will look at extending the reach of competition policy into areas not now covered,such as government business enterprises and the professions.There has to be cquality of competitive standing betwecn government enterprise andprivate enterprise.Again, that is an area where the application of law to Ousincss is a good and necessarything and, by and large, business both big and small supports it.But I know there are regulatory inconsistencies between thc States or between theStates and the Commonwealth areas whcrc regulations may no longer fulfil theiroriginal goal, and areas whcre regulations may have been made without sufficientsupervision by the Parliament or the Govcrrcment.Many of these problems have been addressed by the adoption of principles of mutualrecognition by the States and the Commonwealth.From March next ycar standards recognised in one Statc will be recogniscd in allStates. I am firmly committed to cutting inessential regulatory burdens on small businessesbut let me tell you that the administrativc burden of a GST will be vastly greatcr thanany reporting requirements presently faced by small business.I havc spokent to a lot of small business people about the idea of a Goods and ServicesTax in recent months, and I must say I am puzzled by the gap between what they sayand what somec small business organisations say on their behalf.The people who spcak to mc recognise that small business would be a big loser fromthe GST.It is small business which will have to collect the tax. Undcr our amended wholesalesales tax, only 20,000 businesses will be required to be in the system. Most smallbusiness will be able to opt out and have no reporting requirement whatsoever.But under the Opposition proposals all small businesses will havc to pay a 15 per centtax on their purchases, and add a 15 per ent tax to their sales. They will get the firstper cent back eventually of course, hut only when they have done the paperwork.They will remit the 15 per cent on sales to the Govermecnt, and again they will haveto do the paperwork.
TELAlready, Australian products compete favourably on price; a clearer apprcciation byconsumers, other producers and distributors of the quality of our products can only bebeneficial for all Australia.In deciding to provide this additional support to thc Australian Made -symbol, I havebeen very awvare of the problems that have bccn cncounicrcd recently by somedoubtful labelling practices.We have all heard stories of thc overseas product with a Made in Australia labelbecause it was packagcd here.Fortunately this is not a major problem with thc Australian Made symbol itself.But it is clcarly a problem with the rangc of descriptions that appear like " Made inAustralia", " Product of Australia", " Manufactured in Australia' and so on.And it is not only the consumecr who is confused.Business does not have clear guidelinei and definitions in the various Federal or Statelegislation to which it must adherc.Accordingly, the Ministcr for Consumer Affairs, Jeanniette. McHugh, has been giventhe task of developirng practical definitions of such termis to ensure that bothconsumers and those charged with enforcement such as the Trade PracticesCommission and Customs have a solid and universally-applicable basis forassessing whether something is, in fact, Australian made or not.Thcrc will bc a number of complex matters involved in the review and the vicws of allaffected parties including the groups represented here today will be welcomed.I will also be writing to the State and Territory governments asking them to contributeto this process and adopt its outcome.I expect that this task can be undertaken without delay, and that we can putappropriate changes into legislation in the first half of next year.I said earlier that 1 know something about the hopes and fears of small businesspeople. I know it primarily because my father ran a medium sized business. I grew upknowing it.For example, I know of the difficulty my father had in persuading the banks to lendhim money on cash flow or receivables. They only wanted to lend against theproperty and I have to say that therc is still too much of that kind of thinking amongthe banks today.It was hard to get a loan from a bank in those days, and just as hard to finance thebusiness from profits, because undlistributed profits in private companies were taxedin a very discriminatory way.That's one of the things I'm pleased to say I fixed as Treasurer.Government regulation is a particularly difficult prohlcn because there are, Of course,many areas where regulation is desirable. T1E9L: . EOct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 05/ 09
TEL: 19. Oct. 92 16: 40 No. 014 P. 07/ 097As a New Zealand accountant reported for that country, small businesses people willlose their Sundays to new paperwork.The Canadian expericnce is particularly telling for small business.Canada intfoduced its GST in January 1991. In November 1991, the Canadian peaksmall business organ on, the CFIB, released the results of a survey it conducted ofits members in a report titlcd " The GST: A National Tax Tragedy."Over 25,000 responded to the survey, the biggest response to a CFJB survey ever.And their message was very clear.Over 70 per cent of respondents reported a negative impact from the GST on theirbusinesses while only 8 per cent reported a positive impact.The message was clear small business is much more disadvantaged by a GST thanis largc business.Compliance costs were 5.5 per cent of sales for small business but less than 0.2 percent f) r largc firms.We are told business will b; better off because payroll tax will bc eliminated butmost small businesses don't pay payroll tax. Only a small proportion of the 800,000small businesses in this country, pay payroll tax.About 700,000 businesses will not benefit at all from the removal of payroll tax.What they will receive is a new and complex consumption tax which will hit each andevery link in the business chain.In a way, the position of small businesses illustrates what I think is one of the biggestproblems with a OST.It is a very considerable clerical burden but for nothing.It won't sell one additional article of commerce.It won't help most of the small businesses selling services, which are not taxed now atall. It won't help the construction industry, which will not be able to offset the tax it willpay on all inputs.It won't help the tourist industry, which would be obliged to hit its clients on day onewith a 15 per cent price rise.Here we have an industry which is making a tremendous contribution to our exportsuccess, which has grown so rapidly in the eighties that it is now one of the majoremployers and export carers in this country, and the Opposition proposes acent tax on cvcrything it does.It wants to slap on the tax despite pleas from the Access Economics firm whichhelped it write the GST package.
TELIt wants to slap it on despite the resistance of the Opposition shadow minister fortourism.Anid it wants to slap it on despite thc nearly unanimous view of the industry iself thatimportant products of the tourism industry should be exempted.It's a similar story with industrial relations, We have right now in Australia a set-upin which employers can ncgotiate just about anything with their eniployccs penaltyrates, hours of work, thc working week, work practices and so forth.They can negotiate whatever they wish and come to any agreement they wish, so longas the employees arc not lcft worse off by the new arrangement.That seems to mc a reasonable reservation in our socicly.These deals can be done in a framework of cooperation which has sccn Australia'scompetitiveness improve by miore than 10 pcr cent over the last decade, and ourinflation fall to one of the lowest in thc OECD and in our region.Yet again the Opposition want to throw all that away. It wants to tear up all thcpresent agreemcnts and awards and return to thc kind of pitched battles bctwcenemployers and unions which wc had in the sixties and seventies.Ladies and gentlemecn I began by saying that Australians could take pride in what theyhave achieved in the past decade, and that they have many reasons for confideneabout dccadc ahead.What they have achievced may be attibuted very largely to the spirit of consultationand consensus which dcveloped in the eighties, and which now characteriscs so muchof our industrial relations Culture and the relationship between government, businessand unions.I said there had been a sea change in the Australian economy: it has been the changein our attitudes and in the way we do things which has produced it.And this will bc the province from which more change comies.Morc than anything elsc, it has been the change in the culture from conflict tocooperation which has brought us up to the rest of thc world and given us a chance.And it is the threat to those gains which I think we should perhaps fear most.I have addressed you today as people engaged in business.In conclusion I would addrcss you as Australians meaning people with a care for thcsociety and economy at large.It seems to mie, and I quite sure it will become clear to the majority of Australians, thatour Opponents' policies will be destructivc of both.Destructive of the economy for the reasons which I have broadly outlined.Destructive of the social fabric principally because they seek to replace the principlesof cooperation and consultation with a regression to conflict and divisiorn.We small business and the Government have come a long way in the past decade.Further, I suspect, than of either of us can readily recall.
And, faccd with the alternative which the Opposition is proposing with absolute&nbsp;inflexibility, I do believe we need to be rernindcd.&nbsp;We've come too far to throw it all away.



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, CANBERRA
OCTOBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well I thought I would give you some comments about the Liberals
industrial relations policy. Well this policy completes thc Liberal double.
Firstly, they want to tax everything you consume with a 15 per ccnt goods
and serviccs tax and now they want to cut your pay. So, it is prices up and
-wages down, as though alrcady wages in Australia are too high when our
labour costs are 10 per cent what they were a dccade ago. It is essentially a
return to the dark ages of the common law of master and servant, the
Liberals have now rctreated to the past to dig up the common law of master
and servant last used in thc 19th century to apply to Australians. They are
going to force nearly 8 million people, 8 million working Australians on to
individual contracts which each person has to sign with their employer,
where they have no bargaining rights, and in many cases no bargaining
power, and no protection against dismissal. The policy reduces minimum
standards, it freezes pay and conditions by abolishing awards, but even
when the award is abolished it doesn't prevent an employer from sackins
someone on a supposedly frozen award. It basically has an over-riding aim
and that is basically about cancelling federal and State awards and
replacing them with individual contracts, enforceable only at the common
law.
ZTO'ON 91: ST Z610OZ .131 
It is the most crude industrial policy ever proposed by a major Australian
political party. It is not about flexibility, because everything we need now
in flexibility is available nder enterprise agreements. It is not about
productivity, productivity in this workforce of ours increased by a huge 2.6
per cent in the year to June, and we see evidence of even stronger rises
coming through with all the innovative industrial agreements, enterprise
agreements being signed. It is not about wages verses competitiveness,
because Australia is more then 10 per cent more competitive then when
Labor came to office nearly a decade ago and we have one of the lowest
inflation rates in the world. This is all about forcing Australian employees
off awards and rcgistered agreements, cancelling their existing entitlements
and telling them they can either take the bosses contract or take the sack.
And for every infringement of the contract each employee will be fined up
to $ 5000. This is an unbelievable document and it could only be produced
by a party which under Dr Hewson's leadership has become an extremist
organisation. So, first it was the Reserve Bank and the Treasury that
annoyed the Opposition, then it was the car companies, then it was the
churches, then the tourist industry, the construction industry, people who
rent, and now it is the 7.6 million Australian employees they want to put the
boot in to. I mean, you really wonder where it will end, where this craven
push from the right will ever end. I think it is about the worst policy I have
seen in my public life. Questions if you have them.
J: Well the policy, Prime Minister, does have safe guards for workers doesn't
that make it a little hardcr to attack?
PM: What safe guards? It has minimum rates, it doesn't have safe guards at all, it
has minimum rates, some would lose their current pay rate. If you take, for
instance let me give you an example of a nurse, nearly half of his or her pay
is in shift and penalty rates and that all goes to the minimum rate in the
award, and if they don't take it they can take the sack.
J: What advice have you receivcd, Prime Minister, about the legality of the
proposal to close down State awards, for instance, and push them into
federal awards?
PM: The document is only an hour or two old so I haven't taken any advice, but
the Liberals are saying they will use the full constitutional power of the
Commonwealth, I assume the power, the corporations power, in the first
instance, and other powers to cancel, so that the legislation is valid, to
cancel awards and certified agreements. 
J: workers and employers can't agree on whether to work in or outside the
system, the existing award conditions will remain, that makes no one
worse off.
PM: Yes, but for how long? What is an award worth after three years? I mean
once you disturb it it is not an award, you understand, what remains is not
an award, they made that very clear, they've made that quite clear, what
remains is the rate of pay'and the conditions, but no award status, and you
can be sacked while you are in that position. Do you understand? Let me
find the reference, I mean, this is really crude stuff. It says: " Although the
award pay and conditions, page 13, will continue that relationship between
the employer and cmployee will not be legally governed by an award".
" Will not be legally governed by an award". Therefore any future variation
of that relationship will need to be negotiated between the employer and the
employee.
1: How much impact will it havc on ALP party funds, PM, with the obvious attempts
to shut off unions?
PM: I should say substantial because every employee in this country; only a third of
employees are covered by unions, the rest are not. But they'll all he forced to sign
up to common law contracts and will drag out the master and servant law from the
19th century. MiTha6irCi ewson's new Australia.
J: The United Statcs have survived quite well without an award sector Mr Keating
a bit of an hyperbole there, this cleaning up structure that is 19th century.
PM: Do you think so Tonm ( Burton)? You are such a radical you are, I know and T
realise that, I know you are a social scientist and the rest. The fact of the matter is
that in this country we now have all the flexibility in the world under enterprise
agreements, all the flexibility in the world; flexibility as to hours, as to penalty
rates, as to the nature of working weeks, flexibility in relation to women and their
requirements, The only flexibility there isn't available now is flexibility down,
which is what the Liberal Party wants. So those righits which are protected now
under the basis of a certified agreement which becomes an award give people a
guarantee that they won't be pushed on the minimum rates and lose rates of pay
and conditions that they formcrly had. What is the problem? Is Australian pay too
high? Is the wage share in GDP too high? Does anyone argue that? We've got a
wage share in GDP at 1960s levels.
J: Do you think this debate is about minimum award rates?
PM: This is about taking away the bargaining power of Australians in their work
relationship with their emiployee. So an individual pcrson signs up with say BHP,
or an individual person signs up with ICI or Coles or whoever it might be or a
OT/ M'd ZTO'ON 9T: ST Z610O 13 
smaller business or a smaller individual employer. Thiere is no group basis
bemause they make clear that unions will not be able to sign, they make that
abundantly clear.
J1: You've already said that only 1/ 3 of Australians are now covered by unions. Two
thirds of Australians arc coping quite well without union backing.
PM: It Is not the union backing, it is the process within which the whole industrial
framcwork, rates of pay and conditions, and conditions of work have been set.
Most Australians have enjoyed the benefits of a hundred years of industrial
negotiation, industrial and wage practice, whether they belong to a union or not.
They make it clear here
' Workplace agreements ( pg 10) can be concluded only between indivdual
employers and one, some or all of their employees, unions or employer
organisations or any other agent of the signatories cannot be parties to a
workplace agreement
So this can only be signed by the individual. You've got the negotiating power of
one person against the company, this will all happen to you, you'll have to sign
under them, under the Liberals an individual contract with News Limited or John
Fairfax.
J: Everyone has got an individual employment contract, except the union negotiates
on your behalf.
PM: That's right.
J: That won't change, the union will still he there to negotiate.
PM: Journalists are not quite in the same position as the rest of the work force because
of the fact you can demand executive salaries and be treated accordingly in your
negotiation.
J On the subject of flexibility, surely the Gazal case has just showed there's not that
much flexibility when it comes down to it and if Gazal closes down and those
people don't have jobs what's the satisfaction of having flexibility to them?
PM: I don't know the details of the case, I don't know the issues involved in the case,
but there are apparently a lot of issues involved there about what is owcd to
employees, about where the assets of the companies are.
3: Arc you saying that the existing system has basically reached maximum flexibility
apart from downward flexibility?
JIt7d TO* ON 9T: ST Z64100O 31 
Pm: rm saying we've moved off a craft structure which the liberals never had the wit
to change. Where we had a craft basis, so if you're a metal worker and a rate was
struck with you, that rate went right across the whole of Australian industry for
anyone dealing with mctals. We've moved off the craft structure to a much more
enterprise and industry structure, and within those structures we're now getting all
the flexibility on a company or enterprise basis, and nobody is objecting to that,
they are all supporting that. But there are protections in there and if those
protections go, your only recourse is at the common law.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: It's got unlimited flexibility, it's really up to the imagination of the managers and
employees.
J: The Structure doesn't need to change any more to encourage or promote forward
flexibility?
PM: The proliferation of these agreements and more productivity based arrangements
to the workplace are going to be important for the whole economy because that is
the way of getting productivity you're not going to get it out of central bench
decisions. But having in the 1980s got aggregate wage flexibility, that is getting
the profit share up and the wage share down as we did, now to get within sector
flexibility and intra-sector flexibility is now happening right across the country. I
published in thc House the other day one hundred agreements, the nature of those
agreements, and this has all been done with total harmony.
J: Prime Minister, if everything is fine and we have all the flexibility we need
then why are there a million people out of work and why are we going into
the red at the rate of a billion dollars a month on the current account?.
PM: Because ' d emand ' is down and because our economy has not been able to
produce enough goods and services. The answer to the first question is
because demand is down, and two, because the economy has not been able
to produce enough goods and services. It's not because the rates of pay are
too high.
J: Mr Keating, you have got 11 per cent unemployment under your industrial
relations policy, don't you think voters are going to find a change and this
change palatable?
PM: There's also 7.6 million people employed under our industrial relations
policy, with 6 million in 1982. In New Zealand there arc fewer people
employed today than therc was in 1982. In Australia there arc 26 per cent
more people employed than in 1982. So wagcs are not the problem. The 
wage share in the economy I produced a US Labour and Commerce
Department survey last week where Australia is way down the bottom in
terms of wage levels amongst OECD countries. I mean, what do they want
to do, these people push us into coolie rates? Is that what you're
advocating?
1: But in the US, Mr Keating, there's about 12 per cent more jobs than there
are in Australia with the sort of IR system the Opposition is talking about.
PM: Where do you
J: They have participation rates in the order of 72 per cent, the US.
PM: They have much lower participation rates than Australia, much lower.
J: According to research by Professor Gregory they haveRarticipation rates of
more than 7 per cent.
PM: They've got a participation rate, as I understand it, of about 55 and we've
got, I think, 62. So if we had their participation rate, we'd have
unemployment down to around 6 or 7 per cent. That's the US position.
There's no way US participation is as high as this country.
J: According to Professor Gregory's paper, which was published 2 months ago,
they had rates of participation of something like 72 per cent and it would
mean another million jobs in Australia under an IR policy like theirs,
PM: Yes, but even if its true, so what? The thing is, it's not true. Anyone, I
think, who has been through the US economy and particularly with the huge
participation in this economy by women in the ' 80s, these very high
participation rates Look at our participation rates, just look at us
compared to what we were a decade ago. If we had the same participation
rates today that John Howard had we'd have unemployment, I think, with a
6 or ' 7 in front of It.
J. But doesn't the US experience suggest that with a more flexible labour
market you'd get more jobs?
PM: I don't necessarily think that's right. If you're saying, is flexibility desirable,
yes. But this is not about flexibility, all the flexibility in the world is there
now, that's the point. All the flcxibility in the world is there now. This is
about pushing people into weak bargaining positions, pushing nearly 8 
million Australians into a weak bargaining position so that they either get
the sack or take the boss' contract, and if they want to argue about it they go
and hire a barrister and go to the court, and take it a couple of years to have
it heard.
3: They have got the Office of Employees Advocate, though.
PM: Oh yes, I know.
J: Doesn't that give them an avenuie for some recourse?
PM: That is a Liberal Government appointed trade union. A Liberal Government
appointed trade union.
J: So you don't think that it would be very effective for the employee?
PM: Well hear what they had to say about it. This is thcm at their best. They
said: " The Coalition will create the Office of the Employee Advocate. The
Employee's Advocate will protect the rights of employees
I thought that was a job unions did
" who have legitimate grievances.
Again I though it was thc things unions did. So are we going to have) are
we, a Liberal Party appointed trade union? That is, our democracy has got
to such a point that people will not be choosing to have themselves
organisationally represented, their representation will be decided for them.
The Liberal Party used to attack countrics which had those structures.
3: The ACTU yesterday released some research which appeared to show that
people werc largely in favour of thesc workplace agreements as long as they
had a safety net, and that looks very much like what Mr Howard has put out
today.
PM: No, it's not like what Mr Howard put out today. It's not, it's not about
existing rates of pay, it's about minimums. It's not the rate of pay you would
actually receive. I'll give you the example of the nurse who works all sorts
of rates, or the shop assistant who works all sorts of hours and gets a higher
rate. So your rate of pay and the minimum are two different things. And 
anyway, the minimum that obtains only obtains without the force of an
award, which I've just read to you, and you can be sacked anyway.
I. What about those workers who reach agreements that they are satisfied
with?
PM: You mean the current ones?
1: Under this proposal.
PM: Just say it again.
J1: What about the workers who do reach agreements, enterprise agreements,
that they are satisfied with, that they're quite happy with?
PM: Well some people may be. But this is about each individual signing up, and
you don't have to be a political scientist or an industrial scientist to know
that the individual's negotiating power against a company of any size is
greatly diminished from the position of group organisation. Is that a fact or
not?
J: Prime Minister, just on another matter, what did you say yesterday to Mr
Mulholland on the issue of the Fairfax bureaux?
PM: T'm not into boutique news.
J. Is it accurate?
PM: I know journos are very interested in yourselves, I know that. I said things
supportive of all of you, I can assure you) but I don't want to go into thcm
now.
I; Prime Minister, the basis of the Opposition's document seems to be an end
to what Mr Howard calls the ' outmoded notion of class envy and jealousy'.
Would you agrce with that as a philosophical point?
PM: No, this is about going back to the power that employers had in the last
century against employees. This is about stripping Australians down of
their rates of pay and their conditions. It's the Liberal Party doing what it
has always wanted to do, but now having the gall to actually propose it
baldly in a document. No other conservativc government has ever taken
thcse sorts of policies on. 
9
J: Does it make it easier for you now in the run up to the next election to
differcntiate the Labor Party from thc Liberals on the basis of this policy?
PM: Their policy is a pretty novel policy to get elected on. They said, we'll lift
the price of everything you buy with a 15 per cent tax on everything you
spend, and we'll cut your pay. Now finding a distinction with that, I don't
find difficult to do because I don't want to put a 15 per cent tax on
everything, and will not put a 15 per cent tax on everything everyone buys,
and I won't be around cutting people's pay.
J: If this policy were to produce lower wages, do you think there would be any
incecase in employment as a result?
PM: I don't think wages are a problem and the cost of labour is a problem today.
The problem is basically demand.
J: If wages wcre to fall, do you think employment might increase as a result?
PM: In the case of young people where they are talking about $ 3 $ 3.50 an
hour, God help you, you couldn't get a baby sitter for $ 3 an hour. At $ 3.50
an hour, is that going to expand the number of jobs? I don't think so.
3: What about unskilled labour?
PM; I think by and large the problem is not the price of labour, it is demand.
What arc you going to do with the labour, how are you going to employ it?
J: T7hat's a good question. What exactly are you going to do to get a million
people back to work if none of these Opposition proposals are going to
work?
PM: Expand the economny, let it grow. We can let it grow, we don't need to keep
it comatose as the Liberal Party would need to keep it to keep inflation
down because they have no incomes policy. They have no agreement about
national income. So if the place is more productive, and we're getting more
output from fewer people, how do you deal with the implied redundancy?
More growth. And how do you have more growth without high inflation,
without needing to use monetary policy permanently to comatose the
economy? Answer an incomes policy. We're the only party that has it.
We're the only party that can let the economy grow rapidly, grow quite fast
and still contain inflation. 
I. When will we see that growth?
PM: You saw the Governor of the central bank this morning making his points
clear, his belief about the rates of growth coming through the economy.
I. Prime Minister..
PM: I've got a Cabinet meeting on 10 minutes ago.
J: With the Victorian election just over, already the Kennett Government is
looking at getting rid of 15-20,000 public sector jobs. Would you say that
was a possibility if this policy was Hcwson's policy after the next election?
PM: That Government is going to have to live by its actions and if it wants to
decimate the public sector of Victoria it will have to run the gauntlet of
public opinion. But the problcm in Australia is not that wage ratcs are
uncompetitive. That is a key point. It is not that wage rates or that the
economy is uncompetitive. The problem is that demand is too low.
J: Has there been any recent pressure on you to halt tariff reductions?
PM: I don't want to get into that debate. Go and talk to Laura ( Tingle) about that
one. OK.
J: Can you say that that story in The Australian this morning was true?
PM: I'm not into discussing the Government's discussions. I'm already
minutes past my Cabinet appointment. Thanks.
ends 



PRIMIE MIMISTER 113/ 92
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON
P J KEATING MP, AND THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND
TRADE SENATOR THE lION GARETHT EVANS
GRANT FOR YOTHU YINDI'S UNITED NATIONS CONCERT
A $ 30,000 grant from the cultural relations program of the Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade will enable Aboriginal rock group, Yothu Yindi, to help launch the
United Nations International Year of the World's Indigenous People ( YWIP) at a
concert in New York in December.
Yothu Yindi will be on a North American tour at the time and the grant covers the
extra cost of enabling them to stay on for the UN appearance in New York on
December. We believe this is a practical means of showing the Government's support for
Aboriginal rights and recognition and appreciation of Aboriginal culture.
It will also expose a representative world-wide audience to the uniqueness of Yothu
Yindi which incorporates traditional Aboriginal values in a modem musical idiom.
Yothu Yindi will perform their hit single " Treaty" as well as other songs from their
1992 album " Tribal Voice" which has won many awards including the Human Rights
Commission Award for Songwriting and the Australasian Performing Rights
Association's Award for " Song of the Year".
The Prime Minister has written to all Ministcrs in regard to the IYWIP, asking them to
identify ways in which their portfolios can mark the year and provide specific funding
for IYWIP activities. He has also written to all Premiers, Chief Ministers and the
Australian Local Government Association, inviting them to join with the
Commonwealth in celebrating the year, and seeking their co-operation in making the
year another one of real achievement on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander issues.
NOTE FOR EDITORS: There will be a photo opportunity when the Prime Minister,
Mr Keating, meets members of Yothu Yindi at Kirribilli House today ( Sunday,
October) at 3: 15 pm.
CANBERRA October 1992 



,~ tT BY: ~ TU'O~ K 1~~ 1 I J I d*. C4 IL \ Vrq-
MEET THE PRESS
Network Tfn, Suuday October 25,
GUEST: The Prime MInister, Hr Paul KeatinR
PRESENTER: PANEL: David Johnston
Paul Ilongiorno
Amanda Bucklcy
Max Suich
Please Lccl free to extraCL whatever maerial Is appropriate,
acknuwladging MEET THE PRESS, NETWORK TEN.
81/ T-OT: OT C __ 6O9 13 i hI
8T/ TO* J 5: 00' ON OT: OT 6*'. 30' 92:-131 
N'T 3Y: N'ETWORK TEB ; 2.5-10-2 15: 29 TEN SYNEY PROGRAM1S-( 622397686:-3/ 9
Across the nation, welcome to MEET THE PRESS. Good evening,
I'm David Johnston.
Tonight our first guest. on ME~ ET THE PRV.. SS is Australito'G preMicer
citizen, the Prime Minister, Paul Kettig.
Mr Keating thank you for join-Ing us tonight.
PK: CVood daiy, nice to be here on this premlier occas4' ion.
WJ Patul Yeatina hats spent L. he lasL few days i. n Far North Queensland.
Some say con~ idering his options for the timing of the -forthcoming
Federal El ectioni.
The government mnust go to the polls in the next few months,
Experts very in their second guesses of the P~ rimne Ministers
agendki ywhere from Lhe last. week of November to March.
Paul Keating has been a PiVotal element in the Labor party ' a
historic four terms in office. Atid w.' 11 speak to him Lotight
about his bid for a fifth Labor go~ vernment.
But first a ~ 1look at Prime Minister Keting's first year
in the 1. odse.
TAKE VTR
DJ: Also joining us tonight three of the most respected journalists
in the country. First. Paul Bongiorno, Network Ten's Bureau
Chief in Canberra. Amanda Buckley, / he X ief of ,; he Daily
, role Urnph / Mirr o ' Vreau in Federal Parliamnt, and Max Suich,
forme' 4 Afief Aditoriai $ oacutivo at John Fairfax andJ Sons, now
the editor of the Independent Monthly Newspaper.
Good Evoning. and welcome to you all.
ALL: Thanks.
DJ: Now first of all Mr Keating, Im going to ask you about the state
of the nation to start this discussion, but you've Just come
81/ ZO'd 9œ 00* N 01: 01 Z6130g Z 131 
S NT BY; NET'ORK TE : 25-lU-32 15: u 1L UL. Nt U-KQUKAM-Ub2Ja oooQ.; 4! a
2 among other things, the election date. Have you made up your mind?
PK; Well I wasnt considering it at all.
DJ: Not once? You didn't think about it? Not once?
PKt I think the uh, I think the public expect to get value from
Paclaumonts. and this parliament has got a way to run yet.
DJ: When do you think you'll go, sooner or later?
PK: Vell, as I say, they expect value and value in their terms is
to go later.
DJ: So that means next year?
Pt: That's when I'm sure most Australians would wait amid believe.
ta/
PB: These bLter polls aren t tempting you?
PK: No, I mean in this system the Prime Mini. ster does have a
Is perogative of deciding when the election istbut Cgain, I think
from our point of view the progress which is being made now
on the economic front is important and keeping it going is
important no'just to the government but to the nation at large.
DJ: Well now itsa six years and six months since you made Banana
Republic commepn and you've been saying all this year the
recovery is under way uouple of weeks ago you said the recession
was well over. And yet we still see a struggln to reach that
three per cent growth in the economy. So what do you think
the state of the nation is today in October, 1992, ond,
economically, and specifically in terms of those intangibles
you once spoke about: npirit, hope and purpose.
PK: Oh well I think in terms of uh, hope and purpose, I'll come to
spirit in a momenL, in terms of hope and purpose Australia is
nowi an open trading economy. It was not that a decade ago.
Australia can now be confident that it can trade its way competitively
in the world, that ovnr the longer haul employ its
people, lift its living standards, and tako its place in the
POO'ON 01: OT 6' 309Z 131 
z2NT BY : NETWORK TEN 15: 31 TEN 1.) D\ EY PROGRAM1S-0629397686;: .5i 9
3 community of trading nations. This was not its3 Position a decade
ago. You know I Aaid re~ cently, Australia's got its future back
and it has got its future back. By the early 1980' s. Australia
waa basically a minor qqilrry aind the things we produced the
rest of the wiorld was paying us much less for. That's all1
changed. This~ year we ' re exporting nearly 25 per cent of all.
we produce, A. decade ago it was 14 per-cent. The difference
is a world of difference. We are now exporting more elaboratly
transformed manirarture. 9, or manufa~ ctured goods, than this year
minins or mineral orpa. I tmea n, this is a major transformation.
And we're now investing in our Sroatcst reSOurce, our people.
By keeping kids on RchooI takinR them through tertiary and
vocational eduCaLioli. building product innovation, that is doing
all the clever things wo should have been doing 20 Years ago.
MS: Prime Minister, can I' take you up on getting our future back,
that's an Important print. Profesor B~ ob Gregory whom you know.
in the who is on the Reserve Beink board. said last week
that Austra~ lia probably wouldn't have anh unemployment rate below
seven percent by the end of Lhis decade, that is by M99. He's
not aloae ill-Litat thought. Tf we have that level of long term
unemployment in fact lastlflR over 8 to 10 yearL, we'Ire going to
have a breakdown in our social fabric. We haven't go0t our
future ha-. k in t-hat Sense. And whntever government comes to
power nakxL year is going to have Lo look at more than training
it's going to hAvP. to do something about the social fabri~ c.
What are you going to do?
PKi Well Max, when T say abouit our future, i~ t means LhaL Lhere is
a 2enario for Australia whici gives it a place in the world.
In othe~ r words. when People Ar* e reeling off the names of other
countrien with resources and potential, but who never mnde it
81/ V' 0d iœ 000N 01: 01 Z61309Z : 131 
E. NT BY: NETWORK TEN .23-10-82 15: 31 TEN SYDNEY PROGRAMS-06223S766: i? 6/ 9
4 were it not for the 80' s changes, Australia would have been
among them.
MS: Society is in danger isn't it?
PK: No. Yes, but now it will never be among them. I mean its made
thm great leap. The great change, and that's what I mean about
its future. But is that a commenLry on the fact that we don't
have problems, well of course we have problems, and our biggest
single problem is unemployment. And its the one which I've
devoLed myself greatest to in the period I've been Prime Minister.
The/ abour market was the thing I devoted myself to in all the
years I was Treasurer. We had phenomenal rates of employment
growth. The Australian labour market today is 26 per cent
larger than it was in 1983.
MS: Gregory says we haven't constructed a new job since ' 81 if you
take out the jobs which were provided to make up for the
immigrantiLs thaL were arriving and he also soys and I think
pretty well everyone in the government and the RBA, the Reserve
Bank, would agree that we are not going to gel anywhere
close to anything le. ss i. han 700,000 unemployed by the end of
the decade.
PK: Well we started off with a labour market of six million in 1983,
that's today 7.6 million, Urn, when we have that phenomenal rate
of employment Lthrough the ' 80' s, but a much, much greater level
of participation in the workforce, particularly amongst womena
the lowest we ever Rot unemployment to by the late ' 80' s was
I just under six percent. Now I think what this means is an
economy in transition. One that is changing its structure,
where people are being structurally unomployed. As the industries
change beneath their feet. As they now have to retrain themselves
we arc going to have a tranaienL structural pool of
8T/ SO'd œ 00" ON 01OT Z6' 30" 9 g: 131 
ENT BY: NETwoRK TEN
MS: Good news.
PK: Now Bernie Fraser made. the point, the Governor of the everiL
bank, laet week he thought that was probably about six per
cent. He may be right, it's certainly norzero. If we look
at the ' 80' s experience, its about six percent so it means
that the cyclical, the c~ ye of unemployment, the one we're
living through now, is probably four Lo five per cent as points,
and I believe we can get that down.
DJ: Mr eanting, we'll just take a break. Our guest tonight, the Aust
Prime Minister, Paul Keating.
SEGMENT 2
DJ: Welcome back to MEET THE PRESS, tonicht our guest is the Prime
Minister.
AB: Mr Koating, when the election is finally called will you follow
Lhe American model and debate your opponent, John Hewson, on
television.
PK: Well I debate hii every other day Amanda, why not then?
AB: But will you hold a big public debate?
PK: Oh, 1 don't think I have any problem rising to that challeige.
DJ: Do you sn debates, television debates particularly, becoming
a part of campaigns, a generic part of campaigns?
PK; Oh, yes, but I mean we have debhates every day of the week
when the house sits so this is noi for me would not be for
mo on unusual thing to do.
DJ: Mr Hewson'. A challenged you to that debate, will you?
PK" Good Old John. Good vo him. Good on him.
DJ: Yes or no?
81/ 90" d œ 00" ON OI: 01 Z630" 9 : 131
.25-10-92 15: 32 TEN SYDNEY PROGR. AMS-0622397686:: 7t 9 
A,. 101 NL: i\ tlIKK ILN 10: 00 Ll 20-AU -' U. 1 rK A. MS-uO2. J/ 000.. o
6 PK: I'll be there.
AB: So that's a yes. you'l be thore, will it be only one?
PK: Of course I'll be thero, with bells on.
AB: Good. Only be the one?
PB: He's actually calling for a series. He'd liko one on the economy,
the future and unemployment.
. Pr: Yeh, Yeh, and he may get one. He may get a series, but I won't
be giving him a leg up so I'll he dectding about the formats
later.
MS: Did you see the American debates?
PJK: Only one.
MS: They were very important I think cause they touched on one of
the things I think the eltchaot ( 4q/ about, which is that
they really don't want to vote for either Paul Keating or
John Iewson. In the U. S. that was the same and those debates
gave you a senise of character.
PK: Well I think, I think, exposition, public exposition of the
issues is terribly important, and all of us who ate proctitioners
know its very hard to set the thread of the argument across.
YOu can get the knots across, but not the thread. Any forum
that gives you that opportunity, which is well watchel to put
some continuity to an argument, um will matter, because a lot
of the transmission of news is by way of television news grabs
which are themselves just a condensation of what is said.
Denying the public a real chmnee to understand the issues. So
I mean from my point of view the greater the exposition of the
issues the better. Pa iLcularly in this election.
AB: So
PK: Particularly in this election which where I agree with the leader
of the opposition, he said it will be the moat important election
8T/ O'd œ O00" N OT: OT Z6' 0" O' 9Z : 13J. 
SENT BY: NETWORK TEN ; 25-10-32 15: LLN SYDNEY ROGRAMS-Ob22397686:# 8/ 9
7 since the war. I think it will/ h. This has been said in the
past. But I think this time its true, because there'll be
stark difference between the parties, betwoen a policy oFinclusion,
which we havA, where everybody's part of Australia
and its change, and a policy of looking after yourself.
AB: And it'll be taxation and industrial relations you said
before will be the most importatnt issues, do you stick by that?
PK: THey will he among them, but I think Australia's identity, its
culture, its capacity to work as one nation will be amongst the
other issues as well. As well as those proposals being put by
the opAstion.
PB: Prime Minister,
DJ: People also make judgements on character on those debates too,
do you think, and its often said you're a far nicer bloke off
television and out of the house, than you are when you're seen
on television.
PK: Well we're all victims of the 30 second grab I think.
DJ: So a long debate then is going to reveal more of your real
charecterdo you think?
PK: Well I think more of about what you stand for and why you do
things. Um, you know our first question was about, you know
Australia's lung run future, and you know I'm sure we are yet
to adequately communidcto the fact that Australia's prospects
now are vastly different than a d'cade ago. Now many people
know about that, some people assume that, some people feel that.
But not everyhody knows that, I mean that's important.
MS; Do you think the electurate like thle Lhoice between you and
Hewson, do you think they'd prefer another two?
PK: well I don't think they've Pver liked the choices that much,
I meant
81/ 80" d œ OOON OT: O1 Z6" 30" 9Z : 131 
~ ETBy ; NE1I'kQ) Ri TEN ; 23-10)-92 15: 55 : TEN YDNEY P'ROGRAM1S-U62? s17686: z 4
8 AB: But you' re not very popular out there aire you?
PK: Oh, I'm doing alright Amanda, don't me off don't-rL&amp; 4e(
m~ e down.
AE: but they do think that, they think you're tough, that yO'v
biff people, that youtre savage. you have a poor profile,
particularly with women vocers. W4hy is~ this do you think?
P K I don't, T don't even know LhdL LiaL ' s correct, I mean the
L,% bor Party has not only ZA one occasion in the last twenty
-: ears have we had as many women voting f~ or us as men. So
whothor it'sq aboutt me or its a p~ irLy sit., ition. T don't know.
OJ: Dlc, you think you appeal to women?
PIZ: Jotl I mean aga i n, one can onl y go on the data T have cerrainly
p'~ ersued issues of great advantage to women in the years I
w~ as Treasurer. Nearly threeo quar-ters of Llae j we created
over a million and a half of them went to women.
DJ: That'-, not really what r meant. When Bob Hawke was Prime
MIinster, it was said that: he h~ d m, grra. deal of sex appeal.
ror women. D) o you hnve sex appeal?
P y I'll leave that to roske other makc judgement. Y'ou con't uñ sk
me about those things.
L) J: '^ hy not'?
PX: Oh well, because I don't think I can say.
DJ: It's obvioue
PK, I don't know how I can help you.
DJ; W. ell are you sexier than John 11ew. son?
P Ha, Ha
DJ: And what do you think of his image for ladies?
PK; Oh well. that's for others to judge, not me. I think, look
its very hard to change a country from rhe inside out,
usieu gc. t tu hopi in there aind make the changes. In the 19650' s
81' 60d œ 000N 01: 01 ~ 6109~ 131
8T/ 60' 8 200' ON OT: OT Z6* 130' 9Z-131 
SE. NT E\ \ LIIIORK TEN : 31-2 15:. 56 TEN SYDNEY pRoGRAMi-06220%: 6: 3! 4
9 I was the Treasurer, I hopped in Lhere. Uh, unapolisetically
I wen ther and dfid whkt a caneration of politicians shirked.
All the hard decisions of openina the place up. And that's
earned me, a few~ brick bats, hut: its gotten Me a tot of friends
as well
P~ q: YOU ODVI. OWuLy think its important to call John Hewqon a ferfa)
asbacus or n, affab~ c, an a filing c.-ihtnct. or You wouldn't bd
i r. Do you feel that you' re n contorpoint with the L-lecLOrate
thore. Bob Carr for eXample laSi wee felt that people want
to hcar politicians debating the issues and being lesN' personal.
PlC: Oh. but you've got. to understand what perbonal mcans. Talking
about your familt. q personal. ' ralkifig about your family affairs
is personal. I'va never done that. Talking about the ferial
abacus is a pnlittcRl Lthrowaway, they are not in the same lcia2ue.
Its onjy just simply making a poin~ t, As Dr Hewson rnakus similAr
points to me. He says J'm a loser, and I'm this~ and 7' m that
DJ lie ' l11 be hack wi th the P'rime Minister ripht. af ter this break.
And you're watching MEET THF PRESS ( IN NETWORK~ TEN
8T/ OT'd iœ 000N 01: 01 Z6093 : 113311 
EN T BY: NETWORK TEN\ 3-O8 15: 37 1' EN S DNEY PROGRAMS-062221S7686;# 4! 4
SEGMENT 3
DJ;' You're watching MEE~ T THE PRESS Aii qround the notion. Pa tl1.
PB:. Prime Minister, you've unveiled a this year the ONIs NATI1ON
package and your budgetf, it's 2ll aimed at. stimuNl ating the
econoay, the loosening of fi-sc., 1 policy-so that Jobs can be
created. The states havo got to play their part herc j. t Seems
that uh, thtre is a hold up in the road funding alIlocations,
but more imnportaintly, it sotems to mue, LIiC Premier of our second
higge~ t statr, noxt week his government. or this week rather.
hi&amp; government will uuveil a mini budgot that will hem contractjonary.
It will cut . qponding nnd it will up taxes. h4ow does
that Sol with your plan for Igetina the economy moving and are
you concerned about it?
PK-Welj. any contraction won't hcip, and we were not alone or at
the time perhaps we were, in one notion and expindirig fiscal
polify. Dr Hiewson, my oppoilent, says it was, a mistoko. He
says we Ahould cut the budger by 7 RiS. LION. I say th~ tt would
push Australia right back int. o . L rerr.-, ion. The Japanese
government~ not anything other thant a conServative government
in it~ a recognition around the world, has brought a fieml.
package out as twice as large as ours as a proportion of their
economy. It think its the thina Lo do. We've got the American' R
Reserve Bank Governor, Mr Croonspan~ lauding the Japanese for
their packago. We did the right thing getting the stimulus
Roing in the economy trying to promote activity and employment
get people back to work, get the place moving, get con-
Fidpnce levels going, start to get Lhe wheels of industry turning
81/ 1T'd 000N 01: 01 Z6O91 .131 
E2NB5T-Y1 : uN-2ETE2~\ QRI 16 : 30 TEN SYD\ E) tjRcGRANI 0a29G6; 2
PB: Ru will slashing spending in Victori. a help you get the ec-onomy
going.
PK: It won' t help the VjCtorian economy. It will not help the
Victorian economy. lUh, I don't, can I say though, I don't
piesume ito be putting Mr Fennets budyet together or taking
responsibility for budgetary changes. We've till got to face
those issues. But the general. r'd say the general view is,
the Snneral line should be, that there is a role for
Sovernmelt, in not only promoting activity, but seeing the
6reat public things done. Whether it. he the road system or
the rail sy. tem, or a new airline sysrem or a ne~ w electricity
SriA, these arce all important things for the long tun
infr3structuro of Auutriia while at the same~ tirie giving people
a * Job.
AB: What about Jeff Vennet* s industrial relhtions reforms? Do you
:; ee that as a bit of a test run for the Howard/ Hewson package?
FP: Well I think tLhc uh, Dr Hcwson/ M-r How~ ird havc-made their point
quite cipar. They want to push 8 million people Onl to common
low contract. 4. I nican people have got to understand what this
MeOILS, it means that Snillion Australians tinder a Rewson government
wn a contract which jiu put in front of thcm by thcir employer,
with any real neptotiating strcngth, bccause they are not allowed
to associate in terms of the signing oC those agreviuents. There
won't be minimuns provided for othe~ r than minimums which are
now will meean the contraction in rates of pay for most people
and, I think, its a step back down the time rt'innel, T think
Australian * ociety aind fairness end equity will be very poorly
served by N. uch a change.
API: What about Lhe governments wage: s policy. Is there any chance
9œ ooN: Ono before the next election?
-:-13-L
I
E\ T BY'NERoRK TEN06223070686: Zii " 1 3 
BY: EUORK IFX2-t-2 63 ~ NSD\~ PQR" S 0622387686: 9 3/ 3
I1h1, well the goyerrpments policy has been one of an evolutionary
change. From a relatively inflexible labour titarket where the
wage share was too high and the profit share too low, where
iuvestmeflt was amashed and unemployrnont was rising. To ona
where we Cot the balances Ti. ght ; And then started to open it up.
Through things -qur~ h ais awatrd restructuring whiere we saw fopr
instance in the metals indu : ty three hundred and sixty job
classifications converted into fourteen. It's only by moving
through the craft structure in an rvoluitionary way the old
craft stTVcLurA of the cenltury, can you make the Australian
la3bour nmrk. t as it is~ now becoming. much more flexible
and much more dynamic.
PIB: Would you now support a general wagc ri.,~ e Uacroas the board in
a national. wage case?
We've made our policy clear, we dmn't have to, we've just
arrived at a n. et of arrangement with the A. C. T. 11. who~ re this
year most pceople will have their wAges adjusted under
enterprise agreements. All. the flexibility
PB: What about the rest of themi though?
PK: Letlk understand this, all the flexibility AU , Lzlla needs i( I
wa~ cs it now has. It doeñ. n'L have flexibtility downwards,
and that's what Mr Howard and Dr lewson are, they're about
flaxihflity down, they actullilly want...
All: So no more national waige cases?
PX: They want to cut Lheir vagex
PB! Do you want to go to thc people as Amanda is saying there with
the promi~ e to bo able to say if you vote for us we'll support
a wage rise in a national wage caso?
PK: No, no, no what you' re s'aying with us. if yo~ u yuLe for us you
keep * 1l the rct'con. the Ip;; protections of industrial
Baads.
8T/ iTVd œ. 000N QT: QI Z6O109Z :. 131 
M B; NETWORK TEN : 31-2 16* 50 TEN SYDNY PRQGRAS-( 6278 2' 3
13 MS: Would you support John Hatfpenny's na. tional strike in Vir-torici
next tim'e?
PK: Max, let me gay this. If you vote for John Powson, you lose
all the legal protct~ ions of the century. All the legal*
protections of awards, mateprnity leave, sick pny, holiday pay
penalty rates.
AR! Maternity rates are to be left in...
PK: No, no all these thing--are to be nogntiated, nothineg is left
MS~ That h. i! in't destroyed New Zea~ lan~ d, has it. The trade unions
thnrp don't Iike ii. lut it hasn't destroyed Now Zealand.
PK: Well its only asmall parrt pf* the workforre are cove! red by it
at this st~ g*. Wv 1re tAlLkilg . ibout New Zealnnd Max. mo just
make this point. There art* rewer pe ople in work in New Zealo. nd
i-. hnrt thpre was in 1983. In Austrarli. a [ here, is 26per cent
more in work than there wqq in 1983.. I mean New Zealan~ d hap,
/ Area
been a dl. sister, and renains onc To this d,% y.
DJ: We'll have+ mor@ with the Prime~ Minister Aftc'r this break.
81/ t7TVd iœ 000N 01: 01 Z6* 10O9Z .131. 
NT BY: NET1WORK TEN TE2N-09S Y~ DNEY 11ROGRAI-0622387686:, r 3/ 3
14 SEGMENT 4
dj: Welcome back to MEET T112p PRESS, our ~ Uteit is the Prime Minister.
MS: Prime Minister, we don't-here much anymore about the changinot
of the flag. Are you gotflR t~ o give up on changing the f~ lag
before the next election or tire you going to say someothing
otbout it?
11K Well, I thInk its ireportant, 1 think its imiportant for that
debate t~ o be held. r mean dl 2 of these symbolic represefitational
things need to be debated and understood.
NS Do you have a new flag for the next Plection?
PK: N'o, oh no, aind I wouldn't presume to. I've said already on the
record that uh, before the official flag is chango-d we would
have a pleh~ cite-of g. oma kind in the future. Rdut lets ma~ ke the
point one century on, from Federation as a nation, Lhat we
cant t g~ o on forcver wandering around with the f Lag of another
country in the corner of our flag. And that's n matter
I think, I me. an for Australi. a getting it clear for how it wdishes
to represent itself as a n.-ition, as an o'ftity, it a terribly
impor.. ift debate to have. But to be you know, that's entirely.
another matter mmking transitions in Lhose arrangements quickly.
Morc against Peoples wishes.
DJJ: Mr keating, thank you. ve'%-e run out of time.
PK: I've enjoyed it David, thanks.
DJ: The st ate of the Nation Pri me Minis ter PsulI Kea t ing
Before we go, one last chance Lo perhaps namne thnt date.
P K Hfa, Ha, he, % well you bctter tell me th. n~ ext gueast,
that's probably a better thinR t~ o tell ua.
DJ s Thts fltavi n~ voit -4 1 ' 1 L-T-11
81/ GS~ d œ 000N 01: 01 Z6O91 : 131 
ENT BY: I NETWORK IFN
PK! Dear old JOhn.
DJ: Still no date?
PK: N4o date.
DJi OK.
PK: See you ncxt year.
DJ: Also thanks to our panel. Paul Bongiorno. Network Ten's Chief
Political Correspondent, Amanda E6uc. kley, Canberra Bureau Chief
fnr thr. Dasily Tol( graph/ 1rr A-nd M-IX Suich, Editor of the
Independant Monthly Nowspapcr. You've been watching MEET TIHE
PRESS, on NFTWORK 1P. N. Join us again next week for more of the
p-il
poople ñ wthe issuelfuf the moment, and our guest will be
John Howard, Shadow Minister for Industrial Rela: lons considered
by some the be-st P'rime Minister Australia never had.
I'm David Johnston. goodnight.
IUJ: The Prime Minister is our 6pecial Guemt an MEET THE, PRESS. T
The subject now PAY TV in Australia. MAx.
MS Prime Minister. is the press reports correct that says the
governmenlts going to give Lhe inside run Lo Kerry Packer
on conLrol. iig the 1illiflg and the general subscription infrastrucrture
for Pay Television.
PK: No/ look the Uoverning principles in this, Max, are that we
picked the right technolory whic. h r thi. rik is digital not:
analog that we don't bccome an outpost of the American film
studios, that we're not milked by Hollywood.
MS: But is there an . nside run for Korry Packer?
PX: No, Well or cuur:: i, litstezi Lo Lite inwr they're the principles.
That there is a new player, that there was not now not a network.
owner.\ paper owner, or a celecommnuniCOtion compa-ny that tticra
81/ gTVd œ 000N 01: 01 Z610-9Z :-131
E'. T 1 17: 2: TE\ X SYDONEY PROGRAMS-UUb222330) 766866;:: 3 3? 
SLA.\ T 13Y \ NETVkOR TEN : 925-10-92 17: 30 : TEN SYD\ EY FRQoRANIS-0622307686:= 4/
iA a role for the ABC, for culiural rea~ sOIIS, hut not to enhance
the commerciallitY of the ABC. Urn, and there'll be another
network which will bo able to be bid for which the networks will
q be able to bid for.
MS: But its a sriple question, umn, the press reporting that uh
Packer will control thie billing mnd the infrast'ructure as such.
PY! Nothing of that matter is agreed anywhere.
AB: How soonh?
PK: Well I think one of the key points, the key point is the economics
of free to ai. r television depcnd upon the price of Hollywood
feaurc films. ri we Sct that wronqg, we get On~ whole of the
economics of AustrAlian television wrong. And that's why its
very imUpotanlt to choose the~ right technology you get the right
strve'. tures .4o we gct a good balance in tho cost of running Pay
TV free to air. We get that right, I think, and havc ittiew player,
which is again another new additionn to the cross rule, another
new player in Pay TV. and the ABC are role by virtue of its o
own independence and id~ inLity tis the national broadcster
then I think we'd have a pretty good system,
D J Now Rupert Murdoch wants to co) me bacic to TV in Australia, he
gays that all the rules should be abolished, it should be a
free for all. Uim, whaL do you think about that?
PX: I don't think very much about that really. T mean RupertAj was
-% round, I negotiated amongst others with him thc cross media
rule which selpMLt4ed television bad radio and print.. And T
think its a pretty good rule.
AB: Will, therc be a monopoly on the billitng and administrarion by
one licencen?
PK: Well thaes a11 to be decided.
PD3: So cven thar. Packer option is still alivr?
81/ -Vd œ OO* ON 01: 01 Z6 : 1319 
ENT BY\ EliOR TEN .25-1U-92 17; 31 TL\ SI DNEY PROGRAMIS-u0 3 7686:
17 pki Well I don't think it actually on the tablc nt this stage.
AB: lut, have you been speaking to Mr racker on this subject?
PK: I speak to all the players.
DJ: Mr Keating. there is n story in the press recently which concerns
us because it concerns probably our new owners, CANWEST. What
do you feel about an overseas company coming in and maybe
threatening to get rid of ncw, programs and making decisions
like this in the network? What do you think about that?
We have,
PK-; I think foreign ownership inimitations in relation to telovision
as a prescribed area. And that is a key consideration in our
point or view. The cconoanics of the network. s decided by thosp
who own it.
DJ: And the quality of what happens on that network with a foreign
owner doosaft...
PX! Well we've got such thinus as uh, as local content rules,
whiLh you know are designed to overcome those sort. A of problems.
MS: It wouldn't stop Channel Ten getting rid of its News and Current
Affairs though.
PK: Ah, well I don't know that anyone should make that presumption,
I don ) anything about the bid hy thc way. ? ottIitLg. I ' ve
had no contact with that. group whatsoever.
AB: We are expecting a decision on Pay TV then, are we in the next
couple of wecks?
PI: If its possible to get it together, but again, mandating a new
technology trying to set up structures which we've never hod.
Uim, is not easy and will Lake some doing
DJz Mr Keating, thank you very much
8T/ 8Vd OO'N OT: OT Z6930' 9: 



-I C
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE lION P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, HYATT HOTEL, CANBERRA, 26.10.92
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Irish presidents arc welcome?
PM: Well they are with me particularly, so I had a very good talk.
J: What sort of things did you discuss?
PM; I think she said at the Press Club that we should keep the content of our
discussions privatc, and I think that is a good rule.
J: Mr Keating do you believe that the Coalition is going to impose a wage freeze?
PM: I will answer just this one question. The Coalition is going to push 8 million
Australians onto common law wage contracts. What Dr Hewson established
yesterday was he has not the faintest idea about how he will protect the living
standards of Australians against exploitation by anybody who may employ them.
All the flexibility that anyone requires in the labour market in this country is now
available through the system of enterprise bargaining and enterprise agrecments,
which this Government has established. The only flexibility that we don't provide
is flexibility down cutting people's pay and cutting thcir conditions of work. In
the end that's what John Hewson and John Howard are after, they arc after their
pay packet. That's why they're slipping and sliding over this question of minimum
raitcs of pay. It's the old Tory agenda, it has never changed.
ends 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
WELCOME TO PRESIDENT ROBINSON OF IRIELAND
CANBERRA, 27 OCTOBER 1992
President Robinson, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Australia it is my great pleasure to welcome
you. It is truly a great pleasure for the reason that in
certain significant and undeniable ways we Australians
share your rrishness.
Even those who are not of Irish descent will say that
when they go to Treland it is uncanny how much they feel
at home.
We would like to think that you feel something Similar
among us here.
And when we fppl the-se bondq of recognition and affection
we shouldn't be too surprised.
For at every major point in our history since 1788 the
Irish have been there, in word and deed and spirit.
It is not easy to say just what that spirit comprises.
There has frequently been an eloinent of rebellion about
it of course, but it's much more than that.
The Trish contribution has been primarily to the
language, literature, law, politics, religion and
philosophy of Australia.
And football, and horse racing, and farming, and eating,
and drinking, and story-talling, and what is these days
called the hospitality industry, and music.
To name a few.
In other words, the Irish have been a great clvilising
force. A great creative force.
We share some basic attitudes.
t7/ 10d S000N Z1J: ZT Z6* 1O22 :-11331 
2
Perhaps the most important of them, as you said in your
speech to the Press Club yesterday, is a deep attachment
to the land&amp; we live in: the land itself lives in our
minds, and informs the way we think about ourselves.
More than anything else, the shape of the continent
somehow defines a disparate and far-flung population as
one Australian people.
We have long been thoroughly urbanised and
industrialised, but the land is still at the centre of
our identity.
And I've no doubt that the Irish imagination played some
part in keeping it there.
But as I am sure you know, the Aboriginal people, who
were herp for 40,000 years or more before us, understood
this land in ways that we can never hope to emulate.
Yesterday you told the story of the Choctaw Indians who,
on hearing of the Irish famine, raised seven hundred
dollars and sent it to Ireland for the relief of the
victims. It was a case of people who were already displaced
feeding those who were about to be.
In another nineteenth century example of the global
village, in turn, those Irish were among the settlers who
displaced the Aboriginal people of Australia.
It is one of our great hopes in this last decade of the
twentieth century that we can put to rights the
devastating impact that the European occupation of their
country had on the Aboriginal people, and that we can
reconcile at last the economic, social and cultural
differences which still keep Aboriginal and non-
Aboriginal Australians apart.
This should not be beyond people who have succeeded in
creating a very rich and harmonious society from an
extraordinary variety of cultures.
Through these and many other avenues of social and
economic policy designed to strengthen the ties which
bind Australians, the Government I lead is seeking to
create an Australia which is more truly one community and
nation. President I know Ihat you also look to reconcile the
differences which make for the continuing tragedy of
NorthernIreland. I know that you seek to bring opportunity and justice
equally to women and men and close the divide between
them. 
3
I know that you seek to narrow the gap between rich and
poor, and that your great hope is that everywhere the
outcasts of the world can be brought in.
I know, that being Irish, you must be attracted to your
country's past, to your ancient heritage and traditions
but I know that you look to your country's future.
We have this in common too.
In the last decade Ireland has grown out of the shadow of
both Britain and its own past to become a more outwardlooking
nation, more confident of its identity, more
alive to the world and its region.
A nation carving out for itself a very independent
position in European affairs, and with it a stronger
place for itself in the world.
It has done these things of necessity. Because they were
the only way to give Ireland back its future. The only
way to ensure that the Irish of the next generation will
have no need to emigrate.
So these days when we Australians and Irish say that we
see something deeply familiar in each other, it is not
merely our common past but also our present
preoccupations and our aspirations which we recognise.
For Australia has done the very same things we are more
open to the world, more confident and independent-minded,
and alive to our region, the Asia Pacific, as you are to
Europe. Like you we have stepped out of the past.
old countries we might be in different ways, but in a
sense we're younger than we have ever been.
President, we share many of your hopes.
We share your country's determination to be a modern and
dynamic nation.
our affinity with your country and our roots in all of
its political and religious traditions has always made
the conflict in Northern Treland a matter of deep concern
to us, and we earnestly hope that the current talks being
chaired by our former Governor General, Sir Ninian
Sephen, will be successful.
We share your hope for sexual equality and social
justice; and, at the end of a decade in which some
countries have discounted these ambitions, we are proud
to say that we have made substantial progress toward
them.
GS0ON ZV: ZI Z6OL0 -113311 
That is something else we share it may even be the
strongest of the ties that bind us we know that when we
change we have to take our people with us.
President, the light which you keep burning in your
window tells all your compatriots around the world that
they will always be welcome home.
But, with the greatest respect, there's no need to keep
it burning for the six million Australians of Irish
ancestry. It would never occur to us for a moment that we weren't
welcome. It would never occur to any of the other eleven million
for that matter.
We presume we're as welcome as you are here. And that is
very welcome.
VO/ VO'd SOOON ZV: ZT Z6' 30* Z1: 131 



PRIME MINISTER 114/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PJ. ] KEATING MP,
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO HIGH COURT DECISION ON NATIVE Trl'L&amp;;
I am pleased to announce the first step in the Commonwealth Government response to the
High Court's decision on native title, known as the Mabo decision.
The Government has today initiated consultations with State and Territory governments,
key Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations and the mining and pastoral
industres on teificTifons of the High Court's decision. The consultations will be
directed by a committee of Ministers, chaired by me, and will be led at officials level by a
senior officer in my Department.
The first round of consultations will be completed before the end of the y= a. A progress
report will be considered by the Government before March, 1993 and a final report by
September, 1993. The Government will also encourage negotiation between partics as a
way of resolving differences. Where it seems the Government could usefully facilitate
such negotiation, it will do so.
The High Court's historic decision is a threshold and positive one for the nation. By
rejecting the doctrine of terra nullius, the Court has providcd a new basis for relations
between indigenous and other Australians and given impetus to the process of
reconciliation. It providcs both an opportunity and a challenge.
The nation now has thc opportunity to address the fundamental issue of the place of
Aboriginal traditional land ownershp and indeed the place of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples in contemporary Australia. There is also the challenge to get it right, for
the benefit of all Australians, including the generations of the future.
It is important to rccognige that existing legal rights in relation to property continue, and it
is wrong to see the High Court's decision In terms of existing land holders losing their
land. However, the decision introduces a new element into Australian land tenure, in the
form of native title, and thereby creates a need for clarity in the definition and application
of native title rights, especially in relation to other interests in land. 
The Court's judgement is complex, and its implications are equally complex. We need to
consider the implications carefully, but as quickly as possible. Before deciding on the
right long term approach it is essential that we first consult all the governments. of
Australia, key Aboriginal and Torrcs Strait Islander representatives, especially through the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission, and industry groups, in order to discuss
possible policy responses. This is the most sensible and constructive national approach.
The Commonwealth Government seeks a balance which protects Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander rights and gives benefits to all Australians. Both indigenous groups and the
pastoral and resource sectors are seeking clarity, certainty and a constructive resolution.
Consultation is the first step in that process.
CANBERRA October 27, 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY TIlE PRIME MINISTER, THE lION PJ. KEATING MP
OPPOSITION INDUSTRIAL REI ATIONS POLICY
The Opposition's Industrial Relations policy is one week old today, and already it is
riddled with contradiction.
Dr Hewson told us that this policy would put the Industrial Relations Commission in tile
" dustbin of history".
But now in a bizarre attempt to cover his leader's mistakes on the Sunday program, the
Opposition spokesman tells us he will open the bin and dray the Commission back out
again.
The resulting contradictions in Opposition policy show that it would be in practice
unworkable. Mr Howard put out a press relCasC yesterday in which he said that pay levels in contracts
will have to be increased whenever the Commission increases the rate in the award which
formerly covered the employees.
In other words, whenever anen ployment contract is renewed it must pick up whatever
increase the Commission has decided for the award.
Mr Iloward says a union can apply for such an increase at any time.
The Commission would be able to determinc the frequency and size of changes in the
base rates. It regains its old role as the national arbitrator of wages, with award increascs
automatically flowing into individual contracts as they expire and on renewal.
But the basis upon which the Commission would change a base award rate is not specified
by the Coalition. It may be changed work value for that classification, for example, or
changed relativity, or local circumstances factors that nced not be connected to the
employment contract which the dccision nonetheless alters. I 
So in the attempt to find a plausible way out of the policy's failure to specify a way of
updating minimums Mr Howard has driven a semi trailer through the policy,
Clearly, the Opposition has given no thought to the implications of Mr Howard's
announcement yesterday.
First it was individual contracts, a disappearing Commission, disappearing unions.
Now the Opposition is saying the contracts will just reflect arbitrated changes in the award
minimum. Mr Howard is making policy on the run, trying to cover his leader's mistakes.
But in trying to repair the policy Mr Howard has raised more questions than he answers.
The policy released last week says explicitly that all awards will automatically terminate
except where both employees and cmployers indicate the award should continue.
This raises the possibility that in many areas there will cease to be an award at all. Mr
Howard's policy offers no way of updating the mniniums in contracts involving people
formerly covered by thcsc awards.
Even where an award rcmains, it will be on a shrinking base of employees and employers,
raising the risk that changes in the award minimum will reflect consent arrangements
which may bc inappropriate for enterprises not under the award.
However, under the Opposition's re-announced policy these increases would flow into
individual contracts.
The contradiction over the role of the Commission is just one of the problems revealed as
the policy is subjected to scrutiny.
The Opposition has still not explained how the $ 3.50 hour youth minimum will be
updated. Will the Commission do that too?
What is he telling small business, which is discovering that his policy would apply only to
incorporated cntcrprics?
And what is Mr Howard telling the business leaders who are telling him that the
Opposition policy provides no mechanism for rccognising either one or many bargaining
agents in an enterprise, and provides no mechanism upon which an enterprise bargain may
be negotiated?
In fact, it rejects a collective bargaining system under which a single agreement could
cover a single enterprise. 
The truth is that the Opposition is not proposing a system of enterprise bargaining, in
which agreements are madc to enhance productivity in return for greater rewards from
work. It is proposing a system of individual contracts between the employcr and each employee.
And we now learn that these Individual contracts will be supposed to reflect changes in
awards changes which, as time goes on, would be made for reasons more and more
closcly connected with the residual coverage of the award, and less and less for reasons
connected with the circumstances of the employees under individual contracts who will
nonethelcss be affected.
Isn't it time Dr Hcwson held a press conference with the Canberra gallery to explain his
policies? CANBERRA 27 October 1992 


PRODUCTIVE DIVERSITY IN BUSINESS CONFERENCEMELBOURNE, 28 OCTOBER 1992Ladies and gentlemenI welcome you to this conference on Productive Diversity.It is a timely and important event which may well be seenas a turning point in the way we regard multiculturalAustralia. in the past decade and a half Australia's policies ofcultural pluralism have been among the most innovativeand creative in the world. They have also been thehallmark of a decent and far-sighted society.In a world very often afflicted by ethnic and culturaltension, bitterness and bloodshed, Australia stands amongthose few countries which actually relish theirdiversity. under the umbrella of an overall commitment to the nationand its uniting values and institutions, a society ofgreat richness and variety and remarkable harmony hasevolved here.It has been In part the product of policy, and in part, Ithink, the product of democratic and egalitarian valueswhich have always run deep in Australia.This is something of which Australians can be very proud.it should give us confidence.If this conference should mark a turning point it willnot be in the nature of a break with the past, but rathera Significant Change of emphasis.It is a matter of building on achievements and creating anew multicultural agenda.-There have been three distinct phases In Australia'spost-war response to its immigrants.
The first phase was characterised by an expectation thatimmigrants would fit into the dominant Anglo-Australianculture. The second was characterised by the encouragement oftolerance and respect for diversity, and the effort toensure access and equity regardless of ethnic origin,And this effort will continue.But we now have the beginnings of a third phase.We now nmust take advantage of the potentially hugenational economic asset which multiculturalismrepresents. That is what Productive Diversity is about. It is theharvest on the crop sown and nurtured by our immigrationand multicultural policies.The inspiration for this Conference is the perceptionthat two things must be brought together:*the need for a still more competitive andd4vereified economy with a strong export base andthe cultural affinities Australians have withvirtually all the countries with whom we want to dobusiness.These affinities might be likened to havingrepresentatives in the field who, through theirunderstanding of our customers' culture, language andpreferences, can increase our competitive edge.To give you some examples:At a time when the prospect is for increasedeconomic opportunities in Vietnam we have in thiscountry sixty thousand speakers of Vietnamese.At a time when the triangle of southern China, HongKong and Taiwan is achieving staggering economicgrowth rates, we have in this country one hundredand seventy two thousand Australians to whom theChinese culture and language are a given, notsomething which needs to be learned.At a time when Australian industry aspires to pickup contracts in Eastern Europe and the Middle East,we have in this country eighty two thousandAustralians whose origins were there.And we have a market in Australia whose diversity isa virtual microcosm of the world into which wetrade.
The inspiration for this Conference is the realisationthat we must as a nation find ways to capitalise on theseassets.How can we use our diverse cultural knowledge andlanguage skills to penetrate overseas markets and boostAustralian exports?How can companies reach Australia's diverse domesticmarkets and increase profits at home?How can we better manage the diversity of Australianworkplaces and improve our productivity?Australia is a country of extraordinary achievements andequally extraordinary potential.In no small measure, this is because we are a country ofimmigrants. It takes imagination, ambition and courage to emigrate toa new land.And in my view, it is precisely these qualities that havecontributed to our past achievements, and will enable usto use our potential to the full In the future.During my recent visit to Asia, I stressed our country'scapacity and willingness to change.I said there, as I have said in various forums inAustralia the proof of our capacity to change is in thechange we have already made.We now see ourselves very differently, and we arestarting to be seen differently by others.And we are different.Australia has opened up, both culturally andeconomically. We have realised that our future depends on makingourselves relevant to the rest of the world, andespecially relevant to the most dynamic region of theworld which sits at our front door the Asia-Pacific.If only to take advantage of this great opportunity, thedevelopment of an export culture is a national priorityfor Australia.The change is already well underway.Australian export earnings have reached record levels,despite subdued world trading conditions and depressedcommodity prices.
T2EL8: . Oct. 92 17: 26 No. 035 P. 04/ 14Our export volumes have risen strongly in the ninem~ onths ended March 1992 they were over 10 per cent aboveyear earlier levels.The extent to which our economy relies on trade has risenby around 50 per cent since the early 1980s exports nowaccount for over one fifth of our total output.There are various steps we must take to build on thissuccess.We need a more informed and aggressive national attitudeto exporting.We must better educate and train our workforce.And, most critically perhaps, we must use all theresources at our disposal one of which is our culturaland linguistic diversity.Changes in our markets tell us this.In the 1950s, only one quarter of our exports were soldto non-English speaking countries. Today, over threequarters of our trade is with non-English speakingcountries. Moreover, our fastest growing major markets over the pastfour years have all been in non-English speakingcountries principally, but by no means only, in Asia.In the next decade income levels in Asia will risedramatically. The potential market for Australians goodswill grow in direct proportion.The challenge for Australian business is to developexport and international business plans that take accountof these new markets.We are dealing with countries which are very different.But they are not " foreign" to all Australians.Indeed, for every country which constitutes a potentialmarket for Australian companies, there are Australianswho know their way around.The key to gaining better access to all markets isknowledge knowledge of their cultures and languages, oftheir business practices and networks, and of theirpolitical and legal systems.in an address to the National Conference on Arabic lastyear, the Deputy Director of the National Farmers'Federation, Mr Phillip Eliason, pointed out that we donot necessarily enjoy a great advantage because we speakthe language of international business.TEL:
Advantage often lies, he said, with the country orlanguage group whose communications are difficult topenetrate. Our-Asian Australian communities, through their ownsmall-business networks, are making considerable progressin opening up new avenues of trade and consolidatingcommercial links with all parts of the Asia-Pacificregion. A recent study of Australian entrepreneurs from Chineseand Indian backgrounds has shown how personal networksare crucial in building export markets.This is not confined to Asia.The Middle East is a significant export market forAustralia. It has also been a significant source ofmigrants. The same applies to Eastern Europe, as well as thetraditional markets of Western Europe.Today, well over 20 per cent of Australians were born inanother country. Mure than half of them came toAustralia from non-English speaking countries In Europe,the middle East, Asia and South America.Combined with their Australian-born children, theyconstitute 40 per cent of our population.Such diversity in human resources Is rare by anystandards.The advantages of such diversity are not confined to" ethnic" businesses. All Australi~ an businesses have easyaccess to it. All Australian businesses can profit fromthis specialised knowledge.Australian firms can draw upon the wealth of language andcultural skills that resides in their own workforce, orthey can draw upon them by forging partnerships between" mainstream" and " ethnic" businesses.The Government, through the Office of MultIculturalAffgair shas been piloting and exploring 8 number ofinitiatives which illustrate these possibilities.For example: In conjunction with New South Wales TAFE, a pilotprogram to train exporters of primary products inselling to Asian and MIddle-Eastern countries.A proposal to create from ethnic chambers ofcommerce and other agencies a supportive nationalnetwork for small and medium sized businesses.
A pilot program to place overseas-trainedprofessionals into Australian businesses.Sponsoring a consultancy group which providescultural, linguistic and market expertise tocompanies.The opportunities go beyond exports. They concernproductivity and efficiency.A study of migrant skills undertaken I-n 1989 showed thatsome Australian employers fail to understand or discountthe value of training acquired overseas.It fur Lher showed that employers tend to perceiveimmigrants from non-English speaking backgrounds asidentical, whether or not they have skills.Through the National office of Overseas SkillsRecQnition, the Government 18 attempting to stem thiswaste of talent.of course, there is a significant issue of 800181 justiceinvolved here, as well.But rational self-interest alone dictates that we try toliberate resources locked away.And, in the interests of both fairness and economicefficiency, the Government is taking further measures toassist those job seekers whose lack of functional Englishis impeding their employment prospects.As part of the Employment Package, an additionalmillion has been allocated over the next three years sothat all registered job seekers without functionalEnglish can be referred to English as Second Languageclasses. This will assist approximately 48,000 jobseekers.Central to the Government's micro-economic reform agendaand to our national prosperity is the determinationto revolutionise vocational training based on keycompetencies. Australians from Non English Speaking Backgrounds and thevalue of the languages they speak cannot be ignored inthis process.This conference will hear of work to identify anddocument the practical methods some companies haveemployed to make the most of competencies in languagesother than English, or to work around language barriers,or to communicate cross-culturally.It is not just the opening up of overseas markets thatcan enhance our economic future. There are also marketson the home front.
Ethnic niche markets in suburbs where 70 per cent of thepopulation speak languages other than English at home.The National Australia Ban-k has put in special efforts toreach ethnic niche markets.Indeed NAB has sponsored an ethnic small business awardscheme and I look forward to speaking to the awardcer-emony tonight in Sydney, via satellite.Telecom Australia, for example, recently commissioned astudy of the needs of Its clients from non-Englishspeaking backgrounds.The study will also identify any cultural or linguisticbarriers to telephone use among this client group.Telecom already advertises on SBS television, and Ibelieve that the motivation for this study combines twoaspects of the Government's multicultural policiessocial justice and economic growth.In fact the Government has itself seen the need tounderstand its domestic market better. Through theOffice of Multicultural Affairs we've set up a network ofmore than 600 people who are experts in communicatingwith ethnic communities and groups.The network was developed in response to the Government'sneed to identify the views of individuals or groups whenplanning policies and services.It acts as a channel for the views of those Australianswho for reasons of language, culture or geography havebeen overlooked in the past.Tonight I am pleased to announce that, subject toensuring that the public interest is not compromised inany particular case, this network will be made availableto the business sector on a commercial basis to testproducts, services and advertising for local nichemarkets and potential excport markets.Managing a culturally diverse workforce may not beperceived as a challenge by managers and business owners,many of whom think that their workforce is able to speakcand communicate adequately in English.But a number of studies have shown that there areproducL. Lvity costs in not paying attention tocommunication issues, And some companies have seen thatit is shrewd to invest in English language trainingthemselves.
We are also exploring the option of contributing, alongwith business and community partners, to a scholarshipscheme for Australians with language and cultural skillsto develop international management and marketing skillsat the University of Sydney Graduate School of Business.This would complement Austrade's existing businessfellowship scheme for Asia.I said before that the Government itself is not exemptfrom the need to make better use of Australia'smulticultural skills.We need to ensure that; key agencies providing economicand trade advice and support to business the Departmentof Industry, Trade and Commerce, the department ofForeign Affairs and Trade, as well as Austrade also tapinto these skills.On the face of it, the evidence suggests that Governmentcould do better. for the public service isdispropoxrtionately of English-speaking background.So as another practical step, I'm asking the PublicService Commission and relevant agency heads to lookclosely at what special efforts can be made to ensurethat we recruit people from culturally diversebackgrounds and utilise their particular skills.We are a nation rich not only in natural resources, butin human resources as well.If we are to maximise our potential, to achieve all thatwe are capable of achieving, we need to harness theseresources. In doing so, we will achieve our twin aims of economicdevelopment and social justice for all Australians.Tomorrow, the conference will focus on how we can bestuse the local knowledge and language skills of ourdiverse worktorce to penetrate foreign markets, howcompanies can lift their profits by tapping domesticniche markets, and how we can exploit our manifoldworkplace skills to lift productivity.you will be exchanging ideas and, I hope, developingstrategies which will do much to guarantee our economicplace in the world and, with it, growth and prosperity.Lodies and gentlemenI am very confident about the future of Australia, andone of the principal reasons for my confidence is ourproven capacity in recent years to adapt and meet newchallenges.
9This is a very determined generation of Australians. Itis also a very worldly and knowledgeable one.This conference is a means of ensuring that forAustralia's sake and for theirs we do not waste theirambition and skills.It is, itself, another reason for confidence in ourfuture.Whatever you come up with whatever you say I canassure you, I'll be listening.I congratulate CEDA, the Office of Multicultural Affairs,and all those who have contributed to this very importantconference and I wish you well.Thank you.


117/ 92The Coalition's policy on road user charges is a hypocritical sop to the National Party.It flies in the face of Dr Ilewson's Fightback rhetoric, exposing him as a bully who willabuse and affront his legitimate critics in the community, but shrinks and fails to get hisway in his own Party Room.The decision to fund roads through Consolidated Revenue in the first term of a HewsonGovernment" is flagrantly at odds with Dr Hewson's Fightback manifesto.According to Fightback: " The user pays approach to the provision ofpublic infrastructureis however important in achieving a rational approach to microeconomic reform. A keypart of that reform process is getting the price signals right for transport. Fully fundingroad costs out of general revenue does not achieve that objective."Just one month ago, Dr Hewson expressed it this way: " Down the track, we want to see aform of road user charge for commercial vehicles, especially heavy transport."Obviously, " down the track" means sometime after July 1996. This is not only at oddswith Fightback and Dr Hewson's rhetoric, it's also bad policy and Dr Hcwson knows it.The fact is the fuel excise costs Australian motorists about one third of the average level offuel tax in OECD countries. Our petrol prices are already the second lowest of the 24. DECD countries.In a press release on September 27, Dr Hewson said a road user charge, based on vehicleweight and distance travelled would be used to fund roads, " frecing an amount ofconsolidated revenue."1
Clearly, on real ising that this would mean some heavy trucks would pay up to $ 1 7,000 ayear under a Hcwson Government, the Leader of the Opposition has allowed himself to betalked into a cynical pre-election capitulation deferring the road user charge at theexpense of all taxpayers.Dr I-ewson claims to have eschewed popularity, preferring to strive for what'sideologically and economically right for the nation. But he didn't count on theintransigence of his colleagues in the National Party. The result is a policy under which allAustralian taxpayers will subsidise road usage by commercial vehicles.Dr Hewson's been rolled and, under his policy, the public will pay the price.The reality within the coalition was dcscribed correctly by Dr Hcwson a few years agowhen he said the National Party laid claim to policy positions and the Liberal Party gotrolled. Nothing has changed. Mr Fischer has assumed the mantle of the " roller" and DrI-cwson has maintained the Liberal average as " rollee".CANBERRA 29 October, IM9


The following players have been chosen for the Prime Minister's X1 to play the West Indies at&nbsp;Manuka Oval on 12 November 1992:



Allan Border ( Captain)
Queensland


Michael Bevan
New South Wales


Adam Gilchrist
New South Wales


Dean Jones
Victoria


Justin Lager
Western Australia


Tim May
South Australia


Peter McPhee
Tasmania


Simon O'Donnell
Victoria


Paul Reiffel
Victoria


Mark Taylor
New South Wales


Michael Vektta
Western Australia


Matthew Bugden (12th man)&nbsp;
ACT


Umpires: Ian Thomas ( NSW) and Brian Lawrence ( ACT)



The Prime Minister's XI match has become an important event on the cricket calendar and I have&nbsp;great pleasure in continuing the tradition.
Thc annual match is a great opportunity for young players to gain valuable international experience&nbsp;and for more established players to display their renowned and spectacular talents. The match will&nbsp;also allow team members to 'get their eye in' for the season against the West Indies and Pakistan&nbsp;and stake their claims for national selection.
So, once again, the PM's XJ side contains a blend of some of Australia's most promising young&nbsp;cricketers Michael Bevan, Adam&nbsp;Gilchrist, Justin Langer, Paul Reiffel and Peter McPhee and&nbsp;some of the most accomplished and exciting players in Australian and World cricket.
Graduates of the AIS Commonwealth Bank Cricket Academy have, in recent years, also featured in&nbsp;the team, and that tradition also continues, with the selection of Michael Bevan, Justin Langer and&nbsp;Adam Gilchrist, the wicketkeeper.
This gamc provides particular pleasure&nbsp;to a lot of people and I am sure that this year's team, and its&nbsp;opponents, will put on a particularly skilful and entertaining display.
CANBERRA29 October 1992


TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE, 29 OCTOBER 1992E&amp; OE PROOF COPY( inaudible)
PM: What's knocking off their leave loading going to do for the place? The key toVictoria has got to be more cooperation, more investment, more jobs, more workand more activity. It's not this sort of thing, it's not confrontation, it's not hoppinginto people. So it's what we expect from the Liberal Party and a foretaste of whatthey'll see from Dr Hewson.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: If there's any confrontation in Victoria, it would be because Mr Kennett producedit. And I think he should go backt what has been now a successful formula for adecade of cooperation, discussion, reaching agreement, and for God's sake gettingbusinesses, unions and government together to get on with the place. Lct's get onwith growth.leave loading?
PM: No, absolutely not. We've got today an inflation rate of .1 per cent. We've got&nbsp;today the lowest inflation rate in the world. Who would believe, who could make&nbsp;a case that the annual leave loading is affecting wages or competitiveness? It's just&nbsp;nonsense, it's just tribal Liberal Party nonsense.
ends.



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE MON. P J KEATING H4P
FORUM ON THE NATIONAL STRATEGY ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Thank you for your invitation to attend today's Forum and to
accept, on behalf of the Federal Government, the National
Strategy on Violence Against Women.
I am aware that Commonwealth, State and community
representatives have worked together on this document and I
am pleased to know that you have been able to reach
agreement on an approach towards dealing with this extremely
serious issue.
It is a matter of great concern to me that violence against
women seems to be increasing.
Freedom from fear is a basic, inalienable right. It is
enshrined in the Atlantic Charter. It is a responsibility
of democratic governments to fight it in the same way that
we fight poverty, repression or discrimination of any kind.-
It is also the responsibility of communities to fight it.
It is the responsibility of all Australians particularly,
it has to be said, of men who cause most of the fear and do
most of the violence.
Violence against women is Intolerable.
All Australian women are entitled to be safe, and to feel
safe on the streets and in their homes.
I know-that personal safety is of major concern to
Australian women. For many women, fear of attack by men is
a constant source of anxiety and stress. 
It is a matter of shame that in our major cities women are
afraid to use public transport, particularly trains, outside
of peak periods because they do not feel safe.
That nurses and other shift workers are afraid to walk to
their cars except in groups.
That students in our tertiary institutions cannot freely
walk about the campus at night.
I know that this evening women around Australia are taking
to the streets to march to " reclaim the night", to assert
their right to be safe, and to feel safe, at night wherever
they live.
I fully support the aims of the march.
I often make the point that Australia is a pretty good place
to live in, that our values of democracy and equality, and
our concern for those who need help, make us a society to be
envied. But it Is also pretty obvious that these values are
undermined, and even contradicted, by violence and
especially by violence within the home.
We do not know the true extent of domestic violence but I
think we can say that it is a muchi larger problen ihan many
people are prepared to recognise or admit.
I find this both tragic and totally unacceptable.
In recent days we have had to confront a truly awful example
of such violence.
All Australia was shocked and appalled by what happened on
the Central Coast of New South Wales earlier this week, and
our hearts go out to the surviving families and friends of
the victims. And to their commnunities.
I find it appalling when individuals resort to violence to
deal with feeling frustrated or aggrieved.
We as a society have an obligation to do something about it.
We have to reaffirm the integrity of women and their
equality as-fundamental values which violence undermines. We
have to instil in our children, especially in our boys, the
notion that disputes should be resolved in non-violent ways. 
Our schools have a role to play here but most particularly
parents. And so does our media. There is far too much violence on
television in my view, and this is encouraging violence to
be seen as normal and acceptable. it is sending totally the
wrong signals to our children, and to those individuals who
are wont to resort too readily to violence.
As a federal government, our powers are limited in this area
but there are some practical actions we can and do take.
For instance, we provide funds for 263 women'sreus
Australia-wide which offer safe shelter to women and
children escaping domestic violence.
We provide funds under the Commonwealth -State Housing
Agreement to ensure women escaping domestic violence can
have proiyof access to public housinj This means they
and their children have a real alternative and are not
forced to return to a violent situation simply because they
have nowhere alse to live.
Similarly, we ensure that women escaping domestic violence
have immediate access to the Sole Parents Pension so they
can support themselves and their children and not be
dependent on the man who has been violent towards them.
But perhaps most important of all, the Federal Government
can, and should, provide leadership on this issue.
We can help set the tone of public discussion and public
debate. We can speak out loudly in saying it is simply not on. We
do not want a society where it Is regarded as acceptable or
excusable for a man to attack a woman. It ig not and it
never can be.
We are prepared to put money into reaffirming this strong
view. Early next year the Government will be launching a
million community education program.
We will be using television and other media to proclaim the
message that-violence against women is not to be tolerated
in Australia today and should stop.
I welcome the comprehensive strategy on violence against
women which I have just received as a source of further 
ideas and thinking on how we tackle this sore o u
society. o u
I look forward to reading its proposals and to discussing
with my Cabinet colleagues how we can act to do our bit
towards ending the toll of violence against women.
I urge my fellow political leaders at the State level to
take this document to heart, to study it and to take the
appropriate actions. I
This issue is not a partisan one.
It is one on which we can all agree.
We can agree that we want the world to be safe.
I want a world where none of us is pray, where all
Australians can feel safe, a world where women can get on
with their lives without fear or anxiety.
This is a goal we as a nation can work towards and I pledge
that I will do all I can to see that we do.
Today's national strategy document is a first step. I look
forward to there being many more.
Canberra A.
October, 1992 : A
tIV 


TEL: 30. Oct. 92 17: 03 No. 014 P. 01/ 10qPRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE HON P J KEATING, MPINTERVIEW WITH MAXINE MCKEW, ABC PMOCTOBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MM: Prime Minister, the prospect of wide spread industrial protest as a result of&nbsp;the Kennett Government's IR changes, that must fill you with some&nbsp;foreboding, surely any industrial disruption would play into the Liberals&nbsp;hands, wouldn't it?&nbsp;
PM: I don't think so. What Mr Kennett is now doing is jeopardising the&nbsp;Victorian recovery, and he is breaking the mould on a decade of industrial&nbsp;cooperation. We have got the lowest level of industrial disputes in about&nbsp;or 30 years at the moment, we have got an inflation rate which is the world's&nbsp;best as of this week .1 per cent for the quarter. Who says that there is anyproblem&nbsp;in industrial Australia, the only problem is the problem that Mr&nbsp;Kennett is making. So I don't for a second accept the argument that if he&nbsp;makes the problem, in some way the victims of it have got to live with it.
MM: But surely things like the abolition of leave loading, things like making no&nbsp;difference between weck work and weekend work, getting rid of penalty&nbsp;payments, a lot of that is going to strike a sympathetic chord, particularly in&nbsp;Victoria.
PM: That is all bcing done now, it is all being done cooperatively. The thing todo with industrial knots is to unthread them, to unpick them, you have got topick your way through them, not tear and pull at them which only tightensthem up. Now that is what they arc doing. In the Coles enterprise.
agreement, which was done under Labor policy, Coles can now open 24hours a day, all the penalty rates have been negotiated. But this is notnegotiated this is just torn away, and I might say torn away by aGovernment which has given its Deputy Leader another $ 8000 a yearincrcasc in salary, which has got the silver service back out in the a la cartedining room, where the State Government there has spent the night givingitself rewards. I mean the duplicity of these people, $ 122,000 for theDeputy Leader of the majority party, $ 8000 a year increase, SeniorParliamentary Secretarics, a National Party backbencher a rise of $ 21, 000 ayear. Thc gall of these people, the duplicity is just amazing. And 43Liberal National Party MPs will receive a substantial pay rise from four newparliamentary committcs,
MM: Yes but you would be the first to concede, wouldn't you, that our elective&nbsp;rcpresentatives are pretty poorly paid?
PM: Just understand this, this Governmctit has never at any stage moved MPspay outside of the general wage fixing arrangements. Here is a Governmentwith the hide to be saying thcy are going to strip away penalty rates whichare going to matter to people like nurses, and people in retailing, they aregoing to have a substantial fall in salary, this is not some shaving away ofsomething, a substantial fall in salary because their weekly pattern of workis in a penalty period, and while he is doing that he is out giving $ 8,000 ayear to his Deputy Leader and big pay increases for 43 of his memberswhile he is knocking $ 800-$ 1,000 off Victorian families. And what is thisall about? As if the workforce of Victoria have been the pcrpetrators ofVictoria's problems. What is he doing to penalise the people who causedthe problcm, the pcople who ripped off Trico, who ripped off the Farrowcorporation and Pyramid? They are the perpetrators. But the people whoare basically harmless bystanders, the Victorian public, they're the ones tobe hit.
MM: Mr Keating, the prcvious Victorian Labor Govermcnt were not innocent&nbsp;bystanders, were they also not perpetrators?
PM: Absolutely.
MM: Surely a lot of the pain is now being born by your own constituents because&nbsp;of the previous mistakes of the Kirner Government.&nbsp;
PM: They have taken their cuts by their defeat in an election. But they were not&nbsp;pursuing these sorts of policies. Australia will only grow in a cooperative&nbsp;way. We have got a recovery on now, what Mr Kennett is doing is going tostop it stone dead in Victoria. Who would invest a dollar in this climate,and for what? And while hc is doing that he has got the silver grill out at theParliament House and they have all got salary increases put through at 4.00in the morning. This guy has got more gall then anyone I know.
MM: Is their much cooperation around, though, if John Kalfpenny takes to the&nbsp;streets and people follow him?
PM: Well look at this talk, Mr Kennett is talking about putting police out thereon pickets, there can be no more then six unions in a picket. What is all thismood for?
MM: What are you suggesting, there is a touch of Bjelke-Petersen about this?
PM: Absolutely.
MM: But Joh Bjelke-Peterscn never lost an election by union bashing, did he?
PM: Just understand this. That is, there is no need for any of this, there is atotally cooperative atmosphere in the workforce, enterprise agreements aremoving day by day through industry, we have got the lowest level ofIndustrial disputcs in 30 years, we have got the lowest inflation rate in 33years, said the Statistician the other day. What is the problem? Why shouldtheir be talk about Police, in any circumstances? Why should a Governmentjust legislate away penalty rates, for instance, when they could be negotiatedas Coles has done under their enterprise agreement for 24 hours a dayopening. This is just necdlcss.
MM: Well surely Mr Kennett is accelerating what is underway, so therefore what&nbsp;is the problem?
PM: What he is doing, Maxine, he is introducing a Fedcral Coalition policy.
MM: Mr Howard has said that is not the case. All these things will be in awards&nbsp;if employers and workers what them to.
PM: I have got a Mr Howardpress release here, and what it says is this, these are&nbsp;his words, ' you will have Governments sharing identical views, give or take&nbsp;a comma here or there, identical views on industrial relations.' So the factof the matter is, Mr H oward is saying, that give or take a comma you have&nbsp;basically got the same policy in Victoria you are going to have from us.&nbsp;And he is dead right of course.
MM: That is Selective quoting, Mr Howard said on AM only the other morningthat in fact if workers and employers agree to keep in things like leaveloading they will stay in the awards.PM: He is now backing off at a million miles an hour.MM: Mr Howard has not rushed to endorse the Victorian action at all.PM: No, just understand this, none of the things which Mr kennett has now donehc said he would do in the election campaign, he was quite duplicitist aboutall this. There was no mandate for any of this stuff, there was no hint of anyof this.MM: But surely, Mr Keating, you can't say that the Victorians knew that theywere voting for change.PM: No, not for this change.MM: They weren't demanding the detail.PM: There will be no explicit references to these things by Hewson or Howard,but that is why Howard is right when he said the first time, ' Governmentsharing identical views ( Conservative Governments) give or take a commahere or there, identical views on industrial relations.' Basically they aregoing to push 8 million people onto common law contracts. EveryAustralian worker will have a contract for themselves which they will haveto negotiate themselves, not collectively, not enterprise bargains, 8 millionpeople shoved onto common law contracts and on the way through, not bynegotiation, not by a process of some bargaining, what will be spirited awayare all of thcse things which kccp a lot of people, keep their salaries so theycan make ends meet, like for instance penalty rates.MM: I know you don't agree with them, but surely you can't deny that JeffKennett has a substantial mandate for just this sort of change.PM: He does not. No, I do not agree at all.MM: Why not?
TELPM: Because these matters were never in fact he was given the contrary signal,he was giving the signal that he was going to bc, if anything, more friendlyon industrial relations then the Coalition. He was playing down the courseof the election campaign what his policy would be. In fact, it is a real wolfin sheep's clothing routine.MM: Prime Minister, do you accept that there is a dilemma here for the Labormovement here in how you respond to this? You are obliged after all toprotest these changes on behalf of your own constituents.PM: No I am not obliged to do anything.MM: If you go overboard, though, you risk alienating a lot of people who reallydon't have much sympathy, especially with Victorian unionists. These arethe people who had thc trains lined up in the streets of Melbourne in 1990,that caused a lot of disruption.PM: Well some did, but is that the whole population of Victoria? Victorianunions are also a principle part of the wage compacts of the last decade, aprinciple part of the low level of industrial disputes, a principle part of the. .1per cent inflation rate or .8 for the year. This is industrial unionism ofVictoria, it has been in a compact of cooperation, totally cooperative. Youare not choosing your words carefully when you are saying we are goingover the top, you have got Mr Kennett talking about putting police on picketlines, he is legislating in the dead of night to knock out penalty pay, and weare going over the top, while he has got the silver service out again and he isgiving people pay rises at 4.00 in the morning. He is ripping it off Victorianhouseholds in the course of the day and putting the largess onto MPs in themiddle of the night.MM: Prime Minister to another matter, when Mr Dawkins was made aware in themiddle of June that the Victorian Labor Government had exceeded itsborrowing limits by $ 1.2 billion, did he tell you about it?PM: He did, yes. But if you are moving here to say there is anything wrong withthis, this is a total furphy raised by the Opposition, a total furphy.MM: if hc told you about it why was it not in the Budget?PM: Woo, woo, woo, he wrote properly to the Victorian Government and told thenmthat their arrangements were unacceptable to them. First of all they didn't evenindicate that they were about to make a medium term borrowing, they said thatthey might make a medium term borrowing. T3EL0: . Oct. 92 17: 03 No. 014 P. 05/ 10
TEL: 6MM: In fact they dodged and weaved in all that documentation didn't they?PM: And hc wrote to them and then they meet him and they indicated that they wouldin their Budget remedy in part the debt situation of Victoria, and when they didn'tthe Treasurer then wrote to them again, but within a couple of days the electionwas called. Does anyone in this country believe that a caretaker Government isgoing to be able to put in any sort of medium term debt strategy is going to dealwith a problem like this?MM: But in all that time from June until the preparation and the presentation of theAugust Budgct, Mr Dawkins was clearly unhappy with the answers he was gettingfrom Victoria, why did he put such an unequivocal figure in the Budget, why wasthere not a rider about the fact that these figures were not accurate?PM: You understand it is not iii our Budget, it is nothing to do with the CommonwealthBudget, it's a document which is published with the Budget.MM: It's information Victoria gives to you.PM: It's about State financing, and it is thc borrowing that is agreed or approved by theLoan Counrilf. hey had not at this stage applied for a permanent, that is amedium term borrowing, and the matters had to be resolved when the total pictureof Victoria was revealed in the so Waled Nicholls Report.MM: Do you accept thcn that the result is that the figures in the Budget are inaccurate?PM: No, I don't accept that whatsoever.MM: Or incomplete surely?PM: No, just understand this, that all Governments are entitled to approach the LoanCouncil and to make application for a change in their borrowings. Governmentsover the years have done this and they have been able to do it with all theappropriate confidentially about giving them the flexibility they need to makcchange and put such arrangements into place. That was being done with Victoriaand it was being done because changing the medium term debt arrangements anddebt strategy of Victoria was a matter of substance, and Victorian officials gaveMr Dawkirns to believe that they would make substantial progress in the StateBudget. That took from June till August. When they didn't he wrote to them invcry clcar terms.MM: Why didn't he go public?PM: Because what is the point of going public? EL: 30. Oct .92 17: 03 No .014 P. 06/ 10
TEL: 30. Oct. 92 17: 03 No. 014 P. 07/ 107MM: Because you went public in 1988, you made a big fuss about the AhernGovernment when they exceeded their borrowing limits.PM: I did not, no, that was totally different. Hang on, you've asked me, I'll tell you.What Mr Ahern. said was we will flout the Commonwealth's global borrowings, Isaid no you won't, you do and we'll take it off you.MM: And you thought the matter was so serious you'd introduce legislation.PM: No, but this is totally a different thing, this is not a Governmecnt flouting at a LoanCouncil meeting saying to the Commonwealth they won't abide by arrangements,this is a Government which found their debt position overhauling them and wasseeking a rcmcdy.MM: It's a de facto increase in borrowings, isn't it?PM: We havc accommodated a number of States over the years, I did as Treasurer, tochange their borrowing arrangements. In fact this happened to me over the yearswith Mr Cain, and I told them that the nature of their borrowing arrangementswhere not satisfactory and they to change, and they took a while to put newinstruments into place, new structures, and to do it. But the idea that we should doas now Mr Stockdale had done, blurt all this out in public and upset the financialmarkets and in part the exchange rate. What you're suggesting is we should haveundertaken that course of action to do what?MM4: Prime Minister I'm suggesting this, all the documentation that the Treasurer hasproduced this week clearly shows that the Victorians were stone walling oninformation. Now what I suggest to you is why didn't Mr Dawkins, yourself, anyother senior ministers go public with this? You weren't shy about going public onother issues with the Kirner Government.PM: No, undcrstand this, the point is not to go public, the point is to repair it. Now Iknow being consrructivc is not number onc in thc media's, certainly not theCanberra Press Gallery's first interest, their first interest is to get everything public;Governments have got a more serious agenda, they've actually got to get thingsfixed. And what we said here, let's get a medium term strategy in place, and in factthat strategy was not put into place and once the election was called there's noprospect of a caretaker govcrnment putting it into place. The Commonwealth hasacted as always totally appropriately here, not just totally appropriately but againconstructively, trying to get into place the proper borrowing arrangements to seethat Victoria had a medium term debts scenario.MM: If that's the case, then why is the NSW Premier John Fahey threatening to notcome to any future Premiers meetings while Mr Dawkins remains Trcasurer?
TEL 8PM: You'll ind that the Treasurer today has written in very strong terms to Mr Faheysaying that his statements were totally without any basis in fact, that his officialsknew that everything hc was saying was false and that the Treasurer will be doinga press conference righit now upbraiding him and asking him for an apology.MM: Did Mr Dawkins as least have a responsibility to warn other Loan Councilmembers of what was going on?PM: In the end this was published in the Nicholls Report.MM: But that was September.PM: In September.MM: There's a gap from June to September.PM-: It's now October, so how come all you blood hounds didn't discover it? What doyou want us to do, point It out to you? Please hawke it around the Press Gallery,saying notice this line, see if you can cause some trouble in the financial marketswith it. Governments have got to be constructive and get things done and if themedia is asleep at the wheel, if the people who watch Victorian finances, the TerryMcCranns of this world and these other people are asleep at the wheel that's theirproblem.MM-. Does it point to the fact that the Loans Council is perhaps powerles to doanything about wayward States? Does it point out problems there?PM: What Mr Fahey has done today, I don't quite know whether he really understandswhat he's done, in all the freedoms which I as Treasurer gave the States when theysaid we're mature, give us more freedom to run our own affairs, he's now asked ustoday for the Commonwealth to take those freedoms back, and say we are notmature, you'd better run it for us. Ok, we'll take them back. But I'm not sure otherStates well appreciate what Mr Fahey has done.MM: Prime Minister, with another good inflation result this week, what are yourconcerns perhaps about the combined effects of thc Victorian Budget withincreased taxes there and the depreciation of the dollar? Won't that all cventuallyfeed Into inflation?PM: It may have some effects, but whether they are muted or not depends on the wholeprice environment of Australia, an inflationary environmecnt. But one thing is forsure, Liberal governments lift tax and cut wages and I need no further proof of thatthan to see what Mr Kennctt has done this week, Dr Hewson has the same policy;lift tax with a GST of 15 pcr cent and cut wages. T3EL0:. Oct. 92 17: 03 No. 014 P. 08/ 10
TEL: 30. Oct. 92 17: 03 No. 014 P. 09/ 109MM: Are You wonfied that what's happened in Victoria and the dollar will impede therecovcry?PM: I'd certainly be worred that if there was a Federal Coalition Government whichadds 6 to 7 percentage points to inflation so that the inflation rate will be nearlyback at double digits, we would be in awful trouble, and there's no way thefinancial markets wouldn't take a very dim view of that. As it is, I'm happy to saythis week Australia has the lowest inflation rate in the OECD and that means theworld.MM: Isn't that in part due to the fact that there's not much going on in the economy?PM: No, it's mainly due to the fact that we have got inflationary expectations down andthat the two big tax cuts under the Accord in 1988-89, 1989-90 stopped the blowout In wages and the boom and which gave us a very low base upon which toreduce inflation. Certainty in a stronger recovery there will be some more pressureon prices and the result would not be as tow as we've seen this week, indeed theTreasurer said the underlying rate he thought was about 2.4 per cent the best theLiberals could do would be 10.4.MM: Are you worried about the slide in the doltar?Pm: rm not here for open heart surgery about the exchange rate, interest rates.MM: No, butPM: [' ve come to do an interview, not stay two hours Maxine.MM: I understand that.PM: Thank you.MM: But I thought you'd give us a comment about that. Surely a dollar if it's heldbelow 70 cents will threaten inflation.PM: The exchange rate moves up and down and it has over a period of time. Australia'sfundamentats are these we've got the lowest inflation rate in the OECD, we'revery competitive, we've got a competitive wage structure and we're now growingas fast or faster than any other OECD country so we're starting to grow again andwe're still containing inflation; these are pretty good signals.MM: Would the authorities though be happy to hold the dollar below 70 cents?PM: You can't ask me those questions, It's no good asking me rinky-dink questionsabout monetary matters.
MfM: Altight, a couple of final questions Prime Minister, there are rumours around themarkets again today that you may call a pre-Christmias poll.PM: Everyone asks me about this don't they Maxine?MM: Yes, they do and here we go again.PM: And you can't be the exception to the rule. As I say, I think the public expectvalue from these Parliaments and they think they should go their full ternm, andthat's a pretty good general rule.
MM: Just one other point, there's another poll next week in the US, if we are&nbsp;looking at a&nbsp;victory by Bill Clinton does that cause you any concerns in terms of trade policy?
PM: I think each administration of the United States is to be taken as you find them.&nbsp;The people who occupy high executive positions in government have all sorts of&nbsp;views, arnd you can't assume because In the event that Mr Clinton was elected that&nbsp;it being a Democratic party that it would ncecssarily be more protectionist andtherefore less likely to make open trading arrangements or to keep them. A lot ofthis depends on evcryone's personal experiencc, a product of Mr Clinton'sgeneration will know that thc great growth in world income came frominternational trade and that may be very well impressed upon his mind, one doesn'tknow, But again, before wc jump to conclusions let's wait and see who wins.
MM: Indeed, Prime Minister thank you very much.
PM: Good Maxine.ENDS TEL



TEL: 1. Nov. 92 15: 15 No. 003 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
I NOVEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I just want to make this point to you, that in a most revealing admission today Mr
Reith has said that the Victorian Premier, Mr Kennett, and his Govenment, have
broken their election promise and have no mandate for the industrial relations
_ policies they are now implementing. He said this, I quote him, he said when asked
about whether the promise was given that no worker would be worse off by $ 1.00
Mr Reith said: ' Well it may arguably be put that they have brought down a policy
which was different to what they said before the election'. And when pressed he
went on to say, on the Sunday Program this morning: ' I think it is a fair argument
that they' Kennett and the Government ' made a promise bcfore the election and
in some circumstances that promise will not bc met'.
In other words, they followed a policy which deceives the Victorian electorate into
believing that the industrial rclations policy of the Kennett Government would be
far more sympathetic then it is, and therefore in the full context of Mr Reith's
remarks he has made it clear that there is no mandate for Mr Kennett and his
Government for the industrial relations policies he is now following.
Now, Victoria is the Liberal Party's social laboratory. Victoria is the place where
they are trying out their industrial relations tricks, where they are giving vent to all
their ideological obsessions and they are now slipping and sliding and backing
away from the kind of policies which we would see under John tlewson, John
Howard and Peter Rcith. 
TE L: 1. Nov. 92 15: 15 NO. 003 P. 02/ 04
2
1: Mr Keating does this justify, therefore, the Federal Government legislating to
allow Victorians to leave the Victorian Jurisdiction and move into Federal
jurisdiction under Federal awards?
PM: Well that could be a matter any Government could do in the normal course of
events.
J. How?
PM: There is no problem, there is no reason in policy why if a union wants to be
Federally registered that it shouldn't be able to be. But in the event that people are
going to wear penalties that they didn't bol ieve they were going to wear when this
election was taken in Victoria, having that opportunity, at least gives the Victorian
workforce some option to escape these policies.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well that is a matter that is yet to be discussed.
J: Are you confident that you have adequate constitutional power to do that?
PM: Well again, that is a matter that has got to be propcrly heard by Cabinet.
J: ( inaudible)
PM. Again, these arc mattcrs that Senator Cook would need to bring before the Cabinet.
But the primary matter here is, the Liberal party have gone along as thoughi they
have just finished their port and cigars, their cognac and cigars down at the
Melbourne Club, and decided that the workers are really all the problem, and they
dashed out and hopped into them. In fact we have had a breakout of industrial
peace in this country now for nearly a decade. We are now collecting data, we
think probably our industrial scene has never been as peaceful from the time the'-
statistics have been taken. We have got an inflation rate last wcek which puts us at
the world's best, and on what basis do the laboratory workers of thc Liberal party
believe thcy can then run out into an clectorate and engage in these sort of
disruptive policies?
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well I will see what Mr Kennett has to say when he comes.
J: Mr Keatinig..
PM. There are a couple of things in the conduct of public affairs that should be above
the silliness of politics and the management of financial affairs between the
Commonwealth of States and the management of financial assets ought to be one 
TEL: 1. Nov. 92 15: 15 No. 003 P. 03/ 04
3
of them. It ought to be one place where even Mr Reith knows that his silliness
causes damage. Now the Commonwealth has acted here with total propriety and
free of political favour. All that has happened here is that a matter akin to matters
which I as Treasurer dealt with over the years, and other Treasurers have dealt with
between States, and with the Commonwealth and States, has perhaps for the first
time in a long time becomne a public matter, and there is a lot of interest in it. But
States have been accommodated on all sorts of problems, or we have worked
through all sorts of financial problems, not taking this sort of wrecking approach of
throwing things into the public domain, which has just seen all the bond reels rise
for the Commonwealth and the States making the whole carriage of public in
this country much mnore expensive.
1: So you blame thc Keninett Government?
PM: Let me just give you this example. How would it havc been if I had said at the
time when I knew the State Bank of Victoria was insolvent, for me to have said,
' well I must blurt this out, the public must know; despite the financial problems,
which my making it public will reveal, I shall make it all a public matter'. Of
course I didn't, I got it solved with Premier Kirner and the result was that the
Victorian public wcrc spared the greatest anguish that could have ever been visited
upon thcm in a State which held a quarter of all savings banks deposits. Now
that's what conscientious Ministers do, and I think the Victorian Government now
realise that they have made a mistake in seeking to make any capital out of this,
and that's probably why Mr Stockdale has now taken a back seat on the issue and
wants to discuss it sensibly, I might say, reasonably.
PM; The Treasurer is doing a press conference right this minute on all those matters and
you are wclcome anyone to look at his transcripts and he will take all the questions
that matter.
J: Mr Keating how concerned are you that industrial disruption in Victoria might
jeopardisc national economic rccovery?
PM: Very concerned. Who is going to invest in Victoria in this climate? And what is
the point of it? in a place which was virtually brimming over with industrial
cooperation, where we arc seeing all sorts of enterprise agreements being written
for all the flexibility in the world, to be talking about police, police on picket lines,
about a non-negotiated legislating away of important components of wages and
salaries and bencfits: there is just no point to this. What I suggest to Mr Kennett is,
that he sit down in a cooperative modc, as all of us in Australia have been obliged
to do for a decade, and make Victoria work better.
J: What is your advice to workers about the proposed strie? 
TEL: I. Nov. 92 15: 15 No. 003 P. 04/ 04
PM: That is up to Mr Kennett, any confrontation here is being generated by him, I can
only advise him this, that he should sit down with representatives of the workforce
and try and get his State back onto the road to recovery. Thank you.
ENDS 



* i
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISrERs THE IION P J KEATING MP
AND THE PREMIER OF VICTORIA, THE HON J G KENNETT MLA
The Prime Minter and the Treasurer met tonight with the Premier and thc Treasurer of'
Victoria to discusg Victoria's budgetary and debt position.
Following a constructive discussion, both Governments agreed upon the need to satisfy
the Loan Council that a sustainable long-term strategy is in place to address Victoria's
budgetary and debt difficulties. With that in mind, the Commonwealth Government is
willing to support, in principle, a Victorian approach to Loan Council seeking $ 1.6 billion
of special addition to this year's Global Limit in order to finance the 1992-93 budget.
Victoria prescntod a medium term financial strategy to the mecting. The Commonwealth
and Victorian Governments will work together to further refine that strategy prior to a
special Loan Council mceting in December.
it is expected that this examination will be succssfully concluded during the course of the
next four weeks. The consultations to date provide cause for confidence that Victoria's
problems can bc satisfactorily rcsolved.
Arising from thc meeting's discussion of the steps already taken and those in prospect, the
Conmmoniwealth Government has agrecd to recommend to Loan Council a special addition
to Victoria's Global Limits of $ 1,267 million to regularise Victoria's relationship with
Loan Council. That special addition would be in respect of the borrowings. undertaken in
May or this year to refinance previous short-term borrowingq used to finance budget
deficits in that year and in the preceding two years. Victoria accepts that these borrowings
undertaken by the previous Victorian Government require Loan Council approval.
Both Governments were of the view that it was important that stability be restored to
financial markets by focussing on the task of restoring Victoria's budgetary position and
avoiding a continuation of the potentially damaging public debate of recent days.
2 November 1992 L L. k_ 1 L j L 



I-W 119/ 92
Embargoed to midnight AEST 2/ 11/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HlON P J KEATING MP
URUGUAY ROUND: MESSAGE TO THlE G7
At this critical time for thc success of Uruguay Round I have tonight conveyed to the
leaders of the major world economics a communication signed by a large and
representative STOUP of countries.
It stresses the present danger to the world trading. syjtem and urges the leaders of the
major economies to intervene now to settle the remaining differences in the Round.
On behalf of these countries I[ have asked the leaders of the United States, Japan,
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Italy and Canada, as well as the European
Community and the Dircctor General of the GATT, to recognise that without urgent
solutions the deadline for successfully completing Uruguay Round negotiations by the
end of this year will not be met.
it is quite remarkable and think extremely telling that this expression of grave
concern conics from such a large and divcrsc group of countuics.
It includes Hong Kong, Ncw Zealand, Chile, Singapore, Korea, Colombia, the
Philippines, Czechoslovakia and all the Nordics, as well as Australia.
It embraces most world economic regions, and widely different economies. Despite
widely differing interests all in this group believe the benefits to flow from a Round
outcome cannot be misscd and all share the desire to bring matters to a satisfactory
close. A copy of the communication follows.
Confirmed signatories at 6pm today were Australia, Hong Kong, New Zealand,
Chile, Singapore, Korea, Colombia, Thc Philippines, Czechoslovakia, Norway,
Sweden, Finland and Iceland. By the time of release a number of other countries are
expectcd to have confirmed their adherence to the communication.
CANBERRA
2.11.92 
I C L. Attachment A
COVERING LETTER TO ALL G7 HEADS OF GOVERNMENT PLUS
DELORS AND DUNKEL
Dear I[ have been requested by a significant and representative group of active participants in
the Uruguay Round negotiations to convey to you the attached declaration concerning
the present impasse in the GATT negotiations.
The signatory countrics believe that without urgent solutions to outstanding
differences, the deadline for successfully completing thc Uruguay Round negotiations
by the end of this year, which the G7 leaders committed themselves to in July, will not
be met.
The concern of signatory countries is that unless G7 leadcrs act now, the benefits of a
successful outcome to the GATT round will be denied to the cntire international
community with very serious implications for growth in a wide range of countries with
diverse economic interests and for the future of the open world trading systemn.
commend the attached declaration for your immediate attention.
P. J Keating . I ~ q~ UA V ñ I 1 I 0U~ . J 
Attachment B
URUGUAY ROUND: A MESSAGE TrO THE G7
When G7 leaders met in Munich they committed themselves to a
year end deadline to finish the Uruguay Round. Without an
urgent solution to outstanding differences this deadline will
not be met and a successful conclusion to the entire Round
will be put at risk. The Round cannot be allowed to fail
through lack of political will on the part of 077 countries.
The Uruguay Round has been stalemated since the Draft Final
Act ( DFA) was tabled in December 1991. Already negotiations
have dragged on for six years two years longer than we had
all expected, denying the world economy the boost it urgently
requires. Strenuous efforts have been made in recent ' months to resolve
problems which key participants have with the agriculture
package in the DFA. We understand that considerable progress
has been made. The Round has, however, encountered political
difficulties among major participants which are diverting us
from the objectives to which we all committed our governments
at Punta del Este and in Montreal, and which are holding back
the work all participants must do to complete the
negotiations. The benefits of the Round will Cover all sectors
agriculture, market access, services and improved rules. All
participants will gain. The world trading system cannot risk
a failure of the Uruguay Round with all that would entail. A
successful result is needed to promote global economic growth
and to prevent a deterioration of the world trading system.
it is crucial as well to the development aspirations of many
developing and least developed countries and economies in
transition. The remaining differences in our view are
certainly bridgeable given the necessary commitment,
flexibility and goodwill on all sides.
The economic and trade interests at stake in these
negotiations are not those of the G7 alone, but those of the
entire international community. We all need the benefits that
will flow from the Round package. Moreover the restructuring
and liberalisation underway in many parts of the world could
be seriously threatened if these processes are denied the
encouragement provided by a strengthened GATT system. Delay
in concluding the negotiations is already denying the benefits
of the Round to the world economy and damaging the credibility
of the multilateral system.
we urge the leaders of the G7 countries to intervene now.
Three successive communiques have confirmed G7 commitment to
the Round. it is vital that immediate progress be made if the
goal which was set at Munich of bringing the Bound to a
successful conclusion by the end of 1992 is to be achieved. 



It, ' Aur
T~~~ jt
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KE. ATING, MP
UNITED STATES PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
On behalf of the Australian Government and people, I warmly
congratulate Governor Clinton on his election as President
of the United States of America.
Governor Clinton's great victory represents a clear mandate
for renewal and change. The American people have attached
great importance to this year's presidential election, as
demonstrated by the very high voter turn-out. They have
responded positively to Governor Clinton's call for revival
of America's domestic strength as a prerequisite for
competing in the global economy and exercising effective
international leadership.
It is important for Australia, and other members of the
international community, that the United States be confident
of its own strengths and values and sure of its role in the
world. This is especially critical in this time of profound
change in the international system.
The Government is encouraged by the moderate and
internationalist foreign policy stance that Governor Clinton
articulated durinig t: he campaign. He affirmed strong support
for the multilateral trading system.
on the immediate agenda, Australia attaches high priority to
an early and successful conclusion of the -Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations, and hopes the incoming
Administration will work hard in this direction.
The Government looks forward to working closely with the new
President and his Administration. At this time of change in
US political leadership, a point of continuity will be the
close ties of partnership and cooperation which Australia
and the United States have enjoyed for over half a century.
The Australian Government also pays its respects to
President Bush's achievements over the last four years.
The world will long remember his successful management of US
foreign policy during the challenging period as the Cold War
ended, and his very effective leadership of an international
coalition in response to Iraq's aggression towards Kuwait.
CANBERRA 4 NOVEMBER 1992 



d7
CV)
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNFHAM, 7.30 REPORT
NOVEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COiPY
PL: Prime Minister welcome again to the program.
PM: Good Paul.
PL: ' Unrepresentative swill', ' dcfamers', ' cowards', ' pansies', one could easily get
the impression you don't like the Senate.
PM: The Senate is always ovcr-stepping the mark. We have now got the
Democrats talking about messing around with bills for the income tax cuts,
your viewers would have sccn Senator Bishop pillory one of the bureaucrats
of a generation, Mr Boucher, and allege of him that he made an arrangement
with the Government to secure a position for himself.
PL: They would say they were just doing their job as representatives.
PM: The Senate is out of control and they have to be told that the Government is
made in the House of Representatives, that the Government's money bills
are sacrasonct and that it is in the House of Represcntatives Australia makes
it decisions, and not to try to usurp the powers of thc House of
Representatives in an unrepresentative chamber. That is, where we have the
same number of Senators for Tasmania as we do for NSW.
: 131
80/ 10d 9T0N 61: 81 Z6AON'S 
PL: Yes, but I mean in the Rcps the Democrats can't get a guernsey and they get
a sizeable slice of the vote, they can at clast get a go in a Chamber like the
Senate.
PM: But people are drifting in there with 10 or 11 per cent of the vote. You have
got people sitting in the Senate with 10 or 11 per cent of the vote, that's all
they can get but they are still there. Al! right that is fine for their purpose,
but their purpose is not to defame people, to pillory people, but worse to
stand in the way of legitimate government of the Commonwealth in the
House of Representatives.
PL: But this is under the constitution one of the institutions of Australian
democracy, time honoured, and here is the Prime Minister looking like he is
giving it a good old kicking.
PM: It has been kicking institutions itself it was into the tax office last week, it
is into manipulating all sorts of Government legislation. It was set up, Paul,
as a States House to protect the smaller States from what they thought
would be the majority of the bigger States in the House of Representatives.
What is it now? It is such a party House that Mr Reith, the Deputy Leader
in the House of Representatives, put a press statement out yesterday saying
which Senators would sit on a Senate Committee from the Liberal Party.
PL: This is the one that has caused this rumpus, the one that is investigating the
so-called loans affair.
PM: In other words, it is so blatantly a party house that Senator Bishop who is
now going to serve on it, before she has heard any evidence about this
inquiry said today that it was a cover up. This is not even a pretence at
impartiality.
PL: Sure, but I could say here's Paul Keating trying to denigrate the Senate and
its Committee iin advance of its hearing to try to make sure that it is as
bruised and battered as possible before this inquiry gets under way.
PM: I think Senator Bishop's claim today that it was a cover up is like a judge
making a verdict before he or she had heard the case. This has become a
disgracefully had procedure.
PL: Who is going to nominate the Labor people to this Committee? Not John
Button I should imagine. :-131
90* ON 61: 81 Z6' AON'S 
PM: They will be announced as appropriately by the managers of Government
business in the Senate.
PL: Yes, but the decisions will be made probably somewhere closer to your
office, won't they?
PM: It is a party House, so there should be no pretence it is a States House
having a legitimate review function on behalf of States. It is a party House
where nonsense is the order of the day a lot of the time, too much of the
time.
PL: But why don't you try to change it, or abolish it or something?
PM: It put our whole constitutional fabric at risk in 1975, they got so Boishie the
Liberal Party over there in 1975 they nearly took Australia to the edge of
civil strife. It was only for the good sense and the tolerance of the Labor
movement that it didn't happen.
PL: But as the next clection showed the people supported that.
PM: They are all at it again over there and the fact is that people swept into there
with 10 or 11 per cent of the vote have got no right to be in trying to tell the
Govcrnment and the H-ouse of Representatives what its principal program
should be.
PL: I gather then that you're not exactly broken-hearted or thinking of resigning
over the fact that today you became the first PM to he censured by the
Senate?
PM: No, here they are defaming people under privilege, calumny, detraction, all
sorts of things, and thcn when someone in the House of Representatives,
me, says look at this place, they say this is shocking, this is shocking, how
dare you talk about us like that I
PL: Tell us in the studio hcre about this pledge you have giveni about not
blocking the GST and what has prompted it?
PM: Well we want the battle for the GST to bc fought out in thc House of
Representatives. We are opposed to a OST, Dr [-ewson is in favour of one.
But the Libcral strategists are now saying, you can still vote for Hlewson and
not get the OST. : 131
le-n-A oTrVDOJ FT: RT Z6* AON* S 
PL: Which strategists?
PM: The Liberal Party people.
PL: You know that for a fact?-
PM: Yes, they are saying, and they will say it more as time goes on, you can vote
for Hewson and still not get the OST because it will get held up in the
Senate. All I ami saying, in the unlikely and in the unhappy event of this
nation deciding to clect a Coalition Government with a OST as its centre
piece, then no Senate obstructionism would come from the Labor Party, to
that then Government presenting its program.
PL: So you will let it through?
PM: In other words we would honour the electorate's word, the electorate's
mandate and respect it.
PL: Even though the Democrats are hell-bent on stopping it at all costs?
PM: The Democrats want to say. they want to run around the country in an
election campaign vote for us and we will stop the GST when in fact
they could only stop it with the support of the Labor Party. And Dr
Hewson's crowd would run around saying, don't worry about voting for us
you mightn't get a GST anyway because it may be stopped in the Senate. I
am getting rid of all that nonsense. A vote for Hewson will he a vote for the
GST. A vote for Keating and the Labor Party will be a vote against the
GST.
PL: But they were always going to bring the GST in in the moncy bills, which
you have always pledged since ' 75 that you would never block. So this has
a bit of a stunt element to it doesn't it?
PM: I don't believe that it is legitimate for an Opposition and in the Senate to
deny the principle element of what is a clearly articulated mandate. I notice
George Bush yesterday talked about the ' majesty of democracy' in his very
eloquent speech where he accepted defeat and said he would cooperate in
handing over the mantle to President elect Clinton. Thiat sort of respect for
the democratic process is something my party has always had. Wc are not
the constitutional wrecke rs of this federation that we have left to the
Liberal Party. They arc the people who hold up supply, have Governor
80/ V70d 910' ON 61: 81 Z6' AON* G : 131-
Generals appoint Opposition Leaders as Prime Ministers, all that sort of
nonsense and risk is taken by them.
PL: You're a difficult character to get a handle on aren't you, because one minute
you sound like the very sober-sided statesman and the next minute you're
there with the big bucket over the Senate, using extraordinarily colourful
language, the real larrikin?
PM: You've got to do things to get your attention Paul.
PL: We're always listening.
PM: If I was speaking in the House of Representatives in dulcet tones
PL: You're not doing this for us, this comes very naturally doesn't it?
PM: and articulate as one would do at the bar an argument, not a word would
be reported.-
PL-It's all the media's fault?
PM: No, just that we have to always not only wrap things nicely for you, but put
a bow on top.
PL: And meanwhile, of course, we are not here talking about this so-called
loans affair are we? You've neatly takcn the spotlight off that.
PM: Why would we? It's a sham of an issue anyway.
PL: But if cveryone is so innocent, why not bowl up to the Committee?
Dawkins can look after himsclf can't he?
PM: What is the Senate's legitimate interest in thc operation of a piece of policy
which is principally almost exclusively the business of the executive
government and which this Govemmcnt alone has established. That is, we
were thc only party to establish control over States borrowings with thc socalled
global limits. When Mr Howard was Treasurer, only 25 per cent of
States borrowings were controlled by the Loan Council. In other words, he
is prcpared to let 75 per cent just hacmorrhagc away, but if one small
transaction in the now very tight structure this Government has imposed in a
disciplinary way over a decade, well then it's a crime. So we have a Senate
oniCn'A QTAO0N FAI: RI Z6* AONS .1311 
Committee, but before it starts Senator Bishop says it's a cover up. It is just
a shambles and a joke.
PL: And what if voters say, when on earth are those people in Canberra going to
start talking about the fact that now one in four families has got no one in
work? When are we going to get onto some real issues?
PM: The real issue was Monday night when I met Mr Kennett and resolved
Victoria's debt position with him, resolved to look at the debt strategy which
they'll present to the Loan Council so that the Victorian rccovery and job
growth can continue and not have its financial accounting or thc settlement
of its monies held to ransom by this kind of debilitating and irresponsible
debate which has been promoted by Dr Hewson and Mr Rcith.
PL: Talking of money and uncertainties, are you awarc that people from the
money markets in Sydney and Melbourne have been phoning this building
all day with rumours and seeking confirmation that you are just about on
your way to see Bill Hayden?
PM: You've not been taking their calls I take it?
PL: I have been talking their calls and I've been telling them it's nonsense, but
there is a lot of uncertainty there isn't there?
PM: I don't know.
PL: You don't know? We assurc you Prime Minister there's enormous
uncertainty.
PM: Good on you Paul.
PL: Isn't there some point in trying to put some of this to rcest at least?
PM: I've told you before I think that the public cxpect valuc from thcse
Parliaments and they expect them to run their full course that is into, in
this case, 1993.
PL: So this rules out apre-Christmas poll does it?
PM: I never rule out anything. One of the happy prcrogativcs of a Prime
Minister in this system is to choose the date of the elcction, so I don't rule
things out.
80/ 90* d 910* ON 6T: 81 W6AON-S :-131 
PL: Without seeking to put words into your mouth could we put it this way,
given that a Prime Minister will always go when he thinks he can really win
and he's always got his eye on thc chance, your main thinking now is to go
early next year?
PM: Yes.
PL: Thank you. Finally the subject of violence on tclevision. I heard you raise
this in relation to the v~ iolcnce against women at a press conference you
were at the other day, you've raised it again in the House today, it's
obviously something that has been on your mind. What's bothering you?
PM: I think in television feature films and tele-movies on television, too much
violence is creeping into them. I notice this particularly when my children
were watching television in the school holidays where kids do sit up after
8: 30pm, and in a survey done by the ABT, 53 per cent of children are stil1l
up after 8: 30pm. So what I'm saying is that the commercial free-to-air
broadcasters should make certain that the level of violence on tclevision
declines, and adult only movies should be tclecast no carlier than
9: 30pm of an evening, so that at ] cast children have got some chance of
being protected from it.
PL: Do you think this violence is coming through in our society?
PM: There was a very pithy dcmonstration of that in that program Ihe
Simpsons', George Bush mentioned The Simpsons' in the election
campaign, where the family campaign against violence in telcvision. It very
graphically illustrates the point I think, that the more the ambience, the
insensitivities, as people become more insensitiscd to violence the more
prevalent it is likely to be.
PL: And kids are taught that violence is a way of solving problems.
PM: I just don't think that ' children or young peoplc in particular, who haven't had
enough years to settle their thoughts about these subjects, who a majority of
have probably never seen a violent thing happen or a killing. To see it as it's
now being depicted as what you'd call an every day circumstance of the
depiction of modem television is too much for a culture to keep absorbing.
PL: Are the networks going to go along with the Prime Ministcr's request?
8O/ 2-. 0d 9100ON 61: 81 Z6* AON* S: 131 
PM: I don't know, but I was making the point Paul, they've been treated very
fairly in the Government providing an opportunity for them to extend their
reach into pay television. It's not a case of everything for networks and
nothing for the rest of us, I think they've got national responsibilities.
PL: You almost make it sound like a bribe or a bit of a pay out, we look after
you, you do the right thing.
PM: I'm saying they've been treated properly in national policy where national
interests have bcen brought to bear, they should respond accordingly.
PL: And if they don't Prime Minister?
PM: We'll see, but I'm certainly going to writc to the ' Federation of Commercial
Television Stations saying that I think that AO movies ought to be
displayed after 9: 30pm and the classifications for films should be much
more clear. That parents in particular ought to have a better idea of
knowing what a classification means and what sort of depiction is likely in
the event of someone viewing it. I think the ABA is going to run a survey
and an invcstigation on this to dcvelop a ncw classification system and that
should help a great deal, but the greatest help will come from the self
restraint of the television networks themsclves. Chasing ratings with
violence I think has gone too far.
PL: Thank God for family shows like this.
PM: That's right.
PL: Thank you.
ENDS 131
80/ 80' d 9TO* ON 61: 81 Z6* AON* S 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LIBERALS PUT RECOVERY AT RISK
The industrial stoppage in Victoria is a tragedy for the State
and a cause for great concer~ n for all Australians.
This is a time when all Australians of good will are
determined to work together to maintain the momentum of
recovery. We are attempting to rebuild the prosperity of Australia anld
restore the jobs lost in the recession. The world is not
helping us in this. Success depends on our faith in ourselves
and our fellow Australians.
At this crucial moment the Victorian Government has decided to
deliver chaos.
Mr Kennett and Mr Gude have tried to portray today's strike as
an example of union bloody -mindedness.
Australians know this is not true. The disruption in Victoria
has been caused by the extraordinarily destructive and
dishonest actions of Mr Kennett and Mr Gude since the
Victorian election.
The Victorian Governmeunt's aictions go well beyond their
electoral ana~ Le*. They also go well beyond economic common
sornse, a nd thFe bounds of fairniess and decency on which
Australlian democracy is built.
They constitute an attack on basic liberties as well as wages
and conditions.
That is why Victorians are protesting today, and why so many
Australians share their anxiety.
In the past ten years we have seen a dramatic change in the
way Australians conduct their industrial relations.
In spirit and practice cooperation is replacing the habitual
conflict which for so long dragged us down.
This year the number of industrial disputes is the lowest for
thirty years.
And then along comes Mr Kennett. In one month he has returned
Victoria to the politics of rancour and revenge.
CANBERRA November 1992 T1EL0:. Nov. 92 10: 30 N0.008 P. 01/ 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE EVALUATION OF ACCESS AND EQUITY' REPORT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 10 NOVEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Neil ( Edwards), Gerry ( Hand), Robert ( Tickncr), other distinguished
guests, ladies and gcntlemen. I am delighted to launch this excellent evaluation of
the Commonwealth's Access and Equity Strategy and the new access and equity
regime. A week or so ago I spoke of extending the -multicxultural agenda to take advantage
of Australia's huge national economic asset rcpresented by our linguistic and
cultural diversity, our so-callcd productive diversity. It is true that while for many
years we have been very proud of ourselves about the way in which we have
created something new in Australia, something dirferent to other countries in the
world, we have settled quite divcrse communities into oiic nation. There is as well
as the great social achievement of that, a very clearly emerging and strong
economic bcrnefit, and that is the capacity to do things around the world by virtue
of the fact that we have a very strong multicultural community in this country. Our
skills, our linguistic skills and our cultural diversity, mean that whencer Australia,
which is now an open trading economy, seeks to approach particular markets or
sections of particular markets there are people in this country familiar with those
markets, those places, those customs, those morays, those languages. We can take
advantage of our productive diversity and build again further on our multicultural
achievement. As far as the Government is concerned, I said a week or so ago that wc are
continuing to build on the firm foundation of multicultural policies based on
assuring accss and equity to programs regardless of ethnic origin. Of course all of 
us who are interested in this room know that without fair access to programs we
can't expect all Australians to be able to contribute their best.
The new regime I'm launching today shows our determination to strengthen access
and equity. I must say that whilc we may be talking in these ternms access and
equity I am delighted to see that just a wcck ago we had the American President
elect speaking in their national debate in these terms about access and cquity so
that the people of that country can share in its wealth, have access to what the
United States offers and have equity in terms of the approaches people can take to
it and expect from it.
We have been developing these themes over all of the 1980s, and what I can say
for this Government is in the early part of the 1980s we were standing against the
wind in terms of the prevailing northern hemisphere ideological breeze; that was,
all that mattered was private initiative and private reward. But now where the
breeze has changed and the wind has warmed up, one finds that Australia's view
about such things as fairness and equity in society and programs oftgovernment
which govern for cverybody and seek to help everybody equitably arc becoming
the voguc world wide. So all the more reason and all the more appropriate that we
should be evaluating what we are doing oursclvcs and strengthening our
determination to do things equitably and to demonstrate full access.
The new regime will demonstratc our firm belief that the programs must be fully
available to all Australians regardless of language, race, culture and religion. The
evaluation shows that there has been real progress, but a lot more can be done.
This Government has endorsed the evaluation's recommendations and expects that
all Government agencies will implement them with vigour. The new regime will
be practical and participatory, it will address the real barriers and make sure that
Commonwealth agencies do reach out to all Australians.
These are not just programs in name, but they are programs in reality that actually
do what we say they will do. The agencies of the C-ommonwealth, many of you
here today who administer them, are fervently taking the view that they will reach
to where they are designed to reach and that they'll meet their program objectives.
It gives me very great pleasure to launch both the evaluation and the new regime
and now my colleagues Gerry Hand and Robert Ticker will address you about the
details. Thank you. 



TEL: 11. Nov. 92 14: 47 No. 019 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER 1123/
STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HION P J KEATING MP
COMMEMORATIVE MISSION TO FRENCH BAT1TLEFIELDS
On this anniversary of Armistice Da I am pleased to announce that the Federal
Government will fund a commemorative mission to the French battleficlds in 1993.
1 envisage this journey involving a number of FirstWorld War veterans as a national
tribute to the sacrifices of Australian service personnel.
The visit, likely to take place in August or September next year, will be a forerunner to the
anniivcrsary of thc end of the First World War, in November 1993.
Thbousands of young Australians participated in WWI, and therefore thcrc was a great
impact on most Australian families. The casualty ratc was very high, particularly in France
in the final years of the war.
Of the 313,000 soldiers who embarked from Australia, 53,00X) died in France and
Belgium. About 18,000 have no known grave.
Because of the success of the pilgrimage to Gallipoli in 1990, we now propose that a
limited number of veterans travel to theSomme, an area where Australians fought with
valour in 1918. The number might be of the order of onc or two from each Statc. The
delegation would be accompanied by administrative and support staff.
Thc mission will coincide with the anniiversary of Australian attacks onMiont St -Quentin.-
and Peronne in 1918. This fighting is held by many historians and Australian veterans to
be a brilliant action which effectively removed five German Divisions from the fighting. It
resulted in 3,000 Australian casualties.
It is expected that the group will also travel to Ville rs-Bretonneux and Bullecourt, where
Australian veterans have longstanding links with the French people.
This year's Fedcral Budget provided $ 2 million for support of military commemorations
for the period 1992-3 to 1995-6.
CANBERRA November 11, 1992 


IADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,RECEPTION FOR THE PRIME MINISTER'S ELEVEN WELCOME TOTHE TEAMS, PARLIAMIENT HOUSE, 11 NOVEMBER 1992Ladies and gentlemen.Let me begin by saying that on behalf of the Government Iam delighted to welcome the West Indies and Australiancricket teams to thiS reception in their hon'our.in particular I am sure everyone here will want to joinme in welcoming the West Indies cricket team toAustralia. No doubt it is easier for me to say this than it is forsomeone who has to play against them.But Australian cricketers, being of the traditional mouldthat enjoys a challenge, no doubt are looking forward tothe summer.Because, lit ule as I know about the game, I know it hasto be said that playing the West Indies represents thebiggest challenge in modern cricket.For sixty years they have produced legendary players.in the last fifteen they have produced legendary teamsthey have been consistently the world champions.You might ask how someone who is not a renowned cricketlover gets to know such things.But how does a non-cricket person like myself get to knowabout the West Indies?I know because the West Indies are legendary you can'thelp but know about them.And you cdin't help but admire them. You can't be at thetop for so long without having something special aboutyou.
2You can't come from behind like they did in Barbados tobeat South Africa without there being something specialabout them.All comparisons with the trend in national opinion pollsare, of course, totally invidious and out of order.The thing about great sportsmen and women is that theyhave something which goes beyond excellence andcommitment and belief in themselves they have spirit.They lift the game to the realms of art. Ultimatelythat's why everyone knows about the West Indies.Great sportsmen and women can also lift a game to thelevel of the contests Involved in life itself.Contests between Australian and West Indies sides havelong been fierce and uncompromising.I don't have any problem with that I have much the sameattitude to the Parliament.It's where the game is won and lost, and if you'reserious about your profession and the country you'replaying for, you play seriously.But you'll play better if you love the game.If you take pleasure in it.If you've got a sense of humour about it.And I hope that we see these things this summer deadserious but uplifting and inspiriting.Now I haven't said anything about my side yet.A lot of you probably don't think I had much to do withthe selection of it.Not true. I insisted that _ Allan Border was in it.I can tell you now that I said to the member of my staffresponsible for cricket is Allan Border in it, mate?And he said -of course he's in it.And I said -just as bloody well.There's no need to thank me now, Allan. I wans't going tolet them leave you outI said, if Allan's in it we're in with a show aren'twe? I said before that to stay at the top for a long time isthe mark of someone special.
3There is really nothing more to be said about AllanBorder. I mean, like the West Indies, even I not only know whoAllan Border is, but I feel like I know something abouthim. He is the definitive Australian cricketer of his ere,which is to say that he's more than the best over theperiod he's the cricketer who has done more than anyother to describe us to the world and to ourselves.You can say about Allan that when he's in it we're 811in It.We're all out there with him, and the best thing about itis, we're only speaking metaphorically.Now I won't hold you up any longer.I welcome both sides and wish them luck tomorrow and inthe coming series.To the West Indies team I say I hope you enjoy your stayin Australia. You know you are always very welcome.To the Australian team I say good luck, you know you havethe nation behind you.To both sides I hope it's a great contest played ingreat spirit, and that tomorrow's match sets the patternfor the whole series.I'll be out there tomorrow to tos$ the coin and check theweather and put the key in the pitch and all those otherthings you have to do before a cricket match.Good luck to all of you.Thank you.



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL FAMILY SUMMIT, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA ACT, I11 NOVEMBER 1992
Ita, Summit delegates, fricnds
I appreciate being given the opportunity to deliver the official opening adldress to
this important event.
I know, Ita, that you were motivated to organise this national gathering by your
concern for the social problems you identified as hcing suffc red by many
Australian families today.
I commend your initiativc in gathering together an impressive array of Australians
for this meeting, and trust that these two days will produce fruitful and productive
discussions. I note that you intend to present to me a summary of the Summit proccdings and I
look forward to hearing your thoughts on how wc should all bc rcspoilding to the
changing face of families in Australia today.
For my part, I would like to spend the time available to mc this morning
contributing some of my own thoughts on this challenging subject.
In doing so, I speak as a family mcmber as a husband and a father, as well as a
son and a brother. But T also speak as a member of a Government which has
directed considerable policy effort over the past decade towards addressing the
financial and othcr nccds of familics.
ZO/ TOd 1000N 60: 8 Z6' AON'TI :-1331 
I am proud of my own contribution towards many of these policics particularly
those, such as the establishment of the Child Support Agency and the introduction
of the Family Allowance Supplcm nt which have put money into the hands of
women and children who previously went without.
The record of thc Child Support Agency speaks for itself.
Before it was set up in 1988, only 24 per cent of custodial parents received child
support and the average level of maintenance was $ 26 per child per week.
Today the Agency collcts 70 per cent of the amount on its hooks, and the average
level of support is now $ 48 per child per week.
Similarly, the Family Allowance Supplement has put money into the pockets of
those who really need it. The $ 3 per child per week incrca-.; to FAS recipients
provided for in the ' One Nation' package bcnefited 750,000 low income families
who, between them, have 1.5 million children.
Some of thc government's; biggest programs such as Medicare, Family Allowances
and our housing programs are greatly beneficial to families, especially families
with low incomes.
In fact, it is difficult to think of any of our policics in the income support area, the
health area, the housing area, the community services area that do not benefit
families. This is especially true when wc consider the great variety of family forms that exist
in Australia today.
When we talk about Australian families today. we have to include families of all
sorts and sizes.
Familics with children where both parents are present.
Families with children headed by sole parents women or men.
Families that include several generations living uinder the same roof.
Families where one member cares for another who is frail aged, chronically ill,
disabled or suffering from HI V/ AIDS.
I0/ ZO0d TOO'ON 60: 8 Z6' AON* TT13-131 
And let's not forget all the other combinations, thc single people, the childless, thc
once-or never-married who live alone, the " enipty-ncstcrs" and all the others who
arc equally entitled to be included whcn we speak of the great family of our nation.
In other words, when it comes to caring for people in need be that need physical,
financial, emotional or spiritual let's not overlook anyone just because they
happen not to live in the kind of traditional arrangements that perhaps once
characterised the majority of households.
At the same time, I think we have to acknowledge that families where children are
present are often those where governments have a special rolc to play in providing
financial and other forms of assistance.
Families with children often have greater financial needs, and it is up to us as a
society to ensure that the next generation is clothed and fed and -; hcltcrcd and
educated. That is thc very least we can do.
Ladies and Gentlemcn.
You are no doubt aware that 1994 has been designated by the United Nations as the
International Year of theFamily.
We see this as a most important year because it will enable us, as a government and
as a community, to draw together our ideas and our thinking about families and
help us frame approaches for the future.
We intend that, as far as Australia is concerned, 1994 IYF will be a year in
which we truly try to come to grips with some of the challenges today's families
face.
To emphasise how seriously we intend to treat JYF let me inform you today of
some of the initial decisions we have already takcn in order to be well prepared.
First, I propose to appoint a Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the
International Year of the Family and I have already approached the Minister for
Aged, Family and Health Services, my colleague Peter Staples, ahout accepting
this position.
I am delighted that he has agreed to do so.
TOO00N 60: 8 Z6' AON'TT13:-131 
Secondly, I have decided to establish an JYF S-cretariat in my department so that I
can bc closely involved in thc Ycar's activities. Part of the role of the Secretariat
will be to support an lYF Council composed of members with a variety of
backgrounds and expertisc who will advise the Government and bc a focus for
IYF. I am very pleased to be ablc to announce today that Jennifer Rowe has accepted the
Government's invitation to be Chair of this Council.
For the past fivc years Jennifer Rowe has been editor of Thc Australian Women's
Wcckly, a position sh~ e will leave next month in ordcr to devote herself to her
writing. Ms. Rowe is well known as thc author of adult mystery books, but shc also
deserves recognition for the six best-selling children's books she has written under
the pen name Emily Rodda. Indeed, four of these books have won thc Australian
Children's Book of the Year Award.
Ms Rowe is vitally interested in all aspects of Australian family life and especially
in the challenges faced by the traditional form of the family in today's inceasingly
complex and difficult world.
Her stewardship of the Women's Wcckl-v has put her in touch, with thousands of
familics and she is very alive to the many issuecs families face in a world that no
longer provides tradition or other forms of certainty.
Ms. Rowe is uniquely qualified to lead the IYF Council and I am very plcased she
has agreed to accept this important post.
Thc Government will give careful consideration to the issues nominated by the IYF
Council to address during the Year, but I should like to say today that I will be a
strong advocate for the inclusion of two vital issues.
Domestic violence is one.
How we go about reconciling work and family is the other.
Les's than a fortnight ago I spoke on the subject of violence against women.
I said then, and let me repeat now, that we as a socicty have an obligation to do
something about the terrible toll of violence against women. I singled out domestic
I0/ VO'd 1000ON 60: 8 Z6' AONvr 1131 
violence, saying that we do not know its truc extent, but it is probably greater than
any of us would like to admit.
I say today that I believe we should make the elimination of domestic violence one
of the major aims of the International Year of thc Family.
I don't want to be unrealistic hy setting unreachable goals, but I do believe we can
say that as a society we regard violence within the homc as intolerable and that we
will use the International Year of the Family as our opportunity to take every step
we can to end it.
Womcn and children have the right to safety, the right not to fccl frightened in the
very place whcrc they are entitled to find shclter.
It is surely not too much to ask that wc as a society will strive to make this right a
reality. The second issue I wish to argue for is the reconciling of our work and family lives
for policies and arrangcments on how to make the various aspects of our lives fit
more harmoniously together.
So our lives can become less stressful.
In particular so women's lives can becomc less stressful.
It is women who, these days, are more often the ones who shoulder the " double
burden" of managing the time-tables of family members and who run family
finances in addition to their paid job outside the home.
It is no wonder that many women are just dead tired all the time.
We should be looking for ways to make it easier for them, be they at home all day
with kids or in the paid work-force.
This is an issue on which the government has spoken many times in the past.
I have myself previously advocated that our workplaces become more " familyfriendly".
By this we mean more flexible working arrangements so parents can attend to
children who are sick or need special attcntion. We mean better access to child-
ZO/ SOd 1000ON 60: 8 Z6' AONII : 11331 
care, and child-care where the hours arc compatible with parcnts' working days.
We mean leave that enables women and men to spend time with newborn infants.
As a government we are proud of our rccord in child care.
We have increased the number of places five-fold. We have cstablished a fee
relief system which kccps fees down in community and private sector centres for
low and middle income families. And we have introduced nccds-hased planning
to try to ensure that services arc located where they arc most needed.
Since we came to office we have increased the number of subsidised places from
46,000 to 193,000. By mid 1996 we expect to have over 250,000 child care places
available. This is a record to stand on but we intend to do more.
Already we are planning innovations in our approach. For instance, we have begun
piloting special care for sick kids because we know this is one of the greatest
causes of anxiety in parents what do you do if your child is sick and needs to be
looked after?
Thcrc are many other subjects we could include under this issue of how we
reconcile these two important areas of our lives.
You could almost say it is the crux of modern family life.
It will be one of the more challenging aspects of the International Ycar of the
Family, I believe, to come up with practical suggestions for how to make it easier
for all of us but especially those of us with young children to achieve greater
harmony between these two areas of our lives.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I do not believe it is necessary to wait until 1993, however, to address another issue
which I know is of great concern to parents.
I refer to the subject of violence in the media.
Last wcek in the Parliament I raised the matter of the amount of violence on
tclevision. Following my remarks, I have been in touch with the Federation of
Australian Commercial Television Stations ( FACTS) and I will bc meeting with
Bob Campbell, its Chairman, next week.
TO000N 60: 8 Z6' AON* IT : 131 
I look forward to a productive discussion with Mr Campbell, and I am confident
we caii address the legitimatc conicerns many parents have within the selfregulatory
framework to which the government is committed.
But my concern about violence on our screens is not confined to what is aircd on
television. I am also worried about what we see on the big screen when we go to the movies
and what we sec in our homes when we rent videos.
I believe that all us should bc ablc to have confidcnce in thc classifications system
so that we are not taken by surprise by the contents of a film or a vidco.
This is important to us as adults who want to decide what kind of entertainment we
are paying for, but it is quite cr itical when it comes to choosing movies or videos
for our children will watch.
For thc past three years the Office of Film and Literature Classification has
enhanced the classifications by providing consumer advice for all films and videos.
This advice is set out on the bottom of video covers and in display adver tiscmcnts
for films.
This consumer advice is important in assisting parents to try and decide what is
suitable for thcir children to see, but it does not make up for a funidamcntal
weakness in our classification system.
I am referring to the far too broad scope of the classification for films and
videos. The category is absurdly broad.
I find it difficult to accept the utility of a system which brackets " Crocodile
Dundee" and " Cape Fcar" in thc same " IM" category.
I am sure many other parent.-would share my lack of confidence in such a system.
But what can wc realistically do about it?
In the past there have been suggestions that a special category be creatcd just for
films which depict violence.
2-1OLd TOO* ON 60: 8 Z6* AQNTT13:-131 
TEL: 8
While this would help to identify violent films, it would ignore the concerns of
many parents in the community about coarse language, or depictions of sex or
drug-use which also feature prominently in the category.
I believe that there should be two levels in the prescnt category.
The first would cover the lower end of the category, would include all films and
videos which contained " milder" material and would like the present " M"
category be advisory only.
The second, which might be called MA, would be restricted rather than advisory
( meaning there would be penalties for allowing children under 15 access to these
films unless accompanied by an adult) and would apply to the
other, more raunchy and more violent end of the spectrum.
At the same time as we were making more sense of these classifications, we might
want to take a look at the recommendation of the formcr Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal for a singlc classification system for television and for films and video.
The present dual system is confusing to all concerned.
I recognise these are difficult issues.
We are not trying to restrict what adults can watch.
But I do think I speak for many parents when I say we need more reliable means of
knowing the contents of films and videos so we can make infornmcd choices about
what our children are subjected to.
In this spirit, I propose to ask my colleagues, the State Premiers and Chief
Ministers, to agree to list film and video classification as an agenda item at the
Council of Australian Govermecnts meeting to be held in Perth on December 7.
I trust they will agree that finding a fair and equitable solution to this subject is in
the interests of us all and is especially in the interests of Australia's children.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I have great pleasure in declaring this National Family Summit officially open and
I trust the next two days will see you engage in much constructive discussion.
Thank you. T1EL1:. Nov. 92 9: 45 No-005 P. 02/ 02 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSIOP, MANUKA OVAL, 12 NOVEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
1: Do we have a chance against the Windics side?
PM: You've always got to back the local side. It's going to be a fast wicket, I think, it
was wet overnight. So it will be interesting to see which way the coin falls.
1: Mr Keating, Dr Hcwson has called for a review of violence in TV news services,
do you think that's necessary?
PM: He'll scramble onto anything these days. If he is genuine about wanting to do
something about these things, that's fine. I've never heard the Opposition talk
about this in the past but I'm glad they are now. But let's again, talk about it
sensibly with the people who actually run the system rather than getting all
legislative. Dr lewson is always feeling a Bill coming on, he always wants to
legislate. He is a bit like Mr Kennett, he thinks he should govern in the middle of
the night in Parliament House.
J: Are you concerned about violence on the news as well, Prime Minister?
PM: I said my piece yesterday about violence and censorship.
ends. 



S-I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL IMMIGRATION OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
SYDNEY, 13 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have the opportunity to address this
very distinguished gathering, and I think I should begin
by saying on behalf of the Government, thank you for
giving your time and expertise to a conference of very
great importance to Australia.
The names of those taking part attest to the Continuing
centrality of immigration in Australia's life and, I
think, to the great public spirit at large these days.
And I think it is true to say that these days we can
sense in Ausiralian public life beyond the party
political sphere a new sense of purpose and engagement in
national issues, a new level of interest in the future.
it is something I think all of us would encourage.
Ladies and gentlemnen, a few months ago I attended a
preview screening of the Australian film, Strictly
Ballroom which has since set box office re'cords ' and won a
raft of prizes here anld elsewhere in the world. It is an
extraordinary popular phenomenon.
Strictly Ballroom has a few lessons for us I think.
For a start it is a reminder that creativity and
productivity, the cultural and the economic, are
complementary. Strictly Ballroom is popular culture, including
inulticulture, and it is art. It is also a terrific
return on a public and private sector investment and it
exports. It is both economics and culture, including
multiculture. The story of the film would have been impossible without
the post-war immigration policy. It could not have been
conceived without it. Nor could the personnel the cast
and crew have been conceived for that matter. 
2
Strictly Ballroom concernls faith and hope and opportunity
and care. The making of it concerned the same things.
Strictly Ballroom is about excellence but it is also,
quintessentially, about ordinary people.
The film tells us that, hard as it often is to do it, old
ways need to change. It tells us that we need to be open
to new ideas.
But it is also about the best of Australian values
their immutability and their adaptability. It is a
decidedly iunpiA film. It's about continuity as well
as change.
it might be read as a metaphor for Australia in the last
half of the century. It is about all of us. There is a
bit of all of us in it, and it suggests to all of us, I
think, that there is a lot to learn from the experience
of multicultural Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the latter half of the 1970s,
when I found that I was increasingly in 8 position to
have some influence in the Labor Party, and therefore
potentially some influence on Australian public life, the
nature of my ambitions became clearer to me.
Since then they have become clearer still.
I hope you will bear with me for a moment while I try to
explain them. I think it is worth doing because I don't
think my experience is at all atypical.
The comm unity I grew up in was distinctly Anglo and
Celtic Australian. I grew up with old fashioned
Australian working class traditions, one of which was a
pretty happ~ y partnership with s-ocial mobility.
Success was encouraged and applauded, but it was assumed
that you wouldn't forget your roots. You would take them
with you wherever you went in life, whatever you did.
Now I don't need to explain to you the relatively simple
cultural parameters of such a society. The faiths, on
the outside at least, were work, family, church, league,
racehorses and rock and roll.
Under the surface lurked a love of Australia and its way
of life, a broad egalitarianism, a belief in social
justice, the idea I know it's a cliche but it's true
of a fair go for everyone.
These values were simple enough once you understood them,
and to grow up in them was to understand them.
But what perhaps does need to be explained is the paradox
they contained for people of my generation. 
3
For, you see, I had the greatest respect for the values
and traditions of the Bankstown community. I still do.
Fundamentally, they are what I am.
_ Bankstown is nothing more or less than home.
And, as people do with homes, I want to protect what it
is and what it stands for.
But the paradox was this: much 88 I loved it, I wanted
to change it. I wanted to open the place up.
The Australia I knew as a young man was narrow, insular,
uncertain of itself.
The Australia of the 1970s was still too narrow.
It seemed to me that, for all its great virtues,
Australia was missing out on what the world had to offer,
and it was offering the world less than it could.
Australians in those days tended to believe that you
could only keep traditions up by keeping others out.
By the 1970s I had begun to see my cause among those who
wanted to open Australia up to the outside world I
wanted a Labor Party and a Labor government which was
open to the world and phobia-free.
Like Australia itself, Bankstown is now a very different
place, and perhaps the most obvious change can be seen in
the shopping malls where these days Lebanese and
Vietnamese businesses predominate.
This causes some concern among the older residents just
as it caused concern among my parents' generation when
migrants from Italy and Greece began to move in.
These and other migrant groups have added to the life of
Bankstown they've given it more strength and interest.
In due course I have no doubt the migrants of recent
years will too.
But the old values are still strong there is still that
faith in the idea of social justice, expanded opportunity
and broad egalitarian democracy, faith in Australia,
concern about Australia all these are still the
dominant values, and they transcend ethnic origins.
One of those values is tolerance. 
4
we should not lose eight of the fact that along with the
willingness of migrants to come and join in the life of
Australia, and ' thd wir'lingness of governments to
facilitate that, the essential preconditions for the
success of the immigration program were the values of
democracy, tolerance and goodwill in which earlier
generations of Australians believed.
This is not self-congratulation so much as giving credit
where it's due. I say we should give credit to democracy
Australian democracy.
For under that laconic exterior a serious democracy is
lurking. And under the conservative attachment to the
Australian way of life, there is a capacity to
accommodate change, and welcome difference.
We can draw a parallel between multicultural policy and
economic policy in the 1980s.
As Treasurer I saw miy role as the necessary one of
opening Australia up to the world, making us a player: inthe
longer run, I have no doubt, not just a player, but a
winner. There have been setbacks the recession has been an
awful setback: but essentially that is what it is a
setback on the long road to an Australia which
successfully competes in the world and thus successfully
sustains a high standard of living, increased
opportunities and a healthy democracy for its people.
Just as we are an infinitely more interesting, rich and
rewarding society because we are now multicultural, so
the rewards will be greater infinitely greater
because our economy has joined up with the world.
Imperfect as they might be, the deeper democratic values
of ordinary Australians were absolutely necessary in the
transformation of Australia from a narrow and inward
looking society to a more cosmopolitan and outward
looking one.
i have said several times this year at various functions,
here and overseas if you want the proof of our capacity
to change in the next decade look at the change we have
made in the last one.
It has been the willingness of Australians to make the
change and the capacity of their institutions to make it
which has brought about the revolution in our workplaces,
and which more than anything else gives us reason for
confidence about the future.
We are succeeding In making this a competitive, exportoriented,
productive culture because the people of
Australia have come with us. I I I J A. I I i Ld Q _ 4 
We will only make it wealthier society, and therefore a
place where more opportunity exists, by the same meansnot
by creating an underclass, or by employing some form
of trickle down economics, but taking all the people with
US. I won't belabour you with figures now. Nor am I
shrinking from realities which still need to be
addressed. But the shape of the Australian economy has changed
dramatically in the last few years and the most telling
evidence of this is in the fact that our exported
manufactures have doubled and total exports now make up
23 per cent of Gross Domestic Product compared with 14
per cent a decade ago.
The message is the same as the message of
multiculturalism. The basic values of Australia support
change. our broad egalitarianism does not drag us down, it
underpins our capacity to adapt.
It is our strength. And for me that is the resolution of
the paradox between those things which we value and
those things we want, what we have and what we need,
between inertia and progress.
The basic mould of Australian society has served us well
through generations, through great trials and
extraordinary change.
We need to make it stronger, bigger, more adaptable and
interesting.
But it must not be broken.
The Accord provides another example another example of
building from the mould from the cooperative, equitable
nation-building instincts of Australian society.
The Accord is primarily responsible for giving us rates
of du&amp; strial disputation sixty per cent below the 1970s,
the creation of 1.5 million jobs since 1983, a ten per
cent reduction in labor costs, a substantial shift from
wages to profits, the lowest rate of inflation in the
OECD, a doubling of manufactured exports since 1983 and
an increase of 63 per cent since 1988-89.
There has been no greater contribution to our
competitiveness than this partnership and there is no
better guarantee of it increasing.
The recession has given us totally unacceptable levels of
unemploymeat, but we will not find jobs for those people
by disp~ osing of our strengths and the Accord is perhaps
the greatest of these. 
ILL'.. I ~ oU. PU~
6
I firmly believe that our economic success rests
ultimately on the same bases as our social success -our
success as a nation involves both.
The key is this if we include Australians and their
beat traditions we'll succeed. If we leave their Late to
chance, I believe we'll fail.
More than that, we will lose one of the great egalitarian
societies in the world. We'll lose both our heritage and
our future.
I want to make the point very plainly: the chances for
truly radical change depend on social acceptance of
change. Change which tramples on social values, which
breaks the mould, will simply not succeed.
What I want to say tonight concerns change. Not change
of the strictly economic type with which I know I am
generally associated. it concerns some of the things I
believe we can do in this decade leading to the centenary
of federation to extend the domain of our common heritage
and our common hopes.
if it is true that it was caring for cultural traditions
which made multiculturalism a success, it follows that
fostering ai~ nitifgtenation's cultural life is a
matter of priority.
It's why, among reasons like pure pleasure, I set a lot
of store in the arts.
I think much more than is often appreciated in politics,
they serve to bind society together.
The arts define and re-define us and in that they give us
confidence. They encourage tolerance as well as
excellence, they shape and reinforce the mould of our
society, and by all this they can help carry us through.
Again, we can learn something from that famous decade a
century ago.
The legacy of the 1890s was not just federation and the
Labour movement it was an Image of ourselves and this
land indelibly engraved by Australian writers and
artists. They defined Australia, and in so doing they gave
Australians faith in themselves for generations to come.
I live in hope and it's a confident hope that the
1990s will renew our faith and the faith of new
generations. 
.7
That's substantially why this year we established a panel
of leading Australians to develop a national cultural
policy to bring cultural questions into the mainstream
of decision making in Australia, and to encourage
excellence and broaden participation.
In this the Government is taking a leading role, but it
also responding to public interest and concern.
As I said when I began there is, just now, an enlivened
interest in the nation.
it can be seen in programs aimed at re-defining Australia
both at home and abroad, particularly in Asia.
Some of these programs are coming from government
departments, but what is most striking and most
encouraging is the degree to which they are being
generated by groups of independent individuals or by
institutions which never contemplated such a role for
themselves a few years ago.
I think it is true to say that they are in part a return
on the issues of nationhood which the Government has
raised this year.
Not that we invented them there has been for a long
time I believe a rising tide of national feeling and a
great need to open the channels of expression.
You can be sure that we intend to keep them open.
Ladies and gentlemen, when we think about the issues of
Australian nationhood in the 1990s, once again I think
there is something to be learned from the multicultural
experience. it's worth remembering that long before the post-war
immigration program one could have drawn a cultural map
of Australia defining regional and other differences
based on AuStrala2 experience.
The map essentially still exists. And, as with
multiculturalisem, the object is to find unity in the
diversity, productivity in the diversity.
Long may Queenslanders be Queenslanders and Sandgropers
Sandgropers, and the people of Wagga or Weipa, or the
Mallee or the Barossa take pride in their distinctive
communities, all they do and all they have done.
In fact it should please Australian nationalists to think
that, culturally speaking, Australia will be
characterised by stronger regional identities as time
passes. And by a stronger natlonal Identity. i iov ji rqo uuz) r ui i 
We need a strong national identity at home to give us
more strength of purpose and belief. We need it abroad
to leave no one in any doubt about who we are and what we
stand for.
I think we should and can encourage it.
We can encourage the idea of Australian citizenship in a
number of ways, including by serious consideration of our
national symbols and by a full non-partisan debate on
constitutional change.
I think I have made my position on these pretty clear in
the course of this year. I am one who thinks our flag
would better reflect our contemporary identity and
aspirations if it did not carry on it the flag of another
country. I also believe that thefLaA should not be changed
without the support of a majority of the Australian
people and it will not be.
There would now appear to be no doubt that something very
close to such a majority exists in support of an
Australian republic, and that the number is growing.
It seems to me that the public Is increasingly interested
in this debate and expects of the Government that the
appropriate constitutional changes be fully and expertly
canvassed and considered.
I don't believe Governments in the nineties are going to
be able to avoid this responsibility, and, I think and
certainly hope, that the time is rapidly approaching when
it will be possible for political leaders to discuss
these matters without the inference being drawn that one
is Irish, or creating a distraction, or hostile to
Britain or Her Majesty the queen.
This is not change so much as institutions keeping up
with change with national growth.
These things will have to be confronted because the
people, particularly younger people, want them. And
deserve them.
If it is true that those basic values of Australian
democracy were an essential factor in the success of
multiculturalism, then I think it is probably time that
we acknowledged them more formally.
I saw recently that Asian participants in an Academy of
Social Sciences project said that they were at once proud
of their Australian citizenship and puzzled by how little
pride native-born Australians seemed to take in it. 
9
1 think it is probably true that Australians who were
born here tend to take their rights and responsibilities
for granted, and lapse into believing that this democracy
came to us by accident in the same way that we not so
long ago believed our prosperity was an historical
accident. In truth, just as we have learned that we must work at
creating national wealth, that we must be cleverer and
more cooperative and cohesive, so we have to work at
social and political development at national growth.
In this decade I think we might profitably aim at
building in the whole community a more spirited sense of
our democratic achievements and greater involvement in
the questions now confronting us.
it would be absurd if migrants attending citizenship
ceremonies felt more strongly and were more knowledgeable
about Australian democracy than Australians of long
standing. if our education system is the best means of changing
this, then we should use the education system to change
it. If there are other means, we should employ those as
well. In the next few years we should be looking at all those
elements of our political and constitutional heritage
which have been lost to Australians or leeched of
meaning. Just as we deliver our cultural heritage back to all
Australians, I think we should be seeking ways to deliver
the essential strands of our nationhood.
The patriation of our Constitution from London might be a
start.
As my colleague, the Minister for Justice, said last
night, another very useful initiative might be the
adoption of an Oath of Citizenship sworn to Australia and
the principles of democracy and tolerance, and explicitly
recognising that Australian citizenship is a common bond
involving reciprocal rights and obligations which unite
us all.
At another level there can be no greater hope than that
our efforts to achieve reconciliation with the Aboriginal
people succeed, and that we can convert the
unconscionable tragedy of 200 years into a common cause
for social justice.
Ladies and gentlemen, last February we brought down an
economic statement with the non economic name of Npne_
Nation". 
I LL
By this we meant to convey our message that social and
political cohesion and purpose were as important as
economics in the effort for recovery and securing the
nation's long term future.
It was not just the name, but the programs we announced
which told the story the National Rail Highway and road
programs, the National Traff* gA-uthority, the National
Electicity idwere at-6once emblems and manf-festations
of-our intent.
As a Labor Government whose primary goal is always full
employment, we recognise just how severe the effects of
recession have been how severe they continue to be.
We have devoted by far the greatest part of our efforts
this year to reducing levels of unemployment and doing
our best to alleviate its effects. We have devoted a
very large part of the Budget to this.
We have also taken the view that the solution is not
merely economic.
And the experience of immigration and multiculturalism in
Australia makes that plain.
one cannot speak of immigration without thinking of the
hope and faith which migrants need. In themselves and in
Australia. If we are to succeed as this, the greatest of Australia's
social undertakings has succeeded, we will need those
elements of hope and faith in Australia.
And we will need the tolerance and good will on which the
immigration program rested.
We will need to keep the best of our traditions alive and
guiding us, and our hearts and minds open to the world.
I think that is the best lesson to be learned from the
past fifty years of our history.
That lesson applied might see us with our democratic
traditions essentially unchanged in the year 2000 but our
people more aware of them, and more eloquent in their
expression of them.
By this I mean something beyond a nation in which
everyone knows the words of the National Anthem.-but
that would certainly be a good start.
whatever decisions Australians make in the next few years
and I think it is likely that they will choose to have
an Australian Head of State the proper role for
Government in these things is to open debate and the way
for change. I L) V L) I I q U U UL, r 
I I-IU v L i 4U. U UQ F
The greatest hope is that by the year of the centenary of
federation the social justice Australians have always
believed in is more than ever before a thoroughgoing
reality in Australia and that, above all, full
employment is entrenched again.
if these are my hopes for the year 2000, my hope today is
that, for 811 the necessary detail of your deliberations
here and elsewhere in your professional lives, you never
lose sight of this bigger picture.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THIE PIUME MNITER, THE IION PJ. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, THE PARK ILANE HIOTIEL, SYDNEY, 13 NOVEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J Mr Keating, do you uice with Dr Hewson's ideas about citizenship?
PM: I think people needing to be here four years, broadly no I don't. I think the two
year citizenship has worked well and the question about knowing about the words
of the national anthem 1 thought were made well last night. These things are
important, but I do thinK that most people who take citizenship In this country take
it consequently and know what they are doing.
J: Will the ptocess to change the Australian flagb e in place by the end of this term of
Parliamnicat?
PM: No, what I said was whenever any of our national emblemnis change the community
should Know about it, be part of the debate and it shouldn't change without their
support.
J; But Isn't your Depailinent working out a process for that debatc?
PM: No, I'm at least talking about it whenever I get a chance like on occasions such as
this.
J: So will you be taking to Cabinet a submission?
PM: No.
J: What would you like to scc In place by the year 2000? I li I v i v k 
PM: As I said there by the year 2000 1 think we will see an Australian R-ead of State.
That all of these constitutional issues and constitutional forms should he well
debated and discussed in this country, they have been taboo subjects and they
shouldn't be.
J! Have you got a personal choice for the Head of State yet?
PM: Well of course I don't. That is a penonally silly question.
J; Mr Keating, the changes to ' One Nation' today, how will they help the people on
the dole line at present?-
PM: What we are ensuring to see today that all of the budgcted expenditure of the " One
Nation' package is actually spent, When I announced It we did say that we will
need to monitor the spending tomse that the spending does--take place. Wc have
but Int sonme AreiS it is not possible to spend the monies within the financial . year
we think and so therefore we are moving some of the funding into areas where
there is a demonstrated capacilty to spend and where there is a greatet need and in
the labour market programs is one such place.
J: Is that an acknowledgmnent of failure?
PM: No, you've got to understand some of this was nail money. The States of Australia
left the railway systems In a dinosaur position. Now we are trying and very
rapidly to pull them back Into something like a modern transportation System, but
It is going to take time and some of the monies which we had ready for rail line
expenditure arc now going to be first subject to survey&amp; and engineering planning
that basically the State rail system just haven't donc. We presume that the State
rail systems would have done basic engineering planning and survey work on rail
lines and they hadn't done it. So what it means is it will still be done, the money
will still be spent, but in a later year, so the systems wilt still be built just as we
planned excpt that in this year where we need the money spent for nationul
employment reasons we will move some of those funds into places where we can
spend the money fruitfully and quickly.
J: ( Inaudible)
PM: No, If you are going to try and spend a couple of billion in this country within a
year you've got to be careful about how you do it and if its not running as quickly
in some areas you shift it to others. It'sjust a sensible business like thin&amp; to do.
I. Who is responsible for the delay in your opinion specifically?
PM: Delay in spending rail money?
J: Well in the ' One Nation' package in total, local government, the States? 
3
PM: It Is basically the State rail systems who are trying to scramble from fifty years of
obsolescence, ( hat's the problem. But that is not a problem in itself because we'll
just add that money on in the out years, so the projects will be completed buat over
a longer time frame, another financial year will be added to the existing
construction phases and what that means is It will free up ( linds this year which
can be spent where there is a lot of demand. There Is a lot of demand for the
labour market programs amongst young people.
How long do you think ir will take before jobs are actually being created from the
moncy ainvuniced today?
PM: For instance Jobstart is running very strongly as a demand driven pmgramn and
requires more funding so basically that will go on from this very day. Some of the
others we are trying to put the labour market programs into oroups so that we can
group them for large employers so that they can take them on rather than as
Individual persons for individual programs, they take them as a job lnt, that iR by
their hundreds. So what we've done is cbange the nature of some of these
program,; so they can be packaged up, that means that we will need to spend more
money on them that's what we did last night.
1: How many cxtra jobs will be created as A r* 91ult Of the extra spending?
PM: It is a* matter of not just the extra jobs fromn the extra spending, but realising the
Jobs that have come from the spending arc already available and as we've said that
could be for young people. We have enough funding there to give 100,000. young
people between fifteen and nineteen six months training and a wage subsidy at the
end. % oit is a matter of whether we can get thoft programs up and we can get
companies and Institutions to take them on.
JAre the State~ s doinig eniough?
PM: They are doing all the things we have asked of them by and large, they have
dropped the ball a bit In relation to rail, but beyond that hy and large they are
doing their part in road works and local government is doing mote than its padt in
the Locsl Govcrnment Program which we Introduced in the Budget. In fact that is
now at tile point where we can spend additional monies on it and we are spending
additional mionies on it as of last night.
J: Any specific Statcs?
PM: No, I can't remember which ones.
I. Would you ennsider releasing more funds if unemployment doesn't fall? 
i rLi _ LI i Uv i CI'u r .4j 4/
4
PM: This year demonstrates two things that the fiscal stimulus was the right thing to
do, John H1ewson said we should cut $ 7 billion out of the Budget, we've added $ 2
billion on to it and if we cut $ 7 billion out the economy would just go back Into
recession. The OECD the day before yesterday urged governments to embark
upon an expansionary fiscal policy and we are doing it. The key point hero is that
the Opposition's policies would push Australia back into in a recession and whilo
the economy isn't growing as fast as we would like it, we are on the right policy
track and what we were doing last night Is fine tuning the policy we already have.
J: Prime Minister what's your reaction to the 800 rail jobs going in NSW today?
PM: I didn't hear about that, I've only just heard from you.
J: Prime Minister, do you still believe that unemployment will be below 10 per cent
by next year's Budget?
PM: The forecasts for employment are very much on track with the Budget. We are
probably under target on unemployment at this Stage of the year.
J: Can you recite the words to the national anthem?
PM: I know both verses as a matter of fact, but I'm not singing them for you. I'll write
them down just give me a hit of paper and I'll write them down for you. I just had
a bad chest cold, but I can assure you I learnt them after we adopted it in the 1970s
and I've been singing it manfully right around the country ever since, even if all of
you haven't,
ENDS 



TEL: 13. Nov. 92 15: 04 No. 020 P. 01/(
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HOW P J KEATING, MP
LEBANON; AUSTRALIAN OFFICIAL REPRESENTATION
I met yesterday a delegation of Australian-Lebanese
community leaders to discuss the issue of Australian
official representation in Beirut and related questions
concerning immigration and consular services. The
delegation presented a petition urging the Government to reopen
the Australian Embassy in Beirut.
in response, I said that the Australian Government welcomed
the improved situation in the * Lebanon, but explained there
were still concerns about the s afety of diplomatic._ personnel
in Beirut. In current circumstances, the cost of providing
adequate protection for Australian diplomatic personnel
would be prohibitive.
I assured the community leaders that the Australian
Government would continue to monitor the Situation
carefully, and would re-establish an E mbAssy in Beirut as
soon as conditions allowed. As demonstration of the
Government's intention, a holding lease was being maintained
on the original Embassy premises.
In the meantime, the Government was making efforts to meet
the concerns of the Australian-Lebanese community for better
access in Lebanon to Australian immigration and consular
services. Following his visit to Lebanon in September 1992, the
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Affairs, Mr Hand, had announced that the Government would
establish in Beirut a locally-staffed special office to
facilitate Immigration and consular services, The purpose
was to reduce the need for applicants to travel outside
Lebanon to nearby Australian diplomatic missions to obtain
these services. 
II1' 4 UU.
2
I explained to the delegation that, as part of the process
of establishing the special office in Beirut, the Government
was giving high priority to the selection of a panel of
local doctors to remove the need for travel outside Lebanon
for medical examinations.
The Government expects the new arrangements will be in place
in the near future. Taken together, they will mean that the
ov erall need for travel outside Lebanon for immigration
services will be dramatically reduced.
The new arrangements will remove the need for travel outside
Lebanon for routine visa applications. In cases where an
interview with an Australian immigration officer is
required, travel outside Lebanon will still be necessary.
I assured the delegation that the new arrangements should be
regarded as interim measures pending the restoration of
resident Australian representation in Beirut. The
Governent very much hopes that conditions In Lebanon will
soon permit the re-opening of the Australian Embassy.
CANBERRA 13 November 1992 



Ii
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KKATING MP,
ADDRESS TO ST VINCENT DEk PAl L, TOWNSVILLE, 15 NOVEMUR1R 1992
E &amp; OF. PROOF COPY
We support~ yv lqntar agenies in program with funny names. One we caM SAAP,.
Supportive Assistance Acormonudazn Program, and that program is rccurent expenditure
which we provide to voluntary agencies for overnight and other acixommodation and care.
We havo another thing cAlled C AP, the Capital Ashistance Programn, which builds the
accomnmodation which provides for those people. We have the general relief program
where, if people need a 1it of money for the gps bill or the light bill or food or whatever it
might be, we supply some money as wel.
We're not the dominant supplier but were becoming more significant in wupport for the
voluntary agencies. In the One Nation prograrn announced earlier this year, I put some
exctra money in for the voluntary agencies this year because of the problem the recesson
has brought.
But the thing that will always mnatter the most when dealing with the underprivileged or the
weak or the poor or the sick, will bc in' this sort of society public provision. That'Is why we
must keep a stron~ g social secu5itv~ y" e. We should reject those, as the American
electorate have just reJocted those, who have argued the line that if we support the poor it
drags the rest of us down.
1 might say to you that some of my opponents are arguing that if you put a hand out to
pull the poor up behind you it instead pullsthe rest ofus back. I don't beevetgut Ithink
a community we'-v got to go along together. Sure, some win earn mome in this
communityand somewll am lows, bvthe gapshouldn't beso greatas tosee an
underclass actually oewur, where it actually grates away from the main comnmunity.
The public systemn has got a role to play in providing a good, secure safety net for people.
And that's why I was very pleasantly supportive when I found myself able to tick off the
sentencs in the statements of the Catholic Cornmission for Social Justice and Peace in
recent months, saying thcac very fffings. Ilat co mmunity value is the value that we have to
play to, and not the value of the individual. Private initiative and private reward have their
place, but it shouldn't be the dominant culture of Australia. It has to be a community and a
broad culture.
V* 



TEL: 16. Nov. 92 11: 39 No. 008 P. 03/ 03
PRIME MINISTER
P'A1TIAL TRANSC I PT OF TH-E PRIME MINISITPM, TJlE 11ON P J KEATING
MP, DOORSTOP1, ST VINCENT W, P'AUL CENIH I, T0WNSVIThlE, 1s
NOVEM1WR 1" 92
E P1~ IROO1) COPY
J: Aire you capitalising on problems in V'ictoria o1 thc K~ enne~ tt Gciverranena?
PM: The Kewlett Government has got no re'spocl for its community. It's taking away
b&amp;. nieftt that people have 4eemed o\, ur a e" nTuy, not ncgotiating dhem away but takinS
them, away in the dead of night by legiglation. They tiever had the courage to mention
Ithem in an clection caimpaign. So when G( 3ovvnixnerfs decide to do those sorts of
things they forfeit commuunity regard.
J: Do you think industial actionu shold spread ouigift of Victotia?
PM;-Apparently Mr Howard has 4. aid today th~ at hu endories the Kennett ( ovonnment14
industrial-relations poli~ y s-ei thoef aclw ays did, What thu Konnen Government
har, Ls a policy of stealth theyVe crept up) on pwplc in the middle of the night without
telling them. This naturally is sending very ' bad signals across the wholt; of Ihv,
woi1kforce of Nbs counrtry, who are worried about their terms and -; Mditions of
eniployrnent ' Ibis is not an unnatral thing.
I: Arc the unions; actingj politically in flexing their musclus!
P1M: If the unions are politically flexing their muscles, it's niothing likc the political mus. clcflexing
that Mr Ketuiett is doing. Ile is aiwiing entirely politically In thoend,
( hovernmcnti when they securc. a majotity in the t'artianient, don't get the rioht to war
14% ng down unless there's conutnunity &amp; iappor1 for it. There's boen no community
support for this soit of policy. tIhey are garnering, they are taking mom than tht
mandate gAvc theml. so of crourc naturay thce is a public reaction.
J: Would you be prepared to suppofl national IndustiiM atioun?
PM: Ill wee what cone of it. This 4itpute has becn made by Mr Kenneit, . ot by us.
We'vt; had a deca&amp; e long break out of industrial pcace.-It's boon upset by the Liber
Party of Australiz. 



16. Nov. 92 11: 39 No. 008 P. 01/ 03
125/ 92
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE IION PJ. KEATING MP
PRIME MINISTER WELCOMES MASSIVE NEW MINING INVEST'MENT
Today's decision byMount Isa Mines Ltd ( MIM) and its four Japanese joint venture
partncrs to proceed with the huge McArthur River zinc/ lcad/ silvcr mine in the Northern
Territory has becn welcomed by the Prime Minister, Mr Keating.
The announcement followed the decision of the four Japanese joint venture partners,
np0n Mining and Metals Co Ltd, Mitsui and Co, Mitsubishi Materials Corp and
Marubcni, toexcrcisc their options to participate in the project.
In welcoming the announccment, Mr Keating described the project as a milestone for the
new projcct facilitation arrangements announced in February's One Nation Statement.
MIM had approached the Federal Govenment the day after One Nation through Mr
Keating's Parliamentary Secretary, Mr Laurie Brereton, seeking facilitation and as a result
had received all Federal Government approvals in six months.
The project has also benefited from the One Nation Development Allowance and $ 5.8
million in Commonwealth road funding to upgrade the Carpenter Highway and build a
bypass around the nearby aboriginal community of Borroloola.
" It is pleasing to see that in MIM's own announcement the role of both the
Commonwealth and Northern Territory Government's in bringing the project to fruition
has been acknowledged," Mr Keating said.
" From the outset both governments have worked efficiently and harmoniously to a tight
corporate time frame so that the deposit, first discovered in 1955, could take advantage of
a window of opportunity in the 1990s."
TEL: 
TEL: 16. Nov. 92 11: 39 No. 008 P. 02/ 0
2
" Thanks to this sense of purpose and co-operation between both government and business
a project worth directly and indirectly 1000 jobs and $ 200 million a year in export income
to Australia will go ahead," Mr Kcating said.
" in a difficult world economic climate, to have such a large investment involving four
Japanese mining giants announced, is a significant vote of confidence in Australia, a vote
of confidence from a trading partner with whom our relationship continues to prosper."
" It is a thumbs up to the new government approvals regime which was put in place by One
Nation, a regime which has been welcomed by both thc private sector and State and
Territory Govcrnmients," Mr Keating said.
" What makes this project particularly exciting is its multiplier and infrastructure effects
which can hclp open a remote corner of Australia, said to be one of the richest prospecting
zones in the world."
" T'he impetus on McArthur River could now unleash a wave of investment in nearby
zinc/ lead deposits that will set the Gulf region provide major exports for Australia."
" This arca could prove another Pilbara in the making which is why this Government, a
L-abor Government committed to big job creating projects, has been so keen to givc the
McArthur River Project priority attention", Mr Keating said.
In receiving facilitation support through the Major Projects Facilitation Unit ( MPFU),
administered by Mr BTrccton on behalf of the Prime Minister, McArthur River is one of
the seven projects worth a combined total of $ 3.7 billion which are now under
considcration. Facilitation has built on the Intergovernmental Agreement on the Environment and
involved joint Comnmonwealth and Territory environmental asscssments and agreed time
framcs for Governmecnt approvals coordinated by the MPFU.
in the casc of McArthur River it has also involved a number of consultations between Mr
Brereton, the Membcr for thc Northern Territory, Warren Snowden, and the nearby local
Aboriginal community of Boi-roloola. As a result of these consultations an Aboriginal
cmploynment and training strategy for the community is being put in place, environmental
safeguards havc been strengthened and a bypass is to be built around the township
following safety concerns about the movement of large ore trucks though the centre of
Borroloola. CAINBERRA 16 November, 1992 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIMIE MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, NMP
INTERVIEW WITH CTAIE ARTIJURS, RADIO 4QB, BUNDABERG, QLD,
16 NOVEMIBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
CA: It is a big pleasure to welcome this morniing to our Bill Macarthy studios in
Bundaberg Prime Minister, Paul Keating. Good morning.
PM: Good morning, it's very nice to be here.
CA: We are going to take some calls in talkback this morning and I will just give our
listeners our number again it's 071 532800. Prime Minister before we go to calls
can I go to the qucstion which a lot of people are wondering this morning and of
course the election, if you were to bump into Governor General, Bill Hlayden, in
Brisbane at the airport this afternoon you still could call a December election.
PM: Yes I could hut that wouldn't be quite the place to do it and I have not made any
arrangements to see him.
CA: Then no decision or arc you ruling out a December election all together now?
PM: Well as I said yesterday, it's a funny thing in this business, everyone wants you to
rule things out. One of the prerogatives thc Primc Minister has in this system of
our-, is the option of deciding thc election date so I never rule anything out.
CA: What are you reading into thepoll1s released this wcek which put you and the ALP
ahead of the Coalition?
PM: Well$ I think that we are seeing a trend deterioration in the Opposition's position
and I think because their policy stance isn't the appropriate policy stance for
Australia at the momecnt. It may bc that thcy say that we have got to do more on 
employment and economic recovery and we certainly want to see that
strengthened. But putting a goods and services tax, 15 per cent on everything,
cutting thc Commonwealth bdgt_ back by $ 6-7 billion which would have a very
regressive effect onl the economy, all those of those things are basically the wrong
policies for the current condition of the economy. T think what has basically been
realised that people don't want a 15 per cent tax on everything they buy, food,
clothing, services, and they don't want people thrown off unemployment benefits
after nine months, they don't want the budget deficit cut back so that the spending
from the public sector is withdrawn, and as well as that I think they don't like
the fact that Dr Hewson has attacked almost every group in the country.
CA-Prime Minister let's go to the phones, if you would like to pop your headset on we
will have a chat to Bob who is our first caller this morning. Good morning Bob.
Caller: Morning, morning Paul.
PM: How are you Bob?
Caller: I am all right. My question concerns unemployment, Paul, and I ami wondering
why we perhaps can't embrace some scheme wvhcrcbyo3ncmployment beniefits
continue to be paid for anyone that goes back into the workforce with the
employer making up the difference between their bcnefits and what the applicable
wage might be for that particular industry or job they go into. For instance
suppose an unemployrment beneficiary is on say $ 300 a week that's a benefit, and
the job that is offered. is say paying $ 500 the employer pays the difference between
the two, say $ 200, this continues for say 12 months and after that time the thing is
reviewed and if the economy is coming out of recession then perhaps this can be
continued but on a smaller benefit from thc Government and the employer making
up a greater percentage of the wage?
PM: Yes I understand what you are saying. Wcll look we have things called labour
market programs and Job-Start, which may be a name that rings a bell with you, is
basically just what you aelcribed. It is a wage subsidy which the Commonwealth
pays to any employer taking somebody on. Now, the labour market programs of
the Commonwealth this year will handle roughly 400,000 people and that's a very
large proportion of thosc unemployed. So, we have got quite a comprehensive
range of policies out there now and we added to those in the One Nation program
and in the Budget. So there is nearly 1.5 million of expenditure there now on
labour market programs which either provide a combination of training and thle job
subsidy or the a straight job subsidy. So, they arc out there and we are now
operating those programs to try and get the maximum take-up, which is I say
about 400,000.
CA: Airight thanks very much for that call Bob and we will move on to Roy. Good
morning Roy. 
Caller: Good morning. We have had a small business for a long time but bard times had
come and we owed a $ 20,000 dcbt in 1983. Ever month now we seem to
increase our debt by about $ 1000 more or less. When it is less than $ 1000 the
bank is happy, we arc now in debt to the tune of 160,000 and the Manager of our
business wants his employment contract resigned. My question to you should I
sign to re-engage him even though he is managing our business into a worse
position month by month?
PM: You have a business which you havc turned over to somebody else, is that the
idea?
Caller: Yes we have turned our Australian business over to you and the Labor Party and
you arc managing it month by month into a worse position, should we re-cngage
you at the ncxt election?
PM: Well, I will just say this to you, if it wcrc not for the L-abor Party, Australia would
be still punting on simply agriculture and minerals. We were a farm and a quarry
in the early 1980s and that's all we would be. We were exporting then 14 per cent
of all we produce, today we are exporting nearly 25 per cent of all we produce.
We have actually made the big change to an externally oriented country which is
now exporting heavily and we will be able to pay our way in the world, which was
not the case a decade ago. Now we have been in a recession but we are coming
out of it with a low inflation rate, we have also kept most of the 1980s jobs. In
1983 the workforce was 6 million people in sjze, today it is nearly 8 million, it is
nearly a quarter biggcr and even though we are not cecating enough new jobs as
new entrants join the workforce, that is, as unemployment is rising we have kept
the stock of jobs that we produced in the ' 80s. Now what we have to do is to go
back to growth but we are living through what we call a surge of productivity, and
what that means is we are getting more output more production from fewer people,
so at this stage of the cycle as we grow we would normally be taking people up
more rapidly into employment, we are not at the moment because of productivity.
That is we are getting the came output or production from a small workforce so
because the whole country is now more productive it means it is not laden with
employment likc it was in the past. So, we can only grow more strongly, more
rapidly and as that happens the employment will be taken up, productivity or not,
do you understand?
CA: Can we follow that because last night you were talking to ALP members at an
informal function you talked ahout the fact that Australia had crossed the Rubicon
some ten years early in relation to our attitude to our place in the world. We tcnd
to talk more these days in terms of the things we have to address about the growth
In employment and the growth in unemployment. What about the possibility of
gctting some recognition of the fact that there will always be an unemnployed pool
and teaching our young people to cope with life which includes not having a full
time paid job. 
PM: The key point here is what is today full employment? The Reserve Bank Governor
said last week he thought it was somewhere bctwcein 5.5 and 6 per cent, we've got
unemployment at around just over 11 per cent so half of that he thinks is what we
call structural unemployment, that is unemployment which is there because we are
going out of some industries and into new ones. The other half of the
unemployment is from the cyclc of the recession the boom and the bust. As we
grow we'll take that employment up, that unemployment will come down, but
whcther we can get below 5.5 to 6 per cent is a moot point and it will take some
years. So we are going to certainly be living with a higher level of structural socalled
unemployment than we were in the past. The main thing is that people are
trained for the sorts of jobs the Australian economy will offer in the future, but the
key point is Australia has crossed a Rubicon, we were a country really without
hope in the early 1990s, we'd relied for nearly all the post-War years on mining
and agriculture and as good as they have been and remain good, they were not
good cnough to pay for our imports and they were not good enough to employ
people, that has now all changed.
CA: We might be a country with hope, but there are an awful lot of individuals coming
out of school this Christmas who don't have hope and they might even agree with
you that things might all change in five or ten years, but meanwhile they have got
mouths to feed.
PM: I can only take about the 1980s experience here and that is most young people
found a job quite rapidly and particularly those who were trained. There is a link
betwecn growth in the economy and employment, we've just got to have the
economy growing to take them up. Again a lot of young people arc finding jobs
out there, it is only a minority who are not and the fact now that we've got a much
higher proportion of kids completing secondary school and then going on to
university and to TAPE means their prospects in finding a job are greatly
enhanced.
CA: Let's take some more calls, Lorraine is waiting to talk to you.
Caller: Good morning Paul and welcome to Bundy and first I think you arc doing a pret
job despite the media bias and the promotion of Hewson especially by Lyncham
and Bomnhorst on my belovcd ' 7: 30 Report'.
PM: That's nice of you to say, thank you,
Caller: If the OST is so great in New Zealand, why are there 250,000 Kiwis living here
and approximately 510,000 of them on our dole? But to help Australia we need to
buy Australian goods and less population and only exchange migration, it's ovcr
breeding that causes unemployment because you can see that by the population
explosion in Australia. 
PM: Can I say a couple of things, you often hear New Zealand compared with
Australia. I just said a moment ago to a gentleman that called earlier that our work
force in the last decade has grown by nearly a quarter, it started at six million, it is
now newrly eighit million. In New Zealand the work force is actually smaller today
than it was in 1983, there are actually fewer people in work today than there was in
1983, where we have nearly 25 per cent more people In work today than in 1983.
So the goods and services tax and all that sort of hard-hearted economics have not
stood them in the stead that the policy mix we've had has stood Australia. I
believe that we don't need another tax base in the tax system, putting 15 per cent
on people's clothing and food and services, every service they have whether it be a
bus ticket or a railway ticket or a hair cut, or whatever it might be, is all going to
be taxed as to 15 per cent. It's inflationary, it's going to add about six to seven
percentage points to inflation at a time when we've got inflation the lowest in the
OECD, the lowest in the world, under one per centage point, and that extra
increase in inflation will go straight into interest rates which will only slow down
any recovery we have. So we think it is absolutely the wrong policy miix and as
well as that it's being paid by one group of people but the benefits are going to
another group of people. In other words the people who pay don't get the benefits
by way of tax cuts and the rest, basically it's a switch in income from low and
middle income earners to high income earncrs so we think it is the wrong policy.
As to population, this country can obviously carry a larger population than it has
and we've been complementing our natural growth in our own population with a
migration program. We've cut that roughly in half over the last few years largely
because the labour market is not growing strongly enough to take migrants up as
well as those who are coming out of our own labour market, but the migration
program remains an important long ternm program for our economic strength and
the growth to a critical mass in our population.
CA: Thanks for Your call Lorraine. Prme Minister, speaking of policies, the reason
you are in Bundaberg and in this region today is to talk suigar. Now with the report
into the sugar industry due for release, in fact just about ready to be released,
what's the point in holding taks?
PM: Claire, the point is, I've not meet the groups of cane growers myself and I always
think it's bad form for a government to be making decisions without those
primarily involved, having the benefit of the sort of discussions which some of our
colleagues have. Now Brian Courtice, your member here, is of course, the
Chairman of this group and Brian knows the sugar industry back to front, and he
and the group have spoken to cane growers and cane grower rcpresentatives and
the sugar industry in general. What I want to do is pick up a feel on that, pick up
soeof the feel so when Brian presents the rcport it means something to me and
the Cabinet, that we've got an actual feel of the issues. That I think is the virtue in
seeing people, so that the report has some sort of contcxt when it is presented. I
haven't had that opportunity and I'm looking forward to it today. 
CA: And on the ground Prime Minister?
PM: On the cane fields.
CA: And another call now, and it's good morning John.
Caller: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: How are you John?
Caller-Very well thank you, my discussion is savings in relation to the pension. The
Australian Government in common with most overseas governments which
provide peniions for retirees realise that in the future the ability of government to
pay for pensions will he greatly reduced therefore the Australian Government has
said make a personal effort to prepare for your retirement. My two questions are
connected with that personal effort part Personal savings: why does the Labor
Governmnent not provide an incentive in the form of income tax deductions on
savings invested on which income tax has previously been paid.
PM: You mean that..
Caller: As someone who is an employee shall we say, I'd be income taxed on my wages
regularly then make a saving and I'd be income taxed again on the investment from
that saving.
PM: Right, the principle is we tax income and interest income is income the same as
any other sort of income.
Caller: What about the personal effort if I and others save from my original income as we
are being requested to do, surely we should receive some incentive to do so.
PM: It's all a matter of whether or not a cost to the Budget will add to savings, that is,
would people save a certain proportion of their income prudently and, if we gave a
tax deduction for it, would that not just make the Budget so much harder to finance
and would we have any more savings for it. The one placc where we think we can
add to the savings in a discretionary way is through superannuation that is, by
encouraging people through the tax system and through the labour market under
the Accord programs for employer sponsored supcrannuation and there, as you
know, by later this year cvery person in the work force will have five per cent
contributed for and on their behalf by their employer, and that will rise to about
nine per cent by thc end of this decade. That sort of contribution system going into
their account which is then preferentially taxed superannuation income is vcry
lightly taxed will mean that as it accrues there is substantial bencfit accruing
there for every person in the work force. So when we reach the position where in
about 2010 or 2015 when my generation is retiring, that is the post-War baby
boom generation, therc will be twice as many of us of retired aged than there is 
7
today, and that will put a very big strain on the Commonwealth Budget to pay
aged pensions. We are taking the opportunity now, prudently, to provide for our
retirement income to add to our retirement income, to add to pension in 2010,
2015 through superannuation, And in the meantime for those who are retired now
we kept the pension up, we've got it up to above 25 per cent of average weekly
earnings per person and we've got Support for the aged in our general programs
such as the hostel, nursing home, dementia and all these other programs as well as
home and community care.
We think we've got both bases covered, but the growth in investment and funds
coming Into the superannuation system will do more to add to savings than any tax
preference we could give td savings accounts in banks and if we give it to savings
accounts in banks there is no guarantee we'll actually add another dollar of savings
to that which would have been saved without the tax concession.
CA: Thank you for that, we'll take another call and next this morning is Jean. Good
morning.
Caller: Good morning Mr Keating.
PM: Hello Jean.
Caller: You said last night on ' 60 Minutes' no one has done anything to change the amount
of pornography and violence on TV and videos for the last twenty three years.
Then why havcn't you heen listening to the womens organisations and churches
and the families who have been pleading for you to change these rules?
PM: I didn't say no onc has done anything for twenty three ycars. What I said was I
think that the networks are finding that programs which have more real-life, shall
we say violent, situations tended to believe that these things add to ratings and
they buy a lot of the product which comes from Hollywood which today is more
violent in content than it was say a decade ago. We have had, to this point, self
restraint on the part of the networks in deciding what they put to air, lately they
have been pushing those limits out. What I'm saying is I don't want to be deciding
what adults can see, but I think it is very important that films arc properly
classified. We've now got a dual classification system, we've got one set of
classificat ions for television and another for movies and videos. We need
basically one set of classifications and one which givcs you an accurate idea of
what's in the product -so if parents arc then looking at the television program and
deciding what their children can see they have a fair idea of what the film is likely
to provide, whereas at the moment they don't have much idea at all. Thc other
problem is confusion bccnuse we have this dual classification system and that they
don't provide a good idea of what's in them. Many children are exposed to what
are so-called real life violent scenes which I think basically dulls their scnscs
about these things, that is they become unsensitised to it and I think that is a bad
thing. Perhaps the answer to this is we put adult films on later so that children are 
not likely to he watching them and better that we classify the films so that
everybody has a chance to know what is in them. But can I say though, I know
some organisations havc gone on about this subject over a long period of time, it is
a very difficult one to handle.
CA: Prime Minister, while you arc on the subject of media and while you are in
regional Queensland can I ask two questions about media and of course, the ABC.
Does Canberra appreciate the importance of the ' role of the ABC in regional
Australia and what are your concerns or views on the future of the AB3C
particularly with funding for the region?
PM: We pay the ABC nearly half a billion dollars a year, we pay the ABC more than
we pay the State of Tasmania in Commonwealth grants, so it is a very large thing
and we do it for the public interest broadcasting. I think onc of the things that
most of us in Canberra would think is that it is a regional network, that is onc of
the valuable things about the A. BC that is it is providing a service which in many
places is the only scrvice, in some places the only service.
CA: Does your Government agree with the Coalition that the ABC needs to become
leaner and meaner?
PM: No, we reject absolutely Dr Hcwson's vicw that you can cut a substantial
proportion of funds from the A. BC. Because if you take a substantial proportion as
they want to to fund their program from the ABC, that will simply mean a cut back
in services and that must mean across the whole spectrum not just television but in
radio. I don't think this is appropriate and I don't think it's the time to be doing it.
CA: We'll take another call and coming up now we've got Bill on the phone. Hi there
Bill, thanks for waiting.
PM: How are you Bill?
Caller: Well Paul. Paul, I'm a retired grain farmer, a small farm I might say, my only
source of income is from interest on invested capital, income which is diminishing
with falling interest rates. As my investments mature I'm hard pressed to pay my
way aftcr tax, would your Government consider allowing self funded retirccs
private health insurance costs as a taxation rebate? The present cost is $ 870 per
year.
PM: I think we are coming at this problem a different way. Brian Howe is trying to
negotiate with the States better access by public patients and public hospitals so
that those who are aged don't feel that they nccd to insure thcmselves to cover
themselves for elective surgery, so if some onc needs a hip replacement or
something like that they can reasonably find entry into a public hospital and have
it done, so that we relieve people in your position of the burden of paying for
private insurance. Now that is the aim, that is to sit down with the States and 
conclude in the Budget we provided $ 1.5 billion over the next five years, about
$ 300 million a year for enhanced payments to State governments for better access
for public patients in public hospitals and of course, thc aged are an important part
of that. A lot of aged people cover themselves for private insurance when quite
often Medicare is going to stand them in good stead.
But on the underlying point you raise about interest, it is true that the real rates of
interests have come down and part of it's been that we've succeeded with inflation
so the inflationary floor sitting under interest rates has come down, so what's called
the nominal interest rate, the posted interest rate has dropped and that's the effect
you are feeling now. I can only say this to you, that with inflation running at
around one per cent or less, your prices have dropped too, so it should mean that
while you have suffered a loss year in nominal income, it should be compensated
in pant by the fact that prices are not rising at the pace they were a year or two
years ago which should help you carry on; that is, your income is down, but the
growth in the price lcvel is down with it. hope that if we can conclude a
successful set of agreements on Medicare enhancement for public patients in
public hospitals you'll find that you just don't need to cover yourself with private
insurance.
CA: Thanks for YOU Call Bill, Prime Minister we arc going to have to let you go soon
becausc you are off to sweet talk with the sugar growers, but before you do go just
two weeks ago in that vcry chair John Hewson was talking about personality in
politics and we spoke at some length about the selling of his image and he made a
comment that he doesn't believe there is anty winner in personality politics, would
you disagree with that?
PM! I think the issues are what matter and that's why it is important to articulate those.
One's motives will always be called into question, whether you are a Labor leader
or a conservative leader, in proposing for instance, cut back to the ABC, cut back
in funding for the aged, a thing like the GST, we will refer to their motives as tlhey
will to ours for the policies to which we are associated. I don't regard that though
as personality politics, I regard that as part of the sensible cut and thrust of public
life in Australia. I think thc public are quite reasonably impatient about what they
think is a senseless focus on personalities and they do want value and they do want
the system to work. By and large, our political system does work and a lot of the
static gets transmitted. All too often the mnedia will always pick the juicy bit and
not the forensic bit, if the ncwservice had the time to carry it all, it would look
much more balanced and presentable. So, for our part, we can only do the best we
can to keep the focus on the issues, but at the same time make the whole debate
intelligent to people.
CA: We have people marching in the streets in Victoria against an elected government,
we have business leaders in court, wc have politicians before royal commissions,
do we have a crisis in leadership in Australia? 
PM: I don't think so. I think the Australian political system has served Australia pretty
well in the last decade. We were a country that was flipping under the waves ten
years ago, as I said earlier, we were relying on a group of industries we
traditionally relied on to look after us and they were unablc to and at the eleventh
hour wc had to switch the whole productive basis of the Australian economy and
we've done it. We arc now ini a low inflationary context as well, we've changed
the habits of nearly a century. So I think the political system is working, better in
Australia than perhaps in any country; look at the United States, the problems
which Governor Clinton is referring to there now education, access and equity in
education, aces and equity in health, thcse are all things that were a problem in
America ten years ago, were never touched. They've all been dealt with in
Australia, by arnd large, and the same with thc productive base economies. So I
think the political system in Australia is working. There will be problems in the
States; we've got the problem in Queensland with the corruption enquires, you've
got the problems in Western Australia et cetera. But if you look at the national
Parliament, in the big cockpit of Australian politics where the big decisions are
made, I[ think, by and large, the system has served the country pretty well.-
CA: Prme Minister, thank you very much for joining us this morning and for taking
those calls and spending some time.
PM: Good Claire, I'm sorry I was late starting, but we are late finished so we've made
up the time.
CA: We'll leave you to a day in Bundaberg.
PM: Thank you very much, nice to be here.
ENDS 



TEL: 16. Nov. 92 13: 10 No. 013 P. 01/ 03
PRIMIE MINISTER
TRANSRIPT OF THE PRIME MIISUKIM'HEON'I1* J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, BUNDABERGi 10 NOVEMBER 192
IAOE PROO) F COPY
J. Primc Mini tr, today was to be tho day, iA it to bc today?
P) M: One of you asked earlier if rve got any plans to se Mr Hayden today in Brisbane
no I haven f m goilng to ftY rom here to Western Australia. So those vents will
take care of themselves.
J: Therell be no election this year?
PM: Th is is about Lh laL day you 4; ouhl do ii tbi year.
1: Why not go now, Frinte inister, the pqIl arc gulting better cash day and each day
there are new interest groups jumping al over the OST?
PM: The GST is a Very ugty policy, there's no doubt about that, and I think that people
now rcase ftl what the Ubra maiteted as a plan for Australiais not a plan at
all it's a second-grade tax switch which makes ordinaty people pay ft iax and the
bonefits go basically to hir income groups and to companies. And the other paut
of thcir policy, industrial rlations, is basically to ty to take away from people
thngs which they've put together over a ventuy Without negotiation. So thcre's not
much there for the public with the iboal Party, and I think that's becomin
apparet now. But all ihe gune, Mat can always be better understood and I think
that peoplo are only jusi staning to undmrstand about the GST, and the longcr from
our point of Niew the beter, and the Parliament of course can run to just about the
middle of next year.
3: Thc unerploo) ment figura rcelesed at te cnd of last wcek is not part of your
thoughts on that? 
TEL: 16. Nov. 92 13: 10 No. 013 P. 02/ 0
2
pM-We've had IlI plus numbers eauter in the year and I thik thiat People know tha
therV is now employment Srowth but woi1lbrco growth is bigger them ate nun
people joining the worltforce tha there ame new jobs bein crcaw-d, although we
had 26,000 job stowth lost moth, vWhich was quite wton&amp;. It's going to iakv a
while: to get unemploymecnt down but wo can only do it by getting growth, &amp; W
&amp; pint I want to see the fica impact of the stimultoy spendin we~ Ve dons in the
Budget and the One Nationi package actually bea its fruit in the economy,
J Are you going to wait for unvmployment to drop somu?
F'M: No, it's noi a natur or wailing the Paiiiament rns out in the middle of ncxt yar
anyway, so it's not waiting for the rest of us. But agAhn, the longer the stirmulus has
to work thu bottr
J: So youl have more time to nako tiic coalition hurt over GST?
PM: I think the longer it goe people betner understand the limitations. What have the
Mberals got? They'v got a second quality tax switch from income to expenditure
with a lot of peoplo getting hurt on the way Lhrou6jh, and thcyVe got a savage
industrial relations policy which knock benefits off people. This is not the way
Australia iihould go, it should go cooperatively, it should go with buuinvn and its
workforec working together, as we're vA4in now under these enterprise agreements
r* Mh across the country. That's the wisy to go. The American people have just
voted 180 million of theM for the same sont of policy a policy of inclusion, a
policy of keeping a country together, not splittiog it up and creatinig ufld-r-1Jasmm.
So therefore, I thin the m~ ore that becomes ajpprent the better for us.
3: With the polls going your way and the eroding of that support group of Hcwson
and the Coalition, did you &amp; Mvto day any thought at all for an election this yea,
and how sotiousky wo it*? I
PM: Thcre's so much in thu public debate that of course thes thkng-got thought about.
But again, in tis system the Prime Minster has the option of deding the
termination of the Parliament, and thorethre If*$ something that one should in ti
job kc-ep under notice. But my view is that the greater opportunity the ecnomy is
given to grow the better, and the longer people get a rchance to size up the Liberal
Party's, whai I t* i are, indequate policies the better for us.
1: You'vospvken to as uane growem'exoitlivc in lbuuudabrg this mnorning. aniy good
now'. Qt announoerncnts for tho supr industry?
PM: I found it very intcrcstig and thcrc is always, again, the valuc of discusion and
cooperation. Trying to govern by preom relasc from, Parliament House like the
Liberal Party is now doing in Vietra or Mr Howard and Dr Hewson would do in
Canberra, ih not the way to go. You do learn things by Ltg to people, you do
get a better perspectivo. Now rm much better informed about this industry and 
TEL: 16. Nov. 92 13: 10 No. 013 P. 03/ 03
3
what worries peoplo than I was two huw ago. An you k~ now, Brian Counzco is
heading up a task force to rport to the Gowmrnent about the sugar industry. I
didn't tink that one could just r~ eivo that without having ionie feel of the indwtzy
mywscW So rye bwn very grateful for the opportunity. For those cawa-growcn
who havv come along this morning, apprciatd their point of view, and the
fact that theyVc put ft luidly, And 11nnotionally, just put it in a very dispassionat
way which~ I think Is very uatW.
1; Docs that mean the Taskorce Repo. 9 will got a favourable hcaring?
PM: It mcanx at leaat whecnever Drian Loves it to uw, i going to mean more, well be
able to decipher a lot of the things in it that I'm sure otherwise would
straight over our shouldcr. It's given me a fbel of the industry, Ne hadl aswoiAtion.
with some rural industies and Nov always kept a feel of tho land and tho
winaytidz; nffal Industry, but this hima givion mc a Cood opportunity with sugar.
3. Wero yout ablo to givc thorm any indiration on what you'll be doing in as far' as
-tariff. go?
PM: No, Weause I think that shoulid proport be left for consideration of the report by
the Govrnent. But ther's no doubt that the industry doesi we tariffs as
important, not just for defiecting imports but also In a dufacto price support for
sales in the doniest Industry. At 1his stage7 it probably means more ini that sense
than the ddeflcton of imnpots.
WlNs 4 au cane-gxowcr xpwi sorn sort of decision on this mnatter?
PM: Brian is going to rcport quit son hopefully before Cluisrnjas.
3: Sa before the next election?
PM%. Certainly.
3: u. t ono other mAticr, rrinic Mirtister., any weddig wish or message for Timi
Fischer today?
PM: I10" n Tim planned his wedding around what he thought were election dates. I
wish him the besbt. Ive met his fiancee and she's a very nicc Pesn I hope they
have a vwy happy arariage.
1: So I gucss he can go away and enijoy hiis honeyrrioun then?
PM: Yes, I don't wish him well politically, but I do wish him well personally, he's a vay
nice chap.
ends 



PRIME MINVISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE lION PJ. KEATING, MP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THE HON DR C LAWRENCE, MLA,
PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA, " INTO ASIA" TRA. DE AND
INVESTMENT CONFERENCE, PERTH, 17 NOVEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: I think it is a timely and very important thing for Western Australia to bc doing.
I had the privilege of meeting the Deputy Premier earlier this year when I was
invited to open the Western Australian representative office and that continuity of
interest in South-East Asia, Indonesia in particular, is I think a tremendously good
thing for Western Australia to be doing and Setting this focus on -Australia's trade
relations with the Asia-Pacific in a conference that is widely attended and I am
very pleased to be part of it.
The other reason that the Premier and I are talking to you is to both remind young
people of thc offer which was constructed by the Commonwealth and the State at
the Youth Summit in the middle of the year to take up employment opportunities
for young people and now Treasurer John Dawkins announced the other day a set
of arrangements whereby we can group labour market programs for larger
employers and some employers have indicated they'll take up 1000 or 2000
-younger people as a group, so we've put the labour market programs together and
virtually packaged them as group programs even though there is a menu of
programs within each package. So there is the prospect for up to 100,000 young
pecople of six months training through an accredited TAFE course and then a
labour market program via a wage subsidy at the end of the six months so that
those young people can enhance their prospects of securing employment.
These things are funded, they are on offer, we've now made their adoption and
adaptation easier through the changes announced by John Dawkins last week and
there is at least the prospect of more than 10,000 yourg West Australians being
able to avail themselves of these opportunities. We thought this was a good
opportunity to just restate that and to say that we've made now the adoption of this
menu of labour market programs far more practical for larger employers who are 
likely to take 300, 500, 1000, 2000 rather than doing each one individually as a
single stream which is slow and more cumbersome and is not going to have the
desired effect of taking thosc young people 15 to 19 up and giving them a job
where they have either dropped out of school or gone into the labour market and
found they couldn't get a job. I'll leave my remarks at that, I'm not certain whether
the Premier might want to say something to you.
CL Thanks Paul. First of all welcome to Western Australia and we are delighted that
you did take part in out ' Into Asia" Convention. because as you said it is very
important for us, particularly given our proximity to the region to be the driving
force, the leading edge in the Australian economy. Many of our companies are
now moving very successfully in south-east Asia, particularly Indonesia and I'll be
meeting today with the Governor of East Java as part of cementing the relationship
we have there. This is all about trade, investment, employment so it's timely we are
talking about the medium to long term improvements that wc expect in our
economy as we are talking about an offer to young people and I'm delighted that we
are jointly urging employers and the youth in Western Australia to take advantage
of the opportunities in labour market programs in training and in employment
opportunities. As the Prime Minister has said in the past some of these programs
we rather difficult for employers to get access to, they didn't necessarily suit the
variety of nccds that they had in a simple and we've certainly been urging through
our projects for youth that that link between the employer needs and the young
people in need of training and employment in the community be strengthened and
made simpler. So this is very much the spirit of this announcement and the 12,000
or so young people in Western Australia looking for employment I'm sure, will be
pleasd as they are informed, better able to take part in this program as the
economy improves and those longer term prospects which we believe are very
substantially in Australia are realised.
PM: Thank you Carmen, we might just now invite questions.
J: Prime Minister, getting back to the main issue which is the future, it appears that
President Soeharto may be visiting Australia next year. Are you confident that
such a visit could be conducted without any embarrassment or security problems..
PM: Some people do have strong feelings about it, they have legitimate feclings about it,
but that does not nullify the basis of friendship and the neighbourly association
which Australia and Indonesia share with one another and I would be very
disappointed to thinkc that the Indonesian President what's implied by your
question I think that the Indonesian President may be persuaded from visiting
Australia because of the prospect of somebody expressing themselves against him.
I said today and I will repeat for you that one of the most stratcgically important
things that happened to Australia in the post-War years was the clection of
President Soeharto's new order government. It's brought to this region exceptional
stability, peace, the government has held together the vast Indonesian archipelago
and from that very benign climate we've been able to get on with our lives in 
Australia and develop ourselves without having a strategic problem overhanging
us. I said this in April and I thought it was time that that was said arnd we
recognised the truth of our strategic relations and associations with Indonesia not
with standing thc fact that we've had disagreements about Timor. So I should very
much like to see President Soeharto visit Australia and I can onl-y say that the work
the Premier is doing with the Governor of East Java who is himself a significant
person in the leadership of Indonesia, if anything smooths the way for a
Presidential visit at some point in the future.
J: Prime Minister, some of the latest polls I understand show a lack of support for the
OST, is this something that didn't surprise your shift..
PM: No, I just say how discerning people are, that's the point I'd make about that
because this is a shift of course, in the strategic discussion in Indonesia, but the
GST is nothing more than a crude tax switch crude by virtue of the fact that the
people paying the tax will not get the benefits of it. That is, they will bc grossly
under compensated and it's therefore inequitable and unfair as well as being
inflationary and given the fact that we've now got the second lowest tax-to-GDP
in the OECD group of nations and have got a relatively small public sector, it
seems to me we just don't need a new base in consumption, in expenditure, in the
tax system, that our direct side income tax system is working very, very nicely it
is very light, we've got good tax administration, we brought the marginal rates of
tax down, the overall tax-to-GDP is low. Why do we need another tax base and
why do we need it when it's going to blow our inflation rate to pieces, but
particularly put a very big burden on families, all Australians, and change the way
in which this country really functions. It would lead to a change in the way in
which the Australian society works, it's a very large impost, it's over half the
collection of the income tax, we collect $ 50 billion from the income tax, a GST
raises $ 27 billion it's over half the income tax, not 15 per cent of the income tax,
it's half the income tax and that's why it is so pernicious.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Because in those days, we didn't have a crude switch in mind and then the direct side tax
system was haemnorrhaging to pieces. We had criminal evasion schemes of the late
the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. We had no capital gains taxation, no taxation of
fringe benefits, high effective marginal rates of tax which have been avoided. The
taxation policy advice then was-look, this is almost incapable of repair. it's been left go
so long by the Liberals, it's incapable of repair let's try and tax it where the people spend
it. Now, when we couldn't guarantee the appropriate wage discounts to deal with the
inflationary effect of a GST in the middle 80s, we abandoned it. We were not going to be
in macro--economic vandalism to just push ahead with a proposal we knew would wreck
the national inflation rate, so we abandoned it. But having abandoned it, I then spent the
next 5 years developing a proper direct tax system taxing capital gains, taxing fringe
benefits, tightening up all the loopholes. So, now we don't need a GST.
J: ( inaudible) 
PM: Well, I think the proof of the pudding is in the eating. We've given people the benefit of
higher tax collections by lower rates of tax. The top rate of 60% cent is now 47%. The
corporate rate was 49% it's now 39%. The bottom rate of tax when I became Treasurer
was 30%, it's now 20%. So, you've got to say: why? What's happened to John Hcwson is
he's come along a decde too late with this idea.
The principle is still the same: taking from the poor and give to rich, as you say?
PM: Well, that's not what we were proposing. We had over-compensat ions for all the
categories of social security recipients and also for low to middle income taxpayers. in
other words, we were putting the proceeds back by way of huge cuts in income tax. John
Hewson's putting the proceeds to remove payroll tax and cut the price of petrol. In other
words, it's a different group of beneficiaries from the people paying it.
1: ( inaudible)
PM: Well, just a second. In the middle 80s, thc people paying it were also the beneficiaries.
This is not true now. Under the Howson proposal, the people paying it
J: buy petrol though when it comes to cars?
PM: Well, that's the point: why worry about reducing the price of petrol when petrol -by world
standards is already cheap?
J: passed it in the Senate
PM: Because if a political Party in this country campaigns on the nced for such a basic switch
of the taxation system and the community supports that, open-eyed, understanding what
the issues are, on what basis would any political grouping in the Senate refuse the passage
of it?
J The ruckus over your signing of a couple of $ 5 notes yesterday? Are we going to hear
more of this?
PM: Well, the silly season has got away to an early start.
J: You don't think it might ? 7
PM: I don't know. Look, everyone in the political system signs bank notes, they have for a long
time. In fact, I appointed the two people who signed the notes.
3: ( inaudible)
PM: I doubt it very much, Certainly, I had no intention whatsoever to deface a note, can I say,
the person who asked rr but to enhance it by signing it as Prime Minister.
1: So you're saying that's not defacing the note, Prime Minister?
PM: No, I don't think It is. No, certainly not. 
1: Do you expect to be prosecuted?
PM: I shouldn't think not, no.
Do you think its value is now worth more than $ 5.00?
PM: Well, ask the owner.
1: So, are you saying it's okay for thc Prime Minister to sign?
PM: Oh, come on. You've got more to talk about than signing hank notes, haven't you?
J: Prime Minister, how effective is Austrade in the push for developing markets in Asia,
bearing in mind that they're not even rcp~ resecnted at this Conference?
PM: Well, I don't think onc can conclude, as important as this Conference is, that whether
Austrade is a participant or a sponsor, invalidates its work. Austrade, I[ think, has been a
very profound administrative and structural change to Australia's trade initiatives. From
the old Trade Commissioner service of the ' 70s to something which is now really going
out there trying to identify opportunities, and put companies together, and really do very
good things. I have only heard praise for Austrade abroad. The last time which was my
recent visit to Japan where we've opened four Consulates this year. One was in Nagoya,
where Austrade was involved. I'd just say that Australia's presence abroad is cnhanced by
Austrade's initiatives.
J: Premier Lawrence, with the election ruled out for this year, do you have preference on who
would go first Federally or State ncxt year?
CL: Well, I think both of us agree that the timing of the election State or Federally are a matter
for each sphere of Government, and for the Party, and we'll make-the decision on it. I
certainly will at the time that it's appropriate for Western Australia, which as I've said,
for those of you who are not usually members of this audience, is sometime in the first
quarter of 1993.
J: Would you be guiding the preference of the Prime Minister?
CL: No.
J: ( inaudible)
CL: Not in the sense of us going first, or the Federal Government going first. It's always been
clear that it's a matter for each sphere of Government to decide.
J: Prime Minister, John Ralph has suggested there maybe another drop in interest rates in
relation to poor demand? Can you shed any more light on that?
PM: No. I was in Queensland yesterday, I didn't hear what John had to say about that at all, but
the stance of monetary policy hasn't changed. What has been governing our monetary
policy of late is the underlying ThflatLnjrate,_ but that has come down. Although, what's 
called the underlying rate itself, is a little higher than the statistical rate, and I think that's
what a lot of people in the market look at. So, unless that dramatically changed, I don't see
a change in the stance of monetary policy.
Premier, will you be inviting the Prime Minister to he a part of the State elcction
campaign?
CL: Well, the Prime Minister is here in Western Australia now at our invitation because we
think it is very important that particularly in areas such as trade and investment and a
thrust into Asia that he gives his endorsement, something he already has to such an
important initiative. As far as I'm concerned the Federal Government has very important
matters to put before the people of Western Australia. They'll obviously do so at a time
that suits them, but certainly there is no suggestion that we wouldn't want to hear the
Federal Government's proposals on taxation, for instance as opposed to the GST on
industrial relations as opposed to the very firm endorscment that Mr Hewson has given last
night of the Kennett regime in Victoria. We think it's important that Western Australians
understand that, and we're certainly keen for the Prime Minister and other Ministers to get
that message across to Western Australians contemplating voting in the Fedcral election
and the State election.
J: So, is that a yes or a no?
CL I think it's a very clear yes, isn't it?
J: Mr Kennctt's actions, and the endorsement federally
PM: Mr Kennett? Lo~ ok, rye got no doubt that Dr Hewson has let's, put it this way -that NU
Kennett is doing what Mr Howard said he was doing, and that was giving us an early run
on the Coalition's policy. And for a couple of weeks, the Federal Liberals Dr Hewson
and Mr Howard were dissembling, shuffling, moving backwards, moving away from Mr
Kennett. But now they've decided that's impossible, they may as well embrace it. Well,
they were always embracing it, and I think what we do see in Victoria is what you'll see in
Australia under a Coalition that is, that the whole notion of cooperative wage
bargaining, of searching for productivity by more clever, the more clever management of
businesses and their operation, will be swept away in legislation changes, where wages
and conditions of employment are basically knocked over by legislation. That is, the
award system is taken away, there is no legal protection for employees, only the protection
of the common law, which to all intents and purposes, most ordinary people can't avail
themselves of, they can't hire Q. Cs. T7here is no point in sitting in a lift for 2 years waiting
to have your case heard when the proper industrial tribunal of this ' Country the unique
industrial tribunal of this country have been abandoned. So, at least, as the Premier said,
whenever elections are held in this country at least we now know with the Liberals what
they stand for. That means higher taxes and lower wages. Higher taxes through a
consumption tax and lower wages through reductions of rates of pay and conditions of
employment. We're seeing yesterday Dr Hewson simply confirming that point.
J: Last week we recorded an increase in unemployment to 11.6%. Do you think that strange
to believe your claim that the recession is over? 
PM: Well, there was also quite strong emnployment growth for the month 26,000, the
economy is growing. So no economy that is growing is in recession, but we're still living
with the effects of rccession, and part of thc cffect is, of course, higher productivity which
means more output for fewer people. We're living through a surge in productivity, that is,
companies have stripped down to be more efficient. But in being more efficient they're
getting the same output or more output but with fewer people. So it means that this stage
in the cycle when we would be expecting the growth coming through to be reflected in the
employment growth -it's not being fully reflected in the employment growth because
we're living through a particularly high bout of productivity. But as the growth continues,
obviously the employment will be taken up, but it's going to he taken up later rather than
earlier.
J: But when it comes to voters, they don't understand that. They only know they haven't got
a job?
PM: No, no. That's true, I understand that. But let's at least make the messatge clear. The
economy is clearly in a recovery phase and the positive employment growth the 26,000
who got jobs last month know that, even though we are not keeping up with workforce
growth. Thiat is, workforce growth is ahead of employment growth and therefore
unemployment has risen. We have very high participation rates, very high, and that's
because peoplc have reasonably after the 80s experience come to expect that after the
huge job growth of the 80s you could go looking for a job and find one.
I: those problems outstripping your solutions?
PM: No, well. Well, I wouldn't be too pessimistic about Australia's prospects. We're now
growing faster than any other comparable OECD economy, we've got fiscal policy, in an
expansionary phase, we've got low interest rates. Our colleagues in the Opposition want
to cut $ 7 billion out of the deficit that's nearly 2% of GDP which will just push us
straight back into a recession. And they want to put a 15% tax on everything we consume.
As other commentators have made clear this week, most notably Ross Gittins yesterday in
The Sydney Morning Herald, this could be nothing but contractionary, nothing but
contractionary. So there's a very clear offer on the part of a very clear differentiation on
the part of the Parties. We're saying, let's expand fiscal policy and have low interest rates
to promote a recovery. Dr Hcwson is saying let's contract fiscal policy and see interest
rates rise as the labour market, as industrial relations changes. I'm saying the Federal
Liberal solution is no solution to a recovery, the only prospect of a recovery in this country
is with the Labor Party, with the Government.
J: Can the export incentives your Goverrnment provides further the export growth that we
need?
PM: Well, we've just had a very large depreciation of the exchange rate. The Premier and I
were just talking about it earlier. We're now down 20-odd percent against the Yen, I think
we're about 20% against the Deutschemark. On the trade weight, if my memory serves me
correctly about 12% or 13%. This is a large depreciation which will be very promot-Nig of
Australian product.
1: ( inaudible) 
PM: Well, I gave you the figures inside today. We're now exporting 23% of all we produce,
nearly a quarter of everything that's produced in this country is now exported. in 1983 that
wais 14%.
J: But we do need to keep that sort of growth going?
PM: We have to keep it growing and that's why I congratulate the Premier on this initiative.
You see there's no better way of keeping it going than to keep opening up the market
opportunities in the fastest growing part of the world and that's the Asia-Pacific. So if
we can maximise those opportunities given the fact that we've already made the big jump
to exports in thc 80s just imagine where we'd be now if we were exporting 9% of GDP
less than we are? In other words if we were exporting what it was under Howard and
Hewson in 1982/ 83 we'd be finished, absolutely done for, unable to pay for our imports,
comatose. As it is now, we're now exporting nearly a quarter of everything that we
produce, and it's rising. The fastest growing component of it is manufactured goods and
services.
3: pretty encouraging results in the polls here in the West. How big and turn things
around though?
PM: Well it's not explicable. It's not eaisy to explain how the same transmission of national
issues is in some way not succeeding in Western Australia. I think it's to do with the
predominance of State issues in the West Australian mecdia in the main. But again it's one
of these things which time alone will cure.
J: Well, would you have a personal preference
PM: Oh well, you can't. When you ask silly leading questions, you get silly answers. I won't
give you one because I can't be bothered.
J: Do you concede though that you've got a pretty tough job ahead of you?
PM: Yes, but in national terms we've got three out of foujLpo s putting us in front. No, three or
four out of four putting us in front of the Coalition, and that's because I mean you've got
to believe this: if you cut $ 7 billion out of the Commonwealth Budget deficit, the
economy will go backwards. If you put a 15% GST on all food, clothing and services in
the economy, the economy will go backwards. And if industrial relations blows thc wages
system out of the water, inflation will rise and interest rates will rise with it and the
economy will go backwards again. So, while the Liberals may lament their circumstances,
their policy prescriptions will drive the economy back into recession. Now they rcjcct our
policy prescription, but ours was endorsed by the OECD last week. The OECD secretariat
was urging OECD member States to adopt an expansionary fiscal policy. They were
urging that: to adopt an expansionary fiscal policy. Japan's just done it, we've done it, but
the Federal Liberal Party says: oh no, no, what we've got to do is go back to Thatcherite
policies and pre-Reagan and the rest. Go back to contractionary policies. Well I just say
to Wr,. qcrn Australians, it's poison. If it happens, the economy will stay rececsscd, it will
go back into recession.
1: Given that WA was in the last Federal poll, would you be doing anything special over
here? 
PM:-Well, I'll be coming here routinely as I have been and taking the opportunities. No better
or nicer one today than to be talking about WA's prospects. The great macroeconomic
changes of the W~ s, the floating of the exchange rate, the competitiveness of the dollar, the
low inflation, the lower interest rates, the lower unit labour costs are just bountiful for a
State like WA which is selling into the world markcts with agriculture, principally
agriculture, minerals and international services like tourism. In other words the whole
macroeconomic policy is set up for the primary exporting States, so WA is going to pick
up always that benefit of national policy.
J: But do you think the voters here though are going to see a clear distinction between State
and Federal issues?
PM: I think the Premier is entitled to campaign on the policies which better relate to WA, in
terms of those which are contained in the purview of the States, in the administration of
the State, in relation to the community. And obviously there arc a different set of issucs
than the Commonwealth issues.
J: State health must bc a bit of a worry that they are lacking if you're so concerned about
the Federal health budget?
PM: Look, I don't think it's a worry. I think all State Ministers are naturally concerned about
their area of responsibility. But our aim is to make Medicare more than a health insurance
System, to make it a whole total health system. That is, to enhance public patient access
for public hospitals.
J: ( inaudible)
pm: Well, you did share a platform with the Commonwealth Minister for Health a few weeks
earlier, and rm quite sure that in the arrangements that will be settled between the
Commonwealth and the State of WA that WA will be advantaged. That advantage will
flow most particularly to aii enhanced posicion for public patients in public hospitals and
particularly for the aged who are worried about elective surgery and the need for it like
hip replacements and the rest, without needing to carry the crippling burden of private
insurance.
J: Aren't you worried that WA will see you You tilk about the Coalition's economic
poison when actually you've got a mouthful of your own?
PM: Well, we've had
CL: I want to know who writes his questions.
PM: I know, he's a real charmer isn't hc? The thing is, obviously it's going to be a long way
from here to the Canberra Press Gallery for you many stations alonS the way. Let me
just make a couple of basic points for you. There were 6 million people in the workforce
when I became Treasurcr, there's today nearly 8 million. So there's 2 million Australians,
or just on 1.6 million Australians who have a job because of the policies of this
Government. New Zealand, which we're often compared with particularly by our Federal
colleagues, have fewer people in work today than they had in 1983. In other words the 
workforce in New Zealand is smaller today than it was in 1983. Now, if one looks at it
beyond employment, to look at thc thing that's hardest to provide to any country and that
is a future, a solid future, this is what the Commonwealth and State Labor Governments
together have done through the
1: You're not worried about
PM: Well, it's absurd, absurd. We're now in a position whcre the Premier can hold a conference
in WA about trade with the Asia/ Pacific, Could you imagine that being held here in 1982?
Would anyone have turned up? Would anyone have believed that the great growth
prospects of Australian in the Asia/ Pacific area would have been as they are now? With
nearly 25% of all we produce going to exports? Where the great primary exporting States
have been preferred by national policy with tariff cuts, with a floating exchange rate, with
a proper set of market mechanisms? They are the things that West Australians need to
consider. If they need to consider their prospects in the 1990s and say: which Party has
given them an opportunity to share in the Asia/ Pacific, to guarantee long employment and
higher incomes it's only the Labor Party.
J: Much of Australia 1 million unemployed?
PM: Well, you're obviously in a contest with him. I'in not sure which one of you should win it.
Well, the fact of the matter is to ask the 2 million who've got a job since 1983. Sure, I
would very much like to see a higher level of employment. Remember this: the Federal
Liberal Party left me as Treasurer in 1983 with 700,000 people out of work, 700,000. At
Its lowest by the late 80s and early 90s, it got down to just ovcr 500,000. So we, in a
structural sense, we've always had right through the last decide 500,000 people or more
out of work. It's a matter of profound regret to me that another 400,000 to 500,000 have
been added to that. It's a matter of pride to me that another 2 million or so have been
added to the workforce. So, it's a case of we've always been dedicated to employment
growth and we need to get back to it. But I remember press conferences here and
elsewhere in the late 1980s and when I said: we've had 120,000 job growth this month,
160,000 last month, 119,000 the month before -and you said: yeah, yeaih, yeah Treasurer,
but what about the current account deficit and inflation? Well, no-one's now saying yeah,
yeah, yeah about unemployment, and it's good you might. But you should have been
consistently Interested in unemployment right through the 80s which most of you, of
course, were not but the Government was. That's why there's that extra growth in the
labour market. We remained interested in the whole matrix of policy: employment
growth, the current account deficit, inflation all that's predicated on growing Australia as
a mature economy. We're now doing Ithat via the sort of things the Premier is involved
with today and yesterday: that is, really engaging with the Asia/ Pacific as we've never
engaged before, where we have only paid lip service to our engagement with the area. We
are now truly part of the area and taking part in the fastest growing region of the world.
That's what's going to underpin higher incomes and higher employment. It's not going to
be the notion of taxing your food and your clothing and believing that a change to payroll
tax and petrol tax is going to re-macc Australia you would have to believe in fairies in
the bottom of the garden to believe in that. ThIs is the only way of doing it the right way.
ENDS 



*/ 3
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
" INTO ASIA" TRADE AND INVESTNIENT CONVENTION
PERTH 17 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address the " Into Asia" Trade and Investment
Convention, and I congratulate the Western Australian Government and other supporters
of the conference on the imaginative program you havc devised.
Its appropriate indeed that you are rnccting in this State, because Western Australia in
some respects has been leading us into Asia.
With less than a tcnth of Australia's people, this state now accounts for nearly a third of
Australia's total cxports.
And today, 70 pcr cent of Western Australia's exports go to Asqia.
We are familiar of course with the great wealth that continues to be generated by exports
from Western Australia's mining and energy industries.
[ ron orc from the Pilbara and natural gas from the North West Shelf will remain sinews of
interdependence bctween Western Australia and North Asia.
The State govcrnxncent recognises, however, in its " Into Asia" strategy that Western
Australia's future prosperity depends not only on maintaining these traditional links of
trade with Asia, but also on learning to exploit rclatively new arcas of compctitive
advantage in the dynamic Asian market.
This means expanding services and manufactures exports while continuing with
commodity exports.
As Western Australia has found new markcts in Asia, so too has Australia as a whole.
Nearly two thirds of Australian exports now go to Asia, and Asian mnarkets; continue to
lead all others in export growth.
I would like to take a little time today' to discuss what this powerful and consistent trend
means for our international trade policy and for the way we think of ourselves as
Australians.
e-/ 1O* d 900* ON Z: iT Z6" AON2. I :-11331 
During the 1980s, the dozen or so countries and territories of North-East Asia and South-
' East Asia grew twice as fast as the rest of the world.
During the 1990s, they seem likely to repeat that performance.
At a time when the OECD has had to revise downward its growth forecasts for Europe, the
United States and Japan, Australia's strengthening links with the more rapidly growing
economies of Asia are of critical importance to our economic expansion in the 1990s.
The North-East Asian economies are more complementary to Australia in resource
endowment and trade composition than any other economies in the world.
North-East Asia accounts for nearly half of Australia's exports.
North-East Asia is a major source of tourists, investment and business migrants, and is the
single most important market for Australia's cducation exports.
While North Asia rcmains by far the single most important market for Australia,
Australia's exports to the six countries comprising the Association of South-East Asian
Nations ( ASEAkN) are now growing more quickly than our exports to any other part of
world. The ASEAN countrie-s now account for more Australian exports than cither the United
States or the European community.
Even more striking. is thc fact that Austral ia's manufactures and service exports to South-
East Asia are growing morc quickly than exports of primary commodities.
As South-East Asian economics have modernised we and they have discovered greater
and greater opportunities in trade.
Indonesia probably best exemplifies the need for Austra lians to revise their image of
South-East Asia.
Despite the fact that it has already become our ninth largest export market and second
largest in ASEAN, too many Australians still have an image of Indonesia as a poor and
backward country which is somehow threatening to Australia's interests.
My visit to Indonesia in April this year served various foreign policy objectives.
But, just as importantly, wanted to underline new realities for the Australian public.
I made a point of highlighting the cnormous strategic benefit Australia has obtained
during the past 25 years through the success of the Soeharto Government in consolidating
political stability and economic devclopment in the Indonesian Archipelago.
Between 1966 and 1991, Indonesian's real GDP rose 450 per cent.
In the late 1970s, Indonesia was the world's largest importer of rice. In 1984, Indonesia
became self sufficient.
The people of Indonesia are now better fed, housed, and educated than evcr bcfore. Infant
mortality rates are approximately half of what they were.
_ O/ ZO~ d 9OO* ON VZ: iT Z6* AON *. T1131 
In recognition of the dynamic economic relationship Australian and Indonesia now enjoy,
President Soeharto and I agreed to establish a regular Ministerial Forum to discuss at a
high level trade and economic matters of shared interest.
Establishing this body reflects a ncw maturity and mutual confidence in the relationship.
I am pleased to note that yesterday and today the first meeting of the Ministerial Forum is
taking place in Jakarta with five Australian Cabinet Ministers participating.
I am also pleased to note that one of your distinguished speakers yesterday was His
Excellency Governor Soelarso of Indoncsia's East Java Province, whom I met during my
visit to Surabaya last April.
No visitor could help but be impressed by the vitality of economic dcvelopment in
Surabaya and its environs.
I congratulate the State of Western Australia for its foresight in establishing a sister
relationship with East Java.
A new study by the East-Asia Analytical Unit of the Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade demonstrates that Australia has hcld its market share in South-East Asia during the
past five years.
if we continue to hold it for the rest of this decade and I am confident we can we will
put an additional $ 12 billion onto our annual exports.
So you can see that because of their rapid growth, South-East Asian markets will become
increasingly important to Australia's prosperity.
Now, of course, we won't get the growth and we won't get the exports unless we can
continue to transform our culture, but if you want proof of our ability to transform
ourselves in a decade ahead, you need only look at the way in which we have transformed
ourselves in the decade behind.
We have transformed ourselves from a high inflation nation to a very low inflation nation.
We have increased our competitiveness by well over one tenth.
We have replaced industrial disputation with a cooperative system which has delivered the
lowest strike rate for 30 years a system of consensus which I think the Australian people
are very reluctant to abandon.
We have opened the economy to the world with a floating exchange rate, financial
deregulation, and Cuts in protection.
We havc succeeded in putting governmcnt behind trade with the unification of trade and
foreign affairs policies and departments, the creation of Austrade, the succssful
leadership of the Cairns group in the Uruguay Round, and the initiative which lead to the
creation of the APEC group of Pacific trading nations.
A decade ago, we exported one seventh of what we produced.
Today we export nearly one quarter of what we produce.
2. O/ 20Od 900' ON Z: il Z6' AON* -T :-113J1 
And as the quantity of exports changed, so too has the composition and direction of
exports. Today our manufactured exports are equal in value to our rural exports and our mining
exports. And more and more of our exports arc going to Asia.
As trade becomes more important to our national prosperity, international trade policy
becomes more critical in national governmecnt. I
As I have already made clear, our core interest is in protecting and cnhancing our trade
with Asia.
We Australians should see it as our historic good fortune to be located close to the world's
fastest growing economies and one of its Vrcat economic powerhouses, and to have
already established closc economic ties with it.
We have the further advantage that the regional emphasis of Australia's foreign policy and
our shared strategic intcrcsts with nicighbours to our north correlatc vcry wcll with the
rcgional focus of our trade and commercial interests.
As I said, it is our good luck. It is not the first timle we have been lucky, of course. For
years we were able to rely on special relationships and our rural and mineral products to
see us through.
But our good luck this time is an opportunity to be seized, both by governments and by
business. It won't come to us as a branch office, or as a quarry and a farm.
As never before in our history we have to seize the time ourselves.
Of course, our trading interests are not confincd to the Asian region.
We strongly believe in maintaining and strengthening the open, non-discriminatory
multilatcral trading system based on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade or
GATIT. This interest is shared by Japan and other East Asian trading partners because each of
them pursues outward-looking economic policies and depends, on access to a wide spread
of international markets.
The beniefits of a new multilateral agreement would be considerable.
It would extend international trade rules to cover agriculture and services, and also
strengthen the disciplines and dispute-settling procedures of GATT.
We have been deeply disappointed at the apparenit lack of political will in Europe, and in
France in particular, to agree on reasonable understandings on agriculture.
Sobered by the prospects of trade conflicts in a climate of slower OECD growth,
negotiations betwccn the United States and the EC have now resumed.
900* ON t7Z: i1 Z6* AONL T -1331 
An agreement is, I believe, the most important thing that Europe and the United States can
do to stimulate world growth and confidence.
But whatever the outcome of the Uruguay Round, we are now in a period of fluidity in the
world trade system.
There is an increasing tendency towards regional, subregional and bilateral trade
arrangements. We may or may not like this trend, but it is indisputably there and we must
seek to use it to our advantage.
At the same time, there are powerful forces enhancing globalism, including the extinction
of communism and the new universality of market economics, and the more powerful role
the United Nations is now able to play in world affairs.
In this new era in international affairs, our ovcrriding objective is to do all we can to
preserve and enhance a trading environment in which our major markets remain as open to
us as possible, and these markets remain open to each other.
We must never lose sight of the fact that most of our trade, and the fastest growing part of
our trade, is now with other countries in the Western Pacific.
We must also not lose sight of the fact that many of these countries are highly dcpendent
on the US market.
At the regional level, an important clement of Australian policy is the promotion of a
trade-liberalising agenda in the APEC group.
The grouping includes the United States, Canada, Japan, Korea and the other main
cconomies of the Western Pacific.
Its member-, account for 50 per cent of world output and over 40 pcr cent of world trade.
The importance of APF. C underlines the pivotal role that the United States will have in
determining the trade environment in the Asia-Pacific region.
The United States is the world largest economy and trading nation.
As shown in the Uruguay Round, it retains a vital leadership role in helping maintain a
sound multilateral trading system.
Despite the growing economic importance of Japan, the United States remains the leading
export market for most EAst Asian economies.
And much more of the United States' Own trade now takes place across the Pacific than
across the Atlantic.
Against this background, the policies of the Clinton Administration will have a decisive
bearing on trade alignments in the Pacific.
I have been much impressed by President-elect Clinton's conviction that foreign and
domestic policy are two sides of the one coin.
2O/ SO'd 900* 0N PZ: iT Z6' AON'I -11331 
By his recognition that the United States must he able to compete successfully in the
global economy if it is also tio suciicat home.
We also noted that he affirmed strong support for the multilateral trading system and
avoided the temptation to engage in the Japan-bashing that some in his party have
indulged in.
In Australia's dealings with President Clinton and his Administration, we shall make every
effort to encourage Washington to think more deeply about the future institutional
structure of economic relations in the Pacific.
We think it is very important not only for ourselves but also for Japan, the United States
and other trading nations in the region, that the United States and Japan increase their
economic interdependence rather than diminish it.
We will resist any process which has the effect of dividing the Pacific into trade allies of
the United States and trade allies of Japan.
As I explained during my visits to Japan and Singapore last Scptember, Australia's core
interests lie in maintaining the most favourable possible environment for our bilateral
trade rclationships with Japan and the other economics of East Asia.
This reflects a situation where East Asia now accounts for nearly six times as much of our
total exports as does the United States.
But the regional trading environment for Australia will he so much better if the Western
Pacific and North America remain part of the same thriving trading community.
As important as they are, the initiatives of the biggcr players cannot of themselves
guarantee Australia's success in international trade and commerce.
We have a big responsibility at home for maintaining the drive towards making our
economy intcrnationally competitive, and developing a creative culture of
entrepreneurship. While thcre is much that the Australian Government can do to hclp create the right policy.
environment, we have to recognise that the ultimate challenge Of SLuccccding in the region
rests with Australian business.
Many of our private companies havc acceptcd their responsibilities and arc aircady
demonstrating how well they can succccd.
But there is a broader challenge for the whole Australian comnmunity.
it is a question of attitudes, to do with how we see ourselves as a nation and how we
perceive our relations with the region.
Australia can no longer afford to be a society located with its geographical feet in Asia,
but with its intellectual head and emotional heart in Europe or North Amecrica.
Part of this is being confident in ourselves and knowing that our political and social values
do not have to be compromised in a closer association with Asia.
e2/ 9O* d 900* ON tZ: iT Z6* AON* 2T: 131 
7
Indeed, I would argue that Australia's reputation for openness and multiculturalismi are
definite assets in a region which is already very diversified politically and is showing
increasing pluralism as it advances economically.
We should recognise the increasing contribution that our Asian migrant community is
making to commercial links with Asia.
It also serves our economic purposes that an increasing number of Australian students are
studying Asian languages at secondary and tertiary level.
During my recent visit to Japan, government and business leaders were very imnpressed to
hear that we now have around 100,000 students studying thc Japanese language.
Thiis number is gcater than the number of Japancsc-language students in any country in
the world outside North Asia.
There are now 41 centres or institutes of Asian studies at Australian universities and there
is a growing number of educational exchange programs between Australia and Asian
universities. Increasingly, we are recognising that just as the changes we have made in the way we do
business at home and in the way we conduct our industrial relations involve cultural
questions, so too will our continuing success in integrating ourselves with the economies
of Asia depend upon cultural changes that allow us to adapt our basically European
society to Asian cultures.
It is here, I think, that thc Australian people and government will find its grcatest, most
absorbing and most rewarding challenge in the coming decade.
( VON t?: il Z6* AON* ZT :. 131
inI. Sn-A 90 



Embargo d Until... -1 fn
SPEECH BY THE PRXIME MINISTER, THE HON KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ADVANCE AUSTRALIA FAIR, MELBOURNE CONCERT HALL
18 NOVEMBER 199S,
it's my great pleasure to be here tonight to enjoy this
concert and, particularly, to take part in the launch of
8 new arrangement of the AustralianNationalAnthem..
I understand this is a curtain raiser for Australian
Music Day celebrations on 28 November, and that over
1,000 events promoting Australian music and artists have
been arranged by Ausmusic for the month of November.
The adoption of Advance Australia Fair marked a change,
not just in the song we sang, but in the way we thought
about ourselves.
It has to be said that some people are more equipped for
change than others.
It's unfortunate when sometimes those who lack the
imagination for it hold the others back.
Too often in our history Australians have been held back
and the changes that have been made in the last decade
are proof of that.
We have taken on more change in the last decade than
perhaps we did in the previous forty.
we do things very differently.
We are more open to the world than we have ever been,
more a part of it, more a player in its affairs.
We are much more a part of our region.
We are much more open and phobia-free.
But we are no less Australian for the change.
Notwithstanding~ the permanent barrage of American popularculture
that we endure along with most other countries in
the world, we have kept our best traditions. 
ILL; iC.. 140V~ j If U2% Z., 1 U&amp; 4'
2
In fact I think we have etched them deeper.
And we should continue to.
When the idea of a distinctively Australian National
Anthem was raised in the seventies, the people who
instinctively shy away from change, Cried anarchy and
treason, and sacrilege and blasphemy, and how dare you
cause offence to our past and our cultural superiors.
But those who welcome change when change is due
persisted, and in due course they won bipartisan support,
and now even if a lot of people still don't know the
words we stand for our own national anthem and we are
moved by it.
The words go like this I learnt them a long while ago
in a moment you will hear them recited much more
tunefully. Now it's true that some of the words are a bit old
fashioned.-and so are some of the sentiments.
They come from an age when Australians felt that the
richness and immensity of the land, combined with their
love of it, guaranteed them a golden future.
They are pre-industrial lyrics, and pre-multicultural.
The second and fourth verses are so anglophile and
Victorian they're almost pre-Australian.
But the words of most national anthems are old fashioned,
the British and the French Included.
Both of those prattle on about scheming enemies and
hateful tyrants plotting the overthrow of virtue.
If nothing else Advance Australia Fair is more hopeful
and less paranoid.
It is my duty tonight to thank all those people who have
taken Advance Australia Fair into the realms of a more
modern world, and into, perhaps, the grandeur a national
anthem deserves.
In particular I want to congratulate Ausmusic and Lachian
Wilson. I heard some of Lachlan's music at the recent laying of
the wreath ceremony for Vietnam veterans, and I
understand that that music was actually composed while he
was on active service. 
I also know that he is an old rock musician and that he
was drawn to this project by a desire to make such an
important expression of our national life more
contemporary and more widely appreciated. And more
easily played and sung.
I thank Lachlan for his stirling efforts, and also
Ausmusic for its initiative and follow through and
among the latter I have to single out the irrepressible,
inescapable and undeniable Executive Director, Pete
Steedman. it's a great thing to have the new arrangement an even
better one to have it published and recorded on CD and
sent around our schools and other institutions, so that
all Australians may come to know and take pride in the
Australian National Anthem.
So on behalf of everyone here I thank them all.
As we go into the nineties and the next century we will
need a bold and unmistakeable identity.
we will do best if we have no doubt about who we are, and
if we leave the world in no doubt.
A re-vitalised and popularised anthem will help.
There are a lot of Australians, I know, who retain some
doubts about Advance Australia Fair.
I'm not one of those. it touches a patriotic chord in me,
as I think it does in most Australians. It is
unmistakeably our anthem.
I share with many Australians a sentimental attachment to
Waltzing Matilda.
But it is hard to sing solemnly about a jumbuk.
if Advance Australia Fair is our National Anthem,
Waltzing Matilda Is our national song and I think we
should make it clear that it 1ia our national Song.
There is nothing unusual in this. The United States has
the Star Spangled Banner as its anthem, and God Bless
America and America the Beautiful as its national songs.
God Save the Queen is the British anthem, but Rule
Britannlia and Land Of Hope and Glory, among others, are
equally well known and inspire no less popular sentiment.
So to those who say Waltzing Matilda is the definitive
Australian song, I would say there is no reason why it
shouldn't remain so.
And no reason why it should not sung and played more
often on public occasions. 
4
We can have both the formal anthem, and the popular
song.
And if those who have done such great works with the
anthem feel there is something to be gained from doing
much the same with waltzing Matilda, I'm sure all
Australians would be delighted if they took on the task.
Let me thank Ausmusic and Lachlan Wilson once again and
all the performers the Australian Girls Choir, the
Melbourne Youth Music Council and the Percy Grainger
Youth Orchestra.
We look forward to hearing the new improved Advance
Australia Fair.
And we look forward to singing it.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING MP
WHO IS LEADING THE COALITION?
" I'm absolutely committed, and our party is
absolutely committed to the Introduction of a broadbased
goods and services tax as part of tax reform.
We are preparedr t6"-take o6r political fortunes on
that as an element of the package. I am personally
prepared to stake my political career on it. We are
absolutely determined to demonstrate to people that
we are genuine about tax reform and genuine about
structural change in Australia." Joln Hewson, October 1991
The statement today by Ian Sinclair that the Coalition
may now not introduce a consumption tax requires an
immediate explanation from the current leader of the
Coalition, Dr Hewson.
Mr Sinclair said on radio:
" We're talking about the impact of a policy [ the
GST] that may or may not be implemented and a policy
that is really only a proposition that's been
advanced by the alternate government."
Either Mr Sinclair knows something that Dr Hewson does
not, or Dr Hewson has been misleading the Australian
people about what is intended under a Coalition
Government. In a radio interview only yesterday Dr Hewson said:
" I want to actually tell the truth and I refuse to
deceive people, so I've gone out and told people the
truth about the GST."
And in a press statement yesterday he said:
" We shall continue to advocate reforins... among these
are tax reforms, including a GST." 
Mr Sinclair's remarks confirm speculation that Dr
Hewson's leadership is now a matter of open discussion at
the highest level of the Liberal and National parties.
It is becoming increasingly apparent that Dr Hewson œ 8
the wrong man with the wrong policies for Australia.
Dr Hewson belongs to the era of Thatcherism which is now
in the dust bin of history. The GST belongs there as
well. With Dr Hewson and the GST the Liberal Party now has both
hands tied one to a rock, the other to a hard place.
CANBERRA November 18, 1992 0-1 I I I 4U Q r, v 



TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 00? P. 01/ 14
PRIINMIES TE
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON F J KEATING, M?
INTERVIEW WITH KERRY O'BRIEN, LATELINE
19 NOVEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KOB: Welcome to the program. Tonight I am joincd by the Prime Minister, Paul
Kcating, who onc month from now celebrates his first anniversary in Office. That
period has seen his pcrsonal stocks and those of his Government make a
remarkable turn around, in the face of the worst recession since the Great
Depression and still rising unemployment. The polls show the Government in a
position to win an election and Paul Keating is preferred by the majority of voters
as Prime Minister. Yet the polls are more a measure of the unpopularity of the
Oppositions policics, which is masking the Govermcnts own failures to turn the
economy around. On assuming power, Keating sct the Government's vision, One
Nation promised jobs, tax cuts and infrastructure spending, all predicatcd on
growth estimates that now seem hopelessly optimistic. By its own forccast the
Government has not measured up, commodity prices arc down, the international
economy is sick, the Australian dollar is under attack, business confidence is
clearly still very shaky. As we move closer and closer to election mode, where is
the recovery going to come from? All in all, plenty to talk about tonighit. Paul
Keating, welcome to 1at1clinc.
PM: Kcrry.
KOB: After you settled in as Prime Minister you Iahourcd mightily to come up with a
document that would at least match the Opposition's Fightbuck package as a
strategic plan for the next four years. When you presented One Nation on
February 26 you said and I quote, " Tonight the Governmecnt presents a statement
to get Australia moving, a four year stratcgy for growth in the ' 90s". You also 
TEL: __ 20. Nov. 92 15: 2( No. UU( I-' U77ñ' 4
2
said, " in 1992 we need recovery and we need jobs." After nine months how many
of the fundamental assumptions of One Nation remain true?
PM: The principal thing. That is, that there is a role for Government, that it is not the
Government's job to withdraw from the problem, that it won't solve isclf by a
policy of withdrawl which was largely, for instance, what President Bush was
putting in the United States, and which Govenor Clinton campaigned against and
secured a mandate. Now, in thc very same way in Australia we are saying, in
respect of One Nation, that there was a job for thc Government to do, there was not
only a job for the Governmient to do, but in the large areas of the -public
infrastucture, some of which long forgotten and underspent in the ' 8S, that this
was a time to renew public infrastructure and that the two very nicely coincided
with the needs of the economy in the short and medium term.
KOB: But what you came through with, loud and clear, with One Nation was a ring of
confidence. And it was a confidence that you were trying to sell to the nation,
which I suppose was part of thc strategy, really, to get the economy going. You
have built just about everything on the corner stone of growth, haven't you? In
February, thc One Nation growth forecast was 4.75 per cent, in June that forecast
was adjusted down to 4 per cent, by the August Budget it was down to 3 per cent,
and now it is about to drop again. That is three wrong estimates in 9 months.
What does that do to the integrity of One Nation, given what else has been built
around it?
PM: I don't think in terms of Onc Nation as a package, that the growth forecast worry
its integrity. Its integrity is about whcthcr wc need in Australia at the moment an
expansionary stance of policy. That is, whether we need an expansionary stance of
fiscal and monetary policy. Now the Government believes we do, the Opposition
believes we do not. 1I'hey say take $ 7 billion out of the Budget deficit, 2 per cent
of GDP, we say that will put Australia back into recession, we also say you should
have an expansionary stance, and the things you should do should be substantial.
That's what One Nation was about. The forecasts were important in signalling to
the country what we thought the growth trajectory would be like, hut not intcgral
to One Nation, to the sense and purpose of One Nation.
KOB: Maybe not to the sense and purpose but to the reality of Onc Nation. The things
that were built around it, jobs for example. You built jobs predicated on growth,
and let's look at jobs. You said in a television interview, the night after One
Nation, that of the 800, 000 new jobs to be created over the next 4 years and I
quote, " we would have about the first 150,000 to 200,000 jobs in the first year".
So, how many jobs has One Nation created so far?
PM: It is very hard to say without actually threading through the spending and seeing
exactly where it has come from. 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 27 No .007 P. 03/ 14
3
KOB: But you would be keeping a very tight monitor on that wouldn't you, given the
critical nature of the wholc thing?
PM: But it was ncver a case of month by month employment off the One Nation
spending, it is the whole impact on the economy and how employment has
responded to that. But I think the most important thing though, Kerry, is that if
you look at the 1980s experience, the cast of policy which the Labor Government
adopted in ' 83-4 and ' 85 induced a recovery. What we arc arguing is the same will
induce a recovery now, and has. We are now growing in the last six months or so
at about 2 per cent a year, or that order, We are back into a recovery phase.
KOB: It is still well behind what you are projecting.
PM: I know, but a few things have happened since then. Growth In the world has got
much softer, there is no onc tugging Australia along or putting any impetus into
our economy from external growth and we are going through a very enhanced
recovery. A very enhanced recovery a productivity, there is a big blow out in
* productivity. productivity is running at about 2.6 per cent a year and that is
shorthand for saying we arc getting the same or more output from fewer people
employed in the process.
KOB: But you would have understood thc productivity equation when you went into One
Nation.
PM: I think you can only, with those things, see what thc economy's experience is and
what employers themselves think of the economy, its prospects and what they are
prepared to do in terms of productivity changc.
KOB: But fundamental to everything is jobs. You have said that yourself, you have
preached growth for most of this year, you have preached jobs for most of this
year. But according to the latest Bureau of Statistics trend estimates, I think the
most reliable measure available, 30,000 new jobs have been created from February
to October and that includes a big period before One Nation would have even
begun to bite. And at the same time another 65,000 people have become
unemployment statistics. In other words, for every new job Crcatcd Iwo have been
lost. Now that is not exactly a winning battle, is it?
PM: Well Kerry, if you look at the last few months wc think that employment growth Is
on track with the Budget forecast for cmployment growth. So, you can makc a
commcntary over a year.
KOB: How can it be on track when your growth estimates are running at almost half
what you originally predicated your job growth forecasts on?
PM: No, not on the Budy. ct. Are you talking about Onc Nation or the Budget?
TEL 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 007 P. 04/ 14
4
KOB: Yes, One Nation.
pM: No, I am saying if you look at the Budget forecast.
KOB: Which was a fair re-writing of One Nation.
PM: I think the key point is this, Kerry', this party, this Government produced a record
amount of employment growth in the 1980s. That's what we committed ourselves
to, that's what we are best at, that's our long suit. The recession put us off that
game, we arc simply going back to it.
KGB: But it is much tougher this time, much tougher, much slower.
PM: But you can make a point of discussion about what quarter it is happening in,
where the ping picks up. But pick up it will because the Government's cast of
policy is for growth and employment, The Opposition's isn't, that's thc key point.
So what the levels are or the rutes, thc fact is we had through the ' 80s phenomenal
employment growth, two or three times thc OECD average. It was our long suit, is
our long suit, will remain our long suit.
K013: 8crnie Fraser, last Thursday or Friday in New York, said that unemployment
would stay around 10 to 1.1 per cent for some time to come. That doesn't sit with
your unemployment projections which I think in One Nation said, page 120 of
One Nation, you projected an avcrage rate of unemployment for 1992-93 of
per cent and to around 9.5 per cent by mid 1993, that's by the middle of next year.
What Bernie Fraser says puts the lie to that.
PM: Well that's One Nation, we adjusted all of that in the Budgct. You can't put me
through the same discussion twice. We had all that at Budget time.
KOB: You sold One Nation very hard at the time, are you saying One Nation no longer
applies?
PM: The kcy question is which party is going to induce a recovery in Australia? That's
the key qucstion.
KOB:-Alr-ight. I will keep playing on with One Nation at this stage.
PM: But there is only one, isn't there? It's only the Government because we are saying
that economic policy should be committed to growth and employment growth, we
shouldn't be holding back.
KOB: Let's look at your detailed credibility. One Nation spending on infrastructure,
$ 283 million I think you allocated for railways this financial year. You have now
had to divert $ 150 million of that to other short term job creation because you can't
get the railway programs up on time. 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 007 P. 05/ 1
PM: But what's incredible about that? The question is..
KOB:. But what do we believe about what you project?
PM: The question is will the One Nation package of funds be spent by 30 June 1993?
Answer, yes.
KOHI: But it won't be spent on infrastructure to the degree that you had planned, which is
all about micro reform quite apart from job creation.
PM: In the main it will. But you se, In the tail systems wc had courtesy of 30 years of
indolent Conservative Government, these dinosaur..
KOB: But didn't you..
PM: Hang on, don't be too zealous now, Thes dinosaur public authorities for which
we presumed, and they said, they had enginccring egxp pkqis. r. iady to spend
these monies. In fact, thcse outfits were so run down they didn't have engineering
planning together, and because the Commonwealth was never In the railway
business outside of AN, there is no Commowealth bureaucracy that has any
specialisation in the NSW or Victorian rail systcems. So, what will happen is those
changcs will be made, they will be made in the following financial year, but the
expenditure..
KOB:. So it is delaycd for a year, regardless of why, pardon the pun, it has gone off the
tails?
PM: Not the stimulus, the whole point of the thing was the stimulus.
KOB: Well part of the point.
PM:. The point was to stimulate the economy with a set lcvel of spending over 1 per
cent of GDP. That we will have done, we will havc spent it.
KOB: OK. Let's look at One Nation's promise to return to Budgct surplus in 4 years. In
February you projected a starting point for this year's Budget defcit of $ 8 billion,
in May you revised that to $ 10.5 billion, the Budget in August calculated $ 13.4
billion. Now the ABS, the Bureau of Statistics says it is up to $ 14.5 billion. Given
all the evidence can you honestly stand by the Budget forecast with any
confidence at all as far as the deficit is concerncd?
PM: We had in about a month between June and July a decline in collections of about
billion upon what was expected in the last financial year and coming into this
financial year. Now that reflects just realities in the economy, that is the actual 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 007 P. 06/ 14
6
result. So what is the point of us saying this is not in line with what we thought.
All you have got to do is adjust the cost accordingly.
KOS: I suppose what I am asking is, how can you in all of the instabilities and
uncertainties about this economy, given the Governmient's the Treasury's, the
Reserve Bank's, everybody's incapacity to properly forecast trends, how can you
possibly project anything for 4 years ahead with any confidence?
PM: Kerry, you are becoming a forecasting nlutter. I anm just making this point to you,
the key point, I make it again, is the cast of policy. That is, interest rates
KOB; But what do we evaluate your cast of policy on? What do we judge it on? Results.
PM: Interest rates, fiscal policy, the recovery which is already under way in the
economy clearly from National Accounts data. I mean actual results. If the
revenuec collections are under forecast for this year and they have been dealt with
in subsequent years, so what. The main point is are we going to recover, I say we
will recovcr under a Labor Government because Labor Governments arc about
growth and expansion and thc Liberal Party is about contraction.
KOB: Alright. But can you still say with any credibility, with any certainty that you will
return to surplus in 4 years? Ycs or no?
PM: What did we say in thc Budget? We said that we had a short fall which we needed
to addrcss.
But you would still be targetting for the surplus?
PM: The Treasurer addressed that, but we probably will be nearer surplus.
KOB: Nearer surplus, probably?
PM: But so what? Look, Kerry, let me tell this to you old boy. I was the first Treasurer
in Commonwealth history to post a surplus.
KOM: Alright, I will grant you that, I will grant you that, but that is history now.
PM: Four massive surpluses.
KOB: That is the past wc are now looking about the present and the future.
PM: -But since when do wc have to go back to surpluses? Since when are they holy
writ? None of you cver heard of a surplus, the mcdia could barely spell surplus
before this Government produced them. 
KOB: Because the markets now regard them as holy writ. Because the value of the
dollar, for one thing, Is predicated on issues like that.
PM: Let's say, this is not a forecast projectioa, it has no intelligence to it, but let's say
we were $ 2 billion short of balance.
KOB: But you made your reputation on those policies in the ' 80s. You made your
reputation on the achievements of things like surplus.
PM: Half a per cent of GDP, so what?
KOB: So what is your reputation going to be on the first half of the ' 90s on that score?
Changed circumstances mean..
PM: No Western Government has a tighter fiscal policy than the Labor Government of
the ' 80s. We put away in the savings account of thc nation about $ 20-25 billion of
surplus funds. That is why now we can use them to expand thc economy. That is
why the United States can't expand the economy.
KOB: But you're not using surplus funds to expand the economy, you're in deficit to
somewhere between $ 13-14.5 billion.
PM: But we ran down Commonwealth debt to GDP from about 25 per cent to about 14
per cent by putting surpluses away, we are now running it out to 18 per cent. So,
we have got one of the smallest Government debt to GDP ratios in the world, at 18
per cent of GDP wc arc now using dcfecits for a slow economy by virtue of the
fact that we put away surpluses in a strong economy.
KOB: And foreign debt is getting up close to 40 per cent of GDP.
PM: And here's our Liberal Party friends, the slowest learners in the business, wanting
to say to us, oh no, let's cut $ 7 billion or 2 per cent of GDP out of spending. Let's
push us right back into recesion so we can have a surplus. Surplus at thc wrong
time.
KOB: OK. Let's look at tax cuts. Speaking of the right time and the wrong time, the
promised tax cuts from One Nation. Those tax cuts were calculated on growth,
inflation and bracket creep. Since most of that has gone out the window I am sure
inflation is good news as a component of that, but that effects bracket creep, since
most of that has gone out the window you have had to try to anticipate funding in
advance with other tax increases. The thing is in all the circumstances how can
you possibly justify those massive tax cuts this far out for anything other than
straight political purposes, winning the next election?
PM: Because I don't think the incidence of tax should ris~ e. I don't think that we ought
to be having surplus fetishes years from now and try to cover them with tax 
T2EL0:. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 00? P. 08/ 14
8
collections brought about by a higher incidence of taxation. I just don't think we
need.
KOB: But you have acknowledged for example the need for infrastructure spending.
Thcrc arc some who would say the need for infrastructure spending is even much
greater than you're anticipating. There is a limited purse within which to do that,
but you are promising with a very uncertain economy, very uncertain recovery,
very uncertain international economy, you are promising a massive tax cut, two
years from now, three years from now, four years from now.
PM: To maintain the tax to GD) P ratios we roughly have at the moment. In other words,
what I'm promising is not to put up tax.
KOB: It's got nothing to do with the Opposition's tax cut promises, nothing to do with a
desire to go to the next election campaign with a tax cut.
PM: It makes a very intrecsting political point that we reduce the 38 rate, at the range of
$ 20,500 of Income from 38 to 30 without a consumption tax and that is the point
that thc Liberals are now pondering. That is all the tax cuts that Australians were
likely to gct from Dr Hcwson's Fightback package under a consumption tax, they
will get from the Labor Government and we are legislating them now from 38 to
no consumiption tax.
KOB: OK lct's come back to a final word about ' One Nation' a final measure of what
' One Nation' was supposed to achieve, what it has achieved, what it may achieve
and the extent to which it has been revised. Growth forecasts badly wrong,
unemployment forecasts wrong, job growth wrong, deficit forecast looking sick,
infrastructure spending revised, tax cuts as many would say barely credible.
Surely that all says that ' One Nation!
PM: Legislated.
KOB: Legislatcd, but harcly crcdiblc in tcrmns of thc original basis on which they were
predicated, strong growth amongst other things and in the end surely you've got to
say that ' One Nation' today has become a very shaky, it not discredited document.
PM: No, cut it out Kerry, cut it out. ' One Nation' was a psychological boost for the
country.
K013: It was a blueprint.
PM: No, hang on it said let's go and expand fiscal policy when it needs expansion, let's
do it in all the things that nccd doing rebuilding the rail highway, accelerating
the road highways and the ring roads, the electricity grid, the spending for the
National Training Authority for vocational education all going ahead.
TEL: 
T2EL0:. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 007 P. 09/ 1
9
KOB: OK it was designed to boost confidence apart from anything cise.
PM: That's right.
KOB: H-ow many business people, business leaders in this community today do you
believe could stand up, would be prepared to stand up tomorrow and say ' One
Nation' has the answers, ' Onc Nation' has the capacity to deliver the goods?
PM: ' One Nation' was designed not as a panacea for all thc nation's problemns.
KOB: No, build confidence. How many business leaders today would still havc
confidence in ' One Nation'?
PM: But to say there was a role for Government in kick starting the economy and
getting it cracking.
K013: But it hasn't.
PM: We are growing at 2 pcr cent a year, what do you mean?
KOB: You were going to grow much more than that.
PM: But how do you say it hasn't? We are not in recession, we are growing.
KOB; How many business leaders in Australia today would stand up and endorse ' One
Nation' as a document that still inspires confidence?
PM: Well, how many would stand up and say it has not had a significant influence on
activity? And remember at the time, we had the chief executive officers of a
numbhcr of major companies supporting its stance and do today.
KOB: At the time, in ecbruary. How many would do it today?
PM: We can't go on spending Kerry, you can't go on and have another one and anothcr
one. T1he ' One Nation' expenditure will be spent by 30 June 1993, it will do the
macro economic task it's called for and most of its spending will go as it was
planned to go. Sure the railways were underspent, but they will be spent in the
following ycar and we will spend that money by diverting it to other purposes this
year.
KOB: OK let's look now at some of the other elements that arc going on in the
community. Wc are running up to Christmas, the biggest pcriod for the retail
trade; retail trade are running scared aren't they in the lead up to Christmas in the
main? The' HiA, the Housing Industry Association, the Master Builders
Association are saying that the ousin cqpyiry. has peaked or near peaked, the
Bureau of Statistics says the recovery in ncw home approvals has ended, bleak
TEL 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 2? No. 007 P. 10/ 1.
prospects for the international economny, zero growth projected for Germany for
the next twelve months, we, did a program on the state of the British economy a
couple of weeks ago where senior and respected economists were saying 14 per
cent unemployment quite possible In Britain over the next couplc of years, Japan,
their plan for recovery stalled because of problems in the Japanese administration,
the United States economy, thcy are talking about stimulating but an unknown
quantity. I suppose in the end where are the signs for optimism? Commodity
prices, Max Walsh's column the other clay, commodity prices he says are nearly
down as low as they were across the board in 1986 when they were a disaster for
this economy.
PM: The thing is it is a tough world out there.
KOB: Sure is.
PM: The world is in a very slow phase of growth and it is true commodity prices are
down, it's tough going for Australia. All the more reason why the growth we are
swing and the structural changes is taking Place and the links into Asia and the
productivity shift and the shift down inflation and the competitive exchange rate
are all ball points for Australia. I think all that commentary of yours as just said, is
how hard it is to govern these days and to engineer a recovery.
KOB: And how hard it's going to be for you to go to an election at some point in the first
half of next year with unemnploymecnt somewhere between 10.5 and I1I per cent or
higher.
PM: It's a lot easier than going and saying I will actually push the cconomy back into
recession, I'll contract fiscal policy, I'll put interest rates..
KOB: You'll be saying that though, it's not what John Hcwson says.
PM: No, yes he is, let's be clear about this. HeI says we should cut 7 billion out of
outlays, 2 per cent of GDP.
KOB: Yes, but he's also saying other things, he's talking about $ 20 billion to build
business confidence.
PM: No, that $ 20 billion Is passed onto consumers, if it's not you have a massive
inflation surge. Look Kerry..
KOB: You've got all of these cecemcnts, you've got a shaky dollar, you're on an absolute
knife edge.
PM: Kerry, I heard the question thc first time, I'm just making this point to you that it's
only this Government's policy of expansion and of seeing growth of our
positioning of mionctary policy, the general expansionary phase and thc pick up we 
TEL: ~ 2J7No92 t5T2 No7fJIT F. 11/ 1[
arc seeing now we've seen right through the last year in exports. The fact that the
economiy is growing and that thcre are things in our domestic economy which give
us cause to belicvc that that growth will continuc.
KOB: Bill Kclty has said twice in the last twelve months, he is a man you respect.
PM: Very much so.
KOB: A friend of yours, he said twice in thc past twelve months that Labor could not win
the next election with uinenlploymcnt over 10 per cent. You arc going to have to
go to the election with unemployment over 10 per cent, therc is no two ways about
that.
PM. We say the alternative will push unemployment much higher, that the Liber-als will
basically grind the place into the dust and in the middle of it have an industrial war
a la Kennett and Victoria. Which ever way you look at it Kerry, Labor has been
the growth party, it's been the employment growth party, sure we've been off our
game with the recession, but wc arc back on our game at the point.
KOB: Yes, you said in the Parliament that you would honour thc electorates mandate on
the. OST Hewson wins the next election. Will you honour a similar mandate on
their findustrial relations policies? Provided they stick to the policies they've
outlined.
PM: T'hey don't even know what their policy is to stick too. They don't know what their
policy is to stick to, they are shift and shimmer around every day about it. They
are saying Kennett is right 100 per cent one day then he's on he's 70 per cent the
next.
KOB: Forget Kennett, if they stick to the policies they hiave outlined and continue to
outline, do you acknowledge that thcy will have a mandate on industrial relations
as they will on the GST?
PM: Kerry let me just make this clear to you, I may be old fashioned in this, but the
power of the. House of Representatives is a money power, the money bills, the
budget bills, the big tax bills and the GST is over half the income tax, it's half thc
Budget, it's a tax shift of $ 50 billion, it's half the Budget.
KOB: But it's not just money bills Paul?
PM: If a Coalition Government wcrc to sccure a vcry clear miandate for that, what group
of Opposition parties could with any integrity or any strength sit in Senate and say
oh no, wc won't have that.
KOB: But it's not just money bills. You've said again quote, quitc clearly " I don't believe
it Is legitimate for an Opposition in the Senate to deny the principal element of 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 007 P. 12/ 14
12
what is a clcarly articulated mandate". Now, if they stick to the policies they have
articulated on industrial relations
PM. Hang on, let me tell you this, John Howard said he would produce the legislation,
then he said last week no he wouldn't because he couldn't get it drafted propcrly. I
offered himi the services of thc Parliament Counsel to draft it.
KOB: I bet you did.
PM: I did, he's now running backwards being very tricky because he says now he
doesn't believe the Opposition should show the electorate the colour of the
legislation. They are going to be all over the shop on industrial relations..
KOB: Just like you've been all over the place on ' One Nation'.
PM: and trying to secure from me any support for that absolute grab bag of that
hodge podge of intellectual quackery and ideology is asking too much.
KOB: But you can't rely again, for the next election there is no way that you are going to
be able to rely totally on a negative canmpaigni against the Opposition to win that
election.
PM: We don't need to.
KOU: Well what would you describe here as the fundamental elcments of Paul Keating's
agenda for your first full term as Prime Minister, for Labor's fifth term in office?
An agenda that will persuade Australians that you arc not a tired government, you
are a rejuvenated government, you've got the energy and thc vision to do it, despite
the fact that thc cconomiy Is going to allow you very little room.
PM: Kerry, this is the Government that has made the big changc in Australia, the big
change from basically an inward looking society and economy to an outward
looking society and economy. This is the Goverment that has made the big
trading switch, we are now exporting 25 per cent of all wc produce. This is the
Government which is making now the tightest fit into the Asia-Pacific of any
government in our history, that's what is going to save Australia.
KOB: So more of the same?
PM: It will never be more of the same, it will always be changing. The great micro
reform agenda which we are still working on, most of it completed
telecommunications, ports and wharves,
KOB: Most of it complctcd? 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 27 No. 00? P. 13/ li
13
PM: Telecommunications, ports and wharves, thc labour market, airlines, what else do
you want me to do?
KOB: The Metal Trades Industry Association which has been an employer organisation
that your governiment has time after time, counted as a friend, you've identified
themi as friends in effect, you've called them up to back your case on more than one
occasion, the MTIA..
PM: They believe in a co-operative structure.
KOB: OK, the MTIA has just released a survey of 140 of their member companies across
19 sectors of industry and they say that they have yet to receive across the board,
they say they arc yet to receive the benefits of your micro reform package, where
are the benefits, when are they going to start to flow? You've been doing this,
you'vc been endeavouring to imiplcment your micro rcforrn package since 1987
and y'ou say you've virtually complcted it.
PM: Kerry, we arc going to have a telecommunications operator, thc price of phone
calls has fallen by what, half for long distance calls. Look it's happened in airfares
and travel around Australia with the -dcregulation , of the airline industry. We are
going to set up a free market for electricity in the eastern states of Australia. The
waterfront, waterfront productivity has risen 50 per cent this year. What do you
want mc to do? Put it on a black board.
KOB: we did a program on the waterfront the other night where the bulk of the users of
the waterfront are saying that they haven't got any benefits of it either.
PM: OK, tile users have got to put some pressure on the stevedoring companies, do they
want us to do out their business for them? We can set the change up, what do they
want us to do? Actually make the orders for them? Look Kerry, this place was an
Industrial museum ten years ago, it is now a country locked into the fastest
growing part of the world, open, it's set the tariff wall largely down, removed
exchange controls, a floating exchange rate, a free financial market, a better tax
system, a relatively small public sector, we arc off and running, all we've got to do
is get that recovery phase moving and Australia's position in the ' 90s from a low
inflationary base is going to be a very, very attractive one.
KOB: I image that there is one reason well beyond any other that you have not called a
pre-Christmas election and that is that up until this time you don't believe that
you'd get across the line in that election. The public polls say you would,
prcsumably your own private polling and your own political instincts tell you that
its not yet, you're not yet there.
PM: I think the more time we have to articulate our policy position, our general
philosophic position, the more time we have to articulate our belief about the
Coalition's, the more time we have to see the economy run on the better. 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 15: 2? NO. UU( 14/ 1
14
KOB: Well then that says a May election.
PM: No, it says that any election after Christmas is basically full time.
KOB: But if you want maximum time to expose their policies.
PM: Look, rve bcn in this Parliament now for 23 years, I think the average length of
Australian Parliaments is about 27-28 months, it's 36 months in March so let's say
this, it's on the starting blocks any time in the new year because as far as rm
concerned any time between then and the technical end of the Parliament is the
end of the Parliament.
KOB: And the average length of Lateline interviews is much shorter than this one, we'll
have to end it there. Paul Keating thanks for joining us tonight.
PM: Good on you Kerry, have a good Christmas.
KOB: You too.
ENDS 



T2EL0: . Nov. 92 16: 28 No. 012 P. 01/ 02
16
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MEETING WITH TV NETWORK CHIEFS
This afternoon met the heads of the three comnmercial television networks, Bob Campbell
of thc 7 Network, Gary Rice of 10 and David Leckie of 9, and Tony Branigan thc general
manager of thc Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations to discuss the
question of violence in films shwn on television.'
I put to them my concern that the present system of broadcasting violent, AO. rated films
at 8.30 exposed too many children to unsuitable material. Since I raised tllis issu e in the,
Parliament several weeks ago, [ hfa-ve received hundreds of letters from equally conccrned
parents who are worried about the impact of violent films on their children.
The networks informed me they will incorporate the following changes to their selfregulatory
code:
mandatory standardised indications of the levels of violence, sex and coarse language
in AO films to be broadcast before films in both audio and visual form
a clear visual indication at the start of each segmient of the film's classification
6 restrict the carly evening promotion of AO films.
broadcast regular announcements explaining the meaning of classification symbols
and content descriptions, increasing the frequency of such announcements during
school holidays.
0 urge newspapers and magazines to display and explain the symbols and content
descriptions when listing television programs.
The networks have also agreed to run a high visibility press advertising campaign during
December to support their on-air announcements.
TEL 
TEL: 20. Nov. 92 16: 57 No. 016 P. 02/ 02
2.
1 welcomed these improvements to present program descriptions but argued they did not
go far enoughi to meet thc concerns of parents and others about the content of programs
broadcast while substantial numbers of children are watching. As a result of our
discussions two further steps were agreed. Thie networks have undcrtakcnt to work
towards agreement on a common classificatl n systpi. po that television films are rated by
the same system that applies to movies screened in cinemas and to videos.
As previously announced, I Intend to propose to the Council of Australian Governments
mecting in Perth on Dcember 7 that the States and Territories agree to split the prescnt
classification into two, segregating the more violent anid sexually explicit films and
videos. If we can secure agreement for this, Australia will then enjoy a more rational and
sensible uniform classification system.
In addition, in response to my concerns about children being exposed to violent films, the
networks have undertaken to prepare a detailed briefing for me on thc economic and other
consequences of changing the times at which movies are presently screcned. I look
forward to asscssing this advice early next week and taking account of, among other
things, the proposed creation of a " softcr" classification through splitting the present
category.
CANBERRA November, 1992 



ILL: ZU. INUV. 25Z 1( 11i NU. UZU r.' JI'Ut
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIONAL EXPORT AWARDS PRESENTATION
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA 30 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be with you this evening to
participate in these awards and to celebrate Australia's
export achievements in the past year.
I commend the efforts of the Austrade and its fellow
sponsors in identifying Australia-1' best.
I know from travelling round the country how difficult
the final choices must have been.
There is so much talent out there, and commitment to
excellence is becoming a defining quality of much of our
business and industry.
These awards are a recognised national institution. For
nearly thirty years they have recognised the tremendous
contribution Australian exporters make to the nation's
prosperity. There is no one in this room tonight who doeS not know
that Australia's future depends upon our ability to
compete in the world.
Such is the level of economic awareness in Australia
these days, I doubt if there are many Australians who do
not know it.
For employment opportunities to expand and for living
standards to grow we need more companies like those
represented here tonight companies prepared to pursue
export opportunities and with the determination and nouse
to succeed.
You are here tonight because you have passed the ultimate
test and succeeded internationally. Passed it with
flying colours. 
TEL 2
You've done it by concentrating on quality, skills,
workplace relationships, design, technology, management,
market responsiveness. You've done it with international
-be-st practice.
The last twelve months have seen a difficult
international trading environments Not a few of our most
substantial trading partners are either in recession or
experiencing very slow growth.
So it is all the more a triumph to see Australian
ventures succeeding in a diverse range of markets.
We see this diversity among the finalists tonight.
we have Australians selling cars end car parts to the US
anid Asia.
Australians selling cheesecake and pet food to Japan.
Australian suppliers of beg-handling systems and
packaging machinery to Asia, France, the Pacific and the
US. Australians consulting on major infrastructure projects
in Asia.
Australians exporting high technology computer equipment
and software around the world.
Australians providing engineering equipment, concrete
mixers and state of the art refrigeration technologies
and storage containers.
Australians exporting medical products for sleep
disorders, and training videos for occupational health.
Australians exporting high tech scientific equipment and
specialised resource mapping services.
Australians exporting gas cylinders and steel.
Australians exporting magnesia, salt, iron ore, oil and
gas. Ladies and gentlemen
Australia is a global trader. We are dependent on an
open, liberal trading environment.
Australia's overriding foreign economic policy priority
is to preserve and enffa_ 6iig a tradinig-environment in which
our major markets become more open to us and to each
other. T2EUL:. NOV.% i2 1(; 11 NO. uzu r. uziu( 
TEL 3
For our part, the Government is always on the look-out
for ways of se curing better conditions for our trade., in
whatever context, be it Multilateral, regiona~ l or
bilateral. The Government today, and everyday, is working to see the
global trading rules improved, market distortions removed
and our access to markets enhanced.
In a changing economic world, Australia needs to be open
minded about the institutional forums and the
arrangements we might enter to secure these objectives.
We do not rule out bilateral trading agreements or
membership of regional trading arrangements as means of
achieving our goals in trade.
Nor do we wish to pursue agreements which are prejudicial
to our interests.
The Trade investment Framework Arrangement which we are
now concluding with the United States is an initiative
which arose during the visit of President Bush in
Jatnuary. it is an example of our willingness to enter into
understandings which suit our interests, and which fit
well with the development of the region's trade patterns.
The arrangement will provide Australia with a valuable
opportunity to hold high-level consultations on issues
such as subsidies, quotas and non tariff barriers which
effect some of our exports to the United States, such as
beef, sugar and steel.
our overall interests are clear. A strong liberal global
trading system based on the GATT and a successful Uruguay.
_ Round outcome will mean a un isal liberalisation of
markets. A Pacific-wide trading area, with its most powerful
economies building closer trade and investment bonds,
helps ensure individual markets are fired by the vigour
of prosperity and open trade.
And the facts around these interests are clear.
Australia's overall trade performance and our ability to
negotiate better access for our exports depend
substantially on the competitiveness and performance of
the national economy.
A decade ago our cost structure made it hard for
exporters to compete.
Today we have increased our competitiveness
substantially, and entrenched our competitive advantages
with low inflation and higher productivity growth.
TELU: . Nov. 2JZ 1(; 11 NO. UZU r. uO,/ Va' 
4
More importantly, we have encouraged a wholesale shift
into enterprise bargaininM as the principal means of
deciding wages, and pushed forward 8 program of industry
reform which has dramatically increased the prodtuctivity
of ofr ports, and changed the f ace of our aviation and
telecommunications industries.
These industries are, of course, vital to exporting.
No one should be under any illusions about these reforms
both their strengths and their present limitations.
They are overdue. There is, no doubt, still some way to
go: just as there is still a way to go in developing a
thoroughgoing export culture in Australia meaning an
awareness at every level of the community, that it is
fromn what we do and what we make that success will
spring. But that awareness baa grown dramatically, and so has the
pace of real reform in recent years. Without doubt, it
has been much greater than anyone expected.
Take the key issue of industrial relations: we expect
that by next year abd-ut half the Au btiraian work force
will be working under enterprise agreements.
From any perspective, that is phenomenally rapid change,
and it is happening for the fundamental reason that we
had a cultural change, a change in outlook, in the
previous five or six years.
it was the change in attitude which underpins the
concrete results we're now seeing.
And, truly, there can be no sense in ripping the heart
out of reform and with it, in large part, recovery by
smashing the cooperative ethic which has been fashioned.
why declare war when the peace is working?
And when the only possible victory would leave us
infinitely worse of f?
Why go around the country saying, as the Victorian
Premier did yesterday, Have Courage! Have couragel
when patently, by their actions, Australians do have
courage: and, more than that, common sense, imagination,
public spirit, the ability to work together.
The point is we have made extraordinary progress in the
past decade, and the changes will breed more change. To
reverse the progress will be to halt the change, and
nothing could iever persuade me of the sense in doing
that. Ladies and gentlemen 72EUL:. NOV. 232 1(: l NO. VZU rAJ' 4' u 
TEL:
Australian companies will benefit from the major
investments we have made in infrastructure in aviation,
road and rail; in the doubling of productivity on our
wharves, in reduced shipping costs, reduced
telecommunications costs and improved services, and so
In our One Nation statement we also made changes to our
business taxation system which make it one of the most
competitive among industrial countries.
The important poir&amp; to be made is that these reforms build
on progress.
There has been a transformation of our trade a
transformation in volumes, composition and destination.
Exports of goods and services as a proportion of our
national product have risen from less than 14 per cent
ten years ago to 23 per cent today.
A decade ago we exported less than one sixth of our
production. As the sheer volume of our exports has increased, their
composition and direction have changed.
The value of both our services exports and manufactured
exports have tripled over the last decade.
Manufactures and services together accounted for 34 per
cent of our exports in 1982. Last year they accounted
for 40 per cent.
In the 1990s Australians are succeeding in tourism in
ways unimaginable a decade ago.
in 1982 950,000 tourists visited Australia. Last year
nearly 2.4 millfifn ~ aiiived an average growth rate of
more than 10.6 per cent, and yielding an increase in
foreign exchange earnings of $ 6.3 billion dollars from
$ 1.9 billion in 1982 to 88.2 billion last year.
The forecast number of visitors in the year 2000 ranges
between 4.8 million and 6.5 million.
There is no better or more obvious example of our
individual and collective capacity to adapt, to develop
skills and infrastructure, to exploit our natural
advantages and add value, or to seize an opportunity in a
competitive international market than the success of the
tourism industry.
it now represents 12 per cerit of our total exports up
from 7 per cent in 1982/ 83: and tourist operators, like
all exporters, will continue to receive encouragement and
support from this Government. TZEUL:. rwV.' JZ rNU. UZU r'. UDIV( 
TEL 6
In the last decade or so the Asian region has been
transformed into the most rapidly growing regional
economy in the world, with a high share of exports, and a
high degree of trade within the region.
our economy is increasingly integrated into the region.
Nine out of ten of our largest export markets are now in
Asia and the Pacific.
Last year about 60 per cent of our exports went to East
Asia. The Government is providing strategic support for a
number of key export-oriented sectors, at the same time
progressively lowering the tariff walls in order to
assist restructuring and enhance competitiveness.
Many of the companies here tonight have worked in
partnership with the Government in specific areas for
instance through the International Trade Enhancement
Scheme, the Asia-Pacific Fellowships Scheme, or Austrade
industry special-s-ts refll __ iig _ a _ joint long term
commitment to exporting.
We have shown we can change and adapt.
We have shown we can work together. We have demonstrated
our versatility in many fields of endeavour. We have
shown that we can succeed.
But each of us here tonight knows that to get here has
not been easy it requires sustained application over
the long haul and we still have much to do.
The Government for its part will continue to encourage
more Australian companies to export.
As well as the changes at home, we have been spreading
the message abroad of the " new" Australia. I have made
this a central theme or my visits this year to Indonesia,
Japan and Singapore.
in the last two years, the Government has opened a number
of new posts in the increasingly affluent Asian region.
Ladies and gentlemen, the success of the companies
represented here tonight is an inspiration and example to
others. They need only look to your success for
confirmation that the labour is worthwhile.
Your imagination, determination, skills and effort
constitute a profound contribution to the great national
endeavour in the 1990s. T2EL0:. Nov. 92 17: 11 No. 020 P. Ub/ r' 
IEL: ZU. NOv. z 1 r. 11 NIu. VUV r . Vu u
7
The effort to make Australia a vigorous trading nation
and a prosperous society which can deliver employment
opportunities to all.
Your success is a material contribution to that process,
and a psychological one. Because success raises
Australians' hope, competitive success in the world
raises Australians' self-esteem.
It raises confidence and we will need that in the coming
years, as much as anything else.
So I thank you all, and congratulate you. 



PRIME MINISTER 129/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTERI, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
URUGUAY ROUND BREAKTHROUGH
I warmly welcome today's announcement that the United States and theEuropean
~ inunit commission have resolvcd their outstanding differences over agriculture in
the UruguayjRound Negotiations.
Both sides arc to be congratulated on the flexibility and statcsnianship they have
demonstrated in reconciling a dispute which threatened not only to terminate the Round
but to substantially increase trade conflict.
This breakthrough rcprcscnts in my view the most important achievement sinec the round
commenced six years ago and is an historic step in bringing fair trade to agriculture.
Announcement of the agreement will have a significant favourable impact onl world
economic confidence at a time of slow growth and international pessimism.
I particularly applaud1 the work of President Bush and his administration in working
tirelessly to complete this agrcn-in bcforc thc cnd of the year. It is a fine parting gift to
the world from a President who has already contributed so much in international affairs,
The U. S. Administration kept the Australian Government wcll informed during the
negotiations and we accept the agrecments reached in agriculture as a sensible
compromise which will both assist low cost agricultural exporters like Australia and pave
the way for the settlement of all the remaining issues, icluding services and market
acces, in the Round.
Through its leadership of the Cairns Group agricultural fair traders Australia has played a
key role in insisting that ally ou~ tcome to the Round had to include reform in agricultural
trade. 
The agreement calls for a 20 pcr cent reduction across the board in internal supports for
agriculture. Tt also provides for a 36 pcr cent reduction ovcr six years in the amount of
money spent to subsidise agriculture exports and a 21 per cent reduction in the volume of
subsidised exports.
The agreement will over time substantially inhibit subsidised agriculture exports by all
signatories, including the US and the European Community, increasing the
competitiveness of unsubsidised exporters such as Australia.
Now that the breakthrough in agriculture has been achieved the negotiations will be
brought back into the multilateral discussions in Geneva where all participating countries,
including Australia, will play their part in reaching a final agrcement on the draft Final
Act to the Round ( the so called Dunkel package which has been on the table in Geneva
since December' 1991) and the subsequent conclusion of negotiations of specific
commitments for market access liberal isation in industrial products, agriculture and
services. A successful Uruguay Round package bringing a liberalised trade outcome to industrial
tariffs, textiles, agriculture, services and more effective trade rules will bring enormous
benefit for the global economy as a whole and assist in leading the whole world into
stronger growth.
CAN BERRA
21 November, 1992. 



/ 0
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. PJ. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP PRESS CONFERENCE
GATT ROUND SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 1992
PM: A few of you have asked me for comments about the announcemenits over night or
yesterday about the agreements between the United States and the European
community on agricultuire and I'm quitc happy to amplify what I said yesterday
and that is this is the best news for Australia in a decade, easily in terms of
international trade. It allows for a completion, a successful conclusion of the
Uruguay Round in the other aspects and it means in the first time in a decade we
are able to see a reduction in price supports for domestic agricultural production,
particularly in Europe and the United States. We'll see a very large reduction in
export subsidics and a large reduction in export volumes, in practical terms about a
36 per cent reduction in export volumes, about the same in the value of money
spent on export subsidies,. You've often heard our opponents say of the
Govermecnt that we've been too intcrested in niultilateralism, well this is
multilateralism roaring, this is rnultilatcralism making a world statement that bilateral,
that is, arrangements between two countries, can't possibly make and it's
the first great break for Australian farmers in a decade. Our farmers are, of course,
efficient, they don't require the subsidies others have had, they'vc had to sell into
polluted markets and I'm pleased to be able to say that after six years of work on
the part of everybody, but particularly the Australian Government will bring, I
think, sanity to agriculture markets through the 1990s.
J Isn't there still a risk though Prime Minister that the French are going to pull the
plug on this because of the prcssure that they're coming Linder with their farmers?
PM: They are under pressure but it's a matter of whether President Mitterand exercises a
veto, we're told at this stage his inclination is not to but I'm also happy to say that
the White House today complimented Australia in its Support for these
arrangements, first of all in the establishnment of the Cairns Group, its leadership in
the Cairns Group and the fact that Australia has been right at the front of every
cheek by jowl negotiation over six years. So if we sce, as think we have now
every prospect of seeing, a successful conclusion of this in Geneva as we bring the
other things into the round likec rvices, trade in intellectual property rights etc., it 
will set up for Australia and Australian farmers and Australian agriculturalists and
the agriculturalists of the Third World who have been so often left out a much
better international trading system in agriculture.
J: How quickly would you expect the United States to wind back its use of EEP
given that EEP is intended as retaliation against Europe?
PM: Well it means that none of these things can grow, they'll actually be declining and
therefore all these programs like EEP will go the way of all the other subsidies.
J: Do you have any idea what this will mean in dollar terms for Australian farmers?
PM: No, you can't quantify it in dollar terms but it just means that a 36 per cent
reduction in export subsidies and volumes over six years, it means everything is
heading the right way and in some of these reductions they just continuc after the
six-year period is over. So it means that thc whole backdrop in trade in
agricultural products world-wide will have changed for Australian farmers.
J: On a related issue, talking about the White House, do you have any comment on
the Clinton Administration's partiality to our system of
PM: Apparently the Administration has shown some interest and some data has been
collected on the Australian industrial relations system and by a number of
Democrats on our health -system, on Medicare. You know Governor Dukakis was
in Australia last year looking at this very thing. Hc spent two and a half months
looking at the Australian health insurance -system. So I think there are elements of
the Democratic Party and maybe the administration who think Australia can
provide some structure or some framework on health and on enterprise agreements
and it is, I think, thc nature of the enterprise agreements. is what they are interested
in. T7hat is, how in a consultative structure we can get productivity change and
workplace changc on a national basis.
J: Do you think that Australia should follow US lead on the issue of homosexuality'
in the Defence Forces?
PM: Well that's a matter we've got to discuss ourselves. But in terms of issues of
weight, the issue of weight here is overwhelmingly these sets of announcements in
Europe which I think are going to be phenomenally good news for Australian
farmers.
J: Mr Keating, do you think they'll have any impact on Australia's attempt to get 3
-per cent economic growth this year?
PM: I think thcy'll be a great confidence boos ter to world confidence. There hasn't been
that much leadership by the G7 countries in pulling the world out of the recession
but I think this, which is the essence of leadership, will mnatter a great deal in 
confidence levels and let mec say I think President Bush deserves a high note of
congratulations here because I can't imagine any more important or sweeter note
that he could end his presidency on than setting up an historic set of international
arrangements in trade. When his presidency is completed this will go on for now
forever as one of the very clcar achievements of his administration.
1: Do you think this breakthrough could have an impact this financial year on the
world economy?
PM: No. But it will certainly have an impact on confidence and it will give all the right
signals to all the people that produce agriculture and not only that but all these
other things that will conmc with it trade in services, intellectual property rights,
It's giving us a proper background, a proper world order to trading arrangements
and hopefully it will do in agriculture and services what the so-called Kennedy
Round did in goods in the 1960s. I mean this, brought to fruition will be an
historic change.
J: Mr Keating, on anothcr matter, will you be announcing revised Budget forecasts?
PM: Michelle, that's something you should ask the Treasurer. I'm just not aware of
exactly where he is on the forecasts at all, or where the Treasury is.
J: Do you have any response to Dr Hewson's call for a series of debates on
PM: I notice Dr Hewson is being advised by cvcrybody about selling the GST. I notice
today we've got a group of Sydney luminaries telling him how he sho'uld-better
market his product. Thbe problem is the product is no good. It's not that the
marketing is no good. He has been to every city and every provincial city in the
country talking about it now for a year, one could hardly say the sales effort hadn't
been reasonably ambitious, but thc product is basically a dud, that's the problem.
This always happens with political parties when they have, I think a remark you
made, a very profound one Michelle over the weekend, that is, when political
parties have trouble with policies they say they have a communication problem.
The problem hcre is not the communication problem, the problem for the Liberal
Party is the product ' is wrong for Australia. I notice that commentators like Ross
Gittins and Max Walsh and others have said that Fightback, the GST, is no
solution to Australia's problems in restoring growth whatever one might think
about it in thc medium term. But even in the medium term, does anybody believe
that a tax on the whole nation's food, clothing, goods, services to abolish payroll
tax and reduce thc price of petrol is going to produce the new Australia. I mean
does anybody think that reducing the price of petrol and removing payroll tax is
going to, prcsto, produce a new country. TIs is what the Liberal Party has
advertised this policy as and the fact is this is a very crude lix switch which takes
money off one group of people and gives it to another and it's very disruptive. The
problem the Liberals have is that the product is no goo~ d, not that the sales program 
is no good. It wouldn't matter how good the sales program is, they're selling a dud,
but they still believe in it.
J: But Treasury secretary Tony Cole said it was good for exporters?
PM: No he didn't. If you want to see what the Treasury had to say about this, read the
Treasury analysis three-quarters of all families worse off, a 4 to 6 per cent affect
on inflation, that is, putting our inflation rate back near double digits. This thing is
a macro-economic disaster and tic it in with their industrial relations and you've
got a full-blown disaster.
ends 



TEL: 23. Nov. 92 17: 59 No .028 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER 130/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE FORCE POLICY ON HOMOSEXUALITY
Following Cabinet's consideration today, the Government has decided to end the policy of
discriminating against homosexuals in the Australian Defence Force ( ADE). TMe change will
take effect immediately.
This decision reflects broad support in the Australian community for the removal of
employment discrimination of any kind, including discrimination on grounds of sexual
preference. The dccision brings ADF policy into line with the tolerant attitudes of Australians
generally. The ADF acknowicdgcs that there are male and female homosexuals among its members and
has advised the Government that these members arc no longer actively sought out or disciplined
because of their sexual preference.
In making this decision, my Cabinet colleagues and were mindful of the attitudes and opinions
of members of the ADF and the cx-Service community. The Government appreciates the high
standards of dedication and professionalism expected of ADF personnel, but considers that the
decision will not have the adverse effect on morale and cohesion predicted by some.
The Government believes that the new ADF Instruction on Unaccqptablc Sexual Behaviour,
whether homosexual or heterosexual, tabled by Senator Ray in the Senate in June 1992 and
which Cabinet today endorsed, provides adequate protcction for individuals against unwelcome
sexual advances and gives officers the necessary authority to deal with infringements.
The ADF Instruction takes thorough account of all forms of sexual behaviour which could affect
operational effcctivcncss, group cohesion, morale, command relationships, and protects
underage persons within the ADF.
The Government considers that the Instruction on Unacceptable Sexual Behaviour is a farreaching
and commendable reform. It has been praised by the Human Rights Commissioner and
the Caucus Joint Working Group which looked into the ADF policy. I congratulate Senator
Ray, Mr Bilney and the members of thc Department of Defence and ADF responsible for its
development. CANBE-RRA
23 November 1992 



PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MIP,
HINCH PROGRAM, NETWORK 10, NOVEMBER 25 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
DH: As I mentioned your TV viewing habits are about to change. Sexually
explicit and violent movi es, even big Hollywood hits will soon be banned
before 9.00pm. The man behind thc move, Prime Minister Paul Keating, is
my guest tonight. Mr Keating, good evening.
PM: Good evening Derryn.
DH: With a million unemployed, with the economy in such a mess, how come
this exercised your mind so much?
PM: It's something I've had a bee in my bonnet about for a lot of years, a number
of years. I thinkc a couple of things: one that my own children that age, I've
got four childrcn a boy and thrcc girls, and the girls are 13, 11 and 7 and
they are at that age where I think they are being subjected to very explicit
violence. It's exciting for some of' them and a bad influcnce on them and I
worry about the whole mood of violence, and the desensitisation that goes
on in the community as the standards continue to change.
DH: Is it true that Caroline, Katherine and Alexandra werc sitting at homc one
Sunday night watching a movie with you and you said, hey I don't like this,
don't let my kids see this?
PM: No, what they often do is they watch it in a room themselves, but I find
myself running backwards and forwards to see what they have on. One of 
the things that we had in the recent school holidays was they were switching
in between breaks onto a movie which was a horror movie, which had upset
the youngest one quite a bit, and it really was a horrible thing. The problem
was that they switched. In fact, it shouldn't have been on, in my view, at the
time it was on. As well as that, we had these terrible murders against
children. It's all I think part of a background to violence which is seeping
into our society in part from the transmission of Hollywood product,
American film product.
DH: Is it true your wife said, you're the Prime Minister -so do something about it?
PM: No, not really. She shares my vicw about it, but I had mentioned it over the
years to various people in television and T just thought it was time to say
something about it.
DH: Why shouldn't parents be the arbiters. Why shouldn't parents say to thcir
kids, you're not going to watch this at 8.3Oprn, it's too grown up, and turn It
off?
PM: I think a lot of parents do, and I think that's good that they do. But the
problem we had Derryn was that again, the classifications were bad, that
' AO' classification can be from something really quite soft to something
quite hard. It was too broad and I don't think that what were up until now
the television classifications, did give parents any real guide.
DH: When you talk about what's violent and what should not be shown, are you
looking at things like " Lethal Weapon" where policemen kill people, are
you looking at Dirty Harry movies, cowboy movies, or are you looking at
absolutely extreme violence?
PM: Let me give you one like " Cape Fear", where a womn's check was bitten
away et cetera, that sort of true-to-life, close-in violence, is I think the
stuff that really hurts. But the gencral obliteration of people, if you have a
problem and you can't resolve it, wipe people away this sort of notion that
you pick up in movies these days. OK, adults can put it in the proper
context, I don't think children or adolescents can casily do that.
DH-Moving it back to 9. O0pm, that was a compromise because there was a push
for 9.3Opm, and some groups have even said 10.00pm, haven't they?
PM: There's two things that have happened here now. 8.3Opm is thc most
convenient time slot, it means the films finish at about 1O. 3Opm or 10.45pm, 
same at 11.00pm, it's about when most people want to give it away
watching films, and the audiences drop off quite sharply. What well see
now at 8.30pm is softer than we formerly were able to see at 83Opm.
DH: Do you realise the ramifications, though, when things like late-night news
programs will be pushed right back and may disappear, that a show like the
Vizard Show on the Seven Network will be pushed back and disappear?
PM: That's only if the station takes the option of running a 9. O0pm movie for
something there will now be a split category ' AO' will be split. For a
start, there will be a single category for television, film and video, set by the
Commonwealth film~ censor. So there will be at least, as a result of this
change Derryn, one classification system. Now what was formerly ' AO'
will now be ' M and ' MA. ' MA' can be only shown after
Television stations may choose just to show ' M films and modified ' M
films, in which case they don't have to change the Vizard Show or any of
the other programs. It really means about 70 or 80 films a year out of 500
which the three networks show, they won't be able to show in the 8.30pm
time slot.
DH: When will this come in?
PM: Virtually forthwith. We'll have to make the arrangements and see to what
extent it needs to be legislated.
DH: Is it voluntary now, have the networks agreed with you?
PM: Yes, they've agreed on this structure, they have.
DH: Because it's going to cost them a lot of money, isn't it?
PM: I don't think so, not necessarily, I don't think so.
DH: They're claiming $ 80 million in lost revenue.
PM: It would be $ 80 million if thc whole thing was put back to 9.30pm. Now I
think that probably is right, but we've now kept the 8.30pm slot for the
convenience of most viewers and there's a 9. O0pm slot if they want to put
harder things on.
DH: Mr Pr ime Minister, we'll take a break, we'll be right back. 
DH-: And back with the Prime Minister in our Canberra studio. What about the ABC,
what about SBS are they going to be exempt from this?
PM: I don't think they should be, no.
DH: Do you have control over them?
PM: We are going to see to what extent this legislation is required here and where then
the self regulatory you see basically we are still relying on the-self regulatory
framework because most M' category film which is shown today on television
which is called but what will be VNwI, i ll be still modified ' VI, it's still got to
be modified by the stations themselves. So there will be a monitoring rote by the
Austraian Broadcasting, the ABA-Thle ABA will be looking at bow the TV
stations modify film, so that self regulatory thing still basically exists.
DH: Gary McDonald at the Peoples' Choice Awards the other night had a swipe at you
about this issue because he made the point that you're saying all these movies
should be put back so the little scumbags can watch them at 9: 30pm instead of
9: 00pm. But he also said you're coming out of Canberra which is the X-rated
video capital of Australia is there an irony there?
PM: I don't think so, no. This is about free to air television, this is the stuff that people
can turn on in their homes and they expect I think, reasonably Derryn, if you. turn a
television set on at 8: 30pmn that what you're not shown is very explicit violence
and that it's perfectly reasonable. What's happened is that the networks have been
pushing their luck on this now for a couple of years they've been pushing the
boundaries out and basically what's happened is the political system said hey, hang
on, we think this is basically going to far to fast.
DH: But what about when you see a series like the sex series on the Nine Network,
which was very explicit, not a movie obviously, but a series, a very explicit
genitalia, the works, where do you stand on that?
PM: The sexual material that was unusual.
DH-: It certainly was.
PM: It certainly was that's right, it hasn't been shown before nor since. The sexual
material I don't see in the general not that I see that much television to be that
offending to me. What I think is more dangerous and offensive is violence and I
think it's a culture of violence that you resolve conflict by basically straightcninp,
people up, knocking them out, taking violent action against them.
DH: Could you see thcse moviesq then moving to the pay TV channel? 
PM: Pay TV will have basically uncut films. They will be largely uncut films and that's
why it was important to get a single -you see when pay TV begins those films
will be classified on the same basis as films at the theatre. So we are going to have
one classification system for free to air television and one for pay television,
obviously that was absurd. This was the right time to move to a single
classification system.
DH: Yes, Mr Keating we are about to run out of time but just briefly the High Court
decision today on Phil Cleary, removing the Independent from the seat of Wills.
How do you feel about that?
PM: We fought the election hard, I think it is a pretty tough result for Mr Cleary to be
disqualified on the technicality of being a public servant on leave. like winning
battles, but I like winning them the right way, up front. don't think we're taking
aniy political pleasure in this.
DH: Would you like him to stand as your candidate in the by-election?
PM: That's entirely another matter. He couldn't at the moment stand under a Labor
Party banner, that would be a matter for the National Executive of the Labor Party
should he himself ever choose to be interested.
DHI: One final question, what about the issue now of dual citizenship and allegiance to
foreign powers that may affect more than thirty members of Parliament?
PM: In practical terms there is an appeal process against these things within a period
after the election, that period has passed for members of the current Parliament as I
understand it. But it would certainly be a live issue for people nominating at the
next general election.
DH: And when is that?
PM: That's sometime in the middle of next year or up to the middle of next year so it
means those who do have dual nationality as a result of the High Court's decision
today have got time to basically renounce citizenship of another country to be
certain that their nomination for the House of Representatives or the Senate is
valid.
DH: Yes, Prime Minister thanks for your time.
PM: T7hanks Derryn.
ENDS f) t I T 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF TIlE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE lION P J KEATING, MP
. AUNCI I OF TERRY AULICH'S BOOK " TIlE RIVER'S END"
26 NOVEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well thank you very much I am quite happy to be associated on this occasion with
Kerr publishing and most particularly with my friend and colleague, Terry Aulich.
On this very novel occasion for the Parliament because we believe that this is the
first novel written by a meniher of Parliament since Federation, which makes it
something of an event.
You have got to say one thing about the Labor Party we can breed all the
varieties -we arc the entrepreneurs, the adventurers, the romantics of Australian
politics. And in that high tradition we have produced Brother Aulich. He has
brought to the public a very hiteresting novel. It is interesting because it is about
something which is not quite a contemporary issue, but it is not that long ago that
it was, a decade ago. The issue of the Franklin River and its possible damming,
something which divided our national life which caused the fall of a Government
in Tasmania. The first time that a Government actually took on an cnvironment
issue in this country and of course changed Tasmania for cver, I won't say for ever,
that is too big a claim, at least for the monient. But certainly from the quieter days
of Tasmanian life, things changed when the Franklin and the Gordon-below-
Franklin debate was on.
The interesting thing about this is as described this book, not simply as fiction but
as faction. Half fact, fiction, or fact rolled with fiction, or fiction rolled with fact.
And Terry paints quite interesting pen sketches of some of the players, including
Doug Lowe, then Premier, who Terry in the past used to describe to me as the sort
of boy-ncxt-door type that every mother loved and that every mother wished her
daughter to marry. Well that was a prctty big wrap for Doug, but it didn't do him
much good politically when the crunch came.
œ O/ TO'd 2-O'ON Z,: SI Z6" AON' 9 
2
He lived through this period tumultuously. Of course, one has to know Tasmanian
politics to understand just how tightly fought it is, within that H-are Clarke system
and those multiple-member constituencies. People of thc same party campaign
against one another, so it is all hamlet and village-political machination, inighting
and thc rest. And I had much experience of this when I used to come to
Tasmania as the Shadow Minister for Tasmania in the then Opposition in the
1970s, and Terry was the person who used to take me around the State. Terry
always had a good automobile under him and wc used to he likes the good
things in life Terry and we dashed up and down Tasmania; Fingal, up the top,
and one day Fight down thc full length of the State to two or three things, we were
stopping at all these villages we will just stop in here, two drinks, be seen at the
pub, say hello, out we go, back in the car and off again. He had this sort of death
defying -struggle with the dreaded Michael Policy, who he shared a place with in
the same constituency and it was the fox eyeing off the fox and how one would
gamner support within this constituency. Now you can just imagine an issue like
the Franklin River dropped into the middle of this minutia of political
manoeuvrings that went on, and of course it was really something which was
cathartic to the political system.
What's nice about this book is that Tcrry has writtcn about it in a way that only
somebody as involved as he was could write about it. Someone who actually
knew about it, knew about all those little internecine battles, all those little
jealousies, past rebukes never to be forgotten, all that sort of stuff. And he has it
here woven into a story which I think tells a very nice tale about a big Australian
national issue. That's a very good thing to do and of course it is a most
unpretentious book, and that is in keeping with Terry himself who is certainly not
a pretentious person. He is good humoured and he does like a laugh and he has
that mocking style and all the time I have ever known hinm he has always sent up
all the personalities around hinm and has never taken the whole thing all that
seriously. Now that comes through, which is a very good way to be, a very good
way to be, particularly in public life, and that comecs through in the book, and I
mean there are just some very nice sort of this could only be written by an
Australian as, " Sinbad was a born victim, he had a certain style which didn't go
unnoticed." " There was a sudden intake of breath, a cross between a honk and a
snort", it goes on, " she's a bit on the skittish side and that right fetlock is still
troubling her", or, " you are seeing a lot of that McMillan bird" ( bird is an old word
now in Australia) but " Kerry Wade said plonking his burai on my desk". I mean it
is not reallIy James Joyce, but nor is it obl ique and distended l ike Patrick Wh ite.
So, this is very readable and while it may not be knocking on thc door for a Booker
prize, it's ccrtainly a very nicc piece of writing about Australia and the Australia
that we all know.
It is interesting that Terry has, it's one of a trilogy of books, he has two others
completed and in the course of publication, and it's again quite interesting that
somebody who has been involved in public life as much as he has has been able
still to turn his mind to a subject like this and get himself published and have two
œ O/ ZOdJ _ OON ZZ: GT Z 6AON* 9Z ' 113J1 
other bo~ ks at the ready as well. So, I think this is going to be a joy for many of
us. particularly in political system and journalists, to read. Terry has had a bent for
prose with poetry and writing over the years and I think that many of us who are
ourselves victims of the systemn of politics will find this a really good read.
So Terry, congratulations on putting it together, it is a very rcadablc book, it spins
a very nice tale, it paints tremendous pcn portraits of the characters, Patrick
[ Cennedy reads Ilike a refugee from the NSW Labor Party, but I[ don't know whcthcr
that is true, and he certainly found his way around Tasmania. Congratulations
again, Terry, I hope the book succeeds, it deserves to, it occupies a unique place in
the history of this place and the fact that you are the first as we understand it, the
first MP to have published a novel and not just one but three. Congratulations to
McMillan an Australia publishing company for publishing it. Goad luck to all
concerned. 



T9E: L5: 5 No. 60.0. N69o 2 P. 01/ 01
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA-UNITED STATES TRADE AND INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK
ARRANGEMENT I am pleased to announce that Australia and the United States have concluded negotiations
on a Trade and Investment Framework Arrangcmenu, an initiative which arose during the
visit of President Bush in January.
The Airrangement will provide a valuable framework for regular high-level consultations
with thc United States on trade and investment issues. These includeS _ xpsurtb sidies and
imp~ ort barriers which affect some of our exports to the United States such as beef, sugar,
dairy products anid steel.
Australia and the United States have a very substantial economic relatio nsh-i p The
combined value of the investment stock cach country has i he other is o-ver $ 85 billion.
For Australia, the United States is our largest source of imports ( worth around $ 12 billion
In 1991) and our second largest export market ( worth over $ 5 billion in 1991). For the
United States, Australia is both a significant market for goods and services and an
Important destination for investment.
Through its consultative provisions, the Arrangement will help strengthen the open and
non-discriminatory trade and investment environment which both countries support.
Conclusion of the Arrangement is consistent with the Government's policy to pursue
actively all opportunities to advance Australia's trade interests consistent with Australia's
firm commitment to the GAIT mnultilatcral trading system and our support for the Asia
Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC) roccss as an essential mechanism for promoting
trade liberalisation in the Asia-Pacific region. Some other APEC countries. have
concluded similar agreements With the United States.
The Government welcomes the Tradc and Investment Framcwork Arrangement and looks
forward to even closer relations with the United States on matters of trade and investment.
CANBERRA 26 November 1992 TEL 26. Nov. 92 



I:.
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
TO THE WALKLEY AWARDS PRESENTATION DINNER ANA HOTEL,
SYDNEY, 27 NOVEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a great pleasure to be here tonight.
It is always a pleasure to be among the nation's press.
I have only a hazy idea of why this is so.
But that is better than the Leader of the Opposition who has no idea at all.
Let me get the politics over with early. I don't share this Nixonian you won't have me to
kick around any more attitude.
I like engagement.
The Garboesque has no attraction for me. I don't want to be alone.
I ask myself these days does this make me peculiar?
That I like to talk to the press?
That, wrong-headed or inconvenient as they sometimes are, like journalists?
That like politics?
Am I wrong to believe that for all the inevitable imperfections this is one of the world's
better democracies and Australian journalists are a powerful reason why this is so?
I don't think I IM wrong.
I think it must be a kind of cultural attraction that you have for me.
I see the press down the back of the plane on overseas trips fierce and hungry, like
grizzly bears on a package tour of the Orient.
There are members of my staff who are too frightened to walk down the aisle between
them to go to the toilet. 4423 
They wait till nightfall and tiptoe down when they're all asleep little knowing that
journalists ame at their most dangerous after dark.
Yet I can't resist going down for a yarn..
I think the reason I enjoy the company of journalists, even when I can see by the look in
their eyes that they would like to tear me limb from limb, is that Ilactually like democracy.
It has its problems, democracy.. It doesn't always turn up the results we want. It can be as
frustrating to those of us who want change as it is to conservatives who want the world to
stand still.
But it's far and away the best form of government anybody has ever come up with, and I
must say I think it is my natural habitat.
In fact it seems to mec that in Australia we probably don't sufficiently appreciate the facts
of our democratic achievement that this is one of the great democracies of the world
and, we shouldn't forget, one of the oldest.
Those who complain about politics and politicians in Australia have a point. The number
of our governments creates a demand for good politicians in excess of the supply.
And the good ones have to learn to live in a maelstrom which is often made more by
media forces than by political or policy ones.
Televising parliament has dramatically increased that tendency and set all sorts of new
ii-iWa'o-i &amp; litical success.
For every politician who thrives in this environment there are others who drown, or who
merely cling to the sides, or stay forever unnoticed, tucked up in the vortex.
There is a lot of room for improvement. It does get a bit rugged, and, no doubt, dispiriting
for electors.
But so long s! iQuestion-Time is the televised spectacle of questions without notice being
fired at ministers in the hope of getting them to publicly slip up, there will be severe
pressures on nicety and decorum.
And so long as it is also the forum in which the great questions of the day are fought out, it
will be more than a game of croquet. It will be very often verbal war and no one
prepared to go to war should fight it with less than total commitment.
And really, while it is more public now than perhaps it used to be, the House of
Representatives has always been a rugged place.
Since Federation since parliaments began there has been sniping and pantomime in
styles as various as the human personality.
There has been absolute savagery sometimes.
And we Australians are not alone in it.
4424 
Few Australian politicians have declared their loathing of their opponents in the terms that
Winston Churchill did.
" I hate the Tory party" he said " their men, their words, and their methods."
rye always had a soft spot for Churchill.
That was the same Winston Churchill who, in the House of Commons, called Ramsay
MacDonald " the boneless wonder".
Yet in Australia, which is said to be such a rough-house, it would be considered a bit
beyond the bounds of decency in Australia to say you actually hated the Opposition.
At the very least you would have to be funny about it.
And I know if I called someone " the boneless wonder" on a day when there was not much
other news around, you could be sure that night there would be a fair bit of pious clicking
of tongues in the vicinity of television screens.
Particularly because the grab, almost certainly, would be taken out of its context.
Context is everything.
What Churchill described to the House was how he had been taken to the circus as a child,
where the advertised exhibit which most interested him had been the one described as Thse
Boneless Wonder.
He went on to say " My parents judged that the spectacle would be too revolting for my
youthful eyes and I have waited fifty years to see The Boneless Wonder sitting on the
Treasury Bench".
You would never get all that on the TV news.
It would just be a grab of me shouting over the din of the Opposition " I've waited fifty
years to see The Boneless Wonder". And a cut-away to Peter Reith feigning hurt and
outrage. Lloyd George once described the House of Commons as being to, a politician what a pub
is to a drunkard meaning that it is their natural envirornent and source of happiness,
however perverse.
I would say much the same about the House of Representatives or any great democratic
chamber. And I'd also say to those who believe that the standard of the place will be raised by
replacing the politicians with some species of non-politician that it would no more do
that, than a pub would be improved by having a clientele of wowsers.
Or a newspaper would be a better newspaper for being written by people without a taste
for politics and people.
Better to have better politicians. Ones who have enough faith in the strength of this
democracy to be prepared to push changes. Tough ones. Passionate ones. Ones who
understand politics and power. 4425 
And better to have journalists who understand these things too.
And proprietors who understand them.
There is a cast to Australian democracy which is unique, and which has given us, I
believe, unique advantages.
The principal thing to understand is that it conmes from the bottom up it is not imposed
from the top.
And I believe that its a source of strength.
If the democracies have been the successful societies of the past century, the most
successful democracies have been the social democracies.
The ones that have not feared the inclusion of the less well off in the social system, or
discarded the social net: but who have seen their strength in it, the source of their selfesteem,
the measure of their worth and national achievement.
If you measure the achievements of Australia, this is where they principally lie. They are
democratic achievements, or, at least, they are cast in a democratic mould.
The fundamentals were laid down at the time of federation or before.
And since then, from the principles of arbitration and the basic wage to the development
of social services with few rivals in the world, the cast of politics in Australia has been
democratic. It underpins the success of multiculturalism, no less than it underpinned the ethos of the
first AIF and the legend it created.
These are out of the egalitarian stamp of Australia.
The same thing underpins the Accol. It underpins our recently revived reputation for
advanced social legislation.
It underpins, I would say, the decision to abolish the discrimination against homosexuals
in the armed force.
It is decisions like this which keep us in the front rank of democracies.
When people say they want to break the mould of Australian politics would say watch
out! Because you can't break it without threatening the mould of society too you can't break
it without threatening the democracy.
And that I think is why it is the case that those who are talking about breaking the mould
of politics carry with them policies to break the mould of Australian society.
Perhaps they fail to understand that the two can't be separated.
Perhaps they understand it very well.
4426 
Perhaps they don't understand that, of all the values and traditions which bind Austraia
those of the people are the strongest and the most important.
Perhaps they confuse tradition with class and caste and official ritual.
it would not be surprising if it was simple confusion: becaus the conservatives in this
country have very often been confused about the fact that our institutions and traditions
belong to the people they made the best of them and if they need changing they will
change them.
I will forgive them their ignorance, of course.
But I doubt if Australians will when they get their chance to judge.
And that, rm inclined to think, is what politicians and political journalists have always to
remember. That politics doesn't start in Canberra. It ends there.
And, just as it does politicians good to escape the unreal world of Canberra, it would do
the political culture no harm if the gallery sometimes extended the peripheries of their
vision. There is a culture in Canberra which encourages politicians and press alike to see only the
links and not the chain.
T7hey are very small links in a very long chain.
They are no more than each day in the political life of the country.
it seems to me that this is one of the reasons why journalists often feel obliged to
editorialise in news stories: it is the only way to make sense of what is more often than not
an uncompleted story.
Too often I think.
I do believe Australians have to pick their way through too much opinion to get to the
news. in fact the opinion becomes part of the news the news today is that Michelle appears to
have changed her mind. Or Geoff has not changed his. Or the jury's still out on what
conclusion Peter will come to.
I do think the Australian news is over interpreted.
I know Gerard Henderson has been saying lately that journalists should improve their
knowledge of history and I agree with him.
He also reckons I should improve mine and I don't agree with him.
But the point is well taken. 4427 
It's not to sy I don't thoroughily enjoy the daily meal the gallery makes of our activities, to
acknowledpe that the democratic culture would be better served by mome of the broader
style of political journalism, and more matter of fact reporting of political events.
I think the bers could hunt in a bigger circle the bigger circle of Australian democracy,
the provenance of our institutions and traditions and ideas.
But I think with equal certainty that what is done now is essential and is done remarkably
well. It is literally true that democracy is impossible without a free press.
And it is literally true, and patently true every day of the political year, that the democracy
which is practised in Canberra would be impossible without the free press which operates
there.
Thank you for having me here.
4428 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTR, TME MON P J KEATINOG, MP
DOORSTOP, ST VINCENT DE PAUL, BANKSTOWN
27 NOVEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J; jobs not second hand olothes and structural
unemployment to the turn of the century?
PM: They want jobs that are going to last, not slick
solutions. Agencies like St Vincent De Paul look after
that segment of society which in one way or another slip
through the social security net. but could you imagine
these agencies with people tipped out of the
unemployment benefit as the Liberals want to do after
nine months. The tens or thousonds of Australians who
would nu lunger be supported by the social security
system would have to come to these places for basic
susteiarlue. It's more than St Vincent De Povl or the
Smith family or the Salvation Army can wear, they do a
marvellous community Job but they can't take the place
of the social security system, which iS what John Hewson
wonte them to do.
J: Mr Keating do you accept some responsibility for St
Vincent De Paul's claim that this will be the worst
Christmas since the Depoession7
PM; I hope it isn't, but the thing is the Labor Government
has got a social security safety net out there, I think
now second to none in the world, and part of thot i
accessand equity in health through Medicare, poor
families can bulk bill their doctor at no oos08t, John
Hewson wants to knock it right out of the way. People
on unemployment benefits, knock it right out of the way.
We have got to keep the primary national values of
Australia, community values, where we are looking after
thooe not well off and those who are poor and those who
are sick because I think as a society if we are at the
point where we are nutL looking after these people what
sort of society would we be. 2 iq v. 1 ; uo o U 6 r u I,. 
C: Peter Cook says he doesn't support the national strike
that is planned, what is your view on ft?
PM: The Liberal Party of AuStralia are bent upon turning ten
years of induStrial peace into Industrial warfare. My
very, very strong Contention is that Australia can only
progress together. We can only get along, business and
labour that's 1 a b 0 u r in a compact of
Cooperation. But internecine battling reminiscent of
the ' 60s and ' 706 courtesy of Kennett and Hewoon will
always lead Australia into a low growth path and
industrial disputation, It is their fight it is time
they put It to bed.
J: Do you thik the High Court has over-stepped the mark?
PM; No. The High Court has got very clear imperatives under
the Constitution and the High Court is entitled to sit
in jyugement on all the matters brought before it and
make Judgements without Prime Ministers giving doorstop
commtnts about their work.
J: Will we have a referendum though, on -du8 oitizenship?
PM: I don't know, that is an issue but it has got to be
ranked with the other big issues of Australia.
Js Do you have a Comment on the September quarter trade
figures today?
PM; Well they show again this sort of enormous driver that
exports have become. The driving force of exports, if
you look through the statisticians release as I did you
will see the rural commodity is flat, non-rural
commodity Is bursting away earning for Australia In
exports. The question that the community has to ask Is
where would we be now it we were simply relying, as the
Liberals wanted us to rely, on rural commodities without
that burgeoning export sector now in manufactures and
servicea, which is out there paying Australia'&amp; way in
the world.
J: Will the Government have to reviuo its growth figures
now?
PM: That's not to do with the balance of payments.
J: Do you think the Commission wants greater microeconomic
reform? Do you think we have had enough tPicroeconomic
reform?
PM: The Induvtry Conmassion is a ginger group. They are a
paid for, Government paid, ginger group. And what we
expect ginger groups to do is ginger things up, and
that's what they do. 
TEL: 27. Nov. 92 16: 08 No. 006 P. 03
3.
J; Do you believe people should go on strike on Monday, yes
or no?
PM; Don't give me simple questions. The Liberal Party wants
a national conflagration on industrial relations, that's
what they are trying to give us and they are the only
people who can take it off,
J: do you agree with that7
PM: it is not a matter of my opinion on this, the
primary matter here Is the Liberal Perty of Australia.
Zt wants to turn ten years of industrial peace into
industrial warfare and it is for Mr Kennett and Dr
Hewson to reconsider their position,
J: Have you got a Christmas message for the unemployed?
PM: My message is that the only way Australia will deal with
unemployment is with a . growth strategy like the
Government ran right through the ' 80s. We're the only
Party in Australia committed to growing the Australian
economy and growing employment. And the quicker we can
get back to that, the quioker we will add to the 1.8
million jobs we created in the 19809.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 132/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON~. P. J. KEATING
DR HEWSON'S DOCTORS
It is no wonder the AMA. is campaigning for Dr Hewson.
Doctors can expect $ 760 million from the fee increases
which Dr Hewson will allow, and another $ 300 million
from the increased numbers of private patients which Dr
Hewson's policies are designed to create.
Dr Howson has offered doctors what is surely the biggest
-bribe per person in Australian history more than $ 1
billion for about 40,000 people.
This from the man who so often accuses others of doing
deals with vested interests.
If the Doctors for Dr Hewson are really concerned about
people and not their own pockets, they might ask
themselves whether his economic and social policies are
good for Australians' health?
is the withdrawal of $ 7 billion from the economy good for
people's health?
Is a 15 per cent tax on food and services good for their
health? Is knocking them of f unemployment benefits after nine
months good for their health?
Are lower wages and less job security good for their
health? And Australians might ask themselves why the elite of the
medical profession would campaign for the type of health
system which Americang have just overwhelmingly rejected?
Why would they campaign against a system which is fair,
comprehensive and makes-quality health care * accessible to
all. And one which is consistently supported by a
majority of Australians? 
J.-4* ui F
2
Dr Hewson tells us that he's out to break the mould of
Australian politiCS. This is palpable nonsense.
In fact he's out to break the mould of
society. His industrial relations policy is one example.
His health policy is another.
As Peter shack the former health spokesman stated in the
notorious January 1990 press conference with " all the
frankness" he could muster, " the Liberal and National
Parties do not have a particularly good track record in
health." There appears to be no danger of Dr Hewson displaying
the courage and honesty of Mr Shack.
He hasn't held a press conference for a year.
CANBERRA December 1 1992 



-TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 01/ 17
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER TiE 1I0N PJ. KEATIG, MP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH SENATOR THE HON PETER COOK,
MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, CANBERRA, 2 DECEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: All right we might make a start. Over the last couple of months, the last eight
weeks or so the Comnmonwealth Government has become increasingly concerned
about the threat to recovery in Victoria, which is about thirty per cent of the
national economy, which has been occasioned by the industrial relations policies
of the Kennett Government which is, of course, running on the agenda of the
Hewson lead Opposition in Canberra. This is not just a threat to the recovery, but
indeed to social cohesion in Victoria and which has put at risk the operation of the
flexible structure of enterprise bargaining which the Commonwealth Government
has put in place and where just now in the space of six months we've seen over 550
enterprise agreements negotiated for higher remuneration and better productivity
without rancour and which is the key to Australia's productivity advance.
The Government has always taken the view that successful economics have a
value system of co-operation and one where reform and competition takes place
within that co-opcrativc framework. This has been abandoned by the Liberal
party in Victoria and by the Federal Opposition. Instead they prefer the old master
and servant relationship and are now relying upon and will rely upon the master
and servant provisions of the common law. One should havo thought that in the
lattcr part of the twentieth century Premier Kennett and his Liberal party
colicagucs would have understood that the mature relationship which exists in
industrial Australia today could no longer return to the master and servant
rclationship. The simple point is that social and industrial unrest puts recovery at risk so the
Commonwealth decided to legislate in a way which we think should end wide
spread industrial action in Victoria which has been in some respects crippling to
the Victorian economy and of course, may be in the future. But it does protect
people and will protect pcople from being forced onto individual contracts. The
Commonwealth lcgislation is to provide for coverage under federal awards 
TEL: 2-. D e c. 2 T9 . uerv/ i
. t q,
administered by the Australian industrial Relations Commission for groups of
employees, organisers and unions in Victoria who wish to make sucb a
transformation. And undcr the Commonwealth's foreign affairs power, the
Commonwealth will legislate to give the Commission power to set minimum
wages, equal pay and termination of employment in the state of Victoria for
groups who don't enjoy particular federal award coverage and this legislation
under that head of power will come from the 1I LO conventions which have already
been ratified and ones that will be ratified in the future.
So the end result is I think, there will be a choice for Victorian employees they
can as groups seek registration under federal awards, but the legislation will apply
only where no industrial and arbitral structure exists and of course as Victorian
tends in its legislation to see the cessation of the operation of all awards in Murch
of this year, that condition will obtain in Victoria. T7hat is there will be no arbitral
structure and therefore access to the federal award will take place under this
legislation. The end result should be as I said, in wide spread industrial
disputation this is a remedy for that, people do have recourse, not just to individual
common law master and servant contracts. This is not to say that in relation to the
Kennett government's changes in respect to hospitals or schools one won't see it
localised in sporadic industrial disputation around redundancy and these other
issues. But in terms of widespread industrial disputation this gives the employees
and the public of Victoria protections which the Kennett governent wishes to
take from them. Now Ill invite my collcague the inister for Industrial Relations,
Petcr Cook to add some remarks to mine.
PC: Thanks Paul. I think the Prime Minister has actually explained it quite clearly.
The point is that we believe and stand by fair and independently determined
awards as governing and protecting basic and minimum employment conditions.
Awards arrived at by free arbitratio -n where necessary. By contrast our political
opponents and the Kennett government support individual employment contracts
and the choice which Mr Howard and Mr H-cwson have often talked about the
choice is now clear. People can opt for awards, guaranteed proper minimums
independently determined or they can opt for Mr Kennett's individual employment
contract and I don't think there's much doubt what people will choose, they'll
choose the protection of the tried and true, almost century long system we have in
this country.
In addition wc will be as the Prime Minister has said, legislating minimum
protections in minimum wage,,, equal pay and protections against unfair dismissals
or victimisat ion at the point of termination of employment and provisions that will
allow redundancy. The external affairs power will be the head of power we use,
ILO conventions will be the mecans of establishing the treaty relationship.
1: Without the co-operation of the Victorian employers, I mean it is all very well for
the unions to say well) yes we'd like the federal award, we'll have that. What
happens if the employers resist particularly if it's a State government? 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P U. 5/ 1
PC: A lot of employers don't want the Kennett style industrial relations, they don't
want to break the harmony that has been created under us. As you know Victoria's
industrial disputation is off the bottom of the ABS graph and employers want to
continue that co-operative relationship we have generated. So a number of
employers will want to co-operate with unions and workers to shift state awards to
federal jurisdiction. But if there is a dispute, that is a paper dispute, an argument
and an employer wishes to remain within the Kennett system, then the matter is
heard by the federal Industrial Relations Commission and because there will be in
Victoria no independent access to arbitration that will be one of the guidelines we
will encode in our legislation which will enable the federal commission to make a
decision in those circumstances to facilitate the transfer of the state award and turn
it from a state award to a federal award.
J: Does this also apply to Victorian state public servants?
PC: Victorian state public servants are subject to an appeal that has gonc to the High
Court, that was taken and argued in June and you will recall at that time there was
a negotiation on about awards for the state public service. The NSW government
and the Kennett opposition opposed that and the federal court upheld that, it's on
appeal at the High Court; we arc waiting a decision on that. would expect the
decision will be that the award could stand and if I'm right about that expectation
then state public servants under the first thing that we are doing here will be able
to transfer their state award to the federal area. Under the second thing we are
doing here, the minimum payments provision, they'll be able to do that anyway as
soon as we get that legislation through.
[-lHow can it be that you can widen the determination of minimum wages for the
Commission in a way that doesn't affect the power of other state tribunals other
than Victoria?
PC: The distinguishing feature about Victoria is that in the past, like every other state,
they had an arbitration systemn to which if there was a dispute a party could go and
have the othcr party called before the Commission and have the dispute settled.
What Kennett has done is remove that right. You can't get to the Commission in
Victoria unless both parties agree. So if the party that is exploiting the other party
doesn't agrec to call on the umpire you can't get before the judge. That means
there is an cnd in Victoria of compulsory arbitration. Now where that has occurred
by the actions of the state government then the federal Commission will facilitate
upon application by unions or employers, the transfer of the state award to the
federal jurisdiction.
J: Priruc Minister, when will this legislation of yours be introduccd in the House?
PM: As soon as we are able to get it in. As soon as we are able to bring it in. 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 04/ 7'
J: You have to anticipate the High Court challenges to the use of external affar
powers?
PM;. We are not necessarily anticipating it, but we are confident about our position on
the matter. There has been other principal acts of the Commonwealth held to be
valid by the High Court under the foreign affairs head of power and we think given
the fact that the ILO conventions are conventions entered into by employers,
employees and governments for minima, mostly in countries that don't have
jurisdictions as we have, that seeking to have them apply in this country would be
very much, not only doing in the letter and spirit which the Parliament has ratified,
but in doing it, doing it in accordance with an international convention.
pC: Can I[ just say this, what does it tell you about a government if it be the Kennett
government that you have in mind or if it is John Howard, if its he that you have
in mind, what does it tell you about them and their proposal? They want to block
access to Australian workers to independently determine fair minimum wages,
equal pay, prevention of victimisation at the point of termination, or redundancy.
1: You say you are considering legislation for other standards including annual leave
and matcrnity/ parental and hours of work, would that be legislation based in the
Commonwealth's external affairs power?
PC: Yes, there are HLO conventions upon which we can base legislation for annual
leave, parental lcave, hours of work, those conventions are there. The priorities
however are to guarantee protection of minimum wages, equal pay and a
prevention against victimisation at the point of termination of employment and to
guarantcc reasonable redundancy rights in the event of being terminated.
1: To what extent arc you actually creating a precedent for the Opposition by a use of
the external affairs power if it wants to usc some of the Commonwealth's powers
like this for its own legislation if it wins office?
PC: John Howard said he won't use the external affairs power.
PM: He made that explicit today in a press statement.
J: you are sort of changing the deal if. you like before he comes into office.
PC: B3ut lct's get it clear the field that wc arc changing to. As the Prime Minister said a
momcnt ago the ILO is the labour agency for the United Nations and like the
World Health Organisation makes standard international proclamations on health
standards, the ILO makes them on labour standards and when they adopt them,
they adopt them in a plenary in which thcy arc voted for by workers, governments
and employcrs and they have to be carried to be then presented to govrnmcnts
and those standards havc been adopted in the case of minimum wages and in the
case of equal pay by all Australian's states and the Commonwealth. In a case of 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. Ut)/ le
termination as the Prime Minister said, we will now adopt that convention. These
are international minimum labour standards and is someone going to tell us that
these don't apply to Australia when the world expects them to apply to countries
all over the globe.
J: When this goes into the High Court it will means months maybe years of
uncertainty and it certainily will mean that you'll go to a federal election not
knowing the validity or legality of this legislation doesn't it?
PM: But there will still be access to it. There will still be access even were there to be a
challenge, just because the legislation may be challenged doesn't mn to say it
won't be operative until a judgement is made.
1: Will you be separating federal award changes from the ILO base changes or will
you be wrapping it up in one legislative package?
PC: No, we will be able to move on the changes to the Federal Act immediately on
facilitating thc transfer of State awards to Commonwealth jurisdiction and we'll do
that by using an omnibus bill that is now in the Senate on industrial relations by
adding in a few clauses and I would expect that would go through immediately
and be able to dealt with in the House when it comes back. As far as the other
changes arc concerned we'll need to develop new bills for that and as the Prime
Minister has said we'll do that as soon as we can.
J: Do you have assurances from the ACTUJ that this will mean the end of industrial
disputation?
PM. It's not a matter of assurances and it is not the ACTU that is in a position to
provide them, it Is that the core of the problem is that the arbitral tribunal process
Is to be suspended, all intentions, purposes in Victoria and awards cancelled as of
the 31 March 1993. That is the basis of this widespread industrial disputation,
these measures give thc people affected by those changes an alternative, and one I
think can reasonably assume, therefore, that the widespread disputation or
demonstrations mounted as an appeal to the Kennett Government, in respect to the
legislation, those people will reasonably regard this as of sufficient quality as a
remedy to deal with their perceived injustice.
J: In other words you are giving the trade union movement the capacity to back-off a
damaging industrial campaign which would also hurt your Govcrnmcnt by giving
them breathing space and an alternative?
PM: No. What wc are doing is giving the employees of Victoria the right not to be
pushed into common law, master and servant contracts, 600,000 individual
contracts. The Liberal Party says they arc intcrcsted in choice, well now
organisations of employees have got a choice. 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 06/ 17
1: Are you saying it is important that the unions now don't continue that campaign of
industrial action?
PM:. That is a matter for them. Our problem with all of this is the disruption which it is
causing to Victoria and to confidence in Victoria. As I say in the press statement I
think we are starting to see that in the classified job advertisements which have
fallen in the Age Newspaper, DEETs indicators of skilled job vacancies released
yesterday show rises for all other States, but no movement in Victoria. Victoria is
a large part of the national economy, it has been recovering, we want it to
continue.
PC: Can I just support that by saying this to give you an example of what we mean
nurses In Victoria today are taking industrial action in protest of the fact that
because they are shift workers and lose weekend penalty rates, their salary is
reduced by 25 per cent. What is the response of the Victorian Health Minister?
On public radio today she said that they will be offering, I think, 2,500
redundancies among health workers.. There can't be any guarantee that the
Victorian Government which appears to be off the rails won't go further off the
rails and provoke, in various sectors of public enmploymcnt, particular industrial
disputes.
J: Mr Kcating, have you or Senator Cook had talks about this with Mr Kelty and Mr
Halfpenny, and what has been the response?
PM: Senator Cook and I have had talks with the ACTU about some of the principles. I
have not spoken to Mr Halfpenny about it, I don't think Senator Cook has.
J; What has been their response to that?
PM: Well I think they would regard this as an appropriate legislative remedy by the
Commonwealth to this provocation in Victoria and giving cffcct to a set of
conventions which the Commonwealth has ratified and which now an appropriate
national circumstances can bc used, in terms of their reflection in legislation. The
ACTU has been a party to the disputation in Victoria and the cause is the central
cause, the fact that 600,000 Victorians are going to bc pushed onto common law
contracts. So, you take the contract or you take the sack.
J: is it hypocritical to be now relying on ILO minimum standards whcn the ILO has
found that your own union rationalisation program breaches freedom of
association?
PC: No it's not. But I am glad you raised that point, we will enter it on Friday in a
discussion with the employers and the u nions about repealing our minimum size of
unions decision. So, we conform with the ILO.
J: it's a bit late now isn't it, it's already had an cffect? 
TEL: 2. Dec .92 18 : 39 NWo. 021P . O07-7
PC: No, no it is not a bit late now. When we introduced that it was a reasonable thing
against all of the jurisprudence of ILO previous decisions to do. But they have
found that way now and we have said, we are good corporate citizenis, we will
abide by [ LO decisions and that will be something that I will talk to the employers
about on Friday with the unions. But the point that I think I should also make is
the significance of the ILO and its conventions and decisions. That's an
application the employers made which indicates the employers accept the
sovereignty and authority of the ILO. Therefore, when we encode in Australian
law ItO conventions which have been adopted tripartitely at international
conventions we would expect that they to would be consistent and accept those
stanidards.
1: Can you guarantee to have the safety net legislation passed before an election is
called?
PM: We are going to pass it as quickly as we can pass it.
J: Will that be before the election?
PM: Well as quickly as we can pass it. It is as simple as that. Don't ask me tricky
questions about the election timing please. But we will introduce some of it in the
Senate and pass the balance in the House, or where we need to legislate dirctly we
will introduce it properly in the first place in the House of Representatives. There
Is no cause why it shouldn't be passed by Christmas.
J: Is there a risk that business and international investors might see this as a signal
that the Federal Government doesn't believe that there is a case for speeding the
pace of reform in the labour market?
PM: We don't regard this as reform. We don't regard Kennett's obscurantism reform.
We regard it as a trip down the time tunncl to the 19th century, to the master and
servant structure which is a disruptive, confrontationist, non-coopcrative structure.
So, if you go arnd ask the markets, ask the markets what they think of the
cooperative cnvironment of Japan, of the cooperative environment of many
successful countries. This is the antithesis of cooperation, this is not
rnicroeconomic reform, this is not labour market flexibility without rancour, where
there is an inducement to higher productivity and higher remuneration. I noticed a
day or so ago, the statistician produced the profit results, company profits before
tax, they are rising again back near the peak, back up to the peak, towards the peak
of 1988-89, which was way above the ' 60s historical golden mean. Where they
are now must be near the ' 60s average. So what is Mr Kennett saying? That
wages are too low, and this is before there is any volume on the bottom line, as the
recovery strengthens and we start to see volume, when overheads have already
been covered, the profitability will go straight to the bottom line and that profit
share will jump inordinately. What are thcy saying? What is the Liberal Party 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 69 No. U21 tvJJu/ 1t
saying? That wages are too low, that the profit share above the ' 60s golden mean
is not enough, because that's all they are about, they are about depressing wages.
As we have said often in the Parliament, Senator Cook and myself, the industrial
agreements the Governments introduced gives all the flexibility in the world,
except flexibility downwards, the one thing that John Howard, John Hewson and
Jeff Kennctt want is lower remuneration for Australian workers. That means a
profit share higher than that which we have experienced or are experiencing. Is
this reasonable? Answer, no.
J: Mr Keating, the statement says that the legislation isn't designed to create new
national standards, but to what extent does this greater power for the arbitration for
the Industrial Relations Commission, even if it is only for those people not subject
to a State jurisdiction, still going to create a national standard or a national floor
under rninium wages?
PM: There is a national floor now, there is a floor now in minimum rates, but these are
having less to do with pay rates. Pay rates are being negotiated under industrial
agreements where the productivity is being shared between the employer and the
employee. What this provides is the extension of the Federal power of the
arbitration commission to make awards, in respect of minima, for those
organisations which seek that coverage and for other employees who seek to have
a minima established. This provides that coverage. But again, we are talking
about minimas which are below, mostly, the actual paid rates of the country. But
again it all gets back. What do these people want, a profit share which is at such
levels beyond any historic experience? If you ask the Kennett Government what
do they want, I don't think they know. What is the point of this, to push the profit
share to such levels that we have never seen? Australia is a very competitive
country as compared with other countries in respect of wage rates. The share of
national income going to wages in this country is very competitive with
comparable countries. What do they want?
J: The Government has all but wrapped up its wage deal with the public sector now,
when will we see the completed negotiations, and can you hope to have that
wrapped up by Christmas as well?
PM: What we do in the next phase of our industrial transition is something the
Government is still thinking about and I couldn't give you any timetabling about
when.
J: You would like to have that finished before the election?
PM: It depends what we would be seeking to finalise.
J: Should you presumably be thinking about as the Treasurer indicated yesterday,
about how you would stop a second round effect on inflation from depreciation. Is
that one of the factors that you will be looking at, and would it mean that you 
TEL: 2. Dec .92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 09/ ir
would be looking for some sort of wage deal stretching over, say, a two year
period?
PM: Welt I thought you were all telling me yesterday the column is faltering. How arm
people going to collct high price increases in a so-called faltering economy? Or
don't you really believe that?
1. The Treasurer also suggested that the economy is about to take off. So based on
what he is saying, presumably you will be wanting to look at locking in low
inflation?
PM: Productivity at the moment, I think the national accounts was running in the
market sector at about 3 per cent in the year to September, 3 per cent. So, there is
a huge productivity surgc in there which is going to go a long way in maintaining
inflation. And the fact that the economy is growing, but modestly, means that the
tear-away notion of price taking from higher import prices is think remote.
J But you arc also saying minimum wages are a very important part of your
platform, Mr Keating, that you want to protect low paid workers. So, it is fairly
important, isn't it, that you find some mechanism for protecting those low paid
workers but also locking in inflation, if you have any economic adjustment?
PM: Laura ( Tingle), we do have an inflation rate of .7 per cent.
J: Mr Fraser and Mr Dawkins have both indicated that it is likely to rise because of
depreciation.
pm: well there will be some impact from the dollar, but look at the enormous ramrod
effect the depreciation is going to have for growth and activity in the economy,
PC: See, trimmed labour productivity in the market sector over the last 12 months was
3.6 per cent, that is not bad in terms of productivity performance in the OECD
group.
J: Senator Cook, you said soon after the election of Kennett that there was already an
adequate process for workers wanting to switch to federal coverage. Why is that
process now inadequate?
PC: I don't think it was inadequate, but I don't see any reason why it shouldn't be made
more adequate. If I can explain that, the avenue existed but the principles incoded
in the act didn't take account of someone doing what Jeff Kennett did, so we arc
just making the act take account of that and provide the avenue more easily and
swinging that door that exists more widely open. But we are going beyond that to,
we are putting in this provision for minimum wages which will have I think quite
an important effect across the economy and will also have an effect on freeing up 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 10/ 17
the tabour nmarket further because it will enable small groups or individuals to
approach the Federal Commission to fix minimum rates in their particular case.
J: Mr Keating In your talks with the unions in August you put a $ 10 plus $ 10 wage
proposal, I think it was, where is that now up to and when will that be finalised?
PM: Well Senator Cook basically has carriage of its progress, do you want to reply
Peter?
PC: well at the moment we are still in the process of settling that down and making a
final decision with the ACTU as to what we do. But the important element of it is
that we wanted to allow breathing space to get as many workplace agreements up
as possible.
I: it Is supposed to come in about March.
PC: While we are putting in our efforts to get work place agreements up it means we
will turn our attention soon to protecting minimum standards, this is one of the
things that will help us do that. But the important and strategic priority is to push
as many workplace agreements through as possible to get that productivity
through.
J: Do you think the implementation of that will be delayed somewhat from the
August talks?
PC-It's clearly delayed now, it will be delayed a little longer too, I think, but the
prospcct of..
J: But the implementation was supposed to be next year, wasn't it?
PC: The proposal was for an increase in March, 1993.
J: Will that be delayed?
PC: It depends on how soon wc decide to move, but at this stage it looks like the
March date might be pushcd back a little.
J: How much?
PC: It's hard to say.
J: Thrcc months, six months?
PC: No, no, you can't put a time on it like that. Once our workplacc agreemlent for the
Australian Public Scrvice is registered, if it is on Friday, and I expect it will be, we
will get a very clear idea about thc growth and spread of workplace or enterprise 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 11/ 1?
.47 i
bargaining in the economy. The impetus we've built up from that and the
generation of productivity improvement we've got will provide us with a platforma
to make a decision about that application.
h: Can you clarify an answer to an earlier question. What's to stop workers in another
State taking advantage of this legislation? Should they be unhappy with their deal
with the State Government?
PC: The trigger, in terms of transferring State awards to the Commonwealth, is the
absence of a proper arbitration system in a State. As far as the minimum wages,
equal pay, and termination of employment provisions are concerned, where a State
jurisdiction operates to determine those in our legislation, we will respect the rol4
of that State jurisdiction. Where a State jurisdiction doesn't operate to determine
those, they'll have access to our Federal system.
J: Have you consulted Victorian employers about this legislation in advance, as well
as the ACTU, and if so what was their reaction?
PC: rm going to talk to the industrial parties, employers and unions, in the national
consultative forum of thc NLCC on Friday. I will talk to the Victorian
Government as well. I make the point they never did us the courtesy of talking to
us. And a lot of their laws have federal implications. One of those enduring
implications is, for example, under Victorian State law people covered by federal
awards could still be deemed to be criminals if they took part in industrial action.
No-one talked to us about that. There are a myriad of other implications, but
because they're crass and ignorant and don't consult, there's no reason why it
shouldn't be proper. We will consult appropriately.
J: Mr Keating, you said at the time of the One Nation statement that any Government
that couldn't run the economy at 4 per cent should give the game away.
PM: No, no, just understand what I said. I said any economy that can't travel at 4 per
cent without spilling into Imports should give the game away.
J: So we've got the constraint now of imports and wc can't travel it?
PM: No, no, what I said was, and I've made the paint in thc Parliament plenty of times,
not that we ought to be growing you're not that simple that you think that means
that we should be growing at 4 per cent all the time. Surcly not. What do think
we're going to bounce from recession to 4 per cent growth overnight? What I was
saying simply was this that to the Liberals' eternal shame, after 30 ycars of
government, the most the Australian economy could grow before the demand
spilled into imports was 4 per cent. That is, they had no fat in the infrastructure to
handle 5 or 6 per cent growth rates like a lot of the countries to our North have in
this part of the world. Once we got to 4, there was no more capacity left and we
spilled into imports. What I said was, if we can't run the Australian economy at 4, 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 12/ 17
12
that is if we regarded the growth limit as being under 4, then you should throw in
thc towel. And let me repeat it, because we ought to be able to run this economy
at 4 per cent at least, and will need to bring unemployment down in a sustained
marked way in the long ternm.
3: current pace of recovery?
pm: I thought yesterday's reporting was pretty strange. T7he Sydney Morning Herald
had " New Figures Kill Hopes of Recovery" and then they had a graph on page 2
which had an obvious recovery. There's the peak of 1989, 4 per cent, there's the
recssion, and there's the climb out of 2 per cent. The economy is growing as we
think, in terms at as I read to you in the House last week if you were there the
Economist has got us in their forecast, which is a world-wide one, for the year to,
2 per cent for Australia and higher than all of the other countries surveyed,
Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Holland, Italy, Japan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the UK and the USA.
1: So you are satisfied with the 2 per cent growth rate?
PM: I think no, I think the recovery has not been fast enough. But we are recovering. I
don't think there's any basis for these sort of headlines " Killing Recovery", or
" Faltering".
1: Aren't you running with a B~ alance of Payments constrained at 2, Mr Keating?
PM: I don't think you can deduce that at this point of the cycle, no. Look, if the import
growth represents a trend, there's a lot more going on ou t there than the National
Accounts say. It could be, and it may well be, that businesses are simply
optimistically holding stocks for Christmas, and that we're not seeing basically a
trend. If we're seeing a trend there, they're either going into stocks or they're going
Into thc economy. If they're going into thc economy, we're doing better than
obviously.
J: Business investment figures yesterday wcrc down again, you've got business
surveys showing a lack of confidencc, you've even got a leading businessman this
morning saying that the economy is in crisis.
PM: Who was that?
The Manager of Woolworths on AM.
PM: He's decided to sign up with the Liberal Party. He's signed up with the Liberal
Party, he's in favour of the GST, he's speaking at their meetings. Look, lct mc just
1: Put him on your list? 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 13/ 17
13
PM: No, no, I don't have lists, but I can read. Look, we are reaching a point after a long
deleveraging of business in this country after the high debt cycle of the ' 80s, the
profit share is recovering. I don't know whether many of you saw it September
Quarter the profit share is recovering, we're reaching a point soon where that
balance between debt and equity is reaching the point where businesses will start
looking around for investment opportunities. This had to happen. It has taken in
the Wcstcrn world about 18 months longer than everybody thought for this
delevcraging to happen. But it's not well and truly on the way. The profit share is
recovering. And of course, any volume is going to see, as I said once you've got
your overheads covered all volume is basically cop for the bottom line.
J: You don't think there's a
PM: No, I do not. We've got housing up 12 per cent for the year, 5 per cent for the
quarter. I noticed some people said that there was a reliance on public sector
demand, well I've got some of you saying the One Nation spending is not coming
through fast enough, and when it comes through you say you're relying on public
sector demand. The game is deteriorating, the analysis game, if that's the basis of
your analysis. Two weeks ago the big trouble was that One Nation spending
wasn't all being spent, this week the problem is that there is too much public
expenditure in the growth numbers. Can just say, for all you sleuths out there,
that stock building was in at .5 for non-farm stocks and 1 can tell you this, I
don't have any superstitions about stocks, they're mostly goods that are put on
shelves, and they're goods made by people, and so you can count them in to
private sector demand. And then someone said private sector final demand fell by
1 think we are entitled to say that stocks are part of the private economy. If you
put thc stocks back into private demand, well of course private demand rose in the
quarter along with public demand, which has given us .5 per cent for the quarter,
2.1 per cent for the year, faster I think than most if not all OECD economies, and
across the year, not the quarter, private demand was up 1.1 per cent.
J: But how can you count stocks in that way unless they walk past the cash register?
PM: If you don't think stocks are part of the private economy, old son, where do they
belong?
J: If you're not satisfied with the current pace of recovery, and there's no indication
the economy accelerating, what do ) you intend to do about it?
PM: Thec September quarter, like all National Accounts, still represent a bit of recent
history, and it was for July, August and September. It would be a brave person
who said that the economy is not growing as quick or more quickly in the last
quarter.
J: So do the Budget forecasts on growth stand? 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 14/ 17
14
PM: I think we need time to see, but this quarter I'm told is right on the button with the
quartrly through-the-year structure of the Treasury's forecast.
1: Mr K~ eating, regardlcss of where stocks sit in the economy, the basis strategy of
your government is to try to see as much activity in the net exports sector of the
economy as possiblc. Now, yesterdays National Accounts certainly showed that's
not happening, partly through a slowdown in the world, and partly because
imports are rising. That still creates a basic dilemma between your goals of
boosting employment and not running up a Balance of Payments constraint. How
long are you prepared to see that dilemma continue and to put pressure on the
current account?
PM: I think the dilemma, as you put it Laura ( T7ingle), is resolving itself through the
ramrod effect of the exchange rate. The markets have seen this. It's already made
a 13 per cent adjustment down in the exchange rate. We will see that push activity
through the economy in the next 12 months. Why have we got such a result in net
exports? Answer commodity prices are down, rural volumes are down. And
what have the exchange markets done? They've adjusted the rate accordingly. So
the conundrum you're addrcssing, the markets have already addressed. it's sitting
therc now.
3: Mr Keating, what do you think of Mr Fraser's suggestion for a growth strategy
statement?
PM: I think Mr Fraser is at pains to advise the community what he sees are the
prospects for growth in the Australian economy and the very great opportunities
Australia has. You notice in his recent address, he was largely endorsing the
structurc of governmecnt policy. He was not urging that there be a new structure. I
think what he is after is some mechanism or method to tell the community that
great structural progress has been madc, and that Australia is adjusting, and that
some of the gloom that is dispelled by people knowing that the fundamental
adjustment in the economy is still taking place. I think that's the point of the thing.
J: Do you agree with it?
PM: Yes I do, and I think the Treasurer responded to that yesterday.
J: Mr Keating, on spending and on jobs, Senator Tate admitted this week that the
local capital works funding that went to New South Walcs was not being used to
create new jobs but only keep those jobs that already existed. Is that the case in
other States, and if so doesn't that run slightly contrary to what the Government
said is
PM: While it may in somec cases be correct, upon examninat ion think Senator Tate
would ind that it's not correct. I was in Bundabcrg recently, the very day I was 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. 15/ 1-
there 21 people were put onto one of these programs in that city at that time who
were not employees of the Bundaberg City Council. So this is happening all over
the place. There is additionality, as they say, to all of these things.
J: Senator Cook, given that you would legislate to give effect to the ILO convention,
and if it's not thrown out by the High Court, does that mean constraint on a future
Liberal Government in just wiping out the legislation, or doe it put constraints on
( inaudible) if you do that?
PC; I don't think it will be thrown out by the High Court, let's get that very clear. But
if we legislate minimum standards and an incoming Governiment wants to remove
minimum standards, and if they've got a Parliamentary majority, they can. But
how would you look out there in the community trying to knock off minimum
standards? So if they want to do that, they'll reveal the colour of their morality in
these sort of issues.
J: How do you see the IRC actually implementing this, through a national test case?
PC: No, the way in which wc would propose to legislate is to enable the IRC to do
what it does now, in fact, to declare minimum rates of awards, so that their
minimum standards would be an appropriate standard for the industry sector.
J: Mr Keating, a lot has been made of your comment on Lateline the other night
when you said the micro reform agenda was largely completed.
FM: I was speaking about the Commonwealth own purpose authorities, not the
Commonwealth induced national Look, let mc just make this point. In a
country like Australia, the micro economic reform will never be completed, it's
impossible to complete it because it implies that everything is at optimums in
the labour market, in the product market. Of course it is not and can never be in
any country. So there will always be a desire to make any country more
competitive and more efficient. But in terms of the Commonwealth's own
authorities and its things, in such things as airlines are largely completed;
telecommunications, a competitor, a sunset clause, full competition in 5 years from
now; in tariffs. Wherever you go around the Commonwealth's realm, the big
agenda of thc middle ' 80s is largely behind us, but much of the Commonwealth's
agenda now will be about making State authorities in the public sector more
competitive. But of course, the big agenda will always be making the private
product marlcts more competitive through enterprise agreements, et cetera. That
was the point I was making, that people were saying to us in the ' 80s, you've got to
do thc ports and wharves, you've got to do the airline system, you've got to do the
telecommunications. They are largely done, that's the point I'm making.
V: You're still saying there's a lot still to do? 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 39 No. 021 P. lb/ 1?
a' L~,** DOW4
16
PM:. I think in the public sector, broadly categorised, yes. And particularly in State
authorities for which the Commonwealth does not have authority. That is, where
we've got to do things cooperatively with thc States, we have a national agenda
there. But that's not our own purpose thing. Where we've been in the box seat on
our own things, wc'vc done them.
1: Will you be pushing the States on Monday when YOU See them to speed up micro
reform?
PM: in some respects we'll be talking about micro issues. The agenda for this meeting
some of it will be in areas like electricity where again we are on the verge of a very
dramatic change, thc separation of power generation from distribution. And again,
an area where the Commonwealth's own Interest are the generating units of the
Snowy Mountains hydro-electric scheme, but where the Commonwealth has a
national interest in the operation of the Electricity Commissions of the various
States. So that's the point I was making.
1: Mr Keating, in Mr Hawke's New Federalism there was an aim of cooperation with
the Premiers to eventually get rid of industrial tribunals in the States. Is this still
an aim that your Government would like to work towards?
PM: Would you like to say something about that, Peter?
PC: Yes, we've been pursuing that, and we're doing it cooperatively with the States.
We've done a number of things to help reach that goal. We've appointed, where
States nominated them, all their Commissioners to our bench and they've
appointed our Commissioners to their benches; we opened a common facility in
Adelaide the other day where that there's' one court with both parties using it.
We're moving in that direction. I think there is, as an ideal outcome, a good idea
that we have one industrial relations system in Australia instead of seven. Or, in
the case of Victoria, you'd have to say six and a bit. But we're working towards
that, and I think it would be a desirable outcome to get there.
J: When do you intend to talk to the Victorian Government and about what?
PC: Pretty soon.
Have you spoken to other State Governments?
PC We'll conduct proper consultations with the States and we'll get on our bike and do
it immecdiately.
J: But you've already decided what you're doing.
J: What's thc point? 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 18: 59 NO . UZI
17
PC: There is a lot of point. In the case of many of these State Governments they'll
want to see our legislation to make sure that what we say is the principal, where
there is a genuine Commission. This legislation won't intrude, theyll want to see
that, they're not affected by that, so we'll show them that and go through the
legislation. That's the standard way of proceeding.
J: If they disagree with the legislation you will just go ahead anyway.
PC: As the Prime Minister said, we've got an obligation to the Australian community
to push the recovery through even better, and Victoria is a blight on that landscape,
and if they want to continue to be a blight I don't think that's consistent with our
national focus at all.
J: Senator Cook, if there is a large number of workers who are already outside the
award, wouldn't you expect a flood of dissatisfied workers to the IRC?
PC: There's not a large number of workers outside the award system. The award
system covers about 82 per cent of Australian workers, and of the remaining 18 per
cent most of those are managerial or professional. So there's not a large group
outside the award system, but there arc some outside the award system. And the
significant thing about the changes that we're proposing to legislate minimum
wages, whether some of those people are in a union or not they can approach the
federal Commission and have a fair minimum determined for them.
ends 



TEL: 2. Dec. 92 15: 00 No. 007 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED 4pm
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
PROTECTING AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYEES
Over the last eight weeks the Commonwealth has become Increasingly concerned
about the threat to social cohesion and economic recovery posed by attempts to cancel
the award. systcm:
The Kennett Government is the first to adopt the Hewson agenda in Lndustrial
rtelations. The Commonwealth Government has put Australia's industrial relations system on to
an irreversible path towards workplace bargaining.
This is the key to ensuring that Australia does make the big productivity advance in
the 1990s.
Nearly 600 enterprise agrecments have already been registered with the Australian
-Industrial Relations Commission and the Government is well on the way to having at
least half the workforce currently under federal awards in enterprise bargains by the
middle of next year.
And these cnterprise agreements will be secured through eoopcration not intimidation.
If we have learnt anything in the last 10 years it is that the most successful economics
are those that harness the power of competition and reform with cooperation.
Intimidation leads to dislocation and the intransigcnt protection of entrenched rights.
The Kennett Government is taking Australia down the confrontation route which will
simply derail the reform of industrial relations in this country.
The Victorian Govcrnment's decision to cancel the award systcm and force more than
six hundred thousand Victorians on to individual contracts has already fractured the
long period of irdustrial harmony which has seen the lowest national strike rate for
thirty years. It has disturbed the confidence of investors. 
EL: 2. Dec. 92 15: 00 No. 00? P. 02/ 04
2
For Victoria itself, which accounts for 27 per cent of Australian output, a third of
Australian manufacturing output and 17 per cent of our exports, the industrial conflict
has had a devastating effect on confidence. Classified job advertisements in Thc Age
have fallen. DEETs indicator of skilled job vacancics released yestcrday showed rises
for other states but no movement in Victoria.
As yesterday's National Accounts figures showed recovery is well under way in
Australia and we have been growing at an annual rate of around 2 per cent for 4
quarters. It is a measure of the Government's accomplishments that this has been done In a
situation where most countries are growing much more slowly than this or are still
contracting. However, Australia's growth rate must be increased further and we must build on what
has already been achieved.
On this score, industrial conflict in Victoria is putting the entire Australian . recovery at
risk,
The Victorian Government's decision also highlights the way in which the Hewson
agenda in industrial relations obstructs reform in Australian workplaces. The
Commonwealth has adopted a policy of encouraging workplace bargaining, with
award wages and conditions operating as a safetynet to catch those employees who are
unable to reach agreements with their employers.
Arbitrated minimium wage outcomes are becoming less relevant to actual wage
outcomes, but the Commonwealth believes that the provision of a permanent and
reliable safety net, and of rights to~ plqteetion_ against unfair dismissal, are an essential
foundation upon which reform in industrial relations should proceed.
The Commonwealth's assessment is that conflict between the Victorian Government
and Victorian employees is now settling into a dangerous deadlock.
The Commonwealth Government has decided to legislate to offer Australians who find
themselves in the circumstances produced by the Victorian industrial relations
legislation the. safcty net of federal awards, and the enterprise bargaining structure of
the federal legislation.
This is to ensure that we continue to make progress in making the labour market more
flexible and that we don't get side tracd into pointless and destructive industrial
disputes.
The safety net of minimum wages will be available both thirough federal awards, and
through a new provision which will allow the Commission to determine minimum
wages in a wider set of circumstances than is currently possible.
The Commonwealth Government has therefore also decided to legislate under
internationa~ sonyti o to guarantee rights to equal pay for work of equal value by
men and women, and to protection against unfair dismissal, two national standards
TEL 
T2EL. D: ec. 92 15: 00 No. 007 P. 03/ 04
3
which the Victorian Government does not guarantee and which are most threatened by
its legislation.
These protections will be guaranteed undcr the external affairs power of the
constitution and R1O conventions setting international standards in these areas.
Since the ILO convention governing unfair dismissal has to yet be ratified by the
Australian Government, we will consult with the States and with the industrial parties
on its implementation.
The Government intends to have most of the legislative provisions available by the
time Victorian awards are abolished on March 1 next year.
Consideration is being given to legislation protecting some other internationally
recognised standards, such as annual leave, maternity and parental leave and hours of.
-work,.
This new legislation is not designed to create new national standards, to lay a new
safety net where one already exists, or to replace State systems offering conciliation
and compulsory arbitration.
All awards created as a result of the legislation will continue to be subject to the
provision that they can be varied by enterprise bargaining, so long as therc is clear
evidence that the employees consent to the variation, and the new arrangement does
not leave them worse off in total than the old arrangcment.
Improved acccss to fedcral awards will be facilitated by an immediate change to the
objects of the IR act to encourage Access t-oawards for employees who are not now
under federal awards and arc not within the scope of a state arbitral jurisdiction.
The AIRC will be given the authority to determine minimum rates, whether or not an
interstate industrial dispute exists, for an employee or a group of employees who do
not have that protection.
The Commission will be given the power to award e~ qual pay.
The termination and redundancy provisions sought by the Commonwealth are those
specified in the relevant ILO convention. These include the requirement for an
employer to offer a valid reason for dismissal, Severance pay, and appeal to an
impartial tribunal against unfair dismissal.
The legislation will guarantee the Australian Government's charter for industrial
relations which I announced on August 31
At that time I gave 11 undertakings to Australian employees, some of which the
Victorian legislation has since put at risk
TEL 
TEL: 2. Dec. 92 15: 00 No. 007 P. 04/ 0k
4
Among other commimrrcnts in the Govcrniments charter for industrial relations we
undertook to keep a safety net under the low paid and poorly organised
to makc sure workplace agreements are fair
to enforce agreements with simple procedures
not to force employees off awards
to allow employees to be covered by u nions
In my vicw thes rights cannot be guaranteed for Victorians under the Kennett
Government's Industrial legislation. The legislation which I have announced today is
Intended to fulfil our undertaking, and to safeguard the system of enterprise bargaining
underpinned by award minimums which is successfully transforming workplaces
operating under Commonwealth legislation.
The system of awards is the safety net which protects thc minimum wages and
working conditions of Australian enhployces. It is the Australian Governments belief
that all Australians arc entitled to this form of protection, and the changes announced
today are designed to guarantee them.
CANBERRA 2 December 1992 



TEL: 3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 03/ ag
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING M. P,
PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE FECCA CONGRESS, CANBERRA
THURSDAY, 3 DECEMBER 1992
Ladies anid gentlemen
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to address this
third Congress of the Federation of Ethnic Communities
Councils of Australia.
Over the years, FECCA has made a substantial contribution
to the process of~ nation-buildinfg, to Strengthening the
social fabric, and to defining an Aus~ trali -an identity.
which more accurately reflects today's national
aspirations and realities.
I congratulate you for it and urge you to keep up the
good work.
You have played a leading role in one of the
unquestionable success stories of this country's history.
Multicultural Australia is one of the great social
engineering achievements. In a world once more torn by
ethnic hatred and bloodshed, what has been done here
stands increasingly as a benchmark of democratic common
sense. it is something all Australians should be proud of and
I say " all" advisedly.
I say it because while governments have played a leading
part in this success, and FECCA has played a notable part
with various ethnic groups, and while the ethnic
-communities are themselves deserving of enormous credit,
ina the last resort success depended on Australian
democratic values and_ principles of tolerance.
The policies of multiculturalism encouraged those ideals
of course. Groups like your own have encouraged
tolerance. But, as I said to a recent immigration conference, the
triumph of multiculturalism, is a triumphi of Australian
democracy. 
TEL: 3. Dec .92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 04/ 0'
2
It is built arnd could only be built on a sturdy sense
of-social justice.
Australia was inclined to narrowness arnd xenophobia,
there is rno doubt. All nations in their own way are.
Not a11 nations, however, overcome these feelings.
In not all nations are the democratic values stronger
than the undemocratic ones, the values of-tolerance, the
idea of fai -rness stroriger than the feelings of fear and
resentment towards those who are different.
In Australia to an unsurpassed extent they manifestly
are. And must remain.
in the 1990s I would like to see Australians counting the
democracy they have built here high among their many
reasons for pride.
And the success of multiculturalism high among their
democracy'se achievements.
Multiculturalism should never be seen as a denial of
Australia's heritage, but as an affirmatioi of our
democratic values -and traditions.
The notions of access and equity are not new ones they
were current at the birth of the Federation. They were
there in the 1890s. They have been with us ever since.
Properly understood, multicultural~ ism is an extension of
democracy of pluralism.
The proper end of multicultural policies is cultural
plurallsm The integrity of different cultures within an
Australian democratic framework.
I say these things because I think it will be good for us
in this last decade of the century, the decade leading to
the centenary of federation, to re-awaken awareness of
Australian social democracy.
Awareness of our social democratic values and
achievements. I think sometimes we could do more to raise our
democratic consciousness.
I think it would at once help reinforce democratic
institutions and traditions, and make the way easier for
necessary change.
Multiculturalism is among the institutions a greater
level of democratic consciousness would support. 
T3E. LD: ec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 05/ 09
3
Multiculturalismi as I have described it the opposite
and the antidote to ethnocentrism and cultural
fragmentat ion.
It is a source of cultural strength arnd, as we are now
discovering, a potential source of economic strength.
In this regard I was pleased to attend the ' Productive
Diversity conference, and to announce there some steps we
are taking to exploit our linguistic and cultural
diversity in the interests of a stronger, internationally
oriented economy.
As you probably know I also told the conference that we
have taken steps to assist job seekers whose lack of
formal English is impeding their employment prospects.
In another innovation we have established the Bilingual
Consultants Network to meet the need for
governments to identify the views of individuals and
groups within the community when planning their policies
and services.
The network is designed to act as a channel for the views
of those Australians who, through language, cultural or
geographic barriers have not to date been adequately
considered. The Australia-wide BCN comprising 600 people and fifty
languages, and extending to all States and the Northern
Territory, is now available to government and community
organisations. It can, for example, let agencies and companies gather
knowledge among client groups of their policies and
programs. it is an invaluable, cost effective tool for those who
require soundly-based information on the needs and views
of all Australians.
By such means as these the Government can do much to
create an envitroinent in which all Australians have a
chance to play a part in society.
When I say all Australians let me specifically
acknowledge immigrant women, of all ages and backgrounds,
who have contributed so much to this country and whose
needs, I recognise, have not always been met as they
should. Ladies and Gentleman,
Ethnic radio is a major element in the Government
strategy for enabling those from non-English speaking
backgrounds, particularly older residents and newly
arrived migrants, to participate in the life of
Australia. TEL 
TEL: 3 . Dec .92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 06/ 0S!
4
Ethnic radio programming is an important vehicle for
accommodating the information and communication needs of
people from non-English speaking backgrounds.
Unfortunately, there is at present insufficient air time
available on the SBS's two radio stations to satisfy the
programming demands of all ethnic communities in Sydney
and Melbourne.
-SoS currently provides programming in approximately 64
different languages between 6am and midnight, but the
demand on available air time means some languages are
limited to half an hour per fortnight.
And there is no SBS radio service outside Sydney and
Melbourne. To provide migrant communities with a fairer share of
broadcasting services, I am pleased to announce that the
Government is establishing a.-s econd -SBS radio network in
Melbourne and Sydney, and extending the service to Perth,
Adelaide, Brisbane, Darwin, Canberra and Hobart.
For the first time, Australia will have a _ nati-onl ethnic
broadcasting network.
A second SBS radio network will begin broadcasting to
Melbourne in December 1993 and to Sydney in July 1994.
The first services to Adelaide, Perth, Brisbane and
Darwin will commence In late 1993 with services to
Canberra and Hobart to follow.
The new network will ensure that the many people in
Sydney and Melbourne who are of non-English speaking
background get a better deal.
its programs will be directed to meeting the needs of
ethnic communities in Sydney and Melbourne which cannot
now be accommodated on Radio 2EA and 3EA.
The new service will complement the excellent EA radio
services in each city, and also those of the volunteerbased
public -radiQ. stations that offer multi-lingual
programs. Community broadcasters have nothing to fear from the
decision to extend SBS radio services. The Government
will continue to support the public broadcasting sector.
The new network will help meet the needs of ethnic
communities for programs in their own languages,
including communities affected by the recent
re-scheduling of services on Radio 2EA and 3EA. 
TEL: 3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 07/ 09
The programs will mostly originate from SBS's new studios
at Artarmon in Sydney and be networked to other capital
cities. The SBS will be carrying out consultations with ethnic
communities and stakeholder groups before taking final
decisions on program content, format and scheduling.
I know you will forgive me for pointing out the sharp
contrast between the Government's policy on ethnic
broadcasting and the Federal Opposition's stated
intention to cut $ 6 million from the SBS.
Such a reduction must put in jeopardy plans for
expansion, as well as existing programming, services and
staffing. Six million dollars is more than the SBS spends on
program acquisition. It is more then their Australian
production budget. It is more than the total operational
costs of 2EA.
SBS is a remarkable and in my view remarkably effective
and valuable institution of Australian democracy.
You may be absolutely sure that the Government will
continue to support it, and where possible expand its
services. Ladies and Gentlemen,
Australian citizenship with its attendant rights and
obligations is part of the glue which binds this nation
and its citizens.
The Government is keen to encourage all Australian
residents to become Australian citizens and does not
consider it should be restricted to a privileged few.
The recent decision of the High Court on the eligibility
of several candidates in the Wills bi-election has
implications which are a matter of concern for all
Australians. In particular, the decision which found that two
individuals were ineligible to stand because they had
failed to take " reasonable steps" to renounce their
foreign citizenship may raise doubts about the value of
Australian citizenship.
I recognise that immigrants from certain countries face
almost insurmountable barriers to renounce their former
citizenship, even when assuming Australian citizenship.
Technically, therefore, thiy can be constitutionally
precluded from entering the Commonwealth Parliament for
reasons quite beyond their own control. 
TL: 3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 08/ 0'-
6
The High Court decision effectively debars naturalised
inunigrants Austrfalian citizens from certain countries
from standing for Parliament, unless they have taken
" reasonable steps" to divest themselves of their original
citizenship. Only a constitutional -_ referendum-can ensure that this
does not happen agai-n.
I recognise that the High Court decisions on this and
other eligibility requirements for members of Parliament
raise a number of complex issues, including the -role of.
dual citizenship in our society.
I would welcome your views on these matters and will take
these into account in the Government's consideration of
the subject.
Practical considerations preclude a referendum at the
next election. However I intend to pursue the issues
with the opposition in the next Parliament, with a view
to changing the current constitutional requirements for
eligibility for Parliament.
And in my view Australian citizenship should be
sufficient qualification.
Ladies and gentlemen
Let me conclude as I began by saying that
multicultural ism is an extension of Australian social
democracy. A dramatic extension.
it has radically changed the way Australians live and the
way we think about ourselves and the rest of the world.
But it is built on a traditional democratic foundation.
we need to expand economic and social opportunity, of
course that is the basis of social democracy. It is
one of the principles underlying multicultural policy.
But we also need to develop a greater awareness and
appreciation of our democratic institutions and values
among the immigrant population and among Australians of
long standing.
It is my passionate belief that in this decade we need to
build a multicultural Australia which is richly
pluralist, richly democratic -and richly and
unmistakeably Australian.
Finally I must say a word or two about your retiring
Chairperson, Carl Harbaum.
I know of the hard work he has put into the Federation
over many years, of the dignity and the deep love of
Australia which he has brought to the job.
TEL 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATINGMNP,
DOORSTOP, AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, 3 DECEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, does Mr Kennett have the right to * sack any more public servants
down there in Victoria as a result of your increasing the power of the IRC?
PM: I heard John Howard today talk about the Kennett mandate. I think the important
thing to remember here is this Federal Labor Government went to an election with
_ Accord Mark VI constructed in the actual weeks of the election program, which
talked about minimum rates for Australians, and all the other commitments we'd
made in the past, the supplementary payments for low paid workers, with all of
that economic and social focus on those issues. By contrast, Mr Kennett had no
such declarations in his campaign, in fact he lead people up the garden path, not
only not seeking a mandate but trying to assuage their fears about what he might
introduce. There's only one mandate in industrial relations that's clear to the community, it's
the mandate enjoyed by this Government. And that's the mandate which will have
its way in Australia while ever I'm Prime Minister. So the States can do what they
like, those who want to break those sort of things. And of course not all do, you
won't see it in the Labor States. If Mr Kennett wants to go his wilful way with the
Liberal's ideological agenda, well let him, and no doubt he will still cause
industrial disruption in his own areas of administration by virtue of his own
attitude. But we are giving Victorian employees an opportunity now to register themselves
under the federal jurisdiction, thereby letting the Industrial Relations Commission
protect their conditions. Also for those people who might want to avail
themselves of coverage under federal jurisdiction, we're doing that under external
affairs power. 
So it is the reasonable extension of the commitments we gave at an election, with
Accord Mark VI and all the tenets thereof, and we are think the only government
in Australia which has specifically gone to an election with very clear
commitments about industrial relations. Certainly the Kennett Government didn't
and they can't rely upon that now.
J: Do you take his threat seriously that he is going to renege on the financial deal
with the Commonwealth?
PM: Renege in what way?
J: ( inaudible)
PM: It's one thing for Mr Kennett to be talking about putting the industrial relations of
his State in jeopardy, it's another of him talking of exacerbating his financial
worries. He has got to make his own decisions about financial policy. We've
required him to do nothing other than to agree to a debt reconstruction plan. He
did agree to that and he agreed to that for us agreeing to the borrowings which
were disagreed with the former Government. As far as I'm concerned, that matter
is closed.
J: Prime Minister, how much extra funding will be given to _ SBS Radio to enable
them to set up this new network?
PM: That which is sufficient to do it. can't give the dollars and cents, but it's a very
important decision, I think, for multicultural Australia a second radio network
for the ethnic communities of this country so that they will have access to
programs in their own languages, which to a large extent is now, if not being
denied them, very much truncated by the growth in ethnic languages on the
existing network.
J: What are the practical factors that preclude a referendum at the next election?
PM: There are a number and I don't think now is the time to go into it.
J: You are being accused of vote-catching with this move for this second frequency,
aren't you?
PM: If we want to be accused of vote-catching we could have unveiled it during the
Wills bi-election. No, this is the right time to do it. As the number of ethnic
languages on the SBS Radio Network has expanded, there was a need for another
network, and think this meets the need.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 135/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON. P. 3. KEATING
WHAT MANDATE? I think it's a pity that what is said aboutpenalty
xate _ and holiday leave 1oadins before the election
hasn't been totally adhered to in actual the Bill
itself..
What is my observation is what is in the Bill on
penalty rates and holiday loadings is not the same
as what they said before the election. ( John Howard
on Meet the Press November 1 1992)
1 think there is a fair argument to say, Laurie,
that they made a promise before the election and in
some circumstances that promise may not be met as a
result of their reforms.
I think that Is simply a statement of fact.. ( Peter
Reith on Sunday November 1 1992)
It is " simply a statement of fact" that during an
election in which industrial relations was a major issue
Mr Kennett deliberately disguised his real intentions.
It is " simply a statement of fact" that there is no
mandate for what Mr Kennett has actually introduced. The
Victorian people know it. And so do Or Hewson, Mr Howard
and Mr Reith.
It is " simply a statement of fact" that Mr Kennett's
legislation constitutes a pointless and destructive
attack on the rights and living standards of many
thousands of victorians.
At the same time it threatens the national recovery.
In substantial ways it strikes not at inefficiencies but
at fundamental social Justice, at the reasonable and
decent standards of employment and remuneration to which
Australians are entitled.
' TO" 0OV0N T 7 " I? 
-2
Mr Kennett's legislation undermines not Just V. ictorian
workers but the national interest.
By replacing unprecedented industrial' harmony, with the
conflict it took so long to get out of the system, he has
destroyed the essential condition for reform of
industrial relations the cooperative spirit which has
already produced more than 550 enterprise bargains.
The Federal Government's proposed changes to industrial
relations laws recognise that-workplace reform must
continue. In many cases that reform is seeing penalty rates, leave
loadings and outdated work practices n-egotiated -away,-
with the support of employees.
The Federal legislation allows for all the reform Mr
Kennett wants on penalty rates, leave loadings and
hours worked.
But it also protects people from being forced onto
-individual contracts. It means that the reforms
continue, but no worker is worse off.
In other words, flexibility every which way, but not
downwards. Mr Kennett's legislation is an attack on progress in
industrial relations. It is an attack on the economic
recovery which Australia is staging in the face of an
unfavourable international climate.
The changes I propose create an opportunity for a return
to industrial peace, to give recovery the best possible
chance, to provide the best climate for continuing
essential reform of the labour market, and to protect the
rights and living standards of Australians.
Mr Kennett has referred to this as " gutless."
In fact, acts of destruction require no courage.
Looking after people's living standards and protecting
them against exploitation while bringing on economic
recovery is a much harder thing to do. It requires more
courage and more faith in our fellow Australians and
the rewards are much greater.
CANBERRA December 3 1992
,9fl/ O O* ON SS: SI Z6 131-
LAURIE OAKES: It is not a cover-up, Mr Reith, when they have
an election campaign not only you don't mention these
policies but in fact say that no worker will lose any benefit
under awards. Surely that's a cover-up if it's not a lie?
PETER REITH: It may arguably be put that they have brought
down a policy which was different to what they had said before
the election. I'm not dS 0? ocieAM
œ 0/ 20' d Oœ O'ON SS: ST .6-1' 331a 



3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No. 017 P. 01/ 09
PRIME MINISTER
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J.
KEATING, MP, AND MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS, SENATOR BOB COLLINS.
SBS RADIO NETWORK TO GO NATIONAL
The Federal Government will establish a -national SBS radio
-network to meet the increasing needs of ethnic communities around
Australia. Federal Cabinet this week approved the establishment of the
service. The new service will provide Sydney and Melbourne with a second
SBS radio outlet to complement the 2EA and 3EA stations.
It will provide ethnic communities in Adelaide, Perth, Brisbane,
Darwin, Hobart, and Canberra with their first full SBS radio
service. The network will begin broadcasting in Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth
Brisbane and Darwin from December. 1993.
Broadcasting in Sydney, Canberra and Hobart would begin from July,
1994. There is currently insufficient air time available on 2EA and 3EA
and volunteer-based public radio stations which now offer multilinguae
programs to ruly saiisty me programming aemanas or all
ethnic communities in Sydney and Melbourne.
TEL 
TEL: 3. Dec. 92 9: 43 No .017 P. 02/ 0-
The now-services, which will broadcast on the FM band in all cities
except Melbourne, will help meet the needs of ethnic communities
for programs in their own languages.
SBS will develop programming schedules in consultation with
ethnic communities and stakeholders groups prior to taking
decisions on program content, format and schedules.
This assessment will be undertaken with theCommunity Advisory
Committee which is to be established to advise the _ SBS Board.
The decision to establish the national service is a firm indication
of the Federal Government'$ ongoing commitment to SBS and
community broadcasting in general.
Canberra. December 3, 1992.
Media Inquiries:
Mr Keating's office: Greg Turnbull 06-2777744
Senator Collins office: Brian Johnstone 06-2777200 



PRIME MINISTERI
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE lION P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, JOHN CURTIN HOUSE, CANBERRA, 4 DECEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: What do you think of Jeff Kennett's plan to put industrial relations on the
Premiers' Conference agenda?
PM: We are not superstitious, we'll have anything on the agenda they want on the
agenda.
1: Will you put it at the top now?
PM: And we are quite happy to discuss these details with State governments, but
we intend to go ahcad with our agcnda.
J: What about John Fahcy's threat to boycott.
PM: I didn't hear him say that, but boycott what?
J: Boycott the Premiers' Conference.
PM: John has got to decide whether he is a Prcmier or whether hc is a court jester
and if hc wants to bc in the game that's wvhere the mecting is, he can be there
if he wants to.
J: Are you coniccrned about the atmosphere at thc Premiers' Confercnce given
those comments?
PM: It's all vcry good for John Fahey to say that it's not co-operative. Three
weeks ago lie was standing in Sydney on his way to Acapulco attacking
John Dawkins over loan raising from Victoria which had nothing to do with
him whatsoever. lie has not behaved like Nick Greiner's behaved, hc's into
; ZO/ TO'd 2000N VO: TT 7,6* 3Q* V : 131 
every argument around the place and then he wants to talk about cooperation.
J: Given that are you concerned about the atmosphere of the Conference?
PM: Not at all, no, no, not a bit.
J: Prime Minister, how concerned are you that John Halfpen~ ny intends to
continue industrial action in Victoria?
PM: The. Commonwealth's legislation will give access to the federal jurisdiction
for people registered under state awards and that will deal with the problem
of the decline of the a wards system in Victoria, but it won't deal with a
recalcitrant government in a position of conflict with its own employees.
One will never solve those issues from Canberr a.
J: So it's all right for unions to continue protest thcre whatever the effects on
the federal economy?
PM: No, no just get this right. If Mr Kenncett wants to decimate the school
system and the hospital system he has to wear the public consequences of
that. In just the samc way Nick Greiner had to wear it in schools in NSW,
you can't expect magic and people to lay down in the face of a government
which is just tak ing no heed of community attitudes.
J: Mr Kennett says that Mr Halfpenny is giving you a two finger salute.
PM: I haven't even spoken to Mr Halfpenny about this matter, not once, not at
any stage. This is simply a mattcr that the Kennett government had no
mandate whatsoever to destroy the awards system, none. This government
had a very clear mandate in 1990 not just to maintain the award system but
to maintain minimum rates, we are in there to protect that mandatc and if Mr
Kennett wishes to go his way then the Commonwealth is just doing what I
think is both sensible and reasonable to restore confidence in Victoria and to
see our national recovery going. I noticed today in today's press that the
Japanese economy is in negative growth for two quarters. There's the
United States limping along, the second largcst economy negative growth,
we are growing at two per cent, we are on the way. Jeff Kennett and his
mates want to put us back.
ENDS
O/ ZO'd ZOO* DN t7O: TT Z6* Oat7 11331 



T. Dec. 92 12: 16 No. 024 P. 01/ 01
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PR[ ME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, IULTON HOTEL, PERT' 1} I1 6 DECEMBER 99
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Are you confident tororrows conference Won't break down into a brawl between
the consewatdve States and the Commonwahm?
PM: Don't put too low a Minotation on the word brV. Issues ae important, and
issues arm worth defending The Commonweath hs rnia pretty clear declsions
about industrial relations and rPU be very intemuiod to see what the States have to
say. Bui on the rest of the agedn I diak wcVcgot notobn bclve wo won't
have, as we did last time, a vety cooperaidw meec
Wil you be scein Mr Kennet before the formal medtin% tomorrow?
PM: He's not asked me to, no.
I. Will Victoria get all its $ 1.6 billion now you've fotmd another $ 2 billion blowout?
PM-That will be diacussed tomorrow.
ends TEL 



TEL: ?. Dec. 92 7: 32 No. 001 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR CHRISTMAS APPEALS
When I launched the Sl. Yin-cent de Paul'sChristmas Appeal-in Bankstown on 27
November, I said the Government would look at ways of getting. extra assistance to
those families who are doing it hard this Christmas.
I am pleased to announce today that the Government will match dollar for dollar
cash donations by the Australian public to major voluntary agencies for their
Christmas appeals.
We will build upon the generous contributions of Australians to material aid
organisations like the Smith Family, St Vincent de Paul and the Salvation Army.
These contributions enable agencics to provide tangible assistance such as toys and
presents for children, food hampers and Christmas dinners to thousands of
Australians so that they can enjoy the sort of Christmas that most of us take for
granted. This is a time when some money to help can go a long way. We call upon the
Australian people to open their hearts and their pockets and give to help those in
need this Christmas.
SYDNEY 6 December 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME NITNISTTEq THE HON P J KE-ATING, M7P
PRESS CON FERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE. PERTH
7 DECEMBER 1992
IF&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM III just give a brief overview of the meeting. We'rc nom, about two thirds the way
through the Council of Australian ivennunents' agenda, and there have been many
positive outcomes and Ill refer to those in a moment. On the protocols, on the
crvlronnient, forests, rnicro econornd.; rerorm of electricity and gas, Asian language
development and a few others I'll mention inore comprehensively in a moment,
We had a lona and 01gorous discussion on industrial relations where there was not
agreement between the Comnmonweath and particulaly the State of' Victori a, and
where I said that the Commonwealth was determined to trve the workforce Of
Victona choice. a matter the LiberalS often refer to it t~ hoice as to whethcr
they wish to accept the opportunity of enhanced access to the coverage under the
federal jurisdiction for awards, an option they would lose when State awardi
tvirminate in March of nex~ t year.
I argued to Mr Kenriett and to Mr Stockdale and others-and you miaht have seen
those charts about the factor shares betwe~ en wages and profits, that already at this
stage of the cycle the profit share -is at the level of the golden mncan of the 1960s,
and of coursc with any volume In the economy, any volume ubvc overheads wil
certainly just produce a hi~ her level of profits on the bottom line ul'cornpanies
which will tale the profit share above the ' 60s experience. And urcourse, the
concomitant wage share is at the 1 960s levels, levels where we all believed were
such as they would promote Investment aind allow the econorny to develop. My
question then was what are you asking for' Are you sayinlg that the profit share
is not hi~ h enough at this stage, in absolute 1evels or at this stage of' the cycle, that
the w3Ae share should be lower'? To which of course I had no replies Because
there isn't a reply Wagcs in Australia are competitive Willh Countries with Whom 
we trade, and their unit labour costs are nearly 10 Me cent below wherc thcy wet.
a decade ago.
So I bild Mr Kennett that the Commonwealth would be legislating to extend
Section tI I of the Australian Industrial Relations Arbitration Commission powers
ror coverage for those employecs or groups of employees in Victoria who sought
such coverage. who exercised the choice and who sou~ h such coverage. We'rq
nol imposing coverage, we're leaving the opportunity there for people to make a
choice as to whether they want coverage.
Secondly, that in relation to the adopion of legislation under the ratified ILO
ggrecmrefts, I again reaffrrmed the Commnon wealth's willingness to consult with
states about the detail of that legislation. Need I say, these are for two of these
treaties, treaties which were ratified some timc agu with the agreement of the
States This is for thin~ s such as minimumn rates and equal pay, and it Is putting
into legislation the adoption of the content of the ULO ratifications which arc
Interniationally agreed minima agreed by thc employer, employee, and govcniment
representatives in the ITO. subsequently 4gtcvd by Australian States. subsequenitly
rautied to which we are Si'in clTect. Hardly a basis for Objection And of course,
what point could anybody argue that they don't agree with the principle of equal
pay for equal work. Or in the later to be ustified termination of employment
convention, that there people will have, a$ ain legislated international nimaU
under that convention, but about whcth we've agreed to consult, and consult we
will. We've established today a mechanism chaired by Peter Cook fur that
i; Qnsultation, as he i3 the appropriate M~ inister
So, we take the view, and I miade this point, that Australia in the last decade has
adopted a much more consensus, cooperative model in industrial relations, we
have adN-ance4 in tvi tn ur the change in our conomy materially since that
adoption, that there can be no complaint about the rac. to; sharts in the economy
beween wages and profit% and the 11Otion that we should drive wages down to
peas~ ant levels, or sonmething approaching it, is not what is holding the economy.
What has slowed growth in the economy is lack or demand, not the price of
labour. And it is demand which is now pickint; up, we've had 2. 1 per cenit growth
over four quarters, a lot of that demand has come from the public sectut wlikl, is 4
result of the Comm~ onwealth stimulus, and Australia is growing now faster than
ally ur iiie countries; of the Or--CD area.
So. on industridl reldtions I hNA-you could say we've agreed to disagree, but
around the basii of the Commonwealth Cove; ruient giving Victorian employees a
choice as to whether they want to go on single employer contracts with recourse
only to the common law, or whetherT thty opt rot choosing the enihanced access for
the federal jurisdiction of the Australiwi Industrial Relations Commni3sion. 
In relation to the other ar eas, in the protocols we've established it basis and rules
for the proper Wnictioninl of the Council of Australian Governutents and the
Ministerial Councils, and we've also decidcd to review the number of Ministerial
Councils which are now 48 to more closely align them~ with thc structure of the
Federal Giovernmrent's administrative arrungement3 order a~ 3s g uidt to the Sort Of
model we might have.
On the environment, we have agreed with the Stutcs on ESD and ( 3roenhouse
straegies. This is quite an historic agreement involving work of environentalists
and indust ry, and is a sound basis for further decisioms. 1 think the main flavour of
that is we now have a decision-makcing framework for better land use planning
across the country which we've nevci-had in this nation before,
In forests. we adopted a forest strategy which provides a sound b&amp; 43i for fUture
planning and more confidence for the forest industries. In rduis to water, a
primary national resource, we've adopted certain principles and sought a report on
better pricing, transferability of water rights and the use ofwvater. And in other
mnicro-economic related reformi areas, in electricity we4 have reaffrrned our decision
in May to separate power generation from distribution, making the point that
separate accountin$ is not enough. that we actually want a separation of
deneration and distributioni assets. In gas. where we are working towards the
objective of a free and fair trade in gas in the country. and setting up a report to
achieve it. And also adopting a proposal for enhanced Asian language
, development in the Austaliwi education system.
That is the progress to date. That's about, I'd say, 60 per cent through our agenda
of the Council of Australian Governments, and my coulleague die Treasurer John
Dawkins will share the Loan Council Meeting to follow this aflernon..
J Prime Nfinister, aren't some of the States. including the Labor Statc of Quensland.
concerned about your legislation. while it's directed specifically at VictV1ria, 111ay
have unintended consequences on places like NSW and Queensland, which already
have a number ofenterprise agreements which are outside the State award system"'
WM No, but they have the status of awaids, just as in the Commonwealth arca an
enterprise agreement has the status of an award. Even thougih it may be jointly
entered anid agreed by an employer and employee or a reprewentative uternploym. s
and is no longer the subject of scrutiny by the Cummrnssion still enjoys the status of
an award. There is still an arbitral structure, That's why, while it is national
legislation, the trigger will be the absence of an arbitral structure. That's why
Queensland doesn't have a worry in that respect. In relatiuji to soine of theA other
matters, that is the equal pay, terminations ct cetera, we've agreed to let them me
the detail of the bill, and that's why it's flne 
get any support fromn any of the States today f'or your ILO conventions now,
have you?
PM: Yes, absolutely.
J. States antendments
PM. No, no there's no States amendments. Labor States were arguing the casc with me
aganst the conservative Sovernments rtpi-esented about the nature of the Viqtorian
reforms, so-called
3 But they've all evpresscd tconcem.
P M. They've said they'd like to be party to tbe consultations. I'm very happy to reaffirm
that, and we've set a structure up But I've made it very clear that the tArst and
principal change is the extension of enhanced acCCss for employccs for coycrasc by
the Australian Industrial Relations Cornmnission,. which does not rely on the
ce'dI affairs power.
J. You 3aid you'd consult on that, but you'rc also soing to rush it through the sy1stemn
by Chrictma~ s
PM-No, we Aill Rush through are yuui words We will consult. full stop. And then,
I hope. expeditiously put it through.
I. So doesi that mean it's not likely to go through before Christimas'.
Pm. rm not sure whether we cmhi di lift sonie of it beflore Christmas. but if we can and
we can comsult, we'll put it through. Certainly the cqual pay, and the minimums.
which have already been ratifitd, Lct me state the point a&amp; air, these ar'e 11.0
conventions already ratified with the agretrrments or the States. and they aze for
internationally agreed minima. Who is Suing to tvgue in this country? What are
the Liberals goinS to stand up and say, they don't agree with equal pay, they don't
agree with somebody doing the mirnt woik being paid equaUy?
I Can you just clarit that Mr Keatin'g, you're goin to put through the arbitration
amendments befbire Christmas if you can, and you may put through the JLO
cotvention amendmients as well if it's possible to do thai berbir Clu ssitas?
PM. Ifit's Possible, except the third element, the separations have to be ratified first
3 So the ones that are ratified you would try to get through before Christmar=)
PM' -if it's pus~ ble. and with consultation, 
J. Well in this case, this task force that's been se. t up. Mr Keating, are you SoinS to
move bcforc thait reports" Wouldn't that rcpuit to another Premniers' Conferen"?~
PM No, it's not a task force at all. It's a working group, at workin&amp; party bet-ween the
Commonwealth chaired by Peter Cook, our industrial relations Minister, and
whoever the States wish to nomninate.
I: The States would be putfint3 on officials in positioris?
PM: No, I think Ministers, probably, or officials or both.
J_ So this dotsn't report back to a Premiers' Confetrence?
PM-No.
3. And you can't see this delaying the introduction of that second draft ofilegislation
at all"
PM: No. thcre are two possible delays in it. One, that we can't get the draflinS
completed and introduced in time, and therc's something in the Consultation
which causes us to redraft or do somcthing else. In other words, it's a
reaffirmation of what wc've already said But can I just say that as a1re sult of our
legislation. today in VIctoria the power strike. I understand. is not going ahead.
Again. it makes the point, the Liberals are always talking about choice yet they
object to Victorian employees. instead of the gun-at-the-head policy of take the
contract or take the sack, ofwhich of'courst there is no choice, we're actually
saying you can choose, if you wish, to be covered by the federal Australian
Industrial Relations Commilssion. Now, I don't think Mr Kennett can argue a point
of frusiration here ofthis legislation If there's a free choice ror the comnmunity of
Victoria
J: Mr KeatinS. Mr rahey hai just maid that this is basically Soing to.. miany Urf the
States... tax on employmentcosts"
M Laura, can I just ansv~ er that point straight away. I have agreed as Treasurti to
miany additions to Ilic 6lobdl limnits to States, tu pay redundancies, to cut the size of
llitli wurkrotixc and make their GBEs more efficient. None of us Is entitled to
short-change eniployes ivin tedunawtes on whiiJz they believ~ e always existed,
and it's n~ ot a % alid ease to be saying that it's a cost to the States which they can
tiiove by just soagely, without consultation. removing a right which someone
formerly enjoyed.
J But they're not just talking about redundancy, Mir Keating. they're saying if you
establish a national framework for all particularly in the area of teachers. there
will be another efrect in the setting of wages, and the States will lose control. 
PM. But that' 3 Ot udse now A larbv proportion of State employevs " c covcrod by
federal awards now. And that's nothing to do with this Government, it's just the
way the Arbitration Conumission has developed over timne. A substantial
pruportivii of' State employe" are covered by federal awards. Pic fact is, the
Liberals had no reply to the ractu: share point. that the profit sharc is already hi~ h.
very high rbi this stage of the cycle. that the wage share is competitive with any
country we wish to compare ourselves with. that the levels are ones which
Snitcd high levels of investment in the Australian economy in years gone by.
and that thc whole point of their policy is basically to cut people's income.
J: I thought Mr Kennett's point was, when you said that, was that basically the only
thing, that was rising was unemploy-ment.
PM. it wasn't his point at all They hid no come-back to the essenitial point. that their
policy is basically a red-neck, small business group generated policy which they
had dropped on the people of Victoria without consultation, in Parliasnentary
shtin~ s in the dead of night, without any consultation with the national
Government which has a mandate ror a cooperative policy, which it's introduced
now for over a decade, which is producing high levels of productivity, which has
arranged in an aggregate way the factor shares to generate high levels of
investment in thV101O, Mild Will qgaif III Ol:' 9O0i. flu CAMISUltatkili Uut Urtle Mlug,
rtt policy which basically weks to Scnerate more activity by Cutting people's4
wages. Now. ' wc rcjvt that We Av the wage levels itt this country aic adcqualt
to promote the investment we need. But the problem has been demand not labour
C03 id tNS is basically a red-neck agenda which the Commonwealth will never
accept. I can't set how the Liberals, always so keen to talk about chice, wle
afraid of Victorian employees makin* a choice of their own volition to exercise the
enhani, ed opportunity of coverage undcr thc federal award systwm.
ends 



TL: 8. Dec. 92 13: 58 No. 027 P. 01/.-
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THlE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, ABC STUDIO, PERTH, 8 DECEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: whcn will you begin articulating a fifth term agenda?
PM: Lct's call it a second term agenda, and it will be in the appropriate part of the
cycle in the run-up to the next election.
J: Do you believe this-poll that gives you a seven point lead over the
Opposition?
PM; There has been a confirmation of the polling of recent months in the various
polls so, I think, three or four polls are all within range of one another and,
of course, it will remain to he scen wvhether this month the other polls
corroborate what the Newspoll is saying.
J: So when is the election Prime Minister?
PM: I've said that I think the public should get value from the Parliaments and
they shouldn't bc truncated and we haven't. The Government, this
Parliament, is three years old in March next year so, as I said, any time after
Christmas, in the new year, is basically the Parliaments end.
J: Would you prefer like Bob Hogg to go after the Western Australian poll?
PM: I don't discuss the Labor Party's tactics~ in public. I will keep all flexibility
for us against the Liberals.
J: Peter Reith is blaming the industrial disruption in Victoria for the Liberal's
slump. Do you think that is what has caused you to go up in the polls?
TEL 
T8EL.: D ec. 92 13: 58 No. 02? P. 02/ 0-
2
PM: No, we've been going up steadily in thc second half of the year and I think it
is because of thc Government's policies of inclusion. The Governmenit is
seeking to have a community perspective and an emphasis on community
values where thc Liberal Party emphasis is on individual values. If you
support thc wealthy, they say the wealthy will drag the rest of us along. I
think the public don't believe that, One hundred and sixty million
Americans have just voted against that, they voted for community values
and if you look at the progress wc have made this year and on a whole range
of issues in education, in transportation, in the environment, in industry,
whcrcver you see it and, of course, need I say in s ' ocial policy wherever
you see thesc things, I think the public believe that this is the way to
proce, and they don't believe that lifting tax and cutting wages as Dr
Hewson wants to do is going to help anybody but those who don't need help,
that's the welfare. God help us when the dominant national values of
Australia have to be focussed on the benefits to the wealthy.
J: Prime Minister, is the west Labor's Achilles heel and what can you do about
it?
PM: That is believed, I don't know whether it is true. The polls, though, are not
as strong for us here as they have been. I think the only thing to do about it
is try and articulate our policies as often as I can, as I've been doing today
on radio and on television. There is obviously some sort of feeling in the
West Australian media which is at odds with that which is carried in the east
and it is making a difference here of some kind. But how large, time will
tell.
J. Mr Keating, you admitted that the Labor States were worried about the
second part of your industrial relations legislation relying on the external
affairs power. Are you willing to make any changes as a result of the
consultations?
PM: Worry does not imply legitimacy or legitimate worry. Legitimacy is if
Australia has ratified a sct of conventions which the States agreed to,
including the Labor statcs. With that ratification, why are they worried
when we may legislate to impose the conditions, the international minima
which those ratifications establish? I think it is a concern about something
that they don't quite know all about and we intend to try and overcome that
by consulting with them before we bring the Bills in.
TEL 
TEL: 8. Dec. 92 13: 5tb NO. ue( r
3
J; Prime Minister following on your theme about the politics of inclusion, wil
you be planning to develop policies along the lines of a more managed
economic intervention for next year?
PM: That is too leading a question because it begs an economic reply and I don't
think wc have the time or thc inclination to provide it right here.
J: Just briefly Graham Richardson referred late last week to the idea of using
the tax systemn to help our export industries, would you favour that?
PM: Look, the Government has established for the first time in Australia a true
market economy. It may bc ironic, but it has takcn a Labor Government to
establish a markct economy. But I've always said it has done it with a Labor
heart, and it's done it looking at industries and the needs of industrics in
particular sectors, and that's why our industry policy and the design of our
policy be it in tariff changes or tariff reforms or in other areas of policy
have been ones which I think truly take into account the interest of
Australians. And the potential of industries in areas, say
telecommunications, ship building, pharmiaccutical, are all what one has
termed intervenitionist policies. But we will never turn our back upon what
is essentially a market structure.
J: Prime Ministcr, back to the polls for a second. Do these polls imply that
Australians accept an eleven per cent unemployment figure?
PM: No), I don't think that at all and nor they should, but I think that they believe
that the Government wants to get back to what it does best and that is
crcating jobs as wc showed throughout nearly a decade of the ' 80s. We've
kept most of the employment of the ' 80s and we want to go back to what
we're doing best. I think the public think we are trying to do that, The ' One
Nation' package was about stimulating the economy and pushing it back
into growth; last week's national accounts indicate quite strongly that a
government stimulus is working, is the principal reason why the economy is
recovering and growing as it is, and I think the public take comfort from
that. I think they also take comfort from the policies of inclusion, that we
all go along together and we don't develop an underclass, wve don't let the
unemployed look after themselves without unemployment benefits, we pull
those who are not well off, or need help, along with the rest of us; and we
are not focussing, as the Liberal Party is, upon thc wealthy, saying if they
are well looked after, in their slipstream the rest of us can find some
nourishment. I think that that sort of sterile stuff, which we've seen come in
cycles right throughout the century, is now at this point rejected by nearly 
TEL 4
all western governments and certainly by this government. 1 think the
public agree with that.
J: With all the polls moving strongly in thc same direction, do you think
people now have made a final decision about John Hewson?
PM: I don't know, there is only onc poll that matters in the end, I've never been
too worried about opinion polls though I admit I prefer to be in front than
behind. But what have the Liberals got to offer? Thcy say, " if we tax your
food, your clothing and your services, we will put the proceeds off to
abolishing pay roll tax and cutting petrol," and we arc supposed to be
naively bclicving that the cutting of payroll tax and the reduction in petrol
excise will change Australia. That all of a sudden will spring a new
reinvigorated, modern economy from doing those things, cutting petrol
prices and cutting payroll tax. Well of course it is nonsense and I think the
public realises basically the same sterile old stuff from the same tired old
group. That is, thcy start on this premise how can we push more national
income into the wealthy? And the current trick is a consumption tax, a
goods and services tax. Now that's what Dr Hewson stands for and as well
as that he stands for cutting peoples wages, by pushing eight million
Australians onto individual employment contracts and I think the public is
saying, this is dangerous, this is not good, it is not wise, it is not inclusive, it
says nothing about the sense of community, it is partisan and it is dangerous,
and I don't think they like it.
ENDS TEL.: D ec. 92 13: 58 No. 027 P. 04/ 04 



PRIME MINISTER 189
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P 3 KEATING MP
RELEASE OF NATIONAL ESD AND GREENHOUSE STRATEGIES
The Council of Australian Government has endorsed the National Strategy for
Ecologically Sustainable Development ( ESD) and the National Greenhouse Response
Strategy. The Council also agreed to the release of the Compendium of ESD
Recommendations as a record of how the Strategies agreed by Heads of Government,
together with examples of present policies and programs, relate to each of the
recommendations arising from the ESD process.
Endorsement of the Strategies represented an important step forward and demonstrated
that Australia was serious about seeking to achieve ecologically sustainable development.
This was not, however, the end of the process. The Commonwealth would continue to
discuss a range of ESD issues with the States and Terrtories and also with key interest
groups. The Government would also take further initiatives within the Commonwealth's
own areas of jurisdiction.
Thec achievement of a broad national commitment to ESD was a tribute to the
contributions that many individuals and organisations had made to the ESD process.
Overall, governments have accepted more than 80% of the original recommendations in
some form. Less than 4% had not been accepted, with the balance still under
consideration. The National Strategy for ESD will play a crucial role in setting the scene for the broad
changes in direction and approach by governments. It constitutes a substantial agenda for
change and reform in the longer term. Such changes will present new opportunities in the
future, in areas as diverse as ecotourism, agriculture and cleaner manufacturing processes.
Major features of the ESD Strategy include initiatives to:
endorse the ESD goal, objectives and principles and review of relevant agencies to
incorporate these in charters and corporate plans;
4702 
enhance the role of integrated and total catchment management in policies and
programs; adopt a fisheries ecosystem management approach;
promote adoption of best practice envirornental management by industry and
whole-life-cycle methodologies by industry, and prepare a strategy for the
environmental management industry;
ensure mine sites are rehabilitated to sound environmental and safety standards;
incorporate ESD principles in tourism strategies;
establish criteria for access and use of protected areas consistent with ESD
principles and objectives;
extend the National Residues Survey to cover wildlife and the wider environment;
finalise a national biological diversity strategy for consideration by Heads of
Government; develop a national approach to the protection of rare, vulnerable and endangered
species; assess the current rate of native vegetation clearing on a national basis;
review national and sector balance sheets in Australian National Accounts;
improve the coverage and effectiveness of the Environent Impact Assessment
process; consider the need for a national approach to coastal issues following the Resource
Assessment Commission's coastal zone inquiry;
improve management of water allocations and determine the most appropriate mix
of water resource management mechanisms;
ensure waste disposal costs reflect externalities;
establish an intergovernmental consultative forum for RD&amp; D; and
establish an intergovernmental Ministerial-level Roundtable and establish ad hoc
advisory bodies 4703 
The Council also endorsed the National Greenhouse Response Strategy ( NGRS) and
committed governments to a range of actions aimed at limiting greenhouses gas emissions
and reducing the level of uncertainty which is associated both with climate change
predictions and the actions needed to tackle the problem. Greater effort will also be given
to enhancing our capacity to adapt to climate change and involving interested community
sectors in the future development of greenhouse responses.
The first phase responses are mainly in the areas of energy production, distribution and
use. This reflects the level of understanding of greenhouse gas emission mechanisms in
these areas, and the reasonable scope for taking no-regrets actions. The measures
included are consistent with the broader micro-economic reforms already underway in the
energy sector.
The NGRS; is broadly consistent with existing policies and programs, although it gives
greater impetus to energy efficiency reforms both in the energy production and use
sectors. Major features of the Greenhouse Strategy are initiatives to:
promote more transparent and accessible energy markets
develop and apply an integrated least cost approach to energy planig
improve linkages between energy costs ( including externalities) and prices
diversifying energy sources
improve household, industrial and commercial energy efficiency
improve efficiency of motor vehicles
establish a National Greenhouse Advisory Panel ( NGAP)
develop a National Greenhouse Gas Inventory
Community involvement will remain central to the future development of both the ESD
and Greenhouse Scrategies. As part of the monitoring and review process, the ESD
Steering Committee and the National Greenhouse Steering Committee will report to
Heads of Government within twelve months, and biennially thereafter, on the
implementation of the Strategies seeking input and comment from key business and
community groups.
In addition to the intergovernmental Ministerial-level ESD consultative roundtable, to be
held biennially as established under the Strategy, the Commonwealth will continue to
hold more frequent ESD Roundtable meetings to provide opportunities for dialogue with
community representatives at the peak national level.
8 DECEMBER 1992 CANBERRA
4704
I 



TEL A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW/ TALKMACK WITH PET~ ER KENNEDY/ GERRY
WWkNONI ABC RADIO 8 DECEMBER 1992
Z AND OE PROOF ONLY
KENNEDY; Prime Minister, with regard to yesterday's
meeting of the Council of Australian Government you must have
been disappointed that not even the Labor States aided with
you ont theS issue of industrial relations reforms.
PM: They did on the one part but not another. That
is there are two parts of this, That in that we extend or
make It easier for people to have access to the federal
lurisdiction of the Arbitration Commission where no arbitral
structure exists. Thie is nationwide legislation but for
instance In Victoria, the thing which would trigger it would
be when the awards under the Kennett government expire in
March, Victorian employees can seek coverage and have an award
made to protect them by the Industrial Relations Commission.
Vow it seemed to me the Labor states were not so much worried
about that, they were a bit worried about the legislation
under what we call the external affairs power that was
legislation giving effect to ' International Labour Organisation
conventions on equal pay, minimum rites of pay and
terminations of conditions. But they have got nothing to fear
from that, an4 the other thing is Australia has ratified these
conventions, They were all ratified with the agreement and
consultation of the States and we are legislating to impose
international minima. So I said to them how could you object,
does anyone object to it being equal pay for equal work or
minimumr rates of pay or proper redundancy in termination
axrangemezfts, KENNEDY: You said at the lunchtime news conference that
you wanted to legislate onl some of these-issues before
Christmas. Are you still going to be able to do that?
PM, We have got a very large legislative load and
the drafting task is always, With a thing like this,
considerable. But if we can got it drafted In we will, but we
TEL.: Dec. 92 15: 56 NIo. 038 P. 01/ C 
TEL
2.
PM: ( cont'd) may noat. We certainly will get the extension of
the Arbitration Commission prerogative, that legislation in.
But see the important thing about all this Peter is this, the
States in a sense are worried about their patch.' Mhat I have
got to worry about is the rights and entitlements of
Australian working men and women and what the Victorian
government has done is unconscientable. Come March people
have got no rights at all, no rights. You take the contract,
Individual contract, or you take the sack and there is no
minimums which will protect them. There is no rights to
redundancy arrangements if they don't appear at work it's an
industrial action they can be fined. They have got no rights
whatsoever and that is what I am worried about and that id
what the government sought to protect.
XE4NEDYI How important in your industrial relations
strata g was the need to head off continued Industrial action
especially in Victoria which could have Cost you electoral
support? pXg z think what we have said to the Victorian
community and its workfoarce is, look while the Kennett
government is running the sort of small business
organisation's agenda trying to strip working people of any
roipgphotrst uwnihtyat sotoev ebre, cwoev ewreidll beyx tean df etdoe rayol u aewnahradn. ced I tahcicneks s thanedy
have thought well good enough and therefore the widespread
dispute which we would have had this week with a power strike
in Victoria they have I think quite Wisely but sensibly called
off.
IGANNON a Let's take some callers Prime Minister.
JOHN: In the committee stages of the tax law
amendment file number bill in 1988 on 2 November Paul* Keating
stated the amendments that the government agrees to accept are
designed to guarantee that the tax file number sygtem is
completely voluntary. They ensure that every person when in
all Circumstances retain the right to elect to have tax
witheld at source rather than quote their number. Taking into
account comments reported by yourself in The Australian
newspapar some months ago regarding the WA Royal Commission
and TIN fishing trips, could you please explain the
dragnotting that the Department of Social Security is
indulging in and why my invalid support pension was cut two
months ago because of my refusal to comply with the request
for a TFN7 Is this what is meant by voluntary in your quoted
statement on 2 November 1988?
PM: The voluntary means that you have the right to
get a tax f ile number and to use that or you elect to have
deductions taken at source. That's where the voluntary
quality comes in and most people of course have a tax f lie
number and therefore that witholding at source doesn't Occur.
That's what meant, simple as that. TE: Dec .92 15 : 56 1, o 038 P. 02/ 1-
TEL: Dec .92 115: 6 No .038 P. 03/ C
3. IIIENs What concerne me more than anything is the
health problem that we have, It's all very well f or Xedicare
and all that sort of thing but we here in Kalgoorlie we have a
wonderful hospital, good administrators, nurse., whatever we
need. But not sa long ago the hospital administration had to
close a ward because there wasn't sufficient money to run it.
we are lacking in doctors because we are s0 f ar f rom the
medical centre which is Perth. What is in it and what's going
to happen especially for the pensioners please? That is my
question I am a bit worried about that.
P1 As you know Medicare is a national health
insurance system. It covers the provision of medical servi~ ces
with doctors and also access for patients to public hospitals.
Medicare is not the management system for the public hopsital
system they are managed by the States and what the government
has proposed in the new Medicare agreement# which will now run
for 5 years, in the Budget, we proposed in the Budget to pay
the States another $ 300 million a year or $ 1,500 million over
years for enhanced access by public patients to public
hospitals. That is to make the taking of public patients into public
hospitals more 4ttractive and I am pretty confident thoe
agreements will be signed and it will mean I think that those
particularly elderly patient. who may have a need of elective
surgery of some kind, it means that their access should be
speedier through the public hospital system because it will be
more in the inttere8s of the public hospital system to take
them. Now of course some people will wisely insure themselves
as well but the insurance helps In relation to elective
surgery it doesn't matter that much of course for acute. It
you have got an acute condition you are rushed to a hospital
well then if you go in as a Medicare patient you go in
basically the same room and you are treated by the same
doctor. So these are all matters for judgement but we will
make the public system much better by providing to the States
$ 300 million a year for the next 5 years.
GANNONt So will that mean the prevention of the
scenario for isomebody who has got to wait a year oree 2
years for a painful hip replacement?
PM1 It should shorten it, it should shorten it
considerably because I think the States will then and as well
an that we provided yesterday as a matter of fact $ 50 million
to the States to reduce waiting lists by setting up systems,
computer systems, time management sytems in state hospital
administrations where perhaps you might have queuing at one
hospital but not at another where people's desire for surgery
can be accormodated at a range of hospitals within the city
for instance. So that was done yesterday. All this I think
should help very much in improving public patient access for
things like el. ective surgery. 
TEL: . Dec .92 15: 56 N. o .0
4. C3ANNON1 So you believe that there is still a lot of
scope in the state management of the hospital system for
improvement? PKI I think that is true of all systems but again I
think if the Commonwealth mAkes it more attractive for the
public hospitals to take public patients they will and by
adoption of this scheme yesterday on waiting lists it should
be that we won't f ind a position where someone has to wait
quite awhile at one hospital but at another there is virtually
no waiting time. We can arrange better the queuing more
effectively, more efficiently. Between the two it should make
a very big change.
TAPFYs What I Wanted to Speak to you about in that I
commend your action you have taken regarding the television
violence for our children. Were you influenced by the good
relations that you have and close knittedness(? with your
wife and your children?
PI The thing that influenced me on this was
exclusively my ownl experience with my children because I think
that when you sit down to watch a movie a 8.30 at night you
should be able to sit there with your family and not be
embarrassed by what you see, not have to go and switch the
dial to another channel or shoo the kids off to somewhere else
and that is why I think that what has been happening in
chasing ratings and revenue the TV stations have been pushing
the limits and the edges out to what was acceptable In terms
of violence for showing it at 8.3Opm.
Now what has happened now we have now developed two
categories. First of all we have developed a sole -single
classification system for video, film and TV aQ that the
commonwealth film censor will determine what classification
goes on a f ilm to go in the theatres. That will be the same
classification that goes in the video shops and it will be the
same classification that goes on TV. Afd essentially what it
will mean is that what used to be called AO or adults only on
Tv will now be split into a category called 24 for mature
audiences which is the softer part of AO and the harder part
will be called &amp; XA and they can only be shown after 9. O0pm. So
what it means is one system, so everyone will know more
accurately what is in the film and at 8.3Opm, for an B. 3Opm
showing which is now nearly every night of the week in most
Australian cities people will not see the violence they would
have seen three months ago.
GANNONt so you were influenced by your own family
situation and your own family viewing habits?
PM1 I watched them, I see what my kids have on and
I watch them like hawks you see to switch of f the things which
are violent and i don't think they want to see them and
children 7 and 11 and 13 they shouldn't be subjected to that 13 F .04/ C 
TEL
S1 PXt ( cont'd) sort of etuff and particularly during the school
holidays I think TV stations should use a bit of snose about
what they show and to have kids sitting up obviously a little
bit later in the school holidays watching stuff which is quite
violent is just not a goer. So my children are seeing less
and less TV by virtue of the fact that a lot of it is not
worth watching. I hope this changes.
GERRYs In the light of this country's desperate need
for foreign currency, tourism and offshore business, how can
the government JustiLy the difficulty being enCOuntered in the
UK in relation to visitors'_ visas? Regular family visitors
now have to renew visas annually and a business friend and
frequent visitor applied to extend a 2 year visa to a 3 year
one and got a 6 month visa instead. ' Why are we making it so
hard for visitors and business to help us make ends meet?
Immigration control is one thing, cutting oft our noses to
spite our face is another don't you agree?
PM: Who could not agree with that but I am not
familiar with what change we have made there but I don't think
that anybody that wants to come to this country as a visitor
has any real problem and countries do run Immigration laws to
suit their national interests and I am sure many Australians,
it wasn't that many years ago when people from so called
commonwealth countries had ease of access into Britain but now
what you find is that when you arrive at Heathrow it is the
Suropean Community queue that has ease of access Into Britain
and all the colonials wait on a long line. Now we don't do
that to anybody no I don't think access Into Australia is a
problem and whatever the visa arrangements might be they are
not onerous.
JOHNI my question relates to the goods and services
tax. I am a self funded retiree and have some distinct
reservations on the GST and I also believe that many of the
initiatives that you undertook in your early years as
Treasurer made a very positive contribution to this country.
However, on the GST maybe the electorate has a short memory
but in 1985 a GST was your special project, your baby, you ran
with it, you fought for it, I think you called it the
Taxcard(? 7 Ok you lost out to the ACTU. NOW in respect of
this and the fact that now is a period of record low inflation
I submit that your credibility in opposing this tax now is
lea than
PM. Let me explain
JOHNs Could I just finish my question. My question
is that in the event that Dr Howson wins the election and a
GST is introduced would you give an undertaking that as
opposition leader that you would campaign Ln the 1996 election
for its abolition? T. Dec. 92 15: 56 No. 038 
TEL
PXI Let me just explain things this way. In the
middle 1980o the former government, the Liberal government of
which Dr Hewbon wag a principal adviser to John Howard, left
the tax system in a dreadful state of haemorrhaqe. Very few
people in the Australian tax administration felt, it had been
left in neglect for so long, it was capable of repair. so
perhaps a gloomy view was we want to collect it when they
spend its Let's Put on a consumption tax because we won't fix
the direct side tax system and we have a very large budget
deficit to fund. Two things, 1 when the GS? was denied to me
because the f act I couldn't give the guarantee that the
inflationary effect wouldn't go into wages and I Might say Dr
Hewson certainly can't give that guarantee.
it a Labor Treaeurer under an Accord couldn't give the
guarantee to have the workforce discount the 06T for inflation
certainly a conservative leader could never give such a
guarantee, anyway leave that point to one side. When it was
denied to me I then decided to repair the tax system, coot and
branch on the direct side with things like the fringe benefits
tax, the taxation of capital gains where most tax schemes
relied upon the non taxation of capital gains, Changes to the
tax system in terms of a whole range of concessions. The
abolition of entertainment as a deduction, a whole stack of
things which have now Made the Australian direct tax system
one of the most secure in the world. In the intervening
period we also reduced the site of the public sector
commonwealth spending by about $ 20 billion a year from about
28/ 29% of GDP to 23.
So by the time I finished and that is a couple of years ago we
had A very small public sector, a much smaller level of
spending therefore requiring much loes tax. We had a direct
side tax system which was as tight as Any in the western
world, a tax share to * GDP the second lowest of the 27
countries of the OECD so you ask yourself the question why do
" s need a consumrption tax? The conumption tax's period has
passed and to now take the macro economic risk of pushing
another 6 or 7 percentage points into inflation and then
seeing it go onto wages and then into ongoing inflation and a
6 or 7 percentage point addition to interest rates that will
come with it in now not worth doing.
it's quite wilful, no Liberal leader can give a guarantee that
the price effect of a consumption tax won't go into wages and
into ongoing inflation and interest rate.. And if you can't
give the guarantee it's just vandalism to proceed with it. I
couldn't give the guarantee in the middle 000 and I gave it up
but now we don't need the thing. We have got the second lowest
tax share in CDP in the total economy in the whole of the
OEcD. We have now got a very tight direct side tax system, we
don't need a tax in consumption, we don't need an expenditure
tax and that is the reason why I have opposed it.
T: E; L.: 1 iec. 92 15: 56 No. 038 P. 06/( 
7.
GANI4ONs So if there is A Change Of government next
election, in 1996 at the following election what would be yotm
attitude to GS'r?
PM: I am happy to say with today's polls I don't
think there is going to be a change of government and I think
the Australian public understand very clearly that this Means
a very large impost on gill, look the Liberals have got two
very nasty policies. They want to lift tax and cut wages,
they want to lift tax by a consumption tax and they want to
cut wages like Jeff Xennfltt is doing in Victoria with his
single employment contracts. They will drive 8 million
Australians onto single employment contracts which each person
has to then negotiate with themselves without the protections
of awards, without protections as to minimums and I believe
that such a policy prescription will mean that basically the
Coalition is not going to be elected so I am happy to may I
thinkc they are ntot going to arise,
1( KENEDYt You mentioned today's polls Prime Minister, a 7
point lead f or Labor and a 13 point break on Dr Hewson as
preferred Prime Minister, you must be regretting you didn't
take John Dawkinls' advice and go to a poll before Christmas?
LL. 8. Dec. 92 15: 56 No. 038 P. 07 
TEL IsD'. 21? IN. 06F0'
GGt Well you meatload taft's poib Prim Miulsiar a 7 point lead htr Liabs,
and a 13 point break on Dr Nw.. as pnhmd ? ulue Ministr. You ovat
be. alprvtting you didn't take Jobs Dawkin's advice and go to a poll before
ChristutD
PM: That poll today Is good for us, as I maid sadler In tke year I think the publie
are entitled to see the Parliaments; ran their cooan&amp; This Goverment was
decW three yonarsaIn Mwh of IM amd that thireesyears bjust about
eomins up In so s lon*
G It is coming up for both Dr Lawrence I. Western Australia and youruulf
federally, you must go to the polls earty nhut year, Is It going to be a case ot
ladies before gentdment
PM I don't know# It depends when Caninev wants to put her' toe Wno the pond, so
to speak.
CPO Ru, t you * ould be chaig at the Wit woulnt you, for a poll InF ebruary
Next yoo?
PMO: No. I will see what Is happening lIn the general politkal envir'onment and
when it la opportune hbr the Government and make a decision about It.
GGi Dvi the longer you leave it the greater the chance Dr Rewson and the
Coalition hae of peggin you back.
PM.: I think the longer we are having It, In a sense, the mere opportunity we have
to peg him bedL
MG Hoaw do you momn by that. because the polls show you are clearty in front?
PM: But If you look at that tmte months ago, we wene not as far in front as we are
now. Tb. loer we have gone the better we have gont.
GGi now do you explais the gap that you bave opened uap In these polls with
unemiploymeuat at muth at high level, and possibly likely to go higher?
PM:-I think peopl think that the Liberul Party doesn't have Noy answers. Can I
just make this point what Is their policy? Their policy Is a simple tax switch
M= u Incomet to uemdiurs, thay a" e goig to tax people's food and clothing,
thi evices. and they ane ogo o~ gve thei proeeds to the abolition of
pyrob tax ad thy aftgansto try to cut the price of petroL Does anyone
In Aualla you don't have to be an economic ain. to understand this
point, and that Is this th* at abolishing pay Me tax and cutting the price of
.92 1-0: 1-4 Ho .046 F. 02/ 1 
TEL Dec -' 92 I'W: 1-' 10. U40
ps" sethMeSlo to reallmsAVWtIa What Is plg to remkAutrulasb
a Gomeom being hnv* s Ia ad of * ha sctos thAt ane rally poing to
thamp the Onae, th abar machi IMe we wone At the Prems Comfleucte
yesterday In wowu.~ Is the Provisin of power In ustablahiag a prope
*"* rat hor eleteMlitY Eastern Austrlia These ane the things which have
a role for Gaomeut. Now, Pet we aM already growing fliter than any
ote country is the OED9 we are growing a: 2 per cost a yeare Many of
the other countries, Japan lost week went into at recsion I think many
peoplelIn Australia now undertand and know that the sconomy Is growing.
that employment will pick up and that the big structural change, the
reorientation into Asia, the rebuilding or our education system. all of thewe
things areW thinlgs the Government is doing and the thiap Australia needls
to be does that wel't be cured by is simple tax switch.
GG: But you need a growth rate of) 3 per cent, don't you, to prevent
Unemployment from rising?
PM:. Around 3, yes that to true. But we are already over 2, we hove had fiblu
quarters of growth to 2.1 pop' ent and our tbrecast is fbr that to accelerat.
That being the case, we wED start to see employment rising. having then Its
impact on neemployment, a fkvourable Impact on unemployment, I think the
Gommetumt hasm structmr Is piece It has changed Australia, It is stil
changing Autratl I think that many people think the sterile policies of
Dr Huwsoe's onth. OST and cutting wages to not a solution.
Cro: I anderstand you have a temple 0kmist to sped with metropolitan listeners
after the news, we wIB be happ to a" i of that, Pime Minister, in the mean
time It Is new, time. 9 O'clock.
Thank you Gerry.
GG: The Prime Minister' is still with os, Prime Minister, on the 19th of December
you mark one year in the job as Prime Minister, bow would you look back
and how would you charaCterl.. that year?
i'M: it h" s been a year . f quit substantial1 change. We put togethe the One
N atioa package emullr In the year to Isoulat, the economy and to'get It
moving and I thick we succeeded In that because In the oAtional accounts
whicb came out last week, the firs bit of objective evidence for the year, on#
of the large contributors, the largest contributor to Vvwth is what Is called In
the jargon, public demand, which means the public sector has been pulling
the economy Along. So the strategy, I think, has worked and Is working. As
weln a that we have baen able to cntinu. the enormous Changes which the
Government introduced I the'Sb, we did so much this year. For instance,
we established a national training authoriy In the One Nation package to 
TEL : De Cj. Z I. . VZ4 IAremtode
tot* alor TAfl ad iaoeai eodmetsa s01em noa wil be
dw greatgat ehangsl probxWly of te yea W" ic w# wig an or thu net So
or 30 years ad will SMk a h~ zp differele to the educstlu of AWMatala
kids The deglt. of the * 11w system. eidt" Quite take over
Australian sadbecome sit Integrated ntioiiI And interqational canter,
Anseft MOW appleg $ 0 11eC IN! the eftod 1tersathaal carnior wheom
fbrrnally we only had ats. So we are poing to have real competition is
AWiation which we have never reekl bad bofsva A mew depredation S&amp; heule
for moxtion fbr busle.. which I thisk b is ng a difeatcen to the eco" omy.
It has bees a lowr of very substantial changes and the Government is to
getting those chan". lfte plume At y. eody's Pumiders Conference, we
teade a lot of deciuloe, &amp; n apon power generton end dlatribution, water
quality, x range of those sort of national hate which years ago you woUlnst
baet" touched one Ina des" dorone Iul20yer. We an doing four and five
Major things Ilk this In our waery yea.
GMi Ut160shave beesdeierfWa the " d f t Aof coaity, doyou apect
this rapid chapg to continue throughs the ' 9fs' lit a reform program that
has to be drivn sloWg
It JhostbutltIlak we arenow qute wellWup, Asias thefastut gwing
part of the werldo we mr better placed now is the Asian ame than we have
over boos. Ina terms of doe ecoamy yaw we exported aswiy 15 per cent
of ad we Produce. Pearly a quxrtr of everyting we produced we exportsd.
A decade ago that was 14 per cent. You cAu just Imagine where we would be
now if we were only expartlag 14 per cent of whao we prodiume No thu
pVth of As Ould tq Austra lMu providing we aire set up to ciploit
1te and we are.
O; G: Thattrade debt tog, I man t tilgrowing. i s stilla mansiv
problef. flow ton It be reigne lot
PMN: But the debt servicing ratio, our capacity to pay for ht has been coming down,
and that ham been coming dows as our trade peuftrinamce, improves. There is
only out way out of any these problem that Is bazisicl Srwjwth and trade.
The Goverauent is committed to growth antd It Ib committed to malting
Autralia a competitive society and I beiieve that our greatest comparitive
advantage Is going to be In edueationg That biwhy now nearly children in
comsplete secondar schooL Whes I became Treasurer it was onliy3 In
44) per cent ot thosu are now streamed through aniveretles and the big
weakness, voc~ ational education, TAM! only 29 per centi of' kis tw art
TAFE or vocationaki educated, we hope that will be " 0 per cent by about the
year 2000.20&amp; 5 
GGi But there haven't bee johe for young pooe hi th lad w yu ad t
has bee . me argument put ftrward for the hiher retutio rate. When wiN
thos jobs steel 1 aper
PMs I don't tkink that Is quito gt Ptev. In 0 thO we Wa piety of jobe thee
for young people whon the economy w" s groing strongly, It has sowed up
lately, but apis a lit of young people art finding jobs, partlularly these
Who raiNed so We eDWtOtWaut them, ButtW bitpointis that in a
much more " opletel educat4d R* tl educated societ wheun tho edued.. o
lievels are higher yovag people ake their owe Job apportuuites. They winl
be the cmployere they will be the people who are Actually out thene creating
the sew businessca Tbo Idea, tht we have got to have trained M&amp; d sitn
waetds# ftr someone, to tome along to employ thet%, every other country
which has Investd in educato wil MW that it Is the traed kide that
actually end tup empleyig theoiselves and others. The spring In the step of
the country will come from the education systeda and Labor ba totally
traosforoWeducation Inthieommty. Now efhd you tor claim tobe A
smart country or at capable coustry, or a country to esploit the opportuitIs
we have In the Aula-Paelftc with only 3 WinI 10 completing secondary
sthoolt Tut iswhat sWs 6Ies soni
GGO: But Mea'te Miniter, what do you say to the almost one afton who are
unemployed tWay, asaotfW hom feed that they will never work again? The
changes that you talk about, that you have preakdad of this pant year, they
lon nothing to thoue peowle to Pol* shtin BEolc om and uep today
that havec been out of work for two yeahs, how do you transate all of that
dowa to their level?
IPM:. Gerry, * hat happened to the ' llf ther was a bape amount oftpowth and
expenditure and a big growth in credit, not just In Avowtalla, in the Unitedi
Sates, Japas Dritain, Germany, all reod the would. When the credit
Stowtt stopped, whon the music tpped we fbund our companies and our
Industries very heavily Indebted, or as they s highly leverailed. It bas
taken About it wonths to 2 yeas' longer than I think ay of as expected to
deleirerass those cmpanies, that's what is happening Io the United States
today, that Is what is happening In Japan today. Bat I am happy to jay In
Australia we ar. reaching the point now whene the balance between equity
and debt ina bose isb ow getting back to a proper balance and we are
starting to see Australian companies look around for opportunities, and as
that happens the growth will Isa" spin. If yOu look at our unemploymnt
rate, roughly halt of it comes brm the down cycle in the economy and half of
it coon. from the strctura change of the churanig of different Industries. It
Is called cydleal and structural unemploymentL If we can pull the first one
down, the cycle, as the economy pick$ up to get that I11 per Met
unzeiplymtst rate, heading back towaid 5 and 6 we then bav. to work on 
TEL
the Wag run change to get it belo that. Tha Is the StUVtural ehange So
peopie shoWl not be % ae * war about Is. We bad huge esu seat in the
' 0 mwe 110p40Osf t) b. tIhlAk&amp; a0t 4490010hhvptweuftebd
with Aa or market f 6mlon in 33, Xtoday that is Gilliw seit
quarter baw, we have kept mauty all of thee JAolaSre we have get it
per eent unwuploymeat and we had nearly 11ia IM, but we had 1I pea otea
in ' 83 off a level of6 aifli. we have lot IIper ceat loyof Or levelof
miloto. It's she old rates and levels eamparisoaso So# Austrabl Is a am~
tfll employed couatry today and most of the jobs or the ' S8s we have kept.
what ehave now got to do toetbee is A" dto them We we UM to,
the with pw~ s. got You win OnlIy gr owt In a cooperative
giwlronwent* you wonu't Pet It by bauke* l cowering People This Is die Pela
that I make about the Liberal ? artys they want to cower people, knmoff9
their minimum rataes condltlas reduades rogb of appeals, the paJ
award protections The way we are SAMn to get Australia work iIs by
everybody workisig togotber to a sot of sational objuefvae jult a Japan ha.
done, Kome bas der. Sinapor boo doe% Germany bad don%, United
States is now, under Clinton, starting to do. I think that Is what we have got
to do, $ o It haspgt to be aa eatlveefforto and thatlIswhy the big
community things lik we were dealing with yeeterday at the Prosion
comference Are the thkog which are $ Wng to Matter.
G you have lot about 2 atlnutesleft witht us, let's see It wee oqau emivns ne
ortwo callso This Is 7usd
Caller. Good mor* Prim* Mainr I would like to Ask a questin of you It I may
about superuxuatiosn and the GB?. I wanted to aske Mr Chaney lass we* l
but I could't aed on. 1 retred In M InV1 ictortsand I rofletl over a lamp
sum In the State supersionuatiod ftmd of Victoria. Now that Is payable In
September of 1994 and It will be about $ 300000 payout. Now recenty Ini
Paullament t beard you may tht I WOWl haVe to pay 54000 tax on that
5300,000 under the GST and at present I am told It will be less then $ 15,00.
Isthatgo?
pm, Well what it iseants kthis, that any block of savings. a of the day of the
introduction of the GST, are stomadully diftinished by the price effkct of
the GST because they simpl buy less Ini t eonoray. go there I&amp; a one oft
loss to savings which will never be replenished, that was the point I was
muakinig. Could I just duke thh associated point, there will also be a
continuing Ins" to savings In the desig of Skit GST uander the Liberals. So
tuere is an unavoidable, one off los Wo anyone who is Iblvn off their savings,
someone who Is eaperemuuated as yous are or anyone living from the Income
off a block of savings, those savings ' wM simply buy teso and eamn lae day one
upon the lutroductios of a GBT. 
TEL: D c. 3 4 Iq
GG: u i Ist it~ t aut is pw CM Igs, Igi Itm s6m 1b ae 20pm e." I
IF 1 Pke effet wil be Aaot &amp; T Per eat.
GQ 4.7 per est sftqilag to the Ijbsmb.
PM: YOsN but tha dowa't 1* 0lud Medicare thir aboliion of Medicare and the
fact that you W# v to prmvtel timp. -no T euyes estiMAte is that wfyou
Pal the health changes ' a the 092 effect Or the so0eaLW PlghtSc Ppag Is
6-7 per ceuftp polns, whih is sabesmuua
GO:-RaVe YOU got t1i0e for oue more? Let's Nake ft Peter fom DtUaCraig he Wel
be our last caler. Good morgig t$ you Pete,.
Cafler: Kelo
G; Peter you aire on.
Callmr Thank yoo very much
GGL, Your question to the Prime MIGISte piDase he Is unstiug oPut Of tiMLs
CAlley' Prime Minister I Would Ilk. to sMY tha I Am WerON that would im to po
into busins. Now I havea hous worth abWet $ 150,000 I can misn
$ 100,000 On thil house and to Into it busioess, but It I do that mwd them latw
or within two years your Goveusseot Inraes inttendts" ls not onl
would I lose the business but I would los the houue U tbgft Ay poulblflt,
ever, that you could put say a two year moratorium an lateral rates?
PM: One Or the t0Ovenslf feacrl In intereut rates is the Underlying rate of
Inflation, so obviously It Inflation were to rise it would have a Imupact upon
Interest ftts, ButI think At this 09tag we are at A stag in the cycle Where
inflation Is down, and I think will stay down, so it is probably the beut lons
run, low interest rat&amp;, low nominal laterest rate horimo we have0 seen for
some time. Rlat I think the beet thing for you to do would be to thy to securt
some 00dium sesm fimRAmee YOU Could4 tak IQs some debt now an a five year
basis taking admapg of the prevalil ioteaeat rates, which will give you
quite ssabstlmtWa Protcto 600a145t somse Iovement Ina Margins over the
Period. Now It may cost youm a ts premium to Pick up A five year fkinal
medWIu tgrm finance package, but you could do it rather than be left to the
vagaries of fletiuug rate debt.
GG; Ok, thARIks fbr your tall Petr And to the Print* Minister thank you for your
generosity With your time this moming, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER FOR KEIDANREN MISSION
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
WEDNESDAY, 9 DECEMBER 1992
Mr Itoh, Ambassador Hasegawa, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to welcome Keidanren's Economic Exchange
Promotion Mission to Australia.
The Australian Government and business sector value
highly the close relations we have enjoyed with Keidanren
over many years.
We recognise Keidanren's pre-eminent position among
Japan's national business organisations.
We admire the broad and long-term view your organisation
takes of your country' s economic circumstances.
Both with regard to an unending process of economic
restructuring within Japan, and the evolving challenges
you face in the international economic environment.
During my visit to Japan last September, I had an
opportunity for private discussions with your Honorary
Chairman, M4r Eishiro Saitoh, and other senior business
leaders.
Mr Saitoh's personal experience of the Australia-Japan
economic relationship spans more than four decades, and
he brings a great deal of understanding and authority to
our joint interests.
He spoke warmly about the contribution that Australia's
reliable supply of raw materials and energy has made to
industrialisation in Japan.
For our side too, trade with Japan has been a crucial
component in Australia's economic advancement.
Our two countries enjoy a truly mature and diversified
economic partnership.
4752 
The bilateral trade relationship, now worth almost
billion US dollars a year, is one of the principal
sinews of economic interdependence in the Western
Pacific. But there can be no room for complacency about past
achievements at a time when the Australian and Japanese
economies face severe challenges both at home and abroad.
Your mission to Australia is well timed.
You have the opportunity to observe the effects of
historic changes in both the economic performance and
attitudes of Australians.
During the 1980s, we embarked on an irreversible process
to open our markets to the world, and to make our economy
more internationally competitive.
We now export approximately 23 per cent of total output
compared with 14 per cent in 1983.
Our rate of taxation to GDP is now one of the lowest
among OECD countries, virtually the same as Japan's.
We have transformed ourselves from a high inflation
nation to a very low inflation nation.
We have increased our competitiveness by well over one
tenth.
We have replaced industrial disputation with a
cooperative system which has delivered the lowest level
of strikes for 30 years.
We are moving away from the centralised fixing of wages.
We have decided to make most wage settlements by
negotiation, and at the enter~ rise level.
We expect more than half the workforce to be covered by
enterprise bargains by the middle of next year.
During your visit, you have no doubt seen something of
the current political controversy about labour relations
in the State of Victoria.
The difference between the Australian Government and our
political opponents is that our side puts emphasis on
encouraging change and improved productivity through
consultation and respect for basic labour conditions
rather than by adopting a confrontationist approach.
Recession and restructuring have caused unacceptably high
levels of unemployment. 4 7773 
This year, we have invested a great deal in measures to
alleviate the social and human consequences of
unemployment. The Australian economy is now growing at an annual rate
of about two per ceint in real terms.
This is among the fastest rates in the OECD but not yet
sufficient to bring unemployment down.
Those of you who knew Australia before will have seen
that attitudes have also changed markedly.
Despite setbacks and hardship, there is awareness in
Australia as never before that our standard of living
depends totally on how well we make our own way in the
world. As you have learned in Japan, change induces more change.
Australians now have a new sense of national identity.
The challenges which face us are inspiring a new sense of
national purpose.
The recession has set us back, but the Australian people,
I believe, recognise the worth of what they achieved in
the past few years, and are not willing to give these
things up. I
We have laid the basis for economic transformation.
We know the direction we have to go and I am confident
that the Australian people are determined on going that
way. We have a more confident view of our role in the
Asia-Pacific region.
We have a sharper awareness of the opportunities for us
to engage more closely with economic dynamism in East
Asia. Australians are now committing much greater resources to
education and training.
This is so we can better meet the demands of a modern,
internationally oriented economy.
We reco~ gnise that Australia's human capital provides a
comparative advantage in economic relations with the
rapidly developing economies to our North.
Earlier this week the State Premiers and I agreed to
develop a comprehensive strategy to promote the study of
Asian languages and cultures in Australian schools.
Already around 100,000 young Australians study Japanese.
4754 
AS Australia fully comes to terms with the potential of
our economic relations with the wider East Asian region,
the importance of relations with Japan is unlikely to
diminish. Japan still accounts for 28 per cent of Australian
exports, compared with 57 per cent for all East Asia.
Mr Itoh and colleagues, I trust that your mission will
return to Japan impressed with the vitality of the
bilateral relationship with Australia and the scope for
two-way expansion of trade and investment.
From the Australian Government's perspective, the
relationship with Japan is a corner-stone in the
development of our broader policy towards the Asia-
Pacific region.
Both our countries have a fundamental interest in the
maintenance of an open, non-discrimatory, multilateral
trading system and in the promotion of open regionalism
in the Asia-Pacific area.
A recent article by a senior Japanese official in a
journal published by the Japanese Foreign Ministry
attracted close attention here.
The author identified Australia as having the attributes
to be a key partner of Japan in promoting a desirable
form of economic integration in the Asia-Pacific region.
I should say for Australia's part that we are always
ready to work closely with the Japanese Government and
private sector to strengthen cooperation at both the
bilateral and regional levels.
Senior officials of the two Governments will be
discussing just these sorts of issues early in the new
year as a follow-up to my visit to Tokyo.
In responding to an increasingly fluid world trade
system, Australia has a core interest in maintaining the
most favourable possible environment for our bilateral
trade relationships with Japan and the other economies of
East Asia.
As I said in Japan in September, Australia will not be a
party to any trade arrangement which is directed against
Japan. But in all of this our aim should be to avoid an inwardlooking
relationship and work together to encourage the
most open possible processes of economic integration in
the Asia-Pacific region. 4755 
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC process is
a particularly valuable mechanism in this regard, because
it embraces the key economic linkages between the
countries of the Western Pacific and North America.
The interests of both Australia and Japan are best served
by ensuring that the Western Pacific and North America
remain part of the same thriving trading community.
Mr Itoh and colleagues, let me again welcome you to
Australia. And let me say on behalf of all the Australians here this
evening that we hope that your visit to Australia is both
professionally satisfying and personally enjoyable.
Thank you.
4756 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING
FICHTSACK UNRAVELS HOWARD HUMILIATED
Dr Hewson has tonight publicly humiliated his industrial
relations spokesman John Howard by directly contradicting
Howard's assurance that there would be no change to
industrial relations policy.
This morning Mr Howard circled the wagons around his
industrial relations policy and sent a message to the
Liberal leadership:
" Well, there certainly won't be any changes to our
industrial relations policy because our industrial
relations policy has the right balance of radicalism
with security and protection."
Only hours later, in an interview on A Current Affair, Dr
Hewson repudiated Mr Howard's claim by stating:
" We are keeping the industrial relations policy, but
we can have a look at it again, see whether we can't
improve it."
ThQ Liberal Party is now in utter disarray.
Their leader has panicked and in the panic Liberal and
National Party MPs are tripping over themselves to make
changes to Fightback.
Dr Hewson is now a leader in name only.
If we no longer need Fightback, if the once essential
prescription for Australia is no longer needed, then why
do we need Dr Hewson?
CANBERRA December 9 1992
TOOON 06" 8a'T : 131
&amp; M Am
A Vy 



TEL: 9. Dec. 92 11: 39 No. 006 P. 01/ 03
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF TIIE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, 9 DECEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I want to make some remarks to you about Dr Ilewson. What we've sccn in the
last 24 hours is, I think, the death of a political leader. Dr ficwson said Australia
needs these policies, I'll give you these policies that Australia needs. He is now
saying we don't need these policies. I say, therefore it follows we don't need Dr
Hcwson. Australia has no use for Dr liewson.
He told us that he would resign, " I'll resign", he said, " if any of these policics
change. I'm said to be inflexible, wcll I am. I'm not going to change. Fightback
will not be amended. It stands firm".
What you're seeing here is basically a politically-induced shift, a poll-induced
shift, yct Dr Hewson had the hide to say this morning on AM, " I came to politics
to do a job, I don't play the political game". Well, he's playing the political game
and the political game is very much at the public's expense.
Dr Ilewson said, " Fightback and I are inseparable". He implied if you fillet
Fightback, you fillet him. Well he's filleted Fightback and he's probably filleted
his backbone away with it.
But the truth of the matter is, like all cynicism the Liberal Party has always
displayed, you can take no notice of them. Whatever he says on the 18th would
not be what they do in government. If there's any lesson out of any of this, it is
whatcver he says it will not be as they would govern. Because in office hc would
do cxactly the sort of things he wantcd to do just as Mr Kcnnett demonstrated he
would do the kind of things which he wanted to do indicate to the public that he
was listening, that he'd taken heed of their concerns, in Mr Kcnnett's case, and then
procccdcd in the dead of night. Dr Hewson would do just the same. 
TEL: 9. Dec. 92 11: 39 No. 006 P. 02/ 0
2
T'his is only a political exercise on his part to move away from the policy that he's
had. After December 18 we'll still be left with the OST, a draconian industrial relations
policy, zero tariffs and savage cuts to social security spending. Dr Hewson will be
just as nasty and dangerous after the I 8th of December as he is today.
The difference, perhaps, between him and Mr Howard is Mr Howard said very
pointedly this morning, there'll be no changes to the IR policy. Meaning I'm
standing my ground oven if my leader isn't standing his. He is demonstrating what
he thinks leadership is all about.
Dr Hcwson, in the most extravagant of phrases, has committed himself to not
moving his policies. Those policies are going to shift. His commitments were
worth nothing. And his commitments in office would be worth nothing. He
would do to us just what he wanted to do, and cynically disregard commitments
which he gave the public on the way through,
What you are seeing is the Liberal Party and its Leader again in a state of
accelerated decline.
J: In the interests of Australia, why don't you just wait and see what he is proposing?
PM: Because he hasn't had the courage to give you the changes that he is proposing.
He has very weakly told you that he'll change his stance without telling you what
it is. And so he calculates that the change in his position is then, in public terms,
muted whilc you, members of the press, and the public wait to see what the detail
of the changes are. Dr Hcwson's changc is today, it's not on the 18th of December,
it's now.
J. If hc exempts food though, Mr Keating, from the GST, doesn't that make him
harder to beat?
PM: If he exempts food the UJST revenue falls by $ 5 billion, if he zero rates clothing,
fabric and footwear he removes a further $ 1.9 billion, if he zero rates the five
essential household scrvices of gas, electricity, water, postage and telephone bills,
that would reduce the GST by a further $ 1.3 billion. If he zero rates residential
construct ion, that's housing, he would reduce the OST revenue by a further $ 1.8
( billion). If he does those things, basically his policy has fallen to picces. The
whole rationale for the policy is in tatters. So that being the case, I go back to the
point I made earlier, if he's not going to give us the policies he says Australia
needs, why do we need Dr Hewson?
J: Mr Keating, on the basis of changes in circumstances, you changed economic
policy direction in the One Nation Statemcnt. Why can't John Hewson do the
same? 
TEL: 9. Dec. 92 11: 39 No. 006 P. 03/ 03*
3
PM; No, but hc said recently that he thought Australia was going to slip into a
depression. He didn't indicate any need, in fact in thc Parliament he was
reassrting that his policies were utterly correct. What the Government said was
that policy wasn't correct, what I said was that policy wasn't correct, that the
economy was slowing, this was last year, and that we needed a changc to fiscal
policy. The Government was open about that. He was saying, in the context of
this year, that we're actually slipping into a depression but was still standing by his
policy. He shifted because of the polls. He made his arrangements with the Press
Club yesterday, his Deputy Leader didn't even know that he'd made the
arrangements. His front bench don't know of the details. rm quite sure that people
like Mr Howard are seething over this.
J: Are you sorry you didn't go on December 19, Prime Minister?
PM: No, I think I'm not treating the public with the cynicism the Liberal Party has
always treated thc public with, and which they continue in thcir finest traditions to
do today.
J: it was a bit of misjudgment, wasn't it?
PM: Well, I think you better leave the judgements about political timing rve got two
right middle of 1987 and Fcbruary 1990 not bad going.
1: Doesn't this at least show that Dr Howson is now flexible, that he is listening to
people's concerns?
PM: Dr Hewson is looking at his political skin. I think he feared thc Parliament coming
back for two days and wanted to pre-empt his colleagues by not walking into the
Caucuas room without any policy shift, or without any shift in his stance, knowing
that his position in the polls is deteriorating. He's made the pre-emptive move, the
Liberal IParty have got to decide now whether they stick with him. He's promised
to resign. He said if the policies change, I go. Well he ought to make good his
commitment.
1: Will your Government now start looking at some possible policy changes? Ron
Boswell was saying this morning that the Liberals should now look at tariffs. Will
the Government be looking at tariffs?
PM: The point is you sce, that's what I'm saying the Liberal Party is now..
The tight policy stance, all the policies we've been told we needed are all up for
grabs the National Party is now trying to change the tariff policy, the Liberal
Party is shifting on its basic Fightback package, you've got obviously a leadership
tension there with Mr Howard saying ' I'm standing firm on industrial relations'.
All It means is, I go back to my opening words, Dr Hewson is a leader who I think
is now useless to Australia.
ends 



TEL: IO. Dec. 92 13: 07 No. L2 r. u
PRIME MINISTER
I'RANSCRJyf OF ThME PRIME MINISTE, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, I) FERN PARE, SYDNEY, 10 9 8 -1-11-0199
E OE PROOF COPY 7? e 4e~ A
3: 11.4 per c4ti uncmpluyvnnt
PM: It it a very disappointing figuro, vty dbjappontinfg, and fe only light we can e4
on that horizon is the inceas@ in vasancis which seems to be going on now quite
inexorably around Ibe cwby. But the tigrw= art volatik, we had unemployment
riing by onc per ccnt hi Quenslnd In a month and taing one per cent in Westan
Australia in a month , and obviousy tha's not bappencd.
1: The arcgatw fgurt is Am going up ln't it?
PmN But thc agaS~ tc3s are going up amid they art noi going to tn down until the
growth wc've got now des acelvrat.
Do you think that you have missed an opportunity by not going waziy to an
election? You've let the Coaltion off the book.
PM: No, no, the Coaition.. jt Inaot, whater problems we'vc got today with
unemploytnct, what wcmld we have if dicrc was a 15 per cent tax on cvCythtfl
or a Sbiflioncut to the BudgMt. Thchavo got nopokicy prripionsand what
John Hcwson's proven d&amp; wook is they don't even hive courge In the one they
bliwd in.
PM: But woy frg t tt'ityanth
P.% 4 Thy got frigh; that'sr it, they hrve takn ffiht, ftt's what has happec4 to them
ENDS 



TEL: 11. Dec. 92 15: 01 No. 044 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER 142/ 92
STATEMENT BY THEk PRIME MINISThR, THlE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
BA'XTLE OF GONA
All Australians should remember this week thc dcbt of gratitude they owe to the troops
who, exactly 50 years ago, overcame fierce defences to occupy the Japancse stronghold of
Gona, in Paptia.
Thc campaign in Papua did not end with the iccapture of Kokoda. It involved further
months of bitter fighting in malarial swamps, against anl increasingly desperatc enemy.
Thcre were 8,500 Australian and American casualties in the Papuan campaign. Twothirds
of thenm dicd in the battles for the Japanese beachheads around Gona, Buna and
Sanananda. These men died in vicious hand-to-hand fighting around thc Japanese
bunker-,; their Japanese opponents died rather than surrender.
I recall the words of Dudley McC'arthy, thc official historian, who wrote that the fighting
around Gona, Buna and Sanaiaiida was " so appalling that most hardened soldiers would
remember it unwillingly, and as their most exacting experience of the whole war."
Australians should rceember this week men such as Colonel Ralph Honner, who led his
militiamen across the Kokoda Track and into the maelstrom of Gona; men such as
_ Lieutenant Bob Sword, who served throughout the Kokoda campaign but who died
leading his platoon against the coastal machine-gun posts; and men such as Private A. J.
Skilbeck, who repeatedly crossed open ground under heavy fire, carrying mcssages and
wounded comrades.
These men were real Australian heroes.
While we all honour the men who fought on thc Kokoda Track, wc must never forget the
heroes who fought the Papuan campaign to its conclusion through tile vicious battlcs at
Sanananda, Du~ na and Gona.
Canberra December 1992 


10 December 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
I am very pleased to be here today at the launch of Australia's celebration of the 1993 International Year of the World's Indigenous People.
It will be a year of great significance for Australia.
It comes at a time when we have committed ourselves to succeeding in the test which so far we have always failed.
Because, in truth, we cannot confidently say that we have succeeded as we would like to have succeeded if we have not managed to extend opportunity and care, dignity and hope to the indigenous people of Australia the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island people.
This is a fundamental test of our social goals and our national will: our ability to say to ourselves and the rest of the world that Australia is a first rate social democracy, that we are what we should be truly the land of the fair go and the better chance.
There is no more basic test of how seriously we mean these things.
It is a test of our self-knowledge.
Of how well we know the land we live in. How well we know our history.
How well we recognise the fact that, complex as our contemporary identity is, it cannot be separated from Aboriginal Australia.
How well we know what Aboriginal Australians know about Australia.
Redfern is a good place to contemplate these things.
Just a mile or two from the place where the first European settlers landed, in too many ways it tells us that their failure to bring much more than devastation and demoralisation to Aboriginal Australia continues to be our failure.
More I think than most Australians recognise, the plight of Aboriginal Australians affects us all.
In Redfern it might be tempting to think that the reality Aboriginal Australians face is somehow contained here, and that the rest of us are insulated from it.
But of course, while all the dilemmas may exist here, they are far from contained.
We know the same dilemmas and more are faced all over Australia.
That is perhaps the point of this Year of the World's Indigenous People: to bring the dispossessed out of the shadows, to recognise that they are part of us, and that we cannot give indigenous Australians up without giving up many of our own most deeply held values, much of our own identity and our own humanity.
Nowhere In the world, I would venture, is the message more stark than it is in Australia.
We simply cannot sweep injustice aside. Even if our own conscience allowed us to, I am sure, that in due course, the world and the people of our region would not.
There should be no mistake about this our success in resolving these issues will have a significant bearing on our standing in the world.
However intractable the problems seem, we cannot resign ourselves to failure any more than we can hide behind the contemporary version of Social Darwinism which says that to reach back for the poor and dispossessed is to risk being dragged down.
That seems to me not only morally indefensible, but bad history.
We non-Aboriginal Australians should perhaps remind ourselves that Australia once reached out for us.
Didn't Australia provide opportunity.-and care for the dispossessed Irish? The poor of Britain? The refugees from war and famine and persecution in the countries of Europe and Asia? '
Isn't it reasonable to say that if we can build a prosperous and remarkably harmonious multicultural society in Australia, surely we can find just solutions to the problems which beset the first Australians the people to whom the most injustice has been done.
And, as I say, the starting point might be to recognise that the problem starts with us non-Aboriginal Australians.
It begins, I think, with that act of recognition.
Recognition that it was we who did the dispossessing.
We took the traditional lands and smashed the traditional way of life.
We brought the diseases. The alcohol.
We committed the murders.
we took the children from their mothers.
We practised discrimination and exclusion.
It was our ignorance and our prejudice.
And our failure to imagine these things being done to us.
With some noble exceptions, we failed to make the most basic human response and enter into their hearts and minds.
We failed to ask how would I feel if this were done to me?
As a consequence, we failed to see that what we were doing degraded all of us.
If we needed a reminder of this, we received it this year.
The Report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal.-Deaths. in Custody showed with devastating clarity that the past lives on in inequality, racism and injustice.
In the prejudice and ignorance of non-Aboriginal Australians, and-in the demoralisation and desperation, the fractured identity, of so many Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders.
For all this, I do not believe that the Report should fill us with guilt.
Down the years, there has been no shortage of guilt, but it has not produced the responses we need.
&nbsp;Guilt is not a very constructive emotion.
I think what we need to do is open our hearts a bit.
All of us.
Perhaps when we recognise what we have in common we will see the things which must be done the practical things. There is something of this in the creation of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation.
The Council's mission is to forge a new partnership built on justice and equity, and an appreciation of the heritage of Australia's indigenous people.
In the abstract those terms are meaningless.
We have to give meaning to " justice" and " equity" and, as I have said several times this year, we will only give them meaning when we commit ourselves to achieving concrete results.
If we improve the living conditions in one town, they will improve in another. And another.
If we raise the standard of health by twenty per cent one year, it will be raised more the next.
If we open one door others will follow.
When we see improvement, when we see more dignity, more confidence, more happiness &nbsp;- we will know we are going to win.
We need these practical building blocks of change.
The Mabo Judgement should be seen as one of these.
By doing away with the bizarre conceit that this continent had no owners prior to the settlement of Europeans, Mabo establishes a fundamental truth and lays the basis for justice.
It will be much easier to work from that basis than has ever been the case in the past.
For that reason alone we should ignore the isolated outbreaks of hysteria and hostility of the past few months.
Mabo, is an historic decision - we can make it an historic turning point, the basis of a new relationship between indigenous and non-Aboriginal Australians.
The message should be that there is nothing to fear or to lose in the recognition of historical truth, or the extension of &nbsp;social justice, or the deepening of Australian social democracy to include indigenous Australians.
There is everything to gain.
Even the unhappy past speaks for this.
Where Aboriginal Australians have been included in the life of Australia they have made remarkable contributions.
Economic contributions, particularly in the pastoral and agricultural industry.
They are there in the frontier and exploration history of Australia.
They are there in the wars.
In sport to an extraordinary degree.
In literature and art and music.
In al1l these things they have shaped our knowledge of this continent and of ourselves. They have shaped our identity.
They are there in the Australian legend.
We should never forget they have helped build this nation.
And if we have a sense of justice, as well as common sense, we will forge a new partnership.
As I said, it might help us if we non-Aboriginal Australians imagined ourselves dispossessed of land we had lived on for fifty thousand years and then imagined ourselves told that it had never been ours.
Imagine if ours was the oldest culture in the world and we were told that it was worthless.
Imagine if we had resisted this settlement, suffered and died in the defence of our land, and then were told in history books that we had given up without a fight.
Imagine if non-Aboriginal Australians had served their country in peace and war and were then ignored in history books.
Imagine if our feats on sporting fields had inspired admiration and patriotism and yet did nothing to diminish prejudice.
Imagine if our spiritual life was denied and ridiculed.
Imagine if we had suffered the injustice and then were blamed for it.
It seems to me that if we can imagine the injustice we can imagine its opposite.
And we can have Justice.
I say that for two reasons:
I say it because I believe that the great things about Australian social democracy reflect a fundamental belief in justice.
And I say it because in so many other areas we have proved our capacity over the years to go on extending the realms of participation, opportunity and care.
Just as Australians living in the relatively narrow and insular Australia of the 1960s imagined a culturally diverse, worldly and open Australia, and in a generation turned the idea into reality, so we can turn the goals of reconciliation into reality.
There are very good signs that the process has begun.
The creation of the Reconciliation Council is evidence itself.
The establishment of the ATSIC &nbsp;- the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission - is also evidence.
The Council is the product of Imagination and good will. ATSIC emerges from the vision of -indigenous self.- determination and self-management.
&nbsp;The vision has already become the reality of almost 800 elected Aboriginal Regional Councillors and Commissioners determining priorities and developing their own programs.
All over Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities are taking charge of their own lives.
And assistance with the problems which chronically beset them is at last being made available in ways developed by the communities themselves.
If these things offer hope, so does the fact that this generation of Australians is better informed about Aboriginal culture and achievement, and about the injustice that has been done, than any generation before.
We are beginning to more generally appreciate the depth and the diversity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures.
From their music and art and dance we are beginning to recognise how much richer our national life and identity will be for the participation of Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders.
We are beginning to learn what the indigenous people have known for many thousands of years how to live with our physical environment.
Ever so gradually we are learning how to see Australia through Aboriginal eyes, beginning to recognise the wisdom contained in their epic story.
I think we are beginning to see ' how much we owe the indigenous Australians and how much we have lost by living so apart.
I said we non-indigenous Australians should try to imagine the Aboriginal view.
It can't be too hard. Someone imagined this event today, and it is now a marvellous reality and a great reason for hope.
There is one thing today we cannot imagine.
We cannot imagine that the descendants of people whose genius and resilience maintained a culture here through fifty thousand years or more, through cataclysmic changes to the climate and environment, and who then survived two centuries of disposession and abuse, will be denied their place in the modern Australian nation.
We cannot imagine that.
We cannot imagine that we will fail.
And with the spirit that is here today I am confident that we won't.
I am confident that we will succeed in this decade.
Thank you
&nbsp;



T1EL0:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 01/ 10
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J KEATING MP
AT THE PRESENITATION OF THE BRW-ALCATEL BUSINESS AWARDS
PARK LANE HOTEL
SYDNEY, 10 DECEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very pleased to be able to join in celebrating the
achievements of some of Australia's finest enterprises and
entrepreneurs. So often we hear the doomsayers rattling around, the
jeremiabs projecting their own pessimism and self-loathing
on to the rest of the Country.
it is good to be as I often ami among people who by their
actions prove the opposite.
To re-mint an old conservative phrase, there is a silent
majority in Australia a silent majority of ders out
there.
Men and women who are going about the business of businesslooking
for opportunities, changing where change is needed,
adapting, developing and, in difficult times, succeeding.
It is a pleasure to have the chance to congratulate them.
We need their success. We need their example.
in Australia it's always a tough audience.
In sport, art and business it's the same the gloom
merchants are perched there like crows with the words
III told you Sol'-already formed in their mouths.
it's the Hanrahan syndrome -the " we'll 811 be rooned"
syndrome. But they are a minority. And, anyway, it's not so much in
their natures as in their Interests to be pessimists.
I TEL 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 02/ 10
2
in fact, in my experience, the great majority of Australians
are much more forgiving, much more realistic, and have much
more faith in themselves and their country.
And I think they have good reason to.
In the past decade Australians have recognised the need for
dramatic change, and they have had the imagination and the
will to make it. They continue to.
They have also recognised the need for continuity of
decent values, of the bases of equity and fairness.
That to me is proof of common sense, and the best possible
assurance of the future of Australia.
My typical Australian is a mixture of common sense and
flair. The stoic and the bold.
That seems to define most of our legendary figures from
Ned Kelly to Allan Border.
it might even define Bob Gottliebsen.
it defines most of the successful business people I speak
to.
And, in all likelihood, it defines the people we are here to
congratulate tonight.
Being the people they are, of course, none of them will be
resting on their laurels.
There are many opportunities out there for innovative-. firms.
many rewards to be had.
And you can be sure that these rewards will be a11 the
greater as the overall economy grows.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The recession has been deep and the recovery slower than we
would have liked.
We have not been helped by events overseas.
We can take eome satisfaction from the fact that, at 2.1
per cent in the year to September, we have one of the
fastest-growth rates in the OECD.
However, we all know that this is not fast enough to bring
unemployment down.
We must reduce unemployment. 
T1EL0: . Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 03/ 10
3
We must do it to bring an and to the hardship which the
unemployed are suffering.
we must do it to restore to them the opportunities which
Australia should offer.
And we must do it because people are our most valuable
resource. The health of our economy depends on reducing the number of
unemployed. The only way is. faster growth.
Growth of around 4 per cent or so will bring unempl~ oyment
down. It is also quite achievable.
Over the past year or so the Government has taken a number
of steps to strengthen growth interest rates have been
lowered substantially and there has been direct stimulus
from the One Nation Statement, the Youth Statement and the
Budget. These initiatives have clearly boosted demand and output.
Lower interest rates have been central to the 12 per cent
increase in dwelling investment over the past year.
Public sector demand-has been running ahead of demand in the
private sector, notwithstanding the contraction we have seen
in some of the States' budgets.
So the Government's strategy of providing stimulus is
working. But recovery has been held back by a weak international
economy and the low levels of business investment.
It is important that we understand what has been depressing
business investment, because that is the key to further
economic expans ion.
Fundamentally, it has been the result of the efforts of many
corporations and financial enterprises to reduce debt levels
and establish stronger balance sheets after the excesses of
the late 1980s.
This has been a necessary and very difficult process.
The corporate sector embarked upon an exercise of cutting
costs and reducing debt.
TEL 
T1E0L:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 04/ 10
4
The banks tightened their lending guide-lines and have
concentrated more on their traditional business.
The result has been less business investment and, for those
businesses which want to grow, more stringent tests to meet
before they can get the necessary finance.
Slower economic recovery has been the cost.
The process of debt restructuring is continuing.
But I think it is now clear that the major hurdles are
behind us.
The profit share has held up despite the recession, while
lower interest rates have seen interest payments by the
corporate sector almost halved over the past two years.
As a result, the corporate sector has had the means to
reduce their debt levels.
In fact, corporate debt/ equity ratios have been falling for
the past three years and, apart from a few notable
exceptions, appear to be at relatively healthy levels
overall. The receiverhip business has tailed off while banks' new
non-performing loans have declined sharply.
The total stock of these non-performing loans has recently
begun to turn down.
All these are significant signs of health being restored to
corporate and financial sector balance sheets.
Progress has been slow, but increasingly over the past few
months, it appears that business is increasingly looking for
new opportunities.
I notice the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan
Greenspan, noted similar developments in the United States
recently. He said that " the credit crunch which has been so
debilitating to economic performance over the past two or
three years has shown no evidence of worsening in recent
months and may finally be retreating. At least this is the
implication of some stirring in'the loan markets in recent
weeks", he said.
And in Australia business confidence has been picking up,
arnd the credit ag~ regatesi hae been growing again as new
buslness has begun to outweigh repayments.
TEL: 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 05/ 1(
Today's unemployment figures were again disappointing veryI
disappointing but there are some grounds for believing
that the pick-up in vacancies indicates the start of an
improved labour market ahead.
indeed, as the debt is reduced, businesses are increasingly
focusing on the positive factors that are there
the lowest inflation rates in the developed world
low interest rates
productivity up around 3 per cent over the past year
good underlying profits levels that will improve further
as volumies increase
very favourable international competitiveness
continued wage restraint
and, one hopes, continued very low levels of industrial
disputation.
Coming on top of the stimulus from the public sector that
will continue for some time, these factors give us good
reason to expect the economic recovery to strengthen.
Of course, growth in Australia will be constrained by the
weak international environment we face, but we can look to
the future with greater confidence.
Ladies and gentlemen,
We can be more confident about the future, but at the same
time we have to-learn from the past.
A central lesson has been the desirability of banks
establishing close relationships with their customers.
Lending will always be less risky if the lender has a more
complete understanding of the viability of a proposal.*
Moreover, lending has to be based much more on an assessment
of the likely cash flow of a proposition than on the
availability of security.
Financial -Institutions can no longer rely on property values
underpinning loans if they ever could.
The major banks assure me that they have recognised these
needs and have shifted their 3. ending rules accordingly. 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 06/ 10
6
They tell me they are providing extra training for lending
officers so they are better able to evaluate risk and the
potential of proposals.
Cash flow lending, they say, will be the norm in the
practice of Australian bank lending.
And the banks will, I believe, more aggressively try to
expand their lending under these more disciplined credit
standards. Still, I believe we should go further with the development
of relationship banking.
It is the export of services and elaborately transformed
manufactured goods that have grown so rapidly over the past
years.
These have relied on our strengths in innovation, research
and training.
A great many of the new, successful exporters are small to
medium size firms who are out to establish niche markets
especially export markets.
our future depends on being able to build on these successes
-and that means our future depends in no small way on our
banks. As Australians increasingly develop innovative products and
seek to sell them into new markets, banks will have to
improve their skills and capacities of evaluation.
it is obvious that evaluating the quality of new proposals
will be a challenge.
There is risk associated with new product lines which may
take a number of years to come on stream.
There is risk associated with developing new export markets.
There is risk associated with lending to young firms that
are growing with new ideas.
But these are risks that banks will have to be able to
assess. This is the future they simply must embrace.
And it is where, after all, the rewards are going to be.
Where returns are likely to be rewarding, they are risks
they will have to undertake. 
T1E0L:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 07/ 10
7
It is not just in the interests of the overall economy that
adequate finance should be forthcoming for worthwhile
propositions. So long as they are able to properly assess the likely risk
and return, it can also be very much in the interests of the
institutions concerned.
An important element in the success of the Japanese and
German economies has been the very close relationship their
banks have had with business.
Of course the German and Japanese banking systemis have been
more regulated than our own, and there are many features of
their system we should not try to duplicate.
But the ready access to finance for good projects which
their businesses have is something we must work at getting
here. Poorly appraised risk-taking is the last thing our lending
institutions should engage in. My argument is that they
must do more to develop their evaluation and monitoring
skills.
How this is done will be up to the institutions concerned.
it may mean providing more finance for export business
through regional centres, rather than through individual
branches which tend to be the first port of call for many
small and medium-sized businesses.
it may involve developing clusters of skills in technology
or engineering, or in providing management and financial
advice for small businesses.
From this, expertise in evaluating ventures in new areas
could be established.
of course, these ideas are not new banks have already
taken some action along these lines.
But through whatever means the individual institutions may
choose, I believe it is very desirable for us to go further
down this path.
Ladies and gentlemen
-Through the-Commonwealth* Development Bank the Government has
played a direct role in trying to ensure that suitable
finance is available to a dynamic sector of the economy that
often has difficulty raising funds I mean the Wmall
business sector. TEL 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 08/ 10
Over the years, the Commonwealth Development Bank has
fulfilled a limited buit -very useful role supplying loans and
some limited equity finance f or small business, including
farmers. Because it is required to lend only to businesses who are
unable to obtain sufficient finance through other channels,
the CDB operates at the riskier end of the market.
This means it attracts loan applications which it cannot
approve. Nevertheless it still approves many projects which
would not otherwise be financed.
Although it made a 1088 in the more difficult Circumstances
of 1991-92, it has recorded respectable rates of return down
the years.
It has done this despite its concentration on small risky
loans that tend to involve high overheads.
The reason for this relative success has been the COB's
ability to establish expertise in evaluating and managing
its loans, an expertise that is built on both a detailed
knowledge of the sector itself and a close working
relationship with the businesses concerned.
So the Commonwealth Development Bank has performed that
specialised role.
But the CDB grew up in the more regulated system of the
past. with the removal of interest ceilings, other banks have
expanded further into small business and rural areas, and
the CDB's lending has tended to be pushed further towards
the realms of risk.
It is important that the Development Bank is able to
continue to fulfil its special role, and to do so in a
manner that is consistent with the Commonwealth Bank making
a commercial rate of return.
Accordingly, the Board of the Commonwealth Bank is reviewing
the operation of the CD5 and its special charter to ensure
that it remains in a position to lend to the small business
and rural sectors.
This lending will continue to be based primarily on the
interest irihecrelt-of' a proposal rather than the value of
any security offered. 
T1EL0:. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 09/ 10
9
in addition, the Government is prepared to Consider with the
Commonwealth Bank's Board whether there is a need for any
financial support that may be required by -expanded lending
opportunities. The CDB will always remain in a niche in the market, but a
very important niche.
I am confident that it will continue to fulfil its role and
that it is well placed to grow.
Indeed, I hope that Its characteristic reliance on
soecialist skills and close involvement with its customers
will be emulated by other financial institutions.
Ladies and gentlemen,
our financial institutions must play 8 dynamic role as
economic recovery strengthens.
They will be a vital player as Australia continues to make
inroads into world markets.
Closer relationships between banks and their customers will
help to ensure that Australian business can meet the
challenges and grow.
At the same time, it will help banks' profitability and
ensure that the experience of the past few years is not
repeated. Ladies and gentlemen,
i hardly need to say to you that I think Australia is on the
right path. I
We are now more outwardly oriented. we are more efficient.
We are more flexible.
We think in ways we never thought before about excellence,
about exports, about Asia and the Pacific, about enterprise
bargaining.
We are exporting things we never dreamt of making a decade
ago, and we're exporting them to places we never imagined
could be markets.
There has been an attitudinal change of profound dimensions
kind of -cultural change which was absolutely essential
to our success.
we have generated, as I said, other essential preconditions
like low inflation, and an acceptance among wage earners
that profits need to be adequate.
TEL: 
TEL: 10. Dec. 92 17: 44 No. 043 P. 10/ l1
We have made a number of the essential microeconomic reforms
in telecommunications, aviation, the wharves.
We will continue the process. Let no one imagine that
because we have done these things we don't intend to do more
or that more is not being done now.
what we have achieved has not been easy.
It is not easy to make structural changes and continue to
hold the social fabric together.
But in my view it is essential to do it that way.
Not just because it is more decent though that is a
sufficient condition but also because it is more
efficient. The economic transformation of Australia is not a Sprint for
speedy squibs: it needs stamina and we will get to the
line quicker and in better shape if we maintain and build
our momentum and hold body and soul together all the way.
We have learned that economic change demands cultural
change. It has social consequences.
There are no ways around this. And there is no better way
to go than by taking all sections of the community with us.
We are now reforming the labour market on these principles
of cooperation and mutual agreement on goals.
The 550 enterprise agreements have been built on that
cultural change I talked about.
They are the tangible manifestation of new Australian
attitudes and common goals.
They are built on that sort of realistic faith in ourselves
and each other, on that mixture of common sense and
imagination I talked about earlier.
it is on that, I am convinced, that we will build the
recovery.
And I daresay that is what the success of tonight's honoured
guests was substantially built on.
I congratulate you all.
Thank you for having me. 



S-1 I -4 F
~ PRIME MINISTER 141/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE HON P J KEATING MP
CHRISTMAS APPEALS AND ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR EMERGENCY
RELIEF I announced on 6 December 1992 that the Government will match dollar for dollar cash
donations by the Australian public to major voluntary agencies for their Christmas
appeals. I am pleased to announce today that the Government will also provide_ an additional
$ 2 million for the EmergencyRclicf Program. This money is in addition to the
$ 7.6 million provided for Emergency Relicf in Dccembcr.
Thc Emergency Relief Program makes it possible for some 700 community welfare
agencies with around 1,000 outlets across Australia to provide assistance to people in
need.
The additional funding will ensure that smaller agencies which currently provide
emergency relief to individuals and families are able to offer extra assistance in the
Christmas period.
Many of these smaller agencies focus on special needs groups, such as Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islandcr peoples, or are able to deliver assistance to rural and remote areas.
Only those organisations which do not receive matching Christmas appeal funds will be
eligible for the additional Emergency Relief Funding.
Eligibility critcria have also bccn dctcrmincd for the Christmas appeals matching funds.
Eligible organisations which benefit front the matching funds will be national
organisations or major players in a State/ Territory with an extcnsive coverage in the areas
of Christmas need. Organis-ations must have a sound record in material aid and Christmas
assistance so that the funds can be distributed as quickly as possible. Organisations must
be incorporated with Taxation Exemption Status ( Public Benevolent Institution) and must
also have had a Christmas appeal in operation at the time of the initial announcement on 6
December 1992. 
L
My objective in establishing there matching arrangements was to encourage those of us
who are bcttcr off in thc community to reach out to our fellow Australians who are less
well off so that they can celebrate Christmas in the way that many of us take for granted.
I hope that the Australian community will follow the Government's lead and increase
donations to the voluntary agencies so that all Australians can cnjoy their Christmas this
year. Further information on the guidelines and application details for Christmas appeals
matching funds can be obtained from thc Dcpartrment of Health, Housing and Community
Services telcphone ( 06) 289 5100; fax ( 06) 289 1076 or the Department of the
Primc Minister and Cabinet tclcphonc ( 06) 271 5278; fax ( 06) 271 5107.
Canbcrra 11 December 1992 


TEL 140/ 92The Opposition has decided to bury the Cole Committee's report because it threatcned todestroy the Goods and Services Tax once and for all.Since March, Coalition members havc been ducking legitimate criticism of their. policiesby referring all callers to the Cole Committee and promising that their criticism would beconsidered there.The Committee has, in turn, prepared a damning report which has swollen to 800 pageslonger than the original Fightback document.Sir William Cole was told by Dr Hewson a month ago that his . cprt was unacceptable_ politically, and he should clean it up.But even the censored version has proved too hot for Dr Hewson to handle, and he isreneging on his promise to release the report before Christmas. In fact, he will not darerelease it before the election.This is a betrayal of all those groups cane farmers, tourist operators, bankers, builders,car manufacturers and others who were fobbcd off with clear promises of considerationand who must now be left with a better idea of what Dr Hewson's word is worth.For their benefit alone, the Opposition should come clean and release the report, no matterhow critical it is of Fighiback and the GST.At the insistence of his p. r. minders, Dr I-ewson has been talking this week about" listening" to people; his decision to scuttle the Cole Committee shows there is a lot oftalking going on but no real listening.CANBERRA, December 11, 1992 11. Dec. 92 10: 26 No. 012 P. 01/ 0131



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DEATH OF SIR ROBERT REX OF NIUE
I have today sent the following message of condolence t t he Acting Premier of Niue, the
Hon Young Vivian, following the death on II December of Sir Robert Rex, Premier of
Niuc since self govcrnment in 1974:
I was saddened to learn of the death on 11 December of Sir Robert Rex. Please
pass on my sincere personal condolences, and those of the Australian Government
and pcople, to Lady Rex and her family and to the Government and people of Niuc
on this unhappy occasion.
With Sir Robert's passing, not only has Niue lost one of its founding fathers but the
South Pacific region as a whole has lost one of its elder statesmen and most
eminent leaders. He was an active participant in the South Pacific Forum from its
inception in 1971.
I was privileged to meet Sir Robert during his official visit to Australia in January
this year and again at the South Pacific Forum in July in Honiara. Sir Robert's
father was an Australian and I was particularly struck by his undoubted pride in his
Australian connection. I was also very impressed by his wisc and constructive
perspective on regional affairs. Australia has lost a special friend.
Australia will be represented at Sir Robert's funeral on 14 December by the High
Commissioner to New Zealand, Mr Rob Laurie.
CANBERRA 13 Dcccmber 1992 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 13 DECEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: Today John I-cwson announced that he is going to exempt food from the
taxation under the GST. I've got one simple message for Australians and
that is, you can't believe him. Hc'll put thc tax on the moment he wins an
election. Hec'll do to the nation just what Jeff Kennett has done to Victoria
say one thing before the election and do another thing later. Today he says
in the newsqpapers ' in my own analysis it was fair to do what I planned'. In
other words he is saying, I am changing the policy, but haven't changed
my mind. It would be as easy as simply one press announcecmcnt to rcly
upon those words today, in office, to say he's reconsidered and the tax on
food is to again, to apply. The fact of the matter is Dr Hcwson has rcmoved
this only because of pressure from his own party. Re rcmoved it under
prcssure from the Federal Director of the Liberal party, Mr Robb, and the
State Director of Victoria, Mr Georgio.
Hc has not done it because he thinks it is the right thing to do, in fact he
thinks it is the wrong thing to do. It's a political strategy, it's not a policy
change, it's not a policy test that he's applied in removing his wish to tax
food under a OST, it's a political test and the moment he thinks he could
politically succeed in levying the OST on food he would.
J: Isn't the danger though that the political strategy might work and he might
win back some votcrs that he's lost because they think he's..
PM: Food is just a small part of his total policy mix atid the OST wvill still apply
to all sorts of services to theatres, to dry cleaning, to hair cuts, to water
rates, to just about every service in the economy clothing. The fact is this
is just part and, of course, there's the rest of the draconian policy. But he 
said two days after announcing what is the most spectacular flip over in
Australian politics, where he said he would resign before he had to
introduce these changes, he had this to say in Perth on radio: ' I'm not just
going to give a knee jcrk rcaction and respond to pressure because a lot of
the trouble we're in today as a nation is because political leaders over the
last couple of decadcs have just bcnt to cvcry breeze and problems have
grown and been allowed to drift and ncver bccn dealt with because it was
politically expedient not to bothcr, hut to try and fool people'. Now he said
this two days after he's abandoned the most solemn commitments he's made,
saying he would resign first bcfore hc would change.
And in his press statement on food, on October 9 he said ' the argument that
food should not be taxed simply doesn't stand up' and he went on to say
' excluding food would mean raising the GST on all other products in order
to maintain the revenue'. In other words hc's told us that if you take food
out, the rate of tax on the rest of the products would have to be increased.
Thcsc arc thc extravagant commitments he made in respect of food, he's
now abandoned this. So, given the fact that hc's told us today that he still
belicves he's right he says ' in my own analysis, it was fair to do what I
planned', in other words it was fair to tax food given the fact that he said
that today, you'd havc to belicve in fairies at the bottom of the garden to
believe that if he won an election he wouldn't tax food. This change is a
politically different change, he would ahandon it at the first opportunity.
J: If he did that though Prime Minister, wouldn't it make the public reaction
national, make what happcned to Kennett in Victoria look like childs play?
Would any politician dare risk something like this?
PM: I think Dr Hewson would, if he won office, because he has risked now the
most amazing change to his stated position and his policy which he's had for
a year I will never change, I'll resign he's just thrown it all away. But
what he is saying is I'm right about it though, I'm changing my policy, but
I'm not changing my mind. I say, once he wins an election he will put the
GST on food. This is a guy that would just drive on with the changcs he
wants to make, wilfully put that GST in if it kills him. And if he wins an
election, cvcry Australian ought to know if they believe him, theyll
believe anything. Every Australian ought to know this man will tax
everything they eat, everything they dress iii and every service they
consume. 
3
J: Prime Minister, will the Dcmocrats' move in the Senate in any way imperil
your own announced program of tax cuts?
PM: I don't think so, we have the normal huffing and puffing from the
Democrats, but there wc are.
J. Mr Keating, will you bring back Parliament after Dr Hewson's statement to
make a reply?
PM: At this stage, we are run by the Parliamcntary business load, and I don't
quite know where that is.
Dr Hcwson's plan to take away those tax cuts for high income earners,
doesn't that take the wind out of your sails a bit?
PM: We weren't proposing..
ENDS 



14. Dec. 92 12: 54 No. 024 P. 02/
V6
WA,
PRIME MINISTER 145/ 92
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING,
MP AND THE MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE
MINISTER FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE HON ROSS FREE,
MP THE SEVENTH MEETING OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING COUNCIL
Thc Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council met today for the seventh time.
The Prime Minister chaired the meeting.
Major items discussed by the Council were Science and Technology Opportunities and
Strategies in the Asia Pacific Region, Nanotechnology and Microcrigineering, and
Scheduled ( Intractable) Waste.
The report, Science and Technology Opportunities and Strategies in the Asia Pacific
Region, was developed by an independent working group consisting of senior people
from industry and higher education bodies actively involved in extending our reach
into the region.
Presentations based on the report were made by Professor Stuart Harris, chair of the
working group, and two othcr members of the group, Professor Stephen Hill,
Wollongong University, and Mrs Judith King from the Australian Coalition of
Services Industries.
The paper found that Australia's-science and technology base is a source of
comparative advantage. in the region, particularly when it is applied to provide
practical solutions to Asian problems. In this regard, it noted the importance of the
Government's decision to make the R&amp; D tax concession at 150% a permanent feature
of Australia's tax regime. The opportunity for Australian exporters arc substantial and
there have already been some notable successes ( eg Australian involvement in power
-station and mining development in North Thailand).
The report considers that there is a need for governments, academia and business to
develop ail intcgratcd approach to Australian S&amp; T investment in the region and to
enhance Australia's S&amp; T image.
The Government's increased focus on Asia was welcomed and, as some speakers
noted, has helped Australian businesses gain access and establish links into Asia.
TErL 
14. Dec. 92 12: 54 No. 024 P. 03/ k
2
Nanotechnology was the subject of a presentation by Professor Don Nicklin, Pro-Vic
-Chancellor ( Physical Sciences and Engineering), University of Queensland.
Professor Nicklin chaired a working party established by the Australian Science and
Technology Council ( ASTEC) to produce a report on nanotechnology as part of
ASTECs work program. The working party consists of senior researchers from
industry, government and higher education institutions engaged in examining the
status and potential of this new technology in Australia.
Nanotechnology is concerned with miniaturisation beyond the " micro" level, that is,
the fabrication of devices with component sizes less than 100 nanometres ( a unit of
length measuring one billionth of a metrc or a millionth of a millimetre). This is the
same order as the diameter of molecules. Nanotechnology is considered to be generic
to a wide range of industries: health care, separation technologies, mining and energy
storage, as well as communications and optoclectronics.
European countries, Japan, USA and Canada arc actively positioning themselves for
the commercialisation phase. Japan, for example, has singled out nanotechnology as
the focus of its push for world technology leadership in the 21st century. An
opportunity exists for Australia to participate in these developments. Australia has
expert capacity in govcmment and higher education laboratories to provide a basis for
realising nanotechnology's potential importance to our competitiveness in areas such
as mining, manufacturing and food processing.
A prcscntation on microengineering was given by Professor Ian Bates, Associate Dean
Rcscarch and Development, Faculty of Engineering at the Royal Melbourne Institute
of Technology ( RMIT) and Dr Ron Zmood, Principal Lecturer, Electrical Engineering,
Department of Electrical and Manufacturing Systems, RMIT.
They said that during the next decade micromachines would become as commonplace
in consumer products as the micro chip is now. Potential applications include
improvements to existing technology in medical, industrial automotive and defcnce
areas. Overscas, Japan, USA and Germany have large R&amp; D programs underway. In
Australia, a number of companies, higher education and CSIRO researchers are
working on microengineering fields. RMIT is collaborating with Japan. These
capabilities can provide the basic resources to support the development of complete
imicromachines for exploitation by Australian industry.
Professor Ben Selinger, chair of the Independent Panel on Intractable Waste, and Dr
Bruce Coniglio from ICI Australia, presented the findings of the recently released
study on scheduled ( intractable) waste to the Council.
Their focus was on developed and developing technologies for handling such wastes
which could opcn market opportunities for Australia.
CANBERRA Monday 14 December 1992
Attached: 
TEL. 14. Dec. 92 12: 54 NIo. 024 P. 04/
3
Current membership of the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council
Copies of report on Nanotechnology are available as follows:
Nanotechnology ASTEC 06 273 4966
Report on Australian Science and Technology Opportunities and Strategies in
the Asia Pacific Region ( available from the Office of thc Chief Scientist 06
271 5462).
Microenginecring RMIT 03 660 3260.
Contact: Phillip Tardif
Minister Frec's Office
( 06) 277 7280 ( w)
( 06) 254 7383 ( h) Thu Nguyen-Hoan
Office of the Chief Scientist
( 06) 271 5209 ( w)
( 06) 292 1825 ( h) 



PRIME MINVISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH MAXINE MCKEW, ABC RADIO, THE WORLD TODAY
14 DECEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MM: Prime Minister, Dr Hewson has this morning rejected your claim that he would
change the GST and include food after the election. Don't you have to face the
fact that the electorate could vell be in a mribod to believe Dr Hewson?
PM: Why would they? He has said now for a year that if he changes his policy he will
resign, he'd resign first. All of that humbug has been made obvious by his vaultface
on the matter. He said yesterday in the newspapers, " in my own analysis it
was fair to do what I planned", that was tax food. So he has got the hide to say
yesterday: I still think taxing food is right but won't because of public opinion.
In other words, he has changed his policy but he hasn't changed his mind.
MM: But, Prime Minister, you have made some quite dramatic policy U-turns
throughout your career, why shouldn't Dr Hewson be able to plausibly do exactly
the same thing?
PM: Yes, but anything that I have done has been within the framework that the
Government was working in all the years.
MM: 1985?
PM: No, but we abandoned it. I didn't introduce it and then sneak in a food tax. Look,
Dr Hewson believes let me say this, why doesn't he exempt things If he
thinks the GST is unfair, where does he draw the line? Why doesn't he exempt
other household necessities like water, gas, electricity and the telephone? Or, what
about children's clothing, or clothing in general? Or takeaway food, what's he
going to do with takeaway food? Are all the takeaway outfits going to be taxed
with a 15 per cent GST? 
MM: Well, presumably we'll get all those details on Friday.
PM: Can I just say this. The Cole Committee, which was doing all these details about
the building industry, tourism, all of these questions about food, fast food, all the
distinctions which will really matter, it's now going to cynically report after the
election, after having been promised by Dr Hewson in the middle of the year,
September, October, then before Christmas, now after the election. In other words,
all the details will be buried, and yet we're asked to believe that when he runs into
the complexities of exempting food and the administrative mess of things like fast
food and restaurants, and all the other things, that he won't when he has a political
opportunity introduce a tax on food. Well of course he'll do it. Of course he'll do
it.
MM: Well, Prime Minister, can you spend the entire campaign wandering around saying
that John Hewson is not to be believed? If you do that people might think you
have nothing else to offer.
PM: Hang on, let's be clear about this, this is the man..
MM: You're making a big point about his believability factor.
PM: He's now walking around talking about compassion. This is the fellow who said
this..
MM: Why do you reject that as so implausible, though? Isn't it perfectly conceivable
that John Hewson could have had a conversion on the road to Damascus?
PM: Come on, look, he discovered his heart when he discovered fear in it. Th1at's when
he discovered his heart.
MM: Others would say flexibility, that he's listening to people, the fact that he is now
starting to do all the things that you'd been suggesting he should.
PM: I'd say not flexibility. Fright. Look, he said this in a debate recently, " I remember
you" ( that's me) " I remember you saying not long ago that when they fall off the
pace" ( that's the poor and the underprivileged) " you'll reach back and pull them up.
What you mean is you'll pull everyone else down to the lowest common
denominator". Now how could you hold those sort of cold-hearted views and
then be running around after your Federal Director has been on your back and
saying that you're a born-again compassionate person? Then he said this, in a
written speech recently to the Family Summit, he said " giving people choice is the
compassion that liberates, just giving is the compassion that suffocates". This is a
person who has, in terms of those not well-off, lacked any soul whatsoever. Now
we're supposed to believe that because he is faced with a 47 per cent poll support
for Labor and 40 for the Coalition last week, and the panic-stricken directives of 
his Federal Director, Mr Robb, that we're supposed to say this is a new-found
compassion and a new-found sense of decency in policy.
MM: Prime Minister..
PM: The thing is, Maxine, if you believe that you'd believe anything.
MM: Prime Minister, one could say he has in fact listened to the force of your message,
he is after all doing all the things that you've suggested he do he's listening, he's
talking about equity and fairness and he says he is going to stimulate recovery.
PM: No, this is the same fellow who said this on stimulation, he said on 24 November
in the House ' surely stimulatory economic policies do not work'.
MM: Well, now he's seen the light.
PM: Come on, seen the light, come on. I mean is there any scepticism left amongst
some of you people in the Gallery? Come on, please. This is a fellow who for a
year has told Australians Fightback is the answer, if there's any variation in this I'll
resign. Stimulatory policies don't work, if you reach down to help the poor they'll
drag us all down and now we are supposed to believe with one beach walk and a
couple of press statements that he's a compassionate, thinking, caring, listening
person. You know what he's listening to? His Federal Director. You know what
he's listening to? The polls, nothing else.
MM: Prime Minister, if as you say John Hewson will bring the GST back on food after
the election, what will you then do after the following election, will you remove
the GST if elected, the election after next?
PM: I made it clear where we stood, if he campaigns saying that food should be
excluded and then he puts food in, subscquently we would vote against that in the
Senate. But he would have certainly no..
MM: You'd vote against the food being included on it?
PM: Yes.
MM: But you would pass the rest of the GST.
PM: Well, if he won an election on the basis of the GST.
MM: Right, let's fast forward to the following election, what would you do then?
Would you campaign on the basis?
PM: If you are still here Maxine I'll tell you then. 
MM: Prime Minister, you didn't answer that question in Perth last week. If you are
leaping ahead and assuming what John Hewson will do..
PM: You are talking about two elections away.
MM: I know, but that's what you're doing.
PM: Six years away.
MM: You're making judgements about what John Hewson will do after the election.
Shouldn't you answer the same question about the election after next?
PM: No, Maxine after the election can be within six to twelve months from now, that is,
in the immediate future. The fact of the matter is that even with food out of the
GST, it still collects $ 22 billion it's nearly half the Commonwealth's total
income tax. T'his is a massive disruption to macro-economy and to the way all
Australians will live. What he said is nothing that I've said in the past about being
the politician that Australia needs, about having the policies which we require
about not shifting, not bending what the Liberal Party have ended up with now is
another Andrew Peacock, but without the good nature or the good humour.
They've got someone who is a flim-flam man, someone who really basically
doesn't stand for any policy other than that which will get him a vote at the polls.
So all this hyperbole we've heard from him I'm the man, I'm the person, I'd rather
resign than change is basically just pap. What we've got is what the Liberals
always give us a collection of Andrew Peacocks only this time without a soul,
without the good humour and without the good nature.
MM: Prime Minister, regardless of what you see as the motives, isn't the fact that the
policy shift by Dr Hewson back to the centre ground, if you like, doesn't that put
pressure on you to move further to the left in your own policy?
PM: His model is Fightback, which is a tax switch, which he says now he will make
less objectionable, and he is talking vaguely about some stimulatory add on.
MM: What if he comes out with a big on Friday?
PM: Hang on. Just listen. It would do some of you people in the gallery good to listen,
because none of you picked the pick up in Labor's fortunes, none of you. Basically
you are writing the columns..
MM: Yes, but you don't believe it either otherwise you would be having an election
before Christmas. 
PM: Yes we do believe it, yes, there are too many polls not to believe it. None of you
picked it, just listen to what I say. John Hewson's framework is the Fightback
framework. It is a tax switch which he says he will make less objectionable with
maybe some things added on to it. The Government's framework is entirely
different, it is a decade long development of a safety net, access and equity in
education, in health, in aged care, in child care, it is a systemic approach of a
Government with real compassion, a party with real compassion, well placed and
as well as that a commitment by the Government to go back to doing what it has
always done well and that is growing the economy. His framework is nothing like
that, his framework is basically to have a tax switch which will increase prices, he
wants to cut wages through his industrial relations policy and then we are
supposed to say, well in all that cold hearted, hard hearted framework he might
make the tax change less objectionable and he might add something on to it which
I am supposed to say, oh well in that case, this is really something. I mean this is
the same old tired framework, ideological framework which is reminiscent of
Thatcher in ' 78-' 79, Reagan in 1980, which is now out of sync with the times all
around the world, which Dr Hcwson now realises he has got difficulty with, he is
not changing it because he thinks it is right to change it, in fact he thinks it is
wrong to change it, he is changing it just for votes.
MM: Don't you have to develop your own positive message and not just reiterate a
negative message against Dr Hewson?
PM: Maxine, I have just come from the Science Council where we were just talking
about today, extending Australian science and technology into Asia. Where
people at the meeting are saying that this Government's shift into Asia, in foreign
policy terms, has made all the difference. Later today I am seeing people
associated with the Qantas sale, we have got a brand new airline system just about
to come off the stocks. We were talking this morning about the development of a
national vocational education system which has happened this year with the
national training authority. The Government is the Government of Australia, it is
doing the big bold things like vocational education, like the shift into Asia, like
telecommunications. That's where we stand, we don't have to run around and
say...
MM: But you did.
PM: And say well now this finky dink proposal of the leader of the Opposition is too
objectionable and has to be varied, where are going to say, oh well in that case our
framework somehow has to be adjusted. Our framework is the framework of a
sure-footed, confident Government that has remodelled the Australian economy
from an industrial museum to a modemn industrial state.
MM: But just finally you did articulate in Perth last week that you wanted to work on a
second term agenda, as you put it. 
6
PM: Oh yes, but it will be again consistent with the big things we have done in the
macro-economy, the micro-economy and in social policy. But Maxine let us not
hear for a Government that has strung together one of the best social safety nets in
the world, where you have had somebody as heartless as Hewson saying to us if
you lean out to help people you will pull people down. If you give them things it
is compassion which suffocates them. Let's not hear the hypocrisy and humbug of
him saying, within weeks of saying those things, that he now believes that he is
listening to people with compassion. You know what he is listening to, the polls?
And do you know what he has found in his heart, he has found his heart? Because
for the first time he has found fear in his heart, that is where he discovered it.
ENDS 



I L L4 1o. Ci 4 F
D 144/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE lION P J KEATING MP
EARTHQUAKE ON ISLAND OF FLORES, INDONESIA
I have sent today the following _ message to President Soeharto concerning the earthquake
on the island of Flores, Indonesia:
On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I should like to convey our
. profound sorrow and concern at the news of the terrible earthquake on Flores and
the large loss of life. All those who have suffered in this tragedy have our deepest
sympathy. The Australian Government stands ready to assist in whatever way we can and I
can assure you of a speedy response to any rcquest.
CANBERRA 14 December 1992 



i
I PRIME MINISTER
FOR MEDIA 14 DECEMBER 1992
JOINT STATEMENT WITH THE HON ROSS FREE, MINISTER ASSISTING
THE PRIME MINISTER
The third and final selection round for the Cooperative
Research Cgptres. Program was completed today, with the
selection of a further seventeen Centres, the expansion of
two CRCs established in 1991, and the establishment of a
Research Data Network CRC ( RDN-CRC).
The Prime Minister, Mr Keating, and the Minister Assisting
the Prime Minister, Mr Free, said that the Centres
announced today will make a substantial contribution to
the international competitiveness of our industries and
will provide strong support for the sustainable
development of Australia's resources.
A list of the Centres announced today, together with the
existing 34 CRCs is attached. Details of each new Centre
are also attached.
The new Centres and the extensions to two existing CRCs
will enhance Australia'~ s R&amp; D capabilities in a broad range
of areas, including manufacturing technologies;
information and communications technology; exploration,
mining and energy generation; sustainable production and
processing of agricultural products; environmental
management; and vaccine technology.
All States and Territories, together with important
regions such as North Queensland, are represented.
Total resources available to the new and extended Centres
will amount to S872 million over the initial contract
period. The CRC Program will provide some $ 254 million
dollars. The remaining S618 million will be contributed by
business enterprises ($ 170 million), universities ($ 183
million), Commonwealth departments ayid agencies including
CSIRO ($ 178 million), State departments and agencies
million) and medical research institutes million). 4901 
The Government is pleased with the substantial involvement
by all participants. In particular it is delighted at the
further Increase in industrial commitment to the program.
Some 284 of participant funding is from business
enterprises, up froM 17% in Round 1 and 21% in Round 2.
The industry commitment is unique in the international
context. Even the German Fraunhofer Institutes, often
cited as the example of good industry/ public sector
collaboration in research and development, cannot match
the Australian CRCs regarding the long term nature and
relative size of industry's commitment.
As announced in the Government' s recent White Paper on
. Science and Technology, " Develop# in-AustralianIdeas", a
Research Data Network CRC i s . to be estab; lished. f-rYwill
conduct research into telecommunications and computing
technologies and-services, and have access to
experimental broadband facilities essential for the
development of the next generation communications
networks. The Centre's research nodes are located in Brisbane,
Canberra, Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide. The CRC for
Broadband Telecommunications and Networking announced
today is also expected to collaborate in these
developments, thus adding a node in Perth to the network.
The Research Data Network CRC will also provide $ 3.4
million for the immediate upgrade of the existing
research data network, which links up researchers
( including universities) throughout Australia.
This initiative will address one of the major needs for
r esearch -* infrastructure identified by the Australian
Science and Technology Council in its report on national
research facilities. The importance of the establishment
of a high speed data network-for innovative R&amp; D in
advanced systems -engineering, computing software and
telecommunications, for use by researchers, was
recommended by an expert group to the Prime minister's
Science and Engineering Council earlier this year.
The Prime Minister and Mr Free thanked * Professor Slatyer,
Chair of the Cooperative Research Centres Committee, and
all members of that Committee and the two Expert Panels
for the competent and objective advice provided to them
since the establishment of the Program.
Contact: Phillip Tardif Dr Andreas Dubs
Minister Free's Office Office of the Chief Scientist
( 06) 277 7280 ( 06) 271 5953 ( W)
( 06) 254 7383 ( 06) 251 3329 ( H)
4902 
Successful CRC Applications ( in bold print) together with
the 34 established Cooperative Research Centres
( by six broad fields of research)
Name of Cooperative Research CentreLocation of Core
Participants
Manufacturing Technology i
CRC for Intelligent Manufacturing Systems and Technologies VIC/ NSW/ SA A
CRC for Alloy and Solidification Technology VIC/ QLD B
CRC for Aerospace Structures VIC/ NSW
Australian Maritime Engineering CRC TAS/ VIC/ WA/ NSW
CRC for Materials Welding and Joining NSW/ SA
CRC for Polymer Blends VIC
CRC for Molecular Engineering and Technology: Sensing and NSW
Diagnostic Technologies
CRC for Industrial Plant Biopolymers VICINSW
Information and Communications Technology
CRC for Broadband Telecommunications and Networking WA/ VIC/ NSW C
CRC for Advanced Computational Systems ( ACSys) ACT/ NSW D
Research Data Network CRC QLD/ ACT/ NSW E
VIC/ SA
CRC for Intelligent Decision Systems VIC
CRC for Robust and Adaptive Systems ACT/ NSW/ SA
CRC for Distributed Systems Technology QLD/ SA/ SA/ VIC/ NSW
Australian Photonics CRC NSW/ VIC/ ACT
CRC for Sensor Signal and Information Processing SA/ VIC/ QLD
Mining and Energy
CRC for New Technologies for Power Generation from Lowrank
Coal
Australian Petroleum CRC ( Extension)
CRC for Mining Technology and Equipment ( Extension)
Australian Geodynamics CRC
CRC for Mining Technology and Equipment
G K Williams CRC for Extractive Metallurgy
A J Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy
Australian Petroleum CRC
CRC for Australian Mineral Exploration Technologies
Details on each successful application are provided in the relevant attachment SA/ VIC/ NSW
WA/ VIC
VIC/ QLD
WA/ VIC/ NSW/ ACT
OLD VIC WA VIC/ NSW/ SA
NSW/ WA Attachment ( a)
4903 
Name of Cooperative Research CentreLocation of Core
Participants
Agriculture and Rural Based Manufacturing
CRC for Premium Quality Wool
CRC for the Cattle and Beef Industry ( Meat Quality)
CRC for Aquaculture
CRC for Sustainable Cotton Production
CRC for International Floriculture
CRC for Food Industry Innovation
CRC for Legumes in Mediterranean Agriculture
CRC for Plant Science
CRC for Tropical Plant Pathology
CRC for Tropical Pest Management
CRC for Temperate Hardwood Forestry
CRC for Hardwood Fibre and Paper Science
CRC for Viticulture WA/ VIC/ NSW
VIC/ NSW/ QLD
TAS/ SA/ NSW
NT/ QLD
NSW/ QLD/ ACT
VIC/ NSW
NSW WA ACT QLD QLD/ NSW
TAS VIC
SA/ NSW/ VIC
Environment CRC for Ecologically Sustainable Development of the Great QLD P
Barrier Reef
CRC for Freshwater Ecology VIC/ NSW/ ACT Q
CRC for Southern Hemisphere Meteorology VIC R
CRC for Tropical Rainforest Ecology and Management QLD S
CRC for Waste Management and Pollution Control NSW/ VIC/ WA
CRC for Soil and Land Management SA
CRC for Catchment Hydrology VIC/ ACT
CRC for Biological Control of Vertebrate Pest Populations ACT/ WA
CRC for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Environment TAS
Medical Science and Technology
CRC for Vaccine Technology
CRC for Tissue Growth and Repair
CRC for Cellular Growth Factors
CRC for Biopharmnaceutical Research
CRC for Eye Research and Technology
CRC for Cochlear Implant, Speech and Hearing Research
CRC for Cardiac Technology
Details on each successful application are provided in the relevant attachment. VIC/ NSW/ QLD
SA VIC NSW VIC/ NSW/ QLD
VIC/ NSW/ WA
NSW
4904 Attachment ( a) 
Successful CRC Applications: Level of Funding and Length of Initial Contract Offered
Name of Cooperative Research CentreLocation of Core
Participants Funding in 2nd and
subsequent years ( a)
CRC for Intelligcnt Manufacturing Systems and Technologies
CRC for Alloy and Solidification Technology
CRC for Broadband Telecommunications and Networking
CRC for Advanced Computational Systems ( ACSys)
Research Data Network CRC
CRC for New Technologies for Power Generation from Low-rank
Coal Australian Petroleum CRC ( Extension)
CRC for Mining Technology and Equipment ( Extension)
Australian Gcodynamics CRC
CRC for Premium Quality Wool
CRC for the Cattle and Beef Industry ( Meat Quality)
CRC for Aquaculture
CRC for Sustainable Cotton Production
CRC for International Floriculture
CRC for Food Industry Innovation
CRC for Ecologically Sustainable Development of the Great Barrier
Reef CRC for Freshwater Ecology
CRC for Southern Hemisphere Meteorology
CRC for Tropical Rainforest Ecology and Management
CRC for Vaccine Technology VIC/ NSW/ SA
VIC/ OLD
WA/ VIC/ NSW
ACT/ NSW
QLD/ ACT/ NSW/ VIC/ SA
SA/ VIC/ NSW
WAIVIC VIC/ OLD
WA/ VIC/ NSW/ ACT
WA/ VIC/ NSW
VIC/ NSW/ QLD
NT/ SA/ NSW/ QLD/ TAS
NSW/ QLD/ ACr
VIC/ NSW
NSW OLD VIC/ NSW/ ACT
VIC
OLD VICtNSW/ QLD $ 2,000,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
$ 1,800,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
( b)
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
700,000 p. a.
$ 1,000,000 p. a.
$ 2,400,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
$ 2,800,000 p. a.
$ 2,200,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
$ 1,300,000 p. a.
$ 1,700,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
$ 1,500,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
$ 2,000,000 p. a.
Funding in the first year will be approximately half the amount indicated in this column.
A total of $ 13 million will be made available over 5 years; funding details are provided in Attachment E.
0D Length of
initial offer Attachment
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
5 years
7 years
5 years
5 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years
7 years 
List of Attachments
Name of Cooperative Research Centre Attachment
CRC for Intelligent Manufacturing Systems and Technologies A
CRC for Alloy and. Solidification Technology B
CRC for Broadband Telecommunications and Networking C
CRC for Advanced Computational Systems ( ACSys) D
Research Data Network CRC E
CRC for New Technologies for Power Generation from L-ow-rank F
Coal Australian Petroleum CRC ( Extension) G
CRC for Mining Technology and Equipment ( Extension) H
Australian Geodynamics CRCI
CRC for Premium Quality Wool i
CRC for the Cattle and Beef Industry ( Meat Quality) K
CRC for Aquaculture L
CRC for Sustainable Cotton Production M
CRC for International Floriculture N
CRC for Food Industry Innovation 0
CRC for Ecologically Sustainable Development of the Great Barrier P
Reef
CRC for Freshwater Ecology Q
CRC for Southern Hemisphere Meteorology R
CRC for Tropical Rainforest Ecology and Management S
CRC for Vaccine Technology T
4906 
Attachment A
CRC for Intelligent Manufacturing Systems and Technologies
Core Participants:
ANCA Pty Ltd; Farley Cutting Systems Australia Pty Ltd; Kirby Engineering Pty Ltd;
Laser Lab Ltd; Moldflow Pty Ltd; Hoover ( Australia) Pty Ltd; Sunbeam Corporation
Ltd; Tyree Holdings ( Technical Components Pty Ltd); Convex Computers; ' Me Cadds
Man Lid; CSIRO, Division of Manufacturing Technology; RMIT; Swinburne University
of Technology; University of NSW; University of Wollongong; Strategic Research
Foundation. Research Focus
The mission of the Centre is to research and develop manufacturing systems and
technologies that will assist Australian industry in its pursuit of international
competitiveness. The Centre has three research programs: Enterprise Integration; ( ii) System
Component Technologies; ( iii) Shaping and Finishing and Engineering Components.
The focus of the enterprise integration program will be on the integration of
manufacturing operations, human resources and information technology at all levels
within Australian manufacturing organisations through developments in machine
messaging protocols, concurrent engineering, design for manufacture and work cells.
The System Component Technologies program seeks to achieve improvements in the
productivity, design, flexibility of machine tools and systems utilising studies in
simulation, control, sensors, networking and signal processing. The Shaping and
Finishing program is aimed at the development of a new generation of precision fine
finishing equipment together with support technologies such as rapid prototyping to
achieve lower cost and higher quality manufactured products.
Area of Research Expertise
Manufacturing message protocols, enterprise integration architecture, concurrent
engineering, design for manufacture, production simulation and control, sensors,
networking, signal processing, cutting and polishing, numerical modelling, rapid
prototyping. Contact Person: Dr R H Brown
Address: Carlisle PO Box
AVENEL VIC 3664
Tel: ( 057) 962 522 Fax: ( 057) 962 522 4907
TM n, -W RM Now 
Attachment B
CRC for Alloy and Solidification Technology ( CAST)
Core Participants:
The University of Queensland; CSIRO Division of Manufacturing Technology; Cornalco
Research Centre; Cornalco Foundry Products; Australian Automative Technology
Centre; Australian Magnesium Research and Development Project.
Research Focus
CAST will develop technology for light alloy cast engineering components that will help
provide a world competitive position for Australian manufacturing industry in this area.
The research of the Centre will primarily be concerned with four key areas: ( i)
solidification, casting integrity and performance; ( ii) process technology for casting; ( iii)
tooling and prototyping technology; and ( iv) alloy development. Within this research
program, computer design tools will be developed to improve the design and
performance of complex castings as well as continuously cast products, new and cheaper
methods for tooling and prototyping will be developed to suit Australian production
conditions, improved mean for control of casting processes will be developed, new
casting processes will be introduced to Australian manufacturers, and improved
aluminium and magnesium alloys will be developed. Companies within the autornative
sector and casting industry will be encouraged to participate in research projects to be
conducted by the Centre. CAST will develop education and training programs to
upgrade the technical and managerial skills available to Australian industry in this area.
Area of Research Expertise
Physical metallurgy of solidification, computer modelling of solidification, process
technology for casting, tooling design, phase transformations in metals, alloy design.
Contact Person: Professor G L Dunlop
Address: Department of Mining Metallurgical Engineering
The University of Queensland
ST LUCIA QLD 4072
Tel: ( 07) 365 3641 Fax: ( 07) 365 3888
4908 
Attachment C
CRC in Broadband Telecommunications and Networking
Core Participants:
Australian Telecommunications Research Institute, Curtin University of Technology;
QPSX Communications Ltd; ERG Electronics lid; Department of Computer
Engineering, Edith Cowan University.
Research Focus
The CRC has the mission to provide research and development support that will assist
the creation of an Australian design infrastructure in broadband telecommunications
and networking. Besides pursuing generic research it will perform design in
commercially leading technology of a range of technical solutions as basis for early
technology development. It will also engage in continuing education and research
training programmes with the aim of creating and maintaining a specialised skill base
in telecommunications and network design.
For the immediate the CRC has the dual focus of broadband integrated services digital
networks for customer premises and limited distance wireless communications,
particularly applicable to confined spaces, notably underground mines. In relation to
broadband networking the Centre is creating concepts and systems models, developing
technology and studying performance issues. The near term aim is to develop a
customer backbone network based on forthcoming public telecommunications network
standards. In relation to wireless the aim is to develop appropriate transmitter, receiver
and antenna systems and protocols.
Areas of Research Expertise
Networking Architectures, access protocols, protocol implemnrtation, signal
processing, transmission systems, system dimensioning analysis and control, network
management, signalling and network control, electronic design, application specific
chip design, communications software design.
Contact Person: Professor A Cantoni
Address: Australian Telecommunications Research Institute
Curt in University of Technology
GPO Box U1987
PERTH WA 6001
Tel: ( 09) 351 3239 Fax: ( 09) 351 3244 4909 Wf'TZ 
Attachment D
CRC for Advanced Computational Systems
Core Participants:
Centre for Information Science Research, Australian National University; CSIRO,
Division of Information Technology; Computer Power Group Lid; Digital Equipment
Corporation Australia; Fujitsu Australia lid; Sun Microsystems Australia.
Research Focus
The Centre's mission is to establish an internationally competitive research capability in
high-performance advanced computational systems for the benefit of Australian
industry. The Centre will strengthen strategic alliances with industry, -government and
research organisat ions through focussed demonstrator systems in three initial areas:
Visualisation of complex data, Hypermedia for large scale multi-media databases, and
Command Support.
In the area of information services, powerful new hypermedia systems will be prototyped
to provide high-speed analysis and navigation of large, multi-media information bases
in areas such as parliamentary reporting, census data, newspapers, governent reports and
corporate and research information. The visualisation demonstrator project will
prototype systems for use in the mining industry and for environmental management.
Benefits will include faster and more effective processing of geophysical and
environmental data, faster and more effective modelling tools, and more flexible and
powerful interactive interpretation facilities. The command support demonstrator project
will explore the analysis and presentation of information in an interactive terrain-based
environment, together with support for decision-making through spatial reasoning,
planning and scheduling.
Areas of Research Expertise
High performance parallel computing, advanced systems engineering, humnan-computer
interaction and visualisation, information and knowledge management, algorthms and
computation. Contact Person: Professor M McRobbie
Address: Centre for Information Science Research
Australian National University
ACTON ACT' 2601
Tel: ( 06) 249 2035 Fax: ( 06) 249 0747
4910 
Attachment E
Research Data Network CRC
The Research Data Network ( RDN) CRC will conduct research and education
programs in areas relating to communications network technologies, applications and
services. It will also support network infratructure development, including the
upgrade of the Australian Academic and Research Network, AARNet.
The CRC will be established as a network of nodes, some of which are associated with
other CRCs, with a Management Committee to foster cooperation between the
different groups, to oversee the funding and reporting requirements of the CRC, and to
manage access and connections to experimental broadband network capacity.
Participants
The participants in the research programs include: the CRC for Advanced
Computational Systems; the CRC for Distributed Systems Technology; CSIRO
Macquarie Joint Research Centre for Advanced Systems Engineering; the Department
of Parliamentary Reporting Staff; the South Australian Centre for Parallel Computing;
Microsoft Institute; Thinking Machines Corporation; Australian Supercomputing
Technology; Softway; Film Australia; CSIRO Division of Information Technology;
Fujitsu Australia; AOTC; Siemens; and the Australian Computing and
Communications Institute ( ACCI). ( Not all participants are involved in every research
program). In addition, the Australian Vice Chancellors' Committee and AOTC are expected to
participate in the Management Committee in connection with their role as network
service providers.
Research Activities
There are four research programs:
The Distributed Interactive Multimedia Information Services program and the
Distributed High Performance Computing program will be established as
Demonstration Projects of the CRC for Advanced Computational Systems. The
Multimedia program will focus on systems architecture, tools and techniques for
interactive multimedia access and navigation. This is an area which is of major
importance for future broadband networks. The High Performance Computing
program will integrate the high performance computing resources of Australia through
broadband connections ( as seen in the embryonic national cooperative supercomputer
facility), and the management of data on the distributed computer network.
The Resource Discovery program will be established as an * additional program of the
CRC for Distributed Systems Technology. The program aims to develop resource
discovery prototypes that enable users to access the vast amounts of information
scattered in repositories throughout Australia and the rest of the world. 4191, 
The Nenwrk Performance program will involve research and development into the
utilisation and performance of high speed telecommunications network technologies
such as frame relay, DQDB and AI. This will assist in the design of the future
AARNet. These four programs will enable an integrated approach to the solving of some
important problems, as networks are faced with increasing demands in relation to
capacity and services.
Network Inbrastructure Development
Funding will be provided for an immediate upgrade of the existing research data
network, AAR1~ et, and to assist meeting the projected cost of providing upgraded
services over the next few years.
Funding will also be provided to the RDN CRC to fund access to broadband facilities
such as the proposed AOTC Experimental Broadband Network, at some 10 sites. This
reflects the fact that each of the recommended proposals will investigate technologies
and applications which will require access to broadband testbed facilities beyond those
available at present. ' This will make a significant contribution to the development of
the next generation of network applications and services.
Funding
The funding provided is as follows ( all figures are five year totals):
Proposal Funding recommended
year total)
Multimedia program $ 1.5 million
Distributed igh Performance $ 1.5 million
Computing program
Resource Discovery program $ 2.0 million
High Speed Network Applications $ 1.6 million
program Funding for AARNet $ 3.4 million
development Provision for broadband network $ 3.0 million
access to CRC nodes___
TOTAL $ 13.0 million
Contact Multimedia. and Distributed High Performance
Computing program Professor Michael McRobbie
Centre for Information Science Research
Australian National University
CANBERRA AC!' 2601
ph ( 06) 249 2035, fax ( 06) 249 0747
4912 
Resource Discovery program
Network Applications program
AARNet Mr Rob Cook
CRC for Distributed Systems Tednology
University of Oueensland
OLD 4072
ph ( 07) 365 4321, fax ( 07) 365 4399
Professor F J W Symons
Department of Elcic and Computer Systems
Engineering Monash University
CLAYTON VIC 3168
ph ( 03) 565 3481, fax ( 03) 565 5757
Mr John Mullarvey
Australian Vice Chancellors' Committee
Oeils Court
DEAKIN ACr 2600
ph ( 06) 285 8200, fax ( 06) 285 8211 4913 
Attachment F
CRC for New Technologies for Power Generation
from Low-Rank Coal
Core Participants:
Monash University, Department of Chemical Engineering and Department of Chemistry;
University of Adelaide, Chemical Engineering Department; SECY, Research and
Development Department; ETSA, Environment and Technology Department; CSIRO,
Division of ineral and Process Engineering; ICAL Ltd; Luirgi ( Australia) Pty Ltd.;
Strategic Research Foundation.
Research Focus
The Centre has three research programs aimed at the development of the science and
engineering required to underpin the development of new power generation technologies:
Process Design and Optimisation, ( ii) Coal Beneficiation and Combustion, and ( iii)
Fluid Bed Processes.
Process Design and Optimisation studies will be conducted on the most prospective
generation systems, with the objective of identifying optimal process and component
integration for efficiency, environmental impact and cost-ecffeciveness. This will provide
guidance and targets for the other programs and assist in the development of applications.
Coal Beneficiation and Combustion research will be undertaken to achieve high coal ( and
energy) loading in a slurry and minimum fouling and corrosion from combustion.
I the Fluid Bed program research will be undertaken on gasification, combustion and
drying processes.
Areas or Expertise
The properties and characteristics of low-rank coals; ash formation; the chemistry and
physics of coal processing particularly coal drying; slurry production; combustion and
gasification; mathematical modelling, technology development and scale-up for
conventional and fluid bed processes.
Contact Person: Mr R S Higgins
Address: Herman Research Laboratory
State Electricity Commission of Victoria
677 Springvale Road
Mulgravc Vic 3170
Telephone: ( 03) 565 9805 Fax: ( 03) 565 9808
4914 
Attachment G
Australian Petroleum CRC ( Extension)
Core Participants:
CSIRO, Divisions of Geomechanics and Exploration Geoscience; Centre for Petroleum
Engineering, University of New South Wales; National Centre for Petroleum Geology and
Geophysics in Adelaide; Departments of Exploration Geophysics and Petroleum
Geochemistry, Curtin University.
Research Focus
The Australian Petroleum CRC ( APCRC) was one of the first CRM to be created in July
1991. It focuses on research into major exploration and production issues which face
Australia's upstream oil and gas industry through research programs concerning ( i)
techniques to predict oil and gas accumulation, including the timescale of basin evolution,
and predictive fluid flow modelling; ( ii) reservoir properties and characterisation,
characterising heterogeneity in reservoirs, including quantification of geology; ( iii)
improved oil and gas recovery, including pore scale processes responsible for oil recovery
in miscible and immiscible gas displacements, and stimulation of tight reservoirs; ( iv)
basin analysis, including tectonic and depositional history of sub-basins, and type
reference sections based on detailed well studies; coalbed methane, covering the
targeting and evaluation of potential projects, stimulation and well completion
technology, and reservoir simulation recognising description and multiphase flow
mechanisms in coal; and ( vi) drilling and wellbore engineering including stability of
deviated and horizontal wellbores and formation damage.
The APCRC has had a very successful first year and has exceeded its targets. It has now
been extended in response to the demand for a presence in Western Australia, which is the
industry's greatest growth area, for seismic geophysics research and for an expansion of
geochemnistry research. Curtin University has joined the original APCRC and a new
Petroleum Geophysics program has been created.
Areas of Research Expertise
Organic geochemistry and petrology, reservoir diagenesis, fluid flow modelling,
petroleum geology and geophysics, rock mechanics, reservoir simulation, numerical
modelling, multiphase. pore space physics, wellbore engineering, evaluation and
stimulation of tight reservoirs, seismic geophysics.
Contact Person: Dr A Williams
Address: CSIRO Division of Geomnechanics
Kinnoull Grove
Syndal, Vic, 3149
Tel: ( 03) 881 1289 Fax ( 03) 803 2052 4915 
Attachment H
CRC for Mining Technology and Equipment Coal Extension
Core Participants:
Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre; University of Queensland; CS[ RO, Divisions
of Geoniechanics, Mineral and Processing Engineering, Manufacturing Technology, Coal
and Energy Technology; Australian Mineral Industries Research Association Lid.
Research Focus
The mission of the extended Centre is to expand the current work in mining and mineral
processing and associated equipment development into the same areas in the coal
industry. The Coal Extension will build on the successful work of the CRC for Mining
Technology Equipment ( CTMfE) in the fundamental areas of fracture and rock
characterisation. The CMTE already has a commitment of S1 million per year for 5 years
from BHIP Australia Coal and the new Commonwealth support will significantly increase
the amount of basic coal research of the CUM.
The objectives of the Centre are to: understand the geological and engineering
properties of rocks and coal, which are important in mining and processing; ( ii) develop
mining and mineral and coal beneficiation processes and procedures to solve the technical
problems which the Australian mineral industries will encounter during the next 15 years;
( iii) identify and provide new and improved technologies for the equipment used in the
mining process, including characterisation breakage, transport and processing of rock and
coal leading to a mining equipment manufacturing industry in Australia; and ( iv) train
industry professionals and graduate students at advanced levels to handle the new
technologies. Area of Research Expertise
Fracture and damage mechanics, rock characterisation, continuum and discontinuum
mechanics, fragmientation, mining software, comminution, selective liberation of ores,
instrumentation, monitoring, mining equipment.
Contact Person: Dr D J McKee
Acting Director
Addres: 2643 Moggill Road
Pinjanra Hfills
Queensland 4069
Tel: ( 07) 212 4444 Fax: ( 07) 212 4455
' L16 
Attachment I
Australian Geodynamics CRC
Core Participants:
CSFRo, Division of Geomechanics and Exploration Geoscience; Victorian Institute of
Earth and Planetary Sciences ( Department of Earth Sciences, Monash University;
Department of Geology, La Trobe University; School of Earth Sciences, University of
Melbourne); The Australian Geological Survey Organisation; Digital Equipment
Corporation, Australia.
Research Focus
The Centre will focus on the structural and dynamic processes ( the geodynamics) within
the Earth's crust, particularly on the tectonic evolution of sedimentary basins and
crystalline terrains within Australia. It will involve integration of continental-scale
structural geology, geochronology, reflection seismology and 3D tomography as tools for
determining the structural architecture of the crust, the timing of major tectonic events
and the processes involved in the accumulation of ' world class' mineral end energ
deposits. It will also involve the application of non-linear dynamics to geological
processes and advanced computing systems for 3D visualisation and geological
modelling. The outcome of this research will be a vastly enhanced capacity for
Australia's exploration and mining companies to explore for orebodies and energy
deposits. It will also aid in differentiating between areas of high~ and low economic
potential as a basis for rational decision making in regard to multiple land use.
Area of Research Expertise
Structural geology, geochronology, seismology and 3D tomography, non-linear
dynamics, computer visualisation and geology modelling.
Contact Person: Dr G Price
Address: CSIRO Division of Geomechanics
39 Fairway
NEDLANDS WA 6009
Tel: ( 09) 389 8421 Fax: ( 09) 389 1906 4917 
Attachment J
CRC for Premium Quality Wool
Core Participants:
Department of Animal Science, University of New England; CSIRQ Divisions of Animal
Production and Wool Technology; Western Australian Department of Agriculture;
Department of Animal Science, University of Western Australia; School of Fibre Science
and Technology, University of New South Wales; Wool Research and Development
Corporation. Research Focus
The goal of the CRC is to improve the quality and competitive position of Australian wool
in the world textile fibre market. The programs are: Genetic Technologies to Improve
Wool and Fabric Quality; ( ii) Reducing Wool Tenderness; ( iii) Fibre Structure and
Follicle Function; and ( iv) Education.
The Wool and Fabric Quality program will develop genetic technologies which enable
manipulation of important determninants of textile fibre quality, especially fibre diameter
and at the same time maintain or enhance other economically important aspects of
productivity. The Wool Tenderness program will develop new technologies that increase
tensile strength of wool especially in mediterranean environments where there are
dramatic seasonal variations in feed quality and quantity. The Fibre Structure and Follicle
Function program is comprised of strategic research projects concerned with modifying
follicle function by genetic engineering, with monitoring effects of fibre growth changes
on the composition and structure of the fibre and with determining effects of variation in
these traits on processing performance. Underpinning the three research programs is a
highly innovative education and technology transfer program designed to meet the
requirements of all sectors of the wool industry.
Area of Research Expertise
Genetic engineering, molecular and quantitative genetics, wool metrology, wool biology,
wool processing, wool production, textile fibre science.
Contact Person: Dr L R Piper
Address: CSIRO Division of Animal Production
Pastoral Research Laboratory
ARMIDALE NSW 2350
Tel: ( 067) 78 4000 Fax: ( 067) 78 4358
' I t' -L L 
Attachment K
CRC for the Cattle and Beef Industry ( Meat Quality)
Core Participants:
The U. niversity of New England-Armidale; CSIRO Divisions of Animal Production,
Animal Health, Food Processing, and Tropical Animal Production; NSW Agriculture;
Queensland Department of Primary Industries.
Research Focus
The CRC will develop research ( and education) programs to address the major issues of
meat quality that hold the key to the beef industry's future. The integrated resch
program has four objectives: identify and resolve the key meat science issues that
constrain Australia's ability to meet domestic and export market specifications for meat
quality, at least cost; ( ii) develop molecular and quantitative genetic technologies to breed
cattle suited to new markets; ( iii) design novel feeding and management strategies to
meet meat quality objectives in Australia's difficult environments; and ( iv) address and
resolve major constraints to intensive beef production by eliminating health and welfare
concerns and reducing environmental pollution.
The program will address both the northern and temperate beef industry sectors and the
grass and grain fed production systems. The Centre will establish Australia's first Chair of
Meat Science and will develop postgraduate, diploma and certificate education programs.
The Centre will incorporate major research chiller and boner facilities in commercial
abattoirs and large numbers of pedigree cattle for a multidisciplinary research program.
The CRC will create a minimum of forty new positions for research and technical support
staff. Areas of Research Expertise
Meat science, molecular and quantitative genetics, growth and ruminant nutrition, muscle,
fat and connective tissue biochemistry and receptor physiology, animal health and welfare
including vaccine technology, stress physiology, animal behaviour waste management,
resource engineering for water, soil and air pollution abatement and ecosystem
management, econometic modelling and major meat industry issues.
Contact Person: Dr B Bindon
Address: CSIRO Division of Animal Production
Chiswick Research Station
URALIA NSW 2358
Tel: ( 067) 78 6221 Fax: ( 067) 78 4358 4919 
Attachment L
CRC for Aquaculture
Core Participants:
University of Tasmania; CSIRO Division of Fisheries; Department of Primary Industry,
Queensland; Department of Primary Industry, Fisheries and Energy, Tasmania; NSW
Department of Fisheries; James Cook University; University of Technology, Sydney;
Australian Institute of Marine Science; SALTAS, Tasmania; Department of Industry and
Fisheries, Northern Territory; Darwin Pearl Shell Hatchery; Mossman Central Mill;
University of Central Queensland; Northern Territory University; South Australian
Research and Development Institute.
Research Focus
This Centre will provide the focus for a coordinated national research strategy for
Australian aquaculture and the technological basis for a sustainable industry which is
internationally competitive and environmentally accptable.
The research will be carried out in five related programs: health protection and
maintenance, investigating the alternatives to chemically dependent disease control and a
better understanding of the physiology of Australian aquaculture species; ( ii) nutrition
and feed development, examining the nutritional needs of each species and methods of
meeting those requirements from existing and novel sources; ( iii) propagation ad
genetics developing techniques for the control of reproduction and improved product
~ quality through genetic selection; ( iv) production efficiency and environmental
management, optimising stocking densities and obtaining a better understanding of the
environental impact of culture techniques; and product technology, determining the
aspects of nutrition, harvesting and handling which optimise the quality and
marketability of the farmed product.
Area of Research Expertise
Nutrition, feed development, hatchery technology, genetics, reproduction, environmental
management, vaccine development, immunology, fish physiology, disease diagnosis,
health maintenance, food technology, growout technology.
Contact Person: Professor N Forteath
Address: Department of Applied Science
University of Tasmania
Newnham Drive
NEWNHAM TAS 7250
Tel: ( 002) 202 762 Fax: ( 008) 202 765
4920 
Attachment M
CRC for Sustainable Cotton Production
Core Participants:
CSIRO Divisions of Plant Industry, and Entomology; The University of New England,
Department of Agronomy and Soil Science; The University of Sydney, School of
Biological Sciences, Departments of Agricultural Chemistry, Soil Science, Microbiology
and Agricultural Economics; Queensland Department of Primary Industries; NSW
Agriculture; Cotton Research and Development Corporation.
Research Focus
The aim of the Centre is to develop and implement sustainable cropping systems for the
Australian Cotton industry through four programs: Resource protection; ( ii) Crop
protection; ( iii) Product development; and ( iv) Education.
The program protecting the resource base and environment aims to determine the fate of
pesticides and develop strategies to minimise contamination of soil and water. Additional
research to improve soil structure, soil fertility and water use efficiency will be done. Thie
crop protection program aims to reduce dependence on chemical pesticides by utilising
host plant resistance, biological control and biological pesticides. Ecological studies of
insects, weeds and diseases will also aid in the derivation of alternative crop protection
measures. The product development program will continue to improve yield and crop
adaptability through traditional breeding along with an increasing emphasis on genetic
engineering for disease and pest tolerance. Increased attention will be directed towards
ensuring that the fibre quality of Australian cottons meet market demands. The education
program aims to transfer new management strategies to growers through demonstration
experiments on farm, through decision support packages and through new courses at
University on crop management, particularly for accreditation of private crop consultants.
All core partners will supervise post graduate students.
Areas of Research Expertise
Fate of chemical residues, clay soil structure and fertility, pest management, host plant
resistance, Heliothis ecology, crop breeding, genetic engineering decision support
packages. Contact Person: Dr G A Constable
Address: CSIRO Cotton Research Unit
P0 Box 59
Narrabri NSW 2390
Tel: ( 067) 931105 Fax: ( 067) 93 1186 4921 
Attachment N
CRC for International Floriculture
Core Participants:
Calgene Pacific Pty Lid; Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Monash
University; Department of Botany, University of Melbourne; David Syme Faculty of
Business, Monash University; Victorian Department of Agriculture/ Strategic Research
Foundation; Horticulture R&amp; D Corporation.
Research Focus
Ile objective of the Centre is to establish a world class, industry-led R&amp; D facility for
creating proprietary genetic engineering technology for the floriculture industry. This
technology will be used to develop new and proprietary plant products possessing ' market
driven' characteristics unattainable, or difficult to attain, by conventional breeding.
The research programs will focus on the genetic manipulation of traits that are known to
affect consumer choice. These include colour, fragrance, form and post-harvest
longevity. The Centre will also develop improved gene transfer methodology and
technology for effective containment of the modified germplasm.
Market Research programs will ensure that currently fragmnented market information is
consolidated and extended to provide an accurate basis for the Centre's product
development programs and allow formulation of strategic marketing plans for the
industry.
A key aspect of the Centre's strategy will be the promotion of training programs to ensure
that the Australian floriculture industry is able to fully exploit the commercial potential of
the Centre's technology.
Areas of Research Expertise
Plant secondary metabolism, flower development, molecular genetics of pigment
biosynthesis and senescence, pollination biology, post-harvest physiology, plant
transformation, agribusiness/ international marketing.
Contact Person: Dr M Dalling
Address: Calgene Pacific Pty LUd
16 Gipps Street
Collingwood Vic 3066
Tel: ( 03) 419 9844 Fax: ( 03) 416 1761
4 jI'--
Attachment 0
CRC for Food Industry Innovation
Core Participants:
University of New South Wales, Departments of Food Science and Technology and
Biotechnology and Schools of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Microbiology
and Immunology; CSIRO, Divisions of Food Processing and Human Nutrition; Arnott's;
Burns Philp and Mauri Laboratories; and Goodman Fielder Wattie.
Research Focus
The major objective is to provide a coordinated research and educational base to generate
improved and novel natural food ingredients, principally through~ the use of traditional
food micro organisms. Natural ingredients which will be produced will improve food
flavour and texture, provide substitutes for fats, give natural colours and will improve the
quality and nutritional value of stored foods. Certain ingredients, when formulated into
foods will have beneficial effects on health and well-being. Development of ingredients
will involve a detailed understanding of the molecular and kinetic basis of ingredient
production, improvement of productivity using both genetic and physiological procedures,
bio process development at laboratory and pilot scale level, ingredient recovery, food
formulation, nutrient evaluation and efficacy trials. This program will lead to export
growth by Australian food industries, of both ingredients and value-added food products
which contain the natural ingredients.
Areas of Research Expertise
Molecular genetics and genetic engineering of food grade micro organisms; cellular
physiology and biochemistry, gut microbiology and microbial ecology; laboratory and
pilot scale bioprocess engineering; ingredient recovery and purification; ingredient
efficacy in food formulation and nutritional evaluation.
Contact Person: Professor G M Wilson
Address: Department of Food Science Technology
University of New South Wales
P0 Box 1
KENSINGTON NSW 2033
Telephone: ( 02) 697 5350 Fax: ( 02) 313 6635 4923 
7 Attachment P
CRC for Ecologically Sustainable Development of the Great
Barrier Reef
Core Participants:
Association of Marine Park Tourism Operators, Australian Institute of Marine Science,
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, James Cook University, Queensland
Depazrment of Primary Industries.
Research Focus
The CRC will work with industry and environmental managers to address strategic and
tactical issues relating to the ecologically sustainable development and multiple use of
the Great Barrier Reef region. The research programs will investigate the status of the
Great Barrier Reef environment and its relationship to a wide range of regional and local,
external and internal stresses. The CRC also aims to find positive solutions to
environmental, social and engineering problems associated with the increasing use of the
region by tourist operators and recreational fishermen and to develop models to predict
the consequences of various development scenarios. The research outcomes will be
transformed into practical improvements via the extension program which will also act as
a two way interface with industry. The education program will ensure that the benefits of
the collaborative research conducted by the CRC are spread through relevant professional
communities. Area of Research Expertise
Marine ecology, marine chemistry, engineering design, tourism and its socioecological
context, hydrodynamic and numerical modelling.
Contact Person: Dr D Kinsey
Address: Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
PO Box 1379
TOWNSVILLE OLD 4810
Tel: ( 077) 81 8704 Fax: ( 077) 72 6093
4924 
Attachment 0
CRC for Freshwater Ecology
Core Participants:
University of Canberra; ACT' Government; Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation;
CSLRO Institute of Natural Resources; Melbourne Water, Murray Darling Basin
Commission; NSW Fisheries.
Research Focus
The Centre aims to provide the ecological basis for sustainable management of
Australian temperate region surface waters. There will be six major program areas within
the Centre. These are Flowing Waters, Standing Waters and Eutrophication, Floodplain
and Wetland Ecology, Water Quality and Ecological Assessment, Urban Stormwater
Management and Fish Ecology and Management. Each program will have elements of
short-term applied research and longer term more fundamental research.
The effective resolution of the many applied problems facing water managers in
Australia demands a basic understanding of the major processes and organisms involved.
Australian water bodies are fundamentally different from many better studied overseas
systems. They differ in turbidity, salinity and variability of flow. Australian work is
essential if we are to understand these systems and develop appropriate management
guidelines. Areas of Research Expertise
Freshwater ecology, computer modelling, statistics, environmental chemistry, water
quality, fish biology, riparian vegetation, microbial ecology, analytical instrumentation.
Contact Person: Professor P Cullen
Address: Water Research Centre
University of Canberra
Kirinani Street
BRUCE ACT' 2616
Tel: ( 06) 201 5047 Fax: ( 06) 201 5168 4925 
Attachment R
CRC for Southern Hemisphere Meteorology
Core Participants:
Centre for Dynamical Meteorology, Monash University; Bureau of Meteorology Research
Centre; CSIRO, Division of Atmospheric Research; Cray Research ( Australia) Pty Lid.
Research Focus
The Centre will create, for the first time in Australia, a major world-class university
centre for meteorological research and graduate training. The Centre has three research
programs: Ozone; ( ii) Global Transport Modelling; and ( iii) Southern Hemisphere
Climate Dynamics.
The Ozone program will investigate the mechanisms that control stratospheric ozone,
especially in the Australian region; will develop and improved model for long-termi
( multi-year) ozone modelling and assessment of the impact of stratospheric pollution, and
will investigate the effects of ozone depletion on climate change and vice-versa. The
Global Transport Modelling program will use modelling and mathematical techniques to
infer sources of important atmospheric constituents such as carbon dioxide and methane
from observed concentrations, and will develop a new global atmospheric transport model
to study global atmospheric pollution. The third research program involves investigation
of Southern Hemisphere Climate Dynamics, and is aimed at the delineation of the
fundamental mechanisms controlling the general circulation of the southern hemisphere
atmosphere and its variability.
An important aspect of the Centre is the creation of a comprehensive graduate program in
Meteorology at Monash University, which is possible only through the involvement of all
the participants.
Areas of Research Expertise
Dynamical meteorology, atmospheric chemistry and physics, numerical weather and
climate modelling, atmospheric general circulation, stratospheric dynamics, data analysis
and inverse methods.
Contact Person: Dr D J Karoly
Address: Centre for Dynamical Meteorology
Monash University
Wellington Road
CLAYTON VIC 3168
Tel: ( 03) 565 4413 Fax: ( 03) 565 4403
4926 
Attachment S
CRC for Tropical Rainforest Ecology and Management
Core Participants:
James Cook University of North Queensland; The University of Queensland; Griffith
University; CSIRO Tropical Forest Research Centre; Wet Tropics Management
Authority. Research Focus
The objective of this CRC is to establish a National Centre for Tropical Rainforest
Ecology and Management. The Centre will focus on the elucidation of tropical rainforest
biodiversity and enhance the world heritage values of Australia's wet tropics; study
dynamic processes of rainforest ecosystems and disturbance in order to develop systems
for sound and comprehensive management of rainforest heritage; conduct research
necessary for rehabilitating degraded land and for ensuring ecologically sustainable uses
of rainforest resources in commercial and recreational areas; train students in tropical
forest ecology for future research and management; and communicate with rainforest
resource managers and local communities.
Area of Research Expertise
Biodiversity, resource dynamics, forest rehabilitation and management, rainforest
tourism, education, research support.
Contact Person: Professor I Kikkawa
Address: Deparnment of Zoology
The University of Queensland
BRISBANE OLD 4072
Tel: ( 07) 365 2966 Fax: ( 07) 365 1655 4927 
Attachment T
CRC for Vaccine Technology
Core Participants:
Queensland Institute of Medical Research; CSIRO Division of Animal Health, Animal
Production, and Tropical Animal Production; University of Melbourne, Department of
Microbiology; The Water and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research; CSL lid; Biotech
Australia Pty Ltd.
Research Focus
The Centre will bring together the Australian vaccine industry with basic and applied
research organisations to develop generic technologies for the design and development of
future vaccines; assist industry in the application of these strategies to specific medical
and veterinary vaccines; and train the scientists and technologists required to strengthen
Australia's vaccine industry.
Vaccines are among the most cost-effective measures to protect the health of man and
animals. However, while antigens from a number of organisms for which vaccines are
sough~ t have been defined, it has proved difficult to induce protective immune responses
using these antigens. Industry has defined specific problems which are impeding vaccine
development, and to address these problems a strategic research plan containing three
programs was developed. These programs are: antigen processing; ( ii) delivering and
directing the immune response; and ( iii) responsiveness and maintenance of the immune
response. In these programs specific vaccines will be targeted in both the human and
animal fields. However, the benefits of the strategic research plan will flow to many
different vaccine programs.
Area of Research Expertise
Molecular and cellular immunology, peptide and protein chemistry, vector biology.
Contact Person: Dr M F Good
Address: Queensland Institute of Medical Research
The Bancroft Centre
300 Herston Road
BRISBANE OLD 4029
Tel: ( 07) 362 0400 Fax: ( 07) 362 0104
4928 



VI1IML MlIM1II LK 147/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ XCEATING MP
COMMITMENT OF AUSTRALIAN FORCES TO SOMALIA
The Government has decided today to provide a lrge-scale
commitment of Australian forces to the United Nations
mandated Operation Restore Hope in Somalia.
Tragic famine and clan warfare in Somalia have taken the
lives of an estimated quarter of a million Somalia and
two million more are immediately at risk of starvation.
The extent and severity of the famine has been horribly
compounded by the total collapse of law and order.
Predatory bands of gunmen have preyed upon aid shipments
for private gain in a way that the entire international
community has found repugnant.
In this appalling situation Australian and other
international Non-Government Organisations ( MO0s) have
shown great courage and compassion, struggling against
frightening odds to get food and medicine to the
suffering and the starving.
Australians have been rightly proud of the efforts of
these groups. The Australian public have privately
donated an estimated $ 11 million to the relief effort in
Somalia, and the Government has added S8.5 million in
this calendar year.
In this situation, the United Nations has tried to
facilitate the delivery of aid. It created~ UNOSOM~ aG a
peacekeeping operation.
But UNOSOM was slow to get underway and was not
structured adequately to deal with the problems it faced.
Somalis continued to die.
That is why we welcomed President Bush's action in
Offering to provide substantial US troops to a now
coalition of forces that would try to enforce the peace
in Somalia, not simply keep it.
TTO00N TV: ZT Z6-3a'ST : 3 
Operation Restore Hope is a unique operation. The
United Nations has never before sanctioned intervention
on such a scale in the internal affairs 6-t a memnberstate,
for humanitarian purposes.
It is important that Operation Restore Hope succeed, both
for the people of Somalia and to show that after the Cold
War, the international community can cooperate to relieve
suffering. The Australian Government has decided therefore to
provide an infantry battalion group of about
including a r educed squadron of armoured personnel
carriers ( APC&amp;) and associated administrative support.
Initial elements of the battalion group will leave
Australia before Christmas. The others will arrive in
Somalia by about 10 January 1993.
The battalion group will be provided in the timeframe
required by the coalition of forces to enable it to make
a worthwhile contribution to the overall operation. The
estimated additional cost of sending a battalion group to
Operation Restore Hope will be $ 19.5 million.
ThQ battalion will be in Somalia for 17 weeks, after
which it will be withdrawn.
We will then expand the size of the Movement Control Unit
( MCU) which we have already committed to the follow-up
UNOSOM operation from 30 to 45 personnel.
The contribution of about 900 personnel will be the
largest commitment of Australiian ground forces Overseas
in the last 20 years.
With our already substantial commitment in Cambodia, this
places limitations on Australia's scope to participate in
further acekeeping peffort a in the near futuee õ . But
Australia is proud to take its place as part of this
coalition to enforce and keep a just and humanitarian
peace.
My thoughts and those of the Government and Australian
people are also with the men and women of our battalion
group as they prepare for a very different January from
the traditional Australian summler holiday period.
We wish them every success in their task and look forward
to welcoming them home safely to Australia at the end of
their deployment.
CANBERRA 15 December 1992
ZO/ ZO'd 110* ON IL7: ZT Z6* 3aG'ST :_ 1331 



TEL
PRIME MINISTER 148/ 92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
The Government has decided today that the time has come to amend the Citizenship Act
and the Oath of Allegiance.
The Government has proposed to introduce, at the earliest opportunity, a new preamble to
the Citizenship Act which defincs citizenship as a. common bond involving reciprocal
rights and obligations uniting all Australians.
The Legislation proposes that, in future, people seeking to become Australian citizens will
pledge, or swear as an oath, the following:
" From this time forward, ( under God)
I pledge my loyalty to Australia and its people,
whose democratic beliefs I share,
whose rights and liberties I rcspcct, and
whose laws I will uphold and obey."
Cabinet has agreed that the amended Citizenship Act and Oath of Allegiance will better
reflect the contcmporary reality of Australia and our national aspirations.
CANBERRA 17 DECEMBER 1992 17. Dec. 92 18: 09 No. 011 P. 01/ 01 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PR"% ME MINISTER. 711EE HON P. J. KEATING, MOP
DOORSTOP, BOTANIC GARDENS, ADELAIDE, 21 DECEMBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime AMister, the newspapers this morning have got a poll which shows that thc
Coalition's Fightback Mark II seems to havc been well received. Do you believe
that that poil will be sustained?
PM: No, those polls are, I mean wel see what the polls say. That will take a while, a
poll over the -weekend on a mautter like this is just next to worthless. We knew
News limited were doing this polL we told thL-rn dial last week, that they apparently
wanted a story for today. I don't think this is the one to take much notice of.
J: Are you concerned that it has turned the corner a bit for the Opposition?
PM: Dr Hewson, is running on a policy he doesn't believe, ti~ s is the biggest con job in
Australian history. This guy was telling me, Iwo weeks ago, the stimulatoty policies
were wrong. He said One Nation was a mistake and now he is trying to emulate
the Government's policies. What rve said in the House is that if Australia wants
stimulatory policies delivered, let the people who actually believe in them do them
and thafs the Government. He is running on policies he doesn't believe, on money
he doesn't have. I notice this morning he's trying to back away now from Telecom,
Owa is the centre piec-e of his funding on Friday, is this morning, he's ninning back
away from it. people have got to understand this about Telecom either Dr
Hewson drives a competitor out, that is Optus, to lif the profitability of Telecom to
sell it or he lets Telecom do the Qomrnercial thing and put in timed local phone
calls. You notice in his statermt there was no talk what so ever of declines in
prices or phone prices which the Governmnent has, that is, inflation minus five per
cent which we have as the guidelines for Telecom charting none of dial. To makec
Telecom a profitable show to sell it, you've got to let it do the totally commercial
thing and the totally commercial thing is timed local phone calls. There is no way
Tclcom could be floated to private institutions without it being able to charge
market prices for its product and that is, timned local calls. So, Dr Iifewson today in 
a quite startling display of back pedalling, is running off the Telecon thing which
last Friday was the centre piece of his funding.
J: You said One Nation is ten months old, is it time for a face lift beforc the next
federal election.-
PM: You say that, but look, the Liberal party has come to our policy, we haven't come
to theirs. They are the ones who now say stimulator. policies, they are the ones
saying One Nation was right. Remember John Hcwson said, look I took a year to
put this policy together, he said this last year, he took a year to put this together, he
said we thought about this, we've dotted every we've crossed every' t, what he
told us last Friday was that Fightback was wrong and what was right was the One
Nation policy of a stimulus and basically a policy of inclusion tbr the community.
He is the one who has had to shift ground, not the Govcmcnt. So, it's not a
matter of giving One Nation a facelili, One Nation is tiding on supremely as I said
as an idea. The thing that has had it is old Fightback Mark I, she's in the garbage
bin.
J: So we can't expect any more givc-a-ways before the next before the next
PM: I think it is very intcresting in Australian politics, after a decade of abstemious
economics, the media of Australia arc now inviting the parties to spend their heads
off.
J: Would you say if* th e trends in these early polls are sustained, that makes a
February election very unlikely'?
PM: Why should I debate election dates with you jokers.
J: Is today's cnironmental story the start of an election campaign?
PM: That was there anyway, that's been there for months, after months of work and
planning, this was on. We set this date three or four months ago. The thing is polls
taken over Saturday after look, you don't have to be a political sciCntist to know
this fact a poll taken on Saturday after a statement released on Friday is rubbish.
J: Prime Minister, last wcck Senator Richardson said that although the environmental
movement wasn't exactly in love with the Labor party that Labor could still depend
on the votes because the alternative was even more unattractive. Is this what today
is all about?.
PM: No, what today is about just continuing to build on the job. The soil and water
issues, the larger role on Murray Darling river system, which the Commonwealth
can play because it is a trans-state national issue, is, I think, another important
thing to be doing in the environment agenda. As is a lot of the measures today, to
deal with feral animals, to deal with nimosa pigra, to deal with locking up some of 
these pastoral lease areas which have been part of contiguous envirownent
protection tones. Thiese are all item~ s on the agenda, the study into Shoalwater Bay,
one of the last great virgin areas of the Australian east coast. Thcsw arc things
which come from a party that is interested in the environment again it is the same
point in terms of stimnulatory policy, the Government believes in it and delivers
those policies. In terms of having a decent saiety net and including the Australian
community in the policy,, the Governmient. believes it and deliver-, the policies. The
same as the-envirornent, the Government delivers it and belheves the policies. The
Opposition don't believe it and they% a re out there now tryin to say that the hard
hearted view of last week is now all off. There was a Richard Nixon phrase. I can't
remember it, it was inoperative, I think. It has all the sincerity of that sort of
treatmnent and I just think the public are much too sharp for Dr Hewson, they'll sce
right through him and his cynical Federal Director, NMr Robb and his poll driven
research and his poll driven policies.
J: Would you see any special flood relief for South Australia?
PM: Thurc is a permanent Commonwealth-State regime for flood and drought relief and
any problems in South Australia will come up under that regime.
J: How important is South Australia in the reckoning for the next election, Will it be
an important decider -for yo-u'?
PM: The thing is this. Dr Howson has a South Australian policy, it's a zero tariffs, zero
Adelaide policy. That's his policy. Zero L-anfi; zero Adelaide. On Friday he never
shifted that policy, he stuc; k to Lzfl) tariffs for the motor vehicle industry and that
will see and in mainy other areas of the manufacturing industry the largest base of
South Australian employment decimated by imports. H~ e had a chance to consider
his position, he took it, but didn't change.
J: Melbourne's Northland College is due to be closed do you have any comment on
Mr Kennett's actions there?
PM: Dr Hewsons says IMr Kennelt'. s problemn policies are the cause of my problems. Mr
Kennett doesn't have a OST. Mr Kennett is running on Dr Hcwson's industrial
relations policy. Thle only thing is he put it into place first because he got elected.
Now Dr Hewson is disparaging in rhctoric Mr Kcrneit, but still adoping,
absolutely, all of his policies. The main thrust, that is to put eight million
Australians onto commron law contracts. What we are seeing from D r Hcwson is
no change. I Iis policy is basically this, prices up and wages down. Prices up under
a consumption tax. wages down under an indi~ itrial relations policy where eight
million Australians award conditions and pay are destroyed and where he pushes
people onto comnion law contracts. All that Jeff Kennett had done for the rest of
us is show us in action what John Ilfewson's policy had in the print and it is pretty
c; ynical of himnfow to disparage Mr Kennett when he, Dr I lewson, is the author of
Mr Kenniett's policy. 
J; The Northland Clege is an AIboriginal College, the Melbourne people are pretty
upset.
PM: Mr Kennett is closing schools all ovur Victoria and again he's got to deal with his
own community on these things. but what he has done is introduce the first leg of'
John Illewson's and John Howard's Industrial relations policy and in doing that he's
done in a sense some serneie to the nation in alerting Australians to what they can
expect from a Hewson Governmcni because Dr Hewson again had the opportunity
lWt Friday to ditch this crazy industrial relations policy. All he did was reassert it.
J: Prime Minister, how confident are you that Labor will pick up green preferences at
the next fecderal Clection?
PM: Anyone who is genuinely interested in the environmecnt has got to look at the
environmental record of the Government and its obvious, the whole Party's obvious
concern and commitment to the environmncnt. Not just the Government, but the
Party. And if it is a two party choice, if you left it to the likes of M~ r Reith and Dr
Hewson they'd mine Hyde Park.
J: Mr Keating, Standard and Poors don't seem tot) % concernedth at Coalition policies
would be that negative tbr Australia's credit rating, how do you react to thar.
PM: And we are not too concerned about what they think.
J: But they have just reaffirmed the..
PM: In political terms, what's that matter.
Premier Arnold ha.-asked you to break the nexus between Commonwcalth public
servants and politicians pay, have you considered that yet?
PM: Understand ths, there's nothing about the I iherals, you see them when they are
unfetteredA, at their natural worst. Thu night that Nkfr Kennett was putting through
the cuts to peoples pay, he was putting through a wage increase for State ministers.
And of course would be, they think, horn to rule squad think the world could never
pay them enough. " o in a totalty phoney display of contrition for this, Dr I lewson
said on Friday, yes he'd cut Ml's' pay back. Ml's' pays have been caught up under
a now long standing series of arrangements where they are treated the sa1me
basically as members of the public service, he knows that.
ends. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ENVIRONMENT STATEMENT LAUNCH ADELAIDE, 21 DECEMBER 1992
Ladies and gentlemen
It's a pleasure to be in Adelaide. It always is.
As I have said before, it has always seemed to me to be a
brave city built in an environment which is beautiful and
benign, but very often not easy, and not infrequently
harsh. A city poised between the desert and the deep blue
sea. In Adelaide, one is always aware of both the natural
environment and the built one the natural and the human
heritage. It is the ideal place to launch this statement.
Ten months ago, in a completely different environment to
this one, with the birdcalls coming only from the
Opposition, I announced a package of Government initiatives
under the name " One Nation".
The principle of One Nation was strength through
partnerships. Partnerships of all kinds: between
governments local, State and Commonwealth between
business and government, between employees and employers,
between community and nation.
The idea of One Nation was to lay the basis of a stronger
Australia by calling on all our resources, human and
material, our social and economic strengths, our
intellectual strengths.
To include all Australians in the process of nation
building: and, immediately, in the great effort to bring
on economic recovery and the jobs that will go with it.
Today the effects of One Nation continue to be felt as the
projects we announced get underway.
Just as importantly, I believe, the idea of one Nation has
had some influence on the way we Australians think about
the future.
I think One Nation went some way to extending the idea of
cooperation which in the 1980s had developed so effectively
in important areas of the nation's life.
PRIME MINISTER 
I think it had some influence on the way we confront
Australia's problems and work towards our national goals.
I say these things today because I think this Statement is
concerned with one of our great national goals the
protection and rehabilitation of our environment.
I say it because in many important regards the Statement
embodies the idea and the aims of One Nation.
And I say it because the spirit which One Nation invoked is
already there in the national environment effort.
Today's launch is in part a celebration of the work already
being done right across Australia, by local government,
community organisations and individuals.
And I take this my opportunity to salute their work.
Nothing better illustrates the interdependence of
Australians and their communities than the environment.
Nothing more emphatically makes the point that all our
state borders and provincial differences still leave one
fact unassailable that this in one continent and one
nation. And, for good or bad, what we do in one part of it very
often effects another.
What one Australian does to the environment effects another
Australian. It makes the point very clearly what we do against each
other weakens Australia.
What we do in partnership strengthens us all.
If there is a dominant theme in this Environment Statement
it is Australia's soil_ and water.
Soil and water are basics of life. If we cannot guarantee
their ' integrity-we breach a fundamental trust to this and
future generations, and to the land we call our own.
In doing so, of course, we also deny ourselves the product
of the land. The degeneration of our soil and water has
already cost us millions of dollars.
Whether it is in the colour and taste of Adelaide's water,
or the blue/ green algae on the Darling, the consequences of
abuse and neglect also come at an incalculable cost to our
confidence and self-regard.
In truth, I don't think we can spoil the essentials of life
and degrade the land without depressing our spirit. 
By now everybody is aware that the main focus of the
Environment Statement is the Murray-Darling our greatest
river system, a huge national resource, and a part of
Australia indelibly inscribed in our history and culture.
Nothing better illustrates the network of environmental
interdependence than the Murray-Darling a national artery
which begins life in Queensland and sustains life in South
Australia. At present the Murray Darling is being seriously degraded.
No one should underestimate the environmental and economic
costs of this degradation.
As the statement says: " This has already cost hundreds of
millions of dollars, poisoned a wellspring of our heritage,
and destroyed huge areas of formerly productive land."
At present, ten towns along the Darling are responsible for
ninety per cent of sewage phosphate entering the river.
This will end.
With Australian technology we will eliminate these sources
of pollution and so improve water quality and reduce the
potential for blue/ green algae.
While the repair and protection of the Murray Darling Basin
is a centrepiece of the initiatives announced today, the
Government's Statement reflects the fact that the
community's concern and the environment's needs are broad,
and getting broader. The Statement announces:
Our intention to create a national system of marine
and land reserves.
A comprehensive study of the environmental and
economic values of the. Shoalwatez-Bay area.
The nomination of the Riversleigh fossil site and the
Naracoorte Caves for World Heritage listing.
More research into alternative energy sources, such as
ethanol and solar energy.
Four more Cooperative Research Centres with an
environmental focus.
An additional eight million dollars for the control of
weeds and feral animals, with another five million
specifically for the control of mimosa pigra which is
threatening to invade Kakadu.
Finance for the purchase of Calperum pasto-ral lease
near Renmark to ensure its protection and
sustainability. 
State of the environment reportinct and other
educatio-nal ti6oolsni-essary for Governments and the
community to make informed decisions.
And of course a great deal more.
Not all of these are high profile or controversial matters,
but they are all initiatives of substance, all initiatives
which build on what we have been doing, all links in the
environmental protection chain.
Of course there is more to be done than any Government
could do in a Statement such as this.
But you can be assured that we will keep working away at
the list.
For too long the myth that. jobs-and environmental
protection are incompatible has tended to govern our
thinking. In truth, while some conflicts will inevitably remain for
Governments and communities to resolve, it is increasingly
evident that the economic sustainability of Australia is
dependent on the environmental sustainability of Australia.
Whether you're talking about tourism or our rural
industries, or vital water supplies, we are all now
conscious of the need to maintain our natural resource base
to sustain them.
In other cases, like waste management and re-cycling, the
protection of the environment itself constitutes a booming
industry.
The point is made in the statement: " the drive for
environmentally friendly industries and the protection of
our environment is part of the economic drive part of the
international competitive drive in which Australia is
t engaged." So we will continue to look at ways to achieve the dual
objectives of _ environmental protection and job creation.
I was very pleased to receive recently a proposal for a
" green jobs" strategy jointly developed by the ACTU and the
Australian Co6nservatidon Foundation.
You can be sure that the Government is well-disposed to
this sort of initiative and we will be giving the proposal
our urgent consideration and expect to be able to help
bring the ideas to fruition.
Now no doubt there will those who say that an ACTU/ ACF
_. 1iaison__ 1s an unholy alliance.
But I would argue that in fact it is one of the natural
partnerships on which we can build a national response. 
0 Really, it is no longer acceptable, or even possible, to
retreat to ideology or prejudice or slogans as far as the
environment is concerned.
The environment is a central, main game issue in which all
Australians are involved.
Living in the built environment might lead most of us away
from this conclusion but in fact, as the people of
Adelaide would know very well, we who live in the towns and
cities do not escape our relationship with the natural
environment. We depend on it for our resources.
And for the national wealth in which all of us share.
For our recreational pleasure and spiritual inspiration.
For our soil, air and water.
The environment provides us with the basics of life.
This Statement is informed by that simple fact.
All our lives will be better and Australia will be stronger
for the things that it will do.
Thank you for having me today. 


RETROT: Mr Keating, almost half the funding has been set aside to combat water degradation. Why the accent on water quality.
PM: &nbsp;Well, because the Murray Darling river system on which most of this money will be spent is largely a sort of Commonwealth, it's an area where the Commonwealth can be involved. It crosses States, it's a trans-State issue, it's one where we're already playing the role in the-Murray-Darling Basin Commission but where more needs to be done and where we need to remove some of the phosphorus which is getting into the river from sewerage plants and what have you. So we're taking that on as a much bigger issue over the course of the coming year. This Statement also deals with other things such as, we're having a full and open assessment in the environmental and economic values of Shoalwater Bay area in north Queensland; we're declaring Riversleigh's fossil site in Queensland and the Naracoorte caves of Sth Australia nominated for world Heritage listing. We've also got programs to deal with feral animals and also Mimosa Pigra that problem which is invading the Kakadu. So it's a very broad statement. Again, it's another step along the way for the Government in a long environmental protection program which we began with the Gordon below Franklin in 1983.
RETROT: TO what extent does it build on Bob Hawke's 1989 Environment Statement to which I think was in the lead up to the 1990 election wasn't it.
PM: Yes, well they all have a common theme to them. That is, we believe that protecting the natural environment is not just a good social thing to do but a good economic thing to do and that we have to grow the country in an environmentally friendly and sensible way. And these are issues which for where the Commonwealth needs to be involved which I think probably they won't succeed in being dealt with.
&nbsp;RETROT: How far has that one billion trees program progressed.
PM: Well it has substantially. I mean I'm not addressing that today, but it's a program from sometime back, but it's still going on.
RETROT: what do you make of Tasmanian Greens' leaders criticism, Bob Brown, I'm talking about, that the Government would be better off stopping the felling of trees in places like Tasmania rather than concentrating on trying to plant and grow new trees along the Murray-Darling River Basin.
PM: Well I think I've tried to get that balance right between plantation of old growth forest, it's a long debate but the big declarations and reservations of forests in Tasmania have been of course, done largely at the hands of the Commonwealth Government.
RETROT: I seem to recall that Bob Hawke, in his Environment Statement, promised to get out of native forest wood chipping by the Year 2000. Ie that a commitment that will be adhered to.
&nbsp;PM: Well, it's a complex subject, you can't give simple commitments about it, but I think that obviously plantation has got great potential to it. But again, it's not easy to plant on former agricultural land. I mean, what we're finding with some particular timbers like eucalypt that there are distortions with it, and in fact one of the things that that co-operative research centre in Hobart is looking at in terms of eucalypt and eucalypt genetics, is dealing with some of the problems of growing plantation on former agricultural land. But plantation is one of the ways to go.
RETROT: How important is today's statement as a political document, rather than an environmental document.
PM: Well it was planned some time ago 3 or 4 months ago. I think it is important to keep this agenda going. I mean, I think we're reminded all the time of these algal blooms on some of the major river systems. We know our water quality is declining and in Adelaide for instance, which has its water quality governed by the quality of the Murray-Darling system, that city relies upon water in this system, so therefore, it is something which we need to keep plugging away at. And I think that's the value of it, it's not so much, I mean, if it's got a political value, fine, but it's economic and environmental value is pretty clear.
RETROT What about &nbsp;the timing of it though, so close to Christmas and just after the release of Dr John Hewson's &nbsp;Fightback Mark II.
PM Well, it was timed months ago. We had this arranged months ago.
RETROT: No attempt at stealing thunder here.
PM. Oh, no, no. Well he's the thunder stealer. He's the guy that told us a week ago the stimulatory policies were wrong, that it was irresponsible to spend money as I spent it in one Nation, that we didn't need to stimulate the economy, what we needed to cut was $7, OOOM out of spending.
RETROT Now that you've mentioned Dr Hewson, turning to the Opposition's reborn Fightback package, Dr Howson said on AM this morning that the pressure is back on the Government. In it?
PH: No, I think the pressure is back on him. I mean, the fact is that he's the one who said the stimulatory policies were not necessary. I mean what we've got at the moment, this is the biggest con job in Australian political history. This is a man who's running on policy he doesn't believe, and funded by money he doesn't have. I mean, he said to us, One Nation is wrong, spending a role for Government in the economy to spend was wrong and irresponsible and at the Budget he made a long speech about how we ought to cut S7B out of the spending.
RETROT: But is he back in the running.
PM: He's now saying, well, hang on, that's all wrong, my Fightback package which I said to you I took a year to prepare, is now wrong, I've got to change it, radically change it, and in changing it of course, he's changed it only at the margin and all of the nasties are based on a GST, it's still there raising $ 22a; he's still got Jeff Kennett's industrial relations policy; he's still got zero tariffs it's largely what he started with.
RETROT Yes, but the two aspects of Fightback Mark I, the original Fightback, that you've been beating the Opposition around the head with very successfully f or any number of months now, they are of course the GST on food and cutting the dole after 9 months, they're now gone, what sort of tactics will you now employ to keep attacking them.
PM: Well, Jules, let me make this point to you. Fightback Mark I GST raised $ 27B, that's over half the income tax of the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth raises $ 49B this year in income tax, it was originally $ 27B. It will now be $ 22B. So you can see, with food out, it's still a monster of a tax which will tax all your clothing, services, and practically every other item in the economy. And of course the thing is this. If Dr Hewson were to win the election, the Treasury would say to him, when he was designing the GST, look you can't have exemptions like this. It won't work with these exemptions. And what you'd have is Dr Hewson giving us another press conference saying look I'm sorry about this, but I've now been told I can't really, look I would have liked to exclude food but I have really been told now I can't exclude food and it's back in, but I'll adjust the compensation package. Look, you can't believe this guy.
&nbsp;RETROTs What's your reaction to the way the business community has reacted to the reborn package. I mean, various business leaders have spoken in terms of a welcome boost to-confidence. That's good news isn't it.
&nbsp;PM: Well, I think that there will always be a few people barracking f or those sorts of policies. I mean, a business will always take what you can give them. I gave them a huge depreciation packager early in the year, in One Nation. The package which Dr Hewson is offering is actually a tax cut for investment already in place; not just new investment to encourage new investment, but a tax cut by faster depreciation for investment already in place. it will do nothing to add any capital stock to the economy but just cost the budget. But of course if you go and give business money they'll say thank you very much. I'm not surprised at that. It's a matter of where his priorities are.
RETROT: There are some heavyweights in business though, I'm talking about Ian Salmon?, Chairman of the Business Council of -Australia'_ Economic and Financial panel. He's also, as -you well know, Managing Director of the AMP Society. You've got the Managing Director of BHP, John Prescott, his reaction ' quite warm' they're his words.
PM: Well, I mean, their entitled to their view. They said the same thing about the One Nation &nbsp;Statement. I think what they're saying is that, you see, Dr Hewson has moved to the Government's cast of policy, we haven't moved to his. We've said look, the policies of co-operation, the policies of inclusion, the policies of expansion are the right policies for an economy in a recession. The Japanese Government introduced a huge fiscal package, the United States Government is just about to do the same under Governor Clinton. The OECD is urging member States to introduce a stimulatory package. Dr Howson said no, this is all voodoo economics. No, no, no, it's all wrong, wrong, wrong. He's now shifted to a more stimulatory stance. Therefore, some of the business people who have supported One Nation and supported us, have said, yes, this is in the same line as the general course of policy, we think that will encourage a recovery. I'm not surprised at their comments, but in terms of the tax changes, they're just simply give aways, but I don't think they'll be too laudatory of the industrial relations policy, they're still basically Jeff Kennett Mark I, which is pushing 8 million Australians onto individual wage contracts with all the mayhem and disruption that will come with it, that'a not changed.
RETROT What about his proposition, his proposal to cut politicians pay, that's a canny move isn't it? PMS Well, I think it's a cynical move. I mean, Jeff Kennett, was in there the night that he was cutting penalty rates and annual leave loading, he was giving Ministers a wage increase until the public sprung him and he dropped back. Now Hewson looked at that lesson. You see, everything that John Hewson does is poll driven. The reason he shifted his policies, not because he thinks the new policy is right, it's because the polls were telling him the old policy was wrong.
RETROT: Isn't it sensible for a politician to look at the polls and what they're telling him.
PM: Well, I think it's important that there's some integrity to our national life. When a political leader says something, and says he means it fervently and says it for nearly two years, I think we're entitled to believe him.
RETROT: You would have gone to the polls in December if Labor wasn't on the nose in WA surely?
PM No, no. No, no, no, I wasn't about to try and have sort of, you know, crawl through some crack of light. I think the public is entitled to make their mind up with fair time. But when a political leader makes statements I mean, basically for some of the media-reception to this package, what they've said is look, the fact that Howson doesn't believe this, the fact that he said the very opposite now for 2 years, the fact that a major political leader can change his mind overnight, that's clever, that's clever. well the media is rewriting the ground rules of Australian politics and at the same it's also saying we don't really care where he funds it, we know he can't sell S20B worth of Telecom. We know the market can't absorb it. We know if he sells it, they'll have to pay for it by changing the commercial basis of Telecom they'll move to timed local calls. But look, these disciplines now don't matter. So I think what the media has said in the last couple of days is that the discipline of a political leader sticking with what ho thinks is right and giving his word on policy can be changed and be regarded as clever of adopting a financial package which is shonky, which can't be realised, they're saying is politically clever, they've shifted very rapidly and quickly the ground rules of Australian national politics. And, of course, the Government will be taking note of their response.
&nbsp;RETROT: Mr Keating, lot's change the subject very briefly for a little while. Your 12 month anniversary as Prime Minister came up on the weekend didn't it? On Saturday, 12 months in the chair. Now any regrets in terms of goals not achieved over the past year. PM3 Oh, for me, if anything, Jules, the horizon has opened up over the course of that year.
&nbsp;RETROT: Due to what?
PM: Just opportunities which have come along. I think that my visit to Indonesia and to Japan opened up new opportunities for Australia that I thought mightn't have been opened up as quickly. We've now developed a Ministerial Council grouping in Jakarta which met for the first time about 3 weeks ago, with great success. I think we've got greater access to the Japanese Government and bureaucracy than perhaps we've ever had. This was an opportunity which I wanted to work on but I didn't think we would get as far as we have within a year. Another thing was the development of the National Training Authority. As you know, the of kids who don't get into University, of them only 29% are trained, the rest are untrained in this country, because the TAPE system is not up to it. What we agreed during the course of the year, was a real break through on Technical and Further Education with the States agreeing to join with the Commonwealth in a National Authority, with all of our budgets, to do for Technical and Further Education what we're able to do for universities.
RETROT: The next question is finding jobs for all those trained people.
PM: Yes. That's an opportunity I mean, to give Australia chance at a sort of, a system of European polj~ techniques for a vocational education is a great opportunity. You know, some of the others have come with a re-building of the National Rail highway; we've already at this stage agreed to let Qantas fly internally and Ansett externally; the air system is changing, All this has happened within a year. And of course the other day we agreed also to an offer by British Airways for a trade sale in Qantas which will make it a much stronger carrier. So the year for me has been a very interesting one and also I think declarations about the importance of Australia's identity and the economic importance of that abroad has also been another area which I've found fascinating.
&nbsp;RETROT: Yes, now okay. Christmas just a few days away, what's likely to be in the Prime Ministerial Christmas stocking for you.
PM: Well, for me? The nicest thing for me, I think I get more pleasure at Christmas from my children. The more happier they are, the happier I am. So I think my wife and I probably get our biggest thrill from them and we generally put a reasonable effort into their Christmas. So they're still
RETROT: You’re: not about to say what sort of present might be sitting waiting for you.
PM: No, well generally, there are not too many presents for me
RETROT Is that so.
PM: But, I'm past the present stage. But my youngest is 6 so &nbsp;6, 11, 13 and 16, well the three younger ones particularly are still a lot of fun in terms of Christmas.
RETROT: Paul Keating, have a good one.
PM: Thank you very much, Jules, good to talk to you.


E&amp; OE PROOF COPY.....
RF: The Prime Minister, Paul Keating, yesterday announced a host of messages aimed at targeting Australia's environmental problems. The package has been formulated to correct problems with water, air and soils. It will combat pollution, eliminate sewerage contamination in our water ways, improve water quality as a result, and also issue a challenge to the blue-green algae. $ 15-6 million will be spent over the next 4 years, including $ 72 million on water quality and management, $ 30 million on water catchment areas, and $ 3 million coping with greenhouse gases. Two new areas have been earmarked for world heritage listing, including the Naracoorte Caves. The Prime Minister's visit could not have come to South Australia at a better time, with the State reeling from financial and natural disasters and conservative for polls showing the Coalitions best following is in South Australia, it is obvious this State needs his urgent attention. Mr Keating has delayed his return to Canberra this morning to talk with us. Good Morning Prime Minister and thank you for dropping by.
PM: It is good to be here, Ray.
RF: The measures to target the environment, of course a lot of the Opposition people are going to say here he goes again, another diversion. But quite seriously, are there very many moves to ensure our future?
PM: Ray, it is certainly not a diversion, Dr Hewson in that terrible con-job last week&nbsp;had the biggest diversion of all that was a diversion right away from his normal&nbsp;policy. On the environment we have been working on the agenda now for over a&nbsp;decade, starting with Gordon below Franklin in 1983 with the North Queensland&nbsp;Rain Forrest, with the Tasmanian Southern Forrest, with the declaration of&nbsp;Antarctica as a wilderness park. And this time focussing on such areas as the water quality the Murray Darling River system, dealing with algal blooms and water cleanliness in that system. Dealing with feral animals, Mimosa pigra, and the Kakadu. We are having a full open session of the environmental and economic&nbsp;values of the Shoalwater Bay area, the declarations, you mentioned it yourself, of&nbsp;Riversleigh and Naracoorte Caves for world heritage listing. It is further work on&nbsp;the Government's long run environment agenda.&nbsp;
RF: The environment is still very much high on the list of importance for Australians, I think it has been proved in the last election, Bob Hawke got in on the green vote and obviously people are still interested in the environment. Probably the balancing point though is what comes first, the economy, the unemployment, is this ahead of the economy or is there a place and a time for each thing?
PM: Well I think they have got to come together. I think the environment is now a mainstream issue that people don't regard as a luxury issue attached on the side. Water quality has effected our major river systems, we have now got large parts of the Murray-Darling with those blue-green algal blooms on them. We have reached the point where despoliation of the environment produces a severe economic cost. So I think you have got to do it together, that is you can't distinguish one from the other. We can advance ourselves economically and environmentally, but at one at the same time.
&nbsp;RF: This does look to be a good plan, it looks like you have addressed the problems. People might well ask why we haven't got a better plan for getting out of the mess we are in at the present?
&nbsp;PM: We certainly won't get out of it as Dr Hewson was trying last week, and that is running on policies that he doesn't believe with money he doesn't have. This is a fellow that said to me the One Nation package of Government involvement in the economy of fiscal spending was irresponsible, was going to bankrupt the country, he said we have got to cut the Budget back by $ 7 billion a year. He has now thrown all that out, and he threw it all out basically because he got a couple of nasty polls. He had the Federal Director of the Liberal Party, Mr Robb, on his back making him shift his policy. Is that what Australians want? Do they want political leaders who are going to do things they don't believe, in policies for which they are not really committed, spending money they don't have? He is going to fund this by selling Telecom, and nobody is going to buy Telecom without Telecom being a really commercial show.
&nbsp;RF: If somebody does buy Telecom, will they change the rules? Does that mean if somebody buys Telecom some of the luxuries we have got like unlimited local calls, does that mean they might be scrubbed and we might be under the whim of the new owner?
PM: Well you have only to ask the question, Ray, does anybody, any Government think they are going to raise $ 20 thousand million for Telecom selling it to a set of private owners and then say to them, oh by the way you are not going to be able to charge for time local calls? You're not going to be able to charge by the second. Telecom should stay in public hands, we have got a competitor, the Government has set up a competitive market with OPTUS. We don't need to sell Telecom, and at any rate the sale of a Government asset is just the same as selling a Government bond. It is just like debt. So what Dr Hewson is now proposing, he is trying to outdo the Government on the Government's policy, wvith money he doesn't have, from the sale of a public asset which will probably lead any owner of Telecom to move straight on to timed local calls, where the technology is such now that they can charge you by the second, so if you want to ring your relatives, your wife or your mother, either in Adelaide, within the State or interstate, then you will be charged by the second. That's the only way you would get the revenues up, it's the only way you would make the thing saleable.
&nbsp;RF: Well we have certainly seen that happen in the arena of long distance calls. It is not very pleasant watching the meter tick over, it is like riding in a cab.
&nbsp;PM: There has always been a belief in Australia that you could pick up the phone and ring around the corner and not really have to worry about how long you were on the phone, but that would all change. The key point is that the fundamentals haven't changed. It is still the same policy and it has the Kennett industrial relations policy. He made it quite clear that he wouldn't change his industrial relations policy, there will basically be 8 million people forced onto individual contracts. He says he will have the same tariff policy, which is basically zero tariffs, he reaffirmed that last Friday. As I said yesterday, hjs -South Australian policy is zero tariffs, which for him means zero Adelaide.
RF: That's exactly right, we have had a rough trot here as you well know. But the polls say that the South Australian people are hot on you at the moment, they want more action from you, they want an alternative plan, they also ring us and they say, the Queen, the Oath of Allegiance, Asia, talking about being a part of Asia, are all diversions.
PM: They are totally wrong about that, totally wrong. If people don't think that locking into Asia is not going to give us production in cities like Adelaide, then I don't know where they think it's going to come from. It must come from exports, and it's got to come from the fastest growing part of the world which is nearby. If we want to treat ourselves as though we're still attached to North America and Western Europe, then Australia will suffer accordingly. That's why it is important to have this economic rationalism, it's not just simply a social question, it's an economic question primarily. The point is this, Ray, is putting a 15 per cent goods and services tax across the country, raising $ 22,000 million a year, that's equivalent to half the Commonwealth income tax, going to do anything about the recovery? It's going to put the recover back. Is introducing conflict in the workplace, pitting employer against employee, employee against employee, pushing 8 million Australians onto individual work contracts, cutting their wages and conditions, is that going to promote a better relationship to produce a productive country? It's not. Dr Hewson's solutions are non-solutions.
RF: A lot of people would say, though, that by reducing or taking the GST away from food and not taking people off the dole, he's getting close to your policies.
PM: But we don't have a GST. GST with food included raised $ 27 billion, $ 27,000 million. The GST without food raises $ 22,000 million. It's the same monster, just varied at the edges for food. And Ray, let me put this question to you do you really think if they were in office and they were about to design the tax, and the Treasury say to you with these exemptions it's going to be impossible to market this thing, it's more complicated now than it ever was, unless it's a single rate across all goods and services it's not going to be possible to administer. Dr Hewson flipped last week saying he'll take food out, he'll flop back saying he'll put food back in once he's safe. Last week's change wasn't a policy change, it was a political change. If he's safely elected he'll go back to taxing food, food will be back in. He'd just have a press conference and say I've done my best, I've talked to the Treasury, the Treasury say we can't design a tax with these exemptions, and food would be back in anyway.
RF: Or perhaps the 15 per cent might become 20 per cent?
PM: In every country in the world it has grown. In every country the goods and services tax, the VATs have increased. They've either gone up substantially or in some cases they've doubled. The chances of this thing staying at 15 per cent is very slight. It's a new tax base in the system, and Australians should be very wary of it.
RF: What would you say, Prime Minister, to the people listening to you right now that have been unemployed for 12 months or longer? What would you personally want to say to them, hang in there, have you got any encouragement?
PM: Yes. Ray, let me make two points to you. The economy is growing again, it's growing at the moment at about 2 per cent. It's growing faster than any Western economy.
RF: is 1.7 at the moment, isn't it?
PM: It's 1.7, a lot of them are negative. Britain is negative and many other countries are negative. We're actually growing now over 2, we're growing more strongly I think as goes. As we move into 1993 that growth will pick up. The problem is we're running through a surge of productivity. We're getting more output from fewer people. Businesses are stripped down, they've got fewer employees and they're producing more goods and services. But after a while they won't be able to drag production out of a given workforce, they'll have to start rehiring, re-engaging people. So once we start getting above that 2.5 per cent level, around that level, they start then putting people back on.
RF: A bit like Japan in the boom it had to bring workers in from other countries.
PM: The place is just miles more productive. And of course the other problem is, the longer we go with mechanisation and computerisation and miniaturisation it's displacing labour.
RF: Have you only just woken up to that?
PM: No, but it means you've got to keep growing output all the time. But a lot of people forget this point. In 1983 we had a workforce of 6 million, today we've got a workforce of nearly 8 million. It's nearly a quarter bigger. We've kept most of the jobs of the ' 80s, about 1.7-1.8 million jobs. We've kept most of those. New Zealand, which Dr Hewson is always telling us about, has actually got fewer people in work today than it had in 1983. Whereas Australia has got 26 per cent more people in work today than in 1983. If you had to ask the question, what would you rather have, 11 per cent unemployment off a 6 million workforce, or 11 per cent unemployment off an 8 million workforce, I[ know what the answer would be it's 11 per cent off 8 million. The unemployment rate is still too high, but let's not forget that we have created 1.7-1.8 million jobs in the ' 80s, we've kept most of them, and what we've got to do now is go back to adding to that. We'll only do that as the economy grows. It won't grow with a massive consumption tax hanging around its neck.
RF: People have rung us and said they'll be glad when the election is over. It's almost as though you and the Opposition have been in election mode for 12 months or so and while that's happening people don't see enough attention being paid to the issues. Is there too much politicking?
PM: The politicking is on his part. I came in and said the economy is not recovering quickly enough, there is a role for the Government to spend some money and spend it wisely on the infrastructure. We did that with the One Nation package the rail system, the road system, the technical and further education system, the air system, we've been doing it. He's been saying " it ' s wrong, it's wrong, it's wrong. Fightback, he says, is the answer. I took a year to prepare Fightback, I've dotted every I've crossed every Two years later, one year after its presentation, last Friday he says " sorry, stop that, Fightback was wrong. It's a medium term policy, it's not a short term policy, we need more stimulus, the Government's been right. so disregard all those things I've been saying about One Nation, saying Keating's irresponsible, it's wrong, that was inoperative. It was basically right and let me show you how I can top them". Now, what are people going to say there's real leadership for you? Here's a guy who doesn't believe in his policies. A week ago he was saying there's no role for a fiscal stimulus, and one week later he's saying we'll have a stimulus bigger than the Government. The trouble is, Ray, I've got an opponent who doesn't believe in his policies. I can understand the public being confused, saying where do we stand here? But I'll tell them this, the Government's policy has been about pulling Australia out of the mad hey days of the late which gave us the boom, and then the recession which followed it, getting back to sustainable low-inflationary growth, that's what we're doing, and that's the only way to do it. Dr Hewson proved that point last Friday by paying the Government the greatest compliment he could pay us by saying he's mimicking our policies.
RF: Mr Keating, you're acknowledged as being the ultimate parliamentary performer. You're very rarely caught off-guard, but some of our listeners ring and they don't like the way you carve people up in Parliament. I know your style and Dr Hewson's style in Parliament are completely different and he's probably an inadequate performer when it comes to the Parliament. Do you ever regret the colourful language you use in Parliament and the destructive manner in which you debate?
PM: I think it's constructive, Ray. I don't know whether televising Parliament for news has done any of us a favour. What's happened is I win the argument in Parliament by a forensic, point by point analysis or presentation of our argument, destruction of the opposing argument, at the end of it I put a political wrapper around it. The news services report the political wrapper, but they don't report the forensic argument. You can't win in the House on political wrappers, you can only win on the forensic argument.
RF: What you're saying is that if there's a news flash of a boxing match, they only show the knock-out punch, they don't show the body blows building up.
PM: They don't show the fifteen rounds. I win on the rounds, I win on the TKOs, but for those people who watch Parliament, actually watch the broadcast of Parliament in the middle of the afternoon, who see the long question times, I think they'll see it in its context, they'll hear the arguments and when they see the sting in the tail, they'll know when they see it reported on the evening news that there was more to it.
RF: But people do take offence, do you understand that some people don't like dirty fighting? PM: There's no dirty fighting, that's just straight attack. Dirty fighting I've had Dr Hewson's henchmen attacking me personally in the Senate all year. All year, every day, at it every day, not game to raise it in the House of Representatives, always snide stuff in the Senate. That's Hewson's stock and trade. My stock is right up front look you straight in the eye and tell you. It's none of this snide stuff, getting someone to do your dirty work in the dead of night in the Senate.
RF: Of the election, do you regret that you didn't call the election three or four weeks back when the pendulum was swinging well and truly your way?
PM: I don't think the public respect what they think is tricky behaviour.
RF: Political expediency?
PM: Yes, I think they're entitled to make a judgement about the parties and the issues. And even though Dr Hewson shifted his ground, gone from black to white within a week, they can take that as a judgement, they can factor that in. And they're not going to be put under pressure, they can have the Christmas period thinking about things, let the stuff drop away from them and come back somewhat refreshed and think about these issues. I'd rather behave like that than sneak in a tricky way and mount an election at a time which is not the full run of the Parliament. I'm quite happy with the decisions we've made.
RF: You've been Prime Minister now for just over 12 months, you've celebrated your anniversary as Prime Minister. Has it been everything you thought it would be, has it been stimulating, has it been disappointing?
PM: It's been very stimulating. We have got the economy back from negative growth the positive growth, as I said earlier, we're growing at 2 per cent. As well as that, I take great pleasure in the fact that we've made a very big break into Asia with Indonesia and Japan over the course of that year. We've been able to do things that have not been done before, like we've established for the first time a national vocational education system for that great body of kids who miss out on university or are just not trained, they now will be trained in a proper system that will build beside the universities, to have the same strength and status as the university system. All that's happened. We're re-developing the national rail highway, which has now fallen into disrepair. We've developed the new international airline system with Qantas flying internally and externally, and Ansett flying internally and externally. This is just in the course of a year. The Prime Ministership and the Government gives one a lot of power, but the pleasure comes from using it properly for good objectives and good reasons.
RF: We do thank you for spending time with us today on our program.
PM: Thank you Ray.
ends
&nbsp;



TEL: 22. Dec. 92 16: 12 No. 018 P. 01/ 05
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, WEST TORRENS COUNCIL HALL, ADELAIDE
22 DECEMIBER 1992
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: I might just say a few things first and just get things started. I noticed the
Coalition's Fightback, or ' crawiback', policy is starting to unravel and most
particularly with the Opposition spokesman on communications, Mr Warwick
Smith, saying that timed calls are an option. He is not used to precise political
speak, MT Smith, so he has for the Liberal Party uncharacteristic candour
indicated that with a private owner of Telecom, that John Hewson would very
quickly be ablc to establish what is, in all practical terms, a telephone tax just
as he ceascd to tax all other things, goods and services as well. And I notice
thc Liberals arc now saying oh well, no, this is not what we have in mind
but one Telecom is in thc hands of a private owner, it is a matter of what they
have in mind. And there is no way private owners are going to be paying
billion for Telecom to have it commercially constrained in a way where it can't
secure what they would think are appropriate tariffs for its services. And most
privatcly operated telephonc companics in the world charge for timed calls.
They charge by the second. And this would happen with a privatiscd Telecom
as well. But in the unravelling, there are quite a lot of people who come out
now saying that a lcading stockbroking firm has told the Opposition it can't
possibly raise $ 20 billion it nccds to fund its package. Telccom, ffhcrc is no one
in their financial markets bar a few people with a Liberal Party ticket burning
in their pocket who believes that a float of $ 20 billion is possiblc. Which
mcans that the basic key funding point, the key underlying funding of Dr
Hewson's package is starting to evaporate.
As well as that, there has been a number of attacks upon Fighitback Mark 11.
Mr Ian Baldock, the Exccutivc Director of the Queensland Retail Tradcrs and
Shopkeepers Association, asked this morning, he said, how arc small
businesses, supermarkets, corner stores going to differentiate between food
which is GST exempt and that which carries the GST? Remember this, with
the consumption tax, there are 750,000 taxing points only one-tenith of that
with a wholesale sales tax, less than about 40,000. 40,000 with a wholesale
sales tax, 750,000 taxing points with the OST, and that will mean every small
business in the country. And every small retail business will then have to
distinguish betwecn basic food and all other items. So that it is not even a 
T2EL2:. Dec. 92 16: 12 No. 018 P. 02/ 05
2
simple system to oper~ ate, and the retail traders today are saying it will be an
administrative nightmare for every corner store, supermarket which becomes a
tax point for Dr Hewson. And then we have got the Building Owners and
Managers Association ( BOMA) a very powerful business lobby in this country
asking correctly why is the construction industry being dealt out of the game
by Dr Hewson? Fightback Mark 11, they say, will mean net increases in costs
bctween 4 and 10 per cent plus the one-off inflationary impact to major
building and construction. And hie has told thcm basically to go jump. In State
services, we had the Queensland Treasurer today saying Fightback equals
cutbacks, and he is dead right. Let me say here, that States like South Australia
will lose hundreds of millions of dollars and thousands of jobs under
Fightback. Because he has cuts for the Statcs, very large cuts in government
spending for the States. Now in South Australia, a large part of the South
Australian economy runs on government funding, government expenditure,
govermecnt programs. And when you have got a government in Canberra,
wants to bc a goverment in Canberra, saying that they think we ought to have
a smaller public sector, there ought to be cuts in payments to the States, this
will react on South Australia. But of course, the part of their policy which is
going to react on South Australia more is zero tariffs. As I said yesterday, zero
tariffs in political terms to the Liberal Party mcans zero Adelaide. They would
start carving into the basic fabric of Australian manufacturing industry in South
Australia with a policy which is ideologically driven for which thcy did not
vary one jot in Fightback Mark Il.
So let me conclude on these points. Fightback Mark 11 is funded by the
improbable sale of $ 20 billion of assets, Telecom, to the Australian financial
markets. T7hey can't digest it, therefore the funding package is unreal. The
capital raisings of this year werc $ 12 billion with the private sector. Dr I-cwson
says he wants to induce a private sector investment recovery, but he wants to
crowd out private sector recovery by raising over two years, $ 20 billion for
Telecom, for one public instrumentality alone. In other words, at $ 10 billion
each for two years, he will take up prctty well all of the funding the Australian
capital markets can provide. And becausc that is improbable and unlikely, his
whole funding package falls down and this is where the scrutiny of the package
needs to be focussed. On thc fact that he reserves the right, unlike the
Goverrnent, to introduce unfunded packages, packages which are improbable
and unreal and irresponsible, and it is all to be regarded as sort of slick political
trickery. The fact of thc matter is the markets would kick any govcrnmnent to
pieces trying to fund a package of this size. The alternative would be to drop all
the promises, or alternatively to blow the budget dcficit out. Now these are the
options which we have in the sort of one and a half week revamp of Fightback
which we have seen from Dr Hcwson. His package is unravelling. The markets
say it can't be funded. The Building and Owner Managers Assosiation saying,
What's Wrong with the construction Industry, it is a major generator of jobs, why
do that? Warwick Smith, the Communications spokesman, is saying that timed
telephone calls are an option. The Shopkeepers Association are saying the GST
will be too complex to manage. All in all you can see thc weight is now coming
back on Dr Hcwson's Proposal, as it should because Australia needs a
consumption tax like it needs a hole in the head. And trying to fund these
proposals with an improbable sale of $ 20 billion of public assets will only lead
TEL 
TEL: 22 . Dec .92 16 : 12 No .018 P .03/ 05
3
to the destruction of fiscal policy which has taken this Government ten years to
put into place.
I Mr Keating, couldn't there be offsets for timed telephone calls?
PM: Look, if you sell Teleconm to private owners, they are going to make the
business run commcrcially. And nobody is going to buy the thing on the basis
that suburban or city calls or country long distance calls are not appropriately
priced and charged. Now the whole idea of the cross subsidies that's inherent
in the currcnt Telecom structure will go out the window. It will be just a*
business. And the Liberals know that, and that's why I think Mr Smith today
dropped his guard and said yes, it is an option. well of course it is an option.
J: How much do you think Teleconm is worth?
PM: Well we are not selling it. We constructed a competitive model. We had
Telecom which absorbed OTC and we have given OPTUS a competitor of a
mode of companics of international competency the right to run a trunk
network in opposition to Telecom and to run an international network as well.
in othcr words, wc have a cornpctitivc model in place. mean, Tclecom works
for Australia, what is the point of selling it? So the Labor Party is not
interestcd in selling Telecom.
J: But giving their estimate, what do you think in dollar terms?
PM: We have not done a close estimate of the value of Telecom. The simple point
Is, the Australian financial market was flat out digesting the Wcstpac float and
even that couldn't be placed, that was sitting in the hands of the underwriters,
CS First Boston, for months. It was only when Packer came along that Some of
that stock was actually moved out of the underwriters' hands. The underwriters
couldn't place it. And that is why Woolworths pulled out because the market is
getting choked with issues as we are rebalancing thc debt to equity ratios in this
country, as wc arc displacing debt for equity. Now to come along with a
choker like $ 10 billion a year and say, look hang on all get out the road here
comes the government here is a $ 10 billion a year float for Telecom. They will
be told by every underwriter in Australia, this can't bc done. So the whole
basis of thc funding falls to bits. I said these things last Friday, you know,
some sections of the media regard that as just political comment. The fact is,
go and ask underwriters of substance what they think about floats of
billion a year.
J: Won't the question of timed locail calls, won't people accept Warwick Smith's
assurance that there won't be forced timied local calls?
P M. His assurance can't miea n anything. It might mean something while Telecom is
owned by the Govcrnment. But it can mean nothing whci Telecom is owned
by a private owner. I mean, is any private owner going to bid $ 20 billion for
Telecom and have its hands tied about its charging regime? Of course not, its
rubbish. 
T2E2L:. Dec. 92 16: 12 No. 018 P. 04/ 05
4
J: Prime Miiaiter, how difficult is it going to be to sell your cnvironment package
if you have only got lukc warm response from the environment movement?
PM: The environment movemcnt is basically not interested in ' brown' isues. They
arc not interested in dirty water. They are not interested in salinity. They are
not interested in soil degrcdation. They are interested in trees. The Wilderness
Society is interested in trccs._ The ACF is interested in trees. But thc rest of the
community is interested in the range of issucs. The environment lobbies have
110 moal lien over the environment. This issue belongs to the nation, it
belongs to the government, to the nation. We don't have to have the
approbation of these groups because thcy arc not listened to much anymore.
Bob Brown and people like that say the same thing no matter what a
government does. This is a major program to restore the health of one of the
primary river systems in Australia, the Murray Darling, on which the city of
Adelaide depends for its water amongst many other users to deal with the cold
question of dry land salinity and salt moving through the whole catchment
area, taking phosphorus out of the water. These are important national issues.
But the greens say, well unless you arc rcscrv-ing another stand of trees it
doesn't matter. So all of thesc issues, feral animals the destruction which is
done to the Australian fauna by cats and pigs, particularly to flora by feral pigs,
is profound. It can't be handled on a State by State basis, it is a national
problcm, we are dealing with that. We are dealing with one of thc great
heritage areas of the world, Kakadu, which is now being threatencd Mimosa
pigra. We have a study going on for thc last large great area of thc East coast
of Australia still in virgin state, Shoalwater Bay. Now that is why the
Government's record on the cnvironment, and its initiatives on the
environment, frankly take weight in precedcnce over the claims of
environmental groups.
J: Does that mean you won't be depending on their Preferences at the next Federal
election?
PM: flow can they vote for the Liberal Party? The Liberal Party would mine the
Botanic Gardens in Adelaide here. The problem in Australia is, a lot of the
grccnics would like a rainforest in Pitt Street in Sydney and down Rundle Mall
in Adelaide while the Liberal Party would go and mine the Botanic Gardens in
Adelaidc and Hyde Park in Sydney. Those extremes nobody wants. It is a
sensible majority of people who want a good result on the environincnt think
that inatters. So whcrc are the greenies going to go, are they going to go and
vote ( or the Liberal Party? Are they really going to go and votc for this crowd
who want to get back into uranium enrichment, who want to open up more
uranium mnines, who want to basically let the economic imperative be the sole
Imperative? I mean this is a good Statement and the public will recognise it is
a good Statement and the great pity is that people in the ACF and others don't
have the courage ard the leadership to say what they say to us privately about
it. I mean the trouble with the green groups now arc they are all watching each
other to say thcy say the samne thing. No one will be radical, no one will jump
out of the pack and say where they think the agenda ought to go or what they
should believe, We don't havc any leaders in the environment movement
TEL: 
T2EL2:. Dec. 92 16: 12 No. 018 P. 05/ 05
anymore. Wc have just got people who arc basically matching press release for
press release, and this is a grcat problem.
J: Will the Fcdcral Government provide the $ 23 million called on by the State
Government here in South Australia for rural relief?
PM: There are long standing arrangements. Thierc are standing permanent
arrangements for drought and flood relief betwveen the Commonwealth and the
Statcs and they are there bccausc we have lots of droughts and lots of floods
and this is a real problem for the South Australian community and fortunately
those arrangements are in placc for the Commonwealth and the States to deal
with it and then beyond a certain levcl of costs the Commonwealth takes 100U
per cent responsibility for it.
J So that request went there yesterday, did you see that coming through?
PM: Well they were not requests, it has to be a declaration about the flood, But
once it is declared, it is just a mechanical set of arrangements in place.
ENDS TEL 



TEL 1/ 93
EMBARGO: 23.59 31.12.92
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEA'IINGj MP
RECOGNITION OF FORMER CZECHOSLOVAKIAN REPUBLICS
Australia has decided to rccognise as independent states the two former Czechoslovakian
republics, the Czech Republic and thc Slovak Repujjc.~
This follows today's dissolution of the Czechoslovakian federation, which was authorised
by a vote of Czechoslovakia's federal parliament on 25 November last year.
I conmmend the leaders and people of the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic for the
amicable way in which they have resolved their differences and congratulate them on thc
peaceful transition from federation to independent republics.. They have shown what can
be achieved by parties tackling change in a spirit of civilised discourse.
I wish the leaders and people of both nations well.
The Australian Government is pleased to enter into diplomatic relations and welcomes the
advice that both republics will be represented at embassy level in Canberra.
Thc Australian ambassador in Warsaw will be accredited to both republics.
CANBERRA 1 January 1993 T4E. L: Jan. 93 7: 47 No. 001 P. 01/ 01 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP,
AND THE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRIES AND ENERGY, THE
HON SIMON CREAN MPo PRESS CONFERENCE, 2 FEBRUARY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I've got a Cabinet meeting on which we've broken in thc course of the day
and it's to reassemble at 3.3Opm, so we're going to be reasonably brief with
you. The point of our press confercnce is to indicate that the Cabinet has
adopted a reform package for the Queensl and ' sugar industry, which has
been negotiated by my colleague Simon Crean, and is an interim reform
package which dovetails in with the Queensland Government's reform
program which mcets its next point of change in 1995-96. Thc sugar
industry has bcen an industry which has been substantially regulated under
laws of the State of Queensland. In a sense the Commonwealth plays, in
this industry, a more peripheral role than it does in many others because the
regulation and management of the industry has been by the industry itself
and under arrangcemcnts constructed over a lon&amp; period of timc under
Queensland law.
We've made decisions today in consolation with thc industry. I visited
Bundaberg with Brian Courtice, the Member for Hinkler, and members of
t Takcotcs ggowers in November to get a first hand view of
the problems and to try to understand bctter the industry. Simon has had a
number of visits to the region to meet members of the industry,
representatives of the Taskforcc, the Queensland Government, and we've
developed between us a package.
Part of the Commonwealth's responsibility in this is to make decisions in an
area whcre we can, this is in relation to tariffs, which is for us the key to 
unlocking a larger reform of the industry, and the larger reform goes to al
those questions which deal with assignment, which deal with single desk
selling, which deal with water articulation, which deal with the poolings, the
two pools and the price differentials, these are the key issues in reform.
So we have used the leverage the Commonwealth has, I think, sensibly to
bring togcther a reform package which will, as most of the Governments'
reforms have, over a period of time have been affccted on a phased basis
which will be the case here. But I take this opportunity to congratulate
Simon on getting this together. This has been a most contractible problem
because it has been peculiarly a State problem and certainly on the part of
Coalition Governments in Queensland in the past, no willingness to improve
the flexibility of the industry over time. This has changed of course with the
Goss Government and the Government there is working cooperatively with
the Commonwealth Government. So I'd leave my introductory remarks at
that and now invite Simon to add to them.
SC: Well the detail is there, I suppose there are just two points that are important
to make. Firstly, so far as the sugar industry is concerned the issue is not
just about tariff, that I believe is a mistake that the Coalitions Parties have
made. Tariff, as important as it is as a price support mechanism, is only
worth $ 32 million to an industry which is now in excess of $ 1200 million
dollars. But it is an important price support mechanism in the context of a
corrupted world trading environment.
I have always resisted throughout these negotiations, and for the purpose of
setting up the task force, just treating tariff in isolation. If you look at the
Industry Commission Rcport it identificd a number of impediments that had
to be addressed but acknowledged that the only thing the Commonwealth
could do was really phase clown tariff.
In essence, what we have done is to use the leverage of what we can
influence to affect change in other areas that the IC Report acknowledgcd
we had no influence over, And that is what has been achieved. So whilst
the tariff has been held, and as a result of holding tariff, if you are going to
deliver it you have got to retain acquisition. The two important
impediments to growth are the assignments systern, the means by which you
open up thc land, and we now have an arrangement whereby that can be
negotiated at the local level.
The other important issue has been thepp rce pooi aI~ f ectswheb
not only has a differential existed between that which is in the number one 
pool, vis a vis the number two pool, it has also meant invariably that
growers in the number two pool who arc the new entrants get less than
world price. Now that is just a crazy signal to be sending out to ant industry
that you want to expand, that you can't even get world price. Really what
this agreement does without compensation, because the task force
recommended a compensation package for the phasing out of the price
pooling differentials, what we have achieved is a phase down by agreement
with the cane growers and the Queensland Government so that we can get
clearer market signals to the new entrants, because it is the new entrants
which are going to undertake the expansion.
So not only is this a strategy to deal with the tariff issue, because that's been
the big political issue, but it's also a strategy for growth and expansion in the
sugar industry. And most importantly, it's been a strategy developed with
all of the stake-holders, and esscntially all of those stake-holders support
the thrust of this agreement. It's been a very fulfilling exercise and
demonstrates yet again our approach to industry dcvelopment compared to
that of our components.
J1: Prime Minister, is this decision to hold $ 55 a tonne tariff good politics but
bad economics?
PM: Simon answered the question for you. The good economics is that it is
basically one of the keys to constructing a reform package which would not
otherwise be capable of reconstruction or construction. That is, the reform
of the Queensland sugar industry is largely a State matter because all the
things that matter, such as the pricing, the pools, the price signals, the
assignments, aill of the other issues, the infrastructure, are. State issues. The
. Commonwealtk's role in this is, as I said, a marginal one, but one which
we've successfully been ablc to use to change yet another industry.
J: Haven't you backed off using the stick that you had of the tariffs to get faster
reform?
PM: Put it this way, without having the leverage the Commonwealth enjoys in
tarrif, we'd have no rcform here. Simon has been ahle to construct this with
the Queensland government and the growers, something which probably
three months ago people would have thought was incapable of happening.
So getting the phase down, thc price differential between the two pools,
modifying the land assignment system, these issues are key to the sugar
industry becoming a more flexible, productive, competitive industry.. 
SC: But we have used the stick of tariff to affect the real reform. Understand
that in terms of tariffs we halved tho level of tariff support in a value sense
it's come down from $ 110 to $ 55 in the space of 18 months. What we are
doing now in response to an Industry Commission report and in consultation
with the industry is saying there are more important issues that at the
moment need to be tackled and we have used the impact that we have been
able to have over tariffs to achieve that pace of reform.
3: How do you see this decision impacting on the clothing and footwear
industry, are you prepared to consider tariff pauses i n -thosc industrie . s?
PM: That has got a different impact. Thcre is hardly any sugar imported, this is
not thc case with those industries. This is largely a domestic price support
mechanism and therefore the parallels arc not there. But again, the clothing,
textile and footwear has been subject to a phased reduction in tarr if over
time as has been the case with motor vehicles et cetera, which we undertook
in 1988 and reviewed in 1991. In this case wc've had a reduction from $ 110
to $ 55, we are reviewing it in 1995-96, but along the way as a rcsult we've
opened up a much morc substantial rcform.
J: Would you rule out any wider tariff pause?
PM: This is a one industry specific matter. This is a complex industry, very
much patterned upon State industry structures and State regulations.
3: So you wouldn't rule out that
PM: But the implication of the question is, Michelle ( Grattan), there are linikages
here. There are not. It is as simple as that.
1: Forgetting the linkages, would you take this occasion to rule out a tariff
pause?
PM: I've just said to you, yes. If you want simplc answers to simple questions
yes.
J1: At $ 55 a tonne there arc some that the tariff costs in domestic industry
something like $ 51 million inflates the price of sugar by 23 per cent to the
domestic market. Hlow is this sort of action going to enhance the value
adding side of our domestic industry and makc them more competitive? 
SC: Because there can be an exemption from the tariff impact if the companies
using the input re-export. Direct incentive to export industries, that has
always been the case I might add, but the other thing that convinced me in
looking at these figures is that whilst that figure is dubious of the $ 51
million because it is worth $ 32 million, it's a return of $ 32 million, if you
like, to the sugar growers. The fact of the matter is it is a minuscule
component of total input costs for the food processing industry in total
costs. It is an important aspect and I'm not trying to pretend that in itself it's
not an impediment, but it's not going to be the thing that makes or breaks
that industry. What is going to make or break the sugar industry is its
ability to expand and its ability to do that through proper price signals and
you've got understand really, that the sugar industry itself is in excess of $ 1
billion. It is a huge industry in terms of our natural resource base. What
we've got to do is to secure it and at the same time insure that those input
costs arc properly identified, property addressed, and they will be over time.
J-In today's announcment, has the industry effectively been given some time
to restructure itself andl to become more competitive and efficient and that
when you do come around to review tariffs in 1995-96 you would be
hoping to cut tariff rates further then?
PM: This review dovetails in with the Qucensland rcvicw in 1995-96. Simon
made the point to you earlier, I'm not sure whether everyone here is familiar
with this industry, but all the new growers or old growers producing
marginal tonnages are paid [ 12 per cent] less than the world price. How can
you have an industry continuing on that basis? That is the key thing, if you
want the sugar industry to grow and prosper, that's one of the things that has
to be changed thc right to send your sugar to diffcrent mills. To change
the assignment system is another such thing. They are the key things,
compared to the tariff issue, the tariff issue is an infinitesimal issue
compared with those. That's what is being affccted here today.
J: but giving them time to adjust those reforms in the industry.
PM: Yes, that's right.
SC: You are giving them time to adjust in ccrtain aspects, but what you're
driving is a faster pace of reform than would have been the case. Before
this package there would have been no change to the differential between
number two and number one til 1996. We're getting it immediately. It is
important in terms of the question that Michiclle ( Grattan) asked. Just
because wc've held tarrif doesn't mean we've held the pace of reform. But 
6
what you have Sot to understand is that tariff is not the only mechanism for
reform. It is not the only dimension of micro reform, there are other aspects
of micro reform. But what we've been trying to demonstrate is, areas of
micro reform are not all within the purview of the Commonwealth and
therefore what the Commonwealth has got to do if it's smart about these
things is use the leverage of its position to drive the pace of reform in the
other areas. That's why we've got the conditions to the development
allowance, that's why we've used this strategy to get the pace of reform in
sugar and in dairy, that's why we used the pace of reform, the approach that
we adopted there to also push the States. That's a sensible national
approach.
PM: It's the same thing that we are doing with electricity. Commonwe alth-State
co-operation, in this case with one State, in the case of electricity with three
States.
J: Given the benchmark nature of this agreement, I take it you will be urging
Dr Hewson to adopt it.
PM: Dr Hewson is going to do what he likes. I urge him to adopt some things,
but it's up to him to make his own judgements about this. They take the
view, they are the zero tariff outfit. they think that there should be no
protection in this country for any industry at any level. That's never been
the Government's position. The Government is a low tariff party, it's not the
zero tariff party. We made that clear in 1988 and we made that clear in
1991.
J: What are the political implications here though? Will you be able to pick up
votes in Queensland marginal seats?
PM: Whatever they are you've got about a minute to get them out of me.
J: Will you be able to pick tip certain Queensland marginal seats with this
decision do you think?
PM: This is a genuine issue in reform. It's like every other industry left by the
Coalition for years sclerotic, nothing happening. The same as electricity,
the same as ports and wharves, thc same as airlines, the same as
telecommunications, the list goes on, diary now sugar. We move through
these industries and this has come up in a natural sequence of events, rcports
et cetera. I I 
J: Prime Minister, should Leo McLeay give the $ 65,000 back?
PM: The Speaker has rang me to say he's going to rclcase the statement later
today about his position.
1: potential for expansion?
SC: Yes, the potential for expansion is identified as going from somewhere
around about the 4 million tonnes of raw sugar to close to 5 1/ 2 million
tonnes. Big expansion and obviously the extent to which you get the
assignments and the freeing up in land that opens up the commitments to
investment in milling as well as refining capacity.
J: Are you confident that local arrangements will achieve this?
PM: Yes, I am because what I was very keen to insure in terms of the wording
associated with assignments was not just satisfactory to the cane growers,
but that it was satisfactory importantly to the people who have to make the
investment decision in the private sector and they believe it will provide that
important freeing up. They see significant advantage in both the
assignments dimension of this package as well as the price pooling
arrangements.
J: How many years do you think it will take for that expansion to
SC: I don't know, I think the assessment is somewhere between three and ive
years.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 2/ 93
STATEMENT BY TIE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
APEC EMINENT PERSONS GROUP
I am pleased to announce the Australian Government's nomination of the Hon
. Ncyillc Wran AC QC as Australia's participant in the Eminent Persons -Group
( EPO) to be cstablished this year as part of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
( APEC) process.
The EPG, an Australian initiative, was endorsed at the September 1992 APEC
Ministerial Meeting in Bangkok. It will have as its main task consideration of a
longer-term vision for APEC to the year 2000. In doing so, it will focus on ways
to advance the APEC region's development through strengthened trade, investment
and other linkages. The EPG will also identify constraints and issues which APEC
Governments should address in order to build on tile remarkable economic
dynamism of the region.
Mr Wran is a most distinguished Australian who is well placed to contribute to the
work of the EPG through his wide experience at the highest levels of government
and business. As former Chairman of the CSIRO, Mr Wran also has a keen
understanding of what Australia has to offer the region in the scientific and
technological area.
Mr Wran's involvement in the EPG is a further step in Australia's support for the
APEC process, which is now accepted in the Asia-Pacific region as an essential
mechanism for promoting open regionalism and regional trade liberalisation.
APEC began from an Australian initiative in 1989. Its membership comprises
fifteen key economies of the Asia-Pacifietegion and embraces the main economic 
linkages the countries of North America and the Western Pacific. The APEC
region now accounts for nearly 74 per cent of Australia's total exports and the bulk
of our future trade growth is cxpected to he with these economies.
In parallel with our fundamental interest in the maintenance of an open and nondiscriminatory
multi-lateral trading system, APEC is thc central component of
Australia's trade strategy at the regional level. The Govcrnment is committed to
cooperate with other APEC members in identifying practical steps to promote
regional trade and investment.
The EPO will have an important role to play in this process. It will begin its work
early this year and report to the next APEC Ministerial meeting in late 1993 in the
United States. Other APEC members are currently formalising their nominations
to thc EPG. The group is expected to comprise about twelve distinguished
individuals with backgrounds in government, business and academia.
CANBERRA 3 January 1993 



TEL: OFFICL OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANOERHA 3/ 93
STATEMENT FROM THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
The announcement today of a February 6 election in Western Australia is welcome.
The people of Western Australia now have an opportunity to show their support for
Premier Lawrence and her Government. They also have a chance to reject the divisive
and confrontationist policies of the conservative parties.
Voters in Western Australia should think twice before opting for a Liberal Party whose
Federal President,, Mr Goldswortl, this week threatened to make life tougher and less
secure for all Australians under Liberal regimes.
Carmen Lawrence has attracted a high level of personal support in the State, reflecting her
commitment and hard work on behalf of all Western Australians. She has served the State
well, and should be given an opportunity to continue.
CANBERRA
January 7,1993 8. Jan. 93 7: 33 No. 004 P. 01/ 01 



T1EL1: . Jan. 93 15: 16 No. 013 P. 01/ 01
4/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PAUL KEATING, MP
THE RT HON SIR PAUL HASLUCK KG, KCMG, GCVO
The death of Sir Paul HagluCk is a sad moment in the life
of this nation.
Few Australians this century have had more distinguished
careers. Few have made more profound and permanent
contributions. As a member of the Liberal/ Country Party government from
1949-1969 Sir Paul held a number of high ministerial
offices, including, from 1964 to 1969, External Affairs.
As Governor-eera from 1969 to 1974 he carried out his
duti-es wih in-tegrity, dignity and complete impartiality.
While he is best remembered for the roles he played in
Australian public life, his contribution to the writing
of our history and our understanding of Australia's place
in the world was no less cons~ iderable.
He wrote on subjects as various as international
relations and the Aborigines of Western Australia. He
wrote a two volume history of Australia in the Second
World War and a splendid memoir called Mguing4IaQq4 He
wrote always with a deep respect for our institutions,
our history and for the people of Australia.
Towards the end of his autobiography Sir Paul wrote that
one of the guiding influences on his life had been the
words of Montaigne: " I care not so much what I am in the
opinion of others as what I am in my own."
He shunned praise in life, but with his passing it can be
said with certainty that in the opinion of his fellow
Australians he gave great service to this country and
that his unique contribution will be lasting and long
remembered. on behalf of the Government I extend my deepest sympathy
to Lady Hasluck and her family.
CANBERRA 11 January 1993 TEL 



PRIME MINISTER 5/ 93
STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
MR FISCHER AND THE MABO JUDGEMENT
Thc remarks made by the Leader of the National Party on Western Australian radio
yesterday so distort the known realitics of thc Mabo Judgement, Australian history and the
contemporary ambitions of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, one is obliged to
conclude that Mr Fischer may have intended themi as an incitement to fear and resentment.
Eleven days into the United Nations International Ycar of the World's Indigenous Pcople
this is Mr Fischer's contribution.
Mr Fischer knows that there is no serious attempt on the part of Aboriginal Australians to
re-claim all of Australia, nor any desire to thrcatcn vital national industries, and he should
havc made that clear to the interviewer who suggested it.
Mr Fischer also knows that there is no " guilt industry" in Australia, and to suggest one
exists is a slur on the dccnt conccrn, loyalty and good will of the vast majority of
Australians. As I said in December in our effort to find fair, rational and just solutions to this historic
problem, guilt is not a constnictivc emot ion. But a recognition of historic wrongs and
continuing injustice is not guilt. A desire to see justice done and an abiding care for this
country and its people is not guilt. The belief that the good name of Australia should
rnot he sullied by prejudice and discrimination is not guilt.
Rather, these arc sentiments which will advance Australia's cause and raise the hopes and
self-estcem of all of us.
Mr. Sattler's attitudes arc his own business, hut a national lcader like MY Fischer should
never have conspired in supporting and disseminating them.
In this International Year of the World's Indigcnous People, and in this decade when
Australia secks reconciliation with the first Australians, he. should withdraw them.
It is equally to he hoped that the Coalition Leader, Dr Ilewson, will totally dissociate thc
Opposition from the views expressed by Mr Fischer, especially given Mr Fischer's
assertion that his Liberal colleagues will " go all the way" with his views.
CANBERRA 12 January 1993 



T1EL3:. ian. 93 14: 53 No. 018 P. 01/ 02
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. C. KEATING
THE FALL OF SINGAPORE
in recent days the media has carried stories based on
reports prepared by unidentified British military
officials and endorsed by General Sir Archibald Wavell
years ago.
Some of these reports suggest that AustraliSan troops were
in some way responsible for the fall of Singapore, others
contain allegations that a number of Australian troops
behaved in ways which, if true, would bring discredit on
themselves and their country and reflect on the 17,000
Australian men and women who served on the Malaya
Peninsula and Singapore.
It is important that our history be discussed and that
the truth be told. We should not seek to hide from it.
In this context it is a pity if it is true that these
reports were suppressed 20 years ago in an effort to
appease Australian feelings when Britain was seeking to
enter the Common-Market.
In fact, the substance of the reports appears to confirm
what has long been known: that Singapore's defences were
inadequately prepared, and the British Government knew
it. It was certainly not Australian troops or British
troops but British' aQlicy which led to the fall of
Singapore. It is unlikely that the other allegations can ever be
satisfactorily tested.
But blaming young soldiers for the failures of
politicians an( generals will not find much support in
this or any other country.
TEL 
2-
Whatever the alleged behavior of individual soldiers in
the last days of Singapore, the fact remains that
Australian, British and other Commonwealth troops were
placed in an impossible position.
overwhelmingly, they served with courage and distinction
in appalling circumstances not of their making.
That there was an attempt in this instance to saddle
young Australian soldiers with the responsibility for the
British Empire's most humiliating debacle is beyond the
bounds of decency and credibility.
CANBERRA/ SYDNEY
January 13, 1993 TEL 13. Jan. 93 14: 53 No. 018 P. 02/ 0.' 



TEL: 14. Jan. 93 15: 29 No. 010 P. 01
-7
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING, MP
FAREWELL REMARKS TO AUSTRALIAN CONTIGENT TO SOMALIA
TOWNSVILLE, THURSDAY 14 JANUARY 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
I am honoured to take part in this ceremony to farewell Australian troops dcploying to
Somalia. Tomorrow you will be in Somalia, joining colleagues who have gone ahead to prepare
for your arrival.
You will be part of an historic international undertaking, involving military personnel
from more than 20 other nations.
Never before has the United Nations sanctioned intervention on such a scale in the
internal affairs of a member state for humanitarian purposes.
The world has bccn appalled by the human disaster in Somalia.
A quarter of a million people havc dicd as a result of famine and clan warfare.
Last year Somalis continued to star,, c while food donated by the international
community was plundered by armed gangs or remained in warehouses because safe
passage could not b; guarantccd.
Operation " Rcstore Hope" is the international response to this terrible situation.
Its objective is to establish as soon as possible a secure environment for humanitarian
relicf operations in Somalia.
Australia's contribution to " Restore Hope" is a further demonstration of our support for
a stronger UN role in pcacekccping and humanitarian intervention.
We have a proud record in peacekceping. 
2
Today, Australian personnel are serving in UN-mandaced operations in Cambodia,
Iraq, the Red Sea, Western Sahara, Cyprus, Pakistan and Afghanistan, Israel and Syria,
as well as the multilateral operation in the Sinai.
when you join up with the remainder of the battalion group, you will become part of
Australia's largest contribution to UN operations since tbe Korean War and our largest
overseas deployment of ground forces in more than 20 years.
This deployment is also significant in providing an opportunity for Australia's infantry
to demonstrate the professional skills for which you arc so highly regarded.
I know you are well trained and cquipped for the challenging tasks that await you.
' The risks that you will face are real.
The Government is acutely awarc of what this means for you and your families.
Your assignment is limited to 17 weeks, and this is accepted by Australia's partners in
the operation.
We have no doubt you will be able to make a valuablc contribution to O9eratio
" Restore Hope" in this period.
It is appropriate that you have been assigned duties in the Baidoa area where Care
Australia has maintained a major relief operation in the most difficult circumstances.
You leave these shores with the full support of the nation as affirmed in the joint
resolution passed by both Houses of Parliament on 17 December.
On behalf of all Australians, I should like to express our deepest gratitude for your
service. You go to do what Australians want to see done:-security re-established;
humanitarian relief resumed.
Less suffcring. More hope.
I know that they arc proud of you, and that they wish you God-spccd and a safe return
to Australia.
I should now like to invite the Leader of the Opposition to join me in wishing you
every sucrCess in your important assignment.
CANBERRA 14 January 1993 TEL 14. Jan. 93 15: 29 No. 010 P-02,-



TEL: 1 i. Jan. 96 ' J NO . UU4 r
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECHi BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN TEACHERS UNION NATIONAL CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE 15 JANUARY 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
i am very grateful for the opportunity to address you even
though I am still officially of f duty.
This was supposed to be a Curriculum day.
But with our history being debated in the papers every day,
our national honour sullied again in the British press, every
day the expectation that one will be blamed for something else
going wrong over there, one is inevitably drawn back to the
world of controversy.
And what better place to re-join it than a teachers conference
an education conference?
Education~ will always be controversial. There will always be
arguentsabout it for the simple reason that it is so
important. It concerns the most basic instincts: to advance the interests
of our children. To give them a chance In a competitive
world. To assure their future..
Education is prone to passionate controversy because there is
so much at stake.
yet I imagine If the question were to be asked here What
should an education system aim to achieve? there would be
remarkably broad agreement.
No doubt there would be argument over emphases and over
details. But I don't think many people here would disagree
fundamentally with an ans wer along the following lines.
Our education system should prepare young Australians for
life and for the future. K. UUil// i. 11~) 
T1EL5:. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 02/ 13
2
Our education system should serve the interests of each
and every individual an it should serve the interests
of Australia.
It should be truly relevant: meaning it should instruct
young people both in those values we hold as universal and
unchangeable, and in the skills and knowledge they will
need if they are to play a rewarding role in modern
society. It should be both humanitarian and utilitarian: meaning
it should have a moral core it should encourage belief
and trust in the institutions, values and traditions of
Australia and in liberal democracy; and it should equip
students with a knowledge, including an historical
knowledge, of Australia and the world.
And it should teach the skills our country needs to grow
and succeed, and our people need to increase their life
opportunities and their material well-being.
It should be efficient and it should be fair. It should
deliver the best possible education to all Australians,
regardless of their parents' circumstances.
No doubt there are other useful aims and other ways Of
expressing them, but I don't believe many people here would
dispute them fundamentally.
And I think it's important to remember that essentially there
is agreement about education.
We should etch this in our minds, and when we start to argue
about the details or the best means of delivering education,
we should recall that we share the view that education is
vitally important, that It is a wellspring of useful, happy
lives and a good society.
Today we would add to this, I'm sure, our belief that an
education system should offer education and training not just
to the young but to people of aUl ages.
The modern world demands that education should not stop with
the end of secondary school or college or university.
Increasingly, skcill formnat -oin x will be a lifelong process: the
institutions will need to be there to provide them; and our
schoolteachers will need to be there, providing young
Australians with the knowledge and approach to learning which
will allow them to acquire skills throughout their lives.
The world of my own youth made no ouch demands.
I left school at fifteen at a time when a very small
proportion of Australians completed secondary school. In m-,
area, Bankstown, I doubt if one in ten did.
it was the norm to leave at fifteen in the 1950s.
TEL 
T1E5L:. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 03/ 13
3
Like other fifteen year oids I could leave because there were
jobs to go to.
But the job I went to no longer exists.
That is the crucial point to understand.
The systems and technology which have so remarkably advanced
productivity have come at the price of jobs.
Many of the old jobs are gone. The so-called dead end jobs
are largely gone.
In the new world that our children are now inheriting the
nation's wealth and life's opportunities will depend more and
more on the skills of our workforce.
it's been said before, but it was never so true education
and training are the keys to our success.
That is why in the past decade we have made the effort
necessary to increase the number of students completing
secondary school from 3 in 10 to 7 in
It is why we have created over 200,000 higher education places
the equivalent of twenty new universities.
And it is why last year we decided to establiSh the Australian
National Training Authority, as part of a wider process of
reform to raise the quality and status of vocational education
and training to the level of the other tiers of education.
it is also why such a great responsibility devolves on you
Australian teachers.
You have already borne much of the burden of change, and you
will have to bear more of it in future.
It is on you that our success substantially depends.
You will need assistance and today I pledge you that.
We realise that these great structural changes ultimately are
made by and affect people; and they will be made most
effectively by people who have faith in what they are doing,
and know that society has faith in them.
We recognise that you who teach are the building blocks of
educational achievement, and no reforms which fail to
recognise the need for your professional trust and enthusiasm
can hope to succeed.
Ladies and gentlemen
I said that there is general agreement about the aims of
education. TEL 
TEL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 04/ 13
4
The arguments generally concern the beat means of realising
our ambitions.
Most of these can be settled by discussion and negotiation. If
we never seem to get the perfect system, we do manage to
improve it.
But there is a point in this debate beyond which we cannot go
and that is the point which the Coalition presently
occupies. Our political opponents will probably not argue with the
higher purposes of education I spelt out a moment ago.
But they will tell you that the best way to achieve those
ambitions is to reduce the equity in delivery.
They say equality equals mediocrity they cannot imagine that
we can have excellence in a system which is fair.
I cannot imagine having it in a system which is not fair.
I say if we do not seek fairness and equity in something so
basic as education we squander the efforts of generations, we
betray our democratic values, and we condemn Australians in
the future to the social trauma which flows from massive and
deliberate inequality.
Equity and excellence are nQt incompatible concepts.
Nor do we accept the view which recurs so often through the
Coalition's policies: that if the strong are to prosper,
support for the weak must be diminished.
Dr Hewson has flip-flopped on F tjtback and is now doing an
exicriuciating imitation of a so'ft toy.
He is trying to speak a new conciliatory language. He is
talking about the need to put certainty in people's lives.
The kind of certainty Jeff Kennett has put into the lives of
Victorians. The kind of certainty which flows from the unfettered free
market of which the real Dr Hewson is an avid disciple.
The kind of certainty Mrs Thatcher brought to the lives of the
British people and Reaganomics brought to Americans. The
certainty which comes when the safety net is ripped away, and
the creed takes hold that fairness equals mediocrity.
The kind of certainty which the Federal President of Dr
Hewson' s Liberal Party described last week in a speech in
which he said one Nobel Prize winner is worth more than
hundreds of mediocre practitioners"
Worth more what? Worth more to whom? 
TEL: 15 . Jan .93 9: 59 No. 004
A speech in which he said, echoing the old or real-
Dr Hewson, that lifting the average meant dragging up
" laggards" and pulling down " leaders".
One week before John Hewson pledged himself to putting more
certainty in the lives of Australians, his Federal President,
Mr Goldsworthy said this:
Life has to become tougher with less security and
greater uncertainty.
Greater Uncertainty.
Dr Hewson'a idea of certainty is the kind which underpins his
education policy: that Is, the kind which flows from
unleashing theoretical market forces on education.
The kind which will follow from his policy of shifting
resources from those schools which have the least resources to
those which have the most.
I do not want to dwell on the Opposition's policies I would
rather talk about our own.
But Some remarks must be made about education under the
Coalition. The Coalition proposes a system of student vouchers for
vocational training. They would take the Government's growth
commitment of $ 720 million and re-direct it through a voucher
scheme: and, in doing that, they would remove the foundations
of our agreement with the States and Territories to establish
the Australian National Training Authority and a national
approach to planning.
These vouchers would be available to young people on or about
the youth wage levels of $ 3.00 or $ 3.50 an hour. Those on
higher wages would not be eligible.
To take advantage of a voucher, a young person would be
required to negotiate an employment contract involving time
of f for training, or find training opportunities outside of
working hours.
The voucher policy is both inequitable and unworkable. It is
an administrative fantasy. It raises doubts about whether the
growth funding would ever be spent. Certainly there must be
doubt whether it will be spent where it is needed.
Indeed it may be more than an oversight that the Coalition has
not included Sny funding provision for the voucher policy in
the coatings for 1Fightback Mark II.
The Coalition's policies on vocational training threaten to
give concrete expression to John Foward's fantasy about dead
end jobs. 
TEL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 06/ 13
6
In combination they would destroy our Chances of building 8
skilful society by removing the essential funding, structures
and incentives.
The same thinking governs their policy on University
education, and similar results would follow.
The Opposition want to allow those who can afford to do so to
pay for a place at University, even if they have not earned a
subsidised place on the basis of academic merit.
The cost of a university degree is between $ 25,000 and
$ 130,000.
Existing fee-free places would become subsidised places in an
ill-defined system of student vouchers.
We do not yet know what level of cost will be covered by the
voucher. We do know that universities would be free to set their own
fees on a11 courses.
And we know that students would be personally liable for costs
in excess of the voucher's value.
The consequences for equity of access to University are plain
and unmistakable.
As far as schooling is concerned, I suppose I could do worse
than simply ask for a minute's silence while we think of Mr
Kennett* You don't need me to tell you about Mr Kennett.
The alternative Commonwealth government has in mind
dismantling public education in Australia. They will achieve
this by a couple of simple policy measures, both of which were
launched in Fightback I and live on in Fightback II.
The only area of schooling which would receive any significant
increase in support under a Hewson Government would be wealthy
private education.
At the same time Federal grants to the states, and by
implication to State schools, will be cut. This is a blatant
shift of public resources from State to private schools.
It will be perceived in many quarters as an attack on
government schools and may well re-open the old State Aid
debate. The second major policy measure proposed by the Opposition
would involve a major re-distribution of resources between
non-government schools; the existing twelve categories of
need would be collapsed into six, to the overwhelming
advantage of those at the top. 
T1EL5:. 2Tan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 07/ 13
7
The type of private school which will benefit most from this
re-distribution will include Scotch College and Melbourne
Grammar, which are currently in Category One.
These schools will receive a funding increase of over fifty
per cent.
The schools to receive the lowest increase will be you
guessed it Aboriginal schools and special schools for
students with a disability. That is, those schools currently
in Category Twelve.
We are talking about more than policy differences here. These
are policies reflecting an ideological fixation with the
belief that to quote John Hewson Mark I the poor will drag
us down. The same school of thought which insists that equity
and excellence can't co-exist. That you can't raise the
average without helping undeserving " laggards".
In so far as the HewSon funding increases will provide for
needy private schools, the Federal Government's announced
increases will effectively do the same, and in a climate of
stability and certainty for the entire sector.
Under the Government's policy, schools in category 12 will
receive real increases in Federal funding every year until the
Year 2000. Schools like Scotch College and Melbourne Grammar
will simply have their much smaller grants maintained at the
some level in real terms.
If Hewson's promised windfall to wealthy private schools does
have the effect of re-igniting the State Aid debate, questions
about education quality, teacher training and schools reform
will be buried under arguments about resource allocation
acrimony of the kind which polarised the Australian community
for a decade in the 1960s.
if there is anyone involved in Australian education who
believes there is no substantial difference between the
Government and the opposition, they should think again.
As my colleague Kim Beazley has said, the Liberal Party's
education policy is a triumph of ideology over rationality.
I think it is fair to say that Government policy has tried to
attend to needs and facts.
In higher education, for instance, through a period of
exceptional growth we have been able to maintain a fair system
of student income support and provide undergraduate and postgraduate
courses without up-front fees.
The challenge now is to consolidate the expanded system and
improve its quality.
We will continue to provide for growth there will be a
further 25,000 increase in student numbers between 1992 and
1994. TEL 
EL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 08/ 113
8
And we will provide for exciting a= w forms of opportunity
through the development of the Open Learning Initiative.
I am well aware that, despite this growth, excess demand for
university places remains high.
The answer is not to provide a university place for all who
apply. Apart from being an unreasonable burden on taxpayers, it would
result in 8 major mismatch between the skills we have and the
skills we need.
The answer lies in the provision of fair access to a
comprehensive and balanced range of education and training
options. To achieve this we will need, not only measured
growth for universities, but a major expansion and improvement
of vocational education and training by which I mean both
entry level training arrangements and more advanced TAFE
courses. I am sure most of you are aware of the initiatives we have
taken last year.
Under a new national vocational education and training system
an additional $ 720 million will be provided over the 1993-1995
triennium. It will be a genuinely national system, with agreed goals and
priorities established through a Ministerial Council, end
planned and funded through the Australian National Training
Authority. The system will enjoy the close involvement of industry and
encourage the growth of a network of high quality training
providers. it is an historic initiative, and one of which we are very
proud. it's a rational, decisive and coherent response to-change. A
response to need. It will bring us, within the decade, up to
the level of the best in the world.
Considerable as the undertaking is, in a sense the development
of ANTA represents only part of 8 wider strategy of taking a
national approach to education.
This dates back to the Hobart Declaration on Schooling in 1989
when, for the first time in our history, Australia's eight
State and Territory education ministers agreed on national
goals. For the first time the development of frameworks for national
curriculum and assessment in Australian schools was set in
train. TEL 
TEL: 15.3an. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 09/ 13
9
For the first time employers were brought to the negotiating
table on education issues.
When all eight of the National Curriculum Statements on key
learning areas and their assessment profiles are completed in
June this year, for the first time parents and employers will
have access to common curriculum frameworks which relate to
all Australian schools.
We will be able to produce education resource materials to
support the national statements at a fraction of their present
cost: and these economies of scale will also make regular
curriculum review and renewal much easier.
Beyond the material gains there is, if you like, the national
one. As we approach the second century of our nationhood, we
will have at last an education system which can meet the
nation's needs and express its character and purpose.
Ladies and gentlemen
Earlier I said that the Government is aware of the change
teachers have had to accommodate in recent years.
And we are aware that change is going to continue in the next
decade. As Kim Beazley points out in his Ministerial
Statement, the prospect is daunting.
it will save you from an insufferably long speech if I simply
recommend his Statement to you, and progress quickly toward
the Prime Ministerial prerogative of announcing the good news.
It goes without saying that the success of our educational
endeavours depends critically on teachers.
The Government is of the view that the vast majority of
teachers are dedicated and well able to deliver the necessary
change. There is no doubt that not all the community is so well
disposed. There a belief that some teachers are not
contributing, and even though this may not be in proportion to
the facts, the hard truth is that the teaching profession
cannot afford to carry either the passengers or the reputation
that goes with them.
For while education depends on many players, it depends most
of all on teachers: on their skills and their understanding
of future directions.
This is an age when success depends on productivity
improvement and industry reform, and the education industry
can be no exception.
All parties involved, especially employers and teacher unions,
will have to take up the challenge. I don't believe that
should be a cause for anxiety: in my experience, those who 
TEL
have taken on the task of industry reform never want to return
to the old industrial culture.
We are aware that change is stressful both the experienced
of change and the anticipation of it. We are aware of the
absolute need for support.
The typical teacher today was trained twenty years ago when
only about thirty per cent of students Completed secondary
school. Support and training are required to meet the needs of the
extra forty per cent of students who now complete it.
Work is continuing on the development of the key competencies
essential for effective participation in the emerging forms of
work and work organisation, and these will require new
expertise from the teachers and trainers who will deliver
them. There will be increased demands on teachers to keep up with
developments in subject content, communications technology,
Interactive computer software; and in coming to grips with
the new structures which will integrate schools, TAFE and
higher education.
To help equip teachers for the challenges they face, to
encourage and increase their professionalism, to give them the
training and support they need, I am pleased to announce today
that the Federal Government will commit $ 130 million over the
next three years.
million has been allocated to support the development of
the seven key competencies to a stage where they can be
incorporated successfully into the school curriculum. About
million of this allocation will be earmarked for teacher
training. Up to $ 105 million will be available for new professional
development activities over the next three years.
At this stage I might make the observation that these measures
hold a particular significance for the women who comprise
seventy per cent of the teaching workforce.
Raising the status of teachers, as we are determined to do,
raises the status of women and enables them to contribute more
effectively to national objectives.
It is perhaps significant that this organisation has been the
means of career breakthroughs for two of your past leaders
Di Foggo, your former President who is now on the Industrial
Relations Commission, and Jennie George, another former
President, who is now Assistant-Secretary of the ACTU.
I might say also thiit these new measures of professional
support will assist women who need to refresh their skills on
return to the profession after a period of parental leave.
TL: 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 10,13 
TEL: 15. Jan .93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 11/ 13
Sixty million dollars will be provided over the next three
years to establish a National Teachers' Professional
Development Program to renew and increase teachers' knowledge
of their subject disciplines.
Some of the funds will go towards support for National Teacher
Forums which provide opportunities for teachers and university
academic staff to share information.
The Government will be allocating five million dollars towards
a Quality schooling Program which, in addition to funding
projects in the areas of school leadership, school
organisation and student welfare, will support the
establishment of the proposed National Teaching Council.
The National Teaching Council, we Sincerely hope, will be an
important step towards higher levels of professionalism among
teachers, and a vehicle for the greater involvement of
teachers in the reform of education and the teaching
profession itself.
if the object of providing these new funds can be summarised,
it is to allow teachers to play a central role in determining
their own professional development needs within the context of
emerging national priorities.
There is no question that our aims will not be fulfilled
without improving the productivity of teachers.
There will have to be changes in the way teachers work.
The National Project on the Quality of Teaching and Learning
has developed the National Schools Project which, in 150
schools across Australia, has introduced new ways of working
with the potential for real productivity gains.
These include greater use of para professionals; flexible
timetabling outside traditional school hours; and flexible
class sizes to suit the needs of schools.
Flexibility is the key in modern education, as it is in modern
industry and business and as it must be in government and
unions. it goes without saying that governments need to work with
teachers and their unions and with education systems to
develop ways of working which will create a more effective
teaching environment and a better quality education.
The need for teachers to renew and expand their knowledge and
skills, and to modify their teaching methods, presents an
obvious challenge for teacher education of all kinds.
The Federal Govern-ment recognises, in particular, the
important role played by higher education institutions in the
pre-service and in-service training of teachers. 
TEL: 15. Jan. 95 9: 59 No. UU
12
As the major funding source for Australian Universities, the
Federal Government provides over $ 420 million a year for
teacher training within higher education institutions.
Teacher education faculties have had their fair share of
change and uncertainty in recent times, particularly in the
wake of major reforms in the higher education system.
They have also had their fair share of criticism.
Not all the criticism is justified, but doubtless some is. It
is indisputable that staffing rigidities in many teacher
education faculties are an obstacle to the renewal of courses.
it is significant that fifty per cent of teacher education
academics were school teachers before 1973 and only twenty per
cent have taught in schools in the 1980s.
To their credit, many universities have established strategies
for the renewal of their education faculties, and others are
developing them. For those institutions the Government will
advance operating grant funding to assist in the early
retirement of staff.
Ladies and gentlemen
The announcement of this new funding package for the
professional development of teachers is just one element of a
comprehensive policy framework encompassing all the sectors of
school, TAFE and higher education.
Our goal remains to make education accessible to all, and, in
particular, to assist those people in the workforce who need
further training or re-training to keep their jobs and their
industries alive.
We say that a fair and equitable education system, especially
a fair and equitable school system, will as readily deliver
excellence and opportunity as an unfair one.
And we say that a fair one will deliver a good society.
We see our efforts in education as an effort to extend
Australian social democracy bringing our educational
standards up to those we have achieved in such areas as
health, social security, human rights including the rights of
women. We should be and can be as good at education as we are at
these things, which is to say as good as any country in the
world. And to be good at education is to be both excellent and
equitable. Education in the 1990s is the machinery which will deliver us
a prosperous, strong and good society In the twenty-first
century. 4 P. 12/ 11-
TEL 15. Jan. 93 9: 59 No. 004 P. 13/ 13
13
It is the Vehicle of change and there is no-one else to drive
it but you the teachers of Australia.
So we will support you, and work with you, and we will create
the education system which Australians have a right to and we
a11 want.
CANBERRA/ ME LEOURNE
January, 1993 



F PRIME MINISTER j7/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P4. KEATING MP
MOUNT TODD GOLD MINE
I welcome today the final go ahead for Zapopan NL's Mount Todd gold mine near
Katherine in the Northern Territory.,
Environmental clearance, for the project was confirmed today by M4inister Ros
Kell. It follows last Friday's historic agreement betwecn, Zapopa I the loca
Jawoyn Association, and the Northern Territory Government to resolve all
outstanding land issues through a packagc that includes land, employment, and
training incentives for the local Jawoy people. The Commonwealth, although not
a signatory to the deal, participated in its negotiation.
Today's annouticemcnt means that Federal and Territory environmental
requirements have now becn fulfilled. Together with today's foreign investment
approval it means the path is cleared for development of the 100 million mine that
is expected to cmploy 200 people in the construction phase and 150 when
operational. Export earnings from the project are expected to be in the range of $ 50 to $ 100
million a year or up to $ 1 billion ovcr the lifc of the project.
Since it was proposed to the Federal Government in August, Mt Todd has
benefited from the One Nation Major Project Facilitation arrangements
administered by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister, Laurie
Brereton. It is also expected to be cligible for the Federal Government's 10 per
cent Development Allowance also announced in One Nation. 
This mining project raised a number of complex and at times contentious
environmental and aboriginal issues. That all issues were able to be effectively
addressed is a credit to the cooperative spirit which prevailed in the project
negotiations. The resolution of aboriginal issues was achieved because of a willingness on the
part of Zapopan and the Jawoyn to find ways to meet the legitimate desire of local
people to benefit from the mine. The negotiated scttlement shows that where thcre
is a preparedness to sit down and consult on aboriginal issues, a cooperative
approach to development is possible.
Despite all the issues involved in the project, government approvals were delivered
efficiently and within the company's commercial time frame, as they were with the
previously announced McArthur River and Chargcurs projects.
Yet in spite of this, the project was included in Dr Hewson's Fightback 11 mythical
list of projects allegedly blocked by government approval.
CANBERRA January 1993 



TEL: 22. Jan. 93 16: 31 No. 011 P. 01/ 02
I
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DEFAMATION ACTION AGAINST SENATOR BAUME
My solicitors yesterday commenced proceedings for defamation against Senator Michael
Baume. A statement of claim lodged with the NSW Supreme Court registry sets out the basis for
this action.
For more than eight months, Senator Baume has in an organiscd way raised untrue
allegations against me in the Senate under Parliamentary privilege.
Denied such privilege over the New Year period, in a radio interview in Melbourne
Senator Baumc falsely accused me of putting my personal financial interests ahead of the
interests of the nation when I delivered the One Nation statement in February last year.
Senator Baume accused me of introducing a development allowance scheme In the One
Nation package after I had made a private investment so as to obtain substantial tax
benefits for a company in which I have an interest. Senator Baume stated as a matter of
fact that a company in which I have a purely financial interest applied for such benefits.
This is untrue and totally without foundation. No such application was ever proposed or
made. No more serious allegation can be made of a Prime Minister than that he broke the
obligations of his office and introduced a policy so as to obtain for himself a private
financial bcnefit.
In a weak public defence of his actions today, Senator Baume is reported to have said: " I
think it's in the Australian public's best interests to know what the facts are."
Senator Baunic has made defamatory allegations about me without any basis in fact. 
TEL: 22. Jan. 93 16: 31 No. 011 P. 02/ 02
The making of defamatory allegations by any person against another in public life does
not of itself render such allegationls to be matters of public interest.
Statements which are untrue, without basis, or which are defamatory are not removcd
from the reach of the law simply because they are said of and about a person in public life.
CANBERRA
January 22, 1993 



TEL: L 25. Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 01/ 06
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PLUME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES AUSTRALIA DAY COUNCIL LUNCH,
JANUARY 1993, DARLING HARBOUR CONVENTION CENTRE
I am very glad to be here, and particularly to welcome our guests from overseas.
This very large gathering is a measure both of your patriotism and your support for
A'd ney~ O01" ic bid.
For it is an Australia Day celebration and a great sporting occasion.
There is nothing unusual about that of course. Sport and patriotism have long been
virtually synonymous in Australia, and any Prli i-mMinister who does not know his sport
cannot expect to lead a happy life for long.
I won't boast. I will let my record this year speak for itself: I have addressed audiences
drawn from a wide and eccentric range of sports, including Australian Rules Football, and
I did it without causing the slightest embarrassment to anyone.
In fact Alan Border and Richie Richardson seemed genuinely startled by my knowledge of
cricket perhaps because they had adin the English press that I was Irish.
The fact remains that if Australians cannot bc fairly described as sports-mad, they most
certainly can be unfairly described that way.
For our overseas guests I should perhaps explain that our avid devotion to sport is believed
to derive from a long and intense contest with nature.
In the pioneering phase of our national life we were in perpetual competition with the
elements, and it is said that this translated culturally into an almost universal admiration
for physical prowess.
It is also said that our fascination with gambling has its origins in the game of chance
which the duel with nature always is.
That is how the story goes. In the great enpty spaces in Australia, men and women and
children had room to run and jump, and race their horscs, and kick balls around and
between gum-trees, and throw bags of wheat over fences and buildings. 
T2EL5: . Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 02/ 06
2
It was a physical culture and, of course, a healthy one which made our athletes all the
more formidable.
It is also suspected that our urge to compete derived in part from our status at first as a
colony, and then as a somewhat subordinate partner in the British Empire.
Such peoples thc New Zealanders provide another example are generally determined
to prove themsclves on playing fields. And battlefields. And throughout this century
Australians did just that,
Down here at the bottom of the world we're susceptible to feelings of inadequacy and
neglect. It is important to raise our self-esteem by beating the best in thc world.
So we have always made a great deal of what we do best: and it has long been said that
what we do bcst is sport.
That there is still some truth in this is undeniable.
Last year we watched with great pride as, in Barcelona, Australian athlctes won a swag of
medals quite out of proportion to the size of our population. But we reckoned it was about
the right number.
In the previous three or four Olympics we thought we did adequately when we did as well
or better than othcr comparable countrics.
In sport we expect nothing less than to be above the avcrage.
There were other sporting triumphs, the rugby union team among them. Like all other
Prime Ministers before me, I could stand here on Australia Day 1993 and read out a long
list of our sporting succcsscs in the past twelve months.
But I won't do that.
Instead let me mention a few other medals won by Australians in the past year. Medals
and awards in fields of endeavour for which we are less well known in the world. Fields
in which usually we have taken somewhat less pride than wc might.
But year after year Australian artists writcrs, dancers, musicians, film makers, actors
take on thc world and win.
Last year, for instance, a young Australian ballet danicer, Simone Goldsmith, won the gold
medal at the Royal Academy of Dance Gence Awards in London.
Another Australiani, Holly Smart, won it the year beforc. In fact Australians took all gold,
silvcr and bronze miedals in both years.
Last year a 26 year old Australian viol inist, Ben Lea, became one of the very few
forcigners to be appointed to wvhat many, people will tell you is the greatest orchestra in
the world the Vienna Philharmonic. Bcn's twin brother, Toby, is principal solo viola
with La Scala.
Last year an Australian, Jackie Farkas, won thc world's laT~ est prize of $ 250,000 for a
student film at the International Cincma Students Festival in Tokyo. While another
young Australian, Stavros Efthymiou was naincd Young Film-maker of the Year at the
Edinburgh Film Festival. TEL 
TEL .3
In the United States, Judy Davis won a Golden Globe Award, the Los Angeles Film
Critics Award and the National Board of Review Award for best supporting actres.
And last year a young Australian, Baz Luhrrnann, won the Prix de la Jeunesse at the
Cannes Film Festival for his film Strictly Ballroom.
Strictly Ballroom won a number of other prizes and many standing ovations around
the world. It also won thcrm here. And it was a huge box office success.
That, perhaps, is the most important thing not how much we impressed the world, but
the degree to which with our music, literature, opera, theatre, dance and sport we
inspired and amused ourselves.
I think all Australians should see Strictly Ballroom, including Australians who prefer sport
to art.
They will like it if only because Strictly Ballroomn is about competition, and sport the
most eccentric of sports ballroom dancing.
It is also about all those pioncering virtues of perseverance, and faith, and hope, and rising
above adversity.
The film is about thc need for things to change, the triumph of youth over age, of freedom
and self-expression over stifling conservatism, and of course the triumph of truth and
justice over villainy.
It reminds me of my own life, fighting those conservatives.
" Strictly Ballroom" is a film for our times. Or any other timcs.
It is an Australian fairy talc, both on the Screen and off it. The making of Strictly
Ballroom required those same virtucs of perseverance and courage as the film describes.
It is one of the curious things about patriotism that we all take credit for the success of a
few remarkable individuals. When our athletes won at Barelona we would say that " we"
won them.
When our artists perform brilliantly overseas we say that they are " ours".
Of course, we didn't win those medals. Our athletes did. And it was not our talent or our
perseverance which got their success in Barcelona or in Vienna.
Yet we did wvin. We won in the sensc that their triumphs strengthen our faith in Ourselves.
We also won in that their success was in some measure a return on the kind of society we
have ceated here. A society which does not stifle hope or excellence, but encourages it:
encourages it through the creation of institutions like the Australian Institute of
Sport, the National Institute of Dramatic Art, or the Australian Film and Television
school.
encourages it through a comnmitnmcnt to cquality of opportunity. T2EL5: . Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 03/ 06 
TEL: 25. Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 04/ 06
4
encourages it through commitment to the principles of cultural pluralism which we
have followed in the past 20 years. For while Strictly Ballroom is unambiguously
Australian, the cast and crew and themes of the film arc nothing if not
multicultural.
T'here will, no doubt, be people here who say that we do not do enough to encourage
excellence. There will be some who say we do not do enough to raise the level of
equality. I can only say we do our best by both, and most Australians are agreed that this is at least
the proper ambition.
So I'm inclincd to think that, so long as we foster talent and ambition, when Australian
athletes or artists win we have a right to say that " we" won too.
And, ladies and gcntlcmen, I would also say that if today we considered what all of us
have achieved in recent years, we might begin to feel even morc pride in ourselves.
Becausc what Australians have been engaged in for the past few years, and what will
engage us for the rest of this dccade, is a contest at least as great as our forebears' contest
with nature, and much greater than anything which happens on a sporting field.
It is a contcst, in one sense, with the rest of the world; in another, with ourselves.
It is the effort to transform our economy into one which is modern and competitive. It is
an effort to rc-direct our priorities. It is an effort to make an historic shift to Asia and the
Pacific. All this means transforming ourselves our habits of mind and work; the way we se
ourselves, and the way we sec the rest of the world.
We will nccd those qualities which great athlctes and artists have.
It will requirc confidence in ourselves, our institutions, our abilitics and our strength of
purpose. It will require a miatufe sense of identity.
I am one of thosc who is certain that the great transformation of Australia will occur.
I am confident becausc I know what changes have already been made. I know what we
have already achieved.
Therc has been a revolution in our thinking, and an irrcvcrsible re-casting of our
economy. Few countries, in fact, have moved so dramatically to restructure and rebuild.
Fcwer still have determined oni doing this without sacrif icing those principles of fairness
and equity which have always guided Australian democracy.
My point today is not to argue about who is most fit to lead Australia through thc change.
My point is that Australians have proved themsclves capable of making it. 
T2EL5:. Jan. 93 12: 09 No. 006 P. 05/ 06
Today I could quote to you at great length the irrefutable evidence for this:
thc rise in manufacturing exports.
the increase in those exports as a proportion of GDP;
the increase in the proportion of exports going to Asia.
the number of Australian firms who have in the past few ycars achieved
international best practice.
the enterprise agreements which are transforming our workplaces.
This is not the place to make a speech on the economy.
But it is the place to talk about thc Australian people, and I mention these things as a
tribute to thcir achievements in recent years.
We are going through bard times. More difficulties inevitably face us. But I am in no
doubt that sometime in this decade the peoplc of Australia will be able to look back and
say that, confronted with the challenge of securing their future, they rose to meet that
challenge, And I say that because have seen it happening.
On Australia Day 1993 Australians need look no further than their own recent history to
find their inspiration and their pride.
We will need help, and no doubt our sports men and women will continue to lift our
spirits. And we will continue to see in them an image of what we would like ourselves to
be even an image of what we imiagine We are.
We do see in our hcroes an idealiscd reflection of ourselves, or at least a modcl for
imitating. I
An earlier gencration saw it in the likes of Donald Bradman. At other times people like
Dawn Fraser and Betty Cuthbert and Shirley Strickland have provided the inspiration.
Or Jon Konrads, or Rod Layer or Alan Border.
Or, ladies and gentlemen, Evonne Goolagong, or Lionel Rose or Mark Ella or Mal
Meninga.
That last list could be turned into a very long one the list of Aboriginal Australians who
have excelled in the field by which Australians so frcqucntly judgc themselves.
As it is, the l~ ist of four includes two world chamnpions and two national captains.
Four measures of our national achievement.
In this United Nations International Year of the World's Indigenous People we might look
harder at the idealised reflection of ourselves.
TEL 
I jj i~ i IU
6
And we might draw, perhaps, this conclusion: if we can share the inspiration, the pride
and the patriotism of Aboriginal champions, surely we can share the feelings of those
Aboriginal Australians whosc inspiration and pridc has been shattered, and who have no
reason to feel patriotic.
If we can take pride in what the champions have achieved, surely the same pride requires
us to take sympathetic understanding to their people.
If we can share the triumphs we can share the responsibility.
It seems to me that all great achievemients begin with an act of imagination.
Out there at Bowial in the twenties youn Donald Bradmani must * have imagined himself
making centuries at the Sydney Cricket Ground and somewhere else in New South
Wales the young Bill O'Reilly probably imagined himself getting him out.
I don't know whether Ben Lea cvcr imagined he'd play in the Vienna Philharmonic, but I
suspcct he did.
And against all the odds, thc young Lionel Rose no doubt imagined himself one day a
world champion and a national hero.
If thcy can do it, we can.
I have a feeling that thc solution to one of our great problems is, essentially, that act of
imagination. if sport can teach us that, I amn even more for sport.
If the arts can teach it, I am even more for the arts.
If this bid for the Olympics in the year 2000 can teach uis, I am even more for thc bid.
And if the personal triumphis of the past year, and this bid for thc Olympics in thc year
2000, help Australians imagine a modern, strong, competitive and fair society, those
people will have done their country a great service.
I see the Sydney bid playing a substantial role in the grcat challenges which face Australia
in 1990s.
Whether it succeeds or tails might, in the end, be judged less important than the
inspiration and confidence it gives us.
But like all Australians, I dearly hope that it succccds and sincerely bclicvc that it
should. Thank you all for coming and for the support you are giving this great project. ' V F . UV' L'V
ENDS nc 1 07 1 8 nn M n a D n r a 



PRIME INISTE
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
DOORSTOP, DARLING HARBOUR CONVENTION CENTRE, SYDNEY
JANUARY 199,)
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: The polls are good for you, Prime Minister.
PM: Polls come every week almost, in Australia.
J: Mr Keating, Dr Hewson has talked about your credibility on social justice issues.
He said that you don't have any.
PM: That's about as believable when you have a Liberal leader saying, a Liberal
leader who wants to smash Medicare, who wants to take $ 10 billion out of outlays,
and mostly social outlays, who was happy to see three kids in ten complete
secondary school in the early 1980s, who believes that if we help the poor we drag
the rest of us down, for somebody sharing those views to say of a Labor
Government with an unparalleled record in social reform that we don't have a
notion of social justice, barely warrants a response.
J: There are a million people out of work and we've got a $ 150 billion foreign debt
bill.
PM: But what we have is one of the finest social wage and safety nets in the world, the
one thing that Dr Hewson is dedicated to tearing down. One of the reasons why
this society is as cohesive as it is, even through stress times, is that the
Government has in place a social security system which can equal anything in the
world. It is that system which Dr Hewson wants to put upon a frontal attack.
J: How close are you to making a decision about the election date?
PM: I get asked about that every day, don't I? 
J: minimising his tax, Dr Hcwson's minimisation?
PM: I saw that today. I only know what I've read, and if what we've read is true it's for
Dr Hewson to say what he has done in these respects. But if it is true, he does
seem to have a penchant for 15 per cent tax rates, does he not?
J: Hewson's assessment that official reserves are run down?
PM: Are you from Knight Ridder or something are you? Good bye.
ends 



Check Against Delivery
PRIME MINJISTER EMBRGOD NTI 177 pm 26.1.93
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP TO THE
1992 AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS PRESENTATION LUNCHEON,
26 JANUARY 1993 ADMIRALTY HOUSE
Ladies and gentlemen
On this, like any other Australia Day, there is a great deal to celebrate.
We might start with the most obvious, but perhaps the most often ignored: I mean the
continued good health of one of the world's oldest democracies.
Or a standard of living which remains among the highest in the world.
We might celebrate the enviable freedom and comforts of life in Australia. And the
degree of security with which only a handful of other countries compare.
We could begin by celebrating these things, and giving thanks to those generations of
Australians whose monumental labour and faith and love for this land bequeathed them to
US. On this Australia Day we might draw strength from their example and pledge ourselves to
match their inspiration.
And it is useful to look back for a moment. It will remind us that we are not the first
generation to be confronted by a great challenge, or the first to feel that the going was
tough, or the first to need a sustaining faith in their country and their fellow Australians.
This post war generation might be guilty of bearing a myth about Australia. Perhaps
because we inherited the post-war growth and stability I suspect it was we who allowed
the idea to grow that Australia's history was an uninterrupted progression to better and
better things. And perhaps we conveyed that idea to our children.
Possibly we lost some of the essential truth when, in our scepticism, we ceased to instruct
our kids in the pioneering legends.
Perhaps that is something we should remedy.
The idea that good fortune has nearly always smiled upon Australia tends to obscure the
fact that what has been built here the people have built. 5637 
Australians of any age woul d always tell you that it was their great good luck to live here:
but those who farmied in the Mallee, or dug coal out of the Uthgow pits, or worked in the
nation's factories in the earlier years of industrial capitalism were, more often than not,
creating a fortunate life for the next generation, not their own.
Essentially this country was conceived in the imagination of its people, and delivered to
us by their labour.
One hundred years ago Australia lay deep in drought and Depression. Out of that decade
emerged the Federation.
Thirty years later there was another Depression, and out of that came people with the
strength to fight a war.
Between the two depressions there was another war which took the lives of 60,000 young
Australians from a population of just four and a half million.
These were the legendary Australians: the pioneers, those who struggled through the
hardest of hard times, those who defended this country in 1942.
They have been enshrined in literature, art and monuments and we should never forget
them. In the past year two of the people who helped put those generations forever in the realm of
Australian legend, Sydney Nolan and Paul Hasluck, died. The year before we lost
Manning Clark..
Suddenly it seems the old generation is passing. It leaves a gap which we feel can never
quite be filled.
Yet it is also an unmistakeable sign that responsibility has passed into our hands. Our
lucky post-war generation now has to find the right direction. We have to make our own
history. That is the challenge that is the message, I think, for this Australia Day 1993: to make
sense of our history, make sense of who we are, make the most of our time.
No generation of Australians has faced a greater challenge than the one we face
certainly not in peace-time.
And I would say, as well, that none has shown a greater willingness to squarely face
reality and do what has to be done.
These are difficult times. Not so hard on people as those in the past I have mentioned,
partly because those events made us both wiser and more compassionate.
Today we do not have a third of the workforce unemployed, but a tenth. And we have a
social net in place which was not there sixty years ago.
This is not the challenge of war or depression.
It is the no less difficult challenge of maintaining the momentum of an economic
revolution while restoring employment.
5638 
3
It is the challenge of finding our place in that region which until now has been most
foreign to us Asia. And by finding our place there, securing the freedom comforts and
security our generation has enjoyed.
It is about managing a post industrial revolution and navigating a passage to the places
where our future lies.
These are not options, but imperatives.
And responding to them will require the same qualities of courage and perseverance, and
imagination and faith as those other moments in our history have demanded.
The tragedy of the recession has been the good work undone.
We created one and three quarter million and a half jobs in the eighties and we have lost
three hundred thousand of them.
We have to get them back.
With our tradingpartners either in recession or growing more slowly than we are, it will
not be easy.
It is now apparent that the wild lending of the late eighties and the subsequent collapse in
asset prices has left the banking system poorly placed to fund the production and
investment necessary to get the economy moving.
To compound the problem, Australian companies like those in other countries are now
seeking &amp; reterpToductivity through substitutingnew efficiencies for jobs.
In these circumstances there might be a temptation to think that the unemployed are the
casualties of progres as the environment was in the conquest of the land, as people were
in the industrial age, as cities have been in the rush to development.
But the sacrifice of people to the winds of change, or to ideological fashion is precisely
what Australians resisted in the 1980s, when other countries now manifestly to their
great cost allowed it to happen.
In my reading of the history of Australia this century it is precisely what Australians have
always resisted.
It seems to me it has always been the judgment of most Australians that a true democracy
has a social dimension. That governments have social responsibilities.
So the fight against unemployment will go on. The challenge to get those jobs back is an
imperative. The recession struck a blow at our confidence: all of us have felt it.
It did not strike us all equally, but it seems to me that it is our equal responsibility to strike
back: to re-group and re-build.
And the best way of doing that is to seize the opportunity which the past decade of change
has already delivered to us. ' 15639 
We have to continue the transormation of Australia from a country dependent entirely on
the export of commodities, to a country which also manufactures goods and services
which the world wants to buy.
And we have to continue to go where the greatest growth by far is, where the window of
opportunity is open, where we cannot afford not to go to Asia.
T'his is a fight we cannot afford to lose.
And I can say after ten years of fighting it, and watching Australians fight it, I cannot
believe that we will lose it.
As I'e said more than once this year, I know we can make the change because of the
change we have already made.
Yesterday I spoke at another Australia Day gathering one associated with Sydney's
Olympic bid.
It was appropriate to point out there that Australia had done marvellously well on the
international sporting scene in the past twelve months.
Nowhere did we do better than at the Barcelona Olympics, of course.
And we can perhaps learn from our athletes that the world should hold no fear for us. If
we wed talent with resourcefulness and dedication we can compete with the world and
win. In the same speech also pointed out that we had competed just as successfully on other
fronts where those qualities matter.
In the arts, for instance. Young Australian ballet dancers won gold medals at the Genee
Awards in London. They won all the medals gold, silver and bronze. They won all of
them in the previous year as well.
A young Australian achieved the rare distinction of being appointed to the Vienna
Philharmonic Orchestra.
An Australian film, Strictly Ballroom, picked up a swag of prizes around the world and
topped the box office both here and in Great Britain.
An Australian actress, Judy Davis, won three of the most prestigious American acting
awards and is widely predicted to win at least another two, including an Oscar.
The list of these artistic achievements is as long as those in sport and the lesson is the
same. We can win in the world.
What is true of these successes is true of business. And it has proven to be.
For among the prizes won this year we might also list BliPs successful tender to develop
the oil and gas reserves of Vietnam.
We might include all those companies which made things in Australia and sold them
overseas.
5640. 
That would be a longer list than anyone here would have the patience for. But the figures
constitute one very important reason why I believe that Australia will succeed.
Our total exports have increased in the past five years by more than 40 per cent.
Our exports of elaborately transformed goods have increased by more than 100 per cent.
We have increased our exports to Asia by 70 per cent.
These reflect the dramatic recasting of Australia's economy.
They reflect something else just as fundamental. They reflect a sea change in the way we
do things, the way we think about our future, the way we think about the rest of the world.
The change has occurred in boardrooms and on the shop floor. It can be seen in the
growth among Australian companies of a commitment to international best practice. It
can also be seen in the enterprise agreements which trade unions and managemern across
Australia are signing every day.
There is a new cooperative culture in Australia. There is a new recognition that our
success depends on a common effort. We have learned what the successful economies of
the world learned long ago, and we have learned it very quickly that cooperation is
more productive and more competitive.
There is another lesson that should be learned from those successful countries:
There is a role for government.
Care for people remains paramount even in times of transition especially in
times of transition.
The change we want comes most easily when it comes with the least damage to
the social fabric.
Yet while we can learn from these examples, they will not provide us with our solutions.
The way forward for Australia is not the Japanese way, or the way of Singapore, any more
than it is the British way, or the German, or the American.
What we do will be appropriate to our circumstances, our needs, our culture, our
character. It will call on our strengths and they are many: we are strong in education; in
democracy; in cultural diversity and social harmony.
We remain immensely strong in natural resources, including an environment which is
both unique and, by world standards, relatively undamaged.
The great spaces of Australia are a strength. So is the efficiency of our primary producers,
and the clean air, water and soil in which they grow their products.
We're strong in so far as we include in the dynamic of our country a very large proportion
of our people. We include a considerably greater proportion of our people in the
workforce than does, for instance, the United States. 5641 
We have taken in the past decade more women into the workforce, and we lead the world
in implementing the United Nations Convention on the elimination of all forms of
discrimination against women.
We are strong because we are a liberal democracy. We are strong because we are
progressive. And, as we make this great transition, the more we invest in the lives of our people the
stronger we will be.
For if there is one thing I have learned in the past few years it is that the people of
Australia are our greatest resource.
It is they who have adapted to the change, it is they who have risen to the challenge of the
future, it is they who have both borne the burden and not infrequently pointed the way.
I said yesterday that these difficult times are not yet over. We cannot realistically expect
to achieve all our goals before the end of the decade. We will have to continue to adjust:
by I mean all of us governments, business, trade unions, communities.
But change breeds change; and ingenuity fosters ingenuity and faith is infectious.
Ladies and Gentlemen
In this past year it has been my privilege to speak at a number of events commemorating
the deeds of Australians during the second World War: legendary deeds at Kokoda, Milne
Bay and the Coral Sea.
It was also the 50th anniversary of El Alamnein, Singapore and Darwin.
In this same year I was privileged to be present on the long overdue occasion of our
recognising the courage and sacrifice of those who served in Vietnam.
I spoke at events organised by the various and collective ethnic communities of Australia,
and there it was possible to get a picture of the extraordinary progress that we have made
towards an open, tolerant, pluralist society. A far richer society than the one in which I
grew UP.
I spoke at events organised by groups representing women in Australia, and could not help
but reflect on the advances we have made towards genuine equity and, therefore, more
genuine democracy.
Last year I had the opportunity to speak at several events about our great need to achieve
in this decade social justice for Australian Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders.
We are committed to a process of reconciliation. We are determined to end two centuries
of discrimination and injustice. The response since spelling out these ambitions in
Redfern Park two months ago convinces me that the great majority of Australians are
committed to them too.
Last year I visited Indonesia, Singapore and Japan. It was plain not only that an historic
opportunity exists for us in the region but that the region expects us to seize it. We are
expected to succeed.
5642 
Last year it was my duty to find the words to sy when men and women of the Australian
armed forces were sent to pursue the interests of democracy and peace in Cambodia, and a
few months later it was my gxeat privilege to visit them in Phnom Penhi.
Last month I went to Townsville to farewell our troops as they left for Somalia on a
similar mission.
What became apparent in the course of last year is that this generation of Australians is
carving out a place in the world. It is growing its own legends.
This generation of Australians is making its own history.
We Australians need look no further than what we have done and what we are now doing
to find our inspiration. We need look no further than ourselves.
There is no better message for Australia Day 1993.
Thank You. 5643 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
On Australia Day it is right that we should remember all that
was done by earlier generations to build this country. But
-today I think it is appropriate to also remind ourselves that
this generation of Australians has done as much as any other to
preserve our way of life and make it safe in the years to come.
In the past decade we Australians have risen to meet the
challenges posed by a dramatically changing world, and by our
efforts we have given ourselves security and opportunities we
would not otherwise now have. In doing this we have learned that
we have the capacity to adapt. We have learned that we can
compete with the best.
In the 1990s the chance is there for Australia: we can build for
ourselves a more rewarding and dynamic place in the world, and
particularly in our region, than we have ever had before. In
our great natural _ wealt4, in our collective-skills-, and
knowledge, in our will and strength of purpose, we have all we
need to secure the future.
The challenges remain. With some of our m~ r traigprns
in recession or moving only slowly out of it, the hardship here
will not quickly go away. This is a reality which must be
squarely faced. Equally, we should acknowledge that we are
doing better than most comparable countries, and that there is
good reason to be confident.
In 1993 we will redouble our efforts to accelerate economic
recovery, reduce unemployment and alleviate the stress which
change has brought to Australians in their homes and workplaces.
The great task for we Australians is to continue to confront
necessity and make the changes, while doing all we can to reduce
and share the burden.
Our success depends on our material and human resources, our
natural wealth and our energy and ideas. It also depends on our
faith in Australia and in each other, by how well we care for
each other.
It will be good for us to be guided by these things in 1993,
just as they have guided Australians through other challenging
times. I take this opportunity to wish all Australians a successful,
safe and happy year.
5644 January 1993 



PRIMtZ MINISTaR CA, 4SCRNA
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING NP
The attack on me today by the Opposition's Alexander Downer~
is outrageous. It arises from a flagrant and delibeirate
distortion of accounts which are perfectly normal, and which
have been audited by the accounting firm KP? 40 Peat MarwickC.
My position is not at all comparable to Or Hawon's.
The $ 4million profit referred to by Mr Dowaner arises from
the trading company ( Brown and Hatton wholesale Pty Ltd) on
its trading activities. But when grouped with the primary
producing business-which carries the principal costs of
production the " profito is properly and legitimately
of fset.
This to the normal operation of company grouping and the
grouping provisions of the tax act, and in not tax
minimisation. ] prHewson. and Mr Downer know this, and have resorted to this
distortion to defend Dr Howson's own position. They seek to
rely upon the media's inability to immediately understand
the business and tax arrangements applying within a
particular company or group.
Dr Howson is reported to have minimised his tax by putting a
domestic house into a company.
This is not a device available to the vast majority of
Australians. if Dr Hewson is looking for a comparable example in tax
treatment, I bought a domestic house within one month of'him
buying his home in February 1983. 1 have carried all of its
costs personally and absolutely none have been deducted
against other income, and the house was never placed in a
company for the purposes of tax minimisation.
I have never relied upon such dubious and slick practices.
SYDNEY January 26, 1993 5645 



TEL
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH KEVIN HUME, ABC RADIO 2 7
JANUARY 1993
3 AND OE PROOF ONLY
HUME; Prime Minister, why bother to battle for Carmen, she
is dead and gone isn't she?
Flit I don't think so. Carmen is held In high esteem and
the polls tell us that. She has done a first class job in
tightening up the admuinistration here in Western Australia,
she is an honest# decent, hardworking person who is running a
fairly tight government and I think she has every reason to be
re-elected.
HUME: Every reason to be re-elected, a fairly cautious
endorsement. I mean the polls are showing 9/ 10% swing against
Labor. PM: Polls are not always right, they are not always
right and we will see What happens on polling day. She has
had a battle and she has known that but all the same she is in
there with a chance.
HUJMEt Your talked yesterday about generational change,
Richard Court in a sense represents generational change or
does he?
FM: I don't think so, much the samne age, he and Carmen.
No if Carmen were an elderly person I would say yes that's
fair comment, if she was the age of you know Joh Bjelke
Petersen or Charlie Court or somebody, fair enough, but she is
a young peruon as a Premier and I don't think the generational
change in turn anyway. If a generational change refers to a
youthful view of the world, a youthful view of the world and a
sort of upbeat progressive view of the world, she is a younger
person than Richard Court in.
HUME1 if you look back to the 19809 the heritage of the
past, the baggage of the past that Premier Lawrence has got to
T2EL8: . Jan. 93 7: 42 No. 001 P. 01/ 09 
T2EL8:. Jan. 93 7: 42 No. 001 P. 02/ 09
2.
HUM ( cont'd) discard, part of it includes Of course
economic rationalism. Does economic rationalism to you these
days represent the baggage of the past?
PM: I don't think it includes economic rationalism. I
think it includes state participation' in the private economy
and a lot of questioning about that but the issue is it was
she who set up the processes of enquiry into these policies
and therefore I think that any problems in the way in which
the state has functioned in those respects shouldn't be
sheeted home to her.
MUMS$ Let's look at the wider question of economic
rationlism and your own promise with the coming federal
election to bring just a touch of the Whitlams back into the
campaign, a touch of excitment certainly from the 1970s but
it's curious to look to the past to find that contemporary
touch of magic to inspire the electorate isn't it.
PM1 I think so. I think politics is about imagination
and you can't get nations to do great things, great deed.
without a sense of imagination by the public and it is the job
of political leaders to instill that sense of imagination in
them and I should have thought in the last year we have done
quite a bit of that.
IjUMEt Can you successfully remake yourself though from the
1980s, can you shed all of the baggage from the 1980s?
P21: I don't want to, I am not intending on remaking
myself at all, not one bit. I mean it depends, you are
confusing the terms I think rationalists with the ideology of
the right. The view that sort of John Hewbon subscribes to
the sort of Margaret Thatcher, Reagan view, I wan never for
that but I was always for rational policy not for irrational
policy and you can't com~ pare Australia today to 1983 or 1984.
Here we are now a much more interesting country, much more
diverse industries, much greater wide basis to our wealth.
This is the first year we have exported more manufactured
goods and rural goods than rural products. The great bulk of
those, the greatest growth in those has elaborately
transformed manufactures which we just were not doing a decade
ago. International services, medical services, education
services, health services, tourism, were just not traded
services ten years ago. These came because of a Labor
government turning Australia into a proper functioning market
economy. HUM There have been considerable costs as we have
seen with the continuing turmoil for example over the banks,
the role of the ~ eevBzkwhether regulation ought to be
reintroduced and tightened in the 1990., a dereg4latory
fervour as though you were not susceptible to it. But there
were certain TEL 
TEL: 28. Jan .93 ? 7: 42 No .001 P. 03/ 09
3.
PM: It's not a matter of being susceptible to it.
I introduced deregulation but you can't halt introduce it,
that's the old point about pregnancy, you can't be half
pregnant, you either are or you are not. If, when I was for
instance deregulating deposit maturity controls back in the
savings banks for instancel well trading bank. couldn't
accept deposits under 30 days. Why? Why? No reason. So what
do you say we won't go to accept deposits, any deposits at any
duration, we will only make It 15 days, we will only partly
deregulate. I mean what Ise the rationalisation
HUJMES I am confused here, you are saying that
Thatcher and Reagan for example were excessive in their
fervour as far as deregulation in concerned. You are saying
as far as you were concerned you couldn't be a half
deregulator? PM8 No, no because Thatcher and Reaganism is not
about deregulation, it was about basically no role for
government. it was about government withdrawing, it was about
ripping down the public sector, It was about not breaking the
social wage, the safety net, those people didn't care about
access and equity in education or access and equity for health
or access and equity in age care. These are the things that
marked out the Labor Government against the cold winds from
the northern hemisphere in the 80s. The things we had In
common was making economies function, function more naturally.
That I regard as simply rational.
HUME: One of the costs again of the boo in a sense
though was the increasing internatioflalisation of that
deregulated world economy we are seeing with the turmoil on
the foreign exchange market day by day for example. The
extent to which the Treasurer and the Government, the Keating
Government in a sense is a prisoner of those International
forces, Do you regret in any sense having to deregulate to a
degree to make Australia more competitive, more part of that
International economy?
PM8 No, we just had to happen, it just had to
happen. You look at western Australia, western Australia is
a mining and agricultural state. Just imagine how it would be
without a proper exchange rate mechanism, without a
competitive exchange rate, wh~ ere would those iron ore mines
be. HUME$ But it has made you a prisoner in a sense those
international gnomes in Zurich, hasn't it?
PM: No, no that's all static from the Left, you
have been mixing with too Many Lefties mate, that's just
voodoo stuff. You are a prisoner of your economic
performance. Floating exchange rates came because when some
people were inflating at lot and others at 2 they wouldn't
take your currency for theirs because yours wasn't worth Ea
much, so the fixed exchange rates went, so what was going to 
TEL
4 PM ( cont'd) be put in its place? Obviously mobile floating
exchange rates and in the days of low inflation when everybody
warn inflating about the same low rates of inflation you could
keep fixed exchange rates. But you have seen how difficult
it's been with Britain. I had a lot of people in this country
Say to me in the 80s we shouldn't have our currency tied to
something, look at Britain it's joined the SRm and I used to
say yea, this is a mistake they won't stay there and of course
it's proven to be true. They tried to stick with the fiction
that a country which was lose productive and more high cost
could keep its currency on a par with one which was more
productive and lower coat and of course In the end people
won't swap your currency for theirs for the same price. So
floating exchange rates in fact covert they make the
difference. In other words they make the system equilibrate.
HUXhEt But they still create considerable political
and economical turmoil for a P'rime Minister heading into a
very tight federal election.
PM: There is no turmoil here. There Is turmoil in
Britain with a fixed exchange rate but there is none here.
The exchange rate has come down over a period of time, there
is an occasional flutter and it gets a headline in the
newspaper but by and large the system works and it works
because it's in a sense the shock absorber that takes the
change, be that change be the difference in the terms of
trade, that Is the falling prices for commodities etc or be It
be in Interest rates, whatever it Might be that exchange rate
takes the shock and takes the change. You intimate therefore
we are sort of prisoners of that, what you are if you are a
prisoner of anything you are a prisoner of your economic
performance, you can change all this by changing your economic
performance and countries that don't change their economic
performance, that don't be productive, that basically lay back
on the oars, fine, in the and someone marks them down.
HUME: Let's look at other prisoners of the past
internationally then. John major certainly, Bill Clinton
certainly. The Germans with the price of reunification still
to be paid and hoping to Make it to be paid through credit
cards rather than in a sense through raising taxes. The
Japanese also suffering because of their past enthusiasm for
asset inflation from the late 1960s, stock market fervour and
so on. All prisoners of the past, to that extent you and your
Government and this country is also a prisoner of the past and
the legacy of the past internationally.
PM: The past that I have had to deal with was the
sloth of the coalition parties who believe that we should be
just left with agriculture and minerals. I mean they took the
view when I became Treasurer in 1983 only three kids in ten
completed secondary school. They didn't think we needed to
educate the workforce, they didn't believe we needed to do
sophisticated things like sell health, medical, tourism
services. They didn't believe in high value added products,
T: 28 Jan .93 7: 42 No. 001 P. 04/ 09 
TEL: 28. Jan. 93 ?: 42 No. 001 P. 05/ 09
PHMi ( Cont' 14) they believed basically in farms and quarries.
it has lot us down, that's what produced our national debt,
it's that basic weakness that occurred over 25 years that
produced the rise in our national debt and the only way out of
it is to change the basic nature of the economy so you can pay
for yourself. That you can pay for your imports and you do it
in a way adding value rather than selling primitive
things, primitive things or primary things. Now that is the
job that I had to do that wasn to change all that, to change
all that culture to an outward looking productive culture and
it's changing. As I said this is the first year in our history
where we have exported more manufactures than rural products.
HUMEs Ten years on the point again is still that
Australia is a prisoner of the past, the legacy of Reagan and
Thatcher to a degree a prisoner also of international forces
whether they are the stock market, international foreign
exchange PM; I don't think we are prisoners of anything. I
think Australia is in a position to control it's own affairs.
If it wishes to promote its investment, if it wishes to
produce more product, I~ f it's productive sectors are more
supple and there is a larger level of production then of
course our current account deficit will be lower, our exchange
rate will be stronger. What I am trying to say long windedly
it's all up to us. But it you want to lay back and not make
the changes well you get beaten up, you will get beaten up by
markets. There is no one looking out after you any more
that's all changed and the changes of the 80s mean that we are
now a long way on the path of changing Australia towards that
kind of integrated with the Pacif ic particularly and
integrated productive international culture.
MUME: I can certainly understand your optimism, if I
can quote some Jerimiahs from Britain though, economic
forecasters and others. You say that 1990s because of the
past is going to be a decade of stagnation essentially, It's
going to be a repeat to a degree of the slump of the
America is bound by $ 460 billion of budget deficit, Clinton
can do vey little in the way that PDR did in the 1930.
something like the economy. The Germans as I have indicated
are unwilling to do anything-
PHI The Germans-
HUMEt finance themselves through credit card
fantasies. Not the most encouraging with which you have
to work as Treasurer or Prime Minister.
PM: That's true, the Germans are obsessed with
inflation and they are now through their policy of their
central bank largely hurting, seriously and badly the
economies of western Europe starting of course at Britain, nov
France, now others. The. French Franc is seriously overvalued
and it's hurting, desperately hurting the French economy. But 
TEL: 28. Jan .93 7: 42 No. 001 P. 06/ 09
6. PHI ( cont d) the people in the Bundesbank are keeping the
pressure on those economies to make certain that their
domestic change, that is the incorporation of East Germany
into West Germany is a low inflationary incorporation. in
other ' words-i~ yare prepared to punish the rest of Europe. I
don't approve of that but it's happening we have got to live
with it. Japan is in a recession because of the spread of
credit in the 80s, credit in the BOB went beserk, it went
beserk in Australia. That's part of when you were talking
earlier about the problems in Western Australia. It was part
of that credit binge, the availability of credit, the easy
availability of credit through international credit markets.
HIUO1k48, let's look at solutions then. Bill Clinton
again, the generational change we talked about at the
beginning of our discussion. He has hedged in there in very
little that he can do, he cannot in the sense be FDR as he
might want to be. Can he though reform the international
economic order which is still tilted against countries like
Australia? PM: I think he can, I have great hope and
expectation for Clinton. I am very heartened by his presence
by his attitudes and I think he is in a good position. People
need to remember this that America, like Australia, today
there is one in ten roughly out of work. in the Depression it
was three in ten, this is not to be compared this period.
American production fell by 33% between 1929 and 1933, the
month that Roosevelt was inaugurated three years back to the
stockmarket crash of 1929 American GDP, Aimrican product fell
by 33%. In the last two years American products has fallen by
3% 9 3% not 33, so I think that gives you the relative
weightings. We have got problems, yes, but they are solvable,
they are capable of solution and I think Clinton has the
energy and the youthfulness and the mandate to go and do it.
HUMEt But much depends on either revival of the north
south dialogue from the 706, redressing the balance between
the third and first world or some sort of fairly fundamental
readjustment of the terms of trade around the world. We are
in crisis.
PH: That's what the GAMis about, that's what the
General Agreement on Trades and Ta riffs is about.
HUME1 There has been certainly a significant shift In
terms of GATTr but the job has barely started. It was an
interim arrangement until Clinton gets in there one surely
must hope that Clinton will see the need for radical change
for the world economic order if it is to survive, if
prosperity is to continiue.
PMS We have certainly played more than our role, a
bigger role than our size in getting agriculture into the
GATT. I must say we, I mean this Government in getting
agriculture in to the GATT agenda and the GATT discussion in 
TEL: 28. Jan. 93 7: 42 No. 001 P. 07/ 09
7. MH ( cont'd) 1986 and It's in there now and there in some
likelihood now that we will get a Solution on agriculture
which we will mean we will have an international regime for
trading goods, in services in intellectual property rights and
in agriculture. This will be a great backdrop for Clinton to
inherit the American presidency and a very enthusiastic and
bull point for Australia in finding itself in a fairer trading
world. They are the things you can do as well as all the
bilateral things that's between our country and another
country but It's the multilateral, it's the great world steps
like the GATT which make the difference. SQ I am quite
optimistic, get the GATT together get a decent backdrop in
trade, further liberalisation of trade in the Asia Pacific,
the development of APEC which this Government has started in
the Asia Pacific area, a pickup in American growth, a better
rationing of credit worldwide. I don't think there is cause
for pessimism about the 90s at all. notwithstanding the
excesses of the 80o and they were huge excesses. People talk
about the roaring 20a it was nothing like the roaring 808, the
credit growth of the 80s was profound and this has been part
of Australia's problem. The reason we had the boom in the late
which was then we had to slow down was because of the
excessive growth of bank credit.
HiUAMmEe rican historian Arthur Slessenger, he was
associated with the Kennedy regime in the early 60a in the
USA, pointed a couple of years ago before the trends were
evident perhaps of the 1990s like the 60. and like the 30s in
America and through the western world being a decade of reemergent
belief that government was good, that government
regulation as necessary. Things have changed though, part of
the generational changes you see in the USA is increasing
diversity and fragmentation, multiplicity of races and of
Interests and so on, it becomes more difficult in that sense
for government properly to govern and to manage that diversity
and that rapid pace of change.
PH: This has always been an issue in this century
the belief that the two competing beliefs, one that private
intiative and private reward Is a key to all prosperity, the
other the government involvement and government planning as
the key and you sort of go from Calvin Coolidge on the one
hand to Franklin Roosevelt on the other back to Eisenhower
then over to Lyndon Johnson's great society then back over to
Nixon, across to Carter and then Reagan and now of course Bill
Clinton who takes the view that there is a role for
government. So it's been a competition for that view what is
best. Now what I have said is this I believe in community
values, I believe the dominant national values of this
country, of Australia should be community values not
individual values. My opponent John Howson believes In
individual values, he thinks if you keep the wealthy woalthy
and they have got a buck well the rest will trail along
successfully behind. I don't believe that, I believe that we
ought to be addressing the country as a community so it is
important that people can get health protection and health 
TEL: 28 . Jan .93 42 No 00 F'. U6/ Ui~
PM: ( cont'd) insurance at a decent rate and find themselves
covered for health regardless of income. I do believe that
kids from working class families ought to avail themselves of
secondary schooling and got into universities and into TAPE.
I don't think it ought to be a matter of how much you can
afford to pay as John Howson-does and I think that is the
difference. That In whether a nation commits itself to
community values or individual values and what has happened in
America is 160 million Americans have voted for community
value, f or the policies of Clinton and I have made the point
here and it's worth making to you Kevin. in this election
John Howson is going to ask the Australian electorate to vote
for individual values, to vote for Reagan Thatcher values
against the kind of values which 160 million Americans have
just voted. 80 that is why I think that it's not really about
deregulation or whether the gnomes have got us or what have
you, it's about this nice happy fit of an effective market
economy built around a decent social wage and social policy
and safety not and you can do thorn both and that's why social
democratic parties, Labor Parties have been more successful at
doing this than any in the world and I think we have a pretty
unique mix. We have got one of the best social security
safety nets in the world and it's worth fighting for and at
the same time we have got an economy in a modern transition.
HUMES But the X f actor beyond all of this again to
refer back to another theme of our conversation which you have
moved away from time to time is the ghosts of the past, the
ghosts of Calvin Coolidge If you like. An extent to which in
the public Australian mind Paul Keating Is seen as the ghost
who still walks of Calvin Coolidge and Ronald Reagan and
Thatcher of the 1980s still stick to your clothing.
VMS No# no.
HUMS You can remake yourself
PHI But where do you think Medicare comes from,
Where do you thinkc the family allowance supplement came from,
where do you think supplementary payments for low paid women
came from. Where do you think occupational superannuation
4.. came from? It came from me when I was Treasurer, when I
was Treasurer.
HUMS beyond the world's greatest Treasurer,
Treasurer who gave us the recession we had to have and so on.
VMS No, what gave Australia the recession was a
crazy leaning by Australian banks and the crazy borrowing by
Australian business. That's basically where the overheating
com'e from.
HUME iHMS: And who was responsible for 
TEL: 28. Jan .93 7: 42N No. 001 P. 0-9 /-0
PM: And the slowdown was induced becaUDe we
couldn't afford to go on blowing our national savings. Just
understand this point, that in terms of social1 poli cy while
the social policies of the Labor Government were the product
of a number of people, I was the Treasurer for most of the
period so if you go and ask say, an organisation like the
ACTU, where did they come to give ordinary working people
access to superannuation? They say the Treasurer, to me.
Where do they come for the family supplement, for the funding,
where do they come for continued changes in Medicare or
increase in Bole parent pension or the aged pension or the
hostel program or the home and community care? It came from
the Budgets of which I was Treasurer. So don't put me in the
Reagan and Thatcher category, that's Hewson, he believes in
all that stuff. He never gives the people an even break, make
them pay through the nose, rip Medicare apart, make them go
and pay $ 30 a week for their health insurance, put a 15% GST
on their back because they don't know what's good for them.
Make them pay full fees at university for their kids, that's
his view, it's not my view.
HlUME% So realistically looking to the next federal
election whenever it might be, what are the chances we are
going to see Paul Keating up on television with dark glasses
playing a saxophone like Bill Clinton, heralding in a new era?
pmt I am not a saxophone player and he is, he is a
good one as well and good for him but it's all about your view
of the world. I mean I had the opportunity to take a middle
sized OECD economy and change its orientation out to the rest
of the world, make it f airer and more decent and make it
productive and few people in life are given those sorts of
opportunitites and I had mine 9 years before, 10 years before
Bill Clinton had his opportunities. ' We are basically the same
age so I had got at this stage a 10 year jump on him.
ENDS 



TEL: 27. Jan. 93 14: 45 No. 022 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DR HEWSON'S TAX PHILOSOPHY
The essential point which emerges from the taxation
material aired in Christ ne Wallace's biography Is Dr
Hewson's philosophy towards taxation.
Taxation is the issue which Dr Hewson has made the
centrepiore of his policy tor Government.
Dr Hewson's QW would make tax unavoidable for the
unemployed and the low paid who have to spend 100 per
cent of their income by taxing their expenditure.
Apparently he believes that the expenditure of the low
paid should be fully taxed, but the income of the highly
paid should be open to tax minimisatlon.
Apparently in Dr Heweon's case it is okay to pass oft as
a business expense the normal costs of domestic housing.
If Dr Hewson confirms the suggestion In the Wallace book
that he pretended a domestic and personal expense was a
business expense, for the purposes of tax minimisation,
legitimate question8 arise about his approach to taxation
end social equity.
His message to Australia is that In tax matters " you' 11
pay as I tell you through a GST", but with income tax
" you'll pay only as needs be, upon advice from a tax
accountant." The message seems to be that if you can afford elaborate
tax advice you can minimise tax, but if you are a wage
and salary earner you'll pay on Virtually everything you
consume and every service you use.
CANBERRA January 27, 1993 



TEL: PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH HOWARD SATTLER, RADIO 6PR 27
JANUARY 1993
2 AND OE PROOF ONLY
SATTLERI Are you going to be an asset or a liability to
Carmen Lawrenceat this election?
PMI I am leading John Hewson in the preferred Prime
Minister stakes and every national oinion-pol so I don't
have any problems about entering state election campaigns but
they are state election campaigns.-Of their essence they are
different to commonwealth issues and therefore one can lend
support as I am to Carmen and her government but I am not
obviously part of the campaign in a sense that I am part of
the governent here.
SATTLERI yourself? Were you invited to take part or did you invite
PMi I was over here in December Z think or November
and of course a week or so ago and I have seen her a number of
times recently and she said come over, we would he pleased to
see you here.
BATTLER! PM ® She said we would be pleased to see you?
Absolutely.
BATTLERi DO you think the electorate will be, that's the
most important part of it?
PMI am the Prime Minister and
see you. That may be why the electorate is not happy to
PMI The fact is, well let's go on the polls. The
polls say that the Federal Government is ahead and that I am
at this stage preferred Prime Minister over John HewSon so I
27. Jan. 93 19: 40 No. 052 P. 01/ 12 
TEL: 27 .3an .93 19: 4U NO UDZ L-
2. P) s ( cont'd) don't have any reticence about coming here but
again I am not trying to Claim it as territory that is ours.
It's obviously a state issue and how often one enters, I mean
how often does a Prime Minister enter a state elections that
is the question you are saying. I mean I don't know,
BATTLERt While you are here you have become involved in
a Public row over john . UoWrunis tax af fairs. Why for god's
sake would you do that?
1PlC Because I was attacked yesterday by Mr Downer.
BATTLER i Mr Downer is a pretty junior member of the
Howson team, why would you worry about him?
PM: And by Dr Howson today.
BATTLERS He attacked you after your attack.
PM. No, no thin matter was raised not by me or the
government, it came up in a book written by
BATTLER: An unauthorised biography?
PM: Well Dr Heweon I think was interviewed by the
woman who wrote the book, Christine Wallace and his tax
af fairs came into the public arena ' anid I just ' simply made the
point that it's Dr Howson who was saying that the first
national issue of note in Australian public life should be tax
policy. He wants to tax everyone's expenditure and so I was
pointing simply to his philosophy about taxation. If he takes
the view that, particularly low and middle income people whose
income and expenditure are one and the same, that Is people
who save nothing, spend every cent they earn, whether you tax
their income or their expenditure is the same. So he i s
saying let's tax their expenditure with a GST but if you are a
high income tax payer then he thinks app a-rently that you can
minimise your tax,
SATTLERS Can't you legally?
PM: It's a matter of what one's moral stand in.
Thare is no minimisation with the GST, you pay it or you don't
got the goods.
GATTLERi But isn't it true your own piggery business
earned 84 million and didn't pay any tax?
PM: Totally without foundation-
8ATTIER: True or false?
PM: False, totally without foundation.
GATTLERtBATTLmEucRh. HdOiWd it Pay out of the s4 million? 
TEL:' 27?. Jan .93 19 : 40 No Ut2 M, -uo i z
PM. I See Howard you are asking me a qusion about
Dr Howson&amp;' s tax. For eight months I have been attacked in the
Senate at Dr Howson's behest by Senator Baums
GATLEMa Who you are now suing?
PK, No I don't remember you ever saying to Dr
Howson on any radio program, why are you getting to the Prime
Hiniuter, Dr Howsonl about his personal affairs? Why have you
done this for eight months? No one said that to hime so oneO
Mention from the Government and then it's all a matter of high
notoriety. SATTLERs But the point is you have been the Treasurer or
Prime Minister for all of the time Labor's been in power. Now
if Dr Howson is doing things illegal that's another matter but
this has all come about
PX. Look, look i am Just simply making a simple
point. Wte a matter of philosophy, he is saying that if you
are an ordinary wage and salary earner he is going to tax
everything you consume and your services bar certain food
items# certain food items, but everything else, your shoes,
clothing, household materials, your dry cleaning, it doesn't
matter what it is and your gas, your water, your electricity
and you can't avoid it because you pay the tax, that's it.
You can't minimise it but if you are on the income tax side
it'* a matter of where his philosophy is whether he believes
one should be able to minimise tax.
SATTLERs You believe that don't you if you can do it
l egalIly?
PM, One shouldn't need to pay more than their fair
share of tax but it's a matter of whether in this case what
appears to be the case, and he hasn't refuted the claims made
in the book, is that he's tried to make a private expense into
a business deduction, that's the point.
BATTLERt He is trying to make the beet of Paul Keating's
policies. PM: No, no, no leave me out of it.
BAT'ILERt You have been the Treasurer or Prime Minister
PM-. I am not the Tax Comissioner.
BATTLER: You arc the goverrnent you set the rules.
IPM. Ibut I don't peer over Dr Howson's shoulder when
he is filling in hie tax return, that's for him to do.
BATTLERt Just put those headphones on for a moment
because I have got a cut of a speech you made in 1988 and I
would like you to respond to this. 
TEL: 27. Jan. 93 19: 4U No. u z r. u,,-L
4. PMI anyone in this country who has wealth,
ilncom are mostly inCorporated. I guarantee you half the
prose gallery is incorporated and it is entirely sensible. I
am not attacking you for it, it'@ the thing you do when the
tax system urges you to do it."
SATTLER: That's what you said In 1988 to the Press Club,
PX1 I'll say it again, no problem at all.
BATTLER: But you seem to be encouraging people
P) 1 But look Howard your listeners don't have their
mortgage payments deductible against their income, do they?
SATTLERs Well some do, ne don't.
PX1 That's the point, that's the point. That is,
what is a private expense and what is a business deduction?
An inoorporatLon is beside the point. You incorporate if you
are running-a--business, if someone is a business person
selling radio services you may well be incorporated and that
would be fine. if somebody is providing accountancy services
they could be incorporated. They are providing a service and
the incorporation covers them against limitation of liability
etC. The whole question goes to one's philosophy about
taxation. I am not the one proposing to put a GST on
everybody's back, John Hewuon is. He is the one that has got
to answer the questions.
SATTLERt You are saying it I am right that this revolves
around something which you should not have been able to claim
company expenses for. Is that right?
PM: I think it's a matter of how one exploits the
tax system and what one's philosophy is about it. Por most
people that is a matter not of such consequence but for Dr
Hewson he is proposing to levy a GST which is equal to half
the income tax of Australia. The GST's proceeds are half the
current Commonwealth income tax, that's how big it is. He is
campaigning on a totally radical change to the tax system so
one has to be quite clear about one's philosophy in these
respects. SATTLERt Your track record in the tax area, your
personal record isn't perfect is it?
PM: In terms of tax changes?
SATTLERs No, no 7our personal tax situation, You failed
to lodge returns at least once.
PX1 I failed to lodge a return but it was a return
where I was in credit, I wasn't in deficit. I didn't owe
money I was owed money, I was owed money but it was late. 
TEL: 27. Jan. 93 19: 40 No. Ut2 F. u/-
SATTLER But I just Wonder whether or noi from an
electoral point of view you are getting yourself into an area
which might rebound on you.
PM: Howard, look let me say this. When was the
last time you had John Heweon here?
SATTLERo I had him last week as I understand it.
PMI ' Why didn't you ask him why did he attack me for
eight months in the Senate? Did you7
SATTLERI No I didn't ask him that.
PM. Why didn't you?
SATTLER I was doing an interview about his wife and
what role his wife was going to play if he became Prime
Minister. PM: But why didn't you ask him, I mean this has
been a matter of public notoriety?
BATTLERs Because it wasn't in the context of the
interview. PHI Okay that's a somewhat disingenuous answer you
agree? SATTLERs No I don't.
PM No well of course
SATTLER: well next time round when he is sitting here on
his own like you, I mean next time if you bring Annita with
you I suggest I would be talking to her about the role she is
going to play
PM: That's fine, I am Just saying to you, this
matter has been reported in The West Australian over the
months. He has had Senator Baume in there without any
justification, without -an wvibtahsoiust, any substance,
attacking me under parliamentary privilege
SATTLER: And you are suing Senator Eaume?
PMI Finally of course he started to say things
without the parliamentary privilege and I took the first
opportunity to respond to him, Nobody asked me on radio about
that, no one asked John Hewoon on * adio about it. The only
journalist as far as I know in this country who raised it was
Alan Ramsey in the Sydney Morning Herald.
BATTLER: Will Parliament be recalled on February 23 as
scheduled? 
TEL: 27. Jan. 95 19: 4U NO. U'Z r. uQ,'
G PNI Yes.
SATTLERS And will you be happy to take questions about
your personal tax situation and his?
PM1 Mine is as clean am a whistle, there is no
problem about me I have got a small interest in a piggery,
simple as that. There must be thousands of farmers in Western
Australia, my situation no more or less complex than that.
SATTLZRi How much money have you got in the piggery?
PM1 That's all a matter of public record.
SATTLERi Don't you know?
PM1 Yen, I have got about $ 400,000 in it.
SATTLERt That's a small investment?
PM: ror piggeries these days, for a farm, farms are
quite capital intensive things but I don't remember anyone
asking Doug Anthony, who was deputy prime minister about his
piggery. I don't remember anybody asking Malcolm Fraser about
his farms but you see there is one rule for the coalition and
one rule for Labor.
SATTLER. Could it be that you have set new rules, new
standards about getting personal of people and
PM8 NO, no just understand this I have never
attacked people about their personal affairs, never.
SATTLER: include what you are saying about John Hewson
in that category?
PM: Zn Parliament, in Parliament, I will defend the
governmentle policy, I will put a view aggressively but what I
on't do is use the parliamentary privilege to hop into
people's personal affairs.
SATTLER: But if yOU recall Parliament as planned on the
23 February will you be prepared to take questions about the
piggery, bacause I am sure you are going ask questions about
John Hewson?
PM: I have been sitting there for eight months in
the House of Representatives, every day prepared to take
questions about anything and John Howson wouldn't ask me. You
know why, because there was nothing in it? He was happy to
have someone do it in a cowardly way up in the Senate under
privilege and at least one journalist said, if these questions
are so important Dr Hewson why don't you ask them in the House
of Representatives? One journalist put a note into his office
saying, here was the reply, no reply came because he knew it
was just basically a scam and a shambles. 
EL: 27. Jan .93 19: 40 qo .052 P. 07/ 12
7. GATTLISRi Were you accusing him of being gutless?
PM. I am accusing him of trying to disparage me
undrr vilgein another chamber. No is out saying Keating
plays it tough, he hits us in the jaw, he does this, he does
that bUt w~ hat I don't do is use parliamentary privilege to
make defamatory claims about members of parliament, I have
never done that.
BATTLU t You said this has been talked about f or some
time and we have spent a bit of time on it today but I just
wonder whether all this personal squabbling between you and
John Howson about your own personal affairs ion't irrelevant
to the main game?
PHI Let's make this clear. I gave a major speech
to 10500 people in the convention centre in Sydney the day
before Australia Day associated with the Sydney 2000 bid. on
Australia Day yesterday I gave a major speech to the country
about all the great public issues, Last week in Nelbourne I
gave a ma jor speech about education and the fact that they are
not being picked up in the media is not my fault or the
Government's fault. It's the priorities which people in the
media put on news.
SATTLERi Yes# but I have got a feeling the electorate,
the people in the real world would be saying can we just get
on with the real job here.
PM: Why don't the newspapers report the real
speeches, why isn't the messages of Australia Day in a thirty
minute speech or the day before reported broadly?
SATTLER; Are you aure?
PMI Because the media is always looking around for
something which is more inflammatory.
SATTLERo Do you agree Prime Minister that discussion and
quite expansive discussion today all over the place about Paul
Keating's piggery and John Hewson'S Miftimiuing tax should be
dispensed with?
PH. Put it this way, it was not the Government who
raised this matter. Let me remind you this was raised in a
book by somebody totally dissociated with the Government. In
fact a former Liberal Party staffer, a former Liberal Party
staffer who wrote a book, not me, not at our urging, it Just
appeared two days ago,
BATTLERt But why are you even bothering about it?
PHI Because Dr Hewqon wants to put a consumption
tax on everybody's back.
TEL 
I~. z an: .(. Jdfl.' j i' 4 1 w
0.
SATTL222 So if someone writes something about John
Hewson minimising tax you will use that to beat him over the
head over his CST?
PX4 Just to make the point that he in not entitled
I don't think to be asking people to pay through the nose with
the GST while reserving the rLght to minimise tax.
SATTLIRI Other issues which again are not main issues
but ones which certainly got a lot of feedback over here were
the issue of the Speaker, Leo XcLeay, I think he is a friend
of yours and I think he is from the same faction as you.
PM3 Can I just interrupt you there. Here you are
Howard saying a minute ago that we would be on the main issues
and what do you do one minute later, you are onto some side
event that just doesn't matter.
SATTLZR i What I am saying is the electorate, the
talkback callers in droves were ringing up and saying why is
this man getting $ 65,000 for falling off a bike he shouldn't
have been riding? They say it's symptomatic of the Government
that doesn't care.
PM$ It's nothing to do with the Government.
SATTLERI Didn't the Government finally approve the
PM1 It's not the Government It was done through the
established Commonwealth processes, all set up within the
SATTLERs But you are for a fair and Australia
PMe Listen, look, two days ago, for two days I gave
major speeches to the country about Australia's place in Asia,
about the need for Australians to mount the challenges that
are confronting us, about the need to get investment and
employment back. About putting research and development and
education back high in the constellation of our national
affairs which again I was doing today with Carmen Lawrence.
They are the subjects that I have elected to speak about but
it's very hard to get any coverage for them and I had some
people say to me on Australia Day, those who attended the
convention centre, some of the 1,500 who attended the
convention centre in Sydney the day before how scandalous was
the scant reporting of what I laid, you see.
SATTLER&amp; I have heard John Hewson complaining that he in
not getting a fair go from the media.
PM1 I don't mean a fair go, no, it's about whether
the media focusses on trivia or on substantive national issues
and you just a minute ago said, I am not quite sure whether
you understand what you said to me. What you have said to me
was why are you on this and not on the major issues?
I E" L: 
Jan .93 19 : 40 No .052 P .09/ 12
SAMTE1 Why are you?
VMS Yaen, and then a minute later you ask about Lo
McLeay's compensation claim.
BATTLERS But I prof aced that by saying we have had heaps
Of calls on it, the public think it's a big issue.
PXI The job of people like you and me is to say the
real issue in to make sure that the basis f or growth and
employment and wealth and prosperity are progressed in this
country. They are the real issues.
SATTLERi They are the thing that people believe that you
should be doing.
PHI That's what we, are doing, that's what I devoted
Australia Day to and the day bef ore to and last week a major
speech on education.
BATTLER: But an appeal to national prLde on Australia
Day which by the way and this is another issue I jiLght put,
you might think it'a an issue that's not of great importance
but an Ausatralia where half of the country celebrates the
national day one day and halt on another day, I mean surely
that's symptomatic of the malaise of Australia.
PNI I think that's coming together next year.
GATTLERi In it?
PM, I think so.
BATTLER., But why didn't you step in?
FMm I think it will all be on the one day.
BATTLER: What do you think of the Government here
decreeing it will be next Monday, forget your Labor
affiliations? PM I think Australia Day should be acknowledged
across the country on the one day, on the 26 January. That's
what should happen, that's the sensible thing to happen.
BATTLERs Is that the right day too because a lot of
Aboriginal people think it's not, they think that's the day
when they should be mourning. I wonder when we become A
republic, and I underline that when, and if you are around at
the time how about makinj that our national day whenever that
happens? PK: The 26 January is the day we celebrate as the
day of our settlement, our first day of our settlement,
European settlement in Australia and no doubt if you were part
of a nation dispossessed you would have a jaundi~ ced view of
TEL 
T2EL7: . Jan. 93 19: 40 No. 052 P. 10/ 12
' O.
PH. ( cont'd) the 26 January too and that's why it is
imnortant that Australia move ahead as a country where therse
diferences are basically reconciled. ' That we put behind us
our history.
SATTLER' Could that involve changing our national day to
another day which everybody supports and may be that would be
the day we became a republic, think about it?
PHI I will take it on board.
SATTLERe What do you think about it?
PH. I thinkc the 26 January is a legitimate day of
celebration in Australia and I thinkc the more important issue
is though these questions of reconciliation with the
Aboriginal community, that is it should be that all
Australians, the first Australians and those of us who have
followed a1l the regard the place as their home and that we
can all see it as our home.
BATTLER: Under federal Labor, you as Treasurer and now
Prime Minister, we have suffered and I don't think you would
disagree with that, post depreassion record unemployment,
correct? PHI Yeu but let me remind you when I became
Treasurer there was six million people in the workforcs,
there's eight million today, that's a quarter bigger. Nowv
Zealand which you hear about across the water from Dr Heweon
and his pals ham fewer people in work today than they had in
1983. We have got 264 more people in work today than we had
in 1983. Now unem~ ployment is high, too high and we have got
to got it down but we have kept, the key numbers are these.
In the 80s we created 1.75 million jobs, in the last three
years we have lost 300,000 ot them so we have gone 1.75
million is now just under 1.5 million.
SATTLERs we can't keep up at the moment can we?
PHI What's happening is we are going through slower
growth and also a productivity binge. I mean companies are
getting more output from fewer people. The economy is now so
efficient and companies by and large are so stripped down that
they are getting the same or more output from a smaller
workcforce. N~ ow all that means is we have to actually have
more growth and more activity so that even more output comes
from the economy so we will start to rehire people and we are
reaching the stage where companies won't be able to wring Any
more, squeeze any more jui. ce from th. e lemon,, that is they
won't be able to get more output from the same workcfore and
they will start to have to rehire. Now the economy has been
growing SATTLERt You are pai~ nting a picture of them almost
beating them to work harder.
TEL 
TEL
11 P no what's happened is we have had a big
risle in productivity. Now what that means inu we are getting
more output from fewer people so that's good but it's not good
tor employment so to make it good for employment we have got
to get more growth again. we Are growing at the moment faster
than any other OECDl economy and its. our economy picks up
particularly if the US picks up and we get a bit of help then
we can get back to rates of growth which will see employment
pick up. We did phenomenally well with employment in the
and it's a great pity that we dropped off the pace but the
good thing about it Is we kept most of those jobs and what we
have now got to do is start growing again, growing in
employment again.
BATTLER S John Heweon suggesuted that interostL rate, -may
go up before the federal election. Can you give any
guarantees that they won't?
PMe John Howson has all these predictions which are
always at the national expense. He is saying the exchange
rate we can't affCord to fund Reserve Bank interventions on the
exchange rate. He makes comments about interest rates, all
these things are not designed to produce confidence in
financial marketis and frankly I don't think there is much
benefit in political leaders making thos sorta of claims.
BATTLERi I know you can't tell uas that you think
interest rates are going to to down but can you give any
guarantee that it won't go up before the federal election?
PM8 I am not giving guarantee. on radio stations
about interest rates, It's just a wrong place, we run
monetary policy in this country between the Government and the
Reserve bank under an Act of Parliament the R9serve Bank Act
which requires a government and the bank to agree and I don't
make pronouncements about rates without speaking to the
Governor. SATTLZR# Will they stay the same?
PM: It's not for me to say. We have got inflation
low that's the main thing. The main reason that interest
rates are down to these levels, bill rates of 6.75t is because
we have got low inflation and low inflation
SATTLERt We have got that because people can't afford to
buy what they used to be able to.
PM, We have got low inf lation and we ar. 4 going to
k: n ai t t took us2 years to break the back of inf lation
we ve otit's bakbroken and now if we keep it's back
broken we can keep lower interest rates.
SATTLERi Go out as far as you can, when are you going to
let us know about the federal poll because that can create
T2EL.: Jan. 93 19: 40 No. 052 F. 11/ 12 
TEL: 27. Jan. 93 19: 40 No. 052 P. 12/ I1
12.
8ATTLURs ( Cont'd) uncertainty. What's the last time you will
be able to tell us there in going to be a federal poll?
PX: I think the Parliament can meet three years
after it first met in the ensuing Parliament, that puts I
think an election needs to be held around the first week or so
of May.
BATTLERs You don't want it that late do you?
PM. rt's a matter of what the Government thinks is
fair and reasonable.
SATTLER: No, it's a matter of what you think.
PM: More particularly, all of us in fact.
SATTERi You can't just sort of wake up one morning and
may I'll have an election today.
PMI No, I pick up cues from the electorate and the
cabinet and in this system the Prime Minister has discretion
over the election and
SATTLERs Could you win if you called it now?
PM: I think we have a very good chance of winning,
yes. SATTLERs At least even money?
PM: At least, at least even money. I mean the
polls say we are in front.
SATTLER: May be it's time to go.
PM: We are a reasonable chance. I mean Dr Xewson
was telling everybody last year we were going to have an
election in March, then we were going to have an election in
June, then we were going to have an election at the Budget,
then we were having an election in November, an election
before Christmas, so the best thing you can do is the three
years SATTLERs Why didn't he give you a call?
PMI The three years come around In March. The
Government was elected in March ' 90 so the three years in
March but the Parliament runs until May, so the short answer
is between now and May.
ENDS 



27. Jan. 93 17: 50 No. 039 P. 01/ 06
PRIME MINISTER
lRANS( CMRJ-FPTO ' LlE PRIVE M[ NL1TER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
PRESS CONFERENCE, PXRTH, 27 JANUARY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
3: 1 ow important is the ouzome of this election to the-in of when you call the
fcdcral clcotion?
I'M: It's decidedly unimportant, because the Commonweah Government will decide
the election itself
1: 1 heard that Mr Dawkins was going to release today revised Budget forecasts. Is
chat oil?
PM: Not that I know of, no.
J: line Minister, whats your reaction to John flcwsons comments In Adelaide
on ABC radio this mornfn the fact that tax has which surfaced i the political
debate because you haven't got any policies to counterfight them?
PM: Tax surfaced in Lhu dcbawc bc4ause aournalist totany unconnected with the
Ouvvnunen, wrote a profl about John Hcwson' career, and has obviously
meticulously gone through his past. Thar's why ifs arisen. Notblng to do with
the Govcrnnment whatsoever.
J. And you've got no qulnu about somebody looking at your pigger?
PM: fve had Liberal Senators, at Dr I lewson's bchsi, looking at me, asfitg
qucstions two or three dmcs a day for 8 months. I didn't hear any indignation
from any of you about that process. The key point here I4 Dr -ewson has
made taxation the cenual feature of his campaign. He's saying that we have to
change the ta mix from income to expenditure. You all know that low paid
people, or unemployed people, or midle income people spend all of their
Inconic. So whuller you Lax thr income or expenditur ifs one in the same,
it's all spont. He says that's the way wo ought to raise the taxation we'll tax
virtually all of your income. But if the claims in the book am coC; he's also
TEL 
27. Jan. 93 17: 50 No. 039 P. 02/ 06
2
saying. opT! d~ n well tax you absolutcly when you spend, on cvuy
service you consume, evely good you buy, we2 lax you but on your income
tax, if you'rwe ld-Mave then we Otk W OK to txi-ntdmi So irs Dr
11awson's philosophy about taraion which Is impormn here. I Ufb whAfs
revealing about a this Is not whedtwhe claimed this or deducted that, but his
philosophy. He's saying tax i the leadng Issue of a nationl election from the
coaliton's side of politics. lie's sayin that all goods and Al services in the
community should be taxed absouioly at die poWit of purhase or talc. But fbr
income tax he seems to be sayn he thinks dct'ius for ax tnimbniadon am
OK. It's the philosophy that mullen here.
3: But you can we that he was quite within die law to do what he hadon. If the
philosophy was so wrong why don't you change the laws to make what he did
ileal?
PM: I didn' write this stuiTZ rm not privy to his income or his returns. He can rebut
this if he wishes, ho has'l to date. Therefore these were matters at the time for
the Commissioner of Taxaion. The point Is the point in principle.
Ie. id he woms ketut to dobate you on yowr taxation arranccnta, w ould you
oblige him?
PM: There's no debate, rm a PAYE tax payer. m the most simple case around
Let me just make this clear to youIf you want comparability, I bou&amp; M a house
within one month of Dr Hewson buying his house. On my house al the
deductions are carried by me, As Im an. yours ar. That M, If you We in a
house as a domestic resldence, dw costs art not deductible. To paint the
picture, or to aiake an anfangcmcnt where one nuns a private deduction Into a
business expense, this Is the point her, is an arrangoment which minjirdaus tax,
In the comparable situation, 1\ v still got the house, I'm still ranying the interest
Costs on the mortgage, theyve never been doducte4
3; And for the record, your taxation rate is?
PM; rin a PAYE tax payer, it's as simple as dat
J: And thaf a at what rate?
PM; Pick up the scales and have a look.
3; Do you know the rare that you're paying as a PAE?
PM; LAA mc make ibkj clear to you there is no deduction I make that tries to turn a
privae expcmv, inu ~ a busines" expense that's the key poinL
J. ' then what rate
FM: Don't put words in my tate, I'm te1Iina you
TEL: 
TEL: 27. Jan. 93 17: 50 No. 039 P. 03/ 06
3
I: tm asking the question
PM: You've asked, so rm ivins you the answer. The answer is I do not seek tO turn
private expens into business epenses to masquerade privat expenses as
business cxptnrsas rm quite met al of you would be happy to tun your
mortgage costs into deductibic crxPancs.
1: Did Dr Iewson break thclaw?
PM: Thai's a mailer for hini, the Tax Commissioner, ct cetcra. rm just making the
point, as a matter of philosophy Dr Hewson says that taxation is the issue that
malturs in hs counity. He want to ux exendcitu absolutely at the point of
salt of goods or sorvlczs, but he's saYing in relation to income tax that he thinks
the lelity, tphe lophy of taxniiaionis OK. Thars thekey poiL
Can Ijust also say that we habtie fuldnibiiitioiis by Mr Downer ovrnigt
For 8 month, 8 months mind you therea a few Canberra jounal&amp; ta here,
the know this to be Uue fbr 9 months qutions have been asked wktout
foundation. Questions with no foundation and proved to have no foundation,
questions were asked of me for 8 months. A lot of it was printed in de
newspapers. Someone unconnected with tho Govenument writes a book about
Dr Howson, his taxation becomes a public issue, and eftWr&amp; away he's &amp; ayflg
this is dirty pool, the ( overnnemn is up to dirty pooi. What about the
nconsistency of 9 months of this as Dr -ewon's beheat I think you should ask
Dr HewsoIn what was the point of his tactic7, did he think It was tight?, wa
Senator Baum, aing on his xpress inalnios? and, does he now regret this
1. Jb it the case that Dr Hewson is paying 15 per cent tax and you'rc paying 48 per
cent?
PM; I donit know what he's paying.
3: Are you paying the top margnal rate of tax?
PM: For a start I get rebates like you do, I get a rebate for dependent spouse and
children, But I'm not turning private expenses into business xpem= e. Do you
understand? ~ mars the key point rm not about " yingto tn a private
expenso, like the cost of my mortgag, into a business expense.
JAr eyou giving Dr IIcwson back what you
PM. No, this Isue arose not by us but by a bo*, Mikrhistiwr,-WaUkpc has made
this point But Dr Tiewson has taxation as the primmay issue tn a national
election whorc he says, Australia has been ineficient and lazy and they've got to
do moro, and they think they should be taxed at the point of sale of their goods
or thvir servicos, but to take the view that income taxation should be available
for ininimisation duough devises. In other words, if you're a wage or satiny
varnar you pay absolutely, but if you're well-advised you can minkmise your tm 
T2E7L: . Jan. 93 17: 50 No. 039 P. 04/ 06
4
Tisx Lq a question of philosophy. IV,, Dr Hcwsofl Who's runn* n On taxation not
the Government.
J; You're apparently feluotant to nam
PM4: YouNVe had enough, ato tr any more qumstiw?
J: I wAsjult goigto ak y01r atin&amp; uanyu telus what your uaadw ra
is?
pM. i r'd have to average If's inmateial what miy rate is. IIIl tell yoU this I have no
ClaRM tha turns a private expense into a busines expense,
3: DO YOU think tats morally wrong.
PM* Pardon? Do you think, morally, rnii isation could be aeon as a ( inaudible)? Is tha
what you bdlicvc?
PM: Nc ncvcr Sought to do it, I bought a houst the same tinw as Dr J1owson, I
didWnI Uip it into a company.
J: Why not?
PM; Isecause I don't thinik such a private oxpense ought to masquerade, as a busines
expoense. That' why.
J; Do you thinkpay as you carntax payrv) amben, paying for corpor
Austraia?
PM: Before I becamnc Treasurer, the tax system was subject to MAssiVo
haemclTh&amp;&amp; zg through tax avoidance and evasion as well as minitnistn and
most of thr. minimisation and &amp; vidance scheMV3 had a captal gain underneth
thmm I introduced the = aaMon of capitains in this coUnbry. I inb* odtAcd the
taxation of bingo benefits into tis country, As a resut, peopl now pay their
fair share of tax, which was nover the case When Dr Hewsont was advisig Mdr
Howard. lIn those days the taxation syste was in a state of accelerated
hamorrhaso.
3: Ame you prepared to hav; your taxes debate in Parliament along side Dr
I lowfions?
PM: Listcn, minec havc bcen debated for B nmths. You might have not noticed, or
uhuscn not to notic, they were debated for s montis.
I. Prinir Minister, rcgleas of the detailg of who started it, do you tink t
clectoriaic of AUstralA is lnitetC4 t you and Dr Hewson's pemonal ian
matters? TEL 
TEL: 27. Jan. 93 17: 50 No. 039 P. 05/ 06
PM-No, I don't think thay amc, but I th" n they ame MeY intereted iA the philooph
of taxaio which D~ r Hewson is p~ omting 28 the fhzt issue in owr dational
Politics. He's gaithat ansres and goods hould be t" cat IS parcent
all oxpendtwoe. You know that for Wage and saay earners that MGMn 100 per
Cent of their Income, because their income And . xpendinire Is the sante, they
don't save. They don't have enough money to savC 90it mCAns that their
incom~ e and expcnditur is one and tho samne, and he says therefore we'l tax
thoue. But one oan dnw the obvious point that in teMM Of In1COMe tax, AS
distinrct from consumption or expendIture tP.. .11rT T iniflim . f VA,' f. w. Al-
J; Mr XeAtin.
PM: Comc on, you've had mnorc than your rAir So.
l: D~ o you expect tho Parliament will have the oppoiwiiy to debate ti inanor
Weore shc ce dn
PM: Yes, it will havo the opportunity to debate ThotPuziament Is schedulad to
contC back in the third week of Februaty, it it not? In that p~ uiod all thinp wig
be dcbWAtd
3: Scheduled to come back before ihz elcuion?
PM: At thi stagc if~ s cosing back, absolutely.
3: M Keating, apart from your pononal tax and your busbin hterrsts., have you
nerver souht u) mi'nimie your tax in your business interests?
IPM: No, this was another fiaphy yesterday. The, thing about the Liberals, heme they
were saying~ of me, Senator flaumne was askin these questions beeaus ft Was
the ro~ t thing to do to elicit information on the need to know basis, but when
thc Goverment says what about your position Dr Hewson? Shocking, this is a
b wat p, ih gte o itical OK fortelbesto do itfor 8months, noM
OK for the L~ bor Pailyto doIt for 8minutes. lhbarthie point
3: What about the advantage to you tha tho perception may arise that it Is a
Cuuaudible)?
PM: ThAt'. for you to report and nuke clear, that the issuc of substance is his wish to
tax the Australian clvctorate wit a conpsulon tax against what is apparently
his record in relation to income tax. As far as, this Lady here asked me about
my Affairs, yevivrday's statement woe a total flirphy, Thome is a thin in the tax
provision callvd ' 1rouping. Companies today no lunge need to rn their
mtaiing and tir production witbin the one company. You can have a
prodution copanuy and a rtail compaty and the merge together in the end.
1' otake the profita of one and saytat in smeway itsnot hMnWit s taxp aKd
to i~ iorc the costs of the other is of course a total joke. 
TEL: 27. Jan. 93 17: 50 No. 039 P. 06/ OE
6
J: Do you onaidor your txhtion affai are prdvatt 4min?
PM: I tonoidvr dLcrn to be totally in order. Mine wore ai&amp; diid by a public auditor
and placod of the public record of the ASC. So you can go down there and
punch a screen and go and road about thom Go and ask Dr llewson will he
make his available,
J: Mr Koating, you've called It a lrphy, but to the public at large who may not be
intimate with the laws of taxacol do you ( inaudible) of what the Opposidon Is
saying?
PM: No, why would they? Thtrets not any basis in this whatsoever in this, nothing.
Apparently a number of people today on radio have made that point quite clear.
The Vrouping provisios mean, in the old days people used to have a company
that had income and run all the costs against it een if the companies had
diferent functions. After &amp; ouplng proisions were Invroduced, you could then
havvi a company which was a reta company and a company which was a
prodation compuy, 100 per cent owned within the group. You can't look at
the prolits of one and not include the costa of the other. lb1ats what they tied
to do lat night knowing that moat of you wouldn't be on to it to ty to save him
some ombarrasanint.
J; John lewson wants changes to the debating situation, he doesn't want a panel
ofjoumnaista he just wans a moderator. What's your reaction to that?
PM: Wc'U negotiate a sot of anrangoments, rm not sure cxaiutly what weve asked for,
I thitk a panel Is probably bcst.
Why did you change your mind about a wonsunption tax?
PM. rm not h10V to giva you an cuonornic history lesson. OK
cnd 


STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP SIR SIDNEY NOLAN MEMORIAL
Ladies and gentlemen
My last conversation with Sir Sidney was midway through last year. We talked a lot about architecture, a subject on which I can generally hold my own. But this is not to threaten you with a discourse on art today.
I will leave the expert judgments to Elwyn Lynn and others.
This gallery like a couple of others around the country is one of my favourite haunts.
But just as you can enter a temple without knowing the rites, I know I can come here and pay tribute to Sidney Nolan without pretending to be expert on his life and work.
And that is really the point: the power of his work was such that it has influenced even the inexpert among us.
All of us have had our image of Australia in some way shaped by Sidney Nolan. All of us, I suspect have had our self-image shaped by him.
He was one of the great interpreters of our national life.
He painted the physical landscape and altered our mental landscape. Radical? different as his painting was, when we looked at it-we recognised ourselIves.
This will prompt some journalists to say -Keating admits resemblance to Ned Kelly but I am willing to wear that.
Go and look at the Kelly Paintings here or at Lanyon any~ day and there will always be someone gazing at them and the paintings, like a mirror, will be gazing back.
I've always thought it said something remarkable about Australians that in the 1950s they so quickly moved aside their Heysen gum trees for Nolans, Boyds and Drysdales.
As I have often said in other contexts, Australians have a remarkable capacity for change. And I reckon it is because they recognise the truth when they see it.
You'll forgive me for expressing the passing thought if only they had moved aside Bob Menzies when they moved aside Hans Heysen.
What Sidney Nolan and his colleagues did was just about as subversive I suppose: they took our landscape and our legends and somehow made them both more radical and even more our own.
Just when a generation of Australians had grown used to the Heidelberg school and its successors, and complacent in the thought that that was who were, along came Nolan and said actually, we're more like this.
As an Australian who has been concerned with change, I have to say that the paintings of Sidney Nolan and the success of Sidney Nolan has always given me heart.
His paintings expressed our essential difference - to me they say something about our potential.
It is true of course that Sidney Nolan became Australia's most internationally celebrated painter. He did us a &nbsp;service in that.
Yet his greatest service, I think, was to place before us in a period of pretty dull conformity some might even say regression images of this country which reminded us that our experience was at once unique and universal.
He startled us: in much the same way earlier generations had been startled by the landscape, or by Ned Kelly, or as a bushman might be on seeing his reflection in a Wimmere waterhole for the first time.
I think Nolan was among the poets of Australia.
He was certainly among that generation who I'm sure will in time become legendary themselves.
Those Australians who lived through depression and war and did not lose faith.
Twenty eight years separate Sidney Nolan's birth from the end of World War II in which, incidentally, his brother was killed. In least twelve of those years Australia was either fighting a war or a depression.
Whatever political path they took, or whatever their doubts about life here, they did not lose their love of this place and their essential Australianess.
I don't say this out of any form of jingoism. I mean only that Sidney Nolan was of that generation which kept the place going and of a genius which revived us, renewed us, kept alive the spark.
He was essential to the continuation of the national story.
The sad thing about today is that that generation is now passing. Just a week ago I attended the funeral of Paul Hasluck. This week it was Tom Fitzgerald. It is just eighteen months since Manning Clark died. A year or so before that, Patrick White.
The mantle has unmistakably passed to us - the lucky post war generation.
The life and death of Sidney Nolan is a reminder of how great the responsibility is.
It is also a reminder of how tragic it is when we lose our young artists: in the past twelve months Brett Whiteley, the dancer Kelvin Coe, and the conductor Stuart Challender have all died.
It is a reminder, especially for those who continue to peddle the idea that the right cultural policy is built substantially around starvation, that support for art and artists is an essential investment in the nation's life.
We are currently developing a new cultural policy for Australia. One of the essential elements will be a strategy for developing creative habitats for artists.
Habitats -like the one the Reeds -provided for Sidney Nolan.
That is another essential element in the cultural life of this country we need more private support for the arts. More private patronage. More John and Sunday Reeds.
We are trying to find the best way to create that support. Sidney Nolan certainly understood that, and in his later life he put a great deal back into Australia.
In honour of his brother, in 1974 he donated his Gallipoli paintings and drawings to the Australian War Memorial.
In 1982 he donated the Paradise Gardens series to the Victorian Arts Centre.
And the Kelly paintings have been donated to the ANG.
Today I am delighted to announce perhaps the most generous gift of all.
It is my pleasure to announce that a great project, dear to the heart of Sidney Nolan, has reached fruition.
For many years it was the shared vision of Arthur and Yvonne, Boyd and Sidney and Mary Nolan and their families that the Bundanon Estate on the banks-of the Shoalhaven River near Nowra be made a gift to the nation.
Indeed it was to talk about this, and not architecture, that Sidney Nolan came to see me last year.
The Government has reached an agreement with Arthur and Yvonne Boyd under which the beautiful properties of " Bundanon" and " Riversdale", and an extensive art collection owned by them, are to be given to the Australian people.
&nbsp;A public art gallery and performing arts Centre will be established, as well as facilities for walking and camping in the 1200 hectares of superb natural environment the environment which was the subject and inspiration for a great many Boyd and Nolan paintings.
I understand that there are some 2000 works of art in the Boyd collection, including works by John Brack, Leonard French, Charles Blackman and John Perceval.
Artists, musicians, film makers, performers and craftsmen and women will in future be able to live and work in Bundanon, and exhibit or perform the works created there in a new -purpose-designed gallery and performing arts area.
The gift includes the original sandstone residence dating from 1866 and its antique furniture, paintings and pottery.
In addition there is an important collection of art works, letters and photographs chronicling four generations of the Boyd family.
The Commonwealth has agreed to provide $ 5.43 million to the Bundanon Trust.
Contributions will shortly be sought from major education and government institutions, as well as the public.
This is a gift of profound significance, not to say great generosity.
It will ensure that the contributions Sidney Nolan and Arthur Boyd have made to our national heritage will live on: it also means that new generations of Australians will have their opportunity to contribute.
It means that a superb piece of our natural environment will be secure from the ravages of developers I know that is dear to Arthur and Yvonne's hearts.
I take this opportunity today to express our gratitude for this gift, which has required more than generosity it has needed vision and patience.
This is a rare gift to the nation.
The announcement today Is a fitting tribute to the late Sir Sidney Nolan.
It is also, of course Sir Sidney's tribute to Australia.
And Arthur Boyd's tribute, and I can only say to Arthur and Yvonne, on behalf of everyone here and the Government and the people of Australia thank you.
CANBERRA &nbsp;28 JANUARY 1993
&nbsp;



TEL: 29. Jan. 93 12: 52 No. 011 P. 01/ 02
-im
PRIME MINISTER 11/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DR HEWSON AND " THE TAX CHEAT MENTALITY"
It has been revealed today that Dr Hewson believes the
tax minimisation scheme he was involved in amounts to, in
his own" woTr-ds, ". 6tax cheatery."
As part of an address to the National Press Club a little
over a year ago Dr Hewson attacked the very practices of
which he knew himself to be guilty.
He described at length tax minimisation of the exact
variety he was involved in 88 part of what he called " the
tax cheat mentality" in Australia.
For the past few days Dr Hewson has defended his tax
minimisation practices.
He and other Liberals have viciously attacked me and the
Government for raising legitimate questions about a
person who says it is okay for a wealthy person to
minimise tax, while wage and salary earners must pay
per cent on everything they buy.
In his address he even attacked people who minimised tax
to 15 per cent instead of paying the top rate of 47
cents! He actually nominated the 15 per cent average tax
rate.
With all the compassion he could muster he bemoaned the
fact that these opportunities were not available to the
average PAYE taxpayer.
He attacked those who used superannuation to minimise
tax: " They want to talk about tax rorting, people are
using superannuation as a basis of minimising tax
pay 15 per cent on an employer contribution on
superannuation and downther
peK enLaidJon hatinnMe st11l rubtantial1y
lass than the topax rate of 47 cents." 
TEL: 29. Jan. 9 12: 52 No. 011 P. 02/ 02
There was also scope for other minimisation practices, he
said, but " those opportunities and a host of others are
not available to the average PAYE taxpayer, they are part
of the tax cheat mentality or tax minimisation mentality
that exists in Australia."
He knew when he was saying those words he was describing
an arrangement which he had himself previously entered
into. Dr Hewson's Press Club remarks reveal him as being
totally insincere with the public end two-faced.
CANBERRA January 29, 1993 



I L. L. 12/ 93
STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON4 P .3 KEATING, 14P
NAURU TwENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF INDEPENDENdE.
The Republic of Nauru will celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of its independence from 31 January to
3 February. The Hon Stephen Martin, MP, Parliamentary
Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,
will represent me at the celebrations in Nauru on this
important and historic occasion.
I have written to the President of Nauru, the Hon Bernard
Dowlyogo, conveying my congratulations on behalf of all
Australians on Nauru's achievement of twenty-five years as
an independent state maintaining constitutional rule end
parliamentary democracy.
To mark the occasion, the Australian Government is offering
to Nauru e collection of important documents relating to key
aspects of Nauru's history, together with appropriate
storage, access and display facilities. The Australian
Government has also offered to establish a sponsored
scholarship program to enable selected young Nauruans to
undertake studies in Australia each year in fields relevant
to Nauru's national development.
CANBERRA 29 January 1993 z, s -j a ri -, 3o I ; Z4 NO U I F -U I/ I-



TEL: 1. Feb. 93 9: 31 No. 002 P. 01/ 05
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RON P. 3 KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF THE NATIONAL MEDICARE HOSPITAL ENTITLEMENTS
PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGN, SYDNEY, 1 FEBRUARY 1993
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Let me begin with a brief, real life story.
A little girl called Emily was born with a heart
condition. She had her first serious operation when she was only
five weeks old. She recently had a second.
She's had the best of care. A top cardiologist, surgeon,
and the best of nursing, medication twice a day.
Emily's parents were frightened not only about Emily's
welfare but about how much her treatment would cost.
They feared they would have to sell their home.
Had they lived in the United States. possibly they would
have. Emily's parents knew that in the United States families
are frequently crippled by medical expenses.
So, what did all of Emily's treatment cost? Apart from
the heartache nothing. Medicare paid for everything.
Emily's parents now know that Medicare has given Emily a
life she might not have had.
They say Medicare is a life saver.
Every Australian can take comfort and pride in this.
There is no better system of health care in the world.
it is fair as health care should be-. Like illness and
accident it does not discriminate between rich and poor.
it shares the risk among us all. And it delivers health
care of the highest quality. 
LL~ I . Fr_ U I 1N4U. VV( I l
2
Australia has one of the best public hospital systems in
the world. And you won't find more dedicated GPs an~ d
community health workers anywhere.
Medicare is simple and fair. Every Australian has their
own health Insurance pre-paid under Medicare it's the
care you're entitled to.
Under Medicare, every Australian is entitled to access to
hospital and GP services, and necessary medicines.
Under Medicare, Australians make 88 million visits to the
GP every year. Seventy per cent are bulk billed.
There are nearly three million admissions to public
hospitals. And over 160 million prescriptions are delivered by our
community pharmacists.
Medicare delivers high quality health care public
and private.
Public hospitals like Monash Medical Centre in Melbourne,
Westrnead in Sydney, R~ oyal Perth, Royal Adelaide -so
many. Under Medicare, some of our greatest hospitals -St
Vincent's here in Sydney, the Mater and Wesley in
Brisbane, the Mercy and Epworth in Melbourne, are private
not-for-profit hospitals.
They are run by people concerned about the quality of
health care.
Labor will continue to support our greath'o * spit as
public and private. But we reject the American approach
of handing over our health care to profiteers.
That's because Medicare is an acknowledgement that basic
health care is something every Australian is entitled to.
Today we are here to celebrate Medicare's ninth birthday.
It is the achievement of one of Labor's most cherished
goals fair and quality health care for all.
Because of Medicare, Australia has stability and security
in health care.
These nine year old Australians helping us celebrate
today have never known the uncertainty that Dr Hewson is
threatening.
Most of you have probably forgotten, and these nine year
olds have never known, that before Medicare, one of the
most common reasons for being jailed for non-payment of
debts was unpaid health bills. 
L' W*-Js
3
Under Liberal governments in 1971 and 1981, two million
Australians had no health insurance at all because they
could not afford i t
In the United States, 37 million Americans have no health
insurance and cannot gain access to health services.
Dr Hewson wants to take Australia back to the days of a
vwo classg-health system private care for those who can
pay and public care for the rest.
It is ironic that Dr Hewson is proposing a us-style
health system at a time when the US is looking to
Australia and Medicare as a way of ending the US health
nightmare. Dr Hewson's health policy contains the same elements that
are wreaking haVoc -in the US. He would replace public
facilities with private services, have health charges
dictated by doctors, and introduce tax rebates for health
insurance. It is no wonder the AMA is campaigning for Dr Hewson.
The AMA is looking forward to a billion dollar pay rise
for about 40,000 doctors courtesy of the Liberal's
health policy.
All of this would drive up the cost of health care for
each Australian and for the country as a whole.
The US spends twice as much per person on health care as
we do in Australia for less care.
Even cheap health insurance policies cost more than
$ 5,000.
Dr Hewson believes that health care should be subjected
to market forces, as if ill-health and accident obeyed
the same economic laws as the price of fish or tomatoes.
But there is clear evidence both here and overseas that
the market does not work for health care.
Health is not like other goods. we never know what
illness is going to cost or when an emergency or illness
will strike.
We need to band together to share the risk. That is what
Medicare enables us to do.
Dr H-ewson will make you take out private health insurance
-if the private insurer willacetou 
LL 4
One little noticed area of concern in the Fightback
health policy is that private insurance does not always
cover people for pre-existing serious conditions Such
a9 Multiple Sclerosis or cancer.
under Dr Hewson such people would be penalised through
much higher medical charges, through tax penalties, and
through refusal of insurance coverage.
Fightback could seriously penalise the chronically sick.
it is a case of your money or your health.
Dr Hewson will cut $ 1.4 billion out of public hospitals.
This will force the States to close more than 10,000
public beds. 450,000 fewer people will be treated.
Dr Hewson will take that $ 1.4 billion from public
hospitals and hand it to doctors and private prof itmaking
companies.
He will place profit before the interests of patients.
Under Dr Hewson, Australian families will pay $ 20 a week
more for health care.
The main reason some people are confused about the costs
of hospital care is because private insurance funds, the
AMA and private profit hospitals have generated
uncertainty and fear.
They want people to be fearful they have a vested
interest. They attack the Government for rewarding States which
improve access to hospital services for public patients.
The Government has a duty to look after the well-being of
the entire community; to maintain quality services for
everyone. These vested interests are looking after their profits.
Australians have every reason to feel proud and confident
about Medicare.
Dr Hewson does not believe in Medicare.
He is going to make sure you can't afford to go to your
GP. He is going to price sick people out of the market.
That is his policy.
He will abolish bulk billing for all but cardholders. He
will make you p~ y-your bill upfront. i r t u V 1. . L IIU 
Dr Hewson wants to rip the heart out of our quality
health care system.
Labor fought to introduce Medicare and we must protect
it.
Through Medicare, we are committed to building on the
strengths of our health system.
Labor recognises that the health need$ of Australians are
changing. Our population is ageing.
Hospital admissions will increase and there will be
greater use of high technology procedures.
We want to ensure that our hospitals are equipped to cope
with these changes.
That's why Labor Is spending an additional $ 1.6 billion
to strengthen Medicare and its guarantee to every
Australian of fair access to hospital services.
Dr Hewson will sacrifice the certainty and security of
Medicare for the cost and uncertainty of a privately-run
sys tern.
He will dismantle Medicare. He will make every
Australian pay more for their health care.
As Emily's parents now know, Medicare provides quality
care and pays all your costs.
I want the people of Australian to know what they are
entitled to under Medicare. AS long as it exists no one
should be fearful.
Thank you. 



TEL:
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HION P J KEATING MP
The allegation tonight by Dr Hcwson that I have corruptly bcnefitcd personally from
Government decisions is an unsustainable and outrageCous slur.
Dr Hewson, who last week decried factual revelations about his tax minimisation as
" gutter politics" has tonight made a highly defamatory claim which he knows he cannot
back up.
He should withdraw it and apologise immediately.
CANBERRA February 3, 1993 4. Feb. 93 9: 35 No. 009 P. 01/ 01 I 



i PRIME MINISTER
PRIME MINISTER/ MURRAY NICOLL, RADIO 5AN 4 FEBRUARY 1993
S. 0.2 PROOF ONLY
NICOLLt It was a little unexpected your ride into town
today. It presents an intriguing picture really, riding into
town to save the State. Is that what it's like. A State in
distress. PM: We1, I think it's calling it as it is. That is
there's been a big shadow boxing game going on now between the
Govt down here and the State opposition and the residual problems
from the state Bank and its aftermath are such that I know that
the Govt -fSA regardless of what it tries to do has not the
adequacy of resources to meet the problem; that is that the
residual debt which the State is now carrying, having funded over
$ 3BN intoe-State Bank is a burden which is too much to carry
and it will require Commonwealth assistance.
NICOLLs You're sayina only the State Bank can save us,
we're that badly off are we?
PM: Only the Commonwealth.
WICOLLt I'm sorry, only the sale of the State Bank.
PM Oh yes. I think the State Bank should be sold
because the franchise is still one of the best franchises in the
country that is, if the debts are skinned out of it, and you're
uot left with the actual business the franchise it's the
last great franchise left in the country. So, it's definitely
valuable, and worth a lot of money.
NICOLLt Now would you envisage it happening, the same as
in Victoria, a straight sale to the Commonwealth Dank,
PMg well, not to the Commonwealth Bank. In Victoria
there was a procaas where the State Bank of Victoria was offered
to other banks generally to acquire and that process would need
to be followed here. But, the biggest part of the process is
what'S called the due diligence, that is seeing what the
contingent liabilities of the bank are, because nobody is qoing
to -uy a problem, they'll want indemnification or to be certain
that the problem has been cleaned up, that they're buying the
business without all of its former problems. So, it takes time
to do a due diligence, that is a comb through the b6oke to make
judgments about all the contingent liabilities, the value of the
assets, and to arrive at a figure of nett assets and goodwill.
See, there's a goodwill attaches to the business because it has
such a huge support within SA. The franchise carries a lot of 
2
goodwill and when that's efttablishAd then that can be offered to
other financial institutions. Now, in Victoria, the American
investment banking firm and advisers Merrill? Lynch handled the
sale and it would require someone of that standing I think
probably to manage a sale process here.
NICOLLs So a parallel with the Victorian setup.
PHI Pretty much so I think, Murray, pretty much so.
And I think if the State does that, gets into a position to gat
it sold, there's then the question of compAnsation for the change
in the tax arrangements. At the moment there's a tax stream that
runs to the State Govt, that would transfer to the Fed Tax
Office. So we can capitalise that income stream and hand it to
the State as compensation. So if you look at the sale of the
bank plus the compensation package, this would meet some
substantial portion of the debt. But even after that there will
be such a refidual that I don't believe that the Sth Australian
people, the Sth Australian Govt's budget, cuts in govt spnding
or prevailing on the community with higher taxes, will meet the
costs. I think the risk is SA is in a debt trap from which it
can't emerge without the assistanceof the CommonwAalth Govt.
NICOLLi Of course the State Bank is not our only problem,
it's only one of a very considerable economic problem that the
State's facing, a narrow bass whic-h is rnally reatricting us.
I'm wondering if we'll ever get out of it.
PM Well, I think again there is a role for the
Commonwealth and there has been already now for ten years of the
Commonwealth Govt saying that it will intervene in the economy to
guarantee that a place like SA, a State like SA, which is
dependent upon a certain range of industries does have support.
And it's things like the submarine program, which the
Commonwealth decided upon some years ago, the Multifunction
Polls, the extension of the narrow to the standard gauge railway
into Melbourne, all of these things and particularly the support
for the car industry, all of these things are necessary things to
give the State of SA the industrial weight and ballast and
breadth it needs. Now, you know, I've made the point today, the
Govt is the only party in Australia that believes the
Commonwealth should intervene and make things happen in a StAte.
My opponent, J~ hn Heweon, doesn't believe that he doesn't
believe in intervening, he doesn't believe in intervention. Nowo
what we're saying is if you take the motor industry for instance,
you ask yourself the essential question, should Australia have a
motor industry. The Govt says yes, the Opposition says, well if
it can survive we'll have one. The Govt says, hang on, that's
not right, it has to survive. So you arrive at a set of
arrangements and tariffs that let's it6ukLve and grow.
NICOLL$ FCall, that's critical in this State. Does that 
Mean that you'll extent the same assistance to the motor vehicle
industry that you exteanded to the sugar industry in Queensland.
PH; Wall, the motor vehicle industry-has been subject
to a phase down in tariffs over period 1988 to 1997, weirs now
two-thirds the waythrough it, ( words unclear) the two-thirds the
way through it.
NICOiLL The industry says you can't sustain the risk, not
here. P141 Oh, yes they can, yes they can. They can't
sustain zero, they can't sustain zero which is what John llewson
and Tan McLachlan want to give them, but the end point of the
L~ abor Govt's tariff change is an effective rate of protection of
N~ ow, it's a good compromise between the interests of
consumers and the interests of the industry and its employees
because cars which are now $ 201000, standard saloon care which
are $ 20,000, would have been before these changes, $ 30,000-
fewer people would have bought them and the industry would be so
Much waaker. But at zero, obviously if we take let's say a
Japanese manufacturer who's running 300,000 care on one run in
Japan, they're not going to come to Australia to build a plant
for 30,000 cars with zero protection. Why would they. At zero
protection why would they wear the disabilities of scale and
distance to build 30,000 cars here when they can easily go from
300,000 to 330,000 in Japan.
? 4ICOLLt So how much lower have you got in mind beyond the
Year 2000.
PHI Well, I think the nominal level of it's
effactive and nominal IS. The 35 comes with the export
facilitation progrAms. At thoseo levels I think it's a fair deal
for the motor industry.
NICOLLs Will you hold them at that beyond 2000.
PHI At this gtage I've got no intention of trying to
press them beyond that point. I was part of negotiations with
_ John Button with the various motor industry leaders in 1990 and
' 91 and of course like every industry, Murray, you know, people
make the claims and they press you, a Govt has to work out how
far it can go and how far the claims are real. We think we've
got the right result And I think the fact that the Toyota motor
company decided to build a state of the art plant in Melbourne,
you know, proves the point that is the proof of the pudding in in
the teating. They on the G~ ovt's tariff policy set up a world
state of the art car plant. Btit Bob Johnson from Toyota made
cler tatat zero thoy wouldn't have made that.. investmahi.'
Mitsibushi in SA have mada clear that at zero they won't make the
investment and that.' s why 11--made this clear before to the 
people of SA that the Commonwealth Govt, Labor Govt, does believe
in a motor industry# will support it with the appropriate
mechanisms of support and will do the things that have to be done
to give SA an industrial base of some breahth, such an the
submarine program, such as the Co-operative Research Centres,
such as the railway programs etc.
NICOLLs Alice Springs to Darwin railway line, will that
last. PHI Well, that's a commiercial thing, it's not part of
the main frame rail system. If someone comes along with a
positive commercial story to tell on that, then I think that's
diffarent. Blut at this stage no one has emerged. We've had a
couple of JaPanese Corps in the late eighties express some
intareet in it.
NICOLLi They looked pretty responsible.
PHI Yeah, but they dropped away, no one has kept it
up. FICOLLt So a good viable commercial offer on the Darwin to
Alice Springs railway line would not be thrown out, it would be
given consideration. Not out of the question.
PH: it would be examined but we've got to see one yet,
Can I say though, in the One Nation StAtement what I proposed was
that we build a standard gauge from Adelaide to Melbourne. I
think that's far more important to SA, that SA be pulled more
tightly into the eastern States economy. And the thing that does
that is ba õ iCAlly the standard gauge line over to Melbourne which
of course SA has never enjoyed but should have had many years
ago* NICOLL: You're moving around the country at the moment,
you and the Leader of the Opposition and various Cabinet and
Shadow Ministers are all over the country. This Ls obvious
election campaign then and yet we haven't had an election called
yet. Say the word.
PHt Well, everything in due time. Issues have to ba
attended to. Last week we had a Cabinet meeting at tending to a
number of major issues including as you mentioned earlier sugar.
We have considered now, an a group, SA for some time. I met the
SA membors to discuss tha questiofts which were in the Statement
which I made today in The Advertiser.
NICOLLs Is this conditional by the way on the election. I
me~ n,-can you start thea prfo~ tess now thAt needs to be done if . Lynnw
Arnold sayg okay, we' 1l take that. 
PHI Oh yes, we're already, we are already discussing
with Lynn Arnold and the Govt the compensatory package for the
sale of ( word unclear) the tax stream, the change in the tax
stream from the State to the Commonwealth Govt. That's already
happening now.
NICOLLs is this a fait accompli. Have you decided, you
and Lynn Arnold, that you will sell the bank.
PM No, I think it is his intention in the right
circumstances to sell the bank. He wants to know where we stand
on a compensation package. We're now negotiating that with him.
NICOLLs So we don't have to wait until after the election
to get the details.
PM: No.
NICOLLt And when are we going to have an election. Is
Parlt going back on the 23rd.
PMS Well, that's the $ 64 question.
NICOLL# As scheduled.
PHI Well, that's what I intend. And we have to call
an election by early April at the latest so it's not that far
away. a
NICOLLI Not far away, with Leo McLeay in the chair.
PM: well, in an election the House of course is
dissolved. NICOLLt I mean on the 23rd, if you go back on the 23rd
with Leo McLeay in the chair, not standing down.
PM: Well, he can't stand down. I mean the Speaker is
elected. The Speaker is elected by the Parlt.
NICOLLt He can stand aside.
PM: Well, it torns out you can't as the law turns Out,
I think he has to either be out of the country or ill. Anyway,
that's not the point,
NICOLLt The Opposition will be all over that like a rash.
PH s Oh well, the Opposttion has got plenty of
problems. We've got plenty of problems ready for them.
NICOLLsI think you've got a few of your own too. 
PMe oh yeah, but that's public life.
NICOLLi Bob Mawke is having a bit of a shot at you at the
moment. He says;, he still Says that the ALP was wrong replacing
him with you back in He says if the Fed election was held
today the Coalition would probably win and he also says that the
Australiad people want a change of Govt.
PM: Well, he's entitled to his view. It's a free
country. NICOLLt Your response, is that it.
pMs I couldn't, you know, there's an old saying in
public life, the dogs may bark but the caravan moves on.
NICOLLt Okay. In other words who Cares about what Bob
Hawke thinks.
PMt Well, obviously he cares and good on him.
NICOLLs But you don't.
PM1 N~ ot vary much, no.
N4ICOLL: How much longer are we going to iee this betweenl
you and Mr Hewson. There's a feeling abroad in the country that
we really need leadership right now.
PM: Absolutely. The vory day I'm downi here talking
about the SA budget, the debt profile, the capacity of SA to fund
itself the breath of its industrial base, I've had to Contend
with John Hewson sort of attacking me. Well, you know, I hope
John wakes up to himself and gives it away.
NICOLL: Will you sue him?
VMS: well* let's see what he says about all this. I
mean, he made an intemperate claim it's the same sort of
intemperate claim he made about Bob Carr just before Christmas,
Baying you got to wonder about a follow that doesn't drive a car
and doesn't have children. It's the % Ame sort of intemperate
claim he made about renters he said you can alw. iays tell a
renter's house by the grass growing through the front fence;
they don't look after tha rlace. T mean, it's that sort of
intemperate quality and this was just anothar example of that I
think. NICOLL; Bearing in mind the parlq. g state of SA., let's
come back to that for a moment, and the Fed election, would you
consider making your campaign Apeech, launching the campaign 
formally, instead Qf informally which has already be done,
formally launching it from this city perhaps.
PM Well, that's a matter an much for the Fed
orgAnisation of the Party as for me and these are things we have
not yet decided. So, you know, I can't be anymore prescriptive
about that than being able to say as I've just said. But I think
that the important thing is rather than the cosmetics of any of
these thingg, I think this is going to be an important election,
it's going to materially affect the fortunes of SA. Now I think
the people of SA have got to make a very, a reasonably acute
judgement here.
NICOLLt This state and WA are going to considerably affect
the fortunes of the Keating Govt at a Fed election.
PM: Well, they do in every election, they do in every
election. NICOLLi More so this year than perhaps ever before.
PMs Well, I don't know. No, I wouldn't concede that.
But the judg6oment will be which of the two parties is in the
first instance, interested in SA. In the second instance, is
prepared to take a hand in being certain that it doesn't fall
into a debt trap and can fund itself without an inordinate burden
on the community and a big cut in public services. Which party
will intervene in the economy and guarantee that the motor
vehicle industry stays in business and grows. which party will
broaden the industrial base of SA and intervene in it.
NICOLLi Can you giiarantee all of this.
PM; Well, I may, look at our record rather than our
words. Our record is the submarine program, the MFP, the
railways, the Co-operative Research Centres, fiscal equalization
which I supported for 9 years as Treasurer which pays a higher
proportion of the State pool into SA and the smaller states.
NICOLLt Record unemployment.
PM1 Than the bigger states. I'm just talking about
the state itself. Those things we've done and I made the point
today in the speech that sinee 1978 Australian employment has
risen by 28%. But employment in SA has risen by only 15. And if
you look at some states, Queensland, employment has risen by 53%
over the period. SA by 15. WA employment risen by 44% over the
period, SA by
NICOLLt It's all a bit embarrassing isn't it.
PMSWell it means that there's got to be an effort 
made on the part of Govts You c~ flt jusit say l. ook we'll leave It
to market forces an John Hewsoft does. if you may that, what will
happen in the industrial base of Sh will shrink further and the
employment base with it. SO, Govts must come out and do things
to maintain the ballast of the state which the Labor Govt has
done over a decade and which we'll continue to do.
NICOLL a So you'll see us right.
PHI. We'll see us right in this respect, we'll
continue with a policy of fiscal Oqualisatiofli that is, rather
than just per capita payments to the States we'll see that this
pool with an inordinate ahare for the smaller states to maintain
services, we'll see SA right in joining with the Arnold Govt to
sea that aome of that debt burdan is spread more widely than the
people of SA, that's the State bank debt burden, and we'll see $ A
right by guaranteeing that we focus on its industrial future
including the motor vehicle and components industry.
NICOLL: Would the same apply to a Liberal Govt. I note
you say specifically the Arnold Govt. If there's a Liberal Govt
after the next State election which is not far away.
PX1 Yes, yes, as far as I'm concerned. I mean, it is
the people of the State that matter, it's a region of Australia
which is important and you know, I Just don't believe that a
conlscientious Govt in Canberra can ignore a problem of these
dimensions. NICOLL: Just finally, let me ask you, probably the mst
difficult question of the lot, and that is look ahead 10 or
years, what's your vision for the country. To it possible for
you and we need this, we really need it desperately, is it
possible for you to tell us what you've got in mind for this
country. How you're going to do it in the next 10 to 15 or
years$ put I think Australia has already crossed the Rubicon.
It's become
NICOLLi We've heard it befnre.
PH4: Oh yes, but look, exports are still going gang
bust. As at two days ago you could isee it again
NICOLLs Imports too.
P1 No, no, look 10 years ago we were exporting only
14% of our national production. That's now 24%. 1 mean it's
been a revolution.' This is a much more productive country. It's
now enmeshed truly with the rest of the world oconomy as it never
was before 1983. Before we floated the dollar, removed exchange 
9
controls and lowerod general levels of protection, the Australian
economy was an isolated uncompetitive economy. It's now an
integrate cozmpatitiva economy and what the Govt's done the last
couple of yerand last'year in particular, is much more
successfully integrated Australia into the SE Asian and north
Asian economies. So if you look at the 90' s you'll find that
Australia is well sotup, it's a low inflation economy# it's got a
competitive exchange rate mechanism. It's got a change iii the
productive culture at management and with labor we're a high
productivity country at the moment. we're wall set up to hop
into that growth in the vortex of growth in the Asia Pacific
which will lift income and living standards through the 90' s and
beyond. I mean Australia has made the change. We've got further
to go but we have made the fundamental change which I was talking
about in the early to mid 1980' s and tha Australian people
deserve a tremendous amount of credit for making that change and
being so conscientious about their economic and social
circumstances. NICOLLt It's interesting that you mention Asia because
those countries do have long term plans. Japan for example,
thinks decades ahead. we don't, do we, we think from one
election to the next.
PM: Except, I mean I think we are now by getting the
line straight, that is do we want to be a closed economy shipping
a bit of wheat and wool, no. Are we happy to have only 3 kids in
completing secondary school, no. what have we got now. We'r
not just a closed economy shipping a bit of wheat and wool, we're
an Open economy, where this year for the first year ever
manufactured exports equal rural exports and the fastest growing
component of that is elaborately transformed? manufactures. This
year nearly 8 kids in 10 complete secondary school. Ton years
ago it was 3 in
NICOLLI A lot of them are thef a becausa they can't get
work. P1 Oh no. Well, there ara some thera obviously but
the retention rate has climbed right through the 80' s even when
employment was strong. And we're now concentrating on
Australia's greatest comparative advantage, which is its
education system. Education, research and development, product
innovation, elaborate transformation of products dovetailed into
the Asia Pacific. That's Australia future, not just selling
commodities which is what the Liberal Party locked us into and
where the debt came from. The debt of Australia started in the
late 1960' s and because basically we want through the Rip Van
Winkle years of Menzies and later, but the transformation of
Australia to a modern indtistrial country with a ' productive
culture didn't occur. It waited until 1983 before we started,
but we're well on the way now and I think AustrAlia has made the
fundamental change and will continue to make it &amp; a the 90' B go
one End 



4. Feb. 93 11: 17 No. 02' 0 P. 01
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
All Australians at present should be thinking about which political party has the best
policies for Australia.
It is fair to say that South Australians have good reason to be thinking more deeply than
most. South Australia has some great strengths, including some of Australia's best industries
industries with excellent prospects for expansion both domestically and overseas.
However, South Australia has problems which the rest of Australia does not face and these
have to be addressed.
I do not say this lightly.
It is the reason why I have taken the opportunity to talk about South Australia and its
future.
Unless these problems are addressed properly, this State faces an uncertain future,
regardless of what happens elsewhere in Australia.
South Australia's additional problems stem from two principal causes.
First, its relatively narrow cconomic base has made it difficult to respond to the forces of
structural change.
This has been a problem bedevilling South Australia for the past two decades.
Since 1978 Australian employment has risen by 28 per cent.
Employmecnt in South Australia has risen by 15 per cent.
TEL: 
TEL: 4. Feb .93 11 : 17 tNz). 020 P'. 02/
2
Unfortunately for South Australia, many of Australia's expanding industries have tended
to be located elsewhere.
Queensland's employment has risen by 53 per cent Over the same period.
Western Australia's by 44 per cent.
The second cause of South Australia's additional misfortune is more recent and relates to
the State Bank.
I don't want to revisit all the traumia associated with that sorry debacle.
When John Bannon told me back in January 1991 of the losses of the State Bank it
seemed such an utter waste of public resources.
On that occasion, like many pcoplc I am sure, I fclt an immediate contempt for those who
managcd it.
Since then the losses in the State Bank have proved to be much larger than those that John
Bannon was made aware of in January 1991.
With the latest conimitmcnt of $ 850 million in the 1992-93 S1atc Budget the total amount
of assistance to the State Bank now stands at $ 3.15 billion.
This has imposed an enormious cost on thc State's public finances.
Inevitably it has restricted the State Government's ability to respond to the rcccision.
Nct public debt is now around $ 8.25 billion in South Australia, nearly 30 per cent of Gross
State Product, after having been around 15 per cent as recently as 1990.
Interest payments will take up 15 per cent of State revenue in 1992-93 even though
interest rates are much lower.
The drain on State resources of the State Bank is immense.
It may bc of a similar dollar amount as thc losscs in SB3V and Tricontinental, but the
revenuc base of the State of Victoria is more than 3 times larger.
And while Jeff Kennett is approaching the task wvith minimal finesse and maximum
disruption, Victoria does have scope to put its financial house in order.
The South Australian Government, on the other hand, ran a tight fiscal ship in the 1980s
and, apart from the State Bank, enjoyed a wcll-carned reputation as responsible fiscal
managers. 
TEL: 4. Feb. 93 11: 17 No. 0
3
This is good news in one scnse, as the State in terms of its recurrent budgets has been well
managed, but the bad news is that there is little fat in the South Australian budget to carry
the State Bank.
The State Bank's difficulties have sapped community and business confidence which has
added to South Australia's problems.
All of this has meant that the recession which has hit Australia badly has hit South
Australia particularly heavily.
Between July 1990 and Decmbcr 1992 employment in Australia fell by about 3 1/ 2 per
cent. In South Australia, the peak to trough fall was 5.1 per cent.
To get some perspective on how the recession has had a differing regional impact
employment in Wcstcrn Australia fell by well less than average at 1.7 per cent, while
employment in Queensland actually rose by 2.4 pc ccnt over the same period.
In thinking about the future, all South Australians should take as their starting point the
narrowness of the industrial base of the State and the financial burden of the State Bank.
But this is not the end of the stor)'.
South Australians should also recognise that two other potential calamitics hang over their
hcads. They will come care of Dr Ifewson and a Coalition Govcrnment if that misfortune were
ever to happen.
The first casualty would be South Australia's car companies.
For Dr Hcw'son's election would mcan an immediate and sharp setback for the car
industry. With two of Australia's car companies located in Adclaide that would be grim news for
South Australia.
Twenty thousand jobs would immediatcly be at risk.
Dr Hcwson's commitment to negligible tariffs by the y'ear 2000 and zero thereafter would
stall the investment plans of both GMH and Mitsubishi.
With excess car capacity all around the world, ncither GMIH nor Mitsubishi is going to be
willing to commit new resources to Adelaide if the long run viability of the car industry in
this country is made so unccrtain with zero tariffs. 
TEL: 4. Feb. 9? 3 11: 17 No. 020 P. 04/:
4
No car company is going to invest in Adelaide in the naive hope that Dr Hcwson's GST
will magically enable them to compete.
This is what the car companies have been saying and South Australians should heed their
warnings. But the potential problem is worse than that.
It is not just the car companies themselves that arc at risk from Dr Hewson's zero tariffs.
South Australia could well lose the impetus of the component industry as well.
The component industry is now operating at a tariff of 15 per cent. Over the last 5 years
these manufacturers have seen their tariff come back from 35 per cent, 25 per cent or
per cent to this level.
The important point is that under the Government's Car Plan these component
manufacturers will continue with a 15 per cent tariff from here on.
Under Dr Hlewson this tariff would be reduced to zero.
This sector of industry holds out great promise for South Australia with a number of key
companies already successful in manufacturing and exporting.
This is where Adelaide's future lies: building successful internationally-competitive,
export-oriented industries such as the motor vehicle component industry.
But as the component companies all Stress, they need the 15 per cent tariff and export
facilitation to make it all work.
Without such support the component industry is nowhere.
And unfortunately so is Adelaide.
This city will be denied the opportunity of building new industries and new export
markets in one of the key areas where Adelaide has expertise and has had recent success.
And these successes arc real.
Britax Rainsfords, for example, have doubled its sales over the past three years through
export success. Half of its sales now go offshore. ROHI Industries, Castalluy and Clyde
Apac are all small to medium size component companies who have built up successful
businesses through exporting.
The second great danger for South Australia is less obvious. 
TEL: 4. Feb .93 11 : 17 No .02O
But just like zero tariffs and the automotive Industry, it too has the potential to deal South
Australia another body blow.
Here I am talking about fiscal cqualisation the method by which Commonwealth
payments to the States arc distributcd in a way that benefits the smaller States.
It sounds complex, but when it is explained it has very disturbIng implications for South
Australia. In 1992-93 the Commonwealth will maike financial assistance grants to the States of
$ 17.3 billion.
Ilhcsc will be distributed amongst the States in a complicated fashion designed to even up
the fiscal disabilities faced by somc Statecs.
South Australia is a winner from this process to the tunc of $ 385 million in 1992-93.
In fact, over recent years the two largest States have become increasingly strident about
thc supposed burden upon their finances brought about by fiscal equalisation.
Victoria in particular has challenged the whole bañ sis of fiscal cqualisation, on the grounds
that it was originally designed as the quid pro quo that Victoria had to pay because of the
cost of the tariff to thc States which do not have a manufacturing base.
According to the Victorians, as the tariff declines in importance so too should fiscal
equal isat ion.
The very real risk for South Australia is that a iewvson Government will accede to
pressure from his Liberal counterparts, Fahey in Sydney and Kennett in Melbourne, and
start the process of winding back~ fiscal equalisat ion.
Fahey and Kennett may already have an understanding from H-cwson that he will look
sympathetically at their claimsh.
This spells massive problems for a South Australian budget already staggering under the
burden of the State Batik.
The State Batik is costing the South Australian budget about $ 280 million every year and
the burden of that cost is obv-ious.
Any further loss coming from thc phasing out of the $ 385 million of fiscal cqualisation
money would do enormous damage to South Australia.
Dr Hewson will of course say that he has no intention of removing fiscal equalisation.
South Australians have to ask can you trust him? 
TEL: 4. Feb. 93 11: 17 No. C2C P.. 2 1
6
Can you trust him when Fahey and Kennett will be on his back with their fiscal problems?
And can you trust him when he is philosophically opposed to notions of burden sharing?
He believes in straight per capita funding no allowance for evening up.
It would be a very brave South Australian who puts his trust in Dr Hcwson, and who
believes that Dr Hewson will fight for South Australia's fiscal rights at the expense of the
fiscal position of John Fahey and Jeff Kcnnett.
The obvious question to all of this is what can South Australia cxpect from a re-elected
Keating Govcrnment?
What would a Keating Govermcnt do for South Australia and how would it help South
Australia overcome its special difficulties?
There are no magic solutions but there arc things that can and should be done.
We will ensure that the Australian economy continues to strengthen and grow.
We will work to build new industries and forge the necessary links with the Asia Pacific
to generate jobs and exports.
But South Australia needs more than this.
The unfortunate reality is that even in a national rccovcry South Australia can bc left with
its particular problems.
It will still have to deal with its narrow industrial base and the need to build new industries
and strengthen old ones.
it will still have to absorb the Statc Bank losses.
The simple truth is that this can only be done with Federal assistance.
" rhc choice for South Australians is who will do this more sympathetically and effectively
a Keating Labor Government or a Hcwson Coalition Government?
Would Dr Hewson find additional Commonwealth funds for South Australia when he Is
committed, as he is, to a 5 per cent cut to general purpose payments to the States and to
total cuts to Commonwealth outlays of $ 9.4 billion?
Would Dr Hewson commilttd, as he is, to the doctrine of ' restructure or perish', find the
resources to help South Australian industry restructure? 
TEL: 4. FeL). 9. 11: 17 No C:_) P. 07;
7
Would Dr Hewson committed, as he ist, o the doctrine of non-intervention intervene for
South Australia?
When the same question is asked of the Keating Governmcnt, the record is perhaps more
eloquent than any claims.
For a start the Government for a decade has supported fiscal equalisation to help the
smaller states including South Australia.
The Government has also been prepared to take active measures to build new industries in
South Australia in recognition of the particular difficulties facing that State.
And we will do morc in the future.
That is why we argued that the Australian Submarine Corporation be based in Osborne. It
now supports about 1200 jobs in South Australia and will inject some $ 1.8 billion into the
local economy over the 14 year construction period.
It will also crcatc a viable Australian ship building capability into the 21st century,
The Commonwealth has allocated over $ 50 million towards the cstablishmcnt of the MF:
and is pleased to bc associated with this important projcet.
The Commonwealth has also agrccd to:
build a standard gauge railway from Adclaide to Mclbourne linking South
Australia more into the eastern states economy
upgrade AN's Islington and Port Augusta workshops, at a cost of $ 7.9 million; and
refurbish the Indian Pacific, at a cost of $ 12 million.
On the roads front, the Commonwealth has providcd:
$ 35.8 million in 1992-93 for major arterial road projects including reconstruction
of South Road, the Salisbury Highway extcnsion, and the Western Gawler Bypass;
$ 27.3 million in 1992-93 for local roads as part of South Australia's general
purpose assistance allocation; and
$ 12.9 million under the three year Urban Public Transport program.
The Commonwealth has also assisted the wine industry through the Export Market
Development Grant scheme which has been used successfully by several wine exporters in
recent ), ears, and th e. stablishmcnt of the Co-operative Research Centre for Viticulture
which will receive $ 12.4 million in Commonwealth funding over seven ycars. 
TEL: 4. Feb. 93 11: 17 No. C200 P. O.
8
South Australia will receive up to $ 69 million over the five years 1991-92 to 1995-96
under this Government's Building Better Cities Program.
This Program supports strategics designed to bring about effective and interactive urban
development and redevelopment in three areas Elizabetlh/ Munno Para, the MFP core
Site/ North West Crescent, and the Inner West of Adelaide. A southern area strategy is also
under consideration by the Commonwealth.
In the Elizabcth/ Munno Para area, for instance, Commonwealth funds arc being used to
encourage home ownership, create a more efficient city centre, Improve the housing stock
and better the physical environment through stormwater management and tree planting
programs. The key point is that Dr Hcwson in Fightback I is committed to abolish all of this.
South Australia fared very well out of the Commonwealth Local Capital Works Program,
relative to its proportion of the population, receiving $ 35.4 million ( over 10 per cent).
Among the areas to receive funding were:
S Northern Adelaide ($ 12.0 million) including Salisbury, Elizabeth and Gawler;
S Western Adelaide million) including Port Adelaide, Woodville and West
Torrcn. s;
Noarlunga million);
S the inner urban municipalities of Adelaide, Prospect and Glcnclg ( each between
million and $ 1 million) and
Whyalla, Port Pirie and Port Augusta ( again each between $ 0.5 million and $ 1
million).
South Australia has also successfully hid for several of the co-operative research centres
the Commonwealth has partly funded under the CRC program.
In all, eleven centres have activities based in South Australia, of which four are fully
based in South Australia:
S the CRC for viticulture I discussed earlier. This centre will concentrate on
improving the production of grapes with minimum chemical residues, and
developing techniques to process grapes with the minimum use of preservatives; 
TEL: 4 Feb .93 11 : 1I No . CC F09,
9
the CRC for sensor Signal and information processing. The rcscarch covers signal
processing technologies, principally for nmicrowave and high frequency radar.
Commonwealth funding is $ 12.4 million over sev en years;
the CRC for tissue growth and repair to advance the manufacture and testing of
bloactivc proteins. C'ommronwealth funding is $ 10.2 million over seven years.
Dr Hewson will abolish most of these programs and the fu. ture of all of them is in doubt.
A Keatinig U ibor Government will sit down with the SoL~ h Australian Government after
the Federal election and help them deal with their fiscal problems and stabilise South
Australia's debt.
For a start, South Australia should sellI the State Ba3nk.
This is a view that I put to John Bannon and I know is sh3red by Lynn Arnold.
To assist this a Keating Government will negotiate tax COMPI] eSatiOn for South Australia
in return for the gain to Commronwealth reve-nucs.
Indeed, discussions between our twvo Govcnmcnts are already underway. Compensation
will be negotiated on the basis of current arrangcmcnts.
Lynn Arnold is committed to helping South Australia restructure and I believe he has the
strength and courage ( o do it.
I am prepared to lend him cvcry possible assistance in this.
A Keating Govcrncnt remains committed to fiscal cquiisatioll as an1 appropriate and fair
means of distributing, Commonwealth grants to thc Stts.
A Keating Government believes in an Australian car induistry and will not sacrifice a
major South Australian industry in the narrow pursuit of zero tarilffs and the level playing
field. In fact this Government believes in working wvith industry, providing a helping hand
where it is warranted to build a new industry or to expand an existing one.
Much ha3S been done already and nmore will bc done in the near future.
The problems for South Australia are bY no means insurmountable.
There arc signs of a pick-up in thc South Australian economly and after thc debilitation of
recent years attitudes sem to be growing mnorc positive. For this Premier Arnold descrvcs
credit. 
TEL: 4 Fe-No 0 PF'.
Since its trough in May 1992 employment in South Australia has been steadily improving
and has now risen by 1.0 per cent.
Much of this appears to be due to a strengthening of the car IndustrY in South Australia.
I am confident that South Australians can turn their State around.
They need the opportunity and the assistance to build new industries, to generate thc
income to deal with their problems and create jobs.
South Australians have done it hard over recent years.
Today I would ask them to think. carefully about which of the political partics will stand
by South Australia and its essential industries in the years ahead.
ADELAIDE/ CANBERRA
4 February 1993 



PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THlE HON P J KEATING MP,
PRESS CONFERENCE, ADELAIDE, 4 FEBRUARY 1993
E&amp; OE PR-OOF COPY
PM: I thought I'd start by saying a few things to you, and then you can fire away after
that. The point of the visit today is to cut through the ( inaudible). This State has
problems from which it is not going to extricate itself. We've had national
problems with the recession and post-recession period, and the recovery. But these
problems are more particular than the general problems. So what I've sought to do
is to bring the debate into the open. That is, because South Australians are going
to have to make a choice soon about the national government. T7hat choice is
going to materially affect them and I want them to realise that that choice is going
to affect them.
in truth, it's only the Federal Governmrrent that has the wherewithal to deal with
South Australia's particular problems. South Australians must bc scrutinising the
policies of the two parties and ask the question who will be prepared to provide the
resources to enable South Australia to work its way out of its problems. In other
words, ask the kcy question, which of the partics has a policy for South Australia,
which of the twvo is intcrested in it and which will provide the resources for the
resolution of South Australia's problems? This Govemtmcnct has always accepted
that South Australia necdcd special attention. It's not been in a position to pick up
a lot of the buoyancy of the ' 80s that camne to the Eastern States, or doesn't have the
base in wealth that, naturally, Western Australia has. So that's why, in the course
of the 19RNs, while the Treasury was arguing for per capita funding for States, I
stuck with fiscal equal isation. Fiscal equalisation. meant another $ 380 odd million
into South Australia. In other words, I always took the view that you had to lift the
smaller States up because just paying on a per capita basis meant that services in
this State, the economy of the State, and the strength of the State would he
diminished. 
Over the same period, we made very clear that because we believed the State
needed special attention we argued that the submari -ne prograrn would be best set
up in South Australia, again to provide more balliest to its industrial structure over
a long period of time. The same with the multi-functio ' n polls, we've done what
we can to facilitate that. In my visit to Japan earlier in the year, the Minister for
international Trade and Industry told me that MMT is strongly behind the
development of the MFP in South Australia. And with that commitment and the
successful development of the MFP will come a lot more interest by Japan in the
State of South Australia.
T'he car industry, the Government has always taken the view that Australia needed
a car industry. When one asks the essential question, should Australia have a car
industry?, we've said yes. We've made clear that governments have to do things
that both maintain and build these industries. And that's why in cars, and in
componentry, we've always had South Australia particularly in mind because it's
such a large part of the Australian vehicle industry and components industry.
More recently, of course, is the One Nation Statement. I included in that the
Melbourne-Adelaide standard gauge railway, which is going to be built, and the
link to Port Adelaide, so that we tie South Australia more into the Eastern States'
economics through a rail linkage that should have been reality always had. There
can be no more basic thing than transportation and transportation services to
underpin any economy. I've taken the view that in terms of South Australia that
should be done.
Building Better Cities,. again we've got programs and funding across Adelaide and
the State. The road programs, the cooperative research centres where we focussed
particular funding on institutions and their collaboration with companies for
particular areas of rcscarch which we think are in South Australia's long term
interests. So let me just say this, Labor knows that South Australia needs federal policy, that
is in terms of industry, in terms of its industrial breadth, and fcderal hclp in terms
of its fiscal position.
I'll just say a couple of things about the Coalition. By contrast, Dr Hewson offers
the scorched earth policy. He wants zero tariffs he wants zero tariffs for cars, for
the motor industry. He wants t cut Commonwealth revenues to the States he
wants to cut $ 9 billion from outlays and make a very large cut in Commonwealth
revenues to the States. He has Prcmiers Mr Fahey and Mr Kennett breathing down
his neck on fiscal cqualisation they say that payments shouldn't be made in the
way they're being made to the smaller States. Thiat means that $ 385 million which
comes across under the equalisation pool is at risk. Of course this would come on
top of the ncarly.$ 300 million whigh the South Australian budget has got to find
now to service the State Bank debt. 
So I put the question can South Australians trust Dr Hewson to withstand the
pressures of Premiers Fahey and Kennett in seeking to renegotiate the fiscal
equalisation policy and thc formulas which attach to it? What I would contend to
you is that that sort of policy would push South Australia under.
Perhaps could conclude on this point. Dr H-ewson has no concept of regions. He
doesn't understand that) for instance, caus and components are important to So uth
Australia. H-I doesn't undcrstand sugar is important to Queensland. It's basically
an ideological approach which says if you tax your clothes and your haircuts and
your water bills and your power bills, then that's all than needs to be done, you
don't need to think about regions as regions, you don't need to do things for
regions, you don't need to comprehend regional economies and their needs. Well
the Government does, and that's why it has only been the federal Labor
Government in the ' 80s and early ' 90s which has looked at South Australia
particularly and set up the programs and policies have already mentioned to you.
But now that the problems of the State Bank hangs over the South Australian
budget, given the fact that the revenue base of the State is limited, think there's
about $ 600 odd thousand tax payers only to carry this burden, then we believe that
this matter ought to be brought into national focus, that the shadow debate should
stop, the South Australian Government by itself left to itself left to its own
resources is not in a position to stabilise the dcbt, and therefore I'm willing to, after
a federal election, help and deal with fiscal problem and stabilisation of South
Australia's debt cooperatively with thc govcrnment of Premier Arnold.
So I think I'll leave my remarks at that and invite questions.
J: ( inaudible).
PM-No, no, how do you contend that? Thie fact of the matter is you've got a debt of
$ 3.15 billion, which is already now being carried from the State budget into the
bank. That's going to cost South Australians on an ongoing basis about $ 300
million a year. What's going to happen, left unattended South Australia is going to
get itself into a debt trap. It just won't be able to meet the interest on the interest. I
don't think this has been said quite as obviously as this, and that's the point of me
saying it.
J: How much arc you prepared to offer?
PM: It's not a matter of that, it's a matter to negotiate. I've told you that I've already
spoken to the Premicr about the question of the tax compensation which flows
from the State Bank becoming a federal tax paying institution, thcrcforc diverting
the receipts from the Treasury's budgct to the budget of the Commonwealth. In
that case, what has to be done is that the Commonwealth will negotiate wvith South
Australia as to the valuc of those stream of payments. The stream of tax paymcnts
which were formerly going to the South Australian budget will now go to
Commonwealth budget. They can be capitalised into a capital sumn, and that 
capital sum can meet some of the debt obligation, as indeed can the proceeds of
the sale of the franchise of the bank meet those debt obligations.
J: But that's not special treatment, that's no more than the State Bank of Victoria or
the GIO received.
PM: For a start the bank has to be sold, that's what we're saying. Two, that we will then
negotiate. It'ns a matter of negotiation. What we see as the value of that stream of
payments, what the tax position of the bank is, what the value of that stream is
worth. Then on top of that is, beyond that the residual debt that has to be serviced.
South Australia will need Commonwealth assistance, just as this Governent
provided Commonwealth assistance to the Northern Territory, and as we
negotiated Commonwealth assistance for the State of Tasmania for similar reasons.
But the reasons are not as large or as acute as the problems here.
J; The debtors have pointed out it's around $ 3 billion. If the bank makes the sort of
profits it would bc expected to, it would be around $ 100 million a year which
would indicate you could expect a profit stream of around ( inaudible) a year.
Given those profits over 5 years, what are you offering, $( inaudible)?
PM: I don't know, that's to be negotiated. Obviously it's not a back of the envelope
occasion, it's a matter of sitting down and working out what that income stream is
worth. did that with the State Bank of Victoria, and premier Kirner and I
successfully arranged the State Bank's sale which plugged a very big hole in the
debt of Victoria, and has now seen that bank incorporated solidly into the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, making the Commonwealth Bank an even
stronger institution than it was, and of course most particularly protecting the
depositors in Victoria. That negotiation took place and a similar one will take
place here. In fact we've already had discussions about it.
I: Mr Keating, why is it impossible to work out the details before the election?
PM: The details on the bank?
J: Yes.
PM: The details on the bank..
1: And your proposition?
PM: That's only on one thing, that is on the income stream. But then the franchise has
got to be cleaned up, the debt skinned out of it, and sold. Nobody is going to buy a
bank with a whole lot of contingent liabilities. The franchise has got to be sold
clean.
J: ( inaudible) 
PM: There would have to be a due diligence done obviously, as there was with the State
Blank of Victoria.
1: The Bank is clean now..
PM: That depends on the view of the buyer. Buyers have Oarticular views about
cleanliness, and they're called due diligence. And they'll do a due diligence to
make sure that when the franchise is offered that they can successfully manage it
and confidently buy it. When that happens, then the income stream can be one of
the key issues.
J: How quickly do you expect to sell the Bank?
PM: I think the Government of South Australia should be moving to put the Bank in a
position for sale, and to develop a sales process.
3: Looking at the GIO's sale, that took a couple of years.
PM: We did the State Bank of Victoria in a much shorter time than that. And it was
quite a complex situation because..
J: It won't be a shotgun wedding, will it, with the Commonwealth Bank?
PM: [ t all depends on what a particular bank's market share is in South Australia and
whether there would be trade practices problems putting togethcr what is already a
large market share, combined with an even bigger market share.
J: Who would buy the bank, Prime Minister?
PM: The market has -shown that busincss can expand their stock for acquisitions, and
obviously there are a number of both domestic and foreign banks who may well be
interested in it.
1: Would you prefer a foreign buyer?
PM: No.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: That's always been a comimercial matter, whether it's been commercially viable.
Every study we've had, no-one has ever stepped forward to do it.
J. Are you saying you'd allow the sale of the State Bank of South Australia
( inaudible) foreign ( inaudible)? 
PM: I wouldn't, no. But it may be that the large domestic banks here This will be the
last great franchise to be sold in Australia. The big State Bank of New South
Wales was incorporated into the Commonwcalth Bank in 1931. The
Commonwealth Bank of Australia was largely a national bank flying on one wing,
that was on New South Wales. It got the pigeon pair together when it picked up
the State Bank of Victoria. There are no other such franchises left, except the Stae
Bank of South Australia. Thiere's the R and I Bank, but it's a much smaller
institution, in Western Australia. The only other large one is the State Bank of
South Australia.
J: Mr Keating, are you cons idcri ng suuing Dr Hewson over his allegations that you
made policy decisions for personal gain?
PM: Dr Hewson made an intemperate remark yesterday, it's in the same class as the
intemperate remark he made about Bob Carr saying he was suspect because he
didn't have any children and didn't drive a motor car, the same intemperate
remarks he made about renters saying you could always tell a renter in the street by
the way they look after their house. I put it in that category. Dr Hcwson would be
wise to think Mcore he speaks.
J: You're not considering suing him?
Pm: rye got no more to say about that.
J: On fiscal equalisation, in the last three thc years the fiscal equalisation payments
have been reduced, have they not, to South Australia, it's been a feature of the local
budget, are you saying this will stop that downward trend?
PM: No, I'm saying that there's a pool of nearly $ 2 billion which is distributed to the
smaller States under fiscal equalisation. I'm saying that as an express issue in
policy I believe that fiscal equalisation should be maintained. That is, that the
smaller States should be supported, that they can't providc the services left to their
own devices and their own finances.
J: Will that pool get larger or will South Australia's share get
PM: The Grants Commission makes recommendations each year about the revenue
effort of the States and it equalises. It makes recommendations on the
equalisation, to sec what the relevant disadvantage is. The Grants Commission has
done that year in. year out, and the Government mkes a decision about it every
year. The issue in principle is the pool. Fiscal equalisation is an interventionist
policy. One has got to cut across per capita paymcnts, that's equal payments per
head across all the Australian States, and say in an interventionist way we believe
there will be express payment streams coming to these States for these reasons.
What I was contending to you was the philosophic basis on which Dr I-ewson
works is non-interentic a per capita. Thiat's a big risk for South Australia, 
particularly a big risk when he's got Fahey and Kennett breathing down his neck
about it. So, if South Australians ask themselves the question could they trust Dr
Hewson to keep the payments off with the two large States on his back, both
Coalition States?, well I'll leave the answer to you.
J; Why can't you quantify the sort of offer, why Can't you put some sort of figure on
it?
PM: Because it's not a matter of simple figures in response to a simple question. This is
Dot simple, it's complicated. And it's complex by virtue of the state of the State's
budget, the paucity of its revenue base, the weakness of its revenue base, the
problems of the State Bank, and being able to pull together a debt profile which
doesn't see the budget of South Australia caught in a debt trap.
J: Knowing all of that, can't you give us somne indication of how high you're prepared
to go?
PM: It's a ridiculous question, you're asking a simple onc number question. That's the
sort of question you'd expect from page 30 of a tabloid.
J: A ball park figure would be reasonable.
Pm: rm saying that we will sit down with the Governnmcnt of South Australia looking
at all thcse issues the sale of the Bank, the value of the tax stream, the
compensation, and what further Commonwealth assistance is ncessary to provide
a profile to South Australia's budget arnd debt position.
1: ( inaudible)
PM: I don't think anyone else has come and told you that your budget in the long term
isn't viable. Has anyone? I know you're super news sleuths, but has anyone tole
you that? And if they haven't, it might be worthwhile you taking the issue
seriously.
3: We have been taken seriously which is why we've been slashing public service
numbhers and Lonrd knows what else in this town for the last two years. ( inaudible)
the cutbacks in the federal budget. Are you not prepared to put any figure at all.?
PM: Of course I'm not, hut I'm making it very clear that I don't believe that 1k,; South
Australian budget is capable of dealing with its debt position, and that the
Commonwealth Government is saying it will asist, it will provide federal
assistance. That's the issue in principle.
J: if you decidcd not to sell the Bank will there still bc federal assistance?-
8
PM: I think the Bank should be sold and I think the Premier's view is that it should be
sold, too.
1: And that's the only condition on which ( inaudible)?
PM: The State has got to make its own efforts to deal with its debt problem.
J. Prime Minister, on Leo McLeay, do you believe he should stand downi?
PM: Let's just deal with this issue of substance.
1: T1hen can we talk about whether you are concerned about what Mr Hawke has
said?
PM: I'm not going to answer those questions, forget about those things.
J: Do you agree with former Prime Minister Hawke that you'd lose the election if it
was held today?
PM: You people have a responsibility for reporting the news that's kcy to the future and
well-being of the community of South Australia. I'm a Commonwealth Prime
Minister and I've come here to talk to you about it. I'm not interested in picking up
Mr Hawke's interview of last night.
J: As a national broadcaster, Mr Keating, we have an obligation to service other parts
of Australia, and they're the questions we've been told to ask by our Canberra
bureaux.
PM: Just tell them politely that the Prime Minister refused to give you an answer on
that. OK?
J: OK, looking at pay TV then, the former Prime Minister says your pay TV policy is
strange.
PM: Before we go through all these things, have you got any more questions about
South Australia?
J: On fiscal equalisation, how can you undertake to make the pool larger when you're
running such a large deficit now?
PM: It's not a matter of making the pool larger. The Grants Commission decides how
much is required to equalise the payments.
J: Will we hc getting some paymcnts that would have othcrwise gone to Western
Australia or the Northern Territory? 
PM: No, you will be getting assistance beyond that which comes in the pool. That is,
the Commonwealth will add to the financial assistance grants by way of direct
Commonwealth financial assistance, as we did for the Northern Territory and as
we've done for Tasmania.
1: It won't go through the Grants Commission.
PM; No, it would be an express policy decision of the Commonwealth, as it was for
those two States.
J: On the issue of the car tariffs and how that affects South Australia, what is
different about what you are saying now to your policy a month ago?
PM: Dr Hewson has reaffirmed in Fightback Mark It a zero tariff policy. He's saying he
doesn't believe the car industry Mr McLachlan said it for them he said it is
restructure or perish', was his expression. They're saying we don't particularly say
there should be a car industry. T'here's going to be a zero tariff, if you can survive,
fine, if you can't survive, bad luck. We're saying something totally different.
We're saying there should be a car industry, and we're saying that the tariff levels
which the Government have determined are ones which will keep the car industry
viable and let it grow. It was on the basis of those tariffs that John Button,
epsritnabcilpisahlliyn, g aan sdt amtey-soeflf-twheer-ea ratb lpel atnot iinn1t eVreisctt otrhiea . T oIty'so otan Mthoet obra sCiso omfp t ahnayt policy
that I believe that you'll get expansion from the current car companies of South
Australia. But only on the basis that the notion that you can provide some level of
protection that compensates for the small volume of production. Nobody is going
to invest in a state-of-the-art plant, to build 35-40,000 units, particularly when
we're talking about the Japanese, they can build them in Japan. I went to the
Toyota plant late last year where they have a run of 310,000 cars per year in one
production run. It's much more simple for that company to make that run
340,000 and build all the cars in Japan, than to seek to build such a plant in
Australia on a zero tariff with the disabilities of distance and costs and the
disabilities of scale. So there has to he some recognition of that in the tariff. The
Govermecnt recognises that, the Opposition doesn't. As far as the Opposition is
concerned, the car industry in South Australia can disappear if it can't stand on its
own two feet with a zero tariff. This Would be fatal to the South Australian
economy, fatal to the city of Adelaide.
1 
J: You don't think there should be a slow down in the tariff cuts?
PM: We had a long negotiation with the car companies when we put these together, in
1988 and then in 1991, and they phased down to effective end paints of 35 per cent
average effective rates of assistance of 35 per cent. I think there's a reasonable
trade off there between the interests of consumers and the interests of car
companies, and the employment base of cities such as Adelaide in South Australia
in that kind of tariff level. If one takes the view that at zero and the survival of the
fittest, the fittest will be the 300-400,000 per unit through put companies in Japan
and elsewhere.
3: The economic climate has assisted with the balance of payments...?
PM: No, no. Thie proof of the pudding is in the eating. The Toyota company is one of
the largest motor companies in the world, it has the fastest growing market share of
any company in the world., it made a decision in the face of that plan to put in
what will be the most modem plant of its kind in the world.
3: That company's President, Mr Robert Johnston, was critical of the L abor Party's
plans..
PM: They made it quite clear, he said it by virtue of the fact they made a decision to
invest.
J. ( inaudible)
PM: The Toyota company decided to set up a state-of-the-art plant in Australia on the
announced tariff policy of this Government. That's it, say no more. They'
wouldn't have done it for zero tariffs, and Mr Johnston made that very clear to Dr
Hewson, as has Mr Quinn and everyone else here in South Australia. The zero
tariff policy in manufacturing is a zero Adelaide policy. That's Dr Hcwson's
policy.
J: sugar decision the other day and now help for the State Bank of South Australia
today, is that a reaction to bad polls?
PM: The sugar decision has been onc which has been on for a couple of years. We sent
a refercncc to the Industry Commission in 1991, and it's come back, and we've
made decisions, and we made a decision the other day which will radically change
the sugar industry. The sugar industry is largely a State regulated industry, the
Commonwealth is only a marginal player in it, it only has a role through the sugar
tariff. But all the things such as land assignment and all the other pricing signals
are questions which devolvc to the Queensland Government. The Queensland
Government has a rcfort-plan for 1995-96 which wc'vc now bcen able to tail
into. So it was a sensible reform decision, it has nothing to do with hand outs
which is implicit in your question. In rcspcct of South Australia, you have a 
problem if the national leadership of this country ignores or fails to understand the
problems of South Australia.
3: We've had this problem for a couple of years too.
PM: I know, and so have 1, but I've made it quite clear that the Commonwealth will
provide financial assistance. That's the key change. I've been speaking to the
Government about the problems now for months.
J. Co-operative research ccntrcs..
PM: It's in the press statement. One's on the wine industr! y iticulture, the other is one
sensor signalling and information, the other is on tissuc growth and genetic
engineering, there's a number of them. These things are all again there to direct
and try to foster the development of certain industries. We've set up 51
cooperative research centres across the country, and they are there to try to
promote areas of Australian science that will give Australia a comparative
advantage in the world through technology, and that has to be our long suit.
Australia's great comparative advantage is not its mountains of minerals or its
acres of wheat, Australia's great comparative advantage is its education system, its
research and development base. And it is that that we're promoting. We've
invested $ 250 million in cooperative re. search centres and we've invested with that
$ 650 million from the private sector. So there's now the better part of about $ 900
million or a billion dollars worth of effort going into these novel areas of scientific
research and development, and the development possibiliis flowing from them.
Dr Hewson says you shouldn't have that intcrvention, it's sullying the market, they
shouldn't be there, we don't believe in them. Whereas in fact, it's pulling together
companies, universities, specialist institutes to do specialised things that can give
Australia a huge Icap in certain areas of technology and in production. That's why
they're important across the Commonwealth and just as important in South
Australia.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: There's always a debate about MH-and MRC budgets with all the medical research
faculties around the country. This is a scparate program altogether. The
cooperative research centres are a separate program, which as I say has been so
successful we've matched $ 600 million of private investment with $ 250 million of
government investment in what is going to be a very novel thing. opened one
recently in Tasmania in Eucalypt plantation technology. T'here it is said that
years growth of a Eucalypt trce can be accomplished in 7 years, that the trees will
be more resistant to bugs, they'll be straighter, that they'll saw better for saw log,
that it will establish plantation. Thiese are the things where Australia obviously has
an advantage and should be pursuing it. And it's what governments should do.
Governments have to decide whether they're going to support particular industries
or particular enterprises, just as I've made the point to you about cars. 
J: On the ca industry, why are you so inflexible by not agreeing to a mid-term
review on the tariff policy?
PM: Because the flexibility was all occurring in 1990-91 when we had these
continuing conversations with the motor vehicle industry. That's when all the
flexibility was.
J: They asked for 25 per cent?
PM: O, but there's a thing called the national interest, there's people out there in motor
cars that are now $ 20,000 that would have been $ 30,000 without thcse changes.
So we're going to sell more cars. That's going to be good for Australia, good for
the motor vehicle industry. It's a trade off. It's a matter of finding the right
balance, but the right balance is not zero. That's the point.
I. But we sell fewer cars now than we did 20 years ago.
PM: Yes, and why is that? Buyer resistance to price.
J: Why would it hurt to have a mid-term review?
PM: Because the review was mid-term. We started this in ' 88.
J: There's a lot of volatility in there, particularly with currcncies.
PM: Yes, and thc volatilities run in favour of higher protection for the motor vehicle
industry.
J: At this minute.
PM: The currency has fallen by 12 per cent in trade weighted terms, which far outweights
any shift down in the tariff, far out-weighs.
1: The currency must recover in the..
PM: I'm just saying to you, you make decisions on the basis on where you believe the
effective average rates of protcction can sustain and grow a motor industry that
gives a consumer a fair go, that we don't pay through the nose for cars, where the
quality rises, where we end up with export potential, where those balances lie.
And the time for all that flexibility was when we gave it the flexibility in 1990-
91.
ends 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
HEWSON'S HOLLOW PLEDGE TO AUSTRALIA'S WOMEN
I welcome Dr Hcwson's belated discovery that Australian women have special needs
descering appropriate-and sometimes special policies, but it is a shame that he still does
not really understand what those nccds are.
Even worse, today he has demonstrated he is not interested in learning by refusing an
invitation to meet with Australia's leading women's organisation.
Last July when Dr Hcwson addressed the Fifth National Women's Conferenec of the_
LifriioLPbrty he repudiated the need to have special policies: " Treating women as women
almost by definition implies that women are different. We can say, for instance, that
women have different health needs, different work requirements and different educational
difficulties. And in doing so, we run the risk of unfavourably tagging women and
labelling all individuals with problems that only apply to some".
He's come a lon&amp; way since then. Earlier this week in Brisbanc, when he released his
Pledge to the Women of Australia at a private girls school, he acknowledged what Labor
has always known and actcd upon: the needs are different of women and it's important
when you put a policy package together to actually rccognisc those different
circumstances and those differcnt needs and make sure that public policy is directed to
dealing with those".
The Labor Govcniicnt has always done this and will continue to do so. Labor does not
need to resort to flimsy one-pagc pledges hastily cobbled together at the last minute. We
have a proud track record: the New National Agenda for Women which I will outline
next week, is a comprehensive blueprint setting out the government's plans for achieving
gender equality by 2000. It has been drawn up after extensive consultations and research
with a large number of Australian women. 5. Feb. 93 15: 26 No. 009 P. 01/ 02 
T5EL.: F eb. 93 15: 26 No. 009 P. 02/ 02
2
Today met Sue Walpole, Australia's new Sox Discrimination Commissioner, and want to
take this opportunityt6-cTxprcss my confidence in her determination to fight hard for
working women, particularly her plans to make use of the recent amendments to the Act
relating to industrial awards and workplace aireements.
Dr Hcwson is vague about how a coalition governmient would treat the policy and
advisory bodies that are so important to ensuring we havc sound and appropriate advie
on women. His Fightback Stratcgy for Women document says the Hum an Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission will be maintained but that ' alternative dispute resolution
procedurcs will be encouraged". What does this mean? Will thc Sex Discrimination
Commissioner be ablc to tak * e on discriminatory employers, or will she be forced to turn a
blind eye to exploitative practices?
Similarly, Dr Hewson says he will maintain the Naitional Women's Consultative Council
but only today he refused an invitation to attend thc Council's next meeting later this
month. I attended two Council meetings last year and found them to bc an invaluable
source or information and advicc.
Obviously DT Howson is not interested in listening to the views of Australia's pre-erninent
representative body of women. He thinks he already knows all the answers. Australian
women are not that easily footed.
CANBFRRA February 1993 TEL 



TEL: 7. Feb. 93 13: 29 No. 001 P. 02/ 02
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING
NIP THE SPEAKER, THE HON LB. MCLFAY MP
Contrary to media reports tonight, I have not applied any pressure to the
Speaker Leo McLxay to resign his position.
In a conversation with the Speaker this evening, I have assured him that I am
prepared to await the outcome of the review now being conducted by Sir
Laurence Street. I believe all fair minded people would have the same view.
The matter in question is a compensation matter the damages over which were
awarded by an officer of the Commonwealth.
I have every confidence that Sir Laurence Street will find that the Speaker has
acted in an entirely proper manner.
CANBERRA February 1993 



T7EL.: Feb. 93 13: 29 No. 001 P. 01/ 02
PRIME MINISTER 18/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
NATIONAL AGENDA FOR WOMEN
" Women Shaping and Sharing the Future'", the New National Agenda for
Women, released today, is the Commonwealth Govcramcnt's blueprint for action
for women to thc end of the dccade. The 162 page document describcs women's
aspirations, as expressed during extcnsivc community consultations, and outlines
the government's strategies to meet those aspirations. The Agcnda identifies
-sixtccn important policy areas, including child care, employment, violence against
women and health and wvell being, and also covcrs groups such as women in rural
and remote areas and women with disabilities.
In my Message to the Women of Australia, included in the document, I state that
Australia is recognised around the world for our achievements in improving
women's lives, and I commit my Government to maintaining and improving this
record. I invite the women of Australia to comment on the document and look
forward to hearing their reactions.
On Wednesday in Sydney I will outline in detail how the Government proposes to
act on the strategies outlined in the New National Agenda for Women.
CANBERRA
7 February 1993 TEL 



IP D PRIME MINIISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 9 FEBRUARY 199
" INVESTING IN THE NATION"
When I opened this campaign on Sunday I said that the main issues were going to be the
economy, unemployment and the protection of our way of life.
The statement we have released today goes to the heart of those issues.
If we are to reduce unemployment the revolution in our economy must continue.
But we must take the people with us. Our ambition must remain a fair, just and cohesive
democracy. That is why we must confront the realities of unemployment.
But the reality is that unemployment will not be easily reduced.
Growth is too slow. It is slow here. It is slower still in most other parts of the world.
And at the same time our work places are changing.
Employers are replacing the people who once worked for them with new technologies and
new systems, more people are working part-. time, there are more -women in the workforce.
Confronting the reality of unemployment means providing a social net to ease the
hardship. It also means providing all the training opportunities we can.
But above-all -else it means we* must create more-growth.
Squarely faced, our problems are daunting, without question. 
2
But the same realistic appraisal of our position, gives every reason for confidence in what
we can do, and pride in what we have done.
We have real strengths on which we can build.
We have them particularly in the enterprise of private companies in the energy and
initiative of small to medium sized businesses who are now showing the way in
Australia's drive to develop an international export-oriented economy.
This is where we can provide a spur to economic growth and employment.
Today's statement offers new incentives to business in Australia small, medium and
large. It offers an environment for free enterprise as competitive as any in the OECD, and
competitive with most in Asia.
The Statement is modest in size but because it is so focussed, so targetted, it can mark a
new age for Australian business.
The One Nation statement we brought down nearly a year ago was designed to increase
investment through public spending on projects of long term value to the nation while
private investment was subdued.
One Nation reflected our determination to marry social and economic imperatives. To
meet short term needs without sacrificing our responsibility to the long term interests of
Australia. Today's statement reflects the same deermination.
The vast majority of the measures outlined in One Nation have been enacted or
implemented.
As a Labor Prime Minister, I am proud of the decisions we made in One Nation and at
other times during the year watershed decisions, such as the establishment of a National
Training Authority, the deregulation of civil aviation, the construction of a National Rail
Highway, an environmental overhaul of our greatest inland river system.
These are great projects of enduring value to Australia
I am equally proud of the decisions announced in the Youth Statement and the Budget that
directly assist the unemployed.'
-It-is partly as a result-of One-Nation that the Australian economy has grown in the past
twelve months, while other economies have slipped back.
Modest as the growth is, we might take some small measure of satisfaction in the fact that
what we achieved last year we achieved ourselves and against the odds: against the 
international trend and with much of our corporate sector concentrating on reducing debt
and cutting costs.
There can be no onc now wbo does not understand how imperative it is to be competitive,
to be international, to go into the world, and to go especially where the world is growing
fastest the Asia Pacific.
The truth is that the race for competitiveness never ends. This time five years ago it was
the goal. It is the goal now. It will be the goal, we can be sure, in five years or ten years
time. The thing to remember is that we are now in the race. Unlike a decade ago, we are
competitors. And each year we are doing better.
Amid the hardship wrought by the recession and the blow to our confidence it delivered,
in times when many of the signs are negative and might be read as indicating the necessity
for retreat there are also sure signs that we can advance.
We are more than twenty five per cent more competitive than we were a decade ago.
We have the lowest inflation in the world and, Victoria notwithstanding, the lowest
number of industrial disputes for thirty years.
These are the changes which have put us in with a chance a better chance in many
respects than Australia has ever had before.
The evidence is manifest. We produce one third as much again as we did in the early
eighties. Our exports have doubled and are now nearly a quarter of everything we produce.
More and more of them go to Asia.
We are now a much more competitive country by virtue of conscious decisions, by virtue
of conscious decisions by Government, business and workers.
It is the result of our choosing not to drift, but to take up the challenge. It is what
Australians have done by and for themselves.
A recent McKinsey Report to the Australian Manufacturing Council attests to the success
of a large number of Australian businesses which have grown up in the past few years.
McKinsey found 700 high value-added manufacturing firms in Australia playing a
significant part in Australia's exportgrowth.
The Report says: 
The entrepreneurship and ingenuity of these firms is exciting. Throughout the
study, we have been constantly amazed and inspired by the stories of these
individual firms, their determination and their success.
The authors point out their success has largely gone unnoticed in Australia.
Yet these firms were responsible for over $ 8 billion in exports in 1990-91 and
McKinsey's estimate the figure is likely to double by 1997.
These companies are exemplars of the change in the business and industrial culture of
Australia. They are marked by the dynamism of their leadership; by their flexibility; their export
orientation and their success in capturing niche markets, particularly in Asia.
These are the Australian companies of the future. The companies which will provide
work rewarding, interesting work for our children.
A large percentage of these companies were " born global", meaning that they considered
the world as their market from the first day of their existence.
There is no better evidence of the emergence of an international business frame of mind.
They are the off spring of a new export culture.
The McKinsey Report is a significant indication of the direction economic policy should
take. A sign that recovery will be hastened, and jobs created, by the rapid expansion of
vigorous and innovative small and medium sized businesses in the main, companies.
That is on the assumption that the number of these firms continues to increase at the
present rate.
A principal aim of today's statement is to Increase that rate.
The national quest upon which we are now embarked is for two things production and
employment. One Nation promoted these things with public investment through an ambitious program
of infrastructure spending.
But the private economy has been slow to respond and we have not had the large
ncemetsto production and employment which we need.
But One Nation never pretended that the large and continuing increments to production
and employment Australia needs could be delivered by or in the public sector. 
These things must come from the private economy, from private investment, from private
businesses like the ones McKinsey has described.
A large part of today's Statement focuses on this the role of the Australian company in
the dynamism of Australian business.
The measures I am announcing will make the Australian company a more effective
device, playing a more effective role as an instrument of national achievement and
enterprise. The Australian company, large and small, will be the basic device that powers our
innovation, marshals our capital and our productive power.
And we all know when that happens the other thing marshalled is employment.
We have decided that the simplest and most effective way to encourage Australian
companies to work for Australia is to lower their tax burden.
So, under a Labor Government, on July 1 this year the company tax rate will be reduced
from 39 cents in the dollar to 33 cents.
Coming on top of the accelerated depreciation allowances announced in One Nation, this
will make the Australian corporate tax system highly competitive within the OECD
countries. But, more importantly, we will also be competitive with the countries in our region.
Australian companies will thus be much better placed to trade with Asia the region
where it is going to matter most-
I might add that it should give Dr Hewson food for thought: under Labor a business tax
rate of 33 per cent, under Fightback a rate of 42 per cent, plus a 15 per cent GST.
in One Nation we introduced a Development Allowance for projects involving
investments of $ 50 million or more.
By the end of December 1992 we had received applications to a value well in excess of
$ 100 billion $ 130 billion in fact.
This of course is a wonderfully encouraging response.
We intend to bring forward -the development of as many of these projects as we can.
But we are also determined to enlist new ones. I-
To do this a Labor Government will establish a generalised Investment Allowance which
will help small to medium sized companies invest in job creating industries.
It will also help bring forward the enormous stock of projects which are already seeking
the development allowance.
Increased investment is the key to economic expansion and the key to higher employment.
But the corporate sector has not been investing enough.
It has been cutting costs at the same time as the banks have tightened their lending
guidelines. New businesses and businesses wanting the necessary finance to grow have been
subjected to more stringent tests.
As business stirs the banks must respond. Australian business must have access to finance
when it needs it.
In a speech late last year I outlined the need to encourage a new culture in Australian
banking.
The consequences of lending based on the value of security have been all too evident in
recent years, as first inflated asset prices saw credit expand rapidly and then collapse as
asset prices fell.
Instead, we need a culture which lays more stress on establishing close relationships
between banks and their customers.
I encouraged the banks to provide extra training for staff so that they can better evaluate
the risk and potential of proposals; and to be much more prepared to lend on cash flow.
If we are to develop and expand innovative small and medium business in Australia, this
sort of closer relationship banking is essential.
If Australian banks can develop their skills of evaluation and monitoring, the rewards for
business will be very considerable.
So too, obviously, will be the rewards for banks.
In this we have something to learn from the German and Japanese banking systems.
While we should not be imitating their systems, it does provide another lesson in the
strength to be derived from partnerships in the economy. 
In future, to ensure that our banking system is working effectively, under a Labor
Government the Reserve Bank will establish the machinery to regularly monitor the
conduct and patterns of bank lending.
In addition, the Reserve Bank will conduct quarterly surveys of small businesses to
establish a better understanding of their relationships with banks.
To provide the RBA with more detailed information and advice, the Reserve Bank will
also establish a large and representative Advisory Council whose members will be
principals of small and medium businesses.
To encourage banks to establish the appropriate structures and to increase the lending to
small and medium business, the Reserve Bank will pay market interest rates on bank
deposits it holds, thereby increasing the revenue of banks by about $ 140 million.
Mr Chairman
As you will see there are more measures in this Statement than it is possible for me to
address here. Let me mention just two two which illustrate the broad front on which we
have to work.
The solutions to our problems depend on both on our continuing willingness to change
and our ability to adapt to change.
Let me mention just two examples. There is a trend towards part time work in the
economy and there is a need to provide for unemployed people as much access to this
work as possible.
Consequently today's Statement changes existing programs of assistance for the
unemployed to provide greater incentives for recipients of allowances to take part-time
and casual work.
These measures have the dual purpose of enabling people to supplement their allowances
and maintain their links with the labour market, which means increasing their chances of
gaining permanent employment as the economy improves.
To become a truly competitive nation we must ensure that our workforce is adequately
educated and trained, and able to adapt to the needs of an evolving economy.
We must also recognise that in some cases it is appropriate to devise special policies or
programs which encourage people to look for work.
One such group is women with young children.
The level of women's participation in the labour market is remarkable: it ' has doubled in
the post-war period, and is now increasing at a faster rate than men's. 
These measures move child care into the 21st century.
8
The future growth of the Australian economy and the living standards of Australians will
benefit from the participation of women in the workforce.
But there are barriers to this.
For the more than 50 per cent of women with children under 12 in the workforce, child
care is a paramount concern.
Since 1983 we have increased the number of child care places more than four-fold, and
our program of fee relief has made child care affordable for low and middle income
families. Nevertheless almost two-thirds of working women who use child care use informal care,
often because they are unable to find, or afford, places in the formal child care system.
It is time we began to treat the needs of working parents with the same seriousness as
education or aged care.
It is time we faced up to the implications of child care as an employment related program
and recognised that it is a cost necessarily incurred by parents in the earning of income.
In recognition of this we have decided both to greatly expand our child care program and
to fundamentally reform its design.
First, we will dramatically increase the number of funded places with the aim of meeting
projected demand for work-related child care by the year 2001. We have set an interim
goal of meeting 84 per cent of demand by 1997.
Second, in recognition of the high cost of care, we will introduce a 30 per cent cash rebate,
in addition to existing fee relief arrangements, for all families using child care while in
employment, training, studying or looking for work.
This cash rebate, which will be claimable through Medicare offices, is vastly superior to a
tax rebate. The amount received will depend on child care expenses actually paid, and not
on how much tax is paid. And unlike a tax rebate which can only be claimed once a year,
parents will be able to collect their cash rebate as often as once a week.
The maximum cash rebate will be $ 1466 a year for one child, or $ 3182 a year for two or
more children.
-1Tdijto ensure that-child-careis safe and secure,. and that it provides children with a
stimulating envirornent, we have decided to introduce a system of national accreditation
of child care centres. 
Taken with other child care initiatives outlined in the Statement, they mean that Australia
becomes the first nation to put together a coherent and integrated program which caters to
the needs of the working parents.
It is a program to be proud of, and one that I hope will make the often stressful job of
juggling work and family responsibilities easier for working parents.
Ladies and gentlemen
As said before, today's Statement is modest in size. It will add $ 692 million to the
Budget in 1993-94, declining to $ 387 million by 1996-97.
We will achieve these modest costs principally by reorganising company tax
arrangements and reducing our holding in the Commonwealth Bank to 51 per cent.
We remain committed to maintaining a majority stake in the bank. We think there is a
place in the banking system for a majority Government -owned major bank.
Ladies and gentlemen
It remains to urge you to read the Statement. It contains much more than it is convenient
for me to talk about just now.
The salient thing is this. The Australian economy undoubtedly has in it the potential for
growth. Being close to the most rapidly growing markets in the world offers a potential we have
never known before. Already new Australian companies have emerged to seize the
chance. The Asia-Pacific region is one great advantage. Much that we have done here, as these
new companies testify, has created a number of others.
Having a robust democratic system, a broad consensus on the need for social justice,
including justice in the labour market, and believing as we do in social improvement gives
us an even greater advantage. It gives us both strength and incentive.
My belief is that these things must never be threatened that we will not make progress of
any kind by subjecting these values to attack.
GXood policy-freats -the economy and -society. in concert.
Today, I believ q, is an example of good policy. 
4. What we propose for the Australian company should help create levels of energy and
excellence we have rarely if ever seen in our history companies suited to the
opportunities available.
It should liberate the private sector for growth and employment.
By our radical improvements to our child care system we also recognise the social needs
which change creates.
That is the essential thing radical change where it is necessary, but always sensitive to
social needs and our social goals. 



01/ 09 * 94 13: 43#&amp; 06 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE 2002/ 011
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIONAL AGENDA FOR WOMEN
BANKSTOWN TOWN HALL, SYDNEY
FEBRUARY 1993
Distinguished Guests
including the Mayor of Bankstown
Ministerial and Parliamentary Colleagues
Ladies and Gentlemen
I am very pleased to have an opportunity to address a great gathering of women so
early in the election campaign.
Of course, when this event to launch the New National Agenda for Women was
first planned, none of us knew it would take place during a campaign. Even I
didn't know!
But in fact it makes very little difference.
The thoughts I want to share with you today are not campaign-driven.
would have delivered the same speech had this launch been held two weeks ago.
But I nevertheless appreciate having the chance to address the women of Australia
in this election context because I suspect my remarks will get greater media
coverage than they otherwise might.
And I'm pleased about that.
T'here are things I want to talk about today which I know are very important to
women in this country, and it is important to me that as many women as possible
get to hear about them.
What brings us together today is the New National Agenda for Women the
government's approach to striving for true equality between the sexes by year
2000. 
PM PRESS OFFICE
01/ 09 * 94 13: 44 VB06 273 2923PM RSSOFC
2
It is a document that sets parameters rather than laying down a step-by-step
approach. It identifies the issues Australian women care most deeply about and thus provides
all Australians with guidance about how we should proceed in order that women
may participate fully in all areas of our society.
The framing of the document says a lot about how we in the Labor Party approach
important issues such as these.
The document is truly a democratic one.
In order to find out what women thought about the issues and problems facing
women today we listened, naturally enough, to the National Women's Consultative
Council and the many other women's organisations which last year participated in
a day-long " Renewal Forum" on the Agenda.
But we did more than that. We also listen to women who do not beong to
organisations and do not have a voice when documents such as National Agendas
are drawn up.
We commissioned research which sought the opinions of ordinary Australian
women.
We talked with waitresses, cleaners, primary school teachers, shop assistants,
mothers at home, office workers.
We asked them how they felt about their lives and we also asked them what they
thought of government programs meant to benefit them.
What they told us was not exactly what we hoped to hear.
Many of them felt that governments, state and federal, were not responsive to their
problems and needs.
We learned a lot about what women today are thinking and feeling and we took it
very seriously.
We already knew how concerned women ( and men) were about unemployment.
How they feel for those without jobs, and how they worry about maybe losing
their own.
We already knew this, but we had it reinforced for us. [ it003/ 0I 1 
Z004/ 011I
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 45 '&amp; 06 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE
3
We are doing what we can to confront the realities of unemployment.
We are providing a social net to ease the hardship.
We are providing as many training opportunities as we can.
Above all, as I outlined yesterday in my statement " Investing in the Nation" 1we
are doing all we can to create growth.
We learned something else from listening to Australian women.
We learned that women are very likely to make distinctions between the issues
that are important to them as Australians as citizens, if you like and those that
are important to them as women.
And it is on those latter issues that I would like to spend some time this morning.
There were three areas women unanimously nominated as being of pressing
concern to them; these were child-care, violence against women and women's
health. Before I set out how we intend to respond to these three subjects, I think it is worth
reflecting on changes that have occurred in the lives of women and men but
especially women over recent decades.
In fact if we look back over the past hundred years, we can take enormous pride in
a record of progress and achievement in the area of women's rights ( as they used to
be called) which very early on earned Australia a reputation as a world leader.
Next year all Australians will join South Australians in celebrating their women's
suffrage centenary.
South Australia was the first state to give Australian women the vote at a time
when New Zealand and two of the United States were the only places in the world
to do so.
Australia continues to set the pace for other democracies when it comes to status of
women issues.
Recently the International Labour Organisation singled out Australia's
achievement in reducing the gap between women's and men's wages.
Under our centralised wage fixing system, and with the protection of awards,
women's earnings are now 93 per cent of men's. 
L1005/ 011I
01/ 09 * 94 13: 45 ' 06 273 2923P~ l PRESS OFFICE
4
In countries like the US and Japan, without such protection, women still earn only
around 70 cents for every dollar men take home.
And the important point is, that contrary to the dire predictions when equal pay
was first put into awards, even though women in Australia are paid relatively more
in relation to men than women in most countries, their employment prospects have
not suffered.
On the contrary, growth in female employment has been exceptionally fast in
Australia. In the past ten years the number of women in the labour force has increased by
almost 40 per cent.
What has happened in Australia over the past decade has been a unique partnership
between the women's movement and the Labor Government, a partnership that has
achieved much of which we both can be proud.
Without it, we would not have our pioneering record of legislative achievements
like the Sex Discrimination Act and the Affirmative Action law.
Nor would 77 per cent of girls stay at school until Year 12. In 1982 only 40 per
cent did.
We can be proud that more than 52 per cent of enrolments in higher education now
are women, up from 46 per cent in 1982.
And that more women are being elected to public office and I see many of
Labor's federal and state parliamentarians here today, as well as quite a few who I
hope will be joining us in Canberra after March 13!
Indeed, when we talk about the dramatic changes in women's lives over the past
century, we must not overlook the even more rapid pace of change just over the
past decade.
Indeed the 1980s may well turn out to be the time when the revolution in women's
lives passed that point of no return, that point at which women decided they liked
their new found freedom and opportunities and had no intention whatsoever of
giving them up.
This certainly was the virtually unanimous view of the women who participated in
the research described earlier.
These women, no matter what their age, their education, their marital or maternal
status or their present circumstances, were totally agreed on one thing: they were
better off than their mothers had been. 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 47 ' 1&amp; 06 273 2923 PM PPREESSOSF COFFICE
They valued the choices women have today, including the greater economic
independence more and more women have.
Even though many women felt they paid a price in terms of the stresses involved in
trying to juggle their various roles and responsibilities, they wouldn't turn back the
clock for anything.
I sense that many women today have an enthusiasm for their lives and the
opportunities that are available to them that earlier generations lacked.
An event like today's is a case in point.
A day to think about the issues that as women you care about.
I'm not overlooking the men in the audience and I thank them for coming so that
I'm not the only male here today! but today is a day for women to take particular
pride in.
And a day to remember as the one when we decided to do something about many
of those issues.
Yesterday I released a major economic statement which contained, among other
things, a number of important initiatives on child care.
I included those initiatives in that statement, rather than the very tempting option
of " saving them up" for today, because think it is time that child-care was
included amongst our mainstream economic issues.
Child care should be treated with the same seriousness as education or aged care.
The time is long past, as far as I am concerned, where child care was tagged as " a
woments issue"~ or a " welfare issue" and only attracted the crumbs from the table
where the budget banquet was enjoyed.
I know how paramount an issue child-care is for women.
Without it, mothers have little choice about employment or study or training.
It really is the gate-way to choice, and to independence.
That is why have decided to give child-care such a big budget boost, to ensure it
is never again starved for funds.
For the first time in the history of child care policy we have addressed both the big
picture and the smaller details. L1 006/ 011 
01/ 09 * 94 13: 48 *&amp; 06 273 2923PM RESOFC 1O/ OI
6
We have addressed the three big questions of supply, affordability and quality.
We have also dealt with the smaller but no less important issues of arrangements
for sick kids, playgroups, and wholesale sales tax and Fringe Benefits Tax
exemptions for child care.
As I said yesterday at the National Press Club: these measures move child care into
the 21st century.
We as a nation can afford good child-care and the time has come to provide it.
At the same time, we need to recognise that women's child-care needs are neither
uniform nor identical.
T1here are new choices and new patterns in women's lives today.
Many women are choosing to stay home while their children are young, although
most will return to the labour market at some time in the future.
The point is, though, that policy needs to recognise and respond to these patterns.
It is no longer good enough, if ever it was, to say that any given woman is either in
the workforce or in the home.
Chances are these days, over the course of her lifetime, she will spend periods of
time doing both.
But during her period at home she is entitled to an acknowledgment and respect
that perhaps was not always forthcoming in the past.
At the same time, women at home often can do with some practical assistance.
The increased funds we have allocated to playgroups, and the occasional care
places will help provide a break for women at home while they shop or go to the
doctor. In time, I hope we might be able to take other measures to assist women caring for
children at home.
Perhaps the most sobering message to have come from our consultations and our
research was the level of fear felt by women in Australia as a result of violence on
the streets and in the home.
I find such violence appalling and intolerable. P51 PRESS OFFICEQ007/ 011 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 49 ' BY06 273 2923 PMI PRESS OFFICE
7
As a society we must do all that we can to eradicate it, but we also need to be
realistic and to recognise that we need to provide safe havens for women and
children while we work through ways to make this country less violent.
Today I announce several measures to this end.
Upon re-election, we will establish a referral program in each state for women
escaping domestic violence in rural and remote areas.
This special program would provide practical help to women and children in
remote areas in the form of a 008 phone number to call for help, and payment of
transport to escape violent situations.
We will also extend the life of the National Committee on Violence Against
Women. Late last year the Committee produced a highly praised report, the National
Strategy on Violence Against Women, and I believe that the work of this
Committee in maintaining a national focus on this issue is too important for it to
be disbanded.
Like many others, I was recently shocked to read that a judge, during a sexual
assault trial, had explicitly condoned the use of violence by a man against his wife.
I do not believe that reflects current community attitudes.
It is intolerable that women should continue to suffer prejudice or injustice of this
kind in our courts or anywhere else.
I am pleased to inform you that earlier this week, just before the Parliament was
prorogued, my colleague Michael Duffy the Attorney -General, took an initiative
which I trust will be the first step in ending such unfair and archaic attitudes
We are committed to ensuring Australia's laws and legal practices reflect changing
community attitudes and, to this end, the Attorney has asked the Australian Law
Reform Commission to report to him on ways of ensuring equality before the law.
Justice Elizabeth Evatt will head this inquiry.
Her widespread legal experience within Australia and internationally makes her a
most appropriate person to conduct this report.
I look forward to her Interim Report later this year.
am also able to inform you that the government has provided funds to the
Australian Institute of Judicial Administration to develop courses for magistrates 200O8/ 01 I
I 
LIMj009/ 0l 1.
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 50 * a06 273 2923PM1 PRESS OFFICE
8
and judges to help them identify prejudices that might impact on their judicial
conduct towards women.
' This program is to be developed by a Committee headed by Justice Deidre
O'Connor, President of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
The third issue singled out as being of greatest concern to women was their health.
The Labor Government has had a good record in initiatives in women's health.
Overall, we have allocated $ 123 million to health services specifically for women,
especially in the area of prevention of breast and cervical cancer.
Today Brian Howe, the Minister for Health, informed me that the National
Women's Health Program will continue for a further 12 months at the current level
of resourcing.
He has also developed a National Osteoporosis Policy to meet the concerns of
women whose family history suggests they might be at risk of osteoporosis by
providing a Medicare rebate for a bone density test.
In an important, and unprecedented, step Mr Howe has also decided to institute a
major longitudinal study into women's health.
For too long, we have assumed that health studies did not need to be gender
specific. The result has been that we know very little about the medium and long term
effects on women's health of, for instance, the contraceptive pill or Hormone
Replacement Therapy.
Special studies of women of different ages will teach us a great deal and, in time,
give us a far greater understanding of the health needs of women at various stages
of biological development than we presently possess.
Finally, two measures to increase women's political and economic participation in
our society.
I know that some of the major women's organisations are concerned that women
workers might be disadvantaged by the enterprise agreements and workplace
bargains that are the new prototype for industrial relations.
Let me take a moment to state here that I am categorically opposed to the
reduction in women's wages that the Coalition's abolition of penalty rates would
cause. 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 51 % Y06 273 2923 P RS FIE~ 1/ l
9
And of course it is mostly the lowest paid women who would suffer, the waitresses
and shop assistants and hospital cleaners who are dependent on penalties to boost
their earnings.
But professionals like nurses would also have their earnings savaged.
I have seen figures that suggest that a RN Level I with one year's experience
working two ten-hour weekend shifts would lose $ 155.13 of her current total
wage of $ 403.33 if penalties were abolished.
This is unconscionable.
Making hard working and low paid women bear the brunt of Dr Hewson's IR
experiments. We will do everything in our power to ensure such women are protected.
We will spend $ 1 million to establish Working Women's Centres, initially in four
states, to provide advice and assistance to women on workplace issues, especially
on enterprise bargaining and access to training.
I hope these centres can be up and running soon after we are re-elected because,
with the Liberals gaining power in several states, women are going to need them.
I want to conclude by making one final announcement, one that I hope will be well
received by today's audience.
For too long the major women's organisations in Australia have had to struggle
along 0on paltry amounts of funding.
It is time to enable women's organisations to operate with the same
professionalism and expertise afforded to conservation, ethnic and other
organisations by dint of their receiving more realistic levels of funding.
I propose to increase the program of operational grants for women's organisations
to $ 1 million a year, a more appropriate amount in view of the important work
your organisations undertake on behalf of women.
The new National Agenda is an achievement of which we can all be proud.
It is a non-partisan document, one that sets out to articulate the various aspirations
of Australian women today.
Perhaps the overriding aspiration is the one that is expressed by the document's
title: Shaping and Sharing the Future. PM PRESS OFFICE9010/ 011 
01/ 09 ' 94 13: 52' 06 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE
This title came to us from the women we talked to. It was their expression of their
desire to be part of the nation we are forging together.
While they and we recognise that often special programs are required to meet
special needs, at the same time all of us, women and men, want to join together
making a richer and fairer future for us all. Z011/ 011 



4,
PRIME MINISTER19/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF SOLOMON ISLANDS
I am pleased to announce that the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands, the
Hon Francis Hilly, will be visiting Australia from 11-18 March as a guest of the
Australian government. He will visit Brisbane, the Gold Coast, Sydney and
Cairns, as well as Canberra. Prime Minister Hilly will be accompanied by his
wife, Mrs Fiona Hilly.
Australia has a long-standing and warm relationship with Solomon Islands,
one of our closest neighbours. Prime Minister Hilly's visit will provide an
opportunity to discuss ways in which we can build on this solid foundation in
the years ahead. Australia will provide $ 11 million in development assistance
to the Solomon Islands in 1993/ 4. We also have an active bilateral defence
co-operation program.
Prime Minister Hilly will be keen to explore the scope for expanding Solomon
Islands exports to Australia. To this end, he is accompanied on the visit by a
delegation from the Solomon Islands business community. At present,
bilateral trade is weighted heavily in Australia's favour.
My discussions with Prime Minister Hilly will also focus on regional issues of
mutual interest, particularly the 25th South Pacific Forum, which Australia will
host in Brisbane in August.
CANBERRA 11 FEBRUARY 1994 



I I. ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
BEST7 PRACTICE AND WORKPLACE BARGAINING, INTERNATIONAL
BEST PRACTICE CONFERENCE, SYDNEY, 15 FEBRUARY 1993
There are people who say this country is not performing, that we are not making progress,
that if we keep going the way we're going we haven't a future.
Those people are not here today.
There are people who think that the way through the difficulties we still face lie in
radically regressive labour market policies.
There are people who think that the way to get the best out of your business is to knock
the stuffing out of your workers.
Those people are not here today.
There are people who think that Australian companies can never compete with the best in
the world.
Those people are not here today. And, today, if they were, they would not take up much
room. The people who are here today have proved that Australian companies can be as good as
any in the world; that our business leaders and managers have the will and the
wherewithal to compete with the best, that our workforce has the skills and the spirit to
do it, and that our industrial relations culture has the capacity to encourage and support
change while protecting everybody's interests.
This is the heart of the argument about Australia. This is where we succeed or fail in the
effort to be a great trading nation, a nation which can make and sell abroad the products
6290 
2
of our labour. our skills, and our imagination. This is where our ability to secure our
future will be determined.
Don't let anyone talk this country down. Australia is succeeding, and succeeding more
rapidly than any of us ever imagined was possible.
Let me start with a few numbers quite startling numbers. There are now more than 700
enterprise agreements registered with the Industrial Relations Commission.
These agreements now cover thirty per cent of all Australian employees under federal
awards.
That's in just 7 months since the Parliament passed the new legislation which encourages
the making of these single enterprise agreements which improve flexibility and
productivity. We have agreements in the construction industry, in banking, tourism, manufacturing and
the public sector.
Our industrial structure is rapidly changing, too. Australian manufacturing industry is
coming alive.
Manufacturing output is up by 25 per cent over the last decade.
Manufacturing productivity has increased at twice the rate for the economy as a whole.
In recent years our international competitiveness in manufacturing has increased more
rapidly than all but two of twenty three countries surveyed by the OECD.
We can see the results in the dramatic increase in manufacturing exports. They have
tripled over the decade, and manufacturing exports now match rural exports.
Over the last two or three years high technology manufacturing exports have been
growing faster than any other an average increase of 20 per cent a year.
For me, as no doubt for a lot of you, this is all tantalisingly suggestive of a dream come
true. In the 1970s I remember only too clearly being told that Australia could not be both a
successful exporter of raw materials and farm products, and a successful exporter of
manufactures. It was the prevailing wisdom of the ruling Coalition parties. It had long been an
Australian mind set. ( 3291 
3
1 remember thinking, as I'm sure some of you did: if this is true, how do we account for
the greatest manufacturing country on earth? How do we account for the United States?
In fact, it soon became clear, to me, not only that we could become a modem
manufacturing nation, and ani exporting nation, but that we had to. To preserve our way
of life, to seize our chances in the world, we had to.
More than anything else, that is what the last decade has been about. Changing the
prevailing wisdom. Changing our goals and the way we do things. Changing the stature
and identity of Australia in the world.
We have proved we can be both. In fact, we've proved we can do even better that we
can be a successful exporter of commodities and high tech manufactures and a successful
exporter of services.
Some of the numbers are so startling we've doubted they could be true but they are:
exports of office machinery and data processing have increased forty fold over the last
decade. exports of metal working machinery have increased 135 per cent over the last three
years. electrical machinery exports by 100 per cent.
motor vehicle exports by 73 per cent.
We have the enterprise agreements, we have the birth of successful export manufacturing,
and we have them both in an environment which allows us to get on with the job.
We have the lowest levels of industrial disputes for thirty years.
We have the lowest inflation we've seen for thirty years.
Two of the biggest problems we have had over the last 30 years have been beaten.
And both have gone because of the Accord.
Professor Bluestone remarks in his book Negotiating the Future that " teamwork,
co-operation and mutual trust are in; adversarialism is out" o.
Professor, you're right: and in this neck of the woods it's been on its way out for some
time. mean in both the wide industrial relations system and in the workplace. 
We camne out of the early 1980s recession with inflation running at 11.5 per cent. We are
coming out this time with inflation under 2 per cent. Industrial disputes today are
running at less than half the level of the early eighties.
We've emerged from the recession, with advantages we've never had before. But we'ye
also emerged with unemployment which is far too high.
All our efforts in the past year have been directed at curtailing unemployment. In the
One Nation Statement just on a year ago, in the Youth Employment Statement, the
Budget, and in the Statement last week, we introduced programs to assist the
unemployed, and to get a level of growth in the economy which alone will substantially
reduce the number of those out of work.
We got growth last year. Not enough, but more than virtually any other OECD country,
and the consensus of international forecasters in the Economist ast week was that we
would grow faster than virtually any other in the next year.
That is cause for hope. We're going to put all our efforts in the next three years to getting
that number down: to creating employment, and training people for jobs.
Unemployment is a matter of immense regret. But it won't be solved by mere
incantations of sentiment, or by the recital of hollow promises and so called " plans".
What the exports numbers, and the manufacturing output numbers, and the workplace
reform numbers, and the disputes and inflation numbers are telling us is that we are
heading the right way.
If we can accelerate the growth we will beat unemployment. This is the only way we will
do it: This, and by continuing attention to education and training to labour market
programs and by a sure knowledge understanding of where we are going, and faith in
our ability to get there.
The last thing we need, and the last thing that is justified, is a counsel of despair.
We are heading the right way, and if we keep going we can finish up with a country that
is not only a wonderful place to live, not only a good place to bring up kids, not only a
fair and decent and democratic society, but also one of the most dynamic and successful
economies in the world.
The Best Practice program run by Peter Cook and his Department provides outstanding
examples of the progress we are making and the reason why Australians should believe in
their capacity to succeed.
The Best Practice program is a way of giving recognition to companies that are doing
good things, so that other companies can learn by their example. 6293 
The program selects the best in management, industrial relations, and performance.
There are some outstanding examples. In 1985, the Australian Newsprint Mills plant at
Boyer was about to close. But management and the employees worked together on a plan
to turn the mill around.
Today productivity has improved by around 25 per cent and the mill is fast becoming
internationally competitive.
Then there is the paint maker, Dulux, at its Clayton in Victoria. Its reform program has
included installing leading edge technology, a Total Quality Management program, selfmanaged
work teams, extensive training and development programs and workplace
agreements which also guarantee employee participation in raising productivity.
As a result the proportion of orders delivered in full and on time has more than doubled
from 43 per cent to 95 per cent over the last three years, process time per batch of paint
has been cut by more than one third, and productivity is up by one quarter.
Other companies have chosen international benchmarking comparing their plant's
performance against the best plants in the world.
Australia's largest manufacturer of prefabricated timber wall frames and roof trusses,
Sterlands Pty Ud, benchmarked against Japanese standards.
It has cut its re-work costs by one third at its Gosford plant, and improved productivity
by 15 per cent. A few months ago they recorded their highest single months sales figure
in the 74 year history of the company.
Mobil's petroleum refinery in Adelaide was so successful in benchmarking it has now
become a benchmark itself for plants in the US and France.
Theme are countless examples throughout Australia of the quiet revolution that is
transforming our workplaces, our industrial structure and our exports.
A recent report of McKinsey and Company paints an extraordinary picture of 700
brilliantly successful small to medium sized Australian businesses. 700 companies
exporting to the tune of $ 8.6 billion per annum, and growing at a rate which will double
that figure in five years.
Of course there is always a close link between improving the industrial processes and
improving industrial relations. In the end the employees have to be willing participants
in reform or it just won't work.
An example is Sheraton Pacific Hotels which reached a workplace agreement for its
Sheraton Towers Southgate Hotel in Melbourne which is a model for the entire tourist
G) 2 9I4 
industry. It showed you could have a flexibility and productivity improvements by
employees and management working together to rearrange the award conditions.
These companies are showing the way: employees and employers jointly seeking
productivity improvements and sharing their value.
It is no accident that the question of industrial relations will be crucial in the forthcoming
election. It will be crucial in determining our future success and prosperity; because the quality of
industrial relations is becoming much more important as the whole world shifts to new
patterns of production and trade.
Today competitiveness and the wealth of nations is not determined so much by the
amount of capital or technology a country possesses, since they are both very easily
transferred. It is not determined so much by the amount of raw resources a country possesses, since
these are widely available and relatively cheap.
It is determined more and more by the quality of the workforce by the basic education,
the training, the skills, the flexibility and adaptability of employees, and the quality of the
relationships between employers and employees.
These are things we can't borrow, can't buy, can't import, can't dig up.
We have to create wealth together, Government and the people.
And this is an area in which we are becoming stronger.
For a decade we have run an Accord with the ACTU which now has as its fundamental
basis the idea that wages increases will be consistent with staying competitive against our
trade partners.
In the Accord we talk the issues through, so that we know the problems employees face,
and union representatives know the problems of governments.
There is now less reason for industrial disputes.
There is more understanding that we are all better off as inflation comes down.
There is more confidence that all Australians can benefit from change, and that one group
won't be able to rip off the benefit for itself.
Under the Accord enterprise bargaining is becoming the centrepiece of industrial
relations. 6295 
Over 700 agreements is a good start, but it's only a start. In coming years we want all but
a small fraction of the workforce covered by enterprise-related agreements.
We want to see the agreements becoming more and more comprehensive.
We want to see most decisions about wages and work arrangements made at the
workplace level between employers, and employees and their representatives.
We want to see a situation in which the Industrial Relations Commission continues with a
valuable role in settling disputes in conciliating, in deciding housekeeping issues like
union coverage, and in keeping in good repair the safety net of award minimums over
which bargaining will take place but making few and fewer decisions about actual
wages for most people.
You notice that I mention a safety net of awards and a role for the Industrial Relations
commission and a role for employees representatives unions.
These make a very important distinction between the track we are on, and the track the
Opposition wants to take.
Their commitment is to the complete abolition of awards.
But these awards are the safety net which assure employees that bargains can be made in
good faith, and in the knowledge that they can't be ripped off.
The Opposition not only wants to cancel awards.
When the award is abolished they will declare that each and every employee formerly
covered by an award is now covered by an individual contract.
The employees won't have any say in that.
They will wake up one morning, and they will no longer be on an award.
Each individual will be on an individual contract with the boss. If they don't like the
contract, or don't like any changes the boss wants to make in it, they can take the sack.
Under these common law contracts there is no such thing as unjust dismissal.
If you got a day's pay or a week's pay with your dismissal notice, that's it that's the
beginning and end of an employer's obligation.
I see today Dr Hewson saying that the system he proposes " provides workers with the
opportunity to get higher wages, more job security and more flexibility. It replaces the
' them' and ' us' features of the present system with a togetherness approach", he says.
6296 
Well, one could take pleasure in this, I suppose: to have one's opponents at last see the
light one has been shining for a decade.
If only there was reason to think that they believe it.
But, in fact, this willingness on the part of the Opposition to use language which
completely contradicts the substance of their ideology and their policies really should be
exposed for the shallow deceit that it is.
As far as industrial relations is concerned, there is perhaps no more effective antidote than
the simple memory of Jeff Kennett's pre-election cant in Victoria.
The Opposition system is not set up to reach collective agreements between the employer
and all the employees at a workplace, but to switch instead to individual contracts.
It is not work place bargaining. It's all one way. And if it's all one way, we lose the
participation the incentives to work together collectively which alone can transform
the work place.
I think that is the wrong track the low wage track, the track which belittles Australians
in their working lives.
But the best industrial relations in the world is not enough to guarantee our
competitiveness and our success in coming decades.
If we are to have the best trained and most competitive workforce in the most competitive
region in the world we need to do a lot more.
We also need strong, active and determined Government.
We need to keep up the effort on education, training and retraining and that's what we
are doing.
WVe need assured and affordable child care so that we can fully use the accumulated skills
and experience of women in the workforce and that's what we are providing.
That's why we will introduce a 30 per cent rebate of child care fees for working parents,
in addition to the fees we already pay for working parents on low incomes.
We need strong basic science and research and development to continue enhancing our
productivity and facilitating the change in our industrial structure.
We are doing that too, and given that last year Australia recorded the highest growth rate
in business research and development spending in the OECD over the last decade, so is
Australian business. 6297 
We need to give companies the financial incentives to save, invest and innovate and we
are doing that with our investment tax credits and the big cut in company tax we
announced last week.
This is the track which will strengthen our future as a high skill-high wage country.
This is the track we want to be on over the next three years and the rest of the decade.
There is no future in knocking down wages and conditions, or forcing employees to take
the contract or take the sack; any more than there is a future in going into the drudge
industries the rest of the world is leaving behind.
And it doesn't make these policies any more desirable to couch them in the language of
" togetherness"
I do not believe that a fifteen per cent tax on water, gas, electricity and phone bills, a
fifteen per cent tax on rail fares and bus fares and taxi fares, a fifteen per cent tax on
motels and hotels and meals out, a fifteen per cent tax on swimming lessons for our
children and on meals from their tuckshop, a fifteen per cent tax on shoes and clothes and
haircuts, on books, pens and pencils, a fifteen per cent tax on paint and wallpaper and
timber and building materials, a fifteen per cent tax on hamburgers and piza and
milkshakes, a fifteen per cent tax on everything in the shops except food on
toothbrushes, tissues, tampons, talcum powder, nappies I fail to see how this will bring
us together at all.
Dr Hewson's GST threatens our inflation performance. It is unfair. It won't help create
jobs. The accounting nightmare it involves won't help small business either.
Nor do I think wrecking Medicare will help bring us together.
The Coalition Health Policy has been written by the doctors, for the doctors.
If Dr Hewson were to be elected he would put us on the road to a US-style health system.
We have a system where everyone is assured of high quality health care on the basis of
medical need and where 70 per cent of visits to the doctor are free to the patient. The
entire system costs 8 per cent of GDP.
The US system has none of the universal benefits and costs 15 per cent of GDP.
There was a New YorkTime story the Other day which described how a man went to jail
for seven months in Louisiana because his friend falsely claimed he had private medical
insurance to get him into casualty in hospital. His friend had a crushed vertebrae. He got
a bill for S41,000 which the insurer wouldn't pay. His friend went to jail too, because he
gave the injured man his insurance card.
6298 
I don't think anyone wants to see a health system of this kind in Australia, and I think it is
a very good thing that President Clinton is determined to adopt a different system one
more like our own.
I do not believe a US style health system will help togetherness one bit. don't believe it
will make us stronger or give us a greater sense of common purpose.
I don't believe scrapping our award system and putting every employee in this country on
an individual contract will serve this purpose either.
We are showing now with enterprise bargains that we can make the system extremely
flexible; it can give us productivity gains, and give them along with most wages
increases through negotiations workplace by workplace.
Not only is there no economic gain in the Opposition alternative there is a great'social
loss. There is a price which one day must be paid. When employees know that they either take
the contract or take the sack, their dignity as well as their livelihood is threatened. They
arc belittled.
Far from the spirit of togetherness which Dr Hewson has recently begun to extol, we will
have the rancour and Iconflict of a decade ago.
Far from speeding the transformation of our workplaces, the process will be derailed.
Far from advancing the cause of Australia, these policies will stall it. We Will go
backwards. These policies were tried in other countries in the eighties and from that experience there
can be no mistake: they will change the character of Australia in ways which are hostile
to human dignity and entirely alien to our traditions of fairness and equity.
These three things, these three promises of the Opposition a 15 per cent tax on goods
and services, scrapping Medicare, and scrapping awards to put everyone on individual
contracts, are their kapolicies.
They are the solutions ( hey offer to our problems.
The Opposition is saying: we don't have any brilliant ideas on how to help our trade
performance or reduce unemployment and foreign debt, but, I'll tell you what, we'll give
you a 15 per cent tax on goods and services, we'll scrap your awards, and we'll scrap your
universal health system.
These are their brilliant ideas to impose a GST, scrap awards and scrap Medicare. 6299 
11
Thecn, they say, everything will be tine. These policies are not peripheral or additional to
their so-called " plan". They are the " plan".
[ f employees resist the impact of the 15 per cent goods and services tax on their wages,
we stand to lose over the next decade all the increased competitiveness we have acquired
over the last few years.
If we eliminate Medicare and the award system and impose a 15 per cent tax on goods
and services, what do we expect will happen to wages and inflation?
Certainly, sonmc wages and benefits will be cut. Many women will be worse off. Service
workers will be worse off. Young people will be worse off.
But in the factories and mines and construction projects of this country you will see
industrial war.
I can't think of a worse mix, a more lethal combination for this economy and for our
success in trade than to whack on a 15 per cent goods and services tax, cancel awards and
scrap Medicare, and at the same time cut the Reserve Bank loose and tell it to forget
everything else except keeping inflation under 2 per cent.
But even more fundamentally, policies of this kind put at risk the whole basis of
consensus and cooperation which has allowed us to successfully and radically restructure
ourselves. It remains to say the most important thing of all: and that is congratulations
congratulations to all of you who have been involved in the development of Best Practice
in Australia, and particularly to those companies who have committed themselves to Best
Practice. You are the pioneers of the new Australia. What you do is both the wellspring and the
measure of our achievement and our hope.
So I congratulate you all I know you will keep up the good work and please let no
one halt our progress.
Thank you.
6300 



II,
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TOYOTA AUSTRALIA LINE-OFF CEREMONY
PORT MELBOURNE 16 FEBRUARY 1993
Obviously this is a great day for the Australian car industry. We are here because
Toyota is here for the long haul.
It means1jobs. Long-term good jobs for Australians.
It means another step has been taken in the development Of world-class manufacturing
in Australia. It means another step in the integration of our economy wVith the world's,
and more especially with the region and Japan.
It means that the long relationship between Toyota and Australia continues to prosper
and grow. This is good for us. Toyota is, without doubt, one of the great companies of
the world. It is renowned for innovation, reliability and perfection.
Yesterday I spoke at the Best Practice and Benchrnarking Conference in Sydney. It
goes without saying that Toyota is a benchmark for any company in the world.
It is therefore automatically of great benefit to our manufacturing industry to have
Toyota here and expanding.
Of course the outstanding advantage for Australia in the present economic climate is
that Toyota's investment means long-term jobs for Australians.
Everyone here will be aware that it is my Government's great ambition to increase the
level of-investment -in Australia.
It is the most effective remedy for unemployment, indeed the only answer to the
entirely unacceptable levels of unemployment. we presently have.
6364 
2
That is why last Tuesday we announced that we will be cutting thecornany tax rate in
Australia from 39 per cent to 33, to make us competitive not only with OECDi
economics but with the economics of the Asia Pacific.
It was for the same purpose that we introduced a new investment allowance.
We are determined to bring forward the S130 billion worth of projects currently
claiming the allowance granted in the One Nation statement of twelve months ago.
We are also determined to get new investment going, particularly among small
companies of the kind surveyed in the recent McKinsey Company Report to the
Australian Manufacturing Council.
Small to medium sized companies charactrnsed by dynamic leadership, innovation,
attention to excellence, successful niche marketing and, no less, highly productive and
skilled workplaces.
There is no-one in this country, I should think, who does not recognise that we are
embarked on a course to become a successful, modern manufacturing nation.
I should think there is no--one who does not know that our way of life depends on it.
Equally, we know that our success in manufacturing. and in exporting the things we
design and make depends on new levels . of productivity.
We will not succeed by employing old patterns of production.
High levels of productivity, by definition, means fewer people making more and better
things. It follows that the answer to unemployment is growth a proliferation of
manufacturing effort and expertise. The key! 9ogrowth is investment..
won't today go into the details of the investment strategy we launched last week. But
I do want to talk about two broad related elements of Labor policy.
We take the view that Australia needs a car industry, and we believe that the car
industry in Australia needs an incentive to invest.
Dare I say it might come as a surprise to my opponents to learn that we in Australia are
not alone in the world in this.
We would be alone if we were to go to zero tariffs in the car industry.
We would be alone and without a car industry.
So let me say very plainly we are commnitted to a 15 per cent tariff for the Australian
car industry. 6365 
3
We are also committed, you will know, to that mode of workplace bargaining known
as enterprise agreements.
in this we also take a different view to the Coalition. But, surprisingly enough. I will
not expound on this today.
I do not feel the need to proselytise because this project is built on a model enterprise
agreement. An agreement signed in December 1991 with 6000 Toyota employees.
It's an agreement linked to obtaining international best practice, and delivering to the
company and its employees mutual advantages unimaginable under the old workplace
arrangements of Australian industry and Australian industrial relations.
Advantages, I venture to say, unattainable under any alternative scheme in which
relationships are adversarial or unequal.
700 new enterprise agreements have been entered into in the past seven months.
They seem to me, like this one, clear evidence that we can achieve high levels of
productivity, best practice, international benchmarks in other words the world-class
manufacturing industry we need through enterprise agreements such as these.
As I said in the speech in Sydney yesterday, what is unfolding in Australia now is
' something like the realisation of a long-held ambition.
I remember fifteen years or so ago, coming to the conclusion that the prevailing
wisdom about Australia was all wrong.
There was no need for us to always remain an exporter of commodities, with such
manufacturing as we had crumbling away behind giant tariff walls.
It seemed to me then that we could become a world-class manufacturer. It seemed to
me very soon after, that if we did not, we had no future. it seems to me now in fact
there is no doubt that we are becoming a world-class; manufacturer, and for that
reason there is no doubt about our future.
I could say a great deal more about the subject, but this is a day for Toyota's
management and workers to celebrate. There is doubtless much for Australians and
particuilarly the people of Melbourne to celebrate as well.
For my part, and for John Button's rm sure, there is some measure of satisfation in
having been involved in the creation of economic and industrial policy which has
yielded such results as this.
We are determined to continue the great drive to make Australia competitive in the
world and in the region.
We believe that the best way to do this is not by the imposition of a textbook blueprint
or strict adherence to economic theory, but by a range of measures designed to take
636C 
4
account of factors unique to Australia, to various industries and their comparative
advantages and disadvantages.
We want the most competitive industries it is possible to have.
But we are not prepared to have major industries disappear for the sake of some notion
of what constitutes pure theory.
-Economic ~ policvs not a death or glory game. It requires a measure of subtlety, a
recognition of differences, of the need for interventions.
We might begin by reminding ourselves at the outset that there is no competition
where there is no industry at all.
And it doesn't hurt also to remember that in the end we want industry because we want
secure, creative and rewarding employment for our people.
That is what this $ 400 million investment by Toyota is creating.
That, and further recognition that Australia has the investment climate and the
workforce to make it a place where the best companies in the world can thrive.
And those are reasons for all of us to celebrate today. 6367 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ABC AUSTRALIAN TELEVISION INTERNATIONAL
GORE HIL, SYDNEY
17 FEBRUARY 1993
EMB3ARGOED UNTIL 10.00 PM
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
T'his is an historic moment in our national life.
In the last few years Australians have heard a good deal about our need to go to Asia to
look to the Asia-Pacific, because that is where our great 2pportunity is. It is where our
future lies.
In the past twelve months the countries of the region have heard about it too. They know
that Australia is making the leap that we are siezing the moment.
The argument is an economic one and a geographic one. The Asia-Pacific is the
economic region closest to us. It operates within our time zone. It is the fastest growing
part of the world.
We have not just the raw materials, but the skills and services, the educators, and
increasingly the manufacturing, to become a dynamic partner in the region's growth.
Each month the success of our endeavours becomes more apparent. The Asia-Pacific and
particularly South-East Asia, is the destination for more and more Australian exports..
More and more Australian companies are finding markets in Asia.
And I might say, Asia is increasingly coming to Australia for goods and services
especially personal services.
6418 
2
I think it is true to say that even in the past twelve months our awareness of the Asian
opportunity has dramiatically expanded.
And in the same period, I know from my own travels, the countries of the region have
become more aware of our changed approach, and our new determination to successfully
do business.
The change is driven by a more fundamental change within Australia itself. This is a
much more complex and subtle society than it was a generofa 1 is a richer society,
more open and more worldly.
Australia's great achievement in the last generation has been the creation of a sophisticated
modern multicultural society. A society remarkable for both its diversity and its tolerance.
And this has made us stronger, more adaptable and creative.
We are now living through the second great change the change which will secure our
way of life and our standards of living for generations to come. That is the change to a
modem manufacturing society, integrated with the most dynamic region in the world
our own region.
I suppose no theme has quite so dominated the rhetoric of the past few years as this one.
But, in the last twelve months I have also had the opportunity to say from time to time that
our success in manufacturing and trade necessarily involves Australia's identity.
We will do best if we are confident, if we leave no doubt about who we are. We should be
projecting to the world the truth about Australia; this is a robust democracy, a society as
rich and diverse and unique as the continent itself. A people able to imagine what they
might be. Able to imagine their future in the region and the world. A creative people,
able to make things the world wants to buy. Able to deliver the information and services
which the world needs. Able to deliver the products of their imagination and culture.
That in essence, is the Australian identity in the 1990s and that is what the ABC is now
going to deliver.
As I said, this is an historic moment.
Great credit is due to Gareth Evans and Bob Collins. As good politicians and people of
imagination must, they pushed and cajoled and relentlessly persuaded others to get this
project through. I know they rankc it high among their many achievements, and so they
should. Credit must also go to Bruce Donald and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation for
bringing the project to fruition.
From now on the people of our region will be able to know us better, and that will make
all our other eforts that much easier. 6419 
Australian Television International will bring Australia and the South-East Asian region
significantly closer.
Tonight I am very happy to announce a new initiative with a similar and complementary
purpose. The Commonwealth Government has decided to conduct a study of the feasibility of
staging in Darwin a biennial festival of the region's indigenous arts and life sciences.
T'he festival would be created in conjunction with the Northern Terrtorv community and
private sector interests. Calling on the Territory's unique cultural strengths, location and
facilities including these new ATVI facilities the festival has the potential to become
one of the world's great cultural events.
As never before, it will provide a window onto the achievements and lifestyles the
genius, if you like of the peoples of the Asia-Pacific.
ibis initiative is more than symbolic of Australia's desire to engage with the region; it is
an example of how we can creatively engage.
So too, is the launch tonight of Australia Television International.
Once agin, it is my duty and my pleasure to congratulate everyone involved and on
behalf of the people of Australia, wish the venture every suces
Tonight we have taken another step along the road towards a closer relationship with the
region, and in so doing, another step towards the new Australia.
SYDNEY 17 February 1993
6420 



0 ' 1~
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
SOUTH AUSTRALIA'S DEBT AND PAYMENTS PROBLEM
Recognising that the Comnmonwealth's responsibility for the health and well being of the
national economy necessarily involves a concern for the economic and financial position of
the individual States, the Commonwealth has for some time been concerned that the debt
burden imposed on South Australia as a consequence of the actions of the State Bank of South
Australia has placed an extraordinary and unfair burden on the people of South Australia and
constrained the State in its ability to participate'in the economic recovery now underway.
The Prime Minister and the Premier have recognised that the debt burden imposed by the
SBSA goes beyond the capacity of South Australia to resolve without placing an undue
burden on the citizens of the State.
The Commonwealth Labor Government is prepared to providespecil financial assistance to
South Australia in order to help the State in reducing its current debt burden. This action is
consistent with decisions the Government has taken in recent years to assist Tasmania,
Northern Territory and Victoria.
The Keating Government is prepared to provide special assistance to South Australia of a net
present value of $ 600 million. This assistance will take the form of a combination of cash
grants and debt waivers over this year and the next two years and is conditional on the Bank
being sold.
In recognition of the Commonwealth's decision, the Premier will recommend:
I1. thi~ e 1of. tbe SBSAas quickly as practicable consistent with achieving a fair market
price.
2. that the SBSA be brought into the Commonwealth's tax net free of tax losses from 1
July 1994 or upon sale, whichever comes first and the State will make no further
claims
3. that all existing tax losses will be extinguished
4. that the SBSA be brought under the prudential supervision of the RBA no later than 1
64 16 January 1994 by legislation. 
South Australia has indicated that it will be introducing a debt management plan designed to
return the State's debt burden to sustainable levels. South Australia will be consulting with thc
Commonwealth on the details of the plan.
This package of measures to be implemented by the Keating and Arnold Governments will
lead to a reduction in South Australia's debt by well in excess of $ 1 billion. This deals in a
dramatic way with South Australia's ongoing debt problems. The Commonwealth is confident
that this will provide South Australia with the capacity to fully and properly participate in the
economic recovery of Australia.
The Commonwealth has agreed to give effect to this agreement upon its re-election.
ADELAIDE Wednesday, 17 February 6417 



PRIME MINISTER
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEC BY THE PRIME NINISTER, TIE NOWI P J KEATINIG NP
WON= E IN SPORT
SYDNEY 18 FEBRUARY 1993
it is my great pleasure to be here again.
There's no escaping it if you hold events in election
time, you run the risk of a political speech.
I could spare you from this, and tell you everything I
know about Australian sportswomen.
This would take a little longer than the five minutes I
have been allotted; not because I'm expert, but because
the great traditions of Australian sportswomen go back a
long way.
This year, of course, the tradition has been added to,
particularly in Barcelona and partCicuiarly by Kathy watt
who is our quest of honour tonight.-
By contrast with our women's sporting traditions,
Dr Hewoon's Goods and Services Tax has had a very short
life: in fact, it is my sincere hope that it has no life
at all. Anyway, I have long felt that Australians
particularly Australian sportspeople are tired of
politicians pretending to be expert in sport.
So I'm not going to let you escape.
And just as there is no escaping politics, T might say
that there is no escaping the consequences for sport of
my opponent's policies.
This gathering tonight is a great illustration of how far
women's sport has progressed in Australia.
The Government is proud of the assistance we have been
able to provide through the huge increase in funding in
recent years, and through the work of the AIS and the
Australian Sports Commission.
But of course the Government is not the lifeblood of
Australian women's sport women are, and the voluntary
o rwaisations are. 6471 1 1 
I have to remind you that my opponent promiises to cut S7
million out of the Australian Sports Commission budget;
and to introduce a Goods and Services Tax that will make
it more difficult f~~ tpriia. asul voluntkary
organisations to function.
Sport is a perfect illustration of how the GST will
change the Australian lifestyle.-
All sporting organizations will be hit by the GST and, as
very few of them pay payroll tax, there is not even the
partial compensation which some other bodies will get.
There will be a 15 per cent tax on entry and registration
fees for competition, on admission charges, on air
travel, on basic services, on accommodation and on
uniforms. Sports equipment costs will rise, so will the cost of
remedial treatment. So will the cost of all health care,
of course.
The GST will apply to coaching courses. The price of
swimming lessons for instance.
I recently saw a letter from Forbes Carlisle in which he
pointed out that, with a GST, privately run swim centres
would lose both customers and income, and governments
would be forced to spend millions of dollars if the
public's needs were to be met.
He wrote, " Now with the prospect of 15 per cent added to
fees, many parents will be forced to drop out... There
is no doubt that a GST will result in many less pupils
and fewer children learning to swim..."
He goes on to say that * It is certain that sports club
memberships would be reduced so again the community would
suffer by the imposition of this tax.'
Sponsors wi 11 be hit by the GST. Sponsored sports
will7 receive 15 per cent less or the sponsor will have to
be asked for extra to maintain the level of funding.
Some sponsors will get rebates, but banks, building
societies and other financial institutions will not.
Sports clubs will not only have to wear the tax in dollar
terms, but in the extra time it takes to be a tax
collector and an accountant.
As I have said over the past twelve months and as I keep
saying in this election campaign, the goods and services
tax will change the lifestyle of Australia.
I happen to believe that it is a completely unnecessary
and grossly unfair tax. You don't have to agree with me
on that, but I urge you to give careful consideration to
6472 
3
the consequences for your own lives and professions
before you give it your approval.
In the last twelve months, Australian women ' s spowt has
thrived. many of the now or expanded programs at the AIS
and the Sports Commission have been in women's sport, and--
the participation of Australian women in sport in the
community continues to grow.
I thinkc our approach to sport should be guided by the
same principle of fairness and equality which leads us to
consider such things as education, health or social
security as an Australian birthright. The opportunity
should exist for all Australian women to participate at
the most basic or the highest levels.
And I think it w ould be a great pity if the great
progress we have made in the last few years, and the
institutions and mechanisms we have established, should
be undermined.
It remains for me to congratulate the sponsors, the
Sports Commission's Women in Sport Unit, the judge. and
of course, my colleague the minister, Ros Kelly, for
their efforts to develop these awards.
There is no doubt that they play a vital role in
encouraging the goals of excellence and participation,
not just in sport, but by their example, in other areas
of Australian life.
Thank you for having me along. 63473 



4
PRIME MINISTER
STTI T BY T= PRIME MINISTER, THE iON P. J. KFATING, MP
GST AND LOCAL GOVEIENT TRUST ME, SAYS tMWON
Dr He mwon's own teaam has been caught out again telling the
truth about the GST.
In the process they have reminded people of just how far
this tax will reach into people's daily lives.
Opposition frontbencher Ian McDonald says the GST will now
apply to the water and sewerage services on your rates bill.
lie's also conceded that other council services such as
transport and garbage collection could be taxed.
But Senotor McDonald says the public will have to wait until
after March 13 before decisions are made about how the GST
will affect council rates.
He says the GST Is too complicated and the details will have
to he worked out later.
This is confirmed by another Coalition spokesman, Geoff
Prosser, who said on Perth radio on Tuesday:
" I think that in this whole program we have put forward
we have generally set the guidelines down and we need
to sort of sit down with councils and go through these
Gorts of things.
This can mean only that the Coalltion Is incapable of
telling people how the GST will work, or they won't tell
people how it will work.
Dr Hewson knows the GST will hit people in almost every
aspect of their lives but he won't say so.
If the GST Is so good for people, if it really is going to
create jobs " from day one" why is Dr Hewson saying, " Trust
me, I'll give you the details after the election.'
John Hewson is sounding more and more like Jeff Kennett.
With Dr Hewson it's a case of vote now pay later.
MELBOURNE February 19 1993
54 4 



2 ft
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP'
JOBS NOT GST
Today's Accord agreement between the Government and the ACTU is an historic
achievement in industrial relations and wages policy.
For the first time both wage increases and the timing of scheduled superannuation
guarantec increases will be contingent on progress in creating jobs and reducing
unemployment.
The Accord poses a clear distinction between economic policies under the
Government, and those proposed by the Opposition.
The Opposition Goods and Services tax will threaten jobs.
The Government's economic policies will create jobs.
I recognise that the task of creating jobs is not easy.
The world economy is growing much more slowly than expected.
Growth in Australia can be accelerated, but it requires determined efforts by
govenment, by business and employees and their representatives.
For its part the Labor government is committed to practical sensible policies to
improve investment and stimulate growth.
These policies include a substantial cut in the company tax, an investment allowance
of up to 20 per cent, investment in public works and infrastructure, and job training
programs. The role of business is to seize the opportunities offered by a favourable tax
environment to increase investment.
And the trade union movement. is now committed to accepting the postponement of
both wage claims and scheduled increases in employer funded superannuation
payments if employment creation falls short of what we believe is an achievable
minimum. 
Today's agreement sets a minimum lcvel of employment of 500,000 additional jobs
over three years, progress towards which will become a requirement for scheduled
wage and superannuation increases.
It also embodies the agreement between the Government and the ACTU that wage
movements in coming years will predominantly be negotiated at the workplace level,
in return for productivity increases, and be incorporated in workplace agreements.
Where it is not possible to reach workplace agreements, and subject to progress
towards the objective of bigher employment and the commitment to wage increases
consistent with maintaining our international competitiveness, employees will be able
to apply to the AIRC for arbitrated safety-net wage increases.
The safety-net is primarily for low paid workers.
in the first instance these arbitrated safety-net inr~ eases will be accessible at the
workplace level.
These increases will be accessible only where there is no prospect of further
conciliation or negotiation resulting in a workplace agreement.
In determining the timing and extent of any arbitrated safety-net adjustment, the
Commission will apply its normal criteria and have regard to the circumstances of the
employer and industry concerned.
There will be no double counting. Arbitrated safety-net increases will not apply to
employees receiving wage increases through workplace bargaining.
Any arbitrated safety-net adjustments shall be consistent with the central objective of
promoting sustainable employment growth.
Such increases will be restricted to a maximum of $ 8 available after 1 July 1993.
Subject to progress towards the employment increase there will be scope for two
further adjustments of between S5 and $ 10 from 1 July 1994 and from 1 July 1995.
In recognition of the prevailing condition of the labour market the Government has
also agreed that unemployed people aged 60 and over and who have been unemployed
for 12 months or more will not have to continue to meet the work test. These people
will have the option of continuing to seek work and receive unemployment benefits or
to transfer to a Provisional Age Pension. If they choose the pension option, they will
also have available to them the other benefits enjoyed by age pensioners. The
Government will review the appropriateness of the program in the ligbt of
developments in the economy.
MELBOURNE 19 February 1993 I. I
6543 



PRIME MINISTER
' 1
i'
I STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
GST AND THE LIBERAL LIES
The GST pamphlet distributed today by te liberal Party is a glossy litany of lies and
distofwioas
Faced with the growing community cowcen about this iniquitos sad unnecessary tax
thange. Dr Hewson is now resorting to shameless half tuths which make a mockry of
his prom~ isd TNo-ims-Campag
The pqam* het dimfibtfd today purports to tell Autlian families how they will be
better off uamdr a Goods and SerVces Tax
It make the follwing a wwtiou:
IGST will mean the aboltion of sewn mar tares.
A fie. The coal export duty listed in the pamphlet has already been abolished.
Fwihenmort, Dr Hewson's promise to abolish ' customs duties" is rally doublspeak
for s zerotaiffpolicy whch will cost Austraian Jobs.
" MWry ofthe items you now buy are tared at anything up to 30 per cent under Labor's
current saes tan system. For example... garbage bags...
A distortiiom The wholesale sales axon grbage bags is ten per cent. Garbage bags
would be more cxponsiv under Dr Hewson's 15 percnt OST.
* Food wui1 acfagal be cheaper under the Cration
A le. Nowhere does Dr Hewsons slick pamphlet tell Australian famulies that takeaway
food and restarant meals will be taxed under the GST.
The GST wall go where no other Australian tax has gone before. Hamburgcs, hot
dogs, milkshake and barbecued chicken will all be taxed for the first time in our
histoiy. Why won't Dr I kwson tell Australian familics the truth? 6545 
Futrnome th pbotograph in Dr Hewsonms pamphlet shows a range of supermuare
aasm not just baow foods The diswashing liqud and isues would atuact the GST.
" The GS7 m~ ae umnsfirer and simpler.
A he. IftheOST isso andleWfair, why won Hewson release dheCole
Commnitte report, which consm hundreds of pages of potential problem. and
Wnquitie in the OST? And if the OST really is fiim and, impler, why ame so many
sporting orpaisatos such as Tanis Auwa&amp; and the National BdwAkebl Legu,
confused ad concerned about the impat of OST on thar sports? Why does die
proumnent horse racing idusby figue Coin Hayes bliev it wMl ruin rang i this
counuy Why am the builin ad 1 ourist idinria up mnam about t impact of die
GSTI The GST Wl n101 make taes smple. The GST wil affect eveay busines with
tuarnover as filde a SS0,000 per yev. Small busineses, currently uninmlvd in the
caoction, of wholesale sales ta or payroll tax, wMl be drawn ito the tax not to collect
t OST. How wil it help die Austalian, economy to create about 750,00 new tax
collection pobft
Thewrw will be no GS7' on-4. duatkm
A fie. Parmitw should, he told that they wil havt to pay GST on texiboom purchased
from boolcAbOM school inifonns, school shoes and, on public tranport for dd
dtsiu to and ft~ m schoo
-Family allowanwu wift be double&amp; L
Why doessit Dr Hewson tell t whole truth? About 100,000 families will be tipe
off Family Allowanc wider Dr Hewsons F* ghbak poliqy
vill be no GS7 cm. . councll rates."
A lie. Under Dr Hewson, counci rates notic= will for the first time in owr hitory can
a IS per cenl tax on the water, ac ag and garbage collection components, Dr
Hewaonus 1= ca Goviernment spokesmsan, confimed this on Friday, obviously too lawe to
after die pamphle which had already been prin" e
T77OmS T will mean a , wdumo in invome
Thi does not oompute. If the $ 24 b~ lon proceedis from dhe GST arv used to abolish
existing taes, ther ns no money left for incom tax cuts. The incomie tax cubs promised
by Dr Hlewson would hav to he funded through nm than $ 10 billio wwih of cuts to
Federal Gavannadn sawics and progrms particuilarty in dhe aa of social security
and heafth
654. 
3
" There wll be no GST on. aale ofyour haue."
Why doesn't Dr Hewino's pamphlet tAl Austraria fitaics tha the cod of a honse winl
rise steeply becsuse of the GST on &amp; Hbu dlding mateials and land dewlopuaiL
The pamphlet concludes: 7&amp; h GST L part ofh chanvge that u neededfor o
children to be able to Iget jobs in thefiutare."
Tlti is die bst fie. Even. Dr Hlewsons own economic experts admit Ohere are no new
jobs in a GST. The OSTW-a tu -io n'qnigj ust when we don't need one. It would
wooodher ecorwmic wowth and disrupt Ausfnria business jus when we need it to
accclerte.
CANBERRA 21 Februay 1993 47 



14.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
HEALTH UNDER HEWSON BYE BYE BULK BILLING
Under Dr Hewson's health policy its bye, bye bulk billing.
Thirteen million Australians who now have access to bulk billing will lose it under
Dr Hewson.
That is, their right to visit a doctor and pay nothing goes out the window.
Under Dr Hewson it will be cash up-front at the AMA rate. That's S32 per visit.
Dr Hewson will hand control of our medical system over to the doctors. Doctors will set
their own prices and make health care a privilege instead of a right.
Dr Hewson's health policy was written by the doctors, for the doctors.
The greedy doctors in this country have scored a trifecta Dr Hewson, Dr Woods,
Dr Shepherd.
The AMA would be the faceless men of a Hewson Government.
Dr Hewson says he won't work with any union in Australia except the doctor's union.
The doctors' union has written Coalition health policy and in the process awarded
themselves a massive pay increase.
Bruce Shepherd is Australia's most threatening union boss under Dr Hewson he will
have won foi--s--members a billion dollar bonanza.
It's hard to believe an extra billion dollars for doctors alone.
6594 
This is fairness Hewson-style doctors driving BMWs can sec their own fees, charge
what they like. while wage earners are forced onto lower wages through individual. work
contracts. S3 an hour for Australia's youth S3 a minute for doctors.
Doctors are told they can charge what they' can get away with while workers are told to
sign on the dotted line, or get the sack.
By' their own admission Dr Hewson's health policy is " music to the ears' of doctors.
( Leading AMA spokesman following Dr Hewson's address to theAA conference.)
Think about this if you're a young person on Dr HcIwson's S3 an hour wage you'd only
earn S114 a week, If you get crook and visit the doctor it'd cost you $ 32, almost a third of
a week's pay. Even after collecting a rebate thc gap would be $ 14, more than 10 per cent
of your week's pay. On top of that you'd be paying 15 per cent on your transport. 15 per
cent on your clothes. 15 per cent on your takeaway food, and 15 per cent on just about
everything else you use or buy.
If you're a Shift worker it's the same story'. You'll have to sien an individual work
contract, your penalty rates are taken away, your wage will be cut dramatically. You pay
the 15 per cent GST on every'thing and you'll still have to pay the $ 32 up front.
If Dr Hewson doesn't get you on the swing, he'll get you on the roundabout. Everyvwhere
you turn, you'll be paying more.
Every time you put your hand in your pocket. Dr Hewson's hand will be there too.
BRISBANE February 22, 1993 6595 



P7.
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
MEDICARE: KEEPING HEALTH CARE AFFORDABLE FOR AUSTRALIANS
Brisbane, 22 February, 1993
What a shame that we once again find ourselvcs fighting to preserve Medicare.
And let there be no mistake. Medicare is under attack.
If Dr Hcwson and his Coalition were to get their hands on our health system you know
what would happen.
They would dismantle it.
Don't isten to their " promises" to preserve Medicare. Just look at their track record and
the fine print of their policies.
Remember it happened once beforel
In the 1975 election campaign Malcolm Fraser said he would not dismantle Medibank.
And look what happened. Seven years later, when the Fraser Government was thrown out
of office, Medibank had gone and more than two million Australians had no health cover.
Do we want that to happen again?
I don't think so.
Do we want an Am. ican-stylc health system where public hospitals turn you away if you
don't have a Blue Cross card in your wallet?
I don't think so.
6058 
I
2
Do we want our health costs to skyrocket by giving doctors the power to set their own fees
while the rest of us will have to accept lower wages under Dr Hewson's individual
contracta? I don't think so.
Do you want to see bulk-billing abolished for more than 13 million Australians? Do you
want the Medicare relate for bul-billing to drop from 85 per cent to 75 per cent, thus
reducing the incentive for doctors to bulkbill even pensioners?
If doctors set their own fees, they are likely to increase by around 30 per cent.
This means having a baby would cost $ 1170 instead of $ 475 today.
A visit to the family doctor will increase from S24 to $ 32 with only $ 18 of it claimable.
This means every trip to the doctor would cost $ 14. If families wanted to bring this down
to only $ 5 they could take out gap insurance but that would cost $ 6 a week!
Does this sound fair?
I don't think so and rm sure you don't either.
Yet, make no mistake, this is what Dr Hewson has in store for you.
He may not be spelling out the details of what he has in mind.
He's a bit like Jeff Kcnnt in that respect. He hopes to get through the election ca= paign
without telqlingvW0iiaU the nastiea. He's refuaing to even release many of his policies.
He won't tell us the details of his industrial relationfolicy for instance.
Just like Jeff Kennctt. He didn't tell the people of Victoria either and look what
happened there.
Next Monday the award system in Victoria will come to an end and the working men and
women of that satc will be on their own.
Dr Hewson is just the same on a whole range of policies including Medicare.
He tries to make his plan sound a lot better than it really is. He docmsn't want us to read the
fin print and discover how much worse off most of us would be.
He says, for instance, that he'll give tax credits for private health insurance.
He implies theze will cover the cost of private health insurance. 658k 
What he dga^ tell you is that 60 per cent of families with children will get no tax credits
at all.
The few families who wiLbenefit will only get around $ 200 to $ 300 a year a long way
from the $ 1600 that pnvate insurance costs a family.
And Dr Hewson has the nerve to claim that families will be better off under the Coalition's
health care scheme.
This is simply not the case.
And you don't just have to take my word for it.
Listen to what the experts have to say:
Dr John Deebic, a health economist from the Australian National University, and one of
the original architects of Medicare, has estimated that doctors' private incomes would
increase on average by 60 per cent under Fightback!
And Professor Jeffrey Richardson, the Professor of Health Economics at Monash
University says the Coalition's health policy will lead to " major inflation in hospital costs
and medical incomes".
The Deptenigt of Finance estimates that health costs for the average family will increase
by $ 22 a week if Dr Hewson puts his plan into effect.
Why on earth would he want to do this when we presently enjoy one of the best health
care systems in the world!
We have a simple, affordable system of universal health care.
It means no one is denied medical treatment because they can't afford to pay.
And the government is doing what it can to improve Medicare.
We have committed an additional $ 1.6 billion over the next five years to increase patients'
access to public hospitals. And we are providing $ 70 million to reduce waiting lists for
surgery. What would Dr Hewson do instead?
He wants to take $ 13 billion out of the public hospital system. This would mean that
over 10,000 public hospital beds would Have tobe closed an estimated 1.730 of them
here in Queensland.
It wil mean 450,000 fewer people would be treated in public hospitals.
6590 
This is totally unfair.
It would force thousands of people into costly priyate P nrac Families would have to
find an extra $ 400 to S600 a year just to purchase h cover that is, Just to get cover as
a private patient in a qg= hospital.
This would not give them access to private hospitalsl
Nor would Dr Hewon's health scheme cover people with cancer or other pre-existing
conditions. The private health funds simply won't give insurance to people with Multiple Sclerosis or
-I1V or other conditions that require continuous and often costly treatment.
What is supposed to happen to these people?
How will they fund their treatment?
Do we really want to become the sort of society that abandons its sick and its weak?
I don't think we do.
The kind of society we cherish, and which the Labor Goverment has worked hard for a
decad to consolidate, is one which cares for all its citizens on the basis of their needs
not on the buis of their incomes.
I doubt if anyone he= today wants to put those values in jeopardy.
I am sure that you, as hospital employees, as dedicated medical professionals, do not want
to be in the hideous position of having to turn away seriously ill or injured people because
the= arm no beds for them or because they can't afford to pay.
Dr Hewson also claims that health services will be zero rated under the GST.
But why should we believe him?
The Cole Committee, which was set up to advise Dr Hewson on which items should be
included under the GST, has rcommended that health be taxed.
Just like it is in New Zealand.
But the Cole Committee knew how unpopular this recommendation would be. So they
advocated the Jeff Kennett option keep quiet about it until after the lewiont
Tax heaith. they said to Dr Hcwson. but only " when in Government". 6591 
In other words, don't come clean with the voters. Don't tell them what
new and nasty taxes you've got in mind.
Promiae them anything and then " when in Government' scatter the GST
around on every item you can.
Look at non-prescripton drugs for Instance.
Will the GST apply to aspirin and cold tablets and asthma puffers?
It will if the Cole Committee recommendations are taken up. They say
that only prescription drugs under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Schema
should be zero-rated. All other medical produaIiive a 15 per cent
GST. And that inciudes women's sanitary products like tampons items which
presently attract no tax at all.
Dr HawEon would make it more expensive to be a woman.
You can't get much more unfair than that.
When it comes to other areas of health services, he just won't let on
what he has in mind.
Will chiropractors be taxed? Speech therapsts? Midwives? Akmbulance
services? And what about medical products.
WhIch medicine will be zero-rated?
Dr Hewson has got to tell us.
He can't run around the country telling people they will be better off
under Fightback. when he secretly plans to tax every aspect of our
daily livas. He just won't get away with it.
I believe the Australian people value and appreciate Medicare.
I do not believe they want to return to the bad old days of a new
health scheme practically every year.
Remember during the seven years of the Fraser government there were
five different health schemes.
How many schemes would Dr Hewsn give us before the people said
Enough Is Enough! and demanded the return of Medicare?
6592 
6
I sbuddcr to think
All I know is that it's too big a risk.
Our health is too important to us to risk having it tinkered with in this fashion by an
Opposition which won't even come clean about what they want to do.
We have a system which works. Which is fair. Which we are committed to improving so
it meets the needs of all Australians. Let's make sure we stay healthy under Medxicare.
And the way to do that is to keep Medicare healthy! 6593 



Zces. PRIME MINISTER
fom the
aen severe
mnder the
aioty net
static,
iat under
ny
: ter of
you can't
but it
xi. But
Y net, if
dlace ' the
r, of
in
rates and
t-hem
* iy based.
we vill
the
d, of
lard, atz-ons,
Page 15 of STATIE-MENT BY TILE PRIME MINISTIEKR. E 110HN P J KEATING MP
IEWSON $ 8 BILLION SORT ON TELEC( M SALE
Today's report by Salon: in B~ rothers makes ccr dm likely proceeds from the
sale of'I'elecon o which the Coalitioi's entire funding package is hased would
be roughly half diat mininctcd by DXr lke% son.
Telecom sold as is would raise somewhere oftie order ofS10-12 billion. take
two years to prepare for sale, and three vean actually sell.
Telecom itself was advised this wvhen it souht infonnal dice as to its value
and saleability.
What this means is that the . iberals' Fjghjtbakpackage is massively unljifnded
and that Dr HIcvson could not pay for his pronises. There is at least an S8
billion discrepancy and shoritall in the amnount of monies availahle to him. This
means he cannot fund lii&amp; g. ayIolo1. tAx bolitioni promise.
To raise even $ 12-13 hilli) i reqtiires reltcom to lbc sold as a commercial
entity, free of public cotistraints and comunniti vservice obligations.
This would involve, as Saloman Brothers niak: clear. ' radical restructuring" of
Telecom meaning layoll's of up to 15.000. ( Tclecom NZ laid off 4.000 last
week.) It would also nean commercial charging for telephone calls which can only
mean timed local calls.
It would mean that rural corusumrers wouild no onger be subsidised as to
connections, rentals and the phone bills thcy pay by the main capital cit) and
interstate trink network. 6623 
Timing constraints on preparing Telecom for sale and managing its float means
that to all intents and purposes none of its value can be useiully included in the
Coalition's figuring.
Dr Hewson should iiniediately provide the dacumentation upon which his
billion figure is based and the advice he has received regarding the sale
timetable and scheduling.
Failure to do so leaves one with the obvious conclusion that the Telecom
billion in the Liberal's calculations is a hoax on the public of Australia and
represents the most dishonest fiscal sleight of hand in over a decade.
GRAFTON February 23, 1993
6624 



o* l
. C. AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY POLICY SPEECH
1993 FEDERAL ELECTION
presented by
PAUL KEATING
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
At
Bankstown On
Wednesday 24 February 1993.
ADVANCING AUSTRALIA
Building On Strength 
Let there be no mistake. This IS the most important election in memory.
Today we stand against radical right-wing proposals which are hostile to fundamental
Australian beliefs and Australian institutions and all that we have achieved in recent
years. Not new proposals, but old ones.
Proposals which have been tried in other countries and which in every case have failed
at great social and economic cost.
Dr Hewson says these other countries did not try hard enough. He is nothing if not
zealous. In this election there is Dr Hewson Dr Hcwson and Tim Fischer or there is Labor.
I ask every Australian to think about this:
When you wake up on March 14, whoever has won the election, there will still be
unemployment. There will still be problems to solve.
If Labor is re-elected there will also be an Accord between the unions and the
Government, guaranteeing industrial peace, low inflation, and a continuation of that
spirit of cooperation.
There will still be Medicare, guaranteeing quality health care to all Australians
regardless of age or circumstance.
There will still be equity and access in education.
There will still be a social safety net providing care for the aged, the sick, the les
well-off and the unemployed.
There will still be social policies expressly designed to manage the change we are
going through, to alleviate the hardship and minimise the social damage.
And there will be every reason to believe that we will continue to succeed in our
ambition to become a great trading nation, a great Australian social democracy, a
proud and independent country, united and cohesive and able to deliver to all our
people living standards and a way of life unequalled in the world.
And there will be NO GST. No miserable 15 per cent tax on virtually everything you
buy. But if the Coalition is elected, within six months there will be no Accord instead
discord no universal health system, no safety net.
And there WILL BE a GST. 
There will be much less equity and access in education.
Workers will lose the protection of awards and be forced to negotiate individual
contracts with their employers or take the sack.
Everyone will be paying A 15 PER CENT TAX on virtually everything they buy.
And you can be absolutely sure, NOT ONE NEW JOB will have been created by these
measures. That is why this is the most important election in memory.
T'here really never has been a clearer choice: between the Australian traditions of
fairness and equity, and the economic and social jungle of Reaganism and Thatcherism
which other countries have just abandoned.
Fairness and equity have served Australia well, and never better than in this difficult
period of change.
We believe in change. To meet the national necessity we instigated it. But we believe
it should be managed: we believe it should be moderated by supportive social
policies. We think it should be calm.
Recognising, that all change should have a social purpose, we take account of the social
consequences. I lived here in Bankstown for forty years.
This suburb of Sydney had all the best qualities of an Australian community. It still
has. It is a microcosm of modern urban, multicultural Australia.
Now, as then, it draws its strength from the people, and the people draw their strength
from Bankstown.
Perhaps because Banlkstown was such a strong community, there was a certain
fearlessness about it, a great sense of security, a sense of self-sufficiency. One of the
home-truths I picked up was that the world owes no one a living.
Today a whole generation of Australians know that the world does not owe us a living.
We arce the first generation of Australians to really understand what it means.
I think I began to understand towards the end of the 70s it was then I began to form
what was for me at least a new idea about Australia.
The thought took hold of me that we could be a creative country, as well as a so-called
lucky country. 
I thought that we could become a great manufacturing country, a country which made
things for the world to buy. Things which bore the stamp of Australian work and
genius. I becamne convinced that Australia could be more than a quarry and a farm; that we
could find a place in the front rank of trading nations.
This of course was contrary to the prevailing wisdom.
Yet in the early 1980s it very rapidly became apparent that the idea was not an option,
but an absolute necessity. We no longer had any choice.
The story since then has been a remarkable one. The Australian people are bringing
into being a new Australia.
An Australia which has more than doubled exports in nine years. An Australia which
has tripled exports of manufactures and services.
We still export the raw materials and much more effectively than before. But we
also export high technology medical equipment and high-speed ferries, processed
food, cars, computers, electronic and chemical products information, education,
television programs, tourism.
And increasingly those exports go to the fastest growing economies of the world
those in our own region, Asia.
These things have happened with remarkable speed.
And so have these things: we have the lowest inflation in thirty years. The highest
productivity in thirty years. The lowest number of industrial disputes in thirty years.
We are far more competitive than we have ever been.
What is more, we have a population with a proven capacity for change, and a proven
willingness to meet the challenges Australia faces.
But in the face of this success, our opponents talk incessantly of failure. Where there
is hope they counsel despair. To sell their plan, they think it is necessary to talk
Australia down to extinguish people's faith.
My counsel is hope. These days it is more than hope it is belief.
Belief in what the 90s hold for us all.
rye always said that I wanted to be around for the 90s to see it all come true, to be
part of the transformation.
Our opponents say they have a plan. The word plan is forever on their lips. Their
pollsters demand it. But they have the wrong plan. 
Labor has more than a plan we have a whole national change a sea-change, born
of national necessity, happening now. A change sustained by faith in Australians.
A change not shaped by a computer model or a textbook, but bedded in reality and
commonsense. A change that does not break the mould of Australian society, but reshapes it by
drawing on its strengths.
One that does not look back to the values of Thatcher's Britain or Reagan's America,
but forward to the next century.
I see Australia growing on the dual foundations of energy and care.
Our energy flows from the genius and ambition of our people which the combination
of liberal democracy and free markets alone can deliver.
Our care flows from a spirit we have in common as Australians.
You can see the energy emerging now in those remarkable figures I have quoted.
You can see it in 700 dynamic small to medium sized Australian businesses, born of
this era, dedicated to innovation, earning last year $ 8.6 billion in export revenue, and
expected to double in five years.
The same energy is apparent in the $ 130 billion worth of applications received by the
Government for project development.
It exists in the new, much more clever business culture in Australia a culture we
ourselves have developed.
The " Australian company" is today a much more innovative, dynamic, export-oriented
entity than it has ever been.
It will be the engine of growth and the pacemaker of employment.
That is why two weeks ago we gave a further break to capital and innovation. We
lowered the company tax rate from 39 per cent to 33, providing Australian industry
with a business tax system competitive with any in the world.
This is where the energy will come from. And we will do everything we can to
stimulate it and, where necessary, provide strategic support.
We will make sure that Australia keeps its car industry.
Toyota has already committed itself to a new state-of-the-art plant at Altona in
Melbourne. Mtsubishi is poised to make major investments at its plant in Adelaide. The
Government I lead will work closely with Mitsubishi to bring this about. 
But no government incentive can match the opportunity offered to Australian
companies by the emerging markets of Asia and the Pacific.
Never in our history have we bad such an opportunity.
I have no doubt that if we are wise I mean governments, business and the people of
Australia we will see in the nineties manufacturing and trade on a scale
unprecedented in our history.
But it will not happen of its own accord.
As much as it will need leadership, it will need nurturing and encouragement.
We will need to grow companies committed to Australia, with workers committed to
Australia. Our success as a nation will depend upon our companies, but equally it depends upon
the degree to which we care about Australia and Australians.
In an era of change the watchwords of good government should be care, support,
cooperation. We must take the people with us. That is a Labor article of faith.
We also recognise that on the way to our great social goals there have been problems
as well as successes, and we recognise our responsibility for them. As Prime Minister,
I recognise My responsibility for them.
Governments in Australia in the eighties were not always as prudent or wise as they
should have been.
Nor were all companies: in the newly deregulated economy, a lot of their behaviour
was not in the best interests of Australia.
The excesses of the 80s must not reappear in the 90s. The last thing we need now is a
return to the 80s philosophy of " greed is good" and that the only useful interest is selfinterest.
As in other countries, in Australia a lot was wasted in the boom. And as in other
countries, the recession nearly stopped us in our tracks.
It is also true to say that even some of the gains we made had their social cost those
productivity gains of the last few years are now adding to the level of unemployment.
Industry is getting more product from fewer people.
Unemployment is the greatest problem we face. It is the problem of the era. It is,
overwhelmingly, the principal concern of the Government. 
We have managed to achieve more economic growth than most other comparable
countries. We have had four consecutive quarters of growth. But it has not yet begun
to create enough jobs.
And we're not helped by a sluggish international economy.
What then is the answer? What is Labor's jobs strategy for the 1990s?
Over the next three years Labor will place the emphasis where it has to be.
On business and on incentives to invest.
Labor's jobs strategy is ' designed to assist recovery in business. Under Labor, business
will pay a tax of 33 per cent on profits compared with 42 per cent promised by the
Opposition.
Under Labor, business will be able to obtain an investment allowance of up to 20 per
cent on all investment in the next two yea's.
An incentive the Opposition will not be providing.
And with Labor there will be no GST to weigh down business and depress spending.
No big new taxes, no industrial conflict just sensible practical things to help business
investment. But there is no doubting the magnitude of the unemployment problem.
It will not be easy to reduce and no one should expect speedy results.
But in the search for solutions, there could be no greater Moy than to proclaim the task
an eay one, as Dr Hewson did last week when he promised getting " jobs rolling from
day one".
And no greater shame than to throw away the progress we have already made.
It would be a tragedy if we let the recession crush our faith or ruin our work to date.
There is the other lesson I learned growing up in Bankstown. In hard times you stick
together. When you're confronted with a challenge, unity is strength.
Every time Australians cooperate, every time they form a partnership, every time they
agree on a common goal, every time they combine their ideas and their energy, they
make Australia stronger.
If one word describes Labor's policy for Australia, it is " cooperation'.
Our policy must never be to undo the ties that bind us but rather to strengthen them as
we did with the Accord between Government and the unions last week. 
A new Accord committed to jobs, but built on the same fundamental principle of
cooperation. Under the new Accord, wage increases will depend on progress towards creating jobs
and reducing unemployment.
This is what the Accord has given us. Our opponents in their anger will strike it down.
And as it goes, the century long protection of awards will go with it.
It is incomprehensible to me why anyone should wish to destroy it.
But ladies and gentlemen
Labor's quest for social equity goes on.
Our recently announced child care policy recognises that the future growth of the
Australian economy and the living standards of Australians need women's
participation in the workforce.
We recognise that child care is essential if women are to take a job, undertake training
or study or look for work.
Our commitment to meet total demand for work-related child care by 2001 will aid
women's participation in the economy, as our 30 per cent cash rebate on fees will make
child care more affordable especially for middle income earners.
It is not good enough to say that a woman is either in the paid workforce or in the
home. Chances are these days, in the course of their lifetimes, most women will spend
periods of time doing both.
The needs of mothers caring for children at home are often overlooked in the child care
debate. But we have not forgotten them.
I recognise and appreciate the important role played by women who choose to stay at
home while their children are growing up.
We propose to introduce a new cash payment of $ 60 each fortnight to be called the
Home Child Care Allowance.
This allowance is more generous than the Dependent Spouse Rebate it will replace,
and has the added advantage of being paid directly to the mother at home. This will
provide a source of independent income for women while they are out of the paid
workforce caring for children. 
In a further measure to meet the needs of women at home caring for children, we will
extend fee relief to occasional care. This is in addition to my earlier announcement
that we will double the funding for playgroups.
Labor's child care policies recognise the reality that different families choose to deal
with the responsibilities of work and family in different ways.
Medicare is another concrete expression of the quality of our society and of Labor's
commitment to it. Medicare is a statement as much as it is a system. It's a measure of
our social progress. A measure of our care for one another.
It is not yet the perfect health system, but it is without doubt among the very best in the
world. The Coalition will pull it down. They say they won't. But, as everyone here knows,
they will.
They will abolish the foundation upon which Medicare rests. They will abolish bulkbilling
for everyone but pensioners. 13 million Australians will have to pay their bills
up-front. $ 32 a visit.
The Coalition is determined to take our health system towards the American model
the model that costs far more than ours, delivers infinitely less, and which the
Americans are determined to replace.
The Coalition would cut $ 1.3 billion a year from public hospitals while they cry
crocodile teams over waiting lists. And they want to give $ 1 billion to the AMA
specialists. Three dollars an hour for Australia's youth, three dollars a minute for
doctors that is their policy.
We will never abandon Medicare we will go on improving it.
Today I announce an important improvement for Medicare. We will open Medicare
up to the private hospital system, so that it can purchase an estimated 10,000 private
hospital beds per year for people on waiting lists.
We will also fund post-acute and palliative care patients in private hospitals a step
which will at once increase options for palliative care and free up public beds.
In addition, a new Commonwealth dental health program will be established for
emergency and basic dental care for health card holders.
In education, we will continue to pursue the goals of access and equity which in the
last decade saw th e number of young Australians completing secondary school rise
from three in ten to nearly eight in ten; the creation of an additional 120,000 university
places; and, last year the establishment of an Australian National Training Authority to
provide vocational training of the highest standard for all Australians.
In doing this we met the challenge of the new economic order. Education is our great
comparative advantage. We must keep it and build on it. 
Thbese broad egalitarian goals create not only opportunities for all, they also create the
lift that Australia must have.
Not only are we raising standards, but the guarantee of fair access to education is a
principle from which we will never resile.
Under Labor, wealth will never determine one's chance to get a decent education.
We want our universities and TAFE to remain educational institutions not private
business organisations.
We will not introduce a voucher system for our universities. We will not put a tax on
books. We will not put a tax on knowledge.
We will not cheapen the values of education, or enlightened social democracy, by
making it subject to the principles of the market place.
In Australia we have built one of the best and fairest social welfare systems in the
world. in the next term, we will introduce new measures for unemployed people, including
older men, and today I can announce further initiatives to assist other older
Australians, including a more generous pensions assets test and a new seniors health
card. Looking after people in need has always been Labor's strength, and it is a proud record.
But we should never forget the people in the middle. Those Australians on average
incomes struggling to bring up their families, pay their bills and keep their heads above
water. I am referring to families whose total income is between $ 30,000 and $ 60,000 who
will miss out under Dr Hewson.
Who will miss out on the health care rebate, who will lose their Family Allowance,
who will have their Dependent Spouse Rebate income-tested, who won't get the
Coalition's child care rebate.
I fail to understand why the Coalition is so down on these Australians. Dr Hewson
cuts them out of his compensation package, yet they are the ones who will be most
affected. Labor stands in direct contrast to the Coalition when it comes to meeting the financial
needs of these people. Medicare, the award system, our child care rebate, our
education system and our 1994 and 1996 tax cuts. Our policies provide for the people
in the middle.
A tax rate of 30 per cent, not 38 per cent as now and all without a GST. 
For all pensioners, Labor will also introduce fringe benefits from April, giving 380,000
older Australians valuable discounts on everyday services.
There is one simple fact which all Australians should not forget: Dr HCwsoD intends
to cut $ 9.4 billion from government spending.
Almost half of this will come from social security, health, housing and labour market
programs. This was the level of Dr Hewson's cuts before he delivered his revised package in
December the package he funded with a proposed sale of Telecom for $ 20 billion.
Yesterday it was revealed that Telecom is worth $ 8 billion less than that, which simply
means Dr Hewson's plan is unaffordable.
1-us principal pledge to abolish state payroll tax cannot be achieved.
Business it seems is to get the booby prize. A 15 per cent GST, a 42 per cent company'
tax and no payroll tax relief. And timed local phone calls into the bargain.
As our success depends on the bonds between us, it depends on the strength of our
culture. Labor guarantees support for those great Australian institutions which preserve the
nation's heritage, encourage ideas, disseminate information and strengthen national
cohesion. I mean such organisations as the ABC, the CS[ RO, the Australia Council and the
Special Broadcasting Service. All on Dr Hewson's hit list. Labor will also extend the
services of Radio JJJ to Australian regional areas.
Our cultural life and our quality of life in Australia is uniquely determined by our
environment. Whatever separates us, we have this continent in common. We share
responsibility for it.
tn December, Labor delivered its Environment Statement, the centrepiece of which
was a major program to renew and revive our greatest river system, the
Murray-Darling Basin.
In Labor's next term, improving the quality of the urban environment will be a major
priority of the Government. as will identifying areas of habitat important to the
national estate.
Labor will not be joining the liberals in their rush to uranium enrichment and
engaging the nuclear fuel cycle.
This Government has long spoken of the need to address the historic and continuing
injustice done to Australia's indigenous people. 
Over the years a great deal of money has been spent and a great deal of good will
expended, but the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people continue to suffer the
consequences of two centuries of injustice, prejudice and neglect.
Any Government that I lead will be determined to complete the process of
reconciliation Labor has begun, and at last return to the indigenous people of Australia
the dignity, social justice, health, opportunity and living standards to which all
Australians are entitled.
To fail in this is to betray not just the Aboriginal people, but ourselves, all that we
profess to believe, everything Australia stands for.
We are determined not to fail this time.
It has been Labor's consistent theme that our success as a nation depends on our ability
to harness all our resources, human as well material.
It depends on having faith in our institutions and confidence in ourselves and in each
other.
As I have said, we need only look to the last few years to find the reasons why we
should have faith in ourselves. We need only look to the next few new years and the
opportunities ahead to see why we should be confident.
It is perhaps in part because Australians are growing in confidence that more and more
of them are questioning whether it is appropriate for Australia to have as its head of
state the monarch of another country.
Many Australians some surveys suggest a majority believe that we will be better
able to succeed in the world with the unique and unambiguous identity which an
Australian head of state, chosen by the Australian people, could provide.
While it is far from the most pressing matter facing the nation, it is nevertheless
important that we do not let this decade leading to the centenary of the Federation pass
without advancing the debate.
To do this we will set up a broadly based committee of eminent Australians, including
representatives of the States, to develop a discussion paper which considers the options
for a Federal Republic of Australia.
Any options developed by the committee would not seek to change our way of
goverrnent; only to have an Australian, chosen by Australians, as Australia's head of
state. I would like to extend an invitation to the Opposition to participate in the workings of
this committee.
It would be the intention that as a result of this committee's deliberations and the
public discussion that would follow, the Australian people would be in a position to 
decide by referendum later in the decade whether Australia should become a Republic
by the year 2001.
Early in the speech I said that this community was remarkable for being so strong and
so cohesive.
it has changed dramnatically in recent years, and no change has been more dramatic
than the arrival in Banlcstown of people whose culture and experience is so very
different. Bankstown has accommodated the change.
And just like every other community in Australia, Bankstown is accommodating the
economic change the nation is going through.
Bankstown has drawn on its people, it has drawn on its community spirit, it has drawn
on its sense of justice and fairness on those traditions common to all Australians to
make the transformation from one world to another.
We will only be strong, we will only be able to make the necessary change, and the
change will only be worth making, if we keep the bonds between us strong.
In the end, this is the only way we will get where we want to go. It is the only way we
will solve our problems. It is the only way to avoid creating new ones.
To my mind, it is because Australians know these things and for so long now have
practised them that Australia is a great country, and a country with great prospects.
It is because we have the wisdom both to succeed in the world and to live together in
Australia. And in the end I think that is at the heart of our pride, and why we love
Australia. And why we must make sure that the ties that bind us are never broken. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THlE HON P J KEATING MP
CANADA ANDl THE GST: A WARNING TO AUSTRALIA
Mr Mulroney has now resigned as Prime Minister leaving
Canada deep in the grip of rece-ssi-on with unemployment
around 12 per cent, non-existent growth and a current
account def icit of 4 1/ 4 per cent of GDP. Mr Mulroney
and his Party's standing with the electorate have
plummeted since they introduced a 7 per cent GST in
January 1991 to replace a federal manufacturing sales tax
of 13 1/ 2 per cent.
The parallels with Australia if Dr Hewson were to be
elected are very worrying.
In Canada, Mr Mulroney was forced to omit food from his
OST and he was also forced to reduce the rate from 10 per
cent to 7 per cent because of fears about the equity of
the GST and the negative impact that such a tax Fwould
have on the Canadian economy.
Mr Mulroney claimed that because his GST would replace a
sales tax and because his GST exempted food, the CPI
effect would be small at only 1.2 per cent. The CPI
effect turned out to be close to 3 per cent.
Mr Mulroney refused to recognise that his GST was having
such a big impact on inflation in Canada and the Bank of
Canada tried to squeeze inflation out of the system by
holding up interest rates af ter the GST was introduced.
The result was worsening recession, higher unemployment,
declining living standards, economic dislocation and a
terrible compliance burden on small business.
In an attempt to escape the burdens of the GST, small
business have started to barter their products. People
are bartering plumbing services for dental services just
to escape the dreadful impact of the tax. The cash
economy is booming.
Consumers are forced to shop in the USA to escape.
This is what Australia faces if Dr Howson is elected,
except for Australian consumers there is-no escape and
the tax is twice as large. 
2
Dr Howson says his GST will put the CPI up by 2.1 per
cent. It will not.
All the experience around the world says it will be much
higher and around 4 to 5 per cent.
Just like in Canada, Dr Howson in Government would refuse
to recognise the awful consequences of his GST and the
Reserve Bank would be instructed to squeeze the surge in
inflation from the system.
Already Dr Howson has told the Reserve Bank that it will
have only one objective.
Keep inflation at 0 to 2 per cent.
If Dr Hewson is elected, Australia would live out the
Pointless tragedy that has just engulfed Canada.
The recovery would be aborted, unemployment would rise
further, living standards would fall, the exchange rate
would rise, our exports would suffer and our current
account would worsen.
MELBOURNE February 1993
66-1 1 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE COST OF A 15 PER CENT GST ON AN AVERAGE FAMILY
An average family with children with both husband and
wife in employment and an income between them of $ 50,000
would be $ 75 a week worse off because of a 15 per cent
CST. This figure assumes that basic tgQdis untaxed and that
per cent of the abolition of-the -wholesale sales tax
is passed on to consumers.
This means that consumers potentially face a rise of 9.2
per cent in prices because of a 15 per cent CST before
receiving aiij' dupposed relief through the abolition of
payroll tax and lower fuel excise. This is based on Dr
' Hewson'Is e-stimates of whfat revenue -a 15 per cent GST
would raise after the wholesale sales tax is abolished
allowing for the exemption of basic food. It is also
based on estimated private final consumption expenditure
in 1990-91 adjusted for taxes.
This S75 loss to an average family is absolutely
guaranteed if Dr Hewson is elected on 13 March 1993.
What is not guaranteed is that Australian families will
be fully compensated.
Dr Hewson' s compensation _ packagep cannot be funded. This
was always the case but -in the last few days any
semblance of plausibility has been stripped away with the
discovery that Dr Hewson has an S8 billion hole coming
from the fact that Telecom is only worth $ 12 billion, not
the $ 20 billion he has claimed.
On top of that, consumers are most unlikely to benefit
from lower petrol prices.
The States will be forced to put up their petrol taxes
because Dr Hewson will cut State arants and will not
properly compensate them for the abolition of State
payroll tax. As the NSW State Treasury has informed
Premier Fahey, the NSW State Budget will be out of pocket
by between S300 and S400 million per annum because of Dr
Hewson' s policies. 6673 
Dr Hewson will also impose a road user charge after the
election although he will de~ ny tis.
Now Dr Hewson is claiming that not only will families be
fully compensated for the GST, they will actually be $ 56
a week better off.
He is also saying that the GST will lead to a $ 20 billion
boost for business.
Dr Hewsont s fantasies know no bounds.
There is no way that Dr Hewson's numbers can add up.
Everyone cannot magically be better off with a big new
tax of 15 per cent on nearly everything people buy.
There is no magic pudding.
What is real is that with a Hewson Government, Australian
families will start $ 75 a week worse off because of the
GST and they will be on their own as they try and get
this back from Dr Hewson.
There is no way in the world that Dr Hewson can deliver
compensation of this magnitude. It cannot be afforded by
Dr Hewson and what relief he does grant will disappear
into the pockets of desperate businesses trying to
weather the storm of the GST and -into . t he hands of State
Governments trying to balance their books after they have
been ravaged by Dr Hewson's cuts.
As in Canada, all that a GST offers Australia is the
stalling of the recovery, higher unemployment and lower
living standards.
Unlike Canada, Australia can still avoid making a change
for the worse by ensuring that Dr Hewson never becomes
Prime Minister.
MELBOURNE February 1993
6 67 4 



JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP AND THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, THE
HON ALAN GRHIFFIS, MP
LABOR TO FUND TOURISM GROWTH IN REGIONAL AUSTRALIA
A $ 42 million plan to develop tourism in regional Australia is the centrepiece of the
Labor Party's Tourism Policy, released today in Bendigo by the Prime Minister, Mr
Paul Keating, and the Minister for Tourism, Mr Alan Griffiths.
Labores record on tourism is unsurpassed.
Under Labor, international tourism has increased over 150 per cent, with tourism now
worth $ 8.2 billion* in export earnings.
Nearly half a million Australians many of them young Australians are employed in
the tourism indu~ str. A hfuther 200,000 are expected by the end of the decade.
International tourism grew by 9 per cent in the first 11 months of 1992, with
significant gains for employment and the economy.
However, less than one in three of our international visitors spends any nights outside
capital cities and major international gateways.
There is a rich diversity of tourism experiences throughout Australia, but we need to
improve the capacity of regional areas to attract foreign tourists. At the same time we
will be improving the tourism infrastructure for the domestic market.
Under a program of regional tourism development,$ 20.75 million will be spent over
four years on strategic planning and tourism infrastructure in regional Australia.
In addition, Labor will provide $ 4 million over four years to help develop and promote
register of farm-stay accommodation. This will help rural and regional Australia
attract the tourist market it deserves, just as has been the case in many overseas
countries. We will also spend $ 10 million over four years on ecotourismi, and $ 4 million for the
co-operative promotion of the backpacker market. 6669 
To capitalise on the natural advantages of Australia as a centre for marine tourism,
Labor will spend $ 1 million to develop a coastal cruising strategy.
Compare Labor's record of achievement in tourism to the Opposition, whose only plan
is to introduce a new tax which would savage the tourism industry.
Prices for tourist accommodation will rise by between 10 per cent and 14 per cent,
reducing demand and causing job losses.
T-he Opposition has conceded there would be " winners and losers" under Coalition
policies. In Townsville last week they admitted there would be increases in costs in areas " like
mums-and-dads' motels".
Mums-and--dads' motels, and the other small businesses that make up 85 per cent of
the tourism industry, would undoubtedly be worse off under the GST regime.
We have said so all along. Now the Coalition admits it.
BENDIGO February 1993
6710 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P J KEATING MP
VIOLENCE PREVENTION AWARDS
The Prime Minister today announced the results of the inaugural Australian Violence
Prevention Award. The Award, for a total of 100.000. is~ jjointCommonwealth, State
and Territory iaitiatim~. established by all Australian Heads of Government in late 1991,
following the Strathfield massacre, as one of the initiatives to address the problem of
violence in our society.
The Award is administered by the Violence Prevention Unit in the Australian Institute of
Criminology, under the direction of a Selection Board consisting of distinguished
T-eeii-niatves of the Australian Heads of Government. Professor Duncan Chappell,
Director of the Institute and previously Chair of the National Committee on Violence, is
the Prime Minister's representative and Chair of the Selection Board for the Award. Other
members of the Selection Board are: the Hon Dr Marlene Goldsmith ( New South Wales);
Ms Judith Dixon ( Victoria); Dr Chilla Bulbeck ( Queensland); Ms Pat Morris ( Western
Australia); Mr David Rathmann ( South Australia); Commissioner John Johnson
( Tasmania); Ms T~ ina Stubbs ( Northern Territory); and Mr Ken Begg ( Australian Capital
Territory). The Prime Minister commended the work done by the Selection Board and the
Australian Institute of Criminology in organising the large number of nominations
received for the new Award.
The interest in the Award, and the standard of nominations for 1992 was excellent', Mr
Keating said. ' The Selection Board received numerous inquiries and almost 200
nominations, and had considerable difficulty deciding between some of them. it decided
for this year that, in recognition of the wide variety of valuable projects addressing
violence in many different ways, the Award should be divided between 13 nominations'.
Three nominations were outstanding. They are:
the Julalikari Night Patrol from the Aboriginal community of Julalikari in the
Northern Territory, which was awarded $ 40,000 for its innovative, community
based approach to breaking the cycle between excessive alcohol consumption and
violence; 6727' 
the West End Forum, which was awarded $ 20,000 for its success in reducing
violence in the nightclub centres of the West End of Melbourne through integrated
community action and server intervention programs; and
the Brisbane-based Kids Help Line, awarded $ 20,000 for its unique telephone
counselling service for children, which addresses many of the problems caused by
violence by and against children both in the short term through counselling and in
the longer term through its data base.
Awards of $ 1,000 will also be made to 10 highly commended projects.
These are: the Western Australian Aboriginal Driver Training Program, in the category
Adolescents at Risk, for its imaginative and successful approach to the prevention
of young Aboriginal involvement in police car chases;
The Eastlakes Community Network Committee, in the category of Community
Action, for its development of an effective, coordinated program. on limited
resources, dealing with a variety of problems involving young people;
the Sherbrooke Action Group for Community Safety, in the category of
Community Action, for the way in which the community brought together and
managed a wide range of initiatives, showing how fear of violence can be turned
into positive action at local level;
the Doveton-Hallam-Endeavour Hills Family Violence Program for Perpetrators
and Survivors of Abuse, in the category for its sensitivity to the needs and
problems of families at risk and its development of a system which assists all
members of the family unit in the prevention of family violence;
Project Turnaround, a joint Western Australian Community Policing and Youth
lnsearch Foundation project, in the category Justice Systems and Institutions, for
its development of a innovative and cost-effective approach bringing together
police, other authorities and young people at risk, in a constructive way;
the Campbelltown Cottage Community Care Project, in the category Protective
Behaviour Strategies, for its development of strategies and programs to protect
young children at risk of violence, abuse and neglect;
6" 72 8 
the South Australian Holistic Defence Program, in the category Protective
Behaviour Strategies, for its use of a variety of strategies to develop skills to
diffuse and cope with violence and potentially violence situations for the elderly,
the disabled, young people and women;
the Arabic/ English project Family and Society, in the category Projects for Non-
English Speaking Background Commnunities, for its cost-effective use of audio
technology in a cross-cultural way, to raise the awareness of isolated minority
groups about strategies for the prevention of domestic violence;
the South Hedland Sobering Up Centre, in the category Public Violence, for its
effective, community-based approach to preventing drunkenness from leading to
violence in public or at home, and for clogging up the police and judicial systems;
and the Australian Capital Territory concert project Metal for the Brain, in the category
Violence and Entertainment, for the innovative way in which several young people
in the ACT responded to a violent incident, contributing to the prevention of
violence effecting young people by using drug and alcohol-free heavy metal
music concerts to convey the message of the link between alcohol and violence.
Mr Keating said that the value of the Australian Violence Prevention Awards goes far
beyond the token monetary prize they receive. That a project has been nominated for the
Award is in itself a great honour for the projects concerned, all of which have been
recognised as contributing to the reduction or prevention of violence in Australia.,
HOBART/ CANBERRA
26 February 1993
For further information, contact
Violence Prevention Unit
Australian Institute of Criminology
PO Box 2944
CANBERRA CITY ACT 2601
Dr Jo Herlihy ( 06) 274 0218
Ms Anita Scandia ( 06) 274 0279 67 2U 



STATEMENT 13Y THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING, MP
KE. ATING ACCEPTS HEWBON' S CHALLENGE
I note with some amuseiment Dr Hewson's latest " formal
challenge" to me to put aside " antics" for the remainder
of the campaign.
Dr Hewson's challenge, issued beneath a photograph of the
Opposition Leader taking a dip at Cottesloe Beach after a
4-kilometre " picture opportunity," is welcome.
I will continue to direct my efforts in the campaign
towards jobs and the impact of a GST.
I take it from his latest challenge that Dr Hewson
intends to desist from the following:
Wearing funny hats.
Jogging picfacs.
Impersonating the President of the Uftiited States.
Taking dips at Cottesloe, or any other beach.
Pretending to be a lifesaver.
Presenting himself to the nation's media hot, wet
and half-dressed.
Arranging Liberal stooges to impersonate the
unemployed. Signing pledges to give up a year's salary.
Walking on the beech ( with or without socks).
Telling school kids in Brisbane there will be no tax
on their tuckshop, lunches when his policy says there
will be.
Being force-fed at a McDonald's Restaurant.
And the most outrageous antic of all:
Pretending the Goods and Services Tax will create 2
672[ million jobs.
CANBERRA. 27 February 1993 



L
PRIME MINISTER
STATMET BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE NON P. J. KURATING, MU'
RESPONSE TO HEWSON POLICY STAT2Wf
Dr Hewsan talked today about looking people in the eye
and what he failed to do once again was look Australians
in the eye and tell them bow a 15 per cent Goods and
Services Tax will create jobs when it has taitled
everywhere else.
What he called today a tax reform is in fact a tax slug.
Today's Liberal Policy launc -h did nothing but increase
the speed with which Dr Hewson's credibility is fading.
It was notable not for what was announced, but for what
was kept secret or left unexplained.
Hie failed to answer real concerns about the key question
in this election campaign.
He tailed to explain why Australia needs a Goods and
Service. Tax.
He failed to show how it would create one new job.
He failed to release a list of the goods and services
which will rise In price uinder a GST.
He failed to explain why all small -businesses must become
tax collectors and waste hours each week processing his
complicated GST paperwork.
Hie also failed to explain how he will fund his promises,
given the $ 7-8 billion hole dug by his absurdly inflated
Telecom figure.
He also tailed to say why he wants to remove bulk-billing
for 13 million Australian. and make people pay $ 32 up
front for each visit to the doctor.
He tailed to explain why he and John Howard will not
release the Coalition's industrial relations legislation
until after the election.
He failed to explain why he wants to pay Australia's
youth $ 3 an hour. while paying doctors $ 3 a minute. 6785 
2
He failed to explain why he wants to restrict access to
education by charging full fees for university more
than $ 25,000 for an arts degree.
He failed to explain why he wants to cut S53 million from
th AR nd make others cuts to SBS. the Australia
Council and the CSIRO.
He failed to explain how, with his attacks on living
standards, wages and working conditions, universal health
care, education, social security, and our greatest
cultural institutions, his GST package differs from those
policies which have failed with a devastating social and
economic impact in other countries.
He failed to explain why Australia needs a failed model
.1 with a debilitating and unjust flat tax-at the centre of
It.
And, perhaps most importantly, he failed to explain why Dr
Howson's package of:
a 15% consumption tax a 42% cnmpaLny rate a
disruptive industrial relations model
is likely to ' create more jobs than Labor's
no consumption tax a 32% company rate
cooperative industrial relations an investment
allowance of. up to
While Dr Hewson was pretending to look Australians in the
eye, he should have also taken the chance to explain to
them the policies he has failed to release or adequately
explain such as the environment and industrial relations.
PE'R 1. March 1993
6786 



kg X4e
STATDEEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MYN P. J. KEATING MP
CST CONFUSION HKWSON MUST RELEASE COLE COMMITTEE REPRT
For the Past three days the Opposition Leader and his
frontbench have failed in spectacular fashion trying to
explain how the GST will work.
They have confirmed the comunxity's doubts about the GET and
highlighted even more anomalies in the system.
Dr Howson has maid he will spend 18 months aftern the election
explaining the GST to the community. This is not good enough.
People have a right to know before they vote how the GST will
affect them personally and how it will affect small business.
I want Dr Hewson to be heard. I want Australians to hear him
In total silence. I want Australians to hear him try to
explain the unexplainable and make sense of the senseless.
I want to hear him say why a 15 per cent tax slug is good for
them. why abolishing Medicare is good for them. Why the
laoro youth is worthf Sfiiihour.
Dr Hewson wants to look people in the eye and tell them bad is
good. Dr Hewson is fond of saying he will look people in the eye.
I now call upon him to truly look the Australian people in the
eye by releasing the Cole Committee
recommendations and the Su~ bmissions put to that committee.
If he doesn't people will be right in concluding that Dr
Howson wants to hide the full Story Of the GST.
If he doesn't release the report and the submissions made to
the Committee it will be because it shows the GST to be not
only unfair, but absurd.
Nowhere is this better illustrated than with food.
Since Fightbacc Mark II, the Opposition has been proposing to
zero rate certain food for home consumption other than
takeaway food.
6928 
What does that moan for something like the Australian pie?
In Canada if you buy a Cold meat pie, it's not taxed. But if
you buy a hot meat pie, it's taxed. The same is true for the
UK. So if You buy a cold moat__ pie and take it home and heat it up.
you only pay GST on tiheelectricity or gas to heat it. But If
you buy a hot meat pie and take it home and re-heat it, you
pay tax on the pie as well as the electricity or gas.
What about an apple pie? In Canada, it depends on whether it
Is hot or cold. If it is hoft thanit in taxable. If it is
cold, then it depends how big It is and ho-wmany you buy. If
you buy one Individual cold apple pie, you pay GST. If you
buy five individual cold apple pies, you pay GST on them. But
if you buy six or more at once, then they will be GST free.
If you buy a family size cold apple pie and take it home, then
it is GST free.
In the United Kingdom, it depends on where you intend to * at
the coldapi pie.-If you sit down at a table at the bakery,
then you pay tax on the pie. If you intend to take It home
then it is tax free.
Dr Hewson hasn't told us exactly~ how he intends to tax pies,
but the Canadian and British examples provide a good guide on
the ludicrous nature of his tax.
Dr Howson's GST is an absurdity tor small1 business,
particularly small business in the takeaway food industry.
These small businesses will not only carry the fully
compliance cost of this tax, they will also have to Cary the
additional burden of dividing their sales into food and
takeaway food items.
On top of that a 15 per cent GST on what they sell will
depress sales.
Par from strengthening small business as Dr Hewson claims, his
GST will force small business to lay off staff to cope with
the higher costs and lower demand.
Dr Howson ignores the takeawey food industry. In fact in
Australia, more than 25 per cent of household expenditure on
food Is on takeaway and restaurant food and more than half of
this is on takeaways. It is therefore totally misleading to
claim am the Opposition does that Dr Howson's GST exempts
food. Food is but one area of massive confusion over the GST. If Dr
Hewson does not release the Cole Committee report the
Australian people will be right in concluding that there are
many more.
NOWRA
March 4. 1993 63929 



0
I
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LABOR SUPPORTS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The Labor Goverrncent recognises science, technology and engineering as fundamental to
a growing economy, a clean environment and a world class health system.
The Government has an important role to play in supporting Australian science, not only
through funding for basic research in universities, but by encouraging a long-term
commitment from our business sector.
Labor has a proud record of support for Australian science. Since 1982-83 funding has
increased to $ 2.9 billion per year, a 39% increase in real terms. The 1992-93 Budget
included the fourth successive real increase. i,
We are committed to building on this record in order to make the most of our clever ideas
and thereby underpin our growing international comptiies.
We will continue to support the national science effort through commitment to institutions
such as the CSIRO. The CTSIRO is more than a scientific research agency. Like the ABC,
it is a nationa icon. It plays an important role in preserving the nation's heritage,
encouraging ideas and strengthening national cohesion.
We will also continue to support our high quality health and medical research system.
Since 1982-83, Commonwealth funding of this important area has more than doubled in
real terms. The results, in terms of research which improves the health of all Australians,
have been outstanding. Labor will work with medical researchers and the business sector
to lift research funding to 2.0% of total health expenditure by the year 2000. The National
Health and Medical Research Council's Research Strategy will be important in helping
the Government achieve this goal.
Labor recognises that science involves a long-term investment. Funding cannot be turned
on and off like a tap. It is for these reasons that the Government made the_ 150% R&amp; D tax
concession a permanent part of the tax system. introduced and extended the Cooperative
Research Centres program and will continue indefinitely univcrsikv. Tescarch infrastructure.
funding beyond 1994.
6926 
While Labor will invest substantially in the nation's technological future. te Coalition
will cut research funding. According to Fightback. $ 20 million will be slashed from the
science budget.
The importance of science and technology was completely ignored by Dr Hewson in his
campaign launch.
Dr Hewson should recognise the importance of science and engineering, and the need for
continuing government support. He must:
pledge to maintain current levels of science funding and resile from the
cuts proposed in Fightback;
match Labor's commitments of $ 52 million per year for higher education
research infrastructure and $ 25 million per year for ten new Cooperative
Research Centres.
The Coalition has failed to demonstrate either an understanding of or sympathy with the
needs and aspirations of Australia's scientists and engineers. By contrast. Labor has
worked hard to give science, technology and engineering a stronger role in Australia's
future. It understands their importance and willcontinue to support them accordingly.
CANBERRA 4 MARCH 1993 6927 



I
aA
II I, 7020 PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P J KEATING MP
HEWSON AND RuITH AND THE TOURISM TRAVESTY
on the 25th of February, the Shadow Treasurer, Mr Reith,
released a statement in which he said that the Coalition
envisaged employment growth in the tourism industry " of
more than 6 per cent per annum, generating around 400,000
extra jobs based on quite reasonable estimates of
million tourists by the end of the decade."
At best, this is fanciful arithmetic.
6 per cent growth in the tourism industry will create
275,000 new jobs, not 400,000.
Dr Hewson repeated the fallacy in the debate last night.
Dr Hewson repeated the Coalition's-forecast of 400,000
extra tourism jobs and 10 million tourists by the year
2000. More fanciful arithmetic.
million tourists would represent a growth rate of 17
to 18 per cent 50 per cent more than the peak in the
19809, and that was without a CST.
No one in the tourism industry is predicting growth as
high as 12 per cent. The forecasts are for up to 6.8
million. A CST would lead to these forecasts being revised down.
mhe introduction of a 7 per cent GST caused Canada to
drop from the fourth favourite international destination
of tourists to the twelfth. In New Zealand, the number
of international tourists also dieclined, and what is
more, . the number of New Zealanders taking their holidays
outside Now Zealand increased by well over 100 per cent,
as they took advantage of * GST-Free" packages.
Tourism is a classic example of the deception the
Coalition is practising in an effort to sell its
" plan".
The GST will tax tourism and restrict itsgrowth. it
will reduce the number of jobs not increase them. 
2
Dr Howson and Mr Reith have plucked their figures out of
the air: the 400,000 tourism jobs, the 10 million new
tourists, the 2 million jobs by the year 2000. Their
arithmetic in wrong too wrong to escape the inference
that it is also deliberately deceitful.
SYDNEY 8 March 1993 7021 



4,
iti J, STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P J KEATING NP
DR HEWSON ATTEMPTS TO CON MIDDLE AUSTR&amp; LIA
Last night Dr Howson attempted perhaps the most profound
deceit so far in his campaign to win office. In debating
-health care. he said the following:
OK, so you have to make a decision as to where you
cut off and at what point it is appropriate for
people to start to take out private Insurance. We
made the decision at $ 40,000 for a single and
$ 50,000 f or a couple on the grounds that at those
income levels they are getting very large taxc cuts
and if they have got kids they are getting a
doubling or a whatever their income level is, they
are either getting a doubling or a 50 per cent
increase in family allowances, We've got a lot of
money targeted into the system, but to make the
system work you've got to get people to take out
private insurance. He should be required to take it
out a" so should all the wealthy.
In truth, Fightback says that under Dr Hewson's so-called
" plan" faii16mFsQtith an income of $ 40-55,000 will receive
an increase in their Family Allowance of 6 per cent.
Families with a total ind6ie Wf_$ 55,000 or above will
have their Family Allowance abolished. Not doubled or
increased by 50 per cent as Dr Hewson said, but increased
by just 6 per cent or abolished altogether.
Only 15 per cent of families will have their Family
Allowance doubled under Dr Hewson's plan. 100,000
families will 1-a the allowance.
Or Hewson appears to believe that families with a
household income of S55,000 are wealthy. They will be
forced into private health insurance or pay a penalty of
$ 800 per annum. They will lose the Family Allowance.
And they will pay a 15 per cent CST.
Families in this-. middle income bracket would be
significantly worse off under the Coalition's so-called
. plan".
7018 
It is a perfect example of the way in which their GST
package will attack Australian living standards and our
way of life and Dr Hewson'sa remarks last night are a
perfect example of the lengths they will go to in their
efforts to disguise this fact.
Dr Howson says he has a plan. It is the wrong plan. It
is not the plan he says it is. Everything Dr Hewson says
should be checked against the reality of his intentions
most of which can be found in Fightback Mark 1.
SYDNEY 8 March 1993 7019 



6
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
COMMONWEALTH DAY 1993
Commonwealth Day is an occasion to reflect on the continuing relevance to Australia and
the international community of the Commonwealth of Nations..
This year Commonwealth Day has taken as its theme the importance of human values, It
is appropriate that it should do so. The Commonwealth brings together 50 countries
representing a quarter of the world's population. Its special character and enduring
stre'ngth lie in the mutual respect held by Commonwealth member states for human
values, and for each other's sovereignty, traditions and culture. Respect for democracy
and the rule of law, for fundamental human rights, and for good governance are important
principles uniting the peoples of the Commonwealth in their diversity.
At their most recent-meeting in Harare, Zimbabwe in 1991, Commonwealth Heads of
Government reaffirmed that the Commonwealth's principles, including its human values,
were as relevant as ever before. In Cyprus~ in October this year, Heads of Government
will again have these values in mind when considering the way forward for the
Commonwealth into the 1990s. The commitments by the Heads oi Government, will, I
am confident, enable the Commonwealth to remain relevant to its member states for now
and well into the future.
8 March 1993
CANBERRA
' 7022 



2
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMM HY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE SoN P J KEATING Hip
ADELAIDE TO DARWIN RAIL LINK
The Prime Minister announced today that the next Labor
Government will comit $ 3 million to complete thqaiurreying
work necessary for a rail-lnk between Alice Springs and
Darwin. Such a rail-link has been advocated by various interests for
some time, including especially the Northern Territory
Government. The Commonwealth Government has told the Northern
Territory Government that it woul' welcome any commercially
viable proposal, and indeed would actively facilitate its
approval and construction. It would support the inmeatwt
through-nfraStructure bonds attracting concessional taxation.
To date, however, commercial proposals have not been
forthcoming. Part of the difficulty has been arriving at
accurate figures for the cost of building the rail-link.
Indeed, the recently formed Australian Rail Develoet
Cc has requested Government assistance In completing the
munL9z. ng and pegging of the route. Of the 1400 kilostres
Involved, all but 300 kilometres has been surveyed. The next
Labor Government in happy to fund the remaining surveying so
that the commercial viability of future proposals can be more
accurately ascertained.
Labor is committed to an efficient natj! onal-railnetwqr. We
have provided substantial Investment in a standard gauge
national network through the One Nation funding. We provided
additional funds in the budget for the Islington workshops in
Adelaide. We have also provided-funi4ng for the upgrade of
the workshops of Port Augusta, and more importantly, for the
refurbishment of the Indian Pacific train.
Our record once again stands in stark contrast to that of tho
Opposition who simply do not believe in a central role for
Government. Fightback! would cut $ 87 million from land
transport, including $ 15 million from Australian National
Railways.
ADELAIDE March 1993 7123 



MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
SENATOR PETER COOK
HOWARDS WAY THE
John Howard admitted on ABC's AM this morning that he is
prepared to ride roughshod over workers covered by State,,
awards by using the Corporations power of the Constitton.
State awards cover 57.3% of the Queensland workforCe 48.8% in
NSW, 47.8% in SA, 57.3% in WA and 45.6% in Tasman~ ia.
Being covered by a State award offers no security for workers
in these States. Il
All these workers are under threat by' 4he John Howard system
of individual work contracts.
Some 40% of workers in Victoria hve had their awards
abolished already under JeffzKennett. This experience will
spread across the nation if" 3ohn Howard is in control.
If the States don't agreie to accept his policy, Mr Howard
admitted this morning/-that the Opposition is prepared to act
without the co-oper tion of the States to implement his
policy. He said:
" even if e had to act unilaterally in defiance of the
States; ( our legislation) would reach about 70% of
priva sector employees in Australia."
Mr Howar s admission came in the face of criticism of the
Opposit on's industrial relations policy by Sir Richard Kirby,
forme head of the Industrial Relations Commission who
con d h Opstion's policy as a recipe for the
exp oitation of workers.
Sir Richard on ABC's AM this morning said:
" Let's assume for the moment that the employer, a
particular employer, relying on the fact that there are
thousands of people, million people out of employment,
could say I'm leaving those provisions out and if you
don't sign the contract you're sacked because I can get
many out those million people to come in and take your
place.... That I think would be a very deplorable
thing."
Contact: Don Mackay 06 27732043/ 93 11 March 1993
" 7 1 A ( I a
-4
tZ, 7, PRIME MINJISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MIP
SOME FAiCTS THAT DR HEWSON DOESN'T WANT YOU TO KNOW
' MTe economy grew by 2 1/ 2 per ccnt over the past year, the highest in the OECD.
n growth is set to accelerate and sec. unemployment decline. Consensus Economics, a
London-based firm that surveys prominent economists around the world, predicts that the
Australian economy will grow by 3.2 per cent this year and 3.7 per cent in 1994. Access
Economics forecast growth of 4% in 1993-94 under existing policies. They forecast the
unemploymient rate to fall to 10% next year and down to around 8% within three years.
* There are increasing signs that growth is accelerating. Retail trade is up. private investment
grew strongly in the December quarter. Building commencements are 15% higher than a year
earlier.
* Moreover, there are increasing signs that the labour-marke is set to expand. ABS, ANZ, CES
and DEFT vacancies are all increasing, some quite quickly. Overtime is up. The DEFT
leading indicator of employment again rose strongly in January. Unemployment tends to lag
these indicators and thus will improve in the next few months.
* In addition, conditions are right for a strong, sustained lift in investment and jobs.
* Inflation over the past year is 0.3% the lowest in the world.
Interest rates have fallen by over 12% and are now at their lowest levels for two decades.
Productivity has increased by almost 3% over the past year.
Our international competitiveness has improved by 25% since 1983.
There are now 735 enterprise agreements covering almost 1/ 3 of all employees under federal
awards.
* Industrial disputes have fallen by 60% undcr the Labor govemnment and now are below the
OECD average, a feat never achievcd under past Liberal governments. 
Australia has the third lowest ratio of tax revenue to GDP among all OECD countries, down
from sixth lowest in 1985.
We have one of the lowes -t Government debt levels in the world. Our gross government debt
as a ratio of GDP is below chat of every other OECD country, and is less than half chat of the
G7 major economies and the OECD average.
ving standards, as measured by real household disposable income, have risen by 28.3%
since the March quarter 1983.
* Australia's foreign-debt is entirely due to the private sector, State Governments and
Government Business Enterprises. The Commonwealth Government has borrowed S18
billion overseas but has more than $ 20 billion in foreign reserve assets in other words, we
are a net lender to the rest of the world.
The Research Effort
As a nation we are devoting many more~ tcsources to research and development. Australian
businesses have more than doubled their research and development over the past decade in
real terms.
The Government has increased its funding by 39% and is encouraging a further change in
culture through measures such as the 150% tax concession and the funding of the 52
cooperative research centres. with 10 more in prospect.
As a result. over the past decade we've had the fastest growth in the OECD in both business
research and development expenditure and external patent applications.
tndustr and ExoRts
* Australian export occupy about one third of the world fast ferry market. Government will
extend the shipbuilding bounty whilst the Coalition will end it.
* Cochlear holds nearly 90% of the world's bionic ear implant market.
* Uncle Toby's is the number one name in health food snacks in Singapore.
* We're exporting over Si 1.2 billion in cars and automotive components. Australian firms
supply catalytic converters for Rover in the UKC, leather seating upholstery to BMW and
springs to Mercedes Benz cars. An Australian firm is designing, developing and
manufacturing instrument clusters for Mercedes.
* Exports of IT and Telecommunications equipment are around $ 2 billion. Digital Equipment
Corporation is exporting S240 million and $ 72 million into research and development.
* Exports of pharmaceuticals have risen from almost zero from five years ago to over $ 1/ 2
billion this year and probably S2 billion bi' the end of the decade. ( Peter Roberts, APR
11/ 3/ 1993)
7142 * in aerospace, Lockhart and Preston are winning major contracts for overseas airports.
* Transfield and SN{ EC have landed a S1 billion contract to build and operate a hydro-electric
power station in Laos.
* Quality and productivity performance of Australian industry have improved dramatically in
the last four years. Australian cars have reduced the number of faults per vehicle by 40% anc
many now rival the best in the world. A 1992 survey of Japanese manufacturing investment
in Australia concluded that " within these companies... the concept of quality control has
begun to take root firmly in the minds of factory workers.'
* Of 29 Japanese firms surveyed on their operations in Australia. only one rated labour force
problems as its most important problem in 1992. This compares with eight of 26 Japanese
manufacturing firms in 1988 saying that labour force problems were their major problem.
Stimnml Rfor
* Productivity has more than doubled on the waterfront.
* Crews on Australian ships have been reduced from 28 to below 21, and will fall to 16 over thnext
stage of the reform process.
* A record of over 18 million passengers flew in Australia in 1992 as a result of airfares falling
in nominal terms over the past three years.
Education * In 1982, only three out of every 10 young people finished high school; now. 8 in 10 do.
* The chances now that any young person will finish school and go onto university are Q=
. hizber than when the Liberals were last in office.
* There are actually fewer young people unemployed now than in 1983 110,000 compared
with 158,000. Most young people are in education or training. This is the right response to
the increase in skill level required for entry to employment.
* Under Labor, the number of Australian students attending university has increased by 211,00(
to 530,000. This increase is equivalent to 20 new universities.
* Australia now has one of the world's highest rates of university graduation for young people.
Vocational Training
* Labor has undertaken a fundamental reform of vocational education and training, and
established the Australian National Training Authority, with increased funding of $ 720
million.
* There are 73,100 more TAFE places in 1993 than in 1991. 
* Labor has provided special incentives for employers to recruit and train apprentices and
trainees apprentice intakes increased by 54% in the December quarter of 1992, over 8,100
commencements. Trainee intakes have increased by 146% over the 7 months since June
1992 compared with the same period a year before.
LAbour market promrris
* There were 170,000 job vacancies notified to the CES, in the December quarter of 1992, the
highest for any quarter since March 1990.
* 136,000 people were placed in jobs by the CES in the December quarter 1992, the highest
number placed since the June quarter of 1990.-
* Seasonally adjusted CES job vacancies and placements in the month of December 1992 were
the highest for any month since June 1990
upward trends in both indicators have been established for 12 months.
* Job placements for the long-term unemployed rose substantially in the December quarter of
1992 up 175% on the same period in 1991;
37,000 long-term unemployed people were placed in jobs.
* T'here has been a turnaround in the success of labour market programs
in December 1992 the percentage of people in labour market programs who found
a job or entered further education or training was the highest since December 1990
44% of people who participated in a labour market program in 1992 gained
employment or went on to further education.
11 MARCH 1993
CANBERRA
7144 



C 1. 4.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB
CANBERRA 11 MARCH 1993
I thought he might have surprised us.
I thought, seeing that there is an election on Saturday,
he might have come along for a debate.
I thought he might have stopped impersonating American
Presidents, stopped running, and come along to answer some
questions from the people whose democratic purpose is to
ask them.
No such luck.
Dr Hewson has broken one of the traditions of Australian
-poltics:.. we don't have such a lot of home grown
traditions but one of them is that leaders make
themselves accountable to the press in the week before an
election. Dr Hewson has not answered a question of substance since
Christmas. Every time he has been asked a question of substance and
that is about three times he has fallen over.
Dr Hewson has not been able to accommodate anyone who is
asking for facts about his so-called " plan".
. His campaign itself has been a falsehOOd.
S1D 17nitation of Freaent Clinwios campaign disguises
c fact that QEhat rlinton standt for, Hewson despises.
U .* C14miCF ha% Vrn a mask in this campaign.
If W* AX ans have not seen behind it yet, they still
have two days.
Dr Hewson has been unable to provide 4= wAth facts on the
GST. 71 4F 
He has said it will create 2 million jobs. He has said it
consistently. There is not one person in this room who believes that.
I daresay, there is not one economist in Australia who
believes it.
I would venture to say there are a good many people in
this room and a good many economists who believe that it
will create no jobs or, wnrR, it will cost jobs.
I am one of the latter. I am sure I am not the only one
to have heard reports in recent weeks of companies in my
case some of the finance houses of Sydney and Melbournewhich
are planning lay-offs of workers when the GST is
introduced. That is the first great deceit of the Hewson campaign.
They say the GS'r will create jobs.
The GST will not create jobs.
I would also venture to say that there is not one person
in this room, nor I imagine is there one doctor in
Australia, who doesn't know that Dr Hewson is going to rip
the heart out of Medicare and leave it a universal health
care system in name only.
Dr Hewson would move the Australian health system towards
the American system.
The American strategy of publicly subsidising private
health care and insurance has left 35 million Americans
without insurance, and given doctors and private health
insurance companies the ability to unremittingly Jack up
health costs.
Just as they promise to do in Australia: in their own
journal. In the Sydney seat of Lowe 9 out of 10 doctors
promise to increase their fees.
It's your money or your health.
American health care costs are more than 50 per cent
gredftii'tiin-Kust-ral-j 850 per cent greater and a
fraction of the service.
Last year in the United States employer spending on health
care exceeded total after tax profits.
Last year in Australia employers paid nothing and were
that much more Competitive as a result.
In America a huge part of the population lives in fear of
being sick or injured because of the health bills they
would have to pay. In Australia the only thing to fear is the sickness
itself.
There are waiinlis-ts-it is true. In the campaign
speech I announced action to remedy it by contracting out
the treatment of public patients in private _ hospitals.
This is additional to the S70 million we have given the
States to shorten waiting lists.
But if those waiting lists were twice as long they would
not constitute a reason to adopt the American health care
system. That is the second great deceit of this campaign.
The Liberals say they won't destroy Medicare.
The fact is they will.
I am also sure that there isn't a single person in this
room who doesn't know that Dr Hewson's industrial
relations 2pgram will destroy the cooperative ethic on
whc ifER1naustrial relations are based; or that he will
throw people onto individual contracts and destroy thereby
their security, their wages and conditions, and their
dignity. That is the third great deceit.
Dr Hewson's industrial relations policy is not designed to
reduce unemployment but to drive wages down.
I don't believe there is anyone here who doesn't know that
Dr Hewson's plan for Australia is a plan of radical
regression. A plan conceived in the bowels of a computer in the late
1970s, using the Thatcherite software that was all the
rage at Johns Hopkins in those days.
Dr Hewson's so-called " plan" for Australia is an old plan
that has failed wherever it has been tried with
disastrous economic and social consequences.
My great fear is that the damage he could do in three
years, would take us decades to. jepair.
Then there is the one about selling Telecom to an overseas
buyer for S20 billion.
This is the one from the man who talks about national
sovereignty and creating jobs and funding promises.
On each of these counts, the Telecom sale is a fraud.
Does anyone think that Dr Hewson will get $ 20 billion for
Telecom?
7146 
Does anyone seriously think that there will be more jobs
in Telecom if it is sold?
The only way they could get anywhere near S20 billion
would be to sell it overseas and remove all protection for
Australian consumers and workers. It would have to mean
timed local calls. It would certainly mean huge job
losses. Creating jobs in Telecom by selling it overseas is about
as likely as creating jobs in tourism by making it cheaper
to holiday in Bali than it is in Cairns which is what
the GST will do.
So there is another great deceit.
And here is another little one.
On every Fightback pamphlet that has gone out in the last
12 months the Opposition claims that it will abolish seven
taxes. One of them, the coal -export levy, is a standing
joke because it is already abolished.
There is another one there under the heading " customs
duties". The Coalition says it will abnlish cus tom duty.
That means, unequivocally, zero tariffs.
But when it suits them, they say they are not for zero
tariffs not immediately, in some industries, in some
electorates. Both thin~ s cannot be true.
This whole ' plan" of Dr Hewson is a deceit.
He does not have a plan, he has an obsession.
He does not have facts, he has gimmicks.
He has only one fact at his disposal unemployment.
The one big negative of our national life at present.
Unemployment is the great curse of the nineties.
And it is apparent again in today's figures. Essentially,
they are " as you were" figures, which makes the point that
unemployment is going to be immensely difficult to deal
with and it won't be fixed quickly. That's why we need
the full focus of the nation's energies; and why we don't
need those energies dissipated in a divisive scramble for
a piece of the cake.
7148 The figures mean simply that unemployment is too high.
They also show that the unemployment rate may be
flattening out, which is consistent with recent statistics
showing that the economy is picking up.
But this is really beside the point. If unemployment has
in fact peaked, that is no reason for complacency. It is
certainly no comfort for the unemployed.
The central issue is which party is best equipped to deal
with unemployment, and that means which party will succeed
best at getting the economy moving.
It also poses the question which party is best equipped
to help the unemployed directly?
There is no simple answer to unemployment, but there is no
doubt that the best answer in the long-term and the shortterm
is economic growth. and the way to get growth is by
investing and our efforts are aimed precisely at this
point investment in Australian companies.
By contrast, it seems to me beyond doubt that Dr Hewson's
so-called " plan" will not be a remedy but a new disease.
If unemployment is our greatest problem now, how much
worse will it be if we stifle the recovery with a 15 per
cent tax on virtually everything we buy and everything we
use. How much worse will it be if we deal with the problem of
unemployment in an atmosphere of industrial and social
turmoil. How much harder will it be to find solutions, or to find
the concerted national will to solve the problem, if the
rest of the population is divided, insecure and rancorous.
If unemployment is a great problem now, how muc~ h worse
willitZ. P without a universal health care system, or with
an unfair education system.
If unemployment is a tragedy now, how mucrh worse will it
be with S10 billion taken out of the Budget.
How much worse will it be wit~ i social security spending
cut? How much worse with funding for regional areas cut?
How much worse with cuts to State services like State
schools?
How much worse with S800 million cut out of funds for the
unemployed and people left to wait much longer for their
benefits? 
6
If unemployment is the worst fact of our national life at
present, how much worse will it be if Government " gets out
of the way" as Dr Hewson says it should, and people are
left to fend entirely for themselves?
How much worgep will it he if we put inflation back in the
system? How much worge will it he if we add a tax burden and an
accountancy burden and a time burden to the small
businesses which we know are going to drive growth and
create jobs?
Since the campaign started, a raft of positive indicators
have appeared illustrating our economic progress.
Tuesday's figures on job vacancies and retail sales were
the most encouraging since 1990. Export figures have been
positive.% Today this very day if you distil the politics out of
this morning's press you will find unequivocally positive
economic news. There's a story about our continuing
export surge, another about our growing manufacturing
sector, another about an Australian company landing a Sl
billion contract in Laos. There is much more but John
Hewson of course won't tell you. For twelve months
wherever there has been hope, Dr Hewson has counselled
despair. That's why today I have released a document accompanying
this speech which describes some of the good things which
are happening in Australia, and which Dr Hewson refuses to
talk about.
There is no . quesrion that the direction we are going is
the right one. We are going too slowly to lower the
unemployment figure, but that is not a reason for changing
course. It's a reason for accelerating progress where we can and
we have done this by lowering company tax rates, by
introducing an investment allowance of 20 per cent and by
cultivating a.. nebankint _ culjture.
Every sensible thing that can be done to speed the pace of
recovery and long-term reform is being done, or is
proposed for a second Keating Government.
And the things we do are all directed at the goal of
creating employment and helping the unemployed through
with training and other forms of assistance.
Some of you will have seen the statistics released this
week on the success of labour market programs. They are
working. They are helping thousands and thousands of
Australians. 7
So why wreck the recovery? Why wreck the safety net, the
humane and constructive government interventions? Why
wreck the social fabric of Australia?
my message for those people who are presently wondering
whether to desert the Labor Government is think very
carefully. Think about what you would lose.
In an election the choice is not between one party and a
vacuum, it's a choice between two parties.
Ask yourself whether by voting for policies which are
proven failures elsewhere in the world, you won't be
punishing Australia and the next generation of
Australians. Ask yourself whether the absolute hollowness, the absolute
fraudulence of Dr Hewson's campaign is not an indication
that a vote for Dr Hewson is a leap in the dark.
To the people of Australia, between now and Saturday, I
would say, every time you hear Dr Hewson say he has a
plan, ask yourself do I understand. Has he explained it
to me. And if the answer is no or maybe don't vote for
him. In this forum this week, Dr Hewson had a chance to explain
his so-called " plan" a chance to explain how it would
create a single job, how it would not destroy the social
fabric of Australia, how it differs from the plans of
Thatcher, Reagan, Douglas and Mulroney he had a chance
to explain it in this forum and he refused. He chose to
play soccer and shout slogans instead.
Let me give the oldest advice in the world to the people
who are contemplating the big jump. Don't do it. For
your own sake don't do it. For Australia's sake don't do
it. For your kid's sake don't do it.
I have been to this Press Club 18 times in the last
decade. I've been four times in the past year. I don't
know how many press conferences I have given in the last
twelve months, or how many doorstops that my staff said I
let go on too long.
I don't believe it can be said that I've ever run away
from scrutiny, or from the opportunity to explain our
policies, or failed to face up to the ramifications of
those policies.
As Treasurer and then Prime Minister, I have taken full
responsibility for the economic and social affairs of
Australia. And all the responsibility that is mine, I
will shoulder. All the damage that the recession has
done, I will attempt to repair. Every sensible thing that
can be done, will be done. Much of it is already being
done and I want the chance to build on this.
7150 
AS I said in the campaign launch, fifteen years ago I
began to imagine an Australia which not only exported
minerals and farm products, but Sophisticated
manufactures. The thought occurred to me and a few other colleagues that
Australia could be what no one had really ever imagined it
could be that is. a country integrated with the world
( you've heard it before I know), focussed on the region,
competitive, creative, sophisticated secure.
And as every one of you know this is happening. Any one
who was old enough and compos mantis in the 1970s will
know what a huge change there has been.
You've heard the figures exporting nearly one-quarter of
our total product, exporting 70 per cent of it to Asia,
exporting quantities of elaborately transformed
manufactures we never dreamed we could make.
Some of you will have seen the McKinsey report on the new
breed of Australian company which is emerging. Some of
you will have noticed that in the last two months, a
S2 billion contract has been signed by BHP with the
Vietnamese Government, and yesterday a $ 1 billion
hydro-electric project in Laos one of the largest
construction projects yet in Indo-China.
These-things are happening as a result of a conscious
decision by the Australian people to change. These things
are happening because we intended them to hKappen.
The new Australia the Australia of the nineties will
be different from the Australia of any other era. And the
essential difference will be this: the Australia of the
nineties will be one entirely conceived by Australians and
brought into being by Australians and wearing the stamp
Aius~ tralija on everything it does.
Now I say that is at stake on Saturday. Our economic
future is at stake, and so is the quality of our society
the Australian stamp of our society.
So much is at risk. A society where chil~ d-Car -e is,
finally, a right. A society which believes women should
get equal pay and be able to participate fully in all
areas of work and life. A society which cherishes those
who spend part of their lives caring for children or sick
people. Those of you who know me will know what I believe.
Whatever my faults, I don't think hiding my beliefs is one
of them.
Very simply I believe in creating a high wage, high skill
and high productivity ' Australia. John Hewson believes in
a low wage, low productivity Australia. John Howson believes in dismantling the public sector he
hates the., public sector. I, believe in making the public
sector, as it is in every successful country, more
efficient, more people-oriented.
John Howson believes in fear in the workplace. I believe
in cooperation and creativity in the workplace.
John Howson believes in private health insurance. I
believe in sharing our personal health care risks through
a national public and private system working in
cooperation. John Hewson believes in zero tariffs as an end in itself.
I believe in using tariff reform as a fair benchmark to
improve our industry with long term plans and safeguards.
John Howson believes in American razzamatazz and hoopla
and carefully staged passion plays and bunfights, and
American advisers, and the constant reiteration of poll
driven phrases.
I don't believe in it, myself. I think it's an assault on
good democratic Australian traditions. I think it's
rubbish. I think one should face the music scratchy,
discordant, unpleasant music though it might be. I think
you have to say what you believe and be prepared to defend
it in detail.
This way at least, when people vote on Saturday they will
know what they will get with Paul Keating. To judge him
by his campaign, the same cannot be said of John Hewson.
Finally, let me say this if people are not convinced by
Dr Howson's intention to impose a GST, to make Medicare a
universal health system in name only, to destroy the basic
rights of workers and the cooperative ethic of the
Australian workplace, to turn our colleges and
universities into businesses, to set back our environment
programs a generation or more if they're not convinced
that Dr Hewson's policies represent a threat to our way of
life and our values, perhaps it will help to think of it
in philosophical terms.
Dr Howson's philosophy is based on the idea of selfinterest
and survival of the fittest. Remember what
Margaret Thatcher said: there is no such thing as
society, only individuals making their way. This is Dr
Hewson' s philosophy.
He wants to impose this idea on Australia. That's what he
means by breaking the mould.
What he doesn't like about Australia is the humanitarian,
community ethos the one that is there in Australia from
the beginning of our European history until now. Think
about it. The heroes of Australia have always been and
remain the champions of the underdog. 
Now this may not fit well with the economics that Dr
Hewson believes in, but it fits well with Australia. It
is what we are. It has sprung from our history. It is
what unites us it is the principal bond between us.
I hope I never see the day when our traditions are
subverted by the doctrine of unmitigated self-interest.
That is Dr Hewson's doctrine if I fought him on nothing
else, as an Australian, I would fight him on this.
So if you're not persuaded that ripping up the . social wage
and introducing a giant flat tax will irrevocably-dam8
the fabric and the way of life of Australia, be persuaded
by this.
Be persuaded by the philosophical change, the change in
the ethic be persuaded by all those statements Dr Hewson
has made in the last couple of years, the most telling of
which was that one in the Budget reply when he said, we
must not reach back for people because they will drag us
down. This goes to the heart of it. Ultimately this is the
nature of the risk. John Hewson has been projecting a
more temperate image in recent weeks of course but
perhaps the best reminder of John Hewson's old Fightback 1
persona came in January, in a speech byAshley_
Goldsworthy, the Liberal Party Federal President.
Goldsworthy said Australia needed a jolt. " Life has to
become tougher", he said " with less security and greater
uncertainty". Be warned:-this is the brave new world of Dr Hewson. Let
dog eat dog. Let the lucky and the rich prosper and the
rest gather the crumbs that fall. Dr Hewson is an
unashamed theorist of trickle down economics. If he is
allowed to become a practitioner of this theory, he will
turn Australia on its head.
Call it scaremongering if you like. I do fear for
Australia. I fear for the people. I fear for all those
things which bind us together, and in which I believe
above all other things.
But it's not scaremongering. It's factmongering.
Exposing the facts which Dr Hewson won't reveal.
I am absolutely sure that Dr Hewson will be bad for
Australia. His agenda is radical, disruptive,
destructive. I sincerely hope and believe that
Australians will recognise that they cannot take the risk. NE S L a AS
11 March 1993
COALITION WILL RUIN GAS INDUSTRY
Claims today by Tim Fischer about the future of gas in the Nowra region are a
cheap diversion from the Coalition's real agenda of ruiningthe gas industry
The Federal Minister for Resources, Alan Griffiths, stonglv refuted claims by
Mr Fischer that Labor would not build the gas p, eine extension to Nowra.
" Labor has committed $ 15 million to extende Moomba-Sydney pipeline to
Nowra, to ensure gas is supplied as cheaq as possible to the region, especially
the crucial APPM paper recycling plan ocated in Nowra," Mr Griffiths said.
" We stand by this commitment. T people of Nowra can be assured that the
pipeline extension will be deli ed."
The Coalition plans to sell o the pipeline, regardless of the consequences.
Mr Fischer is today ipdulging in pathetic politics to disguise the fact that the
pipeline extension to Nowra will not be built under the Coalition the pipeline
will simply be soldoff to meet the Coalition's unrealisable promises.
" Only last week, Mr Fischer spoke at the Australian LP gas conference, where
the Coalitio's GST policies were condemned as representing an end to the auto
LP gas industry.
" Furtermore, Mr Fischer knows full well that the Coalition's GST policies will
cripple attempts by the gas industry to extend gas pipelines which supply gas
to'more Australians," the Minister said.
/ Labor was the force behind the Moomba-Sydney pipeline, which now supplies
gas to Sydney and the many country centres Mr Fischer claims to represent,
including Wagga, Orange, Cowra and Young. Under Labor the Pipeline is
being extended to Griffith, Leeton and Narrandera.
Only Labor has a true commitment to develop Australian gas resources to meet
Australian energy needs.
Further information: Kristen Barry ( 06) 2777480
" 7 1. s A 



TEL: S P06---
WELL this is the * weetebt victory of All
-this is thes~ weret. This is a victory for
the true believers, the people who in
difficult times. have ke'pt the faith and to
the Austr-4lian people going throucih hard
time. It makebs tileir Ac-t Of faith All that
much greater.
It will be a long time before an
Opposition party' tries to divide this
Country again. 11 w~ ill be is lont time beforc
somebodyv tries~ to put one 970UP Of
Australians over here and another group
over there.
The public of Atustralia are tooo decent
and they awe too consacientious and the.%
are too interested in their country to wear
those sorts of things.
This I think has been very much a
victory of Australian values, because It
was Australian values on the line and the
Liberiii Party wanted to change Austria
from the coup try I is become, a coaperatie,
decent. nice place to live where
people have regard for ovie another.
Anid could I just say that this has been a
hard campaign and I can assure every
member of the public out there, when
they think we don't know In the political
system how tough it is. I can assure you I
can tell you how tough It was in those last
few weeks.
But can I say to you that I wanted to win
iigain, to be there in the 19905 to see
Australia prosper as it will.
The thing is. I said to the Australian
people ~ we've tu-nea the corner'. Can I say
now, after the election, let me repeat it:
we have turned the corner. The growth is
coming through. We will see ourselves as
a sophisticated trading country in Asia
and we've got to do It in a way where
everybody's got a part in it, where
everyone's In It.
There's always cause for concern but
never pessimism and Australia, wherein
for the first time in our history, located in
the region o( the fastest growth in the
world, and we've been set up now, we are
set up now as~ we've never been set up
before to be in It, to exploit. It, to be part of
IIt offers tremendous opportunities for
Autralans and now we have to do it. and
we havi. to do it comspas. sionately.
I give an assurance to the people that
this victory won't go to the heads of the Victory from
true believers
Government of the Labur Party. Well
take~ it seriously, we'll Wike it thankfully,
and well do a great deal with it.
The people of Austraia, have t" en us
on trurt. and we'll return that trust and
we'll care about those people out there,
particularly the unemployed we want to
get them back to work.
If we can't get them back to work
Immredilately. sune as hell we are going
to took after them. We are not going to
leave them in the lurch. We are not going
to leave them In the lurch and we are
going put our hand out and we are going
to pull them up behind u&amp;.
And we are going to move along, this
country is going to move along together.
We have such enormous opportunity. This
world recession is now starting to
dissipate, we've made the break out of It,
This is the text of the victory
speech by the Prime Minister,
Mr Keoting
America's starting to turn, it won't be that
long before the Japanese economy 5tarts
to turn, and hopefully well be away and
running In the 90s in a low inflationary
period of prosperity.
I can assure you the Government will
now be redoubling its efforts to be as good
a government iia you hope and expect we
can be. To be as Conscientious with this
mandate as we possibly Can be. to give It
our every ef fort our every shot, to see
that we recover quickly and we get going
and we put t'his recessionary period
behind us and we Set this country Of
opportunity off and running.
But keeping the opporteuity for
everybody keeping those preat
keeping those great..,. keeping those
great nostrumb of access and equity.
Getting people into the game. The
poliies~ of inclusion. The policies of One Nation. And that's what it,-g ot to be
about. So can I say Again. this is a tremendous
victory. It's a tremendous victory for all
those who have got imagination and faith.
The people who believe in things. who are
not going to let orood beliefs be put aside
for e. sentially miserable ideas to divide
the place up.
I mean. I think the Australian people
have always had such remarkable sense to
spot the value and to cut their way
through It.
Now part of this victory is our part of
it is them spotting what they think were
the dangers In the Liberal Party's policies,
What I hope in that the next election the
victory is 100 per cent due to the good
governiment of Labor.
Now. I'd like to start thanking tiome
people and the first person I'd like to start
with is my wife, Aurtita, who has helped
me right through the campaign. Thank
yout. Arid can I also say, can I give an extras
special note of thanks to the women of
Australia. who voted for us believing in
the policies of this Government.
I want to pay a paticular thanks also to
good on you mate I want to pay at
particular thanks to the architects of this
victory, my personal staff. Don Russell,
Mark Ryab. Don Watson. my press
sertaries and the rest.
And most partcularly to those people In
the Labor Party w-ho've never lost faith,
never iost heart. and are there at the
polling booths to work and to fight for
good things. Thank you. The people who
never give up but always keep on believing
and are always there no matter how heavy
the travails may be. to You I * Ay thank you
very, very much Indeed.
Thank You again and thank you for
believing. But could I most particularly, " nd again
finally, thank the Austrlan people
without whose faith and decency and
commitment to what's fair and what's
reasonable and what is decent in this
coUntr, without thoue conscientious
judgments this victory could not have
been consummated and put together.
Thank YOu.
And I concludle on this. note, to say we
thank you. we appreciate it. we won't let
you down. Thank you.
TE1L6: . Jul. 93 10: 45 No. 001 P. 01 



PRIME MINISTER 47/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
This afternoon's meeting of the Labor Party Caucus elected thirty members of the
ministry. The following candidates were succcssful:
Paul Keating, Brian Howe, Senator Garcth Evans, Senator Robert Ray, Senator Peter
Cook, David Bcddall, Ross Free, Jeanncttc McHugh, Gordon Bilncy, Robert Tickner, Ros
Kclly, Peter Baldwin, Simon Crean, Senator Nick Bolkus, Kim Beazlcy, John Dawkins,
Alan Griffiths, Senator Bob Collins, Ralph Willis, Michael Lee, Senator Graham
Richardson, Michael Lavarch, Laurie Brercton, Senator Bob McMullan, Duncan Kerr,
Senator Rosemary Crowlcy, Frank Walker, Senator John Faulkner, Senator Chris Schacht,
George Gear.
The allocation of ministerial portfolios will be announced tomorrow morning, before the
swearing in ceremony at Government House.
The Parliamentary Leaders in the House of Representatives remain Paul Keating and
Brian Ilowe. In the Senate, Senator Garcth Evans is the leader, with Senator Robert Ray
the deputy.
The Govenment's candidate for the position of Speaker of the House of Representatives is
Mr Stephen Martin. The candidate for Deputy Speaker is Harry Jenkins.
Mr Leo McLeay was elected Government Whip in the House of Representatives. Senator
Gerry Jones will be the Government Whip in the Senate.
Mr Jim Snow was elected chairman of Caucus, with Senator Sue West the Caucus
secretary. The selection of the Government's candidate for the position of President of the Senate has
been deferred until the next Caucus meeting, probably early in May.
CANBERRA March 23,1993 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING NIMP
The swearing in of the second Keating Ministry will take place at 10.30 am today,
Wednesday 24 March. I am pleasedito announce the composition of the ministry which I
will be recommending to the Governor-General.
The complete list of the ministry, with details of representation of ministers in the other
chamber, is attached.
There will continue to be thiny ministers, with a Cabinet of nineteen and ten
parliamentary secretaries.
As well as bringing new figures into the Cabinet and the Ministry, I have taken the
opportunity to make several changes indepartmental arrangements to reflect emerging
priorities. But the basic structures themselves a Labor reform have served well and
will remain.
As before the election, the Cabinet includes a number of ministers with long experience in
government. I am pleased to announce that Senator Graham Richardson will once again
bring his considerable abilities to the Cabinet. The talented Cabinet team has also been
augmented by the elevation to Cabinet of Peter Baldwin, a minister of outstanding ability
who will be able, as a Cabinet member, to build on his earlier experience as a minister.
I also welcome to the Cabinet three new members who have not previously held
ministerial posts. They are Bob McMullan, Laurie Brereton and Michael Lee who I am
confident will be able to make major contributions to the work of the government in the
portfolios of Arts and Administrative Services, Industrial Relations, Tourism and
Resources. It is also the intention to appoint Michael Lavarch as Attorney-General after
the poll for the seat of Dickson.
In. addition, there.. will be six new ministems.. not in the Cabinet. They are Frank Walker,
who as Special Minister of State in my portfolio will have particular responsibility for
facilitation of major development projects: George Gear; Chris Schacht; John Faulkner,
Rosemary Crowley and Duncan Kerr. The infusion of new talent they represent will help
ensure that the government continues to be relevant and responsive to the changing
conditions and circumstances of the 1990s. Mr Kerr will act as Attorney-General pending
Mr Lavarch's appointment. 
2
Of the Parliamentary Secretaries, six are new to the position. The institution of
Parliamentary Secretary provides a very inexpensive means not only of giving talented
individuals executive experience but providing Ministers with needed support.
I wish to draw attention to the important modifications in ministerial arrangements.
As Prime Minister I am already significantly involved, through my department and
Ministers assisting me, in the major areas of social and cultural change in Australia
represented by the Office of the Status of Women. the Office of Multicultural Affairs and
the Aboriginal Reconciliation Unit. The 1990s will see us carry further the shift towards a
more diverse, outward looking and just society and I intend to enhance the role of the
Prime Ministership in this.
Accordingly there will be an Office of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs in the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, and the Minister and ATSIC will be
located in my portfolio. The Office will not be large, but have a policy advising capability
and will house the Aboriginal Reconciliation Unit. The Office will also be able to provide
advice and services to the minister when it would be inappropriate for the only source of
advice to be ATSIC. For example where Aboriginal groups engage in litigation against
the Commonwealth there may be a nced-for instructions to the Commonwealth's legal
advisers of a kind which ATSIC would regard as inconsistent with its role.
I emphasise, however, that there is no intention in establishing the Office to undermine the
primary role of ATSIC as adviser to the government on Aboriginal matters. Excellent
working relationships have been established between the portfolio and ATSIC on major
issues and this will continue. The Office will complement ATSIC and its creation
highlights the importance the Government attaches to addressing issues affecting
Aboriginal and Tones Strait Islander people and, in particular, to pressing ahead
effectively with the reconciliation process.
Some particular programs for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people will remain
with the specialised Departments, for example DEET in the area of education. But Mr
Tickner, as Minister with overall responsibility in the field, will take a strong and
continuing interest in all the Government's activities in Aboriginal affairs.
Senator Evans, who will be the Minister for Foreign Affairs, will be joined in the Foreign
Affairs and Trade portfolio by a second Cabinet minister, Senator Cook, who takes on the
vital responsibility of pursuing our overseas trade interests. His ability to concentrate
effort upon this will be enhanced by the presence in the portfolio of a third Minister,
Gordon Bilney, who will take over development assistance activities, formerly with the
Trade Minister.
Mr Howe, the Deputy Prime Minister, will be Minister for Housing, Local Government
and Community Services. We are concerned to improve the quality of life in our cities
and particularly people's access to services through improvements in service delivery and
planning. Mr Howe will have particular responsibility for initiatives in this area, along
with continuing responsibility for housing matters, including the better cities program,
augmented by local government which has been in the immigration portfolio, and
locational disadvantage studies which have been in the Department of the Prime Minister 
3
and Cabinet. Mr Howe's portfolio will also take responsibility for the National Capital
Planning Authority.
I expect health issues to have an even higher focus during the next parliamentary term.
We need to examine service delivery issues to improve the efficiency with which the
medical system meets customer needs. We need also to look at the relationship between
the public and private health systems to ensure we are using both optimally, and to make
the most of the linkage between the two. Reflecting this and especially the Medicare
arrangements, there will be another Cabinet minister in the Health. Housing, Local
Government and Community Services portfolio. This is Senator Richardson, who
becomes Minister for Health.
Reflecting this government's commitment to families, there will also be a Minister for
Family Services in the Health, Housing, Local Government and Community Services
portfolio, which will be further enhanced by the addition of the Child Protection Council
and the International Year of the Family secretariat, from the Prime Minister and Cabinet
portfolio. Rosemary Crowley, the Minister for Family Services, will also be Minister
assisting me for the Status of Women.
As promised before the election, there will be a ministry with special responsibility for
regional development. The Department of Industry, Technology and Regional
Development, under Mr Griffiths, will co-ordinate national programs to bring vigorous
new industries to declining regions and to equip people with the skills needed for these
new industries. The Office of Northern Development will move from my department to
the Department of Industry, Technology and Regional Development and Mr Ted Lindsay,
the Parliamentary Secretary in that portfolio, will have special responsibility for Northem
Development issues.
There has been significant structural change in many industries in recent years and,
increasingly, this is being linked to broader competition policy issues. The current Hilmer
Review into competition policy should reinforce these linkages. In this climate. I have
decided to move responsibilities for competition policy into the Treasury, so that it may
complement further the government's continuing microeconomic reform agenda.
Consumer interests will, however, continue to be handled by the Minister for Consumer
Affairs, Ms McHugh, in the Attorney-General's portfolio.
I have also decided to streamline the Cabinet commitee_. systeniand have committees
rather than full Cabinet handle the initial consideration of Cabinet matters.
This approach will leave the Cabinet free to concentrate on broader strategic issues rather
than some of the more detailed deliberations which can take considerable Cabinet time.
Committee decisions will continue to be submitted to Cabinet for endorsement and
Cabinet will be expected to consider the major policy issues, but without getting bogged
down in detail which can be settled in the Committee discussions.
The new Cabinet structure will consist of:-
Expenditure Review Committee
Structural Adjustment Committee 
4
Social Policy Committee
Security Committee
General Policy Committee
Parliamentary Business committee
A General Policy Committee has been added to the structure to pick up the issues not
falling within the terms of reference of the other policy committees and the Sustainable
Development Committee has been abolished as its principal task of developing the
Ecologically Sustainable Development and Greenhouse strategies has been completed.
New administrative arrangements were put in place in December 1992 to handle the
authorisation of draft legislation and there is, therefore, no longer a need for a Legislation
Committee. Details of the membership of committees will be released separately.
Also attached is a list of departmental secretaries.
The government is well served by the public service and regards stability at the top as
desirable. We do, however, have a policy of rotating secretaries after several years in their
positions and have taken : he opportunity of the appointment of a new ministry to effect a
small number of changes
Mr Tony Cole, the Secre: ary to the Treasury, will become Secretary to the Department of
Health, Housing, Local Government and Community Services. Mr Ted Evans, a former
Deputy Secretary in the Treasury, moves from his current post at the International
Monetary Fund to become Secretary to the Treasury. Mr Derek Volker, Secretary to the
Department of Social Security, moves to Employment, Education and Training to be
replaced by Mr Tony Blunn from the Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment and
Territories. Mr Stuart Hamilton, from Health, Housing and Community Services will
become Secretary to the Department of Environment, Sport and Territories.
Dr Geoff Miller. currently Secretary to the Department of Primary Industries and Energy,
is a candidate for the position of Director-General of the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organisation. In recognition of his need to spend a good deal of his time in
pursuit of this objective, and to enhance his prospects. Dr Miller has asked to be relieved
of the full time burden of his present duties The government is strongly supportive of
Dr Miller's candidacy. and accordingly we have decided to appoint him Associate
Secretary for Agriculture in the Department of Primary Industries and Energy. He will be
succeeded as Secretary by Mr Greg Taylor, from Employment, Education and Training.
He will, however, remain Secretary to the Department of Tourism.
I wish to. take this. opportunity to. thank. those. Secretaries whoare moving for their
contributions to the government and the nation over the last few years. I am confident
they will continue to maintain the quality of public administration.
CANBERRA 24 March 1993 
Commonwealth Government 24 March 1993
SECOND KEATING MINISTRY
TITLE MislTER eraaiztt
olber Chamber
Prime Minister The Hon P J Keating, MIP Senator Evans
Special Minister of State T'he Hon Frank Walker. OC. MY Senator Evans
( Vice-Presideni of the Executive Council)
Minister for Aboriginal and Tonfes Strait Islander Affairs The Hon Robert Tickner. MP Senator C: i.; ns
Mlinister for Housing, Local Government and Community The Hon Brian How. e, NIP Senator R: chardson
Services ( Deputy Prime Ministeri
Minoister for Health Senator the Hon Graham Richardson MIr Howe
Minister for Family Services Senator the Hon Rosemary Crowley Mrt Howe
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Sratus of Women
Minister for Veterans' Affairs Senator the Hon John Faulkner Mir Howe
( Manager of Government Business in the Senate
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Andrew Theophanous, MP
Minister for Foreign Affairs Senator the Hon Gareth Evans. QC % Ir Bilney
( Leader of the Government tn the Senatie)
Minister for Trade Senator the Hon Peter Cook Mr Bilney
Minister for Development Co-operation and Pacific Island Affairs The Hon Gordon Bilney, MP Senator Evans
Minister for Defence Senator the Hon Robert Ray kir Bilney
( Deputy Leader of the Governmient to the Senate)
Minister for Defence Science and Personnel Senator the Hon John Faulkner Senator Ray
Pariamen tary Secretary The Hon Gar% Pu~ nch. M4P
Treasurer The Hon J 5 Daiukins. SIP senator MZM ll;-
Assistant Treasurer The lion Gecrgc Gear. SIP' Senator SN: I!: i
Parliamentarv SecretarY The Hont G.: rv Johns. MP
Mlinister for Finance The Hon Ralph Willis. NIP Senator MMia
Mlinister for Employment. Education and Training The Hon Kimi C Beazlcy, NIP Senator Rsy
( Leader of the House)
Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training rhe lion Ross Free. NIP Senator 113%
Parliamentary Secretary The lion Warren Snow don, MfP
Minister for the Environment, Sport and Territories The Hon Ros Kelly, NIP Senator Ray
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Senator the Hon Nick Bolkus Mr Brcre::-.
Minister Assisting the Prim e Minister for M n Itrcuiltura!.;: r
Nlinister for Primary Industrics and Encr-, y Thc Hon Simon Crean, NIP Senator C--ck
Minister for Resources Trhe lion Mlichael Lee. NIP' Senator CzoL
Parliamen tary Secretary Senator the Hon Nick S/ terra'
Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional Dc%-clopment The Hon Alan Griffiths. NIP Senator Sz: tcht
Minister for Science and Small Business Senator the Hon Chris Schachi Mr Griff..*' s
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Science
Parliamenstary Secretary The Hon Ted LindsaY MP
Minister for Transport and Communications Senator the Hon Bob Collins Mr Beddali
Minister for Communications The H-on David Beddall, NIP Senator Collins
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Neil OKeefe. AfP
Minister for Social Security The Hon Peter Baldwtin, NIP Senator Richardson
Parliamentary Secretary Th e H-on Con Scia cca. MP
Minister for the Arts an4. A AiniLratiVC. Seriices.. saahs. eJ1Qs.. UobMNIIan Mir Willis
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Janice Crosio. WIE. MP
Minister for Industrial Relations The Hon Laurie Brercton, NIP Senator NIcMulIlan
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Service Afaters
Attorney -General The Hon Duncan Kerr, NIP ( Acting)* Senator Bolkus
Minister for Consumer Affairs The Hon Jeannette MlcHugh, NIP Senator B" lkus
Minister for Justice The Hon Duncan Kerr. MP Senator Bolkus
Parliamentary Secretary Thte Hon Peter Duincan. MP
Minister for Tourism The Hon Michael Lee. NIP Senator Schacht
Each box represents ap ortfolio. Cabinet MIinitrs are shous in bold type. .' asa g eneral rule, there is one Department in each portfolio. Except fcr the
Department of Health. Housing. Local Government and Communty Serv'ices and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the title of each Deparnaent reflects
that of the Portfolio Minister. Tbere is also a Department of Veterans' Affairs ia the Health. H ousing. Local Ga errmit and Community Scrvices Pcrfolio.
' Mr Lai arch will be appointed Attorney -General. dcerndtne on the re-sult of election for the seat of Dickson. 23.3.93 * 5.45 pm 
SECRETARIES TO DEPARTMENTS
Department Arts and Administrative
Services Attomey-Generais
Defence Employment, Education
and Training
Environment, Sport and
Termtones Finance Foreign Affairs and
Trade Health, Housing, Local
Government and
Community Services
Immigraton and Ethnic
Affairs Industrial Relations
Industry, Technology
and Regional
Development Primary Industries and
Energy Prime Minister and
Cabinet Social Security
Tourism Transport and
Communications Treasury Veterans' Affairs Secretary Mr N J Tanzer
Mr A D Rose
Mr A J Ayers, AC
Mr D Volker, AO
Mr S A Hamilton
Mr S T Sedgwick
Dr P S WilensKi, AO
Mr A S Cole
Mr C Conybeare
Mr M J Costello
Mr N R Stevens
Mr G F Taylor
Dr M S Keating, AO
Mr A S Blunn, AO
Dr G L Miller
Mr G C Evans
Mr E A Evans
Mr L B Woodward SE'n ac
I= W2= 3 



TEL: 7. Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 01/ 05 i
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRINIE MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, ImP
OPENING OF MICHAEL LAVARCH'S CAMPAIGN OFFICE, STRATHPINE
QUEENSLAND, 7 APRIL 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you for that very gcnerous round of applause, and could I thank the Premier,
Wayne Goss, for that generous introduction, and say how pleased I am to be here with
Michael and Linda. My Parliamentary Colleagues, Party President and other members
who are supportive of the Queensland Labor Party, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is always interesting after an election to see what thc-published plls say, because they
are more likely to get it right after the event than before the event' pairticularly with exit
polls and the rest. What the last week or two has shown is that Government support has
risen and Coalition support has fallen remarkcdly. I think we are entitled to say, or to
conclude from that, the public have thought about the election in the three weeks or so
since, and have decided that they have done the right thing. They thought their decision
was right. These were not just confluences of circumstances which lead them to a
particular decision, that upon more mature reflection they might like to reconsider. I think
if the polls give us any indication, they arc only into indications and not levels, the levels
invariably are not that accurate. But as indications, it is an indication that the public had
thought that it was right. What we did was right. And that I think is very good for the
country, very good for the Government, because I think that for that sense of appraisal to
have taken place is important.
And of course they don't go against the background of a Coalition Party which has
literally dropped its bundle. We have seen in the weeks since the election, the Coalition
now without a policy, without any idea of'what basis of appeal they believe they should
have for Australia, let alone for themselves. So they have a candidate fielded in this
election for the electorate of Dickson who is a candidate campaigning on a policy that
doesn't exist, and the only policy tliat exists of course, as Wayne indicated in his speech,
one borrowed from Thatcher in the late 1970s, what was basically an agenda policy of the
Treasuries of the Western World in the 1970s the British Treasury, the Australian
Treasury and which where having the world moved on the Coalition picked it up and
ran mightily with it. 
TEL
1 2
But again, as Wayne intimated, their policies not only lack breadth and depth, but it
lacked any sense of charity. I[ think the public thought to themselves, there has got to be
more than one's nose to the grindstone, there's got to be more than this concept of no gain
without pain, there had to be something better, something broader, something deeper, a
greater sense of community than that which wc have been offered by the Coalition, and
one which is going to seriously disadvantage many Australians, particularly working
Australians. So it is very, in a sense, interesting that in one of thc fastest Vrowing ports of Australia we
are now going to have another contest, another election. An election for the seat of
Dickson, an election which has arisen in quite extraordinary circumistances and where we
are also proposing another quite novel feature of thc clection, and that is the Labor
Government of the Commonwealth is saying to the people of Dickson should you
consider our candidate, and consider him worthy to be elcted as Member for Dickson, we
will make him a member of the Cabinet of the Commonwealth.
This says a number of things. The first thing it says is that we would not have presumed
to have sworn Michael Lavarch as Attorney General, but rather made clear we would
nominate him upon the people's choiZac'flist poinf7 Second point is that he is coming as a
member of Parliament from the State of Queensland and as a very young man to a senior
ministerial job. The first law officer of the Commonwealth at the age of 31. Those two
points are very important. The third is, that he comes representing a community which is
growing very strongly, where there is a demand for services, whcre hc is perhaps as
representative as anyone might wish to be from one of the growing areas of Australia, and
saying we put a premium on that sort of an area in this country being represented in the
cabinet of the government of Australia. Because our Govenment is about governing
broadly and governiing for people who are not advantaged by wealth, and not advantaged
by great circumnstance and who often live with the vagaries and difficulties of a rapidly
growing suburb or region. Michael talked about the services which this area needs and
those which chc Commonwealth has proposed, and has introduced over time, but whcre in
an area growing twicc as fast as this, in a State which is the fastest growing State of
Australia, Queensland, that so typically chat we have chosen such a person to represent us.
I think on those three counts, I hope thc people of Dickson cake the view that they would
choose wisely in choosing Michael Lavarch, someone who has already served Queensland
in the seat of Fisher, who has served in local Govcrniment who understands the
community, is of the community, is from the community and will represent the
community. I don't think any party can offer much more than that to any constituency, to
any electorate, and I think that we are offering. We are offerig as well the opportunity
for the people of Dickson to bc part of the generational change in the Government of the
Commonwealth. TEL.: Rpr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 02/ 05 
TEL: . Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 03/ 0
3
This is an important thing. Governments, particularly governments that have had ten
years In office, need that change, they need that horse power, that charge, the energy
which comes from fresh ideas and fresh faces. Yesterday we had our first Cabinet meeting
of the newly sworn Cabinet and just the change in the composition and the relative age of
the members. I said to Brian Howe who was sitting beside mc, we are now a couple of
oldies in here. It was true I think, and the conversation had some zest. People had read
the brief and they wanted to put their view, and felt all of that electricity and charge that
one felt in the flush of the Government's clcction in 1983 through thc 1980s. Secing it
thcrc again really is very, very encouraging indeed.
That is why I think that Michael Lavarch's elect ion in Dickson can just accelerate that
process by seeing a Queenslander in one of the real jobs, the strong portfolio of the
Commonwealth, the Attorney-Generalship of this country.
We say that we would usc our mandate well, we will use it conscientiously. And
everything we have done since thc election should demonstrate to the public that that is
so. That nothing will be taken for granted, that the public have taken us on trust and it is
trust that we will return to them, and that we will use both the opportunities and the time
to the best of our advantage and theirs.
All of that augurs well for Australia, and I might it augurs well for Queensland. Because
always I get a charge from the throb of Queensland, you get that throb about the place
because it is growing, it is expanding, it is moving, there is optimism here. I just spent a
week in North Queensland, and I was making the point to the Premier on the way across
that coming through this electorate, the growing area, it's got all the buzz of a place on the
move as one gets right throughout Queensland. We do have great opportunities in
Australia and one of the places of opportunities is the State of Queensland, and it is
governed by a governmcnt which is going to be doing the same things and thinking the
samec way as the Commonwcalth Government so that we advance together, we use the
huge power of the Commonwealth with the co-operation of Wayne and his Government
in ways that I think Premicis like Joh Bjclkc-Pctcrscn and others just let opportunities slip
by, by naked, narrow, politicising of State and Commonwealth dichotomics, having
attacks upon the Commonwealth government, who ever it might be, which was not really
productive for the people of Queensland.
That has all changed. Wc have got a very co-opcrative relationship and one where the
Commonwealth today is doing things which formerly was the preserve of the States and
where the States were doing things for the Commnonwealth in areas which were only done
by us. I think the changes we made at thc Commonwealth Council of Australian
Governments, where we can sit down and discuss non-financial matters in things like
education, in railwvays, in coutis, in the micro-economy), in packaging, in standards and all
these other things, are things where co-operativc Fceralisni does mean something in the
hands of good pcoplc and pcopic who want to do things. 
TEL: 7. Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 04/ 05
4
So I am very encouraged, naturally I suppose, by the events of the last month, but I'm
particularly encouraged by the circumstances we find ourselves in with thc Government
here In Queensland and in Australia generally.
Let me say a few special words for our friends in the Opposition. don't want to leave
them out. TeNtoaPnyof course, laid a dead hand on Australia for most of the
post-War years. If there is one reason why Australia has got structural problems today it
is because of the hayseeds of thc National Party. Even those rare well springs of
inspiration that might have comne from Libcral Party ministers in Coalition governments
were extinguished by the dead hand of the National Party. Whose view has always been,
and it has been particularly true in education. Michael, Wayne, Linda and I were just at a
Statc Highi School and wvc were talking about the opportunities for kids and the
importance of higher education, tertiary and vocational educat ion. The National Party
were not big on education, they wanted people educated no further than primary school
and then happily voting for the National Party. That was thcir model, the model they
work In. Holding up a TAFE or a univcrsity to the National Party is like some institution
they moved back from. They just don't like what it stands for.
Thc National Party have bccn a force in Queensland. They filled a void, a political void
not a community void, and now their National Party in coalition with the Liberal Party
just don't know what they stand for. They have got no idca what they stand for, they have
not developed any model of Australian society, they don't know where thcy want to see
the place, they don't know how they want to sce it, they are still fighting reas guard actions
on cverything that you Imagine and adopting the most right wing ideology where ever it is
possible. John Hcwson said that if lie was forced to dump the GS1he would resign. Well he was
forced to dump the GST by his party and he is still there. So that means he never meant it
or the GST was just a device. Whatever it means, it means the L. iberal Party is in a state of
ideological and policy chaos.
And we say to the public of Qucensland in the electorate of Dickson don't elect a party
that docsn't know what it wants to do for you. Don't elect a party that not only doesn't
know what it wants to do for you, but of course is not going to be in office.
So this is a time when the conservative forces in this country have got to re-think a
position for Australia beyond thc morbid ideological positions thcy have thought in the
past. Let's hope that they understand that Australia is a country with great opportunities,
that it is a country that will always be best when people are looking up, ilot looking down,
that we can havc progress without pain, we can if we give people the opportunity and put
faith in them, thcy can do good things, and close as we are in the Asia-Pacific where such
opportunities abound and where we have already made inexplicable links, that our future
is as a country which is very proud of its identity and understands what it is and goes to
the world making that clear. 
TEL: 7. Apr. 93 17: 20 No. 006 P. 05/ 05
I don't know whether you noticed two days ago in the international press one central
newspaper in China making this very point about Australia saying they are shaking off the
colonial yoke, in all ways Australia is now ready to join the region, we welcome them.
IThis is the point they don't understand. And there they all were the Nats, over at the
school waving their banners half an hour ago, and most of the slogans are all the remnant
issues that thcy will fight to the death as the country moves on.
I say this to the people of Dickson, let's move on.
Leave them behind, they have nothing to offer. Maybe at some point in the future they
will, it is going to be a long way off. The public have made a wise decision in re-electing
the Government, and as a result the Government has taken their mandatc conscientiously
and given them a young, vibrant Cabinct in return and comnmitment to the policies we
espouse and the philosophy of Australian life we espoused in the election campaign.
So I[ can only enjoin them to re-elect Michael LUvarch to the House of Representatives,
and on so doing it would be my great pleasure then to recommend him to the Governor
General as Attorney-General to the Commonwealth so that one of the fastest developing
areas of Brisbane, of Queensland will be represented right in the key forum of the National
Government the Cabinet -and where the State of Qucensland in gencral will find his
representation being enhanced by that very high office.
So to all of you who havc fought the last election and found that you were was scratched
just before the racc, my commiserations, but let's say it was the preparation for a bigger
event, another clection, pcrhaps a more meaningful endorsement of the Labor Party and its
young, talented candidate in the electorate of Dickson.
Thank you. 



49/
PRIME MINISTER499
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TH1 IHO N P J KFATING SIP
VISIT TO NEW ZFALAND
At the invitation of Prirnc Minister Bolger, I Shall Make an official visit to
New Zealand from 20 to 23 May.
The visit will provide a valuable opportunity to rcaffirmn the relevance and vitality of
the Australia-Ncew Zealand relationship at a tinie when bothi countrics are undergoing
significant economic and social change, and as we position ourselvcs to take full
advantage of closer integration with the Asia-Pacific region.
It is fitting that New Zealand should be the destination of my first over-seas visit since
the March election. Thc trans-Tasman relationship is among Australia's most
important reflecting thc weight of the interests and values we share with New Zealand.
Two-way trade bctween the two countries has grown rapidly since the signing of thc
Australia-New Zcaland Closer Economic Relatioi s To ISAgreenient ( CER) in 1983
and reached over $ 5 billion in 1991-92. New Zealand is Australia's third largest
trading partner, and Australia is Ncw Zcaland's largest. Investnment between Australia
and Ncw Zealand has also grown rapidly to reach a two-way total of about
$ 13.5 billion in 1991.
Increasing interaction between the Australian and New Zealand economics provides a
sound basis for the two countries to eomipctc succesully in the wider international
economy. Creating a singlc mnarkct in Australasia under CER should not be an end in
itsclf. Rather the CER process should be uscd as a platform for both countries to
engage more closely with the dynamic Asia-Pacific regio.
The strength of the bilateral relationship is also reflected in the scale of people-topeople
contacts between the two countries. Over 800,000 Australians and
New Zealanders travelled across the Tasman on short-termi visits in 1991. Australia is
the largcst source of visitors to New Zealand, and New Zealand ranks third as a source
of visitors to Australia. Nearly 290,000 New Zealanders are long-termn residents of
Australia. I expect the agenda for my discussions with Prime Minister lHolger and his Ministers
will be wide ranging and include the further development of our substantial economic
relationship, trans-Tasman aviation and travel arrangements, defence relations, our
respective approaches to closer economic integration with the Asia-Pacific rcgion, and
Australia-New Zealand cooperation in the South-West Pacific.
CANBERRA 13. April 1993 



PRIME MINISTER
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
TO THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS LUNCHEON, MELBOURNE
WEDNESDAY 21 APRIL 1993
Ladies and Gentlemen
The change in our circumstances over the last decade, even
over the last three years, has been profound so profound
it is likely that we have yet to completely absorb its
meaning. We remain beset by all sorts of problems yet the promise is
undeniable. We have never had such opportunities and in
the last decade we have put ourselves in a position where we
have every reason to believe that we can grasp them.
For all the failures -of the last decade we were bold enough
and conscientious enough to do those things which have given
ourselves a chance in the world.
For all that remains to be done the vision of Australia as a
successful trading nation integrated with the world and the
region is now taking shape.
For all the obstacles we still have to overcome, it is
possible that we are now within reach of a new era of
Australian prosperity of self-sustaining growth, of
saving, invest ment, rising productivity, rising incomes,
rising saving, and more growth.
We have eliminated inflation as a problem in the Australian
economy and we have a government, a trade union movement,
a community committed to preventing it ever coming back.
We have upgraded the skills of the workforce, and we have
put into' place plans to continue upgrading it. 
2
We have a much more competitive regulatory environment -and
we will do more.
We have cut industrial disputes to less than half their
level ten years ago, and workplace bargains now cover one
third of employees under federal awards.
Above all, we have begun to internationalise the economy and
change the pattern of production.
We have set ourselves on an irreversible path of winding
down the tariff protection which for so long fettered the
Australian economy. A practical, sensible and measured
program. We have shifted the trade deficit from over 3 per cent of
GDP 10 years ago, to a small surplus in the last financial
year. We have increased exports as a share of GDP from 13 per cent
to over 20 per cent.
The significance of the structura-lchanoe is underlined by
the fact that manufacturing exports are today consistently
equal to or greater than rural exports. Service exports are
now one fifth of our total exports.
We are exporting a higher and higher proportion of product
to the booming markets of East Asia. A higher and higher
proportion of it consists of manufactures. And thatexported
product is more and more coming from relatively
small, highly adaptable firms which depend upon exports for
their survival and growth.
These are big changes substantial, real, and irreversible
changes. There were also shortcomings in the eighties: they left us
with a million people unemployed.
In the course of the election campaign and on the night that
the votes were counted, I said that reducing unemployment
would be the first priority of a second Keating government.
It will be.
Unemployment is principally a result of the recession.
It is an undeniable fact that unemployment is not going to
fall dramatically in the next few years, and equally 
3
undeniable is the fact that longerm unemployment will
increase.
There are now more than 300,000 people who have been
unemployed for 12 months or more. As unemployment falls
over the next few years the number of long-term unemployed
will increase as employers often prefer to take up new
entrants to the labour market or those with only short
periods of unemployment.
But I can tell you now we will not be accepting long-term
unemployment as an insoluble problem, or as an inevitable
fact of life in the new economic order.
Over the past two years, we have greatly increased
assistance for the long-term unemployed and improved the
effectiveness of our labour market programs.
In my speech on election night, I renewed the Government's
commitment to helping those who are unemployed. In
particular, we are determined to reduce long-term
unemployment and assist people who are in this position. If
new policies and practices have to be developed we will
develop them.
The Employment, Education and Training Minister, Kim Beazley
is now examining the full range of programs for the longterm
unemployed to see where improvements can be made.
One thing I think we should now be asking ourselves if the
practice of wholesale retrenchment is really a synonym for
efficiency. We should ask if the human consequences and the social
consequences are not too great. If the economic burden on
the nation does not outweigh the benefits to productivity.
If the uncertainty and resentment retrenchments create does
not in fact reuc efficiency. And if the initial
improvement to the bottom line of balance sheets is not in
many cases more than offset by the resulting inability of
firms to gear up to meet opportunities as demand expands.
I think governments and business alike should be asking
these questions.
As I said during the election campaign: we got a lot right
in the eighties, but we also got a few things wrong. 
4
It is not right that the unemployed should alone pay for
these mistakes; any more than it is right that governments
should withdraw from the consequences of their actions.
The fact is we cannot separate economic ends from social
ones. It is expected of governments that they should seize
national opportunities, such as those which now present
themselves. They should seize them because the national
interest is at stake, the well being of the nation and the
people. The same is true of our social responsibilities, especially
our responsibilities to the unemployed.
I take the March 13 result as a mandate for an Australian
social democratic agenda for strong economic policy
married to programs which produce not just social justice
but social cohesion and strength.
In no way should that put the Government and business at
odds. The success of economic policy depends on the success
of business. The opportunities will have to be seized by
business. The national interest depends on business and
to a very considerable extent I mean small and medium sized
business. I am saying that we have mutual interests and mutual
responsibilities in the economy and society. I am saying
that we should work together for economic an oca ends. I
am saying that our vision should be broad, inclusive,
nationa. We should share it.
The prospect of a new era of Australian prosperity derives
from our having the preconditions of low inflation and a
restructured economy: yet we feel it is also within reach
because there is a new sense of national energy and national
purpose.
Business leaders should not be surprised that tangible
benefits spring from such intangible things as shared goals,
energy and purpose they have their parallels in every
decent management text book.
Ladies and gentlemen, the eighties were a time of real
achievement, but they were also a time of slow productivity
growth, slow income growth, and of national saving
inadequate to the investment task we faced.
The trick in the coming decade will be to keep all our gains
on inflation, on competitiveness, and on exports. 
To keep all these, and at the same time to increase our
investment so that productivity rises faster, and incomes
rise faster, and generate the savings out of which further
investment and further growth is sustained.
It can be done.
There Ja a new confidence abroad.
Already we can see that the expansion currently underway is
quality expansion.
Growth has now been posted for five consecutive quarters.
The current growth rate of 2. 5 per cent is slower than we
need to make real inroads into the numbers of unemployed,
but we need to bear in mind the context of a slow world
economy, where two of the three major world economies are
still in recession.
More importantly the recovery that we have seen over the
past five quarters displays precisely those characteristics
that are required if Australia is to achieve higher and
sustainable growth throughout the 1990s.
Our current inflation rate of 0.3 per cent is the lowest in
the industrialised world.
Net profits in the December quarter 1992 were 75 per cent
above the levels of a year ago.
Productivity in the market sector has grown by 2 per cent
over each of the past two years.
And by tying wages growth increasingly to productivity, unit
labour costs will remain competitive. We have already seen
real unit labour costs fall 0.5 per cent over the last year.
In the last three years only one country out of 23 surveyed
by the OECD saw its trade competitiveness improve more than
Australia's. The performance of our manufactured exports provides an idea
of how effective these trends can be. While world economic
growth has been slowing, Australia's manufactured exports
have continued to grow. In the current financial year, they
are nearly 20 per cent higher than in the corresponding
period for the previous financial year.
The characteristics of our growth provide encouraging signs
for the future. When the world recovery begins in earnest, 
Australian firms, operating in a low-inflationary, highproductivity,
competitive environment, will be well placed
to reap the benefits and create in Australia growth of a
kind which will mean long-term employment opportunities.
Success in the coming decade certainly depends on things we
must do in Canberra.
It depends crucially on Australian workers, who must
continue to adapt and change and win for themselves the
increasing incomes that are within their grasp. Under the
workplace bargaining system we have adopted and which we
will entrench this year, employees themselves are for the
first time in our history able to create the circumstances
of their own prosperity.
But its up to business leaders to now seize the
opportunities to take advantage of the new structure for
business which is now being laid down.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Investment is the key to economic growth.
The continuing opening of Australian industry to
international competition ensures that firms can no longer
afford to ignore advances in technical capabilities and the
competitive advantages associated with them.
We need to invest not just for replacement purposes, but
also for strategic purposes.
This requires our investing in our people, in ideas and in
physical capital.
It starts with a highly skilled and responsive workforce.
This has been the foundation for our successes in developing
new export markets, and it will continue to be.
The demand for a highly skilled workforce provides enormous
challenges for our entire education system, challenges that
are being met: first through our reforms to secondary and
university education, now through a major transformation in
vocational training.
Australia's record of investment in ideas has been mediocre,
but we have begun to develop an increasingly innovative
culture. 
7
The Government has provided direct grants and assistance
through the taxation system, especially the 150 per cent tax
concession, to encourage greater business contribution to
research and development. Direct assistance is also
provided to fund cooperative research centres to facilitate
greater collaboration between universities, research
institutions and industry.
The most pressing need today is to lift investment in
physical capital.
Many businesses and banks scaled back their operations as
they sought to strengthen balance sheets after the excesses
of the late 1980s. While addressing severe debt problems
was often necessary, the resultant fall in investment
spending cannot continue.
Business fixed investment increased solidly in the December
quarter, and I hope this is the start of a strong recovery
on investment.
The conditions are there for this to materialise low
inflation, good profits, industrial peace.
Moreover, we now have an extremely competitive tax regime
with the corporate tax rate at 33 per cent, accelerated
depreciation and incentives to invest through the
development allowance and the additional investment
allowance announced in " Investing in the Nation".
In addition, we are encouraging banks to get out there and
lend for worthwhile projects based on a close knowledge of
the firm's operations. The banks assure us they starting to
respond. As the recovery strengthens, we need as a nation to finance
expanding investment through domestic saving.
Saving is not a constraint on our economic recovery over the
next year or so.
And, indeed the recovery itself will lift national saving.
But increased national saving is a central goal for policy
in the 1990s.
That is why we introduced the superannuation guarantee
charge, and why we will increase its rate over the decade.
It is also why we are committed to bringing the deficit down
to 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97. 
You can be assured we will do it but you can also be
assured that we will not ignore other priorities as we do
SO.
We will also continue our program of micro economic reform.
We will build more competitive industries by strengthening
competition. The National Competition Policy Inquiry led by Professor
Hilmer will report shortly.
An immediate priority will be to improve the performance of
our trading enterprises. The reform of management
structures, pricing regimes and opening up these markets to
competition can achieve important gains for competitiveness.
The cooperation of the States is vital and we have
established processes through the Council of Australian
Governments to develop national approaches to reform. The
States have a lot at stake not only are they accountable
for the performance of their GBEs there is also scope for
reform to contribute towards the repair of their budgets.
one feature of the recession that has been of considerable
concern has been its impact on different regions. It is
inevitable that differences between regions will develop
from time to time, but the severity of this downturn in
parts of the country demands specific action by Government.
In Alan Griffiths, we now have a senior Minister in Cabinet
charged with regional development. As a result, the
regional dimension of all Government policies will come
under constant focus.
Existing programs will be reviewed, including to ensure
harmonisation with State programs.
More generally, any constraints on development in the
regions will be assessed with an aim of facilitating new
investment. There has been some speculation that this Government may
adopt a more interventionist approach to industry.
Let me say this.
Labor has always believed that Government has a pivotal part
to play in developing Australian industry, one where
sensible intervention is called for. 
Hiding behind the tariff wall was not sensible.
Handouts to favoured industries with little future in a
competitive world economy were not sensible.
Rather, we will continue to encourage our industries to
respond to competitive forces.
We will continue to foster responsive workplaces.
We will continue to provide support where the market alone
does not perform adequately, in areas such as research and
development, in export finance, in services to small
business. We will continue to encourage investment through the tax
system, and to foster closer relations between banks and
business. We will continue to improve the nation's infrastructure and
to press for the efficient provision of services like
transport and power.
All this is the basis for Labor's industry policy..
Where fundamental change is needed, we will provide
adjustment assistance so that our industries and businesses
can adapt to new challenges, just as we have in the rural
sector and TCF industries.
Where bringing major players together helps industries at
large to seize opportunities we will do so, just as we have
in telecommunications and processed food.
Of course we do not face a level playing field in the world
economy. But the answer is not to prop up industries that can only
survive in a protected domestic market.
Rather, the answer is to use dexterity and awareness to
ensure that Australian industry can compete effectively in
the world.
And, as our export performance demonstrates, this strategy
works. Ladies and Gentlemen, 
All these are important issues for the government, but there
is no economic reform more central than to complete the
construction of a system of industrial relations which will
enhance productivity, protect the weak, and distribute
fairly the rewards of cooperation in the workplace.
We have come a long way in a short time with industrial
relations. Since 1983 we have more than halved the days lost through
strike action.
We have dramatically cut real unit labour costs while
restoring the profit share.
Australia's union movement is committed to wage increases
consistent with maintaining our international
competitiveness. And we now have workplace or enterprise bargains
proliferating rapidly.
There has been substantial progress, but I think we need to
do a lot more.
Let me describe the model of industrial relations we are
working towards.
It is a model which places primary emphasis on bargaining at
the workplace level within a framework of minimum standards
provided by arbitral tribunals.
It is a model under which compulsorily arbitrated awards and
arbitrated wage increases would be there only as a safety
net. This safety net would not be intended to prescribe the
actual conditions of work of most employees, but only to
catch those unable to make workplace agreements with
employers. Over time the safety net would inevitably become simpler.
We would have fewer awards, with fewer clauses.
For most employees and most businesses, wages and conditions
of work would be determined by agreements worked out by the
employer, the employees and their union.
These agreements would predominantly be based on improving
the productive performance of enterprises, because both
employers and employees are coming to understand that only 
productivity improvements can guarantee sustainable real
wage increases.
We would continue to have an Accord with the trade union
movement, guaranteeing the safety net of the award system
and the steady accumulation of occupational superannuation,
with improvements to both the safety net and occupational
superannuation governed by a commitment to international
competitiveness. We would have an Industrial Relations Commission which
helped employers and employees reach enterprise bargains,
which kept the safety net in good repair, which advised the
Government and the parties of emerging difficulties and
possible improvements,-but which would rarely have to use
its compulsory arbitral powers. Instead, parties would be
expected to bargain in good faith.
We would have sufficient harmony between State and Federal
industrial relations systems to ensure that they all head in
the same direction and used the same general rules.
That is the goal we are working towards. So how f ar are we
from reaching it?
Whea enw enerprse brgans which cover one third of the
workforce under federal awards. Over eight hundred
agreements covering nearly three quarters of a million
employees. That is extremely encouraging, but its not enough not
nearly enough.
We want it to be close to one hundred per cent of employees
under federal awards.
And federal awards, of course, cover less than one third of
all employees.
In all of the six state systems only a small number of
employees are covered by enterprise agreements.
NSW, the biggest state, has only about 7,000.
Victoria has only about 80 agreements in total.
And of course there are lots of employees who for one reason
or another don't have a union to represent them.
We need to make the system more flexible and relevant to our
present and future needs. 
12
We need to accelerate workplace or enterprise bargaining and
this is as much a responsibility of employers as it is of
unions and governments.
There are not enough enterprise bargains and the bargains
we do have are sometimes not sufficiently comprehensive.
We need to find a way of extending the coverage of
agreements from being add-ons to awards, as they sometimes
are today, to being full substitutes for awards.
As we change to a national system of workplace bargiqning
our laws and institutions will need to be mo dified to fit
the system we are creating.
For example we have laws which give the AIRC a role and
powers that are not well suited to the system we are trying
to create.
My own view is that the government should provide the
direction and leadership necessary to ensure that Australian
industrial relations operate to advance our national
interest.
The Government should do this and we will.
It is our responsibility to work out a way in which the IRC
has suitable powers to run the kind of system we need not
the kind of adversarial system we have had.
The shortcomings in our legal structure go well beyond the
role of the AIRC.
They are also quite plain in the lack of credible means of
enforcing agreements.
Where agreements or other awards apply there should be
clear, substantial and easily enforceable penalties for
breaches. An integrated, comprehensive and simple framework for making
and enforcing agreements.
These are shortcomings which I have asked the industrial
relations minister Laurie Brereton to look into and remedy.
Over the next three or four months he will be consulting as
extensively as he can with employers and employees and
their unions, with the states, with the AIRC, with academics
and experts to come up with the best solutions. 
13
The solution will certainly include legislation implementing
our commitment to ILO conventions on minimum pay equal pay
and on redundancy.
I know Laurie Brereton will invite the liveliest debate and
I hope all interested parties will join it.
I expect that by the time we get to the Budget sitting of
Parliament he will have put together a package to renovate
the legal and institutional structure of Australia's
industrial relations and one that fits with the national
system of workplace bargaining we are already creating.
Ladies and gentlemen
Completing industrial relations reform is another link in
the chain of reform which began a decade ago. It is
important now that we accelerate the reform so that all the
other elements of flexibility in the economy can work in
greater harmony.
I am confident about success. As I said in the campaign, I
now dare to believe that the dream of decade or more ago is
about to be realised. That Australia will become a
creative, innovative, manufacturing nation in the front rank
of trading nations and the front rank of social democracies.
I now believe it will happen because there so many signs to
tell us what we have done is succeeding and that is the
best assurance that we will succeed in doing all that
remains to be done. 



T2EL1:. Apr. 93 9: 58 No. 001 P. 01/ 01
4C
PRIME MINISTERI
STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MIINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PHILIPPA SMIITHI TO BE NEW OMBUDSMAN
I am pleased to announce that I will he recommending to the Governor-General that
he appoint Ms Philippa Smith to be thc next Cornmonwcalth and Defence Force
Omibudsman. I will propose that Ms Smith's appointment be for 5 years, commencin&amp;
on 17 May 1993.
Ms Smith is the first woman to be appointed as Commonwealth Ombudsman. She
brings to the Office an enormous range of experience in the public and private sector.
Shc has held senior positions in the Australian Council of Social Services, the
Australian Consumers Association and thc NSW Department of Health. At present,
she is a consultant with Issues Australia, where she has worked on complaint
procedures in a varicty of organisahions and also a part-time member of thc
Commonwealth Admiinistrative Appeals Tribunal. Her career has been directed at
ensuring that individual Australians are treated fairly.
I believe that Ms Smith is well-equipped to lead the Ombudsman's Office through the
changes that may occur during the 1990s. Her predecessor, Mr Alan Cameron, was an
important force for change and grcater efficiency in the way the Ombudsman's Office
dealt with its task and the way it was perceivcd by the public and I am confident that
Ms Smith will show the same leadership.
I would also express my appreciation to Ms Lindsay Shaw, who has acted as
Ombudsman following Mfr Camcron's resignation, and to the other staff of the Office
who have ensured that the Office Ms Smith takes over is able to meet the challenges of
the future.
CANBERRA 21 April 1993 TEL: 



PRIME MINISTER 51/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING OF PARLIAIENT
I have received a letter this week from the Leader of the Opposition, Dr. Hcwczn,
rejecting the Government's proposed modernisation of the ceremonial opn ing f the 37th
Parliament on May 4.
I find it disappointing that Dr Hcwson, who sought to make the reform of Parliament an
election issue, should mulishly resist such a sensible reform proposal so early in the new
Parliamentary term.
Some of the existing procedures in the ceremonial opening arc unnecessarily time
consuming. For example, Members of the House of Representatives arc required to move
from their chamber three times in the course of the day, twice to the Senate and once to
the Members' 11all.
The Government's proposal that the Governor-Gcncral's Speech be delivered in the G. t
-lallrcduced the amount of traipsing through the building but, more importantly, would
provide a better reflection of the Constitutional equality of the two houses in our system,
and cmphasise the unity of Parliament. The Government believed all Members and
Senators would want the opening ceremony of Parliament to be seen as relevant, modem
and meaningful to all Australians.
But the Government has more to do than spend its time coaxing the Opposition into the
late 20th Century. Whatever the importance of ceremonial arrangements, the Government
is dctermined that they will not interfere with the real business of the nation, so therefore
the ccrcnony will go ahead as before.
Contrary to Dr Hewson's asqertion in his letter, the proposed changes were hardly " the
result of somc last minute initiative." 
I remind Dr llewson that he was a member of the Opposition in March 11988 when it
supported a motion of the House calling for thc opening and the Covcrnor-Gcncral's
speech to be mnoved from the Senate.
Thc Opposition also participated in, and agreed with, the recommendations of the House
of Representatives procedure committee report in June 1991 on which the proposed
changes arc closely based.
It was always intended that the Great Hall in the new Parliament House should be used for
important ceremonial occasions. It was thc for-um for the official opening of the building
by Her Majesty Queen Flizabcth in 1988.
According to Dr Hcwson, thc Opposition is not opposed in principle to sensible and
responsible changes to the cxisting arranigements for the opening of Parliament. The
Government intends, therefore, to provide an early opportunity for thc Opposition to
exprcss such support by moving a motion in each chamber to amend standing orders to
allow the opening ceremony to take placc in the Great Hall for the 3Uth Parliament and
beyond. The point of all this is that at thc first hurdle of Parliamentary reform Dr Hewson and his
Opposition have baulked.
CANBERRA
21 April, 1993 
Leader of the Opposition
2 0 APR 1993
The lion P J Keasting MP
Prime Minister
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
Dear Prime Minister
I understand that your Office contacted mine on 15 April 1993 to
advise that the Government is reviewing arrangements for the
Opening of Parliament on 4 May and to seek * greement to changes
which would include the location for delivery of the Governor-
General's speech.
Z wish to n.' te at the outset that I regard the way in which the
Government has consulted with the Opposition on this issue to
have been quite inadequate and inappropriate. in view of the
significance of some of the proposed changes, the appropriate
channel for preliminary communications about possible changes to
the Opening of Parliament is directly between you and me ( rather
than at staff level between our offices), and the proper forum
for consideration of any proposed changes is the Parliament
itself. I should also add that I regard the briefing paper titled
" Opening of Parliament" which your Office provided to be a quite
misleading, incomplete and inappropriate account of existing
procedures for the Opening of parliament and an inadequate basis
for the changes proposed.
The GovernmSnt's handling of this issua gives every sign of undue
haste. There has been inadequate provision uf opportunity for
proper and effective consultation. And the case for the changes
proposed has not been made out.
Accordingly, the Opposition does not agree at this time to the
changes in arrangements for the Opening of Parliament which were
conveyed by your Office last week,
Parliamrnnt Hous,., Canberra, A. CT 2600Phone 27" 4022 
2.
I want to make, it clear, however, that the Opposition is not
Opposed# in principle, to changes in existing arrangements for
the Opening of Parliament what* ouch changes are Sensible and
responsible, But we are opposed to changes that are the result
of somes last minute initiative, Or that are not fully Considered
and approved by the Parliament, or that seek to break with
Parliamentary tradition for the sake of it, or that are somehow
meant to symbolise, or foreshadow, some broaer constitutional
change. The fav. t 13 that the Opening of Parliament Is a Parliamentary
occasion and not a matter for the Government alone to change,
Change should only be made with the agreement of both the Senate
and the House of Representatives and only after there has been
adequate opportunity for changes to be fully considered anid
debated in bo~ th Houses. To im! pOaa change through other means
would be an abuse of Executive power.
An I have indicated, the Opposition is not opposed, in principle,
to changes in the procedural arrangements for the Opening of
Parliament where those changes are responsitble and appropriate,
and where the proper processen are observed. Accordingly, the
Opposition woul1d support a Joint Commnittee of the ParlIanent
addressing in a proper way existing procedural aztrangements for
the Opening of Parliament. We believe that, before the
poaibility of any proposals for ehange going torward to the
Parliament f or del iberati~ on I detailed and e f fective Consideration
of this kind is the only appropriate courso of action.
Yours sincerely -JvvC4 



TEL: 23. Apr. 93 12: 09 No. 016 P. 01/ i.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF THE BURMA THAILAND RAILWAY. CANBERRA
FRIDAY 23 APRIL 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you very much for inviting me here today, to say a
few words about this fascinating and unique book.
Last year, of course, it was the fiftieth anniversary of
many of the battles fought in defence of Australia, and
it was my privilege on several occasions to pay tribute
to those Australian servicemen and women to whom we owe
so much.
I visited some of the battlegrounds most notably, I
suppose, Kokoda: and I have not had a more moving
experience in all of my public life.
For a nation which has been so involved in wars this
century, we have also been a long way removed from war:
and I think that may be why these places like Kokoda,
or the war cem~ eteries at Boma outside Port Moresby, or at
Lae have such a disturbing effect when we first
encounter them.
My generation was profoundly lucky: we all knew, I think,
that our parents and our grandparents generations had
gone through experiences of a kind that we were never
likely to confront.
For instance, I knew about Singapore, and about Borneo
about Sandakan because my father's brother had been
there, arnd died there. But I was not taught about it at
school, and there was very little to read about it.
We knew the wars through legend and ritual.
And we knew World War I better than we knew World War 11.
But we really didn't know what it had been like.
And, in any case, the generations who fought in the two
World Wars tended to keep their memories to themselves.
We grew up aware of the wars but remarkably innocent of
the experience of war. 
TEL: 23Apr. 93 1-2: 09 No. 016 P. 02/ C
2
And that, I think, is why we are shocked when we see the
gravestones which remind us of how many died, and their
ages, and what they must have gone through, arnd the
people they left behind.
This is the 75th anniversary of the end of World War I.
Later this year I hope there may be an opportunity to
visit those battlefields in Northern Francs where so many
Australians lost their lives. I sincerely hope it is
possible to go, because these places are truly sacred to
Australia. But the battlefields of the Asian and Pacific war are
also sacred. In the next few years I hope the
battlefields of New Guinea, Borneo, Singapore and Malaya
and Burma and Thailand will become as important to
our historical understanding as the battlefields of the
middle East and Europe were to earlier generations of
Australians. Everyone should know about these battles.
Above all, they should know about the subject of this
book the prisoners of war who worked on the Burma-
Thailand Railway.
No Australian soldiers suffered more than these. Few had
more reason to feel betrayed or neglected before,
during and after their capture. None had to call on
such reserves of faith and spirit as they did: faith in
themselves;, faith in each other; faith I like to think
in Australia, what they had created there arnd what they
hoped to create.
Whatever they may have thought, in historical terms they
were doing more than Just surviving.
As Gavan McCormack and Hank Nelson point out these were
the first Australians to go en masse into South East
Asia. They saw it and dealt with its peoples as no other
Australians ever had.
They also saw the British empire as few Australians had
ever seen it and it led a lot of them to conclude that
we Australians had evolved into a different race. it
raised their sense of an independent identity.
So, it may be that in time the 8th Division will be seen
as something more than soldiers or prisoners of war but
as the first pioneers of Australia in Asia. The
frontiersmen. Somehow I think it would be the highest tribute we could
pay them both those who died and those who managed to
survive. 
T: 23. Apr .93 12: 09 No .01E P .03/ C
3
Such a tribute would depend on our succeeding in Asia, of
course. It will mean that we will have to succeed
economically as an entirely independent nation, aware
of necessity and confident of both our identity and our
capabilities. And that will depend on our developing greater mutual
understanding between the countries of Asia and
ourselves, greater mutual respect.
The men and women discussed in this book very often did
just that -they developed a deep respect for the Chinese
and the Malays, the people of Borneo and Ambon and
Sumatra who very often risked their lives to help them.
They found in all sorts of circumstances that they shared
common human ground with people they had, for cultural
and historical reasons, been inclined to patronise or
despise. There's surely a lesson in it we can come to terms with
the countries of Asia and in doing so, far from
sacrificing our identity or our principles, strengthen
them.
There's surely also a lesson in the accounts this book
contains: that so much of the unconscionable treatment of
prisoners came from what the Japanese had been taught.
My old friend, Tom Uren, might say it is lesson in the
nature of fascism and he's right. But it's also a
lesson in ignorance, and parochialism. It's a lesson in
culture and education.
That Is why we should teach the story of the war.
Because the men and women who fought In those battles and
suffered and died in those camps should be remembered and
honoured. And because there is great deal for us to
learn, both about ourselves and about Asia, in reading
about these experiences.
Which gets me back to the most important question to
confront us every Anzac Day: we are left to wonder what
they died for.
We say they died for Australia: the question is, what
sort of Australia? What sort of Australia is it
incumbent on us to create?
Tom Uren and Weary Dunlop would have very different
political views on this I'm sure.
Yet they would agree on some basic things: they would
agree that Australia will succeed best if it incorporates
into its daily life and the conduct of its affairs the
principles of fellowship and cooperation and care for
TEL 
TEL: 23. Rpr. 93 12(: 09 No. Ulb F. FA:
4
each other. Mateship Is as good a word as any other to
describe it.
It has been around for a long time, that word and those
principles. But I'm inclined to think that it is only in
the last decade or so that we have begun to realise just
what a powerful force they can be in the economic life of
a country and in seeing a country through great changes
and hard times.
Mateship was never tested so much as on the Burma Railway
and, for all the tragedy, nowhere was the triumph of
mateship so emphatic. Mateship and the human spirit.
if we imbue all our endeavours in the next decade with
those principles I am sure we will succeed and if we
succeed, we will have paid the prisoners on the Burma
Thailand Railway the greatest possible tribute.
we will have created a prosperous Australian democracy,
built on those values and one in which they are secure.
Hank Nelson and Gavan McCormack have done us all a great
service with this book. So have all the other
contributors -Australian, Japanese and Korean.
I congratulate them all and with great pleasure declare
The Burma-Thailand Railway the book officially
launched. 



r'i1 ri I. H14UU 4 t) r-LlI
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN
I am pleased to announce that the first foreign head of government to visit
Australia since the March election will be the Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr Kiichl Miyazawa.
Prime Minister Miyazawa will visit Canberra as guest of the Government fronm
29 April to 1 May. His visit to Australia will be the first by a Japanese
Prime Minister since that of Mr Noboru Takeshita In 1988.
The visit will reaffirm the vitality and importance of the Australia-Japan
partnership both bilaterally and in terms of our expanding consultation and
cooperation in regional and international affairs. My discussions In Canberra
with Prime Minister Miyazawa will build on the very productive dialogue we
established during my visit to Japan last September.
Australia and Japan share a range of important interests and perspectives as
we each address an increasingly fluid strategic and trading environment In the
Asia-Pacific region. With continuing delay In the conclusion of the
Uruguay Round of negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, both countries have fundamental interests in maintaining an open and
non-discriminatory multilateral trading system and In promoting open
regionalism through the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC) process.
Earlier this month, Prime Minister Miyazawa had Important discussions with
President Clinton in Washington. In July the Japanese Government will host In
Tokyo the annual G7 summit.
My discussions with Prime Minister Mlyazawa will provide a valuable
opportunity to exchange views on these important developments and to Identify
areas where Australia and Japan should work towards shared objectives In the
Asia-Pacific region.
CANBERRA 23 April 1993 



I t L
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HONPJ KEATING, MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY US PRESIDENTIAL REPRESENTATIVE
I am pleased to announce that the US Vice Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Admiral David E Jeremiah, will visit Australia In May as a guest of the
Australian Government. Admiral Jeremiah will be the personal representative
of President Clinton during the Australia-Arnedca Friendship Week and the
51 st Anniversary of the battle of the Coral Sea.
Admiral Jeremiah will participate in various commemorative activities In
Canberra, Sydney, Adelaide and Perth and will also meet senior members of
the Government to discuss Australia-US relations.
Also visiting Australia to participate in events In other parts of the country will
be Vice Admiral Wright, Commander 7th Fleet, Major General Redden,
Director of Plans, Pacific Air Forces; and Brigadier General Smith,
Commanding General of Marine Corps Barracks Camp Butler, Japan.
Fought in May 1942, the Battle of the Coral Sea was the turning point of the
war in the South Pacific and laid the foundations for the Australia-US alliance.
Over fitty years later, this friendship endures, based on the same liberal
democratic values that are so dear to us, The visit by Admiral Jeremiah will
further strengthen the strong ties of friendship which link our countries.
CANBERRA 23 April 1993 ILL:~ 37~' r93 NNo7.5 C' 6. 0. 



PRIME MINISTER 54/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIMET MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
APPOINTMIENT OF MICHAEL LAVARCH AS ATTORNEY-GENERAL
The Govern or-General has today appointed Mr Michael Lavarch to be Attorney-
General, followin8 Mr La-varch's election as Mlember for Dickson. The poll for thce
seat of Dickson was held on 17 April, later than the election in other seats because of
the death of a candidate during the campaign period and the need to issue a new writ.
When mny second Ministry was appointed on 24 March, I announced that Mr Lavarch
was to become Attorney -General upon beinS elected. In the mecantimie, Mr Duncan
Kerr has served as Attorney-Gcneral The Governor-General revoked Mr Kerr's
appointment as Attorney-General today at the same timie he appointed Mr Larvarch.
Mr Kerr remains Minister for Justice, a position which he has held since 24 March. Mr
Lavarch will be a micmlbcr of Cabinet and will have overall responsibility for the
Attorney-General's portrolio.
I ami very pleased to welcome Mr L~ avarch to thle Ministry, where het will be one of
four new Cabinet members who have not previolUsty held ministerial posts. I am
confident that Mr Lavarch will make a major contribution to the work of the
Government CANBERRA 27 AP~ RIL 1993 


28 APRIL 1993 
it is a great pleasure to be here tonight. 
Pleasure has not been an unfamiliar sensation since March 13, of course. But this is a particular pleasure, because I see a lot of well known supporters in the room and not a few who I suspect of being supporters. 
It is also a pleasure because the Evatt Foundation was very much a supporter in the election and I want to take this opportunity to thank them I know Peter Botsman, in particular, never left us alone, and his attentions were very much appreciated. 
It is an inescapable fact of Australian political life that no Labor leader goes through a year without making a speech In honour of a former Labor leader. We honour our dead in the Labor movement. It Is because we have a sense of being part of a great story. In any year it is possible to speak on national issues In honour of Curtin, Chit ley, Evatt, and Arthur Caiwell, among other legends. Lost year for me it was Ben Chit ley and Gough Whitlam, who Is far from dead, but Is a legend anyway. Tonight it is Bert Evatt. 
It is appropriate that we remember these people, as Labor heroes and as Australians. For their contribution was to both the movement and the nation. They were all nation builders. They were all distinguished by their vision and their ambitions for Australia. To lead the Labor party you nee~ d large ambitions. And just as surely you need courage, for it always Involves, in some sense, a leap of faith. 
You need a passion for reform; you need a belief in the capacity of human beings to organise themselves for the general good; a belief in the capacity of people to rise above meanness; to see further than the next obstacle; to imagine something better and to dQ something better. 
And with these beliefs has always gone a profound belief in Australia in an uncompromised Australian Identity, a sense of our own worth, of the great story which has been lived out by people who have made this lend their home. And in the future which we have to make our own. 
It is within that world view that Labor, when It Is in form and running as It should, conceives and executes its projects. In tune with a national agenda. It can be said of Chifley and Curtin and Whitlem and Hawke that they had a clear sense of whet needed to be dons In Australia and they did not shirk from doing it. if they had had their chance it would have been said of Evatt and Calwell. I should like it to be said of me: In fact with the March 13 victory we have the best chance In our history to shape Australia in the imals of modern Labor. Progressive, pluralist, fair, democratic unmistakeably Australian. Bert Evatt made his mark less as leader of the Labor Party than as minister for External Affairs in the forties, where his work was distinguished by courage, independence and flair. He brought an Australian perspective to the task. He stood for democracy and the rights of small nations. He stood for independence he stood for the rights of Indonesians against their colonial rulers. 
Bert Evatt never had any doubt that Australia had a right be heard in the world, a role to play especially a role in the region. 
You will have already perceived the the-me of Continuity: In 1993 we too assert Australia's need to go confidently into the world, and the role we can play and the rewards we can reap in the region. 
Just as we assert the need to raise the level of equality, increase opportunity, lift the standard of living and the life chances of all Australians. 
We assert this role for Labor and we take on again the challenge of nation-building. I mrean doing the things which will serve future generations of Australians and keep Australia in the front rank of the democracies of the world. Whether it's in education, or social services or a universal health system: or giving us an Internationally competitive financial system, or the sort of industrial relations system which will give us the flexibility, productivity and capacity for innovation that we must have In all these things it is Labor, as ever, with the shoulder to the door. And pushing. 
Continuity of effort and purpose is important to us. We are strengthened by the understanding that we are part of the story the Labor story and, because we have always been the change-makers and the true believers in Australia edAustralians, Labor's story has always been very such Australia's story. 
That is the big difference between us and our political opponents. They struggle to find continuity. They are at best reactive and St worst prey to fashion and extremism; and when the fashion passes they unfailingly go to the only place they know back into that gloomy cave of cobwebbed memories of days when the Liberal Party was an extension of the country's semi-hereditary elite. They retreat and rejoice in the memory of the founder and oracle Robert Gordon Menzies. 
And they ask what will put them In touch With a contemporary reality which does not include a communist can to kick, or a Labor Party divided, or a feigned external threat or a cultural cringe to exploit? And they are met with an embarrassing silence which, for all his efforts, even John Howard is unable to fill. 
For you see, on their side of politics, between the Menzies Government and John Hewson's Opposition there is nothing or, to give John Gorton his due, very little. 
They have all in their own way been good little Horatios and held the bridge against national progress. 
Well they no longer hold the bridge and we have had a decade re-building it, strengthening It, broadening it and there is no reason now why the whole nation can't cross It into the new Australia of the twenty first century. 
For all our differences of opinion In the Labor movement there is a thread which runs through us all; there is a bond between us: we are bound by the common goal of social improvement and the reolisation of national aspirations. These things have bound us for a century, and the record of our progress towards them binds us tighter still. 
So tonight we pay homage to a Labor man who believed in these things, who worked for them, and contributed more then most to achieving them. 
But let me also say, as I said in Bathurst at the Chifley lecture last year, the truth Is that this Government has done More. And we will do more still. Much more than Ben or Bert ever imagined. M~ ore in the way of extending opportunity, more in the way of nation building, more In the way of securing the. country's future and delivering Australia to that place in the world the people of Labor have always dreamed could be ours. 
This country, like all new world countries, has always called on people's courage. On their faith and their belief. I'm Inclined to think that, in truth, nothing good and long lasting was ever done that did not need these things. They were present in every act of exploration end settlement, in every enterprise which went into the building of this country. Between the conception and the execution there in faith, hope -and courage. 
Countries are built on this. They fail for the lack of it. And I believe that it is never the people who let their countries down It is their governments. Governments which lack heart. Politicians who imagine things but don't do them. Bureaucrats who take their power to mean the ability to thwart initiative. 
I take the view -and the longer I am in politics the more I take it -that the minimum responsibility of government is to at least have the courage of the people. I mean the courage of a person who starts a business or a farm, or the person who migrates end makes a home here, the people who have gone to war for us, or in peace laboured to create the wealth we now enjoy. The ultimate responsibility of government I think boils down to this: to live up to the same faith, to invest in the future with the same courage. 
I take great heart from the 1980s when the Labor government, trusting to the courage of the people, took on the pioneering changes the nation needed. The people responded. The changes were made. 
That is what gives me heart in the nineties. 
If we Australians are bold end determined and faithful to our beliefs and aspirations I believe the 19909 will be a great watershed in our history. As the 1890s was a watershed so will this decade be. I believe we will emerge a robust social democracy, a player of substance in the world, integrated with our region and prosperous in a way that we have never been before: I mean prosperous not only in material comforts but prosperous in ideas and innovation, in our capacity to make things and to sell them to the world, in opportunity, prosperous in our faith; our faith in ourselves and the life we have created here. 
To do this, it seems to me, we need to be a Country at peace with itself. And being at peace with ourselves I think depends on making stronger than ever the principles of egalitarianism. I think the vote on March 13 confirmed this: whatever else may have motivated the electorate they rejected the Idea of " trickle-down" economics and the new elite and the underclass which have followed from that idea wherever it has been tried. 
And I might say nothing made me more confident of victory than my belief that Australians would not embrace that Idea. Nothing made me more confident of winning, and nothing so re-affirmed my faith in the continuing strength of Australian democratic traditions as the victory itself. 
For the government, of course, that implies some obligations: to keep opening up the avenues of participation and opportunity, to maintain the safety net, and to keep as our by-words Inclusion, unity, cohesion, loyalty. 
We in the Labor movement know that it is easy to say these things, something else altogether to make them happen. 
We also know that these things ring hollow when more than per cent of the workforce is unemployed. 
The principal aim of this government will be to reduce the number of unemiployed Australians. And so long as there is a pool of unemployed, of whatever dimension, the aim must be to decrease the amount of time people are spending in it. 
Long term unemployment threatens to grow in Australia as it is growing in comparable countries. 
How we deal with it will be measure of our success as a society: how well we care for those who are out of work, how well we manage to staunch the flow from the workforce, how well we revitalise the economy and create job growth, and how well we succeed in training and retraining. 
We will need from all the players in the employment equation recognition of our profound responsibility, not only to the unemployed and -those facing unemployment, but to Australia as a whole. We simply cannot allow so many Australians to be permanently alienated from the workforce and, with that, from the mainstream of society. 
It is for the very same reason that a primary goal of the Government in the 1990s will be to remove the stain of dispossession and social injustice which attaches to the relationship between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. Indeed it will be a goal of all governments. 
Some of our opponents insist on devaluing the cause of reconciliation by calling it the product of guilt. But It is not guilt which motivates us in this, it is responsibility. The legacy of injustice towards the indigenous people of Australia shames us in the eyes of the world. Yet feelings of shame and outrage are not necessary to feel that things have to change. Pride should be all it takes. 
Not merely our reputation, but our self-esteem depends on our finding answers to the prejudice, Injustice and despair which Aboriginal Australians continue to face. 
Now, vith the Mabo decision, there Is a unique opportunity. Mabo present. us with a more substantial and binding basis for reconciliation -a legal and historical basis which goes well beyond those pious and well-meaning sentiments whose history is just as long as the prejudice and dispossession they seek to correct. 
We now have a chance to do something real. Because land goes to the core of the dispossession, Mabo may have the potential to work the miracle. 
The High Court has declared that a natire title exists in common law a declaration which has profound consequences not just for land management, but for contemporary issues of social justice and for the process of reconciliation. 
The Mabo judgement constituted recognition of an historic truth and in so doing created, in my view, the best chance we have ever had for 8 notionally agreed durable settlement. it should mean indeed it has to mean that we will enter the twenty first century with the fundamental relationship between the nation and its indigenous people re-constructed on just foundations. 
I think progress has already been made. The cultural shift is occurring. I was enormously heartened by the response to the speech I made in Redfern last year, which indicated to me a genuine desire among the majority of Australians to get these matters set to rights.
 I think the Aboriginal comm~ unities are determined to take up the challenge as well: determined to raise themselves by their own efforts from the social trap into which Aboriginal Australia has for so long found itself, and increasingly determined that -white Australians will not through prejudice or neglect deny their progress. 
They are determined to succeed. I do not think they can any longer be denied. And they won't be if we have the ingenuity and the good will to build an appropriate framework around the central seminal truth of native title. There will always be some who say that we can never overcome the prejudice and brutality, and the alienation and degradation. They have been saying it since 1788: but in truth we have never really tried. We have never made a concerted national effort. 
There were plenty who said our immigration scheme would never work. That cultural pluralism would never work. But it has worked. We made a national effort and it worked. 
There were some who said we couldn't change Australia Into a manufacturing country a competitive manufacturing country, an exporting manufacturing country. They soid we must always be essentially a sheep run end a quarry. Well we made a national effort and it's
working. 
Some said we'd never reform Australia's work piaces. There has been a dramatic change and with the now charter for industrial relations we announced last week the change will be completed. Australia v11l have a flexible Industrial relations system, and we will have a faIr one a late twentieth century system, not late nineteenth. 
We can make these big changes with Aboriginal Australia. We can do the same with unemployment. 
We can do all these things but we will do them better if we are united as a people, confident of our identity and what we stand for. That is why we need to be in every sense, including the symbolic one, our own masters. It is why the affirmation of our nationhood is central to our psychology. 
I believe it Is also why the time has come to start the process of creating an Australian republic. 
There have been some who have said that this is not the right time that there are more important things to do right now. 
People might well have said the same during the movement for Federation. 
I take the view that, far from being the wrong time, there has never been a better time. 
it is not simply because we are approaching the centenary of Federation, but rather because we are undergoing a revolutionary change both in our consciousness and in our situation in the world. 
It is important that the reality of our having to go it alone is matched by our abIlity to go it alone: and our ability depends to no small extent on our confidence, our self-esteem, our reputation, our faith in each other, our cohesion, our shared consciousness of the task before us, our belief In our democracy, our sense of responsibility to the nation. 
Australia therefore has very clear domestic reasons for wanting to define more clearly and in more confident terms its national identity. 
But we should not underestimate the importance this also has for Australia's engagement with the Asia-Pacific region. 
The fact is Australia wJll be taken more seriously as player in regional af fairs if we are clear about our identity and demonstrate that we really mean to stand on our own feet practically and psychologically. 
These things will help us to succeed. 
It Is important to get our democracy right at the same time as we get our economy right. 
That in why I think we should Start now on the journey to the creation of an Australian Republic. 
Last year my canvassing of this subject was frequently described by our opponents as a diversion. It was said to be not the right time. my argument has always been that if the creation of a republic served to heighten our confidence and our sense of ourselves, If it helped create a new and stronger sense of Identity, then It would be 8 maiterial aid to our economic future and lifting the quality of our national life and that alone made it an important subject of discussion. 
Whether or not it was for these reasons I do not know, but it is plain now that there Is increasing interest in, and support for, a proposal to amend the current constitutional arrangemnents so that our affairs are no longer presided over by the King or Queen of the United Kingdom. Our Head of State, the British monarch, cannot in the nature of things ever be a purely Australian head of State since she holds that office in relation to a range of other countries. 
And the monarchy being hereditary, gives us no choice about who the person might be. 
It implies no criticism of the monarch to question whether this arrangement remains meaningful and relevant to Australia today:
- where a growing proportion of the population has few if any ties with the United Kingdom
- where our future increasingly lies within our own region, and
- where our Identity as a nation is no longer derivative but our own 
Clearly, the debate has come a long way In recent months. 
Many of those who might have been expected to oppose change in this area have indicated support for change. 
Others, while not advocating change, agree that debate is desirable. 
John Howard, three weeks ago and running hard for the Liberal leadership, said that debate on the Republic was desirable. 
In fact he went further, bless him, and said:
"I think the Liberal Party has got to be part of that debate, and I would bring my contribution to It. I think there are strong intellectual arguments that can be made on both aides of the Republican Issue and I think what the Liberal Party ought to do Is to become part of the debate." 
We do, of course, welcome the debate. And we particularly welcome John Howard's willingness to put the conservative view though, like many others, I am sorry that since making those remarks he has sounded rather more like a spoiler than a true voice of conservatism. 
At any rate, my position is clear. 
I would like to see the Australian people demonstrate our social and political maturity by voting at a referendum for the establishment of a republic. 
I am an advocate of what has become known as the minimalist approach. 
My view is that the Constitution should be changed sufficiently to replace the hereditary monarchy with a non-hereditary, Australian Head of State. 
But I do not know what the detail of such changes would be, and what range of options might exist within this minimalist approach. 
And although commentators and constitutional forums have dealt with many of the issues In reports and learned papers over time, there has not yet been an officially sponsored study devoted solely to this question. 
In my election policy speech, therefore, I pledged that the Government would establish a broadly-based committee of eminent Australians, including representatives of the States, to develop a discussion paper which considers the options for a Federal Republic of Australia. 
I said it would be the intention that as a result of this committee's deliberations and the public discussion that would follow, the Australian people would be in a position to decide by referendum later in the decade whether Australia should become a republic by the year 2001. 
We have now taken the first steps In this process. 
I have invited Mr Malcolm Turnbull to chair the Republic Advisory Committee and he has accepted. 
The other members of the Committee are: Mr Nick Greiner, Mes Mary Kostakidis, Ma Lois O'Donoghue, Ms Susan Ryan, Dr John Hirst, Professor George Winterton. 
I have written to the State Premiers and Chief Ministers inviting them to choose 2 members of the committee to represent the states and territories and to lot me have their nomination@ as soon an possible. 
I have also asked that the Premiers and Chief Minister. ensure that one representative be fromm'ne of the most populous states and the other from a smaller state. 
in my policy speech I said I would like to invite the Federal Opposition to participate in the work of the
commiittee. 
Although this invitation was refused at the time, I am determined to encourage a bipartisan approach and have therefore written to Dr Hewson today asking him to reconsider and to nominate a representative. 
In keeping with the bipartisan nature of the debate on this issue, I have asked that none of these representatives be practising politicians.
I have also made it clear to Mr Turnbull that he should seek expert advice beyond the committee, including from the Constitutional Centenary Foundation, if he believes this is warranted. 
I expect the committee to start its work by the end of may with my department providing the necessary secretariat support. After discussions with constitutional and legal experts I am confident that such a paper could be completed by early September. 
The terms of reference of the committee ask it to prepare an options paper which describes the minimum constitutional changes necessary to achieve a viable Federal Republic of Australia, without examining options which would otherwise change our way of government. 
The establishment of an Australian republic must be an inclusive process which involves all Australians. The governent does not seek to include any other constitutional changes with the republican proposal. That Is not to say the government is opposed to other proposals for reform but they should be considered separately and on their own merits. 
Even with this relatively limited purpose, however, it will be necessary to examine a variety of practical possibilities. 
The terms of reference therefore require the committee to describe these, and the main arguments for and against them, but without indicating or recommending preferred
choices. 
Before I go into the reasons for not seeking recommendations from the committee, and the further steps which might follow the committee's report, let me briefly describe the things we are asking the committee to
address. 
The first is removal of all references to the monarch and the Governor-General as the Queen's representative in the Constitution. 
The second is creation of the new office of Head of State and consideration of what the office might be called. Heads of state of republics are generally called apresident", but the committee will be at liberty to Identify other possibilities for Australia. 
The third question is that of provisions for appointment and removal of the Head of State. 
As matters stand, we do not have to worry about appointment of the Head of State. The Governor-General, as the Queen's representative, is appointed, and could be dismissed, by the monarch on the recommendation of the government. 
If we are to have a non-hereditary Head of State, there are a number of possible methods of appointment, nomination and selection. 
There are also questions about the length of an appointment, such as whether the appointment should be for a fixed term and what the term might be, and the removal of a Head of State. 
The next matter about which the committee will report is the powers of the Head of State. At present the Constitution Is silent about the s0-called reserve powers of the Governor-General. 
The committee will be asked to consider how the powers of the new Head of State, and the exercise of these powers, can be made subject to the same principles and practices ag apply to the Governor-General. 
The committee will identify the nature of the necessary constitutiona~ l amendments required to implement the options it lists. 
The committee will also report on such Implications as there might be for State Governors if Australia becomes a republic. Obviously the States will be very much Involved in this Issue and I look forward to hearing from them.-
The reasons for not seeking recommendations from the committee are simple. 
First, while description of the options should be relatively straightforward, there may well be legitimate scope for disagreement in the committee about which options it should recommend. 
We want a paper which the whole committee can endorse. 
Secondly, while the forthcoming debate will inevitably focus on options and while the paper will provide the necessary information base for that, the primary task is to establish whether we can achieve consensus about the principle of a move to a republic along these lines. 
Settlement of the detail of what might be put to the people in a referendum should, in my view, be a matter for a different body. 
There will be discussion and debate in the community both before and following the committee's report. 
There will need to be discussions in the Council of Australian Governments, and probably in Commonwealth and State Parliaments. 
If out of such discussions there emerges a developing consensus, it may well be appropriate at some future point for there to be a constitutional conference or convention. 
The task of such a conference could be to deliberate and decide upon the precise options to be put to the electorate. 
The Government would not be interested in putting referendum bills to the Parliament and the electorate unless it was clear that there was this degree of
agreement. 
I do not expect all Australians to agree with the view that a republic is a desirable goal. 
What I do hope for is a mature and sensible debate, in which both supporters of the current system and those who would advocate change will explain positively, clearly and honestly the benefits of their preferred system. if that happens, then whatever the end result, we will at least be seen to have conducted ourselves with the maturity we are entitled to claim after a century of living together as a nation. 
An associated matter In the question of how we commemorate the centenary of federation the year 2001. 
The Goverrnent believes that the opportunity exists to use the occasion, and the years leading up to it, in a constructive way. 
There will be plenty to celebrate, but it will also be an
opportunity to take stock. 
The key Issue In the Immediate future will be how to develop goals and strategies for the years leading up to and including the centenary. 
The states will have an important role in this process and I Intend discussing this whole question with Premiers at the Council of Australian Governments in June. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
This is a crucial decade. The prospect of success Ii real: I mean success in carving out a prosperous future. Tonight I have said very little about the economic future. I could quote you the evidence, the unmnistakeable evidence of the sea-change which has occurred in Australia. 
It's enough to say now that we are becoming a different country a manufacturing nation; a nation exploiting its intellect; an exporter of things we invent, develop and make. The dream some of us had in the late seventies shows many signs of coming true. 
Already the sceptics and the cynics have begun to lose their doubts about our ability to find our feet in Asia, 
And now many of them are losing their doubts about the not unrelated subject of our becoming a republic. 
Our success In the world does depend on our strength as a nation, on our faith in ourselves and the way we represent that faith the way we symbolise it. 
It might not be too much to say that the faith is spreading. Armed with it, I believe we can in this decade marry a new era of economic success to a new era of social justice. 
it will take an act of courage, as all these things do but we won't be found wanting, and the reward will be a11 the richer because we Australians will thereafter always know that we rose to meet the challenge. 
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTER 54/ 93
STATEMENT BY TIHE P1RIME MIINIST'' ER, TIlE HON P J KEATING MP
REPUBLIC ADVISORY CO-MMITTEE
I was very disappointed today to learn of Dr I fewson's decision not to nominate a
member of the republic advisory committee.
I believe it dcmonstrates a lack of undlerstanding on Dr Hewson's part of the weight of
the issue and the approach of the Government.
However, I note Dr Hewson's obvious dissatisfaction with the Liberal Party's outdated
platform, and I hope he succeeds in bringing it more into line with community attitudes
at the party's federal council meeting in August.
The work of the republic advisory committee must proceed, notwithstanding the
absence of a nominee from Dr Hewson, but the door remains open should Dr Hewson
change his mind.
CANBERRA 29 April, 1993 
TEL:
REPITIBIIC ADVISORY COMMTTEE
Announced by the Prime Minister, the Hon P J Keating MP
April 28 1993
MALCOLM TURNBULL
MR NICK GREINER
MS MARY KOSTAKIDIS
MS LOIS ODONOGHUE
MS SUSAN RYAN
DR JOHN HIRST
PROF GEORGE WINTERTON S Chairman
S Former NSW Liberal Premier
S Media Presenter, SBS TV,
member of Constitutional
Centenary Foundation
S Chair, Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Commission
Former ALP Senator and
Minister for Education, currently
chief executive Plastics Industry
Association
S Reader in History, LaTrobe
University, Convenor of
Australian Republican Movement,
Victoria
S Professor of Law, University of
NSW
Leader of the Opposition to nominate one representative.
State Premiers and Chief Ministers to nominate two representatives. 3 pr 4 . cC , 4 .11
T 
TEL: 30. pr .9 TE-4 No. 004 F
REPUBUC ADVISORY COMMITTEE
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The current purpose Is to obtain an options paper which describes the minimum constitutonal
changes necessary to achieve a viable Federal Republic of Australia, maintaining the effect of
our current conventions and principles of government. There is no intention that the Committee
should examine any options which would otherwise change our structure of government,
Including the relationship between the Commonwealth and the States. Even with this limited
purpose, however, It will be necessary to examine a variety of practical possibilities and consut
widely with the community.
The Committee should describe and analyse the possibilities and the main arguments for and
against them, but should not make recommendations as such. The Committee's final report
should be available to the Prime Minister by 1 September 1993.
In light of the above, the report should address the following matters:
1. The removal of all references to the monarch in the Constitution.
2. In light of this, the need for and creation of a new office of Head of State and
consideration of what the office might be called.
3. The provisions for the appointment and termination of appointment of the Head of State
including the method of selection and appointment eg
selection and appointment by the government of the day
selection by the government and endorsement by both Houses of Parliament
appointment by an " electoral college' comprising representatives of various
parliaments appointment following election by the Federal Parliament
popular election
4. How the powers of the new Head of State and their exercise can be made subject to the
same conventions and principles which apply to the powers of the Governor-General.
The nature of the amendments to the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act
required to Implement the options.
6. The implications for the States.
7. Other aspects which arise in the Committee's deliberations and consultations providing
they are relevant to the overall objective in the opening paragraph above.
L 



PRIME MINISTERI
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINIST'ER, THE HON~ P J KEATING, HP
DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER MIYAZAWA
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 30 APRIL 1993
( PLEASE CHECK AGAINSTr DELIVERY. EMBARGO 8.30 PM)
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you,
Prime Minister, to Australia.
I understand this is your fourth visit to our country.
We offer an especially warm welcome on this occasion
because you are the first head of government to visit
Australia since the March election.
This is fitting given the very close ties that have
developed between our two countries.
The Australia-Japan relationship is longstanding and
mature. It is based fundamentally on strong trade and economic
relations which serve our two countries very well.
But these days the Australia-Japan relationship goes well
beyond our economic links, important though they are.
By any standards, the quality of cooperation that has now
been achieved between our governments in regional and
international affairs is remarkable.
And the range of people-to-people contacts which flourish
between Australia and Japan attests to a high degree of
mutual interest and friendship.
All this is the more striking considering the different
racial, social, religious and cultural backgrounds of the
two countries.
Prime Minister, I appreciated very much the warm
jiospitality I received from you and your Government
during my visit to Japan last September. 
I am delighted that so soon afterwards I have an
opportunity to receive you here in Canberra.
Though your visit has been short, I hope you have been
able to learn at first hand today something of our
current priorities and preoccupations.
Australia has achieved important progress over the past
decade in making our economy more internationally
oriented, more open, more competitive, and better able to
take advantage of the economic dynamism of East Asia.
But there is still more to do in this regard.
Last week I announced our goal of making our labour
market more flexible, by switching to a national system
of enterprise bargaining.
And this will help us to become more competitive, more
able to take our place in the region.
on that point, the Government is determined to encourage
Australia's closer integration with the region.
Australians know this is where our geography is and where
our concentration must be and that-. we need to outfit
ourselves properly to participate.
On that score, there Is also wide support among the
Australian public for us to define our national identity
more clearly and more confidently.
Earlier this week I announced the appointment of an
advisory committee which will examine options for making
Australia a republic without altering our existing
parliamentary system or Commonwealth-State arrangements.
I personally believe Australia will become a republic by
the centenary of our federation in 2001.
This, as I say, will help Australia's relations with the
region by demonstrating that we are standing on our own
feet both practically and psychologically.
Prime Minister,' I was pleased that today we were able to
carry forward the very productive dialogue we started
last September on regional and international affairs.
As we address a very fluid outlook in the Asia-Pacific
region, Australia and Japan share many important
interests and perspectives.
Neither of us belongs to a trading bloc, and we each
depend vitally on the maintenance of an open and
non-discriminatory trading system-
17)*-1rt7 K 77 , OT CC.-ir4W-jOC-v-73 
Both of us have important security and economic
relationships with the United States and we both strongly
support the long-term engagement of the United States in
the Western Pacific.
I listened today carefully to your account of your recent
meeting with President Clinton and the outlook for Japan-
US trade relations.
As a friend of both Japan and the United Staten,
Australia respects the difficulty and complexity of some
of the issues that you are now grappling with in the
Japan-US economic relationship.
We have been heartened by your assurance today that Japan
will not engage in managed trade with the United States.
This is an important assurance.
The outlook for the international trade envirornent is
uncertain and troubled.
We have to do all we can to remove that uncertainty.
In that sense, it is imperative that political leadership
be applied by all the main players to restore momentum
towards a successful conclusion of the6 Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations.
Similarly, within the Asia-Pacific region, we face a
decisive testing period for th e APEC forum.
To demonstrate the usefulness of APEC as a force for
trade liberalisation and facilitation, it is important to
achieve concrete results at the Seattle ministerial
meeting in November..
As I explained in a speech on 8 February, I believe we
should seek as our goal an integrated market which
includes Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Korea,
North America, China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and the ASEAN
countries a market of 2 billion people producing half
the world's output, bound together with harmonised trade
rules, harmonised investment rules, harmonised standards
and certification, and an agreed way of settling disputes
between members.
As we move along the path towards this goal, there may
come a point where we decide to use the APEC acronym to
stand for both the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
prneAn as well as the Asia-Pacific Eooi m~ i~
To succeed, such a community must be founded on respect
for the cultural diversity of the Asia-Pacific region and
the different levels of development of member economies.
Our own experience, the Australia-Japan bilateral
experience, demonstrates that cultural differences are no
?-41 
barrier to successful cooperation provided it is based on
shared interests.
As Australia and Japan have found, successful cooperation
leads to trust and mutual confidence.
Because of our shared interests and perspectives,
Australia and Japan are well placed to work together in
promoting the concept of an Asia-Pacific Economic
Community based on principles of openness, nondiscrimination
and practical cooperation.
This is an Important way in which we can use the strength
of the Australia-Japan partnership to promote open
regionalism In the Asia-Pacific.
Prime minister, let me conclude by saying how much I have
valued your visit and our discussions today, and again
how pleased I am to see you in Australia,
I now invite the Leader of the Opposition, Dr Hewson, to
join me in welcoming you and your delegation. 



TEL:
PRIME MINISTER 55/ 93
STATEMENT BY TIlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ALP NATIONAL SECRETARY
I welcome the selection of Mr Gajry ray as the new national secretary of the
Australian Labor Party
As an assistant secretary, Gary Gray has displayed a high level of commitment to the
party, and astute political organisational skills. He is known and highly regarded for
his capacity to stay in touch with the views of ALP supporters at the branch level.
As we commence this important fillh term of the Federal Labor Government, I look
forward to working closely with Gary Gray, and benefiting from his commendable
blend of professional commitmnt and Labor heart.
I congratulate the outgoing national secretary, Bob Hogg, on his highly successful
term in the party's top job. I thank him and wish him well.
CANBERRA April, 1993 30. Apr. 93 15: 45 No. 027 P. 01/ 01 



rvy5-I/ 2aP PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY TIlE PRIME MINISTER, THE 1ION P. J. KEATING, MP
DEATH OF PRESIDENT PREMADASA OF SRI LANKA
I have today sent the following message to Mr Dingiri Banda Wijetunga, Acting
President of Sri Lanka:
I would like to extend to you and the people of Sri Lanka my deepest personal
condolences, and those of the Australian Government and people, on the tragic
death of President Premadasa. Mr Premadasa's enduring contribution to the
development of Sri Lanka will long be remembered.
Please also pass on our condolences to Mrs Premadasa and her children, and to the
families of others killed and injured.
Australians join with the majority of the Sri Lankan people in deploring the use of
violence as a means of political expression. We hope that you, Mr Acting
President, with the Government and people of Sri Lanka, will be able to continue
the search for a peaceful resolution of Sri Lanka's communal problems.
CANBERRA,
May 2, 1993 



TEL: 58/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
FORMER FRENCH PRIME MINISTER PIERRE BEREGOVOY
I have today sent the following message to Mr Francois Mitterrand, President of
France: On behalf of the Australian Government and people, I should like to
convey our sincere condolences on the death, in such tragic
circumstances, of the former Prime Minister, Mr Pierre Beregovoy.
Please also pass on our condolences to Mr Beregovoy's family.
Mr Beregovoy's contribution to French Governments over a number of
years and in a variety of roles has been widely recognised. I recall with
pleasure my own meetings with him in our former capacities as
Treasurer and Finance Minister. I was impressed by his open and
unpretentious manner, and his profound concern for the interests of the
French people at large. His death Is a great loss to France and to his
friends and fraternal colleagues around the world.
CANBERRA 4 May 1993 T4E'L: ay. 93 13: 21 No. 024 P. 01/ 01 



T4EL.: May. 93 10: 49 No. 010 P. 01/ 01
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
RECOGNITION OF ERITREAN INDEPENDENCE
I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government has decided to
extend formal recognition to Eriirea following the overwhelming vote In favour of
Independence by the Eritrean people In the referendum held on
23-25 April 1993.
The referendum was the final stage of the peace process agreed by the
Provisional Governments of Eritrea and Ethiopia In 1991.
Senator Kerry Sibraa, the President of the Senate, led the Australian group to
observe the recent referendum. He has confirmed the view of all the
International observers that the vote was free and fair and decisively in favour
of Independence.
The Eritrean independence struggle has attracted the sympathy and support of
many Australians and has had the strong support of the Australian Parliament.
Prominent Australians, such as the late Professor Hollows and author
Thomas Keneally, have also taken a personal Interest In the problems of
Eritrea. in 1990, Professor Hollows Initiated a blindness prevention program to reduce
the Incidence of surgically curable eye disease In Eritrea. As a contribution to
this effort, the Australian Government provided funding for an intra-occular lens
factory to be assembled In Wollongong and shipped to Eritrea.
Australia has also provided other assistance to Eritrea under the aid program.
In 1992-93 the Government will provide $ 4.3 million in emergency relief,
training and development assistance through Australian non -governmental
organIsatlons, and from this year Australia will also provide a number of
scholarships for Enitreans under the John Crawford Scholarship Scheme.
I congratulate the people of Eritrea on attaining their Independence and wish
them well for the future.
CANBERRA 4 May 1993 TEL 



TEL: 7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 01/ 07
' Asr zic 4"
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY T11 E PRI MN' ~ 1N ISTER, TitE [ ION P J KE~ ATING, Mip
ADDRESS TO illlEAUSTRALIAN MINING INDUSTRY COUNCIL
ANNULAL DINNErR
6 N1AY' 19,9,
1E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you vciy mu1Lch, Campbel and congratulat Ions to Peter Barnett oil his election
as President of AMIC over the next two years. Ladies and gentlemen, well thank you
for having me along here tonight to sp~ eak to you.
I have had a very long asSOCiation Awith ALM1C twenty years this year, in fact, and
barring the last, I suppose six or seven years, qu) ite a close association as many of you
probably know. For nearly a decade I was the Shadow Minister lbr minerals and
energy and I emerged from the shadows in 1983, of course, to becomne Treasurer,
leaving that particular interest not behind, but to one side for others to handle. But I
have always had a great regard for the industry and a great respect for its capacity to
earn for Au~ stralia and to play a role as Australia's, at least equal to any other, leading
and competitive industry.
Campbell's made tonight a number of challengs flor me. He has got me in running
races on wet tracks and all sorts of things fie has given a big challenge to
Governments in this country and I am -sure that we have all taken note, Richard Court,
and Marshall Perron, 1 am1 sure have triken nlotes at the table as well. But there are
challenges for all of uis and 1 think, certainly the Government looks forwvard to the
challenge's which C'ampbell mentioned, but they are also challenges f1or the industry, I
think, to acknowledge that much has changed and moved favourably for it and also the
challenge to take advantage of the environment which is now here.
SO Much has changed and the Governmient has done a great deal. The mrninn industry
has been internationally competitive, buit the g1reat agent for change in the 80 s was no~ t
the private sector of'AuIstralia, it was the public sector. That's the truth of it. It took
Australia firomn basically an inidustrial backwater to a moudern country again, started to
open it uip. That change has continued and muILch Of it. Of course, has been a benefit to
the mining industry. ' Ihere wats a time when you used to talk to ining companies and
. they Would say, look we are quite elflcient, we are at least, in terms of best practice, 
7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 02/ 07
2
up with other companies around the world, price is not bad, but profits are lousy. The
profits are lousy for two reasons, because the exchange rate was wrong and because
wages were too high. These were the things which were holding the industry back,
and both of those very major variables were dealt with in the 1980s, and the cost of
that adjustment was borne by the community at large to set the industry up to become
an internationally competitive world player.
When the Government dc-regulated the exchange rate in the early 1980s the
adjustment burden of that change had to be borne by the community and wage earners
in particular, because we knew the exchange rate was substantially over valued and
when it finally fell to recover our compctitiveness that shill to inflation, in inflation,
which was about 5 per cent had to be cut from wages and the burden of that fell on
wage and salary earners, and the political burden of that fell on the Government. Not
just the Government but the trade unions, and of course given the fact that we couldn't
have accommodated such a change as easily as perhaps we did without fiscal policy
and without tax cuts So in the 1980s we produced these fast fiscal surpluses, while at
the same time paying $ 5 and $ 6 billion tax cuts to take the inflationary surge from
wages to see that the ieal exchange rate was competitive to see that the mining
industry could keep its head luapn d earn profits from its own efficiency.
Now, one can't just put in one's pocket changes like these and say the track has been
pretty soggy, I mean the track has been pretty good for a long time. We have had our
soggy spots, but one of then wasn't in macro-economic policy where that huge
change, and you can see it now, commodity prices have fallen in the last year of so, the
exchange rate has gone down, it has equilibrated and I think if you look at the
adjustment in commodity prices via the exchange rate it is about 1 per cent over the
year. In other words, you have got a mechanism now that is working for you which is
maintaining your competitiveness and you are doing it in a wage environment where
the wage share in the economy today, the average of the 1960s and the profit share is
all ready at this stage of the business cycle at the average of the 1960s, and where we
have seen a substantial shift in profitability, indeed, profitability, net profits in the
December quarter were 75 per cent above levels of a year ago. So profits are
recovering, inflation is low, we have broken the back of Australian inflation The great
threat to the mineral industries competitiveness, the greatest threat, a desperate out of
line infation rate has been brought into line at substantial cost to the community and of
course that means working people in general
Not only that, but the one thing, the one claim that the mining industry used to make in
the years when I had close associations with it was that Governments take the monkey
of tariffs, off the mining industry's back. Now, of course, that never happened until a
Labor Government came along From 1988 through to 1991, and then the adoption of
phasings from 1991 through to 1996.97 will see the tarilf wall in Australia
substantially reduced to an average manufacturing tariff of 5 per cent by 1996-97 and
commensurately lower tariff rates for the plan areas of the economy like motor
vehicles, textile clothing and footwear So, in terms of setting the industries agenda,
seeking to have in ollice a Government which first gave it a competitive exchange rate
mechanism broke the back of inflation, carried the huge adjustment costs of
competitiveness like a ball and chain around its neck, and then smashed the tariff wall 
TEL: I 7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 03/ 07
3
down, they are the things that the mining industry in the ' 70s used to dream about, and
they were all done.
Now, Campbell was waxing lyrical here about whether political expediency will return,
well let me tell you this, Campbell, there was nothing politically expedient sitting with
18 per cent interest-rates three months from an election, I can tell you. There is
nothing politically expedient about bringing down tariffs in a recession. But I am quite
sure you are referring to things like Coronation Hill. Coronation Hill became a totem
issue for the mining industry, where in fact the things that mattered, I think, beyond
Coronation Hill, that is, the things that mattered in terms of the big macro picture of
competitiveness, whether it be by way of exchange rate wages or inflation, other
competitiveness issues generally. These are the things which have had greater weight
and I think people in the industry know that. Coronation Hill had its problems, as a
mine, frankly you could tit it in your eye, the size of it, in terms of the size of
Australia's mining produce it never really mattered, it was some of the principles in
there about how it was treated and whether in fact it was a place that should have been
reserved because of Aboriginal interests. I don't really think that expediency is an issue
in Australian public policy today. I think this Government has been prepared to take
issues on which othci Governments haven't. and not only take them on but continue to
go through them.
One of the other things that Campbell put to us, will our tax regime be adapted to be a
truly world competitive one? Well we have just introduced legislation this week to
reduce the company tax rate from 39 per cent to 33 per cent. When I became
Treasurer in 1983 the company tax rate was 46 per cent and there was a 60 per cent
marginal tax rate on distributed income So, there was 78 cents of tax paid in every
dollar of company income. That today is 33 per cent or if you distribute 47 per cent.
So, 78 to 47 if you distribute, but for private companies as well as public companies
they are no longer forced to distribute they can retain earning in a business, so a
business could retain 67 cents of every dollar of company income after tax today and
before a distribution where that was 22 cents years ago. Now that is a very large
change, and coupled with that of course is dividend imputation. Dividend imputation
is a huge tax break for domestic investors. What it essentially has done is make the
company tax a withholding tax for domestic investors If anyone at an AMIC seminar
in the ' 70s said, I will tell you what else we will do, not only will we give you a
competitive exchange rate, but we will knock tariffs over, we will get real wages down
and profits up, we will radically change our industrial relations scene, we will remove
the double tax on dividends, well I amn quite e sue tlht everyone would have fainted at
the tables. But lthioe things have been done and I think dividend imputation is a great
reform and it has been a great thin tfor the companies.
I just tonight picked up just some graphs of the capitalisation of some of the major
companies in the period, in 1983-84 BHP was capitalised at $ 3 billion, today it is
capitalised at $ 23 billion. So someone is doing right somewhere and I don't think it
was all the BHP Board's doing. CRA was capitalised at $ 2.7 billion, today it is nearly
$ 8 billion. Western Mining, all those lefties down there, they were capitalised at $ 1.1
billion and they are at $ 5 billion, peaked at $ 7 billion in ' 87, but held most of it and
have sort of travelled in the area of $ 4 to $ 5 billion since. Now part of that is the
. enhanced profitability of industry, the enhanced competitiveness of the industry which 
cr . Y H -Ll T in; 9 a x n o v v r v
4
has come of course through investment and good management, but it has also come
through macro-economic policy, it has largely come through macro-economic policy,
and that dividend imputation and that more attractive share price, attractive
profitability for shareholders took our stock market index from about 1200 after the
stock market crash back to about 1500 and it sort of oscillated in that 1500 now to
1700. So, par of that market capitalisation is dividend imputation which is another
leading tax change. We have got a 10 per cent investment allowance there for projects
over $ 50 million, halfofthe projects in the $ 130 billion of registered projects are
actually mining projccts. There is a 10 per cent investment allowance for projects over
million, there is another 10 per cent investment allowance for those projects, that's
both under $ 50 million and over $ 50 million, but for any over $ 50 million it is 20 per
cent and we have got now a very competitive schedule of depreciation, I think it is
competitive as anybody we trade with. Which sees, for instance, forty year assets
written off in 15 years, 20 year assets written off in 7, 5 year assets written off in 3
years. So rapid acceleration, a 33 per cent company rate, full dividend imputation, an
investment allowance of 20 per cent, I don't know what else we have to do for you,
Campbell, in terms of a tax regime which is truly world competitive. This is, in OECD
terms, outrageously comlprtitive. In Asia-Pacific terms very competitive, I think we
are one ofthe very few countries that has a dividend imputation regime.
Now, as well as that, you quite correctly pointed out that the Government needs to
keep the progress up, in terms of micro-economic reform, and I agree with you, I think
that is one of our challenges, it is one of the challenges we all face, it is certainly one
we face and I am quite sure that Richard, and Marshall Perron, who are with us tonight
would agree it has won the States faith as well. But much has been done and we are
seeing for instance in our waterfront reform program productivity in our ports have
been boosted by 127 per cent in recent years. Telecoms productivity has increased by
98 per cent over the last five years, reforms to electricity generation and transmission
have seen productivity increased by 41 per cent over seven years, and more is
happening, we are trying to put together an East Coast electricity grid so that
industries can get the benefit of that coal seam down the East Coast of Australia. We
have set up a competitive modelling in telecommunications with Optus and now a third
cellular mobile carrier. We are continuing of course with water front reform and we
have now got OECD crew manning levels, or actually better than OECD crew
manning levels, on our ships. So, that change is continuing and in the course of this
Parliament we expect to do more about that as well, and of course the largest perhaps
of those changes in the micro-economy is in labour market reform, which you correctly
identified, and in that we are now conducting a comprehensive consultation on a
reform package to consolidaec our gains there That is, to spirit along enterprise
bargaining so that we can see productivity, the production of productivity and the
sharing of productivity between prolils and wages, where we can see that
accomplished as an enterprise where it couldn't be accomplished from the decision of
the central wage bench. The central wage bench will be there for the weaker areas of
the labour market to be setting appropriate minimums, but in the other areas of the
economy, which is most of them, we hope to see a structure for enterprise bargaining
go through. That will mean that employees and owners of businesses will be able to sit
down and do something interesting and clever to make the business better, and tonight
at the table, Campbell, was telling me of his own e\ perience at Renison Tin Mine in
Tasmania where the same thing has happened, that very thing has happened between 
*'^^^ ilyepy~ Ii. t
his management and his employees to see a large shift in productivity. This is
occurring acuoss the country but there is not enough of it and we want to speed the
process up. But it not though. people are saying I noticed my colleague, the Leader of
the Opposition, chiding me yesterday, saying, well you are following us on that. Well I
haven't followed John on many things, and I am not following him on labour market
reform because what the Coalition had in mind was basically a single wage contract,
individual wage contracts, what we have got in mind is the collective bargaining of the
employees of an enterprise with the owners and operators of an enterprise. It is a
wholly different thing. You could never get that cohesion and sense of common goals,
shared goals, and common commitmenis while each person is basically sliced off
individually into a common law contract. It is not the same, and it won't produce the
same results. But it is important to get the problems ofa business identified and to
have them repaired and the make the business more efficient and that can really only be
done on the spot. It can't be done by someone at a hearing in one ofthe central
business districts of the country, and that's why I think the progress now, the
opportunity now, now we have got inflation low to be able to lock that low inflation in
and with high levels of productivity. not only keep it down but also enhance profits on
the way through. So, I think, this is one of the areas where we do want to keep that
progress up
We have been trying to facilitate major projects, and we have got a unit in my
Department which has been involved in expediting projects worth over $ 4 billion in its
first year of operation, and we have been quite successful there I think, and that
coupled with the investment allowance has brought a number of projects forward and I
think we are going to make progress on them, but more needs to be done to
consolidate them.
The other important issue. I think, is the question of Mabo and where it goes. I have
said to Campbell and his colleagues who saw me last week with APEA and the
National Farmers Federation that I think Mabo is a distinct opportunity for Australia,
and one that should be pursued ambitiously. That is something now which the
Government is seeking to do. That is, to talk to all the stakeholders, the organisations
I just mentioned, as well as the Aboriginal community itself, and to see that we can
reach a regime which will be one which is such that we can put to the States at the
Council of Australian Governments in June or July some proposals where we can
advance the whole establishment of a regime to do justice to the High Courts decision.
There is a bit of a view in the industry that this is something the Government has
brought on and it is something the Government is quite happy to deal with, to wrestle
with, it's a decision ol' the I ligh Court of Austiralia of a case which was heard over
many years and the High Court has turned over the concept of Terra Nullius and has
said there is a native title right in common law, it hasn't said what the title is, how it
should be established, who has the title, or how it may be used or exploited, and we
are as a Government saying, well look, we will try and establish a regime here, but we
have to talk to all the stakeholders, and they are principally the States, the industries,
pastoral, mining, etc and of course the Aboriginal community. This won't be easy, but
it will require a mature set of judgements to reach a package which I think is possible
and which will do more in the event for a true reconciliation between the Aboriginal
and non-Aboriginal communnities in this country than perhaps any other thing has the
immediate opportunity of so loing So, we have already started in those negotiations
49 
TEL 7. May. 93 14: 31 No. 004 P. 06/ 07
6
and we are continuing, but we are of course in entirely new territory with this, there is
no structure at all, it has got to be all put into place, and the High Court has only but
given us clues as to what, that is, beyond saying that there is a title, a native title, given
us only clues about what they think the character of the title should be.
So, it is not going to be an easy matter, and it is not going to be a matter where
sloganeering has any place, or incantations, because that could be a pretty expensive
exercise, I think, for all of us. But again, in a consultative, cooperative environment
between ourselves and the States, yourselves, the pastoral industries and the
Aboriginal community itself, I think we can do a great deal.
Let me just perhaps close and sum up on a few of these points. In this year we expect
mineral commodity exports to increase by 9 per cent to a record high of almost $ 31
billion. Total new capital in\ vestment we expect in this year to reach a record of about
billion and over the next five years the AB ARE forecasts the total value of mineral
commodity exports will increase by 22 per cent in real terms and the production of
metallic minerals will increase by 25 per cent. So, commodity exports this year up by
$ 9 to $ 31 billion and total capital investment reaching records of about $ 5 billion.
That is not too bad, a pretty good result, and the key thing is, I think, to keep all those
elements and competitiveness in there so that we can maintain this kind of an effort.
This is what the Government is committed to and of course as you know this week I
had the pleasure of seeing Prime Minister Miya7awa in Australia and that raises the
other prospect of Australia finding itself in an even better position in this part of the
work, bearing in mind 72 per cent of our exports go to the Asia-Pacific area, that we
have a unique opportunity I think with the region, with APEC, this body which we are
now using in a fledging way to develop an open liberalised set of markets in this area,
the interest in APEC by the United States, Japan, China, Canada and most of the
countries of South East Asia, it gives us an opportunity to perhaps find a place for
Australia, an enhanced place, again, not just for manufactured exports or services, but
also for our traditional commodities such as mining. Campbell made the point that we
are also shipping products to the old world and I think that says a great deal about the
entrcpreneursllip and competitiveness of the industry that that is so, but we have
always tended to be most competitive in the area of our immediate region and the
possibilities of us finlding belter markets in this part of the world, are I think, have the
potential to be quiet substantially enhlanced if we kick tile foreign policy and trade balls
in the right way. So, I think that is another challenge we could perhaps add to
Campbell's challenges as well.
All in all could I say that I have always has a great respect for the mining industry. In
the 1970s when I first had contact with it, apart from some segments of our agriculture
industries it was the only internationally competitive industry. It lead the way in
developing new markets in new areas of financing. it had the entrepreneurship the rest
of the country needed In those days we had people like John Stone giving us the
dismal lesson that you couldn't have a malnuflacturing sector sitting beside an efficient
primary export secito that was part of the Treasury orthodoxy of the day. Well I don't
think it was the Treasury I think it was his, but it was his anyway. Of course as you
know in the end commodities couldn't cut the mustard. When John Howard finally
toddled offinto Opposition in 1983 we were running a current account deficit of 6 per
cent of GDP, because e t terms of trade have shifted so dramatically on us that the 
TL-7. May. 93 14: 31 No .004 P. 07/ 07
' 7
world wasn't paying us the prices for raw materials it used to pay us twenty years
earlier, and we lefl it too late to adjust Australia Without a fair bit of pain. But we are
now a long way LhroULgh that adjustment task and we can now have an efficient
primary expoi-tirig sector sitting beside an etlicient manufacturing sector and effcient
tertiary and serv'ice seetoirs So thlt dismnal legacy of'those views has now passed there
is no more Gregory Iflisis tryinlg to rocket our exchiinge rate oil the back of the
mineral industry while ninlcuighas been CutI to pieces. We have got all these
things musch more nicely in balance Lcause thle country. thle Government, thle
industries and the community have had the Courage to face the challenges and meet
them. We are a long way down tile road. We have got a long way to go.
But this Government is goin", to Use its mandute to advance it further and it will be
doing it in those areas which do mnatter in the miicro-economy, in wages, in thle
maintenance of a lo~ v inflation rate ard doin-all those sensible things to facilitate
project developmnt. be it in the Iiining or in other sectors of Lhe economy.
Could I again thanlk you l'ur haviniig ine a ) ln tonighit. I appreciate this contact with
the industry, I thought it % vas a good opportuniity so closely following thle election to
come along at Campbell's invitat ion. I am pleased to be here and say that we will be
keeping thce dialog~ ue with the induIstry open, perhaps more fulsomnely in thle first
instance on Mabo, which I think is a huge challenge for all of us and will test our
ingenuity, I ami certain. Thank you very much for having mie, I ani very pleased to be
here in the comipany of my colleagules, Richard Court and Marshall Perron.
Thank you.
ENDS 



T1EL4: . May. 93 10: 12 No. 007 P. 01/(~
PRIME MINISTER 59/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTIER, THE HON P J K~ EATING, MP
DR PETER WILENSKT, AO
As a result of treatment required for an illness, and in full consultation with him, Dr
Peter Wilcnski, AO, will relinquish his position as Secretary of the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade.
While Dr Wilenski will bc taking sick leave, he will continue to work with the
Department of Foreign Affa~ irs and 1rade. He will carry the title Commonwealth
Government Adviser and, as available, will provide assistance on a range of issues in
relation to the portfolio.
He will continue to serve on the Council of the Australian National Gallery.
Among numerous international, governmental, professional and academic positions, Dr
Wilcilski has served as Australian Ambassador to the United Nations, Secretary of the
Departments of Transport and Communications, of Education and Youth Affairs, of
Labour and Jmmi~ ration, and as Chairman of thc Public Service Board.
It is expected that Dr Wilenski will resume full duties at the end of this year. The
Government will then appoint him to a position commensurate with his status,
experience and the outstanding contribution he has made to public life and public
administration. Following appropriate consideration, the Government will announce soon a new
appointment to the position of Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade. CANBERRA 14 May 1993 TEL 



TEL: 20. May. 93 16: 28 No. 008
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRINI E , IIN ISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, FAIRBURN RAAF BASF
MAY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
1: Mr Keating, do you rcgrct the media headlines that over in New Zealand
over this social security business?
PM: If I got into the business of regretting what the Australian media does I would
be on my knees every day of the week praying for you.
J: Do you expect a hostile reaction over there?
PM. No. I am looking forward to the visit. This is the country that has been
traditionally nearest to us We have got a lot of common, not just cultural but
economic links, and it is a timely visit and I am looking forward to it.
J: Were you pleased to see the New Zealand Ambassador here saying that they
haven't been pulling their weight, they really nccdcd to sort of get down to
on social scurity?
PM: Social security is just one iss e. It is an issue that has been on the table for a
while and requires some attcntion, but it has got to be ranked and prioritised
with other Issues, and there are others of similar rank.
1: Is their quick response on the social security matter though, any indication that
they might quicken their responses in other areas?
PM: Well we have a lot of matters under discussion all ( he time and like two mature
countries we advance them appropriately by discussion, Minister to Minister
and thtn Prime M4inister to Prime Minister. So, one of the things I will be
discussing with Mzr Bolger is his recent trip to North Asia. For instance, how
both Australia and New Zealand can Integrate our economies with the Aia-
Pacific economies, how we can further Integrate our Iwo economies, the 
TEL: 20. May. 93 16: 28 No. OO$ F'. C
2
continuing development of CER, Closer Economic Relations. These are issues
which are, If you like, on the agenda most of the time, but we keep advancing
them in particular ways. This gives us in opportunity to do this again.
J: What's your reaction, Prime Minister, to the Pearce Report?
PM: I will talk about that when I come back.
ENDS 
TEL: 20. May. 93 16: 21 No. 004 P. 02/ 02.
continuing development of CER, Closer Economic Relations, These are issues
which are, if you like, on the agenda most of the time, but we keep advancing
them in particular ways. This gives us an opportunity to do this again.
J: What's your reaction, Prime Minister, to the Pearce Report?
PM: I will talk about that when I come back.
ENDS 



1~ 1 PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THlE HON P J KCEATING MP
TO THE AUSTRALIA-NEW ZEALAND BUSINESS COUNCIL
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND THE REGION
AUCKLAND FRIDAY. 21 MAY 1993
Few relationships between countries are as close, with s0
much mutual benefit and so few differences. as the
relationship between Austral * ia and New Zealand. It is a
relationship in which we literally take each other's good
will and candour for granted, as I believe we should and
always will.
But where once our fellow feeling arose out of a shared
sense of Isolation In this part of the world, my
discussions today with your Prime Minister and Cabinet,
and with your Opposition leadership, confirmed the
thought I've had for some time: the basis of our
relationship is rapidly changing.
Today we share not a sense of isolation but a knowledge
of opportunity.
Not a suspicion that we are in the wrong part of the
world, but a conviction that we are In the right one.
Not a sense that we can depend only upon each other, but
that we are both part of a great web of production and
t rade f rom your South I slIand up through. East As ia to
Japan's northern islands, and from Indc China to the East
coast of the United States.
You with your Asia 2000 program, we with the rapid
reorientation of Australian Industry, are finally coming
to terms with geography. We both remain determined to
integrate our economies, but we are now conscious that
our future lies not with each other, but In the wider
region not separately, not jointly, but companionably.
Like most Australians, I am well aware of the energy and
rapidity with which New Zealand has been restructuring
its economy, and I have followed your national debates on
economic reform with great interest.
And as New Zealand has changed, so too has Australia. Ii 
2
It is most visible in our trade performance. Over a
decade, exports have more than doubled. A decade ago
barely one dollar in eight in Australia came from
exports. Today it is one dollar in five, and climbing.
Today manufactures and services each rival rural exports,
and both are growing. The fastest growing manufactured
exports are elaborately transformed goods and New
Zealand is our biggest ETM market, as we are yours.
As our exports have grown and the nature of our exports
has changed, their destination has also changed. A
decade ago less than half of our merchandise exports
went to East Asia. Today nearly two thirds do and our
exports to Asia are far and away the fastest growing part
of our trade.
The ASEAN countries are now a more important export
market for us than either the US or the EC.
Behind these changes in our trading performance are the
efforts of Australian industry, and deliberate changes to
government policy.
We have opened up the economy by floating the dollar,
abolishing capital controls, and putting in place a
sensible, consistent program of tariff reductions.
We have doubled productivity on our wharves, and reduced
crew levels on coastal shipping to the OECD average.
We have introduced competition into telecommunications
and deregulated air transport.
We have introduced a national system of enterprise
bargaining, which we intend to sustain and encourage
through comprehensive legislation later this year.
We have over a decade maintained an Accord with the trade
union movement which has been a significant factor in
reducing inflation to one of the lowest rates among
industrial countries.
And as a result of tax refo-rms we now have one of. the
lowest ratios of tax to GDP in the OECD.
The change continues today. we are cutting the company
tax rate f rom 39 per cent to 33 per cent. We have
liberalised depreciation provisions to encourage
investment in long lived plant and equipment. We have
Introduced a conditional 10 per cent Investment allowanc6
for plant and equipment, and an additional 10 per cent
development allowance for approved projects with a
capital cost over $ 50 million. 
After the recession of the late eighties we are advancing
Into the nineties with consistently higher productivity
growth than we have had for a generation, low inflation,
arnd the lowest level of industrial disputes for decades.
We have a trade surplus, and manufacturing production is
rising.
There is no doubt the structure of the Australian economy
is changing, anid that we have the policies in place and
under development to maintain the pace.
But change is easier and faster when the entire economy
Is growing rapidly, when young people are confident they
will be able to find jobs and older people are confident
they will keep theirs.
Our growth Is still not fast enough to generate the jobs
we need to rapidly reduce unemployment, and I am more
than ever convinced that the package of investment
incentives and company tax cuts and of jobs programs,
together with an Accord which focused on employment, was
the right package to put before Australians in our recent
election.
We are not doing as well as we need to; and the world
economy is not doing well enough. It is troubling to see
Europe doing so little to move out of the economic
trough. It is troubling to see growth moderate at best
in the US and very slow in Japan and Mr Bolger and I
warmly welcomed Mr Miyazawals recent package to stimulate
the Japanese economy.
If there is one thing which I believe can increase
confidence and optimism worldwide, it would be a
successful conclusion to the Uruguay Round this year.
This is Australia's single most important trade
objective. President Clinton has made reaching an agreement a top
priority and asked Congress for an extension of-his
authority to conclude-the negotiation.--
The French Government appears to have recognised the
importance of concluding the round. And I particularly
applaud the decision of the Japanese Government to offer
last weekend a significant package of tariff cuts as part
of the round.
It defies logic that the US and the EC and Japan. so
close to agreement, with so much to gain and with a clear
choice between cheering on a world recovery and
stimulating their own trade, or puncturing recovery and
encouraging the decay of the trade rules which have
created the modern world economy, will let the
opportunity pass them by. 
But we cannot take a successful completion of the Uruguay
Round for granted. In fact, there are forces at work
which may mean that the Round will simply fade away.
Certainly we will do all we possibly can to advance an
agreement, and already our Trade Minister Peter Cook has
arranged a meeting of the Cairns Group at the end of June
to register the concerns of fair traders in agriculture.
But the deadlines are now real ones and there Is no
guarantee that they will be met.
We must have by the end of this year an agreement which
can be submitted to the US Congress, which effectively
means we need to see real progress by the G7 meeting In
Tokyo in July.
Over the last decade both our countries have greatly
benefited from the mutual tariff reductions and other
liberalisation undertaken as a result of CER.
In the decade since we signed the agreement trans-Tasman
trade has tripled. The total value of Investment between
our two countries has Increased nine fold.
We have continued to benefit from the free movement of
people between our two countries, based on the Trans-
Tasman Travel arrangement which does more than anything
else to unite us.
Today several hundred thousand New Zealanders are living
in Australia, and might I say, -the issue Iof social.-
security accounting asid e, they are contributing a great
deal to the economic and social life of Australia and
strengthening the bonds which bind us.
In the development of our economic relationship we are
now entering a highly significant new phase.
We are still working towards greater economic
integration, with important achievements in prospect in
areas such as the recognit ion. of occupations and mutual
recognition or common standards In goods. We have also
made substantial progress in developing new arrangements
to facilitate trans-Tasman passenger movements.
But we both recognise that the main game is now our
integration in the Asia-Pacific region a point which Hr
Bolger put forcefully and succinctly in his Tokyo speech
earlier this month.
The new CER phase of integration of standards and
certification has Important implicaio6ns for our
iiif_ 4giia~ tT~ nith the region, as I shall explain later. 
My conviction that the 15 member APEC group, which
comprises the major economies of the Asia-Pacific region,
is the right vehicle for Asia-Pacific integration is
based on a few fundamental facts.
The first is that North America anid the Western Pacific
are infinitely better off if they work together than if
they drift apart.
North America is still East Asia's biggest export market.
And East Asia is rapidly becoming more important to the
United States.
At the same time the East Asia region Is accounting for
an increasing share of both world trade and world output.
This has been an extraordinary, historic shift one of
inestimable importance for the conduct of world affairs.
Yet it has by and large occurred in advance of the
sustaining net of understandings upon which trade
conflict can be controlled.
This is why we see today a great contrast between the
mutuality In the actual trade pattern, and the acrimony
in the trade rhetoric.
In reality it is a great cooperative enterprise which is
lifting us all up.
In the rhetoric it is a bitter battle for crumbs.
Given enough tfmte. ' enough ill lull, enou~ h
misunderstanding, and the rhetoric will threaten to
overwhelm the fact.
So there is a contrast between the sophistication of the
success of commerce in the region, and the rudimentary
nature of the political nets which sustain it a
contrast which threatens some day to threaten the
underlying process of integration, and which gives life
to the mistaken Idea that East Asia can go Its way
without North America, -or North America without East
Asia. This is the fundamental reason for the importance of
APEC. But there is another reason too; and that is that
APEC alone is capable of becoming the forum for arranging
the next great leap In trade In the region, for improving
on Uruguay Round outcomes to enhance trade in the region. 
As I told a conference in Sydney in February, we should
be seeking as our goal an integrated market which
includes Australia and New Zealand, the ASEAN countries,
the three Chinas, Korea. Japan and North America a
market of two billion people producing half the world's
output, bound together with harmonised trade rules,
harmonised Investment rules. harmonised standards and
certification, and an agreed way of settling disputes
between members.
It would be a market where trade between its members
already accounts for two thirds of their own trade and
where the total exports of the region already account for
per cent of world exports.
It would be an integrated regional market which had a
place for inner markets like the CER and ASEAN's AFTA,
and the North American NAFTA, but which nonetheless works
towards commonality and minimum restriction in all areas
in which these can sensibly be advanced.
We could look at the possibilities for sectoral trade
liberalisation, when the results of the Uruguay Round
become clear.
But quite apart from tariff changes, we ought to be able
to achieve progress towards harmonisation or mutual
recognition of food standards, consumer electronics and
labelling.
We ought to be able to work towards an arrangement where
our different approaches to competition, compan-Y law and.
business practice -are less of a hindrance to trade.
We ought to be able to agree on investment principles to
encourage and facilitate the vast growth of investment
between APEC members.
And we ought to be able to set up a mechanism for talking
through trade conflicts between members.
We should be able -to do all these things and more because
they all share this characteristic it is very easy . to
imagine how many -industries and how -many mil1lions of
people will be better off if we do them. It is much more
difficult to imagine which industries and which people in
the region will be worse off.
All it takes is mutual agreement that it should be done,
and the time and intelligence of governments to decide on
appropriate standards, the appropriate forms of mutual
recognition, the appropriate harmonisation of conflicting
rules. It is something Europe is already successfully doing.
And It is something Australia and New. Zealand are
beginning to succeed in doing. 
while the task is obviously much easier for our two
countries, New Zealand and Australia can be a model for
this process of APEC-wide liberalisation and
harmonisation. We have already come a very long way since 1983, not only
in terms of reducing bilateral barriers to goods and
services trade and Investment, but also in creating an
appropriate business environment for Australian and New
Zealand companies.
For example, under CER we are undertaking a significant
business law harmonTiation exercise and we are actively
harmonising our customs and quarantine arrangements. In
some areas such as our 1988 Trade in Services Protocol
CER is at the cutting edge of International trade
pol icy.
A particularly good example of the way in which CER can
reinforce what we want to do regionally is in the area of
standards. Five years ago we signed an agreement on technical
barriers to trade which encourages the harmonisation of
standards and certification procedures.
Further work is underway between our two countries.
Our Cabinet decided at the begi nning of this month that
we should go ahead and do more work on the mutual
recognition of regulations relating to goods and
occupations and on the development of joint standards.
Our National Food Authority and your New Zealand
counterpart are now actively working towards the
establishment of a single standards setting system for
Australia and New Zealand.
So Australia and New Zealand have shown that
administrative impediments to trade can be reduced or
eliminated, and-that It. is worthwhile to do so.
When completed, our integration will be a model of the
success of two countries in making trade between them
nearly as simple and uncomplicated as trade within them.
We can bring to the APEC group some of the lessons of
negotiated mutual recognition and harmonisation of
standards which we are learning in the CER.
These are our intermediate goals, and the APEC countries
have put in place processes which can help us realise
them.
We have established an eminent persons group, for
example, for which New Zealand has provided a
secretariat. 
I understand It Is the intention of the group, which is
chaired by Dr Fred Dergeten of the United States, to
produce in good time for a meeting of APEC Ministers in
November In Seattle some thoughts about how regional
Integration should proceed.
Then there Is the preparation for the Ministerial meeting
itself, which many APEC governments are giving a good
deal of thought. My own feeling is that we need to adopt
at that meeting some sort of framework agreement which
outlines our goals, and also an action plan or schedule
which will guide our work over the next few years.
Last year I suggested that a process of periodic meetings
of APEC leaders would also help to stimulate a stronger
sense of regional commonality and mutual interest, and I
have been delighted by the positive response of many APEC
members. I think these are good medium term goals, and of course
they beg the question of what our longer term goals
should be. As I say, we would certainly encourage
progress towards an integrated market. and an integrated
production zone an Asia Paci-fic EconomicCommunjty.
Perhaps some day It will be relevant to think about a
regional free trade agreement and by this I mean an
agreement open to all APEC members, which covers a high
proportion of our trade, and which commits all of us to
substantial liberalisation beyond that already agreed
globally in the GATT.'-
As parties to a very successful preferential arrangement
like CER neither of our two countries can claim to be
opposed to preferential agreements in principle. The
United States, Canada and Mexico are building their own
preferential free trade areas, as are the ASEAN
countries. But I do think the issue of whether a regional
preferential trade arrangement-could one day be given
serious consideration can be postponied uiij we are very
much further down the path of open econoic integration
and of creating an Asia Pacific Economic Community.
The practical and theoretical problems of creating a
region-wide free trade area would of course be Immense.
We need a good deal more practice in economic cooperation
before we contemplate something so ambitious: something
that would change the political as well as the economic
configuration of the globe in fundamental ways. 
I remain utterly convinced however, that a gelectiver
trans-Pacific free trade area would fatally undermine the
most fundamental reason we are pursuing KPEC, which is to
knit together the North American and East Asian
economies. The sort of thing I am arguing against is the idea which
the United States seemed to be seriously considering last
year of a network of bilateral preferent~ al trade
agreements which would align some Pacific trading nations
against others.
Whatever slight trade advantages there might be for
individual players on this side of the Pacific a link
with NAFTA would to my mind be at the expense of and
completely overwhelmed by the strategic damage to APEC.
Earlier today in Wellington I said that Australia and New
Zealand stood on the threshold of a new era in our
history. We have the opportunity in this decade to
integrate ourselves with the fastest growing economies in
the world, and in so doing lay the basis for long term
prosperity. As never before it seems to me very much a matter of
making our own history, seizing our time, in our part of
the world.
In Australia more than a decade ago 1. and some of my
colleagues, began to imagine that Australia could become
a successful manufacturing and trading nation: that we
could develop a creative and co-operative industrial
culture: and that we could seize our opportunities to be
a substantial player in this most dynamic region of the
world. It seemed to some of us that, contrary to the wisdom of
generations, Australia need not remain just an exporter
of commodities that we could do both: we could continue
to export the agricultural and rural products and the
minerals, and we could make things for export.
These thoughts -very. rapidly _ moved from the realm of
imagination to that-of necessity.
Like you, we learnt in the 1980s that there was no choice
but to radically change our financial and industrial
culture, to re-orient ourselves to Asia and the Pacific,
and open ourselves to world at large. To add value to our
products. Our economic survival depended on our willingness and
capacity to do these things.
This is the story of the last decade. It will be the
story of the next.-In my view no previous generation of
Australians or New Zealanders lived in a more exciting
era, or one on which their countries' -future so depended. 
Along the way New Zealand and Australia have at times
chosen different paths. But the goal has been the same.
And it remains the same. It is no less an imperative now
than It was a decade ago.
Yet for all we do as Governments, our success or failure
ultimately depends upon our people the degree of their
enterprise, the level of their imagination and skill,
their willingness to co-operate, their capacity to
change. In Australia it is the changes we have already made which
convince me of our capacity to change in the future.
Our successes in the arena of industrial relations, the
transformation of workplaces, the move from an
adversarial culture to a co-operative one these have
been revolutionary changes in Australia.
That Is one example. The proliferation of new dynamic
small to medium sized businesses is another. McKinseys
recently identified In Australia 700 companies born of
the new manufacturing and export culture, making products
Australian companies have never contemplated making,
succeeding in markets where Australian companies never
contemplated going.
I have no doubt that New Zealand could point to similar
achievements. On both sides of the Tasman it seems to me
we can take considerable pride and confidence from the
proof of the changes we have made, and the rewards which
are now beginning to f low our way.
And we might also take as a measure of our capacity to
meet the challenges we face the progress we have made
towards Closer Economic Relations between Australia and
N~ ew Zealand. CER, too, has been a response to the
challenge.
CER will give us a better chance in the world. And if,
taking heart from our success with CER, we push on with
the task of creating an Asia Pacific Economic Community,
It will have ' given us much more than that.
It will have given us the basis of prosperity and a good
society: it will have given us the confidence that comes
with knowing that what we have we earned by dint of
imagination and courage, and by believing in ourselves
and in the future of Australia and New Zealand.
Thank you. 



TEL
PV1 A'$ h5~-r -1, 22. May. 93 19: 58 No. 002 P. 01/ 11
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MJFNISTER, THE HON P. 3. KEATING; Nip,
PRESS CONFERENCE, THEATRrE~ PARLIAMENT HOUSES
WELLLINGTON, 21 MAY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM-Good afternoon. I might just Opel) uip with a few introductory comments and
invite you to then put questionis. I will begin by saying that this has been a
valuable opportunity for me to talk to Prime Minister Bolger ad the cabinet of
New Zealand and it is of course the first opportunity I have had to go ira
86n4 the election, The opportunity presented has been an important one for
two countries which enjoy a very close relationship, two peoples who enjoy a
close relationship and where conternporafy issues can be discussed and
advanced. We have had useiM talks on a whole rangje of bilateral issues as well as the
international issues in such areas of course as the Uruguay round and in APEC
where the New Zealand view and the Australian view is pretty much at one and
where in we seek to try and integrate our two economies with the region
ground us in the same way as we have integrated with each other.
On the bilateral issues the subjects we covered were taxation, the trans-Ta-sman
travel arrangements, social security, inmmigration pre-clearance in relation to
domestic airline travel or international travel at domestic terminals, mutual
recognition of standards and defence relations. There may be a few other
extraneous niattets which have entered into discussion, but they art principal
topics. So I'd be very glad to take questions from you.
J: Prime Ministr... over the welfa-re pAymnts?
PM-We discuss . ed the wclfare payments and we have agreed to expedite negotiation
aimed at a more equitable arrangement for Australia and this will focus on
pensions and long term allowances and I think relevant mninisters are going to
mcet next month so our travel arrangements of course facilitate an exchaenge of
people that Australia doesn't facilitate with other countries and therefore this
occasion arisc-b41 our social security systemn where trorn time to time situations
emerge wherein Austradias case, iin this instance Australia is carrying a
disproportionate level of the burden or the cost and I think the Government of
New Zealand recognises that and it is whky I think we have alrvady been 
TEL: 22. May. 935 19: D NIJ. VVZ .4-L
2
discussing It and why today we have agreed to expedite that discussion in the
near fu~ ture.
J: So without looking a bit crass you are going to get more money?
PM: It ha been the historic truth of the situation that people who have spent a large
part of their life in Now Zealand have for a minior period of their working life
come to Auqtralia and then been in receipt of an Australian pension and that
means that we are carrying a substantial burden that would otherwise be carried
in New Zealand,
Are you looking at extending agreement to include pensioners who have
been in Australia longer than that period or do you want to add new classes of
beneficiaries to those established already?
PM: We are not talking about unemployment beneficiaries or benefits which are of a
short term nature, only a long terni tiature, We did come to an agreement in
1999 about the methodology of picking tip costs for people after that point.
This is about going back, looking at the burden that we are now carrying, but
again on rules that are sensible and equitable and fair for both sides,
J: Mr Keating, how can Now Zealand and New Zealanders avoid Australians or
prevent Australians from thinking that this country and the people in it will
want to bludge on Australia?
PM. I don't think that is true at all. I don't think Australians think that at all. But
that is not to say that there won't be issues from time to time which arise like
this one. We have had other social security type issues arise with other
European countries for instance and I don't think the Australian community
would conclude from that that they were to use your words, about to bludge
on us. It is just an issue that oeeds to be dealt with and I don't think people
should read more into it than it is.
1; Prime Minister, do you think New Zealand can maintain a credible defence
posture in the South Pacific with Australia while it remains outside or excluded
from the ANZUS alliance or would you prefer to see New Zealand back in?
PM: That is a matter for New Zesland, New Zealand and its relationship with the
United States. The ANZUS alliance is an allitince of value to Australia, I think
it is an alliance. of value to the United States. It was concluded at a time when
there was a premium on such alliances. I don't think such a premi~ um exists in
the United States today. So it is an alliance of value and it is one which the
Australian goverinent puts substantial store in and makes substantial defence
eff'orts on its own part to meet. or course, were New Zealand to decide to
becorme a full parter again in ANZUS that must of itself, strengthen~ the
ANZUS alliance. But the allian~ ce still remains, Australia still has, exercises with
the United States forces from time to time and not only that, of course we
have regular ministerial consultations between the Secretary of State and
defencc secretaries of the United States and the appropriate defence and 
EL: 22. May. 93 19: 58 No. 002 P. U3' 11i
3
foreign afibirs ministers of Australia, So it is for us a fully operationa l aljce
and one which we go to lengths to keep the tone on. I think the other issue
which we did discuss this morning is the thing about the role of defence
generally and national. efforts towards defence and I did expres the view to
Prime Minister Bolger and to the Cabinet that it is important for both our
countries to be able to maintain a minimal, at least a miinimnum credible defence
as the expression is used in New Zealand. Now we are spending about 2.4 per
cent of GDP on defence, that has declined fiomn 2.9 to about 2.4 per cent and
we have Yielded from our changes over the years substantial efficiency
dividend New Zealand is spending now about 1. 1 per cent of GDP on
defence and while there is no doubt that efficiencies have been yielded if you
like, brought to bear in that process, I1th ink it is important to say that it is
important for both our countries that New Zealand does indeed have a credible
defence policy in place. Prime Minister Bolger agrees with that as does his
Cabinet and that is an issue which I think is of fundamental importance
whatever ones view of the ANZUS overlay mi~ Iit be.
J: ( inaudible) credible defence policy?
PM:, No, we are not in a position to second guess and don't attempt to seconld guess
New Zealand about its defence spending, but it is important to keep core forces
in place. These are not things you can build up quickly. Defence experience
and capacity is something which is built tip over a long pvriod of time and that
experience and operability and all the rest can if it dindnishes, can take a very
long time to repair.
I Prime Minister, so you wouldn't necessarily see out of this an agreement for
New Zealand is to increase their defence spending?
PM: We didn't ask for a commnitment ftrm New Zealand, but the Prime Minister
made it clear that they wouldn't be spending any less on defence.
J: Prime minister, are you convinced that the New Zealand Labor party is also
committed to a credible defence policy?
PM: I am seeing the Leader of the Opposition after I see you and I'm sure he will
take about that subject.
J: Ptrme Minister, is it your view that the purchase of one or two ANZAC frigates
by New Zealand is sufficient to core a New Zealand credible defence force?
pM: I think credible defence goes more than material purchases or
procurement or weapons procurement in their own righit. It is a total thing
which is operational forces, combat readiness, capacity logistics as well as
equipment. These are very sophisticated issues which require sophisticated
judgements and most defence mainistfles and armed services try and imake thosc
judgements aU the time. The important thing is I think that ( he Government of
New Zealand is convinced itself that its policies can maintain a credible
TEL: 
TEL: 22. May. 93 19: 58 No. 00 2 P. 04/ 11
4
minimum defence posture because that is of material importance to Australia or
the integration Of Australian and New Zealand forces,
3: How long before minimui core is increasing over the years as Asian nations
increase their defence capability which they are doing already?
PM: It depends I think what ones strategic outlook is and in which way one is
planning ones defence force. Ours has been substantially re-oriented to the
defence of Australia rather than as it was earlier participation with US forces
in the Pacific. That change occurred in the 1 980s and if the key criteria is
defence of ones own land mass and interests then I think that in a sense
describes the policy rather then reference to what someone else is doing nearby.
Whatever someone else is doing would be always part of some strategic
assessment, that has to be fed into any cailculation. But again I don't think
there is any mechanical link between what someone else is doing and what we
that is Australia or New Zealand might be doing.
1; Is there any scope for ifurther integrating the defence policies?
PM-. As the Prime M~ inister said over lunch, there is a lot of defence co-operation;
we call it CDR occurring between Australia and New Zealand and I can only
wish and believe that that will continue.
J. Are you saying though that CDR is in danger of
PM:. No, because the Prime Minister takes the view that the maintenance of a
mi~ nimal credible force Is paramount in public policy. That is the key judgement
for us,
P What issues were raised in the taxation context..
PM. Two things: the re-writing of our double tax agreement between the two
counitries which is now quite an Old docullent and so much has changed of
course, and it needs to reflcet that change and the other is the question of
mutual recognition of dividends, dividend imputation and progress on that
issue. The problem for us an that issue is that the preservation of the integrity
of the Australian tax system and there are of course ma * ny Australian companies
investinS all around the world, and the precedent problem for us is were we to
provide imputed dividend cre~ dits, the tax paid to another Treasury, the
Treasury of another country in this case New Zealand the pressure would
come on to Australia to pay imputation credits for tax paid to the German
Treasury or the British Treasury and other places where Australian companies
have $ one abroad.
J: Are you effectively ruling it out?
PM-I think what we arc saying is for the moment is that we are not ready at this
stage to agree to a change in dividend imputation. If we are prepared to leave
it tinder discussion so that if ways can be found of dealing with the quarantining 
TEL'
problem we will examine them. But there is also another great difference in
the tax systems of New Zealand and Australia and that is New Zealand does
not have a capital gains tax and Australia does. So companies could take their
incomne profits in Australia and their capital profits in New Zealand and again
this would not necessarily guarantee the objectives of such a change for us.
J1: If Australia's focus on actually Sctting greater reparation from New Zealand or
on minimisinS eligibility for frequent pay outs..
PM: We have a very tight social security system, there is an assets test and income
test and over the period of time with the social security review teams and the
rest we have got now by world standards a fairly tight system. So eligibility is
not I think as primacy here, it is just a question of the balance of the costs
which in this case for about 270,000 New Zealanders, 30,000 of whom are
taking pensions in Australia, means that the great body of the burden falls upon
the Australian budget and given that this occurs principally because of travel
arrangeeznts between us that therefore it needs to be remedied.
I: Australian government prepared to recognise, these tax contributions
working between
PM-I think we do and vice versa, but that I don't think deals with this problem at
all.
3: ( inaudible)
PM: Yes, I was happy to reaffirm the strength of the existing arrangements. I think
they have worked well that is basically the avenue by which there is an
exchange of people between the two countries and it works well and I amn very
happy to endorse those arrangements.
3: What did you decide on iim'igrafion..
PM: Thac we should like to be able to establish a pre-clearance regime by the end of
1993. We agreed to make every effort to do that and we are originally
targeting November, there mnay be a bit of slippage in that, but it would be very
nice to do it if we could before the end of 1993 because this will facilitate flying
between domnestic terminals. So it would be international carriage of people,
but to domestic terminal to domestic terminal wvhich means immigration preclearance
and customs and quarantine clearance would obtain at the domestic
terininals, I can't think of any better way of removing impediments to people
travelling between the two countries than to travel through the domestic
terminals and this of course, will mean also enhanced opportunities for the
airlines and those enhanced opportunities can only mean that the tourist
industry between both countries is ernhanced. B~ oth of our countries rely upon a
substantial services sector of which tourism is a rapidly growing part and
therefore getting this done and getting it in place has to be a good thing for
tourism between Australia and New Zealand and of course, in that the airlines
and need I say that this arrangernent is part of a larger arrangement where
22. Mag. 93 19; zm mu. vw,. 
TEL: 22. May. 93 19: 58 NO. UUZ rv'
6
AuStrelia has already agreed beyond rights for New Zealand Ailines out of
Australia to North America arxd to Asia. SO it is not a policy which sits alone,
it is pan of a broader Policy Of a closer integration of our two airline markets
into a single airline market,
3: Prime MInlister, you said in your discussions today in termns of benefits for the
long term like superannuation, do you anticipate at somne stage You Will have to
look at things like the uneCMPloyment benefit?
PM: It has not been On the agenda at this Point in our discussion and I think from
Our Point of view it is that these Mre payments of a shorter term duration, there
is a flux of people moving backwards and forwards, there is not so obvious a
longer termi cost and so therefore I think it is wise for us to concentrate on the
longer term benefits and pensions, aged pensions in particular. I think it is
possible to arrive at a formula where this can be reasonably well constructed,
operate effectively and efficiently and make the system just that much fairer.
Are YOU going to flee up thle travel between the countries is there going to
be mnore New Zealanders with freer access?
FM: The mode of travel would be freer, more subtle, but the basis of the travel is no
freer than what is now eminently free. That is virtually visa free entry into
Australia. Do you resent that New Zealand will have a credible defence policy if it doesn't
increase its..
PM: r sot asked that earlier. I responded to that earlier.
P: Prime Minister, regarding yourvisit to the Savage memorial, are you the New
Zealand government to praise the value and ideals of...
PM: I don't know whether that is supposed to be a leading question. You have a
fusrry thing in your hand there, I take it it is a microphone and that you want
therefore an approprite flurry answer I suppose. I was able to say in -my
remarks a few minutes ago at lunch that I think the thing about these countries
is they are deeply democratic countries. When you say in countries like New
Zealand and Australia, you inake a speech to the Parliamentary folk, you say
these are demnocracies, people say oh yes% d emocracies, but democracies like
ours are few and as old as ours are few. This is a very old democracy in New
Zealand as is Australia's and it is the transmission of demnocratic values around
the world is I think one of the things we do best. With that democracy has
come I think in both societies a deep sense of tolerance. I think tolerance
comes from ones sense of democracy, an innate sense of democracy and the
tolerance has led to different kinds of societies being developed. A different
society here In New Zeal and say to Europc. Certaitfly a different society in
Australia than say Europe, indeed different socictics between Australia and
New Zealand, thcse are different places. That tolerance has also Itik
produced a view of society, a view about the role of ilovernment and the role 
22. May. 93 19to N'u. u-
TEL: 7
of society which has seen both Australia and New Zealand break many of' the
muoulds of social justice and break them in a way which enhance the social
agenda of both countries. I think Michael Savage when he was Prime Minister
did these things. We have continued in our couritty to do these things and
much of the Australian election just passed, the debate was about these things.
There is a role for government. but again too substantial a role for government
is disruptive of private investment and in the end employment, so it is a matter
of finding that balance, to do what i3 fair and just and sensible and at the same
tune pay appropriate due to that sense of democracy and tolerance that Is in
our society and that sense of fairness which comnes froin it. So I think that the
work of great pioneers and 1 think you have to put the former Labor Prime
Minister Michael Savage in that class has laid down the style of New Zealand
life, the sort of society it is, That is not to say these things are immutable, can
never be changed or shouldn't be changed; of course governments will come
along and chop and change them all the time, but the values which arm them I
don't think are going to change and I think that is the good thing.
Prime Minister, going back to your comments on tax you said as I understood
it that Australia was not able to move towairds imputation of dividends because
if you did that it would set a precedent on the countries to have follow. Does
that comment not belie the relationship that the two countries have under the
CER agreement and the progress that has been made on that agrecment?
PM: Yes, but I'm quite sure the US Commerce Department will immediately write
to the Australian Treasurer and say we want the same for us were we to
introduce a dividend imputation system or any other country which wants to
claim the same benefit. But certainly the companies of Australia will seek the
beniefit, they are already seeking it, they have been seeking it for years and were
we to conceive the benefit in New Zealand they will seek it more strongly for
Western Europe, North America, the Asia Pacific.
J: But you have free trading goods and services with New Zealand and you don't
give that to every other country.
pm: No, that is true, but again it is a matter of where th~ e antecedcnts of the
argument come from and this one I think tie argument is that we should give
tax credit for tax paid to a foreign treasury. Now I don't agree with that.
While we would like to see businesses in this country in New Zealand and
Australia integrate more closely, but again it is worth recording we have
already seen an enormous integration of investment between the two countries
particularly since the early 1980s-enormous growth in investment. The other
problem is of course, were Ncw Zealand to extend its imputationl System to
other countries, were it to decide on a few bilaterals on the side, then people
will bring dividends through New Zealand which will end up costing us so we
are defacto extending our imputation system to other countries via New
Zealand and the problem then is saying, we will withdraw the imputation
credits, once businesses have established themselves oil the basis of such credit
you can barely then say, it is possible to say, but ctrtainly business would resist
it, any Australian government sayinu that the beiiefis now be withdrawn, So 
2 2 . M a y .93 1 9 3D N o u u r
S
were we to extend this to New Zealand wed have to have a vezy clear
covenant that it would not be extended elsewhere by New Zealand. These are
all the issues involved and that is why I say at the moment we are not ready to
agree, but we are quite happy to continue examining the policy implications.
3: Prime Minister, your relationship with Mr Bolger, has that been affected at all
by earlier comnents about Joan Kirner?
PM: Earlier, that's much earlier. Months earlier,
1: So exactly what sort of relationship do you have with Mr Bolger?
PM: Very good I think. He is as you know , an affable, easy going, easy to talk to
person who is conscientious about his country's interests and very savvy about
the relationship between Australia and New Zealand and about the issues
involved, So I find dealing with him and on the issues, but beyond that just
knowing him to be a very easy thing to do,
J. Can you say what progress has been made on mutual recognition?
PM: One of the good things is that we do have quite unique, I made reference at
lunch to the fact that New Zealand ministers meet with Conunonwealth and
State ministers of Australia in so many of these functional areas of our
economies and our societies and we have been seeking as States of Australia to
develop a set of uniform, mutual standards so that we don't have one standard
in Melbourne and a different-standard in Sydney or Victoria or NSW as the
case may be. And in that of course, it becomes an obvious thing to extend that
uniformity of standards, classification of standards across the Tasman so that
Australasia has the same standards In these respects and we are making
progress there and I'm sure we'll make substantial progress together on this in
the ensuing period.
J: ( inaudible)
PM. There is a formula that is being discussed, there has been a formula discussed
about,.
3: have you put in any idea of how much the Australian government would
consider reasonable?
PM: You must write for a tabloid do you? No. no I haven't.
3: When will you be announcing the details
PM; We are going to meet I think in a couple of months, within three months there
is going to be another mereting of our respcctive ninistcrs.
ends TEL: 



TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 08/ 09
~-iI4~ 13LO V4: t J LXbNIWL FAX NO: 64 4 49S71 S4 098 P02
PRIME MINISTER
TRMASCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTUA, THE RON P. J. KEATING MP
AND THE RIGHT HOW J 3 BOLGER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
WBLJ4NQTON, 21 lXa? 1993
&amp; O1 PROOF COPY
JR: Can I just say as an opening comment that the talks
this morning have gone very well, both between Prima
Minister Keating and myself and the office and now
with twelve Cabinet Ministers. They have been very
good diecusaionG, we have covored the range of
issues that are important to both countries. I have
been very pleased,
PM: And likewise. This is a natural opportunity to look
at Australia and New Zealand's both relationship one
to the other, but as well our strategic
circumstances in the world In which we live and the
region and the world mote generally. So we have
been able to do those things and then as well as
that discus all the bilateral things as well.
J; Was the contentious issue of benefits discussed at
all Prime Ministers?
PM: We discussed It and I think it has been an issue
under discussion now for some time and one which I
think we will have further discussions on.
J: And what elements Prime Minister?
PM: They will be discussions at Minister level. When is
it Jim, a few months tine?
JD; About a months time. The Ministers are scheduled to
meeL from New Zealand and Australia in about a
month. That meeting was In place, they will pick up
the issue and move it forward. We made it clear
that we are talking about pensions, we are not
talking about benefits. The tenor of te disCuSsion
was constructive, the Ministers will now pick it up
and move it forward, I'm quite certain they will do
that and I would hope they can move it forward
reasonably quickly. 
TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 09/ 09
., d-MHY-' W I-RI M 3: ID'" INES C ENTM E FAX O 64 4 49578 5A # 982 P03
4 2
J: Mr Keating, is Australia talking about pensions or
unemployment benefits as well?
PM: We are talking in terms of discussions we've had
today they have been about pensions rather than
benefits and as the Prime Minister has said that ig
the basis on which ministerial discussions will now
ensue.
J: Do you want that to be wider though Mr Keating?
PM: No, from our point of view that is fair enough.
J; Did you discuss defence issues today?
PM: In the general yes.
J: Are you seeking more ol a role from New Zealand in
defence terms, more defence expenditure?
PM: The important thing between our countries is that we
maintain that sort of operational capacity together,
I'm not sure whether it is qulte the word but
operability between us and that the whole question
about keeping core forces together, their competence
As an issue of Importance for both of.
J: Prime Minister what about the Kangaroo exercises?
JB; That is not something either directly in the control
of Prime Minister Keating or myself. The answer to
your question is yes, but you will be aware of
course of the AmeLican position on that and until
that changes we won't be able to do so, but New
Zealand would certainly welcome the opportunity of
re~ oinlng those exercises. Both the Prime Minister
and myself agree that it is important, that our two
forces operate in a coherent fashion, one
Integrating with the other or complementing the
other and that is certainly an ambition. we both
believe in the five power defence arrangement which
we are members of as again as a strategic, sensible
arrangement. So all that we have no difficulty on.
I think we should Vo, we do have a luncheon that we
are supposed to both appear at and God knows what
you'll say if both of us don't appear at it and I
know Prime Minioter has a press conference later as
well.
PM: I'm happy to take more detailed questions lator.
Thank you.
JB: Thank you.
endc 



21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 07/ 09t
4
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
QUANTUM
In a broadcast on Radio 3L0 on 22 December 1992 1 referred to a number of
polls which had been reproduced In various newspapers concerning the relative
popularity of the Government and the Opposition. In that broadcast I referred
to Quatum_ as being responsible for conduct of those polls. I acknowledge
that Quantum was not responsible for or Involved In the conduct of those polls.
CANBERRA
21 MAY 1993 TEL 



TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. ui/ u'
7
SPEECH BY THE PRIHE MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
STATE LUICKEON WELLINGTON 21 PAY 1993
It Is both a great pleasure and an honour to be here
today, in this famous capital of one of the worldIs
oldest democracies.
I want to thank you for the warm welcome Aunita and I
have received.
This is my first overseas trip since the Australian
federal election on March 13. Jim Bolger was among the
first to telephone and offer his congratulations on the
Labor Party's victory, and in doing so he renewed his
invitation to visit New Zealand.
And I was very glad to accept.
We are old friends, New Zealand and Australia. Good
friends. More serious friends than In commonly admitted.
It Is a friendship Which goes well beyond rivalries in
sport. And boers and wines, and sheep and racehorses and
Sopranos. And films.
It Is a frlendship which goes to a history which we
substantially share, to trade and migration over two
centuries, to shared experiences In peace and war, shared
legends, shared values and aspirations and in the
1990s, perhaps more than ever before, shared
international interests.
Our friendship and the challenges we jointly face are
reflected in the network of contacts which exist between
Australian and New Zealand ministers, and which serves as
a catalyst for continuoui dialogue across almost all
areas of domnatic policy.
In the Closer Economic Relations Treaty we have a model
form of agreement which has brought both our countries
great economic benefits.
We have a long tradition of cooperation in defence.
These days the requirements of oui common interests are
mat by a process of Closer Defence Relations, through 
TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 02/ 09
2
shared training, support and inf rastructure and annual
metings of our defence ministers and service chiefs.
The quality of our defence partnership and the value of
the contribution we each make to wider regional stability
and United Nations peacekeeping depends on our
maintaining credible derenCe capabilities.
These formal contacts are vital to the success of our
relationship, yet in reality the strangth of that
relationship Is substantially built on the less tangible
facts of cultural exchange.
Indeed nothing has established the bond so much as the
simple movement of people between our two countries. For
so long there has been a steady flow these days In
Australia's direction, but at other times In our history
towards New Zealand. A~ nd with the flow has come.
knowledge and famlrarity, end we have learned froA% one
another something about the contours of the Australasian
mind. For generations there has also been a trans-migration of
ideas both ways across the Tasman: in literature and the
arts, in academia, and in the realms of popular culture.
Australian culture continues to be enriched by the
presence of talented and original New Zealan4 filmmakers,
artiste, musicians and writers.
On the other hand Australian popular Culture has for a
long time permeated N~ ew Zealand.
I had no Idea until very recently that New Zealanders of
Jim Bolger's generation were raised on ODad and Dave" and
used to sit in school singing " The Road to Gundagal" and
* Xookaburra Sits In the Old Gum Tree". And those of an
earlier generation than Jim's read the old Australian
bushman's bible The bulletin.
It has been a benign and democratic influence we've had,
I'm sure.
Just as the pervasive Influence in Australia of certain
New Zealand political satirists has been a boon to us
all. In truth, where things really matter, at the heart of the
relationship there really is a common cultural heritage:
and tha irrefutable measure of this to In those
democratic Institutions which srve and symbolise the
faith In democracy and freedom on which both our nations
are built.
it seems to me that paramount among all the things which
unite us is the belief that Australia and N~ ew Zealand
should be countries in which democracy, freedom and
equality of opportunity are exctendled: and if there Is one 
T2EL1:. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 03/ 09
3
thing which characterises the story of both Countries it
Is the pursuit of those goals.
That wes the other great trans-Tasman migration the
migration of progressive political ideas which heas gone
on for more than a century.
A lot of the people who carried these ideas with them
were people from my side of politics: but there has
always been something of a consensus on both sides of
the Tauinan on both sides of politics that Australia and
New Zealand should be lands of opportunity In the front
ranks of social progress. loa the front rankis of
progressive nations.
There Is no better example of this ambition than the
pioneering a centuary ago of women's suffrage. Now
Zealand and Australia especially South Australia led
the world; and New Zealand, I have to conicede, led South
Australia by one year.
This year New Zealand is commmorating the centenary of
womlen's suffrage. Today It has been my pleasure to
present, on behalf of the Auatralia-New Zealand
Foundation, a small contribution to the celebrations.
We start fron what I think is inalienable commn ground.
But of course It woul4 be a mistake of epic proportions
to Imagine that there are not basic differences between
US. I'm Inclined to think that these differences have their
origin* in environment end geography as much anything
else. From the beginning you can see In the work of those
colonial landscape artists who travelled Australia and
New Zealand, two entirely different countries,
And I think there in no doubt that in New Zealand they
saw a landscape which conformed more readily to European
ideas of grandeur anid beauty than Australia did.
For all their understaable attachment to Britain and
Europe, Australitans have Inevitably been shaped by a land
which to eMphatically lika no othar,
It has shaped our character and our institutions and it
will continue to do so and all the more as we at last
come to just terms with the indigenous people of
Australia. For, In the process of reconciliation we have commenced,
Australians have begun to increasingly appreciate the
ancient and extraordinarily rich and adaptive culture of
Australian Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders, and
TEL: 
TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 04/ 09
4
the contribution they have made to our underatanding of
ourselves and the continent we inhabIt.
Australia'. location so close to South-East Asia has also
affected Australian perceptions. For a long while It
gave Australians a feeling of insecurity: but In recent
times that Is changing and, In keeping with our best
interests, we are engaging with Asia on a cotusercial,
political aria cultural level as never before.
Australia is also demographically different of course:
Jim Bolger notwithstanding, Australia has always been
more Xrlsh; since the Second World war More European, and
recently more Asian,
The development of a culturally rich, pluralist Society
and a remarkably tolerant one I count as one of
Australia's greatest national achievements, and one of
our great assets In the internatianalisation of the
Australian economy.
We see our future as being very much bound up with our
region with Asia and the Pacific and we see our
diversity as a great strength in this.
These same considerations have played a significant part
In the recent devlopmsent of the debate about the best
means by which the unique reality of contemporary
Australia might be best expressed and synbolised, arnd
whether or not the time has coma for a Federal Republic
with an Australian Head of state.
There is also a growing awareness that how well Australia
does in the world depends to a conslderable mxtent on how
we are known in the world, and that depends in part on
the symbols and sense of our Identity.
our two nations have Inevitably developed different
perceptions and policies.
The Australian government and people have continued to
place a high value on our security alliance with thio
united States. New Zealand has chosen a somewhat
different path.
Domestically, the micro reform processes we have both
pursued over the past decode have been pursued with
different emphases and we have been led to different
conclusions in a number of importanL policy areas.
Mly Government i* committed to a social democratic
Australia, a free market economy underpinning an
egalitarian and inclusive social policy.
I don't think we neoed be anxious about the points at
which our national lives diverge. There have always been
differences. The friendship is made stronger by
understanding them by appreciating them. 
21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 05/ 09
Living in a vast and dLveQrse Continent, and, no lesS, in
a federal system of government, one learns that lesson
early in life.
We are two nations in a world which ia undergoing
profound change. Remote as we may seem trom much of the
turmoil, both Australia and New Zealand have recognised
the need to engage with it and the roles we can play.
We have joined in International efforts to bring peace
and security to the people o? those countries which have
expexienced tragic and appalling war.
It eems to me that those same ideals of democracy and
freedom which are the cornerstone of our two countries'
history are present with our young men and women now
serving with the United Nations forces in Cambodia and
Somalla. And I believe it is appropriate at this point to
congratulate New Zealand for the role it is playing on
the Security Council as it attempts to find effective
international responses to extraordinarily complex
situatlons. As you will know from our discussions this morning
Australia will continue to commit itself to the processes
of CER which have already been so successful in
stimulating trade and investment between our countries.
There will not be quick and easy solutions to everything,
but everything that should be addressed will be addressed
and progress will be made.
Our determination to continue with our bilateral efforts
is matched by our commitment to securing a successful
conclusion to the Uruguay Round.
we confirmed this in our diScusSiona this morning.
We also jointly recognise the need to build on the
economic growth now occurring in the Asla-Pacific region.
I shall make the point this evening in Auckland that we
should build on the success of CER to integrate more
fully with the wider regional economy.
I am greatly encouraged by what has been achieved in
recent months to advance the progress of APEC.
For both our countries APEC can be the avenue of the
expanded coumercial relationship we seek with the region.
The dialogue has now advanced to a point where I am
confident that we will soon begin to see some practical
measures emerge to permit liberalisatlon of trade ana
Investment within the Asia-Pacific ragion.
TEL: 
TEL: 21. May. 93 15: 33 No. 006 P. 06/ 09
Trade and investment cannot take place In a vacuum. I
know we are agreed that in advancing our economic
relations with Asia anid the Pacific we should also be
seeking to Increase our political and cultural
Interaction. I know we are both aware that our shared Interest in the
region will depend in part on the crucial factor of
stability and prosperity.
We can work together to strengthen regional seCurity and
in so doing secure the basis of our own prosperity and
that of Lhe region. And I believe that our suaccess in
this will enrich our people In more than material ways.
I take the view that our efforts Ina Asia and the Pacific
represent the greatest peacetime challenge Ina our
nation's history.
It Is the dawning of a new epoch In our history and, In~
no small way I believe, the fulfilment of our destinies.
There are those Who see in this challenge a threat to our
culture and values.
I say that ae we succeed as we are and as we will we
shall see that our success Is proof of the strength of
those values.
That io why I say we will be enriched in move than
material ways because It will lift our confidence, our
self-esteem and our faith in those things which have
emerged from our experience as Australians and New
Zealanders. Thank you. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PlNKM Mi NMsr], TIM ReON P. J. XNATING, Np
A) DIUSS AI ORILT K&amp; ORI VKUOIXG CERWIDN, OAIi WATI T
AA, AhCvAID, 8ATUtDAY, 22 MAY 1993
2603 PROOF OPY
Can I thank you for the warvith of your welcome, for the
welcome of your warriors, for the singing, of the women which
vas both moving, touching and most appreciated by me.
You welcome me as the Prime Kinister of Australia, you pay in
that case all Australians a tribute and let me return the
tribute by saying that all Australians recognise the spirit of
the maori. I have always been impressed by the resilience
and the strength of the Naori and the culture of the aori.
It is these things we feel that do give, as your Xinister has
said, a distinguishing character to the country of New Zealand
and I am particularly pleased to be here In this year the
Year of Indigenous People when in this year these countries
and those peoples which came to the new world disturbed of
course the old world, the world of the people who were here
first. And those things which Europeans and Buropean settlers
celebrate are often the tragic things, the periods of tragedy
for the indigenous peoples of various countries no less true
of New Zealand and Australia.
But the Neori have in such strength of ' Culture had such a
dominating influence over the culture of New Zealand. And I
am delighted that the education which you have here at this
Harae is one where you have maintained your traditional
cultures, you learn your traditional cultures, you take pride
in your traditional cultures and you also teach your children
about the society in which they live. This is Ism sure the
most effective way of keeping those two cultures in the first
sense alive and flourishing and beyond that weaving their
pattern together.
in Australia, in this Year of rndigenous People, we too are I
think finally coming to a ba-sof reconciliation with our
indigenous people. And unlike the Naori there was no treaty,
there was no equivalent to the Treaty of Weitangi. So the
nation of Australia has sought to come to terms with our
indigenous people and this year our High Court, the Supreme
Court of our country has in fact last year made a very
fundamental and historic decision to give recognition for the
TEL: 22. May. 93 19: 58 No.( I ) 02 P. 09/ 11 
T2E2L:. May. 93 19: 58 No. 002 P. 10/ 11
2
first time that there wasn a native title in the common law of
Australia Wefor* the settlement of Europeans.
This is a very significant decision and now the government of
Australia and the governments of the States of Australia are
now seeking to put Into the body of law a native title for the
indigenous people of Australia. This can and must be the
first effective basis of reconciliation in our country between
indigenous, the Aboriginal people and non-. Aboriginal
Australians. This process of x~ cQn= i1iStian as a nation ve
have dedicated ourself to and lot me say it tills me with a
certain sense of pride to see In this country such an outward
and obvious pride in your culture -the culture of the Maori
and the willing~ ness of the New Zealand community to see this
culture dominate in many respects its own national culture.
one thing that I think indigenous people understand that
European people have never quite understood and that Is the
relationship between the people and the land. And your Mayor
very eloquently said today that this is an environmental
place, a place where the environment has a premium and we have
much to learn trom the indigenous peoples of our countries
abouit the land. We are only now comning to understand what
they know about the land and hov they have preserved the land.
Whereas as a culture we have been often the destroyer. of the
land. We now understand that is a mistake. We nov understand
the land needs respect and we understand that without the land
having the respect it canvt give to us the kind of life that
could only come by a gentle, melding of the Interests of the
people and the land.
it may be that the environment is an issue amongst countries
and peoples around the world, but it has always been an Issue
with indigenous people. This is another thing you have taught
Us. So it we can learn this valuable lesson the futures of Nev
Zealand and Australia two great lands will be different in
the future than they have been in the Immediate past because
we have the opportunity to preserve our land anid to rebuild
the nature of our lands as many countries have now lost that
opportunity and if we can learn that from the indigenous
people of this country, you the Maori and from the Aboriginal
people of Australia, our indigenous people, we will learn
much. The culture of our indigenous people, Ab~ oriqinal Australians
is nov substantially permeating the culture of Australia in
its art, in its dance, in its music and we are in a sense in
this last decade celebrating the renaissance of that culture
within our own. And I'm sure as time goes on it to will start
to play a such larger role in our general national culture as
the Maori have played in New Zealand culture.
with all that said, Indigenous people have since the time of
European settlement rarely had justice and we know that we
will never entirely live in peace or peace of heart without a
true basis of reconciliation with indigenous people and that
TEL: 
22. May. 93 19: 58 No. 002 P. 11/ 11
3
is why we must be one people. One people with an ephasis on
different values, with loyalties perhaps to different
cultures, but one people in Now ealand, one people in
Australia and of course between us all Australasians. It we
do that we would do well.
Could I thank you again for the warmth of your welcome to me
and my party, to my wife. I think I have visited New Zealand
properly too and I don't think I would have visited New
Zealand without visiting the Marae and receiving its gracious
and traditional welcome.
ends TEL: 



I.
PRIME MIViSTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HION PJ. KEATING MP
APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT SECRETARIES
Further to my announcement on 14 May 1993 that Dr Peter Wilcnski, AO is relinquishing his
position as Secretary to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade because of treatment
required for an illness, I have recommended to His Excellency the Governor-General the
appointment of Mr Michael Costcllp as Secretary to the Dcpartmcnt of Foreign Affairs and
Trade. Mr Costello is at present the Secretary to the Department of Industrial Relations.
Before that he was a Deputy Secretary in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
I shall also be recommending the appointment of Mr Peter Core, currently a Deputy
Secretary in the Department of Primary Industries and Energy, as Secretary to the
Department of Industrial Relations in place of Mr Costcllo. In addition to his
management experience as a Deputy Secretary, Mr Core will bring to the position his
experience as the former Chairman of the Management Improvement Advisory Committee, a
Service-wide committee that considers significant management issues and initiatives in
the Public Service.
These appointments will take effect on Thursday 27 May.
Dr Geoff Miller, currently Secretary to the Department of Tourism and Associate Secretary
for Agriculture in the Department of Primary Industries and Energy, is a candidate for
the position of Director-General of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation.
The Government is strongly supportive of Dr Miller's candidacy and has agreed that to
enable him to spend more time enhancing Australia's prospects of having him appointed he
should be relieved of his responsibilities as Secretaqy to the Department of Tourism. He
will continue to perform his role as Associate Secretary for Agriculture in the
Department of Primary Industries and Energy.
In Dr Miller's place as Secretary to the Department of Tourism I am recommending the
appointment of Ms Helen Williams. Ms Williams was the Secretary to the Department of
Education and Youth Affairs between 1985 and 1987. She was the first woman appointed as
a Secretary of a Commonwealth Government Department. At present Ms Williams is an
Associate Secretary in my Department where she has had special responsibilities for
Commonwealth-State relations.
Because of Ms Williams' current involvement in the meeting of the Council of Australian
Governments on 8 June, her appointment will take effect on Monday 14 June.
CANBERRA 26 MAY 1993 



I LLx I k
7 PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER* THE HON P J KEATING, MP
REVIEW OF GOVERNMENT POLICY ADVICE MECHANISMS
ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN
Today I have asked Senator the Hon Rosemary Crowley, Minister Assisting me on the
Status of Women, to chair a review of the Government's policy advice mechanisms on
thc status of women.
Thic Government is proud of its successful record of reform and innovation in this
important policy arca, and wants to ensure that its policy advice mechanisms remain
appropriate, effective and responsive to the changing needs and interests of women. In
particular the Government will review the functions of the Office of the Status of
Women and the mechanisms for consulting and communicating with women in the
community to ensure that women's interests are well rcpresented to govermecnt and
that the Government's policy priorities are implemcnted effectively.
I have asked Senator Crowlcy to advise on the functions and prioriticsof the Office of
the Status of Women. Those priorities will include -monitoring the implementation of
the Government's policies for women announced during thc election campaign,
especially the new child-care policy. As well the Government will need continuing
policy development work in the key areas affecting women economics, health,
employment, education and justice ( including preventing violence against women).
T'he new functions will include developing a research facility able to identify longer
termi policy issues of relevance to women.
In preparing the report, there will be consultation with women's and other intcrcsted
organisations as well as relevant Ministers, government departments and members of
Parliament. The review is expected to take about three months.
CANBERRA 27 MAY 1993 



vi u~ s: U4 UOS 273 2923 PHNi PPRREESSSS OOFFFFIICCEE 11.
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
REMARKS AT DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER VO VAN ICIET
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 27 MAY 1993
Embargo 8.30 pm
Prime Minister, on behalf of the Australian Government
and people it is my pleasure to welcome you on this
historic visit.
Our two countries have enjoyed diplomatic relations for
twenty years, but this is the first time a head of
government from the Socialist Republic of Vietnam has
come to Australia.
Let me say you are very welcome.
Those twenty years have seen the growth of cooperation
and understanding on a broad range of issues, both
bilateral and multilateral.
In the past few years we have seen frequent ministerial
and official-level visits, cultural and scientific
exchanges, and the implementation of a number of
development assistance programs in education, health and
resources. In recent years our commercial relations have begun to
grow strongly.
Between 1990 and 1992 two-way trade has grown from
$ 42 million to $ 252 million.
Representati-ves-of a -number -of.-Australian companies
operating in Vietnam have joined us for dinner this
evening. We are delighted that BHP will play a major role in the
Dai Hung oilfield project.
Other Australian companies are actively involved in areas
such as coal processing, telecommunications and banking. Q00 2/ 005 
02/ 06 -0 * 93 09: 05 00* 7 27 9933P-MI 03/ 005PRESS OFFICE
2
We can look with great confidence to the future of our
relationship. This morning we witnessed the signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding on Development Cooperation covering a total
of $ 100 million economic assistance over a four-year
period. This should be taken as another manifestation of our
friendship and maturing relationship.
Prime Minister, when we reflect on the history of the
Australia-Vietnam relationship, we see proof of our
capacity to change.
Proof that we can let old wounds heal, so that future
generations will not inherit them and pay the price of
past animosities.
The war which so ravaged Vietnam also left an indelible
mark on this country.
Today, in Australia, we do not debate the rights and
wrongs of our engagement in Vietnam so much as the ways
in which those who fought there, and the families of
those who died there, can be compensated and assisted.
Prime Minister, the Asia-Pacific region now faces a very
promising future.
Your country has embarked on a program to reform and open
up the Vietnamese economy to the outside world.
So, in quite fundamental ways, have we.
As a result, we now find a great many complementary
interests and considerable scope for expanding our
commercial relationship.
In our discussions this morning, I explained that,
although Australia is a medium-sized economy, we have in
many industrial sectors technologies of world-class
standard. Australian companies are well placed to help Vietnam's
development in sectors such as transportation,
telecommunications, infrastructure, minerals and energy,
woollen textiles and services.
I was glad that today we were also able to witness the
signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on bilateral air
services. I am confident we will soon be in a position to establish
regular air services. 
uu~~, ouou~,~ sO 6 73 223 U PRESS OFFICE
3
Direct scheduled flights between Vietnam and Australia
will assist business and tourist links, and help develop
contact between our two peoples, not least, Vietnamese
Australians and their families in Vietnam.
Prime Minister, as you are aware Australia is now home to
135,000 people of Vietnamese origin.
Vietnamese Australians have already made a very
considerable contribution to our national life.
In the multicultural environment of this country, they
have built strong and purposeful communities, and
participate increasingly in our political life.
We believe that in due course the Vietnamese community in
Australia will become one of the main conduits of our
relationship with Vietnam.
I appreciated very much the frank and constructive
discussion we had this morning about the Vietnamese
community in Australia.
I-warmly welcome your commitment towards reconciliation
with our local Vietnamese community and your willingness
to receive an Australian delegation to learn more at
first hand about human rights and other conditions in
Vietnam. This gesture is greatly appreciated by the Australian
Government and public.
For our part, let me say that the Australian Government
will do all in its power to encourage more harmonious and
constructive relations between Vietnam and the Vietnamese
community in Australia.
Prime Minister, the timing of your visit to Australia is
auspicious In that it coincides with the heartening news
we have received this week about the high turn-out of
voters in the United Nations-sponsored elections in
Cambodia. Both Vietnam and Australia played important roles in the
preceding Cambodia peace process.
We share an earnest hope that the long-suffering people
of Cambodia might finally be able to enjoy peace and a
better -way -of -1ife.
Prime Minister, we should like your visit to Australia to
define a new phase in Australia-Vietnam relations.
Not only are both sides keen to expand our bilateral
commercial relations, but we recognise the scope for
fruitful cooperation between our countries in the wider
Asia-Pacific region. IA 0041000 
02/ 06 ' 93 09: 07' OS 273 2923
I am also sure that the human links between our countries
will become a vital source of strength to us both.
I believe we have every reason for confidence that our
relationship will flourish and endure.
I should now like to invite the Leader of the Opposition
to join me in welcoming you to Australia.
CANBERRA 27 May 1993 PM PRESS OFFICE I005/ 005 



M lb ,-r6g
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT TO THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
OF CHINA
As the guest of the Korean and Chinese Governments, I shall be visiting the Republic of
Korea from 20 to 23 June and the People's Republic of China from 23 to 27 June.
Both Korea and China are major economic partners of Australia and countries with which
we enjoy close dialogues on regional and international matters.
Following my visits last year to Indonesia, Japan and Singapore, my discussions with Korean
and Chinese leaders will provide further valuable opportunities to exchange views on trade
and political questions in the Asia-Pacific region which are of fundamental importance to
Australia. In meetings with President Kim Young Sam and Prime Minister Hwang In Sung of Korea
and President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng of China, I will want to discuss how we
should best build on the very substantial economic relationships we already enjoy wvith each
country so that the potential for expansion and diversification is fully exploited.
Another important focus of discussion will be economic relations in the Asia-Pacific region.
The Republic of Korea and China are both members of APEC. I look forward to
exchanging views on APEC at this important time in the lead-up to the ministerial meeting in
November in Seattle, as well as talking about other international trade issues. I also expect
to discuss regional security issues in both countries.
The Republic of Korea is now Australia's fourth-largest export market and China is
Australia's ninth largest. Exports to both countries continue to grow strongly. Australia's
exports to the Republic of Korea grew by 8 per cent last year, increasing the value of our
exports to $ 3.6 billion. Exports to China grew by 23 per cent in the same period, taking the
value of exports to China to $ 1.9 billion.
In the Republic of Korea I shall be visiting Seoul, the industrial centre of Pohang and historic
Kyongju. In China, I shall be visiting Beijing and Shanghai.
CANBERRA 27 May 1993 



I LI.. PRIM MINSTE
STATEMEN4T DY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MIP
ECONOMIC PLANNING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
CANBERRA, 28 KAY 1993
INTRODUCTION
U~ nemployment is unacceptable for the hardship and anxiety
it causes individuals and families who directly
experience it. But the effects of unemployment of the
kind and extent presently existing in Australia go well
beyond the victims. Because it creates acute and long
lasting social problems and involves economic costs which
prevent Australia from fulfilling its potential as a
prosperous and fair society, unemployment affects us all.
Unemployment is a phenomenon of our age. It is presently
a significant problem in most if not all of the developed
Western countries. But there is no comfort to be taken
in knowing that we are not alone in this, nor any in
spreading the blame. We cannot be complacent about high
unemployment. I have said that reducing unemployment and
assisting the long term unemployed is the Government's
first priority. it must also be the nation's first
priority. If we do not do all we can to mitigate the
extent and the effects of unemployment, we betray large
numbers of our fellow Australians, our children and our
own ideals.
BACKGROUND TO THE PROBLEM OF UNEMPLOYM4ENT
The recession has been the most important recent cause of
unemployment. In the course of it many companies learned
to operate with a smaller workforce, and they are
continuing to operate with fewer employees even as the
economy -r. covers.-
But while the recession has been substantially
responsible for high unemployment, it is wrong to assume
that the current problem is only a cyclical one.
Australia experienced a sharp rise in unemployment in the
mid 1970s,. associated with the first oil price shock.
Since then the unemployment rate has moved upward in a
series of large steps. ai. may. vo va, 14 mu. vvz r. V4 
TEL: 31. May. 93 9: 14 No. 002 P. 03
2
Since the mid 1970s unemployment has increased sharply
but fallen slowly. After the 1982-83 recession,
Australia had seven years of very strong employment
growth. However the unemployment rate in 1990 was still
just above the rate in 1982. Between June 1983 and June
1990 well over one and a half million jobs were created,
yet the number of unemployed fell by 150,000.
Associated with these developments has been the emergence
of long term unemployment. Currently more than one-third
of all unemployed persons ( 371,000) have been unemployed
for more than 12 months. About half of this number have
been out of a job for more than 24 months. Experience
from the 1980a shows us that strong employment growth
alone will not be sufficient to reduce long term
unemployment. Special measures are needed to ensure that
the long term unemployed are able to compete successfully
for the jobs which will be generated during the recovery.
The Australian economy is currently growing faster than
most other major economies and we expect the recovery to
strengthen further through 1993 and 1994. However, the
pace of economic recovery in the short term Is receiving
little assistance from world growth. But Australia is
well placed to benefit from the higher growth rates
expected in the Asia-Pacific region. In addition, recent
history shows that we can achieve higher market shares in
this part of the world. Hence, it is possible for
Australia to grow faster than other industrialised
countries, provided our policies further integrate
Australia into the world economy.
ChannAR in Am2nlom~ nf gatterng
In the same way as the level and nature of unemployment
have been undergoing fundamental changes, employment
patterns and labour force participation behaviour have
also altered substantially over the last three decades.
In particular, the distribution of amp. aQment between
males and females, part time and full time jobs,
permanent and casual jobs, as well as the distribution of
jobs between industries, occupations and skill levels
have all altered appreciably.
These factors undoubtedly help to explain why strong
employment growth has not resulted in an equivalent fall
in unemployment and we need to better understand them if
we are to begin to solve the problem. 
T3EL1: . May. 93 9: 14 No. 002 P. 04
3
Sinc, the 1960s the industrial structure of
employment has changed markedly. The proportion of
jobs generated by manufacturing industries has
fallen from 25 per cent to 15 per cent. The
absolute number of manufacturing jobs has also
fallen. Employment growth has been strongest in the
service industries. Their share of employment has
increased from 54 per cent to 71 per cent. This
long term trend has been accentuated by the recent
recession as manufacturing employment has been among
the hardest hit.
Employment growth has been concentrated in high and
average skill level jobs. Conversely, the demand
for low skill and unskilled jobs has fallen.
The nature of Ak~ llq required has also changed.
Problem solving, interpersonal skills and the
ability to work within a team are becoming more
important as a result of changes in technology and
work organisation. As multiskilling becomes more
prevalent, an individual is also expected to be able
to perform a wider range of tasks than was the case
in the past.
The nature of-york has changed. Part time
employment has grown much more strongly than full
time, and now accounts for almost one-quarter of all
jobs, compared to 17 per cent in 1978. Part time
workers now account for one-tenth of all hours
worked. While most part time work involves low
skill and offers little in terms of job advancement,
the skill level of part time work has increased over
the 1980s, at least for females.
Married females, young people attending schools or
universities and older workers account for nearly
per cent of all part time workers.
Three-quarters are female. Most part time workers
are employed on a casual basis.
Full time male employment as a percentage of the
working age male population has been falling since
1970. Clearly some of this is due-to early
retirement and the longer periods which young people
spend in education. However, even for males in the
25-54 year old age group there was still a
16 percentage point decline over the same period.
A number of commentators have noted that the
distribution of earnings has become more polarised.
Employment is growing most rapidly among high and
low pay jobs and middle pay jobs are growing only
slowly, if not falling. This phenomenon appears to
be particularly evident among full time, male jobs.
TEL 
T3E1L:. May. 93 9: 14 No. 002
4
Significant changes have occurred in labour force
participation behaviour. The proportion of the
female population who are participating in the
labour force has increased from 36 per cent in the
mid 1960s, to almost 52 per cent today. On the other
hand, participation rates have fallen among young
people and older males. In part, these changes are
in response to the changing nature of employment
demand. But they also reflect changing social
attitudes and expectations.
It would be tempting to explain the stronger growth in
part time and female employment and the loss in middle
pay jobs in terms of the changes in the industrial
structure of the economy. However, while this has
undoubtedly been important, the story is much more
complex. The incidence of part time employment has
increased in all industries, not just in the service
sector. Similarly, the notion that middle pay jobs are
disappearing appears to be common to all industries.
Furthermore, because developments have occurred in many
industrialised countries any explanation must be based on
more than purely Australian factors.
Part of the explanation must lie in the changes in
technology in recent decades. So radical and pervasive
have these changes been, comparisons might be made with
changes wrought by the Industrial revolution.
Occupations have disappeared, others have merged and new
occupations have been created. In virtually all oases
the skills required to perform a job have changed. The
number of workers required to perform a task or produce a
certain level of output has fallen, while the skills and
flexibility required from workers have increased.
At the same time the shrinking global economy means that
firms are better able to locate different parts of their
production process in different countries. They are also
changing their management structures and their corporate
services are increasingly likely to be contracted out.
All this has consequences for the amount and type of
labour which employers wish to hire.
We do not yet fully understand all these changes. Nor
can we do much to alter the trends. But we cannot turn
our back on them. We have to respond to these
challenges. Governments, like modern companies, modern
~.. economies -and modern workers -have -to be f lexible and
adaptable. They have to be creative and pragmatic as
well as compassionate.
THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE
In order to respond effectively to both the cyclical and
the structural nature of unemployment, we need;
TEL 
T3E1L:. May. 93 9: 14 No. 002 P. 06
high but sustainable economic growth. This will
require appropriate macroeconomic policies as well
as a continued push for microeconomic and industrial
relations reform;
a skilled and adaptable workforce to respond
positively to changing technology and industry
demands and to be a source of competitive advantage;
effective measures to assist the unemployed, and
particularly the long term unemployed, so that they
can obtain jobs during the recovery; and
a better understanding of the long term developments
in the labour market, their implications for
unemployment and how best to respond.
The Aconomic policy context
High economic growth and strong employment demand are
essential to reducing unemployment. But high economic
growth must be sustainable over the long term. High
rates of growth cannot be sustained if they lead to a
blow-out in our current account deficit and a resurgence
in inflation.
To achieve high sustainable growth, national production
has to grow strongly and faster than growth in
consumption. Rigidities that constrain productivity and
cause inflationary pressures must be reduced. The
Government's policies therefore make up a coherent
strategy to:
improve our international competitiveness through
higher productivity and lower inflation;
improve our productive capacity through higher
investment performance; and
increase national saving to finance investment
domestically without excessive recourse to foreign
borrowing.
The strategy comprises complementary monetary, fiscal and
wages policies together with a continued push for
microeconomic reform, including reform of the industrial
relations system.
-Wages policy -and industrial -relations reform under the
Acoro wafeo usedonwokplcebaganng that
increasingly links wage increases to productivity
improvements, and on achieving wage outcom . es that
maintain our inflation rate comparable to that of our
major trading partners. This will help prospects for
high employment growth, improve competitiveness and
increase productive capacity.
TEL 
TEL: .31. May. 93 9: 14 No .002 P. 07
6
In addition to these macroeconomic policies, the
Government has introduced specific measures to encourage
investment, and hence employment growth.
The company tax rate is being reduced to 33 per cent
which, together with our policy of dividend imputation,
makes returns to investors very attractive in Australia
compared with many other countries and gives a highly
competitive tax regime. A development allowance of
per cent has been introduced for major projects which
meet certain conditions. And an investment allowance of
per cent will apply to investment in eligible plant
and equipment ordered before July 1994 and installed
before July 1995.
Continued microeconomic reform, including competition
policy, will help to remove impediments to greater
flexibility and productivity and lower costs. We are
already seeing the results, in terms of a highly
creditable export performance in recent years, often from
small and medium-sized firms in industries which have not
been traditional exporters. The success of small to
medium sized business is crucial to economic recovery and
employment. A ski] Ied andI flexiblA workforce.
Education and training play an important role in the
development of competitive industries and hence
employment growth. A skilled and innovative workforce
committed to producing high quality products and services
can be an important source of competitive advantage. It
also minimises the risk of bottlenecks to growth
resulting from skill shortages.
A major task for governments is to improve the general
education system, to improve the links between education
and industry and to encourage industry's own efforts at
training its workforce.
Since the Labor Goverrnent came to office in 1983, there
has been significant expansion and improvement in the
area of post-compulsory schooling and hhr education.
In 1980 only 34 per cent of young people continued in
school to the equivalent of Year 12. By 1992 this
proportion had risen to 77 per cent. Similarly, there
-were .58-per-cent more Austra-lran -students enroled in
universities in 1992 than in 1982. Over the decade to
1992, the proportion of high school entrants who proceed
directly to university increased from 15 per cent to
per cent. 
TEL 7
Modern competitive economies demand high levels of
technical skills right across their workforce. Both
State and Commonwealth Governments have recognised the
need for a national approach in-this area and the
recently established Australian N~ ational Training
Authority ( ANTA), chaired by Mr Brian Finn OA, will have
an important role in advising governments on planning and
policy for vocational education and training. ANTA will
have substantial industry representation, to ensure the
system is more responsive to the needs of industry.
The Government remains committed to major reforms to
entry level training and is currently funding pilot
projects to test the Introduction of the Australian
Vocational Certificate, which will provide more flexible
routes for young people to acquire skills and training
necessary for successful transition into their chosen
vocations. The system will cover a broader range of
occupations and industries, and competency-based training
will mean that study programs can be tailored towards
individual needs and take account of prior learning.
Our experience of the 1980s shows that strong employment
growth, of itself, will not be sufficient to reduce
quickly unemployment and particularly long term
unemployment. Specific measures are also needed which ensure that many
of the new jobs created are filled by the long term
unemployed. The Government has a range of labour market
programs which provide this assistance. Evidence from
the last few years also shows that labour market programs
can be successful in getting the long term unemployed
into jobs.
Between 1990-91 and 1992-93 there has been almost a fourfold
increase in expenditure on labour market programs
from around $ 300 million to over $ 1200 million. Over the
same period the number of program commencements has
increased from 227,500 to an estimated 490,000.
The Government has also altered * the mix df programs to
give a greater emphasis to work experience'and to linking
training more directly to employment. The number of
people assisted under the wage subsidy program, JOBSTART,
has increased from around 60,000 in 1991-92 to 150,000
this-year.-Wage -subsidies -reduce.-the -initial cosit of
hiring workers and help to overcome the reluctance of
employers to take on the long term unemployed. T3EL1: . May. 93 9: 14 No. 002 P. 08 
TEL: 31 May .93 9: 14 No. 002 P. 09
8
New work experience programs have also been introduced.
The Landcare and Environment Action Program ( LEAP), which
was introduced following the Youth Summit lest year, has
been very successful. It provides young people with work
experience in an area in which they are interested and
combines this with structured training. The number of
places in the program has been increased to respond to
the great interest of young people to participate.
On the iobskille program, participants receive work
experience and training over a six month period. While
the program Is relatively expensive, it assists the most
disadvantaged of the unemployed to regain self
confidence, acquire new skills and broaden their work
experience. The Government has also more closely targeted assistance
to the long term unemployed. This year, 62 per cent of
program places went to the long term unemployed, compared
to 51 per cent last year.
The effectiveness of the change in program mix and the
Increased expenditure per place is shown by the improved
program outcomes that have been achieved over the last
year. This improvement is all the more noteworthy given
that employment demand was still weak and an increasing
proportion of those assisted were long term unemployed.
The assistance which labour market programs can provide
to the long term unemployed is also shown by the fact
that nearly 80 per cent of all Newstart Allowance
recipients who obtained a job did so through a labour
market program. Evaluations of programs have shown that
participation in vocational training programs, SkillShare
or JOBSTART increased a participant's chance of obtaining
a job by around 50 per cent.
Even when labour market programs are not successful in
getting an unemployed person into a job, they can still
help to maintain their attachment to the labour market.
Overseas experience suggests that this is an important
element in the long term unemployed gaining jobs.
Labour market programs can also improve the efficiency of
the labour market by alleviating skill shortages that may
arise later in the recovery, and by ensuring that the
long term unemployed remain active and competitive in job
search. Jrhe-Government--is -determined -to-eclosely monitor its
labour market measures to ensure that the mix of
programs, the targeting of programs and the program
parameters continue to provide cost effective assistance
to the unemployed as the recovery gains strength. 
TEL: 31. May. 93 j~.~ O2
9
The delivery of labour market programs is closely linked
to the provision of income support to the unemployed
through the Zewutart strategy. The implementation of the
Newstart strategy is Currently being evaluated by the
Government and we wrill be taking this opportunity to seek
improvements in the way in which labour market programs
and income support are delivered.
A Gow-nvamant White Pape? on EmploymAnt andi unamplnymgnt
While the Government currently spends considerable sum's
on labour market programs and our efforts compare well
with other countries experiencing high unemployment, we
recognise we need to do better. We need to understand
the long term~ developments in the labour market and their
implications for reducing unemployment and regaining full
employment. We also need to examine whether existing
measures could be re-arranged or new measures conceived.
To this end the Government has decided to appoint a high
level.-committee to prepare a Government Discussion Paper
to assess current policies on unemployment.
1. am also keen to see the committee examine alternative
approaches, Including policies adopted in other OECD
countries. Our search for solutions should not be confined to our
shores, or to our experience. Most industrialised
countries, like Australia, have begun a profound
examination of unemployment and Its effect on societies.
No country has produced a single, simple answer. Nor
will they. The complexities and magnitude of the problem
defy it.
But in seeing what has been tried elsewhere, and in
taking what is best and most suitable for Australia and
combining it with our own ingenuity, perhaps this
committee may begin to fashion an effective response to
the problem.
As an indication of the importance that I attach to this
exercise, I have asked Dr Michael Keating,. Secretary of
the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, to chair
the committee. I am grateful that Professors Bob Gregory,'
Barry Hughes and Jan Carter have agreed to bring their
expertise in labour market and social policy analysis to
the -task. The.-Committee will--also -include Mr
Derek Volker, Secretary of the Department of Employment,
Education and Training, Mr Tony Slunn, Secretary of the
Department of Social Security and Me Mary Ann O'Loughlin,
my Senior Adviser on social policy matters.
Dr Bruce Chapman, who has already begun work for the
Government on the effectiveness of labdur market
programs, will also consult closely idith the expert
commufittee. 
The committee will be serviced by a high level Task Force
established within the Department of Prime Minister and
Cabinet and drawing in expertise from other departments.
The Tosk Force will be headed by Dr Meredith Edwards,
First Assistant Secretary, the Department of Employment,
Education and Training.
The terms of reference which the Government has given to
the expert committee are attached.
I have asked that the Discussion Paper be prepared by
December. This would be followed by extensive
consultations. The Government would respond to the ideas
and options raised in the Discussion Paper and the
consultations in 8 White Paper on Employment and
Unemployment to be prepared in the first half of next
year. I would expect the special. Caucus Employment Task Force
to facilitate the work of the expert committee,
particularly in the public consultations. I have also
asked EPAC to assist, both by acting as a sounding board
for ideas and by the Office preparing background papers
as required.
I expect the committee to ask some fundamental questions
about the future of work in Australia. These questions,
while not new, go to the heart of the way our society
functions.
Questions such as: are we committed to the idea that
everyone who wants to work should have a job? How should
we respond to the rapid changes in technology and the
greater uncertainty in our working lives? How can we
best combine work with our family lives? Should
Australian businesses continue to observe the maxim that
leaner is always meaner, or are there more effective
strategies for ensuring competitiveness?
And if it is reasonable to ask this question of business
and industry, it is also reasonable to ask other
organisations, including trade unions, to examine their
priorities and perceived self-interest to help find the
answers. In short, the committee is being formed to ask if
unemployment is a national responsibility, how best do we
-all -share An-solving it?
My hope is that out of this process, we will better
understand the choices and trade-of fs which need to be
made if we are to regain full employment, how long this
might take, and what more can be done to alleviate the
problems presently facing unemployed Australians and
their families. 
TEL: 31. May .93 9: 14 No. 002 P. 12
And of course if in looking at the problems facing
Australians going through hard times a certain fellow
feeling is aroused, and the sentiments of fairness and
equity are re-kindled, end the bonds between us a11 are
strengthened, then the process will have served not only
the unemployed but all Australians and the nation. 
TEL: 31. May. 93 9: 14 No. 002
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR A DISCUSSION PAPER ON THE LABOUR
MARKET Having regard to:
the Government's economnic and social objectives, particularly to
increase employment opportunities;
reduce unemployment and particularly long term unemployment;
improve the skills base in Australia; and
promote equity in the labour market; and
the Government's commnitment to reduce the budget deficit by 1996-97;
the Commnittee is asked to assess and report on the state of the labour market and options for
addressing unemployment and improving labour market programs and income and other
support for the unemployed. Special attention should be given to the problem of long-term
unemployment.
2. The Review in particular should consider:
the economic outlook and the implications for the labour market;
developments in the Australian labour market since the 1960s, including:
demographic changes;
changes in the labour force participation, employment and education experiences of
males and females; Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders; migrants; sole parents;
people from non-English speaking backgrounds, people with disabilities; and different
age groups;,
changes in employment levels and patterns, including an examination of the strong
growth in part-time employment and regional differences;
changes in the types and location ofjobs being created and lost;
characteristics and location of unemployed, discouraged and underemployed workers;
the emergence of long-term unemployment; and
the effect on income distribution and living standards of the changing patterns of
employment and unemployment;
the medium term outlook for the Australian labour market;
the trends in the labour market in other OECD countries and an examination of policy
responses; the efficiency and effectiveness of:
existing mcasures to assist the unemployed, including labour market, education and
training programs; income support; and other forms of support; and
the delivery of programs and services of assistance for the unemployed;,
policy options to respond to the implications of labour market changes, taking into
account programs and services provided by other sectors; and
options for financing labour market and other support programs for the unemployed. P. 13 



tn A PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH 4 CORNERS, ABC TV
SYDNEY 31 MAY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
AO: Mr Keating has agreed tonight to his first substantive Interview since the
election. and Prime Minister, welcome.
PM: Good Andrew, nice to be here.
AO: When you won power, Immediately afterwards you , urged your Ministers to
stop and think, to do nothing for a while, to take stock, almost like sending
them Into retreat, I suppose, for a while. Oid you actually need to meditate
on just what you wanted to do with this personal mandate over the next
three years?
PM: I think so. I think it is the right time for a Government after an election to
think about the future and think about the circumstances in this election,
some of the longer run issues. The issues which will be Important in
twenty or thirty years from now.
AO: But the point is you haven't really had that much time, I suppose, to think
about that of late. I mean, the last couple of years have been all
consuming, haven't they? First you had to get rid of Hawke, then you had
to stop Hewson, all the time and energy, I suppose, was used in getting
there. Was It a bit like suddenly arriving and having to stop and ask
yourself, oh ok, now I am here what do I really want to do?
PM: No, because last year. In 1992, the principal endeavour of the Government
was to get the economy growing again, but since the election I think the
Government has decided to think about long run Issues, to set its sails,
and to take the wind shifts wherever they are, not to react to them. There
is always this notion, you made this point about being Invisible, that's code 
2
for saying that we should appear at press conferences answering wind
shifts. Well I think it is Important for Governments to think about things,
set their sails, arnd go to them, Since the election we have had on our
plate setting the principles for the fulfilment of the High Court decision on
native title under Mabo, thinking about the future structure of APEC arid
trade which I gave a long and important speech on in New Zealand a
week or two ago, and the other issues you mentioned.
AG: Well we will come to all those Issues.
PM: Setting up the republic and getting a thoughtful structure, to have a proper
debate about the republic. Looking at the long-term unemployed.
AG: For the moment can we stick with the long -term unemployed because the
economy and unemployment, and solutions to that, was a major issue at
the election arnd yet here we are just straight after the election and now
you appoint a committee to look at the issue of long-term unemployment
to find a solution, which they will be sitting on until the end of this year, I
think?
PM: I think so, yes. Because I think we have a chance to do something novel
In Australia, I am quite sure very few comparable countries will attempt to
do as we are already doing and can do. That Is, we already have In place
substantial labor market programs to get people work experience and
training and get them back to work.
AG: But you appreciate the people are cynical about yet another committee?
PM: I know, but again It's not a matter of a committee, I don't think, Andrew.
The fact is we are in a new phenomenon. That is, that we have got a high
proportion of middle age people, of those unemployed who are middle
aged, we set to work on dealing with youth unemployment last year and It
made some substantial inroads Into that. But I think what we don't want to
see In this country Is people marginalised. In Britain, for instance, you
have got very high prices of labour, high labour rates, yet 3 million people
are out of work, And you say to yourself, well how could there be high
rates of labour with so many people out of work? And the answer Is
because they are sidelined, they are just no longer taken to the
employment equation. I don't want to see that happen In Australia.
AO: So what do you want to come out of this committee, what do you hope it
will come up with, what options?
PM: Well ways In which we can get people, longer term people back Into work
expenence and back into work, and to study the post-war patterns of
employment In Australia and In other countres and to try and take lessons
from that experience. ( I D -4 i U U I 
AO: You do want to get them back Into work, though, do you? Because you
did raise an Interesting question the other day when you said, should
everyone who wants to work be entitled to a job. I mean, are you
seriously suggesting that our society can now afford to abandon that
fundemental principle, that right?
PM: Well, it's a matter of whether the notion of full employment Is zero
unemployment, and whether in an economy where there's a lot of flux a
big shift In its structure where people are going to be trained and retrained
whether In that sort of an economy you're not going to have a
proportion of people who are unemployed, Now, you've got another
problem as well and that Is, the problem of the older unemployed, eldedy,
oider people.
AO: Yes, you're now saying that perhaps one solution to that is to bring forward
ihe pension for these older people. Now, I'm sure that's aimed In part, at
least, so they can avoid the humiliation of having to go out looking for
non-existent work, but a lot of people will see it as pensioning off the
unemployed?
PM: Well, we've already made a decision in the election to set up as we have
already we're already doing legislation a provisional aged pension for
people over 60, because It Is somewhat unreal for someone to be
requiring somebodiy who Is 60 to subject themselves to the work test
AO: to start again?
PM: and when they can't get work, But it's an option for them, they don't
have to write themselves down as on provisional aged pension.
AC: But you're thinking of bringing it down to 55, aren't you?
PM: Not necessarily, no. I don't think this is not pre-judging this committee's
work I don't think that's much of an option. I think what you've got to do
Is get more economic growth, find more jobs, train more people and get
the velocity of people through the pool of unemployment up and give them
work experience. About 80% of those who are long-term unemployed
now, find work, those who find work 80% of them have had some
contact with the labour market program these are the programs of the
Commonwealth which touch about 500,000 people a year and about
of those who are long-term unemployed find themselves keeping
their lob and have had some contact with the labour market programs. So
it's a matter of seeing what we can do with this problem.
AO: One thing a lot of people would suggest you could do straightaway, Is cut
the tax cuts that you have in mind. Now, let me mention to you Professor
Bob Gregory who Is on this unemployment committee that you're looking
at, who says that we've really got to be prepared to pay a lot of money for
these people over 45 who can't find work to support them the community 
4
has to be prepared to do something about that. And like many other
people, he's suggesting and same of them Inside your own Government
you'd have to concede are questioning these tax cuts. They're saying
bluntly: look, if you're going to do something about these long-term
unemployed, surely we have to abandon tax cuts for well-paid people?
PM: Let me just make this point on thejA~ cyts. If the country is to make a
commitment to the long-term unemployed, It's got to be a commitment
from more than just the Government it's also got to be a commitment
from the whole community and that includes, of course, business. So the
notion that people should be laying people off as simply efficiency
changes, to find that businesses are not running often as well as they
were and that the moment there Is strong pick-up In demand they'll have
to be re-hired may not be a policy which is advantageous in the end of
business. So If there's going to be a compact in the nation about
committing Itself to higher levels of employment, It's got to extend beyond
the Government.
AO: Indeed, but surely business is simply doing what the Government said?
You've urged them to get leaner and meaner they've done that and
now it's going to be very difficult to turn them around, isn't it? They've
discovered they can do very nicely with fewer people, they just had record
profit?
PM: Until they have a surge In demand, and it might be that they've lost a lot of
skills that they'll pay dearly for to have them returned. So it's not
necessarily the best policy that Is, In corporate terms to be seeing the
unemployment queue rise because often the company demand is not
the problem, it's just simply to get more efficient and they get more
profitable.
AO: Okay, If I could get back to those tax cuts, though. Isn't it almost immoral,
Isn't there something almost immoral about having $ 8 billion that you're
about to hand out In tax cuts to well paid people, when you've got one
million people unemployed those long queues you've just referred to?
PM: I don't think somebody on $ 20,000 a year Is a high paid person.
AO: But up to $ 20,000 they get nothing out of it.
PM: The tax rate at the moment, the marginal rate for somebody on two-thirds
of average weekly earnings, that's $ 20,000, is 38% it's too high. It's just
too high. That's what the tax cuts are there for, they are basically to deal
with that group between $ 20,000 and about $ 45,000. Now I don't regard
those people as wealthy.
AO: Well compared to people without work, they are? 
I LL 1 JTU 1 l 1
PM: But the point 13 this: the notion Is we can't afford the tax cuts because of
what, Government debt?
AO: Yes, because you have a huge deficit, which you acknowledge yourself
you wart to get down dramatically.
P M. Yes, I know, but again look at it in the context of any other parameter
we've got just about one of the lowest Government debts to GDP net
debt to GDP In the world. Australlas net debt to GDP Is 12%
Government debt to GDP I'll draw the numbers because I think It's
Important to get this over. France's is 27% of GDP, the United Kingdom's
is 30.3%, Spain's Is 33%, the United States' Is 34.7%, Canada's Is 49%
and ours Is 12%.
AO: But If we're going to make International comparisons, we're not that
heavily taxed are we?
PM: No, but let me make this point. The point is the Government can afford, in
these cicumstances, to run these deficits because our debt to GDP is
quite low. Remember this, where we're not being given credit Is In the
1980s, we ran very large surpluses and we banked them that's why the
debt is now low. We're saying now is the right time to be using that low
debt to GDP in the right circumstances In the economy. Now people say
to me: well, President Clinton Is pulling down fiscal policy in the US so
should you. But the American..
AO: putting up taxes.
PM: The American's In the 80s had an awful fiscal policy, they never had a
surplus, they were massively In deficit right through the 80s. We were
massively In surplus, so therefore our debt to GDP, net debt, is low.
Fiscal policy has to come back towards balance in the medium ternm, but
not in the short-term. The reason the deficit for the coming year is going
to be higher than this year, the starting point
AO: $ 18 billion Instead of $ 16 billion?
PM: because the economy Is just not growing as quickly and receipts are not
coming in. If the economy, therefore, is not growing as quickly.
Investment per se Is not growing as quickly. If we're not going to have a
draw on savings, what's the point of bringing the deficit back earlier?
What is the urgency? The key point is to bring it back in the medium term,
which is what we'll do.
AO: Well, you said you want to get it back to 1% of GDP in 1996/ 97?
PM. That's right. 
6
AO: That's a lot of money, $ 13 billon, from your starting point coming up this
year?
PM: Yes, but that's years away, and as the economy responds so too will
receipts, and the Government will do Its normal housekeeping job on the
outlays. The key point is: a measure of any Governments, if you like good
health, In Its Budget Is the level of Its outlays. The outays have risen
because of the cycle of spending we've had to deal with the recession and
its aftermath. As the cycle turns down so too will the outlays our outlays
will be back to one of the lowest In the OECD so the rest of it is an
equation with the receipts. That is, where does the economy go and
what's the receipts harvest.
AO: Well, if we needed any evidence of whether the economy Is still in trouble,
surely today's trade figures and the resulting dollar dive must have had
you worried?
PM: Yes, but again, you've got 1986 commodity prices. Remember this, the
world is basically in recession the United States is growing modestly,
Japan's In recession, Germany is barely out of re cession so too is the
case with Britain and as a result commodity prices are now back to 1986
levels.
AO: It's all true but, with respect, Isn't there always a reason, an excuse as to
why things aren't coming good the way you thought they would?
PM: By any other measure, exports have been growing strongly over the
decade, the qualitative change in exports Is to elaborately transformed
manufactures away from rural and mining products and at any rate I
think it's a little bit too early to be making judge ments about the trends in
the Current Account and the Balance of Payments.
AO: But you were In despair when you felt the need to talk about a ' banana
republic'. We're now within 0.1 of that all-time low, aren't we, on our
currency against the basket of currencies?
PM: Oh yes, but in the meantime we've been comparatively high and
sometimes exceptionally high which has worried us too. The market can
get awfully bullish once things start to turn around. So this a commoditydriven
currency, It's less though today, I think, although I don't think the
market thinks that. The change in composition of our exports to
manufacturers away from primary products, will mean that over time we'll
become less of a commodity-driven currency. But we still are a
commodity-driven currency and when commodities are down, the rate will
be down.
AO: Do you sometimes feel like a little balsa raft just being buffeted by all sorts
of things? Do you feel you have control of the economy? 
PMV: I don't think any one person, Individual or Government can have control of
the ecpnIoM-y, but our economy Is growing at the moment about 2.5% to
2,5% to 2 34%
AO: which Is not enough to even make an inroad into unemployment, is it?
PM: Well, It would ordinarily have been the problem Is we've got people
laying people off as you mentioned earlier to be productive. So we've got
the growth bul it's productivity-laden instead of em ployment-laden. If
you're talking about the 80' s it would have been
AO: if it's not one thing, It's another, Isn't it?
PM: That's right. These things are not preordained, but nor Is there any point In
throwing your hands up and saying: well, this Is shocking, It's not running
according to as we wish.
AO: Sure, but the money market Is starting to worry. Isn't it? It Is starting to
show a lack of faith? There has been a number of projections made since
the 1987 crash and a lot of them just don't seem to come good. Where
are these gang-busting trade performances, the avalanche of investment?
They're just not there.
PM: Well they are there and they are gradually happening. I'm sure you'll get
onto McArthur River and the Aboriginal Issue that's another $ 300 million
Investment that's going to happen. There has been quite a number of
those. But the key point is that manufactured exports have risen threefold
since the early 80s, manufacturing production has doubled, the fastest
growing component of our exports is elaborately transformed
manufactures, but while a great part of the basket of our exports is in base
metals and in agriculture when those prices are down In an International
recession so too, probably, will be the Australian dollar. But as the
International recession passes and things start to grow and the demand for
commodities rise, so too, will the Australian dollar.
AO: As it passes, we've just heard more slow-growth from the Americans?
PMV: A low dollar also presents enormous competitive opportunities for
exporters. It means your products in world terms are very much cheaper
and very much more competitive.
AO: And you've got big hopes of getting into Asia. You made a big play about
that while you were In New Zealand, didn't you? What exactly do you
hope to achieve?
PMV: Well, it~ s where the fastest growth and income is in the world, it's in the
Asia/ Pacific, and if we can find ourselves integrated there, if we can
develop the Asia/ Pacific Into an open trading area, then Australia's
opportunities for income and employment growth will be enhanced. 
AO: Don't we have a rather awkward situation at the moment, part of which we
alluded to a moment ago, that Australian companies are becoming leaner
and meaner, they're making these good profits but Instead of Investing
them here, they're off investing them In Asia, especially souther China,
and creating jobs there?
PM: Some are but these things find their right balances, and one of the
balances built Into the system Is dividend Imputation, so if companies pay
tax to a foreign treasury they don't get a credit for their dividends here. So
a lot of companies will find the balance between domestic investment and
abroad, but In that investment allowance the development allowance we
established in the One Nation project, which has registered $ 130 billion of
projects which are now starting to roll If just a proportion of them come to
fruition, the economy will be moving, In investment terms, quite nicely.
AO: What are the hopes of a decent trade zone in Asia?
PM: This Is what we're trying to do with APEC now improve its trade
liberalising agenda and we've established an eminent persons group to
kick that process along. Neville Wran is representing Australia on that
group and its report will be ready for the Seattle meeting of the APEC
Ministers In the United States in November. What we Intend to do with
that is try and establish a framework for further trade liberalisation and
hopefully beyond that, harmonisation of tax policies, foreign Investment
policies, packaging, food standards all the things that will make the
velocity of trade greater In the Asia/ Pacific area. There's already
tremendous growth in these economies, you mentioned China, apart from
the established ones like Japan and less so Korea and the rest of the
Tigers and the ASEAN countries, there's already a lot of growth there if
they are more open, they're more liberal economies, there's a greater
opportunity for all of them and for us. And that's why we're working so
hard on these trade policies, on APEC and of course beyond all that the
Uraguay round of the GATT which would set a much stronger background
and framework for freer trade
AO: While our companies are going into Asia, Malcom Fraser has expressed
some concern about foreign firms coming here and buying us out. I
suspect he expressed a fear that a lot of Australians have when he
wondered aloud the other night whether therell be anything left for his
grandchildren to own. Do you recognise that as an emotional concern for a
lot of Australians?
PM: Yes, but again I think what will happen with these businesses they'll be
developed as export businesses into ASIA from the platform of Australia,
by and large. And this can only be good for us In the long term. Now, a lot
of these concers have been expressed about property in the past
weve now seen high prices payed in the eighties for properties, we've
seen particularly Japanese companies selling that property down now for 
much lower prices. I mean, they can't carry it away I think there are a lot
of phobias about this and the other thing Is If you're running a current
account deficit and It's got to be funded It will be funded with debt or with
equity.
AO: That's what I was going to ask you I mean there Is a perception that you
are a bit soft on foreign takeovers but in a sense you're In that bind aren't
you, of needing the Income for it, needing the proceeds from takeovers?
PM: Well today's current account for the month $ 1700 million has got to
be funded. It will be funded by debt or by equity and equity means buying
positions In the Australian commerce. Now, this Is not the place to be
arguing with Malcolm Fraser but if Malcolm was really worried about that
he wouldn't have let the seventies go by and drop our trading guard so we
start to develop large levels of debt, bad current account Imbalances by
relying on commodities and letting our manufacturing sector fail to pieces.
I mean, we dropped our guard in the late sixties, seventies and early
eighties and we've payed the piper since. And part of that is foreign equity.
AO: But you're urging constantly more Independence for Australia. It's almost
the battle hymn of your republic I suppose. Rather than attacking the
Monarchy some would say, shouldn't we be tackling more seriously our
dependence on foreign money. I mean, our foreign debt has burgeoned In
recent years, hasn't it, from, I think, it's 32% of GOP up to 43%?
PM: Well, that can only be done in two ways. Lifting our domestic savings and
lifting our own import replacement and exporting capacity and those things
are happening, the latter In particuiar I'm not sure whether you saw the
McKinsey study of 700 smaller exporting companies bt their rate of
growth is phenomenal, 14 percent compound a year. Our problem on our
trade front which Is the generator of our debt, the so-called net income
deficit, Interest payments on the old debt, is about two percent of GDP it's
about eight or nine billion. We've got an eight or nine billion dollar trade
problem to deal with and as we deal with it the debt starts to stabilise. It
can only be dealt with by a high level of Australian savings so we're not
calling on overseas savings and overseas debt and a better productive
base in this country meaning more investments, more exports, more
Import replacement. And all of those things are going on.
AO: Despite all our economic woes you've Indicated that you've spent most of
the time since the election concentrating on Mabo you've signalled that
you obviously want to achieve a major breakthrough in that understanding
with the Aboriginal people. What exactly do you want to achieve there?
PM: Well I think the High Court decision does present a tremendous
opportunity. its the opportunity of evening Australia up, of giving the
Aboriginal people what they've always believed was theirs. And that's a
legal title to the land that was always theirs. And while the High Court has
made this decision to facilitate the decision, a whole set of principles have 
got to be developed whereby we give expression now what the High
Court has said Is there Is a native title In the common law which has
existed since settlement In 1788, discovered only In June 1992, but
existed from that time.
AO: What exactly does that mean, do you think, for the Aboriginal people?
PM: I think what it means is that they have a claim on land in this country
which can be facilitated other than by resort to statutory land rights. In
other words instead of the Parliaments of Australia conferring on them a
land right something the community of Australia, via the parliaments,
gives them its something which has more Innate dignity. It's theirs of
right.
AO: Well they're now fearing that In fact the parliaments of Australia are taking
it away from them. I mean given the fine sentiments that have been
expressed about trying to reach this understanding, the reconciliation with
A boriginal peopLe, McArthur River must have come as a surprise to them.
PM: Well I don't think so but I'll come to that In a moment. What we've got to
do is set up a system whereby we establish who has native title, and then
upon having established It, where procedural fairness and compensation
are paid for any use which may be put to that land, subject to that title.
Now hearing claims for native title across Australia will be a test of our
capacity to develop systems because it really means that there Is In
common law a title to land for the Aboriginal people of this country who
can establish an association with it. So Its going to really test our maturity
as a country to see this into place.
AO: You can understand the confusion and the cynicism though can't you,
especially among Aboriginal people. I mean they think, iook the Labor
Government has been in there ten years now, we haven't realy got
anywhere with land rights at all, nothings happened, It's only happening
now because the High Court has put us In a bit of a pickle, put you in a bit
of a pickle, with the Mabo decision. And it's the first real test that comes
along, McArthur River. Well, they go down again, the miners interests are
put first, and they're not even consulted.
PM: It's not really like that. The Aboriginal people themselves made clear to us
that they are prepared to validate titles issued after 1975. Now, the
problem with McArthur River was, there was a project to begin, it needed
the title validated. The Northern Territory Government sald it wouldn't
revive the title. In other words, the title was extinguished. It Issued a
mining right and extinguished forever and always the title. We'e said as
a Commonwealth Govemnment, we reserve the right in the future to revive
that title, after the mining Is complete, so that native title won't be lost.
AO: Will that have to go to a State Tribunal, which has been flagged, or not? 
PM: No. Well, that legislation now lays on the table and before its passage
there's an opportunity for the Aboriginal community to negotiate just terms
about the use of that land. And I got a letter from the Northern Land
Council today. which made that point clear.
AO: We did too. They didn't sound too happy in the letter.
PM: No, It says this negotiatons regarding compensation and a just terms
agreement should, as each of the parties has recently stated, continue a
pace pending the passage of the Bill. So, In other words, they've got a
chance to negotiate just terms. We're protecting under our caveat, the
revival of the title, but what we are doing, Is In the Northern Territory
passing the law, validating the title, which means the project proceeds.
Now, Andrew, were the project not to proceed, you could Imagine the
noise which would be around. People would be saying, well, here's Mabo
at its first blush a $ 300 million project hits the fence. You'd have the worst
elements of conservative interests In this country up there blaggarding the
Mabo decision and all it stands for. So, what we're doing, Is doing no
more than the Aboriginal community offered us, that Is, the validation of
these titles, protecting its revival, allowing a discussion about just terms,
getting it off the stocks so It doesn't complicate the broader Mabo
principles.
AO: Well, that maybe what you're doing, but what they're saying, of course, is
it's the other way round. Look, a $ 300 million project comes along and
suddenly these proclaimed rights of ours go out the window,
PM: Again, It depends how the media responds to this. When Coronation Hill
was on, they said this Is terrible.
AO: Is this the pay back for Coronation Hill?
PM: No, the Government has taken a political approach. It should have taken
an analytical approach. When the Government takes an analytical
approach on McArthur River, they say you should have taken a political
approach. I mea n, you can't do It right, In fact, In terms of Aboriginal
Interests In this country, In terms of getting acceptance of a set of
principles for establishing native title and dealing with native title, McArthur
River threatened the prospects of that happening needlessly, In the event
that it failed. So, validating the leases, protecting the revival of the title,
and giving the Aboriginal community time to negotiate lust terms, in my
view, treats Aboriginal interests appropriately, and properly, but
Importantly, lets get on with the ma~ n discussion about Mabo and not
having it sidetracked by a project not proceeding.
AO: It's effectively an emergency that blew up before you could sort everything
out, But how many more McArthur Rivers might there be before it Is
sorted out? 
12
PM: Well, they'll be some I suppose. But as I Said, this will test.,
AO: And all be treated the same way?
PM: No, because once the principles are in place, then what'll happen Is, they'll
negotiate. A proponent will negotiate with the Aboriginal community and
they'll arrive at terms for mining through procedural fairness. There will be
a procedure procedural fairness as required under the Racial
Discrimination Act, and there'll be compensation. But by then, there will
be a structure in place. The problem at the moment Is, there is no
structure In place. And were we to let McArthur River fall, the people
opposed to Aboriginal Interests in this country, would have banged the
drum so loudly that I'm quite sure upon reflection, the Aborinal
community would have said we would have been better dispensing with
this one properly.
AO: The-Republ. Lc another drum that you've been banging. Is it a certainty
for the Year 2000, or have you still got a lot of wori to do?
PM: I think there's a lot of work to do with it. But I think the procedure we've
set up for a Committee to look at options for a competent change to a
republic, so at least we all know what we're speaking of. I mean, the
problem at the moment is, It doesn't matter who you are as a
commentator, there are no pieces of paper about what constitutes a
change to a republic of any variety. The point of the Committee headed
by Mr Turnbull is to produce those models, so that at least we'll know what
models we're working in, and people can say, well, a change of this varety
I can support, a change of that variety I couldn't support. And In this first
Instance, at least we'll start to track the course. After that, of course, it's a
matter of whether we have constitutional conventions, Involve the States
and other parties.
AO: Can it happen without the support of the Liberals?
PM; I Well, I prefer that it didn't.
AO: But could it happen without that?
PM: It could happen, but I think it would be better if the Liberals recognise the
fact that their involvement In this process can lead to a more harmonious
and competent change.
AO: So how can you get them across the line? How can you get people like
John Howard and Jeff Kennett to see It your way?
PMV: Well, I think a lot of people In the Liberal Party do.
AO: But those two don't. 
" 4I -U I
13
PMV: I know, that's true. And I have said to them that we will give the Uberal
Party time to come to an opinion about this, and that we don't necessarily
want to have only our name on the makers label. That we're quite happy
to have theires there too. But I think the first phase Is Important, and
people can see what is involved in a quite minimal change to the
Constitution.
AO: Can you resist the temptation though Paul Keating the great politician
can he resist the temptation to use this to divide the Liberals, to keep
dividing the Liberals, rather than going for the unity which would certainly
make it a lot easier to work?
PM: Well, I'm Interested in the change rather than worrying about the Liberal
Party. There are plenty of other issues we can deal with the Liberal Party
on.
AO: But how can you convince them of the bona fides then?
PM: Well, I think that just by our actions. That is, I've Invited a fairly broad
committee, a number of people on the conservative side of politics or the
community are on that committee. And once the models are established
I'm quite sure there will be an Informed debate about what constitutes a
minimal change, whether they think there should be change to the reserve
powers, what's the mode of election, should the Head of State be
nominated by the Government, should they be endorsed by the
Parliament, should it have a fixed term. All of these Issues will be
debated, and we can come up what the community thinks is a reasonable
change.
AO: Mr Keating, you'd be very conscious of the television series coming up
next week on Labor in Power, In which you and a number of your
colleagues have been extremely frank, perhaps, on the premise that you
might not have won the election that we've just had.
PM: No, no,
AO: Are you worried they've been too frank?
PM: No. Look, this notion that we've been frank because we might not have
won the election.
AO: Well, why have you been so frank?
PMV: This has been talked up by Phillip Chubb, and good on him, the Producer
of the series. Look, anything I've said In this program I would have been
happy to say win, lose or draw. And I noticed on the weekend In the
Sydney Morning Herald, Alan Ramsey amongst others, had an article on
this, and he's got quotes from these Interviews, and the notion that what 
have we got here. V/ ha it Is, is big boys and big girls behaving like they
are.
AO: But hang on. You'e got the Deputy Prime Minister, your current Deputy
Prime Minister, Brian Howe, using words about you like betrayal. And
Robert Rays statlng quote * constantly carping al every meeting and
every sczial c~ casion. Constantly bagging Hawke, Constantly leakin to
the Pres Gallery, trolling upstairs with the latest story to hurt Hawke.
That Is destabilis-ation of the worst and most disloyal kind." He's one of
your Senior Ministers.
PM: I think he was referrg there I haven't seen the series but I think you'll
find he is referring there notionally to my supporters.
AO: We think you.
PM: Well, I don't know. It may be me, but I don't know. But I think Robert is
happy tucked away back there In the Government. I mean, we're back
there, that's all thzt matters. But the idea that it's being told as it is, Is
shocking. I mean, really.
AO: Well, it is unusually frank. As you say, you would have said it anyway
because you're the Leader, but some of these people are looking for jobs
from you, looking for your favour.
PM: Look, again, It's back In history, And I think what does motivate most
people in public life is what they have on their plate right at the moment,
and their aspiralions for change. And this Cabinet has I think a very
healthy approach in that respect. I think a lot of this stuff just slips into the
past.
AO: Well, it does go to an Issue at stake at the moment. It's come up a lot
since the election anyway. And that Is, your style of Leadership, which Is
certainly very different from the consensus style of. Mr Hawke' You are,
suppose, much dominating, much more interventionist, power centred on
what's already been dubbed the oval office, and that you've promoted
really only your supporlers In the Ministry. Are you really Interested in
putting an incredibly firm grip on this Government, it's you and that's it?
PM: I don't think that's a fair description Andrew. I mean, some of this come~ s
from the Press Galery. But look, I took the opportunity with this election
to try and re-make the Ministry. And the younger and newer people who
have joined it will give the Labor Government a new lease on life that it
might not have otherwise had.
AO: There's some merit In that, but It also will require your stronger hand of
guidance, won't it? 
PM: Welt, I think that energy that you get from now members joining the
Minr" and Cablnet, and paicuariy, yourgar newer members, Is te sort
of energy I think a Government needs. And I cho-se those people on their
abiltes. And I think they're already showing their ability. But as far as
consultation go-as, I can only say to you that I think the Cabinet process
since December 1991 has been a very happy one. The meeting talks
Issues through. Now, since the elecdon we've got a committee proess
Into place, so some of the issues go off to committees and they come
back to the Cabinet and the debate is truncated, so there is less
discussion. But the whole process Is a pretty fiendly and discursive one.
AO: But again, if I can go back to that Labor In Power series. Gareth Evans I
think it was made the point in that, that under the Hawke style the best
was drawn out of the Ministers, because they were expected to contribute
a lot to this consensus style of Government. That perhaps you will be
sitting on top of Ministers much more?
PM: No. My attitude is, you let Ministers make their own pace provided the
generaJ direction is one where the whole Government Is heading. That Is,
provided the direction Is one which is basically not ultra vires of the policy.
I don't think it's healthy for Prime Ministers to be trying to run the detail of
portfolios. I don't think you should do that. But by the same token, it is
Important in meetings, at the right time, for the Prime Minister to have a
view, But I don't think I tend to choke off debate by putting a view. I tend
to let people have their say.
AO: You don't brook opposition lightly tugh, do you? Can I put it to you, that
you have a habit of really crushing quite ruthlessly opposition at times? I
mean, Kim Beazicy Is said to have never fully recovered from the
-savaging you gave him during the telecommunications debate, And even
you have acknowledged on this program, when we were talng about
Labor In Power, that you went too far.
PM: Well, I think In terms of the poilcy I was correct.
AO: But you lost.
PM: But I lost It, But we did in the end, all of us, cobble together nevertheless
a good policy.
AC: Is there a problem though when you do think you're correct that it's very
hard to shake you from It? That you have this fixation about staying the
course, not losing your nerve?
PM: Because the place never had a break in nearly a quarter of a century. I
mean, the place was Inhabited with politicians who wouldn't stay to
anything. it was just a flim flarn place run by the bureaucracy for most of
the post-war years. The reason it has now made the change to a different 
culture, a different sort of society, Is because It's had Ministers who've
meant what they were doing.
AO: Yes, but I'm talng about you and your colleagues, your Ministerial
colleagues, who you will take on and stand up to eye to eye and that's it. I
mean, If you really decide to go for something nothing wiil move you?
PM: Yes, it does, arguments move me. If a Minister is doing a good job, and
he's got a good case, that's fine. I think the notion that I've got a very
Interventionist style In the Cabinet is wrong. And this is a view that floats
around the place perhaps from the hectic days of the 80s. I let Ministers
talk, but in the end, we do bring it to a conclusion. I don't believe in
aimless meetings where I sit mum trying to let a consensus develop for
fear of showing my hand, That I reject as a style of leadership.
AO: Perhaps we're talking about two Paul Keating's? Perhaps, there are two
Paul Keatings? One who is a cynical..
PM: I'm much softer than you think.
AO: There are two sides to this Keating coin I suggest to you. One is the
cynical powerbroker who will resort to just about anything and force his
way through. The other is, at times quite sensitive in some of the
speeches you've made. I'm sure at times even charming, and quite highly
focussed, and desperately trying to think ahead, no doubt about that. But
can you understand, why people find it very hard to get a fix on you? That
they're rather divided over your merits as well, because there are the-se
two people. Which one Is right?
PM: Yes, well, I'm a mixture of things. I am, by and large, I think, nice to
people. I try and draw the best from them, and I stick with them often, or I
help them. Now occasionally, you'li get to the point where you're going to
have a difference of view, and so I'll exercise a view then. I did when I
was Treasurer, and I do as Prime Minister. But this is not in this Cabinet,
a very heavily Interventionist style by me, and I think Ministers would think
that. But these sort of myths spring around. Now, I'm not saying that I'm
some sort of wishy washy sort of character that doesn't have a view. Of
course I have a view. But again, so do Ministers. And I think Ministers
ought to be you choose Ministers, you give them a job, and you let them
go and do it, by and large. And they'll come and ask you, do you think this
Is right, or do you think we should do that, and that's fine, I'll give them a
view. But by and large I let them run. But If it gets to a point where It Is a
problem with direction you've got to have a say, and that's the Prime
Minister's lob.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 68/ 93
SATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
RELEASE OF COMMONWEALTH PRINCIPLES AND DISCUSSION PAPER
ON THE MABO DECISION
The Commonwealth has today issued a discussion paper on the Mabo decision. It has
been prepared by Commonwealth officials at the request of Ministers following
extensive consultations with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representatives,
State and Territory governments and industry groups.
The paper sets out the legal and other issues which need to be addressed in the wake of
the High~ Court decision and identifies possible responses to the challenges posed by it.
The discussion paper provides an analysis of the issues intended to inform and focus
discussion. It is not a statement of Government policy, nor is it legal advice.
Included as an Annex to the discussion paper is a framework of suggested key
principles, which has been endorsed by Ministers, to guide the development of a
response to the implications and uncertainties arising from the decision. It is not our
intention that the principles should be seen as an ultimatum or that they should be
regarded as set in concrete. We hope they will be a means of lifting public debate to a
new and more focussed level.
The High Court has made a landmark decision, and all governments need to come to
terms with its consequences. We should view the Mabo decision as a national issue
requiring a national response and as an opportunity rather than a problem. There are
differing positions, often strongly held, on the questions raised by the High Court
decision. This imposes a particular obligation on all Governments to keep open the
channels of consultation, to examine proposals on their merits, and to develop a
sensible and sensitive package.
The release today of the discussion paper and the principles will, I hope, encourage an
informed debate and assist Governments in the development of a response to the High
Court decision which is workable and just.
CANBERRA 3 JUNE 1993 



PRIMINEI STE 69/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT BY COMMONWEALTH SECRETARY-GENERAL
I am pleased to announce that the Secretary-General of the
Commonwealth, Chief 8leaza Anyaoku, will visit Australia from 7 to
June as a guest of the Australian Government
Chief Anyaoku is visiting Australia, as well as a number of other
regional Commonwealth countries, for consultations on Commonwealth
issues in preparation for the fort~ hcoming Commonwealth Heads of
Govemnment Meeting, to be held in Cyprus from 21 to 25 October.
Chief Anyaoku paid a similar visit to Australia in 1991.
1 look forward to meeting Chief Anyaoku to discuss a range of
Commonwealth issues, particularly ways in which the Commonwealth can
maintain its vitality and best contribute to the interests of its*
members and of the wider international community.
CANBERRA 4 JUNE 1993 8265 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THEE PRIME MINSTER. THE HON P. J. KEATING, M?.
THE COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS MEETING
At Tuesday's Council of Australian Governments Meeting in Melbourne, I will be
putting the Federal Government's view that the Mabo principles outlined last week are
a workable, responsible and decisive response to the challenges posed by the High
Court decision.
Some responses to both the High Court judgement a year ago and to the document of
principles just released reveal a degree of misunderstanding which it is in no one's
interest to perpetuate, least of all the nation's in general.
From the outset the Government decided that the development of policy should take
place through a national process of consultation, and that COAG would be an
important next step in that process.
Tuesday's meeting will be the first opportunity for Mabo to be discussed at Head of
Government level.
The Government has said that recognition by the High Court of native title provides an
unprecedented opportunity to even up the relationship between indigenous and nonindigenous
Australians, and to build a relationship of mutual respect and trust on a
foundation of justice and dignity.
The principles released by the Government are squarely in line with this view.
There is no sense in different groups staking out extreme or unworkable positions. For
instance, it serves no good purpose to argue that native title has continued everywhere
since 1788 and has nowhere been extinguished by subsequent grants of interest, when
in fact the High Court has specifically rejected this proposition.
Equally it is both shortsighted and insensitive to reject outright the notion that native
title should be preserved to the maximum extent possible, or to suggest that
extinguishment is a reasonable option with the title holder having had no say in the
matter. There is also little sense in believing that Australia can put its head in the sand on
issues such as c ompensation. Like Mabo itself', these issues will not go away simply
because they are difficult. 
I do not expect the COAG meeting to end in detailed agreement but it can provide an
opportunity for a positive step forward. A good, solid discussion would itself be a
valuable contribution to the process.
For example, there could be broad agreement on the need for an efficient means of
identifying the who and where of native title and on the acceptance that native title is a
common law reality and needs to be accommodated.
I will also be urging Premiers and Chief Ministers to accept that there ought to be
room for negotiations as well as legal solutions to land management problems, and that
Australia needs to move quickly to a new land management regime.
On related issues:
* it is hardly a revolutionary idea that a mining lease should not extinguish native
title, and that the native title can continue subject to that lease; this idea involves
treating native title no differently from most freehold title.
* the date of 30 June, 1993 does not represent a cut-off beyond which States
canniot issue grants of interest in land such as exploration or mining leases. It means
only that they should do so in a non-discrimninatory fashion and the Commonwealth,
beyond that point, would not normally beVwilling to rectify failures to abide by the
Racial Discrimination Act.
CANBERRA 6 JUNE, 1993 



TEL: 10. Jun. 93 16: 15 No. 018 P. 01/ 08
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM9 7.30 REPORT, MELBOURNE, 9 JUNE
1993 E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, welcome again to the program.
PM: Thanks Paul.
PL When we get down to basics are we talking about a different attitude
towards Aboriginal Australia between, say yourself, and Premiers
Kennett and Court?
PM: I think so, yes that's right, yes I do. I think there is not the willingness
there ought to be to accept that the High Court has made a seminal
decision and It's the Governments of the Commonwealth and the
States to set up mechanisms to respond to the hearing and awarding of
Native Title in accordance with the decision of the High Court.
PL: Could it be that you are too far out in front of community opinion?
PM: No, it is not a matter of community opinion, It Is a matter of the law. The
High Court has said that there Is a Native Title In the common law and It
has existed since settlement in 1788, not In a sense, we will use the
word, discovered until June 1992, but existing from 1788. Now I would
like to say for the purpose of your viewers who are not certain what the
legal position Is, it doesn't mean that large parts of Australia, partlcuiariy
of the buiit up areas of Australia, the urban areas of Australia will be
subject to a native title ciaim. Where freehold title has been issued the
native title has been held to have been extinguished, where a lease hold
has been Issued, the native title In most cases, or in many cases has
been extinguished.
PLU So these enormnous claims we have seen in recent days, I mean the
entire ACT for example, that's a nonsense?
PM: A nonsense. It has got nothing to do with Mabo. 
TEL: 10. Jun. 93 16: 15 No .018 P. 02/ 08
2
PLU Anid not very helpful to you I would have thought?
PM: it's a tactic of some of the extreme elements of the Aboriginal
community, it has got nothing to do with Mabo, has no chance of
succeeding and as a sense.. this particular process.
PU Now you began these talks here today with some Premiers wanting
simply to, if you like, forget that Mabo had ever happened, extinguish
native title across the whole of Australia
PM: There was, if you like, an unwillingness on the part of some Premiers to
accept that the High Court has made a seminal decision to be less then,
if you like, accepting of the tact, or In fact to debate the High Court's
right to mae~ a decision about native title. Well of course this may be
Interesting for them, but of no Interest to me. The High Court has made
this decision, native title does exist and It Is now up to the Governments
to see that the methods are put in place to hear native title, to dispense
native title and to validate all the leases which are put into question.
PL: So, when the Western Australian Premier says that these key decisions
In our national life should be made by elected leaders, you say well
that's a nice Idea, but that's not the way It Is?
PM: No, I said to him today, we have got a constitution which Is made up of
an executive, a legislature, a judiciary and the judiciary, our High Court
makes decisions about these sorts of matters and it has made a
decision about native title. There is no appeal to that decision, there Is
no privy council and nor should there be and therefore the law of that
decision should be respected by all governments in Australia and his In
particular whether he likes it or not.
PIL: Last night, fairly late last night, you thought didn't you that you were
about to come pretty close to getting some sort of agreement here?
PM; I thought I was moving towards an agreement, yes.
PL: What sort of agreement did you have hopes of at that stage?
PM: One where the Commonwealth's said for its part it would validate all
leases that were Issued since 1975.
PL: The year of the Racial Discrimination Act?
PM: The year the Racial Discrimination Act was Introduced and I made what
I thought was a generous offer of the Commnwealth paying any
compensation arising from eighteen years of the Issue of that lease. 
TEL: 10. Jun. 93 16: 15 No. 018 P. 03/ 08
3
PL: So whatever leases the States had issued you would pick Up the tab?
PM: We would pick up the tab which was an exceptionally I think generous
offer from the Commonwealth.
PU And what else was part of the plan?
PM: In return they had to agree to the establishment of a set of tribunals
under Commonwealth guidelines, but set up In the States to hear native
title claims and award native title and to adopt some principles on the
way through such as the protection of native tite and Its revival there
after; after a particular purpose had ceased.
PL: This system for hearing claims for native title, this could apply to future
leases? 6
PM: Future leases that is right.
PUL What went wrung last night?
PM: Premier Kennett unilaterally told the meeting about 10: 30 pm that he had
had enough of this, he was going to legislate unilaterally, that he had
advice that he could validate the leases by a decision of the Victorian
Parliament and that he would then legislate to dispense native title In
VIctorla and where that native title was Inconsistent with a commercial
purpose, he would extinguish the title.
PU: And where native title was found to be proved he would pay
compensation?
PM: He would pay compensation.
PL: But he doesn't expect to have to pay very much at all does he?
PM: No, because most of Victoria, the native title has been extinguished by
freehold title over the last..
PL: Being such a closely settled State.
PM: Yes, over the last one hundred and fifty years, there Is very little
unallenated crown land, other than state forest and national parks which
Is not true of Western Australia, It is not true of Queensland, so in a
sense his response was sort of a beggar my neighbor response, It
wasn't going to cost him anything like as much to choose this path as It
would have cost Queensland or Western Australia.
PL: Can he legally do this? 
TEL: 10. Jun. 93 16: 15 No. 018 P. 04/ 08
4
PM: He has been advised so though Commonwealth legal advisers would
doubt this Is so and we have expressed those doubts In the document
we published a week or so ago which says that legislation In the
Commonwealth Parliament Is the only certain way of validating leases.
Now, It may well be that the States can validate leases, If they can,
good. They issued the leases, they Issued these grants of Interest in
land, not just leases, but grants of Interest In land over the last eighteen
year. They have been the land managers so If they can validate their
own leases and pay the compensation well, that Is not a problem for me.
I say good, If they can do that good.
PL: How did you react to Premier Kenriett's sudden flourish?
PM: I thought it was disruptive of the spirit of the discussion and again this ad
hoc apprcdabt to things, it Is not the way a matter like this, a national
matter should be dealt with. It ever there Is a decision handed down by
our most supreme court, our High Court about the indigenous people of
this country that requires a national response.
PL: And you were prepared then though to make some compromises this
morning weren't you?
PM: I proposed again a change to our document to Indicate that It would be
possible to agree to a package provided that the States understood that
the High Court has made an historic decision, the decision being that a
native title existed in common law, that It was not extinguished by the
acquisition of sovereignty In 1788, that survived sovereignty in 1788 and
that we had to establish the mechanism for tribunals to hear and
dispense native title. Premiers Court and Kennett would have no bar of
that and other Premiers who might have accepted that and some would
have found there was no point In them accepting it.
PU Premier Kennett says an agreement was possible here, but Paul Keating
wanted to do too much, to go too far, you wanted to solve the entire
Aboriginal question once and for all by linking everything on to the Mabo
Issue.
PM: I don't doubt for a moment that Premier Kennett sees attractions in that
glib line, but that Is not true. He and Premier Court wouldn't embrace
even the primary remedial policy changes to give effect to the core of
the Mabo decision, not the add ons or the embroidery or anything on the
edge of it, the core Issue.
PL: We now have Victoria, New South Wales and I gather Queensiand at
least planning their own legislation now to validate those leases between
1975 and now. You can understand they have got to give certainty to
business don't they? 
TEL: .2Jun. 93 16: 15 No. 018 P. 05/ 08
PM: Absolutely and it they can by the passage of legislation through their
houses ot Pariamnent do that and pick up the compensation.
PL That you would have otherwise been prepared to..
PM: No, but you have got to understand that the cost of compensation to
VIctoria will be minuscule compared to the cost of compensation to
Western Australia or Queensland.
PL So, we have been here now for the best part of two days, you have
worked right through into the night, we have got effectively what
nowhere?
PM: Let me say this. We have as a Commonwealth government as a
mlnstet-Fommittee of the Commonwealth been at work now for a
couple Of months on this. We produced a highly Informative document
which the States have had a copy of now for over a week, we refined
that to 33 key proposals and then refined It down further to what we call
the core issues yesterday and today. The States have had their own
legal advice. The Council of Australian Governments Is an executive
body, when a Premier comes to this body they are there to make
decisions, not to have studies or to go back and consult but to make
decisions.
PU* They have Prime Minister, they have said no.
PM: They have made a decision, they wouldn't make decisions to embrace
the core proposals to deal with the High Court decision.
PL: OK, so we have this executive body meeting, the big white chiefs of
Australia in a pow wow, what message does this now send to Aboriginal
Australians?
PM: I think Premiers Court and Kennett have to got to explain to the
Aboriginal community why native title as a concept so rankies of them,
why they are not prepared to hear native title claims and have them
dispensed and I think they have got to explain to the business
community why they have refused a generous Commonwealth offer to
validate the titles and pay the compensation.
PL: And what message does it send to investors If you were sitting In Tokyo
right now wondering whether to put $ 100 million Into a mine In Australia?
PM: That Is a different issue. They can Issue from now on valid grants of
Interest In land providing they follow two key points of procedural
fairness and compensation, they can Issue from here on valid Interests
of grants of land. But each interest in the land extinguishes the native
TEL: 
ILL 1O. Jun. 93 16: 15 No. 018 P. 06/ 08
6
title unless we provide for a revival of the title when the economic
purpose Is finished.
PL So I want to develop a midne. NOe then got to advertise, the State
government has got to advertise the potential native title of it?
PM: Yes, it has got to avertise. If there Is an area of land that the State
wishes to develop It has to advise potential native title holders or the
Aboriginal people of the region or maybe Land Councils that it seeks to
exercise an Instrument over a grant or a grant of Interest In particular
land.
PLU How long will this hold me up for? How long does this hold up the
proce-s?
PM: I don't think It Is effectively a holdling up process at all because even if it
takes a number of years for a native title claim to be heard and
dispensed it doesn't stop the valid Issue of the lease or the Interest,
PU: But I don't know as a business person what compensation I am up for
down the track do I?
PMIV: In the legislation that I was proposing at this meeting we would have
guidelines for the compensation so a business would have an Idea of
what the cost would be further down the track. The key point Is Paul
that the States can now Issue a valid lease, a valid grant of interest in
land.
PRL: Have you perhaps pumped up average expectations too high. I mean
there will be a lot of disappointment out there?
PM: It Is not only me pumping it up. You have got to understand this. This Is
something I have said to thorn on a number of occasions and I'll say to
you that this decision was not a decision of the Commonwealth
government, it was a decision of the High Court of Australia....
PL: But you're linking It with reconciliation.
PM: In a matter between Merlam people and the State of Queensland. The
High Court held In favour of the Menamr people, and in doing so created
a historic decision, it is that we are responding to. So, it Is not a matter
of the Commonwealth government-building up expectations, It Is simply
a matter of law which has to be dealt with.
PL: And how will you go forth from here?
PM: We will I think, as a result of the day, we'll consider our position and see
where we think how best we should respond.
I LL 10. JUh. 93 16' 15 .01 P 06/ 08 
U. 16: 5 No. 018 P. 07/ 08
7
PL There's talk of drafting legislation.
PM: Well we'd be drafting legislation anyway, because we haven't had a
frame work legislation within which these State tribunals could operate.
So, we will go ahead and do that anyway. but again we will be
considering our position. But can I also say that the meeting, the
Council of Australian Governments, considered many other matters,
reform in water, electricity, gas, micro-economic reform and other
mnatters between us, and tha was quite a successful feature of the
meeting. But the most Important one could niot be agreed upon. While it
is the resolution of the Impact of the High Court decision In respect of
native title.
PL: You said s~ eral times that you thought that the Mabo decision was a
great opportunity for Australa, are you still of that view?
PM: Yes, because it Ist he classic evener up, It Isth e thing that gives to
Aboriginal Australians an Interest In land which-has been theirs under
the common law since settlement. It has a wholly different character to
statutory land rights, land given by statute from a Parliament to an
Aboriginal community. It has more Inherent dignity In the sense that it is
available to a native type of hold, and as such It means that this
possession which came with the settlement and the concept of terra
nuilius, the land of no one, has been over turned by the High Court and
Australians community can go forward together on the basis of the
quality of access and availability to land.
PLU Finally, comments by people like Tim Fischer, that this is the guilt
Industry, that this was done by vastly distant past generations, not our
generation, we shouldn't bear the cross.
PM: Well that's wrong, that's a prejudicial view, and it is a wrong view, it has
nothing to do with guilt, it Is a matter of law. In Captain Cook's
Instructions he was told that In establishing a settlement In Australia that
he should proceed with the consent of the native people. So, even back
then the consent of the native people was an Issue. Of course In New
Zealand there was the treaty of Waitangi, whereupon the Maori and the
Crown came to a decision about the development of that country and
their particular rights. This didn't happen In Australia, we had this
concept of the land of no one which the High Court now overturned.
PL: And you will be back with the Premiers again in the next couple of
months, will you, to keep trying?
PM: Well we have got a Premiers Conference, a fi-nancial Premiers
conference meeting In July but at each meeting we are not prevented
rm discussing any matter financial or otherwise. But they have got to 
I~ iv 1U. jufn 5 10; 1D ra. Vio r. voivo
show a willingness to accept the decision of the most supreme of our
Courts, the High Court.
PL Prime Minister, thak for your time.
PM: Thank you.
ENDS 



TEL:
AA PRIME MINISTER
"" SCRIPT or TEZ VKa KXWSTZi, Tm RON P. Jr. K mW
OPIMG RDMRS, PMSS CO PEPNCB, cCO= NIL OF AISTMNLAT
GOVEMO S NUT=*, PARLZIMSM HOUSE, WLBOMMIE, 9 JU2
1993
3603 PROOF COPY
I thought I would give you just a few preliminary remarks
and then take some questions.
As you know the Council of Australian Governments in its
second meeting has met now for two days with a fairly
extensive agenda which has ranged over a number of
issuesj, the main one being the response to the High
Court's decision in the Mabo case and then other microeconomic
issues which are covered in the Communique which
lists a fairly extensive range of issues which we
considered later this morning and into the early
afternoon, after we concluded the discussion on Mabo.
I am happy to take questions about those things. Let me
just say a few things now about the Mabo decision and
take questions from you.
There was not unanimous agreement to the package proposed
by the Commonwealth and the package which we had
discussed through yesterday with the States, if you like
the amended proposals.
I am disappointed with this# but by the same token what
must emerge from this is a comprehensive response to the
Mabo decision. What we had at the meeting was
undercurrents of the view that there was only a grudging
recognition of the High Court's historic decision and a
tendency to view Mabo not just as a problem requiring
bnly a minimalist solution as just a problem requiring
only a minimal solution. There wasn't a preparedness on
the part of some of the Premiers to give effect to the
principles of the Mabo decision; that is to set up the
T9. Jun. 93 17: 15 No. 030 P. 01/ 03 
TEL: 9. Jun. 93 17: 15 No. 030 P. 02/ 03
2
mechanisms to hear and dispense native title that is
the principal core matter that we should have mechanisms,
tribunals, set up under a framework of Commonwealth
-guidelines to operate in the states under State
legislation to hear and award native title. The Premiers
would not agree to this, in particular Premiers Kennett
and Court, would not agree to this and as a consequence
we were unable to advance the mechanics of a response to
the High Court decision..
There a num-er of other issuss which I'm sure you will
ask me about and I will be quite happy to respond to you
On. Towards the end of the day, the end of discussions later
this morning Premier Kennett and others tried to pull
together %, text which they wanted me to accept which of
course paid no zecognition to the problem at hand at all.
And the point I made to them is that the COAG the
Council of Australian Governments is an executive body
charged with an executive function and they are requiring
of the Commonwealth that we execute an executive act to
validate titles back to 1975 and pcovide compensation
that they would execute no executive act what so ever to
give affect to the Mabo decision. In the text that
Premier Kennett wrote just before I indicated to them
that it was not acceptable to me or the Commonwealth
government, the first point was to accept the High Court
judgement in Mabo that there is native title. So they
are suggesting to me as Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth that we should take away trom the meeting as
some sort of concession from them that they accept the
High Court judgement in Mabo because they were disputing
the fact that the High Court can make law and I said to
them, what do you want me to say, that you accept that
the High Court judgement in Mabo, there is native title.
Well, you have to accept it, the Court said it, there is
no appeal from the Court's decisi. on, there is no privy
council, It is an absolute position.
The second part of their text was that the Commonwealth
should then validate all the leases and provide
compensation, but the third part and this is the point I
tested them on, was that in their text they should
establish procedures to hear and resolve issues raised by
claims for native title and I had said to them well, hear
and resolve claims for native title. No, they said no,
we won't have any text which says will hear and resolve
claims for native title. We'll have text which says only
we will hear and resolve issues raised by claims for
native title. So I said let me get this straight, you
want to the tommonwealth to validate all these leases, 
TEL: bW36 .03/ 03
3
pay all the compensationof eighteen years of leases
across the country and you want me to say, to say of to
me that you will accept the High Court decision in
respect of Mabo and that you will only establish
procedures to hear issues, you won't give primary effect
to establishing the mechanisms of hearing and awarding
native title.
I know they have told some of you that we wanted to go
beyond Mabo. Well, we see the Mabo decision as an
opportunity to deal with policy towards Aboriginals In
terms of the reconciliation process and there are issues
there which I am happy to talk to you about.
But the core thing was that they wouldn't agree to the
primary ijsue end that was setting up a system of
tribunals to ' heara nd award native title and not would
they ac-cept the principle of where ever practicable to
protect native title from extinguishment. We said there
is no problem about title co-existing so why say to an
Aboriginal person who may have a native title that there
is a mining grant been issued which may take ten years,
why extinguish that persona title when in ten years time
the mining is finished. Why shouldn't the title revive
after the ten years? Why can't there be co-existence of
title and a revival of the title when the mining is
finished. No, they wouldn't accept the principle of nonextinguishment
of native title.
So in the end they wouldn't give effect to the proposals
which the Commonwealth put up. The Commonwealth
addressed all this in a discussion paper and a 33 point
document. Premier Court told me he had spent four months
with legal advice on this, all Premiers told me that they
had had extensive legal advice, they had our document and
the 33 point plan and yet they said they couldn't agree
to what were nine paragraphs of text encapsulating the
core points. So I said in that case the Commonwealth, if
there is no package, the Commonwealth will not be part of
any partial arrangement or partial solution and that the
Commonwealth would have to reconsider its position as too
would the States.
I am happy to take your questions.
ends 



COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS
MELBOURNE, 8-9 JUNE 1993
COMMUNIQUE
INTRODUCTION The Council of Australian Governments held its second meeting in
Melbourne. The Council comprises the Prime Minister, Premiers and
Chief Ministers and the President of the Australian Local Government
Association. MABO The Council had a lengthy discussion of the issues which need to be
resolved in formulating an appropriate response to the High Court
decision in the Mabo Case which recognises a form of native title to land.
No course of action was agreed by this meeting and member
governments will be considering their positions further.
MICRO-ECONOMIC REFORM
The Council discussed a range of micro-economic reform issues. It noted
that progress is being made in the area of micro-economic reform
including reform in the electricity, water and transport areas. The
Council agreed that the momentum for reform needs to be maintained in
the interests of improving the competitiveness of Australia in the
international economy. It therefore agreed that a working group of
Commonwealth, State and Territory senior officials ( chaired by the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet) should report to the next
meeting of the Council of Australian Governments with an agenda for
further micro-economic reform to be undertaken at a national level.
ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY REFORM
Since the National Grid Management Council ( NGMC) was established in
July 1991, relevant Heads of Government have extensively considered
the arrangements necessary to give effect to their decision to implement
a competitive electricity supply industry in eastern and southern
Australia. On this occasion they discussed two NGMC reports one on
the structure of the transmission network across eastern and southern 
Australia and one on the NGMC's recent work including proposals for a
detailed timetable of the steps which need to be . taken to commence a
competitive market.
The Prime Minister, the Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland and South Australia and the Chief Minister of the Australian
Capital Territory agreed to have the necessary structural changes put in
place to allow a competitive electricity market to commence as
recommended by the NGMC from 1 July 1995.
These structural changes will includd-the establishment of an interstate
electricity transmission network with those States which are already
inter-connected, together with Queensland, working towards
implementation by 1 July 1 995 of the Multiple Network Corporation
( MNC) structural option outlined in the NGMC's report. Under this
proposal, the transmission elements of relevant existing electricity utilities
are to be separated out from generation and placed in separate
corporations. South Australia is considering the use of a subsidiary
structure pending the resolution of cost issues associated with separating
transmission from its vertically integrated authority. Resolution of those
issues would enable the adoption of the MINC model.
Tasmania reserves its position pending the outcome of its current
electricity industry review.
In making this commitment the Council noted that the establishment of
an interstate electricity market and the implementation of the MNC model
requires the settling of a number of important and sensitive issues
including market trading arrangements, grid pricing and regulatory
framework, budgetary impact on the States, the resolution of tax
compensation issues and reform arrangements for the Snowy Mountains
Scheme. It was agreed that there be a progress report on these, and a range of
operational matters under examination by the NGMC, to the next Council
of Australian Governments meeting. Heads of Government endorsed the
NGMC's commitment to consult closely with key stakeholders in carrying
through its work.
Heads of Government also agreed to the further examination, during the
_____ establishment of the MNC structure, of whether the network structure for
governments to work towards should be a national network corporation
or another option.
The conclusions of a response to the NGMC's reports prepared by senior
officials for Heads of Government which were endorsed are attached
( Attachment together with the NGMC's timetable of events leading
up to a 1 July 1995 commencement of a competitive electricity market. 
WATER RESOURCE POLICY
As requested at its December 1992 meeting, the Council received a
report from officials on the current state of play in both urban and rural
water use. The report noted that, while progress has been made in
reforming pricing, allocation and other aspects of the industry, there are
still significant economic and environmental benefits to be derived from
adoption of a range of measures to overcome impediments to reform.
The Council has therefore asked a working group of officials, with an
independent chair, to develop and report on a strategic framework for
efficient and sustainable reform of the water industry, which, at the same
time, takes account of the technical and policy diversity that exists
across the States and Territories. The report is also to address the future
roles of the Council of Australian Governments and Ministerial Councils in
the reform process, other mechanisms and a proposed timetable for
implementation. The report is to be completed in time for consideration
by Heads of Government at the next meeting of the Council.
FREE AND FAIR TRADE IN NATURAL GAS
The Council received a report from the Australian and New Zealand
Minerals and Energy Council on removal of governmental impediments to
free and fair trade in natural gas. The report noted that, while Australia
has abundant reserves of natural gas, on present indications additional
interstate sales of gas will be required in the near term. Heads of
Government agreed to co-operate in the development of policies and
arrangements covering the gas industry which are pro-competitive,
facilitate the development of gas markets on commercial criteria and
remove impediments to free and fair trade in gas.
To this end, the Council has called for a further report from officials for
its next meeting on progress towards a pro-competitive framework for
the natural gas industry, within and between jurisdictions. In this
connection, officials have been asked specifically to review existing
regulatory arrangements, within and between jurisdictions, including
those applying to third-party access to gas pipelines.
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
The Council noted that the Commonwealth had consulted with the States
and Territories on the implications of Australia ratifying the International
Convention'on* Biological Diversity, in accordance with the
Intergovernmental Agreement on the Environment. It agreed that the 
substantive obligations arising from the Convention could be met with
only minor changes to the current policy and program frameworks of
Australian governments. The Council'' supported the Commonwealth
proceeding immediately to ratify the Convention.
REVIEW OF MINISTERIAL COUNCILS
Heads of Government have acted decisively to apply discipline and
streamlining to governmental activities by halving the number of
Ministerial Councils. Heads of Government-have also agreed to a range
of efficiency and effectiveness measures in relation to the operations of
those Councils that remain.
The Council of Australian Governments has taken the decision to halve
the existing 45 Ministerial Councils to 21 following a review of the
scope, distribution and number of Councils. Details are provided at
Attachment B.
The reduction is to be carried out and support structures appropriately
reviewed by January 1994.
The decision will reduce costs associated with providing administrative
support for such Councils and costs associated with Ministerial and
officer travel and accommodation at meetings.
This rationalisation will also improve the quality of policy development
emanating from these Councils. Bringing together interrelated functions
and activities in this way will result in more integrated policy
development and will enable Ministerial Councils to take a strategic view
of the issues beyond the interests of a particular group.
The reduction in the number of Councils is to be achieved by the
combination of a number of existing Councils after consideration of
portfolio arrangements across jurisdictions, common membership,
existing back-to-back meeting arrangements and overlap of
responsibilities. Although in many instances existing Councils will be combined, this will
not mean that constituent Councils will necessarily lose their identity
______ entirely. In several cases, legislation requires that some combining-
Councils retain a separate identity.
The Council further endorsed recommendations to improve the efficient
operation of Ministerial Councils specifically relating to the powers,
scope, organisation, formation, chairing, meeting arrangements, agenda
prioritising and confidentiality of Ministerial Councils. In this regard the 
Council agreed that meetings of Min~ sterial Councils would only take
place in the capital cities of Australia and Alice Springs.
Heads of Government reaffirmed that Ministerial Councils play a vital role
in the facilitation of consultation and cooperation between Governments,
and noted that when Ministers have the authority of their respective
Governments, then Councils determine matters to finality in their area of
concern quickly and efficiently.
CONCESSIONS/ FRINGE BENEFITS
The Council noted the work to date of the Commonwealth-State working
group set up at the December 1992 Council of Australian Governments
meeting to review the allocation of functional responsibilities in the area
of fringe benefits and concessions and identify and cost options for
reform. From 1 April 1993, the Commonwealth abolished the separate fringe
benefits income and assets tests for the Pensioner Health Benefits ( PHB)
card, extending the card to an additional group of part-pensioners and
older long term beneficiaries. States and Territories agreed to extend
their concessions to this group for the period 1 April to 30 June 1993,
on the basis of a Commonwealth commitment to meet their full additional
costs over this period. An initial payment of $ 1 7.5m was made to States
and Territories on 1 April 1993. The Commonwealth has agreed to
provide an additional payment of 8m for local government's direct
costs. The Council further agreed that a decision on the amount of
additional payment to the States and Territories for the June quarter will
be deferred until the 5 July financial Premiers' Conference.
The Council agreed that further work should continue on options for
longer term arrangements in this area and referred this matter for
decision at the 5 July financial Premiers' Conference. To cover the
interim period until the decision is made on long-term arrangements, the
Commonwealth agreed to continue interim compensation to States,
Territories and local governments for a period of one month, with this
funding to be paid retrospectively and to be taken into account in the
longer-term 1993-94 funding arrangements.
COMMONWEALTH-STATE ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The Council noted that the range and nature of government functions has
evolved rapidly in recent times and is continuing to do so. Policy interrelationships
have become more important, leading to a sharing of
responsibilities, among the various levels of government. In this process,
however, the respective roles of governments have become increasingly 
blurred impacting on the efficient and'effective delivery of government
services. Consistent with the program of micro-economic reform which should
encompass all sectors of the Australian economy and our continuing
need to become more competitive internationally, the Council accepts
that there is an obligation on governments to ensure that their joint
working arrangements are as efficient and effective as possible. At the
same time, increasing efficiency and removing unnecessary overlap and
duplication of service provision will improve clarity and accountability and
enable governments to deliver better-outcomes to their citizens.
Recognising the progress that has already been made in clarifying roles
and responsibilities, the Council agreed that it would be useful to take
broad stock of the intergovernmental arrangements in functional areas
involving shared responsibilities and to identify priority areas where
progress can be made.
The Council agreed to establish a Working Group to identify those
functional areas which exhibit inefficiencies in existing intergovernmental
arrangements and where there is scope for clarification of the roles and
responsibilities. The Working Group is to be comprised of a
representative from the Commonwealth and each State and Territory
Government. Where appropriate, representatives from the Australian
Local Government Association will also attend. It will report to the next
-meeting of the Council of Australian Governments which will consider
what further work should be undertaken.
The criteria to be used by the Working Group in this process are at
Attachment C.
CENTENARY OF FEDERATION
The Council agreed to establish a broadly based National Advisory
Committee to develop an options paper identifying goals and strategies
for the centenary of federation in accordance with the attached terms of
reference ( Attachment D).
It further agreed that, after discussions with other Premiers and Chief
Ministers and with the Prime Minister aimed at achieving. a broadly
representative Committee, each Premier and Chief Minister will nominate
a representative to the Committee. The Commonwealth will chair the
Committee, and will appoint such further persons to the Committee as
might be needed to ensure that the Committee as a whole is broadly
representative of the community. 
.7-
REPUBLIC ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The Council noted that the Republic Advisory and its consultations are
limited to clarifying the minimum constitutional change necessary for a
republic. In particular, the Council noted that the work of the Committee
was intended as a first step in an extended process of informed
community debate which will allow full expression of the range of views
held by Australians on this matter. It was agreed that the States and
Territories would be consulted by the Commonwealth in further
consideration of this issue.
FUNCTIONAL FOODS
The Council agreed that Governments should facilitate efforts by the
Australian food industry to capitalise on growth in export markets. They
noted that there is potential for growth in markets for functional foods, a
class of foods that have been derived from existing foods and
reformulated to perform a specific function relating to human health. To
this end the Council agreed that the current restrictions specified in the
Australian Food Standards Code, which inhibit the development of
functional foods, need to be reviewed as a matter of priority. The
Council noted that the National Food Authority is conducting a standard
by standard review and agreed that review of those standards relating to
functional foods should be expedited.
UNIFORMITY OF PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
Heads of Government have acted to overcome the wasteful situation
where parts of Australia are closed down while other parts remain open
because of the lack of uniformity in the observance of public holidays.
It has been agreed that there should be uniform Australian Public
Holidays and the dates on which Public Holidays are observed should be
certain. Christmas Day, Boxing Day and New Year's Day will be observed on
December, 26 December and 1 January respectively; Australia Day will
be observed on 26 January; ANZAC Day. on 25 April; and Good riday,
Easter Saturday and Easter Monday will continue to be observed on the
days set according to formulae traditionally followed for these public
holidays in Australia.
Heads of Government have agreed that a Working Group of officials will
be set up to ensure uniformity for substituted Public Holidays when
Public Holidays fall on a weekend. The Working Group will also examine 
the observance of Labour Day and make a recommendation on an
appropriate date for its uniform observance. The Working Group will
report back to the next meeting of the-Council.
The Council has no intention of reducing the number of public holidays.
Rather, the objective is to achieve uniformity in the observance of public
holidays. This is an important micro-economic reform with the potential
to avoid the costs and disruption for business that occurs under the
present arrangements. 
ATTACHMENT A
ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY REFORM
In relation to reform of the electricity industry relevant Heads of
Government: 1. Announced a firm commitment to have the necessary
structural changes in place to allow implementation of a
competitive electricity market -from 1 July 1995.
2. Confirmed their commitment to the establishment of an
interstate transmission network, separate from generation
and distribution interests, noting that the achievement of
this will require the settling of important and sensitive
issues, including:
market trading, grid pricing and regulatory
arrangements; the budgetary impact on the States;
the resolution of tax compensation issues; and
resolution of reform arrangements for the Snowy
Mountains Schemie.
3. Agreed that establishment of the interstate transmission
network be through adoption of the Multiple Network
Corporation model outlined in the NGMC report.
4. Agreed that jurisdictions in southern and eastern Australia
will work to have the Multiple Network Corporation structure
in place by 1 July 1995, consistent with the NGMC
timetable for the introduction of a competitive electricity
market ( in relation to 1, 3 and 4 Tasmania indicated that it is
reviewing the appropriate structure of its electricity supply
______ industry. and will report to COAG once a decision has * been
made) ( in relation to 3 and 4, South Australia indicated it is
considering the use of a subsidiary structure pending the
resolution of cost issues associated with separating
transmission from its vertically integrated authority. 
Resolution of those issues would enable the adoption of the
Multiple Network Corporation model.).
Committed to further examine, during the course of the
establishment of the Multiple Network Corporation structure,
of whether the network structure for Governments to work
toward should be a National Network Corporation or another
option.
6. Reconfirmed the objective of competitive generation as
envisaged in the Nationa[-Grid -Protocol, noting that this will
involve merit order despa~ tch of individual generators to
ensure that the most cost-effective generation is despatched
and to enable private sector generation to compete on equal
terms.
7. Called for a report from the NGMC at the next meeting of
the Council of Australian Governments on the following
major issues associated with implementation of electricity
reform: the implementation of network pricing and market
trading arrangements to underpin competition in
electricity trading;
appropriate regulatory arrangements, noting that the
Hilmer inquiry into competition policy will report
during this period;
progress in the establishment of a high-voltage
transmission link between NSW and Queensland
( Northlink); and
demand management opportunities.
8. Asked the NGMC to address further major issues, including:
methodologies to ensure a consistent and commercial
approach to the valuation of transmission assets; and
the, implementation of effective system control.
arrangements for the integrated network, independent
of the generation sector, that meet the needs of
generators, distributors and major customers.
9. Noted that the NGMC will need to further consult widely and
visibly with major stakeholders. 
3-
Agreed that the parameters for the 1994 review of the
NGMC be agreed at the next meeting of the Council of
Australian Governments.::
11. Requested the senior officials working group to report back
to the next meeting of the Council of Australian
Governments on:
whether a Memorandum of Understanding is required
between Heads of Government to advance the
establishment of an interstate transmission network
and, if so, what itf should contain;
progress in the resolution of the tax compensation
matter;
-progress in resolution of reform arrangements for the
Snowy Mountains Scheme; and
reform actions taken within the States to facilitate the
introduction of a competitive electricity market. 
I 11'
Electricity Industry Reform
Task Name Duratioi
( Month:
Market Transition 2.02
Transition Arranclement s resolved 0.00
Arrc~ nne Trial Participants 1.00
Trial Education KlIsflralning 1! 0
Initial Market Trial 8.00
Transition Period 12.00
GoMpetive Trading Commences 000
Markel TradingNetwrk Picing 1.0
Publication of Transition Paper _ 0.00
Public Consultation/ Review 2 00
Approve Detailed Trial Proposals 0.00
Accounting Standards established 600.
Government Endorsement 6.00
Settlements Established 3.00
18.00
Publication at Regulation Report! 000(
Submitted to COAG 0.00
Gover! nment Endorsement 6.00
tLeg! ativ Ch anges by Gay._ 12.00 C
RegukIations in operoflon0.. 0
Structural Relarm 25.99
Publication of Structure Report _ 0.00
Government Consideration 6.00
Discussion by C GG 0.00
! mplmentaion Of Structural Retori 20.80 Start Q2
01-Jul-93
01 -Ji ul93
01-Nov-93
01-Jtil-94
03-Jul-95
01-Jul-93
01 -jul-93
01 -Jul-93
31 -Aug? 93
02-Mar-94
01 -Nov-93
) l -Nov-93
) 1 -Nov-93
I -Nov-93
12-May-95
0 Api--93 0-Apr-(
0 1 Apr93i
08-Jun-93 A(
) 6-Oct-93 1993 1994 1 1995
Q41 01 02 I0 3 04Q1 02
130Sep 9.
01-Nc
A-1M-Jul-93-Ag
131-Aug-93
rf1Au9 AOl Nc
YW01Nc
30 Sep-94
Jun-93 4 01 -Mar 94
01-Mar-94 ~ 001
v-93
v-93 1111 11 11102 M( I-. Jul 94 o.
-Jun-94
JUn 94 Q 3
-03-Jul-9!
03 Jill 9b
1\ 03-JuL
02-M4y-95
iy-94 02-M,
FA02-M( jy 9b
30-Juin 93
l'miuled 07-Ii i 93 slJbjtuc I IC. PuViuw 1,0
19 
ATTACHMENT B
RATIONALISATION OF MINISTERIAL COUNCILS
Following a review of the scope, distribution and number of Ministerial
Councils, the Council of Australian Governments has agreed to reduce
the existing 45 Councils to 21 Councils as follows:
1. Agriculture and Resources Management Council of Australia
and New Zealand ( including-the Agricultural Council of
Australia and New Zealand, the Australian Soil Conservation
Council and the Australian Water Resources Council and the
Rural Adjustment Scheme Ministers' Meeting).
Ministerial Council on the Administration of Justice
( including the Australasian Police Ministers' Council,
Corrective Services Ministers' Conference and
Intergovernmental Committee on the National Crime
Authority).
3. Australian Aboriginal Affairs Council.
4. Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation
Council. Australian and New Zealand Minerals and Energy Council.
6. Australian Transport Council ( including the Australian
Transport Advisory Council and the Ministerial Council on
Road Transport).
7. Commonwealth/ State Ministers' Conference on the Status of
Women.
8. Conference of Commonwealth and State Labour Ministers.
9. Conference of Ministers for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
Cultural Ministers' Council.
11. Employment, Education and Training Ministerial Council
( including the Australian Education Council, the Ministerial
Council on Vocational Education, Employment and Training
and the Youth Ministers' Council).
.12. -Health and Community Services Ministerial Council
( including the Australian Health Ministers' Conference, the 
Council of Social Welfare Ministers and the National Food
Standards Council).
13. Industry, Technology and Regional Development Council
( including the Australian Industry and Technology Council,
the Meeting of Commonwealth, State, Territory and New
Zealand Ministers responsible for Small Business).
14. Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy.
Ministerial Council on the Australian National Training
Authority.
1 6. Ministerial Council on Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture
( including the Australian Forestry Council and the Australian
and New Zealand Fisheries and Aquaculture Council).
17. Planning, Housing and Local Government Ministerial Council
( including the Planning Ministers' Conference, the Housing
Ministers' Conference, the Local Government Ministers'
Conference, the Construction Industry Ministerial Council
and the Heritage Ministers' Meeting).
18. Ministerial Council of Attorneys-General ( including the
Standing Committee of Censorship Ministers, the Ministerial
Council for Corporations and the Ministerial Council on
Financial Institutions).
19. Ministerial Council on Consumer Affairs ( including the
Ministerial Council on Trade Measurement).
Sport and Recreation Ministers' Council ( including the
Racing and Gaming Ministers' Conferences).
21. Tourism Ministers' Council.
The Ministerial Council for Common Services Provision will no longer
function. The above reduction in the number of Ministerial Councils is to be carried
out, and support structures appropriately. reviewed, by January 1994. 
ATTACHMENT C
COMMONWEALTH-STATE ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
A Working Group has been established to identify those functional areas
which exhibit inefficiencies in existing inter-governmental arrangements
and where there is scope for clarification of roles and responsibilities.
In identifying those areas that may be considered to merit priority
attention, relevant issues include:---
problems of duplication and overlap;
inefficiencies in delivery of services to clients;
incentives to cost-shifting between governments; and
lack of transparency and clear accountability and
unnecessary duplication in program monitoring.
The Council will consider, at its next meeting, what further work should
be undertaken. In areas where it is agreed that changes might be
considered, the focus would be on the following objectives:-
delivering better outcomes for citizens;
increasing the focus on client outcomes rather than program
inputs; removing unnecessary duplication of effort and improving
efficiency and effectiveness overall;
clarifying the policy and program objectives of the different
levels of government;
achieving administrative arrangements that are cost effective
and clearly setting out the different governmental roles and
funding responsibilities;
clarifying, lines of accountability and increasing transparency
of individual governmental roles in shared responsibility
areas; and
providing greater certainty in funding arrangements for the
level of government delivering programs. 
ATTACHMENT D
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEEf ON THE CELEBRATION OF THE
CENTENARY OF FEDERATION
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The purpose is to obtain an options paper for consideration by the
Council of Australian Governments which identifies possible goals for the
celebration of the centenary of federation, the strategies by which those
goals might be achieved, and the involvement of various levels of
government, interest groups and the-community at large.
In formulating the paper, the Committee should set out goals and
strategies for centenary-related activities in the years leading up to, and
including the centenary, and draw on the views of the community
through wide ranging consultations.
The Committee should consider activities which will commemorate the
events being celebrated, consistent with the significance of the
achievement of federation. It should however take as an over-riding
objective the building of a better sense of national identity and purpose
for the next century and should give emphasis to activities that will have
enduring and worthwhile results that go beyond simply marking the
occurrence of the centenary.
Particular matters to which the Committee should have regard include:
1 The achievement of nationhood by the Australian colonies,
including the events leading up to the enactment of the
federal constitution.
2. The national achievements of the first hundred years of
federation.
3. Ways in which an enhanced sense of national unity, purpose
and confidence about the past and for the future could be
developed.
In considering the strategies for the achievement of proposed centenary
the Committee should bear in mind. the need to recognise activities
which are already in progress or planned on a separate course, for
example by the Constitutional Centenary Foundation or in connection
with the issue of whether Australia should become a republic, or the
Aboriginal reconciliation process.
The Committee's final report should be available to the Council of
Australian Governments by May 1994. 



6.1 37 S7 ? 390
JU 1. C, 3: E7PH 61 5 78 7390 P. 2
PRIME MINISTER
STA'rF. MENT BY THE PIM NI MNisTrEl TJF 140N P J KEATINCI N11,
COUNCIL OF Aus-rRAVIAN GOVERNMENTS &amp;, EETrIN( NIABO0
Today the Commonwealth offered a -package of mneasures to deal wvilh the High
Court's Mal) xi decision and its ramifications. The package included offers to validate
cxisting l eases and pay c-ompensation.
Thci-e was not unanimous agreemili to this package by the States and I'errirories.
[ lhe Slates and'len-itories wanted the Commonwealth to make an executive decision
to validate leases back to 1975 and to meet compensation without themselves taking
any cxccutive decisions to provide an adequate policy response to Mabo.
Responsibility for the failure of this meeting to agree on a national response rests
largely with Premiers Kennett and Court because of their refusal to accept that the
High Court has act ually made a decision which requires a process and mechanism to
give cffcct to that decision.
Further, they wvere not prepared to agree to a scheme to adequately recognise and
protect native title, an obvious requiremecnt of the High Court decision.
Premiers Kennett and Court must now explain to their communities, and particularly
to industry, why they w~ ere not prepared to avail themselves of the Commonwealth's
offer to validate existing leases and carry all the compensation back to 1975.
They must also explain to the Aboriginal community why they were not prepared to
embrace mechanisms which wvould have heard and decided native title claims and
given pitotcewio it) title,., giunIed.
The Council of Australiani Governiments is an executive body. It was established to
make executiv: e decisions. The Commonwealth had circulated a most comprehensive
response to the Mabo judgement and P'remiers attending the meeting % vere in a
position to mnake executive decisions about this matter. Some Premiers clearly failed
to accept this rcsponsibility.
In so doing they have done no service to the nation, and a deep disservice to their
States. 
61 * 5 5h7i 7 J
JIJH. 9 ' 33 3: 5j9Ft 6: 3 17
2
Our sense of selfesteem, our nbul'tY to show that wce dio indeed1 bvilkve in lhilirss and
ittstice fir all and havt: the collctiv* e will delivei it defines tfic kind of people wu
are lo ourselves and the world.
The Commonweal3th will now have to reounsider its position.
I took the view into the meeting that Mabo was a national issue requiring a national
rcsponse. It is it major opportunity, as well as challenge, for the nation as a whole
and for allI its Sovernments.
The core p~ ropositiont's which I advocated were based on the 33 suggestcd principles
endorsed by the Commonwealth Cabinet, and sent to the Premiers last week. In
particular, I emnphasised.-
( ftie need for recogiiiti'it and appropriate protection ot native title as now an
irrefutable fact iii Australian lawv, and the total pointlessness of thinking
otherwise-, 1~ lowing directly fromn this, thc need for land management regimes in the
Future to be updated to recognise and take proper account of native title;
non discriminatory treatment of native title, as the benchmark required by the
Racial Discrimination Act,
the desitability of preserving native title to the maximum extent practicable;
the imprt~ rance of establishing effective mec hanisins, in the ronil ctrihunals,
so that native title claims can be registered and sensibly resolved;
the need to act together to remove doubt about the validity of certain grants
issued since: 1975, and
the importance of responding positively to the wider implication,% o f the Maho
decision in ternms of justice, economic development and reconciliation.
The approach which I put forward was therefore a comprehensive and realistic onc.
In particular, the required action to remove doubt about existing grants must go hand
in hand with a commitment to move to ways of dealing with land which do justice to
1he Mabo decision rather than close our eyes to it.
I also put on the table a very strong offer which would absolutely secure the existing
grants which may be in doubt. I said that the Commonwealth would be prtepared to
pick up the entire comrpensation bill involved in validating grants from 1975 to the
end of June 1993, and that we would legislate to clear the way for States to validate
their grants.
But obviously that offer must be part of a wider national package. 
Ju1 . q3 5: PIH 6 1 .3 5 27, 7 P. 4
3
Against this background, it is disappointing that there were still undercurrents hrorn
States of only grudging recognition of the High Court's historic decision, a tendency
to view Mabo just as a prohlcmn requiring only a minimalist solution, and Parochial
views fairly evidcnt.
Because the issue is of nationial significance, and pressing, AuIstralia needs to move
ahead on Mabo. We shall now proceed to draft Commonwealth legislation which
can set a framework for dealinig with native title. We shall also continue to work on
thc wider Mabo issues.
In this next stage, we will continue to consult -with the States and Territories, as vAell
of course as representatives of Aborigial and Torres Strait Islanders and
representatives of industry. Obviously, we shall take into aCCOUnt what has been said
ut COAG.
We wvant, in all of this, to work with the States and TFerri tories. But we do need to
move fbrward as a nation, and they need to get on board.
The Commonwealth. in its further work, willI continue to be guided by justice tbr
Aboriginal and lorres Strait Islander people, the need for w~ orkable land
managcement, and protection of' thc national economic interest.
MELBOUJRNE
9 June 1993 



rAnsfcc p PRIME MINISTER 71/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MVP
COMMONWEALTH ARRANGEMENTS FOR CO-ORDINATION OF
PLANNING FOR CELEBRATION OF THE CENTENARY OF FEDERATION
The year 2001 will be the centenary of federation. On 1 January 1901, the six
British colonies in Australia federated as the Commonwealth of Australia. As
well as commemorating that event, we will want to commemorate the
centenaries of the various milestones which, through the 1 890s, marked
Australia's progress towards nationhood in 1901.
The commemoration of the centenary of federation, and the events leading up
to It, Is fundamentally a national matter, and I hope the entire community will
particlpate whole-heartedly in it.
I have asked the Special Minister of State, the Hon Frank Walker, MP, to coordinate
the Commonwealth's arrangements for its activities linked to the
centenary. 9 JUNE 1993
MELBOURNE 



T'EL: . tw$ 1O. Jun. 93 1?: 51 * No. 024 P. 01/ 08
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
QUESTIONS AN, 9 ANSWERS, PRESS CONFERENCE, COAG MEETING,
MEL8BOURNEl 10JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
0: What do you want to do from here Mr Keating?
PM: We will reserve our position and go back and think what response there
should be. mhe States have said, Premier Kennett last night when this
debate was proceeding quite well unilaterally told us that he wasn't
having a bar of these points and that he would unilaterally legislate In his
Parliament to validate the titles. I said, well if States believe they can
validate the titles and pay the compensation after all you Issued the
leases, you Issued the grants of Interest in land, If you can validate the
titles and pay the compensation fine, do it.
0: Do you believe they can?
PM: It may be possible, but if you look In our text at page 25 we say the
question needs to be addressed whether the failure to accord such
procedural requirements to native title holders Is In breach of the Racial
Discrimination Act. To validate the titles there are two things which have
to happen. There has to be compensation paid, that is for the title to
have been issued In a non-discriminatory way there had to be
compensation paid and procedural fairness. There can not have been
procedural fairness when no Aboriginal person would have been
engaged largely In the Issue of these grants of Interests say 15, 10, 12
years ago. The question Is whether and I think we have got another
reference at page 48, if this is so then the actions to be taken now to
validate past grants and which affect native title may need to conform
with relevant procedural requirements, and It goes on Commonwealth
legislation would be possible to adjust or remove the procedural
requirement under the Racial Discrimination Act. Premier Kennett told 
TEL: 10.3ur,. 93 17: 51 No. 024 P. 02/ 08
2
me last night that he had had legal advice that VIctoria, the Victorian
Parliament could validate Victorian leases and that he would-carry the
comsation, but of course the cost of compensation in Victoria would
be Just miniscule compared to the cost of compensation In Western
Australia or Queensland. So it was a Victoria first policy and everyone
else later.
0: Pri me Minister, how do you view Premier Courts claim that Western
Australia Is a special case given the amount of land that is likely to be
claimed.
PM: A special case in what sense?
0: He argues it Is a special case because of the amount of crown land and
leases thagjpy be subject to Mabo style claims.
PM: I don't follow his point there, special in what respect?
0: For example the difference with Victoria was t the view was that they
have managed to extinguish a lot of the native title should only have
the same level of compensation..
PM: That Is true and that is why I am sure a number of Premiers were
somewhat taken aback by Premier Kennett's insistence that he could
validate titles and pay compensation when they knew the costs of
compensation could be very large.
0: What do you think the effect will be of Mr Kennett's planned ations?
PM: What he says he seeks to do is to validate the titles. Understand this
these grants of Interests In land have been Issued by state land
managers. If the States can validate the titles and pay the
compensation so that the grants In interests have been validly Issued
fine, but you have got to remember that the Commonwealth offered to
pick up all the compensation and to validate the titles.
Q0; Would you now impose on the States through Commonwealth legislation
native title?
PM: I sad in our proposal that the Commonwealth would legislate to
establish a framework for the recognition, protection and management of
native title and that the Commonwealth would establish tribunals which
would operate in the absence of similar appropriate mechanisms In the
States. In other words it a State was prepared to establish its own
tribunal and after all land management is a State Issue so If the States
establish tribunals that operated In accordance with the Commonwealth
framework, that would be fine. But part of the proposal always was that
the Commonwealth would establish a framework. 
TEL: 10 Jun. 93 17: 51 No. 024 P. 03/ 08
3
0: could legislate to recognise native title, establish tribunals to award
native tWte In the future?
PM: I think the Commonwealth has that power.
0: Will you use it?
PM: Again, we have got to consider our position again. I know that Premier
Kennett said to you that we were Insisting on a couple of issues what he
calls beyond Mabo such as a national fund for land acquisition. You
have got to understand this It Is only Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people who can demonstrate a connection with the land, a
continuing association with the land who will succeed In a Mabo claim.
For manyAorginal and Torres Strait Islander people they will receive
no benefit frm the Mabo decision therefore for those disposessed of
their land, unable to make a claim there needs to be another social
justice package of land acquisition which has to be part of the spirit of
the Mabo decision. Premiers Kennett and Court and others reject that,
but the argument from them Is I'm sure to you that the Commonwealth
would not agree with their proposals because of our Insistence on these
extra Mabo positions. The reasons there was no agreement today is
they would not accept the core proposition that the mechanisms had to
be established to hear and award native tUte claims. They would not
accept that proposition and so therefore there was no and could be no
agreement.
0: Mr Keating, what does the breakdown of this conference mean to the
nation?
PM: I think as I say in the statement Premiers Court and Kennett have got to
explain to their communities and their business communities how when
the Commonwealth has offered to validate these titles and pick up all the
compensation they rejected the offer and how they believe they can
bring certainty to these titles when in fact it was there and explain to the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people of this country why they
won't accept the need to give effect to the High Court decision. The
problem Is a number of Premiers take the view that the High Court
doesn't make law and that there Is an executive over-ride on the part of
governments available to us. A part of yesterday's discussion was
about a wholesale extinguishment of native tite across the country, that
States would simply legislate away native title across the whole of their
States.
0: Does the Inability to make any decision today send any message to the
International business community? 
JEL: 4
PM: No, these questions of native title ailse In many countries and we have
got a semninal decision here with the High Court made In June 1992 and
we have got to come to termns wthIt I Indcated to the States and this Is
a very key point; there Is nothing stopping a State Issuing a valid lease
meeting the requirements of the Racial Discrimination Act for procedural
fairness and compensation. There is nothing today stopping a State
lands manager issuing a valid lease. What we are talking about is9 the
past leases.
0: Prime Minister when you talk about proposed legislation for a national
framework, Is that to address native land title claims of the future still
leaves a question mark over the 1975 to 1993 validation.
PM: No, the proposition we put was an all encompassing one; to validate
past leases, pick up the compensation, establish a mechanism for
hearing 9T* tawarding native title now and provide a basis within which
States can issue valid leases from here on.
0: But you are talking now about the option of the Commonwealth
legislating on its own.
PM: No, I was asked that and I said we will consider our position but the
Commonwealth was always going to legislate guidelines for the
operation of State tribunals In the heawing and awarding of native title.
Whether the Commonwealth now moves to unilaterally to a regime is a
matter for us to decide.
0: In your statement legislation to set the framework for the awarding
of native title, what exactly does that mean, just a draft..
PM: No, we will start the drafting process of drafting the framework
legislation.
0: Not necessarily legislate?
PM: But not necessaily legislate.
0: When will you continue to discuss this draft legislation?
PM: This Is a matter for Premiers but there Is no point in Premiers telling me
that their State communities don't accept the High Court decision as
though I am supposed to take that as some sort of profound piece of
political advice. Communities in thi's country have to accept the igh
Court decision as I have to accept the High Court decision.
0: Prime Minister, given that there Is no mechanism In place to recognise
native title and the States In your account are refusing to do that how
lEL . Jun. 93-iir: 5 No. u-, z r. v"' vo 
TEL: 10. Jun. 93 17: 51 No .024 P. 05/ 08
can there be any exploration or mining lease or be issued from this
point on if it doesn't contravene the..
PM: Because If a native title holder Is not established but a State wants to
Issue a grant of Interest In land over a particular locality where native
tWte may be claimed, States can advertise the fact in newspapers that
they are Interested In awarding a grant of interest in land over a
particular locality, they can write directly to a land council or to the
people In the area, the Aboriginal people in the area who may have an
Interest in the matter and advise them that they are considering issuing a
grant and to speak with them about it and then make clear that the
matter of compensation will be paid If and when a native title Is granted.
That way a lease can be validly Issued and that is where the commercial
Interest comes in, a lease can be validly Issued.
0: no one ever establishes native title
PM: No, no what I'm saying Is In the interim where a claim for native tite
hasn't been heard or awarded provided that the State has followed a
non-dIscrimInatory procedurally fair process of notification and is
prepared later to arrange the compensation the two key points of
procedural fairness and compensation are covered and therefore the
grant of Interest In land can be validly issued.
0: What do you think it will do to certainty in Victoria, Western Australia and
perhaps New South Wales to go ahead with their own legislation to do
validate past leases?
PM: What would it do to certit?
0: Yes.
PM: Leasees would need to be certain that the legislation competently
validated the leases.
0: Are you going ahead, can they actually be certain of that?
PM: Not entirely certain of that in termns of the advice the Commonwealth has
had.
0: In that case do you have the option then but to go ahead with your own
legislation to prevent that sort of filleting off of the States?
PM: No, we made It clear that In respect of say pastoral leases that If you
have got a lease of 20 years which Is renewed every twenty years, so It
might have been renewed five or six times over a one hundred year
period that that sort of lease we would take it, that that type of lease
extinguished the native title. But obviously a tease of say 10 or 15 years 
TEL: 6
over an alluvial gold deposit shouldn't necessarily extinguish the native
tWte and It should be able to revive. We are looking at the principle of
protection of native title for past leases distinguishing between the
continuing type pastoral lease or the tourism lease from say a mining
[ ewse.
0: ( inaudible)
PM: I don't know it may be If the States have been legally advised that they
can validate the legislation, that they In fact can and pay the
compensation because they Issued the leases and the grants of Interest
In land In the first place; they are the land managers. So if the land
manager can through its Pariament validate the leases and pay the
compensation then I've got no problem with that.
0: Don't youirf4ed accompanying Commonwealth legislation to make that
compatible notwithstanding the Racial Discrimination Act..
PM: Well that Is the Issue under question.
0: Prime Minister, Isn't Mr Kennett virtually challenging the Commonwealth
and all Aborigines to have a go at what he Is proposing now again in the
High Court? He said to us here today that what he is putting up In his
ten points on his legal advice Is within the finding of the High Court.
PM:. State Premiers will say what their advisers tell them in terms of the law,
what they believe to be their legal position anid that is up to Mr Kennett,
but you have got to understand this about Victoria, most of Victoria
native title Is extinguished by freehold title. This Is not true of New
South Wales, Queensland, the Northern Territory and Western Australia
and therefore the number arnd variety of leases which might have had a
native title claim and which might have been issued invalidly to be
validated by compensaion would leave a much smaller compensation
bill in Victoria than any other State. So Mr Kennett's unilateral approach
Is basically a beggar thy neighbour approach as far as the other States
are concerned.
0: Mr Keating, on the more social agenda and the reconciliation process do
you think that some of the rhetoric that Premiers have used are divisive
and does threaten to jeopardise the reconciliation process?
PM: Leave my views about their approach to reconciliation process to one
side. Having discussions about whether the High Court can make law
and whether their States have the option of Ignoring a High Court
decision Is taking us nowhere, absolutely nowhere. How do you deal
with that sort of discussion? T1E0L:. Jun. 93 17: 51 No. 024 P. 06/ 08 
TEL: 7
0: Do you regret you didn't talk with more the Premiers, so that sorm of
them who appear not to have a greed understanding of the Issues might
have had their minds around It..
PM: Everyone understands the Issues, everyone understood the Issues I
think, perfectly because for a start they have had their own advice, they
have had extensive briefing papers, they have had our own paper which
I think Is a very comprehensive and good document which the
Commonwealth Ministenal Group has put much time Into as has our
Officials Working Party and COAG Is an executive body; you come
along to agree things. The reason you have a heads of Government
meeting Is because officials can't agree things, so the Premiers and
Chief Ministers turn up to agree things. The proposals we had said we
will validate the titles, we will unexpectedly in their terms pick up the
compensation which was never on the table, it was an offer from me to
pick up tkheitompensation, but you must agree to a process of hearing
and awarding native title and they say no.
0: How much in compensation would It cost the Commonwealth?
PM; That Is a matter for judgement
0: ( Inaudible)
PM: We will consider our position and I think the States will consider theirs.
Yesterday this meeting went along with a reasonable degree of
bonhomie with people trying to feel their way through the Issues and I
was taking some of the Premiers who I felt were not certain of our
approach through the issues, but as we wore making our way last night
Premier Kennett uniliaterally said we are going our own way we will
legisiate, we can fix the leases, we will extinguish native title and issue a
statutory title where It suits uis arnd what do you think about that? And
we sald we would think about It over night.
0: How much ground had you given..
PM: Nowhere In our proposals was the proposition that we would take up
compensation for the past leases. That Is eighteen years of leases and
as well as that I adjusted the terms under which State tribunals could
operate Interfacing with the Commonwealth guidelines but provided that
we set up tribunals to hear and award native tite then on a number of
other issues I gave substantial ground but they wouldn't give any
ground. That was the point. They w anted the Commonwealth to
validate the leases and pay the money and they would agree to hear and
resolve Issues ralsed by native title and would accept the High Court
judgement In Mabo that there Is native title,
0: Did you give away any particular rights.. T1EL.: Jun. 93 17: 51 No. 024 P. UrfUU 
TEL: I0. Jun. 93 17: 51 No. 024 P. 08/ 08
PM: Because we didn't agree to anything we didn't give anything away.
0: But did you offer to the meeting that you already told the Aborigines
there would be no absolute veto and under your proposal and also on
the question of extinguishing you had given ground there to extend most
native title revive after the future..
PM: Most native title wouldn't revive, no, I was taking a contrary view that we
had to protect native title and give it a revival, give It the possibilities of
revival, that is co-existence of title. This was one of the points that they
wouldn't accept.
0: ( inaudible)
PM: Even if a mine lasts sixty years, It Is better that native title reverts to the
native title holder than have It extinguished.
0: ( inaudible)
PM: In the matters of principle I think that is true. I think the other Premiers
and Chief Ministers would have come to the party if a package was
coming together. Now on sort of nuances Maybe they would want some
things corrected, but by and large pertaps other Premiers understood
the Import of the package.
Q: ( inaudible)
PM; I said I was prepared to try and define It and of course that Is a very
large subject, I mean mountain chains, chains of mounts can have
cuitural significance to Aboriginal people so it is a matter which Is very
broad, but there had to be a willingness to embrace the whole package.
It was largely a good natured discussion, but that is beside the point.
The point was that the States would not take any executive decisions.
ends. 



TEL: 11. Jun. 93 17: 02 No. 019 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT FROM PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE
AUSTRAUAN TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCHCON, SYDNEY, 11/ 6/ 93
"... Australia does have great things about it and I think it's very important that we
understand ourselves what we have and seek to protect it. John ( Brown) mentioned at the
table the importance now of the environment In tourism, and people coming to Australia
to ee something that they can't-we In any other part of the wodd... this is just about the
oldest part of the world's crust, the flora and the fauna here are different to everywhere
else in the world and people do come here to see SomethinS they can't see somewhere else
and it's Important therefore that we protect a lot of these thinp.
And I think that some of the things we did in the eighties, like preserving the wet tropics
area of north Queensland has been an important draw to the north Queensland community,
the work of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park in preserving the Marine Park and
undcestanding It better the reef ecosystem better Is important to us, the declarations
of some of the wilderness areas of NSW and Tasmania have been important, the role of
the States themselves let me pay tribute to Neville in the period he was Premier in
declaring National Parks in NSW these things ar quite important and we have as a
country taken opportunities to preserve the natural environment in many key places.
We've not done as well with the built environment, and I think this lets a lot of people
down and It Is one of the things we have to concentrate on over the period, but it is
Important that places important to tourism are developed sensitively. Let me give you an
example say with Cairns In Queensland. Cairns is a place which has not been developed
sensitively. It's an important tourism place. There's no point in building 16 storey hotels in
the middle of Cairns when the building next door is a two storey warehouse or one storey
residential accommodation. You can double the footprint of these buildings and halve the
height and keep them more of human scale than just letting the developers dominate these
municipal or shire councils, or city councils trying to get their way.
And I think It's Important to take stock of places like Cairns to say, look,, if this Is one of
the attractions, let's keep It an attraction. If people come here to see it as a town in the
Queensland tropics, let's keep like a town In the Queensland tropica and let's not devclop
a-
TEL: il. Jun. 93 17: 02 No .019 P. 02/ 04
-2-
It as a Miamil Beacb or Suifers Paradise or somewhere, else. In that wonderful hinterland of
Cairns across the river of that wonderful mountain and the mangroves, there is a
development proposal there, and It may well bt that that development could procced but
again, In those things, you're then playing wilh the actual attractions of the city Itself and
you notice It. I'll eive you San example, you cross into Douglas shire in Queensland no
building above tree height, the cnvironument and public access to the beaches and things
have a premium on them and of course the development of the wet tropics area which Is
within that shire all of those things go towards making a long term~ attracion for the
tourism industry.
I think the envirornent and the built environment beyond the capital cities amc very
Important to us as are the services We provide In the capital cities themsclves. And in
Sydney, which is of course the main port of entry for tourism, we tried to do things not
only has the city Improved dramatically over the pust ten years and again let me pay
tribute to Neville ( Wrmn) for developing a core in the City of Sydney, If you like, In these
key places like Darling Harbour and the Macquaric Street area and down by the Quayside
these are important things and T was very pleased to see John Fahey express
interest a week or two ago In knocking over the Cahill Expressway and beautifying the
wholo Quay-side area.
We've just done, a deal with the Sydney City Councfl with Frank Sartor, where we've now,
on a sixty year lease, eiven the City of Sydney the Customs House which we think will be
the key civic building of the Quay-side and can provide, itself, an important contribution
to Quay-side tourism and tourism of the city with so much of the maritime history which
the Quay represents being Involved there. And of course the buildings near the Opera
House which we've just signed an agreement with the City Council to see them sensitively
developed with proper height limitations to pay due and appropriate deference to one of
the world's greatest buildings, the Opera House, is again snother important thing in terms
of Sydncy.
As are things like the second runway which has taken so many years to bring to fruition
and yet we're seeing substantial and rapid progress on seeing that second runway form
Itself out there In the bay ind seeing it go Into place, ARl these things, I think, are things
the Federal Government's been involved in so Its more than just a bit of money to the
lb" 0ist Commission and something In the depreciation schedules, I think we've been
enuinely Interested tn the industry as a destination for people to come In these areas of
the capital cities and the services in the cities and beyond the cities in the remote areas, to
keep them as beautiful as we've known them to be and where. they have to be maintained.
That Is, there should be an emphasis on the environment and an emphasis on beauty. This
Is Dot a word which, in planning terms, ever Sor of cuts the mustard. Providing we're
always run by either developers or en~ gineers but not often enough by architects and the
reault is we are not beautIfying our capital citis. And if we ame not wise to that we won't
' C 0. t 
TEL:. i. 1u n. 931 7: 02 No. 019 P. U-5fu4
-3-
attract people to this country to Come and see it. Why would you come and see something
you can go to seo down the west or cast cows of the United States when we're sort of
seeking to emulate or duplicate what they have when in fact we ca do something so
much better. So the enviroment I think does matter a great deal.
Airlines have been another important change in the One Nation package. One of the
important changes was for Qantas to acquire AustrAlian Airtincs so that we could develop
Arisett as a second International car-Ic You will have noticed In the last week or two that
Anscut are now flying to pants of south-cast Asia and will now qualify for some Important
schedule of flight Into Kansal Airport, Osaka Airport, service in Japan and this is an
Important development In our aviation history, to develop a -second Australian carrier and
to have It working out there is going to be very important to tourism.
Can I . also say that we ane having a dispute with the United States at the moment about
-Northwest Airlines and I think that Qantas as a corporate entity and its role in the world
has been Important to the Government and to all Australians but I don't want to sec the
Australia-Japan traffc dominated by just a couple of carriers where they are basically
litng an economic rent out of the travellers and diminishing the number of people
coming to Australia. These things should always be kept in balance.
Nor do we want to see Ameican carriers breaking their signed agreemnen-ts in terms of
their access. We can ha-ve access and people on these routes providing that they ant
negotiated ones but where the obj ective has to be that mom people visit Australia than not.
So In terms of what will guide our policy towards these things it will be the number of
people coming to Australia rather than which particular Airline is flying them, but I don't
in that sense want to give Northwest any encouragemicnt that is those who break
agreements can't cxpect to be treated well. But, again, Australia will have a balanced
approach towards airline policy both in and out of Australia arnd policy will not be made
exclusively for Qantas.
Now, we did well with Qantas and we'll do well when wc see It developed as a public
company where It's got a better availability of capital to it and can develop itself properly,
which It Wa not really beei able to do with a Govetnment guamatee and a lot of debt, and
I do look forward to that time and I think the British Airways purchase of. Qantas will
make a great " ea of difference to the operations of Qantas within a world system, and the
fit betuieen British Airways routes and Qantas routes was really quite an uncanny fit and
one which should be a partnership that works well. But, * gain, they'll only be a minority
holder in Qazitas and the majority, which will be the Australian public ought to be able to
turn Qantas Into a firt class carr ier with a good debt to equity ratio in the company, and
with people like Mr Pemberton as its Chair then the= 1' really no reason why we can't
develop an oiline company with already a substantial reputation can grow along in-Asia.
But seeing Azrsett grow along with it will be, I think, Important to us as well. 
TEL: 1. Jun. 93 17: 02 No. 019 P. 4/ U4
-4-
When I was ccently In New Zealand with Prime Minister Jim Bolger we apeed on
facilitating trans-Tasman flying and we'll be flyiD domestic terminal to domestic
terminal probably by Christmas and this should make quite a difference to tourism across
the Tasman where you can go on to an Australian Airlines or Ansett flight and hop off in
Wellington or Auckland as the case may be rather than through the International terminals
and this is another change which came from the One Nation package. So the shift to the
acquisition of Australian by Qatas, the development of Ansett as a second carier, the
trans-Tasman flying this must augur well for the tourism industry In general in getting
more sewiblc uirlinc arrangements.
The other thing I think we need to do is to again focus on our cultural identity aud this is
why I think it is important not that we want to sign everybody up though we'd like
to not that wc can sign everybody up in the movement to an Australian Republic but
the fact is that it will help our identity as will cominS to terms with the aspirations of
Aboriginal Australia. Aboriginal culture is now featuring much more in the culture of
Australia and in the culture of Australian tourism as it should. And as one of the signature
tunes of this country In terms of its art and what have you and of course the more we
progcss that isue as a country the better off we'll be, not only at home in our own
relations one to another, but In the view of the rest of the world which approves of
countries which can get their acts together and run themselves sensibly and at the same
time distinguishing our culture by what the Aboriginal community can bring to the culture
of Australia. So these things like our cultural identity, the environment, having a sensible
transportation policy, as well as all the other things, general promotion, tax incentives and
the like, I think arc important and that's why I have wanted to sec tourism as a Cabinet
ranked post and why we've set up a department of Tourism because it is an important
Industry and it can play an important role and I know in Michael Lec we have a Minister
who will take the Industry's interests to heart and barack for them sensibly and
appropriately In the places that matter." J. 



TEL: 11. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 01/ 06
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J7 KEATINGQ MP
TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCHEON
SYDNEY 11 JUNE 1993
I am very glad to be here today. John Brown's powers or
persuasion are unrivalled 8nd legendary of course, but he
didn't needL. to use them for this.
The modern Australian tourist indust U and I grew up
together, and even in front of John, I will be so
immodest as to say that over the years I have given it
more than one or two helpful shoves along.
The last of these shoves was last year in One Nation when
we created 8 separate Cabinet portfolio for tourism, a
new Department of Tourism and when we significantly
increased funding for promoting Australia as a tourist
destination. This was less a visionary act than recognition of 8
vision realised, because the tourism industry really had
earned its stripes.
I'm fond of reminding people how much Australians have
changed in the past decade and a half. It seems to me
that the changes we have made are proof of our capacity
to make more changes necessary changes.
The change from an inward looking, even somewhat
xenophobic Anglo-saxon society to a much more worldly,
open and multicultural society is one example. The
remarkably rapid adoption of a co-operative industrial
culture is another. So is, in very recent times, our
reorientation towards Asia.
Australians do have the capacity to adapt as the world
and our place in it demands. This, of course, is the
reason why I am confident that in time we will embrace
the Idea of a re publican Australia and why we will
achieve reconciliation with indigenous Australians.
It's why I think that we can find a successful and
creative role in the world and the region, and a greater
level of mature self-confidence and self-esteem. In the
end these things depend on ourselves and on our faith in
ourselives. 
TEL: 2
Now, the other striking example of our ability to adapt
and grow and make the most of our natural advantages is
the tourism industry. A decade ago it was at best
embryonic. Very few Australians imagined that we were
capable of developing the sophisticated standards of
service and infrastructure which we now possess.
It has happened with quite extraordinary speed and we
should find in it every reason for confidence, both in
the future of the tourism industry and the future of the
country. As I'm sure you know, tourism has become a very
significant source of export earnings and job creation in
Australia. It Is our fastest growing industry. It
employs 457,000 people and earns us $ 8 billion in foreign
exchange a year. It will create 200,000 new jobs in this
decade, an4j4n so doing provide a future for 8 very large
number of yj~ ntis Australians.
The news is remarkably good. Studies by the Australian
Tourist Comm ission indicate that we are already first or
bcond most preferred destination in eight out of
thirteen key market countries.
A recent New York Times/ CBS Televisñ bn survey listed
Australia as the most favoured tourist destination for
Americans. Australia rated three times more popular than
France, Italy or Britain.
And new survey results which I'm pleased to release today
show that Americans' satisfaction with Australia as a
tourist destination is not only in the anticipation but
also in the fulfilment of their holiday dreams. An
Australian Tourist Commission satisfaction study of the
US market found that three out of four American holiday
makers rate Australia better than any iff ternational
destination they have visited.
An overwhelming 98 per cent of those Surveyed said they
would recommend Australia to friends and relatives.
The survey also found that Australia scored brilliantly
on a wide range of criteria including hotels, tourist
attractions, food and service standards, and
friendliness. it's one of the pleasures of this job that you get to
tell the good news. Here it is.
98 per cent of Americans were very satisfied with
the quality of our tourist attractions.
97 per cent were very satisfied with the
friendliness and helpfulness of Australians.
97 were very satisfied with the quality of our
hotels, staff, service standards and tour guides.
T1EL1:. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 02/ 06 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 13: 3? No. 010 P. 03/ 06
3
95 per Cent rated Australia as a good or excellent
country to visit for a holiday.
96 per cent said their trip met or exceeded their
expectations. And 89 per cent said they intended to return to
Australia.
You don't get much better product endorsement than that.
Nevertheless, it's very important that we do not
exaggerate the prospects for the Australian tourism
industry or underestimate the issues facing it.
it's not money for jam but a very complex industry often
confronted . b. y problems beyond our control. The success
of tourism relies on the right policy mix in regard to
marketing, transport, immnigration, investment and
infrastructure, training, taxation arrangements,
international relations, Cultural identity and industrial
relations. The Government is determined to help the
industry overcome impediments to growth in all these
areas. During the election campaign, I gave an undertaking to
continue the conspicuous level of support given to the
industry which in the recent pest has included an extra
million in One Nation for tourist promotion,
additional resources for the new Department of Tourism,
improved depreciation arrangements, and a further
liberalisation of aviation policy.
The new commitments include $ 42 million over the next
four years for the development and planning of tourism in
regional Australia; the completion of the -nat ional
ecotourism strategy and associated programs, and to
promote growth in special interest areas such as rural
tourism, coastal cruising and backpacking.
We also want to help the industry plan more accurately
for future infrastructure needs.
, The tourism industry has been plagued by boom-bust
cycles. The investment boom in accommodation in the
mid-eighties has resulted in an over-supply of rooms, a
decline in profitability, and a significant number of
hotels ending up; in the hands of bankers.
However there are signs that unless new investment is
forthcoming, the current surplus of accommodation may
become a severe deficit, at least in some regions.
we are stimulating tourism demand through international
marketing combined with major reforms in the aviation
industry. 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 04/ 06
4
But the lead times involved in the development of
infrastructure mean that we have to anticipate this
demand three to four years in advance.
Investment in tourism therefore crucially depends on our
ability to forecast trends. At present, there is a lack
of agreement within the industry on the credibility of
particular tourism forecasts, and the reluctance to use
these forecasts has confused planning decisions and
contributed to the current low rates of occupancy and
lack of new investment.
To provide much better quality information on which
investment decisions are made, we will establish a
Tourism Forecasting Council.
The Council will report to the minister and comprise key
tourism indpstry, finance and building representatives
with technical assistance from the Bureau of Tourism
Research, industry research organisations and government
agencies. The Council will perform a role somewh~ at like the
indicative Planning Council of the housing industry,
where the industry, the government and other interested
parties sit down a couple of times a year to make an
annual forecast of housing growth. These forecasts are
generally taken by the industry as the best guide to its
immediate future. In the same way, a tourism forecasting
council should provide that extra information which can
induce more confidence about the future and hence more
confidence to underpin investment decisions.
By means of a Council, it is hoped that we will be able
to smooth out boom-bust cycles by better matching supply
and demand and improving industry planning and
profitability. The survey of the American market which turned up such
wonderfully positive responses nevertheless highlighted
some problem areas.
The one that concerns us most was the finding that
American travel agents appear to underestimate what
Australia has to offer as a tourist destination.
It appears that we need to put more emphasis on
post-advertising marketing strategies which will convince
these 35,000 travel agents to convert American enthusiasm
for Australia into firm holiday bookings.
This is an Issue which I know Michael Lee plans to
concertedly address in the coming months.
You will be aware, I imagine, of the emphasis I have
placed on " partnership" in developing a more cohesive,
stronger and competitive Australia. It was the theme of
One Nation. And despite the hiccup on another matter in
TEL: 
TEL: 11. junf. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 05/ 06
recent days, I am not at all deterred from continuing to
pursue it, particularly in relation to the Commonwealth
and the States and Territories.
The tourism Industry especially needs a spirit and a
framework of partnership and co-operation.
We need to break down the old artificial demarcation
between State trade development and Commonwealth consumer
market promotion.
By providing an opportunity to work co-operatively
towards a common goal, the concept of Partnership
Australia will enable us to be both more efficient and
more cost-effective.
What we need Is a united effort to promote the Idea of
" Destination Australia", not just " Destination New South
wales" or Otlestination Queensland".
I was very pleased to see that the Northern Territory has
recently decided to join Partnership Australia and will
be allocating a percentage of its total marketing budget
to co-operative ventures and tactical'marketing
opportunities. The maximum effectiveness of our integrated marketing
ef forts overseas can be achieved only with the
participation of all States and Territories in
Partnership Australia.
And I sincerely hope the other State Tourist Commissions
will respond positively to the ATC's efforts to co-opt
their support.
The Commonwealth Government has worked to reduce the
barriers to tourist growth through liberalising aviation
policy, providing additional resources for policy
development, through the taxation system, through the
promotion of flexible industrial relations and through
the provision of more and better training.
If we can resolve to work more closely together, we can
build on what we have already achieved and maximise the
potential we know exists.
The beneficiaries, in no particular order, will be
Australia and you the industry. Partnership Australia
offers a better means of handling enquiries and
distributing product information. It will Improve the
effectiveness of our marketing effort. It will mean that
we can offer to the world a total and unambiguous
Australian product not the bits but the whole show.
So I urge you all to assist our efforts to persuade the
states and Territories to commit to PartnershiP Australia
and " Destination Australia". 
TEL: -~ 11. Jun. 93 13: 37 No. 010 P. 06/ 06
6
I said at the beginning that nothing confirms my faith in
Australia's future so much as the changes we have made in
the recent past. I said that there is no better example
of this then the tourism industry. However, I know that
the people here would be the last to say that we can rest
on our laurels.
I can give you now an absolute assurance that the
Commonwealth Government will continue to support the
tourism industry in every way that we can and in
Michael Lee you will find you have a very responsive
Minister with great energy, ideas Bad skill.
The Commonwealth Government will give you this. What we
seek from you is nothing more than a continuing
commitment to work with us and with each other in the
interests of the industry and Australia.
And knowinfthat you have come so far along this road in
the last decade, I have no doubt that that is what we are
going to see as never before in the next decade. A
partnership which will make the industry and Australia
that much stronger.
I wish you all the best in your efforts and thank you
again for inviting me here. 



TEL i1Jun. 93 11: 29 No. UU4 V. Ulluz)
rv A s;
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P 3 KEAITING MP
MATTHEW TALBOT HOSTEL APPEAL
SYDNEY 11 JUNE 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a prl~. ylege to be invited here to launch an appeal
by one of the great charitable organisations of
Australia, for one of the great humane institutions of
Sydney. The St Vincent de Paul has been around f or a very long
time of course. It doesn't have as high 8 profile 8s some
of the other charitable institutions, but it is
unquestionably the biggest, it provides more help to more
people than any other, and none is more efficient.
Rather like John Menadue, it is modest and effective
and like the airline he used to run, there's a bit of the
spirit of Australia about it. That's certainly true of
the Matthew Talbot.
Because the Matthew Talbot has been around for a long
time too. It's part of the Sydney legend. it was built
during the Great Depression sixty years ago, when 8 third
of Australia's workers were unemployed, and the idea that
governments should provide a safety net for the victims
of poverty was still pretty much just that an idea.
These days It is much more of a reality. But in modern
Australia where we have one of the better social welfare
systems in the world, we continue to need organisations
like the St Vincent de Paul Society and places like the
Matthew Talbot Hostel for Homeless -Men.
And while we would like to think that the day will come
when we don't need these charities, life being what Is,
and perfection being pretty well beyond us, the fact is
we will always need them.
And, in truth, when it comes to delivering the help that
people need when they are on hard times, in many ways the
charities do it better than the government and nobody
does it better, of course, than the St Vincent do Paul
Society. 
T : PT . n. 9
2
The Matthew Talbot speaks for itself: every day and every
night three hundred men sleep here, 2000 free meals are
served, nursing and medical services are provided, and
counselling along with acceptance, friendship, love and
hope. The men here have come by different routes through
family breakdowns, sickness, alcohol and drug dependence,
unemployment but at Matthew Talbot they all get the
same thing, which in a word is Cag Care and very often
another chance.
I know in her book about a family's experience of coping
with schizophrenia, Anne Deveson pays special tribute to
Matthew Talbot for the care and friendship given to her
son, Jonathan.
I am very nitdti aware that the demands on the society and
on this hostel have been dramatically increased in the
last couple of years as a result of the recession and now
the intractably high levels of unemployment.
I wish I could say that unemployment vias going to rapidly
fall. But it is not going to and wishing will not make
it go away.
Just the same, there are things we can do and are doing
to create jobs and train people, give the young work
experience, and keep those who are older in touch with
the labour market.
We can do these things to give people a chance to reenter
the workforce when the recovery gathers more pace
and business looks for new people. And of course we will
continue to fund the charities and our own welfare
programs to help people through.
There may be other things which can be done I am sure
there are, and that's why we've established a high level
committee to assess thoroughly our policies on
unemployment and to come up with whatever solutions they
can. Because of the long term personal and social damage it
does, unemployment simply has to be our highest priority.
I am well aware that while funding such places as this is
essential, by far the best thing we can do is get our
economy flourishing again and create jobs.
And that, by the way is a message for the whole
community. It's a message business might listen to. 
TEL: 11 . Jun .93 11 : 29 No-. 064 P. 3/
3
If we are committed to the country and the people as well
as to the company or corporation, maybe we could make
some useful improvement by changing the set of our
business minds and looking for ways to employ people
rather than disemploy them. It is not really an
altruistic suggestion to take on new blood now so that
they will have skill and experience on their side when
the economy begins to buzz again.
I think these days, at every step in our economic life,
the consequences for employment have to be considered.
when companies make an investment decision, when they
look at their operations, when banks decide whether or
not to lend to companies wanting to begin or expand.
We need business which is tough and competitive in a
tough and competitive business culture. But that does
not mean efther that business has no responsibility
beyond the balance sheet, or that the operations of the
human heart are inimical to success.
And unions might be thinking along the same lines is
their duty only to their members, or ts it also to the
country and the people? And, therefore, is it really in
their interests to deny work experience to young people,
to close out the unemployed, to make them someone else's
problem? That is something I believe we are learning in the
nineties unemployment is never just someone else's
problem. It's a problem for all of us.
it's a national problem and the solution will have to be
a national one. It will require a concerted effort.
Rather like the effort which is made here.
I don't make the comparison lightly this is a great
cooperative enterprise between the Society and other
groups, governments and individuals. The roots of it are
in the vision, good will and compassion of the people of
St Vincent de Paul and all the volunteers who work here.
They are the roots and the government adds water and
fertiliser. In this enterprise government plays a
supporting role, rather than a leading one and it is all
the more effective for that.
We have provided $ 5.5 million towards these marvellous
renovations but we did not provide the inspiration. The
inspiration came from the people here. It was not the
government which decided that the homeless men of Sydney
deserved a re-built hostel, a safer, more efficient and
friendly building, one so good that I'm told you could
feel the lift in morale. It is rarely in the nature of
governments to understand needs so well. 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 11: 29 No. 004 P. 04/ 05
4
Similarly, it was not the government which decided that
this hostel for homeless men should not be a place for
41warehousing" people, but one providing decent and
dignified accommodation; that no one should be turned
away; that the front entrance of the Matthew Talbot
should cease to be a security gate and become a receptIon
office those sorts of decisions can only be made by
people who are passionate enough about their vocation to
have a vision, and practised and knowledgeable enough to
understand reality. I mean the sorts of people paid
and unpaid who work here.
Governments do not have the capacity to do these things
so well. But they do have the capacity to recognise
social need. They even have the ability to share the
good will. And when they do that they spend their money
wisely. So the Matthew Talbot does provide a model for the
problems we now face it is proof, I think, that where
the resolve exists, inspiration and cooperation will
follow, and when we cooperate, when we work cohesively,
when we think imaginatively, we can w6rk miracles like
this. Old Matthew Talbot could not have imagined this piece.
When it was founded sixty years ago no one could have
imagined it. 5ut you will often find in the history of
Australia when the collective will has existed the
unimaginable has happened.
And there is one more thing for us to learn from this
place. It seems to me that the best measure the truest
measure of our worth as a society and as a nation
really is the degree to which we care for each other. I
mean the fellow feeling among Australians and how much
importance we attach to it.
Not only Is that intangible thing a measure of a
compassionate and just society, but of a strong societya
society capable of solving its problems.
We will. be stronger for Including everyone in the
national equation, just as Matthew Talbot is stronger for
turning no one away.
And we will be better able to solve our problems if we
face them unflinchingly, as Matthew Talbot does, and if
we recognise that all of them economic, political and
social are essentially h~ uman problems.
And nothing speaks more eloquently of that than life at
Matthew Talbot. All of us who might sometimes forget can
come here and remember that when we get it wrong in those
things we call the economy, or the family, or society, or
the democracy, it falls out in the lives of ordinary
people and the last place they fall is here. 
TEL: 11. Jun. 93 11: 29 No. 004 P. 05/ 05
4
There is one more thing to learn from Matthew Talbot it
is that problems can be solved. That despair can give
way to hope. That ways can be found to re-build lives.
And that we are all strengthened by our involvement in
the process.
Thank you for having me, and I mean alU of you the
board, the staff, the volunteers and the men for the
inspiration you give the rest of us.
And for the rest of us it remains to give. 



/ 1
PRIME MINVISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NSW LABOR PARTY STATE CONFERENCE
SYDNEY TOWN HALL, SYDNEY
13 JUNE 1993
We have won an inspired victory. One of the really great
victories of our history.
And the credit goes to the party and the movement.
Especially to you, the New -South Wales Branch.
Anyone who has not comprehended the dimensions of it
think of this:
Ten years ago the Social Democratic parties dominated the
political landscape of Europe.
They governed in Sweden, Austria, France, the
Netherlands, Greece and half a dozen other places.
Today, with the exception of Spain, there are no Social
Democratic parties governing in the European Community.
There are none governing in their own right.
But in Australia Labor governs.
None of us should underestimate the stature of Labor's
achievement. In the eighties the pressure on parties like our own has
been immense.
The necessity to confront new realities and yet keep
faith with traditional principles of social justice was
more than the Labor and Social Democratic parties of the
world could manage.
If they did not confront the new realities they were
overtaken by conservatives freshly charged with free
market zealotry.
If they confronted the realities but abandoned their
principles they lost their integrity, their traditional
supporters and, sooner or later, elections.
But we survived. 
We did better than survive.
And we did it because we recognised that, just as it was
essential to internationalise the economy and make
Australia more competitive, it was essential that we
maintain the safety net and develop new and effective
social policies.
In fact, all the more essential.
Because the human consequences of the structural changes
made it imperative to maintain such essential supports as
a universal health system, a system of family allowan * ces
and other income supplements, social security benefits,
education, training and re-training, guaranteed minimum
rates of pay.
All those things which our opponents, in the interests of
imitating the social chaos and hardship of Thatcher's
Britain and Reagan's America, were determined to remove.
If in the next few years doubts arise in the hearts and
minds of Labor's people, be sure of this: on 13 March
this year more than the Labor Government was saved.
Australia was saved progressive, egalitarian Australia,
that is.
The Australia of the fair-go was saved.
The idea that Australia should be always in the front
rank of the world's advanced societies was saved.
Our success has been no accident.
We are still governing because we were prepared to make
the agenda for change our own.
We made it our mission.
We did not just react.
We didn't come along behind trying to flog old policies
for new and bickering over the rent we took the
initiative. We took charge of the fundamentals.
We led.
And it was only by doing this that we were able to keep
faith with the principles of Labor and Labor's people.
And, we must continue to do it in the next three years.
As I said in this same forum last year, the Labor Party
is a bit like a bicycle if you stop pedalling, it falls
over. We have been pedalling for a decade. 
We will continue to pedal into the nineties; and we will
continue to undertake those great national projects and
reforms which give Australia not just its strength and
cohesion, but its identity and confidence.
Reform never ends.
In fact if Labor ever stops reforming, Labor's power will
end. But if we are going to keep up the momentum of
reform we are also going to have to look at ourselves.
We are going to have to reform the Party.
We did this in the late seventies and into the eighties.
We did it to make the Party flexible enough to cope with
the challenges, strong enough to be politically
effective. Today we should start the process of reinvigorating the
ALP once more.
We need to broaden the base of our membership; we need to
open our forums to more ideas; we need to make sure we
select the best candidates.
We need reforms which will reinforce the national nature
of the Party.
I've asked the National Secretary to start the
Organisational Review process.
I've asked him to get discussion, debate and agreement on
the future structure of the Party.
I've done it because on our strength, our ideas, our
remaining in office, depends the momentum of the nation's
progress as a fair, prosperous and enlightened community.
But we also need more than reorganisation, we need to
rethink our responses to new realities.
How will we meet the challenge of an increasingly
internationalised economy?
What system of industrial relations will deliver the
flexibility we need to compete in the world while
preserving and improving our wages and living standards?
How will we meet the greatest challenge of all how will
we get back to full employment?
Our opponents swing in ten year cycles between torpor and
aggression. 
Between doing nothing and beating the hell out of
ordinary people; between letting the social fabric slowly
fray at the edges and ripping it to shreds.
Just now they're in limbo.
They are waiting to be called.
They are not sure which way to go, so to give the
impression that they are thoughtful and busy, they are
playing the role of spoilers.
I won't spend much time on our opponents today, but let
me say this about them.
The one big thing about Australian conservatives is their
supposed belief in the-rule of law.
They have always preened themselves about that.
And, no doubt, if the High Court had decided that
terra nullius had in fact existed and native title in
fact did not; and that there had been no act of
dispossession to speak of, or injustice or brutality or
prejudice; and really it had all been pretty well the
Aborigines' own fault, the conservatives would have
extolled the virtue of the Court and waxed lyrical about
its wisdom.
But because the High Court decided otherwise: because the
High Court decided that this country had been occupied,
and that the indigenous people had been dispossessed and
still suffer the effects of this; and that native title
does exist and is a means to a just resolution of an
historic injustice: because this was the High Court's
decision, the conservatives have made a small adjustment
to their opinion of the rule of law.
With one or two very honourable exceptions, at best they
have accepted it grudgingly, and at worst not at all.
The conservative view is how dare the High Court
recognise the unquestionable truth that Australia was
occupied in 1788?
How dare it say that native title survived the
acquisition of sovereignty at settlement?
And how dare the rest of us try to find the mechanisms
which will give national expression and fulfilment to a
decision of the Court?
This is spoiling on a grand scale.
This is national spoiling.
But Labor will not give up on this. 
We must not.
The Mabo judgment does provide the best chance yet of
finding an enduring and just basis for reconciliation
between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
It is the classic evener up.
And finding the way to reconciliation must be one of
Labor' s ambitions.
I am certain it must be one of Australia's ambitions.
I believe this because the history and contemporary
reality of Aboriginal Australia is a blight on our
reputation, our traditions of fairness, social justice
and inclusion, and our self-esteem.
It is, therefore, a true Labor cause, and I call on the
entire Labor movement in Australia to get behind it.
But we have to avoid the extremes.
This is not about ensuring the success of Aboriginal land
claims over people's backyards or farms. Nor is it about
enisuring that development can go ahead ignoring native
title. In this as in other things we will get the
balance right.
We must give Aboriginal Australians justice but we have
to do it in a way that keeps the country cohesive.
In this as in every other national issue, we will best
counter our opponents by continuing to do what we do best
making the changes which have to be made, projecting
and defining the vision, and keeping faithful to those
social democratic ideals which is our reason for being.
So what are the challenges facing us in 1993?
To steer a course through these very difficult economic
times towards renewed prosperity.
To maintain and improve our standard of living and extend
opportunity. To define and enlarge Australia's role in the world and
our country's sense of national purpose and vision.
And, above all, to be the country which finds the
solutions to unemployment.
We should be under no illusions it will not be easy.
We are necessarily subject to forces beyond our control.
Working against us are international factors over which
we have little scope for influence. 
But in the long haul, worse than anything that might be
done to us, is what we might to do to ourselves.
That is why I talk about a national effort.
Having gone through a decade of structural change, having
made sacrifices to ensure the changes work, and having
seen sure indications that they are working, the worst
thing that could happen to us now would be to succumb to
the instincts of parochialism.
The worst thing would be to trade Australia's future for
petty self-interest.
We really do have very considerable advantages.
We proved in the last decade that we are a people who can
make changes.
And, reflecting this capacity, we now have in large part
both the necessary cultural outlook and the mechanisms
and institutions.
Today Australia has an unquestionable ability to be
flexible and adaptive.
It does no harm for any Australian to remember that for
all our problems, the great majority of other comparable
countries have more of them and bigger ones.
I think we have reached a crucial point in our progress.
We've come so far: we've done many of the things which
other countries have yet to do; and, among those who have
done them, few have managed to do less damage to the
social fabric in the process.
This has meant that we have come out of the eighties
essentially stronger and more cohesive.
In many of the fundamentals we are ahead of the pack.
Unlike many other countries, we do not have to re-build
the social net only improve upon it.
We don't have to re-educate a generation in social
responsibility only lead by example.
But for the same reasons of social responsibility, we do
need to turn this present slow recovery into sustained
growth and jobs.
I believe that will only come when Australian business
unequivocally throws in its lot. 
It is business which will determine whether we make it in
this decade or not particularly small and medium sized
businesses, " clever" manufacturing businesses, exporting
businesses. This is their era. As The Economist magazine wrote
recently, the days of the corporate giants are passing:
In a broad range of industries, powerful forces are
moving against the big companies. New technology
has spread around the world, trade barriers have
come down, financial markets have been deregulated
and consumer tastes have converged across borders.
All these changes. . have granted business
opportunities to thousands of small and medium-sized
companies.
That is why the changes we have made in the last decade
are such good news now.
It is why the statement of February this year, Investing
in the Nation, aimed at small and medium business.
It is where the future is going to be.
It is where the jobs are going to be.
But we must remember these small to medium-sized
companies generally run lean workforces.
That means, quite simply, to create the employment we
need, we need a lot of companies. A lot of activity. A
lot of innovation.
And we need a trained workforce.
I will not yet again run through what the Labor
Government has done in the last decade to clear the way
for business.
There are still obstacles.
There are still things we can do.
But already the way is well and truly open for business
in this decade.
To invest. To manufacture. To export.
And don't let anyone tell you that there is some kind of
sacrifice involved in investing in Australia.
To use the words of McKinsey and Company in their report
on emerging exporters, the opportunities are " fantastic". 
8
And to help business seize them, there is low inflation,
a highly competitive company tax regime, a new more
generous depreciation allowance, a 150 per cent research
and development allowance, a vastly improved and
improving education and training system, and an
industrial relations culture more flexible than ever
before and delivering the lowest rates of disputation in
thirty years.
The McKinsey and Company report contains some
fundamentally good news. -The changes made in the last
decade have created highly successful export companies.
The structural changes have been partly responsible, and
so have the various forms of assistance the Government
has provided.
While finding 700 dynamic companies has to be good news,
the real story lies in the 90 per cent of Australian
manufacturers who are not exporting.
The challenge is to get more of them into the
international market, and to generate new internationally
competitive firms.
That's a challenge for all of us: government at all
levels, employers, banks especially banks and the
workforce, because to succeed in the modern world, the
quality of the workforce and the quality of its
relationship with the company is vital.
So I say again a national effort will be needed.
There is a collective responsibility to seize these
opportunities, if only because on seizing them depends
our chances of getting back to full employment.
A couple of weeks ago I delivered a statement on
unemployment and in it announced the creation of a high
level committee to assess current policy and consider
alternative approaches.
By the end of this year the committee will deliver a
discussion paper and in the first half of next year, the
Government will release a White Paper on Employment and
Unemployment, the first major study of the subject since
1945. As we all know, because it so seriously damages
individuals and families and has the potential to cause
long-lasting social damage, unemployment must be our
first priority.
In announcing the formation of the committee I suggested
that we needed to ask a few questions. Questions like
are we committed to full employment? 
It was a rhetorical question. It seems to me that to say
that we are not committed to full employment would be to
say that we are not committed to Australia.
Of course we are committed to full employment, but we
have to do more than say so.
If we are committed to full employment, it might follow
that we are prepared to put self-interest and short term
gain aside.
That we might as a community change the set of our minds.
That companies might seek ways to employ rather than
disemploy. That unions might make every effort to see that labour
market programs which will give the unemployed a chance
in life are allowed to work.
That local governments might change the way they tend to
think and as far as possible reduce the obstacles in the
way of business.
In other words, if we are committed to full employment,
how are we going to demonstrate it?
By railing against government policies? But other
countries with different governments and different
policies have the same levels of unemployment.
By blaming the technology which is replacing workers, or
the new lean small companies emerging in the modern
economy? But that is an international phenomenon.
By finding scapegoats?
Of course, the policies should be up for scrutiny, and
governments are ultimately responsible. And technology
and the new shape of companies is a factor in job
shedding but does anyone think the Luddites were right.
But, again, the solution lies much less in what is done
to us than in what we do for ourselves.
Employers who decide to look for ways to employ might
come to the conclusion, as I know some have, that there
will be an advantage to those whose workforce is trained
and experienced when the recovery gathers pace.
And trade unions, I think, should do what they can to
make sure that those in need of training and experience
are not denied them.
And all of us if we think about it might come to the
conclusion that an effort now will save us a great deal
in the future in both budgetary and social terms. 
So a national effort demands an attitudinal change I
would even go so far as to say we should re-define the
way we think about Australia.
I believe it should be one of our fundamental aims in the
next couple of years to build among Australians a more
general sense of identification with national
aspirations. I mean this in a context which is broader than, say, our
republican hopes, or reconciliation with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islanders.
I mean a broader consensus on our social democratic
agenda, on the necessity to develop an inclusive society
not just because it is fairer but because it is also
stronger. And not just a broader consensus, but a greater sense of
pride in our social goals and achievements. The sort of
pride we ought to take in, for example, our achievements
in raising the status, security and life opportunities
for Australian women.
I also mean a broader consensus on the huge opportunities
which await us in Asia and the Pacific, and what it will
take to be successful there. Not just a broader
consensus, but a sense of common purpose.
And I mean a broader consensus on the necessity to work
nationally, to make the nation work.
That, of course, was at the heart of One Nation. The
port developments, the rail highway, the roads, the new
airline system and the electricity grid are essential to
allow Australia to reach its full potential.
But it must also be understood that they will allow
regions to reach their full potential.
Regional development is a matter of high priority.
The process of structural adjustment has had geographic
dimensions which we cannot ignore. The dimensions are
unemployment, hardship and disaffection.
It is reasonable to assume that the search for ways to
correct the imbalance will also deliver ways to stimulate
new energy and economic activity throughout Australia.
Last month the Minister, Alan Griffiths, announced the
establishment of a new Office of Regional Development.
Very soon we will be announcing the appointment of an
expert Task Force on regional development and I am
hoping that Bill Kelty will agree to head it up. 
There is a lot to be gained from success in this: the
stimulation of industry and employment in regional
Australia; the maximum use of our natural and human
resources; the opportunity to see those small and medium
sized businesses proliferate because very often regional
industries have that specialised character which sells
abroad; and the resuscitation of communities which are
presently in danger of drifting to decay.
Regional Development means national development on a
regional basis. It means not parochialism but
partnership. It means pulling the regions of Australia
into the national grid.
It will require a spirit of collective responsibility
between communities, business and trade unions and
between the three tiers of government.
I think it is fair to say that in each case the proper
starting point will be to ask not what can the
Commonwealth Government do for a region, but what can a
region do for itself.
The role of the Commonwealth will be not to deliver money
by the drayload but to assist the regions to take
advantage of their potential.
For local government, especially, it is a chance to play
a more creative role in the life of the community and the
nation. We have been through some very rocky times together in
the last eighteen months. I suppose there is nothing new
in that but there is something to be learned from it.
And I think it is this: we are a pragmatic party and we
know that change is difficult and usually incremental
rather than thunderous and rapid. We know we must be
nimble-footed sometimes and at other times absolutely
immovable. We are both the mountain goat and the
mammoth. The election should remind us that we must never let our
inspiration waver or put our beliefs in our back pocket.
Our inspiration is our ultimate weapon simply because it
is always greater than theirs.
As we translate our inspiration into government and
policy, you can be sure we will remember this.
Because a Labor government without courage and conviction
is not a real Labor government.
So we can't fall back.
We have to keep the shoulder to the door: With social
policy, industry policy, structural change. 
12
With enlarging our national purpose and our place in the
world. We have to speak for our generation and in doing so
create an Australia that will excite the involvement and
affection of the next generation.
There won't be any backing off. We'll listen, we'll take
notes, we'll accommodate, we'll diverge where necessary.
But our eyes will stay fixed on national goals.
And at the end of this next three years we will be much
closer to those goals and much further ahead of the
people who want to hold Australia back. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURING COUNCIL'S REPORT
4EMERGING EXPORTERS, HYATT HOTEL, CANBERRA, 1S JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
my colleague Martin Ferguson, President of the ACTU and ladies and
gentlemen. This is a very impressive and I think seminal work. It is the first accurate snapshot
of what is happening within the smaller innovative exporting firms which
has been undertaken by the Australian Manufacturing Council, under the
leadership of John Prescott and with the help of McKinsey's. A process of
rigorous interview and evaluation of the various firms has been undertaken so
as to give a clear indication of the performance of these businesses and their
trends and the way they are operating and their motivations. Much of this is In
the report.
The important thing about it is I think for all of us who have beleved in an
international culture for Australia, for those who have thought competitiveness
was the key to international success, what the report shows is that the twin, if
you like, Incentives of the carrot and the stick the carrot being access to
export market development grant schemes, export access, NIES, Austrade,
better research and development, better tax concession has changed
attitudes, as has the stick of lower tariffs arnd the incentive to be
competitiveness and then once having become competitive, turn that
competitiveness to exports.
It Is again, a microcosm of what could be a very much larger picture of
Australian manufacturing, and supports the notion of an internationall
competitive economy with an open goods market where companies sort
themselves into competitive lots and where through, then, some inspiration In
leadership, the companies then go on and do things.
We are talking here of quite phenomenal growth but off a relatively small base
15 per cent growth in a year as John indicated, $ 8 billion of earnings to date
growing even at the same addition of the number of firms as the 700; that Is on 
very conservative assumptions, growing to around $ 15.5 billion in five years
time. The very thing the country needs In the... that Is added value,
Innovation and tht focusing on the export markets, paitcularly at the Asia-
Pacific, One of the very clear things In the report Is that while these companies have
been successful, their character, their products and their history is often no
different than thousands of other companies that do not export at all and the
difference is only In attitudes, the difference is only In leadership. It Is not in the
products, It Is not in the research component, it Is not In the maturity of the
business, It is only in leadership and in attitudes which begs the question about
how we should try and motivate the other 90 per cent of similar existing
manufacturing firms to engage themselves In exports as well.
The survey shows that our firms can succeed and that three quarters of the
firms have only began exportng recently after an average of 27 years of
domestic production. Some are, as John Prescott said, some have been, to
coin an expression, born global; that is they have done nothing other than
export, they didn't have a domestic manufacturing history. But the average is
for three quarters is 27 years, they had 27 years of domestic production and so
therefore it is pretty obvious that many other firms could be exporting but are
niot, because they have not had the leadership or the Inspiration.
It Is surveys like this I think that do indicate, I mean a survey of this quality, that
does Indicate to many firms that they to can do the same thing and that the
focus on things such as best practice does lift the whole standard of Australian~
manufacturing. It changes the attitudes of Australians and Australian
businesses towards export and towards Asia and it does give us a real
opportunity to see the place mature as a modern manufacturing country, offsetting
that overwhelming dependence on commodities which we had through
most of the post-War years.
John made some Interesting points about the size of these firms. Many were
thought by the surveying firm McKinsey's to be too small to be successful as
manufacturing exporters, but they are. And one of the reasons that they are Is
of course, the shifts In communication technology. The fax machine has made
a very large difference to the way a small business can present itself abroad.
And of course the Governmen-t's changes there in telecommunications can only
further underpin the competitiveness of smaller companies and interfacing with
the world through these innovative technologies.
One of the other key points that emerges of the study Is the importance In
establishing distribution networlks in Asia. The likelihood of Asian firms
militantly marketing Australian goods is a very slim one and, while it happens in
places and certainly happens with the bulk traded commodities in some
respects, the establishment of distribution businesses in Asia Is one of the keys
to our future and we have to do what Japan did 20 years ago establish
distribution businesses even with clusters of firms operating In various areas, In 
some places foreign access zones which are now available in Japan and in
China, where these countries actually want to see the development of non-
Indigenous distribution arrangements.
These are all things which the report points up, and It most particularly points
up the fact that the culture of internatlonallsatlon, the culture of lower tariffs and
competitiveness is the right culture of Australia in terms of developing our
manufacturing capacity, that added value and innovation will come from a
competitive country which has got all the other things running for it a proper
research and development focus, proper concessions for that in the tax system,
a competitive exchange rate, low inflation, all the big macro things which are
part and parcel of competitiveness, and then what blossoms are the companies
under the leadership of people who can see beyond the domestic market.
This Is a very Important study, it Is a high quality, comprehensive one, the
nature of the Interviews and the assessment of the motivation and the
leadership of these companies in doing what they have done, information
gleaned from the Interviews about the products and the way in which they have
performed and developed make It the most comprehensive study of Its kind and
therefore for the development of Australian manufacturing exports a seminal
work. So I congratulate the Australian Manufacturing Council. I congratulate those
people who have been associated with the work Elizabeth Brian and Bill
Mountsford and also McKnsey and Company who have undertaken the study
and have produced a work, the substance of which were it have been produced
any time in the first two or three decades after the War would have made this
an entirely different country.
0: Mr Keating, one of the problems which the report Identifies is the
problems which the companies have had in getting access to finance. It
has been an issue which the Government has raised quite recently in
testing Is the Government concerned about the banks unwillingness
to lend to business In general and what is it planning to do to try and
address this?
PM: I think the banks had In the first instance and they are now focussing
on the sort of customers that can bring value to the bank. And I think
therefore there will be the development of closer relationships with
banking between banks and smaller businesses, that the cash flows and
business opportunities of these businesses will be much more a focus of
their lending than their assets than has been the case in the past. So I
would not expect that we are about to see a revolution here, we will see
a balance between cash flow lending and assets and a willingness to
find new businesses to grow their to find new customers of quality.
This is going to take a further cultural change In Australian banking and
that is why the Government has in Its ' Investing in the Nation' program
talked about better Information coming to the Government at the 
Reserve B~ ank about lending practices of banks and trying to given
instance specific Information about how particular banks are relating to
toe customers. I think the banks understand thIs Is a problem for the
whole country and that they want to change, but again for them the
change Is going to be a relatlvely slow one because they just don't have
that culture In their institutions and they have to acquire it.
0: Mr Prescott, why has this report ruled out the Impact of the recession,
the report says that import drive is not being driven by low domestic
demand, but surely local firms have been trying to find new markets as a
result of the greater demand in..
JP: I think the report shows that the" e firm have emerged through good
times and more difficult times and that just as many firms were
commencing to achieve this export status while the Australian economy
was expanding as there were when it was shrinking.
MF: The analysis shows that the firms we are talking about are firms that
have made a continuing commitment to an export culture. The research
goes back several years, it goe~ s back right through the 1980s, it shows
no significant difference in pattern as to the number of firms that
emerged in the early and middle part of that decade as has emerged in
the last couple of years.
0: Mr Prescott, how do we get the other 90 per cent of firms who haven't
got the message yet about exporting. Do you have any Ideas?
JP: One of the ideas, of course, Is this meeting. And of course the whole
Idea in producing the report was to try and get a quality piece of
research Into the market place to inspire debate about some of the
issues. This particular subject was first raised In the Manufacturing
Council's Global Challenge report and what we sought to do In the last
two or three years is to develop the various themes in the Global
Challenge report and In the last couple of years of have sought to
understand better what causes firms to export and this is we hope a
quality piece of research I think it is that will lift the standard of the
debate about these issues in this country and I hope it will be taken back
Into the industry organisations, Into the trade unions, Into work places,
onto the shop floor and disseminated and debated so that a much wider
cross section of opinion makers and movers and shakers in this
economy will be motivated to respond. In fact, In short we see the
performance of these 700 firms as quite inspirational.
Q: Mr Keating, is this report a vindication of your Government's policies?
Does it mean that you have finally arrived, that you have done
everything you need to do as a Government and it is over to business
from here on in?
j 
PM.: I think it Is an Indication that the direction Is right. As I said this Is the, if
you like, we are noting the sucecss of these businesses, we are taking
Ie sns from them and they have been õ rowing rapily, the value of their
export merchandise has been growing rapidly. But fromn a relatively
small base which means we have to encourage more companes to do
more of the same, So the kinds of programs which have been there
tha Is beyond the big and impodrtat macro seltngs of the exchange
rate, inflation, interest rates, the key competitIveness issues beyond
tse to programs like export market develop grants, NIES, Austrade',
those sorts of things I think the reach of those programs will become
Important and the lessons of the success of these companies, as John
said, an inspirational lesson is the one we want to transmit to the other
manufacturers, domestic manufacturers who have not ad this stage
bothered with exports and I think it Is a valuable lesson in Indicating that
the directions are right and that where we to have chosen for instance to
have locked ourself behind a tariff wall and continued to subsidise
uncompetitive Industries while the competitive ones in commodities were
subject to lower and lower prices In world terms would have seen us
certainly in trading and current account terms in an Impossible position.
This change has been a very profound one and of course, naturally If it
continues the whole nature of Australia's merchandise exports will
change..
Q: Do you think that the Government has to do more? The report talks
about giving a hand up to exports, it refers to things like developing
systematIc cornpaiisons between Australia and East Asian trading
partners, In terms of competitiveness and so on. Do you see that the
Government needs to more to give a hand up to these potential exports,
P M: Well I think we are trying all the time, and a cut in the company rate to
33 per cent which Is largely the sort of area company rate program a
very rapid acceleration and depreciation. Two Investment allowances,
one for' projects over $ 50 million and one for all projects, these are very
much, I think, hands up to all Australian companies and then I suppose
we may specifically say they are, well, hands up more specifically In
areas such as export market development and NIES and Austrade and
what have you, and refining these programs, I mean over the years we
have sought during the ERC process of the Government to try and refine
these programs down so that they actually worked better each time and
I think taking the lessons of a study like this gives you a chance to refine
them further.
0: Mr Keating, the report talks about changes to the EMDG scheme and
also ITES, obviously they are going to cost money, will you adopt it in
the next Budget?
PM: Well again, as I said a moment ago these are things which we can
continue to refine and obviously some programs will have better access, 
people have better access to them, understand them better and they will
be more beneficil to them then others, We try and work out what those
prorams are arnd to see how we cani Improve them and how we cant
make their reach more obvious and I think we will continue to do that
0: Prime Minister, if manufacturing exports reach the $ 15 billion, that would
slash the current account deficit and bring It down to a sustainable sort
of level, Is that the sort of macro effect that we can look forward to for
PM: It these categories of firms were producing another, say roughly 2 per
cent of GDP In exports, all things being equal, there would be no change
In the level of Imports and commodity prices being where they are, this
would more rapidly bring the current account back towards its debt
stabilisation point. But of course, as we know, nothing ever does stay
equal. So all you have got to do Is keep on trying and these firms could
mak e a very solid contribution, particularly when we have got low prices.
John ( Prescott) and I were having a talk before we came over here just
about the performance of BHP which is now exporting record volumes
just about acros-s all of its range of commoditiles, but at much lower
prices. This Is the thing, the world is largely in recession and prices are
low, therefore the thing to be doing is exporting more volume of the
things which we traditionally exported even at lower prices, and at the
same time try and export these higher value added areas where you cut
some of that difference away, which comes via the terms of trade.
0: A question from the floor, Prime Minister, do you have concerns about
one of the areas identified in the report is an impediment for exporters,
and that is financial Institutions that can't see their way into financing a
lot of these areas. And secondly, it does detect, or It does talk about
Australian concerns about businesses being subject to foreign
Investment and moving off shore, have you detected that sort of attitude
In Australians, and is that a problem for getting more and more of these
companies off the ground?
PM: Well I think it is always very hard to launch a new business at any stage.
They are as hard to launch today as they have ever been. But most of
these have got a history of domestic manufacture. I think one of the key
points of the report is that it is an attitudinal question, it is really a
leadership question. They have got the same products, they had the
same products and the same, if you like, competitiveness features and
the same opportunities, but some are doing it arnd some aren't. The
difference Is only leadership. Now, financing is part of this, of course,
and I was asked a question earlier about the banks, I don't think I can
add much more to what I said there. I think the banks recognise that
there Is a change going on here, but they have not been at the forefront
of the change and they are trying to catch up, and I think we have got to
give them marks for that. 
Q: Prime Minister, does it concern you at all one of the findings of the
report, which Is that even If these companies go ofl exportng their heads
off the job growth out of thai Is very small, only I think about 33 000
people over five years. That's not going to knock much of a dent in the
unemployment problem we have got, is it?
PM: Well I don't think we are seeking to suggest that the growth of the-se
firms is going to solve the employment problem. The employment
problem, we are In a period of much higher productivity then we have
been, we have got a much more productive corporate sector then we
have had for years, and that means fewer people are employed in that
process. How do you get more people employed? Answer, produce
more product, I mean there is no substitute, I don't think, here for
growth. That's the key point.
0: Mr Prescott, what's your answer to the question on the banks, do you
havo a different answer to the Prime Minister?
A: No, I don't have a different answer to the Prime Minister, I would simply
add that In many cases we are not just looking for traditional bank
finance to support these firms, there are quite complex equity Issues that
are discussed in the report, and there are other concepts that need to be
further explored for various types of new funds to provide development
capital. There are no easy solutions to the finance one, but we are not
just looking only at the banks.
0: Mr Keating, are you concerned about the general investment
requirement, and particularly in the last week or so the alleged
uncertainty created by the Mabo issue?
PM: No. Look, the profit share in the economy Is now nearly back to the late
180s, it is already above the 1960s average, if my memory serves me
correctly. We have got a very competitive exchange rate, we have got
by our recent history very low inflation and low interest rates and all
these things, I think, mean that companies have been able to rebalance
their balance sheets, that they are In a position now to look around for
Investment opportunities in a way they were not, say, two years ago. I
think it has taken about two years longer then everybody thought to
change the nature of bal ance sheets and to remove some of the gearing
that existed Into bill the profits and the savings of companies back up.
Now, I think that is happening, I think companies are stripped down to
do things and I think they will do things, and particularly with the
Investment Incentives of these Investment allowances, they are time
specific. In other words, the projects only qualify if they are In there
within the time frame allowed under the Tax Act. So, this Is going to
bring a fair bit on by itself as well as the traditional things of housing et
cetera. 
Q: Mr Griffiths, from the perspective of a ' V~ ctorian, we hear a lot of doom
and gloom about the States Mranufaturing, can you see mo* re promise
from this report for Victoria?
A: Well I think one of the lessons here is that Victoria Is as well
represented, and In many cases better represented then the national
whole, that is a function, of course, of the reliance of the Victorian
economy on the manufacturing sector, So, It is a good news story for
Australia generally, and I suppose in that context for Victoria specifically,
I would reiterate the sentIment that the Prime Minister and John Prescott
stated earlier, and that Is that in large measure success or otherwise is
determined by firm leadership, and a~ s I get around partlcular enterprises
In this country, you can work ot as you walk In through the front gate
and after two minutes of discussion with the leadership and the work
place whether these are can do companies or not. So, really the
message is, I think, all a-bout leadership.
Q: Mr Prescott, you in your speech ruled out any of the means ofmanufacturing
efforts, nevertheless . Qnaudible) talks about larger
companies helping smaller companies get But what do you say to that
approach and how do you foresee it coming about?
A: Well it is a very wide ranging question, of course. But what this report
talks about basically is three things. Firstly, how we build the more
pervasive export culture in this country. Secondly, how we remove
constraints to export success. And, thirdly, what are the key measures
that might enhance export competitive advantages. Now, each of those
three Issues goes much deeper and much more broadly across policy
making then just the idea of picking winners. But there are a number of
examples In the report that show what individual firms and groups of
firms can do to disseminate material. There are examples, for example,
of firms that set up to disseminate research information that, if you like,
provide a basis for bringing the providers of research to the knowledge
of people that might be seeking that research base or may be able to
take advantage of a particular piece of research. There are examples of
firms that by marketing information, technology can Improve the capacity
of other firms to remove a number of constraints and to find more
knowledge of the market place. Then there are other examples that go
more directly to the question of sharing information, sharing
management methods, there is a reference in the report to the
advantages of the best practice program where firms that have
succeeded in developing best practices can disseminate their methods
to other firms to the collective advantage. Their. methods, as distinct
from their own competitive edge. There is a whole host of things that
are brought out in the report where firms that get together can gain
advantage from one another. 
0: Mr Keating, you talked earlier about the need for leadership and leaders
don't grow on trees, so how are you going to Increase the number of
psople who can come to ir-emdionai meAzet in peace and comfort
do you expect just to, for success to breed success, or a domino effect if
you like, or Is there something more specific in there too,
encouragement?
PM. Well I think the culture of the country has changed, I mean we are
putting nearly eight kids In ton now through secondary school, anid forty
per cent of those into university, the culture In terms of the private
research and development effort coming from companies spending more
of their own income on R&amp; D, availing themselves of the Incentive of the
tax concession available, the co--operative research Institutions we now
have there, the CRCs, which I think Is a good and novel way of bringing
business, insfltutions, and research institutions arnd universities together:
this sort of change is, I think, demonstrating to many managers and
owners of businesses that develop an iniiative product and you can
basically draw some economic rent from it, and I think that is the lesson.
I think the launch of this particular report and the coverage of Its
contents is just another example of how we will get that Impression over.
Plus, the fact that we are very, very competitive. I mean there are very
few products now that we can't be competitive in an export markets.
This just makes an obvious point to somebody who is battling to either
keep a business together or to grow it, and as the best practice
programs and the rest start to prolife rate and move through the economy
the culture generally changes, and of course these are the companies
that are going to earn more. If they earn more and they become publicly
listed companies, they are going to have a higher premium on them.
Therefore the whole culture reinforces itself again.
0: Mr Ferguson, do you see a correlation between progress towards
enterprise bargaining correlation on the grim export culture of the
companies, is there any apparent correlation between those two things,
or are they
A: No, I think they are very much integrated. I think you will find that the
company Is adopting a leadership position on the industrial relations
front, also the company Is adopting a leadership position in respect to
your export. The reality of life is, when you talk about best practice you
are talking about an integrated approach looking at industrial relations,
the question of export culture, Investment in research and development,
they are all interrelated anid it is those companies that adopt that
leadership position that are going to lead this country in the future.
0: Mr Keating, how does the Government propose to respond to the
recommendations in the report today? 
PM; Well I think that many of the features of the report already cover, not just
the macro-economic influences of policy, but also the specific programs9
we have there like EMDG... et cetera. But I think from our point of view
what Is interesting Is the quantifcation of the success of these firms,
peering behind their managements to find out what did motivate them
and how they have done it, which itself gives us clues about how we
ought to direct policy in the future. I think In terms of any of the specific
schemes we have, I would think, we will seek to take lessons from such
an exhaustive study and try and improve those. But I think perhaps
more then anything else it just underpins again what we have believed;
that is, that our future is as an exporter not just of our traditional things
but of the higher added value products, and that we can do it and the
difference is not about competitiveness or about the products or quality,
it is about really attitude and leadership and I think knowing that is a very
handy thing for the Government to know to devise further progress along
this path, and that might go to designing some of these schemes more
closely or improving them, but wil probably go to proselytising about the
prospects of added value arnd the likelihood of success. 



PRIME MINISTER1
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF " EMERGING EXPORTERSO
Today I am pleased to launch the final report " Emerging Exporters: Australia's
High Value-Added Manufacturing Exports" that was prepared Jointly by
McKinseys and the Australian Manufacturing Council. I acknowledge the role
the AMC has played in commissioning research in this important area.
The key findings of the study that we have a significant group of dynamic
small firms achieving export success are now well known. The growth of
these exporters is evidence of the transformation of the Australian economy
since the mld-1980s.
This transformation did not happen by chance.
It reflects Australian firms responding to competition in the international market
place. I
It reflects our well trained workforce and our strong technological base.
It reflects increasingly competitive communications and transportation systems.
It reflects government policies that have opened up the Australian economy
and encouraged Innovation and the emergence of new firms.
And above all, it reflects the ingenuity and commitme nt of many individuals, of
a new breed of Australian entrepreneurs.
It Is these individuals who have recognised and taken opportunities. Some
have built there success on unique products, others on innovative approaches
to mark~ eting. B~ ut they all have relied on providing quality Australian goods
tailored to the needs of their customers.
The study has identified 700 firms that have been central to Australia's success
in raising our exports of elaborately transformed manufactures in recent years
by 15 per cent each year on average. .15/ 93 
This Is impressive, but it Is not enough. These successes are from a relatively
small base.
The challenge now is to encourage the development of new firms. Even more
Importantly. it Is to encourage more of the 90% of existing manufacturing firms
who are not actvely engaged In the international market place to do so. It will
never be easy to export for the first time, but the rewards for those who
persevere can be immense. These will be the firms of the future, and the
leaders will be Australia's business leaders.
The conditions for Success have never been better. Our production costs and
our exchange rate are extremely competitive; our inflation rate Is among the
lowest In the world; the tax changes introduced In investing in the Nation mean
that we compete fa~ iourably not only among OECD countries but also In our
region; our work practices are becoming much more responsive; our workforce
is better trained: and our research effort has been strengthened and directed
increasingly to commercial applications.
Emerging Exporters is largely a message for our entrepreneurs, managers and
other employees. It shows how we can succeed even in today's difficult
economic circumstances,
The report also contains important messages for government policy.
Economic policies under Labor were pivotal In many of these 700 success
stories. As the report makes clear, tariff reductions have forced manufacturers
to become Internationally competit * ive and once a company is competitive.
looking to overseas markets is an obvious step. This change in culture has
been profound. For example, three-lquarters of the emerging exporters
identified by the study haye r ecently begun exporting after an average of 27
years of domestic activity,'
The report also highlights. thie importance of other government policies to these
firms, policies that include direct Incentives for exports, support for research
and development, microeconomic reform, cooperative industrial relations and
so on.
These policies have produced results, but just as individual firms need to be
responsive to changing demands so too policy needs to be responsive and
relevant. The Report makes a number of policy recommendations of both a general and
specific nature. Many build on or modify existing programs. My Government
will be closely examining these, but some brief comments are warranted now.
Changing Attitudes 
Attitudes are changing, but some fundamental messages must be driven home.
That Is why today's report Is so valuable, and why the Government welcomes
the Australian Manufacturing Council's continuing involvement In encouraging
dialogue and spreading the message.
A central message is that exporting requires attention to quality and service.
This was the motivation behind the launching of the Australian Quality Council
In March ealer this year. It Is also why the Australian Quality Council Is
working with NIES to introduce a Best Practice manual for small and medium
sized enterprises ( SMEs).
The Report also recommends that the Australian Best Practice Demonstration
Program be more consciously targeted at SMEs. The Government will
examine how to moreG effectively demonstrate best practice to SM Es.
Market Access
The Report contains some important observations about access to markets,
particularly to Asian markets, that go beyond the rules of the game that
governments set. Of course, an open multilateral trading system is needed to
ensure that our exporters have appropriate access to their markets and thus
resolution of the remaining hurdles in the Urugu ay Round Is a very high priority.
Also, we are actively engaged in enhancing regional trade through APEC and
our bilateral relationships.
There is a pressing need to change the Image potential buyers have of
Australia. Our image as a country cf wide open spaces and unique wildlife has
served our tourist industry very well, but the report identifies the need to also
present Australia as a modem., sophisticated society where high tech products
equally reflect contemporary reality as the quality of our beaches.
We are committed to bripadening perceptions of Australia. This will require a
quire a continuing stratdgy on a number of fronts including, for example, the
recent commencement of ABC TV services to the region. We will also explore,
with business, whether a jointly funded campaign to change our image abroad
should be developed as recommended in the Report. 
1
The Report highlights the hurdles that many of this group of emerging exporters
face In getting started In overseas markets. Because it Is difficult to go it alone,
business organisatons and the NIES program have helped to getting flrms to
form themselves into clusters or networks. We can develop these mechanisms
much further. The establishment of common marketing, distribution and other
support facilities in strategic locations in Asia, including some of the foreign
access zones that operate there, would assist many potential entrants. The
direct Involvement of Australian banks would strengthen the operation and put
the banks in a better position to assess the risk associated with particular
exports. Technology The report highligh~ s*-the critical role that innovation plays in fast-moving
international markets.
Our policies are playing a key role in supporting business research and
development. We have made the 150 per cent tax concession for research and
development a permanent feature of the tax system, provided a range of grants
for industrial research and development, provided funding for CSIRO, and set
up the highly successful Cooperative Research Centres program.
Australia now has one of the fastest growing rates of business R&amp; D in the
OECD. Of course, much more needs to be done: our level of business R&amp; D Is
still on the low side by world standards.
The report suggests that we need. to ensure that our programs are effectively
targeted and delivered. The competitive advantage of many of the emerging
exporters identified by McKlnseys. relled in large part on a particular
technological edge. In most cases this technology was developed within the
firm with few of these firms having research connections to outside research
institutions such as the riSI. RO or a university.
I welcome CSIRO's current work in progress on developing a strategy to build
better links with emerging exporters and smaller businesses. In addition, the
Industry Commission's inquiry into research and development will look at
incentives and impediments to the creation of linkages between research
agencies, higher education institutions, and business. 
Finance The availability of finance is a major issue for many emerging exporters who do
not have the support of a largo parent. The reasons for this are clear there is
always a high failure rate among smaller firms while expanding into new
ventures, especially exports, can be very risky. But the rewards can also be
very high and as a nation we need to be able to supply adequate finance to this
group of emerging exporters.
In Investing in the Nation we encouraged the banks to go further down the path
of developing close relations with their business customers. The Treasurer will
very shortly be in a position to announce the details of the measures in
Investing in the Natortand see them put into effect. One of these measures
will be the establishment of a business advisory council that will advise the
R~ eserve Bank board on the concerns of small and medium size enterprises.
The Governor will report on the advisory council's deliberations to both the
Treasurer and Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional Development
who confronts the question of finance routinely in his discussions with industry.
In many cases traditional bank finance will not be appropriate. it is important
that other forms of finance, both debt and equity, are available on suitable
term's, Monitoring the availability of all forms of finance will be a priority of
Government as economic recovery proceeds.
Support for Exports and Small Business
Small and medium sized enterprises ] MEs) have provided the engine of
growth in Australia and indeed in most advanced countries in the last few
years. By the end of 199$ employment in small firms exceeded that in larger
Australian companies for-the first time. During the recession new jobs have
continued to be treated ih smaller companies. This study shows how many of
them have succeeded in'export markets.
The Government has placed considerable emphasis in giving small business a
" hand up", particularly in the areas of developing export markets. A number of
programs have been effective:
Export Access provides training and practical assistance in developing an
export strategy, and Is expected to reach 700 companies over four years;
AUSTRADE is helping an increasing number of small firms to enter markets
overseas, and is establishing more services specifically designed for the
needs of SMr~ s;
* The Export Market Development Grants program, administered by
AUSTRADE. has helped most companies which have succeeded in
overseas markets: 
* The NIES program, jointly funded by the Commonwealth and the States,
priovides consultancy services to SMVEs which can improve their
performance in a range of areas.
In many countiries the emphasis of industry policy has been changing in favour
of smaller companies and away from bigger firms, which often have the
information and resources needed to look after themselves.
While the Government already assists smaller firms in a number of ways, as
we have seen, the nature of the support for this sector and the effective
coordination of programs will be examined In the coming months. The findings
and recommendations of the AMC-McKinsey study provide a valuable
contribution to any a~ sessment of the policy environment for smaller Australian
companies. CANBERRA June 1993 



RPRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
SPEECH TO THE LUNCHEON FOR HIS EXCELLENCY DR CENSU
TABONE, PRESIDENT OF MALTA, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 16
JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
President Tabone, Mrs Tabone, the Deputy Prime Minister and roreign
Minister, Your Excellencies, distinguished guests and ladies and gentlemen.
Mr President It Is my very great pleasure to welcome you to Australia. As
countries of long standing friendships which we have had and with a very large
Maltese born component of our population we have been very much two
countries who have had friendship with one another for a very long period of
time. I am told that almost every family In Malta has some relative in Australia
and so when you come here you came to a place where Malta Is more than
well represented.
The Maltese have made a very significant contribution to this country. It is a
strange but true fact that notwithstanding the fact that Malta is a small country it
has a disproportionate influence on Australia. This has been the case of other
smaller countries too and in the migration program after the war we have seen
Maltese born Australians take their places in Australian society and make their
way and have their families and then watch them grow up and prosper, to take
a mnore complete place In our society as the children of Maltese people born
here.
They have been great contributors and I am sure the Leader of the Opposition
won't mind me saying one of the other great virtues we find In them Is that they
mostly support the Labor party. This Is not an exclusive, we don't have
exclusivity but we have got more than our fair share. I do not know why that Is,
but It seems to be a phenomenon which is true. The fact is though many
people of Maltese decent have been coming here since about 1810 and down
through the years they can be found not just In the capital cities and they seem
to congregate In places like Sydney and Melbourne, but also across the
hinterland of Australia In the townships and the provincial cities. So they wre
very much the pioneers of Australia amongst the pioneers-of. Australia's 
economic development: in rural and provincial communities which were small
places where they have played a prominent role and of course since the
Second World War pioneers In our social development.
We were speaking earlier about the multicultural character of the Australian
community and the Maltese community have played no small part In this great
social development in Australia and part of the tolerance of the country and part
of its sense of commitment to Australia on the part of many immigrants there
would be none that have shown a lead more than the Maltese who have come
here and called this place their own. their home and built a life for themselves
here. It has been a very substantial and creative role In our society and in the post-
War development of our cities and we think that this multicultural development
Is a unique thing In the world. This Is not the only multicultural country In the
world but I think we are doing something which Is Important here, we think we
are doing It as well as anyone else and maybe a little better. That we have
managed to produce a society which is diverse but in many respects, well
entirely cohesive as a community and this Is not an easy thing to do, but of
course the Maltese have been part of that.
I suppose if anything probably freshened up our relationship it was the
strengthening that occurred during the Second World War when Australians
helped defend Malta during three continuous years of bombing by the Axis
powers and it is point not well known In Australian that the Deputy Prime
Minister was just saying to me that Malta took greater bombings than the city of
London and took a tremendous pounding from the Axis powers during the war
and of course Australian forces were there to help In the defence of Malta and
this again just added another layer onto this history we have together and the
fact that we have so many things In common.
Last year your Government announced the issue of a medal to mark the
anniversary of the awarj of the George Cross of Malta to some 2000
Australians who I think, are eligible and as far as I know about 14,000 have
taken it up. This was a very nice commemoration and the acknowledgment of
the role played by Australians in the defence of Malta In the Second World War
and we appreciate that gesture very much Indeed.
We were discussing earlier the fact that we are pursuing different paths. In
terms of our geography Malta Is located in that part of the world where you are
an associate member now of the European community and have appied for full
membership. In the same way Australia Is part of the economic order and*
linkages of the Asia-Pacific and we are trying to grow Asia-Pacific institutions
here and be part of that as you are keen to Improve your own Institutional links
with the European community. This offers a challenge to both of us and we
have to think of novel ways In which we may participate more fully in these very
large communities and you were telling me Mr President, that you are
becoming now a much more service orientated socletykand, bjlI ing new 
3
industries on the service base which Malta can offer and that led us to talk
about air links between Australia and Malta and the fact that we would like to
see that succeed and In its succeeding just again with the transmission If you
like, the transport system being more convenient than it has been will lead to
not Just the natural flow of Australians of Maltese origin returning to Malta, but
may open up business opportunities for Australian firms participating In the
European area using the service facilities of Malta. This Is a good and sensible
development. You were talking also about the vagaries of the common market, the
development of Maastricht and how the European community might develop
with European integration and the Integration of the Commonwealth of
Independent States more fully In the European family and the challenges which
the Integration of those states into Europe, the strength of that challenge for
European nations to overcome and we see the problems In the post cold-War
era with Iraq and with Bosnia-Herzegovlna and the problems of the old
Yugoslavia already reminding us of the Intractability of European problems and
European unity. We would think as a full partner of the European community or
Indeed even as associate members there Is again that great common sense of
Malta playing a role, having a voice in these very Important world affairs as we
In Australia are having a role In the development of the Asia-Pacific area and
always standing up for sense of democracy and our sense of freedom and
human rights which Is an Important signature which Australia has and which we
think we can bring to this part of the world as well.
Beyond those economic, our economic allegiances In terms of the regions we
beong, nothing has stood In the way of our friendship other than those
thousands of kilometres of sea and of distance and we hope that we can shrink
those again. So with Malta as with all those countries from whence the
Australian people have come, there is a thred of kinship which Is bound to
survive our pursuit of our different destinies in different parts of the world.
Mr President, could I say we welcome you most heartedly to Australia. It Is
great to see you here with your wife and Foreign Minister and we do hope that
you enjoy our hospitality, not just the hospitality of the Australian community in
the broad, but particularly those of Maltese origin who I know are thrilled to see
you visit this country and I am sure as you travel around the country you will
find that the bonds between us are very warm and very strong Indeed.
Thank you. 



414
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
WELCOME TO HIS EXCELLENCY DR CENSU TABONE PRESIDENT OF
MALTA, CANBERRA 16 JUNE 1993
President Tabone
It is my pleasure to welcome you to Australia.
Our two countries are friends of long standing.
It is a unique friendship. It is one built much less on economic or security concerns
than on people.
It is the 56,000 Malta-born Australians and twice that number of Maltese descent
who unite us. I'm told that almost every family in Malta will have some relatives in
Australia. You cannot have stronger links than such human ones as these.
The Maltese have been great contributors in Australia and in those things which
really matter, like politics and sport, the Maltese have been there. And I'm pleased to
say that in politics their preference has generally been for the Labor side.
They have been coming here since 1810, I'm told; and down the years they could be
found not just in the major capital cities but out on the frontier in places like
Innisfail, Mackay and Broken Hill.
So they were among the pioneers of Australia's economic development, and since the
Second World War they have also been pioneers of our social development.
The have played a substantial and creative role in the post-war development of
Australia's cities, and in the emergence of a multicultural society which has been one
of this nation's great achievements.
Of course the bonds between our two countries were strengthened during the Second
World War, when Australians helped defend Malta during three y'ears of continuous
bombing by the Axis powers.
Last year when your government announced the issue of a medal to mark the
anniversary of the award of the George Cross to Malta some 2000 Australians were
eligible and I believe about 1400 have so far received it.
Mr President, Australia and Malta are pursuing similar objectives in different parts of
the world.
For us the development of economic and other linkages with the Asia Pacific region is
the highest priority. 84153 
I know that your Government is keen to improve its institutional links with the
European Community.
But in the past such differences have no more stood in the way of our friendship than
have the thousands of kilometres which separate us; and it will continue far into the
future, I am sure.
With Malta, as with all those countries from whence have come Australia's people,
there is a thread of kinship which is bound to survive our pursuit of different destinies
in our different parts of the. world.
So Mr President, welcome to Australia and please enjoy your stay. I am sure as your
travel around the country you will find among Australians of Maltese origin and
otherwise that the bonds between us arc very warm and very strong.
Thank you
8454 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, SYDNEY, 17 JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: With me in the studio the Prime Minister of Australia. Good morning and
welcome.
PM: Good morning John.
JL: There was fog in Canberra was there?
PM: Yes, we darted through it.
JL: So long as it was safe.
PM: Yes, it is easier to get off the ground than get back down.
JL That's right, wintery mornings are not much fun in Canberra. A wintery
morning right around Australia and a lot of people feeling a little chilled
by the Mabo decision and I think somehow a lot of people are getting it
out of proportion. Do you think that is right?
PM: Yes I think so. This is a reasonably complex issue and a complex legal
judgement, it is something the High Court took a better part of a decade
in deciding and it is a milestone decision and one which I think gives
Australia a tremendous opportunity to get its relationship with the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait people right.
JL Can you understand the white population of Australia and there are an
awful lot of them finding it difficult to come to terms with the fact that the
Aboriginal people will be compensated in their minds. Now whether this
is fact or not time will tell and it might take a long time, but the Aboriginal
people will be compensated, that they will receive more money, stories
being told that 1.5 per cent of the population has 15 per cent of the land
mass of Australia. I don't think the people who made those statements 
2
bothered to have a look at the quality of the land mass that they had, but
these are alarmist statements that are being made and cause concern
amongst the public. Do you understand the concern?
PM: Yes, I can see people thinking that in some way Aboriginal people have
been treated in a preferential way, but that is not true. In many countries
these issues, judgements have been made by governments and by
supreme courts and of course just across the Tasman in New Zealand
there was a treaty of settlement, the treaty-of Waitangi.
JL Which is still in place.
PM: Which is still in place. Now, there was no -treaty in Australia. Aboriginal
Australians were dispossessed of the land and what this decision says
and it is fairly simple really, it says that where continuing association
with the land can be established a native title may exist.
J L: Yes, but there is the rub, continuing association. Now if you slip that set
of headphones on there in order that you can listen to the people who
are going to call in that want to talk to you because I see it as being very
important as some people do have what I believe to be an incorrect point
of view on the subject of Mabo. Over the week and a bit that I have
been back I have done my best to explain it as I see it in light of the
Court ruling, as clearly and without hysteria, but still some hysteria
exists and a lot of Australians would like to talk to the Prime Minister.
Here is your opportunity. Hello.
C: I don't know whether I arn limited to a question or not Mr Keating, but I
find this, that your term of Mabo, you are creating concerns by using an
interpretation of a judgement. So, right on, having said that, I will say
this to you, the claims that are being made at the are not going to
mention Mabo is being ridiculed by the Aboriginal Affairs Minister, and
you have not made a public comment on such claims. Do you agree
with Mr Tickner?
PM: Oh yes, I have made public comments about them. These claims have
got nothing to do with Mabo. These are some of these silly claims of
NSW.
C: I have already agreed with you that in my opinion they have got nothing
to do with Mabo. I am talking, do you agree, that it is a total waste of
public funds making these futile claims?
PMV: Absolutely. But it is not public funds that are being wasted because I
don't think the claims will stand at all.
C: Well who prepares the claims? Isn't the ALS and Mr Coe and a few
solicitors and a few barristers and all this getting involved in this? 
PM: That may be true.
C: Well where is that money coming from
PM: Well let's understand this point, the claims haven't got a snowballs
chance in hell of succeeding. They have got nothing to do with Mabo,
nothing whatsoever.
C: Never mind about Mabo, why are you allowing the total waste of tax
payers funds on these futile claims?
PM: You could say the sarme thing for legal aid for non-aboriginal
Australians? Why should we allow legal aid for non-aboriginal
Australians for what you may call futile claims?
C: That cry baby act has gone down the drain a long time ago.
PM: No its not. It's there now.
C: You are making the..
PM: What's your point?
C: The point is this, that you are as boss of this country you are allowing a
total waste of funds under the guise of Mabo.
PM: It has got nothing to do with Mabo, nothing whatsoever.
C: OK good. Now do you want another question?
PM: No, you asked me about this, I am not here basically to soak up all your
prejudices, I am here to answer a few questions about Mabo.
JL: Ok, but let's just clarify this. The point that you have made to the Prime
Minister is that you believe that he is allowing public funds to be wasted
in the form of claims through the Aboriginal legal services that as he
said, don't have a snowflakes chance in hell of succeeding, his reply to
that, which wasn't a bad one was if the white people of Australia are
permitted to have legal aid, which they are, is it not fair and reasonable
that the Aboriginal people should also have legal aid?
C: But we are not allowed to have legal aid for that.
JL: Well aren't we, I don't know? 
PM: You can have legal aid for your particular pet obsession if you wish, and
it may have justice and it may not, just as Aboriginal claims may have
justice.
C: I can't afford to even walk into the solicitors office.
PM: Well you may qualify for legal aid if you had a matter of substance, thats
the point.
C: Don't try and con this whole business of putting it on to what the whites
can get. The whites have been held back, I am not arguing about the
racial side of this business, I am arguing on the hysteria that you and
your Government and the Aboriginal Affairs have caused.
PM: Now, hang on. Just understand this point, this is a decision of the High
Court of the Australia, our most supreme national court. This is not a
matter which has been initiated by the Government at all, it is something
which the Government has to respond to, to put an administrative
framework and a framework in law into place so as to hear and dispense
native title.
C: I have heard you make these claims before, but I point out that this
judgement is regarding the Murray Island people and the State of
Queensland. It did not say, well listen, now, we are going to make this
all applicable to the mainlanders people.
PM: I think you fail to understand what the decision means.
JL: Apart from that it would have set a precedent, but you are not
understanding what the decision means.
C: But Mr Keating is trying to have a settlement out of court, put it that way.
PM: No we are not. We are not trying to do anything of the kind.
C: Well what are you talking about, compensation?
PM: What is your beet? I mean don't you think that Aboriginal Australians
are entitled to any land that was theirs?
C: Of course they are, they should be treated the same as everyone else.
PM: Well ok then, what's your problem?
C: I have to buy my land, why can't they buy theirs? But forget about that
racial business. 
JL Hang on, lets get an answer to that question, you had to buy your land,
why can't they buy theirs? What's the Prime Minister got to say to that?
PM: Well if there had been a treaty here In* 1 788 then the thing Is may be that
the crown might have bought its land.
C: There couldn't be a treaty, Mr Keating, you know that, because there
was too many tribes and clans and whatever.
PM: Well thank you for your anthropological advice.
C: Well that's in history, I am not talking about history.
PM: I think you're talking prejudice, mostly, aren't you? That's what you are
really talking. You don't want to see Aboriginal Australians have any
right to the land. It grates on you that they have a decision here, which
is a decision in justice which you then want to focus on crazy land
claims that have nothing to do with it to try and diminish its standing.
That's what you're about.
C: I am not making the claims, the Aboriginals are.
PM: I think you have had a fair enough go, I understand your point. But let
me just finalise this. The claims over NSW have got nothing to do with
Mabo, nothing whatsoever.
JL: But the point is it is a point of aggravation to the average Australian to
see monies, which they believe to be their monies, that are provided to
the Aboriginal legal services being spent on claims that are futile and
alarmist.
PM: Well some may be.
JL: Well its pretty alarmist to hear that they want two thirds of NSW.
PM: I know, but I don't think that the serious people who basically are
involved in this issue on the Aboriginal side of things are supporting
these things and they have said so. Therefore that will mean in the end
there will not be big cases and long expenses.
JL: Yes, but I am simply asking you do you understand that if the people
aren't equip with the knowledge, and the people are not equipped, you
can hear by the first call that they are not equipped with the knowledge,
but if they don't have the understanding that they are going to panic.
PM: Well, John, it is probably worth telling people just to make this point that
native title is a title subordinate to the crown. That is, where freehold or 
leasehold has been dispensed in the past the High Court has held that
the native -title has been extinguished.
JL: Gone.
PM: So if you take Sydney, the suburbs of Sydney, the settled areas, the
freehold areas of rural NSW, QLD, WA et cetera, the native title is
extinguished.
J L: But can it ever be restored?
PM: No, it can't be restored where it is extinguished.
JL: You see that is the question being asked by many. It might have been
extinguished by freehold title, can it ever be restored, the answer is no.
PM: No.
JL: What about leasehold land?
PM: No. Leasehold to, accept for titles from 1975 onwards, which have been
invalidly issued, some invalidly issued. This is one of the questions we
discussed at the Premiers Conference last week and that was that some
leasehold, pastoral leasehold comes in say 30 and 40 year leases. So,
let's say a family has been on a piece of land for 60 years and then its
lease expires and it applies for another 30 years does the native title
take over? Well the view I put at the Council of Australian Governments
is we would regard that land, that leasehold, in that case to have
extinguished the native title.
JL: And it would continue. So people who have had leases on pastoral
property for generation after generation?
PM: It would continue. So the technicality of the lease expiring after say
years.
JL: How much land does involve itself in the Mabo decision?
PM: I think quite a lot of the unalienated crown land of the country. But again
this is mostly in OLD, WA and some of it in NSW. But as you know you
have got to drive a long way through this State through the freehold titles
of the farming community before you get to large tracts of unalienated
crown land. So, you are talking about a hinterland of NSW.
JL: Now, if the Aboriginal people can reclaim possession of that unoccupied
crown land, that unused crown land, does that mean then that the white
population of Australia can be forbidden to enter that land? 
PM: I don't think so.
JL It wouldn't be much good if that were the case, would it?
PM: Native title has factors about it other than possession of land as we
know it. The Aboriginal association with land is not the association or
understanding of land as non-aboiginal Australians know it. And
remember this, John, the native title can't be sold, it can't be sold to you
or me, it can only revert back to the Crown.
JL: Ok, now we must take another call, because that was the idea to let the
people of Australia talk to you directly so that they would have a better
understanding of the problem. Hello.
C: Good morning.
JL: OK, the Prime Minister is here.
C: My question to the Prime Minister, I would like to actually ask him quite
a few questions on Mabo, but just a very broad question, Mr Keating,
why does your Government see the Aboriginal people as a much more
equal people then the average white Australian?
PM: We don't. We see them as equal.
C: Well you might say that, but all the indications are that you don't.
PM: But I think it was implied in your question that you don't. You think that
non-aboriginal Australians there ought to be discrimination in their
favour against blacks.
C: Not whatsoever. I don't see that at all. But myself and every person I
talk to, I am not racist, every person I talk to..
PM: That's what they all say, don't they? They put these questions, they
always say, I am not racist, but, you know " I don't believe that Aboriginal
Australians ought to have a basis in equality with non aboriginal
Australians". Well of course that is part of the problem.
C: Aren't they more equal than us at the moment with the preferences they
get?
PM: It is not for me to be giving you a history lesson, they were largely
dispossessed of the land they held.
C: I think there is a question over that. I think a lot of people would tell you
that. You are telling us one thing and expecting us to believe it. 
PM: Well if you are sitting on the title of any block of land in NSW you can
bet an Aboriginal person at some stage was dispossessed of it.
C: You know that for sure, do you?
PM: Well of course we know it for sure.
C: Yeah. Well going on to your last caller there I think he had some
pertinent things to say that you couldn't answer either.
PM: Yeah I know but you hold his view, don't you?
C: Of course I do.
PM: That's part of the problem.
JL: Let's clarify the view. What is the view?
C: My question in general, I mean is with regard just to the whole aboriginal
question is why does the average white Australian feel that he is
prejudiced against? Why? Because of the things your Government
does.
PM: Like what?
C: The preferential treatment.
PM: Are you challenging the High Court decision? Are you saying that the
High Court has got this all wrong?
C: No, I am not saying that at all. I wouldn't know who was on the High
Court.
PM: Well why don't you sign off, if you don't know anything about it and
you're not interested, good bye. You can't challenge these things and
then say, I don't know about them.
JL: Well he's gone. But you see sadly what you are hearing there is in
some ways very typical of the feeling that exists and it may be a very
unhealthy feeling but it exists there. What do you do to placate those
people who feel that strongly, and they do feel, I talk to them every day,
they do feel that they are being disadvantaged by what is being given to
the aboriginal people.
PM: Well what is being given to the aboriginal people is at this stage limited
land, let's say before the Mabo judgement, limited land opportunities and
some income support and social justice in education and in health, so
there are Commonwealth programs for health and social justice to deal 
with such things as diseases which particularly afflicted Aboriginal
people, like glaucoma of the eyes, and infant mortality and all these
other piroblems; they had we have tried to direct funding to deal with
those problems, to extend educational opportuniies to Aboriginal
people.
JL: I have always endeavoured to explain it in this fashion. That equality is
what is required, equality in the eyes of the law and equality in
opportunity. But in order for Aboriginal people to have equal opportunity
some extra funding is required at certain stages, in certain areas,
education being one, health being another. Is that true, or not true?
PM: That's right. And also in some cases income support because often
where Aboriginal people live there isn't the opportunities, and not often
the opportunities that existed some time ago for employment arnd so
some of the spending programs of the Commonwealth actually provide
work opportunities for Aboriginal people. That's by and large the remit of
Commonwealth programs and spending to date. Now that money is
administered by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission.
But Mabo is a different thing. Mabo is about saying, the High Court is
saying, that native title survived the acquisition of sovereignty by the
crown.
J L: Ok, but the point to remember, and the point that the people need to
remember is that that High Court ruling is extinguished by the
possession of-freehold title and leasehold title.
PM: Yes.
JL: And it can't be reignited.
PM: I will read you the two points. I think these are the two key points of the
Mason, Chief Justice, Brennan Dean, Gaudron and McHugh,
Native Title for land survived the Crowns acquisition of sovereignty and
radical title. And then they go on to say that by Mason, Brennan and
McHugh that the title to the Meriam people is subject to the power of the
Parliament of Queensland and the power of the Governor and Council of
Queensland to extinguish that title by valid exercise of their respective
powers providing any exercise of those powers is not inconsistent with
the laws of the Commonwealth. In other words where ever a State
issues a title it extinguishes the native title. It has the power.
J L: Is it true that you could simply overthrow the whole thing?
PM: No. Because if a State sought to say it would turn all, say Crown land,
into freehold, you could only do that under the Constitution on just terms.
JL: So they would have to be recompensed? 
PM: So if there were Native Title subsequently established the State which
extinguished the crown land in favour of a freehold title and thus
extinguishing the native title would need to pay just terms, and that could
be very expensive.
JL: Ok and those just terms would be decided, I presume, by the High
Court?
PM: They would probably end up in the High Court.
J L: So we would be right back where we started?
IPM: Well from a States point of view with a very large bill. See, John, can I
just say this what the Commonwealth is seeking to do, what we want
from this is basically this, the High Court has made that decision and the
things which we are requiring of these things, recognition of native title
as a legal reality and therefore bringing the land management laws of
the various States up accordingly. Native Title to be treated in a nondiscriminatory
way on a par with anyone else's land. That Native title
which has survived, that is, which has survived all of these grants of
interest in land is not now unnecessarily wiped out and that we set up a
process, a tribunal for finding out who has native title and where it is.
And that the widest issues such as dispossession and social justice also
be addressed. Now, they are a totally reasonable set of propositions,
that native title is now a legal reality and must be addressed, land laws
must be adjusted, native title should be treated in a non-discri minatory
way, that which has survived shouldn't now be wiped out, and tribunals
should be established to hear and award native title. In other words
what the Commonwealth Govemnment is seeking to do is to develop a
legal framework, an administrative framework to put the Mabo High
Court judgement into effect.
JL: Okay, well lets see what other listeners think about it. Hello.
C: Hello, I would just like to say to Mr Keating that all these people ringing
up saying your trying to blame him for it. It is not his fault. The High
Court has made this decision and he has just got to implement what
they have decided for him. He can't say, well we aren't going to do this,
you know, people have got to be calm and understand what the High
Court has done. They have got to accept that that is the way life is
going to be now.
PM: Can I just say this as well, it doesn't in any way interfere with a title
anyone in this country currently holds. So people have had fears about
their farm at West Wyalong or Bathurst or something..
JL Where are you calling from? 
C: On the North Coast.
JL Okay, well people have had fears there too.
PM: Well I mean, those fears are groundless, that is that there is no threat to
their title at all. This is basically about that which is left. This is the
urialienated crown land which has not been extinguished by former and
earlier grants of interest in land by state land manager, you know, State
departments of lands, etc.
JL~ Okay, so you wanted to tell the Prime Minister it is not his fault, you've
told him.
C: I can't understand why everybody is giving him a hard time about.
PM: Prime Ministers get hard times, that I don't mind, but I
C: It is not that. But I think they are sort of taking it up with the wrong
people if they don't agree with it. I mean, you're the one who is in
charge of the country but you didn't make the decision, you'e just got to
try and explain to everybody. People don't want to understand it.
JL Well people prefer to listen to their hysterical point of view because it
gives them a sharper axe to grind.
C: Exactly.
PM: Anyway, you are tolerant about it. And that is the important thing and I
thank you for that.
JL: Okay and thanks for the call too. Another thing we must also establish,
when you say it only applies to the unoccupied land that exists in this
country. But surely it doesn't apply to all of that. It can only apply, my
reading of it, it can only apply if a continuing ongoing association with
that land can be proved.
PM: Exactly, that is why, you see Mabo, even its fullest expression, will only
give to a minority of the Aboriginal community land because many of
them were dispossessed of the land and therefore can't make a claim.
J L: Will it give them land or will it give them compensation as well, will it
give them money as well?
PM: No. In the first instance it would give them land. It would only give them
compensation if someone wanted to put an economic use on the land,
mining or something else. 
J L: But they would not get royalties for mining?
PM: No. Because the minerals under the land would be reserved to the
Crown as they are for non-Aboriginal Australians. You will find on your
title of your home, block of land, that minerals on the thing are reserved
to the Crown.
JU: Yeah, so the same would apply to native titles?
PM: The same applies to native titles. That is, that if somebody can
establish the fact that or a community of Aboriginals that they have lived
in a region and have had a continuing association with the land and they
are rewarded a native title, any compensation they are paid is paid in
relation to the disturbance and inconvenience which would come from
an economic use. Can I say, John, just as a farmer who might have
2000 acres out in Bathurst or something and someone finds an alluvial
gold deposit on it or wants to do something else with it, pays to that
person compensation for digging a hole in the land, driving across the
land, putting it to some economic use.
JL: Well can we look at that conversely. Lets say the other side of Bourke,
a group of Aboriginal people can say that they had an ongoing claim to
some land there. And running right through the middle of this piece of
land is a beautiful bitumen road paid for by the taxpayers of Australia. In
turn, will the Aboriginal people have to compensate us for the
improvements made to the land?
PM: No, they won't because they wouldn't want the road probably in the first
place, but it is not their road. Because the road will have a title to it, you
understand, it will be an easement.
JL: Okay, so do all roads have titles?
PM: Yes, they will have an easement title. Not all roads, some will be just
dusty roads and they may well be on Aboriginal land.
JL: But what happens if they are stock routes and the Aboriginal people say
which would be their right if they were to enjoy equal title along with
freehold title the same title as we all enjoy, what would happen if the
Aboriginal people said, okay well I'm sorry this is our land and the road
is closed?
PM: Well the stock routes are mostly already reserved if we look at any of
these maps where you see the titles expressed in various..
J L: See these are the things that are worrying people. 
PM: Well they are mostly reserved already. So what you call a stock route
where people actually use it to drive stock over vast distances are
reserved. So that is really not a problem but one of the points I would
like to make here John, and one I mentioned a moment ago, that Is
probably the great majority of Aboriginal people will not benefit from
Mabo at all because having been pushed off their land and
dispossessed of it they can't now make a claim to a continuing
association with it.
JL: And that is important? So in other words, there can't be a mob of people
in Redfern who have lived there for 20 years who suddenly say, my
mum came from the Kimberleys and I'm going back there and the land is
mine?
PM: No. Because they might have been pushed off it many years earlier.
There is a couple of things the High Court has said about this which I
think, were also part of the decision, let me read it.
JL: Is it in High Court jargon because that is difficult to understand?
PM: No. It is very easy to read. Aboriginals were dispossessed of their land
parcel by parcel to make way for expanding colonial settlement. Their
dispossession underwrote the development of the nation and the acts
and events by which that dispossession in legal theory was carried into
practical effect constitute the darkest aspect of the history of this nation.
The nation as a whole must remain diminished and unless until there is
acknowledgment of and retreat from these past injustices. Now the first
sentence says, Aboriginals were dispossessed of their land parcel by
parcel to make way for expanding colonial settlement. Now that means
if they were dispossessed they can't now apply under Mabo so there is
sort of an inherent injustice about the way in which Mabo will now in the
latter part of the 20th century apply. That it will only apply to those who
were not dispossessed of the land. But for those who were
dispossessed there is nothing in it for them. And that is why at the
Council of Australian Govemnments Meeting I talked about a package for
land acquisition for dispossessed people who can't get anything from
Mabo.
JL: And these people would be in the minority?
PM: No. I think the people who will be awarded grants of interest in land say
as a native title will be in the minority. That is, the majority of Aboriginal
people probably won't get anything from Mabo.
J L: Hello?
C Hello. 
JL Where are you calling from?
C: I'm calling from North Queensland. Mr Laws said a while ago there
about the back of Bourke about a bit of land, well I actually come from
the back of Bourke I was born there in 1950 and was reared up there
and I recently went back for a reunion and I tell you what, to walk into
that pound and see Bourke NSW today and what it was in 1963-68
when I left, it was a crying shame. Your cameras don't go down the
street, you don't tell the truth, you don't take photos, you get there and
you cut everything out and then you put it on A Current Affair and
Minutes, but you don't tell the truth to Australia.
JL: Who doesn't?
C: The lot of you. 60 Minutes, bloody Current Affair.
JL: Hold on, I'm not yet responsible for 60 Minutes or A Cur-rent Affair. What
do you want to do, you want to unveil the truth to us, do you?
C: The whole of the main street of Bourke is mesh and tin roller doors.
JL: I know that.
C: You can't walk up there after dark.
JL: Well Wilcannia is the same I know that.
C: Wilcannia is the same Brewarrina is the same, Cunnamulla.
JL: I know all of that.
C: Mate I can take you to a lot of places.
JL: Okay, so what is the point you want to make to the Prime Minister.
C: Well the point is how much Aboriginal have you got to have in you to
class yourself as an Aboriginal?
JL That is a convoluted question and really has nothing to do with Mabo. I
think you were on for a bit of a bitch about things in general, perhaps
you and I can cover that subject alone at some other time. Hello?
C: Hello. I would just like to say I'm of white descent. I think I have been
lucky to be bom here. We have got good education and everything.
This history of our country can't be changed and we have got good
opportunity for education and everything as has those of black descent.
And wouldn't it be good if when we are all older if we could all look 
around and say that we have got what we've got through hard work, not
through court case?
JU Well the point you are making there Is what? You don't believe the
Aboriginal people would get what they have got through hard work?
C: No it is not that at all. It Is just that Isn't it time that we just looked
forward rather than the Aboriginals going for this...
PM: Well can I just say, the thing to look forward to is a country which is in its
soul at peace with itself. That is not prospering in including the
dispossession of another people and that is the point of the High Court
decision, that is the point of the reference I just read about the
dispossession injustice. I mean, we are a unique country now, this is a
multicultural country it has changed enormously since the war. It has
tremendous opportunities, it is an island continent, we are the only
nation in the world that has a continent to itself, we don't share a border
with anybody, we are located in the fastest growing part of the world.
We have the natural protection of the sea. There are great opportunities
here. But to go forward together as a people means we have to go
forward together on terms on which we all agree. And to have the
original inhabitants not agreeing, saying that they were dispossessed
and largely disadvantaged means we will never do that completely.
Now that is why the Mabo decision is an opportunity. It is an opportunity
to deal very late in the piece, but better late than never, with the injustice
of Aboriginal dispossession. And that is what it is about. But it doesn't
threaten, see the point about it is that it doesn't threaten anyone else's
property in these areas of Australia we are talking about, but what it
does, it brings up on a basis of equality the opportunity of the original
inhabitants to have a piece of the country themselves.
J L: Okay, I think that answers that, but tell me this, if the original inhabitants
were given back a piece of what the High Court said was theirs and
there is no denying the High Court ruling simply says that native title did
exist, now if this is given back to the people that had it originally, will
they then be given an opportunity to work that land as the people who
are non-Aboriginal work that land? Will they then be given an
opportunity to do what the people have done who bought their land
freehold and paid cold hard cash for it, will they then be given an
opportunity to become self supportive? Or will they be given the land
and continue to be supported to the tune of more than $ 1 billion a year?
PM: Well they can be given the land and I hope in some cases, operate the
land in a way which is economic and provides employment and
opportunities for them. But the whole notion of Aboriginal association to
the land is a spiritual association, it is not an economic association as
we understand land and the value of land. 
JL: It is very hard for people to understand that though?
PM: I know, it is not a concept which I think non-Aboriginal Australians grasp
eswily but it Is a religious association there which goes more to working
out what the dollars and cents are on 30 June. It Is the actual spiritual
association. I think that is the important point. I think it Is one of the
reasons why Aboriginal people have felt dispossessed.
JL: But if the land is given back to the people, even though they may be a
minority and I get the impression that very few Aboriginal people or
tribes are going to benefit by it in the long run, how then do you explain
to the non-Aboriginal population that make up about 98 per cent of the
place, most of them taxpayers, how do you explain to them that their tax
dollar still goes to the tune of about $ 1 billion a year to help Aboriginal
people?
PM: Because the people it is helping are those that would never benefit often
from a Mabo claim, and even in the event that they do, they still have
these problems in health and in education and in lack of access to
opportunities which we have sought to remedy by Commonwealth
funding over the years. And we are still only just, in a sense, marking
time. We probably made some progress, we've made some progress in
health but not as much as we should make I don't think, the same in
education. And that is why that funding will always remain important. I
think there is a great gulf in the opportunities which are available to
Aboriginal Australians and..
J L: And white Australians. But it needs to be explained to the people
because that is the bit of coating on the pill.
PM: Well I don't think it is bitter. I don't think Australians mind that in their
budgets that they do deal with problems such as Aboriginal malnutrition
and infant mortality and educational opportunities. And you notice with
the Royal Commission into the Deaths in Custody, a lot of the problems
flowing from that come from the problem of lack of opportunity, lack of
education.
J L: Lack of equal opportunity.
PM: Lack of equal opportunity and so the nation tries to even that up through
these funding programs. Now Mabo is a different concept altogether but
you see, John, if Mabo meant that a claim over Circular Quay in Sydney
or George Street had any strength about it then people would have
genuine concerns about their rights to interest in land and their wealth.
But this decision applies to those places where a title has not been
issued and only if there is a continuing association. 
J L: See, that is the important point, and that is the point nobody wants to
hear. The continuing association has to be proof of the land. So, again
let me say It, I've said it a hundred times, there can't be a bunch of
people In Redfern suddenly say I want all the land west of Bourke ' cause
my grandmother was there because they can't prove an ongoing
continuing association. And all of it is going to taeyar anyway.
PM: It is going to take years. And the other thing is the State government
can extinguish the native title where it suits it. For instance, if they
wanted to acquire your property or my property for a reason, for a
school, for a bridge, for a road, for a park, then you can be notified by a
State Minister, you can have discussions about the acquisition, but in
the end the State has the power to resume the land and to change its
title, it will then give you compensation, but you get, in the final analysis,
little say in it and if you want to challenge the decision you can go off to
the Land and Environment Court. Now in the same way, they can do
the same with native title. And that is, again the High Court has made
that quite clear, that is that a State still has the sovereignty to extinguish
a native title particularly for public purposes.
JL: But they must be compensated as we would be compensated.
PM: As we would be compensated, that is it.
JL: Hello?
C: Hello, I want to talk about Aboriginal land rights.
JL: Okay, are you Aboriginal?
C: Yeah I'm Aboriginal. I come from Kintook west of Alice Springs.
JL: What do you want to say to the Prime Minister?
C: I want to say that the Land Right Act has not helped Aboriginal people it
only helps land councils. We started Kintook communities in Perth and
we run a business and the land council came along and forced us to
close our door.
JL: The Aboriginal Land Council?
C: Yes, the land council in Northern Territory.
JL: I see, well how could they force you to close the store?
C: They told me to close my store and at that time I said to them that I was
a traditional land owner but they ignored what I said to them. 
JL What you are telling is hardly associated directly with Mabo.
PM: I'm happy to pick up the point though. Look, there is no doubt that in
some places there Is conflict In terms of the view of particular people in
areas and the land councils. Now in the Northern Territory we have
what is called statutory land rights. Land has been given to Aboriginal
people not by way of the common law for which the High Court
envisages with Mabo but by way of a law of the parliaments of the
Commonwealth and the Northern Territory. In other words, a gift of land
from the pariaments of the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory.
Now how that land, the ownership and use of that land, has largely
devolved to decisions by Aboriginal Land Councils. Now these are often
at odds with the views of some of the people who live in some of these
regions. But again, if you ask the Aboriginal people as a people do they
feel that, if you like, there is a sort of enhanced empowerment to
Aboriginal people through land councils I think the answer will be in the
affirmative. They would say yes to that. Whereas, if their power is
fragmented over individuals and groups of individuals who can't run a set
of accounts, who can't manage these properties, and who can't basically
receive the proceeds or dividends that may flow from them, and who
can't represent themselves well enough in particular situations where
land is being allocated that the land council does that for them. Now,
this is at this stage you are not talking about Mabo, you are talking about
Aboriginal land rights in the Northern Territory, we are not seeking at this
stage to say everything is happy in the garden between all Aboriginal
people and the land councils, of course, it isn't. But again, on balance,
are Aboriginal people better off with a land council system? and I think
most Aboriginal people think they are.
JL Okay madam does that cover it for you?
C: No.
JL: I didn't think it would but I'm afraid it is going to have to because we will
spend too long on the subject and what the Prime Minister said I think is
understandable. Most of us, not everybody is happy with the
arrangement with the Aboriginal Land Councils, but the majority are.
Hello?
C: Good morning John, good momning PM, it is Paul Vanetti, cartoonist here
mate how are you?
PM: Good thank you.
C: I've just been up to Queensland and Northern NSW. I'm now
syndicating my cartoons right throughout Australia so I thought I would
get out there and have a look at some of the places that I'm sending
cartoons to and the enormous fear that is out there. I would be talking to 
people in pubs and just meeting editors and the fear that is out there is
just unbelievable. I have never dealt with an issue a topic.
JU Yeah well there is going to be fear if-people listen to nonsense and
people, now let me just say this to you, you will find many people find it
very easy to dislike Aboriginal people that is their prerogative to like or
dislike and if they get and opportunity to throw a lite more mud than
they have already thrown they leap upon that opportunity. Now if
hysterical comment is going to be made concerning Mabo it will be
grabbed by other hysterical people who are looking, again, for another
reason to be critical of Aboriginal people. And I haven't always spoken
in favour of the Aboriginal people but you better start to tell people that it
is about time to start being a bit realistic about Mabo and not using it as
a hammer to belt Aboriginal people around the head or the Government
around the head because neither of them are directly responsible for
what the High Court said.
C: That is right, the point that I want to make here is that in politics, in
anything, you are really dealing with perceptions and I hope the Prime
Minister understands that and perception is everything. I deal with it
every day. It is similar to, I guess we could make a comparison with the
GST thing during the election, and people are saying to me that this will
be the Prime Minister's GST.
PM: But look, why say things like that, and what have people got to be fearful
about. This is land on which there is no title, which is not alienated from
the Crown, so it is Crown land on which a claim for native title can be
heard providing it can be established as a continuing association with
the land. Now what have people got to be fearful about of? They
haven't got to be fearful about land under their hotel or the main street or
the shops or the farms around, what have they got to be fearful of?
C: Well I think that is the point that we have got to get across.
JL: That is the point that we are getting across, that is exactly why the
Prime Minister is here.
PM: That is the key point, the fact is this, what am I to do, the High Court, our
most supreme national court has made a decision saying that native title
survived the acquisition of sovereignty at settlement. Now the
Commonwealth can stay right out of this. Right out of it. And then we
would have for the next 20 or 30 years on High Court case after another.
One land claim after another. And how much uncertainty would that
introduce. If the next thing that happened is a group of Aboriginal
people decided rather than to rely upon Commonwealth legislation, they
would then take a land claim over a certain area of NSW or Queensland
or Western Australia to the High Court and then that is made. So the
High Court says, look we can't handle all these claims we will put them 
Federal Court. So the Federal Court then nas a bank of land claims
which go on from now till 30 or 40 years from now and no State mines or
land Minister who want to issue a grant of issue in land could in any way
be certain about who the native title holder was, there would be no law
and it would be all decided by court decision one after the other.
JL: And people are now concerned about the amounts of money being spent
in court procedures, and that would quadruple.
PM: Well exactly so unless there is a system of administrative law put Into
place to manage it, instead of tribunals to hear it where the tribunals
become expert in anthropological informnation and the dissemination of
information and which have Aboriginal expertise on them so that they
know when a claimant comes that they can quite quickly determine
whether there is any prospect of a native title. Unless such mechanisms
are established, this could all be decided by court cases.
JL: Prime Minister, I'm going to have to interrupt you because the news is
about to come along. Could you spare us five minutes after the news.
We've got a couple here we would like to cover, I think it is very
important we have an opportunity to summarise it and the news will be
here in about 30 seconds. So you people who are calling us from all
over..
JL: My guest is the Prime Minister, our discussion is Mabo. And it would
appear from what we have heard so far that the understanding of the
facts of Mabo is still distant from the minds of many, Prime Minister.
PM: Well I think that is probably right, John, but I think many other people are
starting to understand what it means. See, I think there is a bit of a sort
of a notion that a whole lot of land has got to be sort of handed out to
groups of Aboriginal people, you know, maybe sitting somewhere
waiting to be given some land. That fact is, these people have actually
got to be on the land, they are actually there now, they are actually on
the land now. It is not as if they are sort of sitting in Sydney waiting for a
grant of interest in land somewhere in NSW, they have actually got to be
there now.
JL: And will it be necessary when the time comes for them to prove that
they have been there for some considerable time and didn't arrive this
week?
PM: Yes, it will be like any other land claim which we have had under
statutory land rights, a relatively sophisticated process of hearing and
determining whether a native title truly exists. But the notion that we
have got all that empty land out there and there is a group of Aboriginals
a long way off hoping to be given some of it is not the situation at all.
They are actually there now, they are actually living on that land now. In 
the case of the Merian people in the Murray Islands around which the
case was built originally, they were still growing vegetables and
occupying and using the land as they were before Cook arrived and so
fte continuing association was obvious. In the same way this land canniot
be allocated to people other than those who are currently there now.
JL 0OK and can prove an ongoing association?
PM: Yes, exactly.
JL OK we will take same calls.
C: Thank you very much John, good morning.
PM Good morning.
C: What most people actually have no problem with the Mabo situation
except of course, maybe in the rural sector, but it is most probably the
ongoing benefits that they intend to worry them.
JL Can you just answer one question for me, excuse me for interrupting.
Why do you think that people have an ongoing problem in the rural
sector.
C: Because basically that dealing with the land on a day to day basis for
their own survival.
PM: Can I make the point though it is not their land, it is not same non-
Aboriginal persons land because if they have title to that land in the rural
sector a farm or a pastoral property, it is not an issue here, it is land
unconnected with that. I think that is the point.
JL So what the Prime Minister is saying, those people who do have a fear
In the rural area, the fear is unbased unless they are using land for
which they don't hold some sort of title, but if they have got freehold title
or leasehold title they have not got a worry in the world. Their land can
not be touched.
C: Can I continue but I think the situation with most people of white
background most probably, would be discrimination they feel that
basically the Prime Minister stated that under his ' One Nation' statement
that there will be more like a one nation situation, but there is one
hundred, there a thousand billion a year being dished out to a set group
and the result is there is separate bodies to administer that group which
could be taken care of quite equally by the Social Security and Ethnic
Affairs and the Housing Department. Which means to say that one
hundred billion could be quite easily distributed and those people then
come into line with everybody else. This is I think most probably most 
peopies beef, is that they feel they are being aiscriminated against in
relationship to those other people who have given the extra as you say,
ftindngs.
PM: Why don't we tryand dealiwith It. Your complaintIs aslIunderstand atIs
that Commonwealth funding for Aboriginal support and services Is
administered by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
and not by a Commonwealth department. It used to be administered by
a Commonwealth department, it was administered by the Department of
Aboriginal Affairs, bt a period, over t last 20 years or so I think we
found that that was not a successful mechanism or device to administer
funds to a community which is often removed from the capital cities, in
areas where there are not a lot of public facilities, where a normal
department which is issuing social security benefits just is not in a
position to be able to manage programs and where everybody the
Commonwealth's interest, the public interest, the budget and most
particularly the interest of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
was advantaged by having these funds allocated with closer attention to
the way in which the live and the places where they are and the kinds of
programs which they had to fund. Therefore ATSIC, the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Commission has now, I think, successfully played
a role in doing that. The key to it all is basically justice questions, the
same reasons the Commonwealth pays supporting parents benefit, the
same reason the Commonwealth pays unemployment benefit is
because people need it, it is allocated on the basis of need.
C: I don't get extra money, if I run out of money I can not go and get extra
money. . i
PM: You can if you are unemployed.
C: and expect it to be fixed up.
PM: You can if you are unemployed. If you run out of money and you run out
of work then you qualify for the unemployment benefit.
C: I have a case just recently, a guy had actually set aside a thousand odd
dollars that he had to pay the Tax Department. Two months later he
was on the actual unemployment situation, they said you go away and
spend that thousand dollars and then you can come back and get
unemployment benefit. He said that is allocated to the Tax Department.
JL: I don't quite understand, I lost it a bit.
PM: I can't resolve all those issues. I am just simply trying to respond to your
point that in some way funds for Aboriginal people are allocated on
same discriminatory basis in their favour. In fact that is not true, they
are allocated to again, on the basis of non-discrim ination so that social 
justice questions can be deait with in the Aboniginal community as they
are dealt with in the non-Abonginal community.
C: My children don't get paid to go to school.
PM: Your children might niot be paid to go to school of course. But again,
this is not true of Aboriginal people either, but things such as Austudy
which is available for secondary school on the basis of income is
available also to Aboriginal people and it is called Abstudy.
J L Yes, but the point that he is making is that some of these payments are
higher for Aboriginal people than they are for white people.
PM: But the thing is the State builds the schools, you are not building the
school either, it is being built with Commonwealth and State money and
that is just the same for Aboriginal communities. If your beef is that
there is in some way discrimination in favour of Aboriginal people, there
is no discrimination in favour of Aboriginal people, there may be funding
in favour of Aboriginal people so as to diminish the discrimination which
has already occurred against them.
J L You see it is designed, I read it this way, it is designed to create equality
where equality would not be possible were the Aboriginal people not
given a little extra at certain times in the areas of health and education.
C: In all my life I have never had any extras, I have always had to work..
JL You are one of the lucky ones, neither have I,. we have all done that
most of us. There is some who can't work, some Aboriginal people find
it difficult to get a job opportunity because they haven't had the
education, that they generated the work ethic and in order to get that
they perhaps need a little extra help at some time along the way. And
that is what is considered and perceived by people like you and many
other people understandably to be discriminatory.
C: I am not discriminatory, I've employed an Aborigine actually.
JL Yes.
C: in the morning, he disappeared at 9: 00 and came back on the
following Thursday for his pay.
JL That's right because they are not accustomed to having a work ethic, but
that has got to do with upbringing and background and not very much to
do with Mabo.
C: Thank you. 
JL We'll take another one maybe Prime Minister and then wind it up.
C: Mr Laws, Mr Prime Minister, I haven't got beef as such I am just a bit
puzzled. I have read the Mabo case a couple of times land rights In
order to settle the Queensland Coast Deregulatory Acts and the Racial
Discrimination Act being inconsistent with each other. Anid as such
every commentary you've made which have been very accurately
reported are in dicta, not in the judgement itself. So don't we have to
have a High Court case to actually decide whether they have land rights
first before everybody all go hysterical?
PM: No, they decided. I read earlier on the program that the decision of
Justice Masan, Brennon, Dean, Toolhey, Gaudron and McHugh and it
says this " native title to land survived the Crown's acquisition of
sovereignty in radical titleo. In other words it survived settlement.
C: I have got here assuming the Menam people could establish their
traditional land rights et cetera.
PM: There is no point in me debating the High Court decision with you. The
point I made earlier is this, that is what the High Court hear in evidence
or didn't hear, this was a case that went on for a very long period of time,
there is not point in you and me second guessing that. They have made
their position clear. But the point I made earlier is the key point. What
would people prefer, that is the Commonwealth and the States of this
country organising a body of administrative law and arrangements to
hear and award native titles sensibly and to provide certainty to the
whole of the Australian community and investment community or for the
Commonwealth to get right out of this and say we'll just leave this to the
High Court and the Federal Court to hear one claim after another? It
was the Murray Islands in the first place, it will be a piece of land
somewhere in north western NSW in the second case, it will be a piece
of land in Western Australia in the third case it will be one after the
other, then there will be hundreds over a period of years of claims which
will be heard by the Court and no certainty while ever those claims are in
process. Or you can have the Parliaments of this country responding to
the decision and setting up a body of law.
That is the right thing to do. What the Commonwealth is -trying to do
here is the right thing, that is to recognise the fact that a seminal change
has been made, a decision has been made by our most supreme of
courts saying that a native title exists.
C: They didn't. They have not said that native title exits, they said
assuming it exists.. 
PM: They nave. LOOK, there s no point in me oeing pecantic with you. I am~
reading it, I have got it night in front of me " native title of land survived
the Crown's acquisition of sovereignty.
C: Assuming the High Court did not, I am going back to Professor Lane's?
with the utmost respect in the world, I have got two very eminent people
pirofessionally and yourself giving different views.
PM: I'm not seeking to interpret the judgement, I am reading it to you.
C: Yes, but you are reading mostly dicta and not judgement.
PM: No I'm not. I can't sit on this program and read the various judgements
of each judge. The decision is about 200 pages long, but the summary
judgement is what I am reading.
JL: And the summary says clearly, I mean we haven't had one Premier want
to argue the point that you are arguing and given the opportunity they
would have liked to.
C: I am just going by Professor Lane's assertion on it and I am doing a
barrister's course at the moment.
JL: I think you have to pay attention to the summary that the Prime Minister
is reading to you in black and white right before his very eyes.
PM: It is all very simple this. In the end it boils down to. this, what the High
Court said if native people, Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islander
people are living on land that they have traditionally lived on and can
prove an association with then they can become a native title holder.
That is basically the sense of it, but where in the years since 1788 all
these grants of interests in land by the Crown, by State land ministers
and mines ministers have gone on, they have extinguished the native
title. Basically I am talking about native title over what is left and what is
left is areas mostly remote from the capital cities and which go beyond
the pastoral areas of this country, the freehold areas.
JL: OK, now we are going to have to call it a day there. In summary let's
just clarify the situation again once and for all so that we all understand.
The only claims that can be made are on land that have no title at all, no
lease title, no freehold title.
PM: That is right.
JL: They can only be effective claims if an ongoing association with that
land can be proved. 
( es. Say for titles issuea after 1975 wnich may oe issuea in a
discriminatory way and contravene the Racial Discnmination Act. In
those cases pastoral leases, there is a matter for judgement there about
what is called revival of title. But what I have said is in terms of the
Commonwealth making law on the matter, we would hold those pastoral
titles with ongoing economic use to have extinguished the native title.
JL And the same with freehold title?
PM: And the same with freehold title. With freehold it is dear. Where
freehold title is
JL Even after 1975?
PM: No after 1975 freehold titles could be issued invalidly. John, can I just
say this to you. The Aboriginal community always seemed to be
laggarded often by people, but I think people should understand this
concession that they have made and it is a very important one. From
1975 to 1993 for 18 years much valid native title would have the
prospect of becoming invalid and invalid non-Aboriginal title will be
made valid were the Commonwealth and the States to validate these
titles.
JL Yes.
PM: Now, if you are an Aboriginal person and you had a native title and it
was valid, would you voluntarily give up its validity for it to be rendered
invalid and to see an invalid title be made valid over an 18 year period of
thousands of titles and to do it willingly? That is what the Aboriginal
community have by and large offered the Govemments of this country
the agreement to validate those titles. Would a group of non-Aboriginal
Australians make a similar generous offer?
JL I would doubt it.
PM: See, how many non-Aboriginals say that is OK, look our title is valid but
you the States and the Commonwealth Government can render it invalid
and all those invalid titles you can make valid; I mean it wouldn't be
said.
JL No it wouldn't be said.
PM: The Aboriginal people have made this offer because they know in the
practicality of administering a set of arrangements under Mabo that land
was issued after 1975, it was probably issued in a discriminatory way
because the land manager at the time didn't know a native title existed.
Therefore they are saying morally these State ministers didn't know land
title existed, but legally we have the right to keep the validity and they 
are giving tnat up. ithink this community ougnt to unoierstana mne
generosity of that position.
JL OK the other point that I think Is probably one of the most Important
points is confidence in the rest of the world that investment in Australia
is safe and sound and that we are not going to have ongoing fights
about who owns what piece of land. Surety the sooner some statutory
body is set up by the Government and the States collectively to handle
all these things the sooner confidence in investment in Australia can be
renewed.
PM: Yes. There are two things, that is the titles from 1975-1993 have to be
validated, that means that all those valid native titles have got to be
Invalidated and the invalid non-Aboriginal titles have got to be validated.
That is the first point which brings certainty to all those leases issued
since 1975 and then as you say correctly we need mechanisms in place
to hear and award native title in the future.
JL: OK, now if compensation is made to the Aboriginal people in sizeable
sums of money, will the Commonwealth see to it that that money is put
in trust or invested property so that the interest payable from large sums
of money paid in compensation can go towards the billion dollars a year
now paid by the 98 per cent of other tax payers in Australia towards the
support of the Aboriginal people? In other words will they be
encouraged to support themselves with their own money?
PM: There is another concept here we have not mentioned and that the
question of revival of title. Let me explain this because it goes to
compensation. If say on a piece of native title land someone discovers
an alluvial gold deposit, it may be a deposit which can be mined within
seven years mining starts, seven years later the mining is finished.
There is no reason why we should needlessly extinguish the title that
has lasted all this time, thousands of years and now 200 years if you
like, and then extinguish it to allow the mining of a seven year gold
deposit. So, the proposition is that when the mining ceases the title
revives, the native title revives. In that event the compensation would
be much less because the native title holder has not lost the title and
given the fact that compensation anyway is going to go to surface
disturbance and inconvenience because the right to minerals will not be
vested in native title holders as it is not invested in non-Aboriginal title
holders there will be therefore no royalties, therefore the compensation
is basically about the same compensation a farmer would receive if
somebody drove across their land to put a transmission wire up or to put
a road through there.
JL: OK, but in order to placate the people who feel that they are being
discriminated against because the Aboriginal people are getting what
they consider correctly or incorrectly to be favourable treatment, if large 
compensation payments are mace then surely it would be in the
interests of the Commonwealth to see that some of that money was set
aside in some sort of trust fund in order that contribution could be made
to the Aboriginal people by the Aboriginal people.
PM: I think what will happen John, and this is a matter for in a sense
Aboriginal Australia itself, but by and large these funds would be paid to
the trust funds of the land councils and they would then be used for
Aboriginal purposes that is for justice and opportunity purposes and to
the extent that there is more funds available in the normal course of land
council management that of course, complements whatever the
Commonwealth is paying directly off the Budget.
JL: OK, thank you very much for your time you have been very generous
with it and we should try and keep it clear in the minds of people who do
tend to feel uncomfortable about it and again summarise by saying if
land is covered by lease hold or freehold title it can not be touched. That
many of the claims being made by the extreme Aboriginal groups are far
from realistic and will never come to fruition and unless the land is totally
unoccupied and an ongoing association with that land can be proved, no
land will be given to Aboriginal groups.
PM: Exactly, but I think the even greater point John is this. That if we want
to progress as a country truly at peace with itself inside, that is where
the opportunities available to Australians are equal opportunities the
Mabo judgement does give Australia a chance to even up, to give
Aboriginal people some of the rights that non-Aboriginal Australians
have had. So it is not a case of discrimination in favour of Aboriginal
people, it is a case of bringing them up to rights which non-Aboriginal
Australians have enjoyed. That coupled with the fact that we have as
ourselves changed as a community through the migration program,
through the sophistication of our society, it lets us get on with it and not
have this question about dispossession and if you like, criticism by other
countries of the way we manage our domestic affairs with our
indigenous people had put that aside and I think this is why the Mabo
decision is a great opportunity if handled properly, but again I repeat left
to the decision itself it will only affect a minority of Aboriginal people, it
will only beneficially affect a minority of Aboriginal people and that is why
we have to think about other social justice programs so that land may be
provided in some way to those who were formerly dispossessed of the
land and can't make a Mabo claim.
JL: OK, Prime Minister thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you John.
ends. 



TEL: 18. Jun. 93 13: 54 No. 011 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PAJ KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT OPENING OF ALP HEADQUARTERS, CANBERRA,
FRIDAY, 18 JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Bob ( Hogg), President Barry ( Jones) and other distinguished
members of the National Executive, particularly our Secretary Gary ( Grey),
Andrew ( Schroth) representing Civil and Civic, my Deputy Brian Howe, other
members of the parliamentary party, Lionel Bowen its lovely to see you
Uonel, Fred ( Daley), the father of the tribe as he is called I don't know
where that leaves Gough ( Whitiam), probably the Holy Ghost I suppose, with
many people vying for the job of Son. John Bannon and Angela who Is with
him, thanks for coming over John during your Presidency this occurred, David
Combe who was the first ' Mr Builder' of the Labor party, the Federal Labor party
and it is great to see him here on this occasion and other distinguished guests.
I am sure I have left somebody out, but I'm sure they will believe they are
distinguished, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very telling thing 10to see a modem, strong, contemporary building like this
opened under the ownership and name of the Australian Labor Party in 1993;
that Is Centenary House, a century on the Labor party has remained relevant to
Australia and useful to the Australia people. What often happens with political
parties over such an extended period, they are no longer useful to their
communities, the fall into disrepair, often disrepute, and they fade away. The
remarkable thing Is that our Party which, of course, has always taken its
strength and Inspiration from the great body of the Australian people has
maintalned Its strength of purpose and Its Integrity and Its usefulness to the.
community of Australia and therefore 100 years after its founding we still*
control the national government of Australia after a decade, many of the States,
and until recently most of the States, and here we are building a building to take
us on into the next century as this building will.
This must say something about us as a Party, about our capacity to change,
our ability to tap the consciousness of the Australian ommuiy oudrtn 
TEL: 18. Jun. 93 13: 54 NO. 011 P. 02/ 04
2
Its aspiratons, and to try and do justice to them. The building represents more
than an Investment or an abode for our federal officers, It represents in a very
tangible way the life spirit of the Labor party In that In difficult financial times
even and with another federal election behind us aind its expense we have been
able to build a building like this and perhaps a testimony to the culture we hav# e
ushered In In this country to see it built under budget and under time. That Is a
tribute to Civil and Civic, but of course a greater tribute to the people who work
and build bildings, the workers of this country, and In this case of the ACT.
who put this building up.
It speaks muvch about the contemporary Labor party and its relevance to
modem Australia and as Barry said a moment ago we are out there again,
starting to draw on some of those Issues which have for so long lain dormant
which Indicates we will always be the Party of change In this country and the
Party that recognises the true underlying issues of substance and tries to do
something about them. I sincerely hope that in this year where so many young
people are now joining the party one of the great things about the election Is
that thousands of young people are joining the Labor party. I went to a function
for Clyde Holding recently in Melbourne on the occasion of his 31 st year In
elective public life and a third to forty per cent of the people there would have
been under 30. We are seeing them coming to our State branches, people
phoning up to join, and for a party to get such an Infusion of youth and
enthusiasm will, of course, carry us on for another generation.
This is a tremendous change for us. We don't have mass parties In Australia,
we like to think we are mass parties, they are not large parties neither the
Labor party nor the Coalition parties they are not large by world standards,
but they are enthusiastic, they are paticipatory parties and to get such a
charge from young people today Is tremendous.
So, If you look at the building and the election and subsequently the
enthusiasms of the election are embracing these great national Issues and the
Influx of young people I think it has got to say a lot about the Party which fit
very nicely with the deblsion to build this building.
It Is funny how foresight always matters, and David Combe had this when he
built our first building, which was a struggle. David was always a frustrated
developer and became a developer not long thereafter and we got the building
up and the building, in our most difficult time in our financial history of recent
times, stood us In great stead as we sold some of it down to pay the election
costs of the previous election. But it said more than that, it was again at its.
time a contemporary building, a brave statement of the Labor party it put a
large building which was then, by Canberra's reckoning, a large building. And I
always thought it was very nicely juxtaposed against the pastiche the Ulberal
party put up a couple of blocks away. It was almost lifted straight from the
suburbs of Connecticut, this architectural pastiche which fitted the politi~ cal
pastiche of the Uberal party. Here they were all being tradltional, this must
have been In their ' all the way the L13J' phase. Or it cp~ sd by ee ht hy 
TEL: -18. Jun. 93 13: 54 No. 011 P. 03/ 04
3
Eggleton looking suitably wise and Menzian felt he had to be surrounded by a
building with traditional cultural emblems of more conservative times and
values. So they built this building and I have always thought it was a scream.
Every time I have come past It I have always thought it was a scream of a
building. But it sits over there, and In and out they go In their cars and when
ever their crises are on In they walk, with the little Georgian windows and you
used to see Tony Eggieton bobbing around through his oval Georgian spoked
window. Isn't this them? And Its just the same, whether Its last week with Mabo or be it
the republic. We have now got Petrou Georglau, who must be breaking new
ground for anyone with a name like that, pushing John Hewson towards
standing up to the monarchy last week when he supposedly wrote the signature
tune on his last speech. Well, be careful John, be careful. That is all I say.
Don't ail believe that old advisers are good advisers. But this Is them. It
doesn't matter what it Is in the contemporary environment, you can bet they will
always be down the time tunnel there, tripping along behind us.
Anyway, here we are brave as always, modern to a fault, putting up this
wonderful building and let me pay you know I am normally such a critic of
packing case architecture and Australians architects and the post-modem
school but, I think Darryl Jackson and Alister Swain have done a marvellous
job here. When our architects get It right, they get It right in a big way and we
want to thank them for this effort and with the builders they have done
something really contemporary and good for us.
I think It says a lot about the spirit of the Party, that we should, in difficult
political times and they were, jump In and build a building like this In bad
financial times as well. Of course we had the support of the trade unions and
the ACTU In the financing of John Curtin House and acquisition of half the
property, but can I say, to particularly John Bannon who was the President,
under his leadership and, most particulaly In an executive sense, to Bob Hogg
a second ' Mr Buiider has come along and put up a building for us and though
Bob has now left the federal secretaryship of the Party he leaves behind
another monument to his great contribution to the Australian Labor Party. Barry
mentioned ItIn Victoria, we have mentioned itI nt he national domain of national
politics and a couple of significant national elections, but in organisational
terms, Bob will go down as one of the greats of our Party and this building will
be here probably when we are ali long gone.
Thank you Bob, and John, for your work here today, but I would like to thank
David Combes for starting this process of giving the Labor Party assets which it
Is able to call, on In difficult times, for those of you in the National Executive
particularly. And I would like to also thank the Auditor-General as the tenant. I
thought the last time we attacked him in the House he might have oancelled the
lease, but he didn't, he has done the right thing by us and even the super
sleuths like Senator Bishop have been over the lease and apparently she thinks 
TEL: 18. Jun. 93 13: 54 No
4
it is all right as well. So there we are, clean as a whistle. There Is nothing like
getting a Seal of approval from the obscurantists of the Opposition.
Can I now say to the Party In general this Is a monument to our vitality and our
verve. I am very pleased to be associated with It, It is a tribute to be here, it is
nice to be asked to officially open it and to unveil the plaque. Thank you.
ends U
S m" .011 



TEL: 18. Jun 53 16: 25 No. 015 P. 01/ 04
76/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
I have today written to the Premiers and Chief Ministers informing them of how
the Commonwealth Is proceeding on the Mabo Issue.
We are proposing Commonwealth legislation which will provide the framework
for certainty In land management and a just and workable approach towards
native title. I have Invited the Premiers and Chief Ministers to co-operate. A
complementary Commonwealth State approach remains our preferred
course. I am prepared to consult on the proposed legislation bilaterally with
Premiers/ Chief Ministers who have accepted the fundamental premises that
native title is a reality which must be recognised, Identified and dealt with justly,
and that the objective Is a national approach, not fragmentation across the
country. Consultation will also continue at officials level.
CANBERRA 18 JUNE 1993 g 4 
TEL: PRIME MINISTER CAN0EUR1RA
18 JUN 1993
My dear Premier
Since our discussions at COAG, I have naturally given thought to how we
should proceed on the Mabo issue.
It has long been clear and I think that there is no disagreement about this
that legislation will be required to deliver certainty and fairness in terms
of land management.
It remains my firm view that thc resolution of the Mabo issue is a national
imperative and that we should be striving for a coherent approach across
Australia. Thus I favour a legislative approach which integrates State and
Territory responsibili ties for land management with Commonwealth
responsibilities for setting a framework of standards and principles. You
will recall that the various documents which were put on the table at
COAG referred to a " national" legislative framework and that, in the final
event, I referred explicitly to Commonwealth legislation.
Accordingly, the Commonwealth will now focus on developing draft
legislation, while continuing to address the wider Mabo issues.
Notwithstanding some of the obviously strong disagreement ' s at
Melbourne, we will be taking into account views expressed and progress
made there. j~ 4. i
T1EL8:. Jun. 93 16: 25 No. 015 P. 02/ 04 
TEL: 18. Jun. 93 16: 25 No. 015 P. 03/ 04
2
We will fulfil our responsibilities to set a framework which recognises the
need for just treatment of native title, workable ways of managing land
throughout Australia, and the wellbeing of the economy.
But we continue to seek, if possible, a complementary approach with the
States and Territories. State and Territory law, processes and institutions
would apply if they measure up to the requirements established in the
Commonwealth bill.
In essence, the following are the main matters the Bill will cover
recognition, protection and appropriate ways of dealing with
native title
provisions to facilitate the validation of existing grants
principles or bench marks for future dealings in land which
impact on native title
establishment of Tribunals for the registration of claims, and
for their determination
parameters in relation to compensation.
I am preparcd to consult on the proposed legislation. My preferred
outcome is to achieve a solid package, in co-operation. By the same
token, individual jurisdictions will do the national interest rno service with
attempts to go it alone.
Suggestions have been made for a further discussion at the Premiers'
Conference in early July. I think it is hard to judge at this stage whether it
w6uld be fruitful to list the item on the conference agenda.
I have askcd Commonwealth officials to meet with State counterparts to
see what common ground can be reached and to help inform the
preparation of our draft bill.
I am myself prepared to talk bilaterally to Premiers/ Chief Ministers over
the next couple of weeks provided the fundamental premises are accepted
that * native title is a reality which must be recogniscd, identified and dealt
with justly; and q. 
~ TEL 3
the objective is a national approach, not fragmentation of the
approach across the country.
We can then, I suggest, judge closer to the event whether it would be useful
to aim for afirther formal discussion of Mabo.
urs sincee ly
P J KEAT N ' ti. 2.
4.
18. Jun. 93 16: 25 No. 015 P. 04/ 04 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DEPARTURE DOORSTOP, RAAF BASE FAIRBAIRN,
SUNDAY 20 JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, Tim Fischer says you are going to split the nation over
Mabo. Is that a real threat?
PM: Look, a little bit of restraint on Mr Fischers part would go a long way.
That Is, he Is supposed to be a national leader not somebody rousing a
National Party conference. Last Friday I wrote to the Premiers and the
letter contaIns a number of gestures which encourages the development
of a co-operative arrangement between the Commonwealth and the
States. Some Premiers have seen that and others have not or have not
wanted to, but that is the import of it and I am quite sure as
Commonwealth officials speak to State officials while I'm away, when I
return, I think, I will be able to open up a dialogue with some of the
Premiers.
J: What Is on the top of your agenda on this trip Mr Keating?
PM: For Korea and China, Korea Is a large trading partner of Australia
basically economic issues. China is now attracting substantial
Investment from Australia, it Is about the third or fourth largest economy
In the world and it is growing rapidly. So, largely ecoomIc Issues, trade
Issues, questions such as APEC and general foreign policy and political
issues.
J: How Important Is trade between China and Australia?
PM: It Is -important now, but It will become more Important. It Is already
growing quite rapidy and the Chinese economy Is, as I say, about the
third or fourth largest In the world and growing at 7 or 8 per cent a yewr.
4w It Is very important to Australia In trade terms and also In Investment
terms. r 
N' 2
J: Will you be raising the Issue of human rights with Premier U! Peng?
PM: I will take the opportunity of expressing Australia's views about such
matters, we always have and I will be again.
J: Can human rights get In the way of trade issues though If there Is a
problem there?
PM: China Is a major country and a major country has to be dealt with on a
breadth of issues and that is what I will be doing.
J: You are not doing any sightseeing at all by looking at the itinerary..
PM: Well, It Is three days in each place and it is pretty full of official
engagements. I hope to make the best of It, cover as much ground as I
can In the time I have got available which is a week. But again, for~ two
countries it Is enough.
ends 



S. j_
TEL: 21. Jun. 93 18: 44 No. 025 P. 01/ 10
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER# THE HON P J KEATING, NP
OFFICIAL DINNER HOSTED BY PRESIDENT KIM YOUNG-SAM
CHONG WA DAE ( THE BLUE HOUSE), SEOUL, 21 JUNE 1993
( EMBARGOED UNTIL 8.00 PM KOREAN TIME, 21 JUNE 1993)
I appreciate very much the warm welcome I have received
on this my first visit to the Republic of Korea.
Ours is a friendship of long standing which spans the
turbulent history of the Western Pacific in this century.
Our first contacts date from the arrival here around the
turn of the century of Australian missionaries.
in 1950, Australia was one of the 16 countries which sent
military forces under the United Nations flag to assist
the Republic of Korea in its bitter struggle against
aggression.
About 17,000 Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen
served in the United Nations forces. Australians will
always be proud of the service they gave.
The loss of life and devastation caused by the Korean War
was horrendous, and it has demanded of the Korean people
great qualities of faith and endurance, not just to
withstand he haydship end suffering, but to overcome it
and build this mo~ dern Korean society.
Australians who know Korea well admire Koreans' courage
and resilience.
They respect not only your recent achievements: they
respect also your long struggle earlier this century to
achieve independence and to reassert the rich tradition
of your national heritage and culture.
As one of the world's ol~ dest democracies, Australians
also applaud the great achievement of the Korean people
in establishing democratic political institutions.
We congratulate you, Mr President, on your decisive win
in last December's presidential election.
My own Governmuent was returned in the Australian election
which was held in March. 
TE: 21. Jun. 9 3 18: 44 No. 025 P. 02/ 10
2
So like you, I know something of the excitement and
challenge of the electoral process.
Your election as the first civilian President in 35 years
is itself a great step forward in the maturing of the
Korean political system.
We admire the vigour with which your new Administration
has set about the task of stimulating and revitalising
the economy.
We are no less impressed by your campaign to strengthen
democratic institutions and create in Korea honest and
open government.
Mr President, what I have seen in Seoul today helps me to
understand In new ways the pride of your people in their
achievements in economic development and nationbuilding.
Korea ' s record of economic growth and dynamism over the
last four decades has been truly impressive.
We value greatly the partnership that we have forged with
you in the course of your extraordinary economic advance.
In 19921 AuStralia-Korea two-way trade was worth over
five billion Australian dollars.
The size of Australia-Korea trade and the interdependence
it generates between key industries on each side give our
economic relationship a strategic character which commits
us to an enduring, long-term partnership.
We are a reliable source of high quality and
competitively priced mineral and energy commodities for
Korean industry, and this is a role we take very
seriously., i
As well as expanding established areas of commerce, we
are interested in widening and diversifying the base of
our economic and business relationship.
We also would like to see expanding air links to Support
the growth of tourism, education and business travel in
both directions.
Increasing numbers of visitors in both directions,
establishment of parallel cultural foundations, and
efforts to promote the study of the Korean language in
Australia will increase awareness of each other's society
and culture.
And that can only deepen our friendship.
TEL: 
-Tf E C: 21 . Jun .93 * 18: 4 A No .025 P d3/ 1Oi
3
Mr President, our strong and successful bilateral
relationship also provides Australia and Korea with an
opportunity to work together in helping nurture a
stronger sense of community among the countries of the
Asia-Pacific region.
Australia arnd Korea share a fundamental interest in the
maintenance of an open and non-discriminatory
multilateral trading system.
We also share a vital interest in encouraging economic
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region, and in having the
countries of North America and the Western Pacific remain
together within the some vibrant trading community.
In 1989, our countries played decisive roles in helping
launch the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC
process which is now showing such promise as a vehicle
for promoting open economic regionalism in the Pacific
area. I have been encouraged by the strong support given by the
Korean Government to the proposal I made last year to
establish a process of periodic meetings of APEC leaders.
interest in this proposal is now gathering momentum.
If realised, it will add status and authority to APEC and
ensure that it becomes the pre-eminent vehicle for
advancing economic cooperation and trade liberalisation
in the Asia-Pacific region.
The economic dynamism of the Republic of Korea and other
East Asian countries provides a very positive outlook for
our region.
But to achieve this great promise it will be important
that our efforts towards economic institution-building
through APEC are complemented by appropriate attention to
regional abcurittr.
Australia recognises continuing uncertainty in the
security situation on the Korean Peninsula.
More widely in the region, a general trend towards a more
favourable security outlook is tempered by increased
fluidity in strategic affairs.
Maintaining in good order the bilateral alliances that
Australia, the Republic of Korea and Japan each have with
the United States Is therefore very important.
In addition, both our countries welcome the increasing
support throughout the region for processes of security
dialogue. 
TEL: 21. Jun. 93 18: 44 No. 025 P. 04/ 10
4
Mr President, as I explained in our talks today,
Australia is now embarked on a sustained effort to make
our economy more competitive, more open and better placed
to take full advantage of economic dynamism in East Asia.
For Australia, the economic imperative of integrating
more closely with Asia coincides well with the regional
focus of our diplomatic and security policy.
The Asia-Pacific region is where Australia must work out
its destiny: the changes we have made and are continuing
to make, to our economy and to our business and
industrial culture, have been expressly geared to this.
These efforts are now finding expression in an
Increasingly confident and independent view of
Australia's national Identity, and a broad debate about
the institutional forms and symbols of our nationhood
reflects this.
As we strive to transform our economy and engage Asia
more closely, we value all the more the relationship we
enjoy with the Republic of Korea.
Based on trust and friendship and a congruence of
economic and regional interests, our relationship with
you can only advance and prosper.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I should be glad if you would join me in a reciprocal
toast to the good health of President and Mrs Kim
to the success and prosperity of the Republic
of Korea, and
to Australia-Korea friendship. 



' 1 TEL: J21. un. 93 14: 49 No. 016 P. 01/ 02
T EL
PRIME MINISTER
TRAIISCRIPF OF INTERVLEW WITH PRIME MNISTER FOLLOWING
MEETING WITH PRESIDENT KIM YOUNG-SAM, SHILLA HOTEL,
SEOULO KCOREA, 21/ 6/ 93
PH: Well I've just come away from a very convivial
discussion with President Kim Young-sam, a long and
Interesting meeting vwhere I think we found such
common ground on many issues. We had a broad
discussion about our relationship between our two
countries, the context we york in in tre Asia
Pacific, various janUes which relate to North Asia,
in particular that is, the relationship on the
Korean Peninsula. Various problems vith the North, a
discussion abot the nuclear issue, their relations
with other countries In the region China and
Japan and ours, APBC and its prospects. In all a
very truitful conversation which 1' ll be happy to
qIve you more details about at the press conference
later.
J; Prime Minister is Australian business doing enough
to get into this rapidly growing market do you
think?
PX; Well We've rmt done that such, either countryl, in
terms of Investment compared to say other countries
ot the area. And yet we are natural partners. Korea
In already a customer for a very large proportion of
our mineral exports and we can do much ore
together. The complementary nature of the economies
is really quite profound. So, I think they see
Australia having particular advantages, not just as
a raw material supplier, but as a provider of
services and also our skills in sUch things as
telecommunications, water quality, the environmental
sciences, computer sciences and services
education services, tourism. There is I think
tremendous potential between these two countries and
maybe veve been late in the piece discovering It,
but I think certainly the President understands
that, a e e2 
TEL:' 21. jun. 93 14: 49 No. 016 P. 02/ 02
-2-
3: you raisa" the isue of the republic in the speech
at lunch time. Peter Reith's nov Saying only a
tolken debate, John Rewson' a back ing off at a hundred.
miles ani hour. Isn't this rather bad ne for you?
PK: gor X think that it may not in the first Instance be
good ses for Autralia. I mean, you're not seeing
the ladrship from the Oppoition on any of these
subjects. mr Reith regards hivself an a champion
* soler on constitutional referenda. Let me tell you
I may this to the Liberal Party advisedly -he
was the Labor Party's, beat asset in the last fifteen
to eighteen months. No wat withouat a shadow of a
doubt throughi all our plling and everything
else M r Reith was wn iquously Labr's best
asset. Nov. whenever he wish*$ to come to the
leadership of the Liberal Party ye will, of course,
be over the soon.
As far as Dr Howson is cncerned, Dr Hewson has an
opportunity to show some real form on a matter which
the High Court has made a decision about and t6 put
down the crude and primitive remarks of the leader
of the National Party -he's obviously in a
position way beyond his capacities in life -and
also to make it clear on the matter that Australia
not should, but must, become a sovereign country
where its head of state is an Australian, on that
there must be leadership from the Liberal Party and
if it's not first Instance it will have to come
later.
ends. 



TEL: 21. Jun. 93 18: 44 No. 025 P. 05/ 10
PRIME MINISTER
PI6M3 maiSTm'S PRESS COxER= C FOLLOWIG METIuG WTB
SIDOT IN YOumkG-SAmN, SUULA OTKL, S= UL, KOREA,
31/ 6/ 93
PI: Can I first say I am delighted to be making my first
visit to the Republic of Korea. Korea is a long
standinq friend and trading partner of Australia and
an increasingly influential player in regional
affairs. It is therefore valuable to have this
opportunity to zeet President Kim Young-Sam and to
talk with him about our bilateral relationship and
also the wider interests we share in the region.
Could I say that this morning I had an excellent
discussion with President Kim and we covered a lot
of ground and I was struck by the extent of our
agreement on all the issues we discussed. As a
career politician I took pleasure in congratulating
bin on being Korea's first civilian President in
more than thirty years. I also congratulated his on
the support he has received for his bold program of
economic and government reform.
He talked about Worth Korea, including the nuclear
program and he thanked me for Australia's strong
support on that issue, we talked in detail about the
Important relations each country has with the United
States, Japan and China. We agreed on the need to
maintain our close defence alliance with the United
States and to develop, in addition, security
dialogues with regional countries. We were in firm
agreement on APEC, on the need to carry forward its
trade liberalising agenda. We also agreed to hold,
as soon as possible, a meeting of APEC leaders. We
discussed our bilateral relationship between
Australia and Korea and agreed it was in sound
shape. We talked about the need to have our economic
relationship expand and diversify and to take
advantage of Australia's standard of skills in areas
like telecommunlcations, computer software and
environmental technology. We agreed to establish a
joint economic committee of senior officials which
will provide a more integrated apprQach to Our
widening relationship. overall( a'-;. jectie! n -n 
I FL. 2
this visit re 3dtaol13ft a stronq worxina
relationship with Presidenr Aim and his Government;
to carry forvard our dialogue on APEC and other
regional iseues and overall to demonstrate
Australia's p-tential to have a wider economic
relationship vith lorea. I thInk we've made a good
start. And nov I as happy to take your questions.
J: Kr Prime Minister, could you tell us regarding the
regional security dialogue, could you expand on it?
Would It be an 3EC-3Le multilateral forum?
PH: go, no we see APEC as having a role in the econmic
dialogue as essentially an economic institution. lut
a wider regional security dialogue can occur outside
Of the formal treaty arrangements between the United
States and Korea, the United States and Japan and
the United states and Australia. That is, instead of
simply along those lines of treaties and formal
discussions we can also have discussions about
security issues within the region.
J: I have two questions. Number one, you were
mentioning about upgrading the current APEC
ministerial meeting to a Summit. How do you propose
to resolve the problem of representation by the socalled
" three Chinas' Chinese Taipei, Hong long
and Mainland? my second question is also on the
regional security dialoque. There are speculations
here that security dialogue will take place within
the existing frameworks of APEC and ASREXM' TANC.
How so you expect to develop those two frameworks
and do you see any competition between those two?
PM: I don't see APEC having a role in regional security
issues. It is one which has been currently built
around that is, any economic discussion
built around the post-ASAN Ministerial Council
Meeting. And that I think is working quite well and
providing a discussion beyond the formal treaty
discussiofs which most of us have been in. On A PEC
itself I think that one of the matters which I'll be
speaking to the Premier of China about will be the
prospect of China's representation at an APEC
leaders' meeting and its views in relation to the
other economies of Taiwan and Kong Kong. And I think
that maybe after that time we'd be able to have a
clearer idea of where China and the other economies
stand. Suffice to say I'd be very surprised it China
wouldn't see an invitation by President Clinton to
covens a leaders' meeting as an opportunity.
J: Prime Minister you talked in your speech today about
asking America to convene a meeting. Are you putting
pressure on then to convene the meeting and when do
you think it might be? I
X1. jUFl. V-. 40044q 1U. U I. V0/ 1U 
TEL: 21. Jun. 93' 18: 44 No. 025 P. 07/ 10
3
PIE: No, I think that were APEC countries to be
represented on a leaders basis it would give it more
political authority and therefore the horsepower it
meds to do things. But aqain, that's not A matter
-of urgency from our point of view. I think it ought
to happen but it's not a matter of urgency. Ad
therefore while there has been some interest on the
United states in coneidering holding such a seeting
Svhether it is this year or next year or the year
after I think is Immaterial to the holding of
It. So, ye're not putting any pressure on the United
States to hold a meeting. Ta is a view coming from
within the adinistration about the usefulness of
AP
J: Australia enjoys more than two billion dollars trade
surplus with Korea, but actually Australia levies
more than thirty percent on imported Korean
textiles, fabrics and cars. Korea only levies at ton
percent of custom tariff and so that means
( inaudible).. another barrier for that. And also
Australia is one of the major countries to
( inaudible)... for the anti-dumping to the Korean
oommodities. So what do you think about that, and
the second thines is there is a little
disappointment from the Korean side because this
time there are no ministers or high ranking
officials from the trade side it seess like
Australia is not putting their efforts to
diminishing trade surpluses with Korea.
P: I think there a just a couple of points to make
about that. The first is that Korea has a, largely,
balance of trade with the United States but ye have
a large imbalance of trade with the United States.
Our current account deficit is of the order of about
sixteen billion and we have a trade deficit with the
United States of the order of about seven billion.
So, what may be your trade surplus, from time to
time, with the nited Statesis our trade deficit.
And I think seeing that in the broad picture is the
vay to see it. Secondly, and I think the reason why
we say have a surplus with Korea at the moment
and I emphasize at the moment is that your
economy has been growing quite strongly and
therefore you have been requiring raw materials
etcetera from Australia. We. on the other hand, have
been growing over the last couple of years quite
slowly. And therefore the demand for Korean exports
has been slower and therefore, in a sort of
temporary way, that trade gap has opened. As we
speed up I think you'll see a more even and more
natural balance in the trade.
PH: On the other questions of access, Australia will
have a general manufacturing tariff of 5 per cent by
1997 and 15 per cent for motor cars. No quotas.
Complete transparency, no quota..', a provides " th. 
TEL: 4
opportunity for any country that's competitive and
that includes Korea to seek to sell its products
within Australia. So, we are preaching the lowering
of trade barriers and we are doing what we preach.
Finally, anti-dumping measures affect about i per
cent only of Korean exports to Australia. I think
it'es just a handful of cases. fe don't use antidumping
measures as a protective device. And the
other thing is, I think, Korea Is currently
exaaining the adoption of Australian. anti-dumping
techniques and policies for its own economy. So,
that tends to suggest to me that the Government of
Korea understands this point vell if others don't.
J: Inaudible.
PH: In answer to the last part of the question, that Is
the first I've heard of that notion and certainly
that is the notion that one should have a caravan of
business people with one to denote one's seriousness
about issues. This is not the view of the
Government of Korea, I am sure. The President
didn't raise the question of anti-dumping today. He
alluded to the trade surplus but in the context of
Australia supplying Korea's inputs for its worldwide
trade and therefore, its trade balances with other
countries to whom it supplies goods offsets the
imbalance Australia enjoys with Korea for its raw
materials. I think the President also understood my
point, that is that with tariffs coming down to very
low levels by the late 1990s, a total absence of
quotas and total transparency in protection that
there are opportunities to grow and we can see that
in the very rapid 20 per cent growth of exports in
the last year. Exports from Korea to Australia.
So, I think the Government of Korea sees this in a
proper economic and trading context.
J: Priame Niister, have you perceived yet any Korean
interest in our land debate on Aboriginal land title
and if there is any interest or knowledge what's
been the reaction to some of the more vigorous
opposition to the land title movement?
P1: No, there was no reference to it whatsoever.
J: Could you explain what are the priorities for the
Joint Economic Committee? Can you also comment on
why it was established as a ministerial group as is
the case I think, with our two other major trading
partners, Japan and the United States, given the
rapid growth Korea has as our major trading partner?
PM: Well I think as In many things one is better to feel
one's way before one dashes to a ministerial group
and much can be gained, I think, by a bette.
understanding of the two econoit.* ou; tIh. e two;.
" i
21. Jn. 9318: 4 No. 25 P08/ 0 
TEL: 21. Jn. 9318: 44 No. 0625 P. 09/ 10
bureaucracies each having a better knowledge of the
@ thor country and the issues in trade and
Ivestment. That will be the primary focUs of this
buresacratic ~ ruin Tat in to understand the
issues in tra r* n" nveetmekat and to understand
then in sucb a way as to be able to ef feet changqes
between the two countriles which enlhanlce our trade
and investment opportuftities. We think there is a
great complementary quality In these two economies
and even though we have a substantial trade between
us It has been to date largely centred around raw
materials and we need to diversity that Into
manufactures and services from bot directions so,
this would be the purpose of the group. Thatos not
to say there will stil1 lof course be meetings of
Foreign Ministers and Trade Ministers periodically,
and Industry Ministers an was the case with Minister
LOO's visit here recently.
Prime Minister, what sort of ass5esmet did you get
froom President Kim about the North Korean decision
to back away from the earlier decision to quit the
NPT!. Did you get a sense that it's a permanent
decision or that North Koreans might revisit back
and acre broadly, whtat sort of assessment did you
get on the state of tension?
H: Well, I think the President made clear to me that he
was pleased by the halt to the withdrawal by worth
Korea frou tihe Nuclear non-Proliferation Treaty and
International Atomic Energy Agency processes and
inspections. So far as it gooe, the halt is at
least a step in the right direction thouqh it
doesn'lt resolve the question of international.
inspections, credible International inspections of
North lorea's facilities. I made clear to the
President that Australia does support credible
international inspections of North Korea's
facilltips and of course, we both agreed the
Peninsula would be better without the further
development of nuclear programs leading to weapons
and the influence this may have in deutabilislng or
upsetting at least the region in torus of strateg ic
concerns. So I thInk the President was happy Vith
Australi; FS view which we had put not ju~ st privately
but in international for&amp; which We bad put publicly:
On the second part of the question about tensions on
the Peninsula, a very large part of North Korea's
GRP is spent on defence. From memory upwards' Of
per cent from an econoImy Which in somewhat
debilitated, this ts a very large expenditure and a
shift of resources# an unwarranted shift of
resources this Obviously makes for tension not just
in the Peninsula but in the area because we're led
to believe that China does not support the
development of a nuclear WeaPOO-8 , Agram by-North.
Korea either. But again, IWtjb n(* ~ p~ a~ 
TEL 6
the Governmen~ ft in Korea, the Goverl3Oft Of 1orea has
lwivihe tis ansoflnow for Many years and t
tink waths tsanSn that context a debate
oant~ ilbd to at least no vithdrawal from th04 e
aslin resumption of discussionsU about the LIport
ofa North Korean Naclear Program-
3: I know there are a lot of Koran compatriots in
Australia. Do you hove any policy in the future to
accept more Korean Lumigrants and if you have any
such policyo plea" s let us know.
PI: Well, Australia has the highest per capita
immigration~ policy in the western world. We take
sore people per head of populationl if you take a
five year average at any time than any comparable
Country. Australia has a non-dism intr
Limiration program, that is non-discriminatory as
to race or religion. There is a perception in the
Korean consciousness through your education system a
knowledg 0Of hustralia's migration program in the
past whch discriminated In favour of furopeans.
This has long since p66sed twenty years ago and that
io why now we have got a very multicultural
Population with almost half the intake each year now
coming from Asia. SO this is a substantial change
on twenty year. ago and that is why nov there is a
very substantial Korean population in Australia, a
very large Vietnamese comunity, a very large
Chinese community, a substantial Japanese coiMunity
along with communities froz the Middle East, Western
ftropeo etc.
J: PriNe Minister, from your discussionstdy i Q
got any Indication at how Korea perceive todyde q
prospect ' Of Australia becoming a republic an4
whether that would have any spin-of fs in terms of
Our acceptance In the region or our trading
relationships?
PIw Woo there was no expressed reference to Australia
becoming a republic. itiki onre uha
Korea they expect a natink to manis ownh atny
and T think that point ie trosably beont destny
for then. Pobbybeodcosn
Thank you one and all.
Ends 



TEL:
VA 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 0' 1/ 10
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE BON F J KEKATING NP
KOREA riORRICR ThADE ASSOCIATIONI
SEOUL MONDAY# 21 JJIE, 1993
It is a great pleasure for me to address this gathering
of business people here in one of the most dynamic and
influential. capitals of the region.
Korea is important to us, of coursei as one of our
biggest trading partners.
But it is important in other ways as well.
Korea is an example of a country which, in recognising
necessity, recognised great opportunities and found the
Way to grasp them.
A country which was determined to re-create itself, which
imagined success in the world and found success.
K~ orea has been an outstanding example of successful
change. An example and an incentive k7uto of course, we are very
different countries and we will find success in different
Ways. in an entirely different cultural, political and
historicat enviizonment, Australia is also undergoing a
radical transformation.
A deregulated economy, a new psychology and new
disciplines in business and industry, a new labour
relations culture, new manufacturing and export
priorities imperatives most of all, a new orientation
towards the region.
Today Australians do business in ways which had not been
imagined a decade ago. And they do much more business in
East Asia.
It has been an epoch-making decade in Australia our
decade of re-definition. And we defining It further.
in recent times Australians have recognised th~ e necessity
to coinpete in the world, to be less reliant Onl 
TEL: 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 02/ 10
2
coymodities, to change the idea of Australia from that
of a country which needed to do little more than exploit
its material resources, to one which also exploits its
intellectual resources.
From one which exploits her vast reserves of natural
energy, to one which also calls on the energy of her
people. Change is being vigorously discussed in other realms aS
well: about how to deliver justice to Aboriginal
Australians for instance; about the institutional and
symbolic representations of our nationhood, about
projecting an iuage of Australia which reflects the
modern cultural complexity of Australia, about whether
Australia would be better served by a republican form of
government. In a significant sense all these debates derive from the
same source, namely the recognition of the new realities
facing us and the need to create a new Australia to meet
those realities.
They are all debates about issues which, in the interests
of expediency, or old loyalties and connections, or
because we were for a long time carried along by our
comodities, previous Australian governments and previous
generations were able to ignore or defer.
Today we can't ignore them. We came to understand that
in the 1980c. And the response from Australians has
been, I believe, a reason for pride and confidence.
but in Australia we face new challenges to keep raising
our level of competitiveness, to find the means of
concentrating our national enOrgies: so toO, I know
does Korea have to deal with the challenges of a more
sophisticated economy.
Korea has also been important to us to all of us In the
region fbr the'foresight and skill of its contribution
to the creation of an Asia-Pacific economic community.
It was here in Seoul four years ago that Australia and
Korea launched the initiative that has today become the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation group.
Two years ago it was again Seoul which hosted the third
meeting of APEC ministers.
When the history of APEC is written it will begin with
that Seoul declaration of 1991 the set of principles
upon which APEC is founded.
Principles of open regionalism, of liberal and expanding
trade connecting the two sides of the Pacific, which
underlie the emerging Asia-Pacific economic comunity. 
TEL 3
Over the years the Republic of Korea and Australia have
continued to work closely together on this great
objective of linking the Western Pacific and North
America. The objective of spreading a net of government
understandings and cooperation under the booming growth
of Pacific trade and industry.
In APEC we produce half the world's output.
Already the degree of regional integration is very high.
of our total trade, two thirds is between APEC countries.
We can observe within the Asia-Pacific region all the
signs of an increasingly rapid and unique economic
integration.
We can see shifting patterns of production as labourintensive
industry is relocated to China and Indonesia,
for example; while Singapore and Korea develop newer and
more capital-intensive industries based on services or
new technologies.
We can see successive waves of restructuring as Japanese
industry is forced off-shore by the ever rising yen.
We can see the growth of trade within the same industry,
but between different APIC countries.
We can see the growth of trade within the same
corporation, but again between different APEC countries.
We can see the rapid growth of investment across APEC
borders and the growth in services trade.
The notion that trade policy is only about access for
goods, about tariffs and concessions, is dead.
That is whvy the trade-liberalising agenda being pursued
in APEC is one wich accommodates diversity and which
focuses on changes from which all participants gain.
Today, only four years after the process was launched in
seoul, we have begun to give some real substance to APEC.
There is an APmC secretariat in Singapore with an
executive director and staff.
There are working groups developing agendas of tradeliberalising
reform in oustoms procedures, standards,
health controls, telecommunications data bases and so
forth. There is an APEC Eminent Persons Group, including Korea's
* Kim Mahn Je, presently thinking about ways to deepen our
integration In coming years. 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 03/ 10 
TEL: 4
And there Is the ministerial meeting in Seattle in
November. That is a meeting which will give all of us an
opportunity to consolidate our progress and set new goals
-and give the United States an opportunity to think
through its economic and trading relationship with this
side of the Pacific.
So we have come. a long way. in building APEC, but we are
Still only at the beginning of what might be possible.
The integration of markets and production in the region
is so rapid that governments are going to have to work
very hard just to keep up with it.
As our economies become more dependent upon each other it
becomes ever more necessary to lay underneath them the
political nets or cooperation, conflict resolution and
dispute settling.
As I said earlier this year, we should be seeking as our
goal an integrated market which includes Australia and
Now Zealand, the ASEAN countries, the three Chinese
economies, Korea, Japan and North America -a market of
two billion people producing half the world's output*
bound together with harmonised trade rules, harmnonised
investment rules, harmonised standards and certification,
and an agreed way of settling disputes between members.
it would be a market where trade between its members
already accounts for two thirds of their own trade and
where the total exports of the region already account for
per cent of world exports.
it would be an integrated regional market which works
towards commonality and minimum restriction in all areas
in which these can sensibly be advanced.
That is sovething beao nd the initial APEC information
sharing,~ trade 1 bral Lsing agenda to a true economic
comuniy.
All it takes is mutual agreement that it should be done,
and the time and intelligence of governments to decide on
appropriate standards, the appropriate forms of mutual
recognition, the appropriate harmonisation of conflicting
rules* There are great opportunities, but right now there are
zany challenges to Asia-Pacific economic COOPeration.
There are the bilateral trade negotiations between Japan
and the United States# which require great sensitiVity
and imagination on both sides. TEL: 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 04/ 10 
i-I
I LL
There is the end game in the Uruguay ikound, which means
so much to the future of the world trading system on
which Pacific prosperity is based.
There is the lateat yen appreciation, which may see
another wave of restructuring of Japan's industry
throughout the region.
Within a few months we will have the rminent Persons
Group report and the November APEC meeting, which will
set out goals for the organisation over the next few
years. We will be looking at the possibility of a framework
agreement which will formalise the objectives and process
of APEC, and strengthen the structure of government
understandings underpinning the has-Pacific economic
community.
We will be looking, too, at a work program designed to
remove obstacles which business people encounter in trade
within the region.
Finally, there is the need for a meeting of Pacific
leaders to give greater weight and authority to the APEC
agenda. It the United States administration moves to host such a
meeting this year, we should all be delighted to attend.
Above all we would like to convey to the United States
the message that the Asia-Pacific region represents much
less a threat than an extraordinary opportunity: Duch
less An area of difficulty than one of almost limitless
potential. it is very much in the interests of all Western Pacific
countries that the United States sees things this way.
There is a great deal to be done, and I know from my
talks with-Presioent Kim that Australia and Korea
continue to find ourselves in close agreement on the main
issues bef ore um.
In a way this alliance between our two countries to
advance the creation of an Asia-Pacific economic
community is less surprising than it seems.
True, we are at opposite ends of the Pacific.
True, we often have so few difficulties In our
relationship that the media have little cause to report
on~ it.
True, the strength of our mutual relationship is
* sonetimes overshadowed by the relationships each-of usr
V&amp; ewith the regional giants of China, Japan and the
United States. I 17-21. jun. 93 14: 13 NO. 011 P. 05/ 10 
but the logic of our relationship in fact depends on
these characteri~ stics.
The economic weight you wield in the world is about the
same as ours*
Like us, you are always aware you are a big player in
relation to some countries, and that Japan, China and the
United States are big players in relation to us.
Like us, you are a security ally and trade Fartner of the
United States, but also an important participant in the
Western Pacific economy.
Like us, you depend on trade to expand your economy and
increase your living standards.
Like us, you have an interest in keeping both sides of
the Pacific together.
And of course the truth is that the bilateral
relationship between Korea and Australia is now very well
established, deep and stable and continuing to grow.
it was in response to this growth and the growing depth
and diversity of our dealings that President Kim and I
agreed this morning to establish a new Joint Economic
Coamittee, bringing together all the relevant government
agencies, and meeting annually to oversee the developmsnt
of our economic relationship.
Korea is now our fourth largest export marketq
Commercial links betWeen Australia and Korea underpin a
relationship from which both countries have prospered.
Australia supplies high-quality competitively priced
industrial raw material inputs f or Korean industry
including coal, aluminium, iron ore, non ferrous metals,
uranium, wool and cotton.
Australia is a Significant market for Korea in mtotor
cars, textiles clothing and footwear# chemical$ and
electronics. Today we are striving for a further expansion of two-way
trade. Korean industry is still growing in areas which miatch
Australia's export strengths, Particularly enkergy.
Australia is broadening its trade profile with Korea as
the Korean market expands and diveraifies.
Australia remains well placed to supply coal andl uranium.
Commercial appraisal is underway Of Australia's capacity
TEL:' 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 06/ 10' 
21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 07/ 10
7
to suPPlY Korea's long-term delhand for liqUid natural
gas a
Australia is now becomin~ g a supplier of Manufactured
goods such as food, fiiM, building products, automotive
engines and component..
We are selling services such as telecommunications,
banking, computer sortwareo education and tourism.
Korea is also Iiproving its share of the Australian
market. Last year your exports to Australia rose 20 per
cent, with cars leading the surge.
While Australia's reputation as a supplier or mineral,
energy and agricultural commodities is well known within
] Korean industry, we are much lass well known by Korean
business as a source of industrial goods and technology.
Australia has recognised Korea's priority to develop and
access industrial technology as a part of the economic
reform program.
r an pleased to note that, coinciding with my visit,
Australia and Korea will sign tomorrow an industrial
technology cooperation a~ reement which will provide a
framework for collaboration in this field.
The extent of business cooperation between Australian and
Korean companies is also encouraging.
I refer particularly to areas such as the coo0perationt
taking place between
The Australian telecomm unicatians carrierl Tel'stra,
and the Korean companyt posDATA. on Wednesday I
will be witnessing the signing or a letter Of intent
between the two cooPanies for a strategic alliance
witi) a view to becoming one of the leading
telecommuiicatjohs companies in Korea.
In the informatiofl-t~ chn~ l~ gY field; the supply of
industrial software to Hyundai zlectronics by
Adelaide company# The Cadds. Man Australia, and the
success of Moldf low Korea in selling Australianl
comaputer-aided engineering software for the plastics
industry. in the area of environmental technology; the suPPly
of new water-related environmental technologY
equipment by cheutronics to several organisations in
Korea, including the Seoul Metropolitan Government,
and the agreement between the West Australian
ovipany, Environmental Solutionls InternatiOnal, and
R Samsung on the supply of oil-from-sludge technology.
in the automobile industry; the supply Of
sophisticated mbachine tools by Kirby Engineerinlg for 
TEL a
the manufacture of automobile steering mechanisms
and the supply of automobile engines by utralia's
Holden Engine Company.
And the supply of engineering services by Kaiser
Engineering for the construction of a new aluminiua
hydroxide plant in Korea General Chemical
Corporation.
In this context, I welcome the joint management
consortium between the Australian company Intag
International, Deutsche Aerospace of Germany and Samsung
of Korea to use Australian technology for electronic
baggage and freight handling. This is an agreement which
will open up new manufacturing opportunities in both
Australia and Korea for markets world-wide.
I am also pleased that Austrade will be expanding its
role in Korea with the-establishment of an office in
Pusan.
The growth of our trade has been more than satisfactory
although Australia still encounters difficulties in the
Korean market over access for agricultural commodities,
particularly for beef and dairy products, and over
Korea's wide-ranging quarantine restrictions on the entry
of Australian horticultural products.
The business environment between our two countries is
being enhanced by the rapid increase in non-stop direct
air services between Australia and Korea. Six flights
per week will be in place this coming July compared with
YAO services at the beginning of 1990.
For those of you who haven't visited us recently, let me
say that everything you hear about our wonderful beaches,
about the forests and wilderness and the outback is true.
But, as I said when I began, it is also true that
Australian% have over the last decade transformed their
economy. It is most visible in our trade performance. over a
decade, exports have more than doubled. A decade ago
barely one dollar in eight in Australia came from
exports. Today it is one dollar in five, and Climbing.
Today manufactures and services each rival rural exports,
and both are growing. The fastes6t growing manufactured
exports are elaborately transformed goods.
Ahs our exports have grown and the nature Of our exports
has changed, their destination has also changed, A
decade ago less than half of our merchandise exports vent
to East Asia. Today nearly two thirds do and our
exports to Asia are far and away the fastest gr6wing part
of our trade., 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 08/ 10 
TEL:* 21. Jun. 9 14: 13 No. 011 P. 09/ 10
behind these changes in our trading performance are the
ef forts of Australian industry* and deliberate changes to
government policy.
We have opened up the economy by floating the Australian
dollar, abolishing capital controls, and puttinV in place
a sensible, consistent program of tariff reductions.
We have introduced competition into telecommunications
anid deregulated air transport.
We have Introduced a national system of eniterpr ise
bargaining by management and labour, which we Intend to
sustain and encourage through comprehensive legislation
later this year.
We have over a decade maintained an Accord withi the trade
union movement which has been a significant factor in
reducing inflation to 1.6 per cent one of the lowest
rates among industrial countries.
And as a result of tax reforms we now have one of the
lowest ratios of tag to GDP in the OECD.
The change continues today. We are cutting the company
tax rate from 39 per cent to 33 per cent. We have
introduced a conditional 10 per cent investment allowance
for plant and equipment, anid an additional 10 per cent
development allowance for approved projects with a
capital cost over $ 50 million.
We now have consistently higher productivity growth than
we have had for a generation, low inflation, and the
lowest level of industrial disputes for decades. We have
a trade surplus, and manufacturing production is rising.
There is no doubt the structure of the Australian economy
is changing, and that we have the policies in place and
under developm~ nt to maintain the pace.
Certainly our recovery has not been as fast as we would
like. economic growth, though faster than virtually any
other OECD country, is not sufficient to make an impact
on our greatest problem unemployment.
Of course, we are not helped by the slow pace of world
recovery, or the low prices presently being fetched by
some of our commodities.
But we have no doubt about the path we are on. Indeed it
is all the more reason to push on with our programs of
reform, especially our efforts to encourage more world
class small and medium sized businesses to flourish, to
flourish as exporters, and to flourish particularly ini
Asia and the Pacific.
Fifteen years ago, with some of my colleagues, I imagined
an Ausntralia which exported not only commodities but 
TEL:
sophisticated manufactures. I sometimes ask those same
colleagues to ileagine for a moment whiere we would now be
bad these ref ormis not been made if We had continued to
drift in the world, instead of qoing out to meet it.
The reforms represent a huge step for any country to take
they involve cultural change as well as structural
change in the economy. It all takes time, anid the world
does not always cooperate with our ambitions. Although
in Australia we are determined to soften the impact,
there bar, been hardship for a lot of people.
But there is no question these reforms were essential anid
that they have given us unprecedented opportunities and
there is hardly a more persuasive testimony to this than
our flourishing trade with Korea.
I said at the beginning Australia has had to re-imagine
itself anid rQ-define itself. And because Korea has done
this, and because Korea continues to meet the new
challenges, I know my audience here today will understand
what I mean.
I have no doubt we will continue to re-define ourselves.
And I am sure that our two countrie&amp; will be able to call
on this excperience in our efforts to re-imagine the Asia-
Pacific region and help re-create it as a genuine
economic community.
If we do that, every country's interests will be served,
and so will future generations of Noreans, anid
Australians. Thanik you. TEL: 21. Jun. 93 14: 13 No. 011 P. 10/ 10 



TEL:
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF PRIME MINISTER'S REMARKS FOLLOWING VISIT TO THE
DEMILITARISED ZONE, KOREA, 23 JUNE 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Well, I thilnk on this visit I have had the opportunity of developing a very good
relationship, I think, with the President. Kim Young-Sam. and given the fact that
It is the boginning of his five years in office this, for Australia, I think is a good
thing. That is, that we have struck up what I think Is a warm personal
relationship which I hope will endure now In our countries terms at least for the
tenure of his Presidency. The other matter which I think we have succeeded In
getting across Is the fact that Australia shouldn't be viewed simply as a
producer of raw materials. That it is a producer of sophisticated products; that
we have a deep research and development base and I think this is being
understood in Korea. That people here know now that even though we supply
them with Iron ore and coking coal, we are also a supplier of high technology
goods manufactured goods and that we can do much In joint ventures with
them, as well as supply them. And finaliy, I think that we have been able to
develop a further consensus of view about the importance of APEC and
pushing the APEC agenda along so that at the November meeting In the United
States we can make positive headway in APEC's trade liberailsing role.
Weli, my impression of the demilitarised zone Is, I think, the obvious one, and
that is that thirty million people have lived behind it for forty years, for forty years
a very large population has had, really, no joy and none of the fruits of growth
and prosperity w~ ich the rest of the world has had, So thats a first dismal
effect and observation I would make about it, The other Is that it just highlights
just how successful the Korean Government, the Government of South Korea
has been the Republic of Korea In developing a modern economy with this
threat almost at its border, within an hour from Its capital city, within an hour
from Seoul. And the tension which the country has lived under has been quite
profound. So one hopes that with the effluxion of time Korea will be a reunited
country and we will not see people living under this threat or thirty million
people living in the relative poverty which they do in North Korea.
ends T2EL3: . Jun. 93 9: 45 No. 004 P. 01/ 01 



TEL: 25. Jun. 93 9: 16 No. 004 P. 01/ 05
F PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH PRIME MINSTR AT SAIIGRI-LA
OTrEL FOLLOWING HErI WITH PREMIER L PEMG, DZIJXIM,
23/ 6/ 93
PH:: Well, I had, I think, a very good meeting with
Premier Li Pen where I thought I was given a
generous welcome where, in the opening of the
meeting he paid substantial compliments to
Australia. I think they regard us as a big and
important player in this part of the world.
He began the meetiny then talking about the first
specific subject about the prospects of the Chinese
economy, its growth and how Australia should be a
participant in its growth and then he paid a
substantial tribute to our raw materials industry
and gave projections about the growth of the Chinese
steel industry and said that he expected Australia
would be a participant in Its growth ae a
substantial, efficient, reliable, raw materials
supplier. So we had come discussion about their economic
growth, about their primdry industries such as steel
and then I went on to mae the point that though we
pride ourselves on being an efficient producer of
raw materials, that we also are now a significant
developer of products of innovative producte and now
a significant exporter and that we could play a role
in China beyond raw materials supply to such things
as telecommunications and computer sciences,
environmental technologies etcetera. At this point
he positively recognised and said that he knew about
our technological vupacitles and that therefore he
thought this was, you know, sensible. As China grew
we would grow with them not only in raw materials
but also in these other areas.
We then went on to have a general discussion about
the world in general, the state of growth, where the
industrial nations are lining up and the
conversation then drifted around to AP&amp; C. 
TEL: 25. Jun. 93 9: 16 No. 004 P. 02/ 05
-2-
And I think we both agreed on the prospects that
APEC holds for accelerating growth and trade in this
part uf the world bearing in mind that the ambient
ulimate is one of lower growth in Japan, Western
Europe and North America. And that we should take
the opportunities or muvilg APEC ahead as a vehicle
for accelerating growth and increasing the velocity
of trade.
He then cQnfirmed to me what he had written to me
and that is China's interest in APEC and in a
leaders meeting. He said that we still had some
arrengements to put together. He was not, he made
no reference to the prospect of President Clinton
holding or hosting such a meeting this year which of
vuurue, as I have indicated to you, rvmains only
something which has been mooted and not decided but
gave a positive indication that they would see a
leaders' meeting having the prospect of bringing
political authority to APEC.
He said that he would uee vu" Cureign ministries
continuing to discuss the position of Taiwan and
Hong Kong though he made the point that he regarded
it as natural for countries with an economic
interest and econumic reldtlons with Taiwan and Hong
Kong to see themselves represented in those
economies at economic ministerial level.
The conversation then went around to the GATT and
thelr application for membership. I said we
supported their application for memLbrship of the
GATT; that lower tariffs and transparency in trade
would not only help China but would help the rest of
us; and it would help them in ways which may not le
obvious now but if they were to become a mainstream
economy thkn they have to be in the mainstream world
trading bodies and GATT is primary amongst them.
I then as we then moved towarda the tall of the
meeting which went for about Just a little over an
hour I then said that Australia had maintained
Its interest in human rights issues and we
appreciated them receiving human rights delegations
in 1991 and 1992 and because we in Australia believe
that this medium of having viesits by groups in
respeQt of human rights is a good one to maintain
some discussion on this issue. I invited Premier
Li Peng to send a delegation to look at these issues
in Australia to see how we ourselves operate as a
society which I think leaves Australia the option
then of continuing a dialogue on human rights in
these terms. V" S 
TEL: -3-
Now, finally, I also invited i'remier Li Pang to send
a ministerial delegation to Australia leading a
group of representatives of their industries to look
at opportunities for further collaborative business
together in all of the areas raw materials and
most particularly in manufactures and services
and hc thanked me for that invitation.
Our meeting concluded with him making light of the
fact that we were friendly rivals for the_ 0lympic
bids and that China would be making every financial
effort to support its bid and I said well these will
) je decided on the technical merits of the bids arnd
we always, think we do well there. He said yes,
well out of the sort at, out of the ring I think the
word he used, of harder Issues, this is something
which we can remain friendly rivals onl.
J: What was his response on the human rights question?
PM; He appreciated that invitation, I think, which means
that they wish to continue that dialogue.
J3: Prime Minister, at the beginning of the meeting we
did hear him mention a word that our relationship
had somne misconceptions in the past. What was the
weight of those comnt?..
PM1; Well, veil there was no elaboration of that but I am
sure that refers to our atLitude to what happened
here in 1989. But I think, I mean, the Chinese are
players for the long run and they regard I'm sure my
visit here as a further episode in the long run
relationship with Australia. And of course they
welcome that.
J3: Is it youz4 view that he will go along with an APEC
tsumuit. at which Taiwan and Hong gong are
represented, Is thdt the sense you get at the end
of it.
PM: Well he, they have irt Vms~ L allowed Taipel, they've
out at a table with Taiwan and nong Kong
representing as they do economies and the whole
question of leaders versus heads of government is
that there may be In uome way a person who is oth~ er
than a head of government, that is a leader, maybik
an -economic minister, could again in some
construction sit and represent these economieS. But
this was a matter he thought our foreign ministries
should continue to work on, That is, he ~ I think,
takeBs the view that APEC and any leaders' meeting
which is part of it has to be set up properly.
TEL: 25. Jun. 93 9: 16 No. 004 P. 03/ 05 
TEL: 25. Jun. 93 9: 16 No. 004 P. 04/ 05
-4
And this is the point I think I've made to you that
this is a matter the timing of this, in a sense,
doesn't matter providing that we get around to
making the best of it. And this may be accelerated
in the event that the united States President wished
to accelerate it in whc. h uase we would have to
think about it more. But, agalin, more naturally it
would occur later.
J: Any discussion of regional security and the U3
presence in the western Pacific?
PM; Not really no, except I said that I thought it was
important to keep the United States very much
involved in North and south East Asia. To pull
both sides of the Pacific together which I thought
APEC could do in an economic sense and of course
where the economics goes, where the investment and
trade goes also does go the United States' other
interests including strategic interests.
J: Did you raise the question of Improved sales of
Australian wool to China specifically.
PM: No I didn't but I have ralsed it with Vice-Minister
Madam Wu Yi and I said that there may some prospect
of Australia developing with china virtually a new
segment of the world garment industry. That is,
they are a manufacturer of garments but there is not
really a world industry of low priced woollen
garments and that there maty be oome prospect of us
being able to do that given the fact that we have a
substantial sto; kplle of wool. But again anything
Australia does would have to be such as to proteut
its existing market for wool in China at the prices
we currently obtain.
J: Did he endorse the braLder regional liberalisation
ugenda you have been pushing on APEC.
PM: Very much so. I think they see growth in the
northern hemisphere, the prospects of it being as we
see it the low growth and he made the point since
the cold war has finished there has been a lot of
difficulty in regional economies and in regions of
the world and he talked about Bosnia Herzegovina
and talked about the CIS amongst them and Somalia
as indications of the fact that once the bipolarity
of the cold war has sort of been lifted these other
tensions and strains had become more apparent.
He also referred, we reCerred briefly to the changed
political situation in Japan and the seeming splits 
TEL: 25. Jun. 93 9: 16 No. 004
4 within the Liberal Democratic Party as not being a
god portent for growth from that economy for the
moment. All the more reason therefore why APEC can
play a, can give clarity and focus on to growth and
trade liberalisatio~ n in what is, as he himself
described, the fastest growing part of the world.
J; There are reports in Australia or theG budget deficit
coming in one billion under expectations does this
mean that next year's similarly will be targeted at
fifteen rather than sixteen billion dollars.
PM: Well, I'm not here to discuss budgetary issues in
Australia. -The Treasurer made some comments about
this some time ago saying that he thought that we
wouldi bring next year's Duaget In somewhere around
this year. But I think when he sai ' d that our
estimates of revenue were less than they are now in
reality. So, I don't think that in those terms he
wus talking about an outcome better than the sixteen
billion he originally forecast.
ends. 



? PA* N8CR2PT OF 114TERVIEW WITH THE PRIME~ MINISTR AT POSCO
STEEL CC"$ AKY, POHANG, KOREA, 23/ 6/ 93
J. Prime Minister, g1V~ fn rthO Amierican decision about
BJIP Steel, dIo you desp~ ilr about ever qettinq a fair
shake from the -AMcricctr,;. on our trade?
I'M I cjci't think so. I thiuk thiS is just part of the
normal trade shananiqbt:; which go on year in, year
out. I ? riCan, that's ror twr' Lo defend that matter,
which I Lhink they will do easil1y.
J. But iwt irzaLter how hlr.-d we rush with the Amiericans we
don't scorn to be getLinq anywhere on this wholo
question of reStricl-ions on our trade.
I'M: Well, I'm not here In Korea to be discussing trade
with the Americans. The f:-L is, that it is nevor
0asy finding access and kceping aceess for
ttonutlw11ies and one's .3fwitys joing to have to do the
hard work of making cerLain that one's products are
understood Lo be conierr~ ially available. And 1 don't
think SH1' partitul., iy for Lhese small
qxuant~ ities-will hav~ t any difficulty doing that.
J: 4Izidudibt) In no waV ieduces your commuitment to
the continuing int. errational. trend to lowerin~ g
t a riœ ffs?
PM: N4o, b'-, Cause if tho polii: y i5 let's play the market
acezo~ gamo, for a Ucid. kv lil: e Australia it would be
very damaeqing indeed. tioh e bs'-st policy for
Aust. ralia is always tLie opf-. r market policy.
J: H-ow tit. you coflLrast ali cot Lhat~ with the situation
here -the Lrading r-ltV3Lion here?
PM. Well, right now I'm at Pohanq SLeel, POS( 0, which is
Australia's single ). afge~ r cLtomer. It's the ' second
1&amp; rgeost rrodlicer of * Lep1 iin the world.. We supply
fift. y percent of i1s raw mt. Pricd. s. Our trade to
this company alon'e is, o. nc billion~ dojiars. V 
lt'r' our larqeat :' a~'&amp; iiy-A-, ere in the wcyld. And
thdL's why T think IMPOrtbrit to visit these
P~ t~ eS-to, YOU knIOW, venew the friendship at the
official level given tbse fact that Atistralia was on
the uro.: und floor of Oic: dovelopment of thle Keirean
ind ustry. sno, is prt of the indrial
region jC FKorea and tj. t; is now the second largest
steel maker. And ouct' Lirne, ( if' course, there's the
prospet. uL of it bC cL'mul~ 0) c lairgest.
1: Thli is one of the r7Tu'Sl. Inodejrt steel industries in
Li'c wor3d. Hlas l-ih anythlrtg to learn from POSCO?
PM: Well, 5tiP aSSISted Wi~ h Lhe irl'tial feaSibility
; if,. udy lor POSCO. Mtid I think orne of the reasons why
Lhc Korean steel inrdu. L; try rcitains very attached to
7Autrali, a is the ti-: t thiaL LshF was on the ground
œ Iloor of their : rpaib: 3 UI. y stt'iies and we wrote the
first raw miaterials cuviirncts. WA were one of the
firt; L cotintriss tto Lauk ri* eA Vorean steel industry
seriously and I think that's Lhe reason why that
atta( 7hment remains. Liut, atguir, like all
rel. iLiunships, they 1*; Ied to be worked on. And I
tloughl. while r was ifcr~ givibn the fact that
they are our largent cu-, Lt.-. mer in. the world this
was a plIace Lo vit.
JR: ei~ i~ iz~ 01our o L. el~~ L comning on top of
Cninada': 3 move agalins; t ouir beef does it augur
well for our effort! s in ths-, Uruguay round?
PI1: Well, we're still procucjing re cord tonnagos of Iron
ore and tc . ual and , tPe) w~ hiat's the response? Turn
up our tocs and say it's~ , I too hard? Of course
it's~ hard. You've just q1ot to keep pressing on.
j n -rlt'I I--



PRIME MINISTER
TPANSCRIPT OF PRIE MINISTERS WNERVIOEW AT FOSTER'SHUAGUANG
FOUNDATION STONE-LAYING CEREMONY, SHANGHAI
26 JUNE 1993
J: Prime minister, how important is it that this
project is a symbol of Australia's intentions
towards business in China?
PM: Well, I think it is very important because its a
major project by major company, with a major
company, and it's important because it's also about
high technology. Beer is basically technology and
we are amongst the technological leaders in the
world and therefore seeing these two companies doing
something in joint venture is a tangible a
tangible benefit for the relationship between China
and Australia.
And this is the kind of thing that Vice Mayor Zhao
has said to me ina the last twenty four hours about
China and Australia doing things together.
J: Is it also important to get-a recognised cultural
symbol of Australia in China?*
PH: Well I think that helps and beer is a bulk commodity
for people and it'll always have the Australian ring
to it, with Fosters, so we-re developing the
whole world is about brand names these days so
we're not only developing a brand name further but
we're doing it in a part of the world that wants us
here.
J: Prime Minister, the g-rowth rate here around twenty
six percent, that really sounds like gangbusters.
Do you think it can keep going or will it have to
slow down sooner rather than later?
PZ!: I think the government wants to slow it down but as
the Vice Mayor has told me in Pudong, this area of
Shanghai, its developing under a national proposal
so its not going to slow down. 
2
So Shanghai is probably Australia's gatevay to
China, or one of them, and that's why I'm so
delighted to be here with the Vice Mayor in seeing
this project begin.
J: Mr Keating, as you leave China what are the major
things you feel you've learnt, in the few days
you've been here, about the place?
PM: Well I think its again the further development of
the relationship. Its been, I think, a good couple
of days well spent in meeting the Premier and the
Vice Premier, Li Pang and Zhu Rongji. And I think in
a tangible way apart from better understanding where
we're going, talking about the Pacific, talking
about APEC, but also talking about particular
business opportunities for Australia in major
expansions of steel with iron ore, of wool. If we
can bring that off.
These things are I think great trading and
commercial opportunities for Australia which can
only been done basically by visits, by building the
personal relationships.
J: Do you think Beijing is coloured by the hope of
Olympics by 2000?
PM: Well, that's not in our hands.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATIG MP
BUSIES RECEPTIO AMD CMINIS
SHAHIM SAURDAY, 26 JUNK 1993
It is fitting that my last public speaking opportunity on
this visit to Korea and China, should be to a
predominantly business audience.
This visit has been very much about business: about
impressing on our hosts how much Australia has to offer;
about. encouraging and supporting Australian firms already
out in the international field; and about sending clear
signals to the business community back home about what
can be achieved.
Let me say that my task has been made a lot easier in the
last few days by seeing first-hand how successful
Australian companies have been in establishing critical
business relationships in this country.
The scoreboard is impressive. In Beijing, I attended
ribbon cutting ceremonies for four new ventures involving
Alcatel, AAP, the ANZ Banking Group and Cadbury
Schweppes. In Shanghai today I participated in a
foundation stone-laying ceremony for the new Shanghai
Fosters Brewery.
Ind here this evening we are celebrating two other recent
events: the opening of the Australian Wool Corporation's
Shanghai office; and ACI's conclusion of a joint venture
for the establishment of two plants one in Shanghai and
one in Guangzhou. which are expected to make it the
biggest manufacturer of glass containers in China.
As well, I know there are representatives here from other
Australian companies, like Suspension Components, who are
setting up in Shanghai.
In naming these recent successes I should not overlook
the achievements of many other Australian companies.
Even before these recent announcements there were an
estimated 540 Australian companies operating in China.
But what is remarkable about the list of companies I've
named is the diversity. 
r rom the Wool Corporation, representing one of our
oldest and most valuable comodity exports.
To Alcatel and AAP, involved with Chinese partners
in sophisticated communications technology.
From the ANZ Banking Group, whose new branch here in
shangha-i will signal Australian competitiveness in
the services sector.
To joint ventures in sophisticated goods-processing
and packaging and industrial components.
I congratulate all of these companies for their
enterprise. Their achievements leave no doubt about our ability . to
succeed here in China and elsewhere in the region and
that is a message I will be taking home to Australia.
The integration of our economy with Asia is not a
speculative venture but a fact waiting to happen.
That doesn't mean it will be easy. I daresay there is no
one in this room who would say that it has been easy, but
equally I doubt if there is anyone who would not say that
it was a chance that had to be grasped.
And I'm sure that ACI and the Australian Wool Corporation
would be among these.
Let me congratulate them both, and now please join me in
a toast to them, and indeed to the success of all
Australian business endeavours here in Saga
China, and throughout the region. Shgai. i 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECK BY nm PMM lawT THE RON P 3 KETING MP
YOSTERS-HUAGUANG PCKDATIMCW S7voE-LYMING
SH&amp; NGI SLVM&amp;, 26 JUNE 1993
This ceremony to lay the foundation stone for the Fosters
Shanghai Brewery might be taken as a symbol of
Australia's commercial response to the opportunities and
challenges on offer in Asia.
It is another significant chapter in what is a genuinely
good news story.
It is good news for the two joint venturers:
Huaguang Brewery vill. benefit from their
relationship with one of the world's foremost
brewery operations, the Fosters Brewery Group, and
in particular Carlton and United Breweries.
And Fosters, which is now a truly international
company operating on four continents, have by their
enterprise won a foothold in a very significant
market. Within five years, it could well be
producing as imuch beer in China as it does in
Australia.
This is also a good news story for Australia and for
China. For Australia, because we see one of our companies making
a major investment and a long term commitment in one of
the fastest growing countries in the world.
And for China, because we're seeing world class
technology and quality international backing linking up
with a Chinese partner to meet a market-driven need.
What we are seeing here is a quality international
response to China's new economic policy.
Australia's new economic policy too: because Australia
is encouraging companies to be internationally
competitive, to get out in the world and compete with the
best, and to look to Asia as a place to invest. 
Joint ventures like this are good for Australia because
the reord shows that trade invariably follows
investment.
And it is trade and investment linkages of this kind that
will guarantee our share of the economic growth in the
region. So Fosters must be comiended.
And the Huaguang Brewery must be commended: it has
forged a partnership with a company that is not only at
the leading edge of its field, but an internationally
recognised Australian icon.
We look forward with a fair degree of certainty to the
day when Shanghai Fosters is a Chinese icon as well.
All of you deserve our congratulations and I wish you
all the very best in this most significant joint venture,
Shanghai Posters Brewery Limited. 



re. IQ, ate r
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIM F, MINISTER. THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
COMMENTS REGARDING FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA
I have received the attached letter from the President and Chief Executive Officer of
American Express Company, Mr Harvey Golub. American Express owns the financial
firm. Lehman Brothers. American Express has also informed me that it is content to
have this letter made public.
CANBERRA, JNE 28, 1993 '-3 9 . r 73/ 93 
HAAV lOAN
w WOuO O WA
June 24, 1093
The Hen. Mr. Paul K, 6
Prime Mlnl* top
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 260
Ower Prime Minotern
I am writing about a I
on national television
analst. Mr. Davleos
reardino the Mabo A
forolgn investment In
way. I wqnt you to know ti
Investment analyst In
viewpoint ot either Ai
to amchaesl2 that it I
than those which rlg
As I read the article,
smart people say var
be Ignored; when the
apologize on behalf a
Yours sincerely, a VOMAW IXPASSO 4 MMA'MYW
* 0L4L CWc2MC WEVI '~ OM iftKq IS4
ting MP
tatemont reported In the Daily Telegraph Mirror and
attributed to Rob Davies, A Lehman Brothers
* xpressed the opinion that the High Court decision
boriginal land matter would be a deterrent to
Australia, and he clearly did so In an Inappropriate
at such personal remarks, which were made by an
one of our subsldiarles. do not represent the
erican Express or Lehman Brothers. I would like
outside our normal practice to make remarks other
t to ja"=~ 1 investment products or oompanies.
Vreinforced my belief that sometimed supposedly
stupid things. When they do so In private, It can
do so in public, spologies are In order. I do so
my Company. VA cC'
i 



FULL TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING,
MP
INTERVIEW WITH MIKE WILLESEE, A CURRENT AFFAIR, NINE
NETWORK, 1 JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MW: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Good, Michael.
MW: You have had varying degrees of opposition and concern about the
Mabo decision, but now In Hugh Morgan you have someone prepared to
lead a campaign which says that in every respect Mabo Is wrong and
dangerous.
PM: Well, there will always be a view put at the extremes of any of these
arguments and I thinK the important thing is for Australians not to be
distracted by that view. I mean it is a minority view, I think, It Is wrong, It
is entirely wrong, it is technically wrong, that's the key point. The
Important thing is that the rest of the country gets on arnd builds a proper
administrative structure just to see this decision of the High Court's
handled and to see justice done to Aboriginal Australians, and
particularly, and as importantly, to see the whole community of Australia
realise that we can't build our society In the future on a Ilie.
MW: What does this mean In political terms, because even National Party
leader, Trn Fischer, concedes there were horrific massacres and
concedes the Aborigines did have cLture?
PM: That Is true. The concept which the High Court overturned this Is the
concept of Terra nullius, land of no one was In legal terms a Ilie. We
have been trying to build a nation on that Ilie for a couple of hundred
years. Well of course it wasn't a land of no one, It was a land of the
Aboriginal people. Now, in other countries treaties were signed, In fact
even in Captain Cook's Instructions from the Admiralty he was asked to 
lay claim to parts of the countty with the consent of the natives. The key
word being consent. Well, none of that was ever done, and now
perhaps later rather than earlier, but better late than never, a decision
has been made which says there Is a'n ative title in the common law.
The key point Is, Michael. that we can now get on and give those
Aboriginals who stiil live and have associations with the land, title to the
land. But where a State land manager has Issued a freehold t~ te, such
as one or residence or a mining title, that extinguishes the native title.
So, there is no fear for people worrying about their land, their backyards,
their et cetera.
MW: But there are a lot of fears and a lot of uncertainties, and when Hugh
Morgan runs a campaign like this, even with his conflict of interest
running Western Mining Corporation his emotive claims make it easy
to put him down, even lampoon him, but because people are confused
and uncertain he can prey upon a lot of fears. That makes your job
pretty difficult.
PM: It does, but again we can't have good things, that is wholesome changes
to the way our society functions derailed or put asunder by these narrow
views. The key points for Australians to understand about this decision,
first of all there Is nothing In It to tear whatsoever. The second point I
made to you a moment ago but It Is worth reiterating, native title is a title
subordinate to the Crown, so where the Crown, or the State, or the
Commonwealth has Issued titles that extinguishes the native title. So,
all of the settled areas of Australia, the freehold -titles * of Sydney and
Melbourne and Brisbane et cetera, and the rural lands and the farms of
this country. Those titles have extinguished the native title, the only
place where native title can be claimed and awarded I s where we have
got unalienated Crown land, which is mostly in places remote from the
capital cities and towns and where there Is still a continuing Aboriginal
association or living upon the land.
MW; Where there are -racist attitudes In Australia, and Hugh Morgan refers to
racism quite often, don't you think In those areas H-ugh Morgan's views
might not be found to be appealing?
PM: Well I think probably for anyone who has that kind of view it is tending to
confirm their view, but again, I mean you can't build a society and a
nation on these sorts of things. I have just come back from China and
you look at the huge opportunities in China, Korea and North and South
East Asia In particular, we are taken seriously In that part of the world
because people see us as a nation of substance and particularly a
multicultural country and a nation which has Its act together. It will
matter very much to us In the future, not just at home where It matters
most, but even abroad, that we have this Issue with our Indigenous
people settled. So, calls to narrow sectional views of the variety that Mr
Morgan made won't do anyone any good, and at any rate It Is historically 
wrong. The thing about Mr Morgan's points were the ones you took up
yourself, and I might congratulate you on the position you took, and that
was to make it very clear that In the historic context he was wrong, but In
the technical context he Is totally wrong. That is, that this matter can be
settled providing we have competent administrative structures there and
the Commonwealth Is now working on a piece of legislation to do that.
One of the things he said was, we can't validate all the titles from 1975.
That simply requires an amendment to a Commonwealth, the passage
of a piece of Commonwealth legislation, which I told the Premiers I am
prepared to do. So you can forget that as a problem as well. So,
technically he was wrong, historically he was wrong, but worse than that
he doesn't do anything for the peace and good governance of Australia.
MW: In view of the fact that he does have an audience of indeterminate size,
may It be, I would like to put a couple of his points to you. He says that
Aboriginal demands that a few years ago were laughable have now been
given legitimacy by Mabo.
PM: Before they knew that a native title existed In the common law, they
sought land because of the spiritual and traditional association of
Aboriginal peopie with the land. It Is not the view a non-Aboriginal
person has of land, we see It having an aesthetic or an economic use.
They have a totally different association with land. Now formerly, they
were asking for land rights. That was land conferred on them by the
Parliaments of the State and the Commonwealth. Where Mabo Is
different, It Is not a conferred right, It Is a more dignified right, It's a right
which exists as a right In the common law. But again, it is limited only to
where Aboriginal people can prove that they have maintained an
association with it, lived on it, or had an economic use with it. And for
most Aboriginals, this is the key point, and one that Mr Morgan doesn't
acknowledge, most Aboriginals have been pushed off their land and
dispossessed of their land, and therefore can not make a native title
claim stick.
MW: Morgan says that all property titles in Australia, all, have been devalued
as a result.
PM: That Is sheer extravagance of language, it is totally untrue. It is
absolutely untrue, and it is a statement not worthy of him making.
MW: And he takes up the cry of his people, the guilt Industry. What does that
mean?
PM: Well it Is nothing to do with guilt, It Is to do with, as I said before, the lie
that sat under the earlier court judgements about the concept of Terra
nullus, the Latin for land of no one. I mean it was a land of people when
Europeans came here. So to put that right, to set that wrong to a right Is
not to do as he says. 
MW: He says that people In the guilt Industry have difficulty In understanding
that when offered a choice between walking across the desert or riding
In a Toyota an Aborigine will choose today to ride In the Toyota. And
that can sound pretty stupid, except he has a point that he Is aiming at a
target audience, he Is saying that that necessity of choice means you
wipe out the weak culture, the weaker culture. Now there may be an
audience for that message out there.
PM: Well, so what's our society built on? The stronger parts of each part of
our society wipes out the weaker parts.
MW: I think that is what he Is saying.
PM: I am sure you take the view, and I certainly do, one feature of Australia
which I think most of the world acknowledges positively and that Is the
great tolerance of the Australian society. I happen to think that that
tolerance comes from a very deep seated sense of democracy. We
have such commitments to democracy in this country that people accept
the right of other people to be different. But If we get to the stage of
saying tolerance goes and it Is only the strong that prosper economically
and socially, god help us as a society. In other words these wealthy
people who think they can put themselves up In their places with barbed
wire round their front yards, that's what they would end up with in the
sort of society that Mr Morgan wants to tell us that exists. It Is a very,
very narrow view.
MW: That Is the basic underlying message Isn't It? That they were going to
die out anyway, so let's not have any guilt Industry.
PM: Yes, well so what do we do, as you said I think very poignantly to Mr
Fischer, well what if some other stronger society wants to Impact
themselves upon us, would we accept that we should give way to them.
At what stage do the Individual rights and dignity of the human person
matter. At what stage do we say our society is built on a sense of
democracy and a right of dignity for each person. I mean that's what
makes our society tick, not how strong we are, that's not how Australia
has come this far for so long. And I should think that It should never
change from that.
MW: Prime Minister, I would like to show you now what Mr Morgan had to say
about you yesterday.
HM. The Prime Minister Is believed to be a great admirer of Napolean and
one can see similar qualities of leadership in the two men. But I believe
there is, that In taking up the cause of Aboriginal separatism that the real
agenda of the so-called reconciliation process the Prime Minister Is
following Napoleon on the bitter road to Moscow. 
MW: Prime Minister.
PM If there was anyone In that period I Should like to take a lesson from it
was Thomas Jefferson who was a contemporary of course of
Bonaparte's and who drafted the American declaration of Independence
with those immortal words ' life, liberty and the pursuit of human
happiness'. Now It would do Mr Morgan well to read the US Declaration
of Independence and may be as well the Gettysburg Address from
President Lincoln to understand what has been the mainstream of
endeavour in that country In terms of dealing with Indigenous people.
MW: Prime Minister, putting aside Morgan how do you handle those fears and
uncertainties that do exist about Mabo In Australia?
PM: To get on with it Michael, the States and the Commonwealth should get
on with It and put down a body of administrative law very simply to hear
native title claims and when they have been heard and determined to
award them. This wili happen largely In areas removed from the capital
cities and the provinclal towns of Australia, removed from the pastoral
areas, the freehold areas In particular. It can be done, the framework
which I spoke to the Premiers about in Melbourne is a very adoptable
one, we have now rejoined in negotiations to try and push that to some
sort of finality and rather than regard this as a probiem, people should
understand it for what it really Is and that Is an opportunity an
opportunity to set right a wrong, to overturn a legal lie and to actually puli
our country together on a basis of equality where the Indigenous people
of Australia have rights equal to the non-Aboriginal people In this
country. There Is a huge opportunity for us In this and If we sort this
problem out In this country with our indigenous people our reputation
and the estimation of those around us In Indonesia, In China, In North
and South East Asia will go up even further and have a material, social
and economic Impact upon us. So it is very important that we get this
right and I believe we can, and-not just that we Will, do it.
MW: Prime Minister, thanks for you time.
PM: Thank you Michael.
ends 



TEL: 1. Jul. 93 11: 18 No. 003 P. 01/ 02
PRIME MINISTER 178/
STATEMENT BY THE PR[ ME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. ] KEATINGj XIP
REPORT OF THE MIN~ ING COMM1TIEE OF THE COUNCIL FOR
ABORIGINAL RECONCILIATION
I welcome the report, Exploring for Common Ground, presented to me today by the
Mining Committee of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation.
In February last year, I invited the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation to appoint a
committee to seek improvements in consultations, mediation arnd the resolution of
disputes between mining firms and Aboriginal people.
Across much of the mining industry, an intelligent awareness of Aboriginal cultures has
developed, and Aboriginal people have increasingly shown that they are prepared to
assist the industry in developing the resources in which all of us, as Australians, have
an interest.
It has been assumed by many people and still is, in far too many cases that the
interests of indigenous people and mining companies must conflict.
Where there is recognition and respect for the rights of others, their interests can coexist
to the benefit of all concerned.
Examples such as the agreement between North Flinders Mines and Sons of Gwalia on
the one hand and the Central Land Council on the other in regard to gold midning in the
Tanami Desert, and the more recent agreements on the Mt Todd mine demonstrate
that a wiingness on both sides to negotiate can result in mutually beneficial
arrangements. This report challenges some of the assumptions which remain about the relationships
between miners and Aboriginal people, identifying common ground as well as
remaining areas ordifference.
Some of its recomrmend at ions, such as ways of improving communications between the
parties and negotiating access to land, are directed to companies and to organisations
which represent Aboriginal communitics. I hope both will consider the
recommendations and act upon themn.
Other recommendations, touching on Aboriginal education, employment and heritage
protection, will be considered by the Commonwealth Government as soon as possible. 
TEL: 1. Jul. 9311: 18 No-. OO3 P. 02/ UZ
I thank the Chairman of the Committee, Mr Robert Champion do Crespigny, and the
committee members Mr Archie Barton, Ms Jennie George and Mr Wenten Rubwita
for their efforts and congratulate the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation and the
greater part of the mining industry on the way they have approached this important
aspect of reconcilation.
I amr also pleased to announce today that the Government will be offering a public
award to a company operating in the mining or resources area in Australia which best
demonstrates a commitment to constructively addressing Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander issues.
This will be a non-cash award, offered this year and open to companies which
nominate themselves or which are nominated by Aboriginal cocimunity groups.
The proposed Joint Council on Aboriginal Land and Mining would be a most
appropriate body to co-ordinate this award.
I believe this award will reinforce the impact of the report I have received today by
focussing attention on the many positive elements of the relationship between
Aboriginal people and mining companies which the report identifies.
CANBERRA, JULY 1, 1993 



PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY
INnfHE
PUBLIC SERVICE
A statement by the
Prime Minister
The Hon P J Keating, MP
I July 1993
Parliament House
Canberra
A statement made upon the publication of the following papers of the
Management Advisory Board and Its
Management Improvement Advisory Committee
The Australian Public Service Reformed
An Evaluation of a Decade of Management Reform
Building a Better Public Service
Accountability in the Commonwealth Public Secicw~ 
THE AUSTRAIMAN PUBLIC SERVICE is one of the great Institutions of our national
life. Its establishment was one of the key acts of Federation. It, along with the nation, is
approaching Its centenary.
The performance of the Public Service and its values are basic to our national well being.
The quality of our system of governance depends heavily upon the Integrity,
professionalism and dedication of the Public Service.
As an Institution, the Service has served us well through difficult times. Two world wars,
the Great Depression and the challenging period of post-war reconstruction.
But the Public Service cannot rest on Its traditions, however Illustrious they may be. The
service has to maintain its relevance and keep ahead of the game.
It can't be expected to do that entirely of its own volition. There has to be effective
political leadership.
As I said In the 1991 Inaugural Chris Higgins Memorial Lecture ( and there was a
professional public servant for you):
only politicians can make major changes to the way a country conducts Its budinesChnge
cannot come fom the bureaucraq n matter how well motivated, or gifted, becuse the
bureaucracy baa mo autodrty to rak priortes or make deddion... Jn the eud, polltidm have to
have the foresight to n the need for change and the courage and sruzgth to carur it throagh.
In fact In 1983 there was a huge reform task to be undertaken. The Publc Service, while
managed and staffed by people of real ability, Integrity and motivation had not been
allowed to move with the times. Rather than liberate the Service to allow its talents and
energies to flourish, our predecessors had preferred Public Service bashing, crude staff
ceilings and belligerent industrial relations.
Central to our reforms of the Public Service was the desire to ensure the government of
the country belonged to the elected poiltclam. We stated at the outset that a key
objective was to make the Public Service more responsive to the government of the day;
more responsive In the sense that it would be better able to recognise and achieve the
Government's overall policy objectives.
We wanted a Public Service that could take us Into the 21st century. A Service that
would meet our aspirations for a modern, competitive, caring and confident Australia.
The reform task has required a massive effort from the Public Service. It has risen to
that challenge well.
Let us take this opportunity to mark bow much we have achieved over the last decade.
What our predecessors had allowed to become a stultifying bureaucracy, obsessed by
process for its own sake, and which all too often had Its own agenda which failed to
comprehend the objectives of the elected Government, is now a far more professional
body. Without doubt the Public Service is more responsive to the general policy direction of the
Government. PERFORMANCEANDACCOUATABLhTY JNTRE PUBLIC SERICE PAGE 1 
We are a reforming Government. We need a reform-oriented Public Service.
We have already achieved a significant cultural change and that Is continuing.
Public servants do now focus on results, on outcomes, on performance.
And contrary to some misinformed commentary, that has not been at the expense of the
traditional public service virtues of honesty, probity, Integrity and fair dealing.
Ethics and equity continue to take their place alongside economy, efficiency, and
effectiveness. Indeed, the greater emphasis on accountability and openness In decision maldng that we
have seen since 1983 has been a powerful contributor to honest and fair administration,
and has reinforced a more deliberate focus on equity.
Nor has the Public Service been politicised.
Quite the contrary. The dearer arrangements that we now have for ministerial staff and
the Important Independent role played by the Public Service Commissioner In SES
staffing decisions have bolstered the merit principle.
We're not interested in a politicised Public Service. But that doesn't mean public
servants have to be political neuters.
We want men and women who have their own Ideas, who are ready to take the Initiative
combined with a high degree of political sensitivity.
That Is all part of a professional Public Service.
A Public Service able to give strong advice.
Able to test Ideas and come up with better one.
Able to articulate objections and point to the pitfalls.
Able to temper misguided enthusiasm.
But with the sensitivity to know when not to press further.
A Service which can recognise when the arguments have been understood, and avoids
unproductive debate continuing to the point of nagging.
A Service which Is then able to get on and implement a Minister's decision with whole
hearted commitment.
Again as I said in the Chris Higins' lecture:
the Govusent has valued official advice and made tet hws titloms that provide It are
strong and effective.
Ahb Government has always believed I a career public service, capable of giving Independent
advk the Government has not sought to shldd Itself from critical advice by appointing " frilendly
voice" to key poeion.
When we turn to performance I say don't be fooled that there was a golden age of public
administration when everything was done perfectly.
PAGE 2 PERFORMANCEANDACCOUIVfABJ7IT7IN JTHEPUBLICSERVICE 
Remember the Review of Commonwealth Administration set up In response to what
Malcolm Fraser referred to as ' breakdowns and administrative failures'?
Remember the ' roc In the stew' meat substitution rackets?
Remember Costigan, the painters and dockers, and the escort services being run out of
the Perth Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office?
And those of you In the Public Service remember what It was like.
Trying to manage without the necessary authority.
The levers that mattered outside your control.
The dead hands of the central agencies.
Departments had to argue with clerks In the Public Service Board and the Department of
Finance on matters of detail that should have been left to management discretion and
which bore little If any relationship to the Government's priorities.
It was this failure to match authority with responsibility which Indeed meant that no-one
could be held to be properly accountable. It was always possible to blame someone else;
departments blamed Finance or the Board and vice versa whenever administrative
failures occurred.
Most Importantly the abdication of responsibility by the successive conservative
Governments in favour of the Commonwealth Club mandarins did our country great
harm. So much opportunity was lost.
Often our political debate focuses on the sins of commission. The Opposition gets Itself
excited about technical mistakes In tender documents.
But what about the sins of omission?
What did the do-not coalition governments give us?
Let us take transport and communications for example.
For all I know we may have had some perfectly drafted rules and regulations.
But In a country so large and so dependent on Its transport and communications systems
we ended up with the most ramshackle transport system In the whole OECD.
Perhaps they did the job well. But It was the wrong job.
The opportunities lost in industry policy over th ose decades were staggering.
Tariff walls beautifly built Detailed and extensive industry regulation was faultlessly
drafted. But who was concerned with whether It was the right poicy or not. It was the
lazy days of the fites and sixties In the lucky country. Nobody was looking where we
were going. No vision, no political thought and no leadership.
PERFORM4NCEANDACCOUNFABILFTIN THE PUBLIC SERVIE PAGE 3 
We have been paying dearly for that political vacuum. We have had to labour hard to
establish national Industry policies, to restructure the economy and to create the
infrastructure Australia needs.
In those days creativity, Imagination and the generation of Ideas were not called for and
so they were not provided. The harnesses which had linked the Public Service to the
driving needs of the Government and the community during the war and the period of
post-war reconstruction worked loose. Uke all bureaucracies left to their own devices,
it grew and focused its energies on itself.
I don't propose to traverse the many changes we have made over the decade. They are
comprehensively described In the evaluation.
You are familiar with the 1984 reforms. You will recall the small change at that time
which marked the direction of all the changes, the amendment of section 25 of the Public
Service Act We added three simple words to the description of the responsibilities of
heads of departments: " under the Minister". Three simple words which said it all. And
we stopped using the description " Permanent Head".
You are aware of the extensive changes we have made to the budget processes that enable
Ministers to decide the priorities to be allocated to the Government's programs.
You are aware of the 1987 machinery of government changes which were directed to
strengthening Cabinet and ministerial control.
At the same time we abolished the Public Service Board. Its time had truly come and
gone. Quite deliberately, to Increase the responsibility and authority of managers in
departments, we have steered away from a single strong management authority at the
centre.
And you are familiar with the more recent reforms: the award restructuring,
commercialsation, even privatisation, where It's appropriate, and most recently
enterprise bargaining.
The evaluation of the reforms has been an ambitious undertaking. Vic Rogers and the
other members of his task force are to be congratulated. Michael Keating tells me that
he is unaware of any other country that has attempted such a comprehensive survey of
management change.
The evaluation has concluded that:
the management reforms have been well directed;
they have been well accepted and their benefits have substantially
outweighed their costs, and
agencies need to take more active steps to fully integrate the reforms into
the culture of the Service and make them work more effectively.
I am very glad that the task force has come to this conclusion because I, for one, have no
intention of going back to 1982.
And so to the future.
PAGE 4 PERFORMANCE ANDACCOUNTABILITYN TIE PUBLIC SERVICE 
T'he Management Advisory Board, itself a product of the 1987 reforms, has prepared the
paper Buikding a Better Public Service. It Is an Important document that I commend for
dose attention by all those with an Interest In understanding what the Public Service is
about. It Is not a detailed blueprint for further reform. Rather, It suggests a strategic approach
focusing on: making performance count,
better leadership, and
a strengthening of the culture of continuous Improvement.
As the paper says, the drive for the reform of the Public Service must be viewed In the
broader context of the changes affecting the whole of Australian society:
the internationalisation of the economy and the release of competitive
forces the Increased demand for Improved services, while maintaining
expenditure restraint, thus requiring continuing Improvement in value for
money and better educated staff wanting to be more closely Involved In decision
makin affecting them.
But the paper warns against complacency and argues that the task of continuing reform
Is as urgent now as it ever was.
And we cannot stand still.
Thnere must be a stronger focus on clients and the quality of services.
Leadership Is crucial. I have already discussed political leadership but more has to be
done to cultivate leadership within the Public Service, especially at Secretary and SES
levels, to achieve the high quality services, representing the best value for money, to
which the Australian people are entitled.
The Public Service has to sharpen Its focus on performance stili further. To Improve
performance It Is essential that people should be told where they stand.
Praise where praise is due.
Fair, frank and firm feedback when they need to lift their game.
The private sector and other public services have developed performance appraisal
schemes. In the past the Australian Public Service has not been good at this. Too much
use has been made of the too hard basket when It comes to appraisal. As a result there
has been Inadequate communication between supervisors and staff.
So to reinforce effective appraisal we are now introducing performance pay. It huas come
In for the Senior Officers, the middle managers, and from today It comes In for the SE&amp;.
We must be prepared to work at It and If necessary develop and refine the arrangements
to ensure performance payIs an effective spur to good performance. It needs tobe given
time to settle In and be properly evaluated.
PERFORMANCEANDACCOUNTABIUrIYI THE PUBIC SERVICE PAGES 
Of course there will be teething problems and we have to find the right balance of public
accountability sought by Parliament and the confidentiality needed if the schemes are to
work effectively.
Again that calls for leadership by Secretaries and all the SES.
As In private sector employment, enterprise bargaining will place the emphasis on
generating reform at the local level.
Increasingly It will be for public service managers at the local level to Improve the way
work Is carried out. They are the ones, together with their staff, who are best placed to
generate the Ideas on how to get that extra value for money and how to further Improve
the quality of the service they and their teams provide.
Those are the questions we must afi ask, a/ the time. We live in a competitive world. In
building a better Public Service the focus is on continuing mprovement.
We are getting this country moving again and the Public Service is playing its central role
In that.
Drawing on the Chris Higgins lecture again, I said then:
rI I will be mm as the time that Amtralla finally stood up and took dock of Itsef and Its
proble&amp; It wil be se am the tiue whem dhage and innovation became the dock in trade of the
political proe.
We Invest In peltical leadership and Ministers are In the driving seat. We have the
talent In the Cabinet, and have maintained the supply of new talent to stay there.
It's an impressive achievement.
And It's also an achievement for the Public Service.
Although the reforms have been driven by Ministers, as the decade has passed there has
been an Increasing enthusiasm for reform. Many of the ideas for reform have been
generated by public servants attuned to the Government's wishes. People such as
Michael Keating who have done so much to push the reforms along can be proud of what
they have achieved.
Ideas have been acted upon and decisions have been Implemented.
That Is how It should be.
I turn now to the subject of the third paper accountability.
This paper should be required reading for public servants at all levels, and for all
Members and Senators especially Opposition Senators.
The paper was first published as an exposure draft in August, 1991 It created a degree
of fuss.
PAGE 6 PERFORMANCEAND ACCOUNTABlJ7TIN T PUBUCSAMfCE 
It has been the subject of a large number of seminars and workshops, both public and
within the Public Service since then. It has been redrafted in the light of the comments
received. I expect it will still create some lively discussion.
But its publication is very timely. As the recent session of Parliament shows, there is a
lot of muddled thinking about the relationships between the Public Service, the
Government and the Parliament.
Parliamentary accountability is a serious matter. Many of the public service reforms I
have been describing have been directed to Improving the capacity of Parliament to
scrutinise government.
Recent commentary, however, has suggested ministerial responsibility no longer operates
in Australia and that there are gaps in our system of accountability. Those parrot cries
are devoid of any meaningul content.
Statements are made that we have redefined the concept of ministerial responsibility.
Watered it down. Changed the rules.
This is not so. I remind you of what my predecessor said about ministerial responsibility
in his 1988 Garran Oration:
The true measure of ministerial accountability, here and in Britain, has never been the tally of
ministerial resignations. Evem In the sower and simpler formative period of our system of
Government, the strict theory that Ministers were fully accountable bor every act or omission of
their departmental officer was, Amply far fetched.
He went on to say:
-ministers mt, of course, continue to be answerable to the Parllament and to take any necessary
corrective actio. But the truth i there b no requirement for them to resign except where a
signifcant act or omission was theirs, or was taken at their personal direction, or was a matter
about which they obviously should have known, and done something.
At that time the Government was criticised for changing the rules and departing from
Westminster tradition. Again the commentators got it wrong. Back in January 1983
the report of the Review of Commonwealth Administration for Mr Fraser disposed of the
myth that In the United Kingdom ministers automatically, regularly or often resigned
where there were acts of maladministration by their departments.
Instead the Review concluded that there " has never really been [ such] a convention in the
UK. Indeed, we have not been able to identify ( In well over a 100 years) a single case that
can properly and confidently be claimed as a resignation for that reason."
And 12 years before my predecessor's comments, the Coombs Royal Commission on
Australian Government Administration, put it this way:
there s little evidence that a minister's responsibility now seen as requiring him to bear the
blame for all the faults and shortcomings of his public service subordinates regardless of his own
Involvement, or to tender his resignation in every case where fult is found. The evidence tends to
suggest rather that while obliged to answer to it when Parliament so demands, and to nldicate
PERFORMANCEANDACCOUNTABIITYIN THE PUBLIC SERVICE PAGE 7 
corrective action if that called for, they themselve are not held culpable and ai consequence
bound to resign or suffer dismmial unless the action whch stads condemned was theis, or
takes on their direction, or was action with which they ought obvously to have been concerned.
And so let us be a bit grown-up about this. On both sides of politics the question of
ministerial resignation will be a matter of hard-nosed Judgement by the Prime Minister
taking into account whether or not the Minister was directly involved, and if not, whether
the Minister should have been Involved.
As Sir Geoffrey Yeend, a former head of my Department, recently made cear in a letter
to The Canberra Times the problem the Journalists have, not to mention the Opposition, Is
confusing responsibility with resignation.
Accountability and ministerial responsibility are not to be measured In scalps taken.
Ministers are answerable to Parliament.
And as Sir Geoffrey made dear in his letter, it cannot be assumed that if there is no
resignation there is no cost. Sanctions are altogether a more subtle business than many
critics apparently understand.
I accept that there are grey areas. The question whether a Minister knew about some
matter can be simply determined. Whether he or she should have known leaves room for
genuine differences of opinion.
What is certain Is that once the problem has come to the Minister's attention he or she
has a clear continuing responsibility to fix t up.
If the thinking on ministerial responsibility has been muddled, It s yet more so when It
comes to the accountability of public servants and their proper relationship with the
Parliament. Public servants are the employees of the Government, not the Parliament. A large
measure of their direct accountability should therefore be seen In the context of the
normal employment obligations that any employee has to his or her employer.
The exposure draft of the MAB accountability paper was, however, criticised because it
appeared to limit accountability to this direct relationshlp.
As the new MAB document makes dear, Secretaries and departmental staff are
accountable to the Parliament through their Ministers according to long established
convention. The document, however, recognises the indisputable fact that the complexity
and sheer scale of administrative tasks means that Ministers cannot be directly
responsible for all the actions of their departments. This is explitly recognised in the
many legislative provisions for extensive delegation to officials. Accordingly the MAB
document recognises that the traditional hierarchical accountability relationships have
been complemented by public servants' duty to explain or Justify their actions directly to
parliamentary committees where the minister neither knew nor should have been
expected to know about a matter.
Furthermore, the Parliament has recognised that it itself is no better placed than the
Minister to keep track of all the administrative decisions. Accordingly various external
4
PAGE PERFORMANCEANDACCOUNTABILITY IN TE PUBLIC SERVICE 
review bodies such as tribunals, the Auditor-General and the Ombudsman have been
established to supplement the traditional accountability processes.
When we consider public servants' accountability, especially when it comes to the
question of sanctions, we have to be clear about the respective responsibilities of the
Government and Public Service managers.
With the exception of the Government's statutory responsibilities in relation to
departmental Secretaries, staffing decisions, including any questions of rewards or
sanctions, are matters for Secretaries of Departments and in some instances the
independent Public Service Commissioner. That is how it should be and I am sure no
one would wish to see the Government Intervening more directly. It would be a slippery
slope to politicisation.
And what are the appropriate sanctions?
Such matters will always Involve careful judgement. It's a weighing up of the
significance of the problems and their nature, of peoples' competence, their overall
contribution and their capacity to fix the problems.
This weighing up of achievement is Important for wider reasons.
We have put a lot of effort in the last ten years into trying to turn the public service
culture around to Instil In public servants an understanding that performance and
achievement are Important.
We must reinforce the understanding that avoidance of mistakes is not the only
imperative or touchstone of public service performance. We must not return to the riskaverse
culture of the past.
The cock-ups, the sins of commission, can be damaging, but typically their consequences
are far less damaging than those sins of omission I referred to earlier.
Unless we are prepared, as a government, to play by these new rules to assess people by
their overall performance we can hardly be surprised if public servants seek to avoid
risk at all costs.
As part of the further developments in public service management reform there will be a
sharper focus on effective performance appraisal, and related rewards and sanctions.
In introducing this tougher environment, we should not lose sight of the Importance of
professional pride for public servants, especially at senior levels. Respect among
colleagues, satisfaction In the achievement of a difMcult task well done, are valued. It is
relevant when discussing sanctions.
The public exposure of shortcomings leads to professional embarrassment. Often this
will be sufficient sanction.
Performance and accountability often arise in the context of parliamentary committees.
It is, I suggest, time for us to engage in some mature reflection on the question of scrutiny
by parliamentary committees. PERFORMANCE ANDACCOUNTABIITY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE PAGE 9 
Our committee system is potentially a very good system, capable of making a worthwhile
contribution to the quality of govertnent.
it Is so Important that It should not be prostituted.
May I therefore makm some suggestions to the Opposition leadership? I hope there is an
understanding among that leadership of the danger of debasing the committee system.
We should take a long-term view of the value of parliamentary committees. We should
expect and encourage public servants to play their full part in providing Information to
parliamentary committees.
But If some Senators In particular adopted a less adversarial approach they might
achieve far more effective parliamentary scrutiny. As the Government has improved the
quality of the Information being provided to the Parliament, and with the Increasing
expectation that public servanats will explain the background to government policies and
account for actions for which they are responsible, there Is a corresponding obligation on
committee members to be professional In their role; for example, to have read the
papers, to avoid aimless fishing expeditions, to have thought out their lines of Inquiry, and
so On.
There Is an Increasing demand for the tabling of documents In Parliament and Its
committees There Is of course a case for the Parliament to have access to some
documents. Often the Government wants debate to be Informed by having key
documents on the record. Often It would help If the Opposition read them.
But there needs to be a shared recognition of the limits and costs Involved.
Consultation between the Opposition and Ministers and senior officials will help to
enable the legitimate demands of parliamentary scrutiny to be met without wasting
everybody's time and taxpayers' dollars Ministers will be cautious In their undertakings
to produce documents and the Government will not accede to requests that are merely
fishing expeditions.
I do not wish my remarks to be taken as dismissve of the proper role of Parliament.
Far from It.
We are Interested to ensure that parliament Is a relevant and modern Institution. And I
hope the Opposition will join us In that.
T7he people of Australia look to their leaders and their representatives to address the
challenges we face together as a nation.
They want good government.
T7hey want the Government they have chosen to be able to get on and do the things that
need to be done.
T7hey want Informed and constructive parliamentary debate about the Issues that matter.
PAGE 10 PERFORMANCEANDACCOINTABILTIN THE PUBIC SERVICE 
Dealing with unemployment
0 Achieving sustainable economic growth
Building up our manufacturing base and Increasing our exports
0 Securing our place In the Asia-Pacific Region
Working towards reconciliation with the nation's Indigenous people
0 Protecting the less well-off, the sick and the aged
Preparing our children for the lives ahead of them
0 Looking after our matchless environment
Fostering our cultural life
Continuing the enrichment of our national life that we have gained from
the successMi Integration of our diverse ethnic backgrounds
Developing our sense of ourselves as a mature, confident and completely
Independent nation with constitutional arrangements appropriate to the
21st century.
These are the Issues which the Australian people have entrusted to their representatives
and the Government.
For the Government's part we shall be energetic in pursuing the community's goals.
I believe the Parliament has a corresponding duty to make Its contribution to the debate
of these big issues.
But all too often what passes for political debate Is the pursuit of scnd order Issues.
The Public Service has a key role to play as we approach the new century. Historically,,
the Public Service has been especially Important at key times In our national
development. T1he push in the 1990s towards federation Is a good example. It took political leadership
and community initiative and popular support to achieve the goal of nationhood.
But a lot of the business of making It ali happen would have fallen to the officials and In
the Commonwealth's first public servant, Sir Robert Garran, there was an excellent
example of professional dedication, and above all, creativity,, In giving form and
substance to the aspirations of the early federal governments.
Similarly,, in those difficult times Immediately after the Second World War, Australia
was blessed with a generation of gifted, capable and Imaginative senior officials.
Contemplating the kind of country that we want Australia to be In 2001 and 2010 and on
Into the century Iam struck by the parallelswith the values that we want to see In the
Public Service and also by the crucial Importance of the Public Service In enabling the
country to achieve that future.
We want the country to be vital and energetic with a strong sense of individual fr-eedom.
In the Public Service we are striving towards a new cuiture of continuing Improvement In
performance. There wil be less emphasis on central direction and more on the freedom
of local management and staff and unions to decide how things will be done.
PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABHMJYIN THE PUBLIC SERVICE PAGE 11 
We want a fair country with equality of opportunity for all groups within It. In the
Public Service, social Justice, access to government programs and equity In all decision
making will continue to be a central consideration.
We want an honest and law-abiding country. In the Public Service we can be satisfied
with nothing less than the highest ethical standards. The Integity and probity of public
office holders ( and I Include politicians) Is the foundation upon which proper standards of
conduct In all walks of life are built.
Corruption in government and public administration rapidly permeates the community.
There Is a heavy responsibility on the most senior levels of the Service because so much is
learnt by example, good and bad. I am a strong supporter of the moves within the
Service to re-emphasise the traditional Importance of public service ethics.
Let me make It quite clear that It has never been any part of the Government's public
service management reforms that the traditional Public Service values should be
diminished. In focusing on performance and achieving results It has been right for us to
examine process. Process which serves no useful purpose should be scrapped and that
has been a significant ob~ ject of the reforms. But that does not detract from the
Importance of adhering to the due process that remains, especially when It is part of the
law. We need our public servants to be achievers We want results. They should be energetic,
responsive, creative and Imaginative.
But the responsibilities entrusted to the Government by the Australian people are
precious. So the energy, the enthusiasm, the creativity and Imagination have to be
carefuly balanced with some prudence, attention to detafl, sound judgement, healthy
scepticism and the guts to stond against the flow.
I acknowledge that we do ask a great deal of the Public Service.
Addressing the Press Club after his Royal Commisson reported, Nugget Coombs
observed that It was, after all, the men and women of the Public Service that could make
politicians' dreams come true.
As a community we should be thankful for It.
PAGED1 PERFORRL4NCEANDACCOUNwTABIHflYIN THE PUBLIC SKRVIC 



TEL: 80/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
The Leadcr of the opposition, Dr Hecwson, refused today to distance himself from the
statements of Mr Hug Morgan.
When pressed by Mr Brian Bury on radio station 2UE about whether he agreed with the
sentiments expressed by Mr Morgan, Dr Hewson refused to say that he could not abide
with Mr Morgan's sentiments. He referred instead to what he called the indecision
surrounding the Mabo decision saying that he thought the Mabo decision ' may prove to be
unworkable' an unhelpful observation.
Dr Hcwson said it was wrong to see Mabo in terms of reconciliation with the Aboriginal
community and wrong that the issues of Mabo and reconciliation should be joined. He
apparently has not read the very explicit references in the High Court decision to
Aboriginal dispossession and the shame this dispossession has laid upon the nation.
Dr Hewson claimed the Oovernment had adopted a fundamentally divisive position on
Mabo, despite the fact that his own statements of last week treated the High Court
decision only in terms of benefits it could bestow on mining companies and pastoralists.
Dr Hcwson was roundly criticised by the Aboriginal community for the callousness of his
position. If Dr Hcwson wants to shoot his mouth off on radio be should at least have the courage to
say that Mr Hugh Morgan's remarks are extremist and that he will not have a bar of them.
He is always talking about leadership. Now is the time for him as the leader of the
conservative forces of Australia to nall these extremist sentiments as alien to the Liberal
Party's philosophy
2 JULY 1993
SYDNEY 2. Jul. 93 15: 12 No. 008 P. 01/ 01 



/ 1 I
' U.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
DEATH OF SIR EDWARD DUNLOP
It is with great regret that I note the death of Sir Edward Dunlop, AC, CMG, OBE, an
outstanding Australian.
Sir Edward typified many of the qualities which Australians prize. He was
courageous, determined, humble and, above all, ever generous in helping those who
needed help.
H-is " War Diaries" proved an outstanding success on being published, but his stature in
the community stemnmed not from his words but from his deeds.
Renowned for his efforts to help his fellow Australians in time of war, Sir Edward will
also be remembered for his work for the survivors of war and their families, and for his
medical contributions to nations across Asia, most notably Sri Lanka, Malaysia and
especially Thailand.
Sir Edward was admired, even beloved, of many. To have gathered as many friends as
Sir Edward did in his life is a tribute beyond any that I can offer.
I extend, on behalf of a nation grateffil for his work and his life, my condolences and
sympathy to his family.
CANBERRA JU1I. Y 2j 1993 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
CLOSING REMARKS, PREMIERS' CONFERENCE; PARLIAMENT HOUSE
JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well thank you very much, Marshall Perron. I might just recap on a few
points that Premiers and Chief Ministers have raised and then we might then
retire to the cabinet room. We have a lunch scheduled for 12.30 pm that we
can vary. So, at a conclusion to my remarks, I think we may, well it is really
your option whether w e go to the cabinet room, or have lunch a little earlier and
then return to the cabinet room, or go to the cabinet room first.
Could I lust begin by addressing some general comments. A few remarks were
made about the one day meeting being a farce. Well I think this belles a
tremendous amount of work by officials, as you know the Commonwealth and
State Treasury and central agency officials have now met consistently about
this subject for some time, particularly in the national fiscal outlook statement,
which is a joint statement of the Commonwealth and the States. It is the first
time that It has ever been produced, it is the first time any Commonwealth
Government has put estimates of receipts out into the medium term and
therefore estimates of deficit or surplus, as the case may be, when I became
Treasurer and John Dawkins became Minister for Finance in 1983, the then
Coalition Government didn't even publish forward estimates of outlays, much
less forward estimates of receipts, and forward estimates of the budget
balance, or let alone give any commentary on the profile of the receipts or the
outlays, or influences on the receipts or the outlays on the way through.
I don't know of any federal Government, -any national governmfent in the world
which publishes these sort of documents. So, the notion that this Is a day of hit
and miss type of things, is wrong. I mean it Is a tip of a very large iceberg and
there has got to be a point where the executive authority of the Commonwealth
and the States Is brought to bear to decide things. But that Is not taken without
undue consultation and understanding of the Issues which both the national
fiscal statement, the new loan council arrangements and the FitzgeraldReport
itself which backgrounds savings in the broad. 
All of that means this is easily the best informed Premiers conference meeting,
ever. I think that we should understand just how much progress has been
made in trying to get a better understanding between us all about where our
fiscal needs are.
The Treasurer was just telling me the offer document went to States on
Thursday as well, not Friday. So there was a number of days there to consider
the distillation of the Commonwealths work In respect of the meeting.
Let me just brefly comment at least on some of the points that have been
made. John Fahey made the point In his opening remarks about the need for
certainty in fiscal finance and arrangements between the Commonwealth and
the States. We have tried to provide that in arrangements over periods of time
where we thought we could see some medium term horizon, and this is the last
year of a three year real terms guarantee, and we will try and devise some
method where the States can have some Idea of where we think we are
heading for the future. The problem with It Is the difficuity of getting the balance
between certainty on the one hand and the need for flexibility on the other, In
my opening remarlks I mentioned the question of the change In the world
forecast and Jeff Kennett picked me up on this point about the OECD, but I will
come to that in a moment, The OECD growth rates for ' 92 changed from a
positive 2.7 per cent to a negative That's nearly a four per cent change in
the forecast, and In 1993 from 4.3 per cent In forecast in ' 91 to .3 this year,
again, for the second year in a row a 4 per cent change In the forecast.
The OECD, I will come to Jeff Ken netts point, it is not a matter of we
Australians comparing our growth rates to the OECD, It Is a commentary on the
weight of the OECD economies in world output. They represent more than half
world output, and much of Australia's prosperity. We now have commodity
prices last this low In the middle eighties and I think from memory the last time
they were that low was the depression. We got very low commodity prices
because the US economy is down, the German economy has been in
recession, and the Japanese economy has been In recession. And so with
these very dramatic changes In the balance of world output, therefore we need
always the flexibility to adjust our own budgetary positions. And so I think the
reason while none of us, certainly on the Commonwealth side, wanted to deny
States certainty about having some predicability in their revenues, we always
do need that capacity to be flexible in the face of quite mammoth changes like
these. These are very large changes. The fact that we are still growing at
per cent -as a-developed-economy with theQOEOD shifting balance of growth,
shifting to the negative for ' 92 and barely positive for ' 93 means that we are not
doing too badly. But we have got to do much better, of course, for the point
which John Fahey also made and that Is respect of unemployment, where of
course rates of growth under about 3 per cent barely start cutting Into
unemployment at all. 
3
Could I just mention, Jeff Kennett mentioned, that we should meet to discuss
national outcomnes and to Improve ourselves. I mean, I don't think we should
underestimate our progress, as I said In my opening remarks we are 30 per
cent more competitive than we were In the middle 80s. We are now hugely
competitive in terms of our exports and Import replacement by virtue of lower
inflation, our wage costs, and a shift in our productivity. And as that Mcklnsey
study showed and pointed out so eloquently a week or two ago the big shift in
manufactured exports and elaborately transformed manufactures Is occuring
not because, amongst other things, because the competitiveness or the
economy, but the big shift Is In attitudes within businesses and the striking thing
about that result was that the survey revealed that It was the 90 per cent of
businesses that were not exporting which had exactly the same products,
exactly the same opportunities and exactly the same availability of
competitiveness, but we are not doing it because of attitudinal Issues. And that
is our big problem getting this attitudinal shift on the part of business to look at
the world as their market and not lust Australia.
But in terms of our competitiveness we have been Improving quite markedly.
I am always quite receptive to proposals of doing things, more things, together
and I think we should. But can I just say and I do not want this to be too
negative a remark about Jeff Kennett's comments, but last Friday we had one
of the most depressing outcomes of any Commonwealth/ State meeting. At the
meeting of Commonwealth and State Ministers for Education and Training a
decision was taken to defer action on major reforms and refer them back to the
States and Territories. This is on the Implementation of a national curriculum. In
schools and I am sure many of you know that the question of key
competencies and the national curriculum In schools Is germane to the
adopting of an Australian vocational certificate. which of course, Is underpinning
our major reform In vocational education. One has got to ask oneself what kind
of country we may be if outside of the tertiary sector of education, at the
vocational area we can't get to a point where a vocational standard in technical
and further education In those thousands of jobs which will be needed to power
the economy along outside the tertiary area where we can't get to a national
certificate for a student who wishes to participate In Industry In those terms.
The more obvious thing why would we want any child not to be able to continue
their education in one State coming from another to find that there Is a dramatic
shift or change In the curriculum.
Apparently the reason these decisions were taken was because the
conservative States decided the States rights issues had to be dealt with. Jeff,
I do not mind * being enjoined to do things nationally, -but If we can not even g~ ve
our kids a national curriculum after five years of work on this between the
Commonwealth and the States to pull out now because of some notion about
States rights when the States have been absolutely the drivers in a national
approach here, then you do wonder where we can ever get to anywhere cooperatively. 
4
But the general view that we should work co-operatively Is coming through, our
nlational fiscal outlook, it is coming through the COAG meetings and we are.
registering important gains, but I think we have got to keep the spirit going. We
have all talked about Asia here today, anyone who has been to Asia particularly
In the last year or two knows what tremendous opportunities are there for
Australia and the notion that we should be bickering about educational
standards or something between States of Australia and not approaching these
markets as a unified national force is of course, folly in the long run.
Can I say a couple of other things then addressing concerns which were raised
by Queensland and Western Australia also South Australia, the ACT, the
Northern Territory and Tasmania about fiscal equalisation.
The Commonweaith Government in the last decade has remained committed to
fiscal equalisation. We remain committed to fiscai equallsatlon. That is not to
say that the Grants Commission should not from time to time examine the
methodology and the relativlties between States and It has taken that
opportunity and that Is why we seek to try and adopt a Grants Commission
Report when that opportunity is taken. That is why we have sought to give
expression to the current change In methodology and relatlvities coming from
the Grants Commission report.
We are one nation and to see ourselves as States and therefore to see only
areas of advantage and comparative disadvantage Is I don't think the way to
view the country and the fiscal equalisatlon has played an Important role In
binding the federation together and keeping some of the smaller States
committed to being part of national fiscal solutions, giving their communities a
standard of living they might not otherwise enjoy.
There is a view, and a very strong view from New South Wales and Victorla,
and I understand the view particularly when the value of the tariff to those
States has fallen and It has fallen notwithstanding the point which was made
earlier about Western Australia. The fact is New South Wales and Victoria
have been through a substantial adjustment to their Industrial base through
protection, declines In protection, and one hopes that these Grant
Commissions relativities at least understand that point and that the shift In the
relativities are fair to the change of position of the various States.
Can I just say a number of States took Up the question of the-Medicare
agreement and Its Influence on the current outcome. At the time of signing the
agreement we gave an-Indication to'States how much they would be better or
worse off from the Impact of the change to Financial Assistance Grants and the
Health Fund Grants Implicit in the Medicare agreement. And In that
Queensland was to lose $ 47 miliion; Western Australia $ 70 million; South
Australia $ 73 million; Tasmania $ 11 mlillion; and the Northern Territory $ 42
million. In fact as a result of in the ' offer document' those numbers have
Queensland losing $ 21.6 million; Western Australia $ 32.4 million; South
Australia $ 68.5 million; Tasmania $ 1 million and the Northern Territory gaining 
$ 36 million. The difference Is that Queensland is $ 25.4 million better off than
expected to be; Western Australia is $ 37.6 million better off than expected to
be; South Australia $ 4.5 million; Tasmania $ 12 million; the Northern Territory
$ 78.4 million; the loser In this Is the ACT which loses $ 27.5 million and that is
why we have already put special financial assistance in for the ACT and I have
also In conversation with the Treasurer and the Chief Minister said that we will
consider additional special assistance as well.
But on the expectation versus the ' offer document' there are substantial gains in
there. We thank those Premiers and Chief Ministers who did make a reference to the
real terms guarantee, we think It was Important to keep that certainty, for the
Commonwealth to keep Its word on those things and that we can therefore at
least consider our respective responsibilities In the context of a pool which is
maintained In real terms.
There were many other Issues which were raised that are not appropriate here
to deal with In detail. I hope I have touched on the broad ones and couid I with
those words thank you for participating In the opening public session of the
Premiers' Conf erence and now invite Premiers, Chief Ministers and Treasurers
to the Cabinet Room.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING REMARKS AT PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, PARULAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA, MONDAY 5 JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I declare the meeting of the Premiers' Conference open and say that this Is
somewhat of a significant occasion because this will be our first meeting where
we have together participated In a study of the national fiscal outlook. Where,
before, fiscal policy of our effect upon savings has always been something
which we have together contemplated, on this occasion we have had quite a
long run study between us and we have prepared a document called the
* National Fiscal Outlook". And It attempts to look at the public sector, Its role
over the medium term, its call on savings and therefore our role In Investment
and in debt and In recovery.
This is the first time we have sought to have that greater transparency,
rationality, predicability thereby giving the rest of the country an Idea of where
we are heading.
This follows the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments which first
met last year and in that it was itself a somewhat historic meeting because It
was the first time that we separated out non-financial matters from the
Premiers' Conference Loan Council agenda. Normally we would have an
agenda for financial assistance grants, Loan Council matters et cetera then we
would have other matters associated with it and invariably, as attendees of long
standing here know we would not get often on to those issues. Now we have a
separate non-financial meeting our Council of Australian Governments
where such things as electricity generation and distribution, technical and
further education, recognition of standards and reorganisation of ministerial
councils has already produced a positive result and so In a way we have been
operating the federation at the financial and at the policy level In a way that
better meets the country's needs than we have In the past.
We have been focusing on sensible, practical gains wherever we Could see
them, and taking advantage of them. 
At this meeting we have another opportunity to deal with the nation's public
financing for the coming year and the fact that you now have a much better
Idea of where the Commonwealth budget Is going by virtue of the national
financial outlook and the fact that we now provide the States, all of you, and
Territories with the ' offer document' at least two business days ahead of the
meeting In this case last Friday means that all Governments represented
here have an Idea of what the Commonwealth proposes and what you
responses to it may be.
The first thing I would like to say is that about the Issues of this meeting Is that
this Is the third year of a real terms guarantee on the -pool of financial
assistance grants to the States and we have maintained that commitment in
that guarantee, on maintenance In real termns for 1 993-94. This for us Is
despite considerable pressure on our own Budget, as you know in terms of the
Outlook Statement.
The Commonwealth offer also accepts In general terms the outcome of the
1992-93 Grants Commission Review so, including all hospital funding grants In
the base for both years, the Commonwealth In Its offer for this year is
increasing comparable funding over $ 544 million over last year which Is an
increase of about 3 per cent nominal and above the expected inflation rate.
in that sense we think that we can do justice to the States In this and at the
same time to national fiscal policy. It is very clearly the Commonwealth's view
that the Budget IS playing an appropriate role In terms of cushioning the Impact
of the recession and with the so-called natural stabilisers working. The world
is slower than we thought it would be just a year or so ago and It Is just worth
recalling that in December 1991 the OECD forecast for the year 1992 was 2.7
per cent. That turned out to be .9 per cent which was a dramatic change from
+ 3 growth for the OECD area as a whole to virtually And for 1993 in
December 1991 the OECD forecast growth at 4.3 per cent for the area, In Its
latest forecast It has 1993 coming out at .3 per cent. So a change from 4.3 per
cent to .3 per cent and the previous year from 2.7 per cent to 9 per cent. This
is a very dramatic change and most of that Is coming from in the case of
Germany, Germany was In there for 1992 at 1.8 per cent and ended up for
1993 at 2.5 per cent in forecast and ended up at -1.9 per cent. Japan was in at
per cent and Its forecast for 1993 Is + 1 per cent rather than 3.5 per cent and
the United States was 3.8 per cent and was In at 2.6 per cent. So, we can see
how that 2.7 per cent and 4.3 per cent transiated themselves Into 9 per cent
and per cent. That was not just the impact of restoring balance sheets and
dealing with lower inflation and the blow out of the credit boom of the eighties,
but the reunification of Germany has obviously put a very large dampener on
European growth. That's obviously affected Japan as well and the United
States. So, this is the context In which our fiscal situation Is set, And It means that for
our country we've been growing of the order of 2.5 per cent while, as I say, the 
OECD area In 1992-93 if you took at us, I just gave you the calender years
but if you look across the financial year If you put OECD numbers In with our
financial year we're growing at about 2.5 per cent and the OECD is growing at
1 per cent. So we're doing better than twice the OECD growth rate. Now, part
of that is because of the role of fiscal policy and lower interest rates and lower
Inflation. And you saw on the national accounts a couple of weeks ago where a
substantial contribution was being made from the public sector. And the public
sector In deficit Is holding the growth in the economy up higher than It would
otherwilse be.
Now there is a view around the place, particularly from the Federal Opposition
that we ought to be having the budget pulled more rapidly back into surplus.
Well this Is very much a wrong view very much a wrong view. And, again, I
remind people what the OECD secretariat and the IMF said just six or eight
months ago. And that was, that the stance of fiscal policy In the area of the
OECD and the IMF ought to be basically In deficit so that the world economy
starts to come out. Now, that's meant that the One Nation funding which has
been spent throughout calender 1992 and now Into calender 1993 Is playing its
role not just in the nation of course, but In each state and it has had its
own Impact upon fiscal policy.
Now, I just paint that picture to put the setting. In that context, our budget and
the maintenance of the same real In terms of payments to the states and
the sixteen hundred million we're going to spend on health over the next three
years is, we believe, getting the balance fairly right In terms of payments to the
states. Now, I'm not sure what Premiers may say about the offer but I just want
to make this point. And that Is that the Federal Opposition at the time of the
last election was intent upon taking $ 709 million dollars out of financial
assistance grants for this year. And that meant NSW losing $ 195 million,
Victoria losing $ 145 million, Queensland $ 138 million, Westemn Australia $ 76
million, South Australia $ 72 million, Tasmania $ 29 million, Northern Territory
million and the ACT $ 11 million. Now, at the time we argued that that
policy was a wrong policy I might say many of you couldn't see the wisdom
of that position at the time and were happy to sign up to that policy and I only
make the point that what you are receiving now Is far more generous than that
which would have been received there.
Could I just say that going back to the economic outlook could I just
make these points. We are well positioned now to grow, particularly after the
visit I had to China and Korea our stance with Asia, our competitiveness has
improved thirty percent since the middle eighties has put us In a very good
position to participate in the growth of this area of the world. We've got solid
productivity growth at the moment, our productivity growing at about two per
cent per annum. inflation is better than our trading partners; Australia's top five
partners' inflation rate is 2.2 per cent and ours Is 1.2 per cent, well below that of
our partners. As we said, manufactured exports In 1992-93 are now around
per cent higher than a year earlier and nearly three times higher than a decade
ago. interest rates are at historically low levels and, Importantly, the profit 
share In the economy Is now already up to just about the late eighties level
which Is beyond the sixties historic experience, even at this stage of the cycle.
So, profitability has Improved, balance sheets of companies have improved and
I think companies are In a position now where thley can look around for
opportunities and take investment decisions.
So, could I perhaps conclude on this note and invite the Treasurer to say a few
things and then I'll Invite the Premiers to address the Commonwealth offer
document and any other remarks they wish to make, just to say that In the
1 980s Australian fiscal policy was arguably in better shape than any OECD
country. As a consequence, we've been able to stand the shift in the budget
balance better and cushion our economy better, than comparable countries.
It's one of the reasons why we're growing at 2.5 per cent and they're growing at
one per cent, on average. We know we've got a fiscal task to perform in the
medium term. But not In 1993-94. 1993-94 Is a year when the budget should
be In deficit; it's a year when we still need the public sector hauling activity
along and at the same time encouraging private sector Investment. And It Is, as
a result of that national fiscal outlook statement, that we will focus on the
medium term of fiscal policy. And that statement allows all states to
understand where we're coming from; It allows the public the opportunity to
know what the shape of fiscal policy may be; and It also provides a role for the
states In being part of that fiscal outlook and savings equation.
So, we think the offer today Is a fair one, we've maintained our commitment to
the real terms guarantee, we've sought also to receive the Grants Commission
Report and Introduce It, and I remind you again that we'll be spending $ 1 ,600
million over three years on health. So, with those things, we think In all the
circumstances the Commonwealth offer Is a decent one and one which the
states can accept.
I now invite the Treasurer to augment my remarks.
ends. 



It I 8 3/ 93
STATIMNT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J ] KEATING XP
PROPOSED METING OF APEC LM~ ERS IN1 SEATTLE
Australia warmly welcomes the announcement by
President Clinton in Tokyo today that he proposes hosting
an APEC Leaders Economic Meeting in Seattle this
November. it is intended that the meeting will discuss
economic development and trade liberalisation in the
Asia-Pacific region.
In recent days, President Clinton has been consulting
other APEC leaders about the proposed summit meeting.
I have already written to him welcoming the proposal and
pledging Australia's firm support. I advised him I will
attend the leaders meeting if it goes ahead on the basis
proposed. Australia believes the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
or APEC process offers an historic opportunity to promote
the economic integration of the Asia-Pacific region in a
way that serves the interests of all members and is
compatible with a sound multilateral trading system.
The current members of APEC are the United States,
Canada, Japan, the Republic of Korea, China, Taiwan, Hong
Kong, the six ASEAN countries, Australia and New Zealand.
APEC economies account for half the world's output and
per cent of world exports.
Since 1989, an APEC Ministerial Meeting has been held on
an annual basis to promote an agenda of economic
cooperation anid trade liberalisation. This November, the
annual Ministerial Meeting is scheduled to take place in
Seattle and is expected to consider a trade and
investment. -framework -agreement and an action agenda of
trade-liberalising measures. Australia has been active
in helping define an effective role and agenda for APEC.
There were very positive reactions in Washington and
other APEC capitals to the proposals set out in my speech
of 8 February 1993 for APEC to take a lead in creating an
Asia-Pacific economic community through measures such as
the harmonisation of standards and trade and investment
rules. Since April last year, Australia has advocated the
establishment of a process of periodic meetings of APEC
leaders to increase the statue and authority of APEC. 
2
We, 0 therefore, warmly welcome President Clinton-s
invitation to attend an APEC Leaders Meeting in Seattle
following the Ministerial Meeting. If the summit meeting
goes ahead on the basis proposed, it will be the f irst
step in an important process to ensure that APEC achieve.
its great potential for economic integration in the
Asia-Pacific region.
CAN4BERRA 7 July 1993 



PRIME MINISTER t49
STATEXENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P J KEATING, NP
NATIONAL ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER DAY
Today is one of our key national days.
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander day is the
day on which we celebrate the rich and ancient indigenous
history -and culture of our country. It is the day on which
we contemplate the achievements of the people who lived in
this country and cared for it for 50,000 years or more, and
whose descendants suffered dispossession, prejudice and
brutality after European settlement and yet survived, and
today continue to make a great contribution to our national
life.
This year the Day has extra significance, not only because
it is the International Year of the World's Indigenous
People, but because it is a year in which Australia is
confronting as never before its obligations to Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people.
The legacy of injustice towards the indigenous people of
Australia is in many ways a shameful one. But feelings of
shame or guilt or outrage are not necessary to feel that
things must change. Pride in Australia is all that we
require.
Our international reputation, our self-esteem, our integrity
require that we find answers to the prejudice and injustice
and other problems which indigenous Australians continue to
confront. The High Court's decision on Native Title. gives, us a vital
stepping stone towards finding-these answers.
Today we should reaffirm our intention to build on that
foundation: to put aside prejudice and fear and guilt and,
taking pride in the heritage of indigenous Australians,
commit ourselves to making reconciliation betw ' een indigenous
and non-indigenous Australians one of the strengths of our
society, one of the measures of our democracy, one of the
hallmarks of our belief in Australia.
CANBERRA 9 July 1993
252 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE BON P J KEATING MP
MEETING WITH THE REPUBLIC ADVISORY COMMITEE
In Canberra today I attended a meeting with the members of the Republic Advisory
Committee.
We discussed the progress of their work, and the Committee informed me of the
activities they had undertaken to meet their terms of reference. Close to 20,000 copies
of the Issues Paper and of the Australian Constitution have been distributed by the
Secretariat. Since the Committee was established in April this year, it has held three formal
meetings. The members have also had numerous discussions with interested parties,
and consulted widely around Australia.
The Committee will shortly complete its schedule of public meetings in the capital
cities and selected regional centres of all States and Territonies.
To date the Committee has received around 400 submissions, considerably more than
originally expected.
As a result, the Committee became concerned that its reporting deadline of I
September 1993 would not allow sufficient time to consider fully all the public
submissions, and to take account of them in developing options for their paper. They
therefore requested an extension of their reporting date.
I have agreed to the requested extension and the Committee will now provide its
report to me by 30 September 1993.
This one month extension will allow a corresponding extension of the cut-off date for
public submissions to Monday 16 August 1993.
For those wishing to take advantage of the extended deadline for submissions, free
copies of the Committee's Issues Paper and the Australian Constitution will continue to
be available by dialling 008-620186.
CANBERRA 21 JULY 1993
394 



23/ 07 ' 93 15: 57 e06 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE Q~ 001
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THU R0n P. J. EATING, NP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 22 JULY 1993
It is a pleasure as usual to be here, even for the
nineteenth time.
I thought I should come along and be re-assured that I
exist. I was a pretty sure I did; my colleagues assured
me, the numerous people with whom I have been consulting,
the people on talkback, the people on committees, the
Chinese, the Koreans, various Heads of State. They all
seemed happy with the degree of my visibility.
But I should have remembered the old maxim I speak at
the National Press Club therefore I am.
Let me begin with a quotation from a very familiar
source. When King George VI died Robert Gordon Menzies made the
following observation:
The death of the King has once more reminded us that
our great Commonwealth is united, not by legal
bonds, not by the Crown as an abstract notion, not
by fine-spun constitutional theories, but by a
common and all-powerful human emotion which discards
form and penetrates instantly to the substantial
truth.
It is not very often that I quote the words of Bob
Menzies. My opponents do it enough for all of us.
The Liberal Party is like a hound which cannot be induced
to leave its master's grave. It is always scratching
around in the dust for a hint, an indication, some sign
which will tell them who they are, and what they stand
for, and what they should do next.
But I agree with what Bob Menzies said in this instance. 
2
I agree that what unites a nation or a Commonwealth
has less to do with the law than with feelings held in
common. 9
Menzies developed a very similar philosophy about the
Queen. He took her extraordinarily popular visit in 1954
to be evidence that Australians' affection for her " was
one of the most powerful elements converting them from a
mass of individuals to a great cohesive nation."
I agree with him there too.
I agree that there is such a thing as national sentiment
and that it is a powerful force in the shaping of a
nation, in the cohesion of a nation, in the success of a
nation. I agree that in the 1950s and for a surprisingly long
time afterwards Australia's unity with Britain was built
on something more than friendship it was built on an
implicit sense of unity, on an instinct.
And I agree that in 1954 the Throne of England, and in
particular the new Queen, constituted a considerable
element of Australia's national sentiment.
I agree with all this. I think more national sentiment is
what we need now, and more unity, and cohesion.
We need it because the old affections are not there in
the same way.
Even though there is widespread affection for the
monarch, there is simply not the same affection for the
monarchy. Our relationship with Britain has changed irreversibly
as irreversibly as our culture and the composition of our
people has changed.
We are a very different country in a very different
world, faced with entirely new challenges which will have
to be met in entirely new ways.
In Asia and the Pacific we have opportunities of a kind
we have never been offered before.
To grasp them I believe we need a new sense of unity a
new kind of national sentiment.
And in 1993 it can only come from one place. From
Australia from the democracy, from shared values,
shared aspirations, from the necessities we face.
I have been saying it for some time now: we need a sense
of common purpose, of fellow feeling the things which
will both inspire Australians and bind them together. 
And if you could transport Bob Menzies from the era in
which he lived, and put him down in this one with all the
necessities it imposes on us, and all the opportunities,
I am pretty sure he would say the same.
We cannot expect to change the direction of our trade and
commerce, adapt to the revolutionary changes in the
processes of production and the nature of work and to the
equally radical changes in the global economy without
cultural change.
We cannot expect to live in this new era with the
institutions, symbols and attitudes of an old one.
We cannot find our place in this new world without
finding and cementing the common ground among ourselves.
These are not radical ideas. They are common-sense ideas
pragmatic ideas.
Let me say it again, if only for John Howard's sake: many
of the things which bound together the Australians of
Menzies, era are either irrelevant or no longer on offer.
In fact there is something much better on offer: there is
the chance to make good in our region, which is the
fastest growing in the world; and to do it on our own, by
our own collective initiative and genius.
In the last decade of the twentieth century the chance
exists for this generation of Australians to set
Australia up for the DeA century.
That is why last year I made a deliberate decision to
depart from the usual overseas travel priorities of
Prime Ministers by concentrating first on Australia's
main regional relationships.
So, as you know, I went to Indonesia, Papua New Guinea,
Japan, Singapore, Cambodia.
And this year to New Zealand, Korea and China.
To our regional partners I wanted to underline
Australia's credentials as an economic and political
player in the Asia-Pacific; to emphasise our commitment
to economic engagement in the region; and to strengthen
our voice in regional affairs.
To the Australian public, I wanted to underline the
enormous benefits that will accrue to our country through
closer economic integration with the region.
During the 1980s the countries of North-East and South-
East Asia grew twice as fast as the rest of the world.
During the 1990s they seem likely to easily repeat that
performance. 
But one of the main messages I wanted to impress in Korea
and elsewhere in Asia, is that Australia is very well
placed to expand our exports of technology-based goods
and services.
And in both Korea and China there was concrete evidence
that the expansion and diversification of our trade is
already gathering pace.
The radical reform and continuing growth of the Chinese
economy are providing numerous opportunities for
Australian companies and, as you know, I was able to
witness a number of joint venture signings between
Australia and Chinese enterprises.
The Chinese leaders made it clear that they were
interested in a long-term strategic relationship with
Australia in the development of the Chinese steel and
woollen textile industries.
At my discussions in Korea and China there was agreement
to strengthen the government-based mechanisms which
support these important economic relationships for
Australia. And our Trade Minister, Peter Cook, will
follow with visits to both countries in September.
I went to Indonesia last year with great enthusiasm.
in the course of that trip and my subsequent ones to
other East Asian countries the enthusiasm has become
conviction. I came away from Korea and China last month more than
ever convinced of the enormous potential the East Asian
economies provide for Australian business and therefore
the potential for Australia's future our integration with
the region holds.
I came away more convinced of this, and more convinced of
the potential of APEC.
The Korean and Chinese leaders very much agree with our
view about the importance of ensuring that the economies
of North America and the Western Pacific be locked
together in one great and dynamic market.
Since my return, of course, President Clinton has issued
his invitation to host an APEC leaders meeting in Seattle
this November.
President Clinton's announcement is very good news for
Australia. It opens up an historic opportunity to
promote the economic integration of the Asia-Pacific
region in a way that serves the interest of all members. 
It is important that the process of Asia-Pacific economic
cooperation provides genuine benefits not only to the
advanced economies of the United States and Japan, but
also to the rapidly developing economies of South East
Asia. If the Seattle APEC leaders meeting goes ahead as
proposed and I am fairly confident that it will it
will put Australia at a table which really matters:
the APEC economies account for half the world's
output and forty per cent of world exports
three quarters of Australia's exports now go to the
APEC region
Establishing a process of periodic leaders' meetings will
greatly increase the status and authority of APEC a
forum which, of course, Australia was instrumental in
creating and has helped define and promote ever since.
The process is necessarily long-term. But this is the
best evidence of progress towards that goal, and the best
possible spur for further progress.
There is, then, this extraordinary opportunity for
Australia. We should not overestimate the speed with which the
process will occur. But it is even more essential not to
underestimate the chance it gives us.
It is essential that we are positive in our approach to
it. And essential that we find the common purpose and
collective will to grasp it.
It is essential that we find the national unity our
effort will require.
Most of you will know that famous story about Menzies
which got him into a bit of trouble at the time: how he
came back from Britain in 1941 and said to the waiting
press how despondent he felt upon returning to all the
local petty politicking.
I love politicking I think it is how the democracy
advances but when I came back from China last month I
think I had an inkling of what he experienced.
I thought here is this fantastic opportunity for
Australia, an historic opportunity to which the whole
national effort really should be turned.
But what do we hear? 
23/ 07 ' 93 16: 02 006 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICEApart
from the usual healthy and not-so-healthy cynicism
we always hear, we hear in the debate over the Mabo
judgement a mad retreat to parochialism and petty self
interest. We hear politicians playing to the lowest denominator of
public opinion.
We hear deliberate misinformation and the encouragement
of outright bigotry.
All this on an issue of fundamental importance, not only
to the Australian economy, but to the values on which
Australian democracy, the Australian ethos, and
Australia's reputation abroad are built.
There has been an element of mischievous and ill-informed
journalism in the Mabo debate. But the primary
debilitating role-has been played by the Opposition.
Tim Fischer goes to Hong Kong and assures his audience
that there is nothing to fear. In Hong Kong he tells the
truth. But in Australia he tells the people that they
will lose their backyards. In Australia he tries to whip
up fear and panders to the worst feelings in the
community. Yet, we expect this from the National Party. Paranoia and
parochialism is to the National Party what grass is to
sheep and goats.
But the party which has Most failed Australia on the Mabo
debate is the Liberal Party. Confronted with a great
national issue which needed, above all others in recent
times, a great deal of good will and good feeling and a
concerted search for consensus, the Liberal Party chose
to foster ill-will and ill-feeling. They chose the role
of spoiler.
And the chief spoiler has been Dr Heweon. Not only has
he refused to distance himself or ta-ke'issue with
outrageous comments from people like Tim Fischer and Hugh
Moqrgan, he has actually joined the little company who
claim that people's homes are at risk. Dr Hewson knows
that they are not.
Last month we saw him on national television talking
about what he called " massive uncertainty" " are titles
secure, is your home secure, your mine secure, your farm
secure?", he asked.
Dr Hewson knows the answer to these questions is
unequivocally " Yes".
Mabo calls for something much better than this. It calls
for nothing more or less than a mature national response. 
23/ 07 ' 03 16: 03 -006 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE I0
7
The High Court judgement entailed recognition that the
fiction of terra nullius was indeed a fiction; that
native title, where it had not been extinguished,
continued to exist; and that the appalling treatment of
Aboriginal Australians did in fact occur.
It is hardly revelatory. In essence it recognises what we
have long known to be true.
The Mabo judgement places great responsibilities upon us,
but it seems to me these responsibilities create the
opportunity to set right some aspect. of Australian life
which have long been wrong. it offers a chance to raise
the level of dignity on both sides.
And these responsibilities are no greater than the
responsibilities which the United States, New Zealand and
Canada all confronted last century. These countries
faced up to their responsibilities while they were still
in their infancy.
I am one of those who believes that in our maturity we
too can meet our responsibilities that we can make a
mature national judgement.
It must be a national response: the entire continent was
declared terra nullius; native title was denied
everywhere; the abuses occurred in all the states.
The need to find solutions is a national need. If the
word " Australia" still means, as I believe it does, a
belief in democracy and social justice, if that remains
the national sentiment, then a just national solution
must be found.
From the first Cabinet discussion a year ago, the
Government has seen as the nub of the matter finding a
rational reconciliation of two imperatives: the certainty
about land tenure which a resource-based economy requires
and the discharge of our deep obligations to Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people whose legal rights have
been granted them by the highest court in the land.
We have been determined that it must be a reconciliation
managed by Governments rather than left to the fate of
protracted conflict and unpredictable litigation.*
We have moved as quickly as possible. Mabo amounts to
the biggest change in Australian land law since we became
a nation. That is why I announced last October that we
would be taking a year to consult on the issues, consider
them carefully and formulate our policy.
I remind you that during the election campaign the Leader
of the Opposition supported the process and the
timetable. 
23/ 07 ' 9 18: 04 WS I_ M72 93P PRESS OFFICE
I will not attend now to any of the shrill and irrational
charges that have been made in the course of the debate.
As for the charge that the States have been browbeaten, I
won't go back over the twists and turns of discussion and
drafting that went on at the COAG meeting in June.
But if it is browbeating the State. to ask them to accept
one of the most important-and positive decisions the High
Court has ever taken if it is browbeating the States to
ask them to do more than simply pocket a Commonwealth
offer to validate their grants and pick up the entire
compensation bill if it is browbeating the States to
ask that effective mechanisms be established to determine
native title claims, and that laws be updated to
recognise and protect native title and if it is
browbeating the States to get them to understand that
Mabo has a significance well beyond the nitty gritty of
land management then the States have been browbeaten.
And the Government will not waver from its view of Mabo
as a national issue requiring a national response.
At our initiative, consultations have been held with the
States since last year, in every State capital and in
multilateral meetings the work has continued since COAG.
I reiterate what I have said to the Premiers and Chief
Ministers: in dealing with the land management
challenges posed by tMabo, our preferred course is
complementary legislation, cooperatively achieved.
That does not mean we will accept the lowest common
denominator, or will fail to establish appropriate
national standards and mechanisms for dealing with native
title. If Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have one
overriding request of the Government it is that the
Commonwealth set the benchmarks. And this we will do.
As we work on legislation, we are going to keep the lines
of communication open to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander representatives, to representatives of industry
and to others. The political heat of the issue will not
deflect us from that sound, deliberative, consultative
course on which we embarked last October.
The legislation we will introduce in the. Budget sittings
will make Mabo work. It will demonstrate that native
title is not incompatible with efficient land management
or with the national economic interest.
Dr Hewson made another contribution to the Mabo debate
yesterday. He said that Mabo threatened to lead to
recession. 
23/ 07 9i3 006 917 PM PRESS OFF 005
9
Dr Hewuon appears unable to live without recessions.
When he doesn't have one, he conjures one up. Late last
year, you will remember, he said that the recession was
deepening. Double dipping. Then he said that we were on
the verge of a depression.
Dr Hewson has also been talking about how the Government
must not " go beyond" Mabo, as if it is possible to
deliver a complete response without paying regard to the
wider implications of the judgement.
Let me say that it is not " going beyond" Mabo:
to see how the decision, by sweeping aside the
doctrine of terra nullius, also sweeps aside the
foundation of the dispossession of the indigenous
Australians or to note that the decision itself talks of
Aboriginal dispossession as having underwritten the
development of Australia
or to consider then what might be done for those who
have been dispossessed
or to consider also how the apprehensions of landbased
industries and the hopes of Aboriginal people
for economic improvement might both be addressed by
giving the latter a greater sense of involvement in
industry
or to recognise, as the High Court has now done,
Aboriginal customary law and traditions as a source
of Australian common law
or to recognise why, therefore, the Mabo decision
can be seen as a major contribution to the social,
cultural and economic standing of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people with the potential to
establish a new basis for the relationship between
indigenous and other Australians
None of these aims exceed our capacities as a community
and a nation: none of them exceeds our democratic or
social aspiration. They are, I believe, consistent with
our values and beliefs.
The spoilers, no less than the bigots, should know that.
And they should know that no amount of sophistry, or
denial, or lies will deliver us from the truth. None of
it will help Australia escape judgement in the eyes of
the world. And none of it is needed.
What we do need and what we will have is a workable
solution that will actually improve the quality of our
national life, which will build up the values we hold in
common, and nourish the reconciliation process. 
-j/ 07 ' 93* 16: 08 006 273 2923 PM PRESS OFIC -a 006
And there is no doubt that we would be considerably
closer to this solution if the Liberal Party had not
decided that it was in their interest to subvert the
national interest.
But, in fact, as Judith Brett wrote the other day, the
Liberal Party is " philosophically bankrupt". They no
longer have any idea how to address those things which
their founder understood instinctively the need for
unity, the importance of social values, the essential
role of a responsible political party to find the means
by which a society can cohere around common principles
and aspirations.
The Liberal Party, the alternative government, has
comprehensively lost its way. This is a fact which in
some circumstances might give the Labor Party comfort,
but there is no comfort for any Australian in their
present behaviour.
And there is little prospect of their improving. Having
just lost an election, they number among their leadership
aspirants the man who contributed more than any other to
the loss.
And having lost it on a Thatcherite program, they allow
to be a contender a politician who, in an embarrassingly
transparent imitation of Mrs Thatcher before she
mellowed, said the other day that government should be
" Poor", and " the laws of the free market are as immutable
as the laws of gravity".
Among their youth two of their brighter sparks are avowed
monarchists. The former Hewson adviser, now Hewsonhater,
Abbott; and the Melbourne lawyer, Costello.
Abbott and Costello lead the youthful wing of the Liberal
Party, along with the likes of the Member for Menzies
who, to judge from an article in The Aae the other day,
makes the man after whom his seat is named look like an
Irish rebel.
But no one is more culpable in the present fiasco which
is the Liberal Party than the bloke who only six months
ago was still believed to be their hope for the future.
In what appears to be a sort of penance for his sins, he
now tramps around the country saying things he doesn't
believe or he knows to be untrue.
It is well known, for instance, that privately John
Hewson will tell you Australia must move on to be a
republic. But unlike the Greiners and the Faheys and Sir
Rupert Hamer and many other leading Liberals, he will not
say so. He will not lead. He does not have the courage
of his convictions. 
23/ 07 ' 03 16: 07 0&amp; 06 273 29 3
The man who just last year
is so reduced he will not er
republic and discourages the
between Aboriginal and white
extraordinary grounds that k~
Keating' s ambitions. PM PRESS Ovpk'' 007_
ras touted as a visionary now
igage with the debate on the
goal of reconciliation
Australia on the quite
Le will not cater to Paul
The nation's ambitions apparently no longer enter into Dr
Hewson's political equation.
Nothing will persuade Dr Hewson that economics cannot be
divorced from social policy, that our economic
performance depends in considerable part on the strength
of our social bonds and on the development of a uniting
spirit. That our success in Asia will depend on these things as
well. I think it is safe to say that Australian business
understands what the political Opposition fails to.
Business knows that in the end it will not be the
Australian Government which carries the day in the Asia-
Pacific. It will be business.
It will not be Government which ultimately carries the
day in Australia. It will be business. Business, unions,
the workforce: public and private institutions, schools
and universities, communities, individuals.
In the end it will be, as I said, the quality of our
national effort which determines our success.
That is what increasingly impresses me in Asia the
number of Australian initiatives which are succeeding.
it is what increasingly impresses me here. It's what
impressed McKinsey in the survey of 700 new exporters.
We will help business up wherever we can. We won't be
shutting down the economy as some people are saying we
should. We'll do what we can to sustain demand.
But once it gets going we'll get out of the way.
Right now it is particularly important that governments
get the broad parameters of economic policy right.
To generate investment and jobs Commonwealth and State
Governments must get their budgets right: they must
support the economy in the short run by providing a
stimulus to spending; but they have to able to show that
in the medium term deficits will be scaled back to allow
private saving to be used to fund business investment.
We cannot allow our private savings to be used solely to
fund big budget deficits. 
23/ 07 ' 93 18: 09 -BOO 273 2923PMPESOIT 0O
12
We have to have more business investment and we have to
free up our private savings to pay for it.
This is what we did in the 1980. when we built up those
big budget surpluses. I
More recently, the Treasurer, the National Fiscal Outlook
and the Fitzgerald Report have reinforced this simple
point. In the medium term, big budget deficits are not
consistent with a strong economy.
That is why the Government is committed to reducing the
budget deficit to 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97; and why
we are aiming for a budget deficit of around $ 16 billion
this year.
The economy has been recovering for seven consecutive
quarters but, while the medium term looks good, the
process has been stubbornly slow.
We can be thankful that with more and more of our trade
in the Asia-Pacific we are not so dependent on the OECD
economies to sustain our export growth.
But sluggish growth in the OECD area has inevitably made
it difficult for us in Australia.
There are some forecasters suggesting that the GDP growth
in 1993-94 might be little different from 92-93.
Private consumption conceivably could weaken.
The economy could therefore do with the stimulus this
financial year that the One Nation tax cuts are scheduled
to bring next year.
on the other hand, because inflation is much lower, the
One Nation tax cuts are now more generous than they were
intended to be when they were announced in February 1992.
It is for these two reasons that the Government is
considering how the One Nation tax cuts can be best put
into place best for the economy and best for taxpayers.
The tax cuts now legislated are to be paid in two parts
one in July 1994 and the second in January 1996.
we are now in the process of considering the extent to
which the first leg can be brought forward to boost the
economy, and the second put back to secure the savings
task in the interim. 
23/ 07 ' 93 .18: 10 1008 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE Qh009
13
As I said earlier, when the tax cuts were announced in
February 1992, they were intended to encompass fiscal
drag. The subsequent better performance on inflation now
implies that they are substantially more than fiscal drag
substantially more than was intended.
Delaying the introduction of the second leg will bring
the tax cuts backs into line with what was intended and
announced in February 1992 while still seeing the tax
cuts paid.
In this way the incidence of income tax will not rise,
savings will be boosted, and the economy will receive a
fillip at a time when it's still needed.
These tax cuts will be delivered in full this financial
year. They will be L A W law.
And what is more, they are R E S P 0 N S I B L E
responsible law.
I began by talking about Australia's national values; or,
if you like, this system of belief which unites us.
I have said before that this a country which has got its
basic values right.
Those values remain, by and large, democratic,
egalitarian, tolerant and far more than before open.
But I do think we need to be more generally aware of
them, and they should be reflected more obviously in our
national symbols and institutions.
I think as Australia changes and old affections
inevitably fade it is essential that we get these things
right for future generations.
It seems to me that there is no better recent evidence of
the need for this than the Mabo debate particularly
where it has been led by our conservative opponents.
In the end, however, I am supremely confident that the
better instincts of the vast majority of Australians will
prevail. I recognise, just the same, that none of this can be
divorced from our economic performance our ability to
provide long term security and prosperity.
That, despite the slow recovery, is now on offer as never
before. It is what the government, and a great many
Australians, have been seeking for some time.
There are profound reasons to believe we will succeed
and in the end nothing will be more important than belief
itself. 



PRIINMISET E
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
ADDRESS AT OPENING OF THE FINANCE SECTOR UNION OFFICES, 230
EL. IZABETH STREET, SYDNEY, FRIDAY 23 JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Thank you very much Keith ( Westgarth), Kevin ( Davern) and Len ( Hingley), I see
the President of the Labor Party here Terry Sheehan and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure for me to could I say Keith, to be here on this occasion and
I can ass * ure you I was elated in March as well. I am quite sure that we would not
be opening any union offices had we not won the election, we would be closing
them and that the savage right wing Thatcherite agenda of our opponents would
now be in full swing. They would be having a beano, working out each bit of
draconian law they could have put into place and how they would hop into
ordinary people and in their defeat they are getting all pious about the
soundness of their policies and the rest. Well, that is all right, let them, I don't
care. The fact of the matter is they would have been into ordinary people, they
would have hopped right into ordinary people in a way we have never seen
because when they had a chance in this last period, the government had been in
office ten years, to put a policy coming from a recession with the government
facing the economic and social difficulties of the recession, where they thought
they were a chance of winning, did they have a balanced approach to life looking
at all the elements of Australian society? Not on your life. They were going to
get in there and grab the national income and give it to the high income people,
rip Medicare apart, rip the social wage apart and hop into wage and salary
earners, put a GST on their back and give the tax cuts to business.
So, there would have been the personal tax cuts they promised, you could have
forgotten those, you would never have seen them because to have been funded
they would have had to cut $ 10,000 million out of the public sector of Australia,
out of the social wage, the social and education programs of the Commonwealth.
As a public sector manager of ten years standing I can say definitively, I actually
know more about this subject than anyone else in the country because I have
presided over sixteen reviews of the Budget, you can not cut $ 10,000 million out
of the Commonwealth budget without hurting a lot of people particularly the
aged, the young, women, the sick and the infirm, these are the places where they
would have had to cut and of course, public opinion would have come down
against them. It would have been a consumption tax and nothing else but that,
I I 
2
but more than that the thing they really wanted to get at was trade unionism.
They hate the fact that people have a right to organise and-bargain for their
incomes. I don't know why it is because the people who run the Liberal party,
they are only basically wage plugs themselves and only one I remember was
born with silver spoon in his mouth or two maybe, in one case a ladle, but the
rest of them are dead ordinary. Why they want to hop into ordinary people has
got me beat, but they do. They would have been right into it, they would have
been ripping away at the structure of unionism and you saw Jeff Kennett at it in
Victoria, I am pleased to say when we extended federal award coverage in
Victoria the great body of Victorian unionists have now registered themselves
under federal awards and so sense will prevail.
All of this at a time when the best things were happening in the labour market,
the best things in our industrial history. At a time when a union like this was
amalgamating and becoming a focussed, central force in the financial industries
of this country, where a union like this had lead the way, one of the leaders in
enterprise bargaining with really innovative changes in the nature of those
bargains especially for women, the majority of whom make up your membership,
where you are looking at improvements in productivity and then spreading those
improvements back to the workforce and to profits, it is the very essence of cooperation
and decency at the workplace and of course, underpinned by the
Labor governments policy of a safety net for those on low income.
What is the point of objection to such a policy? Keith made the point earlier
about the number of offices around the country you were five unions and you
are now one and you may soon be six unions as one. Isn't trade unionism
therefore running in a totally responsible direction? We have got an inflation
rate which until recently was the lowest in the OECD, the lowest in the world and
it is now just a decimal point or so away from that. Can anybody suggest that the
trade union movement is rampant with an inflation rate of that variety, of that
dimenstion? What in God's name made the Liberals so snakey on Australian
trade unions and Australian working people? I don't know, but there is no doubt
they want to expunge any sense of organisation at the workplace away and of
course, the great spoof in their policy was they said they would have enterprise
bargaining, but enterprise bargaining is as you know all of you banding
together, talking to the managers, the owners saying can we reach an agreement
and getting a good commitment, shared commitments which produce a sense of
esprit de corp and comradeship in the organisations that you work in and make
the businesses better.
But that -is not what they wanted. They wanted individual wage contracts, so you
got singled out and separated off and the employers dealt with you individually
and then that was sold as an enterprise bargain. It was never an enterprise
bargain. In contrast we have got enterprise bargaining and we are setting the trade union
movement up with enterprise bargaining and we are setting it up in my view to be
a much stronger body, a much stronger set of institutions in Australia than they
would have otherwise been. In the 1980s when we needed aggregate wage 
3
flexibility, under the various Accords and tax cut arrangements where we had
wages as a proportion of GDP falling, where we had to get the profit share up to
re-start Australian investment after the 1981-83 recession, we had the aggregate
flexibility, but what we are seeing now is flexibility within sectors. The important
thing is that if we still have a centralised system as inflexible as we had In the
1980s, if we didn't have enterprise bargaining as we established in Accord Mark
VI and a Coalition government as it had come along, it would have gone for the
jugular of the centralised system and the organs of Australian trade unionism
would have been out of condition, that is not developing an organic system of
bargaining, it would have been out of condition and less able to resist that kind of
an attack. Whereas now we have moved away from the centralised system to
enterprise bargaining, where unions are slimmed down, where their
management, where amalgamations are congruous, where there are a set of
common purposes amongst people in similar sectors of an industry, where we
have seen appropriate amalgamations. Unions are now much better set up not
only to do a better job for their members and the businesses which employ them,
but they are going to be stronger, better exercised limbs and sinews of unionism
to resist the kind of crude attack that you have seen attempted by the likes of
Hewson, Howard et al.
This structure is a much healthier one for the economy and for unionism and it
also protects trade unions from the right wing predators who hang around our
political system. These are important things and trade unionism has been
through the ACTU and the great body of unionists in this country in the last ten
years at the leading edge of changing the Australian economy into a modem,
productive externally oriented economy with a low inflation rate. Not having to
be dragged along, right up the front and in terms of productivity and bargaining;
before Accord Mark VI the notion in this country was if you want to make a
business more profitable you cut wages. What the trade unions said was there
is something much smarter to do than that, we can make the business more
productive, you don't have to cut wages, we can do more to make the business
more productive together and that is why things like you have negotiated, with
flexible working hours, with cycles up to 300 hours over eight weeks, job sharing,
home based work, career break opportunities, part time employment and now
you are looking at agreements involving Saturday trading, training, team based
performance pay, all of those things are typical of the kind of innovative and
ambitious flexibility that one can get in a co-operative structure.
If you look around our part of the world, in Japan particularly, in Korea and all
sorts of other countries you see the models of co-operation as the places where
people want to do something better with their business and themselves as a way
of making the thing function better and providing higher real income. Not by
cowering people, the straitening, cowering thing, get everyone's eyes down,
threaten them, split them off onto individual contracts if they play up, get rid of
them. This punishing approach which the Liberals have always had. You would
think if they just look around business in the region we live in they would see just
how that sort of British model of employer/ employee relationships is just not
appropriate to Australia any more and why we are much better off doing what we
are doing. 
We have now got one thousand enterprise agreements which have been
agreed. One thousand, which is a very encouraging number and they are
growing all the time. We have got the lowest level of industrial disputes for
decades and part of that is the fact that the Government does sit down
under an Accord with the trade unions to work out a structure. Now, we sat
down before the election with Accord Mark VII, your officers were, there
and we agreed to a safety net. We are now asking the Commission to
endorse Accord Mark VII which provides for three updates of the safety net
over the next three years which will then underpin the enterprise
bargaining structure which will see most decisions in the workforce being
taken. In the course of that we made clear that the Government would support
those safety net arrangements, that we would also look at a legislative
package to bring our laws and institutions into alignment with a system of
national enterprise bargains so we actually change the' system to
accommodate the new thing and of course, in that we talked about, as we
did right through the 1 980s, the backdrop of a decent tax system behind it.
Since 1983 we have had effectively a policy of de facto tax indexation, that
is, in the period up to 1991 we had handed back in tax cuts more than tax
indexation and I made clear with Peter Cook when we sat down to do
Accord Mark VI1 that tax cuts would form again an Important backdrop to
Accord Mark VII.
What I announced yesterday is that those tax cuts will be paid, and not
only paid in full $ 3.4 billion in 1994-95, but they will actually be brought
forward into this financial year. This will be a significant tax cut for people
from two thirds of average weekly earnings up. From $ 20,000 and
onwards. The group who in the 1 980s didn't get above the weight of the
tax cuts which formerly went under $ 20,000 and beyond about $ 45,000.
So, it is their turn and their time and we have been looking therefore to do
that. In the 1 980s we supported the low paid with things which the ACTU was
engaged such as the Family Allowance Supplement was dramatically less
the income of a low income family and made the tax cuts, most of our tax
cuts focussed on the bottom end. When I became Treasurer in 1983 the
bottom rate of tax was $ 30,000 it is now $ 20,000. The tax free threshold
has risen so in that area we focussed our tax attention first. We are now
focussing it in that area from two thirds of average weekly earnings and
beyond. That is why yesterday's commitment to see those tax cuts paid in
full next financial year and brought forward earlier to this year is important
for that backdrop in the labour market where people because of the
slowness of the economy are seeing it has taken time to get wage
increases through the system and we will put the second tranche back into
1998, probably 1998, so that we are doing what we intended to do and
said we would do in February 1992 in ' One Nation' to say that basically the
tax cuts would be paid for by fiscal drag in the system. 
Because Of a much better and lower inflation performance we were going
to be paying much more than such fiscal drag, but pushing the second
round out means we return to pay that which we intended. The tax cuts will
be delivered, they will be delivered in an economically responsible way
and I should have thought given the fact the economy has been in the last
couple of years slower than we had hoped and thought, in doing that we
have met the economic imperative of the savings problem in the middle of
the 1990s by bringing the Budget deficit back to around 1 per cent of GDP.
I noticed in some of the newspapers this morning some comments, you
would swear blind the tax cuts were abolished, much less being paid in full,
and some are actually saying this was a central plank of the election, the
election was decided upon it. It is just not true. The tax cuts hardly rated a
mention in the election campaign. They were there as a backdrop to it
from both the parties, but the election was fought about things that I
mentioned a moment ago. About the way Australians live and relate to one
another, the kind of society we want whether it is going to be survival of the
fittest, or a society which is broader and kinder and nicer, where we do
care about one another and things like access and equity in health, in
education and these things matter. That was what the election was
decided on and appropriately decided upon.
Ladies and gentlemen could I say that I regard the Finance Sector Union
as a model of what is happening in Australian trade unionism. It is growing
in an area of an internationally traded service which is financial services.
Deregulation of the financial system has had a big shake out in the
banking system in particular, but will now lead to a very productive banking
sector, one which I hope is more closely attuned to the needs of the
economy with productive investment into the future. We are seeing the
growth of the superannuation industry through the Government's policies,
and the growth of the whole sector in financial services, banking and
superannuation and insurance is a growth area for the economy, it is
growth of an industry which wouldn't have had the growth possibilities it
now has but for deregulation. And this group of unions has been always
part of that process from the early 1 980s onwards, now coalescing as a
single group to better represent your members and also to make certain
that the organisations and businesses you work for are efficient and
productive ones.
If one has to stand back and say, here is a sector, in many respects a new
one, an internationally traded service, one which has got great prospects
both at home and in the region and what is Australian unionism doing with
this sector and the answer Is developing the appropriate structures to
make the sector better, giving employees within the sector the flexibility
that they need particularly women in the innovative enterprise agreements,
taking enterprise agreements forward and changing the wage system as
we must do in a modern, flexible economy. 
Thank you. 6
I am delighted to be here, thank you Keith ( Westgarth), Kevin ( Davem) and
Len ( Hingley) for inviting me. Thank you, all of you, for having me along.
It is a pleasure to open a union office, a greater pleasure even to open one
which has got its act together which is developing appropriate, rational and
good structures which is operating for good purposes and of course, it just
speaks volumes about the difference between them the Liberals and we
of the community, we of the Labor party, we of the trade union movement.
We stand for good, decent values, the right of organisation in the
workplace, the right to see a good productive industry, what better thing
could one be able to say at the opening of the headquarters of such an
organisation. So, congratulations, it is a great pleasure to be here and to
be declaring these premises of yours officially open. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL MURPHY, DATELINE, SBS
28 JULY 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Prime Minister, thanks very much for talking to Dateline.
PJK: Thanks, Paul, nice to be here.
PM: Reaction to last night's Cabinet decision on aspects of your Mabo
deliberations isn't promising. The Aborigines are quite disappointed
and so are the miners. Now how do you bring with you these key
interest groups?
PJK: I think that the bulk of members of the Aboriginal and Islander
community with, I think, a balanced view of this, it is even an ambitious
view, would think that what the Cabinet decided yesterday was a fairly
substantial move in the direction in which they had been arguing, that
was for a right to be consulted, a right to negotiate, and even though
some representatives today have gone through a ritual, nothing is
quite good enough for us line, the thing to do, Paul, is don't believe
that is representative of the broad Aboriginal community. Because I
don't think it is.
PM: So you are saying that the wider Aboriginal community, when they get
to know about this, will like it?
PJK: I think that is very much true. From the contact I have had with
members of the Aboriginal community, I think ever one of them
understood that a generalised veto was never on, that the Government
would never agree that all land management in Australia would be
subject, that is l -and management in respect of native title land, would
be subject to a generalised veto, that was pretty well known from the
start. The job was before the Aboriginal community, and islander
community, to convince the Government that the special attachment
they had to the land was such that they deserved a right of
/ Td OO* N NO: 6 c6I1nC6Z : 131 
consultation and negotiation. Now, it is largely and broadly that which
the Cabinet decided yesterday.
PM: But that as you rightly say, obviously it fallIs far short of veto, but I am
wondering exactly what it gives them really, negotiation?
PJK: Well what it means is that if someone wants to develop an economic
interest, the State land manager, a mines Minister, or a lands Minister
wants to issue a grant of issue over that land where formerly, before
yesterday, under any of our proposals, that could be done, they now
have to consult with the Aboriginal community, there can then be a
negotiation, and then it would go to the tribunal. The -tribunal -will then
conduct an inquiry and say yay, or nay.
PM: Now these are State tribunals, are they? Or is there an overriding
Commonwealth one?
PJK: Well it would be a State tribunal where a State tribunal was operating
in the State. But if the principles of the tribunal, or its personnel are
not up to the Commonwealth standard then the Commonwealth
tribunal would operate in a designated State. So, the override would
onily exist for the approved tribunal. So, it would be the
Commonwealth tribunal for Commonwealth lands, it would be the
Commonwealth tribunal if it operated in a particular State, but if a State
tribunal were operating appropriately and properly in a particular State
then that Government would have the override,
PM: That Government would have the override? And that means you need
complementary legislation, doesn't it, will you get it?
PJK: Well I think we will. At any rate there needs to be State legislation in
respect of validation of titles from the period 1975-93 anyway. But if
there isn't satisfactory State attitudes and legislation, satisfactory to
the Commonwealth, then the Commonwealth tribunal would operate in
the State where we, the Commonwealth Government, designated to
operate. So, in other words if a State actually brought the standard of
their policy up to the Commonwealth standard their tribunal would
operate and therefore their Government would have then the right to
override a decision of the tribunal.
PM: But if they don't, then what happens? Does Canberra override?
PJK: If they don't, well let's say that there was a development purpose which
the tribunal said no to, the State would have the option of overriding it,
if it didn't, well, we will just have to argue that out in the public debate.
I think the important thing is, Paul, that once a tribunal does take all
the various information into account about the importance of the site to
Aboriginal people, the prospects of development, that which is
proposed for the development and comes to a decision after a period
/ Z0Od ZOO* ON œ 0: 6 5IT1n[ 3* z3 
of months, probably six months, then it will not be an easy matter for a
Government to just come and dismiss all that and override it. In other
words there would have to be weight and moment and circumstance on
the part of a Government, in the hand of a Government, to be able to
override such a tribunal.
PM: Well, Prime Minister, obviously this means that you have still got to
come to an agreement with the State Premiers, you failed to do that at
COAG in Melbourne, are you going to try and do that again with
haste?
PJK Well we are still speaking to them bilaterally, and we are refining these
various principles and we are now in a position to know where we are
trying to get bottom lines, if you like, in the Commonwealth Bill which
we will then take back to them. Now, I should imagine this structure,
States would see an advantage in having their tribunal, as distinct from
the Commonwealth tribunal, being the designated tribunal for a
particular State and therefore that Government preserving the override.
provision. I should imagine that Stat es would find this as an incentive
to cooperate in the scheme.
PM: As I understand the decision last night, the Commonwealth and the
States can override a tribunal decision if it seems to be against the
national interest. Now that means that, for instance, Richard Court
and JeffKennett can do that.
PJK No, they can't. Only if the tribunal which operates in Western Australia
and Victoria, in the instances you mentioned, were to be the State
tribunals. But Commonwealth legislation has precedence and in the
event that Western Australia had a tribunal which didn't do the things
we believe it should do, we would designate the Commonwealth
tribunal to be the operating designated tribunal, and we then the
Commonwealth Government would have the override not Western
Australia.
PM: Ok, it sounds very complex, obviously, are you going to have trouble
selling this, this agreement you reached last night?
PJK Well I think the people in these negotiations understand this, the
Aboriginal community understand that from a position where they had
virtually no right of consultation and negotiation, they now have one.
They have one where they can appeal their views to a tribunal where
an arbitration process can take place. They never had that before
yesterday and of course, the government state or federal as the
case may be would have the effective override. The states would
understand that clearly and they would also understand very clearly
that if their tribunal, in other words if they co-operate and their tribunal
is the designated one then their government gets the override. If they
OO* ON 20: 6 œ 6 6 31 
don't co-operate the Commonwealth tribunal will be the designated
one and it gets the override.
PM: Prime Minister, do you think that you can salvage the character, this
whole matter since the Mabo decision by the High Court became a
debate as it were. Can yoj6u salvage this from being a PR disaster,
because it looks painfully like that at the moment?
PJK: Paul, people have got to understand the size of this decision. In most
countries were a supreme court to say that native customs and law
were part of the common law of the country and that there is a native
title in the common law, many countries would take a decade getting
out of such a large change. We are moving this huge decision and
developing a body of administrative law to make it work. The problem
is developing the structure to make it work. We are just developing
this now with great expedition, it may be that in the couple of weeks or
months that this has been going people are having some difficulty
following the trail, but it is so complex and it is such a large change
that the way in which the Cabinet worked yesterday seven hours of
detailed consideration in a policy sense which would do the Cabinet
proud in any circumstance. Any Cabinet in the world I don't think
would be advancing this kind of technical and social issue at this
speed.
PM: How do you get back business confidence. The miners said today it
was unworkable, the decision last night. How do you get back
confidence and how quickly can you do that so that investment, profits
are flowing?
PJK The mining industry and its lobby organisation will always make its
case, but there are similar provisions in state land rights legislation
around the country. They would not say that is unworkable, they are
not entitled to say of this that this is unworkable, but they will make
their bald statements just as some Aboriginal representatives will make
bald statements too.
PMV: Sure.
PJK: Where is the weight and truth of the matter? Answer:-not far below
the surface.
PM: Prime Minister, if I can move on to the republic, another agenda which
you still prosecute with great vigour. Mr Hawke said that perhaps the
states in the fullness of time should be a bolished. Is that helpful
inducing that into the whole debate about a republic?
PJK: 1 I do not see a relationship between that and the republic and that is
why none of that was reflected in the terms of reference for Mr
Turnbull's committee and it is why in the prosecution of this issue the
/ t7O~ d ZOO* ON N: 6 226~ mI nC 67,31 
Government will not be relying upon this argument. The principal fact
of the matter is that Australia is a unique place, it is entitled to
represent itself both internally and externally as a country in charge of
its own affairs and that means that there should be as our head of
state an Australian person. That is the key issue how we see
ourselves and we represent ourselves.
PM: Elected by the people?
PJK: That is a matter for discussion. As we expect that is one of the terms
of reference that the Government has given Mr Turnbull and his
committee and they will come back to us on these subjects.
PM: Right, would you personally favour that though?
PJK: I think I would rather wait and see. If you ask me the question and
people say what can be more democratic than the election by the
public at large of a head of state; and the answer is the election of a
representative chamber by the same public. I always believe the
greater the numbers, the closer parliamentary representatives get to
their particuar localities in the communities th e more essentially
democratic is the structure.
PM: OK. if I can just go onto other matters CPI figures out today, not a
bad result. Do you think now interest rates should be cut?
PJK: It is a very good result Paul, at .4 per cent, 1.9 for the year. I was an
adolescent when these numbers were around last in the 1 960s and it
is another one of these things which the public debate has put in its
pocket particularly the media. A few years ago I never heard anything
but inflation. I would get up at a press conference and say we have
had very high employment numbers again for the month, 90,000 of
yeah, yeah, but what about inflation? And I would say inflation -is
coming down, anyway inflation is now down.
PM: Sure.
PJK: It is broken, what I call snapping the inflation stick, it has taken us two
decades to do it.
PM: OK and you have done it.
PJK: We have done it.
PM: So what about interest rates coming down yet again?
PJK. As I said the other day, low inflation does give us scope; that is
continually low inflation and the maintenance of it, does give us scope
to bring down interest rates scope. But again it is a matter of the
)/ SOd zoo* 
ambience and the climate at the time Paul. That is, what other rates
prevail in other countries and these require judgements and mature
ones by the Central Bank with the Treasurer to see whether we think
we can lower our margin on which we pay the world and pay domestic
savers the savings.
PM: Prime Minister a final question on foreign affairs. Should the Isra el is
stop shelling and bombing southern Lebanon right now before they
destroy the peace talks completely?
PJK I think Israel is entitled to be concerned about its security position, but
again the quicker that we can see a withdrawal of Israeli forces from
southern Lebanon the better and I think the key here is restraint by all
the parties so that we don't see more bloodshed, more angst and
therefore an ongoing problem.
PM: A permanent withdrawal do you think of those forces. Not to try it on
again?
PJI( These are judgements obviously the Israelis would make, they are
probably different judgements than we would make on these sorts of
incursions.
PMV: OK Prime Minister thank you very much indeed for speaking to us.
PJK-Thank you.
ends
ZOON N0: 6 26* 1n[ 6Z :-13J1 



TEL:
PRIME MINISTER86/ 93
STATEM1ENT BY THE PRIME MINISTERt TJlE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE EXTENT OF NATIVE TITLE
Sections of the media today have treated as a revelation the Governmcnt's view that
the Mabo High Court decision will not increase sharply the amount of land able to be
granted to Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders.
Some commentators have wondered aloud why the Government did not say so sooner.
In fact, the Government and I personally have been making this point repeatedly
since the handing down of the High Court decision in June last year.
I find it extraordinary that some in the media having peddled exaggerated and illinformned
interpretations of the impact of Mabo for months now seek to blame the
Government for allowing such views to be put about. The truth is, the Government has
consistently urged all interested parties to be calm about the issue, and from the outset
has reassured private land holders that their property is not under threat.
The consistency of my approach is demonstrated in the following remarks:
Mabo, even in its fit/ les: expression, will only give to a minority of the
Aboriginal community land because many of them were dispos. sessed of the land and
tecrefore can't make a cla/ im. John Laws Program, 2UE, 21 June, 1993
i. t doesn't mean that large parts of Australia, particularly of the built uip
areas of Australia, the urban areas ofAustralia will be subject to a native title claim.
Wher-efreehold titlk has been issued the native title has been held to have been
extinguished; where leasehold has been Issued, the native title in most Cases or In
many caves has beeni extinguished" NSW ALP Conference, 13 June, 1993
" It is important to recognise that existing legal rights in relation to property
continue, and it is wrong to see the H-igha Courts decision terms ( if existing land
holif'rs losing their land. However, the decisionm introduices a new element into
A ustrallami landf tenure, in the form of native title, and thereby creates a needfor
clarity in t1e definition amid alplication of native title fig/ ts, especially in relation to
other interests it land." Redfern Speech, 10 December 1992
EL: 30.-jul. 93 16: 12 No. 007 P. 01/ 02 
I .1 think it is Word? saying that the court's decision does not challenge the
granting offreehold or leasehold title over musch of/ A , istralia, a~ some people have
feared it might, and it does not interfere with private property rights of this kind
Parliament, 4 June, 1992
To their credit, this view has been reinforced by some in the Aboriginal community,
including Mick Dodson of the Northern Land Council, who said in January this year:
" Our advice on Mabo is that clearly there are the majority, thc overwheliming majority
of forms of land tenure in this country are unaffected by Mabo. People have nothing to
fear, The existing property rights in those lands is secure."
It has also been suggested in the press today that this realistic assessment of the
consequences for land ownership in Australia calls into question the linking of Mabo to
the issue of Aboriginal reconciliation. This is simply not the case, and reveals a
fundamental lack of understanding of the High Court decision.
The Government still holds thc view that the Mabo decision provides an opportunity to
achieve reconciliation with Aboriginal people. However, this link between Mabo and
reconciliation was never based on an assumption that the Mabo judgment would lead
to vast new tracts of land being granted to Aboriginal people.
Rather, it is based on the decision itself. By jettisoning the fallacy of terra nullius and
recognising Aboriginal dispossession, the Mabo decision has left us far better prepared
psychologically to proceed with the process of reconciliation. The foundations of
discrimination and prejudice have becn kicked away.
Many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islandcr people will receive no benefit from the
Mabo decision. They have been dispossessed.
There needs to be and the Government intends to deliver a package of social justice
measures for them, in keeping with thle spirit of the Mabo decision.
CANBERRA JULY, 1993 



a EMBARGOED UNTIL 9. OOPM
CHECK AGAINST DELIVE~ RY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, NWP
COROWA SHIRE COUNCIL CENTENARY DINNER, COROWA RSL CLUB
31 JULY 1993
It i3 a great pleasure to be in ti very beautiful, historic, classic Australan town.
It is particularly good to be here to join in the commemoration of the moment a hundred
years ago when Corowa was host to one of the more important gatherings in our nation's
history: a meeting which, in a combination of national idealism and equally characteristic
pragmatism helped propel Australia towards nationhood.
Enough of the Victorian architecture has been preserved, enough families have remained,
enough memories handed down for Corowa to still speak eloquently of the past.
And thcn there is the river: the Murray tells a story of its own, including of course the part
it played in the -federation of the continent.
For it was the dividing line between the two most populous and prosperous colonies and.
in 1893, on the other side at Wahguinyah therc was a customs shed, a real and symbolic
manifestation of the divisions the people of Australia had to overcome.
You don't have to look hard in towns like this to see the labour that has been done, and the
aspirations of those who did it
Far more than in the cities and the suburbs, you can sense the traditions born here of work
and leisure, of individual enterprise and community cooperation, of a common effort
through good times and bad.
In one sense the story is all Corowa's own. In another it is a typically Australian story.
1T monuments to war, for instance, can be seen in every Australian town.
They bear witness to the sacrifice of famnilies in this region, but also to the common cause
Australians evrhr recognised in times of crisis.
ITO~ J TOr) ro InccOF:;, 6nH' 7 
Thcre are other kinds of monuments: monuments to imagination and effort monuments to
belief in the region's future, and ultimately in AtIstr1ia future.
I mean the farms, this township, the industries, the clubs. And it's useful to reflect on how
they camre to be.
What were the essential elements in their success?
And the answer is private initiative, public cooperation, loyalty and commitment to the
region, confidence, belief.
In every Australian community you will see the samie combination of elements, and over
time, it seems to me they form a collective national experience.
For all our disparity including the great gulf between rural and urban there is in the end
a collectivc Australian experience which should unite us.
Nationally, we have shared in triumphs in sport, in the arts, in industry and science.
But the greatest by far is the creation over the ycars of one thc world's great democracies,
one of the great multicultural societics, and surely the very best place in the world to live.
And we have done this substantially because our effort in the last century has generally
been towards including all Australians in Australia's wealth.
This is a loose federation on a vast and varied contincnt whose population is immensely
diversc in origin and culture.
These factors can encourage division or fragmenrttion they can encourage jealousy and
rivalry, between States, between cities, between the urban population and the people in the
country. There is always that tendency latent or real. But the great majority of Australians
understand, as the founders of federation understood, that we work much better when we
work as one nation.
These individual and collective efforts, these successes and failures, constitute the unifying
experience of our naitional life.
Whether we live in Corowa or Darwin or Wahgunyah this is the story of us all, and the
means by which we recognise each other as Australians.
And this gives us strength.
/ 7_ Od TOO-ON 92: 8 l~ 
3
This and future generations living here in Corowa will continue to draw their strength from
these traditions and from their love of the country, and it will be this as much as anything
else which carries the district through another century.
But I daresay if the people of Corowa were asked what most concerns them today, it
would not bc the past hut the future.
What industries will employ them and their children?
What businesses will grow to replace those in decline?
How will the future of Corowa be secured?
They are the same questions which Australians ame asking everywhere -in every town and
suburb, in every factory and farm.
How will the future of Australia be secured?
It is a question which every generation has asked, including the generation of 1893.
They had every reason to ask-they were living through the worst depression in our
history, the worst civil strifc and the worst drought
The answer to the question in 1893 or 1933 or even 1963 tended to he by secure British
markets for our agricultural products, by the protection of local industry, by the
exploitation of our minerals and energy.
But by 1973 the secure British markets for Australian agriculture had gone.
It was becoming plain that protection had left our industries hopclessly uncompetitive.
And dependence on commodities left us still exposed to the uncertainties of world markets.
So if Britain would no longer secure our future, nor the United States or any other
country, and our commodities alone would not alone secure it, and wholesale protection of
our industries would not, how could it be secured?
The answer was, and remains by our own efforts. by our own imagination, by grasping
the opportunities which our region provides, by confidence in ourselves and our best
traditions, by belief. By those same familiar things which carry Corowa through.
And I know we will secure the future. I know we can be prosperous as never bcfore. We
can find a place in the world as never before.
And we can find it primarily in our own region in that part of the world which the
Australians of a century ago looked at with a mixture of fear and disdain.
/ OdTOO'ON 92: 3 œ Bl~ 1. 
4.
We can secure our future in the huge and rapidly growing Asia-Pacific region. And in the
rest of the world.
And I'll tell you why I know this. Because of the succc-ss we have already had.
In 1993 we are losing industries but gaining new ones. We are replacing old markets with
new ones.
We are steadily growing less dependent on commodities.
We are growing new companies clever manufacturing companies, born entirely of the
export culture created in the last decade.
In the last five years they have boosted their exports to Asia by an average 20 per cent per
annum. They are exporting elaborately transformed manufactures. High tech products.
Last year exports of elaborately transformed manufactures to Europe rose by more than
per cent; to South East Asia by 17 per cent; to East Asia by more than 40 per cent.
IThe opportunities for Australian companies in Asia and the Pacific are boundless, and as
we continue to trasform ourselves into a competitive and sophisticated manufacturing
nation, and a leading supplier of services as well as agricultural products, minerals and
energy, we will begin to see the huge rewards to be reaped from the changes we made in
the eighties.
And I might say the great agricultural regions of Australia regions like this one foodgrowing
regions, will play a pre-eminent role in the future.
That is why I belicve we will succeed: bccause of the success we havc already achieved.
Because of the proven willingness of the Australian people to embrace change.
Because when faced with necessity they were prepared to do what was necessary.
So while the answer to the question has varied with time, one thing has not changed: the
future of Australia like thc future of Corowa will ho made safe by the enterprise and
work of the people.
And by their faith in themselves, in their communities and in Australia.
We will always need that faith.
L/ t O 10 N 9: 26-6nHiZ: 3 
In this last decade of the twentieth century we have a chance the lilke of which the
Australians of a century ago could not have imagined.
There is the chance to succeed in the world's fastest growing region, and to do it by our
own initiative, our own effort, our own genius.
There is, as I have said before, the chance in this decade to set Australia up for the next
century. I can tell you that that is my one great goal. It is the Government's goal
But reaching it, needless to say, will depend on it becoming the goal of all Australians.
Last week I made again the point that I have made many times in the past cighteen months:
to meet the challenges we face we need a renewed sense of national unity.
I quoted someone who I am sure retains more than a little respect in this district, Robert
Gordon Menzies.
It was Menzies who talked about the need to convert " a mass of individuals into a great
cohesive nation."
Menzies understood the power that a common national sentiment commands.
And even if there is little else he said with which I would agree, I agree with him on this.
Of course, he saw the British monarchy as the powerful unifying element.
But these days, while the British monarch still has our affection and our regard, there is no
question that the monarchy commands much less of both.
In truth I think this decline has less to do with the problems the royal family has recently
faced, than it has to do with changes in Australia, changes in the relationship between
Australia and Great Britain, and an understanding in both countries of the different
necessities we face.
The monarchy has had family problems at other times in the past, hut Australians did not
draw the conclusion that the monarchy had lost its relevance.
Today they draw that conclusion because the monarchy is remote from their lives and
perceived as inappropriate to the sort of nation we must become.
If thc challenge is to enliven our spirit, to create a new unity of purpose, to make this a
more inclusive Australia, or to use Menzies' words, to convert a " mass of individuals into a
great cohesive nation" there is only one place it can come from. Australia.
OdTOO'ON 9' 2: 8 6flHn : 13. 
From faith in this democracy. Our shared values and hopes, shared understanding of our
past and the necessities which confront us.
T7hat is why I believe Australian affairs should be managed by Australians.
It is why I am for a republic.
Not because I am against Britain I like Britain very much.
I was raised on her heritage and the cxploits of British heroes and remain a grateful and, in
many regards, a passionate advocate of things British from the parliamnt~ and law
bequeathed us to the art and architecture and music.
But Australia's diverse heritage is uniquely our own. So in many respects is our
democratic heritage: it includes not just the fabled spirit of the " fair go" and the collective
egalitarian tradition, but a number of constitutional innovations which were achieved here
well in advance of Britain among them the secret ballot, payment of MPs, universal male
suffrage and votes for women.
Nor am I against the British monarch I count myself among her countless Australian
admirers. But the Queen of Australia is not Australian and, however conscientiously and
skilfully she performs the role of Australian Head of State, she cannot symbolise or express
our Australianess.
Nor am I against the British monarchy the British monarchy works in Britain. But it is a
hereditary British institution and in the multicultural post-imnperial world in which we live
and, with all the regional imperatives now facing us, it no longer constitutes an appropriate
Australian [ Head of State.
Nor am I against the British Commonwealth of Nations Australia, so long as I amn Prime
Minister, will remain in the Commonwealth. Membership of thc Commonwealth
comprised of more Yepublics than any other category of government is not part of the
argument. Nor do I think the republican debate distracts from thc economic problems which currently
beset us it is no more a distraction for Australians than Federation was for those
Australians of the 1890s whose economic problems makc ours seem insignificant.
And, as Barry Jones said the other day, we don't hear people saying that we should give up
A sport until the economy improves, though much more time is spent on sport than the
Constitution. Nor am I for thc republic because I am against the States IJike many Australians I am
conscious of the shortcomings of the Federal system, and I would like to see rcgions like
this urnc given a more dynamic political role: but I believe the States are an organic part of
/ 9d TOO. 0N ' 92: 83 œ 6U 
7-
the Australian nation and quite possibly inseparable from it. I do not believe they could be
easily abolished even if the nation thought it was worth doing.
Some say the republic will undermine our stability. I value stability and place the highest
value on the social peace we enjoy in Australia.
To the extent that British institutions have contributed to this I appreciate that too.
But Australian institutions also gave us these things.
The idea of social justice, and government policies which gave that idea concrete
expression, played a major part in our stability.
We did not build this stable, sophisticated and harmonious multicultural society with
British institutions half so much as we built it with Australian principles and policies.
It is also said by opponents of the republic that it is primarily a manifestation of my
ambition. Insofar as I have played a role in instigating the debate, they are right.
I have an ambition for Australia and the republic forms part Of it.
Nf an ambition for Australia disqualifies the republic, then those who met here in 1893
should have been disqualified from Federation, along with every one else who ever had an
ambition for Australia and acted On it.
I am for the republic not for what I am against, but what I am for not for what a republic
will throw away, but for what a republic can deliver:
It can deliver a new sense of unity and national pride in which Australians of this and
future generations can share.
It can deliver a re-cast Australian identity defined by the commitment of Australians to this
land above all others, which will say unequivocally to the world who we are and what we
stand for.
Among them I would number democracy, fairness, tolerance, justice, invention, industry,
pragmatism. They will all -serve us well in the new world we have cntered.
I would go so far as to suggest that had we long enshrined the values of tolerance and
fairness, and had we more faith in our own traditions and more commitment to them, more
confidcnce and pride, the dcbate about the Maho judgement would not have taken the
shape it too often has in the past few months.
/) flA--o6on : i :-131lH 
Had those values become the basis of our national pride we might have asked: what good
would it do us as a people, what would it do for future generations of Australians, what
would it do for our reputation in the world as a mature democracy, if we said the Hi-gh
Court was wrong Australia was never occupied before 1788, there never was native title,
injustice and dispossession did not occur what good would it do us if we enshrined lies in
preference to the truth?
What would it say to future generations if in 1993 Australians could not face up to what
the United States, Canada and New Zealand faced up to a century and more ago?
What would it say about this generation of ours if, when we were offered the truth, we
chose to perpetuate untruths?
What would it say about us if, a hundred years after sixty men in Corowa had the wisdom
to see the necessity for Federation, the will to do it, and the wit to know how, we recoiled
from the chance to find a national solution to our oldest problem?
If we turned away from our responsibilites? If we failed to see the legal recognition of
prior ownership and post-European dispossession as providing a basis for reconciliation?
Our duty is to find a mature national solution.
My hope is that In finding one we wil re-learn a little of the value of Australian democracy,
the principles of tolerance and justice, and the necessity to find common cause as a people
that we will re-learn it and pass the lesson on to future generations. Perhaps that will be
the lesson of Mabo.
By their initiative the people who met here in 1893 served generations of Australians,
I believe in this last decade of the twentieth century we need to look beyond the day-today
and towards the next generations of Australians.
If it is true, as I think it is, that this and future generations will be best served by revisiting
the Constitution drawn up a century ago, then we can learn something from the approach
taken at the Corowa Conference.
In 1893 Federation was, as one commentator observed " dead as Julius Caesar".
The Corowa Conference revived it.
Anid it revived it by turning Federation into a poul~ cause. The conference itself was not
a government initiative, but one promoted and paid for by private enterprise by private
indus tries.
T1O0 QM j: 26* 6ntU : 131 
The decisive resolution which wasq passed here called on the colonial parliaments to pass
legislation that would provide for the popular elction of representatives to a national
convention to draw up a Federal Constitution.
That constitution would be submitted to referendum in each colony.
The Corowa Conference gave the people of Australia the opportunity to claim their own
destiny to forge a new national entity from a far-Rlung colonial population.
And the people grasped the opportunity.
The Constitution was the foundation of the new national entity.
ReAd in 1993, it is an uninspired and uninspiring document; complex, lcgalistic and
virtually impossible to relate to contemporary Australian life.
It was framed as a routine piece of nineteenth century British imperial legislation. It shows
its age.
A great many Australians don't even know it exists. Very, very few have ever read it, let
alone understood it.
How many Australians could quote the opening words? Not half as many, I suspect, as
could quote the opening of the US constitution.
In the 1990s there exists the chance and I think the need to revisit our Constitution and
reclaim it, not for the lawyers and the politicians, but for the people.
In Australia, surely in this most democratic of countries we can have a constitution
vested in the people.
It is hardly radical to suggest that our Constitution should bc remade to reflect our national
valucs and aspirations, evoke pride in our Australian heritage and confidence in our future,
and help to unite us as a nation.
It is hardly radical to suggcst this, and hardly beyond us to do it.
We want Australians to consider the strengths and weaknesses of their Constitution.
We want them to debate the advantages and disadvantages of making our Constitution
more closely reflect Australian reality, Australian values, Australian hopes.
In the cnd we want an Australian Constitution in which Australians bclieve.
As I see it, the republic can be very much the precursor to enabling the people to reclaim
the Constitution.
/ 6O* d TOO* oN 92: 8 26-6nd, 71 
Last April wc established the Republic Advisory Committee to work on an options paper
which will set out some of the ways Australia could become a republic and the consequent
changes to our Constitution.
The Committee has consulted widely over the past few months, and the debate as you
have probably noticed is now flourishing in the community.
Following the report of the Committee in September. the Government will consider ways
to ensure that people have sufficient information about our system of government to
participate fully in the decision-making process.
In thc end, as with Federation, it will be the people of Austr-alia who decide.
After they have had time and information enough to consider the issues, the people will
decide by referendum whether we move to a republic or remain a constitutional monarchy.
No one should forget the fundamental point enshrined in the existing Constitution the
only way this or any other constitutional change can take place is by refercndum, It cani
only occur if the people want it if a majority of electors voting, and a majority of clectors
in the majority of the States, vote for change.
Changed or unchanged, the Australian Constitution belongs to Australians and only they
can decide how and when and if to change it.
By way of conclusion, let me go back to the Murray. The Murray says it better than I can.
Tis is the river which divides New South Wales and Victoria, the river along which
customs houses were erected in colonial days.
Viewed one way it can be a real and symbolic obstacle to unity. Yet the Murray is both a
national resource and a unifying national symbol. We bold it in common.
The Murray did not dictate that customs houses be built along the banks.
The Murray was not a border until Australans made it one.
It was not the existence of the Murray which persuaded politicians to run a railway line
south from Sydney in one gauge and north from Melbourne in a different one.
Yet Australians also combined in the national interest to remove the customs and to
standardise the rail line. They combined to harness the water for power and conserve it for
irrigation. They are combining now to restore the environment of the Murray-Darling Batsin and to
rectify the great problem of salination and land degradation. I believe we can combine in
/ OT'd TOO'ON 9S: 8 2j6* 6nH'Z :-3 
11
future to make the Murray-Darling the basis of a hugely expanded Australian food.
growing and food-processing industry.
The choice is always ours: we can pursue local interests or sectional interests or state
interests. We can always ind in our landscape, our laws, and our history re asons for division.
Or we can combine. We can pursue the national interest.
We can do as the Ausuralians of the 1890s voted to do and draw our strength from the
Commonwealth. The republic seeks closer identification with the nation, and a more spirited sense of
national goals and purpose. It also seeks to bring our institutions and symbols into line
with reality.
The States are part of that reality as the states are part of United States reality. The
proper aim is to get all three fiers of government working for national ends.
My argument is that in this era above all others the overriding loyalty must be to the
nation. Let me conclude by addressing the most common argument against an Australian republic.
The one which says " i it ain't broke, don't fix it",
It partly depends on your definition of broke.
If it's an anachronism is it broke?
If it no longer inspires us, or fails to unite us, or offers us no belicf, and therefore
effectively doesn't work, is it broke?
If it does not coincide with contemporary reality, is it broke?
And if we decide now that it's not broke, and in twenty or thirty years time that Australians
not only fail to identify with Britain but also with Australia, will we decide then that it was
broke all along?
Broke doesn't really come into it.
We didn't throw out the horse and cart because they were broke. We abandoned them:
we affcctionately and gracefully retired them when thcy became obsolete.
We took a considered decision to trade up to something that would serve us better.
! K/ TTd IOO* ON 92':' S 6~~. 3 
12
' That is what the people who gathered here in 1893 did.
They knew that Federation would serve Australia better. They saw themselves as having a
responsibility to their country and its future.
Who would say to them now why did you fix it when it wasn't broke?
Thank you for having me here tonight. It has been a great pleasure for me.
Corowa was there in 1893 when a great national endeavour began in earnest.
I hope that some of what I have said tonight has helped define to you what I believe is
another great national endeavour.
A hundred years ago when the colonies soon to become states wcre supreme, and their
primacy was manifest in those customs houses along the river, the people who gathered
here in Corowa stepped out of the orthodoxy and said, we need to be a nation we need
one government in charge of our national affairs.
I should hope in the prevailing orthodoxy of today, having made the step to a national
government almost a century ago, the people gathered in Corowa here tonight can see the
sense again in stepping beyond the orthodoxy.
I hope they can see the sense in that final assertion of nationhood the confidence to elect
one of our own to preside over our affairs.
I notice today the Sydncy Morning Herald writing off the people of Corowa as
conservative, not blatantly but patronisingly, seeming to suggest that the people here
tonight can't see as far as the people of Corowa one hundred years ago.
Well I doubt that. I think, like an increasing number of Australians, they will see the nccd
to put the seal ofl our nationhood.
I think they will feel themselves very capable or taking the view that the affairs of Australia
cannot forever bc presided over by a British monarch.
Tonight we are cclebrating the vision which found expression heme a ccntury ago. I think
no more fitting tribute could be paid to their memory than to complete the work that they
began. In 1993, as in 1893, 1 think we must havc the courage to see bcyond what is to what can
be. ENDS
/~ dTOO* ON 92: 8 266H7 



( I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BlY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SANDAKAN MEMORIAL SERVICE, RURWOOD PARK
1 AUGUST 1993
The people whose initiative has built this memorial have done their country a great
service. It commemorates the most appalling event in Australia's war history.
Two thousand five hundred Australian and British soldiers were taken to Sandakan,
Only six survived and, because the Japanese authorities covered up the story, it is only
from these six that we know what happened.
Three times more men died at Sandakan and Ranau, and in the jungles betwcen, than died
in those heroic battles at Kokoda in New Guinea,
The Sandakan men did not die in battle they were tortured, massacred or allowed to
perish of disease.
Yet until now Sandakan has been forgotten.
The families of those who died received the most perfu~ nctory of messages they never
knew what happened to their husbands, fathers, sons, brothers, uncles.
Knowing how and why makes a great deal of difference to thosqe who are left behind.
Knowing even when the truth is awful is better than the horror and dread of not
knowing at all.
What is true for the loved ones left behind is also true for the country they never saw
again. It is better to know. :-131
/ 2T'd TOO* ON 9S: E 663r 
Australians should know the truth about their history.
A nation is stronger for knowledge of its shared experience, and the experience of these
men should be engraved in thie national memory.
With this memorial we remember these Australian and British soldiers who fell victim to
acts of cruelty and sadism as horrifying as any in World War 11.
Sandakan must be known. It must not be forgotten.
I don't say this because one of my own family died there, or because the deaths of these
men are to be regretted more than any others whether they were in Burma, or New
Guinea, or the Middle East or any of the other places where Australians have fought and
died. I say Sandakan must be known because all Australians should recognse that these men
died in the defence of their country they died as prisoners, as slaves, but they were no
less at war with the enemy.
The final victory was as much theirs as anybody elses,
It must be known because it is a reminder of what was at stake in the Pacific War, and
how much we owe all those Australian men and women and their allies who fought and
finally won.
At stake was the democratic civilisation Australians had built in this country and those
ideas of what is fair and just in which they believed.
The land they loved was at stake, the land they believed in.
The events in Sandakan should be known because we should never forget that there have
been generations of men and women prepared to die for Australia.
We owe a debt to them. Every succeeding generation owes them. Their sacrifice helped
Lis survive.
It should also help us believe.
We should remember Sandakan for one reason above all others.
Sandakan was more than a battle between nations. More than a battle between conflicting
ideologies.
r/~ dTOO'ON 92: 8 2636nuz 31 
3
It was a war between human decency and human depravity.
That is why I think we should remember the men who died there as we remember the
victims of the death camps of Europe as casualties of pure cvil.
There was no glory in this kind of war, and nothing much to comfort those whose loved
ones suffered and died.
With this memorial there will be some consolation in knowing that others know what
happened at Sandakan.
If other Australians can come to know about these things the comfort to those who have
lived with Sandakan for fifty years will be so much greater.
And as a nation, surely, we will be wiser and stronger.
If there was no glory in the way these men died perhaps there can be in their memory.
Perhaps it can inspire in us the feelings for Australia that the men of Sandakan felt.
As Jim said earlier, they were all volunteers.
Men like Keith Botterill who, when recalling his escape from the death march, wrote:
We started at night, the native carried bamboo torches to light the way, until the
moon came up. The next day I was lying down thinking I could not walk another
step, when I looked up and saw an Australian face bending over me. 14e was a big
six footer. He just sat down beside me and cried.
So long as we have some sense of what Keith Bottcrill felt we will have an understanding
of what it means to be Australian.
And so long as we remember the lesson for humanity at Sandakan we will be a better
people and Australia a better place.
I ami very glad and very gratefujl to have had the privilege to speak here today.
Thank you.
/ dS TOO'ON 92: 8 26* 6nu' .1 



PRIME MINISTER 87/ 93
STATEMENT BY TIlE PRIME MINIS'TER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
PUBLIC AWARENESS OF MABO
I was pleased to note today that an opinion poll has found that Australians broadly
understand the limits of the High Court Mabo decision, and that it does not pose a
threat to backyards, or other privately-owned property.
While I have never been one to rely absolutely on the findings of such surveys, it is
reassuring to learn that an overwhelming majority of people have seen through the
scaremongering. It confirms my confidence in the common sense and fair-mindedness
of Australians.
Only seven per cent of those surveyed said they believed the Mabo judgement entitled
Aborigines to claim " any" land in Australia, including metropolitan land. Of course,
they are ill-informed.
As the Government has maintained since the handing down of the Mabo judgement last
year, the decision does not threaten private property rights, and should be viewed as an
opportunity rather than as a problem.
My Government continues to work and make progress towards a sensible
administrative response to the Mabo decision a response which will balance the
interests of Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders with the broad national economic
interest. We are continuing to consult with the States and, as I have said before, we intend to be
in a position to introduce Commonwealth legislation during the Budget session of
Parliament, commencing on August 17.
CANBERRA 4 AUGUST, 1993
i/ O'd 800" ON T$: ZT œ 6" 6nH' 1: 7131 



PRIME MINISTER 88/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
MABO THE TRUTH ABOUT CONSULTATION
From thu moment the High Court handed down its decision the Government has been
determined to develop a response in keeping with both the letter and spirit of the Mabo
judgement. As I said in Parliament in June, and on many occasions since, in ending at last the
absurd doctrine of terra nudlius and recognising the dispossession and shameful
treatment of indigenous Australians, the Mabo judgement has done all Australians a
great scrvice, and created the basis for reconciliation.
Nothing in the Mabo judgement was ever of itself going to deliver justice. It created
the basis for justice; but delivering justice depended on the nation's response.
There have been unhelpful reactions from many quarters around the country, but there
is no doubt that the great majority of Australians want to see justice delivered and the
economic interests of Australia secured.
This is the core of the Government's response and it will form the core of our
legislation. The spirit and the letter of the High Court decision will be followed.
Ambit claims and appeals to prejudice will be ignored.
The Government has consulted widely and with goodwill.
The Aboriginal community was the first to be consulted by Government following the
Maho dcision. At least 30 members of the Aboriginal community met the Cabinet for
almost three hours. A smaller, reprcsentative group returned to consult with the
Ministerial Committee for two hours. Numerous other meetings have taken place
b-tween Commonwealth officials and the Aboriginal community over the past year. I
have met Mr Dodson on three occasions for periods of up to an hour in my office. I
also met representatives of the Land Councils for more than an hour before last week's
Cabinet meeting on Mabo.
These facts expose the accusations of lack of consultation as patently untrue and
unworthy of those who made them. 
It seems [ hat despite several meetings held in good faith with the Aboriginal
community dhe Government can secure only private decision and agreement which
does not translatte into public agreement.
If Aboriginal people seck justie and equity they must provide leaders who accept the
responsihility of lcadership. Some Aboriginal leaders have accepted this responsibility,
others, clearly, have not.
The Aboriginal community asked for a right to be consulted. It also asked for proper
protections in relation to actions affecting native title and the Commonwealth
legislation will provide them. It is therefore patently untrue to say that Aboriginal
people's views about devclopment will not be taken into account.
The Governmnent intends to proceed with its legislation which is workable, just and in
die long term interests of all Australians. We have a responsibility to delivcrjusticc for
past and prescnt wrongs and I am determined to do all I can to see that justice
delivered. But we also have a responsibility to the future of Australia and future gencrations of
Australians, and it is my duty to do all I can to deliver that as well.
As I have said before, a mature, national trsponsc to Mabo can deliver both.
SYD) NEY
6 August 1993 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, M. P.
DOORSTOP, FAIRBAIRN RAAF BASE, SUNDAY 8 AUGUST 1993.
J: Prime Minister, you're off to N~ auru, is there any hope that you'll be able to
settle Australia's long running dispute with that country?
PM: Well, discussions have been taking place now for some time, months, so there's
some prospect that we can get to a settlement yes.
J. What else is on the agenda for your trip to Nauru?
PM: Well its the broad agenda or'the South Pacific Forum and I think that because
we do meet annually we keep fairly abreast of contemporary developments and
I think also the value of it is often in the retreat where the various leaders and
Prime Ministers can get to talk to one another about issues of concern to them.
J: Will you be guaging support for a leaders' mecting of APEC countries?
PM: No I don't think that's going to be a primary issue here but some expression
may be given about it, anyway.
J: How confident arc you ( inaudible)..., be able to solve the problem of Nauru
without it having to go back into court?
PM: I think it's possible to teach a settlement. We are the responders before the
International Court of Justice and we know the parameters of this problem
from the mining of super phosphate over such a long time and I do think, rm
quite confident we'll be able to reach an amicable settlement,
-What sort of-deal are we-offeing'to-themn?
PM: Well, you'll have to wait and see I think.
Prime Minister, what is your reaction to Mr Goss's comments..( inaudible)...?
PM: Well I couldn't understand the point of him making them, to be frank. He I
just brought a note on that subject he said in the Canberra Times, reported
V1 % A tj I W_ I 
-Tr-L H9 4: Ub No. UU3 F. U2lU
-2-
today, he said that he was encouraged and relieved by statements on Friday by
the Federal Attorney-General who said the Federal Government is commidtted
to continuing co-operation with Queensland to ensure the Wik people's claim
did not jeopardise a major investment project there. Well if he was encouraged
arnd relieved I cannot see the point, when we've been negotiating with him
privately in the course of last week and earlier weeks, to come and say things
about it publicly.
And could I say that Mr Ralph wrote to me this week saying that: " Our
agreement with the Queensland Government calls for decisions to be taken on
these proposed investments by the 31 st of December next."
There was no mention anywhere of the 20th August so I just don't know where
that date comes from at all. You see, this matter, as Mr Ralph says, he says
" The Wik people's claim goes far beyond Mabo." And that's right. Mr Goss
has some of the complexion that this is a Mabo matter. This is primarily not a
Mabo matter. This is a claim by the Wik peoples claiming a breach of fiduciaryresponsibility
by the State of Queensland as trustees for the Wik peoples' lands.
And they're alleging that leases issued by earlier governments I think the
Bjelke-Petersen government leases which were issued without due
consideration of the trusteeship responsibilities of Queensland.
Now, that makes the matter primarily a Queensland problem. Now, to the
extent that there is any native title aspects to this the generic legislation the
Commonwealth is now considering in respect of Mabo, that will cover this.
But, the primary problem here is a claim by the Aboriginal people for a breach
of fiduciary responsibility for Queensland and that can run back into the
nineteenth century. So, Mr Goss has sort of put the complexion it's up to the
Commonwealth. It isn't, it's up to Queensland. And we've said we'll cooperate
in looking at it.
But, can I also say that I don't accept that immediately a mining company says
something everyone must spring to attention and then extinguish Aboriginal
rights. No, the Aboriginal people believe they've got an entitlement to go to
the High Court and have these matters tested. Well, think that is their right
but to the extent that these things impinge upon major projects that's a concern
. to. Ofe-has-got to-gethe balance right. But the primary problem here is
because the Mabo debate's around and everyone now understands that it's
around, it seems for some people relatively easy in the public debate to connect
any Aboriginal matter to Mabo. Well, this one is not a primary connection to
Mabo. This is a primary connection to the State of Queensland and the
execution of its fiduciary responsibilities as trustees to the Wik peoples.
Now, the states are often saying ' states rights this, states rights that' but as soon
as therc is a problem they come runnin' home to mumma back to the 
TEL: 9. Rug. 93 9: 06 No. 009 p. 03/ 0
-3-
Commonwealth, I mean, T get them at the Premiers' conferences and it's all
about ' our rights'. But the moment they have a problem it's all up to me and the
Commonwealth. Well, the only way to solve these things is cooperatively.
And also solving them with an eye to the interests of the mining companies, but
also the rights of Aboriginal people to be not just simply extinguished in a
relatively thoughtless way to supposedly just facilitate some project. Now this
is an important project and because of that we are cooperating in the
investigation but the idea that it's going to be all loaded onto the
Commonwealth when it's primarily a Queensland problem and the notion that
the Commonwealth should indemnify companies for leases signed by the
Bjelke-Petersen government is stretching credibility a fair bit, I think.
J: Mr Keating, do you think Malcolm Fraser would make a good President of the
Liberal Party?
PM: Well, the Liberal Party has lost its way and Malcolm Fraser sat for seven key
years in Australia's post ' War economic history and let us become an
uncompetitive economy relying on minerals and energy and grains and Wool.
And that let Australia down very badly. And the notion, he rejects the notion
of the opening up of Australia's markets-, he rejects the notion of a more
competitive economy coming from lower protection; he rejects the notion of an
open financial market; and if the Liberal Party go back to Malcolm Fraser
they're really going back to the past. Now Malcolm's got some views on other
things that I don't mind but on primary things, on economic things, that is on
things like protection and Australia's fu~ ture in the world as an open trading
society it is a trip down the time tunnel with Malcolm Fraser. But, the Liberal
Party too, it keeps going back to its elder statesmen, people. You see this in
the New South Wales Liberal Party, you can see it pretty well across the
Commonwealth.
J: There's a suggestion that Jeff Kennett might be thinking of entering politics to
take over the federal leadership. What do you think of that?
PM: Oh well, we can absorb any culture up here. Even Jeffery.
J: Prime Minister, to the problems of this morning, were there any security
problems highlightcd by what happened?
PM: No, I don't think so, no. Someone parked a car out the front -but vigilance
does matter and that's, I think, all that happened.
ENDS. 



TRANSCRIPT OV TIM PEIME MNISTER1THE HON P J KEFAT[ NG, N~ W
MEETINCTWITH PRESIDENT OF NAUJRU
9 AUQUST1993
MEF PROOF COPY
BEV: Fint ofalI would kc to akets opportunity to say how very proud and
honoured Nauru is to havc the Prime Minister of Australia, Paul Keatg
visiting Nauru. TIs is tho first visit by an Australia PK~ and Governncut, and
dhe people of Nauru arc really grateful for this opportunity. I am also pleased to
a&amp; nounce that Australia and Nauru reached an agreement to se th de case
before the 1Ci. Mr Keating and myself will be sigifts a compact of sculeinet
agreement tomorrow afternoont, at about 5pM and Natmu looks forward very
much to the exciting future with the cooperation and asaistcc which our
people, our nadcm~ i will be receiving from the Govemmint and the people of
Auwalia. Onc4 aan 1 take this oppottunty to thank most sincerely Paul
Keatin&amp; and his Mitnister, Gordon Bilncy, for the cooperative spirt in wich
t" i setllcmcut has bee rcwc&amp;
Well, could I thank the President for Wis introductory rernwka. ThI% is, I t&amp; ink.
an important " ement for the people of Nauni, and it is an inpovant
actfimtnnt and agreement for the peoples of Atatrafia and Namrn. D. aume we
arc doin~ g simply more thcen a settlement, which-I rnight say is being negottd
principally by my oolicaguc the Minister for Deveopment Co-operatiem and
Pacific Island Affairs, Gordon Bilney, and I would l~ ke to complimnent 0ordon
for the achievemnrt of this settlemntz as I do Presidenrt Dowiyogo. The
compct of bettlemeint essentiAly involven a setilement of $ 107 million die bulk
uf it paid by the end or Augut 1994, so in die next 12 nmths.
And then there is a Ovram of pa) Tmcnts which run over the next twenty years,
which will bc a form of stable inicome by way of " bi settlement to the Nauru
budget and economny.
As well as tis, we have concluded a treaty-level commitment by NaWUr to
withdraw its ICJ ows and munce fujture claims arisng out of Ausi'
administration of Nauru. 
e8S-3 13: 31 10-r.@ 2
2
Alp* we have agreed a joint declaration of principles guiding future relatonA
between AustraWi and Nauru. Now this is quite uique in Australian ternis, we
don't havc such a declaaion of principles guiding thc rclatits with any other
countries. We have an atecrent with Papau New Guinea but not a declaration
of principles of treaty status, and I think this will be important to our relations in
the fluture. It will be important to the people of Nsuzai so tt they hav a
doctunztt to rely upon in thuir relations with Australia. Thar why I think the
President hAs correctly called this a compact of setlement It is not simply a
legal settlement elaimsv for damages, but as well as that an aprecnent, a treaty,
abou how we reooone another in the future. So thawhen Nauugetsto
the point where the revenues which it has had from phosphate miniing and the
reat expie, and it has to rebas its economy thmr is something solid upon which
that robasement can occur. So for thoue reasons I think we amc opening up a
new phase of Australis-Naurd relations, and I am quite sare that this is a
important compact in Nauru's history and certainly in its history of its rc~ atons
with Australia.
3: Is $ 107 million cnouOh to oomplete the rehabilitation of a third of the Wsand?
PM: The tems of the aillayncit and the functions and uses of the settlement monies
is a matter for Prvaident Dowiyogo and his Governmnent. It's for the
Governmcnt to map out 3 1ong, term policy for the Wsand, because obviously
when phosph= t ning revcnucs ceasc, apart from the income from its other
invcstmnts, othcr industries like tourism for which now the Government has
improved facilitics, infrastructure these sorts of industries will, be important in
the 14ture. Therefote the use of settlement funds bears upon these questions.
So it may not be simply a Straight reClaMalion, but other developments as well.
BD: Mfay I add to that; the commission of inquiry which lookod into the
rehabilitation of the worked-out photphatc, came out with a f%= ur of about $ 72
million. So this S 107 million on the figurcs is quite generous.
J1: So you are pleased with the agreement?
BD: More Owa pleased. And 1 am very proud to have reached this settlement with
1Prime Ministcr, Paul Keatin.
J: What areas would a joint declaration coVer?
PM: Well it covers really most of the things about we will let you have these
tomorrow, but it refers to our history and it goes into such things as access for
education and cooperation in such thing s, finAncial services, aviatimn, other
transpoft, other service, fisheries, surveillance, health and medical cooperation,
rohabilitation and envirornent Coomeation, developmient cooperation,
comimunication and travel, et cetera.
J: How much will the tiovW paymcufls be worth? A rTJ 1' 4U V I I. V4 V 
PM: Well they are worth about S50 million owr twenty years. Now the Government
can obviously recetve that payment intcrmincntly over the period as maintained
in real terms. It is about $ 2.5 million a year over twenty years maintained in
real terms, or they could of course assign it to a financial institution and take it
at its net present value now, or at some point in the fature. It does give them, I
think, flexibility and that is a good thing.
BD: Ifl may also add to that, the very valuable point of this treaty is that after twenty
years Nauru and Australia can continuc to discuss other forms of cooperation.
J: Mr Keatin&amp; what contribution will you be seeking from New Zealand in terms
of th; s agreement?
PM: Well Nauru will be assigning its claims to the other former mcmbers of the
British Phosphate Commission to Australia. So Australia will be seeking some
payments from both New Zealand and Britain in reaching this agreement and
settlement as the claims which would otherwise be made by Nauru will have be
assigned to Australia as past of the tenrm of the settlement
J: Are you able to put a ball park figure on what you miht be looking for from
New Zealand?
PM: No.
J: Will you be approaching Mr Bolger here at the forum on that?
PM: I will simply mention, I think the President tomorrow will mention, that we have
reached an agreement, so Mr Dolger will have known that. And then when I
see him, as I will be, I will mention that.
J: Mr President how long do you think it will take to get the iland back to the
state you would like it in? Do you have a timetable?
BD: Well we hope to start very soon. This morning during the discussions with the
Prime Minister and our officials, there were some ideas, some proposals which
can be started immediately. One of the priorities is to set contract housing for
our peoplc, and we have discussed about assistance from Australia in terms of
town planners and experts to come up and help to establish that project. That is
an urgent one for us and then we will look at the rest of the projects afterwards.
There is no doubt that the island can be rehabilitated. I suppose you have been
up to Topside, and you have seen some parts of the island where the pinnacle
rocks have been taken out and levelled. And we also hope to set up a sports
stadium up there, and a water reservoir, but in October this year we will be
commissioning our desalination plant, so we will be looking at things. We hope
to commence very soon.
J; How long do you think the whole thing will take?
DB: It won't bc done overnight. It will take a generation, ten, twenty years, and we
will aee from there.
ENDS 



IVI
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY PRIM HMSTER, THE HON P I KEAM) N, NV'
CENOTAPH CEREMONY
9 AUGUST, 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
HIft Fxcellency, the Pres~ ident of Naum1 the honowablo Speaker of ie Nawijan
Puarnment, miembers of the Nauruan Cabinet other distinguished gisests, and tadies and
gcntlomwn. I understand my in~ it is the Frt to Nauru by an Austruliin Primc Minister.
I thiink it is therefore ' very fitting that Presidoni Dowfyogo and I should take a mornant
from the Forum schedule to take part in today' coremony here at the Cenotaph.
The Cerntaph honours the courage and sacrifice of Naunuan and Ausralians who
sufferid dwrinjS the Japan ese occupatio n of Nauu
It 6~ important that we ncvcr forget the great ftragdy experieniced by the Nauruan
peoplc at that tie
The ccrmnunity was dMdcd by mnass exilo. Vnspeakable hardship and brutality mncant
thats mny Nauruans died. Indeed a Largo part of the population died.
Exceptional qualities are needed for a comniiy to surve adversity r-uch as ths.
A generation of Nauruan leadership was forged in thAt bidter stnvle,
Their loyalty to their community remains an timpiration for aft Nauxuans today.
As an Auatralian I am also proud to honour the bravery and dedication of Colonel
Chalmers and hiis four colleagues who died htr in the occupation. Their namecs are
fixed at th.; Ccnotaph commemoration of the fact that they stayed after the evacuation
with the Nauun people anid died as a conscquence.
/ TO'd iO* QN 8T: 2. T 16'~ 6n':-3 
Our two countries have a long association, and it is associations of this kind where we
sharo an experience in war. Where we die at the hands of an enemy, but die together.
We know these things form part now of not just a long association but a long
fricndship. We know each other now as friends and partners.
In recalling together today our shared history, we should draw faith from the courage
and dedication of past generations of Naunans and Australians. People who faced
hardship and struggle, and in the Second World War, of course, brutality on a scale
none of us today are asked to bear.
We should of the consequene of all this commit ourselves to long-standing friendship
and cooperation in the fu;,.
I am very happy that earlier today, President Dowiyogo and I agreed on a compact of
settlement which will define a new phase in the Australia. Nauru relationship.
lhi is a relationship which I think is now underwritten by a treaty of principles,
statement of principles, which I might say exists between Australia and no other country
as it now does between Australia and Nauru.
Never bcfWore have we written downi the basis of an ongoing friendship together as we
have today.
So from here on we know well that we can build a future on a shared past, we know
ours is a unique relationship, one which I am sure will endure.
I am very hlionourd to have had the opportunity to visit Nauru, and particularly
honoured to take place in today's ceremony, where as Prime Minister of Australia this is
the 1rt opportunity for me in the position of Prime Minister to honour the Australians
who died here and to honour the Nauruans who died also. And to bring to our
memory the great losses and shared sacrifices of the Second World War.
Our long history together is worthy of remembrance and now we can celebrate a future
together, one based on mutual trust and mutual respect and one where we know well
together where our future will lead us.
Thank you very much for having me here today as part of this very moving ceremony.
ENDS
/ ZO'd œ SOON 8T: ZT œ 6* 6flh6 : 131 



PRIME MIISTER
SPEECH 13Y TUE PRIME MIMSIER. MHE HON P J XEATING. M P
ISIGNINJG CER~ EMONY
NAURU, 10 AUGUST, 193
E&amp; OI, PROOF COPY
Your Extcellency, the President of Nauru, other distiiauished Nauruant guests, and
ladkio and sentlemen.
I am vceiy please that President Dowayogo and I have been able to tign today theft
three inter-related agr" eemnt whtich makce up the Compact of Settlement betwccnt
Australia and Nauru.
hoe are solemnn and binding comnitments, and I think it is lWr to say they define a
now phaic of coopardou between Australia and Nauru.
The terms of x-tticniciii were made public yesterday and I am heai tened that the
Compact of Settlemnent Wa becen warmly ueleonad int both countries. That 13 what the
President reliably tells Me, ajnd I am sure that is true in Australia as well.
There is a wide recoontion in 1501,1 countries that AuStraia and Nauru arc lungstanding
fdends arnd partners. Theiic is reief, I think. that an issue which has divided
us has been resolved, well I think both amicably and reaRsonably, and honourably, to the
satisfaction of both partes.
Timw reaction of ourirners in the South Pacils; Fonrm was also positive, and a
number of members of the Forum I re-came up to both Of wtq crtainly to mysclf,
saying thial they were pleAscd to see that countric3 within the Forum could resolve
diffcrcricci, dad that paritilArly some of the larger doinor countries who have
boncfited from t rade and commerce with the area could also make such ant
arrangement. I iihink This wax very comforting to them,
They wclvomc the diemonstraion thAt Australia and Naur. u are able to work together
to settle our differvacczi awd solve prohiems as neighbours and friendzi, making the
obvious point that such pi " esses should al1so be able to take place btworn ourselvest
and themselves. 
This is called, of course in this part of the world, the Pacific way, and if this is the
Pacific way obviously it works.
On the Australian side negotiatiorns were C. onducted by my colleague, Gordon Bilney,
the Minister for Developmnt, Cooperation and Pacific island Affairs, and I should like
to note publicly my appreciation of the skill and care with which he has handled this
sensitive task.
The Foreigni Minister Wad to him, how come you can do this, Gordon, when I wasn't
able to? And a lot of the rest of us knew the answer but I won't ( inaudible).
At any rate this is a feather in Gordon's cap, and I am sure that the relationship he has
developed with the people of Nawsu will be one of long-standing, one which there is, I
am sure, repect on both sides which will now obtain for many yearm and in this
important post, particularly in the Pacific Island Affairs this is, I think, a very solid
tbundation for Gordon reprsemin$ the Government to have in its relations with
Nauu Mr President, the agreements we have signed today not only record an amicable out of
court settlemntd of the IC) case, they also set out a frame work for the future conduct
of Australian-Nauru relations.
r
The joint declaration of principles coven3 a large number of field where Australia and
Nauru are already oooperating, and where we lave scope to develop fRther our
partnership. All these fields are significant, but there is one I should particularly underline, at
paragraph 20 in the document it says this. " Both Governments recognise both the
challenge presented by rehabilitating the worked out phosphate lands on Nauru and the
fragility of Nauru's ecosystems, and will work together to facilitate the progressive
rehabilitation of Nauru and the protection of NaWUs environment."
This is an important commitment and one which the Australian side takes very
seiously. and already the President and I had some substantial discussions a day ago
about how and which ways that might be addressed and progressed.
So we should like to see the proposed rehabilitation and development cooperation
4reement contribute in a real way to the process of rehabilitation on Nauru, where the
' people of the country feel they have a very tangible stake in this settlemnent, and where
there are tangible and obvious benefits for them.
I
so, Mr President, I anm pleased to have the opportunity to visit Nauru and attend the
South Pacific Forum. Could I take the opportunity of congratulating you and the
Government for hosting the Forum and for the way in which it has been organised. It
is a diffcult thing to host a Forum like this, for any country, particularly when you are
not doing it often, and to do it so well, and of course chairing the proceedings as you
have done today with great aplomb and dexterity and smoothness, I think attest to the
decision which was taken a year or so ago for Namu to be the host. 
I am especially happy that during this visit it has provided an historic opportunity to
sign this historic Compact Of Settlement, as well as attend the Summit, Can I say I
was also very pleased to lay a wreath on the Cenotaph yesterday in remembrance of
the sacrifice which Australians and Nauruans had made together as long ago as the
Second World War, again underpinning and underlining the strength and depth of the
Australia-Nauru relationship.
As I said, our relationship is unique and it is one to which we acre committed on a long.
term basis and I hope that this historic settlement, the statement of principles, which
for the first time Austrai has written down a set of principles which will govern the
relationship that it has with another country, and the general warmth of the relationship
between Australians and Nauruans on this occasion at this signing and at this point of
the Forum of your host, your hosting of the Forum, this should be I think, let's may, a
milestone, another mnilestone, in Australian-Nauru relations.
So could I again congratulate the President on agreeing to this settlemet, and again
congratulate Gordon Bilney on negotiating for the Australian side. But more
particularly, on behalf of the Nauruan people for a stake in their fuzture development
and rehabilitation, which I think this agreement does and in so doing underlining this
partnership with Australi.
Thank you. 



. L I lLA
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIMfE MINISTEIL THE BON p j KEATING, hip
DOORSTOP, CIVIC CENTRE, NAURU
11 AUGUST 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: The Prime Minister and I had a mneeing as you know at the pacific Forum a
yea ago, and in the intervening time he visited Australia. and our bilateral
relationship has been chuffing alonlg very happily since and we arc very pleased
with it, and we resumed defence cooperation and our two way trade is
growing, and things arc developing quite nicely We had a chat about our
bilateral relationship in broad, some of the trade relationships in particular. The
Prime Minister was kind enough to brief me about changes in the political
developments in Fiji, including the prospect of constitutional processes. And
we had then some discussion about trade opportunities, about Spartica and
how it might be better used to do things, and a general chat about our capacity
to get along together and do things together,
J: Mr Keating what were you able to say to Mr Rabuka about his request for an
ending of some of the rules under SPARThCA, the preferential trade
agreement?
SR: I didn' t really ask that, after looking at the statistics available to actually, we
thou~ ht there inight be a need to further look at those statistics and see if we
can have a common base for our officials to have a better understanding. He
gets a picture, I get a picture of the same thing so we thought we would go
back and Sct out people working on basic data.
J-So what would you describe the state of the debate on SPARTECA at the
moment as?
SR: I wouldn't even call it a debate really. It is a very general discussion and I am
happy with the outcome that we have so far
And from your point of view, Mr Keating,. what was that outcome? 
I LL* 2
PM: Well as the Prime Minister said, we have got a trade agreement and a trading
relationship which is working, the Fijians product access to Australia, that is in
the textiles, clothing area, grew by about 30 per cent by value in the last six
months as the quotas have come off. And it means that in any growing
dhaning relationship it is sensible for us to talk about it from time to time.
And that's what we have done. And I should hope that we continue to do it.
Wherever we can smooth out a wrinkle, here or there, to make these
arrangements work better, so much the better. But as the Prime Minister said
it Is important for us to have the Samie data so that we are all working off at
the moment there is same variation in our data so we are workinS off the
same data.
ENDS I I rl LA ! J V I I 14 I I U L 



FOR MEDIA
Attached is a letter I have sent today to the Premier of Queensland, Wayne Goss,
concerning the Wik people's claim.
CANBERRA 12 August, 1993 
PRIME MINISTER CANBERRA
The Hon Wayne Goss MILA
Premier
Executive Building 2 AUG 133
100 George Street
BRISBANE QLD 4000
My dear Premier
I refer to your letter of 10 August 1993 concerning the
Wik claim and the Comalco operations at Weipa and
Gladstone. You will know from your own officials that my Government
is treating these issues in a serious and concerted way.
You will be aware that the matter was discussed at our
last Cabinet meeting a fortnight ago and that Cabinet
directed a team of officials to produce a considered
paper on the options available to governments. I thought
you understood this.
That work is on track. There have been several
discussions with Queensland officials to ensure that
Queensland's perspective is taken into account. The door
has remained open to talks on any aspect. I made this
clear in my statements to the media on Sunday.
Consultation remains the s * ensible way to address the
question, rather than any effort to build pressure
through public statements.
You must recognise that the issues involved here are not
simple ones, either as matters of law or policy.
obviously we all favour this important project being able
to proceed with security, Aboriginal people being able to
pursue their rights under the law and a just and
satisfactory outcome.
Equally obviously, these sentiments fall way short of
designing a detailed policy or solution. That is what
needs to be done, and what we are doing. 
At this point the Commonwealth has only had communicated
to it vague ideas of what you propose. It would be more
helpful to have from you clearly defined proposals. What
exactly does Queensland wish to legislate? And, given
that, what exactly are you seeking in Commonwealth
legislation? I and my Ministers will be discussing the issues on the
basis of a preliminary paper from officials early next
week. While we are willing to consider appropriate
assistance, it would help us to know what you seek.
Indeed, notwithstanding any remarks made by Commonwealth
Ministers, it is hard to see how we can reach firm
conclusions on the scope of any Commonwealth legislation
without this.
In particular, your letter is ambiguous in relation to
the effect of Commonwealth legislation to provide
certainty with riiitlion to the RDA. You should be aware
that it is one thing for the Commonwealth to legislate to
provide certainty where a Government has actively sought
to act in a non-discriminatory way or acted in innocence
and quite another to provide coverage for discriminatory
action or action which may be found to be in wilful
disregard of particular interests, or actions which may
be found to be fraudulent.
This reinforces the need for us to see your detailed
proposals, and for us to talk the detail through properly
rather than you seeking to publicly force the
Commonwealth into a premature and possibly inadequate or
unjust arrangement.
Again, it would be one thing to legislate to remove any
doubt about leases resulting from the necessary ignorance
by governments and others of the existence of native
title prior to the High Court decision in June 13192;
~ quite another to preclude the right of any Australian to
pursue existing legal remedies on grounds not dependent
on the existence of native title.
You may be sure that I and all Commnonwealth Ministers
have this key distinction very much in mind,
notwithstanding any interpretation that may have suited
you, of the Attorney-General's remarks on the scope of
the legislation. 
3.
In short, reassuring generalities are not enough. We
need drafted detailed solutions. This is the process on
which m overnment has embarked, and I can only enjoin
you con inue with us in it.
ours a ceraly
7^
P J 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY TIlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES, TIlE UNITED KINGDOM, IRELAND,
FRANCE AND MONACO
I am pleased to announce that arrangements have been made for me to visit the
United States, the United Kingdom, Ireland, France and Monaco from II to 24
September. My visit to Washington will provide a valuable opportunity to reaffirm with the
Clinton Administration and Congressional leaders the vitality and relevance of
the Australia-United States relationship during a period of great fluidity in
international relations. Fundamental Australian interests are engaged in the
defence alliance, strong enonomic ties and processes of policy consultation we
enjoy with the United States. Australia welcomes recent public statements by
President Clinton about US determination to stay engaged strategically in the
Asia-Pacific region and the strong support he has given to the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation ( APEC) process. I look forward to, in particular,
exchanging views with President Clinton on the informal meeting of APEC
leaders he proposes to host in Seattle in November this year.
The United States is Australia's second largest export market billion in
1992) and largest source of imports ($ 12.4 billion). It is also the largest source
of foreign investment in Australia and the most important destination for
Australian direct investment abroad.
Following a two-day program in Washington, I will visit New York where I
shall be meeting with UN Secretary-General Boutros Ghai to discuss the role
of the United Nations in the post-Cold War era and Australia's participation in
UN activities.
800ON 91i: T œ 66nuf" T : 131 
2
In London, I expect to have extensive discussions with Prime Minister Major
on a range of bilateral and international issues of importance to both countries.
The visit will provide an opportunity to underline the Australian Government's
commitment to maintaining a warm and cooperative relationship with Britain
at a time when the external policies of both countries are increasingly oriented
towards their respective regions, and at a time when there is increasing interest
in proposals to amend our constitutional arrangements so as to allow us to have
an Australian head of state.
Britain remains one of Australia's most important economic partners. It is
Australia's eighth largest export market billion in 1992) and third largest
source of imports billion). Britain is also our third largest source of
foreign investment and the second most important destination for Australian
direct investment abroad.
Following an official program in London, I shall visit Balmoral Castle in
Scotland for a private meeting with Her Majesty the Queen.
My visit to Ireland will build on the good will generated by high-level Irish
visits to Australia including, most recently, by President Mary Rohinson. I
look forward to reaffirming the strong community fink-sbefiveeh Australia and
Ireland and to discussing with the Taoiseach, Mr Reynolds, and his
Government a range of international economic and political issues of interest to
both countries. I have also been invited to address the National Dail
( Parliament) in Dublin.
I shall have an opportunity to make a very brief visit to the village of Villers-
Bretonneux in Northern France to pay my respects on the 75th anniver'sary of
the decisive campaigns of 1918 in the final months of the First World War. I
particularly want to thank the people of Villers-Bretonneux for the close
friendship they have maintained with Australia since those days.
Before returning to Australia, I shall visit Monaco to take part in the formal
presentation of Sydney's bid to host the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
Canbe~ rra
13 August 1993
e'C7, d 8000ON 9t7: 2T œ 6-6lbfT :-131. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH B! THE PRIME MINISTER, TEE HON P J KEATING MP, TO
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY DINNER,
CANBERRA, 13 AUGUST 1993
When I first arrived in Canberra as a young opposition
backbencher John Gorton was Prime Minister and this great
library was well on the way to completion.
So it is very pleasing tonight to come here and see that
we are all still standing.
Not that it was a surprise the National Library and Sir
John both have about them the same timeless,
indestructible quality.
The building of the National Library spanned something of
a sea change in our history. Sir Robert Menzies laid the
foundation stone. Sir John Gorton opened it.
That was a considerable political shift.
For without intending the slightest disrespect to his
illustrious predecessor, Sir John was a bit of a
revelation to those of us who had really only known one
Australian Prime Minister.
I know there are some who look back and see it as perfect
peace I saw it through different eyes, and so did many
of my generation. We saw it by the mid-1960s in the
doldrums.
With Sir John there was a difference in both style and
substance. It was Sir John, for example, who declared Commonwealth
control over the coast to the high water mark and over
coastal waterways and so preserved national
responsibility for the environmental and resource issues
which these areas presented.
In this and in other ways -like his support for an
Australian film industry -Sir John demonstrated that the
conservative parties were capable of change and vigour
and, dare I say, a rather more unqualified Australian
demeanour. ~ j97
L 
2
But despite sporadic outbreaks of resistance from some of
his successors, the change continued: the powers that he
insisted should be the Commonwealth's have been invoked
in the interests of the environment and the nation; the
film industry has flourished magnificently; and the not
unrelated question of Australia's independent identity
has become a central element in a national debate which
may yet yield an Australian republic by the end of the
century. So I hope Sir John sometimes allows himself the thought
that he was a visionary.
With the luxury of hindsight, we begin to get a
perspective on the nature of the battle in those years
and in the twenty-five since.
In some respects it was a generational shift in values;
yet I think the battles John Golton fought were of a kind
to be found throughout ouir history between different
concepts of Australia's nationhood and identity which
emerged in the nineteenth century and have been alive
ever since.
In time I expect someone will write the history of these
last twenty-five years.
I know " From Gorton to Keating" has a funny sort of a
ring about it, but under a different title it would be a
rewarding project there is that consistent theme of
change attempted and change denied.
Change, let me say, has won a resounding victory and, for
all the certainties which characterised the sixties, this
is a much better Australia because change has won.
We have seen the remarkable growth of tolerant, creative
cultural pluralism and all the riches this has brought
Australia. We have seen our attitude to the region in which we live
change dramatically and today we are seeing the pace of
change accelerate.
The xenophobia has largely gone.
We have seen the culture of the workplace change
fundamentally from an assumption of opposing interests
to one of shared interests.
The shape of the Australian economy has changed: for
instance, we are seeing Australia become an exporter of
manufactures high tech goods as well as raw materials
and agricultural products.
And we have seen Australians come to the understanding
that these are things we must do if we are to secure our
future. 998 
That has probably been the most profound change of all
and our greatest achievement, our willingness to change,
to recognise that the world is changing, and the way we
do things and conceive of ourselves must change to
accommodate it.
Yet far more than other comparable countries which have
attempted the same kind of economic change, we have kept
faith with our traditions of democracy and social
justice. Like other countries we have a severe unemployment
problem. But other countries do not have our health system. They
do not have an Accord between unions and the government.
They do not have the best record in the world on
legislation to expand the status and rights of women.
Few countries have such a secure social safety net.
We have considerable difficulties. There are all sorts
of imperfections.
But at the end of a decade of the most profound economic
change in our history, and at the end of a generation of
equally profound cultural change, Australia remains among
the very freest and fairest societies in the world.
That is not to be complacent it is to recognise
achievement and re-affirm our commitment to these
principles. So this last twenty-five years makes a great story.
And if someone does decide to write it there is one thing
we can be sure of: we can be sure that the greater part
of the research will be done here in the National
Library. For this is where the national story is contained. Like
the Library of Congress and the British Library and the
Bibliotheque Nationale, the National Library of Australia
conserves the materials from which the story can be told
the story which will tell future generations who they
are and how their country came to be.
Ultimately it will tell them whether this generation
cared enough about Australia: whether they had enough wit
to imagine Australia's future and enough courage to do
what was necessary.
The National Library holds the materials by which we will
be judged.
This audience scarcely needs me to tell them why we
should celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
National Library why it is one of Australia's greatest
and most cherished institutions. 199 
But as one who every day has his history written with an
air of definitive authority in a dozen newspapers across
the country, and served up on three commercial and two
public television networks, and on countless radio
stations where the public are also invited to join in the
feeding frenzy perhaps I can offer a politician's
perspective on national stories.
I don't mean to offer the gratuitous advice that you
shouldn't believe what you read in the newspapers: but it
goes without saying that every one of those dozen
newspapers may have, to a greater or lesser extent, a
different account either of what was said or what was
meant, and the television grabs can be equally as various
as can the radio commentary.
Knowing that these are as much basic sources for
historians as the writings of politicians and bureaucrats
with necessarily defective and selective memories;
knowing that the historian will have to read or speak to
people who are absolute artists at covering their tracks:
knowing this, and that most documents can be read in more
than one way, and are deceptive if not meaningless
without detailed knowledge of the context in which they
are created; and knowing that every writer brings his or
her own perspective and prejudice to the task that like
journalists they frequently have an axe to grind:
knowi * ng all this, I wonder how historians can presume to
write the story at all.
That is the second thing we can be sure of when the story
of the last twenty-five years is told many people will
say it is not the real story. They will say it is not a
true story.
They will be right, of course. There will never be one
true story of Australia and I think we should all be glad
of that.
There are any number of people -Isuppose some better
qualified than others who will tell you that the
greatest work to be substantially researched in this
Library is terribly flawed or even quite wrong.
But I don't think there are many people who would say
that Manning Clark's six volume History of Australia does
not contain fundamental truths about Australia, or that
it has not greatly enriched our understanding of
ourselves and entertained us. He made our lives more
interesting by weaving them into a tapestry.
I'm sure that Manning Clark never intended his history to
be the definitive story of Australia, any more than all
those other works on Australian society are the last word
on their subjects.
1000 
Clark's work was the product of one Australian's view,
one Australian's passion for the place. I think it can
be said that Manning Clark's great contribution was that
he encouraged us to believe that our history was worth
writing and knowing. In doing that he encouraged
academics, teachers and students to think about the
issues and the drama of the Australian experience and
encouraged all of us to think about what we could become.
When you look at the works which have been researched and
written in this library, it is probably true to say that
many of them were directly or indirectly inspired by
Clark's labour.
Perhaps more than any other Australian writer, he
elevated Australian history to the point where all of us
could say that the story of Australia was part of the
universal story uniquely Australian, but at every stage
connected to the world beyond.
I would not want to suggest a parallel between Manning
Clark's history and its great themes and the Labor
government and my role in it.
Politics is too much concerned with the day to day to
discern a pattern. A politician's energy is so often
expended on combating necessities which in the longer run
seem petty and even inconsequential.
We are also required to fight on fronts which historians
of the Manning Clark variety are inclined to think of as
pedestrian and even philistine. Reform of the taxation
system and changes to the regulations affecting banking
these things were not exactly grist to Manning's mill.
Nor do historians have to live out the daily grind of
beating back one's political opponents.
For all these reasons it is often very difficult for
politicians to hang on to the long view the wvision
thing" as someone called it. But let me say that the
Manning Clarks of the world, the historians who work on a
big canvas, can help them do it.
Because, buried beneath the weight of daily necessity and
all the words necessary to meet it, there is something of
an affinity between we politicians and the historians.
For, in truth, politicians who believe in their cause are
always conscious that they have a story to tell. Indeed
the telling of it is an essential ingredient of success.
When a government cannot convey a story a consistent
story the people lose faith in the government.
It is one of the meanings of that expression for disaster
" losing the plot". 1001 
The other meaning of the story in politics is that same
vision thing, one's ambition for the country and a
notion of how it might be realised.
We in the Labor Party take the view that we have the
vehicle the only suitable and reliable vehicle which
can change Australia as necessity and ambition demand.
In the 1970s some of us in the Labor Party formed the
view that if Australia was to realise its great potential
and meet the challenges it faced, the Party needed to be
rid of its traditional phobias.
Labor had to rid itself of prejudice which narrowed the
possibility of change, and which in fact stood in the way
of its great ideals.
It had to embrace the pluralist reality of Australia. It
had to make a virtue of it, extend it, celebrate it.
It had to recognise and accept that, for all their
collectivist traditions, Australians believed in free
enterprise and that they were right to believe in it
because, without question, it delivers more freedom and
more wealth and, in the end, more social justice than any
other.
~ Labor had to open itself up to reality, to the world.
It had to recognise that, perhaps as never before, the
story of Australia was bound to be part of the world
story.
And through Labor, Australia itself could become
phobia-free, conscious and proud of its best traditions
and its capacity to adapt, a modern social democracy and
a substantial and creative player in the world.
For ten years now, despite the political machinations and
the stumbles, despite all the interventions of forces
within and beyond our control, this is essentially the
story the Labor Government has been telling.
The point of the last decade is change and improvement:
to change the culture and the structure, to build on our
material and human strengths and give ourselves a chance
in the world.
This is not the time or place to tell you why I think we
now have that chance. But in the emergence of
unprecedented opportunities in the Asia-Pacific, and in
the fundamental changes in the Australian economy and our
business and industrial culture, the chance is there. It
is a better chance, I believe, than Australia has ever
had before.
And when the history is written, I think it will be seen
that it was in these two decades that we grasped the
1002 
chance and set Australia up for the twenty-first
century. The danger is always, I think, that a country's story
or the story of a political party should ossify.
In our national life there are things we should hold
sacred, things which no generation should be allowed to
forget.
Among these I would number our commitment to democracy,
freedom, justice, fairness, our love of the land and our
best institutions and traditions.
We should keep these values forever in the foreground and
of course we should honour all those in peace and war who
have defended them.
But, because it is anathema to those very traditions, we
should resist the temptation to say that one individual
or group has a monopoly on these things.
I can vouch for the temptation to do this in the Labor
Party. I venture to say Sir John Gorton can vouch for it
in the Liberal Party.
Legends give a nation strength. They give us coherence,
confidence and belief. But they also have the capacity
to freeze us in our tracks. They have the capacity to
exclude new generations. They can underpin democracy and
they can undermine it.
Last year was the 50th anniversary of a number of major
battles fought by Australians in defence of their
country. They were as significant as any fought by
Australians in a sense, more significant, because they
were fought in defence of this country and the life that
Australians had made here.
They were fought by men and women of my parents'
generation. It seemed to me that they had not been spoken for as the
soldiers of the First World War had been, because they
were not there at the birth of the legend of Anzac.
It seemed to me appropriate last year to speak for them.
And it also seemed to me that there had to be lessons to
learn from these events in our region, and that we should
not be afraid to confront the controversy which has long
surrounded some of them.
There were some who took offence at what I had to say;
there were others, including veterans of the battles, who
supported me. 1003 
My point was that in paying the respect that was due, it
was necessary to recognise that the Australian military
tradition like every other tradition does not belong
to anyone except the Australian people.
It is not the basis of a political party, interest group,
religion or sect.
It is not the preserve of one generation if it is
allowed to become so it will die.
What is more, it can most certainly withstand re-thinking
and re-interpretation, just as it can withstand the
addition to it of neglected episodes in our history
like the Sandakan death marches, or Vietnam. In the past
twelve months I have been present at the inauguration of
memorials to both.
My point is that if we don't question we can't imagine.
It is bit like the gift an historian must have to see
beyond the received wisdom and what has been set in
stone.
An historian has to have an imagination.
So does a nation so does a government.
If we can't imagine we can't determine our future, we
can't act, we can't change. And we'll fall behind.
That is the point about honouring our legends and
traditions. We fail ourselves, we fail future
generations and we fail those whose memory we are
honouring if we do not re-think the meaning of received
wisdom in the light of contemporary need.
It seems to me the same with political parties.
In the Labor Party we honour our heroes. We make much of
our history and traditions.
But it would be fundamentally silly to live by the letter
of their thought.
I have no doubt that, confronted with the necessities of
this era, Ben Chifley and John Curtin would have
responded with measures quite different to those they
thought appropriate to the forties.
And while I-know my opponents are outraged when I venture
on their territory, I have to say the same is obviously
true of Menzies.
I mean, in recent years three historians have written
books based on the Menzies papers held in the National
Library's manuscripts-collection. Yet Allan Martin,
Judith Brett and David Day have reached very different
1004 
conclusions about Menzies, about what he stood for and
what he means to us now.
This seems to me to say not only that it is impossible to
arrive at the one true story, that it depends on one's
perspective; but that it is foolish to conceive of one's
heroes as bearers of the Holy Grail. Or to let the ' ir
life and times determine ours, or what the future will
be. It is one thing to honour heroes and heroic acts, and to
memorialise and see the lessons they teach. But it is
another thing entirely to let them hold up the progress
of succeeding generations.
Let me conclude by drawing a parallel with Mabo. Just
under two weeks ago, I spoke at the opening of a memorial
in Sydney to the men who died in what was surely among
the worst episodes in our history the death by torture,
execution and disease of nearly 2000 Australians at
Sandakan in Borneo.
No Australian would for a moment question the propriety
and historic justice in the erection of the Sandakan
memorial or in the very moving ceremony that was
conducted there.
Yet there are people who will say that the memory of
death by massacre, torture and disease, when it was
inflicted on Aboriginal Australians, should be expunged.
That to pay tribute to their memory is an exercise in
guilt. That one memory is legitimate, the other the
product of a guilt industry.
I say we can't be so selective. I say that we must pay
tribute to the good and the bad in our history and that
when we honestly do that we are not held up but given the
strength to make progress.
I spoke earlier about the daily machinations,
misinterpretations and accusations which are the daily
stuff of politics, and which sometimes make it very
difficult to keep a grip on the story.
With Mabo, it is essential that we do.
With Mabo, I am prepared to wear short term politics for
the long term result. Mabo is part of the big story and
it can't be left to short term expediency and cynical
compromise. Mabo demands a mature national response. We need to see
Ribo -not as a problem but as an opportunity to solve the
problem. A mature national response demands honesty and
imagination. Honesty because we can't build this country
on a lie. 
We need imagination because we need to imagine an
Australia without the blight of Aboriginal dispossession
and disadvantage.
We need also the capacity to imagine what our failure
would mean. What it would mean to the self-esteem of this
and future generations. What it would mean to our
reputation in the world. What it would mean to a future
generation who, on coming to the National Library, saw in
the documents here that we once had an opportunity to
solve our oldest and deepest problem and we did not care
enough to grasp it.
1006
-L IL-II 



PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING
ABC RADIO " PM" PROGRAM, 13 AUGUST, 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MB: Well, Prime Minister, welcome to PM. Wayne Goss today said the
Federal Government should validate all title back to 1788. Mining
companies are concerned about their investments and Aboriginal
groups are also unhappy. Hasn't this gone on long enough and isn't it
time, indeed, your job, with the uncertainty surrounding the investment
climate, to sort this out?
PM: It's not my job at all in that respect. I'm not here to resolve
uncertainties that are created by the rights of individuals to take cases
of appeal to the courts. I mean, you might recall that a couple of
weeks ago Western Mining and the Savage River Mining Company
had a similar matter running and Western Mining lost the case.
Now, legislation which wipes out the right of people to appeal is not my
job at a-ll7-And the High Court has made it quite clear that freehold title
issued since 1788 extinguishes native title.
MB: So who's responsibility is it then, now'?
PM: Well Mr. Goss is making it clear that he says he's now picking up
pretty firmly some of the points I made yesterday saying oh yes, I
know, I understand he said, we shouldn't be acting in a non.
discriminatory way. And he said, let me quote him, he said, he claims
he's, " always sought that validation be undertaken on a nondiscriminatory
basis". Well if that's the case why does he want the
Commonwealth for us to legislate and put aside the Racial
Discrimination Act?
See, bear in mind this Michael. That is, that these leases are
Queensland leases. If they're not Commonwealth leases it's the
Queensland Parliament that has to legislate to give statutory power to
these leases. That is, ie. validating them. If the Premier says he's
going to do that in a non-discriminatory way why does he want the
Commonwealth to do anything? I mean, why then do we have to
/ TO'd VTO* ON œ O: 6T 16* 6nu* ST : 131 
introduce an amendment to the Racial Discrimination Act? If he says
it's non-discriminatory, what's the problem?
MB: Well the Wik people are saying that Queensland breached duty of
care by giving the lease to Comalco, now obviously you would agree
with that.
PM: No I wouldn't agree with that. I don't know that it's true. They allege
that. But, you see, this is the point, Queensland is about more than
the non-discri minatory validation of its leases there. There are all
these other questions about breach of trust, there's questions about
indemnity. See what Mr Goss is saying is, ' all I want is nondiscriminatory
validation of leases.' That's not all he wants at all. He
wants us to validate, he wants us to suspend the Racial Discrimination
Act so that some of these other matters like breaches of fiduciary duty
and trust can be dealt with. Arnd as well as that he's asked us for
Indemnification. Now, these are the points which we make very clear
to him.
MB: But couldn't this scenario be repe ated across the country? I mean it's
happening here in far north Queensland but essentially the same thing
could happen anywhere, couldn't it?
PM: Well the High Court has said, and you're welcome to read the
judgement the same as anyone else, that freehold grants of interest in
land and leases extinguish native title. But, it's still, our system of
justice still allows people to take an action against a state or a
company for what they think is a breach of trust or a breach of duty or
some commercial grievance and it Is not the job of the Commonwealth
Government and its parliament to rush in and obliterate that person or
group's right to take such actions.
MB: So how do you take it when Wayne Goss says he wants you to
validate all title back to 1788?
PM: I say it's, what he's asking for and unreasonably asking is that
any matter which might arise about any title issued over the years, that
the Commonwealth obliterates any person's right to take issue with the
supposed owners of that title. Now, there is no problem, the High
Court don't rely on my word the High Court said, ' The issuing of
freehold or leasehold title extinguishes native title'. So it is not the
native title problem. You see, this is the confusion that is here and that
Mr Goss, using these terms, in a sense smooths over.
Native title is one thing, but claims by people for other things like
breach of trust etcetera are another. It's the native title, which is not a
problem in that sense because they are... Let's take the Comalco
leases. First of all, it has to be established if native title existed or ever
existed. Now, let's say it did exist. If the Queensland Government has
O'd V7100N 20: 6T œ 6* 6ThfT]. i 
issued leases over that area, it's probably extinguished the native title.
So what is the remaining problem? The remaining problem is breach
of trust and fiduciary duty.
MB: Well what can you do about that? Why not legislate to protect
Comalco in that instance?
PM: But why should the Commonwealth, how can the Commonwealth be
asked? I mean, you understand what words you're putting to me.
You're saying why shouldn't we legislate. What you're saying is, ' Will
you suspend your Racial Discrimination Act to allow the Queensland
Parliament to do a racially discriminatory thing?' Well the answer is
no. The Racial Discrimination Act is there for a purpose. It's to protect
people against discriminatory acts.
MB: Surely other companies could have breached the fiduciary interest as
well. All across the country couldn't they?
PM: And that's why there are claims all the time, in the courts all the time.
But this.-
M13: So Wayne Goss is right then when he says this could happen
everywvhere?
PM: But it happens every day of the week. I mean, you just had it with
Western Mining and Savage River last week. It happens all the time.
But is it a government's right to obliterate someone's right? Let's say
somebody wants to resume your house. Would you appreciate it if the
Government of the ACT or New South Wales obliterated your right to
go to the Land and Environment Court?
MB: What does it say about the investment climate we've got then, at themoment?
PM: It just says this is a real world place like every other country in the
world. That people have got inherent legal rights and they're not to be
obliterated by Governments who are spooked by mining companies.
MB: If you did grant special legislation...
PM: Now let me just make this point. We've already given tax concessions
to Queensland to permit the sale of the Gladstone power station to
Comalco. We would like to see that range of investments go ahead.
And as the Cape York Land Council makes clear that the existing
leases are not threatened and the new leases can be negotiated with
the Aboriginal people. But the mining company in particular does not
want to talk to the Aboriginal people and the Queensland government
does not want to talk to the Aboriginal people. They want us to use a
Commonwealth sledge hammer where they can actually sit down and
lTO* ON 20: 6T œ 6* 6ndUT : 131 
4
negotiate these things. So the Commonwealth want to the see the
project proceed, but we are not about obliterating peoples right at law
particularly when it is not necessary.
MB: Is part of the concern though also that if you do make special
legislation for this, that it would raise question marks about every other
mining lease in the country essentially wouldn't it?
PM: I do not think it does, no. Because a mining lease properly issued
extinguishes native title. All your questions go to Mabo and native
title, but the whole point about the Wik claim is it is more than Mabo
and native title it is breach of trust, it is all these other questions and
that is where we say, this is a Queensland matter, not a
Commonwealth matter. If Premier Goss is saying to us what I am after
here is validation to be undertaken in a non-discriminatory basis, the
simple question is if it is non-discriminatory, after all they are
Queensland leases, validate them with a Queensland Act of
Parliament and all is well.
MB: Does the question of compensation and who is responsible for it lie at
the heart of this?
PM: I don't think so, no.
MB: Who is responsible in this case, Queensland?
PM: It is obviously not the Commonwealth government. These are issued
by the Queensland government in 1958. How can the Commonwealth
government be in any way involved?
MB: So it is Queensland?
PM: In terms of questions of compensation, if all the claims which are in the
Wik set of claims were to succeed, they would be resolved somewhere
between Queensland and the mining company. I can not see by
whatever jump of logic that somehow it is the Commonwealth
government's responsibility.'
MB: What can you do about the states generally though? They were
talking earlier today about holding a separate meeting without you and
I understand that is not on the cards anymore, but it does suggest that
they at least are not convinced that you can deliver on this, doesn't it?
PM: What are you talking about now the Wik claim or Mabo?
MB: No, on Mabo generally.
PM: Mabo as I said yesterday we have already had, we think, quite a lot
of success in the discussions with officials, between the
' Od 17O* N œ O: 6T œ 6* 6lU~ jT 
Commonwealth and the States and we are proceeding down very clear
principles on Mabo. As I said yesterday quite clear and I will repeat it
to you again Michael the Commonwealth, for the decisions it has
taken is absolutely clear and confident about its position, and it is
developing a piece of legislation that we hope to introduce into
Parliament in the Budget sessions.
MB: But Mabo itself is developing a momentum all of its own isn't it, do you
concede it has gone off the rails a bit here?
PM: There is a fair bit of confusion about it, but that is not helped by the
media either. Here we had the Sydney Morning Herald saying today
that I had ruled out legislation in respect of this Wik matter yesterday,
which I didn't.
MB: Didn't you?
PM: No, no what we said was that the generic legislation that we will
introduce for Mabo will cover the native aspects of Wik.
MVB: You were specifically asked to give that thought and you didn't do that
did you?
PM: No, no, I made that quite clear. Then we had The Financial Review
calling false the distinction between wilful discrimination or breach of
trust and innocent discrimination in the absence of any knowledge of
native title. For me it would seem to be a fairly obvious matter. Then
the other one, there is no difference between McArthur River and the
Wik claims or a potential settlement. What is written often people
saying, journalists writing under their by-lines that there is confusion
about this what they should be saying is I am confused about this, but
they will not say that, they say there is confusion and who's
responsibile for the confusion. The fact is the Commonwealth is
proceeding along principles, we have published a principles document
33 principles, which we gave the States ahead of the Melbourne
meeting, we have given them a general discussion document on it, the
Cabinet has now met on a number of occasions for five or six hours at
a time and enunciated principles, Mabo, conceptually, we have
covered.
MVB: Do you rule out Federal legislation in the Wik case?
PMV: 0f the generic variety no. Because the generic variety will come up in
respect of native title under Mabo, but Wik is about more than native
title, that is the point.
MB: But what does it mean in plain language. Do you rule it out? Do you
rule out coming in and solving the stand-off that we have?
/ SO~ d TO* ON œ O: 61 26,6n ,2T 3] l. i 
PM: If you are asking me am I prepared to rule in discriminatory legislation
that is by suspending the Racial Discrimination Act to permit
Queensland to pass discriminatory legislation to deny the Wik people
their rights to appeal to the Courts I would not pass such legislation.
No. I wouldn't.
MVB: So the Commonwealth will not step in under any circumstances here, it
is a Queensland problem and that is where it lies?
PIM: You have got to understand yourself, you are putting the questions. A
minute ago I made a distinction between native title issues, that is
Mabo issues, and non-native title issues. Your question is in respect
of which part that native title part or the other part?
MB: Well, any part, we have a confusion here where a company is worried
about an investment.
PM: Yes, but here you are confused aren't you?
MVB: Not necessarily.
PIM: I think you are. Look, let me take you through it there is native title
issues in Wilk and there are non-native title issues.
MB: No, I understand that, but we have a stand-off in a company..
PM: You are asking me will we legislate for the native title issues. Answer
yes, through the generic Mabo legislation. Will we suspend the Racial
Discrimination Act to allow discriminatory legislation to obliterate rights
on other matters No.
MVB: OK, how much is the personality clash between you and Wayne Goss
got to in the road of finding a workable solution?
PM: I do not think at all, although I notice he said today, he put a press
statement out Premier Wayne Goss today said it was unfortunate
the Prime Minister resorted to personal criticism in response to
Queenslands request that is yesterday. I have made no personal
criticism of him what so ever. I am just dealing with the issues at their
source.
MB: Coming crying back to mama and some of the things you said just
before you went overseas..
PM: That is a commentary on the notion of the States saying when I go to
Melbourne, well hang on we have got rights here and interests, and
the moment there is a problem all of a sudden it is transferable to the
Commonwealth. So, when the Commonwealth is in there trying to get
a resolution of things for Mabo, then we have less than full co-
/ 9O* d V7100N œ O: 6T 16* 6nH* 2T131 
7
operation, the moment there is a problem, ding-a-ling? Back onto the
Commonwealth. I should have thought that was an obvious point to
make and frankly before I made that point, people did not realise, I
don't think, in the broad debate, that things like breach of trust and
fiduciary responsibilities were an issue here.
MB: But you don't have a problem personally with Wayne Goss?
PM: No.
MB: All right Prime Minister, we will leave there. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you Michael.
ends
Od 1T00N 20: 6T œ 6-6lUf21 J
c :-131 



1 rI RUI 1W VIUI UIm I% U -Qr 92/ 93
STATEMENT'BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MW
PRINCIPAL ADVISER
I am pleased to announce that Dr Allan H-awke has been appointed to the position of
Principal Adviser in my office.
Dr Hawke is a distinguished senior public servant, currently holding the position of
Deputy Secretary, Strategy and Intelligence, in the Department of Defence. Ile has a
strong background in personnel and financial management and reform.
Allan Hawkc was born in Canberra in 1948, and grew up in the nearby New South
Wales town of Queanbeyan. After completing his secondary education in Queanbeyan,
he studied at the Auistralian National University, where he graduated in 1970 with a
First Class Honours Bachelor of Science degree. ie was awarded a Doctor of
Philosophy by the ANU in 1976.
Dr Hlawke joined the Australian Public Service in 1974, working in the fields of
personnel management, staff ceilings and organisation design in the Public Service
Board. He went on to the Department of Defence in 19B4, holding senior positions in
personnel and financial management, the Defence Science and Technology
Organisation, and the Defence Signals Directorate. H-e took up his present position in
July 1991. He also headed a Task Force which was responsible for the introduction of
program management and budgeting into the Defence department.
During his career, Dr H-awke has worked on the Review of Commonwealth
Administration; was a member of David Block's Efficiency Scrutiny Unit; and is the
current Chairman of the Management Improvement Advisory Commidttee ( MIAC).
MIAC develops detailed proposals for the Management Advisory Board which is
responsible for advising the governiment on significant issues relating to the
management of the Australian Public Service.
Dr Hawke is married, with one daughter.
I welcome him to my office, and look forward to benefiting from his broad public
service experience.
CANBERRA 18 AUGUST, 1993
/ TO'd ZZ200N 9S: 9T 16* 6nHt8T :-131 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, 18 AUGUST, 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: On the line the Prime Minister. Good morning and welcome.
PM: Good morning, John.
JL: How do you answer Helen?
PM: Well that was only half a quote. The quotation you just referred to
said, what I said was on that occasion, the Government will keep I
haven't got the words with me the tax share, revenue to GDP at
around roughly the same level. We will not put up tax. In other words
we will not put up the burden of tax, and that's what we have not done.
JL: Well you have.
PM: No. That reference was keeping tax to GDP between about, from
memory, 23.7 and 24.2 per cent. The point I made at the time I made
the quotation, but of course I don't expect the Liberal Party
Yesterday in fact, Mr Downer, tried the last five words of the quotation
on me, the one you just quoted, and I read the full quotation. What the
Government has said, John, is this, that we will not be lifting the
burden of tax, that is, the revenue in the economy as a share of the
total economy, revenue to GDP, and we won't be. And the evidence of
that is when the OECD publishes its annual report, which comes out
next week, it will show Australians the lowest taxed country in the
western world.
JL: Yes. But the OECD doesn't mean much to Australia now, if we are
going to make our base Asia. We should be comparing ourselves to
Asia.
PM: Yes, in some things, but not in tax to GDP. Because this is a
developed economy. This is an economy with a full public education
system, this is an economy with a full public health system, this is an
economy which is a sophisticated developed economy. You can't run
this sort of economy on Thailand tax rates. 
r
2
JL Well 80 per cent of the improvement that Canberra is going to receive
is going to be received by extracting yet more money from the workers
of Australia. So, how can you say that the overall burden of tax has
not been increased? That's what John Dawkins said, we will not
increase the overall burden of tax, now, that's a lie.
PM: No it is not. It is dead true. It is detailed in the Budget papers. That
is, that the revenue share in GDP will not be rising above the levels we
were talking about when both he and I made those statements a year
ago, that was around 23.5 to 24.2 per cent of GDP.
JL Why is the Government providing tax cuts by raising taxes? I mean
that's quite an extraordinary thing to do. We will give you tax cuts, but
we have got to raise taxes to give you tax cuts.
PM: But we are paying more tax cuts than we are raising revenue. Now,
the reason is this, that the 38 per cent rate, marginal rate, comes in
now at $ 20,500, it comes in at two thirds of average weekly earnings.
So, every dollar someone earns above $ 20,500, which is just over
$ 400.00 a week is taxed at 38 per cent. The marginal rate of taxation
is too high. Now, these tax cuts paid from November will reduce that
tax rate from 34 per cent. And those tax cuts will provide about $ 8.00
to $ 10.00 a week for someone around about, up to and around
average weekly earnings.
JL Yes. But how much of that tax cut are they going to be paying for in
increased wholesale taxes that have got up on a mass of things and
fuel taxes have gone up?
PM: Well this year the tax cuts are paid for by higher dividends from the
Reserve Bank.
JL Yes, well I mean that was a windfall for you, wasn't it?
PM: Well we are selling, still Government assets. When the Reserve Bank
sells American dollars and buys Australian dollars, as it was doing to
stabilise the currency, we are selling the Australian Government
American dollar assets.
JL You see I can't accept the fact I mean you might be able to tell me in
economic jargon, but you try and tell the average Joe, and I happen to
be one of them that you haven't increased the overall burden of
taxes.
PM: Well we haven't, John, we haven't.
JL Well you might not of in some areas, but you have. I mean you have
done some work on fringe benefits tax, you have done some work on
wholesale tax, you have increased the burden of taxes and you have
put up taxes. 
PM: We are increasing the rates of some indirect taxes, but at the same
time handing back more in tax cuts. Therefore, the burden of taxation
will remain roughly in those areas of 1990-91, which we said going to
the election.
JL Yes, but all the benefits that are going to Canberra, 80 per cent of
them are paid by the workers of Australia. But you have not cut much
back.
PM: Then 100 per cent of them are paid back out to the workers of
Australia via tax cuts.
JL Yes, but you have not cut much back. I mean, you have asked the
people to pay more tax, and you have asked the people to pay more
tax there is no arguing the point, in order that you can look like good
fellas. You are just spending tax payers money. You haven't cut
anything back.
PM: What do you mean we haven't cut anything back?
JL Well what have you cut back? In terms of your expenditure, how many
people are going from your staff?
PM: Well there will be substantial changes to Commonwealth authorities
employment levels over the next year as the productivity efficiency
changes in the public sector emulate the changes in the private sector.
But that's hardly the point, John.
JL But, Prime Minister, it is the point, when you are telling the average
Joe that he is going to have to pay more for a smoke, and more for a
drink, and more for petrol to put in his old bomb. You blokes are
cutting nothing, you have still got as many cars, as many planes, as
many light fittings, as many secretaries, as many everything. The
Budget, in fact, for you fellas has gone up by 16 per cent. You are
going to have more.
PM: When you say us, are you talking about the Cabinet or the politicians?
JL I am talking about Administrative Services.
PM: Well one thing we are doing is cutting back the Commonwealth car
pool for a start. And substantially.
JL: Ok, well how is it then the Budget for Administrative Services is rising
16 per cent?
PM: Well most of that is rents paid to the private sector. Because
Administrative Services carries the rental bill of the Commonwealth.
When we rent a building in the capital cities for a tax office or
somewhere else it is paid for by Administrative Services. You can't 
4
assume that those things are just money spent on politicians. The
great burden, the great bulk of funds outlaid in the Department of
Administrative Services Budget are for basically Commonwealth
rentals.
JL And more money is going to be paid out in social security. Now, that is
money that comes from the workers of Australia and goes to the
unfortunate non-workers of Australia, but that is going to be increased
too.
PM: But look, John, let me just make a couple of points to you about those
things. There are very important changes here, for instance, go to all
people. There is the home child care allowance, which is $ 60.00 a
fortnight paid to all, basically women, at home with dependents, $ 60.00
a fortnight.
JL Married women?
PM: Yes. What are they, non-Australians, shouldn't get it?
JL No, no, they must certainly should get it. But what are we talking
about, are we talking about married women, or are we talking about
single?
PM: In the main, married women whose husbands work. Then you have
got a generalised child care rebate. Then we have got a seniors
health card, then we have got improved spending on the labour market
programs to take the long-termed unemployed back into work. That's
where the social security spending is. Is that illegitimate?
JL No, it is not illegitimate. But it is not working, is it?
PM: Of course it is working.
JL It is not working. Is it all there, is all this in place in order that we can
abolish poverty as such in Australia, or reduce it at least?
PM: Those things are there because we believe, let me give you two
examples, in providing a generalised child care rebate we are saying,
we are regarding this as basically an expense of work, of finding
employment and having your child cared for while you are at work. So,
it is a generalised rebate which will be paid through Medicare Offices.
Now, the symmetry of this is, for those women who stay at home, who
are not at work, formerly they say well there is nothing there for us.
There is now $ 60.00 a fortnight for them. It is a matter of getting the
social balances right.
JL Well it sure is. If this is to fight the war on poverty, it is a failure. 
PM: I mean, you fight the war on poverty over a long period of time with a
broad range of Commonwealth programs, and I don't think they are
failures.
JL Well, explain this. In 1973, 3,916, 000 families, or income units as
they are called by the bureau of statistics, lived beneath the poverty
line, 3, 916,000 families. Welfare's spending in the time has increased
from $ 1.56 billion to $ 28 billion, and yet now we have got 6 million
families or more living beneath the poverty line. So, we have spent
more on poor people, and we have got more poor people.
PM: Yes, but the poverty lines, it depends whose poverty line it is. There is
no such thing as a poverty line, in terms of any definition which is
endorsed. The fact is, John, look we have got a decent income
support system for the aged, via the age pension, which has increased
in real terms under this Government. We have increased the free area
with which pensioners can earn income and keep it.. We have
removed that income totally from the tax system, that is for the aged.
For those with families we introduced the Family Allowance
Supplement, which makes a very heavy payment to low income
families with children, and now we are extending that further by the
home child care allowance, and the generalised child rebate. And we
have cut the bottom rates of tax on low paid people, from 30 per cent
to 20 per cent, that's up to about $ 20,000.
JL Yes, but the benefits that are given to all these people, deserving
though the majority of them are, there is absolutely no question, the
majority of them are. Deserving though they may be all those
payments can only come about because somebody else is going to
work, because somebody else is earning the money. You're taking the
money from us to give to the people that you believe to be the
deserving people. Why should the workers of Australia be paying
monies out to young ladies who decide that it is economically viable to
go and have children rather than go to work?
PM: Well why should the workers of Australia pay money out to support the
aged? Answer, because the aged did their work and made their
contribution.
JL Well that's right. And could you tell me what work an 18 year old who
wants to have a couple of children, can you tell me what work she has
done, what contributions she has made?
PM: You can't go and damn what is one of the best and tightest social
security systems in the world when you are focussing on supporting
parents benefit.
JL Ok, well I will focus on any benefit you like. But let's look at supporting
parents benefits. I mean it is inexcusable these days, apart from the
tragedy of rape or assault, for young ladies to become pregnant unless
they choose to. I mean, we have condoms morning, noon and night in 
6
different colours, flavours and tricks, we have got all sorts of pills
available, we have sex education in schools. Once, sure, a dreadful
accident can occur in a moment of passion, fine we must look after
that. But four or five, or six, or seven or eight times the people of
Australia have to keep supporting these young women.
PM: It is not for me to go and make a judgement about each particular
persons life. What about the young woman who was married with
three children whose husband walked out on her, and she is living in a
flat with three children?
JL: Now, she is the one that we have got to help.
PM: Ok, we will send you around and ask you which one do you like, and
which one don't you like.
JL: But you have got a massive organisation there in the Department of
Social Security.
PM: And, John, we have got a very tight system.
JL: How can it be a very tight system when day after day I get calls from
people who admit to me on radio, and they are not going to tell lies
about what they are doing, they have got five children that they receive
bundles of money on welfare, and have no intention of ever going to
work.. And some of them don't even know the father of the child?
PM: What about the children, what do we say? Well sorry to those
children, you were born into this situation and you are on your own.
JL: No, we don't say that to them. We don't allow the situation to develop
in the first instance by improving family values and by making these
this young ladies aware of the fact that they are not going to be
handed a bundle of money if they go and continually get themselves
pregnant.
PM: Let's get back on to the Budget. What about we get back on the
mainstream?
JL: Well I can understand why you want to get back on the main stream?
PM: There is no change in the Budget last night about supporting parents
benefit. No change.
JL: No, but there was a change to payments in Austudy. You said that you
would no longer pay Austudy to 16 year olds. Which wasn't a bad
idea.
PM: Yes, we are going to pay it to 17 year olds, and we are going to pay it
to the parents and not the kids. 
JL: Ok, well why then doesn't somebody say, and nor are we going to
accept in one instance, pay supporting parents benefits to any woman
under 18 years of age unless she can nominate the father of the child?
PM: Because I just don't think you can run a social security system based
on a whole lot of moral judgements about things like that. And again,
that is not where the great burden of the outlays and social security
spending are. They are basically on the aged and they are on
families.
JL: It is a fair burden, it is a fair burden, it is $ 3 billion a year.
PM: Let me get a plug in for the Budget, and just give you a couple of
points about that. Now, look, I want to say this to you about it, we are
paying out $ 3.8 billion in tax cuts in each year for the next roughly four
years.
JL: And so you should because you promised you would.
PM: Yes, right and we are meeting that promise. And we are meeting
another 100 election promises which we detailed in a booklet attached
to the Budget papers. In any of those years the revenue change will
raise $ 3 billion, when the revenue changes are at their peak, these are
these various things we mentioned petrol and the wholesale sales tax
when they are at their peak they are $ 3 billion.
JL: That will raise $ 3 billion?
PM: At its peak and it builds up over two or three years.
JL: Yes, well $ 3 billion is just sufficient to cover the sole parents pensions
for a year.
PM: OK, $ 3 billion against the tax cuts of 3.8. Now, I have heard Dr
Hewson on various radios and no doubt he will be on to you and
others to say if we had been there things would have been better
well, you can compare $ 3 billion a year in revenue increases under
Labor to $ 24 billion a year under him. The GST was going to raise
$ 24,000 million a year and, of course, the tax cuts he wanted to pay
were not funded by the GST, he had to cut government spending to
pieces to pay for it. So, we are paying $ 3.8 billion out in tax cuts, we
are raising $ 3 billion every year compared to $ 24 billion every year
under the Liberals.
JL: Yes well as I say that is very good and that is very positive as far as
the Budget is concerned but it also very correct because it is what you
told the people of Australia.
PM: Exactly, and John, the key point about this is this, that the tax cut
added $ 2 billion stimulus to the economy, now the One Nation
spending of February 1992 it always takes about a year to get it up 
8
and moving. And the One Nation spending that was on the railway
systems and roads are kicking growth along and when the growth
figures came out a week ago for the last quarter, we had 1.2 per cent
for the quarter and 3.3 per cent growth for the year making us about
the fastest growing of the western economies. To that we are now
adding a $ 2 billion stimulus via the tax cuts. In other words we are
giving it a further push to kick it along so that we really keep the
economy growing and therefore improve the whole ambience of the
economy in the labour market. So the tax cuts do two things, they cut
back that marginal rate about $ 20500 from 38 per cent to 34 per cent
and they provide a $ 2 billion stimulus to the economy.
JL Yep. Well they are all the things that you promised you would do.
Prior to the election you also said that there was going to be an
avalanche, your word not mine of investment. In fact you predicted
that investment would increase by $ 120 billion as a result of that One
Nation investment incentive plan that you just mentioned. And the
latest national accounts data shows that investment actually has
declined. What happened there?
PM: Well we have got investment growing through the year here at about,
I'll just find the forecast it is here somewhere, plant and equipment
investment 9 1/ 2 per cent growth over the course of the year. See
what we are seeing now John is quite high profits. The reason the
stock market has been hitting high levels again is because the
investors are factoring in those higher profits back into the stock
market. Now, in the One Nation and in this Budget we have cut the
company tax rate from 39 per cent to 33 per cent. We've introduced
two investment allowances, we put in a massive acceleration of
depreciation for plant and equipment, the business community has
now got a tax rate, an overnight cash rate of under 5 per cent, 4 3/ 4
per cent at the Reserve Bank they have got a competitive exchange
rate. I mean, on the range of those issues business has never had
those things together all at once ever and they have got full dividend
imputation. That is, relief of the double tax on dividend.
JL Yes, okay, but that is a long way from the $ 130 billion increase in the
avalanche.
PM: No, the 130 billion is the listed stock of nominated investments which
may qualify for the investment allowance.
JL Well, did we get the 130 billion?
PM: Well they are coming through.
JL But we didn't get them.
PM: Well, they have to be listed to qualify for the investment allowance by
a certain date and there is 130 billion listed and as they get approved
and get started they get moving. But that will be over a few years. 
d. i.
9
JL Okay, well let's get back to the part of the Budget that concerns the
people who listen to this radio program. It has got to be inflationary,
the increase in petrol excise has got to be inflationary. Would you
have increased the cost of leaded petrol if it hadn't have been for the
alleged environmental problems?
PM: We'd hoped that the transition to unleaded fuel would have been
faster. I don't know whether you remember, you will need a bit of a
memory on this, but you've got a good one, in NSW when Paul Landa
was the Minister for Environment back in the early 80s he introduced a
law saying that new cars would only have unleaded fuel by certain
dates. Now the Australian motor industry geared up for that and I
think-sorry, he introduced that in the 70s by about the late 70s to
early 80s we actually had unleaded fuel and unleaded cars. But we
haven't had the turnover and stock of vehicles and that has produced a
big problem in places like Western Sydney where you have got
children with lead problems, the inhalation of lead, and high lead levels
in their blood.
JL Yes, is there any absolute proof of this?
PM: I don't think there is any doubt about lead levels around the world.
JL There isn't any doubt about lead levels but is there any absolute proof
of the damage done? I mean are there more children suffering
problems that are allegedly caused by lead inhalation in the city than
in the country? Because in the country there would be very little and
yet it is the country people that are going to be hit the hardest with the
increase in petrol prices?
PM: Well, farmers of course, their implements are mostly diesel and they
get protected by the off-road diesel rebate.
JL Yes but you have made an alteration to that too.
PM: The rates have gone up but they will still get the rebate which will
mean that they will be
JL It is still going to cost them more.
PM: Not for their off-road use.
JL Well according to what I read in the paper this morning its still going to
cost the farmer more. But be that as it may....
PM: Can I make a very important point to you?
JL Yes. 
PM: Petrol excise has declined as a proportion of the total Commonwealth
revenue from 14.6 per cent in 1981-82, that is ten years ago, to 10 per
cent today. What is happening is, the petrol excise is falling off, John,
and its also falling off at Bass Strait. All that oil that used to gurgle up
out of those big fields Halibut and Kingfish off the Gippsland coast are
now no longer doing that, we are now draining those big fields so all
that revenue base we had is falling away. Because we cut tariffs,
customs duty is falling so the indirect base of the Commonwealth is
falling. That means, we'll end up, if we don't do something about it,
with a tax system which has got all the dependence on income tax. So
that means income taxpayers, that is ordinary working men and
women, will pay the lions share of the tax burden.
JL: Well they are doing it now.
PM: It should be paid also by users, people who use these things.
JL: But the income taxpayers are paying the lion's share now.
PM: That is true in every country. But we don't want them paying the lion's
lion share, you know what I mean, we don't want it going to an absurd
level of dependency on income tax. Look, in all these things, it is a
matter of getting the balance.
JL: You see, that is right, it is a matter of getting the balance.
PM: Where as what my friend Dr Hewson was saying is well listen let's
stick on a massive $ 24 billion a year GST on indirect tax problems we
don't need to do that.
JL: Let's not worry about him he is not running the place.
PM: All we need to do is to basically tone up the indirect tax system so it is
W not declining rapidly.
JL: Okay, but you say it is a matter of balance and I think it is an excellent
choice of words. It is a matter of balance and all these complex issues
of levies on petrol and lack of oil in Bass Strait and all the other things
that you mentioned to us are totally incomprehensible to the average
Joe. But there is the balance...
PM: But there is the Joker's like me that understand, John.
JL: Can I just finish, the balance should come in. But balance should be
weighted up according to the effect it is going to have on people that
voted you into office. Now you are hurting the people, the very people
that voted you into office. You are hurting the farmers with this diesel
thing, I have the document in front of me now. The indexation of the
rebate will also be slowed meaning many farmers could lose up to a
cent a litre which could equate to thousands of dollars for larger
operators. So you are knocking the farmers around, you are knocking 
A 11
the average Joe around. Just imagine, I mean you used to be the
Party of the worker, have a look at the average worker listening to this
program now. Let's say he takes home $ 350 a week, has a wife and
three or four kids, drives and old car that runs on leaded petrol, does
or 100 kilometres a day to and from work doing work, smokes, has
a beer, has the odd glass of wine with his Mrs. In other words, and
average Australian good bloke. Could you explain to him why he
should think you are a good bloke?
PM: Well he gets a tax cut.
JL: That is why he voted for you.
PM: Well yes, but a tax cut is more than covering off these things. His wife
is picking up the home child care allowance which is $ 60 a fortnight.
His wife may be at work, in which case they would pick up the
generalised child care rebate. And of course, they would be enjoying
the family allowance supplement which we introduced from 1987
onwards, which is substantial payments to taxpayers with children.
JL: How do you explain to him with his $ 350 a week and his old car and
his 80/ 1 00 kilometres a day and his smokes and his booze. How do
you explain to him when his wife who stays at home and minds the kids
which is a wonderfully old-fashioned thing do, takes them to get some
medical treatment that she has got to pay for them, and yet the young
lady down the road who has got a couple or maybe three out of
wedlock not even knowing the name of the father, gets the treatment
for nothing, how do you explain that?
PM: You are getting back onto those single mums again.
JL: No not single mums. People who have made the commitment, been
married and then lose a husband, could be getting supported better if
we didn't allow this other nonsense to continue. But you people are
allowing it to continue. And yet you had a look at Austudy and you say
we'll take Austudy away for 16 year olds but you will still provide
supporting parents benefits for 16 year olds to go out and get pregnant
when they can't even tell you the name of the father of the child. I
mean, it is wrong, you explain that.
PM: John, you have got to make some decisions about whether or not you
support the welfare of children.
JL: I support the welfare of children.
PM: Regardless of how they are born.
JL: I support the welfare of children, but I think it would be a better idea..
PM: You don't, you are telling us we ought to knock them off. 
JL No I'm not saying any such thing. I'm saying that what we should do is
improve the quality of the people in the country that don't use those
poor wretched children. I don't want to go into details because if I do I
will embarrass you. If you had a look at a few of the tragedies which
have occurred in this country over the last four weeks, just have a look
at how many of those children are on supporting parents benefits, how
many of those were unmarried, how many of those were living on
government largesse and you would be very surprised. It is not doing
much for the moral quality of this country I'll tell you.
PM: Well let me tell you this. I don't think Commonwealth programs, if that
is what the implication of your remarks are leading to some sort of
morale decay, I don't accept that. I mean, if there are changing
community standards around things like families and the structure of
families, it is in part because of community attitude, it is not
government attitude, it is the community's attitude.
JL That is right. But the community attitude is...
PM: And we are governing a community here, we are not governing only
those that have got a house with a white picket fence around it and
daffodils in the front garden, with mum staying at home looking after
the kids.
JL It is not a bad aim.
PM: I know but that is not the only society. It is not the society we have,
John, we have got those sorts of people and we have got other people
who live in flats and might have been married and now are not married.
JL And they have got to be cared for.
PM: Exactly.
JL Nobody was arguing that. But you have got to understand it is also the
Government and the government largesse that lubricates the society in
which we live. The adoption figures are very interesting, in 1971 8500
adoptions in Australia, by 1985 1000. Why, because it is better
economically to hang on to the child. Is that doing the child any good?
PM: It is not government programs doing that, it is the media, its films, its
community attitudes.
JL But you are still paying.
PM: No we are paying to look after the kids. That is our principle.
JL That is right. You are paying to look after the kids and consequently
you are creating a society where kids are being used as an income
earner. 
PM: Well, so what do we do. Put the kids in the streets so that they can run
and pinch money off people, pick pockets, or beg?
JL: No, you are not going to get around me that way. The idea would be
to make it clear to people that they have some responsibility for their
own behaviour. I mean, we have got to introduce a program for
behavioural responsibility. But we had better get back to the Budget.
PM: You are going to be a big winner with the Festival of Light. They will
have you as the patron and standard bearer.
JL: Well I don't worry about ( inaudible). The thing that concerns me is that
what I believe the decline in proper standards in the country like
Australia which is a great country. There are decent people out there
working pretty hard and I think that they are pretty fed up with a bunch
of people who choose not to work and there aren't too many of them
but there are some of them, it wouldn't take much to cover the $ 3
billion a year.
PM: John, there will be always some that choose not to work and use the
welfare system to cover the benefits of their kids but I am just making
these points to you, the key points. This is the lowest tax country in
the Western world. That means, the burden of taxation on all
Australians is by Western world standards, the lowest.
JL: Very good.
PM: Point one. Point two, the spending of the Government reflects those
low revenues and the fact that we will have the Budget deficit back to 1
per cent of GDP by 1996-97 means that the balance, the difference
between that low rate of taxation, that world low and the spending is 1
per cent of GDP. So therefore our spending is commensurate with our
revenue which is the lowest in the world. Therefore, what we are
saying is the Commonwealth of Australia under Labor government is
delivering a good social security system, is delivering Medicare, its
delivering health, aged care, child care, all of these things with a very
low spending base and a very low tax base. And I think they are the
key points and nothing in the Budget is going to do anything but keep
revenue as a proportion of GDP at the levels that I said when you
quoted me right at the start of the program of 1989-90 and 1990-91.
JL: Okay, well what is going to happen when inflation occurs, you can't
deny it will occur with the increase in the cost of fuel, that is going to
push up the price of everything because fuel effects everybody,
deliveries, costs of products, everything.
PM: Well we have still got in the Budget forecasts, even with all these
things in, we have got inflation in year average terms in 1993-94 at 3
1/ 2 per cent. Now with productivity high, in other words, if there is a
higher productivity in the economy, it even diminishes that 3 1/ 2 per
cent inflation. So you are probably looking at underlying inflation, the 
Treasury says underlying inflation is about 2, or 2 point something per
cent. And that is why you can afford to have, as we now do, low
interest rates. I mean we had interest rates this low 20 years ago.
You see, again in the Budget, John, you have got inflation at a 30 year
low and you have got interest rates at a 20 year low. I mean, the last
time I saw interest rates with a 5 or a 6 in front of them was when I was
a kid in jeans.
JL Nobody can argue that. All of that is very good and all of that is very
commendable. And I think that the people generally commend you for
it. They don't understand however, why you appear to be, whether it is
correct or not but you can't blame them for their cynicism, you appear
to be hurting the ones that in fact you allegedly represent. I mean, one
of your strongest arguments prior to the election was that the
Opposition didn't compensate pensioners or low income earners with
the dreaded GST. You have not compensated them either.
PM: We have got pensions as a proportion of average weekly earnings
rising. We have had it rising as well now over 25 per cent of average
weekly earnings. We've increase the free area which in people can
earn and still keep the full pension and we have removed the whole of
that income of the free area from the tax system completely.
JL Okay, but in light of the wholesale taxes you have not made any
alterations for them now. You have not compensated them now have
you?
PM: No, but if that feeds into the inflation rate that will automatically adjust
the pension, one quarter later.
JL Aren't you disturbed when you hear blokes like Martin Ferguson say in
his own way I wouldn't want to be a worker who drives a leaded vehicle
and smokes and drinks. I mean, he is supposed to be the epitomy of
the sort of people he represents.
PM: Yes, but where are the tax cuts going? They are going between
$ 20,500 and $ 50,000, they are going to the great body of the
workforce. Because you have got most workers now in those sorts of
income ranges $ 20,500-$ 50,000. We are providing $ 3.8 billion worth
of tax cuts, $ 8-10 a week once you are in that $ 20-30,000 area. That
is exactly to his constituency, what does Martin ( Ferguson) want to
see? People driving around in FJ Holdens with the mud guards falling
off them and black smoke belting out the back and the kids all picking
up the bit of lead inhalation saying, well, that's good policy well,
thanks Martin, that is a great idea.
JL There is no doubt about you, you certainly have not lost your
wonderful turn of phrase, but I am not quite sure that that is what
Martin Ferguson meant. 
PM: No, but you know John, let me just make this clear about cars. This
is a change which is going to take these increases in petrol take
place over a period of years. That petrol increases 3 cents in August
1993, it is 2 cents in February 1994, it is a further 2 cents in August
1994 and 3 cents in February 1995.
JL: Yes, so by 1995 it is up 10 cents.
PM: It is up 10 cents. Unleaded is up 5 cents.
JL: Why didn't you pressure the oil companies? They have got more
money than Martin Ferguson's mates and my mates that listen to this
radio program. Why didn't you pressure the oil companies to reduce
the amount of lead, they have been asked to do it, they say they can
do it, why didn't you hurry them up instead of hurrying up the
Australian workers?
PM: Look, markets equilibrate. What will happen is..
JL: No, hang on, that wasn't a bad question I just asked.
PM: No and I am just going to answer you and say this that markets work.
If there are more unleaded cars around and more unleaded cars in the
second hand car market, the price of unleaded second-hand cars will
fall. Therefore the transition from a leaded car to an unleaded car will
be nothing like that which is being argued by the Opposition and other
people. The fact is, we have got one of the oldest vehicle fleets in the
world, the average age of the non-commercial car fleet is 15 years.
JL: Why?
PM: You know why? Because they are too expensive.
JL: Yes.
PM: Now, you know why they are much cheaper? Because we brought
tariffs downs.
JL: Yes, but because they were too expensive, because people could not
afford to buy them.
PM: Now they are much cheaper because we have brought tariffs down.
JL: OK, so when you have got the motor car that has got the motor in it
that can only use leaded petrol and you go to sell it, haven't you
noticed in your wide and varied life that used car salesmen tend to be
opportunistic, don't you think the value of the car that they are going to
trade in on the new one is going to drop considerably?
PM: Well, this is a change over three years and during that same time, in
each of those three years we will pay out $ 3.8 billion in each year 
that is about $ 10,000 million in tax cuts which are going to cover off
not going to cover off cover off, more than cover off those petrol price
increases. Basically what it is, it is a relatively mild incentive over a
fairly extended period of time for people to switch to unleaded fuel,
which is what we should do anyway.
JL Yes.
PM: It is good policy, good government, it is good economics, it is good
sense and it is the right thing to do.
JL Yes, but it would have been better if you had of leant on the oil
companies. The oil companies have got much more money than the
average ' Jo' and said to them listen, you fellas had better make some
alternative arrangements, we have got to reduce the quantity of lead in
these petrols so these cars can still run on them.
PM: Your friend and mine, Ros Kelly, is doing that as Minister for the
Environment.
JL I see. How is she managing to do that?
PM: They are talking about that very subject right now.
JL OK, well she is not doing it fast enough.
PM: Yes, I know, but again you can't put lower lead levels in fuels for old
vehicles 15 year old vehicles which will knock and ping away when
they have been designed basically for high octane leaded fuels.
JL OK, but there is a conversion that is available to many, are you going
to subsidise the purchase of the conversion?
PM: I do not think people are going to be converting at these sorts of
prices. If you go and say to somebody look, an $ 8-i10 a week tax cut,
a $ 60 a fortnight home child care allowance being paid into the family
on top of the basic family payment and the Family Allowance
Supplement, for another 10 cents on leaded petrol over three years
you are going to change your car some might. Three years later that
car could be 15 years old and they will change it anyway.
JL Yes, but if it is possible to have a conversion available, why doesn't
the Government offer some sort of subsidy? If the main concern of
Ros " I'll tell you how to lead your life" Kelly is the environment, why
doesn't she then suggest to you that the Government subsidises the
purchase of a device that would reduce the lead in the petrol and save
the individual selling the car?
PM: The better thing would be to try and get the chemical composition of
the petrol such that the lead levels could be reduced and the motors
still not knock or ping. I think that is what they are trying to do. 
JL Well, they can do it.
PM: We don't want to get to a stage remember those..
JL Why don't you hurry them up?
PM: films of India of a year or two ago, I haven't been there for years, but
everywhere you look there are Morris Oxfords everywhere, old Morris
Oxfords with the backside falling out of them. We do not want a
country like that do we? With all these old wrecks running along the
roads, where the braking system is poor, with the suspension systems
had it, with a rust that is not even holding the structure, if they have an
accident they fall to pieces.
JL No, we said..
PM: What is in it as a nation for us to keep that sort of thing going?
JL Nothing, but there are others. You have cited an example which was
questionable when it was brand new, yet alone when it was thirty years
old. Anyway, do you feel happy with the result of the Budget and the
reaction to the Budget?
PM: Yes, because it recognises this point that is, that we need to do two
things with the Budget. In the short-term, this year provide a stimulus
to keep growth growing and give tax payers through the income tax
system some relief from those marginal taxes while getting to 1 per
cent of GOP deficit by 1996-97. In other words, as the economy starts
to grow and investment starts to pick up, when we need that pick call
on savings by 1996, we will have the Commonwealth Budget not
putting its hand out as it is now for so much income. That is the thing
about the Budget it is a four year approach covering off the stimulus
in the short term and being prepared for higher investment and better
saving in the medium term. If there was one message about the
Budget I would say this John: it is an honest, decent attempt to deal
with our economic circumstances to provide a bit of tax justice here
now on the income side and get the spending balance in stimulatory
terms right while looking after the medium term for business
investment and employment in 1996.
JL It doesn't do much for unemployment though does it?
PM: As the economy grows it will. There is in the end no substitute for
growth when you come to unemployment other than by looking after
those currently unemployed with better labour market programs, and
there is a healthy addition to spending in this Budget to take those
programs up to half a million.. 
JL Instead of looking after the people who are unemployed and unable to
get a. job, wouldn't it be better, wouldn't it make more sense to look
after the people who are in a position to give them a job?
PM: We have done that by cutting the company rate to 33 per cent, by
giving them two investment allowances, by giving them interest rates
under 5 per cent.
JL Yes, you cut the company rate, certainly you did that, but then you
increase wholesale taxes, they will be picking up half of that again, you
really haven't cut it the amount it says.
PM: We have taken it, in the first instance, up 1 per cent. We are taking
the 10 rate to 11 and the 20 to 21 and the 30 to 31 and a year later it
goes another 1. That is no problem.
JL But..
PM: John, let me give you this point about business the reason the stock
market is jumping around at the moment is because of the profit share
in the economy; it is as high as their golden era of the 1960s for
profits.
JL Yes, I think the reason that it is jumping around at the moment is that
all sorts of strange things that we never thought would be listed
publicly have become listed publicly and people have got very excited
and gone and bought them, that is what is making the stock market
jump around.
PM: The stock market is reacting just as profitably..
JL Just back to these unemployed people. You say that we are doing a
great deal to help the unemployed people, we are. By " we" we mean
we, that the wage earners of Australia are doing a great deal to help
the unemployed people. Many of them are concerned that a lot of the
people who are unemployed obviously choose to be unemployed, but
there are people there who genuinely want work. Why do we help the
people who can get the work more than we help those people who
don't have work?
PM: Who are they?
JL They are employers.
PM: Employers!
JL If you want more employees, you have got to have more employers.
PM: Exactly. 
JL But, you have got all sorts of strange rules and regulations that you
pay more company tax, more payroll tax if you employ 15, you pay
even more if you employ 20 people. We do more to hurt the people
who want to give their mate a job than we do help them.
PM: John, we have done more to help them. The business community has
never had a set of indices like I mentioned to you, they have never had
JL You ask the small business man that rings this radio program I can
play you a tape of a bloke I talked to the other day who had 12 people
employed, he wanted to employ 15, but his payroll tax was going to
increase dramatically if he did so he decided to dump it. So, there is
people doing without work because this bloke can not afford to employ
them because of taxes that are levied on people who want to give
other people work.
PM: The best way to talk the employing sector of Australia is to look at the
profit share in the economy, the proportion of national income going to
profits. It is now as high as the golden years of the 1960s and going
higher.
JL And unemployment..
PM: And what else can we do? Cut wages further?
JL: I don't know, unemployment has never been higher.
PM: Yes, but that is because of largely an international recession and a big
structural change in the Australian economy. We are going from a
closed, inwards economy that relied on tariffs to make uncompetitive
things to an open, export orientated economy and there is a big
change on the way through. People leaving some jobs and going to
other jobs and being retrained for them.
JL OK but it has also got a lot to do with the fact that people can not
afford to employ other people and please don't argue the point
because everyday I talk to people right across Australia who tell me
that and they don't ring up..
PM: It is not because of Commonwealth taxation.
JL Well, it is because of payroll tax.
PM: It is a factor, but again in the total mix of business costs..
JL And it is because of superannuation and stupid training levies what a
ridiculous nonsense that training levy is.
PM: But wages, salaries, supplements and on-costs including training
levies and superannuation, that is what's called national accounts 
average weekly earnings, costs, were last this low in the 1 960s. What
else can we do? Cut peoples' wages further..
JL No, no that is the last thing I am saying. I'm saying make it easier for
individuals to employ other individuals, make the market easier so if a
woman wants to work Saturday and Sunday morning she can get a job
without Martin Ferguson and his mob jumping up and down and saying
how dare she work two days and only by paid x y z. If she wants to be
that is her business.
PM: John, these labour market programs we have which now touch about
half the unemployed people, there is half a million in these programs
so every year we are contacting half a million a large part of that are
JobStart subsidies which are $ 220-270 a week which we pay to an
employer to take an unemployed person on.
JL Sure.
PM: We are doing all that plus giving them low tax rates and a high profit
share you have got say what else can we give them?
JL That's right, you'll give them the JobStart thing so they put on
somebody I have explored it all. You put on somebody, I looked at it
for people on the farm and I have seen it happen they put people on
and they say we get JobStart, the government is going to give us $ 200
a -week, when the $ 200 a week runs out so does the person they
employed. I couldn't tell you the number of calls I have had along
those lines. They just say well, sorry I can't afford to keep you.
PM: But those people get a bit of work experience 6 months to a year..
JL: Six months.
0 PM: They get training on the way through, their esteem rises, they feel they
are useful to society, their confidence levels pick up.
JL Where does their esteem go?
PM: They do the jobs better, a lot of people keep those jobs and even if
they don't they pick up other jobs.
JL Where does their esteem go when they get fired? After six months of
working and then suddenly where's the feel good go there?
PM: But that is not true for the vast majority who keep the job that they have
picked up and even those who may lose it at the end of the period, if
they have been unemployed for a year then employed for six months
and they are back in the workforce and back with the notion that they
can do something and they have had some particular training, they go
out and they generally find work. The success of these programs is
pretty obvious. 
JL I understand that you have difficulty with employment and with hours
and with wages and things because of the fact that you have to
perhaps not by choice, but historically be in bed with the ACTU and
you have got to keep them happy as well.
PM: But John, the poor old ACTU look, we have got wages at 1960 levels,
we have got the profit share at 1960 levels, we have got inflation in an
underlying sense with a ' 2 in front of it. How can you have a rampant
ACTU with a 2 per cent inflation rate.
JL No, but nobody is talking about wages. When something comes along
that doesn't suit you, you pick up the wrong point. I would like to see
wages increase and if people had more people employed and produce
more and sold more, wages could increase. But we can't have an
improvement in unemployment unless we have employment and we
can't have employment unless we have got employers.
PM: Exactly, and you will only get employers by growth and you will only
get growth going by getting the right mix in the economy starting with,
amongst other things, fiscal and budgetary policy.
JL Yes.
PM: And that is what this is all about.
JL OK, maybe we could have a quiet talk about that one day.
PM: There are a couple of points, let me repeat.
JL OK, we have got about two minutes.
PM: If this is the lowest taxed country in the world -and itis -therefore
JL In what world? In the whole world?
PM: In the western world.
JL But we are not in the western world any more, you have told us we
have got to be in the Asian world.
PM: No, we are a developed country, you can not run a highway system,
road system, health system, phone system, education system of a
developed country as we have on tax shares lower than we have it.
We have the most efficient delivery of government services probably
around the world.
JL OK.
PM: That means that is not standing in the way of growth. Now, the extent
that the public sector was in deficit now and we want to get it back to a 
22
lower deficit by the middle ' 90s as investment picks up that is what
the Budget is all about while keeping faith on those tax cuts and
giving a stimulus this year which is going to help kick the place along
right when we need it.
JL Well, sort of keeping faith on the tax cuts.
PM: We are paying the tax cuts, we have brought one lot forward and we
are putting one lot back.
JL Yes, well sort of keeping faith on them. Anyway thank you for keeping
faith and being on this the most complained about and listened to radio
program in the world.
PM: God! you are a tough competitor. I'll tell you what, those single mums
and supporting I will have to get you into a little seminar on this.
JL Yes, well I am very happy to do that. Any woman who has been
married and had some bounder to walk out on her and leave her in the
cold, we have got to look after her. I would like to be able to look after
her better, but the little floozies who want to go around and create
children, bring them into the world and not treat them properly and if I
was to give you some of the evidence that I have..
PM: I am not endorsing that.
JL You are not endorsing it directly.
PM: I am not endorsing that, but I don't want to leave the children uncared
for.
JL No, it would be a very good idea if you said no single parent benefits
for under 18 year olds unless you can nominate the father of the child.
Pretty simple. Give it some thought.
PM: Well, I think we had better get you in the public sector.
JL Thank you very much.
PM: You might have to take a wage cut to do it.
JL Yes, I am happy to do that. Thanks for your time.
PM: OK, good on you.
JL Prime Minister Paul Keating.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN SHOVELAN, ABC ' AM' PROGRAM
18 AUGUST 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JS:-Prime Minister, thanks for your valuable time. The President of the
ACTU, Martin Ferguson, has said of the Budget, don't ask me to
defend the indefensible. Do you think you have got it all wrong?
PM: Well, I can't understand. Are you sure you are not quoting him out of
context'? You are not talking about one measure, maybe? That is an
inexplicable comment to me about a B3udget which delivers to his
constituency in the area of $ 20, 000 to $ 50,00 primary tax cuts worth
$ 3.8 billion in a full year, starting in November, I1V weeks from now.
is.-Well he went on to say that there was elation in the Labor movement
on 13 March, but not the same sense after this Budget.
PM: Well that's, I think, a remark he can't defend. This Budget is a sound
Budget in economic terms, it is a sound Budget in social terms, it gives
expression to all the Government's election committments on things
such as, the home-child care allowance, which is a payment to women
with dependent children to women, mainly; the seniors health card; a
generalised rebate for child-care; enormous increase in the expansion
of our labour market programs to half a million -that's half a million
people will be touched, those who are unemployed, under the labour
market programs. By which measure would you say this is not
something which is Labor to the bootstraps?
JS: Well, I dare say the first thing that people would point to would be the
increase in petrol taxes.
PM: The increase in petrol. taxes are there, but they are there because the
indirect tax base has ben falling to pieces over the last few years,
with customs duty coming down, with Bass Strait running down, but
what's there let me just make this clear the tax cuts pay back $ 3.8
billion in the full year, this revenue in any of these years when it is fully
up and running raised $ 3 billion. So, by any measure this Budget is 
i r-L 2
returning tax revenue, particularly to those people who the ACTU
would cl aim to represent.
J S Well what about the lowest income earners who will win the $ 100
rebate, is that sufficient, do you think, to compensate them fully for the
increases in direct taxes and the petrol excise?
PM: It is the equivalent to the tax cut someone would get on $ 23, 000.
JS: So they wouldn't be any worse off?
PM: We are taking the $ 23,000 tax cut, and we are running it back through
those lower deciles. But remember this, John, all through the
when I was Treasurer and I negotiated wage tax agreements with the
ACTU, they were always pushed below $ 20,000. That was, the tax
cuts when 1 first became Treasurer in 1983, the bottom rate of tax was
per cent, it is now 20 per cent. And the tax free threshold was
$ 4,700, it is now $ 5,400. As well as that we have supplementary
payments for low paid workers, we had the family allowance
supplement, all, in the main, chopping in way under $ 20,000. The key
to this Budget is, to give the people who have not had that kind of
success in Budget rounds in the past. And that is middle Australia,
between $ 20,000 and $ 50, 000. So, what we need to do here was to
cover off the kind of tax cut that someone would recieve at $ 23,000
and spread that down with a rebate under $ 23,000, but then provide
the tax relief from $ 20,500 up to $ 50,000. And that is $ 8.00 to $ 10.00
a week for someone around average weekly earnings.
JS: Well you are going to have to deal with the Democrats to get this
Budget through. Now, Cheryl Kemnot, last night said that she thought
the $ 100. 00 rebate was totally inadequate for low income earners.
PM: Well, let me just say this. Let's get some perspective on this. This
Government has been in office now 10, going on 11, years. In 10 of
those 11 years we have focussed most of these tax cuts below
average weekly earnings. The Family Allowance Supplement, below
average weekly earnings. Most of these supporting measures..
people are not entitled to look at this in terms of one year and anyone
who does, it is a commentary on their lack of experience or
understanding in what has preceded it in the earlier years.
JS-What about, though, the fact that you with the petrol tax, it is the low
income earners who drives around in the old car, in the old bomb, they
are the ones who can't afford to buy the new car, aren't they getting it
through the neck here? Firstly, their car is going to be worth less from
tonight, and it is going to cost them an awful lot more at the bowser.
PM:-But look, the point is that we have got one of the lowest petrol prices,
we are the third lowest petrol price in the world. And even with these
Increases we will still be the third lowest petrol price in the world, and
10 mu : 1 14U UUL VL1 tik-
we are giving people substantial tax cuts to meet these things. To
more then meet them, that's the point.
JS: There's not much difference between what you are giving them, and
what you are taking away.
PM: What is paid in tax cuts goes often to a different group of people that
are paying some of the other taxes, because business is picking up
some of the other taxation,
JS: So you maintain despite the increase in the wholesales tax and petrol
excise, that you have kept faith with the electorate?
PM: Absolutely. Because at their full year effects the tax cuts cost $ 3.8
billion and the revenue costs $ 3 billion, at their full year effects. And
on top of that all the Governments election committments 100 of
them, listed in the booklet which is attached as part of the Budget
papers in the things that I mentioned to you, like the seniors health
card, the labour market programs, the home-child care allowance, the
generallsed child-care rebate, all of these things are fully implemented.
JS: Last night's Buget offers no real relief for the unemployed, does it? I
mean, there is no suggestion at all that the unemployment rate is going
to come down, in fact it is going to increase slightly in the next year.
PM: It is not going to increase. It is coming off an average unemployment
rate of 11 to 10 3/ 4.
JS: But last week it was 10.7 and now we are looking at 1 0.75.
PM:-That is only a week, though, that is only a month. I mean, we have
been looking at 11, 11.4, 11.3 and we have got in here 10 3/ 4. But we
have also got in there futher expenditure on labour market programs,
which as I said earlier will touch about half a million of those
unemployed. That is, give them training and get them back to work,
and as well as that we have got the discussion paper we hope leads to
a white paper on employment and unemployment to see if we can
devise even more novel ways of reaching those people who are longtermed
unemployed. But the key to employment, John, is growth. We
have got a conservative forecast here. The growth for the year to the
last quarter was 3.3 per cent. For the coming year we have got 2.75
per cent.
JS: So, you think you will get that easy?
PM: I think we will get that easily.
JS: And does that mean then that the 10 3/ 4 unemployment rate is higher
then 
rlLA-,--IQ H U. U UZ r. U 4, VU
4
PMV: And what it may mean, as that growth picks up, then the prospects for
employment will of course be better, but the forecasts are our best
estimates, and 10 3/ 4 is what we have in. But the key to employment
is growth, and the economy is now growing and the key point about the
tax cuts Is that there Is an extra $ 2 billion stimulus in there to keep
there to keep the economy moving. You remember in the ' One Nation'
package I introduced in February 1992 most of that spending has
occurred in the last six months. That is now playing a very substantial
role in kicking growth along, that is part of that 3.3 we saw last week.
You add to that another $ 2 billion stimulus from the tax cuts and we
hope then the economy will start to really roll and we will start to see
the growth. In other words the tax cuts are doing two things they are
giving justice to middle Australia by cutting that middle rate from 38
cents to 34 cents and they are providing a necessary stimulus at the
right time to keep economic growth going.
JS: Prime Minister, the hard headed financial markets are likely to be
disappointed with the amount of cuts from outlays. Does this Budget
show a shift in the Government's thinking, like away from cutting
outlays and possibly Increasing taxes, are we looking at a change?
PM: If you wash the unemployment benefits out of the outlays in other
words If you take the cyclical component of the outlays and look at this
underlying structure, structural outlays they are at early 1970 levels.
Anybody who says we should be cutting our outlays further Is an
extremist. I say that advisedly, an extremist. This is one of the lowest
spending governments in the world and next month, as the Treasurer
has said, when the OECD figures are released it will show Australia as
the lowest taxed country in the western world Australia has the lowest
rate of revenue to GDP, the lowest taxed country in the western world
and our outlays are similar. All these highly paid characters on
newspapers who wander around and want to slip into people's
pensions and supporting parents benefit and Medicare so that they
can argue that we should be cutting outlays back to pre-Whitlam
government levels in structural terms are extremist and not to be taken
notice of.
JS: Mr Keating, you were one of the people that heard the inflation stick
snap first..
PM: I wasn't one of the first people to hear it, I snapped it. I carried the
burden for the recession and the high interest rates. The government,
when I was Treasurer, walked off with the accolade of breaking the
back of Australian inflation after two decades and that is why we have
now got interest rates, overnight cash rates at the Reserve Bank, at
4.75 per cent the lowest interest rates in twenty years.
JS: Aren't these tax increases going to rebuild that stick though? We are
looking at an inflation rate of 3 3.5 per cent next year. 
PM: No, but an underlying rate with a two in front of it, that is the key point
John.
JS: But it does not take much to kick Australia off on an inflation binge
does it, and never has?
PM; There has been a lot of asset deflation around. People, I think, have
learned their lesson and there is a lot of productivity around protecting
the inflation rate. Can I just say as a matter of digression, one of the
things in the media we have had over the years, people have said and
particularly years ago in the late 1980s, when we had a lot of growth
and a lot of employment and I used to say look at the employment we
have 90,000 a month or 105,000, and they would say oh yeah, yeah
Treasurer, but tell us about inflation and the current account. Now we
are telling them about inflation, it is one of the lowest in the world as a
result of this Governments policies the Accord, the tax cuts, holding
wages in the boom and then the natural deflation which has came out
of the recession. Remember this, in the 1982-83 recession we had a
recession then, we came out of that with inflation at 11 per cent, we
are coming out of this recession with inflation at 2-3 per cent.
JS.-When the Business Council says it is worried about the delicate
balance of inflation after last night's Budget. Is it that we should be
worried?
PM: Let them start, in the first instance, restraining some executive salaries
to show they really mean it.
JS:-Mr Keating, just before I let you go, the National Farmers Federation
said that as far as the increases in petrol go that the burden of tax -will
fall most heavily in regional Australia where there is no lead probl em.
It is hard to argue ag~ inst that isn't It?
PM:-Most farm implements are diesel and the off-road rebate for diesel still
applies, but for petrol, our petrol price was the third lowest in the world
and even with this increase, it will be the third lowest in the world.
There is a problem with leaded cars. We haven't replaced leaded cars
as rapidly as perhaps we should have. This has been a burden for the
motor industry, but it has mostly been a burden for the health of
Australians and it is most obvious in places like western Sydney.
JS: On a number of occasions over the last six months or so you have
asked business not to shed any more labour. Are you shedding any
labour In the Budget?
PM: There will be some in the reforms which have taken place in Telecom
because of the competition now with Optus over the last few years and
in some of the other GBIEs.
JS: But yet you still want private enterprise to.. 
PM: Again, it is a matter of a balance in these things. Let me just -say one
of the commitments which we have adopted since the election is we
have cut the company tax rates from 39 per cent to 33 per cent, we
have introduced a further investment allowance, in ' One Nation' we
had another investment allowance of 10 per cent for projects over
million. In ' One Nation' we had massively accelerated depreciation.
Australian b6siness ha've got these things: a 33 per cent company
rate, massively accelerated depreciation, two investment allowances, a
profit share as high as the 1 960s and going higher and full dividend
imputation. You have got to say what else? Is there any other claim?
The business claims of the last forty years have been met for the first
time in these last two years in these statistics.
JS, Maybe that takes us back to where we started and maybe that is why
Martin Ferguson Is saying, I won't defend the indefensible, because
business has got everything seems to be going in one direction.
PM: No, this has been something we have done over a period of eight or
ten years the business changes. First we took the corporate rate
from 49 down to 39 and now to 33 per cent. The ACTU argued for the
investment allowances and a rapid acceleration, they argued for those
things as well. There is no basis, in equity, why the ACTU would not
regard this as a good Budget, it is doing for that group of their
constituency between $ 20 50,000 that which they have asked us to
do for some time that is provide tax relief to cut the 38 rate which
chops in at $ 20,500 down to 34 per cent.
JS: Just finally Mr Keating, how do you think financial markets are going to
see this Budget?
PM: It meets one of the Government's key election commitments, it will take
the trajectory of the deficit down to just 1.1 per cent of. 0? DP by 1996-
97. There will be no other western government that will do that, I am
sure. Most of them will still be by 1996-97 at 2 or 3 per cent or maybe
higher. I think you will find by 1996-97, many other OECD countries
will have a deficit with a 3 in front of them as a per cent -of GDP and we
will have a 1. If the markets say this is not good enough, I tell you this
John, take no notice of them.
JS: Prime Minister, thanks.
PMV: Good John.
ends 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THlE HON P 3 KEATING NIP
THE WIK PEOPIJ;' S CLAIM AND COMALCO
Federal Cabinct last night rcac led agreen n onl the Cononwealth approach
to the legal claim by the Wik people over land including mining ] cases held by
Cornalco.
The decision will provide security for the major investment proposed by
Comalco, while pennitting claims by the Wik people for-compensation and
damages to proceed.
This approach also ensures that negotiation will take place between the
Commonweal th and Quccrnsland Governments, Comalco and thle Wik people.
Cabinet agi-ccd that Commonwealth and Queensland legislation be introduced
to validate all relevant land grants whose validity might be in doubt aq a rcsult
of the existence of native title and its interaction with other laws. Thisvwill be
included in the proposed generic Coimmonwealth Mabo legislation. Such
validation of mining leases would not extinguish native title.
Queensland may also legislate to validate leases, on a non-discriminatory basis,
against other possible causes of invalidity unrelated to native title. Claims
against the validity of leases would, in effect, be convcrtcd into claims into
compensation or damages.
Cabinet reaffirmed that the Corruionwealth will need to be satisfied, on
examining the proposed terms of such Queensland legislation, that it is nondiscriminator-
y.
Compensation will be available for the Wik people, tinder the terms of the
Commonwealth's generic Mabo legislation, for any direct extinguishment or
i nipairinent arising from vid-aiiiii. 
Other aspects of the decision reached by Cabinet are:
Commonwealth legislation will support any prc-existing State legislation
providing for the reservation of mineral rights to the Crown.
Damages ( as distinct from compensation for validation) whether related
or unrelated to native title, will be determined under existing laws or
non-discriminatory State legislative schemes.
In the event of claims against grants issued before June 1993, and
dependent on the existence of native title, being successful,
compensation or damages will be met by government, rather than by
private landholders.
The Commonwealth and Queensland Governments will hold
negotiations with the Wik people, the minimum aim being to explore
possible ideas for a settlement. Comalco should be required to
participate in negotiations, at least to facilitate good neighbour coexistence
of the Wik interests and the mining interests on the ground in
the area.
In addition to resolving the current uncertainties in Queensland, the approach
has wider application to resolving uncertainties arising from the High Court's
Mabo decision. It represents a valuable step forward towards the
comprehensive, resolution of the issues on which work is proceeding. In
particular, grants issued by governments in the past will be secured against
invalidity arising from native title, not only those since the passage of the
Racial Discrimination Act in October 1975.
The emphasis which the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments place
on negotiation also represents a vital element of the approach which must be
brought to bear in the wider Mabo context.
CANBERRA AUGUST 1993 



PRIM MIPISTE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
IDGELL BIRDS EYE POTATO PROCESSING PLANT
ULVERSTONE, 23 AUGUST 1993
I'm very pleased to be here in Ulverstone.
Some mainland Australians are inclined to think of
Tasmania as coming along behind the rest of the countryas
a beautiful billabong cut off from the mainstream of
the rest of Australia.
But in fact as we learned on the evening of March 13-
in many ways Tasmania leads the way.
For some time now Tasmania has had some of the model
export industries of Australia innovative, premium
quality industries of the kind which Australia can and
must have to succeed in the modern world.
There are tremendous prospects for Australian industry in
the nineties and beyond, and no sector of industry has
greater prospects than the food industry.
Today I am here to congratulate the people at this plant
for their initiative.
I am also here to urge everyone in the-food industry to
get behind the program being developed h_ j my colleagues,
Simon Crean and Alan Griffiths, and the 1Agri-Food Council
to treble the level of food exports-.-high quality clean
food exports by the ye~ i -2000.
McKinsey and Company have estimated that by the end of
the decade the food market in East and South East Asia
will be worth in excess of $ 200 billion per annum. 
we in Australia are very well placed to take advantage of
this growth: for the first time in our history we have
the advantage of proximity to our major markets;. we have
a highly efficient agricultural sector; we have enormous
agricultural capacity; we have a much better
understanding of what is needed to succeed in Asia
better marketing, better delivery, better product.
And, crucially, we also have the elements which make this
plant such an exciting reality we have innovative food
processors and a union movement which is behind
Australian industry, including the food industry.
It is a measure of the collective spirit driving the
initiative an6 a clear indication of its potential
strength thatiwe have on the Agri-Food Council, along
with the leading manufacturers, Martin Ferguson from the
ACTU, the CSIRO and the National Farmers Federation.
Above all, it demonstrates a mutual understanding of the
economic imperatives facing Australia the economic and
social imperatives: our national wealth depends on our
ability to export, and on this also depends our ability
to create jobs. Exports and jobs go hand in hand.
we're inclined to talk ourselves down in Australia
we're inclined to underestimate both our chances and our
ability to grasp them.
I don't underestimate them. I think the best chance
Australia has ever had awaits us in the Asia-Pacific
and, indeed, in the rest of the world.
And I think we have changed so dramatically in the last
decade there can be no question of our ability to
succeed. I could read you out a lot of figures which prove beyond
doubt that we are much more competitive than we were a
decade or even five years ago.
I could statistically demonstrate how the economy is
changing in size and shape, and changing as we need it to
change. I could provide all the evidence needed to convince a
reasonable person that, despite our problems and -despite
the legions of naysayers in the press and among some
elements of the business community, we Australians have
good reason to be very confident about the future and
equally good reason to be proud of how far in recent
years we have come.
Yet I think the best evidence I can produce today is this
project itself. 1199 
3
For it is in many ways a model of the change which is
occurring around Australia now and which will secure our
future. It is a model for its vision and for its execution. The
vision is of Australian food exports to Asia. The
execution is through cooperation and World Best Practice.
The redevelopment of the Ulverstone Factory has been
assisted by both the Commonwealth and the State
government. The Commonwealth provided $ 620,000 to assist training and
re-training of employees and a best practice program.
State Government support has included assistance with
acquiring the site and a workplace reform program.
This was useful strategic help, but the driving force, of
course, has come from a company with sufficient faith and
vision not to say resources to invest $ 30 million in
making the plant the most modern and efficient in the
world. The project has required a shared vision a shared
belief. It has required the company and the unions to come to
fundamental agreement.
The Company signed the Agri-Food Council Memorandum of
Understanding on workplace reform and introduced
innovative workplace agreements which among other
things allow the plant to stay open 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, processing 220,000 tonnes of potatoes
a year.
I understand the next step along the road to securing
significant export market in Asia is to increase the
supply of potatoes at a competitive price.
When Simon Crean and I were in Mackay in March this year
launching Labor's rural policy statement, we said that we
would be introducing a world best practi. ce scheme for
farmers.
With the allocation of $ 11.2 million in the Budget we
have now delivered on that election commitment.
The world best practice program will1 help get the
linkages between production and processing working more
efficiently. Because we do not expect growers to carry the burden of
this alone, we will be making grants available to_
industries seeking to improve these linkages acrcss the
whole of the rural sector. 
Today I am pleased to announce that the first proj~ ct to
be supported under that program will be a farm best
practice program for vegetable growers in Tasmania.
As I said, Tasmania is very often in the lead.
Due to the initiative of the Agri-Food Council and, in
particular, the Minister, Simon Crean, Tasmanian potato
growers and processors are going to work together in a
three year program of farm best practice with the aim of
lowering production costs and increasing yields by at
least 20 per cent.
The program wili involve a joint investment of about
$ 800,000 over the next three years, with contributions
from both the Conunonwealth and State governments and from
processors. It is a very practical operation: by working in small
discussion groups, farmers will identify the obstacles to
higher yields on a paddock by paddock basis.
This is a good program for the industry and for Tasmania.
It is a good project for Tasmanian farmers.
But more than that it is a good model for the way we in
Australia can and must work to guarantee the nation's
economic future to create jobs and to realise our
potential as never before.
It is a model because it is inclusive, cooperative,
clever it speaks of the recognition that in the markets
of Asia lies so much of our future prosperity and so many
of our jobs.
But the people I want to congratulate today are the
people who made this plant possible and who are
continuing to work towards its success.
The management, the staff and the growers whose vision,
belief and energy are giving Ulverstone a great new
future and playing their part in doing the same for their
country. 1201 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THIE HON. P. J. KEATING, M. P.
EDGELL-I3IRDS EYE PLANT, IJLVERSTONE, TASMANIA
MONDAY 23 AUGUST, 1993
3: Mr Keating, an issue that's been dominating the local headlines today is that
Savage River and their criticism over the fuel excise: They've got major
concerns... inaudible..., will lead to the premature closing down of the mine.
PM: Yes, well they all say things like that. I mean, the fact is, last week interest rates
at the Reserve Bank and Bill rates in this country went below 5% 4.75%,
Any of these companies, if they've got any debt, or in the event that their
general business environment with customers in this low inflation, low interest
environment is vastly improved. The Budget has just cut the company tax rate
to 33% from 391/. We've just given them further accelerated depreciation on
any equipment they may be using. So, it's a case of looking at all of it, Not
one bit of it.
J: How far are you prepared to tough out the Budget, Mr Keating?
PM: There are a couple of important things, I think, to say about the Budget. The
first thing is the Budget hands more back in tax cuts than it takes in the
increase in indirect taxation. When these measures are up and running the
Bludget hands back $ 3.8 billion a year in tax cuts and it raises $ 3 billion in
indirect taxes, Even this year with the increases in petrol etcetera, the revenue
of the Commonwealth in the total economy, revenue toG5DP is actually falling.
It's going to go down from 23.6% last year to 23.5% this year. And that's why
the OECD) will tell you in two weeks time that Australia is the lowest taxed
country in the western world.
Aud-the other key point is -about the Budget it gets the deficit down to
I% around 1% of GDP' in 1996-97. Now, what you're seeing at the
moment is the stock market booming, you're seeing a pick up in prices and
earnings and that reflected in the stock market, we're starting to see it coming
through in investmntt. And we want to now we've got a recovery really
moving we want to make surc that by 1996-97 we're not out there with a big
public borrowing requirement, that the public sector's out of the road so private
investment can go on in a low inflation sustainable recovery. That's the big
picture, that's the thing that really matters. 
IM. LL 4LQ riLLj LV Z*
-2-
So, that's why the Budget is targeted at that 1% of GDP deficit, in the middle
nineties. That is why the Budget revenue to GDP is still going down because
we're handing back more in those personal cuts than we're getting in indirect
revenue, and that's why we think the Budget's got the right construction for
Australia.
I But most people don't think that why. I mean how are you going to get it
through the Senate and particularly those you mentioned the petrol and
optomctry inaudible.
PM: Well they are part of a package which gives substantial tax cuts fr-om
November. So, people just can't say, ' oh well look at that, look at the petrol'.
If that was a stand alone measure and there were no tax cuts you could say well
ok, there's some very understandable criticism there.
J: Are you going to do a deal with the Democrats to get
PM: Look, the Budget's strength is that Australia is one of the first countries into an
obvious redovery, it's a low inflationary recovery unlike all the others, and we
want to make sure this one goes right through the nineties. So when we start
to see private investment pick up we want the Budget deficit down. Now, to
do other than things like that is basically to, you know, sell the public interest
down the tube. To do other than things like that is to not do the serious things
of Government.
J: Are you going to have to cut a deal though?
PM: Well I've just said to you the structure of the Budget is a good one. We've sent
the Senate a package and we are saying in that package there are tax cuts and
there are indirect tax increases but it's a package.
1: What about the legality of getting it through the Senate?
PM; Well, I notice that these debates come up about the legality or otherwise.
There is no problem about the legality of the Bill. Don't have any doubt about
that. But the legality is one point. If the Senate were to amend this Bill, or
seek to amend it, whether it can amend it or not let's say it can because I
think-it can we won't accept the amendments unless they suit us. Because
the Government has put it up as a package. It has got tax cuts, and it has got
indirect tax increases and it has got other features. So, it's not a matter of the
whys or wherefores, will they, won't [ hey, maybe, can they amend the Bill. The
key question is will the Government, in the House of Representatives, accept
the Bill when it comes back?
J: Some of your backbench though might be willing to accept some amendments, 
I LL -3
PM: Well, I've brought in nine budgets and eight May statements. And two
economic statements since I became Prime Minister. That brings me to around
eighteen or nineteen. On every one of those there was always some
backbencher wanting to amend something.
J: But this time we've got the Morgan-Gallup poll showing you've slipped well
and truly behind the Opposition. Is that a concern?
PM: Well, you know these things go up and down all the time. I mean, it's early
days in a long Parliament, you know.
J: You've got Mr Beazley saying you're willing to put that at risk to go to that
extent, to go to an election.
PM; Well, no, he didn't say that. He didn't say that at all. But the fact is don't
polls are very special things. They're like codes before they've been deciphered
and they can mostly only be deciphered by politicians. So don't try and read
them too hard.
J: Are you going to talk to the Greens or the Democrats?
PM: You've asked me that three times...
J: Just to localise, there has been scathing attacks on your budget from our state
government.
PM: Surprise, surprise.
I flow do you see that affecting the recovery here?
PM: Well, see this plant here. It is here because of' a commonwealth Labor
government. It has got nothing to do with Ray Groom. The remaking of
Australian industry is happening because of low inflation, a competitive
exchange rate, low corporate tax rates and basically a cooperative environment
in the workplace. Labor, Labor, Labor, Labor. Nothing to do with the
Coalition down here. This plant is here because of the Labor Government and
a decent international Australian business, Pacific Dunlop.
Now, the best thing the state government can do is go on and manage their
own affairs. Manage the things that they have responsibility for and let us run
the national economy.
J: Mr Willis yesterday said that hc wouldn't rule out fuzrther spending cuts. That's
a bit of a contradiction.. 
-4-
PM: No, no. We're into this sort of.. We've now got a press gallery with a
corporate memory going back about two May statements and one Budget.
When they could go back seven or eight Budgets they'd know what that meant.
What I'm saying what I said last week was that we will not cut outlays below
where they'll be in about 1994-95. Which is about 24% of GDP. When you
wash the unemployment benefits out of it, when you look at the structure of
the outlays, to cut one or two percent of GDP in other words to cut the
spending of the Commonwealth back as a structural prop for Budgets is not
acceptable. That is not to say we won't do what we do in every other Budget, is do a
housekeeping job on the Budget housekeeping job on outlays. Cutting
$ 200, $ 300 or $ 400 million. But that's not $ 7 billion or $ 8 billion. But that's
what we're being enjoined to do by some of the sort of fiscal junkies who write
columns in the newspapers. Hop into the outlays. See, they said to us, ' what
you need to do is to cut the Budget deficit back to 1% of GDP. We said, ' OK,
well go and do that'. When we did it they said, ' Aha, we don't like the way you
did it. Wed prefer it to be all spending cuts and not revenue.' To which we
say, ' to cut the outlays back any more than that is irresponsible.' It would be
unfair and it is unreasonable.
J: You said the state government should look after its own affairs but the
government is concerned there's a $ 20 million gap in the estimates presented at
the Premier's Conference and the actual special grants delivered in the Budget.
PM: Well, that's about being in government. It is a hard caper. And if you want to
be a Premier, you have to face up to the hard tack of being a Premier. And not
asking this fellow to write a cheque for you.
ENDS. 



PRIME MINISTER 94/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING, MP
TIMETABLE ON MABO LEGISLATION
Today I am meeting with representatives of the mining
industry and with the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation, and tomorrow I will meet with
representatives of the group which earlier this month
gathered at Eva Valley.
The purpose of these meetings is to continue discussions
of the Mabo issue anld to provide details of the Federal
Government's consultative and legislative timetable.
The plan we announced last year is on schedule. To
provide the certainty the country needs, passage of
legislation is required in these Budget sittings.
The steps in the lead-up to the introduction of final
legislation are:
The Ministerial Committee on Mabo is at present
working intensively on a document which outlines the
proposed legislation and this will be released
publicly within the next two weeks.
With the document's release, the Government will
invite comment and further talks will be held with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
representatives, State and Territory governments and
industry.
By mid-September work on drafting the Bill will be
in top gear.
The Government will make every endeavour to have the
Bill in the House by 1 October.
In introducing the legislation by this date the
Government will be meeting its original deadline. On an
issue of this magniLude some groups may wish for more
time for consultation, but the artificial deadlines now
applying in the Parliament close off this option.
It is worth noting that the outline of legislation has
been the subject of thorough discussions between 
-4 r-LA.) V. d IMU. IL r u
2
officials from the Commonwealth and the States and
Territories, and in the next couple of weeks I expect to
have the opportunity to speak to Premiers and Chief
Ministers. I will be in a position to say more about the
Government's thinking on the broader aspects of Mabo when
the legislation is introduced.
we are continuing to work on ideas which will meet the
twin goals which Mabo set us from the start delivering
economic security to investors and holders of existing
land title, and to Aboriginals and Torres Strait
Islanders an unprecdented measure of historic justice.
Mabo has been the subject of extensive discussion in
Australia for more than a year. It has been the cause of
both genuine concern and anxiety and some misinformed and
inflammatory comment.
But the majority of Australians and majority of
interested groups have sought an outcome which is
practicable and just and one which will take us much
further than any previous step has taken us towards
solving a 200 year old problem.
That is what the Government will do everything in its
power to deliver.
CANBERRA, 24 AUGUST 1993 



PRIME MINISTER 95/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT OF THE PRESIDENT OF GERMANY
I am pleased to announce that the President of the Federal Republic of
Germany, His Excellency Mr Richard von Weizsticker, will make a State visit
to Australia from 3 to 9 September 1993 at the invitation' of the Governor-
General. While in Australia President von WeizsAcker will be visiting Melbourne,
Adelaide, Canberra, Sydney and Cairns. I will meet President von Weizsaicker
in Canberra on Monday 6 September.
President von Weizsacker's visit to Australia will be the first by the President of
a reunified Germany. His visit underlines the dramatic changes in international
affairs in rccent times, including the ongoing process of European union.
Australia's relationship with Germany is substantial. In 1992, Germany was
Australia's eighth largest trading partner. Australian exports to Germany were
worth $ 1.1 billion and imports from Germany $ 3.2 billion.' Germany is also a
significant source of investment for Australia, with capital stock of $ 6.4 billion
invested here. Around 1 15,000 Australians were born in Germany and, at the
1986 census, over 230,000 claimed German ancestry.
I warmly welcome President von Weizsacker to Australia, and look forward to
discussing with him a range of issues including Australian-German relations
and the outlook for European economic integration.
CANBERRA 24 August 1993 



PRIME MINMISTER J 96/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINSTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
NATIONAL COMPETITION POLICY REVIE W
The report of the National Competition Policy Review is being publicly released today.
The report argues for a consistent national approach to cormpetition policy and
proposes a range of mechanisms and new institutional structures to deal better with
anti-competitive conduct, unjustified regulatory restrictions on competition, the
structural reformn of public monopolies, third party access to essential facilities,
monopoly pricing and competitive neutrality.
I welcome the report and believe it to be an important contribution towards furthering
competition policy in Australia. I would likc to thank the members of the inquiry,
Professor Fred Hilmer, Mr G3eoffTTapcrell and Mr Mark Rayner for producing such a
high quality, broad ranging and challenging report
The report has been given to all Premiers and Chief Ministers and the Commonwealth
will be discussing the report in detail with State and Territory governments. Initially, a
Common wealth-State officials group will examine the report for the purpose or
providing a paper to assist discussion at a Council of Australian Governments meeting
late this year.
Competition policy is an important and integral element of the Commonwealth's
overall microeconomic reform agenda. We are already progressing with the States and
Territories on a number of reform initiatives in key sectors of the economy such as fair
and free trade in natural gas and a national electricity grid, which have major
competition policy dimensions. We will continue to pursue these initiatives
concurrently with our consideration of thc National Competition Policy Review report.
CANBRRA August 1993 



26/ 08 * 93 17: 46 '&amp; 06 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE 002
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P. J. KEATING, XP
ERICSSON AUSTRALIA TELECOMM( UNICATIONS
BROADMEADOWS, AUGUST 26 1993
It is a great pleasure to be here today.
In manufacturing, the name Broadmeadows has usually meant
one thing Ford Australia.
Without the slightest disrespect to Ford, let me say that
Broadmeadows should mean one more thing in Australian
manufacturing Ericsson Australia.
It gets the balance right small items here, large items'
up the road.
Both innovative, both exporters, both very significant
employers. Both multinational companies with their parents abroad
but both making vital contributions to the Australian
economy and helping to take it in the direction it must
go. To the Asia-Pacific, and to the world.
Ericsson have been here for a long time they've been in
Australia for a century, and in Broadmeadows for thirty
years. They have long been a company of the kind Australia needs
and, I'm pleased to say, is now producing a company
which believes in success through innovation.
The changes in telecommunications over a century have
been remarkable of course from the phone you bolted to
the wall to the phone you put in your top pocket.
But there has never been a change like the one which is
occurring now.
There has never been a change so dramatic, nor one so
full of possibility.
We are seeing Australia assume the status of a regional
and, indeed, world leader in telecommunications. 
2 6/ 08 ' 93 17: 47 '&amp; 06 273 2923PMRESOIC j3
2
We are seeing that leadership translated into rapid
export growth in the Asia-Pacific.
The Government estimates that Australia has the potential
to achieve telecommunications exports of $ 2 billion by
1997 and much of that will undoubtedly be in our
region. It is a strategically important industry for Australia.
With one of the most advanced telecommunications networks
in the world we have the base for expansion into Asia.
I was in South Korea and China a few months ago and the
opportunities were plain to see: over and above our
traditional minerals and energy and agricultural
products, there are burgeoning markets for things we do
well and things we make well things like computer
software, education services, processed food,
environmental services and, perhaps most obviously of
all, telecommunications.
And the same opportunities exist throughout the region.
If telecommunications is a strategic industry for
Australia's economy, Ericsson Australia is strategic to
the industry.
Ericsson Australia has extended its markets in the Asia-
Pacific to China, Vietnam, Hong Kong, Sri Lanka,
Cambodia, Fiji and Papua New Guinea.
And there can be no doubt that in these countries
Ericsson's reputation has contributed to Australia's
reputation as a telecommunications leader.
Today I am pleased to be given the opportunity to
announce some of the initiatives in the expanded role
Ericsson Australia will soon be playing in the Asia-
Pacific. The company has decided to extend its operations in
the rapidly developing economic regions of China by
expanding its marketing of Australian manufactured
telephone exchange switching products into two new
provinces Sichuan and Liaoning.
Also in China, Ericsson Australia will supply
support for the operations of mobile telephone
networks in 11 provinces, catering to more than
600,000 existing customers.
In future, where Australian companies win major
overseas contracts that involve the supply of
Ericsson product, that product will be supplied by
Ericsson Australia as they are already supplying
the mobile telephone operations of Telecom Australia
in Sri Lanka and Vietnam. P) I PRESS OFFICE( it 003 
Ericsson Australia has also been designated as a
major supply centre for analogue mobile telephone
network equipment f or the Ericsson Group's worldwide
market.
In a decision which establishes the company's
Research and Development Centre as a major exporter
of Australian technology, the Ericsson Australia
designed and developed Queuing System, which has
already generated $ 180 m~ illion in exports, is to be
incorporated in Ericsson PABX systems and sold
world-wide
And, finally, I understand the Group is
considering the feasibility of establishing an
Information Technology Centre in Australia to
service the communication needs of the Asia-Pacific.
I was in Tasmania earlier this week at Ulverstone, where
Pacific Dunlop are investing in a potato processing
operation which promises to secure that region's future
by securing a major slice of the Asian market.
The key to their operation is the faith to invest coupled
to international Best Practice from the ground up.
In other words, making the growing and processing and the
management and labour, as sophisticated as any in the
world. I could have gone to any number of other companies around
Australia this week and seen the same sort of thing
happening and I intend to go to many of them in the
next few months.
The lesson everywhere is the same Australia's economic
future rests on companies like this.
Companies which are innovative, determined to export,
intent on establishing at every level from the technology
to the labour force, standards which are second to none
in the world.
The Government is encouraging the growth of these
companies. In fact I might say I have been encouraging them for a
decade since as a Government we decided that Australia
could be a modern manufacturing nation indeed had to be
a modern manufacturing nation and set about the task of
making the necessary changes to the economic structure
and the business and industrial culture.
We are now seeing the fruits of our labour. 
The increased export business that flows from today's
announcements here, make it very clear that the reforms
we are introducing for the telecommunications industry
extend well beyond the measures which put Telecom and
Optus into competition.
In the 1990' s we're seeing Australian companies change
direction. We're seeing the emergence of new companies born of the
new export culture, and the new awareness of
opportunities in the Asia-Pacific.
And we're seeing when we look at the growth in
manufactured exports how absolutely essential it was to
make those changes.
For without that growth we would now be in a genuinely
dire economic circumstances, and we would have a
genuinely dire future.
Today, despite our problems, we have a marvellous future,
As a nation we have the best chance in our history to
secure the kind of long term economic security which will
underwrite our way of life and assure Australians of
employment. We have to find the solutions to unemployment and we
expect the major study we have commissioned to give us a
more comprehensive and effective strategy than we have
ever had.
We are not alone in this. President Clinton of course
has called for an unemployment summit. In Europe they
are doing the same.
Unemployment is the great curse of our era and overcoming
it will teat our ingenuity and our commitment to the
nation and each other. It will test all of us.
But we do know that at least part of the solution a
large part of it lies in the initiative and success of
companies like Ericsson Australia.
Because through them and I mean from the upper levels
of management to the men and women who work in the
offic ' es and on the factory floor through companies like
this one, our economic success will be assured and
employment in substantial measure restored.
That's why I say that for all the hard work we in
Government put in and even for all the flak we took
along the way ultimately success depends on not on
Government but on companies like this; and it is
companies like this with the vision and the courage who
properly deserve the credit. 
You will know that in the Budget and in other measures
taken in recent times the Government is seeking to
encourage the development of small and medium sized
manufacturing exporters.
But we also encourage the role of multinational companies
like Ericsson, with their broad exposure to world markets
and the market access they can provide for Australia.
Ericsson Australia have earned their expanded role on the
world, and by doing that they are helping take Australia
into those markets where our future lies.
So I congratulate you all and thank you for inviting me
along. 



4 K N
PARTIAL EXTRACT FROM SPEECH BY TBZ PRIM W4O1SITRI THE
JiOI P. ) CEATLVG MP. -ERICSSON AUSTRALIA EXPORT LAUNCII,
DIROADMEADOWS, MLBOURNE THUMSDAY, 26 AUGUST, M99
Wha we arc oin as a Govcricni is encouragh thi cbang. And tNs a=
culvad chang has now ovtakcn Australi a3 th. whole tedetcy on protwcton has
drop. The whiole nodmr that wuff priion was the way forward for AusrAli--
a th. ( owmmient hia weaned Apzahan hiduty off tarff protecton ad opened te
oppostiied to develop products we could novar have dreamued of yewr ago, in
makuwe would never hawe thought moostd for Australi procts~ l. Wbich onl
prome the poiA1 if you look ot and look up you ha~ ea fiMnm=;, but ifyou look down
and you we unmetain of youmsef and you lack cozfdene and you seek to axtificiall
potedt yours4f It the end all you do is let Austrakia living tdads decline.
Now, we hmv a chance of being a paut idustrial ntiot, a nsuaczignadon. I
guw up int MY9 sn ulk to tho imme, atIwet to the House of
Reeeit mb* A with ibe notion that you cW&amp; bav a compoitiv inanufictn
ecfto awtng beside a wmoq. Uetit pdbuay export sector t* A an ki. ialay"
conttde soctor M ineirals and wieulturc mant tha it was irup ible becaus
Of the Otew ~ psum on t exchange rate it was imsible to have a burgootdig
And I alwmy thout tis was essenti* l wromg And ave thouth t was &amp; meth e
7opular WWsdM of t Secittaty of te Treasury an thc Treay it was, in wsence,
wroog. AMd it i am t othr~ mpe of how die politWi em leads the wxy and not the
burewcacy. because die few of us HiMn frough die stnies with low growth,
watchig 1acforics close onc aftr te other, wc mai, ' Why mws Austalan be doomed
to a sbctrein nianufacturing simpl becaus@ of t n~ tAken view tha yu ean't
hmv a good MvtccftU* sector sitfizg besid a good pzimmy exp" i sector
Andso wte = wct abotdoft allthe V* that nedd obe doeto luangeth
Fromn opening up our financial rnaket to &amp; oa~ in the Austraian dolla, hang ithe
tax sse" thnde Pro&amp; l and wage shame in the emoM~ right promoting mosarch
and deelpm ntchng the education qftm to food our reearch and devlopntd
bAse and Our Ngtic technologies and taig down the tariff Wall. Anid in the end what
w4ve damei we'e sacocedod inchanging te view. Nobody toda Mubscibes to the
view tha we mal' havea burgcoinza nuacwt sector. But jWs a lite Over tena
,20/ 10' d 910* ON OG: 91 5œ 6 6flW97 1 
yers ago bweaucray in this coumty, pto view of the former Ge= ntmwn was that
thse sorts of produwtg couldn't be made and sold cmpeiti* ly. And dats changed
and changed eomously.
NO Vuy had to get as t Gorirnment In a period of groat change x W' makin
Alm the com MCentatoS in ts COtrY who of cous, Alway, lag behd the gm..
They are awas about soin it befae than we am ad being up the frovt showing to
way. But, i hot, they're most* tailng Whin&amp; Becaue none of them oer articulated
a modem b= Vonhi# industria AustrAia lioked Into the Asia Pacc. It had to come
om tie POkiCj system and frm the Austaian wmmznity. And we're now seirg
Ig oft poiies home
And the Budget which weCvt just inftdlwed which has had more tha its share of
flAk again is about doing thi. Were gening ot budget dcfcit down in the mickte
nimewss so that When the next phase ofinvstment goes foug AustrW an
nanzzfaU&amp; Ctg it doesn't Put too big a stri of 4oi curerl accom and on out
domuede irAvnW Now, by the tiddl nineties well hae die Au* r* mia Budget deficit
down to aba. 1 o0f ODP. The tnIed States -,* whicb ha justbeen trough aheati
rendcitg proess of gcitg the Bils * sou* u the Roes ofRepie tatives in the
ConUssB, Resident Clintos s Budge4 with Oe Viso P Castig the caiting voe in
the Seate &amp; CY2 be down to 3% Of GDP only'by the middle 199&amp; s. J other words
asai in fical tetv, ive're going to be ahead of &amp; e world. As wc ae now with
vusmiabfy low inftion and the rest
Now, the AUtra&amp; ia cornmurity has got to think about the long rm and to umderstad
that the Gvenent has to think about their lon rim interests. And if we want hiher
levels of employment and lower levels of aeamployment we have got to get mom
wh. we an't got mom growth without mor uvest ent and we cant get the
investMent if the Government's got its hands in the Uavi cookie jar, tairg the sVh
for publi consumption. But right now we want to kick the economy along with some
Cxta speafin which wil come viato tax cuts, hocaun we need that aw push to
make * e ecooy grow. But as it st growing and we get the investment raly
caciing again we want to pull the public sector ow of the way so te pdvato sector can
come through and create thcjobsL So the balnces have got to be ther.
And a of the people who have urged upon the Govermuet this kind of policy, when
you produce the pokiy they say, VWeo tanrks very much for that but we don't qite at
the way you got thee You know, you should have cut outlays moe, you should have
relied less On reenuC) you should have done this and done that' Well te fact; z, lets
Pay for &amp; e medium to long tm. And nor think about thiMp just tomonmow, bu think
abo6t 60medium te and in doing &amp; Atwell be them ready with pui e policy to help
the hices of campanies ike Ericsson Auwtralk to be in there o develop a fure for
themselves as we see these stroger growth policies come trougL
Now, wyloymet is Australia's grat problem And you know, wodg in a plant
like dd that higher productivity those macbn.. Mibh are doing the stamping and
j : 131
/ O~ d ST0* ON OS: 9 6n 9 
puttin the compomets on an not eznploqiag people. But it dom Make te busine
campetib and it does gi~ the business a fgtim. And ihan as it rows it cmplays
fm peope. $ mr, it's ftwe peope for the gvmi uabt of producton. But in die end
if * mee at nui nme un of produatio tre will be many mmr people Bt Owe
cWference is, in abusimwhchwMIA d p owasbn otsin uic~ h willbe
Pmb-eooltWyipU and which is static. -So this is wby wr'v .1was got to ty
and blend higher producv* t and mechanisaton in wMt amploymmn And the key to
that is growth and the kcy to go%* is low Wfaion, a competiMv exchanrw, good
budgetary policies, good * naee of t proft and ws~ s in dt econom and a decent
education sita pimnpin rmsarch and dmvlopincmt capacit and innovafmo imt our
kwtriml product.
Thr/ ng an the thinp tha ave sit* in thene now. For a coufty wbich has got a grem
htM.; " o jUSt alone hen. In Aumlia buit abroA, iA the Asia Padci&amp; and the wodid in
generaL Wher, in the 1970' s im wmr consipe to bcln a qury and a fam, where
compaties WVe this and industries Mie this were witn off as not having real c. pacity...
ENDS.
r%-T lkiAC T cR * 6nti : 1 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FAREWELL TO WWI COMMEMERATION MISSION
SYDNEY 27 AUGUST 1993
This is a rare privilege.
I am delighted to have the chance to farewell people who seventy five years
ago were among those who made an Australian legend.
The human cost of the Great War was so terrible and the political cost of the
peace so catastrophic the Allied victory has never been seen as an
unmitigated triumph.
With the possible exception of Sir John Monash who was never given ultimate
command, the conduct of the war produced no heroes among the generals on
either side on the contrary, as one writer said, It contributed more than any
other war to the widespread belief that military commanders were less
intelligent than average.
The unmitigated heroes of the Great War were the men who did the fighting
the soldiers, sailors and airmen.
And while the war produced many astonishing acts of valour and many of
these were duly acknowledged with medals it was the common soldiers, the
mass of unacknowledged individuals who marched into the most appalling
battles and endured the most terrible suffering and who died in the most
unconscionable numbers, who were the heroes.
I think it is true to say that history judged the Great War to have returned little
of any good except this the bravery and endurance, the comradeship and
humour of ordinary men and women was confirmed for all time.
In Australia it became a by-word.
Building on those nationalist and democratic sentiments which had found their
voice towards the end of the previous century and which the First AIF in
fundamen-ways-ef eoted,-those who.-erwed in the Great War created a
leg end the ideals to which future generations of Australians would aspire, the
evalues by which they would live.
So, as I said, farewelling you today is a great privilege, and it is with a mixture
of wonder and some humility that I do it.
It is also with appreciation: my generation of Australians, all Australians, are in
your debt.
Z0O/ TOd I00ON OV: O 1 6-6nbi-Z 
We owe you for more than your service in war but for the service you gave in
the peace, building this country undaunted by depression and another war.
We are grateful for the service you have given and the faith you have had in
Australia for the example you set.
And we are grateful that seventy five years later you have been prepared to
volunteer again.
Your return to France is a reminder of what a hardy and tenacious generation
yours was.
It also reminds us that the Great War has lived on down the years. It found its
way often tragically into countless homes long after the last battle was
fought and it has profoundly affected the character of the nation and its
people. I am only sorry that my schedule will not permit me to be in France when you
are. I will be paying a brief visit to Villers Brettoneux and Hamel in
September. It is a visit I have always wanted to make.
I am also very pleased that on November 111I will have the opportunity to play
a part in the great project to bring home to Australia, and entomb at the War
Memorial in Canberra, the remains of an unknown Australian soldier.
The Tomb -of the Unknown Australian Soldier seems to me to be an act of
quite prolound significance. It is a grand gesture of recognition to the men,
and women who served in the Great War, but more than that, It is an act
which can help bind Australians together now and in the future.
The soldier, to be selected from one of our war cemetries In France, will
represent all Australian servicemen and women, who have given their lives in
all the conflicts in which Australians have served.
It can help bind the generations, help us recognise that we are all part of the
-same story of Australia.
And in all the legacy of Australia's Involvement in the Great War, or any other
war, there is surely nothing more appropriate to symbolise.
It remains only to wish you on behalf of the Government and, I am sure, the
people of Australia a very happy and a safe trip.
It will certainly be a quite extraordinary experience.
-Theaother-side-of-he-workd-ws a-much more -remote place when you first
went there, and all the more so because it was a battlefield.
We can only guess at what memories this trip will bring back to you we hope
that among the inevitable sadness there will also be a little happiness and
pride. Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DEUVERr*
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF COLIN LANCELEY EXHIBITION, SHERMAN GALLERIES,
SYDNEY, FRIDAY, 27 AUGUST 1993
Colin and Kay Lanceley, Gene Sherman and William Wright, ladies and
gentlemen I'm very pleased to be here this evening to open this exhibition of Colin
Lanceley's recent work.
I wanted to make time for this event among the post-Budget feeding frenzy
because I like Colin Lanceley's vision and ideas. I also like his paintings.
I mean, how could you not like someone who says that great art looks as if it was
breathed onto the surface by angels?
It's always tempting for politicians to try and draw analogies between what they
do and what is done by the people we talk about in our speeches. Real people
like painters, and opera singers.
Some of you may remember a previous instance when I did this, and the
interesting events that followed.
So rather tonight I'll content myself with saying, quite seriously, that I think I
know what Colin means when he says that in trying to come to terms with
Australia, you've got to try and put it together in some meaningful way, so that if
it's real it will live in the imagination afterwards.
I have to say that I find the way he puts it irresistible: he says, " Ve need to
develop a profound understanding of our place and to shape it with what is our
finest sensibility. I think we've got to create the kind of place where we get
echoes all the time, and resonances. In a soulless environment where we
aren't able to have those resonances our culture won't develop, and we'll
become a satellite."
Dare I say it-sonds-a-bit like-Manring Ctark. whose great achievement was to
imagine Australia what it was and what it might become. And he did it so well
he helped us all do it.
It is not Manning Clark's politics which some conservative Australians object too.
His politics were hardly radical. And it's not the way he wrote history the way is
always open to anyone who wants to write it better.
1338 I
I tWerhreit achi, Whi, arts will F
The diffe I knc
con, It w.
at al
and I knc
enot We culkt And Asl' arts The mult The notl The wha AblE Aci Anc I kn(
Too mur Yet theE And ach 
2
What they fear is his imagination, and imagination like a sense of humour is a
terrible threat to people without one. When it is coupled with a massive
achievement and imagination becomes a source of envy as well as fear.
Which is why I suppose Manning Clark will always be under attack: Why the
arts will always be a bitchy place: And why the conservative parties in Australia
will never support the arts as the arts should be supported.
The Australia that Colin Lanceley returned to after eighteen years away was very
different from the Australia that he left in the 1960s.
I know that in those days many creative people felt the need to leave what they
considered to be a stultifyingly conformist society.
It was an era when the arts were treated by politicians if they considered them
at all as at best a subject of bemnusement, and at worst a matter for suspicion
and hostility.
I know too that the situation has changed from those days, but not changed
enough.
was cWuelt usratilll ndeeevedl otop mberinntg ac uplaturtr aolf coounrc nearntiso nmaol rdee vinetloo pthmee mnta. instream. To make our
ey -And we'll get there, with help from people like Colin Lanceley.
.) le -As I've said before, my view of the arts is a simple one. I believe that when the
arts flourish we flourish with them.
They are a measure of our identity and our guiding force. In an ever changing
multicultural Australia, the arts are out there at the front, leading and defining.
The arts project to the world the truth about Australia in a way that no-one or
3t if nothing else can.
They show, as I'm sure Colin would agree, that we are a people able to imagine
what we might be.
ur Able to imagine our future in the region and the world.
A creative people, able to make things which the world wants.
And a people prepared to lead rather than willing to follow.
el I know that most Australians are enormously proud of our artistic achievements.
Too often I think we project ourselves as a pretty unsophisticated bunch without
too. much care for the life of the mind.
ly is Yet the achievements are there daily in writing, painting, dance, film, music,
theatre. And I have no doubt that Australians are very proud of their artistic
achievements. 1339 
It is my belief that we should be doing more for our artists, and for those who will And
follow them. imm
And we intend to.
That's why we are working towards putting into place a national cultural strategy. RPereaf
Bob McMullan, as some of you may be aware, is currently engaged in a wide Bec
consultation process around Australia. In fact, today he has been here in doin
Sydney at an Evatt Foundation forum on cultural policy in Australia appropriately expt
entitled, " From Fossils to Films". supr
Which gives you an idea of the size of the task. And'
cBoyn sthidee erendd ovfie thwe aybeoaurt, thhee wroillle b aen idn rae sppoosnitisoinb iltioti ecso mofe t hbea cCko tmo mCoanbwineeatl twhith a tsoc~ dhe
Government in relation to our cultural life and heritage. From this the Allo
Government intends to develop a cultural map to guide us into the next century. thin
It's an ambitious enterprise, and one that hasn't been attempted before. And itsper
will be of great benefit to us all. The
But we haven't just pulled up the drawbridge while we wait for this to happen. Nothat
In the Budget last week we delivered a 12 per cent increase in arts funding. to a
It's perhaps hard to believe, but some people have viewed this with alarm. You
One commentator in the Sunday papers last weekend suggested that " thethan
electorate can look forward to an explosion of Balmain basket weaving" which So i
to say the least, showed scant regard for intellectual copyright. abot
I don't subscribe to this notion that, unlike every other human activity from I wo:
bpahniliksitninge tov ibeaws. e bI athlli, n kth iet' sa rptsri mdoitievse . b eIs tth ionnk ait ' ss taar vfuantidoanm deientt. a llIy t hTinokry itv'sie aw which itshe ar(
confuses excellence in the arts with exclusivity in the arts.
I believe that the approach we developed in the Budget was a sound one. One wIt'istht
which was economically responsible, practical and efficient in its delivery.
An approach which not only provided direct Government assistance for artists. Colir
bouptp owrhtuicnhi tiaelss of oern ncoonu-rgaogveesr namrtse not rgsaupnpisoartti. o ns to be innovative in exploring tAos Fth
iTnh sep a-6rt-sn onresehdip poaft rtohen aagrets. . WIte is n ae esadd tofa gcet t thmaot rAe uAsutrsatlriaanlia nb ucsoinmepsasn iiess n oitn vinol tvheed noaf tUu
habit of providing patronage at least not on the broad and imaginative scale And
that it is done in many other countries.
Artists should be rewarded in ways that are commensurate with the rewards they LaaMdLi
bring Australia. I look forward to the day when more Austraiian companies come
to the realisation that by helping Australian artists they are uitimnately helping Thar
themselves. 1340 
4
And I hope this day comes soon, because the arts are in need of more
immediate assistance than the Government is able to provide. Furthermore I
suspect that this will always be the case.
Real artists, I'm inclined to think, don't choose to be artists. As Colin says in the
Preface from which I've already quoted, painting is compulsive.
Because they reward artists of excellence like Colin who really shouldn't be
doing anything else and give them the kind of mid-career support they need to
expand their horizons and go on to better things, I've always been a strong
supporter of the Australia Council's Creative Fellowships.
And that's the other reason that I was delighted to come and open this exhibition
today. It's a tangible expression of the results of the Creative Fellowship
scheme. All of these works were created while Colin has been on his fellowship, and I
think that no-one could deny that this has been Commonwealth money well
spent. The more observant among you will have noticed that this is the first reference
that I have made tonight to the works that actually comprise the exhibition.
Now it's no secret, I'm sure, that hitherto my attention has been primarily directed
to a different school from that of the Australian Modernists.
You will also probably not be astounded to hear that I have a somewhat less
than nodding acquaintance with the Annandale Imitation Realists.
So in these circumstances you will undoubtedly all be relieved that I am not
about to embark on a detailed critique of the exhibition.
I would however, make the observation, that even with a limited understanding
there is a real spirit in these works that no one can fail to appreciate, and there
is a real feel of Australianness about them.
It's hard to put my finger on why this is so, but I suspect that it has a lot to do
with the colours.
Colin Lanceley clearly is a great colourist.
As Robert Hughes says, his paintings " record a rapturous sensitivity of response
to the light of high summer, to the weird buzz in the bush... There are no artists
of Lanceley's generation to whom the diction of colour seems to come so
naturally." And none whose work I would think it a greater privilege to open.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a sincere pleasure to open this exhibition. I hope that
a multitude of people have the opportunity to see it.
Thank you. 13411 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, TURRAMURRA, SYDNEY, FRIDAY, 27 AUGUST, 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Morning, Prime Minister. What ground are you prepared to give on the Budget
to appease the union movement?
PM: Well, look, the Budget is like many other things I think the Government has
done over the ye--rs, and that is, that we want to meet a set of objectives, at the
same time where we think that there are real problems with some of the
measures, we can see in which way they may be amended or varied, provided
that the strategy and the substance of the Government's fiscal policy is there. I
mean, remember this, that the Government had a mandate to reduce marginal
rates of taxation, secured a mandate for that, and also to bring the Budget
deficit down. Now people are entitled to have their views about how that might
best be done, and Governments listen, generally, we do listen to people. Now
in the middle 1980s when I introduced many tax changes, I varied many of
them, but kept the sense them things like tax on motor cars, or the way the
fringe benefits tax operated or many other things. Provided that they are
sensible then the Government will consider them.
J: Are they sensible, the demands they are making?
PM.-Well, I mean, again it is a matter or some are, and some may not be consistent
wth our strategy. But the Government has a commitment to bring the Budget
deficit down for the good of the whole country, and at the same time reduce
marginal rates of taxation. Now I am sure we can meet all these objectives, it is
only a matter, I think, of having some sense about it. It is because of the sort of
balance of numbers in the Senate that this year these kind of changes have
taken on a bigger moment then they would have in other years. That doesn't
mean they are less legitimate.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: The Labor Council of NSW is entitled to its view about these things, but the
best way to deal with the Government in the Accord is to deal with it
persuasively. And that is, talk to us in private and not in public. 
J: Is this union revolt threatening the Accord?
PM: No.
J: Does the ACTUs, opposition to the Budget reforms make it more likely the
Government will compromise with the Democrats?
PM. No. Let me just make this clear. Now look, Senator Kemnot is the leader of a
minor party in the Senate, she is entitled to a view. But the Government will be
governing, I mean we wAIl talk to the Democrats as we are talking to other
organisations and bodies. And we will, a week has gone by now, get the gist of
peoples objections and try and understand them. And to see in which ways
we can redesign some of the changes so that the sense and integrity of the
Budget is there. So the Democrats will be dealt with, appropriately and
sensibly. But again, It will be the Government deciding about its budget as
Governments should.
J: Mr Keating, the Democrats do seem to be a force to be reckoned with over the
budget. In your view, are they?
PM: Not in all the years that I have been a Minister did the Government have control
of the Senate. And it was my job to pilot many other changes through the
Senate, and with the Democrats of those days. And it is like everything else, I
mean, we will get there.
J: Mr Keating, isn't it time for a wholesale change to the Budget given that it has
been attacked from so many quarters, and within the Labor Party?
PM: That is just another way of asking what other people have asked. No, the
government has got a mandate to reduce the Budget deficit and reduce the
incidence of tax. I mean people need to remember that we are talking about
people be-tween $ 20,000 and $ 50,000. With the bulk of the people around
$ 25,000-35,000. Now despite what Senator Kernot says these people are not
wealthy people, this Is absolutely middle Australia and that's why I think the
commitments which we have given them on tax are important. But why again,
we want to govern sensibly so that when these changes are in and fiscal policy
Is Improved so that we can see more employment, we will try and get the
balances right.
J: What does it say about the power of the Democrats though? Until Wednesday
you were saying that the budget was pretty much non-negotiable, now you are
negotiating
PM: Well I don't think that a Government should ever say, well the moment someone
first raises one note of criticism, ok, we will go and change things. But again,
we have always has negotiations in the Senate in some of the measures,
always.
J: But do you think they do have a renewed power at the moment? 
PM: No, no I don't. I mean they have got minor party status in the Senate and they
will be dealt with appropriately, courteously by us.
J: Can you just explain something of the split which is developing between the
union movement and the Government?
PM: Well I don't think there is a split developing. It is just the fact that on this
occasion people have been more vocal, perhaps than past. And they think
because there is a view by some Senators that they have common ground on
some of these things, that they can perhaps more noisily put their point of view.
J: Does it worry you that Michael Easson has written to Senator Kemnot and Brian
Harradine and called on them to reject certain aspects of the budget?
PM: Well I think evoking the Senate to use its powers against the Government and
the House of Representatives is a very un-Labor like thing to do. And I don't
think that he should be doing that. But that is not to say that he is not entited to
a point of view and that point of view may coincide with other peoples point of
view.
ENDS 



PRIME MIISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPD
LAUNCHING CEREMONY FOR SUBMARINE COLLINS, PORT ADELAIDE,
SATURDAY, 28 AUGUST 1993 PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Todays launching ceremony of the submarine COLLINS represents the
culmination of a commitment made by this Government in the mid-eighties not
only to Australia's defence, but also to Australia's defence industry.
The submarine project went much further than a decision we made to replace
the ageing Oberon class submarines: it is the first part of a determination to reestablish
Australia's shipbuilding industry.
The second part of that commitment was to build in Australia the ANZAC class of
ships for the Royal Australian Navy.
And I am pleased to say that that project is also proceeding on schedule. The
submarine project was ambitious, and not without significant risks.
COLLINS is the first submarine to be built in Australia.
A whole range of new and diverse technologies for Australia had to be set up
from scratch: the production of high-strength micro-alloy steel; high-technology
welding; new construction methods; micro-electronics; visual and electronic
optical equipment; and the manufacture of lenses and submarine periscopes.
The Australian Submarine CorporatiorrtASC) was awarded the prime contract in
1987. The decision to select an Australian prime contractor reflected the Government's
confidence in Australian capabilities and the Government's commitment to the
-polivyoft-a ~ tlr-i, ldiittju~ iJ~~ vndUstry.
The fulfilment of this vision has been a tall order for Australia's manufacturing
industry at a time of great change.
1344 I 
2
It has been an enormous challenge for management, the workforce, and their
unions. I am pleased to say that the companies and people concerned have met that
challenge. The result is a new defence industry culture which is now looking for
opportunities elsewhere.
I pay tribute to the Australian Submarine Corporation's ability to so effectively
pull this very complex project together.
ASC has successfully ensured that the submarine construction is on schedule,
on cost, and meets or exceeds all performance criteria on quality, Australian
industry involvement, employment opportunities, and technology transfer.
ASC is exceeding its Australian industry involvement goal of 45% for the combat
system work and 70% for the balance of the contract.
Of the contract price of about $ 4 billion, more than $ 3 billion will be returned to
Australian industry.
Put simply, ASC has built the most advanced conventional ly-powered submarine
in the world, and a lot of people deserve credit and congratulations.
Among many other things the success of the project represents a major
industrial relations achievement. Before work commenced management and
unions negotiated a three-union on-site workforce.
And more recently, they have negotiated a two-year Enterprise Agreement
based on productivity improvements.
The workers, their unions and management are to be congratulated on their
example to Australian industry.
We should also credit the South Australiao government's foresight in. backing
the project.
It goes without saying that their initiative has brought great benefits to the people
of South Australia.
The Corporation's fabrication and assembly work, together with component
manufacture by South Australian industry, accounts for an injection of $ 1.6
billion into the South Australian economy over a period of 14 years. 13415 
3 I b,
Over 1000 new jobs have been created at the Australian Submarine the
Corporation. m
And several thousand other Australians have gained work through sub-Th
contracts. oul inc
The ASC, of course, has not done this alone, as the presence of distinguished inc
representatives from Sweden and elsewhere testifies. Thi
The Australian Government has appreciated the strong support of the Swedish O
Government and the assistance provided by the Royal Swedish Navy to thece
project. Their support exemplifies the cooperation that can be achieved between two S
countries in a joint venture. Without this level of cooperation, I doubt that we
could have achieved todays success. pe
Minister Bjork, Au! to r
I would like to express to you Australia's most sincere appreciation for the strong
support provided by your government in ensuring the success of this project. Bul
I am sure that you are as proud of Kockums' performance as we are proud of theca
Australian Submarine Corporation. An(
We look forward to continued close cooperation as we both seek to reap the full
benefits in the international market place. It is
Adr
The construction of this submarine is an outstanding example of what can be
achieved when Australia embarks on truly international joint ventures. Thi
The multinational character of the project demonstrates that, in cooperation With n
other countries, Australia is able to develop major new high-technology industry Bot
capabilities. of i
I am pleased to see here today the Ambassadors, High Commissioners, military Sir
officers and officials of the many countries involved in the project. a
in t'
I am pleased also to see representatives of the East Asian region with which we i
seek closer defence ties. Sir
Australia wants to develop defence industry relations with our neighbours. A he Witt
1346 
I believe that such cooperation will assist the countries in our region to support
their own security and defence needs, as well as assisting Australia in
maintaining its industry skills.
The Collins class submarines increase our confidence in our ability to defend
ourselves, and illustrate how, through joint cooperation ventures Australian
industry can contribute to the security needs of our neighbours, and help
increase regional security and stability.
These shipbuilding projects, and other defence acquisition programs, such as
Over the Horizon Radar and high-technology communications programs, are
clear evidence that Australia's industry and technological base is diversifying.
Shipbuilding involves the entire spectrum of technology-based skills and
capabilities including project management, information and communication
systems, electronics, software, electro-optics, integrated logistics support and
perhaps most importantly, customer service.
Australia's defence industry may never be totally self-sufficient. It will continue
to rely to a certain extent on overseas technology.
But there is no question that Australia has developed specific skills and
capabilities that are world class and internationally competitive.
And I believe that these skills and experience will enable us to assist regional
countries in their defence needs.
It is fitting that the first submarine, and the class title, take their name from Vice
Admiral Sir John Collins.
This is the first time that Australian naval vessels have been named after officers
and sailors who have served their country and their navy with great distinction.
Both the submarines and the their namesakes represent the highest standards
of Australian professionalism.
Sir John Collins entered the Royal Australian Naval College in 1913 when he
was 14 years of age and from where he began a along and distinguished career
in the Royal Australian Navy.
Sir John Collins saw service in both the First and Second World Wars.
As Captain of HMAS SYDNEY in the Second World War in the Mediterranean,
he engaged two Italian light cruisers, sinking one and forcing the second to
withdraw damaged. 1347 
During the Pacific War, Sir John Collins returned to help in the defence of
Australia. As Commander of the Australian Squadron, he attended the surrender of Japan
in September 1945.
He was later promoted to Vice Admiral, and created a Knight Commander of the
Order of the British Empire.
Sir John Collins served Australia marvellously well, and I am sure HMAS Collins Inpo
will too. not h
Australia can develop the most advanced technology and manufacture This:
technologically complex equipment, on time, within cost, and to world-class
standards for quality. Ther, unem,
The challenge of the future is to ensure that this new defence industry capability . exci
is maintained and further developed for the benefit of Australia and regionalBu
countries. . geari uneur
I congratulate the Australian Submarine Corporation and the people who built
HMAS Collins; the Swedish company, Kockums; Rockwell Systems Australia; all
other sub-contractors; suppliers and the Navy.
You have all done a superb job and I know all Australians would want me to
extend their warmest congratulations.
Thank you.
PORT ADELAIDE
28 August 1993 Thes and howe, is t
econc
1348 



K I
ol PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING,
AND THE TREASURER, THE HON. J. 9. DAWKINS
THE BUDGET
The Government tonight announced key Budget modifications
which meet Caucus concerns and which it believes should
secure passage of the Budget through the Senate.
The changes will address community concerns while
maintaining the Government's overall deficit reduction
sLrategy. The key changes are:
an increase in the rebate for low income earners
from $ 100 to $ 150 each year.
a reduction in the differential between leaded and
unleaded fuel from 5 cents to 2 cents a litre. This
will be achieved by deleting the 3 cent rise in
leaded fuel proposed in the Budget for February
1995. eye tests will continue to be eligible for Medicare
rebates. unused long-service leave lump sum payments accrued
up to August 17, 1993 will continue to attract a
concessional rate of tax. Future long-service leave
lump sum entitlements as well as all unused annual
leave will be taxed as normal income. As announced
in the Budget, existing concessions will remain for
bona fide redundancies, invalidities and approved
early retirement schemes.
In order to off-set the impact of these measures in this
financial year the payment of personal income tax cuts
will be delayed from November I to November 15, thereby
maintaining this yoar's deficit figure at $ 16 billion.
These revisions to the Budget were discussed with
Democrat Leader, Senator Kernot, Green Senators
Chamarette and Margetts and independent Senator
Harradirie.
ZO/ 1O' TO0ON 81: 8 œ 66nu' : 131 
In addition to the measures above it was agreed with
Senator Kernot that a working party of Government,
Democrat and Green representatives would be established
to examine ways to reduce atmospheric lead pollution.
It was also agreed with Senator Kernot that in order to
reduce the cost of these measures the remaining four
proposed increases of three percentage points on tobacco
excise would be replaced with four increases of five
percentage points.
The combined effect of these measures will mean that the
prospective addition to the deficit for 1996-97 will be
in the order of $ 380 million.
This will see the projected deficit for 1996-97 outlined
in the 1993-94 Budget Papers rise from 1.1 per cent of
GDP' to 1.2 per cent.-
Following this evening's Caucus discussion it has also
been decided to review implementation issues associated
with the 1992/ 93 Budget decision to assess capital gains
and losses on shares for pensioners.
CAEMM" Auogust 30, 1~ 993
ZO/ ZOdj TO00N 8T: 8 œ 6-6l-if :-131 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE ACTU CONGRESS, SYDNEY, 31 AUGUST 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, Martin ( Ferguson), members and executives, and
delegates. Well, the newspapers were telling me that I couldn't come to the
ACTU a week or so ago, in one of our celebrated spats over industrial
relations and now more latterly over the Budget, they said a Labor Prime
Minister couldn't speak at the ACTU. Well I would have broken the door in if I
had to, to get in here. So, you have no doubt about me, if only for the video
show, if nothing else, and that song at the start, I wouldn't have missed that
for quids.
But the fact is, why wouldn't we be together and why wouldn't be true
believers after such an epic triumph as we had. We absolutely stole the
election of the Liberal Party, when they so smugly believed it was theirs, it
was in their lap, and they thought they only had to canter home to election
day and that was it. You can see today's newspapers where we have the
election contributions published, you know, generally it was Labor 20,000,
Coalition 100,000, Labor 17,000, Coalition 75,000, and it goes on. That was
the most well healed campaign they have ever had, their best organised, but
they had at their core the hard right-wing agenda, as Malcolm Fraser has
called it, and we came at them horizontally, vertically, laterally and swept
them up on March 13. It was a great victory for Labor, and a great victory for
the Labor movement.
I can say that nothing moved me more than the meeting I had with your
executive just after the election, about ten days after the election, when one
really understood what it was all about, and when it had sunk in just how
extraordinary a win we had had, and w hat it meant to everybody, those who
did believe in a better Australia, who did believe in decent values, who
believed in an inclusive society, who believed in a clearer sense of our
national identity, and who believed in for justice for Australians, but in a
society which was economically changing and economically efficient, and
where we had all the social and economic balances largely brought together,
and I think we had them right. And so it was a magnificent win and I am
particularly indebted to the trade union movement for their faith in the
Government, for their financial support which was very material, but beyond
that the enthusiasm and commitment which each one of you gave in the 
I 2
course of the campaign from the various sectors, I mean, this made a real
difference in the election, and it had the Labor movement together as last
before perhaps in the early 1980s, but really probably never since 1972. And
the amalgam of people we had, the various interests groups just made it so
obvious to all of us.
So, we have had a magnificent win, and we have now got to do something
with it. Now, we have worn a bit of flak over the last week or two, and I wore
a bit of flak yesterday as a matter of fact from some of the colleagues, but I
am a flak taker and a flak giver, as Lee Matthew's said, a couple of months
ago in Collingwood, there are only two kinds of players in this game, there is
hitters and hitee's, and he said, I am buggered if I will be a hittee, well ditto
for me, ditto for me. So, I think that we have got to come with the ebb and
flow of these things. Now, look, I could have followed up the election with a
round of warm inner glow speeches, quite easy for me, I can get emotional at
the drop of a hat, and roll one of those off my tongue with comparative ease.
And I am sure we would have all felt really good about the long tail on the
comet, the long after glow, and then we could have had a Budget, nice and
pat with a few things in it which paid passing lip service to the social wage,
and everyone said well that's ok, we're back here and we are the crowd we
thought we always were, and we are in office and we are carrying on, but
instead of that what we have done is really hop into the big issues. I mean
the biggest of the big issues. Like dealing with a two hundred year old
problem of Mabo, which most every other Labor Government passed, found
too hard, and where the great stain of dispossession and the shame of the
injustice which came with it, has never been dealt with, that we have occupied
the continent and not recognised the fact that the Australian indigenous
people were here first and that they had truly to be given the same rights and
entitlements in our society as the rest of us have, but perhaps even more
than that, that we recognise a special cultural relationship that Aboriginal
people have to the land.
Now, it is only twenty years ago that the white Australia policy was put to bed.
And we were dead lucky in the 1960s we were not marginalised like South
Africa, dead lucky, running the kind of policy we were in this part of the world.
And there are harder assessors of Australia watching now, all around us in
the countries of the Asia-Pacific region saying, ok these people say they want
to be part of us, that they are a multicultural society, that there is no basis in
race or creed in their selection of their migrants, or the cast of their society,
let's see what they do with their indigenous people, let's see how they deal
with this challenge, the challenge of the High Court decision on Mabo. So, it
is a real test for us, this one. Now, conservative people think we can fail ttie
test and that rights conferred on Aboriginals are ok, but inherent rights are
not. Seeing Aboriginal traditional law and custom in the common law of
Australia is too much for them to stomach. They just don't want to give land
to black people, and that's why we have to come to terms with this essential
and basic requirement of our society, that is, that we are on terms and at
peace with the original inhabitants of this country. Now it is hard, but we are
moving towards it, we will have, I think, one of the most impressive pieces of
common legislation ready in September, for introduction into Parliament and 
the draft bill ready this week, the comment by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander community, by the States and other interested parties.
So, we have taken that Mabo challenge up, in the immediate period, from
March to September, six months to put into place a body of administrative law
in land management, in a decision which most countries would not have been
able to handle in a decade. In six months we will have built, with a lot of
consultation, a well thought through set of principles for the body of
administrative law governing social justice and land management in this
country. And it will be one of the greatest achievements of Labor ever, when
that bill gets the Governor Generals assent. So, that's one of the things we
have been doing since the election.
The other thing is putting together AP EC, trying to find for Australia a place at
a very big table for the first time in our history. Because we have seen the
world moving into blocks in North America and in Europe, we don't
particularly want to be in a restrictive trading block, in fact, we don't. We
want to be in an open regional arrangement. So, Australia, this Government,
has put together the concept of APEC, and in the last 18 months, and
certainly since the election, I have done as much as I could possibly do to
develop and promote the concept of an Asia-Pacific G7. That is, to take
APEC from simply an information exchange, a body which is talking about
economic change and getting a better idea of its constituency and its
features, to one where there is real executive power, and to turn APEC into a
heads of Government organisation. Now, we are still moving through this, but
now President Clinton has invited all of the APEC leaders to attend a leaders
meeting in the United States in November. And that means within a few
years we have taken APEC from just an idea to a body, to an organisation,
and when it comes together with countries like the United States, China,
Japan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand. I mean, when this group comes together it will be representing over
per cent of world gross domestic product and will be very much the focus
of the fortunes and power of the Asia-Pacific.
That is coming off, and it is coming off because in part of the work of this
Government and the work since the election. The other thing we have been
doing is working on our major fiscal challenge which is the Budget. To see
that by the time we get through a strong recovery and private investment
picks up in the middle ' 90s, where our demand on savings the Budget deficit,
which we expanded through the One Nation period to kick the economy
along, is winding itself back. It is 6 challenge we must meet. Because this
time we have the option of a low inflationary long term recovery, the only
thing that can spike it is a short fall of national savings, and the time to get
that done is now, and we have been working on that, as we have been
working with you on the industrial legislation and putting a package to
improve our industrial relations system.
Now, I should have thought a reasonable set of things to do in the five
months since the election, that was Mabo, APEC, major fiscal challenge, our
industrial relations, and of course we have also advanced now the processes
on moving towards an Australian republic, with the establishment of the 
committee to bring back options indicating in which ways we can make a
competent change to a republican structure, and those processes being
considered, those terms of reference had to be written, that committee set up,
I have had some consultation with the committee now, and that committee is
now in the process of writing its report.
Now, I had some people in the media say, well the Government won an
election it didn't expect to win, and after the election it is not sure what it is
doing. I mean, really, really, with Mabo and APEC and the republic and the
Budget, and industrial relations. Have a look at it, I mean the agenda is so
huge, I mean it is unconventional maybe, but the Government takes on issues
this large. But what's the bloody point in being conventional, what's the point
in being conventional, you may as well, if you have got the mandate, hop into
the big issues, and get the work done, get the thinking done, but the thinking
on these things has got to be done properly, privately with time and
consideration and when you have got it together well then is the time to go
and sell all these things.
These, I think, have been as time well spent, and time we well and truly well
used, but the Budget of course has been a big part of it. And I want to say a
couple of things to you about the Budget, because a lot of the essential
strategy behind it has been lost in the public debate, but to put a major
Budget together with these issues on the table at once takes a lot of doing.
And we have got a Budget there now which does two things, it provides a
stimulus of $ 2 billion this year, which is as large as One Nation and it also
provides for a lower Budget deficit in the medium term, in 1996-97. That's the
point of it. In other words we have given the economy a kick along with One
Nation doing then again the unconventional thing, when we had everybody
telling us to hang on to the low Budget deficits, don't expand fiscal policy,
don't give the place a kick along, public demand has now played a very big
part in kicking growth along. We have had 3.1 per cent growth for the year,
for the last quarter, 1.2 per cent for the last quarter, and we have got a
conservative 2.75 per cent growth for the year forecast in the Budget, we may
do better than it, we may. But we have got a conservative number in there.
At any rate we are growing faster than most OECD economies, in fact, I don't
know any growing faster than us at the moment, and the One Nation package
was the right thing to do, as well building good public infrastructure and
getting it up.
Now, we have given in this Budget another stimulus as big as One Nation, in
other words we have got the ball rolling, but what we want to do now is keep it
rolling so that we have a full blown recovery on our hands, and so that comes
by way of the outlays changes and tax cuts, but we then get the Budget back
to around 1 per cent of GDP in 1996-97 by the revenue measures which will
then come in in the nexfone, two and three years. Now, you remember the
United States debate and the television pictures of Vice President Gore
casting the casting vote in the Senate on President Clinton's Budget, and
there was great celebration in the United States that finally they got a Budget
through, and that President Clinton had done more than his predecessors in
dealing with the American fiscal policy. Well in 1996 the American Budget
deficit will be at 3 per cent of GOP, ours will be at one, one. In other words 
we will be fully set up for a recovery, while other people are still limping along
with the Government's hands in the savings jar constraining private
investment. We are sifting there with low inflation, a very competitive
exchange rate, a profit share which is already high, stronger investment
which we will see in this period and the savings balance adjusted via the
public sector to let it all continue.
Now, is that good Government, or is that not good Government. And what
are our opponents doing? They are going to oppose the lot. They are going
to oppose all the changes because they don't want to get to 1 per cent of
GOP, after telling us that's what we should be doing. That change to 1 per
cent of GOP was a key election commitment. It was as key as any other
commitment, and part of it of course, part of the whole Budgetary scene is to
make certain that the tax revenue to GOP comes back to about where it was
in the last couple of years. That's all we are doing there, it's not as if there is
a big tax hike. In fact, in every year between now and 1996 we are giving
away more revenue than we are getting back. We. are giving away $ 3.8
billion a year in the tax cuts each year, and we will be raising about $ 3 billion
when the revenue measures are up and running. And that will mean that
people on the tax cuts, particularly for people between $ 20,500 and $ 50,000
will be paid from November and the result of that will be that we will see a
substantial tax cut of around $ 8.00 to $ 10.00 a week being paid to workers in
that average weekly earnings area of the economy.
Now, even with the revenue changes, revenue to GOP, the key indice in the
Budget, revenue to GOP this year is falling, it is a decimal point below last
year, last year it was 23.6 per cent this year it will be 23.5 per cent. It is just
that it won't be falling as fast because of the changes which we have made.
But that will provide a stimulus as will our monetary policy. Let me just bear
this in mind, we have just cut another half a percentage point off interest
rates, how were we able to do that? Because the Reserve Bank and the
market were convinced that the Government was going to take the Budget
deficit down, so we have now got bill rates of 4.75 per cent. I mean, we had
bill rates of 4.75 per cent when I was a teenager. And not only that, we have
now got a housing rate of about 8.5 per cent. Now, you remember before the
interest rates went up, the standard housing rate was 13.5 per cent, this was
before the rise in rates in 1988-89, up to 18 per cent for cash rates, and I
think housing peaked at 16 per cent or 17 per cent. But let's forget that part
and just look at the standard rate which was 13.5 per cent. It is now 8.5 per
cent, roughly, that's five per percentage points below that norm, and on a
$ 70,000 mortgage, that's $ 70.00 a week. There is a $ 70.00 a week benefit
going to ordinary wage and salary earners by way of their reduced interest
rates because of lower inflation and because of a decent Budget going into
place. So these are all part of the conferred benefits which are there, and I
think the other important thing is the tax cuts.
Now, I want to say something to you about the tax cuts, because we have had
a bit of a view, a campaign, indeed, that we should abandon them, but at the
time they were introduced in One Nation they met everybody's approval. But
what happened after One Nation is the world dropped, the OECD area
dropped by four percentage points of growth for two successive years, and 
the OECD and IMF revised down their growth in two succeeding years, which
meant the second round of tax cuts we put back, but we brought the first lot
forward and maintained them. Now, some people have said, well look, these
tax cuts go to higher income earners, well that's only in part true, they also go
to people at or below average weekly earnings. So I asked the Department of
Prime Minister and Cabinet last week to go back and look at all of the outlays
and tax changes since 1983 and look at a number of category of people and
see how they have been treated in terms of increases in disposable income.
And it is quite interesting the result. Between March 1983 and July 1983 a
process worker who was married with two children experienced an increase
in real disposable income of 15 per cent, real. Not nominal real. That is a
process worker with two children over the period, both on the tax side and
through things like the family allowance supplement and other changes on
the outlays side. If we take in the same time period a female machinist who is
a sole parent with two children, she experienced an increase in real
disposable income of 32 per cent. Between March 1983 and July 1994 a
single income family with two children earning three quarters of average
weekly earings, so this is someone payed above a process worker, obviously,
at three quarters of AWE will have experienced an increase in real
disposable income of 19 per cent.
But a person on AWE with two children, on AWE with two children, the
increase in real terms is really quite small. Because what happened in this
period was all of the tax cuts were going in their greatest measure to those
people below $ 20,000 and just above it. And, of course, a lot of the family
payments were going in that area tailing off in the middle 20,000s. And the
people at the top end, they had their tax cut cut from 60 to 47, but in part was
paid for by the capital gains tax and the fringe benefits tax which basically
covered the budgetary costs of that reduction. The people who deserve
some support now are those in those areas of 2/ 3 of AWE, AWE and above
AWE. And that is what these tax cuts do. So the notion that every tax cut we
ever give has got to be skewed only down the bottom is a notion which I think
is not fair to those who have waited last to get the kind of tax relief I think they
ought to be getting. And who is to say anyone on $ 30,000 or $ 33,000 is
wealthy? Or $ 36,000? Because if we even look at 1996 in three years' time,
even with modest growth in average weekly earnings, we'll have AWE around
$ 36,000. And if we don't change the tax scales those people will cascade
into a marginal rate of 46 per cent. So every dollar they earn at weekends
they will pay 46 per cent at the margin. Now I don't think the Labor movement
can live with that kind of rate and I don't think this Government could and that
is why we thought it was important to do that. And can I just say over the
same period, for what it's worth, for a man on average weekly earnings who
began receiving award superannuation in 1986, and of course, since
enhanced by the SGC, the accrued benefit at Juine 1993 was $ 7,050, and in
two years, that person's accrued benefit will be $ 11,150.
So if you look at the tax~ and outlays side of the Budget, you've got the
changes I've mentioned and superannuation, of course, underpinning it.
Now in this Budget, we have kept our election commitments and funded them
in ways which we think are advantageous to the economy and the community. 
But let me go through some of the measures and I will also tell you what we
decided yesterday in terms of revision to some of the Budget measures.
Since the election, we have introduced the legislation for the home child care
allowance which will go to 840,000 families paying $ 60 a fortnight, or $ 30 a
week, and that will go to the dependent spouse who is looking after the
children in the family. $ 30 a week, $ 60 a fortnight. Now $ 54 of that $ 60 was
formerly paid as a dependent spouse rebate to the taxpayer. That is now
being cashed out to the dependent spouse at home. But $ 6 of it is new, $ 3 a
week of it is new.
Then we have got the generalised child care rebate which* provides a rebate
paid at Medicare counters for child care so that families who spend money on
child care don't have to wait till the end of the year to get a rebate or
something else, they can get it over the course of the year by going
periodically to Medicare offices. And that is a generalised thing, it recognises
child care as an expense in earning income and, of course, gives families a
chance to earn that income and women, particularly, a chance to participate
in the workforce.
The labour market programs. We've increased those in the Budget. We
doubled them last year to $ 1.6 billion, and in this year increased it so that
now 500,000 unemployed people are being touched by those labour market
programs. Where we are giving them either a wage subsidy, and/ or training
and work experience for half a million. In the Budget the Newstart allowance
for single adults increased by $ 6 a fortnight. Basic dental care was provided
for health card holders, that is pensioners and beneficiaries who often find
they just can't afford basic dental care. We created an extra 29,000 child
care places in the community over the course of this year. We've diminished
the waiting period for rental assistance for young homeless unemployed
people, we've abolished that. There are improvements there for pensioners
and for the arts and also, of course, there are other changes in respect of the
labour market as they effect industrial relations.
And, I suppose, the best guide to that is since 1983-84 spending on health,
community services and social security. Well in 1983-84 it was 38.4 per cent
of the Budget. This year it is 51 per cent of the Budget. So outlays on health,
social security, community services and housing has risen from 38.4 per cent
in 1983-84 to 51 per cent of Budget outlays this year. So they are the Budget
measures and, of course, on top of those, the tax cuts.
Now let me say a couple of things about the measures we have decided in
the last day or so. They key changes are that we are going to increase the
rebate from low income earners from $ 100 a week which we have in the
Budget to $ 1 50. And that coupled with the home child care rate increase and
other outlay benefits will improve the position of those people below, say,
about $ 23,000. A reduction, we're reducing the differential between leaded
and unleaded fuel from 5 cents to 2 cents a litre. In other words, the price of
leaded petrol will go up now by 7 cents, not 10 cents and the differential with
unleaded will be only 2 cents. 
We are restoring eye tests under Medicare for full rebates for optometry.
That is, optometry will be as now. And we've-amended the unused long
service leave lump sum payment so that unused long service leave paid as a
lump sum, accrued up until the 17 August 1993 will continue to attract a
concessional rate of tax. Future long service leave lump sum entitlements as
well as all unused annual leave will be taxed as normal income.
Now those changes amount to about $ 110 million roughly this year, and just
on $ 400 million in 1996-97. And that brings the Budget deficit to a projected
1.2 instead of 1.1 per cent in 1996-97. Well the government has made a
commitment to bring the Budget deficit in around 1 per cent, so that still fits
that category. And this year we're putting the tax cuts back 2 weeks to make
sure that the Budget is neutral in terms of those changes. So they will begin
now on the second week of November in stead of 1 November.
So those changes mean that there will be not only no detriments, but benefits
for practically everybody. Now yesterday the Treasurer had these changes
run through the Prismod model. The one which the Treasury constructed to
look at the Liberal Party's Fightback and GST proposals. And when you put
the tax and outlays changes in the Budget together in the Prismod model, it
shows there are no detriments, and benefits right through the quintiles and
the only place where there are any detriments whatsoever, are for those
actually running down capital who have no relationship with the Government
through the tax or social security, or spending systems. In other words for all
the people in your constituency, there are no detriments and only benefits.
But can I say, that even before these changes, on an earlier run of the
Prismod model, there were only very few detriments anyway. Because what
has been overlooked in the Budget debate, was all the outlays changes I've
just mentioned and people focused on the revenue changes and thought that
was the only way to make a judgement about it.
But the key thing, of course, of all this in the Budget is employment. And in
there, we have a forecast of 100,000 job growth over the course of this year
and 500,000 more jobs over the next three years. At least 500,000 more
jobs. Now we're confident that we can meet those forecasts. Because they
are based on fairly conservative growth estimates. And that being the case,
we will start to see improvements in the unemployment rate. And, of course,
as you know we have got this major study into employment and to
unemployment which will be concluded later this year and upon which the
Government can take decisions.
But if you look at the settings we have got now. We have got the Budget
balance which has gone from an $ 8 billion surplus to a $ 16 billion deficit. A
$ 24 billion change which has held a floor under the economy and provided a
shock absorber to relieve a lot of the pain of the recession from the
community of Australia. That was done by a Labor Government and it
wouldn't have been done by a conservative government. We're adding a $ 2
billion stimulus this year, to keep that going, to keep activity and growth and
employment coming through. We have now got very low inflation and low
interest rates and a high profit share. And that profit share now needs to be
spent on higher investment to guarantee higher employment and better 
employment levels over these next few years. And, of course, with the
Budget balance tailing back to a 1 per cent of GOP deficit by 1996 as the
private economy comes through, we should start to see a return to better
rates of employment growth of the variety we are talking about. And on top of
that, the labour market programs sifting there dealing with 1/ 2 million people,
particularly those who are long-term unemployed, of which now over 300,000
are in that category and 180,000 who have been unemployed for more than 2
years. So those programs are particularly focussed on those people to give
them job subsidies and training and work experience to get them back into
the labour market while out in the economy, the big aggregates should be
pulling employment along about 100,000 this year and 500,000 over three
years. So that is our great challenge, to deal with unemployment and to get back the
growth. And I am pleased that profits are picking up in-the economy and we
are starting to see profits come through. But we want those profits spent on
investment and the business community knows if they think they can just
store up profits to levels above the 1980s experience, not just the golden
years of the 60s, but as well as that the really high levels, the peaks of the
1 980s. That if they think the profit share can get to above those levels and
simply stick to it and not invest it, well I'm quite sure the ACTU will have a
strategy to share some of that with themselves. And so we want to see it in
investment, and if we see it in investment, we have got a chance of getting
better employment.
Could I just say a couple of things now about superannuation, very briefly.
And that is, that the superannuation legal minimums will increase
progressively to 9 per cent by the end of the decade. We are supporting that,
and of course then we can look at taking it further, perhaps to 12 per cent,
beyond then to that stage. And on the industrial agenda generally, let me say
that we are supporting you before the Industrial Relations Commission for a
safety net adjustment of $ 8 and we are supporting the development of
enterprise agreements.
Now I know there has been some discussion between us, some may say
dispute between us, but I don't think that is true, about extending enterprise
agreements. And we want to see enterprise agreements extended to the
non-union sector. But we won't see it done in ways which allow for reduced
wages and conditions or weaken trade union responsibilities. And I have got
no doubt a way can be found to do that. We have already established a
working party to consider with the ACTU, with your negotiating committee, a
solution to the problem and I think one can be found. And the Cabinet will be
giving that appropriate attention. But, I think, the thing is, this is a great
opportunity for the labour movement because this election has given you the
breathing space to get out there and organically expand the tentacles of
unionism to make enterprise bargaining work, to involve your members and
include, and bargain with your employers, and train people, and recruit
people, and win the hearts and minds of young Australians who might not
have been coming to unionism but through enterprise agreements. 
So we see the enterprise agreement path as a sensible and organic operation
of the organisation of the trade union movement which lets you build a more
relevant place in the industrial culture of this country. And where you're not
sitting at the whim and caprice of some centralised structure and where we
have a golden opportunity in this next year to legislate in ways which really
sets up a new industrial relations system for Australia, but one which you are
a key part of and which give you all the opportunities to exploit.
Let me just say a couple of things about the Accord and just say that the
Accord has changed and you were discussing it here yesterday. In 1983 we
had an Accord of detailed policy calling for detail commitments from unions,
actual individual union commitments. We are not asking individual unions for
those commitments in 1993 as we were in 1983. What we are asking for is a
commitment to the basic ideals of the Labor movement, of Labor in
government and a recognition of the need for the economy to be productive,
to maintain low inflation and to keep our focus upon employment and
unemployment. I do not think in asking that we are asking a great deal of you any more than
you are asking of us. But together we have done so much and we changed
Australia, we have made it a more competitive place. Just imagine where we
would be if we didn't have a competitive manufacturing sector now. Imagine
where we would be if all those new industries we have created were not
created in this last decade, or if we were still only exporting 13 per cent of
GDP instead of 20 per cent of GDP, or if the debt service ratio was where it
was five or six years ago instead of where it is now, or if we were still drifting
around that old industrial relations culture of a decade ago. Where would the
country be? Where would our constituency be? And where would be the lot
of ordinary Australians without the Accord and the processes?
Can I say the opportunity is there for us, we are going to be in a growth cycle,
the business cycle in on the upturn over the course of these next three years.
We have already generated a recovery and a low inflationary one. We are
setting up fiscal policy for the medium term so that we can capitalise upon it.
We are dealing with employment in the best way we know how by bringing
growth and investment back on again and dealing with those unemployed by
a very expansive program of labour market reform and now looking at novel
ways in ways we can deal with the unemployed on a long term basis to see if
can do again something in Australia which is unique and interesting in the
world. Our opponents of course, they have no such ideas. They met last weekend
at their Federal Council which was the one meeting they had after five
election losses on the trot to sit down and say well, what's wrong with us?
Where have we gone wrong? In which way should we change and be more
relevant? Basically they passed the opportunity up. They sat there and
smothered with a lot of motions which were put around; which John Hewson
weakly voted for and everybody sat there and sat mum on the whole thing.
Maybe it was because of difficulties we were having with the Budget and they
thought well, the Government is having a bad week, we won't distract 
attention from them. But they passed up a great opportunity and if the
problems of the Budget debate has meant that we have succeeded in
keeping John Hewson as Leader of the Liberal Party for longer than his
natural time cycle would have kept him, then it has been a damn good
weekend all round.
People say, he is walking around saying well, I told you so about the election
he told us so we are raising $ 2.5 billion this Budget. The GST was going
to raise $ 24 billion, over eight times as much and it was paid back not to the
people who paid it. $ 7 billion going off payroll tax, $ 6 billion going off petrol,
more than half of which is paid by business and $ 9 billion to abolish the
wholesale sales tax. So the people paying the $ 24 billion would not have
been the people who got the rebates in the other tax changes. And then to
pay $ 12 billion of tax cuts, he was going to cut $ 10,000 million from
government spending. We tried to take $ 90 million out by taking one of the
ancillary medical services of optometry from the Budget. Now, if there is
something easier than optometry, do you think we wouldn't have done it?
You are looking around saying well here is one, oh no, that is too easy we will
do the hard one.
Here we are in a society like this flat out knocking in a major element of a
program, $ 90 million out and they were going to cut $ 10,000 million out, but
they are still committed to it. Griener, not Griener, what's his name
Alexander Downer, Shirley Temple as I call him he was up there at the
Press Club last week, committed to the $ 10,000 million still, but won't say
where the $ 10,000 million is coming.
Look, here is a Budget which is raising over the course of three years, $ 2.5-3
billion and giving back Compare that to raising $ 24 billion and giving it
all to different people who pay it and then cutting $ 10,000 million out of
outlays and seeing the tax cuts from that go only to those on the top end of
the tax system.
Now, it is not to be compared with what we are doing. They are running
around, these characters, trying to make a case for themselves about what
we said in the election about taxation and I'll tell you what I said, so I will give
you the full quote in full. I was asked a question and I said this to maintain
the tax to GDP ratios we roughly have at the moment what's your policy?
and I said to maintain the tax, that is the revenue to GDP ratios we roughly
have at the moment. In other words what I'm promising is not to put up tax,
that was not to put up revenue to GOP. In 1996 with these tax increases and
the tax cuts, revenue to GOP will be about where it was last year and the year
before. In other words, we are keeping our commitment absolutely, but because they
run on a high tax policy with a GST and were canned for it, they have been
seeking to imply somehow we are running on a low tax policy, well we are in
the sense that revenue to GDP has been falling. But we can't let it fall to
pieces, we have got to maintain it at some reasonable level to bring the
Budget deficit down and as I said to you when I started, this year revenue to
GOP is a decimal point below last year even with the revenue changes. In 
1996-97 when we get there, it will be as it was a year or two years ago way
below what it was in the middle 1980s.
So we have kept our commitment absolutely on tax while at the same time we
have kept the tax cut promise to see that people between $ 20-50,000 get a
tax cut and because of the changes in the Budget, those under $ 23,000
secure an increase in the rebate, a cash rebate, plus the home childcare
allowance seeing not only do they not wear a detriment, but they wear
benefits as well.
In all of this we face a Liberal party which is now turning itself against any
norms of decent governance. In the Senate they are opposing everything,
they are opposing all of our fiscal measures how does John Hewson go to
the business community speeches on a Friday telling them about how we
should have a lower Budget deficit, then on Tuesday in the Senate, his
Senators down all the measures. How can you live with that kind of duplicity
and hope to get away with it? Well, of course, he can't. That is why he is not
taken seriously in business he is a low impact player, as I said to him
yesterday, a low impact player with a limited future and he has.
I do not know whether some of you saw the ' Sunday' program on the Liberal
party it was quite interesting. One fellow said well, the problem is we have
got a hole in the centre, he said there is no core, nothing at the core of the
policy. Malcolm Fraser said it was a right-wing group; they have turned the
Liberal party into a right-wing party. I have got the quote here somewhere,
but you all know what he said I think. That is, ' that it wasn't always this way'
he said, ' but it has been taken over by a small group who have turned it into a
right-wing conservative party'. That is really what has happened.
On Mabo, John Hewson sat at his National Council, his Federal Council on
the weekend while they carried a motion which said all options consistent with
the responsibilities of the states for control of land use including a
referendum. In other words he was running around weeks ago saying a
referendum would be divisive, on Sunday he sits there doggo while they pass
a resolution, he weakly puts his hand up for it, like a mouse, hoping he is not
sighted, voting for a thing which abolishes native title and overturns the High
Court decision. Is that leadership? Is that Leadership when he knows
better? On the republic he said when all the younger, brighter people in the
Liberal party were urging a conscience vote and support for the republic, he
put his hand up for a motion which said the onus is on the Government to say
why the Constitution should be changed.
In other words, I have to say why we shouldn't have the Queen of Great
Britain as Queen of Australia, as our Head of State forever. He-ioted for that
Vproposition, the hand went up weakly for that one as well.
In other words, the Liberal party which is always telling us about the rule of
law, I mean how many times have they told us about the rule of law? Until
our most supreme of Court the High Court says that Aboriginal custom and
tradition is now part of the common law of Australia and they are not
interested in the rule of law. It is the same as their behaviour in the Senate. 
They have just a father of a hiding in the election what are they doing?
Three months later, trying to deny the Government's legitimacy by voting its
measures down in the Senate.
Always they attack the legitimacy of the Labor party whether it is endorsed
in popular mandates at the election always they attack you. In other words,
this has never been the Liberal party, the party of convention, it has always
only been the party of shabby convenience. And now where it is a rule of law
and you have fops like Hugh Morgan, well dressed dandies, whose only
clever thing was choosing his parents wisely and out there in the High
Court. You would think butter wouldn't melt in their mouths three years ago
about the High Court, now of course, it is a social 4peri mental group they
say. All now attacking the legitimacy of our measures in the Senate because
we didn't really win the election now they are saying won on a false premise.
What false premise? John Hewson was roundly rejected and at their meeting
instead of saying look, we have lost five elections on the trot, for God's sake
let's sit down now and say what is wrong with us, lets have a good hard look
at ourselves. No, no, they put these mealy mouthed propositions around and
out goes his weak little hand up to vote for them.
That is OK John, I have you covered four square covered. I have got you
right in the sights. The trick for me will be preserving you.
But I tell you this once we get things really rolling, that is we get this solid
budgetary position into place, we get the great principles of Mabo established
in our law and then we really get onto focussing about our place-in Asia and
our right to an independent identity where we are represented by an
Australian as our Head of State, that is when the heat will go on the Liberal
party. That is when the heat will really come on and there will be no weak
little motions then. We will be after them for 1996 like we are after them for
1993. So I say this. Keep the faith as you have, you were true believers and I
amongst others appreciated it ever so much that you were. We haven't let
you down not in the Budget and we won't let you down. This is always
going to be a traditional Labor Government, but it will never be a do nothing
Labor Government. I won't see this be a government of shame, passing the
parcel on Aboriginal rights like other governments before us have done. I
won't see us lose the chance of making a statement about our identity, but
more than anything else I won't see us lose the chance of seeing every
Australian have as much chance as possible to a job and a chance to
participate in what this society can hold.
We will always have arguments rattling through trying to get things right, but
that is part of our strength. At least we can have an argument. We do not
have to have pap resolutions which we all vote for and then go out and rise
and turn and twist afterwards. We can have our debates in public, at the
ACTU Congress, at the Executive, at the wages committees, at your industrial
organisation committees, in our Caucus we can have the debates because
we truly stand for something, we represent Australian society and Australian
culture as no political movement in this country does. 
If our opponents who seek to deny our legitimacy or seek to face up to the
issues, who weakly skirt the real issues in Australian society think they can
sneak under our guard they can think again, because the public are more
conscientious than that. They know we have got the big issues on and that
we have been considering them for a few months we have been
reconnoitring, working out how we deal with them and in which way we
advance them, but get our act together on these things as we are on Mabo,
on the Budget, on these other big issues and you will see, I hope, past
breaking ground, big ground, 200 year old ground, the sort of ground that
only a Labor government can break.
That is what we are about and always remember this: together we are always
strong, while ever the trade unions and the Labor party stick together we are
too strong for the others. If they couldn't beat us in 1993, I think they have
got buckleys in 1996.
Thank you. 



K
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
MABO LEGISLATION
Today marks an important point in the Government's resolution of the Mabo issue.
The Government is releasing a detailed outline of its proposed legislation. The
legislation will resolve the uncertainties created by Mabo, while ensuring that native
title is treated with fairness and justice.
Our proposals are also today being sent to State and Terrtory Governments,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representatives and relevant industry bodies. We
wish to proceed expeditiously, but also wish to provide a reasonable opportunity for
consideration of our proposals. Final decisions will then be taken by the Government,
a Bill prepared and the legislation introduced into Parliament in October.
The legislation will necessarily be complex. The issues are complicated ones.
But running through the complexity and the detail are certain clearly drawn lines of
policy and principle:
1) ungrudging and unambiguous recognition of native title in Australian law;
2) a fair, rigorous and efficient means for determining who has native title, where, and
what the key attributes of that title are in particular cases;
3) a just and workable regime under which dealings in land can go on, and which
provides clear processes within which our vital land based industries can operate;
4) the right of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to be asked about
proposed actions affecting native title land, but without any special veto or
" locking-up" of the land;
full security for people holding grants of interests in land provided by governments
in the past, and at no cost to them;
6) fair compensation for any extinguishment or impairment of native title rights; and 
7) an opportunity for the States and Terrtories to manage dealings in land which
affect native title so long as they meet the standards for recognition and protection
of it set out in the Commonwealth legislation.
These are the solid, principled foundations of our policy. They respond to the calls by
industry for certainty and for clear rules under which land dealings can proceed. They
respond to the equally legitimate demands by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people for the rights accorded by the High Court decision to be respected in Australian
land management. They respond to the calls by the States and Territories for
recognition of their key role in dealings in land under our Federal system.
And they respond, I am sure, to the wish of the wider Australian community namely
that Mabo be accepted, but also that it be made to work.
Ours is no jerry-built proposal designed to provide a quick fix for this or that
particular sectional interest. We are building something to last, because the
implications of the High Court's decision will now be with Australia forever. It is
fatuous, unjust and impractical to the point of irresponsibility to suggest that the
decision might somehow be ignored or overturned. And any policy which sees only
one side of the equation is destined for failure.
From the outset the Government has had twin aims:
justice for Aboriginal and Tortes Strait Islander people in relation to legal rights
granted by the highest Court in the land; and
the integrity of our land management system as one of the foundations of our
economy.
The alternative to simultaneous achievement of these two goals is conflict, antagonism
and endless litigation. We need a coherent, balanced approach which achieves a
reconciliation of the two goals, a reconciliation managed by Government rather than
left to fate in the courts. Our proposed legislation alone among any so far proposed
in Australia -will do this.
Let me now highlight the main provisions.
First, the Bill -will remove any doubt which the existence of native title creates about
the validity of existing grants of interest in land. Nobody holding any, land tenure need
have any fear on this score once our Bill is passed.
Second, the Bill will not leave up in the air what impl icat ions this validation of past
grants has for existing native title. It will make clear that for freehold, and for
residential, pastoral and tourist leasehold grants, the validation extinguishes any native
title rights inconsistent with those grants. For mining leases, and lesser interests over
land such as licences and permits, the validation will not extinguish the native title.
But the Bill will confirm that any native title is subject to the lease or licence for as
long as it runs. I emphasise that this is totally consistent % rtexsing practice in
relation to mining leases over other private interests in land. 
3
Third, the approach to validation will preserve native title to the maximum extent
possible. Those who would like to see wholesale extinguishment should be required to
answer this question: How can it be just to end an Aboriginal legal right which has, by
definition, been preserved for hundreds and perhaps thousands of years in order to
validate an invalid grant when there is no need to do so to achieve that objective?
Thus: * the Bill will permit the reassertion of native title rights at the conclusion of a
mining lease or lesser grant; and
* it will protect any legal rights of native title holders which can co-exist with the
rights under the grant.
Fourth, in validating past grants, the rights which people may have to renewals or
extensions in the future will also be protected.
Fifth, having cleared up the problems of the past, the Bill goes on to provide a
comprehensive framework for future land management by the Commonwealth, State
and Territory Governments. This will allow dealings in land to go on efficiently, but
with native title being properly taken into account. The Bill recognises three basic
ways in which future dealings affecting native title land can proceed:
it makes provision for conversion of native title to statutory title, should Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander people wish. In this way they have the flexibility to deal
with the land, for example leasing it for tourist development or selling part for a
mining project;
it makes provision for acquisition of the land by a government ( for example for
some essential public purpose) and for the extinguishment of native title in this
case. The native title holder would be afforded the same protections of fair process
which apply to anybody else; and
the Bill will provide fair and workable processes of notification, negotiation,
arbitration and determination where a government proposes to make a grant of
interest over the land. The native title will be subject to the grant for the period of
the grant, not extinguished by it forever.
Sixth, the Bill recognises that some grants ( for example a major mining lease) will
have greater impact on native title holders and their land than other grants ( for example
most exploration licences). We are therefore providing an expedited process for
decisions about grants of the latter kind, a process which still however affords rights to
Aboriginal people to be asked and to have their say.
Seventh, the Bill provides processes for managing dealings in land in the inevitable
interim period before we know whether native title actually exists in a particular area.
There must be no hiatus. Land dealings cannot come to a halt. The key here is
appropriate notification of, and consultation with, bone fide claimants and relevant
Aboriginal organisations. 
Eighth, the Bill gives Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people a right to
compensation on just terms where native title is extinguished or impaired whether in
relation to validation of past grants or the issue of future ones.
Ninth, the Bill will establish a National Native Title Tribunal, comprising:
Judges of the Federal Court who will hear native title claims and determine the
existence, boundaries and attributes of native title over particular land;
the Tribunal Registrar, who will registcr claims and decisions about native title,
and will need to be satisfied that a claim meets certain standards before it is
registered; Tribunal Assessors, who will mediate claims; and
Tribunal Members who will assist negotiations between native title holders,
governments and people seeking grants, and make decisions if negotiations fail to
produce an agreement.
Tenth, the Bill will permit the Commonwealth to accept State and Territory bodies in
place of the Commonwealth Tribunal and State and Territory processes for the
handling of grants of interest in land if they meet the criteria set out. There can be no
legitimate complaint that we are putting the States in a strait jacket they have the
option to come up with one of its own which equally well satisfies the objectives.
Finally, the Bill will make certain provisions in the interests of the community as a
whole: that laws and regulations of general application apply equally to native title land;
that governments are able to confirm existing Crown ownership of resources; and
that existing public rights of access to such places such as beaches, waterways,
recreation areas and so on can be confirmed.
With this proposed Bill the national government is accepting its national
responsibilities. The Commonwealth has profound obligations to Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, to the protection of their rights under the law and to the
betterment of their economic and social condition. We also have profound obligations
to all Australians for the security of their rights in land, and for the wellbeing of the
national economy.
Others may feel they have the luxury of taking a narrower view, of pushing a particular
interest or of following the instincts of short-term political expediency. We do not.
As Australia's Government we cannot.
Regarding the role of the States and Territories, I reiterate what I have put to them
namely that the Commonwealth's preferred approach is complementary legislation,
co-operatively achieved. Therefore, as well as inviting their comments on our 
proposed legislation, I invite State and Territory leaders to join with us in a national
approach. Our proposal
permits the States to run their own land management, with the Commonwealth
performing the role most appropriate to it; setting national standards and
establishing an overall framework;
provides legal certainty to the States that they are able to validate existing grants;
provides clewr and fair " rules of the game" for dealings in land and to assist
economic development; and
can be underpinned by the Commonwealth's preparedness to accept an appropriate
responsibility, with the States and Territories, in relation to funding.
This legislation will not satisfy everybody's demands. It would not be good legislation
if it tried to do so, and such an enterprise would be impossible. Rather, our proposal is
the product of intensive consideration of each of the issues on their merits. In this way
we have achieved an approach which has consistency and integrity.
It is also the product of the extensive process of consultation on which the Government
very deliberately embarked last year. We have not been deterred in that time by
pressure, misinformation or hysteria from the pursuit of good, durable policy. We
have stuck to the timetable announced at the outset. The outcome will be all the better
for the time that has been taken to hear, understand and reflect upon the views that
have been put.
This proposed legislation gives Australia a way of settling the land management
challenges posed by Mabo. But the Government remains committed to the view that
the significance of Mabo does not begin and end there.
The crux of the matter is that the High Court has formally recognised what should
have been accepted long ago that Australia was not Terra Nullius, a land belonging
to no-one when the Europeans arrived. There were prior owners. They were often
dispossessed. To understand this deeper significance of Mabo is to recognise that it provides an
opportunity and obligation an opportunity for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
dignity in our society and for genuine reconciliation; an obligation to press forward
with initiatives directed towards greater justice and economic development for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
As a second stage in our response to Mabo, I expect to make announcements about
these wider matters later in the year.
CANBERRA 2 SEPT1EMBER 199 



TEL: 2.' Sep. 93 17 : 17 No .015 P .01/ 1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 2 SEPTEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, look, I have called this press conference today, because today marks
an important stage in the Government's resolution of the Mabo issue. Today
the Government has released a detailed outline of its proposed legislation,
which will resolve the uncertainties created by the High Court decision on
Mabo while ensuring that Native title is recognised and treated with fairness
and justice.
From the beginning the Government has had two essential aims with Mabo.
One was justice for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in relation to
rights granted by the highest court in this country, the High Court; and the
Integrity of our land management system as one of the essential foundations
for our economy.
There has never been any doubt in my mind that an adequate response to
the Mabo judgement had to meet both of those objectives, the objective of
justice and at the same time the integrity of our land management system.
The legislation is complex because the issues are complicated. But we have
drawn clear lines of policy and principal including un-grudging and
unambiguous recognition of Native Title in Australian common law; a fair,
rigorous and efficient means for determining who has Native Title; where and
what the key attributes of that title are in particular cases: a just and workable
regime under which dealings in land can go on, and which provides clear
processes with wh~ ich our vital land based industries can operate and full
security for people holding grants of interests in land provided by
Governments in the past, and at no cost to them, and fair compensation for
the extinguishment or impairment of Native Title.
Now, contrary to so much mis-informed opinion and mischievous propaganda,
the vast majority of Australians will, of course, feel no tangible effects from
this legislation whatsoever. What they may well feel is a sense of satisfaction
that Australia's democratic processes in harness with our better feelings, our
sense of justice and common sense has produced a mature national
response and the biggest chance the nation has ever had to correct a two
hundred year old problem, a real chance to address the wrongs and achieve
our goal of reconciliation between Indigenous and non-indigenous 
TEL: 2. Sep. 93 17: 17 No. 015 P. 02,-
2
Australians. They may feel that their generation has made a mature
response and future generations will be grateful for that mature response.
Neither I, nor the Government, expect that the draft outline will be welcomed
In toto by every interested party in the debate. I can almost guarantee that
will not be so. But a balanced approach was taken, a truly balanced
approach, and a balanced response has been made. The proposed
legislation Is the result of one of the most comprehensive consultations ever
undertaken on a national Issue in this country, and one of the most intense
periods of ministerial involvement and discussion of any issue in the
Governments history.
Since the High Court handed down the decision many meetings and
consultations have been held with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, with the mining industry, with the pastoral industry and with State and
Territory officials. And while the draft released today is not the final
Government position, it does reflect the Commonwealth view on key issues.
Today I have written to Premiers and Chief Ministers providing copies of the
document and seeking comments before the final bill is drawn up, obviously
States and Territories will have comments to make, but the important thing is,
I hope, they will see the merits of a national approach and understand the
obvious advantage to them in such a national approach, and these
advantages are outlined in the detailed statement that I have released. No
doubt other parties will also have suggestions and we will listen to them just
as carefully. But what you do have before you today is a very carefully
considered view of the Government. When comments have been received
we will finalise the Bill for introduction into Parliament in October.
Now, our information package which we have tabled with the draft legislation
contains a detailed statement by me which highlights the main elements of
our proposal. Also there is a detailed summary of the proposed legislation
and a question and answer document which I think will help people
understand some of the principal issues. I might also add that my colleague,
Frank Walker, who is here today and officials that are also here, will be
available after Question Time if you have questions of technical detail about
some of the issues in the Bill.
So, I will be pleased to take questions.
J: Prime Minister, does this mean now that you will be prepared to sit
down and begin negotiating with the Aborigines?
PM;* Let's not have a play on words. A consultation of substance Is one
where an interest group puts to the Government issues of principle
about which it believes the Government should respond. And because
the imperatives in the development of this legislation require that the
twin interests, of justice for Aboriginal people and maintaining a system
of sensible land management are key to the national economy,
whatever is put by an Aboriginal person or group, in a sense, is 
T2EL.:$ ep93 17 : 17 No .015 P .03
3
negotiating a view off that background. So, this has been~ the most
realistic consultation negotiation with Aboriginal people in our history,
about a matter which has great ramifications for them, and for which
we all believe there Is a foundation for a long-r-un reconciliation
between non-Aboriginal Australians and Aboriginals.
J: are you recognising just physical attachment to the land, or also
spiritual connection to the land?
PM: Well, you will see that in the draft legislation, in ways in which that can
be established, but it is not purely, simply a physical association.
Though, that will be the case most of the time.
J: States, States who have already expressed a considerable
opposition of some of your principles, are you really saying that this
draft is merely an ambit claim? How flexible are you on this?
PM: Well, for a start there has been an enormous amount of consultation
and negotiation with States at the official's level. Which has gone on
now for months. The Bill is, as I say in the press statement, it is not a
gerry built proposal designed for a quick fix, that suits a particular
hinatevere sstp. enWt es o amreu cbhu iltdimineg ohne rteh es opmrinecthipinlegs . to Slao, s t thains di sth naott's anw haym wbeit*
negotiating document, this Is the Commonwealth's considered position.
But importantly it gives, in the legislation, a chance for the States to
come back with proposals which they may wish to put to us, where
they believe, in their terms, better meet our principles and objectives
and our Bill. So, while we lay down very clear mechanisms for the
meeting of the principles which the Commonwealth has decided, we
are also saying to the States, if you think you can do it better in some
way by changing or developing your institutions, come back and tell
us. But what we are saying here is that on all the key principles which
we have articulated in the notes, the mechanisms which we have
established around there, be they for hearing and awarding Native
Title, be they for considering economic uses for Native * Title land, be it
exploration, or mining, or pastoral, all those mechanisms we think are
sound ones for meeting the objectives Of the Commonwealth's
principles. And whIch would apply in the Commonwealth Bill for
Commonwealth lands, which would also apply in a State in a noncomplying
State. But we have got a complying State, not only have
they the option to comply with our principles, but they also have a
further option in coming back to us and saying in which ways they
believe they can better comply.
J: On that basis though, would you believe the States who issued their
own draft legislation are more or less with your position, and how far
would they have to move If they are not?
PM: Well, the Commonwealth Bill takes precedence and legal precedence,
and I think there is, well developing within the States, very much the
TEL 
TEL: 2 . Sep 91 17 : 17 tn. o015 P .04/' 1Q
4
view to examine this, to examine this positively. Because this Bill Is a
balance in crafted proposition, and it does seek that balance, and a
nice balance between justice for Aboriginal people and the essential
principles of land management for the economy. There is a nice
balance there.
J Prime Minister, West Australia has refused to even accept the High
Court judgement, WA has refused at this stage still to accept the High
Court judgement. Do you envisage then, that the Commonwealth will
have to impose its...?
PMV: Western Australia will have a copy of the legislation, they can go
through it, but it is in very much of their interest to accept the principles
here, because they are ones which don't, in any way, certainly in terms
of a claim by a State in any reasonable way, constrain mining or
economic activity. Now, If the view Is they don't want to give land to
black people, well that's a view, of course, we will not accept, and In
which case the Commonwealth Bill finally drafted and when It is
operating would operate where a State fails to comply.
J: Prn'r Minister, if this is not the Commonwealths final position, how
much room is there? Is there only room for some more Input, positive
input from the States or is there room from the other interest groups as
well to have somne..?
PMV: There is room for all the interest groups to say. For Instance, we have
divided here the task of hearing and awarding Native Title and then
considering what economic uses Native Title land can be put. Where
formally we were talking about one institution, we are now talking
about two. We are talking about a stream of Federal Court to handle
the hearing and awarding of Native Title, and then we are talking about
an institution, a tribunal which will then look at the economic uses.
Now, we have got time limits on negotiation and arbitration, for
instance. Now, In the way in which those elements of the Bill are set
up, it is quite possible a State or an interest group could come back~
with a proposition which is helpful to the general design.
J: What about if the Aboriginal people came back, for instance, and said
well, we have said we won't accept, that, you know, if you don't give us
the right of veto
PM. Well, they are not getting the right of veto, and I have told them that
right from the start, because it would bring land management In this
country to a halt, it would slow economic activity down, but they
wanted a right to be asked, and they have got a right there of
consultation. They know if in the result of that consultation their view
is not being observed they can go to an arbitration. And if that tribunal
arbitrates in their favour, well in their terms, well and good. If it
arbitrates against them then they have got to accept that decision. But
in the event that a tribunal overturned a proposition for development a 
TEL: 2. ep .93 17 : 17 No. 015 P. 0.1
State or Commonwealth Minister can override that decision. So, the
practical operation will be, any legislation which has an arbitration
procedure automatically turns a consultation into a negotiation.
Because everybody knows if you don't negotiate it goes to an
arbitration. So, there is an imperative there to negotiate, but in the
event that it does go to arbitration a decision can be made and parties
will be able to put their view to it. But the body that Is arbitrating is not
the body hearing the Native Title.
J: Well how vulnerable is your tribunal proposal to constitutional
challenge?
PM. well, I think, invulnerable.
J: You just explained the limitations on compensation, Prime Minister,
particularly there doesn't seem to be a specific mention of special
attachment in the outline and also how would you see the Bill being
spread between the Commonwealth and the State Governments?
PM: Well, we were formally looking at some formulation for compensation,
which in some way devolved a freehold value, and with multiples of
freehold value for special attachment. But for a number of reasons we
think that proposal is flawed and we are now saying that compensation
should only be on just terms, and naturally the just terms will
comprehend the economic value of any particular piece of and the
special attachment which may, and that is the special features of the
land, and therefore the nature of the compensation which could be
more than monetary compensation can be considered in those terms.
On the second part of the question we have not decided what portion
of the financial load the Commonwealth has carried in respect of
compensation for past grants. But only to say that it will be carried by
government.
J: Can I get my question in now what is the position of National parks,
wildlife areas, wilderness areas under this draft legislation? Will they
be able to pay more..
PM: Look, David ( Barnett) can I say I don't want to be running down a
whole lot of technical features of the Bill. So you can put all those
questions this afternoon. The thing I think 1 would like to hear is the
politics, the generic qualities of it, et cetera.
J: Prime Minister, developing among the States as to how they look at
this, the whole issue of a national approach. Can that be interpreted
as you being optimistic that the States will join in with this and if so
what States might be still holding out and also what is your response to
Mr Perron's letter about changes to the Northern Territory Land Rights
Act? 
TEL: 2 . Sep .93 17 No. 0115 P. 6i
6
PMV. Let me deal with the first part of the question I think States which look
at this issue sensibly understand that a comprehensive national
approach is better than a State by State approach. I think the Bill will
get a better hearing than maybe people believe at this point from the
States. Whether we get agreement is a different matter, but I think it
will get a reasonable hearing. I think they are convinced that a
genuine attempt on our part is being made to get the balances right
here. I am not sure in the end how all States will react, it may be that
some want to overturn the High Court decision or take that view. I
think it is an unrealistic view. Sorry, your other question was?
J: Mr Perron's letter about possible changes to the Northern Territory.
PM: Well, we have had, routinely, letters from Chief Ministers in the
Northern Territory about the NT Land Rights legislation. This is not
something the Government wishes to focus on at the moment, this is
the primary focus of our consideration this is this piece of draft
legislation. This is the primary piece of Aboriginal law, potential draft
law in Australia and easily the best piece of Commonwealth law in
respect of Aboriginal land and we want to get these principles drawn
togeiher, agreements around this Bill and deal with this Bill.
J: two sets of rules, two sets of principles acting at the one time.
PM: Well, one goes to statutorily confirmed land rights and the other goes
to inherent rights under the common law.
J: What sort of directions have you taken to match the expectation raised
in your Redfern speech in relation to reconciliation and social justice
for Aboriginal people?
PM: Following this draft Bill, and then Bill, and passage, will be a package
of measures to deal1wth other social justice questions and these will
go to land acquisition and other issues. We are not as developed in
that package as we are with this because this is the primary vehicle for
giving effect to the High Court decision. But where the High Court
decision doesn't have impact on Aboriginal people, that. is where they
have been dispossessed or not able to take advantage of Mabo then
we will then go down the route of trying to see in which ways we can
sensibly advance the social justice for those categories of Aboriginal
and Islander people. I will probably give some expression to that in
the Second Reading Speech on this Bill so that the Aboriginal and
Islander community know that in the Autumn session of next year we'll
will introduce the other legislation.
J: Prime Minister, how can you avoid delays in exploration and mining
activity when under the provisions of this proposal you have outlined
today, you only need to register a claim to then be regarded as having
an interest in that area such that the Tribunal can direct a company for 
T2EL.:$ ep .93 1-7: 17 No .015 F. 7'.
example to negotiate with a registered claimant rather than someone
who has actually had their native title claim tested.?
PM: So, what is your point?
J: Well, that Is going to build In delays because inevitably you will have
to end up having to hear the claim to establish a native title hold.
PM. No, no, it would build in no further delay than that which is inherently
there in dealing with a native title holder. Aboriginal people are
entitled to say, for all these years we have asserted that our traditional
customs and land should have been part of the common law of this
country. Finally, our most supreme Court has said it is. So we have
land which is obviously going to be native title land, but because we
have not yet sorted out the ownership of it, the holders of the title,
should it be reasonably open for companies or economic developers to
then go in just as though no native title ever existed. Native title exists.
it exists this very day, it Is a matter of deciding who the holder of the
title Is. Therefore, should it be treated in any less of a way than native
title land where the holder is clear.
What we have said is this: the registrar under the Bill, has a set of
measures, a set of criteria under which a claim will be registered;
vexatious claims are rejected; claims which for instance seek to claim
title to areas on which freehold title will have extinguished native title,
all those things are taken away, but where there is a reasonable
likelihood of a claim be a valid one and one that can proceed, it will be
registered. If it is registered say a mining company will then deal with
that registered group of owners and then the same time frame applies
that is, four months for negotiation, three months for an arbitration
process if in the event they don't agree, or longer if they both agree. If
it is for exploration it is three months for negotiation and two months in
the Tribunal. But under any mining legislation now It is three months,
for instance, for exploration.
In other words it is a reasonable procedure, a * nd it is a reasonable
procedure for native title where the holder Is'known as it is where a
claim has been registered.
J: it turns out not the native title holder, if someone had just made a
claim, not had it tested and can subsequently be found not to be the
native title holder; you built in all that negotiation for months in delay.
PM; Yes, but you are talking about at the most a seven month process.
Who now gets an approval process within seven months? Who now?
J: Prime Minister, why have you decided that native title claims won't be
heard in the same courts that other Australians use?
TEL 
TEL: 2 $: eP .97 1: 1? No . CII 5 F. 3l
PM: That is not necessarily so. The Federal Court is a court other
Australians use, a State Supreme Court or' a Land and Environment
Court for instance are courts other Australians use, except a stream of
those facilities will be devoted to the special task of hearing claims for
native title, which will mean that anthropological information and tribal
information et cetera, custom and tradition these issues will become
the specialisation of whatever will be a variant on these particular
Courts whatever they might be. They are very much the same
institutions whlchopther Australians use, but varied, changed, adapted
for the special task of hearing and awarding native title.
J: Have you got a timetable yet for when this Bill is to be completely
finished and introduced into the Parliament? How long is it?
PM; We want it in in October and it is just a matter of whether we can get
responses in time to consider the responses, to put them into the draft.
We have concurrently been writing a draft Bill as we have been writing
drafting instructions so what you see here in the draft legislation also
exists as a very rough draft of a Bill. So, that will truncate the time
down of actually completing the draft legislation and drafting
instiuctions and then the writing of it.
J: Mr Keating, what impact do you think this proposed legislation is going
to have on the Government's fiscal policy over the next couple of
years?
PM: Not very much at all.
J: Mr Keating, you have obviously spent an immense amount of time on
this yourself, what do you say to those who say that you have been too
preoccupied with this issue at the cost of political attention to other
areas of government?
PM, I say that is not a correct judgement.
Labor governments are hear to do these things. These are things that
will never be done by Tory governments, they will never get the social
balances that are in this right. That is why governments like this exist.
And I think the work which we have put in here and it has been an
enormous work by my Cabinet and ministerial colleagues and by
officers of the various departments the intensity of the work in six
months to try and put together something which has got principles so
clearly articulated first of all decided and articulated as this has, I
think will do credit to any piece of legislation of this kind anywhere.
So, you get a choice in these things either you can do it the way it
should be done on an issue which is 200 years old for which we have
never adequately tackled, or you can fudge it. What we have decided
to do is do it right. 
TEL: pP9&gt; 3 17 No. 0 15 F. 0 9'
9
As to political attention, when Budgets go like a charm everyone thinks
they are politically tuned and tuned up and polished up and all these
things about politics and consultation are never an issue. It is only
wh~ en something goes awry that you have these problems. Again, one
has got to look at the long run. This is five months into a three year
political cycle and if this Parliament was worth nothing but to get this
right, it would be worth it.
J: Prime Minister, was the Budget going to some extent awry, part of the
cost of the pre-occupation of this issue?
P M. TheOBidgetwill end up a very good Budget for the nation. That is, that
this country alone among few will have a fiscal position which is going
to be exemplary by the middle 1 990s. There are a lot of you, former
incessant barrackers for this position just three or four weeks ago you
have all gone strangely silent. The fiscal industry that exists in this
gallery has gone Into hibernation, but it is not in hibernation in the
Budget figuring it is there.
As I said yesterday, this notion that we should basically not give an
improvement in the tax position of middle income tax payers, this sort
of inverse snobbery on the part of people who have never given a hoot
for low income earners in the past, Is humbug and hypocrisy I will
never cop. If the ACTU wants to talk to us about the low paid, fine,
because they have always been genuinely interested in it. If they want
to put a view about middle incomes I will take it. But I will never take it
from people who have never had a interest ever, who wanted to cut
Commonwealth outlays back at every opportunity and then are already
now discovering as a way of criticising the Budget this question about
the low paid. Anyway, as I indicated yesterday in the House those
huge real increases for people up to around three quarters of average
weekly earnings attest to the fact that the Government looked after
these people first.
Let me say this the Government is taking no humbug or lectures from
anybody about looking after those on low incomes. We have done
more than any Commonwealth government ever, but nor * are we going
to say that somebody on average weekly earnings, at $ 33,000 or
$ 36,000, Is a wealthy person and doesn't deserve to be considered in
the sweep of incomes which all governments have to consider. The
Liberal Party has taken the Bill we have introduced and challenged it,
or are seeking to challenge it. They want to cut away at the Budget's
capacity to pay tax cuts to middle income earners. The Liberal Party of
Australia is hoping in to middle people on middle incomes, the people
on $ 33-36,000. The hypocrisy is profound.
J: As leader of the Labor Party, what message did you take away from
the Caucus Economics Comm ittee meeting of the other night? 
TEL:~~ .9 1.1 11: 5 er Ic 1
PM: The first I'd take away if I was you is don't believe all that is told to you.
Because much of what I saw printed the next day was never said. No,
it was a reasonably, I thought, good meeting and I went there because
I could not attend the Caucus the following day, I had to speak to the
ACTU and I was not going to leave the Treasurer alone in a Caucu3
meeting just to argue the point himself. So, I took the opportunity to go
to the Economic Committee meeting and there most people put a very
reasonable view. Those who had sharp comments either wanted to be
In the Ministry and missed out or had been in the Ministry and had
been dropped out and had an axe to grind. That is all right, we all
know about them, they are wounded soldiers, but we will try and bind
them up and make them happy.
ends TEL 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P. J. KEATING, UP
LUNCHEON IN HONOUR THE HIS EXC ELL ENCY DR VON WEIZSAECKER,
PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 6 SEPTEMBER 1993
On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I
extend to you and your party the warmest welcome to
Australia. Might I say that as one who rarely goes through a day
indeed would f ind it dif ficult to ge~ through a day
without listening to Beethoven or Brahms or Richard
Strauss, I am in almost constant touch with your
homeland. But, of course, Australia's links w ith your country go
well beyond the legacy of music which Germany has left
the world.
Nearly a quarter of a million Australians have German
ancestry and their contribution to our industry and
culture has been profound.
To take the most obvious and tangible example, the wine
before you is purely Australian, but the Australian wine
industry was fundamentally the creation of German
settlers in the nineteenth century.
German emigrants were there on the frontiers of
Australia's development almost from the beginning in
exploration, in agriculture, industry and intellectual
life; and in the post war period they have continued to
play a prominent role in building modern multicultural
Australia. The bonds of friendship between us are made so much
stronger because these historical and cultural links are
strong.
Mr President, let me say that your reputation precedes
you. 
As we Australians consider the future of our own
constitutional arrangements, it is of more than casual
interest to us to observe how effectively you have used
the office of head of state to promote an enlightened
view of Germany's international role in the changed
circumstances your country is now experiencing.
And, Mr President, we regard with great admiration your
appeals for tolerance and civility in addressing new
social challenges in the reunified Germany.
Through you we extend our greetings to 80 million Germans
re-united in freedom after four decades of division.
in doing so we know we greet a friend, a partner, a
people with whom we have more than a little in conmmon and
who face challenges similar to our own.
As we approach the end of the twentieth century we are
both confronted with a world of increasing complexity and
dynamic, gometimes bewildering, change.
The hopes engendered by the sudden end to the Cold War
have been dashed in many cases the post Cold War era
sometimes seems bleaker than we ever could have imagined.
Developments in Central and Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union have necessarily been a major preoccupation
of the German government, and Germany has done a great
deal to assist cotntrieg in these regions towards
democracy and economic efficiency.
In Australia we admire Germany's constructive engagement
in these problems.
In this fluid post Cold War environment Australia has
also focussed its attention on regional dialogue and an
emerging sense of regional common interest and identity.
We have promoted the establishment of the APEC process
which builds on the growing linkages and immense dynamism
of the Asia-Pacific economies.
With a world economy struggling to emerge from recession,
we desperately need the contribution that a fair and open
multilateral trading system can make to sustained global
growth.
Germany is in a powerful position to advance the cause of
such a system. Your country's influence in Europe is
crucial to a successful outcome of the Uruguay Round.
You will be aware that, particularly through the Cairns
Group, Australia has done all it can to bring the Round
to a positive conclusion. 
Mr President, for many years Germany has played a
constructive role in disarmament and non-proliforation,
on the environment, and on international development.
we value your willingness to help keep the international
peace; including in Cambodia, which for nearly 20 years
stood out as the focal point of suffering and instability
in South-East Asia, rather as Yugoslavia tragically does
today in South-East Europe.
We know that the development of a more engaged
international role for Germany is no easy task. We know
it is complicated by frequently conflicting expectations
abroad. It must be disconcerting to be at once
criticised for exercising too much power and too little.
For our part, we regard the Federal Republic as a good
international citizen and we welcome your commitment to
assuming all the responsibilities associated with being a
member of the UN and a major player within the
international community.
We also welcome the fact, Mr President, that Germany
continues to look beyond Europe. We are pleased that the
German government and business community are seeking to
cooperate with the countries of the Asia-Pacific region.
Your visit underlines this interest.
Just as we see scope for enhanced direct business
cooperation between Australia and Germany, so we will be
seeking opportunities for joint ventures in the region.
The presence of senior Germany business representatives
at a major trade and investment conference in Melbourne
in November we hope will lead to practical developments
of this kind.
Mr President, far from diminishing our ties with Europe,
we believe that Australia's increasingly strong links
with Asia will make us a more attractive partner for
European business, politics and culture.
We do not forget our long-standing links with you; nor do
we fail to recognise the opportunities which exist for us
in both the mature markets of Western Europe and the
evolving markets in Eastern Europe.
Germany is a perfect example of a valued European trading
partner both an important market and an important
source of investment.
In 1992 Germany was Australia's eighth-largest trading
partner with total two-way trade of $ 4.3 billion; and
there is $ 6.4 billion in German capital stock invested
here. 
Although we will remain a competitive and reliable
supplier of raw materials to German industry, we also
have, I believe, much to offer as a partner in
manufacturing and there is perhaps no better example of
this than the construction of the ANZAC ships which I
understand you saw last week at Williamstown in Victoria.
New areas for cooperation are emerging.
Our two countries recently signed a memorandum of
understanding on environmental cooperation. Australian
firms are engaged in restoring the environment of the new
Eastern states of Germany.
Australia is to be the partner country at the 1995 Cebit
Information Technology Fair in Hanover.
In the same year, the Australia Abroad Council is
planning to hold a major promotion in Germany, the focus
of which is likely to be Art and New Technologies.
And we have big plans to convert more and more Germans to
the pleasures of drinking Australian wine and eating
Australian food.
Despite our differing regional focus, our relationship is
strong and full of potential. Certainly the prospects
are extremely bright f or our companies to work together
with yours in our nearby markets, whether they be in the
Asia-Pacific or in Eastern Europe, Russia and other parts
of the former Soviet Union.
Kr President, of course our success in the future will
depend in a large part on the extent and the quality of
the contact between our two peoples. If we bring to our
relationship some of the spirit and imagination, the
energy and ideas which the early German settlers brought
to Australia, we are very likely to succeed.
The legendary German explorer, Ludwig Leichhardt, wrote
back to Germany in 1842:
Few come here to stay. But many change their minds
when they have come to discern the attractions of
this rich country, and to find its disadvantages
less irksome. Families of this kind he said who
are taking an interest in the colony, and who have
come to look upon it as their own country,
constitute, in fact, its only real wealth. And it
is through them that a powerful state will gradually
arise, a state which may possibly consign old Europe
to oblivion.
One does not have to believe the last part to see the
truth in the first. For it is true that Australia's
success is built on the faith of those who, abandoning
the old world, made this new world country unequivocally
their home.
T 0 Ob I T T f(' T !-A 
And it is also true, Mr President, that 19th century
settlers and late 20th century tourists and business
people alike, have come to Australia and found that the
attractions far out-weighed the disadvantages.
We hope there will be many more such people, Mr
President, and that you will in future, number yourself
among them. That you will leave Australia assured of the
friendship and good-will which exists between us. And
that you will come again.
I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to join me in
welcoming the President. 



TEL
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NEW NATIONAL PRESIDENT OF THE RSL
I was pleased to be able to meet today with the new National President of the
Returned Services League, Major General W. B. ( Digger) James.
I congratulated General James on his election to the position on 1 September, and
welcomed such an early opportunity to meet him in his new role.
The RSL is an important community voice in Australia, especially on matters such as
veterans' affairs and the conditions of service of serving Defence personnel.
I look forward to developing a good and constructive relationship between my
Government and the RSL, while acknowledging that we will continue to have our
differences ovcr somc issues.
In our mccting today, I assured General James that the Labor Government is
committed to ensuring that veterans and their dependants are compensated
appropriately for war service.
My colleague the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Senator Faulkncr, has appointed an
independent committee to undertake a thorough review of the veterans' compensation
program and to report to him in March next year to enable its recommendations to be
considered in the 1994-95 Budget context.
CANBERRA 8 SEPTEMBER, 1993 99/ 93
8. Sep. 93 13: 15 No. 005 P. 01/ 01 


9 September 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
&nbsp;It is nice to be here to be able to say a few nice things about Bob. I could actually say many nice things about Bob.
Bob is actually going to break the mould by getting out with some accolades. I think that as a Party person this is a great achievement. Someone said well, he hasn't had a lot out of it well, I think he has. He has a great sense of pride and achievement and he didn't need the word ' senato1 in front of his name or the initials ' MP' after it to think he made it. I think the fact that he has never suffered from an inferiority complex means he didn't need a label to actually prove to himself that he was worth it. So, I think he got a lot out of it.
I first met him in 1979, it was the time when Tommy and Arthur had adopted me for the second time to head Hawkie off at the pass in 1980. 1 went down to Victoria and I met Hoggie in the terrace house, at the Party office and Gerry he put Gerry in charge of me. I suppose he thought I was a bigger problem than Richmond council or another black bastard he said from Sydney. I had a terrific time with him. When I got back I said to Graham look, they are not all bad these fellas. Graham said look, I find that pretty hard to believe. I said to him no, no look that Hand actually I said look a great characteristic in the Left is there is no bloody sense of humour amongst them. I said that Hoggie, he gets a laughs out of most everything, I said and Gerry is a smoker, and a punter, a story teller. I said there is hope for the rest of us really with this crowd.
Of course what was happening was quite an important transition in Victoria and Bob's secretaryship meant the reaffirmation of the Party and Barry earlier mentioned himself and Michael Duffy is here tonight Mick and Button and others and John Cain who are on the outer and who Bob recognised as a force in Victoria and put together with a lot of tolerance and good sense an amalgam which saw the creation of the Victorian government. That is a hell of a thing to have on your CV putting a Labor government together in a place which hadn't had one for a long, long time.
Then, of course, as John Bannon said a moment ago this was the start of something big and we then went on to a Commonwealth Labor government and a State Labor government for most of the 1980s around Australia.
Bob played a substantial role in that. Then, like the BBC say when you get a good program, kill it when it peaks - he jumps straight off when he was doing well killed himself and resigned and went into Bob Hawke's office as Prime Ministerial Adviser and that is when he meet Peter Barron. Some one said to me today about him, he said God! they were a pair; he said Barron smoking his head off and talked to Richardson and Hoggie read The Age but between them, the pair of them they got it together and were a great force in those years and a political office which I think we will rarely see the like of.
The thing about Bob is an eminently successful person and the value of him is that he has already made a life for himself, chartered a course for himself outside of public life, outside of the Labor party. The very elements of his personality that have made him such a successful person are now giving him the promise of an interesting and varied life outside of public life, but of course still with a gaze on public life and employing those skills which he developed. Making the transition is as important as being able to do the task in the party, in the movement to be able to make that transition and still remain a useful Labor loyalist as he always will be is, of course, important.
The key thing about him is I think, that he was never self interested and he was never a slick apparatchik, that he did things which needed to be done at the time, he put himself outside of his own faction which is hard thing to do in the clubbie atmosphere of Victorian politics particularly on the left of the party and as John has said quite courageously he took positions which made a very great difference to the Labor party's future in matters like uranium in South Australia where probably John's government might not have been formed without that change on uranium policy at Roxby Downs. And of course, latterly with the great privatisation debates which have been important in dealing with areas of our commerce which we couldn't deal with while they were public authorities and also having large implications as they did for fiscal policy. Again, when ever the opportunity arose or when ever the need was there he was always there, prepared to take a lead and took enormous opprobrium for his stance his stance on uranium meant he lost friendships and lost regard amongst colleagues he lived twenty years with, but because he is consistent and because he is quality, he has lived to tell another story and to come back where others could see their ways and the correctness of his judgement.
So, he is a person of substance is our Bob and it is a great pity for us, in a sense, to lose him, but a pleasure for us to see him succeed in another way, in an industry which he has developed a long professional association with and where no doubt, his contacts with the Labor party will remain in tact. Bob will always be a Labor person. Whether he is in the employ of the party or what ever he is doing, he believes in Labor, he believes in the great strength of the Labor party and the way of the movement and its great goodness and I suppose, it is an important thing for us that we have in our society, beyond our party a whole spattering of people who are significant, influential and share our view of life.
So Bob, could I say on my behalf that I have always while I have had a few fights with him on occasions I have always liked you and I have on many occasions supported you and I know that you leave this very august position as our National Secretary with respect and regard of everybody.
Can I also just refer now briefly to 1990-1993 and say that in these two elections in which Bob was so influential, that we had the chance to give ourselves our longevity in office and in 1990 in that campaign where we were really facing as I suppose we have for so many now, difficult circumstances, we had our act together and that made a great difference to us and the same in 1993.
Here we are now in office, ten years going on eleven with thirteen ahead of us and a chance in the up cycle of the recovery and economic growth to turn thirteen into sixteen if we really want to do it. That is tremendous for the Labor party and for the Labor movement to see a generation of people come, serve and be replaced with another to give you the kind of continuity which we really never had the opportunity of having as a party and the chance to give Australia and present to Australia the real image of Labor which in many senses we were always cheated in giving that sense of social democracy which we have developed, built on the Australian ethos, the values of working class Australia and where we have now modelled this society, to a very large extent in our own image, turning it into a modem industrial economy, a competitive, outward looking economy, but grafting on to it one of the best safety nets and social fabrics in the world.
Very few parties get this chance, but we have been able now to do it because we have had time in office and to consistently apply ourselves to these very big questions. I noticed in today's Financial Review there was a front page which had a very graphic illustration of commodity prices and it showed them back at 1986 levels. You really have to ask yourself where would Australia now be without the Labor party? Where would we be if we left ourselves dependent on commodities as our conservative opponents would have left us in these years? Where would Australia be without the Labor party's breadth and ingenuity? On the same front page in the left hand corner was a stor-y of Telecom succeeding in picking up a telecommunications contract in Hong Kong which a decade ago would have been undreamt of. As you leaf through the paper there are stories splattered through it, just in one day which so typically indicate our success as a party in changing Australia, hedging our bets off it being simply a quarry and a mine, investing in our greatest resource our people and our children and developing innovative products which we are now marketing aggressively and successfully to the rest of the world.
So, I thought that said a great deal about the change we had made and also a day or so earlier, looking through the economist magazine we are now growing as fast as any western economy, in fact faster the only country that comes near us is the United States and that means we have been able to do, in these last couple of years what many countries have not been able to do and they are now growing negatively, if I can use that expression. Most of the OECD has got a minus in front of it for growth and we are sitting up there now with these growth rates.
The funny thing was Bill Kelty made the remark a few minutes ago to me on the table, he said God! it is hard to get a bloody break in Australia with the way things are in the media. You have got an expansionary Commonwealth Budget putting $ 2 billion into the economy, kicking growth along which has already been re-started, being roundly criticised, but a reactionary Budget in Victoria being hailed a day later followed by an unemployment rate of over 13 per cent in that State. You have got to say there is something screwy about the world which doesn't focus on the value which we in the Labor party have seemed to bring to things.
I think it is worth saying that in this Budget and the debate which has followed it, just how meticulous we have been in meeting our promises and doing the things that we have said the things that I said to people on election night, saying that we wouldn't leave an underclass of the unemployed to themselves, that we would reach back and pull them up, that we would actually focus on the big issues like unemployment and do the things we said we would do in support of Australian women and all of the other range of policies in our social platform. Meticulously we have put those into place in this Budget be it the home child care allowance or the generalised child care rebate or the extension of dental services to pensioners and beneficiaries and a wide range in fact we published a document with the Budget which listed the promises we had already met including cutting the company tax rate to 33 per cent, putting in a second investment allowance, all of those things which we have already done and accomplished and accommodated.
One hopes that as a bit of time passes we get a focus on the real issues again and the notion that the Labor party will always be into social progress and into its basic loyalty to those groups which have so earnestly and always supported us and that we won't be doing regressive things as we didn't do on this occasion.
I was pleased tonight that at least one person in conservative Australia, the leader of the National Farmers Federation had the courage to stand up and say to John Hewson what you are doing is wrong and indecent and it is bad for the economy, it is bad for public life. That you don't go voting against the Government's Budget measures in the Senate a point I had made a few days ago, a point some of the columnists had made in the last couple of days when I said last year if we were to have lost the election, we as an opposition would pass the GST and pass the money measures of a Coalition government. You would have at least thought with even the most elementary power of observation, the most cursory power of observation the Australian media would've said it is wrong for you John Hewson to turn your Opposition senators wilfully against the Budget so that the Government has to take the Budget down the highways and the byways of the minor parties. Morality in our public life will always be important and it is not too late for John Howson to do the right thing. He would earn more marks doing what is right than being wilful and stubborn and spiteful and continue to do what is wrong.
At least then we could say that the Coalition government recognises that they lost the last election and they give up the notion of trying to say that Labor governments are illegitimate by attacking at the first opportunity they have, the work of the Government which was fairly and properly elected.
So, there is at least some people prepared to call it as it is.
We have had our share of problems in the last week or two. I think, one would be less than honest not to admit that with the Budget and its reception. We have made some changes and they have probably been some good changes and made the Budget more acceptable. But be that as it may, we are not going to ever pass up the big issues simply to make sure that the cosmetics of our work is more acceptable to the electorate. We are working as we promised on the big issues and the biggest in Australia is unemployment. We have now again introduced another expansionary Budget, with the same fiscal stimulus as the ' One Nation' package, an economic policy that has worked, which as fired the economy back into growth, which is growing faster than any western economy, which is now going to get another $ 2 billion kick coupled with low interest rates, which is doing as much as we possibly can in macro-economic terms to promote growth and to promote employment.
Beyond that in the Budget, we expanded those labour market programs to now reach nearly 650,000 people who are unemployed and in November I will receive the Taskforce report into the labour market to see in which ways we might be able to do something novel in world terms here in Australia about a systemic approach to unemployment and particularly the problems of the long-term unemployed.
On this key issue of Budget and Budget measures and Budget debates notwithstanding, we will be focussing on that issue as promised later in the year when we receive that report. Similarly with the other big issues of the last few months MABO and APEC. On Mabo last week we presented our draft legislation. It is easily the best piece of social work the government had done in a decade in terms of its time, it attention, clear principles, it enunciates the long lines of logic which are there, hoping that we can produce a national settlement, an amalgam between the Commonwealth and the States, that embeds in Australian government and Australia society acceptance and not grudging acceptance, but whole hearted acceptance of the principle of native title and the fact that Aboriginal tradition and custom are the source of Australian common law and that native title exists in our common law. On this very large matter for Australian society and for our party which has always been committed to reconciliation between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australians on this very large issue we will continue to press for a principled solution, a principled ar~ d workable solution to a revolutionary problem in land management and one which seeks to meet the twin goals of justice for Aboriginal people and..
And also I mentioned APEC to you. APEC perhaps more than any other thing has the chance to provide jobs for the next generation of Australians and to guarantee our standard of living as perhaps nothing else we can do can. I leave on Saturday to meet President Clinton in the United States. Naturally, this is one of the issues I will be speaking to him about.
Normally, when Australian Prime Ministers go to the United States, the issues on the top of our agenda are rarely if ever the issues on the top of the US agenda. On this occasion APEC is one of the issues on the top of the US agenda and it is also one of the issues on the top of our agenda. So, I am hoping with that opportunity to be able to talk to the President about the opportunities in the Asia Pacific, about the importance of the role of the United States in the Asia Pacific, its power for good in putting the stamp of the largest liberal democracy on APEC, of keeping it involved strategically in our region and opening up the opportunities of open regionalism and freerer trade in which Australia can participate. If we get APEC to a strong, multilateral body which is given authority at heads of government level, we will have given Australia a seat at the largest table in its history a table that it's largely, in a way, created for itself. But one it can only create with others, but one which has got tremendous influences for Australians; for the standard of living, Australian employment and the way we will be as a society into the next century.
These are all very large measures, very large issues and core issues which we are intending to over the course of this Parliament and indeed this year.
So people in the Party should not for a moment think there has been a bit of this comment we have lost our way. Well, pigs we have lost our way. We haven't at all lost our way and we should not be a moment discouraged by the fact that we have had difficulties with the reception to the Budget because in this game it is a game for the long term and the medium term it is not for this week or next month it is for the long run. Our conservative opponents have got nothing to offer. John Hewson has junked his GST and he has junked Fightback. At the moment he doesn't even have a policy, and his policy is to wilfully oppose the legislation of the Government in the Upper House of our country the Senate, and supposedly pass this off as basically a solution to Australia's problems. It is no solution and while they are doing that, we are working on issues so large, like Mabo and APEC and a long-term solution to unemployment, so large that I think they give the promise of being able to sustain our Party a long time into the future.
Let's be grateful for the fact that we have had ten years in office, that we are on our way to thirteen and that we remain a party of imagination and principal and that we do fight for good and worthwhile things and while ever we have breath in us we will always seek to do innovative, imaginative things which are good for the society, good for this country.
The Labor party is the only real political party in Australia as we all in this room know. The Coalition parties are really like business organisations, more than they are political parties. The Labor party is a real political party with feelings, with loyalties, with notions of fairness many of which they have developed themselves. This in part comes from the ethos of the people we represent working class and middle class Australia and the people who join us and participate in our affairs.
Let me return to where I began. Tonight we are sending off one of those people Bob Hogg. One of the people who in a relatively long political life, but in not a very long period has made such an outstanding contribution to Australian public life and the culture of Labor in Australia.
Bob, let me say as the Party's parliamentary leader, again, recap and just make that point that we owe you a debt of gratitude, we appreciate the things you have done, we appreciate your integrity and your sense of what was right and what needed to be done at the time and say how much influence it has had on all of us and how much influence you have had on all of us and make the point that it is because of people like you, we are the Party that we are a Party of principle and a Party of achievement which will go on to do other things and which will generate more Bob Hoggs and keep the Australian Labor Party the great Party that we in this room know it to be.
Thank you
&nbsp;


I am pleased to announce that Australia Today Indonesia ' 94, the largest trade and cultural promotion ever undertaken by Australia in Indonesia, will be held in Jakarta next year. The promotion is sponsored by the Australia Abroad Council and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Australia attaches a high priority to its relationship with Indonesia, a close neighbour and friend. Australia has already put considerable work into developing the relationship, including through my visit to Indonesia last year, the establishment of the Australia- Indonesia Ministerial Forum ( which met for the first time in late 1992) and the work of the Australia Indonesia Institute in increasing people-to-people ties and mutual understanding.
Indonesia was Australia's tenth largest trading partner in 1992 with Australia exporting $ 137 billion worth of goods and services to Indonesia and importing $ 1.2 billion from Indonesia. Since 1990 the valuc of imports from Indonesia has increased by 138 percent and the value of exports by 27 percent.
Australia Today Indonesia ' 94 will provide an opportunity to showcase Australian achievements in trade and industry, science and technology, education, the arts, sports, media and film, tourism and other areas of distinctive Australian capability. Austrlia Today Indonesia ' 94 will also establish new links between our two countries and promote the continuing strong ties between us in a broad range of areas.
Australia has much to offer Indonesia. Our advanced industrial, scientifc and technological capabilities position us well to develop partnerships with business, government and educational organisations in Indonesia. The promotion will also develop the understanding between our peoples through a cultural program that includes per-forming and visual arts, film and television, sports and popular entertainment.
Australia Today Indonesia ' 94 will be held mainly in Jakarta over June-July 1994 with some events in Surabaya, Yogyakarta and other Indonesian cities. A major Trade and Industry exhibition at the Hilton Convention Centre in Jakarta will provide the centrepiece of the promotion.
The Commonwealth Government has provided $ 2 million to the promotion and State and Territory Governments arc also closely involved. Many companies are exhibiting and supporting the events.
CANBERRA10 September 1993 0


I received this morning a personal message from President Clinton asking my&nbsp;agreement to delay by 24 hours our meeting in Washington next Monday.&nbsp;He explained this had become necessary because of his desire to hold a&nbsp;large-scale ceremony at the White House that day to mark the formal&nbsp;conclusion of the agreement on Palestinian self-rule between Israel and the&nbsp;Palestine Liberation Organisation. Other circumstances mean the President&nbsp;has no choice with the timing of the Middle East ceremony.
The President reassured me of the importance he attaches to our meeting&nbsp;and the relationship with Australia, and offered to help rearrange other events in my Washington program.
In response, I have told the President that Australia warmly welcomes the&nbsp;exciting and historic breakthrough which has been achieved in the&nbsp;Middle East process. The agreement on mutual recognition between Israel&nbsp;and the Palestine Liberation Organisation will end 30 years of unbroken&nbsp;hostility. Australia congratulates the parties to the agreement and commends&nbsp;the consistent support the United States has given to the peace process.
I have assured the President that I understand perfectly the need to&nbsp;reschedule our meeting and that I look forward to seeing him on Tuesday
CANBERRA10 September 1993&nbsp;


10 September&nbsp;1993
E &amp; O E PROOF COPY
Journalist: Mr Keating, I would like to start with the view of you that so many people see. What they see is the style, the fists up, the fighter. It is rough isn't it?)
PM: It is combative. Politics in Australia is very combative and our Parliamentary chamber all the debates are extemporaneous, like our question period. There is nothing with notice, it is all without notice. So, one has to have most of the detail rolling around one's head, so therefore at will, one can draw it down and use it. The whole thing has a sharp combativeness to it.
Journalist Yes, but it hurts, it is meant to hurt.
PM: Yes, but it also gives one the opportunity to persuade people it is also persuasive at its best. Often the film clips are not often the best bits, but the persuasive bits. I think in these sorts of environments Parliamentary chambers one can be persuasive and that is one of the powers of politics to persuade people, to interest them.
Journalist Yes, but is it persuasive to call somebody a ' scumbag', to talk about somebody's ashened faced performances? That is not persuasion.
PM: No, but that all has its place in the intimidatory part of it all, which has its own little spot as well. It is a smorgasbord of technique6s one applies in any of these things. But, in the last decade we have changed Australia from an inward looking country to an outward looking one. I have had a substantial role in that, so ones had an educative role as well as a policy role. All too infrequently that role is diminished compared to the cut and thrust of the Parliament.
Journalist Still, a friend said about you, that when you are at your most combative, that you bruise not just the ego but the soul.
PM: I probably have on occasions more to be regretted, but it is all a bit sweeter than it looks let me say. Journalism naturally looks for hype and extravagance and they find a bit of that.
Journalist And you give it to them?
PM: And it gets repeated, but mostly it is reasonable and about reason and it is mostly sweeter.
Journalist What makes you such a fighter, is it the Irish background?
PM: I don't know. I have what I think is a well honed sense of fairness and when one dispenses fairness, one expects fairness. That is not just about oneself, but about national issues or about opportunity or about disadvantage. So, one feels the pinch of these issues and if you are passionate about them you put it. I think that is where it comes from -I think if you have a well honed sense of fairness and something nice is done, you are appropriately pleased. If something poor is happening, you are offended and I am offended by things like disadvantage, poverty, as I am excited by opportunity and advantage. So, it is a matter of that play of emotions which is in ones personality.
Journalist But you are passionate? Do you think that is an aspect from the Irish?
PM: That is true. I am passionate, yes I am.
Journalist Is that an aspect of Irishness do you think?
PM: This is a characteristic of the Irish, I think very obviously a characteristic of the Irish. It is pretty true of Australian-Irish people and particularly true of Austral ian-Irish politicians.
Journalist Why did your people leave Ireland?
PM: I don't know, but they left of their own free will in 1855, just after the famine. I presume it was the surfeit of labour which was around for the economic opportunity which existed and they took what they thought was a sensible decision to leave.
Journalist Did they leave at all with a particular view of how Britain treated Ireland? H-as that affected your own attitudes?
PM: No, I don't think so. I think that they saw for themselves limited opportunities and probably the deprivation which came in the late 1 840s and early 1 850S and looked at the places where they had relatives and they had relatives here in Australia.
Journalist Do you know much about them and how they came, what it was like for them?
PM: Not very much, no, but I do know accurately who came and where they lived and how all the family followed after that. The thing about the Irish and Australia is that they settled not in particular areas, but across the country and they very quickly opened up a lot of provisions and commerce to themselves and they were very quickly taken up in the main stream of Australian life. They were here in the early part of the formation of this country so, in a sense, they were part of the change rather than arriving as a group after it had already established itself, which was, say, the case in the United States.
Journalist But what has it meant to you to be an Irish Catholic in Australia?
&nbsp;PM: When I was a child, if one was a Catholic one was disadvantaged. I was still around when job advertisements were written that Catholics need not apply. You would never see that today in Australia, but it was still a remnant of it about when I was an adolescent. A lot of the opportunities which were more, generally available to the rest of the community were not always available to Catholics. The whole equality of opportunity which has become and is part of the Australian ethos has changed all that. Now where this issue was once a great issue, sectarianism, in my party, the Australian Labor Party, is not today.
Journalist But that experience of disadvantage left you with a particular political view of the world.
PM-It gives you great respect for minorities and the sharpness of the disadvantage they feel. I am not saying to you that I was economically disadvantaged I wasn't, but there was a subliminal disadvantage there which was obvious to you. Whether one looks at Australia at the various ethnic groupings be it the blacks or the southern Europeans or the Asians one naturally has a more sympathetic view.
Journalist You talk about your working class background, you are seen and referred to as a working class boy, you started work early, didn't go to university and yet people look at you and they see a man who enjoys the fine things of life, who enjoys fine Italian tailoring, who enjoys objects d'art. Have you come a long way, maybe too far from that working class background?
PM: No, I will always be loyal to the working class I have always been loyal to working people. Let me leave the class point out because Australia is not a class based society. This is not Britain, for instance. But to the aspirations of working Australians are the loyalties which I have and I have spent now a decade, the second decade of my public life trying, to advantage materially by way of employment and across the spectrum of issues, the interests of working Australians. But again, one learns things in life and so one should. The fact that I developed an interest in eighteenth century architecture and decoration and furniture and things like that is just simply a commentary on one's interests, that is all. It has nothing to do with ones &nbsp;politic's or ones loyalties.
Journalist Just a last question on what was obviously a very close working class family background, it has affected your own attitude to family hasn't it, family matters terribly to you, your own family?
PM: It does, yes. I think that the great nurturing and development and sense of confidence which children have from a family where there is a lot of affection and care, sticks with them all their life. I think that confidence is part of an inner confidence which they draw down for the rest of their life. This is not true for everybody, I understand that, but it has been true for me and it is true for my family.
Journalist Your wife doesn't work, she may carry a lot of that load for you. PM: She did, she has. She is doing a fair bit of work now in this position, as any Prime Minister's wife does, but we have invested a lot of interest in our children and we hope we are developing nice personalities.
Journalist A last question really on what would have been your youth. You ran a band called the Ramrods, God bless you, was it maybe the only time that you were tempted away from a political career.
PM: No, I joined the Labor Party when I was fifteen and I always saw public life as a big canvas".-The board was there but you did need the palette you needed to be in the game. I had other interests. In the 1 960s when I was an adolescent was this great bounty of popular music which, of course, has really sustained popular music now for two or three decades and I was enjoying that as much as anybody else and I participated in it. My first love was always classical music and I have returned to that and it is now one of the great continuing sources of joy for me, particularly now the compact disc is here with performances of people in the ' 30s and ' 40s which you couldn't procure on vinyl. I think all those things makes the quality of life so much better.
Journalist And your favourite composers apart from the great song writers of he 60’s.
PM: My favourite composers are Germans Richard Strauss; Mahler; Brahms; Elgar who is English; Gabriel Faur6, French; Beethoven, German they are basically in the 19th Century and early Century.
Journalist To move on to something that has captured the imagination of a lot of people in this country which has been your declaration of wanting a referendum on a republic in this country. Don't you want Queen Elizabeth as your Queen, don't you want her?
PM: In the long run it is not a matter of Queen Elizabeth herself as a personality because I think she has been a most conscientious Monarch. But if the question is rather do we want the Monarchy in the long run? The answer has to be an unequivocal no, we don't. Australia's population, its culture, its place in the world, its aspirations, its dignity are inconsistent with having an English Monarch as our head of state.
Journalist Can I put to you some of the things that have been said about you. Obviously it is a controversial position to adopt. You have been criticised as just another Irish Pom basher with a chip on his shoulder. PM: Yes, well, that is silly and unfair, but there are'a lot of silly and unfair people around.
Journalist But is it the Irish in you that doesn't like Kings and Queens and regalia?
PM: No, it is probably in some respects the Catholic in me. That is, that we are all born equally and we die equally and we are children of Christ. Therefore we possess, each, an innate human dignity and therefore that should be given every chance of expression. And where we to choose any group of people or any individual to manage us in the social contract we are part of, it ought to be someone chosen on the basis of those innate qualities and dignity understanding as they must that their governing and managing other people with the same qualities. Therefore, I do not think that is consistent with heredity governance whether that be constitutional monarchs or any other sort of hereditary position. For Australia it has worked at various times, for Britain it still works. But for Australia for the future it won't work.
Journalist But, how long have you felt this way? We have only heard this from you in the last few years Bob Hawke didn't go on about it.
PM: Well, he may have had different views. He shares my view about the republic, but he didn't make it an issue during his Prime Ministership.
Journalist Why?
PM: I don't know really, these are just one of those things. I think probably preoccupied with other pressing issues of change.
Journalist So how long has it been an issue for you?
PM: It has been an issue in my mind for a very long period of time. Again, you only have a chance to move these issues along in a position like this.
Journalist There are some people, maybe unkindly, who say that it is a diversion from the economy.
PM: Yes, well, we are now growing faster than any western economy. We are growing at about 3 per cent a year and we have the prospect of growth accelerating, so that is not really a valid criticism. There is an old saying in Australia the dogs may bark, but the caravan moves on. You will always have yappers, critics, but one has to keep going.
Journalist You will, but won't you have people who genuinely felt hurt at some of the comments you made about Britain's role during the War? Some of the old service men were very proud of the records and proud of their service.
PM: And as they are entitled to be and I acknowledged how could you but acknowledge the casualties, and the service given by British soldiers and sailors in the Pacific campaign. But, that is not to make that point which one makes validly it is to be able to make the other essential point and that was, in the eyes of the British government during the War, Australia was expendable and that in a sense Australia was kidded along. That Singapore and the base there had in some way provided a bastion of defence for us it didn't. But we were never really told that and we were left to face a Japanese invasion. Now, the truth is the truth -and the truth has to be said.
Journalist There still are people and I am talking about something precious that people may miss. There were many people in this country who felt that the link with Britain and the Crown made them belong to something bigger than Australia was, gave them the feeling that they were connected may be with an empire, with a sort of master nation.
PM: That is very true.
Journalist And will they lose that, will it be enough to be Australian?
PM: I think it is going to be more than enough to be Australian that is part of the point. If one wants to one should represent this nation as it is. That is, as it is now independent, independently minded, proud of a culture of its own, and if it wants to belong to anything it should belong to the family of the Pacific nations its natural place and not an unnatural place. Can I also say though, that we have always been a member of the Commonwealth and we would remain, in my view, a member of the Commonwealth, which I think is a useful body. So, in a sense a lot of countries which have become republics and there are many of them in the Commonwealth have remained Commonwealth countries which we would well do, which I believe we would do.
Journalist You are still heading off to Britain though knowing that you are a ' hate' figure in the British press. They call you.-
PM: I don't think that's true.
Journalist Well, Ned Kelly the Lizard of Oz; Ned Kelly in an Italian suit. PM: Well, that is only the low lives who run the British tabloids, we all know about them. But in terms of the broadsheets I had a lot of support in The Times and The Daily Telegraph about the argument about policy during the War and even more support about the republic, So, in the quality press, I think, there is a lot of interest in Britain in Australia which we appreciate and let me make this perfectly clear to you. I think that Britain is an important part of Australia's heritage and it should remain that way: the links, as is the case with Ireland. Journalist Yes.
PM: And they should remain that way. In many respects sorting out our long run constitutional arrangements will actually leave a better feeling about Britain.
Journalist I know many people would love to be a fly on the wall during this conversation, what will you be saying to the Queen when you meet her?
PM: I don't think I can say exactly what I will be saying to her because the convention is, and it is an appropriate one, that the conversation remains private. But, I was asked will I be referring to my Party's views about a shift to a republic and the answer to that is in the affirmative, I will. I would be less than frank if I were not to do that with the Queen and I would never be less than frank with her.
Journalist Do you think she would be sorry to break that link? PM: Yes, but again it is a decision that is going to be taken by the Australian people at a referendum. Not by me or this Government, but by the Australian nation and I don't think she would be therefore sorry that they took that decision provided that the warmth and the affection of Australians for Britain and British institutions remain. I think that would and as I said to you a moment ago, that could even be given a fuller expression once, if you like, some of the embarrassment of the current constitutional arrangements pass.
Journalist A quick question, people are worried about the sort of Australian president, head of state that would replace the Queen. Have you at all thought about the Irish model of the Presidency, you have met our President?
PM: Yes, I was very pleased to meet your President. We really enjoyed her visit here and she made a very large impact on Australia. I think in fact she provided a very nice example of a republic and a Presidency to the Australian people. But as to structures I think you are asking me about the modalities of elections, are you or
Journalist No, I didn't want to really get into that, but wondered whether Mary Robinson and the sort of the President she is would be the sort of model you would look to?
PM: Absolutely, I think she fulfils the office with great distinction and were that to be emulated in any way in Australia we would do well out of the presidency.
Journalist To move on to Asia. You have spoken so much about it and the need for Australia to belong in this particular part of the world. Will Asian countries feel differently about you if you are a republic? PM: I think so, yes.
Journalist Why?
PM: Because I think they want to deal with Australia as a full partner in the Asia Pacific. They don't want to see us as a derivative society, even if the derivation comes from the constitutional arrangement which has been so long standing. Because we are, in a generic sense, representing ourselves by whoever is our head of state and in a generic sense representing the country and its great attractions and its products to be there in this area of the world where there are diverse cultures, you have got to stand on your own feet and be as you are.
Journalist Won't it be difficult though for many Australians to embrace Asia there are barriers of language, there are cultural barriers of history
PM: Much less difficult today than thirty years ago.
Journalist But, say taking the sort of nature of some of the states you are talking about, basic questions of democracy and human rights. Take Indonesia for instance and its record of human rights in East Timor. PM: Yes, but take Indonesia as an old society of 180 million people and what we are seeing there is a move, a very egalitarian move of the distribution of national wealth, consistent rising levels of incomes there is nothing about in the broad of Indonesia's national life that make Australians feel as though they want to be part, in some way, of that change. Certainly with Timor there has been great problems and from our point of view these incidents where human rights have been asunder has displeased us and we have said so.
Journalist But not strongly enough. Your own Parliamentary Committee on the whole question of the Dili massacre felt that your response was soft, I think they said.
PM: I reject that because I think thaC President Soeharto and the Indonesian Cabinet decided to take disciplinary action against some of the officers involved in this massacre and I think for the first time, and probably a long time, there was a real. response from Indonesia to the objections which countries like Australia took. But, one can't hold a whole national relationship to ransom in perptuity over that. The issue for us is to encourage Indonesia not to do these things and to economically develop Timor so that the cause is removed.
Journalist But I am talking to you, having come from a country which saw the pictures on television of the people killed in Dili and who know that Australia, above all, was the nation with the white hat, the nation that stood up for a fair go within the Commonwealth. People in Ireland are asking why hasn't the Australian government, why hasn't Paul Keating created merry-hell about what is going on in East Timor?
PM: But we have.
Journalist Very quietly.
PM: We are not going to say it was like though the Europeans saying we will not deal with northern Ireland, we will not deal with you because of the way you conduct yourselves you can't do that to states. You can make your objections, but you can't in the end, not with this proximity and not this relationship.
Journalist But you have gone further. You, for instance have an agreement with the Indonesians over oil exploration in the Timor Gap and it so annoys the Portuguese that you should be there, that you should have done that a country they regard as illegally occupying East Timor that they are taking you to the International Court of Justice.
PM: The Portuguese were total hypocrites, they were the worst colonists in this part of the world, they left no legacy behind and we have now got a common continental shelf between which it is impossible to configure boundaries and so we are jointly developing it. It is the same sorts of things that happened in the North Sea, it is just a sensible way to conduct oneself and to be in any way moved by the hypocrisy of Portugal in this exercise would be foolish indeed.
Journalist But by doing so, aren't you recognising a questionable occupation, an illegal occupation?
PM: That debate is over. The time to have had that was in the middle 1 970s that opportunity has past. I think, to be arguing now against the incorporation of East Timor into Indonesia would be absolutely fruitless, but what one should argue is that those people be properly treated and that opportunities be made available to them and that the Indonesian authorities change their tune in relation to human rights, especially for Tirmor. All those points. have been made, but the critics want them to be made at the expense of the total relationship and that is not reasonable.
Journalist You are a very inventive name caller, a very inventive user of words is that an Irish thing?
PM: It is very much an Irish thing. I like to use words, to paint word pictures, to use the language creatively, to put a complex argument simply or to develop some emotional colour. Now, I am sure there is something about the Irish in that, because the Irish love words. The great literary tradition of Ireland is manifest and obvious and the passion with which the Irish argue over things and then use the words, paint the pictures well, there is a bit of that happening here.
Journalist To move back to prosaic things the economy, the move of Australians and the facing of Australia towards Asia and its Asian neighbours is vital for your economic survival.
PM: It is-We have made a very great cultural change here. Ten years ago this was a closed country with high tariffs, shipping a bit of wheat and wool, dependent only on commodities. Now the fastest growing exports here are elaborately transformed manufactures, technology products like telecommunications equipment, medical equipment, services, and that has required a very large cultural change inside Australia. We have started that change in our education system. A decade ago only two children in ten completed secondary school now it is eight in ten and we are streaming those people through universities and through polytechnics and that is providing the horse power to our research and development. We are investing in our greatest resource our people.
Journalist You have been very big and committed to the notion of turning a closed economy around to meet the world. You have pinned your hopes on a freer trade world, but while you have brought down the tariff barriers, the rest of the world hasn't always been so obliging has it?
PM: No, but we brought them down in what we think are our best interests as well as others'. The most, I suppose it's an unlikely fact, but the fact is that it has taken a Labor government to turn Australia into a market economy. But it is a market economy with a very nice social safety net grafted on to it and in developing that amalgam, we think we are doing somathing which ic infamqf~ ino in world tArms, in social democratic terms.
Journalist But there would be those as the St Vincent de Paul society yesterday did would point to the high level of unemployment and say you are bringing down the barriers too fast and it is time to slow down. PM: Yes, but it is not tariff barriers producing that. It is just that the international recession has largely produced that, but importantly while those people are unemployed, we have got a good safety net there supporting them be it in health care, in education or just in income support; as we have for low income families, as we have great supporting policies for women, the role of women in our society. We have done something interesting here in Australia.
Journalist But have you done maybe something you really needed to do, which is to bring wages down to the competitive levels of the economies with which you are competing?
PM: We have brought them down enough to make our products competitive, but our products are not highly labour intensive products, they are mostly higher technology products. So you can secure a premium for those products, therefore one doesn't have to pay very low wages to compete with products with a high labour content. We are leaving those products to the Chinese and to others, while we exploit the higher echelons of production.
Journalist To get back to the free ' trade , argument. How do Australian farmers feel when they have to export their produce without subsidy into markets where they are competing with French and maybe Irish produce which is subsidised?
PM: French and definitely Irish. They feel cheated and they feel as though the world is having them on and that is why we have argued so much in the Uruguay round for a diminution of subsidies for our agricultural trade. We say that the countries that reduce their subsidies will be better off anyway in economic terms that their economic societies will be more robust and there will be better levels of employment, maybe different levels of employment, but better levels and a better economic performance.
Journalist Will you be telling this to Albert Reynolds?
PM: I think he will expect the message anyway. It has been coming for a decade, but we are saying yes, it will work to our advantage in being able to sell into non-corrupted markets, But it will also work to the advantage of those who are now in corrupted markets, like the huge costs of the EEC subsidies and the dreadful, lead weight that puts on
the economic performance of Europe. Take that weight off, Europe will perform better, Ireland will perform better and you end up with a better economy. That is what we have done here with protection and we have proved the point. We have lowered protection and we have advantaged ourselves. I
Journalist And you have 11 per cent unemployment? How does the ' world's greatest Treasurer' explain that?
PM: But we are a more fully employed society now than we have ever been. That is 11 per cent unemployment the most massively high participation rates. If Australia had the same participation rates in its workforce as say, the United States does, we would have unemployment at 6 per cent, If we had the same participation rates today in Australia as we had in the early ' 80s we would have unemployment at 5 per cent or 6 per cent but we encouraged through the massive growth of employment in the ' 80s, particularly the involvement of women in the work force, a huge participation rate and that is why really, unemployment is quite as high as it is, but why we are so committed to getting it down. We are not just sitting, waiting for something to happen, we are actually actively trying to grow the economy and get unemployment down.
Journalist Still though, if you had to choose a time to leave the country, looking at the headlines in the papers these last few days and people's anger about the level of unemployment this is as good as time as any to go. You have said yourself the picture ain't rosy.
PM: No, but again Australia shares equal growth place in the world now with the United States that is 2.5 to 3 per cent. Most of Europe is in negative growth, if I can use the expression. Most of Europe is contracting. In relative terms, we are doing well, but not well enough.
Journalist Tell that to the dole queues.
PM: That is right, but again I am not leaving Australia to I am leaving Australia to do something more, to try and advantage our economic circumstances and particularly in things like APE-C which is developing the economic region of the Asia Pacific which will be a great long-term advantage to Australia.
Journalist We have an unemployment problem which is twice as bad as yours and Irish people traditionally have looked to this country as somewhere they can get a job. What would you advise them right now?
PM: I still think the largest single source, while 50 per cent of our migration -comes from Asia, the largest single source still comes from Britain and Ireland, the British Isles and Ireland and that will probably remain true.
Journalist But should they stay at home right nowel
PM: If people are trained they will find work here. It is about how quickly they move, the velocity with which they-move through that pool of unemployment. We have here also labour market programs, job subsidies, training and work experience to take the longer term unemployed back into the work force.' As this economy picks up and employment picks up, the prospects of finding jobs here are going to be much better than they are even today.
Journalist When you look back at Australia's history and Australia's treatment of their Aborigines, what do you see?
PM: Disadvantage and dispossession. We are now taking an opportunity presented by a fundamental change in our law by our most supreme of courts the High Court of Australia which has said that there is a native title in the common law of Australia. So, we are now as a government embarking on a process of developing a whole body of administrative law to handle what is really a revolution in land management with this decision.
Journalist The native right will exist though, in limited cases, we need not go into the details, it is a complex question. Is that going to be adequate to compensate these people for what they have gone through?
PM: No, and we will be doing more than simply recognising this native title.
Journalist You will be giving compensation?
PM: Well, it is compensation that comes in a sense, automatically, but we are doing more than that. We are selling up land funds to buy back land at some point in time, when we announce a package of measures for social justice, for justice for Aboriginal people who cannot advantage themselves from this decision. But, the importance of the decision is that land which Aboriginal people in Australia now secure will not be conferred on them by the rest of us. It will not be gifted to them by the parliaments of Australia, it will theirs of right, it will be theirs on inherent right and the difference in that compared to the position they have formerly been in is all the world of difference.
Journalist You are still meeting resistance though aren't you, particularly in mining areas, they don't like this?
PM: You will always meet resistance from conservative elements, that do not want to give land to black people it is as simple as that. You will always meet that resistance, but I believe we will overcome that resistance and go a long way to removing the stain of dispossession which is part of the former legal concept of what was called terra nullius the land of no one. Where our law never recognised Aboriginal custom and title.
Journalist And remove a blot on your own country's history? PM: I think so and to become the society we are becoming for everybody to embrace the country. Our indigenes must feel that they can embrace it, and where that disadvantage and dLpossession becomes a thing in their memory.
Journalist Since you have become Prime Minister, we have seen some big brush strokes on the canvas here. We have seen perhaps the beginning of an historic settlement with the Aboriginal people, we have seen the conscious embracing of Australia's place in this part of the world, we have seen the very determined moves towards a republic. What does it all add up to, paint me the big picture?
PM: The big picture is a more independent, confident country representing itself as it has now become and with the pride that comes with the dignity of managing your own affairs absolutely. For a nation, it is like breathing fresh air into the place it will invigorate it and give it the possibility of yielding for itself a future that in past modes it could never have possibly contemplated.
Journalist Is that why Australia has never had as you have said, a great leader?
PM: Maybe our circumstances the fact that we have never had great cathartic periods of our history, probably meant that we never needed at the time to produce them. But our leadership has been good enough when it has mattered in WWI in WW2, at various other periods. That is the main thing the country has always been able to meet its requirements in terms of its political leadership.
Journalist Does it matter very much now?
PM I am a punter, I tend to take political risks and I don't mind risking my own hide from time to time because as I have always said to my colleagues, the worst thing that could happen to you in this game is you loose your job, so why be a mouse? Why hang back? Why not punt it up occasionally? And on the big ticket items like the Mabo decision on native title or the republic or the big economic changes, as they say in Australia, let's have a go, lets give it a try.
Journalist So the great leader that Australia has never had, could you be he?
PM: No leader is entitled to talk about themselves. That is all for someone else's assessment. All one should do at the time is understand the ramifications of the issues and try and take the best and most courageous decisions. If, in the wash up, there is a national advantage in there, well, good.
Journalist Finally, even though this country is so very far away, it has always been in the Irish mind, part of our ambit, part of the English speaking world, a place we could come to even though it is so far away, where we could feel at home. Now, you are moving towards Asia, you are plugging into this part of the world, yjou are breaking your links with Britain. Are you going to leave us behind as well?
&nbsp;PM: No, I don't think so. No individual group in this country, no ethnic group here is ever asked to leave things behind. Commitment to Australia yes, but breaking emotional ties with their countries of origin or their friendships no. Why? It is unreasonable and unnecessary. So, British people who are here will always naturally keep pride in terms of their relationship with Britain and be emotionally attached to it. And that will always be true, of the Irish and of course, we say often in Australia the Australian Irish are sentimental to the last tear drop, and I think that is true and always sentimental about Ireland. That is true of me as it is of anybody of Irish descent. I have only been there once in my life, but everything about the place it is soft on the eye and it is soft on the soul and that will always be a place where an Australian of Irish descent can go. And an Irish person can come to this country and feel as though they are in a society they can immediately take a part of. The great thing about Australia is, that is true of so many nations.
Journalist Paul Keating, thank you.
PM: Thank you.
&nbsp;


11 September. 1993
Journalist: …farewell message to the Greens?
PM: I think we can give a farewell message to the Senate and just say, look, everyone's had their sport at this stage, it's now time I think for the nation, the national interest, to get a look-in. And this particularly applies to the Liberal Party. I can only reiterate what Mr Blight said the other day: it's not for the Liberal Party to be opposing Budget Bills in the Senate.
Now, they've all made their point, they've all made their political point about the particular measures that's the Liberal Party, the Democrats and the Greens and I think it's now time for them to think about the nation and getting on with the business of government and behaving like the people, the responsible people, they're supposed to be.
Journalist: What about a bit more compromise on your part, though?
PM: Well, there's been enough compromise. I mean, the Greens want us to lop a half a billion off defence, to scrap the submarine program, to lift the company tax rate, to put a surcharge on incomes: that's not compromise, that's an alternative Budget and it is basically vandalising things like defence policy and also our corporate shill into Asia, because the Greens are worried about exports they say we are not supporting the domestic markets, for God's sake. I mean they must be the only group of people in the country that don't believe in exports. I mean, they seriously say to us, "we're worried about exports". So the thing is that it's time for them also to understand that they've got responsibilities and that the Government has a fair Budget and it deserves passage.
Journalist: Are you worried about the financial markets’ &nbsp;reaction to what the Greens…?
PM: Well, these sort of things go on in every country of the world, I think. And the Budget's a fundamentally good Budget, in financial market terms if anything, it's too responsible in financial market terms and I've got every confidence that it will pass in the Senate.
Journalist: message to Bill Kelty about where the IR reforms..?
PM: Well, that's a negotiating thing and that will take a while to work through.
Journalist: But are you determined still that non-unionists will have access…?
PM: I'm not writing your Sunday column for you, Amanda (Buckley). You've all got to get off' your tail and do your own work.
Journalist: Are you disappointed that the meeting with the President has been delayed by a day..?
PM: No. I think, given what's happened in the Middle East, this is probably a good arrangement for the President and for me. It is such a momentous occasion and I think giving it the recognition the President is giving it is a good thing to be doing, in Middle East and world terms and, not only do I understand, I certainly agree that that's where the priorities should be. And we can discuss then, in the relative peace of the next day, things of interest to us.
Of course, on this visit, I think that where there is an unusual coincidence is that, normally when an Australian Prime Minister meets an American President, what is on the top of our agenda is not normally on the top of their agenda. But this time, that's not so, and I think that with APEC, Asia Pacific Economic Co-Operation or, maybe, Asia Pacific Economic &nbsp;Community that this is very much uppermost in the Americans' minds, as it is in ours.
So, I'm looking forward to President Clinton. I think he's a breath of fresh air in the world I've thought that from the day he really turned on some form in the primaries and I'm really looking forward to meeting him.
Journalist: And what are you going to say to the Queen at Balmoral?
PM: Well, the Queen's always, I think, a very convivial host, and she'll obviously he treated by me with the respect and regard and admiration which I've always had for her.
Journalist: Do you expect a sympathetic response to the call for Australia to become a republic?
PM: Well I'm not campaigning with the Queen, but she's entitled to know my views, and my party's views, and one would be less than frank to not tell her. But her staffwork is, I'm sure, tip top and she would have all of our published remarks already. So I don't think anyone in the Australian media should assume that the Queen is anything other than entirely aware of our views.
&nbsp;Journalist: What odds Sydney for the Olympic Games?
&nbsp;PM: I think Sydney's in there with a chance, a very good chance. But in any ballot and this is a ballot in any ballot you never know till the end, and the numbers are so fine, and the interests so diverse, you can't. (inaudible) until it's all over.
Journalist: There seems to be a bit of a feeling of crisis in the newspapers this morning, that you're leaving the country during very perilous, turbulent times...
PM: Oh. I wouldn't regard the two Greens and putting us in peril or turbulence. No, no. As I say. the Senate's had its sport, all the players have had their little bit of sport. You noticed Mrs Kernot last week coming out saying, everybody's played ducks and drakes with this, it's now time to stop that's after she'd played ducks and drakes. And now the Greens have played ducks and drakes. The Liberal Party have been playing it now for two weeks, as Mr Blight reminded them, And I think ducks and drakes time is over. They've got a couple of weeks to think about it before these Bills come into the Senate, but rye got every confidence that the Budget will pass the Senate.
ENDS
&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIVF Of INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIM4E MINISTER, THE HON. P.
J. KEATINGs ARUiNGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY, WASHINGTON,
US. A, SUNDAY 12 SEPTEMBER 199)
J. Why wson't you be attending the sipnlng ceremony tomorrow?
F'M: BerAuSe I ouly have a couple of days here and so I have rescheduled some of the
Tuesday meetings onto Mooday, to which came for the Trade Secretary, Mr
Kantor and the Secretary of the Treasury. -I'll get a chance to meet them on the
Monday which I wouldik't otherwise do. The President baying scheduled our
meeting on the Tuesday which of course I think Is entirely appropriate given the
weight and circumstauce of what's happening the day before.
3: Did you seek a meeting with the CIA Director, Mr Keating and for what
purpose?
PM: Well that's beena a permanent part of the program, from the time the program
was developed for the purpose simply that this gentleman is director of ali
American intelligecce and we, as you know, have a intelligence partnership witb
the United States and an important one.
J: Will you be us~ drg up with Mr Clintoo the trade issues that have caused friction
in the relationship?
PM: Welk, I think for the President I will leave the discussion on the broader issues.
That is, the broader bilateral aad multilateral Issues and that... mean, the point
of the visit is to get to know him to have the chance to meet an American
Administration in its formnative days at a time when there is a coincidence of
interests between Australia and the United States. These are the things to
concentrate on rather thav scrabble around over a particular issue which I think is
better left to the discussions with the particular ministers who are deating with
them.
J: Won't he have his mind on other tbings? Like the Middle East? J-.41 
.2-
PM: Wellt I thin the Middle Exst ceremony On MOnday Will probably I think
Governnents tend to do things in discrete ways. One handles one issue at a time
one day and something elme the next. I think that the intCests Australia now has
in trade, that is with such thigs as the Uruguay Round and with AYEC also
happen to be on the top of the United States agenda. So I think, therefore, they
are very much contemporary issues and contemporary issues of the Prcsident.
J: Shouldn't you take every opportuity, My Keating, to forcefully put the plight of
Australian rural producers?
PM-, ITl be putting it and I wil mention it probably over the lunch. But for the key
discussiovs I'd 10( e to keep them ou to the big mainframe issues which wil] affect
Australia way into the futurye.
1: On APEC then. will you be tying to get any ind of endorsement from M
Clinton for the Summit in Seattle actually moving towards maing APECa
genuine economic Community?
PM: Well, I think the whole point aboat the APEC m~ inisterial meetings to date four
of them whicb we have had since its inc--pffitb and now the meeting of leaders
and such things as the development of a trade and investment framework
agreement and the work program; all of these things provide the capacity for the
natiorL states of APEC to get to kMOW one Aa6othe, to begin workin cooperative
fratmeworks, to be developing agendas together to develop a sense of economic
community. And that' s the very essnce of it
1: But isn't EB? the most pressing issue in the relationship?
PM: No, I don't tink it is. I think the most pressing issu~ e in the relationship is the
Uruguay Round and APEC to get Australia's long run interests set. EEl' and the
United States' willingness to deal with the Export Enhancement Program~ in terms
of the azeas in which these subsidies go ! I will be making it clear to the
admiinisiration that we've appreciated the assurances we've had in the past of not
extnding EEP into other areas. But I am not bere just simply to make those
trade points. I mean. that's the key point about this visit, it's about the longer
run and ' broader Issues.
J; Mr Keating, bow do you see Austi-alia's relationship with the United States
changin given that the Cold War is over and also Australia's mnaking a bigger
push into Asia?
PM: Well, I thiak it is changing, as the United States' relationship with the world is
changin with the Cold War overlay removed. And that meaxns, therefore, that 
3-
events will have a mofe regional focus and the relatiouship the United States has
with countries will aecetsszil change because of xheir regional complion and
regional fit. This is also true of AustraUl
3: Mr Keating, NAMT is also a big issue in the U. S. How do you see APEC fitting
In with NAFrA if the U. S ( inaudible)
PM.-Well. NAFTA is a North Arnerkcam trading agreement and if North America were
to b~ e mterated with APEC it would be an entirely consistent thing. Were it to
be The Ulnited States and Canada and Mexico in an agreement I don't see that as
being in anly way different to the individual parts.-the United States or Canada
being Involved with APEC.
I1 Is there a rea chance that your talks won't be effective as tbey otherwise would
have been bad the Middle East developments not occurred at this time?
PM-don't think that's true. I think maybe the coDverse fs trUe. That is, I think I
now have more time with the President on the Tuesday than I was going to have
on the Monday. And I think the United States appreciates the fact that Australia
= a see the weight of what is being concluded on Monday. I think they
appreciate countries which have az appropriate sense of priority and magnitude.
But bemause the issueji which are on our agenda are also very much on their
agenda and they have been coperatingwith Australia ic tbem. I'm really
looking forward to the meeting and I hope the President is too.
1: Going back to Dr Evart Australia has played, In many ways, a key role in IsraeL
Does the fact that we're not going now reflect our attitude to the Middle East
and Israel Itself?
PM: No. No, we've tot been part of the peace process.
J: Mr K~ eating are you surprised that the Governor General has entered the
republic-an debate?
PM: I haven't caught up on his views.
1. Prime Minister, your predecessor, Mr Hawke, bas suggested that conservatives are
-Lt an aricle in the London newspapers over the weekend winning the
intellectual debate on the republic and that all hes heard from the prorepublicans
is einotionalism. Is that the way you see it?
PM: Well, no and I think that what you'll bear from~ the iepublicas, so to speak, is in 
.4.
the first instance tbe report of the task force, the committee, which will look at
ways of making a competent ehange to a republic. And I think the music starts
after that.
J: Do you believe that the mooarchists have made a few bits though?
PM: No, I don't think so. Look, Australia wil] become a republic as inevitably as we
are standing here. And it's about modalities, forms and timing. So I don't think
the monuarchists, as you put it, have made any bits at all.
End s. 



TEL: 14. Sep. 93 9: 00 No. 002 P. 01/ 02
K
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P.
J. KXEATINGt M. P. U. S. CAPITOL GROUNDS, WASHINGTON, US. A.
MONDAY 13 SEPTEMBERt 1993
PM: There were a few questions on health but principally I think the, if you're after an
impression of the last day or so, this is the right time to be in Washingtorr putting
Australian views. With NAFTA about to be concluded in the Congress and with
now the critical time with the Uruguay Round emerging with the end of the
legislative fast track the Presdent has on Uruguay this is the time to be talking
about trade structures. And the conversation I just had with Speaker Foley and
senior representatives of the Congress was about international trading structures;
what's best for America and the world and countries like Australia and the Pacific.
So, I think coming here at the moment, talking about Uruguay, a successful
conclusion of it and also the future of APEC and its design these are issues
which are absolutely uppermost in the winds of American legislators and of
course, the United States Adihinistrmtion.
J: What points did you make about APEC?
PM: Just that I think that it serves U. S. and Pacific interests generally. That is, either
as an overlay to a successful Uruguay Round, that is something which can
actually improve upon the outcome of Uruguay. Or in the event that the Uruguay
Round fails and that the French seek to pull the rug on the Blair House
Agreement, then in that case APEC defines a community with a high degree of
integration. In fact APEC is more integrated in terms of intra-state trade than is
the European Community or NAFTA. And it makes a lot of sense for the United
States to be part of that, of that development even if it is in the configuration of
NAFTA itself.
J: Was the American response from Mr Kantor expressed in those terms to you?
PM; They regard the legislative opportunity given to the fast track process to the
President by the Congress as one which has to be taken up and therefore that the 
I LL
Round we Aceed to be mnovi toward a conclusion of the Round now so that the
December 15 Idate is observed.
But this arnbi~ ious notion of APEC as a community, was that somtething that was
picked up by Mir Kantor?
PM;. Yes, I hiks,
high degree o
repect upon
to what rernit
the vezydefir
high degree a
States as well
J* ( inaudible)
PM: I'd say that, h~
within the ad~
starting to tin
fifty percent
States and thu
th= e times tI,
there's a natu
can see.
J: How do they 3. As a defined body of naions who've got a common interest and a
f integration-And how it develops, of course, will deped in some
the Seattle ministerial meeting of APEC and the leadens' meeting as
the leaders want to give APEC into the future. But there's no doubt
ing of it, the drawing of a boundary around it, the recognition of the
f integration is something which is obviously of use to the United
as Australia.
the Administration's mrind -there is a lot of enthusiasm for it
ninistration. Less so in the Congress, but I think the Congress is
lerstand the opportunity of APEC, the weight of the... the fact that
of world GNP is in the APEC area and it is accessible to the United
already United States exports to the Western Pacific are growing at
e pace of imports to the United States from the Western Pacific. So,
-al economic opportunity there which I think Congressional leaders
see APEC and NAFTA fitting togeter, Prime Minister?
Well, I wou4 l tink that they see APEC being an opportunity whether the United
States appro ehes it in a singular way that is jointly or severally. Jointly with
NAFTA or se rally with say Canada, the United States and Mexico. In either
event, it mealis a higher level of trade, a higher velocity of trade, greater
opportunity t6 be part of a larger block, a larger group of nations who are
experiencing Irates of growth far higher than North America or Western Europe.
What about LP, Prime Minister? How far did you push that and what was the
reaction? r
Well, I said: I them that we appreciated President Bush's commitment to
Australians Jot to extend EEP into other markets And we would appreciate that
assurance be ng kept. And that consideration being given to Australia in markets
where EB? rmnerly hasn't been markets where Australia very defintely is.
And the Trade Secretary said yes, he understood thai: and their decision to stay
away from t1' e markets the market in Indonesia for instance was an example
of the practi ~ al expression of that understanding.
PM: J: PM: Ends. I 114. L.: Sep. 96 J; UU INU. ULJL r. UZ/ 



THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
For Immediate Release September 14, 1993
PMSS CONrrRENCE BY THE PRESIDENT
AND PRIME MINISTER KZATING OF AUSTRALIA
The East Room
3: 11 P. M. EDT THE PRESIDENT: Good afternoon. It's a great pleasure
for me to welcome the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. Keating, to
Washington and to have this opportunity to make a couple or
statements and then answer some of your questions.
Despite the vast ocean which separates us, Australia and
the United States share essential values and interests rooted in our
frontier heritages, our shared commitment to democracy, our status as
Pacific trading nations, and our efforts across the years to ensure
and strengthen our common security.
It's a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to
personally reaffirm those bonds today.
The Prime Minister and I exchanged views on a wide
variety of issues, I'd like to emphasize the importance of one in
particular the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations,
We agreed that strengthening GATT's trade rules is a top priority for
both our countries. As a founder-of the cairns Group of free trading
agricultural nations, Australia Is working closely with us to bring
the Uruguay Round to conclusion this year.
So that we can achieve agreement this year, the Prime
Minister and I strongly urge the European Community not to reopen the
Olair House Accord on alricultural trade as has been suggested. We
need to move forward not backward, to complete the Round and to give
the world economy a much-needed boost.
We also discussed the importance of economic relations
in the new pacific Comunity that both our nations are committed to
help build. We discussed the building blocks of that Community;
bilateral alliances, such as the one we share; an active commitment
to supporting the spread of democracy and support for open and
expanded markets. We discussed the important role of the organization for
the Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation APEC. Both the U. S. and
Australia are members, Both of us have been active proponents of
regional trade liberalization. And I look very much forward to
working with Prime Minister Keating to make the November APEC
ministerial meeting and the leaders conference in Seattle,
Washington, a big success.
Australia and the United States also share mutual
security interests. Australia has been our ally in every sar
cOnflict of this century. Today we share an interest in bolstering
the regions security and in supporting its movement towards
democracy. I expressed my particular admiration for the crucial role
Australia has played in fashioning and implementing the international
effort to promote reconciliation in Cambodia. I told the Prize
TEL 15. Sep. 93 12: 08 NoO009 P. O1/ 08 
TEL
Minister that we look forward to many similar partnerships In the
years ahead.-This seeting vas to have occurred yesterday, but Prime
Minister and i agreed that we should delay it because of the signing
of the Israeli-. Palestinian Peace Agreement. That historic
breakthrough reminds us that we live in a momentous time when the old
walls of division are falling and new vistas are opening. Our
success in seizing thee* opportunities will depend on large seasure
on how well the community of democracies can respond to work together
to~ wards shared goals. Today this xestin? with the Prime Minister
reaffirms that our two nations will continue to work together closely
to turn the promise of this era Into reality.
Mr. Prime Minister.
PRIME MINIS79R XEATING: Thank you, Mr. President.
Well, I'd like to say firsthand that our meeting was most worthvhile
from my point of view and Australia's point of view, for the quality
of our discussion&amp; and our close agreement on1 a wide range of Issues
I think demonstrates the vitality and the relevance of the Australiarelationship
at a time of great change internationally. Let me
say, I'm very favorably impressed by the vigor and imagination with
which the President and his team are addressing the now challenges we
now face in the world.
Australia is a country which puts great importance on
it. relationship with the United States. Our longstanding friendahip
which the President has just referred to, is based on shared values
of democracy and freedom and, as he remarked, we fought in rive major
conflicts together over the courae of this century. Arid in the post-
Cold War period, I'm happy to say that our alliance remains very
strong, indeed. In commerce and diplomacy we do a great deal
together. I was impressed In our discussions today by the priority
which now attaches to fundamental questions of international trade
structures. I welcome the strong support that President Clinton has
Siven to APEC as ant organization for promoting trade and investment
n the Asia-Pacific area. I congratulated hiz on his truly historic
initiative of inviting other APEC leaders to join him at an informal
meeting in Seattle thisB November. This will allow APEC leaders to
discuss ways of moving towards an Asia-Pacific Community which brings
benefits of closer economic integration to all members. This step
also recognizes the increased importance of the Asia Pacific in world
affairs. We agreed on the importance of achieving a successful
and balanced outcome of the Uruguay Round by the mid-Decembezr
deadline. No other joint action by governments this year could do
more to boost the prospects of world growth and jobs, both subjects
which the President and I are intensely interested.
We agreed that any move by the turopean Community to
reopen the Blair Mouse Accord on agriculture seriously risks
jeopardizing the whole Uruguay Round. The Blair Hfouse Accord already
represents a mintimum outcome acceptable to those countries seeking to
establish fair rules of trade for agriculture.
Finally, I should like to thank the President for his
gracious hospitality and to congratulate him on the leadership he is
showing on the United States international arnd domestic agendas.
Mr. President, thank you very much for having us in the
White House from Australia. And we appreciated the arrangements#
particular the difficulties of the the opportunitv tlre~ ented by
T1EL5:. Sep. 93 12: 08 No. 009 P. 02/ 08 
TEL 3-
THE PRESIDINT1 Terry, I'd like to call on you first,
and then if we could, I'd like to alternate between one question from
an American jourrnalist and one question from an Australian
journalist. So we'll have to go on the honor system, although I
think most of the Australians are here, on the right.
Okay, Terry, go ahead.
Q Mr. President, you said today that you don't want
to personalibe the NAPTA fight, but I'd like to ask you about remarks
Made today In this room by Presidents Carter and Bush. They both
spoke about demagoguery in NAM, and President Carter spoke about a
demagogue with unlimited finaincial resources, obviously Mr. Perot.
Do you think that Mr. Perot is playing loose and fair with the facts?
THE PRE SIDENqT; Well, I'm going to reiterate what I said
before. I don't want to I am for this agreement because I think
it will create more jobs. I think anyone who wants to enter the
debate Should do so. I think we should be very Careful if we make
-that if we make an assertion that we know that it has some factual
basis. And if any of us make a mistake we ought to say so.
You know, my office has already put out a statement
because I inadvertently made a factual error today not a big one,
but it was an error, and we corrected it. And I just thinic that the
people of this country and of most of the wealthier countries in the
world4 have seen such enormous pressure on the middle class our
folks have really been hurt that they want this to be an open
debate. * But we don't need to prey on their fears# we need to really
work through all the various arguments and the issues and the facts.
And then I'm going to do my beat to do that and I'll be glad to
argue, debate or discuss with anyone who has a different opinion.
out I think, as President, I should take the position that I'm going
to try to bring this country along with this and leave that other
business to others to fight.
someone from Australia yes?
Q mr. Clinton, could you comment on Australian
concerns that the U. S. push on human rights in countries such as
China and Indonesia could threaten Asia-Pacific economic cooperation?
Could Mr. Keating also comment on that? And, Kr. President, could
you also flush out eXactly what you want to see coning out of the
leaders summit in Seattle in November?
TME PRESIDENT: Lest me mention, first of all, the United
states does have a very strong position on human rights, and I think
we should. I also think your government has a good position on human
rights$ which it has not been reluctant to express in dealing with
other nations. But that has not undermined our relationships,
commercial relationships and political relationships with-countries
that we think are makfilg an honest effort to shoot straight with us
and to work with us.
You mentioned Indonesia. I went out of my way to ask
President Boeharto to come to Japan and meet with as when I was
there because he's-the head of the nonaligned nations. Indonesia, I
think, is one of the most underestivated countries in the world.
Xoot pea ple have no idea how big it Is, that IS0 million people live
there, that it is a vast, enormous potential partner in a global
economy. We have questions abo* ut the issues or East Timor, as you
kLnow, and I think yo do, too your country does, too. But we have
had good contact with Indonesia. With regard to China, the United
T1EL5:. Sep. 93 12: 08 NO. 009 P. 03/ 08 
TEL: 15. Sep. 93 12: 08 No. 009 P. 04/ 08
4
Chinese economic revival. We have very strong commercial
relationships with them.
But it is our responsibility in the world in which we
live, I think, to try to restrain the proliferation of weapons of
Iass destruction, to try to stand up for human rights, and to try to
engage the Chinese across a whole broad range of issues, so that we
can't simply have a cooreoe-only relationship.
I an going to do what I can to build the Pacific
community and not to undermine it, and that's what your Prime
Minister spoke so eloquently about today.
I think you wanted him to oment on this, too.
PRIHN XINIST R KZATING; Neither the United States nor
Australia will ever compromise its shared sense of democracy, its
commitment to human rights and the respect of human values. And we
put them forthrightly wherever we see those values under threat or
seeking to be compromised. And this is trus in Australia's case with
Indonesia. It's been true in respect ot China, as has been the case
with the United States.
But I thinX It's true for at and I'm certain for the
President that we sea these issues as part of a total relationship
where we seek to have an influence on these countries and where the
influence may be diminished if the totality of the relationship only
involves the human rights questions, and beyond that* that Is on
these other issues like proliferation and other issues and commercial
questions, where the relationship aust be seen in it* totality.
Q Mr. President, a day after the historic signing
ceremony here on the South Lawn yesterday, the Israelis appear to be
establishing a relationship with MorOco, a formal relationship, and
there is this agreement between Israel and Jordan. What specifically
are you doing now to try to promote the establishment ot formal
diplomatic relations between Israel and other Arab nations Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait good friends of the United States? And do you
thinX that is in the cards in the immediate future?
Th pIsDI$ Well, let me first may that I am very,
very pleased that Prime Minister Rabin and Foreign Mister Peres
have been reoeivelt by Xing Hassan in Morocco. When we learned of
this development yesterday, and we talked about it in some detail
Prize Minister Rabin and I talked about it I was very pleased,
because I think the Xing may have set an example, which I hope other
Arab states will consider following now to try to continue just to
establish dialogue. We are at this moment focusing on three or four aspects
of what we can do to implement this relationship. One is, what about
all the practical problems that are still out there. You know,
elections have to be held. There are a lot of other economic
endeavors have to be undertaXen in the Gaza and there areo lots of
things that just have tp be done practically. So we have a team now
looking at all these practical probleme to see What can the United
States do to facilitate this.
The second thing we're doing is looking at what we can
do to try to organixe an appropriate level of in Ae_ ent. And in
that regard, we're looking primarily at maybe having a donors meeting
and trying to bring in the interested turopean countries and Asian
countries and Arab countries to talk about how we can put together
the kind of package we ought to have.
Yesterday, I met with a couple of hundred Anerican
Jewish and Arab leaders from around the country and I asked them to
participate from the point of view and private sector and
B s9 
TEL 5
partnerships and helping to develops these areas so we could really
move this relationship forward.
And then the third thing that we're going to do is to
discuss on a political level what we should do to try to facilitate
further political contacts. The announcement between Israel and
Jordan today is very helpful. And I hope that will give further
enoouragement to other Arab countries.
Is there another yes?
Q Mr. President, you made a very eloquent appeal Cor
support for your NATA proposals today, asking for the middle class
to understand what it could provide in jobs for your HAFTA
initiative. Yet you're still providing massive subsidies
billion a year in the agricultural sector. when are we going to see
some change in that? Because that is hurting free traders like
Australia. T) a P&amp; RESIDENT I'm sorry, I didn't hear change in
what? g Your agricultural subsidies, particularly the
Export Znhancerent Program.
THE RZESzDzNTt well, perhaps the Prime Minister would
like to comment on this, too, but what we are trying to do with the
Export Enhancement Program is to have it run, if you will, only
against or in competition with countries that have done things that
we believe constitute unfair trade by governmental action. That is
we intend to do what we can to avoid using the program in ways that
undermine Australia's interests. And we're going to work very hard
on that because Australia basically iS a free trading country in
agriculture. And in a larger sense, if we could get a new GATT
a" reement that includes agriculture, that would be of enormous
benefit to Australia, to the entire Cairns Group, and to the whole
principle of reducing subsidies in agricultural trade and opening up
more competition. So I think if you will ust watch the way that thing Is
applied, that program over the next year, you will see that we are
going out of our way not to have it conflict with the trade targets
and interests of Australia, which is a country that does practice
what it preaches in terms of tree trade and agriculture.
Q Mr. President, what is your estimate now of how
many jobs would be lost net jobs lost under the North American
Yree Trade Agreement? And what can you better describe your
proposal for reemployment? Is it job training, are they subsidies?
What kind of proposal ThE PRESIDENT: First of all, we are convinced our
administration is convinced that net mor* e jobs will be gained than
lost. If we didn't think that we wouldn't be pushing it. but we
know that some jobs will be lost. Now many will be lost really
depends upon things that are almost impossible to calculate. Let me
Just give you one example. We know right now that certain
a rioultural seqtors will be helped and others over a period of time
will lose some of their tariff protections in America over a period
of several years. We know right now that certain manufacturing
sectors, particularly high-end manufacturing sectors higher wage,
more sophisticated manufacturing will be helped. Other manufacturing
will be subjeot to more competition and fewer import limits.
15. Sep. 93 12: 08 No. 009 P. 05/ 08 
TEL: 15. Sep. 93 12: 08 No. 009 P. 06/ 08
somewhere else and will then use American products. Let me just give
you one example. Someone told me yesterday about a company that's
making toys now no offense, Prime Minister in China that
intends to open a plant in Mexico because it will cost so much less
to send the toys from Mexico to the U. S. than China to the and
if they do, they will all of a sudden begin to buy all their plastic,
which is ever So percent of the ooaponent parts from Dupont or some
United States company.
So it is hard to know how many obs will be lost. Net,
wTeh ebree liaervee , n owth ejorbe s wbiellin gb e loas bt igi n pdluesf. e nseB uct utthbaecrkes . w ilAl ndb e whjoabt s I lwoasntt.
to do is to completely reorganize the unemployment system into a
reemploygent system in which people who lose their jobe who are not
likely t679et that same job back within a reasonable amount of time
can goet a wide range of training opportunities based on two things:
What do they want to do, first? And, secondly, based on the best
information we have, what are they most likely to get a job doing7
And so, we are now the Secretary of Labor is
designing a progrea we intend to present it to the Congress, and I
think it will have broad bipartisan support.
Q How will you finance it?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Through economies we plan to
finance it now through economies assoClated with Implementing the
Reinventing Government report.
An Australian journalist. Yes, sir?
Q You've just acknowledged that some of the gains of
KAFTA might be at the cost of East Asia. Now do you see NAFTA, which
seems to be essentially a preferential arrangement within the North
American context, being able to operate with in that broader APEC
framewor, which is meant to be nondiscrlminatory?
1 would ask Mr. Keating to also respond, please.
PRESIDZNT CLINTON: If you look at it from our point of
view, what we're trying to do is to further lower our trade barriers
against Mexico, and they're % oing to lower and against Canada
they're going to lower more of theirs against us, That's not
inconsistent with what my overarching goal is, which is to get a
freer trading system worldwide, which is why we're pushing the GATT
Round. But, meanwhile, it is very much in the interest of the
United States to have a stronger, more stable, aore democratic and
more pro6perous Mexico on our southern border, able to buy more ot
our products. And most of what we do there would have marginal or no
impact one way or the other on anything that Could happen, for
example, in Southeast Asia in the next four or five years.
I would also say that If this worxs, what I think you'll
see is more open trading systems and fewer tariffs in many other
Latin American countries which are changing politioally and
economically as well.
so I am not for a discriminatory systmp but what I am
trying to do Is make those systens lea closed in their relationships
with us now in the hope that over the long run, the GATT Round and
the worldwide trading rules will really come to dominate the trading
policies of all nations. And then, when we have regional groups like
APEC, they'll be for the our~ osa of outtina more arrancements 
TEL: 15. Sep. 93 12: 08 No. 009 P. 07/ 08
-7-
PRESZDENT C TON: yes, would you i1Xe tQ answer that?
PRIME MINISTER KUTING: I don't thinX that there is
anything necessarily inconsistent between either the United States
trading into the Asia Pacific, Canada trading with the Asia Pacific,
or Mexico trading with the Asia Pacific individually or collectively
as part of KAPTA. I think what is important in terms of the view of
the Asian economies Asia-Pacific economies of NAFTA is that there
ie perhaps more flesh on the bones of APEC before NAFTA goes beyond
Mexico, perhaps into South America. But the concept of )# AFTA
integrating with the Asia Pacific is one where I don't think there is
any conflict of concepts. And as the President has said, both things
are going to increase the velocity of trade, both within the
Americans and within the Asia Pacific.
Q Mr, Keating, could you tell us it you've determined
who will represent China at the APEC at the leaders conference
that follows the viinisterial meeting, and it you've given the
President of any idea of other issues that might be discussed at that
time, and what the objectives actually are at that conference?
PRIMt MINISTER IATING: Well, I thinX the President
naturally is the host of this conference and, therefore, the invitees
and the acceptances are primary a matter for him. gut I know that
China is now considering who they might send.
The key thing about the conference is that it provides
definition to a new economic world economic comunity. And that
is the Asia-Pacifio economic comzunity. So by having a leaders
conference, by the APEC member states attending at leadership level,
it's providing a definition of that area that formally wasn't so.
APEC, in terms of its Intrastate trade, is, in fact,
more integrated than is the European Community or even NXPTA. go
there's a great naturalness about AP2C, and I think the President's
historic initiative of inviting the leaders together gives its form,
substance, and as we ourselves adopt an agenda, a work program for
the trade-liberalizing agenda o APEC. Not only is that body having
form and definition, but it will actually proceed along the path of
trade liberalivation, the very thing that the President is committed
to. THE PRESIDENT: if I might, let mae just say, first of
all, on the economic issues, Asia is the fastest growing part of the
world. Latin America In the second fastest growing now. About
percent of our exports are now going to Asia. And about more and
more of our trade-related jobs are tied there. It is a very
important thing that we are not only hosting this economic conference
that and the Prime Minister has been too modest. He played a
major role in convincing all these countries that their leaders
should come to Seattle to be a part of this. But the fact that all
these leaders are going to come here and we're going to have a chance
to sit one on one and in groups with no sort of bureaucratic
apparatus, not preset agenda, nothing to weigh us down, and talk
through a whole range of economic and political issues, is an
enormous opportunity for me to follow up on what we did at the
0-7, where we reestablished clearly and publicly the dynamics of our
relationship with Japan, which we're working on now; our security
obligations in Yorea.
Now, we'll have a chance, I'm not sure a United States
president has ever had before, to talk to the leaders of all these
countries at one tine and to try to map out an agenda. Out I don't
want to prewrite what's going to happen there because it might get a
little better as we ao alona. 
TEL: 15. Sep. 93 12: 08 No. 009 P. 08/ 08
THE PRESIDENT: well, we don't know yet. But I's hoping
that they'll be very vell represented and I kind of think they will
be. We owe the last question to an Australian journalist
because we promised 50/ 50. Oo ahead.
Q I appreciate it. For both of you gentlemen, do you
See that the NAFTA THE PRESIDENT; He's not an Australian journalist.
( Laughter.) Q No, for the ABC the Australian Broadcast
Corporation. THE PRESIDENT: Oh really? Okay, go ahead. ( Laughter.)
Q You talked a lot about
THE PRESIDENT: I thought ve'd'get an American trying to
mimic an Australian accent. ( Laughter.) I didn't realize we had
go ahead. Q You've talked a lot about the NAFTA process and
GAT. And for both of you, do you see any positive impact of having
the alternatives of NAFTA and QATT baving alternatives of NMATA
and APEC for the GATTprocess? is there a certain political leverage
that you get out of it? I believe Mickey Kantor had Ambassador
Kantor had talked about that during one of the congressional
hearings. Is there a positive impact going back to the GATT process?
PRINZ MINISTZR 5CATING: Well, I think APEC and NAlTA,
too, end Up being GATT-plus options. They are GATT plus. But in the
event that GATT did fail, they do define themselves as freer trade
areas. In the case of MAFTA, in the case of APLC, defining an area
which has got enormous mass, an enormous weight economic mass and
economic weight and economic growth. So the United States looking
into that all of us locking into that, lifting the velocity of
that means that in defining a new economic and trading community, in
getting that growth up this is at least some alternative than where
we'd have been in the unhappy position of the GATT Round failing.
Now, frankly, I don't think the GATT Round will fail. I
don't think the Europeans can let the French decide that the world's
trading round should fail. I don't think the French will want to
carry the Odium Of the round failing at their expense. And
therefore, I believe there's much in the GAT Round succeeding.
But I do see NAFTA and APEC aS GATT-plus overlays or
overlays to the GAT. but you can also see them in place thereof in
part as discrete area communities where we can all benefit by freer
trade. Q ( Inaudible.)
PRIME MINISTER KEATINQ Well, I think you've got to say
this, that APEC equals growth, equals jobs. I think NAPTA equals
growth, equals jobs. And that's the point the President was making
earlier. THE PRESIDENT: I couldn't give a better answer than
that. Thank you very much.
THE PAESS: Thank vou. 



I/ p
( 7~
PRIME MfIiSTER
TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON. P J. KEATING, M. P.
AUSTRALLAN EMBASSY, WASHINGTON, U. S-A.
TUESDAY 14 SET" EMBER., 1993
PM: Let me just say at the beginning that I'm very satisfied with the outcome of my
visit to Washington. The visit has been, I think, very important for Australia because
we' ve been dealing herm with fundamental questions which have a big bearing on
Australia and its future prosperity. Arid these of course are APEC, the Uruguay Round,
Austraia-U. S, relations and the U. S. role in our paut of the world.
If's important to put a lot of effort into getting these big questions right bemause so much
will depend on them in the future. As T said to you ealier, the timing of the visit has
been excellent because the very things Australia wants to talk about happen at this time to
be high on Americas own agenda. This is a very favourable circumstance, to have this,
when I'm visiting here as an Australian prime minister, in WashingtorL
Througbout my visit I have been impressed by the priority which currently attaches in
* WasiT~ o~ tofundaynental questions of international trade sb'. ucturts. The
adminstration is taking a very strong interest in APEC and economic opportunity in Cast
Asia and there is a lot of concern here about the ai-c: of the Uruguay Round of reported
French m~ oves to reop en the Blar House Accord. And the United States administration
and Congress are now starting to focus seriously on. NAFTA ( Worth American Free Trade
Agreemnent). It's very important to be here now to put Australia's point of view and
represent our interes~ s on these important questions which will, of course, be important to
us for a long time into the future.
The cenitrepiece of the visit, of course. was the meeting and working lunch today with
President Clinton. I'm very pleased that we got on well and established, what I am sure
should be a stong w~ rking relationship. I found President Clinton to be very charming
indeed and with an impressive Srasp of policy and a public spirited, interested, open
personality. As well -as affirming the importace both sides attach to our bilateral
relationship our meeting produced three important results. The first is we agreed to work
closely togetheT for a successfill outcome of the informal APEC leaders' meeting in
Seattle in November. in such a way that the meeting itself takes the historic step of 
-2.
defining an Asia-Paiic Economic Community and-gives political authority and
weight to APEC's work
Secondly, we agreed that it was very importat to?~ vorld &amp; towth and jobs to achieve a
succ~ ssfijl and balanced outcome of the Urugay Round by the maid-December deadline
and. that any move by the European Community to reopen the Blair House Accord on
agriculture would seriously jeopardize the whole Round. Ths sends, I think. a very
Wtong and, I hope, a very clear message to Europe. Thirdly, the President and
Ambassador Kantor each recognize Australi's concern about the damage that the EET
subsidies cause our grain exports and said they would make every effort to minimise the
effect on Australian interests. They cited, for example, their decision to stay out of the
Indonesian market as a bona fide of their sincerity in this regard. They explained that, of
course, the EEP was aimed at countrc~ ting Europe= n subsidies and that the only fully
effective way to reduce the impact on Australia's grain exports was to conclude the
Uruguay Round as soon as possible.
I rigjit also say that all my other meetings were also worthwhile. I was particularly
pleased with the very attentive response I received on Capitol Hill from both Senate
Leaders and the Leaders of the House of Representatives. The main messages I
emphasised were the continued relevance of the Australian-U. S. relationship, the great
economic beneits whbich were now available to the United States in the Western Pacific;
and the importane of establishing institutional structures to secure benefits of the variety
we're talking about, like APEC.
So having finished my program in Washington I must say to you that I think I am please4
with the results. It's clear that Australia's standing is very highi in this city and that we're
regarded as an important friend and ally of the United States. And naturally I should be
happy to take questions.
1: Can you explan how you expressed your concern over the U. S.' s human rights
position and what was your motivation behind raising it?
PM: Just as I think how the President expressed his view today. I think if you read the
transcript of what I said and what hr. said you'll find that it is exactly the same view. Th1at
democracies Like Aastralia have a lot to offer the Asia-Pacifle area and our standards and
values are important * not just to us, but to them: And we put them and should put them
tellingly. forcefully -but see the totality of these relationships for what they are. That is,
representing a whoIle range of issues. A9 the President said, this afternioon in respect of
China with proliferation issues; in their ternis with very major trade issues and
recognising the central point that, of course. one can not influence whatsoever, sidelining
the very large societies if one were to take that view. 
-3-
Now, Australia has never taken that view and because of that wet're more influential in
these matter than countries that might take the view that they can't deal with themn over
human rights.
j. But we wvere led to believe, Mr Keating, that you told specifically the
Congressmnen ont Capitol Hill and Mr Kantor that you would like to see some more
balance in the way the U. S. deals with bilateral frictions particularly with regard to
humnan rights and specifically you mentioned Indonesia and China.
PM: Not see more balance but basically what I said was the balanced way that
they're dealing with them is the right way.
1: But don't we have a different view on how we relate trade policy and human
rights. The U. S. has trade sanctions against Chin* and now Indonesia over human rights.
Australia does not do that And presumably because we are a smaller country we don't
have the don't have more to lose thtan the U. S. Don't we have a differencee with the
U. S. over....
PM-I don't think so, Again I refer you to what the President said today. You can get
no gmeter authority that him, himself, and the expression which he made at the Press
Conference which I think was square on with our own view.
Mr Keating, can you. tell us a bit about what you have to do between now and November
on behind the scenies work on making sure that APEC is a success. What is the least that
you hope will come out of that avetin, and what is the most?
PM: Well, the first thing would be a good attendance at the meeting; that it is attended
at a high level, that the very attendance as I said this afternoon, helps to define the Asia-
Pacific Economic Community) and that we have some understandings before we arrive
about what the process of the meeting might be. how it's conducted and what we can
expevt to glean fromn it in terms of APECs future program and progress.
J: Will you be seeking to enshrine that definition into some sort of Communiqui at
the end of the meeting?
PM: I think we'll leave that up to the meeting, probably. It's a, I think the view the
President's takcing -which I thiink is wise that we don't want a pre-cooked meeting.
That is, with papers that are floating around which have all been negotiated arnd which
basically get a rubber stamp at the end. And that is why his preference and my preference
is for the leaders to attend without staff but only with interpreters. So that it is a
genuinely informal discussion about the Asia-Pacific and about opportunities and trade 
-4.
opportunities. And that if we do produce any statement of principles or any corrimuniqud
that may follow it, it's something that will be puttogether there by the people involved.
Asia Pacific Economic Community what do you mea= I mean how would
you see the Community working in practice?
PM: Well, if~ s already more integrated if you look at the APEC countries their trade
with one another already has them at a higher level of integration than the European
Community or NAFTA. So, the attendance of the leaders of these countries anid the
membership, the membership of APEC the confirmation of the current membership of
A. C at leadership level and for its agenda which will be a trde liberalising and trade
inducing agenda means that as a group of countries it is defined and it can only be
defined as an economic community of countries. So that the initegration we already have,
which is alrcady high, we hope to be able to improve and to improve the velocity of
growth and trade. So that everybody wins from an APEC-typ arrangement.
1: Arc you and Mr Clinton confident the three Chinas problem can be overcome?
PM: I think that thats likely that China will attend and that is currently being
discussed, of course, and hopefully they will attend at a very high level.
J1: You mentioved in your 9 Februar'y speech a much wider agenda for A. PEC than
had bee previously put forward. Has the U. S. admnistration and particularly
President Clinton embraced those points and any of them specifically in terms of the
November rneeting?
PM: Well, I think they see that general direction as the right direction, whether every
particular point is embruced or not, in a sense. is immaterial provided the general
direction is one where we work at ways of lowering impediments to trade and
investment. And whether it be through dealing with protective devices, non-tariff barriers
or harmonisation of standards, these are all things which I think fit very nicly into most
of the participant member countries' ambitions for APEC,
J: How seriously should we take President Clinton'g assurances on the EEP? As
seriou. sly as we took George Bush's or does he go beyond that?
PM: Well. I think the important thing to recognise is that the Export Enhancement
Program is legislated by the United States Congress. So it has Congressional authority
Iit-lfleislation. The key thing then is how it is administered. What the President
was saying today was giving you an indication of how he would administer it as he had
earlier given me at the lunch, as we discussed this question at some length. And that's
why I think he was very forthcoming at the press conference in what be had to say about 
it. And he had indicated earlier that the U. S. staying out of the Indonesian market was
already and indication of how the U. S. feels toww&amp; d Australia in terms of the EEP, but
making the more obvious point that the best w~ ayI6 deal with it is a successful] conclusion
of the GATT Round, which is about pulling these subsidies down. And the Blar House
Accords so, you know, his commitment today is in that context and I think we have to
accept it in that context.
J: Prime Minister you described APEC and NAFTA as a compatible GATTr overlay.
tn the event of t~ he Uruguay Round not going ahead can you see these two discrete area
communities in some way rnergng into a big compatible trade grouping against the EEC?
PM: Wells that's certainly not envisaged at the moment. And I think that it will take, in
practical terms, many years to affect a trade liberalising and harmnising agenda within
APEC and also no doubt, withini NAFTA. I don't see any profit in speaking of APEC as a
protective grouping. B~ ecause I think the greater opportunity exists in openness in trade
and I don't think we should assume, at this stage anyway, that the GATT Round is going
to fail-We are coming towards the end of the fast-track deadline which the Congress has
given the President, of December 15, so the weight is on as far as GATTr is concerned.
Hopefiully we'll get an agreement on the GATT but the GATT doesn't deal with non-tariff
barriers and its going to take more than the GATT to deal with that anyway. So. wc've
got to think of ways of dealing with sorne of these other problems amd fanly when you
look at a lot of the APEC economies many of the devices are frankly hurting themselves.
And when I think that people understand that they will pitch in and commnit themselves to
a broader agenda.
J: Mr Keating, with the easing of Cold War tensions have the Amnericans at all
implied that they might want to reduce the scale of their intelligence and defence
, operations in Australia?
PM: Well. the Americans are doing what is called a bottom up review of their whole
defence structure as a result of the Cold War and obviously there will be a somewhat
smaller core force than they have largely had over the intervening twenty or thirty years.
And that will probably mean a reassessment by them in terms of intelligence collections
and what they think is worthwhile and what, if you like, methods of collection are
imnportnt to then,. I would tend to think the Australian facilitieswill still have relevance
to the United States a long time into the future. Even if, in some primary way, their
intelligence gathering shifts.
1: NU Keating, in any time in your discussions with the Amrericans did you tell them
that their agricultural subsidies whce ompared with their free trade rhetoric, were
hypocritical? 
PM: No, because the Ameicans have been the largest, most burly sentry at the gate of
fiee trade for the last seven year through the GATT Round. So there's not much point in
saying to a real ally on this question that they are iing hypocritical, because I don't think
theyore. They've taken up EEP and some of these agricultural subsidies in defence of
their position in markets against the European Community, But they know that it's
distorting their pattern of agricultural production and their budget and that is why they are
very committed to the Blair H-ouse Accord to bring those price and volume levels
down in subsidies. So. that happening, all these other things will in a sense, take care of
themselves. So the key point is to succeed on the GAIT and to do things which help the
GATT to succeed. beating in mind we've had a substantial, again, coramitment on the
Export Enhancement Program.
I3: Presidentt Clinton said today that America would go out of its way to avoid
hurting Australia's trading interests. Do you take that as a stronger commitment than they
have made in the paut on that?
PM: Well it's quite a specific commitment, that's what is important. It is a specific
commitment and it is one which he reiterated to me at some length over lunch and one
which, I think, having thought about it he was prepared to reiterate in public later.
J: Do you have in your own mind some timetable for the development of APEC?
How it might develop over the decade and do you have any idea how it might be
prevented from becorning rather open ended and just going on and on and on for several
years without malting the sort of progress dint we might want.
PM: Well. it's developing at a very fast pace. I mean, to take this thing from its
infancy in 1989 to what it will be, I hope, by the end of this year is the development of a
body of this dimension in, one would have to say, very quick time. And, therefore, I
don't Lament that we're not going fast enough. We are going quickly enough and were we
to go any faster we would not be getting the appropriate coinitment or consensus
amonos the member countries that will materially advance APEC's cause. So I don't
think there should be any concern about any tardiness in developing APEC and it sort of
drifting on. I think there's been a lot of focused attention by major powers the U. S. in
particular Japan, Korea and the ASEAN countries and as well as other large playein
like China.
J: Tn meeting with President Clinton you talked about the importance of establishing
a personal relationship with him. How did you find himn as a man in the meeting today?
PM:-Well, I gave you some indication in my opening remarks. I think that I found
him interesting, charming an engaging fellow who obviously is in the business of
doing good public works. That is, looking for good outcomes, trying to push U. S. policy 
.7.
in the right directions foT good reasoAs and that Sort of openness and public spiritcdness.
one would have to find that comforting in any cqntext given that the President of the
United States has such a pivotal role in ii ention*. policy and the leadership of the
world in mnany area. To find someone so interested in policy so mnuch at ease with the
intricacy of policy and looking for good outcomes simultaneously is, J think, quite
comforting for anybody let alone another head of government.
J; Is he your sort of President?
PM: Well. jtes not a mater of saying whether bes my sort of President, I think that the
United States has done very well in finding Bill Clinton as it's President. And this his
thoughtfUlnecss and openness is just what America needs, I think at this time to engage
some of these big questions, to set up the strategic directions. to look at the big picture
and to follow it through to logical conclusions.
J: You did speak today about the need to put flesh on bones of APEC before thene's
an expansion of NAETA into South Amecrica Are your worried that uless APEC gets
some sort of a move on following your agenda that America's interest will tend to be
dra'm southwards rather thin into Asia?
PM: No, if you look at the North Amnerican economies and the peckinig order for
membership of NAFTA in South America, it's not going to dranarally change the
weight of North American GDP. But it is going to extend opportunities into South
America. There is a view in Asia that NAPTA has an introspective, inward looking
quality about it That is a view. What * I was saying today is that if we put some flesh on
the bones of APEC so that it is clear to those countries that APEC is actually developing
sensibly, properly, expeditiously there'll be less concern about NAFTA and its directions.
3: How imnportant is it that APEC is institutionalised at a leaders' level? And also do
you foresee any problems in the future where United States human rights policies couild
cause some trouble for APEC members?
PM: Well, I think it is very important that APEC is institutional ised. Because without
the authority of the leaders of the governmeots of the member countries it won't get the
agenda it deserves. It won't get the political borsepower it needs to break through some
of these problems. Arnd, so apart from the utility of actually getting the job done it also
gives it status and weight which I think is important to it. On the human rights question I
don't see that it would be any larger a problem in an APEC context than it would be in
any other context.
J: Prime Minister the Congress has expressed a view about the Beijing bid for the
Olympics-Was that at all raised in your talks, either Yesterday or today? 
t.
PM; No. No it wasn't.
J: ( iadbe rsdn Suhazno attendi4the APEC meeting. Are you hoping to
prOvide some sort of link into the East Asian caucus there and how are t talks
progressing with Malaysia and Indonesia on A. PEC?
PM: Well, 1 think. Certainly with Indonesia. President Suharto has played a
very important role in the acceptance of APEC within the ASEAN group of countries and
his attedance itself is important. And be can play a furter role, I think, in seeking to
define APECs directions and indeed. doing so speaking on behalf of the ASEAN group
of countries. So, I do see his role as being fairly important it has already been, to
APEC and to the development of leaders meetings which I think has been facilitated or
helped in par by his very clear acceptance of the need for them and his attendance.
3: The lack of discussion here about t security angles of Australian-American
relations reflects the state of the world but could you give us some idea of what you and
Mr Aspin talked about in your meeting? Particularly what you see now as the main
security issues in the region for Amrerica and Australia.
PM: Well, I made clear to him that the alliance that we have between Australia and the
United States is a key part of our defence and foreign policy stance. That we have a long
term relationship obviously, and that relationship is doing as well today as it has ever
done. But that said, we'd also had our own Force structmr review in the middle 19808.
Whit. e we could not have anticipated the expeditious completion of the Cold War, if you
like, end of the Cold War and that change. Our Force structure review was actually set up
as though, in some way we knew that was going to happen. And the result that carne
from it gives Australia a more independent defence capability and capacity than it would
otherwise have. But that's part of, still, a broader defence and foreign policy relationship
with the United States in the region.
And I suppose our general message to the United States is, that while these bilateral
defence treatiestmattr to the region and to the United States they will matter more
if the commercial relationship is thickened-up. That is, if the trade and investment links
in the area continue to improve, particularly between the U. S. and the region. So, the old
notion that the British had that where the flag goes the trade will follow iA now -I think
you're seeing the converse of that -where the trade goes the flag will follow. That is,
that the defence and strategic relationship can actually dove tail in, complement a broader
trade and investment relationship.
I. On a defence related issue, did you and the President talk at all today about the
New Zealand nuclear issue and do you detect any softening on the U. S. part any desire
to change the strategic isolation situation?
! pnflA TnON t't7: CT QFrd~ c-CT 
.9.
PM: No, the Preident and I didn't. But I did with Scretaiy Aspin and I think our
position on that is as it has been of late. That is, that we look forward to New Zealand
rtrning to Mii ally status under ANZUS and we~ h Australia would encourage that
happening as indeed, so would the United States. But I think we have a commuon view
that it won't happen and shouldn't happen that iS, a retur to Wul ally starus unless
and until New Zealand accepts the obligations of that status.
[( Ifnot on the strategic then what about on the political issue. Do you see the U. S.
softening their position about elevating political tics with New Zealand?
PM: Well, I didn't press Secretary Aspin on that but I think that the United States does
have a vMi comnmon sense view of this. They are leaving an ambience about this that
eneouages or leaves open the option for New Zealand to retur to this kind of situation
or status which they formerly enjoyed, and would encourage them to do that. So I don't
think the United States will be doing anything at the political level which discourages
that J: ( inaudible)., link between defence and trade. Did you propose at any of your
meetings thAt Austr-alia and the U. S. share intelligence gathered at the joint bases, with
some of our Asian neighbours?
PM: No.
J: On the GATT. the agreement with you and President Clinton to call on the French
not to do what they look like they are going to do. Why should that make any difference?
PM-Well, I think the Europeans have got to understand that an acceptance by them of
French argument about the Blair House Accord a view on the part of France that it
seeks to open the Blair Mou. se Accord means that the fast track schedule of December
is likely to leave the United States without the legislative authority to conclude the
Round. And that an unwinding of Blair House places onus and responsibility on the
French in particular and the Europeans in general for the problems the Pound would then
have its likely failure. And to say that we regard an unwinding of the Blair House
Accord as unacceptable. They are a minmum set of standards, a set of minimat agreed
beyond which, we believe, we should not go. And having been agreed that it is now
inappropriate at this very late stage in the piece for the Government of France to try and
undo them.
J When is the soonest that you thidnk Australia cant hope for a totA abolition of
EEP? 
PM: WeU, again you asked me a question earlier about this. I see EEP in the context
of the Uruguay Round and the remedy to these kiros of intrusive trade subsidies as being
a general solution to trade which can come from a-ilntcrnational response. So, all the
moie reason why I think that Blair House needs to be maintained. And if it is maintained
then the Round can be concluded within the Decemnber 15 deadline.
J; But there would obviously be a lag between a successful Uruguay Round and any
winding down of EEl'. So what's the timeftame as far as..?
PM: I'ye riot had any discussion about that.
J: ( inaudible),.. subjects you covered with Mr Clinton. And did you discuss Health,
for instance?
PM. We discussed the Australian health care system. We discussed Australian social
policy. We discusse the Australian corporate tax system. We discussed other social
innovations like the Child Support Agency. He was very interested in the way in which
thewc agencies have been developed over time these innovative things we've used the
Australian taxaion system for. Dividend imputation and its influences on the equities
market and on the investment, The utility of our health insurance system and how it
works. [ t was quite an interesting lunch time conversation over all these isses.
J: Mr Keating, a few days from today the Olympic bid will be open. What do you
plan to say in your final pitch in Monaco to sway anybody who might still be sitting on
the fence, about whether Sydney is the best place for the Olympics?
PM: Making the obvious points about Sydney and its being the most superior of the
bids in technical termns. That Sydney is the at this time arguably the best bid, that
Australia is a county which has showni more than its share of the Olympic spirit. That it
has been in it for the sport of it and the Olympic ideals and that as the year 2000 is
obviously going to be the era of the Pacific, Sydney is the right choice.
3: There was some talk around the White House today that China might get the bid
because it is more politically correct. That people need Chinese trade more than
Australian trade-H-ow do you counteract those arguments?
PM: Well, I diink there has to be in the minds of the Olympic Committee the need to
keep the inteerity of the Olympic movement clear in terms of the process of selction and
the motivation of the selection. And that geopolitics is not the business of the
International Olympic Committee. Its business is seleciing host cities for the Olympic
Games and that should go to the interests of the competitors and the interests of the
ryr~ n. j r A 



I TEL: 16. Sep. 93 9: 15 No. 007 P. 01/ 0
/ 7
TRANSCRIPT OF QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION WITH THE PRIME
MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, FOLLOWING ADDRESS TO
THE ASIA SOCIETY, NEW YORK, U. S. A.
SEPTEMBER, 1993
J: Sir, the Australian dollar has been taking quite a beating lately against other major
currencies and the RBA has continued to come in to prop it up. Do you plan to
continue with this policy or do you just want to let it float downward? I didn't
mean that as an insult at all because a lot of currencies float up and down.
PM: Well, there was a time when I took the questions of screen jockeys seriously but
fortunately for me that time has passed. And I can say that seeking from any
Government definitive statements about its currency is rather expecting too much.
The Australian dollar has been, for a long period of time, governed by the market's
view about commodity prices and our dependency on commodities. I might say
that that dependency is now weakening substantially as the pattern of Australian
exports has changed to elaborately transformed manufactures, manufactures in
general and services.
So as a country we are much less dependent today on commodities than in the
past. But the currency has always been commodity driven. Now you will know
that commodity prices are now down to the levels that we last saw in 1986, which
was a very low level by historical standards and gold prices have been down
recently, too. And] I think that is what's probably brought the attention of the
market -as indeed the United States dollar has strengthened somewvhat.-Now,
these things run along but the notion that the Government is trying to make a rate
is. I think, wrong. We've never sought to do that. But we don't want to see our
currency unnecessarily knocked about by individual transactions and we take
appropriate steps to deal wvith that. But that's all the world of difference than
trying to make a rate, which I don't think we've ever sought to do.
At any rate, that fact is that there is a lot of movement in currencies these days.
It's the way economics equilibrate to the changes in the terms of trade. It's one of
the values in floating exchange rates and you can see by the fixed exchange rate 
TEL: 16. Sep. 93 9: 15 NO. 007 P. 02/ 0S
systems of Europe how unreal they become when the strains and stresses really
start. So, I'm afraid if you want to be r4, king guesses about the A dollar you're
going to have to use your professional judgement rather than rely on me, at lunch.
3: Mr Prime Minister you mentioned earlier that Australia's competitive position has
improved considerably and that it is equal to mnany in your region. How do you
see this reflected in the external balance in the merchandise trade, picture and so
forth? Could you elaborate? Has this been reflected in shifts in your external trade
balances?
PM: It certainly has. And I think it is reflected most obviously in our general trade
performance and our capacity to service our debt. Not so many years ago, three
or four years ago we needed about 22 or 23 percent of our export proceeds to
service our debt. That's now down to about fourteen percent. And that's in part
because of a better export performance on our part. And we are very competitive;
we're about 25 percent more competitive than just a couple of years ago. We're
vastly more competitive than a decade ago.
We now have very low inflation, with underlying inflation running at around 2
percent. and we have a competitive exchange rate. We have a high profit share in
the ec6nomy the profit share in GD-P is around about the peak of the late 1980s
already. And all of this, I think, is good for investment, good for production, good
for exports and good for employment and good for jobs. So, we've now got very
competitive macro-economics settings. And in our tax system, for instance, welve
now got a corporate rate competitive with Asia, at 33 percent. We've got no,
there is no double taxation of dividends in Australia. We've got very large tax
concessions for research and development, for accelerated depreciation of plant
and equipment.
So, wherever you look whether it's the tax systemn or it is inflation or it is interest
rates or exchange rates or profits, we are now very, very competitive. And I think
that's showing in our exports and particularly in the changed culture towards Asia
which has taken place across the sectors of Australian manufacturing and
Australian commerce where there's a real sea change in the view of Australian
executives on how they approach export markets and with what fervour and
commitment they approach theni,
J1: Mr Prime Minister, unemployment levels in the world have been getting a 8reat
deal of attention. As you mentioned during the presentation, the Australian
unemployment level is what you would consider very high. Do you view this as a
structural problem and what are some of thc specific steps that the Government is
taking to alleviate the problem and can it be solved in the future? 
TEL .3.
PM: Well, it's partly structural and it's partly Cclical. Part of it is from the economic
cycle of the recession; part of its from the churning that's taking place in our
industrial structure. And we're trying to take people and retrain them and put them
back into other sectors of employment and we are directing labour market
programs at the long term unemployed. That is, those people-who are unemployed
for 12 months or more -to give them work experience, training and a36iubsidyto
get them back into the workforce, to get their self esteem up, to give them the
opportunity of getting some specialisations back and some skills back so that they
can maintain their place. And we have a very high success rate with the
unemployed people: who are contacted by our labour market programs.
But aggregate unemployment is still high at around I1I percent although, I might
add, with a very high participation rate. That is, the number of people the
proportion of the population in the workforce is very high in Australia. If we were
comparing for instance the participation rate in the United States with Australia,
were we to have your participation rate we'd have unemployment down to around
6 or 7 percent. But with our participation rate, unemployment is at around I I
( percent).
Now, that means that many people are looking for work and the only way of
finding it, in the end, will be economic growth. And we've got the Australian
economy growing again at about 3 percent and we're hoping for more growth in
the coming year and we see growth principally as a way of providing the jobs.
But, we are now in a productivity laden recovery. This is not an employment
laden recovery as the 1983 recovery was. This is a productivity laden recovery.
And so were gettingrmore output from fewer people, which I guess means that
we've got to have mnore output again, if we are to take up the number of jobs that
we wvant to see be takent up.
As well as that, the Government has commissioned a task force to look at novel
ways in which we might deal with unemployment systemic changes which might
help us deal with this problem, While the cycle of the economy is changing, while
cyclical unemployment is declining and while we are still dealing with the churning
which has come through the change to our industrial structures fromn the old
Australia to the modern industrial Australia. This will be, I think, an important
report for the Government to sec in which ways we can actually do something
novel -in world terms -to help the unemployed.
But, above all else, our commitment will be to growth and emnployment through
growth by letting the Australian economy grow when we see the opportunities to
let it grow. We won't be artificially constraining its growth because we do have an
incomes policy to rely upon, as well as monetary policy, so we are able to let the
TL: 16. Sep. 93 9: 15 No. 007 P. 03/ 09 
TEL: 16. Sep. 93 9: 15 No. 0 p0/ 9
-4,
economy grow faster than most other compgrable countries. That, we hope, will
be a longer term answer to unemployment.
3: Mr Prime Minister, in your remarks you-;'* phasise the consensualnauef
politics in Australia. Arnd yet on the mosf recent Budget it seems that things may
have been going something amiss. I'm wondering if you could take a moment or
two just to clarify the Government's position on the Budget and what we might
expect in the weeks ahead?
PM: Well, the first thing I would say to you is we're pretty confident the Budget will
pass through the Parliament. No other Australian Budget hasn't and we think this
one will. The reason that this one is an issue is bt sciee conservative parties in
Australia have decided to vote against, to obstruct the Budget's passage because
they are miffed about losing, having lost the last election. Now, that's not much of
a reason for voting against a Budget, but that is their reason.
And that has meant that the Government has had to go down the highways and
byways of our second chamber to ensure the Budget's passage and that's why it is
in the debate. This is not a policy which can be sustained by the conservative
pariies in Australia. The Government convincingly won the election six months
ago and therefore it has a very firm mandate for its policies. And the notion that
the opposing party can upset it is not one that normally has currency in Australian
public life.
Now the traditions are different in the United States. Gencrally, here the
Republicans don't normally pitch in and help a Democratic administration carry
budgetary mneasures as we've seen in the United States again recently. But in our
country the Government is made in the House of Representatives and the money
legislation of the country is made there and the convention is that it has passage
through our upper house. The conservative parties in Australia, this time, are
breaking that convention which only means we've got to spend more timne about
the Budget's passage. But pass the Budget will; which then has the happy effect
for me of inaking the conservative parties even more irrelevant than they are now.
3: Mr Keating, I just wonder in termns of the Olym pic choice whether it's Sydney or
Beijing what change would you expect Sydney winning the Olympic bid would
have on your economic forecasts?
P M. I don't know that it would change our forecasts all that much but it would
obviously be a good thing for Australia to host an Olympics. Sydney is well
capable of hosting an Olympics. We've got quite unique facilities, I think, in world
termns not just in national terms ror this bid. And were we to win it it would be a 
16. Sep. 93 9: 15 No. 007 P. 05/ 09
good thing, I think for the southern hemisphere and for the Pacific in the year 2000
let alone for Australia and Sydney in particular. And I think it would be a good
opportunity for us to advertise the Australian nation, its unique identity and its
success, its social cohesion, its role in the world. All these things, I think, are
opportunities opened up to the host of the Olympic Games.
So, I think that's the tangible benefit from it rather than the impetus to growth in
any particular year. No doubt there would be some impetus to growth in the year
2000 were we to secure the Olympic Games but I don't think that is something
which we need to rely upon to build our economic fortunes. It's just one of those
little pluses that come through along the way. More important, I think, for the
country's culture and its view the view of it in the world than it is for any
particular economic effect.
PM: Well, I think I have exhausted you all. Oh no, there are a few punters over here..
3: Mr Prime Minister, could you elaborate a bit on which countries in Asia you might
see priority in trade with you referred to the continent but any countries in
particular?
PM: Well the great bulk of our trade, the largest most preponderant parcel of our trade
is with Japan. And I was just speaking briefly at the table here earlier about our
trade with Japan which is very large. U. S.-Japan two way trade is about $ 100
billion but Australia. Japan two way trade is about $ 20 billion. We have a fifth of
the trade the United States has but the United States economy is twenty times
larger than ours. Which gives you some indication of the level of trade between
Australia and Japan. That's the principal trade sinew of South East Asia and
around that we've also other trading possibilities and opportunities. Among them,
and most notable I suppose is Korea and more latterly, China and the ASEAN
group of countries. So, it is probably the growth opportunites across them all
the growth opportunites are probably greater amongst the ASEAN countries of
Thailand, Indo-China and China itself given that we already have a high level of
trade with Japan and Korea. But in those two countries the trade is continuing to
change to sophisticate away ftom bulk traded commodities onto manufactures and
elaborately transformed goods. And that, I hope, will continue to grow but there
are enormous growth opportunites in these other economies which we intend to
take up as well.
The important cultural change that has taken place in Australia is the attitude of
Australian business to exports. Instead of regarding exports as an exportable
surplus from some domestic production program, companies are now going in for
exports as a primary business. And you're seeing this in food, in food processing
TEL: 
TEL -6,
where we've seen very large acquisition of brand names and the building of quite
large capital structures to export into South East Asia. We're seeing it in
telecommunications, we're seeing it in all sorts of elaborately transformed sectors,
And this is a sea change, as I said earlier, Which we've never had before. So, the
cultural shift in Australia has well and truely been made. It's now simply a matter
of driving it home and maintaining the competitiveness hard won
competitiveness we now have so that we can drive it home.
But wc need the structures to do it in and that's where APEC becomes important.
We need the trade liberalising agenda of APEC to give us the opportunities which
we otherwise wouldn't have the very same opportunities which will make all of
the economies of the region so much wealthier where the velocity of trade can~ be
so much greater. So) while we have distinct and important trading opportunities
we want to get the institutional structures right so that we can not only exploit the
very high levels of growth which are currently obtained in this part of the world,
but even higher levels of growth with even less impediment to trade and
investment so that we can all benefit from a higher velocity of growth in incomnes
through the region. So, really, I think, from Australia's point of view we fire now
in the game in earnest. And we're now earnestly trying to change the institutional
structure so that we remain in the game in perpetuity.
J: Mr Prime Minister, to what extent do you think that the inflationary conditions in
China and the large current account deficit that China has to what extent are
these a threat to trade generally in the Pacific basin and to Australia specifically?
PM: I don't think they're a threat to trade generally. I think China will continue to grow
at a healthy pace. Maybe not growing as fast as it is now, obviously, with
unsustainable levels of investment, And China is now seeking ways of curbing that
activity -while lacking the sophisticated instruments that exist in an economy like
the United States or Australia, They don't have a readily available monetary
systemn to use. Fiscal policy doesn't have the sharpness it has in the United States
or Australiat so there's a much heavier reliance upon administrative mneanis of
slowing up the Chinese economy while at the same time developing these
instruments. So, I would think that yes, we will see China slow down and that will
cause some gnashing of teeth.
But it will still grow at a clip, I think, and it is not simply China's growth though
upon which Australia's trade opponiunites in the area depend or the United
States' trade opportunities in the area though obviously they are enhanced by
China's growth. And the income growth, that's the important thing I think, the
income growth within China itself. But, yes they are in a period of very high
growth, inflation has taken off, they know this is a bad thing for them and they are
T1E6L:. Sep.' 93 9: 15 No. 007 P. 06/ 09 
TEL: No6.. S0e 0.973 9P: 1.50 7/ 09
.7-
doing all they can, 1 think, to bring it back. Atid we should assist themn where we
can in doing that so that their growth is sustainable and that they're in there playing
a long term role on a sustainable basis and not find themselves in, simply, cycles
which are unsustainable and basically sout their investment sectors and those who
invest in them. So, I think China is going to be a very strong player into the future
and I don't think we ought to believe that the current slowdown is going to be
immeasureably change the nature of their economic transition.
J. Mr Keating, I'm an Australian exporter in the fashion industry, new into the United
States. I was just wondering, are you intending to increase the frequency of
payments under the Export Market Development Grant.
PM: We've put somne changes through in the Budget, I think, to enhance the Export
Market Development Grant Scheme. One of the things which a study we had;, by
the McKinsey company, of 700 dynamic exporting companies or the most dynamic
exporting companies in Australia.... One of the things that survey found was that
export market development assistance was of material assistance in helping
businesses develop new markets in various parts of the world.
And so in the recent Budget we have increased funding for export market
development assistance and from memory, one of those things is more frequent
payment. In other words, you don't have to wait until the end of the year to get a
reimbursement of your expenditure -which I think is the point of your question.
I think you'll find a perusal of the Budget papers will reveal that to you, if I'm not
mistaken.
E-nds TEL 16. Sep .93 



TEL: 16-. Sep. 9,3 9: 15 No. 007 P. 08/ 0
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE IfON. P. 3.
KEATING, UNITED NATIONS CENTRI!, NEW YORK, U. S. A.
SEPTEMBJER, 1993
J: Prime Minister, did the U. N. ask for any more Australian contribution to
peacekeeping efforts?
PM: No, I had the chance of a good discussion with the S ecretary-General about the
United Nations, about its rote in the world today and its future. I reassured him of
Australia's commitment to the United Nations, as a foundation member, which has
always paid its dues on time and which has committc4 itself to the serious work of'
the including peace keeping. The Secretary-General told me that there is
great difficulty in managing the organisation with many countries not paying their
funding to the organisation on time which, he says, constrains its capacity to
play the role it can play in the world.
I've assured him that we will continue to be the stolid supporters of the
organisation which we are and that his agenda for peace initiative which he
unveiled some time ago that Australia is responding to that seriously with a
major work. And that in all the other activities that the United Nations undertakes
we'll continue to play the role we've played. In the czurse of his discussions with
me he indicated that the U. N's role goes, of course, beyond peace keeping to other
agendas; like the agenda for women and other humanitarian and social programs.
And I indicated to him that Australia was intent upon holding an international
conference on multiculturalismi next year and he indicated, very generously,
support for that proposal. So, we shall probably end up, I think, next year holding
a conference on multiculturalisin an international confcrence, with the support
of the United Nations and its Secret ary-General.
T. How extensively did you preview the Evans proposals?
PM: Not extensively but he said he was grateful that Australia had responded and was
participating in the dcbatc about the organisation's future. And that was the kind
of debate that he wanted stimulated and he was pleased that we were responding in
the serious way that we were.
J Did you express any reservations about some of the, apparently, appalling things
the U. N. has been up to in Somalia? 
TEL
PM: No, only to say that I thought that if the U. N's prestige matters that like any other
organisation it has got to build a constituency for itself within the populations and
the communities of member states. That whatever it does it should try and pick its
mark so that what it does it does well. So " that with its prestige high, its charter
can then be more effective.
J: So, are you concerned about some of the things going on in Somalia?
PM: Well, in some respects, in some particular things, yes. But, I didn't go to the
particular in this discussion.
J: Do you think Australia is doing enough, sufficiently, in the peace keeping area?
PM: Well, we've I think, at the moment got about 600 people in Cambodia. We're in the
Middle East and the Sahara and I think probably we've got upwards of 700 people
around the world in peace keeping. I think the Secretary-General thinks we're
pulling our weight which I am sure we are. And, in Australia's terms, we can only
support this organisation institutionally, support the requests when we think we
can meet them and play our role and pay our dues on time.
J: Did you discuss East Timor with the Secret ary-General, Sir?
PM: No.
J: Could you comment on the latest U. S. moves to put pressure on the Government
of Indonesia?
PM: No. I didn't discuss it with him.
J: But could you comment?
PM: No, I'm not here to discuss that.
J1: Mr Keating you haven't thought about taking a peace keeping force with you to
confront the tabloids in London, have you?
PM: Not I thought you'd do that.
Ends. T1E6L:. Sep. 93 9: 15 No. 00? P. 09/ 09 



TEL -I
PRIME MINISTER
RMOMRGOED: Against Delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE NON P. J. XEATING, MP
ASIA SOCIETY, ME YORK, 15 SEPMhNER 1L993
" AUSTRALIA, THE UNITED STATES AND) THE NEW ASIA"
It is five years since I addressed members of this
distinguished institution. They have been five years of
extraordinary, momentous change. The end of the Cold War
has greatly increased the level of uncertainty in the
world, but as events in Washington on Monday this week
dramatically showed, it has also greatly increased the
level of possibility. The new world order now emerging
is rich with possibilities which could scarcely be
imagined'a decade ago.
within the brief span of the last five years some of the
deepest and most intractable issues of the post-war world
have been put on a path to resolution.
The Soviet Union has ceased to exist, Germany has been
reunited, and we saw on Monday the beginnings of what may
be a permanent peace settlement in the Middle East.
For the first time since 1945, the United States is now
free to concentrate on new challenges in new regions.
my address today concerns one such possibility. I mean
the opportunity presented by the economic advancement of
East Asia the " new Asia" of my title today. For the
centre of gravity in world affairs is moving inexorably
from the Atlantic to the Pacific: and it is in the
interests of both our countries to recognise the promise
the region holds.
in recent years and particularly in the twenty months I
have been Prime Minister a substantial even a
preponderant amount of the Australian Government's
energies have been directed in varying degrees towards
equipping Australia for the Asia-Pacific era which lies
ahead. Equipping it economically, of course, but also as
a society and as a nation. T1EL6:. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 01/ 09 
TEL 2
In the five years since I last addressed tis institution
we have taken the reform of the Australian economy Rauch
further# to a point now where it is as competitive as any
in the OECD, and in certain essential respects, such as
the rate of company taxation and incentives for research
and development, comparable to the Asian economies.
There have been profound changes in the shape and
orientation of the Australian economy; namely, towards
sophisticated manufacturing, towards exports, towards
Asia. Equally priofound have been the-~ hdnges to the
business and industrial culture necessary to initiate and
sustain the pace of reform.
But in making these essential changes, the Australian
Government has been determined to ensure that social
policy keeps up with economic change.
We take the view that change comes more effectively and
more rapidly when it comes cooperatively and with a
substantial degree of social consensus. For example, we
won industrial peace, a much more creative industrial
culture, lower inflation and much else through an Accord
between trade unions and the Government.
we have always taken the view that a more competitive
economy should not and does not mean the sacrifice of the
social fabric. on the contrary, we have stuck fast to
basic social democratic principles because we believe it
is in them that the faith of the Australian people lies,
and on that faith our progress depends.
we recognise that the re-orientation of Australia towards
Asia gives rise to a certain amount of apprehension among
Australians accustomed to old European ties and
attitudes. But we go to Asia without compromising our
heritage or our beliefs or our democracy. In fact, we
need to make them stronger.
As a result of policies which might be generically
described by the word " inclusive", we emerged from the
1980s with an economy much more competitive and much
better placed to take advantage of our opportunities: And
with a first class national health system, And a social
safety net the equal of any in the world, An the most
advanced legislation effecting rights and opportunities
for women, An-d a richly pluralist and remarkably peaceful
society. it is in this-broad context that some other recent
initiatives might be seen. We have opened up debate on
the prospect of an Australian Federal Republic because it
would seem to be singularly more appropriate to the
reality of our position in the world, and our national
identity and aspirations. T1E6L:. Seo. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 02/ 09 
TEL 3
We are in the process of legislating a new deal for
indigenous Australians because justice is long overdue to
them and because, by delivering justice, we will raise
the level of national unity and notional self -esteem.
we are continuing to actively encourage the development
or a multicultural Australia because, as the United
states well knows, there is enormous strength in
diversity. We are conscious of the fact that the reality of
Australia does not accord with the image of Australia
projected abroad. Pond as we are of our national legend
and our native fauna, we are fonder still of our social
and democratic institutions and values.
You will understand how irritating it can be if you
imagine the United States defined exclusively by coyotes.
By way of a corrective I might quote an article in the
Sydney Morning HaralA earlier this year written by one of
your own -Susan Gaetner, a resident of Manhattan. She
had gone to Sydney in 1991 believing, she said, that it
was a place populated by " rubes and yahoos". She found,
I am pleased to say that the standards of urban chic were
at least as high as her home tows, the health care and
social programs " light years ahead" and the quality of
life " stunningly, resoundingly, overwhelmingly better."
I imagine New Yorkers would find this hard to believe.
More is the pity, so would many Australians. But I should
hope it makes the point Australia is an advanced social
democracy and a complex and modern even post modern
society.
The recession hit us hard in Australia and we have a
major unemployment problem which, in the face of world
recession or feeble recovery, all our efforts so far have
failed to solve. But the reinforcements to the social
fabric we have made have served us very well in binding
Australian society together and making it possible to
maintain the momentum of change and seize the
opportunities which the world, and particularly the
region, offers.
Ladies and gentlemen
in Australia, we understood very well when President
Clinton emphasised in last year's campaign that foreign
and domestic policy are now two sides of the same coin.
These days, trade policy most decidedly is high policy.
And there is no more iiiportant focus for trade poli~ cy
than East Asia.
Right round the Western Pacific we watched with great
interest as, step by step, Hr Clinton began to swing
America's interests towards the Pacific. TEL: 1~ 01: 62.1S eNpo.. 9031 6 ru~ u 
TEL 4
We saw early on that he recognised the link between the
US budget deficit and its poor trade performance through
the eighties. For the nations of-the Western Pacific,
Mr Clinton's deficit reduction package meant he was
acknowledging that America's trade problems cannot be
solved without change at home.
Then we saw that despite the clamour against it, he
reaffirmed American commitment to the Blair House accord
on world agricultural trade. A little while later, hie
committed his administration to a speedy conclusion of
the Uruguay Round and sought a renewed fast track
authority from Congress to complete the round.
For the nations of the Western Pacific, which have
depended for their growth on an open world trading
system, Mr Clinton's commitment to the Uruguay Round was
good news indeed.
Month by month Mr Clinton continued to confound the
sceptics on our side of the Pacific, and confirmed that
the US was on the right track.
His American University speech at the end of February
recognised the centrality Or Asia and of APEC to a
strategy based on economic growth, increasin
international competitiveness, and stronger trade.
For the Western Pacific, Mr Clinton passed a crucial test
when he successfully sought an extension at China's HFN
status, conditional on human rights tests.
in June, he began to reveal a long awaited package of
proposals for enhancing US excports to Japan and we were
relieved to find that the US would not seek preferential
access, or trade quotas.
Finally in July, in his Waseda University speech in
Japan, Mr Clinton proposed to convene the first meeting
of the leaders of the economies of the Asia-Pacific
region. in mny discussions with the President yesterday we shared
our visions of the future course of the Asia-Pacific
economic community.
The discussions confirmed my belief that the Clinton
Administration has found a path out of the puzzling
uncertainties of the late eighties.
The path out is trade, and it goes west across the
Pacific. Now in all this I believe Mr Clinton was recognising an
unmistakable economic imperative. T1EL6:. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 04/ 09 
EL: 16. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. Ut / U'j
South-East Asia is now in the throes of an~ industrial
revolution which is transforming the ASEAN economies from
primary producers to major manufacturing centres.
Manufacturing now accounts for over one-third of their
GDP and around 60 per cent of their exports.
Importantly for Australia, our . near neighbour, Indonesia,
has achieved 25 years of sustained economic development
and transition from one of the world's poorest countries
to one standing on the threshold of the middle-income
group. With the fourth largest population in the world, it is
now launched on a strong growth path.
For the first time in its history, Indonesia has become a
significant industrial exporter.
At the same time, radical reform of the Chinese economy
has unleashed powerful forces of growth and
industrialisation. I visited China in June this year and, particularly in
Shanghai, was impressed by the resurgence of
entrepreneurial drive and skill.
The IMF and others have recently recalculated China's GNP
on a purchasing-power basis.
These calculations suggest that it might be more
realistic to regard China's GNP as three or four times
the official figure, making China already the world's
third biggest economy after the United States and Japan.
Each of the East Asian economies has started from a
different base, with different resources and different
economic circumstances.
But there are common threads running through each story
of success: the determined pursuit of economic growth qnd
social progress, and a willingness to embrace domestic
economic reform and outward-looking trade and investment
policies. in the wake of sustained economic growth, East Asian
societies are being transformed.
Across diverse cultures, there is a common commitment to
modern isation.
There is a high premium on education and technical
training which relate to modern economic sectors, as well
as an international orientation in government and
business. Demand for quality consumer goods, fashion,
entertainment, leisure and travel is steadily growing.
TEL 
In developing East Asian economies including those of
South-East Asia a substantial middle class is rapidly
emerging.
This has political as well ' as economic consequences.
East Asian middle classes valui-political stability, but
they also seek greater participation in the political
process. Circumstances vary from country to country, but there is
a welcome overall trend towards political pluralism and
libera lisation.
Indeed, judging by the examples of Korea and Taiwan, one
could argue persuasively that, beyond a certain point,
dynamic and internationally-oriented economic growth
almost certainly requires progressive steps towards
political liberalisation and democracy.
in the cases of China and Vietnam, the question of how
long economic liberalisation can be insulated from
political reform is a fundamental question for the future
of both countries.
I think it should be emphasised to an Asia Society
audience that the United States is benefiting enormously
from the economic dynamic in East Asia and stands to
benefit more as time goes on.
The two sides of the Pacific now form an integrated
market of two billion people, accounting for half the
world's production and halt the worlds trade.
it is a rn~ rket, a production zone, an economic community
which for a decade has grown more rapidly than any other
region of the world, and which is likely to continue to
grow at twice the rate of Europe.
we often think of the European Community as a model of
economic integration. Or we think of the economic
relationship between the United States, Canada and Mlexico
as an example of a naturally integrated group.
certainly these groups are closely integrated, but it is
a surprising fact that the economies of North America and
the Western Pacific are actually more closely integrated,
without a regional trade agreement, than are the
economies of Europe or of North America, with a regional
trade agreement.
man Americans think of East Asia primarily as a source
of Tmports competing with US industry here or in thirdcountry
markets.
Anid certainly, it is true that the us market remains
vitally important for most East Asian economies. 
TEL: 16 Sep .93 1 U: 21 NO. VU,) LQ v
7
But over the last decade East Asia, Australia and Niew
Zealand have become an increasingly important market for
US exports. A
Less than a decade ago, more than one third of Western
Pacif ic exports came to the UniLted States.
Today the proportion is less than one quarter.
And over the same time-frame, the proportion of US
exports which go to the Western Pacific has risen to well.
over one quarter, on a par with those to the NAFTA
partners and well ahead of exports to the EC.
Since the mid-eighties the trend rate of growth of US
exports to the Western Pacific has been three times the
rate of growth of Western Pacific exports to the United
States. in other words, East Asia is no longer just a production
2one for exports to the United States it is also a
thriving and rapidly growing importer of US imports.
I believe that the Western Pacific today is your key
market and it is not too much to say that the success
of the United States In the international economy, Its
success as an exporter, its success in regaining its
confidence and belief in itself, depends on its
continuing success in Western Pacific markets.
Australia's trade orientation towards East Asia is even
more pronounced.
Around 60 per cent of our exports now go to East Asia.
Indeed, without any formal arrangements, there is already
closer integration between the economies of North
America, East Asia and Oceania than between either the
members of the EC or the members of NAFTA.
Given the enormous stakes involved on both Bides of the
Pacific, it seems to me important that we think
creatively about what sort of policy and institutional
framework will best maintain and strengthen the highly
valuable economic linkages which now operate between East
Asia, Oceania and North America.
in my discussions with President Clinton in Washington
yesterday, we were in ready agreement that the Asia-
Pacific Economic cooperation or APEC process has the
potential to play a decisive role in this regard.
APEC is already showing great promise as a forum for
promoting economic cooperation on a basis of open
regionalism among the main economies of the Asia-Pacific
region. 
TEL: ib. Sep. 93 10: 21 rio.-
APEC'a members are the United Statesi Canada, Japan,
Korea, China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the six ASEAN countries,
Australia and New Zealand.
But to succeed, this process will " also require close
attention to other aspects of trans-Pacific relations
outside the economic realm.
We need to recognise, for exampfe, that the favourable
strategic circumstances and promising economic outlook
that now obtain in East Asia are partly the result of
enlightened US strategic policy towards the region since
the Second World War.
Judging by the quality of the discussion I was privileged
to have yesterday with the President of the United
States? I am sure your country is sufficiently
imaginative and big-hearted to meet this challenge.
I left my meetings in Washington with a deeper conviction
that Mr Clinton is putting the United States on the right
path.
A path west to the pacif ic.
But at the same time as he resolved to rebuild America's
competitiveness, he has signalled his determination to
rebuild hmerican society as well.
I was encouraged by his commitment to the Asia-Paciric
economic community. And I was struck with the unanimity
with which the President, his Cabinet and the
Congressional leadership in both Houses and both Parties
expressed their conviction that the US should assign a
higher priority to its trading relations with the western
Pacific and the Asia-Pacific economic community.
May I also say that I appreciated the Administration's
high regard for its relationship with my own country.
We also discussed the importance of the Uruguay Round and
the need to have a result by the middle of December a
schedule which in the view of both my Government and the
Clinton Administration leaves no room at all for
reopening the Blair House accord on agriculture.
Ladies and gentlemen
Tomorrow I go from New York to London: from a, country
which scarcely notices the presence of an Australian
Prime Minister to one whose popular press is driven to an
orgy of insults by his impending arrival. There it was
recently written that I was among other things a
" barbarian" -which in the London tabloids is pretty well
a synony m for Australian that I was bent on taking
Australij towards " some hellish Japanese future": that
the only solution to we hustralians was, to " shoot them
all". rr. 1 Voi n 
TEL: 16. Sep. 93 10: 21 No. 013 P. 09/ 09
Ii 9
I expect it will get qult-abusive when I
arrive. I must say my sympathies are fundamentally with
the British people who have to endure a press
like this every day.
Of course Britain remains an important trading
partner, a firm friend, and, as with the United
States, a source of much In the way of culture
and institutions that we value.
The British Foreign Secretary, Douqlas iurd,
has made this very point to the Australian
media in the past day or so.
Certainly, the historical ties between Britain
and Australin are unhrnnknbln. nut tlin ( AImn
changnd a long timo ago, In pursuing tho
possibilities which the Asia-Pacific holds
Australia has simply recognised necessity,
which Is to say the future.
Thank you. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, NP~
ANNIVERSARY OF AUSTRALIA HOUSE
LONDON 17 SEPTEMBER 1993
it is a great honour to welcome you here to commemorate
the 75th anniversary of this most famous Australian
institution Australia House. I
For once at least-the word " historic" can be used without
the risk of exaggeration or cliche.
For this building has played a unique and remarkable role
in Australia's modern history, and in the history of our
relationship with Great Britain.
Australia House was built during a dramatic and-defining
moment in Australia's evolution as a nation, the First
World war.
It has stood through the Second World War; through the
growth of Australia from an all but infant nation,
through all the changes in our association with Whitehall
from the Statute of Westminster in 1932 to the
Australia Act of 1986 through the growth to maturity of
our relationship with the United Kingdom.
This is not only the oldest Australian overseas mission,
it is also the oldest diplomatic mission building in
London. The architects who designed it were Scottish;
the materials, English stone combined with Australian
marble and timber all of it highlighted by the works of
Australian painters and sculptors.
The building was opened by His Majesty King George V
before an audience which. included a quite extraordinary
gallery of Australians the Prime Minister, William
Morris Hughes, former Prime Ministers Andrew Fisher and
Joseph Cook, and our greatest General Sir John Monash. 1903 
2
In opening the building, the King said:
it will not only serve those useful purposes for
which it was designed, but will also call to mind
f or all those who pass by the immense opportunities
and limitless resources of the great continent under
the Southern Cross. I
And of course this is precisely what Australia House has
been in the seventy-five years since: the Australian
promotion house; the place that issuied the passports; f or
countless thousands of British people, the first contact
with the country they made their home not to say, a
reminder of home for thousands of Australians living in
or visiting Britain.
Those British migrants were told in various terms over
the years that Australia was indeed a land of unrivalled
opportunity and vast resources. There were politicians
in those days who imagined that by this stage in our
history Australia would be supporting a population in
excess of 100 million with an economy the size of the
United States.
Yet, if these predictions have turned out to be a little
inflated, the fact remains that the human opportunities
Australia has provided are beyond measure, that those
opportunities still exist and, in my view at least,
there is still no better place on earth to live.
Indeed, it is a very much better place now than it was in
1918, or 1948, or 1958, or at any other time in our
history. Better for many reasons.
Better for the principles Australians have stuck to down
the years and the traditions they have developed which
continue to underpin the social and political ethos of
Australia: principles and traditions of democracy and
fairness which, translated into policy, make Australia in
the 1990s one of the truly advanced democracies in the
world. Better also because Australians have not interpreted all
their traditions as immutable and inviolable. So
Australia in the 1990s is much broader, much more open,
more tolerant, more diverse infinitely richer because
new generations of Australians chose to welcome settlers
not just from the United tKingdom, but from all the
countries of the world.
1904 
And better because, like our population, our economy is
part of the world economy. And particularly because it
is part of the most rapidly growing, and assuredly moat
promising region in the world the Asia-Pacific. So
immense are the opportunities there, the words of King
George V hold truer now than they did when he spoke them
here at Australia House seventy-five years ago.
Necessarily, with these developments in the composition
of the Australian people and their society, and the
aspirations and imperatives facing the Australian nation,
a new sense of identity will emerge.
And if we give expression to it through the reform of
those institutions which were appropriate and effective
in the past but not so appropriate and effective now, we
will be that much stronger.
Let me say here in London, as I have said many times in
Australia it is not because our affections for Great
Britain are reduced, or the friendship, between us
frailer, or our respect and admiration for the culture
and institutions Britain has bequeathed us in any way
diminished, that now, in this last decade of our first
century as a nation, we are considering the option of
becoming a republic.
It is not because the machinery is brokeni that we wish to
change it. It is because a great many Australians in
all likelihood a Zaligrity of Australians believe the
machinery is no longer the most appropriate.
I believe the Australian Government believes that
most of the people of Great Britain, if they were asked
about the issue, would agree with us. I believe they
would find it unexceptional and inoffensive that
Australians should consider taking this step at this
stage of their history.
Indeed, I am quite convinced that were Australians to
choose the republican option, this expression of their
identity which has inevitably changed so much in the past
century, our friendship with Great Britain would be
stronger, as any friendship is stronger for being more
mature. But the decision on this will be made by the Australian
People. It can 2aJ be made by the Australian people:
the people descended, as mine are, from these islands,
and those from all the countries of Europe, and the
Mtiddle East and Asia and-throughout the world.
I find it very hard to believe that if Australians decide
that their country shauld be in future a Federal Republic
Of Australia, anyone of good faith in this country will
not consider it a wise judgement as well as a democratic
onle. 1.905 
4
And let me take this opportunity to say that we
appreciate the way Prime Minister Major and his
government have handled this issue.
The Prime Minister echoed my own comments when he said
earlier this year that each of our two countries had been
" driven by the imperatives of geography, economic
interest, social change and political vocation to give a
new priority to its region", that this is " perfectly
natural" and constitutes no threat to the strength of our
friendship, the memory of shared experience or the future
of our exceedingly healthy and flourishing trade and
diplomatic links.
What we are talking about is a new relationship as I
said, a mature relationship.
And I think that maturity was perfectly expressed by the
British Foreign Secretary in Australia earlier this week
when he said that the matter of the republic is one
between " the Government, people, Parliament of Australia
and the Queen of Australia", and that the relationship
between us is one between " two modern countries, with a
great deal of shared modern interest" and should remain
quite unaffected by our discussion about the republic.
And that is what will happen, I am sure. The issue is
complex and sensitive and cannot be rushed. In theI
meantime friendship and commerce between Great Britain
and Australia will continue to grow.
I consider it an immense privilege to stand here today in
a place steeped in the history of our two countries, anI
organic part of the relationship between us, and a place
with which surely millions of Australians have had some
connection. It is a privilege because this building, and the peopleI
who have worked here, have played a dynamic role in
Australia's nationhood. Australia House has always been,
by its nature, a contributor to the growth and
development of Australia.
So it seems to me particularly appropriate that on this
all too brief visit to Great Britain I should be able to
make this the occasion for these remarks.
I thank all those who have made this occasion possible
and all of you who have come along today.
1906 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATINC, MP
AUDIENCE WITH TILE QUEEN
I was received in audience by Her Majesty the Queen a( Balmoral Castle on 18 September.
There is a longstanding convention that the content of these conversations remain confidential
But I am able to say I explained to Her Majesty that, notwithstanding the deep respect and warm
affection felt towards her by the Australian people, there was a growing feeling that Australia
should make the necessary constitutional changes to allow the appointment of an Australian Head
of State. I said such a move was acen as necessary to establish clearly Australia's identity as an
independent nation. I outlined to 1ecr Majesty the various steps that would be involved in such a
process, including the need for a referendum to approve constitutional amendments. The
Australian Governnment's view was that, it approved by the Australian people at a referendum, it
would be appropnriate for Australia to become a republic by the centenary of Federation in 2001. I
told Her Majesty that, in such a situation, Australia would remain a member of the
Commonwealth of Nations, and that the Australian people would warmly welcome visit-to
Australia by Her Majesty as Head of the Commonwealth and as the Queen of the United
Kingdom. Her Majesty authorised me to say that she would, of course, act on the advice of her Australian
Ministers, as she always has, and on any decision made by the Australian people.
LEUCHARS, SCOTLAND
19 September 1993 1907 



dt~ p~; co. J~
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTR, THEL HON PJ. KEATING, MP
TERM OF GOVERNOR-GENERAL
I am pleased to announce, after consultation with the Queen, that Mr Bill Hayden, AC, will
remain in office as Governor-General of Australia until early in 1996. While the appointment of a
Governor-General is not for a fixed term, it has been traditional that appointments are for a
period of about five years. Mr Hayden will complete five years in the office in February 1994. 1
am gratefual to him for indicating his willingness to continue to serve Australia as Governor-
General for an ewended period.
LEUCH-ARS. SCOTLAND
19 September 1993
1908 



TEL: 21. Sep. 93 6: 43 No. 004 P. 01/ 05
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY TUE PRIME MINISTEKt THE HON J. KEATING, M. P.,
STATE DINNER. DUBLIN CASTLE, DUBLIN, IRELAND
SUNDAY 19 SEPTEMBER, 1993
Taoiseach, Mrs Reynolds, Kathileen, our distinguished Ambassador from Australia,
Terry McCarthy and Margaret McCarthy, distinguished leaders of Ireland, both past
and present and distinguished ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much for the warm welcome, Taoiseach, and the warm welcome
particularly from all of you. Its always said in Australia that the warmest welcome
you can have around the world is in Ireland and at first hand Annita and I had tha
experience this evening. We appreciate very much that warmth, the generosity, the
sincerity and the fact that so mnany of you have done us the honour in coming this
evening. It's a great pleasure for someone of my background to come to Ireland in any
capacity, but to come here as Prime Minister is even a more singular honour than
simply coming as a visitor, because one comes representing the Australian nation and
one comes with the thought in one's mind of those great traditions and shared values
which we in Australia have with you the people of Ireland.
So Itfs great to be here and no better day than the grand final of the Gaelic football,
because just an hour off the plane I was trvatc4 to a pageant and It's the only football
stadium in the world, certainly the exception from Australia, where a politician is
warmly received. And I know I was beside such a popular fellow and that's why I got
the claps. I'm sure if I wasn't with you, Albert, there would have been no clapping at
all, but the fkct is that is was warm; and when the band broke to the strains of
' Waltzing Matilda' and the crowd sang the words of that famous Austraan son&amp;, I
couldn't help but be deeply touched by that great sense of kinship betwee us and that
understanding of Australian values,
Those Australians values: support for the underdog, had me barracking for Deny all
through the day. And they are strong right to the e4d and that last ten or fifteen
minutes showed their great athletic form, but rm a member of an Australian rules
football club, which has also been the unedoS club. A great working class club, one
of the great sports clubs of Australia the Collingwood Football Club. And it had
not won a premiership since 1958 and being a Sydneysider of course Fin not a
member of a Melbourne football club. but I joined bcase I could only join the
underdogs club and the year I joined they won the flag. They won the premiership.
7 
TEL: 21. Sep. 93 6: 43 No. 004 P. 02/ 05
.2.
So there are great similarities between Gaelic football and Aussie rules, as the
Taoiseach said. No doubt we're sharing a gene pool, somewhere, because the
contortions and the athleticismn and the bounce and the ball control and all of the other
things which are so common , which we saw there today are conmon to both games,
so there's no doubt, for certain, the Irish have influenced Australian sport in terms of
Aussie Rules. So it was a great game, it was more than a game, it was a pagean. To
we all those flags and that great roar when the two teamns came onto the field and then
the singing and the enormous spontaneity of support for Deny at the conclusion was
indeed something to behold. And as visitors, Annita and I were charmed that as an
introduction to this official visit to Ireland we were able to go to Croke Park today.
Thank you Albet, thank you one and all for that rare privilege.
Australia, of course, has an unbroken relationship with Ireland going back a couple of
hundred years but as the Taoiseach said, we are very different countries now.
Australia is very much a multicultural country While, I suppose, Ireland is probably a
more a monocultural country. But, that said, for all the differences the shared values
and traditions and history ame still there. The Taoiseach took you through those
statistics about Irish inumigation to Australia, there is no doubt that Australia is the
most Irish of all countries outside of Ireland. It mightnt have had the absolute highest
numbers of people fronm Ireland settling in Australia, but it had the highest proportion
of any group settling anywhere in the world. And it~ s had an enormous influence on
Australia, on my country, at every stage of its history, and because the Irish arrived
early, relatively early In Austrlias history, in my case, my family in the midnineteenth
century, in the 1950s, we had the opportunity of having an impact on the
whole society.
So, rather arriving as of late, as was the cam with Irish immigration, say to the United
States, the Irish permeated all Australian culture. As the Taoiseach said, through the
professions, through teaching, through education, through literature. through the axts
pervasively across our country, and of course most obviously in politics where talking
18 required of course the Irish have always done so well. They're great talkers, they're
passionate talkers, passionate people, and so where there were not natual barriers,
where there was an open opportuity, of course, their great sense of passion and skill
excelled. And so. the Impact was so broad across the whole nation and across the
wholo society and as a consequence the Labor Party was in many respects influenced
by the great democratic traditions of Ireland, that sens of nationhood, folklore,
egalitarian values, values of fainess and values of decency.
And if's had a greater impact on my Party than any ideology, any ideology that we
could speak of, and there were many of them in the late ineteenth century and they
had a big impact in the twentieth century, but none greater than that Irish sense of
nation, folklore, egalitarianism, what we now call In Australia the ' fair go'. One of our
former leaders, Arthur CalwclL, who led the Labor Party, said the Irish were among
the great colonisers of the world, but not among the imperialists, the exploiters or the
conquerors. And that, of course, is so absolutely true. He said they brought their 
TEL: 21. Sep .93 6: 43 No. 004 P. 03/ 05
-3-
culture and their virtues with them to enrich the heritage of whatever land they chose
to dwell in. That's a vcry large accolade but a true one.
I'm looking forward to the next couple of days as I rarely look forward to anything.
The Taoiseach has said,-wc have our formal discussions but as well as that, apart from
getting to know Dublin better, and having the opportunity of speaking at the Dail, I'm
also having the opportunity to see rural Ireland and Tynagh in Galway, from whence
my famnily came. And I was deeply moved and very honoured tonight that so many
members of the Keating family fromn Galway have come tonight. I'm looking forward
to seeing them and to meeting them in Tynagh in the next day or so.
But before I do that, of course, we do have a chance to discuss our relationship. As
the Taoiseach said, we have more in this relationship than so far we have taken from
it. There's so much warmth and generosity And good feeling between the Australian
nation and the Irish. And I hope this blossoms into a larger economic relationship
than so far we've been able to manage. it's true for many nations that their sons
and daughters, as they've gone to other countries, have managed in some ways to
build a tight relationship which has had social and economic manifestations. We've
had the social but not much of the economic. This is not entirely true of ; ourse
because we are now doing it much more than we've ever done and Australian
companies are now developing In Ireland and Irish companies arm developing in
Australia. And some very famous ones among them who are represented here
tonight. But we need to do more, becuse I think there's a very natural backdrop
there for the Irish doing business In Australia, and I know with the opennms
and warmth of this relationship for Australians doing more in Ireland.
The Taiosech said we've got things to settle in world term and we have. We've
got te GATT round now about to complete after seven years, to provide for what
all of us widlget most and that is to provide a really good backdrop for multilateral
trade. The thin that lifted the Income3 world wide in the post war years for
countries, great countries WiJka pan and Germnany was a firee trade in goods. We're
now tring to do that in servioes, in intellectual property rights and in agriculture.
And that guarantees us the best opportunity ever to actually participate in the world
and through the velocity of trade lift incomes world wide so that we can have a
period of wealth and growth In prospec unparralleled at any time because In the
world today we've lant seen the world lik this before the First World War, with
great nations reJoining the world economy and society like the old Soviet Union,
R~ ussia and the States of the Commonwealth of Independent States. And China and
India and South America, who are now in the world economy as they've never been
in the post war years. Soif we get this rightin the GATT, we can turn this world
into a place wher incomes really do go up sharply andi where many disadvantaged
societies open themselves up to some bounty and advantage.
Now, in Europe, of course, Ireland's focus has been In Europe and on the
Community which is entirely natural and good and correct, as Ausftralia's has bee 
ItL--4.
in the Asia/ Pacific. But, these opportunities abound for us but nothing greater tha
the wider one of an international agreement on trade and servies and agriculture
etcetera. We'll both go our ways in our respective areas of the world, In the Asia
Pacific with this enormous weight of population and this huge rate of growth. It's
not just for us to participate in but also for countries like Ireland as well, as we are
participating in the European Community. So I look forward to discussing these
things with the Taloseach in the next day or so.
The other thing we have In common is the blight of Wnmploynnt, and this is the
thing I know which touches the hearts of the people of Ireland, as it does the people
of Australia. We're determined that we will not consign a generation of young
people to unemployment, that wc won't accept the damage, the generational damage
of a generation Impacting on the fabric of our society, with unemployment. And
we're in a world today where, through higher productivity and mechanisation we're
getting more output from fewer people. But we can't be content to say we live in a
more productive world, we're getting more output from fewer people. We have to
say therefore we must produce mre products that means we mnust grow more
quickly. And that means we have to deal with idfltion and all these other things in a more
novel way. Now we've done it in Australia with a wonderful accord between the
Australian trade unions, and this governmen and I ) now in your country this is
your hope too. That is, to develop a long standing relationship with your trade
union movement so that there is a national commitment and consensus to growth
and to employment, so large numbers of people are not left unemployed, bearing
the brunt and carrying the load themselves, of economic change and productivity so
that only those who are unfortunate enough to be unemployed should Oanv the
burden and of course, most particularly the young.
This we can never accep. Blecause if equality, and fairness, and egalitarian values
start In any place, they start withgWp-Lojqnent-The way in our socetes you get a
piece of the action is through employment. And we can never accept high levels of
unemployment as part of, " Well, that's that, we have have to live with it." We can
never have a bar of that attitude. So we're now looKing at novel ways to deal with
unemnploymfent. We've got a task force looking at our experience and hoping to pull
something novel from it and I know that you're thinking in the same termns too. and
lt's hope we can share somne experienc there.
The Taloseach mentioned Mary Robinson's visit to Australia last year, it was, I
think, one of the most succesfal tripsiby a Head of State In recent timnes. And for
Australians, I think, a persuasive Illustration of how a Head of State can be an
ambassador for her country and for her people. I enjoyed very much that visit. It
gave Afuter expression to this great relatiowNsp which we have togeter and
reminded so many Australians of the democratic values and traditions of Ireland
I2 L1L.. Sep. 935 b: 46 NO. UU4 r. uq'UD 
i L 2 1 b e p 1-u 4
which were expressed in your President and expressed by your President while she
was with us.
I know at the moment she's In New Zealand, back down in the Antipodes. a long
way from here. And no doubt having the same impact there as she had with us.
So, she Invited me here but I'm pleased to say she's there doing her good work in
the Antipodes. while I'm here, trying to do zine. So Taioseach, ladies and
gentleman, It gives me very great pleasure to remember your President's visit to
Australia. To remember, with it, the great warmth in that relationship. Again
visible here tonight in the warmth of the welcome you've given my wife and
myself. And so can I propose a toast to the President of Ireland and the people of
Ireland and to another two hundred years of Irish Australian friendship.
The President and the people of Ireland.
Thank you.
Ends. 



ILL: 22 uep. vv'
PRIME MUIiSTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MNINSTER, THlE HION.
P. J. KEATING, M. P. SHELBOURNE HOTEL, DUIRLIN, IRELAND
SUNDAY 19 SEPTEMBER, 1993
PM: I was received in audience by her Majesty the Queen at Balmoral Castle
Yesterday and there is a long-standing convention that the contents of these
conversations remain confidential. But, I am able to say that I explained to
Her Majesty that, notwithstanding the deep respect and warm affection felt
towards her by the Australian people, there is a growing feeling that Australia
should make the necessary constitutional changes to allow the appointment of
an Australian Head of State. I said such a move was seen as weessary to
establish clearly Australia's identity as an independent nation.
1 outlined to Her Majesty the various steps that would be involved in such a
proceis including the need for a referendum to approve constitutional
amendments. I explained that the Australian Government's view was that if
approved by the Australian people at a referendum, it would be appropriate for
Australia to become a republic by the centenary of our Federation in the year
2001. 1 told Her Majesty that in such a situation Austraia would remain a
member of the Commonwealth of Nations and that the Australian people
would warmly welcome visits to Australia by Her Majesty as Head of the
Commonwealth, as Queen of the United Kingdom.
Her Majesty authoriscd me to say that she would, of course, act on the advice
of her Australian Ministers as she always has, and on any decision made by
the Australian people.
J: Prime Minister, how did the Queen take to being told by you that there was no
place for her ( inaudible) in Australia's future?
PM: Well. as said to you. I arn not breaking the convention of giving you details
of the conversation or its ambience except to say that the visit was a most
enjoyable one for Mrs Keating and 1. T'here was a most cordial atmosphere
there, and it was friendly and relaxed and I came away after a very nice
afternoon and evening with Her Majesty and her famnily. 
20. Sep. 93 8: 05 No. 006 P. 04/ 05
-2-
Prime Minister has the extension of Governor General Bill Hayden's term got
anything to do with your republican timetable?
PM: No, I'd spoken tv the Governor General briefly about this matter some time
ago and as this is a matter for Her Majesty's pleasure neither he, the Governor
General, nor I could then progress the matter without my first having had a
discussion with the Queen. And she's indicated to me that she is pleased by
the Governor General's proposed extension and hence we will now put the
procedures in place for the Governor General's term to be extended until early
in 1996.
J: Why do you want it extended?
PM: Well, I think that it's a matter that the Governor General seems to be very
broadly accepted by the Australian public and by both sides of Australian
politics and he has obviously both enjoyed and taken great interest in the
position. So, not unnaturally, I've said to him," Should you wish to extend I
should be pleased to raise this matter with Her Majesty." He said to me, " I
am," and so I dld.
J: By extending the term to 1996 though it does mean that if your timetable
comes to pass the next Governor General would be the last before the first
Australian Head of State.
PM: That would be so.
1: Mr Keating the Queen saying that she would act on the advice of the
Australian Ministers on any decision of the Australian people, is that the kind
of green light you were hoping to get?
PM Well, look, the statement's there, and it's there. It's there in print and I don't
want to amplify it.
J: On the subject of Bill Hayden's extension, did his warnings about the dangers
of certain models of a republic influence your thinking or did that make you
think twice or...( inaudible)...?
PM: The Governor General and I discussed this some time ago and it was then
simply a matter of me raising it. with the Queen, which I have. So nothing that
he's said in the last day, or week, in any way has influenced the decision.
J: What do you think of whathe said?
PM: Well, I think he thought he was taken out of context and then quickly went to
clear the context up.
TEL 
TEL -3-
J: Did you ( inaudible)..?
PM I didn't read the full text.
J: When do you think the referendum will be held?
PM Well, that's again a matter for that's a matter for the Australian public and a
matter for debate in Australia. And that debate has already started, it will
obviously again revolve around the presentation of the report of the
Committee we've established and so no doubt in 1994 well see some, I think,
you know, some real reflections by all concerned in Australia upon the merits
of a republic and the modalities of such a change.
1: ( inaudible)... dangers ofa popularly elected President. I know that you told
the Turnbull Committee that you had a reservations about that. Are you
prepared to go public on those reservation3?
PM: Well I think that's probably a conversation for when rm at home. I did speak
to the Turnbull Committee about some of those matters but I think that's a
debate for another place and another time and I'm quite happy to have it then,
really.
PM: I have to go now.
I: Mr Keating, how would you describe the circumstances of the step taken at
Balmoral?
PM: I'm sorry, I have to go.
Ends. 20. Sep. 93 8: 05 No. 006 P. 05/ 05 



PRIME MINISTER
SPUcZX Y Mn Pa! W IWRRTT WM8TINI " M NO F J'DAT o, U
" M bAIL
O~ ftZIWIO A&amp; Y 20 S3PT= WRf : L103
Let me say it is a pleasure to be in the great city of
Dublin; a rare feeling, as ever, to be in Ireland from
vbenCe Came my own people, so many of my fellow
Australian&amp; and so much of my country and an honour to
address the Dail.
I wanted to cone to Ireland as Prime Hiniater of
Australia for the good reason of history.
While I aim here, I will be talking to the Prime Minister
and other Mnisters end busineas people about tra*,
particularly in relation to the GATT Round. I will be
puttinq a particular point of view.
We are both now players in the international economy and
inevitably we have overlapping economic inttrsts.
We will be talking about investrnt in Australia.
I will be talking about the European Community an4-rA1BB
the forum for economic o-opratioh in the Asia-Pacitregion.
Noecssarily, I want to talk about related social issues,
particulaVy unemployent vhioh to a problem afflicting
both our cow* ttle-d virtually all the develgpe4
cOuntries of the world.
I Vfnt to bear Irish views an these watters and I want to
put my own.
But I am also here for the less tangible but utterly
inescapable and irresivtible attraction of hictory.
Pow. I have a feeling that the people in this chamb.. r
might inwardly gruan every tima a politician of Irish
ancestry a8mes through here and signals that he or she is
going to give them a history lecture.
it would not surprlse an it you are t" Intking here vO g
again, he is going to tell us about the Irish past, or
n J Il 1 C. 
-our li~ terary tradition. we is bound to quote Yeats at us:
or tell Usn about 1700 or give Uas hie views on Our
. uaracter.
I would dearly like to $ pare YOU this.
A. s a vcet-colonial couP~ try OUrselv**, soe of us raawsh,-
the preamptions of visitor.
Vat the f at remains tikat Ireland in poasibly unique in
thie world for the hold it has on the conecioushess of
other countries.
I knewoi my rra~ cemsor, Rob Hawk*, e aul~ reesed this
Parliame~ nt several yas ago he spoke about the fseline
he had whan arrived at Shannon Airport he said he
felt he had come home.
Xnud Sob Hawk&amp; is nowhere nlear as Irish as I am. if Bob
felt at homes, It o~ ust he I never left.
And wihen President Rh4" senn nat year made w. hat has
b-M aCluite famous tour of Australia, I fuii.&amp; n myself
unconecioisy repentingq thin * hams at a luncheon in her
honour in Canerra.
because Austr-alian*. do~ feel unoannily at home with the
Irish.
They do feel a qreat arftinity whiah apparftntly transcends
ahetral connections.
Anad * bt see to " e to * peak of the immesane power and
Laportenca of history and semory and lanoquaqe and
culture.-I awk not talking about 9ona quaint showcase of the past.
i am not talking about museiums, Or curioUa 9iAMPsee Or
Cadad agwarian life, or even Coorgian architecture.
X couild ) Look at caargisun arahiteoture all day, myeelf.
3iat the attraotion of Traland is an elemental things it
tuifile a need in us.
It is 611mogt as if one can Say that It Ireland did not
siijat, eountrioa like Auetralla would have to invent it.
knd perhaps we should.
I politician, or oj~ arnu~ mants of all 6apl* exing and
bureaucrats and business people, all those of us in a
postion to inflmenc, pfii ey, xho5uld kniow what it losans
to J~ o'e hi&amp; toi-y and heritage and language and culture.
Yet thoro 1.4 always a tondllnpy in political thought
tovarda' otthocoxy razher than tribes broad and less
readily definied oena* Ae-
SOOON 60: T I 
On the way hors via the United States and Britain I war.
r". ding 2~&amp; I O'?. olainow b. ook jh&amp;_ jxj~ h betlevo jo_ or
nojt. At on* Doint. writingj about Wolf Tonia, he says;
one realm~ that his laughter * 1nd his huAianity WOU14
haVe blown all thee away ( he Deania ort~ xoxy,
sectarianism, pi~ rinteno, aant) would h~ ave defiled
Political 1 1be-ty not merely ln term~ s of rnnuart but
of gaiety and tolerance and a great pity and a free
mind and a free heart and a full lift,
OV-nIatin of ecoirse was talkin~ g about Ireland, wrtich I do
not mean~ to do.
X moanf to talk about my own rnouftry.
many ut the Irish who played loadilng parts in~ Tone's
rabe'klion of 1798 were transported to Australia -among
them premlnont lead-ore or the rebellion like Xiohaol
DvVov, . Tcoeaph Holt, James Meehan anld MKiael Hayes.
T might ^ t4d intar alta that a concentratlan of l7VV
veterns, took u~ p lend to tit* fouth-wast of Sydney in ouch
nunhoro a* to earn the place the name of Irichtown.
Yt In now nim11. od Unketown and It is where I was b~ orn,
qrew up andJ spent most of my life.
Zt is my hometown and tho heart of my volitical
oonstituen~ y and the most obvious * thn-to groups thoec
days axe Lebanese and vletname..
" Lo curious thin5 aboo~ it the 3.798 00oNViott in that! in the
Colony Ot NOWi BOUth W9le8 the . xp0Ctati0o that U1069g
Ftble would rebel was never really met.
The px-ofound opportunities for economic Indae" nne
Which Auatralia prnv( ded for mais and women of ordinary
mea&amp;, combined with the liberal hulmanity of individuals
like Governor Macquario, put paid not just to their
rebelliounnoss, but to the notion that tne Irish wiere
born rebels -that they were .* aaa2 hostile to
society.
Or at least it MAU have put paid to tIC hOttn.
ka the Autraliai historian, Patriek O'Farrell, has said,
then myth of rebellion c. entinued but th) e reality vas
generally rather dirrerent.
In 1416 Nichool Hayes, wrote, " There is room here for
sonis millions if they were allowed to * migrate. what a
happiness It-wniid-b&amp; to, the unfortunate Irish tenantry
woes they here to partielpato in tfluae blesQI1ae9." 
It has' been' a those In the Correspondence or Miaraflta
ever since.
ekn. hundred years later a huge Oi~ n was erected in
London's AldvYch near the site of Auatralii mouse. it
said-" d tn Australia. you will have a hearty welaone, 4
97norous return tor your energy and enterprise and a
Climate that is the healthiest in the w'owld."
Astral. ia has always hold out this crest promise that
it c~ ould tftke the PoOr and the 6PPV6eSmd And give them
the liborty, eConOMic independence 0X% 4 the material
comforts denied in their own country mind beyond that,
by " onme OblevainquO, winnow troa their hearts and minas
all the ancient bittornae and unreason.
As if Australia could do what a Wolf 1kone. mieght have
done. if thaer has been a ipantinucium theme to Australian
history one MIfA~ tn" It to iperh. a 9! hl one. it there
is one, standard we have set ourselves, It has been how
vell ws have lived up this promis..
The th~ eme begins with th~ e British and Irish convicts. it
follows the trail of hLigration through to the present
4^ v. Tt tincludes not just the Irish but the Italionm andl
Croeke and the Lebanese and % Yews and Latvians and
Vietnamese and the Chinese an* Cambodians.
h'aople, in fact, from more thlan 150 countries or the
world. It has beon a 4ifficult ambition to live uip to.
consider the appellati~ ons the 0O~ mtr bAs gone by over
theyears. it has been known as tharlb~ tter neuntryft, tha
I~ ndof t~ bettor obahoem, the 0working man's
paradise", thte usoial laboratory of the world",
Ohmetravlina Unlimited", and, alkhimugh it was originally
meant ironically, " the LuoXy CountrWy."
Occupying a land * o vast. with such bountifull resources,
such a splendid climate, suoh tree inetitutiona being
heirs to a land seemingly so blessed, MAY be why
1AUozallano are sometimes rather severely melf-aritie~ al,
In MeOt, depending on which columnists one reads and
therm sems to be no consensus even amonj the several. of
Trish extraction one would think sozetim** that we
live in a diabolically Impoverished and inadequate place.
iseaconatant ofTpolitictal auiumt In Autralia and
cultural arcument tnAt we n~ ave ralked to cdeliver our 
unlimited oentiali indeed, that our great good fortUne
in paaossln a vast continent had made 49 complacent.
There iA a view, I tninXc. that thome things5 we have
achieved might have been * ere the product or good jucX
than Eloeid wenagemotnt.
Tt Is not a view I share.
With rare OX~ e~ tions, we have delivered liberty. it
material prospeiotty has ocoasionally been hard to come
by, and there have bs~ n enough inetarleem Of Conflict to
indicate that the resentments were not entirely swept
away, kugtrali&amp; has always boon and remains by any
standarda, both a prosperous country and a tolerant~ une.
1 do not know any way to measure the eXtent to Vhich an
i1migirant culture has been responsible for this? how much
it has both obliged us to practise tolaranee and provide
value then.
It's a famillear quetion for mistrais* s how uuh we
are a produot ot our iretzastanees, and how muoh we are
what we have made ourselves tobo
la truths by the ect of mirtion the country was mades
by that voluntary act, end bY then emigrants' ambitions it
was built.
An a politician 2 know that little of a lasting nature
happev'e by virtu&amp; of some latent inoral or pdlitical
torce. AS a general rule we don~' t got blown where we
want to go we have to take ourselves there.
In politics, an in aueb else, it requirets imagination and
a politiCal will which In uy view is the sme as saying
a will to &amp; mercis Political power. hnd that depanda ani
having not just the Irish rebel's sane of in3u. sties, but
the nIneteanth century Irish emjq rant'. ability to
izaqin. a better life. knO to find it.
Indeed I would like to thinc that I had more ot the
qualities of the emigrant.
better a politician who not only confronts an
unsatisfactory reality, but has the wherewithal the
will and the Skill to change it.
Better one willing~ to go toc sea buat not in a boat
withouat erm.
in Australia in the 19806 We embarked on.: voyage of
-conomic ceform. ife deregulated the Icoaomy and opened
it up to the wnrld. 
Zn doing this we did what the emigrant does we
confronted necessity.
Had we not done this, tn* modern world and the
opportunities it otters would have pauced uA by.
it took political will. More than will, it took
persuasion and persistence and the ability to resist the
terptntion to turn back.
souetimes it doen feel as It one hau gone to sea in a
boat without oars. Sometimes there are mutineers.
ComettimeB one thinks it would have been vasier to stay
put in the first place.
Those nnnvict vasel* on which the rebels at 1798 made
their voyage sometimos took nearly twelve xuonths to gut
to Australia.
it nuct have felt like an eternity.
The process of economic reform can feel the sae way
one day flyin along with the sails threatening to rip
apart, the next day beaalmed.
And then, of course, theto are the days when the ship is
Lmaouilately on coutne and travelling at a manageable
rate and you are thinking not of home, nor even of the
journey, but of the destination.
The destinatioA wa and remainm an internationally
esmpetitiva Aconomy: which mena, * Uong other things,
one less deipendtnt upon our mineral and agriCultural
couoditi t and more eapaclo of nauufacturing products
for glonal marketw, particularly the markets of the
XaLa-Paifio region which is to say the fastest growing
markets in the world.
Anid we have gone a long way towards reaohing this goal.
Our 9oonomy has been completely transformed. Extprts
have doubled. Service and manufacturing exporti have
more than tripled and are now equal to rural exports.
Our economy is much ore diverce and the fastest growing
setor ot it by far is elaburately transforied
manlUfactures. A decade ago less than half of our exports went to our
own region. Today two-thirds go to east-haia.
Three-quarter* of all hustralian axporta qo to the
Asia-Paoific region, a region of two 1illion people
producing half the world's output and ngagerd in halt the
world's trade.
These Cigures basically desewibe Australia'w ruture.
CNr I.
.1 
They marX the staqg OA the touarney toward3 an economy or
which it will never be possible to say they got it by
chance. It fell into thour 14p.
Zt will only he possible to say that, like the emigrant,
we recognisei necescity when we saw it an~ d we did what
had to be don.
Of course we were not the o nly country in the world to
reform our economy in the 19$ 06. Much that we did was
donle elsewhere in the world as countri.. reelisad that$
in the modern cra, if they d( A not change they Would rall
behind. There It A* o doubt that we have boon served well by the
* cenomIc -ef crmw we ma~ de.
And we are all the better for having Alan made Anial
A large eleaent of the Improved international
Compatitivenamn we achieved was got by mane of an Accord
between thu Government and the trad6 unions.
The Accord dramatleaily Iaduced induiitrial disoutation,
hold wage&amp; to conpetitive levels, made a muajor
contribution to roducinel Iiflatlin to a rate oymong the
lowiet in the OECD, and sponeored a creative and
~ n-operativa eulture in the workrplace which is radigally
increasing level* of productivity.
rmplamenting the concelpt of the social wage in the 19809
mYIaflt that in the 1909 we have a first class h1ealth
system: a qoe. Ia net an extAnalve and sophisticated an
any in the world; legislation attectinij the rights and
well being of womon a* eduanced an any in the world: and
thr~ vugh poaltive government programsa assiating etnic
groaps and encouraging cultural diversity$ a
multicultural society of Infinitely more richness and
strength -including economic atrength.
In other uwds as tho Australian 0overnment has stepped
out of the market plane&amp; in many reg~ ards, it has atepped
inXJj its sooldl responsibilities.
hs I said, we did not put to sea without oars. Or
lifeboats, and a safety net, or expanlded opportunity
including, AS of this year, an a~ t~ n~ ive system of child
oare and a home care allowance.
It i3 essentially for the same reason Lhat w9 have made
thte biggest effort in n'ir history to at last deliver the
baeis* of social-justice ror indigjenous Auatralians.
I seen the rcason of social unity and social justice oC
axtendMd opportimity which new world countrien like our
own are intended to provide. 
? or the great casualty of immidgration waa Ahenriainal
kuatralia. " ae dostru1etion of this * xtraordinarl ancient culture,
and the brutality and Injusticee inn Icted an the firet
Astralians can nover really be sat to rights, any more
thaen the injustice and dispoegasslon which occurred int
this cuntry can be.
SUt we Can heal woun~ ga&amp; nM &amp; ar* now Vonaratione from the
hurt and bitterness of the pnot.
We anu Include Aboriginal Australia In the scial
* qasation as clu'ltOuBrieo rw;~ tidll~ be over so
alloh strongqer, and the self-esteem of all Auetralians s0
much greater.
2% seems to me a oarf act example of the fact that
nocasity des not or itself load to change.
There ham been a moral and 9ovial nactsity to rig~ ht
those wrong* Inflicted on Aborsiinal huftalin for
geaneration* what has I" d to chary. Im will. Will and
the imagination noceacary to conceive at uiniathing
bettiaw. Go this last decade of &amp; ustv. allia's national lite has been
a decade of Quite remarkable chance. The newt docada
shows every &amp; sii of keelping up the pace.
knd, if we have laarne4 a lesson in the onurea of the
Sourney# It is that tn* Dace will be best Ypairtairaed and
he ohanq* wilil ho nor&amp; affective it the viaop2. avo
included.
No politloel principle van so thorauvhly confirmed for ae
in recant yea an thin nos that one suoaads boat by
trusting to the people's best feelings. I baslieve it In
thei aamenwtial w~ apn of the political reformer.
Chtange will never be made by hAIt. ng the negwi4~ ive the
cervatism, or myopia, or prejudice or pedantry which
eXists in any society. Then@ e prone tn " Arvvuenea Could
dictate to a ref orw agenda.
Chang vil2l be made by looping over the; ;. byataihing of
Soimething better. Of sill t~ he lesson* f &amp; h emigrant for
the politician this is the moot Lrndmental.
And I bmalLeve it is the leascn conltain"~ in those wvrd* 2
quoted about Wolf Tone thtat political reform moans t6~
entlare 3L*.
It me&amp;" s oftewriq an alterative to cant and narrow
orthodoxyv and a11thie debilIitating' conatre Into in Which
historiyI a fovr wrapping us, and to which o,% aorvative
edIt-interest alwIayt appeals. 
Po'itioal reform Means otterinq tq the people wilat
migratlion oftered to the Irish in the hinetaonth
century, to Zurpanm after WorlS war Il, to CImbodian
and Vietnamese in recent tines I lan quite simply the
prosepect of a better life in a better country.
fkrnodm thIrien latnadke. s Me back in turn to those laboons we learn
That if we are drawn to Ireland by the hiatory and the
language and caulture not to Pay by the beauty oC the
Place then goverrments ignore these things at their
peril. Ana tor that reason there is a link between culture and
between the art&amp; and reform, botwen the life of
the mind and refors.
It is Wny, I think like the extension of social policy
the * Xteneien Of policies encouraging cultural
Coveloiakent are eaaential In timac of dramatie economic
change. They feed the national iemainatlon, encouraqe people to
contemplate alternativan and Cf course they soothe the
savage boast in us,
you see vhat lesson&amp; can be drawn from Ireland. seal,
hard, political lessons.
Not that we Vero thinking of Treland when we drw them.
The porallole only begin to present thiemeslves as we
approach the old snores.
Nor were we zninkinq ot Ireland when we thought of the
repubi. 1M.
Rather we vere thinking that we are a ocuntry separated
from these islands ) iy twelve thousand miles and 2Oo yeaiv
Ot experience.
That we era a people eomprisod of poe than 150
nationlities and Cor som tine now we have been
encouargint all of them to retain their cultural
identity.
That our mople live etraordinarily varied lives on an
* Wtr* 6Pinarily varied continent.
And that the time had come in this lae docade of our
first century a* a nation to put a border r'una tins
tapestry of our national li* t * ime e eftchrined the
Ltumigranto traditions ot couraqe and Cai( h together with
those traditions of democracy, tolerance, fair play and
ireatew opportunity uhiah are the haxA traditions of
Australia. 
zt seemed to us that a ropibic might acknowledge and
enshrine the values of a people who have been willing to
imagine something better, vLllinq to conrrant the need to
change* to Make their way on a new frontier and who
have learned that these things are beut done together.
And to those Who went to hold back, who fear change, who
say it is not the right time to do this$ we might say
what if our forebears had said this? What if they had
lacked the imagination and the will? What if they had
stayed put?
Well, I would not be an Australian ard nor would most of
the 17 million others.
And I would not have had the extraordinary opportunities
my country has given ne among then the Immeasurable
privilge of coninq to the land of my ancestors as Prime
Minister of Australia and addressing this national
parliament. Thank you. 


22 September, 1993
Journalist:&nbsp;Sydney appears to be dropping back
PM: It's easily the prettiest city and the most attractive and the best technical bid, so&nbsp;why would it drop back?
J: Beijing appears to be the favourite?&nbsp;
PM: I'm not sure that's true. I don't think... Sydney. as a city, is a place for athletes&nbsp;and this is going to be a decision taken about athletes and athletics and sports.&nbsp;Sydney is by far the most superior place and I expect it to get up.
Ends.&nbsp;


22 September, 1993
Journalist: The Dawkins crisis, Mr Keating. What's the truth behind that?
PM: Well, I think, I spoke to the Treasurer early this morning, briefly and he is I can assure you soldiering on, indefatigably. And we will pass the Budget in the Senate and we'll get on with the business of the Government.
Journalist: Was he considering resignation?
PM: I don't think so. No, I think he wanted to make a point. But there's only one point and that's the business of the Government continuing and that means passage of the Budget.
Journalist: Well what point was he making about threatening to resign?
PM: I think he's feeling that he's needed perhaps more support amongst members of the caucus than he's had.&nbsp;
Journalist: From you, too?
&nbsp;PM: Oh no, I think he thinks my support for him has been exemplary which it has. But the fact of the matter is that we all think this way from time to time but the thing is you've got to get on with it. He said to me, " Look, we will get this Budget through and we will then be in a position where the finances of this Government are largely, then set in the course of this Parliament."&nbsp;
Journalist: Does Mr Dawkins still have your full support?
PM: Of course he has my full support?&nbsp;
Journalist: Should he exercise more discipline in what he says?&nbsp;
PM: Oh look I’m not here to….
Journalist: What do you think of the Senate Commitee (inaudible) They're doing a 'dog In the manger' trick, too. Aren't they?
PM: This is not the place for me to be passing opinions about them.&nbsp;
Journalist: Mr Keating a question for the local press. What did you think about this day?
PM: Well, this is a very touching day. We, I think all of us who were too young to be part of this war because of its huge impact on Australia remember it. We remember the sacrifice of those who served and died here. And as well as that we remember the relationship with France
Can I say though that the flower of many countries' youth was lost here in France unselfishly, for the greater good of this country. And at an important time of world decision, we are not seeing the magnanimity from France that all of us who have fought and respected France, have shown it. And I speak here about the GATT Round; about the selfishness which has crept into European politics most obviously in Bosnia and the selfishness with which I think the French are pursuing international policy. And, I think, it is time for the French to reassess themselves and magnanimously be pan of the world rather than sitting out there by themselves thinking that the world owes them a living. It doesn't and it's not going to give them one,
Journalist: Do you think the GATT Round is now in doubt following the result in the EC Summit?
PM: I hope not. But, I think this is the time for plain speaking. Seven years is long enough and I think that the Europeans should understand the kind of world theyll create if they take the view that they can afford to play fast and loose with the GATT.
Journalist: Mr Keating, are the tax cuts likely to go ahead if the
PM: Look, I'm not here to do a whole series of questions about domestic questions.&nbsp;
Journalist: Prime Minister, have you had any communication with the Americans subsequent to the Brussels meeting?
PM: No, I haven't but I will be doing it.
Journalist: Have you had a reply to your letter to Monsieur Balladur?
PM: No, I haven't. Not as yet.
Journalist: Is there any legitimacy to the Europeans' claims to have some adjustments made to the Blair House Agreement?
PM: In my view, no. Blair House was negotiated between the European Community and the United States. It was done when the former Government of Franc* was here. It seems to m now, that the current Government of Franc thinks that In some way they can, unwind this, Now this is the issue here, this Is the issue here. It's a domestic' political issue; it's France not rising to the occasion. And I can only recommend to Prime Minister Balladur that they rise to the occasion and agree, with some magnanimity, that because the Blair House Agreement is basically a set of minima, that it's untenable to now go back and try and unwind it.&nbsp;
Journalist: Weren't this tough on the Irish, though. Were you Prime Minister?
PM: I said exactly that to the Irish. But the Irish the key problem here is with the French.&nbsp;
Journalist: Mr Keating have you receive any advice on the situation in Russia now?) PM: No, I haven't. No. No, but let me say though that I support Mr Yeltsin is the one democratically elected politician in Russia today. And the path of action which he contemplates is about seeking an expression of the Russian people to give constitutional authority Wn political authority to their legislature. And in the end, I don't think anyone can object to such a democratic process.
Journalist &nbsp;Mr &nbsp;Keating, do you think it's fair to put something that happened in a war years ago In the context of the current trade negotiations?
PM: Well, I think it's more than fair that, when a nation's interests are threatened and other nations answer the call, in such a way... I mean, for Australia we lost, we sent to this war and lost nearly ten percent of our population. That's like losing nearly two million people today. I mean that's sacrifice on a scale almost unheard of. And frankly, I think the world ought to be an easier and better place. Particularly amongst allies and former allies than has been the case recently. European politics are now becoming very, very self-centred and very selfish indeed as, I think, Bosnia well and clearly demonstrates. And I think this kind of self-centredness in the biggest thing of all that affects the world most greatly now, in trade has, I think, got to come to an end.
Journalist What is the significance of the unknown soldier'?
PM:-Well, the symbolism is that, that somebody who died here and was unknown unknown but who died here in the service of Australia and in the service of France. The symbolism is that such a person be taken home. To be honoured. So that the Australian nation c-an honour all service people who have died in similar conflicts.
Ends.
&nbsp;



TEL
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF PRIME MINISTER, TEE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP., AT
SYDNEY 2000 BID PRESS CONFERENCE
MONTE CARLO, MONACO
23 SEPTEMBER, 1993
PM: Well, thank you John. Well, I think my congratulations go to the Bid team on
the effort that they have established over a considerable period of time. And
now, finally, the presentation which I think was an effective one, displaying as
it has, Sydney as a very natural site for the Olympics with all the facilities
largely complete, a great stock of hotel rooms and, of course, the great city
itself. And, I think, also the fact that it portrayed that Australia is a sports
loving country; and that people naturally participate in sports; and that the
various elements of our presentation covered the breadth of the culture of
Sydney and in a generic sense, Australia. Because in many respects here,
while we are proposing the city of Sydney we really are proposing Australia as
a nation as the host.
So, I was delighted to be part of this presentation, as was Annita, and I can
only sincerely hope that the presentation has been as effective as we hope it
was. I said to some journalists earlier, its now in the ballot box and well wait
and me what happens.
J: Prime M'inster the big guns are really here in Monte Carlo today. It's fantastic
to see so many famous people in one place. Could you spell out to me why this
is so important to you, that you, like John Major, have to come here to Monte
Carlo to sell Sydney to the International Olympic Committee.?
PM: Well, I think, as I said in my opening remarks we're selling Sydney but also
Australia in very much a national sense. And I think if one is serious about that
fbr such an International sportin. pageant which the Olympics are, I think it's
entirely appropriate that the headof government come and say that. And also
make clear as we have, our financial support, etcetera, for the bid. I think this
rounds out the confidence with which IOC members view any bid on a national
bals. So, i'm not surprised that John Major is here, as I am. I just think he's
got a tougher job of it than I have, that's all.
Ends. 24. Sep. 93 7: 49 No. 00 


23 September 1993
Journalist; &nbsp;Mr Keating, your impressions of the presentation?
PM: Well, I thought the presentation went exceptionally well. I felt the actual&nbsp;format of the presentation was very impressive and its the first time I'd actually&nbsp;seen it from front to back. And, one gets a good guide to how one's emotions&nbsp;are responding to these things and I thought, after a couple of film clips, one&nbsp;should break out and cheer. But we resisted doing that and I think the&nbsp;presentation went very nicely and we got the key messages we wanted over,&nbsp;&nbsp;for Sydney &nbsp;- all of us
Journalist;&nbsp;Mrs Keating how did you feel about it?
Annita Keating &nbsp;I thought it was great, fantastic.
Journalist;&nbsp;:&nbsp;Mr Keating there is a suggestion doing the rounds this morning that we've&nbsp;slipped into third behind Manchester. Would you give that any credence?
PM: &nbsp; I think, at this stage of the game, its like trying to pick a Surry Hills&nbsp;selection&nbsp;ballot at five to six on a Saturday night &nbsp;- forget about it.
Journalist;Mr Keating, what's the task for the bid in the next few hours before the actual&nbsp;ballot. What remains to be done?
John Fahey; Stay sober. Stay sober, there's nothing more we can do except wait now for&nbsp;the results.
PM: Yes, I think it's in the box, as they say.
Ends.



NINE NETWOIRK AUSTRALIA LIMI'I: ED
A C. N. 009 071 167
SUITE 114 PRISS GALLERY PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANDEkRA A. C. T. 2600 AUSTRALIA
TELEPHONF.: ( nW) 273 3300 FACSIMILE: ( 06) 273 3097
SUNDAY092026-09-93
INTV Prime Minister Keating
Compere Jim Waley:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: Prime Minister Keating flew back into Canberra early
this morning, after a two week trip to the US, Britain,
Ireland and France. His last stop, Monte Carlo, to
bolster our Olympic bid.
Before leaving there, hlie gave his first comprehensive
interview on what's been an unusually productive
fortnight for a travelling Australian leader.
Paul Keating is talking with SUNDAY's Political Editor,
Laurie Oakes.
Mr Keating, welcome to SUNDAY.
Good, Laurie.
Winning the 2000 Olympics for Sydney is a big finish to
an overseas trip for a Prime Minister. But now the
excitement's abated a bit, I mean, can we afford it?
T00ON St7: 8 26' d@ S'LZ_
WIN TV
Subject: 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: We can more than afford it. I think it's a substantial
international endorsement of what we've become as a
nation. Because I think were we not as we are, and as
we're going to be that is an externally oriented
country, which has got a real scnse of democracy and
good values we wouldn't have won this decision.
So, I think, in terms of the directions which Australia's
been going in the last ten years, the Olympic, the TOC
decision, in a sense, endorses those directions.
But can you guarantee that ordinary taxpayers won't
have to dig deeper into their pockets?
I think on the net balance of things, probably in
economic terms, Australia will end up in front. The key
point is it will show the world Australia as we now are,
as a multi-cultural country, a successful independent
country. And I think by then, this is seven years away,
we will be much more part of the Pacific, the Asia
Pacific, and we'll be I think, even more clear about our
identity than we are this very week.
Now, obviously, this will lead to some upsurge of
nationalism patriotism, I suppose. Do you think that
will give the republican movement a kick along?
I think it will, probably, yes I think it will. And I
think it deserves to, because I think that it is important
2
/ Z0Od TOO* ON St7: 8 i6* dGS*! 
that when the world conmes to see us, as i t will in such a
concentrated way, we're there, you know, having a
much clearer idea about ourselves, you know, and more
confidence in ourselves.
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes-
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Could we have a President by then?
That's a possibility, it is. Somecbody's got to open the
Games. It's normally the Head of State. I think the
world would wonder, would they not, if Australia's
Gaines are opened by the Constitutional head of another
nation. The question of Mabo and reconciliation between
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australians
presumably the Olympics have a bearing on that, too?
I think they have a very large bearing.
But can you get there? You've got the Deputy
Opposition Leader, the Deputy Coalition Leader,
Tim Fischer, talking about Aborigines being ungrateful
for the money that's spent on them. I mean, that's the
sort of thing the world will look at, I would have
thought, when the Games are on.
I don't think the IOC would have endorsed that view,
you see, that's the point. I think a lot of politicians in
Australia are going to have to scrub up their: views.
3
TOOO0N StV2? 26* dGS 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: And if the world's actually invested in Australia and
this is a good decision by the IOC, an important
international decision. Because there was a big contest
here between China and Australia, and it. was the values
of Australia which carried the day. In the end it was the
values of Australia which carried the day. If those
values are compromised by the sort of paltry views of
some people in the political system, that will not be
good for us.
There are political implications, aren't there. I know
that the New South Wales Labor Party is concerned that
John Fahey will call an election on the strength of the
Olympic decision. Does that worry you?
Well, I don't think, I think John Fahey has, frankly,
more sense than to try and exploit this decision in a
personal way. This was a group effort. Laurie, the
thing about it was it should inject a lot of confidence
in the people. It's one thing that the Government, me
and others, saying look, we're going quite well, we've a
very large leap in terms of our economny, we've made a
huge leap into Asia, we're now trying to sort of APEC,
we're trying to sort out our place in the world and
there's a lot of pessimism in Australia. I think this
decision should provide a basis for confidence for
people. We're actually doing better than many people
think we are. 4
TOODON SV: 8 26, dasU ] J31 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul K~ eating: Well, related to that, I guess, the running theme of your
trip in Washington, London, Ireland and France was
trade the GATT negotiations your concern about
European attempts to breach the Blair House Agreement.
Do you think you got anywhere?
I think so. One thing is clear, that there's no doubt, I
mean, the centrepiece of my visit was the meeting with
President Clinton. That went well in my terms I
hope, and I think, in his. And that it wasn't about,
simply about reaffirmation of our defence links, and the
normal things we talk about. What was high on the US
agenda that week I was there was trade, which was high
on our agenda, too. And we've agreed now to kick
APEC along that's Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
with a meeting that President Clinton is
sponsoring in November in Seattle. And at that meeting
I should hope that we give much more form and
substance to APEC.
Now, that is, in a sense, Australia's bolt-hole. That is
to get this organisation together, to put Australia at a
very large table for the first time.
What we then want to do is overlay that with the GATT'
the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, the socalled
Uruguay Round. Now, it is stalling at the
moment because of Frcnch intransigence over the Blair
House Accord, which was an agreemenit freely entered
PSO'd TOO* ON St7: S œ 6~ d2aS* LJ.,-131 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: between the European Community and United States.
We say the Blair House shouldn't be touched. Special
Trade Representative Cantor says the Blair House
Accord shouldn't be touched, and so does the President.
Now, you seemed to strike a fairly quick rapport with
Bill Clinton. Is it now the sort of relationship where
you feel you can pick up the phone whenever you want
to? Are you likely to do that?
I could he invited me to do that, and I could do that.
Look, I think Americans have fallen on their fret with
Bill Clinton. I think he's a young, fresh, altruistic,
engaging person, and you can see the any
conversation, the detail that he has in his mind on issues
I mean, in our system Ministers are expcctcd to carry
detail in their heads. In the American system this has
not always been a requirement of US Presidents but
he has it, he can talk about fiscal policy, tax policy,
health policy, trade policy. I mean, he's the genuine
article, and I think that we're very lucky that the United
States is led by a person who comprehends these big
problems and trying to marry the big international
responsibilities of the United States on to the domestic
agenda of growth and jobs.
You're seeing him again in Seattle in November. Are
you going to formally invite him to Australia?
TOO* ON SV: S 26* d9S*, 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: I will. I think that's the time to do it. It didn't on this
occasion, because I think it was a get-to-know-you
meeting, arnd I'll be seeing him soon, and I'll be
speaking to him in the meantime. anyway.
Do you think he'll come?
H-e might. I think he might.
Prime Minister, we'll take a break there be back in a
moment.
Prime Minister, you made a very brief visit to France,
really to lay a wreath and remember our World War I
dead but that turned into a trade matter, too. You
attacked the French there, I suppose almost using dead
dig gers as bargaining chips. What made you so angry
when you got to Velarise Breteneau(?)?
Well, you've got to say to yourself, what does it mean?
I mean, here's a hundred odd thousand young
Australians went from one side of the world to the
other, half of them left their lives behind in defence of
France, French liberty and values.
And, you know, I was there with the names of eleven
thousand Australian service mnen and women engraved
on the wall of that place, Velarise Breteneau, and yet in
Paris on a matter which is about international decency
7
TOO* ON SV: 8 œ 6* daS, 2 1331 
and fair play, which does affect Australia materially,
you're flat out getting a point of view registered.
So you've got to say to yourself what does this mean? I
mean, we were there twice. The actual -the
monument was all, the monument which was built in the
early 1 920s after the first World War was all pock
marked with bullet holes from the second World War,
where we were again.
And you've got to say to yourself, well do we rank at
all with these characters? I mean, that is, did it mean
anything to them? Because what you've got we're
not asking, they're saying, oh, we can't affect the
French farm sector. But we've had to make decisions
about tariffs. We've made decisions which affect our
garment industry and our textile industry and footwear
industries, arnd our manufacturing industries. We've
done what's best for Australia, and we've played our
role as international citizens. But this dog-in-the-manger
attitude which France persists in-
Laurie Oakes: They've protested to you, haven't they, about your
comments?
Paul Keating: Oh, no they gave some churlish off-hand remark by
some Deputy Minister. I mean, I've stung them where
it " matters, and that is to say, look, you've got
responsibilities, and we're making you face the fact that
/ S0* d TO000N SV: S 2œ 6' d, 3SZ 
if the Round fails, you will wear the responsibility for
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Could I ask you about your trip to Balmoral I know
you don't want to say any more about tile meeting with
the Queen than-
Laurie, I don't want to say because, not because I want
to be secretive and evasive. But it is at convention, and
an important one, which the Queen has insisted on
always, that the details of the meeting remain private to
her and the person she's meeting.
Now, she did break that convention by authorising me to
make that statement, which was a very important one,
and I can talk about that.
Well, part of that statement was you said the Queen had
said that she would abide by the inaudible for
Australian Ministers and the decision of the Australian
people. But you'd expect a Constitutional Monarch to
say exactly that, wouldn't you?
Well, yes but she didn't need to authorise me to say
it. I mean,, it could have been that the view from the
Palace was that she would, she would be advised at
least, the Queen would be advised at least to resist such
a change. And being perfectly proper, which I've
always believed the Queen to he, she not only forth-
.9
1000ON S17: 8 26* d@ S 
rightly met that position, but auithorised that I should say
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: So was she declaring herself a neutral player in this? Is
that how you see. it?
Essentially, what she's authorised me to say is this was
matter for Australians, for Australians to decide, and
that she should abide with any decision made by the
Australian people.
Can I put to you some of the things that British
newspapers reported newspapers that claim good
Palace sources, A whole serics of them. claim that when
it came to the point of telling the Queen about your
republican plans you almost bottled it. In other words
you almost froze up and weren't game.
Now let's not underestimate the gravity of this meeting
and the gravity with which the Queen's staff would
have approached, and did approach this meeting. There
would be no leaks from this meeting.
Now, that's not an accurate reflection of the meeting.
The meeting was cordial, and warm, and utterly
discursive on the substantive issues which took, I think,
seventy five minutes.
Did you almost bottle it?
/ OTd T000N SV: S6' das&gt; I2 : 11331 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Well, I said to you it's not an accurate reflection of the
meeting. No, I didn't. I put, as I said before the trip,
my views, courteously, informatively and forth-rightly
and I hope for Her Majesty, helpfully.
They also claim, the British press also claim that you
had a chilly reception that you had to stand outside in
the cold at a barbeque, and got a royal cold shoulder.
I can say, I'm entitled say and I'm sure she should want
me to say that it couldn't have been a warmer meeting.
It couldn't have been a warmer reception in a personal.
family way.
Could I ask you, just we before we finish, about some
domestic issues. You're going back now to, I suppose,
the old problems that you left, some of which are worse.
What about the John Dawkins issue? I mean, is he
showing the strain of this budget battle?
This Government's directions are right, and they have
been right, and we've got to pull those threads together,
and I'm going to call the Cabinet together on Monday
morning to tell them about the trip. And at that meeting
we will have a discussion then also about our budgetary
position, and the budget.
Now, the budget's sense is right. It's aggiegates are
right. We've had a problem with the detail, but the time
11
/ TT* d TOO* ON S7: S 16d@ S 131 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: has come, I think, for everybody to pass the budget and
for the country to get on with it, because we've got so
many other big things to do.
Now, I think the Treasurer has, not unnaturally, been
left to his own devices while I've been away, to fend off
discussion and argument about the budget, including
dealing with the Independents.
And he felt pretty lonely, I would say.
I've spoken to him a couple of times on the visit, and
not unnaturally in this circumstances because what's
happened here is the Opposition have broken the
convention by not passing the Government's Financial
legislation in the Senate.
B3ut the Treasurer has looked pretty brittle, hasn't he?
publicly talking about resignation. I mean, presumably
he didn't-
Well, If think he was sort of, perhaps, waxing a bit
lyrical about that, but, I mean, we've all done that. from
time to time. This is not a cardinal sin.
Did he talk about resigning about the budget, and again
on the phone with you the other day?
No, no, no -he hasn't, no.
12
Td 1000ON St7: 8 16* d@ S131 
L. a urie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating-.
Laurie Oakes: When you call Cabinet together on Monday, will they
bet getting some sort of pep talk from you about the
need now to-
Well, I think, I think, Laurie-
-show more unity, I suppose?
Well, we've invested a lot of time in Mabo, which is
important, and you can see the importance with the
Olympic decision if for no other reason. That is,
beyond the great central reason of reconciliation and
access to land and decency in public decision making in
respcct of Aboriginals. Apart from that, just in termis of
the Olympics, how important that's been. We've
invested a lot of time in that, because Maho is a
revolutionary change in land management and social
justice questions.
But that's now coming together in that legislation. The
budget aggregates are right the directions are right
the budget deficit should conie down. And that's been
presented, and we've trimmed the budget up) in certain
respects without changing its aggregates substantially.
So, yes, we've had a few problems with those, but
they're going into place.
You're looking a bit ragged, aren't you, as a
VT/ 2Pd TOO* ON St7: S 26-daS 13311 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Government and won't that continue while the Senate
is doing what it's doing? Presumably it's not just a
budget problem? They're going to look at all your
major legislation.
Well, I think, providing the Government's convinced of
its policy directions and satisfied with its work, we'll
live with the Senate, and we'll stare the Senate down,
and we'll win the public argument. I mean, that's the
key point.
Prime Minister, thank you very much.
Thank you, Laurie.
ENDS* For private research only. Whilst every effort is made to ensure accuracy for the benefit of our clients,
no legal or other responsibility is taken for errors and omissions.
Transcript by MEDIA MONITORS ACT PTY LTD 14
t71/ Vt * d TOO* ON SV: S 26 d@ S :-113311 



TEL: 28. Sep. 93 12: 34 No. 010 P. 01/ 0
PRIME MINISTER 103/ 93
0STATEME: N'I liY ' Ht I'RIMIC MINISTER, THE HION P. J. KEATING, MP
JOHN BELL
I regret the passing of John Bell, the Melbourne businessman who contributed so much
to young unemployed and homeless people.
As the managing director of the Esprit clothing company, John Bell provided
inspirational community leadership in his approach to training and developing young
people. I recall with gratitude his contribution to the Government's national youth summit last
year. John Bell will be remembered as a man of generous spirit with an exemplary
sense of social responsibility.
CANBERRA
28 September, 1993 



TEL: 28. Sep. 93 15: 57 No. 020 P. 01
I,,
l PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES, THE UNITED KINGDOM, IRELAND,
FRANCE AND MONACO
Mr Speaker
I wish to inforn the House of the outcome of my visit to the United States, the United
Kingdom, Ircland, France and Monaco between 1I and 24 September.
During the visit, I dealt with a number of issues which will have a profound bearing on
Australia's trading interests and future prosperity. on our national identity, and on how
we and othcrs see our place in the world.
I
These are all big questions, and it is important that we get them right.
At a time of great fluidity in international affairs, we now face fundamental questions
about the structure of the world trading system.
The opportunity to secure a successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round is now close
at hand, but the outcome is far from assured.
The APEC forum, which Australia has done so much to bring forward, is now poised
to develop into a valuablc framework for promoting trade and investment in the Asia-
Pacific region.
The United States Congress will soon decide whether or not to approve the North
American Free Trade Agreement with far-reaching repercussions either way on the US
trade policy stance.
At this pivotal moment in the international trading environment, it is important that
Australians are fully aware of the impact that decisions about future trade stnicturs
will have on our interests.
Mr Speaker
At stake is nothing less than the future prosperity of our country. 
28. Sep. 93 15: 57 No. 020 P. 02/ 1
2
At stake is our capacity to provide employment for the next generation of Australians.
More than ever before, Australia is on its own internationally, fending for itself in a
competitive and challenging international environment
But we are seen internationally as a modem soicty with many assets to help us make
our way successfully in the world.
Our recent achievements in fostering a tolerant and diverse multicultural society and in
executig a series of major reforms of the Australian economy highlight our capacity to
change, and to play an increasing role in regional and international affairs.
These subjects were the main thrust of my discussions in each of the capitals I visited.
Mr Spcakcr
I visited Washington at a time Australia's most pressing interests coincide with much
that is promincn on the American agenda.
The future of the Uruguay Round, the development of APEC and the creation of
NAFTA arc all matters to which President Clinton, his Administration and the
Congress are giving high priority.
It was a very useful time to be able to put Australia's view, and to represent our
interests on these issues.
Given the enormous stakes involved, it was important to be able to discuss with the US
Administration and Congress what sort of policy and institutional framework will best
maintain and strengthen the highly valuable economic Linkages which now operate
between East Asia, Oceania and North America.
So strong have thcse linkages between North America and the Western Pacific become
over the last decade that today there is a higher degree of trade integration among the
members of APEC than there is among the members of the European Community,
or among the three North American economies, or among the East Asian economies
considcmd separately.
And while the United States market remains vitally important for most East Asian
economics, I found a growing awareness in the Administration and in Congrpss that
East Asia has also become an increasingly important market for US exports.
Indeed, less than a decade ago more than one third of Western Paciric exports went to
the United States.
Today the proportion is leis than one quarter.
TEL 
TEL 3
Over the same period the proportion of US exports which go to the Western Pacific
has risen to wcll over one quarter, on a par with those to the NAFTA partners and well
ahead of exports to the EC.
Since the mid eighties the trend rate of growth of US exports to the Westen Pacific
has beeti ec times the rate of growth of Western Pacific exports to thc United
States. This rapid trade growth in the region and the prosperity it produces would be gravely
threatened, in my view, if in coming decades North America and the Western Pacific
went separate ways in trade and strategic alignments.
I am glad to be able to report that the Clinton Administration is as convinced of the
importance of the East Asia region as we ourselves have become.
I had very productive discussions in Washington with President Clinton, with Secretary
of Stawe Christopher, Defense Secretary Aspin, US Trade Representative Kantor,
Treasury Secretary Bentsen, Director of Central Intelligence Woolsey and with senior
Congressional leaders including Senate Majority Leader Mitchell, Senate Minority
Leader Dole and House Speaker Foley.
My ineeting with President Clinton was exceptionally useful.
I was impressed by the vigour, imagination and resolve with which he is going about
the task of rebuilding American competitiveness and American society.
We affirmned in our meeting the continuing vitality and relevance of Australia's bilateral
relationship with the United States.
Despite the great changes in die world brought about by thc end of the Cold War,
fundamental Australian interests continue to be engaged in our relationship with the
United States in our defence alliance, in the mutually beneficial processes or policy
consultation we enjoy on a wide range of issues, and in our strong commercial ties.
Despitc our bilateral access problems, which I discussed with Ambassador Kantor and
congressional leaders, the US market remains Australia's second biggest.
And the United States is the largest source of foreign investment in Australia and the
most important destination for Australian investment abroad.
Mr Speakcr
My meeting with the President produced three important results.
First, we agreed to work closely together for a successful outcome of the informal
APEC leaders' mceting in Scatilc in November. T2EL8:. Sep. 93 15: 5? No. 020 P. 0 
TEL: 28. Sep. 93 15: 5? No. 020 P. 04/ I
4
This historic meeting, involving leaders of the key Asia-Pacific economies the fastest
growing area of the world will help define an Asia-Pacific economic community and
give political authority and weight to APEC.
The President noted Australia's vital contribution to the development of APEC.
I was impressed by the President's commitment to the Asia-Pacific economic
community, and by the unanimity with which hehis Cabinet and the Congressional
leadership in both Houses and both parties expreised their conviction that the United
States should assign a higher priority to its trading relations with the Western Pacific.
Secondly, we agreed that it was very important to world growth and jobs to achieve a
successful and balanced outcome to the Uruguay Round by the 15 December deadline
for Congress's " fast track" approval, and that any move by the European Community
to re-open the Blair House accord on agriculture would seriously jeopardise the whole
Round. The United States has pressed hard in favour of freer trade during seven long years of
thc GATT negotiations.
It has been a policy stance of great value to Australia.
But I was convinccd by my discussions in Washington that 15 December is a real
deadline for Congress, and that, if we cannot achieve an acceptable package by then,
Congress as well as the Administration will turn their attention away from global
solutions to trade problems and towards more regional approaches.
Thirdly, the President and Ambassador Kantor recognised Australia's conccrn about
the damage that EEP subsidies cause our grain exports, and said they would make
every effort to minimise the effect on Australia's interests.
They noted the Administration's decision to stay out of the Indonesian market as a
bonafide of their sincerity in this regard.
They explained that the EEP was aimed at counteracting European subsidies, and that
the only fully effectivc way to reduce the impact on Australia's grain exports was to
conclude the Uruguay Round as soon as possible.
Mr Speaker
In New York, I addressed a meeting of the Asia Society and had a meeting with the
Secretary-Gencral of the United Nations, Mr Boutros Boutros-Ohali.
I told the Secretary-Gcneral that Australia welcomed the new possibilities for the work
of the United Nations which have arisen with thc disappearance of Cold War
constraints. I said that, as a foundation member of the United Nations, Australia is fully committed
to the ideals of the Charter and wants to see those ideals prosper. 
TEL: 28. Sep. 93 15: 57 No. 020
I noted that Australia was committed to peacekeeping, with around 600 Australians
serving in Cambodia, Somalia and in other operations around the globe.
We were also a substantial financial contributor to the United Nations, paying in full
and on time.
I told the Secretary-General that Australia would-continue to contribute resources and
ideas to the Organisation.
T" Cheo ompoersat tricncge nfotr e Pxeaamcpe" le, eoxfa tmhiisn icnogn tpreibaucteikoene pisi nSge naantdo rc oEnvaflnicst's r edsoocluumtioenn, t which is
being launched in New York this week.
I also made it clcar to the Secretary-General, however, that the United Nations
Organisation itself had to make sure it was operating as efficiently and effectively as it
could especially in its administration and in its peacekeeping operations if it was to
maintain the international support needed to fulfil its great potential.
Mr Spcakc. r
My visit to the United Kingdom, the first by an Australian Prime Minister since 1987,
provided an opportunity to help reinforce and rshape this old and still very valuable
relationship. I had a long and productive meeting in London with Prime Minister Major.
World trade issues were again the main theme of my discussions.
I told Prime Minister Major how much Australia appreciatcd the very constructive and
positive role Britain has played within the EC, and more widely, in pushing the cause
of freer world markets and the multinational trading system.
We both underlined the importance of a successful and balanced outcome to the
Uruguay Round for jobs and growth.
We agreed that 15 December is a real deadline for the Round.
We also discussed the strong and growing economic ties betwecn Britain and
Australia. Britain is Australia's fourth largest trading partner, and our eighth largest export
market. It is the second largest source of foreign invcstment in Australia.
In turn, we arc the fourth largest foreign investor in the UK, ranking above Japan. 
TEL: 28. Sep. 935 15: 57 NO. 020 P. 06;
6
Prime Minister Major and I agreed that there was much to build on and to develop in
this area.
We noted that an important Australia-UK trade and investment conference, to be held
in Melbourne in January next year, will help to maintain the impetus for growth in our
commercial relationship.
Mr Speaker
I also spoke to Prime Minister Major about Australia's constitutional arrangements.
I said publicly in London that it is not because our affections; for Britain are reduced or
the friendship between us frailer, or our respect and admiration for the institutions
Britain has bequeathed us in any way diminished, that Australia is considering the
option of becoming a republic.
And I also said that our friendship for Britain would be all the stronger for our
becoming a republic, as any friendship is stronger for being more mature.
Mr Major Prime Minister of a Conservative British Government and Mr Hurd, his
Foreign Secretary who was on a parallel visit to Australia, both made publicly and
privately clea that the matter or Australia's constitutional arrangements is one for the
Government, people and Parliament of Australia and the Queen of Australia.
They both assert, quite correctly, that the modern, mature relationship between Britain
and Australia will remain quite unaffected by our moves to become a republic.
Mr Speaker
I was rceived by Her Majesty the Queen at Balmoral Castle on 18 September.
In accordane with longstanding convention, the discussion between us must remain
confidential. But I am able to say I explained to Her Majesty that, notwithstanding thc detp respect
and warm affection felt towards her by the Australian people, there was a growing
feeling in Australia that constitutional changes should be made to allow the
appointment of an Australian Head of State.
I outlined to Her Majesty thc various steps that would be involved in such a process,
including the necd for a referendum to approve constitutional amendments.
I said thc Australian Governent's view was that, if approved by the Australian people
at a rererendum, it would be appropriate for Australia to become a republic by the
centenary of Federation in 2001.
I told H1cr Majcsty that. in such a situation, Australia would remain a member of the
Commonwealth of Nation and that the Australian people would warmly welcome 
T2EL8: . Sep. 93 15: 57 No. 020 P. 07
7
visits to Australia by Her Majesty as Head of the Commonwealth and as the Queen of
the United Kingdom.
HeIr Majesty authorised mc to say that she would, of course, act on the advice or her
Australian Ministers, as she always has, and on any decision made by the Australian
people. Mr Speaker
The issues involved in the creation of a Federal Republic of Australia are complex.
They require thoughtful and informed debate.
But as a result of my discussions in Britain it is clear that, whatever the outcome of the
debate in Australia, whatever thc form of constitutional arrangements on which the
Australian people finally dccide, both Her Majesty and the British Govermecnt regard
these arrangentsL, properly. as entirely matters to be decided by the Ausirdlian
people themnselves.
And it is also clear that the results of any constitutional changes are not seen as a threat
and will not threaten the warmth of the relationship between Australia and Britain,
or the personal respect and affection in which Her Majesty is held.
It is my Government's firm intention, Mr Speaker, to ensure that, throughout the
period that Australians are debating new constitutional arrangements, our existing links
with the monarchy arc maintained and exercised with dignity and respect.
In that regard, I am pleased to announce that I discussed with Her Majesty an
invitation I have extended to the Prince of Wales to visit Australia early in 1994
following proposals by several State Governments.
The invitation has bccn accepted.
His Royal Highness will arrive in Sydney on 25 January, and visit in addition to New
South Wales, Tasmania, Western Australia and Queensland.
Mr Speaker
My visit to Ireland cnabled me to mark the very important contribution which Ireland
has made to the cultural, social and political development of this country.
The peopic-to-peopic links between us arc still strong and vigorous.
In Dublin I had the honour of addressing the D~ ail, and I had extensive discussions with
the Taoiseach, Mr Reynolds, and leaders of the othcr Irish political parties.
My discussions focused again on thc outcome for the Uruguay Round, on which
Ireland has been one of the European countries most resistant to change in the area of
agriculture. TEL 
TL: 28. Sep. 93 115: 57 No. 020 P. 08/:
I put the view forcefully to Irish political leaders, and to business people at a dinner
hosted by the Irish-Australian Business Association, that Ireland, with its growing
industrial exports, will he best served by ensuring that we gct an acceptable outcome to
the Uruguay Round.
That in turn depended, I said, on the integrity of the Blair House accord on agricultur
being fully mlaintained.
I also made the point that, although our trade is growing, die warmth of people-topeoplc
relations between Australia and Ireland is not matched by our commercial links.
I said I hoped that companies in each country would incrwaingly use the oth cr as a
base to develop links into Asia and Europe respectively.
The warmth displayed by the Irish people towards me as head of the Government of
Australia was quite profound.
In all parts of the country I visited, there was a spontaneous expression of warm
welcome and good wishes towards Australia and the Australian people.
It is quite a phenomcnon that thc cultural and emotional links between Australia and
this small country in Europe exist as strongly as they do.
It Is something Australians should value and continue to nurture.
Mr Speaker
On my way fromn Ireland to Monaco for thc Sydney Olympic bid, I stopped for several
hours in France and visited Villers-Bretonineux, thc. site of the memorial to the 46,000
Australians 18,000 without a known grave who died on the We-stern Front during
the First World War.
Like all who have visited the military graveyards of France, I was reminded of the.
courage and devotion of those young Australians who fought and died in that terrible
war and the huge loss this nation suffcred on the French battlefields.
I was also reminded that the tragedy of which they were victims arose, in large part,
from the selfish and narrow nationalism which has so often scarred this century.
We havc the opportunity, as the century ends. to do things hctter, to create broader,
more inclusive economic structures which will generate new growth and new jobs
around the globe by mnaximising trading opportunities for all countries.
If the international community rails in its efforts to resolve the Uruguay Round by mid-
December, there are other options5 available but, as all those I spoke to on my visit
agrecdi, they are not such good options.
Mr Speaker TEL 
T: 23. Sep. 93 15: 57 N0.020
9
The International Olympic Committee's decision to awar the Olympic Games for the
year 2000 to Sydncy was a wonderful outcome for this country.
The Olympics are bound to be a marvellous moment in the life of the city and the
nation: a celebration of international youth and sport in a young country with
extraordinary sporting traditions.
All of Australia's attractions will be on show to billions of people around the world as
we approach the centenary of the Commonwealth's creation.
The Olympics can also be a defining moment in our history in the one hundredth year
of our nationhood, a brilliant opportunity to celebrate our achievements and define our
place in the region and the world.
Thc Olympics will generate economic growth and jobs well beyond Sydney itself.
The IOC's decision was a trbute to all those who worked so hard to put together an
outstanding bid.
My wife and T werc delighted to participatc: in the bid's presentation to thc IOC, and
were &amp; ratified that the Government was able to indicate its material support for the bid.
It is a tribute to the breadth of support for the Games among the Australian community
demonstrated so memorably by the tens of thousands of people who showed their
enthusiasm in Sydney on Friday morning.
In a wider sense, Mr Speaker, the IOC's decision is also a tribute to the society we
have created here its social equity, cultural diversity, tolerance and its sophistication
and efficiency.
Sydney's approach was set iiprt. from others by its technical excellence and by its
commitment to the athletes themselves and to the ideals of the Olympic movement.
All the people involved in the bid deserve the warmest congratulations and thanks of
this House.
More than that, Mr Speaker, they deserve the continuing support of all Australians
government, business and the community in the seven ycars of hard work that still lie
ahead of us.
I can say on behalf of the Commonwealth Government that they will have Lhat support.
Mr Speaker
I began by saying that my visit to the United States and Europe took place at a time or
great consequence for the world economy a Lime when new% p atterns are being
ceated, and when great decisions are beig formed.
TEL 
TEL: 28. Sep. 93 15: 57 No. 0210
Within the next twelve weeks alone we will have the first meeting of the leaders of the
Asia-Pacific economy community, we shall enjoy success or suffer failure in the
Uruguay Round, and we will have, by the year's end, a surer sense of whether recovery
can take hold in Europe anid Japan, and strengthen in the United States.
It is a decisive time in world economic affairs, Mr Speaker. and it comes as Australia is
achiev'ing greater international recognition.
Sydney's Olympic win reflects this most draatically, but it is also reflected in Mr
Clinton's generous praise of Australia's role in forging APEC, and in the respect
accorded to Australia's views in the Uruguay Round as the leader of thc Cairns Group
of fair agriculture traders.
Mr Speaker
There is a responsibility on all of us to recognse that we are in a bigger game a game
with bigger prizes but with new and tougher rules.
T1he world is offering us great opportunities, but to takc advantage of them we must
continue to be flexible and competitive at home.
We must continue to seek national cohesion and strength.
We cannot seiz the opportunities thc world offers us if we cannot agree on the
fundamental instrument of national economic policy, the Budget.
We cann~ ot sciiz those opportunities if we cannot reach a satisfactory and enduring
agreement on the implementation of the High Court's decision to recognise a form of
Aborigial title.
We cannot seize those opportunities if our workplace relations are not free to evolve
towards outcomes based on bargaining.
To selLe those opportunities we need to renew our commitment to change, and our
commitment to the reforms necessary to meet the imperatives of the ncw global order.
It will help us in this regard if wc recognise the success of the changes we have already
made how well we are doing in the world; how much more competitive wc have
made ourselves; how much the chances which now present themselvcs are only
chances becausc of the changes we have made; how we have made them while also
making Austrdlia a tolerant, sophisticated and progressive society with few cquals in
the world and how much better wc can make it if we put aside sectional interest and
parochialism and work together as a nation.
CANBERRA 28 September 1993 



TEL: 1 . OCt .93 131 : M No F'
PRIME MINISTER 107/ 93
STATEMENT BY THEF PRTME MINISTER, THE BION PJ KEATING, MP
MABO NEGOTIATIONS
Reports this morning that the Federal Government has yielded to State pressure and
made significant concessions on the draft Mabo legislation are untrue.
The Commonwealth is still involved in discussions with the States but has already
Informed them that any proposals to water down the principles on which the legislation
has been based would be rejected.
Officials have not been instructed to " Set a deal with the States",-In fact, officials were
requested to tell the States that many of their proposals have been flatly refused,
although we are prepared to discuss others which do not water down the principles of
the legislation.
I have always said it would be preferable to get agreement with the States, in order to
achicve a national approach in dealing with native title, certainty of land management
and, importantly, justice for Aboriginal people.
But I have made it clear again this week that if the States do not accept our principles,
and the notion that any State processes to deal with native title must be established and
operated in accordance with our standards and guidelines, then the Commonwealth is
prepared to itself operate the system outlined in the legislation.
CANBERRA, I OCTOBER, 1993 



TEL: i. Uct. 93 153: 22 " o. 027? P. 01/ L
PRIME MINISTER1
SPEECH BY THE PRIE MIPiSTER, THE HON P4J. KEATING MP
SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE HONOURSv SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE
FRIDAY, 1 OCTOBER 1993
It is a very great pleasure for me to be here this evening to honour such a distinguished
group of Australian artists, who have given so much to their fellow Australians and the
world at large.
But I know you will excuse mc if 1 don't speak at length tonight about the recipients or
the awards.
Their records are a much more eloquent testament than I could hope to provide.
Having said that, however, theme is one performer here tonight that I do wish to pay
special tribute to.
Walter Burley Griffin, perhaps the greatest architect in Australa's history, oncc very
truly said that " buildings are the most subtle, accurate and enduring records of life."
Tonight I want to pay tribute to such a budlding to the Sydncy Opera House itself,
one of the best architectural decisions that we ever made in Australia.
It was said somewhere that:
".. Whenever anybody begins to look at things in a way that is slightly novel,
999 peoplc out of a 1000 are totally incapable of seeing what is put before
themn. It taikes at least 40 years before they can manage to make it out."
There's truth in the observation, but in the case of the Opera House it is only a half
truth. It's certainly true that when the Opera House was under considcration and in the
process of being built, many Australians just didn't know what to make of it. There 
TEL: 1. Oct. M-3 13': 222 No. 027 P. 02/ C
were no other buildings like it in Australia, and you never saw anything like it on your
overseas tour to Covent Garden, or Paris or Milan or wherever.
So wc got the snide comments about the Danish Blue Danish Bluc, of course, was
then a peak of cultural sophistication.
The doubters and the slaves to cultural conformity were out in force, and it took a
major effort to ensure that what now seems thc only WsibIe design for the site, should
prevail. It did not take 40 years for the people of Sydney and Australia to call the Opera House
their own. In a very short time they were delighting in it, and world wide, with Ayers
Rock it was recognised as one of the two great symbols of Australia.
The extraordinary symbolic importance of this building was brought home to me in
Ireland a few days ago, when a man told me how he had gone to Australia recently and
when he stood in front of the Opera House, he said, he couldn't believe he was actually
there. What he described was the way Australians used to feel standing in front of Big Ben or
the Tower of London.
In Monte Carlo it was quite apparent that everyone related their concept of Australia
to these two images, the Opera House and Uluru, and I do not think it is drawing too
long a bow to suggest that they deserve some of the credit for getting us the Games.
John Douglas Pringle, I think, captured the essence of what we feel about the Opera
House when he wrote that:
" There it stands a perfect symbol liniking the city to the sea, welcoming
incoming ships with its wide open arches, shining brilliantly in the summer sun
or gleaming palely by moonlight, contemporary in feeling yet reminding us of
other ages when great buildings were built to the glory of God or the splendour
of princes and not simply for utilitarian purposes it is a building of which all
Australians may rightly be prud...".
It is also significant, I think, that one of the recipients of an award here tonight, Dame
Joan Sutherland, was a important member of our winning team in Monte Carlo.
Dame Joan, like other award winners, has been a trail-blazer for Australia for many
years. She, and Richard Bonynge, Don Burrows, Ruth Cracknell, Sir Charles Mackerras,
Gracme Murphy and Janet Vernon and Garth Welch and Marilyn Jones have done it
hard for Australia. 
TEL 3
I know that they would all prote~ st that they loved what they were doing, and wouldn't
have swapped it for quids. And I'm sure that's truc.
But tlhat doesn't mean that the rest of us should fail to recognise and acknowledge just
what a debt we owc them.
Not just our young performers who have had opened for them doors which these
peoplc had to prise open for themselves.
But evcryone who has found life a bit easier because of what thcy have done to
establish Australia in the eyes of thc world as a rich and creative culture.
These people dcserve our profound thanks.
They have given us enormous pleasure.
Thcy enrich our. lives.
Their art inspires us to try a little bit harder anid to live a little hit better, and I feel
privileged to be among those honouring them tonight. TEL. O: ct. 973 18: 22 No. 027 P. 03/ C 



PRIME MINISTER 106/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING
PRIMS MINISTER'S RURAL AND REGIONA TASK FORCE
I am pleased to announce today the formation of a new
Prime ministerS Rural and Regional Task Force to help
the Federal GovernenL better meet the needs of
Australians living outside the capital cities.
The task force is based largely on the successful former
Country Task Force but its role has been broadened and
will be co-ordinated with other Government activities
already underway, especially those associated with
regional development.
The key aims of the Task Force will be:
1. To inform rural Australians of relevant Government
programs. 2. To assess the suitability of Government programs
which assist rural Australians.
3. To reporL on the effectiveness and efficiency of
those programs.
4. To advise the Prime Minister of any impediments to
improving the performance of rural industries and, in
particular, rural export performance.
The decision to establish the Task Force was made
yesterday at a meeLing between mryself and the minister
for Primary Industrie6 and E~ nergy, Mr Crean, the Task
Force chairman, Mr Harry Wood5, Secretary Bob Horne, and
Senator Sue West. 
Like the Country Task Force the new body will deal with
all rural and socio-economic issues, including small
business, the delivery of services, issues affecLing
women, care fo~ r the elderly, employment and primary
production. Its work will be directed as mu~ ch to people
living in provincial towns and cities as to the farm
sector. The Task Force will make regular visits to rural and
regional Australia to meet with a wide range of conrnunity
groups and other representatives and will report directly
to me.
Mr Woods can be contacted on ( 006) 42 6356.
Mr Dick Adams ( Depu-ty Chairperson) on ( 003) 31 2033
Mr Bob Homne ( Secretary) on ( 049) 34 5656
CANBERRA October 1, 1993 



TEL: 4.0ct. 93 15: 13 No. 002 P. 01/ 0
PRIME MINISTER 108/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE FION P. J. KEATIN~ G, MP
ELECTIONS AND THE CONVENTIONS OF GOVERNMENT
Just over six months ago, Dr Hewson made an unsuccessful appeal to the people of
Australia to elect him as Prime Minister. if he can hold the wolves of his own party at
bay, he will no doubt try again in a couple of years' time.
But Dr Hewson's behaviour in recent weeks threatens to undermine the democratic
process itself, and to pollute his own leadership ambitions for the fu~ ture, He has now
put himself under a grave obligation to spell out just what his determination to
vandalise the Government's budget means to the future of representative democracy in
this country.
Does Dr Hewson now concede and accept that any future Liberal Government has
forfeited the right to frame and enact budgetary and economic policy? Do his own
actions now lead him to conclude that being elected the majority party in the House of
Representatives means only that the Government is entitled to whatever power it can
negotiate with marginal and minority parties in the Senate? Does he accept that he is
trampling on the basic principles of operation of the democratic system of government
in this country?
Dr Hewson, who seeks to be elected to power through the conventional method of
leading a party to a majority position in the House of Representatives, is the leading
participant in a dangerous move to transfer power to the less representatively elected
upper house. Down that track lays chaos and potential disaster. Dr Hewson might
feel frustrated and cheated that he didn't get what he wanted from the last election, but
that doesn't entitle him to take out his petulance on the entire system of government.
There are grave dangers for any country when the power and authority of the elected
government is blurred or undermined. There is a very fine line betwecn the
Opposition's right to make forcefuil political capital, and irresponsible, intolerable
behaviour. Some timie in the next several days, Dr Hiewson will walk back from, or
over, that line. The media have a duty to inform Australia about the course of action
he takes, and to call him to account if he crosses that line.
CANBERRA 4 October, 1993 



TEL 4. Oct. 93 17: 372 No. 00? P. 01/ c
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL BRISSENDEN, ABC 4 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
MB: Prime Minister, welcome to ' PM'.
PM: Michael.
MB: It doesn't matter really what you think of Dr Hewson's actions, calling
him an ' undemocratic vandal' is not going to help the Budget through
the Senate is it'?
PM: No, it is not a matter of name calling, it is making clear what is on here.
It takes 38 votes to block Budget measures. Dr Hewson has 36 of the
38 votes. He has been meeting with Independents in the Senate to
add to his 36 and I am just making the point that does Dr Hewson now
concede and accept that any future Liberal government has forfeited
the right to make its Budget and enact economic policy?
That is, do his actions now lead him to conclude that being the duly
elected government with a majority in the House of Representatives
gives you no further right than simply to be able to negotiate a majority
in the Senate?
MB: Well, is that a threat? If you were in that position, would you
guarantee the government those economic policy rights?
PM: I made it clear last year before the election campaign and during the
election campaign that Labor, in opposition, would pass the money
bills of the duly elected government if that were a conservative
government, including the GST. Now, I did that for good and sound
reasons of convention and princi ple.
MB* But what are you saying here?
PM: Dr Hewson it seems to me is now under a grave obligation to spell out
just what his determination to do this to the Budget means for
representative democracy in Australia. That is, are governments now 
TEL: 4.0Oct.~ 17: 32, Io. 007 P. 02/ C
2
I mean he seeks to be Prime Minister, he is peeved about the last
election result, but he wants to come back in two and a half years time
and re-compete, to get a majority in the House of Representatives.
What does he think that majority is going to mean to him if in fact he
seeks to rewrite the rule book by saying, all you get is the keys to the
kingdom, but not the kingdom you can't pass the money legislation
unless you can garner the support of Independents because 1, John
Hewson, am saying from here on out there are new rules in Australian
politics and those rules are that the major parties have a right to block
the money legislation, the financial legislation of a government in the
Senate.
MB: As you say in your statement, you ask if Dr Hewson does now concede
and accept that any future Liberal government has forfeited the right to
frame an exact Budget policy. Does that mean that gloves are off now,
that you have changed your mind and that if you were in that position,
you would do what John Hewson has done?
PM: No, I am just saying there is a very fine line between an Opposition's
right to make political capital, to make a political point and
irresponsible, intolerable behaviour.
MB: When does he cross that line?
PM: That is I think, a matter for the coming week or weeks. The Bills are
now in the Senate and Dr Hewson has got to make it clear that political
capital is one thing, but actually turning the system on its head is
another. Here we are in a position where the economy is now picking
up we have seen motor vehicle registrations rise in August to be 16
per cent above where they were a year ago; housing finance numbers
are up 30 per cent on a year ago; you have got job skilled vacancies
up 26 per cent; you have got vacancies overall up 50 per cent. The
economy is now in recovery phase and what is hanging over it? The
passage of the Budget and the stalling of legitimate revenue measures
by the properly elected government and stall for what reason?
Because John Hewson didn't like the outcome of the last election.
MB: But isn't that precisely the point? With respect, there has been a fair
amount of political posturing from all sides. The political realities at
the moment would suggest that you have to make some compromises
as well to get this Budget through.
PM:. But look, the Government sat dlown and looked at a range of these
measures it sat down with the Democrats. Now you saw what
Senator Kernot said last week, she said Senate obstructionism has
gone far enough. Remember the point I made a moment ago Michael.
It takes 38 votes to block a Budget measure in the Senate, to block a
Budget. John Hewson has got 36 of the 38 he Is the principal
blocker, he only needs the top up of a couple of Independents to make
it a reality. All the focus has been on the Independents, it has been on 
TEL: 4 . Oct 9 1-7: 29 o.-007 P.-03z/ 0
3
the Democrats, on the Greens and on Senator Harradine. But the
blocker votes, the 36 of the 38 are standing resolutely against the
Budget at the behest of John Hewson.
Now, Malcolm Fraser said last week the Senate is running the risk of
making Australia ungovernable, to use his words. He said it is running
the risk of turning the annual Budget process into a series of bargains
and trade-offs similar to those which occurred in the United States. In
other words, of all things, the cloud hanging over the economy's head
in a recovery phase, when we are now finally getting on with it and the
place is starting to grow, is the Budget. Can I say a Budget where the
revenue to,. GDP is actually falling. That is, where the a tax share, the
revenue share in GDP, it is actually going down.
MB: But, you have been playing politics with it too? The political realities
are still there.
PM: Stop this playing politics business. The Government is not playing
politics introducing a Budget.
MB: Well why not drop..
PMV: No, hang on. The Government is not playing politics introducing a
Budget. A Budget which gives away the equivalent of $ 3 billion a year
in tax cuts beginning from the middle of November and a Budget which
has increases on the indirect side on the revenue which are less then
the tax cuts. In other words, we are raising less than we are giving
away and revenue to GDP is falling. What possible basis of objection
could there be to a Budget where revenue and tax to GDP are falling,
where the Government is about to give away tax cuts to middle income
Australians and yet the Opposition says no, for reasons of political
spite will stall all this, but what we'll do is we'll hide behind a couple of
Independents and put the blame on them. As if they could think they
could lie doggo with 36 votes when it only takes 38 to do the trick to
stop a Budget, to stop the revenue changes of a Budget.
MB. Do you concede that the political realities of the Senate mean that you
will have to drop the linkage between the tax cuts and the revenue
measures?
PM; Look, the technical linkage means nothing.
MB. It means nothing?
PM: Nothing.
MB: So you will drop it?
PM: It means nothing. Let me just make this point clear as day to you.
When the Budget bills come back into the House of Representatives, 
TEL: 4. Oct. 93 117: 32 No. 00? P. 04/ 0
4
the Government cannot be providing tax cuts while the other revenue
base of the Commonwealth is eroding. So in other words, it Is John
Hewson and John Hewson only who will spike $ 8-i10 a week tax cuts
for Australians from November. So all if you like, the kick along to the
economy coming from the spending of tax payers and their families,
the boost to retail sales, the boost to manufacturing and consumption
that is, the next needed boost to gro * wth from public demand, coming
from tax cuts John Hewson is spiking for no reasons other than
political spite and petulance saying I didn't win, so if I didn't win I'll turn
the system on its head.
MB: If the linkage means nothing then why not drop it? In effect if you did,
you would get the petrol tax rise through, you'd get the first round of
the whole sale sales tax increases and you would end this uncertainty
wouldn't you?
PM: Look, let's forget about all the technical, tricky, rinky-dink things and
the rinky-dink questions.
MB: Well, those are the arguments that are being used though aren't they?
PM: Look, there is a Budget presented by the Government a proper
Budget. A Budget which gives a stimulus now and brings the Budget
to 1 per cent of GDP and deficit by 1996. In the United States they are
still cheering the passage of President Clinton's Budget which was
carried by one vote by Vice-President Gore in the Senate. That brings
the American deficit to 3 per cent of GOP by 1996. Ours will be only
one third of that and yet despite its high mindedness in economic
terms and its sense in economic and social terms, in the early round of
tax cuts it is being spiked by a spiteful Opposition. No basis of
economic objection whatsoever.
MB: Well, you're not going to move. The situation Is still going to be here at
the end of this week, and at the end of next week, the end of the
month, isn't it?
PM: That's the point. So far, Australia's not been Informed about the course
of action Dr Hewson is taking. He's hiding behind a couple of
independents in the Senate, needing 38 votes to block budget
measures, and having 36 of the 38 himself, resolutely opposed to it.
That's why he's been attacked by the president of the National
Farmers' Federation, by Malcolm Fraser, by Senator Vanstone and
people on his side of politics, because what he is doing is trampling on
the basic principles of the operation of the democratic system of
government in this country. And that is that parties in the upper house,
the Senate, pass the money legislation of the Government. Now that's
not to say that every budget has gone through untinkered with. I mean
many of the ones I put through in the 80s were tinkered with here and
there. Small measures, small twists in some of the measures. And
some Opposition people are relying on those things and saying " oh, 
TEL: 4 . Oct 9. 17 : 32 No.-007
look what happened then" but no Opposition none ever, has ever
refused the passage of major budget revenue measures. This is what
John Hewson is doing in trying to re-write the rule book of Australian
politics.
MB: Well, Prime Minister, where does it leave us? We're still at a stand-off.
They're not going to change. You're not going to compromise.
PM: The point is the Opposition have got to think about their position. They
have to say: " We are in a position now where were we to form a
Government, if we do this and at some stage in the future we form a
Government, we will have forfeited the right from that point forever and
always to frame and enact budgetary and economic policy. Our right
as a majority elected government will only be that which we can snaffle
on the highways and byways of independents in the Senate." Now is
that the kind of chaos, is that the kind of uncertainty Australians want?
Or do they want to get on with it with a recovery which is now well
and truly underway, as we see a return to growth and employment
again. And there's only one person standing in the way of that, and
that's JR Hewson.
MB: So you in Opposition wouldn't guarantee the smooth passage of
budget bills?
PM; Look, leave me to one side. I've made my position clear. I believe a
Labor Opposition should pass the money bills of an elected
Conservative Government. That's what I believe. I said so, when it
mattered in the key weeks of an election campaign, and before. But
what Labor leader in the future would be able to say to his or her party
:" Look, don't stand up the Liberal Party's budgetary measures.. the
reply would be, well they stood ours up, they've turned budget making
on its head." I mean this is what John Hewson's doing. I mean he's not
been around this place long. But he's into the conventions with a pick
axe. And he's got to understand what happens with the chaos and
uncertainty which will arise from It.
MB: If the stand-off continues the Greens have said they would be
prepared to give you the trigger for a double dissolution. Would you
take it?
PM: I'm not talking about double dissolutions. This is not the refusal of
Supply Bills. This is not 1975. This is not the refusal of the passage of
the Government's spending. This is a change in the mix of the
budgetary measures on the revenue side in the main. But what it
certainly means is that tax cuts which are economically right, and
socially useful will be put at risk by the behaviour of Dr Hewson and
his colleagues in the Senate. But as I say, more importantly, what will
be put at risk are the conventions which Malcolm Fraser wrote about
eloquently last week, and other people on the conservative side of
politics. 
TEL: 4.0ct. 93 17: 32 No. 00? P. 06/ 0
6
MB:-We could remain in an ungovernable position though, couldn't we?
PM: Let's assume that word has some credence. Who is responsible. Only
one person, John Hewson.
MB: The budget of course isn't the only problem that you are going to face
with the Senate, is it? You are going to face this problem with Mabo,
with with almost any contentious legislation.
PM: I got* greater changes through in the 80s as Treasurer, In the tax
system than I think most other persons in that job attempted. I
compromised on many things: the capital gains tax, the fringe benefits
tax. I kept the core principles and changed the detail around the
edges. I mean, no one can assume that you can Pass anything you like
through the Senate. No one's assuming that. And that's not
reasonable and it's not sensible. But, the money bills, the financial
legislation of a Government, they are the core things that give the
country binding, cohesion and stability. They are the things that give
certainty to our style of Government. And they are done by convention.
They are not done by the ruthless use of numbers.,
MB: And have you compromised as far as you are prepared to go then on
those budget bills?
PM: We've made it quite clear right the way through that where we think
there is a reasonable case to shift some of these measures we will. I
mean, we've done that in the past. But the idea that John Hewson says
that the Government has no mandate for any tax rises when we are
giving even greater tax cuts is of course just a bit of nonsense.
MB: So you won't shift on the tax measures?
PM;. Look. We are not shifting on the key principle, and that is the
Opposition in the Senate has no right to block the revenue measures
of the duly elected, properly elected Government in the House of
Representatives.
MB: Prime Minister, thanks very much.
PM, Thank you Michael.
ends. 



TEL: 5. Oct. 93 17: 32 No. 019 P. 01/ 08
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
6 OCTOBIER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I will just make a short statement before taking a Couple of questions. Today I
placed the Opposition on notice in regard to their conduct during Question
Time. Anyone watching the proceedings could be left in no doubt that the
Opposition is engaging in a deliberate and wilful tactic of disruption.
Ministers' answers could not be heard and the Speaker was placed in an
impossible position. And while the Opposition treats the forms of Parliament
with such utter disregard in Question Time and in the Senate the Government
will respond emphatically.
The Government will not be bending to this deliberate assault, and that's why
I cut short Question Time today.
As you know I believe that Question. Time should allow for robust and
vigorous exchanges, I have always approached Question Time in that way. I
have been in Parliament long enough to know to, that on some occasions
these exchanges go further than the public would approve, or even
convention permits. But today's tactic constituted a deliberate tactic to
disrupt the continuity of Ministers answers and where the Opposition felt like
it simply to drown them out.
I hope this unusual action will focus attention on the Opposition's attitude to
this Parliament, and in particular the behaviour in the Senate. There is a
common link between their behaviour in the House of Representatives today
and in the Senate, both of which are calculated to tear away at the
Government's legitimacy.
The Government convincingly won the election just six months ago, the
Opposition is behaving as though the Government is not legitimate, that it has
a right to disrupt the House of Representatives and the Senate to curtail the
House of Representatives capacity to do business until the end of October.
All these things hold the parliamentary process and the political mandate of
the Government in contempt. 
TEL 2
I am happy to take questions from you.
J will there be a Question Time tomorrow?
PM; Yes. But again, we've had the Opposition's Question Time tactics
under notice now for some time. Now I noticed today the West
Australian Speaker was in the Chamber apparently, and he cut
Question Time off in Western Australia after four minutes last week, I
am told. Now, the fact is we have a robust Question Time and nobody
complains. But Ministers have got a right to give answers so that the
continuity of their answers is maintained and that they can be heard, It
is an awfully difficult thing to try and concentrate on a technical
answer, often when there is a barrage of abuse coming your way. And
that was happening today and it is not something that is going to be
easily dealt with by a Speaker when the wthole of the Opposition take
this on as a tactic.
J-Prime Minister, aren't you rather falling for the Opposition's trick? I
mean aren't you, you are accusing them of breaching convention, but
here you are breaching convention as far as Question lime is
concerned?
PM; No. Look, the convention is to treat the standing orders appropriately,
there's where the convention lies, to let the process proceed
appropriately and to not approach it disruptively. Now, as a
Government our record on this Is, I think, very clear. But again,
Question Time is there for the information of honourable Members, it is
not there for these disruptive tactics.
SHaven't you contributed to the mood of Question Time today when the
second question today went from 2.08 to 2.23? It was 15 minutes.
PM: We have an Opposition blocking the revenue measures, the major
revenue measures of a Budget. This Is a matter of high and legitimate
comment, in the House of Representatives at Question Time, and I
chose to make these points and also to quote in a very specific way,
Sir Robert Menzies, on the same subject. Now, the Opposition were
irked at me referring to one of their own, in such precise terms, about a
very similar circumstance of a Government just having been re-elected
with a majority, with a popular mandate, with a contemporaneously
elected Parliament, and these things needed to be said. The
promotion of problems here is the unprincipled tactic of the Opposition.
As I said in the House, John Hewson will try and present himself in two
and a half years time as the Leader of the Coalition and seek a
majority to form a Government in the House of Representatives. But
does he expect to be able to say, I expect any Government that I would
lead to enjoy the passage of financial legislation in the Senate. Now,
he is making it very clear that as far as he is concerned there are no
rules any more about a States House, disruptive to the point of
T5EL.: O ct. 93 17: 32 No. 019 P. 02/ 08 
TEL 5. Oct. 93 17: 32 No. 019 P. 03/ 08
I
3
refusing the passage of major budgetary measures, the financial
legislation of the peoples' House, the House of Representatives.
J: the fact is that the Labor Party has blocked the financial Bills in the
Senate, is that not right?
PM: I have had the Opposition and the Democrats stand up legislation I
piloted through the Parliament as Treasurer time after time after time,
on capital gains tax, on fringe benefits tax, on the abolition of
entertainment as a deduction, one thing after another. And those
things were dealt with in the spirit in a sense that one can never get
complete unanimity of opinion from a Senate. But again, there is a line
beyond which Oppositions don't go. In 1981 a measure of $ 132 million
was refused, $ 132 million compared to $ 3 billion. This is the refusal of
major revenue measures of a. Budget. So let's not for a second try and
diminish what John Hewson is up to. He is in about standing the
conventions of Australian public life on their head. He is into the
conventions I said yesterday with a pick axe.
J: You, by walking out of Question Time, by closing Question Time and
walking out, made your behaviour the issue, rather than the
Oppositions.
PM: I don't think so. By what warped basis of observation would that be
so'? When the place was in mayhem on the Opposition side. Let me
just tell you about conventions. The number of question days
cancelled by the former Government in 1976, for six days, 1977, 7
days, 1978, 7 days, 1979, 5 days, 1980, 1 day, 1981, 4 days, 1982, 7
days. This is not our record. I have seen the Opposition come in,
move censures of Labor Members, to through the night, suspend the
following days Question Time and keep on going. I have been here
long enough to see these things. I remember all these days when the
Opposition, which I served in, was given no Question Time. This was
not our intention, they had a Question Time today which they had
connived in disrupting. And there is no point in Ministers seeking to try
and give an answer with a barrage of hostile abuse coming our way.
And if that is not apparent to you, I think you ought to sharpen your
powers of observation.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well, it is only recently, dare I have the temerity to say, that there is a
bit of focus on the fact that the Opposition is seeking to refuse the
passage of the Budget in the Senate. This has moment, doesn't it? It
has moment, and the points I made today which Sir Robert Menzies
made on that occasion in 1968 were, I thought, pretty much to the
point.
J: ( inaudible) 
TEL: 5. Uct. Y. 5 17: 32 No.
4
PM: Well, again, Ministers have got to give the answers, they are the ones
who have got to try and give the answers in the face of this barrage.
And it may well be that when you are standing looking at this it is not
quite like being there. That is, that trying to keep the structure of an
answer in ones mind and deliver it while this hostility is coming your
way is very difficult indeed.
J-So is Speaker Martin failing to do his job properly?
PM:. He would have had to have dealt with the whole front bench, as it turns
out, to have been able to do that. And of course, that was untenable
for him. They made Question Time today untenable.
J: Is Speaker Martin failing to do his job effectively?
PM: No. The parties in the Parliament have got to comply with the
conventions and decencies in place.
J: You invited Speaker Martin to turn some of them out though?
PM: Because I don't believe that someone should be able to walk up to
take a point of order and then shout. Take a point of order which we
know Is frivolous and has no basis to it, the Leader of the National
Party standing up getting the privilege of a point of order and then
taking a political point. If that sort of tactic continues the way to deal
with them is basically suspend them. But be that as it may, no one
was suspended, but the Opposition decided that they would disrupt the
place anyway. So, they made the Question period untenable.
J. Would you put Question Time off again if they behaved in the same
way?
PM-Of course.
J: Mr Keating, after the Budget when you refused to attend Dr Hewson's
address in reply, the issue to many people in the community became
the fact that you didn't go to his address in reply rather than what he
actually had to say. Aren't you doing the same thing here, you are
making
PM:. Listen, look, get orders of magnitude about you please. This is a man
who connived in the passage of changes in the Senate so that the
Chamber he actually occupies, the peoples house the House of
Representatives cannot pass legislation after the end of October. In
other words, he Is party to the disruption of the smooth passage and
work of the House of Representatives in the Senate. He has joined
with Opposition and Green Senators to pass those procedural motions.
You can't take the prerogatives of the House of Representatives, put 019 P. 04/ 08 
TEL
them asunder that is, disenfranchise the place from doing its
business and then call upon the conventions and expect, in my case,
the Prime Minister to turn up on time and obey all the conventions and
at the other time receive another abusive reply.
You see, Dr Hewson broke the conventions in 1992 of giving an offthe-
cuff abusive Budget reply. It didn't go to the issues, it was simply a
political statement for which he got a lot of kudos in the media. It was
probably on that occasion, at about that time, I decided that there was
no way we would let him maintain himself as a viable Opposition
leader. Can I say I was not about turning up for a repeat of that. The
Government's Budget was delivered analytically, courteously and to be
standing there to take three quarters of an hour of public abuse from a
person who has put asunder the imperatives of the House of
Representatives and its prerogatives in motions of the previous week
in the Senate was basically not to be encouraged.
J: creating an impression that you can dish it out, but not take it?
PM,. Look, I don't think anyone in the great public out there of Australia
thinks I can't dish it out and take it. This is nothing about taking it.
This is about the right of people to have questions asked and to be
heard, Ministers to be heard, and to be able to reply.
J: Mr Keating, before trying to mount the case as you have been doing
aggressively over the last few days, trying to draw attention to what the
Opposition is doing in the Senate, aren't you just distracting people by
your actions today?
PM. No, because what was the action about? I mean what was the
cacophony of noise about? It was the point of objection raised
principally against me about the rights of the House of Representatives
and the government that commands a majority in it to pass its financial
legislation and not for a States House to refuse the passage. Just
remember what is happening here. It is not a review, it is not a
tinkering at the edge, it is the refusal of the passage of major
budgetary measures. Dr Hewson has got to explain how he believes
he can present himself again ii a prospective Prime Minister and
leader of the majority party in the House of Representatives while
expecting, after having disrupted or sought to disrupt this
Government's Budget, expecting the passage of a Coalition
government's financial legislation. What you are seeing here is the
tearing up of nearly a century old convention.
J: part of it at least of what happened today is simply frustration on the
part of the Opposition in having to listen to you abuse them for fifteen
minutes. T5EL.: Oct. 93 17: 32 No. 019 P. 05/ 08 
TEL: 6
PM: I didn't abuse them.
J: Are you saying that in the same circumstances, if the boot was on the
other foot, that the Labor party wouldn't react the same way?
PMV: I don't regard quoting from an article specifically written to the subject
by Sir Robert Menzies as in any way abuse. I reject that term
absolutely. They were not prepared to hear from the founder of their
party such things as he said a Senate Opposition whose party had
been completely defeated at a general election would be in command
of the government of the nation. This would be absurd as a denial of
popular democracy. Inconvenient for John Hewson may be, but
certainly I have got every right as the leader of the Government to
defend not just the Budget, but the conventions.
J: And you don't think that if the Opposition were to quote Chifley at you
for fifteen minutes, that you mightn't get a bit restive too?
PM;-Look, we all quote who we like at each other in this period, but there is
not case you can't make out any case, any respectable case for
Opposition induced mayhem and that is what we saw today.
J: Mr Keating, what is the difference in principle between the Coalition's
decision to try and block that 1.5 per cent of revenues this year and
Labor's decision in 1981 to try and block about 1.4 per cent of
revenues. What is the difference in principle between those two?
PM:. The difference In principle is and I dispute your figures, the difference
in principle is that at no stage did a Labor opposition seek to put
asunder a governments budget. That is what is happening here.
J: ( inaudible)
PM;-Well, do I look under pressure. Even for a navel gazer like you I
wouldn't of thought I looked under pressure.
J Mr Willis said in Sydney this morning that the investment community
was getting increasingly concerned about the Budget's passage
through Parliament and the state of government generally. How do
you think they will feel this afternoon?
PM: Who said this?
J: Mr Willis, this morning.
PM: 1 He told me that he had a number of questions in New York about the
passage of the Government's Budget that people were worried about
it, they saw it as something like a hiatus, something of the United
T5EL.: O ct. 93 17: 32 No. 019 P. 06/ 08 
TEL
States variety. The very point Malcolm Fraser made last week. Look,
there is a real debate here, there is a real decision being made by the
Opposition spiting and smarting under the fact that they lost the last
election to try and wreck the Government's Budget. You have got a
number of conservative people on the conservative side of politics
calling the tactic into question, saying it is unwise primarily Malcolm
Fraser, a former leader of seven years standing as Prime Minister; the
leader of the National Farmers' Federation, a large rural conservative
lobby; Senator Vanstone amongst others and more recently
conservative commentators and a number of editorial writers. This is a
real matter and the notion that it can not be debated in the House of
Representatives without a cacophony of noise and abuse or for it to be
debated is somehow illegitimate is of course, very strange indeed.
J: How would depriving them of Question Time force them to toe the line?
PM: It is not a matter of depriving them of Question Time, it is simply that
there is no point in completing a Question Time with that kind of
mayhem.
J: Well, wthat is an appropriate level..
PM. What is the point of Question lime? It's to give answers and provide
Information and have debate. If in the end it is just disruption and
noise, what is the point?
J: What is an appropriate level of noise for the future then?
PM: That which is not disruptive of the capacity of Question lime to fulfil
that section of the standing orders.
J decide it on the spur?
PM: No, no the Leader of the House and I discussed this in the past and
discussed it again today.
J: Have you spoken to the Speaker?
PM. No, I haven't.
J: If Mr Martin can't control the House, should he be replaced as
Speaker?
PM: You are making the point about not controlling the House. No Speaker
can control the Parliament when one side of the Parliament is set upon
such a course of disruption.
J: Do you think he should name Mr Fischer or Mr Tuckey.. T5EL.: Oct. 93 17: 32 No. 019 P. 07/ 08 
TEL: 5. Oct. 93 17: 32 N6.019 P. 08/ 08
PM: I believe that paints of order which have no point to them and in the
end are disruptive of continuity, if they are persisted with should be
dealt with. I have made that position clear over the years
J: But it is not actually up to you to run the H-ouse is it, it is up to the
Speaker? If he can't control it..
PM: No, but it is up to me to say whether Ministers wish to battle the noise
to try and get an answer out. In the end, after all, Question Time has
to work.
J: discuss this with Mr Beazley prior to Question Time today did you?
PM: No, no at other times. Sometime ago and on the spur of the moment
today.
J: Have you told Steve Martin he has got to be tougher?
PM. No, I haven't spoken to the Speaker. But no Speaker can reasonably
deal with that kind of tactic it is disruptive, but the disruption all
comes from one place a failure to accept the last election result,
smarting over the result, an unwillingness to look at the cause ot the
Liberal and National Parties defeat and now wrecking and stalling
tactics between the House and the Senate and of course, the putting
asunder of the Government's Budget in the States House, at the hands
of the Liberal and National Parties. That is at the root of the problem
between the Houses and today's Question rime.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 109/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME NINISTER, THE RON P. J. KEATING HP
REPORT OF THE REPUBLIC ADVISORY COMM4ITTEE
I met with the Republic Advisory Committee this morning
to receive its report " An Australian Republic the
Options". The report is based on extensive consultations
thoroughout Australia. It is substantial, thorough and
professional and will provide an excellent basis for
public debate.
The report canvasses a number of practical options for an
Australian republic. While recognising that the Issuie is
a complex one, it clearly demonstrates that Australia can
become a republic without changing our current system of
government. As required by the Committee's terms of reference, the
report makes no recommendations.
The Government does not have a timetable for a republic
but it hopes to see a republican structure in place by
the turn of the century. It is essential that pAtnple
have time to consider the issues.
The report is being made available to the public to
provide a factual base for community debate which munt
precede any change, For in the end it will be the people
who decide whether Australia becomes a republic.
The Government will study the report carefully with a
view to developing a considered position on the central
issues. To this end, I propose to establish a small working party
of senior Ministers to consider the issues and develop a
p aper for Cabinet in the first half of next year.
The working party will include Gareth Evans, Kim BeazlAy.
Michael Lavarcht Graham Richardson, Roo Kelly and Frank
Walker. I would like to thank Malcolm Turnbull and his colleagues
on the Committee for the great dedication and energy they
have brought to the task. 
2
The report they have written will provide an invaluable
resource for the people of Australia as we consider the
destiny of our nation.
CANBERRA ACT
October 1993
* The Committee's Report, which is made up of two volumes,
is available, together with a separate overview of the
Report, from outlets of the Commonwealth Government
Bookshop and by mail-order from the Australian Government
Publishing Service on 008 020 049 ( a 24 hour number) or
by fax on ( 06) 295 4888. 


Your Excellency, Mrs Aylwin, Ministcrs and distinguished members of the&nbsp;accompanying party, on behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I extend to&nbsp;you the warmest welcome to Australia.
It is my great pleasure to welcome you, your Excellency, as the first Chilean President&nbsp;to visit Australia. The first, that is, to visit voluntarily, for one of the Iirst two Chileans&nbsp;to arrive in Australia was a former President, General Ramon Freire, who was banished&nbsp;here in 1837 after falling out of favour with the Government of the day.
Not only did you supply us with one of your own leaders of course, you also supplied&nbsp;us with one of ours. For Chile was the birthplace of Australia's first Labor Prime&nbsp;Minister, John Christian Watson.
Prime Minister Watson was born in the Chilean port of Valparaiso, on 9 April 1867&nbsp;and came to Sydney via New Zealand at the age of 19.
This was a period when the flow of people and ideas especially ideas of social reform&nbsp;flowed freely across the Pacific.&nbsp;
And Watson was a reformer.A person, we are told, of graciousness and charm, which won him the affection andadmiration of all who came into contact with him, he was one of the guiding forces inthe establishment of the Labor Party at the federal level.This was an age when people thought of Australia as a working man's paradise as asocial laboratory for the world.
2To commemorate this significant historical relationship between our two countries,President Aylwin has generously donated a plaque to the memory of Prime MinisterWatson. I am pleased to announce that President Aylwin and I jointly unveiled theplaque in the Mecmbers Hall just prior to this luncheon.The plaque will stand as a perpetual symbol of the historic links and friendship betweenthe Australian and Chilean peoples.It is noteworthy that a large contingent of business leaders has accompanied you onthis visit, Mr President, and I am sure that while in Australia they will take theopportunity to discuss mutual trade and investment opportunities.In recent years the Australian economy and the culture of business and industry havebeen dramatically trormned. They are now much more outward looking andincreasingly they look towards Asia and the Pacific.Australian business interest in Chile has expanded substantially over the past decadeand is set to grow further as a result of the stable business and investment climatecreated by your government.Chile is seen by an increasing number of Australian companies as an attractiveinvestment destination and business centre as a country with market orienteddevelopment strategies, iscal and monetary stability and openness to foreign trade andinveStment. With the importance of mining to the Chilean economy, it is not surprising that ourbusiness links to date have been fuelled by the very significant investment whichAustralian companies have in Chile's maining industry.One of the largest is in the Escondida copper mine in Chile where BHP has a 57.5 percent majority shareholding.Overall, Australia is one of the largest foreign investors in Chile with total investmentscurrently valued at $ 704 million.Trade between Australia and Chile has increased at a rate of 34 per cent over the pastdecade. Australian exports to Chile have almost doubled in the past three years upfrom A$ 32 million in 1990 to A$ 62 million in 1992.Chile is now our most important market in Latin America for elaborately transformnedmanufactures. To help thesc ties develop even further, last year Austrade appointed a specialist TradeCommissioner for Mining and Energy. We will shortly appoint a second TradeCommissioner to Santiago.Mr President, each of our countries is pursuing the objective of greater economic andpolitical engagement with the Asia-Pacific, our own region.
Australia regards its relationship with the Asia Pacific region as a matter of the highestpriority, and I know from our discussion that the Chilean Government is equally keento improve its economic and institutional linkages in the region.Today, nearly 60 per cent of Australian exports go to East Asia. Chilean tradestatistics show that in 1992, over 31 per cent of Chilean exports went to Asia. LikeAustralia, Japan is Chile's largest export market.Bloth our Govcrnments continue to pursue trade liberalisation policies with acommitment to export driven growth.Australia is particularly pleased, Mr President, that your government remains steadfastin these policics, despite the domestic pressures for higher protection on agriculturalproducts. As fellow Cairns Group members we both know only too well that this is the onlycourse to follow, despite there being other governments less willing to take the difficultdecisions required in this area.There is no greater trade priority for Australia than a successful conclusion of theUruguay Round by the effective deadline of 15 December.The world stands to gain an immense boost to prosperity and confidence fromconcluding the Round and a great blow to the world trading regime if we allow it toslip from our grasp.I know you shame these sentiments, Mr President.The Cairns Group is, howevcr, but one area in which our two countries co-operate.We also have a long history of co-operation on Antarctic matters.And today Australia and Chile sign two formal agreements as a further measure of ourstrengthening bilateral ties. Th~ e first, an Extradition Treaty, was signed earlier todayby the Attorney-General and the Chilean Foreign Minister. The other, a Memorandumof Understading on plant protection and quarantine, will be signed later today.In addition, our officials have recently agreed to explore the potential for closerscientific and technical cooperation.And I understand that during your visit, Mr President. our officials will be exploringthe possibility of negotiating a double tax agreement and an investment protectionagreement. We believe that both will facilitate the expansion of commercial liksbetween our countries.For business links to expand further, however, we will need to improve direct airservices between our two countries. These are not as good as they could be, and Iknow that much work has been undertaken to seek to improve them. The AustralianGovernment will continue to attach a high priority to concluding an air servicesagreement.
Improved air services between our two countries will not only see business expanid, butit will also make family reunion easier than is currently the case.Ile 1991 Australian census showed that theme am~ over 24,000 Australian residentswho were born in Chile. Around 3,500 of these have been granted refuge from formerundemocratic regimes.In their time here they have been outstanding citizens of Australia.Some are now seeking to return home, and while we wil miss their contribution toAustralia, these returnees testify to the democratic principles and stable environmentcreated by ( he present Chilean governmecnt. Of this, Mr President, I believe you can berightly proud, and it can only further cement the tics between our two countries.Mr President, may I repeat that we welcome you most warmly to Australia.We hope that you enjoy our hospitality, and particularly the hospitality of thoseAustralians of Chilean origin who I know welcome your being here.CANBERRA
6 October 1993
TiEl. LO: ct. 93 14: 48 No. 030


PRIME MINISTER 111/ 93STATEMENT BV THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HION P J KEATJNG, MPMABO NEGOTIATIONSI have spent most of today with Aboriginal Land Council and ATSIC representativesover the Mabo issue.The talks have been positive and constructive from both sides.Encouraging progress was made the original 20 or more outstanding issues betweenthe Commonwealth and Aboriginal representatives have now been narrowed to threeor four.While there has been progress, I remain concerned that two or three of the outstandingmatters are currently incompatible with elements of the position now emerging in theuseful discussions with the States.On these points the Aboriginal leaders have undertaken to provide a detailed writtenresponse as soon as possible.-As I said yesterday, it is the Government's intention to seek passage of theCommonwealth legislation before Christmas this year and to introduce the Bill thismonth. Given the progress made ovcr the past 48 hours it is worth exploring every avenue ofpotential settlement on these outstanding points rather than bring the negotiations to apremature halt.The Cabinet also met this evening and agreed on a number of details arising fromdiscussions between State and Commonwealth officials today.I think it is important to note that some Aboriginal leaders who have tonight madestatements about the Commonwealth's position were not in any of the meetings overthe past 48 hours, and have not accurately reflected the const~ ructive approach of theCommonwealth, nor the significant progress made.CANBE'RRA 7 October, 1993 TEL 8. Oct. 93 8: 12 No. 005 P. 01/ 01


The following text was delivered on behalf of the PrimeMinister by the Hon Ros Kelly, MP, Minister for Sport at thelaunch of Evonne Goolagong's biography " Home The EvonneGoolagong Story" in Sydney today.7 October 1993
TEL PRIME MINISTERSPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,AT THE LAUNCH OF " HOME! THE EVONNE GOOLAGONG STORY,SYDNEY, 7 OCTOBER 1993Its a very great pleasure to be here today to launch this autobiography of agreat Australian.I have to admit that I felt some trepidation about doing so when I read in thebook that Evonne was never too thrilled about politicians she didn't knowmaking a big fuss over her.However, I decided that it was worth the risk to put my regard for the bookand its subject on the record.At the very least we share one thing in common our admiration for theBritish tabloid press and their ability, as Evonne puts it, to provide athoughtful analysis of the situation.Mind you, * Bold and brash, brilliant and boomingm and * the new Miss World'are somewhat kinder than the headlines that I got.But then, I wasn't a 19 year old Aboriginal woman who had just won the firstall Australian final in Wimbledon's * history, in a mere 63 minutes, against agreat defending champion.As Evonne says, those 63 minutes were long enough to change forever thecourse of her life.That life, which In this volume unfolds from the history of her family in theearly part of this century to her present day rediscovery of Australia and herplace in It, makes for compelling reading.With the assistance of Phil Jarratt, It is told in the same way in which weremember Evonne playing tennis with grace and dignity, with flair andexcitement, with imagination.And, most of all, with a sense of purpose and a palpable honesty.7 Oct .93 11 : t 6 No U ILI t
TEL 2Like other books of note, it can be appreciated on a number of levels.You can read it, if you want to, 8$ a fairytale story of a Princess magazinetype of a young girl from the Australian Outback who gets plucked fromobscurity, becomes world famous, finds a handsome prince and lives happilyever after.But that's not a unique story, even among tennis players.And If you were to read it like that, you would be missing out on so much ofwhat this book has to offer.As Evonne relates, she's had and passed up the opportunity to make amovie, because she always felt something was wrong with a Cinderella script.And she passes up that opportunity in this book as well to our lastingbenefit. To quote her, " From 1953 my family lived in a white town, and from 1966 1lived in a white society, but the former didn't make us white, and the latternever made me anything other than what I am a proud Aboriginal woman, aWiradjuri Koori."' Troughout my tennis areer I now realise I stayed close to my Aboriginalroots: from my early days In Sydney through the occasions when I justcould not go on with the tennis tour until I had once again sat with my peopleby the three rivers and felt the cooling breeze of their commonsense., That'sa wonderful phrase!Perhaps the most moving part of the book for me are the chapters dealingwith Evonne's search for her Aboriginal identity on her return to Australia In1991.Where she drives across Battlecamp Range and has to stop and get out ofthe car because the realisation of the Battlecamp massacre of 1873 is socompelling. Where she returns to Wiradjuri country and follows her mother'sfootsteps the Linda lines that take her into parts of the country, and partsof herself, that she had never seen.The story of Evonne Goolagong Cawley can be read, I think, as a story of ourtimes. A story where a young Aboriginal Australian is separated from her ownpeople and adopted by white parents as the best means of getting ahead.Where she excels to the extent that she becomes one of the most popularand admired Australians, but realises, for all her success, that something ismissing from her life. She finds it In her culture and identity. (. UCt I I NO viv r u),, L
T EL: Ot.. 11 : 55 No .0103She always come back to the same starting paint: that her iffe story and herpreoccupation with her Aboriginal ancestry are one and the same. Thatbeing an Australian champion and an Aboriginal Australian are two sides ofthe same coin.There is a message for all Australians in this process of discovery thatEvonne has gone through and written so evocatively about a process thatwas not always joyful and which sometimes involved considerable pain. Aprocess, nevertheless, which had to be followed through rigorously andhonestly. We can all be enriched by understanding and sharing in our culture and byIdentifying with this place Australia. We-. can all be enriched byunderstanding and sharing In Aboriginal culture. And we can all be wiser andbetter Australians by honestly confronting our past and the tragedy ofAboriginal history since white settlement.That Is precisely the goal of reconciliation the process that we are nowgoing through.Reading Evonne's book provides a good dose of inspiration to carry on withit. And so too do encouraging signs from other areas.I want to say in passing how Impressed I was with the AFL's decision tohighlight the contribution of Australia's indigenous people to both our nationalculture and to football at this years grand final in Melbourne. It was clearlyreceived with enormous enthusiasm by the crowd.You have no doubt realised by now that I don't have a lot to say about thehistory of Evonne's tennis career or Its many highlights.Of course, I don't need to. Her deeds on the court are the stuff of legend,and her place In the history of tennis is secure. To have seen her play, evenon television, Is something I am sure no-one would be able to forget.No tedious two fisted backhand, no interminable baseline rallies, and a sweetsilence when she hit the ball. It Is perhaps an overused phrase, but she wasgrace personifiled when she played.People will remember Evonne for this, and they will remember that forEvonne, perhaps more than any other player, tennis was above all else, agame. I should conclude by saying that one thing In the book which impressed megreatly was the amount of space that Evonne devotes to winning her twoWimbledon titles less than a dozen pages in a total of four hundred.
ILL: (.-UCt .' 1z 1 1 r ci u r4That, apart from a true reflection of her modesty, seems to be also areflection of the fullness and richness of her life.Of this book we can say, as her father Kenny Goolagong did on the occasionof her first Wimbledon win, " Beaut, just Beaut".To which we can surely add Read it, just read itl"Thank you.



TEL: 11. Oct. 93 8: 29 N0. OO1, P. 0J4llU
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING THE ADVANCED MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGIES CENTRE
EAST PERTH COLLEGE OF TAFE
PERTH WA
I am very pleased to be here this morning to open the Advanced Manufacturing
Technologies Centre.
The objective of this Centre is to provide Western Australia with a world class
vocational education and training centre one which will respond to the needs of
industry and which will facilitate this State's value added export oriented
industries. This is an ambitious objective.
It is particularly ambitious because vocational education is still, to some extent,
the " Cinderella" of the educational system, lacking the resources and prestige of
the universities, and often acting as an add-on to a generalist school-level
education. The roots of this neglect are deep, and go back to the nineteenth century. As
one eminent person said then,
universities were institutions designed * to instruct the youth of the colony in the
higher branches of education" whereas technical education existed " to instruct
the working classes in their particular business'.
This dismissal of vocational education, which sadly persists in some quarters,
has cost Australia dearly.
It has caused vocational education to become a second-best option for both
students and governments. 
TEL: 11. Uct. 93 6:' J ru. UUF..)/ 1V
2
Over the last 40 years one working lifetime the number of students at
university has increased more than eighteen fold while the number of students in
vocational education has risen by well under a third of that figure.
As a result, the Australian vocational preparatioii system in the early 1980S was
the second smallest in the OECD we had only one 16 or 17 year old in five In a
program, compared with seven In ten in some ccountries, and an OECD average
of one in two.
Not a great performance, you will agree.
And it is not as if students have been going to university instead. Less than one
third of students actually go directly to universitY.
The sad and alarming fact is that almost a quarler of students are seeking to go
directly into work without having undertaken gn4 vocational study.
It is these students who are most at risk of long.-term unemployment and who,
when they get work, will be trapped in low skilled jobs.
Jobs which will inevitably disappear with the inoxorable advance of technology.
I think that no-one would disagree that we haVE1 an obligation through our
education system to prepare young Australians for life and for the future.
We must create an education system that serve~ s individual needs, and by doing
so, serves the interests of Australia.
In the new world that our children are now inheriting, the nation's wealth will
depend more and more on the skills of our worldorce.
That is -precisely why the Commonwealth Government, in partnership with State
and Territory Governments, Is committed to expanding TAFE and enhancing its
prestige. It is why, in July 1992, we reached an historic agreement to establish a new
national vocational education and training syst!, m.
And a new Australian National Training Authority ( ANTA).
ANTA, which Is due to come into operation on. 1 January next year, will oversee
the growth and reform of the vocational trainln!) sector, and ensure that its
programs better meet the needs and priorities of industry. We will add to our
current outlays $ 720 million in growth funds for this purpose. 
TEL: 11. Uct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 06/ 10
3
In this sense, it is a first for Australia. It will bring together government, industry
and training providers to form a national vocational educational training system
with agreed objectives and priorities, assured funding arrangements, and
consistent national strategies.
ANTA will work towards closer interaction between industry and vocational
education and training providers, and will also improve the links between
schools, higher education and vocationai educat~ ion and training.
This is long overdue.
The same can be said for centres such as these.
Manufacturing Is one of the main wealth creating sectors in developed,
economically vibrant economies.
It is also one of the fastest growing segments of world trade, with significant
growth In high value-added goods.
Australia has taken the opportunity to increase Its share of this international
market.
There Is no doubt that we have made dramatic advances in recent years.
Achievements which surprise many Australians when they become aware of
them. In the last three years the volume of manufacturied exports has grown by nearly
two-thirds.
Exports of elaborately transformed manufactures have risen by 217 per cent
over the last decade.
And between 1983 and 1991 research and development personnel in Australian
industry experienced the second fastest growth among industrialised countries.
But there Is little scope to rest on our laurels.
We need to proceed apace with the improvement of the overall competitiveness
of our manufacturing sector and we can do so b~ y the development and use of
advanced manufacturing technologies, or AMT.
Centres such as this one will facilitate the increased adoption of AMT by
ensuring a supply of well trained manufacturing ':. echnologists who have a broad
range of appropriate skills rather than narrow trede-based training. 
TEL: 11. Oct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 07/ 10
01 4
They can be at the cutting edge of Australia's international export strategy. And
they need to be tor the Science and Engineering Council found last year that
the level of adoption of AMT by Australian manufacturing industry Is uneven and
generally lagging behind that in competitor nations.
This Centre will make a valuable contribution to assisting Western Australian
industry to take up and use advanced manufacturIng technology, and thereby
enhance the competitiveness of Australian manufacturing in general.
It will also raise the profile of vocational educatioin, and prove that TAFE is
meeting the challenges of the 1990s.
And there is no doubt that TAFE is doing so.
The results of the survey of TAFE students relef ised earlier this week, which
-shows that 87 per cent of students were satisfied with their courses, indicates
that TAFE Is doing a good job.
But we need to Improve it further, and let people know how good it really is.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to open the Australian Manufacturing
Technologies Centre. I congratulate all concerned with the building of the
Centre and wish students and staff all the best for the future.
PERTH 9 October 1993 



I I
PRIME MINIS11TER
TRANSCItIPT OF PJNTERVIEW WITH PRIME MNJSTER, THlE HON. P J
KEATING, XM?, PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRAL EA
SATURDAY 9 OCTOBER, 1993
3: Prime Ministe, Mir Court said ther was nio pro~ ress. Do you agree with tha?
PM: Well, It was a reasonably convivial discussion that we had, and I ffhink tha t it
certainly bad a very friendly and cooperative towb,. But the ' Premier has this view
that much of Western Australia will fall to native title that much of Wes1ezn
Australias area will b6 native title. Well, that ma~ y in the end be true. That's a matter
that was decided by the High Court of Austraia not by me. The question I put to
him then, is, '" Which way ma you bring certain* y for the people of Wes= er Aumtnlia.
for the economic use of this land?" I say only via our legislation. The
Commonwealth is the only authority which is go ing to legislate with an eye to the
twin objectives of social justice for Aboriginals and a proper system of land
manapucmnt for srates. Anid econorric use for slates.
And, I explainied to him that tde economic use part of the bill is exclusively
dominated by the stars. Theme is no Commonwealt tribunal there. Its the Mining
Board and it's courts reconfigured but still there and there is an over-ride by
state, minism r. So, I said to im " Where. else ame you going to get this sort of
certainty if ites not frorm u3, where?". And he says. " Well, I don't like the Hligh
Court decision." WeIl you know, I don't think ihe nation is going to overtur the
High Cow~ r decision.
Y: So you're saying hes not facing the fact4, then?
PM: WelL, he says that state land mranagemnent should be left to stte ministers. Well, this
has been. by and large, true state ministers miking grdnts of interest over Crown
land. Bat a lot of the Crown land will now beccmne native title land a proportion
of it will become native title land because the High Court has said there is a native
title in the common law. Now, I don~ t know wl. a you do about that.
PM: Do you think he understands that or do you think he's playing local politics?
Canberra bashing has always gone downi well over hert.
PM: Well, if he understands the point I don't think he~ accepts the point that the Hligh
Court has made a seminal decision here. And What rye been tryin to do with the
states all of them, including West= r Ausuralia is to sit down and say let's get a
11. Oct. 93 8: 29 NNo. 0. 001 P.. 8018/ 10 
TEL
regime together here that works for the country, works, for the whole nation. So the
Aboriginal people feel they've got a stake bi it but by the samie token it doesn't gum
up the workcs in terms of economnic develpment. Now, the Bill is a good Bill. Its a
fair and offective piece of draft law. And I asked ii if he wanted an outline of the
draft bill and he said yes and rye undertaken to let him have that. And Icnrainly
hope that when he goes through it he will mee that the Comnmonwealth has done Vl it
can reasonably do to make this a workable systerr of land mainalernent while at the
surie tirm trying to handle the very reasonable aspirations of Aboriginal people for
justice,
1: Whai about these claims that he's beon shut out ol negotiations? Wes been saying
that for a couplc of weeks.
PM: Theme are all matters of choice on Western Austrulia's part. T mean, obviously, the
Cornrnonwealth isn't going to shut anyone out of -these negotiations. We'll talk to the
Aboriginal conumunity, we'll talk to the states. A'id T certainly welcome him in that.
And I hope that he takes the position that the othcr Coalition premiers have taken.
Now, I think he says, " Well they don't have our problern." But ' ours' is a national
problemn.
P: So you're still poles apart then, aren't you?
PM: Well, I don't know whether the Pzmniier is poles a part with me as inuch as lhe is poles
apart with the Eligh Court I think thats the probhl. b
J1: So thores no way you can depend on Richard Co-at for any kind of national solution
on this?
PM: weUi, I didn't comne here today expecting him to SILty, " well, rm giving your Bill a
tick." But, I did expect a serious and proper conlrersation, you know, " n that's what
rye had with him. The public interest demands that heads of government get on with
Setting things worked OUL And that's what we sought to do here today.
3: Can you understad why Wes= er Australian Abcriginals would be very, very
doubtful about having state based tribunals given the attitude of the state government
towards the igh Court decision?
PM; WeUj, this is a nation wide view of Aboriginal pecple against states generally. And
that's why the Comrmonwealth, in its outline, has tried to cover off all those nice
balances between Aboriginal interests legitimate aspirations and interests of
Aboriginal people and the very clear-interest th~ e states have in land management.
It's a nice It seeks to reah a nice balance and T think we've largely achieved that.
J: Where do you stand on the suspension of the Racial Discimination Act?
PM: The Bill will be consistent with the Racial Discrimination Act
On another matter, Archbishop Turn wants the Australian Governent and industry
to invest in South Africa. What's your reaction to that call. T1EL1: . Oct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 09/ 10 
TEL: 11. Oct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 10/ 10
3 0-
PM: We14 I think that as South Afica resolves its economic difficulies as ifs clear that
them is a stablc political basis to the managmeitt, of the couny I don't think the calls
will be necessary. I think youll see investment flow from various parts of the world
The conomic sanctions have been lifted now. ' Ibas the key point
Ends&amp; 



11. Oct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 01/ 10
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH TIE PR[ ME MMSTER, THE EON.
P. J. KEATING, MP.
PERT WESTERN AUSTRALIA
SUNDAY 10 OCTOBER, 1993
J: Mr Keatin&amp; do you think your isiz to West= ui Australia has achieved
anythilic
PM; I think so. I think, amoWt other thin&amp; i I bad a chance to talk to the public and
to talk to my own Party last night at a very large fncdon, and to run rough
the big issue. I had a ' ezy good talk to Carmn LAwrence as well as the
Premier and so, I think it has been wothwble. I also bad the pleasure this
morting of being involved with the Royal Flyiig Doctor appeal
On otto of the major issues between us that I si! oke to Premier Court about
yesterday we should correct the impression in Western Agauab that this is a
matter between the Cozmnonwealth Gvonvxwtnt and the State Govenunen;
that this is a maner which the Comtnwealth Governmenw is ying to push
onto the State Government. Thau is not so. Ttis is a matter of mstalihn law.
This is a matter of the High Court of Autrali dcidin8 that thee is a native title
in the common law. And the Western Aura! ian Government has got to come
to tmswith dat Thve gotd toe d de wbal: 1hey want to do about that.
We're saying that what we have is a scheme, te best possible scheme to deal
with it And tostay out of it sirmly mea u grt eat uctainty would obtain
in Western Australia. So, this is notia soxt of igassic Commonwealth/ Stue
matter of Perth verua Canberm This is Paet versus the igh Co4IT of
Austraa. This is what this is and I think all Weiten Australians should
ndersmand this. That the problems that c= ariSe from this because of the Sawe
Govenmentrs iansienee with the Ibh Crnt decision with the dccision of
the highest court in our land. Now what Im trying to do is to fnd a solution for
verybody in tha decision. And it's not Canbffm seeking to impose anmhing
an the State, but the State in avmyu4eal way not recognisiig die
supremracy and prniacy of the High Court of Australia.
I: Inaudible.. 
TEL 2
PM: Wel4 I di inre Praier knows that hcan go onaboftand nojoinxthe
Commonwealth and other states in this remember there are othe Coalition
govmrments involved in ts, these discussions. He can not join them but how
does he resolve the problem for Western Australian people? How does he
resolv the problem for the Western Austaia ri~ itin industry, the W4: stcn
Australian pastoral industry, for the Western Aiztraian Ab~ original co! munity,
for the Western Australian people? I mean, tis is somethng I have arrived
here saying " Look Permier, I have a scheme hetea which I think will work for
you here, well. Now, why don't you sit down orid talk to us about this scheme?
But if you don't want to talk at all, the Froh Court's decision is going to stand.
But what would happen is there would be nio ceitainty of title for the big mining
operations some of them aud for pastoral ltases arid it is up to the Premier
to get a soluton.
MrC1 ourt sems to think though. that ther could be a High Court challenge to
your legislation. He has not riled tha out this mlomni&amp;
PM: Yes. but the 9i4h Court is not going to challenge its own decision.
1: On Land administration on the States right.
PM! This is not a matter of States rights. This is a matter of the rogts of Aboriginal
people who are Zvennativetifle inthe common law. This is therghrt of
Abofignal people im thii country who our highv,; cowlt has * ven a nativ ttl
inthe connonaw and no appeal othe Ith C,) isgoing to get ovcr that
principal fact. Now, whatwve wil tyand do isI. gislatea scheme that ataf
makes it work. It has become very bard going comning over to a state sTaIg
" Look here we are to help yoo. Here is the Cozamonwealth, government and
other states with a scheme to help you out of the hole you are and the state
saYiIIg " No. no, we don't want to be he~ pe&amp; We; will take mayhem instead."
There miust be a scheme of arrangement for Wc-aen Australia or otherwise,
Aborigina people will just take their land claims to the High Court.
J: Has anythng changed as a result of your weeken d visit here?
PM: WelI dre Premierknow ft besa g ot dIoea l wi he national
goverment. That this idea that it is sort of Wes tern Australia versus the rest of
Austa. ia not just Canberra but every other State -reafly is not very
tenabhle,
J: But Mr Court argues that Western Australia is the s= at most affocted by this
decision and tft it really doesn't malter int other states like Virton; A.
TiEiL:. Oct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 02/ lU 
TEL: 1I. Oct. 93 8: 29 No. 001 P. 03/ 10
3
PA; It will matter less in Victoia but it MUl matter gratly in Queensland. It wMl
matter substantiafly in South Australia. It is not a matter of whether the High
Coutt under our Contitution enjoys sovureignty in these matters. it Ias decided
there Is a natie tifle in the commoni law. If Abo riginal people cAn mount a
native title clam. on land which is now Crowni lAd that land will become native
tite land.
Now, there is nothfing that the Premier can do atbout that other than to work out
how he wishes to run the state. It is no good sa5i4 " We are affected more." It
is not a matter of who is affected more. It is a ftatter of whether the decision is
right; and whether tho-th ' Jm1a AyVm1-t1A a Tt ink itil
the fight decision, so now an! or us Piave got to nmaie it wontK im not me r tr y
and push something down t Premies nieck I am invitin him into a scheme
of arrangement which is good for Western AustialiA, good for Australimn
generally.
J: Do you find M~ r Courfs position ftustrating?
PM; 1 Whnk that you can run this argument for Ion enough., that this is a matter for
the people of Perth and Western Australia versus, the rest of Au~ tra~ ia. Unti the
people of Perth and Western Australia understand that the Prcemier is running
Them up a blind alley, that there is a Hig Court Jecision and it is the law of % he
land all this land including Western Australia and it has to be dealt with.
And the onlcheeodeal w it isthe onewichs in the hands of the
federal government.
J: Are you disappointed that some of the Abongic s you met with~ yesterday ane
sayn that the meeting acieved nothing?
IM: If you get ten Aboriginal people together and say what was thc outcome of the
meeting you will get ten different anwers most likely. And you wil never get
unanimnity. But, again, there is I think a much be ttr understanding and some
very positive responses to the discussions I had. I don't know that a lot of
Aborigina people particularly from the outstations really understand what Mabo,
means to thein and when they have tho opportumity of talking to somebody lie
me and have it explained to them some things become more clear. Now the
Aboriginal community has got its professional, cynics thc same as the non
Aboriginal community but so wbat
Ends 



PRIME mMIIER 112/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MESSAGE TO MR ANDREAS PAPANDREOU
I have today sent the following message to Mr Andreas Papandreou following
his victory In the Greek elections:
On behalf of the Australian Government and people I would like to
pass on my warm congratulations on your 32lectiofl as Prime Minister of
the Hellenic Republic.
The traditionally good relationship tetween our countries is
strengthened by the large community of Australians of Greek descent
who form an integral part of Australia's multicultural society. I look
forward to working with you during your term as Prime Minister to build
on the solid foundation of relations betwee~ n Australia and Greece.
CANBERRA 11 October 1993 



TEL: 11. OCt .9-6 1(: 12 NO. U4.1 r v
PRIME MINIISTER 113/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TMHE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRIME MINISTER'S ATTENDANCE AT COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT MEETING AND VISIT TO INDONESIA
20-20 OCTOBER 1993
I will1 be attending the Commonwealth Head.,; of Government Meeting to be
held in Limassol, Cyprus, from 21 -25 October.
Australia values its membership of the Commonwealth, and I look forward to
joining colleagues from around fifty countries for discussions on a wide range
Of Political and economic issues.
I also look forward to meeting individually w~ th a number of Commonwealth
leaders, particularly from Australia's region.
With President Soeharto's agreement, I will also be making a short visit to
Indonesia from 26-28 October. Since my visiit to Jakarta in April last year,
good progress has been made In the development of our already extensive
-bilateral relationship with Indonesia, including the first meeting of the
Austral ia-indonesia Ministerial Forum in Novemiber 1992.
My meeting with President Soeharto will provide a timely opportunity both to
take stock of this progress and to discuss a number of important regional
issues. I will be particularly interested to disc'liss developments in APEC with
President Soeharto before the November ARP-C Leaders' Economic Meeting
in Seattle, to which we have both been invite~ d, and before Indonesia takes
over as chair of APEC in 1994.
CANBERRA 11 October 1993 



PRIME MINISTIER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 14 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
This morning I met with Aboriginal leaders and oul: lined the Government's
position on the core principles which are informing the Government's
proposed legislation on Mabo and its response to the High Court decision.
Over the past few days I have also discussed in general terms the
Governments approach with other major groups, including mining interests
and the States. And as a consequence I will be taking the proposals to
Cabinet on Monday. The central requirement in thi-i is as always, as it has
always been, and that is to find a balance, not a compromise of the spirit and
substance of the High Court judgement, which was lo recognise Native Title
and address the historic and continuing injustice experienced by Aboriginal
Australians, yet equally not a compromise which ignores contemporary
realities and the rights, interest and attachment to this land shared by all
Australians. We need legislation which strikes a balance, which takes account of
Australia's past and Australia's potential. When the Commonwealth
Government entered the Mabo discussions it was with a conviction that the
vast majority of Australians want a country which is both prosperous and just.
A year later I am all the more convinced and I am confident that we are about
to deliver legislation consistent with that ambition.
The principles I will be taking to the Cabinet on Monday will largely mirror the
detailed outline the Government made available on 2 September. Following
Cabinet the drafting of the Bill will then proceed. I am not in a position to
provide details now, but on the key issues let me say this, the processes of
the Bill will be consistent with the Racial Discrimination Act, existing grants of
interest will be validated and be secure, and the States and Territories will
continue to have the capacity to manage the land if they meet the standards
of the Commonwealth Bill. In other words, not only a just outcome for
Aboriginal interests, but one which recognises the role of the States in land
management and economic certainty. All major interest groups in the course
of these discussions made concessions, all have ultimately recognised the
great significance of the issues involved and that they demand a national
response. We are looking for solutions to the problems which have beset
them for 200 years, that is the Aboriginal people of Ihis country, and continue 
to beset them. No legislation will alone be the solution, nor will any one
interest be completely happy. This of course, none of us believed was ever
possible. But the proposed legislation will lay the basis for solutions to be
developed and above all for creating the essential environment of
cooperation and good will on which progress towards all our goals will
ultimately depend.
I am happy to take questions from you.
J: Prime Minister, to what extent will Native Title be extinguished under
this new arrangement?
PM: No more or less extent than under the outline of the Bill.
J . of where all titles, except mining titles, would have extinguished
Native Title, will that situation prevail?
PM: You will have to wait until you see the outline again. But the thing is
no more or less than was outlined in the outline.
J: Prime Minister, how would you characterise your discussions with the
Aborigines today?
PM: Well I thought they were very fruitful, that is fruitful in terms of the
attitude of the Aboriginal representatives to the points, they had sent
me a collation of their points of agreement or disagreement on some of
the measures. I had been over those in the last couple of days and
was able to then handle those points off one at a time through a fairly
substantial checklist. Now, we are going back tomorrow to have a
further discussion, tomorrow morning some time I think, just to finalise
some of the points we really didn.' t have time to finalise today.
J the situation on Friday, and the situation now?
PMVI Well in terms of the substance I think the Racial Discrimination Act,
that is the Government's clarity about the fact that we can have, if you
like, even greater certainty of titles down the route we are heading,
while embracing the Racial Discrimination Act rather than overriding it,
that is the key point. The other points of substance, there are other
points of substance, one is that we are going to give them the right to
select jurisdictions between the Federal Court and the State Courts for
the hearing of Native Title, but not for the economic use of Native Title
land, that will remain exclusively with the States. And beyond that
there are changes, but the general thrust of the Bill is as of last week,
beyond those couple of core issues. Now, it depends what you call
core, obviously Aboriginal people might have a different view of some
of these points, but I think what I call core issues they are probably two
of the three or four main points, and there are other points. But there
is a very clear intention on the part of the Government in the Bill that
questions of economic land use and the efficiency of decision making 
in this area be that which is left to the primacy of the States as they are
now, as it is now with land management. But Aboriginal people want
protections in respect of Native Title and the preservation of Native
Title and they don't want to see any opportunities for any State to
override Native Title and hence their con.: ern about the Racial
Discrimination Act, a concern which we have rret.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: No, only cooperating States. So, if a State doesn't establish the
mechanisms in this Bill and reflect that in the State, then the
designated tribunals to operate in a non-cooperating State will be
exclusively the Commonwealth Tribunals for the land, that is for Native
Title and land use. But if a State is a complying State and they fashion
their processes instrumentalities, their tribunals in accordance with the
law as drafted in this Bill, well then they will have the prerogative over
land management. Now, Western Australia, in my view, would be
advised to become a cooperating State, in which case their tribunals
will determine the economic use questions, ' 3ut only in terms of the
outline laid down in this Commonwealth Bill.
J: Mr Keating, explain how you have been able to reach the Aboriginal
negotiators, that you can deal with their concens about the RDA. How
have you been able to give greater certainty to title without overriding
the RDA?
PM: Well that's our advice, that the title is entirely certain under the
methodology which the Government has now proposed. What the
Racial Discrimination Act is, is an act against discrimination against
peoples of a class or race. But it has a provision in it where one can
discriminate in favour of peoples in a class or race so as to bring them
up to a level of equality of opportunity with the rest of the population or
community. These are called the special measure provisions. Now, I
told the Cabinet two weeks ago that we were in the course of
examining the special measure provisions and we have been, but of
course we are also in discussion at the same time with the States
trying to agree words on the Racial Discrimination Act. Now, we came
to the view late last week that the words the States wished us to agree
were too broad, that they not only would hava permitted the validation
of past grants but may also have opened up Ihe option of States being
able to do things prospectively without the sanction of the Racial
Discrimination Act. Now, as a consequence of that it was a matter of
us deciding how we could embrace the RDA, how we could embrace it,
and at the same time validate. No doubt you will have heard some
views about advices and things about the special measures and how
they might work. Well they are not the special measures and the
approach is not, as many people have spoken about it, it is the special
measure provisions of the Racial Discrimination Act but cast in a
different way, but in a way which would work. 
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Look, Tom ( Burton) 1 don't want to go through the whole Bill. Look, I
don't want to obfuscate about it, but I am not here either to be
shadowing the Parliamentary draftsman. There has to be a group of
measures which are in fact special in their variety which undoubtedly
taken as a group advance the interest of persons within a class or
race.
J: Can you describe some of them?
PM. Well I can. They are basically the access to tribunals to hear and
award native title and by the facilitation of that process, the nonextinguishment
of native title, the extinguishment of native title which
would otherwise go on with land grants in the interim. In other words,
if these matters were heard in the courts then States would just go on
routinely issuing grants of interests over native title and extinguishing
hand over fist.
So the tribunals, the choice of jurisdictions between the Federal court
and the State Supreme court streams for the hearing of native title; the
iright to negotiate over land; that is a real right of negotiation followed
by a tribunal arbitral process which the Bill provides; the condition of
just terms for extinguishment of native title, that is a Commonwealth
Constitutional requirement which we will require the States to meet,
even though they are not required to meet it; protections beyond the
common law; the designation and funding of particular Aboriginal
organisations which have been the empowerment through which the
empowerment of Aboriginal people has generally come and a package
of measures which also deal with extending opportunity to those
Aboriginal people unable or unlikely to be advantaged by the Mabo
decision as a result of their dispossession. I am talking of such things
as a major land fund which would go on to a revolving fund which
would go on buying land for time in memoriam.
All of those things amount to and can I say many other elements to
that, but I mean this is in the broad, all of these things amount to a
series of special measures which are no doubt there for the
advancement of Aboriginal people.
J: When you talk about the rights to negotiate in relation to land under
those special measures, are you talking about negotiating over land on
which there are other grants already issued and are you going to allow
at the end of it that that's the retrospective procedure of fairness?
PM Look, I'm not into
J, You said on Friday.. 
PM: I know what I said to you and you asked ma a whole lot Of legal
questions at the last press conference.
J: But, you said on Friday that there would be..
PM: I am not going to oblige you now any more than I was then.
J: Prime Minister, does this mean that native Aile will coexist with all
other forms of title except freehold title that is, not be extinguished?
PM: You will have to wait until you see the Bill again, but the general thread
of the legislation as you saw it in the presentation, this is the point I
make to you and the presentation will still be there,
J: Prime Minister, do you stand by your statement of 17 June, where you
said " where freehold or leasehold has been dispensed in the past the
High Court has held that the native title has been extinguished". Do
you stand by that statement now?
PM. No, what do you mean stand by the statemente
J: Well, you made the statement.
PM: It is not a statement, it is a description of what : he High Court said.
J: Do you still agree with that description, you gave it?
PM: That is the extremity of the High Court's power. The High Court's
judgement said to take these principles to their logical end point, a
valid grant of these varieties extinguishes niative title. But we are
saying in our Bill, we give the Aboriginal people if you like, a legislative
advantage over that over the common law position by protecting
native title where it would otherwise be extinguished.
J1 So it is not going to be extinguished?
PM: Again, Peter ( Gill) please don't try on me tricky questions and tricky
points. Please. Do me at least the favour of understanding exactly..
me understanding exactly what you are about
J ( inaudible)
PM: Please don't be any certainty will come with the Bill not with your
column, dear fellow. Now, I know you are all entitled to have a big
head about your columns but, the fact is arid no doubt you are well
read. But, you may not be as well informed a~ s you are well read. Let
me just make this point to you. The High Court has said in its decision
that the valid issue of a grant or interest in land over freehold or
leasehold title can extinguish native title. The question is, should it
extinguish native title? Do you understanci? That is point I made. 
Should it extinguish native title? And we are saying in some cases.
yes, and in some cases, no. And that is in the outline on 2
September.
J: ( inaudible) on Friday you talked about setting up a system of
tribunals around the country to determine these issues.
PM. Sorry Amanda ( Buckley) I wasn't quite with you.
J: I was just trying to work out what part these tribunals you mentioned
just before in your list of points, what part they play?
PMV: Let me explain to you. The Aboriginal community can trot along to the
High Court and mount land claims. Now, this will be a cumbersome,
time consuming process and while it is happening States will be
issuing land grants and extinguishing native title. So we want a
process which is fair, expeditious, and where there is certainty. So we
will set up a tribunal to hear and award native title. That will be a
branch of the courts of the States the Supreme Courts most likely or
the Federal Court of Australia. This will obviate the need to trot land
claims along to the High Court or to the Federal Court.
J: So you are calling these tribunals, but they are in fact of the court
system?
PMV. They are courts. But then parallel to that there is a tribunal. This was
all revealed in the outline of 2 September. What the tribunal says, the
tribunals are there for having had native title awarded and someone
wants an economic use over it, be it mining or pasture or tourism or
what have you, those tribunals then will sit in an arbitral judgement
upon them in the event that the proponent of the economic use doesn't
get to a point of agreement with the native title holder. So, there is a
process of notification, a process of consultation; 2 process of
negotiation:, and in the event that fails a process of arbitration. That
will happen in the economic use tribunals which will be set up only in
the states not in the Commonwealth jurisdiction. But there will be a
Commonwealth tribunal for Commonwealth lands that is the ACT and
Jervis Bay etc. But that same tribunal will apply in a State that doesn't
comply
J: Western Australia.
PM-Well, any State.
J-Prime Minister, what is going to be the cut off date for validating
leases?'
PMV: That is a matter for negotiation. It is more likely to be the end of the
year, end of this year. 
I Prime Minister, are you telling us that you aire finally arrived at a
position that you believe settles, as far as possible, the concerns of the
Aborigines and your concerns the concerns of the Commonwealth
Government?
PM: I What I have done here today is to meet the Aboriginal people, to take
on board their comments on the draft and their points of objection to
see whether we could meet them and where wi) could meet them, say
so, where not say so, say why and indicate to them that we will be
presenting a Bill that has the following featues outlined to them
saying we hope you can support this Bill. We believe that this Bill
covers off the twin objectives of equity and justice for Aboriginal people
and provides a workable system of land management for the economy
and society. That draft outline which I will now take to Cabinet,
Cabinet will consider and when Cabinet has completed its
consideration, we'll then go to drafting. We will then introduce it.
J: Are you confident the Aborigines..
PM. I am confident that the Bill is everything I say it is and that it can pass
through both Houses of this Parliament.
J: Do you think you might introduce the Bill this waek in Parliament, next
week in Parliament?
PM: No, the Bill is weeks and weeks away. The Elill is weeks away, the
drafting of it it is a huge, mammoth drafting. Trhis is a major piece of
law, this is a major drafting task and because even if one changes
some of these obviously for some of the sections they will remain
largely unchanged and drafted as of now. But because many of things
are changing and will have then consequential impacts upon other
sections of the Bill it really requires each time you change this Bill in
anything other than a marginal way, it means that the whole outline is
essentially re-drafted.
J: Where are the States now in terms of the changes that you have made
to this legislation?
PM: I have spoken to State Premiers over the last couple of days and last
week about this. I think they want in the end to be able to sensibly
manage land. I think they want a national system and when we get
down to a finer drafting and they can see that draft I think they will be
convinced of the fact that this is a fair and de.-ent piece of law from
which ever direction it is viewed. This may not be the view of some
States who have now not been in the process of negotiations to date,
but that I hope, is where they will end up.
J* Prime Minister, in the broad can you just tell us what form of
entitlement will and wont be extinguished by nalive title? 
PM: I'd just send you back to the outline Glenn ( Milne). I told you before
and you will have to wait to see in which way the outline has changed.
But by and large it will be pretty much as the outline.
J: So Prime Minister, this is the Government's final word on this package
that you taking to Cabinet on Monday, there is no hope for any of the
PM. Once it goes through the Cabinet it will be into drafting.
J: Would it be right to say that up until last week you thought you would
get the Federal Opposition on side eventually and then realising that
they weren't going to come on side you made these changes?
P M: I think Mr Reith's appointment was there to spike the passage of the
Bill. And he has made that pretty clear hasn't he.
J: So that is the reason for the change is it?
PM: No, the fact is we have the amenity within the Commonwealth
Parliament in terms of its Constitutional power to establish all of these
procedures. We want to do this co-operatively with the States, we
need them to make land management work. But we also need their
support for it I think. We would like their support for it. That didn't shift
the West Australian Premiers position I might add and it hasn't shifted
the Federal Opposition's position as far as I understand.
J. Would you recall Parliament if necessary to ensure the legislation is
passed?
PM: I don't think there is any need to..
J: In your advice, is there any question that the Commonwealth's
constitutional powers to deal with laws affecting race override the
States constitutional powers on land management?
PM. I I am not here to be giving you legal opinions, but we have a clear
power under the race power of 1967 and we have also powers in
relation to the external affairs and the convention. The Commonwealth
has got adequate constitutional power here.
J: You don't think this could be challenged?
PM. That's up to you you ring around the Premiers and their advisers and
see what they say, 



15/ 10 ' 93 09: 02 ' 006 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE ] 001
PRIME MINISTER 114/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
APEC BUSINESS CONSULTATIVE PANEL
I am very much looking forward to participating in the informal APEC Leaders
Economic Conference to be hosted by President Clinton in Seattle on
November.
The meeting represents a historic opportunity for the Asia-Pacific region. It
will build on the increasing economic integration o6 the APEC economies and
give expression to the growing sense of community in our region as well as
focusing the world's attention on the dynamism of Asia.
The active participation of the private sectors of the APEC economies
including Australian business is integral to the success of APEC's further
development. Governments can show the way and create the right conditions
for the development of trade and investment. Ultimately, it is for business to
export and invest.
SI regard it. as essential, in the lead-up to such a significant event, to hear the
views of Australian business about the way ahead for APEC.
I have therefore decided to establish an APEC Business Consultative Panel
which I will chair to assist me in preparing for the November Leaders
meeting. I have invited the following senior Australian business people to
participate in the Panel:
Mr Rodney Adler ( Chief Executive Officer, FAI Insurance)
Mr Frank Blount ( Chief Executive Officer, AOTC)
. Mr Philip Bass-( Managing-DireGor, Pacific Dunlop)
Mr Robert Ferguson ( Joint Managing Director, Bankers Trust)
Mr Bill Ferris ( Executive Chairman, Australian Mezzanine Investments)
Mr Brian Finn ( Chairman and Chief Executive, IFIM Australia)
Mrs Janet Holmes a Court ( Chairman, Heytesbury Holdings)
Mr David Murray ( Managing Director, Commonwealth Bank of Australia)
Mr Michael Nugent ( Chief Executive Officer, Goodman Fielder)
Mr Gary Pemberton ( Chairman, QANTAS Airways)
Mr John Prescott ( Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer, BHP) 
2
Mr Doug Shears ( Executive Chairman, lCM Australia)
Dr John Stocker ( Chief Executive, OSIRO)
Mr Andrew Tumbull ( Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer, Bums
Philp) Mr Stan Wallis ( Managing Director, AMCOR)
Mr Dick Warburton ( Chairman, Du Pont ( Australia))
I expect that the first meeting of the Business Consultative panel will take
place in early November in Canberra.
CANBERRA 14 OCTOBER 1993 



STATKMNT BY THE PRIME ) 4INISTEM, THE RON. P. J. KRATING
COMMOONWE. ALTH RESPONSE TO HIGH COURT MABO JUDGMENIT
The Cabinet tonight finalised the Commonwealth
Governmnent's response to the High Court's decision on
Native Title.
The decision is the culmination of a lengthy process of
discussion and negotiation with a wide range of interests
including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people,
States and Territories, mining, pastoral. and other
industry groups.
The Government's aim has been twofold: t~ o preserve the
integrity and certainty of Australia's :: Wand management
system and so ensure continuing economic development; and
to provide a measure of justice for Abo:--iginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
As Mabo was an historic judgment this is historic
legislation, recognising in law the fiction of terra
nullius and the fact of native title. W4ith that alone
the foundation of reconciliation is laid because after
200 years, we will at last be building on the truth.
In striving to meet these twin gjoals WE. have progressed
from a series of questions and uncertainties to a
detailed blueprint for Commonwealth legrislation.
The key points decided by Cabinet are:
the Commonwealth legislation will give full effect
to the High Court decision withoul. affecting the
existing rights-of any property holder.
the legislation, taken as a whole, will constitute a
special measure for the protection and advancement
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
under section 8 of the Racial Discrimination Act.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people will be
abl~ e to choose the Federal Court or a recognised
State body ( suich as a State Supreme Court) to pursue
a claim for native title. 
2
States which comply with the spirit and principles
of the Commonwealth legislation will retain their
traditional and paramount role in determining the
economic use of land within their borders.
The legislation will also:
allow States to validate grants affected by the
existence of native title on a basis that
provides certainty and accords with the RDA and
Australia's international obligations.
extend the cut-off date for validation of past
grants to 31 December 1993, thus providing
ample notice of the new rules which will apply
in future.
allow States to propose State cir Territory
tribunals or courts for the determination of
native title claims.
accept that normal State/ Territ. ory regimes
should determine compensation f~ or the
impairment of native title. This generally
relates to the surface disturbance caused by
mining, and is paid by the mink'ng company as
is the normal procedure. " Just. terms, will
govern compensation for extinguishment.
there will be further discussions wiLth States and
Territories on cost-sharing arrangemnents between the
Commonwealth and complying States.
the Bill will not jeopardise Australians, right to
enjoy beaches and other recreation a~ reas, including
-national parks.
industry will be a major beneficiary of the
legislation which will provide:
validation of existing grants, with governments
to pick up any compensation costs. There will
be no qualification whatsoever on the rights of
the grant-holder, which have primacy over the
native title and will indeed, in some cases,
extinguish it.
a clear, timely process for determining native
title funded by the government.
native title holders will not have a veto on
development, which could lock up native title
land, but will have a right to negotiation.
protection against the ' double jeopardy, of
consideration of exploration and, later, mining
grants. 
so far as it affects pastoral leases at all the
proposed legiislation will only affect inaid
leases. there are a few pastoral leasegs which have been
issued since 1975 which could conceivably be
invalid hecause the req'uirements of the RDA
were not met when the leases were issued.
there may also be leases issued before 1975
which are invalid on grounds unconnected with
the RDA but connected to some other rights, as
yet unidentified in law, flowing from the
existence of native title.
The Commonwealth has been advii; ed that the
chances of such rights existingi and leading to
the invalidity of leases is smatll, but the
possibility remains. To remove~ this
uncertainty, the Cabinet has decided that the
Bill will provide that any lea, 3es which might
be found to be invalid in any circumstances
connected with native title can be validated by
the Government that issued themn.
In other words, these leases will be made
totally valid and all rights connected with
them will be totally valid and will always take
precedence over native title.
the validation of pastoral leases will extinguish
native title, as provided for in the September 2
outline, however;
where Aboriginal people who own or acquire a
oastoral lease, and who the tribunal determines
would satisfy the criteria for native title,
but for the existence of the pastoral lease,
wish to convert their holding to the equivalent
of native title, they may do so.
the tribunal will decide what native title
rights are in the particular case.
the owners would get the native title
benefits and protections under the
Commonwealth Bill.
the Commonwealth novernment wculd press for the
development of Codes of Conduct where there are
reservation rights, recognising though that, in
the final analysis, this depends on the
willingness of the pastoralists, Aboriginal
people and probably the States to come
together. 
-' I 4 the Bill will enhance the right of native title
holders to negotiate on proposed actions which
affect their land:
time limits for negotiation and arbitration
will be extended beyond those proposed in the
September 2 outline. Four months will be
allowed for negotiation and another four for
arbitration in the case of exploration
licences, and six months for both in relation
to mining leases.
before a government compulsorily acquires any
native title land to grant to a third party,
negotiations must take place.
there will be greater recognition given to the
Potential value of regional and local negotiation so
that nothing in the Bill prevents agreements or
settlements at a regional or local level between
governments, Aboriginal people and others with
interests.
while details will await further legislation next
year, the Bill will make provision for a land
acquisition fund to address the land needs of those
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people whose
dispossession from their land means they will be
unlikely to benefit from the Mabo decision.
18 October 1993 



TEL: 18. Oct. 93 10: 05 No. 003 P. 01/ 03
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE KCIN P J KEATING, MP
RELEASE OF THE REVIEW OF GOVERNMENT POLICY ADVICE
MECHANISMS ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN
I am pleased to be here this morning at the rei~ ase of this review of the
Government's policy advice mechanisms on the status of women.
Today marks the opening of a new chapter in the formation of -public policy on
the status of women in Australia.
Ten years ago the Government embarked on an ambitious program to
advance the status of women. The so-called ' radical' policies espoused by
Labor then, such as sex discrimination and affirmative action laws, are now
an accepted part of our culture.
Since then, the Government has put forward policies to meet the needs and
aspirations of women across the many spheres of their lives. We have made
significant gains in areas such as employmeni, education, access to child
-, care and income security for women caring for children.
We have taken on the challenge of ending violence against women and
children, acknowledging the enormity of the task.
We know we have more to do In many areas, such as health, retirement
income and equality of participation In public Ile, but In these areas Important
advances have also been made.
Policies of governments can promote lasting, structural and attitudinal
change to promote equality for women,
When we won the election in March this year, 1 thanked the women of
Australia who voted for us believing In the policies of the Government.
The Government is very proud of the role it has played in achieving advances
for women over the last decade. But we neec to look forward, not backwards,
if those achievements are to continue.
That is what this review is about. 
TEL 2
It Is about ensuring that our policy advice mechanisms remain appropriate,
effective and responsive to the changing needs and interests of women.
The Off ice of the Status of Women, in my Depaiment, has played a key roie
In achieving major advances for women since 1383.
In its early days it was responsible for putting tcgether the Sex Discrimination
and Affirmative Action Acts. But its recent work has been no less Important.
Work to produce a National Strategy on Violenc~ e Against Women, the new
National Agenda for Women and development of important new policies on
child care announced earlier this year, are just some exampies.
These are all policies that have a real impact oni women's lives.
Getting the policies right for women has to be vur top priority.
The Government needs a strong Office Of the Status of Women which can
provide accurate, weii-researched and authoritative advice on how to move
the agenda forward for Australian women.
I fully endorse the review's recommendation that such policy advice should
be the primary focus of the Off ice of the Status of Women. I also support
giving priority to the three critical policy areas identified in the review:
women's economic security; the participation of women in public life; and
women and the law, with a particular emphasis on eliminating violence
against women.
But the Off ice of the Status of Women and the Government can't get it right
without help from women and their organisaticns.
When launched the new National Agenda for Women, in February this year,
I said that a unique partnership between the women's movement and the
Government has contributed greatly to our achievements over the past ten
years. We want that partnership to continue.
That doesn't mean everything has to stay the same. We need to find the
most effective ways of working together towards our common goals.
The review sets out an approach to consultaton which is designed to be
effective and focussed and elicit the views of the diversity of Australian
women. Consultation has to be purposeful, timely and focussed. It must give you the
opportunity for real input, and provide us witt advice we can use to improve
outcomes for women.
Because we want to hear regularly from organisations representing women,
we will hold Round Table Meetings with national women's Organisation$ twice
each year. The Minister assisting me on the status of women, Senator
Crowley, will host these meetings and invite other Ministers as appropriate.
T1EL.: O ct. 93 10: 05 No. 003 P. 02/ 03 
TEL: 18. Oct. 93 10: 05 No. 003 P. 03/ 03
3
As with today, such meetings will Include repre~ entatives of the union
movement, the business community, Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders
and ethnic communities.
We will also convene specific purpose advisory committees, as necessary, to
assist us with discrete tasks. The first such committee will be the Australian
Council for the Fourth World Conference on Women.
Its role will be to act as a focal point for Australia's preparations for the United
Nation's Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 1995.
Senator Crowley will be announcing details of tViat Committee very soon.
We will also undertake regular research on the views and concerns of women
in the community to ensure that we stay in touch and on track.
In closing I would like to thank the Minister assisting me on the status of
women, Senator Rosemary Crowley, for underlaking this important review
and for her report. I would also thank you for the contributions and comments
many of you made on aspects of the review.
I have accepted and welcomed the review's re%. ommendations. I will leave it
to my colleague, Senator Crowley, to detail the, recommendations and their'
Implications for you. There is however, one rel-ommendlation that I would like
to comment on.
I take very seriously the first recommendation, that we should have a Minister
Assisting representing women's interests in Cabinet.
I do not intend to enter into speculation about how or when this will be
achieved. However, I will give serious consideration to the Issue at the next
_ appropriate opportunity.
The report of this review outlines some exciting and challenging work for
Senator Crowley and the Office of the Status ) f Women. I look forward to
working with Senator Crowley and the Office of the Status of Women, and
with you here today, to achieve further progress towards true equality for
women. CANBERRA 18 October 1993 



TEL
PRIME MINISTER 115/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MPR
ENTOMBMENT OF THE UNKNOWN AUSTRALIAN SOLDIER AN EVENT
OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE
I am pleased today to formally declare the funeralI and entombment of the
Unknown Australian Soldier in the Australian War Memorial on 11 November
1993 an event of national importance.
The ceremony, timed to mark the 75th Anniversary of the 1918 Armistice, will
be the most significant commemorative event in the history of the Memorial
since it opened on Armistice Day 1941. Surviving Australian veterans of the
first world war will participate in the ceremonies providing a unique
opportunity for the nation to honour them and to remember all Australians
who have fought and died in war.
Assisted by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission and officials from
the Australian Funeral Directors' Association, the Australian War Memorial
will recover the remains of an unknown soldier irom one of the many
battlefields cemeteries in France. It was this area where Australia suffered Its
largest number of casualties in the first world war. The Tomb in the
Memorial's Hall of Memory is intended to symbolise all Australians who have
died in war, and to provide a central point for national remembrance.
A national telecast of the event will be provided by the Australian
Broadcasting Corporation. All Australians, wherever they may be, are
encouraged to participate. They may attend thi) funeral in Canberra, take
part in their local Remembrance Day ceremony or watch the ABC broadcast.
I ask all Australians to join in the observation o1 the traditional two minutes
silence at 1 1: 00am on 11 November.
CANBERRA 18 OCTOBER 1993 T1EL8: . Oct. 93 15: 50 No. 022 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. RATING
THE BUDGET
Following meetings today with WA ( Green Senators and
Democrat Leader Kernot and Senator Harradine the
Government has reached agreement to secure passage of the
second tranche of the wholesale sa. les tax increase
announced in the Budget.
The measures meet the concerns of the minor parties in
the Senate which have sought increased assistance for low
income earners and the unemployed to offset announced
increases in the wholesale sales tax.
The measures include an increase in the Additional Family
Payment, further assistance to the unemployed, and
changes to the HECS scheme and Emergency Relief Program.
The Additional Family Payment was raised in three
discussions independent of each other by Green Senators,
Senator Kernot immediately post-Budget and by Senator
Harradine who has argued a case fcr single-income
famil ies.
It also proposed to limit the increase in excise on
kerosene, fuel. oil and heating oil to the 3 cents a litre
that has applied since Budget night. To alleviate the
higher transport costs to Tasmanian industry, Senator
Harradine has urged that * the* Government inc-rease the
Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme and provide
compensation for the Bass Strait passenger service. The
Government has agreed to such an increase.
The necessary legislation for the proposed changes will
be introduced over -the -next few wceks.
The total cost of the measures shown on the attachment is
$ 17 million in this year, rising to $ 144 million by 1996-
97. 
The Treasurer and 1[ believe the agreed changes are a
reasonable compromise which do no: undermine the
Government's medium-term debt reduction strategy and are
consistent with the intentions of the Government for
future Budgets.
Even with the proposed changes thi? prospective deficit
remains around 1 per cent of GDP tgor 1996/ 97.
Today's agreement is a welcome development for the
economy. It will help restore confidence to industry and
provide an impetus to the encouraging signs of recovery
already evident in the economy.
CANBERRA October 19, 1993 
SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET MEASURES
Measure Cost
The Additional Family Payment ( AFP) will be increased by 1993-94
$ 1.00 a week per child from 1 January 1995. ( AFP is paid to $ 45m 1994-95
over 800,000 low income families who generaly will not $ 92m 1995-96
benefit from the tax cuts, although the AFP is indexed for $ 95m 1996-97
increases in the CPT.)
From March 1994, Job Search Allowance ( JSA) for single $ 10m 1993-94
adults will be increased by $ 3 a week. An increase of $ 3 a $ 31 m 1994-95
week for single adults on the Newstart Allowance, which is $ 28m 1995-96
paid to those unemployed 12 months or more, was $ 26m 1996-97
announced in the Budget. ( JSA for single adulLs is $ 15 less
than the single pension; JSA for married couplk. s is the same
as the pension).
HECs charges for students taking more than thc. designated $ 1 m 1993-94
duration of their course of study will not be inc'eased as had $ 3m 1994-95
been announced in the Budget. $ 4m 1995-96
$ 4m 1996-97
The Emergency Relief Program which provides grants to $ 2m 1993-94
non-government community welfare agencies fcr short-term $ 2m 1994-95
emergency assistance will be expanded. $ 2m 1995-96
$ 2m 1996-97
The increase in excise on kerosene, fuel oil and . ieating oil 2m 1993-94
will be limited to the 3 cpl increase that has operated since $ 12m 1994-95
Budget night. $ 14m 1995-96
1996-97
In order to alleviate the transport costs to Tasmanian 2m 1993-94
industry, the Tasmanian freight Equalisation Scheme will be 2m 1994-95
enhanced. In addition, a subsidy will be introduced to offset 2m 1995-96
the impact of the higher excise on fuel oil for the Spirit of 2m 1996-97
Tasmania. I 


PRIME MINIS3TERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPINTERVIEW WNTH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7.30 REPORT, ABC19 OCTOBER 1993E&amp; OE PROOF COPYPL: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.PM: Thank you, Paul.PL: I would like to try to get a run down in simple terms please, of whatyour so-called new deal for black and white Australia really means inpractice. To start with how much of Ausl: ralia do you think will end upin Aboriginal hands as Native Title land?PM: Well, a substantial part of the unaliensited crown land of the northwestern part of the country.PL: Does that mean, as Richard Court says, up to 95 per cent of WesternAustralia?PM: No, that is not right. That is not right. But the point is that freehold isprotected in this. That is, anyone who holds a freehold title hasextinguished Native Title, so that's all the! backyards as they say. Andmost varieties of lease hold. I mean it can be the small lease hold of abee keeper leasing a bit of land for bees or something. But, you know,all the commercial, pastoral, extinguished, so we are down to crownland where Aboriginal people are either living now, or can establish atraditional link. That is, what the High Court said. The High Court saidthat there is a Native Title in the Australian common law, flying fromAboriginal traditional custom and title, bul. what this package is about isputting flesh on those bones. That is, to develop a body ofadministrative law to hear claims for Native Title, to see who is entitledto them, to grant them, to protect Native Tritle, and at the same time doit in a way that keeps land management in Australia for mining, forfarming, for tourism running smoothly.œ 0* 0N 2. T: OZ œ 6* 13O6T : 131
PL: So, all those leases granted between 1788 and the 1975Commonwealth Racial Discrimination Act, there is no question markover them at all?PM: No, they are all valid. A couple may be invalid by virtue of Native Title,or the interaction of other laws.PL: Just a couple?PM: Well it may be like, for instance, the famous one, the Wik one inQueensland, where there was an alleged breach of duty, fiduciaryduty, by the State of Queensland. I mean, you will have some of thoseclaims.PL: Well what happens to those ones?PM: Well, in that case that one is validated. But they will be validatedunder this legislation, they will become valid leases under thislegislation.PL: Can Aboriginal groups go back through the legal system and try to?PM: What the Aboriginal groups decided last night was to give up theoption of looking for any rights, which might be residual rights, ininvalid leases, which in this process we're making valid. In otherwords, let me just sort of make this simple for people, if there is agrazing property and it is a pastoral lease, it is now invalid, we make itvalid, but there could be some residual Native Title rights. That is theright to walk across the land, or to fish, or to hunt, or something likethat. Last night the Aboriginal community gave up that thin sliver ofuncertain rights to take from the Government a better proposal andthat was to turn Aboriginal pastoral leases, not non-Aboriginal, butAboriginal pastoral leases into a form of Native Title. So, to answeryour question let me come at this way, Paul. If the Aboriginalcommunity are not prepared, or interested in challenging residualrights on invalid leases, why would they tother with valid leases?PL: Because the Opposition says there is still a lot of uncertainty.PM: Yes, but that is the spoiling game that John Hewson and Peter Reithhave played. Here we have a package which has the support of theAboriginal community, which has today been given support by theStates, most of them, by the pastoralists, by the miners, the onlypeople out of step is the Federal Opposiion. Because basically, theirgame is to spoil whatever game is on, whether it is the Budget game,or the Mabo game. And this is to important a matter, too great anopportunity, too historic a moment not to seize, to get that question ofdispossession which is at the core of the problem of Australianreconciliation between Aboriginal and ron-Aboriginal Australians, toS2O' N ZT: OZ œ 6' 130' 6T : 131
get that back into repossession on theso areas where Native Title canbe established.PL: Then we have got leases between 1975 and the end of this year.Now, some of them may, when you look back now, be a bit dubious, abit of a shadow over them.PM: Yes.PL: What happens to them?PM: Well they will be validated under legislation. The problem was, theCommonwealth hasn't issued these, tho States have, but the Statescan't validate them because of the problem of the Racial DiscriminationAct, they can only be validated in a racially non-discriminatory way.They need Commonwealth legal protection to validate them, thispackage has that protection, it has beon agreed with the Aboriginalcommunity. So, all of those leases signed between 1975 and 1993 willnow be validated.PL: Pastoral leases, mining leases, tourist lea~ ses?PM: Commercial leases, you know, small farming leases, all manner ofleases.PL: Yesterday, you were saying that pastoral leases should not extinguishNative Title. Last night you agreed that Ihey should. Why the change,and what does it mean in effect.PM: Well what I said to the Aboriginal people I negotiated with last week,look, I will take to Cabinet the notion that there are two notions, that apastoral lease extinguishes Native Title a~ bsolutely, or a pastoral leaseextinguishes Native Title to the extent th-t it is inconsistent with NativeTitle. That's what they asked me to take to Cabinet. This didintroduce for some pastoralists some uncertainty, although, in fact theprimacy of their lease was 100 per cent protected. But to remove it,the Aboriginal people made a judgement, really how much is in this forus, how many of these thin sliver of rights, of uncertain rights, wouldwe actually get? And given that the Government then last night gavethem a different offer to turn many pastoral leases owned by them intoa form of Native Title..PL: They chose that.P M: They chose that.PL: The advantage for them in that, is whatI, A lease can expire a NativeTitle can never expire?D/ iOd SLO* ON T: OZ œ 6* 13O6T : 1311
PM: Well the title can be surrendered, and because it will be a Native Titleequivalent, it won't be pure Native Title, it will be a Native Titleequivalent. It could probably, technically~ be sold, but what it means isthis that as already many large pastoral leases say in the Kimberleyof Western Australia or the Northern Territory or Queensland, ifAboriginal people buy new pastoral leases with some of the fundingfrom this package, the land fund, thign instead of simply havingpastoral lease status, they go to a muc~ h more secure title and onewhich is based on the Maba principles of a connection and a traditionalassociation with the land. So, it was for them, I think, a win, winsituation and by dropping off to the extent of the inconsistency point, itwas a win for the pastoral industry.PL: Are tax payers up for a big compensatio~ n bill for validating all theseleases?PM: Probably a moderately sized one, but ovEor twenty years. It will be onlypayable when the leases are validated.PL: Hundreds of millions of dollars?PM: I would think at least that, but over a longj period of time. Understandthis Paul, these are for valid native title that was rendered invalid bythis process. In other words, today many of these leases which weresigned between 1975 and 1993 are sitting on valid native titles. If youwish to invalidate them you pay compensation the same as if youwish to use a non-Aboriginal Australian's land for some other purposeby a government then you pay compensation the same principle isthere. The key point is, I think, what we sought to do here is to marrythe twin demands of justice for Aboriginal people and an efficientsystem of land management and I think, the Bill achieves both of thoseobjectives.PL: What happens if on land that is proved to be native title land theCommonwealth wants to put a defence ba3se or do something else inthe national interest?PM: Well, the Commonwealth can acquire or resume native title land thesame as it can acquire or resume non-Aboriginal land.PL: And if some major resource is discoverod and it is decided in thenational interest, this Must be developed, say a giant gold mine orsomething?PM: Right, well, what we have done there is all the economic use questionsare reserved to the states. So, a state land manager, that is a stateMines Minister or a state Lands Minister can issue a grant of interestover native title land; there is a process of negotiation and a tribunal,but if the tribunal recommends against the~ economic interest a state/ 170' d S2-OON ZT: OZ œ 6'* 63O6T : 131
minister can override that tribunal in tha state interest. That is a keypart of the Bill, that protects the economic interests in the hands of thatstate. That is why you have got Premier Kennett today and PremierGoss today coming out saying it looks 41 fair package from our point ofview.PL: And what if there is say, a state forest a national park or a beach onland that is found to be native title?PM: On national parks, on beaches the Bill provides a right of access tobeaches which the public now currently enjoy. So it allows the statesto legislate to protect access to beaches as the current access wouldbe there for say, you know, beaches which are in areas where a lot ofAboriginal people live. That would be maintained. For state foreststhere can be a native title claim over state forests, but in a sense thatdoesn't change the forest unless there is an economic land useapplication in which case the state ministers decide that too. So theBill has got all the right balances in ii: and that is why I think, theAboriginal negotiators here said What are our core interests? Howdo we advance the interest of our people? How do we repossess ourformerly dispossessed land? But, how do we do it in a way that keepsthe economic interests of Australia going~? That is what our job wasto develop a Bill that satisfied all of these things. I do honestly thinkthis is a very historic Bill and it will go a very long way to meeting theproblem of dispossession and will advance materially the wholeprocess of reconciliation.PL: You have also done a deal with the minor parties in the Senate overthe Budget, costing $ 144 million by 1996-97. Does this mean now thatall these tax measures go through?PM: It will mean that the wholesale sales ta): measures which are roughlyaround $ 2 billion will pass. It really means the bulk of theGovernment's Budget will go through.PL: When?PM: Well, in the next week or so. It maybe in the course of this week Paul,but in the next week or so. That will mean that the Budget theGovernment's original intention will be. to track the Budget downtowards 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97 and it will also mean that thetax cuts will be paid on time in NovemberPL: Why couldn't there have been a deal like this weeks ago because theTreasurer was being too macho?PM: No, I think that the Senators that is the! Green Senators have onlynow decided close to the voting where their position is. We arrived atœ ZL 0N 2 T: OZ œ-6-10061 j
6a position with the Democrats some woeks ago as you remember andwe have also had discussions with Sena~ tor Harradine.PL: So it has been the Greens, not Labor'? They've been intransigent?PM; I originally said to them at the time we mnet the Democrats, could we sitdown and negotiate the passage and I ion't think they felt comfortableabout it then. They are obviously more comfortable now, but the goodnews for the country is that the Budget will go through largely in termsof its funding and that in tracking down 10 a deficit of around I per centof GDP, it will be about one third of the American deficit. Rememberwhen Vice-President Al Gore cast his vo~ te in the American Senate andthere was a big cheering? They are going to be at 3 per cent of GDPdeficit we will be one third of that. So this is a very good budget forthe medium term, particularly now as the recovery is starting to comethrough with some strength.PL: Wouldn't it be a good idea in the future i: o start negotiations with thesegroups a heck of a lot earlier? Have you learnt anything from thisyourself?PM: Well, you can't do it earlier than the day you present the Budget. And,of course, you understand what the corn problem is here it takes 38votes in the Senate to block the Budget, 36 of them are JohnHewson's. So it is his opposition in the Senate are the villains in thepeace. The two Greens are 36 votes short of being able to bale any ofthese measures up. The only reason~ they were able to do it Isbecause John Hewson and the Liberal party broke the conventions ofAustralian politics in not passing the Government's Money Bills in theSenate. You might recall Paul, in the eltiction campaign I said when itwas not clear how the election would be resolved, I said a Laboropposition would pass a conservative government's Money Bills in theSenate including the GST. No such show of principle has come fromthe Liberals, they have just run the spoiling game on the Budget andthey have run the spoiling game on Mabo and they have been nowsidelined on the Budget and sidelined on Mabo and Premier Kennett'sremarks today and Premier Goss' remark5s today makes that very clearon Mabo, and the Greens and Senator Harradine and the Democratstoday make it very clear on the Budget too.PL: Thanks for your time.PM: Thank you Paul.endsSZO* 0N . T: OZ 9œ 6-13O-6T :-131


TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPPRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSI--19 OCTOBER 1993E&amp; OE PROOF COPYWell, I think you now have some outline in the press statement I published lastnight on the decision by the Cabinet in the settlament of the many issuesinvolved in the question of the High Courts historic decision and the awarding ofNative Title. And I think that it is fair to say that this legislation will put flesh onthe bones of the High Court decision, that it will provide a substantial measure ofjustice for Aboriginal Australians, and importantly with that a security and anefficient system of land management across the country.As I said earlier this morning this is a new deal ror Australian Aborigines, and assuch, a new deal between the indigenous and non-indigenous people of thiscountry. The High Court made its judgement and we now have the chance oflegislating away the fiction of terra nullius, and basing our national social policywith Aboriginal Islander people on a truth rather than a lie.And from that, of course, will flow not just simply~ justice for Aboriginal peopleand a system of land management that works in combination with Native Title,but a better basis, a real basis, for reconciliation that in the past has eluded us.Because land is at the heart of Aboriginal dispo'ssession and the repossessionof land must be at the heart of any process of reconciliation in the future.I think this process has created a new understanding between, certainly theGovernment, but the Australian people, I feel and the Aboriginal community. Iwould like to pay a tribute here to the Aborigine l leadership under LoisO'Donoghue who did the courageous thing, took the step, seized the moment tonegotiate rather than demand, and to sit down and work out where Aboriginalinterests truly lie and where they could be offset against the legitimate economicinterests of this country. And in doing that we have been, I think, able to reach agood settlement.i / TO'd œ SO'ON S : 9T 16' 13O6T : 131
Now, as well uppermost in the Governments mind has been the interests ofAboriginal people in being able to secure and work land, but also there has beenthe requirement to see our great land based industries be able to go on as theyhave in the past, to be able to access land, to cJ3rry out exploration and mining,in the case of the mining industry, for grants of interests in relation to thepastoral industry, or the tourism industry, or commercial development, that wehave a system here now which can happen within reasonably tight time framesin processes which are exclusively with the States and ones where the States!imperatives in land management, I think, are being met. From the States' pointof view their interest has been to see that past grants were valid, past grants thatthey issued were capable of being validated, and that there was a workablesystem for issuing new grants of interest over Native Title land in the future andat the same time giving Aboriginal people a right to be asked a genuine right ofnegotiation, but in the end the rights of the Statios to make decisions in the Stateinterest, in the State interest on what they think is viable in terms of their interestin land and development.But this is a Native Title Bill. The primacy of the, interests are with the titleholders, those people who can make claims, who would wish to make claims andhave Native Title awarded and protected. And the Bill therefore therefore theprimacy of the Bill goes to Aboriginal and Islanicer peoples interests. But it hasthat happy mix, I think, between those interests and the interests of the rest ofthe country, both in social and economic terms. And I think it does prove thatthe cynics are not always right in thinking that differences here wereIrreconcilable, that there was no basis upon which a various interest could beaccommodated in relative harmony, in a package which could be agreed by thevarious stake holders. Now, I think that has not been true and I think thesceptics will have to think again, and if it means that access to land doessomething, if late in the piece, about justice for Aboriginal people and theirinclusion in the laws of this country, in respect oif land in our greater society thenwe will go along together as one country, as onia nation. And that's a core partof what Mabo, I think, means.Can I also say that I think it was important that the High Court in having madethis decision wasn't hung out to dry by the Parliament. That is, prestige was notput under question, and that a decision well takan and courageously taken wassupported by the Government. There has been more ministerial time devoted tothis issue than any issue in the last ten years, and without that detailed work itwouldn't be possible to develop a Bill of this sophistication, and without thissophistication it wouldn't be possible to introduce this sort of legislation. Itwouldn't settle the issues without this sort of soph isti cation, and I may not haveanother opportunity, but I want to place on the record the work done by theofficers of our Commonwealth public service, the officers in my department,Prime Minister and Cabinet, Sandy Hollway, Mike Dillon, Robert Orr and otherswho have worked tirelessly and ceaselessly now for over a year on this problem,1/ 20Od œ SO* ON SS: 9T1 6* 130' 6T : 131
and who had previously worked on the reply to the Aboriginal Deaths in CustodyRoyal Commission. They have been now working consistently on these issuesfor a couple of years. So, I should like to take the opportunity to thank them, andalso those State Premiers who could see something bigger and something betterand tried to see what could be done to meet both the Commonwealth, the Stateand the Aboriginal and Islander interest in this country, and those State officialswho were also involved in negotiation who tried and have materially in someways made the Bill a better Bill then it could have otherwise been. So, I mightleave my introductory remarks there and invite cuestions.J: Can you explain the situation where you have got valid l ' eases, thesituation you talked about yesterday? Will Aborigines still be able todedicate their so called residual rights for the residual Native Title lots, orhave they been extinguished as well?PM: Well, Tom, if Aboriginal people have given up residual rights on invalidleases, and they have, in a sense why woiuld they bother on valid leases?I think that is the question, that is, the key word here is valid, and thevalidity will, I think, extinguish to all intents and purposes any rights otherthan those of the pastoralists, or any other stake holder.J: Will the Aborigines be able to use .( inaudible)PM: Well the legal force of the Act will remain. I think the Act remainsunblemished. But how applicable it is to any of this is a moot point. Imean, that's a matter really for Aboriginal people and their lawyers. Ican't see any application here because o'jr Bill, as I say, emanates fromthe RDA and I don't think crosses any of its principles.J: So, Prime Minister, it's the precedent of post 75 RDA validation thatprotects pre ' 75 valid leases?PM: Say that again.J-It's the precedent of post 75 RDA validatio~ n by the Federal Governmentwhich effectively protects pre ' 75 valid lealses?PM: I have got no doubt councel for the defence would certainly argue that.J: ( inaudible)PM: Yes, I had a very positive phone call with Jeff Kennett this morning, and Ithink that you will find that the States believe that this does provide aworkable basis of land management simply because the key institutionsare theirs. There won't be a Commonweotlth institution granting interest;/ VO~ d œ SO'ON Si: 9T 16* 13O* 6T : 131
over Native Title land other than the ACT Commonwealth Tribunal, andthe ACT and Commonwealth lands, or that which would operate in a noncooperatingState. But for cooperating States there won't be aCommonwealth Tribunal granting interest over Native Title land. So, allthe economic use side of the legislation is with the States. And we havekept their structures, we have even kept to their wishes about just termsbeing paid only on extinguishment and nct in any other terms, that is, forany disturbance or disfigurement of the landscape. In all these key areasthe mining warden still remains, reconfigured, but remains as a key thing.There will be a State ministerial override available if States wish toexercise it. Of course they will have to do it with due caution, but it is, Ithink, a real one. So, from the States' point of view they should regard thething as reasonable. As also particular caitegories of grants will be able tobe excluded from the special legislation. That is, the special negotiationregime. They will have to be negotiated, hat is, those that can go aheadwithout a process of negotiation which will keep the system lubricated,compulsory acquisitions will still be available. it will apply to Native Titleland except where the acquisition is in order to make a grant to a thirdparty, there will be a negotiating period for that. But the the normalacquisition right will obtain over Native Title land as freehold land, as Isay, compensation for impairment will be set in an accordance withcurrent State Territory procedures. So, from the States' point of view, andof course, the Commonwealth will meet a large part of the compensationfor the period of validation ' 75 to ' 93. That is, all those interests whichwould have been rendered invalid by the Racial Discrimination Act, or theinteraction of that Act with Native Title, wo will establish a regime there.Existing Crown ownership of the sources can be confirmed, and access tobeaches, waterways, recreation areas can be confirmed to.J: Prime Minister, what changed the position that you held in Question Timeyesterday from what we now have as the final position in regard to validtitle?PM: Well, I told the Aboriginal people with whom I negotiated last week that Iwould argue a case for them that there may be residual rights, howeverslim, attaching to some of the leases invalidated because of theinteraction of the Racial Discrimination Act, Native Title or in relation tothe interaction of other Acts. And in argu:" ng that case I understood that itmeant that for those lease holders that thray may face some action.Regardless of their likelihood of success they may have faced them. Andthen last evening in negotiations with the Aboriginal community said wellmaybe it is possible to consider a way where there is a greater Aboriginalcommunity benefit from a more certain set of rights then the slender set ofrights, the uncertain set of rights which might flow from Native Title rightswhich were not inconsistent with a grant ini invalid leases. And so the/ ZOd S900' N S : 9T œ 6* 130O6T ' 131
proposal we arrived at war, one where past oral leases are owned byAboriginal people, and there are many of them owned by Aboriginalpeople, or acquired by Aboriginal people that is, for the future as well.That if those holders can demonstrate a trgiditional linkage with the fandunder the Mabo principles we will turn it into, they will be able at theTribunal, or at the Federal Court to pick up a title equivalent to NativeTitle. Now, I think this is very attractive for many Aboriginal people,because as you know there are pastoral leases all over the country, theyown many and will have the opportunity of buying more and this givesthem a certain title and a certain access. And bearing in mind also thatthe Commonwealth 2S part of this package is developing a landacquisition fund of substance, some of those funds could conceivably beemployed in a acquiring pastoral leases which could then become NativeTitle areas. So, considering, in their terms, the slender rights anduncertain rights which may have obtained with invalid leases, they'vebargained something in return which they think is more certain and morevaluable. In that case, equity has been mot, justice has been done andhonour has been settled and a reasonable agreement has been made.J: On page three of your statement you talk e bout the invalid leases( inaudible)... before 1975 ( inaudible).., rights as yet unidentified inlaw. And then you go on in the next paragraph to talk about, " The Bill willprovide that any leases which might be found to be invalid, in anycircumstances connected with native title, ican be validated." Does thatmean that they have to go to the Court firsi. to identify them or..?PM: No. That means that the states can validla~ e them. See, we don't validatethe leases, the states do. But they've got to get the legislative authorityfrom the Commonwealth, via the RDA ( Racial Discrimination Act), toactually effect the validations in a way which is not ultra vires of the RDA.And it is the states who will be doing the validating and they will be ableto validate leases which, for one reason or another, may have becomeinvalid due to the interaction of the RDA or other Acts.J: So it won't be required to be tested at law first?PM: No.J: When the bill provides for the states to val date those leases and where itprovides for extinguishment of native title will there be retrospectiveprocedural fairness provisions built into that, how will they work and whatsafeguards will there be at the end of the clay?PM: Well, under the special measures provision the Commonwealth will bevalidating the titles and paying compensation. So, therefore, because theiSO~ d SO* ON S9-: 9T œ-6* 13O* 6T -131
Bill emanates from the RDA and its authority the question aboutprocedural fairness, in a sense, does not arise. And there has alwaysboon some very grave legal doubt about whether procedural fairness evermattered. The preponderance of legal opinion would be that there wasnot a racially discriminatory thing done by a land manager when that landmanager could never have known that native title existed; and that thepayment of compensation was sufficient tD actually validate a past title.J: Has that been another concession by the Aborigines over the past fewdays?PM: Well, I think they understood implicitly thait the concession was, in asense, from the Government. That is, thsit we would employ the RDArather than in any way circumscribe or override it, and validate using itsauthority.J: Mr Keating, the deal you've worked out with Aboriginal people on pastoralleases so that you can extinguish native title there why haven't youdone a similar deal for mining leases?PM: Because a mining lease is the one variety of lease which does notextinguish non Aboriginal title. A mining lease can be laid over nonAboriginal title and when the mining ceases, the title revives.J: But you said pastoral leases didn't extingu~ ish eitherPM: The thing is, this is not so with other forms of title. But the symmetry hereis that a mining title does lie across other forms of non Aboriginal title andthe other forms of non Aboriginal title come back to full bloom, or arecapable of coming back to full bloom, whon the mining ceases. That isthe principle which is being established.J: Is the land acquisition fund now part of this legislative package or is thatcoming with the social justice package?PM: It will be mentioned in the Bill, certainly th~ e second reading speech and, Ithink, the Bill. But the development of it will come in a second piece oflegislation in the Autumn session of next year. So that there will be aprocess of negotiation with the Aboriginal community who will then, withthe government, sit down and try and design a set of arrangements wherethe control and the functions and the objectives of such a fund can bereasonably met or successfully met. But Aboriginal and Islanderpeople will know, when the second reading speech on the native title Billis given and the Bill is introduced, that tha~ t will be an integral part of itSO* ON S2: 9T 16* 130' 6T : 131
7though it will not have been fleshed out ir substance, that is, in terms ofdesign.J: Did you get last night from the Aborigines, agreement on these lastminute alterations in the packagePM: Yes. I met the same group that I had met the previous week, last eveningfor probably an hour and a half, on and off. And we considered all theseissues, considered the weight of Aboriginal community interests andwhere they lie when a lot of the claims go, about the probable success oflitigation, down to what people really think: they could secure vis a yiswhat was likely to be offered. And that's when, I think, those judgementswere made.J: Once rural land has been acquired, Primet Minister, and converted tonative title, it will then be the case that it can never be sold again?PM: Well, I think the thing about native title is that government can acquire it;it can be surrendered: but it will, I think, in the hands of the Aboriginalcommunity, probably be in perpetuity.J: So, no matter how badly the property is run, no matter how badly rundown it becomes unlike existing farmland where, when things go wrongit just stays on as it is?PM; Well, I don't think you should assume.... tis is true with non Aboriginalholdings across Australia, David. A lot of farms are over grazed or poorlymanaged or where there is acute soil eronion this is not somethingwhich would be a feature of Aboriginal holdings. In fact, I should imaginethat given the success which Aboriginal people are having in managingland and getting even better at it and understanding the value of landmanagement that they'll make pastoral properties succeed. But thereis also the other thing these are lands which will be traditional lands,which, of course, have other values and cither connotations to them. So ithas, if you like, a dual function of meeting a social need as well as aneconomic need. And my assumption is tleat Aboriginal people, given theopportunities to manage pastoral properties and they've had now somesubstantial ones can do it and do it well.J: Prime Minister, given that the farmers of Western Australia have anabsolute right of veto over development, would you envisage in thispassage that native title holders in Western Australia would have thesame right? And if Western Australia does not come to the party in this,which it does not appear that they're going to, would native title holders inWestern Australia who are dealing througih a Commonwealth regime haveœ SO* ON S2: 9T 16-430O61 : 131
the same right to get equity of rights with freehold farmers in WesternAustralia?PM: Well that's a matter, I think, of legal opinion. I don't think we're certainabout that. And, of course, Western Australia could make it certain byremoving a veto right in the hands of non Aboriginal pastoralists. In whichcase there would be no discrimination. But again, the authorities of thisBill vis a vis the states, it's hard to say where the balance of that lies. Iwouldn't assume, and I don't think I would say, that the presence of a vetoright in the hands of Western Australian pastoralists will mean, ipso facto,that such a right exists in the hands of a native title holder. In fact, I thinkI would say the converse. But again, it will be a matter for legal opinionand also a matter for the state of Western Australia itself.J: Prime Minister, you said this was a good deal for the states. Have yougot any idea how many state Premiers will come on board now?PM: Well, I spoke to Premiers Goss and Fahey late last week. I've spoken toPremier Kennett, I think, last week and again today and when I have anopportunity I'll speak to other State and Territory leaders today. Look, Ithink that the negotiations at the Commonwealth bureaucratic level andthe state bureaucracies, about these issues, has helped put into focus thestates' bottom lines on land management. We've been able to see whatof that we can accommodate and what we can't. The great bulk of it hasbeen accommodated. And I think that whsan they look through the Bill, astate land manager will say, " By and large, my prerogatives here, are met.The economic, the land management prerogatives here, are met."But at the same time, met in a way which gives Aboriginal people a rightto be asked about their property and a right to be involved in a realnegotiation, not just a perfunctory one. Not a courtesy but a realnegotiation. And in that, in maintenance of these state instrumentalitiesand state systems I should think most stales will find it an acceptablepackage. And particularly as the Commonwealth is prepared to meet asubstantial part of the cost.J: Mr Keating, have you had any discussions with the Greens or theDemocrats on this, so far? And do you think it will get through theSenate?PM: Well, I've had a couple of discussions with them over the last two or threemonths. And the last discussion I had wit i them was in the company ofAboriginal representatives about two weeks ago. Two to three weeksago. I've not since, but I believe they're committed to the same principlesin this respect, that we are and that they wish to see an honourableœ SO'ON Sœ: 9T œ 6' 10 ' 6T : 131
package fashioned here. One that does justice for Aboriginal interestsbut, at the same time, works. And so that is why I'm confident that the Billwill pass through both houses.J, You said on the last page of this statement that greater recognition will begiven to the value of regional and local negotiations. How will youfacilitate those?PM: Well it depends on how we wish to develop them and what prospects ofsuccess they would have. That is, whether or not regional agreementscan be made as is the case in Canada and other places. We're atleast leaving that opportunity open. In some very obvious and discreteareas of the country such agreements might be made. Even though thereis a patchwork quilt of titles there are vent common threads to some ofthese titles and, therefore it may be possible to enter into regionalagreements.J: Are you confident that the legislation will actually get through this year, MrKeating?PM: Well, I am Laura, yes. I think it will proceed this year and I think it'simportant that it does.J: Prime Minister, did you give any commitments to the Aboriginalrepresentatives on the level of the funding; for the land acquisition fundand do you have any Idea of the ball park estimate on the compensationpackage?PM: No, I can't go to that. That's something that the Cabinet has to consider.But it will be a substantial fund and it will b2e a revolving fund. That is, aproportion of it will be capable, a proportion of Commonwealthsubventions will be capable of being sperit on land acquisition but aportion will probably I say probably he reserved for a revolving fundso that the earnings base of the fund becomes, over time, the proceeds ofthe fund. It goes on in perpetuity. And, in such a way there would be areasonable chance of success of it becoming a major acquirer and holderof Aboriginal property.J: Mr Keating is the Commonwealth.... .( inaudlible).... compensation for theextinguishing of native title even where states may not agree to theCommonwealth legislation?.PMV: No. If a state does not agree, a state has 1: 0o validate, but in validating ithas to pay compensation. You see, these leases are state leases. Thesetitles are state titles, not Commonwealth titles. The validations are to be7/ 6O* d œ 900N Si: 9T 16-13O-6T : 131
done now with the Commonwealth legislative authority, by the states. Butif they are not in our scheme and cooperating then the compensation willbe met by them.J: Will you be expecting Mr Court to come on board with this?( inaudible)...PM: Well, I spoke to him and I think he's coming over this week. But I havehad no indication from him that he believes that Crown title should be,should fall to a native title claim. He doesn't believe that native titleshould be issued over Crown land. He believes the only titles thatAboriginal people should have should be statutory titles conferred onthem. He believes that a conferred right is fine, but an inherent right isn't.Now, its pretty hard from my position to argue with that because it'sdiametrically opposed to what Mabo stands for.But, again, I think he's got to consider thi: 3 in terms of the landmanagement questions for his state. Because we've certainly consideredit for Western Australia. We've taken fully into account that much of thisvariety of land is in Western Australia and that the interests of WesternAustralian industry that is mining, commercial, pastoral need to betaken into account and we have taken threm into account, though we havenot had a meaningful dialogue with the state government. But onedoesn't need a meaningful dialogue with t: he state government tounderstand what some of its core interests are, so we've got them inthere. But, in having very meaningful discussions with the rest of thestates I'm pretty sure that what they regard as core interests, are anyway,the core interests of any Western Australian government and WesternAustralian people. So, I think the Western Australian community ought tobe assured that the Commonwealth has very much had in its mind, itsinterest, in framing this legislation.J: Is there a message for the Opposition, Mr Keating?PM: Well, I think that the one message for the Opposition is that they havenow consistently failed to be part of any negotiation. A number ofbusiness organisations invited the leader of the Opposition as long as tenor eleven weeks ago to join the Government in this matter. No responsehas come. In the meantime Mr Reith has been appointed to basically doto the Mabo legislation what he thinks he was successfully able to do tothe four year parliamentary term referendums. Now, Mr Reith was one ofthe architects of Fightback! and Fightback was a dismal political failureand I think that his tactics on Mabo have been a dismal political failure,too.Ends../ OT'd œ SO* DN S: 9T œ 6* 30* 6T:-131



; T1/
PRIME MII3TER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP RAAF FAIRBAIRN, 20 OCTOBER, 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, are you leaving on a good note?
PM: Yes, I think so. I think we will see the Bucget to bed this week, largely,
in terms of its aggregates, intact which will be good for now and good
for the next few years as the recovery whi,. h is now coming through,
strongly comes through. That's when wewant the Budget deficit
coming down, and that's why the Budget i: 3 going to be good for the
place. And I think the nation is entitled to feel good about Mabo. I
think it proves that even diverse interests can be handled well, and
that the country is capable of doing good things.
J: Prime Minister, do you think you will have to do some more deals with
the Greens to get Mabo legislation through the Senate?
PM: I don't think so. I think they are very supportive of the general thrust of
Mabo.
J: Have you got anything to say to Mr Court today? I believe a
breakthrough didn't eventuate in Melbourne today.
PM: We weren't hoping for one. He was only, I think, coming to tell us what
he thought his points of objection were. Eut again, he has got to
consider his position, I think; that is: how does he handle now the
reality of Mabo, particularly when other co'nservative States are sort of
endorsing the general principles in the Co'mmonwealth's draft
legislation.
J: What do you see as the key issues of the Cyprus meeting? 
PM: Well, I think, it's that there will always be generally attention to
international events and I expect that we will also have a perspective
on things in the African continent from th, 3 African members,
particularly South Africa, but it is a very mixed agenda.
J: Do you foresee any comment at all regarding a republic over there, or
have you already said your piece on that?
PM: No, I don't. But I will have a chance to see Prime Minister John Major
and Prime Minister Mahathir, of Malaysia, and some other leaders as
well.
J: How much will you be pressing Dr Mahal: hir on the APEC issue?
PM: It is not a matter of pressing him. I think we all have common interests
and it is just a matter of understanding what each person, or each
country's position is.
Thank you. 



!~ q2
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
REMARKS FOR REPLY TO ADDRESS OF WELCOME
COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING, NICOSIA
THURSDAY 21 OCTOBER 1993
President Clerides, Your Majesties, Excellencies, fellowi Heads of Government,
Ministers, Secretary-General, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to be invited tc join my colleagues in thanking
you, Mr President, for your welcome to this Commonwealth Heads of Government
meeting. I am happy to see many familiar faces as I look around this room. I met some of you,
fellow members of the South Pacific Forum, recently oil Nauru, the smallest of all the
Commonwealth's fifty members and associates.
I am also looking forward to meeting others over the nfiXt five days.
For a newcomer to these gatherings, the diversity of the~ group is the most striking
thing about it.
The members of the Commonwealth come from every continent and border every
ocean. We are large and small, developed and developing, a very representative
sample of the community of nations.
The Commonwealth gains strength from its diversity, bu-cause its differences co-exist
with important things we hold in common the principl,-s and practices of our law,
administration and education; a shared commitment to democracy; a language even if
often a second language in which we can conimunicatt. directly with one another.
In one important sense, an Australian Prime Minister fe,'-ls immediately at home in a
Commonwealth meeting. Australia's population today includes citizens who came
originally from each of the forty eight countries represeaited here.
Our rich multicultural society drawn from more than 140 nations is a great asset for
Australia, just as cultural diversity gives the Commonw! alth its own distinct and lively
identity. 
Mr President,
Australia like many countries has been going through a period of profound change.
We have been retooling our economy and reexamining ithe fundamentals of our society.
Our economy has been changing at an unprecedented rmte, moving from an inwardlooking
economy to one focused outwards.
We have moved from feeling somewhat remotely connected with our own region to a
commitment to economic, political and cultural engagement with our neighbours.
We have been debating the forms of our own constitution to have it reflect better our
national identity.
And just before I left Australia, my Government put in place the framework for historic
legislation which will provide greater justice for Australia's indigenous population by
recogni sing their original tenure of our land.
We have accepted that Aboriginal or native tradition and culture is a source of
Australian common law.
Australia is not alone in facing change.
Many of the countries represented here are undergoing economic and social changes of
similar magnitude. These changes reflect and respond to profound changes taking
place in the wider world.
The Commonwealth itself is not exempt from this process of change. Like every other
organisation, it needs constantly to re-examine itself to ensure that it is directing its
activities where they are most useful and deploying its resources where they are most
effective. It should not duplicate what others can do better, but u ie its distinctive advantages
creatively and well.
Mr President,
Some of the issues which we will discuss over the next five days will be new, some will
be old, some will come in different form.
One which is different is South Afica. The political change there is cause for great
satisfaction, despite continuing problems and obstacles.
The Commonwealth has had an important part to play in encouraging that change. We
need now to look for practical ways to help South Afiicans to entrench it. 
All of us hope that at our next meeting we will have tile pleasure -of welcoming the
H-ead of Government of a non-racial, democratic Souith Africa as a new member of the
Commonwealth.
I offer my congratulations to Mr Nelson Mandela and President De Klerk on the award
of the Nobel Peace Prize. It is a fitting reward, not just for them but for all those who
have had the courage to negotiate and work together in the interests of creating a new
South Africa.
Other issues will engage us at this meeting.
The challenges of development, remembering I hat more than half our
Commonwealth members qualify as least-deveoped or low income countries
The ways in which we can better use the talents of women and young people to
enrich our societies and economies
The ways we can strengthen the role of democratic institutions and practices,
as the Commonwealth has been successfu~ lly doing with its election monitoring.
One of the major challenges facing the world at present is the need to bring to a
successful conclusion the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations by the mid-December
deadline. Nothing would do more to increase world trade and expand the opportunities for
growth of all countries, developing and developed alik,.
It would mean a boost to the world economy of 213 billion US dollars a year.
The time is very short for us to prevent the Round's collapse.
Some " rich countries" still seem to believe that they cani avoid making difficult
concessions, but still reap the advantages of the Round.
I think they are completely wrong and are Riely to witar the opprobrium and
contumely of the whole world.
It is important that this meeting make every effort to examine what the Commonwealth
can do to help bring about an outcome from the Multilateral Trade Negotiations that
will benefit each of us, and the world at large.
Finally, Mr President, I want to say something about the special pleasure for an
Australian Prime Minister in being here in Cyprus.
More than 50,000 Australians have their family origins in Cyprus, giving Australia the
world's second-largest Cypriot community after this island.
Australian Cypriots have been an enormously energetic and creative community.
Among their contributions to Australian life, has been cne of my colleagues in the
Parliamentary Labor Party, Dr Andrew Theophanous, wvho left Cyprus at the age of
eight. 
4
Our meeting in this city, Mr President, is a reminder that the division of this island,
with all the human tragedy that has entailed, has continued for far too long.
Australian police, whom I met this morning, have beer! helping to keep the peace in
Cyprus since 1964. Their task should have ended long; ago.
We urge those who are not cooperating with the United Nations and its Secretary-
General in exploring a basis for settlement to enter intc constructive negotiations
forthwith. Thank you for your very warm welcome this morning. Like all of us here, I am
looking forward to five days of constructive deliberaticns as well as five days of
Cypriot hospitality. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIE MINISTER, TIRE HON P. J KEATING MP,
AND BRITISH PRIME MINISTER, THRE HON JOHN* MAJOR, DOORSTOP,
LE MERIDLEN HOTEL, LIIMASSOL, THURSDAY, 21 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JM: The Prime Minister and I have had the opportunity of discussion upstairs. We
have been able to range over a whole serie; of international matters, but
predominantly we have concentrated our time on the agenda here at this Heads
of Government meeting. I was delighted with what the Prime Minister had to
say at the opening ceremony about the necessity for an agreement on the
Uruguay round. I took the opportunity this allernoon of re-emphasising that
message. What is very striking about the disi.-ussions we have got here, we
have one third of the nations of the world present at this conference
representing one quarter of the worlds population and a very powerful feeling
from countries all around the world that it is vitally important we can reach an
agreement to the Uruguay round this year. Wc have a further discussion on it
tomorrow and I rather expect that feeling will ) e taken a good deal further. I
won't elaborate on other issues for the moment. I will invite the Prime Minister
to say a word or two and then we'll take questicons for a few moments.
PJK. I can only add to what the Prime inister has said, that I myself was struck by
the genuine concern by those represented about the GATT and the Uruguay
round, the very strong expressions of opinion that came this morning in the first
half dozen speeches the speeches in respome to the welcome of President
Clerides and then in more formal session this . afternoon again, the theme was
repeated. So, there is I think, a very clear und-erstanding that there has been a
very large transfer of wealth from the developing countries to the developed
world via the terms of trade through low ; ommodity prices and that an
outcome in the Uruguay round has to be an outcome to serve everybody, not
just the developed countries in things such as intellectual property rights and
services, but also to give the third world, the developing world, a chance to
improve their incomes and get access to bigger markets. So, it is very much a
live issue here I am pleased to say.
J: Gentlemen, how much more can you achieve fr om GATT with just a strongly
worded statement out of the Commonwealth, have you Mr Keating suggested
that the Prime Minister could push France harder through the EC? 
PJK: I complemented the Prime Minster on the positions that he has taken
consistently on the GATT now for some years and again more recently in his
urging's which he has made with member state., of the European Community.
We can't ask any more than that those of us of the Cairns group, but there is n
doubt that the December 15 deadline is not going to be extended by the
American Congress; this is a real deadline and I think that there has to be
pressure brought upon France in particular, probably including by the industrial
members of the French economy as well as though, more generally the world
community.
3M: If I can add something to that. It is a fairly clear choice by the end of this year
either we have an agreement on the Uruguay round and a substantial increase
in the volume of world trade that will help ev.-ry developed and developing
country around the world, or we have no agreement and a very real danger of
protection, retaliation, collapse in the levels of world trade and a rapid growth
of unemployment. I do not think that is putting the situation too starkly it is
as clear cut as that. Faced with that, I think t1~ ere is no doubt that everyone
must make concessions whatever their domestic. difficulties with the intention
of reaching an agreement.
J: Prime Minister, Mr Keating, did Dr Mahathir's re: marks on GATT reassure you
for the possibility of doing a deal with him on the APEC issue?
P3K: I do not think the two are related. The point is that there is an expansion
occurring world wide. The American economy is picking up, early next year
we expect the Japanese economy to start to groxA again, more solidly and this is
the right time in a low inflationary cycle, in a clear upturn after the problems of
the late 1980s and early 1990s that we have a chance to really improve the
velocity of trade without, as the Prime Minister Eays, seeing countries fall back
into trading blocks or trade tactics which would be pointless with a good
outcome of the GAIT.
J: Mr Major, do you agree with Mr Keating that mcere pressure should be put on
France?
JM: I think more pressure should be put on everyone who hasn't yet found
themselves in a position to agree to a conclusion 10 the Uruguay round. France
is often mentioned France is not the only impediment to be overcome, there
are other ones as well. I think it is necessary for every nation to look at what
needs to be done and judge what the impact woud be if we were unsuccessful.
I think right the way across Europe that is well understood.
J: Prime Minister, that common ground amongst everybody who is here, what
can you achieve beyond simply restating it? What will you do to push the
process forward?
JM: We have a lengthy discussion on that tomorrow. I think those are matters for
discussion tomorrow. 
J: Mr Keating, what is your prediction now for the outcome of that round, are
you hopeflul of success?
PJK: I am still hopeful of success. It has had seven y(; ars in the making, there are so
many obvious benefits for so many countries in the round and I think that on
balance, even those who have expressed difficultes will, on balance, be winners
from it and can't believe that in the end they will see it fai as a consequence of
intransigence on one point or another.
J: Mr Keating, apart from GATT did you discuss the prospects of Australia
becoming a republic?
PJK: No, no, no the Prime Minister and I had a chat about that in London, I think
you might remember and we didn't discuss it tday. This is an issue in our
constitutional life which will take some time 1o be resolved, but like most
national debates of substance they take time.
J: Did you talk about the future of the Commonwealth?
JM: I think when many people look at the Commonwealth, they think it is just
bound together loosely with intangible ties. I think that understates what the
Commonwealth does and understates it quite dramatically. Many of the
principles that we agreed at Harare two years ago are now being put into
practice. A number of Commonwealth countrieE that weren't democracies two
years ago are now democracies. The level of trade in the Commonwealth is a
very dramatic instance of the close relationship that exists between countries
often on different parts of the globe. I think those people who stand back and
say well, the Commonwealth may have been of !; ome use years ago, but it is a
little out of date now, I believe they are absolutely and totally wrong and I
think this conference will prove it.
J: Mr Keating, would you see a republican Australia stay a part of the
Commonwealth?
PJK: Entirely and definitely because I think that as the Prime Minister has said,
intangible though some of these links may be, it is the intangible quality, the
common ground, the common history, in many respects, of course, the
common language and the success the Commonwealth has had in such weighty
matters as South Africa in just recent times. I think it is very difficult to get a
grouping of nations states together today for w. iat ever reason. But to have
one with a history like this representing such a large part of the worlds
population and production is a unique opporturtity to, I think, not only raise
matters of international significance, but actually ; eek to remedy some of them.
JM: Thanks very much indeed.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THlE PRIME MINISTER, THlE HON P. J KEATING, MY
EXTRACTS FROM JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE, MEDIA CENTRE,
HAWAII BEACH HOTEL, LIMASSOL, FRIDAY, 22 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
His Excellency Mr Glafcos Clerides:
We have had our afternoon break and because we have concluded the
discussion of a very important subject and because we have reached a decision
we thought that during the break, we would come and inform you about the
decision taken. With regard to the importance of the decision I have four
Prime Ministers with me who will explain the importance of the decision..
P1K: Mr President, I don't think I have much more to add to that, but to say that the
importance of the statement is that it exists, that it has come from a diverse
group, most from the developing countries including the least developed
countries, two G7 countries, four members of the (" airns Group represented at
CHOGM. It is a substantial statement at a critical -drne. There are 55 days left
only to the December 15 deadline and we are calling on the relevant countries
to endorse the Draft Final Act including the Blair House Accord which was a
substantial part of it. The key point is that the inte:. ests of all participants are
factored into the GATT Round as it now stands. The Round began with an
ambitious proposal to-look after the traditional areis of goods and then moving
it to services, intellectual property rights and agriculture and including, of
course, much of the agriculture of the developing world. I think what has been
agreed in the Draft Final Act and the Blair House, Accord are key minimums for
a successful conclusion of the Round. So, the minimums are in place, the
Round can be successfully concluded, there has to be some give on the part of
a number of countries and the Round could be successfully concluded and I
think the point of the delegation is to impress upon selected countries the
importance which a representative group like CHOGM believes is important
for the things which Prime Minister Major said fj-ee trade, growth and jobs.
J: Can I ask Prime Minister Keating, how he would describe any Heads of
Government in key capitals visited who prove imf ervious to the arguments of
this delegation?
P1K: I didn't quite get the sense of the question. The fact that this is such a
representative group, say covering four Cairns Group countries, two G7 
2
countries and a lot of developing countries, it has status by virtue of the fact
that this statement exists and that there is a willingness and a wish to see the
Round concluded. Now, as people know, much has been done to get to a
point of conclusion as Prime Minister Major has sid. There are a few areas
outstanding and they are the matters which I think we should wish to focus
upon and that is why as the Secretary General said, a decision about which
places, that is which Governments will be visited and by whom will be the key
points.
ends 
Left to right along table 6k enc &amp; n
1 The Rt Hon P J Patterson
Prime Minister, Jamaica
2 The Hon P. J Keating MP
Prime Minister, Australia
3 Mr Glafkos Clerides
President, Cyprus
4 The Rt Hon John Major
Prime Minister, Britain
Chief Eleazar Chukwuemeka ( Emeka) Anyaoku
( simply as Chief Anyaoku)
Commonwealth Secretary-General
6 The Hon Goh Chok Tong
Prime Minister, Singapore 



/ 7
PRIME MINISTER
COPY OF PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH NOTES
CHOGM EXECUTIVE SESSION
FRIDAY 22 OCTOBEF, 1993 
paech nok'o œ Ce c. utV
Sc'yior 22 o c\-j
CHOGM 1993
AGENDA ITE1 3 . IULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS
TRADE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE CONCLUDING PHASE
Heads of Delegation, delegates
Gratified to hear so many speakers expressing strong support for the
urgent completion of the Uruguay Round of Trade Negotiations
trade has always been the basis for economic growth and
development
Earlier this wxeek, the Cairns Group, led by Australia, and including
Malaysia, Canada and New Zealand aVgeed on a strongly-worded
communique which set out parameters for concluding the Round by
December and Ministers led by Senator Cook presented this to key
participants in Europe
Completion of the Uniguay Round negotiations is the single most
important task on the economic agenda for national governments
and the international trading community
No other action could do more to revive the hesitant world
economy.
After seven years, the negotiations face a real deadline by 15 December
only 55 days away
The Uruguay Round is not just a bilateral issue between the world's two
largest trading blocs
The Round outcome will encourage the integration of developing
countries into the international trading and financial systems of the
global economy
Recent World Bank/ OECD study, mentioned by John Major and others
yesterday, demonstrates that all countries have a stake in the Round 
potential gains for the world economy of USS213 billion by
2002 ( up to USS190 billion of this from liberalisation of
agricultural trade)
developing countries would obtain a direct share of these gains
over USS70 billion from the agriculture package and a
further USS8 billion from the liberalisation of
manufactures
And these estimates do not take into account the Round outcome on
services, the fastest growing area of wrld trade
These potential benefits for developing countries are at least
equivalent to the amount industrial countries annually transfer as
official aid ( around USS55 billion in 1991)
The Uruguay Round has been the mosl ambitious round of multilateral
trade negotiations it has engaged all 111 contracting parties of the GATT
developing countries have been more involved in the
negotiations than in any previous GATT Round in the hope of
obtaining improved access to markets
The outcome will cover sectors of interest to developing countries
such as agriculture, textiles and tropical products
multilateral liberalisation in the Uruguay Round will also remove
the bias against processed exports fiom developing countries
outcomes on intellectual proper. and investment measures will
ensure new technologies and investments are available to share
The result of the Uruguay Round should be a comprehensive,
balanced and coherent set of trade rules to meet the needs of a more
interdependent Nworld 
it should deliver significant cuts in the distortions to trade in
agriculture; reductions in tariff and non-tariff barriers to industrial
products, including textiles; and new agreements on services and
intellectual property, embodied in an overhauled legal and
institutional framework
Failure to conclude the Round risks unleashing protectionism and
unilateralism political will is needed to surmount rising populist protectionist
pressures and resist narrow interest groups in some of the world's
major economies
The Round was commenced covering the full range of interests of all
participants and it must be completed this way
reject suggestions of partial or interim solutions for the benefit of
some
Commonwealth countries have, in the past, expressed their strong support
for the Uruguay Round
it is time for us to say clearly tc the world that the Uruguay Round
must be concluded this year and it must be a balanced outcome.
We have an opportunity to put the Commonwealth's name to a separate
statement calling on all participants in the negotiations to show good
faith and stop using their self-interested concerns as an excuse for delay.
A substantive statement on this subject at this critical time, which had the
full support of this diverse group, could have a positive impact on the
negotiations Know extensive consultations have occurred amongst delegations here
over the past few days on the text of a possible statement
which should be in the strongest possible terms and be conveyed in
the clearest possible way to le2ders of the major countries.
National political expediency for some cannot be allowed to stand in
the way of a global result of benefit to all 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, HMY BRITANNIA, LIMASSOL, FRID) AY, 22 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Was it a friendly meeting?
PM: I've never had anything but the most friendly and cordial meetings with
the Queen ever. As you know I hold her n the highest regard and I
always enjoy her company as we all had the privilege of enjoying her
last night.
J: What did you make of her speech last night?
PM: I thought it was an entertaining speech, but it also shows I think, that
Her Majesty is herself making her own commentary on the changes
which have occurred in the Commonwealth in the last 40 years, as she
did last night. And also making everyone aiware that she understands
it is a continuing dynamic and that the cha3nge she has seen is only
evidence of the fact that there will be more change and that she
understands and can accommodate those changes.
J: Do you see it as a public affirmation of your Balmoral discussions?
PM: I thought in a sense she was as she authorised me to say there, she
herself then was saying last night something similar. That is, countries
have constitutional discussions, she wished the nation the best in
those debates taking no particular side in them and saying that the
monarchy has in respect of these things, the Constitutional Monarchy
has a certain position, entirely certain of its position and that countries
should in their own interests go and have these debates.
J: Did those remarks give you encouragemrent for heading Australia
towards a republic? 
PM: It is not a matter of any encouragement, it is the Queen as
Constitutional Monarch defining what she ; ees as changes or possible
changes and drawing on the evidence of change over the 40 years of
her realm. As she was saying, one wouldn't have believed in 1955 or
1953 for instance that a CHOGM meeting would be here for instance
in Cyprus. Or she said that Fiji wouldn't be here. She was making
obvious the fact that a lot of changes have already occurred and some
may still occur, that she understands these things.
J: Prime Minister, do you get the feeling that she is comfortable with that
process of change?
PM: I'm not here to reveal any context of any disicussion I have had with the
Queen, but to say that I think Her Majesty understands these historical
changes probably better than any of us talking here at the moment.
ends 



( D aC ' 4 C
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIM1E MINISTER, THE HION P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, CORAL BEACH HOTEL, PAPHOS, SATURDAY,
23 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, how seriously do you think the French are going to take this
delegation the Commonwealth is going to send?
PM: There are a couple of francophone countries in it and I think it is representing
all of the Commonwealth Heads of Government and Commonwealth countries,
so they are going to have to consider it. It a measure of the weight of
international opinion for a successful conclusion of the Round. I think that all
the parties here are going to need to give that little extra bit of ground that it is
going to take to get the agreement to bed it has, after all been seven years in
the doing.
J: If this pressure does not work, if this final fling a 5 it were doesn't work, is there
anywhere else to go?
PM: I think that we are pursuing our own efforts through the Cairns Group with the
United States and also speaking directly to Europe. So, I'd say it is coming at
three directions that is the US themselves, pre~ sure from the United States in
collaboration with the UK and Germany; another stream coming through the
Cairns Group and perhaps another now with the Commonwealth.
J: Why should cities like London and Washington be included on the mission
agenda and cities like Dublin not?
PM: Because I think that the key ones here are probably Paris and Bonn and
Washington is there because its part of the negotiation. as is Geneva.
J: But they're already on side, I mean London and Washington. 
PM: I know, but it is quite a complex negotiation this. There are little bits and
pieces in the services packages and the intellectual property rights packages
that other people are arguing over.
J: In our terms, what does success and failure meani for Australia?
PM: In round terms it means about $ 70 billion ta the agricultural commodity
producers world wide and we have a substanfial piece of that. It is worth
about $ 200 billion in international terms the saiccess of the Uruguay Round.
It is the most important backdrop that we can have now to all these economies
rejoining the world economy the old Soviet Union, the Commonwealth of
Independent States coming back into the world cconomy for the first time since
1914; India; China; South America to have this great change in the world
economy, something which we have not seen in the post-war years it should
be there with a backdrop that covers goods and services and intellectual
property and agriculture. Without that, the risk is there will be a slide back into
protectionism and back into blocks and it s',-ems that so much has been
accomplished there is just that little bit extra to 1go to get an agreement.
J: Prime Minister Major has talked of world wi slump, world wide growth in
unemployment, what is at stake for Australia in 1 hose sorts of terms?
PM: I think the world is in a recovery mode after now three years in recession or
two and a half years in recession, but there is no doubt that the velocity of
trade and the impetus to trade and investment coming from a successful
conclusion of the Uruguay Round would be very profound. I think the world is
growing again; the US is growing again, Japan is about to turn, Europe is still
quite flat, but the Uruguay Round would certainly add some impetus to that.
J: Prime Minister, you wrote a letter to the Frencf. Prime Minister, Mr Balladur a
few weeks ago, I remember you telling us on the last trip. Did you get a reply
from that and what did he say?
PM: Yes, we had a reply, but it was a reply saying that there had to be a balance of
interests, it had to be comprehensive and balanced and, of course,
comprehension and balance is all in the eye of the beholder.
J: In your discussions last night with the Prime Minister of Malaysia, had you
succeeded in bringing him any closer to the way that you are thinking on
APEC?
PM: It is not a matter of me succeeding. I had the oipportunity to talk to him about
what we see as APEC's opportunities and how that in his terms multilateral ising
US interests in the Pacific and Japanese intere~. ts in the Pacific is not only for
the interests of the Asia-pacific countries, but Malaysia as well. I think the
Prime Minister took the conversation in good spirits and I really enjoyed it.
J: Mr Keating, do you think most Australians rea ly appreciate the importance of
the end of the GATT round or understand it? 
PM: It has been in the news for so long now, I don't know whether people just give
a gigantic yawn about it, but there is no doubi: that this deadline December
is the final deadline in the seven years. Thi!; is the end of the US fast track
legislation given to President Clinton by the Congress; this is the last legislation
they can tie a deal up under. So this is it De,-ember 15 is 54 days away and
we have got 54 days to get a major internationi1 trade service and agricultural
agreement to conclusion.
J: Can you spell out what it would mean, what failure would mean, to the average
Australian?
PM: What it wkill mean I think, is that the improvement in our international income
from agriculture and potentially from service,, and goods would over time,
substantially constrain Australian incomes from what they would otherwise be
if there were a set of background rules. In Australia's terms, we are doing
some other things. We are also covering off ithat contingency by developing
APEC, but APEC can be a GATT plus outcome, that is the GATT overlay plus
APEC or in some way it can substitute by becoming a freer trade area, but the
best result is to get the general international backdrop in, to get GATT
concluded.
J: Would this renewed Commonwealth emphasis on trade, do you see that
affecting the fu~ ture direction of the Commonwealth, how do you see that
going?
PM: No, I thought it was a fairly healthy argument and discussion. That is, that for
many years now the Commonwealth has focussed on South Africa and played a
quite decisive role in a resolution of the impasse in South Africa and as I
suggested today, I hope in a couple of years time we will see a South African
democratically elected Head of State here at a Commonwealth conference. But
as that issue is abated in Commonwealth terms, the Commonwealth is picking
up other issues of interest to member countriesand of course, GATT and trade
and incomes is an obvious one.
J: So is the Commonwealth increasing its value to Australia?
PM: I think the Commonwealth provides the opportunity of being a very large and
representative group of countries and were the Commonwealth not to exist
how would such a group of countries meet? Why would they meet? And the
strength which has been drawn from them just wouldn't be available. We
would be left to other fora like the United Nations et cetera. And it has been
particularly useful on a number of issues or South Africa and in a lot of
technical issues in education for young peopl.!; an environmental policy and
maybe now with a GATT.
J: But how useful have you found this discussions i: oday in the retreat? 
PM: Useful enough. Today there was a discussion about the mechanics of this
who would represent the Commonwealth and what capitals would be visited
and then we had a discussion about Cameroon's entry into membership of the
Commonwealth and that took up all of today's discussions, to this time.
J: What are the human rights concerns about Camneroon at the moment, that the
Aficans were putting up today?
PM: There wasn't much put up by way of a constraint upon Cameroon joining, just
saying that lets prima facie decide that they should join in two years time
provided that in the interim, they continue on the path of improvement in the
general conduct of their society starting with, of course, the elections which
they have had and where we have seen some multi-party elections et cetera.
So, I think it is left on the basis that if there is any broad objection to
Cameroon joining in two years time then that may disqualify, them.
J: Prime Minister, on the matter of you meeting with Dr Mahathir, do you think
you have now established the basis of a reasonmble relationship with him, it has
been a bit rocky over the years?
PM: My discussions with Prime Minister Mahathir were very pleasant indeed. He
has arrived at a number of positions on various things of interest to his country,
he is thoughtful and I hope he thought that Australia has thoughtful, well
worked through positions as well and we had a chance to talk about some of
those and I think that was a good opportunity another reason why the
Commonwealth is quite a useful body.
J: You have got a grand vision for APEC, is it still a concern though that Dr
Mahathir is still unconvinced and cautious about APEC?
PM: I think we would like everybody to be embracing it as enthusiastically as
possible, but nevertheless his thoughts are running in the same direction as ours
that is, he is supporting the GATT, he is supporting multi-lateral solutions
and he is supporting freer trade.
J: Has the Government done projections for the effect on growth, the effect on
unemployment, the effect on other economic ar.-as for Australia if GATT fails?
PM: No, no, it is not a matter of GATT failing. If GATT fails then the world will
just rattle through without, and I mean rattle through, without a proper and
sensible backdrop in trading rules and that would be a great shame and a time
when the world economy has the potential to &amp; row so much. Now, the World
Bank and the OECD did a study which concluded that international world GDP
would be improved by about $ 210 billion if the GATT succeeds. Now, of that,
commodities represented about $ 70 billion and Australia would have a share of
that.
J: But have you done projections on what effect il would have for Australians? 
PM: No.
J: If the Uruguay Round actually failed, you ' iave spoken about the world
breaking into blocks where does Australia fit i: 1to that scenario?
PM: I don't think we should assume at this stage that it is going to fail or that people
would break into blocks. I think there will be a great resistance on the part of
many countries not to see the areas they live become exclusive areas, to
become blocks, but basically open and free trade areas. Therefore if GATT
were to fail not compound the problem by seeing their trading areas become
blocks, become exclusive areas of trade. I think there is a lot of understanding
about the dangers of this and the best way, of course, is to make the GATT
succeed.
J: With Dr Mahathir's continual reticence, does that put extra pressure on this
meeting with President Soeharto to try and get s; upport?
PM: No. Everyone doesn't have to agree with everything for things to be valuable
and worthwhile.
J: But you do need a significant supporter in ASEAN?
PM: Yes, and that has been so. We have had that to date and that has been
appreciated, but we still are at the stage in our we are always nevertheless
tolerant of other peoples views, even if they don't agree with us on some of
these things.
J: Prime Mnister, did you try to persuade Dr Mahathir to come to Seattle?
PM: No, I didn't. We were just talking about trade, the Pacific, trading entities,
multilateralism. and a few things of interest to Australia.
J: You've suggested that APEC turns into an Asi a-Pacific economic community,
Dr Mahathir didn't sound particularly enthusiast . c about that this morning, what
is your timetable for that? Do you actually have one?
PM: No, I don't, but I think that it is very likely that at the Heads of Government
meeting that the acronym may change from economic co-operation to
economic community. APEC first envisaged was like a mini OECD an
information sharing, policy focussed organisation. What I think it may become
is a device for pro-active liberalisation of trade which is taking it a step further.
J At this Leaders Summit?
PM: I think so. I think we will get an endorsement of those sorts of directions at
this Leaders Summit.
J: Could you say why you didn't raise the Seattle question to Dr Mahathir? 
6
PM: No, no, because I know his view. It is not a matter of me trying to corral him
or to pressure him, he is entitled to his view. You can't expect everybody to
agree with you on these matters.
J: Are reciprocal visits between you and Dr Mahathir next year now a done deal
do you think?
PM: I think so. We haven't arranged any times, but I think that will happen.
ends 



/ 14
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP KOUION ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE, SUNDAY, 24
OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, it has been another long day of talking, as we are getting
towards the end of this conference, do you 6un the Commonwealth is any
more or less relevant now than it was at the befinning?
PM: I think it is a very useful body, it is a dispara-1 body drawn from right across
the landscape from the countries of the world and it can play a very useful role.
It does deliver, apart from concentration on issues like South Africa which it
has done effectively and Rhodesia in years gone by, this year the GATT. It has
also focussed attention on things it can do ii: self as a program deliverer of
things like education and health into certain countries and that was the subject
of today's discussions. There is the Commonwealth fund for technical cooperation;
Commonwealth health programs and the some evaluation of the
efficiency of the Secretariat it was an administrative day. But these are the
things, I think, the Commonwealth does and does rather well.
J: How do you feel about the sort of big pictuie demands that people like Dr
Mahathir are calling for Commonwealth interv,. ntion or action of Bosnia. Do
you think there is a role there?
PM: No, the Commonwealth is not a crisis management organisation. That is a role
which is properly with the UN. I think if it tries,. to extend itself into those sorts
of areas, I think it will get into trouble. Now t lere was some of this discussed
yesterday and I made that point, that the Cormmonwealth should pick its mark
and do the things it can do and not try and do the things it is not set up to do. I
know people get distressed about these varioL s situations in various parts of
the world. Indeed here in Cyprus a country which is divided. But, the
Commonwealth can't fulfil that role, but it can c: o other things and it is a matter
of deciding what it can do and what it can't do. 
J. o you have majority support Prime Minister, ; 1mongst the -Other leaders'?
PM: I think so, I think that was very broadly reflected yesterday that view about
what the Commonwealth can do and can't do and what it should do. It is an
effective body I think, for certain things, but there is no point in over claiming
for it or over reaching for it because to do that is to transgress upon the field of
other organisations like the United Nations or the World Bank or the IMF. So,
it is a case of the specialised dialogue it can promote and the work it can do
and the programs it can deliver are things of substance and they are important
in they're right and it doesn't have to go doing things which other agencies and
organisations, in fact, are set up to do.
J: Prime Minister in your view, what are the major threads that Commonwealth
leaders will have to pull together in preparatior for the final communique?
PM: I think that is probably all revealed now in terms of the discussion on the
GATT. I think some of the themes which we discussed yesterday that is,
some of the things around the agenda for peace themes run by the UN
Secretary-General and the program delivery issues which we discussed today.
J: Prime Minister, the Queen talked the other day of changing the
Commonwealth. Some of the British papers are now canvassing the idea that
Prince Charles perhaps could become Head of the Commonwealth, what do
you think of that idea?
PM: I have never heard of that idea. I think, tha Queen has managed to keep,
obviously, a personal association with the Commonwealth all these years and
takes the opportunity on every Commonwealth meeting, I think, to meet each
Head of Government and to participate appropriately in the proceedings of the
meetings. So in that sense, I think, she is a unifying and binding element on the
Commonwealth.
J: Do you think she should stay on in that role?
PM: It is not for me to say, nor is it for me to comment on Fleet Street stonies.
J: Do you think it is the sort of job that someonie like Charles would be able to
handle?
PM: I think, Prince Charles is quite competent at whatever he has turned his hand to
in the various things he has taken an interest in, but to say that is to say the
obvious isn't it, rather to endorse him for any role with the Commonwealth.
That is a matter entirely for the Queen herself
J: Prime Minister, the Commonwealth is made up mainly of developing countries.
Is there a danger that there just won't be enough money to keep an Organisation
like this doing the things that the Commonwealth wants to do? 
PM: There is always a discussion every meeting about resources and there was a
discussion about resources today. These are in the main -made up, the great
bulk of them are made up by the developed countries and countries are
assessed, but most countries make a contribution. So, the body is well funded
and there has been efficiency reviews in the lasi year or two and the Secretary-
General was talking about those today. So, I don't think resources are a
problem, it is a matter of having it adequately resourced and efficiently
delivering its programs.
J Would you prefer a shorter CHOGM next time perhaps?
PM: I think they could be shorter. T made those remarks today. In fact they meet
every two years, I suggested they could meet every three and probably for
three days rather than five.
J: How did that go down?
PM: I am not sure all that well, but the fact is it had to be said and I said it.
J: Prime Minister, you got a round of applause when you mentioned Mabo
reconciliation in the opening speech, there arc suggestions at home that the
Coalition there are divisions within the Liberal party about the way the
leadership is handling the issue, do you think that the Liberal party and the
leaders specifically, there is an element of racism in their response to Mabo?
PM: That is extreme language, but I think the federal Opposition would be wise to
join the rest of the country in supporting a Ma: oo settlement, a comprehensive
one. I think it is better for the Aboriginal and Islander community of Australia
that such a settlement enjoys the full support of the parliament. But, there is a
lot of interest in it here at CHOGM because I think that countries are interested
in Australia and they are interested to see what we do with our indigenes.
J: Has this been a particularly successful CHOGM in terms of Australia's role and
Australia's interest given the predominance of issues such as GATT and other
things?
PM: We pursue our interests and I think single mindi. dly on the issues that matter to
us, obviously trade at the moment is topical to us and the GATT and we have
pursued that because we think this is a very effective forum to promote a
successful conclusion of the GATT. We hav, 1 a thought through position I
think, on most things and on an agenda such as the one which has been
promoted at this meeting. We have had a position on each and every item. So,
I think we have come well prepared and we take the business of the
Commonwealth seriously.
J: Prime Minister, one more question on rcconciliation and that is the
entombment of the unknown soldier. Dr Hewson has is apparently wishing to
be one of the pall bearers, do you think that wculd be reasonable for him to be
joining you? 
PM: I will think about that when I get home, if he says anything about it to me.
J: Prime Minster, you are to meet the Singapore Prime Minister tomorrow, what
do you hope to get out of that and what sort cf subjects are you going to rely
on?
PM: I think mutual trade and investment issues, the politics of the area and also
APEC because Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong is going to Seattle and he will
be interested in APEC and I would be interested in his thoughts about how the
APEC discussion is developing.
J: Would you hope that a person like the Prime Minister of Singapore would act
as an honest broker if you like in further discussions with Dr Mahathir?
PM: I didn't raise ever with him yesterday whether he should go to Seattle or not. If
he goes good, if he doesn't go the meeting will go on and I think be successful.
It doesn't have to be entirely inclusive, people have choices here, so I think we
would like to see Dr Mahathir there, I would, but if he is not there the meeting
will succeed, I think, anyway.
ends 



TEL:
AMC CHM 933575634534 442 t~. 26. Oct. 93 8: 07 No. 001 P. 01/ 01
25-10-93 12: 38PM ( 591 # 1
STAmMCi: NT BY THE PRIM NSTERK-r1 EliON P J KEATING, MiP
MAISO AND LEADLRSIPI
T hc Mabo issue has exposed again John Hewson's wantton lack of leadership.
Threatened by his Western Auslralian Parliamrtrary suprorters, John Hcwson is failing
absolutely to show ary leadership on Mabo while the Western Ausiralian Premier
says he wiU legislate to actually extinguish native title, to abolish it.
At the same time as Dr Hewson sits mute on tht issue, Pi. ter Reith attacks the
legitimacy of the JBigh Court and thrieatens it, reportedly Sayulg if it contllues to
behave this way it wiU be reformed, and arguing any preference for Aborigines in the
Native Title Bill should be struck out.
Keithl is sharply at odds with the Deputy Leader of the Iiberal Party Dr Wooldridge
who has indicated his support for the High Court dCcision and its legislative
rainifications.
Dr Ilcwson is presiding over a divided Liberal Parry and a divided coalition on Mabo.
Without a shred orcouragc or decency he is leaving the field to the Courts and the
Reiths for fear of his owti job and the position Western A. usirdlian Liberads might take.
Premier Court has challenged John -ewson to stick with him on Mabo and that means
conniving in the wholesale extinguishunenr of Naiive Title.
Wkhen will John 11cwson stand up and be counte.
Is Dr Mcwson's only rolc to be that of spoiler a role he Is working hard to pci-feet.
CvP RUS
2S Ortither 1993 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MiINISTEIF,, TH7E HON P. J. KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, LE MERIDIEN HOTEL, MONDAY, 25 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, how did the meeting with ViWr Gob go?
PM: It was exceptionally warm and we had 1Ti. any things in common the trade
between Australia and Singapore which is growing now inexorably, all the time;
the co-operative things we are doing, not just in Australia and Singapore, but
with third countries particularly in south-east Asia and also our mutual interest
in APEC which, of course, Prine Minist er Goh will be attending the APEC
leaders summit in Seattle next month and wve were talking about that too.
J: Does he share your view of APEC becomaing an economic community at this
leaders summidt?
PM: I think Singapore is verny strong about APEC's prospects and the verny nice
coincidence of events which have brought it about and the fact that we the two
largest economies in the world verny interested and verny keen to develop a multilateral
structure that is, of course, the US and Japan so he is quite excited
about APEC as I am.
J: Prime Minister, why did th6 Commonwealth squib the issue of human rights?
PM: I don't follow your ' squib' comment.
J: Well, they didn't issue the Paphos Declaration, it seems to be a verny watered
down statement.
PM: I see, you mean the humanitarian statement. Because, I think, basically that it
was not possible to draft something whichi saw the Commonwealth taking on
some crisis management, dispute settling rc'le which is what some of the drafting
had anticipated. That is not the Commronwealth's strength, it is not the
Commonwealth's role. Some of us said that a day or so ago, I said it to you
yesterday and I think that is the reason why it will be reflected though in the
communique, but in more appropriate terns.
J: What was the thinking behind maintaining residual sanctions against South
Africa until there is a democratically elected government in place? 
PM: I think there has been a consistency on ihe Commonwealth's part about these
things, but again, we are very up beat about the prospects of the election of a
democratically elected non-racially select,. d government and I indicated in this
morning's session that Australia would. be contributing financially, to the
monitoring effort on the part of the Commonwealth.
J: With the personnel that we would be expected, the election observers or
whatever, that we would be expected to pirovide as well, is that in addition or in
exchange for involvement in any United Nations forces?
PM: No, that would be in addition to. I also said we would be inviting some of our
staff to participate in the monitoring, tha: is some of our electoral staff, as well
as the financial commitment by Australia, which was very well received.
J: Prime Minister, how hard a job do you think it is going to be to get the situation
in South Africa after the election sorted out, how long realistically do you think
it is going to take, how long will Australia be involved?
PM: I don't think I could say Peter ( Harvey) exactly how long that would take. It
depends on how much good will there is on the part of the South Afican
community in general after the election;, but it will be a watershed for that
country and watersheds to produce a change of sentiments, so it may well be
that things run there as they did in Zimbabwe.
J: Mr Keating, can you see Australia and -he Commonwealth reaching the point
where they might impose sanctions on Turkey over Cyprus?
PM: Cyprus is essentially in the charge of th,. United Nations and I think what the
communique will express today is a recitation of the Commonwealth's support
for the UN resolutions which have been passed on this in 1974 and 1984, but I
don't think the Commonwealth sees for itself a role in taking primary carriage
of the matter. It is properly with the UN, but we think it is a useful thing to
support the UN's efforts.
J: Do you think sanctions would work againist Turkey?
PM: I don't know, but that begs the question about who manages the dispute and it
won't be the Commonwealth managing it.
J: What have you really achieved here after five days?
PM: I think getting a very firm statement of support for the conclusion of the GATT
Round is a particularly important thing at this critical junction. I mean, the
Commonwealth's meetings have been held coincidently as it turns out with quite
important epochs in the history of countries and communities most particularly
obvious was Rhodesia and South Afica. It happens also to be true this year for
the GATT and getting such a firm statement of support and a delegation to visit
the key players in the GATT Round at this key time would be a very useful 
thing. If this meeting succeeded in doing ihat and that only it would have been
well worth having and beyond that, of counse, it has done other things.
J: Why do you feel it necessary to issue a statement in relation to Dr Hewson and
Mabo?
PM: Because I think his position is becoming appalling, that is why. Dr Hewson is in
a position now where Mr Court has called on his support and what Mr Court
is saying he wants to extinguish, he want tc actually abolish native title, he wants
to wipe out the thing the High Court said Australia indigenes have. Now, where
does Dr Hewson stand? For how long can he hide from these vital questions
particularly at a time when Mr Reith is saying that the High Court is usurping
the role of Parliament, that it needs to be reformed, to use his word, that a
Coalition government would need to reform it, whatever that means, whatever
threat that implies for the High Court and while there is great division in the
Liberal party between the likes of Mr Woolridge Mr Reith and between other
Liberals and Mr Court. And the implied threat that Western Australian
parliamentary liberals who are supporting Dr Hewson's leadership won't support
him if he doesn't toe Mr Court's line. I think it is time that Dr Hewson stood up
on Mabo and said on this matter of great principle where he stands.
J: Prime Minister, is there anything in the legislation that we don't know about that
might spring a surprise and cause great concern to some elements of the
community like pastoralists?
PM: No, I don't think so. Let's not be trying to give Dr Hewson any outs this is a
very simple matter. The High Court has siid that there is a native tite flowing
from Aboriginal tradition and custom in th common law of Australia does he
support that or does he support Richard Ccurt and if he supports that he should
put his shoulder to the wheel and support tlis legislation.
J: Who do you think is going to win the split then between the two factions in the
party who do you think will come to the ascendancy?
PM: The Liberal party on this key question is very divided and given the fact that
since the election Dr Hewson has done noihing but play a spoiling role on the
Budget and more laterally on Mabo, then I think it is time on a matter which is
going to extend way beyond this Parliament. A matter that goes back to the
actual genesis of our settlement to have a resolution of this is a matter of high
policy in Australian public life. And for him to be ducking and weaving, or
worse, conniving in any attempt by Richard Court to actually abolish native title
would leave the Liberal party without any credibility on this key matter.
J: Prime Minister, what are hoping to achieve now in Indonesia with your talks
with President Soeharto?
PM: Well, it is eighteen months since I have seen President Soeharto and I think
given the fact that I have got to overfly or fly through Indonesian air space, it
was a reasonable time to actually call in and say hello and just recap on the 
eighteen months of events which have taken place and take the opportunity to
have a talk about APEC which is now a month away the Seattle meeting
what we see for APEC; how he is seeing the APEC matter unfolding and so we
can compare notes ahead of the meeting.
J: Do you have any specific goals out of that meeting at all?
PM: No, I just think routine visits by neighbours should be more of the rule rather
than the exception.
J: Are you expecting clear support from President Soeharto as opposed to Dr
Mahathir's opposition to some aspects of APEC?
PM: Indonesia has had a very careful, but nevertheless pragmatic approach about the
great opportunity which APEC opens. I mean, APEC opens the opportunity of
seeing in a multi-lateral context the trading interests of the first and second
largest economies in the world, along with those of the Asia-Pacific community.
It is a great opportunity and, I think, Indonesia understand that and has seized
upon that.
J: In your meeting with Mr Goh, you said that you talked about trade with third
countries, the sort of joint venture trade into other areas, is there anything
specifically that the two governments can do to promote that or is that going to
happen within a wider context of APEC?
PM: It is happening now, it is happening at a ferocious speed now. There are so
many joint ventures being entered between Australian companies and
Singaporean companies for business, not just in Singapore, but for other
countries of the region. I think that the collaboration between Singapore and
Australia will just continue to grow and grow.
J: Prime Minister, Mr Howe has said that a jobs levy on higher income earners
will be considered by the Government, is it a possible goer?
PM: We won't be anticipating any of that until I receive the report on employment
which will be handed down in a month from now, so we will see what the
Commidttee recommends and then we'll take a position about it.
J: Is there growing support for the idea in the Government?
PM: It is a fashionable idea at the moment, but whether the fashion will give up the
solidity I think it would require will depend on what comes from the Report.
ends 



W-I44'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, WISMA NEGARA STATE GUEST HOUSE, TUESDAY,
26 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, you have had a very brief meeting with the Indonesian
President, can you give us some idea of what the discussion was
about?
PM: It was just a welcome and I think it had a nice relaxed air about it with
a kind of informality that one can't engender without some real basis of
a relationship which I hope we have developed over the last couple of
years. So, it was a very convivial meeting and we'll get onto the matter
of substance tomorrow, although I did have a chance on the way into
the city to talk to Foreign Minister Alatas about some of the issues.
J: What are the matters of substance Prime Minister'?
PM: Essentially I think, they are going to revolve around trade and
investment issues and most particularly of course, the forthcoming
APEC meeting in Seattle in November.
J: Will you be asking the Indonesians to agree to APEC becoming a
community?
PM: I think the Indonesian Government understands well what the Eminent
Persons Group has recommended and I think supports the general
development which APEC is taking. But, again, that is a matter for
Heads of Government and leaders at the November meeting and that
is the whole point of the meeting they will put the construction on
APEC which they think is the appropriate one.
J: Their view seems to be though softly, softly.
PM: Maybe softly, softly, but I don't think slowly, slowly. I think they have
got a nice balance between the pace of change and what it should 
encompass, as I think we have as a country which has been very much
involved in the development of APEC from its inception.
J: Mr Alatas has just told us he really appreciated your remarks in
Washington on human rights, will you be going further down that path
here?
PM: What I said there was one deals with a country on the totality of its
relationship and we see the relationship with Indonesia in the broad,
that is a large country of 180 million people, very geographically close
to Australia, developing now at quite a pace and reaching out to the
world and it also has its particular problems as developing countries
do and this has been expressed in a number of ways. In part, of
course, the problems in Timor a few years ago. But, I think the
important thing is to see the relationship in the totality; we have made
our position clear about these human rights issues, but we also are not
a sort of mono-dimensional government. We are looking at Indonesia
in the broad.
J: Prime Minister, given ASEAN's importance to APEC, at Seattle if the
ASEAN leaders that are there have some doubts about changing to
any kind of community faster than perhaps you would like, will
Australia support that position?
PM: I don't think you understand well I mean the importance that the
ASEAN countries put upon the development of the Asia-Pacific or
APEC, they are more positive about this than the media generally
gives credit. Australia, as a prime mover in this has had to take all
views into account those of the major powers, China, Japan the
United States, Indonesia, those of the smaller countries, I think we
have got the balance about right.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P. J. KEATING UP,
PRESS CONFERENCE, STATE GUEST HOUSE, JAKARTA, WEDNESDAY,
27 OCTOBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROFF COPY
PM: Well, I will be very brief just to say that I have just concluded a meeting
with President Soeharto which went for one and three quarter hours. I am
pleased to say that all the time was taken up with matters of substance
rather than any statement, any discussion about things, obvious, or With
any other protocols. It was all about our mutual interests both bilatera,
and multilateral and of course I will have the opportunity today of meeting
other ministers in the government including the Foreign Minister to
complete the rounds of discussions and dinner with President Soeharto
and Mrs Soeharto this evening.
The purpose of the visit is a working visit virtually one full business day
stopover from the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in
Cyprus and it is I think an opportunity for me and I think also the President
and other Ministers too recount the progress we have made since I visited
here eighteen months ago. And anyway I regard it as a good opportunity
and one certainly to be taken up.
J: Did the President give you any indication he will attend the APEC Leaders
Meeting?
PMV: Well, we had a long discussion about APECabout what it means to the
region, and the value it holds for countries like Indonesia and Australia
and the importance of the Leaders Meeting in Seattle. One I think
important thing about APEC is that it has been a principal to principal
matter. That is APEC has developed in to this stage and certainly the last
eighteen months on a principal to principal basis its not been developed
by Foreign Ministries its been developed by Principals and therefore the
instincts of leaders in this becomes particularly important because there is
no road map for APEC it's all new ground. And therefore it relies upon the
instinct of the players about how it goes and where it goes. Thars why the
Seattle meeting will be important, its not just a routine meeting one which
is going to put the sort of gloss upon the work which is done in the
ministerial meeting. The ministerial meeting will be important but the 
Leaders Meeting will be, I think, supremely important and therefore fte
modalities of the meeting and its conclusions will be important now and
you asked me about President Soeharto's attitude to hosting a meeting in
1994, much of that depends upon the attitude of the leaders at the Seale
summit. So I don't think any of us are seeking to make any assumptions
about those things but to take this meeting on for what it is and-that is a
substantial opportunity to clear our collective minds about the
development of what's going to be a very significant grouping of countries
and an open regional grouping of countries.
J: Does President Soeharto indicate that he doesn't want to fast track
APEC?
PMV: No, the thing is what his view* is as my view has been, that is he has
tested out peoples opinions, you try and get a feel of the issues and as
things change you move it forward. Now you know the conventional
wisdom for instance not so long ago that China wouldn't this meeting that
conventional wisdom has proven to be untrue as I believed it would be
untrue. China having attended puts a different construction again on parts
of the meeting in terms of its comprehension. So one absorbs the various
changes, takes them into account and then tries to move the agenda on
and in that sense we are all taking notice of the changes which occur
along the road in the development of APEC. And understanding that there
has to be each particular block go into place for it to develop and that
certainly is President Soeharto's view but it is most definitely my view.
J: Did you discuss your hopes for APEC to become a community?
PMV: Well, that Is the very essence of it, it's not a matter of my hopes versus his
or what he thinks, that's the essence of it. It's a community of open
regionalism. The thing it is not a bloc to the extent that a bloc is regarded
as an exclusive economic zone or an exclusive economic region this does
not have exclusivity about it, it's an open regional structure as you have
heard me say so often it is hopefully a GATT plus structure so we have
the GATT into place then we overlay APEC across the top of it, but of
course obviously were GATT to fail APEC would then have an even more
obvious advantage in the sense that you are bringing together the two
largest economies in the world with China and with all of the countries of
South East Asia and putting them into a multi-lateral structure. I mean any
structure which multi-lateralises the interests of the United States and
rnulti-laterlises the interests of the-product in Japan and as a bonus China,
in structure with the rest of South East Asia is of course a huge advance
in the removal of impediments to an increase in the velocity of trade and
investment and that's what APEC should be seen to be about. I mean
journalists all too often try and see it as a bloc here and a bloc there, it is
all simple stuff black and white. It's not that, it's not. This is not win and
lose; this is win and win. I mean this is a structure which has a lot
sophistication about it and therefore those of us who are trying to put this
together understand what it holds. But also understands what each
member country or State will want to secure from it. 
J: Prime Minister, are you still as confident now as you were in Cyprus that
APEC will take the first step of becoming an economic community at the
meeting in Seattle?
PM: That is what I was just asked, that is what I've just answered.
J: But, are you as confident now as you were then?
PM: Well, of course I am that Is the whole essence of it. Developing APEC
beyond an information sharing thing where it started, a sort of mini OECD,
to something that has some executive functions about it. That is.
something which is looking at the development of an open, co-operative
regional trading zone or structure that is the essence of the change.
This is a very big change, but that is the essence of it. That question was
appropriate nine months, or a year ago, even eighteen months ago.
J: Can I ask you about GATT, following your success in getting the
Commonwealth to issue such a strong declaration, given President
Soeharto's position as head of the non-aligned movement are you hoping
for a similar sort of statement from him about GATT?
PM: Well, the President and I had quite a discussion this morning about the
GATT believing it to be supremely important, believing that the countries
of the south will genuinely secure a lot of market access from GATT. As I
said at CHOGM about billion worth of value to developing countries.
particularly agncultural producers coming from the GATT which is equal to
more than the bi-lateral aid which comes from developed countries to
developing countries now. So, there is a huge benefit in there and I think
the significance of Indonesia in not just its size, but the fact that President
Soeharto Is chairman of the non-aligned movement will not be lost on any
of the APEC attendees in terms of anything the President might say about
a world trading order and the importance of the GATT.
J. Prime Minister, how important do you think it will be in furthering the pace
of change of APEC in having Indonesia as the chair?
PM: What matters to APEC is the decisions that the Heads of Governments
take and leaders tako in Seattle. There are two logical points from hare
thore is the ministerial meeting and its important work; there is the
consideration of the Eminent Persons Group report and then there Is the
leaders meeting and its conclusions. They are the next logical steps in
the development of APEC.
J: So there is no doubt in your mind then, that President Soeharto will
attend?
PM' No, I expect President Soeharto to be there and I think that he will do as
he has always done competently and well and that is not just represent his
own country's interest, but countries with similar interests to Indonesia. 
J: A few months ago you spoke about APEC becoming a community how
do you describe the difference between an APEC Community and the only
model known to most people the European Community?
PM: The European Community has a formal treaty structure and it already has
open borders and no tariffs between them. This is not true of this ares of
the world. What I think APEC portends is half the worlds GOP being
allowed to move more freely between member states so that by takiig
away impediments to trade and investment and harmonising standards:
we can actually pick up the velocity of trade and investment in this part of
the world which is already going quite quickly and the fact that the United
States is interested in this and in fact NAFTA would become, if you like, a
sub-group of APEC as Mexico or Canada trade with the United States into
the region. These things too will mean that not only is the velocity of trade
in north and south Asia picked up, but you end up with, of course, north
America involved as well. So, it becomes a very significant promoter of
faster development and faster growth.
J: Prime Minister, in your assessment, is President Soeharto in step with you
over APEC, does he share your grand vision or is he a little bit more
cautious?
PM: Right the way through this I mean from its earliest stages in the
development, I first tested these views with President Bush in Australia in
January 1992 and then after that in a series of meetings with the Prime
Minister of Japan, the President of South Korea, but before then of course
though, after President Bush next was President Soeharto. So, in a way
there has been a recognition as we've gone through these discussions of
the potential which APEC holds and each time I found on the part of
President Soeharto, clarity of thought, recognition of opportunities and a
willingness to go the next step. I found that exactly the same today.
J: What is Australia's expectation when Indonesia chairs APEC group next
year?
PM: I answered that earlier. There has to be decisions taken by the leaders
themselves about where they want to see any regulatory or formality
arising in APEC and so both the President and I see an obvious
sequential thing here a sequencing which is both important in terms of
underlying where as a group the leaders want to see it going and giving
everybody the opportunity to be able to put a view about how it should go.
APEC has come a long way in a relatively short time mainly because
process has been observed, processed matters getting the steps well and
truly discussed and into place before the next step is taken.
J. Prime Minister, did you say anything on human rights concerns?
PMV: No, the only thing I said to the President was that there is concern in the
United States about this subject and the United States in proposing
membership of APEC and the way in which it is, is prepared to be
subjected to the disciplines of a multi-lateral structure. in other words it is
giving something, it is giving something to the common good. In some 
way it is curbing its capacity for uni-lateral or bilateral solutions to its
problems and if it curbs its capacity and gives something way towards a
greater good, it will expect something in return and that is true of every
country that belongs to APEC. There are American concerns about some
of these things, as there have been Australian concerns expressed often
and I hope effectively. I think these expressions are not lost on Indonesia.
he understands the value of membership of a multi-lateral body like this
and I think it is because of that sense of co-operation which Australia has
had with Indonesia, which the US is having with Indonesia which
encourages a more co-operative attitude within Indonesia. And this is part
of the point many of us have made over the past a policy of nonengagement
one that does not look at the totality of interests or
relationships is not an effective policy.
J: Australia and Indonesia have moved closer together in defence relations
in recent years. Did you discuss defence and if so what was the topic?
PM: One of the things I am very happy about in the development of our bilateral
relations in the last eighteen months is the fact that we have
stepped up defence co-operation quite substantially and there are joint
exercises which have been completed in terms of ground forces and there
are going to be other joint exercises with the other forces as welt in the
near future. So, we will see from the most spare defence co-operation
which we have had in the last eighteen months or so a very substantial
shift in a co-operative relationship in defence going to those four
structures and this will also spill over into other things such as training
intelligence et cetera.
J-Is there any concern that Australian journalists are still denied access to
Indonesia'?
PM: I thought that the ABC was here and I think the Sydney Morning Herald is
here.
J: A Sydney Morning Herald journalist was deported a couple of months ago.
PM; They Sydney Morning Herald ( Fairfax) is here in an institutional sense and
the ABC is here and our other commercial networks are able to be here, I
don't think the story, the general line you're putting has force.
J. Was the issue of nuclear co-operation between Australia and Indonesia
discussed?
PM: No, it wasn't mentioned.
J: One more question on the APEC discussions, did you discuss ways in
which Malaysia might be brought into the process more the APEC
process?
PM: The President and I are both conscious of Malaysia's views about APEC
and its fear that in being part of such a multi-lateral structure will be
subjected to pressures that it might not otherwise. For my part, I put the 
view to the President, as I did to Prime Minister MahAhir that uni-latermi
action by major countries against Malaysia or anyone is far more
threatening and disruptive as is bi-lateral relationships that is, bilateral
trading deals where smaller countries are given offers they can't refusie by
larger countries, is far more constraining and less likely to take the
interests of those countries into account than the disciplines of a multilateral
structure are. That is the essential point of difference we have with
the Prime Minister of Malaysia in terms of the analysis of APEC. But
again, countries have got the right to make their own attitudes about these
things and I think for my part we have put our view about the benefits to
Malaysia of APEC and I think these have probably well been put within
ASEAN. I think both President Soeharto and I are sensitive to Prime
Minister Mahathirs views and Malaysia's interest, It is just that certainly I
think, and I would be surprised if the President doesn't think this, that a
multi-lateral structure multi-lateralising the interests of the United Statesand
Japan vis a vis those of Malaysia are far better for Malaysia than bilateral
structures or worse, unilateral action so the thesis that Malaysia Wit
be buffeted more in a multi-lateral structure I don't think stands up to
argument.
J: Prime Minister, did President Soeharto give you any indication as to
whether he would take any initiative to add to the pressure to get a
Uruguay Round conclusion by December or would it stay apart of this
process?
PM: I think Indonesia has played a role and I think the non-aligned movement
have played a role and he has played a role as chairman of that in
expressing their views about a successful conclusion of the GATT. So,
Indonesia is doing that itself as a nation, it is doing it as chair of the nonaligned
movement arfd I think the President would also see the leaders
meeting in Seattle as another opportunity for an expression by the leaders
about the need for a world trade overlay. A successful ending of the
GATT being the best way that all countries can make a contribution to
world trade and growth and a growth in incomes and employment world
wide. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THREE HOUSES. GLENN MURCUTT BY E. M. FARRELLY
SYDNEY 3 NOVEMBER 1993
I am delighted to bc here today to launch this fascinating book by Elizabeth Farrelly
on the work of Glenn Murcutt.-
My delight is all the greater because the launch is taking place here at Tusculum,
which some or you may bc aware is one of my favourite buildings in Sydney.
You may also be aware that its architect, John Verge, is in my view one of the great
Australian architects. As is Glenn Murcutt, of course.
There is a happy convergence between the work of the two, and indeed with the
launch of the book today. For among his many outstanding commissions, Glenn was
responsible for the completion of the one remaining fragment of the John Verge villa
" Engehurst" in Ormond Street, Paddington.
And, as his biographer says, Glenn's solution to completing the fragment later served
as the model for the Rall-Fastaway house, one of the three which are the subject of
the present volume.
The timing of this book is very appropriate. It comes when Australians are concerned
as never before about the role of planning and development in this country. A role on
which Glenn Murcutt has always been most forthright.
I was interested to discover from this book that a perception of Glenn Murcutt as a
peculiarly Australian romantic in his approach to building design has cared him
headlines such as " The Outback Warrior" in the overseas press.
As another Australian with romantic inclinations who also on occasion attracts the
talents of foreign headline writers, I can sympathisc with him about the infinite
capacity of such people to be spectacularly wrong or their ability to go for the
superficial rather than the reasoned analysis.
Such an approach to her subject matter would be unimaginable in Elizabeth Farrelly's
case, and we are all the richer for it.
I on/ tn'A f f ' T Tr, c'AOKI ' C-171 1 
While this work will undoubtedly be a major contributor to a debate of continuing
importance for architects. Elizabeth has also provided the rest of us with a volume
which presents scrious issucs in a way which neither patronises or mystifies the lay
reader. And that is particularly important For thc issues which the architecture of Glenn
Murcutt throws up are ones that are ultimately the concern of all Australians.
The houses which are the subject matter of this book. the three iconic houses, as
Elizabeth describes them, are for many Australians, quintessentially Australian
houses. They are. houses which make a statement about thc sort of country we live in. To use
Glienn's own words, houses which arc his response to the genius of the place to a
land of incredible strcngth combined with unimaginable delicacy.
These three houses encourage us to think about where. we have come from and about
where we are going. They challenge us to contemplate the possibility ( if anarchitecture,
and, in wider terms, an approach to urban design, in which aesthetic and
functional considerations live in harmony.
More and more Australians are coming to realise the importance of urban design to
the attainment of the quality of lifc to which we aspire.
We are, I believe, coming to understand that what makes Australia such a privileged
place to live is in danger of being lost through poor planning through the imposition
or an alien schema, as Glenn Murcutt describes it.
And his remedy is spot on " The land appeals for care and we need to become friends
with the landscape and not be threatened by it."
I might add that we need to temper our approach to the development of our landscape
with an eye to the long term future, rather than exploit it as an easy source of
immediate profit. In terms of development, greed is never good.
This prescription is as applicable to the city fringe as it is to the city centre; as
relevant to the planning of development along our coastline as it is to the preservation
of our inland waterways.
Devclopment is not just a problem for the city or the bush, depending on where you
live. Its a matter for consideration wherever it occurs in Australia.
Recognising the dimensions of the issue sometimes appears to be the furthest thing
from the minds of those who should most be aware of it our planners and
developers. And even when they see a problem, at times we justifiably despair that
they will ever come close to finding an appropriate solution.
It is no secret that developers and planners are Glenn Murcutt's least favourite people.
Local authoritics, he says, are " so often stupid, absolutely stupid and unreasonable.
800' ON 9V': IT œ 6^ ON' 2 -131 
Our building regulations inventorise mediocrity and our councils administer and
police such conservatism."
To quote Elizabeth. " he laments the wholesale slaughter of our city by developers, but
sees this process as complete, describing Sydney city centre as a gagglc of rubbish..
junk and rubbish." He sees the countryside in terms of the " destruction of the flora
and the displacement of the fauna with the blessing, if not active collusion of our
subdivision regulations."
This is a dccply pessimistic picture. But one hard not to share at times.
While Glenn has generally chosen to respond to this situation by withdrawal from
working in the city and by refusal to participate in the design of large scale works
( although I'm delighted that this did not prevent him from working to redesign the
Customs H-ouse) this is not an option which I bclieve is availablc to the
Commonwealth Government.
On the contrary. I believe it is imperative that we become a lot more involved in these
issues, which have hitherto been the almost exclusive preserve of the other levels of
Government. This is why I am announcing today that I have established a Task Force on Urban
Design. In reviewing the quality of urban design in Australia, the Task Force will focus on
ways in which the day to day working, residential and recreational environment of
most Australians might be enhanced by more thoughtful attention to design.
Its not just a Matter of building new and impressive structures to amaze and delight
us, although there will be a place for that where and when appropriate. Who, for
example, could now imagine Sydney without the Opera House. whose anniversary we
are currently celebrating?
And its certainly not a matter of confecting facades, as Glenn describes it.
Nor is it just a matter of preserving our built heritage buildings such as Tusculum
important though that is.
Rather it's a matter of focussing on the total picture. Of looking at towns, suburbs,
regions even, and dctcrmining how they might work better, while at the samne time
preserving those unique characteristics with which their communities identify.
It's about developing on the community scale what for Glenn Murcutt has always
been crucial in his design of houses a scnsc of place.
It's about better relating whcre people work to where they live. It's about getting the
children to schools which they look forward to going to. It's about being able to go to
the shops without having a car or waiting for hours for public transport which may or
may not arrive. It's ahout having the right housing mix for the location, and proper
oo eon, . j onnflnm Oft-TT ( 9' AkJ cI 
health and recreational facilities. And allowing our elderly citizens to enjoy their
retirement. It's about making better use of existing infrastuceture, rather than a process of endless
urban sprawl.
We will probably see the usual knee jerk rection to this task force.
Don't bc, surprised if you hear talk about a new ) U RD. It will be a typical example
of the usc of misinformation by those who benefit from the status quo those who
feel that their immediate intere. sts are threatened
And don't be surprised if you hear us accused of making people conform to a boring
bureaucratic standard.
Nothing of course is further from our minds.
What we want to do is to put a bit of poetry into the souls of our town clerks-and shireengineers
to get our planners and architects to come up with ideas with a sense of
the miraculous, to focus on the wider questions of urban form rather than restricting
themselves to narrow interpretation of land use regulations.
Nor arc wc looking for a stultifying conformity of planning correctncss. As Elizabeth
points out in her book, for Glenn Murcutt there is no contradiction between
disparateness and harmony in his approach to designing houses " harmony is about
disparate sounds which when put together make a pleasing whole not monotony,
not sameness."
But there is a different point, not sameness or monotony but uniformity.
I have long held the view that grandeur of form most commonly or obviously
emerges from uniformity perhaps a variegated uniformity but a consistency.
It seems that these days this is the one thing we arc supposed to most forthrightly
eschew. Any sense of this other meaning of sameness, a sameness which involves
variations on a theme.
These days the inculcation is that individuality is everything that no whim or fancy
should be subjugated to a commnon purpose or even the greater glory of a greater
whole. The grandeur which emerges from a mountain view is-generally a commentary on its
uniformity or scale. As is say a coastal view with the juxtaposition of the sea with
its consistent mass meshing with the. uniformity of the beach or even a forest.
The same is true of architecture whether it is the massing on the canals of St
Petersburg, or the variegated uniformity of Bath or the disparate harmonies of the
pia7as of Venice, or the egg carton classicism of thc Greek Islands or even Paddo
and Carlton. 
In each case thc architect's whims and fancies have been played out lie the shadows
on a mountain rather than the re-definition of an excavation.
Architects too can profit spiritually in signing up to schemes greater than most are
individually capable of devising.
Working within an environment should be regarded as the done thing more often than
not-The Task Force, I am pleased to say. is composed of people with a bit of magic in
their makeup, and I thank them for donating their time to this task. Thecy are all busy
professionals in their varied fields. What brings them together is thcir common
interest in seeing uis do things better, and their conviction that we ought to be able to
do so through a process of education rather than by spending money.
I want in particailar to thank the Convenor or tihe Task Force, John Mant. who is
unstinting in his scrvice.
The Task Force should have a report ready for us early in the New Year, and-both
Brian H-owe, who has a crucial role in this matter, and I look rorward to recciving it.
in 1962, just after Glenn Murcutt graduated, one of the doyens of Australian
architccture, Robin Boyd, wrote that, in relation to architecture, the Australian public
appears ready to encourage new ideas for the first time In short, Australian
building may have grown up."
Since then, Glenn Murcutt has done Australia proud. His many awards both
domestically and internationally attest to his success. It is crucial that we learn from
him. That is why the book which is being launched today is so important.
Especially when it is written by a person who is such an eminent architectural
commentator, and an elected public official with such a strong commitment to the
betterment of our built environment.
Fspecially when it is written with such insight and clarity.
It gives me much pleasure to welcome the publication of Three Houses Glenn
Murcutt by Elizabeth Farrelly. I urge you all to read it.
Thank you..
' 80/ 80' d 8OO* ON 9V: TT 6* AON~ i: 131 



9, PRIME MINISTER
TASK FORCE ON URBAN DESIGN
During a speech in Sydney this morning I announced that I have appointed a Task
Force on Urban Design to report to the Deputy Prime Minister and myself on ways in
which the day-to-day working, residential and recreational environment of Australians
might be enhanced by more thoughtful attention to urban design.
The Task Force has been asked to report by early next year under the terms of the
following charter:
" The Task Force should review the quality of urban design in Australia and make
recommendations to the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister for improvement.
It should particularly focus on ways in which the day-to-day working, residential and
recreational environment of most Australians might be enhanced by more thoughtful
attention to urban design.
Urban ( or ' community') design should be understood to apply to all scales and types of
urban activities and to be concerned about the physical arrangement and functioning of
urban activities, the physical appearance of the built environment and its relationship to
the natural environment, the way in which people experience it and the social and
economic factors which influence its quality.
The Task Force should examine all influences on the way in which urban growth and
change takes place, including informal but conventional practices and formal planning
controls. It should consider the impact of current trends in urban development and
whether current practices are adequate to create pleasing results.
The Task Force should determine how improved design may enhance the quality of the
built environment and provide examples of the way in which this might occur. In
'-making eommendations forimprvements, thereport may wish to increase examples
in Australia or in other countries of more successful urban design than is commonly
encountered in Australia.
In making its recommendations the Task Force should bear in mind their feasibility,
equity, practicality and cost. It should also take into account current complementary
work on urban planning issues, including the Better Cities Program and the National
Urban Development Program." 
The members of the Task Force are:
Mr John Mant ( Convenor)
Solicitor Planner
Phillips Fox
SYDNEY Professor David Yencken
Professor Landscape Architecture
Melbourne University
MELBOURNE Professor Evan Walker
Dean of School of Architecture
Melbourne University
MELBOURNE Mr Alex Tzannes
Architect SYDNEY
Mr Michael Llewellyn-Smith
General Manager
Adelaide City Council
ADELAIDE Ms Wendy Morris
Architect Urban Designer
Department of Planning Urban Growth
MELBOURNE Professor Peter Droege
Professor of Urban Design
Sydney University
SYDNEY Mr Espie Dods
Architect SYDNEY Mr Neville Gruzman
Architect Councillor
SYDNEY Mr Geoff Campbell
Planner Deputy Prime Minister's Ofce
CANBERRA 
1.3
Dr Catherine Bull
Landcape Designer
Queensland University of Technology
QUEENSLAND Mr Michael Dickinson
Journalist Belle Magazine
SYDNEY Mr John Mant can be contacted on 02 296 8127.
3 November, 1993 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, SYDNEY, 3 NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: My guest is the Prime Minister of Australia Paul Keating, good morning and
welcome.
PM: Good morning, John.
JL: How are you?
PM: Good, thank you, it's good to be here.
JL: Caught in the traffic?
PM: Just for a few minutes.
JL: What is your reaction to the polls showing Bronwyn Bishop at 2-1 winner over
John Hewson as the Liberal leader?
PM: I think it is a matter of what John Hewson's reaction is, that's the more important
one.
JL: No, I think yours would be much more interesting than his.
PM: This is a matter for the Liberal Party to worry about. There seems to be a lot of
angst within the Liberal Party about Mrs Bishop. Their complaint seems to be that
someone without any proven policy ability, without any ideas has come so far and
is annoying so many of them.
JL: How do you think she has come so far?
PM: I think basically there is a vacuum in conservative politics and when there is a hole
in this game, someone generally will try and fill it. 
IL: How would you fancy lining up against her in the House. It would be tough
wouldn't it, you couldn't call her ' scumbag' or ' vermin' or any of your favoured
terms could you?
PM: No but I don't use those I've used ' scumbag' once in my life.
IL: Only once?
PM: Only once, and never heard the end of it.
IL: ' Vermin'? Well you never will.
PM: The thing about it is, Bronwyn's speed is to attack public servants under privilege.
It is a bit different in the House of Representatives. In the House of
Representatives we actually strike back it is a little different.
IL: And you think it might be different for her?
PM: Look, the House of Representatives is like a big blotting paper. Senators mostly
disappear whenever they arrive there.
IL: I see.
PM: You've seen that with Fred Chaney and a few others big noises in the Senate,
hardly a whimper out of them in the House of Representatives. I mean, State
Premiers have disappeared in there, there are all sorts of people who have
disappeared in there. So, I wouldn't be too concerned about that. I think this is a
matter basically for the conservative side of politics and the issue is, I think, John
Hewson lost the 1993 election and that means that all the policy issues he ran on..
that is, his abandoning of them have left him in a rather incredible position.
IL: Why do you think they found themselves in trouble? Do you think that the
conservatives moved too far to the ight and, as they moved to the ight, you lot
moved to the ight and took the centre ground, and now I don't think there is any
alternative but for them to head severely back to the left.
PM: The thing is John Hewson won't lead. On the republic he says you tell us why we
have got to change, you explain to us why we have to change and if you explain
well enough, we may follow. In other words, the onus is on you the Labor
government, you lead. The same on Mabo. We won't have a policy, we'll see
what the government comes up with. So, it is a case of you lead, we don't provide
any leadership and we'll obstruct wherever we get an opportunity. Now, I think
that is engendering its own destruction within side the Coalition. I don't think they
have mapped out ( inaudible) they have for themselves and John Hewson has
not mapped out a place for the conservative parties in Australia. They have no 
ideological or policy bearings, whether it be in social policy, in economic policy or
the greater issues it just seems to me that they have lost their way.
JL: Yes, it seemed to me the only one who was prepared to talk out about Mabo on
the conservative side was Sir John Gorton, how did you react to Sir John's
statements?
PM: This is very much sort of old blue blood orthodoxy, you know that blacks are
inferior. Now, this is an old them isn't it? Well, too old a theme for anyone with
any sense of understanding of these issues or work better than that, just human
understanding. He is not mainstream. The mainstream Liberal party has ' Peter
Reith around talking about Aboriginal home lands ie trying to make the link with
the South Afican home lands. Today, we have got Richard Court saying that he
will line up the Coalition to support his West Australian legislation on Mabo.
Now, does that mean he has spoken to John Hewson? Does it mean that he has
his support in cutting across the High Court decision?
IL: Tell me, are you happy with the outcome of Mabo, you could hardly be totally
happy because it really is a compromise isn't it?
PM: No, the good thing about the Mabo outcome to date John, is when you peel
through it there are no ugly compromises sitting in it. Mostly a big national issue
like this, as you leaf through it somewhere there is a horrible comprise sitting
looking at you.
IL: But, there are a number of compromises in it.
PM: There are interests' which are accommodated, but I don't think they are
compromised. I think there is a difference between accommodation and
compromise and the thing has got nice lines of logic in it from the point of view of
the Aboriginal community and miners, industry, the states et cetera. There is no
reason why the Coalition can't support it. The only reason is, that John Hewson is
basically boxed in, he is boxed in every way he goes. He is boxed in principally in
many respects, by John Howard John Howard is in many respects the villain in
the piece for him. He won't let Hewson move anywhere. If he wants to move
anywhere on the republic, he says you change to the republic I'll be against you.
You shift your ground on Mabo, you'll deal with me.
IL: Surely, John Hewson is the leader, why doesn't John Hewson say to John Howard
you better hang on a minute I'm the leader and this is what I intend to do?
PM: Well, that takes a little bit of guts, doesn't it?
IL: And you don't believe that John Hewson has got a little bit of guts?
PM: That takes a little bit of hitting power and that is what he lacks. In the end, he has
been corralled by all these characters so he has got Howard corralling him on the 
right, he is afraid to move on any of these issues; his instincts on the republic are
good, I think, but he won't say anything decent about it, he won't support any of
the changes; I think no rational person could believe other than the High Court
decision on Mabo is right, he is boxed in there; and then because he is boxed in and
because he won't make a break for himself, then of course, the others are around
the Bishops of this world and the Costellos.
IL: What is the situation with Western Australia, I mean Richard Court unveils his
legislation tomorrow, how will that affect your legislation?
PM: Commonwealth legislation will take precedence over that State legislation. What
he wants to do is abolish native title, he wants to turn free hold land into some
other kind of statutory title denying Aboriginal people the right to be able to apply
for native title.
IL: Can you understand him wanting to do that?
PM: No.
JL: Don't you feel that his is the State that will be most affected?
PM: It will be most affected because it is so big it is almost half the continent and
there is still lots of unalienated crown land which can be subject to a native title
claim. But again, it is not in the areas of, the built up areas which is where native
title has already been extinguished by freehold title in the south eastern part of the
state. Look, it is the old conservative line in some respects Court says I don't
mind giving Aboriginal people some land under a title I confer on them. In other
words, if it is conferred it is OK, but if they have it as an inherent right it is not
OK. In other words, if it is theirs by right, by the common law, but they have only
got to establish who has the title, it is no good. If you can confer it on them, from
a parliament, then it is OK.
IL: Well, if the High Court makes a decision, surely then Richard Court can't turn his
back on it can he?
PM: This is the point about all these characters John. How often have we heard from
the Liberal party about the rule of law? Over the years the Labor party has been
lawless, it doesn't believe in the proper norms we have heard all this stuff for
years. The moment anything comes along which they don't like Reith says the
High Court needs to be reformed, it is a social experimentation place, it needs to
be kicked back into line. Court says there ought to be a referendum to knock over
the High Court decision, so too does Bronwyn Bishop these are the people who
believe in the rule of law. I mean, these people believe in only their own interests
and the interests of their constituency.
JL: What is the story with this wretched teak table? 
PM: There is no story at all about it.
JL: Well, it is becoming a story. I heard Mrs Fraser expressing points of view on the
subject this morning, crying the praises of Margaret Betteridge. Did she simply
say don't buy it? What is the real story?
PM: Look, the real story is that for years the Lodge has lacked a decent dining table
and Hazel Hawke wrote to the Australiana Fund and to the Prime Minister's
Department saying in the final refurbishment of the house, at least we ought to
have a table which can accommodate an official party of people. On that basis
they all trotted off last year to try and find one.
JL: Who found one?
PM: Well, it was found by, I think in the first instance, the person you mentioned, Ms
Betteridge.
JL: She found the table to begin with?
PM: Yes.
JL: And did she then suggest that that would be the table for the Lodge?
PM: Well, to find it and then to propose an offer to me and my wife, show photographs
of it and invite us to go and look at it, would lead you to assume, would it not, that
it was one that she approved of
JL: Why did she then disapprove of it?
PM: Look, I think this is the revenge of the ' hyphenated names'.
JL: The what?
PM: They hyphenated names. It is all the people with their hyphens showing didn't
you see, there is more double names in this stunt than you have ever seen in your
life it is all the basically it is either the blue rinse set or the hyphenated names
striking back. Whenever you read it there is Dawson-Damer there is all these
sort of, hyphenated names. Basically, it is the old Tory antique club who have got
on the back of this and Tamnie is holding the side the up with a plum in her mouth,
doing her best for them too.
IL: Why did Margaret Betteridge change her mind?
PM: I think that a bit of peer group pressure probably got to her. That is, some of the
other hyphens on the committee suggested that it wasn't ideologically pure enough.
IL: Did you get rid of her? 
PM: No, I read about it the same as you John. I read about it in a newspaper.
IL: You didn't call her and abuse her?
PM: She was offered another job as I understand it, along with a group of other people,
or 90 other people in a review of departmental functions and she chose not to
take it, but to take the alternative which was a package.
JL: Was she offered the other job on your recommendation? What I'm asking is, did
you want to get rid of her?
PM: No, this is handled bureaucratically, it is not handled by me. Can I say though, just
as because this is an aside, this would be the only country in the world..
JL: That would have an issue about a dining table.
PM: Exactly.
JL: But it has become an issue and you the Prime Minister.
PM: It has only become an issue because of these bone-heads around the place who
want to talk about something that takes their fancy.
IL: Yes, so you didn't deliberately get rid of her?
PM: Look, the fact is, there has been a restoration going on since about the middle
1 980s of these official houses. It is just about complete and this was a full time
job, but where the work was basically over. Now, I think, the department has said
look, the job is basically coming to an end and it is redundant, would you like
another position? Answer no, I prefer to take a package.
IL: OK, I have been lead to believe from people that have talked to me about it, that it
was a pretty good table at a pretty good price and would have served the purpose
pretty well, even though it might not have been ideologically pure. Was it a good
table at a good price?
PM: Yes, I think so, I think that is true but, I mean about the last thing I need is to
spend any time worrying about dining room tables. So, I couldn't care less, it was
only basically sent on approval and if it didn't suit, it didn't suit.
IL: OK, so long as you get a feed, you don't mind where you get It?
PM: The current one will do me.
IL: OK, you finally got the Budget through after more than a little, again the word
required is compromise because you did have to compromise didn't you? 
PM: At the edges we did, but by and large the bulk was through and we will see the
Budget deficit track down now to around I per cent of GDP by the middle
the thing is John, we do have now substantial recovery on our hands, you can
start to see that strengthening week by week, you can see it in the stock market,
you can see it in our trade figures. What we need to accommodate the investment
that must carry the jobs with it is a smaller budget deficit by the middle 1 990s.
That is largely what the Budget does, what it sought to do from the outset. Now,
we did introduce some changes to secure its passage, but in terms of money they
did not materially alter the Budget balance in the next three years.
IL: Does it mean that we can now look forward to this sort of messing around with
every Budget while ever there is a hostile Senate?
PM: We have never had a majority in the Senate from 1983. What was different this
time, is that John Hewson decided to vote against the government's money
legislation he took an unprincipled decision. Look John, it takes 38 votes to stop
a Budget measure, the Greens have got two votes and the other 36 belong to John
Hewson. So, everyone put the weight on the Greens whereas the villain in the
piece was Hewson sitting back, smugly, giggling up his sleeve in his office while
everyone ran around to recruit the Democrats and the Greens. You might
remember saying, I think I said to you on your program, that were we to have lost
the last election, a Labor opposition would have voted for the Coalition
Government's money bills in the Senate.
JL: Yes.
PM:... including the GST. Because I have always believed, perhaps old fashionedly,
that is, that the government's money legislation shouldn't be held to ransom by an
unrepresentative chamber like the Senate which was put there to protect states'
interests, it was not there to muck around with the Government's financial
legislation. Now, John Hewson ripped that convention up and threw it out the
window. Why did he do that? Because basically, he has got no experience in the
game, he has blown in out of the financial market and the first serious thing he
really does is stand up the Government's Budget. So the, everyone says, how will
it be carried? So, the focus is on then the ones who are likely to carry it the
Democrats and the Greens who in the end did carry it, along with the Labor
Party. The Coalition voted against all these measures ight throughout.
IL: Yes, but they only carried it with a number of compromises. Do you still look
upon the Senate as unrepresentative swill?
PM: The Senate is an unrepresentative chamber. You get a dozen Senators elected for
NSW with a population of 4-5 million and you get a dozen Senators elected for
Tasmania with a population of around 400,000 obviously, it takes many more
votes to elect a Senator from NSW than it does from Western Australia or say
Tasmania. 
IL: OK, the two from Western Australia, where they a nuisance?
PM: The fact is the Budget succeeded and it passed and the Hewson tactic failed. In
fact he had to admit that it failed. What sort of an Opposition are they? They
won't lead on any matter and all they want to do now is vote everything down in
the Senate, to use their numbers. You see John, what happened the Senate is
elected you know this, that at each election half the Senate comes out for
election. In the current Senate half of it was elected not in 1993, but in 1990.
Now in 1990, we didn't do particularly well in certain states, so it means when you
put the 1990 result and the 1993 result together for the current Senate, the Liberal
party has 36 Senators, the Labor party has 30 Senators and the balance is made up
by Democrats and Greens. So you can make a decision, the public of Australia
made a decision on 13 March 1993 to elect this Government, but what is sitting in
the Senate is half the Senate which was elected three years earlier, which has not
been elected on these contemporary issues, there was no contemporary decision
made in March 1993 and yet these characters hold the government in the House of
Representatives to ransom. That is my point about it being neither representative
nor contemporary. Now, all right it has always been thus, but it hasn't always
taken on to itself the job of knocking down Budgets. That is the point. Yes, it is a
states' house; yes, it is unrepresentative and yes, it is not contemporaneously
elected that has always been true, but it has always kept its place as a house of
review. It is not doing that now.
JL: No. Do you believe that those two Senators from WA were doing what they were
elected to do?
PM: They are both new Senators. One has been there a year, and one has just arrived.
These are very large issues to have laid upon them, and a lot of public weight,
which in the normal course of events, if the 36 Coalition Senators were voting for
the Government's financial legislation, say look we lost the election. The whole
thing here is, John, that John Hewson won't accept that he lost the last election.
He is carrying on in Canberra as though he won the election and he is entitled to
behave in the Senate on the basis that in some way the Government has acted
dishonourably. Let me just make this point, we have had this debate running
around about how they were too honest. I mean, they were too honest when John
Hewson was telling everybody in January and February this year there was a
double-dip recession coming along. We were going to drop back into a
depression, and here we are with the economy growing quite strongly now, and
the stock market back to its 1987 levels. I mean, he knew that was untrue when
he said, he frightened the hell out of everybody right through the campaign. Then
they had the ads with the gun shots, the people in the gun shot sightes, and people
falling through trap doors. I mean, he was too honest, my god, if that is honesty.
Now, by contrast, the Government is going to pay the tax cuts in the middle of
November, it's introduced the legislation.
JL: Can we really afford those tax cuts, though, really? 
PM: Yes, sure. And to not afford them means that the real incidence of tax rises. It
means that even modest inflation on the tax system just takes the tax take up on
ordinary people.
Now, as well as that we have put in the home child care allowance, which is a
payment mainly to supporting parents at home, which is mainly women, which will
be about $ 30.00 per child, per fortnight, no, sorry $ 60.00 a fortnight, and the
generalised child care rebate, and a whole lot of other things. All the things the
Government said it would do in the election campaign, it has in fact done.
IL: What are you going to do about making it easier for Australians to employ other
Australians?
PM: To give you a quick answer, that is, the changes in industrial relations, which
Laurie Brereton is now piloting through the Parliament which will allow
tremendous flexibility for smaller businesses in the economy. Now, we have two
streams of changes in our industrial legislation, one is enterprise agreements which
largely the large companies are involved with, that is your BfLPs and your Fords
etc, where they make an enterprise arrangement for the whole company with a
group of constituent unions and their employees', and then you have got the
smaller areas, you know, the smaller manufacturing businesses, your stationery
shops, your cake shops, or whatever it might be, and what we just succeeded in
negotiating is a change to the industrial relations legislation which will allow the
employer and employees of a small business to come to an enterprise agreement..
JL: But only with the approval of the union.
PM: No, no. The union doesn't have to approve it, only if there are unionised
employees in employment, in other words let's say we are talking about..
JL: Well it would be very hard to find any business that wouldn't have some unionised
PM: Well that's not true. I think you would find that most small businesses..
IL: Well you just mentioned a cake shop, surely the person baking the cake is going to
belong to some bakers union, more than likely, which would mean that the shop
assistant who wanted to work on Saturday for no penalty rates would have to get
the approval of the union before that could be done.
PM: Well the first thing I would say is most of these places aren't unionised, I mean,
mainly because it is simply too arduous to get round and unionise very small
places. You find that a great bulk of unions are in the bigger businesses. And in
the event that the owner of the cake shop wants actually to create a new
agreement, they can do it without any reference to the union. Now if a union
person is employed there and a union gets a chance to be involved, the business 
and the employees, there has got to be consent which is 50 per cent plus one. So,
if there is 50 per cent plus one of the people..
JL: But it is not 50 per cent plus one. Some unions say it is 75 per cent plus one. We
have had discussions on that subject, that it is not 50 per cent plus one.
PM: Well I can assure you that the legislation will make it a simple majority, and that
will mean that if the employees of a place organise themselves to make a better
arrangement you will find that unions won't be stopping the ( inaudible) provided
that there is not a diminution in benefits. In other words if the package of
employment benefits is reconfigured to suit the employer and the employee in a
way which improves the productivity of the business and the wages and salaries of
the employees, I don't think anybody is going to stop it.
JL You don't think, but you don't know? I mean, the militant unions are a bit of a
handful.
PM: But there is not that many militant ones left. You have got an inflation rate, John,
at 2 per cent. There is not that much militancy out there now.
IL: No. But there are militant unions. I mean, we had discussions the other day to
somebody I can't quite remember.
PM: You will always find one. But if you look at Australian trade unions at the
moment, if they were too militant you wouldn't have an inflation rate bobbing
around at 2 per cent.
IL: Yeah, well some of the nice ladies who listen to us at Lithgow worked in the Berlie
factory there, 70 per cent of them wanted an alteration made to the structure, and
they couldn't get it through because that wasn't a majority. Now the union in that
case said that 70 per cent wasn't a majority. Now, how in the world can anybody
get anything done if 70 per cent isn't a majority?
PM: Well, what they could do there is actually go through what is called a section 134
agreement. That is a full enterprise bargain, a fll enterprise workplace bargain, as
the larger companies do. I mean this new stream we are putting in is for the small
businesses. But look, how it will work, in the main, in the main, if someone wants
to vary the coverage of a federal award they will be able to do it without reference
to anybody.
IL: Ok, well why couldn't the people at the Berlie factory at Lithgow do it? 70 per
cent wanted it, but that wasn't the majority. They wanted 75 per cent plus one.
PM: Well, the answer is I don't understand that. If the majority of employees wanted
change I can't see why any union would want to sort of spike it.
JL Well they have, and they did in that instance. 
PM: Providing it is not about a reduced set of benefits, that is, taking their actual
overall package down.
JL: Well, if 70 per cent say that that is fine, that's nobody's business.
PM: You will find that 70 per cent, I'm sure, never said that. I mean they are not about
going there to take less.
JL: No, but it was a new arrangement and 70 per cent wanted it, and the union said,
no, it has got to be 75 per cent plus one to be a majority. I mean, the union can't
even add up.
PM: Look, what we have done, we have got away from the centralised industrial
structure where the arbitration commission decided every wage and salary in the
economy, largely. And we basically left it to enterprise agreements for large
companies and then enterprise award flexibility arrangements for the smaller ones.
The good managers will actually exploit all these things and so will the good
union. You will always find there will be managers who don't take the options up,
and there will be some unions that can't see the benefits. But by and large we
think these much more flexible arrangements are a huge leap forward on anything
Australians had over the last ninety years.
IL: So, can we have our daily guaranteed that a majority is 50 per cent plus one.
PM: Well, you certainly will in the legislation.
JL: 50 per cent plus one, not 75 per cent plus one.
PM: Yes. A simple majority.
IL: A simple majority which would be 50 per cent plus one. Ok, well we will get back
onto the union involved with the Berlie activity in Lithgow.
There are very loud rumbles coming from Canberra that you are considering a
Cabinet reshuffle, true or false?
PM: False.
IL: False.
PM: Yes.
JL: Everything is going to stay.
PM: Well, the Government was elected in March, it is October now, it is not that long
ago. 
JL: Fairly loud rumbles that Laurie Brereton wants out of industrial relations, right or
wrong? I mean you wouldn't blame him.
PM: I have never seen a fellow enjoy himself so much getting this legislation through, I
mean, he is absolutely thrilled to bits.
JL: The union movement isn't all that happy with him, are they?
PM: Well, look, he is a tough customer, Laurie, and he stood the unions up and said
these are the core things that the Government needs, and in the end he negotiated
himself a package which delivered the goods.
JL: You have been taking a bit of a belting in the press of late. Have you got the press
gallery offside? What has happened there?
PM: Well, I have been there for a long time as you know, John.
IL: Yes, but you had a good relationship with them.
PM: 24 years and 11I years as a Minister, and it waxes and wanes a bit, but they are not
too bad at the minute.
JL: Kerry-Ann Walsh gave you a good work out in the Bulletin last week, and I think
Laurie Oakes is at you again this week.
PM: Well he runs hot and cold, old Laurie.
JL: What about Kerry-Ann?
PM: Well she has only just returned to the scene after a few years away. So, we have
got to see her put in a bit more form yet.
JL: I see. Do you keep an eye on all of them?
PM: Yes. I keep a good close check on what they all say and do.
IL: Do you believe that they are accurate in their criticism of late? The criticism has
been fairly strong.
PM: The problem the press gallery has at the moment is it is a proprietorial problem.
There is basically very little investment in, well someone put it to them yesterday,
human capital. People are not there long enough, they are mostly very young, they
are arriving in there early twenties and they are leaving in their later twenties. And
we are not seeing the development of the political personalities, I think, we need
to, and this does give, I think, it means that instead of having experience in yard
sticks to measure events by, the gallery is more prone these days to ebb and flow 
on particular issues or personalities without the experience of having been around
a while.
JL: I must say, as much as I would like to, we couldn't by any stretch of the
imagination say that Laurie Oakes was in his late twenties.
PM: No, no. Laurie if one of the stayers.
IL: And Michelle Grattan.
PM: And Michelle.
IL: Julie Flynn.
PM: There is a couple of hundred up there though. I mean Alan Ramsey, you could put
people like that in it. But by and large it has changed enormously, and I don't think
that the newspapers in particular, or even the television stations are doing the right
thing by the nation in not developing people and leaving them there long enough
to develop a mature, and to see, and to get some experience of election campaigns,
of changes in the economic cycles. Not to leave them there for three for four
years. Three or four years is no where in a place like Canberra.
IL: A few weeks back we were talking about the Olympic Games, when I first came
back from overseas. And there were suggestions made to me that I thought were
good suggestions concerning the Olympics and the merchandising of souvenirs at
Olympic Games time. Now, the Olympic Games are going to be a hell of a thing
for Australia, I believe people are going to arrive here in Sydney and say it has
been the best kept secret in the world, I think it is going to wonders for our
tourism.
PM: I think that is right too.
IL: A lawyer in Forbes in NSW who listens to us through 2PK in Parkes, he feels that
legislation should be passed to make it law that every souvenir and piece of
merchandise sold in relation to the Olympics be made in Australia. Apparently
Korea had similar laws in place and it was a great success and they made a fortune
according to him. In contrast Spain lost millions because their Barcelona t-shirts
were made in China, this man says. Now would you introduce legislation to say
that all the souvenir goods for the Olympics would have to be made in Australia?
PM: Well that's something I would need to speak to our Olympic Committee, but one
thing we will be doing is probably introducing legislation to protect the Olympic
logo, which will become part and parcel of the Sydney Olympics. That is, Sydney
having succeeded, and the Australian Olympic Committee being the relevant
authority in the management of the Games and the advertising and merchandising
associated with it. They would be the ones who need to protect the logo and
would be the ones who would have a view about whether things are made here. I 
think it is very hard to say that things should be made here, because often things
are not made here, or they are made competitively somewhere else. But the logo
requires core protection and it gets it generally by national legislation.
JL: I don't quite understand why it would be very hard to pass legislation that things
had to be made here? I mean, you just pass legislation.
PM: If that was true we could just say that, if you take that argument you could apply
for the whole economy and say, well everything needs to be made here, but you
are not going to get your video recorders made here, or your compact disc players
made here.
JL: But we are not talking about that. We are talking about souvenirs and things that
we are capable of
PM: I think, well, this again gets back to Australian entreprenuership, John, I think a lot
of people will see, as you say, the opportunity and take the view that Sydney has
been a very well kept secret and they will exploit it and sensibly, and they will
make things which are attractive. I mean, we are getting our act together, if you
look at now just the catering of the tourism industries in major cities and provincial
areas of Australia compared to three or four years ago it has changed enormously,
as Australian merchandises are now picking up the opportunities that tourism
offers.
IL: But would you make it easy? Would you offer some kind of concession to people
to make souvenirs available that are made in Australia, or would you make it tough
for the?
PM: I think before I answer any of that I wouldn't mind a talk to the Olympic
Committee about it.
JL: I am sure they would agree.
PM: They have obviously got a perspective on this after having been through so many
Olympic Games themselves, and also the challenges, or the competitions for
Sydney and for Brisbane and Melbourne and Sydney. So, I don't know that I
would say more then at least referring the matter to them.
IL: While I am on the subject of tourism this coming Friday, I think, the Crown
Monarch, of Cunard line arrives to become a resident here in Sydney. It will be
doing tours from Sydney to Cairns looking at the Barrier Reef and then back again.
It will be the first big tourist liner to make its base here. One slight problem it has
because of maritime laws, they have to take a jaunt out into the middle of the
Pacific Ocean because they have to go offshore. So, I think a day and a half, or
two days are wasted going out into the middle of the ocean turning round and
coming back again, because they might upset those people who have vessels going
up and down the Coast. Now, nobody has vessels going ' up and down the Coast, 
so we are making it very hard for the Cunard people, and probably any other
people that want to bring tourist vessels here to Australia. Don't you think it is
time we had a look at antiquated Maritime laws that restrict tourism?
PM: I do. And I think, I am relying on my memory now, but I think we have a thing
called continuous voyage permits which can be taken where there is a new trade or
business been established, a foreign ship can be brought onto the Coast and
operate in the way in which you described.
JL Well obviously there are difficulties, because the same difficulty, I think, existed in
the Caribbean and they had the sense to alter the laws there, there was one tourist
vessel there, now I think there are 22 flzlltime in the Caribbean. Now, that's the
sort of thing, this leaves the Mediterranean for dead, the Whitsunday's.
PM: Absolutely. This is something we should be in. I will check this up for you John.
JL: Because I think it is pretty important, it would be great for Australia.
PM: Well it is one of our great growth industries, tourism. It has happened largely in
the 1980s and we are seeing a greater sophistication of tourism services in the last
few years, particularly as the going got a bit tougher, we got a bit better at it. And
those services will proliferate and it doesn't surprise me at all that you will see
major shipping lines operating.
IL: Well, you see, you take this Cunard vessel, I think, it accommodates something
like 600 people. Probably 60 per cent would come from the United States, so we
would be getting American money in. But we shouldn't just have one tourist
vessel, I mean, we should have 22 full time going up and down the Coast.
PM: Absolutely.
IL: So, will you have a look at that?
PM: I will indeed. I will get back to you about it.
IL: Because in the area of tourism we are way in front of the rest of the world in what
we have got to offer, it just that sometimes funny old fashioned laws that have
been in place for a long time are a bit restrictive.
PM: Basically all the coastal shipping all about, largely it is not even about passengers,
it is basically about freight. It is not about tourism.
JL Ok, well thank you for your time. I hope the press sees the charming side of you
soon.
PM: Well we are getting the big things into place. Governments are either there to do
the big and right things or they are there to mark time. Now, basically I was hired 
16
to re-start the economy. That's why I was, I think, chosen as leader of the Labor
Party, it's probably why we were re-elected. The economy is now growing again
and growing quite markedly. Big social issues are coming along like
unemployment, we have got this white paper on unemployment coming down at
the end of the year, which will probably be, I think, we are ahead of the world
again in trying to deal with a long-term problem there. In big social issues like
Mabo we are moving a very large solution into place which would confound most
countries similar to us. And as well as that we are also making a place for
Australia in Asia with the development of APEC, and I will be going to Seattle in
November for that. And all the big things the Government is doing, not just what
it said it would do, but giving Australia the leadership and the capacity the country
needs from a Government prepared to take risks and do things. Now that's why I
am there, that's why the Government is there. And we have all got to put up with
a bit of criticism from the press from time to time, or problems with Budgets.
Providing the big core things are going into place, it is all worth it.
JL: Thanks for your time, let's hope we can talk to each other soon.
PM: Good John.
JL: Prime Minister of Australia, Paul Keating.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING
LODGE TABLE
Given the current interest in the matter of the
replacement dining table for the Lodge the following,
facts may be of interest to the media.
The need for a replacement dining table for the Lodge was
first raised by Mrs Hazel Hawke in 1991. She indicated
at the time that a replacement table was the last major
outstanding item to be settled under the Lodge's
refurbishment program. It was widely acknowledged that
the existing table was unsuitable for the many large
official functions held at the Lodge.
The matter was raised again in early 1992 but it was not
until November 20 of that year that I discussed the need
for a replacement table with members of the Australiana
Fund.
At that meeting it was agreed that a suitable period
dining table, probably from London, could cost up to
$ 150,000 and that this expense could not be justified.
I suggested it may be possible to commission a less
expensive reproduction table through a local manufacturer
or supplierz, and mentioned Mr Paul Kenny as one
possibility. Mr Kenny is acknowledged as one of the few
leading suppliers of tables of this type and his
expertise and standing is widely recogni. sed within the
industry and by Ms Betteridge herself.
It was agreed at the meeting that Ms Betteridge approach
suitable people or firms, including Mr Kenny, to
undertake some preliminary investigation and costing.
Ms Betteridge's investigations revealed thaL Mr Kenny had
a table under construction which might be suitable at a
cost of $ 25,000. Contemporary Australian furniture
makers and individual craftsmen were also approached but 
their quotes ranged from $ 40,000 to $ 60,000 for a table
of equivalent size.
MS Be~ teridge subsequently inspected the table and
provided me with a photograph. Preliminary arrangements
were also made for members of the Australiana Fund to
inspect the table. The table was delivered to the Lodge
" ion approval" on or about June 9.
While this sequence of events was unfolding, the
Australiana Fund was also considering whether the Fund
itself was the appropriate vehicle for purchase of the
table, or whether it would be preferable to procure it
through the annual budget for official establishments.
I did receive a preliminary indication that some members
of the Acquisitions Committee of thle Fund might consider
that the table fell outside its purchasing guidelines.
But when I met the chairman of the Australiana Fund, Mr
Walton, at an offircial function he told me there was
still a possibility of the Fund buying the table given
the difficulty of obtaining an alternative at reasonable
cost. He told me the matter would be discussed at the
next meeting of the Fund, to be held within weeks.
Against this background my of tice advised the Department
not to settle t1he account with Mr Kenny until the matter
was finally decided by the Australiana Fund.
When it became clear the Fund would not purchase the
table I decided against paying for the table from the
annual departmental budget for the Lodge, and arranged
for the table to be returned to Mr Kenny and had the old
table re-installed.
I then telephoned Ms Betteridge to tell her the table had
been returned and to express my disappointment that the
matter was still unresolved, a full two years after Mrs
Hawke had first raised it and to express my disquiet
about the serious inaccuracies and reflections on my role
in the many notes for file she had written.
Two months later I learnt of Ms Betteridge's decision to
accept a redundancy package via a television news report.
The secretary of the Prime Minister's department has
advised that to date 19 ofters of voluntary redundancy
have been accepted by PM&amp; C officers and that the
Depar~ nenL expects eventually to abolish 25 positions.
in Lhe two years since this was first raised there have
been conflicting accounts of events.
At the heart of this confusion so far as I was concerned
was conrininuing doubt about the eligibility of the
proposed table for purchase by the Australiana Fund. 
In any event, I have always believed that a new table for
the Lodge was desirable but not at taxpayers' expense.
If a suitable table could be found at reasonable cost and
that cost borne by the Fund which is tinanced by
donations and events such as ' open days' at official
establishments well and good. if not, then there should
be no new table.
Needless to say, I do not intenid to reopen the matter and
the old table will remain in use for the forseeable
future.
Attached is a letter sent by the chairman of the
Australiana Fund to its members and copied to me which
may provide fur~ her useful background.
CANBERRA November 4, 1993 
THE AUSTRALIANA FUND
0. P. O. BOX 493 1. S YDN EY N. S. W. 2001
Tclcp1honc 251 5711
September 13, 1993
Dear Member,
The recent spate of publicity regarding the possibility of the Australiana Fund
acquiring a Dining Room Table for The Lodge has prompted me as your
Chairman to write this letter.
Following a request from Mrs Hawke in October 1991, the Fund has recognsed
the need to replace the table that was purchased for The Lodge in 1981
following the extension of the dining room to create more seating capacity. In
fact I responded to Mrs Hawke's letter indicating that the Fund would be
delighted to work with her in acquiring a table which not only captured the
spirit of the 1920' s, thereby enhancing the Lodge, but which would also offer a
pleasing and practical solution to the then present problems.
Despite widespread inquiries and searching it proved impossible to find an
appropriate original replacement table. It seemed that the only solution would
be to commission the required piece. This was in fact discussed with members
of the Fund Council when they met with Mr and Mrs Keating at The Lodge in
November of last year. Although my unexpected hospitalization prevented me
attending, I understand the question of commissioning a dining room table,
possibly made of Thai mahogany, was canvassed at that meeting.
Subsequently a number of discussions took place involving various people,
including our fine arts adviser, Margaret Betteridge. The matter of the
purchase of the Thai table was considered by the Acquisitions Committee who
recommended rejection. It was never put to a vote of the Council or of the
Official Establishments Trust.
When the request to consider this acquisition was recently made, I indicated
that the Council was scheduled to meet at the end of August and the matter
would be decided at that meeting. Before this scheduled meeting took place
there was some unexpected, unfortunate and uninformed press comments
regarding the possible purchase of the table. Concurrently I was advised by
certain members of the Acquisitions Committee of their strong views in the
matter. We were subsequently informed that the Prime Minister had decided
not to proceed with the acquisition of the table and that it had been returned to
the dealer who had commissioned the work. 
-2-
There have been a number of previous occasions where the incumbents of the
Official Establishments have been of a different view to the Acquisitions
Committee. The Rojo bookcase, the Devlin silver candlesticks, the De Maestre
murals are a few cases in point. In each instance the feelings of the occupants
have been given considerable weight in the final decision of Council,
notwithstanding the recommendations of the Acquisitions Committee.
It is after all Their Excellencies and the Prime Minister and his wife ( who has in
every instance been President of the Fund) who make the success, perhaps even
existence, of the Fund possible. They allow the Open Days and other fund
raising events, provide generous hospitality to our members and donors,
occupy the houses that are used for the display of our collection, financially
contribute to any necessary restoration work through their departments, and
generally provide considerable assistance and support for our endeavours.
Without this spirit of mutual co-operation, with communication and
understanding on both sides, the Fund would almost certainly wither and
gradually die.
We have received the fullest support from the present occupants of the Houses,
and I was very pleased to announce Mrs Keating's acceptance of the Presidency
of the Fund at our 1992 Annual Meeting. Fortunately my concern for working
in close co-operation with the Governor General and Prime Minister and their
wives is shared by my fellow members of the Council. This is not to say that
where there may be different views, these should not be resolved in a spirit of
sensible negotiation wherever possible.
I do reiterate that the question of the purchase of the particular table was not
formally considered by the Council as when Council met there was no longer
any decision to be made. You will however be pleased to know that Council
has unanimously resolved to have the Fund participate in the acquisition or
commissioning of an appropriate dining room table for The Lodge, to be
selected with the acquiescence and approval of the Prime Minister and Mrs
Keating. Already we have had approaches from a number of craftsmen
wishing to become involved in such a project.
Further, in view of a recent inaccurate article in the Australian Financial Review
regarding the whole sorry episode, I must set the record straight on the
acquisition of the Geoffrey Hannah cabinet which proudly adorns the hail of
Government House. We are fortunate that Mrs Hayden spotted this unique
contemporary piece in an exhibition at the State library of NSW and referred it
to the Fund. The Acquisitions Committee, with one person dissenting,
recommended its purchase, a recommendation which was unanimously
endorsed by the Council and The Official Establishments Trust. The piece was
paid for in two Instalments, was sponsored to the extent of $ 25,000 by World
Book Encyclopaedia, and is probably worth double its $ 92,000 price tag today.
The public reaction to the piece has been overwhelmingly favourable and in the
opinion of almost all Fund members who have enjoyed the hospitality of Their
Excellencies, it is a most appropriate item for the collection. 
I tLL: 4 NOV 1: 22 NO-U I Z '. IUb/ t-
-3-
Finally, since Its inception in 1978 the Australiana Fund has prided itself on
being an apolitical organisation. This also is obviously critical to its future.
Regrettably, whilst most members who have been recently approached by the
Press have declined to comment, some statements have been made and stories
leaked, which on the surface appear to be Politically motivated. Clearly it is
Crucial that we maintain an apolitical stance to ensure the continued support of
the public, our corporate donors, the occupants, and thus the viability of the
Fund. This is especially so with the possibility of a Republic just around the
corner. Please don't hesitate to contact me if you have any questions or commnents on
the above rather lengthy diatribe. Meanwhile, let us get on with the job of
mending fences, regaining our momentum, and working together to enhance
the Fund.
With warm regards,
JOHNL WALION 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP AT THE
AUSTRALIAN FILM INSTITUTE AWARDS PRESENTATION, SYDNEY,
NOVEMBER 1993
1 am delighted to be here tonight with friends in film and television to
celebrate another year of spectacular achievement for the industry.
Another year of success and confidence.
As an Australian I'm very proud that we have a world class film and televlsion
Industry which produces world class material. And with It an event such as
the AFI awards to recognise it.
I know that over recent times, and particularly in the light of the nominations
for Best Film this year, we've had a bit of a debate about what an Australian
film looks like.
About whether you have to have a gum tree rather than a fir tree in it. Or
sun, sand and surf. And a little snow or in Vincent's case, a lot of snow.
About whether its got to be packed with people who are recognisably
Australian, and, If so, who is. About whether its still OK to do period pieces
I know that this is more than a matter of taste or fashion and I welcome the
debate. In fact, as you've probably noticed, I welcome most debates about our
cultural identity, and none more -so than in this industry which is so crucial to
our cultural development.
And that I think is the important point.
This Industry Is crucial to our cultural development.
We need it and we can't do without It. 
Other countries can, of course, produce films, indeed excellent films, for
Australians to see. And to learn from.
But that is a very different matter.
The simple fact is that no other country can produce Australian films. Or
Australian television programs.
Nor can they acquire the ability to do so. Its not something they can be
educated to or grow into. Its certainly not something they can buy or we can
sell. No-one else can give Australians ( or indeed the rest of the world) the
perspectives that our filmmakers do.
That is why we have to make sure that Australians don't lose creative control
over the things that help us and future generations to understand what it
means to be Australian.
Why we have to make sure that the revolution in communications technology
serves our cultural needs, rather than sit back and allow the globalisation of
the telecommunications market to set our cultural agenda for us.
Giobalisation can of course work in our favour too. It can create opportunities
for our fil-ms tobe seen more widely.
And as films such as Strictly Ballroom and the Heartbreak Kid, among others,
show, we can go on making, dare I say it, distinctly Australian films, which the
global market will pick up. Films which are not hung up on categorization or
ideological purity.
Australians must retain the capacity to show ourselves to the world and to tell
the world our stories the ones that Ae want to tell. The ones that we should
tell. But this does not preclude our filmmakers from exploring other parts of the
world. We don't have a monopoly on Insight into the human condition. There
are lots of things out there for us to learn. And to tell others about.
Nor should it preclude us from attracting other filmmakers to Australia to
make their films, or from pursuing new co-operative arrangements,
particularly within our region.
When I was in China earlier this year, I was fortunate to be able to visit the
Beijing Film Studio, and meet Chen Kalge. Filmmakers such as Chen are at
the front of liberal change in China. it would be good to see our industry
working cooperatively with them. 
We need such things to keep the industry flourishing. So we can provide
Australians and many others with what they clearly want to see.
While this Government will always be ready to assist in the process, It cannot
nor should not be responsible for maintaining the critical mass the industry
needs to survive.
But I can assure you that we will continue to be a strong supporter and keep
looking for new and better ways to help.
I congratulate the AFI and everyone Involved for the great show tonight. I
congratulate the ABC for televising it. Most of all, I congratulate the industry
for its successes over the last year and I look forward eagerly to the triumphs
that are sure to come.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER 139
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
COMMENT ON THIE WEST AUSTRALIAN MABO LEGISLATION
Thc Mabo legislation introduced by the West Australian Government is draconian and
discriminatory, may well be invalid in whole or in part under the RDA, and will result
in massive uncertainty.
* It is a recipe for endless dispute and l itigation, which will bog down land dealings
and smother industry and investment
* it fails even to validate pre-1975 grants and state legislation ( unlike the
Commonwealth proposal); there will be considerable doubt whether this validation
is successful
* there is no clear means of determining who has native title and where
* there is no clcar means of determining what rights are available under native title or
the statutory substitute
* the new traditional usage rights can only be defined by a court where there is a
conflict; this is a recipe rot increasing community disputes and ongoing uncertainty
* the Bill gives Aboriginal people only 12 months to claim compensation for
extinguishment of native title; the only way for Aboriginal people to protect their
rights would be to swamip the compensation system with claims whenever a grant
is made
* the Bill extinguishes a title which under the High Court doctrine could run as high
as exclusive possession, and replaces it with a statutory title deliberately pitched at
the lowest imaginable level of rights to land
* the Bill allows freehold or leasehold to be issued where there is native title and to
wipe out Aboriginal rights; this would make Aboriginal title the only form of
interest in relation to land which could he taken away and given to a third party
without compulsory acquisition 
a due process is denied; grants may be made irrespective of any court proceedings
concerning rights of traditional usage
4 the shabbiness is compounded by the schedulc of amendments to other WA Acts
which can be used to deny holders of traditional usage rights important procedural
protections available to other West Australians and give Aborigines no effective
standing or avenue of appeal
* the virtually unfcttcrvd discretion for Ministers to disregard Aboriginal interests
raises serious questions about appropriate checks and balances in public
administration
* there has been not a shred of consultation with Aboriginal people
* the Premier misrepresents important aspects of the Commonwealth proposal, e. g.
hc alleges that it contains no capacity for Aboriginal people to obtain land rather
than money as compensation.
The Bill is an obstacle to the achievement of what Aboriginal people. industry and the
community generally needed a just, workable and certain land management regi me
which took account of Mabo.
It would do damage to Austratlia's international reputation. It would cost the country
in terms of international as weli as domestic investment.
It would polarise the Austr-alian community. It is the antithesis of reconciliation, and a
throwback to an earlier era in which Aboriginal rights were steamrolled whenever
governments or interest groups judged it expedient to do so.
A right which, by definition, has survived for 200 years and derives from occupation of
land for thousands of years before that would be extinguished not much more than a
year after being recognised by the highest Court in Australia.
It has sold out the interests of West Australians Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal.
The Commonwealth Government cannot afford to see economic development in a
third of the continent brought to a halt and will protect the national intere'st. Nor is the
Government prepared to stand by and see Aboriginal people disposed of land to which
they have native title.
I reiterate my commitment to a national approach to Mabo which will work in the
interests of all Australians. The Bill shortly to be introduced into the Federal
Parliament would be balanced, fair and workable,
The West Australian Government should get on board.
CANBERRA November 1993 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, SUNDAY,
7 NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OIE PROOF COPY
PM. I just want to give you some comments on Dr Hewson's performance
with Laurie Oakes on the ' Sunday show this morning. It is the weakest
and most helpless performance that I have seen a parliamentary
leader put in in my 24 years in the House of Representatives in public
office. Dr Hewson made clear that he does not have any policy on
Mabo despite the fact that he has released policy documents that
native title is at the core of Coalition policy, upholding the High Court
decision is at the core of Coalition policy, he said. Now that policy has
no status, it hasn't been through the Shadow Cabinet, it means nothing
and even when questioned about It being a set of principles he
demurred saying It was really for anyone to say what they thought of it.
Now, all this means, I think, is that Dr Hewson is so weakened, he
can't now put down as he should, Ian McLachlan for walking away from
what has been the Coalition's stated position now since June. I think
that is because Dr Hewson is relying on Western Australian
parliamentary Liberals. The related theme through this is of course,
that Richard Court is contemplating the most unconscionable
extinguishment of private land titles in this country's history. This is
the party that believes in the rule of law, In private property. It has now
said that the High Court should be chastised, that the High Court
should be reformed, that the High Court is a social experimentation
place and on private property they are prepared to rush in and use the
powers of the West Australian parliament for the most blatant
extinguishment of private property ever. Dr Hewson should, as a
position of principle, come out and say he would have no bar of that,
that he would protect the centrality of the High Court's judgement
about terra nullius, but today he made clear that while he could
understand native title applying to the Merian Islands, he couldn't see;
he said he had reservations about how it would apply to the mainland
of Australia, God help us after all this time. He then went on to say 
2
that Mabo was a major issue facing this country well, of course it is Dr
Hewson, that is why It requires a principled policy position, that is why
the Government has spent the better part of a year on it to give effect
to and build a body of administrative law for the hearing, awarding and
protection of native title and not to see it squandered or worse, to
connive In Its extinguishment with an unprincipled government in
Western Australia.
All of this means that Dr l-ewson can't deal with his leadership; he
can't discipline Mr McLachlan who is way out of court with the Federal
Parliamentary Liberal party; Dr Hewson would know that the great
body of the Federal Parliamentary Liberal party does believe the High
Court did as every other similar group of jurors around the world have
done and that Is found that these concepts such as terra nullius are
void and that, of course, a native title has existed in the common law
and having had the decision made should join with the Government in
seeing it protected. He hides behind this ruse that the he hasn't seen
the Government's Bill, but he has seen the High Court decision since
June 1992. He has had now all that time to make a decision about the
core principle, which you don't need the Government's Bill to establish
and that is, whether native title should be protected or not.
The fact Is here there are big issues here for the Liberal party. This
view that you can't give Aboriginal people In this country inherent right,
only a conferred right, that if you have the chance you should lunge
out and try and extinguish their rights to private property of course,
never for a moment considering that every other Australian should say,
well, how sacred are my rights to private property If any Liberal
government believes It could extinguish any category of persons
private property in this country. And yet, Dr H-ewson won't draw the
principal threads together and state his position, stand McLachlan
down, put Reith in his place and adopt a position of principle In the
Parliament on this important question of native title. Dr Hewson is
running the same line, essentially he ran weeks ago that is, that
everybody In the Liberal party Is entitled to carry the leaders baton in
the knapsack and that virtually the more contestants there are the
merrier, but in his case he is all right. But the fact is, of course, it has
lead him to be completely powerless and helpless. He is now like a
cork bobbing around in the ocean, pushed and shoved by any force,
any Influence which comes from this week to that and particularly not
In any way being able to cope with the big issues of principle facing
Australia and not showing any leadership whatsoever.
J: But do you think his leadership is seriously under threat?
PM: I think, any parliamentary Liberal looking at that program this morning
would despair they know his leadership is finished.
J: Where is the threat coming from? 
PM: it is coming everywhere. It comes most particularly from him, because
he won't display any leadership.
J: But who will take over, will Bronwyn Bishop?
PM: Fortunately, that is not for me to worry about.
J: I presume Mr Keating, that you are not going to put him out of his
misery by bringing on the Mabo legislation as soon as possible?
PM: The Mabo legislation will be introduced when we have the Bill written
as accurately and as securely as we can we will then introduce it.
J: You don't have a date yet for the introduction?
PM: No, It will probably be around the 16th or 17th of November as I said.
J: Was the legal advice received from Atorney-General's that Richard
Court's legislation could be valid?
PM: I am not basically here to debate the whys and wherefores of Richard
Court's legislation. Simply to say this, that what the Court Government
is doing is unconscionably seeking to extinguish a proprietary right for
an unspecified, undesignated so-called set of native title rights, only to
be expressed whenever there is a dispute and when they are wiped
out, Aboriginal people have a year to argue for compensation, but how
would they argue for compensation when they could never know
wh~ ether they were in fact the native title owners in the first place.
J: How can the Commonwealth's legislation be Imposed In West
Australia, Mr Court's legislation is valid, don't you have a problem on
that front?
PM: The Commonwealth has primacy in this area and it will assert It without
fear or favour. And can I say, that also as an aside here, the mining
industry has got to stand up here and decide what it wants. It was
telling us, remember all the Wik carry on about how titles before 1975
had to be validated, there is no such validation in the West Australian
legislation whatsoever for any titles before 1975, yet they are saying
in their press release that yes, they think this Bill fits the bill with the
mining industry. It would provide absolute chaos in Western Australia,
total uncertainty and the one thing which the mining industry has
always said was its first requirement, that is, to be able to validate the
titles. Look, the core matter here Is this, this is a matter as Dr Hewson said
this morning a major issue and principle for the country. The
Opposition is now without a policy, after all this time Dr Hewson has 
told us this morning that the policy that he announced in June which
said the Coalition accepts that the High Court has determined that
native title exits he Is now running away from saying it has no
status, that it has not been through the Shadow Cabinet and it has no
party room support. Right at this moment, the Coalition of the country,
the conservative parties have no position on the question of native title
or its preservation that is just an appalling disgrace.
J: Is this the issue that is going to bring down Dr Hewson do you think?
PM: It they are big enough they are too hot for Dr Hewson to touch.
Wherever he goes, if It Is on Issues like the republic he meets on the
right Mr Howard, if it is on Mabo he runs into the West Australian
Liberals in the likes of Mr McLachlan. He won't make a stand
anywhere and the thing about leadership it is all about making a
stand around principle something that Dr Hewson doesn't
understand, that his leadership flows from his own strength and that he
hasn't displayed any. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRZSB BY THR PRIM MINSTIR, TER HON P J MATING NP
BUSNUSS ASIA CONVZTION, ADLAIDI, 8-9 NOVMWEDR 1993
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address this
very well-timed Business Asia Conference.
It comes at the end of the Grand Prix, which has been an
opportunity for South Australia to demonrstrate its
capacity to successfully organise world class events and
its ability to provide world class products.
I am sure that no business visitor could be left with any
doubt that South Australia is a State which intends to
succeed. South Australia's commnitment to success in the export
market and particularly to markets in our regioh is
exemplified here today.
Today, half of South Australia's exports go to the Asia
Pacific region. I know the South Australian Government
is determined-to double its exports to Asia in the next
five years.
Of South Australia's ten most important export markets,
nine are in the Asia Pacific region.
The reasons for Australia's success in Asia go beyond the
simple fact that the Asian economies are growing.
Australia is uniquely positioned to benefit from economic
growth in Asia. And we have strong complementarities
with the dynamic Asian economies.
Australia's exports to East Asia now account for almost
per cent of our merchandise exports.
Last year, South East Asia was the fastest growing
regional market for our exports. Exports grew by 19 per
cent during the past year. And our manufactures exports
to South East Asia have grown annually at an average of
over 27 per cent in recent years. 290.9 
Over the lastA five years, Australian manuf actures exports
to the rapidly growing economnies of Singapore, Taiwan,
Hong Kong and Korea accounted for over 60 per cent of
Australia's growth in manufactured exports.
And demand will further increase as the economies of
Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia continue to grow and
diversify their imports.
The Asia Pacific region is forecast to continue to grow
by 7 per cent over the next two years.
As Asian economies are maturing their consumers are
growing in affluence. In Indonesia alone there is a
mniddle class of 15 million which represents a huge
potential market for Australia.
In 1990 there were 6 million people in South East Asia
with annual incomes above $ 5,000. In 2010 there will be
some 45 million.
So the opportunities are there and my Government has done
much to get the right macro-and micro-economic settings
for business in this country to capitalise on them.
There are now stronger signs of economic recovery and of
an improvement in business conditions and the" economic
outlook. There are also signs that improvements in business
conditions are being reflected in employment.
Economic growth was 3.3 per cent to the June quarter, the
seventh consecutive quarter of growth.
Last week's balance of payments numbers showed a
strengthening trend to higher exports.
Conditions are right for further strengthening in
business investment growth. Interest rates are at an
historically low level.,
The world economy is picking up and this will further
strengthen our own recovery.
Australian industry is beginning to turn the corner.
orders are picking up.
An important factor behind the recovery in manufacturing
productionl has been the growth in manufactured exports
over the past year.
I commnend the South Australian Government for actively
supporting its exporters with the establishment of the
Strategic Trade Development Scheme and the New Exporters
Challenge Scheme.
001 
3
To further assist South Australian companies in their
export endeavours my government this week announced an $ 8
million expansion to the Export Access program.
I am also pleased to note that Mike Rann, the South
Australian Minister for Business and Regional Development
is working with Shane Stone of the Northern Territory to
pursue business opportunities in ASEAN, and particularly
in Indonesia. As you know the Northern Territory has
important business connections with Eastern Indonesia.
This partnership sends an important signal that our
States are not always competing with each other in trade,
but can collaborate in the national interest. Any
assistance that States can offer to each other can only
assist the overall future development of Australia.
We all know of the strong manufacturing base in South
Australia. South Australian exports of manufactures products have
been a notable highlight in the South Australian economy
in recent years.
And for every million of extra manufactures exports,
it is estimated that around 10 to 12 new manufacturing
jobs are created and this does not include flow-on
benefits to jobs in other sectors.
The world's major car manufacturers have gained
confidence in Australia's ability to produce world class
and competitive vehicles and components.
In South Australia General Motors Holden's Automtive Ltd
invested some $ 150 million in the construction of a state
of the art paint facility over the last year. It is
expected that further investments of over $ 500 million
will be made over the next four years.
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd has also made significant
investments in recent years with $ 168 million being
invested in plant upgrade and a further $ 400 million
being invested in the development of new Magna/ Verada
cars due for release in 1997.
South Australia accounts for some 30 per cent of
Australia's automotive component exports.
There are some 20 automotive component manufacturing
companies in South Australia producing world class
products. Exports of automotive components totalled $ 150
million in 1992.
One example is Air international's South Australian
producti-on of automotive air conditioning systems, which
has gone from employing 20 people and annual sales of $ 1
million in 1991 to employing 160 people and sales in
excess of $ 100 million today. 2911 
4
But there is also an important agricultural base in South
Australia. South Australia has made a serious commiitment
to develop and exploit its reputation as a producer of
aclean foodo.
A major focus for the Conurnwealth and States is to
maintain the momentum of micro-economic reform. It is
these reforms which directly influence business costs and
the capacity of individual enterprises to compete
successfully.
We have already made a lot of progress. we have opened
up the economy, floated the exchange rate, implemented
reforms on the waterfront, in the rail, road transport,
aviation and telecoimmunications industries. we have
established an orderly program for reducing protection
for our industries, and improving the capacity of the
economy to respond to the challenges of the international
marketplace. There is much more to do and governments are currently
considering reforms to the structure of our electricity,
water and gas industries.
I am pleased to say that South Australia is one of two
states which has made definite moves toward this goal.
Because of the efforts of Premiers Arnold and Goss the
construction of a second Moomba-Sydney gas pipeline to
supply South Australian ethiie to the ICI petrochemical
plant at Botany, NSW, is likely to go -ahead.
One of Australia's great export success stories is wine.
It has been going on f or some years now, but none has
been more impressive than the past year. The record
export performance for the month of September of 16
million litres exceeded the level of exports for the
whole of 1985-86.
South Australian wine exporters, as the premium wine
producers in Australia, have been at the forefront of
that export drive. They have proved that with the right
product and the right marketing there's enormous
potential for Australian agriculture and horticulture.
Asia represents enormous potential for wine exports.
South Korea alone is now importing over a million litres
of Australian wine per annum.
This willingness to seek out overseas markets for quality
products, in many cases to markets in our own region, is
a model for all.
The submarine project is an example of government and
industry working together. When I spoke at the launching
ceremony of the Collins submarine in August I
congratulated the South Australian government for its
foresight in backing the project.
2912 
My Government recognises that it has a role to Play in
assisting Australian business change its approach and
move into the global marketplace.
Without that support and the support of South Australian
industry the project would never have achieved the
current high standards.
over 1000 new jobs have been created at the Australian
Submarine Corporation.
And several thousand other Australians have gained work
through sub-contracts. Here is an example of a
commi~ tment by a state government helping the growth not
only of their own state's industry, but also the growth
of Australia as a whole.
A project of the scope of the submarine project has
brought to Australia valuable technology transfer. In
addition, many Australian companies have refined
previously available technology.
The project is a catalyst for research and development,
design initiatives, improved production techniques, new
ways of testing and proving equipment, and so on.
The development of computer software to be used on board
the submnarine, the development of special tiles and the
successful reduction of noise in the pumps represent fine
examples of the development of previously available
technology. A number of those companies are South
Australian companies and represent potential exports for
Australia. On the broader front, my government's trade. policy
priorities are the successful conclusion to the Uruguay
Round and further development of APEC.
We strongly believe in maintaining and strengthening an
open, non-discriminatory multilateral trading system
based on the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade
-( GATT). This interest is shared by our Asian trading
partniers because they depend on access to international
markets. We are concerned that some countries : Are taking a
particularly parochial and defensive approach in the
negotiations on the Uruguay Round. X comprehensive,
balanced agreement covering all sectors would benefit not
only Australia, but all nations.
Such an agreement is the most important achievement that
nations can make to stimulate world . growth and
confidence. 2913 
My visit to Seattle to attend the APEC leaders meeting
next week will further underline the importance Australia
attaches to developments in our-region.
The Asia-Pacific region has emerged as the world's preeminent
economic region.
It has led the world in growth over the past two decades.
It now accounts for half the world's GDP and over half
the world's manufacturing production.
And the region's growth has been outward-looking. The
Asia-Pacific region is the fastest growing and most
integrated trading conriunity in the world.
The Asia-Pacific region accounts for some 40 per cent of
world trade. in 1992, 66 per cent of Asia-Pacific
exports stayed in the region. Trade within the region
now exceeds that of the European Commnunity.
And regional investment is growing even faster than
trade. In the period to 1997, 40 per cent of new global
investment demand will come from Asia.
The key challenge is to unlock the full economic
potential of the Asia-Pacific region. I believe Asia
Pacific Economic Co-operation APEC can play a
decisive role in meeting this challenge.
APEC shows great promise as a forum for promoting
reiional economic co-operation on a basis of open
regionalism. APEC is about removing impediments to doing
business in the Asia-Pacific region and increasing the
velocity of trade and investment for example by
harmonising standards.
I have made clear that the Government does not see APEC
as an alter-native to GATT but as a OGATT-plus' structure
which builds on GA!' outcomes. We do not have in mind
anything like the European Commiunity, which is a much
more formal, highly-structured and inward-looking
grouping. The informal Seattle meeting of APEC leaders in November
is a historic opportunity for the region. It will build
on the increasing economic integration of the APEC
economies and give expression to the growing sense of
commnunity in our region. And it will focus the world's
attention on the dynamism of Asia.
As I said recently in Jakarta, that meeting will be
supremely imporzant for the region. It will give APEC
leaders a chance to clear our collective minds about the
development of what is going to be a very significant
open regional grouping of countries.
2914 
The active participation of the private sectors of the
APEC economues including Australian business is
integral to the success of APEC's further development.
Governments can set in place structures such as APEC to
help create the right environment for trade and
investment. But ultimately it is for business to trade
and invest.
To assist me in preparing for the Seattle leaders meeting
: have established an APEC Business Consultative Panel.
wdhich met t3r the first timne last week. in the meeting I
heard first hand the views of a group of senior
Australian business people on their ideas for the way
ahead for APEC.
As I said to the panel members. there is no road-map for
APEC. Alt is imp~ ortant to get the business coummunity
involved. Through APEC Australia, as a well-regarded
member of the Asia-Pacific region, can help put in place
structures which encourage economic co-operation and
integration. APEC will have done its job if it achieves
this. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, ADELAIDE CONVENTION CENTRE, 8 NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, you have walked into a State election campaign, you have
often been critical of the States in the past of being fairly irresponsible
with money, I suppose South Australia's performance, the performance
of this Government has added weight to your claims, do you think it
would be an indictment of the system to see a State government like
this one returned?
PM: I think contrary to your claim this Government is the one repairing the
problem. This is the one which has now taken active steps, really
active steps, to get South Australia's debt problem under control, and it
was with Premier Lyn Arnold that I negotiated the $ 600 million
payment from the Commonwealth to South Australia. Now, that was
$ 600 million. That was a huge amount of money. And without it, of
course, South Australia wouldn't have been able to repair its problem.
That I negotiated with the Premier as part of the debt restructuring
strategy before the last federal election, and it is Premier Arnold's
Government which is actually moving the whole of the South Australian
debt back into a reasonable position.
J The polls show the true believers are deserting Labor in the State, do
you think they should?
PM: Well, look, the last one to take any notice of this will be the pundits,
they're Invariably wrong in elections, and the public will, I think, look
through this I mean, have a look at the Coalition. Here they say
debt is a major problem here, but they are keeping mum about what
they will do about it. What people would find out they'll do about it, is
they would sock those least able to afford it to try and remedy the
problem. Whereas, I think what the Premier and the Government have
done here is say, ok, we have a problem, let's talk to the
Commonwealth Government, let's negotiate a strategy and let's get it
down. Let's get the debt under control. That's, I think, the far more 
mature way to go with than the Liberals keeping some proposal up
. their sleeve to pull out in the last days of an election campaign and let
people repent at leisure later.
J: Neal Blewett is planning to stand aside from federal politics, do you
support giving him an overseas posting?
PM: Well, that is not a matter for here, it is a matter for the longer run.
J But do you believe that Neal Blewett will be leaving?
P M; Well, that's a matter for him, I think. Neal has had a very long service
now, and a meritorious service can I say, and in all spheres of public
life people will take the opportunity to change careers, and he may well
do.
J: Are you happy to be ahead of Dr Hewson in the polls now?
PM: Well, they go up and down these things. You can't take too much
notice of them.
J: Governments tend to stand or fall on their record, don't you accept the
Royal Commission's finding that this State government in large part,
was responsible for the problems that now face it?
PMV: Well, I think, Premier Bannon took that responsibility to himself, and
accepted it. Premier Arnold was elected to repair the problem, and it
has been repairing the problem that he has. Did you notice in the
Federal Election that the Federal Liberal party would make no
commitment of funding to South Australia? Did you notice that the
State Opposition Leader was unable to procure any financial funding
from the Commonwealth under a Coalition Government? That's not
true of Premier Arnold. I mean, he and I negotiated the $ 600 million.
Let me just repeat that number $ 600 million. It seems that you guys
won't talk about it, $ 600 million, which the Commonwealth has
advanced to the people of South Australia,
J: Yes Prime Minister, that got you re-elected.
PM: No, it is not a matter of getting re-elected. Thank you, no, for the
cynicism. This State had a problem which it was not able to repair on
its own account. Lyn Arnold understood that and approached the
Commonwealth and we sat down and sought to remedy the problem.
We have now got it back where its debt trajectory will come under
control. It doesn't need a Liberal government with a secret plan to
knock everyone over the head to do that. 
J* Mr Keating, this Government has presided over a $ 3 billion disaster
with the State Bank, you're saying that people should still vote for this
Government, what is the cut off point?
PM: What I am saying is that was the Bannon Government and, I think, this
Government decided, this Government, the Arnold Government,
decided that prudence demanded, that a debt management strategy
be undertaken. I just don't think it is right to say that this Government
was the one that created the problem. I mean this one is now
remedying it.
J: This Government, Mr Keating, is the Bannon Government minus Mr
Bannon over the last eleven years, that's all this Government is.
PM: Well the fact of the matter is that the Government is pursuing a
strategy which is now about dealing with this problem, in the belief in
the first instance that leaving these matters with financial institutions
was the right and proper thing to do. As it turned out whenever a
Government has ultimate responsibility for funds that they are best
with some knowledge of what is happening within these financial
institutions. Now, it turns out the former view was a mistaken view.
But having accepted that, the Government has now made changes to
give South Australia a debt situation which you can bring under
control. What I would say to you is, no other Party and no other
Government was, in fact, capable of negotiating that with the
Commonwealth, and that would not be the happy position South
Australia is now in.
J: Both major parties are basing their debt reduction strategies on 4 per
cent growth, Is that a bit ambitious, you are talking about 3.3 per cent,
in a report the other day, 3 per cent?
PM: We grew over 3.3 for the year to June, I mean, these are matters for
judgement, But again, I am not privy to the figuring in the these things.
J: Has the wine tax and the petrol tax done irreparable harm to Arnold's
chances?
PM: I don't think so. Look, I have just given figures a moment ago, the wine
industry's exports are growing, we have exported more in the month of
September than we did in the whole year of 1985-86. Now, I
remember when the wine tax was introduced in the 1 980s, I introduced
It. It was then going to be, sort of disaster for the wine industry. It has
gone from strength to strength ever since. Thank you.
ends 



13 124/ 93
PRIME MINI1STER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE [ RON P J KE-ATING MP
LAWLESS LIBERALS
The Liberal frontbencher Ian McLachlan's approach to theMabo issue is now one of
seeking to brazenly defy a judgement of the High Court. There should be no place for
him in the shadow ministry of a party which genuinely believes in the laws and
institutions of this country.
For some time now I have highlighted the extraordinary arrogance and hypocrisy in the
approach of many Liberals to the Mabo High Court decision. As conservatives, they
stand by the rule of law and the sanctity of private property. But when a decision of
the highest court in the country doesn't suit their vested interests, they say the court is
in error and the decision should be overturned.
Mr McLachlan's performance on ABC Radio this morning was the most flagrant
confirmation to date of this moral bankruptcy. In effect, he endorsed Professor
Blaincy's view that because some Australians of influence do not like the judgement of
the High Court, the Chief Justice should call his court together to explain themselves,
or resign.
His agreement with the " general thrust" of Prof'essor Blainey's incitement to defy the
Court in Adelaide last night is an indictment of the Liberals, and an indictment of Dr
Hewson for failing to pull him into line.
Mr McLachlan also describcd Premnier Court's legislation legilation which Mr
McLachlan endorses as " the start of a process of reversal of the native title decision".
Dr Hewson should dissociate himself from Mr McLachlan's views, and from the
Western Australian legislation now, or stand accused of the same arrogant refusal to
accept the decision of the Court which even Mr Hugh Morgan describes as " the
keystone of the Constitutional arch".
But where was Dr Hewson while this was occurring? Giving Senator Bishop the
political equivalent of another kiss on the cheek in exchange for her hollow assurance
that she doesn't want his job, The Liberal Party leadership is now a vacuum waiting to
be fillecd
CANBERRA 9 November, 1993 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPD
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
9 NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Last night [ an McLachlan, the Liberal front bencher, was brazenly
defying the High Court and endorsing the general thrust of the
fanatical views put by Professor Blainey wh~ o said that the Chief
Justice had failed in his duties and should seriously consider making
way for another Chief Justice. In other words, here's the Party that has
always believed in the rule of law, and the sanctity of private property,
saying the High Court only works when it works for us, and when. it
doesn't work for us the High Court Judge, Chief Justice, should either
explain himself or resign his position.
Ian McLachlan then endorsed that general thrust of those views. Now,
I think, that it is imperative that Dr Hewson dissociate himself from Ian
McLachlan's endorsement of Professor Blainey's fanatical right wing
views about the High Court to dissociate himself from those remarks,
and Mr McLachlan's remarks that he endorses the start of a process of
reversal of the Native Title decision. And to not do so would leave Dr
Hewson accused of the same arrogant refusal to accept a decision of
the High Court, which even Mr Hugh Morgan describes as the
keystone of the Constitutional arch.
So, here is a High Court decision very much along the lines of similar
Supreme Courts in other countries. One that it is a sound legal
decision, and now where a front bencher of the Opposition says the
Chief Justice should resign.
Now, last week Alexander Downer was the only Liberal that came out
and said that Mr McLachlan was out of court, he was out of line and he
should be corrected and put back into line or stand down from the front
bench and that Dr Hewson should ensure that he does. Dr Hewson
has done no such thing, his weakness in relation to the High Court and
Mabo, that is, a Liberal Party leader considering and tolerating such an
attack upon the High Court for this decision simply means, I think, that 
Dr Hewson -now has no strength in dealing with the High Court, he is
showing no leadership whatsoever in his Party, and that was again
endorsed this morning by his make up with Senator Bishop. Senator
Bishop has been campaigning for his job. A Week ago he was kissing
her on the cheek in a slilly make-up, and today, apparently in another
display of a total lack of leadership and weakness, he is saying it is ok,
Bronwyn, if you are quiet it will be all right with me. The fact is John
Hewson should try and stop Senator Bishop where she wants to start,
in the pre-selection for the seat of Mackellar, he is not doing that. He
is going to let her through and now let her slide onto the front bench
providing they all kiss and make up.
Well, I just say to you, Dr Hewson is a weak leader. I told you last
weekend that I think his days as leader are finished, and to tolerate the
brazen contempt by Mr McLachlan for the High Court in endorsing the
fanatical views of Professor Blainey just makes that abundantly clear.
J-How long do you give Dr Hewson in the job?
PM. Not long. I think now, any Liberal who would have seen his interview
with Laurie Oakes on the Sunday Program last weekend would simply
despair about the state of the Opposition leadership.
J: Prime Minister, didn't you earlier in the year also invite criticism of the
High Court for leaving a lot of the questions unanswered on Mabo?
PM: No, there is one thing about'the tidiness of the judgement, that is,
whether or not some of these questions about leases etc should have
been referred to, that is, leaving so much of it to the Parliament. It is
another thing to say that the whole decision is illegitimate and the
Hight Court and the Chief Justice should stand down. It is an absolute
outrage. They were always invoking Menzies, I mean, Menzies would
turn over in his grave on this sort of an attack on the High Court.
These are people that believe in the rule of law. The West Australian
Government is contemplating the most far reaching obliteration of
private property rights in the country's history. They want to. take
Native Title and extinguish it.
J. Prime Minister, do you think Mr Blainey is a racist?
PM; We know of his notorious positions on these things, you can put him in
the Hugh Morgan category. The problem here is McLachlan,
McLachlan is a front bencher in the Opposition. He is endorsing
Blainey's views that the Chief Justice should stand down, that * the
Justices should explain themselves or stand down. And the leader of
the Opposition is letting that position remain, and letting those remarks
stand without disciplining Mr McLachlan. 
J: Does Professor Blainey have a point when he says that Aborigines
have too much land and that anyone who criticises that is being
labelled a racist?
PM:* Well, in 1788 they had all the land didn't they. What are they to get
now? Not that in the coastal periphery of the country, but only in the
main, in the hinterland and only where they can establish native title on
a customary basis. In the end, these people don't want to see land
conferred on people, they want to see land conferred by Parliament
they don't want to see it as an inherent right of indigenous people.
J: Prime Minister, when will we see your legislation on Mabo?
PM:-Probably, you'll see it when I introduce it in the Parliament not so far
from now.
SYou can't give us a date yet'?
PM: I think probably about the 16th or 17th.
J: Prime Minister, do you see a democratic right to be able to criticise the
High Court the Labor Party's position on the ad ban decision?
PM: It is not a democratic right to go and say that the principal and most
supreme court in the country should explain itself or resign over a
matter like this, not when the party who is endorsing it was saying that
the native title decision was correct. I mean, in a statement which Dr
Hewson published in June he said the Liberal Opposition supports,
the Coalition, supports the native title decision of the High Court. Now,
to have a front bencher say that the High Court, endorsing a view that
the Chief Justice should explain himself or resign is an outrage.
J: That was only a principle, it wasn't policy.
PM: Yes, that was only a principle, it wasn't policy that's right. We
discovered that with your very important probing on Sunday Laurie
( Oakes).
J: Mr Keating, you talk about a vested interested, in your statement, you
talk about vested interests are you talking about Mr McLachlan being
a pastoralist there?
PMVI No, but look, Mr McLachlan is a pastoralist and a substantial one and
he comes from that area of Australian life that believe that the
country's bounty is for them to enjoy, but nobody else. The fact is, the
Court has made a principled decision here and Professor Blainey's
views are an outrage, but the greater outrage is the endorsement of
them by Mr McLachlan and the failure of the Leader of the Opposition
to stand him up. What is politics coming to? 
J: Mr Keating, the Greens seem to be suggesting now that there won't be
time to consider this legislation this year are you concerned that it
won't get through the Parliament this year?
PM: I would like to see it through the Parliament this year and the Greens
have got to know and have got to understand this well, that what
Richard Court wants to do is to extinguish native title. He wants to
wipe out the private propert rights of Aboriginal people, that is what's
on here. Richard Court wants to take the private property rights and to
use Mr McLachlan words " start the process of reversal of the native
fitle decision". I mean, they're the stakes here, so we are not worried
about some petty debate about time tables, we are worried about
matters here of great principle.
J So, will the Federal legislation override the West Australian
legislation?
PM: Well, you wait to see that. Look, the Federal legislation will take
primacy in these matters.
J: And you are convinced that the West Australian legislation will be
unconstitutional?
PM: I am convinced that the Commonwealth Parliament's power to legislate
in respect of Aboriginal people is secure, sound.
J, Prime Minister, what is your response to yesterday's opposition
questioning in Estimates about the Lodge?
PM:-I thought it was appalling and I mean Dr Hewson sanctioning this sort
of behaviour could you imagine Menzies raking over John Curtin's
tenure or staff arrangements at the Lodge or John Curtin raking over
Joe Lyons family arrangements at the Lodge this is the sort of dirty
linen view that the Liberal party now specialise in, Where is the
Liberal party under this man? How low does Australian politics need to
sink? Can I say, I was also appalled at just how quickly the voyeurs of
the Press Gallery took this up in a London tabloid way with alacrity that
would even surprised the London tabloids, and ran it all on pages one
and two of the newspapers. I might also refer you to the correction
The Canberra Times hid on page two of its edition today after running
two front pages on Saturday and Sunday about this phoney story
about prints in the Cabinet Room. The Press Gallery ought to get on
with the big issues and wake up to itself.
ends 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF NEW SBS PREMISES, SYDNEY
NOVEMBER 1993
It is a very great pleasure to be here this evening at the opening of the new
premises of the Special Broadcasting Service.
I'm delighted that SIBS has moved to Artarmon, alongside other networks. As
it should be, because for a long time it has been in the media mainstream.
In fact, for a long time it has been a groundbreaker a leader rather than a
follower. A service which has directed Australian eyes to looking both at this
country and its place in the world in a new way.
SBS has taught us truths about the Australian identity which not so long ago
we found it convenient to ignore truths which some people, whose names
probably spring easily to mind, still sadly seem unwilling or unable to come to
terms with.
It has also been an important weapon in the fight against the sporadic efforts
of a few to incite outbreaks of racism and cultural paranoia in this country, not
least by its ability to expose the absurdity and intellectual dishonesty of such
positions. This new building Is very appropriate for SBS. Not only does it provide a
home for the service which is consonant with its image elegant, economic
and efficient but it also provides a home for the complete service, bringing
radio and TV under the same roof for the first time.
That I think is important, because for some people, particularly those who
speak no language other than English, the glamour of SBS television makes
it easy to overlook the fact that radio is such a crucial part of the service. A
part which is in such demand that it will soon be going national.
In fact I understand that it will go national next year on Australia Day.
And that is most appropriate. 
It is fitting that it do so because SBSs strength is that it reaches into real
Australia. Multicultural Australia.
It does so by providing, principally through its radio service, an indispensable
source of information and advice to newly arrived migrants advice about
their rights, advice about their responsibilities. Information without which they
would have much less chance of participating fully as Australians in the
development of this country.
It also does so by giving Australians perspectives on issues which they
cannot get elsewhere. Not only through its news and documentary services,
which are second to none, but also through its commitment to valuing
creativity, to celebrating variety, to championing a view of Australia as a
country rich in human resources, and most of all, ideas.
How nice it is to see a media service which puts a premium on ideas and their
dissemination! Valuing ideas, I have to say, doesn't seem to be something which is
preoccupying a lot of other people in the media at the moment. Rather there
seems to be an obsession with the superficial and the trivial; with the cheap
headline rather than the in-depth analysis of issues which are of real concern
and importance.
We need the media to play its part in broadening our vision.
We need it to help educate Australia about issues which are vital to our
future, and which we need to resolve now. Issues which include
fundamentally our multicultural population about the competitive edge they
can give us in selling our products overseas, in opening up new markets in
the Asia Pacific region, where all the action is. Where Australia has to
perform. We need the media to promote Australia as a sophisticated and socially just
society. As a country with which other countries see the advantage of being
associated. As a country which takes itself seriously.
When did we last see a major newspaper story or TV feature from another
network which acknowledged that multicultural Australia was one of the great
success stories of this country's history? Or one which considered the
opportunities multiculturalism has opened up for us?
But if a critic on the most unsubstantial evidence attacks the principles and
working of multiculturalism it is front page news.
In truth, multiculturalism is a given a fact of our normal life. 
We need SBS, if only to remind us of this truth. And it is to the credit of the
people who have shaped SBS people like Nick Shehadie, like Brian Johns
and now Malcolm Long that they have been resolute in their commitment to
this principle.
Ladies and Gentlemen
This is a Government which is steadfastly committed to a multicultural
Australia. Human decency demands it. Economic efficiency and
commonsense requires it.
Our policies of cultural pluralism have been among the most innovative and
creative in the world. They have also been the hallmark of a decent and far
sighted society.
In a world often afflicted by ethnic and cultural tension, bitterness and
bloodshed, Australia stands among those few countries which have avoided
such conflicts.
And we have done so while celebrating rather than sacrificing our diversity.
While we need to guard against complacency, it is true to say that under the
umbrella of an overall commitment to the nation and its uniting values and
institutions, a society of great richness and variety and remarkable harmony
has evolved.
SIBS is both a symbol and a microcosm of that society.
It gives me great pleasure to formally open its new home. I congratulate all
associated with the design and building of these new premises and I wish all
associated with SBS a most successful future.
Thank you. 


TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P J KEATING, M. P,DOORSTOP, ' ONE AUSTRALIA' LAUNCH, REGENT HOTEL, MELBOURNE,WEDNESIDAY, 10 NOVEMBER, 1993
J: Inaudible,
PM: Well, Customs has been under review. We've got a systemic review&nbsp;going at the moment and it's been going for somne time.
J: Inaudible.
PM: Well, I think there'll be a more than adequate review undertaken.
J: What about Nick Greiner's comments on the leadership within the Liberal&nbsp;Party?
PM. I Well, that's for the Liberal Party. I think there's a great vacuum inAustralian public life with John Hewson. He's not providing the kind ofleadership which the Opposition needs. It's. incredible that after all thistime since the High Court handed down it's decision on Mabo that theOpposition still don't have a policy. Can you believe that? John Hewsondoesn't have the courage to nominate a policy. And now, of course, he'sinviting Richard Court over to try and hold the Western Australianparliamentary support under his leadership. Well, if you ever see me inthat state you can write me off. You can say, ' This guy is finished". If youever see me get to that you won't have to say anymore than say, " It's allover".
J: Is Nick Greiner inaudible.
PM: I think just for some strength and leadership in the Liberal Party. Nothingmore and nothing less. I think as a former Liberal Premier he's entitled tohave a say about the state of the Party.ends.



ILI 2.,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL MURPHY, DATELINE, 86$ TV
NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Prime Minister, welcome to Dateline.
PJK: Thank you very much, Paul. Good to be here.
PM: If I can start with the Seattle Summit. You are off there Wednesday of
next week for the APEC Summit, but President Clinton's having real
trouble with NAFTA, getting it through the Congress, if he fails to do
that what's the effeict on APEC?
PJK-I think the effect would be, perhaps an indirect effect, and that would
be that the flag of free trade or freer trade would be lowered in the
event that NAFTA didn't succeed in passing the Congress. It wouldn't
in any way diminish the United States capacity to trade into APEC, or
Canada's independent capacity or Mexico's independence to trade into
APEC, it is just that they wouldn't be an entity trading into APEC. But it
won't affect APEC it only basically effects the North American trade
arrangements.
PM: What do you expect out of the APEC Summit? Is it just a meeting, an
informal sort of meeting amongst leaders, or do you expect some real
progress? Because some people are saying to you, don't press too
hard, don't expect too much.
PJK: Well we have got an eminent persons group who have outlined steps
for the directions that APEC will take. We are trying to take APEC
from, basically, a mini OECD, an information policy secretariat, to an
executive body that will actually improve trade facilitation and lift the
velocity of trade and investment in the Pacific area. That can't happen
without the authority of the governments. So, we need the leaders of
the governments together, to pull it together, if we are to talk of it being
a community. 
2
PM: Yes. Would you accept Russell Fynmore ( of BHIP) advice that you
may be going too fast and to put the brakes on?
PJK: No, I don't think so, no. Australia hasn't got a second to lose. We
have all ready lost a century or so of getting ourselves accommodated
in this part of the world, and to get a structure in the Asia-Pacific. The
great thing about APEC is that, all at the one time, it gives us a chance
to multilateralise the interests of the United States, Japan and China,
as well as the countries of South East Asia. Now, large countries like
the United States always reserve the rights to do things by themselves.
They don't like signing up to a set of rules. But I think this is the great
opportunity of APEC and why it should be taken.
PM: But, Prime Minister, what about Asian countries who do have high tariff
wails, will they feel threatened at all?
PJI( I don't think so, because you can see there is Indonesia now starting to
announce a week or so ago a reform agenda to get industrial
protection down. You can see that China will do the same. But we are
talking about two things here, facilitating trade, trade facilitation, and
protection. Such things as harmnonised company rules, harmonised
investment standards, harmonised foreign investment, propert law
all these things will make investment better.
PM: Prime Minister, on to your Mabo legislation, which I think we will be
seeing pretty soon, can yobu sketch out the principles with the
accompanying social justice package? What are you doing there for
Aboriginal and Islander people?
PJK: The big problem for those who can't avail themselves of some of the
benefits under the Mabo decision or the body of law we will establish
are those who are formally alienated from the land, dispossessed of
the land, the so-called social justice package largely will be a land
acquisition fund, a large revolving fund.
PM: How big will it be?
PJK Well that is yet to be decided, but it will be substantial. I hope that the
earnings from the fund itself will be enough to be able to continue an
acquisition program every year. In other words it won't be the
spending of just a fund, but the earnings of a fund, will continue to go
on.
PMV: Hundreds of millions, or billions?
PJK: Well, hundreds of millions, at least.
PM: At least. 
Z 9UU4
3
PJK At least.
PM: Now Richard Court is going it alone, he is extinguishing Native Titde,
but he i-s allowing traditional use of the land. Why can't you do that as
well as doing what you are doing in your legislation?
PJI( Well, what he is doing is basically taking away the proprietary title, that
comes under our legislation, it comes from Mabo. He is saying
Aboriginal people can have the maintenance of so-called Native rights
undefined, but no proprietary title, certainly nothing running as far as
sole occupancy, or anything like running as far as freehold. In other
words what he is saying is you can have a set of rights but not title,
and we can take those rights away whenever it suits the Government.
PM: But you will ride roughshod over him, won't you, when you bring down
your legislation?
PJK Well, we are hoping that he will sign up to the principals we have there'
when he sees the legislation. Because we made it very clear here,
Paul, that the economic imperatives, as well as the social imperatives,
have got to be met here. And so we have left all the development area
with the States, and for them not to accept that, same States like
Western Australia not to accept that, is to wilfully take an ideological
view that in the end Aboriginal people should not have title to land.
PM: But he is unlikely to sign up, isn't he?
PJF( Well if he doesn't the Commonwealth tribunals would operate in
Western Australia.
PM:-Right. Could I move on now to one of your biggest and most
intractable problems, unemployment? Now, you are saying that the
economy is really recovering now, but how can you really say that
when we have still got unemployment over 10 per cent?
PJK: Well, I am not saying that unemployment has recovered much Paul,
because it hasn't. This has been a product ivity-l aden recovery that
is, we are getting more output from fewer people. We are starting to
see the job vacancies and some employmrent come through now. You
notice the ANZ job series this week was up
PM: Yes, 7.7.
F'JK: Yes, 27 per cent over the year and up substantially in the month. But
what we have to do is not just get aggregate employment going, but
also deal with the long-term unemployed who have slipped to the
bottom of the queue. 
15I193 15: U0 2 lud 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE 400O5
4
PMV: Indeed, on a personal note, in your own electorate in Canterbury-
Bankstown anyhow 20,000 people out of work, that is 14.4. What
can you do about that, because you have been back in power now for
eight months?
PJK That is why we have this major study going on now that is, to see
whether we can do something in Australia which is novel and new in
world terms, as well as dealing with the long-term unemployed through
the labour market programs which we are now spending over
billion on. That will get people at least bark into work experience
those who have not had any work experience in the recent years.
PM: OK you have got the White and the Green Paper, but when is the
earliest we can see some decisions on that, like things such as the
jobs guarantee level whether you are going to do that?
PJK: Ail those questions will be resolved in the Budget round of 1994.
PM: Right. What about Mr Dawkins' suggestion for low award payments in
the private sector?
PJK: We are waiting to what the Committee recommends. It is the most farreaching
review into the labour market, and trends in the labour market
and unemployment, that we have had since the war. So, it is a very
large piece of work and the Government will take it seriously and we
will then look at the policy responses coming up to the Budget next
year.
PM: OK, just to clarify that, the new Budget round you say. Is that Budget
round being brought forward, say February/ March for say an
AprillJune Budget?
PJK: The Government is considering bringing it forward on the proviso that
we can get the Budget through by 30 June. That is, we actually do
genuinely change the cycles and not that we have some spill over that
runs into July and August because were we to do that there is no point
to it.
PM: Right.
PJK So the Treasurer is now exploring those matters and will be with the
minor parties in the Senate in the next week or two.
PM: So, can you promise Australians that there will be some really concrete
action on unemployment say February/ March/ April?
PJK I can certainly promise them this Paul there will be very concrete
action on this report by the Government to deal with unemployment in 
UU 0
the next Budget. Now, if it is an early Budget, it will be earlier, if it is a
later Budget, it will be a bit later.
PM: OK just on levies. What about raising the Medicare levy for those who
can afford it, who earn over $ 50,000 a year?
PJK That is another thing that Cabinet has got to consider what we do
about health and there is no doubt that a lot of the healthier people are
dropping out of private insurance. But, Medicare is a generalised levy:
I pay 1.4 per cent on $ 160,000 a year, someone on average weekly
earnings pays 1.4 per cent $ 32,000 a year.
PMV: Should you pay 1.9 per cent?
PJK Well, I'm paying now much more say, than someone on a low income
and that has been the principle of Medicare universality and a single
rate. I think, the Government would need a lot of convincing to shift
away from that.
PMV: Graham Richardson of course, says that he is summoning up the
courage to suggest to you that you and your family should go into
private health insurance.
PJK He is going to need a lot of it.
PM: A lot of courage?
PJK: Absolutely.
PM: You are not contemplating going into private health insurance?
PJK No, I'm not and why should I? Because the fact is we have got a levy
which is universal. It is a bit like the argument saying you can't put
your kid into a public school if you have got an income over $ 60,000.
PMV: But, you have often listened to Graham Richardson, so in this case
you are not going to take his advice?
PJK: No, well, Graham is going to bring a package of things to the Cabinet
and this was only one of a great number of measures, and he has
always made it clear to me not any one of them is vital to the package
he has in mind.
PM* A final question on multiculturali-sm. You have always tried can you
give a commitment that your Government will continue to fund a lot of
the programs that entails, because you have out English tuition to adult
migrants by 30 per cent? 
15/ 11 ' 93 15: 04 % T06 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE -007
4 6
PJK But, our support generally for the mulficultural programs of the country
has been growing right through the ' 8Os and in the ' 90s and also may I
say, SBS is a model of that. In fact, the very expression of that.
PM: A very final brief question do you think you will be facing a new
Leader of the Opposition Christmas or New Year?
PJK I think Dr Hewson signed off on 13 March as an effective Leader of the
Liberal Party. He got the job back because they didn't know what to do
at the time. Now, they have had some change to ruminate about it and
think about it I think they will come to the conclusion there is no more
life left in him and whoever it may be, we will deal with them as they
arive.
PM: Prime Minister, thank you very much indeed for coming onto Dateline.
PJK: Thank you, Paul.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 125/ 93
DEATH OF JUSTIN O'BYRNE
It was with considerable sadness I learned today of the death of Justin OByrne, the
former President of the Senate.
Justin O'Byrne was a remarkable Australian. A fighter pilot and a prisoner of war in
World War 11, he continued his service to the nation as Senator for Tasmania for the
extraordinary period of 34 years, until 1981.
He had a typically Australian streak of larrikin in him, which threw into relief and made
more effective his great commitment to social justice. Even before that phrase had
been coined, Justin OByrne understood and gave voice to the principles which the
term sums up.
His service as a Senator was capped by his election to the position of President, in
which he served with vigour and distinction during the Whitlam Government, a
challenging and tumultuous period for one in his position.
Justin O'Byrne's contributions to debate inside and outside the Senate were always
lively, but he managed to attract friends wherever he went. We will all miss him now.
SYDNEY, November, 1993 



I L PRIME MINISTER 126/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, IMP
REMEMBRANCE DAY
I was honoured to participate today In the Remembrance Day ceremony at
the Australian War Memorial for the entombment of the Unknown Australian
Soldier. After the service, I spoke with the 14 First World War veterans who
attended the ceremony and thanked them on behalf of all Australians for their
involvement. I congratulate all those involved in the arrangements for the ceremony and in
particular members of the Australian Defence Force for the extraordinary care
they took with the preparations for the ceremony.
The Entombment of the -Unknown Australian Soldier involved the cooperation
of a large number of people and organisations in France, Britain and
Australia. The Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the High
Commission and Embassies in Britain, France and Belgium all played
Important roles.
The ceremony brought to the attention of all Australians the important role the
Australian War Memorial has played and continues to play in the life of the
nation. I commend the dedication, professionalism and commitment of all
those involved.
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Senator John Faulkner, has announced
today that supporters of the Australian War Memorial intend to establish a
Foundation to assist the memorial. I strongly support the establishment of
such a Foundation and encourage all Australians to respond.
The Australian War Memorial helps us to learn about our country's proud
history and understand more about our own national character. We should
never forget those who gave their lives and all who had served their country.
CANBERRA 11 November 1993 11. Nov. 96 lb: it) No. u2( ,. ui/ vj 


11 November&nbsp;1993
We do not know this Australian's name and we never will. We do not know his rank or his battalion. We do not know where he was born, or precisely how and when he died.&nbsp;We do not know there in Australia he had made his home or when he left it for the battlefield of Europe. We do not know his age or his circumstances whether he was from the city or the bush; what occupation he left to become a soldier; what religion, if&nbsp;he had a religion; if he was married or single. We do not know who this Australian&nbsp;was.
Yet he has always been among those we have honoured. We know that he was one of&nbsp;the 45,000 Australians who died on the Western Front. One of the 416,000&nbsp;Australians who volunteered for service in the First World War. One of the 324,000&nbsp;Australians who served overseas in that war, and one of the 60,000 Australians who&nbsp;died on foreign soil. One of the 100,000 Australians who have died in wars this&nbsp;century.
He is all of them. And he is one of us.
This Australia and the Australia he knew are like foreign countries. The tide of events&nbsp;since he died has been so dramatic, so vast and all-consuming, a world has been&nbsp;created beyond the reach of his imagination.
He may have been one of those who believed the Great War would be an adventure&nbsp;too grand to miss. He may have felt that he would never live down the shame of not&nbsp;going. But the chances are that he went for no other reason than that he believed it&nbsp;was his duty the duty he owed his country and his King.
Because the Great War was a mad, brutal, awful struggle distinguished more often&nbsp;than not by military and political incompetence; because the waste of human life was&nbsp;so terrible that some said victory was scarcely discernible from defeat; and because the&nbsp;war which was supposed to end all wars in fact sowed the seeds of a second, even&nbsp;more terrible, war we might think that this Unknown Soldier died in vain.&nbsp;
But in honouring our war dead as we always have, we declare that this is not true.
For out of the war came a lesson which transcended the horror and tragedy and the&nbsp;inexcusable folly.
It was a lesson about ordinary people and the lesson was that they were not ordinary.
On all sides they were the heroes of that war: not the generals and the politicians, but&nbsp;the soldiers and sailors and nurses those who taught us to endure hardship, show&nbsp;courage, to be bold as well as resilient, to believe in ourselves, to stick together.
The Unknown Australian Soldier we inter today was one of those who by his deeds&nbsp;proved that real nobility and grandeur belongs not to empires and nations but to the&nbsp;people on whom they, in the last resort, always depend.
That is surely at the heart of the Anzac story, the Australian legend which emerged&nbsp;from the war. It is a legend not of sweeping military victories so much as triumphs&nbsp;against the odds, of courage and ingenuity in adversity. It is a legend of free and&nbsp;independent spirits whose discipline derived less from military formalities and&nbsp;customs than from the bonds of mateship and the demands of necessity.
It is a democratic tradition, the tradition in which Australians have gone to war ever&nbsp;since. The Unknown Australian is not interred here to glorify war over peace; or to assert a&nbsp;soldier's character above a civilian's; or one race or one nation or one religion above &nbsp;another; or men above women; or the war in which he fought and died above any&nbsp;other war; or of one generation above any that has or will come later.
The Unknown soldier honours the memory of all those men and women who laid&nbsp;down their lives for Australia.
His tomb is a reminder of what we have lost in war and what we have gained.
We have lost more than 100,000 lives, and with them all their love of this country and&nbsp;all their hope and energy.
We have gained a legend: a story of bravery and sacrifice and with it a deeper faith in&nbsp;ourselves and our democracy, and a deeper understanding of what it means to be&nbsp;Australian.
It is not too much to hope, therefore, that this Unknown Australian soldier might&nbsp;continue to serve his country he might enshrine a nation's love of peace and remind&nbsp;us that in the sacrifice of the men and women whose names are recorded here there is&nbsp;faith enough for all of us.



F PRIME MINISTER EMBARGOED UNTIL 7.3OPM EDST
ADDR36S BY TEX PRIME MXNISTZR, THE RON P J KEATINGQ, NP
MASO AN ADDRESS TO THE NlATIONf
When the High Court of Australia handed down the Mabo
judgement last year, it set our generation of Australians
a great challenge.
The Court's decision was unquestionably just.
It rejected a lie and acknowledged a truth.
The lie was terra nullius the convenient fiction that
Australia had been a land of no one.
The truth was native title the fact that the land had
once belonged to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians and that in some places a legal right to it
had survived the 200 years of European settlem~ ent.
So here was an issue the country could not ignore
either legally, or morally.
There was another form of title that had to become part
of the way we manage land in Australia.
-we owe it. to Aboriginal Australians, to all Australians,
we owe it to our fair and democratic traditions and to
future generations of Australians to recognise this
native title.
Tonight we are within reach of an enlightened, practical
response to Mabo. This week I will be proposing
legislationi to Parliament which meets both the spirit of
the H-igh Court's decision and Australia's
responsibilities and needs.
The Bill will necessarily be complex, but this evening
want to cut through the complexity to some of its simple
prin~ ciples.
tœ irst we need to get tile background straight.
over tens of thousands of years Aboriginal people had
developed a complex culture built on a profound
attachment to the land. 
The land nourished them spiritually a6 well as
materially. In the landscape and the life upon it they
saw evidence of the epoch of creation. Down through the
generations they passed on laws, customs, traditions and
ceremonies reflecting an obligation to care for the land
which went to the heart of their society.
Yet this most remarkable fact about Australia this
oldest continuous civilisation on earth has until now
been denied by Australian law.
The first European settlers declared that the land had
belonged to no-one and the indigenous Australians were
shunted aside, often with appalling brutality.
Much of the despair and degradation, conflict and
disease, and many of the problems which Aboriginal
Australians face today are a consequence of this
dispossess ion.
we have no need nor any use for guilt. This
generation cannot be held responsible for the cruelty ofprevious
generations.
But to ignore Mabo would be the final cruelty, and we
wg~ J4 be held responsible -by the world and by future
generations of Australians.
And they would be rih to hold us responsible.
There is much in Australian history of which we can be
tremendously proud for here in Australia we have
created a modern, tolerant, free, prosperous and
democratic society.
But we must understand that Australia's success has had a
price and surely the highest price has been paid by
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians. They
often paid with their lives; with their rights, their
dignity and happiness; with their Land.
When the connection to the Jafld was broken their societ~ y
and economy was devastated.
But the connection was not broken everywhere and it is
a testament to the tenacity and resilience of Aboriginal
Australians that so much of the culture so much of the
Aboriginal story -has been passed on through generations
down to this day.
In 1982, Eddie Mabo and four others began action seeking
a legal declaratcion of their traditional land rights in
the Murray islands of the Torres Strait,
Tvn years later onL 3 June 1992, the High Court decided
that his people were entitled as against the whole of !: he 
world to possession and I emfphasise Opossessions
occupation, use and enjoyment of these lands.
Thus the High Court of Australia recognised native title
arnd Aboriginal custom and tradition as a source of
Australian common law.
The Court accepted that native title existed where two
fundamental conditions were met:
that their connection with the land had been
maintained, unbroken down through the years
and Lhat this title had not been overturned by any
action of a government to use the land or to give it
to somebody else.
It is probably only where there is so-called vacant Crown
Land, and in remote areas where traditional Aboriginal
life has not been disrupted, that native title exists.
Nevertheless, the high Court's decision posed manyquestions.
Who holds native title over the land, and where?
What rights does native title give to Aboriginal people
to control access to the land, and the use of it?
What rules should govern dealings in native title land,
and how can our vital land-based industries get on with
the business of developing our natural resources.
From the outset the Government recognised that these
uncertainties needed to be faced: the Court had made its
decision but there was not the body of administration and
law to give effect to it.
From late last year the Government has been developing a
framework for such a law and discussing the principles on
which it would be based the first of these principles
being justice for indigenous Australians.
What sort of country would we be how could we claim
respect for the law if, after the highest court in the
land has recognised native title, we denyi it?
How could we say that we stand for a fair go if we were
to wipe away a title to land which has lasted through
thousands of years of occupation of the continent and 200
years of European settlement-How could we explain it to
Aboriginal Australians? How could we explai. n it to the
wo rl1d?
To deny Lhe High Court decision, to deny native title in
Australian common law would deny justice: for it wo-ild
deny indigenous Australians rights to land enjoyed bry
other Australians. 
-M I
And the result could only be antagonism courtroom
battles and uncertainty in the commu'unity and in industry.
There is no decent or practical option but to recognise
the High Court decision and make it work.
Which brings me to the second of our objectives.
We must maintain a system of land management in Australia
which provides clear and predictable rules; security and
certainty for people who hold land; and a capacity for
dealings in land to proceed effectively.
So it must be an efficient system of land management, but
it must also be fair.
The legislation which we will introduce this week will
accomplish these objectives.
it will enable us to determine who has native title.
where, and the rights involved.
It will give Aboriginal people holding native title
the right to negotiate about actions affecting their
land a right, but not a veto.
it will permit governments to step in and decide, in
the final analysis, whether an important economic
project should proceed.
It will have the Conrnonwealth Goverrnent play its
proper role in setting clear rules and standards for
dealings which affect native title, but leave land
management to State and Territory governments if
they accept the national standards.
It will set up a system of courts and tribunals, in
effect as an umpire on matters of native title.
It will, to the extent practicable, preserve native
title from extinguishment, and where it is
extinguished, ensure just compensation, and...
It will provide security, so that no one who owns a
home, a farm, a mine, a tourist operation no one
need have concern about their tenure.
No one group will get all they want from this legislation
not Aboriginal people, not industry, not governments.
But the national interest will be served, and only the
Commonwealth legislation is capable of serving it.
As you know, Uit. e moment western Australia disagrees
with r-he Zomonwealth approach and is trying to ago it
alone." 
Going it alone is not the answer. Ultimately, the
Couunonwealth law will prevail over the Western Australian
legislation and in the meantime uncertainty will only
continue. There is only one way to provide certainty and that is
with a single, uniform, national approach, a fair and
predictable set of rules which everyone can work with.
This is not just my view, it is the view of seven out of
our eight States and Territories, all of whom believe
this legislation can work.
It is also the view of the head of the National Farmers,
Federation and, among other prominent Australians, senior
memnbers of the Opposition parties.
With the challenge of Mdbo effectively met -with native
title efficiently brought within our land management
system, we can move on.
We can move on to see Mabo as a tremendous opportunity -it
18.
An opportunity to right an historic wrong.
An opportunity to transcend the history of dispossession.
An opportunity to restore the age-old link between
Aboriginal land and culture.
An opportunity to heal a source of bitterness.
An opportunity to recognise Aboriginal culture as a
defining element of our nationhood and culture and to
make clear that this Australia, this modern, free and
tolerant Australia can be a secure and bountiful place
for all including the firs. t Australians.
CANSEP November 1993 



I EL : N6 v593 y 15: 14 No. 008 P. 01/ 0 11
Z. 1
PRIME MINISTER 179
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
APEC LEADERS MEETING SEATTLE
At the invitation of President Clinton, I will be attending an informal meeting of
leaders of the APEC economies in Seattle on 19-20 November.
This historic meeting will otter an unprecedented opportunity for leaders to
discuss In an informal setting their own national economic experiences, their
vision for the region into the twenty-first century, and the ways in which APEC
can help to maintain the economic momentum in the Asia-Pacific region, the
fastest growing area of the world.
I will also take the opportunity at the Seattle meeting to have bilateral
meetings with a number of the leaders present, including President Ziang
Zemnin of China, President Kim Young Sam of the Republic of Korea,
Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai of Thailand and Prime Minister Hosokawa of
Japan. The Seattle meeting will follow Immediately after the fifth APEC ministerial
meeting at which the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Evans, and the
Minister for Trade, Senator Cook, will represent Australia.
The ministerial meeting will discuss a trade and investment framework for
APEC, and APEC's 1994 work program. It will also discuss the report of -the
Eminent Persons' Group which was formed to look at the opportunities for
trade in the region over the longer term, and on which Mr Neville Wran
represented Australia. I expect that both the ministerial meeting and the
leaders' meeting will want to look at ways in which APEC members can help
bring about a satisfactory outcome to the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
negotiations. The APEC economies represent forty per cent of the world's population and
are responsible for half its production. Three quarters of Australia's exports
go to APEC members and around two-thirds of our imports are sourced from
APEC. Canberra November 1993 



1 22/ 12 ' 93 14: 18 ' e&amp; e062 2373 229223
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIE MTNIS7TERI-THE RTON. P13
KEATING, NEWPORT BEACH, U. S. A.
WEDNESDAY 17 NOVEMBER 19) 93
E &amp; OE COPY
PM: Today, Dr Howson has sold out the ' indigenious people of Australia. He has sold out the
Ular and decent traditions of his country and he has sold out on tho hopes and expectations
Of those moderates; in the Ubera Party who thought he rnight have turned over a now leaf
after the election. What has happened here is, out of weaknma rather than out of strength,
Dr Howson has caved In to states' interests. In this asm one state, Wastcm Australia,
while mouthing the rhetoric of the High Court decision saying he supports the 16giI Court
decision. But yes, Dr Howson, but only so long as it stands beyond extinguishment from
the actions of some errant state.
The only way that we can bring certainty to this Issue is to pass the Federal Governmnens,
my Governent's, legislation. And 1 can think of nothing worse than a Senate inquiry.
After spoiling for a year. going around Aboriginal communities acceptinzg their hospitality
and their goodwill, taking them down while all the time conniving in the possible pilrering
of their title, he's now recommending a Senate inquiry. Tlic bust thing Dr Hewson can do
is to get his shameftl speech over and done with so that more seaiuus people in Wis Party
can get on with trying to rebuild it.
J How much harder is this going to make the task of getting acceptance for your Maibo
legislation?
P'M: Wcl, I had hoped that the Aboriginal people of this country could have gone, with this
legislation, with the support of all major parties. I mean, Isn't it time after two hundredl
years that these people -having been given a private title right by the highest court in our
countiy could have expected both major parties, the Coalition and the Government of
this country, to have gone to the Parliament with legislation which was unasimous? Mhs
PM PRESS OFFICE ( 1024
16 
ZZ/ 1Z ' 93 14: 19 % 20O6 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE
020
is not so. It will mean that the GOVefW lt will Perhiat with its leg8ilon it will succeed
with itg legislation. If$ s Iir, workable leogisaton ad it doesn' extinguish the rights to title
in the way in which Dr HamWsns proposals would.
J: Do you have any reason to believe that the Oroons and the Democrats will definitely
support it., because obviously you'll need them now, itfs crucial?
M: Well. well need them but lt the Aboriginal people who will need them. The Aboriginal
and Islander commuty in our country wil need them. And I believe that every fbIr
thinking person in the Senate will see the legislation for what it is a decent and
honorable attempt at settling an Issue of two hundred years in the making.
1: Prime Minister, it looks as though the NAFTA vote will go the President's way. What are
the Imiplicaions of that for the APEC moetinB?
PM: Well, I think they are very good implications. If the President wins it means the winds of
free trade are blowing in the United States. And what the president will say is conr&amp; M
what Secretary Christopher said today and that is America will be looking weag of the
Pacific, leaving behind some of Its Euroceinricity and taking up the great growth market
of the Asia-Pacific where the preponderance of American trade already exists. in making
a decision in favour of the North American Free Trade Agreement the Congress will be, in
fact, endorsing the President's view of engagement with tile rest of the world rathe than
the fallback. to protectionism, an America-first policy which would not have delivered
highur incomes and more jobs to American.
J Prime Minister, do you think youll be able to avoid a Senat inquiry as Dr Hoewson has
asked for now, or do you think you'll have to go thriough with one?
PM: I think that anyone who has interests for Aboriginal and Islander people in Australia can
best fuzlfll them by passing this legislation. Not by shifting Offito Some Senate Committee.
I mean, what light is the Senate going to shed on this? A bunch of biased Liberals at boat,
or weak liberals at the worst who ffiled to sop Dr Howson, Poring over the
Government's principal legislation. Where is that going to got us?
J. The Democrats and the Oreens have shown that they're attracted to Senate inquiiei
the past. W~ hat is your message to them at this moment? rsi
PM: Well, I think my message is to listen to the Aboriginal people of tius coiuntry. Listen to
them and let them tell the Senators that they want the Bill passed, And listen to the
representative people who genuinely represent institutional groups within the Aboriginal
and Islander community who themselves represent very large constituencies. And they'll
say, " Pass the Bill".
ends, IZj025 



ADDRESS BY THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER
THE HON P J KEATING MP TO THE WORLD AFFAIRS COUNCIL ORANGE COUNTY,
CALIFORNIA, 17 NOVEMBER 1993
" PRESENT AT THE CREATION OF TE
ASIA-PACIFIC ECONOMIC COMMUNITY"
I am in Orange County taking advantage of your kind invitation to
me to speak because I am on my way to Seattle to attend a meeting
about which I can tell you little.
Mostly, when political leaders meet, our officials and diplomats
f rom the best of motives are anxious that the soil is well tilled
and the crop planted and fertilised and the political leaders are
allowed near only when the harvest is ripe for picking.
This time, President Clinton has organised a break-out.
Leaders of the APEC economies will be left in a room for a day,
without of ficial s, to discuss with each other visions for their own
countries and for the region into the 21st century.
I'm sure you are by now beginning to become familiar with the
acronym APEC, the organisation just four year. old, which brings
together the nations of North America and the Western Pacific.
It includes all six ASEAN countries in South East Asia, Australia
and New Zealand, China, Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, the United
States and Canada. Mexico and Papua New Guinea are now expected to
join.
This leaders, meeting in Seattle is a remarkable event you will
forgive me if I use the word " unprecedented" once or twice today.
The people gathered, representing the most dynamic region in the
world, have never met as a group before. Indeed, until a couple of
years ago the idea of such a meeting would have been inconceivable.
It has all happened with extraordinary speed. Yet not before time.
One hundred years ago a US Secretary of State was proclaiming " the
Mediterranean is the ocean of the past; the Atlantic is the ocean
of the present and the Pacific is the ocean of the future."
At the turn of the 21st century, I think we can surely say that the
Pacific's time has arrived. For it is beyond question that the
Asia-Pacific economy is, as a recent analysis. concludes, " the
dominating fact of modern economic geography, the most striking
event in the economic history of the 21st century".
So when President Clinton proposed an informal APEC leaders meeting
to be held in Seattle, I was delighted.
3216~ 
It was a sign of the freshness of approach and willingness to
embrace a now vision which has characterised President Clinton's
agenda. it was a sign which Australia and other countries in the western
Pacific welcomed, of a new commitment to engage with the region
with which the United States does more than half its trade, and
where it will always have vital security interests.
So while it is very difficult to predict what will emerge from the
Seattle meeting, I am confident that we will look back on it as one
of the defining moments in the remarkable history of the
Asia-Pacific.
Ladies and Gentlemen
I have called this speech " Present at the Creation of the
Asia-Pacific Economic Community", but the title begs the question
of what a commuunity is.
Are we talking about an uppercase " C"-style Community, like the
familiar European one, complete with an uppercase " E"-style
Eurobureaucracy, and aggressive protectionism against the rest of
the world?
Let me make it quite clear that I, for one, an not.
But I am talking about something more than a random collection of
countries which trade with one another to their mutual benefit.
A community and I am now using a lowercase HC" is marked by the
comprehension of common, and enduring, interests.
Among the most important of those interests is the maintenance and
improvement of the economic conditions which lead to shared
prosperity. A community is marked not necessarily by a monoculture, as
Australians and Americans accustomed to diversity readily
understand, but by a sympathetic understanding of cultural
differences. And, I might say, by an awareness that in cultural
diversity there is immense dynamism.
A community is marked by a shared history and a history in which
points of contact and common endeavour are of greater interest than
the threads of isolated achievement.
And above all, perhaps, a community is distinguished by a shared
sense of possibility, shared goals, a shared sense of. the future.
That is what APEC can help do. It can develop something like this
in the diverse Asia-Pacific region.
And, in fact, in the economic area at least an Asia-Pacific 3217 
I3-
community has already emerged -unplanned, unstructured and
unheralded. In Seattle we will meet in a context which for the first time
obliges us to think about common problem and opportunities, and
how we may work together to underpin the extraordinary success of
the Asia-Pacific economic community.
This economic community is not something governments have brought
about by a process of formal agreement like the EEC, NAFTA or our
own agreement with our neighbour, New Zealand, the CER.
It is already happening spontaneously, based on a market which for
a decade has grown more rapidly than any other in the world, and
which is likely to continue to grow at twice the rats of Europe.
The two sides of the Pacific now form an integrated market of two
billion people, accounting for half the world's production and
nearly half the world's trade.
The economies of North America and the Western Pacific are actually
more closely integrated, without a regional trade agreement, than
are the economies of Europe or North America, with a regional trade
agreement.
That is, the APEC economies as a group have a higher proportion of
trade with each other than do the members of the EC or the members
of NAFTA.
Overall, the share of total exports of the APEC group to other
members of the group is 66 per cent.
In the EC, the comparable share is 61 per cent. In NAMT it is 42
per cent.
The European Community was created as a means of integrating the
economies of Europe, lowering tariffs and increasing trade.
By contrast the Asia-Pacific economic community is already highly
integrated, already successful, and already benefiting from four
decades of worldwide reductions in tariff protection.
Yet as the recent report of the APEC Eminent Persons Group pointed
out, 20 of the 24 members of the OECD increased their trade
protection during the 1980s. And after seven years of difficult
and often disheartening negotiations, the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round is less than a month away and there is still no assurance
whatever that we will get a worthwhile result. For the
increasingly open economies of our region, there is no higher
economic priority than an open and expanding world trading system.
Our weekend meeting is an occasion to ponder the significance and
the implications of what has already begun and what we can imagine
it to be.
3218 
I have no doubt that there are many things we can do as a group to
increase trade and prosperity and to help private business make the
most of the region'sa opportunities.
And I am sure that Americans arm thinking along these lines too.
As the Clinton administration says, if the US is to go about
expanding its trade, increasing its competitiveness, renewing its
global economic force, the Asia-Pacific region is the logical place
to look.
Californians are already well aware of the importance 0ñ f the
western Pacific it is the market for a little under half of your
state's exports.
Since the mid eighties the trend rate of growth of US exports to
the Western Pacific has been three times the rate of growth of
Western Pacific exports to the United States.
In less than a decade the portion of US exports which go to East
Asia has risen towards one third.
Not only is the Western Pacific market growing faster than others
for you it is also buying a higher proportion of the most
sophisticated US exports.
Today US exports of elaborately transformed manufactures to the
Western Pacific total over $ 230 billion, and they continue to grow
rapidly. Ladies and Gentlemen
This process of growth in the Western Pacific market has some very
interesting characteristics.
We see, for example, great changes in the structure of production
in the region; labour intensive manufacturing industries which
first went to Japan, moved to Korea and Taiwan, then to Hong Kong
and Singapore, and are now moving to Malaysia and Indonesia and
Thailand and the Philippines and on to the awakening industrial
giant of China.
As those industries leave countries with rising labour costs,
others move in capital intensive high tech industries or
knowledge intensive industries as we see now in Japan, and in Hong
Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and Korea, as well as in the United States,
Canada and Australia.
The result is rapidly rising living standards through the whole
region, which in turn changes the structure of demand and of
consumption. Incomes and wages in Japan may now be as high as they are in the
United States, and higher than in Australia. 3219 
Income per head in Hong Kong and Singapore is higher than it in in
Ireland, and as high in Taiwan as in Greece and Portugal. Wage
rates in manufacturing are higher in Taiwan and Korea than they are
In Portugal, and higher in Hong Kong than in Mexico. Indonesia now
has a middle class larger than the entire populations of some small
wealthy countries.
None of this has involved sacrificing the openness and
international isation of the regional economies, or the trend to
more and more liberalised markets.
China's most rapidly growing businesses, for example, are almost
always in the private economy.
Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand have all been growing rapidly in
recent years because they have liberalised investment rules, and
begun to deregulate their economies.
We are familiar with similar stories in Korea and Hong Kong and
Japan. By any standard this growth is impressive. And we are still in the
early stages of the region's development.
China is still only at the beginning of a transition that could
well make it the world's second biggest economy sometime early in
the new century.
Indonesia, with its 190 million people, vast resources, stable
government and enlightened economic policies has enormous
potential. And the countries already achieving middle incomes, like Korea and
Singapore, will within a very few years be joining the rich
countries. Ladies and Gentlemen
As I have indicated, the region presents great challenges and great
possibilities. A reasonable estimate of what Western Pacific economies will need
to spend over the next decade in ports, roads, bridges and
utilities to support their continuing development is at least one
trillion US dollars.
McKinsey and Company tell us that the additional power capacity
required in Asia by the year 2000 is more than 350 gigawatts, with
a capital cost for generation alone exceeding $ U3400 billion. And
there are similar requirements in hydrocarbons.
Development on this scale will have a dramatic impact on the
regional environment. So we will have to use the advances of
technology and science to minimise the adverse environmental
3220 
consequences of rising material living standards.
If these are the challenges, the opportunities are there to build
the roads and ports and pipelines; to devise and implement the
technologies for a cleaner environment; to seize the opportunities
for trade and investment.
And while many of the responses will be local or national, they
will be much more effective if we aiso have a well-designed
regional organisation able to help governments remove impediments.
APEC can be that organisation.
Ladies and Gentlemen
As I said earlier, the growth that has taken place in the APEc
community has been spontaneous growth.
It has had no regional safety net of understandings and agreed
processes spread beneath it, no mechanism for encouraging
agreement, or for facilitating trade growth by removing
impediments.
The more sceptical business people among you may say that, given
the growth that has taken place, we obviously don't need a
framework for the region. But I am convinced that as time goes by
this will be less and less true.
It is already the case that the trade problems between North
America and the Western Pacific could sometimes benefit from a
discussions among all the parties, * rather than bilateral
discussions between the United States and the individual countries
of East Asia.
We can benefit, too, from the adoption of common or compatible
product and occupational standards, simpler and more uniform
customs procedures.
Earlier this year I proposed an agenda of discussions along these
lines.
Agreement on rules like these would facilitate trade and economic
integration. Some of these discussions are already taking place among APEC
officials, and part of the purpose of the Leaders, Meeting is to
give them more political weight.
Most of the work being undertaken in APEC is not being successfully
done in other international institutions like the GATT. And while
it doesn't discriminate against countries outside our group, the
benefit will be mostly within. They are what I call " GATT-plus"
initiatives. The area of product and industry standards Is particularly 3221. 
important. A feaw weeks ago I convened a meeting of business people in our
cabinet room to discuss APEC and what business hoped could be
achieved within it. And one of the things we talked about was the
impediments to exports caused by different product requirements and
standards in the f if teen nations of APEC.
In many product areas where large sellers and buyers have long-term
relationships, standards and product descriptions are not a
problem. But in other areas especially in manufactured food exports, in
pharmaceuticals and in telecommunications conflicting standards
and requirements are a significant difficulty.
One manufacturer told us that the standards requirements in
different markets added 5 to 10 per cent to the initial costs of
entering an export market.
The whole-problem is made worse because even where we have similar
standards, one country's standards authority often doesn't accept
the testing results of another's, and the same test has to be
replicated right through the region. There is not much sense in
that. Standards are also relevant in the finance industry, which I
believe will be one of the great growth markets in the region as
increasing wealth creates the demand for sophisticated funds
management. Here the problem is not so much too many standards, as
not enough.
We need to have clearer legal and administrative structures so that
funds can be reliably and prudently managed. Australia is eager to
play a part, through our legal firms and particularly through the
expertise of our Securities commission.
Another area we could look at is standards and descriptions in the
increasingly internationalised education market. I am told for
example that we do not have reliable common descriptions of courses
and standards in vocational education in the region a shortcoming
we ought to be able to remedy.
These are issues on which we can engage and produce results. We
don't pretend that harmonisation of standards will be easy, or that
once achieved it will revolutionise regional trade and welfare.
But it will get us talking, and if we are successful it will make
a discernible difference.
Economic research commissioned recently by the Australian Trade
Minister, Peter Cook, suggests that the value of removing
impediments like conflicting standards in the Asia-Pacific region
may be just as great as in Western Europe.
3222 
f
The reforms summarised in Europe 92 were over time expected to
yield an increase in European GDP of around 3 per cent.
Our research suggests that a program of standards harmouisation in
APEC would yield at least MtJ400 billion boost to regional output
an increase bigger than the annual output of all but tour of the
fifteen APEC economies.
I am convinced that everything that APEC does wiil be done stronger
and more effectively it it draws regional business into its work
I think we should have business people on our standards committee.
for example, and energy committees and customs committees and so
on. The private sector has created the Asia-Pacific economic community,
and private business is best placed to know the impediments which
governments should remove.
There may veil be other things we can do in coming years.
There is little doubt, for example, that some of the energy needs
of the western Pacific could be most efficiently met through a
network of natural gas pipelines that, in the most ambitious form,
might extend from the north west of Australia to Japan. But no
such network could be imagined, let alone built, without a very
high degree of cooperation among governments in the region.
The same goes for connecting up the separate power generation and
transmission systems of the Western Pacific another logical and
efficient solution to energy problems, but one which would need a
degree of cooperation between governments which we are only likely
to develop through APEC.
At some point we may wish to talk about a regional steel agreement,
or a regional electronics agreement or a regional food agreement or
a regional services agreement.
But on these major trade issues the consensus within the group is
that we should await the outcome of the Uruguay Round of GATT and
then see what is left over which could be usefully advanced on a
regional basis.
If the Uruguay Round fails or the outcome is completely
unsatisfactory, perhaps we might think about some kind of regional
round which picks up the Geneva agenda and attempts to do for the
Asia-Pacific, for half of the world economy, what the GATT will
have failed to do for the whole world economy.
Some ideas on these issues were presented by the APEC Eminent
Persons Group report chaired by Washington economist Fred Bergstel.
In the longer term, the Eminent Persons Group report calls for free
trade in the region a goal to which Australia heartily
subscribes. But just how to get there and by what time is a 3223 
subject which in my view it is too early to determine.
What really matters now is that f or the f irst time the governments
of these rapidly integrating economies are talking about comisn
problems and about their relationship to each other.
Secretary Bentsen has proposed regular meetings of APEC Finance
Ministers. I think that is a good idea. Although our economies
are different in scale and historical experience, the problem we
are facing are increasingly similar. Each of us has much to learn
from each other.
Ladies and Gentlemen
As I said at the beginning, for Australia's part, we are already
committed to the Asia-Pacific region. During the last decade we
have internationalised our economy through financial deregulation
and tariff cuts.
Since we began the reforms we have seen our exports trebled, and
increase as a proportion of GNP from 13 per cent to 20 per cent.
We have seen manufacturing exports rapidly increase, so that they
are now consistently stronger than the rural exports for which we
are still better known.
And we have seen the proportion of our exports to East Asia
increase from under half of the total towards two third@.
Australia now sends more of its exports to Asia than does Japan.
For us, there is no turning back just as I believe that for the
United States there is now no turning back.
Ladies and Gentlemen
The impact APEC can have goes well beyond its economic potential.
AFEC's development will have a lasting -strategic impact on the
Asia-Pacific region.
I do not mean by this that APEC itself has or should develop a
political or security dimension. other forums exist to fill those
roles. But I have no doubt that APEC has the potential to change quite
wfuonrdlda meinnttaelrlayc tt hew iwthay eianc hw hiocthh ert hea ncdo unthter iedse gorfe et hitos pwarhtic ho f thtehye
understand each other's interests. And that, I am convinced, will
have consequences well beyond the economic field.
The process will be quicker and deeper if, as I hope, this first
meeting in Seattle leads to a regular pattern of informal leaders'
meetings, with all the opportunities that would open up for closer
personal contact and understanding among the leaders of the APEC
3224 
economies. By bringing the United States and Japan the world's two largest
economies and the emergi. ng giant of China into a framework of
multilateral economic cooperation, APEC will provide all the
countries of Asia and the Pacific with the reassurance-that during
a period of profound change in the world, this region will continue
to be characterised by interdependence and engagement.
Half a century ago a distinguished group of Americans around
President Truman were present at the creation of the post war order
an order based on superpower rivalry between the Soviet Union and
the United States, on the creation of a united Western Europe, and
the rebuilding of Japan and Germany as prosperous, free countries.
Today I believe we are present at the creation of quite another
configuration in world af fairs one which succeeds the cold war,
which is directed to increasing welfare through economic
prosperity, the Asia-Pacific economic community.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
sBwo BY T3 PSZKM KUI! STZa, TKl mO. 1. J. = TXG
flWSOM B nIAZLMI2 OF MiRDUS8P1 PRfSCIPL UD LIDERLZS
Dr Hevson has today sold out Australia's indigenous
people, the fair and democratic traditions of his
country, and what remained of the liberal traditions of
his party.
In his address tonight he will be speaking not for a true
Liberal Party, but a party of the nev right.
And there is a pathetic and inexcusable dimension to this
development Dr Hereon has brought it about not by
strength, but by weakness. By a total failure to lead.
The fey remaining moderates within the Liberal Party have
been jettisoned along vith commonsense, principle and the
national interest.
Anyone vho thought that the Liberal Party had turned over
a ney leaf after losing the election on a right wing
platform was mistaken.
There is nothing of substance in the Liberal Party's
response to the Government's Nabo legislation to su~ gest
that it has been guided by anything more than cynicism
and opportunism.
At the end of 12 months of intense and extensive
negotiation with the major parties and the achievement of
a remarkable degree of consensus and support for the
legislation, Dr Newson now tells the Australian people
that a Senate inquiry is needed.
Nothing was ever needed less.
What is needed nov is the just resolution which the
legislation provides and an end to uncertainty.
Dr Hewson has told the Australian people that he accepts
the High Court's judgement on Native Title. 
Yet tonight, he will tell them how be will embrace
Premier Court's legislation which will wipe out Vative
Title across Western Australia.
In his press statement of today Dr Howson talks
unctuously about an " undivided Australian nation" but
tonight vill hand over responsibility for this national
issue to a Premier bent on overturning the High Court's
decision and denying the rights of indigenous
Australians I remain confident that most Australians Vill reject Or
Hewson's " response" for what it is, and that the
Government's legislation vil survive such cynical and
unprinciple4 opposition.
O qlek COUNYT, CALO" 31
November 27 1993 



1~~
II. PRIME MINISTER
E &amp; OE COPY
TRANsCRTP'T OF PRIE JMUN13TERIS ADDRESS ( QUESTIONS ANSWERS)
WORLD) AFFAIRS COUNCIL, NE WPORT DEACHI U. S. A.
WEDNESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER, 1993
Q: What does Australia think of NAFTA?
PM: Well, 1ve already answered sonmc Of thatt. There has been a discussion in our country
about whether Australia should be part of a rogional trade agreement with the United
State.,. In other words, you might remember President Bush making a speech in the
election catupaign called the hub and spokes speech whero tho U. S. was proposing makinil
bilateral trade agreements with countries of the Auia-Pacific. It was a sort of NAFTA writ
large. f-think NAFT A can wurk for the United States because there is a naturalness about
it Canada's already a large marktL and you share a common border with it. M** dco
you share it border with It and you have an Interest In lif1ting the economy mid wooyo
Mexico In terms ofi wealth. But I think a more naitural ai-rangemenct ~ s to ftee up trade
to that countries can trade with one another and not be caught up In artificial bilateral
arrangements. Theres nothing purticultrly suilficial about Mexico and Canada and the
thiac's a niaturalne~ ss about that.
B~ ut there can be an artificial quality to bilateral trade things, So. the notion that Austu alia
should be part of NAFTA is, I think, nut one which Australia would embrace, but, rather,
seeing NAk'TA part of APEC Is a more natural thing. That Is. whether the, Unted State.
trades in gin agreement with Canada or Mexico Is immxater-ial to whecther it trades into the
Pacific or whether Canada trades Into the T'aciflc or whether Mexic trades i the Pacilfc.
So, we think NAFTA Is good for the United States. It's not necessarily our ticket our
ticket is the bigger agenda of AI'EC and the U. S's Involvement In that. Indeed the NAPTA
partners' involvement in that. But, it does certainly underline, in the whole question about
American directions, that the Congress has decided with the Prcsldcnt, to look to the freer
trade path because it's only In freer trade have we seen the greut growth iincomes over
the course Of thi$ cetntury. Sol I think if' NAFTA'. a bell weather of where the Uiitod
States is going thezi NAFTA Is something to be approvad of
Q: When we were In Australia quitu rce; vzjtly there was a lot of discussion about the republic
. Inaudible.. rclationship with the Comm nwealth Inaudibhl..? 
2-
I': I think hes trying to act. me Into troublel But 1' 11 happy to obli hin. Austria is a very
unusul % situation. lt a large continental land mass, were the only nation on earth With a
continent to itself, eighteen million people, we've got to consolidate the place and be part
of the region in which we live, And Australia has changed. It's not a monoculturs, it's a
diverse multicultural country. For instance, half our intake now from our migration
program comes from, Aia; theres about 150 nationalities In Australia at the momntA.
Multicuituralism hes worked there very well indeed. The toleiance and sern of
democaoy In the place Is protbund.
We think that we are a different kind of country than the one that we might have known In
the last century or even in the first half of this century. And that Australia should be
ropresented for what it is. That is. an Independent people with its own culture and its own
cultural identity and that it can't make Its way i thme world &amp; 3 well as it might unle i t Mn
represenits itself. Just as the people of the United Stas took a decision many years ago to
manage their own affairs absolutely. This is something we are thinking of. Now, as you
know now, the Queen of Oreat Britain Is also the Queen of Australia and consftutional
head of Australia. And I have been bold enough to say that I think that constitutional
arrangement doesn't suft us anymore. And that Australians would be advantaged by
moving to a republic, with an Australian person with our Head of State so that our whole,
if you like, man~ ifestation of the place and our representation or ourselves to the world is
one a proud country which is indigenous and which is independent. And projecting that
pariciularly in the are whore we liv.
An important pan of that to also coiing to terms with oursolvcs And we are just at the
moment having our own NAFTA debate with an issue called Mabo. Which is
time name of an Aboriginal person who succeeded in having our supreme court age that
there was a native title in the common law of Australia. And I have just introduced a Bill
into the house of Parliament In Australia this wek to give an adnirativo expression,
to build a body of administration and law so that the Aboriginal people of Australia secure
land or repossess land as a common law right. A native title. And this Is a matter of great
debate, as you can Imagine, in any country. But in corning to terms with our Aboriginal
community, in seeking to let them repossess land long ago dispossessed, wc will go
forward much happier and more harmonious. But go forWard a different kind of country
than the one we used to be. And when we do that well be at our most powerful and our
most persuasive in telling people about ourselves and, I think, to be doing that we'll be
most successful. So these are the thoughts which are runnming thrugh thme mind of the
nation, These are matters to be decided but for which tlicre is already a very important
debate.
Q: Who will open the Sydnvy 2000 Olympics, the Prime Minister or..?
PM: A real trouble maker, a real trouble maker. Well, the answer is our Head Of State. My
Party's objective is to sce Australia become a republic by the year 2001 which is the
Centenary or our federation. Well that's the ItA January 2001 and the Olympic games are
e I 
on in Octbcr or November of die year 2000. So theres only three months diffesrence, so
let's not haggle over three itonth, end maybo we cam get the job done before then, in
which case it would be a simple answer. B~ ut, as none of us havc a crystal bill I can nldy
say, our Head of State.
Q: As Anmemica's our best mate, OK? How do you see our trade relationship?
PM: You want me to take that. old?
C: You take Il
0: Well, we have, as I said, a great history together. I man there is genuine warmth between
the United States and Australia. Genuine warmth. People to people writh. It', not just
stylised government to government warmth it's Pot treaty warmth, It's rWa warmth. And I
think that's evident here tonight In a reciprocal way. That's the key thing, The rent of it
flows naturally.
We du have diflbrent economic interests an'd we live In different pang of the world. But
we do live In the pant of the world which Is growing the most rapidly and that's the Asia-
Pacific. sop at good Mrends of the UnIted States we've taken the, view that, Isure, the Cold
War has finished and a lot of that Cold War polarity has gone. And there may have been a
view In the United States well in that caut the peace dividend has come horne from the
Pacific. But 1 think too much of the Pacific policy has been made by die berence
Department and not enough by the Conunerce Deparunent and the State D~ cpartinent. So
what we are 3aying as Miends of the United States Is, ' Well. look we want to see the area
blossom but we want to see you in It. We want to swe you in it in terms of investme~ nt, in
terms of trade. We want to see you there culturally. And we want to see you theme
strategically. And by doing that, saying that. and arguing a case ft~ r the United Stistas pau-ticipation in
this part of the world, I think we argue the case ofa fMend, by a fiend. And themrsult will
be, I think, a much better Pacific, a much quieter Pacific ind 1a1 11re bountiftit area. Not
just for the countries of the Pacific but for the United States as well. So I'd likce to see out,
relationship grow that way In trade terms. We'll still have our bilateral deflcie, treaty but
the most important thing I'd always like to st Is more tourivin, inore visits by Americana
to Austuia and vice versa to thicken up those personal relationships which, in dwi end,
are the core relationsh~ ps on which, country to country relationshipr, exilst. And, they are
the things I think were most proud oft That boast of friendship betwumn the United States
and Australia which will remain and will provide the basis of whatever we do in trade, in
IAYCuitinn or in strategic terms.
Q: Prime Mfinister do you share any oftDoctor Mathiers concerns that the United States
inaudible.. too much powcr/ Influetice.. Inaudible..? 
-4
PM; Well, there are many countries suspicious of the powcr of the United States but any
country this large and Whs successfu will always find its detractors. Rut. fhr my Wai I'm
not, obviously, because I've argued the converso cast. The key point, I think, for
countries like Malaysia which worry about it, is this: The argument runs, you take, a
country like Malaysia or any such country and put It Into APEC, it will get pushed around
by a country like the United States. But the United Statts has a greater capacity to shape
relationships thtrough bilateral ai-angements of unilateral arrangemecnts iand lea of a
cApacity in a multilateral iatructure.
So, there is a great body of opinion in the United States administration and the Congress
which says, " Don't sign up to multilateral structures. lDon't lose our right basically, to be
the top do&amp; on the street. Don't multllateralise. ourselvcs with a set of rules." That's what.
APEC means. The U. S. Would multdlateralise Itself with a set of rules. It would give
something away. But In return it gets a much greater access and more growth in the area
of the Pacific, which can be of great benefit to it. So, for people who have fears about the
Untied States' power theres more to be feared fromi the U. S. dealing with them
unilaterally and bilaterally than the U. S. signing up to a multilateral struetuire with the
disciplinary rules and disputes settlement procedures which apply to all the member istates,
including the United Statop.
So, that's why I've always thought the case against the United States mid APEC basically,
is not correct. And the U. S. is better in APEC and were better off with the U. S. in APEC
with the multilateral struCtUre. Now. I hope that Prime Miist er Mahathir and other
people see that way over tine because I think that's as It Is.
Q' I wonder if the Prime Minister could answer why he cuddled the Queen and secondly, did
she enjoy it?
PM: I can probably do this one cold tool Well that brought mny concern for the Queen to meet
her if you like, her friends in Australia, the people slit knew, her Australian subjects as
some would put it was to spirit her through a crowd. And it led with it got III* the
salutation In the London tabloids, ' Hands orfvobbctil'. O-R-Fr. And they
apparently bclicved I wag some sort of lounge lizard so they cliristcocd mec the Lizard of
Oz. Now, I'm sure Her majesty was flattered with the attention. She has hinted that to
nie since. But T can't get the tabloids to publish a word ofit.
ends. 



IPRIME MINISTER
E OE PROOF COPY
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME NMSTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, M. P. CNN WORLD BUSINESS TONIGHT
SEATTLE, USA THURSDAY 18 NOVEMBER, 1993
J: Mr Prime Minister, APEC is being asked by the Eminent Person's Group to
convert into what it calls a true Asia-Pacific Economic Community. Is this kind
of a economic repudiation of Europe that is turning inward these days?
PM: I don't think so, it's just that the great preponderance of United States trade is in
the Pacific already. $ 300 billion of U. S. trade is in the Pacific and $ 200 billion is
in the Atlantic. The $ 200 billion is growing slowly and the $ 300 billion is
growing quite rapidly. And there is the possibility of increasing the velocity of
trade and investment. And APEC is about that. It's about open regionalism. It's
not a block and it's certainly not a Treaty of Rome arrangement.
J: Would you want to see it become a block though?
PM: No, I think that the benefits really are in the opening up and in doing things which
some of the Asia-Pacific economies don't quite have. That is, for investors being
able to litigate their property rights; being able to litigate equity issues; to
standardise products; to standardise professional standards; to establish funds
management arrangements all the things that many countries in the area don't
have. So that's what APEC's about. It's about, how do we improve the whole
trading and investment climate of the Asia-Pacific? How do we make a good
thing better?
J: Australia so often likes to say it's part of Asia. You're not really, you're on the
edge of the Pacific. Why do you want to be part of Asia?
PM: We don't. We are not an Asian country but we are part of Asia. And three
quarters of our exports go to the APEC area, already. See, one of the things about
APEC which I think isn't quite understood is that it's even more integrated than 
NAFTA or the European Community. It trades with itself in a more concentrated
way than those two areas. 66% of APEC's trade is from member countries. The
same figure is 61 for Europe and about 42% for NAFTA. So this is already a
highly integrated area and Australia has very large trading arrangements with
Japan, with Korea, with other countries in the area. So, we're a natural for it. But
we say the U. S. is too because so much of its potential growth will be linked to
the Pacific.
J: Would Australia be more acceptable to Asia than it is now if you broke ties with
the British Monarchy?
PM: I don't know about more acceptable but we'd be more as we are. That is, Australia
is now a multicultural country, we would be representing ourselves more as we
are rather than as some derivative which still has as a Head of State the Queen of
Great Britain. The person who should be the Head of State of Australia should be
an Australian person.
J: Do you intend to step up your proposed timetable, particularly as a result of
winning the Olympics? For the year 2000 I think you've talked about the year
2000.
PM: Well, the Olympics are on in October or November of the year 2000 and it is the
centenary of Federation in January in the year 2001 so there's only three months
of difference and in speaking about one, ipso facto we're speaking about the other.
J: Do you think you'll be able to pull this off
PM: Well, I think so. I think there's a good debate running in Australia now, about
this. And I think seven years gives us plenty of time to consider all the issues and
make such a change.
J: Tell me a little about the state of the Australian economy. You're having an
extremely, stubbornly slow recovery. What is it going to take to get your
economy really growing?
PM: Oh, it's not that slow. We're growing as fast as the United States or faster. We're
growing at around 3% at the moment and we've been doing that growing
between 2% and 3% for the last 18 months. We've got inflation at around 2%,
we've got exports booming, we've got a very big pick-up in consumer sentiment.
So all the signs are there. But, of course, what we won't have is the silly lending
of the eighties. The same thing you won't have now. We're going to have a
recovery which is non-inflationary, firmly based, no crazy credit growth but 
-3-
focusing on innovative products, elaborately transformed goods and services
and a very large part of it going to Asia.
J: One final question. How are you going to reduce Australia's dependence on
overseas capital?
PM: Well, by lifting our domestic savings, the same thing you're doing here. The same
thing the President is doing. That is, we are pulling the public sector back to a
very modest deficit in a couple of years time. And we've also encouraged a
national pension scheme. We have now, at this stage, got every employee in the
country contributing 5% of their income to long term pension arrangements. This
will become 10% over time, over the next few years, half dozen years. This will
put an enormous stock of savings into Australia. It's one of the ways we think we
can grow faster without growing our current account deficit.
J: Thank you very much. Paul Keating, Prime Minister of Australia.
Ends. 



PRIME MINISTER1
8TAT~ ITBY TE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. XEATING. MP
NEWSOIPS SHAMEFUL SPEH
Dr Howson's address last night brought no credit to him
personally, or to his party. It was a shameful speech
confirming once again that the leader of the Liberal
Party believes Australians share his Incapacity to make
reasoned and principled judgements on major Issues.
Last night Dr Hewson sought to Incite anxiety where there
need be none, and attempted to play on fear and prejudice
for which the majority of Australians have no use and
which they have rejected throughout the Mabo debate.
He portrayed the Mabo challenge as something beyond the
reach of Australians' intelligence and goodwill.
Most disturbingly, he cynically traded in distortions,
misconceptions, untruths and downright lies.
Dr Howson says Australians should worry about their
homes and farms when he knows the Government
legislation provides security.
He says Australia's challenge is to respond to the
High Court yet he seeks to deny the Court's
.0udgement. He says we can't undo the past yet nobody is
suggesting that we try to. What we seek Is an
acknowledgement of * past injustice, but most
Importantly, a future built on justice.
He says we must recognise the ' possibility* of
Native Title yet he supports Premier Court's
legislation which will wipe out the possessory
rights of Aboriginal people.
He says we should respect our Constitution what he
really means is he will stand by and let a state
abolish Native Title.
He speaks of his visits to Aboriginal communities
but didn't have the courage to tell them he would
sell them out in the Parliamient.
3270O 
2
He cries crocodile tears about living conditions in
some Aboriginal communities then questions the
money spent to help improve them.
He says Mabo won't do anything about Aboriginal
education, health and welf are but Mabo is about
JAdA and the High Court decision, which Dr Howson
says our legislation goes beyond, Is about land.
He argues that States should have control of land
management when he knows the Government's
legislation specifically provides for States to
retain powers over the economic use of land.
He criticises the Governimt. s decision to provide
compensation for potential Mabo claim. on titles
Issued between 1975-93 does he want private
landholders to toot the bill?
He says land will be locked up from economic
development when he knows that nothing will be
locked up. The Bill provides for Ministerial
overrides to permit economic development to proceed
In the national and State Interest.
He says valid leases of pastoral land &amp; ade prior to
1975 may be subject to claims for Native Title
when he knows this is a downright lie. The gill
specifically protects valid leases.
He says providing more land for Aborigines Is Omore
important' but criticises the Governmnt's
Intention to establish a land acquisition fund. If
more land 15 to be provided, how will It be done
without money?
He says the Commonwealth and States must work
together seven of the eight States and Territories
are working together with the Commonwealth.
He says the rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people must be respected all rights, It
soe, except their right to land.
He decries the " handing over* of land he means
that land rightfully belonging to Aboriginal people
should be denied them.
IZATTLE, WASHINGTON
NOVUERt 18 1993 3 2711 



ZZ/ 12 93 14: 11 % TO6 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICEIMj 018
ate" k
PRIME MINISTER
E OE PROOF COPY
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH TH3E PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ
KEATING, M. P.
SEATTLE, USA THURSDAY 18 NOVEMBER, 1993
1: Prime Minister, what's the minimum that we could expect out of this meeting if you
are able to regard it as a success?
PM: The first success of it is that it's actually happening. That the-APEC structure has
brought to it the President of the United States and all the leaders of the Asia Pacific
area, who are now members of APEC. So the fact that it's on; the fact that it's been
given this kind of status; that people have come for it, means that APEC will have
so much more authority in each of the member countries, and of course in the
United States.
So I think that's the first thing, because that, then, gives the bureaucracy of each
country the trade and foreign ministers of each country a signal that the group
at a leadership level wants to continue this process.
I think that the dynamics of the leaders' meeting, itself, will be important. Leaders
invariable, I have found, will always do more than ministerial groups largely
serviced by bureaucracies. And this meeting is, of course, a free meeting in the
sense that there is only one other person here with each leader, and who will largely
be an interpreter, so it really is the leaders, themselves.
_: President Clinton has arrived here today talking about how this meeting is about
looking after America's own interests, but also about the fact that he doesn't want
NAFTA just to be about Mexico, but opening up trade with the whole of Latin
America. Are those bad signals for Australia? 
22/ 12 ' 93 14: 12 V0O6 273 2923PMRESFICPM PRESS OFFICE
-2-
PM: Oh no' I don't think so. I think if APEC means growth and jobs for Americans, it
means growth and jobs for Australians, as well. And I think that's why we're all in
it. We think there is some common good that can come from this. Now, no doubt
President Clinton is speaking to his own constituency, as each of us do. But things
which facilitate trade, which liberalize trade in an area where we've already seen
quite substantial growth, and has a potential for greater growth, are going to be
good for all of us. You can just see what's happening already with Australia's
exports. Australia's exports have been booming, and they are largely because the
area of the world we live in is now the fastest-growing area of the world.
J: Prime Minister, do you sense that President Clinton's NAFTA victory has given
him a lift and more enthusiasm for APEC?
PM: Well, I think it was a very big test of American official opinion about whether the
United States wanted to be introspective and reclusive, or whether it wanted to get
out there and trade with the best and expand its horizons through trade. America
has been a great free-trading country, and a lot of America's growth has come
through free-trade. And it was doubting itself, doubting its competitiveness;
doubting its capacities, and I think this vote will send a very big signal. And the
fact that a Democratic president has actually pushed NAFTA through, with the
support of Republicans in the Congress sends a very big message to American
business, and, I think, the world.
J: The Malaysian Prime Minister says he's glad he didn't come. Is that a problem, or
are you glad that he didn't, too?
PM: No, no, no, it doesn't matter whether he comes or not, in a sense. It's better if he
does, but if he doesn't it's his ewn business. I mean, there are 15 countries here;
there's half the world's production here; and if you don't want to be at it, it's your
problem.
J: Mr. Keating, you've been pushing very hard for a formalized name change to the
APEC Economic Community. You were pressing that theme as recently as last
night. Other nations seem less convinced. Isn't that going to be a bit of a setback?
PM: Well, it just depends on how the leaders' meeting goes. I mean, the President made
a speech in Tokyo and one in Korea, this year, talking about an Asia Pacific
Community, or Pacific Community, rather. We've been speaking about APEC
becoming a Community not just simply an information secretariat, but more of a
Community. It does present difficulties to some countries which have powered the
non-aligned movement, for instance, and you might see becoming a Community Q 019 
22/ 12 ' 93 14: 14 1006 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE00
-3-
with the United States, as cutting across, if you like, their position. But the
important thing will be whether APEC adopts the work program which it has that
is, whether the substanc is going to be accelerated the substance of its work.
That's going to be the test, rather than what the acronym means. But I still think
that whatever anyone thinks, we are moving here towards... If we do things as a
collective, we are moving towards a Community.
J: Chile is now being admitted to APEC; that was against your stated wishes earlier in
the year. We see President Clinton extending his view for NAFTA into South
America. Isn't there a real chance that APEC could take a secondary role?
PM: Oh, no, not with NAFTA. NAFTA may well extend into South America, but
NAFTA will end up being a sub-group of APEC, I think, in terms of the trade of
these particular countries into the region.... ( interruption)
J: The question was, with the President today expanding NAFTA's horizons into South
America, and Chile now being admitted into APEC, isn't there a chance that APEC
itself may be given a secondary role by the Americans?
PM: Well, I've always seen NAFTA as a trades... as APEC grows, as a subgroup of
APEC, and that's true whether NAFTA is simply Canada or Mexico, or whether it
goes further into South America. The main thing about APEC is, we need to
deepen it before we broaden it, and I think that's one of the key points. That is, to
make sure that we know what APEC intends to do, what work it should undertake,
how we will facilitate trade and liberalize trade, and those should be the focus. So
in other words, APEC proves its worth before we invite everybody on board,
because we don't want the thing just to sort of dissipate and become a very broad
body which anyone can belong to, but doesn't mean very much.
J; Should Chile be a member?
PM: Well, this is a matter for debate, I mean the Americans have interests in South
America. It borders the Pacific Ocean, and we've never made any firm criteria
about what constitutes qualification for APEC membership. I think the APEC group
is going to be quite wise about borders. They'll take on a few natural ones, but repel
borders for a while.
J: But they haven't repelled Chile for more than a year, if it gets in next year' isn't
that defeat for you?
PM: Oh, no, no, these things are not wins and defeats, Laurie, these are only matters of
whether we can, in the longer run, define what APEC membership should be. Q020 
ZZ/ 12 ' 93 14: 15 U06 273 2923PM RESOFE O2
-4-
J: Are you happy with ( inaudible)?
PM: I think we should define APEC membership. We should be able to say what defines
an APEC member, rather than simply just spreading, you know, for instance, would
it be Colombia, Peru, the states of Central America, India, or the old Soviet Far
East, Russia, the Russian Pacific.-These are al questions which I think the
constituency has got to think about.
J: In terms of sending a message to GATT, are you still pushing for a cut in tariffs,
and is ASEAN going along with it?
PM: Well, I don't think you've caught up on the debate on APEC, with all due respects.
I mean, we're not a round of tariff cutting in this stage, I mean. But the trade
liberalizing is going to be very much part of the agenda of APEC, but it will
probably follow trade facilitation. That is the thing where there is I mean, a lot
of member states of APEC are liberalizing now Indonesia announced a package a
week or so ago; we've been doing it, now, for years. This is true also in the United
States. I think the thing that's going to focus APEC's work, mostly, will be trade
facilitation. That is, things like standard customs laws, standard business laws,
general recognition of standards these sorts of things.
J: You were looking for more than a declaration, weren't you, to GATT?
PM: I'm not sure what you're saying.
J: Well, I understood from what Trade Minister Cook said, and others, that you were
looking for something more than just a declaration of principles. You were looking
for some sort of gesture by APEC to GATT.
PM: Oh, well, GATT's a different question. Before you asked me about APEC, whether
it had a trade-liberalizing role. That's got nought to do with GATT. GATT's a
different matter. Well, it may well be the leaders will say something about GATT.
About the desirability of the successful conclusion of the GATT. I mean, I would
certainly be happy to say that.
J: The Emminent Persons Group has suggested that the Seattle meeting, given a
blockage in the Uruguay Round, should offer some specific measures as a way of
getting the Round unblocked.
PM: Well, I don't know whether this meeting would be seeking to gamner commitments
from countries in the Uruguay Round. I think this meeting would be inclined to say
PM PRESS OFFICEQ 021 
22/ 12 ' 93 14: 18 % YO6 273 2923PMRESOFCPM PRESS OFFICE
that the Uruguay Round should be successfully concluded. Some member states
have to give ground, to conclude it. But again, the commitments which are on the
table from member countries of the GATT are there now. I don't see this meeting
actually being able to take specific trade concessions from constituent members and
offering them the GATT context. I just don't think that's going to happen. What
will happen, if anything about GATT happens, is that we would say that we should
reach a conclusion of the Round by the 15th of December, so that the fast-track
authority which President Clinton has, can be exercised by the Congress. Now, this
is an important grouping, and were we to say that, it would have some weight.
J: Prime Minister, are you prepared to allow Conrad Black to lift his holding in John
Fairfax up 25 percent?
PM: Well, he hasn't asked me. He hasn't put any specific proposal. I saw Conrad Black
the other day, he pays me the courtesy of a visit whenever he visits his assets in
Australia his business. Not always, of course, mostly. And it's mostly... as all
proprietors do, asked for something. Now, in Conrad's case, he wants a bigger
share of John Fairfax Sons, and I've told him that there are real national interest
questions here, and that something easily given isn't generally something worth
having.
J: He seems to believe that it also has something to do with the quality of reporting in
the Fairfax newspapers. That if it becomes quote ' more balanced' unquote, in your
words, that in those circumstances you would entertain lifting his holding above
percent.
PM: Oh no, I had a conversation with him late last year when John Hewson had offered
him 50 percent equity in John Fairfax Sons, and I said to him, " Oh, I wouldn't
consider that." I would consider going to 25 percent, because his claim was that he
couldn't run the business at 14.9 percent; that he had just concluded that day, a
meeting at the Opera House where he had been pilloried in running the business
with 14.9 percent, and I said, " Well, we'll think about it, but we want a
commitment from you that the paper will be balanced. And if there is any notion
that, you know, of bias, that is that you barrack for the Coalition, on the basis of
your conservative proclivities in other places, then there's no way you would qualify
as the kind of owner we would like." Now, as it turned out, I think the Herald's
coverage was... I won't say it was balanced, because I think the whole media wrote
the government off in the election campaign. But that said, that was in part, of
course, the fault of some of their so-called, often-quoted Lbor strategists. But we'll
leave them for another time. So therefore, after the election, 1, on behalf of the
Government made good a commitment to reconsider them, and took them to
But there have been no further specific requests, and certainly no commitment. I9j022 
22/ 12 ' 93 14: 17 ' 006 273 2923PMRESFICPM PRESS OFFICE
-6-
J: But Mr. Keating, should a commercial dealing of that sort rest on your judgment
about whether a media organization is fair to Labor?
PM: No, not whether it's fair to Labor, but whether reporting is fair.
J: But you're the judge, are you?
PM: Well, I'm the Primc Minister. That's how I become the judge.
ENDS IQj023 



c CIL
PRIME MINISTER
E OE PROOF COPY
TRANSCRIPT OF UiNTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MI1NISTER, THE HON PJ
KEATING, M. P.
SEATTLE, USA THURSDAY 18 NOVEMIBER, 1993
J: Prime Minister, what's the minimum that we could expect out of this meeting if you
are able to regard it as a success?
PM: The first success of it is that it's actually happening. That the APEC structure has
brought to it the President of the United States and all the leaders of the Asia Pacific
area, who are now members of APEC. So the fact that it's on; the fact that it's been
given this kind of status; that people have come for it, means that APEC will have
so much more authority in each of the member countries, and of course in the
United States.
So I think that's the first thing; because that, then, gives the bureaucracy of each
country the trade and foreign ministers of each country a signal that the group
at a leadership level wants to continue this process.
I think that the dynamics of the leaders' meeting, itself, will be important. Leaders
invariable, I have found, will always do more than ministerial groups largely
serviced by bureaucracies. And this meeting is, of course, a free meeting in the
sense that there is only one other person here with each leader, and who will largely
be an interpreter, so it really is the leaders, themselves.
J: President Clinton has arrived here today talking about how this meeting is about
looking after America's own interests, but also about the fact that he doesn't want
NAFTA just to be about Mexico, but opening up trade with the whole of Latin
America. Are those bad signals for Australia? 
PM: Oh no, I don't think so. I think if APEC means growth and jobs for Americans, it
means growth and jobs for Australians, as well. And I think that's why we're all in
it. We think there is some common good that can come from this. Now, no doubt
President Clinton is speaking to his own constituency, as each of us do. But things
which facilitate trade, which liberalize trade in an area where we've already seen
quite substantial growth, and has a potential for greater growth, are going to be
good for all of us. You can just see what's happening already with Australia's
exports. Australia's exports have been booming, and they are largely because the
area of the world we live in is now the fastest-growing area of the world.
J: Prime Minister, do you sense that President Clinton's NAIFTA victory has given
him a lift and more enthusiasm for APEC?
PM: Well, I think it was a very big test of American official opinion about whether the
United States wanted to be introspective and reclusive, or whether it wanted to get
out there and trade with the best and expand its horizons through trade. America
has been a great free-trading country, and a lot of America's growth has come
through free-trade. And it was doubting itself, doubting its competitiveness;
doubting its capacities, and I think this vote will send a very big signal. And the
fact that a Democratic president has actually pushed NAFrA through, with the
support of Republicans in the Congress sends a very big message to American
business, and, I think, the world.
J: The Malaysian Prime Minister says he's glad he didn't come. Is that a problem, or
are you glad that he didn't, too?
PM: No, no, no, it doesn't matter whether he comes or not, in a sense. It's better if he
does, but if he doesn't it's his own business. I mean, there are 15 countries here;
there's half the world's production here; and if you don't want to be at it, it's your
problem.
J: Mr. Keating, you've been pushing very hard for a formalized name change to the
APEC Economic Community. You were pressing that theme as recently as last
night. Other nations seem less convinced. Isn't that going to be a bit of a setback?
PM: Well, it just depends on how the leaders' meeting goes. I mean, the President made
a speech in Tokyo and one in Korea, this year, talking about an Asia Pacific
Community, or Pacific Community, rather. We've been speaking about APEC
becoming a Community not just simply an information secretariat, but more of a
Community. It does present difficulties to some countries which have powered the
non-aligned movement, for instance, and you might see becoming a Community 
with the United States, as cutting across, if you like, their position. But the
important thing will be whether APEC adopts the work programs which it has that
is, whether the substance is going to be accelerated the substance of its work.
That's going to be the test, rather than what the acronym means. But I stil think
that whatever anyone thinks, we are moving here towards... If we do things as a
collective, we are moving towards a Community.
J: Chile is now being admitted to APEC; that was against your stated wishes earlier in
the year. We see President Clinton extending his view for NAFTA into South
America. Isn't there a real chance that APEC could take a secondary role?
PM: Oh, no, not with NAFTA. NAFTA may well extend into South America, but
NAFTA will end up being a sub-group of APEC, I think, in terms of the trade of
these particular countries into the region.... ( interruption)
J: The question was, with the President today expanding NAFTA's horizons into South
America, and Chile now being admitted into APEC, isn't there a chance that APEC
itself may be given a secondary role by the Americans?
PM: Well, I've always seen NAFTA as a trades... as APEC grows, as a subgroup of
APEC, and that's true whether NAFTA is simply Canada or Mexico, or whether it
goes further into South America. The main thing about APEC is, we need to
deepen it before we broaden it, and I think that's one of the key points. That is, to
make sure that we know what APEC intends to do, what work it should undertake,
how we will facilitate trade and liberalize trade, and those should be the focus. So
in other words, APEC proves its worth before we invite everybody on board,
because we don't want the thing just to sort of dissipate and become a very broad
body which anyone can belong to, but doesn't mean very much.
J: Should Chile be a member?
PM: Well, this is a matter for debate, I mean the Americans have interests in South
America. It borders the Pacific Ocean, and we've never made any firm criteria
about what constitutes qualification for APEC membership. I think the APEC group
is going to be quite wise about borders. They'll take on a few natural ones, but repel
borders for a while.
J: But they haven't repelled Chile for more than a year, if it gets in next year, isn't
that defeat for you?
PM: Oh, no, no, these things are not wins and defeats, Laurie, these are only matters of
whether we can, in the longer run, define what APEC membership should be. 
J: Are you happy with ( inaudible)?
PM: I think we should define APEC membership. We should be able to say what defines
an APEC member, rather than simply just spreading, you know, for instance, would
it be Colombia, Peru, the states of Central America, India, or the old Soviet Far
East, Russia, the Russian Pacific. These are all questions which I think the
constituency has got to think about.
J: In terms of sending a message to GATT, are you still pushing for a cut in tariffs,
and is ASEAN going along with it?
PM: Well, I don't think you've caught up on the debate on APEC, with all due respects.
I mean, we're not a round of tariff cutting in this stage, I mean. But the trade
liberalizing is going to be very much part of the agenda of APEC, but it will
probably follow trade facilitation. That is the thing where there is I mean, a lot
of member states of APEC are liberalizing now Indonesia announced a package a
week or so ago; we've been doing it, now, for years. This is true also in the United
States. I think the thing that's going to focus APEC's work, mostly, will be trade
facilitation. That is, things like standard customs laws, standard business laws,
general recognition of standards these sorts of things.
J: You were looking for more than a declaration, weren't you, to GATT?
PM: I'm not sure what you're saying.
J: Well, I understood from what Trade Minister Cook said, and others, that you were
looking for something more than just a declaration of principles. You were looking
for some sort of gesture by APEC to GATT.
PM: Oh, well, GATT's a different question. Before you asked me about APEC, whether
it had a trade-liberalizing role. That's got nought to do with GATT. GATT's a
different matter. Well, it may well be the leaders will say something about GATT.
About the desirability of the successful conclusion of the GATT. I mean, I would
certainly be happy to say that.
J: The Emminent Persons Group has suggested that the Seattle meeting, given a
blockage in the Uruguay Round, should offer some specific measures as a way of
getting the Round unblocked.
PM: Well, I don't know whether this meeting would be seeking to garner commitments
from countries in the Uruguay Round. I think this meeting would be inclined to say 
that the Uruguay Round should be successfully concluded. Some member states
have to give ground, to conclude it. But again, the commitments which are on the
table from member countries of the GATT are there now. I don't see this meeting
actually being able to take specific trade concessions from constituent members and
offering them the GATT context. I just don't think that's going to happen. What
will happen, if anything about GATT happens, is that we would say that we should
reach a conclusion of the Round by the 15th of December, so that the fast-track
authority which President Clinton has, can be exercised by the Congress. Now, this
is an important grouping, and were we to say that, it would have some weight.
J: Prime Minister, are you prepared to allow Conrad Black to lift his holding in John
Fairfax up 25 percent?
PM: Well, he hasn't asked me. He hasn't put any specific proposal. I saw Conrad Black
the other day, he pays me the courtesy of a visit whenever he visits his assets in
Australia his business. Not always, of course, mostly. And it's mostly... as all
proprietors do, asked for something. Now, in Conrad's case, he wants a bigger
share of John Fairfax Sons, and I've told him that there are real national interest
questions here, and that something easily given isn't generally something worth
having.
J: He seems to believe that it also has something to do with the quality of reporting in
the Fairfax newspapers. That if it becomes quote ' more balanced' unquote, in your
words, that in those circumstances you would entertain lifting his holding above
percent.
PM: Oh no, I had a conversation with him late last year when John Hewson had offered
him 50 percent equity in John Fairfax Sons, and I said to him, " Oh, I wouldn't
consider that." I would consider going to 25 percent, because his claim was that he
couldn't run the business at 14.9 percent; that he had just concluded that day, a
meeting at the Opera House where he had been pilloried in running the business
with 14.9 percent, and I said, " Well, we'll think about it, but we want a
commitment from you that the paper will be balanced. And if there is any notion
that, you know, of bias, that is that you barrack for the Coalition, on the basis of
your conservative proclivities in other places, then there's no way you would qualify
as the kind of owner we would like." Now, as it turned out, I think the Herald's
coverage was... I won't say it was balanced, because I think the whole media wrote
the government off in the election campaign. But that said, that was in part, of
course, the fault of some of their so-called, often-quoted Lbor strategists. But we'll
leave them for another time. So therefore, after the election, I, on behalf of the
Governent made good a commitment to reconsider them, and took them to
But there have been no further specific requests, and certainly no commitment. 
-6-
J: But Mr. Keating, should a commercial dealing of that sort rest on your judgment
about whether a media organization is fair to Labor?
PM: No, not whether it's fair to Labor, but whether reporting is fair.
J: But you're the judge, are you?
PM: Well, I'm the Prime Minister. That's how I become the judge.
ENDS 



E OE PROOF COPY
TRANSCRtIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P J
KEATING, SE~ ATTLE, U. S. A.
FRIDAY 19 NOVEMBER, 1993
PM-. This morning T had meetings with Prime Minister Chaun of T'hailand, President
Jian&amp; Zemin of China and President Kim Young Sam of Korca. Another ve~ y
useful do vclopment of APEC, that onc has the capacity to have bilateral
discussions. At each of those meetings we were able to discuss APEC, whlat it
means, Its development and also bilateral issues between us. There are, of course,
as you know many bilateral Issucs and I was able to discass dcvclopmcents in the
Australian economy; developments between Australia and Its economy and
China; thc growth of trade last year of 40 tie progress we ate making in trade
talks recently, the progress we are mnaking on wool for instance; as well as talking
about API C, the prospects for this meeting, its future and its institutional
NtTucturc. In my discussion with President Kim Young Samn we r-anged uver those issues
again that is, the APE-C pecLuliar issucs, as Well as Australiaes support for South
Korea's position with North Korea over nuclear weapons. And lie also usked me
ubout our likely support otKorea for a place in the . J'N Security Council,
representing Asia. It was a useful and interesting morning.
J: Did you get any sense from the Chinese President of how they arc going to
respond to President Clinton's entreaties oil human tights?
PM; No, 1no 1 met Presidcnt Jiang /. emin before President Clinton would have met him
and I also indiuuted because I don't think it is as well understood outside of the
United States or outside of wtintrics like Australia as here therc is some still
body of opinion In the 1. Jnited States that says they shouldn't tic thcir hands in a
Multilateral structure, that they should miaintain the right to do things unilaterally
and bilaterally)-also a great dichotomy of view often between the Pres~ idency, the
President, and thc Congress. And I think that our Chinese friends need to take 
-2-
that into account. That this is not a monolithic debate in the United States, and
getting a United States President interested in trade ill the Pacifc and looking
Wcstward doesn't mean the whole monolith goes with him. But those of us who
are interested in securing US support for developments in the Asia Pacific aren
have to also encourage the Congress and other elements of the administration as
well. So. I took the opportunity to give himi these views which may havc been
useful ahead of him meeting the President.
Blut from China's point of view they have got a massive trade surplus with the US,
in one way the StMtuS quo suits them just finely doen't Vt
PM: Well thiese economics are going to grow so rapidly, their ifastructure demands,
their energy demands, their environmental problems are going to he so prtfound,
that unless they get the institutional arrangement-; in place to see this sort of
development, they are tnt going to grow as fast as they otherwise would. They
would then experiece the same kind of trade prcs~ surcs Wili the United States
which Japan is experiencing. So you've got to let the United qtte,; be able to
tradc in the area to see its exports rise.
And this is thc point President Clinton continually makes about growth and jobs
in the United States for the export growth which hits the potential of reaching in
the Asia Pacific areat. In othier words, the US has got to be allowed to freely
exerise its commercial possibilities in the area so that it is not living with very
large trade imbalances against it. Now, that is why getting these structures right
and thinking about them ahead of time is important.
J. Are you disappointed that the Ministerial Statement didn't embrace the 1996 JITO
target on free trade, agrement on free W-ade? And if! T could ask one more thing,
the Chinese Foreign Minister in answer to questions about that meeting
upecirically rejected the idea of it namec change to community or any sense of a
community?
PM: Well let me deal with the second one first. T've sdid to you oflcn there is no road
map with APEC, we have got to explain it as we go along. ' Mere is a concern that
the word community implies a Brussels-lypc supra-national structure. Now, it
doesn't. None of are thinking about a European community Brussels-type
bureaucrucy which makes national decisions, or supra-niational decisions, or
decisions for Nation's. APEC is a much looser, co-operaivc structure than that,
and it won't have those formial arrangcmcnts. So the word community doesn't
have the samec connotation as lRuropean community.
B~ ut again, the main thing is, as I said to you yustcrday, that the member states
here adopt the work programns and go on positively with the main substantial work 
-3-
of APEC. Some at thle moment seem to be more worried about the form than thc
substance. When you get down to substanc they have no worrics. When you
talk about the formn they seem to have worrics. Well, OX, let's focus oil
substance, the form will look aftcr itself.
And the question about the LVC1 and the 1996 date?
PM: Well. again, this is another point. You see, we don't envisage tat AI'LC should
be displacing the (. iAFJfor trade liberalising things. We see tht OATT as having
primacy in global terms, in terms of goods, services, intellectual property rights
etc., But what CIAICaniL do is basically get inlto things like trade facilitation,
that is encouraging the development of a bcttcr legal background in countries for
investment, better protection for propwry, the rights to litigate on equity issuex,
customs procedurcs, company law standardisation, standardisation of profesional
siandards, standardisation of food standards, standardisation of electrical and
telccommunicahion standards, these are not G~ ATT things. But, these arc very
imrnltant things to this region. They arc one of the things that will help, for
instance, trade from all of us into the area&amp;
So it's a case or showing what GMJT= c do and what APEC can do so that the
trade facilitation, I've always said to you, the trade raili~ ation agenda will be up
the front and the trade liberalising agenda will follow, B~ ut because, I think,
countries of the -rea see the trade posibilitiesl they are already doing it. It was
like the tariff changes in Australia. We announced the tariff cuts in 1988, by 1989
companies were already looking to adjust for the end points, even though they
were years away. In the same way Indanesia. this year for instance, is now
introduving a very large package of deregulation and boardcr protection reforms.
If we keep on the trade facilitation and if we focus on what we can all do together,
L think the trade liberalisation will come along as well as through the OATT, not
only through the CYATT, but by unilateral decision% which countries will takc to
open Up their markets.
J: Arc you happy with the message that is now being sent through t) OATT from
APE. C?
PM: Well I think so, an(] you mnay have seen today's release, if you have it, the
commitmenits which the various APLC countries have been prepared to put their
namec to. which have been negotiated in G'eneva under tht aUSPiCC3 Of the G7AIT-1.
Now, in Australian termns they arc off a 1989 ba-se, and, of course, after then we
introduced thc tariff chunges or 1988 to 1991 and then the tariff changes of 1991
to 1 996. So we are In the happy position of being able to comply with all of these
commitnienis without, in ract, changing the policy we ulready have in place. 
.4-
J: Does it involve any concessions on our part?
PM: Not beyond that which we have announced years ago.
J: One of the things you want to come out of this conference is to make them a
regular event, a regular summit, do you think from the talks you have had so far
hero that it is likely to come oil.
PM: I think so. I think that It's likely that tomorrow it may be proposed that there be
another meeting again next year. And I think that is likely to succeed.
J: Who will propose that?
PM; I don't know. This is another thing, that the dynamics of the Leaders' meeting is
going to be quite important, because it is not pre-cooked or scripted. Thecrcfore it
is likely to have an impetus, in fact, some of the leaders are stronger on this than
their foreign ministries are. And this is why, I think, it will be important to see
how the chemistry of the meeting runs itself.
J: Would that be in Jakarta?
PM: Well, next year is in Jakata. The next ministerial meeting is in Jakarta. But,
again, there would need to bc a consensus for it. I think in the cvcnt that there's a
consensus I'd be pretty surprised if President Suoharto wouldn't issue an invitation
but there would need to be a consensus.
J: Given what you've said about the meeting tomorrow, do you hope the Leaders'
meeting can push forward in the arcas that the Ministers' meeting met resistance?
PM: In what areas?
J: The name change, the EPG, things like that.
FPM Well, again, the main thing is to keep broadening the understanding of what
APF. C is and what it can do. And to then summon the consensus for that and
move on. In other words, you gather up a bit more each time and then you move
along. This has come a long way from nothing, in four years. When I first started
talking about giving APEC more authority with 1Leaders' mectings was when I
met George Bush in January 1992. This is the end of 1993, it's only two years
and you've got half the world's leadership. 
3: Werc you hatppy about the recognition of Australia's pivotal role in setting up
APE C, tbrough Bill Clintoo's acknowledgement of [ Bob I lawke, today?
PM: Oh ycs. I think Australia is very clearly identified with authorship of APFC wq a
grouping. Ii's all now a matter about what it is and how deep it is. And the APEC
we're talking a~ bout now is more than just an informnat ion secretariat. Tt's
something which is lookin~ g at these trade facilitating things and just by
summoning the leaders to it naturally gives it more attention national attention
and morc focus in all of these national bureaucrAcies and, of course, in their
communities. So API2C will, therefore, be very much stronger as a result of* thjs
change.
J: Is it correct that teams lik~ e the ten working groups inaudible have actually
done a lot of work in Identifying trade barriers, other tariff barriers and so on.. the
work's there, there's a stack of books this thick. And it was tip to this meeting,
thought to be up to this rnccling to actually give it the policy impetus to mnake
decisions on how to actually lower or eliminate those sort of barriers and in fact,* it
soorms as thought that impetus is not there.
P'M: No, no. Thars not right. This inecting never envisaged adopting wholesale the
Whole trade libcralising agenda. The mecting does not have enough ol* it history
as an executive group, I think in this time, to izontcmplatc: ( hat sort of wholesale
adoption. in other words, no-one is considering notihstanding the fact that
one can easily collate where tarifE or other non-tairiff barriers might be no-one
is believing that this mneefing is going to be, in fact, adopting an cxecutive role
which then says, " Ohi yes, we'll lick these binding changes t) national economics'
borders." That's not what is envisaged hbrm.
But what is cnvisagcd here is to give APEC more authority, that is, to make clear
that the lcadcrs' want it to have a role doing things more than simply exchangin
Wnorpiation and, in the first instance, ito look at these trade facilitation programs.
Which I think it tcan do. And it will do those things but, I think, on trade
liberalisation everyone W! Il sit back and see where the GIATT goes. Now, irthe
GATl succeeds and there's a great change in thc GAiT ' and there's a lot of
liberalising people then say, " Well, what else can we do". And in a year or two, a
fcw years after thui, I ihtink we can follow it up.
J1: you've slid that you're going to invite President Clint-on to Australia on this trip.
When will you issue this invitation?
pM: Well, obviously 7' ll be seeing him a number of tinics ovcr this weekend and in the
event, of course, that the meeting were to deuitdc that there would tie another 
16-
mfecting, irt the S. outhern Hemisphere in Indonesia I would say, " Well, look,
if You're there, come and see us." Whether he cun... it President's schedule is
always fully booked so whether you can jUSt issuc and invitation and expect to get
an acceptance is a different matter. But, I'll certainly ask hin.
J: insudible Christopher indicated there could be somec soil of developments on
the Korean Peninsula. In your discussions with the South Korean President today,
did he indicate anything happening in that regard? Sumv. sort of breakthrough or
some behind the scencs development?
PM: No, I think their preoccupation seems to be with nuclear issues in the North and
continuing world support for their position. That is, pressure onl North Korea to
open themselves up for IAFA inspections and to keep pressure onl them so as to
see them not got to the rcproccssing business. But now, no doubt there is a lot of
bilateral business between Korea and the United State.% b ut thiuy'll announce all of
that in their own good time. And it's their business.
J1: Mr Keating, there's been a bit of contioversy in Australia over the agreement you
made with, apparently. with Mr J0lack, on Fairfax. How can wc be sure that, in
future mecdia decisions that your Government has to make, that you won't make ak
shnilar agreement or deal with, say, the Pay TIV contracts?
PM: It's not a matter of making similar... Look, t~ here's no group more sel f-interested
than the Fairfax journalists in the affairs of Fairfax. The only rivals arc the ABC
and thc affairs of the ABC. Outside of these two very articulate and selfinterested
groupings, the rest of* us arc bystanders to the general media debate. I
was asked yesterday about M~ r Black and our decision to increase his holdings to
Obviously, no government is going to give such and agreement to a
proprietor who behaves in a paisan way, or immnaturely. And the last election
ww; a reasonable test of how the ncw management proprietorship and
management would behave in that environment. And that's the sum total of it.
Beyond thazt, Mr Black has not formally put any proposuls to the Government so
therefore, there's nothing to consider.
J7: So, will you be applying, that same criteria to future, potential media owners in
Australiat? Particularly with Pay TV?
PM: No. Because, well, Pay TV is not the principal broadsheets of the country. But,
obviously, I don't think anyone in Australia should wclcolicb eavy handed
proprietorship. I remember the whole of thc Fairflax employees talking about. the
rights to write and have printcd that which they bclicvc and 11ot have prOPrietorial
intervcntion. And it was tha point that I was~ making. 
.7-
J: On thc subject of proprietorial intervcntion, you put a bit of a bucket on the
British tabloids the other day when sitting right next to you was Rupert Murdoch.
Did he say to you afterwards anything about the Lizard of Oz?
PM: No, of course it took mc a while to make the link between thc Sun and him. His
newspaper empire is so extensive that one needs to have an encyclopedic memory
to remember all the titles.
J: Just on Fairfax, Mr Keating, who made the judgemnent about whether they were
balanced or not. Was it you alone or was it other ministers as well?
PM: Oh look, I don't think I need to take that debate any further. I mean, Mr Black
made the point that it was very hard to manage the newspaper with 14.9% of the
stock and it's a pretty reasonable point to makc. We've given him 25% and
is nowhere near a commanding position in tenns of the cquity but it gives him the
authority to manage it.
PM: Do you think, for instancc, that a Liberal Prime Minister might make a different
judgement of balance as a Labor Prime Minister?
PM: I shouldn't think so. I mnan, I don't think it's an unrecasonable thing to require of a
newspaper that it be balanced.
J: Wcrc you pleased with thc way Conrad Black thrust your discussions into the
public domain?
PM: I was absolutely delighted.
INDS,. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, M. P. ABC AM PROGRAM
SEATTLE, U. S. A.
SATURDAY 20 NOVEMEBER, 1993
E OE PROOF COPY
GD: Is the decision to have another summit in Jakarta next year a sweet victory?
PM: Well. I think, rather than a sweet victory I think it's a very pleasing achievement
to see Australian diplomacy reach the point where it has taken the interests of not
just the United States but most of the major countries of South East Asia and
North Asia, to come together over this weekend to form, for the first time, a
meeting of the APEC leaders and to agree that the meeting was so successful as
to go on again and do it again.
GD: But, doing it again does roll over some of the scepticism that was coming from
some of the Asian leaders coming into this meeting, doesn't it?
PM: Well, yes, it may well do. But, I don't think there was so much scepticism as
there was some caution, about APEC. As I've said before, there's no road map
with APEC, this is all new so people have got to try and find their way around
where it's leading from an information secretariat, which it first was, to a body
which is drawing a lot of executive power and a lot of executive attention. I think
the people have convinced themselves that it is very much in their interests that
the largest economy in the world, the United States, and the second largest
economy, Japan, and one of the emerging economies, China for the three of
them to multilateralise themselves, that is, to subject themselves to disciplines and
dispute settling mechanisms of an organisation like A. PEC there is a
recognition that they have given something up for something greater. r r U fC ci c-
And, hence, a willingness on the part of the rest of the countries involved to take
this at face value and to take it on for the very important body that I think it will
become.
GD: In terms of the Malaysian fears though, about APEC overshadowing ASEAN,
ASEAN has had about four summits in about 25 years, you're looking at getting
two APEC summits in five years is that proof that APEC is growing very
quickly?
PM: I think APEC has grown very, very rapidly but I think it needs to. That is, that the
growth of the Asia-Pacific, which is important now to all of us, does have
bottlenecks about it. We've had spectacular growth of quite small economies
spectacular growth of, in some cases, small levels of activity. So, you can get
very high growth. As these economies get larger it is not so easy to continue
these growth rates and there will be bottlenecks in infrastructure, in power, in
hydrocarbons, in all sorts of things. And, I think that is where some general
attention, on the part of major governments, to these questions can continue to see
growth, or will facilitate growth, into the future. I think most of the APEC
constituency recognises that and knows that to be important and needing to be
addressed.
GD: How much further has APEC moved towards becoming a policy making body?
PM: Well, the fact that it has, sitting in its leadership group, the President of the United
States, the Prime Minister of Japan, the President of China, the President of
Indonesia and other heads of government, means that it has an enormously
powerful set of sponsors. And so, therefore, it can undertake executive tasks and
it can get them done.
GD: Because of those sponsors is APEC going to be able to drag along the doubters,
such as Malaysia which talks about Australia being too extreme, pushing too hard
trying to get an Asia-Pacific community and free trade?
PM: Well, look, Malaysia is represented ministerially at this, I think it would have
been better in Malaysian terms had the Malaysian Prime Minister come. But,
again, that issue was decided some time ago, it took no attention this weekend
whatsoever. APEC is going to be bigger than any one of its constituent members
and that includes Malaysia.
GD: The vision statement that you put out talked of a new voice in the Asia-Pacific, a
new voice on the world stage. What sort of voice do you think it is going to be?
PM: Well, APEC's not going to be a European Community-type structure, it's not
going to be a Brussels-type supra-national organisation that makes decisions for
national governments. It's not going to be that, there's going to be no Treaty of 
Rome equivalent or Maastricht Treaty or the endorsement of those treaties by
nation states. It will be a much looser, cooperative body, but, I think, no less
effective because these economies have already proved that they can grow and
grow quite spectacularly. And, given a bit of help and direction, can do much
better. But, APEC provides such enormous opportunities to, if you like, deal with
the interests of the United States and Japan and China and just so many other
important economies like Korea and Indonesia etc. And ourselves. This is the
first time Australia has really sat at a very big table, in its own right. Years ago,
the question was, could we get into the GI10 or maybe, perhaps, in our dreams, the
G7? It was always, you know, would we be let into something? What has
happened here is Australian diplomacy, with the help of others, fashioned
something else, something new, which I think will become a major body and of
which it is a full constituent member.
GD: Does that picture of President Clinton and the Asian leaders, does that picture
send a real jolt to Europe? Does it say to Europe if there's not a result in the
Uruguay Round that it won't be a three block world but, that it will be the
Americans joining Asia to face Europe?
PM: No, I don't necessarily think that and it won't be a three-bloc world whatever
happens because I think the advent of APEC means we won't see the Americas
bloc up with NAFTA and we won't see a yen bloc in Asia. But, rather, we will
see, sensibly, the melding of interests of North and South Asia and the Western
Pacific. Essentially, that is what APEC has accomplished. It's pulled together the
policy interests of North and South Asia and the United States, North America,
Canada and Mexico. So, it will behave as a trading area. This will be noticed in
Europe because it means...
GD: A bit of a scare for Europe?
PM: No, well it's not designed for that. But, it will be noticed in Europe and some of
that sort of smugness that Europe has about its importance it means that the
United States, which already has a preponderance of its trade in the Pacific
$ 300 billion of its trade is in the Pacific, $ 200 billion in the Atlantic well
obviously the $ 300 billion is going to grow faster in the Pacific than the $ 200
billion in the Atlantic. And these other economies are making markets
themselves. See, APEC is very integrated. It's more integrated than the European
Community now. 66% of its exports are traded within its own member states,
where the equivalent figure in the European Community is 61 And the
equivalent figure for NAFTA is 42%. So, APEC's already.. there's already
tremendous trade between APEC member states and, therefore, the dependency
on Europe is going to be less and less as time goes by. Therefore, there's a
message in this for the Europeans they shouldn't be too cocky about their
importance. 
GD: Is APEC on its way to being as equal in importance as, say, the G7, or being more
able to move policy along than the G7 has been able to over the last few years?
PM: APEC will be far more focused because it will have, all the time, common
interests which the G7 has never had. You've got the United States and Japan,
Germany, Italy, Britain, Canada it's such a disparate group, the G7 couldn't
effectively be the kind of body that APEC is capable of being.
GD: The big bilateral out of this was the meeting between the Presidents of China and
America, the first bilateral since Tiananmen Square. Do you think that APEC can
give a sort of structure which will allow these to deal with the problems they have
over human rights, that issue the Americans have been hammering China on?
PM: I think so. A very important thing about this meeting was the chemistry and
atmospherics of the meeting which, as it went on, were pretty spectacular. The
relationship of everyone, after a day or two, started to get much more, not just
more friendly, but more prepared to talk about things, more confident of one
another. Now, give this a few years and of course this will dramatically improve
relations. It's not to say that countries won't keep their interests but it means
they'll be able to open topics up in a non hostile environment. In fact, a much
easier environment with APEC rather than, say, a foreign policy environment.
And the bilaterals are important. I had the opportunity myself of talking to the
President of China, the Prime Minister of Japan, the Prime Minister of Thailand,
amongst others, the President of Korea. These are all useful and valuable
discussions. In one place you can do so many things. Now, this will be true for
the whole body so APEC will be able to transact business probably beyond its
agenda, by mere virtue of the fact that these people will be talking civilly and
sanely and harmoniously together.
GD: Finally then, if this was summit number one, a getting to know you summit, what
does that make summit number two in Jakarta next year?
PM: Well, I think, in the meantime we have decided to do quite a few things. We've
decided to, in the first place, support a successful conclusion of the Uruguay
Round, to seek there to establish over the course of the year work on a common,
non-binding set of investment principles a first step towards a regional
investment agreement. We're going to be examining links between energy use in
the area, which is going to be vast, and the environment. Also, to set up a
business group which will have two members of the business community of each
country from it and adopt, also, the work of the Ministerial Committee here for
consideration next year. So, there's going to be quite an agenda, this thing will
have work to do.
And, as you enquired about human rights... I was able, for instance, to talk to the
President about Hong Kong I stressed there the importance of a smooth 
transition, of the protection of peoples' rights. I've got no doubt President Clinton
did the same with the U. S. concerns about human rights and China. The mere fact
that you've got this leadership coming together in a forum where you can have a
meeting and discuss things means that you can obviously discuss things beyond
the trade and investment framework.
GD: You talked about it in historic terms, I suppose I should ask you if it struck
you as historic, your personal reaction to this meeting with this diverse range of
leaders?
PM: Oh yes. I have got no doubt about the historic nature of it. Because, there you are
with this amazing group half the world's production, 40% of the world's
population sitting there, chatting away in a group, at a table. Talking freely on
the boat on the way out, you know, swapping the odd story, finding the odd
amusing thing. It was highly unusual to see such a collection of people, all
focused on the one task. From the President of the United States down through
the Pacific economies.
GD: Thank you, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.
Ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THE PRIME MINISTER THE
HON.! PJ KEATING, M. P..
FOUR SEASONS HOTEL, SEATFILE U. S. A.
SATURDAY 20 NOVEMBER, 1993
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: Good afternoon. Today when the APEC leaders -met under the chairmanship of
President Clinton I think one can say it was a completely historic occasion. For
the first time having the leaders of the major Asia-Pacific economies meet and the
significance of it was, I think, a tremendous thing for relations in the region. The
atmospherics of the mecting were terrific. The chemistry, the relationship
between each individual, thc. I think, diminished fears that some counres may
have about the US and its motives and the whole, if you like, development of
APEC to date. A lot of those things, I think, fell to the wayside and we had a very
good and cooperative discussion. The thing about these couple of days is people
do get to know each other better. We had adin= crlast night and by the time they
got on board today they were all chatting around about nothing in particular, and
everything in general, until they then got on to the more formal discussions and
the more formal discussions today were, I thought, very productive. The
contributions were very thoughtful and quite a lot, I think, was achieved.
The first thing that was achieved was that evcrybody thought the meeting was a
success, so much so that they have decided to have another one next year in
Indonesia in 1994. As well, there was unanimity of opinion that now was the
chance to do the, if you like, the triple. And that wus NAFTA, APEC and GAIT.
And there was a determination on the part of everybody theme to try and press the
Uruguay Round to a succcssful conclusion, and President Clinton walked away
with thc support of everybody in thc doing of that
There was also an understanding, I think. of the need for closer cooperation in
APEC if emerging bottle necks to gruwth are to bc avoided. Leaders rccognised
there are bottle necks to growth, that while these Asia-Pacific economnies have 13 3 03 
grown strongiy, they have mostiv gown from a smaii base. and they arm with the
cneray demands. infrastructure demands. ana other issues. goin2 to run up against
some orobiems over time. And it was gcneraily agreed that they needed to be
avoided and work needed to be done to think about them.
They weicomed the Eminent Persons Groun challenge to achieve freer trade in
Asia and the Pacific. and the next oracticai steps agreed inciude: a meeting of
ø-conomic munisters. tinance ministers. on macroeconomic development; a
-heeting on neiping smail and meoium business to understana what they believe
APEC could deliver to them, and how APEC might hel; and an examination of
the links between energy use and the environment, because of the enormous
energy which is _ olng to be consumed in these economies over the next few
y. ears.
We agreed to set up a business forum, it hasn't got a name at the moment, but lets
call it a round table for the purposes of giving it a name, with two representative
of business from each country to identify ways of facilitating trade, and to give
APFC a business perspective on how and in which ways governments might be
able to help the genera] development of the policy settings to promote business in
the region.
Between now and the next meeting, the heads of government agreed that
ministers and officials should work on common non-binding investment
principles as a first step towards a regional investment agreement which I
thought was a particularly useful thing to do. And generally there was also quite
broad ranging discussion about the needs of the developing Asia-Pacific
economies and also the needs of the larger industrial economics like the United
States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand etc. their relatively slow growth over
the last few years, and the attendant problems of quite high levels of
unemployment. We had a very useful discussion around those things as well. It
was agreed that the stronger motor economies, such as the Germany, Japan,
helps the Asia-Pacific in the same way as the Asia-Pacific growth can help the
motor economies.
So it was. I thought, a first class discussion all morning and afternoon. Leader
went away, I think, convinced that the step they have taken to meet was a step
well taken, and that they should do the same again next year. I think that the
impression everyone else had was that they all felt much easier with one another
towards the end of it, they fell they could talk to each other easily about most any
topic. Some of the countries represented don't have any forum to discuss
economic policy. This is particularly true of China and Japan, and China and
Korea, or indeed the US and China. Even though Japan and the U. S. meet in the
Gi7. Korea doesn't, nor does Indonesia or the ASFAN States. as well as Australia.
So it was a particul-rly good meeting, and I think everyone who attended it was
buoyed by it. and we all look forward to it occurring next year in 1994. 
It was proposed by President Kim Young San that we meet a second time in
19.94. This was generally agreed and President Soeharto said he was honoured to
issue an invitation for a leaders meeting concurrent with the APEC ministerial
meertings which will be held during 1994.
So I would be happy to talk questions from you.
1: Mr Ke~ ating you said one of thc things you wanted to achievc out of this was to
give more poiitical authority to thc APEC process. Do you believe that todays
mecting has actually advanccd the cause of APEC beyond what was achieved in
the ministerial meeting?
PM Yes I do. think that the leaders meeting had its own separate dynamic, as I
thought it would, and the leaders were prepared to push the agenda a bit further,
not only endorsing the things undertaken by ministers at the ministerial meeting,
but to advance a little further in some of those areas that I mentioned.
j. Mr Prime Minister when you say that the leaders welcomed thc EPG challenge to
cut tariffs in the Asia-Pacific. does this mean that you think that the target date of
1996 is still achievable in terms of starting to dismantle tariffs?
PM: I wouldn't have particularly endorsed that, no. But I think that the leaders thought
that the EPO report was a challenge to be met. that free and fuller trade in the
area was something that ought to be done and could be donc. Though we didn't
go through thc EPG report ticking this and crossing that. Except to pick up those,
that is endorsement of the ministerial work, and to go on to do those other things.
That is, work on common non-binding investment rules that might lead to a
formal investment agrement. and the meeting of economic ministers' to consider
the development of maciocvonomic policy instruments, in some countries and the
development of economic policy.
And also the question of helping small and medium business examine their links
with energy usc and the envir'onment. These things, I think, were all vcry useful
things. In other words, the leaders have had a meeting, it's endorsed the vision
statement which you have, it's gone on to say this has been so successful we ought
to have another one next year in the interim we will do these things as well as
pick up the work of the ministerial meeting.
J: Prime Minister was therm any discussion of Malaysia's absence and did anybody
volunteer to try to bring them on board?
IPM: There was no discussion. Only a question of which I think~ President Clinton
fielded at the midday press conferenic. 330.5 
J: Mr Keating, yesterday when Mr Clinton was talking about APEC, he, in a
likened it to setting up of bodies like NATO and the IMF. Do you see APEC in
( inaudible) grand kind of scale and can you talk about what you sec as the full
potential of APEC.
PM: I think that APEC is a tremendously important vehicle for regional economic
cooperation and trade facilitation. It is not portending a formal, nationally agreed,
parliamentary endorsed, or public cndorsed, set of proposals as say the Maastuicht
Treaty or the Treaty of Rome or a supra-national bureaucracy like the Brssels
bureaucracy who make decisions for other national governments. Not that. But
certainly a cooperative structure which can do many of the same things, but in a
cooperative way. The mere fact that these people are sitting down, the US with
China, and China with Japan, and Korea with China, and Korea with Japan and
Indonesia with everyone else and all the ASEANs, Australia as well. Just of itself
produces a familiarity and some trust. Because everyone agreed that the personal
relations are so important, and I think they are.
Now, while countries will still always have interests, and often they won't
compromise their interests, but they will have interests, but I think the personal
relations are terribly important. And that has been shown over and over again in
foreign relations, and it's just as true here. So, I do think this is a very historic
body and I don't think that the President's words about it are sort of, basically
superfluous hyperbole. I think it does truly reflect the historic nature of the
gathering.
J: Mr Keating. yesterday when Mr Clinton was talking about APEC, he, in a speech,
likened it to setting up of bodies like NATO and the IMF. Do you see APEC in
( inaudible) grand kind of scale and can you talk about what you see as the full
potential of APEC7
PM: I think that APEC is a tremendously important vehicle for regional economic
cooperation and trade facilitation. It is not portending a formal, nationally agreed,
parliamentary endored, or public endorsed, set of proposals as say the Maastrieht
Treaty or the Treaty of Rome or a supra-national bureaucracy like the Brussels
hureaucracy who make decisions for other national governments. Not that. But
certainly a cooperative structure which can do many of the same things, but in a
cooperative way. The mere fact that these people are sitting down, the US with
China, and China with Japan. and Korea with China, and Korea with Japan and
Indonesia with everyone else and all the ASEANs, Australia as well. Just of itself
produces a familiarity and some trust. Because everyone agreed that the personal
relations are so important, and I think they are.
330 
Now while countries will still always have interests and often they won't
compromise their interests but they will have interests but 1 think the personal
relations are terrbly important. Now that has been shown over and over again in
foreign relations, and it is just as true here. So, I do think this is a very historic
body and I don't think that the President's words about it arc basically a
superfluous hyperbole. I think it does truly reflect the historic nature of the
gathering.
I: Prime Minister, at lunchtime President Clinton seemed to indicate that, come June
next year, that he would have better news for Americans about the Japan-
Amenican trading relationship. Will you havc similar better news for Australians
in terms of access for our rice and better access for our beef and other
commodities?
PM: Well, I don't know if that is exactly the kind of news the President wishes to
convey except that I think that he is developing a very good relationship with
Prime Minister Hosokawa. The interest of both of them in this agcnda today and
their contributions on the way through mean that you reay have got a meeting of
minds on these things. Now, countries have interests but, again. they do realise
there is a lot of common interests there. It may be that there is a view that the G7
is not producing the goods. That was not said by them today but that perhaps is a
view that I have and maybe a view they have too.
J: PrimneMinister inaudible.. talked about finance ministers' meeting and also
consulting on macroeconomic developments. Do you envisage there will be a
greater coordination of economic policies between the APEC countries which atc
keen to do perhaps some... inaudible..?
PM: No, I don't think so. While macroeconomic discussions can be important and they
can influence policies J don't know that formal policy coordination, so to speak.
is really on the agenda for them. But in many countries of the APEC area they do
lack monetary and fiscal instruments and so therm is a lot to be said for finance
ministers talking about these subjects. Not just to convey their own experiences
or even the assist in setting up some of these macroeconomic instruments or
advise upon them just to discuss where the economies are going. To discuss
with national ministers their views of their economies and their potential is. I
think, very important because while a lot of people believe this stuff can be picked
up in this central bank bulletin or that central bank bulletin is never like hearing it
from the horses mouth. T7hat is, to actually have the person running these
economics participate in such a gathering. So, I think, that can be very useful.
J: Undcr the umbrella of this APEC meeting we have seen significant bilateral
meetings between the Chinese and the Americans and also the opening up of
relations again between New Zealand and the United States. Is this a proper role
for an organisation of tis kind and can I also bear your specific comments on the 3307 
kind o. that seenm to be moving between the New Zealanders and the
Americans?
PM:-Well. I think that one of the good spin-offs of APEC is you can have a series of
bilateral meetings. I met four or five leaders bilaterally as you know and I found
those meetings to be very usefual. No doubt so did othcr leaders. It does give you
an opportunity to discuss whatever subjects are of interest at the time even if they
are not purely trade subjects. So. it is a very good opportunity to have a meeting
and to be able to range over those things in the context of the broader common
objectives of greater growth and higher tradcs and better incomes and better
employment. You mentioned New Zealand. There is no doubt that Prime Minister Bolger's
engagement heme and his discussions with the President obviously helps that
relationship where formally New Zealand officials were not having discusion at
Secretary level in the United States. There arc still difficulties in the New.
Zealand relationship obviously, with their anti-nuclear policy and that would
remain a policy difficulty but in terms of the relationship obviously a meeting like
this improves it.
3 Prime Minister, would you give us a flavour of how the meetings were conducted.
Did everyone speak in turn Or was there give and take and I am particularly
interested in what the contribution of President Jiang was and was there any
interchange with the Taiwan minister?
PM: We were seated virtually in an arc. There were consecutive translations so leaders
spoke when they wished. They gave an indication to the President and he would
call them in turn and they had their say. Some started off scripted reading a little
text. As the meeting went on, all the participants were really speaking
extemporaneously. Some, of course, spoke extemporaneously right from the start.
As the meeting went on it had a mome free wheeling quality to it. I thought that
was very good. So, there were people coming in for maybe 30 seconds or a
minute then someone else would come back in and then some onc would speak
for three minutes and some one would then go on and reply to some of that for
two. It had a generally discursive quality to it. I thought there was trcmcndous
goodwill there. A great interest to comprehend quite technical things.
J: Like what?
PM: Talking about macroeconomic policy. The impacts upon -employment. The
whole question about the opcrations about monetary policy, whether it should
comprehend employment as well as price stability. The impacts of productivity
on employment. It is unlikely that such a discussion might have been held
years ago, for instance. 
J: Mr Keating, Australia played a very big role in getting APEC off the ground and
you of course, played a big role in getting the Lzadcrs' meeting going. What do
you think is Australias role in APEC from here on?
PM: Australia has enjoyed the role it has had. That is, in shaping with other countries
seeking to give APEC a form and substance from the germ of an idea and see it
change over time. I would like to particularly pay tribute to the work of the
Foreign Minister in this Gareth Evans, and more latterly. Peter Cook, as Minister
for Tradc, who have certainly taken this issue up as something which can play a
defning role in an Asia-Pacific economy. Our colleague ministers and leaders
appreciate the role that Australia has played. We try and play a cooperative role
with other countries. Moving the agenda along but moving it along where people
feel comfortable for it to move.
J Did Australia oppose initially the entrance of Chile into APEC. If so, why? Will
the entrance of Chile into APEC in 1994 mean ha the President of Chile will be
at Jakarta?
PM: The answer to the last part of the question would be yes. We said that we would
not stand out againt any conscsus on Chile. APEC has started basically as
North and South Asia and the NAFTA arma It is defined by its trade in many
respects and I think, with any orgmnisation like this, which has some definition it
is important to deepe it before it is broadened. We can certainly accommodate
Chile but we would want to be able to move to some fairly firm criteria over time
which defines APEC and it is not an organisation which virtually anyone can join.
I think with an organisation that has got value, being stingy with membership is a
good policy. Not to be difficult, but to give the thing the respect it deserves and to
let people in if their interests are harmonious with the interests of the body
concerned.
J: Prime Minister you have spoken a lot about * the need to improve harmony of
standards inaudible. As a result of this meeting, in your view, is the Trade and
Investment Committee actually empowered to conduct substantive negotiations
towards harmonising product and investment standards, and if so, have you got
any... inaudible.
PM: Ministers will come back with work on hanmonised standards, customs
procedures, competition policy and legal and regulatory frameworks. Those sorts
of issues between now and the next meeting of the ministerial meeting and the
leaders meeting to see whether and in which ways wc can advance those.
1: Did you speA-anymore to Mr Clinton about a possible visit to Australia? 3309 
PM: I said to him ofecourse, I invited him down and he said that he would like to covie
to Australia. Obviously an opporfune time would be whten he comes to Indonesia
in 1994 and we will try organise an itinerary now, though I don't know whether
we can at the time. Presidents ame pretty busy people and vrying to organize an
APEC leaders meeting plus some other country visits will be difficult to schedule
into anyone's schedule let alone President Clinton. He has indicated a willingnes
to come and said he would like to see Australia and of course, we would
absolutely be delighted to have him.
J Can you give us a readout of the discussion at the meeting of the micerence to a
ree trade and the region in Asia. In particular between two models of a
preferential region versus an MEFN type free trade. Could you also tell us what
Australia's position is on that issue? And finally if! I can. what is Australia's
position on the US-China debate on human rights?
PM: Let me deal with the first one. We seethis as basically apolicy of open
regionalism as we have always said. That is. if we can lower the impediments and
enhance the prospects for growth so that we can all participate particularly against
the backdrop of a successful outcome to the Uruguay Round, obviously trade
investment and incomes and with it employment, will be higher in the area than it
would otherwise be. We don't e it as being an exclusive area. We have made
that clear right from the stan. Fears that the body is going to be an exclusive one
or a trade bloc ame unfounded. T1here ame many things that can be done here. This
area has grown quite fast already without any agreement or any structures of the
APEC variety. Our fear is that we will run into problems and impediments so that
that growth won't be able to continue at the pace that it has and that is where
probably now there is a place and a role for an organisation like APEC to do that.
On the human rights question, I think the US position is pretty much the same as
Austraia's. That is that one of the defining things of preat democracies is respec
for human values and human decency expressed in the term human rights and
Australia has been completely clear about its attachment to those values and its
role in the Pacific, if you like championing and heralding those values. As with
the United States, they obviously see the China relationship in the broad,
comprehending this human rights question as in fact we do ourselves, by virtue of
the fact that we have resitabilised relations with China after Tienammen square in
1989. The same is true in respect of Indonesia.
1: Do you support the U. S. threat to impose trade sanctions against China..
inaudible..?
PM: Well, that is a Congressional threat and whether that materialises into the policy
of the administration, timc will tcll. The thing is, the United States has made
fairly clear its objections about human rights, but. I mean. we have ourselves. The
Tianazunen Square issue in Australia was a matter of great heart burning and all of
the ramifications of it were transmitted not just around the world, but to China in
particular.
-3: 3 1 
J: Was human rights discussed in the meeting with China?
PM: No, no.
J1: Is there any possibility of including Russia into APEC since part of Russia is in
Asia?
PM: Well, again. there has to be a naturalness about APEC. They have to be
economies which have a preponderance of their exports in the area and where they
are rcaily involved in the commerce of the region. So, theme is going to be no easy
policy for joining. When decisions arc made about membership here they are
going to be very deliberate ones.
1: Do you stil believe that NAFTA will become a sub-group of APEC and did you
raise this with President Clinton?
PM: No, but obviously the United States is now trading into Asia and U. S. exports to
Asia am growing at three times the pace of Asian exports into the United States.
This is also true for Canada and it would be also true for Mexico. So, whether
they art actually trading as a trade entity is immxaterial. They'll still trade into the
Asia-Paeilic. APEC is far more integrated than NAFTA is. That is, trade within
the APEC area is already running at about 66%. NAFTA has an integration of
about So, the bigger shooting match is obviously going to be Asia-Pacific
trade. And I have no doubt that the United States will adapt to that trade whether
it has the cloak of NAFTA on or off.
J: Mr Keating, the Leades Statement taks about APEC being a new voice for the
Asia-Pacific in world afars. How often will we hear that voice, and in what
circumstance? And do you see an APEC voice being exercised more than once a
year at an event like this?
PM: I think, it's now meeting annually at ministerial level. It will obviously meet for
two consecutive years at leaders level and may go on to meet regularly. I think it
probably will go on to meet regularly beyond that. And that's a, for the economic
development and history of a region like that, that's quite frequent. I mean, what
is historic about this body is that there is no forum for these very large countries
to talk to one another. And, particularly for China and Japan and China and
Korea or for Indonesia and the United States. It provides not just a body which
can facilitate enhanced trade and investmnt but one which can obviously, by
virtue of its existence and the personalities, lower suspicions, do something
material to ease tensions and provide better understanding between nations of
their respective diffcrences and interests. Now, I think, in that respect it's a very
clear benefit.
J1: Prime Minister, in the Australia-China bilateral was human rights discussed at all? ~ 3311 
TEL: 3. Dec. 93 11: 01 No. 015 P. 02
PM: No. I went mainly to APEC topics. I visited China this year and made clear there
our position on human rights to Premier Li Peng, where I particularly emphasised
Tibet and the continuing problems of that country and China's management and
stewardship of it. This bilateral was largely about APEC, about the structure and
some bilateral issues such as the things we are doing cooperatively with China on
wool and other things we are doing on the trade side.
J: Mr Clinton, after the meeting, spoke again of the idea of the APEC community as
opposed to a cooperation forum.-Was there any discussionl on the change of the
name today?
PM: No. I think the President's use of the term community reflected, I think, the
generally eased concerns about the notion of that implying the sort of Brusselsstyle
bureaucraey. And therm wasn't any demur from him using that term so, he
did talk about a Pacific community earlier this year and he spoke about a
community at the press conference today. The mere fact that APEC's trade is as
integrated as it is gives-jtan economic community status but it is a small Vc
commnunity not big dieaning a Treaty of Rome or a nationally endorsed
Maastricht Treaty orusupra-niational bureaucracy of the Brussels variety.
And I think that, that understood, there was no real concern amongst APEC
leaders about the term or the meaning of the term. In general, I think I would
have to say to you that APEC has developed quite fast, with a lot of definition, a
lot of form, a fair bit of trust and a lot of ambition. It's come a long way in a short
time, as it needs to do, to accommodate the growth problems of the Asia-Pacific
area. And I pay tribute to everybody who has been involved with it, those other
countries which have tried to find a new model to work in in the Asia-Pacific and
I think we made quite tremendously important steps over these couple of days in
giving APEC so much more authority at leaders level than it could have otherwise
had.
J: Now that you've had the Leaders' meeting do you feel more confident about the
future of APEC and being able to build regional cooperation or is the magnitude
of the task, the differences and the problems, become more apparent?
PM: Oh no, I think I feel far more confident about it, I think there's a tremendous
atmosphere of cooperation about it. And the fact that we could conceive such a
structure and see it take the form it has with the quite disparate countries involved,
with all their very clear interests and differences, is quite a special thing to have
happened.
Ends. 
APEC Leaders Economic Vision Statement
We have held an unprecedented meeting of the economic
leaders of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum. In this
post Cold War era, we have an opportunity to build a new economic
foundation for the Asia Pacific that harnesses the energy of our
diverse economies, strengthens cooperation and promotes
prosperity. Our meting reflects the emergence of a new voice for the
Asia Pacific in world affairs. As we prepare to enter the
twenty-first century, we believe our dynamic region, representing
forty percent of the world's population and fifty percent of its
CNP, will play an important role in the global economy, leading
the way on economic growth and trade expansion.
The foundation of our economic growth has been the open
multilateral trading system. Therefore, we pledge our utmost
efforts to bring the Uruguay Round to a successful conclusion by
Decembcr 15. We are determined the Asia Pacific region will lead
the way f. n taking concrete steps to produce the strongest
possible outcome in Geneva. Increased participation by APEC
economies in a strengthened GA77 system also will facilitate
greater regional cooperation.
Our success has been the result of the ability of our
societies to adapt to changing circumstances. Our economies are
moving toward interdependence and there is a growing sense of
community among us. We are united in our commitment to create a
stable and prosperous future for our people.
Recognizing our economic interdependence as well as our
economic diversity, we envision a community of Asia Pacific
economies in which:
o The spirit of openness and partnership deepens, enabling us
to find cooperative solutions to the challenges of our
rapidly changing regional and global economy;
o Wc are a vast Asia Pacific market of two billion people
where dynamic economic growth continues, contributing to an
expanding world economy and supporting an open international
trading system;
o We continue to reduce trade and investment barriers so that
our trade expands within the region and with the world and
goods, services, capital and investment flow freely among
our economies;
o Our pcople share the benefits of economic growth through
higher incomes, high skilled and high paying jobs and
increased mobility;
,. 43-20)-1Q -93 11i: 19BAEI S &amp; S OFF ICE343" 30 P. 02/ W 
BLFKE IS PRESS OFFICE 2
0 Improved education and training produce rising literacy
rates, provide the skills for maintaining economic growth
and encourage the sharing of ideas that contribute to the
arts and science;
o Advances in telecommunications and transportation shrink
time and distance barriers in our region and link our
economies so that goods and people move quickly and
efficiently;
o Our environment is improved as we protect the quality of our
air, water and green spaces and manage our energy sources
and renewable resources to ensure sustainable growth and
provide a more secure future for our people.
we recognize this vision will become a reality only if we
work together actively to secure it. We are convinced we can
succeed. We intend to use our shared vision as a guide for
developing the future of our region.
We reaffirm our support for the continued devto, ent of
APRC as a forum dedicated to producing tangible economic benefits
to the region. We urge APEC to expand its economic dialogue and
advance its specific work projects. The entrepreneurial spirit
and markt-oriented policies that have driven our economic
dynamism will continue to be fostered within APEC.
We welcome the challenge presented to us in the report of
the APEC Eminent Persons Group to achieve free trade in the Asia
Pacific, advance global trade liberalization and launch concrete
programs to move us toward those long-term goals. We ask APEC to
undertake work aimed at deepening and broadening the outcome of
the Uruguay Round, strengthening trade and investment
liberalization in the region, and facilitating regional
cooperation, including in such areas as standards.
We agree to convene a meeting of APEC Finance Ministers to
consult on broad economic issues including macroeconomic
developments and capital flows. We believe such discussions will
help us address some of the challenges facing the region,
including ensuring non-inflationary regional growth, financing
investment and infrastructure development, and promoting capital
market development.
We ask business leaders to establish a Pacific Business
Forum to identify issues APEC should address to facilitate
regional trade and investment and encourage the further
development of business networks throughout the region. We also
ask APEC to strengthen its policy dialogue on small and medium
size business enterprises.
1993 11: 22P BM 
191913:~ BILSA P~ RKEESS OFFICE333 . G
3
We agree to make an Investment in our future generations by
establishing an APEC Education Program to develop regional
cooperation in higher education, study key regional economic
issues, improve worker skills, facilitate cultural and
intellectual exchanges, enhance labor mobility and foster
understanding of the diversity of our region. We agree to
cstablish an APEC Business Volunteer Program to promote
cooperation among us in the areas of human resource development
and the exchange of management skills and techniques.
As members of APEC, we are committed to deepening ouzr spirit
of community based on our shared vision of achieving stability,
security and prosperity for our peoples.
APEC Economic Leaders
Seattle, Washington
November 20, 1993 TGTAL P. 004
i-iOU-20-1993 11: 2234330 P. 004 
November 20, 1993302mPg1
-Saturday, November 20, 1993
Remarks by President Clinton At Apec Meeting Blake Island Puget Sound
Washington Saturday
REMARKS BY PRESIDENT CLINTON AT APEC MEETING
BLAKE ISLAND, PUGET SOUND, WASHINGTON
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1993
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, as we
ipproach the end of a week of APEC activities, we've just completed
-hree hours of meetings among 14 APEC economic leaders. It's been a
) leasure for me and an honor for the United States to host this week's
events and to convene this historic meeting on this beautiful island.
The Asian-Pacific region will play an increasingly vital role for
nation and the world. The region is home to 40 percent of the
. ld's people, includes the world's fastest growing economies. And
: he leaders standing here represent half the world' s economic output.
This week's events have been a success for all the region's
? eople. we've laid a foundation for regional efforts to create jobs,
raise incomes, expand business opportunities, and foster regional
aarmony. This week we took several tangible steps towards these
goals. On Monday and Tuesday, over 1,500 business people engaged in
: rade came together to focus on the region's potential to benefit
: heir bottom lines. Later in the week, our ministers agreed to a
? ackage of market opening measures designed to help bring the Uruguay
-round of the GATT to a successful conclusion by December 15th. And
: he ministerial meeting agreed to develop an action plan in the near
future to reduce barriers to business throughout our region, such as
differing product standards.
The capstone of this week's activities has been this first-ever
-aders meeting. Our discussions this morning, which will continue in
the afternoon, give us a chance to become better acquainted, and to
compare our visions for our own nations and for our diverse and
dynamic region. By meeting and talking, we've been able to forge a
stronger regional identity and a stronger purpose. That purpose is
captured in the vision statement we just released.
The statement sets forth our shared view of a regional economy
characterized by openness, cooperation, dynamic growth, expanded
trade, improved transportation and communications and high-skilled,
high-paying jobs. We've welcomed the challenge of the eminent persons
group to achieve free trade in the Asian-Pacific region, advance
global trade liberalization, and launch concrete specific programs to
move us toward these long-term goals.
In our discussions last evening and today, I've been struck by
how many priorities we share; strong sustainable economic growth, more
open markets, better jobs, working conditions and living standards for
our own people, better education for our children and our adults, and
protection of the region's unique environment. 3: 02pm Page 1 
November 20, 1993302mPg2
of course, we will not always agree on how to achieve those
joals. But at least now, for the first time, our region has a means
: o hold serious policy discussions on such questions as how to remove
: rade barriers, or how to sustain robust growth.
If you asked me to summarize in a sentence what we've agreed, it
_ s this; we've agreed that the Asian-Pacific region should be a united
) ne, not divided. We've agreed that our economic policies should be
) pen, not closed. We've agreed that we should begin to express that
: onviction by doing everything we possibly can to get a good GATT
igreement by December the
With today's meeting, we're helping the Asian-Pacific to become a
jenuine community, not a formal legal structure, but rather a
: ommunity of shared interests, shared goals and shared commitment to
i-tually beneficial cooperation. The development of that community is
tainly in the interests of the American people and all the people
) t this region. We should be pleased with the progress we've made.
\ nd let me say again how honored I am, on behalf of the United States,
: o have had the opportunity to host all these leaders. Thank you,
. rery much. Yes? Q Mr. President, there was no sign of any flexibility by
T-hina in the areas dispute that you have or with Japan on trade
: mbalances. Can you say, were any minds or attitudes changed during
: he course of this meeting?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well, you're referring to meetings that I had
iesterday and discussions we had today. I'm the host of a meeting
. here we discussed economic issues. And I frankly believe by I'll
nake you a prediction on the economic issues by next June or July
-certainly by a year from now, I believe that the responsibilities
the United States and Japan to do more to promote global economic
_) wth will have been, in large measure, advanced. And I think you
vill see that we've done some of the things that we should, both of
Is. So, today we focused on what we could do together economically.
% nd I think that's what I ought to respond to today.
Yes, ma'am.
Q Mr. President, the fact that this time you invited both
representatives from Taiwan and China to join you to discuss about the
vision of Asian-Pacific area, I wonder, how do you find your
respective vision for this area? And, in your opinion, how does this
feeting affect the relationship between Taiwan and China?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well, that's something for them to determine.
I invited, as the host, all the members of this organization which
was the appropriate thing to do. Actually, I'm struck by how much
common investment and common activity there is now, and by the common
3: 02pm Page 2 
November 20, 19933: 2mPg3
rategies of high savings and investment, hard work, and
. trepreneurialism that are sweeping that part of the world. It is
. mensely impressive, I think, to anyone who has observed it.
Yes, go ahead either one. Flip a coin.
Q I'll go after you.
Q Mr. President, what do you think about Malaysia's absence
of Dr. Mahathir's absence from this meeting? And what do you think
) out EAEC the East Asia Economic Conference?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well, I'm not against first of all, I'm in
: vor of anything which increases regional economic cooperation and
Ivances the economic interests of people, as long as it doesn't close
ff economic opportunities for other. And I wish Mr. Mahathir were
and I look forward to meeting him someday.
Yes? Q Mr. President, how serious is the situation in North Korea
3 a threat to this whole region, and is that something that you
Lscussed today at the meeting?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: We didn't discuss it today, but it was
. scussed yesterday. And I look forward to meeting with President Kim
i Washington. He's going back to Washington, and we'll be meeting
iere and talking about it. It is a source of concern to us, but one
iat we believe we can find solutions to and we're going to be
iking some initiatives in that area in the not to distant future.
Yes, ma'am?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Mr. President, is New Zealand now
iguratively out of the cold, if not literally? Have you now restored
political relationship with New Zealand?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Actually, we're out in the cold today.
1jaughter.) The Prime Minister and I had a good talk about that, and
a agreed that we would at least take a good look at our relationship
rid to see what else might be done. We have an awful lot in common
rid a lot of natural instincts toward friendship and cooperation. And
think both of us are uncomfortable with what has become of our
alationship over the last several years. So, we'll take another look
t it and we may have something to say about it, but not today and not
omorrow. Yes, ma'am, in the back there.
Q Mr. President, when you're talking about NAFTA, you
entioned several times Taiwan, Japan, and China are the three major
bstacles when you're dealing with U. S. trade deficit. A lot of
eople think that was not very helpful when you're trying to cooperate
ith Asian countries. I was wondering, after this meeting
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Wait, wait, wait, wait. You can ask the
3: 02pm Page 3 
November 20, 199330pmPg4
ruestion, but let me restate what I said. What I said to the American
Deople was simply the fact that the people who were against NAFTA
3cted as if Mexico essentially was going to displace the entire
. ndustrial production of the United States, or significant portions of
And I pointed out the fact that we have a trade surplus with
lexico and that our largest operating trade deficits are with Japan.
' hina, and Taiwan. That's simply a fact. That's not an act of
iostility, it's just a stated fact. So, go ahead, ask the question.
Q Yes, the question is, after this meeting, will you think
: hat in the future, the United States is willing to use cooperation
. nstead of Articles 301 type of trade retaliations threat to deal with
: his problem? PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well, I think, first of all, we've used
\ rticle 301 rather sparingly. And secondly, we do seek cooperation.
' hat's the whole purpose of this meeting. That's one of the reasons
it I wanted all the leaders to come here, because I think that we
iave so much in common in terms of our shared views about what the
2conomy of the 21st century ought to look like and what our roles
Dught to be that I think we can do a lot through cooperate. And we're
working very hard to do that. In the end, if we're going to develop
: he right kind of free market system, it is going to have to be a
:: ooperative one, but it's going to have to be one that is plainly in
: he interests of all the people involved in the system. That is,
averyone has to be going forward together.
MS. Last question.
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Yes?
Q Mr. President, how hard and fast is the December
ieadline for successful completion of the GATT Round? It's been slid
slipped a couple of times previously. Would you be prepared to
2xtend it, if you don't have agreement by then?
PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well, it's not entirely up to me, is it?
nd then and, of course, we have certain legislative authority in
merica, as you know, that controls that. All I can tell you is that
I think we want to take this moment of opportunity that, frankly,
: he House of Representatives and I hope today that the Senate will
give impetus to through NAFTA and that we are trying to give energy
: o through our meeting here and through our clear statement again that
we want the Asian-Pacific region to be united not divided
economically, open not closed, and committed to GATT. We want to
seize this moment to try to get it done now. And I've always found
that when you're working on an objective, you shouldn't discuss what
you'll do if you don't get there until after you don't get there. We
still think we can be there, and we're going to try.
Thank you very much. END 3: 02pm Page 4 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH DAVID MARGAN, 7.30 REPORT
SEATTLE, USA, 21 NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
DM: There's been an awful lot of discussion about what APEC should be.
And certainly perhaps coming into this conference there were hopes
within the Australian contingent, Singapore, South Korea and the
United States, that perhaps the institutional basis of APEC may move
forward fairly quickly. There was some discussion about whether it
should really be a community, and in fact, you were suggesting the
idea that the name be changed. None of that though really happened.
PM: Now, some members of the APEC constituency thought the word the
big community meant a Brussells style bureaucracy with supra
national decision making in one place, that is, a bureaucracy able to
make decisions for each of them. Now, none of us has ever envisaged
that this is a much more lose arrangement without any formal treaties.
So, it is a small community, but it is definitely a community. But the
success of it can only be measured by the fact that all of the leaders of
the APEC community met, including China, which is half the world's
production, representing half the world's production and 40 per cent of
the worlds population, and decided to meet again. So, decided to
meet next year in Jakarta and adopt a whole range of things in the
meantime which will then come up for endorsement at the Jakarta
meeting. So, APEC Is off and running.
DM: So, what was your reaction to certain elements of the Australian
media, particularly in relation to your attempt to have the name
changed, when they described that attempt as a failure, that you had
been rebuffed?
PM: It is foolishness bordering on what seems to me a sort of negativism
and a complete lack of pride in anything Australia does. Some of the
nit picking by Australian journalists abroad, I mean, what other country
our size would put together a thing this large? When I first started
talking about the APEC leaders' meeting, the same people were
saying, oh well, it is beyond anyone's imagination, this won't happen,
Mta -. Ptlo 
Australia can't put a thing like this together. When it actually comes
together then they say, well you want to get the name changed, so
thats a failure too. Here's the rest of the Asia-Pacific basking in this
sense of engagement, including and most particularly a US President
who had lent all of his prestige to it, and large countries which have got
very particular differences like China and Japan, and Japan and the
United States all there trying to draw the best from it. So, it really puts,
I think, some of the negativism by Australian based journalists abroad
in its proper perspective. That is, when are they ever going to say,
well this was a great thing Australia put together and it has actually
come off, it has actually come off. That Australian diplomacy has
again produced another very great change.
DM. It is said by a number of people looking at this conference before it
started that its success will be measured by how many concrete things
It comes out with. I am particularly talking about trade liberalisation.
There was some criticism of the Eminent Persons Group for having a
timetable for discussion that didn't start until 1996, but it seems the
conference has even thrown that aside and delayed the idea of trade
liberalisation even further, and some would suggest it would be the
year 2000 before they have even liberalised trade in snow ploughs.
PM: Well four years ago APEC didn't exist at all. Four years later it has
gone from a mini OECD information policy secretariat in 1989, to an
executive Heads of Government body today in four years. But what's
not adopted this year Is Invariably getting adopted the following year,
you know what I mean, it takes people a while to warm up to see that
there is no hidden punch, there Is no catch. You have got a very
disparate group of economies. And what happens with some of the
simple simons in our media, they are saying, hang on, look you have
got this, now you said you were going to do this, but you never got
there. I say, but hang on, look, four years ago this didn't exist, I mean
this is a grouping of very disparate forces, people have been arraigned
against each other for most of the century. Either we keep pushing
and pull same of the others behind us, or we stop pushing and wait till
they get some natural momentum. Now, if we do that it will be much
slower. So, if you are sitting in Australia's seat or the US's seat, but
particularly Australia's seat, as we have been the prime movers in this,
you keep pushing, and then gather in the things which we have done,
including now turning this into an executive body, and rapidly, and then
going on as we have this weekend, on to design up a set of investment
rules for an investment agreement between now and next year. I
mean, who could have thought four years ago we would have had an
Investment agreement in the Asia-Pacific, it would have been
unthinkable.
DM: In terms though of our sort of Immediate concr-ete results, would
perhaps the unified position that this group has taken on the GATT
Round be the most significant for the moment? 
PM: Has the Position they have taken?
DM: In that the APEC leaders have decided to take a unified approach to
the GATT Round and have sent therefore a message?
PM: Yes.
DM: To those talks.
PM: We were saying to President Clinton yesterday, you have got to go for
the triple whammy, that's NAFTA, APEC and GATT. He said, well I am
going for it, I am telling you, I am going to go for it. And the statement
we made yesterday about the GATT, I mean, that is coming from half
the worlds production, that's representing half the worlds production
saying to the French and the Europeans, get this finished, get this
done.
DM-. On another issue, perhaps the gloss of this event, this pride at the
moment was taken away momentarily, perhaps, by the comments of
-Conrad Black on an ABC television program.
PM: No that is only just an Australian sleeve issue, I mean who cares about
those things, they are just ephemeral day to day things. This is the
biggest of the big pictures, and the Black business is just, not even a
splash of paint on the picture.
DM: But for some it Is a very Important matter of public policy. Some have
thought it was a sleazy inside deal to give a foreigner some rewards,
financial rewards.
PM: No, Australian Governments have got to make decisions about equity
issues in print and broadcasting and we will make them on the highest
motives, and we have. But, you have only got to say Fairfax and the
Fairfax joumno's go Into a tizz, and they play the first stanza and
generally the ABC does the second stanza for them.
DM: But so the issue of balance.
PM: Break the mould.
DM: Doesn't it seem a bit strange that we should discover this notion of the
Prime Ministers view of balance in an investment matter that involves
millions of dollars from a book published by Conrad Black himself. I
mean, why wasn't this on the public record before. We have had these
conversations, we have told him..
PM: But all these things were discussed at the time. 
DM: So, deciding, I mean, why did he in the end get 25 per cent?
PM: I mean, this is just simply dust in the cracks of history. Just forget
about it. I mean you are on the APEC picture, that's the picture to stay
on, this stuff just slides into nowhere.
DM: But it is an Important matter of public policy, our control of our media,
how the deals are done, who gets what.
PM: Compared to what has been done here, this last weekend it is hardly
worth a mention.
DM: So, you think the Australian public should have no concern about how
its broadcasting policy is run?
PM: Yes, but all in the right frame work, not juxtaposed with haughty
subjects tike this.
DM: I am still interested though, in the Prime Ministers notion of balance.
Should you be the one who decides that, though?
PM: Well Prime Ministers have got to decide, I mean, I noticed a bit of
comment about this saying, well isn't it unusual that the Prime Minister
has had to make a decision about the acceptability or otherwise of a
particular set of proprietors. That's one of the things, I am afraid,
Prime Ministers have to do. Because we are the ones who have got to
take the decisions about who gets what in terms of equity. So, it may
be an uncomfortable lot and a burden, but that is part of the job.
DMV: Do you think the next media baron should come to you about
questions of balance and objectivity, for your decision?
PM: If they are foreigners, and if they want to buy a large ch'unk of
Australia, yes.
Ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P J
KEATING, M. P.,
BOEING . FACTORY, SEATTLE, U. S. A.
SUNDAY 21 NOVEMBER, 1993 . m
4o. h;
E OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, why did you decide to come to the Boeing factory?
PM: Well, we do a lot with them commercially. ASTA, which is the Ausmtlian
Government's aerospace organisation, has just won the international supplier
award for Boeing. We supply the rudder assemblies, for rudders for 737s and
other elements for other aircraft So, in a very internaionally competitive
environment like this, to end up as supplier of the year is one hell of a feather in
Australia's cap. So, it was my pleasant duty to be associated with that award and
to talk to Boeing about the future of ASTA in the event that we privatise it
J: Is there much chance that we'd get more work for Australia from the Boeing
factory?
PM: Well, the good thing is we're getting the work now, not as part of the old offsets
program that is, if we buy a Boeing aircraft it is mandatory that we make some
of the bits we get it now, purely commercially. We're winning commercial
contracts to supply major components to Boeing against the rest of the world. So,
it's a really good basis for doing things.
J: Prime Minister, Boeing has an interest in tendering for the refurbishment of the
P3 Orions and also for the supply of the AWACs aircraft. Given that the defence
budget took a big cut in August would you say that either of those two programs
are threatenend and were you able to tell Boeing anything about that today?
PM: We discussed both of those. There's another development of the AWACs
program which Australia is going to wait for, we're not going to be picking at a 
ftaditr, conventional technology. In other words, a 707 with a dish on the top.
We're not buying any of those. I think we'll wait for the later development. But,
on the P3, well, this is our maritim surveillance capability and Boeing is going to
be part of a group tendering for the refurbishment program, but that program will
go ahead.
J: Can you guarantee the AWACs will go ahead, based on the 767 airframe?
PM: No. And I don% think it ever will go on a 767 airframe. We'll go for... thars only
for a very conventional technology which we are not interested in. We want to go
to the next generation AWACs technology which doesn't require a very big
aeroplane to carry it around.
J: Did you discuss a VIP plane for yourself?
PM: No. Like all good salesmen they said, " We've got everything on offer, including
those," and I said, " Thank you, no, no, we're happy with one of your earlier
models."
J: In ters of Boeing's chances for the P3 Orion you say they're just one of the
firms tendering offers there? And in terms of AWACs there doesn't seem to be
any commitment for either of those programs on Australias part
PM: Are you a Boeing rep' are you?
1: No, no I'm from the local media in Seattle.
PM: Well, I suppose that's one and the same around here, right?
J: inaudible.. Australia's going to spend some money here.
PM: Well, we're always spending money here. No, I think the P3 program will go
ahead and Boeing will probably become part of the consortium for the
redevelopment of our P3 capability. But on the AWACs, we're going for the next
generation of technology which lets us out of these very big airframes.
J: Do you say the 767, then, is not suitable, in terms
PM: We won't need it. It will just go in a much smaller, fuel efficient aircraft.
J: Prime Minister, Dr Mahathir says he is not sorry that he didn't come to Seattle.
He says if you snub your nose at people they take more notice of you. Is he a lost
cause for APEC? 
PM: Look, I don't know and I don't care. I'm sick of asking questions about Dr
Mahathir. Everyone bad a chance to come here if he didn't come, that's his
business. The thing about it was, it was just a very historic meeting. Just
remember this: we war sitting there with the leaders of half the world's
production. China's sitting there even though it has great diplomatic problems
wih the Unted Staes whmthe U. S. has putan embrgoon ms alearmt
of China's activity; where President Soeharto, who reprzmt the non-alignd
movement in Indonesia, was sitting there. I mean, it wus a most historic gathering
and everyone who was there felt the sense of history of it But, I think the other
great thing about it was, it was a meeting of leaders without officials. The leaders
there were making their interventions and moaking their suggestions without notes
from officials and without winiks and nods. And, it had a tremendous freshness
and vitality about it. And, to put together an organisation like this. for the Asia.
Pacific area, will enhance economic developments in the* Asha-Pacific very
rapidly, I believe, compared to that which would otherwise happen. And, it will
also just, naturally, produce a good strategic envirnment, a better strategic
environment because these leaders know each other and are talking to one
another.
J: Is theme still time for Dr Mahathir to get on board?
PM: Look, I couldn't.-please don't ask me any more questions about Dr Mahatbir. I
couldn't care less, frankly, whether he comes or not.
J: Will you still see him next year, Prime Minister?
PM: Yes. I'll see him in his own right. Malaysia is a country which Australia has
interests with and which is a neighbour and I'll see him on those terms. But,
APEC is bigger than all of us; Australia. the and Malaysia and Dr Mahathir
and any other recalcitrants. I mean, APEC is a very big development in world
termis and, I think, ushers in a period of important cooperation very important
cooperation in what is already the most integrated trading area of the world.
What you saw yesterday was a very historic meeting and I think the sense of
history was not lost on any one of us there.
J: Do you want the same formuat for the next one?
PM: I think the format's fine and I think the fact that the leaders agreed to have another
one was very important and we'll have the samne sort of arrangement wHere the
leaders will attend without officials and we'll have a genuine discussion. It was,
one of the high points for me was, we were sitting there in this room just fifteen
people with these huge economies, discussing these contemporary problems. The
problems in developed economies of high productivity and higher output but with
fewer people involved and, therefore, higher unemployment. What we do about
that, how we get these developing economies able to cope with their savings 
requirements and' nFrasruure needs... and to have leaders actually sitting there
focussing on these particular issues and thinking inventively about poroblems is a
pretry novel experience.
J: Mr Kmazng, should the outlook for the economy change in any way because of
the APEC conference?
PM: No. I don't think the short term outlook changes, we're in a growth phase now. I
don't think the short term outlook changes but the long term outlook certainly
changes. I think that, you know, we were just talking to Boeing about simple
things like standardisation of receiving capacities in airports, some
comprehension about the development of generations of aircraft and how they
will be accepted. And whether wide-bodied aircraft carrying many people comning
to few national airports and using them as feeder airports will be the way things
develop, or whether we should go to one step down in smaller generation widebodied
aircraft which go to other ancillary ports. I mean, all, these things are very
key questions in the development of transportation. And the APEC group can
think about these things because the greatest growth in air travel is in the Asia.
Pacific. The greatest growth in &amp; icraft sales is in the Asia-Pacific. The growth in
air travel is in the Asia-Pacific. So, what we do with our airports will decide how
the aircraft are buit to take these things. So, APEC's going to have avery big
spin-off for Boeing, a very big spin-off for the aviation industry in general and the
tourism industry.
Ends. 



EMBARGOED: Against Delivery, 8pm
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, HP
NATIONAL TR~ ADE AND INVESTMENT OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
MBLDOURNE, 24 NOVE10ER, 1993
Some of you here will have heard these opening remarks
before, many of you will know the truth of Lhem.
But I would like everyone to know and chat is enough
to warrant repeating them once more.
The imaege of Australia as an extended sheep run and
quarry is false.
The idea that Australians5 enjoy the comforts of
sophisticated contemporary life principally through the
proceeds of pastoralism and mining is false.
The idea that we cannot compete with the world in the
business of making things and selling them at the
sophisticated end of the international market is false.
We hear an echo of these ideas from time to time, but
they are curiosities not realities.
They linger because they were sufficiently true for lonig
enough to leave a residue.
Only a decade ago the suggestion that we Might-Lrade
competitively in manufactured goods and services, as well
as in minerals, energy and primary products that we
might be able to create and SuSLain a more diverse,
creative dnd sophisLicated economy was scarcely
entertained. This National Trade and Investment Outlook Conference is
one indication among many of how much that way of
thinking has changed.
And how much the reality has changed. 
Now we know that the only way we can maintain and improve
our standard of living, create employment and reduce
unemployment, and share in the wealth of a'rapidly
changing world, is by means of a diverse, flexible,
creative, operi and sophisticated economy.
The Australian Government knows this, most Australian
companies know this, most Australian workers know it.
indeed there are few countries perhaps none where the
process-of economic education has been so rapid and so
general as it has been in Australia in the past decade.
Not that this evening we shouldn't repeat some of the
injunctions once more; exports mean employment and
prosperity. Exports mean growth.
Exports mean a share of the excitement, a share of the
good jobs and the good life in the years ahead.
Exports are what it is all about.
We know how far the frontiers of trade have widened. We
are very much aware that we live in the fastest growing
region in the worl. d the Asia-Pacific region which now
accounts for about 80 per cent of our exports.
We know how rich is the potential.
How demanding the challenges.
We also know how deep our resources run, and that what we
need principally is the resolve and ingenuity and that,
I presume, is the business of this conference.
Those of you who have heard me say these things before
and, it's true, I have been saying them for a decade
will quite possibly have also heard some of these figures
I am about to quote.
I confess to this as well in the-past twelve ionths or
so, as the pattern has emerged, I have not been backward
in describing it.
And I see no reason to make tonight an exception.
Because I wani. to demonstrate that more than our thinking
has changed the reality has changed too.
Australian exporis as a percentage of GDP have grown from
13 percent a decade ago to 20 percent today.
Today exporLs of manufactures now exceed exports of rural
products aiid minerals and fuiels.
As I said, what. remains of the old image of Australia as
a farm or a mine may now be jettisoned for good. 
A decade ago, in 1982, exports accounted for 14 per cent
of sales by Aust. ralia's manufacturing sector.
Today the figure is 24 per cent.
in other words, almost one quarter of sales earnings by
Australian ianufacLurers came from overseas.
Manufactured exports increased by an average of 12.5
percent a year between 1982 and 1992 more than four
times faster than growth in agricultural exports and
slightly faster than growth in mining exports.
in the fastest growing component of world trade
services our exports have grown threefold since 1983
and now account for almost a quarter of our total
exports. This conference, then, takes place within a context of
dramatic change in the structure-and direction of the
Australian economy and a parallel change in Australian
consciousness. A change in the outlook of Australian business and
industry, Australian workers and Australian governments.
All of them now take it as given that we can and mus
export and I don't know anyone who has credibly pointed
to the limits of our potential to do so.
Of course, the outstanding fact in any consideration of
Australia's trade and investment potential is our
location in the Asia-Pacific.
We live in the mosL dynamic region in the world and that
gives us* the greatest opporLuflity we have ever had.
There is no doubt we have the resources to succeed, and
not only in the ' traditional areas of minerals and energy
and agriculture.
There is no question about our capacity for technological
invention and innovation.
This country develops and produces world class products
at the forefront of medicine, science and technology in
the field of microsurgery, IVF, the cardiac pacemaker,
plant genetic*.
Australian-made h ' igh-speed ferries ply their way through
European waters; Australiani-made engines and automotive
components are found in European cars; Australian
software manages some of the most advanced airports in
the world and the Swiss Stock Exchange.
We have a highly educated and skilled workforce. The
Goverrnent has made education and training an absolute
policy priority. N 
We have raised the number of young Australians
completing secondary school from 3 in 10 to 8 in
A higher proportion of Australians leaving school
now enter university than in Germany, Japan or the
United Kingdom.
In AuStralia today over 40 different languages are
taught in our schools the Federal Goverrnment
spends about $ 22 million a year on Asian language
education and studies.
We are making training more responsive to industry,
increasing capacity in our training institutions, and
promoting the relevance and quality of that training.
We have the human and material resources. We have the
awareness and motivation.
The task is to clear the way for business to exert its
genius and muscle.
I think it can be safely said that in the past 10 years
no Government has done more to both raise awareness of
the economic imperatives arid to make the practical
changes necessary to meet them.
We have opened up the economy, floated the exchange rate,
reformed the waterfront, rail and road transportation,
aviation and telecommunications.
We have established an orderly and manifestly effective
program for reducing tariff protection, and improving the
capacity of the economy to respond to the challenges of
the international marketplace.
We have introduced industrial relations reforms which
will increase labour market flexibility and productivity
growth by widening the spread of enterprise bargaining.
The fruits of these reforms should now combine with other
favourable conditions to-attract investment and growth.
Interest rates are now at historically low levels.
Inflation is low and under control.
We are seeing solid productivity-growth.
In addition, the recent business tax initiatives have
ensured that the competitiveness of our system is on a
par with comparable OECD countries; and the reduction in
Australia's corporate tax rate to 33 per cent makes it
competitive with most of our tLading partners. 
Partly through Government encouragement, growth in
research and development has been the second highest in
the OECD, and Australia now employs more research and
development Personnel than most counLrie5 in our region.
we have introduced a development allowance, a general
investrnenL allowance, a substantial acceleration of
depreciation provisions and concessionally taxed pooled
development funds.
The Australian economy is now around 27 per cent more
internationally competitive than 10 years ago.
it is a more diverse, more flexible and much stronger
economyr. Despite subdued world trading conditions, Australian
export earnings have reached record levels.
An export culture which we have developed in the last few
years is now growing new small to medium sized businesses
whose entire reason for being is export.
It is high value-added products they export, and more
oftLen than not it is to the ASia-Pacific they go. Indeed
these companies have been instrumental in achieving
average annual growth of 15 per cent in our exports of
sophist icated mariufacLures.
Australia's advantages have been recognised by a growing
number of multinational companies who have selected
Australia as a base for activities in the Asia-Pacific
region. Lexmark, Cathay Pacific and Tandem Computers incorporated
to name a few.
We encourage the establishment of regional headquarters
in Australia.
My Government is willing to be responsive in addressing
issues impacting on companies' location decisions.
The Australian government takes the view that that its
principal role is to create an environment in which
business can be flourish in which established
businesses can grew and new ones be born.
But. we remain a governxnent -which also believes in working
W11 industry: to open doors and build new relduionships.
We are assisting exporLers. In the telecommunications
area, for example, the Government has established a joint
body to ensure closer collaboration between the industry
and Government in their export efforts. 
Earlier this year, the Government launched a processed
food export drive, one of the largest and mostcomprehensive
single campaigns of its kind aimed at
tapping the quality of Australia's food industries.
Australia is an extremely efficient agricultural
producer, but there is enormous scope to develop the
industry further and exploit the rapidly expanding market
for high quality clean food.
My Government has also recognised that enormous
opportunities can be created by tapping into the
potential lying in the skills and abilities of those many
Australians who have come from oLher countries and retain
personal and cultural ties with their homelands.
The continued growth and stability of the APEC region arid
its continuing integration is crucial. to Australia's
expansion and prosperity.
This is particularly true given the disappointing failure
of the US and the EC in their most recent meetings to
produce a breakthrough on the market access issues
necessary to move the Uruguay Round to conclusion in the
middle of next month.
Over the nexL two years increased exporcs to APEC mernberb
will create more than 70,000 new jobs in AuStralia. good
skilled jobs with good wages and a good future.
Over the next two years increased exports to APEC members
will account for around a third of our total increase in
AusLvalian production.
At the end of those two years Australian exports Lo APEC
will account for around 15 per cent of our total output
of all we do, all we make, all we sell.
Sixty six billion dollars worth of exports to Lhe most
dynamic and the most rapidly growing region of the world.
It is already the case that APEC has a higher degree of
trade integration than the EC.
just on two thirds of our exports by APEC economies are
to other APEC economies.
I have just returned from Seattle where leaders from the
Asia-Pacific region met to discu. ss ways of working more
closely to assist the free flow of goods and services.
I went to Seattle not knowing, as I to~ d an audience in
California, what exactly would happen when fourteen Asia-
Pacific leaders, with no staff and no formal agenda, got
together on Bl~ ake Island in Puget Sound. 
It was the first meeting of its kind and it no easy thing
to predict the interaction of such different people, from
such different countries.
But the result was I thought very powerful evidence that
the leaders of the, Asia-Pacific economic community are
developing a stronger and stronger sense of the
importance of things which we can do together to advance
the prosperity of the region.
We came away from that meeting with some substantive
understandings. we agreed to ask our officials to get to work on an
investment code for the region, which would allow us to
define some common approaches to the vast movements of
funds, technology, and techniques which are proceeding in
every direction in the region, and which ar'e doing so
much to transform it in ways we are only beginning to
comprehend
We agreed to greatly increase the importance of businessin
the APEC process by creating a council composed of two
business leaders from each country.
Its job will be to suggest ways APEC can help business in
trade and investment, to become engaged in the work
program of officials, and to urge us on to do whatever
governments can do in concert to enhance regional
prosperity. We also agreed that harmonising product standards was a
worthwhile goal for APEC, and endorsed the work of our
ministers in agreeing to a trade and investment framework
document which formalises the APEC structure.
We also agreed that harmonising product standards was a
worthwhile goal for APEC, and endorsed the work of our
ministers in agreeing to a trade and investment framework
document which formalises the APEC structure.
We agreed that finance ministers would meet early next
year to commence an exchange of information-and views
about the regional economy, and the lessons we can share
in tAcroeconomic policy making.
The most important of our agreements was to meet again
next year in Indonesia.
This means that the whole work agenda of APEC officials,
the whole series of meetings on customs, standards
harinonisation, investment rules and on the regional
economy suddenly takes on a new significance, a new
weight. 
For the first time the results of all this work will
ultirnaLely come under the scrutiny of leaders, and roLr
that reason it will have a little more urgency, a little
imore consequence.
So the formal outcomes of the Seattle meeting were
important, but I think the informal outcome was much more
importanlt. This outcome was simply the chemistry of the meeting
the excellence of the personal rapport which was present
in this first ever meeting of Asia-Pacific leaders.
it is a remarkable thing that in this age of faxes and
telephone calls, of instant electronic communication,
face Lo face mectings still matter.
But in my experience they do they matter tremendously.
We didn't create a new community in SeaLLle.
Instead, wc begjan to think of ourselves as the community_
we have already become. 



. Pt PRIME MINISTER 133/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HOW P J KEATING XP
THE GOVERNMENT'S MABO LEGISLATION
Those trying to turn the screws on the Government in
relation to the Native TitleBill, are playing into the
hands of the opponents of justice for Aboriginal people
and a sound and workable outcome on Mabo.
The Bill is principled, balanced and workable. It is the
product of a process of analysis, consultation and
negotiation as thorough as any undertaken.
The Bill reflects an agreement reached with Aboriginal
representatives. Mr Mansell and others participated at
various times In the process. The door was never closed
to them. As far as the Government is aware, the
Aboriginal representatives the Government negotiated with
stand by the agreement reached.
The Government certainly does.
The Bill will be passed this week by the House of
Representatives. It will then go to th~ e Senate. The
Government will be urging passage in the Senate before
the Parliament rises.
The Government is obviously prepared to consider
proposals which improve the Bill. But it will not accept
any proposal which is outside the policy parameters to
which the Government is totally committed.
The Government has asked the -Green Senators for their
proposed " holding" Bill. They have not yet been able to
provide it. The Government's initial view, on the basis
of legal advice, is that the concept is unlikely to be
feasible. I met this morning with several Aboriginal
representatives who put forward various proposals for
change to the Bill.-I made it completely clear that a
number of these were simply unacceptable.
For example, vesting of mineral rights in native title
holders and a right of veto over developments on native
title lands cannot be accepted. 
' 0 2
Mr Rob Riley amongst many others, was urging as late as
this week that the Bill be passed by the Senate
expeditiously. Mr Riley should heed his own advice, as
should Mr Mansell and the rest of this group. It is the
same advice coming from moat other respected Aboriginal
leaders. In short, the Government has a Bill before the Parliament
and will be pressing for its passage.
CANBERRA 24 November 1993 



PRIME MINISTER 132/ 93
STATEME; NT BY THE PRIME MThISTER, THEl HON JP J K0; AT1NG, MP
CONRAD BLACK, JOHN HEWSON9 AND SENATE INQUURIES
Today in Question Time I made clear my intention to refuise any request to appear
before a Senate inquiry.
I make no apology for refu~ sing to take part in yet another of the Senate's costly
political fishing expeditions, engineered by and for the Opposition.
I will continue to be available to answer any number of questions on this matter in the
House of Representatives.
As I said in Parliament today, my Government and I have acted with complete
propriety in our dealings with Mr Conrad Black. Further, unlike the Opposition
Leader, the Cabinet has given proper consideration to the national interest in our
dealings with Mr Black.
It is reported this morning that Dr Hewson is willing to appear before a sham Senate
inquiry. I look forward to watching him explain why he undertook to allow Mr Black
unlimited control of the Fairfax press, regardless of the national interest, and how he
separated that undertaking from his admitted discussion of Fairfax journalistic
standards with Mr Black.
CANBERRA 24 November, 1993 



' Cl
PRIME MINISTER
STATHMRNT FROM THEl OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
FAIRFAX The Prime Minister has never given mr Black any promise
to support an increase to 35 per cent in his holding of
John Fairfax Limited.
During a meeting in November last year Mr Black made
clear his preference to achieve the highest possible
stake in Fairfax. In this context he indicated he would
prefer 35 per cent rather than 25 per cent.
The Prime Minister made it clear to Mr Black that while
the Government could not, of course, prevent him from
making further applications to increase his holding,
per cent would be the maximum achievable level.
This was borne out in the Cabinet decision of April
this year, when the ceiling was set at 25 per cent, and
when the Treasurer announced that no further increase
would be countenanced. This remains Government policy.
The stark difference between the positions of Mr Keating
and Dr Hewson is that the Keating Government has not at
any time contemplated allowing foreign interests to gain
majority ownership of Fairfax ( that is, a shareholding of
per cent or more), while Dr Hewson is reported by Mr
Black to have said he was " very relaxed about what our
( Black's) level of ownership would be."
CAkhEPJA November 25 1993 



# 4
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC AM PROGRAM
26 NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minister, this latest account from Conrad Black makes you look
bad, doesn't it?
PM: No, it doesn't at all. The 35 per cent that he mentioned was mentioned in
the meeting, but mentioned by him. And as you made quite obviously
clear in the conversation with Dr Hewson, the Government then
considered this, that conversation took place in 1992. In April 1993 the
Treasurer put a statement out saying the Government had considered Mr
Blacks requests, the Government agreed to the Telegraph increasing its
share holding in Fairfax among the 15 per cent to 25 per cent, and he
finished it with a sentence saying the Government will not countenance
further increases in the permitted level of foreign involvement in mass
circulation newspapers.
FK: You confirmed last week in Seattle that it was 25 per cent ownership you
had been discussing as relying on balanced coverage. Mr Black now
says that condition was applied to consideration of 35 per cent.
PM: Mr Black wants to buy up-to-4OO.. per-cen4-, up-to--00 -per-cent of John
Fairfax and Sons.
FK: He said that you said you might be disposed to consider such an
application if there was evidence that the company was encouraging
professiona4 -standards.
PM: That is not right, and as a consequence what proves it not to be right was
four months later when the Government considered this it said 25 per cent
and no more. But let's make this very clear, Mr Black does want to own
majority control of John Fairfax and Sons, and that's what he told me the
Leader of the Opposition had promised him. He said on the Sunday
program, Business Sunday, a week or two ago, he said, " I wrote in my
book about Dr Hewson's position which was that this was not an issue
with him, and he in an agreed phraseology" that's where he and Hewson 
had agreed to what to say " was very relaxed about our level of
ownership would be, in the event that he won the election". In other
words, Hewson said to him, " you can have control, I am very relaxed
about the level, I won't nominate any particular level, you buy what you
want."
FK: That's not the same as saying Dr Hewson said he would 100 per cent.
Mr Black said himself that no ceiling was ever mentioned by Dr Hewson.
PM: The ceiling is not the point, it is control. " I wrote in my book that this was
not an issue with him, " in other words it was not an issue that John Fairfax
and Sons newspapers, The Age, Sydney Morning Herald, The Financial
Review, should pass to the control of a foreign person. Now, the
Government wouldn't let it pass to the control of a foreign person, John
Hewson was going to let it pass the control of a foreign person by going
beyond 50 per cent which gave Mr Black a majority of the stock. And
then, with all the hypocrisy in the world, John Hewson is on your program
this morning and running around radios and television a week ago talking
about me when the Government has had a Cabinet discussion, decided
on 25 per cent, put out a statement saying no more then 25 per cent, he
has offered 50 per cent up to 100 per cent, unlimited, and now he is
backsliding on a Senate Committee because he knows if he goes he will
need to purjure himself when questioned under oath about whether he
offered control of John Fairfax and Sons to Conrad Black.
FK: Aren't you going too far though, by saying that he has offered 50 per cent,
100 per cent, unlimited, when in fact both Dr Hewson and Conrad Black
agree that no ceiling was ever mentioned in their conversations. No
percentage at all.
PM: The percentage was clear control, do you understand? He was saying it
was not an issue with him, and he says today in his letter, Mr Black, that
the Opposition had not expressed a preference for any specific ceiling on
such ownership. In other words, no limit. Do you understand the
connotation of no limit?
FK: Well John Hewson has called you an unmitigated liar. And isn't it true
that you have said that you would consider 25 per cent, Conrad Black
now, today says, you promised to support 25 per cent. That is quite a
difference, isn't it? Promise to considering, or promising to support.
PM: liar on a dozen times every day. He has got no control of himself on
radio, in the Parliament, anywhere else. One of the things he said was,
we lied about the tax cuts. They were delivered last week. People got
their tax cuts last week. He will go on radio and say anything. Look, let
me just make this clear, Mr Black mentioned 35 per cent, he mentioned
control of John Fairfax and Son which is over 50 per cent, and he told me
that he could buy up to 100 per cent on the say-so, with the agreement of 
John Hewson, but he didn't need 100 per cent, something over 50 per
cent would be enough for him.
FK Conrad Black told you that?
PM: He told me that.
FK Prime Minister, can I just clear this one thing up? Did you say to Conrad
Black that you would consider 25 per cent, or as he says did you say you
would promise to support it?
PM: Meetings with Mr Black, Mr Black wants to get control of John Fairfax and
Sons, he swans into Australia about every three months and each time he
comes, every three or four months he seeks to see me and no doubt he
seeks to see the Leader of the Opposition and other people. And all the
game is about is whether he can lift his limits above 50 per cent, so that
he can control of John Fairfax and Sons. Now, I made it quite clear, I said
look, Mr Black, just understand this, that where you're from in Canada the
interests of Canada strategically are covered largely by the plurality of the
United States, and the general side for the US population and its
defences and foreign affairs and strategic interests. This is not true of
Australia. Australia doesn't have 230 million people bordering it. Its
broadsheet newspapers must keep a peculiarly Australian attitude. They
must be controlled by Australians. And that's why he always stumbles
with me, because I said to him you're a Canadian who lives in London,
you are not an Australian, and the Government is not going to pass
control of John Fairfax and Sons to you. John Hewson couldn't care less
about Australia's national interests. You have got to go back to these
months just before the last election, the arrogance with which Dr Hewson
was strutting around the Sydney business community and all of the high
spots of Sydney and Melbourne saying he had the election in the bag.
Black came in to see him: look don't worry, we don't have any hangups
about levels of ownership, we don't have this economic nationalism
nonsense which the Labor Party goes on about, we are very relaxed
about. what level you want,.. there. is . no. particular. ceiling from us, tell us
what you want, you can have it.
FK With all due respect, Prime Minister, isn't the issue now for you and
people of Australia and your Caucus whether you promised Conrad Black
to support him in his bid for. 25 per cent promised that support and then
indicated that you would then later consider 35 per cent.
PM:. Let me just put the hypothetical. If you were right, I broke the promise,
didn't I? Because when the statement came out in April, on April the
it was 25 per cent, after a full Cabinet discussion. The fact is I never told
Conrad Black that I would consider his 35 per cent, he wanted 35 per
cent, he wanted 50 per cent, he wants 50 per cent plus, he wants
wantever number gives him complete certainty, and he particularly wanted
them because he thought John Fairfax and Sons were cheap. Now, the 
fact is the Government has considered this, the real issue is this, will Dr
Hewson now appear before the inquiry which he has fostered by the
Liberals in the Senate, because the Democrats want to write a line into
the terms of reference that the questions about my discussions with Mr
Black should also be questioned about the Leader of the Opposition
discussions with Mr Black. Now, when you put that question to him, he
says he wasn't debating these things, it was done by somebody else.
What you will find is, if Dr Hewson mentions, in the terms of reference by
the Democrats, which he should be, he won't appear. And he won't
appear because he knows that under oath Mr Black is going to testify that
Dr Hewson was prepared to pass control of John Fairfax and Sons to him,
and Dr Hewson will either have to purjure himself or confirm the fact that
he was prepared to pass the control of John Fairfax and Sons over to
Conrad Blacks telegraph interests. Now, key question.
FK: PM, just briefly on another matter, will you apologise to Malaysian Prime
Minister, Dr Mahatir?
PM: Don't ask me these things. Can I just say, on the program yesterday you
also had Kerry Stokes on there. There was a question put to him, I don't
know whether it was by you it said Conrad Black said Mr Keating has not
compromised the integrity of his office. Do you agree with that
assessment? He said: I certainly do not in other words, he's suggesting I
compromised the integrity of my office. Look, the Leader of the Opposition
uses the word ' liar' about 100 times every day. I let him run his silly race.
But Mr Stokes is a different person, he's got a very big and loose mouth
and let me use your program to tell him I'll put a very big writ in it, if he
keeps speaking in these terms. The Government acted with complete
probity on this. It was considered by the full Cabinet on a submission by
the Treasurer, and a decision was announced and it was announced with
the line: the Govt will not countenance further increases in the permitted
level of foreign involvement in mass circulation newspapers. Let me make
quite clear again, I believe that the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age in
particular are the premier broadsheets in this. country and I don't believe
they should be majority foreign-owned. That's the difference between
John Hewson and me he believes they should. Basically in a
conversation where he didn't give a tinker's cuss for Australia's national
interests, he decided simply to slip them away to Black because he
thought it would shore him up in the election campaign.
ENDS 



TEL PRIME MINISTER ' 35/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HON P. J. KEATING, MP
TASKFORCE REPORT ON BENALTA FLOODS
I have received the report on the Benalla floods prepared by the Government's Rural and Regional
Taskforce, headed by the Member for Page, Harry Woods.
This report was compiled after the taskforce visited the Benalla region and met representatives of
the Victorian Farmers' Federation, the Chambcr of Commerce and all local municipalitics, to
establish how much damage was done in the floods and how the Commonwealth could help.
Mr Woods has noted that the local representatives he met were generally happy with the
Commonwealth's initial response to the immediate personal hardships. There was recognition of
the value of programs such as JobSkills and the Landcare and Environment Action Program. The
taskforce has recommcnded thatithese programs be extended specially in the flood-affected area.
It recommends that assistance be considered through the National Landcare Program in restoring
and repairing severely damaged land, waterways and vegetation. And it recommends that the
Minister for Social Security consider special disaster provisions, so that benefits could be paid
retrospectively to those who have helped in the clean-up.
Mr Woods has reported to me that many local pcople told the taskforce they believed they were
being denied the level of financial help that ought to be provided by the Victorian State
Government. Sinilar concerns have been voiced by the Victorian Farmers' Federation, in a
statement of November 11 and at the taskforce's hearings.
This is a matter of concern to the Commonwealth Government. Under the terms of the National
Disaster Relief Arrangements, the cost of disaster relief is met by the State Government up to an
agreed threshold, and matched by the Commonwealth beyond that. Victoria's spending has not
reached that threshold, Mr Woods told me.
I am now examining the report of the taskforce, and I will ensure that recommendations for action
are put before the relevant Commonwealth Ministers without delay.
CANBERRA, November 26, 1993
Further inquiries: Harry Woods, MP, Chairman, Prime Minister's Rural and Regional Taskforce
066 426 356 26. Nov. 93 12: 52 No. 019 P. 01/ 01 



/ 0
PRIME MINISTER
PAUL UMaIrZNG WITH RUSSELL POWELL, 2GB, 1OVMIR 26, 193
X a 03 PROO OnLy
POWELLs Prime Kinister, Paul Zeating, is on the line zow.
Prime Minister, good morning.
XltAIUNG ( inaudible)
POWEL I'm well. Are you satisfied with Conrad Black's
discussion of the whole issue in the papers this morning-ia
the erald?
XXATTNGi Well, look. His point about 35 percents he
mentioned this. You see, to understand vhat'm happened here,
Mr Black wants to get control of John Pattf ax A Sons, he wants
over .50 percent of the stock. No saw thi Qvreaimhkt, I had
discussions with him, and he mentioned 35 prcent. Out, Iour
months later, when the Covsmaasnt considered this in a full
Cabinet meeting on a submission from the Treasurer in April
the Treasurer put a statemenL out saying this case has been
assessed against the objective of limiting foreign involvemnt
in mas-circulation newspapers and the Government's agreed to
the Telegraph increasin its shareholdinj in Fairfax from just
undar 15 percent to 2? percent. And a finished the press
* tatwuunt by saying the Goernment will not Countenance further
inoreases in the permitted level of foreign involvement in
mass-circulati on nevpp&amp; Ors. So, Xr Black came, asked and
received 25 perc. unt on a full Cabinet decision four months
after he asked me. Now, this little piece in the paper this
morning refers to the first conversation. But what today's
paper also says is that Lhe Leader of the Opposition.. he said
that the Opposition had not expressed a preference for any
specific coiling for such ownership. In other words, Dr Howson
vent in and gave him unconditional.. an unconditiunzal p-; Fto-val
to go to whatever level he wished. So, before the election#
what's happened is thl; Mr black's walked into me and said:
' Look# I've seen the Leader of the Opposition, he said he is
very relaxed and ho can take.. we can take our interest up to a
hundred percent, it we wanlt. But we don't need to go to a
hundred pareent bh&amp; uie 50 percent is control. go, from the
opposition we're getting control, what are you prepared to give
us?" Ad I saidl " Well, Australia's national interests need
to be taken into account here. I don't believe that a 
foreigner should be controlling Australia's two premier
broadsheet newspapers. So I saids " We'll consider it in the
appropriate way." We did, and we wont to 25 percent. Now, Dr
Howson's on the radio toeday calling me a liar and everthing
else. He uses the word liar ten times each day, these days,
about me. But the fact of the matter is, the proof of the
pudding 1s in the eating. We put a statement out after the
Cabinet meeting ftour onths after this conversation and decidud
nn 25 percent.
POWJ Lt0 Toe*, So, despite canvassing 35 percent at that
meeting, the decision's been made and that it won't be
KIR TIN4Gs Exactly. Now, on the Sunday prograa ' Business
sunday', a weak ago on the.. Just over a veok ago, Mr Block
said this s " I wrote in xy book about Dr Hewson's posltion
vhich was that this vat not an issue with him" In other
vords, the control was not an issue with him. And he was, he
said in agreed phraseoloqy in other words, he and Black had
agreed to say this as they left the meeting " very relazed
about what our level of ownershlp would be" in the event he won
the elootion.
POWELLa im. Well, he ( inaudible)
XEATINGs In other words: " Look, I'm not going to put any
silly 25 prcenL or 15 percent limits on this.. you can.. this
is unconditional. You can have what you like."
POWLLS Yes. He claims he didn't talk about 50 percent or
one hundred percent. You're saying that it's applied in what
he said, that it.. there could be total Ownership.
xATrNGat Exactly. It's uneonditional, in other words, he's
very relaxed, he couldn't care less. He can have the things,
in other words.. you see, you've got to understand that, before
an election, you've got Mr Black swannrming into town sayings
' Look, you know, I'm nov the hairy-chested owner of John
Fairfax Sons. Now, what are you going to do for me? Because
Dr Hawson's going to let me have a, you know, unlimited control
here., And I saida " Well, hang on. Their happen to be a few
national interests here. And, yes, I understand4 you've
difficQlt runninlg the papers at 14.9 percent and we may
consider taking it to 25 which would give you control to run
the business. Replace the presses And do all the things you
need to do. But it's not majority as far as.. because, look, a
Canadian living in London can never be an Australian."
POWELL ryeah. And did you say.. did you atiuntiui also
percent later? You might be disposed to support 35 percent.
SBATIRMIdWell, of course, they try and push you up, these 
feallows. And he mentioned 35, but I gave him no, no
eneouxagement on that at all.
POWBLL&amp; Okay. So, what he's saying In the paper this
oning is wrong?
IATZNOs No, what he said was, I think he said in the paper
this morming that z said I'd consider 35. Well, I didn't say
that. But the truth is, it Wuldn't matter what I'd said, when
the Cabinet considered it, the statement said 25. And that'
whera he nov stands.
POWXLL, Yeah. He said.. he said, now, I've got it hezre.
He saids " If at some stage after the election we wish to raise
our percentage to 35 percent, if he was still Prime Ltnhister,
he might be disposed to support such an application.'
M TINGM Well, here it is after the election, I've seen him
again a couple of weeks ago, and he is not going beyond
percent. So, there's ( inaudible). can I ust make this clear
to you, Russell. John Hewson now wants a ienate inquiry. But
when Sanator Kernot the Libs put up those teoms of reference
which saids " Question* about the Prime inister's conversation
with Mr Black*. When Senator ornot put up.. changed the toam
of reference to include, as vweall, questione by Dr Hewson with
Mr Black, John Hewson'sa now back-sliding from appearing before
the haring. Because Mr Blaok said on tho same ' Businesm
Sunday' prograut ' I said I'i quite happy to appear under oath
and say what each has said to me." Now, Dr Hewson doesn't want
to appear because, if he has to appear under oath, ho' 11 either
have to perjure himself or confirm what Mr Black ha saide
that he was relaxed and had no level and regarded an
unconditional, letting Telegraph newspapers buy control of John
Teirtaf a Sons. you've got, you know, him now running
around on your radio program he's on other radio programs
this morning saying the Prime Minister is a liar, he's got
this to answer for. He won't even appear before the committee.
He's got nov Senator Aleton, his fellow in the Senate, trying
to remove the term of reference to him. And then he's saying
that I should appear.
POWELL: Yeah. Well, as I remember, he told me this
morning that he would be willing to appear but said that he
wasn't the target of it.
XRATIHMO Yea, that's code for saying' " If I'm mentioned in
the terms of reference, I von't be there.' Because vhat that
means is, when he's asked about these things, he's under oath,
and he's going to have to say or perjure himself that he
was prepared to shovel control of John Fairfax Sons to a
foreigner. 
POWELLI Well, he...
xUTITNGs And, at the same time, attacking me. So, at a
time.. see, Russell, May I make this point to you. Since late
last year Dr Howson was striding around Sydney arrogantly, like
the sort of toast of the business scene, about to becoame Prime
Minister. You know, he vas ushering people into his office
like he was a sort of king of the castle. And in came Xr
Black, you know: " What can we do for you?" OWell, you know,
now we run the major papers in this country, we want control of
it." " Look, we're very relaxed about that, we are very relaxed
about that. You can have whatever you like." Mean hile, silly
me I'm only protecting the natiunal interest. When he comes
and sees me, Z says " Well, hang on, whoa, whoa, whoa, there's
a few interests here. You've got 14.9, yes, we understand
that's a problem.
POWELL Teah. Yet the point that probably re Ains
unresolved is this whole issue of balanced reporting. And what
is halanned reporting from your point of you, and was it going
to be a trade-oft of balanced reporting for 25 percent?
KEATINGs Yes, wVol, I made no deal with Mr Black
( inaudible). There was no element of a deal. In other words,
if it's balanced reporting. See, what happened to us, Russell,
in the campaigns the Herald editorialised against the
Government. In the editorial on the 12th of March IL saids
" Tt's time for a change', The Age said. " Why the Coalition
should win tomorrow"', the Financial Review said: " Why Hewvon
should win'. In fact, the.. and I referred in the Parliament
to that appalling front page, after the policy speech of the
Labor Party, which was headed$ " Pork barrel Republic and a
free set of steak knives, too'. I mean, it was the moat biased
presentation of a front page following a major policy speech
that I have ever seen. Despite that, we still let Mr Black go
to 25 percent.
POWZLL So, it wasn't balanced reporting, in fact...
M ATINGt No.
POWELLt during the campaign.
XEATINGa It was the Herald's presentation of news and
aditorial vent in favour of the Liberal Party.
POWELL: So, it was unbalaneod and..
KEATINGe Well, in my view it was. But the fact was, 48 it
wasn't to the point where, I believed, it disqualified the
legitimate request Black had to have enough of the stock to
actually be able to run the business. 
POWBLL; Yeah, yeah.
KERATINQs3 At 14.9 percent, everybody in Jones Street,
Broadway, told Mr Black to go and disappear. You know, the
journalists, the managers, saying " Woll, hang on, you've only
got 14.9 of the stock. It won't be long before you're out of
hot., Why should we take notice of you?" So, naturally, he
was sayings " I can't run the business at 14.9 percent. 0 So Z
saids * Tou certainly can at 25, and that's all you need." So,
this is it, now. But, I mean, look., the proof of the pudding
of this will be in the eating, that is whether Dr Reveon
actually apears before the Senatv co mittee he's promoted.
Because, it he does, it'll become very olear that Mr Black's
now three references I refer to the one in the book, the book
which started all this. What he said was, t he Leader of the
Opposition had already promised promisedi that, if he was
elected, he would remove restraints on our ownership. Now, I
act a group of journalists of John Fairfax sone not long
after I met Mr Black this yas late last year, and some of the
Fairfax executives.. and at that meeting I told them that Mr
Black told me that John Hewion had said to him that they could
take their interest as high as a hundred percent. So, it's not
a matte of me saying it now...
POWKINLt So, presumably they can back you up on that?
BRZATINGs Exactly.
POWELL: What, senior Fairfax executives and journalists?
KrATINGs Exactly.
POIWELLs Mike Secombe among them,
KZATINGs Mike Steketee was amonget themr Rose Gittins..
POWELL, K.
K~ ATING: so, i nean, I said it then. Kr Black said it nov
and, yet, you've got Dr Hewson saying.. he starts off an
interview ' liar, liar, liar, liar, liar, liar..', he says that
about fifteen times and then people says " Oh, this is
serious.'" But this is part of the standard stock in trade.
POWILLs Okay. Well, 3ust finally., he said yesterday that
he'd slap a writ on you within an hour, if you said the kinds
of things you were saying in Parliament outside of Parliament.
EATINaG: Yes, but, you see, that sort of bluster goes
nowhere, nowhere in public life. You can't say of a Prime
Minister that he has in some way diminished his office by doing 
6
something untoward. And when the reply comes back " Well,
hang on, you're going to give the company up to four times as
Ach stock in this, and then accuse him, to say: " Oh, well, it
he says that again I'll put a vrit on hiam." I moean, this is
the sort of tactic Dr Mmwon uses. I mean...
PowULt Are you threatening a writ this morning, because
there's a report aroun4 that you are.. on Kerry Stokes.
SATINGi NO, what Kerry Stokes said.. I mean, I don't have
to deal with the elorry Stokes of this world. Hoe's 8 bit below
my speed. But what he did say yesterday was, on the A. m.
program, he said.. there was a question, " Conrad Black says Mr
Reating has not compromised the integrity of his offaice".....
now, mind you, Black did say thisa that I had not compromised
the integrity of my offee...." Do you agree with that
aseoement? I certainly do not., XeanAing that I had
compromised the integrity of my office. What I said this
morning# well, about Nr Stokes vass that if he continued in
that vein, I would.. I would issue process against him.
Because none of us have to put up vith him, with people like
that. But the Leader of the Opposition.. I'm not in the
business of Lesuing write against politicians because, I think,
you've got to be able to take as well as give it.
POWELLs Yeah. Well, you've dished it out in the past end,
I suppose, you do have to take it.
REATTINGS But the Leader of the Opposition..... well, that
is it it's not of a very personal or defamatory nature, but,
itf it's of a porsonal, defamatory nature I think it's a
different matter. But if it's just general political issues
like this you take it as it comes, But the Leader of the
Opposition.. you know one of the things he said this morning on
anothOt tAdio station, he said, ' The Prime Minister is a liar,
he promised tax cute, he lied." The tax cute were delivered
last week.
POWLL; Yeah.
IZATINGa Eight to ten dollars a vaak for everybody as of
last Tuesday.
POWLI Yeah. The tax cuts are not the issue here, are
they? IZATINGs They're not# no.
POWELLs OKay, Prime Kinister, thank you for your time this
morning. I appreciate that. I hope we'll talk again.
ZCATINGn Good. 



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON.
P J KEATING, M. P.
ALP NATIONAL EXECUTI VE MEETING, CANBERRA
26 NOVEMBER, 1993
J So, how do you respond to Conrad Black, Primc Minister?
PM: Well, I responded very well to the last sentence of his piece where he said, " It
will be the Prime Minister's accusers who will end up in trouble here." That's
what he said. See, the clear point in all of this.... there are only two simple
points in this: the first, that the Government has limited Mr Black's ownership
of John Fairfax and Sons to 25 percent, and it did so fouir onths after these
conversations. The other key point is that Mr Black has said that Dr Hewson
promised him unlimited stock in John Fairfax and Sons, that he would remove
restraints on ownership. So, therefore, it is the Government which has said
percent and no further-, it is the Opposition who said, " You can have it. A
foreigner can take control of our major broadsheet newspapers." It's therefore
Dr Ilewson who has the explaining to do and that's why he's now backsliding
on the Senate committee.
J: But how do you explain the discrepancy between your version of the
conversation and Mr Black's?
PM: Well, I explain it by the statement. The Cabinet considered the Treasurer's
submission for 25 percent and put out a statement in April saying the Cabinet
considered the foreign investment questions of ownership of mass circulation
newspapers and decided that the maximum should be 25. percent.
J: Was there any discussion at all of 35 percent?
PM-Yes. From Mr Black.
J: In Cabinet?
PM: No, no. Not in Cabinet, no, no. Mr Black comes into Australia about every
four months, seeks to see me and, I'm sure, the Leader of the Opposition and 
others and it's about, basically, getting his stock up. Now, John Hewson
offered him 100 percent. In fact, I attended a lunch of Fairfax executives
where Mr Mulholland was the host and where there was Mike Steketee,
Ross Gittens and others before Christmas. And I told that lunch that Mr
Black had told me that John Hewson would let him go to 100 percent.
Now, if John Hew son doesn't appear before a Senate Comnittee, if Senator
Alston can't persuade Senator Kernot to remove the referen-ce to him, Dr
J-ewson, in the terms of reference, the likelihood is that Dr Hewson won't
appear. And if he doesn't appear it will be because he would fear needing to
perjure himself before the committee where Mr Black has said he's quite happy
to appear.
J: Why do you think Mr Black is claiming that you offered to consider
percent, then?
PM: Well, I don't know and people have fuizzy recollections of these conversations.
I mean, I'e been Prime Minister for nearly two years and Treasurer for nine.-
I've collected conversations with media proprietors like other people collect
stamps. I remember them very well. And I know exactly what I say and
what I said I'd consider we did consider, and the Government considered it
with complete probity at Cabinet level, on a submission by the Treasurer, made
a decision and announced it.
J: Prime Minister, yesterday you were able to use Mr Black's words to
devastating effect against Dr Hewson. Doesn't today's development make Mr
Black, at best, an unreliable witness?
PM: No, no. He said, let me read the part from his book. Mr Black said, " Te
Leader of the Opposition had already promised that if he was elected that he
would remove restraints on our ownership." See, when Dr Hewson says to
you. " We didn't nominate any particular level," he must think you are complete
fools. By not nominating a level he has told Mr Black there is no level. In
other words it's an unconditional decision to let Mr Black go to whatever
control he wishes of John Fairfax and Sons. Now, the Government's position is
on the record and clear. . So there can be no debate about this. We're at
percent, Dr Hewson's up to 100 percent with no specific limit. He said he was
quite relaxed remember Mr Black said, " In agreed phraseology," he and Dr
Hewson agreed what they'd say a fter the meeting and the term was ' quite
relaxed' the Leader of the Opposition was quite relaxed.
You sec, the context you've got to see all of this in is before the last election
where the Leader or the Opposition arrogantly believed he was already Prime
Minister and he's sitting in court receiving foreign visitors, including Mr
Black and swanning around the business community just seeing who he
would entertain or who would entertain him. And Mr Black has said, " Look,
we want control of John Fairfax and Sons and we want you to comply in that,"
and he has said, " Look, I'm very relaxed about that. There's no upper limit as
far as rm concerned." Now, when Mr Black saw me he said, " Dr Hewson's 
offiered us virtually unlimited control of the stock," and 1 said, " What, up to
100 percent?" He said, ' Well, up to 100 percent but I don't need 100 percent.
Just over 50 percent will be enough for me, to get control. Now, what about
the Governmnent?" And I said, " Well, just hang on, just step back here. The
Government's got national interest questions and we've always taken the view
that these papers should be controlled by Australians. Now, I accept the fact
that you've got difficulties running the papers at 14.9 percent and well consider
a request for 25 percent." I mean, the Government's position has been
conducted with complete probity whereas Dr Hewson has basically, has just
obviously said, to a foreigner, " L~ ook, you can have control of the Age and the
Sydney Morning Herald and I'm very relaxed about it."
J: So, you're asking people to believe what Conrad Black says about Dr Hewson
but not believe what he says about you?
PM-: No, but I ask you to believe what he also says about me. He says the Prime
Minister's accusers will find, in the end, they are the ones in difficulty.
1: Have Mr Black's comments been unhelpful? is comments published this
morning?
PM. I'm sure they're not unhelpfual to you.
Ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J K~ EATING, MP
INTERVIEW WNTH KERRY O'BRIEN, LATELINE, ABC TV
29 NOVEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KOB: Paul Keating before we go to the broad thrust of this interview I'd like
to start with a couple of issues that are running at the moment, firstly
your dispute with Malaysia's Dr Mahathir. Do you now regret your
comments in Seattle that Dr Mahathir is recalcitrant and that you
couldn't care less whether he comes to APEC meetings or not.
PM: I think the important thing is that we've had no official indication from
Malaysia, that they regard, I mean Dr Mahathir apparently has gone
out of his way to say that he didn't require of me any apology and that
his main interest is getting on with our relationship and that's my main
Interest too. I had a very good talk with him in Limassol during the
CHOGM meeting and since then I wrote to him the day before I left for
the APEC meeting saying we would look at his problem with the Indo-
Chinese boat people to see if Australia could take some of those
people so it was a friendly environment. Since then I have done
nothing except to keep this relationship on a reasonable keel and I
think that is what he wants too.
KOB: In Seattle, the body language that was coming from you that matched
the words was one of frustration. What was coming from you was
frustration, it was like I couldn't care less.
P M We have got Senator Cook going there this week, and Senator Ray.
So, from the Government's point of view we are showing every
willingness to maintain a good businesslike, and might I say, cordial
relationship.
KOB: But that wasn't reflected in those comments. I am curious to know
what sparked them. It surely wasn't just a question... 7 
IL 2
PM: Well I had been asked too many times. I must of been asked this
question I am not the only APEC attendee I am not quite sure
whether every other APEC attendee was asked as often as I was
asked in the previous month or so, about Dr Mahathir's attendance.
KOB: But not every other nation has as tricky a relationship as Australia has
with Malaysia, as sensitive a relationship as Australia has with
Malaysia, and your Government has done a great deal over the last
year or two years to try and heal previous wounds, and previous
perceived slights, haven't you now put that at risk? And isn't that,
given the stress that you yourself are placing on the importance of
trading relations with countries like Malaysia, isn't it somewhat self
indulgent?
PM: Well we are not hearing, there have been no requests from the
Malaysian Government, they are not saying ' we require an apology".
This is all basically..
KOB: What are the signs coming from Malaysia? He says he is
disappointed.
PM: there is a whole lot of basic sort of media chatter about it...
KOO: Dr Mahathir himself said he was disappointed.
PM: in the business of feigned indignation. There are a lot of hard things
been said about Australia and Australians. Now, I don't take weekly or
monthly Indignation at it, I don't go requiring statements to . be made, I
don't go expressing disappointment. That is part of, I think, part of the
rough and tumble of national and international life, and I think that is
fair enough. But the key thing is, Is the core relationship here good
and working well? I think it is.
K01B So when you say " feigned Indignation" you believe that sometimes Dr
Mahathir's expressions about Australia are feigned?
PM: Let me say this, let me leave Dr Mahathir out of it. Most of the
comments that come from Malaysia come from Ministers other than the
Prime Minister, and from other people in the Party and the press.
K01B: But if one of your senior Ministers were to make a public expression
about one of our neighbouring countries. That neighbouring country
would be quite within its rights to see that as an expression of the
Government. So why Isn't it an expression of the Government when
some of Dr Mahathir's Ministers are personally insulting to you, and Dr
Mahathir hasn't distanced himself from those comments. He hasn't
reiterated them, but he hasn't distanced himself from them.
2 0. NOV. IJO 10; 1( NU. V14 r-V4f14 
TEL: 3
PM: He has been given a chance to endorse them, and he Seems to have
let that opportunity go by. I think that Is a sensible sign, and I am
prepared to say and confirm my wish that the relationship continue as
it has been going and our ministers will be there.
KOB: It was reported on the front pages of this morning's papers that Or
Mahathir had privately supported a boycott on some Australian
business. Now, If those signals are real, Is it worth you swallowing
some pride and apologising to Or Mahathir for any perceived slight?
PMV: Well should there be a matching set of multiple apologies for the
slights against Australia? I mean should there? Do you think there
should be? I am asking you, that is what you are putting to me.
KOB: Well I am asking you. Is that how you weigh it up?
PM. No, I am just saying that in international affairs one has got to basically
roll with some of these things, and just get on with the main business.
KGB: Another domestic issue that is running at the moment is Sports
Minister, Ros Kelly's, $ 30 million hand-outs for sporting facilities.
PM: Kerry, look, I am here to discuss the broad picture, I think that was the
basis of the Invitation, not to go down the highways and byways. Was
it or not? Let's make that clear.
KGB: But as I have said to you, well what it was to do was to talk about your
Government in this past year and to look ahead. And there is a
contemporary Issue running, which Is running quite strongly about one
of your senior Cabinet Ministers, and an Auditor-Generals report about
whether she was pork barrelling in handing out $ 30 million. Are you
saying you simply won't discuss it?
PM: No, no. I am not saying that at all. I am just saying that there has got
to be a nook or cranny of the Australian media who we can get across
some of these smaller issues to the bigger Issues. Hopefully this
program remains one of them.
KOB: Well thlere are many people who regard that as quite a significant
issue, and I am prepared to spend about two minutes out of thirty on
this, if you are?
PM: The answer is, those are three or four members of the Opposition
frontbench and half of one side of the corridors press gallery.
KOO: And the Auditor-General?
PM: Look, the Auditor-General is on the record, his position has been very
clear about this. T2EL9:. Nov. 93 18: 17 No. 014 P. 03/ 14 
I tLL;-7i 17D73 i~
4
KOB: How do you read his position? Do you say he has no concerns about
the way that money was granted?
PM: There was no basis for political bias.
KOB: He didn't say that Ms Kelly's office asking her Department for details of
electorates In which grant applications were located, but then not
being prepared to put that request in writing, he didn't say that that
would then open the way and lead to speculation about motives behind
the selection process.
PM: But Auditor-Generals will always provide those sort of comments in
annual reports. I mean the whole issue is about the propensity of
these things to go to marginal or Labor electorates. Generally these
are where facilities are the least best.
KOB: Yes, but you had a situation where in the first two years of this
particular program $ 20 million was spent, but in the three months to
January 1993, just before you declared, called that election, a further
million was allocated, most of it to marginal electorates. And that
was a program that was supposed to run until the middle of next year,
suddenly it is all allocated in three months against all previous
practice.
PM: So, what's the point?
KOSB-The question that has been raised is, was it pure coincidence, the
timing, and the difference in the pattern that in the course of three
months Ros Kelly slots in $ 30 million of sports grants, questions are
asked in the process of determining those grants about what
electorates they fall in, and the implication has been drawn that it is
pork-barrel ling. Now, you are saying that it is not pork-barrelling, and
you have full confidence in the way that Ros Kelly did it?
PM; I have full confidence in Ros Kelly, one. Two, there is an enormous
paucity of facilities in sport and recreation facilities in this country.
This program has been an important part of helping it. A lot of
municipal authorities just don't have the financial horse power to do it,
the sporting organisations don't, and I think a lot of these localities that
have been mentioned should take note of the Liberal Party's attitude
that they resent these funds being spent in those particular areas and
they should well long remember the fact that the Liberal Party has not
had this premium on supporting amateur sports.
KOB: There's also the matter of the Senate inquiry Into Conrad Black's
increased acquisition to the Fairfax Group, it was sparked by that. Is it
beneath your dignity to attend that Senate inquiry? lb; lf NO. vi4 r. u4iiq 
PM: Look, Kerry, let me just endorse what Laurie Oakes wrote a week or so
ago, saying it is about time we required a new you know, millions
of tax payers dollars being spent on basically wasted and worthless
inquiries. Now, I am not going to be part of that charade, I made that
very clear. I can't remember any other Prime Minister appearing
before a Senate Committee, and any way they are loaded terms, they
are rigged terms. I mean the Democrats didn't stand Dr Hewson up,
the terms were to be Mr Keating's conversations with Mr Black, Dr
Hoiwson's conversation with Mr Black. The Liberals twisted the
Democrats arms, they gave up on the fast term of reference. Now,
Dr Hewson's views about foreign investment in the print media, not his
conversations with Conrad Black. So, this has been put together by
the Liberal Party and the Democrats on terms to suit Or Hewson, so
why should I bother with him?
KOB: Did you as Conrad Black wrote in his book, when you met him, or
when he met you In January of 1992 just after you had become Prime
Minister, did you say to him that you thought the previous Government
decision to limit his holding in Fairfax to 15 per cent as quote, " shitty
and outrageous"?
PM: No, I did not at all.
KOO: And did you indicate to him as he says you did, that he should just give
you six months to allow things to settle down and you would sort it out?
PM: No. Look, I was not in the Government during the time Conrad Black
was given his authority to go to 14.9 per cent. That was all done while
I was on the back bench. His case to me was he couldn't manage the
company on 14.9 per cent, now In the end the Government accepted
that view. That Fairfax needed management, it needed capital, it
needed a new printing plant, and it needed that managerial sense to
-be brought to It. We had to weigh those, juxtapose those against
whether how much of the stock should go, and whether the national
Interest should be protected, that is whether or not foreign interest in
these two major broadsheets and financial newspapers should be less
than 50 per cent. As it turned out the Government decided that. I
mean, the core thing here, the hub bub is caused by John Hewson.
Now, Conrad Black told me expressly on a number of occasions, he
said, John Hewson has made it very clear to me that he is completely
relaxed about how much of the stock we own, they don't regard foreign
Investment as an issue at all. And I said what, he will let you go to 100
per cent, and he said yes, but I don't need 100 per cent, I just need a
majority of the stock. I repeated that to a lunch of Fairfax editors late
last year where there was Mike Steketee, and Ross Gittens and Max
Walsh, and hosted by Mr Mullholland. So, I mean I am not just wise
after the event, I said it at the time when it wasn't in a sense
newsworthy. d-Z I I U V .7% V A V -A I 11W a-
I V L. 6
KOB: But when you had that January meeting With Conrad Black, you didn't
indicate to him that if he gave you some time you would fix it, you
would get it up to 25 per cent, because you thought 15 per cent was
outrageous?
PM; No. Why would anyone think 15 per cent was outrageous? Here was
a foreign person, foreign company coming along getting 14.9 per cent
of John Fairfax and Son and told by the Government in the press
statement Mr Willis issued that was all they would get. Now, what I did
say was that we would consider some increase which would
consolidate his management. But the core matter here, Kerry, is that
John Hewson attacking me and the Cabinet for agreeing to give
Conrad Black 25 per cent of the stock in John Fairfax and Son when
he was prepared to pass complete control of the company away.
KOB: But what he is particularly attacking you on beyond the 25 per cent is
on the basis on what Conrad Black said, that you had promised him
that you would entertain going higher if the Fairfax reporting of this last
election was balanced.
PM: No, look, in fact Mr Black raised the question of balance. The only
matter I raised was the question of accuracy and reporting. He said to
me in the first conversation that he wanted to move the Herald and the
Age more towards the British broadsheet standard of accuracy. And I
said to him this is a good thing, this needs to happen, there should be
more presentation of news and less of views. Comment that a news
copy should be news copy Where the reader has a chance to read.
That was the matter I raised. Not In fact about the balance, but
someone asked me on what basis do you get a right to consider the
balance.
KOB: And you said because, I am Prime Minister.
PM; We, the Cabinet, were the deciding authority, that's why.
KOB: On deciding balance in newspapers?
PM: No, that is when we decided despite the opposition we received from
the Herald and the Age, editorially, and news management terms in
the election campaign, when we had to decide at the Cabinet whether
we would allow Black to take from 14.9 per cent to 25 per cent. That
was decided by this Cabinet.
KOB: Ok. When you were talking about accuracy on your version of these
various conversations that you have had with him, his own accuracy
leaves a great deal to be desired. He would probably say yours does.
PM: Well I think It ( Black's) does. May be I have missed something, Kerry,
who should be deciding these matters? The man outside Hoyts? I
4CV I U V. V ñ O. L -IF I NU VJL4 1 V 
I LL-7
mean who is the person that decides these things? It is not the
Government?
KOB: it Is not a question of who decides, it is a ques tion of how things are
decided, and what the perceptions are of how they are decided,
perceptions that others have drawn?
PM: Well what are the facts? The facts are that this Government has
limited telegraph newspapers interest in John Fairfax and Sons to
per cent of the voting stock, fact one. Fact two, John Hewson on
behalf of the Coalition promised Black he could take his stock to full
control of John Fairfax and Son, that is the objective fact. Yet he has
had the hide, Hewson, to try and pin me, but now of course the game
Is changing, and he Is going to be appearing before the Senate
Committee and he will be asked a few hard questions.
KOB:-And you are not.
PM: No, I am not.
KOB: You are going to say at the end of this that we have spent too much
time on it, but I have got one more question on Conrad Black, did you
really tell him in apparently expansive mode on the verandah of
Kirribilli House overlooking the Sydney skyline after that January
dinner, that amongst other things you had promoted the interest of the
entrepreneurial classes against the excessive appetites of the Labor
unions.
PM: Well, that's Conrad Conrad is a wordsmith.
KOB: Well, behind the words he is saying that you took pride in the fact that
you have promoted the entrepreneurs against the excessive appetites
of the unions.
PM:-Of course I didn't say that. Why believe that text? I mean Conrad is a
wordsmith and a romantic and he writes all these things and obviously
he likes people to know that he..
KOB: He also thinks that you are a great Prime Minister and he is an
extremely conservative person in terms of his political views.
PM: He is more perceptive perhaps than we might of thought he was
originally.
KOB: From his conservative perspective he thinks you are not bad. I wonder
a lot of labor people would be a bit discomforted by that.
PM: Let me just tell you this. That my conversations with Conrad Black, like
any conversations I've had with any other persons similar to that are
29. Nov. 93 IU: l( NO. U14 V. Ur/ 14 
TEL a
entirely proper and juxtaposed against Australia's national interest and
I have always taken the view that in these big broad sheet newspapers
that our national interest is a real and live issue and we didn't pass off
to Conrad Black control of John Fairfax and Sons. That is the key
point. That is the key decision of the Cabinet and the person who
wanted to give control away willy-nilly in his arrogance before the last
election was John Hewson taking foreign visitors, the next Prime
Minister taking foreign visitors. Oh yes, you want John Fairfax and
Sons you can go and have it.
KOB: Well he is on tomorrow night and he will no doubt put a different view.
After two years in the job..
PM: Let me just say, Black has made it very clear in his text on a number of
occasions what he said. He made it clear to me. I repeated it in
December in the Fairfax board room, so iet's pin that one.
KOB; After two years In the job, how would you like to think people perceive
. you and your Prime Ministership?
PM: That I am continuing to hammer home the issues that will set Australia
up in the 21 st century.
KOB; Well, if we take one of those issues Mabo. You have got the Greens
getting In the way again of what you want with that legislation, so they
appear to be intransigent at this stage on that and it would also seem
from public feedback from opinion polls that to the extent that you have
tried to make this break through on Mabo that you have not carried the
bulk of national opinion with you. You have not really carried the
people of Australia with you otherwise why would so many of them be
saying that they want a referendum?
P M. Well, you wouldn't know. Maybe they want a referendum to guarantee
that Aboriginal people have title to their land. Some would want a
referendum to knock native title over. The only time we put a
referendum about whether the Commonwealth should have power over
issues In relation to Aboriginal welfare, it was carried in 1967 and I
have got no reason to believe other than understanding in the broad
Australian community about the need to right these wrongs and to be
able to address Aboriginal policy, Aboriginal issues is firmer today than
it was in 1967.
KOB: How are you going to get around the Greens this time?
PM: I think the Greens are standing four square against the best interests
of the Aboriginal and Islander community of this country.
KOB: But they have got two pretty crucial votes? T2EL9: . Nov. 93 18: 17 No. 014 P. 08/ 14 
I LL
PM: Well, in the end they have got to cast them.
KOB: How long can you afford to wait. I mean in the end you have to wait for
as long as it will take?
PM: We will have to wait until the Senate votes on it. But, in the end
nobody can go hiding. They are going to have to sit on the side of the
chamber where they believe their interests are, but if they sit on the
side of the chamber of the Coalition they will have the result they will
have to live with it for the rest of their days.
KOB: How will you deal with the Greens next year in terms of not just Mabo,
but every important piece of legislation. There is every prospect that
they are going to stick their heads up and make it extremely difficult for
you.
PM: I think the same basis we do with the Democrats. That is, we argue
the case about the value of the legislation as we did with the Budget
and we will do that again.
KOB: What is your personal bottom line onMedicare. You have effectively
stopped Graham Richardson from recommending an increase in the
levy for wealthier tax payers who refused to take out private health
insurance. How else will you solve the problems of hospital queues
and declining private health Insurance?
PM: I don't think even Graham believes that a levy is going to solve
anything like the problem. He himself says it is only a contributor and
a fairly minor contributor. There are other strategies for dealing with
that. He spoke about those over the weekend. He Is talking those
strategies through with some of the interested groups in this and also
with the Caucus and at the right time, not too far from now, he will
bring the matter to Cabinet.
KOO.-But you did head that one off at the past didn't you, you didn't wait for It
to come to Cabinet to have a discussion about that?
PM: Well, it had been thrown around the public debate by Graham amongst
others for some months.
KOB: Well yes and you.
PMV. No, no, not by me until I finally said something about it. I don't want to
see a health system where there Is a well off people's health system
and the poor people's health system. Where one breaks away from
the other, so we end up with a welfarebased wealth system where the
best surgeons and practitioners are not participants and the well off,
well to do health system where anyone who can afford it gets the best
care. The great thing about Medicare Is that it is stuck together as one
z-10L Iru 4r 71 
ILsystem,
It Is a universal. Universality Is not just an easy word Kerry.
Universality means that the poorest person in Australia can go into a
hospital and get a very good surgeon to perform work on them and
alternatively where they can go to the general practitioner of their
choice. I don't want to see that get to the point where we have got
basically a degraded public health system and degraded and
degrading and moving away a private health system. But nor does
Graham Richardson might I add. But it is a matter of how we tailor the
system so that those who would otherwise seek protection by private
Insurance are able to get it at reasonable premiums.
KOB: OK, we are getting close to time and I have got a number of issues I
would still like to get through with you so maybe we can try and do
them as briefly as possible. On the republic what is a reasonable
time to allow discussions in the Cabinet sub-committee on the Turnbull
recommendations before the full Cabinet considers recommendations
from that sub-committee?
PM: We are not rushing to a referendum on this, I made that pretty clear.
We have got until 2000 2001 in terms of our partys policy to make
such a shift and I think that is going to require a fairly relaxed and
protracted debate in the community. But, we have now an important
document from Mr Turnbull's committee which really does shed some
light upon what needs to happen for the various modes of such a
change. Where before no such authoritative document existed.
KOB: But will the Cabinet sub-committee come at some point during next
year, come up with some recommendations for Cabinet to consider on
the basis of that committee?
PM: I don't know. I think that we will proselytise in favour of an Australian
republic because in the end the identity of Australia, can only in the
end, be represented by Australians and by an Australian as our head
of state. I think that is self evident. And it is on those matters, I think
but what you are portending Is a Cabinet discussion leading to a
Cabinet submission leading to a referendum sort of, A B C.
KOB: No, not necessarily.
PM: That Is exactly right in that case.
KOB: But you still have a commitment ultimately to a referendum?
PM: This can only be changed by the Australian people of course. Of
course I do.
KOB: More likely than not in the next term or am I going too far ahead for
you? Z O. NUV.* JO 10-i( NO. U14 r. IU/ 14 
ItLit
PMV: I don't know, but certainly we would like to see it in place before the
turn of thie century and It ought to be In place because the country
cannot I don't think, culturally draw Itself together and make the kind of
change it needs both internally and externally being at all uncertain
about itself or not prepared to see itself governed in every way by
Australians.
KOB: Do you accept some wisdom In the comments of some in the
republican movement that your high profile in the game has been to
some degree divisive and it has lead to political partisanship which has
damaged the republican push?
PM: Kerry look, before the Government took this on as an Issue, made it an
Issue in the election campaign, an element of the policy speech this
was a coffee and after dinner mint discussion.
KOB: OK, next point. I am told that the long-term unemployment task force
does favour some sort of tax levy to directly fund more employment
and training Initiatives. The ACTU made public a very strong
submission to that affect. What is your latest thinking on that?
PM: Well, I haven't got the report yet and I can't you are able to confirm
you say what's in the report, I can't so I have got to wait until I see it. I
think the key thing Is..
KOB: But you have seen the reports of the ACTU submission. What do you
think of that?
PM: Well, I haven't seen the ACIU submIssion myself.
KOB: Well reports.
PM: I have seen reports of it that is fine. I understand where they are
coming from. The key thing is the Government said, I said In the
election campaign we would not leave the unemployed behind. That
is, we wouldn't march on as a society and forget them and marginalise
them and that I think, is the important point. The Government will have
unemployment and dealing with it and particularly long-term
unemployment as a key objective In the course of this parliament and
the receipt of this task force report will be central to our consideration
Of it.
KOB: You point out so often that your interest as Prime Minister lies In the
big picture and yes, there are signs of some good things on the
horizon in some important areas of the economy at least. If it is such a
big, important picture out there and these really are the watershed
years that you describe them as, what on earth are you doing also
worrying about pictures hanging on the Cabinet wall and what sort of
pictures you should have or worrying about the style of table for the
I LL. . reUV. V 10-1ñ r ru. uig 
12
Lodge to the extent that that diverts the public from what you are on
about?
PM: I am not diverting the public about this, it is this bitter Opposition. The
bitterness started in 1975 while ever the Labor party was in Opposition
it was there laying fallow. We have now succeeded at five general
elections, we are eleven years in office and the bitterness that
pervades Dr Hewson and his colleagues is so profound that..
KOB:-But aren't you handing them the material?
PM: No, no. Please don't talk over me. W~ hat they did is make these things
an Issue in the Parliament every day at Question Time and if they are
therefore they are public issues. They are not for me.
KOB: But can you understand why large clumps of the electorate would react
very negatively to an Image of a Prime Minister in a time which is still
very tough out there for many Australians, still nearly a million people
unemployed, this image of a Prime Minister arguing about a special
purchase of a particular kind of bird for the Cabinet wall.
PM: But, I'm not arguing about these things. These were literally two or
three minute discussions at some stage in my life over the last twelve
months a couple of minutes.
KOB: But why should you spend that amount of money $ 80,000 or $ 100,000
whatever it was on a particular kind of painting for your walls?
PM: Basically because the Cabinet room was unfumnished. As simple as
that. People come there, look around and the place whose
responsibility is it for those simple tasks? Where is the authority to do
anything? And it basically comes from the occupants of the executive
building of which I am the head. Remember this though Kerry, this is a
five minute conversation, now the fact that John Hewson without a
policy, embittered over his defeat in 1993, all that front bench of his
from Howard down absolutely embittered by the fact that they are
facing another term of Opposition want to have Mr Connolly rifling
around through these Issues, It is their priorities which have been
chosen, but they will have to be judged on them. Remember this, the
day that I presented the Mabo legislation and the day before I flew to
the APEC meeting, I had to deal with these issues in Question Time. It
is Dr Hewson who you will be seeing tomorrow night you ought to put
these questions on to where is his policy framework? Where are the
big issues?
KOS. OK, but you as Prime Minister and as a politician and a leader of a
political party have to deal yourself with the public perceptions of your
style of prime ministership and on the one hand you want us all to
focus on what you are doing with APEC and what you are doing with 
I L. L. 13
Mabo and what you are doing on Industrial relations and on what you
are doing with the republic and all these other things.
PM: And inflation and growth and all the other matters.
KOB: Well let me put to you the kind of perceptions that are coming through
and yes they are Liberal studies; yes they are Liberal surveys, but It is
private Liberal research qualitative and quantitative that has been
done largely in the lead up to the South Australian election which says
tehlaitti stt'h, e'by uirledcinogrd ad peaslacrciep tifoonr sy ooufr syeolfu', ' liinkteo le'praonwte ra nddr unnakr'r, ow'im mpeinrdiael'd,
when you are crossed', In short hand used to making that these
people, the electorate used to make allowance for your aloofness and
arrogance because they respected you as Intelligent, dynamic and
unafraid there is a couple of words you might like, but in short you
are seen as a man who can't manage power.
PM: If you believe Liberal party research Kerry, you are off your head. The
same people who are parroting this stuff were putting that around
before the last election how they were going to walk in. The federal
secretary of the Liberal party is one of the best assets the Labor party
has and it is mainly because of this sort of nonsense. Don't take any
notice of it. In the end, the public look for value, they know that this
Government is trying to make Australia's place In Asia with APEC; they
know we are trying to do the big things about our national identity
including with Mabo; they know we have succeeded in restarting the
economy, it is now growing at about 3 per cent; they know we have
broken the back of Australian inflation for the first time In two decades;
they know we are going to deal with long term unemployment those
things they know. They know we are going to protect their health
system, that they know. And on the big issues it is only the big issues
they vote in that ballot box, so all this stuff goes to the keeper and
-while it Is interesting at the time and it is the stuff of press copy, I don't
think it matters a tinkers cuss.
KOO: OK, last question. Very serious this one. Why do your antique mates
call you ' mona'?
PM:-Well, it is just untrue. It is just another bit of nonsense.
KOB: Oh, is that right?
PM: That was a Valerie Lawson thing. * She dug that up, that was just
nonsense as well.
KOB: I know they certainly all have nicknames for each other. Did you miss
out did you? I S~ I~ ZZP. riUV. V, . LO. Lr rNu. vi' r. 1014 
mLL. ZV. 114UV.: P,. JL 0 If VNI U IA F-m 4. L I~
14
PM: They do, but I don't have any as far as I know and I'm quite sure I
would know at this time, but of course that is all part of the Colour of
Queen Street or ' Konigstrasse' as they call it in the eastern suburbs.
But you know, the Herald being middle class as it has been, the journal
of the yupples, this Is right down the main street of yuppiedom that and
the Financial Review and that is basically why these sort of pieces are
written.
KOB: Paul Keating, we are out of time. Thanks for talking with us.
PM: Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
* PLEASE CUCK AGAINST DELIVZRY
SPEECH By THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
THU 1993 EXPORT AWARDS, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
NOVEMBER 1993
The growth in Australian exports constitutes one of the
more remarkable chapters in our history.
Laconic, sceptical self-effacing nation that we are, we
tend to play it all down as it it is something that is
happening to us, rather than something we are making
happen. in due course, no doubt Australians will recognise that
this was a remarkable generation a generation of
exporters who might reasonably be numbered among the
pioneers of modern Australia.
But Irn inclined not to wait that long.
I think that our efforts will be helped by building a
contentpor-ary understanding of the importance of what we
are doing the need for it, and the success we are
having. That is why these awards are so important, and why the
organisers deserve great credit for staging them.
These awards acknowledge some of the outstanding
achievers in Australia's export drive and this is only
proper because their efforts are a major contribution to
the nation.
It's particularly significant to me that the cultural
industry features prominently at these awards tonight.
I've alway* strongly held the view that our commercial
development has to go hand in hand with our cultural
d6eve1opniiut that a society which values creativity and
innovation, a society which is confident in its cultural
identity is a society which produces better quality
products for its markets. 
In this sense having an interest in art and design is not
an elitist abstraction it is fundamental to our broader
trade push.
The 30 finalists here tonight have contributed no less
than $ 1.6 billion to the nation's economy, and in doing
that they have contributed jobs opportunities for other
industries, improved living standards, a more prominent
and creative role for Australia in the world, a more
active place in the Asia -' Pacific region, a more secure
future for generations of Australians to come.
This is not to overclaim.
These are basic facts about contemporary Australia as
basic as the figures which describe Australia's export
achievements in the past few years.
In the last decade, exports have doubled.
They have grown from 13 per cent of GDP to 20 per cent.
Exports of manufactures have trebled and now exceed those
for rural products and minerals and fuels.
In the past six years exports of EThs have grown at an
average rate of 19 per cent per annum and nearly trebled
in value.
Exports of services have grown at 7 per cent a year and
now account for 20 per cent of total exports.
And the proportion of exports going to North and South-'*-
East Asia continues to rise and now accounts for 60 per
cent of all Australian exports.
You see why I say this is a generation pioneering the new
Australia. It is not something that is being done to us it is
something we are doing for ourselves.
As a government we began a decade ago to create the
conditions in which Australia could become a modern
manufacturing nation able to compete with the best in the
world. we did it because we felt that to fail would cost nothing
less than Australia's future to fail would mean
Australia joining the ranks of those benighted conmmoditydependent
countries.
I won't take you through the steps, but what we did and
what we continue to do has helped create the environment
in which businesses of all sizes are now manufacturing
and exporting, and in which each year more companies are
born Qniy to manufacture and export or provide services
for export. 
This is not to claim all the credit for the government.
I must say that it gives me some satisfaction to see how
the challenge has been taken up, and how now we are
seeing the rewards for these decisions in the changing
shape of the Australian economy.
And I also must say that absolute necessity for the
changes we have made has never been so clear we need
only look at the trade figures and ask ourselves, with
commodity prices as they are, where would we now be
without the shift to manufactured and service exports?
Where would be had we not recognised the chance in Asia,
that thai was where our future lay?
Where would be had we not decided that Australia could
reinvent itself that Australians had enough genius and
enough faith in themselves to change?
In the end that is where the credit properly goes to
the people of Australia who were prepared to take on the
change and wear the hardships which change often
involves. It goes to the business people and trade unionists who
found cooperative ways of working.
It goes to the farmers and manufacturers and scientists
who found new products and new ways of producing them.
In the end the credit goes to those who saw in the
imperative to export a great challenge and a great
opportunity. The Australian Export Awards honour all these peopl * e who
did not wait for something to happen 12 them but went out
and made something happen = Q them.
That is why we can talk of a generation of exporters
they have it as their ambition and they are translating
that ambition into success, not only for themselves but
for their country.
of course, we all hope that these awards also encourage
others to enter the new world of exporting.
During the 1980s, 30 new companies a year joined the
ranks of emerging exporters.
it doesnt take much imagination to get an idea of the
benefits that would flow if this number were doubled.
Now I have no need to tell this audience what it takes to
be a succesuful exporter. 
Let me instead quote one example to illustrate that once
we know what is reqjuired and have no fear of the global
market place, there is really no limit to the potential.
We have always been considered uncompetitive in the area
of textiles, clothing and footwear, yet last year exports
in this area rose by $ 534 million, a 21 per cent increase
on the previous year and tonight we have among the
finalists a representative of the i1CF industry.
This is not an occasion for me to tell you all. the
reasons why the climate is right for building on these
successes. Let me say only that we have never been so
internationally competitive as we are now and we will be
more competitive in the future.
I think you know that the Government remains determined
to do all it can to make the local environment favourable
and open to suggestions about how to make it more so.
What I want to say in the remainder of the time at my
disposal concerns the internatipnal environment.
I imagine there is nobody here who fails to recognise the
absolute importance of a successful conclusion to the
Uruguay Round of the GATT.
But sometimes it helps to repeat yourself.
And sometimes it helps to spell it out in figures; a
successful outcome in a fortnight's time is likely to
boost Australian exports by $ 2.5 billion per annum by the
year 2002.
A successful conclusion will enable Australia to maximise
its commercial advantage and secure new trading
opportunities for Australian exporters.
Australia has done all it can to see that such a
conclusion is reached.
it now remains to hope that common sense and fairness and
vision prevail, and that the interests of a few are not
put before the interests of the world.
But there is no guarantee, and that is why the continued
development of APEC and the recent remarkable meeting of
APEC leaders in Seattle are so important for Australia.
In Seattle, I visited Boeing which is, of course, the
world's largest Aerospace company.
But I went to demonstrate my support for an Austraian
company Aerospace Technologies of Australia which had
just been awarded Boeing's ' Major Outside Production
Supplier of the Year" award. 
TEL
You will also be aware that before going to Seattle I set
up an APEC Business Consultative Panel to inform me of
what business thinks APEC can do for business.
In Seattle, I am pleased to say, we agreed to set up an
APEC Business Forum to identify issues APEC should
address to facilitate regional trade and investment and
encourage the further development of business networks
throughout the region.
Australia will be represented in that forum.
APEC is not an abstraction.
Real outcomes from the Seattle meeting include work by
APEC on deepening and broadening the outcome of the
Uruguay Round, strengthening trade and investment
liberalisation in the region, and facilitating regional
cooperation in areas such as standards.
We also agreed to draw up a common non-binding set of
investment principles that might lead to a formal
regional investment agreement.
All these steps will deliver, in time, real benefits to
Australian businesses.
All of them will make it that much easier for them to tap
into the potential of the Asia-Pacific and find their
niche in what is set to be the aPacific Centurym.
Ladies and gentlemen
Someone said this morning as if we did not know itthat
we are not Asian.
of course, we are not Asian.
But we share a future with the countries of our region.
And APEC is, to my way of thinking, the best the most
creative expression of that future.
As I said earlier, 60 per cent of our exports now go to
the Asian region.
And as I said at that very impressive National Trade and
Investment conference in Melbourne last week, over the
next two years exports to APEC countries will account for
about one third of the total increase in our production.
In two years' time Australian exports to APEC countries
will account fb5r around 15 per cent of all we do, all we
make and all we sell. T3E0L: . Nov. 93 18: 00 No. 008 P. 05/ 06 
TEL
And over the next two years, increased exports to APEC
mem~ bers will create more than 70,000 new jobs for
Australians good jobs, well paid jobs, jobs with a
future. Perhaps this is the most important thing to say about the
new export culture in Australia.
I said Australia's exporters were pioneers they are,
they are pioneering not just a new more dynamic shape to
the Australian economy, and not just a new prosperity for
Australia. They are guaranteeing that Australians of this, but more
particularly of fltZurp generations, will have a place in
the front rank of societies that they will have access
to the jobs and opportunities on the leading edge of
economic development.
That is the most rewarding place to be.
It is the Qnlg place to be if Australia is to remain one
of the really great places to live in the world, and one
of the great social democracies.
It remains for me to congratulate all the finalists here
tonight and the people who have put on these awards.
It is always a great occasion because it honours great
Australian imagination and enterprise.
And finally let me congratulate Austrade for its
achievements last year. I noticed a newspaper report
today which indicated that Austrade contributed to new
exports last financial year valued at $ 4.25 billion.
This is a fitting tribute to Bill Ferris, the outgoing
Chair of Austrade, and it set-s A high standard for Bob
Johnston -to emulate when he comes on board to replace
him. As the Financial Review said today, however, Bob brings a
lifetime's experience of trading in Japanese and Asian
markets to his new job, and so he will be well placed to
build on Austrade's already formidable record.
I look forward to presenting the winner's prize later in
the evening. T3EL0:. Nov. 93 18: 00 No. 008 P. 06/ 06 



I1r* llVl IVIIIMIU I Cr i 137/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE PRINCE OF WALES
Further to my Statement to Parliament of 28 September, I am pleased to
confirm that His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales will visit Australia from
24 January to 5 February.
His Royal Highness will visit New South Wales, Tasmania, Western Australia
and Queensland. The detailed program has been settled in conjunction with
St. James's Palace and the relevant States.
Features of the Prince of Wales' visit to New South Wales will include
participation in Sydney's Australia Day celebrations at Darling Harbour; and a
visit to Parkes and Forbes to meet farmers. He will also hold a meeting of his
Business Leaders' Forum. In Tasmania the Prince will visit Hobart; spend a
day in Strahan and Queenstown, with a focus on the mining and tourist
industries; and visit Launceston to see work on the Railway Yards restoration
project. In Western Australia he will visit Perth, hold discussions with youth
trainees engaged on restoration work; and visit a child health institute. He
will visit Karratha to view the Woodside LNG plant, and Deep Gorge
Aboriginal site. In Queensland, His Royal Highness will visit Gladstone,
Bundaberg and Fraser Island.
Details of the State programs will be announced by the relevant State
Premiers.
This will be His Royal Highness's twelfth visit to Australia: he last visited in
1988. CANBERRA 1 DECEMBER 1993 



02/ 12 ' 93 16: 48 ' 006 273 2923PMP SS FFCQ001 OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
STATEMENT BY A SPOKESMAN FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
The Malaysian Government has made no official protest to Australia and, according to
the Malaysian Foreign Ministry, has taken no action to downgrade the relationship.
Wc welcome thi and believe it is appropriate.
In response to problems which have emerged in the bilateral relationship over recent
days, the Australian Government has made official and high-level representations to the
Malaysian Government through our High Commissioner in Kuala Lumupur and to the
Malaysian High Commissioner in Canberra.
We have underlinied the following points in those meetings:
Ile Prime Minister values Australia's relationship with Malaysia and wants to build
on it
Thc Prime Minister accepts that on some issues Australia and Malaysia will not see
eye-to-eye
Both Governments need to avoid a situation in which the media is setting the tone
of the relationship
We hope that both Governments will act in a way which clearly draws a line under
what has happened and avoid any further deterioration in the relationship or any
slide into tit-for-tat retaliation
The Prime Minister has also written a personal letter to Dr Mahathir i which he has
made the following points:
This issue has been blown out of proportion and it is not in the long term interests
of either Australia or Malaysia for it to continue
The Prime Minister's rcmarks in Seattle were not calculated to give offence to Dr
Mahathir. Rather, they were made to make clear that it was a decision for
Malaysia, and Dr Mahathir, if Malaysia wished to absent itself from the APEC
meeting and that Australia had clear design interests in the architecture of APEC,
interests which it would defend vigorously
4b The Prime Minister considers that this issue can only be settled if both countries
are willing to put it behind them PM PRESS OFFICE 
02/ 12 ' 93 16: 48006 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICE
If this was the case. the bilateral relaonship between Australia and Malaysia could
flourish
The Prime Minister believes the bilaeal relationship between Australia and Malaysia
has substantial potential and wants to see it continue to dcvclop.
CANBERRA December 2,1993 o002 



PRIME MINISTER 138/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
QUEENSLAND'S NATIVE TITLE BILL
I congratulate Premier Goss for the Native Title ( Queensland)
Bill introduced into the Queensland Parliament today.
The Queensland Bill will operate in conjunction with the
Commonwealth Native Title Bill.
As the Premier of Queensland correctly said " the choice for
the States is clear. It is a choice between accepting the
High Court decision and participating in a national
legislative response on the one hand, or, alternatively taking
the path of legal uncertainty and confusion".
Queensland has decisively chosen the former course, and this
decision will benefit all Queenslanders Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people and others.
In stark contrast, Western Australia alone among the States
has tragically chosen the course of legal uncertainty and
confusion. The ill-concieved and discriminatory Western Australian
legislation was guillotined through the upper House last
night. As of today, Aboriginal people face the prospect that
native title has been extinguished across the entire State.
The only thing standing in the way of this extinguishment of
the legal rights of West Australians is the Commnonwealth
Native Title legislation.
I again urge the passage of the Bill by the Senate.
Queensland is a case study in how States and Territories can
work effectively with the Commonwealth legislation. It is
proof that cooperation can work.
The cause of justice, and sound and certain management of land
across Australia, will be served by passage of the
Commonwealth Bill and by other States and Territories
following the Queensland example.
CANBERRA 2 December 1993 



PRIME MINISTER ' 3 91
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
JOHN KERIN
John Kerin has advised me by telephone this afternoon that he intends to resign as the
Member for Werriwa early in 1994.
The Federal Parliament will be poorer for the absence of John Kerin, but he has
explained to me the reasons for his retirement from politics, and of course I wish him
well. John Kerin, by any measure, has had a distinguished parliamentary and ministerial
career. Among his many distinctions, I believe he was among the most committed and
successful Primary Industries Ministers Australia has seen.
As he has noted in a media statement this afternoon, John Kerin's parliamentary service
to Australia and the Labor Party goes back to the days of the Whitlam Government.
He was one of the " originals", and he will be missed.
I note his total support for my Government, and for Labor, and his intention to
continue to work closely with the rural sector to promote Australia's agricultural and
trade interests. I wish him success in whatever he chooses to do.
CANBERRA 3 December, 1993 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE CONFERENCE ON WOMEN, POWER AND THE
21ST CENTURY
MELBOURNE, 3 DECEMBER 1993
Thank you for the invitation to speak at this very
important conference.
It is really a conference about the great anomaly of
Australian democracy the great flaw in Australian
democracy. This is a country which pioneered women's rights which
delivered to women the vote and thie right to stand for
parliament in 1902, yet whose national parliament in 1993
is overwhelmingly male.
This is a country which prides itself on its democratic
institutions yet in the most important of those
democratic institutions, the nation's parliaments, men
outnumber women 7 to 1, in the House of Representatives
more than 10 to one.
This is a country renowned for its pervasive democratic
spirit and the dictum of the fair go yet, when it comes
to women's parliamentary representation, the record and
the contemporary reality of the party which has always
believed itself the embodiment of these traditions, the
Australian Labor Party, is only marginally better than
the rest.
No doubt the aberration can be explained: but it can't be
justified. There are reasons but we shouldn't call them
excuses. The ruling body of the nation should be representative of
the people it serves. At present it is not.
Parliaments make laws for all the people and its
composition should as far as possible reflect that. At
present it does not.
In fact it is has been calculated, by Kay Setches I
think, that at the present rate of increase it would take 
another 60 years to achieve equal representation of men
and women in the Commonwealth Parliament.
In the meantime Australian democracy is the loser. This
is the fundamental point, I believe we all lose.
It is less that women have a right to be there than we
have a need for them to be there. It is less an argument
for women than an argument for the country.
Equal representation of women and men strengthens the
legitimacy of our decision making process. More than
that, it strengthens our capacity to make the right
decisions. At present we are losing a vast pool of talent and
wisdom. We are losing leadership.
We need look no further than Joan Kirner and
Carmen Lawrence for proof of that.
We need Joan Kirner and Carmen Lawrence and many more
like them in the national parliament. We need them in
the debates on economic and social policy, on
unemployment, the workplace, trade, foreign affairs,
arts, Mabo.
We need women involved in the debate about an Australian
republic. We need them in a leading role.
Australia is changing at a quite remarkable rate. It is
being re-fashioned to some extent by economic and
cultural forces beyond our control; but more
substantially, it is being re-shaped by our own efforts
and our own vision. The direction of policy and the
shape of our relationships are changing fundamentally and
very rapidly.
Our relationship with the region has changed dramatically
in the space of a couple of years and that in turn will
change Australia. It will create extraordinary new
opportunities. The implications go well beyond trade
they go to employment, business, education, culture.
There is a generational shift occurring. The experience
of multiculturalism, the fact of global communications,
new technologies, new economic and social imperatives,
and indeed the new status and increasingly prominent role
of women, is shaping a new national identity one, I
hope, which will continue our best traditions while
embracing the new reality of Australia.
Women must be there in all these momentous debates,
asking the questions and helping to find the answers. And
the more they work from the centre of the debate and the
less from the margins, the more their voices are heard in
the nation's parliaments, the more they will be heard in 
the wider society and, I have little doubt, the more
parliament will be heard as well.
Now of course if it were enough to just say these things
we could all go home now. It is necessary to say them,
but saying them will not get the barriers down.
Getting the barriers down requires political power and
political will and let mie hasten to say that they are
by no means the same thing. There have been plenty in
our history who have been attracted to power and plenty
have gained it but relatively few I believe have
exercised it as they might have.
Relatively few have actively pursued the necessary
reforms, or seized the opportunities which are presented
to each generation and so some of our old deficiencies
have been passed on.
Now I take some comfort and even some pride from the
fact that in the past ten years we have removed some of
the anomalies relating to women.
If it is true that choice is the prerequisite to the
exercise of power, and the prerequisite to choice is
economic independence, then this Labor Government can
take some pride in its record.
For we have taken not a few major steps in the direction
of economic independence.
Family payments paid directly to women caring for
children was one of them.
The extension of superannuation so that now most women
workers are entitled to coverage is another; and coverage
and benefits will increase substantially over this
decade. The past ten years has seen very significant improvements
in women's access to education.
The number of young women completing year 12 nearly
doubled to 80 per cent.
Enrolments of women in higher education grew by 77
per cent and women now make up more than 50 per cent
of higher education students.
Women are still under-represented in courses such as
engineering and in most apprenticeships and their
employment opportunities are accordingly restricted;
but the Government's reform of vocational education
and training will open up some of these pathways for
women. 
We have greatly expanded child-care. As of 1993 child
care in Australia is recognised as a mainstream economic
issue.
Child care is an integral part of the drive to become a
more competitive country.
It is now a commonplace that successful countries are
those with flexible and skilled workforces: it is
therefore common sense that women with skills and work
experience be kept in the workforce.
Our economic growth and our living standards will benefit
from women's participation.
For countless Australian women child care can make
participation possible it can make the choice between
participating and not participating a real one.
As part of its commitment to meet demand for work-related
child care by 2001, by 1996-97 the Government will fund
nearly 300,000 child care places.
From next July we will provide a 30 per cent cash rebate
on the cost of work-related child care, a long overdue
recognition of the costs involved for women earning an
income. These employment, education and child care programs are
all designed to increase life choices for Australian
women, and in doing that they open that much wider the
way to positions of power.
I might also say today that I have advised the Office for
the Status of Women to monitor the implementation of
election commitments of specific relevance to women, in
particular the new child care program.
For all the improvements in women's opportunity, status
and influence, for all the widening of equality and
freedom, there remains the fact of violence against women
violence which strips them of the most fundamental
freedom and denies them power over their lives.
Violence which degrades Australian society and mocks our
belief in democracy and justice.
-As.. a-government . we know that . we cannot expect women
denied freedom from fear to share our faith in this
society: or to believe us when we say we are serious in
our pursuit of social justice if we are not seriously
attempting to eliminate violence against women.
We have acknowledged this in a recent review of our
women's policy advising mechanisms which identified as
priorities women's economic security and the law, with a
particular emphasis on the elimination of violence. 
The same review identified as a priority the subject of
today's conference women and public life and their
involvement in decision-making.
This is an issue whose time has well and truly come. The
time has come for companies, businesses, unions, the
bureaucracy, churches, schools and universities, the
courts. And it has come for the Australian Labor Party.
It has come for the Labor Party for all the reasons I
have mentioned because the Labor Party is the party of
social justice, and the party with a vision of Australia
as a great social democracy, and we cannot have these
things unless women are receiving equal justice and
participating equally in the democracy.
In fact the time came long ago: as long ago as the turn
of the century when a campaigner for women's suffrage
wrote, " to sum up all reasons in one it is just."
The numbers speak for themselves. Of the 837 Members of
Parliament in Australia, only 118, or 14 per cent are
women. Of the total number of ALP Members of Parliament
17 per cent are women. In the House of Representatives
there are 13 women or 9 per cent. Of the ALP Members,
11 per cent are women.
The Labor Party should not claim that the underrepresentation
of women is someone else's problem.
Nor can anyone claim, of course, that it is a result of
chance or the merit principle in action.
There is no question that we have to tackle
discrimination both direct and indirect.
Indirect discrimination is likely to be the hardest to
shift because very often it is coming from entrenched
cultural habits and perspectives.
Cultural change is difficult but not impossible. it
seems to me that the starting point is recognition of
necessity. That is what, for instance, drove the change
in our industrial culture in the last decade.
In the ALP we now have to take on the business of equal
representation as a necessity. It has to become part of
Labor Party culture.
We have to take up the battle for hearts and minds on
this, and at the same time pursue the necessary
structural change.
The campaign in the Party under the heading " Half by
2000" is one way of doing this. And I support it.
I support increasing the number of women in all federal
and state caucuses. Whether we reach that goal of 50 per 
cent depends on many things, not least of which is our
continuing to win elections.
But the goal is important to indicate what we stand for
and to measure our progress.
If you will permit me to return to a theme of mine I
have always believed that when Labor stops reforming,
Labor will lose power.
It is the old bicycle principle if you lose the
strength or the will to pedal you'll fall over. If we
stop pursuing our social democratic ambitions and our
national ambitions we will stop being the government of
the Commonwealth.
In a speech to the NSW Labor Party earlier this year, I
said to keep up the momentum of reform we had to look at
ourselves. That we had to reform the Party.
The Organisation Review process of discussion and debate
on the future structure of the Party has begun.
And as part of this process, I have asked the National
Secretary, Gary Gray, to report to me before next year's
national conference with specific recommendations on what
changes are necessary to increase the number of women in
state and federal caucuses.
Early next year, I will also be meeting with the state
Labor leaders to pursue the issue.
This is a Government of reform, you can be sure of that.
We are determined to confront those changing realities of
contemporary life at home, in our region and in the
world and create a country which can share in the best
the future has to offer.
I mean more and better jobs, more opportunities for
Australians of this and future generations, more security
for all Australians.
At the same time, as we take up the challenge of
contemporary change we are determined to do all we can to
solve those problems which governments have neglected for
generations. We do these things because it is consistent with the
Labor Party's commitment to social justice. We also do
them because it makes sense.
It makes sense, for instance, to deliver justice to
indigenous Australians because this country will gain in
respect and self-esteem, and in time it will gain from
bringing into the mainstream people whose talents and
energy have until now been wasted on the margins. 
Equally, it makes sense to ensure that the half of the
population who are women are in no sense left on the
margins the margins of society, the margins of justice,
or the margins of our representative institutions.
Every time we expand Australian democracy, every time we
extend the limits of freedom and justice, every time we
include in all the reaches of our national life all the
people of Australia, we make it stronger.
When we talk about women sharing power in Australia it is
a sufficient argument to say that it is " just" but it
is an irrefutable argument to say that it is both just
and, because it is in the interests of Australia, also
very wise.
Thank you for having me here. It is now my pleasure and
privilege to declare this conference open. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J.
KEATING, MP
WOMEN, POWER AND THE 21ST CENTURY CONFERENCE, MELBOURNE
FRIDAY 3 DECEMBER, 1" 3
J: Prime Minister, the Issue of the day do you believe you will manage to
make peace with Malaysia having written to Dr Mahathir overnight and
Indeed, have you heard anything back from him?
PM: No, I haven't. I have written to Dr Mahathir, and that and what we have
said, I think, Is to say enough about the Issue now to we can get on with
the rest of the business of the oountry Which Is Important, And, I noticed
today that a bit of real news did squeeze Its way on to the front page of
the Australian press A rarity I know but there It was, OGATT, the final
historic chapter', and, of course the G3ATT moans so much to Australia.
And, also, oJob ads soa as recovery gathers pace". So, we are starting
to see the economy start to pick up. We're starting to see the response In
the job vacancies and job ads. wo've had 70,000 employment growth over
the past two months. Arid that and the environment where we are on the
precipice now, on the cusp of making a Very large International change In
the General Agreement an Tariffs and Trade, the GATT, which promises
to set the world up for a period of growth which would be unprecedented
given the range of the Wsues under discussion.
So, these are very good portenlts for the country and that, coupled with
APLO a meeting We've just completed which Is an Asia-Pacific
area organisation to look at growth, trade and Investment, these things, I
think, augur well for the country...., particularly for 1994 as we start to see
the recovery here gather pace.
J: Prime Minister, are you saying that the Malaysia row wasn't news? 
-2-
PM: Well, It's certainly not news as this Is news. I mean, Australia has had a
recession, we've now been out of it for about nine quarters, I think, from
memory and we're starting to see It gather some real strength. We saw it
In the national accounts the other day, the economy Is now growing at
about three and a quarter percent as fast as any In the western world.
And, of course, we're being tugged along by growth In the Asla-Pacific
area which Is growing faster than the OECD. So, these are the real
Issues, I think.
J: Do you think relations are smoothed over enough... Inaudible...?
PM: Well, I've said all I think I need to say about It.
J: Prime Minister, on GATT, do you support the principle of last minute
concessions to France to clinch a deal?
PM: If there are elements of the current, draft final Act which, In their
application, don't actually tear away at the structure but which would make
this more palatable to get a general agreement, then I think that's worth
considering. But, that doesn't mean wholesale changes to the Blair
House Accord or substantial changes to It.
J; It seems that the base Is being moved that the base from which
GATTs agreement on agricultural products will be a lot softer than
originally planned. Does that matter?
PM: No, that's not apparent at this stage, I don't think. The United States has
held pretty firm. The BSair House Accord is an accord between the
European Community and the United States Government and the United
States has held very firmly to that The fact that It was negotiated by a
previous French administration Is, In a sense, beside the point. Now, no
doubt the French are trying to find wriggle room in their domestic society
on this and that we understand. That's what negotiation Is all about. But
let's hope everybody sees the opportunity of extending the Kennedy
Round In the sixties on a general agreement on goods, to Intellectual
property rights, to services and to agriculture. Because, to do that when
these very large societies are re-emerging In the world economy really,
for the first time since In the case of Russia, the first world war and in
the case of China the second world war to see these large nations
returning to the world economy with the cold war now finished, we need a
good backdrop In rules on trade to really kick the world along and GATT Is
the name of that. 
-3-J: Have you discussed with either Joan Ki( rner or Carmen Lawrence your
desire to see them in Federal Pariament?
PM: Well, I have at odd times discused It with both Of them but for various
reasons they have seen fit to Stay In the Jurisdictions they are In, In the
states. But, there Is no doubt that we need more women In the federal
parliament. We need more women of their calibre In the federal
parliament and the more reprsenlative the palament is of the Australian
community, the better the parliament will be. it's under-represented now,
with women and It needs to have a higher representation amongst
women.
j Your job's cut out for you though Isn't it? Even hero In Victoria the new
leader, Mr Brumby has been trying to Implement strategies and
procedures for Increasing the number of women and been rolled by the
factions.
PM: Well, I canst attest, cheek by jowl, of all the factional movements In
Victoria but I think the big principle Is the Australian Labor Party Is
genuinely Interested in the affairs of Australian women, we appreciated
their support at the last election, we have done many, many things to
Improve the lot of Austrailan women. More recently, with the generalised
child care rebate and the home child care allowance, on top of many other
things which we've done In the I 960s which I reconted this morning.
And I think it Is that notion that Labo Is the party which cares most, I
believe, In a practical way about women and women's Issues, that we
reaily need to reinforce tt wfth a higher representation of women In our
parliamentary parties. So, this has got to be a state of mind thing In the
Labor Party and Its got to be a state of mind thing In our national politics.
And, I think, the state of mind thing matters more than any sort of factional
arrangement about whio should get what, where. Rather, the state of
mind that women must be a larger part of the national body poitic.
J: Prime Minister, can we expect to se more women In Cabinet before the
next election and would you expect to see more women in Cabinet If you
win the next elction, afterwards.
PIM: Well, I'd like to see more women In Cabinet. It's a matter of, again, finding
the opportunities and seeing the portfolios that particuiar people can hold
or wouid do Justice to. Bu, part of that IS to lift the general stock, the
numbers and we just don't have that there now. That Is. there just aren't
enough women In the federal Labor Party and therefore, It you like, the 
TEL: 3. Dec. 93 12: 09 No. 020 P. 04/ 04
-4-area from which ministers are drawn is just not as large as It would
otherwise be. Lets hope that Improves after the next election.
J: Is this concept of half by 2000 realltic under those circumstances?
PM: Well, I think it's a good objective ana It gets the focus on the issue and I
think that... I mean, lets make the simple point; the more the parliament
is representative of the general population, the better off It will be.
Therefore, the more women that are In parliament, the better, generally,
will the nation's policies be.
Ends. 



PRIME INISTE
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING
WORK FOR AUSTRALIA LODGE FUNCTION
I have written to a number of individuals and
organisations who assisted the " Work for Australia" Task
Force, inviting them to an informal gathering at The
Lodge next Sunday.
The task force, initiated by Mr Bill Kelty and Mr Lindsay
Fox,_ was established last year to encourage empl-byers to
take on young Australians and to explore ways of better
co-ordinating employment programs.
I want to take this opportunity to thank those who served
on the task force as well as those from all over
Australia who assisted in its deliberations.
By talking in an informal atmosphere with those involved
I hope to acquaint myself as much as possible with the
ideas which have emerged from their work in the week in
which the Government will receive two major reports on
jobs and regional Australia.
The Government's Discussion Paper Restoring Full
Employment will be delivered on December 15. The
following day the chairman of the Regional Task Force, Mr
Kelty, will deliver his report and I expect many of the
issues raised in that report will be relevant to the
broader task of job c-reation.
The aim of the regional development task force, broadly
speaking, has been to discover how best we can create
jobs and widen opportunity for the people of regional
Australia; how we can strengthen their economies and in
so doing strengthen the national economy; how we can give
the regions of Australia a stake in Australia's future.
The function at The Lodge will be a unique opportunity to
discuss with a wide range of dedicated individuals the
issue which will be the primary focus of Government
attention and policy in the New Year.
CANBhERRA December 5, 1993 



NINE NETWORK AUSTRALIA LIMITED
A. C. N. 009 071 167
SUITE 114 PRESS GALLERY PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA A. C. T. 2600 AUSTRALIA
TELEPHONE: ( 06) 273 3300 FACSIMILE: ( 06) 273 3097
WIN TV SUNDAY 0940 05.12.93
Subject: INV Prime Minister Paul Keating
Compere ( Jim Waley):
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: As we've already heard, the Malaysian Government line
seems to be hardening in the row over Paul Keating's
choice of words to describe Prime Minister Mahathir.
A letter from Mr Keating, explaining he meant no
offence, has been rejected as not conciliatory and now
there are reports that the Malaysian Cabinet will
consider downgrading the relationship with Australia.
This latest threat was made public last night after
Sunday's Political Editor, Laurie Oakes, recorded this
interview in Canberra with Prime Minister Keating.
Prime Minister, the first issue I wanted to talk about,
obviously; is Malaysia. Dr Mahathir has rejected your
letter. What's your response?
Oh, I don't know that he rejected the letter. I think he
just said that it was not as conciliatory as he expected it.
But the one clear message in it is I mean, it's an
honest, frank letter but the one clear message in it is that
what I said was not calculated to offend him, and that's
true. So, therefore no offence was intended and I hope 
he accepts therefore that none was taken.
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: Well, he said last night that it did give offence. Do you
regret that, even though you didn't intend it, do you
regret that he took offence?
Well, if my remarks were not intended to offend him
and he has taken offence at it, well naturally one would
regret that. But they were said in the context which, at
the time, made it fairly clear that there were some issues
of difference between us and I've always got to argue,
and will of course, for Australia's policy positions.
Have you done all you can now or will you try and
make contact again?
No, I think what I have done is very reasonable. That
is, I've written to him, putting in some sort of context
I mean, there is not much point in writing letters saying
' Dear Prime Minister, under the tail plane in the Boeing
747, I had this to say', and not provide any cofitext, and
I've put some context-there but made clear that the
remarks were not designed to offend. The remarks were
made to say ' look, this is not my matter'. That is
whether Dr Mahathir attends APEC meetings or decides,
as he put it, to thumb his nose at people, is for him.
That was the point of the remark.
Although you obviously didn't apologise in this letter, is 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: it fair to say that you're sorry that he's offended?
Laurie, look I've made it quite clear. I represent
Australia's national interest. We have interests, I was
asked by journalists and I've been asked persistently for
months about Dr Mahathir's attending of these meetings.
On the day I was asked, what prompted the question was
his remark saying that his policy was to thumb his nose
to people and that was his best way of being noticed. It
was in that context I said ' please don't ask me about
Dr Mahathir. It's not my matter and that APEC's larger
than any one of us, including those who seek to thumb
their nose at people.' That's what I was really saying.
It was not, I don't think, offensive or calculated to
offend. Now, that's what I have told Dr Mahathir quite
clearly but look, we want to put a line under the
relationship, Laurie and get on with it. Now, I've got
Senator Cook and Senator Ray going there this week. I
mean, it's very tangible evidence on our part. We want
to keep the relationship going and on a good footing. I
think there are substantial opportunities in the economic
developments between Australia and Malaysia. This has
always been our view and, you know, we want to try
and maintain that kind of momentum.
Dr Hewson says that you should now pick up the phone
and talk to Dr Mahathir personally. Is there any point
in that? 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Well, I don't think so. I think I've said what I wanted
to say but, you know, one the Federal Opposition
saying in the first instance they could understand my
remarks and then, as late as yesterday, Dr Hewson was
running around saying I should get on the phone and do
this and do that. Well, I mean, they should make their
mind up what they meant. I mean, I'm sure their first
response was right. That was that they could understand
my remarks and Australia does have a position of
substance on these various issues between Australia and
Malaysia and I've put those. But again, hopefully in the
context of a good ongoing relationship.
Since you've been Prime Minister, you've stressed the
need for Australia to engage more heavily in Asia.
Now, how does this row affect that?
Well, I mean, I don't think it does. I mean, we have
had spats with Malaysia before on other issues, or more
particularly, Malaysia's had spats with us on other
issues. I have a very good relationship with-President
Sohato, I've a very good relationship with Prime
Minister Go Chok Chong(?), I've an equally good
relationship with President Kim Yung Sam(?) and I
would like such a relationship with Prime Minister
Mahathir but he's got to want it to. Malaysia's got to
want to have a relationship with Australia of the kind
Australia's prepared to have with it. 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: If the worst happens and there are more sanctions, more
retaliation from the Malaysian side, does Australia have
any way of hitting back? I mean, could we engage in a
fit for tat fight with them on this level?
Well, I don't think we would like to. That's the point.
We would prefer a constructive relationship to continue.
But what about those 5 power arrangements? I mean, is
that something that we could pull out of if we took
offence? Well, I mean, defence agreements are fairly solemn
things and, of course, they exist because countries
regard each other's sovereignty as important enough to
defend and that means keeping core relationships going.
Now, I think everybody in that arrangement, including
Malaysia, understands the importance of keeping the
relationships going. Australia certainly does.
But if there's a freeze on the Malaysian side, r mean, is
there any point in having a defence relationship like
that? Well, I think this is premature to be talking about this,
Laurie. Well, the reason I raise it is that when we had the last
spat you mentioned in ' 91 over the Embassy television 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: -series, Gareth Evans did make some recommendations
about this to the then Prime Minister. Bob Hawke took
a different view and he decided instead to apologise, but
presumably that kind of recommendation is still there for
you to look at.
Well, I'm not aware of that, to be honest. Thank you
for the research.
But you haven't looked at that yourself this time.
No. What would the Malaysians have to do to prompt you to
go that far? I mean, if they were to start defecting
Australian businesses, disadvantaging say the company
that's bidding for the patrol boat contract, you couldn't
sit back and just cop it, could you?
Well, I don't think it's going to help our relationship for
me to even canvas those issues. I mean, I'm faking the
presumption-Malaysia wants a good cooperative
relationship with Australia, as certainly as we want with
it. But again, as I said earlier, Malaysia does have to
want that. In the end, we can't whistle up or in some
way develop the spirit of a great relationship if one party
doesn't want that. Now, I mean, our bona fides in this
are that our two very senior ministers are going there
this week to maintain that relationship and I think really 
we've got to see where it goes from there.
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Do you wish you hadn't used the word recalcitrant?
Well, Dr Mahathir said that morning that he thought the
best policy was to thumb to use his words thumb his
nose at people to be noticed. The word recalcitrant was
a sort of shorthand way of tailking about the odd person
out or odd people out. As he had himself described
himself that way, I didn't think it was particularly doing
anything other than simply identifying that kind of
attitude. The reason I asked for this interview was to look to the
future in our last program for the year. So, I guess I'd
better move on to that. Can I ask you, do you think that
at last the economic and political cycles are coming
together for your government?
Well, I think that's true but I think, more particularly,
the economic cycle's coming together for the country. I
mean, we are growing now at three and a quarter
percent, we're growing as fast as any other OECD
country, there's a fair bit of, there's a nice mix in some
of that a bit of investment, private consumption, a bit
of government spending but all in all, it's going quite
well. We're seeing job vacancies improving quite
sharply, job ads and we saw 70,000 employment
growths in the last 2 months. So, I think we can say 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: with some confidence, the economy is now looking
much better.
And what about the Japanese situation? I mean, how
worried are you that the problems they have could drag
Australia back?
Well, I think it's certainly delaying their recovery.
Japan's still running a structural budget surplus. I can't,
with all due respects to Japan, see a lot of sense in a
country which has got a recessing running a structural
budget surplus. Now, there may be some indications
that the government of Japan is going to change its
policy there. That would help. But there's no doubt
these very big changes in asset values would be very
inhibiting of growth and activity in investment. That
can't be good for us, Laurie, but again, given the spread
of our the elements of our growth and where it's
coming, I think we can maintain the kind of growth
rates we've got at the moment and do better.
You've been preoccupied since the election by Mabo.
That's, every other way, served one way or the other. I
mean, what's your priority for ' 94? What's your main
focus? Well, I think we're coming into ' 94 with the following
things in place the economy growing, we will have
received the report on full employment by the 15th of 
December. On the 16th of December, Bill Kelty will
present the Regional Development Task Force report..
We'll be focussing on those two things in the run up to
the budget which will now be an earlier budget and that
kind of focus, I think, coupled with other changes which
the government will be looking at over the course of the
year, including say in health, means that we're going to
have a fairly full domestic agenda, following as it has
already upon a very successful conclusion of
negotiations in respect of industrial relations. I hope by
then a successful conclusion of the Mabo debate in
legislation, the development of APEC as a structure for
Australian investment and trade to grow within.
So, we're moving on a broad front but I think next year
we'll get back onto those domestic issues and hopefully
that will occupy a large part of the debate.
Laurie Oakes: Prime Minister, we'll pause for a break. We'll be back
in a moment.
Prime Minister, the task force on unemployment's due
to report, I think on the 15th of December. Do you
expect any sort of left field options from them, anything
radical?
Paul Keating: Well, I think that the whole tenor of the report in
western world terms will be reasonably radical. I mean,
I think we can pride ourselves on being quite innovative 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: in social policy with things like the family allowance
supplement-and those other income support mechanisms
over time. I think we have the opportunity here to be
doing something innovative again. There is no doubt
that there is a problem and a reasonably long term one
with the long term unemployed and we have to address
it otherwise it'll be a long term problem and so it was
an important part of our election policy, that as I said
we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind and that's
why the Government will be considering it very
carefully and acting on it as quickly as possible.
In the budget...
In the budget and of course it'll be an early budget
which means we'll be acting on it fairly early.
You're prepared to spend money on it?
Well, I think so. But again, that's got to be money well
spent. That is that the proposal has got to be thought
about, thought in the structure of our current policies in
respect of the labour market so that when we spend
money, we spend it effectively.
The ACTU talks about spending $ 3 billion. Is that the
sort of ball park you've got in mind?
No, I haven't got any in mind at this stage, Laurie. I 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: think it is very important for us actually to see the
colour of the report, to see what's actually
recommended. But does that sound unrealistic?
Sounds on the high side to me, for some of the
objectives that have been spoken of.
The ACTU, of course, like ACOSS and a large slab of
the Caucus, says it should be paid for, part of it should
be paid for with a jobs levy. Now, what do you think
about that? Your Treasurer doesn't like it.
Well, no, I think John has made a remark about it but it
is an option, of course. It's a relatively short term
response to what would otherwise be a long term
problem. How we'll raise the revenue or how we will
deal with outlays are matters for the ERG and the
Budget Cabinet to consider. But the jobs levy is
obviously an option and we'll consider that because it
may well be that the report actually recommends it.
The employers, of course, say that the jobs levy will
cost jobs and there seems to be some backing from
economists for that.
Well, I think that that's like saying that the
Commonwealth revenue, wherever it might be, if it's 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: high it'll cost jobs, if it's lower it won't. I mean, this is
the lowest taxed country in the western world. I mean,
this is the point I think the Australian business
community have got to understand. This is the lowest
taxed country in the western world and the profit share
in GDP, the profit share in the economy now, is back to
the highs of the late ' 80s. So, I don't think there's any
real case for saying the Commonwealth shouldn't be
spending money on the long term unemployed.
So you don't have an in principle objection to the jobs
levy idea?
I don't have an in principle objection but I don't, I've
never embraced levies in the past when we've spoken of
them and when I was Treasurer, for what I thought at
the time were good reasons. So, I'd like to see what is
recommended, look at our budgetary options and then
see what we can do within the, if you like, the normal
parameters of budget making.
Now, is your plan for next year all economic or have
you got some sort of cultural program as well?
Well, we've got, we've had this review of cultural
policy being undertaken. That will be announced next
year. I think the whole there has been a see change in
Australia, Laurie. There's no doubt the culture has
changed from the ' 80s culture, the ' 70s culture of 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: protection. Australia's now an open trading economy,
we've got the GATT backdrop hopefully underpinning a
greater growth in trade around the world, we've got
APEC as well but we are now very, very competitive
with a competitive exchange rate mechanism, low
inflation, low interest rates. It's all there for us. We've
got a good education system which is feeding through
into our industrial base and into product innovation and
research and development.
How's that related to culture?
I think one has to look at all of that in terms of a total
culture. That is, Australians have got to know, have got
to feel proud about themselves, they've got to feel proud
about the change they've made in the last 10 years and
we go to the world as ourselves, as a totality. In other
words, you just can't market a bit of R D here or a
particular service there. You go as Australians who
have made an important change competently to deal with
the rest of the world. So, I think the whole culture
matters. I -think art matters, culture matters. You know
my views about the republic. I think the earlier
Australia represents itself in these matters, the better.
So, what you're talking about is creating some sort of
national spirit but can governments do that?
Well, I think a lot of that's happening already. It's a 
combination of the Government's ' 80s policies changes
and the early ' 90s policy changes and the willingness on
the part of the Australian public to actually make an
important change for their own long term economic and
social benefit. It's a totality and I think we're a long
way down the road to that totality but I do see it all as
one thing. I don't think just the economic bit and then
there's the sort of social bit and it's got to be a total, a
total view of Australia.
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: We're almost out of time but could I ask you about the
political bit? You're now facing a couple of hielections,
probably 3. It's a bad time for you to face a
hi-election, isn't it, with the Government on the nose,
basically? I don't think that's true, Laurie. I don't think the
Liberals have any standing, basically. John Hewson
hasn't come up with a policy change since the election.
But they're miles ahead in the polis. I mean; these hielections
must show a big anti-government swing:
Well, hi-elections traditionally do, hut look, all of this
will come back to the field. If you ask people seriously
whether the Opposition amounts to an alternative
government, I don't think the answer to that's in the
affirmative. John Hewson's been the classic
Oppositionist, opportunist since the election. . He's 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: nothing like the figure he said he would be someone
removed from public life, trying to do the right thing in
policy. That's all gone and even last week he said
basically he was readopting the essence of Fightback.
So, I don't think in leadership or policy terms I can't
remember one policy that they've articulated since
March 1993 that matters. Not one policy.
But if that's the case, why are you so far behind in the
polls? I mean, is it because of the things you refer to as
dust in the cracks of history? Are people offended by
things like your style?
In political terms, we had a bad budget and it's taken us
a lot to in political terms. In economic terms, it was a
very good budget for us. It's taken us a while to
recover from that. We have had the distraction of all
these other issues and
What about your so-called imperial style?
Well, I think people will make their judgement about
that. In the end, I think people ' make their judgement
without the big issues. You know, in a couple of weeks
where we concluded the budget, wrapped up a deal on
Mabo, attended a meeting of APEC of which we had a
large part in the architecture there of, and are now about
to consider long term unemployment and regional
development, for that not to be recognised I mean, I've 
been here a long time and so have you. There was
more change this year than there was in 10 years of
Coalition governments. I mean, I remember my own
government and the Gorton Government and the whole
government. I mean, they didn't do these sorts of
things. So, I think it's pretty unfair to have that, you know,
important classic work you know, really large changes
in any way diminished by basically silly issues.
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Compere: Prime Minister, we thank you.
Thank you, Laurie.
The Prime Minister with Laurie Oakes.
ENDS Agency Report For private research and not to be disseminated. Every effort made to ensure accuracy for the benefit of our clients but
no legal or other responsibility is taken for errors or omissions. 



TEL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 01
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEAT1NG, MP
LAUNCH OF THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF THE FAMILY
BANKSTOWN, 6 DECEMBER 1993
I am delighted to be here today to launch the International Year of the Family in
Australia. For me, families matter.
Indeed, I am sure that we are all here because we think the same way on this.
Because of the importance of families to all of us as individuals.
Because of the importance of families to our communities.
Because we think families are a national resource vital to the future of this country.
And because we want everyone to be aware of it.
Wc want everyone to know the value of families.
And when we speak of the value of families, we speak of the value of all families.
We recognise that families have their own unique needs, and that the Government has
a special role to assist them.
We have implemented and will continue to put into place measures to help families.
But one thing is certain.
Families are endlessly diverse in shape and structure.
It is appropriate then, that Government programs continue to recognise this diversity
of family forms in Australia, and meet their different, but equally legitimate, needs. 
TEL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 02
2
As I have said before, when we talk about families today, we are talking about
families of all sorts and sizes.
Families with children where both parents are present.
Families with children headed by sole parents women or mcen.
Failies that include several generations living under the same roof.
Families Where one member cares for another who is frail aged, chronically ill, or
disabled. And any number of other combinations which complete the Australian national
family. Just now the biggest problem facing many familics is unemployment.
It is the dominant economic and social issue of our times.
We know only too well what the consequences of unemployment are particularly
long term unemployment on individuals, on children, on families, on communities,
on the social fabric.
That is why we have commissioned a Discussion Paper on Unemrploymnent, which we
will receive next week a major report on the dimensions of the problem and how to
deal with it.
Following our consideration of it, the Government will release a White Paper on
employment next year the first since the end of World War 11.
Among other considerations, our response to the report will recognise that, although
all families are vulnerable to unemployment, some are more vulnerable than others.
There is no gctting away from the fact that unemployment affects families in different
ways, and that for solutions to be effective they must take the differences into
account. Our policies must address the diverse nature of Australian families, and the diverse
nature or their employment and assistance needs.
A major issue to address in this context is how families balance the responsibilities of
work and family life.
Governments should, T believe, promotc policies which recognise and support choices
families are makting in combining paid work and family care.
We have to make these aspects of peoples' lives fit more harmoniously together.
We have to keep pressing for more " family-friendly" workplaces. 
TEL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 03
3
And child care.
This Government is very proud of it's record in the creation of childcare places.
It is proud of the system of fee relief it has introduced and its needs based planning.
The child care rebate, to be provided next year, is anothcr important plank in our
child carc policy.
It is a long overdue recognition of the cost of child care for families in earning an
income. We recognise that childcare needs are neither uniform or identical.
We recognise that women, throughout their lives, have a range of equally legitimate
choices about being in the workforce or being at home.
We appreciate the value of caring and nurturing provided by women who do choose
to stay at borne while their children are growing up, and the value of the unpaid work
they carry out both in the household and in the community.
That is why we have introduced the Home Care Child Allowance for supporting
parents caring for their children full time at home.
By paying the allowane directly to the caring parent, usually the mother, we have
provided many women at home with a source of independent income which otherwise
they would not have.
Perhaps I could summarise the Government's support for families by saying simply
that we are about recognising diversity and facilitating choice,
And this, I believe, siL% well with the objectives of the International Year of the
Family. Some people, I know, get a bit cynical about International Years, and about their
usefulness. I am not one of them.
I support the concept of International Years on the basis or their results.
Because of the benefits that conmc from them.
These benefits don't necessarily come overnight.
Some of themi don't conmc nearly quickly enough for everyone. 
TEL 4
But they do come, and they come, in part, because of the change in attitudes which
the International Years bring about.
Few would deny that there has been substantial progress in what women have
achieved since the International Year for Women in 1975.
And equally few would deny the impetus which the Year had on legislators, not least
here in Australia.
Similarly, the International Year of the Disabled marked a turning point in the way in
which socicty viewed people with disabilities.
There is now a much greater sensitivity towards their needs, and it's reflected in
evciything from building codes to co-ordinated hospital and community services.
This Year is the Year for the World's Indigenous People, a year we have marked
indelibly in Australia's history with landmark legislation which will put an end to an
historic lie and go some way to laying the basis of real justice for indigenous
Australians. Legislation which will go a long way towards extending the Australian family by
granting basic rights to peoplc who have long been denied them.
In addition to individual achievements, the cumulative aspect of International Years
has, I believe, also been very important.
We might well have been able to have an International Year or the Family without
any previous International Years.
But I strongly doubt whecther the Year would have the focus intended for it, would
explore the crucial range of issues that it plans to address, without the previous
International Years to which I have just referred.
They have brought about a fundamental shift in the way we think about families.
And now the National Council for the International Year of the family will be
building on these paist achievements.
The Council, which the Government has established, is chaired by Professor Bcttina
Cass and comprises a number of Australians who are eminent in their fields.
Before the International Year of the Family came along, the members of the Council
were already busy people in their own area of work.
I realise that the members are giving up scarce time to serve on this Council, and I am
pleased to place on record my appreciation for their important act of public service.
This year won't simply be about celebrating families, although there is much worthy
or celebration. T8EL.: D ec. 93 14: 52 NO. 011 P. 04 
TEL:
Rather, the International Year of the Family is an opportunity to take stock of the
types of support and services that Government and non-Governmnent organisations
provide r famfilies.
To see how we can do things better.
T'he Government, together with the Council, will be looking to strengthen the
partnerships between families, governments, education and community services,
business, unions, religious organisations and community groups.
Ultimately out of our work wc hope will come the basis for family policy for the
future an Australian Agenda for Families.
Ladics and Gentlemen
The International Year of the family affects us all.
While the style of familics has changed, one thing should not change and that is the
binding and the support that members of families should provide to one another.
Children particularly benefit from having the support of loving and interested
partents. Support and esteem which stays with them throughout their life.
We have, perhaps, become too blase as a society about the obligations of' parents to
their children about the need to consider them in our life choices.
We will succeed better as a society when parents have a strong and continuing
involvement with their childrens' lives and their emotional development.
Families are all important in determining how children develop into adults and form
their own families. They are crucial to our development as productive and fulfilled
members of a wider society.
Ultimately it is the family which provides any individual with his or her most
essential need the need to belong. This is at the heart of our responsibility to
support families, and at the heart of a family's responsibility to support its members.
Cherishing and supporting the family, all our families, is the most important
commitment we can make to future generations in a just, decent and humane society.
As the Christmas holiday season approaches, our thoughts of family come particularly
to the fore.
Let me conclude then with an illustration of the importance of family from Evonne
Goologong Cawlcy's recent autobiography. T8E. LD: ec. 93 14: 52 NO. 011 
ILL: 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 06
6
Shc relates how the family car broke down on Christmas Eve on a back road far from
anywhere. In her words, " Mum and Dad helped us tear paper into strips and we decorated a little
scrubby tree.
Then we sat around it on our tarpaulin and sang Christmas carols.
Silent Night was Mum's favourite, so we sang that twice.
I can't have been very old but I have a clear memory of drifting into sleep that night,
my head in my father's lap and catching a glimpse or both my parents in the
moonlight. They wcrc a good looking couple and they loved us.
We might have been stuck on a back road in Western New South Wales on Christmas
Eve, but wc were the luckiest kids in the world."
In these rew words, Evonnc has captured the enduring feelings of love, acceptance
and commitment values we all seek and cherish in our family lives.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the International Year of the Family.
TEL 8. Dec. 93 14: 52 No. 011 P. 06 



I
PRIME MINISTER 142/ 93
VISIT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL
ISLANDS I am pleased to announce that the President of the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, His Excellency Amata Kabua, and Mrs Kabua will make a State visit
to Australia, as guests of the Australian Government, from 5 to 12 December.
They will be accompanied by the Republic's Foreign Minister, the Honourable
Tom Kijiner.
President Kabua will also be accompanied by a trade and investment mission
which will brief Australian businesses on opportunities for investment in, and
trade with, the Marshall Islands at a series of seminars to be held in Sydney,
Melbourne and Brisbane. The President will deliver a keynote address at
each of the seminars.
In addition to the opportunity which the visit offers for a constructive dialogue
on South Pacific regional and international issues of mutual interest,
especially in the context of the South Pacific Forum, it will underline and
strengthen of the already warm and cooperative links between Australia and
the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
President Kabua last visited Australia in September 1988.
CANBERRA
6 DECEMBER 1993 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, lIP
THE INAUGURAL SIR EDWARD " WEARY" DUNLOP ASIALINK LECTURE
MELBOURNE, 8 DECEMBER 1993
It is a great privilege to be asked to deliver this
address I cannot imagine a greater privilege.
" Weary" Dunlop was an Australian of phenomenal
achievement. If his work as a surgeon and teacher were all that
distinguished his life, an annual lecture and much more
to preserve his memory, would be warranted.
If the sole criterion was his contribution as architect
and overseer of schemes for the betterment of his country
and the welfare of its people, he would rank among the
great Australians.
If he was known only as a pioneer of Australia's
friendship with the countries of Asia, we would be
justified in honouring his life's work this way.
Talking about his work in Asia in one of his last
interviews he remarked that he was " a bit ahead of
Keating." I unequivocally dips my lid. It is a galvanising thing
to know that we are, in some way, building on the work of
Weary Dunlop.
Would that we all shared his vision.
Would that we all might have half his courage, half his
reason, half his powers of leadership.
These among others were the qualities which lifted Weary
Dunlop into the ranks of the imnmortals.
In my days at school we read about the epic feats of
Sturt and Eyre and Stuart, the heroic philanthropy of
Caroline Chisholm, the remarkable feats of Mawson in
Antarctica, and the Anzacs at Gallipoli and we wondered
how men and women could be so brave, resourceful and
resilient. These were giants. 
We should have also been reading about Weary Dunlop
even so soon after the war we should have been reading
about him.
And our children should be reading about him now.
For to read about Weary Dunlop in World War II, to read
his diaries, to hear him interviewed in the last years of
his life is to hear a story every bit as awe-inspiring
as any in our past. It is perhaps the most inspiring
story in our history.
As many of you probably know, the story began in the
bush. Ernest Edward Dunlop was a son of the soil,
raised at a place called Sheepwash Creek in north-eastern
Victoria. He was educated at State schools in Stewarton
and Benalla, and I would hazard a guess that the heroes
of his basic education were the same as those of my
generation. Gallipoli loomed large. Four members of his family had
gone to the First World War.
The Australia of Dunlop's youth, of course, was very
different. A new nation, Australia looked at the world
through the prism of empire. Our economy, our foreign
relations, our defence were all dependent on Britain.
Our people were overwhelmingly of British and Irish
extraction. This Australia was an outpost of the British empire,
separated from the civilisation we held to be the highest
by what we saw as an amorphous and potentially hostile
mass of humanity to our near north but which we called
the Far East.
" White Australia" kept the potential threat at bay
" White Australia" and the might of the British Empire.
It stood to reason that Australians looked to Britain for
their cultural, if not their spiritual, values. Not
because they were less Australian, it seems to me, but
because to share in the British heritage was one of the
most agreeable things about being Australian.
It conferred considerable advantages on us among them
the chance for young men of promise to further their
education and careers in an agreeably ancient yet
familiar culture.
Weary Dunlop was in London doing post-graduate study when
the Second World War broke out. As he said himself, he
couldn't wait to get into the Army, and somehow he
contrived to this country's everlasting benefit to
get into the Australian Army. 
He served in the Australian Army Medical Corps with the
Second AIF in Palestine, Egypt, Greece and Crete.
By the time he sailed for the war in south-east Asia, he
had already experienced more than an average share of
hardship and danger; including service with the Sixth
Australian Division during the siege of Tobruk; and he
had already demonstrated his great physical strength and
his capacity to apply his wonderful skills under
conditions of extreme stress including his skills of
leadership. He arrived in Java in February 1942. Singapore the
bastion of Britain's Far East defences and Australia's
security had fallen to the Japanese. Three weeks
later, Weary Dunlop and his unit were captured at
Bandung. The prisoners very soon were made aware that they were in
the hands of a ruthless enemy. Almost as quickly they
became aware that in Weary Dunlop they had a leader of
equivalent bravery.
As the hospital in Bandung was being broken up and the
sick and wounded forced to march, Dunlop protested,
pointing to one man who, as he described him, was " blind
with a shattered face, amputated hands and a broken leg".
When the Japanese commander indicated to his guard that
the man was to be bayoneted, Weary Dunlop, to use his own
word, " interposed" his body.
In the next three years, Weary Dunlop ceaselessly
" interposed" his body between hope and despair, reason
and insanity, pride and humiliation life and death. He
was the principal reason for the survival of thousands of
men. Enduring the same hardships the illness, the
torture, the terror and squalor he was leader, doctor
and inspiration.
As one of his fellow prisoners wrote later:
When despair and death reached for us, he stood
fast, his only thought our well-being. Faced with
guards who had the power of life and death, ignoble
tyrants who hated us, he was a lighthouse of sanity
in a universe of madness and suffering.
Nothing I can say tonight could possibly describe the
horrors inflicted on Australian, British and allied
prisoners of war on the Burma-Thailand Railway or the
estimated 200,000 labourers from Thailand, Burma,
Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam who were press ganged
into service.
As one who went through it said the survivors often did
not talk about it simply because it was " indescribable". 
The best account by far, of course, was written by Weary
himself. The detailed diaries he kept were themselves an
amazing testament to his strength and devotion to duty.
And that it was forty years before he got around to
publishing them is equally a testament to his humility
and no doubt to his determination to get on with life.
Weary Dunlop's great qualities were universal physical
strength, intelligence and insight, courage, persistence
and, above all, boundless love for his fellow man.
Yet much in his character and the values he brought to
the appalling human trial on the Burma-Thailand railway
we recognise as unmistakably Australian. And he was
unmistakably Australian.
It was the military history of his own country which
inspired him, indeed the military history of his own
district and his own family. He went to war in London
dressed in the uniform of the First AIF, and it was as if
he was filled with the same spirit.
There is the same familiarity in his pragmatism and the
astounding capacity for improvisation he displayed in the
camps of Thailand from the saline drips he devised for
cholera victims to his tax on fellow officers to raise
revenue for food and medical supplies.
As his diaries reveal, he took to the struggle not just
stoic courage but, in the best Australian tradition, an
unfailing sense of humour and irony.
In terrible necessity he saw the need for discipline but
he also knew that authority should be earned.
He recognised that the key to survival in adversity was
willingness to share the hardship, that reliance on each
other was essential. He knew the value of mateship.
Strong as he was, he did not despise the weakness of
others. He knew that if not all were of equal capacity,
all were equal in suffering and all equally deserving
help.
We do not have to believe that these are uniquely
Australian insights into human nature, or uniquely
Australian qualities, to see in them a continuation of
the values associated with the Australian legend
including the legend of Anzac. We can see in Weary
Dunlop, and Australians' admiration of him, an
affirmation of our values, an embodiment of our best
traditions. But the legend did not stop him. He did not live the
remainder of his life in defence of the past, but in
doing all he could to ensure that Australia had a future. 
Although he had every reason to do so, he did not let the
evil he experienced destroy his faith in the capacity of
human beings for good.
The war did not close his mind to human possibility, it
opened it.
He did not live weighed down with hatred for Japan, nor
buoyed by satisfaction with his own heritage and culture.
Weary Dunlop was tortured, beaten, three times sentenced
to execution. He spent every day attempting to save the
victims of insane cruelty. He wrote in his diary on May
9 1943 that the sight of men " broken into emaciated,
pitiful wrecks, bloated with beriberi, terribly reduced
with pellagra, dysentery and malaria and covered with
disgusting sores" produced in him a " searing hatred" of
the Japanese.
Yet he overcame his hatred. He opened his heart and
his household to his old enemies, and widened his
perspective even so far, I understand, as to adopt
elements of their philosophy and culture.
He did not see his experience in Asia as confirmation of
Australia's old prejudice towards these countries, but as
proof of our necessity to understand and engage with them
not as colonisers but as colleagues.
The war convinced him that our future depended on
learning to live in Asia, and he never doubted that we
could do this and be enriched by it, and still carry on
those best traditions which he exemplified.
As one fellow POW, Tom Uren, said; " Weary Dunlop
continued to grow as a human being all his life".
That is one more reason why the story of Weary Dunlop
should be known to all Australians.
He embraced change, he encouraged it, he believed in the
possible for all his love of Australia ( and indeed of
Britain) he imagined a different Australia.
I cannot even begin to do justice to Weary Dunlop's
activity after the war. To read the startling entry in
Who's Who, rather like the Diaries, is to wonder if in
fact we are all made of the same clay.
He was pre-eminently a surgeon. The first Surgeon
appointed to the Royal Melbourne Hospital after the war,
Honorary Surgeon to the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear
Hospital, Consultant Surgeon to the Peter MacCallum
Clinic, special surgeon to the Repatriation Department,
the second Australian to become Vice President of the
International Society of Surgeons, and in 1969 leader of
the Australian surgical team in Vietnam. 
He pioneered surgery in the oesophagus, mouth and throat;
but as Les Tanner, whose larynx Weary Dunlop removed,
pointed out this year, he was among the last of the " allover"
surgeons meaning he could operate on your toe or
your head and everything in between.
And of course he was an " all-over" man; a patron,
vice-president, committeeman and member of countless
organisations in the public interest beyond the scope of
medicine not least among them the association of ex-
POWs and their relatives.
He was a pioneer, of course, of the Colombo Plan, an
adviser to Thailand, Sri Lanka and India. He lectured in
countries throughout the region. He was President of the
Australian-Asian Society.
Ladies and gentlemen
In a speech in Seattle a couple of weeks ago President
Clinton summed up the change in the countries of Asia
and in our perceptions of them by saying that the
" dominoes have become dynamos"
Weary Dunlop recognised the potential for this long ago.
In 1954 he said:
The people in these emerging nations are going
toward what they want. They have their star to win,
and they let nothing stand in their way. It uplifts
you to find that spirit.
In 1993, we in Australia are coming to terms with the
reality of their astounding success.
Not that Asia has dawned on us all of a sudden. It is
often forgotten that Australia's relations with the
region go back to the very beginning of post-colonial
Asia from our support for Indonesia's independence
movement through our participation in the defence of
Malaysia during confrontation, to our involvement in the
Colombo Plan.
Far-sighted people like Weary Dunlop and Richard Casey
and a handful of others knew where Australia's interests
lay and worked hard to build up the trading,
institutional and cultural links as the countries of Asia
grew. From soon after the end of the war with Japan, Australia
played a vital role in the economic reconstruction of its
former enemy by providing the necessary raw materials and
minerals. Thus the ground was laid for the enormously
beneficial trade relationship we now have with Japan. 
Some deep personal friendships and inistitutional and
commercial associations were forged which underpin the
close government relations and people-to-people contacts
we have today.
And I might say that we have to a very large degree
repeated this experience with the industrial miracle in
the Republic of Korea.
In the last decade, the growth of our trade and other
ties with Asia, including South-East Asia has
dramatically adcelerated.
A decade ago, 46 per cent of our exports went to Asia.
That figure has now reached 60 per cent. Over the same
decade our exports to South-East Asia have grown by 400
per cent.
We have seen a remarkable expansion in people-to-people
relationships. In 1980 just over 315,000 Australians
visited Asian countries. In 1992 the number had grown to
780, 000.
110,000 people from Asian countries visited Australia in
1979. In 1992-93 the figure was 1.2 million 650,000 of
them from Japan.
I've already made several references to " Asia" tonight.
It is a convenient term but, of course, it is also a
misleading one. It should not blind us to the great
cultural, social and other differences within the region.
It is a term we use in full knowledge of this diversity.
In this general regard, I think we can say that we have
seen substantial advances in the process of cultural
understanding. One measure of this, among many, is language learning.
In 1982, 15 per cent of Australian Year 12 students
learning languages other than English were learning Asian
languages. Today that figure has nearly doubled.
Another recent development is Australian Television
International which is now projecting images of Australia
to 15 countries of the region and fostering an
understanding of Australia that goes way beyond the old
stereotypes. I might say that this service also provides an
unparalleled opportunity for Australian business to reach
an increasingly sophisticated market through a quality
English language medium.
The sponsors of this lecture, Asialink, are another
example of the efftorts being made to heighten cultural
understanding. 
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Asialink for
the work they are doing and in particular tonight
commend them for the establishment of the Dunlop Asia
Awards Fund. I should also commend the Buckland
Foundation -for their initial contribution of $ 50,000.
And I take the opportunity to announce that the
Commonwealth Government will at least match it.
The Dunlop Fellowships will go some way towards creating
a generation of Australians who look to Asia for
stimulus, much as earlier generations looked to Britain
and Europe.
As I said, we are witnessing continuing development, a
steady progress, not a sudden revolution. Yet in the
past two years, there is no doubt that progress has been
suddenly more rapid, our activity suddenly more intense;
and, I believe, comprehension of the opportunities and
imperatives which the region represents has become
suddenly more general among Australians.
We have seen developments of considerable substance far
more developments and far more substance, I venture to
say, than we have ever achieved in such a short time
before. We have established a Ministerial Forum with
Indonesia, a structure which has enabled us to
increase co-operation across a whole range of
government business.
We have helped to create the ASEAN Regional Forum, a
new institution for the discussion of security
issues in an area formerly suspicious of
multilateral approaches to security.
We have seen the successful conclusion of the
Cambodian peace effort in which Indonesia and
Australia played such an important catalytic role.
Our relationship with Japan has developed new
dimensions and depth of co-operation. I have had
three separate meetings with the Japanese Prime
Minister in that period.
Most importantly, APEC has continued to develop, and
we saw last month in Seattle the remarkable meeting
without any officials present of a group of
leaders representing forty per cent of the world's
population and fifty per cent of its production to
discuss the challenges facing the region.
The role of leaders in these developments is vital,
because through their actions they inevitably set the
direction and symbolise national choices.
I have made it a priority to do what I can to set a
pattern of contact with the leaders of our region. 
I am pleased to say tonight that at the invitation of
Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai I shall visit Thailand next
year. During that visit I will have the opportunity to
pay my respect to over 1300 of Weary Dunlop's Australian
comrades who are buried at Kanchanaburi Cemetry. I hope
also to be present at the opening of the Australian built
and funded Friendship Bridge over the Mekong River
between Thailand and Laos.
Forging a new presence in our region has not been plain
sailing, of course, nor will it ever be. Countries have
different interests to pursue and different ways of
pursuing them.
I want to say something very briefly about the current
difficulty we are experiencing in the relationship with
the Government of Malaysia.
The difficulty began because of the reply I gave to a
question from a journalist at a doorstop press conference
in Seattle.
That answer, as I have said, was not intended to cause
offence and I regret that offence has been taken.
For more than 30 years we have had a close and mutually
beneficial relationship with Malaysia. More than 100,000
Malaysian students have been educated here; we have a
very balanced trade relationship; 85,000 Australians were
born in Malaysia.
We have always been committed to the security and
development of Malaysia and the Five Power Defence
Arrangement is a demonstration of the fact that we are
committed in the most fundamental way.
The Australian Government wants to preserve the interests
we share and the friendship between our two countries and
our two peoples. We want to work in harmony with the
Malaysian Government.
But any relationship of substance and value requires
commitment from both sides. For our part we are
committed. We are willing to put in the effort necessary
to keep the channels of communication open.
We have been putting in that effort at Ministerial level
with the visits of Senators Cook and Ray to Malaysia
within the last two days and with the contact today
between our two foreign ministers.
Ladies and gentlemen
There is now, I am sure, widespread recognition not only
that our future lies in the Asia-Pacific, but that we can
play a dynamic and rewarding role in the regional
community. 
Eighteen months ago when I gave an address to the
Asia-Australia Institute in Sydney, there were still some
loud protests decrying our ambitions. We heard them
sporadically throughout the year. It was as if we were
advocating the abolition of Shakespeare and cricket.
Ladies and gentlemen
Soon after I took office as Prime Minister I made this
point in my first major speech on Australia's foreign
policy. I said and I think it bears repeating now that we go
to Asia " as we are"
Not with the ghost of empire about us. Not as a
vicar of Europe or as a US deputy. But
unambivalently. Sure of who we are and what we
stand for. If we are to be taken seriously,
believed, trusted, that is the only way to go.
Claims that the Government is attempting to turn
Australia into an " Asian country" are based on a
misunderstanding both of my own approach and the
direction of government policy.
This is something I want to be understood very clearly
because it is at the core of my view of Australia and of
the Government's approach to relations with our
neighbourhood. Put simply, Australia is not and can never be an " Asian
nation" any more than we can or want to be European
or North American or African.
We can only be Australian and can only relate to our
friends and neighbours as Australian.
This is not an expression of self-satisfaction. Nor is
it an assertion of our mores over those of any other
country. But we want to draw on all the distinctive strengths of
our history and our contemporary democratic, pluralist
culture the rich and ancient culture of indigenous
Australians, the energy, bravery and resilience of our
early European settlers and the institutions they
created, and all the creativity and drive which comes
from the people of 150 nations who now make their home in
Australia. And we want, in particular, to draw on the talents and
experience of those immigrants now almost half our
total intake who come here from Asia.
Ladies and gentlemen 
In perhaps the most profound change of our history, the
monocultural Australia of Weary Dunlop's youth has become
a multicultural Australia; and the multicultural mix
includes a large number of people from Asian countries
who just a generation ago were excluded as a matter of
policy. In a change hardly less profound, the Australian economy
has been transformed into one which is much more diverse,
much more competitive, much less regulated and much more
capable of succeeding in the modern world.
Accompanying this process, and essential to it, a new
business culture is emerging with the emphasis on
cleverness, comparative advantage, excellence and
exports. It is no accident that exports have risen from
14 per cent of GDP in 1982 to 20 per cent in 1992.
At the same time, we have seen an extraordinary
revolution in the culture of Australian workplaces, from
perennial and habitual conflict to co-operation and
creativity. In many ways, as a consequence of these changes, we are
now seeing the greatest change of all the integration
of Australia into its own region.
The past ten years have given me the greatest faith in
the willingness and capacity of Australians to respond to
the need for change. Properly managed, change should not
be a problem for us. Our values and institutions are
strong enough our people sufficiently resourceful.
Resourceful enough to make me think that, if anything, we
should set ourselves more challenges than we have been
prepared to in the past.
Far from representing a threat to Australia's democratic
and cultural traditions, I am convinced that our capacity
for change is enlarged by living up to them. In fact I
am convinced the only way to successfully manage change
is by pulling the threads of our common values and our
common interest together.
We will not, for instance, make ourselves more
competitive by leaving marginalised large sections of the
population whether they are Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders or the unemployed.
I might say inter alia that that is why the Government
took up the challenge of Mabo: difficult and temporarily
divisive as the issue has been, the long term interests
of Australia can only be served by delivering to
indigenous Australians recognition of the truth and the
basis for justice. 
Australia will be stronger f or tackling this 200 year old
problem. We will be stronger for knowing that we have
taken up the challenge; stronger for the unity it will
ultimately bring; stronger for the international respect
and, who knows, greater self-esteem it will bring.
The need to make us a stronger, more cohesive, more
inclusive nation not to say one which is more
productive and efficient is also why we have taken on
the task of regional development. And why we are
conducting the most intensive investigation in our
history of the causes of unemployment and the means of
creating jobs. Our standard of living, our decent
values, do not have to be lost in the course of
international or regional competitiveness.
Unemployment will not make us more competitive any more
thhan will: running down our health services, or cutting
away our social security net, or making access to
education less egalitarian, or undermining in any way the
policy manifestations of our tradition of the fair go.
If we want change we have to guarantee these things
above all, we have to find ways to solve the problem of
unemployment. Paradoxical as it may sound to the more simple-minded
economic rationalists, the cause of competitiveness is
best served by a spirit of co-operation. To learn the
lesson of cooperation and the value of pooling our
strength we need only go to Weary Dunlop's diaries. But
we should not have to go to them. That lesson has always
been the same we will be much stronger for having a
sense of common purpose, of shared national goals.
There can be no greater national goal than helping to
create a vibrant Asia-Pacific community, thriving on its
economic dynamism and its cultural and ethnic diversity.
A community whose members acknowledge and appreciate each
other's differences while sharing a sense of common
economic and security interests, and a common destiny. A
community with a small " I2cas I have always said. A
community with a shared sense of possibility, a shared
idea of the future.
Ladies and gentlemen
Until recently, the diversity of the Asia-Pacific was
overlaid by the fault-lines of the Cold War and by wars
which pitted neighbours against each other and cut across
common interests and complementarities.
Now the outlook is very different. Now it is reasonable
to imagine a great self-creating, self-defining regional
community of nations. Now it is possible as never before
to see the complementarities that exist in the region and
the opportunities for co-operation. 
That is what the leaders of the region saw in Seattle.
That is why APEC is so important. APEC is a framework
for a new Asia-Pacific era. It recognises the benefits
of diversity in the region. It gives expression to the
sense of community which has emerged unplanned by
governments. And it offers a way to maintain the
momentum of co-operation and to ensure that we make the
most of the opportunities now within our grasp.
For Australia, APEC is the expression of our greatest
challenge. We want to engage with the region: to learn
from it, react with it, give something to it.
APEC is no abstraction. It is not the preserve of
politics and business.
It is important to every Australian and to future
generations of Australians.
Because APEC will make it easier for Australian companies
to do business in the region, APEC can underpin growth in
the regional economy and in the Australian economy and
thus create employment worthwhile, fulfilling
employment. Our economic integration with the region, like our
integration with the global economy, is an essential
prerequisite of economic growth and our standard of
living. It is a guarantee that Australians of the next generation
the Australians of the Pacific Century will live in a
country at the leading edge, where the innovation and
opportunities are.
At the Seattle meeting it was agreed to develop a common
non-binding set of investment principles, as a first step
towards an eventual investment agreement.
The meeting agreed to work on improving regional cooperation
in areas such as standards which will reduce
the costs of business, remove obstacles to exports and
encourage trade flows.
Recognising that continuing prosperity in the region must
be driven by the private sector, the meeting agreed to
establish a Pacific Business Forum; and recognising also
that small and medium businesses are the source of much
of the region's dynamism, they agreed that such
businesses will be brought into APEC discussions.
The meeting agreed to establish an APEC education program
which will foster people-to-people and cultural links.
The program will develop regional co-operation and higher
education, promote study of key regional economic issues,
improve workers' skills, enhance labour mobility and
foster mutual understanding of regional diversity. 
All these initiatives widen the horizon for Australia.
Business, trade and employment opportunities present
themselves. A world of great cultural richness and
diversity is open to us a world in which Australia,
calling on its traditional and newly evolving strengths,
can play a creative and rewarding part and, in so doing,
deliver prosperity and security to the Australians of the
21st century.
Ladies and gentlemen
I said earlier in this address that I believe the life of
Weary Dunlop should be required reading for every young
Australian. In his story there is an irresistible greatness, an
irresistible lesson for our times.
The greatness stemmed from those universal qualities of
courage and resourcefulness and love for humanity which
he had in such astonishing abundance.
The lesson is that we should be open to change. The
lesson is that we can be true to ourselves and yet open
to others, that we can be bold and confident without
being parochial and intolerant. The lesson is that,
relying on each other, we can take on the most daunting
challenges and succeed. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF GEELONG WOOL COMBING LTD PLANT, CORIO
DECEMBER 1993
I am very pleased to be here today at the opening of this
wool combing facility in one of the great regional cities
of Australia.
This year marks the bicentenary of the invention of the
first mechanical wool comb, an event which was followed
by combers rioting in the streets of the English wool
towns. You can't help having sympathy for the old Luddites, but
historically speaking they won a few battles and
comprehensively lost the war.
It is very important that we Australians win the war: our
industry has to be at the leading edge of progress.
And this new plant is a perfect example: it will help the
industry and the region.
We are all well aware that the wool industry is going
through a major transitional period that has not been
easy for many growers. The collapse of the Reserve Price
Scheme, the accumulation of a large wool stockpile and a
massive debt, the effects of drought and a collapse of
wool prices have all posed very significant challenges.
Equally, we know that -Geelong has not had an easy time of
it recently.
But both the wool industry and the Geelong region are
resilient: the basis for recovery is there in the quality
of the product and the people.
Both the wool industry and the people of Geelong know
that our industries and our regions need to adapt to keep
pace with international developments. Increasingly they
know that unparalleled opportunity can come from a
readiness to embrace the necessary change.
And the Government is supporting them. 
It is one of the truisms of the past that Australia
rode on the sheep's back. And it is a truism of our
present that for all the greatness of our primary and
extractive industries we have to add value to the
product. We have to get from our great resources the maximum in
dollars and the maximum in jobs.
Wool is a marvellous product a marvellous fibre. We
count wool as a primary product but nature has already
added value and marketability. Wool begins with a
distinct comparative advantage. This plant builds on it.
It adds more value.
It can't be said often enough that the image of Australia
stuck in a time warp where it is content to be a supplier
of raw commodities for others to transform is false.
The " dig it up and ship it out" mentality hasn't applied
for a long time not to the Government, not to our
businesses, not to our workers.
That this has happened is a consequence of the energy of
business and industry and the willingness of employees
to confront necessity and embrace change.
You will forgive me for saying that it is also the result
of government policies which we began to apply a decade
ago. Let me briefly run through a few facts.
The Australian economy is now around 30 per cent more
internationally competitive than 10 years ago.
In the last decade, exports have doubled.
They have grown from 13 per cent of GDP to 20 per cent.
Exports of manufactures have trebled and now exceed those
for rural products and minerals and fuels.
In the past six years exports of Elaborately Transformed
Manufactures have grown at an average rate of 19 per cent
per annum and nearly trebled in value.
Today, profits are at record levels.
Inflation is low and under control.
Interest rates are at historically low levels.
Investment is beginning to grow, just as manufacturing
output is growing strongly.
A new culture of industrial relations has been
established one which increases labour market 
flexibility and productivity growth by widening the
spread of enterprise bargaining.
Our recent business tax initiatives have ensured that the
competitiveness of our system is on a par with comparable
OECD countries.
We have reduced our corporate tax rate to 33 per cent.
We have introduced a development allowance, a general
investment allowance, a substantial acceleration of
depreciation provisions and concessionally-taxed pooled
development funds.
And we have established an orderly and manifestly
effective program for reducing tariff protection.
There were those who doubted the wisdom of orderly tariff
reduction. What they failed to appreciate was that the existing
tariff regime was manifestly inefficient and unfair
unfair to our trading partners, unfair to employees in
other non-protected areas, unfair to consumers who had to
pay more for their goods.
We had no choice but to change the focus of those
industries, which survived only through border
protection. To bring them to an outlook which is more
conducive to wealth creation for this country an export
oriented outlook.
And we are being proved right.
Take one example. For years it has been axiomatic that
Australians could never be internationally competitive in
textile, clothing and footwear industries.
Well, last year, exports in the TCF area rose by $ 534
million, a 21 per cent increase on the previous year.
They rose because the TCF industries embraced the
necessity of a new industrial culture.
The opening of this plant, as with other recent
developments within the wool and wool processing
industry, is a welcome sign that the wool industry is
embracing this new culture too.
Embracing the need for increased value adding.
The importance of utilising new technology.
The crucial requirement to be market-oriented to be
closely attuned to the needs of its customers.
And to export, export, export particularly to the
rapidly growing markets in the Asia-Pacific region. 
It is not enough, as everyone realises, that Australia
continue to dominate the global supply of wool. We
account f or some 30 per cent of world production and
per cent of finer apparel wool but that wool, of
itself, will not re-establish the pre-eminence of the
wool industry in Australia.
The bulk of our wool is still exported in greasy-form,
with little or no value added. For example, Australia's
production of wool tops accounts for only 4 per cent of
global supply and even less in later stage processed
products.
Compare this with a country such as Uruguay which
produces 3 per cent of the world's wool, but is the
second largest exporter of wool tops.
While it is pleasing to note that over the last decade
Australia has doubled its exports of scoured and
carbonised wool, and increased wool top exports by 75 per
cent, there remains considerable scope for expansion in
this area.
It is clear that if we are to secure the Australian wool
industry's long term future as a world supplier of a high
quality wool and wool products, we need to strengthen
linkages between the various segments of the wool
production and marketing chain.
This view was endorsed by the Garnaut Committee, which
was established by the Government to review the wool
industry's institutional and operational arrangements.
The committee's recommendations for new institutional
structures and a new market-driven approach were in large
part taken up by both the Government and the industry,
and new legislative arrangements to give effect to them
have just been put into place.
There is a solid base for Australia to expand its wool
processing sector, particularly in early stage
processing. We have access to a high quality and diverse wool clip.
We have a close proximity to the growing markets of Asia.
Our energy costs are competitive.
For this industry, China will be a key. It alone has
been responsible fo~ r a 20 per cent increase in sales in
the region over the past decade.
In June this year, I discussed with the Chinese Vice
Premier the possibility of developing strategic long-term
linkages between our respective wool and wool textile
industries. 
Following a series of negotiations at official and
Ministerial level, agreement was reached whereby China
would reduce, from 1 January 1994, its tariff on wool
tops to 15% that is to the same level as applies to
greasy and scoured wool.
This agreement is an encouraging step forward. It is up
to the industry now to follow it up. We simply cannot
allow such opportunities to pass us by.
The well justified satisfaction we take in the success of
our new manufacturing industries should not lead us to
conclude that our old established industries are of
declining importance. The wool industry remains a great
industry. The point which this new plant makes is that
it can become a greater one.
The decision by Bremer Woll-Kammerei ( BWK) to establish
its first plant outside Germany, is tangible evidence
that major foreign investors believe that Australia is a
location where the wool industry can renew itself.
The benefits that will flow from the establishment of
this plant are significant, both locally and nationally.
Total investment in the project is expected to be
million, and it will create more than 150 new long
term jobs, in addition to those that have been created
during the construction phase.
As a recognised world leader in the production of high
quality wool tops, BWK will also bring state of the art
processing technology to Australia.
I understand that the additional capacity of this plant
will increase to 8 per cent the proportion of the total
Australian clip processed to tops stage by 1996 about
$ 34 million a year of value will be added to the raw wool
processed at the plant.
The Government is substantially supporting this plant
with a $ 5 million grant and a $ 15 million low interest
loan
This plant is the first to be supported under a
million Further Wool Processing Program.
In future, the projects funded will generate over
$ 200 million of new investment, resulting in additional
capacity of over 30 million kilograms of wool tops, a
doubling of current top making capacity, and the creation
of 445 new jobs. Most of this additional output is for
export. This is yet another example of the importance to
Australia of market access, and why the Government has
placed so much importance on securing a successful GATT
outcome. 
That outcome now looks like delivering dollar benefits
for Australia at a conservatively estimated
billion. The immediate benefits to Australia will be in
agriculture, but the result will also see the textiles
and clothing sector again coming fully under the GATT
through the phasing out of existing import restrictions
under the Multi-Fibre Agreement ( MFA), particularly in
the important US and European Union markets.
This will free up the world trade in textiles and
clothing, estimated to be worth more than $ 100 billion
annually.
Australia will directly benefit from the liberalisation
in this sector as a substantial supplier of textile raw
materials and a growing exporter of made-up articles.
It is also reasonable to conclude that increased demand
should also push up commodity prices.
We are now in an excellent position to seize the
initiative and capitalise on the opportunities opening in
the international market for wool. I am confident that
our wool and wool-processing industry can emerge as
leading players.
I am confident, too, that the Geelong region will play an
important part in Australia's future success in this and
other industries, just as it has in the past.
Regional development is a matter of primary importance to
the Government, and, as you may be aware, we will next
week receive the report of a Task Force on regional
development, chaired by Mr Bill Kelty.
The Task Force has been inquiring into impediments to
economic development in the regions of Australia, and
into the ways in which regions can use their comparative
advantages to build their future prosperity.
There is no doubt that the internationalisation of the
Australian economy has had differing impacts on different
regions. We believe that if Governments, industry and regional
communities get together, identify the opportunities and
develop the strengths that already exist in abundance in
our regions, it will have major consequences for the
future well-being of this country.
And for the regions themselves, it will ensure that new
jobs and opportunities for enterprise and our youth can
be offered, that the local knowledge and expertise
essential to a prosperous future will not be lost, and
that the regions, which give Australia not just strength 
7
but character, will be revitalised for the twenty first
century. In conclusion, let me say again what a pleasure it is to
be here today at the beginning of a new partnership
between a great Australian industry and a great city of
Australia. And now let me officially declare the Geelong Wool
Combing facility open. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF SPEECH AND INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON P J KEATING, M. P.
GEELONG WOOL COMBING PLANT OPENING, CORIO, VIC
FRIDAY 10 DECEMBER, 1993
( Opening Remarks Speech):
I am very delighted to be here on this occasion. I think this says a great deal
about the change which is taking place In Australia, Indeed, In just this last
couple of days you can see the threads of the potential of the nineties coming
together.... with a conclusion of the GATT Round drawing to a close the
benefits of which, as you know, Australia has put the Cairns group together and
fought within the GATT now for seven years. And this agreement looks likely to
be conservatively worth about two and a half billion to Australia, which will make
a tremendous amount of difference not just In agriculture but In the trade In
goods and services. We have seen, yesterday, news of -further employment
growth In the economy leading now to 100,000 new jobs In three months which
means the economy is ticking away We had confirmation just a week or two
ago of the economy growing at about three and quarter percent and a week
before that with Inflation around two percent.
These are good things and we are seeing plants like this being developed in the
wake of Australia's competitiveness which has now been with us for the better
part of about six or seven years. So, this is a very great change and one which,
I think, these various portents hold for the 1 990s and for Australia taking Its
place more fully as a trading entity In the world 
-2-
( Doorstop Interview):
J: Prime Minister, have you had any response from the United States about
your concerns about the Blair House agreement?
PM: Well, we will be pursuing the m arket access questions right up until the
last moment but I think we have to record that the seven years of
organlsation and lobbying which Australia has organised through the
Cairns Group has now paid substantial dividends for us because we have
kept the pressure on the system and we are going to get an agreement
under the GATT and that agreement will conservatively be worth two
and a half billion dollars to Australia. That's the bulk of It. And its a case
now of understanding that with the large part of the bulk of It In place
we're now chasing down the last of the market access questions and we'll
do that right up until the agreement Is concluded.
J: What was the detail of the letter?
PM: Well, just saying that we'll still be pressing for access on particular
commodities but recording, with the President, our pleasure with the
United States' position to maintain the thrust of the Blair House
agreement, the Blair House Accord between the Government of the
United States and the European Community. That's what we wanted
most preserved. And the substance of that has been preserved and so
we're encouraging the President to complete the round, or have pressure
on to complete the round, also saying that In terms of some of the market
access questions we'd like to pursue these so that Australia walks away
with the best possible deal we can get.
J: ( naudible).. angry that it's been watered down?
PM: The Australian media wants to be permanently angry. What about being
permanently happy for a change? And that Is to say that we've got an
outcome that we could not have envisaged seven years not even
have envisaged seven years ago. At least a two and a half billion dollar
benefit to Australia; most of that agricultural change that Is there Is
because of this government. This government has built the structure to
develop a real place In the negotiations of an International GATT Round.
And we're now starting to draw some of the success from that in the
closing days of the Uruguay Rou nd. So, for Australia it's going to be a tip
top outcome. And if you take a plant like this plant here this plant will
now feed its product into a world textile Industry which Is no longer
constrained by the multi-fibre agreement, it's a two hundred billion dollar 
-3-
Industry and Wts going to be opened up to us, These are the sort of
opportunities which the GATT can produce which Australia has gone for
from the first moment It started In 1986.
J: If GATT was to go ahead with the amended Blair House Agreement In
place would It still be a tip top agreement?
PM: Let me just make a more general point because I haven't got all day here
I think what the GATs going to do Is underwrite a real pick-up in
confidence In the world and In Austraia. And that's coming as we confirm
that the Australian economy Is growing at three and a half percent, as we
saw yesterday the creation of 100,000 jobs In three months, as we saw
two weeks ago Inflation at around two percent. Australia is really well
poised to ship products competitively into the world as It renews Its own
economic recovery. And so, we're now a better set-up than perhaps
we've been In the last 20 or 30 years probably since the war to
participate In world trade as a competitive, Innovative nation and doing it
in a way which also brings the. regions of Australia Into It, like Geelong
and other regional parts of the country.
J: ( inaudible)... on rice, what would you consider a good outcome?
PM: I'm not here to give you a blow by blow, commodity by commodity answer
to that... simply to say that I was at the 1986 OECD meeting where the
Europeans were resisting putting agriculture Into the OECD communique.
Australia got It into the communique, we got It onto the G7 Summit In
Tokyo which was presided over by President Reagan, and a
consequence of that Is that agriculture went Into the round. And not just
agriculture, all the other things Australia Is Interested In, trade In services
and International property rights. So, we will have set up in a background
In trade that which we have never had before, and a large part of that
structure has been put there by Australia. Anid that's why I think the
Australian community should understand that a very big thing Is
happening here, and, I think, a very great achievement and one that I
hope will stand our economy in good stead for the next half century.
J: Can I ask a question about South Australia? What chance for Labor?
PM: In ele ctions you have to wait and see, as we found In March 1993. 1
notice there Is very demure punting by the media these days once
bitten, twice shy and all I say Is, that's a good policy.
Ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 143/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF LAOS
I am pleased to announce that the Prime Minister of the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, His Excellency Mr Khamtay Siphandone, and Mrs Thongvanh Siphandone
will make a State visit to Australia, as guests of the Australian Government, from 14 to
19 December.
Prime Minister Khamtay will be accompanied by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the
Minister of Industry and Handicraft, as well as senior Lao officials. The Prime
Minister will have talks in Canberra before attending a privately organised trade and
investment forum in Sydney entitled ' Indochina and Beyond: A New Regional Focus'.
Australia is developing its links with Laos -and there is good potential for further
expanding commercial ties. Two way trade is increasing and Australian companies are
involved in major infrastructure projects. In 1992 Australian exports to Laos totalled
$ 20.4 million with strong sales of gold, silver and platinum. Transfield recently
concluded a development agreement with the Government of Laos for a hydro-electric
power station at Nam Theun. The billion dollar project is the largest and most
important ever negotiated by the Lao Government. This is a tribute to the
professionalism of Australian business and the experience which Australia can bring to
such substantial infrastructure projects.
Australia is a significant aid donor to Laos, with a program of development
cooperation activities valued at $ 9.5 million in 1993-94. The Mekong friendship
bridge designed, constructed and funded by Australia is a symbol of our
commitment to Laos's development. I look forward to attending the opening of the
bridge in April next year.
Prime Minister Khamntay's visit provides an opportunity to strengthen government-togovernment
links between our two countries and to discuss how we might build on the
solid foundation we have established for economic relations.
CANBERRA DECEMBER 11, 1993 



PRIINMISET E
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P
J KEATING, M. P.,
WORK FOR AUSTRALIA LUNCH, THE LODGE, CANBERRA
SUNDAY 12 DECEMBER, 1993
J: Prime M~ inister, another Labor State has fallen to the conservatives, does that
pose problems for you nationally?
PM: Well, I think it's a disappointing result for Lynn Arnold and I think he deserved
better I think his government had tried hard to repair the state's economic
position as we cooperated in fuinding $ 600 million of commonwealth funds into
South Australia to ease the bank problem. But, I think what it means is now
the Labor Party is going to have to rebuild down there and focus on the needs
of South Australia, which I'm sure it will do. It's been in office for I1I years, it
was a long innings, it deserved a better result than this but the people have
made their decision and I think the party has got to take notice of it and build.
J: What difference will it make to federal/ state relations, especially in the Loan
Council, now?
PM: I don't think any difference, basically. I think we've got a very public process
now with the joint national fiscal outlook; everyone knows, basically, where the
fiscal game stands and we treat states as we find them in terms of their
problems.... each state and its problems when they arise. So, I think we'll have
the same cooperative spirit in the Loan Council and the Premiers' Conference
that we've had.
J: Does it make it harder though, to pursue.. inaudible., like industrial relations
and perhaps Mabo, things like that?
PM: Well, Mabo is in a different category. I think that we've actually had some
Coalition states in the past that we've done a lot of cooperative things with, in
terms of micro-economic reform. So, I don't really think that's a problem. I
think that we have a Federal system that works and works well, and I think it
will work well no matter who the Governments are. 
J: Prime Minister, are you satisfied now that the Malaysian matter is entirely
behind us?
PM: Oh, I think so. They've made that clear themselves.
J: Are you confident that jobs will actually flow from the Green Paper this week
people will have to wait around until Cabinet next -year to find out what
the real options are?
PM: Well, obviously, jobs can't flow from a paper the day it is presented but it will
be focusing on the long term unemployed particularly those people who
have carried the brunt of the decline in the labour market, who've been
unemployed for one or two years and we need to try and get them back their
self-esteem, back into employment and back into the mainstream labour
market. We are helped, of course, by the fact that we've had now some real
growth in the economy, as confirmed last week. We're growing now as fast as
any OECD country, we've had about 100,000 job growth in three months
which is very encouraging. And that really leavens up the labour market and
makes the difference in terms of making some of these programs work. So,
we're looking forward to the receipt of the -Employment Task Force. report, to
consider that along with the report which Bill Kelty is presenting on regional
development. And we'll consider the two in the run-up to the Budget which
will now, of course, be an early Budget.
J: Does jobs growth lessen the need for a jobs levy, do you think? I mean, we've
got growth and jobs in the economy?
PM: There's no point in me speculating about what things will emerge from the
policy consideration of it but there is no substitute for growth in the economy.
There's no substitute for growth in employment. And we are seeing growth in
the economy and, of course, we're seeing employment with it. And it's that
aggregate employment which comes from growth which is the key to making
the place that much better. And it means that the programs which do focus on
the long term unemployed are then working in a much more sympathetic
economidc environment.
J: If the Green Paper does recommend the jobs levy given that the ACTU and
others are already pushing for it how much pressure is the government then
under?
PM: The Government's not under any pressure with it. It's a matter of just making
its mind up about what it wants to do by way of new programs and how it
wishes to fu~ nd them.
J: What's your view of the jobs levy?
PM: Well, I've said before, I've got an open mind about it. But, again, I'll see what's
recommended and then consider what we might do and how that ought best be
fujnded. 
J: You've said three billion dollars is a bit much to spend on job programs. What
sort of ballpark figure are you looking at?
PM: Well, again, I can't give you that either, off the top of my head, but three billion
is a very big increase in outlays and we need to consider this report carefully.
J: Considering the growth that's going on in the economy now, do you think that
lessens the impetus for having to have a jobs levy?
PM: No, because one can talk about aggregate employment but that's an entirely
different thing to those who are long term unemployed..., those who have been,
already, out of the labour market, have lost self-esteem, lost their skills, lost
their place... and even if the labour market is picking up, as it is, it doesn't
necessarily mean those people will get a job.
J: Are you looking forward to having Bronwyn Bishop as a sparring partner in
the lower house, now?
PM: Well, I think the Liberal Party has decided to let her through. So, from my
point of view I won't be taking much notice of anything Dr Hewson says from
here on in, because I think his days are numbered. If the party wanted to
preserve John Hewson's leadership they would have stopped Bronwyn Bishop
coming into the House of Representatives.
J: So, you can see her as the next leader of the Opposition?
PM: Well, they didn't stop her and it's pretty obvious that she has run for the
leadership all year and she's now made the transition into the House of
Representatives, and I think that's probably, we're seeing the very clear end of
John Hewson's period of leader of the Liberal Party.
J: Just to go back to Dr Mahathir, do you think there's a lesson to be learnt, in the
way all this has occurred, in relations between Australia and Malaysia?
PM: Well, we've had a good thirty year relationship. It's gone back to the time of
the Indonesian confrontation period and other periods earlier than that, I think
it's a pretty robust relationship and I think this proves that.
J: If I could take you back to South Australia for a moment, given the weekend
result, there's been talk of Neal Blewett retiring, would you like to fight a byelection
down there early next year?
PM: I think the Federal Government is presiding over, now, a growth economy. We
said, in One Nation, we'd restart the economy, get it back into growth and get
employment growing. That's what we're doing. I'm quite sure, had the
Coalition won the election, you would have had Dr Hewson strutting around
saying, " Look at all this growth and look at this employment, it's all because
we've arrived." In fact, it's all because of the policies of the Labor Party with 
the One Nation package and Investing in the Nation. That's what has restarted
the economy; low interest rates, low inflation and a good economic policy.
And, it is with that promise, not just a return to growth but stronger
employment and setting ourselves up institutionally in the Asia-Pacific these
are the things that are going to be meat and drink to the Australian people. So,
why would the Government worry about testing those policies in the
electorate.
J: Do you think people can separate the state and federal issues?
PM: I think this was exclusively decided on state issues as, in fact, most state
elections are. I think this was determined on state issues and the federal
government will run on its own strengths, on its own policies.
Ends. 



13 -Dec .93
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP
ADDRESS AT INFORMAL LUNCH FOR THE -WORK FOR AUSTRALIA!
TASK FORCE, THE LODGE, SUNDAY, 12 DECEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Distinguished guests, first of all could I say that Annita and I are delighted to
have you here and thanks very much for coming. We wanted to record two
things; one, the fact that so much effort and so much goodwill was invested in
the jobs program coming through 1992 and 1993 from the jobs summit of last
year and to thank each of every one of you and those not here who were
involved in the success of making so many of these programs work.... and to
focus now on the questions of regional development and the Task Force
report which Bill Keity has chaired and which he will present next Thursday.
In the last year, of course, during 1992 when we held the jobs summit it was
probably at the depths of one's hopes and aspirations for the economy and
for the labour market, and particularly for young people, And, we've sought to
find ways to make that transition from school to work, for young people, via a
program of enhanced training. Not just higher retention rates in schools
and that itself, I think, is very important because it needs to be remembered
that just ten years ago just under three -kids in ten completed secondary
school and that's now just under nine in ten... and that's a revolution in
education. And we've now added the equivalent of about 15 universities to
the system since 1986 and we're streaming those kids 40% of the output of
our secondary education system goes through into the universitites and now,
in 1992 at the time of One Nation, we also focused upon the development of
the thing we've probably lacked most in Australian education and that was an
expanded and revamped technical and further education system; a
comprehensive system of national vocational education for those kids who
are not going to qualify themselves for a tertiary institution but who wish to
get vocational qualifications which stand and will stand them in good stead
and which will be recognised across Australia.
And, so, with those two things the higher participation rate, the streaming
through university and also for those who drop out earlier than the
TEL TEL: No3.0. D01e c. 9P3.0: 162/ 11 
TEL 1. e 9 : 2N. 0 .7
2
completion of secondary school to take them through a school-to-work
training transition. And for that, of course, we've had great support from not
just employers but from the ACTU and the constituent unions in trying to build
the institutional arrangements to let that happen. led like to pay tribute here to
Bill. Kelty for his work, but more than that, his great view of the country and his
commitment to working people and particularly young people, into the
bargain. And also to Lindsay Fox who joined with him in going around talking
to regional Australia and seeing if they could find the jobs which we know,
basically, are there, and where we could exploit the labour market programs
which the Commonwealth had set up in 1988-89 and in 1990 and in the One
Nation statement of 1992.
It's one thing having these programs, it's another thing having them used,
having them taken up so that people understand they're there and that
acutally, particularly for small business, we can do so much with them. It's
been a fact of this period of recession that we've been through a productivity
surge; and that's another way of saying we've got more output from fewer
people. And we've seen very large lay-offs in industrial companies and that
had, of course, a debilitating effect upon the labour market
As we are now starting to see the economy pick up, I think this is something
really to rejoice in because we do have growth now running at about 3.25 per
cent, we are growing as fast as any other OECD economy, we have 100,000
job growth in the last three months and we are starting to see some of the
hints of the kind of recovery we had in 1983-84 in the labour market. That is,
we are starting to see some of that stronger job growth coming through. And
as you know, those of you who have been involved in these programs, it
makes all the world of difference in being able to leaven up the labour market
with some really new employment there and despite the efforts of people like
yourselves who have put young people on and give them training and work
experience to make that transition to permanent work and already you have
told me, so many of you today, that a high proportion of those who have gone
into the programs have actually found permanent work, they have been good
employees. It makes it so much easier with labour markets that much
stronger. And so I think that is happening now and there is no substitute for
growth. In which ever way one looks at employment, there is no substitute for
growth. And the essence of the Accord which Bill Kelly and I had so much to do with
from ten years ago was in fact an implicit deal, wage restraint for employment
and the wage restraint of the ' 80$ was taken up in more employment so that
today even with the unemployment we've had Australia has 26 per cent
growth in the work force over 1983 which is still quite a spectacular figure.
So it means that more people in households are in work than would have
been without Government policy focussing explicitly on growth.
I know that people say that all governments are in favour of growth, well yes
they are, but they don't set up the policies for growth. Most of the European
economies have not been in favour of growth, they have been in favour of
13 Dec 937: 12 No. 001 P. 07/ 11 
TEL 1. e 9 : 2N. 0 .8
3
firstly of low inflation and growth has been secondary and employment has
come way behind and they have now got 17 million unemployed people in
Europe. Now, we never took this policy in Australia. We actually went for
growth until we couldn't procure it particularly with the recession and the
International recession which was built around it.
But, always we have been about growing the economy faster and we are now
starting to see the economy accelerate and as it accelerates the link between
growth and jobs which has always been there is reappearing again. But, that
Is not to say that that will deal with those who are lo ng-term unemployed,
those who have fallen to the bottom of the labour market or who have been
unemployed for twelve months or more, that have lost their self esteem, that
have lost their skills, they have lost their place and they are the people we
said in the election campaign we wouldn't forget and a day before Bill
presents his report we'll have the Employment Task Force report, the first
such major inquiry since the Second World War into the labour market which
we hope will focus some new directions on how we can bring the long-term
unemployed back up and back into the mainstream of Australian society.
Because we want to avoid things that happened In Europe and in countries
like Britain where there is 10 or 11 per cent unemployment, but wage rates
continue to rocket and you say; well, how can wage rates rocket when you
have got a pool of unemployment and the answer is because they are
sidelined they are out never to come back and the labour markets
requirements are then met with new entrants to the work force, from schools,
new people joining the labour market.
So, we don't want that to happen and we do want to focus on those long-term
unemployed and to bring them back into the main culture of Australian
society, the economy and the labour market and that Is why the jobs
programs are important, that's why the labour market programs are important,
they are not in themselves job creation programs as much as they are things
that find people who have been disadvantaged In the labour market or longterm
unemployed and give them a chance to get work experience, self
esteem and a permanent job.
Now, In the ones which Bill . and Lindsay ( Fox) and you are focussed on are
mainly for those who are young people those in that sort of 16 to 20 area
who have never had the joy of being in employment and having that kind of
independence. So, it was a problem of particular size and dimension and we
have attacked that and Bill gave you the figures a moment ago that there are
50,000 jobs there committed and 31,000 in place and that is a tremendous
effort and I think that we should, while there is a lot of corporate effort here in
the doing of that, just record the fact that Bill Kelty and Lindsay Fox were the
prime movers in this coming from that jobs summit last year and they are to
be congratulated for the hope and the joy they have given so many young
people. The future now is how do we get the labour market moving again? How do
we bring those who have been disadvantaged back into it? How do we build
13. Dec .937: 12 No-001 P. 08/ 11 
13 Dec 93
4
on the skills that we have? Because don't doubt for a moment that Australia
has been through an absolute revolution in the way this economy is set up in
the last ten years. We are more now outward looking, we are more confident,
we now recognise what our strengths are more than we have ever done and
as a consequence we are now building on those skills and those advantages
and whien often the advantages are right under our nose we can't see them.
But I think Australians now appreciate the particular advantages which we
have and that we are out there to build upon them and to make them work
and that is why we can see, I think, a greater future for regional areas in this
country and regional Australia is so well represented here today and it has to
be I think, to build on our comparative advantage; first of all to recognise it, to
understand it, to build on it and to see where the regions of this country can
find themselves in the national and international economy of the Asia-Pacific
In particular. This we are doing and we are doing it not as successfully as we
would like, but we have started I think, to understand that there are many
diverse advantages and skills in regional Australia and that that is something
to build upon.
I look forward to the receipt of Bill's report next week to give us a chance to
even up employment and business opportunities across Australia and to let
the regions of Australia know that they are also part of the great economic
change of the last ten years and the benefits will not simply be the preserve
of the cities, but also of the regional areas.
There is a new co-operative ethic In Australia, a productive and co-operative
ethic which has come out of this, There is a sea change in business, I mean
ten years ago what business wanted was more tariff protection, but when you
look at the business environment today it something that hardly anybody in
business ten years ago would have imagined. That was, we are 30 per cent
more competitive than ten years ago; we have got an inflation rate of 2 per
cent instead of 10 per cent; we have got a competitive exchange rate
mechanism in place; we have got a 33 per cent corporate tax rate instead of
46 per cent; we have got removal of the double tax on dividends so dividends
are taxed only once, where in the ' 70s and early ' 80s we had debt taxed once
and equity taxed twice now we have got debt taxed once and equity taxed
once so we are really set up a good depreciation schedule and a very high
profit share in the economy.
So, all these things are there basically now to power investment along in a
sustainable way and particularly now with the banking sector somewhat more
experienced and more mature coming from the early days of financial market
deregulation. We are going to see scarce national assets put in the right
places this time rather than simply chasing inflation in property and other
things and so when you look at the whole of that together, that tremendous
mix and the fact that we are also not just set up for growth and investment
and employment, but we are sitting in the area of the world that is growing
most rapidly in the Asia-Pacific. And in that the Government in the last ten
years has pursued the GATT Round which is now coming to a successful
conclusion; where there will be about a $ 2.5 billion advantage for Australian
TEL TEL: No3.. 0De0 .19 37P: 1.029 / 11 
TEL: 13. Dec. 93 7: 12 No
producers in world markets as a consequence of the GATT and then in the
things the GA77 can't do In our immediate area we are setting up APEC
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation into an economic community-which will
see Australia integrated for the first time in its commercial history truly
integrated outside of empire preference which was a thing that powered us
along in the late 19th Century and early 20th Century will be set up in the
Asia-Pacific as an integral part, as a country integrated into it as never
before. So, you took at the big market of the Asia-Pacific, our integration with it a
really good fine texture in the GATT rules for agriculture, intellectual property,
services and goods that gives us a good set of rules and dispute settling
mechanisms to really power trade along and then look at our own economy
per cent more competitive, low inflation, the lowest interest rates for
years, a good fiscal scene; all of these things I think mean that Australia
really can participate and the Australian economy can continue to change as
it has been changing.
This must spread through to the regions of this country and that this is an
Inclusive change which involves the whole of the community and that means
that nobody gets left out and that means particularly the young people, those
who are young and unemployed, the long-term mature aged unemployed and
the regions of Australia which have felt the pinch of the recession and
unemployment even more cruelly than other parts of the country.
So, we wanted to just record with you today, firstly our thanks for what you
have done in dedicating yourselves to the work and happiness of so many
young people who might not have otherwise found themselves in employment
and the esteem which comes with it, for focussing on the problems of regional
Australia and co-operating with Bill and Lindsay Fox in trying to articulate
what they are, in articulating to the task force the problems and being able to
communicate those to us so that as we focus on this coming Budget we can
look at the reception of the Employment Task Force and the Regional
Development Task Force reports, consider them in policy as a whole, as a
totality at a time when the economy has got some natural lift in it and where
the labour market is responding.
So these are, I think, cause for hope that we can really do much better across
the country, but particularly in regional terms next year and in the next couple
of years as the economy really gets a spurt on.
So could I again just thank you for coming. Annita and I are pleased to see
you here at The Lodge to share this day with us and as I say to record our
thanks for your commitment to young people, for the effort you made and to
awaken employers who didn't know about the labour market programs, that
they do exist and there Is real complement to them in terms of labour that Is
available under these Commonwealth labour market programs. And, can I
say again finally to Bill Kelty thank you Bill for your very unselfish efforts
over the last 18 months on the road so many days in each week and so many .001 P. 10/ 11 
TEL: 13. Dec. 93 7: 12 No. 001 P. 11/ 11
6
nights into regional Australia and with Lindsay who is not here at the moment,
but may arrive later there are some great people on Australian business and
they have stuck their neck out and they have made a great effort and I want
to thank them too. But to those of you who are representing regional
councils, regional institutions, companies, the CES, radio, television and
other important areas of the regional economy, thank you ever so much for
coming, we hope you enjoy the day and you will give me an enhanced
opportunity to talk to you because while I get around the regions quite a bit,
you can never get so many regions crowded into one place at one time as
today and that is something I am looking forward to.
Thank you. We will now complete our official speeches and we can go and
have a lunch and have a pleasant talk together, thank you one and all. 



TEL: 14. Dec. 93 7: 13 NO. 001 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATINGt MP
PUBLIC SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
The Government will be recommending to the Governor-General the
appointments of Mr Andrew Podger and Mr Sandy Hollway as secretaries of
departments. Mr Podger, 45, has held senior positions in the Departments of Social
Security and Finance. He has been Deputy Secretary of the Department of
Defence since 1990. The Government will be recommending his
appointment as Secretary to the Department of the Arts and Administraive
Services. Mr Hollway, 46, has held senior positions In the foreign affairs portfolio, the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Prime Ministes
OffIce. He has been Deputy Secretary of the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet since 1990. The Government will be recommending his
appointment as Secretary to the Department of Industry, Technology and
Regional Development.
Mr Noel Tanzer, who has been Secretary to the Department of the Arts and
Administrative Services since 1 March 1989, w ll be retiring from the
Australian Public Service. On behalf of the Government, I express
appreciation for the considerable contribution niade by Mr Tanzer during his
career, especially in recent years as Secretary to the Departments of
Veterans' Affairs and Administrative Services.
Mr Neville Stevens, has been Secretary to the Department of Industry,
Technology and Regional Development since 22 December 1990.
Previously, he was Deputy Secretary In that Department from June 1985.
While the Government considers it timely for a change in the leadership of the
Department of Industry, Technology and Regional Development, it wishes to
continue to draw on Mr Stevens' considerable skills and experience.
Accordingly, the Government will be recommending Mr Stevens' appointment
as a Commissioner of the Industry Commission.
The Government will recommend that these appointments take effect on
Monday, 20 December 1993.
CANBERRA 13 DECEMBER 1993 



PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE1F PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P4. KEATIN( G, MP
OPENING OF ARTHUR BOYD RETROSPECTIVE
ART GALLERY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
TUESD) AY 14 DECEMBER 1993
1 am delighted to bc here this evening at the opening of a long overdue retrospective
exhibition of the work of one of Australia's, not to mention the world's, great living
painters. At the time of Arthur's last retrospective, the critical notice in the Adelaide Advertiser
was accompanied by a special offer of a washing machine for forty nine guineas, which
gives you an idea of how long it has been between drinks.
Thirty years in fact.
That is remarkable in itself. But what is even more remarkahlc is that, at the time or
thec Adelaide retrospective, Arthur had already been painting ror thirty years.
He started painting at a Lime, as one writer has said, when the air was heavy with the
arrogance and respectability of old men, old and tired in spirit and in the handling of
painlt. When some critics were happy to announce that Australian art pointed to the way in
which life should be lived in Australia, with the miaximum of flocks and the minimum
of factories.
A permanent Antipodean arcadia.
We owe Arthur Boyd a large debt for removing Australian art from this rcalm of
provincial complacvency.
With sonmc of the most compelling image., of any painter before or since, he showed us
those factories and the social deprivation which went with them, lie opened our eyes
to the horrors of war. To the plight of indigenous Australians and our callous
disregard for their future. To the threat to our environment. 
Like Nolan and Drysdale, whose work was also featured during the 1964 Adelaide
Festival, Arthur Boyd has provided us with new ways of seeing Australia and a new
sense of being Australian.
A warts and all way. A way that. is more complete, and thereby mome valid.
This is not to suggest that Arthur's work is a catechism of grim rectitude. Nothing
could be further from the truth.
As befits such a delightful character, his work is full of jollity, of gentlc mockery and
self deprecation. But at the appropriate time, as I have said, it is serious too.
Someone once said that Arthur Boyd as a painter of the Australian landscape was able
to successfully combine the golden vision of Streeton with the darkness conveyed by
earlier painters such as Buvclot and thereby to show us the hush it rcally was a
thing of menace as well as beauty.
In a more general sense too, he has enabled us to sec the darkness as well as the light
in Australian life. Just as Manning Clark did. Just as novelists like Rodney Hall and
David Malouf are doing.
For the last sixty years, despite the fashions of the moment, he has been there, taking
our spiritual temperature, and offering his prognosis for our national well-being in his
own unique way.
Not hecoring or harassing. Jus opening our cyes to things which wc might have been
otherwise inclined to overlook or sweep under the national carpet.
As he himself has said, he has been concerned with a certain grandeur in things, even
little things. And he has been second to none in helping us to comprehend the
dimensions of that grandeur.
People whose judgment is much morc expert than mine see in Arthur's work a wide
ranige of influences. At times it seems that of itself it is a mini-history of Western art.
But, as Barry Pearce points out in the exhibition catalogue, while he has takcen what he
has needed from European tradition, he has also given back something of his own
which is a sense of our essential difference.
He has brought to Australians, and to the world at large, a sense of the Australian
identity. In this way he has lived up to the credo of the Antipodean Manifesto " in the growth
and transformation of its myths a society achieves its own sense of idcntity. In this
process the artist may play a creative and liberating rol." Y
Other artists have played this role too, but it is hard to recall anyone who has played it
better. 
Arthur's own career has so far spanned sixty years.
But when one takes into account his remarkable forbears and talented relations, it is
fair to say that when we eecbrate Arthur's achievements we arc also paying tribute to
the Boyd family. The Boyds have been intimately connected with art and letters in
Australia for well over a century.
And in a country which has only known Lwo centuries of European settlement, such a
family contribution to our history is surely unique.
It is fair to say that, for ordinary Australians, the idea of being grateful for the
existence of partcular faimilies is somewhat a novel idea.
From the early days of the colony we have rejected the idea of a bunyip aristocracy, of
the idea of special status deriving from the inheritance of money, or property or other
privilcgc. But the Boyd family is nothing like that.
Their status derives from the spiritual rather than the material dimension from the
fertility of their imagination, and their ability to convert it by pen, paintbrush or pottcrs
wheel to a vision of ourselves which we otherwise mightn't have had.
Arthur, I'm sure, because he is such a modest and unassuming person, would be the
last person to claim any special status for his family indeed, he would probably reject
it with the same vehcmence that he rejects any ascription of special status for himself.
But he is a special Australian, as the work in this exhibition attests.
And an Australian of rare gencrosity.
Many people here tonight arc probably aware that some of the works in this exhibition
are part of the 1975 Boyd gift to the National Gallery. A gift which played no small
part in getting the Gallery going.
But not enough for the Boyds.
Early this year I met Arthur and Yvonne in the sadder circumstances of a memorial
service to their brother-in-law and great friend, Sir Sidney Nolan.
I was privileged to be able to speak about Si Nolan's legacy to Australia's cultural life,
just as I have been able to do in relation to Arthur today.
And I was able too to announce the Government's acceptance of the girt by Arthur and
Yvonne Boyd of their beloved Bundanon properties.
This was a gift to the nation of profound significance, and one which the
Commonwealth Government was proud to accept and to support. 
Subsequently the Bundanon ' Irust was established and we provided $ 5.43 million to
help it bring to reality Arthur Boyd's great vision for Bundanon.
As if that gift wasn't enough, I am plcased to be able to announce tonight that the
Bundanon Trust is to be the beneficiary equally with his children of the copyright in
all of Artur Boyds works.
Arthur's assignment of his copyright means that his support for the work of the Trust
will continue for many ycars to come.
The Bundanon gift is valued in money terms at more than $ 12 million.
I hope that Arthur and Yvonne Boyd's great generosity will be matched by thc rest of
Austalia when the Bundanon Trust commences its major gifts campaign early next
year with my strong support.
All Australians wil have the opportunity to assist Bundanon through the Trust's
Donations, Friends of Bundanon and Merchandising Programs, and I urge them to do
SO. It remains for me to congratulate the Art Gallery or New South Wales for the
tremendous achievement of putting this show together. Edmund Capon, Barry Pearce
and Patricia McDonald have assembled a collection which can more than hold its own
with any of the overseas blockbusters.
And that perhaps gives the truest indication of the achievement of Arthur Boyd.
To a painter who wanted to paint the Great Picture, or if not the great one, then some
very good ones, I can only say in sincere admiration, Arthur, that your wish has been
granted in abundance, and we arc all the better for it.
And now I have great pleasure in declaring the exhibition open. 



PRIM MINSTER147 / 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINSTER. THE HON P 3 KEATING MP
URUGUAY ROUND
The Uruguay Round deal to be concluded today will deliver the largest ever world trade
deal and a much needed shot in the arm for the world economv. The OECD has estimated
that for agricultural and industrial products alone it will result in an increase in global
economic activity of up to $ 418 billion by the year 2002 when the effects will be fully felt.
Australia will benefit from enhanced market access. and more predictable market
conditions. The income gain for Australia has been estimated by the OECD at $ 2.5 billion
per year. More recent assessments by the Industry Commission suggest that there may be
as much as a $ 5 billion increase in exports and a $ 3.7 billion increase in Australian gross
domestic product. The results include:
well over $ 1I billion in increased agricuiture exports
a more than fifty per cent cut on average in tariffs across Australia's manufactured
exports. The tariff cuts on Auistralian manufactures will total at least $ 400 million.
improved conditions of trade for our mineral exports. especially coal
the biggest market access tariff cutting package ever achieved 30 times larger than
outcomes achieved from previous rounds
To these figures need to be added gains from expanded services exports and increased sales
and royalties for Australian know how.
Importantly, these increased export opportunities will translate into tens of thousands more
jobs for Australians.
Australia can justly claim credit for its role in securing these benefits. Darticuiarly in the area
of agriculture. As a leader of the Cairns Group. we have worked tirelessly with other likeminded
countries to address the distortions in world a~ zricultural markcts somethin~ z that
has eluded the world trading community for the last 45 years. The Round will see:
3882-
a 21 per cent reduction in subsidised export volumes, an outcome that will be
particularly significant in relation to Europe and the United States, our principal
competitors in world agricultural markets
limits on the extent to which governments can artificially support inefficient domestic
industries cuts in trade barrers and improved market access for a wide range of commodities of
particular significance to Australia ( including rice. beef, dairy), and
a much more predictable and transparent trading environment through the conversion of
non-tariff measures to tariffs, together with commitments to reduce tariffs substantially.
There will be almost 50 million tonnes 1= subsidised wheat on world markets over the
period 1995-2000 than if the current level of export subsidies had continued.
The difficulties Ausukaihas experienced as a result of the US Export Enhancement
Program ( EEP) will also be reduced under the new export subsidy disciplines. Total
allocations for subsidised wheat under the EEP scheme this year were 32 million tonnes and
$ US 1 billion; by the year 2000. these will be limited to 14.5 million ronnes and $ US 364
million. Beef, rice, and other commodities will each benefit from reductions in export subsidies.
Combined with major improvements in market access, these measures open key agricultural
markets and provide for expanded production.
The Andriessen assurance protecting Asian markets from subsidised EU beef exports will
continue. We have also won a new assurance from the United Stares that FEP subsidised
rice will nor be introduced inro the newly opened Asian markets.
Once the agreement is fully implemented. Australian farmers can expect an increase in
income of around $ 1 billion per year from these reforms to world agricultural trade.
Australia is likely to receive:
an extra $ 340 million per year in beef exports with significant improvements in the US.
Japanese and Korean markets. The US Meat Import Law which has created difficulties
for Australia since 1964 will be repealed.
$ 250 million in wheaL
$ 125 million in dair-Y.
Producers of coarse grains, sugar. sheepmeat and rice are expected to benefit by up to 175
million. The decisions by Japan and the Republic of Korea to open their rice markets for the first
Lime symbolises the hiich level of commitment to achieving a positive Round outcome. I
recognise and pay tribute to the leadership displayed hy Prime Minister Hosokawa and
President Kim Young Sam on this issue. From 1995. Japan will allow in around 400. M()
tonnes of imported rice or four per cent of d6mestic production. Over the period through to
the v'ear 2000. that access will increase to 800.000 tonnes around double Australia's
current level of total rice exports. valued at around $ 230 million. 3 8 8: i 
In minerals and mauatrdproducts. Australian exporters will meap major dividends
through the final across-the-board figure for tariff cuts of close to 50 per cent. And
importantly. over 75 per cent of Australia's total trade will now face ' bound" tariffs,
increasing certainty for exporters. Key outcomes include significantly improved market
access for non-ferrous metals, steel, processed foods. and a wide range of high value added
manufactured exports.
An agreement has been negotiated to improve conditions of Australia's coal trade to Europe
by eliminating trade barriers and securing reductions in subsidies on coal.
Participation, for the first time, by a wide range of developing countries in the outcomes will
bring guarantees of improved market access in some of the fastest growing world markets,
particularly those in our region.
The agreement on trade in services will provide. for the first time. international rules that
allow Australian services exports. already worth some 15 billion, to compete on an equal
footing in this fastest growing area of world trade.
The services agreement will provide important guarantees of non-discriminatory access in
telecommunications with a regional market expected to grow to over $ 110 billion.
Financial reform in regional markets should ensure continuing improvements to market
access under the GATS.
Export prospects of business services and the professions will be improved in important
markets such as legal services in Japan and insurance markets in Korea.
Australian cultural industry and intellectual iroperty innovators will receive a boost from
this outcome. Our music and film producers, writers and book publishers and computer
software industry will all benefit from intellectual property and copyright protection which
will result from the Trade in Intellectual Property ( TRIPS) agreement.
There will also be important benefits to manufacturing exporters and business from
strengthened and improved agreements on standards, anti-dumping and industrial subsidies.
On the environment, the Round is expected to result in agreement to a trade and
environment work program for the new Multilate ral Trade Organisation. The inclusion of
trade and environment in the Uruguay Round agreement reaffirms the goals set at Rio de
Janeiro last year and will facilitate the integration of trade and envirornent policies.
As I said following the Seattle Summit. I believe the GATT-and APEC will perform
complementary and mutually reinforcing functions. GATT sets the framework at the global
level, providing a set of rules to liberalise trade in goods and services, and protecting
intellectual property rights. Within this framework. APEC is there to facilitate and expand
regional trade by encouraging cooperation, a greater sense of shared interests. and working
towards harmonisation of rules and standards.
3 8 P4 
The successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round will fundamentally strengthen the base for
Australia's economic expansion. Our export performance. one of the success stories of the
Australian economy over the last decade, can only continue to improve as industry takes
advantage of the trading opportunities presented by the finalisation of this marathon
process. The commtment of Australia, in its own right and as a leader of the Cairns Group of fair
agricultural traders, has paid off. I would like to particularly commend the efforts of our
negotiators in Geneva. ably led by Senator Cook-Their unstinting efforts in pursuing the
best possible outcome for Australia have ensured that we will benefit substantially from the
opening of trading opportunities which this historic GATT deal represents.
The Uruguay Round outcome will lead to a more open and active trading system. expansion
of economic activity, greater prosperity and employment. The multilateral trading system
has been expanded and revitalised this will serve Austr-alia well into the next century. It is
a fitting conclusion to the most ambitious multilateral trade exercise ever undertaken. We
have had 7 long years of negotiations with 100-plus countries each vying to ensure their
priorities were reflected in the final deal. It is extremely heartening that in the final days. all
participants recognised that the compromises they have made are more than made up for by
the benefits flowing from a successful overall outcome.
CANBERRA December 15,1993 3885 



PRIME MINISTER 148/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIVE TITLE BILL GOVERNMENT AMENDMENTS
The Government this morning circulated a number of carefully considered proposed
amendments to the Native Title BUi.
The amendments have been prepared for several reasons:
I a number respond to the recommendations of the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Committee's report on the Bill
U a number respond to legitimate concerns put to the Government by Aboriginal
interests.
HI a number are merely technical improvements or clarifications.
TV importantly. other proposed amendments involve fine tuning of land
management processes arising from the Bill and in particular are designed to
make even clearer the certainty the Bill provides to economic interests and
other g~ rant holders, on such matters as renewal of pastoral and mining leases.
The proposed Government amendments take into account a wide range of views and
interests across all sectors of the community. They represent as does the Bill itself a
balanced package. They all improve the Bill.
The Opposition's strategy of blanket opposition to all Government amendments is
counter-productive and against the interests of all Australians, including industry
groups and Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders.
The fact that the Opposition announced their strategy this morning. prior to circulation
of the Government amendments, proves that they are not prepared to consider theseamendments
and indeed the provisions of the legislation as a whole. on tneir mer-its.
Their approach sells out the very interests they claim to be representing.
CANBERRA December 1993 



TEL: 12. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AND THE MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING,
THE HON KIM BEAZLEY, MP, JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 15 DECEMBER, 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Well, today I have received the report of the Committee on
Employment Opportunities. This is the first such report of its-kind which any
Government has commissioned since the Second World War. And the
Government established a committee this year requiring it to look at the
causes of Australia's unemployment and the policy options for the future.
I think the first thing to understand is that this is not a Government report. It
is a report to the Government and to the Australian community. And on a
matter such as this, a matter which has had such public discussion in the last
couple of years, last year in particular, there needs to be further public
discussion on how best to remedy the problem as a basis for such a
discussion. And that must occur between now and the deliverery of a white
paper on the subject early next year.
During this process of discussion I think it would help us all to reflect on the
fact that the pros and cons most of us, business people, lobby groups, those
who understand the issue, politicians, will all do that from the comfort station
of having a job. -In other words to -be effective the -process -will require all
Australians to imagine what it is like to be out of work. Now, this was a major
issue in 1992, it was a major issue in the election campaign, and there seems
to me to have been a fairly strong consensus in Australia that high levels of
unemployment and particularly long term unemployment are unacceptable to
us. Unemployment is a problem because it makes the economy inefficient, but
principally of course, it is against our Ideals, egalitarian ideals, of an
opportunity of work for people, it has a devastating effect on individuals and
their families, it debilitates social cohesion, it increases the cost of welfare,
and hence the burden of taxation, it limits the scope of public expenditure on
other things, Including reducing our public debt. And it Is our greatest
contemporary problem. 
TEL: 12. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 11
2
Now, the report makes these issues fundamentally clear. It says there's no
single simple solution to unemployment, no single solution, but without
question an essential condition Of success in the fight is a high unsustainable
rate Of economic growth. Now, we have got substantial reason for
confidence, that we can grow the economy at some speed. At the moment
we are growing at around 3.5 per cent, which Compares favourably with our
OECD counterparts, and as you know we have got interest rates low, we
have got inflation low, we have got a high profit share in the economy, and we
are more competitive than we have been in our living memory. So, there is
every reason that we can see Investment pick up and growth continue. The
report makes clear that more change is needed, that we will need to keep up
all the issues of our competitiveness to keep that growth going.
Now, the Government is of the view that we can restore full employment and
that we should be bearing down on unemployment. But the report says we
can only do this provided the Government and all sections of the community
are prepared to develop a new and stronger sense of national purpose and a
consensus that the goal is worth pursuing.
Now, the report details what we are spending now on labour m arket
programs. It talks about the long term unemployed, it makes clear that at the
end of the employment boom there was still 100,000 people unemployed for
12 months or more, and that that equivalent group is now 340,000 people, the
number of long term unemployed has risen. And that the report makes clear
that this has a severe social implications and is a severe impediment to
labour market efficiency, and I think this should be underlined and
understood. It is a severe impediment to labour market efficiency.
So, it Is a most important report, not just for the Government, and not just for
the unemployed, but for the community as a whole. We have not had a thing
like this produced in the past. It raises questions which are fundamental to
the kind of society we have and have had. And I think reminds us of the
issues which need to be addressed in keeping a cohesive society together of
the kind we have had.
So, I do urge all Australians to recognise unemployment is their concern, and
to make full employment their goal, and with that kind of national consensus a
discussion around this paper and the white paper which will follow, I think,
can take us materially down the path of bearing down on unemployment and
attaining that goal of full employment.
Now, before I invite questions I will invite my colleague, Kim Beazley, to
address you with any remarks on the topic from the report that he thinks are
appropriate. KB: If I could just add to underline one of the things that you said, Prime
Minister, and that is this, this is not a work creation sche -me that has been
handed to the Government. It is not about a number of full time jobs being 
T1E2L:. Jan. 9412: 30 NO. 006 P. 12
3
created. What it is about is putting the unemployed in a position where they
can be job ready and employable.
It is about ensuring a situation does not develop, which~ unattended will, and
that is by the end of this decade we have still got, no matter what levels of
growth we achieve, around about 7 or 8 per cent unemployed, half of whom
are long term unemployed. Well, the committee points out that if this is
implemented or something like It those numbers will be trending down to
about 5 per cent, with only about I per cent of them long term unemployed.
Long term unemployed left to themselves will stay at about 300,00, picked up
here will go down to 90. So, it is also about growth, efficient labour market is
critical to growth, if we are experiencing bottle necks as we are starting to, I
must say, in Western Australia at 9 per cent levels of unemployment, if we
are starting to experience bottle necks at 7 or 8 per cent unemployment we
will then get inflationary pressures which will damage growth and we are
going to find in subsequent recessions a plateauing of unemployment at
higher and higher levels.
It Is not an acceptable outcome to the Government, it is obviously not
acceptable to the taskforce, and that is the very heart of their
recommendations. J: Prime Minister, the report says that funding -the jobs compact will
require either a reordering of current priorities in the budget or the
raising of revenue. Which is your preferred option?
PM: Well, I don't have preferred options at this stage, it is a matter of
considering what we think we may do from the report and then seeing
where that fits within our priorities, and making judgements about
them. The Commonwealth budget is now over $ 100 billion in size,
there is always a degree of discretion on the part of the Government
about how that $ 100 odd billion ought to be spent, and indeed about
how it is raised. And I think the core matters here are, do we believe
that unemployment should be addressed, and particularly long term
unemployment? If we believe that, how do we most efficiently address
that problem? . And-with what. programs, arnd at what cost, and then
when we get the answers to those questions, we then decide how we
fund it, and not the reverse.
J: Do you think the challenge is sufficient though, or great enough to
warrant thinking about the bottom line, to think about whether or not
you should increase the deficit?
PM: Well, I think the press have got a fascination this week for how this
thing is funded rather than what it is. I mean, this is a very novel
report, and it is one, as Kim has said, which focuses on this question of
the efficiency of the labour market and the long term unemployed.
Now, what the ' 80s showed was despite the fact that we had strong
aggregate employment growth, and we got unemployment down, or be
TEL: 
TEL: 4
it In the face of a very high participation rate and a very big lift in
participation, we did not succeed in changing by a large measure that
character of the long term unemployed. It took us a long time to get it
down. Now, that group has now trebled, and that poses problems of
efficiency in the labour market, which the economy shouldn't need to
bear, as Kim said, I mean it is just unacceptable to be thinking about
bottle necks with unemployment of 9 per cent in Western Australia as
an example he gave. So, therefore it is a matter of looking at the
programs and thinking about the problems and how the social security
system should be set up and us making, as we have in the ' 80s on
many issues, another quantum leap in the way the Australian society
functions. And we have done it in health, we have done it in
education, and we have done so much of it in social security with
income support, and we are prone to be doing it again here. I think
that is the story, the story is not how it is to be funded.
J: Prime Minister does the Government's four year deficit reduction
strategy remain intact?
PM; Well you are asking me just another way of putting the same question.
I Before this report was released you said that you were hoping for
some radical and innovative ideas to combat unemployment. Has it
matched your expectations or are there things that you think haven't
been touched on in this report?
PM: I think it is a comprehensive examination of the problem. The problem
Is that a category of people, a large block of Australians, group of
Australians, the long term unemployed would be otherwise
marginalised or sidelined other than in the event that we get them back
into the main stream labour market or to use Kim's expression ' Job
ready". What has happened in countries like Britain for instance, is that
despite the fact of quite a large pool of unemployment, wages growth
continued to move along quite strongly and you would say well, how
does this happen when there Is quite a pool of unemployment? It has
happened because they were marginalised. These people were no
longer part of the employment equation and what happened is the new
entrants to the British labour market were people who came from
school or from universities et cetera or from migration. They did not
come from the pool of long-term unemployed. That is a terrible
efficiency drain on the country, it is a story of multiple personal
tragedies and the despair which comes from the long-term unemployed
and we can, I think, take the opportunity to address that problem. So,
that is what the report is looking at that is, how do we move towards
. I mean do we mean it when we say we believe in the goal of full
employment, or do we take the view which says if you were part of the
adjustment process and you got adjusted out, you are unemployed,
T1E2L: . Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 13 
TEL: 12. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 14
bad luck for you, the rest of us are now back on the gravy train and we
are moving on. And now it has pulled out of the station, it has got a
head of steam up again, we are just seeing you disappear into the
landscape, forgetting about you.
The report goes to address those issues.
J: Prime Minister, the employers argue that a more flexible labour market
would create 200,000 new jobs without the necessity of having to look
so closely at the bottom line, you know offer jobs levy or increased
deficit or whatever.
PM; Yes, that on the balance of assessments of whether one looks at the
long-term unemployed or has a reduction in nominal wages it is the
former rather than the latter which is the preferable choice. Because
why should the whole community have a reduction in purchasing
power and earnings to try and induce some more employment, but
even if it does it will not go to these people. That is the key point
even if it did, it doesn't go to these people. It will reduce the aggregate
pool of unemployment, but it will not pick these people up and why
would we do it when the profit share Is already at the late ' 80s levels
beyond any historical experience we have had at that point. What are
we saying are employer groups saying to us-we want a profit share
not only above the late ' 80s experience, but that is way beyond any
historical experience. The whole point of economic policy and
economic growth is economic growth and economic wealth and that
means over time, higher real incomes not lower real incomes. Our
objectives should be higher real incomes not lower real incomes.
J: see your responses to this report it seems to set out some fairly
clear goals for policy, that is faster economic growth and a target of at
least 5 per cent unemployment, that Is drop to 5 per cent
unemployment by the Year 2000. Would you embrace those goals or
would you actually be aiming for a better unemployment outcome by
the turn of the century?
PM:-There is a set of charts in here I think, a couple of bar charts, and what
one shows is that in the ' 82-3 to ' 89-90 period, we experienced GDP
growth on average of 4.3 per cent. What the report argues is that to
reduce unemployment down to around 5 per cent by the Year 2000
instead of 7 per cent we would need to be running at about 4.8 instead
of 4.3. This doesn't seem to be outside the realms of possibility, but it
Is something which the report is proposing. It Is not something which it
is urging the Government to make as a target which is the word you
used. Rather it is, has the changes of the ' 80s, the new business
culture, the more competitive culture, the enterprise flexibility, after we
move through the aggregate reduction in wages versus profits and now
the leavening and flexibility which enterprise bargaining is giving and
which the new federal award variations provisions of legislation carried 
TEL:. 12. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006
last night gives as these things come through, as businesses are now
more productivity conscious and they are running companies more
flexibly, as the labour market is now far more flexible, in the running of
rates of growth in the 4.5 -5 per cent area would ' we be able to restrain
prices and imports.
In other words, is there enough productivity growth and enough
Investment to keep it there? I should hope there is because if there
isn't it just means we are going to end up with a pool of unemployment
higher for longer and It will mean the gap between the wealth of this
country and the wealth of the countries in our region will get greater as
their growth rates easily exceed ours.
J: The Hawke Government In 1983 set a goal for how many jobs it would
like to see created over its first term. I suppose I'm wondering whether
YOU Would like to once you have considered this report, and the
appropriate responses to it also set a similar jobs target?
PM: We put half a million up in the ' On e Nation' package.
J: It hasn't moved on since then as this report shows..
PM: That and we have also in terms of the discussions we had with the
ACTU we talked about reaching the target of 500,000 jobs I think from
memory, over three years beyond which, that Is, we had to reach there
before we had a chance In the wages policy in that document. Now at
the time there was some misgivings on the part of some commentators
about the prospects of getting there. I think the Treasury Is now
talking about 180,000 jobs for this year which means that 500,000
does look attainable as indeed it was In the ' 83-4 rebound where we
had 500,000 in the first Parliament. In the first Parliament, three years,
we got the 720,000 from memory or 740,000 it might have been.
J: What about the long-term unemployed though?
PM: What about them though?
J: Giving that you are identifying them as a particular group that needs to
be targeted. These figures In the report talk about trying to get the
number down from 290,000 to 90,000. Would you be prepared to
embrace that sort of goal policy?
PM: If we embrace the thrust of the report, if in the analysis, discussion,
public discussion, white paper discussion the Government picks up the
central thrust of this report, hopefully the central thrust of the
conclusions will also be available to us, but there is never a great profit
in Governments setting targets for themselves because people like you
never stop reminding us when we don't meet them. 
TEL: 12. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 16
7
J. Prime Minister, on that score what do you make of the Committee's
observation that after four years and the expenditure of something like
$ 1.4-I1.5 billion a year, the best you could do in -terms of permanent,
ongoing jobs for the long-term unemployed is about 50,000. Isn't that
a bit disappointing?
PM: No, not at all. I think there Jim ( Middleton) you have missed the point
of the plot. This is not a job creation thing. It is a labour market
efficiency flexibility thing, it Is principally a social thing. It is a social
thing and it is a labour market flexibility thing, it is a jobs ready thing.
Now, if in the payment of subsidies like Jobstart and the rest you end
up with some additionality in the labour market, in other words jobs that
might not have otherwise been there, which is where your 50,000 is,
good. But they are a by-product. They are not the central proposal.
The central proposal is not job creation, it is about being job ready and
to get the efficiencies of the labour market up.
J: But job ready with no jobs.
PM: No, but the aggregate jobs will be there, it is a matter of getting the
long-term unemployed people to take some of them.
KB: I think the point that has to be made here is if you are not job ready,
in other words, if the labour market is effectively churning and it is only
growth in the end which brings down those total numbers, Ntfh e labour
market is not churning you are getting enormous health problems
coming on stream, enormous social problems coming on stream,
enormous additional expenditures that you might not necessarily have
needed to make otherwise for people on unemployment benefits
because the level is too high and terrible social dislocation. It is a hell
of a lot better to be out of work for six months than forever and in terms
of all the social impacts on you and that is essentially what the
committee here is arguing.
J: Are you as agnostic and open minded about a jobs levy as the Prime
Minister?
KB: I'm always agnostic about things that I'm going to discuss with my
Cabinet colleagues as far as public presentation is concerned. There
are a lot of propositions presented here by the Committee. I think the
surprised tone I get from some of the people I've had a chance to talk
to is that the jobs levy is not such a huge focus of this report when it is
actually taken on balance, it simply happens to be one funding
mechanism which we will bat about and some of us are more or less
agnostic on this, but there are at this stage no atheists or Christians.
ends 



TEL: 12. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 02
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MID
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
16 DECEMBER 1993
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Well, the Uruguay Round of the GAT -T,_ long in the making, has finally
come to a conclusion. And, for those of us who have been talking about it for
so long, and participating in it for so long, one would have to say, it is well
worth the wait. And it has been well worth the wait.
Because the Government has had an approach to trade, to multi laterali sm,
and to open markets right through its history, from 1983, and the changes of
which we have made in opening Australia up and in reducing tariff protection,
and abolishing'quotas on the 1 960s, all of those things were predicated upon
us having an open trading opportunity in the GATT Round, of the likelihood of
the GATT actually coming to some conclusion.
Now, as a consequence, we have built Australia's policy expressly on the
GATT Round. And the GATT Round has now come to fruition and as a result
there will be at least conservatively $ 2.5 billion worth of benefits for Australia,
including $ 1 billion of benefits from an agreement on agriculture. And they
mean that there will be cuts in subsidised export volumes of 21 per cent by
the end of the 6 year period, the elimination of non tariff barriers by
conversion to more transparent tariffs, -an average cut-in agricultural tariffs of
36 per cent, a 20 per cent cut in trade sorting domestic subsidies for farm
production and incomes.
Across Australia's key agricultural exports this could see an extra $ 340
million per annumn in beef exports, $ 200 $ 250 million in wheat exports, $ 125
million in dairy, $ 90 million in coarse grains, $ 40 million in sugar, and
million to rice growers. So, this is, in a nut shell, a very substantial outcome
which could only, in agriculture, be achieved by a multilateral trade
agreement. And, of course, in agriculture it wouldn't have been achieved
without Australia injecting agriculture into the Round, in putting the Cairns
Group together, and in fighting the agriculture issue right down to the end. 
TEL 2
Now, what it will mean is that in terms of the US and EC subsidised export
sale of wheat, which will give an indication, there wilt be 50 million tonnes
less subsidised wheat and flour over world markets over a six year period.
US and EC subsidised wheat exports are likely to be--down by a third by the
year 2000 compared to current levels. But because it was expected that EC
and US subsidised wheat exports would grow, the outcome will now actually
b~ e about a half the expected level. It is a third off the current level, but about
half the expected level of wh~ ere it would be by the year 2000.
So, this is a fairly remarkable change. And other important breakthroughs
have been In other key agricultural markets; in the US there will be a 25 per
cent increase in access for Australian beef in 1995 compared with the level in
prospect for 1994. In Japan the rice ban will be lifted and rice imports will
grow to around 800,000 tonnes by the year 2000 that is around twice
Australia's total current rice export and tariffs on beef, dairy and sugar will
be reduced. In the European community area access will improve for
Australian exports of meat, milk, powder, butter and cheese. And we have
also continued the European assurance not to sell subsidised beef exports to
key Asian markets which has undefined growth in Australian exports to these
markets of 200 per cent since 1985.
So, that's the picture in respect of agriculture. I will just say something in
respect of manufacturing on industrial goods we expect average tariff cuts
on the products of interest to us to be over 50 per cent, as closely as we can
calculate it to be about 53 per cent. Now, that is the tariffs of other countries
which we are facing in terms of our products, including key product areas
such as, non ferrous metals, medical and scientific equipment,
pharmaceuticals, chemicals and beer. The United States, and the European
community, and Japanese offers represent tariff cuts of around 60 per cent,
and alone cover Australian exports totalling $ 18 billion. So, $ 18 billion of our
exports now will be dealt with by this reduction of tariff cuts in the US and
European community, and Japan, of over 60 per cent.
The new GATT agreement on services ensures Australian service exporters
can compete on an equal footing in the fastest growing area of world trade,
and that, as you know, is growing very rapidly for us.
So, I might also add that Senator Cook has over night obtained an agreement
from the United States that it will not export subsidised rice to the Japanese
and Korean rice markets, so our farmers will be competing on a level playing
field there.
There has been much, can I just say on the question of the export
enhancement program, which has been an issue in Australia with the United
States. I just can't put my hand on the figure but there is a substantial
reduction in the impact of that, from about $ 1 billion of subsidised product to
about $ 3.40 million over the six year period. So, all in all, I think this has been
a remarkable outcome. Its the largest ever world trade deal and an
enormous shot in the arm for the world economy. At a time when economies
r1EL2: .3an. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 03 
TEL: 3
have been struggling to grow, that we are seeing growth of ourselves, the
United States growing, Japan still finding itself in recession, Germany the
same, this will be a huge boost to confidence. Apart from the financial effects
and commercial effects this will be a huge boost to cor-fidence.
The OECD has estimated that for agricultural and industrial products alone, it
will result in an increase in global economic activity of up to $ 418 billion by
the year 2002. And, as I have said, that translates to us at about $ 2.5 billion
per year. More recent assessments by the Industry Commission suggest
there may be as much as $ 5 billion increase in exports and a $ 3.7 billion
increase in Australian GDP.
So, it's a tremendously important outcome and could I say that a statement
issued today by the Trade Negotiations Advisory Group, by Geoff Allen... it
said, ' The Australian business community is delighted with the achievement
of a meaningful result in the Uruguay Round; we will not get all we want but
the result will be overwhelmingly positive for all Australians. In this eighth
round of negotiations under the GATT there has been unprecedented
cooperation between government and the business sectors, it has
represented a model for close government/ business collaboration in
international affairs."'
So, I'd like to, again, record my appreciation for the work which has been
done jointly by Australian business, with the government. But, again, I signal
that what has happened here is a very definite view, by the government, of
the kind of society and country it wanted Australia to be. And that was an
efficient, open, exporting country. And that's changed from the day we
removed exchange controls in 1983 and started reducing tariffs in 1988.
And, as a consequence, we're now set up to face the world but it wanted, in
our terms, to be a world which was open and more free. This we've achieved
under the GATT and, of course, where the GATT leaves off APEC will take
over in the Asia-Pacific where we can do other things of the trade facilitating
kind which are not part of the general reductions in protection under the
GATT. So, Australia has been turned into a competitive,. open,. trading economyby
a Labor government and then we have set in place structures; by
putting together the Cairns Group in the Uruguay Round and getting
agriculture into the round... set in place structures which will also help now
with APEC to complement, again, the work of the GATT. So, in all, Australia
should be well placed to grow its commercial sectors as our economy picks
up and our competitiveness is now so strong. And, I think, as a leader of the
Cairns Group we have, at the same time, played a role for those countries in
the Cairns Group of countries and, not just played a role but kept faith on the
big issues which are important to them.
I'd like to take this opportunity to congratulate Peter Cook and his negotiating
team in Geneva on the effort that they have led in the last week, but most
particularly in the last year. I'd also like to thank those who have been
T1E2L:. 3an. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 04 
TEU; 4
involved in this over such a long time seven years. In the first place, the
Treasurer who was then Minister for Trade and who put the Cairns Group
together, John Dawkins, followed by Michael Duffy who pl5-yed a -very
important role at a key time in the round, as also did.-Weal Bleweti and John
Kerin. This has occupied the time of many ministers and many officials, I
might say, who have had to endure those many nights locked up in hotel
rooms and conference rooms arguing over these points. One of those people
is with us today, Peter Field, and I'd like to pay a tribute to Peter's work as
Deputy Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade ( DFAT) who
had the principal carriage of this responsibility for most of the period and
other people of DFAT who were involved in it throughout the period.
So, could I wrap up my remarks by saying it's a tip-top outcome for Australia,
well worth the wait, the largest world trade deal ever done, a great thing for
the world economy, a bull point for markets around the world and giving
Australia the trading environment it could only have dreamed of seven years
ago. J: Can you bring all these billions home to average Australia? What's it
going to mean to workers, to families, to young people?
PM: Well, it's going to mean a pick-up in employment the best we can
estimate this at quickly is around 50,000 jobs which is a very large
complement. It's going to add another $ 3.5 billion to Australia's GDP
which is an Important addition. And what it means is that we'll have
the confidence that as we grow these markets and commodities of
ours, we'll be growing them into markets where we have access. So,
the confidence that Australians and their children will have jobs and
that they'll be able to trade Into this area, into these markets, will, I
think, be very high.
The GATT Round, the GATT outcome is largely an employment and
wealth outcome. And, I said recently, GATT equals growth equals jobs
I'd repeat that and say this is a place where Australia's view of itself
and Australian diplomacy has played a really important role.
J: When do you think that Australia will actually start seeing some of
these benefits flow through? The implementation period on most of
these doesn't start until 1995 but do you expect any immediate
benefit?
PM: Well, that's when it does start. I th ink that it's going to flow through
earlier because, like all of these things like the time we announced
tariff reductions behaviour changes almost Instantaneously before
the actual changes take place. And I think this will be true here
you'll see a change in the way countries approach markets. When
they know protection Is coming down and they know they're going to
have to earn their keep in these markets they start changing their
E': 12. Jan. 934 1 e3V 
TEL,
habits and I think, as a consequence, it will start to pay off for us much
earlier rather than later.
J: Do you think we'll get an even better outcome' with the negotiations
that Peter Cook's still going on with in Geneva?
PM: Well, I think it's a case of watching the bouncing ball. Obviously, in
particularly some commodities, these things are changing by the hour
and that's why you have to be on the spot, you have to be in there for
your chop and arguing your case. And Peter Cook, who has rung me
a couple of times since the weekend, has been in there arguing his
case on these particular things. Arid, I might just say, he just turned up
another one on rice, by getting that assurance from the United States
that they will not be exporting subsidised rice to those two markets
which I mentioned Japan and Korea.
J: Are there any further details about that rice assurance from the
Americans?
PM: We've got officials here and you're welcome to talk to them after I'm
finished, if you like.
J: The United States has been fairly generous with its market access
package but the European Community doesn't seem to have been,
does that disappoint you?
PM: Well, I think the Europeans will pay a price for holding onto the tenets
of protectionism in some of these areas and I think this is going to be
an expensive lesson that you can't hope to give Europeans the
living standards that they wish and the income and employment levels
that they wish if a large part of their product is being funnelled into
subsidies for agriculture. And while it may suit a particular political
need at the time I don't think, over time, it's going to help. A couple of
key things have happened in the United States that are well worth
recording... one is the very deliberative vote of the American Congress
in favour of NAFTA -which is a-trade liberalising--decision-. and -now. the
support through three administrations Reagan, Bush and the Clinton
administration for the GATT round and open trade and the fact that
they have held on to the Blair House. Sure, the impact will come a
little later rather than earlier, but it is largely held there I think speaks
volumes for the United States view of open multi-lateral trade. This is
not the view of the European community, It is the view of some
members of the European community, but it is not the view of some
countries and as a consequence the rest of us will have a higher
standard of living and better incomes relatively speaking than will
Europe as a consequence. T1EL2:. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 06 
TEL: 6
J* Prime Minister, there was one area that the United States specifically
wanted us to open our markets on and that was access to their
television and film material. Have we given any ground on that?
PM: No, we value substantially the maintenance of our capacity to produce
cultural material here which reflects our own culture and our own
needs and while we see value in general trade in these particular
commodities and there is, as you know, Australian audio visual
services take a lot of American product, we still have a cultural product
to protect and we have argued that case. I think what has happened
so too has the French and others and there has been an agreement to
disagree on the part of the United States and European community on
this question. So audio visual has effectively fallen out of the Round
and with it falls away any need for a commitment by Australia.
J: Is it possible to spell out what changes we will have to make to our
own rules as a result of this sort of zero, zero agreements and other..
PM: I think you can ask the officials Tim ( Dodd) and they would be glad to
tell you.
J, With the boost that this will give business competence, what effect for
the European, American economies and recoveries and then what
effect for ours?
PM: There has been a very large change in the United States economy as
there has in Australia, a lot of de leveraging by companies, essentially
the accounts of most companies are now in better shape as you know.
In this country our profit share Is very high; we are starting to see
investment take off again; we have seen very strong profit
performances and therefore a strong stock market performance, a lot
of capital has been raised; a lot of capital has been marshalled. I think
a decision like this, an outcome like this just adds to that aura of
confidence which is developing around the motor economies and
those which still have troubles which are still going through de
leveraging in the case of Japan. and -the problems -of. integration. in the
case of Germany that is the integration with East Germany, the GDR.
Those things have been real inhibitions for those economies taking off,
but this is just such an obviously good outcome world wide that it must
be a tremendous bull point in markets.
J: What does this deal mean in terms of future government policy. Do
you see it taking away from protectionism accelerated in the next few
years?
PM;-I don't think so because we have already had it when I say the trend
away it will be a maintenance of the trend towards lower levels of
protection which we have in place on a trend basis, a trend decline in
protection. We removed all quotas from our markets in the late 1 980s
T1EL2: . Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. U( 
T1E2L:. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 08
7
and now with tariffication, tariffs in this country being the only effective
protective devices those travelling down to 5 per cent by 1996-97 and
in some cases a little higher. I think what this means is tat all of this
has proven to us that we were correct in the. first place in following
through on a strategy of multi lateral trade, support for an open multi
lateral trading system and every effort even though it has been
laborious that we put into the GATT Round is worth it in the end not
to see the world break up into trading blocs and I think that now won't
happen. And the Europeans will make a choice when they look at the
Asia-Pacific and the growth of the Asia-Pacific and the lift in incomes
and employment in the Asia-Pacific now that the world is not going into
three blocs, but there is a general GATT back drop, but two trading
areas Europe and the Asia-Pacific the Europeans will have to
decide whether they want to be at the cutting edge of all this or
whether they want to try and hide behind protective barriers or do
trade distorting things, because, in the end it catches up with you and
it will catch up with them.
So, there is great competition in Europe going to come from the Asia-
Pacific and they can be in the competition by having open product
markets or they can try to resist it.
J: Does this mean the outcome then that you can increase the pace of
APEC's development. Do you now have any specific initiatives that
you would like to see APEC.
PM: I have always talked of APEC as a GATT plus outfit that is, it did
GATT plus things. These things become part of the back~ drop, the
GATT becomes part of the back drop, but in the things which the
GAIT is not doing and can't do, that is in trade facilitating type things,
this is going to be one of the strengths of APEC. rhat is, in things like
investment agreements, in things like company law, in things like
consumer product standards, all of these kinds of things are things an
organisation like APEC can do, but the GATT can't do. So, that is why
I think if we make a choice in this part of the world for faster growth
and a higher velocity of -trade and investment we -could facilitate it
through APEC. So too can the Europeans, through the European
community, but they have got to want to do the same things and I don't
know whether they will. Before APEC we didn't have such a structure.
With APEC we do have now such a structure and happily it will build
upon the GATT and there will be no question of it replacing the GAIT
or doing something with APEC that might have needed to be done in
the event the GAIT Round failed.
So, it will be basically GAIT plus things, things will enhance the
outcome and make it better for all of us.
J: that you like the senior officials to adopt..
TEL: 
TEL: 12. Jan. 94 12: 30 No. 006 P. 09
PM: The last lot was a very large speech I gave in California which outlined
some of the directions we think APEC should go and we articulated
some of those at the ministerial meeting in Seattle.
J: One of the things which was one of our highest priorities in the Round
was to ask our Asian friends to reduce their tariff barriers to
manufactured products from Australia they had tariff escalation of
low tariffs on raw materials, high tariffs on finished products, Are you
happy with the success we have..
PM: It is 53 per cent across the board of the countries we deal with on the
weighting of the products we handle, so that one has to say is a
spectacular change from any multi lateral trade round. There is no
doubt whatever people do with this, looking at it and turning up this
leave and having a look at that point, it is by far and away the most
spectacular outcome from a multi lateral trading round that we have
ever had. I wouldn't be surprised to say likely to have, but certainly
that we have ever had it to this point. Thank you..
ends 



rimr-vi ivmibfI. i iti 146/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RELEASE OF REPORT " RESTORING FULL EMPLOYMENT"
Today, I have received the Report of the committee on
Employment Opportunities. The Government established-the
CommTittee on May 28 this year, requiring it to analyse
the causes of Australia's unemployment and present policy
options for the future.
It should be understood that this is not a Government
Report, but a Report the Government and to the
Australian community. There remains the process of
public discussion which must occur between now and the
delivery of the White Paper next May.
During this process of public discussion I think it would
help for us all to reflect that as we argue the pros and
cons most of us business people, lobby groups, and
politicians will do so from the relative comfort
station of actually having a job.
In other words, to be effective the process will require
all Australians in work to imagine what it i; s like to be
out of work.
Unemployment is at once offensive to our ideals and a
major source of inefficiency in our economy. It has
devastating affects on individuals and their families,
and debilitates social cohesion. It increases the costs
of welfare and hence the burden of taxation. It limits
the scope of public expenditure, including the reduction
of public debt. 7: is Australia's greatest contemporary
problem. it is the first priority of the Government and
must be the first priority of the nation.
The Report makes tefundamental issues abundantly., clear.
There is no simp'ñ e solution to unemploymenrt, no single
solution: but, without question, an essential condition
of success in the fight is a high and sustainable rate of
economic growth.
we have every reason for confidence that we can achieve
this growth. The cresens rate of 31.5% compares favourably
with our OECD counterparts. Interest rates are the
3878 
lowest in more than a decade, inflation the lowest in a
generation. Profits are back to pre-recession levels.
Australia is more competitive than ever before and the
willingness to embrace change on which this new
competitiveness has been built will itself be a vital
factor in solving our unemployment problems.
The Report makes clear that more change is needed.
Australia needs to continue on the road to greater
competitiveness. Without it, and without a higher rate of
economic growth than we have at present other policies
will merely tinker at the margins of our problem.
The Government is firmly of the view that we can restore
full employment.
But as the Report says, we can only do this provided that
the Government and all sections of the community are
prepared to develop a new and stronger sense of national
purpose, and a consensus that the goal is worth pursuing.
In the past year, we have done much to make the economy
more competitive, much to stimulate growth and much in
the way of direct labour market assistance for unemployed
people. We have spent more than $ 1.3 billion on labour market
programs this year, doubling the job chances for over
500,000 unemployed Australians.
The Committee takes the view that, vital though it is,
economic growth will not on its own be sufficient to
solve the problem.
We learnt this during the 1980s when, at the end of an
employment boom, 100,000 people remained unemployed for
12 months or more. These long term unemployed
Australians now number 340,000.
The Report is unequivocal about this: long term.
unemployment has severe social implicaEions and is a
severeimpediment to labour market efficiency.
The Report, therefore, presents various options for an
immediate, determined attempt to reduce long-term
unemployment. Central to these options, is the principle of " reciprocal
obligation". That the obligation on Government and
the community to provide positive assistance to : nose who
are out of work, and the obligation on unemployed
individuals 1to actively seek work and accept it when it
becomes available.
The obligation, of course, extends to business, unions
and empioyees who must address the constraints to growth. 13 Or1 
3
Foremost amongst the Conuittees options is a
" Job CompactO for the long-term unerqployed under which
this country would decide that it i..% simplv unacceptable
for anyone to remain out of work fdr longer than a
specified period the Report suggests 18 months.
The aim of the " Job s Compact" is to break through the
barriers which confronit the lona term unemployed: only a
Dob effectively puts a person back into contact with the
labour market. Only a job puts skills back into action
and encourages the development of new ones. Only a job
regenerates morale, discipline and confidence.
The Report estimates that the " Job Compact" would reduce
the number of long-term unemployed from an anticipated
290,000 in June 1988 to around 90,000.
The Report also addresses the critical issue of
restructuring our social security system to reflect
changing employment opportunities and changing job
aspirations. In addition, the Report contains a wide range of
proposals for the targeting and delivery of services,
increasing the skills of the Australian workforce and
encouraging the unemployed to undertake training and
study. This is a most important Report, not just for the
Government, not just for the unemployed, but for the
Australian community for every Australian.
It raises questions about matters which fundamentally
affect the welfare of our fellow Australians, the health
of our communities, the well being of future generations,
and ultimately our status as one of the world's advanced
social democracies.
I urge all Australians to recognise that unemployment is
their concern, and to make the goal of full employment
theg oal.
CANB3ERA December 15, 1993
82P0 



T1E6L:. Dec. 93 12: 19 No. 010 P. 01/ 01
PRIME MINISTER 1149193
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P . J KEATING MP
The Australian Government welcomes the Joint Declaration on Ireland issued
by the British Prime Minister, Mr Major, and the Irish Taoiseach, Mr Reynolds,
on 15 December.
The Government believes that the Declaration offers all parties in Ireland a
new opportunity to establish a solid basis for understanding and trust within
the Island and with the United Kingdom. Peace in Ireland can only be built on
such understanding and trust.
The Government hopes that all parties will now work for a renunciation of
violenc" 3 and for peaceful reconciliation.
Australia's support for peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland has been
shown in the past by Sir Ninian Stephen's chairmanship of the political talks
on Northern Ireland.
We continue to be ready to offer what support we usefully can to the process.
CANBERRA December 16, 1993 TEL 



TEL: PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE OFFICE OF TREASURER
Following the announcement made tonight by the Treasurer, the Honourable John
Dawkins MP. I shall give consideration to a replacement for the position over the
Christmas period.
In due course, it will be a matter for the Caucus to meet and elect an additional
member of the Ministry.
CANBERRA 17 December, 1993 20.-Dec .93 7: 2t) No. Uui 



STATENIENT BY THEF PRIE MINISTER, LION P. J. KEATrNG, MP
DEATH OF RAWU SIR PENAIA GANILAU
I have sent thc following message to the Prime Minister of the Sovereign Democratic
Republic of Fiji, the Hon Major-General Sitiveni Rabuka:-
" I was very saddened to hear the -news of the death of President Ratu Sir Penaia
Ganilau. Fiji has lost a respected leader who will be remembered for his outstanding
contribution to his country as a distiguished soldier, public servant, politician and
Statesman. In addition to his achievements in high public offce, and his high chiefly statuis, Ratu
Sir Penaia w~ as widcly respected by members of all communities in Fiji.
Please accept and convey my sincere condolences, and those of the Australian
Government and people, to President Gianilau's family and to the Fijian Government
and people
CANBERRA 17 DECEMBER, 1993 



TEL: V uLrel tf L 5Zu. r
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISThR, THE BON P J KEATING MP
THE HON JOHN DAWK[ NS MP
I congratulate John Dawkins on his courageous personal decision to relinquish the post
of Federal Treasurer to return to the backbench, with a view to eventually retiring from
Parliament before the next election.
I am, of course, saddened at the departure from the Cabinet of a friend and colleague
of such distinction, passion and ability.
As I said in the Parliament tonight, in John Dawkins we saw the Cabinet Minister's role
performed par excellence.
John Dawkins has had a highly significant mninisterial career, spanning about I1I years.
Among his many achievements, his spearheading of the formation of the Cairns Group
of agrcultural trading nations stands out as a major contribution to public fife in
national and international terms.
He has, of course, achieved many other things in public life in Australia, in a range of
Ministries. He will be remembered for reforms to public sector management; his
transformation of the tertiary education system, and his tireless work on the
Government's Expenditure Review Commidttee. Most recently and particularly as
Treasurer, he has played a significant role in the reformation of Australia's economy for
a new, outward looking and competitive era.
He has been one of the great reformers within the Labor Government.
He leaves the office of Treasurer with Australia growing strongly; with inflation
beaten; and with economnic indicators pointing inexorably towards a strong recovery
and new prosperity for Australians.
I salute John Dawkins and congratulate him on the grace and style with which he
reached and announced this important personal decision. I extend my best and
warmest wishes for the future to him, to his wife Magge, and to their family including
their newborn baby girl, Alice Esther.
CANBERRA 17 DECEMBER, 1993 



TEL III, r~ t
IPRIME MINISTER 1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFElRENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
18 DECEMBER 1992
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM; I would just like to make a fcw basic points about Dr Hewson's speech today. I
think the first thing I would like to say is that you just can't believe him. He said
he would rcsign if Fightback was changed, hc now said he will resign if he
changes it back.
Obviously his performnance today was of a person jolted by the fact that he was
saying things that he didn't believe. lHe didn't believe them, the audience who was
listening to him didn't believe them, I am quite sure that the press gallcry didn't
believe them, I didn't believe them, but I think what showed most particularly is
that he didn't believe them. I think what we arc seeing is somecone who made it
impossible for Australians to believe him as well.
What Dr Hewsons proposed today, he said the integrity of Fightback will always
be preserved irrespective of whatever wc decide to do. I think that just about said
it all. Thiat is, Fightback will be preserved irrcspective of whatever we decide to
do. So whatever changes he makes, whatever adjustments he makes to try and
garncr some support in the community from the heartless policies he has pursued,
he said we will still maintain thc integrity of Figlitback, and if that is true the
essential unfairness would be maintained.
So what are we left with after the presentation of Fightback Mark well for a start
a 15 per cent goods and services tax, only nowv it is more complicated. He has got
sonic things in and some things out. Food is out, but restaurant food is in, fast
food is in, other forms of food are in. It will be just more complicated and it now
raises just $ 22 billion instead of $ 27 billion. It raises nearly half t ' he income tax of
Australia, it is a monster, it is still there. Zero tariffs are still there, the Jeff Kennett
industrial relations policy is still there, and I noticed he even said the very same
things that Mr Kennett said in his pamphlets, what you have now you will keep
T1EL8:. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 01/ 11 
T1E8L:. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 02/ 11
2
said Mr Kennett in his pamphlet, Dr I-ewson made the same point today.
billion of cuts in Government spending still there, but what is new is a huge unfurnded
program in a delivery of a financial account that I would absolutely shrink
from producing in public, never would I have presented as Treasurer, or as Prime
Minister something so . shonky and deliberately false. All that Dr Hewson has done
is add $ 5 billion in asset sales in 1993-94 and $ 5 billion in 1994-95 on top of
what he already had there in the original Fightback Mark 1. So it is now a program
of $ 10 billion of asset sales in 1993-94 and $ 10 billion of asset sales in 1994-95.
You have got to bear in mind that at its peak the Australian capital market in 1988
only funded $ 13 billion to the whole private economy of Australia. In 1991-92 it
funded $ 12 billion to the whole private economy of Australia. It has all ready had
problems digesting the Westpac float and the Woolworths float. He is going to
have, just on the Goverinent's account alone, $ 10 billion in each year, it is
impossible for the market to digest and he is going to spend $ 3 billion of those
proceeds each year from it on his policies.
He says he is going to have a kick start policy, he has got the so-called Ralph
Committee, the rebuild Australia fund, it will be just likc the Cole Committee, it is
going to receive suggestions, it will receive suggestions until the election is passed
and then they will go exactly where the Cole Committee's suggestions have gone,
into someone's top draw. So, the $ 3 billion of infrastructure that is going to kick
the economy a long, I am quite sure that the Ralph Committee recommendations
will never sec the light of day.
So, the fact of the mattcr is that we have got basically a policy which is about
maintaining the essential unfairness of Fightback Mark I which is going to abolish
Medicare, Is going to replace it with a US style health system. I don't know
whether some of you noticed in the Australian today the references from that
American authority about the health system saying, the American health system is
moving to bankruptcy, the Federal Coalition of Australia is trying to adopt the
samc policy. Importantly, he has re-Imposed the co-payment on medical
payments raising $ 450 million. So, he is not just scrapping Medicare but he has
got a co-payment in there of $ 450 million.
There is no guarantee that food won't be put back in after the election, no
guarantec that the 15 per cent rate on the goods and servies tax won't become 17
or 18 per cent, like it has in every other country. He promises to do us the favour
of lifting taxcs on child care where now none exist. He said he will put a tax on
child care in Fightback, now he is making a big fellow of himself telling us he will
lift it when it was only lie who was going to impose it. Child care at the moment is
untaxcd and the same on food, he is going to make a big fellow of himself lifting
the tax on food. Food is untaxed. Now, he was going to tax it, but now he says he
won't, but hie will be taxing certain sorts of food like Kentucky Fried Chicken,
Macdonald's and the restaurants et cctcra. Hie said in answer to a journalist, I am
not sure I have got the quotc with me, I think I have, I will find it, that he was
asked about pump priming, he said, yes, this is when the Government spends a
TEL 
TEL: 18. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 03/ 11
3
wholc lot of money it doesn't have. Now I put it to you with capital raising
capacity in this country of about $ 12 billion a year, does anyone seriously think
that we are going to send, on thc Governments account alone, $ 10 billion of asset
saics for two consecutive years, at a very time when this fellow says we need more
private investment? And as you know that moncy is not going to go to pay off
Governiment debt, what basically he is going to do is borrow it, take it off the
market and spend it, it is just the same as a borrowing, a point I think Mr Davidson
made at the press conference, which he wcll understands.
So all of the prctcnce about tight economics and accounting has fallen away, we're
back to the Liberals a la Howard Box Hill 1987 with a shonky set of numbers.
Peacock in 1990 and now Hewson for 1993. Let me tell you what the numbers
really are, if you take the asset sales and the FI3T compliance out the additions to
the deficit in year one are $ 6.6 billion, in year two, and year one is 1993-94, in
1994-95 $ 7.6 billion, and in 1995-96 $ 7.6 billion, and the rest of it is shonk,
shonk land, shonky numbers, shonky asset sales, the market would choke on the
so-called magic pudding of Telecom. There is no way this capital market can
fund $ 10 billion. A program like Qantas, which the Government agreed last night,
is at the outer limits of what this market can fund, this was proven with the
Commonwealth Bank, it has been established this year with Westpac and
Woolworths. Fancy saying we need private investment when the Government is
going to soak up $ 10 billion of private sector savings in a capitalisation program
like this.
So, I will conclude on these notes. I thought it was a very sad performance for
somcone who is making a speech, the contents of which he didn't believe, didn't
believe in, and the strain of that, I think, made it a very sad performance. But that
is where Dr Hewsori has taken our national politics. I told you he would. He said,
I spent a year putting Fightback together, when he presented it every i was dotted
and cvery t crossed he said, he then said I have presented it to the electorate for a
year and everything is right about it. The first whiff of grapcshot, the first poll that
really mattered, his courage fell, up went the white flag and out came the policy
which is totally alien to him and to his party and worsc based on funding proposals
which are a disgrace at this stage of our national economic history.
3. Mr Keating, why won't you be ablc to sell Telecom to overseas carriers?
PM: Let's keep it onto this for a start thanks Tomn ( Burton). I'll come back to you later
on that point.
J: Mr Kcating, it seems like Dr H-ewson has gone carefully through the list of all your
insults about Ferraris and food and everything else, he seems to have addressed
each onc of them.
PM: Do you think so? 
I U L. 4
1: by changing the luxury tax on cars, by taking food off, how many insults do you
have left?
PM: It's not a matter of insults, no, we don't need insults to make these points. I just
told you a moment ago what's there. And what is thcre is still $ 10 billion of cuts
to government spending, a tax on everything except food, still going to destroy
Medicare, all the nasties arc basically still there, they arc only putting off the cuts
to labour inarkct programs by twelve months. Don't rely on my claims, just read
the thing.'
3: Mr Keating, why is your policy on kick starting the economy substantively better
than what Dr Hcwson is proposing? He's arguing that regardlcss of what you think
about the asset sales program, you haven't funded the kick start by anything other
than borrowings.
PM: I take the view that if you arc going to add a stimulus to the economy then a
stimulus is a net addition to demand. But he says surely stimulatory economic
policies do not work and an alternative approach is called for this is on
Novembcr 24, this is less than a month ago. He's upbraiding me in the Parliament
saying when 1, he sought to argue a case for stimulatory economic policies and he
referts to the 1991 Budget as stimulatory he said, given that One Nation was
stimulatory, and given that 1992 Budget was stimulatory, he then gocs on to say
sure conomic stimulatory policies do not work and an alternative approach is
called for. What we've seen today is not a refinement of Fightback, but a
capitulation.
1: But doesn't hie have a point though Mr Keating?
PM: Just a hang on a minute, I'll come to you, you haven't got to rush me. It is a
capitulation. Look, everyone of you know that he doesn't believe this, everyone of
you around this table know that he doesn't believe in thcse policies. Where is our
national politics getting to? He knows that, you know that. The fact is the
Government has believed, as we believed in 1983-84, as we believed in 1984-85
that when private sector spending was down, that lifting public demand was the
way to go. And it is the way to go this year, you can see it in our national accounts
two thirds of the growth that camec through a week ago on the national accounts
for the quarter is from public demand. What Dr Hewson is doing is trying to
change tile cast of his policy not to suit the economnic circumstance, but to suit
what he is hearing in the polls and where has the kick start comne from? It comes
from a committee which a business person is going to sit on, who is going to take
suggestions and does anybody believe that this would be a government intent upon
proposing thcse sorts of policies?
1: But Mr Keating first of all you say it is a capitulation and then you say it's as big
and as bad and as ugly as it ever was. You can't have it both ways.
110 . CIL-Z? L Q V % 0 11 W W 
TEL:
PM: Because it is, it trics to do two things. No, Fm not saying it, he's saying it. He is
saying the integrity of Fightback will be maintained regardless. Ho is saying that
all of those basic things which rve just mentioned to you, the $ 10 billion cuts in
governnment spending are to be maintained, the tariff cuts are to stay where they
are, the wagc policy is to stay exactly where it is, the tax on everything but food is
to be there, the destruction of Mcdicare is to continue, co-payment is to be levied,
they are all there. But, he then says, but hang on, don't worry about that, its
fundamental nature is going to be camouflaged by a fiscal expansion and the word
listening must bc mentioned three hundred times in the text. He had the hide to
say, talking about democratic processes and the community had the right to be
heard, hc made a virtue of saying the community was wrong and that they needed
a leader who would put the right policies into place. This is just all cynical, poll
dr-iven stuff, you can see by the nature of his delivery and the nervous clapping of
his Liberal supporters at the Press Club.
J: But that's what you did before the One Nation Statement wasn't it Mr Keating, you
went around the country, you listened to peoplc and you brought up a policy, that's
what he's done..
PM: No, no, but I went and listened, I said that we are going to embark upon a
stimulatory policy, how best to deliver the stimulus. I listened to business about
depreciation, we listened about the infrastructure program and it was very useful
and the results of it, genuinely listening was there in the document. But what has
he listcned to? Here's the 24th of November, less than a month ago deriding
stimnulatory policies. All lie's listened to is Andrew Robb and his pollster, that's all
he's listened to.
Mr Keatinig, nevertheless whatcver your criticisms this obviously presents you
with a more difficult political situation, do you envisage some policy response to
this?
PM: My first response is the one I've given. This is basicay the same policy
camouflaged by the supposed notion of a stimulatory complexion that's been
delivered by a supposedly caring Liberal Party which we know is a nonsense, and
that the GST is morc complex and still a monstrous $ 22 billion of collect ions in
size. In other words you're asking me what message I'll givc. The message is
broadly the same as before except there is a fcw camouflages there now, be aware
of them and understand what Dr Hewson is doing.
I. rni asking you what you are going to do to try to match this policy which has
given you a new political problem?
PM: But you are always in the matching business, we've been in the government
busines and the govcrnment..
1: You matched his in One Nation. T1E8L:. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 05/ 11 
TEL: 6
PM:. No, no, but the govcrnment business has paid off pretty well for us. L. ast night we
were govcrnig, we saw a quite mammoth change to our international airline
system last night. This government has been continuing to make changes right
through the course of this year and for the next term of its governent, the
government will announce appropriate policy changes and settings which we're
already in the course of considering.
J. Mr Keating, Dr Hewson is now offering tax cuts for low to middle income earners
which arc much more substantial than those being offered by the government.
PM: We don't have GST Laura ( Tingle), that's why. We don't need to compensate
people for a tax we are not going to apply.
J: So you still think you can justify the tax cuts which arc basically aimed at higher
Income earners in the One Nation package?
PM: No, no there are people on two thirds of average weekly earnings $ 20,500.
Average weekly earnings is around $ 30,000, therc's two thirds of AWE and we are
taking the rate down from 38 to
3: Do you rulc out bringing it forward?
PM: Yes, but let me just remind you, who lifted the tax free threshold to $ 5,400 from
$ 4,900? Who cut the bottom rate from 30 per cent to 20 per cent? The
Government. And did we ever get any support from the Opposition when we were
doing it? No way. Who put in the Family Allowance Supplement? You know
what hc says, giving is thc sort of compassion that suffocates, this fellow has no
clothes whatsoever when it comes to support for low income people.
1: Mr Keating, do you rule out bringing your tax cuts forward?
PM: Yes. Michelle ( Grattan) I had the plcasure of delivering sixteen economic
statements on behalf of the Government. They had in terms of their figuring and
their deliverability, in terms of tax changes and policy changes a tightness that
we've never had before in Australian public life. We've done that again in the One
Nation package arnd we have been so precise about our commitments we put the
changes through, the compliance changes to the fringe benefits tax so as our
starting points would be within acceptable ranges. Here's this person, Dr Hewson
adding $ 6.6 billion, $ 7.6 billion and $ 7.6 billion to the starting point deficits,
saying don't worry we've got a shonky asset sales program, it's going to raise
billion a year. You say is that right Dr Hewson? What is the maximum raisings in
the private equity market of Australia? Oh $ 12 billion, so you're going to add ten
to the twelve. T1E8L:. Dec.' 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 06/ 11 
TEL: 18. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 07/ 11
7
3: You'd sell a lot of Telccom through trade Sales Mr Keating, you know that the Us
carriers and other will be very interested.
PM: We are not selling Telecom. We've got a competitive model.
J: privatised asset..
PM: Let Dr Hewson say that the major Australian carrier is going to be sold to a
foreigner, Ict him say so if that's what hie mnics.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: No, what he's saying is this will be raised in floats. That's what he's making clear
here.
J: asset sales.
. PM; No, he quotes McCaughan, up the back, talking about how much the Australian
capital market raised. " The capacity of the Australian equity market", page
" should comfortably cope with accumulative equity raising of around $ 12-15
billion". In other words, he's talking about the capacity of the domestic markets to
absorb these, not the foreign markets.
1: They arc going to sell some of it by trade sale.
PM: Maybe they could scll a bit of it by trade sale, but they won't sell the bulk of it by
trade sale. The thing is, does anybody think when the Commonwealth Bank
came along, which was what, $ 1.5 billion, the market digested it but only just
digested it. The underwriters were telling me at the time the market may not be
able to digest this. Woolworthis pulled its float because it didn't think the market
could digest it. Do you really think there's any credibility in these numbers, that
we're going to have an asset sales government programi of around $ 10 billion?
Really.
J1: Mr Keating, why don't you sell Telecom?
PM:. No, because I think there's a place for a private carr ier in the system. We've set up
a competitive model with Optus as a competitor. We're already seeing now a very
large lift in productivity, a very large shift in efficiency, a very big fall in tariffs.
1; What's the rationale of keeping Telecom in public hands?
PM: Michelle ( Grattan), I'm not here to have an ideological discussion with you about
the Govcrnment ' s view in relation to public authorities. I'm saying we're not
selling Telecom. He's saying he wants to add $ 6.6 billion in the next financial
year to his deficit, and $ 7.5 billion in the subsequent years, and hc wants to call the 
TEL 8
magic pudding of Telecom his way out. If you go back to Fightback Mark 1, if
you look at the table on page 76 of this new document, where you see the lines
$ 9.8 and $ 10.1 billion, that was formerly in the first document $ 5 and $ 5 billion.
H-e's just added $ 5 billion on in two years. T7hat is, in ' 93-4 he's put another
billion on. 5 billion[ I $ 5 billion half of the raisings of the total equity market
and the same in ' 94-5. That is the total science of this document.
I: Mr Keating, you came to office 365 days ago, do you see it as a sort of
achievement that you've managed to kill off the original Fightback, or do you
regret parting with it?
PM: No, one of the things I said is I'd expose Fightback for what it was, and that was no
answer to Australia's problems, a document laced with ideological fetishcs, that
was unfair, that was inequitable, and that didn't do the right job. What Dr
Hewsoii's basically adnmitted to us by this shift is that Fightback wasn't the right
policy, that it was unfair and inequitable, and he sought to change it.
J: Were you too successful in changing his mind because surely this is much more
attrachivc to voters than the original document?
PM; Some of you were telling us that it was such a good thing not so long ago.
1: Mr Keating, do you think you need to take a pay cut?
PM4: If ever Dr Howson had the guilts about Mr Kennctt trying to jack up Ministerial
salaries and looking totally duplicitous while they were trying to cut ordinary
people's wagcs and salaries, in terms of the most paltry, token things in this
statement, I think that's just about got to be it. I never heard him talking about
private sector salarics In the ' 80s, I didn't hear him over saying that there should be.
restraints on the $ 1.5 and $ 1 million plus senior excutive salaries around the
place.
J. What effect will this have on your election timctable? Will it be pushing it out
further?
PM: That will be for mc to think about, Amanda ( Buckley), I don't know.
J: Mr Keating, you're saying two slightly contradictory things herc. You're saying
that you don't believe that Dr Howson actually intends spending the money
through the Rcbuild Australia Fund and it will never see the light of day, but
you're also accusing himt of speniding all this money at the same time.
PM: Let's get this clcar. If he spends the $ 3 billion in a way which was expeditious,
then the numbers upon which he is relying would basically add substantially to the
Budget deficits of thc country, and in my view, would not be covered by his asset
salcs program, and even if thecy are they are akin to borrowings anyway. But the
T1EL8:. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 08/ 11 
TEL: 18. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 09/ 11
9
notion that we're going to have a big infrastructure program delivered by courtesy
of Mr Ralph's committee, I think as a notion will only last th~ rough the election
period, and then I think that committee's work would be shuffled to one side like
the Cole Committe.
J: Do you think he can spend the money or not?
PM: The thing is) in the cnd you won't know. But if one relies upon the stated intention
of having a $ 3 billion stimulus to the economy, what rm saying is this will simply
blow fiscal policy in this country in a way which Irn sure the financial markets
and thc media would never have tolerated for a second from the Government.
J: You spent $ 2 billion yourself at the bc-ginning of the year.
PM: Yes we did, but we said why against the backdrop of putting in the savings bank of
the country two $ 8 billion surpluses and a heavy surplus in the first year. We've
brought down government dcbt from 24 per cent of GDP to 14. We've got one of
the lowest government debt to GDP in the world.
J: Now it's going up again.
PM: Cyclically ycs, not structurally.
J: Why won't you allow him the credit for the tax compliance changes and the FBT
changes? Why can't he usc the revenue for that that you're going to use?
PM: Because ours are devoted to the starting points.
1: That's what he's..
PM: No he's not, he's just trying to spend it, he's trying to garner out. We're required to
be totally pedantic about the points. I had someone asking me about it recently,
about what if we were a billion or two under balance. I said, ' let's not get a fetish
with all this', and that was reported as a fiscal revelation. Was it not?
3; He's entitled to spend money, isn't he?
PM: No, he's not entitled to require of us standards of accountability and then come up
with a shonky little operation like this.
J: If thc money is there for you, it will be thcre for him if he does the same things.
PM: Yes, but we're not add ing these amiounts, wc'rc not adding..
J: I'm talking about thc compliance to the F13T changes. 
TEL
PM: Put it this way, I give you those as a guide. Thc 6,6,7.6. if you put the FBT and
compliance monies off it, it comes to about what $ 5 billion or $ 6 billion,
something of that order.
I: Mr Keating, how did you actually gct to those figures, because you said $ 7.6 in the
sccond year, whereas if you take the second year the balance itself is about zero.
PM: You're quite welcome to talk to my staff about that, or the Treasures staff.
J: I was just going to say it looks like the figure is something like about 4.
PM: No they're not, I've got a tabulation here, but you can talk to the staff later.
1: Mr Keating, why is your deficit acceptable and a deficit not acceptable for Dr
Hcwson?
PM: The point I made yesterday, Glenn ( Milne), was this: if the Opposition wants to
deliver parts of the Government's policy, let the Government deliver it. The
Government believcs in it. Let thc Government deliver it. And the Government
said, after putting away massive surpluses in the ' 80s, that it is appropriate for
public demand to be lifted during a period of low private demand, that a fiscal
stimulus was appropriate and necessary. So has the GJovernmcnt of Japan said
that, so has President Clinton said that, so has the OECD Secretariat urged that
world-wide. We're in the mainstream, he's out of it. All I'm saying is, we're the
people who have brought the big fiscal imbalances in Australia down, we're the
ones that reduced the govcrnment debt, and we're the ones that are saying that a
stimulus to the economy is appropriate because we believe it to be appropriate, we
believe it to be ncecssary, but it will be a cyclical stimulus, the structure of the
budgets will return to the kind of balance we had before the recession began.
J: But isn't your problem that he's jumped right into the mainstream?
PM: The thing about that, Michelle ( Grattan), is that I'll just make it very clear to the
public, that all the big nastics are still there. He's not in the mainstream with a
per cent tax on goods and services, he's not in the mainstream with zero tariffs, he's
not in the mainstream with the Geoff Kennett industrial relations policy. We'll just
say to the people of Australia, when he makes these protestations about listening to
people and shifting his ground, don't bclicve him.
J: On tariffs, is thcre a temptation to draw a bigger contrast between yourself and the
Opposition on tariffs. by being more lenient about tariff cuts, in particular to the
sugar industry?
PM: We madc value judgeincnits over an extended period of time, after talking to
industries over a period of years, about where the end points ought to be on tariffs.
And I think we got them right. But in a lot of cases they are not zero.
T1E8L.: Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 10/ 11 
T1E8L:. Dec. 92 18: 03 No. 031 P. 11/ 11
11
j When will you announce the decision on sugar tariffs?
PM: I think Mr Courtice has presented his rcport, did he not, in the last wcck or so?
We'll consider that and make some statement.
J. When?
PM: I'm not sure.
J: Mr Keating, does this policy makc you inclined to stay and attack it for a while or
arc you inclined to perhaps go for an early election on thc basis of the policy
today?
PM: I'm inclined not to tell you, Tom ( Burton), not that I want to rob you of a good line
in The Herald.
J; Are you waiting for tile next polls?
PM: They came out interestingly, didn't they? Taken thc weekend after the
announccmcent he made on thc Tuesday. Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday
four days later, and the Coalition seemied to dctcriorate further. These are only
straws in thc wind, I know.
J: Does this give you enough material to kccp doing Dr Hewson slowly, Mr Keating?
PM: I like to think I've done a reasonable bit of that to date.
J: Why do you think he was wearing his socks onl thce beach? He said he was not
wearing his socks.
PM. don't think that's a matter of..
3: How did you know about his socks?
PM: Apparently people reckon he had socks on, I don't know.
J: As I said, he'll stand fluff on the niavcl, but hc won't stand sand in the toes.
PM: And why do you say that, what was that based on Mr Keating?
J: It was based on an cyewitness, was it not?
ends TEL 



DECEMBER, 1993 nfi Ail
E&amp; EPOFCP PII: teW el ricpa rasnfo tlkn i t js M keon oit ler
andw the atw iisl, l sit the Parliament wvrln ttkst e hsBl
thouht4noyl thSIeoav. Atendnto hmusto fen
spiitd iliuserng y heLibra Prt, b JhnHewonan PeerReth
PM: tr Wel the pcpalreanit ofraling as just makdeen onettpoint clear
the indigenous Australians.
This is an historic piece of legislation. The like of it has not been seen in this
country. It had an inordinate amount of coordination and consultation.. The
Government has released draft legislation, it released the discussion paper,
and then draft legislation. It has had discussions with every imaginable
group, and there is simply no reason why these sort of tactics ought to be
employed by the Coalition in the Senate.
I will just remind you that for the first three weeks of the Senate sittings,
nearly all of the three weeks were devoted to procedural questions in the
Senate. There was only five hours work spent on Government legislation.
And now we have had, from Friday, the Second Reading Debate, then Friday
to midnight, 7 hours, Saturday from 9 am to midnight, 12 and a half hours,
today about 5-6 hours already. And the Coalition spent nearly 2 and a half
hours this morning with another attempt to stop the Bill by sending it to a
committee. Now, the fact is, the Opposition decided to vote against the Bill, and they
have got a tag team in, asking questions taking up time, that are simply sitting
in the explanatory memorandum, that are sitting in the discussion paper, the
draft legislation, the explanatory memorandum for any person to read.
Now, the fact of the matter is that the Coalition today, and the States, have
just put out a statement saying, " the passage of the federal Mabo legislation
through parliament has become totally confused". 20. Dec. 93 16: 44 No 010 p ni/ nA 
TEL: 2
There is nothing confused about It. We on this side of the parliament are
totally clear about the legislation, because we have spent a year putting it
together. And everybody dealing with It understands that.
" The Government is trying to railroad through theSenate hundreds of last
minute amendments." This is in the over 24 hours of debate it has had, with
a discussion paper released nearly six full months ago, a draft legislation.
" Railroad"; " this is a completely unacceptable way," they say. Having failed
to try and put it off to a committee, tried again today, and now with a tag team
of filibusterers going around asking these obvious questions, they're now
saying the legislation should be delayed.
For the word delayed, read destroyed. Because what John Hewson wants to
do Is destroy the Bill and that is why, he knows the Bill is a principled piece of
legislation, why does he want to destroy it and delay it? Because of the
Western Australian Liberal support for his leadership. In fact, the Liberal
Party leadership is now being played out around responses to the Mabo Bill.
And when there was some discussion in the shadow executive the other day
of supporting the legislation and putting in the amendments business needed,
John Howard waved at John Hewson the transcript of his, John Hewson's,
earlier inflexible remarks about the Bill and the debate was put to one side.
Now, let me just say a couple of things about what the Coalition did on
Saturday night. The Coalition on Saturday night voted down mining industry
and pastoral industry amendments. They voted with the Democrats and the
Greens. The Liberal Party and the National Party voted with the Democrats
and the Greens to vote the amendments down. These are the amendments
which were needed, that had been suggested by the National Farmers
Federation and the mining industry, and had the temerity to say, today, and I
see it reported broadly in the press today, that in some way this was the
Governments responsibility. The Government said it would introduce these
amendments, clause 24, it did exactly what it said. It did exactly what it said
and introduced them and they voted them down.
Now, I noticed today in the Sydney Morning Herald in an editorial, and a good
one, says that instead of a sense of historical moment the debate on the Bill
in the Senate has elicited mean spirited opportunism and truculent
inflexibility. Hear, hear to that. And it said, the Native Title Bill is not a
perfect piece of legislation, but in terms of its fairness and its ability to end
the current uncertainty over land titles, it is about as good as they come. And
consider the time, energy and consultation that has gone into its drafting, and
it goes on, compared to that how likely is last minute tinkering to improve the
Bill in any substantive way.
So, let me say, that some people in the Coalition were more intent in nailing
Ric Farley in the National Farmers Federation because he brought some
good will and consensus to the Bill on the Bills merits. As a leaders of an
industry group he negotiated with the Government, got the things his industry
T2EL0: . Dec. 93 16: 44 No. 010 P. 02/ 06 
TEL 3
needed, was part of the consensus, displayed goodwill on the basis of merit,
and they are about trying to defeat the amendment he was associated with
last Saturday night, so they could say that he was party to putting the
consensus on the Bill together. And the Liberals are around today telling
Industry they are confident they can push the Bill to the end of next week, so
that the Bill either fails or isn't voted upon. I mean, this is the wonderful John
Hewson's high principals. I mean, god help this sort of political morality.
Now, let me assure Dr Hewson, that no filibustering will prevent us dealing
with the Bill. If we have to sit here till Christmas Eve, and come back on
boxing day and keep going, we will. Because we are going to see the Senate
vote upon this Bill. And let me just make this clear. Let me just quote again
Mr Farley, this morning, he said, about the industry things, " what I said was I
had been betrayed, I didn't say I had been betrayed by the Government'. So
the betrayal Is really In terms of the breakdown of the processes of a
negotiated outcome. Now, as for the Opposition, the Liberals and the
Nationals, I find it astonishing that the Liberal Party would seat down with the
Democrats and the Greens and vote down amendments for the legislation
which was supported by industry.
Now, this is where the Liberal Party is at the end of 1993. On a classic piece
of legislation coming from a seminal high court decision, to give Aboriginal
people the right to be heard on Native Title, and have it awarded to them, and
leaving With the States complete authority over economic use of land, with all
the checks and balanced In It they don't even have the decency to take a
position to say, that even in industry or their constituency terms they would
improve the Bill. They are quite happy to improve the IR Bill in their terms
" improve" it, within their frame of reference " improve" it even though they
are opposed in ideological terms to the Bill. On this Bill they won't even
support their constituencies' amendments because of the bloody minded
opposition to the Bill.
What we have seen here is three weeks of a Senate wasting its time five
hours on Government business only and now over 24 hours of debate, over
24 hours, onMabo. After a discussion paper was released months ago, after
draft legislation was released to all interest groups including the States and
Industry, after all amendments have been taken on board, they say, the Bill is
being dealt with in a completely unacceptable way and its being rail roaded
through the Senate.
I have never seen in the years I have been here the Coalition behave in such
an unprincipled way standing up the Government's financial legislation with
the Budget, even though the Government had a complete mandate to its
policies, and on this, a matter which the Government said it would deal with in
the election campaign, which has met the approval of all of the Industry
groups, all of the interests including the Aboriginal community they now
seek to try and destroy it by the effluxion time.
I can assure you we will sit the Senate, we will be here until they all vote.
T2EL0: . Dec. 93 16: 44 No. 010 P. 03/ 06 
T2EL0: . Dec. 93 16: 44 No. 010 P. 04/ 06
4
J: Mr Keating, at the end of the day, whether that's next week, Boxing
Day, end of January, when ever, isn't the real problem that there is
some points of total disagreement between the Government and the
Greens on essential elements of the package?
PM: Not as I understand it, no.
J: What about the issue of extinguishment on validation, I mean isn't that
an essential thing?
PM: I am not about to debate each paint with you. I am trying to make here
a procedural point, a point about the procedures and the Liberal
party's lack of principle and lack of decency on it. The Liberals
downed amendments that the mining industry thought were important
to it and the pastoral Industry believed were important to it. They were
voted down. The Government kept its word, introduced the
amendments and they were voted down by the Liberal and National
parties.
J: is it possible to reach agreement with the Greens on the essential
elements of the Bill?
PM: I have got every confidence the Bill will pass.
J: Will you have a go at bringing those amendments up again for
example, by re-introducing them into the House of Reps?
PM: No.
J: Why not?
PM: Look, the Liberals knew what they were doing with the Bill. They had
every chance to consider It. We are not going to delay it any further.
J: Are you frightened of the Greens if you do it again?
PM:-The fact of the matter is they had every opportunity, everyone knew
the issues and, as you know, a couple of National Party Senators
broke with them and voted with the Government, but it wasn't enough.
We would have needed ten or something.
( inaudible)
PM: We will have a look at the words of it. We have reasonably, I think,
looked at every amendment, we have introduced many amendments
from various stake holders and interest groups here and Gareth Evans
is dealing with each amendment.
TEL 
TEL:
J: Prime Minister, does it concern you that as a result of the amendments
being defeated on Saturday night it seems that now you have got the
INFF as well as AMIC and all these Liberal state governments in a
sense saying, the legislation is no longer acceptable to us.
PM: Look, what's happening here is basically a political stand-off now.
What's happened is the Liberals are rounding up the suspects and
trying to drag them in to oppose the Bill. The Bill was never about
valid leases. Valid leases that were valid, never any question of
validity, the renewals of those leases was never a question -these
things are only clarlfying amendments anyway.
J: Prime Minister, the Chairman of the Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Committee, Senator Barney Cooney, said when they reported that the
Bill had to go through now because the level of public support for it
was so fragile that it wouldn't sustain until February and it was a
matter oflin fact beating the declining level of support In so many
words, for the Bill is that your view?
PM: I think what will happen is if you have an unprincipled polarisation on
the part of the Liberal Party, a filibustering around debates, around
obvious points for which information can be obtained In explanatory
memoranda et cetera, any such debate will produce a certain
polarisation. You could see this today in the statement which Liberal
Premiers have been obliged to sign, you will see It in the rounding up
of mining industry people and what have you. That can't be good for
the debate. But that doesn't say the Bill isn't a good Bill, a highly
principled Bill, an historic Bill that should be passed and that all
Australians it is the Australian people who are being denied
something here. Those Australians who in the past voted in 1967 for
the referendum and had believed that we should have an equitable
basis of dealing with our indigenous people they are the people who
the Liberal party are tying to cheat of this legislation.
J: What's wrong with leaving it until February why doesn't the Bill go
through in February?
PM: Well, you can see what's happening with this sort of thing now. Why
should I suit Dr Hewson who has done not one principled thing in this
everything which has been unprincipled.
J: Dr Hewson is that Mr Keating, Mr Goss has expressed some
reservations today about whether this thing is now workable and your
suggestion that these other Premiers have been coerced into signing
this document doesn't really stand up either does it?
PM: I don't see Mr Goss' signature on the document.
J: ( inaudible) T2E0L:. Dec. 93 16: 44 No. 010 P. 05/ 06 
TEL: 20. Dec. 93 16: 44 No. 010 P. 06/ 06
6
PM: Yes, but I don't think that I didn't hear him on " AM" and I'm not sure
exactly whiat he said, that is Wayne Goss. But let me assure him that
the Government in a completely principled way agreed to put these
amendments, and did. And they failed only because of the attitude of
the Coalition. You have got to say It Is a first that Liberal and
National party Senators to vote dlown the amendments sponsored by
the National Farmers Federation and the mining industry.
J: Simon Crean said on Sunday that a lot of those amendments would do
damage to the mining and farming industry, but you say that those
amendments
PIM; The Bill was about the validating of past acts which might have been
invalid. It was never about dealing with valid acts. Valid mining leases
with valid renewals are exactly that, but some people want a clarifying
or a reaffirmation of the amendments. All right, we sought to oblige
them the Liberal party voted them down, but again the Bill will hang
together without them.
J: For every pastoral lease which expires In Queensland will revert to
native title..
PIM: Say that again
J: As pastoral leases in Queensland expire because native title is held to
exist in its equivalent to freehold, because there isn't automatic title
to renewal in Queensland, those pastoral leases will become native
title.
PM: That is not right. Look, the fact is the Bill is fine in terms of valid
leases. We were quite happy to entertain these clarifying things, but
that is not the point. The key point is, there should be a proper basis
to our public life and a basis of morality to it. This tawdry procedure,
as the Sydney Morning Herald calls it, mean-spirited opportunism and
truculent inflexibility, shouldn't be part and parcel of our national life,
not around a matter like this not around any matter, but most
particularly not around a matter as historic as this.
So, I am just making it clear that the Liberal party, without any
principle, believes that it can wear us away on this legislation. It can
think again. And if it has got leadership squabbles on and it has it
ought to resolve them in their own right and not play out their
leadership troubles through the Mabo legislation which they are
currently doing.
J: Prime Minister, when will you decide on your new Treasurer?
PM: They are different matters.
ends. 


E&amp;OE....PROOF COPY
PM. Well, could I just begin by saying that the imminent passage of the Native Title Bill will be a great day for indigenous Australians. It will make this a great day for indigenous Australians, and I hope a great turning point in their recent history.
This has been the longest continuing problem that Australia has faced now ( or over 200 years recognising that indigenous people, that native people, had a right to their own soil. It is the end of the great lie of terra nullius and the beginning, we all hope, of a new deal, the basis of social justice and reconciliation. A real basis to reconciliation.
In that sense a turning point for all Australians, something that should raise our self esteem and our pride in this democracy of ours. The important thing is I think it has been a triumph of good will and cooperation between Australians. At the start of the debate I was told by a great many people that this could not be done, that the interests were too conflicting, that there was not sufficient good will. I was told that by talking about justice for Aboriginal Australians, we had set the hurdle too high, or as John Hewson put it, cruelly raised expectations. I was told that the scare mongers would prevail, we all heard them, the people who talked about Australians losing their backyards, and we should never forget who they were.
The passage of this legislation will demonstrate that this generation of Australians will not buy that sort of bigotry, or that brand of politics. I think it might mark a watershed in the way we conduct politics in Australian.
The Bill for its part is the antithesis, the absolute antithesis of lowest common denominator politics. It has got solid principles and long straight lines of logic. But it is something much better than that. It is politics in which people who imagine we can overcome our major problems, those people who imagine we can have something better, can have faith in the people who saw this through and the institutions that were able to deliver on their aspirations.
1 would like to pay tribute to many of the people involved here, my Cabinet colleagues who stuck this out over the better part of the year with ministerial attention to detail which would have no parallel anywhere in the western world, I don't think, in terms of putting such a huge piece of property and social law together. To the Caucus of the Government which stuck with the principles of support for Aboriginal people in giving them their opportunity to see the flesh on the bones of the High Court decision. To those who played a role in negotiating it, to those in the institutions, and can I particularly say how much I have appreciated the leadership of Lois O'Donoghue who decided that she would lead in the negotiations, and congratulate those associated with her, the principal negotiators who decided courageously to take a stand arnd stand up for the Aboriginal community and negotiate with the Government. Because negotiate is a word that is often thrown around but not understood. Negotiate means you have core interests and you chase them, but you realise what isn't core and you negotiate over them on both sides. And this was a process of negotiation, and I congratulate them for it, and those who have supported those negotiators in the broad Aboriginal community understanding how hard it was to stand up and take a stand.
To others could I say, to Ric Farley from the National Farmers Federation, who showed a spirit of goodwill and compromise and represented well, I think, history will show, represented well his constituency, keeping always faith with his constituency, Senator Kernot who believed in justice for Aboriginal people and her Party, all of them who stuck to the principles of the Bill and fought it through to the end, to our Green Senators who came on board, I was pleased about that, it was a very hard process, I think too hard, but nevertheless the Bill will be there, and most people in the State bureaucracies who negotiated to try and find a basis of preserving the States rights in land management while dealing with the broader rights of justice for indigenous Australians. And some State Premiers who stuck it out to the end, who were prepared to support us, Wayne Goss, obviously, because he didn't sign yesterday's letter, but as I said to you yesterday that was a bit of a coercion job, and a couple hung out to the end, one of whom was Jeff Kennett. &nbsp;
In the end the Government was able to bring together a disparate group of interests and a disparate group of interest groups, and fashion a policy which, I think, will stand Australia in good stead, which will stand the Aboriginal and Islander community of this country in good stead, but which we have now got to make work. And the Government, I am happy to say, will be in a position to have the system up and running, at least in its earlier stages, on the 1ist of January. It will take a while, of course, to develop the institutions fully, to set them up and to see the system work, but it is one which I think can work. So, let me begin where I started by saying I think this is a great day for indigenous Australians, a great turning point in their recent history. A day when a 200 year problem was put behind us, a day when we recognised that indigenous Australians had a right to their own soil, and I am pleased to be Prime Minister at this time when a Bill of this principle can succeed in a Parliament which has formerly not either had the understanding, or the integrity, or the courage to pass such legislation.
J: Mr Keating, how would you compare this personally to other things you have achieved in public life?
P M. Well, it is not a matter of ranking the things, this is a group achievement, but an Important one. I wrote to the reconciliation council within a week of the High Court decision saying I thought this was the basis of a firm footing for our reconciliation process, and that the Government would be examining the decision and trying to fend legislative support to it. We did that in the most exhaustive Cabinet room process and bureaucratic process in our time. And part of that, or course, was the tremendous work done by the Commonwealth bureaucracy, and let me again just record our debt or gratitude to Sandy Hollway, in Prime Minister and Cabinet, now Secretary to the Department of Industry, Technology and Regional Development, Mike Dillon, from the same department, Robyn Orr, from Attorney Generals and the other officers of the group in Prime Minister and Cabinet. rhis was a most gruelling bureaucratic effort and you can see that in the advice which was being tended to Gareth Evans. And let me again record the appreciation I have for Gareth for standing the test, standing at the crease for over 30 odd hours, and batting the balls back in fine intellectual style.
J: If you had your time over and was standing at the beginning of this long Mabo process, would you handle anything differently?
PM I don't think you could handle this differently, I think the Aboriginal community walked away from us in the middle of the year, and thought they were being messed about with. I think they were right to come back into a serious negotiation, that was the point I made about Lois earlier, that wasn't an easy thing to do. Starting from scratch from a clean sheet of paper to build a body of social and property law of this kind, particularly with the difficulty of the spiritual attachment Aboriginal people have to the land and taking that into account, and understanding how important it is in their culture is a terribly difficult thing to do. I think we took the steps right, we met with the Aboriginal community, we met with the other stake holders, the mining industry, the pastoral industry, the States, we produced a discussion paper, we then) had a run over the principles at the COAG meeting in Melbourne, that didn't produce an early agreement, we then refired the principles, then after much work, and then after much negotiation, produced a draf Bill. The draft Bill, we then took opinions on the draft Bill, we then produced the Bill. And in the producing of the Bill we also took readings from the various stakeholders about the Bill itself. So, before the Bill ever went to the House of Representatives it has had an inordinate amount of work and negotiation and consultation, and of course it has had more in the whole process.
J: The bill that you take to Parliament late tonight, is that different in any important ways from the legislation that was introduced into the Senate, has this long marathon produced any important changes?
PM: Not in its core structure, core principles. It has got some important changes around some of the operability of it, but not in its core matters and they are that there is, first of all a right of indigenous Australians to go and claim native title and a set of tribunals to hear them and award them, a federal court stream and a state supreme court stream and then there is institutionalised in the bill a process of consultation and negotiation and where necessary a process of arbitration leaving the economic interests over land grants economic interest over land exclusively with the state institutions which have been refashioned to take account of the peculiar nature of dealing with native title. That is, comprehending the complexity of Aboriginal culture and society in the doing of it. They are the core things, as well as that, the validations of the 1975 92 period, but I think it is very workable. There is a view by some industry groups that it is unworkable that is not true. In the end these matters are left with state institutions, indeed there are state ministerial over-rides available in the event any development needs to be in the opinion of the state government persisted with, But there is a right to be asked for indigenous people and a real process around the asking of it.
J: Did you put up Clause 24 in the Senate only to have it knocked over, and if not why is the Government now prepared to accommodate the renewals question for the pastoral interests, but not the mining interests?
PM. We put up Clause 24 because we agreed to propose it and we did. And it failed because of the obdurate obstructionism of the Liberal and National parties in the Senate. It was therefore defeated. Some in the mining industry wanted it to pass because they thought the Greens then wouldn't vote for the Bill. So, it wasn't being offered in good faith or supported in principle by many in the mining industry and they had their chance to have their principle backed in by asking the Liberal and National parties to vote for it. The Liberal and National parties didn't vote for it.
J: But you won't give it another run in the House of Representatives?
PM. I answered that yesterday.
J Having now achieved this, what is your view now to a treaty with all Aboriginal people?
PM. I think that I am always, I hope, practical, looking for solid things. The core matter is the empowerment of Aboriginal people in lifting their &nbsp;dignity, self regard and their position in terms of if you like, their balance in this society is land. This more than anything else seeks to give them land under the native title principles. Because it extends the principle into acquiring pastoral leases and converting those to native title it in a sense multiplies out the High Court decision. Now, this will do some justice to those who were formerly dispossessed, but it can never repair the stain of terra nullius it can only make som amends. But, let's start with something solid like land and the social justice consequences of this as well as the other things we have done in the Aboriginal Deaths in Custody Royal Commission response and the mainframe policies administered by ATSIC and let's see how that goes before we start taking the route of looking at treaties which can sound high minded, but in terms of their practical impact may not be as high minded as this.
J: Prime Minister, what can you offer the National Farmers Federation who have stuck with you for so long would believe that you have sold out in what occurred in the last few days?
PM. I don't think it was and I don't think it believes that. I don't think you have got a right to say that, I mean, you are paraphrasing a view that I don't think they hold and I don't think you have a right to paraphrase their view.
J. What sort of a selling job do you think you will have to do among the states and in industry now once this is through?
PM. This provides for an orderly, I think for the mining industry, expeditious process for looking at exploration and mining and also seeking to get some seamlessness between the exploration and the mining phase. I think that can happen. We were not seeing the growth of pastoral leases in agriculture anyway, they had come to a grinding halt. One of the principles in here is you can't grant an interest over native title land that you can't grant over freehold land. None of us who have a freehold block of land in this country would like any government to be able to simply give it to somebody else. Similarly, you can't give native title to somebody else. There is a procedure in here, an acquisition procedure -if it needs to be done as there is for non-Aboriginal Australians. So, it has got those balances about it.
J. Do you think the implementation process is going to be fairly smooth?
PM. We are charting new country with this, but we are in a position to run the systern from January 1 and then the Government will make it a priority to build the institutions to let it work and it will have its teething problems and there will be a fair bit of experience garnered on the way through and that experience will no doubt make the operation of the institutions more efficient and then, I think, we will start to get through the land claims.
J: Do you think it is inevitable that another chapter here, a High Court challenge of some sort given the advice just amongst some of the interest groups?
PM. I don't know, that is up to the states. But, let's record this fact the Liberals are always talking about the rule of law. When the rule of law and the High Court said that the concept of terra nullius was wrong, that the notion that this was a land of nobody was wrong, they said let's change the High Court's personnel. How dare the High Court make this decision. They say they are always for private property, but when the private property, the common law land right of Aboriginal Australians was given by the High Court, the Western Australian Liberal party with the support of the federal Liberal party wanted to abolish their private properly right by a single legislative act and in doing that what they have shown is that they only believe in laws which suit them and their constituency as they perceive it and in property rights enjoyed by classes of Australians they approve of. So, you wouldn't know where they will come. With that obscurantist view of the world, one wouldn't know what attitude they, as a group of political organisations, would take to the legislation. I hope that they have learned a lesson from this. That all this time the Liberal party has had no policy on Mabo and when Dr Hewson was pressed on the core matter about whether the set of principles stood for anything and he said they didn't, the interviewer at the time Laurie Oakes said I am staggered and he was entitled to be. Nothing has changed from that day. There is now no more principles today than there was two months ago. The whole Mabo debate has come and gone simply only with their opposition and the principles so-called which never even applied, barely had any mention of native title or the interests of Aboriginal people.
J: Do you concede that the Greens in the end did play a role in getting some Aboriginal groups in behind this legislation who otherwise may have stayed out of it and in fact, that in the end they improved the legislation from the Aborigines point of view?
PM. These are all subjective matters and I have always wanted more Aboriginal people to be involved than fewer. But, were the process to be smoother the getting of support amongst these various Aboriginal groups wouldn't have been as central to the passage of the legislation.
J-Prime Minister, how much of Australia do you think will be successfully claimed as native title under this legislation over say the next tenor twenty years?
PM: You mean how much of the most valuable parts of the country or the arid parts or..
J: The Northern Territory under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act has ended up at about 49 per cent, although the original estimate twenty years ago was 14 per cent. What is your estimate?
PM; I don't think I can give you an estimate David ( Barnett). But, I think the implication of the question is if it goes to native people then somehow it is alienated from Australia -that is the implication of your question. That sort of pre-Copernican obscurantism which we often have from you David is what is wrong with your view of Australia and your view of Australia has just been done in this week.
J: Thank you for the tribute..
PM; You are entitled to many things David, but tributes isn't one of them.
J: ( inaudible) David Barnett
PM. Well, time will tell.
J: Mr Keating. given the role the Greens and the Democrats did pray in the end, is there a case for them to be bought in to the preparation of the social justice strategy?
PM. I have told Senator Chamrarette I am happy to engage her and Senator Margetts in the process as I have made a commitment to Lois O'Donoghue and the principal negotiators who I am pleased to say are all here at the moment, to say that we will sit down and we wll engage as far as possible the broader Aboriginal community and we will try and put together a package which is really good one that works to deliver in the first instance, a capacity to buy land and ways which we can improve the social equation. I might leave it at that. Thank you very much.
ends



PRIME MINISTER 153/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
FURTHER HELP FOR VICTORIAN FLOOD VICTIMS
The Commonwealth Government has decided on a new package of assistance for
people affected by flooding in regional Victoria, in addition to the substantial
assistance provided immediately after the flooding.
This decision follows the receipt of a report prepared by my Rural and Regional Task
Force, and further considerations by my colleagues in the Ministry. The task force,
ci-aired by the Member for Page, Harry Woods, visited the severely affected centre of
Benalla on 12 November to examine first-hand the damage caused by the floods.
The Government will make available $ 209,000 from Landcare funds, on a dollar-fordollar
basis with the Victorian Government, to develop further flood prevention
measures. An extra 50 JOBSKILLS places will be allocated to the flood-affected region. This is
in addition to the 20 LEAP places allocated to the Wangaratta-Benalla area for 1993-
94 at a cost of $ 164,000.
The Govcrnmcnt plans to amend the Social Security Act to permit some retrospective
payments. In the Victorian floods, there is clear evidence of some families having
difficulty in accessing entitlements. Where people were eligible for benefits, but did
not get their applications in on time because of the floods, payments will be available
as an act of grace.
In light of the Victorian experience, I will discuss with the Minister for Finance
whether we need to review the thresholds which operate under the Natural Disaster
Relief Arrangements, and the relative treatment of households and businesses under
the A-angements. This will be additional to the substantial assistance provided to
Victoria under the existing arrangements.
This response shows that this Government is committed to ensuring that appropriate
and timely assistance is provided to those affected by natural disasters of this type.
CANBERRA 22 DECEMBER, 1993
( For further information: Harry Woods, MP, 066 42 6356) 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
NATIVE TITLE BILL IMPLEMENTATION
The passage of the Native Title Bill is an important step towards justice for
Australias indigenous people.
Australia now has a coherent framework for dealing with native title, as
established by the High Court in June 1992.
The Government is moving now to implement the scheme.
The legislation will come into force from 1 January 1994. There will be no
hiatus between the cut-aff date for validation of past grants and Acts, 31
December 1993) and the commencement of operation of the new land
management regime. This will provide the certainty sought by the
Government and interested parties.
The full Institutional structure for determining native title claims and managing
dealings affecting native title land, and permanent appointments to those
Institutions, will be put in place as rapidly as possible in the new year. In the
meantime, from 1 January, the President of the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal has agreed to act as President of the Native Title Tribunal and the
Registrar of the MAT will act as Registrar of the Tribunal. I am grateful to
Justice O'Connor and her colleagues for their active help and co-operation in
this important national enterprise.
A Task Force in my Department, headed by a Deputy Secretary, supported by
other key agencies such as the Attorney-General's Department and the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission, is already well advanced
on arrangements to implement the legislation. In particular, the necessary
regulations are being prepared; designated Aboriginal organisations to
represent claimants are being identified; discussions are under way with
States and Territories willing to co-operate with the Commonwealth scheme
on recognition of State and Territory institutions and processes according to
the criteria in the Bill; and a range of other matters is being addressed. 155/ 93 
2
The Government is determined to devote the resources and the effort
necessary to establish the Native Title framework and to make it work.
We wish to do so in co-operation with States and Terrtories. A national
approach remains our clear objective.
The Commonwealth Government is also committed to sharing with co-
Operating States and Territories the costs of compensation for any necessary
validation of past grants and Acts and for administrative and legal expenses.
Our intention is to finalise these details early in the new year.
The legislation Is constitutionally sound. Any challenge to it would prove
fruitless and be counter to the common objective of certainty in land
management. The Bill provides every opportunity for States and Territories
to retain control of land management as It affects native title, and they should
support the Bill.
We now move on to address the wider opportunities presented by Mabo for a
just reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. In
particular, we will be giving priority to establishing, in consultation with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, the land acquisition initiative
provided for in the legislation. The target date for the establishment of the
land acquisition arrangements is 1 July 1994.
With the passage of the legislation Australia has an unparalleled opportunity
to establish a new era of legal, social and economic justice for the oldest
Australians the original occupants of our country.
CANBERRA 23 DECEMBER 1993 



Awi/ i
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KE. ATING, MP
MINISTERIAL APPOINTMENTS
Following the resignation of John Dawkins as Treasurer and the election of Gary Johns to the
Ministry, I have decided to recommend to the Governor-General a number of changes to
ministerial and administrative arrangemuents.
A copy of the new ministry list is attached, showing the detail of the changes. I am pleased
to announce that Ralph Willis is to become Treasurer. He has made an outstanding
contribution to the Labor Government since it took office in 1983 and he comes to his new
position as a Minister of wide experience and demonstrated capacity.
Other changes to be made by the Governor-General will be the appointment of Kim Beazley
as Minister for Finance and Simon Crean as Minister for Employment, Education and
Training. Senator Collins will be Minister for Primary Industries and Energy and David
Beddall, Minister for Resources.
I will also be recommending to the Governor-General some adjustment of departmental
arrangements. The Department of Transport and Communications will be renamed as the
Department of Transport and a separate Department of Communications will be established.
Laurie Brereton will be Minister for Transport ( as well as remaining Minister for Industrial
Relations) and Michael Lee becomes Minister for Communications and remains Minister for
Tourism. The Secretary to the Department of Communications will be Mr Neville Stevens,
the former Secretary to the Department of Industry, Technology and Regional Development.
The rccord of achievement in Transport and Communications in recent years includes new
industry structures for aviation; the development of a third runway at Kingsford Smith
Airport; reform of the shipping and waterfront sectors; progress towards a national rail
freight system and uniformn national road regulation; new regulatory arrangements for
telecommunications, broadcasting and radio communications. and the introduction of
comperition in telecommunications; and sale of communications licences for more than a
billion dollars. The new arrangements will build on and enhance these achievements, which
are alrcady contributing substantially to Australia's improved international competitiveness.
The Department of Health. Housing, Local Government and Community Services is to be
renamed as the Department of Human Services and Health. and Brian Howe will become the
Minister for Housing, Local Government and Human Services. 
Reflecting my commitment that there should be direct representation of women's issues in
the Cabinet, Ros Kelly will become the minister assisting me for the status of women. She
will be assisted in her normal portfolio duties by the appointment of Janice Crosio as a
parliamentary secretary in that portfolio. Con Sciacca will replace her as parliamentary
secretary in the Arts and Administrative Services portfolio.
I am very pleased to welcome Gary Johns to the Ministry. He will become Assistant
Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Service
Matters. Paul Elliott will replace Mr Johns as parliamentary secretary to the Treasurer.
There will be an Executive Council meeting and swearing-in ceremony at Government House
at 2.30 this afternoon.
23 December 1993 
ommonwealth Government
SECOND KEATING MINISTRY 23 December 1993
7Vhu MROSME Rtejrsenauze to
other Chamber
Jrile Minister The Houe P J Keating, MP Senator Evans
Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait iWander Affairs The Hon Robert Tickner, MY Senator Collin
Special Minister of State The Hon Frank Walker, QC, MP Senator Evans
( Vice-ftesident of the Exeutive Council)
Parlamentary Secetary The Mont Andrew Theopha noms UP
Miister for Housing, Local Goverment and Human Servicesi The Bon Brian Howe, MP Senator Richardson
( Deputy Prime lvfiistcr)
Minister for Health Senator the Hon Graham Richardson Mr Howe
Minister for Family Services Senator the Han Rosemary Crowley Mr Howe
Minister for Veterans' A&amp; ffairs Senator the lion John Faulkner Mr Howe
( Manalar of GoVeremtent Dahess In the Seate)
Parliamentary Secretary The Han Andrew Thwophwzou, MP?
Minister for Foreign Affhirs Senator the Han Gareth Evanis, QC Mr Bilney
( Leader of the Oovernient to the Seate)
Minister for Trade Senator the Hoe Peter Cook Mr Bilney
Minister for Development Co-operation and Pacific Island Affairs The Hon Gordon Biltiey, MEP Senator Evans
Minister for Defence Senator the Hon Robert Ray MY Beazley
( Deputy Lcader of The Government tn the Senate)
Minister for Defence Science and Personnel Senator the Hon John Faulkner Mr Beazicy
Parliamentary Secretary 2thi lion Gary Puanch, MP
Treasurer The Hon Ralph Willis, MP Senator McMullan
Assistant Treasure Tha Hon George Gear, MP Senator McMullan
Special Minister of Stae The lion Frank Walker, OC, M? Senator McMullan
Parliamentary SeCetay The Hon Paul Elliott, MP
Minister for Finance The Bon Kim C Bealey, MP Senator McMullan
( Leader of the Haoust)
Minister for the Environmient, S port and Territories The Hon Ros Kelly, M7 Senator Richardson
MmitrerAusiing the Prime Minister for the Statusr of Women Senator Crowley
Parliamentary Secretry ( Yerritorids) The Hon Warren Snqowdoau MP
Parliamentary Secretary The Mon Jankie Cras4a U89M Af?
Minister for Immigraton and Ethnic Affairs Senator the Hoo Nick Bolkus My Bramain
Minister Assising the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs
Minister for Employment, Euncation and Training The Hon Simon Crean, MP Senator Schacht
Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training Thle Han Ross Free MP Senator Schacht
Parliamentary Swretary The lion Warren Snowdon, MP
Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional Developmecnt The Hon Alan Grilfiths, MP Senator Schacht
Minister for Science and Small Business Senator the Hon Chris Schacht Mr Griffiths
in Ister Assisting th e Prime Min ister for Scien ce
Parliamentary Secretary ' The lion E) J Lindsay, MP
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy Senator the Hon Bob Collins Mr Beddall
Minister for Resource The Hon David Beddall, MP' Senator Collins
Parliamentary Secretary Senator the Mon Nick Sherry
Minister for Social Security The Han Peter Baldwin, MP Senator Crowley
Parliamentary Secretry Thje Hon Con Seiacca, Mp
Minister for the Arts and Administraive Services Senator the Hon Bob McMullan Mr Walker
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Con Sciacca, MP
Minister forludaatdaiRelations . e-Han LAurie Brereton, MP Senator Ray
Assistant Minister for Industrial Relations The Hon Gary Johns, MP
Mimioter Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Service Matters Senator Ray
Minister for Transport The Hon Laurie Drereton, MP Senator Cook
Parliamentary Sea'etry T'he Hon Neil OlKeefte MP
Attorney-General The Hon Michael Lavarch, MP Senator Bolkus
Minister for Consumer Affairs The Hon Jeannette McHugh, MP Senator Boikus
Minister for Justice The HOD Duncan Kerr, MP Senator BolkUs
Parliamentary Secretary The lon Peter buncan, MP
Minister for Commounicatiofh The Hion Michael Le-e, MP Senator Cook
Minister for Tourism The Hen Michael Lee, MP Senator Ray
Each box represents a panfoio. Cabbat Mixistert ane shows as bold type. AsS a ner! ul dc them in one Department in ewA poxifollo. Except far the
Departmen of Human eryicu and Meath and the Department of Poreign Affairs nad Trade, the title of echb Department reflects that of the Portfoio Minister.
There isa &amp; Wa Departmeht of Veterans Affairs is the iunmsa Services and Health psolo. 



TEL S
7
.3 4..
PRIME MINISTER156/ 93
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
FUNERAL OF THE LATE PRESIDENT OF FIJI
The Governor-General, the Hon Bill Hayden AC, will represent Australia at
the funeral of the late President of Fiji, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau. The funeral
will take place. on 29 December in Fiji.
Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau was a respected leader who will be remembered for
his outstanding contribution to his country. He also had a long association
with Australia. His passing is a sad toss for Fiji and the Pacific region.
It is a mark of our great respect for the late President that the Governor-
General will attend the funeral ceremonies next week.
CANBERRA 24 DECEMBER 1993 24. Dec. 93 9: 19 No. 004 P. 01/ 01 



TEL: 10. Jan. 94 11: 47 No. 004 P. 01/ 06.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JULIE FLYNN, RADIO 2UE, RE: NSW BUSHFIRES
SUNDAY, 9 JANUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
JF: Mr Keating, what's been your personal response to the scale of the
devastation the fires have caused?
PM: Well, it just demonstrates how vulnerable people are even in the
relatively inner city suburbs in modern brick homes. Sydney, and
NSW in particular, is well served by its very large areas of open
space and forest. But, I suppose, as the years have gone on people
have believed that large fires of this nature are more the exception
than the rule. It has been the unlikely weather conditions which have
produced this. But, I must say, that I think the fighting of the fires
have been very professional and losses have been while too high still
minimal for the size of the fires that have been experienced.
JF:-It has been an extraordinary performance by everyone involved. How
long do you think the fire fighters can sustain this effort?
PM: Well, the latest advice I have is that if conditions prevail as is now that
is as of late Sunday there is an expectation that within 72 hours the
great majorlty of fires will be brought under control.
JF;-Is there anything more that the Commonwealth can do at this stage?
PM: Well the Commonwealth has got as much equipment really and
personnel there as can be taken. We have got 30 helicopters
currently deployed and we have 10 on standby, we have got 400
people deployed, 200 on standby not yet required as well as dozens
of water tankers and four wheel drive vehicles etc. So in terms of, I
think the cooperation between the Australian Defence Forces and the
emergency services have been tip top. And so everyone says, but we
stand ready-t deploy more if needs be. I think one of the important
things out of this Julie ( Flynn) will be the experience of the fire
fighters, the volunteers In these fires each episode of these fires 
TEL 2
brings the professionalism of fire fighting up and I think after it would
be important to get peoples' views to see in which ways both In terms
of equipment and personal deployment we can better fight the fires in
the first instance with the emergency services and volunteers and with
the Australian Defence Forces.
JF: Do you think we probably also need a national review of bush fire
strategies overall, particularly in the question of burning back?
PM: I think that will come fairly naturally with this. It is a long time since
Sydney has seen fires like this or the NSW region generally and of
course, because of this time there has been some complacency In the
community but this has not been true of the professional services as I
think the success in fighting these fires has demonstrated.
JF: Do you have any message for the employers who have staff working
as volunteer fire brigade officers?
PM: I think most employers would take a fairly sensible, I hope humane
view of the services which volunteers can provide, and that is on
these times every professionally qualified person who understands
how to fight a fire it is of course very important. But I think what we
have seen is quite magnificent efforts on behalf of volunteers, and
pulling the volunteer service in together with the professional services
is not a very easy thing to do but it has been done very affectively
here.
JF: There have been calls for a nation wide appeal to raise money for the
victims of the fire do you think that is necessary?
PM: Well I made clear yesterday that any contributions to designated
funds ' will be tax deductible to encourage people to make
contributions towards it. There will of course be assistance to people
affected by the fires and the natural disaster relief arrangements
which the Commonwealth has in place With NSW. But also can I say
that the Commonwealth indicated yesterday that we would meet NSW
dollar for dollar in the cost of fighting the fires.
JF; Have you had any overall cost conveyed to you yet by either the
Premier or the Bush Fire Authorities?
PM: Well, no not of the fires or the cost of restoration or replacement of
infrastructure but as of yesterday the cost of actually fighting the fire
was about $ 15 million, we are meeting half of that. I also Indicated
yesterday that the Commonwealth will be declaring a disaster relief
payment under -, the Social Security Act. And at the moment that
payment is limited to aformula, we will probably increase that formula
a number of times which will mean a more generous level of
payments. T1EL0: . Jan. 94 11: 47 No. 004 P. 02/ 06 
T1EL.: Jan. 94 11: 47 NO. 004 P-03/ 06
23
JF: Prime Minister, having a look around at what has happened you say
you have been impressed by the work of the people who have been
fighting the fires, but there has also been an extraordinary response
from just the people who have been affected and ordinary Australians
who have rushed Into help, hasn't there?
PM: There has been a magnificent response I think from just general
members of the public trying to give a hand and there the ones who
are fighting effectively many fires, way beyond the course of the
capacity of volunteers. I mean the effort has been nothing short of
magnificent and just shows you when things get tough in this country
the country does pull together in a very strong and meaningful way,
and I think that has been demonstrated very clearly here. The main
thing is where does this now go and I think the next 24 hours are
going to tell the story. My latest advice was that in the suburban fires
in the Sydney area, the likelihood that sufficient resources could be
deployed to contain theme there has been no property loss in Sydney
in the last 24 hours despite the fact that many homes were lost
yesterday around Sonnet Bay and Jannali. There are 155 homes lost
I think in total so far but none lost today. That is my advice which if of
course we can maintain that record we will then be fine. There is the
Blue Mountains Kariong area which is a problem. There are spot fires
there, the wind conditions are not good but resources are being
deployed. T-he overall view from the emergency services is as
conditions currently are there is same expectation that within about 72
hours most of the fires could be contained.
JF: Prime Minister thank you very much.
PM; Thank you Julie.
ends TEL 



I L J* ad FL D U) NO . LII.-1 I . U11
PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE lION P J
KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE AND DOORSTOP INT'ERVIlEW AT THE
BUSHIRE OPERATIONS CENTRE, ROSEHILL, SYDNEY
8 JANUARY, 1994
PM: I think it is worth recording the fact that the fires have been fought
notwithstanding thc loss of life we've had, and property, quite successfully over
the last week, and particularly in the last 24 hours. Yesterday there was a
reasonable expectation of many hundreds, maybe thousands of homes being lost,
that not having happened, and now the weather conditions being the all important
variable, and this day in particular being significant as some meteorological advice
gives us the hope, as the premier said, that wc could have a shift in conditions by
about six this evening. Now if that's the case, with damper air, thc containment
task should be something which this force now deployed is capable of. Could 1
just say from the Commonwealth's view we have as many Defence Force assets
deployed here as needs be. We have got more standing in rcscrve. We've got
anothcr five hundred people ready to be deployed if needs be, and that also goes
for equipment. I think we havc got now about 25 helicopters committed. Wc arc
reaching a point where Commissioner Koperbcrg's view is that if more aircraft are
dcploycd there is a risk to the aircraft and to firefighters, and that we are fighting
these fires conventionally, and conventionally has provcn to be the best way to
fight them, augmented by aviation scrvlccs as. needs be.
So I have indicated to the Premier this morning that for the firefighting task, which
is outside the National Disaster Relicf Arrangcments, the NDRA arrangements,
that is the actual task and cost of fighting such fires on such a large scale, the
Commonwealth will mcct NSW dollar for dollar on thosc arrangements.
I -L 
2
Also wc are this morning, the Commonwealth, the acting Minister for Social
Security, John Faulkner, will be declaring undcr the Social Security Act the
provision of emergency payments to families which are affected by the fires, with a
one-off payment which was set sometime ago and we arc reviewing thc quantum
of that paymcnt... at the moment it is $ 600. We will probably increase that, but It
will have to be increased by a change retrospectively to an act of parliament. So
that will be there to support those people who have been affected in the Immediate
sense. Of course, the National Disaster Relief Arrangemcnts are there for the
longer run re-instatement of infrastructure and other assets.
So cAould I perhaps round up my remarks by congratulating the firefighting effort
and task in NSW starting with the Government, the Premier, Minister Griffithl,
Commissioner Kopcrberg his deputy, the fire Chiefs, and the normal services who
have behaved in a way which is of course way above normal. And that was the fire
brigade, the ambulance, the police and the defence force, but most particularly all
those volunteers who have come and given their Christmas break to their fellow
Australians to make this burden easier on them. To those, and to the thousands of
people who were just simply helping, I think we all owe a great debt of gratitude.
J: Are you going to inspect the damage?
FM: Wc are &amp; oins to look at the fifes which are the ones probably the most
threatcning at the moment. I have made clear though that neither I nor the Premier,
nor any of the other Ministers here or officials involved would want to be taking
aircraft which arc needed in the effort. But we have now aircraft which are surplus
to the effort, and thcrcforc I think it is probably worth our while to have a look.
J: With the cnd of the Cold War, do you think the defence forces should he more
aimed towards civil emerencics?
PM: The nature of the equipment of any conventional armed force will always
havc some civil applications in circumstances such as thcsc, and it is the
adaptability but more than that the willingness of the defence force to actually
apply them effectively which matters. And I think that's what matters rather than
the equipment selection or the rest, and that is that there will always be people
there. And in this case, certainly from the Government's point of view, and that of
my colleague the acting Defence Minister John Faulkner, we take the view that
wherever the defence force effectively help, then It ought to. And I know that Is
certainly the view of the chief of the Australian Defence Force, chief of general
staff, and the general willingness of the dcfcnce force personnel to actually be
involved, and to do it well and to do it quickly. 
ILL 3
J: Mr Keating, you're a Sydney resident, art you shocked by the way the fies have
ripped through NSW?
PM: I am, and we all arc, but these arc unusual weather conditions. And I mean
Sydney has assets which very few cities in the world have, and they arc very large
areas of reserve around it, which the people of this city enjoy variously from time
to time, but it always carried with it somne risks, and I think it Is a matter of
managing those risks. It is thc Paitre of NSW, and the fact that there arc many
national parks which does make the place such a beautiful place. But large forest
areas will always attract some of these risks. It is a case of managing them. But out
in the very large areas, as the Premier said, it is a moot question about whether you
can ever effectively manage such a risk, with clearing et cetera. But in the Inner
city areas, or areas near to the city proper, it is imponant I think that we do manage
these areas well, particularly in the future, But preserving what we've had luckily,
which other governments In the past have given us, that Is, thc foresight to declarc
reserves around the city which has rmade Sydney one of the nicest cities in the
world. TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP W ITH POOL TV CREW, OPERATIONS
ROOM J: What's thc extent of the fires now?
PM: Weill the first element of the briefing was that the containment of fire
overnight, and the minimisation of loss of life and housing was probably the best
news of the day, because as John ( Fahey) said earlier, we expected yesterday that
mnore homes would be lost in the evening. Now it depends very much I think on
the prevailing weather conditions today. If there is a successful containment over
the course of the day there is somne prospect on mecteorological information of the
wind shifting by about lunchtime tomorrow.
J: How have you been able to help the fire fighters?
PM. Well, we've got maximum deployment I think. We talked about aircraft, and
we now think if we put any more aircraft in the air there is a dangcr to aircraft and
to firefighters. So there is a maximum levcl or commitment of resources one can
make, and I thinik in the case of the services we have more aircraft on standby and
more pcrsonriet, but I think the message John and I rececived today was what we
have deployed at the moment is the optimum that needs to bc deployed for the
problcrms at hand. .1fal d 1 1 V INL1 V I. 
I C L 4
J: What do you think the costs will be to the governments?
PM: Well let me just say this before I give you that answer, I think the spirit here
has been remarkablc. That is, the co-operative spirit that has seen thc work not just
of thc professional fire services, the police, ambulance, and thc defence forces, but
the volunteers, and of course the thousands of ordinary people who
have thrown their lot in with this. I think we are seeing Australia at its best in this
environment. On costs, I've indicated to John this morning that wc, the
Commonwealth, with NSW will pick up half the cost or the fire ighting effort.
On the larger issues or replacing and putting back some of the lost infrastructure
facilities and homes we have a set of forrmulae in place for that, but we are also
having a talk about that as well.,
DOORSTOP AFTER PM's AERIAL INSP'ECTION OF FIRE SITES TO
THE NORTH OF SYDNEY
PM: I think the impression we have is that the wind conditions at the moment, I
mean the fires are burning on very broad fronts, and some of them arc still quite
Intense, you can see very large flames. Others are burning through grasslands
below the trees, but they axe burning on a broad front and you can see the
extensive damage, and where certain localiti.. have been saved you can see where
the fires have come right up to the odges of the homes. I think we'd say that the
wind conditions at the moment are, if you like, retarding the progress of the fires
somewhat. And with the wind change wc hope that doesn't accelerate them off into
another direction, They will help In one respect, but not In others.
J; Mr Keating, were you shocked by what you saw?
PM: Well, it is the extent of it. But the fires which have taken homes they are
smnall local fires which have come up a gully, they arc not part of thc big fires. The
big fire,; have largely been contained in terms of communities and homes. But of
course they have devastated a very large area of, if you like, the State's estate.
J: So you are hopeful, are you? 
I LL
PM: Well I think the conditions today are better than we thought they might be,
and by the end of the day if we get a wind change that suits the fires I think we
could bc in better shape than we thought 24 hours ago. Bushflircs arc nasty things,
especially seeing them work on such a big front and with very high flames. But
some arc the high flame variety, others are the low grass burning variety which arc
moving up through the hills, and they arc moving inexorably, now that the
bushfires themselves arc not being fought, so they are just going on. If the wind
goes thc wrong way on us, they'll jump some of the crccks, and that's some of the
conccrn. Some of the small communities, you can see where the towns have actually been
saved, the fire has burnt right down to them. So while there has been loss of life,
which is tragic, and loss of housing, it is nothing on the scale that it could have
been without a quite magnificent fire fighting effort.
( Ads. C, -1 0 1 1 4 i 1 I A1-1 i-I 


PM: The Government has today substantially increased the disaster relief paymentunder the social security system, which will triple it in many cases for families, tojust under $ 2000 and over $1000 for a single person. Now, this will be paid topeople who have had their homes damaged or whose income has been severelydislocated - for instance firefighters who've not been paid by their employerswould qualify. And we've already issued cheques this morning through theDepartment of Social Security, particularly to some of the residents of Jannali andthose areas, and there is a Social Security hotline through which people canenquire and have these things paid.
So, the Government takes the view that this is a natural disaster and a very largeone, the most significant bushfires we've seen, and it is appropriate that theCommonwealth Government help people through this period with theseImmediate and personal payments.J: How will people be assessed?
PM: This payment is not income tested or asset tested. It Is only on the basis ofwhether their homes have been damaged or destroyed, whether they have sufferedmaterial income loss in the course of the fire or fighting the fire. So, for instance,it won't be paid to somebody who has simply been evacuated and is coming backt0 their house which is undamaged. But it would be paid to others who havesuffered an employment loss or loss of Income.J: will this include volunteer firefoughters who have lost income?
PM: It will include volunteer firefighters who have lost income. Volunteer firefighterswho’ve income or have not been paid by their employer - we would be ableto pay them this payment.
J: is there a limit on the amount of money?
PM: Well, it's a formula and It would depend on whether someone is single, married orwith children and it rises accordingly. With two children under 13 it's about $ 2000, roughly.
J: How many people do you think would be eligible?
PM: Well, it's very hard to say. But, obviously, with the nature and the extent of thedevastation It's going to be quite a significant number of payments.
J: So It's Social Security who are doing the assessing and processing?
PM: Social Security regional offices will handle all of the processing and the payments.And, as I've said, quite a number of cheques have already been paid this morning.
J: Where will the funding come from?
PM: its from the Commonwealth Department of Finance through the Department ofSocial Security.
J: Ins ems of the ftr % ie and emergency workers would you like to wso= rSW1 of public re~ ntion or tribut for them?
PM: Well, I think this has been a magnificent effort on the part of the firefightingservices. The fact that we have lost 155 homes, or thereabouts - too many ofcourse for those who have lost them - but considering the scale of the fires itsbeen a very successful firefighting effort, A success only guaranteed by theprofessionalism of those engaged and the volunteers; that is, those who helpoccasionally with firefighting and who are engaged, If you like, as part timefirefighters and those ordinary people who’ve, just decided to pitch in. I think it'sbeen an absolutely wonderful effort and, as! I said a couple of days ago, it'sAustralia at Its begt you see the best things about the country coming out of it.
J: Prime Minister, should you have come back from holidays sooner to deal with thismatter?
PM: No, well, I was back a day or two - the acting Prime Minister was dealing withthis matter from thc moment it became a problem beyond the normal capacity ofthe firefighting services. And I was kept Informed and a day later I had anInspection of the area.
J: Does forest management need to be reassessed at this time?
PM: Forest management is essentially a State issue, particularly in terms of fire control,and no doubt the state government will assess the questions about burn backs andall of the other preventative things which could be material to diminishing theimpact of large fires. And also, I think educating communities who are invulnerable: areas about how they might protect their homes. Because most of thesehomes awe lost through the roof. They start burning in the roofs and if thereis protection in the roofs the likelihood is many of the homes in Jannalli forinstance, might have been saved. So, this is something that I think is worthassessing after all of this and, no doubt, the whole campaign will be assessed. But,one would have to say there has been experience brought to this firefighting effortfrom Past fires and the Success therefore, is, I think, pretty obvious.
J: Can you give us an assessment of how much this is going to cost Australia Indollar terms?
PM: Not I can't do that. I think it would be impossible. There are obviously bigproperty losses and then there are also all the other things like timber resources, forharvesting, which would have gone. So, at this stage, I think it's impossible to say.
J: ( inaudible)… defence force personnel a bit earlier to help out7
PM: No, there was not a question about bringing them in a bit earler, they came inwhcn they were needed. Normally when fire start they are uinder the control ofemergency bushflnc fighting services and I think you'll fnd Mr Kope" br andatiers tell you that the cooperation that they'Vc had with the Defence Departmenthas been exemplary. We've had, really, more reserves and equipment availablethan can be used. T hat's still the cane today.
J: NSW has been asking the Federal Government to contribute more to the cost ofInfrastructure, rebuilding etc. Would you consider that?
PM: Well. we're meeting half the cost of fighting the fire because fighting the fire itselfIs just a very large cost in itself. Now, normally this would be met by NSW, we'regoing to meet half of that. But, for the replacement of Infrastructure and otherthings there is a set of arrangements in place. The National Disaster ReliefArrangements ( NDRA) which has an assessed formula where a state picks up thefirst millions at 100 percent and then the Commonwealth comes in forpercent and there's a formula where the Commonwealth picks up more thereafter.Now, the Premier has asked me to look at that and I've said to him to give us anyadvice which is germane to the question of the peculiarities of this particularcircumstance and why the NDRA may not be entirely appropriate on this occasion.We'll look at that but I think in the first instance the main thing is to help them inthe cost of fighting the fire and to help people who've been affected by the firesand to keep Commonwealth defence resources wherever they're needed until thefires are put out.
J: Should the defence forces put more emphasis on firefighting in training and thosesorts of things?
PM: Well, I think the defence forces have been no only very, very useful in thedeployments which we've bad In helicopters and in petso tel, In evacuation and tofighting fires, but I think they'll probably be very useful in the mopping upoperation. Because of the numbers which they have at their disposal and also thematerials so I think the ADF has been a very Cooperative force in this, rm veryhappy to say.
J: Can you give us an Idea of when you think this will all be over?
PM: Well I think that's a question you Should properly address to the firefightingauthorities. I think thenc weather couditions, rain and Cooler weather, haobviously got to help the containment of fires. I think you'll probably find that theflrofightlng scrvicc Is now In a containment policy with back burning so that theycan limit the damage which fires might cause when weather conditions changj, Uexpectcd later In the week. I think the key objctive of their policy now would beto be ready for a change In the weather later in the week. So, that now, they canactually back burn and take advantage of these conditions.
J: Do you have a personal message for those directly affected, those who have losthomes?
PM: Well, for most who have lost homes one can only express one's deepest sympathyand concern to see ones possessions gone, Of course, the loss. of life and the lossto those families of people ones heart goes out to them. To see peopleobviously devastated, their possessions, all their worldly goods gone, Is a heanreniding experience and one doesn't liko to sme that happen to ayboy least of all,particularly, the people we live amongst.
J: Prime Minister, it's gained worldwide attention, have you had any enquiries fromother governments about what is going on here?
PM: No, but I set up some enquiries myself earlier In the week, with New Zealandabout whether they could help, particularly with water bombers. There were acouple of Canadian water bombers there but they've already gone back to Canada.But, I did arrange for these water buckets to be delivered to Australia and, 1 think,eighty of them were delivered late yesterday on a Hercules. And, they're helpingtoday to mount a larger anti-fire storming effort.
J: Is that equipment to be kept here or just on loan?
PM: No, they're on loan for the moment but you need as much as you can bring to bearas quickly as you can Set It and whether we can use all of those I don't know, butthey're going to be here anyway and some are being used today
J: The New Zealand Government has also set up an appeal and donated a milliondollars, what's your reaction to that?
PM: Ibat's very commOdabic and I appreciate their concern. I appreciate thecooperation of the New Zealand Govemment and people in this.J: Has it been put to you or any talks been held about buying more of these bucketslocally or having better equipment?PM: Well, there's always been a debate about water bombing; because of the nature ofthe Australian bush canopy a lot of the water actually hfts the leaves and doesnr'tget to the base of the fire. And, therefore, they are obviously not as effcctive asmany people think and, of couse, water, heavy water hiltting at great speed canalso damage propeniy, but worse than that, affect materially the health offirefighters. So, there's no simple solution. I think the key point is if the lite is notdifficult it can be fought with conventional ftirighting means if it is notdifficult it doesn't need water bombing. If it is difIcult, water bombing is lesseffective but so, too, Is conventional firefighting. This is a very difficult problem.A bushfire has a character all of its own and is very difficult to contain. So, it isthe preventative measures, In the long run, which are worth, I think, thinkingabout.
End
&nbsp;



T1E0L: . Jan. 94 11: 47 No. 004 P. 04/ 06
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL BRISSENDEN, ABC ' AM' PROGRAM,
MONDAY, 10 JANUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MB: Mr Keating, you have seen the fires first hand over the weekend, what
impression has it all left on you?
PM: The scale of it. I don't think many communities anywhere will have
seen fires of this intensity on this scale and one has got to say that the
fire fighting effort has been highly professional and very effective.
MB: This happens somewhere in Australia every ten years or so, what is
your view of the way we handle such disasters as these?
PM: My view is that maybe we have become a little complacent about the
bushfire problem. That is, it has been a long time since we have seen
fires of this dimension and probably thought they might not happen
again. Well, of course, they always happen again and I suppose
following these fires there will have to be a reappraisal of policy in
terms of management of these large forest areas particularly around
Sydney which is, of course, a large city which is almost unique in the
world with these very large reserves around it and about it.
MB: Does that suggest we haven't managed those resources properly or
those areas properly?
PM:-No, I don't think so. But, I think that Jannali was a tragedy. Half the
homes were lost with a local fire in Sydney, the Jannali fire was not
part of the large fires, it was a local fire in Sydney where of the 150 or
160 homes lost, half were lost In one place. It Is for communities living
on spurs, communities living on the spur of hill tops or mountain tops
who are vulnerable where 1 think policy needs to be examined.
MB: There has been some criticisms from some quarters of the National
Parks and Wildlife Service that they haven't been back burning enough
TEL: 
T1EL0:. Jan. 94 11: 47 No. 004 P. 05/ 061
2
and they haven't managed the forests properly. Do you share those
concerns?
PM: I'm not in a position really to make a judgement~ bout that and I don't
think you could ever get that absolutely right because who can say
whether any particular area has been back burned sufficiently or not.
The one thing I think that does need recording is that for fires of this
scale and dimension were it to be almost any other place in the world
we would have had probably thousands of homes lost and a greater
toll ot life. So the management of the fires I think, has been first class.
The tragedy Is that any houses were lost and of course, beyond that
the greater tragedy that lives were lost.
MB: Overall, apart from that management question, what have we learnt
from this experience?
PM: We have learned a couple of things. Firstly, that we see a tremendous
volunteer effort. The volunteer effort here has been nothing short of
magnificent and the enmeshing of the volunteer effort with the
professional fire fighting effort has been absolutely first class and this
experience can only make it better. On top of that we have had the
integration of the defence forces with the bush fire fighting effort which
includes the professional and the volunteers that has worked very
well as well. And the many thousands of ordinary people who have
joined Issue with them and joined with them fighting the fires have
taken instructions and fought them competently. So, coming from this
will be a better understanding of not just the management of fires, but
the effort that can join the professional fire fighting service and join it
effectively. As to deployment and equipment, even the forces own
equipment and its rapid deployment, these are questions I think we
should look at and happy to look at in the near future.
MB: All right, to the finances. The Federal Government has promised as
you said on the weekend dollar for dollar assistance for NSW. Is that
adequate?
PM-I think so. This is for the fire fighting effort. Then we have behind that
what is called the NDRA the Nati onal Di saster Reli ef Arrangements
they sit there with fires, floods, or any such natural disaster. In terms
of the sharing of costs between any State and the Commonwealth and
this of course, applies between NSW and the Commonwealth, but
because the fire fighting effort itself has been so large and the state
has had to incur funds in fighting the fires we have met them dollar for
dollar on that, but normally the Commonwealth wouldn't be Involved.
Now, I have told John Fahey that If NSW makes a case to us, parts of
any of these arrangements which they think are peculiar and outside of
the NDRA arrangements we will consider them.
TEL 
TEL: 10. Jan. 94 11: 47 No
3
MVB: YOU have also suggested that the Government might look at the
provisions for emergency relief under the Social Security Act to see if
there Isn't some way of changing it. Obviously $~ 0in this case isn't
enough is it?
PM: No, well, we are looking at that and we've looked at it and I'm quite
happy to tell you and your audience that we will be making
declarations under the Disaster Relief Payments under Social Security
and we will be increasing those amounts threefold. So we will be
paying up to $ 20-00 for families. It will be graded, if you like, on the
size of families so families with more children will receive more rather
than less up to about $ 2000 as an Immediate payment just to help
people through the circumstances of the last few days.
MVB: So, how does a family qualify for that?
PM: For a start the declarations have to be on the basis of damage to
property and loss of life. Well, those two conditions under the Act exist
and therefore we will have Social Security hotlines set up and people
who have been disadvantaged or lost property can phone and have
Social Security deal with them and get a payment to them very quickly.
MVB: Is this a one-off for this disaster or will this be changed now forever?
PMV: No, this has always been there. It is there as I say triggered by those
two things loss of property and loss of life and that will remain in the
Social Security Act. I think what will happen as a result of this we'll just
continue to upgrade the amount as we have done now by trebling it.
MVB: All right. Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thank you. .004 P. 06/ 06;
ends 



OFFICL. OF It-iL PRIME MINiSTER
CANBERRA
Mr Keating, who Is on leave in Sydney this week, today issued the following
statement on the death of Mr Justice Barry Maddern:
" I was saddened today to learn of tbe death of Justice Barry Maddern, the President of
the Australian Industrial Relations Commission.
" Justice Maddern presided over what was in world terms a novel wages system
operating under an accord betwcen the Government and the trade union movement.
The record shows that during this period inflation in Australia was broken, and a more
profitable business sector led to higher investment and higher employment.
6He also presided over the most fundamental award restructuring in the nation's
history, and contributed to Innovative exercises in wage setting, such as the
introduction of supplementary payments.
" Industrial disputes fell significantly while he was in office. There was no wage
explosion exacerbated by decisions of industrial relations tribunals, which is in no small
way due to him.
" Justice Maddern brought a sense of consistency to the decisions of the industrial
relations tribunals of this country, and was very successful in developing the
relationships among the various tribunals, and within the federal tribunal.
" Justice Maddern displayed a considerable degree of independence in his work, and
will be remembered for the larger view and sense of consistency he bestowed on the
country's industrial tribunals.
" I extend sincere condolences to his family."
SYDNEY 14 January, 1994 


PRIME MINISTER 2/ 94I am pleased to announce that Mr Geoff Walsh is to join my office as Principal Adviserfrom next week.
Mr Walsh will replace Dr Allan Hawke, who has accepted an offer to become DeputySecretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Mr Walsh served as a press secretary and senior adviser to former Prime MinisterHawke, and has most recently been First Assistant Secretary, Public Affairs Division,in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
My Political Adviser, Mr Mark Ryan, will leave the office within a few weeks to takeup a position in private enterprise.
I welcome Geoff Walsh to my office, and wish Allan Hawke and Mark Ryan success intheir new positions.
SYDNEY21 JANUARY 1994&nbsp;



PRIIMNEIS TE
STATEMENT BY THE PRJM MINISTER, THE H9ON P. J. KEAT[ NG, MIP
MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY, TECHNOLOGY AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional Development, Mr Alan Griffiths,
has today tendered to me his resignation from the Ministry. I have advised the
Governor-General to accept the resignation.
Mr Griffiths has informed me that he has serious concerns about possible misuse of
funads he has received for party political purposes, possible misuse of the facilities of
his Melbourne electorate office, and irregularities in documentation relating to
electoral fuind raising and expenditure.
He told me that he had no involvement at all in any of those matters and that his
lawyers are satisfied that on the material presented to them in respect of those matters
in their opinion he is not guilty of any wrongdoing or impropriety. However, Mr
Griffiths has informed me that in the best interests of the Government and the ALP he
has decided to tender his resignation so that these matters can be fiuy investigated.
He has expressed to me his absolute confidence that after that process is concluded his
name will be fully cleared.
The Australian Federal Police have been asked to excamine these matters and determine
whether an investigation is warranted.
In addition to any consideration by the Federal Police, Mr Griffiths has asked me to
arrange for a full investigation by an independent person to determine whether his own
conduct in these matters has met appropriate standards of Ministerial behaviour. He
has expressed confidence that such an inquiry would exonerate him and permit him to
recontest his ministerial position at the earliest opportuity.
I intend to grant Mr Griffths' request for an independent inquiry and have informed
him that I would advise the Caucus not to fill the vacancy until after the investigation is
concluded. At that time, if appropriate, I expect Mr Gr-iffiths to put his name forv~ kd
to the Caucus for re-election to office.
I expect to be in a position to announce new Ministerial arrangenmns next week
Mr Griffths will be available to comment this evening at 7.3Oprn at 4 Treasury Place.
Melbourne. SYDNEY 22 JANUARY, 1994 4207 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ANNE SUMMERS' BOOK, " DAMNED WHORES AND GOD'S
POLICE", SYDNEY, 24 JANUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Anne, if I had of known you were this popular I would never have let you leave
my staff. You must accompany me more often with this guaranteed turn out of
media. Well, it is a great delight to be launching the book for an old friend, as Anne is,
and to be doing so where it is recognised that of all her great achievements, this
is perhaps one of her greatest, probably her greatest, because this book has
been continuously in print for nineteen years and it has sold more than 60, 000
copies. That must be a real feather in the cap for Anne, and for Penguin and
now as Bob says the book has been revised and Anne has written a couple of
new chapters at the beginning and at the end, and revised the work in its
substance. One of the things which I thought touched me in the book, she says it is logical
that the generation which launched the movement will have to see it through.
There is a certain weariness about that statement, which I well understand.
Anne is a baby boomer, and so am I, I was in the middle run of the baby
boomers born in 1944, when I turned 50 the other day I knew that all the Peter
Pan notions that we baby boomers have had, because we have resisted ageing
as no generation before us has resisted ageing, and that basically it is a losing
battle, a losing battle.
But we are still in there punching away, putting our views about, trying to reform
the place, moving the debate on. Anne is in that classic tradition of the activist
baby boomers of Australia. So here she is with her famous publication doing it
again, after having returned to Australia from a very exciting and interesting
period abroad and re-establishing herself here and doing things, further things,
for the Australian women's movement and for the status of women in this
country. Now, this notion of hers, she said it was logical that the generation which
launched the movement will have to see it through. And the other interesting
thing she said when saying that, she said that when she was editor of Ms 
magazine in the United States the staff came to see her about the management
of the magazine and some of its content. And the presumption was by Anne and
her partner, the staff would be pretty much wanting to see things the way she
had seen things, and to be committed to, if not just simply the same ideals, the
same vision, particularly for the status of women and women's issues. And they
said to her, we are here to say that we did not want to be and don't want to be
like the editors. In other words, the debate had moved on, and the success
which women had had, particularly feminists in the ' 60s and ' 70s, with women's
issues, changing the status of women, had been so profound that the next
generation of people to follow them were in fact living in a different epoch and
that their vision and vista and their objectives were not the objectives of those
who had been the pioneers of change and of the movement.
With some basking, I think, in the success which they had brought, Anne was
then, as you know, running and editing a magazine where the staff were looking
from a position for some plateau in the change of the status of women. In ways
which were different to Anne, which drew upon the strength of the changes
which people like her had made. And she said that we now have to, in making
that statement which I said has weary overtones, have to start thinking about
things like being frail and elderly, and the lack of economic independence. Well,
she is not frail and elderly yet, but there may be some baby boomers who are
frail and elderly. So in other words, the issues change, and we are going across
the life cycle of a generation of women who started this at university, started
these issues, being involved in these issues at university and have gone on to
see the changes through.
One of the things I thought was most telling, and she makes reference to it in the
book, was the survey which was conducted in 1992 amongst Australian women
about the attitudes of women to the changes which have taken place in society.
And Anne was on my staff at the time and we considered the survey results very
closely. Women were pleased with the changes in their lives, with the increased
opportunities, with the greater freedom, with the independence coming from
employment, the much higher participation rates in education in fact the
dominate participation rates in education. They valued the choices which the
changes of the ' 60s and ' 70s and the ' 80s had brought to them.
And so one of, I think, Anne's conclusions upon returning to Australia from the
United States was that women's lives have changed enormously in Australia
across the course of the ' 80s at least, if not the ' 70s. But the changes were not
only here to stay, but women were rejoicing in the changes and enjoying the
choices and opportunities and that one of the frequent subjects of discussion
was the role of men in coming to terms with the changes in their lives in their
new relationship with women, their wives and partners, and that being part and
parcel of the current debate.
Now, I think it is true that those changes have been profound and that they are
widely enjoyed by Australian women. Because there is no doubt, if I look at my
political life, over 24 years, the status and opportunities of Australian women
today are nothing like they were when I became a member of Parliament in
1969. And a large reason for that is because of the pioneering work which has 
been done by those interested in the status of women, the feminists, and by
people like Anne Summers.
Now these changes are very real, and I just mentioned a moment ago the
participation in schools and in university, now there are of course, more women
graduating from universities than men, in technical and further education this is
also true, we have got a higher participation rate in secondary school now
amongst women than men. And all of this has meant a dramatic change in the
opportunities for Australian women.
Now, we have had a lot of talk in this country in the last year or so about
reconciliation between Aboriginals and non-Aboriginal Australians. The word
reconciliation has been used a lot and used with all of the meaning that it
deserves to be used with. But one of the great reconciliations which is underway
now, is a reconciliation between men and women and the lives they now lead,
with the changed role of women, the changed opportunities of women and it will
be, I think, many a long year before that reconciliation is complete, if ever.
But the progress and opportunities underlying it I think are fairly profound. And I
think most men understand that and they are adjusting their view of life and
society and opportunity, in terms of the changes which have taken place, and
the reconciliation which is required of it. It's a major adjustment by men to the
new order of life which has come about because of the efforts of many women
like Anne.
One of the things she talks about is domestic violence, and she laments the
prevalence of it as we all do because there was a lot of violence against
women in the early days of this country, and it's more the pity that it's still a partand-
parcel of Australian life. It's something I think we all have to be conscious
of. It's something which I think we all have to try and remedy. As much as one
can make public policy remedy it, the Govt remains very interested in the subject
and determined to do something meaningful about it. But again, it's something
which only societal change and education and understanding can, I think, really
make the difference in terms of that issue.
One of the revelations in the book -Anne said of course she needs to bring it upto-
date, and in a sense she's sort of admitting she's brought herself up-to-date
by saying that she's now a fervent pragmatist. Now, these are words Anne
would never have uttered not so many years ago. I could have saved her a lot of
anguish if she'd asked me 19 years ago, but I'm not quite sure she would have
been taking that kind of advice from me then. If even now. I know a lot of
people think there is a great contradiction between pragmatism and ideals,
between pragmatism and vision and the words become one which is overworked
and, of course, misunderstood. But pragmatism is not cynicism. It is
about learning the lessons of things, and seeing how one can advance visions
and objectives. A lot of my public life in the years before were managed by
ideology. We had the largely competing polarities the ideology that
intervention by governments in society was the appropriate way society should
run and then the competing ideology that the more unfettered is life and society
from government intervention, the better. We've seen that pendulum swing over 
the period between the Calvin Coolidges in the US and the Richard Nixons and
the Ronald Reagans. Then on the other side, the planned economies of Eastern
Europe and less so the social democratic parties' interventions in policy over the
course of the century. These have been the competing ideological things. But
what's happened, is that ideology has faded as in fact communities demand
changes from governments and those people who are given a role in managing
society. And so one looks for if you like visions and then objectives within
those visions, and the going about of getting those objectives, and in the doing
of it materially advance the welfare of people, of men and women. I think
Anne's confession to being a fervent pragmatist, is that when she looks at the
women's agenda in this country from the late 60' s onwards and so much having
been accomplished when one compares Australia to other countries, not just in
Australian terms, but it in international terms, so much in terms of the change in
the status of women having been accomplished in this country she's seen
being put into place like building blocks. One block, on top of another block, on
top of another block the foundation, a structure and one moves on. In other
words, it can't all be done instantly. And while it's idealistic, if it's simply
ideological it probably won't happen or wouldn't have happened. The changes
needed to be engineered by interested people who knew what they were doing,
who set for themselves objectives at the time, and went and pursued those
objectives and brought them home.
Now, this is very much a commentary on life in general and certainly in
government and something which I've very much subscribed to myself. One
has a broad vision a big canvas as I've often called it -and then one sets up the
objectives and goes after them, one after the other, until there is a coherent
whole and when one reaches a plateau with a firm set of foundations, one
builds on further and goes on further.
Now, if that's called pragmatism, that's what's changed Australia from an insular,
frightened society one not prepared to get out and trade, and to deal with the
rest of the world in its own terms in the 60' s and 70' s to now a burgeoning,
outward-oriented and confident society and economy. It's been done by that
method. So too, have the changes in the status of women in this country been done in
that way. That is, those achievable things are understood to be achievable, and
those committed to their achievement go after it. It's sometimes called
pragmatism, but it's very effective and it's the effectiveness which I think Ann
recognises and nominates. Let me just give you an example. She came back to
Australia, to. join my staff, and then set about feminising me which she knew
was basically a hopeless task. But really what she set about was what she
always set about -and that was how next to try and improve the lot and status of
Australian women. With some other very committed people on my staff and in
the Prime Minister's Department, and in the Office of Status of Women and,
need I say, with an enlightened Cabinet we put together some changes which
have been very material just over the course of the year, in further improving the
status of Australian women. Child care, an issue which went to opportunity in
work, was advanced by the Government announcing and setting into policy, the
payment of a generalised child care rebate making this an area of availability in 
the normal course of the Government's disbursement system, an opportunity for
women to join the workforce. It's something which we'd never had before, even
though the Government extended child care opportunities with child care places
we'd never had a generalised rebate for child care. It's there now, and of
course we announced further extensions of child care. The other change which I
think, amongst many, which was notable, was the cashing out of the dependent
spouse rebate into a home child care allowance which evened up some of the
benefits and incentives of the tax-free threshold and income-splitting and
recognised the fact that the primary chair at home had the responsibility and that
there are payments to be made. Rather than simply a rebate for dependents,
they were paid as cash by the Government to the accounts of that person
mostly of course, the woman, the Mother, at home. That I think is going to
change forever, the way in which we regard support for dependents in the
Commonwealth, and the way in which we will support and make available to
women in the main those direct payments, and the capacity that change provides
to do other things in policy. It was a landmark change, and the women's
movement have been arguing for it for many years and Anne was there at the
key time to bring the enthusiasm about and to get support for and to drive it
home. She's a great networker, she's a great talker. She's tremendously energetic and
everyone who has known her, can only marvel at the depth of energy she's
always been able to bring to bear on any subject, and the enthusiasm that she
has. As well as that, she has that other glorious quality, and that is she has a
great sense of humour. There are enough bores in the world without us needing
to be burdened further all of us particularly in important areas of policy, by
people who've got the blinkers on and are so serious, that it just becomes such a
leaden issue that one can hardly deal with it. Anne's always had that lightness
about her, that sense of fun, of joy, and I think this has made her so much more
effective, and has given her a sense of balance on life which has been terrific
for her and everyone associated with her.
Now I know her Mum's here today, and Chip's here, and all the people who are
close to her are friends to rejoice in the fact that this celebrated work by this
very celebrated person, has been re-written for another generation of
Australians men and women. It's a standard text now in our tertiary institutions,
and as a consequence Penguin has a been on a winner for a long time, and it's
likely to stay on a winner. So, could I say to Penguin, congratulations again
first of all on supporting Anne in the first place and encouraging her through the
years, to update this seminal work as the status of Australian women has
changed. And congratulations to Anne, for putting, her mind again to this
important work, which has traced over time the evolution from 1788 to the
present, the threads of exclusion and oppression, the threads of
misunderstanding and misrepresentation, the threads of prejudice, of
victimisation, of the threads of violence. It's there, written tightly for all to read,
recording the changes as we've made them. Congratulations, Anne. It's a great
pleasure to be associated with you again on this happy occasion, and to launch
if it needs launching again your seminal work Damned Whores and God's
Police. Thank you. 



TEL: EMBARGOED AGAINST DELVIBRY
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON I' J KEATINGO Mp
AUSTRALIA DAY, ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SYDNEY
26 JANUARY 1994
Ladies and Sentlemien
It is traditional to make personal resolutions on the first day of the year. On the 26th day
We Australians could do worse than to imake out natinnal resolu. tions our collective,
Corporate resolutions.
By thc-26th January, we have had our break from work most of us. Mercifully free from
work and politics, we have had time to reflect.
On the fthMs In the bush and the backyard we have communed a little with the couguy
and our countrymecn and women. We have travelled the highways, seen a bit more of thi
place, got the fedl of It again.
We have watched Australians fuiously competing on land and sea and, who knows, seen
in them some reflection of ourselves or something we would like to be.
If we have 1xccn aniung the countlless thousands who use thc holidays to go to galleries,
theatrcs, museums and festivals of all decciptions, the chances are we have ever so
slightly re-adjusted our conception of what Australia memn and what it mea= to be
Australian. And in general I suspect that, whatever we have done, the majority of us have returned to
work rcncwcd in the belief that, on balance, there is no better place to live than this. Yet
it is also true that many Australians will go back to work this year uncertain of the future.
Many Australians will return unconvinced that we have made the most of what we have,
or that we can shape our destiny.
Thc truth is too many have reason to be unconvinced. And too many have no work to
rcturn to.
Ladics anid gentlicuz
The vicw from here, across the harbour to the nation's birthplace, can only inspire
confidciice. We can stand here and admiire the beauty of it, and all the symbols of our energy and
griuwth, and justly say that Austraslians havc created a great, vigorous and rich society.
T2E6L:. Jan. 94 10: 34 No. 002 P. 01/ 04 
I CLL. zo. Jdl.~ 4 U;-4 Nf'UUZ4 t U2/ U4
2
But this view Is not available to all Australians. Thc view varies from suburb to suburb,
town to town, workplace to workplace, farm to tarm across the continent. Too often the
view takes in hardsh~ ip, discrimination, and waste.
Thc view depends on the limits of opportunity it depends on the extent to which
communities and individuals have weathered change and the recession, the degree to
which they have it within their power to adapt and renew themselves.
It depends on industry and investmecnt, on employment and educational opportunitice.
It depend-s, thcrcforc, on the extent to which we all of us are prepared to say that, vast
and varied as the continent is, this is one nation and all are part of it.
It depends on the degree to which we are dcteined to balance the principles of freedom
and individuality with the principles of fairnes, cure and responsibility. In that balanc, it
seems to me, lies the principle of nationhood.
This year the lesson has surely never been clearer.
A3 thc New Year unfolded and we enjoyed all the traiditional pleasures of an Austra~ ian
summer, not for the first time we were stopped short by the spectacle of our fellow
Australians desperately defending lives and property.
71oz bushfires in New South Wales, like the floods in Victoria a few months earlier, were
a reminder that we live in a land which is plentiful and benign yet also cruel and
unforgiving. B~ ut Australians have known that since the first months of scttlemient across there at
Sydney Cove.
Thc rcal lessons of the fires seem to me to lie in our response.
Seeing the landscape ravaged by fire reminded us of our love for it.
Seeing mcn and women fighting to save lives and homes and all the products of their
labour remindcd us of the ties that bind Australians wherever they live.
And seeing them triumph reminded us of what we can achieve when we are moved by
thes affections and work together.
In the end It was a triumph of expczience and commitment, of the things we know and the
things we feel ahout Australia.
Thc rcsponw, was magnificent. T'he hindrances to effot and cfficiency in the normal
cours Of OUr affairs appeared to vanish.
State rivalries were put aside.
The bureaucratic black holes and red tape were replaced by dedication and urgency.
Suddenly thcrc was nut a hint of cynicism in the media.
And when it wus over, even as we counted the losscs, we knew the remarkable thin&amp; was
how miuch had been saved.
It waIs a victory. And our faith in ourselves was stronger.
It scem~ s to mc that we can vcry usefully take the lessons into 1994 and beyond. 
I I.. L-: 3
We have been through a decude of change and through three yamS of economic recaion.
We now have in economic recovery a broad strons recovery and, because of our
effort,, before us liet an * era of immcnse opportunity.
We have on our hands whAt we haven't had for over a quarter of a cenaury a strong low
inflation recovery which gives us the potential to make the balance of the 19909 one of
thc best periods of opportunity this century.
But we should be in no doubt that this recovery was won by our own exertions.
We got here by virtue of out collcctive will, out collective faitht, our colloctive ability to
think and fight our way thiough it.
What we make of our opportunities in the nineties will equally be a product of out
collecive effort.
And I think there is another lesson we cannot fail to see.
As thim economic recovcry gathers strength we will beat sonie people begin to say in
fact we are already hearing them ever so faintly let's not worry about the unemnployed,
or the communities which are not doing so wel,.
Lat's not pause to take them with us or we might lose momentum.
We's leave them to take their chances in a reinvioratod market place.
Every time we hca this said, we should remember the bushfircs.
We can no more abandon the unemployed or strggling communities than we could have
abandoned those in the path of the fires.
Our sense of justice tells us that we cannot turn our backs on them, but so does common
sense, the sense which tells us that an Injury to one group ofT Australians Is an injury to all,
and that we are all strengthened when we act in concert.
This must not be a recovery for some and not o thczs.
It must not be a top-end-of-town recovery. It will not be for making paper fortunes at
the cxpense of productive investment which will deliver wealth and jobs in the long term.
The rccovery must reach into every community.
It must give hope and opportunity to all Australians.
It must give every Australian the chance to benefit and contribute.
On this Australia Day 1994, on the most sober understanding of the realities, we might
reasonably resolve to make this one of thc great ycars in our history.
Wc might rcasoiiably think that 1994 can be the year on which a future generation might
one day look back anid say tha~ t was thc year when the decision was taken: the year,
wvhen, without ceremony or fanfare, or any campaign to drive thcm, in government and
boardrooms, workplaces and communitics the people of Australia resolved not to waste
the chance which this economic rccovery offers us.-
It cain be the year, I'nm surc, when as a people and a nation we dcide that we will build on
the hard work of the last decade: zo. ian. IJ4 NO. UU 2 
zo. jafl. j IU:,) 4 NO. UUZe r. U"/ u' 4
4
that we will make surn the burden of change and the burden of recession which the
country has borne will not be for nothinS oc for a few
that we Will not squandcrT Our energy anld wealth in corporate greed, or secional
interest, or bureaucratic Inefficiency of provinzcial rivalry
that we will uot rztreat from the future, Or fear it. but take it on aW shape it in the
image of our traditions, beliefs and affections for Austalia and all its peopl.
It cAn be the year in which we recognisc as rarely before in our history, the common caus
among us and pitch in for the future of Australia.
Ladles and Sentlen
Ou Australia Day we honour an Australian who by personal inspiration and effort Wa
made an outstanding contribution to the life of the nation.
It seems to me that the Award Of Australian of the Yea and Young Australian of the yeau
illustatcl the point I have been malcing today,
Thesc awards aire for great Individual achievement, but more often than not they go to
men and womnen whose eforts have been directed towards helping and inspiring others
We honour them on Australia Day because by their eXample they deepen our faith in
Australia and Strengthen tbc ties betwtcn us.
llank you. 



4
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. P. J. KEATING, MP
Like all Australians I was appalled to learn of the incident at Darling Harbour this evening
and relieved that His Royal Highness suffered no harm.
Physical violence, even the threat of physical violence, has no place in Australian society.
Prince Charles is a very good friend of Australla and a very welcome visitor.
I sincerely hope that the remainder of his stay here will, like his many previous visits, be an
enjoyable one and that all Australians will welcome him wherever he goes.
SYDNEY January 26 1994 



TEL:
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH RAY MARTIN, A CURRENT AFFAIR, CHANNEL 9
SYDNEY, 27 JANUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RM: PM, thanks for your time.
PM: It's a pleasure, Ray.
RM: Have you had a chance to talk to Prince Charles?
PM: You mean since yesterday?
RM: Yes.
PM: No. But I had a very pleasant conversation with him the night
before, and we had a little bit of correspondence between us
yesterday morning, but I haven't seen him since.
RM: You haven't. Do you know whether he was concerned? He
certainly looked very calm, didn't he?
PM.-Oh, he's a professional at this sort of thing. He was attending
functions liIke this when he was seven years of age. I think
he's had more experience at these sorts of events than any of
us.
R ut you can't get experience with someone coming out of a
crowd with a gun?
PM: No, I know. But his relaxed demeanour his control in the
circumstances -1 think reflected the professional attitude he
has.
RM: The NSW Premier's called for tighter security. Have you
personally called for that?, 28. Jan. 94 7: 48 No. 001 P. 01/ 0( 
TEL: 28. Jan .94
2
PM: No. 1 think one of the nice things about this country is that
people are accessible. I think the important thing to record
about this, is that it was not an assassination attempt it was
a political demonstration. It's unfair to Prince Charles, for
anyone to be reporting it as an assassination attempt, when it
wasn't. It's a serious thing for somebody to be saying that
somebody is out to assassinate you. This was not true, and I
think that therefore the Prince's own relaxed demeanour
reflected how he wished the episode to be viewed.
RM: Yes, he wouldn't have known at the time though, would he?
Suddenly someone comes out of a crowd with what looks like
a gun?
PM: Oh sure, absolutely.
RM: Similarly, Premier Fahey and Ian Kiernan were quick out of
the blocks a~ d _ Sh5~, f extraordinary reactions?
PM: Absolutely. John's had experience on the football field and
Ian's an all-round sportsman, and quick reflexes and I think
everyone would have been very, very proud of their quick
response.
RM: Britain, America around the world that footage obviously is
in the news tonight. Should we be embarrassed?
PM: I think we must reflect upon this. We are all embarrassed
whenever any good friend of Australia any person such as
this is affronted in this way. Prince Charles is a good friend
of this country and he should be treated with the respect and
dignity that a good friend deserves.
RM: What about the alleged reason for the demonstration?
Should we be embarrassed about our treatment of
Cambodian refuge es?
PM: Well, we've got processes in place to deal with refugee
assessment. It's not a simple issue for Australia or any
country, and we've been working thrbugh these legal
processes to try and resolve all these problems.
RM: Children, women, men in jails, effectively for four years?
PM: I know they're long, and we are trying to get them resolved
and finalised. ?: 48 NO-001 P. 02/ 07 
TEL 228. a. Jan 94
3
RM: Now the speech itself the Prince gave yesterday, last night.
Some papers say that Prince Charles gave his tacit blessing
to the republican movement. Is that the way you read it?
PM: What he said I think was, or directly said look, this is a
matter for Australians. This is a matter for you people, but
personally I think this debate is a sign of a mature and
confident country. In other words, personally I think you're
able to handle this debate, and it's a good thing you are.
RM: But republicans, he said, may be right?
PM: Well, I don't think I'm entitled to say that he's saying Australia should
be a republic. I think he has said to us have your own debate. As a
member of the Royal Family, we will accept a decision by the
Australian people, and frankly, he said, it shows a sign of a mature and
confident country. I mean he is giving us a wink and a nod to carry on
with this debate.
RM:-You know that's going to be headline tomorrow? PMV says
Prince Charles gives us a wink and a nod?
PM: Not for a Republic, but to have the debate. But he's certainly
not giving us a wink and a nod not to move this way.
RM;. I'm just looking at your speech tonight, shortly in Melbourne.
You have been accused over the last couple of years by
some of bashing the poms over the Singapore evacuation
and Gallipoli and things like that, and yet in this speech you
seem to be out there touting for British business.
PM: There is a really good modern linkage with Britain of the kind
we should have. What I can't stand is this tugging the
forelock business.
RM:-Just before we leave Britain, can I just ask: there was a report
on the weekend papers that Princess Diana would like to
come to Australia. As the mother of a future King would she
officially be welcomed?
PM: I have never seen any request from her, Ray, and naturally
we would discuss that. But again, most people who want to
come to Australia are welcome, that would include Princess
Diana.
RM: Can we leave the Brits there for a moment? We will come
back and talk about other things with Mr Keating in just a
moment. 7: 48 No. 001 P. 03/ 07 
28. Jan. 94 7: 48 No. 001 P. 04/ U?
4
RM.-Let's turn to the economy it has been a good year. The indicators are
very good for this, can we let the good times roll?
PM: Yes, b~ ut I said yesterday, and. 1, think it is worth repeating, this can't be
a top end of town recovery.
RMV: What does that mean?
PM: We don't want to see into the stock market and people playing paper
assets, or throwing paper assets around.
RM: Like the high fliers of the
PM: It has got to spread out into plant and equipment investment and into
employment.
IRMV: Can you officially say th -e re cession is behind us?
PM: The recession is definitely behind us.
RM: No question about that. Are you worried about interest rates going up?
PM: The recession Is way behind us, accept that we have still got the carry
over in long term unemployment which the Government is devoting
itself to now in these next three months.
RM: So that becomes a priority suddenly does it?
RM: It becomes a priority from a social justice point of view and a national
economic efficiency point of view.
RM: What can you do about that? There is almost a million out of
work.
PM: Well there is about 400,000 who have been out of work for one year or
more. They're the problem. The Government has got to try and get
them back into the swim as well as get aggregate employment going.
So it's the short-term unemployed and the long-term unemployed.
RM: Someone sitting here watching this tonight and says Keating would
say the recession is over but I haven't had a job for a year and a half
and I'm not going to get one.
PM: Well that is my point. There is a lag there. I think the word, Ray, I
used it a lot with One Nation and in 1992 and in 1993, and that is
Inclusion. This has to be an inclusive society. That we all move along
together. And if someone does drop back, we bring them up. And not
let them slip away into an underclass. 
TEL: 28. Jan .94 7: 48 No. 001 F. Ub/ U?
RM: Yeah, but clearly from this speech tonight, you are very optimistic
about the Australian economy?
PM: I think we have never faced in the last 25 years, a period quite like this.
This is strong growth with very low inflation,
RM: Is it a good time to invest in piggeries?
PM: Well it is a good time to invest in Australia's comparative advantage.
One Australia's great comparative advantages is food and we should
all be investing in things which add value, employ people and
hopefully it will lead to exports.
RM: PM, how about sandwich shops?
PM: Well, I think Ministers are entitled to invest in things, but they also
have to be responsible for them.
RM: Alright, was AllanGriffith's responsible with his sandwich shop?
PM: Yes, if you have an investment you have to be responsible for, in
political terms.
RM: Can you tell us tonight who the new Minister is?
PM: No, I haven't decided that yet, Ray.
RM: Would you think, I mean, Laurie Brereton, Simon Crean, Graham
Richardson, Peter Cook are the names, Is that a fair guess?
PM: Well each one of those would be a competent industry Minister.
RM: Does Mr Griffith, at this stage, have a political career?
PM: Absolutely. He is still a Federal member of Parliament, and also while
he will not be Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional
Development he will still have a right to recontest a position in the
ministry.
RM: I know you can't speak about it, so I won't push it further, but there are
reports in the press that Mr Griffith knew about these alleged Labor
Party checks and about the $ 941.00 six weeks before he told you.
PM: Well I am not aware of it. The first, you asked me earlier, the first I
knew of any of this matter was last Friday evening.
RM: Do you think, if that's the case, should you have been told six weeks
ago if he knew? 
TEL: 28.2jan. 94 7: 48 NO. 001 P. 06/ 07
6
PM. Well that's a matter for him, and in the end when all this comes out in
the wash, and let's not presume all these things are right, then we can
make judgements about that.
RM. What do you think about Bronwyn Bishops line that you can't run the
industry portfolio if you can't run a sandwich shop?
PM-Well I think the more important line is what contribution have the
Liberals got to make to modem Australia. I mean here they are, they
have opposed everything last year, they tried to knock the Budget
over, they have opposed Mabo for no reason other than to oppose it.
They start the new year without an economic policy, I mean they are in
a terrible situation. You have got Dr Hewson on the one hand, and
now Senator Bishop on the other. It seems to me, Ray, it is a choice
between a vacuum and a lot of hot air. I mean Senator Bishop has no
policy structure in her head.
RM: Do you have any fears at all about Bronwyn Bishop and the bull ring,
or bull pit of the House of Reps?
PM: As far as I am concerned, as they put them up we deal with them. It
was Andrew Peacock, then it was John Howard, then it was Andrew
Peacock, then it is John Hewson. Whoever is next we will be ready
and waiting for them.
RM: Does your crystal ball say she is going to be leader before the year is
out?
PM: Well she is going to keep on trying, even if the Party doesn't give her
the job. But if they do give her the job they know in their heart of
hearts that there is no structure there.
RM: All right, tough question now, what's it like to be
PM:* Well all those Peter Pan notions go right out of your mind. I mean I
belonged to that baby boomer generation which believed it was never
going to grow old.
RM:. Do you feel old?
PM: I don't feel old, but I know I am getting older, much older, and I am sure
there Is no generation that has resisted aging more than mine. And
you see them, and they are still out there, but there ranks are thinning
and they are fattening up, and their hair is thinning, as mine is. So the
years go on.
RM: Do you qualify as a dear old thing as you have called some of the older
members of the Labor Party, are you now a dear old thing? 
TEL 7
PM: Not quite, not quite, there is some cross over point, it has probably got
a six in front of it.
R M. You have had your real holiday, the break. What did you do? Did you
read a book, or just play old rock and roll records?
PM: We went to the beach, we went sailing quite a bit, I did a bit of reading,
-a bit of music. I went to a bit of theatre, so, I have had a couple of
weeks of sun and culture.
RM: Did you play any Tom Jones records to loud for Anita?
PM: Well we had Billy Joel, the kids like Billy Joel and so do 1. We meet at
Billy Joel. Everything sort of after him I tend to drop off. And of course
when the kids are around they monopolise all the audio visual
eq~ uipment as it is called.
RM: PM, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you, Ray. T2EL8:. Jan. 94 7: 48 No. 001 P. 07/ 07 



I t-L
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, M. P.,
GLENQUARIE SENIOR CITIZENS CENTRE, MACQUARIE FIELDS
THURSDAY 27 JANUARY, 1994
J: Prime Minister, do you have any thoughts on who might be the new Industry
Minister?
PM: No, I'll make that announccment, probably, by the weekend.
J: When did you find out about the latest allegations....?
PM: I haven't even caught up on that, to be honest. Mr Griffiths is no longer in the
ministry and that's the key point.
J: Mr Keating what is your reaction to the attack on Prince Charles last night?
PM: Well, I was appalled by it. Prince Charles is a good friend of this country and
deserves to be treated as a good friend In this country.
J; What did you think of the efforts of Mr Fahey and Mr Kiernan?
PM: Well, security is always difficult and I think what Michael Hleseltine said today
was pretty right. That is, its never possible to guarantee complete security In thase
circumstances but, as it turned out, the so-called attempt was really a political
demonstration and I think that's how it should be viewed.
J: Prime Minister, how did you interpret yesterday's speech by Prince Charles?
PM: I thought it was a very clear minded speech with a sort of confident detachment
where the Prince said, This is a debate, as the rcpublic,_ which Australians should
decide. And he said, For my part, I think this shows the signs of a mature and
confident country. In other words, For my part it's a good thing you are having
this debate it's a good thing for you that you arc having this debate. I think it's
r. c-J 4 
a very ci car stutentotit by a member of the royal family Niat the~ rcpiihlic iq, of
course, a inatter ( or Australian; mtnd that he, Prince Charic1, thinks thai a debate
like thir. rctflecfs our ec'nfidcncc and maturity. Arnd, com~ ing as It has, dirctly and
forthrightly from him, I think It is an Important vini~ tricoi ( u owui tional
political discussion.
3: Ts John I howard right though when he says that the Prnce wouldn't say anything
else, except that It Is up to Australians.
PM: John Howa. rd ' vIi always~ put the best construction on hiq W ( uitfh e caiSe. John
Howard would not be pieasceda tIhte notion that the Ilri= c thinks this debate is one
of a m., ikire Aincnnfidcnt country, That Is. John Howard docsnt want this dtlmwI
arnd he doesn't want us to be confident even irhu tiks wt aiw mhatuic.
Pritmi Ministci, the media have said that the speech actually reflected the Prince's
suppori for a republic. Do you interpret It as strongly as that?
PM: WCil, he's saying, I( think t1iii; an appropriate debate for a confident and mature
country to havc. He's said that direCtly, absollutely and lie said. It's a matter fur you
to make your mind up abom it.
J: M it's as far as heCango..
PM: 1 think. 11ts a twiwhi or confident dctaehxnent removod frorn the k. muc but Sivang
a wormldcat overview of the debatc. And, I think, we most appreciate that
comment from him.
J: How do you see that comment, though?
PM: As I've just said, I think it's a helpful contribution wo Australia's nalltonal discussion
ahu its idcntity and Its constitutional future.
j Do you chink his trip will suppoi the monarchists? Do you think they'll get a
iitsLt t0h is trip?
PM: Well, I don't think so and I don't think he mecan: it to be so. think he wraarm to
come hero, as ho always dercribes, himiself, as a friend of thist rnontry. % Amnconc
who has nevcr been at odds with its interest; amdc who cnmcsq hcre In a relaxed,
confident way. That's how twe mtn no come, that's how wc should reccivc him.
J: j% th ce-ministcrial reshuffle taking longer than what you first thought considering
that It's now... inaudihlc
PM: kNuoy. In'viact tjeurs tt ol iraLd~ motlvhce ra tnhdi ntghsu t'tso rdeoso. lvMedt . G rAifnfdit, h s1 i hwrese alellfyt tuhpe tmo imnief, i rnyo wso, tthoa dt ewciadse a. i 
I I
J; Who will head up the independent inquiry?
PM: Again, I'm thinking about that but I have taken advice from the Commonwealth
police that I should se what the progress of their enquiries is before we set the
terms of rcforcncc.
J; My Keating. when are you likely to amnounce a ministerial inquiry?
PM: As I said, Il be guided by what the Commonwealth police say about this.
1: What do you think of the efforts of Mr Fahey and Mr Klernan helping tackle this
alleged assailant?
PM: I think it's something any person should do and they did it with alacrity and they're
to be complimented for that, commended for that. And they did it, of course, In
the service of a good friend of this country.
Ends. 



TEL 27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 02/ 08
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KFATING, MP
TO THE UK/ AUSTRALIA TRADE AND INVESTMENT CONFERENCE
MELBOUIMN, 27 JANUARY 1994
Mr Premier and Mis Kennctt, Mr arnd Mrs Hescltine, Sir Derek Hornby, ministcrial
colleagues, Indies and gcntleinea.
I an prateful for the opportunity to open this very important conference.
And let me begi b~ cxtcnding to our guests from the Ulnited Kingdom a vcry wam
wecmet a-thank you for coming.
For those who Interpret the cumrnt debastc about our constitutional arrangements; a3
marking a decline in the rclationship betweeut our two coutres this coinferice offers a
timely corrective.
It is further proof that, far from declining, the relationship has reached a new level of
maturity. It should surprise no one that in 1994 we Australians are debating questions of identity
and sovcrclinry and, because it Is germanec to the debate, our rcmainWig constitutional
links with The United Kingdom.
And it should surprise no one that last night His Royal Highness also formally rcwoised
the truth of this it should not surprise us because few Englishmen have taken such a
close interest in Australia for such a ton&amp; time and few, I suspe~ ct, have such a sympathetic
understanding of the issues which concern us.
These debates reflect nothing more or less than recognition of a chartfing rcality. And the
pivotal change Is thc change in our trading and investment relationship.
That is why this conference comes at such a stratcgic moment it undcrlincs the
unarguable, but little appreciated. fact that the business relationship between our two
countries is stronger than it has bcn for many years and it has the potential to grow much
stronger. It underineis thc fact that our new more independent relationship is mutually rewarding.
It is, to quote Mir Major just a year a~ o, a " new relationship which is well suited to the late
twcntieth century and which holds pentzy of promise for the future".
A new relationship which builds on our common heritage, cultural and institutional
ajffinities and substantial commercial links, while acknowlcdging that the direction of
policy in each country has, of necessity, changed. 
To put It in the baldcst terms: as Europe has been to Britain in the last twenty five years
the Asia Pacific has been to Australia in the last decade namely, the place where our
principal interess lie, the placc whert out future lies, thc place where Australia simply
had to find a role.
As N&amp; r Ma jor said " it is perfectly natural for two nations on Opposite sides of the world to
dcvclop distinctive characters, to carvc out paillcular roles in t heir own regions, to pursue
policies which promote their own economic interest-.."
Therc is no doubt that this is much imore widely und erstood and ac~ ptcd than it was even
a year or two ago.
But much less understood, I am sure, is the degree to which the pursuit of our own
interests creates clmplemcmna interests~ and considerable new potential for both of us.
The tact is, the maturing and modernisation of our relationship has enlivened and
enlarged it.
And I might add I am in no doubt that maturing and modernising our constitutional
relationship would have a similar effect.
Lct me quote a few flgures to illustrate the strength of the economic relationship;
IlTe UK is Australia's fourth largest trading partner
our largest services trade partner
our eIl1ith largest export Miarkcet
our third largest source of imports
our fastest growing European export markct
ou thid l rgest souceof tourist
our sccond ;~ reintvfreisnto r
* out second largest destination for investment
our largest foreign investor in manufacturing
The exciting dimension to this profile is, of course, the change in the na= a of
investment.
No longer do British firms invest in Australia because they can get behind tariff wail in
order to scrvice the domestic market.
No longer does Austialia have such a tariff wall.
1instead, Australia has the confidence and ability to compete Internationally in
manufacturing and services, just as we have done for many years in agricultural an~ d
mining products.
The Australian domestic marqct continues to attract British investment becuse, with our
population steadily increasing, the market is expandig.
But today British firms along with firms fromn other countries also invest here because
they know they can compete internationally [ loin an Australian base. I
And, in particular, they know that Australia is an ideal beachhead for thc most dynamic
markets in the world the Asia-Pacific markvis.
Some of you will have sccn in today's Financial Review a summary of a report by Clayton
Utz called Doing Business ut Auvrrafia. The report details just how attractive the
Australian beachhead is. For Instance: 
27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 04/ 08
3
Operatjngf costs are 40 to 105 per cant cheaper than Singapore. 105 to 286 per cent
cheaper th~ an Hong Kong.
E DO phone costs arc 50 to 85 per cent cheaper than Singapore, up to S0 pcr cent
cheaper than Hong Kong.
Managerial costs are substantially lower.
We have a distinct skills base advantage.
Thet report concludes: " Looking ahead five to ten yemr and beyond, one camiot be other
than optimistic about Australia's future."
And that is the truth of the matter.
The simple fact is that we are a low cost, efficient location for business.
And a low tLx location last year the corporate rate was reduced to 20%, along with
provision6 -accelecrated dcprcciation, an investmnent allowance of up to 30 per cent, and a
150 per cent tax concession for research and developmnent expenditure.
Australia's real unit labour costs are almost ten per cent lower than a decade ago and our
labodumarktsa6re infinitely more flexible and responsive.
Today you may have read that the Australian company, Transficid, outbid all othtdw&gt;*
international competitors for the construction of a $ 80 million oil and gas platform In
Bass Strait.
And the pr'nIpa reason for their success was a benciuark enterprise agrceree which
cut costs by 16 per cent by increasing labour and equipmnt efficiency.
Australia has frec-financial markets operating in the Eas Asia time zone, sophisticated
cost efficient telecommunications and highly developed linkages into the countries of the
Asia Pacific.
For all these reason an ineroasing number of companies arc now making Australia their
springboard ito those Asia Pacific markets companies like Cathay Pacific, Data
General, Microsoft, Dow Corning and Kellogg wbich have located their regional
headquarters here.
Bniih companies arc doing the same. A recent Australian British Chamber of
Commerce study found that eighy per cent of the companies surveyed were using their
local subsidiaries to servicce oflier markets in the region.
Almost half use their subsidiaries as a springboard into South-East Asia. and more than
twenty per cent are using them as a basi. Tor operations In NJ6iihthEst Asia.
Behind these trends we can find individual comipanties positioning thcmsclves for the
futurc. For instance, British Airways' 25 per cent holding in Qantas will givc it improved access
to the Asia-Pacific region and provide Qantas with an opportunity to boost its presence in
world markets, including Europe.
To qjuote a few other examples: 
4
Cadbury Schwepps Is doubling its capacity with a view to supplying the Asia-
Pacific which happens to be the fastest growing chocolate market in the World
Vodafone has decided to establish its Asia-Pacific headquarters in Sydney.
British Telecom will locate its Asia-Pacific Centre for Nctwork Management and a
software enineering centre in Sydney.
Tate and Lyle, United Biscuits, B3Th, ICI, BP Oil, Bond Helicopters among othets
arc all using Australia as a base for their trade with the region, and
demonstrating beyond doubt that this is a competitive and cost effective country in
which to do business.
Meanwhile thc implementation of the single market in Europe and further economic
integration promotrd by Maastricht has created opportuinities for Australian companies to
expand their operations in Europe, using the United Kingdom as a base.
I imigine it would surprise a lot of Australians to know that Australia is the fourth largSt
investor int ( he UK a larger Investor in fact than Japan and that the increase between,
1984 and 1992 was fourteen fold.
Uf it is true to say that in recent years Australia has bcoeon a good place to do business, it
is equally true that ia' 1994 and the years to corn it is going to be an even better place.
Over bho twelve mnths to the September quartcr, Australian G3DP increased by abut
three and a half per cent. I
Some commentators think Qiat we will see growth rates reaching four per cent or more
before too ln&amp; and I believe they arc right. I believe we are now well placed to grow at
four par cent orniare for a number of years.
At the same timec the OE~ CD is looking at a rate fur this yea of two per cent-
We have had inflation of two per cent or less for the past two years, and TuLsday's figures
confzm our ability to keep it ainong the lowest in the OECD.
Where once we survived on the margins of the world's most dynamnic mnarkets, we are
now strategically placed alongside them and increasingly integrated 2aih thenm.
But as Max Walsh pointed out today in the qydrMami Anrlerald even Max has
acknowledged it now -the grwth we are achieving, like the new role we are carilng out
to the Asial-Pacifc,' did not bappen by accident.
We have been achieving out current growth rates despite a very weak world economy,
and with a business sector more concerned with clawing back debt than looking for new
investment opportunities.
The Frowth can be directly traced to the stimulus lower interest rates provided in the
housing market, the strength in exports flowing from the lower dollar, and the direct boost
to spending we provided through the Budget.
lntc-rcst rates are now at their lowest levels for 20 years.
We are now around 30 per cent more internationally competitive than a decade ago.
And, since the Oiic Nation statement of Febr-uar-y 1992, we have pTovidcd stimulus from
the Budget equivalcnt to more than two per cent of GDP. T2E7L:. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 05/ 08 
TEL: 27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 06/ 08
Out of respect for our British guJests I will Dot record here the unending criticism of these
pol icies we have rceived from the Opposition, some business groups and many in the
financial pres".
The figures speak for themselvcs.
But what also Should be spokeni for i the fact that Government policies havc provided
more than short term stimulus: by focussing on the skills of our people, on infratructure,
reschb and incentives for business investuient, they are providing long term benefits to
the operation of the economy and tho opurations of business.
Renlly, the time has come, I think Australian business ought to recoonse that the
present recovery andC the outstanding prospects for the futurc have been made possible by
these policies and policies implemented in the eighties.
Long experience tells mc it is pointless to expect the equivalent of a Faullan coaversion
among Australian business I can assure our British guests that political affctions die A'S
hard In the New World as they do in the Old.
Despite the logic of it. I don't expect to see a niass defection from our increasingly
Inchoate and rudderless political opponents.
But I do expect, and I think it is reasonable for the country to expect, that Austalioa
business will iucrtasingly go out and invest in those areas which will deliver long teTm
riewards to their companies and the pation.
I mean investment in plant, in technology and in people in trining and employment.
Thc capsary to do it is theire: In the past year profits have grown 20 per cent and are now
above t I9M peak. As a Share of GDP, profit share is now approaching rhc peak of the
Late 19WVs and that was an all-time record.
As volumes pick up in the recovery, profits will increase further.
Those who made the effort to export in recent times are today reaping very substantial
rewards.
Those who make the effort now will also reap them as the markets grow.
And the markets till grow'. They will grow in no small measure because of the
successful conclusion to the GAIT; and, in due course, because of the substantial work
now underway in AYEC to remove barriers and facilitate trade and investment in the
. re gion. 1
You are all awarce of the role the Australian Covenimerir played with the U~ rupuy Round
and thc creation-of APEC.
And I can assure you that implementing the GAIT outcome, achieving concrete results in
APEC, and removing bilateral barriers to trade Will continue as issues of the highest
priority for the Ccwcrnnient in the comning year.
Our major domcsiic priority this year might go under the simplc heading of " efficiency*.
We will bc working vcry hard on the microcconurmic reformu agenda; pullinS together the
rail, port, road interface; driving the enterprise bargaining prograili as hard as we and
y'ou can; and implementing the White Paper on employment.
We will be dcveloping and refining industry policy. 
27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 07/ 08
6
Our industry policies bcar no resemblance to those of earlicr decades.
N~ o longer are inefficient industies protected
Rather, policy is directed at helping industry grasp new opportunities at borne and in the
world trading envirowncut.
The transport pro*= az we undertook almost two year ago in One Nation particularly
the national rail highway has begun to rnatcrialisc, and you wilt see it materialise much
more rapidly in the next teve months.
Our industrial relations reforms demand your cooperation and that of the unions.
Cooperation demands recognition of realities.
Onc of those realities is known to every Australian business leader in this room.
It is that Australian workers have made a maslive contribution to the greater
comnpetitiveness of this country, and that the results wc at.. now seeinig, the opportunities
now presented, would have becti impossible without the trade unions' willingniess to
cooperate in necessary change indeed, oftcn to dK Uv the change.
Tht Accord between the Goveninent and organised labour, in place now for 11
Succ= Ssivc years, has beena instrumental in giving us sustained industrial peace, low
hnflation and the profit share which business is now enjoying.
The unions of course must continue to embrace change.
I noticed tho other day the ACTU President, Martin Ferguson, urging unions to move
more quickly towards enterprise bargains.
Today I urge Australian business to do thc same. 17hc new industrial relations legisation
ensures that minimum standards are maintained, but provides for great flexibility.
EAch and every business = a now tailor its arrangements to meet its business P. eeds and
each and every business this year should make the effort to do so.
Many will want to strike their deals with unions, but there is no imperative. As lone as a
mnajority of employees want to, management can negotiate directly with thcir employees
rather than with unions.
I said yesterday that this recovery is not for the top end of town. Our hard work has not
been for the benefit of speculators and fly-by-night developers.
It has been to create a competitive economy of depth andqu ulizy which will assure
Australia's prosperity in the next century. it has been to deliver opportunity to every
community and every Australian.
The responsibility is on businem. as well 4s government to see that this great opportunity
is not wasted.
Togcther wc also share responsibility for employment and training. There is surely no
greater inhibition to national efficiency than a large pool of unemployed men and women.
The White Paper to be delivered in April will form thie basis of a major strategic assault
on Australia's unctrployment. 
TEL: 27. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 08/ 08
I 7
The emphasis will be on putting the long term unemployed back In touch with the labour
market. Education and training will be a priority.
In short, our approach to unemployment will be to give those presently uncmployed a
chance to share in the new prosperity and to contribute to it.
In doing so the whole nation's economic performance will be that much morc cfficient.
If this is to be what it should be a recovery for the whole nation the responsibility falls
on the whole nation to make it so.
For this reason above any otha I am pleased to be with you tonight. This conference ca
be anothcr step on the road to greater prosperity for the people of both our countries.
Today the relationship between the Unitcd Kingdom and Australia is built on both
continuity and change.
The continuity of 205 years of shared history, culture, investment and trade.
The chanse in which we are both engagcd, the change which offers us extraordinary new
opportunities at home and abroad and the change which will, without doubt, ensure that
our relationship is stron and enduring.
MELBOURNE 27 January 1994 
TEL OFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
Correction In UK Australia Trade and Investment Conference speech, paragraph 4 on
page 3 when delivered will read.
last year the corporate rate was reduced to 33 per cent, along with
provision for accelerated depreciation, an Investment allowance of up to
per cent
27 JANUARY 1994
MELBOURNE T2EL7:. Jan. 94 18: 09 No. 008 P. 01/ 08 



PRIME MINISTER 59
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
I will be recommending the following ministerial appointments to the
Governor-General:
Senator Peter Cook is to become Minister for Industry, Technology and
Regional Development.
Senator Bob McMullan is to become Minister for Trade. He will also
continue as the Minister for Administrative Services.
Mr Michael Lee, MP will assume Senator McMullan's responsibilities for the
Arts. The Department of the Arts and Administrative Services will be renamed the
Department of Administrative Services. The Department of Communications
will be renamed the Department of Communications and the Arts.
A revised ministry list is attached.
The Governor-General has agreed to making these appointments and related
changes at 7.30 pm on Sunday 30 January.
SYDNEY
28 January 1994 
Commonwealth Government
SECOND KEATING MINISTRY30 January 1994
TITLE MINISTER Representative in
other Chamber
Prime Minister The Hon P J Keating, MP Senator Evans
Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs The Hon Robert Tickner, MP Senator Collins
Special Minister of State The Hon Frank Walker, QC, MP Senator Evans
( Vice-President of the Executive Council)
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Andrew Theophanous, MP
Minister for Housing, Local Government and Human Services The Hon Brian Howe, MP Senator Richardson
( Deputy Prime Minister)
Minister for Health Senator the Hon Graham Richardson Mr Howe
Minister for Family Services Senator the Hon Rosemary Crowley Mr Howe
Minister for Veterans' Affairs Senator the Hon John Faulkner Mr Howe
( Manager of Government Business in the Senate)
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Andrew Theophanous. MP
Minister for Foreign Affairs Senator the Hon Gareth Evans, QC Mr Bilney
( Leader of the Government in the Senate)
Minister for Trade Senator the Hon Bob McMullan Mr Bilney
Minister for Development Co-operation and Pacific Island Affairs The Hon Gordon Bilney, MP Senator Evans
Minister for Defence Senator the Hon Robert Ray Mr Beazley
( Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate)
Minister for Defence Science and Personnel Senator the Hon John Faulkner Mr Beazley
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Gary Punch, MP
Treasurer The Hon Ralph Willis, MP Senator Cook
Assistant Treasurer The Hon George Gear, MP Senator Cook
Special Minister of State The Hon Frank Walker, QC, MP Senator Cook
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Paul Elliott, MP
Minister for Finance The Hon Kim C Beazley, MP Senator Cook
( Leader of the House)
Minister for the Environment, Sport and Territories The Hon Ros Kelly, MP Senator Richardson
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women Senator Crowley
Parliamentary Secretary ( Territories) The Hon Warren Snowdon, MP
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Janice Crosio, MBE, MP
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Senator the Hon Nick Bolkus Mr Brereton
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs
Minister for Employment, Education and Training The Hon Simon Crean, MP Senator Schacht
Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training The Hon Ross Free, MP Senator Schacht
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Warren Snowdon, MP
Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional Development Senator the Hon Peter Cook Mr Lee
Minister for Science and Small Business Senator the Hon Chris Schacht Mr Lee
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Science
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon E J Lindsay, MP
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy Senator the Hon Bob Collins Mr Beddall
Minister for Resources The Hon David Beddall, MP Senator Collins
Parliamentary Secretary Senator the Hon Nick Sherry
Minister for Social Security The Hon Peter Baldwin, MP Senator Crowley
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Con Sciacca, MP
Minister for Administrative Services Senator the Hon Bob McMullan Mr Bilney
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Con Sciacca, MP
Minister for Industrial Relations The Hon Laurie Brereton, MP Senator Ray
Assistant Minister for Industrial Relations The Hon Gary Johns, MP Senator Ray
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Service Matters
Minister for Transport The Hon Laurie Brereton, MP Senator McMullan
ParliamentaryS ecretary The Hon Neil O'Keefe, MP
Attorney-General The Hon Michael Lavarch, MP Senator Bolkus
Minister for Consumer Affairs The Hon Jeannette McHugh, MP Senator Bolkus
Minister for Justice The Hon Duncan Kerr, MP Senator Bolkus
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Peter Duncan, MP
Minister for Communications and the Arts The Hon Michael Lee, MP Senator McMullan
Minister for Tourism The Hon Michael Lee, MP Senator Ray
Each box represents a portfolio. Cabinet Ministers are shown in bold type. As a general rule, there is one Department in each portfolio. Except for the
Department of Human Services and Health and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the title of each Department reflects that of the Portfolio Minister.
There is also a Department of Veterans' Affairs in the Human Services and Health portfolio. 



TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER THE
HON. P. J. EATING, NP
KIRRIBILLI HOUSE, SYDNEY, SUNDAY JANUARY 30 W WERRIWA BYELECTION
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
PM: Do you want a comment on the by-election? It was a
very standard by-election result, a sort of " as you
were" result, a six per cent swing against the
government is at the bottom range of par for the course
for by-elections. A couple of years ago when we-had
by-elections in Adelaide and Oxley when Mr Howard was
leader of the Liberal Party the swings were double
digit swings, 10 per cent, that sort of order. I think
the difference between mue and Dr Howson on this byelection
in Werriwa Is that him party will be very
unhappy with result today and mine is very happy and 1
congratulate Mark Latham on a campaign wall fought and
I think as a result of this you will hear the knives
sharpening in the Liberal Party, you will see a very
desperate Dr Hewson jump out of the boxes at Question
Time this week. Telecom would have had a great fillip
this morning from the calls in the Parliamentary
Liberal Party saying, well there it is, this fellow has
not won one political contest since he's been Leader of
the Opposition, not a general election and not even a
decent swing in a by-election. So if you hear the
clattering, you'll know what it is, it's the sharpeners
at work.
J: You mentioned mr Howard, does that mean you're pushing
John Howard...
PM: No, no. They're the only things to compare against,
simply to compare against the by-elections which were
on a couple of years ago in Oxley, in Brisbane where
the swings were the order of 10 per cent. Six per cent
against the Government is a standstill result in a byelection
and if the Liberal Party is looking for any
comfort, if Dr Hewson's looking for any endorsement
from this he is really, I think, sadly mistaken. I'll 
bet if there is any sort of frequency counter inside
Telecom, or Optus indeed, today, you can bet the
Liberal Party's frontbench has really sent it up on the
scale this morning.
J: When you say a standstill result, does that mean the
Labor Party is content to stand still at the moment as
far as the electorate is concerned?
PM: It means the electorate is basically continuing to
support the Government and the opportunity that any
group of constituents have to express an opinion in a
by-election, well they have to the order of six per
cent. It's a good result for us. Thankyou very much.
ends 



AI
PRIME MINISTER 7/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME,: MINISTER, LION P. J. KEATINGsMP
MITSUBISHI MOTORS AUSTRALIA LTD
The announcement by Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd that it will continue to
manufacture In Adelaide beyond its current program is welcome news for Australia and
for South Australia in particular.
Mitsubishi's activity in making the Magna and Verada range in Adelaide has been a
significant positive clement in the states economy.
It has been a substantial source of employment in the State, and has provided valuable
export income for the nation.
The Government recognises that the vehicle building industry generally is still going
through a lengthy process of adjustment in Australia, and is facing international
pressures caused largely by economic growth slower than Australia's own. This
announcement ffrm one of the major manufacturers, however, is very encouraging.
CANBERRLA, 4 FEBRUARY, 1994 



4~ 4~ TR~ IA
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
I am pleased to announce that the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, Mr Paias
-Wingti, will visit Australia from 8-14 February as a guest of the Australian
Government.
The Australian Government attaches a high priority to relations with Papua New
Guinea. I look forward to discussing with Prime Minister Wingti the broad policy
directions and objectives we have set for our countries, particularly as they relate to the
region. The common interest Australia and Papua New Guinea have in engagement
with Asia, including through the development of APEC, has added an important new
dimension to our relationship. Prime Minister Wingti and I will also discuss a number
of important bilateral issues.
While in Australia, Prime Minister Wingti will also hold talks with the State
Governments of Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland.
CANBERRA 4 FEBRUARY 1994 I A31k111
mrwlr 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PROCEDURES
8 FEBRUARY 1994
Honourable Members will recall that during the
valedictory remarks at the end of last year's Budget
Sittings, I made some comments about the reform of our
procedures here in the House especially in relation to
Question Time.
The new parliamentary year is a good time for us to be
acting on the recommendations made by the Procedure
Committee in its report, AbZ it Time.
The title itself has a lot of merit: if we want to
preserve the institutions of our democracy, if we want
them to work more effectively we have to be prepared to
change them where necessary. And, of course, there have
been great changes since many of these institutions and
procedures were first introduced.
These changes are overdue as I said last year, the
honourable Member for Bonython and the other members of
the Procedure Committee have done us all a great service
in the preparation of that report. 
This week the Leader of the House will be tabling a
detailed government response to the Committee's report
and the House will be considering revised sessional
orders. But there are some points that I wish to
highlight. The Procedure Committee report dealt with three main
areas: first, the handling of legislation particularly
the need to free up chamber time for the proper
consideration of legislation by providing a Main
Committee ( or " second chamber") for handling routine
and uncontroversial bills.
second, parliamentary questions, and particularly
Question Time, and
third, when, and for how long, we sit.
The Government has given consideration to these matters
over the summer recess, and I am pleased to be able to
inform the House that we intend to accept, in whole or in
part, the great majority of the Committee's
recommendations. Sitting times 
Taking our sitting times first, it is clear the time has
come to change the hours we sit. As we all know, and the
Committee has confirmed, sitting late into the night,
night after night, is not a productive or particularly
sensible way to conduct our business.
Except at the beginning of new sittings ( and public
holidays), we shall from Monday 21 February sit Monday to
Thursday each sitting week. So far as possible we shall
stick to the ' two-on, two-off' pattern.
In the other place, Senators will also be sitting four
days a week and it will be convenient for the two houses
to have similar patterns of sittings.
Our normal starting and finishing times will be:
Monday 12.30 to 8.00
Tuesday 12.30 to 8.00
Wednesday 9.30 to 8.00, and
Thursday 9.30 to 6.00
QOuestions Mr Speaker, the idea of reforming Question Time goes back
a long way. 
In an article on Question Time in the Journal of Public
Administration in 1972, a scholar by the name of John
Howard John H Howard concluded " new procedures and
parliamentary institutions must be implemented". " It is
no longer acceptable", he said, " to rely on conventions
and precedents that were established over 100 years ago".
The Question Time he describes sounds remarkably like the
one we hear complaints about today. " The modern aim of
Question Time", Mr Howard wrote, " appears to be not so
much to seek information as to impart it, or establish
debating points"
He quotes a senior politician saying Question Time
" enlists information to secure a political advantage and
to embarrass the Minister concerned"
" The first concern of a member of Parliament when he is
in the House", Mr Howard said, " does not lie with the
conduct of public administration. It lies with the
survival of his party, whether it be in Government or
Opposition".
All the same criticisms are there in 1972:
fewer and fewer questions being asked
the practice of Dorothy Dixers 
the intervention of broadcasting and press publicity
which are alleged to have encouraged the diversion
of Question Time into Dorothy Dixers and attempts to
" score" by the Opposition
the lack of " tranquility" in the Chamber
the impossibility of enforcing Standing Orders as
the Liberal Party Speaker, Sir William Aston said,
" it is impossible to enforce all the Standing Orders
at Question Time. I believe that if I did that,
possibly we would have no Question Time at all."
I know as does the Member for Bennelong that this
Mr Howard was describing it accurately. Because I was
there at the time. And, in fact, as you will see in the
Hansard of 18 April 1972, I spoke on the subject.
Mr Speaker, Question Time has always been a great deal
less than perfect.
As John Uhr wrote in a monograph on the subject a decade
ago: " It would be wrong to look for some golden age of
Australian parliamentary affairs when questions were
asked and answered in an exemplary mode of nonpartisan
public service." 
It has never been perfect, Mr Speaker; it has always been
to some degree in need of reform. But the Government of
which the Member for Bennelong was a minister did not
reform it. This Government will.
The Government accepts the Committee's view that Question
Time can be improved and that the time has come to try
some new arrangements.
The Procedure Committee recommended we should have a
limited experiment with the rostering of ministers for
Question Time. They proposed that ministers other than
the Prime Minister, the Treasurer and the Minister for
Finance would attend Monday Question Times on a roster
based on half-hour segments.
The Government, however, has decided that if change is
needed, there is no point in tinkering at the margins.
We have decided to institute a fully rostered Question
Time on a trial basis for the remainder of this Session.
With other ministers, including the Treasurer, I shall be
available for Question Time on each Monday and Thursday
to take questions ranging across the whole spectrum of
government. 
Other ministers will be rostered to answer questions
relating to their portfolios and those of the Senate
ministers they represent. The Leader of the House will
be drawing up the roster and will consult the Manager of
Opposition Business in the process.
Question Time will be at 3.00pm and will last for
minutes as recommended by the Committee, with a minimum
of 14 questions.
It should also be remembered that because the House will
on that schedule be sitting one extra day in each two
week session, there will be an additional 45 minutes of
opportunity for questioning the Government.
All this will mean that more homework will be needed on
both sides of the House. Some Members of the
Opposition's long front bench will have to think up some
questions on their shadow portfolio responsibilities for
the first time.
As the other Mr Howard said in 1972, " The advantage of
the Westminster system is that it makes the questioner
have some degree of responsibility as well as the
minister who has to provide an answer". 
Those, like the Member for Bennelong, who complain about
Question Time being used for political purposes, at the
very least ought to have the honesty to admit that the
questions are as political as the answers.
Mr Speaker, our parliamentary system is based on the
Westminster system of government and in my view is
superior to any other. But as I have said, Mr Speaker,
this does not mean it should forever close itself off
from reform.
The reality of the way in which our national politics is
conducted is vastly different from that which existed
when the current arrangements for Question Time and
sitting patterns were instituted decades ago.
The advent of television and other new technology, as
well as the many points of accountability outside this
place, means more emphasis is now placed on
opportunities, and appearances and form as much as
substance; more often than not on the theatrics rather
than the seeking and provision of information.
Some Members of this place have never required an
audience beyond its walls to encourage them: I think you
will find, for instance, that the former Member for
McKellar in the early 1950s was ejected from the House
for doing imitations of a gorilla. 
In fact, Mr Speaker, I hope there will continue to be
room for theatre as there has always been in this and
other Parliaments. I, for one, would miss the Member for
Kooyong's angry look terribly. Or the Member for New
England's profound tactical observations.
But I also think the time has come for the emphasis to be
reweighed in favour of substance.
Mr Speaker, these new arrangements will not diminish the
Government's accountability in this place. In many ways,
they will increase accountability across the breadth of
the Government.
To listen to the Honourable Member for Bennelong's
statements about accountability, one could be forgiven
for thinking that I was under constant interrogation in
this place and that these reforms were designed to
protect me from the Leader of the Opposition.
Of course, Mr Speaker, this is nonsense and a quick
perusal of the record of Question Time bears this out.
For instance, last year more questions were asked of
me by the Government than by the Opposition. 
The Leader of the Opposition asked, on average, one
question of me per sitting week. Under the new
arrangements he may either increase or decrease this
ratio as he and the Opposition Tactics Committee
sees fit.
For reasons best known, perhaps, to the Opposition,
in 1993 only 87 questions were asked of me, compared
with 276 in 1992.
The fact is, Mr Speaker, the Opposition, any opposition,
chooses its targets according to its perceived political
interests and those on the other side really should not
insult anyone's intelligence by pretending that they
occupy some high moral ground.
In Opposition in 1975 the then Member for Moreton was all
for changing Question Time. It was " choking" the
Parliament, he said.
But did the Government of Malcolm Fraser unchoke it? No.
Malcolm Fraser didn't change a thing.
Malcolm Fraser believed that Members who genuinely wanted
information, as opposed to publicity, should place their
questions on notice for a written answer. 
The contemporary record also shows that vast areas of
Government responsibility go largely unscrutinised by the
Opposition. More questions are asked of a broader range
of Ministers by the Government than by the Opposition.
In 1992, 70 per cent of all Opposition questions came
from the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Opposition and
the Leader of the National Party. 70 per cent of all
questions in that year were asked of the Prime Minister
and the Treasurer.
Those who lay claim to being the traditionalists of
Parliament must agree that all this provides a distorted
version of ministerial accountability to the Parliament
and in no way reflects the original intentions of those
who framed the existing arrangements.
Mr Speaker, the reforms we propose ensure that more
ministers are questioned, and provide the opportunity for
more policies to be tested and more detailed scrutiny
given to Government departments and their administration.
In short, the Government's reforms will aid a return to
our genuine parliamentary traditions and help make
Question Time a forum not merely for leaders, but for all
ministers and all parliamentarians. These changes
should, in fact, be supported by traditionalists. 
It's entirely consistent with our Westminster
parliamentary tradition, with its emphasis on collective
responsibility, that we should encourage questioning, not
only of the leading ministers, but of all ministers; and
not only questions from the Opposition leaders and
Government backbench, but from all backbenchers.
Handling legislation
I turn to the Procedure Committee's recommendations on
the handling of legislation.
The Government has already made significant changes to
improve the flow of legislation, especially the move to
three periods of sittings and our decision that,
generally, legislation will be introduced in one sitting
for passage in the next.
Nonetheless, the Government has agreed to a trial of the
Procedure Committee's recommendations and has decided
that the machinery should be put in place to allow
uncontroversial bills to be considered by a Main
Committee or " second chamber".
The Government has also agreed that there should be a
Second Deputy Speaker and that he or she will be
nominated by the opposition. 
It will take some time for the necessary supporting
arrangements to be put in place but I would hope to see
some initial use of the Main Committee system during the
current Autumn sittings.
The Leader of the House will be giving notice of the
necessary sessional orders and amendments. to the standing
orders of the House this week. The Government intends
that the new sitting times and Question Time arrangements
will start on Monday 21 February.
I believe these are very worthwhile improvements we are
making. Again, let me express my appreciation to all
honourable Members and others who have contributed to the
development of these reforms and particularly to the
honourable Member for Bonython.
L 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCHEON FOR THE PRIME MINISTER OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
THE RT HON PAIAS WINGTI
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
WEDNESDAY 9 FEBRUARY 1994
( EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY)
It is always a pleasure to welcome Papua New Guinea's Head of Government
to Australia.
But it is a particular pleasure to welcome you, Mr Prime Minister, because so
much of the tone of the modern relationship between our two countries has
been set by your efforts.
During your last period as Prime Minister, you helped to develop the Joint
Declaration of Principles, which sets out the basis for our relationship.
In that document, we each commit ourselves to conducting relations between
us on the basis of certain fundamental principles mutual respect for one
another's independence, sovereignty and equality.
In the discussions we have just had, and during our earlier meeting on Nauru
last year, it was clear that you and I have a very similar approach to this
relationship. It is a relationship which is important to each of us anchored by geography,
shaped by history, reinforced by mutual economic interests and by the
shared experiences of tens of thousands of citizens from both countries over
many years. 
We already have a substantial and mutually rewarding economic relationship.
Our two-way trade is worth $ 2.1 billion and Papua New Guinea now enjoys a
significant trade surplus with Australia. Thirty four per cent of Papua New
Guinea's exports come to Australia, while you, in turn, are a particularly
important market for Australian manufactures.
Australian investment in. Papua-New Guinea is around $ 1.6 billion, making
PNG the ninth-largest destination for Australian investment overseas.
Although this is a good record, you and I both believe that we can do more in
this area.
I know that one of your aims on this visit is to have discussions with the
Australian business community. In that regard it is good to be able to
welcome a number of business people with long-standing interests in Papua
New Guinea to this lunch today.
Visits like this help with the very important function of keeping open the
channels of communication between government and business.
Papua New Guinea's task in building a modern, prosperous and peaceful
nation is a huge enterprise. You have already faced many difficulties in your
efforts to develop your country, and no doubt more lie ahead of you.
But the remarkable thing is how much has been accomplished.
Australia is committed to continuing our help for Papua New Guinea's
development Our development assistance program, worth about $ 300 million a year, is
designed to help the people of Papua New Guinea develop effective and
long-lasting solutions to the challenges the country faces.
As we shift from budget support to jointly programmed aid by the year 2000,
Australian assistance will be targeted in areas that you identify as priorities.
These include education, health and, as we discussed today, law and order.
These form the bedrock on which national development can take place and I
am pleased that Australia will be continuing to work on them with you into the
next century.
But although our ' bilateral ties are important to us both, and will remain so,
there is no doubt that the relationship between us is evolving,
Mr Prime Minister. 
We are beginning to see each other as part of a broader region of enormous
promise and great economic dynamism. Your ' look north policy has been
one response to this. Our own deepening engagement with Asia is another.
So it is also a pleasure to welcome you here as a fellow member of APEC.
Both of us have committed our countries to APEC's goal of securing an open
regional economy in Asia and the Pacific, more integrated and open to trade
than ever before.
Another key regional institution in which we both participate is the South
Pacific Forum.
Papua New Guinea and Australia have been working with our colleagues to
make the South Pacific's pre-eminent organisation as effective as possible in
the post-Cold War environment. I look forward to the opportunity we will
have to carry this job forward when we meet in Brisbane in August.
Mr Prime Minister,
Old hands in both our countries sometimes claim that we are drifting apart.
It is true that the relationship between us will never again be as intimate as it
was when Australia was the administering power in PNG, a fact which neither
of us need regret, particularly when as you and I have discussed before
we reflect on some of the architectural legacy we bequeathed you.
And the efforts we have noted on both our parts to develop our links in the
wider Asia-Pacific region mean that, relatively speaking, we may each loom
less large for the other.
So I sympathise with those who think that we need to put more effort into
promoting contacts, particularly between young people from both countries.
We need to take care, on both sides, not to take the relationship for granted.
We need to talk to each other at all levels.
I am very conscious after our meeting today, and following our earlier
discussion on Nauru, just how productive and interesting such contact can
be, and how much of relevance we can learn from each other.
That is another good reason for welcoming you here today, Prime Minister.
I now call on the Leader of the Opposition, Dr Hewson, to join me in this task. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
CHILDREN OF THE HOLOCAUST EXHIBITION
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
9 FEBRUARY 1994
I was deeply honoured to be asked to open this exhibition and a little daunted by the
requirement to speak. To be required to speak about the unspeakable.
One does not have to see these pictures to begin to feel overwhelmed it is enough to
know that one is &amp; Qoin to see them. To know that they exist.
To know that because they are children's pictures they will be like other children's
pictures, like all children's pictures like the pictures our own children might have
drawn.-To know that they might have been our own children.
That it might have happened to them. That the unspeakable might have happened to
us. Children's pictures are all the same in one sense. No one who looks at these can fail
to think of the pictures their own children have drawn, the pictures these days you see
stuck on kitchen walls and refrigerators.
But children's pictures are also remarkable because each one is different. We treasure
them, display them, find it hard to throw them out years after our children find them
an embarrassment because in them we see the first signs of individuality. The first
expressions of each child's personality.
-We see in them the evidence of their hearts and-minds &amp; eloping,. their innocence
and their potential. They contain their hope and ours.
Even in these drawings, done by children cut off from their parents and families,
hungry and afraid in the g hetto of Terezin, there is hope. And innocence,
imagination, love need.
This exhibition is a profound reminder of the appalling betrayal of the good in them,
and the good they inspire in us.
Few of us, I suspect, ever expected to see pictures drawn by children who were
murdered in the Holocaust. It comes somehow as a surprise that they exist.
Yet, had we thought about it, we might have known that they existed. 
We knew that there were children in the ghettoes of Europe and children who died in
the extermination camps.
We know all children draw pictures.
So we should have known that someone would have hoarded them away, as we hoard
away our own children's pictures.
We should have known . that-there-would be pictures which remind us that these
terrible events took place, in our century, in our civilisation, in our Europe.
In fact we probably did know. But we simply hadn't thought about it.
And that I believe is the point we have to think about it. That is the only way those
of us who did not experience it will remember the Holocaust.
This exhibition forces us to think forces us to remember.
It reminds us of how profoundly important it is to keep alive the memory and
forever reaffirm the reality of the Holocaust.
It reminds us that those people who keep it alive do so for all of us not just for the
Jewish people and the survivors and descendants of the others who were persecuted,
but for all of us.
Ladies and gentlemen
These children's drawings were not collected by the parents. They were not re-visited
by the kids who drew them.
Most of the parents were killed. And most of the children. Of the 17,000 children
under the age of 14 who were sent to Terezin, only 150 survived.
The drawings were collected by people who knew what they would mean to us. Who
knew, perhaps, that we might nee reminding.
Hidden in suitcases and forgotten about when Terezin was liberated, the drawings
were rediscovered and found their way to the State Jewish Museum in Prague.
I understand the Museum values them so highly that today only copies of the
drawings are placed on display, and the originals are secured in the Museum's
archives.
I also understand that visitors flock to see the display. The collection is
internationally famous.
It therefore says much for the generosity of the museum authorities in Prague that
they have allowed some of these drawings to come to Australia.
And I take this opportunity to thank the Director of the State Jewish Museum, Dr
Kybalova, for the cooperation extended to the Australian War Memorial.
I also want to thank the former Ambassador of the Czech Republic in Canberra, Dr
David-Moserova, for her assistance and the staff of the Embassy.
I am pleased to see that the Czech Embassy is represented here tonight and ask that
my gratitude be passed on to the authorities in Prague. 
And, of course, I must also thank Dr Michael McKernan, the Deputy Director of the
Australian War Memorial, for his efforts for having the wisdom to see the
importance of this exhibition to Australia and to the Memorial.
The Australian War Memorial is one of our great national institutions, and its
continuing. importance to our national life could not have been more amply
demonstrated than it was last year at the Ceremony for the Entombment of the
Unknown Australian Soldier.
The Memorial was founded by Charles Bean in the belief that we would only
understand the realities of war, and the evils of war, by knowing the stories of the
people affected by war.
Down the years the Memorial has done this superbly. So long as it is here, and in the
hands of wise and imaginative people like Dame B~ eryl, Brendan Kelson and Michael
McKernan, Australians will not forget the sacrifices made in war by their countrymen
and women.
But nor should we ever forget the sacrifices made by others, or fail to teach the stories
and the lessons of their experience.
This Memorial stands as a permanent reminder of the Australian experience of war.
It contains many of the clues to who we are, many of the icons of our identity.
But no conception of what it means to be Australian, or what our experience in war
means, can be complete or falthful to the truth and our ideals without an
understanding of what others have been through.
We cannot be indifferent to the experience of others we most certainly cannot be
indifferent to the experience of the Jewish people in the Holocaust.
After all, in the end, it was because they were indifferent, and knew this country
was not immune to evil and the suffering of others, that the men and women honoured
in this place sacrificed their lives.
In the end, it will only be because we are not indifferent, and do not think ourselves
immune, that new holocausts will be averted.
Today, as children die in Bosnia and terms like ethnic cleansing enter the vocabulary
of that part of the world, the words we see on this memorial " Lest We Forget"
surely embrace the children of the Holocaust.
I congratulate all-those associated with this exhibition. ILunder-stand. from here it
moves on to the Sydney Jewish Museum and I thank Mr John Saunders, the founder
of the Museum, who is with us tonight.
I should also like to thank John Glass for speaking to us about his experiences in
Terezin and the other Holocaust survivors who are here and who will, in the course
of the exhibition, give their time freely to speak to visitors.
Let me conclude by saying that I sincerely hope every Australian who has an
opportunity to see the Children of Holocaust does see it.
I now declare this exhibition open. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF WESTFIELD ENDOWMENT FOR ENSEMBLE
DEVELOPMENT, CANBERRA
FEBRUARY 1994 EMBARGOED AGAINST DELIVERY
I am very pleased to be here today at the launch of this significant development in
Australia's musical life.
My regard for music and those who make it is no secret. I believe music brings out the
best in people. It inspires them, it sustains them, it soothes and comforts them.
It's difficult to imagine life without music. Such a life, I'm sure, would be very bare
indeed. The thought of not being able to settle down with a CD after a day in this
place, for example, is pretty horrible to contemplate.
Musicians are among those creative artists who put a premium on the use of
imagination, whether as composers or performers. And in this they provide a lead for
all of us.
We need, as a nation, to put a premium on imagination. And creativity. And
innovation. Successful societies place a high value on these things. They are prepared to take the
trouble to develop them, and that means nurturing the talented individuals in whom
these qualities reside. Particularly the emerging talent.
As I've said before, this Government is more than prepared to play its part in the
process. We've demonstrated that with our support for the arts in the years we've been
in office, and particularly in last year's Budget.
Wt-are-detrin ed -to-forge-a new role-for the arts-in-Austr alia, and our forthcoming
cultural policy statement will articulate what we believe this role should be, and how
we intend to help bring it about.
In the meantime, however, we've put the Arts Ministry into Cabinet, where it belongs.
And we've combined it in a portfolio with Communications, in recognition of the fact
that cultural and communications development are inextricably linked together. 
But we can't and won't do it all alone.
We are also determined to see the level of private support for the arts in Australia
substantially raised.
The arts need more corporate support, more patronage. We need to get up to the level
of other countries in this area.
The smart people in our corporate world know this.
They know that the arts take a lead in projecting Australia to the world as an exciting,
dynamic country with which it pays to form partnerships..
They know that by helping Australian artists they are also, ultimately, helping all
Australians. Frank Lowy and the Westfield Group, with this award have confirmed ( as if it needed
to be-) not only their acumen and far sightedness as eminent members of our corporate
sector, but also their generosity as long time supporters of the arts in Australia.
In one sense, of course, they couldn't help it. Genuine lovers of the arts, I believe, feel
the frisson that a work of art conveys. They recognise the essential part the arts play
in their lives. Just as they recognise the inescapability of the debt to art that this
creates. Its a debt that can be repaid in many ways, but one of the most important is by direct
financial support of artists. We need to do more for our artists. All of us.
That is why this award is particularly well directed.
It is the first award in Australia specifically designed to support developing ensembles.
It means that young Australian musicians will have some financial security while they
work together to achieve professional excellence.
And the size of the endowment means that an annual award can be given in perpetuity.
It is with great pleasure, then, that I officially launch the Westfield Endowment for
ensemble development.
I am sure that you will join with me in applauding the generosity of Westfield in their
-extraordinary-gesture to honour Tony -Berg -in his professional capacity as a
businessman, and in his private commitment to Musica Viva and to music development
in Australia-
It is an honour richly deserved.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NORTHERN TERRITORY FOOTBALL LEAGUE
ABORIGINAL ALL-STARS v COLLINGWOOD BALL
As the football experts are prone to say there's a lot
hanging on this game tomorrow.
But it's not so much on who wins or loses. Both sides,
it seems to me, are already the winners simply for
playing the game.
It also seems to me that they are sides with something
very basic in common: I mean they both know what it is to
do it hard in the world.
Collingwood, the greatest sporting club in Australia,
grew up In a poor working class area of Melbourne. They
were social underdogs who became sporting top dogs.
Collingwood succeeded because it tapped the spirit of
people whose circumstances might easily have drained the
spirit from them.
The Collingwood Football Club gave them a collective
strength. It gave them the means by which they could know
success. The spirit was there it just needed a vehicle
for its expression.
The All Stars have much in common with this story. They
have been drawn from the ranks of those Australians who
have been denied a lot of the good things in Australian
life and subjected to a lot of the worst things.
They too might easily have given in to their
ci rcumstances.
But the All Stars like the teams in the Territory from
which many of their players are drawn are proof of
their willingness to overcome the odds. The team is an
expression of the spirit and the potential of Aboriginal
Australia. Like Collingwood, the spirit is there it only needs the
vehicle for its expression. 
I will come back to the football in a moment.
And before you murmur what would this character from
Bankstown and Canberra know about Australian Rules? I
have to remind you that in Miarch last year, aliost alone
among the tipsters, I said that the winner of the 1993
Browniow Medal would be Gavan Wanganeen.
And Kicky Winmar was my second tip.
Nicky Winmar's gesture of defiance at Collingwood is
destined to be legendary. In my view it was a great
gesture. Yet there were other gestures in last year's football
season which were, in a sense, just as significant
because they spoke of success.
There was Gavan Wanganeen with the Brownlow Medal in his
hand. There was Michael Long with the Norm Smith medaland
the Premiership Cup above his head.
And there was the gesture of Allan McAlister coming to
the Territory to meet the Aboriginal community, to talk,
to learn, to come to a new understanding.
Tomorrow's match builds on all those events.
And let me say now there will be other winners to come
out of this weekend's events.
Pre-eminent among them will be the City of Darwin.
Hundreds of thousands of Australians will be watching
this historic match. I am sure it will not fail to enter
the minds of most of them that Darwin was the place which
had the national vis4on and character to make it happen.
Darwin and its people.
Standing here in a dinner suit on a night like this I
realise that among the many attractions of Darwin must be
the climate.
It is a wonderful climate for politics. I mean the sort
of climate in which no politician would dare to make a
long speech.
Most of you will know, I hope, that I am a politician who
is inclined to take a national view. I tend to think of
Australia as one nation.
The details of what I mean by that would take too long to
describe at a ball in tropical heat but in short it
means that whatever the difference in geography and
experience, or colour, or creed whatever the degree of
our attachment to the place in which we live we are all 
Australians, and think of ourselves as Australians, and
do better in the world and by each other when we work
with a common national purpose.
That means, among other things, that while the place I
come from is very different to Darwin, Darwin's
experience is part of mine. When Darwin succeeds we all
share in that success. When Darwin's spirit rises so
does the spirit of Australia.
And Darwin's spirit is most definitely rising.
This has always been a frontier town but never more so
than now. It Is in the forefront of the great change
which is taking place in Australia.
It is our gateway to Asia, a place with a vital role to
play in 6ofeonomic development, and in our cultural and
social development. Darwin, after all, has always been
multicultural, it has always had multiracial sport it
has set the example for the rest 6f7AUitrala.
As I said, Australia is undergoing a profound change: in
the way we do things, in the direction of our thinking,
in the way we imagine ourselves and our role in the
world. They say you can't write history until you are far enough
away to see the shape of events. Up close, in the midst
of the fray, it's all a bit of a blur.
But in the last twelve months I reckon we've all felt it.
You could sense the change in the last year or so as if
the tide had imperceptibly turned and was now running
our way.
Just now we are starting to see evidence of it in the
figures. You can see it on the score-board.
it actually is a bit like a football match There is
that moment when you feel the game change.
And I truly believe the game has changed between black
and white Australia.
This game is evidence of it. In that sense the score is
already on the board.
It's hard to say precisely what the turning point was.
I know that Kevin Sheedy and the Essendon Football Club
played a role wffith theifr recruiting caiimpigns and their
regular pre-season games in Darwin and last year's
Premiership was proof that there was wisdom as well as
justice in the policy. 
I think they deserve enormous credit for their
initiative.
And of course there is one other person who deserves a
lot of credit NickyWinmar.
Think of what one gesture of defiance triggered a
national debate on racism in sport and a new recognition
of -th&amp; -role Aboriginals play -in Australian sport.
Not to mention a horrible succession of mysterious
Coll1ingwood defeats.
Along the way, things also went wrong for Nicky and St
Kilda; Allan McAlister came to the Northern Territory;
Essendon, with a sizeable crew of Aboriginal players, won
the premiership; Michael Long won the Norm Smith medal;
and my March selection, Gavan Wanganeen, won the
Brownlow. It has all ended up here with this historic match.
And it all happened in the International Year of the
World's Indigenous People and the year of Mabo.
So the game, as I said, has changed.
There is a change in mood and awareness.
And with the Mabo decision there is a change in law and
let me tell you that de-sjpite all the arguments, all the
understandable anxiety, all the negotiation which is
still to take place, the Mabo legislation puts right an
historic wrong and there is no going back on that.
I am very much aware of how far there is to go.
I am also aware that very often the sentiments expressed
by politicians seem out of touch with social and economic
reality out of touch with the complexities of life as
it is really lived in Australia.
It is our duty to get in touch with those realities and
fashion policies accordingly. Ultimately the trick is
always to put the right people and the right money in the
right places.
But it ig also necessary to state the principles: not
because one ever believes that they can be translated
into a perfect reality, but because they are necessary
values and ambitions for a nation to live by.
They are the nation's articles of faith, the code we live
by. In some countries they are write into
constitutions and bills of rights: here they are
unwritten, but they are just as powerful. 
eft-
1 am talking about ideas like a fair go for all, support
for the underdog, tolerance of difference, respect for
those who by their own efforts have succeeded against the
odds. Every one of those principles on which we pride ourselves
declares that racism is abhorrent everywhere, Including
football fields or tennis courts, or athletics tracks.
It is abhorrent to our best traditions and the best
traditions of sport.
I was at a function at the Australian War Memorial during
the week the opening of an exhibition of drawings done
by children in a Jewish ghetto in Poland during the war.
All but a handful of 17,000 children in the ghetto were
killed in the Auschwitz extermination camp.
I mention this only as a background to words which a
survivor of the ghetto used in a speech at the war
memorial to summarise, he said what an extraordinary
gift the tolerance and freedom and democracy of Australia
had been for refugees like himself.
He also said that democracy and tolerance were more
deeply embedded in the f-abric -of Aus-tralian life than
anywhere else in the world.
His words were very moving. They were a reminder that
those intangible things like tolerance and fairness are
real, especially to people who have been denied them.
It was a reminder of how vital to our national life and
character these values are how jealously we should
defend them.
I would like to think that tomorrow's contest is part of
that defence.
That's why I said at the beginning that, however close
the contest on the field and whoever wins, the teams are
both winners.
I hope and I think we all hope that in due course it
will be seen that they were both playing on the same
side. in fact I think all Australians can be winners from this
weekend's events. if we all want to be. If we all are
prepared to enter into the spirit of it. If we all see
it as a step along the way a highly symbolic step
towards reconciliation between black and white
Australians. I congratulate Tony Shaw and the NTFL, and Allan
McAlister and the Collingwood Football Club for all they
have done. 
6
I also want to pay tribute to Maurice Rioli, coach of the
All-Stars, former great player and for years now in the
Northern Territory and throughout Australia a hero and
role model for Aboriginal people.
And finally, let me wish the players the very best of
luck. DARWIN 11 February 1994 



04.-11-93 14: 11P. 01
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE. HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH KEVIN NAUGHTON, RADIO 8DD
DARWIN, II FEBRUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KN: you may have heard on AM earlier today, it seems that there was some mirth at
the expense of Senator Bronwyn Bishop. The mirth occurred in the House of
Representatives, and it seems as thughsome of Senator Bishop's colleagues didn't
come to her rescue as a Bronwyn Bishop was doing the rounds of the Government
benches. In fact, Michael Wooldridge actually crossed the floor to find out what
the joke was, came back passed it around his colleagues and they all had a good
giggle. Well, to find out just what the joke was, and other things, I am joined in the studio
by Prime Minister, Paul Keating. Thanks for coming in.
PM: Good, Kevin, nice to gee you.
KN: What was the joke?
PM: Just that as Kim Beazley was telling us about this dinner or lunch which Senator
Bishop had attended, and where she had passed these remarks about economic
policies in the ' 80s which had causcd some mirth at the lunch apparently, as he
went on, it was quite a long answer, and not one person on the Coalition side got
up to interrupt him. Up the back one of the National Party fellows got up to move
an extension oftime, you see, so that was the joke.
KN: So, it was as simple as that?
PM: It was as simple as that. That sort of produced a general hubbub and giggle on
both sides.
KN: And a bit of humour for the day. Now, that's sort of been the issue that has
stopped the Coalition, the one that has dogged the Government since half way
through December has been the one relating to Sports and Environment Minister,
Ros Kelly, known as the sports-rorts affair or whatever. It's an issue that has been
around now for two months, that must do a bit of damage?
PM: I think, look, it is a ripple in the Canberra pond I think. These things, you see,
journalists, being professional, take the things up and have a look at them as they
ID-
04-1-93 4: 11IUP. .02
2
turn up. But I think the public they tend to just put a big discount through all this
stuff;, I mean, they come and go. And I think Ros Kelly's position is that no one
has made any allegations stick that there is any fraud in any of this, so there is no
fraud. Everyone is admitting that, even the Coalition. The Auditor said a program
like this notionally is open to fraud. But the interesting thing about these sports
grants, this is all the small sporting organisations in the country who might need
facilities for, it could be netball, or it could be...
KN: But hasn't the argument been, it is not a question of whether the money was spent
in the right areas or not.
PM: I am just going to make this point to you. It has to be spent before it is
recompensed. So, it is not a matter of writing a cheque which is then basically
wasted or blown or something, it has actually got to be spent and then it is
recompensed. So, therefore the opportunities of this thing being open to abuse are
fairly diminished.
KN: But isn't the argument the fact that decisions are made in the Ministers office, as
opposed to in the Department?
PM: Yes, that's the charge by the Liberal Party, saying that there is political bias in
themn, but when the Coalition government decided to, you know, build a dam here
and build an airport strip there, they were made in Ministers' offices too. I don't
think you can pin a Minister and say that decisions are necessarily wrong because
they are made in the Minister's office. 1 mean, I was the Treasurer of this country
for nearly ten years and most of the primary decisions I took were made by me.
KN: On white boards?
PM: They were made, often, in my head. No boards at all.
KN: Let's go on to that question of white boards.
PM: That is what happens. You can be in a discussion on the matter which I have seen
this in the Expenditure Review Committee of the Government on many occasions,
discussing something, and come back a day later and propose something that has
no paper at all. I mean, this idea that there has to be a sort of paper thing that has
got to be recommended by the Departmcnt is just simply an invention of a couple
of characters on the front bench of thc current Opposition.
KN: And also a question of concern for the Auditor-General, but just going back to that
question of plitical damage,_ because the story has been around now for a while.
Things like this white board angle, those sort of things can go into folk lore. Now
somcone suggested to me today that if the Australian Taxation Office knocked on
a small business and said where's your records for the last seven years and the
business person said well they were all on a white board, the Taxation Office
wouldi wear that would they?
PM: No, but what's happened here is that all of the proposals which Mrs Kelly has
approved camne from the department with recommendations. When I say with
recommendations. not that which one or the other should be approved, but that
they were all adoptable. The choice was then a matter for hers after making
04-11-93 14: 11Me 
04.-11-93 14: 12 0-P3
3
judgements about each particular one. 1 mean, we do elect Ministers to make
decisions. And what the Coalition is saying, that this is shocling, this Minister's
actually made a whole lot of choices here, this is dreadfiul. You know, if there is
not a bit of departmental paper with some wallahs name on it, it's a stew.
KN: So Ministerial decisions are part and parcel of the political landscape?
PM: Exactly, 1 mean, one of the things about this government is that, you see before the
Labor Government in 1983, the place was run by the bureaucracy. That's why
Australia was in a hole. I mean, the power of Ministers to make decisions is a very
important thing. Now, what the Coalition is saying is look, we want to see a
recommendation from the departmcnt recommending this particular thing against
that particular thing. Whereas if all of the proposals coming from the department
to Mrs Kelly are adoptable ones, it is then a matter for her to decide which ones
arc adopted. Now, whether she does it in her head, on a white board, or doodles
on a pad, I mean, in the end, I don't think it matters. But, I mean, we have got all
this sort hand wringing. Last night we had Paul Lyneham on doing the second
interview for the week with Senator Kernorand she had her most misty expression
possible, more in sorrow than in anger she said that, you know, Mrs Kelly should
go. The previous two nights she said there shouldn't be a whitewash by the House
of Representatives Committee. So Mrs Kelly turned up, took 300 questions,
that wasn't enough apparently. You know Senator Kernot is now again talking
about some inquiry. With these minor parties there is always veiled threats
through their remarks. And then saying we will think about all this. The fact is,
this has gone on for weeks. Not a sole, not a member of the Coalition, not
anybody has established that there is any fraud here or anything wrong. It is really
just a matter of choice about decisions and they don't like our priorities.
KN: But it is certainly a story that you would like to see go away?
PM: Look, Kevin, it will either linger longer or it will go. In the end, it won't make a
tinkers cuss worth of difference to what happens to the country in the broad.
KN: Now thc reason that you are in Darwin for the football match between
Collingwood, of which you are a member, and the Aboriginal Allstars. The match
obviously attracted your attention when Allan McAlister got in touch?
PM: He said to me would I like to come. And I thought it was a good thing to do. I
think the match is a good match. I think it is a good idea and being associated
with Collingwood, and having a fairly big spot in my heart and mind for the
-Aboriginal. people of this country, I thought this was a good opportunity,
particularly for Aboriginal sports men and women. And I see this as basically a
celebration of them.
KN. Charlie Perkins said yesterday that, to many Aborigines, sport is one of the few
ways in which they can change some the lifestyles that they've been stuck with
because of family and social tragedy.
PM. Well I agree with that. I think that is right. 113-P. 03 
04-11-93 ENDS
041-3 13 I D-P. 04414:
4
KN: So can you see the value of this game then being telecast and broadcast all over
Australia as, if you like, a very big and public step into, perhaps, widening that
whole process?
PM: Well I think it is just another recognition of the fact that the Aboriginal community
of this country have delivered to the nation great sports men and women. And that
they excel in all codes and they do it often. In this, we'e got, drawn together
from around the country, Aboriginal players of Australian Rules and, of course, a
fair contingent from the Northern Territory, playing one of the great sides of
Australia, Collingwood.
KN: The great side?
PM: The great side, well I think the greatest sporting club in the country.
KN: Not much argument here about that. Finally, there is going to be a bookmaker out
there, who are you backing, or is that a stupid question?
PM: I don't think there is going to be any losers out of this, you see. I know someone
is going to end up winning on the day, but T think everyone is going to win because
1 think it is a good thing to do and it is a celebration of the huge contribution and
athleticismi of Australian Aboriginal people, in this case Australian Aboriginal men,
into this code. So I wouldnft want to try and pick this one, Kevin, I know you are
a Collingwood supporter and maybe the underdog bias in us would have us go for
Collingwood. I have got divided loyalties on this one.
KN: Okay, Prime Minister Keating thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you Kevin. 


11/ 02 ' 94 18: 30 The Talk Show 35: 30: 14 MARY KOSTAKIDIS Hello, I'm Mary Kostakidis, welcome to the very first talk show. Tonight, we're chatting to Prime Minister Paul Keating, who's just had a birthday arnd accepted our invitation to share his reflections on turning 50. Prime Minister, thank you for joining Me. The man on my left knows something about turning 50 and more than a little about Prime Ministers. Phillip Adams, welcome. PHILLIP ADAMS The PeterPan of Australian politics, the big 5-0. Intimations of mortality? PA UL KEATING When one is young, particularly in public life you see, I was in the House of Representatives when I was 25, just on 25 years -ago. And one's looking at a big open opportunity, blue skies it'Is called. it'Is all upside and you tend to keep doing that and you think this is the natural order of things, and yet you never quite you never seem to age much. And then all of a sudden your're 40 but you're still not bad, you're still plugging away but then all of a sudden things change. When I f irst went to Canberra with Lionel Bowen in 1969, he said to me he and I shared this little box of a room and I was 25 and he was 48 and he said, " I'll tell you this, champ," he said, " When you get to my age you end up concentrating more on the end of your life than the beginning of it." And I think that's probably right, when you're young it's all all the future is there and it gives you that tremendous energy and you do have that Peter Pan quality too, you know, but I think later you can't delude yourself. By the time you'Ire 50 the great bulk of it is behind you unless you're going to do the ton, and not many of us do that. PHILLIP ADAMS Are you talking about personal mortality or political mortality? PAUL KEATING Personal mortality. I mean, political mortality, in a sense doesn't matter. It's just... MARY KOSTAKIDIS Doesn't it? PAUL KEATING It does and it doesn't. I don't think it does. 1e1 / 2 9 026 3u0 38 59 SRSTELEVISION 11/ UZ ' V4 1U: JU% Q'Dl UZ 440 ñ U 37: 39: 18 PHILLIP ADAMS So you don't fear either death? Personal or political? PAUL KEATING Personal, I probably do. No, I don'It f ear death, no, I don'It think. I think probably probably this is true of my generation, the post-war baby boom crowd, who were a sort of generation of Peter Pans, who will resist ageing as no generation before them I think. But I suppose there's the another friend of mine said to me recently, he said, " You know the thing about growing old?" I said, " No, what?" He said, " There's not a good thing about it." I think that's probably right, so it's only the it's not really fear of dying I don't think, that worries me, and political death, I mean, I just couldn't that I just regard as part of the thrills and spills of life. MARY KOSTAKIDIS It's interesting that you say that because becoming Prime Minister-was very important to you. Do you -feel Comfo-tabI16 being Pyrime Minister? PAUL KEATING No one, I don't think, is entirely comfortable with it. Megalomaniacs are. We've had a couple of megalos over the time but anyone who's got normal levels of sensitivity can never be comfortable with what is required. It is, in a sense, the one has to not just govern a government, run a government but, at the same time it's the semi -embodiment of what people think the country's about. It'Is very hard to f it all that into one personality. PHILLIP ADAMS You've used the term megalo, and I know you're familiar with the Tony Benn analysis of politics, or politicians, which transcends country, ideology, fation and he says there are three, only three types. There are straight men, fixers and crazies. Straight men Nick Greiner. Fixers Neville Wran, Hawkie. Crazies Margaret Thatcher. You use the term megalo as a pejorative but you like the crazies, don't you? PAUL KEATING Yes, I think that in his pecking order the crazies were the one where he handed out the compliments, you see. Everyone has a role, I think he said, but when you think about those categories they're pretty right. And he had Churchill in the crazies. He was a principal crazy of his lifetime and of Benn's lifetime. Because I think the crazies do charge in and get things done. ODOñ. uu i~ 4iu:~ TWUU1 11/ 02 ' 94 18: 31 Ia81 02 438 1590 ig~ yUJUJV. IiI 40: 08: 14 PHILLIP ADAMS You weren't at all offended when I suggested that you were in that category. PAUL KEATING Oh no, I thought it was a I took it as a high compliment. MARY KOSTARIDIS So it's the crazies then who achieve greatness. PAUL KEATING It's not greatness, it's to go where others fear to tread. You know, to go and do things and I if you look at my life I've always been drawn to those sort of people. The first person I was, I suppose, really interested in public life was Churchill. For all of those characteristics. I used to think, when I -was a kid, if that's the business he's in, that's the business I should be in. The other one was Roosevelt, who again, used to tread all over the gentry at Hyde Park and insist that there were other notions of fairness and equity and a greater glory for America. People like that. In Australia, Jack Lang, who I was friendly with, just because he was a big doer, he'd get in there and push his way around and get it done. PHILLIP ADAMS. But his grasp wasn't as long as his reach, was it, so you acknowledge that greatness can, in fact, be an aspiration rather than an achievement. PAUL KEATING Oh, yes, I think it'Is a very dif ficult thing to quantify in these people but if you look at them there was just a little thing I saw a f ilm. clip of Churchill in Europe after the war, in I) Amsterdam, and it had a banner across the street, " Welcome Mr Churchill, Saviour of Europe." But it was true. He was. Now, technically, it was Dwight Eisenhower and the American armed forces, but really, the person who stuck it out, who Identified Hitler as a criminal, when it was unpopular to do so, and all the 0rest of it, and I don't think those things can be said of people without they really make the big gestures. And take all the risks. Now, look at his risks, after his problems in Turkey in the First World War... PHILLIP ADAMS The Dardanelles embarrassment. PAUL KEATING The Dardanelles campaign, all these other things, yet it didn't hold him down and it was the same with Roosevelt and his time, and the same with people we know here, with the likes of John 11/ 02 ' 94 18: 32 Curtin and Lang and people like that. 42: 44: 12 PHILLIP ADAMS But you've been a bit misanthropic about the quality of leadership in this country, historically. The famous leaked speech, and I put it to you a couple of weeks ago, that I'Ive noticed over the years that you're pretty good at denigration but I've never known you, apart from references to Churchill and Lincoln and Roosevelt, to be that generous about people. Who do you unequivocally admire? PAUL KEATING I am a star lover. I love stars. You often get asked, who'Is your favourite sports person. That's the easiest question in the world for me to answer. It was Mohammed Ali, by a mile, not a yard but a mile, or a metre but a mile. I like people who are good at what they do. They may not necessarily have position, so there ' s a lot of people I like, there ' s a lot of people I like, but they are mostly people that your audience wouldn ' t know, you know what I mean? That's not to say I don't like a-rot of prominent people, I do, like I admire people, people who I think... PHILLIP ADAMS I know you like Tom Jones, which many people f ind a bit of a laugh but you like him because he's a stayer, don't you, 300 concerts a year. PAUL KEATING That's right. It's one of the great voices in the world. And you say to him he said to me, " I've been playing Las Vegas and Reno and Lake Tahoe every year since 1962." PHILLIP ADAMS A bit like question time. PAUL KEATING And you say, Is that right? How many nights a year do you sing?" Because he sings for two-and-a-half hours and it's with such force. And he said, " I average 240." You know, who does that? People talk about Al Jolson, and all these great stars, but is there anyone doing that anywhere? And, of course, there's that big throaty basso sound rolls out of him, all these years later, and you've got to say, this character is a massively unusual joker. So I turn up to the concerts and I, you know, I patronise him whenever he turns up. Not because I like the songs. In fact, last time he sang all the songs he sang a lot of black gospel songs last time. One impressed me, called Thank Ye Lord. Now he is expected to hop into some hot bubble number which he'd 11/ 022 9641 1 80322 438 1590 LBS TELEVISION IU 0004 11/ 02 ' 94 18: 32 V51 02 438 1590 5B5 iIZEi1IUN normally do, but he sang this thing which was so moving. 45: 15: 04 PHILLIP ADAMS Hey, Mary, isn't it great that he's raised the Lord because we want to talk to him about the Lord, don't we? . PAUL KEATING Let me answer this, Phillip. There's lots of people I like, you know. I mean, I like you two, that's why I'm here basically. I do things for people I like and I like to be with people I like and I and I don ' t patronise people I don't like because I can'It be two-faced about them. So, there's a lot of people I like. MARY KOSTAKIDIS Let's talk about the Lord, do you ever turn to her? PAUL KEATING To her? PHILLIP ADAMS I think that'Is the wrong member of the trinity, actually. You'Ire a Roman Catholic, are you a seriousRoman Catholic or are you a Jack Kennedy Roman Catholid&amp;?-PAUL KEATING Oh, no, I'm a more serious one than Jack oh, I don't know, who can say, I don't want to diminish his beliefs either. I think that where does humanitarianism leave of f and where does religious charity take up, religious commitments. The one thing I think that I picked up as a kid in a Catholic school was the Church would never have a bar of racism out. Absolutely out. We all arrived equally, we're all children of Christ, that's their view. And that's always been part of my belief, that everyone has an innate dignity, every person, so you can't say my life's more important than yours because I'm the Prime Minister, I'm a better person because that's not true. There's a lot of tremendously good people doing very ordinary things and it's immaterial whether they're doing ordinary or important things. Now, that's the point. I really do think that life is a great leveller. And that we arrive equally. I mean, when you're born, even if it's into a great household with the cutlery... PHILLIP ADAMS Not the silver spoon... PAUL KEATING The silver cutlery in your mouth, or the cutlery service in your mouth. You're not aware of it as you're born and you're certainly not aware of it as you die. So, I think these people 11/ 02 ' 94 16:. 33 eei, 02 438J1 520 SA viil_ 006 who parade themselves, who look f or the adulation of other people, who regard it as important to be feted and to be basically admired, well, we like to be liked, but needing that is something that I don't think a balanced person needs. 47: 54: 00 NARY KOSTJIKIDIS What about love? You went down to the Mahler concert in Melbourne the other day and you said great works of art are inspired by love. What do you mean by love? PAUL KEATING I was quoting Mahler about his wife, Alma, who he was saying it was the dediddtion on the cover sheet of his great chorale work, the 8th Symphony, and he was saying, I dedicate it to you, and my love for you is the inspiration of it, what a pity you can't return it. She was then having an affair with somebody else. It had that sort of melancholy to it, but there'Is no doubt that these, that the two things though a Jew, he became a Catholic, Mahler, the notions of Christianity and the meaning of life and love were the things that inspired the music and, of course, it came with such force, with such an absolute outpouring of this massive symphonies, choral symphonies, not all choral but massive symphonies. I think that you've got to have that feeling to do anything like that. Anything that borders on the epic. PHILLIP ADAMS Politics is epic. Does love have a place in politics? PAUL KEATING I think so. I think it does in the work. I think that unless, if you're not really warmly warm-spirited and warmly tied up with the community, say in my case, warm towards the community about what it is... PHILLIP ADAMS Do people perceive that you have a warm relationship with them? PAUL KEATING I don't know but without that inner feeling, you can't do the work. What's the point of running, I mean, what are you running for all the time. It's certainly not to make page one lead on the Sydney Morning Herald or The Age, I mean, once we've all been through that particular barrier, we all like to forget it, not to be reminded about it so why are you doing it? MARY KOSTAKIDIS Why are you doing it? Because you cop an awful lot of abuse. Don't you? On the other hand, people say that you dish a lot of it out, as well. 11/ UZ ' V4 15: 43 50: 19: 03 PAUL KEATING But I dish it out in the professional running of the job. The me of the parliamentary chamber and the me of this kind of conversation, or me of the doorstop interview, or me of the cabinet room discussion or me of at home, is a completely different me. I do what I do in there because it's the cockpit of Australian politics, it's the clearing-house of Australian political pressures, it's where the ideas are contested... PHILLIP ADAMS. True. PAUL KEATING So you get in there and you argue for your idea but... PHILLIP ADAMS You're subjected to the CATSCAN of media every day of your life. PAUL KEATING Yes. PHILLIP ADAMS You are analysed, dissected arnd you feel misrepresented. You feel very often that the real you, whichever one that is, isn't getting through. Here's your big chance. Tell us something we don't know about you. Tell us something we should know about you. PAUL KEATING I think I am the stereotype would have me as arrogant, in some respects. The antithesis is true. I mean, the antithesis is true. I don't think I'm any special person on the pavement. I mean, I'Im there. I' 11l f ight someone else f or the job or a policy thing but I don'It go around saying here I am, here I am. I'Im not into that sort of stuff. So basically, I think I'm humble in a genuine sense humble. I'm not self-deprecating to the point of deprecation, where I'm ineffective but I think I'm humble. The other thing is that I'm always motivated by good works and deeds and other people'Is good works and deeds. I meanI I get very turned on by someone who does something well. It might be in an institution, it could be just in life or people who do things well. Or do things for other people, kind and charitable things. Or just do what their profession is well, or whatever it might be. I get great warmth towards them. MARY KOSTAKIDIS Okay, this is how you see yourself, Phillip, is that how you see Paul? % 7831 U243T = Z9 Aj-J L V13UI1 11/ 02 ' 94 18: 34 #&amp; 61 02 438 1590 SILSTLYISIUN 1 UUO 52: 55: 00 PHILLIP ADAMS There's also a very funny Keating who tells a great story but there's also a very angry one and one of my f irst impressions of Paul was him throwing a wobbly during the tax summit at Yarralumla and it was a gold medal wobbly. I mean, this was a fantastic performance, and I often wonder where the anger comes from. It'Is not j ust you, it'Is your faction. The New South Wales right, which you correctly say is the most effective faction in political history in Australia and probably the world, I think you said once, are such good haters. PAUL KEATING It's now 50 years old. PHILLIP ADAMS Where does the anger come from whence? PAUL KEATING It's indignation. I think if it I don't think it's anger so much as indignation. Because, you see, the New South Wales Labor Party, the right of the New South Wales Labor Pafty-id-Ehe -centre of the it's the point of equilibrium of Australian politics. It's not really over to t -he right of the Liberal Party, . and f-t's not over the left. The centre point is basically where we are. But the Labor Party in the fifties and sixties was attempted to be hijacked by people who saw it running command economies and policies of the left, which we always knew would deny us government and deny the public of Australia the things it ought to have, like it'Is had from this government. That is, the notion of a social democracy, which we've given Australia in the last ten years. PHI LLIP ADAMS No policy speech. PAUL KEATING I'm just saying, okay. Therefore, to be maligned, say, as a Tammany Hall group down at Sussex Street, makes one very indignant and somewhat angry. PHILLIP ADAMS So it's righteous indignation rather than anger. PAUL KEATING It's righteous. PHILLIP ADAMS This comes back to the Catholicism. 54: 45: 24 PAUL KEATING It'Is righteous indignation because, you see, the motivations are all very high-grade motivations, I think, and therefore they're not all, no one can say all the time they're high-grade but the general motivations are a very high grade, as a group, and therefore, being rebuked or put down or worse, mocked for something is, one gets very, very peeved about. The other thing is, I get very indignant about the rights of other people. I mean, what's made me run in social policy, you sea, what makes me indignant about the Liberals, is that they are straighteners, they di' t sed-the good-i-n-pople. There' s not enlargement, they're straighteners and punishers, they always want to straighten someone up. What's wrong? People are paid too much, knock their wages of f. They really, we can fix the place up by punishing them with a set of arrangements whether in health or tax, or whatever it might be. There's no bigness and generosity in them. PHILLIP ADAMS Let's talk about bigness, for a second. It seems to me that your predecessor was very much poll-driven. If there wasn't a good support happening in the polls, he wouldn't shift. In fact, I remember having a discussion with him at SBS, saying why didn't you look at the nonsense of drug policy, for instance, one of the calamities of the century, which doesn ' t work, you can'It do that, the public aren't ready. Now I would have thought greatness in politics, or even potential greatness, means you don't wait for that. How will you know if you're a great prime minister, how will you know when that happens? PAUL KEATING I'm not here to be a great prime minister. I mean, I'm here to get the policy changes through, to make the place a kind of social democracy I think it ought to be, to give it a real place if the-zld7fc,_ new basis to our wealth, a new basis to employment, a nice social policy wrapped around it, a place which is complete, inclusive, kind, and gentle. A nice place. PHILLIP ADAMS it's a big ask, isn't it? PAUL KEATING No, but we're getting there. PHILLIP ADAMS It's a big ambit claim. PAUL KEATING But we're a long way down the road, aren't we? We are a long, long, long way down that road. Now, that's what I'm about and when I go, someone will write an assessment of me and other Nuut 11/ 02 ' 94 18: 35 people but in the end, once you'Ive been on the stage and you go, so what? I mean, all these characters are out there, I mean, everyone's written a book. I don't know whether Malcolm Fraser has written a book, Gough wrote a book, Bob's now writing a book, Menzies wrote a book... 57: 13: 00 PHILLIP ADAMS Crook book. PAUL KEATING These books, they all end up being self-serving, and they're invariably not worth writing, I think. But the point is, it's not to say that they don't have truths to them or they're not of value from an historical perspective but, in a sense, why bother? If you're any good, someone else will write a book about you. But even if they don't like you, so what? It's all about one's inner satisfaction. You've got to say to yourself, did I do as well as I could do while I was there? Did I make every post a winner? PHILLIP ADAMS That's a good answer. PAUL KEATING Did I make every post a winner? MARY KOSTAXIDIS How long do you see yourself being there? PAUL KEATING Not an inordinate length of time. Not an inordinate length of time. I don't... PHILLIP ADAMS Peter Pan's looking a bit frayed around the edges now. PAUL KEATING That's right. You see, the Labor Party is in an unusual historical, in historical terms, in an unusual position. We're now in office for 11 years going to 13. Now, in the next election it will be 13 going to 16. The days when the lif e-cycle of a government was the life-cycle of one leader is, I think, for the country, over and for the Labor Party it ought to be over too. This is one of the points I used to make to Bob, and the point I used to make to others. Part of it's ego, oh, look, they couldn't-do without me. You know, up we came and down we went and that was it. You can see it with Menzies. The life-cycle of the Menzies government was really Menzies, because everyone who followed him after it Holt, McMahon, Gorton the government just disintegrated and finally expired. It only 11&amp; 8 1' 4 10623 4318 1506-_ jiAMZT~ jL15iSID ULU 11/ 02 ' 94 16: 36 1&amp; 6i 02 438 1590SBTEVSINiuñ really had life-force with him. The trick is to have a life-force in it with constant changes. In the leadership, in the ministries, in the personnel, to get that rejuvenation in office. And the way to kill off the rejuvenation is to sit in a pool of Araldite, stuck to the seat. 59: 07: 00 PHILLIP ADAMS Okay, when it'Is over, you'Ive then got to f ill in the rest of your life. Fifty is not that old these days. PAUL KEATING I'm not quite going at 50 either. I've got a few years yet. PHILLIP ADAMS* But you know there's nothing sadder than an ex-national leader. Generally, we don't know what to do with them, do we? PAUL KEATING They are a reasonably I wouldn't say yes, they are a reasonably sad lot, I suppose. PHILLIP ADAMS Tragic, most of them. What are you going to do for the next years? PAUL KEATING I don't want to be one of them. If the Commonwealth can leave me off the invitation lists and forget about me. PHILLIP ADAMS We'll fix it up with the protocol office, it's easy. PAUL KEATING I would be delighted, you see. So one can just fade away to being a person who is allowed to do normal things again. That's what I'd like to do, and all the things I like. I love I've got my wife and family, which are my principal interest in life, and all the other things I like. I like music, I like supporting people in music, I like supporting people in the arts, I like architecture, decoration, all the things I'm into. You know all the things I'm into, you're into them yourself. And you can go about people say what are you going to do after public life? And I say, because they expect you to line up : for thisfcharity or that charity, and I say, well what I'm going to do is indulge my senses, that' s what I'm going to do. They say what do you mean by that and I say, exactly what I've said. That's what I'm going to do. 11/ 12 1i6: 3b -U1~ UZ 445 IZUU Q~ ñ ZLXVLaUvi1 00: 26: 06 PHILLIP ADAMS It sounds a bit voluptuous, doesn't it? PAUL KEATING It is, but basically, I've been run by my eyes and ears, and I'm going to let my eyes and my ears run me when I got out of here. When I slip the noose on the game, to put it in western suburbs parlance, I will then be run by my eyes and my ears. MARY ROSTARIDIS When do you hope that that will be? PAUL KEATING It'll be, there'll be some natural point. There's a naturalness about public life, there's a natural order to things, it's very hard to beat it, very hard to beet it. PHILLIP ADAMS You mean you'Ire not going to cling to the cabinet table with f ingernails in the varnish. We won'It have to drag you out of the Lodge. PAUL KEATING No, there'Ill never have to be group come round and say, we think you have to before they come I'll be long gone. MARY KOSTAXIDIS You talked about the importance of f amily and Anita, a moment ago, you pursued her for a ~ bil fyears, what was it that attracted you to her? PAUL KEATING Just the sense of the likeness of the personalities, I think, not that we are exactly, no two people are exactly alike, but the commonality of interests and personality and that indefinable thing, that you know when you'Ive met the person you want to marry. You know, I always say to my younger friends, on my staff, look, never roll into a marriage. You know, you've lived with somebody, and you think oh, god, I'd better get married. I say, if that's what you think, forget it, unless you get that big hit in the chest, the big thud, don't bother. MARY KOSTAKIDIS How did you convince a woman who's cosmopolitan and a jet-setter to give it all away... PHILLIP ADAMS And shack up with a bloke from the western suburbs. 4w AS 11/ 02 ' 94 16: 37 02: 13: 00 MARY KOSTAXIDIS Downtown Hankstown Australia. PAUL KEATING She was living in Rome, so it was a big shift from Rome to Bankstown, it was quite a cultural change. PHILLIP ADAMS Well, at least you were Catholic, it wasnl't that far of a shift from Rome. PAUL KEATING Oh no, that was a great sacrifice on her part and I hope I could only recompense that by giving her a happy life, and we've got four children which we're both very happy with and proud of and one of the things that pleases me now is that in this position Anita's got much more freedom to do things herself. And to indulge some of her ' own interests, which she really wasn't able to do while I was Treasurer. When I was Treasurer, we spent nine years in three rented houses in Canberra, and she looked after a young family alone, basically alone. MARY KOSTAKIDIS When you became Treasurer, you moved your family down to Canberra, and there was a lot of you copped a lot of f lack over that, didn't you? PAUL KEATING Yes, but it was worth it. It was worth it. My last daughter was born there, my second youngest was one when we went there and Patrick my son was seven. So I had three children, seven, three and one and that was the right time to go there. PHILLIP ADAMS It's the International Year of the Family, which is having a big run at the moment, and around the world, conservative parties have appropriated the notion of the family, along with the flag, now Clinton is making a grab for both. You've got pretty good credentials in the family area, but the Labor Party has almost been embarrassed by the word in recent years. PAUL KEATING I don't think so, Phillip, I don't think that's right actually. If you look at the a lot of the income support and the things we've done have been about supporting families, children in families, the family allowance supplement which is probably one of the best income support systems in the world, has been about supporting families, even the child support agency which an outfit for chasing maintenance dodgers. 11/ 4Z1 160: 72 433 IDBU ZU L= VloluiN tww UU . L.) 11/ 02 ' 94 16: 37 04: 24: 07 PHILLIP ADAMS I can see that, but you know there's been an intellectual embarrassment with the notion of the nuclear family for instance and the notion of families being redefined, constantly, the goal posts are being shifted, as society changes. PAUL KEATING Earlier on, the Labor Party was in that debate, you know, the nuclear family is no longer just the family and there's the one, there's the sole parent family and all of that. That's all past, I think. My view is the family is the basic unit of society, it's where the love is, it's where the nurturing is, it's where the binding is, and whether it's a sole parent or it's a nuclear family, or a two-income family is beside the point. It is beside the point. And the other thing, I think, in families, we've got to get to the stage where parents continue to care about their kids. I think, probably, in the last 20 years, we ' ye got to the stage where there's less caring by parents for the kids. That's not to say they don't dress them or feed them, I don't mean that kind of caring, but the values they have, the principles they have, the things they see, the things they are permitted to go to, the functions, the venues, the associations, I mean there's a lot of flick the kids off and let them do their own thing. PHILLIP ADAMS That's one of the reasons you intervened in the issue of television violence, isn't it? That didn ' t come out of an upsurge ~ fp-arW -attitudes or party policy, you just did that. You and the Pope. PAUL KEATING I think it's a terrible affront to children or families, a family with their kids, to turn on the television and be hit by a stack of violence, which you don't see in your normal life. I mean, I'Ive never seen anybody shot in the street in my life. You probably haven't Phillip and I doubt if Mary has. Yet you see it all the time on television. There's this sort of, if you like, dulling of the sensitivities about human values which I think is being Imparted to us from this culture of violence which has come out of movies and television. If someone in my position doesn't say we've had enough of this and we're not having any more of it, at these hours anyway, then who does? Are we going to wait for a welling up? We'Ire seeing some of that in the United States now, the violent pictures are not making the money, and now the producers are starting to go back to the sof ter stories. Maybe there is a natural cycle in all these things. But, at any rate, I took the view then that if adults want to watch the stuff, then okay, it's available a bit later but not during the hours when the kids are up. Now, that does spring from my view about children having the right to be young. Children having the right to be innocent. PHILLIP ADAMS Spike Milligan talks about us destroying the notion of childhood 11V/ 06 1'~ 94 0182: 438 1590 bb IP-zvñ ibUNiIiui4M Ui4 LU: Z5 WU1 115 gas 153 iWuN and he's pretty right, isn't he? 07: 16: 00 PAUL KEATING It's pretty right. I mean, we've kept our kids young. They are all young for their age. Some may say that'Is not much of an objective, but they've lived lives which have always at least reached out to the boundaries of what we've all known childhood to be. Now, as they grow up and get a bit smart, they might be a bit street smart later than their friends, but so what?, I mean, they'll end up, I think, more balanced and take with them, you see, I think you do take through life that which is invested in you in your family, all that nurturing and binding does stick with you, it gives you conf idence, so that when you'Ire up against the hard things in life later, it sticks to you. Now, I think that if they leave with that sort of sense of affection which is invested in them, the confidence, the binding, they leave more complete. It may be an old-fashioned view but it's certainly my view. PHILLIP ADAMS It's coming back into fashion again. MARY KOSTAKIDIS One of the things I f ind surprising is that polls seem to say that you're not that popular with women voters and yet, I think the one thing that is important to women voters is integrity and as we're speaking of the family, I mean, unlike many of your contemporaries, you haven't done things like chuck in your job or trade in your wife for a new model. I mean, what's been the key to the rock-solid marriage? PAUL KEATING I think that's I mean, I don't want to overuse the word, but the word love, that's basically the key. I think that if one is not getting, emitting those images of affection and love, then I don't think you can... MARY KOSTPAKIDIS Are you an affectionate man? PAUL KEATING Oh, yes, I'Im a romantic, you can'It be a Mahierite and not be a romantic, I mean, I'm an absolute romantic. PHILLIP ADAMS Can I change the agenda a bit? You and I share a passion for nationalism, in its healthiest manifestations, short of jingoism and xenophobia, but I have a feeling that we're rather old fashioned in this, that the notion of nationalism isn't going to last much longer in the world, in a funny sort of way, because of the winds of globalism, the all-at-onceness of the global b0b MLLVIOLUA 14/ UZ UJ4 1654 * U'U1 UZ 4J8-J-9-u 5U iBLrl~. l~ Uineconomy, media and so on. But Australia, surely, has a chance to be a new sort of nation, a nation without pomposity, a very complicated nation in terms of its ethnic diversity. 09: 56: 00 PAUL KEATING That's right, and therefore strong. PHILLIP ADAMS But people can't see that, can they? They tend to think that a nation of complexity is fragile. PAUL KEATING I can't see how they can't see it. It's quite true, as you say, a lot of people can't see it but it's difficult to see how they can't. And I think it's also true, as you say, Phillip, there is an internationalism coming from the global village and the media and mobility, and the 747 and everything else, there is an internationalism. PHILLIP ADAMS And Gates' information highway... PAUL KEATING Superhighway and all the rest of it, there is an internationalism and be an internationalist by all means but be one from the strength of knowing what your own national position is, what your own national family means. Engage the world the world, again, from the strength of your own family. The problem we've had in this debate in Australia about these things is people have seen our family as being the family of a country it's not international... PHILLIP ADAMS The Windsor knot. PAUL KEATING The Windsor knot. It's not internationalism of the kind where one confidently goes out into the world but it's been a derivative, a derivative kind which has said that Australia has not the confidence to go and do things itself and it can't represent itself, it's not totally confident about its own management. MARY KOSTAKIDIS should we not be as worried about the American influence as we are about the Windsor knot? PAUL KEATING I think you've got to be very worried about the American stands... 11: 46: 00 PHILLIP ADAMS And energy. PAUL KEATING And energy. And it stands there, as it did in the GATT, and has a go. But that doesn't mean to say you throw your film industry over into the hands of Jack Valenti, or somebody like that. It doesn't mean to say that Australians are not entitled to their own cultural property, their own cultural diversity, therefore we said and the French said the same thing. So, I think you have to be worried about those areas. This place is not America and it's not going to be like America and I don't want it to be like America. This is a better place than America, a much better place than America. It's a fairer place, a more decent place and it doesn't have the extremes of wealth, it's more tolerant and it needs to be what it is, it needs to be Australia. That's the point Phillip makes continually, and the point I make as well, and you've made, Mary, and your service on the committee on the republic just gives evidence to that. In other words, we're all about the notion of the place having its own intrinsic value. PHILLIP ADAMS Even though that changes, it's fluid, isn't it. PAUL KEATING It's fluid but the strength is in the fluidity, the strength is in the it-may be plastic in the mobile sense but the plasticity gives it strength. PHILLIP ADAMS As opposed to the rigid, which snaps. PAUL KEATING Snaps, that's right. It's got malleability, it's malleable. MARY KOSTAKIDIS We're running out of time. Phillip, one more question? PHILLIP ADAMS I haven't got any more questions. MARY KOSTAKIDIS I'd like to turn it back to turning 50 now... PHILLIP ADAMS Happy birthday... L11UZ V4 16: 4U 13: 1g: 14 MARY KOSTAKIDIS and ask you of what life has dealt you and what you, perhaps have dealt to others, is there anything you regret? PAUL KEATING No, no, I think I'Ive been very lucky. I could never complain about the hand dealt to me and I've tried to give back as much as I'Ive got out of it, I mean, I think Australia today is, in the true sense of the word, a much more modern, modern in a contemporary sense, inclusive society, than it was ten years ago. It's much more confident in its position. Eighteen months ago, if you said look, we'Ire part of Asia, you'Id get a fight f rom many people here. You don't get it today. Just in eighteen months, that's changed. You know, or a couple of years, that's changed. PHILLIP ADAMS And Mabo was reasonably painless finally, wasn't it, despite all the noise and the sound and the fury. PHILLIP ADAMS That's right but Mabo, again, that's something that had to be done but I think-th atwhat I've had, I've had the opportunity of having a go at changing an economy and a society, and that's a very great opportunity to be given and I just hope at the end of it people think that I never missed an opportunity, that I never threw the fight anywhere. You mentioned the word integrity earlier. That goes very much to this, I think. That you don't throw the fights, in the cabinet room, in the nation, in the country, in the public debate, that you don't squib them. In other words, you see a problem and you go and try and get it resolved. Now, I have certainly done that in the ten years that I've been in ministerial office, and to have the opportunity of doing that I regard as a very great opportunity and to have it with, as I'Ive had, a good family and a happy life, what else could you ask? Neville Wran used to say to me, " I tell you, Champ," he said, " if you have a warm bed and three square meals a day, you're going pretty well." And that's pretty right. You see all these people who've got properties and everything else, but you can only sleep in one bed at a time and have one meal at a time, so if one's looking for the valuable things in life, rather than the material things, I think, then you can'It be ' too far wrong, and I hope I've looked for those things and it's made me very happy. MARY KOSTAKIDIS All right, thank you very much Prime Minister. 16: 28: 20 IL/ UZ UZ 4384 IbV 1hbibliguullab



-mix
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MY
DOORSTOP, NT MUSEUM ABORIGINAL ART GALLERY
DARWIN, 12 FEBRUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J. This morning's papers, the story on the new evidence about the East Timor
massacre, have you got a comment on that? It seems to be more savage than we
thought.
PM: Well this was a very murky period and I don't think any of us profess to know the
full details. There were still people missing, unaccounted for. But nor can we rely
upon the reports that we have. I am afraid Mr Pilger's credibility is always under a
cloud as his views about Cambodia last year revealed very starkly. At any rate, our
Ambassador has got a routine visit with the Indonesian Foreign Minister in the next
day or so, so we will be putting some questions to the Indonesian Government and
no doubt we will get a response.
J: The Chief Minister of the Northern Territory has described as blackmail your view
that should there be a challenge to the Mabo Act,-no money will be forthcoming for
the setting up of the administration in the Territory. What's your view?
PM: Well, the Commonwealth has made a very generous offer. I mean, we have these
niggly remarks sometimes by other people, but we are paying half the legal costs of
managing, half the managerial costs of this claims process, and hearing process, and
we are picking up 75 per cent of the compensation costs right back to 1975. Now,
you have got to say, well, what else would they require of us? You know, to pick
up 100 per cent of everything? I mean, it is after all these Governments who issued
the leases, not the Commonwealth. So, it is very generous on our part. At any
rate can I say that these issues will be worked out over time and we will be trying
to make the whole system work as effectively as we can.
J: But it is a big ask to ask State Governments to surrender their fight to challenge
Commonwealth legislation. So the land rights Act here was in th-e-Courts for years
from both sides sorti-n-git out to a workable piece of legislation.
PM: We can't ask anyone to surrender their rights to challenge anything we do in the
courts. And we are not asking them. But nor can they suggest that the
Commonwealth Parliament hasn't a ight to legislate of course we have. 
J: So, that last line in your letter from last Friday, I think, is not a suggestion to the
States that they won't see any money if they're non-cooperative in challenging the
Act through the Courts will be seen as being non-cooperative?
PM: If they are not adopters of the scheme of arrangement in the Bill, they will be a
non-cooperating State and Territory and they will carry the costs themselves.
Now, that's what we are making clear to them. The Commonwealth Parliament's
legislated a State or a Territory has the right to go it alone, but then they will not
have the financial support we have just spoken of.
J: Will there be a consent provision in the social justice package attached to the
Native Title issue?
PM: What do you mean?
J: Veto. Certainly the Aboriginal groups are pushing for missed the veto..
( inaudible)... Native Title legislation.
PM: Native Title legislation has no veto arrangements, and there are two things which
the Aboriginal community sought, but which we were not able to give them. That's
the ownership of minerals and a veto right. What we have got is, I think, usefual,
workable, consultative negotiation processes and an arbitration process in the
Native Title Bill. It is a very good piece of legislation. And that's why, frankly, all
the States should support it, and that includes the Northern Territory and that
includes Western Australia.
J: But the Northern Land Council and others are hoping for a veto under the social
justice package, are you completely ruling that out?
PM: There will be no vetos. There are not going to be vetos.
J: Is there any danger that this afternoon's football game, which you have primarily
come up for, is a black against white game, not black against black and white?
PM: No, I don't think so. I think it is a good thing to celebrate the contribution of
Aboriginal sports people to this country. And in the great code of Australian rules
there has been a tremendous contribution by Aboriginal Australians. Now, nobody
says when they get the State of Origin side together to battle it out with NSW...
and in some way there is a sort of, what shall we call it, some sort of regional
Queensland thing... any more than I think it is appropriate to say that if the All
Stars come together as a team drawn from all over Australia to play Australian
rules against one of the great sporting clubs of this country, Collingwood, that it is
in any way other than what it seems. That is, basically, a celebration of the fact
that just like the members of the State of Origin play all over the rugby league code
in this country, so too will the All Stars play all over the code of Australian Rules.
So, you know, I think that stuff is basically narks.
J: So, who is going to win?
PM: I think everyone is going to win, I said this yesterday, I think everyone is going to
win. Because it is a good thing to be doing. It will be pretty hard to get a draw 
out of all this, so someone will probably win the game. But everyone will win from
having had it.
J: Territory Labor has been in the political wilderness longer than the Federal
Opposition, what advice would you give your colleagues on
PM: To keep on doing what they are doing. I think they are about to come out of the
wilderness in a big way. I am very confident that we will see the defeat of this tired
administration here in the Northern Territory. Tired, without ideas, not up to the
great fuiture which I think the Territory has. And I think the team which Brian Ede
leads has every opportunity now of becoming the Government of the Northern
Territory at the next election.
J: You have probably heard that journalists in the top end are pretty fair game for the
pollies up here, any thoughts on Territory politics?
PM: On Territory politics?
J: The style.
PM: On the style. I think politics is much the same the country over. But just as after
years a Labor Government came to Canberra and renewed and reinvigorated
this country, rebased its wealth, I think the opportunity of the Northern Territory
now as it is close, one of the great gateways, the nearest gateway to Asia, growing
as it is in these great tourism and mining industries and agricultural industries it
requires a Government better than it has. And I think the Labor Party can provide
that Government.
Ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, M P
DOORSTOP, BAN KSTOWN AIRPORT, SYDNEY
FEBRUARY 1994.
J: You must be terrified this morning, with the news that 17 percent of
Labor voters are prepared to vote Liberal under Bronw yn Bishop's
leadership?
PIM: Yes, well, don't believe any of those rinky-dink, one thousand, polls on
the telephone they're just not worth reading. The fact is. the Liberal
Party's in a state of chaos, I think. And, as Four Corners reported last
night, when people are coming out attacking the leader saying they
can't win with him, with Senator Bishop prowling around displaying
herself politically to the rest of the Liberal Party and the country then I
think the Liberal Party has got deep problems. The problem for the
Liberal Party is it doesn't know what it is there for. It's got no policy
framework, they don't know where the society and the country is and
they can't relate to it. That's why they're in the trouble they're in. It isn't
because they have somebody who parts their hair the wrong way, it's
not to do with appearances or political appeal they don't know why
they exist. They've lost the policy threads in this country and they can't
relate any more to Australian society and the Australian community.
J: There would also appear to be a lack of discipline, too?
PM: Well, that comes whenever you get the policy paralysis and the
breakdown and that's what they've got. The Labor Party had the same
thing in the 1950s and 1960s.. They've got it now. They don't
understand the changes in Australia, they are not part of them and it's
because of that that they have the dissension they are having. It's not
about personalities, it's the fact that they don't have any policy
cohesion.
J: How seriously do you take a Bishop-Costello Coalition? 
TEL: I. eo. I4, J No. U1 t. UD Q-
2
PM: Well, I think while ever the Liberal Party doesn't know what it's about,
while ever it fals to relate to the community and understand the
changes taking place in Australia, it doesn't matter who they propose to
lead them, they'll be in trouble.
J: Mr Keating, on another matter, do you anticipate any flow through
effects from the worsening trade war between Japan and the US?
PMV: Well, this has been on now for years, this balance of payments problem
between the US and Japan, and no doubt in the working out of this the
US and Japan have got to find accommodations. And they will over
time.
J0 Do you think it will have an effect on Australia?
PM: Japan Is In a recession and that's already having an effect on us. And,
obviously, the more that we can spread economic growth, the more the
GATT round can open up opportunities for growth, the better off we'll all
be Including Japan and the United States.
J: In the past, Australia has taken the position, your government has taken
the position that in a war between Japan and America you would be
Inclined to take Japan's side. Is that still your position?
PMV: No, it was never our position. What we're saying is we won't enter into
bilateral arrangements which are detrimental to Japan. That's a
completely different thing to saying we're taking one side against the
United States. It's for the US and Japan to work that out, we've helped
create a new institution to work it out, within, and that is APEC. APEC
gives the United States and Japan a chance to work it out within an
umbrella organisation, to look at their policy and trade differences. But,
they'll always do it bilaterally as well as in any other framework. There's
a lot of serious thought about this relationship and in terms of their
current-account it's had a problem for years which stems from an
underlying savings imbalance between the two countries. Now, it's
going to take time -to work. this. out. but. it's, working. itself o4t in a sense,
now as the United States is enjoying very rapid growth of exports into
north and south Asia so that the dependency of Japan on the United
States, as a market, Is diminishing and like most problems they tend
naturally to work themselves out.
J: What's your reading of the American position though, do you think the
timing of all this is to take advantage of the political vacuum and crises
that exist In Tokyo at the moment?
PM: No, I don't think so. I think this is just, I think Prime Minister Hosokawa
and his government have had a good relationship with the Clinton
administration. I think this is just a reflection of fundamental underlying
differences, 



I L L
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME ZIINISTERO THE HOW* P 3 KEATING MP, TO
TzZ LAUNCH OF THlE VICTOR CHANG CARDIAC RESEARCH INST ITUTZ
SYDNE~ Y, FEBRUARY 15, 1994
When senator Richardson suggested that I come along to the
launch of the victor Chang Cardiac Research institute, I
accepted without much resistance.
The Institute promises to do two things which are of
irresistible appeal.
First, it honours Victor Chang a great Australian, a great
surgeon and a great humanitarian.
Second, it provides for research into a form of disease
suffere4 by 130,000 Australians and which kills as many as
200 people every week.
In fact, I suspect most people My age live in a certain
degree of fear of heart disease, most of us have had friends
who have suffered froam-if or di-ed from it.
Perhaps I should add a third reason why I was keen to say a
few words here today and that is th~ at the Institute will
be attached to St Vincents which has an unsurpassed
reputation based in equal proportions on its excellence in
health care and medical research, and its core values of
compassion, human dignity and social justice.
St Vincents is a hospital with a philosophy and that is
something all great institutions need.
And no hospital could have a better philosophy tnan that
provided by the Sisters of Charity.
The Sisters of Charity bring to St Vincents a compassionate
web, a family culture which, far from being at odds with
modern management principles and strategies, strengthens
them puts humanity into the technocratic void, if you
like. The great thing about St Vincents and the great thing
about this new Victor Chang Cardiac Research institute is
that the nighest standards of medical excellence, and the
most advanced techniques and technology, are delivered to
all Australians regardless of their social and financial
clrcun~ tances. i D r c U L, 4 i i 10 u 
TEL 2
And f or this we have the mission of the Sisters of Charity
to thank.
It goes to show that a$ health care goes through rapid
changes because of advances in medical science arnd
technology, the importance of traditional values is
undiminished though it may be these days even more
essential to assert them.
This new Institute will have, as I understand it, three main
goals. First, to improve the lives and life expectancy of all
Australians. Second, to save millions of dollars each year in health
costs. And third, to make internationally recognised contributions
to our understanding of heart muscle disease.
It has been fashionable in recent years for all modern
corporations and institutions to have what Is called a
Mission Statement a document worked up in the company
defining common goals and corporate philosophies.
You couldn't have a better Mission Statement for a hospital
than the Mission of the Sisters of Charity.
And I daresay you couldn't have a better name to call
yourself by then Victor Chang.
I met Dr Chang but did rnot know him well, but I know people
who did and I read the testimonials after his tragic and
outrageous death, and I have heard people talking today.
There is no doubting his extraordinary quialities.
It has, perhaps, not been adequately acknowledged that among
his great contributions to Australia was the work he did in
fostering cooperation between Australian medicine and
medical research and medicine in the countries of South-East
Asia. I hope his work as an ambassador for Australia Is not
forgotten, and that advances made at this Institute which
bears his name will flow on to those countries In Asia in
which he took such an interest.
He was, as I said, a great man, an marvellous surgeon and,
perhaps most of all, a man with a genuine personal concern
and understanding for his patients.
it was Victor Chang's great dreasm to see here at St V1. nrents
H~ ealth Care Campus a team of world class researchers
pursuing the unique challenges of heart disease. iS FeD ' J4 iZ 6 iAO UU,: Uzi 
I C L 3
With tbe creation of this Research Institute, Viotor Chang's
dream can be realised.
So, it remains for me to say just two things:
First, i urge all AUstralians to give all they can to
this appeal, for in so doing It they will be not only
helping to carry on the work and the memory of victor
Chang, helping themselves and their fellow Australians.
And second, I congratulate and sincerely thank all those
who have given to the cause already both those who
have given money and those who have given their time
and their skill and effort.
I declare this Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute
officially launched.
SYDNEY February 1994 I r C ,1 1 * 4U ,. lQ r, V 



i LD.: i u, iaJi. uu( Q r
-A vy/ 0
PRIME MINISTER109
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE POLITICAL CYNICISM OF MR COURT
Last year, the. Federal Parliament passed the historic
_ Native Title Act. The legislation is sound, workable, and
balanced., it provides justice f or indigenous Australians following
the High Court Mabo decision. it provides certainty for
Investors and land managers, and protection for existing
title holders.
it provides a national system, dealing in a fair and
reasonable way with a national issue.
The action of Richard Court in challenging this national
legislation has all the hallmarks of political high
cynicism and parochial mischief. He is apparently still
putting what he thinks are his political advantages and
" States' rights" interests ahead of the national
interest, when western Australians enjoy the benefits of
Commonwealth legislation as Australians.
As Premier of Western Australia, Mr Court has a
responsibility to participate in a national syctom to
deal with this national issue in a manner that is
sensible and just. That is what the Commonwealth
legislation does.
The Commonwealth Government is currently holding
constructive discussions with other States in regard to
cost-sharing and implementation of the national system to
identify and grant native title rights. The way remains
open for M4r Court to change his attitude and participate
in these discussions.
CANBERRA FEBRUARY 17, 1994 



i I C . VZ 4 ii IlU . v r,
PRIME MINISTER 9/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO TIAILAND, LAOS AND VIETNAM
As a further step in consolidating Australia's links with important regional partners, I
will be making an official visit to Thailand, Laos and Vietnam from 5 to 13 April 1994.
I will in each case have the opportunity to discuss with my counterparts our shared
bilateral interests as well as a wide range of regional economic, political and strategic
issues. I will also be attending the official opening of the Australian-funded Friendship Bridge
over the Mekong River between Thailand and Laos on 8 April. The bridge provides
the first ever road link between those two countries.
My visit to Thailand will provide an opportunity to follow up the discussions I had in
Seattle last year with Prime Minister Chuan Lckpai.
Australia has a strong relationship with Thailand. Our two-way trade in 1992-93
amounted to nearly $ 2 billion. Thailand's rapid growth presents considerable scope to
expand our economic links, for example, through Australian involvement in
infrastructure projects and provision of services for Thailand's increasingly
sophisticated economy. We have worked closely with the Thai Government in the
development of APEC, We also have valuable defence and security links with
Thailand. My visit to Laos reciprocates the visit by Prime Minister Khamtay to Australia in
December last year. Australia has much to offer Laos as a supplier of technology,
expertise and in development of major infrastructure. Transfield's successful bid for
the billion dollar Nam Theun 2 hydro-power project is a good example of the
contribution we can make.
Prime Minister Kiet's visit to Australia in May 1993 ushered in a new phase in the
bilateral relationship with Vietfnam. Our bilateral trade has grown rapidly over the past
two years and I expect that growth to continue as Vietnam opens up its economy.
Australia has already invested heavily in Vietnam's development, including through
BHP's participation in the Dai Hung ( Big Bear) oilfield project.
During my visit I will be discussing with Prime Minister Kiet ways in which our two
countries can further consolidate our economic and other links. Australia needs to
draw on the very constructive role that the Australian Vietnamese community can play
hi fostering these links.
CANBERRA FEBRUARY 17, 1994 I L L 



4 74
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DISCUSSION WITH PANEL PHILLIP ADAMS, FRANK BRENNAN AND
CHERYL SAUNDERS, ANU, CANBERRA, TUESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
You have just heard from the Peter Pan of Australian politics who while he
advocates change, changes very little -himself. ' Now, as you know Prime
Ministers' appearances are subjected to rapid aging. I mean Hawke aged a
decade every year, and I think the same thing was true of Fraser.
I am going to remind the Prime Minister of a brief exchange we had 20 years
ago, when he was, I think, the youngest Minister in the Whitlam Government.
I asked him is he was aware that he bore an eerie resemblance to an actor
called Anthony Valentine, who played a really sleazy sinister character in
Callan. Not only was he aware of it, they turned out to both be aware of it
because the two of them had bumped into each other at Foils Bookshop, in
London, and gazed at each other in mutual disbelief.
I have great news for you Prime Minster, he hasn't worn well, I saw him the
other night in a new series called Body and Soul, he now looks like
something the cat dragged in after mastication in the garden, and I think the
press should address not the Gould Prints in the Cabinet Office, but the
Dorian Gray portrait in the Lodge garage.
Now, we are now going to mark the Prime Minister's home work and I am
joined by Professor Cheryl Saunders. Cheryl holds a personal chair in the
faculty of Law at the University of Melbourne, she is Deputy Dean of the
Faculty with special interests in constitutional law, administrative law and
comparative constitutional systems. She doubles as Director for the Centre
for Comparative Constitutional Studies; a specialist centre of the faculty of
law.
Also sitting here with us, I don't know what the Pope thinks of him, but he is
my favourite Jesuit, Father Frank Brennan. For many years he was the
Aboriginal Affairs consultant to the Catholic Bishops of Australia, and legal
adviser to the Queensland Aboriginal Coordinating council. And he is a
member of the Council of the constitutional centenary foundation. 
If I can go to you first, Cheryl, given your great interest in institutional matters
would you like to address areas or sins of omission and commission in the
Prime Minister's extemporised chat?
CS: Well, I'm torn Phillip, starting with the little issues or starting with the
big ones so I'll start big and work down. Prime Minister, I spend a lot
of time these days wearing my Constitutional Centenary Foundation
hat talking to people about this constitutional decade that leads to the
centenary of the constitution in 2001 and passes all sorts of other
important milestones along the way and I say that this is a great
opportunity to engage the people of Australia's interest in their own
system of government, to identify issues that actually need change and
if we decide collectively in some way or another that change is
desirable to pursue those matters. I get a range of answers to that, but
having you here it is too good a temptation to miss not to ask you the
same question. How would you like us to use this constitutional
decade?
PM: I have always been one who has believed that with change one has to
whether it be constitutional change or any other change to
proselytise for it; make it popular, make it interesting; gather and
gamner support for it; but there has to be some lead, the leadership
group has to lead, has to step out and bring the community up with it to
be able to make the change stick. Otherwise one is simply moving out
on the limb and the limb breaks off. I mean, you have got to, if you
like, thicken it up, strengthen it so that it can support the weight of the
political change. Therefore, I don't believe that change just comes
from the ether. I suppose if there is any point of disagreement with you
about not with the question, but other things which you have said on
behalf of as you say the constitutional decade, there won't be a
constitutional decade unless a political system wants to embrace a
change-then, I-think, -you can garner support for change, proselytise for
it and move it to an action point. I think, you are in the proselytising
business and that is a good and fair business to be inrespect of the
constitution. But I think one has to set objectives and go after them. It
is a matter about change whether one is objective oriented or whether
one sees a change in the broad and wants to make the change in the
broad. I don't think you can make the change in the broad. I think you
can see the pattern of the change in the broad, but you have got to put
the pieces of the matrix in one after the other and build on them.
This is also true in constitutional change where one decides what is
possible to be done, what isare desirable and possible, get a
commitment to political action for that then bring up the community with
us. I think then we can really get some changes into place. But, I
think were we to rely upon simply seeding the communities mind with
the inadequacies of our current constitution and the benefits of change
will do no more than seed the community's mind about the constitution
and the need for change, but it won't get the change. 
3
CS: Yes, I understand that but the problem is in the past we've also
adopted the other method which is getting the little bits of the matrix
and putting them to the community and the community says no. This is
an attempt to try and find some other way around that impasse.
PM: I think with the constitution we'll always need the best we can get it, bipartisan
support in these things and the things you and I have had in a
common discussion in the public debate about the republic and these
sorts of issues are issues which of course, will always be stronger and
better with bi-partisan support. In my terms let me just put a partisan
hat on and say I'd be encouraged if, for instance, our opponents were
interested in that debate rather than resisting what is an inevitable
change in my view. Now, if the political system can move on a broad
front I have got no doubt that we can with the great changes already
passed in this last decade, encourage Australian people to make
changes. I think, if we go with piecemeal referenda which are basically
disputed by the parties at a poll, it is as you say, it will go nowhere.
So, it is a matter of understanding what is core and essential and
garnering support for it and moving ahead with it and Australians have
a great capacity for change and as I said at the beginning of my
remarks, perhaps one of the most fundamental and important of the
institutional changes has been the appetite for the change.
PA: How do you sense the appetite for change on the republican issue at
the moment?
PM: I think there is a tremendous appetite for change in the republican
issue. I think that is no longer appropriate for the head of Australia tobe
t~ ie Monarch of Great Britain. It is as simple as that.
PA: I think we know the arguments, I am just saying the polls at the..
PM: No, I know the arguments..
PA: the polls are vacillating aren't they?
PM: But, you are asking me about whether people have seen it. Well I'm
pointing at it. It is such an obvious thing to see, generally people see
obvious things.
EB: One of the issues that hasn't been raised thus far tonight of course has
been Mabo which surely is a major institutional change.
PA: It is, but I'd like to start by saying I think it is a very welcome thing,
Prime Minister, that we can have an extemporised address by a Prime
Minister on institutional change to the people and then we can have
two lawyers one able to proselytise and the other a cleric who are not 
of your stable, where we can sit down and have a discussion about
these things and I think it is about the people that it is most important
in terms of these institutions. So when it comes to something like
Mabo I think that we have to concede that yes, a political leader like
yourself took the ball and ran and that was essential in terms of the
recipe of getting it right, but what has been essential is not just
arrangements or deals between stake holders or politicians, but rather
the public coming with you and the public having to own, for example,
the principal of non-discrimination. That even though your political
opponents didn't support your legislation, all of our elected leaders
nationally after the debate said we insist on non-discrimination and so I
just take that as one example that maybe we need to do more as a
nation in involving the people sooner. For example, on the republic
one, if it is that self evident, rather than leaving the people to the end
and the politicians doing the timing, are we perhaps getting to the
stage as a nation where we need some sort of indicative plebiscite
which just says do you want a change of head of state or not? And if
we can get that out of the way and we then run with that then all of the
complexities and all the rest, we can have five years of flash
constitutional lawyers and all the other arguments, what do you think?
PM: I still think you have got to find a square peg for a square hole. That
is, it is like with Mabo. If I had said at the beginning of that debate:
" Look, the High Court has made a decision let's put a motion through
both houses of Parliament: are we in favour of a legislation to
empower Aboriginal Australians with a title to land vested under this
High Court decision?" It would, I think, probably have been defeated.
Therefore, I think if one has a square hole and one is starting with a
round peg you have got to get the peg squared up to drive it home.
Therefore, that requires all of the skilling, all of the technical dexterity,
all of the ambition, all of the horsepower, all the people muscle that
one can arrange at the particular time so the peg is just outside the
hole and you hit it in.
Now, this happened with Mabo and it can happen too with the republic.
It is like those who say let's have the full referendum now knowing that
the Coalition would oppose it, therefore truncating the public's chance
to really consider the issues and get them clearly in their mind. I want
the change and therefore I think it should come when we've developed
well enough in peoples' minds an understanding of what it is. Then, I
think, you have got the fertile ground to put a referenda of that kind,
but I think if we went early I don't really think we would advance it. It is
all again about spearheading change and pulling up the support
behind it and I don't really think there is any substitute for political
action and general community support, that is, concurrent community
support. 
P A: You seem to have got some support from Balmoral. Tell us you are
amongst friends here what you and the Queen discussed when you
sort of worked out what was obviously some sort of deal?
PM: Prince Charles made it very clear. He said he thought that we should
have a debate about this subject and he said who knows, those who
argue for it may be right. Well, I'm sure we think they are, but time will
tell. At any rate, it's a variation on the same theme. That is, how do
you get change? Have we got a community that wants change and
has the capacity to change? The answer is very much in the
affirmative in both counts and therefore it is a great thing. I mean, you
can turn on any talk-back program in this country and find a debate
about such things as non-discrim ination; a debate about the republic
and constitutional change; debate about the micro economy, microeconomic
reform you would never hear this in many other countries in
a general debate. We have a tremendous popular debate going and
therefore, I think, the thing for the political system to do is to recognise
that the community has a great capacity for change provided that it is
prepared properly.
FB: What about for every action there is an equal reaction. Do you reckon
the Mabo debate on open-line radio programs, one was aware of the
vast swelling of bigotry carefully flamed by many of the radio
presenters. Don't you also recognise..
PM: Don't mention names there.
FB: No names, I wouldn't mention Alan Jones if you paid me! But this
appetite for change is also surely shadowed by a repugnance for
change, a growing fear of change?
PM: I don't believe that, I really don't believe that. This Government put
itself at risk in 1987 and in 1990 and to some extent again in 1993 by
running policy changes in short parliaments, which governments in the
post-war years didn't do. And it was done on the simple nostrum that
good policies represent good politics and faith in the Australian
community's capacity to believe in something better. Now, that may
sound starry eyed there are three important election victories to
prove otherwise. I actually think anybody who believes that the public
has had too much change and they are afraid of it sells them short.
That is, not particularly to sell them short, but fails to understand, in
fact, how much they comprehend. This is a most conscientious
electorate, a most serious constituency and it is listening all the time
for value. This is what the pollsters never pick up, it is what the press
galleries never pick up. They ran on herd instinct, on basically what
they think a pollster can deliver, it always needs a politician to
decipher the code. I used to do this with Bob Hogg you'd pick up the
pollster's information, I'd read it and I'd just read completely different
things to him, completely different, completely different things to me. 
6
PA: Like a couple of Dead Sea scrolls' scholars.
PM: Exactly. So, yes, one looks at the colour of the paper and the
parchment and style and note the way the questions are put.
Therefore, I think one has to know that there is this great well of
listeners, people listening to bits of value and they hear it and they
register it, but it may not be in the static and the hubbub of public life
that sort of drifts through them. I think if one assumes that I do, that
this, if you like altruism and sense of greater good exists in the
Australian community, therefore one operates in the belief if you can
tap it, you prosper by it.
PA: Cheryl, if the states didn't exist they would need to be invented we
have learnt tonight. This I suspect you would view as not sufficiently
moving down the path of change, a bit to minimal for you.
CS: No, no, the minimalist stuff comes up with the republic Phillip. No, I
was wondering whether we should turn to the states and COAG and
leave some of these other matters behind and I was -very interested in
what you said about that Prime Minister. I am personally of the view
that we have wasted a lot of time as a nation in wondering about
whether we should have a federal system instead of making it work so
any efforts in that regard over this decade are, I think, very welcome.
But the real question still is how. I mean you set out your four
principles, but nevertheless that doesn't really get us there. We have
somehow managed to build up a very adversarial federal system, a
federal system that, I think, to a greater degree than any other federal
system in the world relies on the courts to police it rather than having
political will at both levels. How are we going to actually make COAG
work and the other institutions of inter governmental relations work?
PM: I certainly share the view and I have always, I think, that is, we are
better getting on making it work than seeking to abolish the states
because if you look at the areas I mean we are a most urban ised
country and if you look at the areas of greater Melbourne, Sydney,
Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth et cetera, one would find very large regional
areas to their hinterland. For a start, very large regional greater city
governments and given the fact that most of the populations of the
states are concentrated in these places the greater city government in
fact becomes the government of the provincial area or the state so
really you are into a discussion about what the boundaries of NSW
and Victoria ought to be in the hinterland. Now, it may be if you were
redrawing all this you would have northern NSW relating more to
Brisbane than to Sydney and in north Queensland there would be
another central authority there would be another rather than the
authority being in Brisbane. But that said largely in terms of the
change that would be about it, so therefore given the enormous
constitutional difficulties of trying to rescramble that one it's better to 
7
get on with it as you say and make it work. But, one of the things I said
tonight which is central to that is that whether the people who did at the
time understood what they were doing uniform taxation is the glue
that binds the whole thing together.
Now, much of the haggling and arguing of the last ten years, I can only
speak for my time with the states, has been about not really them
acquiring taxing powers, but guaranteed revenue shares from the
Commonwealth et cetera. Some would like now taxing powers. To
give them taxing powers, to give them income taxing powers would end
up with six different economies in this country and not one and when
given half a chance a couple of years ago they wanted actually to have
different rates of income tax in different states.
PA: Well, it worked with the railways didn't it?
PMV Yes, well the thing is that can't happen to us, but that said I believe the
states should be properly resourced and I think then we should sit
down and look at all the functional areas, but sit down as Heads of
Governments and Ministers and see whether what we are doing in
health or supported accommodation or in housing is are we getting
the biggest bang for the buck; are we able to deliver the Australian
community the best programs. I think, that sort of co-operation, we are
already seeing quite great strides. Let me just indicate a couple of
them. In the last few years the development of a national training
authority to do in education in the vocational area what the
Commonwealth has been able to do with the universities but, to do it
co-operatively with the states. A National Rail Corporation for a
national rail highway is another. We are now looking at a national,
certainly an east coast electricity grid. So there is a lot of progress
and one has to underline that progress and then go on to do more, but
it has got to be done on the basis of we're saying look, let's forget this
debate about states, let's make clear that they should be properly
resourced, let's have a central taxing authority and a central economy,
that's fine, let's look at these functional areas, but in the micro areas
where it now does matter about the turnaround times in ports, where it
does matter what the price of electricity is, where it does matter about
the competitive quality of the states, government business enterprises
be they in these areas or in rail these things need to be worked out
between the commonwealth and the states.
The commonwealth can't do this alone, the states can't do it alone.
PA: Frank Brennan, would you like to turn your finely honed Jesuit and
intellect onto micro economic reforms as an area of which you have
some criticism.
EB: I don't have to earn a living. But, I would like to turn it onto is looking
at something of the role of the Parliament as the elected 
8
representatives when you are speaking of these sorts of changes and
if I might draw one other from the Mabo discussion if COAG had gone
well and you pushed through Mabo there, I think the chances of
Aboriginal endorsement of it would have been very slight. Whereas it
was because you had a Senate, people like Michael Mansell could
come out and congratulate you on being flexible and saying this is the
sort of legislation we can run with. So, how do we go forward in terms
of insuring that our Parliamentary institutions are strong so that the
voice of the people can really participate in that debate rather than the
elected politicians simply delivering from the executive some sort of
sealed solution?
PM: Even had the COAG meeting endorsed the proposals that I had put,
that was never a Bill or a piece of legislation. Even if there had been
endorsement for that, by the time it had got into the form of a Bill we
would have had these debates and the government had moved well
before the COAG meeting to have most broad consultation with the
Aboriginal community, with the mining industry, with the agricultural
industry, pastoralists, we had already had a very large consultative
structure. I think one of the reasons so much change has been accommodated in
the last decade is the process of consultation. Consultation has
mattered with the workforce, with business, with the states and in this
case with the Aboriginal community. We have seen it in other things in
the forest debate with the forest industry, with the environment lobby et
cetera.
PA: But in terms of institutions, could I suggest that even with a reformed
Labor party, but for a High Court decision and but for a Senate you
didn't control, the Aborigines would not have got from a Labor
government what they got?
PM: That is not necessarily so. They might not have got a native title
springing from the common law which was emanating from the
common law which was then given if you like, turned into a propriety
title by the Parliament, but they may well have been given some kind of
statutory title that is, with a general land rights legislation except
remembering that general land rights legislation existed in every state
of Australia bar Western Australia. So, really, it was always going to
be about statutory land rights in Western Australia. We could have
also at the same time land funds could have acquired pastoral leases
as under the native title legislation. So you have had in a sense,
something of the same result, but maybe not on the broad front that we
got by virtue of the fact that terra nullius was overturned.
But doesn't that prove just another point. When a wrong is righted we
are all better off. 
9
PA: Prime Minister I think your homework has been marked quite nicely
tonight. You have got a koala bear stamp which is very rarely given
and I have the privilege of asking you the final question. What is the
single aspect of our character and our culture that we need to change
in your opinion? What do we really lack?
PM: What do we lack? I think we have mostly lacked adequate confidence
in ourselves to be able to represent ourselves or to relate to other
people and other nations as a fully developed culture. I think this is
what we have lacked most. This is changing fortunately, it has
changed, but we still have a way to change it. The fact that we can
have a debate about this question, the fact that there is still a debate
about the flag the flag of Australia with the flag of Great Britain in the
corner means that we are not past this hump and we have to be to be
a fully fledged confident nation.
PA: So it is the cultural maturation process?
PM: Yes.
PA: Simple as that.
PM: Yes.
PA: I would like to thank my guest tonight. I would like to thank Cheryl
Saunders and Frank Brennan and of course the Prime Minister.
ends 



I.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF MANNING CLARK CENTRE, ANU, CANBERRA
22 FEBRUARY 1994
I count it as a great honour to be asked to open this
Centre tonight I count the late Manning Clark as a
great Australian.
And I may as well say at the beginning, I have absolutely
no doubt that his work and reputation will long out live
his recent detractors.
Generosity will always triumph over meanness. Creativity
over negativity.
I used to pay Manning Clark an occasional visit in
Tasmania Circle on my way home from work.
I was by no means a close friend and on the face we had
not much in common.
Manning was a man of great formal learning. I left
school at
Manning went to Melbourne Grammar, Melbourne University
and Oxford.
I went to De La Salle, Bankstown, Belmore Technical
College, the Federated Municipal and Shire Council
Employees Union, and the Australian Labor Party.
I am a politician. Manning was an historian.
Perhaps for these reasons we talked less about Australian
politics than Australian possibilities, less about
Australia's history than Australia's future.
In fact we found that we had a gnnd dpa in common. 41303 
2
I know Manning has developed a reputation as a pessimist,
but I never found him to be that. It is true that he had
deep awareness of opportunities lost opportunities for
building a more just society. A kinder and more creative
society. A society with a more independent view, a more
mature identity.
He was disappointed by what he believed had been promise
squandered by faint hearts and narrow minds.
That did not mean he had no regard for what Australians
had achieved, or love for the character and traditions of
the place. His affection for Australia was huge it
defined him.
And he had enormous regard for Australian achievements.
Surely, no one left more evidence of that regard than he
did in his six volume history, his countless other books
and articles on Australian history and in his immense
contribution as a teacher of Australian history.
This Centre will not only bear his name, but I hope carry
on his work.
Among such distinguished academic company and people who
knew Manning Clark very well over a long period, it would
not be appropriate for me to even attempt an appreciation
of Manning's work.
I can only say that from what I know of it and what I
knew of him, I drew a lot of inspiration.
He wanted to believe in Australia and, through all the
doubts he had, he did believe.
And I confess that there have been times in the last two
years when I have wished that he was alive to see some of
the things which are happening in Australia now.
I mean in part the initiatives we have taken on issues
broadly related to our national identity.
I also mean the stand we have taken and the legislation
we passed in response to the High Court decision on
native title and I must say I wish he had been in
Darwin the weekend before last to see a well appreciated
multicultural football match between Collingwood and the
Aboriginal All Stars.
But I also believe Manning Clark would have appreciated
what I think is a new confidence and optimism, a new
sense among Australians of their capacity to carve out a
good society and a creative role in the world.
In other words, I think he would be excited by the signs
that in the 1990s we might be about to truly live up to
both our best traditions and our unique potential.
4604 
As I said, I'm not an historian not in the sense that
Manning Clark was and many of the people here are. But
I've been in the Labor Party for 35 years and in the
Labor Party we are &amp; Ul historians.
We know how important having a story is it's just about
the most important thing there is.
Because Manning Clark, as a teacher and writer, did more
than anyone else to unravel and tell that story I know
how much Australia owes him.
Which is why I said at the beginning that I count it as a
great honour to formally open this Manning Clark Centre
and that is what I now formally do. 460.5 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THIE HON, P J
KEATING, M. P. AND SIR BOB GELDOF
MIDDAY SHOW, CHANNEL 9 STUDIOS, SYDNEY
TUESDAY 22 FEBRUARY, 1994
DH: Welcome back. Some big changes to the way that Parliament operates in Canberra
today. For the first time, Paul Keating has an RDO, a rostered day off. He's not in
Parliament as formally required because of a change to the system. A change that he
wants to have, has made possible. So, the ringmaster is absent from the circus and
that's why Prime Minister Keating can be our guest today. Would you please welcome
the Prime Minister of Australia.
DH: It is true, the first day the ringmaster hasn't been there for Question Time?
PK: It is the first, well, in 25 years.
DH: 25 years. Why?
PK: Oh I think it just became a stale format where the focus was only on the leaders and
one or two other people and that was it, basically. It lost the opportunity for ordinary
backbench members and, I think, general interests that is the eliciting of information
and general interest by the public.
DH: But you were regarded as the King of Question Time. You were the, almost the
serpent in the House. Won't you miss that?
PK: No, I don't think so. There was a time when Question Time provided the rank and file
backbench member the chance to raise things which were of genuine and local interest
to them. Now, all the questions are scripted by both sides.
OH: Yes, because your people also throw Dorothy Dixers.
PK: That's what I mean by scripting scripted to suit the general policy lines that either
side of politics wants to get out on the day. So, this way I think it will be far more
spontaneous, more natural and therefore better. 
DH: But it's not being... it won't be televised now, will it?
PK: Oh yes, it will still be rebroadcast. That is, on the news services or later but it won't be
live in the afternoon because...
DH: It runs into Play School...
PK: It runs into Play School..
DH: One play school has been replaced by another, you might say.
PK: It runs into Play School and the ABC says Play School stays and Question Time
doesn't.
DH: Yes, somebody is making some decisions there. Now, on the SBS with Mary
Kostakidis the other night, some people would think they were watching a different
person. I mean, here's a Paul Keating who is saying he's humble, is saying, virtually,
he's modest, that he doesn't want to be remembered as a great Prime Minister?
PK: Well, no. One of the questions was, " Are you there to be a great Prime Minister?"
Well, that's for other people to judge. I'm there to do what I have to do. But, I think,
Derryn there are sides to my personality which are not always evident in the same
way you've switched from haridhitmi iiiiiestigative journalism to a more open, warmer
format here which is revealing a different side to your personality there's a different
one to mine, too.
DH: Yes but I don't have any power, you see, you're the Prime Minister. But when you see
the Paul Keating that people know and you can be I'll blow your bags here a bit, for
a minute you can be very urbane and you can be very charming company and you
talk well at cocktail parties and all that sort of stuff.. but then you get into the House,
on the floor there, and you say the Liberals are like dogs returning to their vomnit, you
call people scumbags, sleaze bags, all of that.
PK: No but, hang let me just correct that. I've used scumbag once in 25 years, once,
once.
DH: Well, I never said shame, shame, shame and I got hooked with it...
PK: And, you see, the House of Representatives is the central cockpit of Australian politics.
It's where the big issues are fought over and when people want to, if you like, change
policy whether it be in health or in education or in social security this is the place where
I defend the interests of ordinary Australians. I mean, if somebody...
DH: And your party and your Ministers...
PK: Yes, but, if somebody wants the right to have elective surgery or to have their hip
replaced and they don't have private wealth Medicare is there to help them do it. Now,
when that's under attack I'm fh-ere to defend it so you can't go in and say, " This is all
blase, we don't really care. We don't really care whether access and fairness in health 
or in education goes. If the Liberals want to make assaults on these things I won't fight
it." 1
DH: But you've actually been defending your own Medicare against one of your own
ministers, Graham Richardson. He thinks you should have private health coverage as
well.
PK: Medicare is like any other national scheme, it's evolving. It has to evolve. And, as
private health is more sophisticated than it was a decade ago, as technologies improve,
as all of these diagnostic imaging and things improve the system has got to change with
it. I think all that Graham and I are now looking at is how we change that system and
keep the best.
DH: Speaking of systems, we had Senator Kernot on the program the other day talking
about women in politics and do women get a tougher time in Parliament from men,
because they're women, or do they get an easier ride because they're women? How do
you regard it?
PK: I don't think they get any tougher or easier ride, by and large.
DH: Because you've jumped to the defence of Ros Kelly very fast and very loudly...
PK: Yes I did on a couple of occasions where I thought the notion of drowning her out as
she was trying to give a serious reply someone had made an allegation and she was
up replying to it and then being drowned out by a front bench of noisy characters
was unfair. And, therefore, I made that point at the time.
DH: Do you believe she had 2,000 names on a whiteboard?
PK: Well, what I believe is that because nobody in the Opposition's actually held down a big
job, apart from John Howard and Andrew Peacock, no-one's been a minister and
they've never held down a big job so they don't know that ministers make 50, 60, 100
decisions a day. It's not a case of little notes from bureaucrats which you tick and
cross. It's a sort of a naive, childish view of the world, ministers are there to make
decisions.
DH: One final question on Ros Kelly doesn't it smell to you when a minister is going to
give a $ 60,000 grant to bowling club of 100 people and it gets to $ 100,000 by the end
of the Comcar ride?
PK: No, basically because this is a facility for those sports clubs that can never basically get
that sort of money together. Be it in netball or basketball or bowling or whatever...
DH: I'm not opposed to grants. But I am saying the way it is distributed...
PM: Yes, but, in the end if they eligible and all of these are eligible a decision has got
to be made then about whether the grant works, or whether it is designed well enough
or whether it is enough. On this occasion Mrs Kelly made that discretionary change. 
But that is the power that a Minister has. I mean who else does it? I mean, who else
do we have in the system to do it?
DH: Will she survive?
PM: Oh, of course. Survive? She had them for breakfast a week ago.
DH: All right, speaking of political survival. If you, Paul Keating, had a Labor Bronwyn
Bishop coming after you like a barracuda, how would you deflect it?
PM: By making the obvious points about her, I think. And that is, I mean why has the
Liberal Party not taken Bronwyn on? I mean is she as notionaily popular? But there is
resistance to having her. Why do the people who know her best, why won't they take
her? And the answer is, because she has got no policy depth. It is all tip and no
iceberg. Now, that is what they understand.
DH: But, she is a populist, and Bob Hawke proved as a populist that he could go above the
heads of his party in Canberra, and look where it got him.
PM: Yes, but Bob had a framework in his head about the society, the economy, that
Bronwyn Bishop doesn't have. And it rankles the Liberal Party's parliamentary party
that somebody who has basically made it by weekend magazine reviews, and middle
newspaper reviews, and television magazine reviews, has climbed over them without
earning the right to do it in terms of knowing about the structure of this country and
society.
DH: I would agree with that, I have said before and to her, on television, that in Canberra
she is so popular she would get three votes in a Caucus leadership vote if she was
allowed to vote for herself three times.
PM: That's right. It's a nineties version of the Joh for Canberra campaign. At the time when
Joh was running for Canberra all the conservatives were all in a tizz saying, oh, this will
be terrific. Nobody, today would seriously have thought that Joh would have ever,
have made a contribution. Now, she is the nineties Joh for Canberra version and the
serious people in the parliamentary Liberal Party are saying, well hang on, there is an
entry price here, you have to know what the economy and the society is doing and how
to change it.
DH: And you have to know where Manila is.
PM: Yes, you have got to know where Manila is.
DH: Which she didn't know. Now, on a personal thing, will we ever know what happened
about the housekeepers at th-e Lodge? Because I read at the weekend that your
daughter sent Gail Gray a birthday card, that they used to walk the dogs and worm the
dogs and even cut your hair on occasion. 
PM: Yes, we had a nice relationship. Well, look it is now largely a matter which is between
the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet who employs them and the
Commonwealth Ombudsman is now running through..
DH: But you didn't have a clash and say, " Get them out of here"?
PM: No, no. I never had a cross word with them. But there were obviously problems
amongst the staff.
DH: There were factions.
PM: Well the Department sort of sorted it out, and their argument is with the Department
and the quicker that is resolved the better.
DH: All right, we have saved something up for after the break, I am going to talk about
your serious career as a rock and roll manager, and we are going to come back with Sir
Bob Geldof.
PM: Well, he is a rocker.
H: Welcome back, I wonder how observant you are because during the commercial
break the Prime Minister just said to me, " Do you realise we are wearing identical
suits?" It's like two women at the races.. but the ties are a little different.
PM: Let's keep an eye on the detail...
H: That's true, that's true. We have been talking to Paul Keating and I guess he'd
agree that my next guest would be pretty formidable in the political ring but Bob
Geldof s not interested in joining that boxing troupe. Instead he uses his songs to
sway the world and his clout to get interviews with heavies like Yasser Arafat,
Nelson Mendela, Desmond Tutu and Paul Keating. So, to reunite a couple of
interesting Irishmen, please welcome Sir Bob Geldof.
BG: I thought I'd wear the same suit...
DH: No chance that you were going to risk that.
BG: Well, it's the Italian cut, knew you guys were into it so...
DH: With these careers you have, the charity work you've done, one your main career
of course as a singer and entertainer, suddenly here's this breakfast television
host...
BG: Yes, mega tycoon I think, media tycoon, that's the new thing.
DH: Now, you interviewed the Prime Minister?
PK: He did, about a year ago. 
DH: And, although he's sitting there, what was it like?
BG: Oh, it was a pain in the arse, you know.... No, it turned out we have some mutual
friends in London and it turned out we shared some...
DH: Liz and Phil..
BG: Of course, yeah... . and the guys generally, you know. And so, that was a pretty
good basis and..
PK: He's a toff, Bob. He's a tofft you know.
BG: Who me?
PK: You.
BG: Yeah but I don't try and hide it Paul, you know.
DH: When you interview all these people, I mean, Arafat, Mandela, Keating what were
they like to interview? I mean, your life hasn't been from that school of journalism
so you would come from a different perspective. What were they like?
BG: I only said I'd do it if the people interested me. It wasn't necessarily their political
agenda, it was that there seemed to be some moral stance that they took, vis a vis
their politics.
DH: What was his? Keating's?
BG: He just interests me as the classic Paddy, Tanimaney Hall politician.
PK: Hey, cut that out, you'd better decipher all these terms...
BG: It's the Irish-Catholic, union, Labor, mass sort of...
DH: Like in Boston and al that sort of stuff, the Tammany Hall stuff?
BG: I'm not sure I like it but I come from it, you know, from Dublin. And so over here
is very recognisable to me and he's an immensely robust politician, you know.
DH: Did you believe he was humble, didn't want to be a great Prime Minister, didn't
care if he was remembered by history?
BO: Well, you know, some of the things I say when I do interviews are for a specific
reason and some of the things he says are for another reason. I mean, he does
interviews to get across his agenda and I'm more interested in the person. I'm not
a political look at those shoes, can we have a close up.
DH: Do you like those? 
BG: Look at Hinch's shoes.
PK: Well your's are exactly...
BG: Well I've been in Mildura. I've just been in Swan Hill, I mean, you know.
DH: That explains it. Mildura explains that.
BG: Look at them, oh no they're Keating's ones.
DH: At least they're shiny.
BG: Well, they don't have to be those sneakers Derryn, I mean, you remember that
don't you? But, like I said, the politics in this country are immensely robust.
DH: Well, you being Irish, do you feel for the strength of the Keating argument for a
republic?
BG: That's his thing, I'm also in somebody else's country so to me I don't really care,
it's your argument as, you know, Prince Charles said. But I come fr~ om a republic.
Now if you shut up for a minute, if you can just manage that.
PK: Well so far I have.
BG: Can anybody nanme a President of Ireland who isn't Irish. It's very hard to
remember who the President of Germany is or the President of Ireland, even
though she's immensely a bright woman and very charismatic and I think republics
are a bit of a bore. And I've lived in one all my life and I understand your
argument about the Monarchy and all that, but I think it would be quite good to
have this sort of Australian King and I think that, Paul, you would look very nice.
DH: Swap the vermin for the ermine you think?
BG: I would have that as tongue in cheek. I'm not sure that a republic has that time
and that politics hasn't gone. And as you are consciously looking forward to the
next millennium.
DH: Your upbringing. You had a fairly sad childhood, didn't you. In terms of your
mother dying when you were very young. I'm just wondering, you both being
[ rish, both being Catholic. You said in your SBS interview that your religion is
very strong for -you.
PK: Well I think it has set a lot of political values for me and for Australia, certainly in
the Labor Party.
DH: And yet, Bob, you are very anti the church in a lot of the things you have said over
the years. 
BG: Unlike Australia, the Church and the state are hand in glove in Ireland, maybe less
so. But certainly when I was growing up it was. And it was a very close society
and young people, in particular, were not allowed to you have it here the tall
poppy syndrome thing which you have sort of elevated into this national shiboleth
sort of thing. And you weren't allowed to express ambition, even that was to
cause derision. And so all possibilities shut down on you because of this
claustrophobic small country, society. And so I had to get out and loads of us
blame that relationship that did exist between church and state. It's becoming
disentangled now rightfully.
PK: Well, of course, that's not true here. I mean, what Bob says about Ireland may
well be true, but it is not true here. There has always been a great separation.
DH: Actually the separation of church and state has been almost as virtually strong here
as the United States where it is protected virtually constitutionally.
PK: I think the sort of great humanitarian values of the Labor Party spring from a
sense of equality and justice and these things spring from the dignity of the human
person which has come from...
DH: But the Labor politicians can play just as dirty as anybody else.
PK: But it is always this question about, you know, the classic conflict in Australian
political thought between what Manning Clark called the enlargers of life and the
straighteners of life.
DH: You see, what intrigues me about you is this very thing, you are a person who in
your life has built to be this urbane person, a lover of classical music, and Bob
gave you some classical music, you collect antique clocks, you love fine art, you
certainly like bird prints, but then the other side of you is that you are a political
bovver boy...
BG: He's a street brawler.
DH: But then you are a bovver boy, in other ways you are a bovwer boy.
PK: Yes, but principally what I am, I am basically a builder of a better place here. That
is what I am principally about. I mean, what's my life about it's about enlarging
the show.
BG: Well your idea of a better place.
PK: Well, not my idea. Simply a better place, that is a fairer, more just, more decent,
more productive place.
BG: But everyone in politics is that, they just use a different format.
PK: No, but everybody says that, Bob, but they don't all do it. I mean, the difference
is, we have done it. 
BG: They do try, you just won the last election, Paul, that's all.
PK: I know, and that has come, those instincts, I think, in part have come through this
sort of society we have and it has also come through the sort of belief people like
me have had.
DH: Would I be right if I said that Paul Keating, when he made his speech to staff at
the Chinese restaurant before the election last year, thought he would be in
opposition the following day, and thought you would be out of politics?
PK: No, I thought we would sneak in. I thought we would sneak home. But when I
say sneak home, for a start we had an I11 seat lead, a majority of 11. And that had
to be whittled back before anything camne from us, so I knew we were going to do
well in Tasmania and NSW.
DH: So you really thought you would win it?
PK: I thought we were in there with a real chance.
BG: When I was talking to him, you know, it looked very grim indeed. And said to
him, you know, you may as well kiss goodbye to this place. He just said wait and
see, you know, he was pretty insistent then.
DH: Because you looked like stunned mullet for the first few months after you had
been elected as if you thought, gee we haven't got any policies cause we didn't
think we would be here.
PK: Well, it is just because the Government ducked back into the Cabinet to do the big
things like Mabo and other things which we had on that year. I mean, the problem
is we were running against a couple of deadlines and having already lost three or
four months of the year, we had to basically get our heads down and get at it.
Now that was assumed to be that the Government had sort of lost control of the
agenda.
DH: On British politics, I'm sure this doesn't happen in Canberra..
BG:..... plug by music, he's plugged by politics.
DH: No, I'm going to in one minute, this will plug in music as well, I'll hold this up
while I'm talking about British politics.
BG: Along side your shoes please. It's the Cuban look, you know.
DH: It is too. Why is it in British politics, so many of the politicians dress up in
women's dresses, and these are the men, or there was one guy who was found
hanging in a gas mask and an overcoat in his shed, and another one had on
women's stockings and suspenders and a plastic bag over his head. 
BG: Because they have to get their kicks somehow, it's so boring in the house of
parliament. You know, have you ever sat there? I mean, when Thatcher went it
would probably be like him, you know, the fire went out of the street politics.
And what you were earlier talking about women and whether they got, no pun
intended, an easier ride or a harder ride. And the thing that Kinnock always said,
who was leader of the opposition during Thatcher's reign, that he felt always
pulled back because he came from the Welsh valleys and he was sort of brought
up to respect women, and he always pulled back from the killer insulting blow.
Even though he loathed everything she stood for, he just couldn't bring himself to
go.
DH: Well speaking of strange dressing habits, would your weirdest gig in music have
been the Goondiwindi bachelors and spinsters ball? And what were you doing
there?
BG: It was one of the best dresses. Because I'd heard about B&amp; S things and being
Irish they struck me as familiar. This used to go on in Ireland like, while I'd grown
up. And I went there and had a great time, I mean, these people got seriously out
of it.
DH: Is it true that that is going to be seen on British television?
BG: But, so what?
DH: Well I think Sylvania Waters was bad enough. They'll think this is going on
everywhere.
BG: Nobody watched Sylvania Waters, and these are young people who are in a
drought land area and they have had drought for years, they still have drought.
And as they say on the film, at the beginning of the film, it is a time where we can
forget our troubles for 48 hours and go back to work with a fresh hope. And
these people are walking off their farms now. They've sold their car, the banks are
closing and they walk away, it's like the dust bowl in Okalahoma. And they have
got immense dignity and they should be allowed to get out of it for 48 hours and
the great thing about it, unlike an english audience where I would feel fear and
danger, that never went off in any violent sense. And I think, in Europe that they
probably would.. the naive, the sort of, cliche salt of the earth, but their values
are so fixed and straight and generally good, I thought it was great.
DH: Now, let's talk about your music. You are making a new clip with Sting who has
been singing for you on Crazy, that's coming up on your new compilation.
BG: Yes, the single thing. So I did that about four weeks. . the Pinnacles, do you
know where that is? North of Perth, have you ever been there?
PK: I've never been there.
BG: I've seen more of Australia than you and you're supposed to call it a stump. 
PK: I don't think that is true, but I haven't been to the Pinnacles, no.
BG: Twenty-five cities and towns in 30 days. You know, Goondiwindi gave me the
taste for it, of seeing the country. And he said you should move over here, you
know. And I said, well it's 60 per cent marginal tax, sure.
PK: Forty-seven, forty-seven.
BG: Not if the Left have their way.
DH: You have fallen in love with this country, haven't you, you spent a lot of time here.
BG: Yes, its a beautifuli country. Me and the Mrs and the kids are made for it and were
it not for the fact that
PK: What do you like about it most?
BG: It is very familiar to me, the attitude.
PK: It's open, accessible.
BG: Yes, all that. The attitudes are very familiar to me from Ireland.
DH: Being both Irish Catholics, both family men, how do you handle, as Bob Geldof,
the disciplinary things with your kids?
BG: Beat the crap out of them on a day to day basis.
DH: How do you? I mean you are growing up, the rock world, the sex, the drugs,
the rock and roll, and you see your own little kids growing up. How do you
handle it and how do you guide them?
BG: Like any parents you give what you believe are the correct moral parameters to in
which to live to your life. And then you hope that at 13, 14, and 15 they kick
robustly against that and find their own way. And like, you know, you say you
can't do that, you are not allowed to do that, you have to go to bed at this time,
you know, you have to behave, you have to show respect et cetera, et cetera.
DH: Do you work this way?
PK: I think so. I think you try and give your children, as Bob said, a moral framework,
or moral parameters which, hopefu~ lly enough of that glues on to them so as they
go their own way there are these residual values which they then rebuild and build.
DH: But do your children still see you, are you two people to them, I mean are you at
a Prime Minister Keating to your family, or are you still just Dad?
PK: No, no. Just Dad. I had my second youngest saying, what are you going to do
when you get out of politics, Dad? She said, you want to be a composer, don't 
you? And of course, I don't, you know. And before I got a chance to say
anything she said, well I think you had better forget that because you would be a
dud composer.
DH: Do you stand around at home and conduct?
PK: Yes, I conduct a bit a home, she might have got the conducting and the
composing mixed up. No, I think I like to see the kids personalities, jumping
around and springing and going.
DH: When will you get out of politics, how many years?
PK: I think there is a natural time in all this. You get the right message.
DH: Will you know when to go?
PK: Oh, I think so. And I don't think anyone should try and stay on too long.
DH: Like Bob Hawke.
PK: Well, anyone.
DH: Who are the megalos, the megalo Prime Ministers you were talking about?
PK: No, we are not in the identification business.
DH: Menzies, Whitlamn, Hawke?
PK: We are not identifying.
DH: Two out of three ain't bad. Hold on, here it is again, this is a Bob Geldof new
happy club. You are not looking very happy on it.
BG: I am not a very happy person, you can tell I am deeply disturbed.
DH: I will make you happy now, by doing some of Bobs concert dates.
BG: The ex-rock manager should do this.
PK: Yes, I should be.
BG: Failed rock manager.
PK: As I say, I could probably do for Bob what I did for the Ramirods, send him into
obscurity.
BG: It is an unfortunate name.
DH: Mr Prime Minister? 
13
PK: Well, if Bob gives me a piece of the action, I mean I am not going to manage him
for nothing.
DH: Will you please thank Prime Minister, Paul Keating, and Bod Geldolf.
ENDS 



T2EL3:. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 01/ 07
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEAING, MP
RESHAPING AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTIONS
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, 22 FEBRUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you, Phil lip ( Adams), Vice Chancellor, Dymphna Clark, members
of the Clark family, Professor, distinguished guests and ladies and
gentlemen. One has always got to be careful when one is sponsored to do a talk or a
lecture, universities generally appreciate the opportunities, media
organisations always hype it up. And Radio National has me tonight
announcing my vision for the future, and Phillip wants it all done in
minutes. Where, in fact, what they asked me to do was talk about reshaping Australia's
Institutions. I will do my best, Phillip, to get this in 20 minutes, but I think this
is going to be a splice job for you and your colleagues, because had I known
you wanted me to speak to a tight time table I would have probably had it
prepared. But the fact Is it is coming, I am afraid, as it comes.
Talk about reshaping Australia's institutions It might not have been possible
a decade ago to propose such a subject and expect a lecture or a talk whiich
went in substance to substantial changes in Australia's institution frame work
because In most of the quarter century before the early 1 980s there wasn't
much institutional change in Australia. It is not to say Australia didn't have
institutions of value, but there wasn't much institutional change.
So, I am tonight with some history and with some forethought, looking
forward, talking about what I think of some of the institutional changes that
have taken place, and which ones are currently moving and will take place in
this decade.
Perhaps the first one to start with is the appetite for change. Because there
was no appetite for change in the ' 60s and the 1 970s. Australia very much
was seeing change at the margins and the public, if you like, the public
clamour for change, the public pressure on the political system for change, on
TEL: 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 02/ 07
2
clamour for change, the public pressure on the political system for change, on
our institutions in general was not as evident as now. I think what has
happened is we have developed a tremendous appetite for change, so that
when this Government in the 1 980s brought forward substantial and far
reaching changes it did so at its considerable political risk.
Now if Governments say, look we think we have had enough change, and we
don't want to burden you the public with more of it', the public said ' well thank
you we will have somebody else". They want change. And there is now a
very great appetite for change.
So, much of what we do these days, as a nation, is we manage change. And
I think we are now, we have seen unprecedented institutional reform.
Australia Is now working differently, within different structures, they think
differently, they have learned the need for change, but I suppose more
important then anything else, they have come to believe in their capacity to
change. And if the last decade means nothing, it means that our capacity for
change is very substantial and very great.
So, managing change, and keeping up with change is now a key matter in
this country, and the appetite for change is one of the background thoughts,
In a sense, across the country In the whole community which one could call
Institutional change of the variety which changes the character of the country.
Now, I have been one of the people Involved In public life through this period
of managing change, and I thought I would run through some of these topics
which come under this heading; ' Reshaping Australia's Institutions'.
One of the first places to start with this, is of course, the Cabinet of the
Government, and in 1991 1 gave a lecture called the ' Challenge of Public
Policy in Australia', the first Chris Higgins memorial lecture. The lecture in
the memory of the former Secretary of the Treasury. And I talked about the
importance of Cabinet, Government and the role of Ministers, because
Ministers until this Government came to office had never run the policy. The
policy was in part operated by Ministers within some vague parameters, and
then moved along further by the public service, but because the public
service was always limited in the political authority you could bring to bear on
public decision making, the changes were, of course only at the margin.
So, much of the institutional change we have seen devolves to the role of
Ministers. And I said this I will just read this to you from that lecture it said:
' while many decry the role that politicians play, only politicians can
make major changes to the way a country conducts its business.
Change can not come from a bureaucracy no matter how well
motivated or gifted because the bureaucracy has no authority to rank
priorities or make decisions, Nor can' change come from the media
and the opinions of columnists, no mAtter how imminent. In the end
politicians have to have the foresight to see the need for change and 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 03/ 07
3
the courage and strength to carry It through. That's why a strong and
practical Cabinet Is absolutely essential for Australian at present and
will be for years to come".
And then I talked about the role of the public service and the compact which
has existed in this last decade, and still exists now, between the Cabinet, the
Ministry and the bureaucracy. And that's been a compact of cooperation and
change so that we have seen the very best technical capacities and instincts
of the civil service of this country brought to bear with a political authority
which Minsters could marshal around the Cabinet table, and as a
consequence Australia has advanced mightily, and we have seen Cabinet
Government in a new Institutional form, of a variety of which we've, perhaps,
certainly not seen in my lifetime. And because of the important need for
change, rebasing the basis of our wealth, and changing our society, this
came at an important time for us.
That still exists and the years have only strengthened it and we now look
forward in the 1 990s to the Cabinet Ministers, again deciding where the
envelope of change should be pushed out. Where we, with the history of now
much change behind us, where the direction should be and then having a
proper appropriate bureaucratic effort In there to make it work. Now, I think
that is developing the appetite for change and then being able to basically
spirit the change through, or many of the changes through, in the first
instance at the Government level and a wider economy I will come to later,
has been a very important and fundamental institutional change in this
country. Another has been managing growth and inflation. One of the other great
Institutional changes In Australia which we have had now for a decade and
which we are going to have In the future is a basic understanding between
the Government and the organised workforce. That is, the Government and
the workers of this country. It has come by way of the Accord between the
Government and the ACTU. But what started as simply a fairly simple
document of wage restraint In certain limited circumstances has become a
way of thinking, so that as a consequence a whole productivity culture has
grown up a low Inflation productivity culture, which could only be put together
by the cooperation between, and the common objectives between a
Government and the organised workforce of this country.
As a consequence today we are looking at an Inflation rate of under 2 per
cent. We saw Australia grow mightily over the last decade; bar for the
recession we are seeing that growth pick up again. Australia today has 26
per cent more people in work than 10 years ago, as a consequence of that
accord. And In the doing of it being able to focus on a whole range of other
things such as occupational superannuation, addition of national savings,
diminution, of course, of Industrial disputation, but more than anything else a
state of mind about productivity and being able to, at the same time, hold
workers Incomes up while reducing inflation, is something that didn't exist in
any institutional way before this time that exists now. 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15. No. 010 P. 04/ 07
4
The other element of that was, of course, developing a central bank, not just
as a branch office of the Treasury, but something which stood in its own right,
and with a great reform to the financial system of the ' 80s running a quantity
based system in the financial markets. So, now monetary policy is not set by
the bond selling program of the Treasury, it is set by a central bank which has
now, in an open quantity system, perogatives of its own which it operates in
tandem with the Government. And as a consequence, we have as a country
developed a new institution. It is still called the Reserve Bank, it still has the
same Reserve Bank Act as it had in 1959, devoted as it is to price stability
and full employment, but what we have is a new institution which we have
effectively used together in another institutional process of change between
the Government and the Board of the Central Bank to deal with growth and
inflation simultaneously. And as a consequence that is the other arm of the
anti Inflation machinery which institutionally we have set up between the
ACTU and the Government under the Accord, and with a cooperative process
of common objectives between the board of the Central Bank and the
Government. Now, I was going to quote here a couple of things from the Reserve Bank Act,
but for time I will shorten them. It says:
" The duty of the Board is to do in its opinion what best will contribute to
the stability of the currency and maintenance of full employment in
Australia, the economic prosperity and welfare of the people of
Australia. The Board shall from time to time inform the Government of
the monetary and banking policy of the bank, and in the event of a
difference the Treasurer and the Board shall endeavour to reach
agreement."
So, those very wise words drafted so long ago have been given new meaning
in an institution which Is effectively new, brought and given authority by this
Government in a new financial system which is helping us develop a low
inflationary culture. It is a very hard thing for any country to develop a central
bank of substance that can effectively deal with inflation and do it in the
context of a wage compact. So, these are significant and important
Institutional changes we have brought along with us.
The other, I think, enduring national institutional change is the change of the
Australian Labor Party. The Labor Party is now a party of economic reform; it
is a party of social democracy; it is a party of social progress; it is a party
which has developed an open competitive model for its society, and grafted
on to It a fair and equitable social wage and social system. As well as that it
is a party which understands the culture of the nation and it is a party which
feels that the identity of the nation, and issues of identity, are important to it.
Whatever people may think of the Labor Party it will never regress to being
what it was in the 1950s and the 1 960s or even the 1970s. So, in terms of
institutional change, if a major party of Government which is what the Labor 
I-' 05 7
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 050
Party is can in its, perhaps, most significant reformation, plot out for itself a
world ranking course in setting up a middle sized OECD economy in its image
as an open competitive economic society which also has tolerance and
fairness underpinning its social fabric, then I think, in institutional terms we
have done mightily to secure that change. It is one of the important ones.
But the changes in reshaping institutions have not been limited to just what
has happened in Australia, but what Is also happening and what we have
done for ourselves in the international market place. We have through our
foreign policy and our trade policies, built institutions outside of Australia and
let me just name a couple for you: The Cairns Group, which was influential in
the GATT Round, was largely managed by Australia, the United States and
France and the European community, APEC, Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation, which throws an economic, if you like, net across the Asia
Pacific, which actually builds an institution for Australia to participate in;
outside of Australia the Asean Regional Forum for security dialogue, when
ASEAN was an organisation which had very tentative discussions about
many things it is now actually discussing full-bloodedly its security position;
and of course things we have done in chemical weapons, Cambodia and
other things.
This is another institutional change, that is, rather than simply playing a
marginalsed role In the foreign policy fora of the world, Australia Is actually
out there creating Institutions and finding a place for this country. Now, with
that background, that is these very important, I think, institutional changes
developing an appetite for change, being confident about the countries
capacity to change, that is the country itself being confident about its capacity
to change.
The actual vehicle of change, developing the Cabinet process, the role of
Ministers as the spearhead of change and doing it in a compact with a
cooperative altruistic civil service, managing growth and inflation, keeping the
core elements of competitiveness In place, are key to any institutional shift in
any country and the whole culture of productivity which has come into the
bargain and in the doing of it reshaping one of our major parties.
Now, for the future there is much that still has to be done about institutional
change. Perhaps, one of the changes is going to come, let me say two areas.
One is identity, us being, importantly, being confident about ourselves and
about those things which symbollse ourselves and the other is keeping the
economic and social change moving through our society. And a lot of this
goes after the great macro-economic changes of the 1 980s. It goes to the
micro changes in industry, in business, in the States, in this decade. And
what, I think, we will see is an Institutional change where we will see a much
more cooperative relationship developing between the Commonwealth and
the States. But built around, what I think, was one of the central institutional
changes of Australia In this century and that was uniform taxation in 1942.
Uniform taxation is the glue that holds the federation together. It is the
reason we are one nation with one economy. But with that foundation there Is 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No.
6
now much to be done about the perogatives of the States and the
Commonwealth In managing this great country of ours and choosing to work
cooperatively together to deal with the great micro-economic areas of this
country, much that we have to do.
Let me Just say that this change must also manifest itself in business and not
simply with the States. I think we need a new partnership, a new sharing of
responsibility for change. We mightn' t get it, but now Is the time, I think, the
natural time to invite one. And with the election behind us, with all these
benefits of the past we can, I think, enter a new period where we can call
upon a new commitment to advance ourselves.
Over the coming decade I would like to see a new relationship with the States
evolve, based on four principals. The first of these is that we recognise that
the States have a vital role as units of Government in Australia, because
there is this debate, which you often see from time to time, about abolishing
States. As I said some time ago, if we didn't have States we would almost
need to Invent them for the great regional, management and disparities of this
country. The second principal should be that both the Commonwealth and the States
should independently assess the value of reforms and use them for their own
sake, not as part of a deal in which the Commonwealth is supposed to buy
the cooperation of the States. That is, change in the great micro-economic
areas of the States, in electricity, in water, in gas, in ports, in rail, in all these
things, should be seen by States as a change of advantage to them and their
citizens and not something where the Commonwealth has to buy that change
and that cooperation.
The third principal should be that we are willing to enter into a genuine
discussion between heads of Government and portfolio Ministers to look at
the present roles and responsibilities of the States and the Commonwealth, to
see that where we can develop and deliver better policy outcomes, but where
the Commonwealth Government will always have a role in setting priorities
and national objectives to social programs such as health and education, as
well as the environment and economic programs.
And the fourth principal is that while the. Commonwealth believes the States
should be adequately resourced it should be taken as understood that the
Commonwealth will not be party to any substantial transfer of Commonwealth
taxing powers to the States.
Now, within those four principals we have the opportunity to cooperatively
develop, I think, a new commitment, if you like, a new consensus, a new
understanding between the Commonwealth and the States about how to
make these important areas of the micro economy change. The
Commonwealth has largely done Its things in telecommunications, in
banking, in air transport what remains to be, done now is largely with the
States and it is also with business, because a Commonwealth Government .010 P. 06/ 07 
TEL: 23. Feb. 94 13: 15 No. 010 P. 07/ 07
7
can't change the productive culture of an Individual enterprise. That must be
done by business, and business should take up the challenge of enterprise
bargaining with the workforce to make that productive and institutional
change, certainly enterprise change, within those particular businesses.
So, we have got, I think, If you like, having come so far and now looking at the
areas where we need to see more sophisticated changes, put the polish on
the changes to find, If you like, another institutional shift. It is In a cooperative
venture between the Commonwealth and the States in these areas, and also
further cooperation between Labor and business under the aegis of
enterprise bargaining in search of higher productivity, higher incomes and
better profits. This is the institutional change we need for the 1990s.
Now, you have heard me say often I mentioned it earlier I don't think a
country can sell itself until it knows what it wants to sell of itself, how it wants
to present itself, how It wants to be viewed and be seen. And so, therefore, I
believe issues of identity, being clear about our identity, being clear about the
culture that we have become and that we wish to represent, its symbols are
an Important part of how we as a nation will behave and present ourselves in
the 1 990s. But we have seen much reshaping of Institutions in these last ten
years, my point Is we are going on doing it. And the changes we have see,
are changes I think forever, they are not changes which are going to be
turned back. But what we have to do now Is search out the new ones, so that
if we were giving a lecture on this topic In a decade hence, we would be able
to say that in these areas of productivity, of international engagement, of
change In the culture at the work place, change in the relationship between
the Commonwealth and the States, this was another great Institutional
change. I should hope In 10 or 15 years, we would have been able to reshape our
Institutions in a way that compensated for the quarter century or so that we
failed to do this. As a consequence Australia is stronger and better for it.
Thank you very much. 



TEL5 4 No2 .. 90F04b 1 P. 02/ 04
TRANSCRIPT OF iNTERVI EW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, M. P.
COUNCIL OF AUSTRALTAN GOVERNMENTS MEETING -HOBART
THURSDAY 24 FEBRUARY, 1994
J: Mr Keating, do you think that tomorrow can achieve anything, the
Premiers seem particularly befl. igercnt?
PM; Well, I think that we've had quite a breakthrough in establishing the
Council of Australian G; overrnents ( COAG). It's a departure, a new one, from
the financial arrangements of 60 years longstanding of the Premiers' Conference,
so that we can discuss nion-financial things and we've had quite a lot of success to
date. in just a short time we've established a national authority for vocational
education. We're now working on the national trunk rail system, electricity
power ge~ neration and distribution and now on the agenda for this conference
is the question of competition policy across the country but including, of course,
the state government business enterprise area. So, much has been achieved in a
relatively short time and I think separation of the financial meeting and a
general policy meeting has been a good thing. This is a general policy meeting
and think it has all of the opporturnities that the last meeting has had to push
this agenda-a little further.
J: Well, Sir, what's your response to Mr Court's claimi that you're the worst
thing that's ever happened to federation?
PM: Well, I think the other Premiers don't agree because they've signed
up to a national rail freight corporation, they've signed up to a national training
authority, to power generation. I'm afraid Mr Court is the odd person out in this
view of the role between the Commonwealth and the states. And, simply, the
worst of parochial instincts won't help the people of Western Australia and
that's why other premiers, generally, won't have a bar of that kind of policy.
If the states want compensation for implementing the Hiliner Report are
you prepared to negotiate on that?
TEL 25 Fe b 94 
TEL: 25. Feb. 94 : 3: 54 No. 001 P. 03/ 04
-2.
PM: Well, it Would depend on whether it was compensation of the vAriety
which particularly affected the Commonwealth advantageously. But, if decoding
that message means that the Commonwealth pays for all reform the answer, of
course, is no.
J; What is the Commnonwealth prepared to pay to see the policy
implemented? PM: WelL understand this... ynu've got to just get this right. Here we have
some conservative governments and one which boasts of its conservativeness
Western Austraia and you've got a Labor government, repeat, Labor
govermrent asking them to open themselves up and be competitive in a free
market economy. Now, these are the conservative, so-called market people. Yet,
you've got the irony of a Labor government saying, please be competitive in an
open economy. And they're sayin&amp; oh well, not sure about, not sure about that.
1: Prime Mirnister, NU Court's view is that the West Australian Government
has already implemented many of these sorts of competitive reforms.
PM; Well, if you believe that you'll believe in fairies at the bottomn of the
garden, won't you? Uf he can handle you that easily you're going to be a
pushover. J: If the states, tomorrow, won't agree to any of these competitive changes is
there much point in continuing with these meetings?
PM: Well, that's what we said at the first meeting of COAG and we got the
electricity agenda together and we got the National Training Authority together...
I wouldn't be too gloomy about it if I were you.
s it a-bargaining poit, is it?
PM: Well, I think there's a lot of understiinding for the need to that in some
of the important areas of electricity, water, gas, ports, wharves these are
peculiar things now that the states must be involved that the
Commonwealth can't do these things by itself.
J. inaudible... you've got to have changes to the tax sharing arrangements
or guaranteed. share of incouw tax?
PM: That's a view. That's only a view.
J: Mr Court's eager to talk about the whole future of the makeup of the
Federation, do you think it will get that involved tomorrow?
P-M: What do you mean, are we going to get a history lesson? 
TEL: 25. Feb. 94 : 3: 54 No. 001l P. 04/ 04
-3.
J: He's keen to talk~ about the whole future where the Federation is
heading, whether more power should be returned to the states.
PM: It will these have always got their element of bargaining about them
but, in the end, it's pretty hard for conservative premiers who are believing in
market forces to say, " Oh no, we believe in market forces but we don't really.
And here's this Commonwealth Labor Sovernment comning along asking us to
adopt some market forces. Now, we'll only do it if you pay for it."
J: Prime Minister, who won the day in Parliament today?
PM: I thought D~ r I-ewson had all the leadership eggs in his basket and dropped
them all at once. It was a dreadful speech which he took on as a tactic himself, I
think, against the advice of some of his front bench advisers and whe~ n they
realised that he had perform~ ed so poorly they decided to blow the Parliament up
so that the news story was ' uproar in Parliament' instead of ' John Hewson
collapsing' in what ought to have been a relatively easy few debating points for
himn. Ends. 



C. PRIME MINISTER
MEMBERSHIP OF THE COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS'
CENTENARY OF FEDERATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The Government has finalised today the membership of the Centenary of Federation
Advisory Comnmittee.
The Council of Australian Governments ( COAG) agreed last year to establish a
broadly based National Advisory Committee to advise it on goals and strategies for the
centenary of federation in 2001.
COAG decided that the Committee should comprise representatives of each State and
Territory, a Commonwealth appointed Chairperson and such further persons,
appointed by the Commonwealth, as might be needed to ensure that the Committee as
a whole was broadly representative of the community.
The Committee will be chaired by the Hon Joan Kirner, AM and will have as members
the following:
Commonwealth appointments
Mr Phillip Adams, AO broadcaster and Chairman, National Australia Day
Council Ms Robyn Archer actor and writer
Ms Marilyn Beaumont Federal Secretary, Australian Nursing Federation
Ms Michelle Grattan Editor, Canberra Times
Ms Marcia Langton anthropologist
Ms Helen Patsikatheodorou child-care and community worker
Ms Lesley Podesta management consultant
Ms Dana Wortley education consultant and education editor, the Adelaide
Advertiser 4651 
2
State and Territory appointments
The Hon Sir Max Bingham, QC ( Tasmania)
The Hon Jennifer Cashmore, MI-A ( South Australia)
The Hon Mr Justice Sir James Gobbo, AC ( Victoria)
The Hon Bill Hassell ( Western Australia)
Mr Robert Maher ( New South Wales)
* The Hon Jim Robertson ( Northern Territory)
Associate Professor Marian Sawer, AO ( Australian Capital Territory)
Mr David Williams ( Queensland)
Under the terms of reference agreed by COAG the Committee will provide an options
paper for consideration by COAG setting out possible goals and strategies for
centenary-related activities in the years leading up to, and including, the centenary.
The Commnittee has been asked to draw on the views of the community through wide
ranging consultations. The paper is to be completed by July 1994.
The Committee is to take as an over-riding objective the building of a better sense of
national identity and purpose among Australians and is to give emphasis to activities
that will have enduring and worthwhile results that go beyond simply marking the
occurrence of the centenary.
The commemoration of the centenary of federation, and the events leading up to it, is
an opportunity for all Australians to celebrate the achievements of the first hundred
years of federation and to reflect on the challenges facing our nation as we approach
the 2 1st century. I hope the entire community will participate whole-heartedly in it.
A Secretariat for the Committee is being provided by my Department. The Secretary
is Mr Gavin Fry and the Secretariat can be contacted on ( 06) 271 5128.
CANBERRA 24 February 1994
4652
I. A, 



 4
R E H A M E
E. O. E.
DATE 24TH FEBRUARY, 1994.
TRANSCRIPT OF BROADCAST ITEM:
3AW MARGARET FLETCHER
FEBRUARY, 1994. 12.30PM24TH
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL KEATING, PRIME
MINISTER, WHO COMMENTS ON HIS MINISTER,
ROS KELLY'S, ALLEGED SPORTS RORTS AND
QUESTION TIME RESTRUCTURING
MARGARIT FLETCHER PRESENTER:
But right now, as you probably just heard before, at fairly
late notice so we couldn't give you too much warning, on
the line is the Prime Minister of Australia, Paul Keating.
Prime Minister, welcome to you.
PAUL KEATING PRIME MINISTER:
Hello Margaret. Nice to be here.
FLETCHER:
Well, it's nice to welcome you back to 3AW, ' cause you've
been a bit quiet on the media in Melbourne. You
haven't been on 3AW, I think, since the election?
KEATING: Well, it's not exactly a Government cheer squad station,
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD Rehame Australia
Monitoring Services Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia elephone ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 03) 521 2980
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Business Centre
Birkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Orummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 8196266
Facsimile ( 02) 8106388 
R E H A M E
KEATING CONT/ D:
early morning.
patronise it but
with you, Margare And so therefore, I don't necessarily
I'm hoping for a reasonable discussion
: t.
FLTCHER; Are you saying my colleague in the morning is biased?
KEATING;
Well, I'd say that Lu say the least. Of course I do.
FLETCHER: Isn't that more of a challenge?
that's a really good time to come Don't you reckon that
on a station?
KEATING: It doesn't matter whether it's a challenge or
time. I mean, I think that's what it's all about. a waste of
FLETCHER: Is that that you can't take criticism though?
KEATING: No, no
FLETCHER: That could bc said.
KEATING: no, its just that there is a requirement on newscasters
that they be impartial and open minded, so that when
talking to a minister or head of government, at least you
can elucidate issues. And I don't particularly want to
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD Rehame Australia
Monitoring Sirvlces Ply Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 3 521
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Business Centre
Brkenhoad Point Centre
Cary Street
Orummayne NSW 2047
lelephone ( 02) 819 1
Facsimile ( 02) 8196388 
R E H A M
KIEATING CONT/ D;
waste my time arguing with people who've made their
years ago.
F LETCHER:
Well, I suppose in fairness, that there are issues that have
got to be taken up in a critical sense. I mean, if we could
start on one, and that's the so-called sports rorts, Ros
Kelly affair. And for the life of me, I'm intrigued as to
why she's still therc.
KEATING: Well, do you know much about the issue? I mean, what's
happened herc is that there's a programme to provide
grants to small sporting clubs. This is your amateur
sporting clubs who can't put enough money together for a
netball court or a basketball court, or refurbishing a green
on a bowling club, or this sort of thing.
Now, what the Opposition are saying, they're saying we
we're not alleging fraud here, we're not alleging any
corruption here. They've made that clear. They don't
like the choices of Mrs Kelly, in respect of these
particular grants. Now, what she's made clear is, that in
Labor electorates, you're more likely to find an absence
of these kind of facilities, and she's argued that case. But
nobody's said, no one has argued, that this money hasn't
been spent properly, because one of the criteria in this,
Margaret, is that the money is first expended by the
proponents and then reimbursed by the Commonwealth.
So it's got to be spent first, before we actually pay it.
Now so the charge against Mrs Kelly is that the Liberal Rehame Australia
Monitoring Services Pty Ltd
ACN 006 389 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 03) 521 2980
Suite Henry Lawson 8uness Centr
Birkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Drummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 819 626
FarAlmilN 819IM
3
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD 
Rehame Austmra
Monitnrlno Serces Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
E H A M
KEATING CONT/ D:
Party doesn't like her choices. And they said, well, then
on what basis did you choose it, and she said I've chosen
it myself, as a minister.
FLETCHER: On the white board.
KEATING: Well, it doesn't matter how you do it. I mean, you
see, because none of them as only now, John Howard
and Andrew Peacock have held a ministerial job; the
only ones who have held a ministerial job. There is
there's no one held down a big job. They don't know
what a minister's life is like. And a minister makes, you
know, up to, you know, thirty, forty, some of the times,
you know, decisions like that a day.
FLETCHER: Yeah, but that's what you're paid for. In all fairness,
that's the job.
KEATIN ' G:
Exactly. So that's what's she done.
FLITCHER: But it's well, I mean, even the parliamentary the
draft parliamentary inquiry results say that all their
questioning according to The Financial Review's ( sic)
ministerial compctence and damning her role is totally
inadequate. I mean, I'm not suggesting fraud either, but
you would know the perception is also something in
politics, and she's perceived to be incompetent, to say the 93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 03) 521 290
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Business Centre
Birkenheafl Pnint tentre
Cary Street
Drummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone 819 6M
FNrmile ( 02) Big 638
HEHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD
I 
R E H A M E
FLETCHER CONT/ D:
least. I mean, we even broadcast from a white board on
3AW, at one stage. We just sort of it's so outrageous.
Well, the point is if you've got to make a decision as a
minister see, this idea that a minister has
recommendations from a department which says box A,
tick if you agree; box B, tick if you don't agree; and box
B, maybe, and the minister sits up there like some kind of
dummy that just ticks one box or another, and if they
don't have a piece of paper recommending that therefore
they're not administering properly, no anyone who
thinks that, knows nothing about the Government of the
Commonwealth. FL ETCHER:
But it's thirty million dollars of my money.
KEATING: Mmm F! F. TCHER:
I mean, it's not exactly mine.
million. I'd love to have thirty
KEATING: where has it gone? It's gone to sports facilities for the
people I'm sure, you know, your're broadcasting to. That
is, amiateur sporting clubs
ELTC. F. R:
Yes. Look, I don't go against the philosophy, and
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD Rehame Australia
Monitoring Services Ply Ltd
ACN 006 389 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 03) 521 2980
Suite 300
Henry Lawson eusinns, Centr
8irkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Orummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone 819 626
Facsimile ( 02) 819 6388 
R E H A M E
EL1ETCH-ER CONT{ DX
everybody's I mean pork barrelling has been part of
politics forever. It's just the way that she's gone about it,
and apparently making decisions on the run to up
programmes. 1 also know of programmes that were rated
in those categories that didn't get the money when she
should ( sic), but again I would get back to the fact that
this is not going to away. I mean, the Opposition won't
let it go. Isn't it better to cut your losses.
K EAkTING:
Oh well, it's case of so, in other words, if the
Opposition keep asking questions, we have a minister
resign. Now, what if they ask another minister a series of
questions about some matter, and if gets past two weeks
of questions, we say, well that minister better resign too.
I mean, I don't remember I mean, John Howard was
up there yesterday with all the fury in the world, saying
Mrs Kelly should resign. I don't remember him resigning
when the McCabe Lanfranchi report came down in
Victoria, about the criminal evasion of the tax system. He
just sat there as it he were glued to the seat with araldyte.
So I mean, frankly, you've got to be around here a long
time to see a big issue and that was the biggest the
biggest scandal in public administration in the post-war
years was the evasion of the bottom-of-the-harbour
schemes in the 1980s. And you've got Mr Howard up
here saying to Ros Kelly, who's handing money to a band
hail, that she should resign and he said this morning,
and never come back for life. In other words, resign
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD I
RFthm AuitmNl
Monitoring Services Py Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone 5M 2611
Facslmlle ( 03 521 29
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Business Centm
Birkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Drummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 819 6M
Facsimile ( 02) 819 6388 
R E H A M E1
FLETCHER: Yes. Well, I mean, some of the language is a smidge ( sic)
colourful. KEAT1NG: characters. I mean, you know. So, what you've got to
do is separate out here a lot of the hyperbole from the
value of the programmes. And wha...
FLETCHER: The public perception still is, Prime Minister, that she is
incompetent, that she has not done this in what we would
see as a businesslike way. It's thirty million dollars. And
I would have thought that it's damaging you and your
party. I mean, I would have thought that there would be
a lot of people in within the Government who would
be very uneasy about Ros Kelly. It won't go away.
KEATING: Well, it won't go away while the Opposition keep asking
questions. FLETCHER:,-But they will keep asking them.
KEATING: We've ourselves established a House of Representatives
inquiry into this, and that will report next week. And
that is the appropriate process.
Now, in your remarks a few
said that the draft report.
breach of privilege matter moments ago, Margaret, you
Well, there's already been a
raised about this report. A Reharnme Australia
Monitoring Services Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephnne ( 03) 5212611
Facsimile 12 29B
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Business Centre
Dirkenhead Point Centre
Gary Street
Orummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 619626
Facslmlle ( 02) 8196388
7 -7
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD 
R E H A M
KEATIN CONTID:
minister a report is not presented. You can't take any
indication that what is notionally a draft recommendation
from this report of findings, are in fact the report's
findings at all. We'll know that next week. And we've
had established a House of Representatives Committee
look at that, and I'll take notice of, obviously, of those
or that report.
FLETCHER: But you see what I'm saying. It's obvious that the as
you say, the Opposition's going to go on. Therefore, the
issue won't go away. In a public sense, we're looking at
this brawling going on, and I would have thought, in a
political sense, it would be just as easy to chop.
KEATING: Well okay, but let's you chop people when they have
actually done something which is either there's always
questions about magnitude; forn and substance,
magnitude. Now, if there was fraud here, if there was
some obvious problem of that dimension, that becomes a
you know, a much more obvious matter. But this is
not the case here. See, nobody, even the opponents
Mrs Kelly's opponents nobody alleging fraud here.
PLETCHER: No. Well, I'm not either. But I tell you what, if I was
incompetent, I'd be out of a job.
KEATING: They don't like the choices. And therefore, I think the
best thing to do is to wait until the cutmittee reports and Rehame Austratli
Monitoring Serice Ply Ltd
ACN 008 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 03) S21 29M0
Suits 309
Henry Lawso Business Canue
Birkenhead Point Cenire
Cary Street
Drummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 819 5266
Facsimile ( 02) 819 388
REHAME AANU8STRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD 
0 REHAATLE M R9 T
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD Rehame Australia
Montonring Services Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Strect
Windauu Victoria 3181
Australla
Telephone ( 03) 5 2611
Facsimile ( 03) 521290
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Business Centn
Dirkenhead Point Centre
Gary Street
Drumnmoyne NSW 2047
lelepnone ( 02) 819626
Facsimile ( 02) 8196388
R E H A M E
KFATING CONT/ D:
see what it has to say.
FLETCHER: Okay. Well, we'll move onto another subject perhaps,
and that is question time this afternoon, and the changes
in the rules there. Again, I would talk as a voter; and it
really annoys me that you're rostering people and that
question time has moved, and even the ABC's putting on
the kid's programmes in front of question time.
KEATILG: the ABC. That's nothing to do with me.
FLETCHER: No, I know it's up to the ABC. But it's because of the
time changes, etcetera. I mean, we don't I wonder
about the accountability now. What chance have we, as a
public, have to there a lot of people who listen to
question time, or who watch question time. They won't
have that opportunity, and nor will you be there very
often. KEATING: I'll be there two days a week. I'll be there this afternoon,
as I was on Monday afternoon.
FLETCHIER: But that's a it's such I mean question time is the one
time when the Opposition gets a chance to question the
government. 
R E H A M E
KEATING: And they now get a better chance, in a sense, because
they'll have a smaller group of ministers each day
FLETCHER: You're not seriously telling me this.
KEATING: Yes, if you actually
FLETCHER: ( Laughs).
KEATING: See well, you're you may be a question time
listener, but you're not a question time watcher, here.
Now, let me tell you what's happened here over the years.
When I first came here, twenty-five years ago, an ordinary
backbench member could ask a minister a matter about
his or her electorate, and matters of substance. Now, all
the questions are picked by the Opposition Whip, with
the Lleader of the Opposition, for maximum political
effect. An ordinary backbench member gets no question
and no chance to ask a question. And ninety per cent of
the answers arc given by three or four ministers.
So in other words, largely, the Government goes
unscrutinised and, largely, backbench members can'l. raise
electorate or other policy issues in their own right.
In other words, what's happened with question time, it's
become a very stylised leader-to-leader, first two or three Rehams Australia
Monitoring Sevcea Ply LW
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Streel
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone 5212611
Facsimile ( 03) 521 29m
Suite 309
Ienry Lawson Busines Centre
Birkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Orummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 819 260
Facsimile ( 02) 819 6388
REHAMREE HAAAUUMSSETT RRAALLIIAA MMOONNIITTOORRIINNGG SSEERRVVIICCEESS PPTTYY LLTTDD 
KEATING CQNT/ D:
on the front bench to first two or three on the front
bench, on either side, contest. And therefore, I believe,
it's not serving accountability well, it's not serving
information well, and it's not serving the public debate
well. FLTCHER: Well surely there are some rules and regulations that
could be changed to improve question time, rather than
take the main players out of it.
KEATING: Well, I don't I mean see, to be accountable to for
the Government to be accountable twice a week on each
sitting week, is a lot of accountability, particularly when
on every other day, ministers are present. So for four
days a week and remember in this. arrangement, we're
giving the Opposition an extra sitting day each week so,
instead of three days and four days, it's four days and
four days and a second chamber for further debate,
where we can elucidate things. That is, where people
may wish to speak in committee stages on bills, can now
go to a second chamber, where that time would be
truncated in the House of Representatives.
The reform, overall I mean, if you were able to see the
first half an hour of question time yesterday, I think you
would have seen question time working well. For
instance, on Monday
FLETCHER:
What, becau...
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD Retarne Australia
Monitoring Services Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
I-93 Wellington Stlest
Winasor Victoria 3151
Australia Telephone 1 2611
Facsimile ( 03) 5 2980
Suite m
HeiNy Uawson BuSinss CORM
Birkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Orummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 819 66
Facsimile ( 02) 819 M388 
R E H A M E__
KEATING: Can I tell you this: I used to get one question a week
from Dr Hewson, on average. One a week. I got seven
from the from the Opposition on Monday
FLETCHER: Mmm. KEATING: and three from him.
FLETCHER: And none ycsterday.
Look, you know, I think that's stupidity on the
Opposition's part, to be perfectly honest. They should,
too, take that opportunity. But if you're not there, they
can't anyway. I mean, with the sports rorts affair and Ros
Kelly, she'll be there today and you will be
KEATING; Mmm. FLETCHER. but not yestcrday. I mean, I would have thought that
there was con...
KEATING: But she was she was not there yesterday, but she was
there the day before.
FLETCHER: Yeah, but why I mean, we pay you to be there all the
12 AUSTRALSIAE RMVOICNEITSORING
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD Rchtame Australia
Monitoring Servires Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 5212611
Facsimile (( 0315? 2980
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Ousiness Centr
Birkenhoad Point Centre
Cary Street
Ormmayne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02 8196266
Facsimile ( 02) 8 9 6388
U 
Rehame Australia
Moitoring Services Ply Ud
ACN 006 369 982
SR E H
I-3 A M El
ELETC R CONTJ:
time. I mean, wc're asking an hour a day when
Parliament's sitting.
You pay me to manage the Government of
Commonwealth. the the
FLETCHER: And to be answerable to us.
KEATING: Well, but understand what the Government is. The
Government is the business of the country.
Accountability in Parliament important is another
thing. It's a matter of how one exercises the
opportunities of that accountability. The track record is I
used to get one question a week from the leader of the
Opposition over the last year. One a week. So now, I
got more in tact, I got more questions on the first day,
on Monday. And yesterday, for instance, Mr Beazley,
who's Minister for Finance, was getting questioned about
genuine Finance Department issues, which he would
never have got in the old format.
So the the new format's working quite well. In fact,
the Opposition's claiming yesterday, it's because Mrs Kelly
was in there on Tuesday in the new format, that they
were able to ask the question that they did.
FLETCHER: I just think it's really not a lot to ask. I don't really
understand what the problem you have is with an hour a 93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 03) 521
Suite 309
Hemy Lawson Iuines Cenre
Birkenhead Point Cntre
Cary Street
Orummoyns NSW 2047
Tolephone 819 6
Facsimile ( 02) 819 WN
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD 
R E H A M El
FLETCHER CONT/ D:
day, when the House is sitting.
KEATING: Well, the problem is it's become a very stalc format,
which is basically
FLETCHER* Well, change the format.
KEATING; Well, we did. That's exactly what we did.
FLETCHER: No. But I mean, you can make rules to make question
time more productive.
KEATING: No, not if in fact it's all head-to-head stuff between the
two leaders and the first two or three members of the
frontbench. You've got to have a break in the way the
format runs.
1 mean, after all, take the mother of parliaments in
Britain; the Prime Minister goes to question time twice a
week and ministers are asked questions at other times.
It's exactly what we're doing hcre.
FLETCHER: I just well, we'll agree to disagree.
of the traditions that I actually
precious in Parliamecnt. I just think
found really it's one
rather Reharne Australia
Monitoring Services Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Strem
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia
Telephonem ( 01) 21 2811
Facsimile ( 03) 521 2980
Suite 309
Hlmry Lawson Susiness Centre
Birkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Drummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 819 6266
Facsimile ( 02) 8196386
a -14 7
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD 
R E H A ME1
KEATIXGIt's become a stale tradition, and not an interesting one.
And one where, what you're getting is basically a
twenty-second clip on the fourth item of the commercial
news services, which doesn't take most of us anywhere.
FLETCHER; Well as I said, we'll agree to disagree, ' cause I know
you're just out of time. I did say that at quarter to one,
we would free up your time. But I just wanted to ask, on
the Russian spies, could you tell me why we don't know
what happened there? Why it's only now that we've
found out?
KEATTNG;
This is with the US, you mean?
FLETCHER: With the five Russians.
expelled from Australia. No, it was the Russians being
KEATING: Well, I'm not sure 1 can be as informative about this as
you might like me to be. I think we might take that one
on notice. Well, 1 mean, 1 can talk to you about that
again. FLETCHER:
Okay. Well, I thank you
you won't leave it as long
on 3AW. for your time, and I hope that
next time that you'll come back
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD Rehame Australia
Monitoring Searvice,. Ply Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 5212611
Facsimile ( 03) 5Z1 2980
Suite 309
Henry Lawson Busness Cente
0lrkenhead Puint Centre
Cary Street
Oiummoyne NSW 2047
lelephone ( 02) 819 6
FaRiimila ( 02) 819 388 
Rohame Australia
Monitoring Services Ply Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
R E H A M E
iI A
KEATING: No. Well, I'm look, I'm quite happy. Let me I've
got no superstitions about 3AW. But it's got to be in the
news and information business. It can't be in the political
pamphleteering business.
FLETCI TER:
But, you see, I had lots to talk to you about today, but
we're out of time now.
KEATING: You and I are not on the breakfast programme, or the
mid-morning programme.
FLETCHER: All right. Well, will you come back on my programme?
KEATING:
Well, I think I will.
LETCHER:
Good. Well, that'd be lovely, Prime Minister. And I've
got a number of things to talk to you about.
KEATING: Righto Margaret.
FLETCHER:
Thank you. Thank you for your time.
That's the Prime Minister, Paul Keating. And the...
having a bit of a slammo ( sic) there at my colleagues
here. I wouldn't ever accuse them of bias, competencc
REHAME AAUUSSTTRRAALLIIAA MMOONNIITTOORRIINNGG SSEERRVVIICCEESS PTTYY LLTTDD 93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australia Telephone ( 03) 521 2611
racsimilu ( 03) M 2980
Suite 309
Henry Lawson 6usiness Centre
Birkenhead Point Centre
Gary Street
Drummoyne NSW 2047
Telephoe ( 02) 819 6266
Facsimile ( 02) 819 H8 
R E H A
-01 M Ej
FLETCHER CONTL/
perhaps, which is really more than I can say, in a personal
sense, than about Ros Kelly.
But nevertheless, the Prime Minister has said he'll come
back on the programme. Next time, we might ask more
things, like the jobs situation and the levy, etecctera. I
didn't get a chance to ask him about the Opposition, but
my undertaking was that we would have the Prime
Minister for quarter of an hour, and therefore that's what
we'vc done.
But nevertheless, hopefully the Prime Minister will be
back on the programme very soon.
END OF SEGMENT Rehame Australia
Monitoring Services Pty Ltd
ACN 006 369 982
93 Wellington Street
Windsor Victoria 3181
Australin TileponA ( 03) 521 2611
Facsimile ( 031I 290
Suite 309
Henry Lawsun uiness Centre
BIrkenhead Point Centre
Cary Street
Orummoyne NSW 2047
Telephone ( 02) 619 6266
Facsimile ( 02) 819 6388
REHAME AUSTRALIA MONITORING SERVICES PTY LTD 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
COAG AND A NEW COMMITMENT TO CHANGE
On the eve of the COAG Conference in Hobart I take the
opportunity to repeat the Government's call for a new
commitment to change. A new consensus about change.
The Commonwealth Government does not believe that its
role in economic reform is over by any means. Although
the role has changed there remains much to do as the
forthcoming White Paper will confirm. However, what
Australia urgently requires is a willingness on the part
of business and the States to accept their share of
responsibility for economic reform in the decade ahead.
As I said on Tuesday night, the truth is that reform in
electricity or in competition rules will only succeed if
the States accept that it is in their own interests and
the interests of their citizens. And that it most
certainly is. Similarly, progress in enterprise
bargaining or bringing Australian industry to global best
practice is in the interests of business and business has
the ultimate responsibility for achieving it.
If we are going to maintain the progress of economic
reform, strengthen economic recovery and extend its
benefits to all Australians, the States and the
Commonwealth must develop efficient means of working
together and in a more complementary way.
If we are going to deal the people into the opportunities
which national recovery offers the States have a
fundamental role to play.
We have spent a decade knocking down the barriers to our
external competitiveness and creating a cooperative and
productive workplace culture. We have to bring the same
resolve and the same attitudes to the . Federation.
The pursuit of competitive standards of efficiency which
the Commonwealth Government has fostered and to which so
many Australian businesses have responded must be brought
to the Federation. 4649 
The principles of efficient management and efficient
delivery which have come to govern Australia's best
businesses should govern the business of Australia.
The Commonwealth wants to discuss the roles and
responsibilities of governments in the Federation how
to deliver programs more effectively.
But a commitment to common national goals must the
guiding principle of the relationship between the States
and Commonwealth.
HOBART 24 February 1994
4650
I 



TEL 25. Feb. 94 8: 54 No. 001 P. 01/ Q4
13/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SIGNING OF NEW FINANCIAL AGREEMENT
Heads of Government today signed the new Financial Agreement Between
the Commonwealth, States and Territories.
Under the new agreement, the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern
Territory become, for the first time, members of Loan Council and parties to
the Financial Agreement, originally signed in 1927. Until now, participation
by the Territories in Loan Council arrangements has been on an informal
basis. Obsolete provisions of the present Agreement, which prevented the States
from borrowing in their own names in the capital markets, have been
removed. The administration of the Agreement has been simplified and the
requirement for Commonwealth and State borrowings to be approved under
its provisions Is removed.
Borrowings by the Commonwealth, States and Territories are subject to
monitoring and reporting under new Loan Council arrangements introduced
from 1993-94.
The new Agreement would become effective after the passage of
complementary Commonwealth, State and Territory legislation.
HOBART FEBRUARY, 1994 



TEL: 25. Feb. 94 10: 30 No. 010 P. 01/ 04
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN SHOVELAN, ABC RADIO, " AM" PROGRAM,
FRIDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: We have come a long way with COAG the Council of Australian
Governments in just a short period of time. We have seen a number
o1 -substantial success stories in the national arrangements for
technical and further education with the National Training Authority;
we've seen a declaration to do something very radical with electricity,
so I am hopeful that that same spirit will continue because it is now up
to the commonwealth and the states to move along change in the
government business enterprise area.
JS: Well, are the states still adamant that a national competition policy is
going to cost them a lot of money?
PM: It is in every states interests to see reform, I think, in their own
Interests not just something which the Commonwealth is seeking to
manage, in a sense against their interests or against their wishes. We
must have a competitive economy in the private sector, in the public
sector and this kind of change will mean that their states are more
competitive therefore business succeeds Is more likely to succeed;
growth will be more obvious and therefore the proceeds and their
budgets will become more bountiful. The more supple are the
economies of each of the states, the more likely they will have healthy
budgets.
JS: But they seem more concerned about the short term don't they, at least
going into the meeting?
PM: I wouldn't underestimate people. I think there is a lot of value amongst
them In terms of knowing what is good for their states and good for the
country.
JS: What are you offering the states in return for adopting your idea or the
Hilmer Report on a competition policy for Australia? 
T2EL.: Feb. 94 10: 30 No. 010 P. 02/ 04
2
PM: In a sense it is not just a Commonwealth idea, It is a general thing that
the nation must do. We have now been moving towards a much more
competitive country over the last ten years.
JS: But you have got to sell it to them don't you? There are a few Premiers
there that are a bit reluctant aren't they?
PM: It is a repo rt which has the support of the business community, of the
major business organisations and one would have thought that most
Premiers would see their states interest running parallel to those
business interests in terms of the private economy. So, It shouldn't be
a very radical proposition for a meeting of Heads of Government to
adopt a policy on enhanced competition.
JS: H-ow do you read Premier Richard Court's mood? I understand he has
released a forty page audit of what he calls " a Commonwealth power
grab"?
PM: I don't think he could construe a move towards higher levels of national
efficiency in any way I mean, how could it In any way be a
commonwealth grab so-called. it is simply making the state of
Western Australia as the other states as In the other states more
efficient. That Is, making the government business enterprises more
efficient. It is something for them, not for the Commonwealth.
JS: Do you believe your attitude towards COAG has changed a great deal
since the days when you were a back bencher? For example, when
you campaigned very strongly against the idea of a fixed share of
revenue for the states?
PM: I have always said that uniform taxation is the glue that holds the
federation together. That is a view I have, I do not believe that six
states with their own taxing powers will do anything but develop six
separate economies In this country. That can't be good for any of us,
so I have never compromised on that view. But, that Is not to say I
don't believe that the states shouldn't be properly resourced and that
we ought to develop, that is, a co-operative culture together in these
other matters. That is, In service delivery in program delivery, in the
efficiency of government business enterprises these are all things of
common and mutual benefit.
JS: That is a hump though that you have to get over with a few of the
Premiers Isn't It?
PM: It hasn't been at the last couple of meetings.
JS: But coming into this one there has been, I think, Premier Goss,
Premier Fahey. TEL 
TEL: 25. Feb. 94 10: 30 No. 010 P. 03/ 04
3
PM: But there is a general assumption that Premiers are not into good
works and deeds. I just don't think that is true,
JS: This time around it Is five Liberal Premiers, I think it is, and Premier
Goss, how does the mechanics differ, the dynamics differ given the
party structure?
PM: I do not think the party denominations has made any difference over
time. I have had more arguments with Labor Premiers than I have ever
had with Coalition Premiers.
JS: Well, that's one of the Ironies isn't it'? I mean, there is a strong
suggestion that Jeff Kennett is probably your biggest ally in there.
PM: I have had arguments over they have been basically financial ones,
but where these are about micro-economic change and program
delivery, they are different kinds of issues. But I think, from my point of
view, you take people as you find them and most people in public life.
are well motivated towards change and doing sensible and reasonable
things.
JS: It Is Important for you that the meeting is successful because there is a
perception around that the government has become politically bogged
down by the ' sports rorts' affair. That is fair enough isn't? That is a fair
enough perception for people to take out of what has been going on
over the recent weeks?
PM: I don't think it is, but this is a classic Canberra Press Gall ery story.
Out there in the country in the broad, I just don't think too many people
have ( switched) onto the so-called ' sports rorts' affair which Is about
what in the end? About giving grants to amateur sporting clubs who
will never have the financial resources themselves to put in a netball
field -or a basketball facility or what ever it might be.
JS: Do you accept though that it is causing some problems for you?
PM: It is causing us some problems, yes, it is. But again, let's see where
the value is. The value is In the pick up in the economy, which Is now
very obvious; it is in changes of the kind that we will be considering at
the Council of Australian Governments; it is in the pick up in
employment. That Is where the value is and I think the public focus on
value and they let a lot of the political static go over their shoulders.
JS: Yesterday the public galler applauded and John Howard thinks the
public gallery was actually applauding him. Who do you think they
were applauding? 
TEL: 25. Feb. 94 10: 30 No. 010 P. 04/ 04
4
PM: Look, it is very hard to decipher these things at the time. The fact is,
the leader of the Opposition made a very poor speech and his
backbench was embarrassed as was his front bench and they decided
that the story should be parliamentary hi jinx, parliamentary uproar,
rather than the story which would have otherwise been written entirely,
though of course it's been said, in the commentary over night, that
John Hewson had an opportunity to land some punches and couldn't
even do it on this. That was what it was really all about.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF 7.30 REPORT INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME
MINISTER, THE HON. P J KEATING, M. P.
ABC TELEVISION'S 7.30 REPORT
FRIDAY 25 FEBRUARY, 1994
PL: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you, Paul.
PL: Now, this buzzword here in Hobart today, competition
policy, exactly what does that mean?
PH: Well, it's trying to expose to all competitive
forces and the Trade Practices Act those parts which
have formerly been protected, such as state
electricity authorities, water authorities, rail and
unincorporated business enterprises.
PL: So, we're really talking about a big change in the
way our economy works, are we?
PM: It's a very large policy matter and the adoption
today of the principles of these competitive changes
is a very large, economy-wide change.
PL: Are we talking about the professions as well,
medicine, law, that sort of thing?
PM: We're talking about the legal profession, we're
talking about some professions, not necessarily all,
but, now, the Trade Practices Act already applies to
many. But, because the Commonwealth can only
legislate in respect of corporations we need state
legislation for unincorporated people. And, then,
of course, the other area in which the Commonwealth
needs the support of the states is in the state
government business enterprises such as electricity,
water, rail etcetera.
PL: Now, what are the gains in here for the community?
If we really get a lot more competitive and get rid
of a lot of these monopolies and really open the
thing up, how do we benefit and by how much? 
PK: Well, at the moment a lot of the electricity
tariffs, for instance, accrue to the electricity
commissions, electricity authorities or they go in
state budgets so they don't accrue. You have reforms
but the benefits never go back to the consumer or
rarely go fully back to the consumer.
PL: And if I'm running a factory I'm, in effect, paying
a sort of hidden tax in higher energy charges?
PM: Exactly, so what we're saying is if we really want
to kick along in the nineties, if we've done all the
things in the eighties, in the labour market, in the
general product markets of this country... we've
now got a huge boost to exports but we'll run up
against competitive problems by not getting these
barriers down. Now, there's only one way to get
them down and that's cooperatively. And that's
basically what has happened here today. It's a very
big outcome with the Commonwealth and the states all
agreeing that we should be accepting these
principles and working on joint legislation up to
the next August meeting of the Council of Australian
Governments.
PL: Of course, many state governments are rather hooked
on the revenue stream they get from these nice cosy
little state monopolies, aren't they?
PM: They are, but just as we, the Commonwealth, have
lost the better part of $ 600-$ 700 million a year now
by reduced customs duty because we've long ago now
brought the tariff wall down. Just as we've paid
money for structural adjustment by buying out
employment on the waterfront and other things
there's probably well over a billion dollars every
year now that we spend on structural adjustment
we've lost the revenue, so the states will have to
lose the revenue too.
PL: Yes, but they don't like that idea, do they?
PM: No, they don't. They want part of the
discussion today was them saying, look, we'll reform
in a sense, if you pay for it. And we were saying,
well, hang on, hang on, hang on, there's going to be
a great benefit for you, in your state, by more
employment, more activity in reforming. But, if
there's a peculiar transfer to the Commonwealth in
some of these things we'll consider some
reimbursement. So, we're saying, " Look, we can't
buy the reform for you, you're going to have to do
some of this yourselves. But, when you do it you'll
find just as we did, in telecommunications,
we've done the reform and what's happened? Phone
charges have gone down and services have come up.
The same will happen to you, you'll end up in a
better state, dare I say it, in a happier state." 
PL: So, in future this freeing up, this competitive
regime, will mean if I want to start producing gas
and pumping it into a national grid, I'll have
access to these monopolies will I, to electricity?
PM: Yes. For a start you'll have access, you'll have
fair, competitive rules and there won't be the
capacity to draw down what's called, in the jargon,
monopoly rents. In other words the monopolists
won't be able to charge what they like and then give
it to a state government budget or keep it in their
reserves. With competition, prices will fall and
the public will end up with cheaper electricity,
business will end up with cheaper electricity,
cheaper water and, generally, cheaper inputs. And,
our economy can't really maintain the
competitiveness with Asia unless we have the whole
all of the sectors of Australia. Not just
the corporate sector or the Commonwealth, but all of
the sectors dropping these barriers to competition.
PL: And, some of the premiers have suggested that if
you're fair dinkum about real competition you've got
to have another look at industrial relations?
PM: Well, what I have said during the day is this
product market reform will always precede labour
market reform. If you look at the motor car
industry, if we hadn't lowered tariffs on motor cars
you wouldn't have seen the productivity changes at
Ford or General Motors or Mitsubishi or Toyota.
Because they faced lower tariffs and a more
competitive environment they just had to change.
So, the employees and the unions changed with them
but if there is no pressure to change the labour
market reform is just theoretical.
PL: Yes, but if you have closed shops for example, that
doesn't sound too competitive. I don't think
they're talking about screwing wages down but we
have got a bit of a cosy situation still, haven't
we, with unions in the workplace?
PM: Well, they dropped this item on the agenda today.
They didn't want to press ahead with it. I'm
talking about the conservative premiers, they didn't
want to press ahead with it. I think the main thing
is, I said this week that Australia has to have a
cooperative relationship between the Commonwealth
and-thfe states. Through cooperation much can be
done, already a lot has been done. Now, I think
it's fair to say there wouldn't be too many federal
systems where you could sit down as today say in
Canada or in Germany or in the United States and
get the heads of governments to agree to open their
government business enterprises that is, 
expose them to competitive forces as in the rest of
the economy.
PL: Especially not over a three hour lunch.
PM: So, this is an effective device, COAG, but, of
course, what underpins it is, essentially,
cooperation.
PL: On another matter, Prime Minister, Mrs Kelly. How
much more damage can the government sustain on this?
PM: Well, again, it just highlights the point doesn't
it? I mean, here's the government looking at trying
to open up sectors of the economy which have been
closed for all of this century to competitive forces
and what are the opposition doing, chasing around
$ 11,000s from being paid to pipe bands in band
halls...
PL: But, that's what's in the headlines, that's what's
hurting the government.
PM: Yes, but it demonstrates, I think, the difference
between the government which is going all the time
for the main, big policy changes and an opposition
which has got no policy, basically trying to track
down a minister not because of any fraud or any
corruption, because they admit that because they
just don't like the way she administers it.
PL: Well, some would say at two to one on Labor
marginals they had a right to not like the way she
administered it.
PM: Well, most Labor marginals are always in deprived
areas. So, netball courts and basketball courts to
the small organisations of amateur sports clubs... I
mean, after all, this is small money being paid to
amateur sports clubs. Its almost the...
PL: It's two to one, shouldn't she have just fudged it a
bit more than that?
PM: It borders on the essence of civic virtue.
PL: But this borders on the essence of using taxpayers
money to try and win an election.
PM: And here's John Hewson at the Cairns University
saying, I Will1,-wi-thout the Vice Chancellors giving
him any support, without the higher education
authorities giving him any support, saying, oh yes,
I'll give you $ 30 million for a new campus ~ because
it might help us win the seat. It's aliright for
John Hewson to promise $ 30 million. And when asked
by a journalist, Dr Hewson how did you evaluate this
million? Like, was there a whiteboard? He 
said, on his fingers, three times ten,
contemptuously. Now, in other words, there's a rule
for John Hewson but the same rule doesn't apply to
Mrs Kelly.
PL: Well, how long are you prepared to hang tough for
Ros Kelly?
PM: Well, there's a House of Representatives report
following the Auditor-General's examinatiif-b-f this
program and that House of Representatives committee
will report next week. And I'll see what that
report says. We have a committee to look at these
things, it has and I'll be taking...
PL: And you'll weigh that report on its merits?
PM: I'll look at the report, absolutely. I have to,
don't I and of course I will.
PL: Yes, but Mrs Kelly's a colleague, a longstanding
friend and you've got the government's face at
stake, haven't you?
PM: But, remember this, I have never minded the notion
that ministers lose their place in the government
because there's been impropriety or there's been
some fraud or something of that matter. There is
nothing of that kind, here. What there is, is
constant attacks by an opposition without any
policies over what they think are allocations which
run against them.
PL: But you will have a look at this report next week
and you will weigh it up on its merits?
PM: I said in Parliament yesterday that this report is
to be presented, it's a House of Representatives
report on which the Government has a majority so, of
course, I'll be looking at the report to see what
they say.
PL: Thanks for your time.
PM: Thankyou.
Ends. 



G-A&amp; C.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON
P. J. KEATING, M. P.
COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS MEETING HOBART
FRIDAY 25 FEBRUARY, 1994
PM: The Commonwealth, myself and my colleagues the Treasurer and Deputy
Prime Minister, met with Premiers and Ministers over lunch and while there
were varying opinions we did manage, in a cooperative way to get an
agreement on adopting the general principles of the Hilmer Report on
competition policy; on authorising work to be undertaken jointly between us
on legislation, between now and the next COAG meeting which will include in
the broad the f1ilmer Report on competition policy applying to all sectors of
the economy and all levels of government.
So, I'm just about to give to Premiers the collated result of that session and that
will be incorporated in the communique. So, it was a productive lunch, -one
which will advance the whole process of competition policy reform over the
next months to August, but, more particularly, one which will advance
competition policy making the whole economy more competitive including, and
particularly, government business enterprises.
J: What about their demands about industrial relations reform?
PM: Well, this was not.., whatever discussion there is to be on that it was not part
and parcel of this result and this was one of the core matters of this COAG
meeting in fact the core matter of this COAG meeting and I'm pleased to
say we've had a very cooperative discussion.
J: Prime Minister, are you prepared to change the industrial relations legislation in
any way?
PM: Well, we're about to go in and discuss now the other elements on the agenda
water, electricity reform and all these other things. Industrial relations is just
one of those agenda items. The key message here is that the Hiliner discussion
has been encapsulated around itself only and not party to other...
J: So, IR legislation is on the table? 
2
PM: No, look, ask me about the IR legislation at the end of the day.
J: What about the audit that the states wanted?
PM: Well, that is the states understanding, themselves, what these competitive
changes mean in terms of costs for their own government business enterprises.
Well, that's fine, all governments should know that.
Ends. 



TEL: 26. Feb. 94 14: 22 No. 002 P. 01/ 04
PRINIMISET E
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPR
DOORSTOP, RICHMOND, TASMANIA
26 FEBRUARY$ 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minster, does Mrs Kelly enjoy your unqualified support
PM: I thought you were going to ask me about the things that really matter,
like the success we had yesterday. The Commonwealth and the
States together and one of the most, I think, far reaching decisions
thatprobably this country has seen. That Is, to open up these great
huge Government business enterprises like water and electricity to the
same competitive Influences as the rest of the economy. And I am
very pleased that yesterday was a demonstration of the fact that so
much cooperation has been in evidence at the commonwealth heads
of government meetings, because there is a view before each one, you
know, there is going to be the general line that tends to be run in the
media: " well there won't be any agreement here", but invariably there
is. And we have now got a national rail corporation, a national training
authority, Hilmer endorsed, so it was a very productive dlays work and
can-I say that the Commonwealth Government was very happy at the
outcome. it will mean a lot for consumers. I think that over time, as
you can see with telephones, putting a competitor into Telecom has
reduced telephone tariffs. This Is going to be just the same over time
in these other big bulk trading commodities like electricity and water,
which are not just Important to consumers, but of course, absolutely
critical to business as we go on to become a more competitive country.
J: Are you talking about private power companies, private water
companies eventually emerging?
PM: Well, what we will see is a separation of power generation from
distribution. So, you will have power stations tendering to provide their
power. But instead of being locked up away from the Trade Practices
Act and simply immune under state legislation they will be open to the
same competitive influences as the rest of the private economy. 
TEL: 26. Feb. 94 14: 22 No. 002 P. 02/ 04
2
J: So, cheaper power, cheaper water?
PM: It will end up cheaper power, cheaper power for consumers, cheaper
power for business, whicI s I think especially critical given that we are
sitting on a coal seam all the way down the East Coast of Australia.
We have a great natural advantage in electricity, and of course, in
water and the other products. So, it was a very far reaching decision.
Now, we have got to put flesh on the bones of the decision, we have
got to work it up to the next COAG Meeting, work up the
Commonwealth legislation joIntly with the States, and State legislation.
J: Jeff Kennett, though, is still saying that IR is the rock on which all
this could fall.
PM: Well that's a bit of ideology on the part of the Liberal Party. And what
we say to them Is this In tact, they dropped their agenda item
yesterday anyway the Government has now laid the foundations for a
most flexible labour market. Any enterprising business can enter into a
nw ind ustrial -relations agreement or anyone covered by a federal
award can vary the award without recourse to a union. Now, all that
really means is that it is up now to the employers to take these things
up and run with them. But they will always take them up when these
product markets are changing. I mean, if there is competition say
with Telecom it meant that the Telecom management and workforce
had to make the place more efficient. So, the labour market reform
generally follows, or the labour market changes, generally follow the
changes In the product markets. But you can't get the changes unless
you do things like yesterday.
SSo you can guarantee to business then, that the IR changes aren't
going to mean two categories of citizens: the unions and the rest?
PM: No; no. Because one of the rocks upon which this democracy of ours
is built is the right of free association. But be that as it may, an
employer under these changes can still make a new agreement with
the employees without reference to a union, Now, really what the
Liberals want are to cut peoples wages. And with profits as high as
they are in the economy now, in the stock market and in business, the
notion of going around and cutting people on $ 350.00 a week back is
something this Government won't wear. So, when you hear Liberal
Premiers talking abo -ut I R change~ sti is simply code for cutting back
ordinary people on low income wages. Now, if profits were broken and
the place had no prospects of growing these issues sort themselves
out in a low growth economy. But profits are high, as high as any
period in our history, and the stock market is back to where it was
before the stock market crash of 1987. So, to go around now saying,
" well look, we can only have change providing we can cut these little
people back on $ 350 bucks a week", is not the change we need. It is 
TEL: 26. Feb. 94 14: 22 No. 002 P. 03/ 04
3
mean spirited, it is unnecessary. What we need are the big changes
and it was the big changes we went after yesterday, and got.
J: One of the problems is that there is so much political noise around as
a result of Mrs Kelly and the -sport grants, the sort of good news you
are giving us tdc-ay is getting lost.
PM: Well I think it is up to you guys to put the right priority on things.
Where is the weight? I mean, what happened yesterday will stick to
the country for the next ten, twenty, thirty, forty years. These other
little matters disappear within weeks. They are just one of the political
dust storms that come through.
J: Mrs Kelly and her problems seem to be sticking to the Government.
PM: Well it is a matter of the weight. I mean, even the Liberal Party don't
say there Is anything other than their lack of appreciation, let's put it
that way, for Mrs Kelly's choices. That's what it boils down to. Well,
tough for them.
J: Do you think the jury is still out untill this committee report comes
down?
PM: Well we will see. We have got a committee and we have set it up, so
there we are, we will wait and see what it says.
J Kelly's future hinge on a positive response from that?
PM: Well we will just wait and see what it says.
J: Do you think Mrs Kelly the prospect of resigning during the week?
PM: -Well we will wait and see what it says. And I will see her Monday.
J: Mr Keating, is the Government concerned about federal court action
which could delay the start of Pay TV?
PM: No, I mean, that is one out of the blue. I must say that is not one I
have caught up with. I am quite sure in the hub-bub over Pay
television, that is, In the jockeying, commercial jockeying of both the
people who have got licences and the people who have got product,
will see obviously quite a lot of huff ing and puffing in courts, but this is
natural whenever you are going to see something which is virtually
going to change the choices of Australian television viewers, there is
always going to be competition for a thing like that.
J: Is their any indication of Telecom being involved in that legal action? 
TEL: 26. Feb. 94 14: 22 No. 002 P. 04/ 04
4
PM: I have got no Idea, Telecom runs itself as a private business and it
has got to look after itself.
J: Prime Minister, do you believe that Tasmanians have received the best
value from the $ 312 million in Gordon below Franklin Dam
compensation?
PM: Well I don't think I am in a position to make a judgement about that.
That is up to the State Government, they have got to be accountable to
the Tasmanian electorate, for the expenditure of very valuable dollars
from the Commonwealth. These are things which will come once, they
won't come again, and no doubt the opposition here will make clear
what it thinks are the valuable decisions and what are not.
J: A senior Tasmanian economist has said that it is a wonder that the
Federal Government doesn't try and retrieve the funds. Is that an
option?
PM; I have never seen that remark at all. But can I just say about
Tasmania generally. I think it is worth reporting that Tasmania has
picked up the competitive breezes in Australia. This morning I was at
a fish canning plant which is exporting. Not so many months ago I was
in Ulverstone at a potato factory, which Is exporting, Pacific Dunlop's
Potato Plant, and so the agriculture industries of Tasmania, particularly
small industries with small growers, are picking up product and
exporting it around the world. So, in a sense Tasmania is becoming a
bit of a model for the rest of the country in seeing the opportunities of
the new competitiveness of Australia and the Innovation which can
come from sensible management and good relations between product
suppliers and the workforce. And again, here in Richmond, I mean the
restoration of an important colonial town, one which adds a lot of
tourist lustre to this part of Tasmania, and one which is, of course,
helping keep the economy of Tasmania moving. So, tourism, niche
markets, food markets, but building on Australia's huge
competitiveness and exports of the kind we saw this morning is the
way for Australia, and I think In some of these industries Tasmania is
actually leading the way.
J have you heard anything about the Hobart Aquatic Centre..?
PM: No, I haven't.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF ADDRESS BY THE PRLIE MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, M. P.
SYLVIA SMITH'S ELECTORATE OFFICE LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA
SATURDAY 26 FEBRUARY, 1994
It is a great pleasure to be here with Sylvia ( Smith) to open this, her electorate office,
in the city of Launceston because it was on that night, just slightly less than a year ago,
that we saw Tasmania lead the return of a Labor government. And, when I saw the
numbers in the Tasmanian seats, given the fact that we had a substantial lead anyway, I
knew then we were always going to be unbeatable. As it turned out, that's as it turned
out to be. But, the truth is that we now want to earn that faith and trust which you put
in Sylvia and the government, through the course of this parliament, to see again the
great things that Labor can do for Australia, and to see return to the fold all of the
Tasmanian seats at the next election.
Tasmania, of course, is playing its part in the recovery which we are now seeing in the
Australian economy. We are now growing faster than any other comparable economy
and we'll be doing well growing around four percent into next year. And, I'm very
pleased to see Tasmania taking a part in this, sharing in this, in fact in some places,
leading it. And, today, just coming from Hobart, as I did, through Richmond and then
Ross, up to Evandale, seeing the tourist industry of Tasmania obviously playing a role
selling Tasmania's heritage as it does because the preservation of this wonderful city
and the places I mentioned is, I think, second to none in Australia. But, what also
pleased me this morning, I went through a fish export factory and, not so many months
ago, one at Ulverstone exporting potato chips. And, when you look at the amount of
industry and innovation which is taking place with Tasmanian companies picking up
the competitiveness which this government has now induced in Australia... we're
seeing Tasmania not just hanging behind the recovery but being ight in there with it.
And that will mean, as we're already seeing, employment start to pick up and we're
starting to see, I think, 145,000 job growth over the course of the last six months or
so, so we're well on the way to the half million jobs in three years having kept the
nearly two million of extra jobs which were created in the 1980s. So, we've had the
recession, we're out of it, we're on our way again and weve kept the great social
programs of the Labor party intact while we've been doing it. That is, Medicare and
thie ed ucation ' sy stem -and support for aged people and for young people and for
families we've been able to hold that together, now, as we contemplate the nineties.
And the nineties hold such bounty for Australia, now, as a low inflation country locked
into the. Asia-Pacific, -able to export our products and, in fhatjor the first time in our 
history being closer to fast growing world markets where, for most of our history, we
were a long way from the markets of Europe and North America. So, now we are
part of the fastest growing part of the world and we're right in there with it.
Now, of course, that couldn't be done, we couldn't realise the great ambitions we'ye
had through the eighties in setting Australia up as a modem society and economy,
without getting this period of office, this term of office, to give us a chance to ride the
growth cycle through the 1990s. And, you've helped give us this term of office by
sending Sylvia to Canberra as Member for Bass. Now, Sylvia said she is a woman of
the people. She gets around and she knows the electorate and she knows the
community. And this is what the Labor party always has, it has touch with the
community because it is from the community. And, that is why it has taken a Labor
government to give Australia a market economy, it's taken a Labor government to
enlarge the country and give it a greater future, it's taken a Labor government to see
the great opportunities in Asia and, at the same time, see our whole society grow
along... so that this recovery is not just for stockbrokers or people at the top end of
town, this recovery is a recovery for everybody and that includes the unemployed and
the long term unemployed and all Australians who ought to be able to participate in it.
Now, I said at the election, on election night, that we were not going to forget the
unemployed. That we were going to reach out our arms and bring them up with us so
we could go on to growth and prosperity in the 1990s. And, in this half year coming
up towards this Budget, I'll be introducing a statement dealing with the problems of
the long term unemployed and long term unemployment. And, let's, us, do something
new in the world7-fist in the world, again to say that in our society, in our
compassionate society, we will not leave three or four hundred thousand Australians
long term unemployed. That the rest of us won't move on and forget them, that we'll
go along as a society together. Because, only in that way will we keep this a nice
country which has got good values where we care about one another and where we
say, when we move along we all go along, not just those who are well off.
So, these are the great things we're fighting for, these are the great things we've been
elected for. And, we've now got a healthy, strong parliamentary majority and, for the
first time in a long time, the state of Tasmania playing a real role through the Labor
members in the Federal government of Australia. Now, it was 20 years ago when it
was thus, last like this. But, now Tasmania has rejoined the fold and as a consequence
Tasmania is getting the lift from the policies of the national government. And this has
got to help in general prosperity, in employment in this beautiful state. So, ladies and
gentlemen, Sylvia has already distinguished herself in the time she has been in the
parliamentary Labor party, she is a person of the people, she has that common touch,
she cares. And that input to the policies of the government, to the business of the
caucus of the party, is what makes all the difference in whether you've got a real
political party in office or just a business organisation which the Liberal Party is and
always has been a sort of semi-business organisation. Not a feeling, growing,
organic political organisation with touch to the community of this country.
So, I had a lot of pride on election night, none more so than seeing Tasmania return a
swag of Labor members. And, amongst them, Sylvia, whom I share this platform with
today with very great pride. So, could I thank each and every one of you for coming 
3
along, for supporting her, for believing in her, for having faith in the government and
faith in the great ideals of the Labor party. And let's hope, from the portals of this
office, that the great humanitarian policies of the party and its great sense of
enlargement can be accomplished here in Launceston. It gives me very great pleasure
to declare Sylvia's electorate office open.
Ends. 



Z t.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 27 FEBRUARY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
PM: Last Thursday evening and Friday while I was at the Council of
Australian Governments meeting trying to open up competitive breezes
for the first time ever in Australia's great government trading
enterprises and in unincorporated business and see further reforms on
water and electricity, the federal Opposition frontbench were briefing
the press about how they have given up the business of policies in
politics and they are going to take up the business of dirt and smear in
our public life. They ranked the Kelly sports matter, which is a dispute
about policy delivery as their only success in recent years and in an
article in The Australian they say that if one notes the success the
Coalition has had in recent years in Victoria, in South Australia, in
Western Australia and the Labor government's success in Queensland
it was basically out of issues connected with smears, corruption and
dirt. In fact they go on to say that " it has not been policy that has won
and lost office in Australia in recent times, but stench" and go on to say
these things that the shift in the Coalition will be most evident next
week when the focus of its attack in the House of Representatives
shifts from pork barrel to pork politics. They particularly want to
through mud at Paul Keating. The accusations as far as we can gather
will not be of corruption by Keating, the aim is simpler to ignite the
politics of envy". They go on to say that " for the first time in almost a
decade the Coalition is planning quite coldly to play the man in a
desperate attempt to shake the Labor Party out of office federally". It
goes on to say " this week the final stage of the Coalition's rejection of
John Hewson's authority over it, he's stated preference for playing the
game and not the man has been brutally overturned by the party's hard
heads and leadership pretenders." It says the parliamentary
geriatrics Andrew Peacock, Ian Sinclair, John Howard this is the
group who believe they can now start to destroy Keating and his
government with a new attack. This is why the prize of a win in the
new dirty politics will be much more important than anything to do with
odour from a piggery. For Hewson this turn of events is a new
disaster". 
These people can I say, Ian Sinclair, none of you could remember one
major contribution from him in public life over twenty odd years and
you can pretty well ditto that for both Peacock and Howard though they
led a Coalition in terms of policy change we saw from them, basically,
next to nothing.
The issue is this, that the Coalition, and at the same time as all this
Malcolm Fraser has Malcolm Fraser on the Party in despair So
this is a party without policies, who have had five election losses in a
row, they say that I helped to defeat their leaders Peacock, Howard,
Peacock and now Hewson and they'll seek to tear me down, but I
beat them on politics and policies and not on their personal life. In an
attempt now to break the unwritten rule of Australian politics and that
is, that parties win on policies and policies and party leaders and
ministers are attacked on policies and policies, they want to change
the basis of our national politics away from these things while great
policy changes are afoot to go back to personal attacks.
John Hewson knows what having your personal life exposed means
and he knows that neither I nor any member of the Labor party took up
one element of that two years ago. Not one bit. It was left where it
ought to be left as his personal affairs.
I have had now twenty months of questioning in the Senate, of claims
and accusations against me at the hands of the Liberal party through
Senator Baume, Boswell and others, all of which have been completely
fallacious and as you know have gone absolutely nowhere because my
personal investments and my life have nothing to do with my
administration of the Commonwealth and yet despite this how does this
compare with John Hewson acknowledging the fact that as a shadow
minister he took consultancies from a financial institution, that John
Howard to this day brazenly says that he is taking a consultancy from
Clayton Utz the major legal firm and the question is: Where does
now Dr Hewson stand on this tactic? Is it a fact that he has been as
Ms Tingle says in her piece rolled by the Coalition." The final stage
of the Coalition's rejection of John Hewson's authority of it, his stated
preference, that the week and the tactics was a new disaster for him,
where does he stand on this? Does he believe that low personal
gutter politics ought to be substituted for real policy? Is that where the
Liberal party is after five election defeats? Are the has-beens of the
Liberal party Howard, Peacock and Sinclair going to come back and
wreck it again when it has a chance to rebuild itself? And I want the
Australian public to know who fired, if they want to fire these shots,
who fired the first shot? Who fired the first shot in breaking the
unwritten rule of Australian public life that it is policies that matter not
the personal affairs and lives of MPs or Ministers and it will not be the
ALP that fires this first shot because we believe there is enough
differentiation out there in policy without this sort of nonsense. 
For my part, if the Coalition want to move along this tactic that's fine.
This is a very strongly written piece, it has been sourced obviously
from the Opposition frontbench, we have heard rumours of this now
floating around the Press Gallery and the business community for
weeks and let's get it into the open. Let's say that if the Liberal party
after five election defeats wants to now turn its back from policy, turn
away from the game and hop onto the man playing the man and not
the ball of rejecting John Hewson's view that that's the way public life
in Australia should operate, that gives the Liberal party a chance to do
as Malcolm Fraser suggests find a new basis for itself in Australian
public life. Let it make clear that it's the one who has decided on this
path and let it make clear that we, and no matter what they think,
whatever political success they might think they've had in trying to
belittle Mrs Kelly with the sports program administration, that is in
essence a policy matter over sport. This is an entirely different matter
and I'm just giving the Liberal party a chance to make clear what its
policy stance is and to let the country know that in this day and age
with great change afoot as we saw on Friday, vast co-operations now
between the Commonwealth and the states; a recovery on our hands;
the government now attending to long term unemployment; that the
best the Coalition can do is run around making fallacious claims about
nothing which in my case has nothing whatsoever to do with my
ministerial duties.
J: Mr Keating, last time Ian McLachlan raised the question of your
piggery in Parliament, you also raised questions about his residence
and his pecuniary interest what's that if not playing the man?
PM: That was in response, but I have never raised in a frontal, personal
way over twenty five years in public life the personal affairs of any of
these people. I have never made any reference to Mr McLachlan's
assets before he made a reference to mine. Last year I had Dr
Hewson and Mr Reith who put Mr Peacock up to a question about the
lateness of a return of a company I had with the Australian Securities
Commission and I in response said yes, and your two companies are
late by two and three months. I have only referred to their matters in
response to them attacking me. I have never taken this matter on, this
sort of stuff on. What we have here is the old guard. This is the crowd
who not only did nothing in the 1960s and 1970s, but essentially
robbed the Liberal party of its victories in the 1980s. Coming back, I
mean, when you see them on the front bench, for me it is like a trip
down the time tunnel to twenty years ago, to see this group who took
the country and the Liberal party and the Coalition nowhere
surrounded by a group of backbenchers who just don't know what they
are doing. And the few in the Coalition who have some idea of policy,
not being able to get a toe hold whether that's Hewson or Wooldridge
or who ever. 
J: If they pursue this strategy, are you going to hit back?
PM: We'll see what they will do, but if there is to be any middle class
moralising going on in the editorials of this country and there is plenty
of it, let them contemplate this kind of change to our public life and let
them understand that what these old guard renegade group are up to
is not the politics and the policies of the new Australia, but basically
the old smear rubbish that they think brought down a series of
Coalition state governments. What brought down a series of Coalition
state governments and Labor governments was basically financial
mismanagement of financial institutions. In the case of the National
Party in Queensland, proved corruption. In Western Australia, the
Western Australian Inc matter, but these went to Ministers'
management of their portfolios. This is entirely a different matter.
J: What's it going to mean for the week in Parliament Prime Minister. Are
we going to see a repeat of last Thursday?
PM: I think you have got to say to Dr Hewson does he support these sorts
of tactics? Is this background briefing so strongly given to The
Australian an indication of the frontbench policies; was he rolled last
week; was the tactics of taking on censure motions and uproar in
Parliament all part of that sort of thing or does he believe as he's
always said he has, that politics is about playing the issues and not the
man. For my party, I have been around here a long time and I can
look after myself, that you don't need an assurance. But it is up to the
Liberal Party to say whether the useless, old guard is going to take
charge again of its parliamentary politics.
J: Do you accept no blame for what happened last Thursday?
PM: Look, I'm not here to debate last Thursday. Last Thursday was a
different matter around different issues.
J: Are you saying you have no option but to respond in kind if those are
the tactics that are embarked on?
PM: I'm not saying anything like that. Let me just tell you this that for
twenty months, not two months, I've had Senator Baume, Boswell,
O'Chee and others up making a set of charges. All it came to'nothing.
One, that I changed the foreign investment policies in the ' One Nation'
Statement to advantage myself completely fallacious and was proven
to be so. Second, that I connived with AQIS to bring in pigs from
Denmark totally debunked by the AQIS people before a Senate
committee. The third was that I introduced accelerated depreciation
policies in the ' One Nation' package to avail myself of them which I
didn't do. Every single claim has fallen to the ground because it is just
basically dirt and rubbish. 
J: How do you see the attack on Mrs Kelly fitting in with these new tactics
of the Opposition. What is your view on Mrs Kelly's position now?
PM: Whatever I think about the strength of Mrs Kelly's position in terms of
the administration of the sports program, which is a discretionary
program for grants to minor amateur sporting organisations, whatever
claims are made about this, it is a pursuit of the administration of a
federal program. I am just trying the make the point again. This is an
entirely different matter to the personal life of ministers.
J: So you still stand by Mrs Kelly as you have so far?
PM: I said yesterday, I don't think I can add to what I said yesterday, that
the Opposition are all about process and in this respect so too is the
government and we established a House of Representatives
committee to look at all of the aspects which none of the rest of us on
the front bench are able to do in such a comprehensive way, not being
able to give it that sort of time and attention. That report is coming
down this week and, obviously, I will be waiting to read that report.
J: You said you would see Mrs Kelly tomorrow, why is that?
PM: I didn't say that at all.
J: I thought you said that yesterday.
PM: I mean I see colleague ministers virtually everyday of the week.
J: There's a report today saying that she's going to be asked to resign...
PM: Well, I'm not responding to reports, I mean that's about all I can say.
She deserves at least I mean all these people that believe in process.
There has been a House of Representatives committee, and it is going
to report, so I think decency demands that we wait till the report. We'll
see what they say.
J: You're talking about the Opposition's Parliamentary tactics. Stephen
Martin said today he wanted to push for an independent speaker, and
John Howard said that perhaps it's time to consider the British
system...
PM: Look, all this stuff about unctuous indignation by John Howard about
speakers and the roles of speakers. I remember the times here when
the Opposition would suspend question time to censure people like
Jim Cairns, run the debate through the evening, make people sit all
through the night and walk out in broad daylight, suspend the next
day's question time and keep going. I mean don't you believe even
with Coalition speakers it's been anything other than thus on the part
of a Coalition with a majority to kick the hell out of the then Opposition 
6
whenever it had a chance. Today politics is nothing like it was. It's a
relatively, I'm afraid for the rest of you, more genteel matter than what
it was 20 years ago.
J: Any comment on another matter what has happened in the Middle
East?
PM: I am appalled by what has happened there. I can only hope that this
doesn't derail what is now beyond a peace process to a reconciliation
in the Middle East, but I will be getting a report on that as soon as
possible. Thank you.
ends 



TEL: 28. Feb. 94 16: 44 No. 021 P. 01/ 02
, I
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
NEW MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Following the resignation of Ros Kelly as Minister for Environment, Sport and
Territories I advise that I will be recommending to the Governor-General the following
new Ministerial arrangcments:
Senator Graham Richardson to become Minister for the Environmcnt, Sport
and Territories
Senator John Faulkner to become Minister for Sport and Territories within the
above portfolio.
Mrs Kelly was Ministcr assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women. I will
now assume full responsibility for that part of my portfolio.
28 February 1994 Af
AA&amp; 6 
T2EL. F: eb. 94 16: 44 No. 021 P. 02/ 02
Commionwealth Governmient
SFCONI) KFATING MINISTrRY
mvaux 00m CHAumM
Prime Minister The lHan? J Keating, UP Senator Evans
MWinie, for Aboriginal wid Torrcs Stiait. Ulandor Aftain Thre Non Robert Tickner, MIP Suaor Collins
pecial Minister ot Stat. ( V~ tx-PfMd~ o1 of the t'xmitfvc Council) The lion Frank Walker. QC, Mp SenAtor fv
Parliamentary. Serretary The lion Andrew Zheophanoni4 Up
Minister for hlousing, Local Goycirnment aud Humnan Sen'ie The Han Brian flowe, ? AP % AUsio Richrda
( Dgeuty I'ru Miniuter)
Minister for hecalih Senator the Hion Grahant Ricmardson Mr I laws
Minist for Family Siec Senator the lion Itosemmay Crowley NIT I owa
Minister for Vseorans' Affairs, ( Miaiigct uf 0overencal Business to Seair the Hon John Faulkner Mr How*
A&amp;$ seet )
Parliamentary Secretary The l1on Andrew Thoophano~ t MP
Minhter for Forcilo Affairs, ( Leadct of Tbe Cuovenicai in the Senate) Seator the Han Gareth E~ vans, QC Mr Bilhimy
MlbbLw ror Trade Senator the Uon Boh McMullan Mr licy
Minister for Dtvclopinevi Co-OPUration And Padic Wsand Affairs The lion Oordon 1ijincy, MP' Smnto Evans
Mtinistcr for Defence, ( Deputy Iader of the Governmeat to thc Senate) keator the Haon Robert Ray Mr Dlewiey
Minister fot Deene Science and PursonacI Senator the lion john rAulner Ma' Ileazcy
Parliazmentary Secretary The Hon oary Pwach, UP
Trtasurcr The lion Ralph Willi%, MP Senator cook
Amsaut Treauror The Man George Gear. MV' Senator cook
Special Minister of.% tAte Tne lion Frank Walker, 10C, M1' senator cook
Puriaumensary Secreta ry te lion Paul Ellicw, Am
Minister for kinance, ( 3c&amp; i&amp; r of t Wmu) The Ron Kim C Besley, MIP Seator Cook
Minister for the Environment, Sport and Territorhis Senator the Non Craharn lchnrdin M, L" e
Mknisicy tor spoa't and TwrTitorics Senator the Hon John Fasulkncr Mr Lee
Plarllemetital Serary ( Territories) the RON. Warren Snov4 or MP
Parliamenfory Secretary The lion Jaket Croio May, 4 MP
Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional Developmnent Senator the Ro. Peter Cook Mr La.
Minister far Scitnce and Small flusinars Senator the Han Chris Schacht Mr Lee
Miiter Auisting the Prime Mini Ibfr Sciene
Perliamentar Secretary t lon E Lindisay, M11
Minister for Immingratlnn and Ethnic Affairs Senator the lion Nick flolku4s Mr orertzon
Minister Assistin the Prime Minister for Multiculftral Affairs
Minister for Fusploymcut, Education and Triing The Hop Simton Creep, MP Senator Schacbt
Minister fur Schools, Vocational Education and '[ raining The Hon Ross Proti, MP Seamar Schucht
Parliamentary Secretary te Hom W4arreng Sowdon, Afp
Minlistr far Prituary Industrics and Energy Sentitor the huma Bob Collins Mr Beddall
Minister for Resources The lion David fledall, MP 8" maot Collns
Parlilamentary Secrtar Senatur the lon ffick Sherry
Minister for Social Security The Roo Peter Bold win, MP Seamar Crowley
Parliamentary Secretary T7e lion Con Sdruaca, MP
Minister for Admlinlstrativg $ mrice&amp; Senator the Ron Dob McMullen Mr funnxy
Parliamentary SecretAry The lion C'on Sciacca, U~ P
Minister for Industrial Relations The Nion Laurie Brtrclon, MP Senator Ray
. Aastant Minister for Industrial Relations Tho lion Gary IOlrni, MP Senator Ray
Mmifser Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Service Matters
Minister fur Transport The Ilon Laurie Urereton, MP Senator McMullani
Parliamentary Secretary The lion Neil O'Kegfe, MP
Atiorncy-Generml Thei Ilea Michael IlAVarci, M? Senator BoikUs
Minktcr for Consumer Affair% Tbq lIIon lcallnete M4; tiugb, MP Senator HOlUa
Minifter for Justice Tle lion Duncan Kerr, MP Senator Hoilkus
l'urlianmniry Secretary The Yo( n Peter Duncan, MP
MiPister for Communicaions and the Arts The Hon Mital Lee, MIP Senaor McMuilao
Minister for Tourism T'he Ruon Michuel lee, MP Seatlor Ray
EA boa frueae It poctfollo. Cabinet ialiters * IT shown In bnld type. As a SenJ rule* there Is ow4 Depuimt.~ in each potulio. lt fag the
Department of the rue Minster and CAbiact. the Depastmest of huiunt Seoices and Hlealth and the Duaitaet of i'ozca~ a Allain and Tad@, th tk of cub~
Dquncnit eflects thiat of the Portfolio Mlinistcr, There Is albo a Depurt'unt of Vtetes Affairs in the Ilma" Services and lisaith portfoio.
TEL 



FEt.. a, I rlar 16 : 39 No . C26 F .01;,' U
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH. STAN GRANT, REAL LIFE PROGRAM, CHI 7
1 MARCH 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
SG. Why did Ros Kelly take so long-to resign?
PM;. Because she believed, as all reports have confirmed, that she had
done nothing improper, that there was no question of fraud and
impropriety, and therefore questions about her choices, that is the
exercise of her ministerial discretion, were subjective ones that didn't
require resignation.
SG: So, what was the final straw then?
PM: Well, the House of Representatives made a report and said that there
wasn't an adequate paper trail. That is, in terms of recommendations,
that the record keeping, they said, wasn't up to scratch. I think Mrs
Kell-y would have had to live with that. But then of course, the Senate,
as is its habit, was debating whether they would have a full scale
senate inquiry which would then go on for more months, and I think
having gone on for months she thought it was doing the Government
more harm then good.
SG: But before that parliamentary inquiry there was evidence of
incompetence, of bias, of misleading parliament. Wasn't that enough
for you to say to her you have to go?
P M. No evidence of misleading Parliament. There was none of that. Not
incompetence, an argument about bias.
SO: I don't know if the whiteboard is seen as competent, do you? 
TEL: I. Mar., 94 16: 39 No. 026 P. 02/ 07
2
PM: It is a matter of how she made the decisions. But you see these were
decisions for amateur sports clubs, Stan, for netball courts..
SG: $ 30 million, though.
PM. Yes, that's right. For grants of $ 50, 000 and $ 100,000 to netball
courts, squash courts, basketball courts, for small amateur sporting
organisations that can never get this sort of money. As she said
yesterday, nobody said that any one thing that was built shouldn't be
built. What the Liberals said was, " this is a pity, we are not getting as
much of it as we should". But that didn't stop John Hewson saying that
in one go he would spend $ 30 million on a university without one note
of paper, one bit of evaluation, and when asked, " well how did you
arrive at your $ 30 million, Dr Hewson?" He said contemptuously, put
his fingers up and said " three times ten."
SG: But, Prime Minister, even now after we have had the resignation, we
have had the parliamentary Inquiry, it sounds as though you are still
trying to play it down, still trying to say it is a piddling matter.
PM: No, I am saying that you asked me why she didn't resign early. I said
because there was no hint of impropriety or fraud, but a debate about
the priorities she set and that was going to go on for some time, and
she thought that it was going to do the Government harm.
SG: Do you accept in prolonging it, for as long as it was, that the
Government suffered a lot of damage and gave the Opposition the
opportunity to score a few points?
PM: Let me read to you from today's newspoll, and this is the real story of
the day, Stan. It says, ' despite the Coalitions political success in
forcing the resignation of a Cabinet Minister over the sports affair,
voter dissatisfaction with the Leader of the Opposition, Dr F-fewson, has
re-ached an all time high.'
SG: So, you don't accept that you did suffer any collateral damage, as Kim
Beazely put it?
PM: What has happened in the period since this sport things has been on,
the Government's popularity has risen. Now, it's not to say that the
Government wants the issue around. But what today's newspoll
makes clear, and this would be if you put a stethoscope on the heartbeat
of the Liberal Party in this building today, they wouldn't be talking
about sports they would be talking about the fact that they are going
back~ wards.
S G. Prime Minister, now that one Minister has gone for incompetence,
does this mean that other Ministers are now on notice as well? They
can take it as being warned? 
TE. LM: ar. 94 16: 39 No. 026 P. 03/ 07
3
PM: Well, I think, one has to be, competence is part of one's skills in this
life. Now, this Government is 11 years in office and it has been a very
competent Government, but part of that is because of the discretion
Ministers have. This sort of amateur baby blue view of the world, that
a Minister can only do what is on a piece of paper and tick it a piece
of paper from a bureaucrat is only the view that somebody could have
who has never held a big job, who has never held a major portfolio,
who has never made the big decisions. Because this Government has
actually run the policy, it is not being run by the bureaucracy, it is
being run by the Government.
ST-Ok, given that you are going to allow that discretion to continue,
unfettered, how do you make sure that this situation is not repeated
again. The Democrats are calling for a code of conduct, are you
prepared to agree to that?
PM: Well, the first thing the Democrats can do, in any code of conduct, is to
declare their own interests in the Senate. Do you realise Stan that in
the House of Representatives Members and Ministers have to declare
all their personal assets and all their interests. There is no Senate
register. Whenever the Government has proposed a register of
Senators Interests, the Democrats and the Greens and the Liberal
Party between them vote It down. So, the only suggestion I have got to
make to Senator Kemnot, if she wants to start on the questions of
accountability and putting things on the table, they ought to first start
with a register of their assets in the Senate.
SG: So, you are saying no to a deal over a code of conduct?
PM: Well, let them show by actions and deeds, rather than words, that the
Senate is actually interested in putting some code on itself.
SG: So, -you are saying, no you don't want more cheques and balances to
make sure this doesn't happen again?
PM: No, but the same code which the House of Representatives has had
on itself for 10 years. You probably don't quite realise this, but there is
a set of disclosure things in the House of Representatives that there
isn't in the Senate. And yet it is the Senate moralising about codes of
conduct.
SG: Well, again, Prime Minister, you are saying no to Senator Kemnot?
PM: We are saying pass the register in the Senate, show us a modicum,
just a modicum of sincerity on this and we will think about it.
TEL 
I TEL 4
SG: She is also saying, Senator Kemnot is also saying that if you agree to
the code of conduct she won't go ahead and support the Opposition for
another inquiry Into the sports rorts affair.
PM: Well, that is a veiled threat, you see.
SG: You don't wear that?
PM: What I said last week, all these minor Parties, almost every week they
have a veiled threat. The current week's threat is, if you don't agree to
this that and everything oflse we will have a senate inquiry into all this.
I mean, last week Senator Kernot -wanted to gaol public servants who
answered back. I mean, those dreadful public servants who happened
to say that they were instructed by the Government and Senators say,
" gaol them, gaol them."'
SG: Now that Graham Richardson has taken over Minister Kelly's portfolio,
is Graham Richardson just holding that portfolio over until Carmen
Lawrence goes into Parliament?
PM: Well, there is a number of things, there is an inquiry, which as you
know, Mr Griffith's will soon be undertaken into these matters
connected wIth Mr Griffith, he has already been cleared by a police
inquiry, which means he has a prospect of returning to the Ministry at
some point. You've got Dr Lawrence's election in Western Australia.
These are choices the Labor Party has got to make.
SG: So the chances are that Dr Lawrence will take over that portfolio?
PM: No, I couldn't say that to you Stan, but at least, obviously, there are
some choices for the government.
SG: What about Ros Kelly's future?
PM: She was a great Environment Minister and she has a very proud
record and I think it is worth recording that, can I just give you a couple
of instances: she negotiated the agreement on the National Forest
Policy; developed and implemented the Commonwealth's endangered
species legislation; established Ocean Rescue 2000; made major
advances in the World Heritage Listing at Shark Bay, Fraser Island
and Kakadu; established the National Reserve System Program;
established the Feral Pest Program, this is a very proud record from an
Environment Minister.
SG-But, for all of that, she will be remembered for the ' sports rorts' affair
and having to resign over that. What about her future?
P M: She will go now to the backbench of the Parliamentary Party to the
Caucus. TE. NLa r 94 16~ 3 No 026 P 04/ 0 
i I L L
SG: No chance of being recycled at ra Graham Richardson?
PM: And if she wishes to recontest a place in the Ministry, well, of course,
that is going to be open to her and open to the Caucus to consider her
again at some time -should she so choose.
SO: Do you look at that favourably?
PM: It is not a matter of whether I look at it favourably. At some point in
time every member of the Caucus has a right to offer themselves for
selection.
SG:-But, after this affair, do you think it is feasible that she could possibly
come back?
PM:. The thing Is, I don't think at the moment it is even in her mind.
SG: The Opposition has already signalled that it is going to go on the
attack after this. It has asked questions already about your piggery. It
has also said that Dr Lawrence will be targeted once she gets into
Federal Parliament, so how are you going to counter that?
PM;. Malcolm Fraser the other day said this: twelve months since the
loss of the March 1993 election, we are as much in the dark about
what the Liberal Party stands for as we were the day Fightback was
buried very condemnatory statement by a former Liberal Party
Prime Minister. In other words, the Liberal Party's problem Stan, is
they have no policy, their leader is at 26 per cent approval rating, they
would lose an election if it was held today and they think now their
recourse because they believe they are going to lose the next election
and they are facing a further five years in opposition, they think what
they'll do is throw mud as some sort of substitute for policy. Well, what
the -electoral record shows is that people without a policy, without
substance, without a link and contact and understanding of the
Australian community don't get returned to office.
SO: Prime Minister, Peter Costello today has been contacted by Federal
Police wishing to interview him over leaked documents in this ' sports
rorts' affair. What do you make of that?
PM: Probably the Secretary of the Department, sensibly, and not
unreasonably, when documents are stolen from the Department of
Finance has asked the Police to investigate it.
SG:-He says it is an attempt to harass and intimidate public servants who
have been making information public about malpractice. 1. 11 a r-., j4 io NO r U, 
TEL.: M ar .94 16: 39 No. 026 P. 06/ 0-(
6
PM: Does he mean the same public servants they are threatening to goal in
the Senate? Are they the same ones that the Liberal party will vote to
discipline in the Senate? Look, Stan, don't believe that nonsense. If
the Department of Finance seeks a recourse to the police for loss of
documents and the trail leads to Mr Costello, that's Mr Costello's
problem.
SG: Prime Minister, finally, one of the things to come out of this of course,
was that disgraceful performance in Parliament last week. How can
you make sure that that is not going to happen again?
PM: What that was about was that Dr Hewson was defeated in his
executive, was obliged to move a censure motion against me over the
sports affair he didn't want to do it. When he did it he made a mess
of it. It was a terribly weak speech.
SG: But you stirred the pot didn't you?
PM: No, hang on..
SG: You got your backbenchers do create a bit of a raucous.
PM: No, it was a terribly weak speech and so because the Liberal's said
well, what will we do now, our blokes made a mess of it? They said
let's make the news " Parliamentary uproar'. So, then it was all about
them telling the Speaker off and jumping up and abusing so..
SO: Your slde is not innocent in that either.
PM. No, but the story was not " Hewson weak: hopeless speech" but
" Parliamentary uproa3'. mhat was an instant decision the Liberal party
fr ontbench made when Dr Hewson finished his speech. Now Stan,
look, they are a desperate little bunch, they have been in opposition
for eleven years heading to thirteen and, 1 believe, going to sixteen.
SG: But you are as much to blame for that little effort last week, how can
you make sure that it doesn't happen again?
PM: I beg your pardon. No I wasn't. I got up and made a speech. They
censured a Prime Minister and allowed me five and a half minutes out
of fifteen to reply, the other ten minutes were taken up by raucous
noise and abuse.
SG: Stephen Martin, the Speaker, is talking about having to bring Arnold
Schwarzenegger into Parliament to have some sort of control. Has it
really gone that far?
PM: If you look at Parliaments around the world, this one is a fairly demure
one. Look at the Japanese, the Korean Parliament, the Italian
TEL 
TEL: I. Mar * 94 16: 39 No. U26 P. 07/ 07Cj
7
Parliament let's not over do the hyperbole. What happened here
the Liberal party leader made a censure on the Government, on the
Prime Minister, failed and his front bench to smother for him decided
they would have a day of parliamentary hi jinx. Stan, these things
come and go. The next day I was In Tasmania pulling together an
historic agreement between the Commonwealth and the States to open
up the water, electricity, railways and ports of this country to
competitive breezes. That day I was in the course of getting across
those issues. The following day we actually came to an historic
agreement with the States. As far as I am concerned if the Liberal
party wants to get Involved in Parliamentary nonsense as distinct from
substance-let them.
SG: If the Speaker Stephen Martin has to discipline the Government, has to
throw any of your Ministers out of Parliament, how would you react to
that?
PM; Speakers have done that in the past.
SG: You would accept that?
PM: The Speaker has disciplined Government members in the past. Of
course I would accept that.
SO: So he would be under no threat at all if he did that?
PM: No, but the Speaker sensibly, will make his own judgements about
these matters. It is not a matter of me or you deciding some strategy
for him. What happened here was basically a rudderless Opposition
with a leader now nobody supports, a weak leader, a weak person who
can't cut the mustard In policy or In discipline or in organisation, is
sitting there with a divided Opposition and the only tactic they know is
now noise and disruption.
SG: Prime Minister, for all the attacks you have made today on Dr Hewson,
you are the one who is being accused today of having looked after a
mate for too long.
PM: Mrs Kelly resigned her position and she has paid the price for
whatever is believed to be the management of this program. But
again, let me repeat, after a very distinguished ministerial career in the
environment and in other portfolios, no hint of fraud or impropriety, an
argument simply about choices and one which would have gone on for
months.
ends 



TEL.: Mar. 94 13: 23 No. 019 P. 01/ 03
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KIZATINQ MP
RADIO SWP, RIUCHARD UTTING I MARCH 1II4
E AND OE PROOF ONLY
= T~ NO: Will her resignation finish this affair clo you think?
PM; I think so, If' s sntlally a Canberra poitical dust storm Which I think
Ros Kelly graclousiy hosed down yesterday and I think It More Is any lesson to be
loorned out of this the House of Representatives Cgmmlttee sold In its report that In
.11 future grants programs, this Is a grant progiram, there ought to be a sort of
schedule of appicatins that evaluates such projects and contains
recommendations to guide the ministes decisions. Now I think that I&amp; probably
right and that some good Will come from It
UTTING; But Paul that should have been obvious some weelks ago and No
been a running sore as far as the Government Is oonoerned, hasn't it
PM. Well except thet things of course were z0 dsAffbuted last year and
the year before that so Whot'l dlStubut$ 4 can't be undistilbuted but essentilly tee
were relatvely small grants to amateur sporting organisations and you know there
has got to be some basis of evaluation. Now the evaluation was done by the
minister herself, whet the committee looking at this taid, well she should do It may
be but the administration should largely be Vith the department and well I think
tat' something we can take note of from this episode. The main thing Is that there
was no fraud involved In tttl. no Impropriety because these monies had to be
expended -befbre they woerahibursed. Oet a lot of programs, monies are
expanded to the U1mit and they are not then fully spent, well spent This one, the
local people had to spend the money and only after it was spent were they
reirnbursed by the Commonwealth so therefore Mie oceoson at fr~ ud was very
diminished, There IS no Indication, no hint of fraud or Impropdety Just In a sernse
dIssatisfact~ on with the way In which, with the ministees choice.
UTTI NG: It does appear that Labor. marginal -Labo electorates were favoured
by the allocation of gnnmts.
PM: I Well mostly Labor marginal electorates have a dearth of these sort of
fucilitie6, rietball courts and basketall courts end what have you whereas
established areas, you know your sort of Peppemnt Grove&amp; and Dalkeiths, and
these sort of areas have got these things and they don't need them.
TEL 
TEL.: Mar. 94 13: 23 No. 019 P. 02/ 03
2. LrrTING; It surely means that there should be Proper guldelind3 for the
allocation of thiese grants s0 that there Is no perception of poflica Wias-.
PM: Yes well thats a point I think In a sense I was making a moment ago
In refenlng to what the House of Rpreentatves Commite, said was this. in all
fMure grants programs there ought to provide a schedule of application that
evaluates the proposed pruJects and contains recommendations to guide the
ministers decuisone, In other words the minister Is just not sittng there himself or
herself saying yea or may to this one or that one.
IJTTING; But as Prime Minister Paul, you should have been aware of the
problems In this program some time ago and doneO something to remedy ft.
PM: Well the program lhes had great popular support Richard, You take
any of the sporting dlubs. I mean I sad the other day the way the Liberal Party haed
beaten up this thing you would mwar blind It was a terrlble thing to give money to
amsaur spairting dlubs. How does on amateu ' r sporting club that is looking for a
notball court or a basketball court or a bowling groen or call It what you like, raise
that sort of money, under what programs do ty get ft? Now as I said this thing
has a lot of virtue this program, a tremeindous amount of virtue. So It's really only
with t process of evaluation end not the program of t essence. The Liberal
Party put no money Into sport, never, they put peanuts In the 70s, they had two and
three million, we have got sort of sixty, eighty Million dollars a year going Into sport
now, that's both into elit, sport and Into amateur sport. They have attacked all
these programs as If ther Is something terribl, about giving funds to amateur
sporting themes whic I think are the salt of the earth type orgmnisations to give
funds to and therefore they don't really cam about areas which have been deprived
or groups who ara financlally strapped who have had these programs made
available to them. I think you have always got to keep an eye on what Is basically a
decet policy mnollvaton.
UTTING: Now you stood by Roo Kelly for a long Orme ever this. ' Met was the
straw that broke the earners back?
PM: The likelihood Is that she would have probably faced continuing
questioning about this and the House of Represetatives Committee cAine down
end sald there was adminIstrtve deficiencies In t way In which these wore
Issued but they made ft quite clear there was no frud or no Impropriety, so she
would have had that to deal with and of eourse we had t Opposifion with their
Piinka in the Senate. so It may have gone on for much longer at her expense. I
think that was her decision but Richard I thinK its worth concentrating on this point.
The real story in today's papers I* the penl of The Austalin and this Is what Is
running the Liberal Pa" t. I wAl just read you the first paragraph It says, despite the
Coalition's politeal success In forebig the resignation of the cabinet miniser over " i
so called spoats torts afar, voter dIssaifacton with the Leader of the Oppositon
Dr Hewson has reached an all time highi.----
LifTING: This Is the whole point Isn't kt you nlow can take the attack up to the
Opposition rather than having t1he hoomorrtaging 0f tne &amp; pan&amp; s rtn thing distrctng
evelytIng. TEL: 
TEL
3, PM: That's right I spenlt last Friday in Hobart w" t? the Premiers putting
together what was a lanidmark~ change In the adoption of competon policy within
ths great Overnment buisiness enterprises of this country, that Is the electricity
authorities, the water authorities, the ports, all of thees orgaisatione. Now tais.
huge change, they have always been cosattad these organlsatloris. They charge
mostly monopoly prices, you could sM whom the Commonwealth Imtrouced
competition Into telecommunications West Australians would nodie most particuany
how STD prices have come down to the rst of Australia because of competition to
Telecom. We In the Federal Government have been tyilng to got t States to
agree to competitin within those Mtate authorifies. This was agreed In prl~ pie last
Friday In Hobart Now it Is these matters of substance Richard, like the other thing
we are doing now, looking at the Wog term unemployed which maters and The
Australian poll Is basicall right Wile ever the Oppositon wants to basically get
Involved In Canberra dust storms of this variety thiey have not been able to translatel
it Into any political success and the poll published this morning basicaly would mean
that If we went to an election this week the Government would win.
LITTING: Now talkIng about peraps not long term unemployed but someone
who Is taking it a bit easy I guess, whers Ros Kellys political future now?
PM: she win remin a member of the House of -Representative. for
Canbeirr which Is the prImary role a person In Paiament has and she can just
make het own mind up then about what she thinks, what she wants her career
prospects to be. But she has been a very aignificlant Minister for the Envirnment
ane of the core matters agreed upon lost Friday was lhe adoption at the Council of
Austral Ian Qlovermmnt tt Is the Commonwealt and the States of standards for'
air and water uality and nwo pollution which ame care environmental mattr.. The
quality of water and th. quality of alt and national standards, This It one of the
things that thi country needed, this is someth'ing, a milestone thing she negotiated
as environment minister so silo has haed a very Important career In public life had
four year* as Ministeir for the Environment In Cabinet and chalked up great
succeuses and most particlarly last Friday the very day she was under attack,
ENDS i mar 4 16 5 10 U I J UD/ 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINSITER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF WORLD SUMMIT ON TELEVISION AND CHILDREN
TWO-WAY VIDEO LINK WITH MARK MITCHELL IN MELBOURNE
2 MARCH 1994
MM: Prime Minister, Mr Keating, welcome. Thank you for being with us
again today.
PM. Pleasure. Well I was with you a couple of years ago with Janet
( Holmes a Court) and Patricia Edgar and David Hill wthen we launched,
I think, Lift Off on that occasion. And that was a very successful
launch and I am pleased to be back.
MM: Since that time Mr Keating you have made your position and your
feelings about childrens television very clear.
PM: Well I think that I have. I have tried to say that I think what children
see on television is important in the way they think. The sensitivities
they develop in their lives, their value system, and I think we have at
least made some mark on commercial television in requiring that
violence is not being telecast at times that kids are looking at
television, and generally just making a more general point. That is,
that a lot of the grade material and rubbish which is on television
ought to be improved and-it is-organisations such-as theChildren's
Television Foundation which is, of course, leading the role in d~ oing
that.
MM. There is a theory that children enjoy it, that sort of rubbish.
PM: Well I think they will watch what is there for them to see. But in some
of the products which the foundation has produced where it is kids
looking at themselves rather than seeing someone banged up or Ninja
Turtles, or whatever it might be, whether it is violence and other things,
when they actually see something about themselves, in their own
environment or a contemporary environment, particularly when they
recognise the contemporary Australian quality of something they are
looking at, they are much more interested. And I think the support
TEL: 10. Mar. 94 10: 15 No. 002 3 P. 02 
ILL: 2
which the various things; Round the Twist and Lift Off and those things
have had demonstrates that point.
MM: I think that is certainly true, Prime Minister, of Round the Twist. It was
very Australian, Australian accents, Australian concepts, they have
even had a ghost in the dunny. I guess the ghost in the dunny or the
loo or the toilet, whatever it is called, wherever they watch it, is a fairly
universal thing for kids.
PM: Well, I think it certainly brought a lot of attention from Australian
children and support, and of course with Lift Off, I think it had
something like a 5 million viewing audience in Britain and it has been a
great success there, even greater than some of the so called popular
programs like Mash and things like that. So, it has produced its own
reward and as Janet said a few moments ago the BBC is now in a coproduction
with the foundation and I think that is the proof of the
pudding.
MM: 5 million viewers in fact watched Round the Twist every Friday night. It
out rated Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles at a time when they were
enormously big everywhere in the world. Do you remember them at
all?
PM. Yes, what ever happened to them? They vanished off the scene.
MM: They didn't have the foundation behind them, I guess. I believe that
there is some good news about Round the Twist, Prime Minister,
Patricia Edgar tells me that a feature film is being considered, is in fact
in the pipeline. So, that will be something to look to. I believe you
have something very special to announce today.
PM: Well I am very pleased to be able to announce, following discussions I
had with Janet and Patricia last year, that I am able to announce the
first world summit on television and children. Now, this is not just an
Australian first, it is a world first. It will be in Melbourne next year, the
Delegates are coming from around the-ASEAN area, from China, from
the United States, from Japan and its objective will be to look at the
information highway, the thing Mr Gates was telling us about so
eloquently a week or two ago, the fact that television will be interactive
not just simply delivering product to children and others, but giving the
capacity for interaction and therefore the important focus we should
now have on the cultural impact of that medium, and this is the first
international opportunity to get that focus. I think it also will underwrite
the status of the quality of Australian children's television product and
our foundation.
This will be a good thing for us because I think we are leading the
world in thinking about television product for children and the
organisation of television time for children. And given the fact that we
LL: 10. Mar. 94 10: 15 No. 002 P. 03 
3
are now in this country about to embark upon pay television, where it
can't be that many years away where we are looking at the capacity for
interactive television, having if you like the world leader, and I think we
are, in this medium of material for children and thought about children
and television, having us in fact host this conference and manage it is,
I think, a good thing for children around the world, for children in
Australia, and a good thing for Australia's reputation as a country that
has got good values and cares about its children.
MM: Thank you very much, Prime Minister, and thanks for your ongoing
support.
PM: Good, Mark, pleasure. 



TEL
I PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL CRIME AUTHORITY BOMBING REWARD
The Federal Government will contribute $ 250,000 towards a reward being
offered to help bring to justice the culprit or culprits responsible for the tragic
bombing of the NCA office In Adelaide yesterday.
This contribution will be combined with the $ 250,000 reward offered by the
South Australian Government to assist the police investigation.
I appeal to anyone with information which may assist police in their inquiries
to come forward immediately.
The Government will make every effort to ensure whoever perpetrated the
savage and senseless attack is apprehended.
CANBERRA 3 March 1994 16/ 94
T3EL.: Mar. 94 13: 08 No. 010 P. 01/ 01! 



TEL: 4. Mar. 94 15: 53 No. 020 P. 01/ 02;
VA PRIME MINISTER 17/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
MEETING OF EPAC AND THE EMPLOYMENT WHITE PAPER
Today's meeting of the Economic Planning Advisory Council ( EPAC)
provided timely input to the Government's deliberations on its forthcoming
employment White Paper.
The White Paper will be released on 28 April and will incorporate policies to
encourage job growth and to address the particular difficulties faced by the
long-term unemployed. The White Paper will also address the two related
areas of Industy policy and regional development.
The Prime Minister will chair a special committee of Cabinet to develop
policies and programs for the White Paper. The committee will include the
Deputy Prime Minister, Brian Howe, the Treasurer, Ralph Willis, the Minister
for Finance, Kim Beazley, the Minister for Industry, Technology and Regional
Development, Senator Peter Cook, the Minister for Employment, Education
and Training, Simon Crean, the Minister for Social Security, Peter Baldwin,
and the Minister for Industrial Relations, Laurie Brereton.
The meeting of EPAC today was devoted to issues central to the White
Paper. Discussion focussed on two major reports that were released last
December as well as presentations on two studies commissioned by the
Government that are in the process of being finalised.
The Report of the Committee on Employment Opportunities, Restoring Full
Employment. was introduced by Committee members Professor Bob Gregory
and Mary Ann O'Loughlin and the head of the associated task force, Meredith
Edwards. The Chairman of the Task Force on Regional Development, Bill Kelty,
introduced the report of his task force.
The issue of regional development is also being addressed in the McKinsey
and Co study of Firms' Regional Location Decisions. Michael Rennie and
Rob Mallick from McKinseys presented some of their preliminary findings to
the meeting. 
TEL: 4. Mar. 94 15: 53 No. 020 P. 02/ 02
2
Timothy Sims presented preliminary results from the L. E. K. Partnership study
on Services Exports. This study highlights the fact that in the same way that
exports of manufactures have been growing rapidly in recent years, services
exports have also demonstrated rapid growth and it identifies some of the
driving forces behind that growth.
The Government is pleased to have had this opportunity to discuss these
reports with their authors and the representatives of State and local
governments, business, trade unions, the rural sector, welfare and other
community organisations.
CANBERRA
4 March 1994 


INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S&nbsp;DAY&nbsp;
Today is a significant day on the international calendar, commemorating the&nbsp;achievements of women the world over who have contributed to improving&nbsp;the status of women.
International Women's Day is especially significant for Australian women this&nbsp;year as the nation celebrates the centenary of women's suffrage and&nbsp;commemorates the struggles of earlier generations of women to gain&nbsp;fundamental democratic rights.
International Women's Day provides an opportunity to consider the gains&nbsp;which have been made, as well as where further action is needed, to Improve&nbsp;women's lives and opportunities.
Over the last 12 months, the Commonwealth Government has acted on the&nbsp;issues that Australian women have nominated as their most pressing&nbsp;concerns. Since launching the Government's New National Agenda for&nbsp;Women in February last year, progress has been made in a number of crucial&nbsp;areas. Employment Historically, International Women's Day recognises the efforts of those who&nbsp;have fought for women's rights in employment. At the beginning of this&nbsp;century, women garment workers in the United States were striking for better.&nbsp;pay and working conditions and, at the first Australian Women's Day rally in&nbsp;1928, -women called for equal pay for equal work and an eight hour working&nbsp;day.
The new Industrial Relations Reform Act ( 1993), which comes into effect at&nbsp;the end of this month, makes a significant contribution to the Government's&nbsp;achievements in the employment and industrial relations arenas. in addition&nbsp;to legislating to ensure that all workers in Australia have access to key &nbsp;minimum entitlements in employment, the new Act will introduce a range of&nbsp;mechanisms to ensure that enterprise bargaining is accessible and fair for&nbsp;women. Discriminatory provisions in new awards and enterprise agreements were&nbsp;made unlawful under amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act in 1992. The&nbsp;new Indtustrial Relations Reform Act takes this reform even further by&nbsp;ensuring that discriminatory provisions in awards cannot be deemed to be in&nbsp;the " public interest". The Act also requires that an annual report be made to&nbsp;the Minister for Industrial Relations on the impact of enterprise bargaining on&nbsp;women. Under the new Industrial Relations Act, the Industrial Relations Commission&nbsp;will, in addition, be able to make orders to ensure that men and women&nbsp;receive equal remuneration for work of equal value, including, for the firsttime, In the over award area which is especially important for women.
Careing for Children
The Government is taking steps to recognise the unpaid work of women&nbsp;caring full-time for children. The Government will introduce the Home Child&nbsp;Care Allowance of up to $ 30 a week. This payment will provide an&nbsp;independent source of income for women in unpaid employment in the home.&nbsp;It will not be income tested on family income.
The Home Child Care Allowance will replace the Dependent Spouse Rebate&nbsp;which is currently paid as a tax rebate to the spouse in employment, usually&nbsp;the husband. The replacement of a tax concession with a cash payment has&nbsp;many advantages for women. First, the payment can be made directly to the&nbsp;person with primary responsibilities for caring for the children, usually the&nbsp;mother. Second, some 55,000 low income families who do not pay enough&nbsp;tax to get the full value of the Dependent Spouse Rebate will now be entitled&nbsp;to the direct payment. And finally, up to 120,000 families will be able to claim&nbsp;the new payment as soon as their circumstances change, such as when a&nbsp;woman leaves work to have a baby, rather than waiting for a new financial&nbsp;year as is the case now.
Currently, most working families do not receive any assistance from the&nbsp;Government In paying for child care. The introduction of the Child Care&nbsp;Rebate on 1 July this year will provide long overdue recognition of the high&nbsp;cost of child care for many working families.
A rebate of up to '$28 a week for one child and $ 61 for two or more children&nbsp;will be available. The full rebate will be payable where families have spent&nbsp;$ 110 a week on child care for one child or $ 220 for two or more.&nbsp;There has been some criticism that the Child Care Rebate is unfair as it will&nbsp;not be income tested. The Government's view is that the cost of child care&nbsp;should be treated similarly to other expenses workers incur in earning an&nbsp;income, expenses such as the payment of union dues, the cost of the&nbsp;membership of professional associations and the cost of protective clothing.
Such expenses are treated as tax deductions and are not income tested. The&nbsp;criticisms against the general child care rebate seem to imply that expenses&nbsp;born, by and large, by women workers are somehow less worthy of&nbsp;recognition than the more traditional costs incurred primarily by male&nbsp;workers.
Stopping violence against women
This Government has been the first to tackle, at a national level, community&nbsp;attitudes to violence against women. We have launched hard hitting&nbsp;education and publicity campaigns which emphasise merls responsibility for&nbsp;their violence.
We are also tackling the issue of gender bias in the legal system. The&nbsp;Government has provided funding to the Australian Institute of Judicial&nbsp;Administration and the Family Court to conduct gender awareness programs&nbsp;for judges, magistrates and court personnel.&nbsp;The Australian Law Reform Commission was also asked to report on&nbsp;women's equality before the law and its Interim report was tabled in&nbsp;Parliament last week.
This reference generated an unprecedented level of public interest.&nbsp;Hundreds of women from around the country came forward to recount their&nbsp;experience of the legal system. A particular focus was the link between&nbsp;violence against women and their lack of access to justice. Many women&nbsp;drew attention to serious difficulties they have in gaining protection from, or&nbsp;redress for, violence against them.
The Government will be considering the recommendations of the Interim&nbsp;Report, including the establishment of a National Women's Justice Program&nbsp;to meet the needs of women for legal advice, Information and advocacy as&nbsp;well as for greater opportunities to effect the development of new laws.&nbsp;We are also working with the States and Territories to achieve national&nbsp;consistency in domestic violence legislation.
And we have given priority to the safety of women escaping violence, with&nbsp;funding for programs to assist women in rural and remote areas and with&nbsp;ongoing funding for women's refuges.
Women's Health
The Government is proud that Australia now has among the best breast and&nbsp;cervical cancer screening programs in the world.
With improved breast cancer screening underway, we are now seeking&nbsp;further improvements in the way treatment and care are provided to women&nbsp;diagnosed with cancer. Our aim must be to get the system right and to make&nbsp;sure women have much better information about treatment options and a real&nbsp;ability to choose what best suits their condition.
Commonwealth and State Health Ministers have made the tight against&nbsp;breast cancer a priority. They are soon to release a National Health Policy&nbsp;discussion paper for extensive consultations, including with women and&nbsp;women's organisations. The paper will propose a national goal to reduce&nbsp;deaths from the disease and invites views on strategies to achieve that goal.&nbsp;The strategies include improved diagnostic, treatment and support services,&nbsp;better access to services, as well as enhanced clinical and other research.
Choice and Equity
Essentially the Government's policies are about providing women with&nbsp;greater choice and backing up those choices with supportive employment,&nbsp;income and child care arrangements.
The proposals under consideration in the context of the Green Paper on&nbsp;Restoring Full Employment are about making sure that women have access&nbsp;to job and training opportunities and that appropriate support is provided for&nbsp;those who choose to remain outside the paid labour force to care for children.&nbsp;I recently hosted a meeting of over 40 national women's non-government&nbsp;organisations to obtain their views on the Green Paper proposals and other&nbsp;priority issues. These Round Table consultations, with a broad range of&nbsp;women's organisations, will take place twice yearly to ensure that women's&nbsp;voices are heard on major policy issues. They are a new addition to the&nbsp;measures I have adopted to ensure that Government policy is sensitive to&nbsp;women's needs and reflects women's views and priorities.Conclusion 
Earlier this year I said that one of the great reconciliations underway in&nbsp;Australian society is the reconciliation between men and women over roles&nbsp;and responsibilities and the enhanced opportunities for womerf participation&nbsp;in the workforce and society generally. On a day when we commemorate the&nbsp;undeniable and irresistible momentum that has changed forever the&nbsp;opportunities available to women, it is Important to remember also that such&nbsp;changes demand greater flexibility and understanding by men and women.&nbsp;Without a doubt, Australia benefits from womerfs greater participation in the&nbsp;economic, social and family life of the nation. It Is incumbent upon the&nbsp;Government to find ways to promote real choice and equity for women and&nbsp;also to support women and men in coming to terms with the changes.
CANBERRA8 MARCH 1994
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
THE UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME AUSTRALIA GRADUATION CEREMONY
PERTH TUESDAY, 8 MARCH 1.994
It is a great pleasure to be here tonight.
I suspect that until you see a graduation ceremony you
haven't fully appreciated what education means to people.
I mean you don't very often see the sort of general and
unmitigated happiness you see on people's faces here.
You don't see all that evidence of fulfilment and hope in
one room very O~ ften.
For me, being with you this evening is also a pleasure,*
because I missed my own graduation ceremony.
Not that I didn't have a classical education but it was in
the Australian Labor Party.
Apart from a few degrees in economics, it afforded me a Ph. D
in Varieties of Human Behaviour.
Tn fact, of all the Primp Ministers since the 1940s, with
the exception of John McEwen, who was in the job for just a
few days, I am the only one not to have had a university
education. My academic education ended at the age of seventeen.
I am quite sure that the great majority of people from my
background in those years would not have expected to set
foot in a university in their lifetimes.
It was beyond reach -or at least seemed to be.
It is true that with application and intelligence the sons
and daughters of working people aQ get there.
But not many of them. The majority simply couldn't afford
it. And there were not many universities.
However, the physical limits were not the only impediment,
nor perhaps the most important one. 
There was a psychological obstacle. A university education
was beyond the reach of our social expectatiohs.
It required young people to think beyond their
circumstances, beyond the patterns of life in their families
and communities. It meant very often leaving those families
and communities.
It required a leap of the imagination which most of us could
not make.
Most did not expect to go to university or even finish
secondary school indeed, just a decade ago only three in
ten Australians were finishing secondary school. That is in
1984.
And so long as jobs were available we were not very
concerned. In the 1950s and 1960s jobs were available: not particularly
interesting jobs but jobs. Jobs like the one I took, aged
fiftaon. AA nlrk in thp Svdnpv Cnntv Cominil.
DuL 1.1tiL JIL1IJ lAtLi IJLLV~ tLe2I. A I. M TILuiI. iiji. v, aJiL T iL
WnauP UZI&amp;* CA: 0 V; FL Qur nxaowy X0 M. L anum.
All over the world in modern economies like this one, the
old low-skill jobs are going. All over the world the story
is education and training.
Personal opportunities depend on it. The success of nations
depends on it.
Now, I suspect that it is customary for politicians making
these addresses to speak on one of two or three themes
themes from which some lesson can be learned to guide you
through your lives.
For instance, I could tell you that while your formal
education is a very good thing, your real education is about
to begin in life, in work, in the school of hard knocks.
I could tell you there is no substitute for experience.
Or I could tell you that we're delighted to see you all
graduating today at this lovely new university but, in
all modesty, you owe it to us, for really we made it all
possible. I intend to spare you a speech on these themes today, but
there is a little truth in both of them.
On the second one, I cannot refrain from saying that my
pleasure in seeing these young people graduate today is
appreciably greater because I know that, in the course of
the last decade, tens of thousands of young Australians have
been given an opportunity to study and earn degrees at new
universities and colleges. 
Since the 1980s, the equivalent of twenty major universities
have been added to the system by the Commonwealth Government
Commonwealth Labor Government.
This expansion of our tertiary education has not only
delivered new opportunities to countless individuals, but it
has made it possible for people to get higher education
without leaving their communities.
My pleasure is greater because the Government, and
particularly John Dawkins, played a part in it. If you
like, the milestone you reached today is something of a
milestone for us as well.
Where people from working class suburbs and poorer ru~ ral
areas not so long ago never imagined that their children
might go to university, it is now one of their life options.
The lesson is: look what can flow from engagement in public
life, look what this democracy can do, look how we have it
in our power to change.
Look how, like the graduates here today, we can imagine
something better and turn it to reality. We can do it as
individuals, as communities and as a nation.
As for the first of the familiar themes it is true that
the very best of formal education is still no substitute for
life lived. It is true that in this life one is constantly
learning. But no one today would stand here now and discount the need
for a formal education. The fact is young Australians need
one as never before more than one, because it is a
statistical certainty that the majority of people graduating
today will be re-trained at least once and probably twice in
their lives.
So what is the lesson? Be open to change. Believe in your
capacities to understand the contemporary world and
confront the challenges. Embrace the future, don't retreat
from it.
Which leads me to a third cliche of these addresses: it is
to say that in your hands the future of Australia lies.
I suspect this has most often been said by politicians who
didn't care to have the future in fheir hands.
It is a half-truth.
It is obviously true that the future depends on young
Australians, but I have to tell you my generation is not
quite ready to hand over responsibility.
It is my generation on whom the responsibility falls: we
hold the instruments of power in the national parliament,
in the states, in the community. 
And your generation should judge us all by the same
criteria: Are we prepared to confront the necessities which
face us? Are we prepared to make over those elements of our
national life which need making over?
Or are we prepared to let things drift?
The temptation in politics is alwys to let things drift.
It is very easy to decide to play safe and manage your way
through. It is much harder to imagine reforms, set them as goals and
go for them and trust that the momentum which comes from
the pursuit will carry you through.
It is also easy to become preoccupied with the day to day
business of politics warding of f aggressors, pursuing a
more potent media profile, handling the little crises which
dog all democratic governments.
Sometimes political life is a bit like being inside a
pinball machine: with balls whizzing around all over the
place, you can find yourself with your eyes closed and your
hands over your head adopting a crouch as a permanent
political position.
You can preoccupy yourself with every missile, with every
seeming necessity, with every process, with every ritual and
think you're playing the game, yet forget that the game is
ultimately about getting done what has to be done.
The lesson is: power is for using. It is not to be wasted
or feared or despised. It is to be used to deliver our
democratic ambitions in my case, our gnnial democratic
ambitions. Which brings me to MX theme for tonight.
You will have heard, I'm sure I sincerely hn~ you have
heard those terms which have become watchwords of the
Australian economy, and for that matter, Australian society.
I mean words like " competitive", " internationally
competitive" -" an internationally competitive economy"
You will have heard a lot of talk about " productivity".
These were the words which emerged to describe our economic
ambitions in the 1980s. In the 1990s, we can safely say,
they describe much more of the reality.
What you might have heard less frequently are the words
which describe our Anial ambitions.
Yet we pursued them with equal energy. We were determined
from the start to make the Australian economy
internationally competitive, yet no less determined to see 
that the principles of a competitive economy did rnot flow
over, as it has in some countries, into a creed of
selfishness, or a justification for abandoning our
traditions of social fairness.
Because if you abandon these, you abandon opportunity and
thereby abandon talent. And you abandon the social cohesion
on which national success depends.
In the nineties, I think it is essential that we maintain
the momentum of our economic reform while also maintaining
our determination to see Australia emerge as one of the
truly advanced social democracies of the world.
This was our reputation at the end of the last century. I
have absolutely no doubt that it can be our repaliit. y at the
end of this century.
We can do it through continuing to make our economy and our
federation more creative and efficient, and at each step in
that process ensuring that the benefits flow to the whole of
the country and all of the people: making the safety net of
social services more effective and sophisticated, extending
the reach of opportunity and assistance to communities and
regions which have been denied them.
I am talking about dealing everyone into national recovery
and national prosperity and making everyone feel part of
the national equation.
There is no intellectual copyright in political life only
the satisfaction which comes from having persuaded the other
side of politics to one's own view.
So it is deeply satisfying, not to say flattering, to hear
Dr Hewson talking about remaking Liberal Party policy into
something more socially " inclusive" in other words
something rather like L. AQnr Party policy.
For, in fact, it will be no bad thing if there emerges a
general consensus on the need to share in Australia's
future, because there are extraordinary opportunities for
Australia in the modern world most particularly in modern
Asia. " Asia" is another word you hear a lot of these days, and
often in the context of " competitiveness" and
" productivity".
For Asia does set us these same economic imperatives: and
meeting them successfully translates into words like
" opportunity" unrp( rPcented opportunity to build a rich,
creative, complex society and set up generations of
Australians in the twenty-first century.
The truth is we have never been in this situation before:
riot with a chance to make it on our own, in our own region,
by our own genius and endeavour. 
But it is essential that in doing this we make sure that
these opportunities the chance to benefit and the chance
to contribute are extended to Australians wherever they
come from and whatever their social and economic
circumstances may now be.
The economic and the social are not separate categories.
The major issue now facing us, long-term unemployment, falls
into both.
We have to tackle long-term unemployment for reasons of
social equity,-for reasons of compassion, for the reason
that we will never be able to say that we have succeeded as
a nation so long as we have several hundred thousand men and
women and their families unable to find work, and with it
dignity and hope.
But it also has to be understood that unemployment has
economic costs as well: we lose the productive output that
they would otherwise create, we lose their talent and
energy. And we lose again, because we need to support them
when they might be supporting themselves.
Now there are some people who will say that the way to make
Australia more competitive is to reduce wages. They believe
that a less equal society is a more efficient one because
the labour market is more competitive. For which read
more desperate, more " do or die".
This is the path that some countries chose in the 1980s.
It is emphatically the wrong one for Australia.
The human and social cost of privation and uncertainty is
too high. The cost of inequalities to efficiency and
cohesion is too high. The cost to Australian ambitions to
our Sense of what it means to be Australian is too high.
In my view it would betray not just our century-old
traditions of social justice, but all we have done in the
past decade to make Australia a country which can profitably
make its way in the world.
The acceptance of a low wage society would be to deny our
capacity to improve. It conveniently takes the pressure of f
our efforts to create a better country here a low wage
society for instance, has less need to provide educational
opportunity for all.
The alternative the only alternative is to improve
productivity: improve the quality of everything we do from
the workplace to the boardroom, our farms, our schools,
colleges and universities, in government, be it local. State
or Commonwealth. 
And this is where you come in the graduates here tonight
and their families.
This is where every Australian comes in.
Higher levels of productivity are only possible with high
quality human resources high quality people.
If we are going to be competitive, we need a skilled, highly
educated population.
The future belongs to societies that organise themselves for
learning. What we know and what we can do now holds the key
to our economic success, just as our command of natural
resources once did.
Because we are so rich in natural resources, it has often
been said that for much of our history we have tended to
believe that our country would always deliver us. Now there
is no question that we have to deliver our country.
Our mining and pastoral industries, like the great freedoms
which Australia's space and environment provides, will
continue to enrich us.
But only if we match it with human creativity, engagement
and ideas. Only if we do things and make things which in
one way or another wear the badge of Australian learning,
imagination, confidence and endeavour.
As I said, that is where you come in.
Where once the great majority of Australians left school to
do work that required few skills and little knowledge, and
had no reason to expect that they would ever need them;
where once it could be safely said that the best school was
the school of experience, now the acquisition of skills and
knowledge must be inseparable from that experience.
It therefore must be the duty of my generation, and
especially the duty of those of us in positions of power, to
deliver to the generation of people represented by those who
graduated here tonight educational systems which make
learning part of our national life part of the experience
of all Australians.
I said a moment ago that these remarks applied not just to
the new graduates, but to their families.
And of course it is true. The most fundamental learning
begins with them: it is where our attitudes are shaped, our
aspirations and expectations formed.
We get our approach to learning from our families. They can
teach the value of work and faith in the future. They can
teach us the value of ourselves and others.
They can also fail to do these things. 
8
But when they do them, they do for Australia everything good
governments strive to do. I mean they provide security
nets, education, health care, cohesion, certainty, identity,
ambition. And the truth is, they do it so much hZtt~ than
governments. It would be inappropriate to conclude this speech without
saying something abo~ ut Notre Daime Univel3ity. The le s I
can say is how impressed I am.
Impressed, yet not so terribly surprised. When we are
talking about extending educational opportunity to everyone,
we are talking about extending human dignity. I am very
well aware of just how powerful a motive this is in Catholic
education. And so long as I am in the Australian Labor
Party, it is quite impossible to forget it.
I began by talking about how opportunities for tertiary
education were largely denied to most Australians in the
days when I was growing up. The great change which has come
over our education system since then has been reflected in
virtually every element of Australia's life.
Those new educational opportunities for people of working
class backgrounds were vital in the transformation of the
union movement and the Labor movement in general. They were
vital to a generation of migrants and their children. They
were vital for women. They have been vital for business and
the public service.
The confidence and capacity to transform ourselves as an
economy and a society in this last decade has been
substantially derived from the transformation in our
education system.
It seems to me that in the 1980s, for the first time in our
history, Australians had the confidence to take on the
world. That has been the task of my generation. It will
also be yours.
In this, the education you have had here at Notre Dame will
serve you well but as an old De La Salle boy, and a Labor
Party man, let me tell you that while education is essential
to your lives, and always will be, there is no substitute
for faith.
That's my lesson: believe in yourselves, believe in your
generation, believe in your ideals, believe in your country.
Keep the faith. 



TEL: W'a-. 9414-11 ! 4O. UID r. Vi'u'i
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTERo THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, ADELAIDE, 8 MARCH 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, how do you feel about the festival withdrawing your
Invitation for security reasons?
PM: Well, I mean I'm not sure whether this is a pressing national issue. I
think this by-election Is an Important by-election for the country. It is
important for the Government We have got now a major economic
recovery underway, we are seeing employment growth pick up. We
have a first class candidate in Martyn Evans, who actually even lives in
the electorate. I mean, how old fashioned that is, that we should
actually be fielding a candidate who lives in the place he is
representing.
J: But have you the Greek community to a larger extent?
PM: Just one second. And as a consequence we will be sending to
Canberra, I expect, the people of Bonytrion to be sending to Canberra
someone who will fill the shoes of someone of the calibre of Neal
Blewett who presided over a transformation of Australia's health and
social security policies, and in Martyn Evans we have someone of that
calibre. And I think that is the real issue, that is, that the Government,
the general policies of social democracy which the Government has
fostered, and of economic recovery, will be recognised in the byelection
by the people of Bonython sending such a candidate. Now
these other Issues such asGreek fe stivals and the rest, I am not able
to go, and Senator Bolkus normally attends in my place, often in
functions like this, and he may well attend on this occasion as well.
J: But given the reaction to your recognition of Macedonia do you think
may be the Government has been a bit premature? 
T8EL.: Mar. 94 14: 11 No. 015 P. 02/ 04
2
PM:. Well the United States recognised the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the Government of Greece sponsored -the United Nationsmembership
of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. So, if the
Government of Greece can sponsor its membership, it's, I think,
drawing a long bow to say that Australia can't even recognise its
existence.
J: How concerned are you about the response, the emotional and at
times violence from the Greek community?
PM: Well, I think there is a cause for maturity in these things. I mean, there
has been, as a consequence of actions Australia tooK, this State is no
longer describing itself as the Republic of Macedonia, but rather as a
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia a result of actions Australia
and others took. It's this constitution to deny a territorial claims to
parts of Greece. We have made clear that the symbols and
representations of this State, such as the star of Vergina for which
there is a strong feeling in Greece, should be respected. I mean,
these are express and obvious consequences of Australia's policy.
The policies produced, I think, a real change in these issues, if you
like, for those who identify with the interests of Greece. But, when 59
countries all of western Europe, the United States recognises this
state, when Greece itself sponsors its entry into the United Nations -I
think, it is a time for some maturity on the part of Australians of Greek
decent to understand that this government has acted in a way which
has advanced what they see to be their interests.
J: Mr Keating, how do you see the latest Liberal leadership wrangles
affecting the by-election here?
PM: I think nothing I say or do will change the propensity of the Liberal
party to keep hacking itself to pieces. The reason is, they have no
idea about where they stand in Australian society. They don't know
what they represent or who they represent. And now you have got
John Howson in the last day or so, using a word which I have used all
through 1992 and we've used all through the 1980s that is, the word
' inclusion' saying that Australians are entitled to live in a -society
where everyone has a piece of it; where the growth and prosperity is
shared by all including minorities. Well, Dr Howson discovered this
last week and now he is trying to paint himself as a sort of moderate,
small Liberal which would almost make a cat laugh.
Mr Howard on the other hand, is working flat out on turning the clock
back. He is out there, he has got the clock and he has wound us back,
at this stage probably about 14 years, and he is still winding to see if
he can actually get us back to the 1 950s and then he would be very,
very happy indeed. So, this once great party has ended up in this
state. TEL: 
T8EL.: Mar. 94 14: 11 No. 015 P. 03/ 04
3
J: One of the issues that the Liberals are split on is income splitting.
Where do you stand on that?
PM: Income splitting diminishes tax for husbands but doesn't give the
money to wives. What the government has done over the years is to
make sure that there are payments that actually are paid to women's
bank accounts. The Home Child Care Allowance which I introduced in
the last election and which we have now introduced into the
Parliament, into law it pays money into the bank account of the
partner at home generally the wife. Now, these are things, I think,
Australian women appreciate a degree of independence they
wouldn't otherwise have.
J: On the question of a Medicare levy does that have your full support?
And is it a bad time to be perhaps looking at something like this when
you've got two crucial by-elections in a bit over a week?
PM: There are no policy proposals around in the government that warrants
an increase in the Medicare levy. Nothing I have seen.
J: Are you ruling it out?
PM: And there is no case on the part of any Minister coming before the
Cabinet to rule it In.
J: So, in other words it's off the books, it is not going to happen?
PM: There will not be changes of the variety that have been discussed in
the newspapers, speculatively I might say, which would lead to such
an increase.
J What about a jobs levy. The Treasurer has said that it is still broadly
on the edge of the table of the Finance Minister do you think it is on
the table at all?
PM: The jobs levy remains an option, but again, the government would like
to finance this change in the labour market. That is, to deal with the
long-term unemployed without resort to a levy. I think, most of us think
that Is possible.
J: So the growth forecasts will enable that? Are you going to rely on the
recovery to pull you out of it?
PM: The economy is growing much more rapidly than people expect it and
through the year growth next year will be something in the order of four
per cent faster, I think, than anything in the OECD or the western
world. This will produce an increase in revenues as every such
recovery always does.
TEL 
TEL: 8. Mar. 94 14: 11 No. 015 P. 04/ 04.
4
J: Getting back to the by-election, you mentioned that Martyn Evans is a
high quality candidate. There's a bit of concern within the South
Australian Labor party that it is losing some of its best talent, you are
not concerned that the Federal party is bleeding the State party dry in
that regard?
PM:-One thing about it, they are a community based party. When someone
leaves, someone generally fills their shoes and I think that it is a tribute
to the Labor party in South Australia that it has sent so many high
calibre people to the Commonwealth parliament and the
consequences are obvious in the social economic policies of the
government.
J; Do you see the Ros Kelly affair affecting this by-election?
PM: I don't think so. These things blow over in a few days and the real
issues, as always, it is always the weight rather than the flim-flam and
fairy floss that matters. And even if it often doesn't matter to the
media, it does matter to the public and I think they weigh things
accordingly.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, 225 ST GEORGES TERRACE, PERTH, 9 MARCH 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I just had a discussion with a very representative group about the
labour market and the Green Paper proposals that the Government
has published to deal with the problems of the long-term unemployed.
I had a chance there to listen to what particular sectors involved in this
this is the technical and further and education, TAFE; the Salvation
Army; SkillShare; the Labour Council; the employers; Chambers of
Manufactures so one does get a fairly, I think, representative view. I
regard this as valuable because picking up some of the texture and
text of this discussion is very important in thinking about how such
changes ought to be made. That is, how do we make the long-term
unemployed jobs ready again? How do we train them and give them
confidence and give them the prospects of getting employment? And
do we make a national commitment to them? I think, the answer is
those questions have all got to be answered in the affirmative and, I
think, the group I have just seen are suggesting ways where we can
make the labour market programs work better; how they are better
understood by business; how they are more readily taken up; and I
regarded that as a very valuable and helpful discussion.
J: Prime Minister, on Medicare, is there room for a change in the way that
the levy is applied at all?
PM: This debate seems to be running around the columns. Look, the
Government has had a look at the health system every year it has
been in office from the day Medicare was first set up. But there is
nothing around at the moment to promote major changes, that warrant
an increase in the levy.
J: Mr Keating, can you categorically rule out any increase in the
Medicare levy? 
PM: I was saying, there is just nothing around that warrants a change to the
levy of the kind described.
J: What about a-phased increase similar to the tax rates?
PM: Yes,' but you can ask me about every other tax in the system too. I
mean, there is just no point in me trying to give you answers to them.
J: You said earlier today that it was undecided..
PM: No, no, no, not undecided about the Medicare levy. What the
Expenditure Review Committee does every year is look at the health
system because things change all the time and every year we look at
the changes. I have seen in the last ten years the mechanical costs of
pathology and diagnostic imaging drop enormously as we've seen
miniaturisation and computerisation and medical science change the
productivity of those tests so therefore we pay less. All those sorts of
things are always under review.
JL: So, can you rule out any rise?
PM: You would like me to rule out every tax change and everything else.
No, I don't make statements like that. There is nothing to rule it in, that
is the point.
J: Can you rule out an incremental change just 1.4 per cent for higher
income; 1.8 per cent..
PM: This has been tried on me before by people who have suggested that
higher income earners should pay a higher levy I don't believe that
and I have said that plenty of times.
J: In Fremantle the Liberals are saying that Carmen Lawrence is going to
be your puppet in Canberra rather than representing the people of
Fremantle. What do you say to that?
PM: That is the sort of partisan, biased nonsense you would expect from
the Liberal party. That is what I say to that. Carmen Lawrence was
Premier of this State, she has made a contribution to public life, as a
woman in public life, which stands the test of any in the country and.
she will be a great Western Australian representative in the national
Parliament. Bear in mind that you already have the Minister for
Finance from Western Australia in the Cabinet; you have got the
Minister for Industry in the Cabinet; you have got the Assistant
Treasurer and until recently you had the Treasurer Western Australia
is well represented in the Cabinet of the Commonwealth. Dr Lawrence
will join the caucus of the Government and may, of course, at some
point join the Ministry. In which case she will end up an absolutely tiptop
representative of this State. The Liberals can eat their tiny hearts
out. The fact is, she will better represent West Australian interest than 
3
the sort of carping that goes on now by the Liberals under the claim of
parochial interests.
J: Mr Court seems to want to talk to you about _ Mabo. Perhaps he has
painted himself into a corner and is looking for a way out, shouldn't
you offer him that?
PM: You can ask him is he going to drop his challenge to the High Court
case. The answer is no, he is not. The fact is, if I see Mr Court any
more than I've seen him then I will offer him bed and breakfast at the
Lodge. Honestly, I keep bumping into him at lunch, at breakfast and
everything else. I am a pretty reasonable person. I'm sitting for lunch,
I can always take time off to discsuss Mabo or anything else.
J: If he drops the challenge will you talk to him?
PM: But he has never raised these questions with me. But if he drops the
challenge he can then be part of the co-operative scheme. Remember
this, this is a Commonwealth law carried by the House of
Representatives and the Senate. It has been complied with by all
other States bar Western Australia. If Western Australia complies the
structure is set up for certainty, sense and a decency and the
management of the native title issue.
J: So the conditions are that you will talk to him if he drops theHigh
Court challenge?
PM: Just remember this, that I offered his government and his bureaucracy
access to all of the Mabo discussions all last year and he would not
participate. They would not send their bureaucrats to the multistate/
commonwealth meetings.
J: Prime Minister, by coincidence there has been, as of yesterday, as
native title claim, a very nice stretch of the river front in the Fremantle
46 dcfnate. -Have you been briefed -on that all
PM: Howard Sattler asked me about it this morning. Who owns the land at
this stage?
J: I think it is public open space, but your view on that is quite
coincidental, there seems to be..
PM: Look, if there is any grant of interest by the State or dedication of the
land that means that any native title claim is subordinate to that. That
is what it means. But the thing is, this can be all decided in the
Western Australian Supreme Court, if the Court government complies
with the Commonwealth legislation. Otherwise it will be decided in the
Federal Court of Australia. Again, the Federal Court of Australia will
hear it here in Perth. 
J: spending a lot of time with Carmen Lawrence on this particular
campaign. Is that because you are worried about your low popularity
or the Labor party is worried about your low popularity in WA?
PM: We have got to get past the point where the Liberals feed you dunce
lines and you all repeat them. You are paid to think, to be jolly, to be
looking at the big scene and to pick the right things out, not to be
parrots for the Liberal party. The fact is, I am seeing Carmen at a car
plant later. I saw her yesterday. She and I have had a good
discussion about the issues here. In campaigning for her today I have
dealt with Commonwealth issues on a large rating and popular radio
program. Last night she and I shared our campaigning responsibilities
and she went to one function and I went to another at the Notre Dame
University Graduation and we are doing the things which have to be
done in a campaign. We don't have to be walking side by side
everywhere to put the Commonwealth interests. This is nonsense stuff
from the Liberals. Where are the Liberals today? Here is Peter Reith
saying, look, we have had a gut full of all of this he said about the
Liberal party leadership and we have got this what you might call play
ground rules. Andrew has had two goes, so I want two goes says
John Howard. Andrew has had two goes, so little Johnny Howard gets
two goes. Hewson is saying no, no, no it is still my go. Reith is
saying, look, we have had a gut full of the whole lot.
The truth is the Liberal party doesn't know where it stands in policy;
where it stands philosophically; Malcolm Fraser said a week ago in a
national newspaper none of us know a year after Fightback was
dropped any policies that the Liberal party stands for. The Liberal
party today has leadership troubles because it has no policies. Now,
here we are in a by-election four by-elections in fact with the other
major party, Coalition parties, having no policy and a dispute about the
leadership and they are worried about whether I am here walking
shoulder to shoulder with Carmen. They have major troubles.
J: Would you be expecting then a swing on Saturday?
PM: I think Dr Lawrence has a huge standing in Western Australia. I think
the Labor party is very privileged to have her as a federal candidate. I
think the people of Fremantle will be well served by her as the Member
for Fremantle and I expect her to be returned well. Now, Dr Hewson
has just taken a punch on the nose in the Werriwa by-election and now
we will see what will happen in Fremantle, but I bet you pounds to
peanuts, it will only lift the debate within the Liberal party about how
much longer Dr Hewson stays.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT qF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
RADIO OPR, HOWARD $ ATTLER 9 MARCH 1994
E AND OE PROOF ONLY
SATTLER; Prime Minister, welcome to the studio.
PM: Good Howard, good to be here.
SATTLER: First time since the election.
PM; I have been busy over there engineering a recovery in the economy
and trying to keep the general agenda that we set in the election campaIgn that you
just referred to on the tracks and things are running as we hoped and expected and
the recovery Is coming through strongly and as you know we are now seeing
145,000 Job growth In the last three months. We think we are going to grow
something like 4% In the coming year, which puts us up as fast as any western
country and I am hoping, the key thing Is I think, to make sure the recovery Is
enjoyed by everybody,
SATTLER: How much credit do you personally take for that?
PM; For the recovery?
SATTLER: Yap.
PM: Well the recovery is I think, been engineered by national economic
policy. That Is, ira come by virtue of the Budget policies of the lIst three-years by
-thle er inflation rate, by the lower Intereft--riin a more competitive exchanga
ruts mechanism In place. Al11of that I think is
SATTLER: But don't be so modest you were the architect of the economic policy
for most of the time weren't you?
PM: I was with the then treasurer John Dawkins, but I think we are seeing
as a consequence of Commonwealth Government policy and also the fact that
businessIW now rebalanced their balance sheets. As you know In the 80s we had
debt displacing equity. Now companies have had to build up profitability to
rebalance things to take the debt out and put equity back. that's happened and they 
3. PM: Carmen is the kind of person you don't need to make promises to,
she takes her chances In the rough and tumble and opportunities ot public it. e. But I
think I would be very surprised If the Caucus of the Government didn't at some
opportunity, take some opportunity and give her a seat in the ministry.
SATTER: Does she need to got nominated?
PM: In our Caucus there Is none of those pretensions, You nominate
yourself. WMhen they call your name you stick your hand up.
SATTLER: Do you need a seconder?
PM: No you don't even need a seconder.
SATTLER: You just need the vote.
PM: Because years ago we used to have this sort of thing where people
say is there someone to nominate so and so. There would be a sort of momentary
pause and a hand would go up and so now we call a roll of Caucus members and if
you are Interested in a job you put your hand up.
BATTLER: Okay she will put her hand up, will she get your vote for a ministerial
position? PM: She would, she would.
BATTLER: Now if as expected she is elected to a ministerial position what have
you got in store for her? It seems obvious to a lot of us after Ros Kelly's resignation
and you just adding all those portfolios to poor old Graham Richardson who Is crook
with bronchitis by the way, you nave really saddled him with a bit. You have loaded
him up. now are you just going to transfer those portfolios to Carmen if she as
expected gets the nomination or is voted in?
PM: These things are a matter for the Caucus to make judgemonts about
and none of us
SATTLER: You are the bloke who allocates that.
PM-: No I got the job, the right Indeed as you say, to allocate the portfolios
but the stock of members who are part of the Government is decided by the broad
parliamentary Labor Party. Now that has got to happen first, now In the event of
that happening, well. I have some choices there as you say. But again were that to
be the case I would obviously have a conversation with Carmen before I ever
presumed to know what she would be interested In.
SATTLER: Are you sure you haven't already ao that conversation?
No I have had a general chat to her but not to that detail. 
2. PM, ( cont'd) are now ready to sort of shuffle off and invest and I think all these
things coming together means that we have got a pretty robust, we have got on our
hands what we haven't had for 30 years, a robust low inflationary recovery.
SATTLER: Interest rates, are you concerned about what has been happening in
the USA and predictions that interest rates will rise In Australia before the and of the
year? PM: Not really, I think that the United States federal reserve bank has put
a very modest Increase in rates, deolmal. point or two
SATTLER: It still sent a shiver through our stock markets.
PM: What the fads so called Is doing Is keeping an eye on Inflation in
America. So are we here, but as you know our Inflation rate keeps coming out
below the pundit's expecttone-and our Inflation rate for the year In the last quarter
was So we have always got to be vigilant about Inflation, all of us but Its that
low inflation rate that gives you the low interest rates.
SATTLER: Are you confident Interest rates will remain at their current levels in
Australia until at least the end of the year?
PM: I think that I am confident that Australia's inflation performance will be
such that this will be a very strong and bull point for the maintenance of low Interest
rates. SATTLER: You are here to campaign for Dr Carmen Lawrence who I think Is a
lay down misers for the seat of Fremantle, god if you I-t-Frmantie-that would be a
nice old slap In the face wouldn't It?
PM: She is such a good candidate and she is going to, I think she is going
to, add to the stock of Western Australian people, members of Parliament who give
a particular and peculiar focus on Western Australian Interest In the Commonwealth
Parliament. I think having bean a premier and joining the Commonwealth
Government Western Australians Will have absolutely tip top representation
particularly in the seat of Fremantle but as you know you already now have Kim
Beazley as Minister for Finance, you have got Peter Cook as Minister for Industry,
George Gear as the Assistant Treasurer. Until recently John Dawkins was the
Treasurer, so Western Australian interests if you like are well and truly represented
there In the key policy portfolios.
SATTLER: Can we take it that she is not going to Canberra to be a back
bencher? PM: She would be the first to say she is not going to hide her light under a
bushel.
SATLER: What have you promised her? 7 
4. SATTLER: But we can take it that Graham Richardson is not going to continue to
have all those portfolios surely?
PM: You think the flu might knock him over do you?
SATTLER: I think it already has and the other thing he has had It appears, a
difference of opinion withi you over a proposal to increase the Medicare levy. Now
you knocked that on the head yesterday In Adelaide but you have said yoU haven't
seen anything to that effect does that mean that there isn't anything or something
might just surface later on?
PMV: Medicare is a great national health system. We have got now other
governments around the World looking at it, but things change. We have seen
change in the relations between public and private systems, you see changes in the
technology and things like diagnostic Imaging and pathology and all systems need
to change With it. Whet Graham has had is the whole system under focus but at this
stage has been as we are, undecided about what we should do. Our primary foc-us
at the moment Is the Green Paper on unemployment because one of the things I did
say on that election night which you referred to ealer was that wa were not going to
leave the unemployed behind and these first couple of months of 1994 are building
on the Green Paper group who reported to us late lest year on how we are going to
deal with the long term unemployed, so that's the principle focus of our work.
SATTLER: Yeah, but there is a story running around this morning they are going
to take people off the Jobseareli allowance and the ACOSS people who supposedly
represent the unemployed are not too pleased about that prospect?
PM: There is no point in me trying to run through the threads of this. This
Is a very large change It Will be a White Paper which the Government Will introduce
In late April which I hope Will let us as a Government do something novel In world
terms. not just In Australian term., but In world terms about the long term
unemployed. See we have got three hundred odd thousand people who have been
unemployed 185 months or more. Now apart from the social Inequity of that, that is
they having carried the brunt of the recession, we are going to find ourselves even
With sort of 10% unemployment, skills bottlenecks in certain areas of the labour
market and that is largely because we have got a pool of people who are not being
retrained. SATTLER: Too many skilled people.
PMV: So what we have to do Is get those long term unemployed people
trained and back Into the labour market so that the recovery Is a recovery for
everybody, not lust the top end of town but those already who carried the largest
burden of the recesion, that is those who are unemployed.
SATTLER: Are you prepared to knock a JobsL levy on the head at this point
because that Is another one that has reared its head?
PMV: The jobs levy as it was an option proposed for consideration by the
Green Paper report, by the Green Paper group as a way of funding the programs
VC;: 
PM: ( cont'd) which give these long term unemployed people a job subsidy and
training for a set period. Now I don't think that we necessarily need a jobs levy. I
think the general budgetary scene may be such that we eon do this without
resorting to such a levy. it remains am Option for us but its not one essentially
preferred by me or the treasurer.
SATTLER: So as far as you are concerned no jobs levy, no Medicare levy
Increase? PM: You only do things where in this respect where you have to and we
are In a recovery and we are starting to see a better performance by the Budget
What generally happens In recoveisS is that we invariably see a pick up In revenue
as we have seen a decline in revenue In the recession. The pick ups ore always
greater than we forecast and the declines are always greater, there is always
forecasting conservatism in the numbers. Now I think on this occasion, I mean If
you say to Australians do you think that the national budget should accommodate a
program that gets to the low@ who have been unemployed 18 months or more back
into the labour market, I think moat Australian&amp; will answer that In the affirmative, as
I think they should.
SAiTLER: Unless they have to pay for it.
PM; Even so 1 think that there is the notion of social equity of the fair go in
Australia. When we talk about productivity In this countiieflip side of that coin is
a higher level of unemployment, that is productivity means getting more output from
fewer people. Those fewer people have bean Unemployed and if they are
unemployed over 18 months or a couple of years they lose their self esteem, they
lose their job readiness, they then can't actually get the jobs that then actually turn
up in the labour market, 3o 1 think we are under all of us, all Of US, a soCial obligation
to get them back Into work so that we do our best as a country, as, a society, as a
community to say that we ea not going to have a tail of three or four hundred
thousand people who are basically in labour market terms crippled by it.
SATTLER: But what I think you are saying underneath all of that is if we have a
job we should figure ourselves lucky and we should fork out a bit more for those
who are unfortunate and don't have a job.
PM*. What we e saying is. that the Budget should fork out a bit more, in
other words that the spending priorities of the Commonwealth change in favour of
those who have carred too much of the burden
SATTLER: What, go further into debt?
PM: No, every Budget there is new policy proposals, every Budget there
is always a stack of worthy new things which the Government may consider. It's a
matter of whats at the top of the pile and what I think should be at the top of the pile
is the long termn unemployed. 
6. SATTLER: We look as though we are going to be roped in or the United States
are going to try and rope us In to their trade war with Japan and yourcollague,
trade minister Bob McMullan apparently has-been called in eatthe last minute to join
trade talks today with visiting US Secretary of State, Warren Christopher. I have to
say the United States-for an ally, for a good-friend has trea-ted us as faifas trade is
concerned with a bit of disdain in recent years. Why should we go Into bat with
them against Japan?
PM: The world has shrunk in terms of trade, the Inter relationships of trade
are now so Important and obvious to us all that we have to in a sense move on
fronts as they say in the trade, multi-laterally, that Is a number of countries together
not just two together but a number of countries together. The United. States, we
played a major role with the United States in the GATT round, that Is the trade talks
which took 7 years to open up trade opportunities around the world. So the US has
played a good role and the US is making a point with Japan that Japan should open
Its markets. I think where we have some misgivings about this Is the technique that
the US Is considering imposing In the doing of it That is in arguing that Japan
should open Its markets we say that Is fine, that Is good, it's going to be good for
world trade, good for the US, good for us. But imposing managed trade solutions
which is what Washington Is now talking about that Is where they use the thing
called the US federal law called the super 301 where they can actually double tariffs
if you like on particular commodities, It's the heavy handed sledge hammer number
to crack the nut
Now we think that's going to lead to a lot of bilateral trade tensions and that Is why I
think we see the body which I was involved in last year In establishing at head of
government level, this Is the APEC, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, this trade
argument between the US and Japan is a sitter for resolution within the APEC
framework. So It means that the 15 countries of APEC. Australia, Indonesia.
Malaysia, Singapore, China, Korea, Japan, the US etc can come to a set of multi
country solutions rather than a nasty little trade war between the US end Japan
which can then affect us because we sell so much product to Japan if those markets
of theirs have access problems in the US that affects us.
SATTLER: But what's in it for us to go Into bat with America against Japan? I
think we have got a trade surplus with Japan but America has got a trade surplus
with us, shouldn't we be getting some concessions there?
PM: We have got a very heavy trade surplus with Japan but US has a
very heavy trade surplus with us.
SATTLER: And is pinching more of our market.
PM: We are saying to the US. yes we agree that Japan having garnered
so much from the world's trading system should open Itself up so that everybody
has a chance to participate in the second strongest economy in the world. But there
is no doubt about the justice in the US case there, but we don't believe that
managed trade solutions are the best and the other thing that wrong foots the US
and makes It look as though they are not really committed to free trade when they
r C -rn nmr~ F~; qrr~ rp~ rr nl^ rrr~ nrr-r lrrr;~ i I; r~ e h c--c~ l 
W. ny'wC.-W. tW...~ sr r fl. r . r lr. ttew. rA. t
7. PM: ( conrd) are. so this Is a potential to be a major stoush and like all of these
major things when people are lining each other up in a thing like this caution and
common sense ought to be the watchwords here and I think what Gareth Evens and
Bob McMullan have said to Secretary of State Christopher is look, yes, we agree
with you as trade objectives here but we don't agree with the solutions and why
don't you look at It more In a multi lateral context, kaap us involved, we are friends
of Japan and we are friends of the United States and we don't want an argument
running between two close friends.
SATTLER: So he is not going to get the answer he wants today?
PM: May be not, no.
SATTLER: I understand you are heading for South East Asia next week or the
week after to open a bridge that we have put $ 42 million of taxpayers money in and
we have had afew callsabout that you canexpect that and it comes at a time
when the Government is being heavily lobbied over issues like breast cancer
research where we give only $ 1.4 million annually to research there and it kills 2,500
Australian women a year. Can you understand that some Australians see some
rather misguided priorities in the allocation of all that money there end so little to a
disease which Is killing so many of Australia's women?
PM: Our budget is about $ 105 billion, its about $ 105,000 million so it has
social security spending. its got payments to the states, it's has a foreign aid
program, it has national health and medical research budget. So we don't have to
deny our aid program the sort of funding which is involved in this bridge to actually
do something on something like breast cancer for instance. Because I think, let me
just say about the bridge in the first place. This is the first time, this is a bridge
across the Mekong River which Australia has built and which the Australian
company, John Holland has actually done the civil-engineering on, and this is the
first road connection between Thailand and Laos, the first ever and this will now be
the main highway between Thailand and Beijing so Its called the Friendship Bridge
and Australia sits there and in terms of Australia's reputation in the area and our
interest in these countries like Thailand, a developing country, an Important market
for us, Laos, Vietnam, Australia's name Is very good In this area.
SATTLER: So the business people up there know we built it do they?
PM: Absolutely and I will be actually opening it, so you have got, if you
like. two nations focussing on the fact we are doing It and Its been done by a
company owned In Western Australia, John Holland. Could I just say though on the
other point, on breast cancer, the first thing to say about this, this is a dreadful
disease which is costing us the lives of too many Australian women, that is point
one. Point two what we need is a comprehensive national strategy to deal with it.
What often happens in these diseases., crtain institutes have particular branches of
research and they approach the Federal Government seeking support for this one
but not for that one saying this Institute is more worthy than that Institute and to try
and overcome these problems we have a thing called The National Health and
Medical Research Council which makes decisions about which particular areas of
research 
PM: ( cont'd) are funded. There Is already breast cancer research but I don't think
there is a comprehensive strategy and next week In Perth or the week after next I
am sorry. Graham Richardson is meeting with the state health ministers to amongst
other things decide on a comprehensive national strategy to fight breast cancer and
they will be releasing a major statement for a comprehensive campaign against
breast cancer. This Is I think the way to tackle it. Now at the moment, as you know,
the Commonwealth Government runs a breast cancer screening program which Is
available to all women over 40
SATTLER: Yes but there are women under 40 dying from breast cancer?
PM: But its also available upon the reference of a GP for anyone who has
any symptoms of It, or has it in the family, to go and have a screening. But it's also
available just simply under Medicare. That is if your local GP refers a woman for a
breast cancer screening, Medicare picks It up and pays a rebate.
SATTLER: Can I throw In one for the blokes, what about prostate cancer? It's
killing about 2,000 men In Australia every year.
PM: There is generic research into cancers and the cancer's effect, breast
cancer, prostate cancer, bowel cancer, throat, all the other ones, lung cancer. That
is generic research Into cancers and there is a specialised research Into the various
things. There Is speoialised research into prostate cancer too but the numbers in
breast cancer are really quite profound and I think therefore in this area we do need
a comprehensive national strategy. In fact I am happy to say my wife is the first
patron of the Breast Cancer Day and she has been actively Involved in this issue.
SATTLER: So has she put a bit of pressure on you to do something about it?
PM: She has done a bit home lobbying on this subject.
SATTLER: Not a bad thing either surely?
PM: No, not a bad thing and I have taken the Issues up. But Graham
Richardson said, quite appropriately, that what we need here is a comprehensive
campaign and a comprehensive national strategy and I think thats what we are
going to do and the meeting will actually be here in Perth the week after next.
SATTLER: I want to play a short excerpt from an opponent of yours, the Premier
of Western Australia was sitting in this studio just the other day and this is a request
he made. " Paul Keating will be sitting In the seat which you occupy at this moment,
he will be here tomorrow morning, are you going to be meeting him while he is in
Western Australia.
COURT: I would certainly want the opportunity to meet with him and to discuss
Mabo. I mean the Prime Minister can't come to Western Australia and not address
this particular issue so I hope that he is prepared to put aside an hour or so, so that
we can try and have some proper discussions to resolve the 
SATTLER; Have you made a request to see him?
COURT: Yes I have made a request on a number of occasions."
SATTLER: Alright we in Western Australia and I think people around Australia
don't want this thing to get to court, it's going to cost a fortune and we are not here
to make lawyers rich, be they Queens Counsel or whatever. Are you going to meet
with the Premier and try and resolve this out of court?
PM: I have seen Richard three times In the last week. I saw him in Hobar
at the Premiers' Conference, I saw him at the EPAC meeting last Friday in Canberra
and I saw him last night at the Notre Dame University.
SATTLER: You spoke with him last night?
PM: We had a chance to talk there, just to say hello, but a chance to chat
if he wanted a chat If I have to see him any more I will have to put an annex on at
The Lodge for him, may be a room out the side, promise him bed and breakfast, a
cup of tea In the morning, a bickie, MA .
SATTLER: Are you sick and tired ofAMl7 Are you sick and tired of trying to
resolve this?
PM: The truth is let's not mix words here. Western Australia had no
interest in talking to us when we were designing the legislation. I made the offer to
the Western Australian Government to send their bureaucrats to the multi state
Commonwealth bureaucrats meetings on the Mabo legislation and they were not
interested. We have now passed the Bill and he is challenging It in the High Court.
It's his challenge not ours.
SATTLER: And you have to defend it In the High Court don't you?
PM: We will have to defend it. What he is saying is the Commonwealth
Parliament doesn't have the right to pass laws in respect of title of land for
Aboriginal people.
SATTLER: What Is this going to cost us?
PM: The truth Is ask him because he shouldn't be doing it. See the
Commonwealth Parliament's legislated in an area where it has I believe sovereignty,
what we are doing is providing all the certainty, the mechanisms of certainty that let
all this be resolved. What Richard Court is doing to Western Australians is saying, I
will tell you what I will do, I will leave this a Jumble for you for the next four, five or six
years, I will throw it all into the uncertain basket. See remember this Howard, it is
the High Court which has said that Aboriginal people have a proprietary right to land
and had it from the time of European settlement in 1788. Now let's say the
Commonwealth Government, Labor Government didn't legislate to set up the
tribunals for Mabo, the awarding of title. All that would happen Is Aboriginal groups
~ h~ N rsl; T ~ wrmrrr m~ sTrr nlwm~ lrr~ un; l 
PM: ( cont'd) would simply make a series of claims and lodge them in the High
Court. We would have Western Australian commercial interests in a hole, In chaos
for the next 20 years.
SATTLER: They are making claims now. Here is one today at Point Walter
reserve. PM; Can I just make this point We have now set up a federal court
stream and a state Supreme Court stream If Richard Court wants to be In It. It's his
state Supreme Court can be in It If he wishes to hear native title claims and resolve
them, orderly and to resolve them in a way which actually then doesn't impact on
the commercial Interests or developments of Western Australia. What he is saying
Is look I don't want to be in that, I think I have got a political issue on the line here. I
think I can screw all the political joy out of this I can. I will challenge this legislation,
when the Prime Minister made offers to meet me and bring our bureaucrats over I
rejected them and now what I will say is look, I will go over and this fellow ought to
be talking to me to stop me making my crazy challenge. I mean it's his challenge.
SATTLER: But what do you as the Prime Minister say to the Banell family who
have Just made a claim for part of Fremantle, the Point Walter reserve, there's the
map there?
PM: Simply this, that If there is any, what the High Court made very clear
In all this and legislation made it clear, is that native title Is subordinate to the Crown
and wherever there has been a Crown grant that Is an Interest In land given by a
State Government which is either freehold or leasehold, It will extinguish the native
title. So people can make claims but they are not worth the paper they are written
on. SATTLER: The Benell family should give up on this they don't even live In
Fremantle, they live at Armadale?
PM: Yeah well I haven't seen the matter but this is a process from here
Howard. The federal court of Australia is a place where a native title claim can be
lodged, it can then be heard and decided yea or nay. But generally what we are
talking about here, we are talking about title to land being given to Aboriginal people
who currently still live on land which is owned by the state.
SATTLER: That accounts for the Benell family.
PM: In other words land which is not awarded to anybody, that is not part
of a freehold title, It's not part of a lease, you are talking about land In the back
country In the main which belongs to the state, Crown land, unallocated,
unalienated Crown land on which Aboriginal people still live and really what the High
Court is saying is look, let's right a wrong admittedly 200 years late but better late
than never, let's say this land was always their land, they always had a title to it, but
if they are still living there let's say then can then apply for it.
SATTLER: So most Aboriginal people in Australia won't benefit at all will they
because they live in the suburbs?
T~ LZ~ 91CII~ OmI ~ BCRCb~ n~ AI* I~.;( IIYL' ~ 04&gt; E -rPr~' ' rrl~' D-I( ';"' YOIT '~~ gLm( rpr~' 
PM: A lot of Aboriginal people, this is right, a lot of Aboriginal people won't
benefit from native title and that is why we are now looking at the social justice
Component, the land fund component of Mabo this year so that those who can't
apply for native title because they are long pushed off the land can actually get
some access to land.
SATTLER: Okay you are off to Fremantle shortly but It seems that your wife has
taken the front running in the campaign. She has been accompanying Carmen
Lawrence around this morning, is that part of the strategy, is she more popular than
you over here?
PM: No, I am seeing Carmen, we are going to talk about employment and
employment strategies and programs at 11am this morning and I saw Carmen
yesterday for a good chat. But last night I did one function and she did another I
had the honour of speaking at the graduation of graduates from the Notre Dame
University In Fremantle while Carmen did another function and we spread the shot
so to speak.
SATTLER: Some people think you don't care too much about Western Australia
you rarely come here, what do you say to them?
PM: The whole of national economic policy in the last 10 years has
favoured Western Australia. That is Western Australia's great claim was being a
primary exporting stat-il irinerals and agriculture that It carried the tariff monkey on
its back. The changes of the 80s expressly benefited Western Australia and the
Western Australian recovery which is as strong as any in the country is there
because of the federal Labor Government.
SATTLER: Will you be back again soon?
PM: I will be back, sure.
SATTLER: Look forward to seeing you then.
PM: I will see you then, thank you Howard.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 13 MARCH 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, do you think the swing t owards the Government is due solely
to Carmen Lawrence?
PM: I think there are two messages here. There is a mark from the public to the
Government for having sensible policies and endorsing a good candidate and there is a
heavy mark against the Coalition foiF-agarbage tin campaign having no structure and
no policies. They are, I think, the two messages.
J: So, you would be expecting something similar for Bonython next week would
you? PM: I think the Government has generally taken its mandate on conscientiously and
done what it could to deliver on the things that we have said matter most; such as
engendering a recovery which we now have; restarting employment growth 200,000
jobs later I tfiik -wecan fairly claim that has started; settl. Iing big nati-ojiji issues like
Mabo and now working on long-term unemployment as well as the ovei r archin-gis-suie
of our place in the world.-These thifigi, 1 -think , the public understand and will mark
the Government sensibly on.
J: What is the message for John Hewson and the Opposition in this?
PM: The first thing is that Malcolm Fraser said it all a week ago when he said a
year after Fightback was essentially denied by Dr Hewson, we don't know what the
Liberal party stands for The Liberal party doesn't have policies and in a campaign
both in Parliament and in the by-election of personal vilification against Dr Lawrence,
where the Liberal party did rip up the rule book, I think, garbage tin politics never
takes you anywhere in Australia and the Australian public is quite wise about all this
stuff. They go right through it to the heart of the matter: and the heart of the matter
was that they thought the Government had done well enough and that Dr Lawrence as
a candidate had the standing to return her with that kind of vote. For Dr Hewson it
means until he decides what his philosophy is and his party's philosophy is and until he
can establish some sort of relativity between that and the community, the Liberal party
will continue to wallow. 
J: Prime Minister, who do you think you will be facing as Opposition leader?
PM: It doesn't matter to us who we think. I have already made a comment today
about Mr Howard saying he is not yesterday's man, he is almost last century's man.
Only in Australia if you walked around this country looking for a 35 year old person
with the views of Mr Abbott, only could such a a person bob up in the Liberal party.
And it is this sort of harking back to the Menzian epoch of the 1950s when the world
was completely different, when Australia was essentially a mono-culture, is not and
will do nothing for the Liberal party and for Australia.
J: Do you really think though that the Liberal party is, in fact it sounds like your
saying, consigning itself to the margins of Australian politics.
PM: This has happened to parties periodically right over the course of this century
and I think it is happening with the Liberal party. Mr Howard pushed all of the centre
ground people out of the main stream of the Liberal party and if the Liberal party had
to ask itself a question did Bob Menzies do well in nominating Andrew Peacock as
the young member for Kooyong and did the NSW Liberal party under Mr Carrick's
stewardship do well in putting John Howard into Bennelong: the answer would have
to be a resounding no on both counts because the two of them between them have
rendered the Liberal party almost now an irrelevant organisation. Dr Hewson coming
from a private advisory job and a financial market job to the leadership of a major
political party has proved that you need more qualifications than that to make that
jump. J: Prime Minister, given all the expectation, what do you think the result in
Fremantle says about the Mabo issue?
PM: I think it means that all the foreboding about Mabo, that people who think that
the Australian community have lesser instincts than those that we would like them to
have, Fremantle proves that wrong. That is, that the comnmunity has felt good about
Mabo. By and large they think a good thing has been done and while it has had its
trials and its tribulations and still got teething problems in the application of the
legislation, I think, a result like this in the heartland of Western Australia and Perth
gives lie to the claim that the Western Australian people in some way are biased
against Aboriginal Australians.
J: One year on, are your ambitions for the next few years as great as they were in
terms of Mabo, the economy
PM: One of the things that I most want to do in the next two years is excite young
Australians about their future. And that means their future in the world. And the
Government is getting Australia set, it's getting set, getting Australia set in Asia in
the place where we live, the place where the opportunities are, in the place which
will give Australians interesting secure and well paid jobs. That I think is something
that I'd really like to see happen. As part of that we have now got a tremendous roll
on in getting our links into Asia, and just soon I'll be making a visit to Thailand,
Laos and Vietnam, and later in the year I'll be attending the next APEC leaders'
summit with President Soeharto and President Clinton and others in Jakarta. It is
important I think that Australia's stewardship of APEC, that we keep up the
momentum of change, and that we find when we look at any conversation like this
one year after the next election that Australia is well and truly well placed in the Asia
Pacific, and our community knows it, and is feeling the buoyancy of it. That in the
end is what I think the next couple of years are going to be about. 
3
J: You've hinted at a policy job for Carmen Lawrence today and some other
changes. Are we likely to see some changes in the actual structures of the ministry
rather than just the personnel?
PM: You all are well aware now when you move one place in these Cabinets a
whole lot of other places move. Now I'm not proposing in the event that Dr
Lawrence is chosen by the Caucus a major reshuffle of the Cabinet, but it will
obviously mean some changes. But I think Dr Lawrence's standing as a former
Premier, her standing in the Labor Party, and might I say her standing with women
in this country demands that she have a policy job.
J: What sort of policy job?
PM: That I'll tell you later.
J: There is a bit of tidying up to be done though isn't there? The ministry's certainly
not in the same shape it was when the super ministries and so
PM: Because I think things move on. When we had transport and communications
together it made sense at the time, the big issue then was telecommunications reform
and reform in some areas of transport. That is now passed. Communications issues
today are much more finely textured issues. Transport is now changed away from
simply the privatisation of the airlines down to things like rail and road and these
things, and again there are going to be a different set of specialisations. So therefore
the super ministry is not right for now. So I think the country changes, the issues
change, and the structures have to change to accommodate them.
J: Prime Minister are you convinced that Australia can now handle four per cent plus
growth without it spilling into inflation...
PM: I think so. I think that we have broken the back of inflationary expectations,
which is the important thing. That's not to say though that the Government or the
community can be cavalier about inflation. I think we will always need to be vigilant
about inflation. But the notion now that we should put our foot on the brake just
after we've got the economy growing, while we've got a lot of unemployed
resources, or under-employed resources both in people and in capital stock, is too
gloomy a view to be contemplated. And now's the time to actually let the growth.
move through and to take that up, but keeping our eye on inflation as well.
J: What's your message for the markets which don't share your optimism?
PM: In the end the Government will always have a better hold on the productivity
cost inflation picture than the markets will have, because simply we know more
about wages and we know more about what's happening in these particular indices.
And what we have said about inflation over the years has been more right than a lot
of people in the markets have been I think. So what we say is now is not the time to
see interest rates rise, but in saying that, that's not to say they will never rise because
we will always keep a very weather eye on inflation.
ENDS 



NINE NETWORK AUSTRALIA LIMITED
A. C. N. 009 071 167
SUITE 114 PRESS GALLERY PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA A. CT. 2600 AUSTRALIA
TELEPHONE: ( 06) 273 3300 FACSIMILE: ( 06) 273 3097
CHANNEL 9 SUNDAY 0900 13.3.94
Subject: R\ V Paul Keating
Prime Minister
Compere' ( Jim Waley): For Paul Keating there's double cause for celebration on this
first anniversary of his re-elected government. Yesterday Labor
won the by-election in the Western Australian seat of former
Treasurer, John Dawkins, a victory which brings to Canberra
the Fremantle doctor, Carmen Lawrence, -who's expected to
breeze straight into Cabinet.
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: The Prime Minister is in our Canberra studio this morning. To
talk with him, Sunday's political editor, Laurie Oakes. Laurie
Thanks, Jim. Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
Thank you, Laurie.
Carmen Lawrence handed you a pretty good anniversary
present. I think she did and congratulations to her. She won well and I
think for the government to see a pick up, a swing to the
government in a by-election, is unprecedented. I can't
remember any time in the 25 years I've been in public life 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: when at any by-election there was a swing to the government.
Even you wouldn't have predicted that, would you?
I thought we would Someone asked me the other day and
my staff were talking about it coming back from Perth last
week, how we'd go, and I said I thought we would pull out the
1993 result. As it turns out, we've picked up another one per
cent.
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Carmen spoke to me last night and she said, ' Look, whatever
this result means for me, there's no doubt that it would not
have happened unless the government was doing reasonably
well. And the notion that we're doing poorly in Western
Australia I didn't find anywhere in the course of the
campaign'. I think what it is also, Laurie, it's a repudiation of
garbage bin politics. I mean she's suffered so much vilification.
The attacks on her in the House of Representatives and the
Senate under privilege about blood on her hands I mean all of
that muck raking the Liberals literally ripped up the rule book
for this by-election.
But Carmen Lawrence herself in the campaign said everywhere
she went she was getting feedback from people that they're
sick and tired of the behaviour in the federal parliament too
and she's going to bring that message to you and others in
Canberra. Yes but I think it's one thing to talk about behaviour and it's
another thing to talk about what is done and said. I mean for
instance all of this attack on Ros Kelly over now a month in
the end what does it bring the Liberals in a by-election?
Answer: a swing against them. Look, Laurie, it's always. 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: That's really a long bow, isn't it? I wouldn't have thought the
swing against them was down to the Ros Kelly affair. Surely
that's got a fair bit to do with Liberal leadership woes?
They were saying that the concentration on this issue and Mrs
Kelly's resignation was a big plus for the Liberal Party. Well,
where's the plus? I mean it's a legitimate question for me to
ask. Where is the plus? The answer is there is no plus because
the public wisely are looking for value always and they're
looking for fundamentals.
But your own polling, though, showed that at the time of the
sports rorts affair hitting the front pages in the West there was
a swing against you and it came back to you last week when
the Liberals were brawling.
I think the swing against I've said to you, I think Laurie,
and I've said to others, all of this sort of static what is for the
public, static and the public debate which doesn't go to their
lives, their values, which doesn't go to the long run
fundamentals of the country, just a big discount factor. If the
Liberals want to keep at this, let them go their hardest but
where does it leave them when there's a swing to the
government in a by-election such as this? It leaves them with
those tactics basically
Just to make that grin a bit wider, the next McNair poll in the
Bulletin Magazine shows that you've now got a 17-point lead
over Dr Hewson as preferred Prime Minister. Have you seen
him off, do you think? Who do you think you'll be fighting at
the next election?
Laurie, a year after the election a year ago, in the year since
we've seen the economy heading towards 4 per cent 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: economic growth, 200,000 jobs, a legislative solution to the
vexing problem of Mabo, Australia getting itself set up
properly in the Asia-Pacific with APEC. They're the things of
value and I think it is those things which carry the weight of
public opinion.
Do you think you'll be fighting the election against Dr
Hewson, or has this result finished him?
I don't know but you see he told us, and we should remember
what he said a year ago that Australia would be into a double
dip recession. You remember the gun sight ads in the election
campaign bang, taking out your jobs. There's 200,000 been
put there in their place. I think Malcolm Fraser's comment of
two weeks ago in the Australian he said, ' A year after
Fightback was repudiated by Dr Hewson no-one in the Liberal
Party knows what the Liberal Party's philosophy or policies
are'. And I think that's true.
This result will worry some people. Obviously this is a signal
to you to maintain the arrogance and you might get away with
it because of the weakness of the Opposition.
I just reject that maintaining the arrogance line, Laurie. Look,
I started consulting about Mabo in April of 1993 and I kept it
up til December. I mean arrogant people don't run those sorts
of consultative processes. I did the same throughout the year
on APEC trying to build a constituency for that leaders'
meeting in November the following year. I think in the caucus
and in the cabinet I'm the first amongst equals in there. It is a
cooperative process. We've had a generational change inside
the government. There's tremendous enthusiasm on the part of
the newer Ministers. In that I think this sort of old claim, that
' Adffihk_ -OW ~ 1 
I r
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: to have pride in one's work and determination to see things
done, is arrogance it's untrue. But whether it's untrue or not,
I don' t in a sense care provided that we keep making the
changes and we keep getting the fundamentals better.
Carmen Lawrence presumably will go into the Ministry at the
next caucus meeting on Tuesday week. Is that right?
I would like to see her in the Ministry. It is a matter for the
caucus. I mean everyone knows my views about this. I would
very much like to see her in the government.
And that would be the time table Tuesday week?
In the event that the caucus agreed, yes.
And what sort of portfolio do you have in mind? You must
have thought about this.
Not very much. No, I haven't because I would like to consult
her. Laurie, there's a thing called commonsense and
presumption. It's not sensible and it's presumptuous to have
discussions myself and Carmen about what she might do
and portfolio. The first thing is see what the public think. Let's
get the by-election out of the road, see what the caucus thinks
and in the course of those consultations I'll see what I think. I
mean after talking to my colleagues, to Brian Howe, my
deputy, and to the other leaders and opinion leaders inside the
caucus, I'll talk about the spread of jobs.
But presumably if she's to be the kind of use that you want,
you'll have to give her some sort of important portfolio in the
social policy area, won't you?
Not necessarily. It should be
You wouldn't get rid of her on admin services?
No. I think, given her record as a Premier and as a major 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: contributor to the Labor Party and to Australian public opinion,
she should have a policy job.
Now, are you just filling one vacancy the Ros Kelly vacancy?
Or are you now going to close up the hole left by Alan
Griffiths? It's clear from the sequence of events that it's not going to be
opportune to resolve the question with Alan Griffiths now.
There's some flexibility there for us. I'll soon be establishing
the inquiry which Alan asked me to establish. That'll take
some time, though. So I mean it still leaves the government
happily, I might say in a position where it can make
judgments about all these things. But it will mean, I think, the
fact that Dr Lawrence will be joining the caucus and will
contest a place in the ministry, that it will be the occasion of a
set of decisions about ministerial responsibility.
This will be your fourth reshuffle in three months. That's
starting to look a bit untidy. People are talking about
instability. You won't want another one a month or two down
the track, will you?
Laurie, let me say this to you: I don't think in terms of Alan
Griffiths or Ros Kelly any of us would want these things. But
let me also say that what we are seeing, and have seen, with
the resignations of people like Neil Blewett and John Kerin and
John Dawkins is the opportunity for a major generational shift
in the government. The vigour, the youthfulness, the vivacity
for the job all those sorts of things are on display I think with
the newer members of the ministry and the cabinet and, might
I say, those who've been there across the last 10 years.
But surely you want it to settle down? Can I ask you I 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: specifically, do you still hold to that promise to keep Alan
Griffiths' job open until this situation is resolved or, for the
sake of stability in the government, do you think it's gone on
too long?
I think that's a matter to be amicably settled. I think this is a
very fair caucus. No-one is going to say of Alan, well, because
of this matter where you've resigned but have since been
cleared by the police, and he has and where there's an
inquiry in prospect, which he has every confidence of being
cleared in terms of his ministerial conduct. This is a very fair
caucus and I think that caucus will consider Alan's position
very favourably.
On the night before the election a year ago at a party with your
staff, you said that if you won the election Labor would do
more things here than any other Western government will do in
the next three years. Now there's been criticism in the last few
days that at apart from the employment White Paper and a
Mabo social justice package, the agenda for the next couple of
years looks pretty empty.
I don't think that. Let's go back to that statement. What have
we got since? We've got the economy growing faster than any
other Western economy between 31/ 2 and 4 per cent now.
We've had the creation of 200,000 jobs across the year. We've
had the legislative settlement of Mabo, which in most
comparable countries could have taken five to 10 years and put
the whole development of a continent under question, with
continual claims being lodged in the High Court. We have the
continual improvement in Australia's position in Asia, in the
world. We're not only building structures in Australia but 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: we're building structures for Australia outside of Australia, and
we're now going to try and do something in Western world
terms novel about long-term unemployment.
I was going to ask you about that.
Either we have developed in the public commentators a bunch
of sort of insatiable change junkies. I've been here for
years, Laurie. No coalition Prime Minister could have made
that claim after a year in office at any one time.
Let's talk about unemployment. Obviously the economy is
recovering. The former Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank
said on Business Sunday this morning that even though when
this recovery reaches a peak he expects unemployment to still
be at 8 or 9 per cent. Is he right?
Time will tell but one thing is for sure: long term
unemployment will be far higher than at any other time and I
think we do have to get these people job ready and stream
them back into the labour force. In other words, of those
laminations, that laminar flow from various parts of the
community into employment, one of those laminations has to
be from the long-term unemployed. In other words, what we
are trying to do is to get those people out, up, get their esteem
up, get their work experience up and get them back into work.
But the possibility of unemployment still at 9 per cent when the
recovery hits its peek: that's pretty grim, isn't it?
I don't know whether I'd be as pessimistic as that. But, again,
one thing's for sure: there is no substitute for economic growth
for employment and the government does want to see the
economy grow. I noticed some terribly dismal and I thought
pretty pathetic headlines in one of our major newspapers a day
1; 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes: or so ago saying, ' Let's put our foot on the brake'. We've got
a sort of a pile of unused resources out there in the capital
stock. We've got a pool of people unemployed. Now is the
time to take those resources up and not to in some way put a
suture on it just as we're starting to get the thing flowing.
There seems to be a mindset at the moment that good news
equals bad news, that the growth figures mean that inflation is
inevitable, higher interest are inevitable.
I think we just can't cop this kind of analysis, Laurie. The
country cannot cop this sort of gloomy analysis. When we're in
a recession, it's terrible. We grow for six months, it's
shocking. From the dismal sort of fiscal and monetary watches
I mean people who in the big public debate wouldn't blow a
candle out. I mean in terms of if you said to them, ' Look, you
run an agenda and get the place back on its feet', they wouldn't
know where to start. Now, this place of sort of studied caution
at this point, at this point, we don't need it. That's not to say
we don't need always to be vigilant about inflation and we
will be or that we don't need a sensible role for monetary
policy. Of course we do. But we have been in a recession,
after all. You've just made the point about the store of
unemployed people, including the long-term unemployed.
Now's the time to get on with the growth and to get the place
really moving so we take some of those resources up.
Another anniversary question: again in that speech in the night
before the election you told your staff that voters were
contemplating taking Labor back but not with any relish. And
you said, ' We love their votes but we don't particularly need
their love'. Is that the way you still feel? You don't care how 
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating: Australians think about you?
We want their respect and their regard. Look, they must
understand now that Labor is setting Australia up in the
for a period of low inflat ion regrowth. We've got proximity to
markets that are growing faster than any in the world for the
first time in our history. This government has made the
structures and the access and the cultural change to exports to
let us be part of that. Now, it is in those matters of substance,
of fundamental importance to Australia, that mattered yesterday
in that by-election. They will matter in the next federal
election. In other words, the public elects the government to
deal with Australia's problems and its fundamentals and the
government responds. Whether on the way through they like
the way I part my hair, or the look of the faces of the ministry,
in a sense is secondary to whether they approve of the policy
fundamental job and the fundamental things that the
government's doing.
If yesterday's result was not about Carmen Lawrence's
personal popularity, does that mean you expect a swing to the
government in next week's Bonython by-election?
I think each by-election is different but I think that the
government is travelling reasonably well because I think the
public do look for value. I've always thought this always
right throughout my political life. Laurie, you've reported me
saying nearly a decade ago that good policies are good politics
that don't sell the public the dump, don't believe cynically you
can feed them pap or dross and that they'll take it. They won't.
They'll look through it and see what you're actually doing.
What we're doing is re-modelling Australia and giving it a 
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Paul Keating:
Laurie Oakes:
Compere: future and giving it a sense of optimism, particularly I think
with our young people, giving it a setting in the part of the
world we live.
You're getting some help from the Opposition, though, aren't
you? We've got an Opposition that doesn't know where it is. I mean
I noticed John Howard saying this morning, ' I'm not
yesterday's man'. He's right about that. He's a man of
years ago.
We're out of time but thank you very much, Mr Keating.
Good, Laurie.
Back to you, Jim.
The Prime Minister there with Laurie Oakes.
ENDS For private research only. Whilst every effort is made to ensure accuracy for the benefit of our clients,
no legal or other responsibility is taken for errors and omissions.
Transcript by MEDIA MONITORS ACT PTY LTD. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LUNCHEON FOR THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE SOLOMON ISLANDS,
THE HON FRANCIS HILLY, MP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
MONDAY, 14 MARCH 1994
It is my great pleasure to welcome to Australia the Head of Government of
the Solomon Islands.
I have been looking forward to seeing Mr Hilly in Australia later this year,
when the South Pacific Forum meets in Brisbane.
In fact I have already had the pleasure of seeing Mr Hilly at the forum in
Nauru last year, and at CHOGM in Cyprus.
However, those are not really occasions for bilateral discussions such as we
have enjoyed this morning.
Australia welcomes talks with the Solomon Islands of the warm and friendly
nature we had today. They enable us to, explore issues of concern to both
countries in some greater depth than a multilateral occasion.
At the forum, I have no doubt Mr Hilly and I will have the opportunity to
address regional matters which concern each of us.
That is the Pacific way.
But neighbours in the region must have opportunities to talk within the
framework of their own relationship in this case, a relationship of great
warmth which Australia values highly.
I particularly welcome the fact that on this visit, Prime Minister, you are
accompanied by a trade and investment delegation from the Solomon
Islands.
And that you and the delegation will be exploring ways to expand trade and
investment opportunities, with a special emphasis on tourism. 4961
I J 
In my first few months as Prime Minister I had the opportunity of visiting
Honiara to take part in the South Pacific Forum, which happily coincided with
the 15th anniversary of the independence of the Solomon Islands.
While my time was mostly confined to the capital itself, I saw enough of
Guadalcanal and the surrounding waters to recognise the value of your
attractive environment and the tremendous potential it offers in the long term
for tourism.
As I said at last year's forum in Nauru, the promotion of the private sector and
the development of export industries will be fundamental to the Pacific's
future economic prospects.
Your initiative, Prime Minister, in bringing this business delegation to
Australia is a concrete and helpful step in this context.
As you know, trade between us is heavily weighted in my country's favour.
That is not uncomfortable for Australia, but we are prepared to help in
encouraging Australian companies to trade with, and invest in, the Solomon
Islands. Your government's commitment to economic reform is, in this regard, most
welcome. The path to economic reform is not easy. I know that because the Australian
government has been following it for a decade.
But success in economic reform should also open up opportunities for
Australian business, to the benefit of both nations.
However trade links are only one facet of our bilateral relationship.
Australia is your neighbour in the South Pacific, and we consider the region
we share to be of vital importance in our foreign policy and security
objectives. My appointment of Gordon Bilney as Minister for Pacific Island Affairs reflects
the Australian Government's desire to give even closer attention to the
region. We will be providing some $ 11 million this financial year to help, in particular,
with education and training.
We also maintain strong links through the Defence Co-operation Program. I
enjoyed very much visiting the patrol boat base at Honiara in 1992, and
Australia is very pleased to have provided two Pacific patrol boats to help
your government protect its valuable fisheries.
4962 
We also enjoy excellent people to people contacts, and your invitation to the
business leaders who have accompanied you will help promote them.
I have been looking forward, as I said, to welcoming you to Australia again for
the 25th South Pacific Forum in Brisbane in August, which represents
another aspect of the relationship between our two countries.
I trust we can have a useful discussion there of the economic challenges
facing all of us in the region, looking in particular at how to make the best use
of our resources.
But I also trust that our bilateral talks this morning have been as useful to you
as they have been to me.
And I trust that your current visit to Australia is both useful and enjoyable. 4963 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
COMMONWEALTH DAY 1994
The strength in diversity that is a unifying feature of the Commonwealth of
Nations is reflected in the theme chosen for this year's Commonwealth Day
Sport.
The Commonwealth Games, to be held in Canada in August, encapsulate
one of the most notable aspects of the Commonwealth the coming together
of people and countries from all continents in a spirit of participation and
healthy competition.
Commonwealth Day 1994 also sees us only a few weeks away from historic
elections in South Africa elections which owe much to the efforts of
Commonwealth countries in maintaining pressure for change.
The significant role of the Commonwealth in encouraging respect for
democracy will be highlighted through a distinguished Commonwealth
observer group, electoral officials, and other personnel assisting with the
South African transition process, including representatives from Australia.
Although Australia's place in the world is changing, the Government
continues to see value in our membership of the Commonwealth of Nations.
We are encouraging the Commonwealth to respond similarly to global
developments to ensure its continuing relevance to member states.
I am looking forward to discussing this and other related issues when I meet
with the Commonwealth Secretary-General, Chief Emeka Anyaoku, during his
official visit to Australia at the end of this month.
CANBERRA March 14,1994 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA TODAY INDONES IA ' 94
OVERSEAS PASSENGER TERMINAL, SYDNEY
WEDNESDAY 16 MARCH 1994
I am very pleased to be able to launch the Australia
Today Indonesia ' 94 promotion. Prime Ministers are
always pleased to open things.
But, for both political and national reasons, I think I
am entitled to take an extra measure of pleasure today.
No country is more important to Australia than Indonesia
If we fail to get this relationship right, and nurture
and develop it, the whole web of our foreign relations is
incomplete.
When I became Prime Minister, I was determined that one
of my highest priorities would be to ensure that
Australia's relationship with Indonesia received the
attention I believed it deserved.
We live adjacent to the fourth most populous country in
the world.
Too few Australians understand the importance of this
neighbour of ours these 180 million neighbours of ours.
Too few understand the riches and variety of Indonesian
culture. And too few appreciate the pace of economic and social
change taking place in Indonesia, where the economy has
been growing in real terms at a rate of 6.7 percent a
year since 1965.
For too long we were inclined to see both Indonesia
itself, and our relationship with Indonesia, in almost
exclusively political terms.
The Australian fear of Indonesia as an expansionist
power, forged during the Sukarno era, persisted long
after President Sukarno and his-policies had gone. 
And Australian ignorance of Indonesia continued long
after we should have known better.
So I made a deliberate decision to make my first overseas
visit as Prime Minister to Jakarta.
And I decided to state publicly there what all
Australians need to understand: that the emergence of the
New Order government of President Soeharto, and the
stability and prosperity which his government has brought
to the sprawling archipelago to our north, was the single
most beneficial strategic development to have affected
Australia and its region in the past thirty years.
An Indonesia mired in poverty, split by ethnic or
regional tensions, and hostile to Australia, would have
had incalculable consequences for this country.
And not just for our security but for our economic
prosperity as well.
One of my aims during my visit in April 1992 was to
examine ways in which our relationship could be broadened
away from its concentration on political issues on
which we were sometimes at odds to a much broader
agenda of economic, social and cultural cooperation.
I was convinced then, as I still am, that as Indonesia
developed, so the complementarities between us would
grow. Indonesia's economy has grown five and a half times since
1966.
And every year since then the income of each Indonesian
has grown on average by four and a half percent.
The percentage of people living below the poverty line
fell from forty percent in 1976 to around seventeen
percent in 1987.
An economy heavily dependent on commodities, and
particularly on oil, has been transformed, reformed and
deregulated. The industrial sector now accounts for 23 percent of GDP,
more than agriculture.
There are parallels, of course, with Australia's
experience over the past eleven years.
Our economy, too, has been modernised and opened up to
the world through financial deregulation and tariff cuts.
Our exports have trebled and have grown as a percentage
of our GDP from 13 percent to 20 percent. 
Our manufacturing exports are growing rapidly and are now
consistently stronger than the rural exports for which we
are better known.
Services exports are also becoming an increasingly
important element in our trade, growing from $ 4.2 billion
in 1981-82 to $ 15 billion in 1992-93.
So, with these changes, we have become more efficient,
productive and competitive than ever before.
With these changes in Indonesia and Australia have come
new opportunities for cooperation.
And our two governments must foster this co-operation.
I have been very pleased to discover on my two visits to
Jakarta, and in meetings with Indonesian Ministers here,
that President Soeharto and his senior colleagues very
much share this approach.
In April 1992, President Soeharto and I agreed that the
establishment of an Australia-Indonesia Ministerial Forum
would be one useful way of broadening our relationship.
We wanted the Forum to include a range of economic
Ministers who until then had not had a great deal to do
with the bilateral relationship.
That Forum has begun its work well, establishing working
groups in a number of areas of practical importance to us
such as agriculture and food co-operation.
Its activities are designed to reflect and to accelerate
broader movements already underway in our relationship.
Here are some figures which bear this out.
At more than $ 3 billion, two-way trade is nearly three
times its level five years ago.
Australian approved investment in Indonesia over the past
five years amounts to nearly $ 700 million.
Sixty percent more Indonesians were enrolled in higher
education in Australia in 1993 than one year earlier.
The number of Indonesian visitors to Australia almost
doubled in two years to 1993.
So my simple proposition is this: no relationship
Australia has offers greater potential, on the social,
the cultural or the economic fronts, than this one with
Indonesia. I happen to think that this holds true for Indonesia as
well, although that is something Indonesia will have to
decide. 
But having said that, potential is just that
potential. Despite encouraging figures such as those I have given,
we should not fool ourselves that there is anything
inevitable about the trend at work here.
For example, our bilateral trade grew by only 1.5 percent
during 1993. This was the lowest increase in several
years. And although there are several particular reasons
for this, it is not a good enough result.
If the relationship is to live up to its potential,
effort will be required from the whole range of people in
our communities.
But, we can certainly do much more in the economic area.
To take just one example, we hope to sign shortly an
agreement with Indonesia which will facilitate increased
co-operation in science and technology.
And in the area of language, all Australian Governments
are putting their money where their mouths are with the
recent decision by the Council of Australian Governments
to endorse a new national strategy for Asian languages
and culture which will greatly increase the number of
Australian students learning four key Asian languages,
including Indonesian.
There are other areas worth our attention, too.
Changes in Australia and Indonesia and in the world
around us since the end of the Cold War should compel us
to take a fresh look at our strategic relationship.
I believe great potential exists for further defence cooperation
between Australia and Indonesia.
The Government's recent strategic review proposed the
concept of a strategic partnership with the countries of
our region.
If we are to turn into reality our policy of seeking
defence in and with Asia, instead of against Asia,
Indonesia is the most important place it will have to be
done. Already we share many strategic interests. We have no
conflicting interests in this part of the world, and
there is a great complementarity in our respective
defence postures.
And despite the differences in the structure and
functions of our defence forces, new areas of practical
co-operation are opening up to us. 
On the political front, we are working together very well
in regional organisations such as the ASEAN post-
Ministerial consultations and we will co-operate closely
in the new ASEAN Regional Forum.
We have also worked together effectively on particular
issues such as Cambodia and regional chemical weapons
arms control and, of course, in APEC.
President Soeharto and I have spoken on several
occasions about APEC. We both see the great potential
the organisation offers for keeping up the momentum of
growth across the whole Asia Pacific region.
And each of us is conscious of the opportunities APEC
offers to ASEAN and the developing countries of the
region, as well as the developed ones.
Indonesia is the Chair of APEC this year, in addition to
its chairmanship of the non-aligned movement. This is a
real tribute to Indonesia's standing in the world.
In my view the APEC Leaders' meeting in Jakarta in
November will be a decisive moment for APEC and the
region. I have offered President Soeharto any help that
Australia can usefully provide.
But despite the bright prospects in areas like these, it
would be foolish to claim that the road ahead will always
be smooth.
I do not doubt that Australia's relationship with
Indonesia will encounter problems from time to time.
We are different people with different cultures and
different views on issues which matter to us.
The management of those differences is part of the
challenge. We will always want to be able to talk
frankly and directly about them. But it is the way in
which we come to grips with them which can give the
relationship its particular value.
Some years ago people in both Australia and Indonesia
liked to refer to the idea that good fences make good
neighbours; that good relations were a matter of keeping
the palings in repair. In my view, the need for such
defensive thinking is well past. As both countries
change, we should and can approach our relationship with
much greater confidence.
I believe that Australia can establish with Indonesia a
partnership which can stand as a model for co-operation
between developed and developing countries, between
countries based on western structures and values and
those based on Asian models. 
The task will not be easy. It will require more energy
and commitment; warm hearts and, when required, cool
heads. If a relationship of the sort we want is to endure, we
have to look beyond mutual economic interests and to
establish a deeper understanding.
There is no doubt that work is required on both sides.
We need be in no doubt that Australians' lack of
knowledge about Indonesia is matched by misconceptions in
Indonesia about Australia.
A recent survey commissioned by the Australian Government
found that almost two-thirds of Indonesians believe that
the White Australia policy is still practised. Fewer than
one in five Indonesians see Australia as a modern society
or an advanced country. Australia is perceived to have
relatively low expertise in defence, shipping, aerospace,
mining and manufacturing.
There are other more positive aspects to the survey
findings. But it shows how far we have to go.
This is one reason why the Australian Government is
putting this effort into the Australia Today Indonesia
' 94 promotion.
Australia Today will be a showcase in Indonesia for
Australia's achievements in a whole range of areas from
trade and technology to the arts and tourism.
It will be the most comprehensive promotion that
Australia has ever undertaken abroad, and with the
highest level of participation. More than 500 Australian
organisation represented by at least 1500 individuals,
will take part.
When I visited President Soeharto last October, I was
pleased to receive his support for the promotion.
I am also delighted that the patron of the event will be
the Indonesian Co-ordinating Minister for Trade and
Industry, Mr Hartarto, who knows Australia and
Australians well.
I should particularly note the contribution of some of
the corporate sponsors of the promotion.
New Hope Corporation
Austindo Group
Krakatau Steel
BHP
. CRA 
* Coca Cola Amatil
* Price Waterhouse
* ANZ Banking Group
* Commonwealth Bank of Australia
* Blake Dawson Waldron
* Southcorp Wines
* Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation
* TNT Express Worldwide ( Australia)
These are all far-sighted companies. They all have a bit
of vision about them. They understand the potential I
have talked about today.
Several of my Cabinet colleagues will attend Australia
Today events, and the Minister for Trade, Senator
McMullan, will lead a trade mission of business leaders.
The ' Visions for the Future' exhibition will provide a
showcase for Australian science and technology that will
last beyond this promotion and will help sell the message
of Australian achievements in other parts of the world as
well. All Australian states will be represented in this
promotion. In particular, the Queensland and the Western
Australian state governments will have programs in
Semarang and Surabaya respectively, to celebrate their
flourishing sister-state relationships with the
Indonesian provinces of East Java and Central Java.
The cultural program we are putting on will give
Indonesians a taste of the best we have to offer in the
arts, entertainment and sport everything from
exhibitions of art including Aboriginal art the West
Australian Ballet, the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra,
theatre and music.
Elite national teams in soccer, volley ball and badminton
will meet their Indonesian counterparts.
Several top Australian sports coaches will work with
Indonesian sports people a good beginning to the kind
of cooperation which might be possible in the lead-up to
the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney.
' Australia Today Indonesia' will go some way towards
letting Indonesians know about the achievements of the
continent to their south. At the same time it will
expose large numbers of Australians for the first time to
modern Indonesia. 
It should go a long way towards creating a better
cultural understanding and, thereby, a better culture
for business and trade.
When this promotion is over, the challenge will remain.
But it will be one we should welcome.
It is in every sense an historic challenge. The chance
to set up for the twenty first century a strong, dynamic
enduring relationship between Australia and
Indonesia. An immensely profitable and creative
relationship between ourselves and the 180 million people
to our north.
Without doubt, there is no more exciting and potentially
rewarding challenge facing us between now and the end of
this century.
That a prominent business group like the Institute of
Company Directors has associated itself with this event
is yet another welcome sign of the growing willingness of
the Australian business community to get engaged with
Asia. I congratulate them, and everyone else associated with
the project and now take great pleasure in launching
it. 



PRIME MINISTER WITH DOUG AITON ON RADIO 3L0, 16/ 3/ 94.
E OE PROOF ONLY
AITON: Prime Minister, Paul Keating, good afternoon.
PM: How are you Doug?
AITON: Very well indeed thank you. You must be very pleased with the results that
came out today on the economy.
PM: I think it vindicates what I said on behalf of the Government in the election
campaign, that we had a growth economy on our hands, that we could re-ignite the
economy back into growth indiiml-yment growth, and today's figures which give us
four percent growth in the economy over the year and two hundred thousand jobs and
low inflation as a kind of trifecta I think Australians should be very pleased with.
AITON: Also the tenth consecutive quarter of growth I think In a row, It Is consecutive?
PM: Yes it is. So it's firm and it's growing, it's on a broad front, it's now got a very high
share of profits in the economy which are still driving it. The tax cuts which the
Government delivered late last year certainly promoted consumer spending and that's
shown up in striong retail sales. So by and large it is, as I said a year ago and most of
the day.
AITON: And what about exports, which is so crucial to us to improve upon. They
came up I think 2.7% inicreas-, was it?
PM: For the year, and they were growing as fast as imports across the year, so
we've made the great jump to exports and a leap into Asia, particularly with
manufactured products. But I think the great thing about it is not just the level of the
growth, which I might say Doug is now stronger than any other western economy, but
with low inflation.
AITON: Yes, can you keep that up? Can we keep that up?
PM: Well I think so. I think so, and the good thing about these accounts is that there's
a number of measures of inflation. The one that we all know is the CPI, the Consumer
Price Index, but that's got a basket of goods in it and even with all the -good'sit Fias
we've got inflation for the year at 1 Well, there's another thing called, wait for it,
it's called the non-farm GDP deflator. Now what it means is, it's an even broader
measure of prices than the CPI and it came out I think one four, so I mean it's very
good confirmation that inflation is low and the trick will be now to keep the productivity
coming through so wage increases which come in the next year or so are protected by
a fair bit of productivity, protecting the inflation rate by productivity. 
AITON: The media criticism comes out of course on days like today, and the one that
I've heard most is that business investment is still down or still lagging. Is that true
according to you?
PM: Well it's growing and it's grown moderately well across the year but it's not as
high as we would like it, but again, look at that high profit share recorded today. The
highest level of profits to GDP in the nation's history. As high as the last period of the
late eighties which was higher than any other time since the war. Now that will mean
that business has got the balance sheet into place and it will mean they will be looking
for investment opportunities, and we can see it coming in the expectations data which
we're now recording for private capital investment.
AITON: Well I suppose the question that people will want to know the answer to most
of all is regarding unemployment because I'd know of no family in my immediate social
contact area that has not been afflicted or touched by unemployment. Do you think
these figures actually will give us a direct result there?
PM: Well the link between growth and employment is profound and if you look at any
graphic illustration of it, say from the 1960' s onwards, wherever you see the
employment chart or graph laid over GDP, whenever you get a growth in the economy
you get growth in employment, and we're seeing the same classic illustration of that in
the last year. That is, we've seen the economy pick up, and what have we seen with
it? Two hundred thousand jobs.
AITON: So what are you saying is going to happen?. Can you stick your neck out?
PM: I think we're going to have a fair swag of jobs come out of the rural growth of the
economy and five hundred thousand jobs which I set as an objective at the time of the
last election campaign. One year down a three year path Doug we've got two hundred
thousand in the bag already.
AITON: Yes, true. I did notice, as we all did, in your triumphant election speech of a
year ago, election win speech of a year ago, that you made a point of saying whatever
happens we're going to look after the unemployed. It was a line that affected a lot of
people and it was very well and dramatically put. I wondered at the time, and I still
wonder now even though despite what you've just said, were you foreshadowing that
unemployment is going to become a fact of life in Australia for a long time?
PM: No, because we're hoping that while it will be a fact of life for some time, we're
hoping to deal with the most difficult part of the problem and that is the long-term
unemployed, and the Green Paper which the Government published in November. and
the WhitePaper which vwll be-announcing in late April with the policy changes to deal
with thelong-term unemployed, will be Australia's biggest and most, if -you likevalia-nt
ifi~ tipt todo something interesting, not just in Australian but in world terms, about how
you deal with the problem of three hundred-odd thousand people who have been
unemployed eighteen months or more. So I think that the sense of compassion, the
sense of fair play that resides in the community of this country, will demand that as we
go off now into a long, low inflationary recovery we don't leave an underclass of people
behind forgotten, carrying the burden of the recession, that we actually bring them with
us by making certain that government policy adjusts at getting these people back in the
mainstream of the labour market. 
AITON: Do you expect that Australia can return to the 1960' s-type figure of
unemployment which was more or less nil?
PM: No, I don't think so. I don't know what so-called structural unemployment is. You
see, we've got the cycle, that is slower growth which Fai _ ro-cu-ced a pool of
unemployment, and we're now seeing that change with the faster growth. But
underneath that we've got all the changes that come from the redundancies, the
productivity changes, the industrial changes, the tariff changes, the rebuilding, the new
higher-tech industries. That structural change sits under that. If you wash out the
cycle, if you wash the cyclical unemployment out and look at the flux which is always
created by one group leaving one set of industries and another group being trained to
take up another, it's somewhere in that five to six percent area, I think.
AITON: Forever?
PM: Well certainly between now and the sort of intermediate period, certainly between
now and the end of the century.
AITON: If I could move to another matter, l~ m sure you're focussing on the figures
more than anything else today or the economy, but the greatest social problem we
appear to have in the news at the moment is that of Macedonia, and I notice that you
have intervened yourself and attended lunches or-6ea-kfast' -or something with the
Macedonian leaders and what have you. Would you like to state the Government's
point of view on this very troubling matter right now?
PM: Well I said something about it today as a matter of fact but I'm happy to say
something about it to you Doug, on your program, and that is that I think the thing we
pride ourselves on is that down the years this has been a country where old world
hatreds have been mediated and forgotten, and I think this is the way we should
remain. So the principle should be that all those who have made Australia their home
should never forget that their first loyalty is to Australia, and my point is that you can't
be loyal to Australia if you break with the basic traditions of the country, that is, and
these include above all tolerance and non-violence. So old attachments
notwithstanding, acts of violence and engagement in campaigns of hatred I think
constitute an assault on the traditions of Australian democracy and what we as
Australians believe in, and they're not acceptable.
AITON: Alright. Is there going to be further Federal Government intervention on this
matter? PM: Well we've made it clear that what we're looking for is basically, the Government's
made a position of principle, on the basis we've decided to recognise
all other states, a recognition of this state of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, and in the argument, if you like, that's bee-n had by groups in this country
wvir~ e saing that Australia's, if you like, unwillingness to accept this state recognising
itself as the republic of Macedonia has in fact, if you like for those associated with the
interests of Greece, brought a recognition, at least temporarily, to this name the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. But now the Australians formerly from this state
objecting to the termSlavMacedonian which was introduced by the Government, not
to cause a sense or to make some ehnic statement but simply to describe a fact, that
these people are people from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. I mean 
personally I'd prefer they all call themselves Australians, as I think all people would
prefer to see them called.
AITON: Yes, semantics is always going to get you into trouble though.
PM: The key thing is there are no borders here, there are no borders in this country.
And while it may be an interesting debate for these people to be discussing the
contemporary division of the former ancient state of Macedonia, the whole notion of
pursuing the old hatreds in Australia and the notion that these people have a right to
some sort of violence in our society is, I think, a line we ought to draw without
qualification. AITON: Mr Keating, it's a year now, last weekend, since your unexpected, to most
people, election victory. These figures of course are the sorts of things that you
would've hoped would happen a year after that, the figures today. But is there any
particular matter where you are disappointed that you have not been able to achieve
what you would have liked to in a year?
PM: The mandate I set down was to re-start the economy, get it growing strongly
again, see the recovery bloom, get employment running strongly again, deal with
Mabo, the High Court decision, focus on APEC, that is build structures for Australia in
Asia, and deal with the long-term unemployed. And I think I can give a tick to most of
those things. That is, I can say honestly Doug, to you, the answer to that question, we
have got the economy growing again, we have got two hundred thousand jobs, we
have legislated for Mabo, an historic piece of property in cultural law, we have put
APEC into place and it's growing and changing, and we are now working on the White
Paper and long-term unemployment, and of course we're seeing low inflation right the
way through it. So in terms of the mandate, can I just say our opponents, Dr Hewson
said we'd be in a double-dip recession, they had the ads with the gun sights taking
people out of employment, not putting people back into it. All of that's proven to be
untrue, that Australia wasn't going to go into a double-dip recession, that we weren't
going to see more Australians unemployed but in fact fewer unemployed and more
employed, and a year down the track I think the Government's been true to its mandate
and true to its promises.
AITON: Do you feel embarrassed about the Ros Kelly business?
PM: No, that's part of the sort of sideshows of public life. But you see one of the
things that today's national accounts, there's a growth of consumer sentiment and retail
sales which came from the tax cuts of last year. You never hear about them now
Doug. Eight to ten dollars a week for people, a promise the Government made and
kept, and we had to battle it through the Senate, against the Liberal Party and the
National Party and the Greens and the Democrats and everybody else for the right to
pay people a tax cut which the economy needed to kick itself along.
AITON: I notice that you're coming up further ahead of Dr Hewson as preferred leader
in recent polls. I know you have a certain amount of contempt for polls but
nevertheless we have only them to go by. It seems to me that you might actually like
Dr Hewson to stay there as leader because it makes you feel secure.
PM: Well Doug, when we get that tricky, any of us in public lifethat we're into the
business of choosing our opponents' leadership, that's the time to call it quits I think. I 
just think from the point of view of the parliamentary leader of the parliamentary Labor
Party, as we are in office, therefore Prime Minister, I take the view that whoever the
Coalition propose as their leader is the person I have to deal with in policy terms. Now
the Liberals last time in a highly ideological election. they wanted to make a big tax
grab through the GST and essentially funnel the money to the high paid, despite the
fact that the profit share was rising as it has indicated today the highest level ever in our
post-war history, and the public said hang on, this is too greedy, we're not being in this,
we're not going to see you knock Medicare out, we're not going to see you knock the
social wage around and we're not going to let people go onto individual wage contracts,
we don't want a GST, we do want a more inclusive society, we do care about the
unemployed, we do care about our community, we do care about aboriginal Australians
and we want something better. So I mean we were at the time putting what I call the
policies of enlargement out against the sort of straightners and the punishers, that their
view being we can only succeed if we've got our head bowed, our eyes down and
wearing a penalty. This society deserves better and can have better.
AITON: This is a very funny day for you with those figures which are hard for the
Opposition to dispute in any way or to mock. What's been your darkest moment
though over the last twelve months since that triumph of the election.
PM: I must say, I'm happy to say I haven't had many dark moments, and the growth
today came out of the One Nation package of 1992. 1 mean what restarted the
economy? What started those ten consecutive quarters of growth you mentioned
earlier? And the answer was the One Nation spending which Dr Hewson said would
bankrupt the country. So this wasn't put there by accident or good fortune. It was put
there by express government policy and so I haven't had many, can I say, dark days
since. I mean if there was any frustrating, it was the Budget process of last year, that
was frustrating. As you know, I don't believe minor parties should hold the money, the
financial policies of the Government in the House of Representatives to ransom. That
was a trying period but we got through that, we got the tax cuts paid and the
economy's growing as a consequence.
AITON: You told SBS television in an interview recently that when the time comes to
go you won't have to be told, you'll be gone. But where will you go?
PM: Oh where do any of us go? I mean former Prime Ministers are generally a pretty
sad bunch and I suppose I'll end up like the rest of them somewhere along the way but
not quite yet.
AITON: Good to talk to you and thanks for your time today.
PM: Okay Doug, nice to speak to you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, OVERSEAS PASSENGER TERMINAL, CIRCULAR QUAY
SYDNEY, 16 MARCH 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: National Accounts. Well, I think this Is a very encouraging iesult rut Ue whole
country. That ithat we arc now growing faster than any western country at
around 4 per cent. We have had very significant growth in the December quarter.
Happily the National Accounts again rrncrding very low inflation for Australia. That
isc, o mplementing the CPI and this I think Is a terribly encouraging result for the
whole country.
J: You must be worried about the low Investment figures though?
PM: No. Investment Is picking up. What the Accounts also record Is the highest profit
share in our history, that is the highest shlre or profits to GDP In our history. So.
the Government said at the time of the last election it was going to restart the
economy, It has done so. We said we would like to see 500,000 jobs created In
three years, what the Accounts show is 200,000 In the last year. And that mandate
we secured to get the place moving again Is. I think, pretty obviously being
satisfied.
J: But why are those Investment figuros taking so long to come through.
PM: Well because companies have been re-balancing their h. lance sheets. They
have been starting to get tieirconfidence back. find their mark and opportunities,
build their profits up, and now I think they will start hunting.
J: What message do you think today's result will send to the markets?
PM: One of a growing econumy with strong exports, good employment and low
Inflation. I mean it Is a very good message.
J: Any need to change the budget figures at all
PM: No, I dun'l think so. I think these are the kind oT growth rates that we expected to
see, and the thing is they are now in evidence. r 
J: What ramifications do these figures have on Interest rates?
PM: Well, I answered that the other day. We have still got a lot of underempluyed
resources. I mean, I have Just had quostions here about business Investment, We
have still got a way to go to see business Investment pick up to levels which would
lift those underemployed resource.; up and see them used In this country. We are
not abuut to choke that off by any misplaced, utterly misplaced sort of caution.
J: Mr Keating on the Macedonian issue
PM: Well. I think the Australian public Is entitled to be entirely disinterested In this
argument, entirely disinterested. And an aiyuierinl, by two eLhnlc groups over an
ancient territory, essentially abuses the traditions of this country of tolerance and
understanding, and injects into this society episodes of the kind wc have seen in
the last wnok or two which this country could well do without. Now, while it may be
a matter to Greeks and Yugoslav Macedonians, a matter of great moment, how the
ancicnt State of Macedonia Is ieprusuited today In contemporary terms. It Is not a
matter of great political interest to the Australian community, nor need it be. So, I
will just say to these communities that this Is their adoptod country, they should
respect its mores and traditions of tolerance and fairplay and non-violent
resoluion of political and community conflict.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH RADIO 21-M, GOONELLABAH, 17 MARCH 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Welcome, Mr Paul Keating.
PM: Hello Jenny.
J: I believe you have Irish ancestry.
PM: Yes, I do actually and I went back there last year to the village of my
ancestors and they could actually show you the block of land they
worked on.
J: And did it have an impact on you going back?
PM: Yes, it was wonderful. A village of 250 and 6,000 turned up.
J: Fantastic.
PM: It was wonderful, the warmth of Ireland. I guarantee half the worlds
warmth must reside in that little country.
J: I heard an Irish woman today say that she thought St Patrick's Day
trivialises the problems over there. What do you think about that?
PM: I don't think so, no. It is a great national occasion, a great national day
for a country with enormous spirit and which has made an enormous
contribution to the culture of the world and we keep the celebrations
going here. Harry Woods is with me, I don't whether Harry..
J: He is in green.
PMV: Harry has got the colours on, he has got a bit of the Irish.
HW: I have ancestors from Glare. 
PM: From Clare. I am from eastern Galway. Harry is from Clare. You see,
black Irish we've both got the black hair.
J: All right, still talking about overseas on two more serious matters. We
are having trouble competing successfully in the international arena
because our major competitor Asia pays such low wages, our
corporations are starting to go -off -Shore to manufacture and even
some of local industries now are setting up factories overseas. How
can we compete successfully internationally?
PM: We are already doing that. Our manufacturing production has doubled
since 1983; our exports have trebled. Let me just explain this to you
ten years ago we exported 13 per cent of all we produce, this year that
is 21 per cent. So, we have seen a huge growth in exports and in the
national accounts which came out yesterday which showed the
economy growing so strongly at 4 per cent, a big contribution to that
was exports. So, what I am saying to you Jenny is not a claim, it is
simply a fact: that Australia is exporting its head off and we are hugely
competitive via wages, via the inflation rate, via the exchange rate
all of these elements of our competitiveness have turned around
Australian manufacturing. We don't want to be in the business of
competing with low wage countries. We want a society here which has
much higher incomes than that. If our future was only a dismal one, in
other words we would have to have the same wages as China or
Malaysia or somewhere else, then Australians would be very much the
poorer. So, what we would need to do is to do innovative and clever
things and that is why the government has put so much emphasis on
our education system that now we have got eight kids in ten
completing secondary school and most of them going into universities
and into vocational education, into TAFE. The kind of society we will
have and the kind of products we will produce will be a measure of
their creativity. So, the money is in selling innovation. There is no
money selling simple things.
J: A lot of those kids though are staying on because it is programmed
that way, because they are keeping them at school longer because
there is not enough jobs for them. Can you see that changing though?
PMV: If you look at the 1980s, we are starting to get strong employment
growth back again now. If you look at the time when we did have it,
say from 1983 to 1990, those kids instantly went into jobs. I was
talking to somebody the other day at an secondary educational
institution, a tertiary institution, they were saying that every single
person who graduated found a job. I think that won't be generally true,
but people who are qualified for interesting work will be taken up. That
is why the emphasis has to be on education and training. In other
words, we don6' T want to be an untra ned, -lowwage society. We want
to be a highly trained, much higher wage society where we are selling
services and services growth has just blossomed where we are
sefling manufactures and where we are really reaching out into the 
world. All that has shown up yesterday again in those National
Accounts.
J: You obviously must have been pleased with them, but I understand
there has been very little new business investment shown in those
figures. Have you got any plans to make it more attractive for small
and big businesses to increase their investment?
PM: In yesterday's Accounts the profit share of the economy that is the
share of national product going to profits if you take national income,
le~ t ' s talk about some of these terms, and you come to the fork in the
road: one part goes down to profits and the other part goes down to
wages, at the fork in this road the profit share of national income in
yesterday's National Accounts is the highest in Australian history. So,
business has now got very, very booming profits and what it will now
do is invest them. But this is a phenomenon of the last year and it
takes a while to get started. We are now seeing quite strong
investment coming through; we are seeing very strong housing
investment; we are seeing strong retail spending and the tax cuts the
Government promised in the election and delivered were responsible
for kicking along retail sales in the December quarter and that has
been part of the power of the 4 per cent growth we are seeing. So,
yes, business investment has been slow since 1989-90, but we are
now starting to see the pace and if you look at the expectations data,
this is the surveys of business to see what they think they will be
doing, they are saying they will be doing much more in the coming
year.
J: So, you are saying the don't need any more incentives offered then?
PM: They don't need any more profits, no. Let me just make this very clear.
If business doesn't start investing the work force will claim some of the
profits back to wages. Can I make this point: the Government since
the election, has reduced the company rate from 39 per cent to 33 per
cent we have got a company rate the same as Singapore we have
introduced an investment allowance 2 in fact where we add 10 per
cent value to any proposal for right-offs; accelerated depreciation; no
double tax on dividends. The Government can't do any more on that
front. What business has got to do now is basically get off their tails
and start investing.
J: We are all looking forward to seeing how Carmen Lawrence. will do,
but she seems to the be exception and not the rule. There doesn't
seem to be that many women in the top jobs, why are there so few
women in your Ministry?
PM: Let me just make a point, there is not one women in the National party
in Canberra. Not one. Now, of course there are many in the Labor
party. 
J: Quite a few in the Liberal party too.
PM: Yes, there are quite a few in the Liberal party, none in the National
party; we are going to have many more in the Labor party and we have
got a number now in the Ministry
J: Two isn't it?
PM: No, we have had three, and Ros Kelly resigned, but as you know I
have argued quite firmly that I think Dr Lawrence should join the
Ministry and were that to happen we would go back to three and that, I
hope, is the start of a greater level of representation amongst
Australian women in the higher echelons of national politics in the
executive area.
J: Has your party got a policy on equal. representation?
PM: Our party is now debating this question about how we move towards a
higher level of representation, indeed, equal representation by women
towards the end of the century and each state branch is now seeking
to deal with that. My experience, if you take Dr Lawrence as an
example, she has been a Premier; a person who can develop policies
and articulate them and will play, I think, a very strong role in the
national government.
J: Can you imagine a woman Prime Minister in the next five or ten years?
PM: We have had women Premiers Joan Kirner was recently the Premier
of Victoria; Carmen herself was the Premier of Western Australia it is
entirely possible as it ought to be.
J: This is a big retirement area and many elderly people feel a bit angry
and frustrated about being -taxed on the interest of their investments.
They feel, I suppose, they have worked hard for their money, they
have paid their tax through the years, a lot of them have put a bit aside
for their retirement thinking they can survive on it without being on the
pension and so forth. Can you see any answer to that, do they have to
be taxed on the interest, can you see why they might be angry?
PM: There are a few things that people should realise about what the
Government has done with pensions. When we became the
Government pensions were just under 21 per cent of average weekly
earnings. Now, I think, they are nearly 26 per cent of average weekly
earnings because pensions are always adjusted with the CPI, where in
the more leaner times wages were not. If you look at 1990 and 1991
and 1992 what has happened is that at the bottom end of the work
force wages have dropped, but the pensions continue to rise because
they have been inflation adjusted. Now as well as that, the
Government has said we will increase the free area of earnings under
the pension so that a single pensioner or a couple can earn much 
more without losing a dollar of pension. But we did one additional
thing: we said that money you earned was formerly taxed, it is now
removed completely from the tax system so a pensioner person or
couple can go out and earn that money, not lose a dollar of income,
but also not pay tax on it. Now, once they get over that free area, they
start to pay tax on it. But again, if you earn income in this country you
are taxed, if you are on a full rate pension you can earn within the free
area I can't exactly remember the figure at the moment, but it is now
quite generous and not lose a dollar of pension.
J: But how about these people who are not even on the pension. They
are finding it really hard.
PM: The pension is available on the basis of means and income. It is a
very fair test, I think. So, if people have assets which take them
outside the pension range, the pension system doesn't need to serve
them or, if they have income if you like, outside the income ranges.
But for most people who have got a bit of superannuation or a bit of
something else they end up being a part-rate pensioner. Therefore
they then pick up the medical benefits support, they pick up the
pensioner concessions.
J: I just thought it might be good to encourage the people that aren't on
the pensions to stay off the pensions, it might be a little of the lighter
load.
PM: The way people stay off pensions is to have income above the income
test ranges. The pension is not a national right for everyone who is
elderly. The pension is there to support those whose income levels
drop below certain levels and whose assets fall within certain ranges.
But you see the other thing about the Government, in terms of the
aged, it is not just very good income support through the pension and
adjusting it and seeing its proportion of average weekly earnings rise
and increasing the free area and removing it from the tax system, but
the government has also invested very heavily in support for aged
people in the home and community care program; in geriatric
assessment; in hostel and nursing home programs. These things, I
thfilik, -matter tremendously to people and, of course, they have the
general protections of Medicare.
J: Given that the Pacific Highway is the main route north from Sydney,
why is it still-a state -responsibility and are there any plans for the
Commonwealth to take it over?
PM: No, there is now a very clear delineation between the national highway
system and the highway system under the management of the states.
The highway in NSW which is part of that national system is the New
England highway. Now, were the Commonwealth to take over
responsibility for the Pacific highway it would mean that NSW -would
have to take responsibility over for the New England highway, the 
Commonwealth wouldn't have responsibility for both highways and, of
course, there would need to be substantial financial adjustments to
Commonwealth payments to NSW in respect of responsibilities the
Commonwealth would pick up for the Pacific highway. At the moment
this rests with NSW. We have spent $ 170 million on the Pacific
highway before this change in responsibilities or the delineation in
responsibilities and Harry Woods was telling me this morning we have
spent about $ 25 million, I think, in this area on the highway and
including another $ 4-5 million on the black spots areas of the highway.
So, I wouldn't say we are the only people putting money into it at this
stage, but we have certainly put fairly heavy money into it, but it really
is a long run program and one that has to be resolved by NSW
principally. Can I also say the other thing we are doing is upgrading the main
Brisbane-Sydney railway line left undone for 25 years. This -is a7stIat
responsibility essentially. We are now putting money into it under the
' One Nation' program I announced a couple of years ago which will
see less trucks on the road; a better rail service down to Sydney; we
are building a new viaduct in this part of NSW. There is a viaduct at
Grafton and we are building a number of new steel and concrete
bridges and upgrading the permanent way in tracks. This is going to
speed up the trains and make them more regular which will mean they
will be a better freight service between Brisbane and Sydney and
points along the way which will mean fewer trucks on the roads et
cetera.
J: So, will you be listening to your taskforce, the Labor party taskforce,
that are campaigning to have it become a Commonwealth
responsibility?
PM: We are listening, but again we are not about to just take NSWs
responsibilities willy nilly and put them onto the Commonwealth
government. There is a notion around the country today if there is a
problem go and see the federal government because they have got the
money and they can fix it. Well, so too has NSW got the money and
they have got to be required to fix more of their own responsibilities. It
has taken the national government initiative to pick up the national rail
highway system from this rickety old state rail system to remodinize it
and do something with it so we can have a freight service which runs
from Queensland all the way to Perth on a proper national highway
system. We have put a lot of money into that. We are putting a lot of
money into the national road highway system, and we have until
recently, until the states said let's free up road funding, we've put into
arterial roads in the states and black spots, and it's the black spots, of
course, where people are killed, where there are a lot of accidents.
J: In the paper recently Jim Bolger was saying that he suggest that New
Zealand might become a republic by the year 2000. Have you got any
comments on that? 
PM: Jim is picking up my lines, I am very flattered. I think I have converted
the Leader of the New Zealand Conservative party to this thinking, but
I haven't had as much luck here with Dr Hewson and the obscurantists
in Canberra. So, they are still fighting for Queen and country and John
Howard is flat out winding the clock back, he is now back to about
1961 and still winding, and no doubt, if he keeps going he will find
himself back where he really feels most comfortable, about 1951.
J: Just to finish up, personally your predecessor is a self proclaimed
agnostic, what do you believe?
PM: I am a self confessed Christian and I think most people know that.
Everybo-dy has-their own views about these things. I don't go around
parading my religious views or requiring people to take note of them. I
actually think that Christian teaching and dogma has been a wellspring
of the recognition of human dignity and human endeavour and this has
been very telling in the politics and policies of western civilisation. It is
no less true here and it has always been very true of the Labor party in
particular which always says that the dignity of the human person is
paramount that is, we do things because of the innate importance of
each particular person rather than they belong to a particular
economic class or socio-economic group.
J: All right, when you go home, what do you do, how do you relax and
what to you read just to finish up.
PM: When I go home my principal interest is, of course, with my wife and
family and my kids keep me more than amused I can assure you. I
enjoy them immensely and I have got home interests. I like music
which Annita, my wife, does too. We had a nice little jam session on
late on Sunday afternoon and we went through about three or four
hours of Maria Callas and some of the great tenors of the ' 60s and
sopranos and various others, we got into choral music and then we
finished off with a big Mahler symphony. Or occasionally if the mood
takes it, I hop into the pop stuff, get a bit of Tom Jones on. I have got
these generally home r elated inte rests I read a fair bit of biography.
One of my passionate interests in architecture and furniture, I read a
lot about that. I am d-oi-ng my fourth degree in architecture, that is
privately. When I'm not doing thiose -things I'm-talking to my
colleagues like Harry about various problems. You have got to have a
mix of the two though bit of work and pleasure.
J: You mustn't have much time for pleasure.
PM: It's mostly work, but there we are. That's why we signed ourselves up
and that is why we are basically pleased to be doing what we are
doing in the service of the public of this country.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY TU1E PRIME MINISTERj THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
WOMEN IN SPORT AWARDS
BRISBANE 17 MARCH, 1994
It is my great pleasure to be with you again tonight.
Last year, I enjoyed the occasion very much.
But it was in the middle of an election campaign. Elections are the political equivalent
of the Olympics but, the pity is, they occur more frequently
Elections have a way of making every living, breathing thing, including sport, political
and I know that is not to everybody's taste.
It is not to my taste, for a start.
Tonight I can speak to you unsullied by politics, and at the end of a year in which the
winds of' change really did blow very strong in Australia.
There is a new optimismn around; in the economy and in the nation at large, I think.
And in sport.
Some pcople say that if the Australian cricket team is winning, or Greg Norman, or we
pick up a gold medal or two somewhere in the world the whole nation lifts, even
when the other news, the cconomic news, is not so good.
But just now we've got them cycling together the Australian economy is flourishing
again and so is Australian sport.
So, if' the theory is true, in the nineties we should be able to lift enormously.
In the last twclve months there has been no bigger boost to this very welcome
phenomenon than the Olympics 2000 decision.
It was a great boost to national confidence. 
We are honoured to have with us tonight, Shirley de la Hunty, one of the few
Australians who knows what it was like to compete and win at the Olympics in front of
her own crowd.
We are six years away now from having the opportunity to see that again.
The night we won the Games in Monte Carlo will remain a highlight of my time as
Prime Minister and a great memory always.
But when all the work has been done, when the events are over and the crowds have
left Homebush and all the competitors have gone home, the success of Sydney 2000
will depend not on politicians or organisers or officials.
The glory will belong to the competitors.
What we remember about Melbourne 1956 is not the method by which the city won
the right to stage the Olympics, or the extraordinary efforts of the organising
committee to actually get the show on the road.
We remember names such as Cuthbert, Fraser, Rose and, of course, Strickland.
If you watched the National Athletics Championships on ABC television last weekend,
you would have seen among the familiar Anglo-Celtic names, new ones like Costian
and Poctschka and Capobianco and Van der Kuyp.
On the same weekend, if you watched the one-day cricket, you would have seen a
young man named Chee Quee scoring a century.
If you had watched the netball, you would have seen a young woman named Avellino
shooting goals.
Look at an Australian sporting team these days and increasingly you see a microcosm
of the contemporary society and in the energy and success they represent, I believe a
view of Australia's future.
The presence of people from vastly different backgrounds at the higher levels of
competition embodies the principle that all of you try to promote that sport is for
everybody. They should inspire Australian youngsters to realise that our Olympics 2000
competitors can come from any cultural background, any gender, or any school.
Their example, like that of the Cuthberts and Kilborns and Flemings and Frasers and de
la Huntys, teaches this generation the television generation, the multicultural
generation that sport is indeed for every Australian.
These elite sportsmen and women are a permanent reminder that this is a society open
to talent: open, in fact, to anyone who wants to participate. 
They serve as an inspiration to people who want to compete at any level.
I said at the beginning that some things are best left divorced fr-om politics. The truth
is that athlctcs can do things which politicians can only hope to do.
Politicians can talk until they are blue in the face about the need for the community to
accept people of different backgrounds, and they might if they are lucky in a lifetime
do as much for the cause of tolerance and reconciliation as Cathy Freeman does in 22
seconds. A politician can talk about the need for women to enjoy the same opportunities as men
and achievc less in a year than Betty Cuthbert achieved in less than two minutes as an
Olympian. Or what she achieves every time she appears in public today, every time we remember
her. It is not only because we bathe in her reflected glory: it is because she embodied then,
and still does now, the enormous effort that goes into such success in sport, and to see
it triumphant gives us inspiration and hope for our efforts in life.
All of us need this example.
As they make their way dceper into positions of opportunity and influence, and into
spheres of our national life from which they have been too long held out, women need
it. But men probably need it more.
Men need it to remember what other elements in our culture incline them to forget.
It will heclp men to remember the absolutely equal entitlements of women in the wider
society if they rememnber their absolutely equal perhaps even greater contribution to
sport. They have, after all, won I I of the 14 track and field Olympic gold medals in the postwar
era.
They do, after all, participate in broadly equal numbers.
We can hardly define ourselves by our feats in sport and ignore at least half the people
who have achieved them Australian women.
This gathering is a celebration of women in Australian sport. It is a celebration of the
great contribution that women make; of their central and equal role in sport at every
level-of the equal part thcy have played as models and inspirations for the nation at
large. 
4
As Prime Minister of a country for which the " fair go" is a by-word and tolerance a
basic part of what it means to be Australian, I not only congratulate all of you, I thank
you for the contribution you are making to Australia in ways that go beyond the
boundaries of sport. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH CAROLINE TUCKER, RADIO 4QR, BRISBANE
17 MARCH 1994
J: Good afternoon, thank you for your time.
PM: Pleasure Caroline.
J: Now one of the big issues concerning Queensland at the moment is the
recommendation from the Grants Commissi-on to lop $ 149 million off our
State budget, causing a lot of angst here, and a lot of tough talk too
between the New South Wales and Queensland Treasurers. Do you
believe you will be considering overruling that?
PM: It's not a matter of overruling it I think. We have this process called the
Grants Commission which looks at the capacity of States to raise -taxes,
their taxing effort, the shift in population it's a formula which we all
affectionately call the black box. Every year the relativities between the
States change, so there's a pool of money which the Commonwealth
reimburses to the States and there is sometimes adjustments to those
pools for shifts in particular things revenue, population or something
like that and that's what has happened here. But this number, $ 148
million, was a very preliminary one and there was, I think, after that a
population adjustment which favoured Queensland so it will be very, I
think, substantially diminished from that.
J: So you will be looking at it very closely and very substantially diminished
from...
PM: I think the Premier, I think Wayne Goss will ensure we look at it closely.
J: Have you made up your mind?
PM: Well, we'll have an offer on the table next week which I think will be, as
we always think it is, fair to everybody and it will be fair to Queensland. 
J: No clues about the figure today?
PM: I can't give you that unfortunately, but we are cognisant of the issue and
we will be, as always I think, fair. Whenever these reports have come in
we have always sought to make sure that where there are large
adjustments, that in some way these are more easily accommodated
than simply would otherwise be the case if the raw number was to be the
only number. So we are massaging those numbers and I'm sure we will
come to an equitable result.
J: We all certainly hope so. The issue of compensation to arise out of
native title claims is one that was on the agenda in a big way last year.
We haven't heard a lot about it this year when's that going to be
resolved?
PM: Well that's pretty well settled. The Commonwealth has said we will meet
up to three-quarters of the cost of compensation-with complying States
and half of the administrative costs. Now the administrative costs here
are very large, so we are meeting half those, but we are meeting up to
three-quarters of the costs of compensation for, if you like,
compensation paid for grants of interest in land as far back as 1975. So
it could be a substantial sum over time, in which case the
Commonwealth will be picking up the lion's share of it. Now, I wrote to
Premiers just before the last Council of Australian Governments meeting
in Hobart and nobody raised it at the meeting, so therefore, one
assumes, I think it was reasonable for me to assume, that they were
happy with that.
J: Because they haven't said anything yet?
PM: Well in this business, generally everybody speaks up.
J: Fair enough. The Medicare levy. Now are we going to have a rise in
the budget?
PM: Well I think Senator Richardson said something today saying that -I
can't remember his exact words because I didn't actually hear him say it
but to the effect that there is no basis of understanding to increase the
Medicare levy. He hasn't even brought any of his health submission to
Cabinet at this stage. These things are always around in budgets.
Every budget there's always some. And of course budget-making is
now more public, well it has always been with us a process of
consultation, and a much more public process. This in a sense always
puts all the hares running and this is another budget hare.
J: But Senator Richardson also said that there are serious problems
funding the health budget. 
PM: Well there's always a serious problem funding any part of the budget
and health is always changing. I mean we have seen changes in
technology and changes in the way in which the health system
functions. But you only have costs when you make changes, by and
large.
J: You ruled out a 2 per cent levy. Would you rule out an increase?_
PM: Well I didn't rule anything in. I mean at the moment we have got the
health system being delivered on. You see the Medicare levy never
pays for the health system, it's only a part contribution. Most of the
costs of the health system comes from the Commonwealth budget,
comes from other parts of the budget. Fortunately, we have kept health
costs in Australia pretty constant and around about 8 per cent of Gross
Domestic Product. The health cost of the country is about 8 per cent of
the size of the total economy. In the United States, it's about 16 so we
are doing something right. But it's never to say...
J: But you wouldn't rule it out?
PM: But I'm not ruling it in either.
J: Okay, the jobs levy are you ruling that out?
PM: No, we are not ruling that out either. The thing is, the jobs levy,
presents us as an option raised by the Green Paper Group when
looking at some of the options in funding a much more, if you like,
equitable program of training and subsidies to make people ready for
work for the long-term unemployed. Now it's a concept, it's a proposal,
it doesn't mean though that the Government should take it up. Now I
think both Ralph Willis and I have said, and I'm happy to repeat here, I
would prefer to be able to see this funded without resort to a levy. But
it's still on the table and it will be there until the budget numbers really
go to bed.
J: Still on the subject of unemployment, Cheryl Kernot was calling on you
to define long-term unemployed today. She says yesterday you were
saying eighteen months and the Social Security Department says
twelve. Which is it?
PM: Well I think once people pass the twelve months' gate for
unemployment, you have got to categorise people as long-term
unemployed. We are not changing that category, but the fact is we
have been the Party which has said we are not going to leave the
unemployed behind. We are not going to see the recovery come
through with a sort of an under-class of people who have sort of
slipped off the back of the truck so to speak. That they're left behind
as the rest of us move on. I made this very clear on the evening of the
election a year ago in Bankstown in Sydney, and I have repeated it 
since. That is, we should have a recovery which everyone has a piece
of including, and particularly those, who have borne the greater burden
already and that is, of course, the long-term unemployed. So, we don't
mind helpers on the job, like Mrs Kernot and the Democrats, but
essentially they are outriders to the main force which is, of course, in
all social matters like this, the Government.
J: Speaking of the out riders, how serious are you about changing the
electoral rules for the Senate?
PM: Well, we have never advanced any proposal about it. We have been
electing the Senate proportionately now since Adam wore shorts.
That's a while ago isn't it? The only points I have made is that as the
House of Representatives gets bigger there is a thing in the
Constitution called the nexus and what it says is this: that the Senate
should be roughly half the size of the House of Representatives. So,
the House has expanded in size, so too then has the Senate. That
means that the quota to elect a Senate person, a Senator, given that
there are more Senators coming all the time, is smaller and smaller
and smaller. So, if we had a full Senate election and you are talking
about 12 Senators for a State you are talking about a quota of around
8 per cent.
J: So, you think the system is no good. Do you want to have that debate
in the sitting of Parliament?
PM: No, no. Every time they ask me I tell them and it infuriates all those
Senators. They all like to think that they can slip in. You see,
Senators are elected at large in a State. Senators are not elected
within definable districts like a member of the House of
Representatives is. They are not responsible, or responsive to a
particular constituency, suburb, locality. They are elected across the
whole State. Now, some take the view that once election night has
passed, particularly if they are on the first major spot on the ticket, and
they have got a full six years, it's: " we will see you in six years time."
Do you understand? Meanwhile, in the House of Representatives
people keep contact with their communities, their constituencies, and
we're saying, I think well, if somebody is getting elected with a low
quota this is somebody who couldn't even get near 50 per cent of the
support of the public. Someone who is sort of, basically, sliding
through the door at 6, 7 or 8 per cent and who might be there for some
years, it is hardly what you call a robust show of democracy.
J: But you are saying that now here in the ABC studios, when are you
going to say that in Parliament?
PM: I said tlat all last week. Every time I do it it is sort of like the thing
belling the cat, you know. I mean, every time I bang the cage they all
around there in that Senate they all the Clerk writes another paper, 
and the Clerk's clerk, and the Clerk's Deputy, and the Deputy's deputy
writes another paper. It's a real scream around there.
J: Well, would you consider introducing legislation to change the voting
rules?
PM: No. We are not at this stage contemplating legislation. But it is worth
talking about these things. For instance, let me make this point to you.
We were elected, the Government was elected a year ago. We were
elected on the mandate of restoring growth to the economy. That we
have done. Yesterday the economy grew in those National Accounts
at 4 per cent faster, or as fast as any western economy. We have got
low inflation, we have had 200,000 jobs over the year. But half the
Senate was elected three years earlier than that. In other words, it is
not a contemporary house. It wasn't contemporaneously elected with
the House of Representatives one year ago. So, you see, they don't
like these home truths being pointed out. Basically I don't think even I
would bother to point them out were it not for occasions the place
makes a nuisance of itself. So, therefore I then say, well look, just
understand what is happening here. The Government was elected
with a mandate, it didn't give the Senate a mandate to refuse its
budget, the Government did promise to restore growth to the economy.
It has. The Government did promise to re-start employment. It has.
The Government did promise to put in a big piece of cultural and
property law with Mabo. It has. The Government did promise to bring
in tax cuts around November. It has. The Government did promise to
bring in the home child care allowance, the general rebates for child
care. These things it has done, so therefore a Senate is trying to
thwart the wishes of a Government elected in the House of
Rpresentatives and which is going to be accountable to the public in
just two years from now it is not as if we have got five year elections
in this country. They are only three years. So, this idea that they are
over there to keep us honest, we who can keep ourselves honest by
doing all those things I just mentioned to you. All were then, some of
them sitting there with massive quotas of 5 and 6 per cent of the vote.
These little facts need to be pointed out occasionally.
ENDS 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA, 20 MARCH 1994
PM: The truth is, it is not a bad result. The one consistent thing about these tw o byelections
is that the public won't have a bar of the Liberal Party. There was a
swing to Labor in Fremantle and a swing to the Liberals of three and a bit per
cent in Bonython, which means in a real election that we would clean them up
as we have done in the past. So, I suppose, if I had to borrow a phrase from
Les Patterson I would say about this result, " no worries". It is a pretty much in
the groove by-election result and what really happens in these by-elections I
think is that the public say we want you to stay sharp and we are not going to
make it easy for you, particularly when you have a number of minor parties.
But I want to thank the people for Bonython for returning another Labor
member, a member of stature to the National Parliament for the Labor Party
and I would like to make the point about the generational change which is
occurring within the Government. If you look at the last three by-elections,
replacing men who have given a great deal of public service over a decade of
ministerial office, John Kerin, John Dawkins and Neal Blewett have been
replaced by Mark Latham and Carmen Lawrence and now by Martyn Evans. I
mean, three great ministers replaced by three great candidates. And that is
really why the Labor Party is going to be the force it is now through the
nineties. And look at the fogies on the other side. I notice Peter Robinson
today described them appropriately as fogies. I mean Tony Abbott, Downer,
Bishop, these people believe in things that the Liberal Party and others believed
in in the 1940' s and 50O's and I said last week you wouldn't find a 3 5 year old in
the country that holds Tony Abbotts views. In fact the members who are
leaving Jim Carlton and Michael MacKellar were far more progressive than
the, people they are being replaced with.
J: What are your thoughts on the a-nti--immigration crowd ending up with
PM: Oh, I think that just comes and goes. These things come and go I think Peter.
I don't give that any particular weight. But I think I regard one of the
important things for the government is having a generational change and as you
know since the last election now about fourteen ministers, or thirteen I am not 
sure thirteen or fourteen ministers, out of the stock of the government have
been changed, are new ministers. And if you look at the quality we are getting
in the by-elections.. I mean what used too happen to the Labor Party in the
is all the crackerjack candidates were in marginal seats and when you
would lose a seat you would lose them and the safe seats often went to people
who were not going to make a great contribution. That's all being reversed.
J: You say generally you would clean them up but on an 8 per cent two party
swing they would clean you up surely?
PM: Look, this is the sort of thing about these days by-elections.. well just have a
look for a start, have a look in Fremantle which everyone is talking about
Western Australia and Richard C ourt and what sort of mandate he has got and
how he's going and here we are in the state where Mabo mattered most,
picking up a swing to the government. Here we are in a state now in South
Australia where there has just been a massive swing against the State Labor
Party, basically with a 3 per cent swing to the Liberal Party and a bit flipping
off to minor candidates. As I said it is a no worries result.
J: Wern't there more revelant federal issues, was it a vote against the Medicare
levy?
PM: No, hardly hit the light of day. Look the other thing is you have got to
understand this also about polls these days I am not talking about by-elections
but just polls I mean what happens in polls these days, people go up and say
what is your preference, are you going to vote for the Coalition or the Labor
Party, they say " well I probably would vote for the Labor Party, but I will say
the Coalition because I will just give the government a little needle." So they
are giving little needles in the polls these days. They have worked all that out,
but of course the pollsters haven't worked it out and generally the journo's
haven't worked it out but I'm glad the camera man can see the humour in all
this even if the journo's can't, but it is true.
J: Prime Minister are you able to give any indication of what the ministerial
changes might be announced next week?
PM: Not at this stage, no. I told you I very much hope to see Carmen Lawrence
take a place in the ministry and I think I would like to see her with a policy job.
I don't know what that will be at this stage but it is going to be a very big week
for the government, I mean getting two people of the calibre of Carmen
Lawrence and Martyn Evans is a tremendous shot in the arm for the Federal
Labor Pa rty, a huge shot in the arm.
J: What does the 3 per cent swing or 3.5 per cent swing say about Dr Hewson's
leadership?
PM: I think, look what he's into now, I mean, poor fella, look six months ago he
was into throwing people off the dole after 9 months. He was going to clean
out the social wage, put people on individual wage contracts, now he is into re-
making himself, into product differentiation from all the other fogies. So now
he's using the word inclusion, as I said, I take that as a compliment, he's got to
borrow our phrases. He is now running around as a sort of person who is remaking
himself into a softer gentler version of his dear old right-wing self of
last year. Now what is the problem here? The problem here is the Li beral
Party does not know where it stands with Australian society. It doesn't know
what it wants to do with Australian siociety and Menzies was probably right
when he told Bob Santamaria some what decade ago, fifteen years ago, that the
Liberal Party had probably run its race then. Well it has more than run its race
now.
J: Some Labor MPs seem to think the Griffith's vacancy should be filled now
PM: I mean, you know I think the Party, I said the other day I think the Party is
pretty fair about these things. This matter has come up and the police have
cleared Alan but there are residual matters to be determined, with Police
enquiries, and that is for him inconvenient but I mean I think all of that doesn't
matter whether there is a place there now for him or not, what matters I think
is the government will always be, or caucus will always be, sympathetic to
somebody who has been, you know, caught in these sort of circumstances.
J: Does that mean they could accommodate him later down the track
PM: Well, now or later on. I mean I don't ever think it is quite the mechanical thing
of leaving a spot there and then saying well if that's not there that is the end of
you. I don't think the Caucus works like that.
J: Mr Keating does the government plan to abolish lump-sum super payments?
PM: This is just a pre-budget story. They flow out every year, all this pre-budget
speculation and the government has not considered it.
J: Just going back to the Bonython by-election, how long do you think it might be
before South Australian's actually forgive Labor rightly or wrongly for the
State Bank
PM: When they work out what a dreary government they have got. I think this
government of all the State Governments, and our ministers run into their
ministers in ministerial councils, the functional ministerial councils, by far the
-dreariest government is the new Liberal government of South Australia. Now
at the moment there is a bit of bonhomie about a new government a new
Premier, but wait till they have a bit of time, they will see how absolutely dead
ordinary this government is.
Thanks 



/ 0
[ Embrpr. j iUntil. M
PRIME MINISTER
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE TAKES EFFECT
I welcome the commencement today, Monday 21 March, of the United
Nations Climate Change Convention.
This marks the beginning of the next phase of concerted international action
to mitigate the potentially adverse effects of climate change.
Australia shares the genuine concern of other countries about this major
issue, a concern reflected in the extraordinarily speedy negotiation of this
convention. Parties to the convention will act within their own boundaries and share in
actions extending beyond national borders.
Scientific and economic research, limits on greenhouse gas emissions,
education and information programs, and planning for any possible adverse
effects of climate change will make up a large part of the world's concerted
action.
Australia's response recognises that action must take place within the
framework of a sustainable Australian economy and a competitive trade
position, as well as protecting the environment.
Australia has been a leader in this field. We were among the first nations to
develop and begin implementing an action plan, the National Greenhouse
Response Strategy.
The State and Territory Governments co-operated with the Commonwealth
Government in developing a national Strategy that allows for change within
the context of changing international conditions.
It is significant that parties to the UN Convention agree to review their
commitments in the light of the best scientific and economic information until
the objective of the Convention is met. More is being done in Australia than
the original Strategy demanded, and more will be done.
Since the Strategy was adopted in 1992, the Commonwealth has developed
an inventory of greenhouse gases, adopted a guaranteed excise-free period 21/ 94 
for alternative fuels, and initiated a study of the opportunities and strategies
for a biomass-derived energy industry.
At the recent Council of Australian Governments in Hobart, the States and
Territories agreed to work for national markets in gas and electricity that will
be more competitive. By increasing efficiency in generating energy, such
markets will reduce the nation's demand for new generating capacity and
thereby provide for more responsible use of finite resources of fossil fuels.
This Government has always recognised the environmental and economic
interests at stake in climate change.
Australia will continue to be actively involved in future negotiations, and will
continue to protect and advance those interests.
CANBERRA March 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP
THE ECONOMIST ROUNDTABLE
Today I met and held discussions with Bill Emmott, the Editor of The
Economist and host of the magazine's Roundtable with the Australian
Government.
The Roundtable consists of a dialogue between Ministers and other
Australian public figures on the one hand, and an audience of senior local
and international business representatives on the other. I shall speak at the
closing session of the Economist's Roundtable on 24 March.
The Roundtable is taking place at a very opportune time. The Australian
economy is recovering strongly from recession, with one of the highest
growth rates in the OECD.
Four factors point to the potential for this growth to be sustainable:
the low inflation rate, and low inflationary expectations;
the increasing coupling of the Australian economy to those of the high
growth countries of the Asia-Pacific region;
the ongoing program of microeconomic reform, which will continue to
raise productivity and the growth potential through the 1990s; and
the continuing diversification of Australia's exports, with rapid growth in
manufacturing and services exports reducing our susceptibility to the
fluctuations of commodity prices.
. These factors,-. together with Australia's advantages as a place to live and
work, make this country an excellent location for international companies
seeking to do business in this region. 
2
These themes are developed further in Australia in the World, a publication
released to coincide with the Roundtable. The document contains an
assessment not only of the comprehensive reform program undertaken to
date, but also of the future agenda for economic, political and social
development. CANBERRA
22 March 1994 



12,
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE HON ALAN GRIFFITHS INQUIRY
When I announced Mr Griffiths' resignation from the ministry on 22 January I
said that I intended granting his request for an independent inquiry to
determine whether his conduct had met appropriate standards of ministerial
behaviour. I also said I had informed Mr Griffiths that I would advise Caucus
not to fill the vacancy caused by his resignation until after the investigation
was concluded.
I now understand that the Director of Public Prosecutions ( DPP) has
approved the laying of criminal charges arising from the Australian Federal
Police investigation into matters upon which Mr Griffiths had provided
information to the AFP. The police investigation found no evidence of
criminal offences by Mr Griffiths, and accordingly no charge has been laid
against him.
The Attorney-General's Department has advised that until court action in
relation to charges which have been laid is complete it would be
inappropriate for a government-appointed inquiry into Mr Griffiths' conduct to
proceed if it would hamper the defence by a person of any charges pending
in the courts. I am advised that, even if this were not the case the DPP would
be concerned if persons who were witnesses in a pending criminal case were
also being asked to give evidence about the same issues to an administrative
inquiry. I am of course concerned at the delay implied by this advice, particularly
because I am aware that Mr Griffiths is anxious to have these matters
disposed of and his future resolved as soon as possible. In the
circumstances, however, I have decided that while the independent inquiry
can now begin it should restrict itself, until relevant criminal cases are
concluded, to matters which can be investigated without hampering any
person's defence or taking evidence from potential witnesses in those cases. 
The terms of reference of the inquiry are as follows:
Whether the conduct of the Hon Alan Griffiths in relation to the matters
leading to his resignation from the ministry was in accordance with
appropriate standards of behaviour for a person holding office as minister
and a member of parliament and, in particular:
whether there was any conflict between his private interests and the
performance of his public duties and;
whether he authorised or condoned any inappropriate, improper or illegal
activity by any of his staff in relation to the conduct of his private interests.
The inquiry is entitled to adopt any findings made by other official inquiries if
it appears sensible to do so. In case other matters arise which appear to
bear on Mr Griffiths' fitness to hold ministerial office, but which do not fall
strictly within the above terms of reference, the inquiry will have discretion to
inquire or not, depending upon its judgment of the relevance, seriousness
and substance of such matters.
The inquiry will be conducted by Mr Michael Codd, AC, who has wide
experience in and knowledge of issues related to ministerial conduct and
propriety. Mr Codd was Secretary of the Department of Employment and
Industrial Relations from 1981 to 1983, Chairman of the Industries Assistance
Commission from 1983 to 1985 and then became Secretary of the
Department of Community Services, before being appointed Secretary of the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet in 1986.
I am attaching a copy of a letter I have today sent Mr Griffiths informing him
of the inquiry. Also attached is a copy of my letter to Mr Codd.
CANBERRA 23 MARCH 1994 
PRIME MINISTER CANBERRA
2 3 MAR 1994
The Hon Alan Griffiths, MP'
Member for Maribyrnong
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
Dear Alan,
I am writing to you to confirm our discussions concerning the inquiry into the
circumstances leading to your resignation from the ministry.
As I indicated to you, the situation is such that the inquiry will not be able to proceed
as quickly as we both initially had hoped.
In the light of this I appreciate your willingness to accept that it is now necessary for
the proper functioning of the Government to proceed to fill the ministerial vacancy
which had previously been held open pending the outcome of the inquiry.
Once the inquiry is complete and if its findings, as you expect, are that your conduct
was not such as to call into question your fitness for ministerial office, it is my intention
to facilitate your return to the ministry at the earliest opportunity.
P J KEAT' 
PRIME MINISTER CANBERRA
2 3 MAR 1994~
Mr Michael H Codd, AC
RMB Monaro Highway
WILLIAkMSDALE NSW 2620
Dear Mr Codd
I am writing to request you to inquire into and report on whether the conduct of the
Hon Alan Griffiths in relation to the matters leading to his resignation from the
ministry was in accordance with appropriate standards of behaviour for a person
holding office as a minister and a member of parliament and, in particular:
Whether there was any conflict between his private interests and the performance
of his public duties
Whether he authorised or condoned any inappropriate, improper or illegal activity
by any of his staff in relation to the conduct of his private interests
In inquiring into the above matters, you are entitled to adopt any findings made by
other official inquiries if it appears sensible to do so. In case other matters arise which
appear to bear on Mr Griffiths's fitness to hold ministerial office, but which do not fall
strictly within the above terms of reference, you will have discretion to inquire or not,
depending upon your judgment of the relevance, seriousness and substance of such
matters. The Attorney-General's Department has advised that until court actions in relation to
criminal charges are complete it would be inappropriate for a governmient-appointed
inquiry into Mr Griffiths's conduct to proceed if it would hamper the defence by a
person of any such charges. I am advised that, even if this were not the case the DPP
would be concerned if persons who were witnesses in a pending criminal case were
also being asked to give evidence about the same issues to an administrative inquiry.
I am of course concerned at the delay implied by this advice, particularly because I am
aware that Mr Griffiths is anxious to have these matters disposed of and his future
resolved as soon as possible. In the circumstances, however, I have decided that while
your inquiry can begin you should restrict yourself initially to matters which can be
investigated without hampering any person's defence or taking evidence from potential
witnesses in those cases. 
You will not have any special powers of compulsion in relation to the giving of
evidence or the production of documents, but you will have access to official records
in the relevant agencies of the Commonwealth. Your inquiry should be conducted in
an inquisitorial rather than adversarial manner. It would be appropriate for you to
invite submissions from parties who may have information that would be useful to the
inquiry.
You will have access to legal resources, including the legal resources of the Attorney-
General's Department. Mr Rose, the Secretary of the Department, is available to
discuss with you the precise nature of the assistance you may require, for example in
relation to the conduct of interviews.
Persons interviewed in the course of the inquiry should be permitted if they so desire,
to have their legal representatives present during such interviews, with the right to
make submissions on their behalf should they so wish. The government will consider
any applications that may be made to it for financial assistance for such legal
representation by persons centrally involved.
You may also wish to consider the desirability before finalising your report, of
affording affected individuals the opportunity of responding to any adverse
conclusions you may have reached.
I am attaching a copy of a media release in which I have outlined the above matters. I
would be grateful if you could begin the inquiry as soon as possible, subject to the
limitations I have indicated above, and provide me with your report within three
months of completion of the prosecution actions involving people associated with
these matters.
PJ KEATING I 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON.
P J KEATING, M. P.
THE ECONOMIST ROUNDTABLE, HYATT HOTEL, CANBERRA
THURSDAY 24 MARCH, 1994
PM: Well, I'm going to missGraham as a colleague and as a friend, particularly as a
fiend. We've been friends now for nearly a couple of decades. And, as a
colleague he was somebody who believes that good policy is good politics. He
was part of the shift in the culture not just of the Labor Party but of the
country, the Government the shift that Australia should have had twenty or
thirty years earlier. He held major portfolios with distinction, he ran major
agendas. He was not only effective in developing policy, effective in the
Cabinet room as well, in their carriage, but he was effective in going out and
selling them. He was effective in communicating policies. So, he is going to
be missed but as he has just, himself, eloquently said, we've got a store of new
ministers and members truly regenerating the Labor government. And, it's
never been our business to run our assets into the ground, we don't expect
people to retire exhausted.
So, I wish him well in his life in the future and Cheryl, his wife and his family.
All families pay a price in public life, Graham's has paid a big price over a very
long period of time not just in elective office but before in the machine of the
party. And he can pride himself on being one of the generation that didn't shirk
the challenge, that didn't throw the pass like twenty odd years of Coalition
ministers did. He can leave public life with his head high, as somebody who
saw a challenge and did his best to meet it.
J: When did Senator Richardson tell you that he was leaving?
PM: About a week ago, a bit over a week ago.
J: Did you make any money fromfthe piggery?
PM: I made a decision to divest myself of that. I was not going to have my partners
in that pilloried by cowards under privilege twenty two months is long
enough.
Ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ECONOISIT ROUNDTABLE
CANBERRA, 24 MARCH 1994
Let me begin by thanking the Economist and everyone
associated with this conference.
It is a very useful magazine, the Economist. These days
I particularly like reading the last couple of pages
the economic indicators.
I like reading them because today they show how well this
country is doing relative to the rest of the world.
There it was on March 12 Australia leading the world in
GDP growth, and leading the world as far as the
Enonomist's forecasters were concerned.
And along with the growth, low inflation.
I thought it might be interesting to compare these
figures with those of a decade ago.
In 1983 the Economist had just started running these two
useful pages of indicators. And here in Australia we had
just floated the dollar.
In the week we floated it, 17 December 1983, the
Rconomist's indicators revealed our GDP growth for the
year was the lowest in the world. Not the highest
the lowest. Minus 3.9.
And Australia's inflation rate was not among the lowest
in the world, it was among the highest. For the year the
CPI was 9.2% the third highest. The US was 2.9%,
Germany 2.6% ' r--oday Australia's inflation rate is lower
than both those countries.
So between those two sets of figures, separated by ten
years or so, there lies a tale.
And, whatever else this conference has done, I hope it
has told that tale. 
2
If your conference has stimulated thought, questioned a
few orthodoxies, opened people up to new information,
ideas and opinion it will prove useful in the short run.
It will be significant in the ing~ run if it re-shapes
thinking about Australia and its place in the world: I
think my own hope would be that the Conference has helped
perceptions of Australia catch up with the realities.
We tend to take for granted that people here and abroad
fully comprehend the massive structural and cultural
change which has occurred in Australia in the past
decade. The truth is a lot of Australians are not really aware of
what is taking place here. They are not fully aware of
what they themselves have achieved.
When you are driven by reforming zeal you tend to forgo
the luxury of reflecting on your work.
And in the 1980s as now Australia wag driven by the
need to break from the downward spiral of economic
fortune which a quarter century of conservative
government orthodoxy had got us into.
We are only now beginning to see what we have done. And
we are beginning to see it because the effects are
beginning to flow.
As that process continues, I think the dimensions of this
national transformation will increasingly become apparent
to Australians.
And I think that this awareness will itself be a fillip
to Australia's progress.
I believe there is a great story to be told about
contemporary Australia. And as Australians'
consciousness of it increases, so I believe will their
enthusiasm and sense of national purpose.
Now of course I hope to see the same consciousness about
modern Australia developing in other parts of the world.
What we have in Australia in the 1990s is the best
conjunction of growth and low inflation for 30 years.
We have a productivity culture to help us maintain that
happy circumstance.
We have an export culture that we didn't have before.
In Asia and the Pacific we have the export markets, and
increasingly the necessary structures to grow and service
them. 
We have exports now representing 20 per cent of GDP. An
export base which is much more diverse than it was a
decade ago, with exports of elaborately transformed
manufactures growing at 16 per cent per annum since the
mid eighties and exports of services also growing
rapidly. Above all, we have the confidence which can only come
with success itself.
There is nothing harder to move than an orthodoxy. No
amount of arguing with it will make much difference.
The orthodoxy about Australia used to be that we could
not be a manufacturing nation and an exporter of
commodities. The truth was we could be and we now are.
The orthodoxy used to be that we couldn't develop a
cooperative productivity-based industrial culture. The
truth is we could and we have.
The orthodoxy was that we couldn't do business in Asia.
The truth is, today that is where we do most of our
business. The orthodoxy was that we could never be a truly
competitive nation. The truth is we could and today we
are. The old orthodoxy obtained as much at home as it did
abroad. Today in Australia the new reality is
progressively dislodging the old way of thinking, and
there are promising indications that the same thing is
happening abroad.
And where this is not the case, it most certainly should
be. For in addition to those fundamentals we now have firmly
in place, we have the added advantages of a skilled
workforce, massive participation rates in schools, a
strong shift to private research and development, highly
developed infrastructure, and a society and a political
system as stable as any in the world.
Now, I have no doubt that in the course of the Conference
there will have been objections raised to perceived or
real disincentives to trade and investment in Australia.
In reply let me begin by saying that we do not believe
our job is over; or that the schemes we have in place are
perfect and not in need of tuning and reforming from time
to time.
In the broad, we are pleased with what we have done. 
But nothing suggests to us that we can for a moment rest
on our laurels. Everything in the modern global economy
suggests that no nation can.
So, where there are difficulties our mind is open. We
know you don't get to solve large problems by being
closed off to criticism we didn't make ourselves
competitive by closing ourselves off, we did it by
opening ourselves up.
Having said that, I should restate the Australian
Government's view that we are not about the economic
imperative transcending the social imperative.
We are not interested in Australia in creating a low-wage
low rent society.
We do not for a moment believe the nonsense put around by
some people in the 1980s and even by some people today
that our competitiveness depends on imitating the wage
regimes of developing countries.
Our objective is a high wage economy built on education
and productivity, coupled with an affordable but
sophisticated social net.
No doubt investors will see some advantages in the
developing countries, but Australia will more than match
them in skills, productivity, stability and certainty.
Similarly, if an overseas investor tells us that our
taxation system is too complicated that for example,
the fringe benefits tax or neraZin other provisions make
life difficult for them, we will look at the problem.
But we will not lose sight of the first principle, which
is that the tax system should be fair and effective.
And we might be inclined to say to such an investor:
whatever you may see yourself as losing on the little
roundabouts, you will more than make up for on the big
swing of economic and political stability, a massive
profit share, a first class universal health system,
schools, hospitals, social services which in general have
few peers in the world and with a revenue share in GDP
the lowest in the developed world.
A small public sector but an effective one.
In short, this is a good place in which to live and to
work. It should be plainly understood that Australia has
rejected the socially regressive forms of economic
rationalism in favour of structural reform allied to
inclusive social policies. 
The results of this mix gave Australia one of the highest
growth rates in the OECD over the last decade, the
highest rate of employment and one of the lowest rates of
inflation.-
The model here in the nineties is a modern socialdemocratic
one.
And I might say it seems to me that if you surveyed the
successful countries of the modern era even if only
through the Economist'sa economic indicators you will
find that this model has been the successful one
everywhere. " Model" in a sense is the wrong word. Because what
characterises the philosophy is flexibility, pragmatism,
responsiveness, an absence of ideological rigidity.
It is a " model" which balances the imperative to take
bold steps and often difficult ones with the
imperative to take the people along with you.
Manifestly, it is a model not just for social and
economic justice, but for social and economic cohesion
and strength.
That is why, incidentally, the Government is determined
to see that the benefits now flowing from the recovery,
and from the great changes made in the 1980s, flow right
through the country into services, into regional
development, into the unemployed.
From the Government's point of view this has to be a
recovery that is both deep and broad.
It can be a recovery, I believe, which will complete the
transformation of Australia and set us up in the front
rank of countries in the 21st century.
That will depend on the successful completion of a number
of other tasks. First among them is the problem of the
long term unemployed.
on 28 April we will bring down a White Paper on
Employment the first since the end of the Second World
War.
With its implementation, we expect to get the bulk of the
long term unemployed back in touch with the labour
market. In doing so we will not only alleviate what is a major
human problem now, but avoid a major social problem
later.
And at the same time we will exploit an otherwise wasted
human resource and substantially increase the skill level
of our workforce. 
That is a major challenge for us in the next few years
creating a more skilled and flexible workforce, and
thereby, industries which are more competitive and
responsive. So we will be investing heavily in education and
training.
We are also very much aware that this federation of
states is not always as efficient as it should be
indeed, for a long time, in many areas it has been
dreadfully inefficient.
In recent months we have taken some dramatic steps
towards creating a much more efficient and competitive
Commonwealth by creating a more cooperative one.
One more committed to common national goals.
In a real sense, what we are doing is applying to the
Commonwealth the same principles as the best companies
apply. And I would take the analogy further than the simple
mechanics of efficiency.
As companies need a sense of purpose about them, so do
countries. As companies need an unambiguous corporate
identity, so do countries.
That is why the Government has been concerned with issues
relating to our identity and nationhood.
The circumstances of our history have left us with a
residue of ambiguity and anachronism which in this decade
the Government would like to see swept away swept away
without cost to our best traditions, but with great gain
to our collective confidence and effort.
In a broadly similar vein we have set about at last
bringing in to the national mainstream the indigenous
people of Australia.
I gather one speaker at least has expressed concern about
the Mabo legislation the Government introduced last year.
This was perhaps the most complex and difficult
legislation in Australia's history, and also the most
overdue. We introduced it above all because justice
demanded that we do it.
We also did it in the knowledge that success will mean a
more cohesive country and a people with more confidence
and self-esteem.
We did it not to create uncertainty but certainty the
certainty which comes from a national system to determine
native title. 
We would be only too happy to explain how the legislation
does this to Mr Masuda and any potential investors in our
mining and pastoral industries.
I would only say now that this is good and necessary
legislation and investors must recognise it as fact of
our national life.
I say to them and to our own States that the legislation
has already brought certainty and with their cooperation
it can bring even more.
The dire consequences predicted in some quarters have not
eventuated, and show no sign of doing so.
I have no doubt that in the long run the Mabo legislation
will be seen as a force for a better investment climate,
as well as a better country.
Ladies and gentlemen
On all these matters there are sceptics out there I know
and cynics, and naysayers and obscurantists of all
kinds. But their ranks are thinning.
We are very confident. As I said at the beginning there
is nothing like seeing the story unfold and recognising
your part in it to lift the spirits and firm up the
faith. If nothing else, I hope that at this gathering the
faithful have multiplied and that they will now go
forth and tell the world.
Thank you 



TEL 2. a : 3N. 0 1' Q
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, M. P.
THE TREASURER, THE HON. R WILLIS, M. P, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA, FRIDAY 25 MARCH, 1994
PM: Well, Mr Willis and I were going to give you a comment about the
outcome of the Premiers' Conference and Loan Council meeting. I
tfihiik we've seen move into place today a very substantial reform to
Commonwealth-State financial relations. For the first time in at least
11f years we are seei ng -a formula for the Commonwealth dealing with
the States which provides a basis of certainty and growth to
Commonwealth payments to the States. We've given the States today,
for the three years, in real terms, that is, a payment covering inflation,
the existing base of Commonwealth payments to the States plus
inflation. And we've built into that population growth.
So, it will be the existing base, plus inflation, plus population growth
which Is really the most certain stream of payments the States have
had and one which can now grow along with national population
growth. Now, of course, in that there will always be the within-state
distribution and shifts in population which the Grants Commission
measures because, as you know, people leaving Victoria and going to
Queensland, all those sorts of things will come up in what is called the
relativities, every year. But, the pool of funds from the Commonwealth
to the States will now have that betterment factor of real terms plus per
capita or . population growth. Now, I think we've seen here a
substantial reform and even though you won't get all the Premiers to
say so I think they do, too. They certainly said that inside. And, it
means, I think, that the cooperation we were able to get at the Council
of Australian Governments in Hobart, we'll see again in the August
meeting as we now will not be having a discussion about the pool
next year or the year later, that being settled today. Now, I would just
invite the Treasurer to add his remarks to mine.
T: 1 think the Prime Minister has said it all. Essentia~ y, this is a very good
deal for the States. They are no worse off this year than they would
have been had the old formula applied. By 1996-97 they start to kick
28. Mar 948: 23 No. 001 P. 01/ 05 
TEL 2
some real goals with the application of the real terms per capita
coming through and giving them substantial increases by that time.
And, in the years to come, of course, should the agreement continue
as we expect it would, then the States would be very much in front.
Over the course of a decade they'd be something in the order of $ 6
billion dollars better off as a result of this formula applying, assuming
that Inflation remains steady for ten years; $ 6 billion dollars better off
than they would have been with the old formula. So, for the States this
is a very, very substantial gain and one which should enable them to
considerably improve their services over the next decade or so,
J. Prime Minister, if that's the case why haven't the States been happy as
they've come out only one seems to have supported it?
PM: Well, when we said, " If you want to leave it as the status quo, that is,
as last year," not one of them wanted to leave behind a real terms
guarantee and population growth. I mean, no one really was prepared
to walk away with the status quo. And, I think that's the best test. The
best test, really, is what they say around the table. And, what they
said around the table is, look, this is the best thing to come our way,
let's have it.
J: How would you describe your relationship with the States after todays
meeting?
PM: Pretty good, really. Look, this is a federation, there is a huge pool of
national funds here which Is essentially divvied up and distributed in
one day. Now, the effect of G rants Commission reports, a change in
an old Capital Works Program with a very istoric distribution going
all those things -coming and going some States are better off and
some worse off. So, getting an outcome where most agree is a very
difficult thing to get. But, we got that.
J: Is there any talk of improving the States shaky revenue base and if
there wasn't do you think something should be done about it?
PM: Well, I think they'll pick up the revenue growth that comes with the
recovery, So, if they're getting not just real terms maintenance of
Commonwealth funding, but with population'as well and on top of that
they have the growth in their own revenues they're going to be in a
pretty comfortable position.
J: Premier Fahey told us that over the next three years Commonwealth
revenue is expected to rise by $ 26 billion, how much of that will be
given to the states now?
PMV: Well, as the Treasurer said, a proportion of it will be given to them as a
consequence of the formula. But, again, over the last three years
we've added about $ 25 billion to our national debt through the deficits
T2EL8: . Mar. 94 8: 23 NO. 001 P. 02/ 05 
TEL: 28. Mar. 94 8: 23 No. 001 P. 03/ 05
3
which the Commonwealth has to run in the national economy. And, so,
now is the time for the nation to pay those deficits back. I know that
some Premiers had this quaint line, ' they're not giving the money back
to the people'. Well, the people are all the people and the nation, the
people, must have a reduction in the budget deficit if we're to keep low
interest rates, growth -and jobs.
So, the Commonwealth provides a natural stabiliser for the economy.
That is, it provides the cushioning whenever there is a recession and
therefore it has got to have the financial capacity to take the debt out
when the good times come back.
Now, to say ' Look, sorry, the States get full payments in the bad times
and they also take all the joy in the good times," even I don't think they
expect us to accept that.
J: Mr Kennett says the extra $ 20 million for Victoria is disgraceful
considering the extra revenue you would get as the economy grows.
PM: Victoria did very well out of this and they are all saying look, lets get
population growth and the real terms guarantee that's the real
reform, let's grab hold of it. Now, they haven't been offered that in the
past and they did grab hold of it and I think Mr Kennett was chief
among them.
J: Are you saying you will continue real, per capita increases beyond
1996-97?
PM: I think that is our general intention.
T: The agreement is only for three years, but we would expect that that
agreement would roll on provided we had a co-operative relationship
with the States over that time. Now, we expect to get that in relation to
micro economic reform. We have made that clear as an element of the
proposal for the next three years and should that be forthcoming as we
expect that it will be, then we would be prepared to maintain real terms
per capita. So, that would roll on and the States would be very, very
substantial beneficiaries.
PM; As I said this morning, there is a maturing here of this relationship in
terms of the big micro reform agenda in COAG and in terms of funding
under this fofi-Tila so -the States now know whait they will be getting
every year in terms of the Financial Assistance Grants pool. There will
still be internecine interstate arguments about who gets what and what
population shifts there are and whether the Grants Commission got the
formula right, but that won't be about the pool; that will only be about
the distribution amongst themselves. 
TEL 4
J Would you prefer to see the maturity of the relationship reflected in the
Premiers' public comments?
PM: The more grist to the mill the better. I always think it is better for them
to tell the public as It really is. And as it really is, is pretty good.
J: What was the tone of the meeting compared to previous years. It
seems to have been pretty quiet?
PM: Compared with the 1960s... they were tough meetings. This was, what
we would say, wearying, but not harrowing.
J: Prime Minister, In terms of Cabinet reshuffles, have we seen the end
now?
PM;-I think you are seeing a new stock of competent Labor people coming
to ministries. One, a former Premier. You are seeing a new important
contributor to the Government-John Faulkner, go into the Cabinet. I
think the Labor party is very lucky that it can see people like Neal
Blewett and John Dawkins and John Kerin leave the Parliament and
see the kind of people who have replaced them.
J: But is this the end of the shuffle?
PM: It depends whether somebody resigns for some reason but I don't
expect there will be anyone from this point on resign and, I think,
probably you've seen the last change. But it is a good change and it is
a very good ministerial line up.
J: Why take science from. Senator -Schacht?
PM: Science goes into the Cabinet with Senator Cook and Senator Schacht
then will keep responsibility, amongst other things, for small business
and also for thie Co-operative Research Centres. So, he is going to
maintain his link with that science faculty which we've built into the Cooperative
Research Centres as well as being the Deputy Minister to
Senator Cook who will have science in the Cabinet.
J: Have you been concerned though about the problems that have been
occurring in the science portfolio since Chris Schacht took it over?
PM: I think the scientists are a pretty tough team to manage, really. I don't
know that anyone can do it easily. Again, it is not a case of cheers and
clapping from the side.
J: Would you have preferred to have the free hand at this time that you
had last time after the election rather than having to bow to some of
the factional pressures? T2E8L:. Mar. 94 8: 23 No. 001 P. 04/ 0t 
TEL: 28. Mar. 94 8: 23 No. 001 P. 05/ 05
PM: There was no bowing here. Let me assure you, the three people whio
were elected yesterday were elected unopposed and each of the three
were three that I had suggested to people should be coming to the
ministry. As it turned out, the Caucus agreed with me about that We
will now have something like about seventeen ministers. Sixteen
ministers wilt have changed since the last election. That is a
tremendous change for this country. Energy is the life blood of politics.
Energy and Ideas. To keep that energy coming through Is terribly
important for the national government.
J: Are you saying you didn't want Mr Elliott in your Cabinet?
PM: No. It is not a matter of making judgements about Mr Elliott or any
other single person. It Is just that in terms of seniority and
contributions others have made, others had greater claims at this time.
J: Did Mr Brereton ask you for a change in portfolio?
PM: We are happy to provide you with some overview advice, but not open
heart surgery.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING REMARKS, PREMIERS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, FRIDAY, 25 MARCH 1994
1 would like to declare our meeting open and to welcome everybody to it. It is not that
long since we met at the Council of Australian Governments and we are all pleased to
be able to say at the conclusion of that discussion that it was a good co-operative
outcome and that we are able to advance a number of major things in the economy and
the country in a way that some of the sceptics thought we might not be able to do.
It is an innovation separating the financial Premiers Conference and the issues of
finance from other issues between the Commonwealth and the States in areas, say, of
the micro-economy; in the things which we have been doing in technical and further
education; or in water; or in gas; or in electricity because in years past while some of
these items came on the agenda of the Premiers Conference given that it often took us
time to get through the financial discussions there was not the opportunity to be able
to range over the things that we are doing together and need to do together of the
variety I just mentioned.
It seems that the Council of Australian Governments structure -and the division of
discussion between the financial meeting and the policy meeting, if you like, is working
for us and we are getting a much better co-operative understanding between us and we
are able to do things that we might not have been able to do individually or have been
able to do together.
So, we meet with at least a new structure now starting to gather in some maturity
about itself and we meet also at a time which is, I think, pretty obvious that we have a
fairly strongly improving economy, at a time when we can look forward to a pick up in
growth and activity and with concomitant low inflation. This is something we have not
been able to look forward to any of us during most of our political lives and this
happens to be true at the moment. There was quite a bit of comfort to be taken from
last quarter's National Accounts the December quarter National Accounts published
a week or so ago. Apart from the growth figure of 4 per cent and the acceleration in
growth over the course of the year, what I thought was most compelling about the
numbers was that on the broadest measure of inflation, the non-farm GDP deflator,
broader even than the CPI, we had inflation sitting at 1.4 or 1.5 per cent which was 
pretty encouraging. Now, a pick up in commodity prices which feeds into the nonfarm
deflator will lift that a bit, but with the CPI running at under 2 per cent and the
non-farm deflator running at 1.5 per cent it is fair to say that we have got a very solid
scene on inflation and that has given us a fairly solid scene on interest rates which is
important to all of us because we know the influence the interest rates have in the
economy.
There has been some talk about interest rates and movements in interests rates and the
Treasurer has made a couple of points that are probably worth remarking here about
the United States. It is true that the United States have lifted their bank rate or
discount rate by a quarter of a per cent and there is some speculation that there is a
further quarter or half per cent in the pipe line. But, it is worth recalling that their rate
is now down to three and one quarter per cent and they have lifted it to three and a half
per cent. So they are barely covering the inflation rate; their interest rates are barely
covering the inflation rate. It is almost like it was in the 1970s where you had negative
rates of interest, there were people able to borrow at less than the inflation rate. Well,
in the United States it is barely above the inflation rate and the other thing is the United
States has got unemployment now down to around 6.5 per cent and in the US full
employment is somewhere between, probably, 5 and 6 per cent. Some would say full
employment, structural employment in the US is 6 per cent, so the United States is in a
position where it is nearing fuill employment and there is not too much spare capacity
in plant and equipment. Because a large part of the weight of American public
economic policy is on monetary policy and not on fiscal policy despite the success of
President Clinton introducing a diminishing budget deficit, there is still a huge
financing task in the funding of the American deficits and the American Federal
Reserve Bank is still carrying a lot of the weight.
This is not true in Australia because of the good financial scene we have had in the
1980s, federally and with the states, and our fiscal scene is much, much better so the
balance between fiscal and monetary policy in this country is so much better than is the
case in the United States.
So, it is not therefore unlikely that the American Federal Reserve Bank and its
Governor would keep a weathered on eye on inflation and look at interest rates. That
does not mean that the parallels with Australia should immediately be drawn because
we are a long way from full employment in this country, with unemployment running
with a 10 in front of it 10 per cent something and with full employment at least
down where the Americans regard it as being, we have got a lot of spare resources in
people and we have got a lot of spare resources in terms of plant and equipment. Our
capacity utilisation levels are still relatively low. There was a lot of invested capacity
put in in the 1 980s, so we have got a lot of spare capacity in plant and equipment and
we have got a lot of spare capacity in the labour market. All that means to us, that if
we can keep the inflation rate down where we have it, we have a very good
opportunity of having attendant interest rates which will keep the recovery going.
So, therefore, fiscal policy will remain important in the 1990s as it was in the 1980s
and it is the reason why we are now talking about bringing the Budget deficit down to
around I per cent of GDP by 1996 because as the recovery picks up, as private
investment picks up, it has got to be funded from the national pool of savings 
somewhere and the best way to augment that pooi is to diminish the Government's call
on that savings pooi and hence our objective of trying to get that down.
The other significant thing worth mentioning in the Accounts was that exports grew
per cent over the year and imports grew by 3 per cent. So, what has happened in
the 1980s is as we opened the economy up, as we broke the tariff wall down, as we
made it capable of having a much more open product market there was a big pick up in
imports as the import penetration ratio rose, as it has done in every other country
where such openings occur but, once it gets to an optimum, in a sense then which
happened in the course of the 1980s, now it is a matter for judgement about where in a
recovery those imports will run.
Well, in a recovery today, exports as I say are growing 6.5 per cent over the year,
imports by 3 per cent, the other statistic worth remembering is that the debt service
ratio the thing that has occupied us perhaps most as Premiers and Treasurers in the
last half dozen years, that was the current account deficit and the attendant debt the
debt service component of our exports, that is the proportion of our exports which we
used to service the debt the nation has, has fallen from 21 per cent in 1986 to I11 per
cent today. So, there is a very large change in the debt service component of our
exports. Our exports are growing and they are growing in these areas of elaborately
transformed goods.
As well as that, the accounts also had 200,000 job growth across the year which means
we are well and truely on the way of getting a bit of growth moving.
Now, all of that means that we are in an upswing in the cycle, we do need to keep our
eye on inflation, fiscal policy has got a player role, monetary policy at the moment
certainly should basically encourage more investment in the economy and any outcome
of anything we decide here today and the Budget subsequently will help in that result.
Can I say that therefore the relationship we have and we have engendered together is
important to giving confidence in the community and particularly the business
community about where we are going and what we are doing. We are getting a lot of
things done, I mean, the National Training Authority which we put into place a couple
of years ago is now becoming very significant. It's very clear to all of us, I think, that
in terms of training and education in the community and the economy that TAFE,
formerly the Cinderella of Australian education, is going to play a much stronger role
and it's because we've been able to do these things. Or the National Rail Coporation,
for the first time we're going to have a national rail highway which we've not had
before, which is going to take pressure off the roads and put competition back into
transport. Or electricity or any of the other things we've been talking about gas and
water etc.
So, it is a time, I think, where we've all recognised that none of us can do these things
alone, that we've got to do them together. And that means that we have to have a total
relationship and I don't want to pull anyone's leg by trying to overblow it, by talking
about a new relationship here or new federalism or anything else. But, I think a good
cooperative is what we need. So, therefore, at this meeting the Commonwealth
government has taken some notice, substantial notice I might say, of the things you've 
said to us about certainty and assurity in Commonwealth payments to the states. And,
what we have proposed here to you, today, is a funding formula we've never had
before and that is that we offer the states a real terms per capita guarantee. That is,
that we offer the states a funding formula based on real ternms funding with a national
population factor in the pool. And that population factor will expand the pool and
therefore then the distribution of that pool will then devolve to population shifts within
Australia as measured by the Grants Commission under its formulae and the
distribution will depend upon relativities which the Grants Commission will
recommend from time to time. But the pool will be bigger by virtue of the fact that it
has a per capita guarantee.
Now, I know that some have argued, well look what we really need is a share of
Commonwealth income tax. Could I just say from our point of view, we don't think
that's been argued very hard. And the reason we don't think that's been argued very
hard is because we think most of you are pretty smart and you know what that means.
What it means is and what it would have meant in the last couple of years is that
the states would have lost two to three billion in revenue through the recession. And,
whatever any of us think of your budgets there is no way the states could wear a
funding hit of that proportion. Now, if we'd had it there, I think one wouldn't be
exaggerating by saying if we had a share of tax revenue sitting there and we had in any
offer document, as a consequence of that, very large reductions in payments to the
states not unreasonably premiers and treasurers would be saying to us, " Look, we can't
run our budgets with this sort of a loss. So, at least you're going to have to give us the
same nominal or the same real as last year." And we'd say, " Well, hang on you signed
up to a formula and the formula is running very much against the states," that we'd be
facing the practicality of the delivery of your services, as you would be and the
likelihood is that we'd come to some agreement about the within year problem.
All that leads us to believe that the Commonwealth would carry the down side but the
states would then carry away the upside revenue growth in the years of recovery, as
now. Except for this one point and that is that the Commonwealth is carrying the
natural stabilisers in the economy. This budget has shifted from a budget surplus of $ 8
billion to a budget deficit of $ 14 billion. It's a $ 22 billion dollar shift. And that $ 22
billion dollar shift has put a great cushioning into the economy and one of the reasons
we're growing faster now than most countries bar for a decimal point as fast as
any country in the world is because, I think, that the natural stabilisers and the stance
of fiscal policy has worked. Therefore, the Commonwealth has got to be in a position
to be able to meet the deficit accumulations in the good times, when the good times
come. Whereas the fluctuations in Commonwealth revenue are not mirrored in the
same amplitude in state budgets.
So, we think what the states need, not unreasonably, is a set of payments which have a
predictability about them and also have some growth about them. And, real terms and
population seems, to us, to get to that point and then the upsides which might come
and which all governments look forward to, will come in your revenue base which will
reflect the growing improvement in the economy across a whole range of state taxes
and charges. So, there will be a buoyancy in state revenues, as there will be this year
but the Commonwealth payments as part of those revenues should be reasonably
certain, at least maintained in real terms and at least covering the population growth in 
the country. This will cost us, over the course of this three years, more than a real
terms guarantee would have cost us if it's in for three the likelihood of it not being
then the permanent funding formula or at least the base into the future is, I think, is a
very diminished likelihood. That is, that the real terms per capita guarantee becomes
the norm.
Now, Ralph ( Willis) had a number he mentioned to me yesterday, over a period of ten
years it amounts to $ 9 billion additional fuinding in the financial assistance grants but
net of the capital it's $ 6 billion. So, therefore, we think it's got some value to it and we
hope you do as well. But, more than that we hope you think we've listened to what
you've had to say and tried to come to something reasonable about it. Can I just say in
terms of year three of the current formula year three adds about $ 220 million to our
forward estimates because of the formula. So, the result is total net payments to the
states excluding TAFE and special debt repayments increase by 2.1 percent
nominal this year. And, this is a year when your revenues are going to pick up fairly
strongly.
Part of the offer, and Ralph will probably come to this, is the capital works program,
rolling the capital works program into the financial assistance grants. Now, this does
affect people advantageously in some respects, disadvantageously in others. But, this
program came from the 1930s, it came from a time when some states were not able to
borrow at home or abroad and the Commonwealth borrowed for them and then sent
proceeds on to them. When I became Treasurer I11 years ago this program was worth
the better part of $ 1.5 to $ 2 billion dollars; it's now down to $ 333 million in a FAGS
pool of about $ 14 billion. So, it has no relevance today the historic shares of the
capital works program or the on budget loan program or the governmental program, it
has had different names over the years the historic shares today mean nought in
terms of the realities in terms of say, a Grants Commission recommendation. So we
think this is the time to basically roll it into FAGS because it has got to go at some
time and try and deal with the attendant effects. So, then at least we're only talking
about Financial Assistance Gra nts and we can apply then the real terms per capita
formula to that pool into the future. So, it's something that probably should have been
done in the past, better late than never and probably better now as we're going to go to
a longer term funding formula with population.
So, could I complete my remarks by, again, saying how much I appreciated the
atmospherics of our last meeting, the cooperative we've done particularly the work
on Elmer and look forward to the work that will come back to us in August for
that. I hope that, as a result of these arrangements we can go from here on to a
fuinding formula which is less about a discussion here annually about money because
you'll pretty well know what it is before you come. And, the discussion will then be
about, really, Grants Commission relativities. Now, there's a big influence on Grants
Commission reports now, I understand that. Part of that is the return of funds to the
larger states of NSW and Victoria. They claim, and they have claimed for years in
here, that they were, to use the colloquialism, dudded by the formula over the years.
There was a review of the formula and the methodology and as a consequence of that
there's been a shift back in that, as indeed, there are different population effects taking
place and different population movements. 
6
So, I guess that the Grants Commission matter will be on the table whenever a Grants
Commission report is presented, about the distribution of the pool. But, at least we
ought to get to a point where the pool itself is not under examination and discussion
every year that we know what the pool formula is going to be and that's, I think, the
certainty which the offer today brings to you probably for the first time certainly in the
last 11 years. So, could I conclude on those notes, welcome you again to the meeting,
each and every one of you. I think the Treasurer would like to add to my remarks and
then I would invite you all to respond. Thank you Ralph.
Ends. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Following the resignations of Mrs Kelly and Senator Richardson and the
decision that Mr Griffiths will not return to office at this stage, Caucus has
elected Carmen Lawrence, Con Sciacca and Gary Punch to join the
Ministry. Arch Bevis and Mary Crawford will become Parliamentary
Secretaries. I welcome all five and look forward to the contribution they will
make to the work of the Government.
I have decided to recommend to the Governor-General a number of
changes to ministerial and departmental arrangements on this occasion.
Mr Hayden has agreed to my announcing these changes now, in advance of
the appointment ceremony and Executive Council meeting to be held later
today, 25 March, at 4.30 pm.
I shall be recommending that the Department of Human Services and
Health be divided and that there be a Department of Housing and Regional
Development and a Department of Human Services and Health. The
Deputy Prime Minister, Brian Howe, will become Minister for Housing and
Regional Development. Mary Crawford will be Parliamentary Secretary in
his portfolio.
Carmen Lawrence will join the Cabinet as Minister for Human Services and
Health, and will be Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of
Women. Peter Cook will become Minister for Industry, Science and Technology, and
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Science. Chris Schacht will
become Minister for Small Business, Customs and Construction. He will
have responsibility for Co-operative Research Centres.
Bob McMullan will continue to be Minister for Trade but will cease to be
Minister for Administrative Services. The Department of Administrative
Services will remain a separate department but it will be located in Kim
Beazley's Finance portfolio. Frank Walker will become Minister for
Administrative Services. Gary Johns will replace him as Special Minister of
State, working in my portfolio, and will continue to be Assistant Minister for
Industrial Relations. 
John Faulkner will join the Cabinet as Minister for the Environment, Sport
and Territories.
Con Sciacca will become Minister for Veterans' Affairs and the Department
of Veterans' Affairs will be transferred from Human Services and Health to
the Defence portfolio. Gary Punch will become Minister for Defence
Science and Personnel. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for
Defence will be Arch Bevis.
Janice Crosio will become Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for
Social Security.
Mr Tony Cole will continue to be Secretary to the Department of Human
Services and Health and I shall appoint him to act as Secretary to the new
Department of Housing and Regional Development.
A copy of the ministry list is attached, showing the new arrangements.
CANBERRA MARCH 25, 1994 
Commonwealth Government
SECOND KEATING MINISTRY March 1994
TITLE MINISTER OTER CHAMBER
Prime Minister The Hon P J Keating, MP Senator Evans
Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs The Hon Robert Tickner, MP Senator Collins
Special Minister of State ( Vice-President of the Executive Council) The Hon Gary Johns, MP Senator Evans
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Andrew Theophanous, MP
Minister for Housing and Regional Development ( Deputy The Hon Brian Howe, MP Senator Bolkus
Prime Minister)
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Mary Crawford, MP
Minister for Foreign Affairs ( Leader of the Government in the Senate) Senator the Hon Gareth Evans, QC Mr Bilney
Minister for Trade Senator the Hon Bob McMullan Mr Bilney
Minister for Development Co-operation and Pacific Island Affairs The Hon Gordon Bilney, MP Senator Evans
Minister for Defence ( Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate) Senator the Hon Robert Ray Mr Punch
Minister for Veterans' Affairs The Hon Con Sciacca, MP Senator Faulkner
Minister for Defence Science and Personnel The Hon Gary Punch, MP Senator Ray
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Arch Bevis, MP
Treasurer The Hon Ralph Willis, MP Senator Cook
Assistant Treasurer The Hon George Gear, MP Senator Cook
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Paul Elliott, MP
Minister for Finance ( Leader of the House) The Hon Kim C Beazley, MP Senator Cook
Minister for Administrative Services The Hon Frank Walker, OC, MP Senator McMullan
Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Senator the Hon Peter Cook Mr Lee
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Science
Minister for Small Business, Customs and Construction Senator the Hon Chris Schacht Mr Lee
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon EJ Lindsay, MP
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Senator the Hon Nick Bolkus Mr Baldwin
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs
Minister for Employment, Education and Training The Hon Simon Crean, MP Senator Schacht
Minister for Schools, Vocational Education and Training The Hon Ross Free, MP Senator Schacht
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Warren Snowdon, MP
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy Senator the Hon Bob Collins Mr Beddall
Minister for Resources The Hon David Beddall, MP Senator Collins
Parliamentary Secretary Senator the Hon Nick Sherry
Minister for Social Security The Hon Peter Baldwin, MP Senator Crowley
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Janice Crosio, MP
Minister for Industrial Relations The Hon Laurie Brereton, MP Senator Ray
Assistant Minister for Industrial Relations The Hon Gary Johns, MP Senator Ray
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Service Matters
Minister for Transport The Hon Laurie Brereton, MP Senator Collins
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Neil O'Keefe, MP
Attorney-General The Hon Michael Lavarch, MP Senator Bolkus
Minister for Consumer Affairs The Hon Jeannette McHugh, MP Senator Bolkus
Minister for Justice The Hon Duncan Kerr, MP Senator Bolkus
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Peter Duncan, MP
Minister for Communications and the Arts The Hon Michael Lee, MP Senator McMullan
Minister for Tourism The Hon Michael Lee, MP Senator Ray
Minister for the Environment, Sport and Territories Senator the Hon John Faulkner Mr Brereton
( Manager of Government Business in the Senate)
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Warren Snowdon, MP
Minister for Human Services and Health The Hon Carmen Lawrence, MP Senator Crowley
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Status of Women
Minister for Family Services Senator the Hon Rosemary Crowley Dr Lawrence
Parliamentary Secretary The Hon Andrew Theophanous. MP
Each box represents a portfolio. Cabinet Ministers are shown in bold type. As a general rule, there is one Department in each portfolio.
Except for the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the title of each Department
reflects that of the Portfolio Minister. There is also a Department of Administrative Services in the Finance portfolio: and a Department of
Veterans' Affairs in the Defence portfolio. 



Embrao'! AUnil 7
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL LANDCARE AUSTRALIA AWARDS
29 MARCH 1994
Thank you all f or coming tonight.
The fact that some of you have come a very long way to be
a part of this event indicates how widely the Landcare
movement has spread in Australia.
This success is, on the one hand, proof of the need for
better land management in Australia; on the other, and
perhaps more importantly, it is proof of the care
Australians feel for their country.
An environmental consciousness is not new in Australia,
but what we have seen in recent years is an awareness of
the need to preserve the environment of Australia allied
to the knowledge that it is an economic, and indeed a
social imperative.
When we move to save a damaged or threatened environment,
like that of the Murray-Darling, for instance, we are
acting to save industries, families and communities.
If we move cleverly we can do more than save: we can
increase productivity, create new industries, restructure
local economies, revive regions, and give a lot of
Australians particularly young Australians new jobs
and opportunities.
In other words, when we recognise the problems of
salination or any other form of land degradation, or the
means by which an improvement to the environment can
translate into increased productivity, we recognise the
fundamental link between the environment and the quality
of our national life including that which underpins it,
our national economy.
That is precisely the new consciousness which Landcare
manifests. Everyone who joins a Landcare group has
recognised the link between self-interest and the
interest of the environment community interest, the
national interest and the interest of the environment. 
And I might say that if Landcare and these awards help to
show Australians that they are all linked by their
relationship to this unique continent if they help to
unite us on this basis they will have done Australia a
great service.
I think it also should be said that one of the great
things about Landcare is that individuals and communities
are driving it.
It has not been an easy couple of years on the land, with
falling commodity prices and extended drought in at least
two States.
But, far from discouraging Landcare projects, this
hardship appears to have made the network flourish.
Landcare is one of the great movements of our time
because the energy is coming from people with an
affection for the country coupled to a belief in its
future.
And the future is most certainly there. In the-food
industry, for example. There are strong signals abroad,
identified by the Agri-food Council, that demand is
likely to increase for clean, green food products that
is, food produced by the most environmentally friendly
methods. That means potential for exports and jobs. New hope and
opportunities for people on the land. Potential to
invigorate regional Australia.
The fact that one farming family in three is involved in
Landcare goes a long way towards putting Australia in a
position to realise this potential.
I said in the Government's Environment Statement in
December 1982: " The drive for environmentally friendly
industries and for protection of the environment is. . part
of the economic drive part of the international
competitive drive in which Australia is engaged."
The success of Landcare is testament to the speed with
which that message is spreading through Australia.
The fact is Landcare's achievements are bigger and better
than were ever envisaged. So successful has Landcare
been, demand is outstripping supply.
But that goes for every successful program and it
certainly does not mean what a press report today took it
to mean.
It does not mean there is a funding crisis, or that
Landcare is about to collapse. 
The Government is presently spending far more than it
committed for the decade of Landcare.
We are very much aware that our commitment to Landcare
needs to be maintained: that we need to make the
structure and administration of Landcare programs more
effective, but not weighed down with bureaucracy; that we
need to keep the long term funding up and, of course,
that we need to continue to spread the message of the
link between land conservation and improved production.
We need all Australians to understand the basic
principles of Landcare.
We-will get the best out of our country if we
understand it and care for it.
We will get the best out of ourselves if we live in
harmony with the land.
Ladies and gentlemen
Tonight you will meet the new Federal Minister for the
Environment, John Faulkner.
John Faulkner has proved himself a very capable and
popular minister for Veterans Affairs. Veterans are not
always easy to please.
But with that highly desirable mix of ideas, commitment
and wise and practical judgement John Faulkner has
pleased them.
Environmentalists also are not always easy to please.
Nor are their opponents. And it is not always easy to
bring together.
John, I am quite sure, has the qualities needed to get
the results we need not ones which will please
everybody, but ones which are good for the environment
and good for the country.
It is an irony that, because we have so many programs
already in place and so many achievements already under
our belt, the Government these days is not getting much
credit for environment policy.
In fact a great deal has been done and a great deal
continues to be done.
I know that John, like me, is very conscious of the
contribution made by the people who preceded him.
Graham Richardson's work needs no further commendation
from me. It is enough to say that he made the
environment a primary policy area for this Government. 
I don't think it will hurt any of us to recall what Ros
Kelly achieved.
Among other things, she implemented the Endangered
Species Legislation, established the Feral Pest Program,
made major advances in World Heritage listing and
protection of Australia's most special places, such as
Shark Bay, Fraser Island and Stage 3 of Kakadu, and
established Ocean Rescue 2000 the Commonwealth's first
marine conservation program.
She also recognised the natural progression to the socalled
" brown agenda" the hard, dirty issues facing
Australians every day but which Australian governments
had not tackled so seriously before.
While Ros Kelly was Minister, Government policy reflected
this.
We established the Commonwealth Environment Protection
Agency, developed the first National strategy on Waste
Minimisation and Recycling, took head-on the issue of
lead pollution, established national targets for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and undertook the massive task
of restoring the health of the Murray-Darling.
I hardly need to tell people like yourselves, who are
involved in environmental projects, that we cannot
announce new programs and new projects every day. You
know better than most that starting an environmental
project or program is one thing and seeing it through is
another. We are seeing them through.
So we have, after the contributions of these two
Ministers, measures for a great range of environmental
issues.
We have available an increasing range of assistance to
meet objectives similar to those of Landcare for
example, programs such as LEAP, which is being creatively
used to support a Greening Australia project in the
Northern Rivers district of New South Wales which I
visited recently.
Yet for all the Government's initiative, and all the
Government's financial commitment, for all the
Government's effort on scientific research and education,
we can never eliminate the legacy of environmental
problems without initiative, commitment and effort from
individuals, companies and communities like those
associated with Landcare.
Like most things in the life of a nation, there is much
that Governments can and should do, but so much more that
people can do better.
Ladies and gentlemen 
Tonight, f or the third time the achievers of Landcare
Australia are being honoured.
But I would like to say that in honouring these
Australians we are paying tribute to all those involved
in Landcare for, by the fact and the nature of their
involvement, they are all achievers.
Later, I will have the task of congratulating the winners
of this year's awards.
Right now, I should acknowledge the generous
contributions made by Landcare's major sponsor, Telecom,
along with Monsanto, Combined Rural Traders, Ford,
Ansett, BHP, Alcoa and the National Landcare Program
itself. I must also congratulate Bob Collinsi the Minister for
Primary Industries and Energy, on the leadership he has
shown in the National Landcare Program.
And Jim Kirk, whose departure from Landcare I understand
is imminent.
The success of the Landcare network is by definition a
tribute to the person at the helm.
Jim will leave Landcare with the outstanding reputation
for business and community leadership he already enjoys
substantially enhanced.
Ladies and gentlemen
Our economy is now growing faster than any in the western
industrialised world. The prospects for an era of
prosperity and national growth and development have few
parallels in our history.
The issue at the heart of Landcare is at the heart of
those prospects.
In the environment statement of 15 months ago I said
this: In the next decade the pioneering spirit will be
carried on by Australians who these days work on the
frontiers of technology and seek new ways to grow,
or make or mine things. Economic growth and the
jobs which accompany it will increasingly go hand in
hand with environmental protection and renewal. The
old war with the environment will be replaced by a
partnership in the national interest.
Nowhere is that partnership stronger than in Landcare.
I congratulate and thank you all. 



SPEECH BY THE-PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY AND INAUGURALEXHIBITION
" ABOUT FACE: ASPECTS-OF AUSTRALIAN
PORTRAITURE*, OLD PARLIAMENT HOUSE
MARCH 1994
I am very pleased to be here in this hall of memories
this place where I-used to sit and try to read-the mind's.
construction in the face. The Tory's-mind in the
Liberal's face. Or was it-vice versa?
This whole place is still full of faces for me.
It is where on every sitting day I saw a-national.
portrait gallery right in front of: me. A gallery of
Australian life or-about. half of-it.
From our side the view was principally Protestant,
pastoral and legal, mixed elements of rich and rustic;
blokes they were nearly all blokes -whose faces
betrayed a. life of relative ease, and blokes whose life
on the land had furrowed their brows, narrowed their: gazeand
reddened their cheeks.
There were men like John Gorton who wore the scars of
battle; there were slightly tormented looking characters;
people whose faces showed. the strain and those who hid
it, even under pressure.
There was the odd dandy, occasional obsessives, people
trying to hide the encroachment of age or baldness.
There were conservatives of a kind you rarely see these
days. They came from another Australia. The kind who,
just by looking at them, you knew-would speak with an
accent more English than Australian.
Most of them were decent. If-by our lights they were all
wrong-headed, in the end there were not many who were
wrong-hearted.
It was a galaxy of Australians, a sort of human zoo and
down the years we watched them look upon us in triumph
and disaster. We saw them change. 
And they saw us. You will have to ask one of-them what
they saw.
This is the place where Mick Young once called to Andrew
Peacock give us your angry face, Andrew.
It's . the perfect place for a ; Portrait Gallery.
It-can always be said, and often with irresistible logic
and passion, that we need one more gallery or museum
One more place to put our-heritage on show.
It-may have reached the ears of. some of you that I-have
sometimes resisted this-logic and this passion-
It-is true. I: have not-always been persuaded that-anotherhuge
and-hugely expensive building. on the: banks off Burley_
Griffin ranked high among-the things we need for a. betternational
life.
Iam well aware that the National Portrait Gallery in
London is world renowned and much loved by the British.
I: know that the Americans have their-National Portrait
Gallery in Washington.
Eknow that there are people who say that in portraits we
can see the nation's mind and I believe that issubstantially
true.
IEhave long known the reasons why a National Portrait
Gallery is desirable, but many things are desirable and
some things are essential and there is only so much-money
to go around.
And generally I have felt it-was better to spread it:
among those who are prntlycreating.
So I remained a less than passionate advocate.
I have nothing against portraits. Im all for them.
It's almost unAustralian not to be for portraits.
What other country has an. annual nationwide barney about
a. portrait contest?
Perhaps it has something to do with the perennial
question of identity in Australia the old " who are we?"
question. The question that should have been settled a
long while ago.
And I suppose that is how at: least-in-part I-came to
the conclusion that a portrait gallery was one more
gallery worth having. -Vf
7r 
I thought, maybe in the last decade of the century this
National Portrait Gallery can help give us a bit of
direction on the question which really should have been
settled a long while ago the identity question. The
" who are we?" question.
I have to say that it's not a question which has ever
caused me much concern.
But I know some people remain ambivalent about it-.
Perhaps it helps to have Irish ancestors..
The answer of course is dead simple and there were
plenty in this country who knew it a century and more ago
" we are Australian-.
And that means among other things, that we are all the
nuances of attitude, feature-and expression; all the
hopeful, despairing, brave, anxious, lofty and lowly,
males and females of any and every ethnic origin whose
portraits were ever rendered by any means on this
continent. If the Portrait Gallery makes these the boundaries of its
ambition, then it will be well on the way to being truly
national and truly worthwhile.
It will be better if it-is not dominated by governors and
other eminent Victorians in heavy gilt frames. Or a
gallery with an exclusive emphasis on the great
achievers. It will be better, I think, if it is a much broader
gallery of our national life -including contemporary
life. And I think Australians will like it much more.
And that is why this first exhibition is such a good one.
It's good to see Meryl Tankard in there with Nellie Melba
and Dorothy Hewett and Germaine Greer and all those
colonial women we have never seen before.
Bill and Dallas with Zelman Cowen, Bob Menzies and Henry
Parkes and George Reid. And me with Bob and Bob with
Hazel. Bungaree with Albert Namatjira and Lois O'Donoghue and
Gulpilil and Eddie Mabo along with the Lieutenant
Colonel Nunn who was responsible for the Waterloo Creek
massacre. Not to say Stella Bowen's airmen in their fur collars who
were dying in the war before she could finish painting
them, and Percy Grainger in the same period, and also in
fur. 
-If the exhibition gives us a sense of continuity, it also
offers up a measure of the extraordinary mosaic of
Australia now and in the past.
Not just in the variety of the subjects but in the way
they have been portrayed so that we get an idea of the
way the modern media paints its pictures, as well as
modern artists, or portrait artists of. other times, or
amateur-photographers.
There are all sorts of Australians here in all sorts of
contexts, and captured in all sorts of mediums.
The effect, it seems to me, is democratic in a totally
uncontrived way. Intrinsically and inescapably
democratic, like the country itself.
I think Annie Loxley has succeeded brilliantly in making
this an exhibition which is unimpeachably representative
and democratic and it has to be said, in places,
painfully nostalgic.
But she has also provided us with some great Australian
works of art.
To see this exhibition, then, is to begin to understand
what a National Portrait Gallery might do.
It might excite a wider interest in our history and
society. It might encourage us to learn the story of
Australia, and to better understand the stories of our
fellow Australians.
It might help us understand what it is to be Australian,
and what it was to be Australian. What it:. is-to be an
Aboriginal Australian. An Australian woman. An
Australian with your life hanging on a thread during the
Second World War. A child living in Australia in 1814.
Last, but not least by any means it-might induce us to
recognise the enormous contribution to Australia made by
our artists.
It might help us to remember that in the end the quality
of our national life depends upon and is measured by the
quality of our creative life.
It might lead us to the conclusion that life is what we
make of it nationally speaking, that was never so true
as it is now.
As ever much will depend upon the support and initiative
of government.
But not just government the arts and heritage of
Australia does need more private patronage than it has
been customary for them to receive. 
They should~ receive more and I'm sure they willwhen
their crucial role is understood.
Perhaps the National Portrait Gallery can help that
understanding. Perhaps some wandering sponsors will come
here and see their own lives reflected in these faces and
decide to put something back into the country through the
arts. I might say that the Arts Angels, launched so
successfully in Melbourne recently, seem to be a good
example of what can be done.
It is in this context that I should take the opportunity
to thank on behalf of everyone here, Gordon and Marilyn
Darling for their resolute support of this Gallery.
You see I have become a convert to the National Portrait
Gallery. The more so because it is not-going to be left sitting in-
Canberra locked up in yet another massive mausoleum.
The works on display here are all on loan from both
public and private collections.
Their quality, and variety and the degree to which they
represent the many faces of Australia, is a fair
indication of just how much of our heritage is kept out
of the sight of the people.
And a fair indication of the role the National Portrait
Gallery can play in levering this heritage of f walls all
over the country, so that the country can see it.
Even better, these exhibitions will not be confined to
Canberra. Under the Visions of Australia program which we announced
during the last election campaign, the National Portrait
Gallery will be able to offer this and future exhibitions
to other venues in metropolitan centres and through the
network of regional galleries and museums.
The same program of course is open to other cultural
bodies across the country.
It seems to me that in a country of our size and
demography, all our collecting institutions all our
cultural institutions should be exploiting modern
transport and technology to take our heritage out to the
people. So I hope that the National Portrait Gallery prospers and
prospers along the lines we see here tonight. 
' There are many people to congratulate. Warren Horton and
John Thompson and others from the National Library. Anne
Loxley, the curator, of course.
Marilyn and Gordon Darling I have already mentioned.
Those private collectors who donated their works so
willingly. The public collections who showed immense
good will towards the project and made their works
available at short notice.
My friend and former colleague, Doug McLelland, Chair of
the Old Parliament House Committee.
I am sure there are others. But they will forgive me for
passing them by, because it is now my duty and great
pleasure to officially open this exhibition and in
doing so wish every success to the Australian National
Portrait Gallery.
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, M. P.
PRIME MINISTER'S RURAL REGIONAL TASK FORCE
I am pleased to announce that the Rural and Regional Taskforce headed by
theMember for Page, Mr Harry Woods, is to prepare a report in to the
Remote Air Services Subsidy ( RASS) Scheme.
The scheme presently services many remote communities in far North
Queensland, the Northern Territory and parts of South and Western
Australia. The Rural and Regional Taskforce will report to the Government on the
impact of the scheme on those local communities.
The Taskforce will meet major users of the scheme in Darwin and Cairns in
the week beginning April 1 1th, and will also meet representatives of the
Isolated Children's Parents' Association and representatives from Aboriginal
communities. They will also discuss the scheme with members of some of
the outlying communities which RASS helps to service.
For further information: Mr Harry Woods MP ( 066) 426 356
CANBERRA 31 March, 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JULIE FLYNN, RADIO 2UE
4 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JF: Prime Minster, how do you intend to handle the sensitive human rights
issues on this trip?
PM: Well, look, I think, more particularly, how do I want to handle the trip, I
think, is the real issue. And that is, I see the visit, it is to Thailand, the
second largest ASEAN economy, Laos and Vietnam within Indo-China.
This is a part 6ft1he world where dramatic changes have been
happening, particularly with the end of the Cold War not so long ago,
we have seen the settlement in Cambodia, economic reforms in Laos
and in Vietnam and dramatic growth in Thailand, and I am visiting the
area, in a sense, to consolidate some of our interests there, to see at
first hand what is happening there, and of course being there at the
opening of this bridge which Australia has built and funded across the
Mekong River, joining for the first time Thailand and Laos. So, it is
part of the general development of our relationship with Asia, South-
East Asia and the Asia-Pacific. And that is the key matter. Now,
human rights will arise, discussions invariably do wherever there have
been human rights violations in countries. We will be, I will be as
forthright in putting our views about that as I was more recently in
China.
JE: Don't we have a problem with our own standing in the region given that
we have had boat people in detention here for up to three or four
years?
PM: All the people in detention here have chosen to exercise their rights for
further appeals under our court system. They have all been given the
offer of being able to return to their countries and apply for permanent
residence. They have not taken it up. There is no analogy here
between human rights violations in this part of world, and Australia. 
JF: What do you see as the major benefits for Australia from the bridge
itself?
PM: Well, I think it shows that Australia's engaged with the area in a
constructive way. That is, we have now seen great changes in
Australia in the ' 80s. Australia has become an open modern trading
economy, we are engaged with these countries, we are seeing many
Australian companies invest in these countries. It is part of what is
going to set Australia up in the 21 st century, to provide jobs for
Australians. The bridge, I think, is, in a sense, exemplifies Australia's
interest and role in these countries, and I hope indicates to their
Governments and their communities that we see them as not simply a
commercial relationship, but a broader one where Australia can play a
role, of course, as we did very tellingly in Cambodia.
JF Some of our Aid organisations have expressed concerns that the
bridge will actually bring some negative things with it. I think one of
them has referred to the fact that AIDS is spread along major transport
lines and that not all necessarily the transport in and out of the region
will be good. Is that a concern you share?
PM: Well there is a concern there, but do I share the concern, no I don't. I
think it is a pretty high handed attitude to take to say to a country like
Laos which has got a per capita income of $ 200 a year, $ 4.00 a week
to say that is ok you can stay on $ 4.00 a week, providing our
consciences are clear, and there is no complicating factors of any
growth in your economy and society we, you know, some of middle
class moralisers of Australia, will be happy and contented. I think
these countries want to see themselves grow, they want to see their
economies participate in the growth in the area, and how can they do
that when they don't even have primary infrastructure. So, this is a
piece of valuable primary infrastructure which both countries want, and
which Australia has been happy to provide. Now, can I just say on this
question of AIDS. Australia does run now a program between
ourselves and Thailand about AIDS, education and management. But
that is really not the issue, I think, here. The issue here is Australia's
forthright sensible engagement with the area manifesting itself in this
case in the building of some primary infrastructure funded by us and
built by an Australian construction firm. That rounding further the
engagement we had politically and socially with these countries.
JF: Thailand and Laos have had a disagreement about who will manage
the bridge. They seem to have come up with a resolution to that
problem, do you think that will be a permanent solution?
PM: I don't know, it is up to them to make decisions about these things.
Thailand is somewhat taken for granted in Australia. This is the
second largest ASEAN economy after Indonesia. It is growing very
rapidly. Because we don't have any problems with it there is a bit of 
view around Australia that we don't need to tend to the relationship.
Well, I think we do. I think there are tremendous opportunities there,
we have got many many companies operating there and the same
opportunities I think are opening up in Vietnam and also in Laos.
BHP, for instance, is in Vietnam, we have got many hundreds of
companies now operating up there and I hope that some of the growth
that exists in, say, Indonesia and particularly in Thailand through this
bridge can sort of start to avail itself, or to be made available to these
other economies in Indo-China; Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.
Australia's concern for these countries beyond simply the commercial
relationship to the political, the civil, strategic, the I think stands us
in good stead.
JE: You will be holding talks with the Thailand Government, what regional
security issues do you expect to come to the fore, given that we are in
a post Cold War era?
PM: Well I think we have seen a lot of developments in that area together.
I mean the Cambodian settlement was something which I think has
cheered people up in the region no end. They have shown us all what
we can do together. The Post ASEAN Ministerial Council Meeting,
which is a strategic meeting on defence and security issues is now
attended by us, by the United States. So, we now have a regular
dialogue on security issues with the region and I think these countries
are interested in the broader security issues. That is, you know, what
is the region going to look like into the future with the Cold War
overlay removed, concern about the maintenance of the American
military presence in the area. Australia playing, if you like, a larger
role in foreign policy and also in defence cooperation terms. These
are the sort of things that I think people will wish to discuss.
JF: Do you think that North Korea is a problem in this particular region?
PM: Well it is a problem. It is a problem, and we have been urging North
Koreans to open themselves up to inspection by the IAEA, the
International Atomic Energy Agency inspections, and to date, of
c ourse, this has been an on again off again matter with them. Largely
this relationship is managed or North Korea's behaviour is examined
by, obviously, South Korea and the United States. I hope that the
North Koreans see the sense of putting there nuclear installations
under international safe guards and abide with them.
JF: While you are away, of course, the Government will still be going
ahead with Budget and Employment statement preparation, do you
accept the Governor of the Reserve Bank concerns about the need to
keep the budget deficit down?-
PM: Well I think the Government is doing that, and we have been
preaching this for years, I think. In the ' 80s Australia led the world in
the fiscal consolidation which it introduced. It was because of that we 
4
were able to expand the budget when we needed to in the recession.
Something, for instance, that the United States couldn't do. Now is the
time, I think, to pull the budget imbalance back, and the notion that the
Government is basically going to be spending the proceeds of growth
I mean, it will have that deficit heading down, as it should, as private
investment picks up.
JF: Thank you very much
ENDS 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAOS STATE DINNER, 5 APRIL 1994
( CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY; EMBARGO 9PM AEST)
Thank you very much for your warm welcome.
I am pleased to have the opportunity to return the visit
of Prime Minister Khamtay to Australia last Decemubervery
pf~ eased to visit Vientiane and Laos.
In the last two years, as Prime-Minister, I have been to
many of the countries of the region. I have to say that,
apart from the quite phenomenal energy and growth to be
seen, nothing is quite so striking as the difference
between them.
Every country I have visited is a reminder of the fallacy
which still prevails among many people in the Western
nations, that Asia is essentially monolithic that the
countries of Asia are fundamentally alike.
Laos is another reminder of the untruth of that.
Not only is Laos a country with a unique history and
cultural heritage, within your borders live, I
understand, people from about 70 different ethnic
backgrounds. While I suspect that it is not widely known in the rest
of the world, including in Asia, the modern Australian
population is also a heterogeneous one deriving from
some 150 national backgrounds, including the nations of
As ia.
Despite this, I think it is safe to say that in Asia many
people think of Australia as a purely Europeanessentially
British country, with a purely European and
essentially British view of the world.
In fact, like Laos, these days our view of the world is
distinctly our own.
Like Laos, Australia has embarked on a new future. Like
Laos, we seek it primarily in new and deeper
relationships with the countries of Asia and the Pacific. 
2
And because we have undertaken some fundamental reforms
to open up our economy, we are succeeding.
Today the Asia Pacific is where we do most of our trade;
it is where we invest; it is where we work to develop the
necessary stucues for trade and investment, increase
mutual understanding and strengthen the security of the
region. We have long recognised the fact of our proximity to
Asia. We have long seen the necessity to engage with the
rg-ibn.
Our forty year old relationship with Laos is evidence of
thi s.
But we have never engaged as we engage now. Our
relationships with the countries of the region have never
been so rewarding or so complete. We have never been so
positive about our relationship with the region, nor so
confident about the creative role we can play.
To do this we have had to open up both our economy and
our minds.
We have recognised the rewards to be gained from
engagement with the most dynamic economies in the world;
and the benefits which flow from our participation in the
economic development of countries like Laos.
These are great rewards.
But Australia has also recognised that, whether it is in
our relationships with the developed or the developing
countries of the region, there is an added dimension to
the return on our investments.
There is a'sense in which contemporary Australia is
discovering itself through its increased involvement in
As ia.
We have discovered, among other things, that we can
compete with the Asian economies.
In learning to compete we have discovered new capacities
to work more efficiently and more cooperatively, to use
and develop our skills and technology, to develop
products and markets for them, to understand and do
business with countries very different from our own.
Countries like Laos.
We have also discovered that we can play a creative role
in the great issues confronting the region. We learned
that through the success of initiatives to bring peace to
Cambodia.-
We learned it through our initiatives with " APEC the
forum which promises to contribute so much to -trade and
investment in the Asia Pacific.
And we have discovered that, far from representing a
threat to our culture and institutions, our engagement is
increasing our confidence and re-shaping and renewing our
sense of national identity.
For similar reasons I believe Laos should feel confident
that its culture and traditions will readily survive the
new openness the Laotian government is encouraging.
Your government's far-sighted reforms will enable Laos to
deepen its relations with other countries in the region.
Reforms such as the new liberal forei-gn investment laws
are attracting investment and expertiise essential for
economic development.
Australian companies are keen to take advantage of them.
It is an example of the way in which, with the easing of
longstanding political antipathies, we are discovering
that we have many complementary interests.
Australian companies can offer expertise in transport,
building and construction, communications and energy
emerging from the experience of developing a vast and
immensely varied continent.
It is a matter of great pride and satisfaction to my
government and to the Australian people that we have put
these skills to use in the construction of the Friendship
Bridge. It is our great hope and belief that it will play an
important part in making the future for the people of
Laos more secure and more prosperous.
Australia hopes that theFr. Lendsbhip_. Bari4ge will be an
enduring symbol of our relationship with the region of
the expertise we can bring and the good will we bring
with it.
It is also a matter of pride that, like the Friendship
Bridge, the new border control facilities, which it will
be my privilege to open tomorrow, were funded by
Australian development assistance and engineered by
Australian companies.
Australia is now the third-largest foreign investor in
Laos.
An Australian company, T-ran~ s-4eld, is developing the Nam
Thewn 2 hydro-electric project the largest single
enterprise investment ever undertaken in your country. 
NormandyPoseidon, an Australian mining company, has
formed a joinfV venture to explore for minerals and
develop a 5,000 square kilometre area north-east of
Vientiane. During my stay I will have the pleasure of witnessing
with Prime Minister Khamtay the signing of a Memorandum
of Agreement between the government of Laos and the
Hydro-Electric Corporation of Tasmania to develop two
major projects in Southern Laos.
Prime Minister Khamtay and I will also witness the
signature of an investment promotion and protection
agreement setting up a framework for commercial relations
between us.
I also take this opportunity to say that the Australian
government is aware of the acute rice shortage Laos is
presently suffering and I am able to announce this
evening that Australia will contribute $ 1 million in
emergency relief funds through the World Food Program to
help meet this need.
Tonight I am pleased to announce the first Australian
multi-year commitment to Laos $ 47.5 million over the
four years to 1997.
This will allow pressing needs in a number of development
sectors in Laos to be addressed.
These include the construction of a number of
bridges on Route 13 and further road works in
association with the Friendship Bridge.
An innovative program of English language
instruction to be screened on Australian Television
International supported by audio visual and print
materials. A childrens health initiative including an increased
effort to eradicate polio and control malaria in the
region.
We are friends of 40 years standing. Yet only now are we
discovering the potential of our friendship.
While very different countries we are rapidly learning to
recognise similarities in outlook and interest we had
never seen before.
A common interest in trade and investment, in regional
security and prosperity; a common interest in protecting
our culture and identity while underpinning our future
prosperity. If Australia and Laos continue to look for the common
ground between us, while remaining open to the region and
the world, I have no doubt that our friendship and our
two countries will grow and prosper. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, FAIRBAIRN RAAF BASE
APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, what do you hope to achieve on this visit?
PM: Well it is a visit, I think, which pays recognition to the growth of
Thailand and Indo-China, Australia's involvement with the area, and I
thiink the opening of the bridge is going to symbolise Australia's
constructive engagement with this part of South East Asia. I think that
is the main point. Thailand is the second largest ASEAN economy, it
is growing very rapidly and there is much for Australia to do there, and
for Australians to do there. We will be very pleased, I think, to
participate in this piece of primary infrastructure, the Friendship Bridge
between Thailand and Laos. I am also looking forward to going to
Vietnam to renew the contacts I have had there with the Government
and the Prime Minister, to see if, again, we can do further to develop
that economy with Australian companies. And I think the key message
is all this sets Australia up well in the 21st century. That our children
will have the benefit of closer integration with Asia, a more interesting
growing economy in Australia as a consequence, and to be truly part
of the region.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: We are not doing tarmac doorstops on budget deficits.
J: What about on federal interventions into ALP factional brawls?
PM: About the trip, anything else?
J: ( inaudible) 
2
PM: Yes, I will. But again, as I have said many times we put our views on
human rights clearly and forthrightly, but we also want to maintain
relationships with these countries and that is to see them as total
relationships, and I think that has proven to be a successful policy and
I will be pursuing that here on this visit.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH GRAHAM WORLD, ABC AM PROGRAM
APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
GW:-Mr Keating, the opening of the friendship bridge is the centrepiece of
this visit. What tangible benefits should it bring for Australia?
PM: Well, I think that it underlines the fact that Australia is very closely
involved now with the region. And it indicates, obviously, we have
comprehended the changes, which have taken place since the Cold
War: that's the settlement in Cambodia; the economic reforms in Laos;
the growth. in Thailand. the dramatic growth in Thailand; and the
economic reform on the way in Vietnam. In a sense the bridge tends
to symbolise the changes which are talding place within Indo-China.
And Australia is now involved with each of these economies, it is
involved with the Governments and it is tangibly involved by the
development of this important piece of infrastructure.
GW: Well, there is concern that the bridge could hasten the spread of Aids
into Laos, that there will be new commercial pressures, environmental
degradation. Having built the bridge what responsibilities do we have
on those fronts?
PM: Well, I think the Governments of these two countries, Thailand and
Laos, wanted this bridge to be built. I think the per capita income of
Laos is $ 200 a year, $ 4.00 a week. I don't think that people in this
country saying look, we are quite happy to leave them on $ 4.00 a
week as long as they don't get tangled up with the rest of us, that's
fine. Well, I don't think that is much of a policy, frankly. It is up to the
Laotian people to make their own minds up about their development,
and infrastructure of this kind, simply a bridge to ford the river, the
important Mekong River, is something of course that might have
existed a long time ago, biiit for the fact that these countries can't fund
these infrastructure needs. So, I think that, yes, the Governments will 
need to be mindful of some of the development responsibilities here,
but again it should give us a chance to lift the wealth of this area, and
including particularly, Laos.
GW: They can't even agree at this stage on precisely where the border
should be.
PM: Well I don't think we should worry about those sorts of things. One of
the important things here is that Thailand is the second fastest growing
ASEAN economy after Indonesia. It has got 58 million people. We
-have always had very warm relations with Thailand, so because it is
not a problem many Australians think, therefore, it shouldn't be in a
sense, attended. That is, we shouldn't develop the relationship
further. Now, I think we should develop the relationship further, that is
part of the point of my visit. And the growth and wealth which has
been generated in Thailand can flow into other parts of Indo-China
including Laos. So, this will be a tangible help to lifting the income and
living standards of these people.
GW: Turning to the region in general, you have been building an extensive
network of contacts, APEC has been your primary vehicle, but how far
can this network go?
PM: This is the way to set Australia up in this decade and for the 21 st
cent Iury: to be part of the growth of the Asia-Pacific. And you can see
just how quickly it has changed already. It wasn't too many years ago
we lived in fear of Asia, or, if not fear, contempt of it. And then when
the tigers took off we developed a bit of an inferiority complex about
them, well, we are now shedding that. We are now engaged with the
area, we are now relevant to these economies and societies, and the
the way to do it is bilaterally. That is, between Australia and each
other country relationship developing, and multilaterally through
organisations such as APEC where we can increase the velocity of
trade and investment, make the -Asia-Pacific a greater area of wealth
generation for all of us. But we will always need to attend to these
bilateral relationships and that is why I have gone out of my way to
develop them in the area, be they with Indonesia, or Singapore, or
Thailand, or Laos or Cambodia, et cetera.
GW: In Thailand in recent days moves to reform the Constitution have been
blocked that sparked some fears of civil unrest. How much is that a
cause for concern?
PM: Well, I mean, often the politics of some countries in the area, the
mechanisms are not there to be exercised the way they are in this
country, I think this is one of our great strengths. That is, our basic
sense of democracy in this country is one of the things that actually
stamps us out, marks us out in the area. But I don't think that this is a
matter of, in a sense, concern to me in this visit. I mean these
constitutional issues, no doubt, are of great significance in Thailand 
and matters will come and go. But it is the relationship, nation to
nation which matters. Even though we have seen over a period of time
some quite regular changes of Government.
GW: All right. With Vietnam how quickly do we want an economic and
political relationship such as we now have with Indonesia?
PM: Well, you have got to, I think, firstly understand that Vietnam's
economy is about, well, only a fraction of that of Indonesia's, it is
growing. We have got a very warm relationship with Vietnam which
we developed over time. I had a chance to host a visit by Prime
Minister Kiet when he came to Australia, and I am looking forward-to
hit invitation-to return.
GW: You said that Australia can never be an Asian nation, and that we go
to Asia as we are, as Australians. So, given that to what extent do we
have to play be their rules?
PM: Well, I think the main thing, one of our strengths is that we play by our
rules. We are a democracy, we have gone to Asia with our values
intact, we are playing a leading role in shaping the region, as you can
see in Cambodia and in APEC. We play our role in helpful
infrastructure development of the kind of thing like, for instance, the
Bridge which I will be opening during this visit. And I think that our
open society, our sense of democracy, means that we are well
regarded in the region and we don't need to be there apologetically,
you know, playing by, if you like, the cultures or cultural standards of
those countries. We don't need to accept the idea that we have to
become a low wage society, that the only way that we can compete in
Asia is to be a low wage country. I mean, it is one of the point of the
Governments industrial relations changes introduced a week or so
ago. It is one of the differentiating points with our opponents. We
want to be an educated society selling high value added products,
taking premium prices, being price setters and not price takers and the
way to do this is to develop ones education system, research and
development, product innovation, exports, keeping the
competitiveness, the low inflation rate, and the general cultural shift to
a more productive society, and taking that engagingly to Asia, and
being relevant in the area. I mean, I think that is the thing which can
set Australia up into the future.
GW: Well, just finally, you mentioned domestic politics. You are flying out
leaving a factional brawl going on in NSW. Does that need to be
settled now by the National Executive?
PM: I joined the Labor Party 35 odd years ago, this will be factional brawl
number probably 210,341. Like all the other it will be settled at some
point. It is over State pre-selections and fortunately I don't have to
worry too much about those. 
4
GW: Even though it damages the Party?
PM: These are all passing things. I mean if you want to see a brawl look at
the one in the Liberal Party. It is a real one. It is about the national
leadership of their Party.
GW: Mr Keating thanks for joining us.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 1
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF BORDER CONTROL FACILITY, LAOS, 6 APRIL 1994
On behalf of the Government and people of Australia I am very pleased to hand over
this Border Control Facility to the Government and people of Laos.
If the Mekong Friendship Bridge which will be opened next Friday is the door to the
development of Laos and surrounding regions, this building is the key.
This is the place where immigration, customs, police, bankin&amp; and postal services from
the Government of Laos will facilitate the movement Of people and goods across these
borders. It will be an introduction to Laos for many visitors.
Like the Friendship Bridge, which it will complement, the Border Control Facility is a
very tangible expression of cooperation and friendship between Australia and Laos.
Australian companies designed and built it, drawing on traditional Lao design and on
Lao technical and other assistance.
It is a model of the best sort of development cooperation, because it involved not just
the provision of infrastructure from outside, but also training for Lao customs and
immigration staff'-some of them through sponsored overseas study teams.
And today, specialists from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation are assisting the
Lao television'and radio crews to ' cover this event as part of a five year regionaJ
pro-ram Australia is sponsoring.
Last September nothing existed on this site. Transfield Construction has completed
the building since then, on cost and on schedule,
Today we congratulate all those, both Lao and Australian, who have been involved.
It is a splendid tribute to the expertise of Australian companies, and I hope it will
encourage others to invest in the region. 
TEL: 6. Apr. 94 15: 01 No. Olb F. UZ/ uz
2
It is also a reminder of the friendship and good will which exists between our two
countries. On Australia's side those who deserve credit include Maunsell Sinclair Knight, the
project's consultant engineers; John Holland Construction, who were responsibile for
creating the earth platform from paddy fields; Gauard Shelton, the supervising
architects, and of course Transfield,
All of these companies provide a first rate example of what Australian businesses have
to offer in the development of infrastructure in South-East Asia.
Of course, it is not only in engineering and construction that Australian companies
offer expertise.
In mining, power generation, telecommunications and in education and training
Australians are active in Laos.
Some 50 Australian companies are now operating here and many of them, I am pleased
to say, are represented here today.
The signature of the Australia-Laos Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement
which Prime Minister Khamtay and I have just witnessed will give added confidence to
potential investors from Australia.
I welcome that. and the opportunities for further economic cooperation between
Australia and Laos which are now being opened up.
Mr Prime Minister, I welcome also the new opportunities which this Border Control
Facility will bring to the people of Laos. and I hope it will remind all who pass through
it of the enduring friendship between our two countries.
And now it gives me great pleasure to declare this Border Control Facility officially
open. 



TEL: 15:~ 463. INAop. rU. 26954 F-U. l'u,
TRANSCR~ IPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, BORDER CONTROL FACILITY, VIENTIANE,
WEDNESDAY, 6 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: My first comment would be to say that I have had a very warm
reception here in, Laos, very good meefings with the Prime
Minister and the President. I think they appreciate very much the
tangible manifestation of Australia's friendship with Laos in the
building of this bridge which will change the commerce of this
country by allowing traffic from Thailand for the first time ever.
This Border Control Facility we are standing in now is set up
really for the next thirty or forty years of traffic of people between
these two countries, This is a matter of great significance to thorn
and, of course, not only were jobs created here in Laos, but many
Australian jobs were created in providing the materials for these
particular construction projects and the design work which went
with thern.
Australians are very Interested in the area, they are very
interested In the Asia Pacific, they do want to see Australia
projecting Itself and engaging Itself with the area. I can think of
no better example of that than this that is, a change of material
substance to two nations brought about by Australia's financial
assistance and technical capacity. I thnk this will open the way
for our many major companies in this country for Instance. the
, likes of CRA the gold miner Normandy Poseidon, T eistra which
is our major telecommunications carrier operating here and many
other companies as well, and our construction companies, of
course, who have built these facilities.
So, in a sense, the civil work~ s are a pipe opener to even greater
things in commerce which we can do together and these things
auger well for our relationships in this part of South East Asia.
TEL 
T6EL.: Rpr. 94 15: 43 No. 023 P. 02/ 031
2
J: Mr Keating, did you seek or did you gain any assurance from the
Lao authorities that the buidge would be able to operate efficiently
and that it would start carrying treffic soon after it opens?
PM:. That assurance is completely clear. That is, there is no way that
these facilities are going to be built and not in any way used to
their maximum capacity. I had very good talks with the
Government and with the Prime Minister and he told me that the
priorities for development is this country were firstly, for human
development, education, health, social security and then In areas
where the country has a oomparative advantage in hydro
electricity, in agriculture, and in these areas he said that national
policy was being focused and he mentioned most particularly
protection of the environment. The Government here is very
conscious of the natural heritage of Laos and they want to keep
that heritage while developing the country. I was very heartened
to hear this and as part of out aid program we have provided $ 1
million which can be devoted to an environmental protection
strategy which may assist the Government of Laos in developing
the country, but doing it in a way which is harmonious with the
environment.
J, Aid has been the primary feature of Australia's relationship with
Laos to date, how quickly do you think that that will be reweighted
in favour of trade over time?
PM: I think it will be reweighted first In favour of investment and then
latter in favour of trade. Trade between us is growing, but in
absolute terms it is not great, but the Investment is going to pick
up quite sharply because Laos has attracted a clutch of the best
of Australian companies. That is, the financially strongest,
technically able and, I think thW given the prospectivity In
minerals, the prospects in agriculture, the Interest the
Government has in developing hydro electricity, civil engineering,
road and other constructions, all of these things, I think, lend
themselves to Australian companies and these projects are a
demonstration of what Australia can do. So, I think, there is
going to be probably quite substantial investment by Australia in
. Laos and what will follow that will be trade.
J: This investment message is similar to that you were putting in
China last year. Are Australian companies moving quickly
enough?
PM: I think so. In China we have got nearly one thousand companies
operating and here we are seeing over fifty companies already,
but as I said, they happen to be somne of the strongest that we
have. They are not just any companies, but some of our
strongest companies. When one looks at the tremendous
TEL 
TEL
r 3
development possibilities here and you can start to see,
particularly some of the Thai financial institutions in the city,
some of the buildings which have been built on the highway out
to te bridge, it is not going to take very long before you start to
see this economy tick over and it will require fir3t: and foremast
primary infrastructure which we are very much In the position of
supplying.
J: Do you think ordinary Australians realise the extent to which
Australia is now involved in South East Asia?
PM: I would like to think that Australians are both not just pleased to
be involved in South East Asia for their economic long-run
benefits and prosperity, but proud to be as well. That is, to be
engaged with the region as wo have never been engaged before
because all of these things are laying the foundations for the 21 st
century Australia. The one that will have a much closer
engagement with Asia, whose economic fortunes will be
interwoven with Asia. I think ali of this means, this is a pro-cursor
to growth and jobs in Australia. That is, if we want long-term
increments to wealth and employment, exports and trade in
services are going to be part of that story and this is the place to
be selling it.
J: Did you make any specific representations to the Lao
Governiment about the need for human rights and greater
democratisation?
PM: one question I did raise with them was the q~ uestion of North
Koreg and the Laotian Government has very good relationi with
' 4orth Korea and I pointed out the futility of North Korean attitudes
in terms of the International reaction to thorn and how the
Government of L8os May encourage the government of North
Korea in the kind of developments which we have seen here. I
had an encouraging response from the Prime Minister also
saying that, of course, matters have got to be resolved by Cooperation,
by discussion and amicably, but he did echo the
concerns which I had expressed and agreed in my view that the
kind of development which North Korea ought to be able to take
is precisely what we are seeing here.
ends TL: 6. Rpr. 94 15: 43 No. 023 P. 03/ 033 



TEL 88 . A pr .994
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME-MINISTERl THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP,
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOLLOWING ADDRESS TO BUSINESS
LUNCH* ERAWAN HOTEL, OANGKOK, THURSDAY, 7 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
0; Mr Prime Minister, my name Is Bruce Crompton, Gold Corporation,
Thailand. Is it your Government's pol icy to continue with projects such
as the Friendship Bridge, It's unbelievable the amount of good will that it
has created in this area?
PM: Thank you. Well the answer to that Is yes it Is. Australia each year
commits a substantial proportion of its natural resources, or certainly its
fiscal resources, its budget resources to foreign aid, that is development
and program _ aid. Aid we try and mainlaki're'asonable share of-our
budgetary appropriations to this task. We think In well-judged, wellresearched
projects that we can undertake some which, are often
beyond the capacity of national governments to do, particularly in public
Infrastructure of the variety of this bridge across the Mekong. And just
yesterday I announced inl Vientiane that we are now providing that
country, Laos, with a four year tollig program of aid which will be
devoted to public Infrastructure, to education and to health. So, I think,
we see a role for ourselves in the region doing things like the Friendship
Bridge. Things whilch often are difficult for some national governments
to do, to find resources and do. The main thing is that we pick the right
projects, There are always many oN offer, but some better than others
to be taken up. It is certainly our intention to keep doing the sorts of
things we are doing with the Bridge.
0: ( inaudible) from the National Newspaper ( inaudible)
PM-I was looking for business people rather then journalists, but anyway I
often travel down market.
0: As you talking about theGATI itha to be reported that the..
( inaudible) will try to push human rights cause In the next meeting In
( inaudible) what is Australia's position in this issue? 9: 37 No. 012 P. O1/ U2 
TEL-8A. fpr. y 4 ': or Jou. uL r. uL . V
2
PM; In the issue of?
Q: Human rights and ( Inaudible)
PM: Well. Australia is a true liberal democracy. Australia is a very deep
rooted democracy and that democracy has expressed Itself in a respect
for human values and human endeavour and human rights which I think
I could say few in the world have, if not emulated, done better or are
more committed to those ideals. As you know, Australia has been In a
number of international conflicts over this last century, never for one
square centimetre of territory. Always out of indignation at the actions
of others against the liberties of other people. So Australia regards its
concern for human rights as very much a natural offspring of its society,
of its sense of culture and democracy and tolerance and it will put Its
views forthrightly and strongly where ever we think human rights are
being violated. Now, we have put these views often and consistently In
places where, often in foreign policy and trade terms, has not been
entirely convenient for us to put them but we have put them
nevertheless. And will continue to put them. And I don't believe, and
never have believed for a second, that Australia's democracy or values
need be compromised or that it is a burden for Australia to share these
views in various parts of the world. But, by the same token, Australia
does see national relationships in the broad and the Important thing is to
be effective in trying to improve human rights in some countries. We
believe one can be most effective doing this in a broader relationship of
many parts. So that, therefore, the cost to countries of losing parts of
this relationship become more expensive. And I think we have been
more effective in making our voice heard In human rights by maintaining
a broad relationship with a nation that we are dealing with. And, I think,
in terms of our own debate about this subject, it's a matter whether one
wants to be heard ineffectively or whether one wants to be effective. If
one wants to be effective, one does not have to compromise values of
the kind which you have asked me and to which I have referred.
Q: If I may, Bruce Clark, Avacor Company. Mr Keating, you have built a
fantastic bridge in Non Khai. I have seen it and it is great. I would like
to ask you whether AIDAB is contemplating anything as regards a
coordinated computer controlled motor traffic system here rather than a
rail traffic system.
PM Well, I think that, I am quite sure that a number of members of the
government of Thailand will know by now and if they don't I will tell them
that one of the things that Australia has developed is a sophisticated
clty traffic computerised traffic system which spirits traffic around a
number of Australian cities on the basis of a central control. And this
has worked very effectively because it provides a monitoring role, as
well as a computerised dispersion role and so good is the system we
think it has got international market ability. We don't think that we've
actually sold it to a number of countries. So while I'm not exactly a
travelling salesman for these things I am quite happy to give them a kind
reference on the way through. Thank you very much 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, ERAWAN HOTEL, BANGKOK, 7 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I will try to give you an indication of some of the things which I
discussed this morning with the Prime Minister and members of the
Government. The first thing to say Is not enough people in Australia
have understood the potential in the rela-tionship. with Thailand.
Whatever the reasons, I would like my visit to be the moment at which
Australia and Thailand begin to pay each other more attention.
Whatever the reasons in the past, things like the level of investment,
while increasing does not do justice to the relationship which we might
otherwise have. We need to take steps to maximise the conditions in
which investment can flourish and trade opportunities develop.
This is the second largest ASEAN economy, soon expected to be the
fastest growing. During' our-dscussions this morning the Prime
Minister and I and members of the Cabinet, his Ministry and my party
discussed the relationship in the broad, the elements In our bilateral
relationship, its prospects, we discussed APEC, developments in the
region, security matters. and I have got fftihr opportunities to discuss
some of these questions tonight with the Prime Minister over dinner.
We agreed upon a number of things also today. One important thing
was an agreement to establish a new ministerial commission which will
give us for the first time a regular riiinisterial level forum to discuss
ways of expanding trade and Investment links. You might remember,
though Australia has now with a number of countries, two others
Japan and Indonesia a joint ministerial forum. This will be our third
with Thailand and it means that many of the, if you like, intra portfolio
points can be raised in this context. For instance, I raised today
questions about Qantas's growth potential out of the hub of Bangkok
and the Inhibitions it faces. Such a question could be raised in a
ministerial council context. At the same time, the Prime Minister raised 
with me barriers to Thai imports into Australia. This would be typical of
the kind of matter which would be discussed there.
I also indicated today and you may be aware that Bob McMullan, the
Minister for Trade, will lead a major Australian trade and investment
mission to Thailand later this year. Our trade is growing especially in
manufactures, but we can and should do better and I think this trade
mission will help enormously.
We decided today In what I thought was an important decision to
explore further what prospects there might be for the establishment of
a link between the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement and the free trade
area of Australia and New Zealand. So that is a link between AFTA
and CER. We had a reasonably long discussion about this point and
we have decided that I will raise this matter formally with New Zealand
and I was invited by the Deputy Prime Minister to raise the matter
formally with other ASEAN states, other members states of ASEAN. In
the discussion I made the point that the combined GDP, of ASEAN
which Is now an important regional trade area is approximately the
same as the combined GDP of Australia and New Zealand. So, It
would be a doubling of that market in terms of access. So, we have
decided to pursue discussions around this point.
I was also very pleased with my discussions with the Prime Minister
and the Government about APEC, about the prospects for multi lateral
resolution of trade problems , and expanding growth and trade
opportunities on a multi lateral basis as distinct from the problems of
unilateralist approaches and bilateralist approaches and, I think, our
understanding of APEC Is getting closer, we see it having quite an
ambitious potential and I am looking forward to further discussions
tonight with the Prime Minister about the November meeting of APEC
and its agenda in Indonesia later this year.
I was also glad I raised with the Prime Minister the question of
Cambodia. The fact that we have the United Nations sponsorship of
the Peace Accords has produced an outcbme of great satisfaction, but
work remains to be done. The Government has to succeed in growth
development and the equitable government of the country, but I was
glad to have an assurance from the Prime Minister that Thailand will
not be supporting any individual factions in Cambodia. We articulated
the importance of isolating the Khmer Rouge from trade and Income
and to encourage them to be part of the processes of government In
Cambodia including, of course, the incorporation of the Khmer Rouge
into the army of the Royal Cambodian Government.
I might say I am meeting General Wimol this afternoon because we
have a long standing defence relationshil'with Thailand and the Thai
army is an Important element in Thai society. 
Finally could I say, the Prime Minister invited Australia to participate
more fully in other regional growth areas of this part of the world and
commended Australia on its aid program, most particularly mentioned
the Friendship Bridge and the enhanced trade and investment
opportunities which it will bring to the region.
J: Prime Minister, what signals did you get from the Thai Government as
to their sounding with other ASEAN nations about the prospect of a
greater Asia-Pacific free trade zone?
PM: This is In a link between AFTA and CER. The Deputy Prime Minister
told me in having raised it informally with member states of ASEAN he
had received no indication other than a positive one from his efforts.
He said it had not been formally discussed at the formal meetings of
ASEAN, though he had discussed it Informally with ASEAN member
states and governments. But, in enjoining us to do the same, he
believes Australia could play a role Itself in opening up this discussion
and just making the point that the economy of Australasia is as large or
larger than the combined GDP of the ASEAN member countries. So,
in a regional freer trade area, we would be extending the concept of a
free product market between Australia and Now Zealand as they would
be extending the concept of freer trade and diminished tariffs between
the ASEAN member countries.
J: And do you have a time frame all over which you think this might be
achievable?
PM: No. We have spoken of it now over the last six months or so. You
might remember Deputy Prime Minister Supachai raised this publicly in
Australia during his visit and we will progress it I don't think with any
time frame in mind. The other issue which the member states of
ASEAN need to discuss is the rate of decline in tariff protection which
is now scheduled for a 15 year phase down. I think, there is becoming
a general view with the outcome GATT that that time profile is out of
sync with GAIT commitments and also the natural economic
expectations of these regional economies.
J: How important would such a move be for Australia and its trading
prospects in the region?
PM: Where ever we can extend the notion of freer trade we ought to. We
have done this now over a long period of time with New Zealand. We
have an open goods market and we have now a much more open
services market and to open that opportunity up further in countries
with a GDP of roughly the same of our own, obviously, extends market
opportunities for Australians and Australian business, it would further
underpin our trade efforts in the area and more rapidly lead to the
prospect of higher economic growth and more employment. 
J: context of APEC, would you see this as a sub-group of APEC
initially which could form. the nuclei of a broader and more
comprehensive free trade region for the APEC area as a whole?
PM: I think APEC will be an umbrella which covers a number of free trade
areas. The most obvious one being the North American Free Trade
Agreement and area NAFTA, it already covers NAFTA, CER and
AFTA, it Is a matter of whether we could make AFTA and CER fit which
would just extend, if you like, that free trade area, but within the
compass of greater multi-lateral, If you like, a broader multi-lateral
frame work with APEC.
J: Do you see the integration of AFTA and CER eventually allowing trade
as free as it is now between Australia and New Zealand?
PM; These are complementary economies, there are higher levels of
protection extant in these economies than there is in Australia. There
would need to be some understanding about the pace with which that
changed. In other words, were we to, let's say have such an
agreement this very day, the agreement would only be of benefit where
the trade liberalisations had already occurred. If they are going to
occur over fifteen years It would mean there would be benefits, but
over a much longer time frame. So, I think there is two elements to
this. That is, quickening the pace of tariff reductions within the ASEAN
free trade area and at the same time then seeing what complementary
benefits there would be in Australia and AFTA doing something
together.
J: Prime Minister, if I can ask a domestic question, unemployment figures
came out today suggesting that another fall in unemployment down to
10.3. How soon do you think Australia will see unemployment back In
single digits?
PM: I. I don't think I can say precisely when because of the complication of
the participation rate which has been dancing around now for the last
couple of years. So, you could actually see quite a pick up in
employment, but a shift up in the participation rate which would still
leave unemployment In double digit figures. It is my hope though that
consistent employment growth will consistently chip away at the
unemployment level and with reasonable participation rates see
unemployment slip down under 10 per cent.
J: The OECD. report warned that the level of unemployment benefits are
reaching a stage where they are a disincentive to some peo ple to get
jobs. Is that going to be addressed In the White Paper?
PM: 1 The answer is yes, it will be. I know something of the OECD report but
I have not read it. We are looking at a set of incentives amongst other
things in the White Paper context which would encourage people into 
work, particularly part time work, but I think all that will be revealed In
due course.
J: The OECD has also said that Australia is suffering from a narrow and
declining base and suggested that broader based taxes... It is
basically a favourable report a concern to the bureaucracy certainly
in Australia.
PM: It Is part of this, sort of, euro centricity of the OECD, but basically they
are Into bigger government than we are. Bigger government in
Australia in the 1970a dislocated Australian private investment and
getting a smaller but better government which is what Australia did
through fiscal consolidation in the 1980s leaves us way outside the
OECD pack in terms of fiscal effectiveness. Therefore, the frame of
reference of the OECD Is not the frame of reference of Australia in this
respect. Ours is an ambitious experience way beyond the general
OECD experience and these writings would come with the context of
the OECD experience. Were the OECD general member countries
able to consolidate their fiscal scene as Australia has and make its
outlay programs more effective, you know , it is a turn up for the books
to have the OECD arguing for higher taxation. I spent most of my
decade going there when they were arguing for lowering taxation.
J: after compensation with Australian authorities though, it must reflect
there..
PMV: No, it doesn't. You can never assume that. I like the OECD, it is a
useful body, but no OECD assessor could ever have anything like the
fiscal experience of the Australian Cabinet and therefore it is like most
OECD reports you take the parts which are useful in our experience,
but the notion that Australia should go down the route of consumption
taxation to build a second tax base in the tax system, to dislocate
Australian private investment would be ultra-vires of our interests in
the next fifteen years.
J: What about their comments that we should also follow the New
Zealand experience on labour market reform and having to move away
from..
PM; As I understand It, the OECD said that the labour market changes of
our new industrial relations act provides a frame work which would
assist in flexibility. I think that Is Important. I don't know whether too
many of you read the Australian Magazine last weekend on Britain in a
piece by Phillip Knightley where he recounted women working seventy
and eighty hour weeks for the equivalent of $ 120-13OAUS a week.
Yet, the managerial classes of Britain had enjoyed very high salaries
and, of course, there was great wealth being generated in their stock
market. Australia will not go down that route, that is why it
unashamedly and unambiguously will always put a floor under these 
6
so-called processes of flexibility which denies the opportunity of some
people to make poor people poorer and hence the importance of the
award system as a base for enterprise flexibility. In other words, what
Australia is doing in this respect is superior to what Is being done in
some other countries and the frame of reference again is euro centric
and needs to be seen against the broader aspirations of a social
democracy of the kind fashioned by a labor government in the 1980s
and not the Thatcher government of Britain for instance. Thank you
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIIE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
STATE DINNER, BANGKOK, 7 APRIL 1994
Thank you for honouring me with this dinner.
1 am delighted to be here in this great city and in a country whose unique and rich
culture and warm hospitality is legendary throughout the world.
It is certainly well-known to Australians, and held in great affection and regard.
For some time now Thailand has been a favourite destination for many thousands of
Australian tourists, aifd increasingly for Australian business people.
I am very glad that, as Australian Prime Minister, 1 have now had the opportunity to
make it my destination.
The friendship between our two countries goes back a long way, at least to 1945 when
the first Australian Mission was established in Thailand.
In the years immediately before that thousands of Australian soldiers had come in
contact with Thailand and the Thai people as prisoners of war on the infamous Burma-
Thailand Railway.
Through the horrors of that experience Australian soldiers came to hold the Thai
people in very high regard for the assistance they gave them and for their courage and
humanity, It led one of them, a very great Australian, Sir Edward Dunlop, to devote a substantial
part of his life to developing medicine in ThailFaind and to promoting a better and more
extensive relationship with Thailand and the other countries of the region.
Weary Dunlop died last year, but his message about Thailand and about Asia has never
been better understood in Australia than it is now.
We are old and good fiends. And today the opportunity exists to build that friendship
into a far-reaching relationship with great rewards to both our countries.
A summary of what we have achieved between us in recent years illustrates the
potential for cooperation, the potential for an expanded Australia-Thailand
relationship. In the past five years, two-way trade between us has reached more than $ 2 billion,
growing at a rate of 25 per cent and making Thailand our twelfth biggest export
market. 9 
Our aid program with Thailand is Australia's fourth largest.
We have an active defence cooperation program.
On a per capita basis, Australia has settled more Indochinese rcftigccs from Thailand
than any other country.
Our education links arc growing rapidly, with over 2,000 Thais studying in Australian
institutions and 50 per cent more Thais seeking visas fbr education in Australia in
1993-94 than inl the previous year.
Since 1991 there have been more than 40 separate ministerial and parliamentary visits.
Nearly 200,000 Australians visited Thailand in 1993 and more than 4,000 Thais are
now visiting Australia eachi month, with the latest figures showing a 50 per cent
increase on the corresponding period in the previous year.
B~ othi our countries recognise that we share interests beyond the bilateral ecollnic and
comnmercial relationship.
Wc recognise that it is in our mutual interest to ensure that the voice of mliddle sized
efonies is heard internationally.
We recognise that we have much to gain from cooperation on regional political and
security issues, as well as developing regional economic linkages.
We recognise these common ambitions and, fiirthcrmore, these days we know we canl
achieve t hem.
Wc worked together on the Cambodian peace settlement.
We worked together in the Cairns Group.
We are now working together with APEC.
It was a great privilege to work with you, Prime Minister, at the historic rnccting of
APEC leaders in Seattle last November. That meeting was concrete evidcnce ofthe
growin$ sense of community in the Asia-Pacific region, and the meeting ill Jakarta
later this year wAil be vital in building the momentum,
By bringing the economics of East-Asia and North America tog'ether in one
cooperative framework, APISC is a key to unlock the region's full economic potential
for the 21st century.
A rapidly growing economy linking thie developing economics of Indochina and the
rest of South-East Asia, Thailand also has a vital role to play aS a leader in ASEAN.
It is for this reason among others that Australia is very pleased to have built the
Mekong River Friendship Bridge a real and symbolic link between the developing
economics of Laos and Vietnamn and the dynamic ones of ASEAN.
For Australia, the Friendship Bridge is a striking symbol of the creative rolc we Call
play in the region.
We are in no doubt that Australia has a very great deal to offer Thailand as an
economic partner and as a source of skills and expertise. 
Much is happening within the relationship to demonstrate the truth of this. But we are
far from realising its full potential.
As a first step towards doing so that we must come to a fuller appreciation of the
changes which have occurred in both countries over the past decade.
We must understand present realities particularly economic realities.
For example, I doubt that many Australians are aware of the size of Thailand's
economy over 100 billion, the second largest in ASEAN.
And I doubt whether many are aware that your economic growth is predicted soon to
be the highest in ASEAN.
On the other hand, I am not at all convinced that the dramatic reform of the Australian
economy is widely appreciated in Thailand.
Australia's economy is now highly competitive, open and geared for integration with
the region and the world.
It is the fastest growing economy in the OECD; the lowest taxing country in the
OECD; and with inflation among the veryjlowe in the OECD.
The Australia of this decade is anew Australia. An efficient, productive, competitive
and creative Australia.
An Australia which is a very good place in which to invest, which welcomes
investment, which actively encourages investment.
An Australia whose companies are now constructing Bangkok's tallest building and the
Si-Chang Port Development, bidding for Bangkok's mass transit system, providing
ba-kin services, using Bangkok as a regional aviation hub, helping to build the $ 1.3
billion Muang Thong Tani residential project.
An Australia, in other words, able to play a constructive role in Thailand's future and
the development of the region.
Prime Minister, next year will be the 50th anniversary of the first Australian diplomatic
mission in Thailand, the first step in what has been a most warm and rewarding
friendship. The talks we have had today I hope will mark another step a very substantial step
towards fifty even more rewarding years in the Australia-Thailand relationship.
Thank you very much for extending to me and Annita the privilege of this dinner and
the opportunity to address you this evening. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEAJING, MP
B3USINECSS LUNCH, ] BANGKOK, 7 APRIL 1994
It is a great pleasure to be here in Tkhaan, and in Bangkok, one of the great cities of
the world and without doubt one of the citics of the future.
B~ angkok is a very important city to Australia. Not just as the capital and port of a
country which is an increasingly significant trading partner, but for many thousands of
Australians the gateway to Thailand and its culture, and indeed to) a wider experience
of Asia.
Bangkok has therefore played an important role in the transformation of Australian
thinking about Asia.
I make these remarks at a business lunch because we recognise that to successfully do
business in the region we need to raise our level of cultural understanding.
Wc rcalise that economic integration with the countries of the regioin means getting to
know those counties better.
And if our knowledge is still far from complete, there is no doubt thatt a great change
has occurred in the direction of our thinking and our perceptions.
These days not only do we look to the region for trade and investment, we now look
to it as we used to look almost exclusively to Euro-p-e -for culture, -fbr leisure, for
diiehrencc. And as I said in a speech in Vientiane on Tuesday night, this new orientation towards
Asia has brought with it the rather unexpected consequence of recasting our
perception of ourselves.
We learnt very quickly that to succeed in Asia we had to be iore competitive and, in
becoming more comipetitive, we learnt that we can work more efficiently, develop our.
skills and tcclinology, develop new p~ rodulcts and markets. 
We knew we had to find our competitive advantages and build on them, and in doing
that we learned that some of them alone and in combination were unique.
Above all, we have learnt from our increasing engagement with Asia that we can
succeed. My visit to Thailand, and earlier this week to Laos, confirms that fact.
I am confident that Australia has much to offer and the ability to deliver it.
I am also confident that our two countries have the capacity and the will to deepen and
expand our relationship.
Thailand and Australia have fundamental interests in common interests which are
revealed to us by the transformation of our economics and the opportunities for trade
and investment which have consequently opened up.
Two-way trade between Thailand and Australia last year amounted to just over $ 2
billion. Over the last five years it has grown at an average rate of 25 per cent.
If we do no more than maintain our share of Thailand's imports, we should double our
exports to Thailand by 2002: and it is a measure of the change in Australia's economy
Sincluded in that would be $ 1 billion worth of elaboratcly transformed manufactures.
And 1 believe that we can do better than maintain our share.
The capacity is undoubtedly there.
Thailand's economy is the second largest inASEAN and is likely to be the fastest
growing ASEAN economy within the next few years.
Thailand also has the strategic advantage of being located at the heart of continental
South-East Asia, linking Indochina with the ASEAN countries.
The Mekong River Friendship Bridge, which tomorrow I will formally hand over to
His Majesty the King of Thailand and President of Laos, is a powerful symbol of
Thailand's importance as a hub for the South-East Asian hinterland.
It is also proof of Australia's capacity to join with Thailand in contributing to the subregion's
development.
I am in no doubt that Australia has much to offer Thailand as an economic partner in
the long term.
The Friendship Bridge is one good reason to believe this.
I saw more evidence to support the view on my visit to Laos earlier this week, and I
have seen it in other Asian countries I have visited recently. 
I know I will see still more of it when I visit Vietnam on Sunday. Australian
companies are playing a very substantial role in the economic development of Vietnam.
Rut the basis of my belief in the future of our relationship with Thailand as with other
countries in Asia is the change we have made to the Australian economy in recent
years. We have undertaken significant economic, financial and industrial reforms which have
made the economy much more open and much more competitive.
We are now seeing the fruits of those reforms.
Our exports have grown to 20 per cent of GDP.
Our manufactured exports are now consistently stronger than rural exports and the
fastest growing component of these are elaborately transformed manufactures.
Our exports of services in 1992-93 are now at $ 15 billion.
The Australian economy is growing at 4 per cent, faster than any in the OECD, and
with low inflation.
Australia is now more efficient, productive and competitive than ever before and
more export-oriented.
We can offer to our economic partners first class tcclhnology, expertise and skills.
We can provide them to Thailand.
We can help Thailand develop its infrastructure.
An Australian company is building the tallest building in Bangkok.
Australian companies are installing a centraliscd trafic control system and fibre
optic telecommunications for the State Railway of Thailand.
An Australian company, in conjunction with a Thai group, is building the Si-
Chang deep sea port on the Eastern sea board of Thailand..
Australia can also offer high class services, education and training to Thailand.
We are presently pursuing a program of activities in higher education through a
memorandum of agreement with your Ministry of University Affairs.
We are providing computer assistance to Thailand's customs service.
Australia is a world leader in environmental technology. 
We have unmatched experience in shaping environmentally-friendly urban development
and in Bangkok Australian planners and architects are heavily involved in designs for
new urban development schemes.
For all these examples of success, there remains a well of untapped potential.
When it comes to trade, we are basically like-minded countries.
We have shared a commitment to the Cairns Group and to APEC which promises to
deliver real benefits to our business communities by stimulating and facilitating trade
and investment flows in our region.
The Uruguay Round outcome will improve the economic prospects of middle ranking
economies like ours.
But of course we cannot simply wait for the opportunities to present themselves.
I have to say that I do not believe we have yet made the most of our relationship.
Until now we have tended to take each other, I think, rather too much for granted.
This may be because there have been few major problems in what is a relationship of
many yoars standing.
Whatever the reasons, 1 would like my visit to be the moment at which Australia and
Thailand began to pay each other greater attention.
For instance, the level of investment, while increasing, does not do justice to the
relationship. We need to take steps to maximise the conditions in which investment
can flourish.
And we need to tackle the remaining barriers which inhibit the expansion of trade
between us.
I discussed some of these issues with Prime Minister Chuan this morning.
At the governmcnt-to-government level, we are putting in place the framework for
greater private sector cooperation and investment.
Today Prime Minister Chuan and I reached agreement on the formation of a
Ministerial Commission a regular ministerial forum in which to discuss ways of
expanding trade and investment links.
Prime Minister Chuan and I also agreed that the Australian Trade Minister, Senator
McMullan, will lead a major business mission to Thailand later this year with the aim
of identifying ways to expand our commercial links and develop cooperation between
us in third markets.
It is essential that through government contact we create an appropriate framework for
expanding trade and cooperation. 
But on this visit it is equally an objective of mine to highlight to the business
communities of Australia and Thailand the great opportunities which now exist.
Australian business has the chance to be a part of Thailand's economic success and the
certainty of burgeoning development in coming years.
And, equally, the major reforms of recent years have made Australia a very good place
for Thai companies to do business.
The Australian Government welcomes foreign investment. We actively encourage it
with a business tax system which includes generous accelerated depreciation
allowances and research and development concessions, and a 33 per cent company tax
rate after which foreign investors get tax free dividends.
Foreign companies in Australia also enjoy the benefits of a skilled workforce, cheap
energy, highly developed infrastructure including sophisticated telecommunications,
and a society and a political system as stable as any in the world.
It is, as I said, a very good place to do business these days.
Ladies and gentlemen, 1 will be very pleased with this visit if hereafter our two
governments and our two business communities acknowledge what has been until now
a somewhat unacknowledged fact I mean the profound convergence of our interests.
In the past few years we have worked together for the liberalisation of world
agriculture markets. We have worked together on APEC. On Cambodia. Our
companies are working together.
We have been building bridges together for some time now.
1 hope that my visit to Thailand will help both our countries to recognise that we are
standing on the threshold of a dynamic new phase in our relationship.
After my discussions this morning with Prime Minister Chun and his senior colleagues
I am confident that the Thai Government shares that view.
It is reasonable to infer from your presence here that the Thai and Australian business
communities have come to the same understanding.
If the Australian and Thai governments do everything that is practicable to make the
most of the future we share, it will still depend on your efforts to turn potential into
reality. You are at the heart of our relationship.
If there is to be a new era, you will number among the pioneers.
I congratulate you for your enterprise and wish you well with all your endeavours. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, ORIENTAL HOTEL, BANGKOK, THURSDAY, 7 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J* Prime Minister, are you pleased to have been given the Order of the
White Elephant?
PM: Well I think it is a tribute to Australia that the King of Thailand should
have bestowed upon the Prime Minister of Australia an order which is
their highest civilian order.
J: What does it mean to you personally?
PM: I take it as a compliment that His Majesty the King of Thailand and the
Thai Government regard those things which I'm undertaking here as
being of significance and of sufficient importance to warrant such an
award.
J: Did the King talk at all about the bridge and the significance of
tomorrow?
PM: The King was very taken with the bridge, saying that he regards it as
an historic occasion; that it will be his first visit from the country in a
quarter of a century. His first visit ever to Laos, and the bridge is of
course the occasion for it happening. He said, to use his own
expression, it was a very historic occasion.
ends. 



S 7'
" Vl
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE MEKONG RIVER FRIENDSHIP BRIDGE, 8 APRIL 1994
It is my great pleasure to present to the government and peoples of Thailand and , aos,
the Mekong River Friendship Bridge a gift from Australia.
We ask you to think of this bridge as a symbol of our friendship.
We hope that it will also stand as a landmark in a new era of relations between the
countries which border the Mekong.
Above all, we hope that it will help to bring to people on either side of the river greater
prosperity. We are very proud that the skills and technology which built this bridge were
Australian. Not merely because it is a great bridge, but because it is a bridge to strengthen the
traditional bonds between the Lao and Thai people.
Because it will create daily contact between them.
Because it will encourage cooperation between them.
Because it will encourage trade, promote development, boost commerce and raise the
general level of prosperity.
The Friendship Bridge creates the first road link between Thailand and Laos in history.
It provides Laos with road access to the port of Bangkok. It provides Thailand with
road access to Vietnam.
It establishes a land transport corridor from Singapore to Beijing, thus linking the
dynamic economics of South-last Asia and southern China. 
In these ways the opening of the Friendship Bridge is a real and symbolic contribution
to the development of Laos and Thailand and the region.
There could be no more practical demonstration of the common interests uniting the
countries of Asia than this bridge across the Mekong.
As the centrepiece of a new infrastructure famework spanning the region, it will help
attract development investment and encourage economic development and growth.
It will complement the economic reform now underway in Laos and elsewhere in the
region. It is also a skills and technology bridge.
Fewer than twenty Australians were employed on this project, while about 500 Thai
and Lao workers learned skills in such areas as environmental technology and
engineering and construction techniques.
This in itself is a source of satisfaction for us and another demonstration of the real
and lasting benefits to be had from Australia's partnership with the countries of region.
It is a partnership which we want to strengthen and develop. Australia wants to play a
positive and creative role in South-East Asia and through projects like this one we are
proving that we can.
Before concluding I must congratulate the Australian companies involved:
Maunsell Sinclair Knight which did the preparatory investigation and design
arid -upervised the construction phase.
And John Holland Engineering and Construction, the construction contractor.
I have no doubt that for the people associated with both these companies this is a very
proud day.
And today we should also remember the role played by my predecessor, Bob lHawke
who, in 1989, saw the potential of this project and gave it every support.
When people from Thailand and Laos cross this bridge I hope they will remember the
Australian part in building it, and be assured that they have in Australia a good
neighbour, friend and partner.
Australia hopes that you see in this bridge the way to a better future.
And we hope you sec that we are part of that future.
We hope you sec in the Mekong River Friendship Bridge the potential for many other
rewarding projects and a relationship with Australia that grows ever deeper and
broader. 



M PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
KANCIIANAUUR! WAR CEMETERY, THAILAND, 9 APRIL 1994
Tis place honours those who died on the Burma-Thailand Railway. It reminds us of
the worst of which humanity is capable, and the best.
Almost one in five of the thirteen thousand Australians who worked on the Railway
died. With them also died thousands of men from Great Britain, Burma, New Zealand,
Malaya, Java, India, The Netherlands and Thailand.
Although they wcrc criminally mistreated and denied their rights under international
convention, those from the allied nations died as prisoners of war. The vast majority
of those from Asia upwards of throc hundred thousand of them died as slaves.
To visit lilifire Pass and see the scale of the work men were driven to do is to be
reminded that the task itself was inhuman.
When we are told of the speed with which it was done, the hours the men worked, the
disease they suffered and the brutality and sadism that they endured, we begin to
understand why the Burma-Thailand railway ranks among the most evil acts of World
Wa' II.
The images of our countrymen returning from those camps gaunt and debilitated
remain in the minds of every Australian who ever saw them. The knowledge of what
was done to them remains as shocking now as it was when it was first revealed almost
fifty years ago.
It is not because those inhuman acts can in any way be excused or forgotten that we
have come now to think less about the cruelty and more about the means men found to
endurc it and to help thcir comrades endure it.
The Burma-Thailand Railway has become one of those episodcs in our history from
which we havc chosen to draw inspiration. It has become a legend of courage,
comradeship, sacrifice and resourcefulness. iFi i~ 0t~ 0 SOooOoooooo, .1BJ 
And we have come to recognise tliat these qualitics were embodied in one man, Sir
Edward Ernest " Weary" Dunlop. the soldier and doctor whose remarkable bravcr'and
skill saved so many lives, eased so much suffering and, when it was so desperately
needed, inspired so much faith,
No Australian of his generation is more universally admired than Weary Dunlop, and it
is our duty to make sure that Australians of fuature generations know what he did and
understand the greatnec-s of it.
When we teach his story there is one great theme we should not neglect his great
respect and affection for the Thai people.
We should remember, as he always did, that were it not for their assistance
exemplified in the deeds of his great friend, Boon Pong the lives of countless more
Australian and Allied prisoners of war would have been lost.
From the war's end until his death last year, " Weary" Dunlop returned the friendship by
working to improve thc standard of medicine in Thailand and to deepen understanding
between our two countries.
It is worth remembering that Australia's first major engagement with Asia was in war.
In Korea and Malaya aind Vietnam it was again war.
Today it is a partnership with Thailand and other countrics of the region. A
partnership which will extend the domnain of our common interest and reduce the
ground for conflict.
It seems to me that there could be no better way to honour those Australians who
suffered and died here than to succeed in this enterprise. No better way to see that
what they endured, and what their allies and hundreds of thousands from the countries
of Asia endured, will not happen again.
Tomorrow I go to Victnam. The Australians who fought and died there have been
justly honoured in Australia as those who were here have been honoured, and for thle
same reasons for the sacrifice they made, the faith they showed.
In Vietnam the lesson is the same. The wounds have to be healed. The terrible legacy
of the past must not cripple future generations.
We must never forgct, but for the sake of future generations and in the name of those
who died, the memory should not hold us back) but inspire us to find the way to peace
and friendship, justice and prosperity.
The best lesson we can draw from this place is that here we saw the best in ourselves. 



FROM t267796S4 MEDIR RDVISER TO : 06 273 2923 1940-9 400 N?. 1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, HELLIFIRE PASS, SATURDAY, 9 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, you are drawing parallels from our past to our future,
how do you see this visit here to Hellfire Pass In those terms?
PM: Our first engagement with -Asia. was in war, our first engagement of
substance with this country was In war. It is now an engagement not
only in peace, but in partnership. What happened here was slavery
during the war. The Japanese strategic objectives, many thousands
died using primitive devices to cut a pass like this and other passes to
build a railway which was of strategic value in the conquest of Burma.
We should not simply remember the thousands who died here
including Australians, but the many hundreds of thousands of local
people who had no medical support what so ever as Indeed we had,
but thousands of Australians, British, Dutch, some Americans, Malays,
Thais died here. And for us this has become a symbol of endurance;
of tenacity; of ingenuity; of compassion and part of the Anzac legend
which was born in Gal lipoli and in Flanders and in Western Europe
has been added to during the Second World War in places like this.
So, I think we should have these things in our mind when we think
about that part of Asia closest to Australia, in thinking about the
relationships we now have to draw on this experience and to value it
and learn from it.
J: Prime Minister, should young Australians focus on the atrocities of an
old enemy or the sacrifice of fathers and grandfathers?
PM; We focus on the faith these people had in Australia in what we built
there; in the values we had established there and that which kept them
going through this terrible period of tribulation for them. That is the
spirit we wish to remember and we have seen it embodied in many
Australians. Unfortunately, too many are here still, buried here. 
FROM 12677964 MEDIA ADVISER O 30623921994, e4-09 14101 # 87 P. 02
2
J: Prime Minister, you have chosen to go to a war site here, but not in
Vietnam. Can you explain why?
PM: We don't have any cemeteries in Vietnam. We brought all of the
Australian dead home. So, there -isn't the' Australian war cemeteries In
Vietnam that there Is in Thailand or indeed In other parts of South-East
Asia.
J: It Is a more complex equation though isn't It, we are talking here about
a country where Australia was always allies with Thailand, In Vietnam
it Is a more complex situation to deal with though isn't it?
PM: Well, continental Australia was under threat in the Second World War
and I think that it was a battle for our nation and this was of that battle.
J, The resignation of the Japanese Prime Minister, would you care to
comment on that?
PM: No, well, I don't know any more than I think you've already reported.
J: Mr Prime Minister, do you think Japan has adequately apologised for
the war?
PM: I think It has sought to do that. I think we would like the Japanese
people particularly younger Japanese people to understand fully the
ramifications of the war and it Is in the telling of the history that Japan
has to be more fulsome and complete in articulating its role In this
period.
ends. TO I OS 273 2923 



K
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP. TEMPLE OF LITERATURE, HANOI, SUNDAY, 10 APRIL 1904
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, how does it feel to be the first Australian Prime Minister to
come to Hanoi?
PM: One feels the obvious senme of occasion and history of it and it is at an
Important time in the histoy of Australia and Vietnam, particularly in
Vietnam's development. I feel the poignancy of coming here, the first
Australian Prime Minister in God knows how long and to sum wh~ at's
happening here and to be relevant to Vietnam's development.
J: What do you think you will achieve out of this visit to Hanoi Mr Keating?
PM: I think we will get a chance to understand what aspirations the
Goyemnment of Vietnam has for the country; how It is proceeding with its
development; Its view of Australia's role here, the Possibilities of Australia
playing an even larger role in the development of Vietnam and also the
view of the Government of Vietnam's role in the region and the chance for
us, me in this case, to talk to the Government about how we see the
region developing and what rale we think we should be playing in it.
J: Is it your anticipation that there will be a meeting with the General
Secretary Do Muoi?
PM: I think we have one scheduled.
J: Prime Minister, people like Tim F ' ischer are saying that you should alter
your schedule to have some sort of commemorative service for the
Vietnam veterans.
PM: I don't discriminate in Australia's commemoration of our war dead, that is
why in ' Kanchanaburi ' at the appropriate time I mentioned those
Australians who died in Vietnam, but when we enquired of our Embassy
what particular focus or point that one might attend or visit, they said that
there wasn't any obvious place because Australia took its war dead home,
there is no cemetery here. So, I can only repeat what I said when our
Vietnam veterans were appropriately honoured in Canberra a year or so
ago that they died with the same faith In Australia and the same belief in
our values as every other service person did in other theatres of war. But 
2
again, this in Hanoi and really in the places I am visiting there is no
natural opportunity as there was in Thailand.
J: Do you accept that the Vietnamese might feel that the kinds of acts that
were perpetrated against them were in some way equivalent to the kinds
of things that were done by the Japanese to Australian soldiers in World
War II?
PM: That is for them to know really, but for us to discern. I don't know whether
they feel that or whether they want to put the war behind them. We are
here to help them to develop their country as best we can and to put that
history behind us.
J: Do you have anything to say to the Vietnamese leadership about
Australia's role in the war here?
PM: Not particularly. I don't think they are looking for any acknowledgment by
me of our role here. I saw Prime Minister Kiet in Australia, he made no
such references there and I don't see there is any particular point to make
them now.
J: I have only one question, Australia is now paying much attention to Asia.
Do you bring any message from Australian businessmen to Vietnam this
time?
PM: We see Vietnam having a great opportunity in the countries of Asia to
grow and develop itself and Australia believes it can make a contribution,
It can make a difference in all sorts of ways In our aid program, in
education, in social policies and in commerce and we will be represented
in this country on a very broad basis.
J: Would you like some reciprocal gains like increased aviation rights?
PM: Not at this stage. I am not here in a sense in a bartering role, it is a
general discussion about where our economies are going.
J: Prime Minister, there seems to be large numbers of foreign delegations
passing through Vietnam at the moment, can Australia realistically lay
claim to a special relationship here?
PM: There are very few special relationships in the world anywhere. You have
got to earn your freight, each country has to do that with the other. We
were amongst thle first to give aid to Vietnam after the Cambqdian Accords
were signed. When it most needed support, I think, we were the first to
give it and we are still giving it and we can give a lot more and make a
greater contribution than we have already been permitted to make. Thank
you.
ends 


PRIME MINISTER10PM ( AEST)SPR INY " I'f-PRTUR UIHISTXKR.-IHWXj~~ PZ MY=. Za! G, 11PUMM'DDIM~ 1 flfll fM BY 9 K Ii YO vu! MET; ? RMK1XESTMR OF TE SOCIIST REUBLIC OF V137MM AND: MDAUM,HANI, fl APRL 1994it is a&nbsp;&nbsp;very great. pleasxmre for me to be in &nbsp;Hanoi And a&nbsp;very great pleasure to see you again,&nbsp;Mr Prime Minister,&nbsp;after your&nbsp;welcome visit to Australia&nbsp;last year.
We live in a time of great change in Southeast Asia
In Laosand Thailand I have just ssen for myself the wswya in which economic dynamism nad a new openess between the countries of the region &nbsp;are creating an era of unprecedented opportunity.&nbsp;
Opprttmity. for growth and for peaceful regional&nbsp;cooperation.
Australia&nbsp;is: pleased to be a. part of these davelopments,, as we are pleased to be part of the changes&nbsp;in Vietnam .
Mr Prime Minister.In tfl. short time. I niave bleen in 11anoi I have bee-n ableto-tte for mysei~ f something of the impa ct of -YourCoveruext's Do -i Noi OCOnomic reform program-Yvu. policy, comzbinad with the ckill and anterprise nftbco* Vietnamace peoplp, have c'. een youir economiy gro. by.mnre than a-per cant last -year, and-. your exports grow by16. in-vCent in 1992.WP weicome your closer enqLñ i. eu&amp; t with the countries ofLhe region through participation in the ASP-AS Reqi.. Ons Igorm, and we look forwarti to your even J~ il. Uean. esiASEAN and AVEiC.Mr Prizme Minister, AustraLia, too, h2as undtmyuui= aneconomic revol ution. We have omened our induztry tovvmvetition and our cconomy to the world.-
It h as been. a difficult task. But, like you, we... know therewards -wi11l be innense.Lke-V! etnai r. Atist~ lia is. als; o sekn lsrLn with---our.-reigion niot: only economically,, but. cultur-allypolitic* ly . and st3rategically. as well.These parallel interests between our two countries arecreating extraordinary-new opportunities for U.-Traie* b4tiween: A ustralia and* Vietnam in 19.92 was $ 2million. In 1993" it was $ 366 million.*Anstr-alia is now Vietnais th ird largest foreigninvestor, -with:-nearly $ 800o million invested here.The companies involved axre some of Australia's largest.,like BNP, -Telstra-and the ANZ' B! ank, as wel1 l as s,. iqIa Or,-innovativecopne which have seen the great' potentialWe are ajlso developing new avenues for cooperation . on.reg~ ional issues;-Our common membership of the ASEMN Regional'Forum. willenable -us to -* contibute Ito -the. development : of ad -moresecure -and-peaceful. neighbourhoodMN Vitn. can count on-warmI zupport fZQLg1 AUW= 1i4 4*you m6ve-towards greater involvement in regionalorganisations.. Bilaterally,, our two countries are finding new:opportuni-ties-: to work-together.I was . very. p leased that we have reached agreement on thedetails of: the. parliamentary Consultative Delegatidnwhich you. proposed -when -you were in Austral ia, -and., which.will. visit vi~ tnamn in July.I was also pleased to be able to tell1 you today, M4r Primeminister, that. Australia. will double its * aid to more thana-new four-year aid-prograLm, waih, -wehope will cover areas such as education, . health,Infrastructure and commerical and administrative law.we have developed valuable people-to-people contacts inrecent year, and I am sure that in time the web ofcontact will be greatly str-engthened by the presence inAstralia of! a large, hardworking Vietnamese population.Hr Prime-Minister our friendship is not'. newAustralia -was one of the first Western countries torecognise the Socialist Republic of Vietnam more than
And, tbc fir_-t tc_. Z = G .1i aj~'~ L LLL GJ~ LJU.. LGW. 6 have a. good deal.. in. commoll.Austrañ 3Jdus. bold ! Me qualities ot rei1 nri andaptzbility. in high esteem. dua~ L the VietnamesepeOPlA'we se them in abundance.Bacaue-iWe ehere the view that. econuiu development... shnxld-b Iataaed with care f or the p 1--our. -economic-, reforms tiave. been accompanied ny programs. whi ch;taith. f= l to o= traditions of social nsceioand hIrMonY..* Prime MiiaterI am* tihe first Austzalian 2rime minister t o vi ! ni r. RarniBut I* will. not be the last.Ouzr common interests, the opportunities wflich lie ahtadof u. and theunderztonding which iz developing -; betiaeeanun-wi1l1 akb -sure of that-Thank you ' again for your wmrm hospitality.
I&nbsp;would&nbsp;like to propose a toast to tile health of HE President Le Duc Anh, the health of HE Prime MInister Vo VAn Kiet and MAdama, the happiness and prosperity of the people of Vietnam&nbsp;&nbsp;the further&nbsp;development . of relationsbetween&nbsp;Australia and Vietnam, and the health of all&nbsp;present at the banquet.



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
The article on the front page of The Australian this
morning contains the assertion that in our discussions
yesterday I gave the President " what amounted to an
apology" for Australia's participation in the Vietnam
War. This is completely untrue.
HANOI, 12 APRIL 1994 t~ t 



PRIME MINISTER
STATMENT BY THE PRIME MIINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
VISIT TO LAOS, THAILAND AND VIETNAM
On this visit to Laos, Thailand and Vietnam new
understandings and agreements have been reached. our
relationship with the dynamic economies of Thailand and
Vietnam has been put on a new plane. The foundations of
regional security have been strengthened.
These were the objectives of my visit. They were the
objectives because it is on these things which the
interests of our country depend the interests of this
and future generations of Australians.
On them also depend, to no small extent, the well being
of the countries of the region and their peoples.
This visit has gone some considerable way towards
advancing the interests of Australia.
On this, as on other visits, I recognise that the office
requires that I be Prime Minister, not just for
Australians of this generation and future ones but for
past generations of Australians.
Wherever possible, I have made it my practice to visit
those places abroad which are sacred to the memory of
Australians. That is why in Thailand I went to Kanchanaburi and Hell
Fire Pass. While there I made mention of those who
served and died in Vietnam because they occupy the same
esteemed place in our national memory as those who are
buried in Thailand, but it was not possible in Vietnam to
visit a place where Australians who served are buried.
We did not seek a memorial service in Vietnam principally
because we decided there was no suitable place in Vietnam
to conduct one, and also because I did not think it
appropriate, while in Vietnam, to revive bitter memories. 
2
I am dismayed by the misrepresentation of my views on
this matter. The war was a trauma at the centre of our
national life for more than a decade, no one who lived
through that period can fail to have been affected by it
but, equally, as I have said before, no one who did not
live through the war itself can know what it was like.
What we do know is what I said at the inauguration of the
Vietnam Memorial in Canberra and repeated at Kanchanaburi
that those who died in Vietnam died with the same faith
in Australia, with the same courage, the same willingness
to lay down their lives for their country as those who
died in other wars.
It was for this reason that the Government completed the
Memorial. The Memorial and what was said there on the
day of its inauguiation finally brought Vietnam veterans
in from the cold. It ensured that they received for the
first time their proper recognition.
In Vietnam the war still weighs heavily on the lives of
the people. Economic sanctions and the isolation of the
country have kept it impoverished and underdeveloped.
The wounds of war are far from healed.
I came here to lay the foundation of a mutually rewarding
friendship between our two countries. I came to South-
East Asia to hand over to Laos and Thailand the
Friendship Bridge. I came in pursuit of a new creative
partnership with the region.
I am the first Australian Prime Minister to visit Hanoi.
As I said there on Monday night, I will certainly not be
the last.
In the future Australian Prime Ministers will come to
Vietnam regularly. And when they do, like me, they will
remember those who suffered and died in that terrible
conflict of the sixties and seventies -and I confidently
expect that in due course they will be able to remember
them at a suitable memorial.
HO CHI MINH CITY
12 APRIL 1994 



I VLt' YW~ , WtWA~ C1 *' Ir.' vfl
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, OMNI SAIGON HOTEL, HO CHI MINH CITY, 12 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, Dr Hewson in Australia has said that it is another
mistake in relation to the so-called apology, what would you say to Dr
Hewson?
PM: If there are any apologies to be made the Liberal party should make it
to the 504 Australian families who lost sons in Vietnam in a war they
should never have made a commitment to and I would -have thought
the Liberal party would have been the last organisation in Australia to
be talking about the war in Vietnam. I thought they would just go away
and hide.
J: Why is that?
PM: Because of the unprincipled nature of their commitment. The same
kind of reasons why they are making the same utterance today for
unprincipled political reasons, domestic political reasons. That is why
the commitment was made in tifirst place.
J: By the same token wouldn't it make sense in terms of trying to achieve
final reconciliation of opposing views in Australia which have been reopened
by events of the past few days to make some kind of gesture
on the ground here?
PM: I made it at the appropriate place which was the one cemetery that I
was able to visit in this area which was Kanchanaburi.
J: But there is a memorial at Long Tan?
PM: 1 have said enough about it and I don't want to go on about it. K2 
J: Can I ask you, In relation to the discussions you had with the
Vietnamese President Le Duc Anh, what was the message you were
seeking to get across in relation to about acknowledging the
difficulties the Vietnamese face which is being interpreted in some
areas as being some sort of apology for the war?
PM: There was no apology. I notice the beat up by that in The Australian
this morning, that was a complete fabrication without foundation. I
sought here to establish further Australia economically and
strategically with the two fastest growing countr! ies in the region
Thailand and Vietnam I think, those interests have been advanced.
The kind of relationship which I have been able to develop with
Indonesia in the last few years, I think, I have seen more than the
beginnings of In the relationship with Vietnam and with Thailand. That
is, coming to understand better and, I think, in both these countries we
found genuine enthusiasm for the role Australia has been playing in
Asia. Whether it be APEC or Cambodia or the strategic dialogue or
the post ASEAN Ministerial Forum the ASEAN strategic regional
discussion of which we are full members and Vietnam is now a
member that Australia's role in the region is very well appreciated.
J: Can I clarify what you meant though when you said Australia had met
its responsibility to Vietnam.
PM: I'm not even sure the word ' responsibilities' was used. What I made
clear was that Australia would do that which it could sensibly do to
help build the Vietnamese economy and that is with the aid program, in
education, in health, in writing bodies of commercial law which they
don't have. All these things will be about the more rapid development
of the Vietnamese economy.
J: When the question of human rights came up with the Parliamentary
delegation, how did the Vietnamese respond?
PM: Prime Minister Kiet gave me a commitment in Canberra that there
would be an exchange of delegations to look at the relationships
between our two countries including human rights. He has honoured
that commitment and the resultant consultative delegation, I think, will
be very useful in establishing the relationships between our two
countries in these areas. That is, in all areas including human rights.
J: Would you be distressed if that delegation were not able to consider
individual cases, merely to consult?
PM: I am not here to be making judgements about something which might
or might not happen in the future. The thing was they have recognised 
3
that was an issue between us and they have put an instrument in place
to discuss it within. But again, I think, this relationship is going to be
one of many struts, of many piers and they will include economic
development, trade, investment, strategic interests and an interest in
the development of the whole Asia Pacific area.
J In terms of economic development of Vietnam, what was the main
message that you wanted to get across to the Vietnamese in the way
in which they went ahead into the future?
PM: Just that they should think about the region in terms of structures, that
Is, they should see where the developments are coming, what the
strategic influences are going to be. They, I think, will be important on
them, how the strategic and the commercial are intertwined, how they
should try and set their economy up, what things they might do first,
which things are best pursued by government, which things are best
pursued by the private sector, these sorts of things.
J: And in that transition from the command to a market economy which
are things you think they ought to be doing that'-should be left to the
private sector not the..
PM: I think the Government should principally invest in human capital.
They should invest in the creativity of their kids, through their
education system because if they get those levels of education and
creativity up they will find the opportunities and they will make the
pace. I said to the Government, to Prime Minister Kiet, and I also
made the same point in Laos that many things in the public
infrastructure can be provided privately and there is not a real lot of
point for a Government with scarce resources providing funds for
things like telephones or certain reticular roads.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: I think so, because I think they understand that with scarce resources
It is basically the investments ought best be made in the areas of
social development, human development like education, like health.
J: What point do you want to make to the Secretary-General this
afternoon?
PM: Where Australia stands, how we see the area basically better viewed
as a Asia-Pacific rather than simply as Asia; that there is an important
role for the United States in the area, particularly in relation to Japan
bringing a high degree of strategic certainty and peace to the area, at
any rate the trading links are trans-pacific and that they should be
thinking in terms of arrangements which allow them to freely
participate in multi-lateral trade, through the GAITT, but also things
which build on the GATT that allows them a greater level of 
4
participation more rapidly and that those structures are the ones.
Now, whether that means extending the ASEAN Free Trade Area or
pushing along the agenda for APEC, these are the sort of structures
which are..
J: So you will be urging him to take a less hard lin~ e, a more tolerant line?
PM: I don't think one has to urge that at all, I think, that has already been
taken. It is a matter of trying to inform some of the views from our
perspective.
ends 



TEL: 14. Rpr. 94 11: 22 No. OO6, . O1/ O2
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, FAIRBAIRN RAAF BASE
14 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, were you happy with the overall outcome of the trip?
PM: I think in trade and foreign policy terms it couldn't have been better.
Starting with the handing over of the Friendship Bridge between
Thailand and Laos, I think it was the cause of the introduction of a new
relationship for these two countries which, of course, have got a long
history together. In many respects close features to their history, plus
separated now for to long and I think that has been changing, and as a
consequence of the Bridge I hope a lot of things will happen there,
And the visit to Thailand was, I think, important to talk to the Thai
Government, to get to understand a bit about their view of the region
and their economy, doing more with Australia. This is the second
largest economy in ASEAN, there is much more we can do there. And
the visit to Vietnam really couldn't have been better. The discussions I
had with the Government had all the weight and quality that one could
ever have hoped for.
J: Were you a little disappointed though, with the domestic storm
PM: Well, no, those things they pass through, what matters is the weight
that sits under them and the relationship with the Government of
Vietnam, with the President, the Prime Minister and the General
Secretary, the meetings I had there couldn't have been better. This is
a country which has done it hard for a very long time and is now trying
to come up, to lift their people out of poverty and to take a part in the
region and Australia is there helping. 
TEL: 14. Apr. 94 11: 22 No. 006 P. 02/ 02
2
We have got nearly a billion dollars worth of investment there, we just
doubled our aid budget to them, and I think they appreciate the
interest which Australia has in them. So, in terms of three countries in
the region where we have had a long association, particularly in
Thailand and now with Laos and Vietnam, I was very happy with the
meetings, the visits, the quality of the discussions, the genuine
friendship and the understanding.
Thank you. 



0
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
WHITE PAPER ON EMPLOYMENT, INDUSTRY AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT In view of the importance of the Government's forthcoming White Paper on
employment, industry and regional development, I have decided it would be
appropriate for it to be delivered in Federal Parliament.
Accordingly, I shall deliver the statement in Federal Parliament on
Wednesday, May 4, instead of the previously proposed date of April 28.
CANBERRA April 14, 1994 



TEL: 15. Apr. 94 16: 42 No. 017 P.( 1202
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRJME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATIYG MP
URUGUAY ROUND
The signing today in Marrakesh, Morocco, of the " Final Act" of the Uruguay Round
marks the formal end of these multilateral trade negotiations. Over 120 countries will
be represented, with Senator McMullan signing on behalf of Australia.
Signing of the final act represents the culmination of over 8 years of sustained and
intensive effort by Australia, including through our leadership of the Cairns Group, but
also our active role in services and other negotiations.
The benefits of the Round outcome are widely acknowledged. It represents the largest
trade agreement ever in terms of countries involved, products covered and
liberalisation achieved. Se: veral studies have now confirmed world trade could be
boosted by as much as $ 1,000 billion when the full effects flow through. Australia
could gain up to $ 5 billion in export revenue and $ 4 billion to GDP over the next
years, with benefits across the full spectrum of Australian exporters.
Since the Uruguay Round deal was struck in December last year, we have already seen
a restoration in world business confidence and a rallying of a number of world
coimnodity markets of importance to Australia.
I hope that countries will now move quickly so that the new World Trade Ozganisation
can be in place from 1 January 1995. The creation of this body will bring new vigour
to the world trading system. Strong multilateral trading rules remain crucially
important for Australia and other medium and small sized trading'nations.
Australia will continue efforts in the WTO to pursue liberalisation in world markets
and to ensure our voice is heard in future discussions on issues such as trade and the
environment, and trade and competition policy.
The Uruguay Round aclhievement also provides a good basis for seeking further trade
liberalisation in the Asia-Pacific region. I am pleased that APEC trade ministers met in
Marrakesh to take forward the direction from Leaders that APEC undertake work
aimed at deepening and broadening the Uruguay Round in our region.
April 15, 1994
CANBERRA 



TEL: 15. Apr. 94 16: 42 No. 017 P. 01/ 02
PRIME MINISTER
INAUGURATION OF SOUTH AFRICAN PRESIDENT
Two former Prime Ministers, the Rt HonjdMalcolm Fraser and the Hon Bob Hawk~ e,
will represent Australia at the ioauguraion of the new President of South Africa
scheduled to take place in Pretoria on 10 May 1994, following the elections on 27
April. It is especially appropriate that Mr Hawke and Mr Fraser should attend the
inauguration, since for more than 20 years Australia n governments on both sides of
politics sought an end to apartheid. From the early 1970s, despite a number of
changes of Government, one constant, whichever party was in power, has been
Australia's active opposition to apartheid in all its manifestations.
Both Mr Fraser and Mr Hawke were personally in the forefront of international efforts
to end apartheid. Both were firmly committed to Commonwealth sanctions against
South Africa.
As Prime Minister, Mr Fraser was one of the driving forces behind the
Commonwealth ban on sporting contacts imposed as a result of the 1977
Gleneagles Agreement. Following his retirement from politics, the Commonwealth
recognised Mr Fraser's standing in the struggle against apartheid by inviting him to
be joint chair of the Commonwealth's Eminent Persons' Group ( EPG) which helped
encourage the development of political dialogue in South Africa.
During his term as Prime Minister, Mr H-awke was closely involved in Commonwealth
efforts to end the oppression of black South Africans. In 1985 he made a strong
personal commitment to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
( CHOGM) in Nassau which agreed on the imposition of trade and investment
sanctions against South Africa, and at subsequent Commonwealth meetings he was
Involved in strengthening the sanctions regime. In particular, he was involved in the
development andd pro motion internationally of the concept of financial sanctions.
The Labor Government under Mr Hawke also led the way in developing the
Commonwealth's policy of the phased reduction of sanctions in response to positive
steps by South Africa in negotiating a transition to democracy.
Mr Fraser and Mr Hawke will carry with them the best wishes of the Government and
people of Australia for the future of a democratic South Africa.
CANBERRA April 1994 29/ 94 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC ' WORLD TODAY, MONDAY,
18 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minister, you have accused the Liberal party of now being bereft
of policies, but isn't it truer to say that they are-just moving closer to
yours?
PM: No, their strategy is to have no policy. This is a very strange political
party which has actually had a weekend meeting to develop a strategy
to have no policies. ' Fightback' the policy which they said was too
good to be changed, which Dr Hewson said he would resign over if it
was changed is now, he said, dead and buried and had they won the
1993 election he would be putting it into place. So, the policies which
he said were critical to Australia and Australians he would have, had
he won the election, be now implementing, he has now said are dead
and buried, they were wrong and they don't need them. So, basically
what's happened to the Liberal party is it's now given up on policy and
is picking up themes. Whenever you hear a conservative party
running on law and order, the Queen, the monarchy, the flag, all that's
happened to the Liberal party is it's getting further and further back
towards 1954.
FK: But what they spent their time yesterday saying was that the time has
moved on now for the economic stuff, that the recovery is in place and
now it is time to focus on the social implications of high unemployment,
building bridges with the minority groups. Now, you and your voters
would have to support that as a focus wouldn't you, that's the way you
go?
PM: We don't have to support that as a focus. We are the focus. I was the
person who introducing ' One Nation' said this was a policy of social
inclusion. I used the wora-' Tnclusion' there, I used the word ' inclusion'
in the speech on election night and right through the course of the
eighteen months up to the election when I was Prime Minister and 
since. When John Hewson talks about inclusion he is thinking of
something which will include him. When he talks about consensus he
is thinking of a consensus about his leadership. The consensus is, as
you and I know Fran, that he should go so, he has changed his
identity. If he came out in a toupee and a moustache he couldn't be
more obvious. This is just simply the most hollow change.
FK: But you couldn't be recommending that he hang on to ' Fightback'. You
must welcome the change that the conservative party is now focussing
on the socially bereft?
PM: But, this is the party of inclusion he says now. He is going to use the
word ' inclusion' except for the unemployed, except for the low paid.
He says he is interested in the welfare of Aboriginals except he
wouldn't support Mabo. He is now going to focus on immigration, but
he is down on migrants. This is the same fellow who attacked renters,
school teachers, churches, nurses. He says, for instance, they talk
about family values, but they want to take away the material supports
for the family. The fact is, these people when they talk about law and
order they are at the same time talking about inequality, lower wages,
a weaker safety net, they want all the conditions in place that actually
lead to a break down of law and order. This policy statement or this
strategy statement of theirs is the most comprehensive twaddle I've
heard since John Howard came up with incentivation a few years ago.
FK: They have done extensive research and their research shows that
middle Australia is upset about the changes caused under your
Government, changes caused by high unemployment, the
hopelessness amongst the young, the rising' crime rate, the
disintegration of families as the poverty levels rise. These are all
problems that have risen under you.
PM: But these are people who say they don't want to support families.
They say when we increased the Family Allowance Supplement in
' One Nation' it was bankrupting the-country. These are people who
want to tug away at lower end wages. These are people who want to
attack someone on $ 360 a week and say they should be exposed to
peasant wages under individual wage contracts. People who should
be dragged down from $ 360 a week while at the same time they're out
there talking about the family. You've never heard them say anything
either about Medicare, where they stand on that. They say that they
have junked ' Fightback', but where do they stand on Medicare and
health? And are they still supporting South-east Asian wage rates?
Are they still supporting individual wage contracts? I'll bet they are.
FK: But, politically, aren't they smarter to fight you without a detailed
economic policy document, fight you on your ground if you like, so they
can't now be accused of being heartless econocrats as they were last
time round? 
3
PM: Well, they are a party now officially without a policy. This is going to
be a novel experience in Australian political life. They are going to go
to an election without a policy and I don't believe that this community,
conscientious as it is for change and prodding the political system all
the time for change economic. -change, change in our social
environment, change in the region we live in, integration, exports,
research and development all of those things, will take a party that
has got no policies or a party which said our policy which we would
now be implementing had we won the last election was all wrong and it
is now dead and buried. I mean, where does it leave them? Where
does it leave John Hewson who said he would resign over the policy if
he had to change it, that it was too good to be changed where does it
leave him now'? A person who was elected on the basis that he had
some economic credentials? Fran, what they have said, is they have
given up on the economy, the economy is doing too well. They have
said the economy is growing too well, we can give up by it. This was
their principal focus of attack not a year ago. So, where are they left
now? They are now saying we are now for inclusion, just forget the
fact we attacked the renters and the school teachers and the churches
and the nurses and we are going to attack the low paid, we don't
support the long-term unemployed, we tried to knock over Mabo, I
mean, as I say, if he came out with a toupee and a moustache he
would be no more obvious.
FK: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you, Fran.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
RECEPTION FOR DIRECTORS OF COOPERATIVE RESEARCH CENTRES
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 19 APRIL 1994
This exhibition, which is being mounted in conjunction with the 1994 QRC
Directors' meeting, gives me the opportunity to underline my continuing
support and that of the government for the work of the scientific community,
and in particular for the Cooperative Research Centres program.
Over the past few months, the government has been considering the central
role industry policy must play in shaping our future as a nation.
A vital thread in this is the importance of innovation, which will provide the
only sustainable growth available. Innovation in technology, science and
engineering are central to this process.
Australia comes out well in any international comparison on government
investment in science. Past investment has provided a rich human and
institutional resource base for us to build on.
The creation of my Science and Engineering Council indicates my own
commitment to the development of Australia's science and technology. A
further indication has been my recent decision to include science and
technology in Peter C ook~' s Cabinet portfolio.
The main problem we face is under investment in R&amp; D by the private sector.
Although we have in the past d-ecadehh ad the highest di owth rate -int he
OECD in business funding of R&amp; D, there is still a way to go to match our
main competitors. Government programs for science and innovation, such as
tax concessions for R&amp; D, are supporting the move by the business
community to meet this challenge.
But we must remember that our competitors do not stand still. Our innovation
support programs will continue to be monitored and fine-tuned to maintain
their effectiveness. Most recently, we have been giving increased attention 
to the ways in which we can encourage innovation in small to medium sized
enterprises. But there is no reason for large companies to rest on their
laurels. We must also capitalise on the very considerable investment and expertise
that lies within our public sector research institutes by linking them -more
closely with those of industry and attuning them to the market place.
The Cooperative Research Centres program is an important part of our plans
to improve the commercial isation of research results.
The government is expecting that the Australian Technology Group
established late last year will also enable us to make significant steps forward
in this area. I know that the CRCs will be looking to forge strong links with
the ATP and will take advantage of its areas of specialist expertise.
We need to consider whether we are making best use of all the resources
available in our research labs. Women with science skills are a particularly
underused resource. If we cannot involve women in the national pursuit of
innovation and competitiveness, we are not managing our human resources
efficiently. There is room for improvement in both public and private sectors.
As directors of CRCs, those present today may be in a unique position to
develop and promote science skill development, irrespective of history and
gender. I hope you can also promote an increased role for women in industry
research, which has been very much a male preserve.
The pioneering CRCs are now in their third year. Tonight's exhibition gives
just a glimpse of some of the many achievements which they are beginning to
record in fields as diverse as aerospace structures, photonics, and tropical
plant pathology. These achievements have also been demonstrated in the
presentations made by CRCs to my Science and Engineering Council.
As I have stressed, innovation is essential to Australia's future. So the
linkages being developed by the CRC program between public and private
sector research are essential. CRCs have introduced a new kind of multicultural
approach to research, linking industry, academia and the public
sector. CRC participants include business enterprises, universities, and government
agencies including the OSIRO. These participants have agreed to contribute
more than $ 1 ,500 million over the expected life of the existing 51 centres.
This amount includes nearly $ 350 million from business enterprises. Their
total contributions are equivalent to approximately $ 2 for every $ 1 of
Commonwealth funds. Over 200 companies are associated with CRCs in
various ways, many of them as formal participants. The success of the
program depends on the participation of both institutional participants and
individual participants, particularly those who serve as Chairs of CRC boards
or board members. 
The next two years will see the CRCs progressing further down the track from
bright ideas to products and services which can generate new industries and
reinvigorate old ones. As the third and fourth round centres come to full
operation, and the program reaches maturity, we shall see more and more
evidence of the economic benefits it will bring to Australia. The CRCs will
help to build Australia's reputation as a nation with leading edge research
capabilities that underpin a dynamic world class economy.
As Australia pursues full and successful membership of the global community
we need improvement and maintenance of our innovative capacity. We need
stronger alliances between business and the public sector, to exploit more
effectively our investments in people, processes and production.
Knowledge, expertise, creativity and technology these are our passports to
a healthy and prosperous future. For the part which the scientific community
in general, and the CRCs in particular, are playing in pursuing these goals, I
should like to convey the thanks of the nation, and the firm commitment of the
government. 



PRIME MINISTER 32/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENTAL SECRETARIES
The government has decided on some changes to departmental secretary
arrangements and I will shortly be recommending these to the Administrator
of the Commonwealth in Council, to take effect from Tuesday 26 April.
The Secretary to the new Department of Housing and Regional Development
will be Mr Andrew Podger, currently Secretary to the Department of
Administrative ervices. Mir Tony Cole, who has been acting as Secretary to
both the Department of Housing and Regional Development and the
Department of Human Services and Health, will remain as Secretary to the
Department of Human Services and Health.
The Secretary to the Department of Administrative Services will be Mr John
Mellors, currently Executive General Manager, Corporate in that Department.
Mr Mellors was Director-General of the Victorian Department of Planning and
Urban Growth from 1988-1990 and before that held senior positions in
several Departments in the Australian Public Service, including
Administrative Services and Finance.
The Secretary to the Department of Veterans' Affairs will be Dr Allan Hawke,
currently Deputy Secretary in the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet. Dr Hawke was previously Principal Adviser in my office and Deputy
Secretary in the Department of Defence. The vacancy in the Department of
Veterans' Affairs occurs because of the government's decision to recommend
the appointment of Mr Lionel Woodward as Comptroller-General of Customs,
announced separately today by the Minister for Small Business, Customs and
Construction. CANBERRA APRIL 1994 



PRIME MINJISTER3/ 9
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
APEC BUSIN~ ESS FORUM: AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATIVES
At our meeting last year in Seattle, APEC leaders agreed to establish an APEC
Business Forum to " identify issues APEC should address to facilitate regionaf ijide7
and investm ent and encourage the future development of business _ netwo~ rks*
thioughout the region".
The APEC Business Forum will bring together one representative of large business
and one of small to medium enterprise from each APEC member economy and will
report to the 1994 APEC leaders' meeting in Indonesia. It will play a vital role in
providing leaders with a business view of constraints to the further development of
trade and investment in the region and ways in which APEC can assist in overcoming
them. It will also consider ways of involving business much more closely in APEC's
work. I am pleased to announce that Australia's representatives on the Forum will be
Mr Philip Brass, Managing Director of Pacific Dunlop, and Mrs Irnelda Roche,
Managing Director of Nutri-Metics International. Both Philip Brass and Imelda Roche
have extensive business experience in the Asia-Pacific region as well as in Australia
and I believe they will make a strong contribution-to the Forum's work.
Pacific Dunlop is one of Australia's largest international companies and has an
increasing proportion of its operations in the Asia-Pacific region. As the Australian
representative at the APEC Business Roundtable meeting in Seattle last year,
Philip Brass has already made a significant contribution to dialogue between business
in APEC's member economies. He was also a member of my APEC Business
Consultative Panel which gave me valuable assistance during my preparations for the
Seattle meeting. Philip Brass was BRW Australian Businessman of the Year in 1984.
Under the joint leadership of Imelda Roche and her husband, Bill Roche, Nutri-Metics
International initially expanded throughout the Pacific region to New Zealand, Japan,
Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei and Thailand and more recently to Hong Kong and
China. 
2
Mrs Roche led the recruitment and development of the Nutri-Metics Asia-Pacific sales
force and was awarded the Australian Pursuit of Excellence Award in 1986 for her
role in the direct selling industry. She was named Australian businesswoman of the
year in 1991. In 1993 Imelda Roche was appointed chairman of the World Federation
of Direct Selling Associations and Nutrimetics was named BRW retailer of the year. I
attach a high priority to strengthening APEC's policy dialogue on small and mediumsized
businesses and am looking forward to working with Mrs Roche on this.
The APEC Business Forum is expected to meet twice before November 1994. A date
has not yet been set for the first meeting.
CANBERRA April 21, 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING, MP
INDUSTRY COMMISSION REPORT INTO WORKERS' COMPENSATION
The Commonwealth Government today released the Report of the Industry
Commission into Workers' Compensation in Australia.
In the report the Industry Commission has highlighted the economic and social
importance of workers' compensation and has identified deficiencies in current
arrangements which warranted careful consideration by Commonwealth, State and
Territory Governments.
Each year around 500 people die and 200,000 are injured in workplace accidents in
Australia. It is claimed that a further 20,000 cases of occupational disease go
,-nrecognised. Workers' compensation premiums account for about 17% of nonwage
labour costs.
There are ten main workers' compensation schemes in Australia, one in each State
and Territory and two under Commonwealth legislation. The Commission found that
significant differences exist among schemes in relation to their administration,
insurance arrangements, benefit levels/ structures, dispute resolution procedures
and rehabilitation and return to work strategies and programs.
The Industry Commission findings show that
the costsrising from work-related injury and illness to individuals, to firms
and to the community are large. The cost to Australia is estimated to be at
least $ 10 billion each year;
costs are shifted ( both ways) between workers' compensation schemes and
government programs often to the detriment of both;
the existing multiplicity of workers' compensation arrangements results in
inequity ( eg different benefit structures and entitlements) and inefficiency ( eg
national employers and their employees must cope with different rules in each
jurisdiction); and
better standards of service by insurers to injured workers and to employers
would help improve attitudes to good health and safety practice and, by 
facilitating co-operative employee-employer relationships, help achieve good
return to work rates.
The Commission said, " the very scale of the problems in terms of people affected
and costs involved demands attention and emphasises why they should be
addressed as a matter of urgency".
The impact of actions by governments to influence the location decisions of
businesses by creating low benefit, low cost workers' compensation schemes was
also referred to by the Commission, which concluded that such schemes were
generally being paid for by other firms or taxpayers.
The Commission also concluded that competition at this level was unhealthy as it
eroded both benefits and incentives to reduce the cost of work related injury and
disease, and called for healthy competition which would lead to best practice in
prevention, rehabilitation and claims management.
The Commission's preferred approach involves:
putting in place agreed national benefits and supporting arrangements to limit
the extent of cost-shifting onto injured and ill workers and the community; while
at the same time
encouraging greater competition in the provision of insurance ( and other
services aimed at effective prevention and rehabilitation).
The Commission has recommended wide ranging changes in relation to prevention,
rehabilitation, compensation and licensing and prudential arrangements. In
particular, it has highlighted that an effectively structured compensation benefits
package combined with performance based premium systems, will create incentives
for employers and employees to reduce the incidence and costs of claims and that a
nationally consistent approach to these and associated administrative arrangements
will address equity, efficiency and cost sharing issues.
The government acknowledges there is room for substantial improvement in
Australia's workers' compensation arrangements and generally endorses the
directions for reform contained in the Commission's recommendations. However,
very careful consideration must be given to the design of any new, uniform, benefits
structure to ensure that an appropriate balance is achieved between the needs of
injured workers, the incentives for employers to maintain safety as well as the
implications for labour costs and employment. In this context, I note the
Commission's illustrative benefits structure which would create greater incentives to
reduce the costs of workpla ce injury -and illness but also involve at least a short term
increase in premium levels.
Consistent with the usual timetable for handling Industry Commission reports, the
Government will provide a detailed response to this report no later than August, with
a view to co-operatively developing a strategy for reform with the States and
Territories. 
3
The next meeting of the, Labour Ministers Council in May would provide an early
opportunity for the States and Territories to provide initial comments on the Industry
Commission report.
CANBERRA
21 APRIL 1994
Copies of the report are available from Australian Government Bookshops. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SUPPORT FOR JOINT COMMEMORATION AT KOKODA
The Australian Government will contribute $ 1.5 million to commemorate jointly with
Papu~ a New Guinea the sacrifices made by both countries on the Kokoda Track during
World War Two.
I first discussed this proposal with the then Prime Minister, Rabbie Namaliu, when I
made what was for me a very memorable visit to Kokoda in April, 1992.
When the Prime Minister, Paias Wingti, was in Australia recently I returned to the
discussion, and we agreed our two governments would undertake construction of a
number of facilities at Kokoda.
Details of the construction will be finalised with the Papua New Guinea Government
soon, but Australia expects that they will include a new airport terminal at Kokoda, an
expanded and renovated war museum, a hostel for people hiking along the track and a
new medical centre to serve the area.
Those who made the greatest of all sacrifices, in the name of their country and their
people, have already made Kokoda sacred.
Australian servicemen, many still in their teens, came to Kokoda to save their country
from a ruthless enemy. They won a famous victory, and we honour them for that. We
also pay tribute to the unquestioning help, courage and selfless humanitarianism of the
people of Papua New Guinea who supported them.
Together they suffered appalling hardship in a terrain totally inimical to their task.
They suffered in battle. Many suffered long after. This and future generations must
not forget them.
We hope that tomorrow, " Anzac Day, we can begin to remember their sacrifice and the
bonds between our two people in a substantial way.
I also thank Rotary Australia, which has agreed to undertake the construction and
supervise the associated administration.
CANBERRA 24 APRIL, 1994 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ANZAC DAY
( Embargoed till 12.01 am 25 April 1994)
Since that fateful April day in 1915, a spirit of duty and courage that cannot be
destroyed has been symbolised by what we know as the ANZAC legend.
Wherever Australians or New Zealanders are on this day each year, they gather to pay
tribute to the gallant men and women who made the ultimate sacrifice in the service of
their country.
The qualities which have given rise to that legend continue to inspire us today.
So very few of the original ANZACs are still with us in body, but the spirit of them all
survives through the activities of our service men and women on duty abroad,
particularly through our participation in United Nations operations. Courage and duty
are still their watchwords.
Through all the years and all the wars, wherever Australians and New Zealanders have
fought since, that spirit born at Gallipoli has been a bond joining them with the
ANZACs of 1915.
Many commemorations will be held today. When we pause on this day, all our
reflections are the same, no matter how far we may be from home, no matter how
grand or how humble our surroundings: the honour that the AINZACs did to our two
countries, the honour of which we must all try to be worthy.
CANBERRA 24 APRIEL, 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO " PM" 1 PROGRAM,
WEDNESDAY, 27 APRIL 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minister, the last minute save of Abogriginal health funds last
night, why did you undercut the normal budget process like that?
PM: Because I think that that is one of the things that Prime Ministers do
make sure the system works properly and I think that we hadn't
maximised our opportunities in this area, and a further consideration of
it has meant there will be a massive improvement in the funding of
Aboriginal health in this country.
FK: It has been reported today that Graham Richardson rang you and
lobbied hard for you to intervene. Did he persuade you to persuade
ERC?
PM: That is totally without foundation. That is just a bit of Press Gallery
corridor nonsense. Largely, what has been allocated last night is what
would have been allocated, I think, had Graham Richardson remained
the Minister. And the important thing is that -weare-going to see a
huge increase in the program funding to around nearly $ 500 million
dollars over the period.
FK: But that is a long way short of the $ 800 million..
PM: But Graham's submission was never ever for $ 800 million.
FK: Where did that figure come from?
PM: Well again, it was floating around. What has come out is what would
have come out, but I have got to say, though, let me just say a couple
things here about Dr Hewson in this matter. He did a press doorstop 
this morning saying that I have lied to Senator Richardson, that I am
lying. He has this very unpleasant habit of calling people liars. It
seems to be his principal political tactic these days. Now, this is a
fellow who said in the Times on Sunday 1987, " I live in fear of some
Ministries, Aboriginal Affairs and Veterans Affairs, are wastes of my
talents." Now, this is an area of policy which he said was a waste of
his talents, he said that I had raised expectations in the Redfern
speech about Aboriginal policy, but never delivered on them. We
delivered Mabo in full, more then the Aboriginal community would have
expected at the time. And as the Bills passed the Parliament Dr
Hewson said it was a day of shame. This is a man without judgement
and without integrity. Now, can I just say that as far as the
Government is concerned that the things which we think can sensibly
be done, these programs have got to be delivered on the ground. So,
this is a big boost, but the important thing is it will be a boost which is
also delivered effectively and efficiently.
FK: It is a boost to funds, but people are still saying today that you have let
them down. Expectations were raised, the figure, whether it was right
or not, around was $ 800 million dollars. No one ever stepped in to say
that that was not right.
PM: But look, numbers around Press Gallery discussions and corridor
conversation that has no Cabinet authorisation, for which a submission
has never been lodged, has no status whatsoever. I mean, what has
happened here is what would have happened in terms of the
Governments general intentions about this area. And I must say
Carmen Lawrence did a first class job in arguing the case in full
Cabinet and the ERC yesterday.
FK: How much of your decision to step in and get the funds boosted was a
desire on your part to protect Carmen Lawrence from what would have
been a very public defeat in virfuallfy the firsv-action.
PM: Carmen doesn't need any protection whatsoever. I noticed some
people jumped all over it. Some of the lower life's of the West
Australian got all over it. But apart from that she doesn't need any
help from me. She did well and effectively with a difficult brief. I mean,
I made her the Minister for Human Services and Health, this is an
agenda which was being developed by a former Minister and she has
run with it with panache and alacrity.
EK: What exactly did you promise Graham Richardson? He said at his
final press conference that you had given your word that his package
on Aboriginal health was safe. What was the promise?
PM: That the broad outlines of the medical program and environmental
health program would be funded in the budget. 
FK: So the criticism today from people like AMA President, Brendan
Nelson.
PM: Well I thought he was complimentary.
FK: He said, as I understand, he said it was a cruel hoax on Aboriginal
people, this letting down their expectations.
PM: These are all the people who wanted to damn Mabo. I mean, Dr
Hewson stood in the Parliament and voted it down shamefully without
a reason, and then, as it passed, calling it a day of shame. Remember
he was recently up crying crocodile tears over Vietnam Veterans,
today it is over Aboriginals. This is a fellow who said, ' I live in fear of
some Ministries, Aboriginal Affairs and Veterans Affairs are a waste of
my talents'. He says, when things are going well for the Government,
he says the Government is running scared. I notice today in the
Bulletin David McNicoll saying and he says With things going well
for the Government, it seemed almost incredible that the Hapless
Hewson emerged from his " retreat" and announced on television that
the Keating Government was " running scared". Has Hewson no
minders? Or doesn't he take any notice of advice?" Well, I can
only say dead right.
EK: Well, things are going well for the Government at the moment on the
economy. There was a beautiful set of numbers again for you today
with an inflation rate of 1.4 per cent for the year, with things going so
well will you be able to fund the White Paper spending from growth
without tax increases in the Budget?---
PM: I'm not here to run through the White Paper numbers, but the
Government's record of fiscal consolidation is second to none in the
OECD over a decade. I mean, it's not what we say, it's what we do
that matters. Can I just say about the inflation rate though, it is a
tremendous outcome; .4 per cent for the quarter and 1'. 4 per cent for
the year and, I think what it does clearly show is that the bond market
has lost credibility as a guide to inflationary expectations. With
everyone playing the game; business, the workforce producing a CPI
as low as the only people not playing the game are the financial
markets.
FK: Why the decision not to go ahead with the jobs levy?
PM: You will have to wait and see what's in the package. I said on election
night, that this Government was governing for all Australians; that we
wouldn't leave the unemployed behind; that we'd put an arm up and
pull them up. When I said, that Dr Hewson said if he does that he will
pull the rest of us down. I am not going to be deflected by John
Hewson's callousness and we set in train the Green Paper processes
and we have now considered it to produce a Wh-tef Pap'e That White 
Paper will maintain the momentum of the economic changes which
Australia has and in doing it sweep along all those areas of the
economy that need support and that will be including outside of
physical resources in the area of those who are long-term unemployed.
That, I think, is a proper social and economic objective of a Labor
Government, indeed any government, and the doing of it is something
which will make this a country more economically efficient and more
equitable.
EK: What about the Medicare levy? Carmen Lawrence indicated before
last week that a sm all rise in-the Medicare levy was probably a good
idea to fund some health measures, yet now we hear no rise in the
Medicare levy. Why not?
PM: Again Fran, you will have to wait and see what's in the Budget, but can
I just say this about these measures governments can resort to
revenue measures of this kind. We have modestly increased the levy
since 1983, but the public, I think, have always got to take the view
that what comes in return is a quantum improvement or at least a
qualitative improvement in the circumstance of their health and
welfare. Therefore, occasions for increasing the levy have to be
occasions where there are changes of that variety.
FK: And there's not those kinds of changes right now? There's certainly
plenty of changes being called for.
PM: I think I'll have to say to you, you'll have to wait and see what's in the
Budget.
FK: The Opposition are saying today it is clear the Budget will include
hundreds of millions dollars worth of increased taxes are they right?
PM: I'm not confirming their nonsense. Here they are flat out holding
themselves together. They are now having crisis meetings twice a
week to try and keep themselves together and as Mr McNicoll
described him " the Hapless Mr Hewson" is flat out staying afloat. So, I
think he should wait and see what's in the Budget and then he can
have all the time he likes to make judgements about it.
FK: Just finally Prime Minister on South Africa. Black Africans are voting
for the first time today. Australia has played a fairly significant role in
getting to this point. How do you feel watching black Africans casting
their votes?
PM: I think it is very moving to see television coverage of voters lining up
for South Africa's first non-racial elections. There was a nice picture
on the front page of Ne1sorL. Man~ ela's niece going through the novel
experience of voting. Things seem to be going peacefully and not
withstanding the problems of the recent bombings and this must be a 
tribute to the political leadership of the country and most particularly
Mr Mandela. We are contributing as you know to the Commonwealth
Electoral Office Task Force in monitoring the activities of the national
peace keeping force and we have got, as you know, two former Prime
Minister's who will represent Australia at the inauguration. So, you are
right, we have a lot in this, we have had a very firm policy on apartheid
and South Africa for a long period of time and it is very pleasing to see
the course of democracy that that country is taking.
FK: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you, Fran.
ends 


Statement by the Prime Minister, The Hon PJ Keating MP&nbsp;
Attendance at D-Day Commemorations
At the invitation of the British and French Governments, I will attend 50th anniversary commemorative celebrations of the D-Day landings in Normandy which took place on and around 6 June 1944. D-Day, the start of the Battle of Normandy, was the prelude to the liberation of France and the turning point in the battle for Europe.
Heads of State and Heads of Government of those countries which contributed forces to the landings will attend ceremonies in the United Kingdom on 5 June and in Normandy on 6 June.
An allied force of more than 130,000 members took part in the Normandy landings, the largest amphibious assault in history. Amongst their number were some 2,600 Australians, most of them from the 14,000 members of the Royal Australian Air Force who were serving in squadrons based in Britain. An estimated 500 Australian naval personnel also served in some of the 1,200 warships which supported the landings. Ten of these ships had Australians in command.
I will attend several ceremonies near Portsmouth before crossing the English channel to Normandy.
Principal activities in France will be centred around Omaha Beach with combined or individual commemorative activities being held in particular towns and villages in the Normandy region. I also expect to attend a memorial service at the Commonwealth War Cemetery in Bayeux where 16 RAAF personnel are buried.
I will also visit other memorials in the United Kingdom and France which have a special significance for Australia.
I will be accompanied during the commemorations by four Australian veterans representing each of the three services and those who were held as prisoners of war in Europe.
These representatives will be selected by the relevant Australian ex-service organisations.
I will also take the opportunity of the visit to hold official discussions in Europe.
CANBERRA April 29, 1994



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
HOLDEN'S ENGINE COMPANY, TWO MILLIONTH EXPORT ENGINE
MELBOURNE, 2 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you very much, Peter ( Thomas), Tom McDaniel and Bill Hamel,
Your Excellencies, the Consul General of Britain, and the Federal Republic of
Germany and other distinguished guests, and my Parliamentary colleagues,
the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria, and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here on this occasion, and the point is not lost on
me that in a week when the Government will deliver a White Paper on
employment in this country, the first in over 45 years, was the -s-am e time
years ago when the then Chiefly Labor Government, the Government that
produced the first White Paper on employment and post war reconstruction,
was the Government which was negotiating with the General Motors
Corporation to see the development of the General Motors Holden Company
in this country.
And now, just on half a century later, we have this amazing coincidence of the
Governments, Australia's, second White Paper on employment coinciding
with the export of these hi gh technology products, the tiv-rnillionth Holden
engine. I
On the occasion when the General Motors Holden Company unveiled its first
car, my predecessor, Ben Chiefly, doffed his hat to the car. Well, I don't
happen to have a hat to doff,* but if I did I would doff it to those high
technology engines on that clamp. Because what we are seeing here is the
face that the General Motors Company has displayed in this country from the
days of the old Holden Motor Body Company and the engines which General
Motors Corporation of the United States used to sell to the collaborative
program, the acquisition and then the building of GMH in Australia. 
And it was to many Australians recognition of the fact that we have come of
age as an industrial country, when we can produce our own motor vehicles.
And we saw the fledgling Australian motor vehicle industry emerge from that
time. We also saw Holdens being sold all over the world, but I am sure we
would have thought in market terms, in those days, of markets like New
Zealand and like South Africa and the developed countries of the Southern
Hemisphere, we wouldn't have been thinking in term of mainstream products
in the mainstream international markets of the Asia-Pacific, of your largest
customer for engines in Korea, or indeed supplying General Motors engines
to other parts of the General Motors Corporation Companies throughout the
world. So, the Holden's Engine Company has now a very great and distinguished
performance since its inception, and the tradition of the belief and faith that
the General Motors Company has had in this country and its working is borne
out of the successes the company is having today. And it gives me very great
pleasure to acknowledge and to salute that success.
We have been through, all of us, an amazing transformation in the last
decade. We turned our back on tariff protection, we've said we want to
engage with the world, we want to be part of the story of the Asia-Pacific. We
want to be part of the story of a confident, outward looking, dynamic
economy. And the changes which we have made, and we have all made
them together, all of us, have produced a now confident, externally oriented
country which can do things which we wouldn't have dreamt of ten years ago.
And so we are now seeing at this point that the country that lived its life on
wheat and wool, and then more latterly iron ore and coal, now finds that its
fastest growing exports are its Elaborately Transformed Manufactures.
We don't want to be a low wage, low productivity society. We want to be a
high wage, high productivity, high innovation society. We want to do the
clever things which can be done by research and development, product
innovation, education and training, commitment, employer to employee,
unions to management so that we advance as a country doing the skilful
things which millions of countries in this region won't, or will not be able to do
for many years into the future.
Fundamental to our view of Australia has been the belief that our great
comparative advantage is not our paddocks of wheat or the great harvest of
the bales of wool or the natural endowments of our minerals, but our great
comparative advantage has been our education system.
Australia is at a point now where this year eight kids in ten will complete
secondary school. That was three in ten, ten years ago. We are streaming
now 40 per cent of those through tertiary institutions and we are now
rebuilding vocational education along side the universities to carry the rest
into training and skills and to reskill them for life's work. The statement which
I'll introduce this week will say a lot more about education and training and 
particularly the importance we give on the school to work transition regarding
the period 15-19 years of age as a period of vocational preparation for work
and where we see the skills path start to open up already in secondary
schools.
This is the rock upon which all of our innqvaticons in the future will be built.
But perhaps beyond that the great structural dhantie of the last ten years has
been the collaborative and co-operative attitude of Australian employees at
work. And the attitude of Australia's employees and our unions and the
corroboration that has been engendered between them and management
across the country have given us now an inflation rate under 2 per cent; an
inflation rate for the last quarter of .4 per cent; the lowest interest rates in
thirty years; the highest profit share in our history and now coupled with a
company tax rate competitive with most any rate in the Asia-Pacific
massively competitive when compared to other industrial developed nations
these are the ingredients of a productive culture which Australia has not
really known in the past.
So, we're seeing this transformation across the economy, but I was glad that
Peter Thomas ( Managing Director, Holden's Engine Company) mentioned the
suppliers here today. Let me pay tribute to you too. Because I'm sure many
suppliers don't regard themselves primarily as exporters, but in fact they have
become exporters because the product which they produce, the efficiency
with which it is produced, the quality control and the delivery schedules, all of
these things that make up a good on-going commercial relationship have
come to pass and now we've got this great team spirit between suppliers and
particularly in the motor vehicle industry this has become very apparent.
It wasn't so many years ago, not so many, when motor companies in this
country would say to the Government we find it very difficult to survive without
a tariff wall of great size because we can't get the competitiveness into a
vehicle components parts industry; we can't get the commitment of
component parts suppliers. Well, that has happily all changed. I think one of
the things which changed it is the fact that we decided that we would be
competitive and throw off the protection of high tariffs and as we've seen
tariffs decline over. the period, this has put competitive disciplines on
companies, on motor vehicle manufacturing management, but it has also
brought the suppliers to the party so that now, together, we are all able to
produce cars of greater quality and lower price so that Australians can enjoy
owning a car of comparable international standards, but at prices which are
far more competitive than would have been the case a couple of years ago.
This has been a great endeavour and a great outcome by the motor vehicle
industry in this country and in this respect the commitment of General Motors
Corporation of GMH to that its national undertaking, has been central to the
change in the quality and price of their cars, to their export potential and, of
course, the spin-off in manufacturing of engines as we see in this plant here
today. 
So, this is a considerable success story and it can't be there simply because
of an enlightened management; it can't be there with enlightened and
competent plant managers, it can only be there with the commitment of the
workers, the employees to a partnership with the management that makes
these things possible and a commitment by the company to product
innovation and to playing a role in Australia's exports.
So, it is with a considerable degree of pride and genuine pleasure that I come
to this place, to Fishermens Bend, where Ben Chifley came nearly half a
century ago to take his hat off to the first Australian made car. And, as I have
the pleasure as leader of the Labor party and Prime Minister to introduce a
White Paper on employment in this country, on the development of regions in
this country; of industry policy; of training and re-training and a commitment
to the young, on this occasion, in this week nearly half a century later I have
the historic opportunity to visit Fishermens Bend and to not doff my hat, but to
pay a well earned round of tribute and praise to everyone involved in the
production of the engines of the Holden's Engine Company.
So, ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, one and all it is with very
great pleasure that I am here in the company of the Chief Executive Officers
of the Corporation and to be here on this the occasion of the building and
packing of the two millionth Holden engine.
Thank you very much indeed. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, 600 LORIMER STREET, PORT MELBOURNE, MONDAY,
2 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, what sort of indication can Australia
PM: Well, the White Paper which I will be introducing for the Government
this week is one of the biggest things the Government will have
undertaken in ten, going on eleven years. I might say it will do as I
said we would do on election eve and that is not forget the
unemployed; that is leave an arm out to pull them up with the rest of us
so the recovery will be capable of being enjoyed by all Australians. Its
principal features will be a commitment to the long-term unemployed,
but it has many facets and another will be a commitment to the young
people of Australia; a guarantee that they are trained for work and that
the years of 15-19 are regarded as a period of vocational preparation.
Other features will be an involvement, a capacity for greater
involvement of the regions of this country in the national economy and
further reforms to industry policy which will carry the reforms of the
past decade even further.
The White Paper is something that our opponents could neither
conceive of nor deliver and it will paint very starkly the difference in
social and economic policy of the government and its comprehension
and the paucity of ideas and views on the conservative side of
Australian politics.
J: Will next weeks Budget contain any further incentives?
PM: The Budget will consolidate the White Paper and will contain other
changes, but they will be changes not related to the principal things
the White Paper is focussed upon.
J: What form will your commitment to long-term unemployed take? 
PM: You will have to wait for them I think, but as you know we have had a
green paper which we commissioned after the election that has
reported. We then had consultations on the Green Paper, we've taken
notice of those consultations; there has been a huge investment of
ministerial work in this statement. As I say, it is one of the biggest
things that we have done and I am quite sure you would be flat out
finding the government of any other developed economy committing
the ministerial and bureaucratic time that this has taken to produce.
J: Do you think business will welcome it, that they will be happy with it?
PM: We are not going to have the complement to the labour market from
migration that we had in the last cycle. We cut the immigration intake
a few years ago and as companies see their markets pick up as is the
case here at this plant General Motors as companies start to grow
and rehire labour they'll want to find a source of skilled and trained
labour. We believe the best place that can come is from the pool of
unemployed and particularly the pool of those long-term unemployed.
J: What's your response to an internal DEET survey that is critical of
labour market programs?
PM: Well, this is a complete overhaul of labour market programs and will
have a completely new framework for the delivery of labour market
programs in the White Paper.
J: So, is it possible this Budget and this statement together could be a
good precursor to go to the polls early?
PM: No the Liberals, they are that spooked these days. I mean, today's
poIs again show the Government would clearly win an election
except the Saulwick poll, but I contend that is mostly wrong. But, if you
go to the Newspoll, Morgan, all the others, the Government is clearly
in a strong position and it is simply because it has got the energy and
the ideas. If there's one word will emerge or one observation will
emerge from the reading of the White Paper document it will be
energy. The enormous energy which the Government has committed
to this task. And that I is why I believe that in recognition of that the
energy and commitment and inclusiveness which the Government
brings to the job of Government and policy making, I believe the
Government is doing well in the polls. But that doesn't mean to say
because we've got the drop on the Coalition that this is the time to
leave off the tiller of Government. This is a time to push the changes
home.
J: Do you care to make a comment on Ayrton Senna's death today?
PM: I didn't know about it, I've only just found out. I find that very sad
because I think this fellow was a great champion. One of the great
drivers of the post-War years, but of course participating in a very 
dangerous sport. I think everybody who is in it understands that, but a
champion is a champion and all of us are saddened when we see them
go.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: That was the different times for post-War reconstruction. This is for
the changes to an externally orientated economy that Ben Chifley
wouldn't have conceived of in those years. That is, the level of
sophistication in the Australian economy today as evidenced by what's
happening here at General Motors and the paper which reflects the
kind of economy and society we have, has the degree of
sophistication, I think, Ben Chifley would have been very proud of had
he been in a position of reading this White Paper.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER394
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA FESTIVAL AT THE KENNEDY CENTER, WASHINGTON, DC
I welcome the announcement today by the John F. Kennedy Center for the
Performing Arts in Washington that it intends to hold an Australia Festival
between October 9 and 16 this year.
The week-long festival, featuring many of our best known performance artists,
will promote Australia as a vibrant, creative society with a rich and unique
cultural life.
This can only enhance our image in the US, and help us understand each
other better.
The Kennedy Center's five theatres will showcase a wide cross-section of
Australian talent including the Australian Ballet, Tjapukai Dance Theatre,
Circus Oz and The Chamber Made Opera." Australian films will also be on
display.
The benefits flowing to Australia from the festival will be of great value. By
giving Americans a glimpse of an Australia they seldom see, it will promote
tourism, cultural trade and the exchange of creative ideas.
I am particularly pleased that Aboriginal Australians will play such a key part
in the schedule of performance. The Tjapukai Dance Theatre and the
popular band Yothu Yindi will awaken Americans to the diversity of modern
Australia and its remarkatle indigenous influences.
The Australian Government will provide sponsorship for the Festival, with
details in next week's Federal Budget.
CANBERRA
3 MAY 1994 



PRIME MINISTER 38/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATLNG MP
SOUTH AFRICAN ELECTIONS
I wholcheartedly welcome the South African election result. It is a vindication of the
many years of struggle in South Africa and a triumph for the democratic process.
I would like to pay particular tribute to the leadership and vision shown both by
NelsonMandela and F W De Klerk in the negotiations which led to these historic
elections. Despite earlier violence and some minor practical problems in the electoral
process, the elections represent the triumph of moderation over extremism and reason
over anarchy. Ultimately, it is the spirit of reconciliation and forgiveness shown by all
parties, especially those who were the victims of apartheid, which has made these
elections so remarkable.
I am very pleased that Australia has been able to play a leading role both in supporting
the fight against apartheid and in ensuring the success of the elections in South Africa.
I am sure that all Australians will join with me in offering best wishes to
Prosident-elcct Mandela, the incoming South African Government and all the citizens
of the new South Africa in meeting the many difficult challenges which lie ahead.
Australia stands ready to assist where it can in this task. I look forward to developing
a strong and enduring relationship between our two countries.
I am sending messages of congratulations to Mr Mandela and to President De Klerk
CANBERRA
May 3, 1994 



PRIME MINISTER 40/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY US PRESIDENTIAL REPRESENTATIVE
I am pleased to announce that Mr Jack H Watson Jr will visit Australia from
4-9 May as the personal representative of President Clinton during Australia-
America Friendship Week. Mr Watson is a lawyer. He was Cabinet
Secretary in the Carter Administration and is an adviser to President Clinton.
Mr Watson will participate in various activities in Canberra and Hobart to
commemorate the 52nd anniversary of the Battle of the Coral Sea as a guest
of the Australian Government. He will also hold discussions on Australia-
United States relations with senior members of the Government.
The Battle of the Coral Sea, fought in May 1942, was a turning point of the
war in the South Pacific and laid the foundations for the Australian-American
alliance. The close cooperation between Australia and the United States,
based on the strong bonds forged during that conflict, continues over fifty
years later. The alliance between our two countries retains its relevance and
strength in these very different times.
CANBERRA May 3, 1994 



L
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, POWERHOUSE MUSEUM, SYDNEY
3 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: South Africa, what's your response?
PM: Well, I think it is a matter of great pleasure for all of the people who
believed that the policy of apartheid was wrong. It is a vindication of
the long lonely struggle of people like Nelson Mandela. It is also a
vindication of the leadership of President De KlerK.' My best wishes
now go to the South African people, to the new Government of South
Africa, for the job of consolidation which it will have to do to bring in
the community and give it confidence all of its community. This is a
great job of work to be done. But at least there is a new beginning for
South Africa, one based on truth and justice, and the right of
everybody to participate in that community, and to decide who should
govern them.
J: Has the Australian Government been in contact?
PM: Well, I have this morning dispatched a letter of congratulations to the
President-elect, Mr Mandela, and also to President De Klerk for his
role in the process and the election.
J: Mr Keating, on the White Paper there is some fairly disturbing images
of DEET last night..
PM: I think you will have to wait until the White Paper is delivered tomorrow
on that.
ENDS 



S
PRIME MINMISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 4 MAY 1994
WORKING NATION The White Paper On Employment And Growth
This White Paper reflects the collective concern of Australians and their collective
ambition. Their concern for their fellow Australians, their ambition to make this a good
society and a great and successfulI country.
It is a statement about the two imperatives of a decent society compassion and strength.
About the bonds which exist between all Australians and the premrium this country places
on the talent and energy of every individual.
It is about the desire to extend the safety net and basic services which expand equality of
opportunity and go to make a truly civilised society and the ability to pay for them.
This is a White Paper for the times we live in: an era of unprecedented change and equally
unprecedented national opportunity.
It is also an era in which hundreds of thousands of Australians, through no fault of their
own, are bearing the burden of that change and are denied their share of opportunity.
Unemploym~ ent is without question the greatest problem we face. Unemployment saps the
confidence and self-esteem of our fellow Australians which in turn saps the nation's. It
damages the social fabric.
It has profound consequences for our social cohesion.
As we have seen in other countries, ignored and neglected as a social problem, left to a
fate to be decided solely by " market forces", unemployment threatens to create a
permanent underclass.
3! H. 12 
It threatens to create the conditions for social decay.
We are not alone among nations in this it is endemic to the western developed countries.
This government for one is determined to deal with the problem.
I said on election night last year that we will not leave the unemployed behind. And I said
on Australia Day this year that this recovery must be shared by us all. The White Paper I
present to the House today delivers on those two commitments.
But success won't come easily: with this White Paper we caninot say that the battle has
been won, but we can say that it has been joined. And we sincerely hope not just by the
Commonwealth Government. It has to be understood that success here depends upon all
Australians joining the effort.
That means business and trade unions and communities. It means all tiers of Goverrnent.
If we do want to reach the point where we can say that every Australian who wants a job
can have one, it will require a conscious and concerted national effort.
So we don't say that this White Paper will wipe away the problem at a stroke, but we do
say that Australia will not leave people neglected and forgotten.
Through this document Australia says to those who are out of work: we believe you are
entitled to the benefits of recovery and a chance to contribute to it.
I~ f you don't have the appropriate skills, we'll help you get them.
If you are young, we will see that you are trained.
If you have been a long time out of work, we will offer you employment and training, if
that is what you need.
It says we will do all we can to help make you ready for a job.
The means of giving concrete expression to our intentions constitute the most profound
reform of Australia's labour market and social security provisions since World War 1I.
The new provisions are tailored to meet the needs of the unemployed in the modemn
Australian economy. They will serve Australia for many years.
The White Paper is a statement of policy on employment and growth. It takes the view
the incontestable view that economic growth is the key to employment growth.
The evidence is very plainly there in this recovery we have already seen 230,000 new
jobs created in the past twelve months. 93 1:. 3 
In ti
That is why a substantial part of the White Paper addresses itself to the means by which corr.
Australia can achieve higher levels of competitiveness. thos
One of our great goals in these last years of the century must be economic efficiency, and The,
the microeconomic reform and other measures descnibed in this Paper are no less Wh
important than the training, labour market and social security reforms. The
The Government believes that Australia can sustain or improve upon the present rate of wh(
low inflation growth through to the end of the decade. doii the
The period will be characterised by a continuation of the trend towards successful small
and medium size enterprises producing sophisticated manufactures for export. It is
con
It will also see continued growth in sophisticated services. For
Australian business and industry will need to be increasingly flexible, innovative and sub
responsive to customer needs. Cer.
It will need these qualities to succeed in the increasingly competitive markets of the world. woi
As these companies grow, jobs will grow with them. But we know from the experience of The
the eighties that very largely these new jobs will go to new entrants to the labour market une7
and not to the long-term unemployed. une and
As the Green Paper indicated, even with strong economnic growth, without intervention of
the kind we have decided to undertake in this White Paper, by mid-1998 there would still 1ndi
be some 290,000 people in the pool of long-term unemployed. We
This is not only profoundly unfair, it is profoundly inefficient. It is a waste of our greatest unt
resource the talent and energy of our people. To:
Returning the long-term unemployed to the productive process of the nation not only pec
returns them to the income, social interaction and creativity which work provides, it taps lite,
their potential for the good of Australia. pre
As the White Paper says, when we employ these otherwise wasted human resources we It i'
are made stronger. yea
Large numbers of long-term unemployed people demand large outlays on social security Thi
and other assistance. pro
Furthermore, having so many people effectively disqualified from the workforce reduces
the efficiency of the labour market.
59). 14 
In this recovery the complement to skill formation in the labour market is not going to
come from migration. This time it has to come from training our own people, including
those who are presently unemployed.
The details of the Government's policy reforms are spelt out in the second volume of the
White Paper.
The measures l am announcing today will cost S1.7 billion in their first fll year. Those
who may question the cost of these measures should ask themselves what are the costs of
doing nothing. The cost of failing to introduce the major efficiency and equity benefits to
the labour market, industry and the regions that this package describes.
It is important to note that we have been able to accomplish these fundamental reforms
consistent with our target of a deficit of around 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97.
For the information of Honourable Members, I will concentrate on only the most
substantial of the new measures.
Central to the Government's strategy for getting the long-term unemployed back into
work is the Job Compact.
The Job Compact puts new obligations on both the Government and those receiving
unemployment benefits. The Government will provide to those who have been on
unemployment benefits for eighteen months or more individual case management, trang
and support and the offer of a job for six to twelve months.
Individuals will be expected to take the job or lose their benefits.
We will also introduce measures to identifyr people at risk of becoming long-term
unemployed. Together with those who have been continuously unemployed for twelve months, these
people will be given individual case management including remedial action in such areas as
literacy, numeracy, language and vocational training and access to relevant labour market
programs. It is expected that over half a million people will receive individual case management each
year. This is a radical program, a qualitative change in'the way we approach labour market
problems. 5915 
The objective is to make long-term unemployed people ready for a job, and break forever It " n
the pattern in which the long-term unemployed become steadily more dispirited and advan
unqualified for employment, while employers become steadily less inclined to consider of o0:
them employable. It iso0
In other words, the purpose of the Job Compact is principally to see that a substantial
proportion of the new jobs in the recovery go to long-term unemployed Australians. In the
schoc
A new Training Wage will be introduced to provide employers with extra incentives to for th
hire long-term unemployed workers and invest in their training. 95 pe
aTwhea rtdr awinaingeg wwaillg eb ee ndcisocuoruagnetesd efmorp laocycerresd titoe dp rtoraviindien gtr aainndin tgh ep leamcepsl oiyne trw woi lwl areysc. e ivTeh ea Tuet%
wage subsidy from the Government at a level above what it would be if no training were
involved. This represents a substantial incentive for employers to play their part in the Thet
national effort. no
An in-principle agreement on the Training Wage has been reached with a high-level ACTUJ
committee which will be recommending its adoption to the ACTU Executive. The Seco
Government will also be consulting with employers on the details of the training wage. younE
To deliver case management and job placement services, the Government will radically And f
change the labour market by engaging community and private sector agencies. for ui
the ur
Job seekers will have a choice between these and the CES, with the competition between The p
them regulated and encouraged by a new authority the Employment Service Regulatory
Agency ( ESRA).
The CES will be revitalised to meet the greater responsibilities placed upon it by the Job
Compact and other initiatives.
Additional resources, extra training of staff, external recruitment and improved
information technology will be brought to the operations of the Service.
The emphasis will be on closer relations with employers, greater skills and efficient
delivery through more sophisticated technology and coordination.
For instance, job boards and job cards in CES offices will be replaced with computerised Unde
vacancy systems featuring user-friendly le-cliftology to encourage self-help job searches. Aiistri
the Jc
As the White Paper says, we are never going to return to a world where large numbers of
full-time jobs are available for unskilled young workers. As the keys to a successful Ines
modern economy are skills, ideas and innovation, the keys to employment are education can rr
and training.
~ 591I6 
It cannot be stressed too much in the modemn economy skills are our greatest competitive
advantage. Whether it is in global enterprises or local small businesses, it is on the ability
of our people to add value that our standard of living depends.
It is on skills that every individual's standard of living increasingly depends.
In the past decade, the number of young people completing Year 12 or an initial postschool
qualification has dramatically increased. However we are still below the average
for the ' OECD and well short of the goal that all Australian Governments have set namely
per cent of 19 year olds by 200 1.
The White Paper describes the Government's program for building the skills of young
Australians. T'he three principal elements of new Government policy are: first, the Government aims to
encourage young people to stay in education and training by giving them appropriate
financial support and more relevant courses run jointly by schools and industry.
Second, we will be increasing the number and range of entry level training places for
young people by an estimated 50,000 by 1995-96.
And thirdly, we will be introducing as a major policy change a Youth Training Initiative
for unemployed young people. The key to success is to provide help at an early stage in
the unemployment cycle, which means with the least possible delay after leaving school.
The principal features of the Youth Training Initiative are:
intensive case management, with an initial assessment of skills and knowledge, for
all unemployed people under the age of eighteen
a doubling of the number of labour market and vocational training places for young
people assistance in finding a job, and
reformed income support arrangements to help keep young people in education or
training.
Under the Youth Training Initiative in the clearest possible signal that every young
Australian should be in education, training or employment unemployment benefits or
the Job Search Allowance will be replaced by a Youth Training Allowance.
Investing in skills of Australians, particularly young Australians, is the best investment we
can make. This is recognised well beyond the realms of Government. 59) 17 
Industry is increasingly recognlsing it and increasingly indicating its desire to play a part. In an
We are very well aware of industry's concerns about the relevance of current training and inder
for this reason we are anxious to engage industry in both the design and delivery of child
courses. P The
In future, Australian vocational training will be available through traineeships based in oblic
schools, TAFE, industry and labour market programs and will be available to adults as
well. Ther with
A Training Wage which offers a much simpler alternative to the multiple industry-specific will I
rates currently applying will be available to employers who provide entry-level training. The.
The social safety net was a term first used in the 1 940s by Ben Chilley. He thought of it peop
as the net under a trapeze artist, " to break the fall towards aestitution and sustain a man
and his family while they help him climb the ladder of opportunity again". In thi
worl,
The basic principle of the safety net remains the same and so does the basic necessity in a cons,
decent society to maintain it. But circumstances have changed and so must the way we
design the net. The most fundamental difference is that no longer do families depend on If we
the man alone to bring in the income, at ris.
out c
In general, the present social security system continues to assume that only one member of
a couple, in most cases thie husband, will be actively looking for work while the other will The
be a dependant. new
This ignores the increase in employment for women. It means that unemployed couples If we
have not been encouraged to take advantage of the opportunities in the labour market, our T
flour
Over the last ten years, the gap between income support for a married couple and income
from lower paid jobs has also narrowed and the incentive to find work has been greatly As tldiminished.
Austbuild
In another basic structural reform of our income support system young unemployed
couples without children will need to qualify for unemployment payments in their own Thiret
right and the joint income test for unemployed couples will be abolished. The effect of time!
this will be to encourage both partners to seek work. It also means that many low income Coin
working families will gain extra income support. The
Under the current social security income test, after a modest level of income, for every differ
dollar of income earned, a dollar of income support is lost. From July next year the dollarfor-
dollar taper will be replaced with a 70 cents in the dollar taper which will mean that The
people will always be better off from working because work will always increase their appr(
total income. thenr
59~ ' 18 
In another radical initiative,. a Parenting Allowance will be introduced to provide an
independent source of income for parents in low income families who care for dependant
children under 16 years of age.
The Parenting Allowance will effectively provide a payment for one parent free of any
obligation to seek work.
There will also be a more generous income test for those who wish to combine parenting
with paid work. By any measure. ths is a major reform. The simplest measure is this it
I will mean an extra S59 per week on average for nearly 120,000 low income families.
The Parenting Allowance signals a new approach to income support based on the right of
people to be paid as individuals, rather than as dependent partners.
In this, and in the fact that it constitutes greater recognition of women's role in the
workforce and the growth in part-time and casual employment, the Parenting Allowance is
consistent with the changes to income testing.
If we do not take remedial action, the long-term unemployed and many young Australians
at risk of joining their ranks will be relegated to the margins of our national life and miss
out on the opportunities offered by the present recovery.
The same can be said of many of the regions of Australia. The White Paper presents a
new Commuonwealth approach to regional development.
If we are to make the most of all our national resources, including the skills and energy of
our people, we need to ensure that the regions of Australia are given the opportunity to
flourish that they become partners in Australia's growth.
As the White Paper says, to neglect the regions is to neglect not only a great many
Australians and all that they have to give this country, but to pass up the opportunity to
build a stronger and more diverse economy.
Three reports on regional development have been received by the Government in recent
times the Kelty Taskforce Report, the McKinsey Report and the Report of the Industry
Commission. The principal lessons to be learned are that the regions, though presently enjoying very
different degrees of success, have in common an abundance of energy and commitment.
The Government takes the view, with Kelty and McKinsey, that the most effective
approach for the Commonwealth is to provide strategic assistance of a kind that will help
the regions to make the most of their human and physical resources. 5919 
More often than not, this will require them to integrate their local economies with the The
national and international economy. depi
wor
The White Paper instances some remarkable achievements and some other places where
major obstacles have yet to be overcome. The uneven performance of our regions in large For
part flows from an uneven quality of organisation and leadership. In st
The White Paper details the way in which the Commonwealth Government will support and
the formation and functioning of regional groupings and provide assistance to regions so
that they can develop and implement effective strategic plans, with an emphasis on We
international best practice. the culti
We will also be significantly modifyng the tax treatment of infrastructure bonds and takdig man
other steps to encourage private sector investment in regional Australia. and
We will also provide funds for capital works where it can be demonstrated that their Thei
completion is vital to local economic performance. be a
The White Paper nominates two regional development projects the Government will The,
support which may be taken as models for other regions in Australia. whiu
The Goulburn Valley and the Sunraysia have developed plans for ecologically sustainable, The
highlyi productive, self-funding, irrigated agriculture which will repair the environment and Pol
greatly increase the contribution t~ o GDP the Sunraysia is expected to double output in
the next two decades. The
year
The Government will provide funding for essential capital works projects and support for Ausi
re-structnrng through the Rural Adjustment Scheme. the on i
I will be going to the Sunraysia on Friday to see first hand the proposed projects and meet
with some of the region's leaders. It de
It should be noted also that reforms to the labour market, education and training and The
social security contain provisions for programs which will be specifically tailored to and
regional needs. our then
In addition, some sixty DEET Area Consultative Committees will be created and they will
seek to establish direct links with successful regional development organisations. The Thei
Consultative Commiittees will include employers, local and state government effic
representatives and education and training providers. finaz busii
Just as it is essential that we do not allow the long-term unemployed to become cut off Trai
from the mainstream of society, it is equally important that we take steps to see that
regions of Australia are not left to drift out of the nation's economic and social life. 
These reforms and initiatives necessarily depend on continuing economic growth. They
depend on the ability of Australian enterprise to flourish and carve out a future in the
world economy and especially the Asia-Pacific.
For that reason the White Paper contains a statement of the Government's industry policy.
In summary, the thrust of Government policy is towards eiobalisation. competitiveness
and productivity.
We are seeing major success from measures already taken. a dramatic increase in exports.
the rise of dynamic small and medium-sized businesses which have been born of the export'
culture developed in'the last decade " born global" in other words the growth of
manufactured exports to rank now with agriculture and mnining as a proportion of GDP
and the rapid growth in exports of sophisticated manufactures.
There is no question that our policies, including our tariff policy, are enabling Australia to
be a competitive player in the regional and world econiomy.-
There is equally no question that we have no choice but to continue the process of reform
which alone will keep us in the race.
The White Paper contains a broad statement of the principles governing our industry
policy and a number of specific measures consistent with those principles.
The process of microeconomic reform, will continue. A consistent goal of the next few
years must be economic efficiency. The principles of " best practice" which many
Australian companies have adopted, must be adopted by the nation itself. In this, as in all
the measures described in this White Paper, much depends on other tiers of goverrnent,
on trade unions, business, communities, the people of Australia themselves.
It demands a continuation of the great cultural shift which has occurred in the past decade.
The Government sees its proper role as creating a competitive environment for industry
and by strategic intervention, helping to create competitive companies. As the Paper says,
our policy must be to harness the power of markets, while recognising that, left to
themselves, markets will not always give us the best possible results.
There are measures described in this White Paper to remove impediments to business
efficiency, to facilitate exports, to encourage research and development, to make access to
finance for small and medium-sized business easier, to remove regulation and lower
business costs and among the latter, the White Paper announces the suspension of the
Training Guarantee. 5921 
One significant initiative will be the establishment of a body to improve coordination and Just
delivery of government programs for business. The body, to be called Ausindustry, will gove
be within the portfolio of the Minister for Industry, Science and Technol'ogy and ' Ill be the . i
guided by a board comprising people with experience in all aspects of business, from ways
research and development to international trade. This
The establishment of AusIndustry is a direct response to two recent studies by McKinsey
which found that business was often confused about the ranee of services available under Thes
government programs. deca Aust
Our success will also depend on the capacity and willingness of Australians to strike worl
productivity bargains in the nation's workplaces. It WC
The Industial Relations Reform Act introduced last year provides the framework for this we h
process to rapidly proceed. Much now depends on the willingness of employers and once
employees to strike the kinds of bargains which will be mutually rewarding to them, and
rewarding also to Australia's economic future. It WC
the v
We have seen in a very short time a sea-change not just in the shape of the Australian
economy, not just in its orientation and in the way we do business, but in the way we think That
about our business practice. We understand both the need for, and the principles of,
competitiveness. We understand the need for cooperation in the workplace. We It is,
understand the need for ' skills and creativity. We know that we must be a nation which Govc
makes things and sells things in the international markets of the world.
We know these things principally because we know that not to do them will mean to fail
as a nation. It will mean a lower standard of living for this and future generations.
The major reforms announced in this White Paper should be seen in this context.
We do not accept that we can raise the standard of living of Australians by allowing a
large number of people to drift permanently out of the system. We do not accept that we
can afford to waste their potential. Nor do we accept that the only way to maintain our
standard of living is to lower the wages of Australian workers.
The White Paper is underpinned by the belief that Australia must and can be a gjkwage
and a high productivity country.
A hundred years ago, the Australian colonies federated into a nation which numbered
among its watchwords " the social laboratory of the world". The Australia of a hundred
years ago prided itself on advanced social policy.
59 22 
12
id Just fifty years ago, with the White Paper on full employment, another Australian Labor
, I govern. ment codified and consolidated social policies which together formed the basis of
e the Australian social welfare system. That was a document of its times in some essential
ways, a much more modest document than this one.
This White Paper is a document for these times.
er These social programs. together with those introduced in recent years. mean that in this
decade we should take pride in the fact that, faithful to previous generations of
Australians, we have made this one of the most sophisticated social democracies in the
world. It would be no bad thing if, in this decade, we also developed pride in the great changes
Ms we have made to our economy. We should be proud that we now compete in areas we
once thought beyond our capacity.
It would be a very good thing if, at the end of the century, we defined ourselves as one of
the very fair societies in the world and one of the most creative.
tink That is the philosophy which underlies this White Paper.
It is a program for employment and growth. It underlies all the policies of this
Government.
ye 5.923 



S
I PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAMI 7: 30 REPORT, 4 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: We'll go now to the Prime Minister who has just joined me here in the
studio. Mr Keating, thanks for joining us.
PM: Thanks Paul.
PL: Chifley had a vision. Where's Paul Keating's vision in all this?
PM Well, the vision here is of a cohesive society where we don't take the
callous view that half a million people, lo~ ng. 4erfrLuner( npoyq1, pqople
can be the people who carry the burden of economic change and you
keep a society, you keep a country together by letting everybody
believe they are part of it. And this is particularly so with young people
so that they don't grow up believing they are alienated and that no one*
is interested in them.
PL: But, you've produced more Budgets and statements and packages
than most of us have had hot dinners over the years. Doesn't this
suggest it's taking a hell of a long time to get this right?
PM: Paul look, the Australian economy today is not to be compared with
what it was 10 years go. I mean, it's exporting its head off.-It has got a
2 per cent inflation rate, it is growing at 4 per cent. We've had two
million job growth in the ten years, we had a work force of 6 million in
1953, we've got a work force now of over 8 million. Employment is
going to pick up again strongly, but it is not right and it--is-ndt dieent
and it is not efficient to leave a large body of people untrained,
unc-ared for, unthought of. Now, this program; we are going to be
personally case managing 504,000 people next year.
PL: This is really one-on-one stuff is it? 
PM: One on one 504,000, I mean, if that's not a vision of getting people
back into the mainstream of Australian society I don't know what is. I
mean, I don't want to see Australian cities like New York or Los
Angeles.
PL: I'm sure no Australian does.
PMV: No, and the way not to do it is to reach out to the unemployed and to
give them this work experien0ce and to train them and to give them self
esteem and confidence and competence and see them taken up
because, I think, in this recovery another point that needs to be made
Paul is this, that the complement toA~ jI1~ formation, when we are going
to need skills in this recovery is not going to come from migration, it is
going to come from within Australia. In part, it is going to come from
that pool of long-term unemployed people.
PL: And If we start running into skills shortages then we are going to end
up with a bit of a bottle neck?
PM: If we run into skills shortages, you'll have wage cost pressures and
you'll have higher inflation. So, the way to deal with it is to get this
pool of under employed resources and unemployed people trained and
back into the mainstream labour market.
PL: All right, while we're on the big picture, the long bond rates hit an 18
month high, they went into panic mode this afternoon after your
statement.
PM: No they didn't.
PL: Well.
PM: Look, they have been rising for a couple of weeks on notions of what
the American Federal Reserve Bank is doing and frankly, here we are
when the low inflation rate came out last week at 2 per cent, it made
monkeys of them. I mean, the long term bond market has got no
credibility..
PL: This document, Prime Minister, the cost of the White Paper measures
are covered by the growth dividend, this leaked draft of the Budget. Is
that right?
PM. That document, God knows how old it is. It is as old as Methuselah I
think given what's in it. It bears no relationship to the Budget, but I
made the point very clear in the statement today, Paul. When one
makes the judgenment of saying is the economic efficiency and equity
point of picking up the young people of Australia between 15 and
and the long term unemployed and giving them a place in our society
and growth in our economy and a complement to the labour market 
better than the short term financing effects of another $ 1.7 billion off
the Budget. There is no judgement to be made, none what so ever.
PL: But we have got six days now until the Budget. Are you going to be
able to assure the markets that interest rates don't have to go up again
because we could jeopardise growth, the real growth and prosperity
we need to get real jobs in there.
PM: Paul, just ' on the markets. The market has got the long bond rate now
at well over 8.5 per cent. We have got a 2 per cent inflation rate, we
have got a real rate of interest of 7.5 per cent. The average real rate
of interest in the last 30 years was about 4 to 4.5 per cent. It is the
bond market that has basically got to wake up to the fact this is not the
United States, that what the US Federal Reserve does has nothing to
do with Australia's inflation rate and that the Government will bring in
the Budget, as I say in this White Paper, and meet its target of a
Budget deficit of around 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97.
PL: And will the cost of the White Paper measures today be covered by
the growth dividend, Prime Minister?
PM: It will be covered by the things which any sensible society, the
resources, any sensible, efficient, compassionate society would spend
on its people who are carrying the brunt of unemployment. All these
people who incode say, I mean, Professor Sloane, she Is confused
about whether it is young people or It is all about saying, " look,
forget them", she talked about substitutions forget them. You forget
them and you end up with a Los Angeles on your hands.
PL: Yes, but there is going to be churning Isn't there?
PM; That's what happens to you, you end up with someone breaking your
window in.
PL: But, there is going to be a lot of displacement. People will displace
others in this.
PM: But, we'll have in a strong economy with low inflation a lot of aggregate
employment growth and that is the key point. But, are these people
entitled to be part of the stream? Well, the answer is of course they
are.
PL: To what extent though will all these training schemes and so on mask
the real level of unemployment? Your critics say it is another Keating
' ace up the sleeve trick'.
PM. There wouldn't be an OECD government, a western government,
undertaking a package of this size and this comprehension. It is only
in this country that you can get a nit-picking debate on this sort of
thing. 
PL: Well, Margaret Thatcher is pretty good at massaging the figures, some
say you are learning tricks from her.
PM: Well, after that load of old codswallop you started with at this program
. I mean, that Is the most absolutely irrelevant statistic I have ever
seen in my life, but anyway..
PL: What. the manufacturing trade deficit has no relevance Or did you
see the figures today?
PM; You are trying to outdo Elle McFeast. You better make your mind up
whether you are in entertainment or news, Paul.
PL: OK, well how entertaining were the trade figures today the
merchandise trade figures?
PM: I'll just give you a couple of simple numbers. Manufacturing production
has doubled since 1983. Manufacturing exports have tripled since
1983 80 per cant of our economic growth comes out of services not
manufacturing. That chart is completely Irrelevant.
PL: And what did the figures show us today. We had merchandise exports
up 5 per cent and Imports up 13 per cent. r-1-
PMV: I don't mind you trying to make a sensible point, but why make a daft
point? We are all short of time. We are all busy, why make a dumb
point?
PL: Because the point is our economic future..
PM. Because you don't know what the real point is.
PL: Our economic future is determined by our export performance. You
keep telling us we have got a record deficit in manufacturing trade.
PM: Paul, 10 years ago we exported 14 per cent of all we produce. What is
it today? 21 per cent.
PL: Record deficit.
F M: Today. What's today mean in the long you mean, one month's
balance of payments numbers?
PL: No, we have a record deficit 1992-93. It has been getting worse as
you see there.
PM.-That is the manufacturing sector, but what about the mining sector, the
agriculture and services. As Professor Sloan said why point to that? 
PL: it is one part of
PM: Paul, look, I don't want to have a silly argument about a silly point. Let
me just make this clear that the Australian Chamber of Manufactures
said today the job compact will ensure that a persons need to find a
job will merge sweetly with an employers need to fill one. The Metals
Trades Industry Association said they regard the Government's White
Paper, ' Working Nation', as a constructive contribution to public policy
which will provide new directions for industry et cetera. This is fulfilling
the commitment the Government made during the election and on
election night to keep faith with the unemployed, to have a more fair
and equal society and a more efficient one. That is the point of today's
message.
PL: Thank you, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you, Paul.
ends 



4.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RAY MARTIN, CURRENT AFFAIR", CHANNEL 9,
WEDNESDAY, 4 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: we've had nearly a couple of million job _ growth in the 1 980s and we
have held those jobs, but we didn't grow enough jobs to take
everybody up and we have lost some as well. We lost some jobs,
largely we kept the 1980s employment gains, but what happens in
every recovery is that the new entrants to the work force are rarely the
long-term unemployed.
RM: Now, you have got to live with this, of course, you said back in 1983
you said that you inherited the worst recession in 50 years with three
quarters of a million people unemployed. Now we have got almost a
million unemployed.
PM: Yes, but in those days we had a work force of 6 million and now we
have got a work force of 8 million. So we have put 2 million jobs in
during the period, Ray. Now, sure unemployment is too high and the
economy is now growing reasonably strongly and we have seen nearly
a quarter of a million jobs created this year. But, the problem is as in
the 1 980s, the people who go into those jobs are not the long-term
unemployed. Someone who has been out of work a year or eighteen
months starts to lose their self esteem and their confidence and the
employers think that they are not employable. So, this is focussed to
pull them up and give them a chance.
RM: Well, you talk in this paper of half a million out of work by the turn of
the century, is that the figure for the hard core unemployable?
PM: No, we are saying that if we do nothing there will be 300,000 people,
long-term unemployed still out of work by the turn of the century
which is too much.
RM: The figure is half a million. 
PM: We are looking at the prospect of getting to 5 per cent unemployment
by the end of the century.
RM: And with the normal rise in the work force that would be about half a
million wouldn't it?
PM: No, it would be much more. It would be well over one million, Ray.
RM: All right, how does that sit then if you accept that more than a million
are, in fact, going to be out of work, how does that sit.
PM: No, sorry, well over one million jobs will be created to get down to
around 5 per cent by the end of the century.
RM: And is that figure about 300,000 out of work by the end of the century
or 500,000?
PM: Well, 5 per cent of the work force then would probably be about
500,000 4 to 500,000.
RM: PM, how does that set then with you claim that in fact every Australian
who wants a job can have one?
PM: Well, it is the time people are in the pool, Ray. Let me give you an
idea about this. By the time we got to the end of the growth phase of
the late 1980s we still had unemployment of about 6.5 per cent, but the
average duration in the pool was only a few weeks. I think three
weeks on average from memory. The problem we have got here is a
long tail of people who have been forgotten. They have lost their
esteem, their skills and their job readiness. This is about picking them
up, intensively case-managing them, training them and placing them in
a job.
RM: All right, but again with respect, to say that every Australian who wants
a job can have one under this program doesn't it sound a bit like Bob
Hawke's ' no child in poverty in 1990'?
PM: No, what we are saying is that the aim should be that if we can grow
the Australian economy quickly enough that we ought to be able to
take up more than just simply new entrants to the work force. We
ought to be able to buy down, wear down, the pool of unemployed.
RM: This is as you say, if this is the best of all possible worlds, if business,
if unions, if the unemployed work with you and if we don't have a
disaster.
PM: Yes, but remember what we are doing here. We will be case
managing, we'll have somebody in the CES or a private case 
management business case managing personally over half a million
individual people.
RM: How is that possible without an army of public servants?
PM: Well, there will be a lot of people involved in that, I wouldn't say there
would be an army involved. There will be a lot involved, but unless
you actually take somebody in and talk to them, know about their
personality, about their qualifications, about their work experience,
about their education, it is not really possible You see in a rigid
national system which to some extent is what we've had, somebody
who turns up at a CES counter, say somebody 45 years of age, might
have two or three children, he's just been caught up in a system and it
doesn't really find out their skills and place them properly.
RM: But we accept that and it is a dreadful situation for those men and
women in that situation, but 300,000 people have got to have
individual case management.
PM: 500,000.
RM: 500,000 individual case management.
PM: Next year 504,000.
RM: All right, what about the training wage you talk about. How much is
that going to be?
PM: That will be decided in the next week or so with the ACTU. There are
three principal elements to this Ray. There is a job compact for the
unemployed of 18 months or more. Then we have got two things on
the youth side:-the Youth Training Initiative for young people
unemployed under 18. We-Nil-case mana ge . every young person
unemployed under 18. That is, every young person in this country
who is under 18 years of age and unemployed, we'll pick them up and
speak with them, train them and case manage them. The other
element is Entry Level Training. We are going to start vocational
preparation in Years 11 and 12 at school. That is, away from school
on the job training during school years Years 11 and 12 and the
training wage is an attempt to engage another 50,000 trainees and
also pull kids in from their last school years and skill them.
See, the great change Ray, I think, people need to remember, is when
you and I were teenagers there were many jobs for unskilled people
to 20. That is all done today by computing equipment. The sort of
industries, the clerical jobs, and a lot of the message carriers; all that's
gone. So, now what we have to do is regard 1 5-19 as a period of
vocational preparation. We want 95 per cent of kids completing
secondary school by the Year 2000. 
4
RM: All right Prime Minister, let me just get specific for a moment then. We
had last night we spoke to a man in Launceston who heads the
Unemployed Workers Union. He has been on the dole for ten years.
Have a listen to what he said and tell me how the White Paper is going
to effect him. The fact is that the jobs just aren't out there and it is about
time you know, I just get sick of playing the game and
pretending, going along with this fiction that the jobs are out
there if only I knew how to write a better job application letter or
I knew how to apply for a job. I was trained for one of these
jobs that didn't exist.
RM: But would you do any job? Get fair dinkum, would you
do any job if someone rang up tonight?
No, I wouldn't just do any job. No, bugger it. Why should I?
I mean, I'm not going to do a job that pays terrible wages or has
got terrible conditions. I am a human being, I'm not a slave.
RM: Prime Minister, you have said today that you are going to get tough.
Will he have a choice or will he have to take the job you give him?
PM: He will be a job compact person. He would be intensively case
managed, there would be a training course recommended for him and
there would be a job subsidy and if he doesn't take the job, under this
proposal there is a reciprocal obligation on the part of the unemployed
person to take any reasonable job offer.
RM: Or he goes off the dole?
PM: There is a set of penalties then where then he loses so many weeks
for the first time he refuses and a greater number of weeks for the
second time and it goes on in that vein.
RM: It is not up to him to decide whether he accepts the wages or the
conditions. He has to take what he is given finally?
PM: Well, he has got to take what he is given because what he is given will
be, because of the case management something that will suit him and
if he is unskilled, I mean probably his reason for not being able to find
a job is because the economy has changed from an economy that
used to have unskilled jobs and many of them, to an economy now
which has got many more skilled jobs.
RM: He says in fact, he lives in Launceston and he says there are no jobs
in Launceston. If you find a job in Burnie or Hobart would he have to
go there? 
PM: No, this would be one that is within reasonable distance of where one
lives.
RM: But, there are hundreds of country towns around Australia like this.
You say that most of the jobs are going to come out of the private
sector. They say these country towns, I'm sorry, there just aren't any
jobs.
PM: There is never going to be an evenness of jobs right throughout the
country Ray, but in every classic recovery particularly where you have
got a high profit share in the economy and wages set right which we
have now we will get employment growth we have already seen it
as a quarter of a million jobs this year as the economy starts to pick
up. Now, there will be a lot of aggregate employment, but will these
people be part of it and the answer is without this no, they won't be.
RM: All right, on behalf of 950,000 unemployed Australians I wish you good
luck.
PM: Thank you very much, Ray.
RM: Thank you Prime Minister, very much.
ends 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA, 5 MAY 1994
f I were to begin with a quotation today, you might expect it to be fr~ om Ben Chifley
or John Dedman, or Bevan or Beveridge, or some other author of a white paper on
employment. I will begin with a quotation. It's a very simple quotation and its from Samuel
Johnson, who is not generally regarded as one of the heroes of the Labor movement.
Johnson said, " Inj a civilised society, we all depend upon each other".
And I can't think of a better text for the day. I can't think of any more appropriate
injunction for Australia in the 1990s or any better broad definition of what this
Government is about.
We are about a civilised society.
And we shouldn't underestimate the forces working against us. Think of them. We
are as culturally diverse as any country on earth. We have people among us who in
other places are sworn enemies. But we do behave with proper regard for one
another. Even though we have close to half a million long-term unemployed, we live
in peace with one another.
The other force potentially working against our sense of society is the necessity to be
competitive. This might encourage us to think that the way to succeed is through a
creed of dog-eat-dog.
Some countries whose traditions should have instructed them better did read it that
way in the last 20 years. They took the imperatives of economic progress to mean
social regress.
Australia did not. Australia in the last decade has stuck by it's civilised traditions. At
every election, including the last when, after ten years of the same Party in office and
the worst unemployment figures in sixty years, the temptation was great, the Australian
people refuased to vote for a dog-eat-dog society.
They stuck by the principles which have their origin in the birth of the Labor
movement a century ago and in those true Liberals who believed that the imperatives
of civilisation should temper self-interest.
There was a profound lesson in last year's election. The people of Australia were given
a genuine choice: should Australia take on the ethic of unmitigated self-interest? Or
should they stand by their own values? 
It will not have escaped some of you, that Labor won that election by making the
difference as stark as possible. I know John Hewson has been inclined until recently to
say that we ran a scare campaign.
My answer to that is read Fightback. Remember what John Hewson said about the
unemployed and the disadvantaged. The echoes of Thatcher and Reagan were clear
and unmistakable.
The notion that if you reach back for the poor and the weak they will drag you down,
quite simply, stands for a set of values which Labor will never stand for and I don't
believe Australians will ever stand for.
That remark, as much as Fightback itself, threw down the political gauntlet. It
challenged Australians to abandon a century-old tradition which even at its worst ( in
Labor's eyes at least) his own Party had never totally abandoned. Labor did not run a
scare campaign, it put the traditional view that " in a civilised society we all depend
upon each other".
Faced with this stark choice, the Australian people voted for their beliefs. They voted
for one nation, not two. They voted for bringing the unemployed along with us. They
voted for what I called policies of inclusion a phrase which our opponents are now
using. This idea of " inclusion" is unremarkable. It simply encapsulates the idea of a nation
even a nation which for all sorts of geographic, demographic and historical reasons is
as loosely constructed as Australia. It encapsulates a nation of people as diverse and
easy going and individualistic as Australians are.
It poses no threat to that marvellous reality of Australian life and culture. It simply
means that " we all depend upon each other".
The fact that Johnson said it at a time when Britain was treating her own people
abominably, hanging and flogging the poor and preparing to shovel them off to the
other side of the world where they would be out of sight and out of mind, only goes to
show that words are not enough the only proof is what people do.
Whatever our problems as a Government since 1983, I hope we will at least be judged
as a government which did things.
Had words been enough for the Government in 1983, we would still be talking about
the need for Australia to be a competitive country. We would still be talking about
deregulating the economy. We would still be talking about lowering the tariff wall.
We would still be talking about opening up to the world and succeeding not just in
mining and agriculture, but as a manufacturing nation. We would still be talking very
largely about succeeding in the Asia-Pacific.
There are many things we would still be talking about. But instead we did them. In
1994, Australian workers are doing them. The regions of Australia are doing them.
And had we been satisfied with words alone, we might still be talking about the need
for extensive and sophisticated social services. About what a nice thing it would be,
and how consistent with our democratic pioneering traditions, if we implemented to an
extent greater than any other country in the world the UN Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
Or how we might one day recognise that this continent had belonged to Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islanders. We could very easily still be talking about these things, but we
have done them. 
In 1994 we live in a country which has few peers in the world in the way it has
transformed its economy, developed its social services, extended freedom and
opportunity, and maintained its values through an era of extraordinary change. We five
in a country which has responded to every challenge.
We should never underestimate this. Few, if any, generations of Australians have
proven themselves more comprehending of what the challenge was and what was
required to meet it.
As a member of the Government in these last eleven years, I am proud that we painted
a picture of the reality. As an Australian, I am much prouder of the fact that the
people of this country recognised it. The Labor Party recognised it, the trade union
movement and an increasingly large section of the business community, and the
Australian electorate.
They recognised that cooperation in workplaces was better than conflict. They
recognised that we could be a manufacturing nation without a tariff wall. They
recognised that we could succeed ini the Asia-Pacific.
And why did they recognise it? Because they believed in themselves and that in their
country there was a wellspring of potential which had not yet been tapped.
They had what these days is called a vision and they knew that the best way of
realising it was to work with a common purpose, to work together.
In other words, they recognised that in a civilised society, we all depend upon each
other. The White Paper I presented yesterday is prefaced with a reminder of the things I said
on election night last year and on Australia Day this year. The words were that we
would not leave the unemployed behind.
There have been a few critics of this White Paper today who say that we should leave
them behind. They say it in various ways. They do not say it directly. They say that
to prepare the long-term unemployed for jobs, is to create competition for the shortterm
unemployed.
This is the moral equivalent of transportation. It is to say these people have lost their
right to a job like other Australians and we have lost our capacity and our will to get
them ready for a job. They are simply a problem and should be ignored. We won't
have it.
There is another argument which says that we shouldn't pick them up, and train them,
and get them back into the labour market where they can enjoy, not just an income, but
the self respect and social intercourse and creativity which work provides, because the
cost is too high.
This is the moral equivalent, not of transportation, but of keeping them on the hulks
keeping them in jail because it is cheaper. It takes no account of what the cost of
doing nothing is the cost to their lives and the cost to ours. The cost to our social
cohesion and order if we were to allow an underclass of Australians to form.
The cost also to our sk411 õ . The cost of wasting this potential. The cost to our
civilisation of saying that we don't depend upon each other that these people are
expendable. 
There is another argument that has been put. It says that the only way that we will
create jobs for these people is to so change our industrial relations system that wage
rates and conditions of employment will be debased.
This, it seems to me, would be to betray the unemployed as profoundly as neglect
would betray them. It would be truly a cruel hoax on Australia.
This argument says we will substitute an army of working poor for unemployment. It
says we will abandon our goals of a good and equitable society, we will lower our gaze
to a society where differentials of wealth are wide and profound. We Will have the
same problems of social disorder and alienation and decay but we will have the
unemployment figure down a couple of notches.
The argument is not only devious, regressive and deceitful, it's fundamentally wrong.
As the Green Paper pointed out, cutting wages in the great depression did not produce
a surge in employment. It made those high-minded, comfortable, middle-class
economists feel very morally superior, just as it makes some of our own academic and
journalistic pundits feel superior but it didn't solve the problem then, and it won't
solve it now.
Many of you would have read the Phillip Knightley article recently in which he
described how in Great Britain they have lowered wages security guards can be paid
as little as $ 2.50 an hour for an 84 hour week. There are women doing piece work for
$ 6.30 a day. The chairman of the company employing them at that rate earned
$ 270,000 a year. He said " we wouldn't get the productivity if we paid an hourly rate".
I will never accept for Australia the notion of a competitive economy being a synonym
for social regression.
Nor do I have to describe to people here the tragedy of American poverty. Some of
our opponents point to the American unemployment rate of 6 1/ 2 per cent and say that
is the model for us to follow. To which I would reply if you would like to fight the
next election on your support for an American social model and our support for an
Australian one, we will be very happy to do so.
As Geoff Kitney pointed out today, America is also paying an enormously high price
for widening the dispersion of wage rates.
Those who criticised the White Paper make one fundamental error or at least a
fundamental misjudgement about this Government. A long while ago, we committed
ourselves to finding a place for Australia in the very front rank of nations.
The point of opening up this economy and deregulating it, and lowering tariff walls,
and building an export culture, and best practice, was to make sure that Australia
became a player in the premier league. I mean where the technology is, where the high
value adding is and where the best jobs are.
To opt for any other goal is to opt for a place in the second division where the
second rate jobs are and where the national pride is missing.
Now we are not going to opt for the premier division in the global economy and, at the
same time, opt for the second division in our social goals. We are not going to accept
social decay, human alienation, rising levels of crime, a loss of faith and belief in other
words, an underclass cut off from the rest of the nation.
We did not take the economic path we have to end up with a second rate country. It is
so plainly true you cannot have a first rate economy and a second rate society. 
Let me give you just one little example of what I mean. When McKinsey surveyed
firms in regional Australa they found that just 4 per cent among them thought wage
casts were an impediment to growth. Increasing productivity and seeking out new
opportunities were the keys to the way forward.
The White Paper is not proof of success. But it is proof that this Government
continues to believe that words alone are not enough. We will do what on a strenuous
appraisal of the evidence presents itself as necessary.
On that appraisal, it is necessary to sustain economic growth and much in the White
Paper is about the means by which we will do that. We will do it by providing the
means for firms to build, to take advantage of the expanding markets in Australia and
in the region.
It is also necessary to make an effort of unprecedented intensity to lift the long-term
unemployed out of the mire in which they are trapped. That is the heart of it.
The economy in which skills are our greatest resource. Now I won't go into the details
again of how we are going to do that. But let me say that when you examine the
document, it should be apparent that it is a document for these times it brings our
labour market, education and training, and social security programs up to the 1990s
and they will serve us well into the 21 st century.
That's why comparisons with the 1945 White Paper on Employment are largely
inappropriate. They are different documents, informed by different ideas to meet the
imperatives of different times. They have two things in common: the 1945 document
was required to find the way to demobilise a million servicemen and women and the
1994 document has set itself the task of finding ways to remobilise a million
unemployed. That is the first thing they have in common. The second thing is they
were both done by Labor governments.
Growth is the context. Employment, training, support, help, is the heart of it.
I don't think we can stress enough how great the changes have been. How important it
is that we succeed in getting into that front rank. It has been, I suppose, something of
a highwire act. The rewards will be huge not just because it will maintain our
standard of living but improves them for generations. There are also basic quality of
life considerations involved in this.
Yesterday I quoted Chifley's definition of the social safety net the net under the
trapeze artist to catch him when he falls so that he can climb the ladder of opportunity
again. What we are doing with this statement on employment, is providing, on behalf
of the nation, the net and the ladder for the long-term unemployed and for the youth
of Australia.
If it is true that in a civilised society we all depend upon each other, we have to
provide that net and, principally through training and education, the ladder of
opportunity. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JULIE FLYNN, RADIO 2UE, 5 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JF: Prime Minister, there has been a mixed reaction to yesterday's
Statement. Can you understand why some people are sceptical that
this will solve the unemployment problem?
PM: Well, people are entitled to be sceptical, but I don't think they are
entitled to be negative about it. This is a very large program. No
Government in Australia has ever entertained this. But we know that
unless we intensively case manage the long term unemployed, by the
end of the century there will still b6, even witfh a lot of econ . omic growth
and a lot of employment, about 300,000 people still long term
unemployed. Now, what this program will mean is that every individual
will be personally case managed. That means that their personality,
their work experience, their education, their educational standards,
their aptitude, their prospects for training, and their prospects for a job
placement will be managed by one person, which gives them a real
chance to break the cycle and get back into the labour market and
enjoy the country as the rest of us has.
JF: But you are going to need business to be part of this compact, aren't
you? If they remain sceptical, how can you ensure that they will
participate?
PM: Well, I think we are setting up, in a very novel change here, a
competitive case management and job placement market. That is, we
are not simply leaving this to the CES, there will be the development of
private case managers, and we will ee a much greater effectiveness
in job placement. Therefore, I think, a better relationship with
employers, and a willingness on the part of employers, therefore, to
build a relationship with a case manager, or a case management firm,
or the CES, and to take people up. As well as that, there are very
strong job subsidy payments here. If employers take people up they're 
will be $ 230.00 to $ 260.00 for the first 13 weeks, and it drops back
after that, and if they keep them on we give them a bonus too. So, as
well as that the Government will be introducing the feature of a training
wage. So, for trainees, particularly young people and unemployed
people, those people will take a discount on award wages for on-thejob
training. So, I think the other thing that needs to be remembered
here, from this recession to this recovery, in this recovery, there won't
be resort to migration for a compliment to skills formation in the
economy. This has got to be internally generated from the new
entrants of the labour market and from the long term unemployed.
JE: And if we don't train those people ourselves we end up with a problem
at the other end of higher demands on wages because of skill
shortages.
PM: We end up with that, and you end up with this terrible problem of
alienation. Where 300,000 to 400,000 people think that society
doesn't care about them, that they are cast offs, that there is no role for
them. And that leads, I think, in the end to social division and social
decay. If you look at countries like the United States where you see it
in a lot of the capital cities, it is because no Government at the time
ever took this kind of interest.
JF But, if you are going to say that you want to include employers,
employers are saying that the new industrial relations Act, which
makes it harder for them to sack people, is actually a disincentive to
employ people.
PM: Well, employers were quite bullish, I thought, yesterday in their
reaction to the Statement. The Chamber of Manufactures of NSW
said, the White Paper is a helping hand, the White Pa per is a helping
hand, it is also in the best interests of industry. If sid th-e job compact
will ensure that a person who needs to find a job will merge sweetly,
sweetly, whether employers need to fill one. Now, those organisations
represent the many smaller businesses, and medium sized
businesses, and I think that was a very encouraging sign.
JE: Do you think, perhaps, there should have been more incentive for
business to invest, because isn't that in the end where the new jobs
are going to come from?
PM: Well, there can't be a greater incentive then the highest profit share in
the countries history. Which is currently what business has: a 33 per
cent corporate tax rate, massive acceleration depreciation, if that is not
going to work, nothing is going to work.
JF: Now, you have introduced a parenting allowance, and a partner
allowance, and a youth training allowance, why isn't it fair to say that
these are simply devices to get those people off the unemployment
lists? 
PM: Because what we have been doing in the past is jointly income testing
couples where the bread winner has been unemployed. So, if then,
let's say the husband, gets some extra income with a very savage
taper on the pension, that is, for every dollar of income they earn they
lose a dollar of unemployment benefits. That income to the family is
also lost from the spouse caring for the children. So, in a very major
reform in this White Paper, what the Government decided is to
separately, rather then jointly, income test. And to separately pay to
the couple, the individuals, half the married rate of unemployment
benefit. So, you will find that a spouse would be paid $ 132.00 per
week, let's say for a mother, into her bank account. And that is there,
either, while she is being work tested for unemployment benefits, or
she has children at home so accepts it as a parenting allowance.
Now, she won't lose any of that money until the husband, if you like,
until his income rises to about $ 380.00, $ 375.00 a week. So, in other
words, as a result that couple now on unemployment benefits, or even
where one is in full time low paid work, will be advantaged quite
substantially. Probably, I think, about 120,000 low income families will
find themselves about $ 60 a week better off. So, in other words let
me try and put it simply again instead of jointly income testing a
couple on unemployment benefits we pay the benefit separately to the
husband and wife, or partner as the case may be, and we income test
them both separately. But because the income test is more generous
with a 70 per cent, what is called taper rate, rather than 100, that
means that the husband can earn more and the wife still keeps the full
amount, either as unemployment benefit or as a parenting allowance.
JF: But it does mean that a lot of those people will disappear won't they,
and the young people from the unemployment list as we see them
now, because they won't be regarded as part of the labour force?
PM: Well it is a matter of whether a woman 32 years of age with a couple of
kids, 2 or 3 children, who can't really be work-tested should ever have
been regarded as being in the labour force. I mean is that person
really in the labour force? The answer is they are not.
JF: Prime Minister, when you look at the package you say the underlying
philosophy is employment and growth. But in fact the other argument
is that you have got to get the growth first and the employment will
come. Why not reduce the budget deficit further then was expected
under the previous budget deficit reduction program?
PM: Because I think we answered this in the White Paper. We say the
judgement to be made is the marginally lower budget deficit and
marginally lower financing effects. Vis a vis picking up the better part
of half a million people and managing them back into work. The
macro-economic effect of that is far greater than it is the marginally
lower interest rate effect on financing a lower budget deficit. At any
rate, the financial markets have gone crackers lately anyway. I mean, 
here they are with long bonds up 2 per cent, on the short end up point
7 for no good reason. So, they are saying to the Government; " you
should produce a lower budget deficit", which they want. So, we leave
the long term unemployed, half a million people in a hole, and we then
say to you, well, in that case you will give us a lower interest rate when
you have just demonstrated that you are going to give us a higher one
for no good reason, even when you look at the low inflation numbers
coming up.
JF: Are you concerned that the current account deficit yesterday showed
that there was a 2 per cent increase in the trend figure, suggesting that
perhaps we are seeing a blow out in the current account again?
PM: I don't think so. We have had such a great export performance over
the last few years. The shift to export, the cultural change is just so
strong now. I mean, there are business people all over South East
Asia and North Asia. We are massively competitive on the exchange
rate, inflation and wages, and that is why in the White Paper on
industry policy we have got those changes running through again on
export market development grants. We have said we will leave the
scheme there for another five years, and we have improved it. On the
ITES ( International trade enhancement scheme) another four years.
All of these out-reach programs help business break into export
markets. So, the whole Statement is one about national efficiency, as
well as equity. We are saying it is not simply a matter of fairness, but
it is a matter of efficiency; that you don't have a pool of half a million
people long term unemployed. That skills formation in the recovery is
not going to come from migration, even with the migration level, intake
levels we have now. It is going to come from new entrants to the work
force and retraining a large body of people who shouldn't be bearing
the brunt of the recession by themselves.
JF: Your White Paper was fairly comprehensively leaked, and Bronwyn
Bishop appears to have got a leak of the outline of the Budget speech
for next week. Are you concerned?
PM: No, it is not a leak. It is a Paper asking a set of questions about things
that might be considerations in the Budget. I mean, it must have been
very early in the process, the Government has moved way beyond that
now, and the Paper bears no resemblance to what the Budget will be
in a week.
JF: Are you aware of the allegations that were made in the Parliament
today
PM: I wasn't in Parliament today, other then to present the Paper.
JF: Are you aware of an investigation by the CJC in Queensland, and are
you aware if it involves any Labor Party figures? 
PM: I have got no idea. I have been told about the claims made. I can only
comment on the cowardice of this person, in the House of
Representatives, abusing the privilege of the Parliament to make these
sort of allegations. I mean, this is these days the stock in trade of the
Coalition. I mean, they don't have any policies, they are devoid of
policies, they must look at this Paper and just wonder. The Liberal
Party and National Parties couldn't have conceived of this White
Paper, let alone implement it. And if that is their form, if this is their
parliamentary form for this session, in the face of this sort of quality,
then the Australian people again, will, I think, judge them harshly.
JF: Thank you Prime Minister.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH SARAH MACDONALD, RADIO TRIPLE J, 5 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
SM: This is quite a major initiative done, you are addressing Australia's
biggest problems. Is it the most important policy you have ever
released?
PM: It is very hard to qualify the various statements. I mean, I think,
probably the most important things in terms of the long run future of
the Australian economy were done when I was Treasurer, and more
recently, restoring the economy to the growth with One Nation in 1992.
But this is an important statement of social policy. What we are saying
here, we are not as a Labor Government prepared to leave a body of
people 350-400,000 long term jemlyedpeople carry the brunt of
economic change and economic adjustment.
SM: When we look at people who are under 18 and who haven't got a job
under this scheme, they will now get a new allowance instead of the
dole, but it will be about the same amount of money. What's the point?
PM: Well, the thing is, we will now case manage, that's personally, every
young person under 18 who is unemployed. So, every young person
who is under 18 and unemployed will have a relationship with a case
manager, who will get to understand their personality, their educational
attainment's, their work experience, their aptitude, what things they
might be able to do, what training might be able to be given to them,
what job placement might be able to be had for them, rather than being
part of simply a relatively rigid national system of management of
unemployment, it will be this personalised basis. And we think that
because the economy has changed so much in the last ten years that
a lot of the jobs that might have been available, say then, and ten
years before that, for young people are simply not there. So, they
have to be trained and they have to be managed. 
SM: Well, on this training allowance it will be about $ 120.00 a week, it will
depend on your parents income, but it won't change whether you are
doing training or not. How do you think young people are going to go
to work every day, a training place every day, clothe themselves and
buy lunch on that sort of money?
PM: Well, there are two things we are talking about here. We are talking
about the youth training initiative, which is picking up unemployed
people undeF1 8' nd giving them base management, training and a job
placement, and there is the traineeships for people who are in work,
and who are doing training. And as you know, the Government
announced yesterday that it will be developing a training wage. The
training wage will be well, by a very big margin, above $ 125.00 a
week. Now, that training wage will provide on-the-job training and it
will be, I think, a great advance. That is, a single rate across all
industries, not just a multiplicity of training rates, but a single rate
across all industries for people who are in training.
SM: Now, if people are in training and they drop out they will lose that
wage. Are you worried that employers will exploit them knowing that
they can't leave?
PM: No, I think the retention rates we are seeing with these labour market
programs is quite high, and with case management it will get higher.
That is, a greater proportion of people remain employed, and their self
esteem goes up, and their feeling about themselves improves, and
their capacity improves, and their value to an employer improves. The
alternative is to take the heartless view that you see from some of
these right wing people, say, " forget them, forget them, if they are not
good enough to go through the school system and into university or
TAFE, forget them."
SM: At the end of a training period you are giving an employer a bit of a
lurk, $ 500.00 if they keep the person on. Do you think that will be
enough? I mean, how can you ensure that such programs mean real
jobs and real careers at the end of training?
PM: The real jobs don't come out, what you call real jobs this package is
about training people who are disadvantaged who have been
unemployed. It is not of its essence a job creation package, it is not
supposed to be.
SM: So you are relying on the economic recovery to find the jobs. When
do you think that will happen, though?
PM: Well there is a quarter of a million come through this year. A quarter
of a million in the last 12 months. 
SM: How much choice will people have in this individual case management
when they are put on a training program? Say if a young person wants
to manage a rock band, instead of being trained in tourism, how much
choice will they get?
PM: Well, it depends what their aptitude is, and what their interests are. I
think that a case manager may respond well to somebody who has got
some real musical capacity and some real management ability. But
they won't respond well to somebody who wants to be a rock manager,
but doesn't understand the music or the management, or doesn't have,
seemingly, enough of an educational standard to be able to do it. So,
there is in all these things, and particularly the job compact for those
unemployed 18 months or more, there will be a great effort by the
Government and the Commonwealth to case manage people, to give
them training and a job subsidy and work experience. But there is a
reciprocal obligation to take any reasonable job offer.
SM: Well, what sort of reasonable job offer would that be, though? If it was
in something they are totally not interested in, would they not have to
do it?
PM: They would have to do it.
SM: They would.
PM: They would. Otherwise we would be saying, well look, we will carry
you financially while you decide whether you will do something or not.
And remember here there is going to be a big effort in case
management. The subsidies for these people will be up to $ 260.00 a
week if they are unemployed for three years, if they are unemployed
for over 18 months, over a year, that is $ 230.00 a week. Plus the
costs of a training place in TAFE, it is a big public expense, and
therefore, I think, people have got to say, " ok I will take what I can do,
and what the case manager works out with me." It depends on the
relationship that the person is going to develop with the case manager
as well.
SM: When young people and the long term unemployed are in training they
won't show up in the unemployment figures. I mean, forgive me for
being a bit cynical, but they will make the figures nice and low for the
next election, won't it?
PM: Well I won't forgive you for being cynical. Because if you think the
Government is taking on this sort of work, have you see this White
Paper..
SM: Yes, I have.
PM: Have you seen the work in it? I mean, it was an enormous amount of
ministerial time and effort in this. This was something that I made a 
commitment to in the last election campaign. The fact is, this
Government will not accept the notion that comes from the Liberal
Party and others that what we ought to have is basically a low rent, low
wage society for people on the outer, and if you are really on the outer,
too bad for you. It is only the achievers who get a crack at the national
cake. That sort of society breeds all sorts of fractures in social
cohesion and discontent and alienation, and it is simply unacceptable.
That is why the Government is doing this. It is not about the
unemployment numbers per se. But can I just say earlier, like, you
were seeming to cast a doubt upon the fact that there won't be enough
jobs in the economy growing. I will just remind you that between 1983
and 1993 we had, in this economy, 2 million job growth. Ten years
ago, eleven years ago when I was first sworn in as Treasurer we had a
labour market of 6 million people. That is 8 million people today.
Even with the unemployment we still created 2 million and hung onto
them. So, already in this year we have seen 250,000 job growth. The
economy is growing at 4 per cent, we are growing as fast, just about,
as any other western country in the world. So basically the aggregate
employment growth will be there, but the point of this policy is to make
sure that everyone gets a crack at the stream of jobs.
SM: And they are ready for those new jobs. Well, as the man in charge of
the economy, where do you think those new jobs are? If you were
looking for a job now and you had just left school, where would you be
going?
PM: The kind of jobs that were available when I was a teenager are not
around now, because they have mostly been taken up by data
processing equipment, and by fax transmission. I mean, all those
transmission jobs which were around in the banking system, in the
public service, in the 1960s, they are not there today, in retailing, they
are not there today.
SM: Which jobs are there today?
PM: Trained jobs are there today. People with skills are there today. I
mean, you look at the 1980s, we had no pfo6blem taking up large
bodies of young people who were trained, but we will have problems
taking up people who are untrained. And that is the point of this
policy, we are saying, for those who wish to be in structured training,
there is the traineeships and the training wage, and for those who are
already, say, 16-19 who are unemployed there is a youth training
initiative which will pick them up and case manage each one. So, we
are saying that the period 15-19 should be a period of vocational
preparation. That nobody should believe that you leave school at
or 16 and you go out there and try and get a low paid job. You stay in
school or you stay in structured training until you are in a position to
take a job which this economy will now offer you. 
SM: I was just wondering if you could give us, perhaps, a bit of a hint about
where you think most of those jobs are going to be, though, so people
can get themselves ready if they are still at school?
PM: 80 per cent of Australia's national production is in the service sector of
the economy. What is happening as Australia gets larger and
wealthier, we are seeing greater sophistication in services, we are
seeing it every day of the week
SM: Ok, the service industries. Thank you very much for your time to
Prime Minister, good to talk to you.
PM: Pleasure. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO 5 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minster, you are about to spend billions of dollars on subsidies
to employers, and yet employers say that all the time, that all they want
is less business on costs. Why not spend the same billions taking
some of the costs off business?
PM: Well, because this is about an impact on a group of disadvantaged
Australians. That is, people who have been unemployed for' 12
months-or more, and there is 360,000 of them. And it is unfair, and it
is inefficient, and we have got to re-skill them and be interested in
them, and place them in work, and lift their confidence, and lift their
esteem, and lift their usefulness to an employer, and when we do that
we will do a lot for business. Because in this recovery, which is
showing every sign of being a strong one, we won't get the compliment
to skills formation from migration. It is going to come, and has to
come, from the Australian labour market, from new entrants into the
labour market and from this pool of unemployed people. So, in getting
them re-set by intensively case managing each individual person in
this category, we are going to do a lot for business.
FK: But the key to all this is new jobs. Business says the key to new jobs
is new growth and less business on costs. Why not listen to thtrh nd
just take more of that away and let business do it themselves instead
of bribing them to take on people?
PM: Well, the answer is, we have now got the highest profit share in the
nations history. That is, a proportion of national income going to
profits was last this high in 1988, and before then had no historical
precedent. We have given business a 33 per cent corporate tax rate,,
the same as Singapore, and tax rates in the region. We have given
them a massive acceleration in depreciation. We have removed the
double tax from dividends. You have got to say, well what else? So,
what do we do, say forget 300,000 500,000, but forget it. You stay in
a hole, feel alienated, believe society is not interested in you,
particularly young people. But we will marginally improve the 
2
profitability of business, which is already, in macro-economic terms,
massively profitable.
FK Alright, but as you say, the key imperative here is to get people skilled,
is training, how can we trust business to train and train adequately
when in the past they have roundly abused the Training Guarantee
Levy by sending people off to junkets on desert islands, they haven't
put it in to training their staff. Why trust them now?
PM: Well, there will be various forms of training, there will be accredited
structure training by places in TAFE'_ 1in other training institutions as
well as on-the-job training. I mean, much training that employers
provide on the job is the kind of training that is very useful to them and
their employees. And that is the reason that they keep them. But, one
of the problems we have in this country today, in most western
countries, is when I was a teenager there were jobs available for low
skilled work, that work is mostly done by data processing equipment
today. It is work that doesn't exist. Now, we have ten years ago, only
three kids in ten completed secondary school, this year it is eight in
ten. We mean it to be nine and a half in ten at the end of this decade,
in six years time. But there are still kids 15 19 who are dropping out
who are untrained, there aren't jobs for them, and what we want to do
is basically there aren't unskilled jobs for them we want to skill them,
we want to train them, both at school in years 11 and 12, as
traineeships under the training award we are talking about, a training
wage, and on-the-job training.
FK: But you are also investing billions of dollars in this training that is
going to be coordinated and overseen by the Department of
Employment, Education and Training, by the CES, both areas that
have had an incredible number of problems and restructuring to try
and get it right in the past. How can we trust that this billion dollars will
be spend efficiently, and won't go down the drain in mistakes?
PM: Well, one of the things we are doing, which is another novel thing we
are doing, is we are setting up a competitive market for the provision of
case management and job placement. Now, under this proposal in
1994-95 we will be personally case managing, that is one to one case
managing, 504,000 people, over half a million people. And we want to
see that done by the CES and private institutions in the case
management business. So, we are creating a competitive market for
case management. In other words, we are saying this will no longer be
a monopoly for the CES, there will be competitive providers of these
services and by doing that, I believe, we will be very effective in getting
the key thing, which is an accurate assessment of the state of a
person's esteem, to understand their skills, their educational
qualifications, the work experience they have had and to properly
place them in a job.
FK: If that training works, at the end of all this, the only guarantee you are
really given in the White. Paper is that it will create one million job
placements through it. Not one million jobs, not permanent jobs,
that is not much of a promise is it? People want promises of real jobs. 
PM: Well, it is a huge promise. For people who have been out of work for a
year, or 18 months, or two years..
FK: But they don't want six months job placement, do they? They want a
real job.
PM: They want firstly enough training to be able to take a job. They want
the esteem which comes from knowing they could actually do a job,
that people actually liked them and were satisfied with them. We have
tremendous success in placing people out of labour market programs.
And that placement means that you have got someone usefully and
gainfully employed back in the economy. But the aggregate
employment growth will come from growth in the economy. The
economy is already growing at 4 per cent:
FK: Well, what is the employment rate going to be then, at the end of this
four years?
PM: Well, we have already had 250,000 job growth in the last year.
FK: But we have still got a million people unemployed.
PM: What we are aiming for here is an unemployment rate, which we think
is within our grasp, of 5 per cent at the end of the decade.
FK: Is that good enough? Are you happy with that figure?
PM: WellI it is better then 10 per cent as it is now.
FK: It is a long way from full employment though, isn't it?
PM: Well, in western countries, I don't think you will find any country is
below 5 per cent unemployment. In the United States they regard full
employment as 6.5 per cent. Now, I would like to think we can get to
five and do better. But at least this is a huge attempt, a novel attempt
to deal with the long term unemployed and to get them down based on
real economic growth. I mean we are exporting our heads off, we are
growing faster than any other western economy, I think, bar New
Zealand. But New Zealand has lost so much growth in the ' 80s, it is
not to be compared with Australia. And we have got low inflation, high
profit share, massive innovation in manufacturing, tremendous
sophistication in services, all we need to do is to train the people to
take the places and the natural growth in the economy will pick the
great body of people up.
FK: It is a novel attempt, but isn't it when it comes down to it just really
putting an awful lot of faith in the job compact working? How can you
really promise all your critics who say they are just going to be
shuffling the long term unemployed queue.
PM: But it is more than that. We are also changing the social security
system. At the moment there is a 100 per cent withdrawal rate on 
unemployment benefits. That is, every dollar you earn you lose a
dollar off the unemployment benefit rate. We are changing that to
per cent. We are going form joint testing of a couple to individual
income testing, we are paying the unemployment benefit individually to
a husband and a wife or partner. And by changing the taper to 70 per
cent it means that many of them will take part time work, which they
now can't do. And if they take part time work, again, they get more
family income, their self esteem, their contribution to society grows.
So, it is not just a job compact, there is a whole sophistication of
changes here, there is a radical restructuring of the social security
system where for the first time we are paying benefits individually, and
income testing people individually. And as some people, may well by
now know, there is also the option of women who are at home, or the
spouse at home with young children, to take the parenting allowance,
which will mean that the parenting allowance is paid directly to the
spouse who is looking after children, mainly the mother, directly to her
bank account, and it is not diminished by what the husband or partner
earns, as is the case now. So, this is a very large change which will
actually encourage people to go out and take part time work, and there
is a lot of part time work in the Australian economy today.
FK: How are you going to pay for all this? Is it going to come out of the
growth dividend, is that where the money is coming from?
PM: Well, what we are saying is this will cost $ 1.7 billion in a full year, and
$ 6 billion over the next four years. That is about point 3 of a per cent
of GDP per year, and we say very clearly in the Statement that the
marginally higher financing cost of that addition to the Budget deficit,
or that, if you like, change in the Budget deficit, that would otherwise
be that much lower, is not to be compared with the macro-economic
benefit of having, meeting, skill shortages in a recovery, training
people from a large pool of unemployed resources, getting a more
responsive social security system, case managing every young person
under 18 years of age who is out of work, training them the macroeconomic
effect of that is not to be compared with a Budget deficit
being $ 1.7 billion lower.
FK: But you still have to pay for that.
PM: Look, people say well you will end up with a marginally lower interest
rate effect. Here we have got the financial markets, long bonds are
now over 8.5 per cent, the inflation rate is two. You have got a real
rate on the long end of 7.5 per cent. The average real rate of interest
in the last 50 years was between 4 4.5 per cent, or 3.5 4.5 per cent.
I mean, the notion that the Government should basically forget, the
better part of half a million people say, " tough luck, you're unemployed,
you have taken the brunt of the load and if you are alienated, too bad
for you".
EK: No one wants to forget them.
PM: The implied question is.. 
FK: How is it going to be paid for?
PM: The answer is, in an economy that the Government has said in the
Statement today I said we will still bring the Budget deficit down to 1
per cent of GDP, around 1996-97. That is the Government's
commitment and we are doing this within that commitment.
FK: So, will this come out of the growth dividend?
PM: As the economy grows it will produce revenue, more employment, less
unemployment benefits, and the Budget deficit will improve. This is
coming where it should come, it should come from the nation's purse,
for the nation's people, the nation's disadvantaged people.
FK Does that mean more taxes then, in the nations purse?
PM: No, it simply means that the nation is facing up to its responsibilities to
a category of individuals who have carried the burden of economic
change.
FK: Finally, Prime Minister, on another matter, National Party MP, Bob
Cater, asked Michael Lavarch in question time yesterday whether
Graham Richardson was the Labor politician referred to in the
Australian newspaper in relation to a sex scandal. What is your
reaction to that accusation?
PM: The then Senator Richardson had a similar low brow accusation
levelled at him a decade or so ago, about some love boat in Sydney
Harbour, there wasn't a grain of truth in it. And to have this coward
getting up under privilege, he wouldn't say it at the front door of
Parliament House, but always these characters get up under the
privilege which is extended to Members of Parliament for serious
issues to sort of attack somebody. I wasn't in the House, I was still
preparing the Statement, and I came in later to deliver it after question
time. But, I mean, every Parliament seems to pick up a number of low
quality individuals.
FK: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Pleasure.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS, NATIONAL PRESS CLUB
MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Q: Robert Garran from the Australian, Mr Keating. You seem to be
proposing to pay for the White Package through a growth dividend
arising from faster economic growth and from asset s-ales. Some
pundits, including Reserve Bank Governor, Mr Fraser and Ross
Garnaut, have argued that the growth dividend should be used to wind
back the discretionary rise in the Budget deficit of the last three years.
The bond market's response to the White Plaper suggests that many
investors agree with them. Are they wrong?
PMV: Yes. In short, yes. The notion is that there is a discretionary thing
here. That this is a matter of luxury. That the discretion actually
extends to some sort of measure of luxury. You know, this is a gold
plated thing the Government might not do. Well the critics of the policy
number among those who say, " let's leave them. Let's forget them,
let's side line them". Because they know anyone who has any
economic credentials knows that looking at the 80s experience, or any
other, economic growth will pick up the new entrants to the labour
market, but it won't pick up the long term unemployed. And the Green
Paper estimated that even with ' economic growth of the magnitude in
question, by the end of the century we would still have 300,000 people
long term unemployed. Now one of the points I made yesterday, I will
make it again today, compliments to skill formation in this recovery will
not come from migration. They will come only from our own workforce,
and people joining our own workforce as new entrants, or re-training
and replacing those who are long term unemployed. So, therefore, if
we want to keep a high rate of growth and keep away from skills bottle
necks, and sustain that rate of growth and get down the natural rate of
unemployment with a sustenance of stable rates of inflation, the only
way is to reform the labour market. Therefore, I reject the notion that it 
is luxurious or that it is discretionary. If you then accept that it isn't
discretionary, that it is a thing that any civilised country with sensible
and sane values should do, it is something that a Government does.
The main thing is that the things are workable, that they are efficient,
that they are well targeted, that there is a very large bang for every
dollar bang for the buck here in the program design and delivery.
And if you accept those things then the deficit which falls from the
budget numbers, in whatever equation of growth and diminished
outlays, or pick up in receipts, is the one that is appropriate for the
country. But the one that we will have with this program, inclusive of
this program, will be one within the previously determined target by the
Government of a Budget deficit around 1 per cent of GDP by 1995-96.
Now people are aguing that the marginally diminished financing effects
of the $ 1.7 billion diminished deficit will outstrip the macro-economic
efficiency effects of case managing half a million people back into the
labour market. That is absolute bunkum, absolute nonsense. And are
we to say to a financial market, which lemming like has sold down long
bonds because of a change in monetary policy of point 75 of a per cent
in the United States, and driven up yields in their fright that in the
hands of these great thinkers that we will have an appropriate dividend
for a lower budget deficit at the expense of half a million Australians
and their livelihood, then we won't be making that calculation. And
that's why I answered yes.
Q: Ross Peake from the Canberra Times, Prime Minister. I was speaking
to a manger of a CES Branch this morning, who incidentally really likes
the W ' hite Package, but the discussion raised two questions. How will
you deliver on your guarantee of a job for the long term unemployed in
a small town where unemployment is already high? And secondly,
how confident are you that you can change the mindset that employers
seem to have against hiring the long term unemployed?
PM: Well, that is part of the challenge, I think, that faces the whole country,
that the Government can't do this alone, we have made this very clear
in the Paper. That is, that this has to be done by everybody, there has
to be a premium by all of us on the notion that we are better and
stronger if all of us have opportunities of work and enjoying Australian
prosperity. Now, you can take the other view. You can take the view
that the British manager took: " we won't give them an hourly rate,
because we won't get the productivity". You can drive the wage race
down so you have got essentially a heap of working poor people. I
mean, one of the things that President Clinton said to me in Blake
Island going out, on the back of a vessel, I remember well he said,
"' one of the things I want to remedy in this country is the fact that the
American working poor haven't had a real wage increase in 15 years."
Now, that's what has happened in America. You have got a huge body
of poor people. And I don't believe that we can make that decision.
Therefore, it means that we all have to regard full employment, that
much of it as we can garner from these changes, from economic 
growth, as an objective for us all. And it means if the Government sets
up programs that actually provide case management and training
where necessary, or a job subsidy, employers should at least take The
opportunity of taking peo~ ple up and giving them a go. And they will
find, I think, that with the retention rates we have been able to secure
with many labour market programs has a high success rate. And given
the fact that a lot of labour market programs now are actually managed
through a fairly rigid system, a fairly rigid system, a much more closely
arranged and targeted system, a person-to-person case manage
system should mean that the matching between the person and the
employer, and the attitude of the person should be better. So,
therefore the retention rates and success rates in jobs of long term
unemployed people should be higher. If that happens employers may
change their mind about the value of taking unemployed people. As
well as that the subsidies are quite high, for someone unemployed
three years it is $ 260.00 for the first 13 weeks, it drops down
substantially after that. But it is still a substantial benefit. And for
$ 230.00 for people unemployed 12 months or more. So, there is, I
think, a value in that, and of course with a training wage we have got
the prospect of employers taking on young people for training at below
award rates because there is some structured on-the-job training. All
this, I think, leads to good employer and employee relations that
generally lead to on-going employment. So, that's where I think the
relationship will be. In country towns there will always be a problem
where there is a dearth of jobs, but one of the things we have in the
White Paper is a new opportunities program where we might be able to
fund some of these payments to community organisations who engage
young people and unemployed people in community work. Now, there
is a bit of additionality in jobs in the paper, essentially, it is not about
additionality, it is about streaming the long term unemployed back into
the mainstream labour market.
Q: Laura Tingle, from the Australian, Prime Minister. You said in your
speech yesterday, and also today in your comments, that in this
recovery the compliment to skill formation in the labour market is not
going to come from migration but it is coming from training our own
people. I was wondering given the unemployment crisis, and the fact
that it is going to take a long time to resolve, what the Governments
parameters are on establishing a migration program in the medium
term?
PM: Well, we will be, as you may know, Laura, this time each year we
announce a migration target for the year. That follows a process of
extensive consiitations vWhich we have with the States, with employer
organisations, with community groups and this process has been
undertaken by my colleague, Nick Bolkus, and he will be reporting to
Cabinet shortly with his recommendation for this year's intake. But it
needs to be juxtaposed against the view that the migration program
was cut from, I think, a high of about 147 thousand to just over 
thousand a couple of years ago. And the emphasis there, a greater
emphasis on family reunion, and therefore, the notion that people will
have come here and set themselves up here, and being housed here
ready to participate in the recovery and meet skills shortages at
various points in the economy, is one that I don't think that we ought to
substantially rely upon. That is not to say there isn't some additional
skills and some complimentary skills coming through, there is. But
principally we are going to have to rely upon the natural growth of the
workforce and how could you do that and at the same time ignore 360
thousand people who have been unemployed for 12 months or more.
Let alone those who have been unemployed for less than 12 months.
So, this is why we believe that this is an economically efficient thing to
do. This is a micro-economic reform of great substance. That's the
point, this is a micro-economic reform of great substance, and if we
want to see the natural rate of unemployment, the NAIRU, the natural
rate of unemployment, with a sustainable low rate of inflation at the
lowest level possible, then we need to engage these people back into
the workforce.
Q: Fran Kelly, ABC Radio, Prime Minister. One of the big promises, and
one you have mentioned here again today is the one to one case
management of half a million people as part of this White Paper. That
has got to mean at least 2000 people involved in administering and
giving out the case management, those people currently aren't there.
Where are you going to find them? And is this going to turn out to be
an overly ambitious promise that can't be fulfilled?
PM: I don't think so. I think, though, it has a lot of ambition, that I would
never deny. But the question is, is it appropriately ambitious and I
think it is. The challenge will be for us to get the systems in place to
make the policy work and work well. And that's why I think it is an
important feature of the paper that the Government has said, that not
withstanding a substantial addition of resources to the CES and a
compliment to its capacities and training, that it will seek to develop,
and put incentives to develop, a private market for case management.
And we will see a whole series of companies and institutions set up. It
is very possible for instance, take the Metal Trades Industry
Association which yesterday issued a very complimentary press
statement about the White Paper. It is conceivable in capital and
provincial cities, that an organisation like the MTIA could be a case
manager, particularly for people in its industry, or other industries, the
hotels and tourism industry, for instance, could be another. I mean, I
think, one of the things we might be able to get from this is not simply
devices and organisations to case manage those who are at risk of
being long term unemployed or unemployed, but we'll actually develop
a better labour market where employers know how to responsively, in a
way where there is a quick and accurate response, go to a case
management body, be it the CES or a private one, and go there with
confidence for their future labour market needs, the future needs of the 
business. I would hope a better matching of these things should be
possible, and this is particularly so with computerisation, ADP
equipment more generally available in the economy then say in ten or
twenty years ago. And bearing in mind, I think, the CES places only
about 18 per cent of people in employment, most people find their own
job through newspaper or their own individual efforts, or networking.
And if we can improve that networking and get better matching we can
end up with a really important change from this.
Q: Nikki Savva, from the Herald Sun, Mr Keating. Can you give an
assurance now that the extra spending in the White Paper will not be
funded by increases in spending on new taxes or by increasing
existing taxes?
PM: That's the sort of question that disc jockeys normally ask me, or
reformed disc jockey's, out of print journo's I expect more sophisticated
questions. And the answer is no. I am not in the business of giving
guarantees on those sorts of things. I mean it is a week to the Budget
and that's when, I think, all will be revealed.
Q: Kim Sweetman, from the Courier Mail, Prime Minster. The regional
development plan virtually leaves provincial areas to drag themselves
up by their bootstraps. While areas like Cairns, which was cited as an
example, have managed to develop themselves due to long term
planning, what real hope can you give to the 12 per cent of Australians
which are living in areas which are already in decline?
PM: Well there seems to be a very clear contradiction in your question.
You are saying the people of Cairns under their own leadership have
made it, but you are not going to let other groups under their own
leadership make it, that's the very essence. I mean the message of
the Kelty Report, and the Mckinsey Report that after a vast survey, and
in the case of the Kelty task force, a most comprehensive visit to the
reg ions of this country and discussions of quality, and also the Industry
Commission report the one key finding was given that regions with
leadership cohesion, a sense of unity of purpose between local
government, municipal bodies, shire organisations, business
organisations, trade unions and other community organisations, that
regions which have a clear ambition for themselves and work
cooperatively invariably do better than those who don't. And so what
they found was a lot of the investment in these regions didn't come
from outside, it wasn't floating investment, it was investment generated
form within the region. And this I think is quite a revelation. Because
the notion is you have got to have someone jump in from outside and
do something they weren't formerly doing, but most of the investment
actually came from the region itself. So, what we have done in the
White Paper in response to the recommendations of Bill Kelty's
taskforce and the various other reports was to say, well look, where
there is the establishment of regional economic development 
organisations as he recommended, READOs, we will fund those and
we will let people get into a position where they can actually put
together some cogent plans for their region. As well as that we will do
some other things for them. We will actually help them with some
financial devices to fund capital formation and infrastructure that may
be necessary in particular locations. And we had a very substantial
change to the tax treatment of infrastructure bonds. We are now
giving a 33 per cent tax rebate on infrastructure bonds, where formally
these might not have been attractive to low taxed tax payers, such as
super funds which are taxed at a rate of 15 per cent or less. And the
same with pool development funds, we have changed the tax treatment
of those from 25 per cent to 15 per cent in the hope that high marginal
rate tax payers can through the mechanism of the PDF fund some
equity and capital into some of these regions. Now, I think what you
will see in regions is increasingly people will pool their own savings in
regions and they will invest them in regions because funds
management is sophisticating all the time across the economy. You
have got in some regions of Australia very large collections of retired
aged people who have got lump sums to invest and what have you.
Many of them are investing in capital city organisations. They could
have invested in regional organisations, and, I think, as a
consequence of that we can see regions starting to get their act
together, know what they should do and be helped. We have also got
there a capital fund, not a large one, but one that can, I think, make
clear that for really good capital works that will provide a big regional
dividend, that is important in a regional sense, the Commonwealth can
play a role there with either seed funds or a more substantial role. I
think that is the answer, so when we look at Cairns we have got to say,
why is the region of Cairns successful? By and large because it has
got a community comrmitted to a common set of objectives, and I think
getting those objectives together is the way to do it. But the notion of
pulling them up by their bootstraps, left to their own devices, the
flipside of that remark means the Commonwealth should be simply
going along with a very large cheque trying to rebuild these regions
and that is not possible if the regions themselves don't understand
what they can do best, how they can do it together. And where we can
play a role is helping them do that. Helping them conceive their plans
and execute them sensibly.
Q: Malcolm Farr from the Telegraph Mirror, Prime Minster. What will be
the major occupational groupings of the one million jobs the White
Paper says will be created between now and the end of the century?
And what will be the growth areas in vocational training to accompany
that?
PM: Well, I think that the general answer to that, Malcolm, would be that
per cent of our product comes from the service side of the economy.
While we have doubled manufacturing productioh in the last ten years,
and tripled manufacturing exports, productivity in manufacturing has 
probably demonstrated that those involved, the number of people
involved in manufacturing has, if not grown, fallen. But our output is
greater and our product innovation is better. Now there is a potential, I
think, with small and medium-sized enterprises to employ more people
in manufacturing, and that is one of the hopes I have and why I think
vocational education is going to be a very important complement to
tert1iry ~ skis formation. But again, if you look at the service sector of
Australia, it's changing all the time, it's far more sophisticated than it
was five years ago. And we have got services which are now
internationally traded like tourism. We are now earning $ 9 billion a
year from tourism, we were earning virtually nothing, there was a
tourism deficit in the early 1980s, and we have been closing that at
great speed. So I think that you are going to see it across the
economy. But remember this, that we had enormous job growth in the
1980s, between 1983 and 1989-90 the economy grew on average at
per cent or around that. What we're saying is that at that speed or
even slightly more around 5 per cent, ought to be a possibility in a
much freer economy than the one that we inherited over a decade ago,
where now a lot of micro-economic and structural reform has made it
far more flexible. In that context therefore, the growth in employment
which we saw in those years two million jobs, should be capable of
being replicated at that kind of rate through the balance of this century.
Therefore, I don't have a problem with the notion that in aggregate this
can be done. What we need to do, I think, is to make sure that we
accept the notion that there are not very many unskilled jobs for young
people, that 15 to 19 should be a period of vocational preparation. In
this White Paper we are actually reaching into Years 11 and 12 to give
kids work experience and to set them up vocationally while at school
as well as expanding mightily by 700 million over four years TAFE and
seeing the provision of a private training market in vocational
education beyond TAFE where we have a much closer fix by business
and industry on the training needs of the particular institutions and
where business and industry take a very close and high interest in
training themselves.
This is going to mean, I think, that vocational preparation and
education is going to rise phoenix like I believe and hope, from what
was basically a section of Australian education largely forgotten and sit
beside the universities as a real complement to Australian education
and skills.
Q: Michael Millet, Sydney Morning Herald. Prime Minister, how important
is the training wage and ACTU acceptance of it in the overall success
of the White Paper agenda and a somewhat different question are
there any circumstances in which the Government would be prepared
to revise its deficit reduction program? 
PM: Let me go to the second one first. People are saying to us you need a
lower Budget deficit, there is always someone out there bidding the
numbers down and at the same time they'll tell you investment is not
quite as strong as it ought to be. Well, if investment is not quite as
strong as it ought to be, we don't need the savings complement from
an earlier reduction in the deficit. The rate of withdrawal of the
stimulus and the cushioning which the natural stabilisers had in the
turn around of the Budget deficit from a surplus of $ 8 billion to a deficit
of $ 14 a $ 22 or $ 23 billion turn around meant the Australian economy
was saved a lot of pain and grief even beyond that which it
experienced in the course of the recession.
What we found about the recession was, it was long rather than deep
in terms of the loss to GDP, but it had very large effects in
employment. Whether that was through labour hoarding in the 1980s I
don't know. So, therefore, the notion that we should be just the
lowest deficit is the best deficit belongs simply to the mind of those
who have been preaching this stuff for years. You know, putting a
monkey on the Governments back for no particular virtue than simply
the supposed economic virtue of the lowest possible number.
Therefore, if the economy performs more strongly the revenue yield
will be greater, the natural shift in the Budget balance will become
apparent. The key point is that the cyclical changes the Government
introduced in ' One Nation' and I notice some person on television last
night talking about how the general policy had failed, yet the economy
is growing at 4 per cent and maybe even faster. You have got to say,
what do you mean it failed? It succeeded, absolutely and yet the
stimulus of ' One Nation' has been withdrawn, it was a temporary
stimulus. So, if you look at the underlying level of the outlays and the receipts,
have they been in some way changed on a discretionary basis by the
Government in some massive way which affects the budget balance?
they haven't. If anyone says ' what about the tax cuts?' My reply would
be without those the real incidence of tax would have risen. Therefore,
the budget balance as you see it and its return to surplus which is now
going to be accomplished in this period is something which we've been
able to do because of the great fiscal consolidation of the 1980s.
Because Australia had a surplus it was able to open up the deficit and
cushion the effect of the recession upon the economy. Similarly, now
the economy is growing it will come back and it will come back
sensibly. But everyone who says that in an economy of $ 400 billion
odd of GDP and a budget of $ 110 billion or there abouts, look, $ 1
million is going to make or break the whole show, we say what kind of
vernier dial to you have? What kind of enhanced calibrations to you
possess because there is no doubt that the Wallahs of the financial
markets have no such vernier dials and no such calibrations.
That is why I believe that the Government in these things is correct. 
The training wage is important because, for a start, we are trying to get
up the-canc-pTof a national training award or a national training
decision with one rate. So instead of having a multiplicity of rates
across various industries that we've had we end up with one rate which
has a discount on the award rate for on-the-job training, not simply a
low rate. I notice the Liberals the other day out talking about this thing
of theirs called Jobtrain. They were talking about massive discounts
on award wages without any need for training. Theirs was simply the
word they used for pushing wages down. But there they were at the
front door the other day saying, " we thought of this first" imagine them
thinking of anything novel first. Novel let alone first. I suppose there is
a tautology there, if its novel it must be first. Anyway, there it is.
Therefore, it can be an important thing for young people and for
unemployed people for an employer to say look, we won't be giving the
award wage, but the discount will be a sensible one and we'll make
that up by on-the-job training. Because for many employers the onthe-
job training is the kind they really want. They get somebody that
comes to their place or factory, they teach them something and they
become a real value to them. They build a real relationship. That, I
think, is the value of the training wage.
Q: Mark Riley, Sydney Morning Herald. If our focus is going to be on full
employment, could you share with us your definition of full employment
in per centage terms and secondly, the best case scenarios seem to
be that we are going to be stuck with unemployment of 500,000 at the
turn of the century. To what extent would you and your party accept
responsibility for that figure?
PM: We'll accept responsibility for the number, but if we were the
Government and I think we will be, that is, if we were able to get
unemployment down to around 5 per cent which roughly equates to
half a million people where now we have got a million people out of
work, the way I see things half a million out of work is much better than
a million out of work. But understand this point, to get to that one
would have to create well over a million jobs because you are not just
talking about half a million off the current one million, you've got to
take all the new entrants to the labour force up between now and then.
I don't know whether you understand this point. If you think about it
you know you are not dealing with just a million. You've got roughly a
million people there and then you've got the addition to the work force
in the period. So, if you're getting to half a million, you've got to have
well over a million.
You are saying, would we take responsibility for that? Absolutely.
Q: ( inaudible) 
PM: Well, that is difficult. What is structural full employment these days in
an economy in a massive transition? In the United States they think
it's around 6 per cent. The aim of this White Paper though is to get
down what's called NAIRU-the natural unemployment rate consistent
with stable low inflation. That is, if we have labour market programs
this sophisticated, if we have flexibility in the labour market coming
from changes in the industrial relations laws, if we have enterprise
flexibility in enterprise bargaining, if we have productivity diminishing
costs therefore, with a combination of these things and low inflation
generally sensible outcomes on wages productivity, profits et cetera, it
should be possible to lower whatever otherwise one would believe
would be the unemployment rate with stable rates of inflation. Now, I
don't know what that is. When I say that let me complete the sentence;
I don't know what it is other than to say it is certainly not zero, but we
would certainly be within close proximity of making a fine judgement
about it were we to have unemployment at 5 per cent by the end of the
century. I think that is the important point.
Q: Tony Vermeer, AAP. Prime Minister, the relative air of peace between
the Right and the Left seems to have ended in a big way in NSW and
Victoria recently. You plan to privatise airports, that appears to be
grist for the mill for more destabilisation between the factions. Are you
headed for a big stoush at the ALP national conference?
PM: I don't think so. The thing is, one of the great structural changes for
Australia in the last eleven years was that the major party capable of
forming a government in its own right has reformed its views, changed
the way it has operated, become a party of government and led a
process of major, massive national reform. For any nation this is a
major advance. When you see major parties going to seed in Western
Europe and the United States and other places like North America, this
is a major change. The Labor party has proven it is the vehicle of
social and economic change in Auitralia and it has proven it changes
itself on the way through it. Now, at every point along the way,
whether it was foreign bank entry or whether it was the sale of Qantas,
you'll always have these debates. I regard those as fairly healthy and
we've always worked our way through them. The thing is the Labor
party can change and adapt. What the Coal ition has shown is they
can't. Every reference of their they talk about rebuilding by going
back to Menzies. They talk about the future by going back to Menzies
and we are told reliably Menzies didn't vote for them in the last two
elections of his life. I don't think he voted for us either, but we wouldn't
want his vote.
Therefore, I think, that the public being quite wise about all of this,
looking past the static of the daily media reporting to the points of
value, say this is good, there's the Labor party taking on another thing
and they listen for what the debate is about and if they form a
judgement that say an airport can be run efficiently as a private sector 
organisation, perhaps even more efficiently, they say a good thing has
been done here. And if it requires a debate so be it.
Q: Randal Markey, The West Australia. Prime Minister, earlier this week
you told Caucus when the time comes for the next election you will
" punch out the Coalition's lights". Given that the two WA Green
Senators said last night that they will have problems voting for the
legislative based parts of your White Paper and the Opposition is
toying with the idea of voting against parts of it, although it hasn't
specified what it will do, could rejection of any part of the White Paper
provide you with the double dissolution trigger to ' punch to Coalition's
lights out'?
PM: One of the things that would restrain me and that is, if I punch their
lights out, I'd break your heart anyway and that would displease me no
end. The fact is that, let's see what the Senate does. It is always
talking about these days, it is always getting minor officials to defend it
and telling us how representative it is, this is something for which the
Government went to an election, it is something I made clear in the
course of the campaign we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind.
John Hewson said if you reached back to pick them up they'll pull the
rest of us down. I believe that faced with the structure, order, sense
and decency of this policy, the Senate will have no recourse but to
pass it.
Q: Geoff Barker, The Melbourne Age. Prime Minister, you said yesterday
that the decade of Labor Government made Australia one of the most
sophisticated social democracies in the world and I note that Professor
John Neville of the University of New South Wales has published
research showing that the number of Australians living below the
Henderson poverty line over the 1 980s has increased from 9 to 13 per
cent and that general income distribution has become distinctly more
unequal with the rich doing much the best. How does that research
square with your view that Australia has become one of the most
sophisticated social democracies in the world?
PM: I think Ross Gittins answered this quite well in an article the other day
saying that the poor have become much less poorer even if some of
the wealthy have become wealthier. As a consequence, if one looks at
the transfer payments which we now have well, a number of things,
the support for low paid people in the wage system, the direction of the
tax cuts for nearly ten years to their benefit, the reduction in the bottom
rates of tax and the lift in the tax free threshold, the Family Allowance
and the additional family payment formerly the Family Allowance
Supplement all of these things and support for, I'm just trying to
remember the expression, but in the late 1980s to the early 1990s we
had a complement to the wages of unskilled low paid people, mainly
women in the retail and clothing industry, and these things, I think,
have changes as with the advent of Medicare and the social wage in 
general, changed the treatment of the poor in this country. You'll
always have critics from the Left and from the Right, but I don't think
any serious person believes with the targeted safety net we have in
place today and there is more of it in this White Paper. Here we are in
a very marked reform again taking the joint income testing of an
unemployed couple and separating it down the middle and paying half
the married rate to one partner and half to the other and then income
testing one and where the others income is not affected, as it was
under the joint income tests, not affected until that unemployed person
has substantially more income. In fact $ 230 of more income before $ 1
is lost under the new taper of the spouses unemployment benefit or
parenting allowance another milestone, major change.
Let me say Geoffrey, I was very disappointed with The Age this
morning. Because, frankly the Sydney Morning Herald's coverage and
the Australian coverage beat The Age into the ground. The Age is
always going around saying it is part of the Melbourne social
laboratory it is interested in social and economic issues; your lead
story was reporting financial market whinges. Mark Baker had one
which was peripheral and not to the point and you really had to get
back into the body of the paper to find out what the Government was
actually doing. There was a little box on the front page which was
indecipherable. Now, where is The Age when we need it? Where is
The Age when great social reforms are about and where its former
championing of these things doesn't seem to matter that much these
days. At least Geoffrey your carrying on the fight and good on you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE COMMUNITY OF SUNRAYSIA, MILDURA SHIRE
COUNCIL CHAMBERS, FRIDAY, 6 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Shire President, Councillors Elizabeth Maffei and distinguished members of
the Shire Council, could I also acknowledge the Mayor and distinguished
members of the City Council, distinguished Parliamentary colleagues and
guests, ladies and gentlemen, one and all. It is a great pleasure to be here
and Mr Fitzpatrick, before I go on, as President of the Murray-Darling
Commission. It is a very great pleasure for me to be in his company here
today too.
I have had a most enjoyable morning and one knows about areas like the
Sunraysia, you learn about them at school, I did where I went to school and
the great irrigation areas of Australia because they are and were so much
part of the ethos of rural Australia, particularly in the post-war years and in
the case of Mildura, Mildura was even moving as an irrigation area before the
nation federated.
There is a great sense of tradition as Mr Fitzpatrick said, of heritage about
much of the area of the Murray-Darling catchment and for these particular
irrigation areas. I think that one of the things that we are finding with the
changed Australia, the new Australia, the open externally orientated Australia
is that the things which we did in the past for our domestic consumption
where we set up farm models and scales on European models for domestic
demand, these things are changing and the regions of Australia have an
opportunity now to participate in the new Austraifii economy, the more
competitive, faster growing externally oriented one which opens up the
prospects for a greater involvement by the people of regions and a greater
sharing in the prosperity of the nation than that which they formerly would
have been able to enjoy. 
Part of the ' Working Nation' statement of a day ago was about giving regions
a greater role in Australia, in the nation, in the governments of Australia and
we've, in the reports which we did commission, principally that by Bill Kelty
and his task force, the very extensive McKinsey research study and the
Industry Commission Report all reveal one thing and that is that regions that
know what they are doing, that have a sense of strategy about them, that
have a sense of cohesion between municipal government, between
employers, employees, trade unions, and other community bodies; generally
have a higher economic performance than those areas that don't have that
sort of coalescence of view or sense of leadership.
We thought one of the sensible things to do is to give regions a chance to be
able to resource some of the things that they might do in mapping their own
strategies. Give them a chance to see what they can do for themselves
because whenever regions are given a chance to do something for
themselves they always do better than something which drifts in from outside.
That's not to say that outside, that is the footloose industries from time to time
don't or wont' change an area, it happens, but by and large most of the
change comes internally. We want to see that those things could work.
So, in here we have got support for regional economic development
organisations. We've got funding there to resource them, to see if they can
refine th eir strategies and plans; we've got to change the tax treatment of
some instruments such as infrastructure bonds, which could be important in
some vital, if you look at an irrigation area a vital piece of public community
infrastructure, which can be provided privately if the tax system is set up
properly; in pool development funds where one, for instance, might see the
joint ownership of particular resources or even farms or production facilities
and where those people, groups, companies or bodies need more capital
through pool development funds they might have a chance now of raising it
with a much more advantageous tax treatment.
There are a couple of important instruments, we think, there. Like all of these
things one has to refine them. We've had a couple of goes at infrastructure
bonds, but now we have got a 33 per cent tax rebate in there which will affect
beneficially, say, super funds which are very low taxed and therefore a tax
deduction doesn't mean anything to them, but a re-batie does. So, some of
these things are a case of seeing what the market will'do with them, but
anyway the chances are'there and we're listening to see what the reactions
will be. We do think they will help in regions.
The other thing is we've got a capital works program there for particular
public works, community works which can be of special value to regions and
it is from that pool that we will be funding some of these salinity control works
which I have the pleasure of being involved with later on this afternoon, but
more particularly, that being part of the general salinity control problem. In
this case, in the Murray-Darling catchment system.
There are two approaches there is the generic approach to regions and
there is a specific approach to particular works. Where we think a region has 
in a mature way or matured their plans so that some Commonwealth and in
this case, State funding can go together to do something sensible because
you know it is going to be money well spent.
One of the most impressive things we have seen in the last six or seven
years is the collaborative work between the Commonwealth and the States in
the Murray-Darling area and let me pay a tribute to the people in the
Commission who have worked these plans up and produced a sense of cooperation
and collaboration so that we are now making substantial strides in
dealing with salinity problems and looking at the future of the Murray-Darling
in the long term Australia's greatest river system and it's one which we must
nurture. We have a much greater appreciation of the environment. We would now
shake our heads in horror at the clear felling of trees which has gone on this
country really since European settlement and which has had now such a
deleterious impact upon the landscape and upon, particularly, things like
erosion and salinity et cetera. And approaching it in a co-operative,
collaborative way is the only way because this system covers the various
states Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and you
need therefore a council, you need to think in national terms and you need to
work with communities co-operatively and bring them along and let them see
the point and purpose of it all.
This is, in fact, what has happened and a lot of progress has been made;
much is yet to be done, but one thing is very clear: once people get to know
about things they make the changes very quickly and at Mr Well's farm this
morning I was just interested to learn some of the finer points about drip
irrigation versus the sprays and that versus the gravitational irrigation and the
quality it brings to the grapes and the diminished demands for water and the
improved therefore salinity problem. All these things, no one group or
individual can change these problems, it has to be a community thing. This is
why, I think, with the Commonwealth involved with the States in the larger
scheme of things like rural adjustment, the case of Victoria Farm-smart, all of
these programs, Landcare, all these things help to make Australia better and
more productive.
With all these export markets opening up to us with tremendous demands for
horticultural products in this part of Australia and the tremendous demand in
Europe and in Asia for the products of this country particularly in agriculture
which we produce we have, I think, a great opportunity. So, sustainable
development is a very important phrase for our country from here on in. I was
very impressed with the advocacy of this in the Sunraysia by Mr Hewitt
amongst others, over a long period of time and we've picked those themes up
in the various task force reports and I'm very impressed indeed, with the
general sense of community and notion of common problems that I'm seeing.
Thank you very much for doing me the honour of meeting me here today. I
thank the Shire President for hosting this lunch and for the opportunity to look
around the region and see what is capable of being done. I hope that with 
the ' Working Nation' statement the more generic things on regional
development and the specific thing here in the Sunraysia on this scheme of
works for salinity control, we can just move the agenda of that commercial,
community and environmental agenda just on that much further so that
Australia is going to be a stronger and better place and the regions of
Australia will have a greater role.
Let me conclude on this point. Unemployment is a big problem here, it is in
many regional areas. It will be a test of a country's capacity to do things
innovatively and maturely to see how they can work. We will be intensively
case managing every young person under 18 years of age who is
unemployed from here on. That is, anyone who has left school, is
unemployed, they will have someone who is personally dealing with them and
managing them, understanding them, their aspirations, their educational
attainments, their aptitudes and trying to find things to do. Where work is
limited in regional areas we have got a thing called the New Opportunities
Programs where we are seeking community type works which we may be
able to fund through the labour market programs and it will be, I think, a
challenge for local government and other community bodies to come up with
some of those things. Beyond that, in the greater scheme of things, the
notion is going to be on education and training regarding the years 15 to 19
as a period of vocational preparation. We don't want kids dropping out of
school only then to be picked up and then brought back in someway into
TAFE and other things, but to keep them there and then, of course,
intensively case managing those people who have been unemployed for
twelve months or more.
There is a great challenge there in that agenda, but at least a day ago we
started moving on it decisively and, I think, we are doing things which
Australia may again be doing some novel things that other comparable
economies and societies are not doing in respect of employment.
Let me conclude again by thanking you for coming for the very warm
welcome and I look forward to meeting you all. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL, TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE
HON. P J KEATING, M. P.
RADIO 3MA, MIOLDURA
FRIDAY 6 MAY, 1994
PK: I think that the markets have probably taken a wrong view of economic events in
Australia. Australia ' produced an inflation rate a week or two ago of under two
percent and there is nothing around that leads me to conclude that we will in any way
vary that outcome. So, if we have persistently low inflation with strong economic
growth and I think we can have I think that the market's snap judgements made
about conditions in the United States and the international market place are basically
wrong judgements about Australia. They've got, really, little to do with the White
Paper. They've got to do, really, with the bond markets of the United States anid world
growth and world inflation.
Ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, SHIRE COUNCIL AND LOCAL COMMUNITY COUNCIL
CHAMBERS, MILDURA, 6 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: I might just say a few introductory words and then you can ask me
some questions after that. The point of my coming was to demonstrate
the application of the White Paper for regional Australia. And in the
White Paper we fund an importanf salinity program here in Sunraysia
Mildura, and as a demonstration of that, regional areas that
understand what they are doing and have programs of coherence will
get support, and can get support, from the Commonwealth and State
Governments. And in the White Paper there is the opportunity to
exploit now infrastructure bonds, pool development funds, but more
particularly, funding for regional economic organisations that need
some core funding to let them put strategic plans together. Because a
lesson out of all the studies, the KeltyTs Force, all of the other
studies that we have had, is that regions which are well lead and
coherent in their plans, do better than other regions that aren't.
So what it is, is strategic funding and specific funding for particular
projects from an infrastructure fund. And I am looking forward to today
being involved with that salinity program this afternoon. This morning,
of course, I had a very interesting tour-through the district, looking at
some innovations in horticultural production in grapes, this is going to
be one of the important grape growing areas of Australia for the
Australia wine industry, export industry. And therefore, consolidation
of farms, higher output and productivity, new techniques, mechanical
harvesting, better use of water, all of these things, I think, are
important lessons and I was very pleased to be able to see them
today. Could I just say for the White Paper in general, that there is a great
opportunity here, I think, for regions, but also for all areas of Australia
where unemployment is high, to have people who are long term 
unemployed case managed so that they are better trained and placed
for work, so that their prospects of retaining work are enhanced. So,
can I say I have been heartened by the reception it has had from
business, which has been very supportive of it, the various industry
groupings, the Chambers of Commerce, the Metal Trades Industry, the
big companies like BHP. Because of these things, I think, have been a
big confidence boost for it.
J: Mr Keating on the White Paper, it obviously going to be a great test
here because unemployment is 20 per cent here. You hope to get the
national average down to 5 per cent by the year 2000, what will it do to
Sunraysia?
PM: Well, there will always be greater problems in regional areas because
of diminished employment opportunities. But if we can get the output
and productivity of areas like Sunraysia up, there will be more
aggregate employment. But we have also got a policy in the White
Paper called the new opportunities program, which will allow support
of job subsidies under labour market programs to go to regional
proposals that are conceived well and which have got some chance of
using local, otherwise unemployed labour, other than in commercial
things. I wouldn't suggest this is going to be the complete answer to
unemployment in regional areas, far from it, it won't be, but it will help.
J: What per centage?
PM: I don't think I can say that either. But one thing I think you need to
know and remember is, in the 1980s we had just about, in those eight,
nine years between 1983 and 1990-91, we had nearly 2.5 million job
growth. We lost about 300,000 of those in the recession, but we still
kept the 2 million. To get to around 5 per cent unemployment by the
end of the century we have got to create over a million job growth. I
think we can do that.
J: Mr Keating, in light of your own and Mr Howe's statement that the
regional development strategy aims to on what potential of
Australia's regions. Will you talk to the NSW Opposition and tell them
to allow passage of the Irrigation Corporations Bill, debate on which
has been adjourned at the moment, and seems that that may be
threatening the $ 27 million refurbishing of the irrigation project?
PM: I am not aware of the Bill, but now that you have mentioned it I will
acquaint myself with it. I think there will be a lot of privatisation in
some areas of the public infrastructure which is going to be
commercial. We announced a very large one in the White Paper and
that is, the Federal Airports Corporation large airports around
Australia. So, I think, from the Government's point of view we have
been the first Government in Australia to champion large scale
privatisations with a sale of half the stock of the Commonwealth Bank,
and more'latterly, the FAC, Qantas, which is coming up. So, again, it 
all gets back to the viability of these projects. I don't know the project
you speak of but I would be very pleased to find out.
J: You will talk to him?
PM: I will talk to him about it, sure.
J: Mr Keating, if regional Australia does have such big potential, why was
out of $ 6 billion only $ 150 million went to regional areas?
PM: You have got to see this not in terms of the way you help regional
areas is by just throwing a bucket of money at them. That has proven
not to work. I think what works is regional communities who know what
they are doing themselves. I mean, you can see this here in Mildura,
in the Sunraysia. The people I met here today are very confident
about regional plans, how they can lift the productivity of the area, how
they can lock that into the world market, how they can draw capitals to
the area. What they need is strategic funding, that is what the White
Paper provides. It has also got mechanisms to draw private funding,
private capital, into public infrastructure works, but might not otherwise
be -available through the public account. So, I think that is the
approach. Any approach which says we will fix the money with a big
cheque from the Budget, really, has never worked, and it won't work
now.
J: Dr Hewson says that regional Australia's expectations have been
raised, but they have just got piddling concessions.
PM: Well Dr Hewson is somebody who is discovering, I mean, Dr Hewson
would need an army map to find his way out of Sydney and Melbourne,
particularly Eastern Sydney. He is obviously somebody who has been
more comfortable in the comfort station of the leafy suburbs of Eastern
Sydney than anywhere else. We are acting on the Report of the Kelty
Taskforce which had the most extensive regional consultations of ainy
taskforce ever. The huge surveys of McKinsey and Company, and the
Industry Commission Report, all say what we need is strategic funding
which supports the regional leadership and some instruments to
finance things that otherwise regional bodies can't finance. Now, if Dr
Hewson thinks that is piddling, that is a reflection on his failure to
understand the aspirations of regional Australia and his failure to read
the reports, which in themselves, I think, are very illuminating. He is
also, can I say, he has been running on this the last day or so, this
question about poverty traps. Let me just say a couple of things about
that. I made this point clear in Parliament yesterday, that is, the
changes to the Social Security system, the changed taper
arrangements, and paying half the married rate of unemployment
benefits to each member of a family, a couple, is going to dramatimlly
change the Social Security system. It is the antithesis of a poverty
trap. A poverty trap is a circumstance where somebody can't earn
more income by virtue of the fact that the marginal effective tax rate, or 
the withdrawal rate takes it from them. That is the current position
before the White Paper.
The introduction of the White Paper will mean that couples will be able
to earn much more income by, instead of having a flat cut off of 100
per cent, that is, for every dollar of income earned a dollar of the
benefit is lost, we will go now to a 50, then a 70 per cent taper, and
that withdrawal rate. And that will mean that people won't be in
poverty traps as they are now. But this is the same Dr Hewson who
said that people on unemployment benefits should be chipped off after
nine months, this is Australian families. This is the same person who
said, " if you reach down and pull the unemployed up beside us, you
will pull the rest of us down". These are the people who described the
unemployed in the Social Security Office as riff raff. These are people
not to be listened to.
ENDS 



1_
NETWORK 10 MEET THE PRESS 1130 08-05-94
Subject: INTV Prime Minister Keating
Compere David Johnston: Good morning across Australia, and welcome to Meet The
Press our guest today, the Prime Minister Paul Keating.
Four days after the release of the Government's White
Paper on employment, the dust is starting to settle.
Promising subsidised employment or a training position for
all of the three hundred and fifty thousand long term
unemployed over the next four years, the ambitious six
point five billion dollar jobs package has been described by
the Prime Minister as Labor to its bootstraps.
Immediately lampooned by Doctor Hewson as
Whitlamesque in its excess, and criticised by some as an
election strategy, financial markets endorsed the gloomy
assessment by sending bond rates through the roof a
reaction angrily described by the Prime Minister as
lemming-like and irrational. 
Prime Minister:
Compere:
Prime Minister: Dismissing claims of big spending excess, Mister Keating
said the jobs compact will deliver a large bang for the
buck. But just how many bucks will be revealed in
Tuesday night's budget.
Our panel today Paul Bongiorno from Network Ten;
Michelle Grattan, The Canberra Times, and Geoffrey
Barker from the Melbourne Age.
Welcome Mister Keating to the programme.
Thank you, David.
Well now, the dust has had time to settle a little. Are you
happy with the way the White Paper has been received, or
are you still angry with the financial markets?
Oh no. I think we've had probably as good a reception to
this document as we've had to any of the budgets or most
statements the Government's done over a decade. And, I
mean, the last editorial I read was the Sydney Sunday
Telegraph this morning, which said it was a bold step
which deserves community support.
I think that's pretty typical of the reaction, and I'm very
happy about that, because I'm happy about the fact that the
media and the community and the business community in
particular has been very warm to the idea of including the
unemployed in Australia's progress. 
Paul Bongiorno:
Prime Minister: Treasurer Paul Keating used to say that the deregulated
financial markets would keep Governments honest. Has
Prime Minister Paul Keating changed his tune?
No, no. No Paul, no, no. I mean, what's happened I
think people need to understand what's happened. First of
all there's the business community, which is actually
employing people, and they've been very supportive of
this. Then there's the financial markets which are selling
securities. So, in terms of the impact of this with the real economy,
it's the business community's reaction that we look for,
and that was a very positive one.
What's happened with the financial markets is simply this.
From about the end of 1989, early 1990, we had interest
rates at eighteen percent, and they fell to four and three
quarters in one percentage point falls from eighteen
down to four and three quarters.
Every point drop was an increase in the capital value of a
bond. One point down, one up. So each way down it was
a picnic for bond buyers and bond holders.
They've now got a belly full of bonds, and they're at a
point where now interest rates have bottomed and in some
places in the world are going up. Where the world
economy is picking up, where they think inflation over the 
Compere: Prime Minister: longer run may pick up not in Australia necessarily, but
the world. So they're saying well the party's over, the
capital improvements are finished in bonds. We're now
looking at a prospect of interest rates rising so the thing
to do is get out of them.
So what we're going to see is a lot of bond selling which
has nought to do with the White Paper, nought to do with
the budget simply the fact that the eighteen percent to
four percent beano, which the bond market has had now,
predictable profits for eighteen months to two years has
finished. And bond holders are now saying well that
picnic is over, let's get back now into equities and other
things so they'll sell them.
But wasn't their question over funding, over the funding
of the plan?
No, not really, no. Look, this sell off would have been on
no matter whether there was a White Paper, a budget or
no White Paper or a budget. Because it was sparked by
the US Federal Reserve taking the rates from three percent
to three seven five. And the US bond market is saying
well look the big interest rate reductions in the US,
they're over too. And what we're really seeing in the US
is a pick up in the economy, so therefore we the bond
holders believe we're going to be in a position of rising
interest rates and therefore capital losses. So they try and
get out. 
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Geoff Barker:
Prime Minister: But there has been worry about funding. Are you
convinced that Tuesday's budget will provide a convincing
answer on the funding question, or do you have a big
selling job ahead of you?
No. Look, the government I don't think has any peer in
the OECD in terms of fiscal consolidation. And one of
the reasons why Australia is growing at four percent plus
is the fact that fiscal policy was consolidated in the
eighties, and we did have a chance to wind it out in the
recession, and hence cushion on the shock and restart the
economy. So we've had, I think, a great record as budget managers,
and I think next week will simply confirm that.
Prime Minister, with the economy in recovery, do you
expect next Tuesday's budget to be a good news budget,
or how do you think the community and the markets will
react to Tuesday's budget?
I think well. I think well, because the budget shows that
we'll be well and truly within the target of one percent of
GDP by ' 96/' 97, and Aust will go back into surplus in the
balance of the nineties.
Now, as far
comparable advantageous as I know there'll be virtually no other
country, or very few, in that very
fiscal position. 
We'll be back on that good news point after this break.
commercial break So, will next Tuesday's budget be a good news budget
Michelle.
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan: Mister Keating, how would you characterise the thrust of
this budget?
I think the budget is principally a macro-economic
document. There will still be substantial, some substantial
policy in it, but of course a great block of the policy has
been delivered last week, and the numbers for that will be
consolidated in the budget.
So instead of the budget being largely a policy document,
as well as an accounting document, it'll be more of the
latter, and less of the former by virtue of the fact that we
separated the two statements.
So, I think the budget will be seen as a positive step by the
business community towards the target the Government has
set for itself, and give Australia a quite advantageous
position. And a good news budget? Can I press you on that?
Compere:: 
Prime Minister:
Geoff Barker:
Prime Minister: Well I think you'll probably have to wait on that. I
certainly don't think it's going to be a budget which is
going to be in any way gloomy.
Given that you've separated out the jobs compact, will the
budget have much more in it in terms of Labor's vision for
social and economic reform? You said it would please the
business community will it also please the people who
have less in this society?
Well I think yes, yes the answer to that's yes. But the
bulk of what we wanted to do, in terms of unemployment,
we did last week.
Could I just say, in terms of the last election, the
government said it would do the following things. It
would provide cuts it's done so. First tranche is paid.
It would legislate for Mabo it's done so after a very
large debate. It's introduced a Home Child Care
Allowance, the Generalised Child Care Rebate, and now
in fulfilment of the commitment to the unemployed, we've
introduced the White Paper. And we're also bringing the
budget down as promised.
So, I mean, Government's come in for criticism for not
meeting election commitments. This government has met
the major election commitments. 
Paul Bongiorno:
Prime Minister:
Paul Bongiorno:
Prime Minister: There's a lot of discussion over just how firm your
forecasts are going to be in this budget. Some people say
that already the figures in the jobs paper are a bit rubbery.
I mean, what is your attitude to forecasts on inflation,
employment, and growth? Do you see it as something that
you should be more up about, rather than down?
No, I think they're all just best estimates, but the
important point is that on inflation, which is an important
indice in this country, as in all countries. I think we're in
a fairly good position.
With that , CPI-that came out a couple of weeks ago, the
CPI is now around two, or just under two percent point
four percent for the quarter. The underlying rate is a little
bit higher, but by and large, the portents there are very
good. On the wages front, in terms of wages flexibility,
in terms of prices, in terms of productivity you see the
prospects for growth-
But on Thursday you spoke in terms of growth at four and
a half to five percent, and we've had two leading
forecasters since then say that's two ambitious.
Well the Australian economy grew on average at four and
a half percent between 1983 and 1989. Over six years, six
to seven years, it grew at an average rate of around four
and a half percent.
IF-. 
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister: Now, we've got now much more competitive product
markets with low tariffs; we've got a much more flexible
labour market than the rigid one we had then; we've
already broken the back of inflation, that's down to low
numbers; we've got the lowest interest rates in thirty
years; we've got a very high profit share; a thirty three
percent corporate tax rate. If all of that doesn't add up to
doing as well as we did in that six years, well there's
something wrong with all of those influences. And
nothing can be wrong them.
How tough are you going to be with the minor Parties
after this budget? Do you take the attitude they've had
their say during the consultative process, and that's it? Or
will you give them further ground if you need to in the
post budget period?
Well I think we've got a good relationship with the minor
Parties, and we have in this budget round I think done
something new, and that is that we have consulted the,
they've given us their views on what should be included in
the budget this has never happened in Australian federal
history-But what happens if their Oliver Twist like, calling for
more when they see the document?
Well that's got to be just weighed up. I think, I mean,
this invariably happens, but I can't predict what the 
Democrats or the Greens or any of the Independents in the
Senate might say.
Compere: Did you have compromise with them much?
Prime Minister: I don't think so, but I think there's a lot that the
Democrats and the Greens in particular, and Senator
Harradine, would find to support in the White Paper, I
mean generally. I mean, if you look at the Parenting
Allowance, which will put a hundred and thirty three, up
to a hundred and thirty three dollars a week in the hands
of a supporting mother I would have thought for
instance Senator Harradine would support a measure like
that, as I think probably the Democrats and the Greens
would. I mean, there are many things there. By and large I don't
think anyone should assume there's some sort of
adversarial situation there, because I think the policy
outcomes are pretty much heading in the directions most
of these Parties think they should be.
Compere: We'll continue on Meet The Press after this break.
commercial break So, if it's a good news budget, could it possibly be an
election budget Paul.
I 
Paul Bongiorno:
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Compere: Prime Minister: Well Prime Minister do you get the impression that neither
the Opposition nor the minor Parties really want an
election soon, and probably your budget will get through
for that? But does that tempt you to perhaps go to the
people sooner rather than later?
No, I don't think so. No thinking about it certainly
not. This is, Labor Governments residing over a growth
economy with a prospect of doing a lot of important things
like Mabo, like the White Paper these are opportunities
that shouldn't be missed or lightly passed up.
So are you committed to full term March ' 96?
Well, I'm committed to seeing, sensibly seeing the balance
of this term out. That's not a matter of cutting off any
options the Prime Minister enjoys in this system, but
certainly, I mean I'm not saying to day, to the month, day
or week no-one ever does but by and large I don't
believe that the Parliament should run half its course and
have an election for what point-
But this White Paper is electorally important the success
or failure of it, isn't it, really?
No, I think the White Paper is a very altruistic attempt to
give Australia the kind of society that many other western
countries have passed up, and that's an inclusive one-
Compere: Prime Minister:
Geoff Barker: If it fails you don't think that's important I mean for
your electoral chances at the next election?
Well I don't think it'll fail. But I think it's important that
there is a notion of inclusion, that people do not feel
alienated, cast to one side, forgotten and in a callous
way the rest of us move on and say well they carried the
brunt of economic change.
I think this is a statement about Australian values; about a
fair go; about egalitarianism so that we move along as
a society inclusively.
That's what the White Paper's about it's done just after,
a year after the election. This is not set up in the cycle
of an election, it's not six months before an election, it's
not there for all of that and I think it is because of that,
its timing and its content, that the community has given it
a warm reception.
So this is a good thing, we feel better about the fact that
these people are not going to be forgotten.
Prime Minister, part of the funding for the jobs compact
will involve the sale of some government business
enterprises airports have been mentioned and
certainly that seems to have left the Left of the Party fairly
angry. Are you confident the Party's behind you on that
sell-off and others that might be in mind? 
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister: Well, I mean, the Labor Party in policy terms and
ideological terms is more united now, Geoff, than I've
ever seen it in my lifetime.
When you look at the things that we've accomplished in
the last few years, I mean getting back to growth we've
had nearly a quarter of a million job growth in the last
year; a huge piece of cultural and property law like Mabo,
which is a great breakthrough for Australia as a society
and for Aboriginal people, and something which the Left
would feel that it was important they had a role in, and we
did. The same is true on the White Paper on unemployment-
But you are pre-empting the conference, aren't you-
Can I just say, Michelle, now these are very Labor
outcomes. I mean, these are very Australian, good
Australian societal outcomes but they're very, of their
essence, Labor outcomes and I should imagine people
on the Left would feel as though they've been part of a
process which has been significant and important.
And therefore I think these other matters like asset sales,
and we've had some big debates now, as you know, about
QANTAS, TAA, Australian Airlines which is now
incorporated into QANTAS these sorts of debates. I
mean, the competitor to Telecom in 1990-
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Paul Bongiorno:
Prime Minister: But how do you answer the point, Mister Keating, that this
sale of the airports will be approved by the Parliament
before it goes to the ALP conference, which should
approve it in terms of policy, which is required to
approve-Well there's always, I think there's always these, you
know, cart and horse things but by and large the
directions are pretty right, and I don't think any wise
Cabinet gets beyond Party or community opinion.
Well the Left are meeting in Canberra today, and they're
telling us that the factions are not all that happy, and
they're going to try and fight this in the Caucus. What's
your message to them today?
Well I don't expect complete harmony on every issue of
policy, but if you take the Left of the Australian Labor
Party, and look at the Left of the British Labour Party or
the political Left of Germany and these other countries
who would do anything like the White Paper in western
world terms? I mean, who would take on a matter like
Mabo you know, such a huge issue as that?
I think that the Left feel very comfortable, by and large,
about the direction of policy. And yes, there'll be a little
bit of chattering about this sort of stuff, but you've got to
see it in the bigger context. 
Comere: We'll continue with the Prime Minister in just a moment.
commercial break Our guest on Meet the Press, Paul Keating.
Geoff Barker:
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan: Prime Minister, two important issues at the Labor Party
conference in September will be quotas for, specific quotas
for women Labor MPs, and the Party's uranium policy.
Will you support a motion for a specific number of women
MPs within a specific time, or do you agree with those in
the Labor Party who say that's sacrifices merit for gender
equality? Well I think that's complex issue. The underlying thing is
that there is not enough women in public life, and not
enough on our side of public life, and we want to improve
it. And we're only going to improve it by some
affirmative programme, and it is that which the Party's
now considering.
So what about quotas, though? Are you willing to go
down that path?
Well this is an organisational matter that I can't simply
embrace or dictate, but-
But you can have a view.
Compere: 
Prime Minister:
Compere: But I think that we will have to decide for an affirmative
programme, to leave it other than to the vagaries of the
selection systeme in each state-
It would have to be fifty-fifty, wouldn't it?
Prime Minister:
Geoff Barker:
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan: Well, that will not happen quickly. But it's a matter of I
think the Party getting focused up to the task, and women
are being, as candidates, coming forward and being in a
position to take the selections for House of
Representatives-How about uranium policy, liberalisation of uranium
policy? Do you think that's on, would you support further
liberalisation? I haven't, Geoff to be frank with you, I haven't thought
about this for years, and I didn't know, I mean other than
the sort of protemps things that come on you probably
know more than I do about this. But it's coming up at our
conference. But it usually does.
It usually does, and it usually goes-
Isn't it time to liberalise the policy again? 
Prime Minister:
Michelle Grattan:
Prime Minister:
Paul Bongiorno: Well I don't know. There's been an oversupply of
uranium in the world. I don't know that the big issue
has always been whether you can develop the large mine
in the flood plain of the East Alligator River of Kakadu.
What's your feeling?
Well I've always, frankly, had great reservations about it.
That is, you know, how you handle a tailings problem
from such a large deposit in a region like that.
Now once we decided upon Roxby Downs years ago,
effectively we opened up uranium mining in Australia
because of the huge bulk and the sheer size and scale of it.
So whether it's one big one in South Australia or some
little ones somewhere else really in a sense doesn't matter.
So to that extent I don't think an x number of mines policy
is something that should be holy grail.
But then it gets back to the Pan-Continental site Jabiru
is it? Or Jabiluka? I can't remember which one it is now
and I think that's just got big engineering and
environmental problems.
There is one issue that you haven't given a lot of thought
to, and that's the republican one. It's now May we
were expecting the response from the Cabinet to the
Republican Paper earlier in the year. Has that been put on
hold? 
Prime Minister:
Compere: Prime Minister:
Compere: Only to the extent that the White Paper has been such a
time consuming, Ministerially intensive process.
Remember this, Paul, we're doing something novel this
year we've never done before we're having a budget
before the beginning of the financial year.
So Ministers, and they're often the same Ministers, have
been involved in the ad-hoc process of the White Paper
and the budget. So from the last week of January we have
done nothing but those things. And we really haven't been
in a position to be considering the Turnbull Paper, or take
opportunities to proselytise on the issue.
Mister Keating, Robert Ray on this programme a few
weeks ago spent some time talking about your successor.
Was talk of your replacement a bit premature, do you
think? Well I think it is. But again, I've always taken the view,
I've said to people privately, I don't mind saying publicly,
no-one will have to knock on my door to carry me away.
And I think the life cycle of government should be more
than the life cycle of the leader or Prime Minister or
Premier as the case may be.
So what do you have in your mind, after say the next
election that you think you'll win, of course. How long
after that do you think you'll stay? 
Prime Minister:
Compere: I think that from this point of view, I think you should
take three years at a time. I mean, I like to have the next
Parliament, and set the Labor Party up. I mean, the one
thing I think, the thing that gives me great pleasure out of
this is the zest and energy in the Cabinet room. I mean,
everyone's jockeying for speaking positions, every view is
contested. I mean, papers are well prepared, it's got so
much energy.
And that big change after the election in personnel has
been a tremendous fillip to the Federal Parliamentary
Labor Party, and I think it speaks volumes for turnover
freshness. But it will take a while before they turn me
over. And on that point we'll leave it. Thank you very much
for your time this morning.
Prime Minister: Good.
Compere: Our guest today has been the Prime Minister Paul Keating.
Thanks to our panel Paul Bongiomno, Michelle Grattan and
Geoff Barker. Til next week, goodbye from Meet The
Press.
For private research only. Whilst every effort is made to ensure accuracy for the benefit of our clients, no
legal or other responsibility is taken for errors and omissions. 


SOUTH AFRICA: INAUGURATION OF PRESIDENT MANDELA
Australians join wholeheartedly with South Africans in celebrating the inauguration of President Mandela. It is a great moment for South Africa but also for the world.
Australia is represented at the inauguration by former Prime Ministers Hawke and Fraser, each of whom helped to put Australia in the front ranks of the international community in the long struggle, which culminates today, for a non-racial and democratic government in South Africa.
We look now to the full restoration of a strong and close relationship between Australia and South Africa. As part of that process Senator Evans and Mr Bilney have announced today a new program of assistance amounting to $30 million over three years.
I have written to President Mandela congratulating him on the election result and assuring him of the warmest possible welcome if he is able to visit Australia again in his new capacity.
Canberra10 May 1994



Kr
4;
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, SYDNEY, I11 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: listened almost in silence to the Budget speech last night, which has to
be a first. There wasn't much racket going on there was there?
PM: The Liberals were there, I thought, some wag yelled out at the end of
it, " get them the smelling salts", get them the smelling salts. As I
walked out I said, " I think they have all just sucked on a lemon." They
were the sourest looking lot. Because they thought this is the Budget
we should be delivering, all this growth, the good news in it of nearly
250,000 jobs. John Hewson, who in the election campaign was saying
we are going to have a double dip recession and maybe a depression,
could see himself up there wearing the laurels and accolade of growth
and jobs.
JL: So, you don't think the silence was..
PM: The silence wasn't out of regard for the Treasurer.
JL: It wasn't a bad sign, though?
PM: It was just, if you like, the silence of reflection.
JL: On what they have lost?
PM: Yes, on the opportunity.
JL: Well based on what happened to John Dawkin's Budget of last year, it
doesn't matter how quiet it was last night, the fun and games really
only starts now. You have got to try to negotiate the Budget through
the minefield of the Senate. Are you going to put up with objections
from the minor parties in the Senate again this year, or do you
anticipate there won't be any? 
PM: Well I don't know if there will be any. Let me just say a couple of
things about the Budget, John, which I think are important. The first
thing to say about it, I think, is that Australians have earned this
recovery. We have had a very good reception of the Budget, but there
are always the sour puss commentators. If it is not pain it is not any
good. They can't say well look we have had a recession, we have got
out of it, we are now growing, people are starting to get a buck again, it
is moving on. No, no, they won't. " Hop in there with tax increases,
hop in there and get the Budget deficit down faster". We are getting it
down faster than any other Government in the Western World, to a
lower number than anybody else.
JL: Can I just say, apropos part of the reaction, you say that it has been
fairly well received. When you look at some of the headlines, has it
been well received? " Hope and pray". " Labor gambles on business."
" Gamble on growth." That's the kind of headlines we are seeing.
PM: But I think the key thing is what the business community say about it, I
think. Because they are the people who employ people, they are the
ones whose expectations about investment matter, and I just noticed
as I was coming up to the station this morning, on 2UE news there was
Macquarie Bank, Bill Shields from Macquarie Bank, an ex Reserve
Bank chap, saying that the Government's investment forecast and
growth forecast are pretty much as Macquarie Bank and other
forecasters had forecast them.
JL: Well, that is one saying that. You have got others saying that the
anticipated growth is not enough. And after all the anticipated growth
is only just fractionally over the OECD average.
PM: No, no. We grew in the year to March at 4 per cent. The Budget
forecast is for 4.5 per cent. The OECD average is about..
JL: Is about 4 isn't it?
PM: No, it is about one, 1 per cent. The Western World economies are
growing, on average, around about 1 per cent. Germany is actually
contracting, it is getting smaller, it is not growing, it is getting smaller.
Japan is just at about zero, the United States is growing at a couple of
percentage points, I think 2.5 per cent.
JL: The OECD average, it is certainly not the average being claimed by
some of the commentators. The OECD average is just about 1 per
cent?
PM: Around one, around 1 per cent. That is the position, and we are
growing at 4 per cent. I am not saying we are projected to grow at 4
per cent, we actually have grown at 4 per cent for the year to March.
And we are saying in the coming year, 94-95, from July to June next
year, we are saying we will grow at 4.5 per cent. Given the fact that
we have got low inflation, low interest rates, we have got a high profit 
share, a competitive dollar, a much more flexible labour market. We
were growing at 4.5 per cent on average through the 1980s.
JL Are interest rates going to stay low?
PM: While ever inflation stays low, they will stay low.
JL Are you confident of that?
PM: Of course.
JL Just back to the Senate. Do you think the Green people and the
Democrats will behave themselves as far as this Budget is concerned?
PM: Well there is no tax increases in it, John.
JL But there is not all that much spending increase that they would have
liked, not as much as they would have liked.
PM: There is quite a bit. Just let me run through a few things. There is
$ 500 million over five years for Aboriginal health. There is $ 63 million
over four years for youth homelessness. We have got a national Asian
languages program in there. $ 169 million over four years for mental
health. $ 209 million over four years for breast cancer. $ 10 million for
child immunisation.
JL Is that going to be enough for them?
PM: Well, they are all the sort of things that they claim to be interested in.
And we have got $ 135 million there for the preparation of the
Australian Olympic Team between now and the year 2000, and we
have got $ 68' million in for foreign aid, extra foreign aid. So, the sort of
things which the Greens and the Democrats normally attach
themselves to are very much here. And, of course, the Budget
consolidates the White Paper: the largest attempt that certainly any
Australian Government has ever had dealing with the long term
unemployed.
JL How much have you got for homeless youth?
PM: $ 63 million over four years.
JL What are homeless youth?
PM: Well, these are kids who just drop out of the system and find
themselves in the Kings Crosses of this world, and the St Kildas.
JL Because they don't like it at home?
PM: Well, some of them don't have homes. They just get driven away from
home. 
JL: I think they get beckoned away from homes by Government subsidies,
in many instances. Obviously you are going to give them more.
PM: Well these are not subsidies, these are just refuges. But they are
largely run by the States, but these are top ups which we provide them.
But on the big agenda we have got, the key thing about this, is that
Government spending, that is outlays, all Government spending
outlays are running at less than the growth in the economy, and they
will do that right down to the end of the decade, which means the
Budget is going to go back into surplus later on in the 90s. In other
words, if you can keep spending below the natural rate of growth in the
economy, all the proceeds of growth then go off the Budget deficit.
And that is the sort of fairly good position we have got here now.
JL: Just back to the Greens and the Democrats, did you have discussions
with them prior to the Budget, on the Budget?
PM: I haven't, but we had a formal process this year, for the first time ever,
of consultations between the Government and the minor parties in the
Senate, and Ralph Willis and Kim Beazley, that is the Treasurer and
the Minister for Finance met them, and as far as I know they had fairly
good conversations.
JL: Did anybody warn them that you might change the proportional
representation system if they wanted to play up again this time?
PM: I don't think so.
JL: Would you change it?
PM: We only mention it from time to time, when something annoys us.
JL: I would have thought that that might have been an appropriate time.
Would you change it?
PM: That's an issue for the long run, I think.
JL: Well, given your position now, as you sit here in this broadcasting
studio, would you change it if necessary?
PM: The best thing is to see how the Senate performs on these things.
Look at the White Paper, John, the White Paper is a novel attempt, not
just in Australian terms, but in world terms, to actually case manage
personally half a million long term unemployed people back into work-
JL: Yes, well the White Paper has been well received, but that is a long
way from would you change the proportional representations?
PM: Yes, but that is a long way from the Budget. The answer is no. I have
no plans at this stage to change the proportional representations in.. 
in the Senate. But the fact of the matter is, that in terms of social
policy, the White Paper and the Jobs Compact, and the Youth Training
initiative and the entry level training from schools to TAFE, and the
Budget changes in Aboriginal health, and in breast cancer and these
things, the sort of things that a developed country should be doing.
And we can do it with a declining Budget deficit, and the Budget
coming back into surplus.
JL You are going to need the help of the private sector. In fact if it is not
with the private sector, none of this will happen, will it?
PM: One of the points the Treasury makes in its commentary on the
economy has been that there has been a sequential or rolling nature to
the growth in this recovery. The first wave came from consumption,
that's personal spending and housing. There has been another wave
there from exports and rebuilding of stocks, and now private business
investmqnFTI -[ d~ ome in as, if you like, the third wave.' Now, as you
know we have had a great paucity of private business investment since
the recession began three years ago.
JL But not enough.
PM: We have got 14.5 per cent growth in this year which is a real pick up, a
strong pick up. And that was the figure that Mr Shields from the
Macquarie Bank was endorsing on your news this morning.
JL Ok, before the last election, in fact, during the first of the debates with
John Hewson, I think 14 of February it was, Valentines Day, you said I
quote, ' We have got the growth, we have got the investment sitting
there, $ 130 billion, enormous, an absolute avalanche." I can't say it
with the conviction that you said it with at the time.
PM: Well you have got the voice to do it.
JL I am sure you are remembering the phraseology, " and once it starts to
go, the economy starts to move", that's what you said. Now, that was
nearly 18 months ago. " An avalanche of investment of waiting to fall
on us, $ 130 billion." According to last night's Budget we will depend
on growth to pay for everything, and that growth depends on
investment dollars, business investment dollars. But even Ralph Willis
last night, despite all the layers of gloss, said the business investment
had made little contribution to the economic recovery, and despite an
optimistic prediction of an increase in business investment of 14.5 per
cent, which you have just acknowledged, next financial year, that
represents investment spending, according to Mark Westfield,
Business Editor of the Australian Newspaper, of less than $ 5 billion.
So, what happened to the avalanche of $ 130 billion.
PM: They were the projects which were registered for the development
allowance. Remember we gave a tax concession which said you could
write off 10 per cent of your investment in a development allowance, 
but you had to register, or apply, that was the process of application.
We have now got a large proportion of those registered, but the key
point in the election campaign, John, was I was saying Australia is
going to grow, and grow as fast as any other substantial economy in
the world, and John Hewson was saying, " No, no, we are going to
have a double dip recession and then maybe a depression."
JL: That's right, but you did say we had an avalanche of investment just
sitting there, $ 130 billion.
PM: We are growing now already at 4 per cent, and investment is going to
play a part in that. But it is not just investment can I say? We have
also got private consumption picking up from 3.5-4.5 per cent, and
there is gross national expenditure up from three and a quarter to four
and three quarters, private business investment, 14.5 per cent, non
dwelling construction five and three quarters, plant and equipment
18.5 per cent. So, there is a sort of mix to it, but there is a big
component of business investment, but so there should be, given the
fact that we have got now a huge profit share in the economy.
JL: But where is the avalanche? Where is the $ 130 billion?
PM: Well, 14.5 per cent is a pretty big slug, old son.
JL: Is Mark Westfield wrong when he says investment spending at the
moment is about $ 5 billion?
PM: That number is absolutely wrong, absolutely wrong.
JL: Well Access says investment will increase by less than 8 per cent.
PM: Well they have been consistently wrong in the last couple of years.
Look, these are all the people who said to me when I brought the One
Nation package out they said, " Oh this is a great mistake, it is going to
bankrupt the country." I mean, it kicked us along in growth and as a
consequence we are growing faster than any other substantial OECD
economy. We are doing 4 per cent and the average is doing 1 per
cent.
JL: Yes, and I understand that to be fact, and I accept that as being fact.
But if you don't get the growth you can't pay for the programs, can
you?
PM: Yes. Look, basically what have we done here? We have spent in
large measure this year around $ 1.1 to $ 1.2 billion on the long term
unemployed, on the youth training initiative which is about getting case
managing for all young people under 18 who are unemployed.
Personally managing each one back into work, and changing some of
the incentives in the social security system so that low income people,
and particularly unemployed people, can take on part time work. 
JL: Why did it take so long to get this training wage? Because Blind
Freddy could have seen that if you had to pay an 18 year old the same
as you paid a 28 year old, and if you could get a 28 year old, you
would take a 28 year old, and it was shoving youth out of the
employment circle? Why did it take so long for the penny to drop, or
did it only come about because finally the ACTU agreed with the
Government.
PM: I will come to that in a second. Let me just make this point. You see,
what some of these people say, " Oh well this all depends on growth."
JL: Well it does.
PM: Well the point I made is, well haven't we earned the recovery, haven't
Australians earned the recovery after the last few years. Firstly high
interest rates and then we had the recession, and we finally got the
books balanced again, and got some sense back into bank lending,
and taking some of the speculation out of the economy and got back to
a real basis of earnings and exports and competitiveness, we have got
the growth going now. What they are saying is, particularly some of
this more rightwing rabid characters who write columns for the
newspaper, sort of, " what are you doing spending $ 1.1 billion on the
unemployed?" And what they don't understand is, in this recovery we
are going to need a lot of skills and the skills formation is not going to
come from the migration program, as it has in the past. It is going to
come from our own labour market.
JL: And it came from the migration program for too long too, didn't it? I
mean, that is another thing that should have happened sooner?
PM: Well, it is going to come from new entrants to the work force, that's the
school leavers, and it is going to come from retraining 350 400, 000
long termed unemployed people, giving them work experience, getting
their esteem back up, and getting them back into work. Now, in a
country this wealthy, to say callously to 400,000 people who have
taken the brunt of the economic change, " sorry you have missed out,
and we will carry you as an underclass, goodbye." Is not only
inequitable, it is also inefficient because in this economy, this is why
the business community has been very, I think, supportive of the White
Paper the Australian Chanber of Manufactures, the MTIA, all the
people who actually employ people, have actually said, look, this is a
good thing, you can actually get some skills complements here in the
1990s. And, John, we will have this is the point what the White
Paper and the Budget which consolidates it says, as a society we will
not go the way of a low wage working underclass or unemployed class
as in the United States, as in Britain. We will not go that way.
JL: What's unemployment in the United States?
PM: What is it? 
JL: About 6 per cent isn't it?
PM: 6 and a half?
JL: Ok, but we'll always have unemployment at about 5 percent, won't we?
PM: Well, I don't know but our participation rate is way beyond theirs.
JL: Well, when you and I have talked before I think we've agreed that
there would be an ongoing employment rate of about 5 percent so
we're going to have an underclass anyway.
PM: No, it depends how long people are actually... see, in the late 1980s
we had unemployment down to six and a half percent ourselves and I
think the average time people were unemployed was about three to
three and a half weeks. So, you've got a pool of unemployed people
but how long are they in it? And there wasn't a great pool of long term
unemployed people but now there is.
JL: Yes, but that period of time, wasn't that what your people, particularly
those on the Left of your mob, called the " decade of greed", when we
had unemployment down at that rate? Wasn't that because private
enterprise was employing lots of people?
PM: Exactly, it was. We had 1.6 million job growth in the 1980s and..
JL: Yes, but you make claim, or your Government makes claim
particularly Bob Hawke to the 1.6 million jobs, we created 1.6 million
jobs, but you didn't create them, the private sector created them.
PM: Oh, yes but only... that was three times the rate of growth as the
Fraser Government had in the previous seven years. And the answer
is because the government had an Accord and it restrained wage
increases and it had a set of complementary tax cuts.
JL: So, you created the environment?
PM: We created the environment.
JL: OK, so if you created the environment for the 1.6 million jobs created
you must have also created the environment for one million now not
created.
PM: Well, absolutely and I have argued that point and accepted that point
in the course of the election campaign. But, what I've said is let's get
growing again and let's do the things to get growing again and I said
on election night we would not leave the unemployed behind. We are
saying as a society, certainly as a government and I think as a country,
we're saying we will keep Australian society cohesive and together.
We won't have someone slip out of the system. We won't have an
underclass. 
J L Well, aren't you only able to do that by encouraging the private sector
to employ because I mean, they are the employers they employ you,
they employ all the parliamentarians, the bureaucrats...
PM: In the last year or so we've given them every thing that opens and
shuts. They've got a 33 per cent corporate tax rate, John Hewson
wanted to give them 42 percent, we've given them 33, the same rate
as Singapore.
JL But that's been for some time and it hasn't turned it around.
PM: No that's just been for 15 months. We've got the highest profit share
we've ever had, that is, the share of national income going to profits is
as high as it's ever been in Australian history, right at this very time.
You can see that reflecting in the stock market. We've got a
competitive exchange rate, we've got much more flexibility in the
labour market through productivity bargaining so, everything is set up
now for a big roll of investment and some of that is in the Budget.
That's where that 14 per cent comes from.
JL OK, now I know you wouldn't expect Terry McCrann to say anything
kind about it..
PM: Oh, look, Terry McCrann, there ought to be a law against people like
Terry McCrann.
JL I suppose he's entitled to his say. He makes the point this morning
that unemployment will only come down with at least 6 per cent growth,
that's to get real jobs. So, growth could get to 4.5 percent, according
to him it needs to be 6 percent before it's going to really bite. Do you
accept that or not accept it?
PM: Well, he's arguing for a lower Budget deficit. They're real characters
these guys, they say, " This depends on growth", and then they say,
" We're not sure the growth will be there but you should cut the Budget
deficit back." We say, " But hang on, if you cut the Budget deficit back
you cut back all that government spending, that will slow the growth
even further." They say, " Oh, no, no, no, that's not right, what it will
do, it will actually make interest rates cheaper and therefore we'll have
a big blow out in growth." I say, " But hang on, interest rates have
come down from 18 percent to five 18 to five and you're saying if
we have a tighter, harder Budget which may knock another billion or so
out of it all of a sudden we're going to have some miraculous reduction
in interest rates after it has fallen from 18 per cent to 5 percent.
You see, in the end these people are rabid, right wing idealogues.
They all roll out into their company paid cars on their $ 200,000 a year
salaries, couldn't care less about the unemployed, couldn't care less
about kids wandering around Kings Cross or St Kilda, couldn't care
less about kids who are unemployed under 18 couldn't care less. 
All they want to do is write some thing for these financial markets so
you've got some 24 year old kid sitting up at a Reuters screen trying to
sell a bond to some superannuation fund. I mean, there's got to be
more to life than that. And that's why the public have got to peer right
past all the commentators and say, what has happened here? Terry
MCrann said, when I bought the One Nation package out, that it was
going to bankrupt Australia. Here we are, we are going to come back
into surplus in the 1990s in our Budget. We've got one of the lowest
government debts to GDP in the world, as the charts in the Budget
papers last night show.
JL: That's if all the predictions are right.
PM: No, no that's just right now. Let me just make this point to you. We've
got to the stage in public comment in this country where the culture of
criticism is so bad that they won't even acknowledge that Australians
have worked hard for this recovery and are entitled to it.
JL: Oh, I think the Australians acknowledge that and I think the Australians
understand that.
PM: I think the public understand that and that's why the government is
always in a relationship and conversation with the public and not with
the media.
JL: Yes, well, when you talk of youth unemployment why wasn't something
done about a training-wage a long time before this, because you
couldn't get the cooperation of the ACTU?
PM: Let me just show you this, your listeners can't see this but you can.
Chart 3 in Treasury Budget Paper No. 2, comparison of general
government debt. There's Australia, took at all the others. Look at
Italy, Canada, UK, France. There's the OECD average and there's us
look, we're about a third of it.
JL: Yes.
PM: We're amongst the lowest. It says, " Australia's public sector debt is
low compared with other OECD countries but with both gross and net
general government sector debt to GDP ratio as being amongst the
lowest in the OECD.
JL: Yes, but you've qualified that as saying public sector debt.
PM: That's right. But, this is the government Budget. You see, people are
saying, you'd better get that Budget deficit down. The McCrann's of
this world are saying, get the Budget deficit down but, hang on, our
debt to GDP is amongst the lowest in the world, we're going to be back
in surplus earlier. Let me look at this, another little chart here, it's
interesting. Look, it says, " International comparisons of fiscal targets,"
and they've got the targets. Our target is one per cent of GDP by 
1996-97. The United States is 2.3, France is 2.5, Italy is 5.8, United
Kingdom is 1.5 and Canada is three per cent. The only other country
which has a target of one and will get there, as we will, is Germany.
Because it has got massive debt from the East German reconstruction.
We're actually going to be under one, now. But, do you read that in
any of that in the columns? Not a bit of it. You see, these characters
will not accept the principal commentary which is, these are facts, not
arguments.
JL: But, all this is going to be paid for by growth? It must be, it's the
perennial budget fundamental question, where's the money coming
from?
PM: The word ' paid for' is not right.., let me just make this simple point
about what is called the cycle of the Budgets. In 1989-90 when I was
the Treasurer we had a surplus of two per cent of GDP, or about $ 8
billion. This year we look like having a deficit, in 1993-94 of around
$ 14 odd billion. Now, that change is a change of $ 22 billion. From a
surplus of eight to a deficit of 14. That's $ 22 billion dollars worth of
cushioning which the government sector has given to the Australian
community to cushion it from the impact of the slow down of the
recession. But, when things start to grow again, when government
spending comes back and when receipts and company earnings and
employment pick up then, the cycle changes and the deficit starts to
come back to surplus. We're saying we're going to come back to
surplus in the later 1990s but we'll be back to a deficit of under one per
cent of GDP in 1996-97.
JL: Yes, but all this hinges on all of your projections, or all the Treasurer's
projections which I would imagine are the same being right.
PM: Well, what is the big number? The answer is 4.5 per cent. But, we are
already growing at four and have for the last four quarters for the year
to march.
JL: And you don't believe there's anything that can change that?
PM: No, I think Australia's really got the wind behind it now, in terms of
earnings and growth and exports.
JL: But, do you understand the sceptics who aren't prepared to listen to
the spin, as they call it in newspeak. I mean, you promised us, I think,
you'd bring home the bacon in 1988, soft landing in 1990, the
recession we had to have in 1991...
PM: Yes, but, John just remember, the 1980s were are period of great
bounty for Australia. I mean, we ended up with one and three quarter
million more jobs, basically, than we started with, and we averaged
four and a half per cent growth all those years through the 1980s we
averaged four and a half... 
JL: So, you don't see the 1980s as the decade of greed?
PM: I see the eighties as well there was a fair bit of greed around but
there were tremendous opportunities around, as well. Tremendous
opportunities.
JL: And, don't you think we should encourage that sort of opportunity
again?
PM: Absolutely, and that's why we've got the company rate at 33 per cent,
we've got a high profit share, and we're also saying, this is not just a
recovery for the top end of town. This is a recovery for ordinary wage
and salary earners, that's why we reduced the tax rate on middle
incomes in the tax cuts before Christmas. And, we're saying, also, to
the unemployed and to other sections of society, " You'll be in this as
well. It's not just for the guys who are doing well."
JL: I know that you say this is not just a recovery for the top end of town
and maybe that is said in order to placate some of the left wing that
you've got to take care of but the top end of town has got to recover,
it's very important that they do recover.
PM: Yes, exactly, but it's your small and medium sized business enterprise
I'm interested in. They're the ones who'll put the extra one or two
people on. They're the ones who need the break in the labour market,
in the tax system, in general competitiveness and they are the things
the government is seeking to do. But, they'll need skills as this
recovery picks up and if we don't retrain that great body of long term
unemployed people we'll have skills bottle necks. And, when you have
labour shortages you start getting wage push inflation. And, that's the
thing we've got to avoid in 1996 and ' 97 and ' 98.
JL: So, you do subscribe to the theory, if you want more employees you
have got to have more employers?
PM: Well, I have always done that. I mean, let me make this point again
in the seven years between 1983 and 1990 the Australian economy
grew at an average rate of 4.5 per cent, exactly the forecast we have
for this year and this Budget. But, to grow at an average of four and a
half in some years you've got to be doing better than four and a half.
In some years we did five. Now, you compare the economy then, to
now. You never had low inflation, like now, we never had flexibility in
the labour market, in enterprise bargaining, like now. We never had
the linkages into Asia...
JL: Why didn't we have all of those things you've mentioned?
PM: Why? Because we had a slug of a government for 25 years, the
Coalition, that never did a damn thing about any of these things. 
JL: But your people have been in there for ten years, you didn't do
anything about enterprise bargaining for ten years.
PM: Yes we did. We started in about ' 85 on productivity bargaining and
started to change the centralised system around.
JL: Yes, but nothing happened until the last 12 months.
PM: Oh, no, no, no. We got enterprise bargaining in the late 1980s. The
great change we put in in the last year was enterprise flexibility in the
Federal Award area. So, even in places which are not organised,
where there are no unions, small to medium sized enterprises, they
can now vary their terms and conditions of employment...
JL: Do you regret that you didn't introduce that earlier?
PM: Well, I think everything takes time. You see, the rigidities and the
interlinking awards and the leapfrogging which characterised our wage
fixing system for 90 years can't be changed overnight. But we've now
changed it. But, my point is this, John, that with all those changes, if
we could do four and a half per cent growth in the ' 80s in a far more
rigid economy the chances of doing four and a half now in this flexible
economy much more flexible, and remember this, that 75 per cent of
our exports go to the Asia-Pacific. The Asia-Pacific is growing much
faster than North America, -Japan or Western Europe. This
government has set up structures not only in Australia, but outside of
Australia, for Australia.
JL: So, what do you believe our growth could be? I don't want to hold you
to it, I'm just thinking about the growth in Asia.
PM: This year I think we'll do the four and a half, as forecast and, I think, it's
possible for the Australian economy to grow at that pace or greater,
over the period. Now, we're forecasting, in a sense conservatively, our
growth rate drops back to around four per cent for the next couple of
years.
JL: Do you think you are making it easier for private enterprise to employ
people or do you think you are making it tougher?
PM: Oh, we're making it easier because, basically, now a good manager
can make the wage bargain that he or she thinks can kick the business
along. And that, I think, is the big change.
JL: I hear the greatest complaint from the private sector, or one of the
greatest, and there are plenty of them, but one of them, which I don't
think is unreasonable, is that it might be easier now to employ people
but it is very, very difficult to get rid of them.
PM: Well, I don't see that's valid. But, the point about it is, look, let's not
get gloomy about getting rid of people, the fact of the matter is that we 
have, all of us, changed this economy from a closed, inward,
frightened little place, with a tariff wall around it in the 1980s and a
managed exchange rate and a sclerotic financial system to one which
is open and free, free and open product markets with low tariffs, open
services markets and open financial markets and great linkages now
into Asia, with low inflation, low interest rates and a competitive
exchange rate. The ball is at our feet, and where now 8 kids in 10 are
completing secondary school; ten years ago when we started on the
task it was 3 in 10. In two years time it will be 9 in
JL: How many of those kids are staying at school because they believe
they wouldn't get employed if they left?
PM: All the incentives have been to keep them at school because we don't
want the Australian economy to be a low wage, low brow economy.
We want it to be a high wage, high technology, smart economy doing
the smarter higher valued things and you can't do that without
education and research and development. Now, that's the sort of
economy we've got set up for ourselves. Only we can muck it up at
this point. The ball is at our feet.
JL: OK, when you say qualify that.
PM: Well, that is, by some characteristic of our economy or community we
don't take the opportunities up. I mean, by the business community for
instance not taking the opportunities up; by the labour market not
changing.
JL: Do you believe they will?
PM: No, I think they will. Look, John, I was in Vietnam three week ago and
I went to a function which the Australian Embassy had arranged and
there were 235 business people there from Australia 235 Australians
in Ho Chi Minh City. We've got $ 800 million invested in Vietnam.
Australians are everywhere in Bangkok there is a great group of them
there that I met. We've made the leap into Asia as we've never had it
before and that is what is holding some of this growth up. That is, that
exports which have been going gang busters now for years are doing
so because the linkages we have into an area of the world which is
growing much faster than north America or Japan or western Europe.
Now, if we continue to keep our competitiveness, get that right, but
believe in ourselves, have some faith in ourselves and not knock the
place or have these sort of crabby right wing journalists saying, " oh
well, look, there's not enough pain here, what we need is another sort
of I know they had high interest rates, but now let's give them high
taxes. Let's belt them around." This sort of notion that if it's not
painful, it's not any good; when do we ever get to enjoy it? And if we
understand that we do have tremendous opportunities here I'm sure
Australians are going to just grab them. In other words, in the terrible
sort of tall poppy cutting and knocking of Australia, basically the
community is in for the main chance, which is growth and opportunity. 
JL Just back to industrial relations. I was saying yesterday that you have
done extraordinarily well, or somebody had, getting the unions on side
probably Simon Crean in the main with your assistance but, the new
Industrial Relations Reform Act would appear a major impediment to
getting ' changes in the work place. The flexibility promised by the
White Paper of last week is prohibited by this Industrial Relations
Reform Act because it reforms all the secondary boycott provisions, it
puts up barriers to the formation and retention of non-union shops,
you've got to advertise any work place agreement and consequently
the unions can get involved again. Are you going to have another look
at that?
PM: No, because, look, secondary boycott things never made any
difference to the way so meone runs a business. What this means is,
instead of the rigid flexibility of awards which we had from the
centralised system, someone now who, let's say it's a business
employing eight or ten people in a federal award area, even though the
people may not be unionised, may never have ever been members of
a union or been in any way organised, those people can now vary the
terms and conditions of their employment in agreement with the
employer without reference to anyone. Now, the only condition we put
is that they can't be varied down. They can change their hours of
work, they can change their remuneration.
JL But they have to have agreement.
PM: Between them.
JL Yes.
PM: Yes.
JL But the agreement has got to be a majority approval, but the funny
majority you lot have down there is 70 per cent. I would have thought
51 per cent was a majority.
PM: I can't remember what we've got in the Bill, John.
JL Well, that's what you've got.
PM: The fact of the matter is, look, any employer with any nous these days
has got all the flexibility to actually get their employees together and
do something clever. Now, they are doing it. You see, one of the
reasons why last month the inflation figure came out for the year at 1.9
per cent and in the old days wage increases without productivity would
be pushing that rate up. The reason it has remained consistently low,
and it is very low, is because we are getting wage increases, but they
are paid for by productivity. So, it's not flowing into inflation and the
system is already working. The proof of the pudding is in the eating.
Just look at that inflation rate, I mean, we are not in a recession now. 
We are growing stronger than any substantial economy in the world
and yet we've still got inflation at 1.9 per cent. In the same part of the
cycle in 1983-84 when we came out of the 1982-83 recession we had
inflation at 11 per cent. We've got inflation now at 1.9 per cent and we
got it because, basically, the system is more supple, flexible and
productive.
JL: And do you believe inflation will stay that low?
PM: Well, we've got it slightly higher in the Budget at 2 and 1/ 4 per cent.
From 1.9 per cent to 2 and 1/ 4 per cent.
JL: If it goes to 2 and 1/ 4 per cent will interest rates stay down or go up?
PM: No, I think there is no reason why interest rates should rise on the
forecast. Because, we've already got interest rates running at 5 and
1\ 4 per cent or 5 and 1/ 2 per cent on bills for instance which is a real
rate of interest on the short ends. That is, the real rate is taking the
inflation from the nominal rate of interest if the nominal rate is 5 and
1/ 2 and inflation is 2 per cent the real rate is 3 and 1/ 2 per cent. So,
we've got a real rate of about 3 and 1/ 2 per cent.
JL: You see, because that's where the confusion exists what's a rubbery
figure? I mean, what is the real rate and what is the anticipated rate?
That is where the discrepancy lies. Somebody said last night, I don't
know whether it was Ralph Willis or not or somebody in an interview
later, that we had the lowest income tax rates in the world.
PM: We are. Australia is the lowest taxed country in the western world.
Again, that is confirmed in the papers..
JL: Well, I'm just looking here, for the average wage of $ 35,000 here, we
pay 22.6 per cent tax. The same rate of pay in Asian countries has
much, much lower rates; Indonesia 23 per cent; Malaysia 16 per cent;
Korea 15.6 per cent.
PM: But, they are not OECD countries, John.
JL: But, these are the countries we are dealing with.
PM: I know, but, they don't have a developed road system, the don't have a
developed health system.
JL: Japan doesn't, Singapore doesn't.
PM: Singapore is a city state. It is as big as the city of Sydney. I mean,
once you put the roads down they are down for the next twenty or thirty
years. Look at Australia, you've got to run highways.
JL: It is a bit bigger than the city of Sydney. Japan 10 per cent; Thailand
10.4 per cent. 
PM: Yes, but Japan's rate of tax is about the same as Australia's. That is,
Japan and Australia are within a decimal point of one another as the
two lowest taxed OECD countries and we are.
JL: But, when you say the others aren't OECD countries, that of course, is
quite right. But, they are the countries in whom we have been
encouraged by you to place great faith because this is obviously where
our trade is going to take place.
PM: That is true, but you can't compare their general revenue effort with
ours when we run a fully developed economy when they don't. But,
what we have done for it to say, but, we do trade with them, and
therefore as a concession to that point we've cut our corporate rate to
33 per cent so at least our businesses are on the same competitive
footing as a business would be in these countries. But, in terms of the
general community of Australia, we've got now a very low level of
taxation because we don't have a consumption tax; we don't have
social security levies.
JL: But, it's not the lowest?
PM: It's the lowest in the OECD.
JL: Sure, but we are not dealing directly with OECD countries. Haven't we
got to take the comparison between the other Asian countries.
PM: Yes, well, go around Malaysia and go around Korea and see what
conditions are like outside of Seoul or Kuala Lumpur or these places.
It's just not like Australia, they are not developed countries.
JL: But, these are the countries with whom we have to deal?
PM: Yes, but we don't want to end up like that.
JL: I agree.
PM: I mean, they are trying to end up like us. They are trying to get to
where we are.
JL: OK, well now Prime Minister, tell us what we, as a nation, have now
got to do?
PM: I think, what we have to do is to consolidate our gains on inflation.
That is, we have to always think about price increases and wage
increases; we've got to keep the notion of productivity, the whole
productivity culture in front of us; in preserving that inflation rate we
preserve our core competitiveness. That keeps us in the market
places of Asia and the Pacific and, to that extent, North America and
western Europe. They are the things that will basically drive us. Then,
I think, we have to keep a premium on education and training as we 
are to make sure that we end up with a skilled work force producing
clever goods and not a low income work force producing things that
developing countries are producing. And, above all that, we've got to
keep Australia as a cohesive society. We've got to be determined that
we shall be an inclusive place. That everybody is part of the
Australian family and there's not just part of the game for the wealthy
and well-to-do people with the middle income earners doing it hard in
the middle and those on low incomes doing it tough or the
unemployed. That we keep the place as a cohesive whole. Now, if we
do that, we'll do what the Americans have not done, what the British
have not done in the 1 980s there has been basically an underclass
rip away from American society. You've got a very high proportion of
low income employed people, but people below the poverty line on
abysmally low wages and you've got a body of unemployed people as
we have.
What the White Paper is, is a statement which says we will not be that
kind of society. That the Australian ethos of the fair go and
egalitarianism will remain a core part of the culture under this
Government and in the Australian community. So, we get those three
things together, maintain our competitiveness, keep an emphasis on
training and product innovation and keep the place together and
cohesive, I think, Australia can be a country, the envy of many in the
world.
JL When will we start to see the results of these things when put in place?
PM: I think, we will start to see them relatively soon. One of the challenges
in the next two years is to develop a private case management and job
pl acement market to sit beside the Commonwealth' Employment
Service so, if an employer needs somebody, with confidence they can
ring a certain agency and find somebody relatively quickly who they
know they have personal experience of. I think, it is also important for
Australia's young people: there is a lot of alienation amongst young
people because they think society doesn't care for them or doesn't
care about them. I think, to be personally case managing them, oneto-
one, understanding their personality, their educational..
JL You'd have to employ an awful lot of people to do it.
PM: Yes, we've got to employ about 3,000 we think to handle 125 cases a
year, personally. But, you'll get to know the person, understand the
person, their educational qualifications, their aptitudes, their work
experience and they'll go away saying " well, look, I'm not on my own, I
haven't been forgotten, I'm not just cast aside", and, I think, that ' s
terribly important particularly today when many young people who drop
out of school early find that they can't get work because the sort of low
paid, unskilled jobs which existed 25 years ago don't exist now.
JL In the time that you've been Prime Minister, have you achieved
everything you wanted to achieve? 
PM: No one can achieve everything they want to achieve, but I do want to
see Australia set up well at home and abroad. That is, set up well in
terms of a productivity culture in our industry, but a community culture
which has a premium on each Australian personality remaining
important.
JL: What's the best thing you've done since you've been Prime Minister?
PM: I don't know, it's for others to judge I think, John.
JL: What's the worst thing you've done?
PM: Well, whatever it is I wouldn't tell you, not here.
JL: Later?
PM: Later maybe. Look, I think if we can get that kind of society and I think
we are getting it now, we've got a tremendously good social security
system, it's targeted, it's relatively inexpensive in world terims.
JL: But, is it really working?
PM: Yes, look, it has held the country together through these last couple of
difficult years.
JL: Why have we got more people on it then?
PM: Because we've got more unemployed people, but...
JL: So, it's not working?
PM: No, that's because the economy wasn't running at its optimum, but the
system is working because it has picked them up and it's managed
them and it's now managing a lot of them back into work.
JL: Why do we have more poverty now than we had before if the system is
working?
PM: We don't have more poverty.
JL: Yes, we do.
PM: No, I don't think that's right. I mean, Australia is a much more
JL: We were not going to have any by the 1990s according to your
predecessor.
PM: Australia is a much more fully employed place than it was ten years
ago not withstanding the recession. I mean, largely we kept of those
1.7 million jobs that were created in the 1980s, we've largely kept them 
all. What we haven't done is we are not adding to new ones at the
pace that we were formerly adding to them and that is what we are now
changing this year with 230,000 job growth and in the Budget
forecast for another 240-250,000. So, that will make a difference. The
social security system, the health system means that Australia is a
very equitable place, I believe, and what we've got to do now is just
make sure that the proceeds of growth are spread to employment and
to education and that we continue to make these linkages into Asia.
JL: OK, thanks very much for your time. As usual you have been
generous with it and thank you for the explanations. I still think there
are a lot of things that need to be answered and I'd like it very much if
soon, and I won't hold you to it, but if soon you could spend some time
with us and talk to the people who listen to us around Australia.
PM: A bit of talk back. I'd look forward to that.
JL: You like that don't you?
PM: I like that, yes. I like an intellectual challenge, John. Thank you very
much for the opportunity and I thank your listeners.
ends 



p
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SECRETARY TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT
The Government will be recommending to the Governor-General the
appointment of Mr Stephen Skehill as Secretary to the Attorney-General's
Department. Mr Skehill, 44, has held senior positions in the Departments of Business and
Consumer Affairs and Social Security as well as the Attorney-General's
Department. He has been a Deputy Secretary of the Attorney-General's
Department since 1988, holding the position of Australian Government
Solicitor from 1989 to 1990. The vacancy in the Attorney-General's
Department occurs because of the Government's decision to recommend the
appointment of Mr Alan Rose as the President of the Australian Law Reform
Commission, anndunced siparately today by the Attorney-General.
The Government will recommend that these appointments take effect on
Monday, 23 May 1994.
CANBERRA 11 MAY1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH RUSSELL POWELL, RADIO 2GB3, 11 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RP: Prime Minister, Good Afternoon.
PM: How are you, Russell?
RP: I am well. Now, leaving aside the funding side for a moment, because
a lot of people have talkedabout that throughout the day, the Budget
is also being seen as an election primer. How do you react to that? Is
it?
PM: Well, that is just a bit of nonsense. I mean, elections are too hard to
win, without simply giving them away quickly or cheaply. So, we have
got plenty of time to run.
RP: Now, the funding side and the growth forecast. Many are saying those
forecasts are too optimistic?
PM: Look we are running at the moment at about 4 per cent growth. And
as a consequence, here's the Liberal Party arguing between 4
per cent. Now, I remind you of this, Russell, we grew on average at
per cent through the 1980s. But the economy is now far more
subtle, inflation is much lower, there is a productivity culture in the
country, in the community, in the business community, we have not
had in the past. And as a consequence there is every reason why
Australia could grow at least as fast as it did in the recovery phase of
the 1980s. Now, we had in the forecast last evening 4.5 per cent
growth and as a consequence we are predicting half a per cent above
what we had for the year. That is, we have had growth in the year to
March of 4 per cent, and so we have got to haggle now over 4 or
per cent. Now, the Liberal Party was telling us, Dr Hewson was telling
us in the last election that we were going to have a double dip 
recession, that we are actually in for a depression. And now, they
have got the front to be up there arguing about whether the growth rate
is going to be 4 or 4.5 per cent.
RP: Well some of the asset sell offs, which are also part of the funding, the
left has been critical of. In fact, I had Laurie Ferguson on the air last
night, John Button once said he wasn't concerned about any asset
sell-offs, except Qantas. Well, Qantas is among them.
PM: Yes, that is right Qantas is amongst them. But it doesn't change the
character of the Budget. We have got outlays spending in the Budget
running at below the rate of growth of the economy. Outlays are
running at 3.1 per cent growth. If you take the asset sales out of that
they are growing at 2.9 per cent. So, it is making no difference
whatsoever to the general pattern of the Budget. And things like
Qantas, frankly, will be much better in private sector hands because
they can keep the capital up to them, run them effectively and
efficiently, and of course, with a big share holder like British Airways,
and linking Qantas into the British Airways world system will make
Qantas a much better and stronger company than it is today. I think
we have got to be interested in what we do with these things at
institutions. It is like the Commonwealth Bank, the Commonwealth
Bank is worth as much to the Commonwealth today, we have sold half
of it, yet we have had billions paid to the Budget, and yet it is still worth
as much as when we started.
RP: But you only get one go at those kind of things, of course.
PM: Yes, I know. But I mean, there are always some asset sales in the
Budget. I mean the Commonwealth acquires assets all the time for
various reasons over the years. It has got to be in a position to
dispose of some at the same time.
RP: Ok, harking back to the White Paper, can I say, I think there will be
many people out there cheering for the parenting allowance
announced there. Many people who perhaps aren't even organised
lobby groups, but who feel that they have been missing out on choice
in that area. The choice to stay home and look after the kids, they now
have that choice as a result of the White Paper. That was obviously
your feeling as well, that the choice wasn't there?
PM: What we have done with the White Paper on the Social Security side
has completely changed the way in which the Soci'al Security system
works. For all of the post war years we have presumed in the Social
Security system that it is today like it was in 1945, that you have got a
married couple and one person either at work or unemployed. Well, in
fact, now both couples in a marriage or a partnership go to work, often
go to work. So, the change we have in the White Paper is rather than
jointly income testing and work testing a couple, we are giving a half 
married rate unemployment benefit to each person, and then we
income test and work test them both. But the spouse who is looking
after children can elect to receive the parenting allowance rather than
be work tested. So, if you take, let's say generally the mother, a
woman under 40 who has got a couple of children, who is likely in her
terms to choose not to be looking for work, then we will pay her the half
married rate unemployment benefit and she won't lose it simply
because her husband or spouse earns a bit of income. Whereas,
before the White Paper we had this sudden death taper of 100 per
cent. That is, if you picked up a dollar of income you would lose a
dollar off the unemployment benefit. We have now got a 50 per cent
taper and a 70 per cent taper cutting in at different points. So, it
means that unemployed people can actually go and get part time work
and add to their unemployment benefit, and in the doing of it, let's say
the husband of a couple, wouldn't diminish the wife's benefit until he
earns $ 230.00 over the unemployment benefit. So, what it means is,
Russell, what it means is that people can' now, if they have the
incentive to take on work, particularly part time work, they will end up
with more income, and the spouse caring for the children has a real
choice about whether she wants to line up for UB, unemployment
benefit, and the work test or stay at home and receive the parenting
allowance, which is about $ 132.65 a week.
RP: And it is an important recognition of what she is doing as well.
PM: It is. And there is also the home child care allowance we introduced in
the Budget of last year following the commitment I made in the
election.
PR: Well it is clear looking at your own family life that there are areas there
that you feel pretty strongly about. I remember the crack down on
violence on TV, part of that was motivated by what you had seen your
own kids watching. And I understand that your wife Annita had a part
to play in the breast cancer allocation as well. Some people may
criticise that, but I think it is a recognition that you are drawing from
real life the issues that are affecting Australians?
PM: Well, I think she has made the point to me on a number of occasions
about the problems of understanding breast cancer. The problems of
detection and how it should best be treated. So, we have increased
funding in this area, quite dramatically, to increase primary research
into the disease, but also to extend the screening program so that
there is earlier detection. And some of that research in various
branches of research into generic cancer, in a generic sense and
breast cancer in particular, will, I think, probably let us understand it
better and treat it more effectively once it is discovered. 
RP: Of course there is the statement today too, that men have significant
problems, prostate cancer is another area that may well be worth
targeting? That is a huge problem.
PM: Well, it is. I think, that a lot of the research for these sorts of cancers
is generic. They go to the mutations of cells and this is of a generic
variety rather than an organic variety. But, this will be allocated, of
course, sensibly by those who know where the research programs are
and what merit they have and who should receive the funds.
RP: Well, you have the Budget out of the way, you have Mabo now out of
the way, is it time to concentrate back on the republican issue? Is that
an issue that you're going to be raising again now?
PM: Well, it is an issue that I campaigned along on in the 1993 election and
I have raised it from time to time and I'll continue to raise it. I think,
that Australia has got a tremendously good future in the 1990s as a
competitive economy with a productivity culture we've never really had
before; a very high premium on education and training and product
innovation; big links now we've made into Asia, we are exporting
per cent of our exports into Asia, we've taken exports from 14 per cent
of GDP of all we produce, to now 21 per cent. So, there is a big
change in the character of the Australian economy and its society and
there are great opportunities for us in Asia, as well as home, and I've
always believed that these will always be enhanced by the country
being more confident about itself. Reflecting in its identity and
understanding what that identity is. Hence, the natural extension of
that is, that we manage our own affairs.
RP: Sure, that's been moderated though in recent times. I think the debate
has gone a little quiet. Does it need to accelerate or are you happy
with the pace of that debate proceeding?
PM: Let's say this, Russell, it is on simmer. It is simmering away out there.
It is a real life issue with people now and they think about it and they
talk about it and they talk about it in schools and it is an after dinner
matter for discussion. You know, you'll get it in the after dinner debate,
I mean, this was not true a few years ago. So, the work which the
Republican Advisory Committee did under Malcolm Turnbull's
chairmanship was a very good piece of paper, a very interesting
document; the first of its kind looking at the modalities or models of a
shift to a republic and how it might be done. And, I think, it provided
the debate with a very good basis and we'll be continuing to participate
in that debate from time to time.
But, we have been focussing on the White Paper and on the Budget
and, as you've mentioned, Mabo. One of the things I would like to
communicate to people is that the Government has kept its election
commitments in respect of the things it said it would do Mabo, the first 
round of tax cuts have been paid, we've got now our commitment to the
long term unemp! oyed, we've picked it up with the White Paper, which
is a novel thing just not in Australian terms, but in international terms.
We are doing something here that I don't think is being done in any
comparable countries. That is intensively case managing on a one-toone
personal basis over half a million people 500,000 we estimate
will be intensively case managed in the coming year to understand
their personalities, their aptitudes, their educational standards, their
work experience and place them back into society. In doing that, not
only will we do something which is good and efficient for the economy,
that is, in complementing skills formation and the economy, but we are
doing something which is also giving Australia some more social
cohesion and equity. I am very proud of that and we've now got a big
job of work to do to make sure that works.
Of course, the Budget consolidates all that and in the Budget we have
got some other important changes. The Land Fund for Aboriginal
people, $ 500 million there on health; $ 135 million for the preparation of
our Olympic team; $ 209 million on breast cancer; an immunisation
program for children and all in the context of declining Budget deficit
coming well within the target of 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97 as
promised.
RP: OK, but you are confident you can get the growth to fund that and the
business investment?
PM: Well, the four quarters in the year to March came out at 4 per cent so,
we are nudging that up half a point when profits have never been
higher, when the exchange rate is competitive, when inflation is low
and interest rates are low, a 33 per cent corporate tax rate legislated
after the election in last years Budget, links into Asia we haven't had,
tremendous growth in exports. If we can't screw a half a percentage
point out of it, then at this stage of the cycle Russell, I think, we are all
whistling dixie.
RP: OK, just finally, can I take you to a matter you touched on a little
moment ago. The election promise has been kept for the first round of
the tax cuts, the second round of the tax cuts have been deferred, are
they gone forever?
PM: Well, what I said a year or so ago, I said, we were deferring the
second round for payment probably in 1998, but depending on how our
fiscal conditions are at the time. What we need to keep an eye on is,
first of all we are carrying the full costs this year of the November 1 tax
cuts. You see, you pay the tax cuts last November, but that's not the
end of it, those tax cuts keep being paid every week and they're now,
for the full year, consolidated in this Budget. So, we will be looking at
how the economy picks up, how capital formation is, looking at
investment and the demands on national savings to see what is the 
appropriate timing for another round of tax cuts. Now, we'll do that a
little later than now when it becomes a little more clear what those
various influences are.
RP: Have you got a probability rating on that?
PM: Well, can I just say this, all the tax cuts that the Government said it
would deliver from 1983 onwards, it delivered. And, I think the best
thing to do is look at our record. The other thing, I think, which is
important to understand is in this period, say, 1995 right out to 1997-98
where we are forecasting now over a four year period, we are doing it
without a rise in general revenue. In 1994-95 the estimate, that's for
all revenue, to GDP is 23.7 per cent. We expect it to be 23.8 per cent
only a decimal point difference in 1997-98. Now, in all recoveries like
this we've seen the tax to GDP ratio rise by over two percentage
points. In the 1970s it went up from 22.5 per cent to 24.5 per cent. In
the 1960s it went up from around 21 per cent to around 22.5 per cent.
In this recovery it will be pretty flat which means we are not relying on
a huge revenue poultice to bring the Budget deficit down.
RP: Yes, so on that basis you are confident they will be there in 1998?
PM: What I'm saying is, that the Government's intention is that the
incidence of tax over time shouldn't rise unnecessarily even with
modest inflation. That is, with the impact of modest inflation on the tax
scales and at a time appropriate to Australia's fiscal needs and general
savings, we'll introduce a second round.
RP: OK, Prime Minister, we'll leave it there. I know you have other things
to do. I thank you for giving us this time and I hope we'll talk with you
again soon.
PM: A pleasure. Thank you very much, Russell.
ends 



13
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO " AM" PROGRAM,
WEDNESDAY, 11 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minister, no new taxes, that sounds like a slogan say, for a preelection
Budget, is this an omen?
PM: No, it's not an omen. This is a Budget which builds on the changes
which we have made in this country and in budgetary terms over many
years and it is a Budget basically set up for growth and jobs. We've
got the economy growing at about 4.5 per cent; we've already grown at
4 per cent in the year to March; we'll accelerate to about 4.5 per cent;
we are predicting 3 per cent emrn poyrpent growth, which is just under
250,000 jobs and all in the context of the deficit coming back and
winding down to the 1 per cent or actually noW, better than 1 per cent
forecast as a deficit for 1996-1997.
EK: Well, you've delivered a deficit figure to the markets, what if they don't
buy it, what will you do then?
PM: I think market reaction so far has been pretty good. The long bond
rate dropped back a bit, I think, during the course of the day and
tentative signs from market commentators have been not too bad. The
fact is that the Budget is well predicated and premised. That is, the
revenue is coming from growth which is built on growth in employment
and a growth pick-up in average weekly earnings.
FK: The Treasurer said the Government will use monetary policy to keep
the inflation. figure in check. Will there be a rise in-iri-r-t rates this
year as part of your economic strategy?
PM: Certainly not because of the Budget and I don't think there is any
cause at this point in time why interest rates should rise. One can
never say interest rates will never rise, but that is the very point of
having a monetary policy. But, with growth of this order and low 
inflation in prospect remember Fran we've just had the inflation rate
for the quarter at 1.9 per cent; we've got it in the Budget at 2 and 1/ 4
per cent for the coming year, so we've very subdued inflation which is
a very good sign for interest rates.
FK: You could have reduced the deficit further and faster, instead you
chose to deliver a Budget with no tax increases and minimal spending
cuts. Why such a benign Budget?
PM: Because I think it is not a matter of being benign. One doesn't go out
of ones way to say, bang up taxes. I mean, we gave tax cuts late last
year which is another election promise fulfilled. This Budget fulfils with
the White Paper many of the election promises we made to introduce
those tax cuts which have now been paid; to introduce the Mabo
legislation which has now been done; to bring up the unemployed and
deal with that through the White Paper which we have now announced
and in this Budget to produce the jobs we said would be produced and
the growth as well as doing a lot of other important things. There is
billion over ten years for the Aboriginal Land Fund for those who
won't secure benefits from Mabo; there is $ 500 million over five years
for Aboriginal health and Aboriginal health programs; there is $ 209
million'over four years for breast cancer; $ 135 million over six years
for the preparation of our Olympic athletes for the Sydney 2000
Olympics; an increase in foreign aid, but we have done ail that within
the context of falling, over time now to 1996-97, falling outlays to GOP.
EK: You've also done all of it though, mostly, from the growth dividend.
Why did you choose not to take the harder path, but in fact people
have probably been expecting, given last years Budget, a few more
spending cuts?
PM: The growth dividend so called, there should always be a dividend from
faster rate of growth, faster employment growth, better company
profits, more people in work and we made a judgement a week ago or
a couple of months ago that the White Paper and the efficiency
effects, the broad economic efficiency effects of getting 350,000 longterm
unemployed people back to work and case managing young
people under 18 years of age and setting up better linkages between
school and work were both more efficient things to do, were things
that should have been done in equity terms and we've done that. And,
even in the doing of it we've still got the Budget deficit down at $ 11.7
billion 2.5 per cent of GDP, actually lower than we forecast for this
year last year.
FK: The Opposition says you are fudging your figures, though. You are
including asset sales to fund general recurrent spending. Is this a..
are you selling off the family silver as they say?
PM: Look, that is just absolute nonsense. Outlays growth this year is less
than GDP growth. Outlays growth is 3.1 per cent. If you wash the 
asset sales out of it, it is 2.9 per cent: 2.9 per cent as again from 3.1
per cent. Look, the Liberals in the House listening to the Treasurer
deliver the Budget, I'm sure if somebody had stood up and said at the
end of it, I move that the Liberal Party wind up, it would have got a
majority of people. They looked so dispirited. Some wag yelled out
' let's get the smelling salts out'. They have got nothing to say about
this Budget. It is strong on growth, it is strong in employment, it has
got the deficit coming down, it's got outlays running at less than the
rate of GDP, it's got no tax increases, it's forecasting strong business
investment and yet it is consolidating the White Paper changes and
doing all those other things I mentioned as well.
FK It is counting in though, the selling off of Qantas. You have been
trying to sell Qantas now for the past two years, ' what makes you so
sure you are going to sell it this time?
PM: We can sell Qantas, it is just a matter of when we choose to go to the
market. At a time of maximum opportunity for the Government.
FK And that time is now?
PM: We think it is in the course of this coming financial year.
FK You've given $ 1.5 billion to the Aboriginal Land Fund over ten years in
this Budget, but there is no mention of who is going to run it. How will
it be run?
PM: There is a structure there we are considering, but we've also got to
have further consultations with the Aboriginal community about that.
But, for this year we have allocated $ 200 million. It will be a revolving
fund, a proportion of that will be spent on land, but a high proportion
will be retained and it will be the earnings of the fund in the long run
that actually pays for new acquisitions.
FK: But will the Prime Minister's department want to hang on to control of
that spending?
PM: It will be set up under the auspices of the A TSIC Act, but the express
structure, it will probably have a couple of functions. One will be
financial management of the funds that's the funds management side,
because it will be the accrual of earnings on the fund which will matter
for land acquisition and there will be a property management and
property acquisition side.
FK Will this Budget be held up in the Senate again or did you deliberately
avoid tax increases to avoid the minor parties having the power to hold
over you again.
PM: No, but the fact is we gave tax cuts as promised and what is the point
then of coming this year simply to produce an even lower deficit, of 
lifting tax? We made a judgement about that, it has got nought to do
with the minor parties in the Senate and, I think, many of the things
that we are doing on Aboriginal health and the Land Fund and national
Asian languages program, homelessness, mental health, breast
cancer, medical research, child immunisation, are all things which I
think probably the Greens and the Democrats would approve of.
FK So you don't expect them to hold it up?
PM: No, I don't.
FK: What about, you mentioned the tax cuts that you've delivered. There
is a second round of tax cuts promised. There is no mention of them
in this Budget, when will people get that second round of tax cuts?
PM: I said this at the Press Club about a year ago. I said that they would
be considered for payment in the latter part of the 1990s, probably
1998. Now, the Government can make a judgement about that closer
to the time.
FK But, they will get them eventually?
PM: I said so and it will be a judgement which, I said it in terms that if fiscal
conditions permit. That is, if the growth in the economy, the
investment phase, the cycle we're in then permits their payment.
FK: But the guarantee of them eventually being paid is still there?
PM: It sits on the words I've said very clearly a year ago.
FK Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Good Fran.
ends 



' 4lit
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH DEAN BANKS, RADIO 3AW, 11I MAY 1994
DB: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Pleasure, Dean, nice to be here.
DB: I believe this is a first for your office?
PM: Yes, this is right from the... . well, it is not an oval office, it is a square
office, a rectangular office, but it is a first.
DB: Well if it is not the oval office, then no new taxes is probably the
message from the Budget.
PM: Well, no new taxes, strong growth, strong employment. 4.5 per cent
growth over a qu arter -of a million new jobs in the course of the year.
As you say, no new taxes, and a deficit which takes us down, as we
said, to that 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97. So, it is one that sets the
whole country up to grow with low inflation throughout the
DB: You have been involved with, what, eleven Budgets and mini
statements and economic statements and so on. How many does that
total over the years?
PM: About 21 or 22.
DB: How does this compare? I mean, when you are not there doing the
driving?
PM: This is a tip top result. The measure of good housekeeping in Budgets
is always to have a look at those outlays, and there we have got the
outlays growing below the rate of economic growth and they are
trailing down through the balan-ce of thF-9O-s. Which means then, of
course, without resort to revenue, as there is no tax increase in the 
Budget, it means the Budget balance just, sort of, churns back towards
surplus.
DB: Prime Minister, your comments earlier in the week, or last week, with
regard to the overseas markets, I mean in some respects are Budgets
today for those overseas markets?
PM: No, I think they are for the business community, and I was very
pleased at the reaction which the Government has had to the Budget
from the markets, and yesterday longbonds dropped back a bit in fact.
But the main thing is one of the strong elements of the Budget is
business investment. We have got strong pick up in business
investment and that's where the employment comes from, and that's
why the key businesses here are the actual employing companies, that
people actually make things and do things rather than simply trading
financial securities.
DB: How dependent are they then on the banks? And is there a message
here for the banks?
PM: No, I think the message for the banks is I think it is a good message
for the banks and that is, that we are going to have an extended
recovery and we are going to have it with lowinflation and low inflation
means, with it, interest rates kept at low levels.
DB: No concerns about what they laughingly referred to as the Gumnut
twins?
PM: What are the Gumnut twins?
DB: The two Green Senators.
PM: The two Green Senators. I think they will approve of this. This, of
course, consolidates the White Paper, employment changes in respect
of the long term unemployed, and we have got in this Budget over ten
years the Aboriginal land fund to complement Mabo, we have got $ 500
million in a program over five years for Aboriginal health. There is $ 63
million here over a four year period for homelessness and homeless,
particularly young people. There is a $ 169 million mental health
program, there is a $ 209 million program over four years for breast
cancer, $ 93 million for medical research and we put $ 135 million
between now and the Olympics for the preparation of our Olympic
athletes, which I think is going to be a very popular program. And as
well as that we boosted foreign aid in the Budget. But all with these
very low outlay to GDP numbers.
DB: So, in summary, no problems with regard to the Senate like we
suffered last time? 
PM: No, I think the Greens and the Democrats and others would look at
those things, the Aboriginal land fund, the Aboriginal health program,
homelessness, a national Asian languages program, mental health,
breast cancer, child immunisation et cetera, as things which very much
sort of fit in their general orbit or constellation of the policy.
DB: How does the Aboriginal health funding sit with what the former
Senator Richardson was talking about?
PM: Well, that was largely what he was talking about, at about these levels,
which is a very big complement to the funding. And it is like all these
programs, you have got to be able to live with them effectively, it is not
simply a matter of money, but making sure the money can actually be
spent properly and programs established. And I think we can do that
here, but it is a very big increase in funding for Aboriginal health, and I
think Graham Richardson, who is the Senator you are speaking of,
would be very happy indeed with this outcome.
DB: Prime Minister, you have been involved in so many of these, as you
mentioned, the Budgets and the Statements and so on. What is the
process? Sitting at home having breakfast this morning, I mean, what
goes on, and how long does this process take to put together a
Budget?
PM: It generally takes about two to two and a half months of running
through the outlays, most of the time is on the outlays, that is, the
spending programs of the Commonwealth. And we have a core group
of Ministers called the Expenditure Review Committee, and we have
had it here for over ten years now. This group basically agrees to any
new policy, it sets the priorities for new policy by going through the
Cabinet submissions which each Minister presents. And it also
decides what the savings items should be, changing the nature of
policy to yield a saving and produce better program delivery. And it is
because of so much intensive ministerial time, the fact that this has
basically been done by the one core set of Ministers over a decade
that Australia's fiscal position is so much better than most comparable
countries. In fact, there is, I think, in the general OECD or Western
World area, we are going to be in a very highly advantageous fiscal
position. Basically, because of that intensive ministerial work.
DB: I can remember when I was a kid growing up in this country, the
comment would be made when a Menzies Budget came out, " Oh well
there's no tax benefits in this one," and that was about all that we
talked about.
PM: Well, they were prepared by the Bureaucracy in those days. I mean
the Treasury would write a speech and the Treasurer would stand up
and read it out. But that all changed in 1983 when the Ministers ran,
from then, the Ministers have run the Government. And now the
bureaucracy works for the Government and works for the Cabinet, and 
because there is so much authority vested in Ministers, if Ministers
actually get off their tail and do things, and take responsibility and
make decisions you can kick along, in a very big way, the prospects of
any country. And that's what has happened here. Ministers now have
tremendous program knowledge so that in a sense, they have almost,
in many cases, well, not almost, but in many cases superior knowledge
than bureaucrats because many Ministers have actually managed
program longer than some of the bureaucrats in their area. But as
well as that they have the authority to change things, so they become
very effective and that's why fiscal policy, or budgetary policy in
Australia is the product of the Government and not simply just a
Treasury document which the Treasurer politely reads out.
DB: What about the state of Victoria, the City of Melbourne, is there in the
Budget Papers, are the funding messages there for us with regard to
roads programs and some of the other majors which were talked about
some time ago?
PM: Well, the big one, I think, was the one I announced a week ago in the
White Paper, and that is the main tunnel. We are looking at
feasibilities on that to see whether it is possible to build that, which I
think would do a lot for the city of Melbourne. The other big change
we announced was the process of sale which was announced in the
Budget last night in respect of the Airports, and that would include over
time, Tullamarine Airport, which would then be privately owned and
able to be expanded. We have got the infrastructure bonds which I
announced in the White Paper a week ago, and that gives us the
capacity, or anyone, particularly Victoria. Say if they want to build a
light train service from Tullamarine to Melbourne, infrastructure bonds
could fund that, because we have made them much more attractive to
low taxed institutions like super funds. So, there is a lot there, I think,
for Victoria, but the main thing there, is growth and jobs. We have had
a quarter of a million job growth in the last year and we will have a
quarter of a million job growth in the coming year.
DB: All right, and those tax cuts as promised, still on track?
PM: Well we have provided the first round of tax cuts. Let me take this
opportunity, Dean, just to make these points. Governments go to
elections and they make commitments and people say, " Oh yeah,
yeah, where are they." Well, the tax cuts were paid, the first trance of
tax cuts were paid late last year, and that has made a big difference to
demand in the economy. We have had the Mabo legislation which we
campaigned on in the election campaign established through a long
consultative process, and introduced. I said in the election campaign
we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind, and the White Paper is a
mammoth attempt to actually case manage all of those people
personally who have been unemployed over 12 months or more,
intensively if they are over 18 months unemployment and intensively if
they are under 18 years of age. So that commitment is there. The 
commitment to the Aboriginal land fund, to Aboriginal health, the
Governments broad thrust of its election commitments, will now, as a
result of the White Paper and this Budget, be put into place.
DB: And did you enjoy the party last night?
PM: The party here is what we call in the public sector, the psychic income
because a lot of the people in the bureaucracy, the public sector is not
highly remunerated as parts of the private sector are. People like to
think good policy and doing good works. The reward is some psychic
income. So, you can always tell. I mean, last week we had the White
Paper and I met the people in our bureaucracies, Department of Social
Security and Employment Education and Training and Prime Minister
and Cabinet and Finance, and the various departments, you could feel
the great pride that people had in doing what was not something just
novel in Australian terms but in world terms, and similarly with the
Treasury Offices and Finance and some of the other control
departments in respect of the Budget. You can feel, again, a good job
has been done. It is a very nice feeling and gives all the Ministers, I
think, a lot of pride.
DB: Good of you to give us that time, and maybe when you are next in
town you will come back to the building that you opened years ago?
PM: That's right, I remember that well. It is good it has been kept in the
business in the stream of radio. There we are, and they bought it for a
song as well, which was an even greater joy for the management.
Well, in this recovery there will be plenty of profits including radio
profits.
DB: Let's hope so, nice to talk to you. Prime Minister just one final
question, not associated with the Budget, but we are doing a
broadcast on D-Day from Britain. Can I simply just ask you are you
looking forwardl to going and participating?
PM: Well, I am looking forward to it. Of course, D-Day was the largest
amphibious operation ever mounted and was a turning point in the
battle for Europe, and that of course was the battle for liberty in the
world. And the fight against nazism and fascism. I think about 2,600
Australians took part in the invasion of Normandy, mainly members of
the RAAF but also naval and army personnel. So, along with other
Heads of State and Government and from other allied countries I will
be very pleased to take part in the commemoration ceremonies at
Portsmouth, and then after crossing the channel at Normandy.
DB: And maybe there is a chance we can catch up during that broadcast
from London.
PM: I look forward to it. 



: 6
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH NEIL MERCER, " 111 AM", CHANNEL 7, 11 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
NM: Dr Hewson says interest rates will go up as a result of this Budget,
what is your response to that?
PM: That is nonsense. Look, Neil, the Liberals sat there last night like
they'd all sucked on a lemon. They are the sourest looking bunch you
could imagine and one of our wags yelled out ' give them the smelling
salts'. This is the Budget they'd thought would be their own. The
growth they would claim as their own.
NMV: You are looking pretty cocky about all this.
PM: Well, this is a tip top Budget for growth and for employment: 4.5 per
cent growth; nearly a quarter of a Million new extra jobs and the deficit
going down.
NM: So, interest rates won't rise?
PM: No, because you've got..
NM: You are quite sure about that?
PM: Well, you can never say interest rates won't rise, but they won't be
rising on the back of this Budget. That is, you've got low inflation
forecast again that is one of the principal determinants of interest
rates and the Budget coming in as the Government said in the
election campaign under 1 per cent of GDP, now under 1 per cent of
GDP by 1996-97.
NM: Again, the Opposition says you've cooked the books, your growth
forecasts are wildly optimistic 4.5 per cent are wildly optimistic. 
2
PM: Well, we are already doing 4 per cent. For the year to March it is 4
per cent. So, their big debating point is whether it is 4 or 4.5 per cent.
This is the same Dr Hewson that told us we'd be now in a double dip
recession. Remember in the election campaign, he was forecasting a
double dip recession. We are growing now as fast as any other OECD
economy, in fact faster than most. The average of the western
countries, they are growing at 1 per cent. We are already growing at 4
per cent and we're forecast to grow at 4.5 per cent.
NM: You've talked in the past about getting up on stage and doing the
Placido Dimingo. How do you think the markets will judge this
performance tonight?
PM: Well, I think, more importantly, the markets in a sense, are not my
principal concern here. It is the business community. They are the
people who employ people. They are the people that do the business
and we've got business investment in here very strong in the coming
year. So, it is that which matters most and people shuffling financial
assets, they catch up with the game always at the end. But the people
who I wanted to influence are those who are making investment
decisions and making decisions to employ Australians.
NM: It has been said it is a very benign Budget, no tax increases. Are you
setting the scene for an early election?
PM: No, no. They are too hard to win without giving away time free of
charge.
NM: On a specific issue, your Government has spent or will spend a lot of
money on breast cancer research, breast cancer screening. Is this an
issue that you feel particularly strong about? I remember when you
won the election, on the night you won, you particularly thanked the
women of Australia.
PM: Yes, I think the women of Australian did support the Government in full
measure. My wife was almost, in public terms, alone on this issue over
the last eighteen months or so. She is very pleased by the $ 209
million program we have over the next four years: to understand how
this disease affects people and how it can be treated, that is in primary
research as well as prevention and extending the screening program
as well.
NM: Well, just talk about that a little bit if you can. How much of an
influence on you was your wife?
PM: In this?
NM: Yes. 
PM: Well, I think she pointed out to me the intractable nature of this
problem the frequency of it and the trauma, let alone the loss that
comes from it. So, she has made me more aware of it and as a
consequence of that and, I think, dare I say good policy, I think, we
can allocate money here to a reasonably ambitious program.
NM: And it's something you discussed at home, is that an issue you
discussed at home?
PM: Yes, she has been on my back about this for quite a while?
NM: And what sort of things did she say to you when she was getting on
your back?
PM: The death rate, I mean, once a women contracts this disease it is very
hard to throw it off and so it is either a tragic terminal position or it is
one where people have their life style substantially changed.
NM: And you are confident that the input of money will change what is
happening at the moment?
PM: I think, that it deserves a larger research funding program as well as
extending the screening program, so we actually get to early detection.
NM: On the question of unemployment, you've got a young son who is
around the age, at the youth end of the work force. Is that also an
influence on you when you drew up the jobs package last week. Do
you think about him and say, well, what are his prospects?
PM: I do and I think about my girls too. I think, that there is a view amongst
young Australians that no one is interested in them.
NM: No one cares.
PM: And it is not true because we've now got a much higher level of
retention in schools, many more places in universities, we are now
reforming-TAFE and the Government is very interested in them, but
there is often with many people a sense of either loneliness or that
they are not being included and they get dejected. I think, that
particularly for unemployed people, so case managing personally each
unemployed person under 18 is going to be an important moral and
morale building thing as well as it is going to be a practical thing
seeing them get training and work. So, I think, the notion of saying
" look, the country is interested in you, we are interested in you and we
want to try and manage you into a better situation in life," is, I think,
going to be very important to young Australians.
NM: Prime Minister, given what happened last year with the Senate and the
Budget, it was a bit of a shemozzle, what do you expect to happen this
year, will the Greens and the Democrats support you? 
PM: I think so because most of the things we are doing, the big Aboriginal
Land Fund, the Aboriginal health issues, breast cancer, -the
immunisation program, the $ 135 million program for the preparation of
our Olympians coming up to Olympic athletes, all of these things, I
think, would sit rather comfortably with the Democrats and the Greens.
NM: Just on that point, you are spending $ 135 million on our Olympic
athletes, but only $ 62 million on the homeless. For a Labor
Government, shouldn't it be the other way around?
PM: That is $ 135 million over six years. The homeless program is
essentially managed by the states. We complement them and improve
them in some places and we are doing that on this occasion.
NM: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER LAND FUND
The Budget delivered this week meets the Government's commitment to
establish an Aboriginal Land Fund part of our comprehensive response to
the Mabo decision, and our determination to provide justice for all Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people.
The Government will allocate an amount of $ 200m in 1994-95, and $ 121m
adjusted for inflation thereafter for 9 years, to an Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Land Fund to be established by legislation to be introduced later this
year. The total amount of the allocations to the Fund as indicated in the Budget
papers is $ 1.463 billion. This figure is the expected total of cash allocations
to the Fund over 10 years allowing for maintenance of the allocations in real
terms. The Fund will be established under the ATSIC Act, and will be the subject of
further discussions with indigenous interests before the introduction of the
Bill.
The Fund will be invested so as to accumulate a self-sustaining fund for the
acquisition and management of both existing and newly acquired indigenous
land.
An Indigenous Land Corporation will also be established which will receive
draw downs from the Fund. Draw downs will be $ 25 million in 1994-95, and
up to $ 45 million in following years adjusted for inflation. ATSIC's existing
land acquisition and management program will be amalgamated into the
Fund. As an independent specialist body, the Corporation will be able to focus
specifically on land matters, and will have the necessary commercial
expertise in land acquisition and management. The Board of the Corporation
will include the ATSIC Chairperson and at least one ATSIC Commissioner.
Members of the Board will have specialist expertise. The details of the 43/ 94 
Constitution of the Board will be the subject of discussions with indigenous
interests. Publicly available regional strategies will be the basis for the
Corporation's planning for land acquisitions.
As I stated in the Second Reading Speech on the Native Title Bill 1993, the
Government has always recognised that despite its historic significance, the
Mabo decision gives little more than a sense of justice to those Aboriginal
communities whose native title has been extinguished or lost without
consultation, negotiation or compensation. Their dispossession has been
total, their loss has been complete.
The Government shares the view of ATSIC, other Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander organisations and the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation, that
justice, equity and fairness demand that the social and economic needs of
these communities must be addressed as an essential step towards
reconciliation. While these communities remain dispossessed of land, their economic
marginalisation and their sense of injury continue. This dispossession has
led to the social and economic marginalisation which the government is
intending to address through a package of social justice measures, of which
the Land Fund will be the major financial component.
The Government remains committed to working with ATSIC and other
indigenous representatives to remedy indigenous dispossession.
CANBERRA 12 May 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB POST BUDGET LUNCH
MELBOURNE, FRIDAY 13 MAY, 1994
QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION
Q: ( Inaudible)... I'd like to know if you'd be interested in having an Accord
with business, you've had an Accord with the unions but what about an
Accord with business?
PMV: Well, the emphasis of the Accord was, the Accord started from the
1983 economic summit which was a cooperative undertaking between
the government and business and the trade unions to sit down and sort
out where our national income went and what we did with it. And, as a
consequence of this, we've seen a great behavioural change in the
workforce which has, over time, expressly, beneficially affected
business. And the consequence of that is now that the profit share,
that is the proportion of national income going to profits, is today as
high as it was in 1988 and in 1988 it was beyond any historical
experience in Australia. It was the highest profit share in our history.
And, we've got, as a consequence of wage restraint, we've got
endemically low inflation at around two per cent. So, low inflation
gives us the capacity to have low interest rates, a higher profit share
gives us the capacity to have investment and the government has built
on these things by introducing a 33 per cent corporate tax rate from a
high of 49 per cent, which it was not so many years ago. We've
removed the double tax on dividends, we've got a big tax break in
there for research and development, a 150 per cent write off. So,
there's a package of things and central to that is the Accord. So, while
the government's been able to sit down with the trade unions because
we're now a more decentralised labour market where the centralised
system of today is but a remnant of what it was and where most
wage fixation is done on an enterprise basis and that will continue to
become more the case in the next couple of years, the Accord 
becomes more a state of mind than an actual instrument for setting
wages or prices or profits. But, the commitment from the trade unions
is that we'll have wages growth in Australia so as we have an inflation
rate competitive with our trading partners. So, the Accord is now 11
years old and the sea change in the Australian labour market has been
so profound that we can sit with one of the lowest inflation rates in the
world. So, while business doesn't sit at that table or didn't sit when
the Accord was entered into last in 1993 for the three years in fact,
business is always there because the very essence of the change is to
promote higher profits, to have a more flexible system of enterprises in
this country, a better system of enterprise bargaining and, of course, in
the end, greater competitiveness. So, business is, let's say, the silent
partner in the Accord but the clear beneficiary.
Q: I thank you for that explanation, it's excellent. However, in any game, I
put to you, we need two teams. We've got the government, we've got
the unions, but we need another player and that's business. So, you
can't win the competition unless you've got the ( inaudible)..... in the
game. So how about letting business get into the league?
PM: Well, what a government must do or try to do is create the conditions
for growth. This is where business gets its crack at the title, its piece
of the action. And as the Budget forecasts ( inaudible).... we're going
to be growing in the coming year at about four and a half percent. We
grew at four percent for the year to December and we're saying the
economy will grow, in the coming financial year from 1 July at four and
a half per cent. Now, the average rate of growth of the OECD
economies, that's the Western world economies, this year is one per
cent. So, we're growing now, much more rapidly than that and now
we've got a more flexible economy than we had in the 1980s where we
averaged four and a half per cent from 1983-90. We might be able to
do that with more ease now or even do better. So, this is where
business gets its chance at the national cake and where it's involved
and becomes central to the whole thing, through the progression of
growth. And, growth is maintained by the public sector hopping out of the way
as demand for savings, for investment comes through in the
investment phase of the recovery. And, this is what the Budget has
sought to do, to pull out the fiscal stimulus or the underpinning or the
cushioning which has, if you like, provided the shock absorber for the
community and the economy over the last three or so difficult years.
So, as now we are starting to grow we don't need the Commonwealth
cushion in there. So, we're now gradually withdrawing it but we don't
want to withdraw it too quickly unless the game collapses again, well
slows down, slows to a rate other than that which we could otherwise
attain. 
So, we've got, we think, the right balances. That is, we provided the
cushioning for the recession, the Budget balance changed by $ 20 odd
billion, that meant there was $ 20 billion more being spent than would
otherwise be spent. But, now the economy is picking up we can
withdraw it and business can come in and take up the slack.
Q: Mr Keating my name is Tim Grant, I manage Beaurepaire, the large
Australian tyre company. We're a large provider of goods and
services to government at federal and state levels but I wonder why
federally, the government doesn't take a stronger stance regarding the
purchase of Australian made for government.
PM: Well, there is a policy which we've developed for government
purchasing and generally it devolves around suppliers who have a
record of supply with the Commonwealth. But, I don't think that
government purchasing government purchasing can be important
particularly in developing industries which might not otherwise have
the kick along that they have had without government purchasing.
Computer software comes to mind instantly as a locally grown
business in this country that would not be as strong as it is today
without the Commonwealth being a major purchaser of that sort of
product. But, the sea change in Australia in the last few years, of
course, is the fact that it's a much more open economy.
And now it is more open it means, generally, our manufacturers have
measured up to the competition and we're now doing things much
more smartly and much more competitively. I mean, the, perhaps,
most obvious place we can look is the motor industry. Look at the
quality of Australian cars today and the price, compared to 10 years
ago. And there's only one reason why it's there and that's because the
tariff wall has come down. Now were that not to be the case we'd be
still making expensive cars of much less quality because there is no
need to get to where the world insists that you should. As a
consequence of getting there, we've had major investments by general
motors, Ford is now considering where it goes with the Falcon
replacement, Toyota has made the decision to put a five million dollar
state of the art car plant in Melbourne and to feed its product into the
international system, Mitsubishi have just made a decision to build a
Mitsubishi Magna in South Australia for world distribution and is now
considering where it goes with the Magna sedan. This was
unthinkable ten years ago, that these decisions should have been
made. That's the reason why preference has been diminished in the
Australian economy over the last ten years and in the doing of it a
whole lot of clever industries and companies have sprung up. So,
while there's a role for government purchasing as part of that
preference in kicking a fledgling industry along, if we're basically down
to products which are long beyond their infancy and certainly we've all 
got to agree pneumatic tyres are in that category, then making a case
for government purchasing is basically a bid for business and good on
you. But, I've got a bigger set of considerations to think about.
Q: ( inaudible)... something which was not qualified in the Budget is
the government's attitude to superannuation and in particular the
contributions for small and ( inaudible)... Could you give us some
indication here as to what the government's view is on this issue in the
future, because there is a lot of concern in that area as to what that
attitude is in the future?
PM: Well, let me, as an opener, say, " Where did the policy come from?"
And the answer was superannuation tax concessions before 1985
were available to people really only in the public sector and in the, if
you like, the softer places in the private economy. They were not
generally available. And, what we've succeeded in doing, as part of
the Accord which the first questioner referred to is we've got the
Australian workforce to take five per cent of their income as savings.
And that will soon be six, then seven, then eight, then nine and then
beyond that we'll have to decide how it gets to what we think the
mature contribution is, which is around ten or 12.
Now, it's a very great change to get a whole nation's workforce to take
a significant percentage of their income as savings and not as cash.
Because it builds national savings... ( inaudible)... it is very difficult to
get a behavioural change in the way or the propensity of a country to
save. And some countries are big savers, like Japan, that's why it
always has a big current account surplus. The United States is a
comparatively low saver so it has trouble with its trade accounts.
We're a middle ranking saver but for the capital formation needs of
Australia for its private investment we were not saving enough. And
the public sector was using too much of the savings. So, in the 1980s
we had the public sector dissave. We had the public sector move into
a period of saving by pulling the Budget deficits into surplus and we're
doing the same now.
But, we needed a complement to private savings. Now, lower inflation
will probably make private savings more palatable whereas the tax
treatment of savings with higher inflation made saving less palatable.
So that big behavioural change in inflation will make a difference to
savings just by itself. But, other than that we've got superannuation,
as a device which does two things: it provides something nearer to a
working income in retirement through self provision and it adds to the
stock of national savings. That's why the policy is there and we're now
a long way through it. Now, it is universal but it's private and it's
privately managed. There's not one big government fund, it's
managed by the private savings institutions of this country and it's
provided privately. 
Now, because it's universal there's always going to be people who are
casuals who slip in and out of the system. If they're not there for the
long run employment and where the collation and tabulation of their
savings and their superannuation benefits becomes more difficult.
We've been examining that and, as you know, the banks have now
made a bid for these savings ( inaudible).., of the superannuation
industry is trying to hang on to that which they believe is theirs and this
is something we are yet to determine. But, we think there is some
difficulty with people moving in and out of these things and therefore
some, more ready portability is something which would be desirable on
all accounts on the part of the employee and the employer and the
country. So, we haven't resolved precisely where that is going other
than that the employers are obliged to fund those contributions under
those Accord arrangements given the fact that all of those employees
would otherwise be taking those contributions in higher wages. But, it
is something which I think, when we sort it out and get it working well,
will just add to the strength of superannuation as a vehicle in this
country.
Q: ( inaudible)..
PM: Well, on the first, I think, you are confusing the point about the $ 1
billion budget deficit and 1 per cent of GOP. The Government in ' One
Nation' never talked about a $ 1 billion budget deficit ever. We talked
about getting the Budget to a deficit of 1 per cent of GOP in 1995-96.
But, then after the February 1992 ' One Nation' statement we had a
further unforeseen deterioration in revenue and the Treasurer reported
to us, I think, something like a $ 6 billion shift in revenue down. So, we
put back by one year the 1 per cent of GOP target which is now at
1996-97 and not 1995-96.
Now, what the Budget said on Tuesday night is that we will now be
within that 1 per cent target by 1996-97 and what we have in the
Budget estimates now, is .9 of a per cent of GOP. So, if we don't do
any better than where we are now, we believe we will be under 1 per
cent of GOP by 1996-97.
Now, the only other country in the world that will reduce its budget
deficit that rapidly is Germany. All the other countries, let me just
quote you from the Budget paper, the only other countries which are
likely Germany, have got a target of 1 per cent by 1997; the US, 2.3
per cent by 1998; France, 2.5 per cent by 1997; Italy, 5.8 per cent by
1996; UK, 1.5 per cent by 1997-98 and Canada, 3 per cent by 1996-
97. Australia in contrast will be at 1 per cent or under 1 per cent in
1996-97.
Remember I was talking earlier about the cushion. If the
Commonwealth simply says, as some financial commentators, I might
say non-discredited by the way, non-discredited, people have been 
consistently wrong for nearly a decade and saying well, look, let's get
the budget down to balance quicker. So, the Commonwealth says
well, ok, let's rip the cushion out goes, a lot of the private sector
investment we're seeing today. So, we are going to have a very rapid
consolidation of the Commonwealth account, but it's got to be at a
pace which keeps the thing going.
You see, a lot of these people say the ' One Nation' thing, you know,
remember that and the implication is there's something wrong with it
and some of that implication you'll question. The fact is it did exactly
what it said it would do. It got Australia going again and we're growing
somewhere at the moment between 4 and 4.5 per cent faster than any
other substantial western world economy. And that is happening
because fiscal policy in the ' One Nation' package in particular and the
current fiscal policy has been right. Now, in the last election we had
John Hewson telling us we were going to have a double dip recession
and a depression and things are going to get worse and he had the
gun sight ads blowing the unemployed away. We've had 235,000 jobs
in the last year and we're now, as I said, growing at over 4 per cent
and we'll have the budget down to around 1 per cent of GDP by then.
And, including paying the tax cuts which you referred to. These were
brought forward and by some, I can't remember exactly, I think five or
six months, a $ 3 billion round of tax cuts and we'll deliver on those tax
cuts as we've delivered on every other round of tax cuts since the
Accord. The first tax cuts were negotiated under the Accord of 1984
and what we've said for the second round of the tax cuts, we've put
things back we've brought the first lot forward, we but the second lot
back and said that we'll pay them when fiscal conditions are
appropriate probably in 1998.
So, in terms of the Government's macroeconomic management of the
economy, we have got back to growth, quite high growth, and with low
inflation. I know of many other countries that would like to be in this
position. Can I ju st say about Melbourne, you asked me about Melbourne. One
of the things which the Committee for Melbourne has pressed on me
for years is letting Melbourne develop itself its airport and we
announced, my colleague Laurie Brereton announced here in
Melbourne about 3 weeks ago, that in the White Paper, the regional
development section of it, that we would start to prepare for sale the
Federal Airports Corporation and sell off the assets. One of which will
include Tullamarine airport. I think, that gives Melbourne a real
chance to wind the capital it wants to wind into the airport and to see
the thing grow and prosper. Qantas is going to be floated. Qantas
will be, in this financial year, a private sector business. It will have
per cent ownership of British Airways, it will be part of the British
Airways world system. And Ansett is now an international carrier for
the first time in its history as a consequence of the ' One Nation' 
statement. In the ' One Nation' statement we took away the bunkum of
having one airline flying outside of Australia and a couple flying in.
We now have the similarities between domestic and international
carriage of passengers. Now, Ansett is going to be flying to Japan and
Bangkok and Singapore and other parts of the Asia-Pacific.
Therefore, if Ansett and Qantas are both commercial companies and
Melbourne has an unrestrained capacity to develop its airport and
services, then, I think, it's then up the to the city, to the State to say to
those companies there is value in having more frequencies out of here
and it's not something then the Federal Government is responsible for.
Not that we are now.
So, I think, that giving Melbourne the status in its airport and seeing a
couple of strong financial secure private sector airlines in this country
should mean that a city with the promise and tradition of Melbourne
and the state of Victoria should have no trouble later in attracting the
kind of frequencies that can display Victoria to the world and not only
that, as the kind of commercial intercourse which it needs to participate
fully in the Australian economy.
Q: Mr Prime Minister, as an Australian, I am staggered by your suggestion
that you paid for Jeff Kennett's trams But as usual, we paid for those
trams and Jeff Kennett's contribution ought to be recognised
( inaudible)
PM: I was only cracking a joke about Jeff being co-operative. The thing is
the Commonwealth has many choices about where it wants to fund
programs and one of the choices was into Victoria. Some of the
smaller states that have less than the revenue base than the State of
Victoria would say, that if there's any priorities for Commonwealth
expenditure in transport or anywhere else it ought to be not in the
major two States of Victoria and New South Wales. That has not been
this Government's view. We have, therefore, sought to talk to
Victorians about their State. I mean, this is where the conversation
with the Committee for Melbourne has gone on for years now about the
city, about the airport, and one of the things which I said in the speech
is that they're also looking now to see what we can do to build the
Domain tunnel.
Now, let me tell you this. No other Commonwealth government would
build a Domain tunnel. You wouldn't have had a Coalition build a
Domain tunnel in the State and that's why I was making a reference, if
only to the co-operation which, I think, the Commonwealth does
have with the States and which, I think, is imperative in seeing cities
realise their full potential. Because, if it refers to the State mean
administering something like the Domain tunnel and managing the
airport or doing things in the housing sector or the Commonwealth
can play a role. Which, we believe, the Commonwealth should do. 
8
Where the traditional rule has been the Commonwealth is not into
regional development, it's not into urban mainstream arterial roads, it's
not into budget transport infrastructure, these are things which the
States have traditionally had. We haven't taken that view.
What I'm saying is: I don't want Jeffrey to put his name on the makers
label of all of them, but to leave a bit of space for the rest of us.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB POST-BUDGET
LUNCH, HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE, FRIDAY, 13 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Chief Justice John Phillips, Leader of the Opposition John
Brumby, guests at the official table, my friend Bobby Rose amongst them
and ladies and gentlemen.
I really am glad to have the opportunity the Collingwood Football Club
extends to me as Allan ( MacAlister) said, for the first time in the week of the
Budget to offer up a few thoughts. And, of course, I always get a few
thoughts around the table.
Since I first became one of the many thousands of Collingwood members
and one of the millions of supporters, this lunch has become a bit of a
tradition and we might have moved the date of the Budget, but we maintain
the tradition of the lunch. The thing I've learned is you don't tamper with
Collingwood traditions. As a result of all this I now get to pay a visit to
Melbourne while there are still a few leaves on the trees and a little warmth
in the air and I am very pleased to be here.
As this national recovery grows, Melbourne is emerging as a major player
and that has to be good.
Victoria took a hammering for a few years, and I think it is a real measure of
the character of the place and the people that they did not lose their nerve or
drop their collective bundle.
This is a city with genuine spirit and toughness. It does have class it must
have because Leo Schofield has decided to move down here. Leo hasn't
come for the football he's come for arts and because he's grown to love the
place. And this is a great compliment from a Sydney sider for this great city. 
Australia needs Melbourne to succeed. If this particular part of the nation's
heart isn't pumping our whole constitution is weakened. So when we see
companies down here beginning to thrive again, we're pleased. And when
the Committee for Melbourne says it wants to build the Domain tunnel, we
want to help. When the Goulburn Valley gets a plan for its future tdgether,
we'll kick in with some Commionwealth assistance.
You might notice there are not a lot of Labor voters among any of those
categories, but, I think, the important thing is we all work together.
It's like working with Jeff Kennett. I don't mind that, but what's more
important, is given that he reckons we'll win the next election, he can work
with me.
But I want to say, I do like working with my mate John Brumby and I've done
a bit of work with him over the past and we'll be doing a bit in the future.
Mind you, the relationship will be more amiable if Jeffrey refrains from taking
credit for Commonwealth projects. in Victoria. I don't like him riding on those
trains in Spring Street when I pay we the Commonwealth to put the rails
down or plumbing to the Treasury building which we decided to refurbish.
And I also hope that in this new era of growth he doesn't forget I hope no
one in Melbourne forgets that Melbourne's future depends on not just
development but planning and preservation.
The world is full of second and third rate cities skewered by sixty-story
plinths towering over planning disasters. Monuments to myopia and short
term private interests over long term public ones.
The great cities of the next century, like the great cities of any century, will
be those that look good and are good to live in.
They will be efficient and vibrant cities which maintain their character and
quality. In a very real sense that is what this last decade of the century is all about
building the quality into Australia. Into the economy, into the society, into the
nation. I mean knitting the skills and technology into our ambitions and
traditions. I mean pulling all that great diversity and vast distance into a
cohesive nation a loose federation and a singularly independent-minded
and unregimented people, but a cohesive people.
We have learned a lot about these things in recent years.
We've learned that it's not enough to just grow and mine things we have to
make things as well and service things too. And what we grow and mine and
make has to be the best. 
That has implications for how we grow it and mine it and make it and service
it we have to do it as well as, or better than, anyone else in the world.
So the quality has to be built in. I don't think this is the time to give you a
talk on international best practice except to say that, whatever the degree or
detail with which business applies it as a code for the pursuit of excellence
best practice will increasingly govern the operations of the Commonwealth
Government, and should increasingly govern those of state and local
governments and regional organisations of this country.
The nation itself in the 1990s should work to that same goal.
We have built this into the regional development strategy we announced in
the Government's White Paper because regions have to find what they do
best and the best way of doing it. They have to find their niche in the
modem Australian economy, and in the international economy.
We are also bringing the same sorts of principles to the federation through
the Council of Australian Governments, the States and the Commonwealth
are beginning to remove a lot of the impediments to national efficiency. This
is a great thing, working together co-operatively in a way we've probably
never done before.
The Commonwealth has a decade of economic reform behind it. The truth is
that the next wave of change will have to substantially come from the States.
We have improved the environment in which our firms operate through
substantial microeconomic reform. Further progress is in store as we work
with the States to extend greater competition to the public utilities. Recently,
the COAG meeting in August will also consider specific reform to electricity,
gas, water, legal services and the maritime sector. So a* lot will depend on
what they do and on the sort of cooperative agreements we can strike in the
national interest.
The last decade of the nineteenth century, in some respects, followed an
uncannily similar path. It began badly and ended in unprecedented national
unity which is to say it ended in federation.
We need to end this decade the same way we need a degree of national
unity, cohesion and purpose such as we have never seen before.
I think we sometimes lose sight of the fact that we made some really
fundamental progress in this direction in the last decade. The Accord
between the Government and the trade unions was a real and symbolic
manifestation of the capacity for Australian workers and Australian
management and the Australian Government to work together in the national
interest. We have seen a cooperative culture develop in our workplaces as
a consequence. And we are seeing the rewards in low inflation, higher
productivity and greater competitiveness. 
The challenge remains to maintain and extend this progress. To do it, we
will have to vigorously push on not just with the microeconomic reform
agenda, but with enterprise bargaining. Because, it is not simply the agenda
of the government business enterprise which will determine how successful
and competitive Australia is or will be, but the competitiveness and efficiency
of each employing unit.
A lot of the responsibility lies in realms which are not the Commonwealth's.
In the case of government business enterprises or the States and regional
governments and with employers and employees in the case of firms. We
will only be truly successful when we build in the efficiencies from the ground
up; when the quality flows right through the economy; when in every tier of
government and every workplace the same goals and principles apply to do
things as well as they can be done.
That is what being internationally competitive means. It is also the
precondition of a good society in the twenty-first century. If we want a place
in the front rank of nations and the prosperity, opportunity and fulfilment that
goes with it, we are all going to have to work for it.
If this sounds a bit like a three-quarter time address, that is probably in the
stage of our development, now, appropriate that it does. Because in the
final analysis the words won't matter it will depend on what the players do
and that's where the issue will be settled.
I don't want you to get me wrong in thinking that prime responsibility to lead
the process of reform and, in spirit and effect, encourage national unity and
purpose lies other than with the Commonwealth Government it doesn't. But
it has to be a shared responsibility and we will put the pressure on the
States, on regional governments and on business and in the trade unions to
make sure we all move along together.
Perhaps the best illustration of what I'm talking about can be found in two
reports we commissioned on regional Australia. Bill Kelty's Taskforce and
McKinsey and Company surveyed the regions of Australia and each came
up with the same essential conclusion the key to success in the regions
was in the leadership and organisation. The key is finding the means by
which the material and human resources, the talents and energies of regions
can be put to best effect. This is a very telling set of surveys, a very telling
couple of reports which reveal that, as always, there's no substitute for
leadership and wherever we see it, we always see an organisation or a
region doing well. The successful ones are better helping themselves.
The lesson for the Commonwealth is neither to abandon regions in this
country nor to pour in material assistance the lesson is to give strategic
assistance, to give strategic help, the sort of assistance which will enable the
regions of Australia to get the best out of their physical resources and their
people. 
You see how the parallel with the three-quarter time address returns. And
the message is very similar we will succeed best if we share a sentiment
and an identity, if we are working to the same purpose, if we cohere, if we
call on everyone's talent and everyone's energy and will. In other words, we
won't make it as a nation, as an economy or a society if we don't make it
together. Success will depend on these factors tangible and intangible. But, the
other thing it is going to depend on is skill.
The phrase that is used these days, often in Australia, is value-adding. I
daresay a decade ago very few Australians had ever heard of it. These days
it is widely used and understood. It means, of course, adding another
dimension to a product and, in doing so, adding to its value in the market.
If value-adding was the catch-phrase of the last decade, kil's must be the
catch-phrase of this one. Our success as a nation the success of any
nation in the modern world will depend on the capacity of our workforce to
add value to products, and that will depend on their skills.
It follows that our ability to create jobs for Australians depends on the skills
of our workforce. Skills are our greatest resource. We will never return to a
time when there were vast numbers of unskilled jobs. If we want that place
among the front rank of nations in the twenty-first century, we need our
people to be skilled.
The White Paper on employment and growth is very largely about just that.
It is about skills. It is about making the country stronger and more efficient
by giving the unemployed, and those at risk of becoming unemployed, the
skills they will need if they are to find a job. That will make the country vastly
more efficient and, of course, vastly more just.
Some people have said that by training and giving work experience to the
long term unemployed, and removing disincentives to work in the social
security system, we are creating competition for new entrants to the labour
market. This is a polite way of saying don't worry about the long term
unemployed, just leave them behind. But commonsense and compassion
tell us, I think, that we can't do that and with the White Paper the
Government has said that we won't. It was never an option.
It has also been said the cost is too high. The answer is the same: we can't
leave them behind not if we want to maintain our national self-respect and
our social cohesion and order. The answer to those who say that the cost is
too high is count the cost of doing nothing. Count the cost to their lives and
to ours. The cost of wasting their potential. 
There are others who have said that the only answer is to so change our
system of industrial relations, that wage rates should be cut and conditions
of employment degraded. Well, this is a very old argument and a discredited
one. In effect it means emulating the model of Great Britain and the United
States. In Great Britain you will find men working as security guards for
$ 2.50 an hour for an eighty-four hour week and women doing piece work for
$ 6.30 a day. In the United States, where the unemployment rate is six and a
half per cent, there exists an army of working poor, they are in jobs, but they
are jobs which keep them well below the poverty line. In both countries the
gaps in wealth are wide and profound and there are unmistakable symptoms
of social disorder and decay symptoms which we do not want to see in our
country, in our society.
So, with the White Paper, the Government has signalled that Australia will
be a high wage, high productivity country making innovative, value-added
products. We have no intention of creating a first class economy but a
second rate society even if it were possible to do so.
With the White Paper I believe all Australians should understand, and most
of our political opponents should understand that the days when economic
progress was construed to mean a dog-eat-dog society are over forever.
There are two very good reasons for this. The first is that by their decision
at the last election, the Australian people registered the notion of such a
society, they voted for social compassion and cohesion, for a safety net and
for bringing the unemployed with us. As I said the other day at the National
Press Club, in 1993 the Australian traditions of fairness and equity which
had been born in the 1890s were profoundly reasserted.
But the people did not just vote with their hearts. They also voted with their
heads. They recognised the waste in leaving a great body of unemployed
people behind. They recognised the folly in a doctrine of unmitigated
economic rationalism the folly in believing that economic progress implies a
return to the social conditions and mores of the 19th century.
So, put another way, with the election of last year behind us in 1993 and the
White Paper of 1994, Australia has embarked without qualification on the
path towards a sophisticated social democracy underpinned by a
sophisticated modern economy.
We have made a decision to play in the premier league and that compels
us to build quality into every sphere of our national life.
That is what the White Paper is about and the Budget which consolidates it
which takes those costs and fits them into the national, annual economic
parameter. With them we say that economic policy and social policy go
hand in hand. 
We say that a first rate Australia, like a first rate city, will manifest not just the
evidence of growth and development but of character and tradition. It will
have a human dimension as well as an aesthetic one.
We also say a first rate country, like a first rate business or a first rate
football team, will be characterised by the strength which comes from shared
sentiments and fellow feeling and the competitive edge that only skills
provide. We say that a first rate country has all these things built in.
And finally we say that in 1994 we have opportunity unprecedented in our
history to do these things.
And every reason, every confidence that we will be able to do it and in the
doing of it set Australia out as a place that never lost its fix, its judgement or
its values. Thank you very much indeed
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING, MP
HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE
FRIDAY 13 MAY, 1994
J: ( inaudible)... Mr Kennett's bid for the Soccer World Cup?
PM: No, I think States take these things on themselves and generally
manage them well.
J: How will the Aboriginal land fund be administered?
PM: Oh, I don't think this doorstop is the place to assess the Aboriginal
land fund. But, I tell you what I would like to say I would like to pass
a comment about JohnSmith, the late John Smith, the Leader of the
British Labour Party. And just record the fact that this was somebody
of great substance, a great loss to Britain, to the Labour Party, to
British society. He was a man who believed in a modern economy and
the modernisation of the British economy, but being able to do so in
the context of a social policy which provided a lot of cohesion and
compassion. And he's going to be very greatly missed. I extend my
sympathies to his wife and family and to the British Labour Party and
say that, in the Australian Labour Party he was thought of very highly.
For the future, we wish the Labour Party well in the choice of its new
leader but many people in Australia remember John Smith and his
contribution fondly, and well.
J: Prime Minister, are you still confident the Budget will pass without
trouble given that Kernot has spoken...( inaudible)... Dr Hewson?
PM: Well, the Budget has four and a half percent growth forecast in it, it
consolidates the tax cuts of last year, it has no new taxes or increases
in tax rates and it has a whole lot of social spending the Aboriginal
land fund, $ 500 million on Aboriginal programs, $ 209 million for breast
cancer, money for a child immunisation program, money for foreign
aid... These are all the things that I would have thought that the 
Democrats and the Greens, particularly, would be supporting. And, I'd
find it very difficult for them to take exception to it.
J: On world cup soccer, it can't be just one city that vies for it, it has to be
a national effort. Will you support Mr Kennett in that?
PM: Well, he's not approached me about it.
J: Don't you think it is wrong that he hasn't?
PM: Well, the answer is no. I don't go around, at every street corner,
building stadiums. I mean, governments have a process by which they
deal with one another about matters like this.
J: Cambodia Prime Minister...( inaudible)...?
PM: Well, we want to see the peace in Cambodia consolidated. We've
always hoped that the Khmer Rouge would join in a political compact
with other parties in Cambodia. And we will be underwriting
assistance to Cambodia I think, probably, well into the future. We
haven't decided how best that should be done. Whether that's with
any military material which may be used by the government there, in
whatever way, or whether it ought to be just by civil programs. But,
this is a matter the government can think about.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well, I don't think I'm here to go through a history of Cambodia, either.
J: On the structural... ( inaudible)... of the Budget, is there any pressure
on monetary policy...( inaudible)?
PM: Well, as I said here today, I hope eloquently, that is, Australia's return
to a balanced Budget and surplus will be faster than all Western
economies bar one, Germany. And the reason Germany's coming
down is because it's had a bigger problem than we have had. So, to
take the Australian Budget down faster would be appropriate only if the
growth is faster than we predict. And, if it is, it will be good for the
country and good for the Budget. But, we've got endemically low
inflation and, therefore, the portents for interest rates into the future
are pretty good.
Ends. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERNATIONAL DAY OF FAMILIES
( embargo 12.01 am 15 May, 1994)
International Day of Families is a day to reflect on what families do for all of us, and
on how we might strengthen family life.
Most families go through difficulties at some time or another. Illness or injury, trouble
in balancing work and family responsibilities, any number of unexpected events can put
families under strain. These days there is no greater cause of pressure and hardship
than unemployment.
In a good society those in need of help receive it. They are not left to fend for
themselves, but are supported by their communities and governments. Throughout
this International Year of the Family, Australian communities should take up the
challenge which unemployment presents to us all. Because it has the capacity to cause
a breakdown in family life, the effects of unemployment go beyond the damage done to
individuals it strikes at the basic unit of our society and squanders our greatest
national resource.
The Australian people rightly expect their Government to devise programs which meet
the needs of families in difficulty. They also expect that these programs will be tailored
to the different needs which exist among various sorts of families. They must be
programs which recognise diversity and change. In Australia we have devised a
system of family payments which is equal to the best in the world. Our Medicare, child
care and aged care services provide real support; and in part they do it because they
also provide real choice.
My Government's White Paper on Employment and Growth will play a major role in
relieving some of the pressures on our families by creating opportunities for jobs and
training and reforming the Social Security system in ways which will greatly assist
families to balance domestic and work responsibilities.
The White Paper requires more than an effort from Government it requires a national
response. All Australians must recognise the threat that unemployment poses to our
society and rise to meet the challenge. There can be no greater incentive than the need
to defend our families against the stress of unemployment. 
In the International Year of the Family the Australian Government is anxious to find
ways to make life easier and more secure for families. That is why the National
Council for the International Year of the Family, chaired by Professor Bettina Cass, is
holding consultations around the country, seeking the opinions of communities, groups
and individuals and advising the Government of their views. On the basis of the
Council's investigations, at the end of the year, we will release a blueprint for future
policies called the Australian Government Agenda for Families.
There is much to celebrate today about Australian families, and much to thank them
for. There is also much to resolve to do to build a healthy environment and strong
foundations for family life, and to assist those families in need.
We should remember also that the greatest responsibility for the health of our family
life rests with Australian families themselves. In the end, families must recognise their
essential role in the support and nurturing of new generations of Australians, and their
responsibility to deliver the things which our children need.
It is in families that our essential values and traditions lie. It is through families that
they are passed from one generation to another. The quality of our lives and the
strength of our community and nation depend to a large extent on families.
May 1994
Canberra 



/ Ia.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO LABOR PARTY DINNER, GREEK CLUB, WEST END
BRISBANE, 16 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed for that tremendously warm welcome. And,
thank you Wayne, Roisin ( Goss) for coming along tonight, and the Lord
Mayor, Jim 8orley, and Mairy Phillips and our official guests, and all of you,
thank you for a tremendous welcome and tremendous enthusiasm. And, I
can tell you, quite sincerely, that it was in this room, this crowd, two years
ago, more than at any other time in the period that I had been Prime Minister,
that I got more cheer and more zest and more support than in any other
place. I was doing it hard at the time, and I needed a kick along, and I had had a
good couple of days in North Queensland and I came down here to one of the
best dinners I have ever been to, and certainly then, the best of my time as
Prime Minister. And, I would say this, there is no State branch of the Labor
Party that can put a show together like the Queensland Labor Party.
And I say that as a New South Welshman, I will be reminded of this when I go
home, but as Mike ( Kaiser) said earlier, it is a test of the Labor Party's
strength and vitality, that with a weeks notice there is just on 1000 people.
And, if it were not for the capacity there would be more then a thousand. I
thank Mike and the Party and Wayne for suggesting it, and Mike for arranging
it, and for all of you who have come, thank you very much indeed.
I am particularly indebted to Wayne for his very kind words of introduction,
and it is true to say that he and I had a very good day, I think, where we went
to a school here in Brisbane and we were involved with the teaching of
Chinese in a class room, and Wayne and I sat down at our desks in the
classroom while the class around us spoke Chinese. And, I thought what a
marvellous thing it is that a Labor Government in Queensland can lead the
country on this concentration on Asian languages, with now more then 
2
100,000 kids from Queensland learning an Asian language, and be the
forerunner of this nationally. As you probably know, Wayne proposed this at
the Council of Australian Governments, that the Commonwealth should join
the States in a national Asian languages program, which will teach Chinese,
Korean, Japanese and Indonesian in the first instance. And, for this to
succeed as a policy would tremendously change the nature of Australian
education and our capacity to relate to our part of the world. At any rate, we
have done it. And, the Commonwealth Government has committed funds to it
and as time goes on we are going to commit more and it will be a great Labor
initiative, but a Labor initiative that started here in Queensland with Wayne
Goss, and congratulations Wayne on that.
But, as Wayne has said, we have done many things together, and I said to
him today, you would have to go back half a century to find two people
holding our office to be members of the Labor Party, Labor Prime Minister
and Labor Premier of Queensland together in a, Queensland school and
doing things for the nation and for Queensland. Wayne was kind enough to
mention the collaborative program that we have decided on between us, and
we announced in the Budget to claim back that part of the Daintree, that
wonderful rainforest area of Australia, of Queensland, so that it remains as
part of the national estate forever and always, for our children. And, he
mentioned the National Training Authority, and let me just say this, that we
have made some very big decisions in education to support the University
system federally was probably one of the important ones. To pick up
retention rates in secondary schools was another. But, no doubt, the third leg
of those important decisions will be the development of our vocational
education system, of Technical and Further Education into a national system.
And I was able to announce for the Commonwealth's part our commitment to
be in that in the One Nation program in 1992, but it would not have been
possible without the support of Wayne Goss and the Government of
Queensland. And it is absolutely right and fitting that the headquarters of the
National Training Authority which will see the renaissance of vocational
education in Australia changing the Cinderella status of TAFE into a full
partner of Australian education, it is right that that headquarters should be
here in Brisbane.
But, after all, that is what Labor Governments are for, isn't it? I mean, here it
is, a lot of our kids who don't make it beyond secondary school to university
for one reason or another, often who drop out, we want them now to be part
of a better education system, with a much closer focus to the work place and
that's what TAFZE will be. And, so that is a great initiative, I think, between the
Commonwealth and Queensland Government, indeed the Australian States in
general. But, Wayne had a tremendously important role, and had a key role
in that, and Australian children will be forever in his debt.
Let me just say something about Mabo. Now, Mabo, we had a long rocky
road with Mabo. But, as we got down towards the hard part, and that's
rounding up the constituencies to support it, keeping some of the States in
there, Wayne Goss and the Government of Queensland were the key to 
keeping the State response to Mabo together. And, I can assure you that we
wouldn't have a Mabo Bill today, or one that we have today, without the
support of the Government of Queensland, of Wayne Goss in particular, and
his pivotal role in keeping the States into the collective support we had for the
Mabo legislation.
Now, that is something only a Labor Government would do, and we did have
the support of some conservative States, and they were there because they
believed in something better. But, the great leap forward in property and
cultural law which Mabo was wouldn't have happened without the Labor
Party. It wouldn't have happened without the 1993 election, it wouldn't have
happened without a Labor Government here in Queensland. So, these are
some of the great collaborative things we have been able to do together, and
there is much more to do. Queensland is either now leading Australia in
growth, sometimes it is in front, at other times Western Australia is, most of
the time Queensland is. And, it is because of that leadership that I think
Australia is now back to strong rates of economic growth with a State like
Queensland tugging the national economy along.
So, I am delighted to be here. Glad to have had Wayne's company today in
this important thing we were articulating in Asian education, but most
particularly, above all that;' in a collaborative partnership and working
arrangement between two Labor Governments of substance, of quality and of
sincerity. So, thank you, Wayne, and thank you for having me in
Queensland.
Well, I said it was two years ago since I last spoke to you. And I think it was
here in this room that Labor's journey to victory in 1993 really started to role.
Because it was here that I said, that the difference between the Labor Party
and its opponents was a matter of heart. It was here that I first said, if some
group drops back we will lean out our caring arm and pull them up. And, I
suppose it is appropriate, it is fitting and it is probably right, that I should
come back here two years later, one election later, to talk about the White
Papef, Working Nation, the device we have constructed to pull the
u nemployed up with the rest of us.
Only a Labor Government would conceive such a plan, and only a Labor
Government could execute one. And, I first articulated that view about
unemployment then, it very much separated us from our conservative
opponents and set the tone for the balance of the Parliament. So, this night
two years ago was a turning point in Labor's re-election in 1993. And,
wherein John Hewson replied, " when the Prime Ministers talks", he said,
" about pulling people up, doesn't he realise he will drag the rest of us down."
And, that set the tone. But, the fact is, we have done what we said we would.
We kept the promise and we kept the faith. Faith in ourselves, faith in
Australians and faith in Australia, faith in the enduring values of our traditions
as a country, of fairness of egalitarianism, of a fair go, and a capacity for
tolerance, and a great capacity for change. And, perhaps it is the last, which
is as important as any of the other, and that is the capacity to change. For 
change we have. Change as a nation we have. Australian's, I think, are
entitled to be proud of the change of the last ten years. For we have made
big economic and social changes in Australia to ensure our economic future
and to change from an inward looking country to an outward looking confident
society going out to trade with the rest of the world.
It has been our lot, as Labor people, as a Labor Government with now eleven
years in office to fashion Australia in an image of the Labor Party. Modern,
progressive, caring, to become a country which is economically strong and
robust, and efficient and dynamic, and which at the same time is socially
cohesive. In many respects the White Paper which I had the privilege of
announcing a week ago said it all, it was a declaration that division and
exclusivity was not for Australia. That we were not going to bust our
traditions in favour of a dog eat dog society, of a prosperous majority, with an
underclass of people to maintain it, of a low wage, low productivity culture,
with an army of working poor never freed of the tyranny of poverty and debt.
And, I made this point a week ago in the House of Representatives, for those
people on the conservative side of politics who believe the only solution is to
push labour rates down for those who are low paid, or those at the bottom
end of the work force, or indeed for even those in the middle of the workforce,
And I made the point, there is not any distinction in social terms between
someone who is nominally employed on a most meagre wage, who lives
below the poverty line, who permanently lives in debt, than someone who is
nominally unemployed receiving unemployment benefit. Because that is not
the sort of society we want.
We don't want an army of working poor in Australia. We want Australia to be
a high wage, high productivity society. Built on education, built on skills, built
on research and development, built ' on product innovation, built on access to
international markets, with pride in ourselves and what we produce. That is
the sort of society we want. We don't want to go for the low paid jobs, the
jobs which Australian's have now changed themselves and their country over
a decade to escape to a higher standard of living and better levels of
employment. So, the White Paper is a land mark in our development, not just
for what it does, but for the beacon it lights which says, " this is the way that
Australia is going". It is very much a declaration of where we are. And, we
came to this fork in the road in 1993 when the Coalition argued the case for
the economic rationalists, hard lined, dog-eat-dog case, and we argued the
case for social inclusion and social cohesiveness and economic progress
based on the common effort of the whole of the Australian nation. And, we
believe and we state, we declare, that when we have come to that fork with a
decision that people made in 1993, that this is the way that Australia is going
to go. That we have marked ourselves out as a country that will not take the
underclass route, that will not say to half a million people, " sorry you missed
out, too bad, bad luck". We don't believe that we can maintain the traditions
of egalitarianism and fairness if we say to those people, sorry you are the
buffer at the end of the station. You are the people that take the brunt of the
load of economic change, while the rest of us toddle off into employment and
to prosperity. 
Now, that has got to be a conscious decision. The country has got to get up
and say, no, we are not going down the Thatcher path. We are not going to
have the working poor, as there was in Reagan's America. We are not
having it. And the White Paper said, " No! Not for Labor and not for
Australia". So, our creed has to be economic change always changing economic
strength, social unity, fairness and a premium on human happiness, human
respect and human regard. And the day we move off those things is the day
that we forsake the great traditions of this country and the great traditions of
the Labor Party. So, the White Paper is no surprise it is simply an articulation
of those things, at a time when we have seen economic stress turn 350,000
people who have been unemployed for one year or more into that part of the
labour market where there is no demand for them. And, that is why we have
made the change. But, one of the important things is we have done all this,
this huge package which is not just novel in Australian terms, but novel in
world terms, we have done all this within a disciplined fiscal framework. A
Budget which sits with the best in the world.
So, let there be no doubt that Labor in this Epoch keeps a first class set of
books. The first Budget surplus is now history, and now a Budget to
consolidate the recovery. And, that is the thing that always gets under the
skin of the Torys. That Labor can run the show. And, what did the Budget
reveal? As I said, a Budget to consolidate the recovery, and some recovery,
per cent GDP growth, the fastest of any substantial western world
economy, two and a quarter per cent inflation, 3 per cent employment growth
or just under a quarter of a million extra jobs, and a deficit of under 1 per cent
of GDP by 1996-97 as low as any other country in the world outside of West
Germany.
And the Liberals and the National Party, they could have spat chips. As
Ralph Willis was reading the forecast out, " growth and low inflation", the
heads slumped down, and they thought it would all be theirs. The same John
Hewson who was predicting a double dip recession, and a depression, and a
currency crisis in the course of the election campaign, wanted to be now out
there claiming Labor's work as his own. And, could you imagine it? If it was
a Liberal Treasurer standing up there claiming 4.5 per cent GDP growth, two
and a quarter per cent inflation, 3 per cent employment growth and the deficit
coming down to under 1 per cent GDP. They would have been, honestly,
they would have been casting little gilt statues to them in some of these
business organisations. You can imagine the claims, you know, the role that
Dr Hewson would have played in taking the accolades for this. But, what was
he left to debate? The difference between 4 per cent and 4.5 per cent. That
was the big debate on Budget night, 4 per cent or 4.5 per cent. With the
western world growth average at 1 per cent, at one, and up to 4.5 per cent,
and they are saying, " oh no, no, 4.5 per cent is too much, it should be 4 per
cent". This is the same economy that was going to be in a recession. And,
the fact is, are they bitter, are they bitter. All semblance of equanimity is 
gone, for a while you see, after we had won a few elections, well, you know,
the born to rule gang, they were out of office and out of sorts. But a couple of
parliaments regrouping that see five election losses on the trot, five election
wins for Labor on the trot and all the fun has gone out of it.
All semblance of equanimity is gone whatsoever. And there it was last year,
where we beat them fair and square in a national election where they had
their best funded campaign ever, where they articulated with massive media
coverage their program... we won the election, we beat them
overwhelmingly, we brought in our Budget as the elected government and
they said, " All Labor governments are illegitimate, this Budget is our
business," and they went on then to lead us a merry dance in the Senate.
Not within a year of the government taking office. Now, this year our White
Paper and Budget are met with a scowling reassertion of the principles of
Fightback!. After, it got too much for them, the general support of the
business community, of the media, of the public, in the end rather than
saying, " Well, OK, it's not a bad budget and they're good outcomes and let's
fashion a policy around no, no, they went back to saying, " Look, hang
on, we are reasserting the principles of Fightback!." The sort of, sullen
contempt came out and out came the old policy.
So, two weeks ago at the retreat it was all social inclusion. Fightback! was
dead and buried. Well, inclusion lasted just about two weeks. Now, this
week, it's back to what they do best exclusion. Exclusive. See, they
always regard themselves as exclusive and their supporters as exclusive, so
the whole notion of inclusion is alien to them. It's only the Labor party that
believes in inclusion. And, so, they were deciding I said John Hewson
couldn't have been more obvious if he put on a toupee and a moustache
and he was out there talking about inclusion, well it lasted two weeks when
Peter Reith blew the whistle on them on the weekend and he said
," Fightback! was as good a package after the election just as it was a good
package before the election." Oh, it was a terrific package, Peter, terrific
package. But there was more.... he said, " Fightback! should form the
framework of the Opposition's next election policy." And, yesterday, Dr
Hewson agreed with him. He said, this is Hewson, he said, " An awful lot of
what we've said in health, family assistance, the aged, veterans, immigration,
you name it," he said, " will go forward in a refined form to the next election.
Well, presumably they're the same veterans Dr Hewson said were beneath
his abilities, the same immigration that led him to say multicultural ism was
absolutely a fundamental mistake.
But, he's returning to Fightback! Like Wiley C. Coyote, he's returning to the
scene of the accident. He said, " The essential philosophy of Fightback! has
to be preserved" like the coyote waiting for the anvil to drop from the sky.
But, they are an unhappy lot, these days, our opponents. No, they are no,
they are an unhappy lot. They've got positively no regard for one another.
And, we saw over the weekend Hewson and Peacock reported as referring to
Howard as ' The Rodent' and Kennett referring to Costello as, ' Dog'. Not ' The
Dog', just plain, ' Dog'. And, of course, Bronwyn, who enjoys almost universal 
contempt in the party, well she's had a rough couple of weeks and after we'd
presented the White Paper I was cruising down the corridor of my office and I
heard this great roar of laughter come from the office... and I put my head in
just as the camera was panning away from Bronwyn's press conference.
There she was talking to the camera, all by herself. You know, how the
budgie talks to itself in the mirror. There she was, up, talking to herself.
Oh no, well you laugh.... John Hewson was up there yesterday at his family
conference and I always remember something Jack Lang said to me, and of
course whenever I mention Jack Lang they always hate it, because they hate
the memory of Lang, you know.., he said to me, " Look, I'll tell you this, Paul,
never be worried about the skyrockets of politics. At first a shower of sparks
and then a dead stick falls to earth." And I thought, in fact, the fireworks
analogy fits this lot well. And some of you are old enough to remember
cracker night... and I've seen this bunch sitting on the front bench, crackers,
as crackers, with Hewson the skyrocket and Howard, Howard always such
promise. He always reminded me of that thing called the flower pot. Now, I
don't know if any of you remember the flower pot but that was the one where
it always promised a dazzling performance. And you'd light it up and it had
multi-colours and it did a show for you but, often, when you lit it up it went
fffftt, you know, a bit of a spark.... and there was a bit of a show and then
there'd be a bit more and a bit more, then, finally, it fell away to nothing. And
that's really, basically, very typical of his contribution.
Then there's McLachlan, our establishment friend, who was supposed to
have come to Canberra and really gone off with a big bang. I always think of
him as the bunger, you know, the big red bungers... The strong silent type
capable of the big bang, you light it up, everyone stands back and then the
wick sort of goes down.., and everyone's waiting... and they keep on waiting...
and that's it, it doesn't go off. And then there's Bronwyn, she reminds me of
the catherine wheel. We used to nail them to the fence and they'd go off and
they'd take off, spreadeagle the kids, burn the dog, run up a tree and then
fizzle out going round in circles. So, that's them. Bitter, burnt out and
accident prone.
Nevertheless, we can never be complacent about them. And we won't be.
Because, as Mike said and as Wayne alluded to, we have a generational
change on our hands. Our party, our great party, has been in office now over
a decade, federally and we are seeing a great generational change and a
great new set of challenges. And, even if the Coalition is not up to it, even if
they don't understand, even if they've learned nothing from their hard hearted
cynical politics that doesn't deflect us from our challenge and the challenge to
rejuvenate and to change as we go. And the enthusiasm, I think it's worth
saying, that the enthusiasm of our Cabinet has got to be seen to be believed.
The pride in the work, the commitment of people to the joint effort, the group
effort, and the zing at meetings of the Cabinet and the committees is a
tremendous reminder of the capacity of the Labor party to rise to the
occasion. And I look at people like the Attorney General here from
Queensland, Michael Lavarch, 31, the Attorney General, 31. You know, 
Michael Lee, 35, holding down that huge job in the Arts and Communications,
John Faulkner, all these new people have just joined the Cabinet recently.
John Faulkner, Laurie Brereton, Carmen Lawrence, Peter Baldwin, Bob
McMullan a tremendous group of new participants in the Cabinet process
and mixed with the experience of people who've distinguished themselves
over the years like Ralph Willis is doing now, as Treasurer, Kim Beazley,
Gareth Evans, Brian Howe, Simon Crean, Robert Ray, Peter Cook, Nick
Bolkus and Bob Collins. In terms of that mix of experience and commitment
and the new members with so much promise and hope and generosity, then
Labor is in for a very good time of being able to meet the challenges which
come along. And that, coupled with the tremendous competence of our
backbench and our ministry.
And, I think one of the things I'd like to report to you is that I think that we are
seeing, now, a corporatism and an understanding in our caucus to measure
up to the task of managing this recovery and taking on the new challenges in
a way I saw it shaping up in the 1983-84 caucus which carried us right
through the 1980s. So, this is a tremendously good thing for the country, for
our party and for the government. It is a tremendously good thing to see not
just a competent Cabinet and a competent Ministry but another group of
people who can fill their positions and who are prepared to commit
themselves to the work of the caucus and to the backbench, in a unified team
effort. I've never seen more policy unity in Canberra than now, I've never
seen a greater pulling together, I've never seen Labor any better than it is at
this time. And, this is a great thing.
But, we have challenges and Wayne mentioned a couple of them in his
opening remarks. One of them is, of course, the Asia-Pacific. We've got to
create structures not just in Australia but create structures for Australia,
outside of Australia. And we're doing this in bilateral relationships with
countries, we're doing it in APEC which is a trans Asian-Pacific body, we're
doing it in the development of the ASEAN regional forum, we're doing it right
around the world. But, we're doing it most particularly in this part of the world
and that job will always need constant work, it will always need constant
attention. And, we're going to be giving it that work and constant attention.
The other great change we embarked on in the last Parliament and this one
is enterprise bargaining in the workplace: the hardest, deepest microeconomic
reform in the country and of course, it's always left to the Labor
government to do it. The Liberals now bemoan the centralised wage fixing
system for its rigidities but it sat there all through their political history all
through the period of their governments. And, in a party which is aligned to
organised labour, to the trade unions, as the Labor party has, is the party
which always finds these things difficult to do, we as always, have done it.
When they've shirked it, we have done it and the challenge now is to make
sure that the culture of productivity, low inflation and better wages and profits
is exploited by the spread of enterprise agreements and enterprise flexibility
across the economy over the course of this recovery. And, as we see that
change home and it will take some seeing but as we see it home we will 
have broken the back of the last really deep and intractable microeconomic
area of the economy. So, after the big macro reforms of the eighties and
many of the micro reforms, in telecommunications, in land transport, in
shipping, in the airlines, we're now spiriting this change home. And, that's
one which we will be taking the challenge on in the course of the parliament.
The microeconomic reformagenda is never complete in any country that
is, all these little parts of the private economy and the public economy which
need to be honed up and lifted in efficiency. And, I'm very pleased to say that
I welcomed again, at Council of Australian Governments ( COAG), Wayne's
support for change at the micro level in respect of state authorities as the
Commonwealth and states have, together, got to reform their own authorities,
both tiers of government, to try and make this microeconomic reform a more
successful one. So, whether it is in wharf authorities or grain handling or any
of the other the production of electricity or gas or water this is another
area of great national endeavour which will, again, test our abilities.
Regional development is another. We have said that we want this to be a
recovery for everybody and, to bring the regions of Australia into it. So
that those people who live in provincial cities and of course this is the most
decentralised of all of the Australian states with many provincial and regional
cities and towns accross the state we want them to be part of the national
recovery and the national economy. And, we've done things in Working
Nation, in the White Paper, to make sure that we support the leaders of
regional Australia who want to do new and good things for their communities
and we give them that strategic assistance they will need to be able to do it.
And put in their hands some of the financing instruments which they might
use to pull their regions along. So, that remains a challenge for us.
Cultural policy tying up the threads of our national life, is another. And
we'll be releasing our cultural policy statement later in the year. But, this is
an important thing about Australia's identity which Wayne mentioned earlier,
about how we see ourselves and about how we see all the threads of our
economic and social lives becoming part of our culture and our cultural life,
perhaps, making it clear what sort of complexion it places on Australia as a
society and as a country. And then, of course the republic. Because it is not
just enough to say it's inevitable, if we believe in it, we have to do it. And,
again, like the White Paper, this will depend on the whole country because
this is something which has got to be done with understanding, where people
know what they're doing, know its value, see its cultural significance and see
its economic and social significance and it's something which the
Australian people will need to understand and, of course, support by
referendum. So, it's got to be done with the whole country.
All of these things have got to be done with the country, all of those things I
mentioned: the Asia-Pacific, enterprise bargaining, microeconomic reform,
regional development, cultural policy, our identity, the republic, these are part
of the forward challenges facing the government, facing Australia, facing all
of us as a people and as a country. So, I am delighted with the opportunity to 
talk about these things here in Brisbane at the same place that I started
articulating the policy which was the beginning Labor's return to the election
in 1993. And, maybe it's entirely apt that when Wayne approached me and
said why don't we have a day together in Queensland talking about some of
these major issues, including a dinner for the " true believers", the faithful, that
I thought, well, this has been nothing but a good omen for me and, I hope, for
the government. So, I hope that with the support of you people in the
Queensland Labor Party we'll be able to chart a course forward, not worry
about our opponents, leave them in our wake and go on to make the changes
which will make this a great and powerful, but really decent and nice, place
live.
The Queensland Labor party is a no nonsense show that has always kept
closely in touch with the community. It's not middle-classed out of existence.
It's a show which has that common touch and the earthiness which has given
it great strength and we can see this in the Queensland Government. I
think that this is one of the states where Labor has seats to win and will be a
key state in returning the federal Labor Government in the next election. So,
thanks for having me back on this occasion, it's a long way from the election
now but we've got a lot to do yet. And, as we do it I hope you people of the
Labor party in Queensland can be proud of this government, proud of what
we stand for, but, as important as that, know one thing, that we'll all stand
together Commonwealth Labor Government, Queensland Labor
Government, Paul Keating and Wayne Goss, our ministers, our party friends
and supporters, all of us, together. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, STAFFORD STATE SCHOOL, STAFFORD, BRISBANE
16 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Just a couple of words to say that I was very pleased to be with the
Premier, at Stafford, where we saw, at first hand, Queensland in its
successful efforts to develop Asian language studies and, particularly,
language and the facility of language, through the Queensland school
system and now extending that as a result of decisions taken at COAG
at Queensland's initiative, to extend Asian language teaching across
Australia. And, I had the pleasure of announcing a $ 48 million
program in the Budget to begin this exercise. But, I wanted to
congratulate the Premier on the initiative at COAG and I think what we
have seen here today is an illustration of the competency of Australia,
the facility of Australian kids mastering at least one substantial primary
Asian language.
WG: Could I just say that we now have about 100,000 students in
Queensland schools learning an Asian language and I think this is
going to be tremendously valuable to their education, but also to the
Queensland economy in the years ahead. I think it is also important in
terms of the development of our national identity and future
generations seeing themselves as part of a multicultural country in the
Asia-Pacific and not a European colony on the other side of the world.
Queensland is very pleased with the progress of our program to date.
We did propose at COAG the development of a national strategy and
the working group chaired by Kevin Rudd, the Director of our office of
Cabinet, has come up with a report that has been endorsed and it has
been a cooperative effort between the Federal Government and State
Governments. And, from a Queensland point of view, we are
committed to the Asian languages program, but we are absolutely
delighted to see in the Federal Budget a substantial funding
commitment towards taking this program national. Among other things
it will mean a lot more teachers coming into the system, and the 
teachers are absolutely vital. And, it will mean, we believe, in a couple
of years time we will have Asian languages right down through the
high schools, down to as far as grade three. And, it is at that young
age, as you saw today, that these kids have such a tremendous facility
to learn and to understand a foreign language.
J: Prime Minster, what has been decided by Federal Cabinet regarding
the republic, and talking about the republic through the Government?
PM: Well I noticed a report today in the Sydney Morning Herald, which was
more zealous than it should have been, obviously, someone has
provided to a journalist some details of proposals put to the Cabinet,
but not adopted by the Cabinet, about general development of
understanding about the Constitution. Now, the Cabinet will return to
this question at some point, no doubt. Because I think that one of the
things which the Republican Advisory Committee revealed in its report
was the dearth of understanding, particularly in schools, of our
constitutional arrangements. I mean the Premier and I were just
saying coming in the car that we often are concerned about children
losing their enthusiasm for public processes and for politics and for
Government, and being disillusioned by it. And one can understand
this when there is not even a primary understanding of the nature of
the Constitution and the role of the Commonwealth and the federal
system. But the Cabinet didn't decide at this point to develop or
activate or move on, or pick up the recommendations of this particular
report, and therefore, whoever has given information out didn't say,
because they probably didn't know, that the Cabinet decided not to act
upon it, certainly at this stage.
J: Is there anything for the monarchists to fear? I see that New South
Wales has said that if a kit does come out they won't accept it.
PM: Who said that, by the way?
J: The New South Wales...
PM: Well this is the sort of knee-jerk response, which is pretty pathetic in
Australia. I find that surprising because basically the Premier of New
South Wales believes in the republican case. But that is not the point
of any such proposal. The point of such a proposal is not to put a yes
for no case about the republic, but rather it is just to fill in some of the
gaps which are not easily understood in our constitution, because they
are not explicitly referred to. For instance, the Cabinet is not referred
to in the constitution in a way which would give anyone to understand,
other than the Executive Council for instance, that the Cabinet is the
power, the principal power in the Executive. The reference in the
constitution is to the Executive Council, I mean all these sorts of
things, which I think, a proper understanding of the constitution would
reveal. 
J: Prime Minister that we might help out with troops in Rwanda, can
you tell us whether the Government is considering that? I-there is a
considerable down side, isn't there?
PM: Well, we are considering and I think we have generally responded
positively to proposals by the United Nations in these sorts of
exercises, in this case looking at the provision of aid and facilities to
these people. But at this stage I don't think the UN have quite
developed their proposals, and hence we are not in a position to say
whether we would be part of any operation or not. But our general
policy has been one of sympathy with these kinds of exercises and we
have committed people to them in the past.
J: Some Defence leaders, today, said that they would prefer a peace
plan in place first before you considered...
PM: Well, I mean, peace plans can't be hatched up when everyone thinks
they should be. We -have seen this in various places around the
world, but still you have got a very big humanitarian problem there to
be dealt with, and the UN is obviously thinking about it.
J: Have you got anything to say on John Hewson's drop again in
approval, and on the re-emergence of Fightback?
PM: Well Fi ghtba c k he said was dead and buried two weekends ago at the
retreat, and now we find that it isn't really at all. That as I have been
saying the philosophical attachment of the Liberal Party to some of the
brutal nostrums of Fightback is basically alive and well. And Mr Reith
is telling us so, flushing Dr Hewson out who confirmed his view. So,
the Liberals just never seem to learn. That is, in saying that they are
abandoning it and seeking a more, if you like, inclusive complexion on
their policies, they then go back to endorse all of the things that, of
course, Mr Downer said on the weekend that there wasn't going to be
any tax rises, only outlays cuts. So, presumably, they would be the
same outlays cuts which they had in Fightback. And they were the
very things that made it very clear that Fightback was the antithesis of
inclusion. It was about basically straightening up the poor,
straightening up the disadvantaged. So, at least we know where the
Liberal Party stands. It still stands four square behind the philosophy
of the package which was rejected at the last election.
J: So, Fightback is live and well, rather than dead and buried?
PM: Well, it is obviously part and parcel of their mainstream philosophy.
They haven't been able to move away from this hard edged economic
rationalism which they have adopted, and Dr Hewson's attacks upon
multicultural ism last year, on school teachers and renters, and all
these other categories of people was, I think, only giving you evidence
of the view that Fightback held, and basically is still with them. 
J: Prime Minister, the latest Morgan Poll has Labor ahead and Hewson at
an all time low, will you maintain your lead until the next election?
PM: Well that is what I would most certainly like to do. There is no point in
coming second in this business.
J: does it have you towards an early election?
PM: I answered that weeks ago, that question.
J: Premier, have you reached a decision yet on the Daintree package?
WG: As I said the other day, we are regarding the offer in the Federal
Budget as a very generous offer, and one that we propose to take
advantage of. We weren't aware of the full details of the funding and
we are still talking to the Federal Minister, or rather our Minister will
now be talking to the Federal Minister, and seeking to work out a
cooperative program to implement that, and to put the whole of the rain
forest back into the rain forest.
J: Do you still think it is likely that you will have go for four or five years,
rather than three?
WG: Well that is one of the things that I have got our Environment Minister,
I have asked her to talk to the Federal Minister about. She has been
away and only got back this weekend, and I spoke to her this morning
and she will now pursue that. As I said to you last week our Budget
was locked up last Monday, but we regard the offer as too good and
too generous to walk away from. So, one way or another we are going
to find a way to access it.
PM: Can I just say that I am very pleased with the Premiers response to
that. I think it is a great collaborative thing that we are doing here, and
I think again, it shows how the Federal Government of Australia and
the State Government of Queensland, Labor Governments, can work
together to do some of these things. When this area was declared a
heritage area. and there were substantial exclusions, one is this area
called the so-called hole in the heart. And to be able to bring that area
back to pristine, a pristine forest, which will be difficult, but which is
possible, it is best to be begun with an acquisition program to see that
the damage doesn't continue and development in the area doesn't
proceed. So, let me say, I think for one of the great areas of Australia,
of its heritage, of its national estate, the Daintree Rain Forest and
Queenslands management of it, I think, and for the Queensland, and
indeed, Australian tourist industry I think this is a really good thing to
be doing, I am very pleased about it.
J: The Premier said that you had fallen in love with the Daintree, is that a
fair assessment? 
PM: Well I think very few countries will have the joy of preserving areas like
these. I think anybody who has actually been across to Daintree falls
in love with it. The notion of this forest extending from the high
reaches of the mountains to the beach and repairing that damage
which has been done, preserving for ever this important ecosystem for
Australians is a tremendously good thing to be doing.
J: Do you think business fully understands the value of a clean
environment that we have in Australia relative to the rest of the world?
PM: Well certainly the tourist industry does. And I think to see tourism
grow they need these primary assets to grow on.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH CAROLINE TUCKER, 4QR, BRISBANE, QLD
MONDAY 16 MAY, 1994
CT: Now, you were preaching to the converted today, weren't you?
PM: Now, well, I suppose if we are to say that the Queensland education
system is already giving a lead to Australia in the promotion of Asian
languages maybe that's true. Because, the Premier and I had the
pleasure of going to a classroom after the assembly and I must say,
seeing a class full of Australian kids speaking in Chinese with a very
enthusiastic teacher of Chinese, was really a thrill.
CT: Do your children study Asian languages?
PM: No, they don't but as a consequence of this, the Premier bought this
up at the Council of Australian Governments which is, as you know, a
non financial Premiers' meeting and we adopted a policy of developing
a national Asian languages policy. This will focus on the speaking of
Japanese, Chinese, Korean and Indonesian and we announced a $ 48
million dollar program in the Budget for it so we're now starting to see
it move. So, there's a bit of Queensland leadership which has been
very good.
CT: Good to see. On the subject of education still, it appears the
republican debate is set to be rekindled, can you tell us about the
public education campaign which is being designed?
PM: Yes, well, somebody, today, got a story from the bureaucracy about a
matter the Cabinet was considering, or a Cabinet committee, about
some general education about the Constitution. Now, as it turned out,
the Cabinet didn't adopt it that didn't make the story. But, the point
was that one of the things that Malcolm Turnbull's Republican Advisory
Committee found was that the unde rstanding of the Constitution was,
fairly slight. That's in part because it was basically written, as you
know, in the last gasp of the 19th century for the British parliament to 
2
keep an eye on Australia. And, so, they had all of these mechanisms
there like the Executive Council the Cabinet isn't mentioned and
so a reader, today, of the Constitution would hardly understand how
Australia works.
So, you know, the Premier was saying as we were coming in in the car
today that we often despair about the fact that kids sort of lose interest
in public life and in politics and lose faith in it; if they don't
understand at least how the Constitution operates then we're a bit of a
loss. Anyway, this was a proposal to talk about the Constitution, not to
put the ' yes' or ' no' case on the republic. And, we didn't even adopt it,
anyway.
CT: So, it's not even on the table?
PM: It's not even on the table. But, it may come back because I think,
probably, Constitutional education or education on constitutional
issues is something we should do. It's a bit like the Asian languages.
CT: So, would you be sticking to the timetable for the republican debate to
go ahead?
PM: Well, in a sense we don't have a timetable. I think this is something
that Australians want to think about and as the public debate filters on
and the work of that committee was very good, it was the first real bit
of text that we've ever had about the quantification of powers and
mode of election and all these other things. As it seeps out in the
debate, generally, there will be a better understanding of it. And the
government will be saying more about it as we move through the next,
you know, year or two.
CT: If we could just go back to Asia, you're going to Jakarta next month?
PM: I am.
CT: That's four times since you've become Prime Minister, is there a
special area that you're interested in over there or do you think it's just
a regional issue?
PM: Well, I'm going on this occasion because of the Austral ia-Indonesia
1994 Exhibition which will be the largest trade exhibition we've ever
mounted in any country, or ever mounted outside of Australia. And,
because Indonesia is so significant as an economy and matters so
much to us as a society and it being such a very large exhibition, I
thought the thing to do was to respond to the invitation to open it. And,
secondly, I'll have a chance to see President Soeharto and talk about
the forthcoming APEC leaders' meeting which is on in November so it's
a natural point to have another conversation with him and the
government. 
CT: Do you see Indonesia becoming increasingly important to Australia?
PM: I think it is the country of greatest significance to us in terms of our
foreign, commercial and trade policies. And, therefore, understanding
it, getting to know it better, building trust and confidence between us is
central to Australia's best interests.
CT: Well, with that focus in that particular region and countries like
Indonesia how do you view sending Australian troops to Rwanda?
PM: This falls into the general humanitarian category and our general
support for the United Nations as an institution. I think the UN has
asked a number of countries if they'd be willing to provide military
assistance to assure delivery of humanitarian assistance. They're not
saying, " Come over here and separate the warring parties." But, at
this stage there is no formal Security Council decision about the nature
of the operation and while we've been generally sympathetic to these
sorts of operations in the past, we'll want to see exactly what is being
proposed.
CT: Would you support it without a truce of some sort being in place?
PM: Well, I think I'd let that one go until we see exactly what the UN
intends, itself. And, even after it decides something it doesn't mean to
say that we will necessarily agree, though, on occasions we have.
CT: Alright, on to something else, last week's Budget set aside $ 500
million for Aboriginal health over five years, the AMA doesn't quite
agree with those figures, what's the real picture here?
PM: Well, the AMA, this Brendon Nelson character, this is an organisation
whose general policy is to do Medicare in. I mean, this is an
organisation which is about tramping all over the one health system
that provides lower to middle income Australians with security in
health. And, they're now going on, taking up the cause of Aboriginal
health as a cause celebre for which you would believe they were the
principal protagonists. They never have been. And, we don't believe
that with a massive increment in funding proposed by the government
that you could actually spend more than that and spend it wisely. So,
you know, this is
CT: Is it really a massive increase, though?
PM: Oh, it is, it's a big increase.
CT: To what extent?
PM: Well, it's, I think, at the limits of what we can sensibly program to
spend. And that's, I think, the important point. But, the idea that this is
a betrayal of Aboriginals, if you said to Mr Nelson, " Listen, what about 
we start reviewing the common fees for some specialist consultations
and we provide some of those savings for Aboriginal health?", you'd
hear the shout and the hue and cry from AMA headquarters. So, we
could treat a lot of these general protestations with the scepticism,
healthy scepticism, I think they deserve.
CT: There's been a fair bit of discussion about the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Commission ( ATSIC) having control of those funds as
well. Do you feel that that is really the right decision, to leave those
funds in the control of ATSIC?
PM: Well, health, in respect of Aboriginals, has never been exclusively with
ATSIC. The Commonwealth Department of Health and general
national health delivery has found its way to support of Aboriginal
people. There's always this question of a trade between so-called self
determination in the management of Aboriginal affairs, including
health, and the other general programs of the Commonwealth. I think
we've got the balance pretty right and the notion that we should take it
away from ATSIC and just dispense it all departmentally I don't agree
with. The main thing here is to make sure that Aboriginal people, that
their health environment and the direct help for health in acute terms,
is more effective. That's what has to happen here and we think these
programs can be made to be delivered effectively. But, once you start
pushing the envelope out where you can't be certain you can really
wind the programs up, you've got to wonder about the point of all that.
CT: You must be reasonably pleased, just to finish off, reasonably pleased
with the sort of reception the White Paper and the Budget have had
out there in the community? Jeff Kennett seems to think you could win
another election in the near future, would you give it a go?
PM: Well, I said the other day, elections are too hard to win to give the time
away for nothing. I mean, it's just fifteen months since the last election
and I don't think the public want nor appreciate anyone sort of, at this
point, looking around for an electoral opportunity. They want you to do
what you said you'd do. Now, in the election campaign, we said that
one of the things one of the things I made very clear is we would
pick the unemployed up, we'd bring them along with the rest of us, that
we wouldn't leave them behind. And the White Paper is a serious
attempt, not just in Australian terms but in world terms, to do
something innovative and new in terms of the labour market to
personally case manage and next year we'll be personally case
managing 509,000 Australians to understand their personality, to
understand their aptitudes, their educational standards, their work
experience and to try and design training for them and then place them
into a job with a job subsidy. In doing that, what the White Paper says
is we will remain a society that cares about one another and we will
remain an inclusive society. That is, one where we move along
together and we don't develop an underclass. Now, I think Australians
expected the government to do that, we said we'd do it in the election 
and that's the nature of the Paper and, I think, Australians have felt
good about that. They've said, " Good, that's what we think, that's what
we think you should do."
CT: Has business said that?
PM: By and large, yes. The White Paper got a very good response from
I've got some of them with me from the Metal Trades Industry
Association, from the Business Council, from various other, if you like,
business bodies. Because, in this recovery skills formation which
we always have problems with in recoveries, shortages of skills
normally we have recourse to the migration program, on this occasion
we won't be able to have the recourse to it in the volume we've had in
the last recovery phase. So, the skills will have to come from our
domestic labour market, from new entrants to the workforce from
school and by training those three to four hundred thousand people
who've been unemployed for 12 months or more. So, I think business
has said, " Look, we will face some skills bottlenecks here; it's a good
thing the government is doing here." Basically, if we can get these
people and train them and place them and get them back into the
mainstream, not only is it an equitable and decent and fair thing to do,
it's also an efficient thing to do.
CT: Alright, I'm afraid I'm going to have to leave it there once again,
we've run out of time if I want to include anything else in the program
today. Thankyou very much for coming in. Good to see you.
PM: Good Caroline. Thanks for the opportunity.
ends. 



jet,/
PRIME MINISTER 45/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
I will be visiting Indonesia from 27 29 June to open two major events in the Australia
Today Indonesia 94 promotion which will be taking place throughout Indonesia in
June and July. I will also meet President Soeharto and will have discussions with other
senior members of the Indonesian Government.
The Australia Today promotion, which follows similar successfuil events in Japan and
Korea, will demonstrate Australia's achievements and capabilities in a range of fields,
from trade and industry to the arts and tourism.
On 29 June I will open the Business and Investment Forum and the Business and Trade
Exhibition being held as part of Australia Today. These events will bring together
Australian and Indonesian business people with the aim of expanding our already
extensive commercial ties. Australia's total trade with Indonesia in 1993 was more
than $ 3 billion, and our exports have grown, in trend growth terms, by 17 per cent
over the past five years.
With President Soeharto I will be discussing both bilateral issues and important
regional issues including APEC, which Indonesia currently chairs. President Soeharto
will host the next APEC leaders meeting in Indonesia later this year.
CANBERRA 16 May 1994 



MAY. 16 ' 94 6: 56PM P. 1 e~~
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH GREG GARY, RADIO 4BG, BRISBANE,
MONDAY, 16 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
GC: The Prime Minister, Paul Keating, visiting our city and joints us for a few
minubes. Nice to see you.
PM: Good, nice tobe here.
GC: You've been out at Skifford school today talking about all kinds of
things. It went well, good to see the kids?
PM-It was a realty nice day and the Premier and I got such a nice welcome
from the kids and we were delighted. The cause of going was tha
Wayne Goss promoted, at the Council of Austrian Governments, the
Premier meeting, the notion of a national Asian languages strategy
which we were happy to join the states with and to join Wayne with and
It will mean that we will be focussing on Japanese, Chinese, Korean and
Indonesian in the first instance in schools in Australia. And, out there at
Stafford today there was a Chinese class which really did tremendous..
It is very interesting to see a bunch of Australian kids speaking Chinese
with a very enthusiastic techer of Chinese.
GC: * You wouldn't have thought it a few years ago would you?
PM: No. And, Wayne tells me there are 100,000 kids in Queensland
studying Asian languages right now. So, Queensland has been the
leader an this and I took the opportunity to congratulate the Premier on
his initiative in this respect because for Australia joining the world I
mean, when I grew up all we knew was basically that Australia belonged
to the. Commonwealth and that sort of thing, that we were part of Europe
and North America and wouldn't have known that much about the 
MAY. 16 ' 94 6: 56PM P. 2
2
region, you certainly couldnt have spoken the languages. So, to be
able to do that is going to be a tremendous fillip for this country.
GC: So, when you were out there with the children and you were looking at
their young shiny faces full of potential and prospect and the rest, do
you allow yourself ever to think about our country 40 or 50 years down
the road when they in turn are having their children. And I wonder if you
allow yourself that thought, what kind of county it will be at that time?
PM: I do and much of what I do is about that Thats what motivates me and,
I think, that kids will have a much more interesting life then than we had.
Not that we didn't have good lives, but were they as interesting as they'll
have? And the answer is, no they weren't. Theirs will be far more
interesting and I was just making the point to them today, talking about,
particularly young children, the messages have got to be ones that they
can digest You know, the 747 jumbo jets changed all of our lives.
When I was a teenager the only destinations from Australia were all met
by sea. They were not met by you know, when in half a day being in
North Asia or South-east Asia. And, given that mass transportation is
going to change the opportunities for people to move around this area
of the world are going to be tremendous and in employment and in
incomes. So, it gets back to what I said in the Budget. We want this to
be a high wage, high productivity, culture and the way to get it is
through training education and training.
GC: Just talking about the schools for a moment We've had several calls
this afternoon, Prime Minister, concemed about the story about the
republican kits going into schools.
PM: This is a story in today's Sydney Morning Herald. Somebody has given
a journalist a lead in Canberra, but the Government didn't actually adopt
these proposals. It was for the development of an enhanced
understanding in our educational institutions of the Constitution,
because the Republican Advisory Committee, which was chaired by
Malcolm Tumbull, that Committee discovered that to their chagrin one of
the problems we had was people understanding the Constitution and, in
fact, that is understandable when even an institution like the federal
Cabinet is not mentioned in the Constitution. It mentions, in terms of the
Executive Council, the thing that advises the Governor-General. So,
there is all this code in the Constitution that people don't understand
and a lot of the kids today are disillusioned about public life and politics
and if we can't at least communicate to them things about the
Constitution, well, where are we going to begin.
So, it was a proposal to do that, but the Government didn't adopt it. We
might in the future, but we haven't yet. 
MAY. 16 ' 94 6: 57PM 3
GC: Does that relate, some of the things you just said then, to that wonderful
line you dropped with John Laws last week on this radio station, when
you talked about a culture of criticism-Can you expand on that a little?
PM: Well, I think, that the culture of criticism in Australia has got tothe point
that instead of the media standing back saying, look, there are some
good and important things happening here and my point was, that
Australians had earned the recovery, that they had earned the right to
be accredited with meeting the challenge of economic transformation
which they have in the last ten years. We have gone from an Inward
looking, shut little place to an open, aggressive trading country. And
here we are now teaching languages in 3chools and the whole culture is
changing. Yet, instead of that positive compilation being presented to
the public of a nation which is at the leading edge of change, certainly in
western world terms, growing faster than any substantial western
economy, low inflation, big shift in education, big shift in the productive
culture, this is not getting through to the public, it is all niggardly stuff..
Journalists are in the position now where if they present the positive
things, their peer group pressure is such, that somebody says, hang on,
you're going soft on the Government or soft on this Minister or soft on
that Which, I think, is a pity because the public are looking for,
listening for the value. They are listening through the screen of noise to
find the bits they know have got some value to them.
One of the values of doing radio interviews like this is that you ran talk
about these things. But, by the time it gets filtered through the media..
GC: Maybe it is media driven, but I wonder if it is wider than the media in that
Lee Kuan Yew comes to Australia and wants to tell us how to run our
race when, in terms of any country on the planet, we are doing all right.
Is there an underlying lack of confidence perhaps still residing in our
country, that we are prepared to accept that critical assessment all the
time?
PM: I think, if's not so much that we are prepared to accept, we politely
accept it. There is a diference between being polite and uncritical
acceptance by us. One of the things I was pleased to say a week or two
after Mr Lee's visit was that productivity per person in Australia was
much higher, say, than Singapore. much higher. That's productvity per
person. The only measure that is really worth, if you are-tialking about
the productive quality of the countries, the only measure worth having.
The thing is, Australians have got faith in themselves and they believe
that Australia can do, as a nation, good and important things and we
have done them. I mean, in the last ten years Australia has been
through a most profound transformation and it's still going on. Ten
years ago, only three kids in ten were completing school. This year it's
eight in ten. it will soon be nine in ten and by the White Paper changes
we're going to make sure that no kid who drops out of school isn't 
MAY. 16 ' 94 6m: 57PM 4
picked up, that the transition from school to work is a good one. All of
those sorts of changes which are primary to a culture which is about
productivity, innovative products, research and development, exports, it
is a shift we've made and the public are enrtitled to get a tick for it.
GC: We only have four minutes ahead of the news. Two questions I want to
put to you. One, our listeners have talked at great length this afternoon
about whati's happening in Rwanda. There is much confusion and
people hear you talking abotithe prospect of us being Involved in the
UIN force. Is that on the cards and if it is, why?
PM: We have been asked by the United Nations if we would be willing to
provide military assistance to ensure the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in Rwanda. No formal security council decision about the
operation has yet been made, so we don't really know what the
character of such an operation would be. Now, in the past we have
given sympathetic consideration to what we might usefully do to help
with difficult humanitarian problems. In this place there have been
200,000 deaths already. Well, it is inconceivable in Australian terms,
but the first thing we need to do is to see the shape of the proposed
operation before we make any decision. But~ essentially we expect the
UNoperation to be aimed at assisting relief operations and not
sepsiriffng the waring parties. So, we wouldn't be in there trying to say,
hang on, we're going to be the referee here, but rather assisting in the
humanitarian operation. So. we don't know what the UN is proposing
and at this stage we haven't made a decision about it although we have
responded to the UIN in similar situations around the world.
GC: There remains a risk none the less doesn't there. We had a caller a litte
earlier about to go to Rwanda in a couple of weeks from now, said he
had been in Somalia and elsewhere and whilst our motives can be
applauded, when you get on the ground over there the bottom line
question, is it worth risking one Australian life to help these people who
seem not too keen to help themselves?
PM: Well, we either subscribe to the notion that we have an international
order and the governing body is the United Nations and support that
body or we don't. As you know, the same argument could have been
mounted in the mid-west of the United States when same mother said of
her child, why should I send him to the South-Pacific? Why should they
fight in the Solomon Islands or anywhere else?
GC: But we knew who the good guys and the bad guys were.
PMV: I know, it was a more obvious thing. But I mean, in these things, I think,
there has to be a view about Australia's role in the world and we are very
careful about the conditions under which we commit people as were in
Somalia, as we've been in the Middle East. But, good things do 
MAY. 16 ' 94 6: 58PM
happen. We've been involved with UN operations as part of peace
keeping forces in the Middle East, we've done that long enough now to
see the Israelis and the Palastinians come to a peace accord which will
change the character of that area. So, we are either in the business of
helping and seeing better world outcomes or we're not. But, again,
these are on-balance judgements and we look, at each time, the nature
of the operation.
GC: We are a better and larger and more decent country than sometimes we
take the time to think of ourselves aren't we?
PM: Well, we play a larger role in the world. Always, I think, we have played
a role in the world larger than our relative size and that is a compliment
to Australians I think, the fact that we can take it I mean, look at the
settlement in Cambodia as a case in point in our own area.
GC: South Africa. Just talking about South Africa I was faxed a, I think, a
head line from the New Zealand Herald today and it ran this story the
former Deputy of white supremacist Dr Juan Smith in the church of the
creator organisation, is understood to be leaving South Africa for
Australia. South African sources said yesterday that Mr Youhan Grieff?
had applied for residency in Australia and that we might be already on
his way here having left South Africa Should we be letting people
like this into our country?
PM: I don't know whether he's applied or he hasn't, but we don't, generally,
try and import into this country extreme views and, I think, that is a pretty
good policy.
GC: So, if it was likely this fellow turned up on the front door?
PM: I can't say. I'd have to find out all about it.
GC: OK, in the meantime your Canterbury Bulldogs sit atop the premiership
ladder. They are looking good.
PM: Thats right, they are doing really well and the other side I support
Collingwood in Victoria are in the middle of the field and rising. So, I'm
going for the yearly double, annual double.
GC: It's good to see you. Next time you visit come by and we'll talk some
more.
PM: OK, Greg and thanks very much.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER CANBERRA
THE CRETAN ASSOCIATION OF SYDNEY AND NSW: BATTLE OF CRETE
COMMEMORATION
Fifty-two years ago, Greek and Commonwealth forces,
including 6,500 Australians, fought to defend Crete from
German invasion. Today, we remember the sacrifices made
by Australians and Cretans in that bitterly fought
campaign. Without heavy equipment or air support, exhausted from
the campaign in Greece, the Allied troops in Crete
nevertheless inflicted heavy casualities on the German
forces. When resistance finally ceased, the people of
Crete risked savage retaliation to help Allied soldiers
evade capture. In the weeks following the battle, more
than 300 Australians, aided by Cretans, succeeded in
escaping. Hundreds of other Australians and New
Zealanders were hidden by Cretans.
Australians have not forgotten the courage of these
Cretans. The ties forged in war have endured and grown. After IL
World War Two, more than 250,000 Greeks, including many
Cretans, migrated to Australia. They brought with them
an ancient culture and a spirit of enterprise which has
enriched Australian society immensely.
Thus, when we remember today the sacrifices of 1941, we
reaffirm the enduring ties between Australia and Crete,
ties built on a common democratic heritage tested in war
and peace.
P J KEATING -7 P* no 130 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, REGENT HOTEL, MELBOURNE, MONDAY, 23 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What is your view of the leadership challenge that is going on this
afternoon? I
PMV: Well, whether the Liberal party changes jockeys or not, this is just
about people, about who they think can sell the same policies better.
They might say, " we are not running the GST anymore". It's not about
the GST, that is out, everyone thinks that's o-6jt,' the Liberal party. It is
about the general cast of their policies. This is not a contest about
policies and ideas, it is a contest about who can sell them the best. I
think, the Liberal party has reached the stage in its political history
where its usefulness to Australian society is very debatable,
exceptionally debatable, because I don't think it has touch with the
great majority of Australians, I don't think it understands the way
Australia is these days or what its future is. So, whether it is John
H, ewsori or Alexander Downer or whoever, until the Liberal party
decides to change the way it thinks about Australia and to look at
Australia in broad terms rather than sectional terms as it did at the last
election and the one before that, and the one before that, then, I think,
the Liberal party changing jockeys will not change the nature of the
horse.
J: Would you take advantage of the instability in the party and call an
early election?
PMV: I get asked early election questions every day of the week and I give
them the same answer elections are too hard to win without giving
away free time. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7.30 REPORT, 25 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, welcome again to the program.
PM: Thank you, Paul.
PL: Now, Alexander Downer says you are a fast money man. Has he got a
point?
PM: Well, that's come from his view of the world. If it is not old money, it has
to be fast money. And, if it is fast money it is not proper money.
PL: There's not much difference in the end though, is there?
PM: I mean, God knows what he thinks of John Hewson. If he thinks that fast
money is improper. I mean, this is all part of the b'orn to rule squad. I
noticed in yesterday's Australian, the front page, " I am born to the Liberal
Party, and I am a creature of the Liberal Party." In other words, I am born
to rule the rest of the you. Because, what we have seen here is basically
a take over by the old Fraser Staley gang, this is a return, as Gerard
Henderson said, it looks like a return to the fifties.
PL: But it doesn't matter whether it is new money, old money, or what sort of
money. The fact is, most of the people at the top in Australian politics,
yourself included, are quite wealthy. Wouldn't we be better just getting off
on that basis?
PM: No, it has got nothing to do with that. He came on saying I had made a
personal attack upon him. Where in fact, I had repeated Dr Hewson's 
remarks about the mode of his selection by the Melbourne political and
business establishment at the Melbourne Club.
PL: Now, this was Dr Hewson's comment last Friday night. As a matter of fact
we have got that, let's just have a look at that now.
JH: " It is a very important issue, this ballot. Because the issue is the future of
the Liberal Party, and the Party now has a very clear choice between a
Party that would be very broad based and inclusive of all Australians, and
a Party that will be run by the Melbourne Club."
PL: Ok, run by the Melbourne Club. But that is just political rhetoric.
PM: No. The Melbourne Club is an attitude. It is about an attitude, it is about
the political establishment of the Victorian Liberal Party, always hankering
after control of the party again, resenting the fact that it had what they
thought was a Johnny-come-lately from NSW. The point I made was that
Mr Downer has actually gone to the Melbourne Club, Mr Wooldridge tells
us that he had to learn his fate from the head waiter, that all these heavy
weights had decided his fate, Dr Hewson's fate, in Melbourne. I made
that reference, then he said this was an unprovoked personal attack to
which then he refers to my house in Elizabeth Bay, which by the way
doesn't have scintillating harbour views, it is just an inner city terrace, and
investments I have made et cetera. I made one 22 years after I joined the
Parliament.
PL: But look, in the past..
PM: Let me just make this point, Paul. The fact of the matter is I made a
political remark about Mr Downer, and the political remark was a repeat of
the very remark you have just shown your viewers by John Hewson. Dr
John Hewson and Dr Wooldridge's fate were decided by the heavy
people. By Malcolm Fraser, by Mr Staley. First of all Mr Downer had to
do an interview with Mr Kennett, then he was taken to the Melbourne Club
and put through the paces by Mr Staley. Mr Peacock was interviewed
saying, Yes he supports Dr Hewson, the next day, denying Dr Hewson, he
climbs into a Rollsroyce with Ron Walker, the Treasurer of the Liberal
Party, and mover and shaker in the Victorian Liberal apparatus and
business establishment. They are the people who decided to make
Alexander Downer Leader of the Liberal Party. I was simply making that
point.
PL: You say the Melbourne Club is an attitude, they are his wealthy backers.
But, I mean people would say the ACTU is an attitude and they are your
wealthy backers. $ 10 million dollars at the last election. 
PM: Well, he could have made that political point, but he didn't. He made a
personal attack upon me.
PL: But you have made personal attacks in the past. You never called him
Shirley Temple?
PM: I don't talk about their personal assets.
PL: Who called him Shirley Temple?
PM: Look, he has had fifty warnings from the Speaker to behave himself in
Parliament. But let me just about the Melbourne Club, Paul. It is a club
of entrenched privilege and prejudice. Half the population of this country,
women, are excluded from being members there. Mr Downer belongs to
the Adelaide Club, half the population of this country, women, are
excluded from being members there. And, I think at least one thing
should happen between now and when he stands up to lead a major party
in the Parliament next week, he should resign his position from the
Adelaide Club on the basis that in 1994, not 1984, or 1894, no leader of a
party that wants to be Prime Minister of this country should be a member
of a club that will not have women as members.
PL: So, you have put the political heat back on him. But look, that suit you're
wearing right now would feed an average, the money you spent on that
would feed a family for a couple of months. I mean this is an absurd
argument when we get down to your richer than me, and you know, you
are new money, no, I am old money.
PM: No, but that is him, that is not me. I am simply making this point, I said
that the interests of the wealthy people of the Melbourne Liberal
establishment who chose him and selected him, and shifted Andrew
Peacock and his handful of votes to make the difference. Their interests
and the interests of a boiler maker in Footscray, or a cabinet maker in
Fairfield in Sydney, or in Brisbane, are completely in contrast to one
another. They wouldn't even give them a thought over a warm gin this
crowd. And that was the point I was making. This notion that we have
gone back to a fresh start, Malcolm Fraser has never been so happy. I've
never seen Malcolm so joyous since 1983.
PL: Many of these Cabinet..
PM: He has finally got his way, he has got the Party Alexander Downer has
said ' Malcolm Fraser is a great man'. This is the man who gave us seven
years of political waste. Seven years of wasted political time in Australia's 
post-war economic adjustment. What we're going back to is back to
Malcolm Fraser type policies.
PL: Many of these tradesman you evoke, these so-called ordinary Australian
battling families would like to point the finger at you and say you've given
it to them damn tough.
PM: We gave them between 1983 and 1993 1.675 million extra jobs; we gave
them an increase in household disposable income in every year that the
Government was in office.
PL: And crash landing in 1989.
PM: Well, just hang on. We gave them a health insurance system which
means that they or their families can get sick and not be afraid of it; we've
given them an aged care system and a social security system which is the
envy of any in the world; when we became the Government only 3 kids in
completed secondary school, now it is 8 in 10 we've given their
children an education.
PL: And over 900,000 unemployed right now, Prime Minister?
PM: Yes, and we've got a White Paper there, we've got 4.5 per cent growth, 2
per cent inflation. Could you imagine
PL: And business investment just gone back 5 per cent in the March quarter.
PM: I'll come to quarterly figures in a moment Paul. As you know, they dance
around all the time. Could you imagine this crowd, this new group
producing the White Paper? Could you imagine them worrying about
whether the kids under 18 are personally case managed back into
education and into work? Could you imagine them worrying about a job
compact for the long term unemployed? And yet they'll put themselves
up. This was never a contest about ideas or policies, it was only about
who could sell the Liberal party's philosophy.
PL: But isn't he selling well, he's got under you skin. You've come here, you
are on the rise?
PM: No, no, I will just bat the ball back where ever I see it. When I became
Prime Minister, I said what I would do. I sat down at the press conference
and said where I would take the country. Before I became Prime Minister,
I said that fiscal policy needed to be expanded, we had to make the
linkages into Asia, I mentioned the countries. Not one specific policy the
other night. 
PL: He says he's got a document coming out in a month or two. Now, you've
got to give him a bit of time don't you?
PM: For the business community this is just going to be a horror show. This is
just going to be a blancmange. Could you image this group removing
exchange controls, floating the Australian dollar, knocking the tariff wall
over, recasting the tax system, introducing the kind of labour market
programs; the micro economic economy, water, electricity, gas, could you
imagine this coming from this group who want, what did they say their
policies are? A broad church and social stability'.
PL: Commonsense policy not bound by ideology or sectional interest'. In
other words, that's going to appeal to a lot of people.
PM: What that says is, we haven't had commonsense policy from Dr Hewson,
we are having commonsense policy from now.
PL: You said the other day that you never underestimate anybody. How do
you really estimate Downer as an opponent?
PM: I think, it is the Liberal party, I mean, for the business community and for
the broader Australian community who knows Australia must continue to
keep changing, must continue to make the break to Asia, this is a leader
who would deny the full expression of Australian sovereignty, this is a
leader who has a great question mark hanging over multicultural ism and
immigration, this is a leader who would take his party back to the policies
of Malcolm Fraser and that is basically, back to the kind of society and the
kind of attitudes which just about broke us.
PL: Well, he is doing pretty good if you look at the Saulwick poll this morning.
59 per cent of voters believe Downer will improve the Liberals chances
and they have given him a nine point lead over you as preferred Prime
Minister.
PM: And they gave him a 20 point lead over the Government. In other words
the Saulwick poll this morning gave the Coalition a 20 point lead over the
Government. This is the Government with 4 per cent economic growth, 2
per cent inflation, 250,000 jobs, a White Paper.
PL: But, it is not all first night euphoria.
PM: No, just a second, a strong Budget performance, a decade of reform and
on one nights election the Liberal party jumps 20 points in front of the
Government... Well, Paul, if you believe that poll and let me tell you 
there are plenty of people in the gallery who believed Saulwick polls in
the election campaign, much to their chagrin if you believe in that you'll
believe in anything.
PL: I believe, for what it's worth, that he's going to do a lot better for the
Liberal Party, in the months ahead, than John Hewson was doing in the
months before and that that puts them ahead of you.
PM: Any change from Dr Hewson's position where he was rejected at the last
election, and his views and that negative approach he took to the job,
would be in the honeymoon though I'm not here to spoil the happy
honeymoon, Paul, I'm just here simply to make the point...
PL: Oh, is that right?
PM: I'm not here really, to spoil it. I want them to have their full enjoyment, as
long as they understand that this country is not going to go backwards to
the fifties as Mr Henderson said, to the seventies under Malcolm
Fraser and Staley, of having it run by people who don't understand the
broader society, as these Melbourne establishment people do not this
country is not going to want the country run in that way from that place
and the Government's policies of reform and change, of the White Paper,
of the Budget, of the shift into Asia, of the Republic, of all of these things,
of Mabo, this is the direction of Australia. It is not to go backwards. This
is not a fresh change, this is basically back to the past.
PL: Is it politically smart though, for you to be overseas early next month, for
about 11 days celebrating D-Day?
PM: Well, I was invited by President Mitterand of France and the British Prime
Minister and one can hardly refuse the invitation in the terms in which it
was put when we were participants in the second World War.
PL: And, finally, those investment figures, backwards five per cent in the
March quarter. That's not good.
PM: In the year to now they are on track with the Budget forecast, Paul.
PL: But, you've got to get one per cent growth this financial year. At the
moment you are running minus at 1.7 per cent so you've got to do about
2.7 per cent in the June quarter to get to that target and then you've got to
get to fourteen and a half next financial year... and, you're on target for
all of this, are you? 
PM: Yes, and we've got realisation factors in there, on this data, well below the
actual outcomes in the last ten years. So, as the Treasurer said
eloquently, today, in a press statement, these numbers fall squarely into
the Budget forecast.
PL: Because, I don't need to tell you, upon that investment depends the
growth and the jobs and your whole White Paper strategy.
PK: Well, you look at the eighties changes and these are very conservative
forecasts, I think everyone has accepted that. And, as I say, they are on
track. The key point to remember, Paul, is this the average growth of
the Western world economies is one per cent this year. We're already
doing four per cent and heading to four and a half.
PL: Thanks for your time
PM: Thank you, Paul.
ends 



TEL: 26. May. 94 16: 54 NO. 011 P. 01/; D1
PRIME MINISTER ~ 9
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MVP
THE DOWNER SHADOW MINISTRY
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr Downer, has failed his first test in the job by
announcing a frontbench larger than the Government's.
All his talk about having a commitment to smaller government is exposed as
humbug. The best he could do was to trim Dr Hewson's Gargantuan shadow
ministry down to 32 members still two more than the Government.
And so much for a " fresh start." His " new look" shadow ministry now includes
no fewer than three failed Leaders of the Opposition, and presumably the
tonew blood" is typified by the return to the frontbench of the former Fraser
Government minister John Moore.
The list of Shadow Ministers and Shadow Parliamentary Secretaries issued
by Mr Downer today includes a grand total of 45 people. That is, virtually
everyone who voted for Mr Downer last Monday, plus two presumably Dr
Hewson and Dr Wooldridge.
The ethnic community will also note with concern that Mr Downer has not
included Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in his Shadow Cabinet, relegating it
to the outer shadow ministry.
The appointment of Dr Hewson to the Industry portfolio will underwhelm many
in the business community, who withdrew their support for Dr Hewson so
pointedly last week. The car industry, for one, will not relish dealing with the
man who wanted to impose Fightback's zero tariff policy, thereby rendering
our motor vehicle Industry uneconomic and driving it offshore.
Mr Downer needs to try harder.
CANBERRA 26 MAY, 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH SARAH HENDERSON, 3AW, MELBOURNE
FRIDAY 27 MAY, 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
SH. Mr Keating, could I start by asking you about Bronwyn Bishop, she's
made some comments this morning about tobacco sponsorship and
about the fact that perhaps there needs to be a case made out that
tobacco is a dreadful product. What are your views about this?
PM: Well, this is a debate which was won 20 years ago. And, this is the
point I've been making all week about the supposedly new-look Liberal
Party this is the old-look Liberal Party with all these old-look views.
And, Mr Downer's given this important job in social policy, health, to
Bronwyn Bishop and her first utterance is that she supports advertising
of cigarette products knowing that the target of the advertising is
essentially young men and women who the cigarette companies want
to recruit to their ranks. And, the linkages between cigarette smoking
and cancer and other deleterious effects are so obvious that beating
that kind of a drum when the debate was over so long ago, I think,
means that Mr Downer has made a mistake in giving her the job.
SH: She's been in the job for less than one day, should she go?
PM: I think she ought to go, yes. What point of credibility is there for
somebody who is an experienced political person saying, in a key job
like responsibility for health in a Shadow Cabinet, debating, whether or
not tobacco is deleterious to people's health. And, arguing that
because it's sold legally they ought to be able to advertise it. It's
outrageous. It's just, simply, outrageous and I just think Mr Downer
should say, " Look, Bronwyn, I'm sorry about this but you just, simply,
ought to have more sense and if you haven't got that much sense,
goodbye, I don't need you." 
SH: Mr Keating, could I raise the issue of business investment with you.
There are obviously fairly alarming figures for the government, the
whole premise of the Budget is based on the estimate that there'll be a
14.5 per cent increase in business investment, we've just heard that
it's now down by five per cent. Were your predictions about a
turnaround in jobs and also of four and a half per cent growth now
have to be revised?
PM: No, we think they, these are quarterly numbers and they dance around
all the time, but even this number is on track, as the Treasurer said
yesterday, with the Budget forecast of 14.5 per cent. The 14.5 per
cent for this stage of the economic cycle was reasonably down beat on
the Government's part. You saw last week we published the profit
numbers for the quarter, it's the highest share of national income going
to profits in our history. You've got low interest rates, a very good
labour market...
SH: The problem with low interest rates, of course, is that Bernie Fraser
has predicted they will increase, now if they increase surely that's
going to be a bigger deterrent for business not to invest and make it
more difficult to get that 14.5 per cent business investment.
PM: The profits are so big, everything is propitious now for a reasonably
strong surge in investment and we're seeing it basically come through
in employment. We've already had 243,000 jobs, from memory,
243,000 in the last 12 months so the economy is set up I've never
seen a better conjunction, in the 25 years I've been in public life I've
never seen a better conjunction of economic data with inflation, with
growth, the profit figures, of course the growth in exports, it's all there
happening right now.
SH: Is it true though that if you don't get this 14.5 per cent in business
investment that you're not going to get the growth and you're not going
to get the turnaround in jobs, certainly not 2,000,000 jobs by the end of
the century.
PM: It's not all based on business investment, there's housing, there's still a
strong contribution from private consumption, business investment is
just a part of the growth forecast for the year. But, as I say, we've got
realisation factors in there on the investment expectations data way
below the 1 980s outcomes. Let me just go through this point again
we get expectations data from the statistician who polls business and
talks to business and he publishes those. Governments generally then
pick a realisation rate in making their forecasts, that is how much of the
expectation will actually happen. We've got the realisation rate in the
Budget way below what actually happened in the eighties. 
SH: Could I perhaps just point you to the Budget papers because in fact,
Treasury does say that the central feature of the economic outlook is
the substantial pick up in business investment...
PM: That's right...
SH: And that's very much predicated on your whole prediction, isn't it?
PM: I know, but I don't think you look at one quarter's numbers and say,
" Well, that's all wrong." I mean, that's the point you're trying to make
to me and I'm rebutting the point.
SH: So, you're confident that that's going to turn around?
PM: Well, look if you don't get a surge of investment out of a profit share
this high, a dollar this competitive, a labour market this competitive, a
productivity culture like we've never had before you'd just have to put
your glasses down and say, " When would we ever get wouldn't
you? If the profit share is at records beyond any historical experience,
and it is, how high need it go, therefore before we get business
investment? If people are arguing we won't get business investment
now, what, therefore, is the solution? Of course we're going to get it.
SH: Mr Keating, how concerned are you about criticism of the Industrial
Relations Act given that there has been a major backlash by
employers particularly over unfair dismissal provisions? And, also,
Laurie Brereton has conceded that a review of the Act will be required
within the next six months.
PM: Well, I think that what the Government has done here is what needed
to be done 20 years ago in Australia. Can I just say a couple of things
about the current political environment and the labour market because
these points are worth making; Malcolm Fraser is out there this week
as happy as a sand boy, he's got his person up as leader of the Liberal
Party, Mr Downer. He's now arguing, writing articles, going on radio
and television, arguing the kind of case that a kind of country, kind of
policies that Malcolm Fraser always believed in. His government was
an absolute blancmange of a government that stood for nothing and
reformed nothing, including the labour market.
This government has had the difficult job of taking a rigid, centralised
wage fixation system and decentralising it. And, we've done that by
moving away from centralised wage fixing and seeing within-sector
flexibility introduced. This has come in two ways: full enterprise
bargaining for a grass roots investment say, like an industrial
agreement like the Federal Hotels or Toyota where there is a new
plant or a new industry is making a cross industry arrangement
there is a new agreement between the employees and the employer
about improving productivity and splitting that productivity between 
profits and wages. In the reforms introduced last year we've also
introduced within-award flexibility, that is, the people covered by
federal awards, now, an employer without reference to a union can sit
down and negotiate with their employees and cut a new arrangement
to improve the productivity of the business. Now, these are vast
changes and if you look at the states, some of them are beating the
drum about labour market changes like the Kennett government or
the Fahey government in NSW the federal government has a
massive number of industrial agreements now done, Enterprise
bargains under federal awards, the states have got nearly nothing. So,
we're the ones at the cutting edge of this change and you've got
people like Mr Howard and others coming out arguing a case against
us when their party, in government in Victoria and NSW can't even
start in this area can't even get a foothold.
SH: I know on this program I've actually had people calling in, saying,
" Look, I would like to employ people, the traineeships are there, but
the unfair dismissal provisions of this new Act are just too much of a
deterrent, it's too much of a liability." Would you consider in this
review, looking at those again and perhaps modifying those provisions.
PM: Laurie Brereton has said as with all path breaking legislation, the
whole package that he will review it. But, you know, there will
always be some people who will say, " If it wasn't for this, we would do
that... If it wasn't for the exchange rate, if it was competitive, we'd
actually invest", so you give them a competitive exchange rate. " Oh, if
it wasn't for the low profits, we would invest," so you give them a high
profit share. " Oh, look, if it wasn't for the tax system, if it wasn't for the
high corporate tax rate," so you give them a 33 per cent corporate tax
rate. " Oh, if we had faster acceleration depreciation we'd invest in
plant and equipment," so you give them rapid acceleration
depreciation. " Oh, if we had an investment allowance we might
consider investing. If we had enterprise bargaining," yes we've given
them enterprise bargaining. " Oh, well, what you've got to
say hey, hey, hey, come on...
SH: So in this review would you consider looking at these particular
provisions?
PM: What I'm saying is we're not going to be run by people who are
basically offside politically, trying to market themselves as people who
are, that is, people who basically barrack for the Coalition trying to
make a point. In terms of the practical operation of industrial laws this
review Laurie Brereton is speaking of will encompass these things.
But, there can be no apologia for people not investing in a climate, last
this conducive, probably thirty years ago.
SH: Could I just address this specific provision though, because this has
been a major sticking point, particularly for the Australian Chamber of 
Commerce. Would you consider in this review looking again at the
unfair dismissal provision?
PM: Well, that's up to the Minister for Labour but I'm sure, given that there
have been a number of organisations which have raised this with him,
he will look at it, I'm sure.
SH: Mr Keating, we may need to take a quick break, would you mind
staying with us for a few minutes and then we'll be back to talk about
one of your favourite friends, Alexander Downer.
SH: Mr Keating, let's talk about Alexander Downer, some people are saying
that your attack on him and his class and his background...
PM: Hang on, just let me get this right, his attack on me.
SH: Well, you have had a fairly vitriolic attack on him...
PM: No, no, no I haven't
SH: Let's just say, on the Adelaide Club and his background and the fact
that he's come from a very wealthy background embellished in Liberal
roots. Do you think that this has backfired, considering that you are
very much entrenched in things such as Zegna suits and..
PM: I'm very much entrenched in the Family Allowance Supplement, the
Child Support Agency, supplementary payments for low paid women,
Medicare, occupational superannuation for the low paid workforce,
they're the things I am entrenched in, you see, and I'm not going to
have people say that a decade with a social record of the kind of
commitments I have to working Australians, men and women,
particularly on low and middle incomes, are in some ways passed off
or diminished because I happen to be able to admire a picture or
something.
SH: I can understand your view..
PM: Let me just make this point though, you've made a point about a
vitriolic attack I didn't attack him at all. What I said was, all I had to
do was play back to Alexander Downer, John Hewson's words about
the Melbourne Club and he went off like a fire cracker. I mean there is
no steady hand at the wheel here. He went straight on television
talking about my house in Sydney. I never mentioned his house or his
private assets, never. But this is what these Liberals do. Mention a
policy thing and they straight away go at you personally. What I said
was if he wants to talk about, seriously an inclusive society he should
resign from a club which excludes half the population. That is the
point. I mean, how can anybody in 1994 support an institution which
bars half the population and be out there talking about inclusion. In 
other words, I'm making a social and political point. This is not a class
point, this is not vitriol, it's making simply I mean, people these days
don't seem to know what vitriol is it is making a political point. That in
this day and age to say to women you can't be in this club I mean,
he made the point he said ' oh, I guarantee you Keating has never
walked into a club'. I've belonged to a club in Bankstown since I was
21. I've been in it thousands of times. It has got 25,000 members
men and women it is etched in the Liberal party's consciousness
because it was there that I claimed victory in March last year the
Bankstown Sports Club.
It is repugnant to me that this notion of exclusivity that these people
have should be that they can bail themselves up in clubs which
exclude women and then be out there on the political hustings talking
about inclusion. It is simply making a political point.
SH: I understand that you don't like commentators and the media focusing
on your personal assets and on your wealth and that's quite
understandable, Is it not perhaps fair game to stay away from the
personal attack and concentrate on the policies?
PM: Exactly, but what personal attacks do you mean?
SH: Well, you are talking about his wealth..
PM: I have never mentioned his wealth and I have never mentioned his
house. I wouldn't know where he lives.
SH: Well, you are painting it very much as that's how..
PM: Understand this. Alexander Downer went on two television programs
the night after last when I had the temerity to repeat what John
Hewson said about the Melbourne Club being critical in his selection,
that is, the inner sanctum of the Victorian Liberal party, Malcolm
Fraser, Staley, Ron Walker, Andrew Peacock, all these people, Jeff
Kennett, and when I said that what was his response? ' Oh, Keating
lives in a house in Elizabeth Bay with outlooks to the harbour' which it
doesn't have. You know of my investment in a piggery, my first and
only one in 22 years of public life. I mean, the fact is, as soon as you
raise a political point against these characters, they are so thin
skinned they go off like a cracker. And he went off with an attack on
me. And then the next day I said well, hang on, you're talking about
inclusiveness, do you think you can really talk about inclusiveness with
any credibility when you belong to a club that won't let half the
population into it.
SH: Can I read this letter to you. This is a letter to the Sydney Morning
Herald and it is by someone named ' if Mr Keating believes Mr
Downer should resign from the Adelaide Club because it does not omit 
women, then shouldn't he resign from the Catholic church. Its refusal
to admit women to the ministry is also sexist or are there different
interpretations where Mr Keating is concerned?.'
PM: Look, I'm not here to have a religious discussion about the Catholic
church. The fact of the matter is in this day and age I spent my life
trying to look after the interests of lower and middle income Australians
giving them access to health, to employment, to a decent social
security system, and to decent income support in things like the Family
Allowance Supplement, the Home Child care Allowance and more
recently, of course, in the White Paper where we are picking up the
long term unemployed. Now, my credentials are as clear as day and
nobody is going to diminish those in a decade of social reform by
making some reference to me and a French clock. It is just nonsense.
But the simple point is this, that if Mr Downer seeks to be running the
notion of inclusiveness, he's got to understand that you might get away
with belonging to an outfit like the Adelaide Club when you . are a
backbencher, but if you are the leader of a major party, you can't go
out then and say I'm interested in the interests of half the population of
women, but by the way, I won't let one of them into my club.
SH: Could I just ask you this and this is a question that has been raised by
a number of financial commentators talking about personal background
and issues of wealth. A number of commentators have actually said
that in fact Mr Keating is a far more wealthier man than Mr Downer.
PM: That would be patently untrue. Remember this, for eighteen months in
the last Parliament, every sitting day for nearly two years twenty
months I had Senators at the behest of Dr Hewson asking questions
about my investment in a simple piggery. Now, that has never
happened. The Labor party has never done these things. They are
villains these people and they never stop it. But the fact is look, Mr
Downer is now leading a party, he's had the job two days a couple of
days he presents it as a new look team, it is an old look team, he's
got three former opposition leaders, he's got John Hewson saying
yesterday that the front bench was chosen from Downer/ Costello
supporters, he intends to speak widely on any policy matter and
particularly economic matter that comes his way, he was critical on the
diminution of the number of women in the front bench and you've got
Mrs Bishop out there today with her outrageous statements about
cigarettes. What you are going to see very quickly here is not a
smooth change in leadership, but the same old Liberal party we've
seen before. That is, people claiming territory as Dr Hewson is
already doing. Mr Downer is saying it's a leaner party. He's got
people on the front bench or as Parliamentary secretaries, he's got as
many people that voted for him. The antithesis of discipline is to give
virtually everybody who voted for you a job in the executive. 
SH: Mr Keating, would you like to see the personal attacks on both sides
from the Prime Minister and from the Leader of the Opposition taken
out of politics given that Mr Downer has accused you of starting a
class war on this issue?
PM: I reject that absolutely. What I've had the temerity to do is repeat what
John Hewson said and John Hewson said " this choice next week" he
said this last Friday " will be between a party which is open and
inclusive, a leader which is elected on that basis or one selected by
the Melbourne Club" or the Melbourne business and political
establishment that's what he said. I had the temerity to repeat it and
I'm not going to, in a sense, in any way resile from making this point
clear to the electorate, just where Mr Downer has come from. Now, let
me just say about political attacks as distinct from personal that is,
references to ones home, money, that sort of thing I've suffered more
of that than any one in public life over twenty odd years.
SH: Well, would you like to see that changed?
PM: All I'm seeing here is Mr Downer just picking up the threads of where
Dr Hewson left of. Within an hour or two of him getting the leadership,
what's his first to reference to: my house in Sydney?
SH: But that was only in response to your criticism of his membership of
the Adelaide Club.
PM: But, not his house or Look, if I can't get this through anyone else's
head, I'm determined to get it through yours. Not about him
personally, it is about his position in society and the exclusive position
he claims to hold in the nature of his selection. This is a political point.
It is not a personal point. That's the point.
SH: Mr Keating, can I raise something else with you. This is a report in the
Herald-Sun. Can I just read this to you after a surmptious dinner at
the Lodge one night, Paul Keating ordered the staff to lay out all the
antique silver cutlery on the table because he wanted to play..
PM: I saw that, that's from Niki Savva.
SH: I just wanted to find out..
PM: Look its headed " Downer Wins in a Class War' from Niki Savva.
SH: But, let me just explain to people what I'm talking about..
PM: Niki laying out all the silver antique cutlery there isn't any in the
Lodge for a start. I mean, the Lodge was built in 1927 and anything
that goes.. 
SH: We just need to explain to people what we are talking about. The gist
of the story is that there was a guessing game on the make and the
origins of the silver cutlery in the Lodge and I was curious to know
whether, in fact, that was true?
PM: No. Look, the thing is, ' Downer Wins in a Class War' says Niki Savva.
Niki is basically an apologist for the Liberal party and she is going to
fall in behind Mr Downer wherever she gets an opportunity and this
piece is just another one of those.
SH: So, there were no guessing games with the silver cutlery?
PM: No, the thing is look, the fact of the matter is this, and to what point.
Let's say to what point.
SH: I'm simply asking you I mean it seems an unusual sort of dinner
party game..
PM: And see what she says. She goes on to say ' his opponent was the
Queen'. Well, I've never had the Queen to the Lodge. The Queen has
never been to the Lodge. So, Niki's husband is a key member of the
Liberal party, so Niki writes what comes from the federal secretary or
her husband.
SH: Do it didn't happen?
PM: It is just not true.
SH: Can we end, we've only got a few minutes, can I end by asking you
about D-Day. On 6 June you will be attending a monument to typhoon
pilots. You, of course, were fairly young and perhaps too young to
remember the war. What does D-Day mean to you?
PM: What it means to me is, I think, the triumph of the democracies over
totalitarianism and fascism in Europe and the fact that it was typified by
the largest military assembly of military might and a landing at a point
to reclaim Europe so dramatically, so pungently, if you like expressed
in that military operation. I think, it says, perhaps encapsulates what
the Second World War was about first of all the encroachment on
countries and then their conquering by Hitler. The fact it then had
continental Europe bar Russia, of course, tied up and then the repulse
coming from the D-Day landings. So, in many ways, I think, if one has
to have a mind snapshot of the liberation of Europe and the triumph of
the democracies over fascism it is D-Day.
SH: And what role will Australia be playing in all of this?
PM: I was invited by the President of France and the Prime Minister of
Britain because of Australia's involvement in the Second World War 
generally in Europe and, of course, in two wars in Europe within
years. In Europe and for the Battle of Britain, in the Middle East and,
of course, as you know the Pacific.
SH: And, do you think this will renew a lot of the thoughts and the
memories that Australians have of that time, do you think that's going
to be a major stumbling block in recognising what role Australia
played.
PM: No, I think that the 50th anniversary celebrations of heroic deeds by
Australians or remembrances of heroic deeds by Australians in Papua
New Guinea, in Singapore, throughout South-east Asia, in the defence
of this country which occurred, of course, in the last 12 to 18 months,
of the period of assault between 1942 and 1943, so, for the last two or
three years we've had a role, if you like over a three year period, a role
in the 50th anniversary. That plus the Entombment of the Unknown
Soldier, I think, has brought back vividly to Australians the courageous
role Australians have played in defence of liberty. This was never
about a centimetre of Australian soil. We've always gone out there
and fought because we were indignant about the way others are being
treated. This is most particularly so in Europe.
SH: Mr Keating, we'll have to leave it there. Thank you very much for
coming in today.
PM: Thank you, Sarah.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, SALVATION ARMY CENTRE, MELBOURNE,
FRIDAY, 27 MAY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Let me just say a couple of things about the Salvation Army and what
you've just seen here. These are the sorts of things which Australia
needs to do to encourage those who have missed out in society and
missed out in the work force, who are untrained or who are homeless
and how the White Paper which the Government introduced two weeks
ago can help to see people case managed, trained, placed in a job
and where, as a society, we pick them up and we don't just forget them
as the rest of us move on into the recovery of the 1990s. So, the
Salvation Army as a voluntary organisation will be a case management
agency and one of the challenges to the Government now is to build
the administrative system to deliver all the White Paper policies. And
it will be with organisations like the Salvation Army that this will
happen and the sort of co-operative, interested work which you are
seeing here where there is not the rigidities of the work place that a lot
of the benefits of self esteem and experience, these are the things
which, I think, the long term unemployed, the homeless because the
thing you've got to remember about a lot of people who are homeless,
particularly kids, you've got to be awfully street smart to survive.
They're mostly very intelligent and it is a matter of focussing their
intelligence into things which they can do and this is what this is about.
So, I'm looking forward to seeing a change in the next couple of years
in the way in which we introduce the White Paper, apply the White
Paper to the problems of the unemployed in this country. And, what
I've seen today, here, is a tremendous example of the innovation which
the Salvation Army has been able to bring to helping homeless kids,
people who have been institutional ised get experience, get their self
esteem up, make products that actually sell and run as a business, Of
course, it has grown here by about 300 per cent, the turnover here, in
the last year or two. 
J: Prime Minister, on issues like this where you are relying on voluntary
agencies like the Salvation Army to do so much, they are finding their
funding base increasingly difficult the Red Shield Appeal was down
for instance what happens when these agencies can't meet the need
that is confronting them?
PM: We will be paying case managers on a fee basis. We have set up an
organisation to actually operate the case management business as a
market. This organisation called ESRA which will see the
development of a case management agency in competition with the
CES. So, we will actually be paying a fee, we won't be simply saying
to organisations like the Salvation Army, you cover the industry cost of
it. In other words, it will be in the interest of voluntary agencies to
actually take up the White Paper proposal.
J: Mr Keating, are you impressed so far by the performance of the-
Opposition's new frontbench?
PM: I must say I thought if Mr Downer is starting to say that he is going to
show some strength, he could start by dismissing Senator Bishop from
the position of Shadow Health Minister. I mean, for somebody trying
now to run an argument which was won in this country 20 years ago,
that there are very clear links between smoking and health, smoking
and cancer, I should have thought there are some things where people
get things wrong, and in the tolerance of public life you can say well,
that's one they got wrong, but ok, then move on. But, you don't get a
thing like this wrong. This is just plain negligence, incredible
negligence and a terrible arrogance speaking to buttress the interests
of cigarette companies against the common good of the community. I
think, Mr Downer ought to say, look I'm sorry about this Bronwyn, this
is going to hurt me as much as it is going to hurt you, but out you go.
J: Mr Downer said though, he is not going to do anything you tell him and
that actually you are engaging in 1930 style class war rhetoric in your
attacks on him.
PM: I know, and don't the media run some of that simple simon stuff. Look,
I made two points which he says are class war tactics. They are not at
all. One is, I repeated what Dr Hewson said that Mr Downer's
leadership was decided by an exclusive group of the Victorian Liberal
party that is simply just a point of fact. The second point I made is I
don't believe that any leader of a major party today, in 1994, ought to
belong to clubs that exclude women. I mean, what sort of society
would we be if the policy behind that kind of intolerance were to be
applied generally in the community. I noticed Mr Downer has run
around saying I've never been to a club and everything like this, look,
the fact is the club I belong to and I've gone into thousands of times in
my life, a club that must be burnt into the Liberal party's memory where
I accepted victory on election night the Bankstown Sports Club in
Sydney 25,000 members, men and women who participate freely and 
enjoy each others company. But, the notion there is some sort of basis
of superiority and a basis of privilege, wherein a club or its
membership say to women you can't be involved here is something
that the Downer's didn't tolerate.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: Just understand this, don't let Mr Downer pass this off as some class
matter. This has got nothing to do with class, it is simply to do with
social comment. It is a matter of a social point to be made and the
social point is that women should not be excluded from institutions in
our country, least of all, of course, clubs.
J: in parliament?
PM: I've been in public life for 25 years and I've faced them all.
J: Do you think the new Opposition front bench is looking a bit tougher
than the front bench you've had to face in the past?
PM: Well, are we talking about toughness or crassness? Because if
barracking for cigarette companies against the interests of young
Australians, who are basically who they are trying to hook into the
habit of smoking, if that's tough, well, that's not the sort of toughness
Australian politics needs. I would have thought, also, the appointment
of Mr McLachlan as the environment spokesman, just laughs at every
person that has a serious interest in the environment. So, there are a
lot of, I think, poorly placed people here. But I noticed Dr Hewson said
that he was making it very clear that he thought there was a lot of
preference here, they were very pointed comments by Dr Hewson.
Yesterday he said well, a lot of people who supported Mr Downer have
been rewarded here and then he went on to say some other things, but
he made the point that he didn't think it was appropriate. It is not going
to be an entirely happy little gathering.
J: ( inaudible) and right across Mr Downer's agenda ( inaudible
PM: Yes, you see that's what Dr Hewson did say. He's expecting to speak
across the agenda and he's there basically to you see Mr Downer is
trying to say we're going to run a broad inclusive kind of policy which,
by the way, doesn't include women in particular places, but an
inclusive policy while all the drys in the economic area sit in the key
economic jobs and they're saying Fightback, which they committed
themselves to absolutely including Mr Downer, who is now trying to
reform himself as a dry.. you see, you've got this terrible dichotomy..
Malcolm Fraser has made his leadership by recruiting Mr Staley and
all of them in Melbourne getting him up. Malcolm has never been
happier than the last week. This is Malcolm's best week since 1983.
He is as happy as a sand boy, he's got Mr Downer up, he can't stop
smiling, he's writing columns, he's on radio stations, he's doing press 
comment, he's in seventh heaven. Now, the Fraser government was
the blancmange government of the post-war years. The government
that did nothing. So, Mr Downer is going to be the leader of a
government like Mr Fraser, but he's got all the hard edged economic
guys in the economic jobs who believe in Fightback. So, Fightback
has been on the scrap metal heap, but will soon be seeing all the tin
men of Fightback crawling out of the heap, coming back. Because
that's basically all the Liberals believe in. They believe in the hard
edged economic things of Fightback as their leader is now trying to put
another complexion on the hard edged philosophy of Fightback. Now,
remember this, the hard things about Fightback were not simply the
consumption tax, but the $ 10,000 million cuts to government spending
that would affect the whole social welfare system and organisations of
the kind we've seen today. All that is still there. Mr Downer told us
that a week ago in the Budget reply, that he is going to basically base
his changes on cuts to government spending. He calls it efficiencies in
government. Read: efficiencies for cutting into the social wage.
So, just understand the contradictions here. You've got Mr Downer
seeking to emulate Mr Fraser in, if you like, the broad rhetoric, but the
non-reformist policies of the Fraser years coupled with all the hard
edged people put into the economic jobs who are all inherent to
Fightback. Now, you know what that means for the rest of you I can
tell you fun and games. Fun and games as this dichotomy emerges
over time. They have to be one thing or the other.
J: ( inaudible) Downer a formidable opponent, what do you think
about that?
PM: Well, why should I take any notice of that. Paul ( Kelly) also thought
they were going to win the last election.
ends 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ZIONIST FEDERATION OF AUSTRALIA
36TH BIENNIAL CONFERENCE
HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE
28 MAY 1994
I am always grateful to be invited to speak to the biennial meeting of the
Zionist Federation of Australia.
This is the third time I have had the opportunity to address you. As a record,
it doesn't go near matching Mark Leibler's but it is enough to make me feel at
home here.
It is particularly good to be talking to you this year, when so many of the
Federation's long-standing goals seem closer to realisation, and when the
signs for a more peaceful and secure future in the Middle East appear better
than they have for years.
The changes in the world since the end of the Cold War have sometimes
startled even the most hardened sceptic.
What seemed impossible is now familiar the democratic revolutions in
Eastern Europe and Russia; the pace of economic growth in China and
Vietnam as they have dropped the old tenets of central planning; the
progress towards settlement of apparently intractable conflicts in regions such
as Cambodia.
And most recently, of course, we have seen Nelson Mandela's historic
election as President of South Africa.
None of these changes has been accomplished without difficulty. All of them
generate new sets of problems.
But the astonishing thing, when you look back ten years, is that they have
happened. So it is with the Middle East. 
Mark Leibler uses the right phrase In his President's Report to you this year
when he says that, with the Madrid Peace Conference in October 1991, the
Middle East entered a new epoch.
The lessons of history and the lessons of history in the Middle East more
than elsewhere are that we would be wise to temper our optimism with
realistic caution.
And for the key participants, the stakes are so high that prudence is always
called for.
However, with agreement on the Declaration of Principles between Israel and
the PLO on 13 September last year, an~ d the signing of the agreement for
autonomy in Gaza and Jericho, it is possible to have expectations, as well as
hope, for a more peaceful future in the region.
As I said in Parliament on 5 May, Australia warmly welcomed the autonomy
agreement. It is a real milestone in the quest for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East
and a tribute to the leadership of Prime Minister Rabin and PLO
C hairman Arafat, who held their nerve in the face of terrorist attacks by
violent opponents determined to disrupt the process.
Anybody looking for a reason to break off the negotiations would have found
many. It was no time for faint hearts.
The result is also, of course, a tribute to the untiring work of other
peacemakers, like Shimon Peres.
Now we look to the next stages of the process to agreements which will
bring a lasting peace with Israel's neighbours, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon,
and to the successful completion of the next round of Palestinian autonomy
negotiations.
With same contrast, Australia's international Interests lie overwhelmingly in
the Asia-Pacific region. That is where we do three-quarters of our trade.
That is where our key security interests are engaged.
That is where our future lies.
But we cannot and should not ignore the Middle East. The stakes there in
both strategic and human terms are so great as to Impose their significance
on all the areas and members of the international community.
That is why the Australian Government is keen to see the cause of peace so
actively supported. 
And our help has been of the most practical kind.
It Is seen in our three-year, $ 15_-mil -lion program of assistance to economic
development in Gaza and the West Bank for such things as training, health,
sanitation and water resources.
The success of autonomy will depend heavily on whether these basic
services can be delivered.
It is seen in our participation In the working groups on Arms Control and
Regional Security and on Water Resources, which have been ' set up as part
of the peace process.
It is seen in our military commitment to the Sinai MFO, now under Australian
command, which helps maintain confidence on the border between Israel and
Egypt.
And, not least, it is seen In the work of individual Australians and Australian
non-government organisations who have dedicated themselves to improving
conditions on the ground for ordinary citizens.
It is a welcome truth and a reflection of the changes at work in the region
that the views of the Jewish community and the Australian Government on
issues facing the community and on the Middle East have probably never
been closer.
Nor have the views of the Australian and Israeli Governments.
But even when in the past we have disagreed with particular policies of
individual Israeli Governments, we have never wavered and will never
waver from our commitment to Israel's right to exist within secure and
recognised borders.
And, beyond that familiar phrase, we will never waver from a deeper
conviction that the international community Is a better place, a more decent
place, for the contribution Israel has made and will yet make.
That is why we have been so willing to work to ensure Israel's full
engagement in the mainstream of International activity.
It is why we worked so hard with Israel to rescind the odious United Nations
resolution 3379, which equated Zionism with racism. We voted against its
adoption in 1975, and we co-sponsored its rescission in 1991.
It Is why we have supported Israel's efforts to broaden its diplomatic ties in
the Asia-Pacific. 
It Is why we continue to be active In making representations to the Syrian
Government regarding the welfare of Jews in Syria.
It Is why we urge Arab governments to lift their anachronistic and
counterproductive economic boycott of Israel.
Uke any strong relationship, our friendship with Israel is given weight and
value by the ties which exist beyond the actions of Governments, between
the people of our two countries.
The Zionist Federation of Australia has been an essential element of this
facet of our relationship, of course.
I want to note here the major role which Mark Leibler and the Federation
played in keeping the problem of UN Resolution 3379 at the forefront of
public debate in Australia and before the Australian Parliament where both
Houses voted unanimously in favour of the efforts to rescind the resolution.
Similarly, your Federation has done important work in sensitising Australian
opinion to the injustice of the Arab economic boycott of Israel.
But a lot of the Federation's most Important work has been in relation to our
own society.
On these questions, our views are close.
For this Government, the promotion of tolerance and respect for cultural and
religious differences, and a decent concern for the other members of this
diverse society, is at the core of our view of what It means to be Australian.
The Government continues to believe in the importance of involving
community groups in the development of policies.
Some of you will know that the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,
Senator Bolkus, will be appointing in the near future a Multicultural Advisory
Council. Helene Teichrnann will be well aware of this, because I was
delighted to hear that she has accepted an invitation to be a member.
The Council will advise the Government on specific matters such as the
cultural diversity dimensions of the Centenary of Federation and the Sydney
2000 Olympics, as well as on the means of fostering greater debate and
better understanding about Australia's cultural diversity.
I should note, in speaking of Senator Bolkus, that this Government continues
to regard Immigration and Ethnic Affairs as sufficiently Important to warrant
the attention of a senior Cabinet Minister. 
We are preparing to take a further step to safeguard our record of tolerance
with the introduction shortly of nationai legislation on racial vilification.
The Australian concept of tolerance embraces freedom of opinion and
freedom of expression. These are fundamental to our sense of ourselves.
However, some forms of expression are sufficiently offensive to be intolerable
in a decent society.
This was brought home to me when I opened the Children of the Holocaust
exhibition at the Australian War Memorial in February. The suggestionby
some that the Holocaust never happened fosters incipient racism and, in the
eyes of the Australian community, is obnoxious.
Mnother example was the jailing of people for a series of violent attacks in
Perth inspired on racial grounds.
While most Australians are offended by the racial aspect of those crimes, the
perpetrators were jailed under laws which do not recognise that aspect of
their behaviour.
Racial vilification and racial violence are offensive to the Australian
community. Our laws must reflect that.
The racial vilification laws will dissuade those who seek to incite violence and
hatred against particular groups defined by ethnic origin.
The existence of a legal prohibition should of itself persuade most of the
intolerant to think twice before parading their prejudices.
It will ensure that those invited to publish racist slurs have a legal ground for
refusing. But there will still be breaches of the law, and the Cabinet is considering how
they will be dealt with.
We are not interested in elevating racists to the status of martyrs.
But the vicious and the reckless who would attack Individual groups must be
made to know that they are assaulting the values of the entire community and
that there is a price to pay.
The very existence of such a law is a public and collective statement by the
community that there are types of behaviour it will not tolerate.
By taking such a step we will reassert the value our community places on
tolerance and respect. 
For the past ten years, Mark Leibler has been at the forefront of the Zionist
Federation of Australia's efforts to promote the cause of closer ties between
Australia and Israel, and the aspirations of the Jewish community in Australia.
I first met Mark about eight years ago, talking not about the Federation or
about Israel, but about taxation reform in Australia The work we were
engaged in then and since was not quite as difficult as reconciling the
interests of Israelis and Arabs, but it sometimes seemed the views of the
participants were just as resistant to change.
Ten years is a long time at the top of an organisation like this.
It is a tribute to Mark's skill and his commitment that the Federation has
remained throughout that period so lively and influential an organisation. If
the Government has not always agreed with Mark and the Federation, noone
should ever think it was because your President and his team failed to
carry your views forcefully even relentlessly to us in Canberra.
So I want to add my voice to all those congratulating him.
The contribution he has made over that decade has not been simply to the
Federation and the Jewish community. It has been a much broader
contribution to public debate in Australia about some of the key issues
affecting the nature of this society.
It Is a contribution he can be proud of, and for which we are all grateful. We
look forward to just as productive a relationship with his successor, and to our
continuing dialogue with the Zionist Federation of Australia. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIE MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SOUTH AFRICA REJOINS THE COMMONWEALTH
I warmly welcome the announcement that South Africa has been re-admidtted into the
Commonwealth of Nations from which the former regime withdrew in 196 1.
In rejoining the Commonwealth, President Mandela's Government of National Unity
has acknowledged the substantial contribution the organisation has made over the
years to the successful transition to democracy. Australia has been proud to be part of
this process.
We believe the Commonwealth can continue to play a useful role in helping South
Africa in the post-apartheid period.
I look forward with pleasure to South Afica's participation in the Commonwealth
Games in Canada and to President Mandela's attendance at the Commonwealth Heads
of Government Meeting in Auckland next year.
CANBERRA May 31, 1994 



PRIME MINISTER 48/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AGREEMENT WITH THE ACTU TO IMPLEMENT ACCORD MARK 7
The Treasurer, Ralph Willis, the Minister for Industrial Relations, Laurie Brereton, and
I met today with the ACTU's Wages Negotiating Committee to discuss the
implementation of Accord Mark 7, " Putting Jobs First".
The Accord partners reaffirmed Accord Mark 7, particularly its objectives of achieving
a minimum of 500,000 net additional jobs over the three years to 1996 and cementing
low inflation as a feature of the Australian economy. The Government proposed, and
the ACTU agreed, that a package involving the two remaining Safety Net Wage
Adjustments in Accord Mark 7 should, in this International Year of the Family, also
incorporate consideration of direct assistance to workers with family responsibilities.
The partners agreed:
to support before the Australian Industrial Relations Commuission second and
third Safety Net Wage Adjustments of $ 8.00 per week not before 1 July 1994
and 1 July 1995 respectively, to be applied where agreement at enterprise level
is not achievable in line with the processes set out in Accord Mark 7.
that there should be a minimum period of 6 months between the first ( already
achieved) and second safety net adjustments and a minimum period of 12
months between the second and third safety net adjustments; and
that for next year's Budget, the Government will have further negotiations with
the ACTU about ways to assist families, and in that context give consideration
to introducing a maternity allowance paid through the Social Security system,
in the spirit of 110 Convention 103 ( Maternity Protection).
This is a landmark agreement in the Accord mould which provides a sure foundation
for sustaining the low inflation recovery in which the essential and characteristic
Australian concerns for social equity continue to be addressed.
A copy of the Agreement concluded today is attached.
CANBERRA I JUNE 1994 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE FEDERAL LABOR GOVERNMENT AND
THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL
OF TRADE UNIONS REGARDING CONTINUING
IMPLEMENTATION OF ACCORD MARK 7
" PUTTING JOBS FIRST" Canberra, I June 1994
The Accord partners hereby reiterate and reaffirm their shared commnitment to
promoting sustainable job growth and substantially reducing unemployment.
Accord Mark 7 " Putting Jobs First" was agreed in February 1993, to apply for the
period 1993-1996 upon re-election of the Labor Government.
In the Accord tradition " Putting Jobs First" is a comprehensive approach to economic
and social policy, based on co-operation not conflict. Its basic objectives are:
to increase employment by a minimum 500,000 net additional jobs over three
years; to maintain low levels of inflation;
to continue the devolution of wage fixation by encouraging bargaining at
industry and workplace levels involving employees and their unions;
to ensure that all workers are protected by a safety net of minimum award
wages and conditions and have access to arbitration;
to provide access to arbitrated safety net award adjustments;
to increase living standards over time through:
increases in real wages associated with improving productivity and
implementing flexibility at industry and workplace levels consistent with
the objective of low inflation;
further improvements in the social wage, including substantial tax cuts,
child care improvements, education and training;
to provide a solid foundation for a long term retirement policy by improving
the level of employer provided superannuation support in line with the SGC
schedule;
to continue the process of increasing equity in pay and conditions of
employment for women workers;
to give further consideration to measures designed to assist workers with
family responsibilities. 
Accord Mark 7 commits the Labor Government to " gearing the policy instruments at
its disposal towards achieving a minimum of 500,000 net additional jobs" over the
three years to 1996. The ACTU considers that the Working Nation package, together
with the federal Budget, Uly reflects that commitment.
With more than 230,000 additional jobs created since February 1993, the Accord
partners agree that the recovery is on track to surpass the minimum target of 500,000
additional jobs.
Moreover, the Training Wage Award, combined with the White Paper package, will
enable Australia to attack directly that hard-core problem of long-term unemployment
in a uniquely Australian way, improving equity in the community and efficiency in the
national economy.
Accord Mark 7 commits the union movement to work towards " wage outcomes which
are consistent with Australia maintaining an inflation rate comparable with those of our
major trading partners". The Labor Government considers that the track record of low
inflation rates achieved in Australia in the early 1990s fully reflects that commitment.
The Accord partners agree that the 1 990s must cement low inflation as a feature of the
Australian economy.
Workplace bargaining is proceeding consistent with the broad Accord framework
subject to the effective safety net provided uniquely in Australia by the award system.
The first safety net wage increase contemplated in Accord Mark 7 has been achieved,
albeit not in the agreed form. The parties remain committed to the process as agreed
in Accord Mark 7, and will support access to the Accord Safety Net Adjustments
( including the first) for all groups unable to reach an enterprise agreement, recognising
there shall be no double counting.
It is appropriate, in view of the continuing economic recovery and continuing
achievement of the Accord's key objectives, that the quantum of the second and third
Safety Net Wage Adjustments now be agreed between the parties, so the matter can be
progressed expeditiously through the Australian Industrial Relations Commission.
The Labor Government has proposed, and the ACTU has agreed, that a package
involving the two remaining Safety Net Adjustments should, in this International Year
of the Family, also incorporate consideration of direct assistance to workers with
family responsibilities.
Such an initiative is envisaged and embraced by Accord Mark 7' s key objectives. It
complements and builds upon other initiatives, namely the significant increase in
payments to low income families and in the number of child care places; the child care
rebate which recognises that the cost of child care as an expense in earning an income;
and the Home Child Care Allowance and Parenting Allowance which redirect
assistance to parents caring for children at home. 
3
In agreeing to consider initiatives to directly assist workers with family responsibilities
as part of an Accord package, the Government sought the unions' agreement to Safety
Net Adjustments less than the maximum contemplated in Accord Mark 7. In view of
the low inflation outlook, the ACTU has agreed.
Accordingly: The Accord partners will support before the AIRC second and third Safety Net
Wage Adjustments of $ 8.00 per week not before 1 July 1994 and I July 1995
respectively, to be applied ( consistent with the Accord framework) where
agreement at enterprise level is not achievable in line with the processes set out
in Accord Mark 7, at paragraphs 5.10 5.13;
there should be a minimum period of 6 months between the first and second
safety net adjustments and a mninimum period of 12 months between the second
and third safety net adjustments;
for next year's Budget, the Government will have further negotiations with the
ACTU about ways to assist families, and in that context give consideration to
introducing a maternity allowance paid through the Social Security system, in
the spirit of 110 Convention 103 ( Maternity Protection).
This is a landmark Agreement in the Accord mould which provides a sure foundation
for a sustained low inflation recovery in which the essential and characteristic
Australian concerns for social equity remain in the policy mainstream. 


The Australian Flag issue raised today in Question Time was debated at&nbsp;length on 28 April 1992. At the time the then Leader of the Opposition, Dr&nbsp;Hewson, described the issue as a " distraction".
The Australian Flag was first proclaimed in 1953. Before that date there were&nbsp;three flags available for official use: The Union Jack, British Red Ensign&nbsp;( with Southern Cross), and the British Blue Ensign ( with Southern Cross),which is the flag as flown today.
The Prime Minister's statements today are consistent with the DAS&nbsp;publication, The Australian Flag, and are supported by the publication, I, by Ausflag Limited:
" Australians have not always fought under the present flag. Indeed the&nbsp;only war ( undeclared) where that was definitively the case was the&nbsp;Vietnam War. The Union Jack was the only flag used on our side&nbsp;during the Boer War, the Union Jack was again predominant in the&nbsp;First World War ( it being the senior flag until 1953). And there was&nbsp;confusion among the Union Jack, the Defaced Red Ensign and the&nbsp;Defaced Blue Ensign. The famous Changi Flag, which flew at the&nbsp;liberation of Singapore in 1945 was a Red Ensign. The United Nations&nbsp;flag was the flag we fought under in the Korean War".
CANBERRA2 June1994
See Hansard Debate 2 June 1994
See Hansard Debate 28 April 1992
&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THE HON P J
KEATING, MP AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE UNITED KINGDOM,
THE RIGHT HON. J MAJOR, MP
DOWNING STREET, LONDON, UK
FRIDAY, 3 JUNE, 1994
JM. rm delighted to see the Prime Minister here. He's here of course for
the D-Day celebrations and we're delighted to see him here. We all
owe a very great debt of gratitude to the many Australian servicemen
who played such a remarkable role in that operation and in other parts
of the war. We've had the opportunity of beginning our bilateral
discussions; we hope to continue them, perhaps in more informal
settings over the weekend.
We have no bilateral problems worth mentioning; there's an extremely
good relationship. Trade between our two countries has been growing
very substantially both ways. In terms of trade flows and investment
flows and we're very attracted to that trend continuing and have been
examining how we might improve it. We've had the opportunity of
reviewing the outcome of the GATT negotiations and are looking
forward to the establishment of the World Trade Organisation, There
have been a series of other regionaldiscussloni on the opportunities
for further trade within the ASEAN region, looking at countries of
mutual interest China and others spring to mind so it has been a
welcome opportunity to exchange views and I'm delighted the Prime
Minister could be here. I'll Invite him just to say a word and we'll then
take any questions you may have.
PK: Thank you, Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister said, we've both
agreed there is no problem of substance in the relationship. Our two.
way trade is growing stronger every year. Australia Is the fourth
largest investor in Britain and Britain is the second largest investor in
Australia, and our two-way investment that is, the Australia-Britain
two-way investment Is the largest Investment relationship Britain has
and the largest investment relationship Australia has. So, that, I think,
underlines the relationship In commercial terms.
In cultural terms I think that it is an ' important opportunity, which I
welcome, to Join with the Prime Minister In these D-Day 
commemorations and at least he was kind enough to refer to the role
Australians had played. And, I will take the opportunity. as I will now.
In saying that we will take this chance to pay tribute to Britain and
Britons, In the fight for the democracies against fascism In Europe to
load that fight, to carry the brunt of It, and as a consequence leave
open the prospect of the landings in Normandy and the successful
defeat of Nazism in Europe. so, rm looking forward to that opportunity
over the weekend.
The Prime Minister end I discussed, as he said, the outcome of the
GATT. We've also discussed some of the social and political parallels
In Australia In social and economic policy, and there are quite a
number of profound ones. And, as he said, we'll take up the rest of the
conversation over the course of the weekend.
JM: Now we can ( ake a couple of questions if there are any.
J: Mr Keating, I wonder given our long historical association with Britain,
whether you Informed Mr Major that you wished to change the
Austraia~ n flqg by taking the Union Jack out of the corner and I
wonder, Mr Major, how you might react to that?
PK: Well, this is not an active matter in Australia and hasn' been... for the
Prime Minister's benefit, I was asked a question about this In
Parliament the other day by our Opposition and that's promoted this
question Which I have no more to say about than I said then or as I
have said on many other occasions.
J: Prime Minister Keating, did you discuss the developments in North,
Korea and what is your vlew?
I
PK We didn't but I'm sure the Prime Minister and I would share a similar
view that the defuellIng of reactors in North Korea should be subject to
International inspections, that there must be a clear understanding on
the part of the International Atomic Energy Agency that there Is not
diversion of weapons and, at least for Australiao's part, we stand ready
to join any international decision the United Nations might make
Including sanctions which make the North Koreans accountable In
terms of their nuclear facilities.
J: Would Prime Minister Major regret the fact of Australia removing the
Union Jack from the corner of ( he Australian national flag?
JM: I think that is a matter for Australia. Australia is a very remarkable
country, nothing that happens In any way Is going to damage the
Instinctive relationship and the trade relationship that exists between
the United Kingdom and Australia. It has been there, It Is very strong
and it Isn't going to change In the future. Thank you vary much.
PK: Thank you.
e nds. 



' or, S I. 4.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THB PRIM M[ NISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP AT
THE AIR FORCES* NORIAL RUIIYME SATURDAY, 4 JUNE
1994 We have come to Runnymede on the fiftieth anniversary of
D-Day to pay tribute to some of tWose who gave their
rives in defence of liberty.
We honour all those whose memory is preserved here.
Never were men braver or more selfless. They gave their
lives so that we might enjoy freedom.
We honour in particular our countrymen: those Australians
who left their homes and all they loved to cross the
world and fight in a war against evil.
Their deeds bestowed great honour on Australia, indelible
honour on themselves.
We should tell our children what this var concerned. Why
Australians came to right alongside the British, the
Americans and the Canadians. Why a generation of
Australians believed freedom was worth dying for. Their
spirit can nourish the life of a nation.
Shortly before I left Canberra my office received a
letter from an Australian, Xr Martin Pirrie, whose
father's brother commanded a small coastal craft offt the
coast of Normandy on D Day. It was his 24th birthday. In
support of the Canadians he went within range of the
enemy's guns and, with others of his crew, was killed.
His brother learned of the event while serving with the
Australian infantry in New Guinea. Kr Pirrie wrote:
I cannot help but feel that in many ways young
Richard typified the spirit of those Australians who
fought and died in the war and reflected the values
and spirit of the country they gave their lives for
in a foreign land.
it is true. It is why we remember them wherever they
served. (; 5199 
2
It is appropriate on the eve of D-Day's anniversary that
we pay tribute to all the Australians who served in
European campaigns: those who fought against the odds in
Greece and Crete; those who spent precious years of their
lives in prison camps in Europe; those who served in the
forces of other allied nations; those who fought and died
in the crucial war at sea.
In Australia the memory of every one of them who died is
held sacred: their names are recorded on the walls of the
Australian War Memorial with the 100,000 others who made
the supreme sacrifice for their country.
The names of 1397 Australians more than a quarter of
all our airmen killed in Europe in World War 11 are
inscribed here at Runnymnede. They number among the
eighteen thousand Au4stralian servicemen and women with no
known grave.
The Tomb of the Unknown Australian Soldier is for them.
The principles for which Australians fought in Europe are
universal ones. Liberty, justice and human decency do not
know the boundaries of nations or cultures, any more than
courage and sacrifice know them.
So it is right that they should be honoured here among
those from other countries with whom they fought and died
in common cause.
And it is right that they should be honoured in the
country from which came the most stalwart resistance to
tyranny. For Britain embodied the courage democracy
needed. Britain inspired the tree world and those whose
freedom had been taken from them. There can be no doubt
she inspired those whose names are recorded here.
In the course of the war two Australian Prime Ministers,
Robert Menzies and John Curtin, came to Britain and were
moved by her example.
John Curtin visited shortly before D-Day. When he
returned to Australia, he reminded the Parliament of the
epic dimensions of the British effort. It is worth our
being reminded now.
" They have thwarted an invasion by a great and powerful
continental foe" he said.
At the risk of their local defence they have
conducted campaigns overseas, and are at present
engaged in the greatest of all. They have
maintained command of the sea over a large part of
the globe. They have conducted an air offensive in
Europe. They have produced immense quantities of
munitions and supplies not only for their own
requirements, but for other-members of the United
Nations.
( f0 
4 3
Fifty years later the admiration John Curtin expressed
lives on. It is true that in fundamental ways our future
is less closely intertwined with Britain's than our past.
But whatever different paths we take the history we share
the story we share goes with us. The battles we
fought together will be remembered. The men and women
who fought them will be remembered. And Britain's heroic
defence of freedom will never be forgotten.
Nor shall the Australian airmen of this memorial be
forgotten.
Twenty thousand Australian aircrew served in Bomber
Command 3486 were killed, a death rate to compare with
that on the Western Front in World War I.
They were young men. They knew how high the risks were.
Rollo Kingsford-Smith commanded No 463 RAAF Lancaster
Squadron. The Squadron had an operational aircrew of
about 240, yet in the 18 months after November 1943, 546
were killed or posted as missing in action.
Mr Kingsford-Smith wrote to se a few weeks ago:
Young inexperienced crews coming into my Squadron
knew their death was almost certain, yet their
morale was always high and they fought the Germans
and the weather with equal determination. Other
Australian squadrons and Australians in RAF
squadrons would tell a similar story.
These Australians served their
fought at Gallipoli and on the
They fought in that tradition.
lives was an immeasurable loss
immeasurable loss to Australia. country as those who
Western Front had served.
The loss of their young
to their loved ones an
But it can never be doubted that they fought in a great
cause.
Mr Kingsford-Smith tells me that " many next-of-kin of
those Air Force men feel Australia has forgotten then.."
From today let there be no doubt that we will always
remember them.
RUNNYMEDE 4 JUNE 1994 G; 0I 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
CIVIC RECEPTION, NOYERS-BOCAGE, NORMANDY, FRANCE
MONDAY 6 JUNE, 1994
Distinguished guests, citizens of Noyers-Bocage and veterans of the second
world war, from Australia.
I think we Australians feel proud to be among you and I'm delighted that so
many of us could be with you today. As I was moving around the crowd of
course, the faces all looked the same I didn't know who was Australian and
who was French. And, I think it is nice for the veterans to come back to meet
the community that they defended when they could never have met them, like
this, at the time. Because, it has to be real... one doesn't fight for something
and die for something which is ephemeral or imaginary and that which is real
is, of course, the kinship between Australia and France. So, for the families
who lost their sons and daughters, in some cases in this part of the
world, to hear the expression of heartfelt thanks from President Mitterrand
today is, I think, a very heartfelt, confident and reassuring thing.
When you see the village pictures at the front door you see how much
destruction there was here and how vicious and evil the Nazis were... and
entrenched and how hard they were to remove. But, the French understand
liberty and they understand democracy, as we Australians do; true
democracy, deep democracy. And, that is why we could never live, any of us,
under the tyranny of fascists like Hitler. So, these are lessons that we all
have learned expensively, some more expensively than others. This all
happened the year I was born. Fifty years later I want to remember and I
want all Australians to remember. And, Mr Mayor, we are in your debt when
your citizens remember, too.
So, let's agree that there is a great friendship between Australians and the
people of France. Indeed, between the people of France and all the people
who fought here. Let us agree that there is a kinship which extends across
countries, across borders and across -cultures. So, today, we again celebrate
our freedom and our friendship and faith in one another. And thank you for
being such gracious hosts to us, thank you for coming in such numbers to see 
my countrymen. We're delighted to be among you, we thank you, Mr Mayor,
for the privilege extended to us and hope that D-Day will never be forgotten.
Mr Mayor, I have a picture for you of an Australian flier shot down here. Pilot
Officer Mason who was reburied, as I said, in 1992. And, so in 20 or 30 or
years from now someone will look at the picture and understand what it was
all about.
Thank you very much, indeed.
ends. 



I I T1fhin aeqi
I cal
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING HP
TYPHOON MEMORIAL, NOYERS BOCAGE, FRANCE
6 JUNE 1994
MUBARGO: ll. OOPM AEST
This is a monument to the good which unites the people of
many nations with the people of France. It unites the
Australian people with the people of France.
It is not the only such monument.
The Australian airmen of World War II whose sacrifice is
commemorated at Noyers Bocage followed that heroic
generation of whom more than forty thousand lie buried in
the fields of France.
By their suffering and sacrifice, their courage and
character, that earlier generation gave birth to a legend
which still inspires and unites Australians.
As brave and selfless as any who came before them, as
devoted to the cause of freedom, as faithful to their
ideals, as full of hope, the Australians commemorated
here lived by that legend and died by it.
Like those who fought at Gallipoli and on the Somme, they
went into battle knowing that death was more than
possible it was likely. And more likely each
succeeding time.
Today in Noyers Bocage we honour the airmen of all
nations who fought and died in the strug-g to liberate
Europe in World War II.
And, because we are Australian, we honour our countrymen
especially. We honour those who left the place and the
people they loved and crossed the world to defend freedom
and advance the cause of justice.
Among those to whom we pay tribute today is Pilot Officer
Don Mason, whose Typhoon was shot down on the eighteenth
of June 1944 and whose aircraft and remains were not
discovered until late 1992. It was this discovery which
brought about Australia's association with the Typhoon
Pilot Monument.
W(-2 Aut Soc Thc haz
And hon vai our We
Nor peo corn nca
goo ocei I ki
liv
havw pool The'
inat ri2) the,
We to as for
Our the
and That val fro
liv 1
it
the sac and 
There is a tnreac In AUULLljQ'a hintory whioh has always
linked us to France. What the French called liberty,
equality and fraternity Australians were inclined to
call "' mateship" and the " fair go" for all.
Australians had in mind the same ideal of a free and fair
society. A better place for all men and women.
Those commemorated here, all those who flew those
hazardous missions, know the value of these things.
And their sacrifice made us know them better. When we
honour their memory, when we say they did not die in
vain, we mean that we know they made our freedom safe and
our faith the stronger.
We mean that we will never forget.
Nor can we forget today the trials endured by the French
people. The people of Normandy the people of this
community endured loss and devastation on a terrible
scale. They endured what we in Australia have had the
good fortune never to endure for we have never suffered
occupation and tyranny.
I know that the airmen who fought this war those who
lived and those who died would want it known that we
have not forgotten the support they received from the
people of France.
They would want it known that their own courage was
matched by the French Resistance; by the people who
risked their lives to protect them and help then find
their way to safety and freedom on the ground.
We see this monument to the Typhoon Pilots as a monument
to the courage of the French people as well. We see it
as a memorial to their resilience, and to their desire
for peace.
Our two countries are f ar apart in so many ways. But in
the events of fifty years ago common values were proved
and a story in common was written.
That is the reason for this memorial. It enshrines those
val~ ee and the story of a generation* who so believed in
freedom and justice they were prepared to lay down their
lives. It honours their memory and tolls new generations that
the peace and freedom we now enjoy came by their
sacrifice. It tells us that we must inherit their faith
and pass it on to our children. G3727 



PRIME MINISTER
SPKECBY TE PRflIE MINISTR THE HON PJ KEATING MPl
AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY, PARIS 8 JUNE 1994
Thank you for inviting me to open this exhibition of
works by the women of Utopia.
I will pretend to no expertise in these works of art:
but I will say this.
The art and culture of indigenous Australians is a
wellspring of the national culture, and the more we make
it so the richer will we all be.
Increasingly, I think, we respond to Aboriginal art and
music and iconography, not out of curiosity, but out of
recognition. However limited our understanding of their meaning, we
see something in these paintings which is familiar to us
whether it is the colours, or the abstracted landscape,
or simply the " abrignalitya or RAustralianness" of the
themes and design.
A change has come about in our response to Aboriginal art
and I think that means our hearts and minds are opening
up to the place and the people. I think it means that we
are learning.
In a sense that is what is meant by " reconciliation" of
the indigenous people with other Ausltii-aians.-
It means not just making amends for past wrongs, great as
the wrongs have been.
Nor is it just a matter of compensation, though
compensation is certainly due.
Reconciliation means recognising how much we have to give
each other.
It is more than the giving and receiving of material aid
important as that is. it is more than the goods of our
culture in exchange for the destruction of theirs. U 762 
I think we will know we are making progress when our
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australians alike find pre
themselves thinking less about what can be given
Aboriginal Australians, and more about what they can give That
US. a cc
tha.
This exhibition might help to get us thinking along these Aboz
lines. it
These works of art by the women of Utopia shape our image hel;
and understanding of the Australian landscape and Inte
remind us how much they have always been shaped by
Aboriginal culture. I mi
ever
They tell US something about who we are and where we f it UtOF
in the story of the continent. priv Crea
They are a reminder that it is important for AUJ of us,
to have a story. This
Holm
And from that we might reach the conclusion that all our Aust
stories will be richer if we bring them together. Aust
We non-Aboriginal Australians have a lot to learn from Fina.
the Aboriginal story which is inseparable from the land weale
itself. noti
It has taken us a long while to read the lesson in that, anot
but I believe we are reading it now. it i
There is also a contemporary lesson for us in the way
Aboriginal people pass on their stories and the lessons
they contain from generation to generation. Australian
society generally will be stronger if we do the same.
in turn, the lesson is that the best thing we can return
Aboriginal Australians is a connection with the land.
At one level, this exhibition is a testament to the
resilience of Aboriginal culture a reminder that for
all-the destrui-ci6 Eukopeans have wrought on it, their
story and their art is stronger.
it is therefore a reminder of just how important culture
is in the scheme of all things and why governments and
communities must make it a central concern.
It is all the more ' appropriate I suppose that we should
be reminded of this in Paris.
At another level, the exhibition simply reminds us that
at Utopia we have some great artists producing images of
intriguing beauty and power.
Either way, we are reminded of the heritage late
twentieth century Australia has been delivered. It is a
living heritage of immense benefit to our culture and to 
our future, and we have a great responsibility to
preserve and nurture it.
Five That is why the late Robert Holmes a Court, Jane -t Holmes
a Court, and the Holms-a Court Foundation deiserve our
~ 1inksforthe support and encouragement th ey have given
ese Aboriginal art and artists over the years.
It is also why I am proud that the Australian Government
age helped to bring this exhibition to France through the
International Cultural Relations program.
I might also say I take a little extra pleasure this
it Uetveonpiian'g s fgrroema tr eacratlilsitnsg, thEamti lyt woK nqyweaarrsr eyaeg, o aIn dm eth ado net heof
privilege of presenting her with an Australian Government
Creative Fellowship.
This evening I should also thank the Curator of the
ur HAoulsmtersa liaa nC ouArmtb asCsoaldloerc; t ioann, d ALnynne TuBirto, d y; t heA laDni reBcrotwonr, oft hethe
Australia France Foundation here in Paris.
d Fwienlaclolmye, inI wpoaurltdi culliaker tNoa nctyh anPke tyyoaur rea llw hof ora t cvoemriyn g, s hoarntd
notice has made an epic trip from one artistic capital to
another. it is now my pleasure to declare this exhibition open. U 7~; 



* 1 tToh, su
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRINE IINISTER, THE RON P J KEA3rNG xP
FRDICH BUSINESS COINXNITY LUNCH, PARIS, WEDNESDAY S JUNE
Thank you very much for coming. It is gratifying to see
so many senior business figures who have taken time off
from their heavy commitments to be here today.
I am in France because fifty years ago Australians took
part in the landings in Normandy. Australians were here
then as they had been in the First World War. It is one
of the remarkable features of our history that a
profound part of it was written on the battlefields of
France. A tragic part of it, yet a part which shaped the
Australian nation and the national character.
In fact the threads of our relationship go back much
further than the wars: they go back to the foundations of
European settlement in Australia. In 1788 as the Aritish
raised the Union Jack on the shores of Sydney Harbour, La
Perouse was anchored just offshore.
Indeed, the Australian coast from Perth to Hobart is
dotted with the names left behind by La Perouse, Baudin
and D'Entrecasteux.
The map of Australia tells the story of a scientific or
academic interest, rather than a commercial one.
I" am here today to tell you that we believe the time has
come to convert your interest to wholehearted economic
engagement. To be an Australian in the nineties is to feel present at
a definitive moment in our history. Literally definitive
the culture, including the work and business culture,
the economy, the nation's identity and international
direction are all being re-defined and newly articulated.
Australia's place in the world is being re-defined.
I believe the decade will, in time, be seen as one in
which the remnants of post-colonial ambivalence were
swept away, not with any loss to our best traditions, but
with the creation of institutions and procedures. which
reflect the great changes of recent years and are
appropriate to the reality and needs of Australia in the
twenty first century.
67 2 8 Mai fri
wi rei 101
De' th: ma( cu2 In
cai tal rej
The ou: if
aI co AU en Su
de exj us
Jul us ini an
bu th Th wol
Thi thq Thi col wil 
The old barriers to the world outside and, in particular,
to our own region the Asia-Pacific have been
substantially removed.
mass post war migration, first from Europe, and then also
from Asia, long ago broke down the old monoculture and
with it the xenophobia which, if not entirely the
reality, was certainly the image of Australia for a very
long time.
Deliberate government policies, combined with what I
think is a strong underlying tradition of tolerance have
made it surely one of most successful examples of
cultural pluralism in the world.
In the last decade the Australian economy has also been
capital conro isadudroka araaic program ot
tariff reductions.
The sum result of the chanqes in Australia has been that
we now see ourselves in a much larger mirror a mirror
which reflects the comparative advantages on which we
must build and the comparative shortcomings which we must
rectify. The same mirror also suggests that we must clearly define
ourselves. If it is true that companies need corporate identities in
a competitive world, it is probably also true of
countries; and the need is greater f or a country like
Australia which has undergone rapid change and is now
entering the new world of the Asia-Pacific.
Such an identity does not need to be invented: the
deeper understanding and the imperatives which flow from
exposure to the world will essentially articulate it for
US. Just as this exposure in the plainest possible way told
us that work place practices had to change, and
international best business practice had to be applied,
and inflation controlled, and an environment in which
business, especially export business the business of
the future could flourish.
That is what has happened. And, because in a competitive
world change never stops, it is continuing to happen.
There has been massive structural and cultural change in
the Australian economy and the results are striking.
That is why, entirely without apology, I am urging French.
companies to invest inAustralia. I can assure you it
will be good for both'of us. 67 2.9 
3
Never has the climate for investment been better.
We have the highest economic growth in the OECD. In the
last twelve months GDP increased by 5 per cent and
employment rose by over 3 per cent.
We have corporate profit share at an all time high of
just over eighteen per cent of GDP.
We have interest rates at their lowest level for twenty
years. We have inflation at around 1 per cent even less based
on the product deflators in the national accounts. And
we have it locked in by an Accord on wages with the trade
unions. We have wages increasingly linked to
improvements in productivity.
A revolution in the industrial culture has given us the
lowest level of industrial disputes for decades.
There is strong export growth. Ten years ago exports
made up no mare than 13 per cent of Australian GDP
today that figure is over 20 per cent and they are much
more diverse. The proportion of manufactures is now
equal to the proportion of agricultural product. Exports
of elaborately transformed manufactures have risen by
per cent in the past three years.
And when you see where our exports are going you see
another reason why you should invest.
if rising demand in the domestic-market is the first 1
reason, the international market is the second. ourIt
firms have demonstrated that Australia is a wonderful c
base from which to export into the booming Asia-Pacific h
markets. AW. all of us here today know, the scale of change in Asia 9
isremarkable. d
Take China.
At the present rate of growth, China's economay is e
doubling every eight years. c
While world trade grew by about So per cent between 1996 a,
and 1992, the trade of the three Chinese economies grew Ki
by 180 per cent.
But of course there is much more to Asian dynamism than a,
China. There are the rapidly growing markets of South a
East Asia, including that of Australia's nearest T
neighbour, Indonesia, and the likely new tiger, Vietnam. i
67: 30 
It is with this most dynamic region of the world that
Australia now does most of its business.
Well over half of Australia's merchandise exports go to
-East -Asian markets. Almost two-thirds of our total
exports go to Asia. Australia's trade relationship with
Japan is one of the economic sinews of the region.
In the last five years our annual average -axpor-t -growth
to the ASEAN reqion has been more than double the growth
of our total exports and the increase in our exports of
elaborately transformed manufactures has been
particularly dramatic.
more and more Australian businesses are being born of our
new Asian export culture. One-third of our exports of
elaborately transformed manufactures are coming from
small firms that have begun exporting only in the last
ten years.
These days Australian companies measure themselves
against Asian levels of productivity and competitiveness.
We have substantial advantages: a skilled multicultural
workforce, high standards of education, political
stability, an effective legal framework, well-developed
infrastructure and a continuing program of microeconomic
reform.
Australia is a leading information technology country.
We invest more of our GDP in telecommunications than
Japan, Singapore or Hong Kong.
We have more computers per head of population a third
more than our nearest rival, Singapore than any other
country in the Western Pacific, and more telephones per
head of population than anyone else in the region.
Australia is a very good place to do business, a very
good place to establish regional headquarters which is
woat many international service companies have already
done. Not only can we more than match the newly industrialised
economies of Asia in skills, productivity, stability and
certainty, investors will find that the cost of an
international telephone call, office space and housing,
are significantly lower than, say, Singapore and Hong
Kong. They will find a corporate tax rate of just 33 per cent,
a 10 per cent tax rate for Offt Shore Banking Units, and
accelerated depreciation rates for plant and equipment.
They will find that the overall tax burden in Australia
is the lowest of all OECD countries. G7 3 t
p 
They will find a lot more space to live in, air that is a
lot cleaner and the trip to the office quicker and less
stressful.
They will also find a first class universal health
system, and schools, hospitals and social services which
in general have few peers in the world.
They will find a small public sector but an effective
one. They will find a Western culture in an Asian location and
in an Asian time-zone.
In short, they will find that Australia is a very good Y
place to live and work.
In the 1980s Australia rejected the socially regressive
forms of economic rationalism in favour of structural C
reform allied to inclusive social policies. I
Last month we delivered a major statement on employment F
a comprehensive strategy for training and returning the e
long term unemployed to the workforce.
The strategy will deliver to us greater levels of social t
cohesion and justice and a more skilled and flexible
workforce. A b
We are building our economy on skills and productivityt
coupled with a sophisticated social net.
We have no intention of im~ itating the wage regimen of w
developing countries. We have proved that we can compete r
by other means and be considerably more attractive toI
overseas investors.
In other words, Australia offers a perfect springboard b
for companies wanting to take advantage of the dynamic T)
Aslan markets. al
You will be aware that Australia has taken a leading role
in building new structures in the region for trade and s
security. t
Last year I attended the first meeting of APEC countries a
in 9 -eattle., There fourteen Asia-Pacific leiders laid of
down objectives for the future. t
The aim is open regionalism regional tradeLt
liberalisation which avoids disadvantage to others.
We envisage ultimately an integrated market bringing
together the economies of Australia, ASEN, the three
Chinas, Korea, Japan and North America.
63% 8 
A market of 2 billion people, producing half the world's
output, with harmonised trade and investment rules,
harmonised standards and certification and agreed means
of settling disputes.
APEC leaders will meet again in Indonesia later this
year, lending weight to the gathering momentum of
cooperation in the region.
It must be stressed that neither APEC nor Australia has
in mind turning away from others parts of the world. We
are certainly not talking about raising barriers.
We are inextricably linked to the world economy. We
depend on an open world trading system. We unequivocally
support the multilateral system.
our increasing integration with Asia does not mean that
Europe is fading from our minds.
Far from it, we remain actively engaged with European
economies and we want to do much more.
We want to do nore with France. And the gathering here
today rather suggests that we are and that we will.
At present only 7 per cent of exports from the fourth
biggest economy in the world go to East Asia. I know
that Monsieur Longuet wants to change that with his
" French Initiative Towards Asia". I am sure that he
-Qiti France to dramatically increase her trade-with the
region before other players take their shalre._-
I am in no doubt that great benefits will flow to both
our countries if French companies make Australia their
base for moving into these new markets.
There is also very great potential for increased trade
and investment between our two countries.
In recent times a number of French companies have made
substantial investments in areas as diverse as
telecommunications, air traffic control systems, resort
management, waste water treatment, film and television
and viticulture the last being an outstanding example
of cross investment combined with cooperation in
technology and research.
Ladies and gentlemen, if for the first two ' centuries of 6733 
Leadei
We find them in vineyards from Western Australia to the
Hunter Valley of New South Wales. We find them in the
industrial suburbs and the central business districts of
our major cities. we find thou in laboratories and film
studios. They are present in the booming tourist
industry of Queensland as investors and managers, and
as tourists.
We want to see more of France in Australia and more of
the French.
I therefore hope to see you, M. Longuet, in Australia
soon. I also hope to see those of you here today and
senior executives from other French companies later this
year at our second National Trade and Investment
Conference, when France will be the European country
invited to join representatives from the Asia-Pacific.
It is for this reason that I want to thank the people who
organised this gathering, particularly Club Australie
with which I know many of you have been associated, and
M. Gandois who has played a crucial role in developing
business links between our two countries.
It is great enterprise and I have no doubt it will be a
very rewarding one.
ENDS 67 : 14 RPdrrfiimaMt 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH RAY MARTIN, A CURRENT AFFAIR, CHANNEL NINE
14 JUNE, 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RM: Prime Minister, welcome home. You have come back to a barrage, a
media release today from the Leader of the Opposition saying the
Keating Government is in a shambles, it is about time you showed
some leadership.
PM: Yes, well that's what they all say. That's what they all say, Ray. I
mean, as you know on my European trip I met a lot of the leaders of
Western Europe, I mean, nobody there had 5 per cent growth, 1 per
cent inflation and 3.5 per cent employment growth. When they hear
those numbers they say, " Well, gee, if only we could have that". That
is the sort of problem that I am quite sure that Alexander Downer would
love to be wrestling with.
RM: All right, well let's borrow a phrase from Mr Downer, did the grovelling
with the Europeans work?
PM: Well the point is, you see, this gets back to Mr Downer's view of the
world, which was Mr Fraser's view of the world, and Mr Menzies view
of the world, that Australia should stay at home. You have a country
ringed by a high tariff wall, you don't have foreign investment in, and
you don't have foreign investment by Austraiians dbrbd. That's their
view. Whereas the view the Government has had is that you become
a competitive country, which we now are, and you go out to the world
and you take positions in it, and you invest in it. What has happened
to us in Western Europe is, I think, particularly in continental Europe,
they don't know enough about the modern Australia. They don't know
how we have progressed, how we have become independent as we
have been in an economic sense, how we are now back to a high rate 
of growth, low inflation, and how we have made this cultural change to
the rest of the world.
RM: But Prime Minister, the French are pretty sophisticated, as we all know,
they would realise that we have liberty, equality and fraternity in
Australia, they would know we were independent, you don't have to tell
them that.
PM: Yes they know that, they also think, particularly the French, that
Australia is basically a sub-club of Britain.
RM: That's an old fashion, do they really think that? I mean, does the
President think that, does the Prime Minister?
PM: Part of the point of me going there was to say, " well hang on, let me
bring you up to date." Australia is not a mono-culture, it is now a plural
society, it is outward going, it is internationally competitive, it is making
structures for itself at home and abroad. I talked about APEC and the
Asia Pacific and President Mitterand said to me, " I have never heard
an Australian talk this way before." Let me repeat from the horses
mouth, Ray, Francois Mitterand said to me, " I have never heard an
Australian speak this way before."
RM: But he would be briefed, the same as you are briefed before someone
comes here. He would know as much as you are going to tell him,
wouldn't he?
PM: But it is not the briefing, people live by impressions. They live by their
own life experiences and they live by what they know. I mean, we
could all pick up a piece of briefing paper, I mean, I went to see him
and I could get a briefing paper about him and his Government, or
about his country, but it is not like talking to him, and that's the value of
going.
RM: So, is this why you raised the issue of the republic there?
PM: Well, amongst other things, simply to say that Australia has now
changed its orientation from the ' 60s and ' 70s from an inward looking
closed place, to an outward looking confident place, that we pull the
tariff barriers. down, that we have made a big shift to exports, that we
are a multicultural plural society, and I said the Governmnent policy is to
reflect this by moving towards a republic by the year 2000.
RM: Did you expect to get the grovelling, cringing, sucking up to the French
attacks?
PM: Well, I suppose I did. But I mean, you always get that from people who
have basically always shied away from dealing with the rest of the
world. And the thing about the Alexander Downers of this world, and 
the Malcolm Erasers and the Bob Menzies is they kept Australians at
home, and the consequence was that we have fallen from having the
second largest income per capita in the Western World to number 18
by 1983. We just kept simply back as that rest of the world moved on.
RM: But then whatever happened to the so-called London convention? The
idea that you don't raise domestic issues when you are overseas,
clearly the republic is a hot domestic issue?
PM: That was only something Bob Hawke said to suit a particular
circumstance at the time. The London convention isn't anything.
RM: So it is fair game. If you are overseas you can call Mr Downer two
faced, anything you like?
PM: Well you see Mr Downer was over here saying he wants clean politics,
while he is trying to link Graham Richardson with prostitutes in the
Senate. He is saying he -wants-an-' economically reformed country
while he is saying we shouldn't have foreign investment. And I just
thought it was time to point those inconsistencies out.
RM: But isn't this a bit rich from a bloke like you who, in the one sense,
wants to get rid of the monarchy, but then accepts a ride on the royal
yacht Britannia to look at the Normandy re-enactment?
PM: Of course not. I am the Australian Prime Minister, I was invited by the
Government of Britain.
RM: As against the Queen. It is the Queen's yacht isn't it?
PM: And the Government of France. And the Queen as Head of State of
Britain was involved in those ceremonies. So, anyway I don't accept to
be I noticed some journalist said, " Oh isn't it shocking, Mr Keating is
talking about a republic after enjoying the Queens hospitality."
Apparently if you have a cup of tea and a scone, that's it, she has got
you for life.
RM: But if you call Alexander Downer two faced and then turn around and
do that, aren't you guilty of the same crime?
PM: I don't follow you.
RM: Well if you say that you want to get rid of the monarchy, and in the
same breath you say, yes, I will have a ride on the Royal Yacht
Britannia?
PM: I don't think there is any inconsistency there at all. I have said this to
the Queen directly. Remember I met the Queen in Scotland, in
Balmoral a year ago, and had a long and frank conversation with her 
about how Australia could no longer make its way as a sort of society it
has become with the Head of State of another country. I made that
clear. And I said to her that itzwas the Government's policy that we
should move towards a republic by the year 2000. And you might
remember the Queen authorised me to say that these were matters for
the Australian people and she would accept the advice of our
Ministers, and you might remember, Ray, that Prince Charles said
much the same thing when he came to Australia. This is a matter for
Australians, and why shouldn't they have such a debate he said. In
fact the Queen knows exactly where I stand on this.
RM: She still invites you on the yacht?
PM: The meetings I have had with her have always been absolutely first
class.
RM: Are the fl. g_ and the republic as one, are they combined? Do they
have to go together?
PM: No, I don't think so. But were Australia to become a republic, you will
probably see a manifestation of that in all of its symbols, including the
flag.
RM: Are you still sticking to the target of the year 2000 for a republic?
PM: Yes.
RM: And what about the flag, is there a timetable for that?
PM: No, I mean, I have got an opinion on the flag, but I don't have a plan
for the flag.
RM: What's your opinion? How close to your heart is a new Australian
flag?
PM: Well, whenever I'm asked I always say what I've said before and that
is, that I don't think that I mean, this was essentially, the flag we had
was essentially the flag of the British Merchant Navy, to which we
added some stars for the Southern Cross. There was a very
interesting article in today's Australian making that very point.
RM: What about the nervous nellies as you like to call them in the Labor
party the flag waiverers. Are you being told by anybody to back off
on the flag issue?
PM: No, not by anybody. But, you see Ray
RM: Malcolm Turnbull says that he told you that. That he asked you to
please move away. 
PM: I can't recall Malcolm saying this to me, but whether he did or not
doesn't move heaven and earth-Look, the fact of the matter is that
Australia is an independent, plural country. It is now economically
competitive, we've made a huge shift to exports, we've changed the
culture of business in the work place, we are a much more dynamic
society and we've made great linkages into Asia and, indeed, into
northern America and to western Europe. It just follows that one can't
go on in the future marketing Australia saying that we are an
independent place while our head of state is the head of another
country. In fact, just in passing coming back in the plane reading the
British Economist, in an article about Australia it just said in the last
line, not with any great fanfare, but just as an attitude from a journalist
only colonies continue to borrow the monarchies of other lands
Now, Australia is not a colony, but we are still borrowing the monarchy
of another land.
RM: What about Bob Hawke's suggestion that the new flag and the republic
are inevitable, but there is no need to divide the nation.
PM: Well, I don't think it divides the nation. I think it is an issue, it's a good
sound cultural issue for this country to actually declare itself a republic.
It is something that would make the country not only feel better about
itself, but be better.
RM: But what about if a majority of Australians right now don't want that?
PM: Well, we are not going to have it now.
RM: But to the year 2000?
PM: Well, I think the majority will.
RM: And will we have a new flag then too?
PM: Well, the Government has no plans to bring in any legislation other
than as I've said in the past. First of all we have no plans to do it.
Secondly, only when there is popular support for it. But again, don't
under estimate Ray, the fact that the Olympics are coming up in the
year 2000 and the whole sense of nationhood and national pride is
going to be there, let alone the changes we've made in the last 10 or
12 years.
RM: Do you fear at all that the flag and the republic are going to be major
issues in the next election campaign?
PM: Well, I think, it is Mr Downer who fears they might.
RM: You'll be quite happy if they were? 
PM: Remember this, leaning towards the republic was part of my policy
speech in the 1993 election.-
RM: But it wasn't an issue, the GST was the only issue then. But now if
they make this a prime issue, does that worry people in the Labor
party?
PM: Well, I don't think so, no. Let me tell you this, as sure as you and I are
speaking here Ray, Australia will become a republic. Now, sensible
people in the Liberal party like Nick Greiner say this any day you want
to ask them, the only discussion is about the timing. What Alexander
Downer is saying is no, we should keep the monarchy of Great Britain
as our head of state.
RM: Have you seen a flag design that you like, a new flag design?
PM: I haven't, no.
RM: Not up tonow?
PM: No, I mean I don't take any notice of flag competitions. There is a lot
of them.
RM: But clearly the point that Malcolm Turnbull and others make is that it is
hard to sell anything if you don't have something to show people. If
you can't say this is the flag we should have.
PM: That's probably -right, but I'm not out there selling a flag. Let me just
repeat the point. I have an opinion about the flag, but I don't have a
plan for the flag.
RM: What would you like to see on the flag?
PM: Well, I've never really refined my own thoughts about it.
RM: Kangaroo? Southern Cross? Emu? Didgeridoo?
PM: I don't think so, but I've never seen a design that actually suits me.
But, the key point is this Ray, Australia is now a modem plural society
with an inflation rate of 1 per cent and 5 per cent growth, we in this
country are doing something right. All of us. We've made a great leap
into the Asia Pacific, we are now setting up structures like APEC. -In
other words we are remodelling Australia inside and we are
remodelling, recasting it from the outside. It is untenable to wander
around then saying, oh by the way, excuse us, we'ye done all these
things, but by the way our head of state is the monarch of another
country. 
RM: Let's go to some of those things, on the front page of the papers today
the report that the Government is looking at a radical plan to make
elderly and chronically ill peopletin Australia pay more for Medicare or
for health care. Is that true.
PM: No basis to it. Carmen Lawrence debunked that today.
RM: Absolutely no basis?
PM: No basis.
RM: What about a wealth tax?
PM: There was no basis for that. I noticed that Duncan Kerr one of my
ministerial colleagues was reported as referring to that over the week
end. He never did. In fact, I don't know where that came from.
RM: So, he didn't refer to it?
PM: He didn't even refer to it.
RM: No reference to the rich actually being taxed heavier?
PM: No, what he said was that Australia was going to have to keep an eye
on its revenue base. But he never talked about wealth taxes or
inheritance taxes of any kind.
RM: But that's widely reported?
PM: I know, amazingly.
RM: Well, can you do a George Bush and say'read by lips, no new taxes?'
PM: Well, certainly not those taxes.
RM: Certainly not, maybe some other taxes?
PM: No, no, just that what the Government Ray, what the Government
has done just less than a year ago is give major income tax cuts,
reductions in tax.
RM: So, how are you going to pay for things? What about privatisation?
Are you going to sell off 49 per cent of Telecom?
PM: No, but that is not to say we won't sell some things.
RM: Telecom, part of Telecom? 
PM: No, what we are thinking of is the Federal Airports Corporation and
' Australian National Line and in this year we will be selling Qantas and
last year part of the Commonwealth Bank. I mean, the Commonwealth
is always acquiring assets, it's got to sell some too, particularly where
we think they can be more advantageously managed by the private
sector.
RM: But, can you rule out tonight selling off any part of Telecom?
PM: It has never been on our agenda Ray.
RM: And is not, all right. Now, what about an old mate of yours the old
Labor stalwart Jack Ferguson, said at the weekend, it's still a case of
us against them, the workers against the millionaires. Do you agree
with that sentiment?
PM: Well, Australia has right at the moment the highest profit share it's ever
had in its history. That's the highest share of national income going to
profits. It has no historical precedent. So, therefore, the notion that
the Labor party is sort of somehow run by the politics of envy against
people who invest is wrong. Now, it is a minority view now and I think
it has always been a minority view.
RM: So, it's not us against them?
PM: Of course not. If it ever is, we'll never develop as a country probably.
RM: Is privatisation, just quickly getting back to that, is that going to be a
major issue, a battle ground for the Labor party in Hobart at the
national conference?
PM: You'll always have these, I mean, you've been reporting national
conferences of the Labor party for years and most people in public life
have. Every two years we have a national conference. Every two
years we have some matter which gets the focus, or a couple of
matters which get the focus of the debate and no doubt, privatisation
well get a good run for its money.
RM: All right, but you're confident that its not going to split the party?
PM: No, it never does.
RM: All right, a bigger worry then, how close to war are we in Korea?,
PM: I don't think we are close to war. What's happening there is that the
Koreans are defuelling a nuclear reactor the so-called spent or old
fuel rods can be reprocessed for weapon grade material and the
international agency inspecting all this, International Atomic Energy
Agency wants to see that there isn't a diversion of these materials from 
spent fuel rods into weapons. Now, the North Korean government
won't allow the inspections and it is that which everybody is upset
about.
RM: But, there appears to be one of those inevitable movements we have
infrequently thankfully, but a movement towards confrontation.
PM: Well, there is an element of confrontation about this, but part of it is, I
think, the United States and others saying unless there is international
inspections here there should be a movement towards some
international sanctions.
RM: Would we be part of that, economic sanctions?
PM: We would be because we believe that there should be curbs upon
nuclear proliferation and weapon proliferation and that all states
should be subject to the scrutinies of the IAEA, particularly states
which are signatories to it.
RM: What about if it became a bilateral sanction between the Japanese
and the Americans. Will we join that?
PM: If there is a set of UN sponsored actions we would join that.
RM: But the Americans, the Japanese acting independently, we wouldn't
join that?
PM: We'd have to see what was proposed, but it would be unlikely.
RM: What about troops, would we commit troops?
PM: I don't think we are at that sort of stage.
RM: Are you in touch with Washington, are they keeping you up to date on
that?
PM: We keep in touch with the developments and have been, but I think,
that the United States wants to move towards some kind of sanctions
and I think, the United Nations will consider that this week.
RM: All right, just quickly while on Asia, there is a copy of Asia-Week
arrived on my desk, someone showed, me with a horoscope, your
horoscope in there. Do you realise that you are a water sheep?
PM: I'm a Capricorn.
RM: Apparently 1944 makes you a water sheep. You are not aware of
that? 
PM: I'm not aware of that, no.
RM: Let me just read you what your-horoscope says then. They say that
water sheep are infinitely adaptable and can, if they decide, make their
neighbours love them.
PM: Well, I hope that is a good omen because our neighbours are pretty
important. Not just at home, but abroad.
RM: Well, I thought I should let you know about that as you're about to go
to Indonesia.
PM: I'll tuck that one away Ray.
RM: All right. PM thanks very much for your time.
PM: Good on you Ray, thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, REGENT HOTEL, MELBOURNE, 15 JUNE 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: ( inaudible)..
PM; I Well, in the first day of Parliament I said I thought it was a very
disappointing thing that Alexander Downer who said he was going to
make a fresh start, startedhii-s fresh start by flattening the new person
he gave Aboriginal policy to, who dared to say that she would consider
the Liberal party's support for the Government's proposed Aboriginal
Land Fund. And, I would have thought that any Opposition party
looking for a fresh start in society given the obscurantist views which
Dr Hewson held on some of these issues, that Mr Downer would have
taken them up. He didn't. I was interested to see the Anglican church
spokesman today say that they would be critical of an Opposition that
voted against the Land Fund because the point I'd made is " What is
their objection?" it is not a fiscal objection. They know that Aboriginal
people can secure land from Mabo if they have a traditional
connection with the land, but if they have been dispossessed of the
land the only way they can benefit is not by the Mabo Native Title
legislation, but by an acquisition program under the Land Fund. So,
what is the point of objection other than they don't want to give black
people land.
J: Opposition spokesperson Chris Gallus said today that any change
wouldn't come until just before the next federal election.
PMV: Yes, well, I think that is high cynicism for Downer to be around now
saying oh, look, I'm opposed to this, the first thing I did as Opposition
leader was quash the Land Fund, but I might consider it on the day
before the election. We all just should say don't give us that cynical
tripe Alexander, don't give us that.
J: Mr Keating, will there be a loosening up of the community rating at all
in health? 
PM: No, I knocked that on the head yesterday, no.
J: Prime Minister, in your speech-inside you said that it was hoped that
by the year 2001, 95 per cent of 19 year olds would have completed
Year 12 or post-school qualification. How many of those do you
expect will have jobs to go to?
PM: Well, I think as the economy what we found in the 1 980s, which is
our last experience of this, if you get strong aggregate employme -nt-.
trained people get jobs. I think the lesson of it is, that we want people
trained and that's why we've invested so much in higher throughput in
education, higher retention rates and a higher transference into tertiary
institutions and now, lately, into TAFE.
J: Can you put a figure on how many..
PM: No, no.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: Well, more broadly what I'd like to see is a better understanding of the
Australian constitution, of the elements of our democracy, the ethos of
our democracy,-these are things which, I think, should be well and truly
transmitted in school and we are looking at ways now how we can
improve the understanding of these primary things, these primary
instruments of our Governments.
J: Mr Keating, you said in your speech that you'd like to strengthen the
role of ANTA, how important is that change going to be in achieving
the educational goals you set out today?
PM: I think vocational training has been the Cinderella of Australian
education and the Government has now got very substantially
increased retention rates in secondary school. As I've said, we've
created 17 universities since the middle 1980s, but the weak link in
Australian education is vocational education -and.. training. This we
tried to remedy and it's started to remedy in the One Nation statement
of 1992 where we put together the Australian National T raining.
Authorityand committed over $ 1 billion to growth within the sector.
What we want to see is that sector working more closely with
industries so that the training profile of industry better fits the well,
put it this way, that TAFE's training profile better fits the profile of
industry so that we are getting people trained with accredited
certificates which they can use nationally and which really help
business in their skills formation.
J: Prime Minister, are you concerned about the recent rise in the
Australian dollar and do you believe that it is justified? 
PM: I'm not here to comment on the exchange rate. I did get asked do
you work for Knight Ridder or something do you? I get all these
weirdos who work for Knight Ridder ask me at doorstops about the
exchange rates and interest rates.
J: Mr Keating, with this actual group you are thinking of going to teach
students more about should that actually involve an education about
the republic and about the implications
PM: I think, learning about the constitution apprises people of the fact that
we've got a constitution which was designed by the British foreign
office to look over the Australian government's shoulder. I mean, that
will become very obvious when anyone goes through it. Now, the
Statute of Westminster changed a lot of that, but it didn't change a lot
of the thinking about the Australian constitution. I don't think a lot of
people know about it. For instance, the Australian Cabinet is not
mentioned in the Constitution yet, it is the central agency of change in
our democratic structures outside of the Parliament. So, just to know
about those things, I think, is important. This, I think, will lead to
people questioning the structure we have. Now, as you know I'm all
for that. That is, I believe that as I said yesterday, I'm sure Australia
will become a republic, it is only a matter of time, but Alexander
Downer along with Malcolm Fraser, along with Menzies, along with the
others of his ilk believe that the Australian nation remodelling itself,
resetting itself in the Asia-Pacific should have the head of state of
another country as our head of state. As I quoted yesterday the
Economist magazine, just in passing in a line which was in a column
last week it said only colonies borrow the monarchies of other
countries. Now, we are not a colony, but we are still borrowing the
monarchy of another country.
J: What about the flag issue?
PM: I've said heaps about that.
ends 



PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NEW EDUCATIONAL REALITIES CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE, 15 JUNE 1994
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak to you today very pleased to address so many
people whose concern is Australian education.
With an economy now performing as well or better than any in the world, with so much
now in our favour, we have a marvellous chance to lay the basis of an Australian society
which is fair and cohesive, rich in opportunity and reward.
A great responsibility falls on our generation to seize the opportunity. It falls particularly
on people like yourselves because education is where one of the great efforts must be
made. It will be fuindamental to our success.
I am particularly pleased because you come from all parts of the education sector, from
industry and from the wider community. Success depends on your involvement. Our
modern education system needs your participation your efforts, all your ideas.
If we are to be a sophisticated and cohesive society, a society through which run both the
threads of ambition and those of tolerance and care; if we are to be a modern, competitive,
successful society in which opportunity and the common good are both enlarged; if we
want to succeed in the world and in our own region where so many chances are our
education system will have to meet the challenges.
If we want our children and succeeding generations to have the chances we have had and
more, if we want them to trust in and maintain our democracy and our best traditions our
education system will have to pass on the knowledge and instil the faith. 
If we want to put half a million Australians back in touch with the workforce; if we really
want to make the good society a reality for all Australians it is going to depend on our
education system and the people who run
We will need what is fashionably called a " vision" though I am not sure that " vision" is
precisely the right word. I have a suspicion that sometimes visions have a little in common
with hot air. I am not sure that the founders of compulsory primary education or our first
universities talked about " vision" very much at all. I don't think the real visionaries ever
do. I think the best of them have been like the best of parents they have simply taken every
care and responsibility for the future of succeeding generations. They have had not just
imagination but courage and persistence, and I daresay an absolute determination to see
that policies and programs work.
So what I offer you today I'm less inclined to call a vision than a schedule of necessity
the series of things we need to do, must do and can do.
The worst judgement that can be passed on a government or on a generation is not that
they lacked something as vague as vision but something as concrete as responsibility, the
responsibility to do what was necessary to secure the future.
In this there is no substitute for effort a great national effort. I have said this many times,
I know. I said it in One Nation more than two years ago and I repeated it in the White
Paper just a few weeks ago.
It is not just rhetoric it is the only way to succeed.
We are all aware of the criticisms which are made of us: bureaucracies for not following
through and delivering; business for standing back and not getting involved; government
for not having the imagination or courage.
Well, the Government, I believe has shown the imagination and courage in education.
And I believe business will get involved it is so obviously in their interests. And the
bureaucracy wijll deliver because government and business and every parent and every
child in the country depends on it and we are watching.
In the past decade the Government has massively expanded Australian higher education.
Seventeen universities have been created in the last eight years, many of them in areas
away from thi-main urban centres.
We now enrol thirty per cent of all seventeen to twenty-two year olds. Today we can say
that our higher education system is truly open and accessible. 
Perhaps even greater than this achievement has been the dramatic increase in secondary
school retention rates. In the space of a decade we more than doubled the number of
youiing Australians completing Year 12.
But comparing the present with the past is much less useful than comparing it with where
we have to be in the future. In international terms the present figure is acceptable but the
base it came off was deplorable. Fourteen per cent of our young people still drop out of
school early and don't go on to further education or training.
The Youth Training Initiative announced in Working Nation will maintain the momentum
of reform. It is designed to reach these young people at this turning point in their lives,
and stop the cycle of disadvantage and alienation.
Through the Initiative, unemployed fifteen to seventeen year olds will be case managed
and assisted into worthwhile education, training or work opportunities.
Young people who are still unemployed after six months will be offered a variety of labour
market and vocational training programs which may lead to permanent employment.
The Youth Training Initiative goes some way toward completing the expansion of postcompulsory
schooling we began a decade ago.
Our record in vocational education and training is not similarly impressive. Only one in
five Australians aged-sixteen and seventeen are in vocational preparation. The OECD
average is one in two. We have to reach a comparable level and do so quickly.
This is the great education challenge for Australia in the nineties to bring vocational
education and training up to the level our economic and social ambitions demand. A level,
for example, which compares with Germany, which has four times the number of
apprentices relative to the size of the workforce and twice as many people with education
or training qualifications other than university degrees.
Our objective and all Australian governments have agreed to it is that by the year 2001
ninety-five per cent of nineteen year olds will have completed Year 12 or an initial postschool
qualification, or be participating in formally recognised education and training.
In a successful Australian economy of the future, the key competitive advantage will be
our general skills.
To quote one very instructive example. Comparative studies of the hotel industry in
Germany and Great Britain in the 1980s found that the productivity of German workers
was fifty to sixty per cent higher than their British counterparts. The productivity of
German hotel managers is also higher because they did not have to regularly monitor their
staff. The difference was that the German workers had had specific vocational training
and the British workers had not. 
The same lesson can be drawn from the example of Australian car manufacturers who
have embraced training to lift quality and productivity.
In cooperation with TAFE they developed a Vehicle Production Certificate. They now
build world class cars. They export. The industry has a future. The car production
workers have a future.
The moral of the story could be applied to the nation as whole. Our long term prosperity
depends on nothing so much as the quality of our workforce both their vocational skills
and their general education.
Over the last five years we have taken measures to massively increase the quantum of
vocational education and training.
In cooperation with the States and Territories, we established the Australian National
Training Authority ANTA to drive the expansion.
It was a watershed in Commonwealth-State cooperation of the kind we need to succeed
with in our education system, and we laid the foundation for expansion with 1. 1 billion in
growth funding over the period 1993-1996.
In Working Nation we announced an ambitious plan for the expansion of entry level
training by 50,000 places over the next two years. This program will be supported by a
revised system of payments to employers who provide young people with training places.
The introduction of a training wage will also provide employers in new and emerging
industries with a single scheme of payments. Traineeships will be expanded across the
whole workforce and the supply of training places increased.
It is not enough to just expand the system. The system has to meet the goals we set it.
We need to find the means by which the different education sectors can be effectively
linked with each other and with the worlds of work and culture. We need to make the
system more responsive to economic and cultural change.
Post-compulsory education has been fundamentally changed by the increase in retention
rates. Yet the curriculum still reflects the days when most of those completing senior high
school were hoping to go on to university.
Now that a large proportion do not have this intention, schools need to provide studies
which are integrated with relevant vocational education. In future there should be no
segregation of general and vocational education. 
That is why Working Nation announced the creation of a new Australian Student
Traineeship Foundation a scheme delivered through regional partnerships between
schools and industry which will enable Year-I 1 and 12 students to combine school studies
with work experience in local industry and off the job training.
The traineeships will allow young people to complete their training and apprenticeships in
a shorter time. More generally, they should serve as a model for the next century when
schools must link as easily with vocational education and training as they now link with
universities. Similarly we must link industry and tertiary education indeed, we need to escape from
the tradition of keeping work and education in different spheres.
The task is to create an environment in which educational institutions and government
authorities involve industry in mainstream planning and decision-making and one where
industry feels bound to be involved.
The delivery of tertiary education must be more flexible to meet the wider range of
industry needs.*
The introduction of the second stage of the Government's Open Learning Initiative, which
includes the development of an electronic support network, will mean that employees will
no longer have to spend time away from the workplace in order to galn qualification.
Employers and education providers should be able to develop programs which meet the
needs of individuals at their own pace, at their own place.
Employers also need to be involved in developing a more streamlined and responsible
vocational sector. At present, they understandably complaln about the maze of
authorities, boards and processes they need to negotiate before they can get appropriate
training programs.
The National Framework for the Recognition of Training, which was meant to solve this
problem, has so far failed to deliver either national recognition or portability. In
cooperation with State and Territory Governments, the Commonwealth is seeking the
means of overcoming the problem.
One possibility is to increase the powers of ANTA, in order to give employers and training
providers a " one stop shop" where training can be nationally accredited in a single
streamldined process. Working Nation contained measures which Will assist cooperation
between business and training authorities. Administrative arrangements will be
streamldined. Industry will be put in the driving seat to make training administration simple
and relevant to industry needs. 
The National Employment and Training Taskforce will enable traineeships to be fasttracked.
The new Enterprise Stream for traineeships will allow enterprises to develop
their own training standards, develop their own nationally accredited programs and issue
their own national vocational qualifications.
Working Nation suspended the Training Guarantee for two years, and it will be abolished
altogether if business seriously comumits itself to creating new entry level training places.
That really is the bottom line. None of these reforms will be effective unless business
increases its own effort and cooperates with providers in setting directions for the future.
The presence of so many business people at this conference suggests that Australian
industry is in fact keen to establish a genuine partnership with government and the
education industry.
Industry wants more than specific vocational skills. They want employees with general
skills, general knowledge, judgement, self-discipline, literacy and numeracy.
That is one very practical reason why the emphasis we are now placing on vocational
education and training must not be seen as antithetical to traditional educational values. In
fact, we should be strengthening those values as we go.
Education is a foundation of the nation's culture and strength. It is where knowledge and
appreciation of our heritage and institutions is passed on; where our sensibilities are
broadened; where moral, ethical and aesthetic faculties are shaped.
I don't think that I am alone in suspecting that some of these things are not the priorities
they once were.
Yet our success as a nation and as a society, as much as the responsibility we have to our
children, demands that we do not let these values slip from our education system.
Perhaps most of all, our children should know what the privileges and responsibilities of
Australian democracy are. What their great inheritance is. What change is desirable and
possible. The creation of an Exert Group to provide the Government with a plan for a program of
public education and information on Australian government, citizenship and the
constitution may be seen in this context that is, as a means of strengthening our
democracy by enlivening our appreciation of it.
The composition and terms of reference of this group will be announced soon.
It is scarcely less important that we improve our understanding of the nations with whom
increasingly we deal. 
It will profoundly assist our relationship with the countries of our region if we understand
the languages they speak. Z.-
Today less than four per cent of Year 12 students study an Asian language. Only twelve
per cent are studying a second language of any kind. Yet the study of a second language
has a substantial practical significance both for the student and for our national
development. In the Budget the Government announced funding for a joint Commonwealth/ State
National Asian Languages Strategy which will see all Australian school children in Years
3 to 10 learning a-seco6nd language by the year 2006.
Sixty per cent of them will study one of four priority Asian languages Japanese,
Indonesian, Modern Standard Chinese and Korean and forty per cent will study any
other second language of their choice.
Twenty-five per cent of all Year 12 students will be studying a second language and one
per cent of students will go on to do a " Year 13" in Asia under the Young Australians in
Asia Program..
The program will greatly enrich our education system and with it the life of the nation. In
one sense, it is one more practical step in the process of opening Australia up to the region
and the world. In another sense, it is symbolic: symbolic of our willingness to meet other
countries half-way in our relationships with them, and symbolic also of our will and
capacity to devise for our education system new building blocks for necessary social and
cultural growth.
If we are to enter the twenty-first century with an education and training system large
enough and good enough to meet the aspirations of individuals and the needs of Australia,
we will need a national effort.
We will need State and Territory Governments to cooperate with business, and business to
engage as it has never done before. The States must streamlJine their training
bureaucracies: business must increase its own training efforts and share the responsibility
for shaping and implementing the training agenda.
As in so much else, the Australian education system will have to become more flexible.
The borders between schools and vocational training, and between education and work,
will need to come down.
Education must be a prime mover of necessary change, a vehicle by which the nation can
grasp the unprecedented opportunities which are now presented and all Australians can
share in the rewards and the responsibilities. 
8
I said in Paris a few days ago that to be an Australian in this decade is to be present at a
defining moment in our history. Your presence at this conference I take as encouraging
evidence that you not only share this belief: but are willing to share the responsibility that
flows from it.
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT THE LAUNCH OF THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF ABORIGINAL
AUSTRALIA, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 20 JUNE 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you very much, Robert ( Tickner), Dr Bill Jonas and David Horton,
the Chair person of ATSIC, Lois O'Donoghue, and ladies and gentlemen.
Well, I am very grateful for the opportunity to launch these volumes today, to
be asked to launch this massive work, six years I am told in the collation and
the writing. And I know it has been very eagerly awaited. It is very
comprehensive work, covering a vast canvas of infinite complexity and I think
it will provide all Australians, that is Aboriginal and non-aboriginal Australians
alike, with an invaluable source of information and understanding. And it
struck me looking through it, it will be particularly useful for young
Australians, and for the teaching of Aboriginal history in Australian schools,
for both teachers and pupils alike, to be able to refer to such a
comprehensive work and define something useful there in such a readable,
digestible way. It should play a useful role in helping future generations to
comprehend the extraordinary history and culture of the oldest continuing
civilisation on earth.
It wasn't so many years ago that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
were specimens of great anthropological curiosity, but little more as human
beings living in the modern world, they were until 1967, of course, in this
country not even citizens of Australia. And that is not that long ago, that's
only two years before I entered the national Parliament. This country did not
recognise the descendants of the original Australians as citizens. This
encyclopaedia examines that referendum. It should also be made
compulsory reading for some politicians, current ones, so they can see how
far they have wandered from the ideals of their predecessors. Maybe some
extracts and photocopies spread around might be the order. I don't think they
understand the vast majority of the Australian people gave the
Commonwealth the power to make laws for indigenous Australians where
they were deemed necessary. 
But, it not only looks at the referendum, it looks at the struggle for recognition,
and that which preceded it, the contribution that Aboriginal people have made
in that field, as in so many others, It also has a lot of interesting names of
Aboriginal people who have made a great contribution, and are well known to
their compatriots and it gives them, I think, the recognition they deserve. And
many of the references, are of course, in our epoch, in our time scale. And I
was pleased to see Lois O'Donoghue mentioned there, and I read her
reference, nothing in it could have said how much leadership she provided
when it really mattered to one of the great leaps forward in the recognition of
the rights of Aboriginal Australians and their right to land in this country.
And while the encyclopaedia refers to the native title decision of the High
Court it hasn't understandably yet referred to the Act because of the cut-off
point for publication, but not only the change in the statutory basis on which
such claims for land can be made came from all that, what came from it was,
I think, also something that needs to be put into the encyclopaedia under T,
and that's the word trust. Because I think a lot of trust, something very
ephemeral, difficult to get your hands on, very hard to develop, easy to
destroy, but terribly important to the way in which things are done. And what
happened during 1993 was the development of a lot of trust. Firstly between
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves, and the fact that
there was something of great moment happening, brought them together,
perhaps as never before, to sit down and negotiate with the Government of
Australia. As I am sure in a negotiation, never had such a discussion of such
significance taken place in the past. In one of the meetings I had with Lois I
stung her by saying that Aboriginal people don't know how to negotiate. And
I said it because I believed it to be true, hoping that they would involve
themselves in the process of negotiation, where you understand what your
core interests are, and you understand what the other persons core interests
are, and you try and negotiate a position that settles both. And by taking up
the leadership of this issue, and providing that the Aboriginal community Lois
brought together, as you know, that group of people who probably never sat
down quite in the same way before and discussed something of such moment
as then.
And a lot of people who are not mentioned in the encyclopaedia, but ought to
be in the future, emerged in whom I have great faith about the future of
Aboriginal people in this country and their leadership, Marcia Langton is one
of them, she is here today. Young people, who really, really started to turn it
before, with Noel Pearson another, David Ross another, and there are many,
many examples. And these will have, I think, an interesting sprinkled position
throughout the encyclopaedia for their contribution in ushering in a new order
of trust between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves.
And we saw this repeated again just last week in our discussions on the land
fund, and certainly a new order of trust between the Aboriginal and Torres-
Strait Islander people and the Government of Australia. Because I think
when the Mabo battle really started to heat up Aboriginal people kept coming
back to the Government, " is it still all right, are they still right". A couple of
weeks later it got hotter, " still ok". " Still ok". And it went on to the point where 
3
as the problems became more stronger we saw these things being negotiated
around so we could comprehend the problems.
I am speaking, perhaps, inordinately long about this, because I think it is such
an epic period between the relationship between Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people and non-aboriginal people in this country, in this very
important epoch that just passed.
So, we have seen periods of change in respect of the Aboriginal community
and its relationship with the nation, if you like, and the Parliament run through
high and low points, and we saw periods in the last, certainly since the
referendum, when a lot of hope has been dissipated, and a lot of spirit has
fallen away to see it come back and flourish again. I hope we can capture
some of this in the encyclopaedia in later editions as it comes along.
The important thing is in the reading of this anybody seeking out the
references can start to pin point things and events and times and places of
significance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, that's not in any
written history because no written history ever existed. And so they're little
snapshots, pieces of the matrix that can let both Aboriginal and nonaboriginal
people work out what the story is. That, I think, is its great value.
And it is such a quick and handy reference, but across such a very large
scale. It is a mighty piece of work, and David Horton deserves the greatest
congratulations for the undertaking, he has also assembled an array of
excellent contributors to match that vision with Ian Howie-Willis and Dallas
De Brabander featuring most prominently, but of course there are many
others. I would also like to congratulate the Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Studies headed by Marcia Langton and Bill Jonas for their
commitment to this massive project. It is a great job of work, well done, and
well undertaken, and I hope it becomes one of our long run best sellers. It is
out there and people have it in our schools and at home and to make that
when they have the thought, or they want to know something, that they go
and they find a quick reference to it, but a comprehensive and readable one.
Congratulations to all concerned, I look forward to this huge work in its later
editions for some of the matters I mention, but I think all of us stand in some
awe at the amount of time and effort that has gone into this, and appreciate
ever so much the great initiative and the work which everyone has
undertaken in bringing it to fruition. It is with very great pleasure that I launch
this important publication, these two very special volumes.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH KERRY O'BRIEN, LATELINE, ABC TV
22 JUNE 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KOB: Mr Keating, welcome to Lateline.
PM: Thank you, Kerry.
KOB: Whatever else we talk about tonight, I know it won't surprise you that intere -st rates
comes first? You have repeated time after time in the past few months that none of
the fundamentals in the Australian economy justify a rise in interest rates. But the
bond markets continue to go mad, the bond rate is up from 6.5 per cent in February
to nearly 10 * per cent today. How long can you resist that pressure with all of the
psychological instability that it builds into the market place and into Australia's
business community, and for Australian consumers for that matter?
PM: Well I think it builds a bit into the market place, but I am not sure it builds that much
in the business community. I think what has happened here has been triggered off
by American activities. The United States federal funds rate got down to 3 per
percentage points. At our lowest we are at four and three quarters. That is, one
and three quarter percentage points above the Americans. They had their
economy far more fully employed and there was pressure in the US financial
markets to say, look, these rates are too low. Three or four moves by the US
Federal Reserve Board brought them up.
KOB: And they are expected to keep going up.
PM: Well, I don't know about that. And, we are at four and three quarters, so our
business lending rates, this very day, is somewhere between 6 and 9 per cent.
That is, 6 to 6.5 per cent if you are in Bills, 9 per cent if you are getting reasonably
preferred rates. Now, we are talking about an underlying rate of inflation of 2 per
cent here, Kerry. So, that is a real rate of interest somewhere between 4.5 per cent
and 7 per cent. Now, that is not low. This is not easy money. This is business
lending, 4.5 to 7 per cent real. So, I think a few people in the markets should dwell
on some of those facts and just remember those things.
i 
KOB: Yes, but they are not are they? I mean, they would know that, they would know
that as well as you do. That doesn't seem to influence them at all.
PM: They have taken the US scene as our own, and it is not our own. I mean the fact is
we are doing much better on growth. One of the problems we always had in
Australia is wage push inflation. Wage is growth, average weekly earning growth
in the year to March was point 5 per cent, half of a per cent.
KOB: Yes, but you see you have been trotting these figures out in one form or another for
months. The message has been substantially the same. They are not taking any
notice of you.
PM: Kerry, you have got to go back a long time to remember a conjunction of these sort
of circumstances. We have had inflation decelerating.
KOB: I know. You know, they know. But the bond rate is still going up, they are still
saying that they know you are going to have to increase interest rates by three
quarters of a per cent to one per cent.
PM: I mean, here's the Government, the labour market, the trade unions, the business
community, everybody, has got inflation down statistically to one per cent, with an
underlying rate of about two. Of all places we have got the financial market saying,
oh, hang on, we think it might be 4 per cent or 5 per cent, and we are pricing our
instruments accordingly. The problem with that sort of an approach, were the
Government to simply say, " well that's right, don't take any notice of us or anyone
else in the business community". The problem with all that is that it starts
generating wage claims. People start saying, well hang on, if mortgage rates are
rising, if the wage restraint I have given has been useless, if there is nothing in it
for me but higher interest rates and higher costs let's go and claim it in the market
place.
KOB: So, you are saying that if interest rates do go up they could trigger another push for
wages?
PM: I am just saying you wouldn't want people in the bond markets, you are talking
about bond market dealers. Now, these are people in super funds, managing a
bond portfolio, probably somewhere between 25 and 40 years of age, maybe been
through one economic down-turn, maybe, never really had any grip on inflation
fighting as a concept, telling the Government, the ACTU, the trade unions, the
business community, that they know better about inflation than we know.
KOB: How long can you continue to stare the markets down?
PM: Well, the Government, we, have made our position very clear. While the
fundamentals are as we have them, then we don't see a need to shift short term
rates. Now, as the recovery goes on, Kerry, and there is simply more growth and
more investment and a bigger demand for funds, the price of money may rise. But
that is not here yet. You have got to remember this, this is before the investment
phase, the large investment phase. I mean, you have got people in markets
wanting to lift interest rates actually before the investment comes. 
KOB: Absolutely, and that is a problem in itself, isn't it? I mean, you say that the
business community is not terribly fussed at this moment, but Ian Salmon, the head
of the Business Council and also perhaps Australia's biggest investor expressing
real concern about the implications of all of this right now. We hear Bert Evans
representing the metal trades sector, an important sector, saying that this could
have deleterious affects, so they are concerned. I mean, in terms of the
psychological impact.
PM: I am not saying that people mightn't be concerned about it, but the point is, facts
are facts and a truth is a truth. Wages growth is half a percentage point for the
year. I mean, you have got to back 30 to 35 years to find something like that.
KOB: Do you believe that an increase is still months away?
PM: Well, I'm not here to be giving you a calendar..
KOB: You have gone to some degree in the past
PM: Look, I am not here to be calibrating interest rate movements and timing versus
activity. But I will just make this point, we have seen a substantial appreciation of
the Australian dollar now over the last four or five months. And this again, what
doesi it do? If does two things. It makes imports cheaper which makes a more
competitive environment, and therefore keeps downward pressure on inflation. It
takes some of the price surge out of commodity prices going to the primary export
sector, it moderates growth, it moderates surges in income and it provides more
price competition in the economy. This isn't a further bull point for inflation. That
is, for low inflation. So, when you look at all those fundamentals they are looking
pretty right.
KOB:. Do you believe the reports that the Reserve Bank is becoming more concerned
about protecting its credibility on the Fssue of controlling inflation? How does it get
back ahead of the markets and convince them of its resolve to keep inflation under
3 per cent, and that resolve is still strong without actually putting rates up?
PM: I noticed some report yesterday, or today it might have been, saying that people in
the bond markets are worried about the Government and the Reserve Banks
resolve on inflation. Now, I am just saying to you, these are by and large people in
the 25-30 age bracket.
KOB: Their age bracket doesn't matter.
PM: But these are people who have not been through two or three economic cycles.
That's the point I am telling you.
KOB: But that doesn't matter does it, if they are the people that are calling the shots?
PM: I am telling you, about inflation, you have got to live through the surge in inflation in
Australia in the ' 70s, that of very high inflation rates to understand what has
happened here. There has been a break in inflationary expectations and we have
seen a rapid deceleration in inflation. The Reserve Bank and the Government put
cash rates up to 18 per cent for over 18 months. So, if that is not resolve, Kerry,
what is it? What is resolve? Can I just say that we have just done another Accord, 
another Accord, $ 8.00 for the bottom third of the workforce for the next two years,
which is again consistent with that very low inflation rate.
KOB: If business and consumer confidence clearly become affected by this, and if the
instability is on-going, your hand will be forced won't it? Regardless of political
problems?
PM: Well I don't know. The point is we will see how activity goes. That's the point.
That is, growth and investment and demand for funds, but we will always keep a
weathered eye on inflation. That is, we will keep our low inflation objective always
in place in operating monetary policy.
KOB: Is it your anticipation at this stage that there will be no sign of heat on inflation, of
undue heat in the economy for at least several months?
PM: I can't see it anywhere.
KOB: You don't expect it?
PM: I can't see it.
KOB: For months to come?
PM: We keep getting national accounts data and every quarter wages growth
moderates, inflation decelerates, you know. The Government has always, always
got an eye on wage claims, always. And it will always keep an eye particularly in
an upswing in the cycle.
KOB: Politically it is a frustrating bind for you, isn't it? The Opposition has been harping
about a rise for months. A rise at some time does seem inevitable. The minute
that rates go up they rekindle the public's painful memories. That is, business
memories and home owners memories of that awful spiral up to 18 per cent plus.
And the minute they have gone up the speculation will start again, won't it, about
the next rise after that? I don't know how you deal with that politically.
PM: Well just cast yourself back three to four weeks. What was the Opposition saying,
Mr Downer then as Shadow Treasurer, he was saying he couldn't believe the
growth forecast in the Budget, they were too optimistic. Remember the attack on
Budget night? That growth, there wasn't enough of it. The Government had
overestimated the growth forecast and we needed more of it but we weren't going
to get it. Now, we have got the growth, what's his line today? The growth doesn't
matter, what his line today is is interest rates.
KOB: At some stage interest rates are going to go up, and when they do you have got a
political problem, and the minute they do the cycle starts again too.
PM: Kerry, I can talk over you to, if you want me to.
KOB: Yes, go for it.
PM: The Opposition is just into opportunism, three weeks ago there is not enough
growth and the Government has cooked the figures. 
KOB: Yes, you said that.
PM: When the national accounts come out at 5 per cent growth, there is now too much
growth. They are barracking for the markets, the financial market, this narrow
financial market, they are barracking for the market against the interests of the
country. That's what Alexander Downer is doing.
KOB: But you have still got a political problem which surely you must acknowledge that
when interest rates do go up it will trigger very painful memories and it will also
immediately they go up there will be another cycle of predictions about further
rises.
PM: But, Kerry, were interest rates to rise at any time, at any time, off a cash rate of
around 5 per cent, you are drawing a very long bow to be talking about 5 per cent
and 18, aren't you?
KOB: Yes, but you are dealing with psychology as well aren't you? You are dealing with
perceptions and you are dealing with memories, and they are painful memories.
PM: At the moment, they are good memories. I mean, you have got low housing rates
of interest.
KOB: Although you say yourself the real interest rate is high?
PM: But you have had a huge increase in disposable income from lower interest rates,
and that's one of the reasons why we have seen a boom in housing starts.
KOB: But you do acknowledge that real interest rates are high compared to other
countries?
PM: I say that real interest rates, there is no easy money in Australia, with real rates of
interest at the figures I nominated earlier.
KOB: I take it you are still confident of meeting those all important budget targets on
business investment. How early and how strongly do you expect to see it flowing in
the new financial year?
PM: Well, the conditions have never been more propitious and what you find with these
sorts of economic conditions the text books work. I mean, you get the investment
and you can see it in the expectations data.
KOB: But, we've been waiting and waiting and waiting and I know that the signs appear
to be good, but how strongly and how early in the new financial year do you expect
to see it flowing?
PM: Well, I think the budget forecasts will be met. The thing about this recovery as the
Treasury said in Statement Two, it's had a rolling nature. It started with
government consumption, then private consumption, then housing and then
investment. So, it has had a four phase roll in quality to it and I think that's fine. 
KOB: But, have you got any sense of whether that's going to come as a great spurt or
whether it's going to come in a kind of steady flow over the 12 months. I mean,
what are the signs that you and the Treasury are going to be looking for to
reassure yourselves that that business investment is going to be of the order that
you want and so desperately need and what scope do you have for further action if,
in fact, it doesn't appear to be coming in the way it should?
PM: Well, we'll take the partial data which comes through monthly and we'll take the
anecdotal evidence as it comes through and we'll see, I think, there investment
reflecting the budget forecast.
KOB: Debate continues about the issue of public sector infrastructure spending and the
kind of infrastructure we have and should have and you know backwards the
arguments that core public sector infrastructure feeds business investment
because it assists private sector productivity as well as creating jobs. Yet, public
sector infrastructure is at its lowest level since the war. It was 7.5 per cent of GDP
in 1984-85, it's been declining ever since apart from the blip of ' One Nation'.* 1994-
it's going to be down to 4.4 per cent of GDP. Haven't you got to arrest that
decline and if you can't increase deficits, haven't you got to raise taxes to do so.
PM: No. Well, the first point is this. In the 1980s Australia was caught in a classic
squeeze of a sharp decline in national income coming from the worst commodity
prices since the depression. That was the 1986 crash in the terms of trade which
brought on the ' banana republic' stuff. We made a very rapid adjustment to fiscal
policy to make a public sector contribution to national savings. If you have a
savings problem as we had of that dimension, then, you can't have a gold plated
infrastructure.
KOB: True.
PM: So, therefore, we cut our cloth accordingly.
KOB: Without raising tax..
PM: Now, the implication of your question is, well, maybe this will inhibit at some point
national efficiency. Well, it might Kerry. It may have already, but that is the price
you pay when your national income is down and your savings are not what they
ought to be to cover your investments.
KOB: It's also the price you pay when you continue on this path of lower taxes which both
sides of politics in this country are continuing to walk down.
PM: But, there's another part to this. There is another point I want to make to you and
that is the Government has just now changed the tax treatment of infrastructure
bonds. Now, I think, this will open up an opportunity for savings from the big public
savings vehicles like the superannuation industry and particularly award
superannuation to invest inP,-tfait is, optimal private sector provided public
infrastructure. Now, I think, this is going to make a very large difference and you'll
start seeing state governments starting to focus. I mean, you'll soon hear State
Premiers and Treasurers starting to beat their chest about this project and that, it
will be because of the Federal Government's policies in respect of these and
tapping that great pool of savings which is now in award superannuation which, of 
course, the Liberal Party has always opposed. That is, occupational
superannuation for the workforce. A decade ago we had about $ 17 billion in super
funds. We've now got over, I think, $ 330 billion and that money is looking for a
home and some of it can look for a home in Australia in privately provided public
infrastructure.
KOB: And yet the unease continues within your own party about the levels of taxation
and the levels of infrastructure that the Government should be funding and Duncan
Kerr's comments, your Justice Minister, a Cabinet Minister ( sic) in Tasmania,
recently underscored that yet again. Australia is now the lowest taxed country in
the OECD the so called western world total revenues as a proportion of GDP
were 27.8 per cent in 1986-87, they will be about 23.7 per cent in the next financial
year, that means $ 16 billion decline next financial year $ 16 billion next year that
you do not have. $ 5 billion more than your whole deficit. You now seem to be in a
political straitjacket on taxes.
PM: Yes, well, let me get the advert right, Kerry. This is a low tax government. Let me
say proudly, this is a low tax government.
KOB: To the point where you can
PM: No, let me finish it. Lower tax than anything we have seen from the Coalition and a
bit lower at the moment because of the loss of receipts coming from the recession
and the impact of the recession.
KOB: They'll go lower again because they are talking about various tax concessions on
things like business exports and so on.
PM: Who are?
KOB: The Opposition.
PM: Well, the Opposition has already got an $ 8 billion gap. I mean, here's Alexander
Downer running around today saying " oh well, we need a tighter fiscal policy so we
don't have these interest rates effects." I mean, the hide of him. And, he's out
there with an $ 8 billion problem and he's been in the job three weeks. I mean, the
Financial Review yesterday sketched out the $ 8 billion gap that he and Mr Costello
already have.
KOB: The point is
PM: So, there's no point in making a reference to them. They are not going to be any
help.
KOB: All right, but you're both in a political straitjacket on taxes aren't you and it's a
problem of your own making?
PM: Look, Kerry, no, no.
KOB: It's almost impossible for any political party in this country today to actually
increase taxes substantially. 
PM: Let me just make this clear to you. I believe this, that when public sector spending
in the 1970s rose under Malcolm Fraser to nearly 31 per cent of GDP, under
Malcolm Fraser and John Howard, and revenue rose accordingly, it dislocated
private investment in this country. It dislocated employment and that's why in the
first seven years after that government there was five times more employment
growth than there was in the previous seven years Now, if the aim of the game is
to get people into jobs and to make this place productive, principally that's got to go
into private sector investment. I don't believe that a great, I mean, this sort of line
which percolates around parts that are left in this country, that basically, they are
now using the line ' we've got to be economically efficient, therefore, we'll go back
to what we always believed having a huge, a large anyway, or a larger public
sector is the way forward.'
KOB: It includes people in your own Cabinet.
PM: No, it does not include many people. That is the point.
KOB: All right. Can we look now at industrial relations and the first big challenge that you
nominated for this term of government was labour market reform. You initially
pleased business and angered the unions with the goals that you and your Minister
Laurie Brereton articulated. By the time your draft legislation became law, you'd
made 140 amendments. The unions were happy and business was angry. Now
you've made further changes, but will the package deliver the goods and how will
you measure its success over the next year or so? What will your benchmarks be
going to the electorate at the next election?
PM: The number of private enterprise agreements. That is, the number of enterprise
agreements in the private sector that are undertaken from the time the legislation
was introduced until the election.
KOB: Well, what about the quality of those agreements. You can wave around on a
piece of paper any number of agreements, but how do you measure the quality of
those agreements?
PM: Well, I don't think you can just say that. I mean, here we are now talking about an
$ 8 a week increase for those who can't access enterprise bargaining and we are
talking about it for really, the bottom 20-25 per cent of the workforce. I mean, we
are already in a position where the great bulk of the workforce is going to be
adjusted by a flexible system of enterprise bargaining and award flexibility courtesy
of this Government's changes with the ACTU. And, I think, as we see those
proliferate and let me say, some of these State Governments that actually say " oh,
hang on, our legislation is better for enterprise flexibility" look at the number
already of enterprise agreements in the Federal jurisdiction under our legislation
and, say, the number in Victoria or the number in New South Wales. I mean, they
are infinitesimal.
KOB: All right, but I come back to the quality and presumably your ultimate goal with all
this is* in creased productivity. Now, labour market economists are talking about an
expectation of p~ rqtuctivity in the next 12 months of something like 2 per cent.
Surely your goal would have to be higher? 
PM: But, what employment? I mean, what have we got at the moment 5 per cent GDP
growth and roughly 3 per cent employment growth, or 3 and 1/ 4, so we've got 2 per
cent productivity. If we want more people back in the workforce the standard
measures of productivity are always going to drop, always going to drop. But,
we've got a more fully employed country. So, what we want is..
KOB: But, have you got a work force that is competitive, that is seeing boosts in exports
PM: Well, with 1 per cent inflation I'd say that's right. With exports, despite the fact that
we ye got 5 per cent growth, exports are out-pacing imports by 11.2 per cent to
about 9.5 per cent. What you'll see, you made the point, will they be good
agreements, if that's what you're saying?
KOB: Yes.
PM: Well, that's up to business isn't it? Business has been saying to the Government
now for half a dozen years ' let's make the system more flexible'. And we are now
saying..
KOB: You say that's up to business..
PM: It's up to business and their employees.
KOB: You've got a report coming to you in the next couple of months from a task force
which was tasked by your government with measuring the quality of Australian
management. They've already issued enough interim reports for you to have a
very clear picture of their views of Australian management. Their fundamental view
of Australian management is that it is extremely poor, that it is archaic, that it is still
operating in the 1950s, that it is too hierarchical, the quality of Australian
management is poor. You're saying that you're trusting that management to deliver
you quality enterprise agreements.
PM: Well, so, what are you arguing?
KOB: You're saying that you've got no way of measuring the quality of these agreements,
it's up to management. And, yet, management, you're being told, is not good.
PM: But, then I say, what are you arguing, we go back to a centralised wage fixing
system?
KOB: No, I'm asking you how you're going to measure, as the Government which wants
to see these outcomes, how you're going to measure the quality of these
agreements.
PM: Kerry, look, opening this economy up, a decade ago has changed the face of
Australia, including corporate Australia. The first wave of managers went very
quickly.' The second wage of managers came on, tottered around the scene and
the market cleaned them up. We're into the third wave now and there are some
good people there. But, we will continue to take time to make this a more
sophisticated management scene, in this country. But, I do believe that there is
now a productivity culture out there in business where the good manager spots the 
opportunity to lift productivity in the business and to split the higher earnings
between profits and wages. Now, I think that's on and you can see it in the
numbers and you can see it in the inflation rate and you can see it in the growth
numbers.
KOB: We are, of course, rapidly running out of time and I've got far too many things to
talk about. On Telecom, I know you've said that Telecom is not on the
Government's privat is ation agenda but do you also rule out beyond the next
election the stripping of Telecom's non core assets? And, if, as Frank Blount, the
head of Telecom says, Telecom's core business revenue is going to decline, how
will Telecom fund its expansion overseas which is, presumably, the only way it can
maintain its place amongst the world's major telecommunications carriers?
PM: Well, as a general policy what we've done is set up a competitive environment for
Telecom. We've established a second carrier Optus has now made substantial
market inroads and one of the things we're doing over the next six to twelve
months is looking at the future of telecommunications policy and where we go after
1997 in terms of opening up. So, that's the model. The ownership of Telecom,
therefore, isn't especially important other than that it's subject to the competitive
disciplines of that particular competitive market place. Now, by and large that's
been happening. We've seen a tremendous improvement in productivity, a very
large decline in tariffs and, by and large, I think Telecom is finding it can fund itself,
it's going in and it's making innovative deals around the place with various private
sector organisations.
KOB: So, its ownership is not important?
PM: Well, I think in terms of whether you deliver better services at lower prices, what
has been important is the absence of a competitive environment until the
government's reforms...
KOB: So, it doesn't matter if it's publicly owned or privately owned?
PM: Not of its essence, no.
KOB: Then why don't you sell it?
PM: Well, it depends what environment the governement has chosen. The government
has chosen to have Telecom in public ownership and to set up a competitive
framework with a duopolist. Now, we are now considering where the duopoly goes
after 1997.
KOB: So, its future is a question mark?
PM: Well, Telecom's future is a question mark in that environment. That is, can it be as
certain of its future in that environment as it was before, say, 1990? Of course it
can't. But in terms of its ownership, though, that's a different question again.
KOB: So, the issue of whether this goveniment might ultimately sell off its non core assets
is also an open question?
PM: Oh, no, that's not an open question. I mean... 
KOB: You would close off that option?
PM: But it depends what a non core asset is. I mean, Telecom has made all sorts of
corporate arrangements in the last year or two, so..
KOB: Is it important for Telecom to stay together, as it is now?
PM: Every last little tiny piece of it?
KOB: We're not talking tiny pieces, the substantial elements?
PM: No, every last piece of it? No, it's not. But, as an institution, yes.
KOB: But, if it requires substantial capital funding...
PM: From the Government?
KOB: Capital funding per se.
PM: It's not going to get it. It's not going to get it from the government.
KOB: It's not going to get it from the government. Where does it get it, then?
PM: No, it will be provided by Optus or somebody else. In other words, the market will
fund the capital the market needs from some other source. In other words,
Telecom will be able to grow at a rate where it can replenish its capital. If it can't
grow quickly enough, it will be taken up by other contributors in the market place...
In this case, Optus, the resellers of services and any future we've now got
Dataphone in part, obviously, the capital requirements in the Australian
telecommunications market are going to be taken up by other suppliers.
KOB: Your comments to journalists in Paris about whether or not you've become bored
-with politics, sick of the Opposition, sick of the media and so on have fan-nedspeculation
that you've got an almost terminal problem of maintaining consistent
interest and energy in politics. I wonder how you address that and perhaps you
can tell us exactly what you did say?
PM: Well, there were a dozen journalists there and only one of them took that view, so
there you are.
KOB: What were you saying?
PM: We were in...
KOB: It arose because journalists were pursuing, as I understand it, were pursuing the
signals that they are hearing within the government ranks about concerns amongst
some of your colleagues that you've been privately indicating to people that you
are bored.
PM: I've neves. privately indicated that and it never arose in that context at all. We were
in the Australian Ambassador's residence and a little squad of journalists were 
taking in the view of Paris and, of course, I got on to one of my subjects,
architecture and what have you... and they, sort of, went along nicely from there.
Kerry, look, I can't remember a time that has been, for me, better than recently.
We won an election; the Opposition said we'd have a double dip recession and a
depression; we've got five per cent economic growth; we've got one per cent
inflation; we've put through a huge piece of cultural and property law with Mabo;
we've now introduced a White Paper, which I think most Western governments
would be proud of, to try and reform the labour market; we've made tremendous
advances in our reach into Asia and also with APEC, the development of APEC
which is developing further and will do in Indonesia in November this year; we've
got the whole Council of Australian Governments agenda on competition policy...
You know, I don't think I could have, if you had been writing the script back then in
March 1993 I don't think it could have been better. And, perhaps I illustrated this
best by my cracker night analogy in Brisbane recently...
KOB: OK...
PM: . Where I didn't think I sounded bored at all.
KOB: There's a dangerous political acceptance...
PM: Can I just interrupt you and say, though, that in the cracker night analogy, of
course, I never even mentioned Alexander Downer, I never even gave him Tom
Thumb status at the time.-
KOB: Well, he snuk up on you, didn't he? There is a perception amongst some of your
colleagues that you'll go some time in the next term. But, that, of course, does give
the Opposition more scope their aura of instability coming up to the next election.
Are you committed...
PM: The Opposition developing their aura of instability? Let me just get...
KOB: Are you committed to serving another full term after this one?
PM: The answer is, I am. I am. But, the Opposition which has John Howard, Andrew
Peacock, John Hewson, two deputy leaders, Peter Reith and the former deputy, all
sitting on the front bench along with two other leaders and two fizzers, McLachlan
and Bishop and they're talking about instability?
KOB: Yes, but it's a new ball game with the Opposition now, isn't it? And, even though
the poll figures that we've had in the past few weeks would reflect, to some extent,
a honeymoon, that immediate sharp lift in their stocks and drop in yours, surely,
was a strong knee jerk message from the electorate that a lot of people out there
would still like to give you... They'd still like the luxury of giving you a kick in the
teeth, figuratively, of course, that the only thing holding them back was their
rejection of John Hewson's damaged leadership and that Alexander Downer is
going to be a much tougher target for you to hit?
PM: Do you really believe that, Kerry? Do you really believe that?
KOB: Well, he's been doing pretty well so far. 
13
PM: Has he? I mean, he said he was for clean politics, his first utterance against me
was that he wanted me to clean up my act...
KOB: But this is your critique of him compared to public perception of him.
PM: No, no, he jumped straight in to prostitution with MPs in Parliament and
encouraged he became the Sultan of Sleaze within about two weeks. Then he
said he was in favour of blocking off foreign investment in this country. Can you
imagine it, with a current account deficit of $ 16 billion, with us going out to the rest
of the world, he's opposed to us investing in other parts of the world. I mean, this is
someone who was telling us a year earlier that we ought to open the flood gates
and remove the Foreign Investment Review Board. I mean, this chap will say
anything, anywhere.
KOB: And you're not going to acknowledge...
PM: If you think I've got a problem with that, Kerry, it's like hitting balls coming in slow
motion.
KOB: On the. republic, how long can you sustain the debate without saying anything new,
without starting to come to grips with the substantial debate, I mean, where do you
expect to take the debate between now and the next election?
PM: I expect to take it to a referendum sometime between now and the year 2000,
2001. That's where I said we'd take it, at the last election, that's where we will take
it. And, all these people who want to run backwards there they were the other
night, the monarchists, singing the song, the anthem of another country, including
the leader of the National Party, God save the Queen, there he was, clinking his
glass...
KOB: Yes, but, this is still at the rhetoric end, isn't it? I mean, at some point you've got to
develop your line on the republic to the next stage. When do you do that? How do
you hold off from giving people a more substantial signal about where you want to
go?
PM: Well, what we're doing at the moment is considering the report which Mr Tumnbull
and his committee prepared for us and for the public. We're wading through those
issues and we're looking at, first of all, getting some testing of opinion and how and
in what way our institutions ought to be shaped for Australia to become a republic.
It will be very direct, well thought through, forensic, so don't have any doubt about
that. But, again, all in good time.
KOB: I'm jettisoning questions all over the place, here. Bob Hawke's book is due out in
the next few months and I understand that he's already indicated semi privately that
it includes material that could damage your prime ministership. I believe he
recounts in the book his version of your private conversation with him after that...
PM: He told Malcolm Fraser and Malcolm told me and he's told you and...
KOB: . That he expects, according to Malcolm Fraser, that he expects that there will be
material-n that book that will bring down your prime ministership. And, I believe,
that he recounts in the book his version of that conversation that took place 
between you and he after the famous Placido Domingo speech in which, he says,
you referred to Australia as ' the arse end of the earth'. Did you say that, and if you
did, what where you saying about your attitude and your commitment to Australia?
PM: Kerry, I've been in public life, at the end of this year, 25 years. I've served 11 as a
minister and over two as prime minister. I was amongst the group that changed
Australia from the Rip van Winkle years of Menzies when Australia was shut up
behind tariff barriers under do nothing Coalition governments, the government that
gave Australia a future in the Asia-Pacific and has remodelled it as no one could
have expected a decade ago. That's my commitment to Australia and if anybody
doubts that I mean, I don't believe one can exercise that kind of energy and
pride in this country and have any doubts about one's commitment to it.
KOB: But, did you in that conversation refer to Australia as the arse end of the earth?
PM: If Bob's got a book... Let's wait and see what his book says.
KOB: The point is, if he makes that stick, if enough people in this country believe that you
described Australia as the arse end of the earth do you acknowledge that that is,
potentially, very damaging, politically, for you?
PM: Kerry, I don't know what's in the book but I've always made it clear to my
colleagues, when we're way out of the world trading milieu, away from the flux of
the Northern Hemisphere, as an island continent in the South Pacific, we're always
going to have to do better. I've always told them that, always.
KOB: Well, we're well out of time, thanks very much for joining us.
PM: Good.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER494
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MEMBERSHIP OF THE CIVICS EXPERT GROUP
The Government has finalised today the membership of the Civics Expert Group.
I foreshadowed the creation of the Expert Group in my address to the New Educational
Realities Conference on 15 June 1994. The Expert Group will provide the Government
with a plan for a program of -public education. and information on. Australian government,
citizenship and the constitution. The Group's terms of reference are attached.
The Expert Group will be chaired by Professor Stuart Macintyre, the Ernest Scott
Professor of History in the University of Melbourne and a Council Member of the
Constitutional Centenary Foundation. Professor Macintyre has published numerous
books on Australian history, most recently A History for a Nation.
The other members of the Group will be Dr Kenneth Boston, Director-General of the New
South Wales Department of School Education; and Ms Susan Pascoe, Co-ordinating
Chairperson ( Policy) of the Catholic Education Office in Melbourne.
Under the terms of reference the Expert Group will provide the Government with a
strategic plan for a non-partisan program of public education and information on the
Australian system of government, the Australian Constitution, Australian citizenship and
other civics issues. In addition, the Expert Group is to monitor the implementation of the
education program and contribute to its evaluation.
The terms of reference will enable the Expert Group to consult widely, with education
authorities, with political parties and with other expert and interested bodies of individuals
in the field, such as the Constitutional Centenary Foundation.
I have asked the Group to report by 30 November 1994.
As a nation we do not seem to know enough about our system of government and our
national achievements. As I said in my address on 15 June, the Government's education
program will strengthen our democracy by enlivening our appreciation of it. It will inform
all Australians of the privileges and responsibilities of Australian democracy and ensure
that Australians have sufficient information about our system of Government to
participate fully in decision-making processes.
CANBERRA 23 June 1994 
ATTACHMENT A
CIVICS EXPERT GROUP
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The function of the Civics Expert Group is to provide the Government with a
strategic plan for a non-partisan program of public education and information on
the Australian system of government, the Australian Constitution, Australian
citizenship and other civics issues. In addition, the Expert Group is to monitor the
implementation of the program and contribute to its evaluation.
The Group will draw on an assessment of the current level of knowledge of
governmental, constitutional, citizenship and civics matters in the community,
based on research by an expert consultant working in consultation with the Group.
The goal of the Government's public education program is to ensure that
Australians have sufficient information about our system of Government to
participate fully in decision-making processes. The public education program
would therefore be expected to cover a broad range of topics which may include:
the Australian Constitution, its history and development; how the federal
government is structured and operates, including the role and working of the
Parliament, the Judicature and the Executive, together with the Governor-General
and the Monarch; Australia as a federation and the roles of the three tiers of
government; the role and responsibilities of the citizen in government ( eg voting,
jury duty); the principles of responsible parliamentary government; and the
symbols and traditions of our government.
The education program should address the needs of school students and others
in the community. The strategic plan should be available to the Prime Minister by
November 1994. The Government will arrange for its publication. The
strategic plan should have regard to relevant initiatives undertaken by other
organisations and should include recommendations concerning:
initiatives to address deficiencies in the level of public understanding of
governmental, constitutional, citizenship and civics matters;
approaches to the development and testing of appropriate educational
materials; and
the timing, implementation and evaluation of the education program.
In developing the strategic plan, the Expert Group should have regard to the
following objectives for the education program: 
to educate and inform the public about governmental, constitutional,
citizenship and civics issues in Australia;
to help Australians understand their rights and responsibilities as citizens and
to promote good citizenship; and
to enhance Australians' capacity to participate fully in decision-making
processes affecting these issues.
In developing the strategic plan the Group should ensure that recommended
initiatives: have regard to rigorous quality standards and best practice in teaching and
education; are planned to ensure that materials are available on an equitable basis;
are non-partisan and likely to attract wide public acceptance;
take account of the need for rigorous standards of accountability;
use existing programs and delivery mechanisms where possible; and
are planned to provide for appropriate evaluation to assess efficiency and
effectiveness.
The Expert Group should consult, to the extent practicable, with relevant
organisations such as the Constitutional Centenary Foundation, with political
parties and with Australia's government and non-government education sectors. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP,
INTERVIEW WITH KEITH CONLON, RADIO 5AN, ADELAIDE
THURSDAY 23 JUNE, 1994
KC: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: How are you, good, Keith?
KC: Pretty good. Why are you available to the media at such short notice
today, Prime Minister, is it as some critics are already saying, that
you're a bit rattled by Downer's popularity?
PM: No, it's just that you characters put in requests and occasionally we
take them up. And, we take them up when it suits us. And, I did a
major television interview last night on Late/ mne and there's a bit of
press around, today, about that, so I thought this wouldn't be a bad
opportunity. But, of course, if you don't want me on, just let us know.
KC: No, we're delighted that you are. We're hoping that as we're talking to
Alexander Downer fairly regularly we were hoping we might talk to you
more regularly.
PM: Well, now is your chance.
KC: Yes, indeed. One of the big issues that came up last night was
Telecom and we've actually been sent a letter from the Oppositionthey
naturally keep track of what you do during election campaigns-
* and -init you-told Telecom workers, ' Telecom won't be sold under my
government," and later you said, " We are committed to continued
public ownership of Telecom and Australia Post. tHow does that sit
with your comments last night that public or private ownership, it
doesn't matter, it's not of its essence, public ownership is not
especially important? 
PM; Before that I said that we are keeping Telecom in public ownership.
That is, because of the pivotal role telecommunications plays in the
economy and society and the need to ensure that services are
available to all of the community on a fair basis. Because, as you
know there are enormous cross subsidies in Telecom. A lot of rural
and provincial country users, and certain other services within cities,
are effectively a set of cross subsidies. I think, keeping those services
there and the sheer size of Telecom and the local loop, as it's called
that is the telephone connections to the homes of this country it's
very important, I think, to make sure that those services are not
impeded. So, that's why the Government has always said that
Telecom will remain in public ownership. But, the question then was
put to me, " Well, in terms of tariff rates and competition and
efficiencies, is, therefore, the public ownership thing critical?" I said
no, providing there's a competitive model there and we have a
competitive model now, with Optus, with Vodaphone and, of course, a
lot of private resellers of Telecom services.
KC: You did say last night, or you actually wanted Kerry O'Brien to qualify
the question last night, Prime Minister, you were saying, " Are we
talking every little bit of it?" Has that left room for the Left
PM: You were viewing, were you Keith, you were viewing?
KC: I was certainly watching. Does that leave room for the Left of your
party to be continually concerned about what they would call
privatisation by stealth?
PM: No, because what we're saying is that the government's got no plans
for the sale of any part of Telecom. None of that is on the government
agenda. But, its precise structure will always be evolutionary, it's
continuing to adapt and change. So, not every last morsel of it will
always be critical to Telecom, the entity.
KC: So are there some non core assets that could be sold sometime soon?
PM: There are none that we are planning to sell but Telecom is making
commercial arrangements every day of the week and in a year from
now or two or three years from now you wouldn't know what there will
be there.
KG: In a wide ranging interview last night, Prime Minister, this alleged
comment that is coming up in Bob Hawke's book came out this idea
that you had referred in a private conversation with him, to Australia,
as the ' arse end of the earth'. Did you say that?
PM: I can't ever remember saying that to Mr Hawke but if it's a reference to
a short hand way of saying that Australia is way out of the Northern
Hemisphere markets and is a long way from everywhere, that we have 
to be better than most, that we have to be competitive, that we have to
actually go out and get business, that we have to actually be better at
trade and promotion these are all points that I have made to the
Labor cabinet over a decade.
KG: Is it likely, though, to become one of those statements like the ' silly old
bugger' phrase that Mr Hawke had to carry with him, an aside
perhaps?
PM: Mr Hawke said that in public, to an aging person in a shopping centre.
I don't remember making this comment to Mr Hawke, at all.
KC: Did it did it in any way, if you said something similar to this, did it in
any way reflect upon your attitude towards Australia as it is today?
PM: I notice Alexander Downe r running on about this today saying that, you
know, he wouldn't talk about his country in this way. He wants his
country to have the Head of State an English Monarch, not an
Australian. I mean, here's the Leader of the National Party the other
night singing the national anthem of another country, " God Save The
Queen". I mean, you know, let.. I mean, I think this debate about our
commitment to Australia is a pretty silly debate frankly. I mean, I've
been a member of Parliament for 25 years, I've been a Minister for 11,
I've been Prime Minister for 2 and a half years, to be having a debate
about whether one's committed to Australia or not is pretty, pretty
puerile, I think. I mean, I accept the fact that Mr Downer's committed to
Australia, as I am, but he's not committed to the sort of policies I
believe are in Australia's best interest.
KG: But this business about who's Australian and who's not and what the
attitude is seems to be a matter of continuing comment. I understand
in the Senate this morning,_ Galreth Evans told the Senate at least your
Government has a leader with an Australian family, so he's making it
an issue.
PM: Well, I didn't know he'd said that. That matter is simply a matter for
Mrs Downer herself.
KG: Is it though that kind of continuing personal sniping that you claim that
you don't want to be part of now?
PM: But I'm not part of it. I mean I've just given you my reply. I mean,
that's a matter for Mrs Downer.
KG: And Senator Evans, perhaps?
PM: Well, Senator Evans can speak for himself. 
KC: Prime Minister, the market is obviously an area of enormous
importance. It was the substance of the talk last night with Kerry
O'Brien. What about the allegation today that it is not a question of
whether the settings are right within Australia, but perceptions in the
overseas markets that there is loose fiscal policy here?
PM: Well that, that Keith, that's a bit of nonsense. Here we are look I was,
as you know, recently at the D-Day commemoration with most of the
leaders of Western Europe. Not a person there, not a Prime Minister,
not a President, had 5 per cent economic growth and 1 per cent
inflation. Not one. Not one had anything like 3 and a 1/ 4 per cent
employment growth. Now they're the settings that Australia has got
and in our national accounts, that came out just 2 or 3 weeks ago, for
the year to March we found that average weekly earnings growth was
half a percentage point. I mean, the thing that normally drives inflation
along in this country, I mean you've got to go back, I don't know,
you've got to go back well before I was in public life to find wages so
subdued and as you know, the Government has just made another
arrangement to pay $ 8 a week this year coming, and the following
year, which will hold that's for the bottom 25 30 per cent of the
workforce which will hold inflation, again consistent with that low
inflation outcome. So...
KC: And those, those things are within the country Prime Minister, but this
is the perception of a world market, a market which you wanted us to
enter Alexander Downer's made the point this morning.
PM: It's not the world markets doing this, it's the Australian bond market
doing this. This is not, the international bond markets have not shifted
to the degree to which the Australian Bond Market has shifted.
KC: This morning one of the Australian dealers has fought back, Prime
Minister, and said " Look, it is not the Australian dealers, it is not their
fault, we are part of a global market".
PM: Oh, they're part of a global market but in the end who holds the great
stock of Australian Bonds? It's held in the domestic portfolios, of, you
know, the AMP Society's number one fund, National Mutuals' funds. I
mean, they're held by the big Super funds and private instituions and
companies, that's who holds the bonds principally and the bond
markets may here.
KC: Prime Minister, we started out with the Leader of the Opposition this
morning here on 5AN asking him to do a bit of self-assessment on his
first month in, would you mind doing a quick swat analysis? What do
you think Alexander Downer's strengths have been in the first month?
PM: Well, I think he's made the mistake of thinking he can go back to
Malcolm Fraser's policies, and Malcolm Fraser's approach to life. That 
is, back to that blancmange policies of the Fraser years, where we
missed a decade of opportunitiy to restructure ourself and then had to
do it with a great urgency from the early 1980' s onwards. We should
have actually been changing this country, making the linkages into
Asia, opening up the tariff barriers, getting our business competitive,
lifting product innovation, lifting exports of things other than primary
products. We should have been doing that from the early 1970' s and
we lost that time and it's one of the reasons why the liberal Party is as
ideological as it has been in the last, say, half dozen, ten years is
because what they perceive is the perceived failures of Malcolm
Fraser's administration, yet Alexander Downer wants to emulate it with
soft fluffy talk anywhere and certainly, no, no hardness for policy What
he's saying is..
KC: Is he a tougher political opponent, though Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I don't, I haven't had time to work that out, I mean John, John
Hewson never made anyhting very easy for me, but if you look at what
I've seen so far from Alexander Downer was, is basically spoiling
negativity. On the Land Fund, where he had an opportunity with
Aboriginal Reconciliation in this country, to put the MABO mess of the
Liberal Party behind him, he corrected Chris Gallus the first time she
opened her mouth in respect of saying maybe we should consider our
support for the land fund, when the Church..
KC: Prime Minister,
PK: when the Church..
KC: Prime Minister, unfortunately the news is coming up and we, and the
news waits for no one. I much appreciate your time being with us
today.
PK: OK, Thank you then.
ends 



TEL 0 gu m0 o w% nr1 0-E MN IVS5I1N/ 9I4N
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ALLEGATION BY MR HAWKE
A Channel Nine news report has tonight broadcast what
purports to be a verbatim account of a conversation
between Mr Hawke and myself in 1991. According to
Channel Nine, these remarks are contained in Mr Hawke's
book. I categorically deny ever making these remarks.
The allegation is deeply offensive and defamatory. it is
clearly intended to personally vilify and politically
damage me.
I have served 25 years in the Australian Parliament, 11
years as a Cabinet Minister and two and a half years as
Prime Minister. People can choose to believe the record,
and what is on the record the real, tangible testaments
of my affection for Australia and devotion to its
interests or they can believe Mr Hawke's alleged
fragment of a private conversation.
CANBERRA 23 JUNE 1994 T2EL3:. Jun. 94 19: 29 No. 02? P. 01/ 01 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH GRAHAM DOBELL, RADIO AUSTRALIA
FRIDAY 24 JUNE, 1994
GD: Prime Minister, what will you be saying to the Indonesians about the
closure of the three news magazines?
PM: Well, I'm not going there, principally, to talk about the closure of the
three news magazines. I'm going to Indonesia as part of a visit to
participate in the Australia Today trade forum the largest
international exhibition Australia has had. And, as this will be my third
visit, to take the opportunity, in a fairly informal way, of going back
over some of the progress we've made already in respect of our
relationship and the progress we've made jointly in APEC and focusing
on the fact that President Soeharto will be chairing the APEC Leaders'
meeting later this year.
GD: What does the ban, though, do you think, say about the feelings at the
top in Jakarta, about the pace of change that they're confronting?
PM: Well, I think, Indonesia is like many countries in the region; its in a
state of constant change where there are many imperatives starting to
impact on their country the growth imperative and all that it brings
with it for change and diversity and plurality of opinion. I don't doubt
that these are pressures which haven't been as evident in bygone
days as they are now. For our part, Gareth Evans, as Foreign
Minister, has made clear Australia's disappointment about the fact that
these organs have been changed. But, again, from our point of view
there are similar things... there is press control in China and we still
deal and trade with China, there is fairly tight control of the press in
Malaysia and we still deal and trade with Malaysia. And, I think, this
relationship now has many legs to it and it does give us the
opportunity, I think, to maintain a working relationship despite some of
these things which are disappointments to us. 
GD: Does it symbolise though, some effort to put on the brakes? Is it a step
back from the policy of openness that President Soeharto has been
talking about?
PM: Well, I think it may be that we will witness in many countries similar to
Indonesia such as Indonesia and similar to Indonesia that there
will be sort of, four steps forward and one back, and four forward and
one back. I think we'll see a bit of this. But, there's also strong public
opinion and reactions about this, about any crimp on information
wherever it occurs, in most places, and I understand this to be the
case in Indonesia as well.
GD: One of the comments from Jakarta has been from the head of
Indonesia's largest Muslim organisation, Abdul Rachman Mahid
He said he thought you, as a friend, should speak to the President on
this. Do you have a duty, perhaps, as a friend, to speak to Soeharto
on this?
PM: Australia is not the international news and media plurality policeman.
Now, there is a sort of view around that because we have a very fre
press-we ought to be arguing for a press similar to ours wherever we
go. Well, we are an open and plural country and that's part of our
strength and we're also very forthright. But, I could make my next visit
to China, the first item on the agenda, press freedom and plurality.
Would this be the first agenda item, though, one should choose?
GD: How close do you think Australia should be seeking to get to the
Soeharto. leadership and how will it be positioning itself for the
leadership which will follow Soeharto? Do you draw that distinction?
PM: No, because I think that what Australia has done is develop a
relationship with the government of Indonesia in the broad, in the
bureaucracy as well. So, it's a very wide relationship and now that's
extending into the institutions and into industrial companies. And, the
Austral ia-Indonesia Ministerial forum is an indication of that, minister
to minister contacts. This was say, evidently true with Malaysia in the
difficulties we had with Malaysia less than a year ago. On that
occasion the relationship between Australian ministers and Malaysian
ministers, I think, mattered. In the same way, though, I've developed, I
think, a very competent working relationship with President Soeharto.
I've also, I think, got a reasonable relationship with some Indonesian
ministers and some of the ministers in this government have an even
better relationship with them.
GD: In terms of the trends you're talking about, though, must it be ultimately
a commitment to Indonesia and not to the Soeharto leadership?
PM: Well, it is. It is exactly that, it is a commitment to Indonesia to what
Indonesia is, what it has become, to the people of Indonesia. I mean, 
that's the nature of the relationship, I think, Australia has. But, I don't
think anyone should underestimate. though, the sense of peace and
stability which President Soeharto's administration has brought to the
archipelago and to the region.
GD: You said in March that no country mattered more to Australia than
Indonesia, does that mean that your policy in Asia has to reflect to
some extent what is happening in Indonesia, the pace of change in
Indonesia?
PM: Well, I think there is a certain geographical and economic imperative
in that, and particularly since the change in the end of the Cold War
where we have seen a change in the bi-polarity of the world, where
regional, a regional focus becomes more important. I almost think it's
self-evident that Indonesia emerges as the most important relationship
for Australia.
GD: How much of a veto power almost does that give Indonesia. Do we
have to have Indonesia to get the sorts of things you want, for
instance, in APEC?
PM: No. I don't think it gives them veto powers at all. But I think it means
that we're stripping away some of the perceived difficulties in this
relationship and going to the core basis of it, that is, is there a basis in
the Indonesian/ Australian relationship which is one where trust can be
built in terms of Indonesia's view of Australia, and Australian interests,
and vice versa, Is there a basis of mutual respect here? Is there a
basis of going on to build something bigger? Now, I think the answer
is in the affirmative in all three things.
GD: If this massive trade push that we're making into Indonesia, that you're
going for, if thdtf ucc6eeds, how would Indonesians, do you think, think
differently about Australia?
PM: Well, I think the relationship with Indonesia has changed enormously
in the last few years. Indonesia is now much more open to Australia
than it has probably ever been. It's institutions are more open. It's
Government is more open. It's companies, it's business organisations
are more open. And as that happens I. think that the understanding
about Australia, and respect for Australia, will improve. I mean, the
ABC's international television agency, ATVl, is now a free-to-air
provider of news and information in Indonesia and is now gathering, so
I understand it, substantial support amongst the Indonesian elite,
those who make policy and make investment decisions they find it an
important source of news and information. So, we're injecting more of
Australia, all the time, into Indonesia, and we're getting a response.
GD: However close that relationship can become, must it always be at
some levels uncomfortable, perhaps symbolised most significantly by
the fact that it's been twenty years now since President Soeharto 
actually set foot in Australia. Is that a symbol of the problems that will
continue?
PM: Well, I don't think so. There's a core question here, whether Indonesia
has any strategic designs on Australia, and I don't think it has and the
other question is do we on Indonesia? I don't think we have. We
haven't. So therefore there is nothing but a basis for friendship here.
There's no disputed territory, there's no shared borders, there's none
of this sort of thing. So it brings us to a position where we say, well,
this archipelago has been brought together as a nation, held together,
it's growing, there's income re-distribution going on, there are good
things happening here. How can we be involved in it, how can we
support it, how can we make it better?
GD: But two countries that probably hard to think of two countries, two
neighbours in the world that have less in common. How far can you
go, in terms of achieving that comfort level?
PM: Well, as far as you can try, I think, I mean, one will never end up with
perfection in any relationship, and we won't with this. But I think
Australia should try and make it as good as we can. Just as we
dutifully try, I think, ambitiously try, to do the same with other countries
in the region.
GD: Thank you Prime Minister
ends 



V
4
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OFFICIAL OPENING, EUROPEAN MASTERPIECES FROM THE
NATIONAL GALLERY OF IRELAND
NATIONAL GALLERY OF AUSTRALIA. 24 JUNE 1994
It is a great pleasure to be here today to welcome all of you, especially our friends
from Ireland, and to open this great exhibition.
This is the first exhibition to come on ioan from a national gallery to the Australian
National Galleriy, and I anmde lighted that it comes from a Ireland, the country where
learning and expression are themselves considered national treasures, the country with
whom we share so much history and culture and beliefs, the one so close to so many
Australian hearts.
Contemporary Australia is not derivative of any single nation, but there is an awful lot
of Irish in the mixture.
Tonight I won't go over the familiar ground of the things we have in common, the
singular contribution the Irish have made to Australia or the great bonds between us.
Except to say that this exhibition in a way points towards other realms of experience
we share.
Living at a remove from the centres of European art and culture and for a long time a
colonial remove at that might have meant succumbing to a temptation to be imnitative
or deferential in our creativity and taste; or perhaps equally, an instinct to be
aggressively parochial.
In various ways, to various degrees and at various stages of our history we have
resisted this. And in their ways our National Galleries speak for this resistance.
Their collections might be read as the embodiment of the development among us of a
love of things which are good, no matter where they come from: Guinness from
Ireland, wine from Australia, Velazquez from Spain. And much else from each of us. 7041 
Of course this is the century in which it has become possible as never before to indulge
in these things.
One of the great liberating forces for Australians has been the Boeing 747.
It is now possible.-not necessarily easy, but possible for Australians other than the
most wealthy to travel to Europe where, among other things like meeting their Irish
relations they may see masterpieces such as these.
Even more liberating, and more democratic in this century it is increasingly possible
for these works to come to us.
Or for works such as Sidney Nolan's to go to New York, or Aboriginal artworks to be
shown in Paris where I saw them just a few days ago. It is a two-lane air highway.
On the evidence of this exhibition, you would have to say that perhaps some people let
themselves down by visiting Ireland and not visiting the National Gallery.
It should be unthinkable like visiting Canberra and not visiting the National Gallery.
Let me congratulate those who have managed the task of bringing this exhibition to us.
The principal curator, Sergio Benedetti, and his helpers, Irish and Australian alike,
faced a tremendous challenge and we are deeply gratefual for the courage and skill
with which he met it.
I am not sure whether we have ever seen a Velazquez in this country I am told there
may have been one in the 1 960s. But since there are so few in the world outside the
Prado, it was a bold decision to let even this one painting travel from Europe.
But the rarity and splendour of that one work will not blind us to the value artistic as
well as monetary.-of works by Titian, Goya, El Greco, Murillo and Tintoretto.
Raymond Keaveney deserves the greatest thanks for letting them all come to us.
Annita met Raymond when we visited Ireland last year and found him typically [ rishk
which is to say charming and generous.
And recognising these qualities in him not to say those of the marvellous paintings in
the gallery she took advantage of his native good will and his need to find a
temporary home for these works while his gallery was repaired.
The result of their conversation and one or two letters between them is here before us
this evening.
But many others, of course, brought it from conception to reality and I know you
would want me to thank them all.
Dr Tony O'Reilly, who has sponsored the exhibition, deserves our most sincere thanks.
7042 
3
I must make mention of my friend, Betty Churcher, for her involvement in yet another
triumph. And we must thank Ireland and the Irish people. Their love of the best in life, the
engagement with the human spirit and imagination, their passion for expression, is
evident in the making of this collection.
We in Australia never forget the things for which we should thank Ireland this
exhibition of great European masterworks is one more thing. 7043 



TEL: 24. Jun. 94 14: 34 No. 017 P. 01/ 02
PRIME MINISTER 52/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING COUNCIL
Together with several of my Ministerial colleagues, I met a number of leading
scientists, engineers and business people at today's meeting of my Science
and Engineering Council.
The Council discussed some areas of technicaf and economic development
critical to the future prosperity of Australia, many of which were addressed in
Working Nation.
Working Nation is about looking to the future, making decisions today which
will give us an innovative and competitive future using and developing our
skills and our science and technology base.
An important feature of our future will be the so-called ' information. super
highways', which will transform all our lives over the coming years. We
discussed these today at my Science and Engineering Council.
My Government has a keen interest in seeing Australia reap maximum
benefits from the development of the information super highway.
We established the Broadband Services Expert Group last year to advise it
on the technical, economic and commercial preconditions for the widespread
delivery of broadband services in Australia.
The Group reported to Council today on its progress, and expects to release
an interim report around the end of July 1994, and a final report by the end of
1994.
My Government also commissioned a report from the Australian Science and
Technology Council on research data networks, an information highway
already up and running. This report was discussed today by the Science and
Engineering Council before being presented to Government in August.
The Australian Academic Research Network allows our scientists and
engineers to Interact with one another and with their counterparts around the
world. It provides access to data banks, sophisticated opportunities for
Information exchange with other users, and the ability to shrink global
distances that we expect from the super highway. 
, n 1.~ LL: n. 941 4: 34 NO. 017 P. 02/ 02
2
The Australian Vice Chancellors Committee has developed this network,
drawing on significant government assistance, and we now have a network
that is second only to the US.
Discussion at the meeting of my Science and Engineering Council today also
focussed on strategic directions for the Government's policies for science and
technology, and on identifying the key strategic issues needing to be
addressed. In creating an innovative future, I believe that we will need a cultural change
in our perceptions of science, technology and innovation, building an
appreciation in our society of their importance in maintaining our quality of
life. We will also need to recognise the vital role of demand for science and
technology in stimulating industry to innovate and to improve its innovative
capacity to compete globally.
At today's meeting, members discussed a new study that the Australian
Science and Technology Council is proposing to undertake, of matching
science and technology to future social and economic changes in Australia
over the next fifteen years.
I consider this is an important study which should provide insights for policy
development, as well as stimulate awareness of science and technology
more generally.
I was also impressed by a presentation to Council today from leading
business people and scientists, about the opportunities that Asian food
markets provide for Australia's agri-food industry.
It confirmed the directions we are taking in responding to the Hilmer Report,.
and the initiatives announced in Working Nation.
Australian agri-food companies, with their high quality, low cost products and
high skills bases, are already increasing our presence in Asian food markets.
In the past 2 years, exports of highly processed food have increased by
$ 900 million or 39%,
It is this type of success that my Government is laying the foundations for
through the initiatives of Working Nation.
Also, through expert studies such as those I heard about today at the Science
and Engineering Council, we will be able to take a long term view, putting in
pl ace the policies and programs that will secure an innovative and
competitive future for all Australians.
CANBERRA 24 June 1994 TEL L'-4 . JU 



PRIME MINJISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, HYATT HOTEL, JAKARTA, TUESDAY, 28 JUNE
1994 E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: You wanted some details and impressions of the meeting I had this
morning with President Soeharto and I'm very happy to give you an
opening stateme-nt -and I'll take questions.
Well, as you may know I had a meeting this morning with President
Soeharto which lasted two hours which was all business, a very
productive discussion, from my point of view, I think, I could safely say
from the President's point of view as well. We both remarked how
relations between Australia and Indonesia ' had improved very
dramatically in the last few years. This was evidenced by a constant
flow of ministers back and forth, by a greater confluence of our
business interests, the traffic of business people from both countries
one to the other, by the increasing tourism between Australia and
Indonesia, and underpinning that a better understanding of our
respective cultures and the* role that each of us are playing in the
region. I'm giving you a short hand version of these things, they were much
more extensive, of course.
The President and I then discussed the very great progress which had
been made at APEC, -both in Seattle and post Seattle and pre Bogor.
That is, the work of the special assistance led by Mr Bintoro and him
having been joined by the special assistance of other countries to, if
you like, develop further the decisions that were made by the leaders
at Blake Island in Seattle so that they could be brought to a point of
adoption and advancement at the meeting in Bogor. Both of us agreed
on the need for freer trade consistent with GATT and the President
said that he was looking forward to the GATT agreements being 
consumnated before January 1995 so that we could see the GATT
agreement coming into force, which would itself be an important thing
the whole GATT regime having been agreed in the lead up to the
Bogor meeting.
Our discussion moved on then to relations between Australia and
ASEAN, indeed between Australia-New Zealand and ASEAN and
there I intimated to the President that the Government of Thailand had
raised with Australia the desirability of Australasia joining AFTA and
that I was interested in the President's view of how he saw AFTA
developing and what role he thought Australia and New Zealand might
be able to play. We had quite a long discussion about this and, I think,
the response that I received on this issue was a very encouraging one
from the President where he thought the developments that have
already taken place, within ASEAN in respect of freer trade, were very
encouraging and what we had done as a country was very
encouraging in terms of reducing our tariffs and, in a sense, there was
a sort of developing natural confluence at any rate of the relations
between our two countries. That is, in trade, remarking as he did, that
two way trade had already reached $ 3 billion.
The President and I spent quite a lot of the time on those two subjects
APEC, AFTA and 9ER. and the bilateral relationship in general. I told
the President that Australia had been very heartened by the initiatives
taken by him and his Government over the last year towards greater
openness including today's reports about further deregulation of * their
product markets and the adoption of an inves-tment -package, a
deregulatory package for greater foreign investment freedoms within
the Indonesian economy. I said, infhe context of that opening up of
Indonesia, that the Government of Australia and I have therefore been
disappointed at recent events with the press closures which appear to
conflict or at least contrast with the openness which had generally
occurred in the Indonesian economy. The President took the
opportunity to explain his perspective on the closures saying that it was
very important that national stability and national unity at this time of
great economic growth and transformation that these things were to be
taken as given in this society and that the journals in question had put
some of things, that is national unity and stability, at risk.
The discussion then ranged back over the forthcoming meeting in
November and the fact that as this will probably be the second, of
maybe a series of meetings, there will be very heavy international
attention on the meeting, perhaps even more than there was in Seattle.
The need therefore for the Special Assistance Groups and he as the
Chair of the meeting to try to draw the strands and the best possible
result from the second leaders meeting towards a set of outcomes for
Bogor which advance the whole cause of the Asia-Pacific and its
trading relations. 
So, I'll leave my opening remarks at that and I'll be glad to take
questions.
J: Ian MoPhedran, Canberra Times. Mr Keating, a report due out
tomorrow by the Department of Foreign Affairs warns that East Timor
is the issue most likely to cause difficulties in the bilateral relationship.
Did you discuss East Timor?
PM: It came up in the discussion, but we didn't discuss it in detail.
J: In what context Prime Minister, did it come up in the discussion?
PM: Just talking about how in the past this issue had caused difficulties
between relations between Indonesia and Australia and Indonesia and
the United States. The President being very aware of the problems
which it had caused.
J: Phillip Williams, ABC TV. How would you characterize the response
from the President to your concern regarding the press clamp down?
PM: I said last week that I think I've developed a good constructive working
relationship with the President and in such a relationship one is able to
express oneself in terms of issues of concern and this was a matter I'd
said that was a matter of disappointment to the Australian Government
and to me. I think, he took that seriously and sought then to explain
the decision where he had come from, what he had thought the role
of these journals have been in their societal debate juxtaposed against
the need to keep a singular focus on Indonesia's development and
growth at this particular time.
J: Did you accept that explanation?
PM: I listened to what the President had said. I'd raised and said what I
wished to say and he responded.
J: Geoff Kitney, Sydney Morning Herald. Mr Keating, did President
Soeharto indicate how this issue may be resolved to you?
PM: No, he didn't. No.
J: So, he didn't offer any view about whether these newspapers may
return at some point?
PM: No, he didn't.
J: Indonesian journalist. Prime Minster, did President Soeharto discuss
his visit to Australia because he has been invited? 
PM: He has been invited by me a number of times. I didn't reiterate the
invitation today, I didn't need to. But it wasn't discussed. I know the
President has said to a number of people including, I think, some of
our own people here that he would like to go to Australia. But again,
arrangements have just have been inconvenient or they have not been
put into place. He knows there is a general standing invitation, it is a
matter for him to take it up if he chooses.
J: Indonesian journalist. When is the proper time according to your
assessment for President Soeharto to visit?
PM: I think that is for his assessment, rather than mine. You see, it's not for
me to say when he should visit Australia. Governments very kindly
provide general invitations to heads of state and heads of government
to visit and it's up to their discretion and their convenience to take it up.
J: Indonesian journalist. If President Soeharto visited Australia this year,
can you guarantee no demonstrations?
PM: Well, he has not given me any indication that he's coming to Australia
this year.
J: Malcolm Farr, Telegraph Mirror. Prime Minister, has President
Soeharto given any indication at all of his personal timetable for
staying in the leadership or perhaps leaving?
PM: No, he didn't raise it and nor did I.
J: Is that a matter of concern, not concern, but certainly to the
Government? How long he stays in the job.
PM: The Australian Government?
J: Yes.
PM: It is a matter solely for him and the people of Indonesia and I didn't
presume to raise the issue or to put any view. Not that we have a view
about it.
J: Indonesian journalist. You were asked a question on President
Soeharto was he happy or not?
PM: Well, I'm not here to give you I can give you a sense of the
meetings. I'm not here to give you an, if you like, the body language of
the meeting. I said at the start it was a very convivial meeting and
conducted in a relaxed and sincere atmosphere. 
J: Mark Baker, Melbourne Age. Mr Keating, on the subject of APEC did
President Soeharto express any concerns about directions of the body
particularly to the extent that he feels perhaps that it is being
dominated by developed nations..
PM: He did say that he thought it was important that APEC develop for all
the countries of the region and that the developed countries should
understand the aspirations of developing countries and consider
developing countries when they think about APEC's charter. Now, I
couldn't agree more with that. I think that is spot on. In fact, one of the
things Australia has always said is that we see the interests of
developing countries and developed countries being well and truly able
to be catered for in such a structure. Now, we did have a discussion
about the World Trade Organisation and about worker rights and what
that may mean in the future. I indicated to the President that we were
very concerned in Australia about the rights of workers. We had award
minimums and we had award standards to protect the work force. He
made similar points about Indonesia, but made the obvious point that
the capacity to pay people in Indonesia depended on the prosperity of
the Indonesian economy and that capacity is going to rise over time.
But, I think, he was well aware as I am that there can be some room to
misconstrue concerns about worker rights in terms of maybe quasi
protectionist devices against developing countries and he is alert to
that. I told him of my discussions of this in Europe and I gave him the
full account of those.
J: Phillip Williams, ABC TV. Prime Minister, part of your mission, I
believe, is to boost business ties between the two countries. Did you
discuss ways that could be done and why do you think Australia and
Indonesia's business relationship hasn't been good in the past?
PM: I think these things flow from general political and strategic
relationships, you know, trading relationships and Australia's is better
now than it has been, I think, probably in the last couple of decades
with Indonesia. As a consequence we are seeing a much better flow
of business interests and the exhibition here, the largest Australia has
ever mounted is, I think, proof positive that we see the relationship
seriously and we want to invest in this country and vice versa.
J: Ian McPhedran, Canberra Times. Did President Soeharto undertake
to take your aspirations for CER and AFTA to ASEAN and did you give
him an indication of your time frame?
PM: No. This is a proposal put to Australia by a member of ASEAN
Thailand. It is not a proposal put by Australia to ASEAN. But, I agreed
at the behest of Thai ministers, Prime Minister Chuan and Deputy
Prime Minister Supachai to raise it with other ASEAN leaders and in so
doing I raised it when I had the opportunity here today. 
J: Indonesian journalist. Do Australia and Indonesia have the common
push for the APEC summit?
PM: No, I think any commonality in terms of the APEC summit will emerge
from the special assistance gatherings. And, I think, under the
chairmanship of Mr Bintoro this is proceeding quite well.
J: Wally Brown, Courier Mail. Prime Minister, did you refer to the
republican issue?
PM: No.
J: Geoff Kitney, Sydney Morning Herald. Mr Keating, is it your view that
the matter of the closure of the magazines is essentially a domestic
matter or did you express a view to President Soeharto about how
Australia would prefer to see that issue resolved?
PM: No, it is obviously a domestic matter, but that doesn't preclude us from
expressing our view about it, which I did. Particularly in the context of
the opening up of this economy and society which has been occurring
under his Government. Most obviously again today in a substantial
announcement about further deregulation of their product markets and
the freeing up of foreign investment controls. I pointed to the apparent
tension in that, inconsistency in that, and that led the President to give
me an indication, at least, where he was coming from.
J: So, is Australia's view that we would like to see those magazines get
their licenses back?
PM: I think Australia's view is that the opening up of an economy brings
with it a chance, an opportunity, for the transmission of information
which is best accomplished in a plural media. Therefore, it follows that
as the Indonesian economy opens up and its society opens up, its
media should have the chance to reflect those changes.
J: Mark Baker. Did President Soeharto elaborate in any way on how he
saw these publications threatening, putting at risk the stability..
PM: No, he said that he thought I mean, Indonesia is, again, still growing
quite strongly and it's playing a role in the world, in APEC most
obviously, in the non-aligned movement amongst other things and that
this was, he thought, a time for a clear unity of purpose and not the
nagging away at divisions. Now, that is his view and obviously
juxtaposed against his long history as President of this country.
J: Indonesian journalist. Indonesia would like to have Australia's help in
strengthening ASEAN influence within the structure of APEC. 
4 PM: I think, ASEAN has already had Australia's support in seeking a full
place for it within the APEC structure and for member countries. The
fact that the first summit was successful, that's the summit or the
leaders meeting in Seattle, I think, demonstrates that ASEAN had no
trouble finding its place in the organisation, most obviously
demonstrated by the fact that President Soeharto, a leading member of
ASEAN is the chair and Indonesia is the host of the second meeting.
Thank you.
ends
k 



s
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, HILTON CONVENTION CENTRE, 29 JUNE 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM; You can see today, I think, that Australia has got its trade act together and
particularly here in Indonesia. This is the largest trade exhibition Australia
has ever mounted. Its comprehension has to be seen to be believed,
running from manufacturers through services and it's going to have, I
think, a large impact upon the business community of Indonesia. Australia
is now being accepted for what it is a high technology, thoughtful country
which can really help develop Indonesia and this part of the world, both in
services and in manufacturing. So, it is with much pleasure that I was
here and able to participate with Minister Hartarto in launching the
exhibition.
J: Prime Minister, last night, Alexander Downer was claiming credit for
forcing you to raise the censorship issue with President Soeharto. What is
your response to that?
PM: It is ridiculous. It's just high school debating stuff. Foreign Minister Gareth
Evens last week made very clear Australia's position about this. He said
Australia was disappointed. He and I discussed the matter. I repeated
that to President Soeharto when I raised it and, I think, he understood the
context with which it was being put. I can say after eleven years in office,
in a sophisticated foreign policy we don't need high school debating
tactics from Mr Downer to be able to raise matters of national importance.
J: Prime Minister, I'm from Radio Australia, we broadcast live in Indonesia
every day here during the ATI' 94. Would you have something to say to
our listeners in Indonesia?
PM: Just that I think that there is a great bond developing between Australians
and Indonesians. There is great facility, I think, that Australia can provide 0. 
2
Indonesia. Many Indonesian people have said they feel very comfortable
with Australians, we are capable, we are obliging, we offer help, we are
not overbearing. I think these are all qualities appreciated in this country
and will stand us in good stead.
J: Prime Minister Keating, in a briefing to Indonesian journalists one of the
Ministers here said that it was President Soeharto who specifically raised
the issue of the magazine closures.
PM: No, I raised the issue first. I raised the issue. But again, it's raised in the
context of this broad relationship we have which is most obviously
demonstrated here today. Thank you.
ends 



29/ 06 ' 94 07: 36 F-AX 62 21 3903839 EEMSB GGENN OOFFFCICE
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
EXPANDING HORIZONS AUSTRALIA AND INDONESIA
INTO THE 21 ST CENTURY, JAKARTA, 29 JUNE 1994
Let me say how pleased I am to be here at the opening of this historic event,
and I welcome you all.
Three months ago I launched the Australia Today Indonesia 94 program in
Sydney.
Today we launch the centrepiece of the program this trade. and Investment
forum which in time may well be seen as a turning point in the relationship
between our two countries.
I am particularly pleased to be joined today by Indonesi a' s Co-ordinating
Minister for Industry and Trade, Hartarto. Minister Hartarto has been a great
~ iipporter of expanding economic ties between Indonesia and Australia. The
success of the Australia Today program in Indonesia owes much to his efforts
and I thank him most warmly for that.
We have with us today Ministers and representatives from a number of
Australian State Governments. I welcome them here.
I know how they have worked to develop economic and cultural links between
Australia and Indonesia particularly links with various provincial
governments in Indonesia.
The Australian States have a crucial role to play and there is no doubt that
they are playing ft.
Most of all, I am pleased to see so many Australian and Indonesian business
people here.
The trade mission which my colleague Senator Bob McMullan is leading
includes representatives of over 200 companies.
This Is the largest trade mission ever to leave4ustralia. It Is an outstanding
response -and a measure of interest and jo; pnt among our business
P PM PRESS OFFICE Q~ 002 
V~ UD~ 047 : 36 FAX 62 21 3903839EfGEOFIE PMRSSFIC oz
2
communities which underlines the force and meaning behind the title-
" Expanding Horizons".
It is useful to bear in mind the reasons for this sudden explosion of interest in
the relationship between Australia and Indonesia.
It is not merely because we are neighbours. We have alay been
neighbours. And far-sighted individuals in each country have been urging the
value of closer links for decades.
The heightened interest flows from a mixture of new circumstances and new
resolve. It derives partly from changes at work in the wider world, and partly from
changes in our two countries.
The end of the Cold War has fundamentally altered the way the international
community operates. Old structures have broken up or loosened. New
options have opened up and new linkages are being formed. Regional ties
are getting stronger. Uncertainties have grown.
At the same time, developments in the global economy technological
change, quicker and easier cammunicati6n, the free and rapid flow of
Investment funds are bringing changes to the patterns of International
commerce and to the role which governments must play.
Developing countries are becoming more important In the global economy.
For example, In the past decade exports from developing countries in Asia
have grown at twice the rate of world exports. And over the same period
these countries have grown two and a half times as fast as the world.
economy. Like any substantial change, this has caused a degree of unease.
Many have found the adjustment difficult; for many It threatens difficulty. Irvr
meetings with some of Europe's leaders-earlier this month I argued that the
developed world should not fearthe products of the developing nations, and.
should not try to stem the tIde of their growth.
Developing countries have the right to expect that their products will be able
to flow to world markets without meeting new protectionist barriers, either
direct or disguised.
And why should they not expect open markets, when the fact is that they can
benefit'all of us at home and abroad? 
These changes in the structure of the world and the world economy have run
parallel to internal changes in Australia and Indonesia. To keep up with the
world, we have opened up to the world.-_
It is a difficult, even painful, step. But it is the only sensible one to take.
The clear evidence is that the comforts of protectionism are illusory, that
without the stimulus of competition economies stagnate and structures decay.
In Australia we are now seeing why the hard decisions of the eighties had to
be made. We are seeing some of the rewards.
The Australian economy is growing at five per cent, faster than any other
developed country. Our inflation rate, now around I per cent, is expected to
remain low.
With the floating of the Australian dollar and the abolition of exchange
controls, with the total abolition of quotas and the reduction of the general
rate of tariffs with few exceptions to five per cent or less by 1996, the
Australian economy is now one of the most open in the world.
Australian exporters particularly our manufacturers have embraced the
challenge of competing in world markets.
Our exports grew by more than seven and a half per cent in 1993, faster than
either domestic or world economic growth . And elaborately transformed
manufactures now represent over 20 per cent of our exports, compared with
11 percent In 1983.
The results of Indonesia's liberallsation are similarly clear. GDP growth last
year was more than six per cent.
This, too, is a product of resolve.
Over recent years indeed in recent dM~ the Indonesian Government has
undertaken significant deregulation and reform, removing non-tariff barriers
and reducing tariffs, taking steps to deregulate industry and to create a moreliberal
investment environment
This commitment to reform Is bound to boost the confidence of investors.
That Indonesia continues to reduce Its tariff levels is of course a matter of!
direct interest to Australian exporters. But as Indonesia industrialises, furtherliberallsation
of the Indonesian market will mean more productivity and more
competitive Indonesian exports as well-
Changes In recent global trade arrangements wvill also help our economies.
TOOJ MaSININ awmid a3 IdAo NoD ejia 6CfZC TZ Z9 MY LZ: 9O M6 90/ 6Z 
W ug~ j2 ' 2 1F3A9~ 0 839Efl GEN OFFICE PM PRESS OFFICE
4
At the beginning of the next century the Uruguay Round alone will be adding.
well over $ 400 billion annually to the wqrdd economy. Of that amount, about
$ 120 billion is likely to benefit developing countries such as Indonesia.
Indeed, once all the effects of the Uruguay Round have flowed through,
Indonesia could receive a stimulus to Its real GDP of 7 per cent or more.
Australian research suggests that global tariff barriers on industrial products
exported by Indonesia will fall* by 42 per cent under the Round. Most of
Indonesia's exports will have secure access through bound tariffs in its major
markets. Real exports could Increase by 30 per cent.
Through APEC we can add to that momentum by setting ourselves goals for
free trade; and by harrmonising standards in key areas. The benefits to
Indonesia from further lberalising In concert with other APEC members will be
even greater than those flowing from the Uruguay Round.
It Is one of those cases where you have to be In it to win and all who are In it
will gain.
These are the realities which underpin our new horizons. These are the
reasons we are here. We have all seen the opportunities.
Already, two-way trade between Australia and Indonesia has grown at a trendrate
of 22 per cent in the past five years to reach $ 3 billion in 1993.
Over 180 Australian companies are now operating in Indonesia, and of
course I hope that will rise over the next few days.
Australia is one of the top ten Investors in Indonesia.
And the composition of our trade Is changing. For both of us, manufacturesz,
are an increasing percentage of the total. In 1984 only 7' per cent, of'
Indonesian exports to Australia were elaborately transformed manufactures-.
In 1992, the figure was 25 per cent. For Australia, the figure has risen from-.
19 per cent to 24 per cent In the same period.*
I expect services trade to be an Increasingly strong area of growth in futurez-
Australia is-already the fourth most Important source of tourists to indonesia
And more than 7,500 young Indonesians are already studying in Australia.
All these very welcome developments are no accident And we should not baFshy
about-saying so for they mean the pain of economic reform had: apurpose.
It Is a reminder that common sense and the courage to exercise it have--
rewards. It means that cooperation has rewards.... l1 005 
0. vg: Jb A1 82 21 3903839 EMB GEN OFFICE PM PRESS OFFICE Q~ 006
The rewards, of course, come in the form of jobs, higher standards of living,
greater economic strength and resilience, access to knowledge and
technology, and the satisfaction that comes from nation building for future
generations of our people.
They come in the form of successful enterprises successful companies.
The companies represented at this forum illustrate what is happening to the
relationship. With so many present it is almost invidious to single out a few.
But I want to note the contribution of New Hope Corporation of Australia. and
its local associate the Swabara Group of Indonesia as co-presenters of the
forum. New Hope Corporation's bulk commodity port project in Kalimantan is an
excellent example of Australian design skills, engineering excellence and
financial expertise combining to meet Indonesia's infrastructure needs.
It shows how technologies specifically developed in Australia can be
transferred to Indonesia.
When the first stage of the port is completed in early 1996 at a cost of $ 150
million it will be the only deep water port outside Australia built specially for
buik commodities.
There is a great diversity among the Australian companies now in Indonesia.
The ANZ Banking group is Involved In a joint venture with the Pan Indonesian
BanWo7ffiering financial products to the commercial market. -The AMP Society
and the Panin Group are launching a joint venture which represents the
largest eVer Australian involvement In the Indonesian financial services
sector. Davids' Asia have signed a Technical Assistance Agreement with PT Hero for
the development of a modem warehousing and distribution operation in
Indonesia. BTR Nylex is involved in a joint venture with KCI producing glass packagingfor
a wide range of markets.
ABB Australia is involved in power generation and distribution; Boral Is.
engaged in producing materials for the construction industry.
AWA has provided air navigation and road traffic control systems with its-
Indonesian joint venture partners and Is looking to expand its operations.
Goodman Fielder, with Its partner the Sinar Mas4Goup, is involved In the food.
manufasturing sector. BHP and CRA have major investments in the minerals-' 
rA Z 21 3903839 EB G OICE PSS OFFICE 007
6
sector; Transfield in engineering projects; Lend Lease Corporation in a range
of service industries.
And let me here pay a small tribute to some of the pioneers in this area.
Southcorp Holdings through Rheem Indonesia, established in 1968 what may
well be the oldest Australian investment in Indonesia. Commonwealth
Industrial Gases set up a joint venture with Industrial Gases Indonesia in
1972. The John Holland Group began operations in Indonesia in 1974.
The Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation has operated in Indonesia for
almost 25 years and its expertise will be in growing demand as Indonesia's
resources are developed.
I could go on, and perhaps I should because it is a roll of honour. But there
are too many to name here.
Governments can significantly help by creating structures for closer ties.
That is why President Soeharto and I agreed during my first visit to Indonesia
to establisif -Fodrrum through which our Ministers could explore the
possibilities for co-operation.
The Ministerial Forum will meet in Canberra for the second time later this
year. Its agenda continues to lengthen.
In the past three years there have been twenty seven visits to Indonesia by
Australian Ministers, three times the number over the preceding three years.
And the Australia Today promotion has brought a further eight Australian,
Ministers here.
These bilateral developments are strengthened by developing regional
structures. One of the most important issues President Soeharto and I discussed.
yesterday was the APEC Leaders' Meeting which he will chair orr
November in Bogor. I believe the Bogor meeting will be as pathbreaking as
the meeting at Bandung was forty years ago.
Both of us see the meeting as critical to consolidating APEC and developing
an open Asia-Pacific region.
Both of us want a region which will be actively involved in liberalising trade;
facilitating commerce, and strengthening economic linkages between a group
of economies which represent half the world's population and more than half
its production. A. a 
2 V 39389 EB GN FFIE PM PRESS OFFICE ( o
7
As President Soeharto has said our aim is to improve ' the stability, security
and welfare of the people of the Asia-Pacific region under a spirit of united
community'. Australia will be working very closely with Indonesia towards fulfilling that aim.
I also discussed with President Soeharto the proposal we are studying to
promote closer links between the ASEAN Free Trade Area and the Australia
New Zealand agreement on Closer Economic Relations.
With all these things happening, I firmly believe that the conditions global,
regional and bilateral which have caused this new burst of activity in our
relationship will continue to impel us in the same direction.
Because this relationship is not some temporary, take-it-or-leave-it affair.
It is-no transitory fascination; no purely academic interest. It is a deep,
complex and, I might say, exciting relationship which has to work if both
countries are to live up to their potential.
As I said In March, no country is more important to Australia than Indonesia.
I also said then that the job of developing the relationship will not be easy.
We are very different countries with very different societies, we stem from
different cultures, we -are at different stages of development. Indonesia's
population Is ten times ours.
We are an industrialised country; Indonesia is a rapidly developing. one.
So can we sustain a relationship of depth and worth across this divide?
Of course we can.
Of course we must.
But the doing of it requires clear sight and sensitivity. Courage, hard work.
boldness openness.-
I want Australia to be much better known in Indonesia for what it is,. X
sophisticated, technologically-advanced. society with a, diverse, operr and
tolerant people.
It was painful, for example, to learn as part of the research for the Australia
Today promotion that most Indonesians still think Australia has a raciallybased.
Immigration policy. 
80339Efl GEN OFFICE ** PH PRESS OFFICE 0 9-
In turn, I want Indonesia to be known by Australians for what ft is, in all its
cultural richness and ethnic diversity, with all its challenges, its achievements
and Its aspirations.
That is why the Australia Today promotion goes beyond business and trade,
and offers an insight into Australia's diverse contemporary society.
Next year Indonesia celebrates fifty years since its declaration of
independence from Holland. Just a few years later Australia will celebrate the
centenary of our Federation.
As I said back in March, the relationship between Australia and Indonesia can
be a model for ca-operation between developed and developing countries,
between countries based on Western structures and values and those based
on Asian models.
So my message to all of you in this room, and to the increasing numbers of
people in both our countries who see the great potential in our bilateral
relationship, is that your commitment will be worth it.
I said at the beginning of this address that it was worth bearing in mind where
the new interest in our relationship came from.. I said it came from a mixture
of circumstances and resolve.
It is worth bearing in mind because there is a lesson in the story. The fact is
that people can live side by side forever and never really be neighbours they
only'truly became neighbours w hen they begin to talk to one another, and
cooperate and share an interest In each other's lives, however different those
lives might be.
These relationships do not develop by accident, there is nothing inevitable
about them. They have to be initiated, common ground has to be
established, along with mutual respect for different history, culture and
aspirations. So long as we share the neighbourhood and we always will these efforts
will be necessary and very worthwhile.
So long as we share the neighbourhood, we should share its responsibilities
and its potential.
That is the reason for all this bilateral activity. That is the reason for our
support for APEC. It is why I am here, and why you are here because we
have recognised the widening horizons of our relationship and are determined
to explore them.
I most sincerely thank you for coming and wish you well in your endeavours
of thepcext few days. 



PRIME MINISTER539
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER LAND FUND
Today I introduced into the House of Representatives a Bill to establish a
national Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Land Furfd and the Indigenous
Land Coiporation.
Late last year we enacted the native title legislation in response to the High
Court's historic Mabo decision. That legislation gave effect to the Court's
recognition that Australia's indigenous people owned the country before
European settlement, and were dispossessed, often violently, of their land. It
also provided for the validation of existing interests which may be invalid
because of the existence of native title. In a real sense, the Government
legislated for all Australians.
The native title legislation is fundamental to the process of addressing
dispossession, and will benefit greatly those people who have been able to
maintain a connection with their land sufficient to prove native title.
Unfortunately, this will be a very small proportion of Aboriginal people,
because the majority have been forced from their traditional lands.
The purpose of this Bill is to enable indigenous people to acquire land, and to
manage and maintain it in a sustainable way to provide economic,
environmental, social and cultural benefits.
The Bill is built on a foundation of input from a wide range of interests,
including State and Territory Governments, farming, industrial, environmental
and church organisations. In particular, I ensured peak indigenous interests
were fully consulted, and were directly involved in the formulation of the
Government's proposals. The Bill I introduced today contains a number of
provisions which are directly attributable to my discussions with indigenous
interests.
The Bill establishes a Land Fund to receive monies from which it will make
allocations to the Indigenous Land Corporation for land acquisition and
management. We have already allocated $ 200 million to the Fund in this
year's Budget. The Bill provides continuing allocations of $ 121 million
indexed in terms of 1994 dollars for a further nine. years. Thereafter the fund
will be self-sustaining. 
The new Corporation will be an independent and commercially oriented
statutory authority, with a dedicated focus on land matters, and specialised
expertise in land and environmental management.
The Corporation will advance the cause of self-determination by providing
indigenous people with greater access to the land and its resources and will
be controlled by indigenous people. At least five of the proposed seven
members must be Aboriginal people or Torres Strait Islanders.
The Corporation will prepare a national Indigenous Land Strategy based on
regional strategies covering three to five-year periods, and regional
organisations will be involved in planning at the local level. Given the
extensive indigenous land holdings in remote areas of the country, the
Corporation will provide a vehicle for ensuring that land management and
sustainability issues are given much greater focus on indigenous owned
lands. This will benefit indigenous landholders directly, but will also have
significant spin-offs for the nation as a whole.
The Corporation will receive payments from the Land Fund to enable it to
undertake its functions. However, to ensure a smooth transition, ATSIC will
retain its land acquisition and management functions and budget for the next
three years. ATSIC will also be undertaking the day to day administration of
the Fund.
This legislation prohibits the claiming of land acquired by the Indigenous
Land Corporation under the Northern Territory Land Rights Act,. but does not
prevent the conversion of p~ storal leases to native title under the Native Title
Act. The Government is committed to redressing Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander disadvantage, and in particular to formulating a comprehensive
response to the Mabo decision. The Bill introduced today is an integral part
of this response, and its most financially significant element. It acknowledges
that the economic, social and cultural marginalisation still endured by
indigenous people can be traced to their dispossession. In a further stage of
our response to the Mabo decision, the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation
and ATSIC are undertaking consultations with a view to advising the
Government on institutional and structural changes which will assist in
remedying indigenous dispossession.
Through the social justice measures, the Government is working towards
establishing a new relationship between Australia's indigenous peoples and
the wider community, a relationship in which Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander culture is to be protected and valued, and indigenous people
participate fully in Australian economic life.
CANBERRA JUNE, .1994 
MAIN FEATURES OF THE ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT
ISLANDER LAND FUND BILL
Background In 1992 the High Court in its Mabo decision recognised that
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people owned much of the
Australian continent before European settlement
The Commonwealth Government enacted the Native Titl Act 1993 to
give legislative recognition to the High Court's decision
To prove native title, indigenous people must be able to demonstrate
a continuing connection with the land
Because most Indigenous people were dispossessed of their land,
only a small proportion will be able to prove native title
The Government is therefore establishing the Land Fund as part of a
broader response to the Mabo decision in recognition of the
dispossession of indigenous people.
Purpose of the Land Fund
The Land Fund will provide monies to enable Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people to acquire and maintain land in a sustainable
way to provide economic, environmental, social and cultural benefits
The majority of monies allocated to the Fund will be Invested, so that
after ten years the Fund will be self sustaining
The Fund will provide money to a new Indigenous Land Corporation,
and for a transitional period, to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Commission, to enable the Corporation and the Commission
to purchase land for indigenous people and to assist them to manage
and maintain land.
Structure and Funding of the Land Fund
The Government Is providing $ 200 million to the Fund for 1994-95 and
$ 121 million, Indexed In term of 1994-95 dollars for the following 9
years the total allocations over 10 years will be $ 1 .463 billion
after allowing for outlays, the Fund Is expected to reach $ 1.1
billion in $ 1 994-95 dollars ( or $ 1.26 billion In nominal terms) after
years, assuming a real return on investments of 4% per annum
The Indigenous Land Corporation will receive from the Fund
million In 1994-95, $ 24 million, indexed In terms of 1994-95 dollars for
1995-96 and 1996-97, and $ 45 million Indexed In terms of 1994-95
dollars for a further seven years thereafter 
After ten years, the Indigenous Land Corporation will receive the
returns, after inflation, on the investments of the Fund
it Is expected that this will be about $ 45 million in 1994-95 dollars
ATSIC will retain the $ 21 million it currently spends on land
acquisition and management In 1994-95 and will be paid an
equivalent amount from the Land Fund In 1995-96 and 1996-97.
The Indigenous Land Corporation
* The Indigenous Land Corporation is being established to provide a
specialised focus and expertise on indigenous land Issues
The Corporation will be responsible for purchasing land for the
purpose of granting it to the indigenous corporations and providing
grants to such corporations for the purpose of purchasing land
-land may be purchased to provide for economic, environmental,
social and cultural benefits
The Corporation will place particular emphasis on the sustainable
management of Indigenous held land ( including land bought before
the establishment of the Land Fund)
-generally It will do this by entering Into agreements with the land
holders
-It may also make grants or loans for land management purposes
The Corporation will be required to adopt sound land and
environmental management practices; to directly Involve indigenous
land holders in land management activities; and to act In accordance
with sound business principles when operating on a commercial
basis -it will also be required to attempt to maximise the employment of
indigenous people and to use goods and services provided by
indigenous people
The Corporation may establish subsidiaries to undertake some of Its
functions -for example the Corporation could establish subsidiaries to
undertake Its functions In a particular area or region
The Corporation will be required to develop national and regional
strategies for its operations In consultation with relevant Indigenous
Interests The Corporation will be headed by a seven person Board of whom at
least 5 must be indigenous people.
Purchase of land In the Northern Territory
* Land purchased by the Corporation in the Northern Territory will not
be available for claim under the AboriginaiLand Rights ( Northern
Territory) Act 1976 
this will ensure that there is not a significant increase in pastoral
properties claimed under that Act before claims cease in 1997
this will not preclude conversion of such properties to native title
ATSIC moneys will continue to be available for the purchase of
properties in the Northern Territory without restriction on claims
under the Land Rights Act.
Office of Indigenous Affairs
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
June 1994 ' 4" 



.4I PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP,
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONFERENCE, ' AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY AND THE
KEATING GOVERNMENT QUESTION ANSWER SESSION
TUESDAY 5 JULY, 1994
Q: I wondered what your major policy agenda is for the 12 months from now?
Do you have one or two specific things that you want to achieve in the
next twelve months?
PM: Well, I want to drive the White Paper changes from, simply, a statement
of policy changes to an outcome. That is, developing the training market,
developing the job placement market, getting a much better focus. With
information technology the way it is, the capacity to match demand and
supply, we should be able to develop a much more sophisticated job
placement business outside the CES which also should include, I think,
case management. That is, we want to develop a market beyond the CES
for case management. That is, we are to take people who are either long
term unemployed that is, unemployed over 12 months or at risk of
long term unemployment and manage them into the workforce. Including,
of course, meeting the commitment we set in the White Paper of not
letting any person under 18 slip through the system. That is, making a
commitment to case manage every young person under 18, who might
slip out of school, back into training, education and back into the
workforce. Now, I made the point in the speech, I don't think we're going to see
migration making the commitment to skills formation which we're going to
need in this recovery and we can do it through training and I think that is
going to be one of our major objectives actually driving this change
along and making it work.
The other... the Government has got a sort of holistic approach to these
things. I made the point about foreign policy being a part of economic
policy and now it is in a very big way. I can't emphasise too much how 
well we did with the Uruguay Round. It went on for seven years, I was at
the OECD meeting where we s! tood up the Europeans in pushing
agriculture into the round and, with the support of the United States, got it
into the Tokyo Summit with President Reagan and into the Uruguay
agenda. And, as you know, with the Cairns Group, we drove a lot of the
debate through the period. But, there was a great cockiness in Europe
coming up to 1992 and the notion that they could go their own way
without giving concessions to the rest of the world was pretty strong
among them. But, they were and are very worried aboutAPEC
needlessly so, in my view, but right through my visit to Western Europe on
this occasion I had all the major European leaders asking for full observer
status by the European Union in APEC. They are worried about APEC
getting away as a fast growing area and I think, as I said, without APEC
having developed the way it has with half the world's production and
over half the world's population sitting down represented by heads of
government it was the nudge the Europeans needed to sign up at
Uruguay. For a country like Australia which is not part of the European
markets, that's not, has a close market like North America, that's basically
got to trade on its own fat, the Uruguay Round was a great change for us.
In principle and in content. And, to go and extend that and do GATT plus
things in the Asia-Pacific is, I think, the way to go. That is why APEC is
important to us. We are now exploring this opportunity, as I say, with
AFTA and Australasia. The GDP of Australasia is about $ 500 billion, the
GDP of the ASEAN countries combined is about $ 500 billion; there's
complementarity between us in not only relative size and weight but
complementarities. And it would give Australia a place in a trading market
of around 300 odd million people and a combined GDP of around $ 1000
billion and growing quite rapidly. So, that's important for us as well.
These are all, I think, things we have got to drive, and drive this industry
innovation debate and the extension of that into these markets over the
next couple of years. I think it is going to be terribly important to us. In
the last year exports have grown by about 11 per cent and imports by
nine per cent. This is quite encouraging in a recovery phase where we
normally see a sharp lift in imports. So, we're heading down the right
paths. I think the thing is to cdfitinue to push these changes through.
The other change we want to see pushed through is the shift to entemnse
bargaining of the great majority of areas under federal award coverage.
And, as I say, we want to get to 80 per cent by 1996 and if we can do that
we've really remodelled the Australian labour market away from the
centralised system and made it more responsive. There's going to be a
test in this recovery to see whether managers can spot the opportunities
and draw from the workforce the productivity of related changes in
business which can keep that inflation rate low, but lift profits of
companies which can be divided between profits and wages. This has 
never been the case in the past because, by and large, industry was
always looking to centralised wage fixing. In fact, we are already hearing
some firms saying, as there is a little bit of pressure coming from the
recovery, " Can't we go back to centralised wage fixing?" Well, the
answer is, " No, you can't go back to centralised wage fixing and we've got
to do this one right." So, I think, that is another important part of the
government's agenda and driving those things is going to take more than
enough time.
0: Prime Minister, you've just alluded to a very important point about the
management challenge in all of this and the David Karpin Task Force
report is due out very soon and in that, I think you will already know, that
management doesn't get a very high score card there. I'm wondering
whether you feel the challenge that management is up to this national
picture challenge that you paint for us because, clearly, the rest of the
workforce seems to be pushed very much towards the big challenge?
PM: Well, I think the environment has changed, that is the main thing. The
environment has changed and, as a consequence, there is always, in
every company, the person who spots the new environment, who
understands the new environment better and exploits it better. And the
performances of one firm verses another in this environment means that,
generally, boards of directors make decisions about management if they
find they are losing a competitive position or their opportunities are not
being fully maximised. So, I've always been a great believer in getting
the tariff levels down, getting the free winds of competition in the
economy, getting an emphasis on product innovation and all the bits and
pieces which need to come with that to make investment fire. That is, a
profit share that gets investment off and running, a tax system which is
sensible and, of course, flexibility in the labour market.
Now, I think, with those things we are seeing, really... I don't know what
the consensus in business now is about the term of a chief executive
officer but I would think that it is getting shorter and shorter. It was always
about eight years and it is now coming down to about six and, more likely,
five. After five years of a big effort by managers I think they are mostly
moving on to do something else and there is another wave coming
through. This is very healthy for the economy, I think, and very healthy
for business. So, I'm very optimistic, really, about business management
in Australia. I don't think we've been the best in the world, by a long
margin, but I think that is changing and I think that turnover is going to
sort of pick the people to suit the environment.
Q: Prime Minister, your White Paper was very well received. This move to
increase training, I think, everyone must have agreed with that. Now, 
there were a few comments though, buried deep in the leader of the
Financial Review was a comment that perhaps the training was being
concentrated too much on the people who are least likely to show any sort
of response. I was just wondering if you have any reply to that and that
perhaps that you could do better next time around?
PM: Well, I think that our view is that the Cinderella area of Australian
education has been TAFE. And, trying to lift the status of vocational
education has been one of the key objectives of the last few years. We
started this with Qn-eNatio-n by putting $ 700 million over three years
which we've now added to, it is now $ 1 billion for the growth in the
TAFE system and we pulled the threads together into a national system.
But, we wan-t to develop... I mean, there is always a division of, if you like,
interest or loyalties, as the case may be, in these things. I think the
government wanted to see a training market emerge and not a monolith
with TAFE. But, because we haven't really seen the proliferation of
private training providers TAFE was the basic building block of the
system. So, what we have sought to do is get TAFE geared up to take
the throughput of the higher participation rate in schools and to say to
kids, " Look, 15-19 is a period of vocational preparation, you can go
through high school and out into tertiary institutions." We take about
per cent of the output, we are at the top of the OECD, or in that near top,
where we are optimising the number of people exiting the secondary
education system into tertiary. But, we are way, way below the optimum
sorts of level of training through vocational education if, say, we compare
ourselves with Western Europe or even North America, but particularly,
with Western Europe.
So, expanding TAFE and getting it right is, I think, an important way to
make a difference to aggregate training training in the aggregate. But,
that means, I think, that we want a private market to develop and we want
business to be, basically, driving it. And, I think we'll see a very different
complexion across TAFE. Where TAFE was once, the product of TAFE
came from the training providers in the system we now Want the product
designed by the users of the system, the people who have demand for the
product and that is, essentially, business. So, I think, if we can get the
result we need in TAFE we are going to see a big change in training
capacities and a focus by business on human development within
companies and on training in the broad, which we haven't seen in the
past. Now, the labour market and the long term unemployed are different things
again. Here, we've got people who have been unemployed for a year or
18 months or even greater, longer, two or three years. And, our
experience with them is that, properly streamed and invested that is, 
people investing some time and effort in them they pay, generally,
substantial rewards. And, it is not a case of investing in the least likely
but, rather, knowing that we can't have, in this economy, a labour market
of this size 300,000-400,000 people who are long term unemployed.
That is too big a drag on our national efficiency, it is inequitable and it
produces this, sort of, division in society which is unhealthy. So, getting
the focus back there, taking a personal interest in these people, case
managing them, getting to understand their personalities, their
educational attainments, their work experience, their aptitudes.... focusing
them into a business or training them, I think, gives them a chance to get
back into society. Particularly when the economy is producing enough
aggregate jobs to take up a substantial proportion of unemployed people,
including that stream of the long term unemployed who would not
otherwise be there. So, it is a balance and in the balance I think we are
getting the balance right. At any rate, I think it is a mistake both in
social and economic efficiency terms to regard the long term
unemployed as a lost cause and to move on. Because, we will run into
skills bottlenecks and shortages and that can give us problems about
wages and wage push inflation at another stage in the cycle and now is
the time to be thinking about that.
Q: Prime Minister, infrastructure. In your last budget you adjusted the One
Nation infrastructure bonds so that they are now tax attractive to
investors, including institutional investors. What are your expectations for
the role of private sector investment in infrastructure in your economic
development agenda over the next five years?
PM: Well, I think this is going to let me just go back a step and say public
infrastructure has suffered in the time when we had fiscal consolidation in
the 1 980s. When we had the government in a savings mode, the public
sector in a savings mode developing those surpluses in the middle to late
1980s. We cut back all of the public sector, including infrastructure. And
there will be a need for some public infrastructure which we have
recognised in later times, in One Nation, for instance, in the national rail
highway where we are putting now a substantial investment in the
national rail agreement, in the major highway systems, in the trunk roads
around the capital cities, I mean, we are doing it, now, in some places.
But, there will be places where public investment or community
investment in facilities will be important. I mean, after Working Nation I
went down to the Sunraysia district and there this is going to be the
bulk wine growing capital of Australia. And, yet, the irrigation system was
set up on gravity, all the contours of the system have, basically, been
designed around the local topography. And, now, to expand the system it
needs some community infrastructure in terms of drainage systems and
water reticulation which, as a community, would provide an optimal kind of 
6
investment to go there. Now, it may be that a super fund which is a low
tax paying body which has found infrastructure bonds unattractive in the
past given we are now giving a 33 and 1/ 3 per cent rebate on
infrastructure bonds may find them attractive to invest. But, again, it is
going to be a ' suck it and see' situation, to see what the funds think of the
particular projects, whether they think they are going to stand up
economically or whether they're, simply, just after the tax concession.
And, we'll have to muck around to get that balance right, see where it is.
Some substantial state infrastructure, infrastructure in the states, will also
qualify under the investment bonds, infrastructure bonds, but I don't want
to see, if you like, a large proportion of state infrastructure responsibilities
transferred to Commonwealth tax expenditure either. So, we're going to
have to just see how it goes. For our part, we are willing to give it more
than a reasonable fly to see if we can tap some of the savings of the
superannuation industry and see them go into some of these sorts of
areas. And, if they are well judged and well managed this could be a real
addition to the national stock of infrastructure.
Q: Prime Minister, I was pleased to hear you reject, in the early part of your
speech, the thinking that we either have a strong resources sector or a
competitive manufacturing industry...
PM: Yes, that was a John Stone thesis so we don't hear much of it these days.
Q: Given the rejection of that thinking, though, I'd be very interested to
hear how you see the benefits of the resources sector in building the
future economy of Australia. How do you see it contributing to a future
competitive Australian economy?
PM: Well, I think it is still of primary importance. And, if you look I mean,
we are now focusing, often, on the success of the manufacturing sector
from the inward looking structure we had a few years ago to what we have
now. There's been a great transformation. This, in some way, is masking
the success of the resources sector which has gone from strength to
strength through the eighties. It has picked up, first of all, the primary
benefits from the exchange rate, the new exchange rate system, but it has
been well managed, it is more productive, its markets have diversified, the
market penetration. The effort has been maintained and the contribution
to national production and national exports has been growing very
strongly. So, any notion that, you know, there's a new fascination with
manufacturing and services at the exclusion of the primary export sector
would be a very big mistake, in my view. And, I think, therefore, one has
got to concentrate across the board and to see that all of our sectors get
the advantage of enhanced competitiveness and where we can at least 
7
give the managers of these resource sector companies of ours the
chance to pick up the things that are coming from national productivity
and national competitiveness. Now, a lot will then depend upon their
entrepreneurship, their marketing and everything else but, by and large, I
think that we have been able to provide a much more competitive
environment and they have done the things that they need to do to make
their businesses more productive and more competitive. Anyway, the
proof of the pudding is in the eating and the strong contribution from the
resource sector is sitting there in the national accounts.
Thank you very much.
Ends. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE FINANCIAL REVIEWS CONFERENCE " AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRY AND THE KEATING GOVERNMENT', SYDNEY,
TUESDAY 5 JULY 1994
Let me begin by congratulating the Financial Review for taking the initiative in
organising this conference on the future of Australian industry.
Just a few years ago there were some who would have placed a question
mark at the end of the title of any conference on Australian industry.
And the agenda would have largely revolved around tariff levels and sectoral
support measures.
At such a conference there would also have been those who argued we would
be better off to turn our backs on the reforms of the
We should, the argumentwyould run, have re-regulated the economy and
returned to a regime which sheltered Australian industry from a more
competitive world.
At the heart of that debate was a test of our national will and a test of our
national nerve.
Last week in Jakarta I saw the results of having passed those tests.
In Indonesia I had the privilege of opening Australia's biggest ever trade
promotion in that country.
More than 200 exhibitors participated in an impressive display of just how
much Australia has to offer the world and, in particular, the Asia Pacific.
After visiting the exhibition you could not fail to be struck by what a distance
we have travelled in the past decade. 
The overwhelming impression the exhibition projected was of a diverse,
vibrant economy with world class capacities in services and manufactures.
Industry sectors ranging from building and construction to education and
training and from marine, engineering and manufacturing services to power
and energy were all strongly represented.
So I come to this conference this morning with fresh evidence of what
Australian industry is achieving and a well-founded confidence that we will
build on these successes.
The Financial Review has therefore picked a very appropriate time to stage an
examination and discussion of industry policy.
As a starting point the Government does not see industry policy being
developed and implemented in isolation from the other major policy streams.
Industry depends for its success as much on macro-economic, industrial
relations and trade policy and micro-economic reforms as it does on specific
industry develo~~ ri6nt aind supp'ori m-easures.-
In fact, much of what we are striving to achieve in industry policy is intertwined
with our objectives in these other areas.
Industries committed to world best practice need a Government committed to
ensuring the domestic impediments are cleared away.
Our industry policy is, therefore, in many respects an international competition
policy which seeks to identify and encourage those characteristics we need to
be able to compete in world markets.
Australian industry should. approach the future with optimism.
Few other developed countiribs can match the circumstances in which
Australia presently finds itself. Few countries have such good prospects for
growth. No predictions for the future of Australian industry can be made, however,
without comparing its condition now with the situation of a decade ago.
While we had some strong export industries at that time particularly in mining
and agriculture the manufacturing sector was still sheltered from
international competition by absurdly high tariff barriers.
For all this protection, the reality was that industry was not strong.
The steel industry, with our resource endowments, should have been one of
the nation's strongest industries. Instead it was going out the door backwards. 4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
Australian made cars were becoming less and less competitive both in terms
of price and quality. The response of the outgoing government was to
propose yet more protection, with tariffs~ of up to 125 per cent.
While other countries were increasingly participating in world trade, we were
putting the shutters up.
When we introduced the first tranche of tariff reductions we were warned we
would have a disaster on our hands. While the last generation of Australian
managers may have been found wanting in certain respects, they certainly
had an entrepreneurial approach to finding reasons for government
assistance. We were told that our market was too small to allow international
competition, our labour force was unskilled, lazy and strike-prone and that
nobody else had a level playing field and so why should we.
Instead we have a story of outstanding success.
Exports of elaborately transformed manufacturing have grown by 17 per cent a
year ince 1988, one of the very highest rates of growth in the OECD.
Services exports, which have grown by about 9 per cent a year, now account
for 20 per cent of exports.
Small firms have emerged from the former torpid business environment and
become innovative and export-oriented McKinsey has identified more than
700 small and medium manufacturing exporters.
Foreign-owned companies that told us they could well leave Australia without
protection, have invested in state of the art plant, competed successfully with
imports and also entered export markets.
Whole industries that were set to be counted among the dead or dying have
undergone Lazarus-like revivals.
Firms have embraced innoVtion, giving us one of the highest growth rates of
business R&amp; D among developed economies if even from a relatively low base.
The reasons for such success are complex. Partly it is due to the basic skills
that were lying dormant in Australian industry. We were also helped by some
natural good fortune, such as our location in this dynamic region of the world
and the fact that we are reaping great benefits, in terms of productive
diversity, from our multicultural population.
Some credit must also go to the Government, for having the courage to take
the hard choices and stick with them.
Policies in a range of areas will support the future growth of Australian
industry, and a continuation of its success in world markets. They will help us
maintain high rates of employment growth so we can reduce unemployment.
We want to bring an unemployment rate of 5 per cent within our grasp by the
4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
turn of the century. To achieve this, we must have a high rate of economic
growth. We must also ensure that this growth is sustainable.
We have made an impressive start.
We are growing at an annual rate of 5 per cent, which makes Australia a star
performer among OECD countries. We have added 260,000 new jobs over
the past year and re duced the unemployment rate to under 10 per cent.
Inflation is running at less than 1 1/ 2 per cent and expectations are for a
continued low inflation environment.
As a nation we can take satisfaction from this progress.
But even more importantly, we can expect to see strong growth with low
inflation continue.
Of course, there will be the permanently miserable who will want to talk up the
risk of the economy overheating, of economic boom followed by economic
bust. In their minds, the risk flickers from too little growth to too much growth.
But the reality is quite the contrary. The nature of this recovery gives us
confidence that strong growth can be sustained. We have what we term a
" 1rolling" recovery.
Initially, the recovery was driven by public demand, the pick up in dwelling
investment and strong exports. The strong export performance is set to
continue, but as the recovery proceeds the stimulus from the public sector is
quite deliberately being wound back while the dwelling cycle will naturally
begin to wane. In its place, business fixed investment will both support overall
demand and provide the wherewithal for greater production.
The rolling nature of the recovery is not limited to what is happening in
Australia, it is also a characteristic of what is happening internationally. Some
of you may have seen a sh~ t article in the latest OECD Economic Outlook
reporting that major OECD economies are not synchronised in their current
cycles. The US recovered earlier than Japan and much of Europe which are
both now beginning to turn.
The consequences for Australia are very healthy. Commodity prices have not
gone on a roller coaster, with the result that our exchange rate has been more
stable. Our traders continue to benefit from favourable international
competitiveness which is still around 30 per cent better than in the early 1980s
notwithstanding the recent rise in the Australian dollar.
Moreover, as this international cycle has helped keep inflation low worldwide
so our rolling recovery has helped in Australia. The OECD now sees inflation
remaining between 2 and 2 1/ 2 per cent over 1994 and 1995.
We have established a low inflation culture and we intend to keep it. 4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
We have not done this by telling the Reserve Bank to blindly pursue zero
inflation and then washing our hands oftthe matter. Instead, we have given
inflation a central role in all economic policy.
Of course, monetary policy has a major role to play in containing inflation. But
monetary policy, by itself, doesn't deliver a change to the culture of inflation. It
is too indiscriminate and cannot be left to apply indefinitely.
Today's low inflation has been achieved through monetary and fiscal policies
as well as through the Accord with the unions and the flexibility we have
introduced into the supply side of the economy. The attitudes of those directly
involved in setting prices or wages have been changed.
And it is these changed attitudes that are at the heart of keeping inflation low.
We won't achieve that by relying on any simple-minded formula to control
interest rates. Instead, we need to maintain comprehensive policy action
through: the continuing commitment to low inflation via the Accord VII;
the improved responsiveness of our workplaces to enterprise bargaining
and higher skill levels;
the lessening of the risk of bottlenecks by re-engaging those unemployed
for lengthy periods with the labour market;
the greater competition to our product markets from domestic and
international sources, via the exchange rate and lower tariffs;
the progressive winding back of fiscal stimulus as the recovery proceeds;
and when action is warranted, appropriate adjustments to monetary policy.
All of this represents a mature approach to policy. And the increasingly
mature approach to business that we are seeing in our workplaces is also
delivering results.
The A=" r will continue to play a central role in wages policy. It has been
crucial in achieving appropriate aggregate wage outcomes since 1983 and
pulling inflation down. It has facilitated the move towards a more
decentralised productivity related wage fixing system.
Enterprise bargaining has become the primary focus for wage fixing and a
vital catalyst for workplace reform. The new industrial relations legislation
provides the framework to achieve the labour market flexibility, productivity
growth and wage restraint necessary for strong and sustainable economic
growth. 4V7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
As I announced in Working Nation, the Government aims to see 80 per cent of
employees in the Federal award sector-covered by direct bargains by the end
of 1996.
In addition, awards will be reviewed and simplified.
Working Nation spells out the close interrelationship between industry policy,
the creation of secure and rewarding jobs in flexible high productivity
workplaces, and the policies we need to educate and train the work force that
industry needs.
Working Nation contains a number of important initiatives to get
unemployment down and the skills of our work force up including a Job
Compact for those unemployed for over 18 months, and a Youth Training
Initiative. Under these initiatives training and jobs will be provided for people who have
become marginalised from the mainstream of economic life during the
recession. We want to ensure that this is a recovery for all Australians not just for the
top end of town.
But the case for doing so is not just based on equity arguments, important as
they are. Failing to address long-term unemployment would be very costly to
the whole economy.
But we are succeeding in meeting this challenge. In the past three years,
close to a quarter of a million long-term unemployed workers have been hired
by employers through JOBSTART subsidies alone.
As from yesterday, the attractiveness of Jobstart has been improved.
Subsidies have been incregsed, the period of subsidy has been extended to
9 months and a bonus payment is available to employers who keep these
workers on for a year.
Employers will also have the incentive of the new training wage which will be
payable to all unemployed people and new entrants to the labour force.
Together with Jobstart, this will mean an employer will be able to receive
subsidies ranging from $ 5000 to $ 8260 for taking on a long-term unemployed
person. The training initiatives in the White Paper were also directed to the longer
term needs of industry. They encompass a comprehensive strategy to enable
industry to sharpen its competitive advantage through getting the training it
needs. 4/ 7194 9: 54 PM 
We all must recognise that training is not a welfare issue. It is not something
the Government is promoting because we feel sorry for the unemployed.
Training is a mainstream economic issue, and promoting training is the
responsibility of all of us business, unions and government.
Both management and work force skills are vital to the competitiveness of
firms. Access to capital and investment in technology are important of course,
but these can often be replicated by competitors. Replication based on the
skills of individuals in a firm's work force is much more difficult.
Whatever the reasons for the failure to invest in training in the past, Working
Nation wipes out any excuse for this state of affairs to continue.
The Government has set up NETTFORCE, chaired by Lindsay Fox and
including Ivan Deveson, Bert Evans, Ted Wright and Bill Kelty as members, to
ensure companies are aware of the benefits available, and assist them to take
full advantage of them.
NETTFORCE is developing 21 national, industry-based traineeships. It aims
to cut through the delays of the past and provide employers with a one-stop
shop to put together training and industrial packages to get trainees employed
quickly. Industry is being given the opportunity to have more say in early vocational
education. The Australian Student Traineeship Foundation announced in the
White Paper will provide funds directly to local groups, which may be
committees of employers, to run traineeships for year 11 and 12 students.
Students will combine school studies with work experience in local industry
and off-the-job training. The traineeships will allow young people to complete
their training in a shorter time.
Industry must set the direction of training and drive the administrative
processes so that they are simple and relevant to the needs of firms.
I I
To show our faith in this approach, the Government has suspended the
Training Guarantee Levy. Now it is up to industry to take advantage of the
funding we have provided. It is up to industry to take control of the training
agenda. Industry must play a strong, positive role and capitalise on the opportunities
the world is offering. The game plan has been spelt out in Working Nation.
There, we have set out a comprehensive industry policy that will help
Australian firms achieve world class excellence. It is about providing a
competitive environment for doing business and enhancing the capacity of
businesses to succeed by being competitive both in Australia and on world
markets.
Tax policies have worked to reduce industry costs and enhance our
competitiveness. Australia is the lowest taxed country in the OECD. Working
417/ 94 9: 54 PM 
Nation includes tax initiatives to encourage private investment in public
infrastructure, investment in smaller and medium sized enterprises and the
location of regional headquarters in Australia.
The Government's telecommunications, Government Business Enterprises,
shipping, aviation and waterfront reforms are reducing input costs, increasing
the quality of goods and services and ensuring the reliability of supply.
We've introduced competition to telecommunications and seen domestic call
rates fall by about 13 per cent and international rates by more than
per cent in the past three years. Further falls in prices and improvements
in service quality and diversity can be expected as carriers position
themselves for increased competition after 1997.
While domestic costs have been cut, the export sector of the
telecommunications industry is thriving. Exports reached $ 545 million during
1991-92 and are likely to grow to as much as $ 2 billion in 1996-97.
In shipping, the average crew level on Australian ships has come down from
28 in 1959 to 18 and is expected to be reduced to as low as 16 in 1995.
These reductions will save over $ 80 million a year across the Australian flag
fleet, or about $ 1.2 million a year on an average ship.
On the waterfront, the workforce has been reduced from 9000 to fewer than
4000 in the face of strongly increasing trade volumes, more than doubling
labour productivity. Container handling rates in the more efficient terminals
are now at levels comparable with our trading partners. Ship turnaround times
have been cut by nearly 45 per cent. Truck queues and waiting times are
much shorter.
We are increasingly look~ ing to the States to achieve, in partnership with the
Commonwealth, rapid progress with the reform priorities that remain. Here
governments are working to reform electricity, gas and water supplies, further
maritime reform, and to ref&amp; m the legal profession. Industry will benefit from
lower input costs and better services.
Most importantly, we are working with the States to implement a national
competition policy, which will increase the transparency of pricing practices of
public monopolies and provide a more systematic basis for reforming public
utilities, the professions and agricultural production and marketing.
The transformation that our manufacturing and services sectors have
undergone during the past decade has produced a new generation of firms
and business leaders.
No longer are they producing just for a protected domestic market, accepting
second best methods. 4/ 7194 9: 54 PM 
Rather they are operating at the leading edge of their industries using world
best practices and technology.
Our industry policy reflects these changes. From a phase when the focus was
on opening up the Australian economy, we have moved to policies which
support our firms to grow, be innovators and ultimately prosper in world
markets.
Access to finance will be improved through a range of measures including the
provision of expert advice, promotion of the role of the Commonwealth
Development Bank, greater tax concessions for equity finance provided by
Pooled Development Funds, and the extension of the Export Finance
Insurance Corporation's facilities to cover the services sector and
manufactured goods.
Innovation will be encouraged by a more generous R&amp; D tax concession, a
program assisting small and medium sized enterprises ( SMEs) to
commercialise new technology and a national network for technology access
and diffusion.
Management and marketing skills will be encouraged by expanding enterprise
development services to SMEs including a major effort to target potential
exporters focusing on innovation, quality, research and development,
marketing and management skills. SMEs will also be helped to form networks
and alliances.
SMEs will benefit from the National Regional Development Strategy that will
provide more than $ 150 million to regions over the next four years to enhance
the development of their competitive industries.
The establishment of Au~ lndustry within the Industry, Science and Technology
portfolio will improve coordination and delivery of programs and bring together
all the Commonwealth's business assistance programs under a unified
marketing structure. The Chair of Auslndustry's Advisory Board and a
significant proportion of its membership will be drawn from the private sector.
Auslndustry will provide the entry point for all Commonwealth business
improvement programs and, through the existing network of the National
Industry Extension Service, provide a major link to State and Territory
programs.
The successful pursuit of global m~ rkets is vital to the future success of
Australian industry. The growth of world trade has been faster than the
growth of world output in nearly every year since World War 11 and much of
this growth has been happening right on our doorstep with exports from the
developing Asian countries growing at twice the rate of world exports over the
past decade. 4/ 7194 9: 54 PM 
The successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round and the creation of the new
World Trading Organisation will add around $ 400 billion annually to the world
economy. For Australia alone the Uruguay Round will be eventually worth an
annual $ 5 billion.
As well as big gains for Australian farmers and miners, the Round outcome
will bring great opportunities for our manufacturers and services exporters.
The Round achieved the largest global tariff cutting package ever negotiated
with tariff cuts on products of interest to Australia of more than 50 per cent.
The new GATT agreement on services will allow Australian services exports,
already worth some $ 15 billion, to compete on an equal footing in this fast
growing $ 1 trillion ($ 1,000 billion) area of world trade. Sectors such as
telecommunications, banking, insurance, professional and business service
sectors stand to benefit substantially from this agreement. On current trends
by the end of next year Australia could well be a net exporter of services.
With APEC, we are working to build an enduring framework for trade and
economic relations in the Asia-Pacific. Already, APEC is doing work that will
greatly facilitate Asia-Pacific trade and investment.
In November this year, I expect APEC leaders will endorse a set of investment
principles that will define some common approaches to the treatment of
foreign direct investment flows. Work on harmonising product standards and
mutual recognition of standards and conformance arrangements is also
proceeding well. This will have tangible benefits for Australian businesses
trading and investing in the region.
Having recently met President Soeharto, who will chair this year's APEC
leaders' meeting, I am convinced that in November APEC leaders will again
push APEC on to a higher. plane of activity. President Soeharto and I both
want our region to be actively involved in liberalising trade, facilitating
commerce and strengthening economic linkages between APEC members,
whose economies are now the powerhouse of the world economy.
And we want business to drive the APEC process. After all, business, not
government is responsible for the high level of economic integration amongst
APEC economies intra-APEC trade is even higher than intra-EU trade.
Business now needs to give APEC governments a clear message on what it
wants. One way this will happen is through the APEC Business Forum, which
was established by APEC leaders last year in Seattle and will report to the
November 1994 leaders meeting in Bogor, Indonesia.
We are exploring with ASEAN countries the possible link between CER and
the ASEAN Free Trade Area ( AFTA). This is an attractive proposal. Our
economies are very complementary and linking them could create a market of
335 million people with a GDP of about $ 1 trillion. ASEAN members have
4V7/ 94 9: 54 PM 
agreed that the idea merits further consideration and we will continue to
discuss it with them.
At home, the Government is working directly with exporters through Austrade's
and other exporter assistance programs and in industry-based strategies
such as for those for agri-food, construction, and health services to jointly
harness Government and industry export efforts.
Australia is on the threshold of a new and exciting era.
Australia has opened up, culturally and economically, to the rest of the world.
We are ready to reap the harvest of opportunities presented by the new
technologies, the new era of trade driven world growth and our proximity to the
most dynamic and fastest growing region of the world.
Our immigration and multicultural policies have nurtured a unique human
resource on which astute businesses are beginning to capitalise a culturally
and linguistically diverse nation, whose migrant and ethnic communities are
drawn from all parts of the world, including our fastest growing export markets
in the Asia-Pacific.
All this means that Australia can become one of the great social democracies
and one of the great trading nations a nation with a vibrant, multidimensional
culture underwriting a strong, vigorous and internationally
competitive industrial base trading extensively in all the continents. Our
cornerstone will be especially close links to the Asia-Pacific nations.
In all this, industry must play a prime role. Industry must be able to capitalise
on the full range of skills, talents and potential in Australia's human resources,
including its youth, its women, and its many migrant and ethnic communities.
There is still a long way to go. We will succeed because we are a naturally
innovative nation with the will to change. Our unique combination of policies
to free up markets, while en'suring social justice for all, provides the
opportunities, fairness and cohesion needed to succeed.
Thank you 4/ 7/ 94 9: 54 PM 



C-9-
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND, THE HON J B BOLGER
MP, DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
WEDNESDAY, 6 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I might say a few things first and invite the Prime Minister to also say a
couple of words. I would like to begin by saying I am very pleased to
see the Prime Minister in Australia. We've had a very good and useful
talk this morning for quite a long time, ranging over a number of
subjects, and we've just had lunch with members of the Cabinet and
we'll be meeting further this afternoon. We had a very useful
discussion about our role, our joint role, in the Asia-Pacific, about
_ 4PEC, about the prospects for APEC, how the debate's going, how it's
developing, about the development of further linkages between
Australia and New Zealand and the ASEAN group of. countries,
particularly in their free-trade area, AFTA, a-nd potential linkages, or
the prospects I suppose you'd say, of linkages between AFTA and
CER, and how we might best progress that discussion, what value we
see in it for ourselves, how we might participate. We discussed then
some bilateral issues I think we agreed that the relationship between
Australia and New Zealand is in very good shape we just dealt with a
couple of issues in the last year that were around for a while, that was
an agreement on Social Security payments, we've just come to a
settlement over compensation payments to Nauru Island and then we
went on to have a discussion about the trans-Tasman aviation market
and also about audio-visuals, and the capacity to enter this market with
the appropriate accreditations for products, audio-visual products
made in New Zealand. I think that's it in a nutshell, and I'll invite the
Prime Minister to add to those remarks.
JB: Certainly, and good afternoon. I just want to confirm what Prime
Minister Keating has said that the discussions were very constructive,
they were warm. I think the fact that we spent a lot of our time on
regional issues APEC, the forum, links between, or possible links
between the ASEAN free-trade agreement and CER demonstrates
that the relationship between the two is a very mature relationship
between New Zealand and Australia, and there are not many
additional items that attract immediate attention that we have to deal
t 
2
with. There are some that are on-going that Prime Minister Keating
has touched on the aviation issue, TV quotas, audio-visuals and the
like delighted that when we do come together we can progress some
of these issues and that, as the Prime Minister said, last year we had
to resolve the issue, or make progress on the issue, of Social Security
compensation to Australia for New Zealanders that were here. We've
been able to do that, we've been able to reach the agreement
necessary on compensation to Nauru, so it's been very good. If I say
it's the type of meeting I think we should have on a regular basis, as
we've agreed. No great fuss or bother, we just sit down, discuss one
or two issues that are important to both countries and that are
important to our region. So that's what we've been doing.
J: Did you discuss the twin republics, and if so, what was said?
PM: No, we didn't.
JB: No.
J: Why not?
PM: Well, we had other things to discuss, that was the point.
J: Did you discuss the single aviation market? Did you make any
progress?
JB: I believe we did. We discussed, of course, the single aviation market
when Prime Minister Keating was in New Zealand last year. I think
what we would agree is that we haven't seen enough progress on it
and there are some quite valid reasons why it's been difficult to
advance, but we do want to see it advance, even though there are
difficulties. So we want to see that. We know there is some issues to
be resolved, that flow from the Memorandum of Understanding, and all
of that. So we've had quite a good discussion.
J: What are New Zealand's views on that?
JB: Well, Air New Zealand's got a view as to what on-rights should be
available to it, and the like. There's obviously two views on it.
J: Mr Keating, what are Australia's problems.. . with a single aviation
market?
PM: Well, I think we see, I mean, Australia and New Zealand have moved a
long way with an open product market. We haven't been as successful
in services. As you remember, the former government of New Zealand
sold Telecom New Zealand to a couple of American companies, and
we haven't had the integration in electronic communication, and
telecommunications, that we might have otherwise had, and I think we 
are therefore more mindful of how we need to progress and succeed in
doing something similar, that is successfully, with air transport. There
are a lot of balls in the air at the moment with air transport, we've got
the government of Australia's intention to sell Qantas, and a float
coming up. We've got Ansett now emerging as an international carrier
and stabilising its domestic balance sheet and its domestic services;
and Air New Zealand's participation in the Australian Market and a
view about what sort of airline system Australasia needs to service it in
the long run. Now, I think they are fairly complex issues and they're
not really open for, sort of, simple resolutions.
J: Mr Bolger, is it possible for a conservative leader to be in favour of a
republi[ c? And, the way the debate is going in Australia do you think
New Zealand might beat us to a republic?
JB: Despite, I'm sure, your ambition or the Australian Press Gallery's
ambition to embroil me in the Australian debate, I don't intend to get in
it. Can I just say, in answer to your query, that I have set out a view
that New Zealand will eventually follow. I have set no particular time
frame on it and it is a view that is now being discussed in New Zealand
with no particular heat. I have set out my views on the issue, I know
there have been views set out here in Australia but I don't intend to get
into those ones.
J: Mr Keating, do you think New Zealand might beat us to a republic?
PM: Well, I don't know, that is a matter for New Zealand. I think the Prime
Minister has taken to this subject with alacrity and good for him. In our
country, of course, we've got a debate now and we've had a mature
debate going but, again, you see the leadership weakness of the
Opposition. Mr Downer's leadership weakness. I mean, he is on radio
and he is on television, he has words everywhere but he has no policy
anywhere. And, he has no policy on this and now he is being
contradicted within his own party, on the republic. Let me just say two
things about that, there are two questions about the republic. The first
question is when the question is put, " Do you believe in an Australian
republic?", if the answer to that is in the affirmative you go to the
second question, " How do you do it, what debate is there, how do you
participate in it, how does it come off?" But, what Mr Downer has said,
in June, on 2UE is, " I am opposed to an Australian republic." So, in a
sense, he has disqualified himself from moving to question two, that is,
how it is duhe. Now, ll-he has got the problem within his party...
J: But he has challenged you ( inaudible)...
PM: There is no good him pretending there is something in my position that
prevents him from showing leadership. The first issue, the first issue
of substance in his leadership has come upon him and he is all over
the shop. He has no policy and he has, on this issue, no strength 
other than to say that he is not in favour of the republic. Now, as far as
the government is concerned, we've already moved to question two.
We've got a cabinet committee looking at the issues in the republic
and the modalities of a shift to a republic and we've published and set
up a committee to look at the modalities of a change the Turnbull
Committee and, it has produced a report. And, the best thing I can
say to Mr Downer is, " Get a copy of the report." He can get a copy from
the Bills and Papers Office, it's freely available and he can go and take
it.
J: That's not the government's position though, that is just a committee
report. Mr Downer is saying, " When are you going to come out and
say what
PM: Let me just say this; Mr Downer said, " I am opposed to an Australian
republic." That means he has disqualified himself from participating in
any debate about how it might be done. Is that right or what? The
second point is that the establishment of the report was part of the
government's election strategy at the last election. I said this, I took
the position of leadership and said the Australian Labor Party believes
Australia should become a federal republic. And, we set up an expert
group, headed by Mr Turnbull, to produce the first piece, what is the
first piece of paper in this country, which looks at all the issues. Now,
that report has been presented, the government is now considering
that report. But, the opposition, you know, all over the place. Mr
Downer has shown no leadership whatsoever. Words, transcripts, but
no thoughts.
J: He said you don't have the guts to set out a detailed position, when will
you do that?
PM: Well, he is the one who is not in favour, look, let me just read you the
quote, 3rd June, 1994...
JB: He came prepared.
PM: " I'm not in favour of the republic," so, where does it leave him on the
republic? It leaves him barracking for the Monarchy. But, he knows, in
his party, a great many members of his party do not support the policy.
But, he also knows that if he shifts he also has to deal with Mr Howard
and others. So, the government is moving well and truly in its
discussions and has moved on to question two.
PM: having decided in the affirmative, yes we want a republic, and that's
the Government's view, we've moved the question two. Mr Downer
hasn't even moved past question one.
J: ( inaudible) ( when will the Government respond to the Turnbull
report??)
I 
PM: When the Government considers its position.
J: New Zealand has considered joining or has examined joining a free
trade agreement with Chile. Is that likely to progress and what would
that mean for New Zealand'
JB: Well, I'm sure it will have no down side in any relationship, any
relationship we establish with Chile will have no down side on the CER
relationship with Australia. That idea is being considered. Officials
have had preliminary talks, they've gone no further than that. We see
some benefit in it, but itis very early days. We just need to see where
a progress of what the substance of it might be and then we'll make a
decision.
J: Mr Bolger, tomorrow you are seeing how Transfield is getting on
building the patrol boats, is it an option for New Zealand that rather
than build a third or fourth Anzac frigate, you might, in fact, buy patrol
boats? 2
JB: Not being considered. We don't have to make a decision on the third
and fourth frigate for some time yet. So, that issue just simply hasn't
been addressed in New Zealand.
J: Given that you're both keen on a link between CER and AFTA how
long do you think it will take to achieve that?
PM: I don't think either of us could say. I think, it is a matter of this is not
a necessity for Australia or New Zealand. I think, we agree, we think it
is a good thing. Therefore, because we think so, there's a case for
progressing it sensibly by talking to ASEAN leaders and to see what is
in it for Australia and New Zealand and * what is in'it for our potential
partners.
JB: The speed of progress will be substantially, in my view, and I think
Prime Minister Keating agrees, be determined by the ASEAN nations.
If they believe it is a good idea, what time frame do they think it should
occur over. And, we again, are in preliminary discussions. We both
agree it is a good idea, we've both said that publicly, we've both had
the opportunity to talk one to one with ASEAN leaders so, I think, it is a
good idea that we should just quietly take it forward.
J: ( inaudible) ( Australia's concern with the level of defence spending
in NZ??)
PM: The PM and I didn't discuss it at this meeting, but as we were walking
out I said we probably will say something about it together later this
afternoon. I think our position on this is fairly clear. We think that
Australia and New Zealand should maintain and be able to maintain 
core competencies and a core capability in defence spending and the
Prime Minister knows my view about this. I said so when I was in New
Zealand and I don't have to say it this afternoon to him. I've just said it
now.
JB: And you don't have to say anything more, but we probably might have
a little chat. The simple fact is I said in our discussions last year in
Wellington that the Government was committed to keeping spending at
about the level it was. We have and we will.
J: A question to both Prime Ministers. The US federal reserve decision
on official interest rates in the US. What ' s the impact on..
PM: We don't know what decision that may be so why speculate about it?
J: Mr Bolger, how is it in New Zealand your country is able to have a
reasonable rational bipartisan approach to the republic..
( Dennis Grant: We're like that
JB: Mr Grant who has been in your country for some time has given you
the answer. No, I think, the answer is that the debate has not
advanced as far in New Zealand as Australia and what way it will
develop, I think, is yet to be determined. But, what one must observe
is that all the political leaders of New Zealand even in quiet voices do
agree.
J: Mr Keating, on the republic. How do you feel about the fact that you
and Dr Hewson may end up on the same side on this issue?
PM: Well, I was inviting Dr Hewson you remember I made what I thought
was an open political offer for his Opposition to join with the
Government and make the transition for Australia from a constitutional
monarchy to a republic. That offer at the time was rejected. The
Government then went on to establish the Turnbull Committee and it is
now going on to consider those outcomes. But, even late repenters
we're very happy to see them on board.
JB: Can I go back to the early question, because I may have left it slightly
understated there. I'd have to say there's an awful lot of
parliamentarians on all sides of the Parliament who don't agree
however.
J: Did you discuss New Zealand's warmer relationship with the United
States ( inaudible)
PM: No, we didn't. We think this is a matter between New Zealand and the
United States. It's not our business and I'm very glad you think, and 
7
it's generally afoot, that there's a warmer relationship between the two
countries. I'm sure that's a very good thing.
JB: It is and it is warming and the relationship between myself and
President Clinton is a very positive one and I think it's very good for
not only New Zealand, but I think it's good for our region.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: We've been discussing this
JB: I was just going to say no, that won't happen. Relax. Thank you.
ends 



r7~
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
MONDAY, 11 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Well, we've had a real spectacle over the weekend, haven't we?
Alexander Downer said he was going to take the fight up to the
Government on ! he monarchy and before the bell goes for round one
he is scurrying back to the seconds and throwing in the towel. And he
says look, really, we don't really need this contest, both ideas are
compatible, the Queen isn't really our head of state. To the
monarchists he says look, I'll keep the Queen for you, tucked away, as
long as you don't mind me labelling her quaint and irrelevant, and to
the republicans he'll say, you don't really need a republic at all, our
effective head of state is the Governor-General. It is riot The Queen.
Now, can I just say that this is in contrast to a couple of things he said
last month. He said the monarchy was a foundation stone of the
Constitution June 3, The Canberra Times If you want to change
to a republic you have to take away a foundation stone of our
Constitution which is the monarchy." And, of course, over the weekend
and under pressure, " Well, the monarchy doesn't matter at all it's
irrelevant," he says. He says the Governor-General is our effective
head of state, so he is not simply just leaving us to borrow the
monarchy of another country, but he wants to damn Australians to
having as their head of state the deputy of a foreign monarch. In other
words, the anachronism is good enough, we just keep on rolling along
with the anachronism.
But, as I said this morning on radio, what this really reveals is how
Alexander Downer would be under real pressure. Here he is on a
debate on the republic and the monarchy, early in the piece, slipping
and sliding around on the unarguable that the Queen is our head of
state. And you wonder on the big decisions in the economic and 
social areas as the Government has conducted them in the past the
big buy down in fiscal policy in the 1980s, the removal of exchange
control, the removal of tariffs, Mabo, the Uruguay Round. I mean,
where would this sort of weakness and vacillation get us in terms of
the prosecution of major national interests of Australians? As I said
earlier today, Alexander Downer is a policy free zone. He is all words
and no thoughts and no policies. And Mr Costello said, his deputy,
after they were elected on 27 May, " In six weeks time we will be giving
you a broad statement of principles and directions," and Mr Downer
himself said " well, in a couple of months, I hope, a directional
document which will make things quite clear." Well, they've been in
office seven weeks and we haven't seen anything of the kind from
either one of them.
So, the fact of the matter is and the other thing, of course, if you
actually have an empirical argument with him where he says the
Queen is not our head of state and I say well, I beg to differ she is,
she's central to our Constitution, he says I am personally abusing him
and I am in the gutter. In other words, he will not even have a proper
policy debate. If anyone crosses any of the policy lines I mean, he
expects to go through life without being challenged on policy and once
challenged says oh, this is shocking, I've been personally attacked by
someone in the gutter.
So, what I say to Alexander Downer is, show us the colour of your
polices and let us at least on this issue see you stand for something
honest. If you believe in the monarchy, say so. You've said so, stand
by it and understand what it means that you're saying to the Australian
community that this generation and the next generation, that we will
continue to borrow the monarch of another country and under a
Coalition government the effective head of state of this country would
be the deputy of a foreign monarch and that's good enough for
Australians. Now, that's where he stands. The Government stands four square
against him on this and as I've said in the policy speech last year and
subsequently, the Government believes that we owe it to Australians,
to this generation, and particularly the next to our children, that their
aspirations and their ideals and their identity ought and can best be
reflected by Australians taking full charge of their own affairs with an
Australian person as our head of state.
J: Prime Minister, why isn't Alexander Downer right that the Governor-
General is the effective head of state. Can you name an instance
where the Queen or King before her has actually stepped in and over
turned a decision of the Australian government? 
PM: The head of state of this country is a monarch of another country. The
head of state of Australia is the monarch of Great Britain. That's a
simple, clear fact..
J: hasn't made any difference ( inaudible)
PM: And as the well, look, the fact has made all the difference in the
world, it's made all the difference in the world because the powers of
the monarch were the powers that were used on a number of
occasions in this country and last, severely, in 1975.
J: When he said no decisions made here are influenced at all by the
royal family, that's not right?
PM: . The central question is, here, there's only one question here,
whether Australia should and can continue with its head of state
Australia's head of state, the Queen of Australia, so called being the
monarch of Great Britain. And not an Australian person.
J: Well, the decisions of December 1975 were taken at Yarralumla, they
weren't taken at Buckingham Palace.
PM: They were taken under the monarch's powers.
J: Would you seek to limit those powers, then?
PM: Well, that's a different question.
J: But that goes to the heart of it...
PM: Well, let me decide what goes to the heart of it, thank you very much
at least in this instance, seeing I'm giving the answers. The first thing
is that the Government said that it would commission an expert group
to look at these issues. It did. That. expert group has now reported
and the government is considering that rerp-rt. And, in due time the
cabinet will make a judgement about how such a shift to a republic
ought best be executed.
J: Prime Minister, Mr Beazley said yesterday that it would be a minimalist
change; you, yourself have said that it is a simple proposition. If it is
so simple why can't we see it?
PM: Well, because, firstly, it hasn't been put together the change. And
why should it be? We've struggled along now for, until 1993 with the
monarch of Great Britain as our head of state. And the Labor Party, at
its national conference, said it should be an objective of a Labor
government to see Australia become a republic by the centenary of our
federation. So, it is on that basis that the government has said that we
should move towards a republic and that we will exercise these, our 
consideration of these issues. But, the question minimalist, and the
change, is not about a change to the way our system of government
works. It is not about a change to the states, it is not about a change
to the Senate, it's not about these things at all. It's about a change to
an Australian head of state.
J: Prime Minister, the Turnbull Committee saw all sorts of problems in a
popularly elected president, accepting that the government is yet to
take a final position, do you have a personal view on this? Would you
be prepared to allow the Australian people to elect their own?
PM: My personal view at this point doesn't matter very much because the
cabinet is in the process of considering all of these issues and that is
not the point. You've got here, the leader of the Opposition arguing
weakly, the unarguable, that the Queen is not our head of state.
J: But, Mr Downer did challenge you last week to rule out the possibility
that you wanted to appoint the President?
PM: I gave you the answer then and I'll give it to you now. There are two
questions to be asked here. Do you believe in an Australian republic
or do you believe in the monarchy? If the answer to the first question
is in the affirmative, you move to question two. That is, how such a
change should be executed and what the modalities might be. But, if
you say in answer to question one, " No, I believe in the monarchy",
you are disqualified from a debate about question two.
J: You have signalled in the past being personally more disposed
towards the idea of parliament electing a head of state rather than a
popular election, is that still your inclination?
PM: Well, this is a matter for the cabinet, not for here. But, Laurie Oakes
wrote a column on my view about this some months ago and how I see
it. But, again, these are preliminary thoughts. But, can I say this, no
debate about this is going to save Alexander Downer slipping and
sliding in his weakness all over the landscape, trying to say to his party
and to the country, " Look, if you want the monarchy, I can keep it as
long as I can brand it as quaint and irrelevant." And to the republicans
he'll say, ' You don't really need a republic at all, a monarchy is good
enough.
J: Those preliminary thoughts which favour the Parliament over popular
election haven't changed, have they?
PM: Well, that's a matter for the cabinet, not for here.
J: Is it a matter for the people, ultimately, will they be given that choice to
make? 
PM: Well, this is all going to be by referendum, that is the key point. This is
a matter for the Australian people, in the end, to decide. This is why
all this stuff about the constitution and how its... I've never seen more
cowardly references to the constitution than from Mr Downer. And,
then, we find on ABC radio today, he says, " Written constitutions aren't
the be all and end all at all. It is the conventions."
J: Do you think it is a fair enough question for people to say, if we're
going to have a republic, if they ask what sort of republic?
PM: No, I think the key question is whether Mr Downers assertion can be
sustained in Australian political life. That is, whether or not the Queen
of Great Britain is or is not the head of state of this country. That is the
central question.
J: ( inaudible).., what sort of republic?
PM: Well, just wait your turn, Tom. I mean, it's all there in the report. Go
and pick up the Turnbull report and have a read through it.
J: Can you give them a reassurance that what we're talking about is
something as simple as whether or not we have an Australian as a
head of state and they'll be able to decide the rest?
PM: Between now and the year 2001, or certainly between now and the
time a referendum will be put, the Government will make its position
abundantly clear on all of these things. As I said a week or two ago,
forensically clear.
J: Will it be clear before the next election?
PM: Well, that's a matter for the cabinet to think about.
J: Will there be a referendum about whether or not the President should
be elected?
PM: You weren't listening, David, I just told you, there will be a referendum
put to the Australian people in due time so that Australia may become
a republic by the year 2001.
J: You also said, Mr Keating, that it's all going to be decided by
referendum. Do you think that the question of how a president would
be elected would actually be put to the people at a referendum, so
they'd have the choice?
PM: Well the Parliament will decide what referendum proposals go to the
public. There's a very democratic process here. There are first of all
referendum proposals that are put to parliament, parliament then
carries them and they are put to the public. 
J: Do you agree that until you've got your position, or the government's
position, in the open, you are vulnerable .( inaudible)
PM: Not at all, not at all. I've got a mandate for my position. I stood up in a
national election, and a tightly fought one one where, in fact, at the
time, everybody believed that the Government was behind and said
I believe that Australia should become a republic, my party believes
that, and we will set up an expert group to look at the machinery, we'll
get some documentation there doesn't currently exist, we'll have a
national debate. That's my position. I stand here with a mandate for
that.
J: But Mr Downer says you're plotting, that you're seeking to lI mean,
can you say that
PM: Well, Mr Downer's even...
J: Can you say now that something as simple..
PM: Well, take.. let's just..
J can you say something as simple...
PM: Well, lets just cast Mr Downer's view to one side by his weak assertion
that the Queen of Great Britain isn't our head of state. I mean, that's
the state of him.
J: But nevertheless, can you reassure people now that the change you're
looking at is as simple as whether Australia has an Australian as head
of state? Just that no more, no less.
PM: I'm here giving full expression to the Government's mandate. And the
Government's mandate is to look forward to a republic by the year
2001, to have a public debate which we've already generated -I
mean, we're having it, aren't we? By having the documents, quite
voluminous and tightly-written documents, in the political market place
for the first time ever, and the Government has undertaken, and I
repeat the undertaking, to have referendum proposals, in due time,
proposals passed by the parliament. See the thing is this about Mr
Downer. He thinks he can skate through life without policies and the
country, the Australian community, can't get a move on, can't get a kick
along without leadership. It can't get a kick along without decisions. It
can't get a kick along without victories. And it is the victories, whether
they be in Mabo or in the Uruguay Round, or in opening the economy
up, we move ahead by decisions and leadership. You don't move
ahead by vacillation and trying to please everybody at once,
shillyshallying and compromising, as he's seeking to do. I mean, if
that's the best the Liberals have to offer, after now 7 weeks in office, a 
leader who can't even stand to defend a position he's taken on the
monarchy, then the Liberal Party has, as I've said before, from
Peacock to Howard to Peacock to Hewson to Downer, soft to hard to
soft to hard to soft.
J: Mr Keating, later this year when Cabinet gives it's response to the
Turnbull Committee, do you expect it will indicate a preference to the
way in which the present...
PM: Look, in due time, the Government will make its thoughts on this
subject known. I mean, this has been on for, now, a debate about our
future has been on for over a century. And given that the government
has said in 1993 that it considers that the full expression of Australian
sovereignty can't be achieved and our aspirations can't be met by
other than an Australian head of state, it's doing that which it has a
mandate to do, that is embark upon a process where there is a debate
and a set of proposals put and that will happen.
J: By refusing to rule out the possibility of personal benefit inaudible...
PM: Well, look, I'm not going to, look, look, let me tell you this. I'm not
going to argue Alexander Downer's case for him, and nor should you.
The key point is ' this-that you've got, I mean this must be, I can't
imagine any other Western world leader in a democracy, particularly a
Westminster style one, where you have the leader of the alternative
government saying that the head of state isn't as the constitution says
itis
J: Iwas..
PM: I mean that's where we are.
J: I was going to put Graeme Campbell's view to you that you're doing
this as a power grab?
PM: Well, let me tell you this. There's, let me tell you this. Seriously and
jocularly, there would be no way, no way whatsoever, no matter what
the outcome is, that there is more power for the government or for me
in this. But what I want to see is young Australians, in the main our
children, have the chance to grow their own society with a full
expression of Australian sovereignty and the full, and their full
aspirations, and not have it compromised by an anachronism of having
the deputy to a borrowed foreign monarch. OK, I'll take one more...
J: You talked earlier about leadership, and also about what's owed to
future generations of Australians in those terms, shouldn't the revamp
of the Australian constitution, a 19th Century document as you said,
written in the British foreign office, shouldn't it involve more than simply
the head of sate... 
8
PM: Well, the constitutional...
J: . shouldn't it involve things like four year terms and updating things like
relations between the states and the Commonwealth....
PM: Well, these things are all...
J: . inaudible...
PM: well look, it's a matter of how one prioritises any such thing. There's a
constitutional centenary foundation, a bi-partisan group, which is
engendering now a discussion about the constitution and all of its
parts, fine. The Government supports that, it thinks its a good thing.
But there is a central question, and in the Government's terms, a
priority question, and that is should the Australian head of state be an
Australian person? Now the Governments answered that question in
the affirmative.
J: Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.
J: Prime Minister, inaudible. . the situation in North Korea?
PM: Well, I'd just say that we're watching developments there closely. It
seems by early signs that Kim Jong 11is succeeding to the leadership
of North Korea. It seems, also, that the third round of talks between
the United States and North Korea and the North-South Leaders
Summit, is going to continue, if with a delay. So, I think there's a
choice here for North Korea that's one of greater openness, or taking
the uncertain path of developing a nuclear capability and isolating
itself from world opinion. So I hope they see advantages in the former
rather than the latter.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH LYNDAL CURTIS, ABC MONDAY, 11 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, I think, Mr Downer is trying to tell people that the royal family
isn't our head of state or as he said yesterday, the Queen is irrelevant.
I think these comments reveal Mr Downer as weak and vacillating. He
wants two bob each way. He wants to say to the republicans look,
don't worry, the Queen isn't our head of state and it doesn't matter and
we won't need to shift to a republic. And, to the monarchists he says
don't worry, we'll keep the monarchy, we'll hide it and pretend it isn't
relevant.
LC: But, isn't he right in saying that the Queen's role is theoretical when in
reality she doesn't exercise the say in this the affairs of Australia?
PM: No, he is not right. The Queen is centrally involved in our Constitution
and is our head of state. She is the Queen of Australia. I am quite
sure the Queen would be very surprised to find that her Opposition
leader in Australia believes that while she may by the monarch, she's
not the Queen of Australia and she's not relevant. I mean, what these
comments reveal is that notwithstanding the gravity of the issue itself,
that is, the value of the monarchy and the prospects of a change to a
republic it reveals so much about how Alexander Downer would handle
major issues of national management like hard decisions, like the
shift outwards of Australia in the 1980s, the cuts in fiscal policy, the
removal of tariffs, Mabo. I mean, what these reveal him as is, I think,
first of all insincere, telling people the sun wouldn't rise, that is, the
Queen isn't our head of state, weak, not wishing to offend one group or
another and incapable of driving through hard decisions.
LC: Isn't he right in saying that the debate about the republic is not a
debate about the royal family; it is a debate about the constitution and
whether change is needed to that constitution? 
PM: It is a debate about whether the head of state of this country is an
Australian person. And, the head of state of this country is not an
Australian person and no wriggling around by Mr Downer is going to
reveal that argument. I mean, it's unbelievable that an Opposition
leader would try to defend the monarchy by saying it's irrelevant and to
all intents and purposes doesn't exist. I mean, Dr Hewson looks like
an absolute tower of strength compared to this fellow.
LC: Why should the Liberal Party or anyone, in fact, have to come to a
definitive view about the republic before they've seen what you have to
offer?
PM: Well, the Government is not asking them to come to a detailed view
about a referendum proposal or anything of the like. It is saying that
we expect people in public life to have definitive views about the key
question of whether an Australian person should be head of state.
Now, Mr Downer, has made it very clear. He said, at the start he made
it clear, I am opposed, he said to the republic. He is in favour of the
monarchy. Now, he is finding that he wants to try and curry favour
within his own party and he's really saying ' oh, look, don't worry, don't
worry, the monarchy is irrelevant.' And to the monarchists we can say
we can just hide it and call it irrelevant. And to the republicans we can
say ' well, look, the Queen really isn't our head of state at Imean, I
have never seen a weaker view put in the face of an issue. If we
wants to stand with some strength and say ' I am opposed to the
republic and I'm in favour of the monarchy'. Fine. We understand
where his values are and what he stands for.
LC: Hasn't one of his central points been that he supports the current
system and hasn't found a need for a change. Isn't he right to wait and
see what you have to offer before he decides on whether there is a
need for a change?
PM: Not right. I stood up at a policy speech in a national election and said
I believe that an Australian person should be the Australian head of
state and we should move to a republic. That is my position. If he
wants to argue he can come to a decision about that matter without
detail this argument that you've got to see what all the nuts and
bolts are before you decide this key question. I mean, how can any
person who has risen through public life to the leadership of a major
party not know whether they actually believe that the Australian head
of state should or should not be an Australian person. That's got
nothing to do with the Government and it's got nothing to do with the
Government's proposals.
LC: Doesn't it though have to do with the detail of the proposals and the
detail of how the system will be changed?
PM: No, because you've got to first decide whether, in fact, you believe it is
inappropriate for the mMonarch of Great Britain to be the head of state 
of this country. Now, I believe it is. I don't believe we can have the full
expression of Australian sovereignty, of Australian identity, of
Australian aspirations while ever our head of state is borrowed from
another country. Mr Downer does, but he doesn't have the courage to
come out and say so and stick with it.
LC: When are you going to put forward your plan to the Australian people?
Have you got a time frame?
PM: Well, I said at the election campaign that I, the Labor party believes
there should be as its announced policy says, a republic by the
centenary of our federation 2001. I said upon winning the election, I
vwould establish an expert group to write what in effect is, the first
paper on the issues relating to a change which is to change our head
of state and that we would publish that paper. That committee was
established, the Liberals were invited to participate they declined. Mr
Turnbull headed it. It is a comprehensive document. It's been
published and now the Cabinet sub-committee of the Government has
had two meetings on that document. In other words we are doing
exactly what we said, but we can't even find an Opposition leader who
stands for anything. I mean, when Dr Hewson was in office he
wouldn't commit himself to a republic and I'm happy to see now, he
has second thoughts and Mr Downer was going to trounce the Labor
Party all the way up to the next poll on this question of the monarchy
and the republic and four weeks later where is he? Trying to tell the
rest of us that the Queen isn't our head of state.
LC: Do you want to be around to put in place your republican plan?
PM: I want to be around to see that humbugs don't prosper. The thing
about Alexander Downer is he is a policy free zone and perhaps worse
than that he is a principle free zone. This country simply can't afford
the luxury of somebody who simply wants the big white car and the
Lodge and doesn't particularly care how he gets them.
LC: Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER5/ 9
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
I welcome the Democrats' contribution to the Republic debate.
Like the Government, they have recognised the importance of this issue to
the aspirations of the current generation of Australians, and to the legacy of
appropriate democratic and independent institutions we want to leave for our
children. We are committed to the course of action on the Republic debate we
announced to the Australian public some time ago that the Australian
people should be in a position to decide by refererjdum later in the decade
whether Australia should become a republic.'--
We have always believed that this decision is too important to be rushed,
and, for that reason, the Government will formulate its position only after
detailed consideration of the issues. We have set ourselves a carefully
measured program:
the preparation of a comprehensive options paper on how to achieve
an Australian head of state ( the Republic Advisory Committee Report);
the consideration of these options by a Cabinet committee with a
report to Cabinet later this year;
a parallel education campaign to raise the general awareness of
governmental structures and operation.
The Government will continue on the basis of this program.
The contribution that the Democrats have made shows that the debate on the
Republic that we sought is now taking place.
I hope that others will join the debate in the same constructive way.
CANBERRA 13 July 1994 



PRIME MINISTER549
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
John Fahey and his Government have by their decision to retain the Cahill
Expressw . ay the eyesore that mars the most significant precinct in SYdny--
demonstrated again the unfitness of their stewardship of the fortunes of this
great city.
The Harbour Tunnel provides the first and only opportunity to remove the
expressway and get it down before the Olympics.
The Commonwealth Government offered to help with the expressway
Mr Fahey made the decision without further reference to the Commonwealth.
Mr Fahey and his government are without any vision for Sydney and are run by
the various authorities. The authorities are too strong for the Cabinet.
Obviously the State Rail Authority and the Roads and Traffic Authority have
decided this issue for the government.
Money is deciding another great issue for Sydney. The Fahey government
decision to build a casino in P yrmont will destroy the opportunity to return
Pyrmont to the attractive compass of the city.
The hideous proposal for the casino will be a blot on the landscape of the city
and flies in the face of what the Commonwealth Government is seeking to
achieve with the Better Cities Program for Pyrmont. The fine textured
redevelopment of Pyrmont is to be sacrificed to a budget subvention and an
architectural proposal dominated by lowest common denominator guidelines.
Between the activities of the State government in its quest for money and the
Roads and Traffic Authority, Pyrmont is being destroyed.
By the time Sydney gets an Olympic's Chief there will be no opportunity left to
bring Sydney up to the potential of its beauty for the world to see in the year
2000. Sydney is in the hands of a government focused solely on money without the
slightest idea of the vision and sense of grandeur that Sydney now needs.
God help Sydney because John Fahey and his government won't.
CANBERRA 13 July 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, WEDNESDAY,
13 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: On the line from Canberra, we have the Prime Minister, Paul Keating.
Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: How are you John?
JL: Have you got any money?
PM: Well, this is Mr Webster is it?
JL: Yes.
PM: You see, it's State Government Ministers without any vision and
without any ideas. When the national government talks and they say
well, rather than us give you a plan or sit down and negotiate
something with, give us a cheque, give us some money. In other
words, if you want something give us some money. Now, the
Commonwealth has got a lot of money in Sydney now with the Better
Cities Program in Pyrmont.
JL: Yes.
PM: $ 117 million and a number of areas around Sydney. I made an
offer to the Fahey government, that is, that we would deal with them on
this subject. They never came back to us. Not at any stage and I've
been waiting for a response and a proposal. One which says look, it
costs this much to take the expressway away, these are our idea about
the railway. What has happened here, John, is the State Rail
Authority and the Roads and Traffic Authority look, we're not having
this, we want to keep our expressway and you can see basically, the!
run the Cabinet down here. 
JL Well, many people would feel that way because many people would
see it simply as being pig headed and non-visionary to leave the
wretched thing there when it is an eyesore and does precious little
good, but they are saying it would cost $ 400 million to make the
alternate arrangements and they can't afford it. Now, it's hard for
anybody to deny that they're not telling the truth?
PM: Based on what though? Based on what? I mean, putting the railway
under ground or terminating the railway at Wynard. I mean, it didn't
always go round past Circular Quay. Doing what with the road
system? Selling off the real estate either end. I mean, what's the
basis of that? See, at no stage has the New South Wales government
come back to the Commonwealth about the issue. I'll tell you what's
happened here John two things.
JL I was led to believe, could you tell me if I'm wrong, I was led to believe
and, I think, you might have told me that you said that you were so
keen on the idea you'd be happy to sort of give them a hand, help, I
think, was the word used. Is that true?
PM: That's right and in other words sit down and where some of these
projects are beyond the capacity of a State government and
particularly where you've got national I mean, this city is going to be
the show case city of the world at the end of this century.
JL Well, it should be.
PM: It's not going to be with the way the Fahey government is
administering it with a Casino in Pyrmont, with the destruction of
Pyrmont by the Roads and Traffic Authority, with the decision to leave
the Cahill Expressway there, the fact is that, and I'm told that this
decision has been made for two reasons. One, that the National Party
wouldn't stand spending this sort of money in the city that's point one.
JL Yes, well, that was intimated by Robert Webster.
PM: Well, he is a National Party Minister. And point two, that the Cabinet
is not strong enough for the SRA and the Roads and Traffic Authority.
Just look at the destruction at Pyrmont and you can see the sort of
tyranny that these bodies are actually wreaking on Sydney. No central
planning. No idea about objectives, if they want to put an expressway
or an elevated expressway through an urban area, they just bang the
houses and the buildings out of the way and there it goes ugly as sin
and the aesthetic and the urban environment is the last thought they
have.
JL Yep, well, you've said to me on more than one occasion that Sydney is
the most wonderful city in the world. Very few people would argue, but
I suppose your personal view and personal pride in Sydney can't allow 
you to simply hand over the money because you want something
done. There are other things that have to be taken into account.
PM: There are important objectives here. The Olympics is an important
thing.
JL: Important to all Australia.
PM: Well, the Commonwealth joined with the former Labor government
with Neville Wran and Laurie Brereton to get this harbour tunnel built.
JL: Yes.
PM: Together we made arrangements to build a harbour tunnel. That left
the opportunity then of feeding eastern Sydney other than by via the
Cahill Expressway. So, it's now an opportunity to take it down, but I'm
afraid this Government has no courage and no vision.
JL: Well, when you say you are prepared to help them does that mean you
would give them financial aid?
PM: Yes. I've said to them if they come back with a set of arrangements
that we would consider it, but it's got to be a scheme, an arrangement.
But, basically what they've said is ' look, we don't care about it and
there's no way the National Party is going to let us spend this money in
Sydney, so, we are not doing So, the Commonwealth offer just
went apparently Robert Webster said we reneged on an offer. Well,
that's a straight untruth. A complete untruth.
JL: Maybe I could get Mr Webster back again and suggest to him that..
PM: Ask him when we reneged. Is there any correspondence? And, there
won't be.
JL: Yes, he said there was incidentally.
PM: No, there was no correspondence. The fact is I was waiting for them
to come back to the Commonwealth and they never have.
JL: Anyway the point is, it's another thing that shouldn't be a political issue
should it? We're talking about the beautification of the greatest city in
the country.
PM: You've got to have governments that have got some heart, John.
JL: Yes, and you've got to have governments that are prepared to be a bit
co-operative.
PM: and they still haven't got an Olympic Chief appointed. They want to
build a building as ugly as sin in Pyrmont which will destroy that whole 
area over there and basically that's because of lowest common
denominator guidelines. I mean, the casino shouldn't be in Pyrmont, it
should be in the city proper. And, I think, that the people of Sydney
and New South Wales, indeed all Australians, who are interested in
Sydney particularly as the Olympics are arising, there's a stewardship
here given to the Fahey government to go and make some decisions
for the nation not just for Sydney or for New South Wales and
making a horrible mess of it.
JL: Yes, and you are prepared to be co-operative in the making of the
decisions?
PM: Yes, but I'm not prepared to say, to down-the-line National Party
ministers ' look, here's an open cheque for what you want to do', and
them saying to us ' otherwise we won't deal with you.' The
Commonwealth will not deal with any government on that basis.
JL: Well, I suppose the Commonwealth couldn't do that because you can't
have people holding a gun to your head can you?
PM: No and, you know, without basically doing what these see, there is a
central issue here , John, these authorities are outside of political
control.
JL: That's right.
PM: The State Rail Authority and the Roads and Traffic Authority will wreck
any urban environment, they will destroy any city state if it suits them.
They are run by engineers and all they are about is building bigger
and more impressive, in their terms, expressways or corridors and the
urban aesthetic, the urban environment, the beauty of the city I
mean the whole notion of beauty is not even in their lexicon.
JL: Yes, the thing is again and I hope you agree, that this really should not
be a political issue should it?
PM: Well, not when the Commonwealth government which has no
responsibilities for Sydney directly has said generously because of the
Olympics we will sit down and look at the central quay side area of
Sydney and Pyrmont and where we have already invested, on the
verge of investing $ 117 million.
JL: Yes, well, you've given the City of Sydney the Qustoms House and
there surely is the opportunity to make the most wonderfully
aesthetically pleasing area for an entrance to this great city in this
great country.
PM: There are two things that the Commonwealth has done, that I've done
recently. One was to give to the Council of the City of Sydney a sixty 
year lease on the Customs House because it is a central civic building
of the Quayside. It's now hidden behind the railway station.
JL Yes.
PM: The other thing we did was to, in the course of those financial
arrangements, give the City Council the capacity to buy down the
heights of the buildings behtind the Opera House, so the Opera House
wasn't marred by a big, ugly set of buildings built on those sites behind
the Opera House.
JL Yes, it's bad enough that people ought to remember when they are
complaining that it could have been worse if you hadn't have been
able to do the deal with the City of Sydney.
PM: What will come there won't be perfection, and it wouldn't be as I would
like it all, but it is going to be much, much better than it would have
ever been. Now, the only leadership which has been shown in the
area of the central city and the Quayside and these environs is going
to matter so much to Sydneysiders and to the country over the long
term is via the Council of the City of Sydney and the Commonwealth
government. Not the Fahey government.
JL OK, well, you've now made it patently clear that the offer is there to
help. Help, of course, in what form I don't know and that's none of our
business at this stage, but something could be discussed and would
be discussed if they chose wouldn't it?
PM: But, I'm not going to have some down-the-line National Party minister
from a State government saying ' well, Prime Minister, you give us a
cheque and then don't ask any questions.' I mean, we are not dealing
like that and it's up to New South Wales to come back with a proposal.
They have not done. so. The Commonwealth hasn't reneged. This is
just a failure of leadership by the Fahey Government, nothing else.
JL Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you, John.
ends 



SPEECH NOTES FROM THE PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATES TO THE WOMEN LEADERS FORUM, 14 JULY
1994 " The Forum is built on the recognition of two dynamic trends: first, the
opening up of Australia to new commercial and trade links with the Asia-
Pacific region, with the enormous opportunities foi; growth and employment.
And second, the move of many more women into business and management,
with the benefits for Australia of their talents and resources."
" The fact is women have not been a firm part of most of Australia's trade
missions. Yours is a unique trade mission, which capitalises on the expertise
and contribution of business women to developing new commercial and trade
links. If we are to project a contemporary image of Australia's business
capacities, then it must be an accurate one and must include leading women
executives." " An important aim of the Forum is to achieve greater recognition of the talents
of Australian women recognition by governments, the media, the community,
and business both in Australia and in the region. If Australia is to have
internationally competitive, high quality management in the future, we must
harness the talents of women in business."
" The Forum is an exciting initiative. It is an example of the entrepreneurship
that Australia needs to take full advantage of the recovery and the
opportunities opening up in the Asia Pacific. It deserve9 to succeed. I have
no doubt that it will achieve signifcant advantages both for your corporations
and for Australia."
" I wish the Forum every success and congratulate Georgina Carnegie,
Telstra and the other corporate sponsors on your vision in conceiving,
organising and supporting the Forum."
ends 


The Prime Minister met today with 20 leading Australian businesswomen who&nbsp;will be taking part in the Telstra Austral ian-ASEAN Women Leaders Forum in&nbsp;Singapore next week.
The Forum will bring together around 100 of Australia's most influential&nbsp;businesswomen with counterparts from the ASEAN region in&nbsp;a ground-breaking exercise to extend trade networks.
Mr Keating told representatives of the Australian delegation today that he&nbsp;was confident the Forum would lead to significant trade and other cooperative&nbsp;ventures between the businesswomen of Australia and from other nations in&nbsp;the Asia Pacific. Notes from the Prime Minister's address are attached.
Minister for Trade, Senator Bob M cMullan, will lead the Australian delegation&nbsp;which includes Deirdr-e Mason from the Telstra Corporation, Jenni Neary from&nbsp;the GIO, Edith van Dommelen from Woolworths and Susan Ryan from theAssociation of Superannuation Funds.
Major female figures from the ASEAN countries Indonesia, Brunei, Malaysia, &nbsp;Thailand, the Philippines and Singapore~-will take part, along with several&nbsp;from Vietnam, Cambodia and the Lao PDR.
Sponsors for the Forum include the Telstra Corporation, AMP, Arthur&nbsp;Andersen, Qantas, the Queensland Investment Corporation, the ANZ&nbsp;Banking Group, CRA, McDonalds and Nutri-Metics.
The Telstra Forum has been a cooperative project with financial and&nbsp;organisational support from the Office of the Status of Women, Golden&nbsp;Marketing, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, AIDAB and the&nbsp;International Division of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.&nbsp;
14 July&nbsp;1994



13.09 ' 95 11.35 *&amp; 61 6 273 2923PM RES FFC j01
PRIME MINISTER 56/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
THE 1995 GLOBAL CULTURAL DIVERSITY CONFERENCE
I am proud to announce that the Australian Government, in conjunction with
the New South Wales Government, through the NSW Ethnic Affairs
Commission, and the Australian Multicultural Foundation, will host a major
international conference on cultural diversity next year.
The Conference will be the first international conference of its kind, and will
be a part of Australia's official celebrations for the 50th anniversary of the
United Nations and the International Year for Tolerance.
In keeping with the stature of the occasion, the UIN Secretary-General,
H E Dr Boutros Boutros Ghali has agreed to deliver the keynote address.
1995 is also the 50th anniversary year of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation ( UNESCO). The UNESCO Director-
General, Dr Federico Mayor will also address the Conference.
The event will be staged at the Sydney Convention and Exhibition Centre at
Darling Harbour, from 28 to 28 April 1995. We expect to attract around 1,000
national and international delegates.
Senior political, academic and community leaders from around the world will
be invited. The Conference will provide a forum for the exchange of ideas
and experiences on ways of dealing with the increasing diversity of our lives;
the result of the international movement of people', advances in
communications; and the globalisation of international markets.
The Conference will be held in the first year of the Decade of indigenous
People. indigenous issues will be woven throughout the Conference
program.
The focus willbe on developing public policy aimed at building social
cohesion and encouraging an appreciation of cultural, religious, racial and
linguistic diversity, including ways in which it can be developed as a social
and economic asset.
It will also be an occasion when our own proud record of achievement in this
area will be held up for international scrutiny.
CANBERRA 18 July 1994 PM PRESS OFFICE00( ii 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, DREAMTIME CULTURAL CENTRE, ROCKHAMPTON,
TUESDAY, 19 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, you made some remarks about the importance of regions,
we're talking about the Central Queensland region here, how important
will it be in Australia's future?-
PM: Well, I think, that regional development is going to be important across
the country, but probably especially so in states which have better
than average growth opportunities and, I think, this is true of
Queensland it's got this temperate climate running for it, it's got a
population shift running for it. Regions, I think, are getting better
organised, they are more tightly focussed and they do engender their
own confidence. I mean, what studies show is where we see regional
leadership we see progress beyond the national average. Now, the
Commonwealth is prepared to get in and help people in such progress.
We are prepared to get in and help regions do these things, but it's got
to be on the basis that people are there to help themselves too.
But, I think, in this part of Queensland where we are seeing people
are aware of the fact that there are enormous international
opportunities here as well as national ones. I think, that's a big break
through.
J: What is the significance of talking to the young Central Queenslanders
this morning?
PM: Well, I always get a charge out of talking to young people because
their minds are, apart from being fresh and alert, they are not weighed
down with a whole lot of baggage and prejudices and they're just
happy to take things as they come, think about them and respond.
They are always a tough audience young people. They are tough
judges and I always like to give them the opportunity to at least say
things to them directly and it is not filtered through the media or 
something else. So, I enjoy the opportunities and well, I think, they
did.
J: How did you impress on them the days of riding on the sheeps' back
are over. It's a tough message to deliver in an area that is so rurally
focussed.
PM: Well, it is not to say that we don't need rural industry, we do, and rural
industries contribution to Australia is still very obvious. Fortunately
now because of the change in the last ten years, rural industries are
now more competitive than it used to -be. But, it is not enough to
sustain the Australian population. It needs more than it. It needs
innovative product markets, internationally traded services and the
other thing is we can have them and we can particularly have them
with a big through put to our education system. You know, high
participation rates in schools, huge addition to university and TAFE
places, all of this is going to power along, push along product
innovation and our capacity to market sophisticated products. So, I
think, with rural industry what we want to do is do the traditional things
well, but add value where we can and our changes of doing that now
are much greater than they were 10 years ago.
J: Shoalwater Bay is obviously the biggest regional issue at this time.
Will you be having a look at it?
PM: Let me confess my interest in some of the pristine areas of this
country. I was one of the members of Cabinet that supported the
decision to preserve the Daintree rainforest, more recently Jervis Bay
in NSW and 1, as you know, commissioned the study of Shaolwater
Bay, looking at the economic and environmental values of the area:
Now, the report has been presented. The Cabinet is about to consider
the report and I hope that will be soon.
J: Have you also had a look at what the miners have had to say about
the report?
PM: Well, I've had some cursory examination of that, but I think, this will all
be revealed in the Cabinet discussion we'll have.
J: So, you can't give any hopes to the ' greenies' here today?
PM: Well, I think, the hope to the ' greenies' as you put it is the fact that the
review is there in the first place and it is now reported and the
Government will have to deal with its recommendations, but there is a
thing called due process and due process means that you don't rush
the judgements.
J: Any comment today on home lending. Banks is a big issue the word
in Canberra today. 
PM: Well, I think, the Reserve Bank is doing what central banks do they
keep an eye on the system they run they run the banking system,
look at its impact upon the national economy, its prudential
supervision, and the Government has obviously, you know, had some
communication with the banks about housing lending, its modalities
and its impact on the economy.
J: Should we feel confident then with new home lenders, new home
buyers?
PM: I think, there is more tha n enough. I m-ean, you are seeing now an
absolute proliferation of home lending institutions. An absolute
proliferation of them. We've got the ACTU joining with one of the big
mutual funds to provide housing lending, we are seeing it coming from
some of the smaller savings banks, so I don't think the housing market
has ever been better serviced than now.
J: What about re-regulation as the way to go?
PM: Well, if we are talking about re-regulation in the pure, no, of course, it
is not the way to go. We just spent a decade getting out of it, but that
is not to say that the sensible supervision on the system, that is, the
central bank nudging the system in one direction or another isn't an
appropriate thing for a central bank to do.
J: the drought will worsen, is there anything further the Federal
Government can do to help the farmers?
PM: Well, we think that these climate change affects are now so profound
that they are with us almost every year, that these are no longer simply
a, sort of, fall into disaster category. It is almost part of managing rural
enterprise and accordingly we have now included drought
arrangements in the Rural Adjustment Scheme, well, in the breadth of
the Rural Adjustmenf Scheme ra ther tlian simply regarding it as a one
off, because they are not one offs, they are around most of the time in
one form or another. We are now looking at this scheme and Bob
Collins was, I think, here recently, is now seeking a review of the
scheme to make sure that it is meeting its objectives in terms of
assistance to drought affected areas.
J: The farmers are upset that you haven't been to a droughted property
on this particular tour?
PM: Well, I have on others. I mean, I know what the problem is and it is
coming from these obviously climate change affects. As I say, it is
more or less a permanent feature of the landscape in one place or
another. So, the thing to do is to try and deal with it systemically
through something like RAS and where we think that it is not working
right, think about it, talk about it, review it and get it right. 
J: Mr Keating, the remarks made on ' AM' this morning from Thailand's
Deputy and Foreign Minister, are you aware of the pointed criticism of
Australia's stand on human rights issues?
PM: Someone did tell me about it. Look Australia's human rights record is
as good as any in the world I think. It comes from the deep sense of
democracy in this country. People do have a very tolerant attitude to
one another and respect for one another and that's where that respect
for human values come from and I've really thought it is one of our
great strengths here and abroad.
J: Well, how does it feel, the Bishop of Dill making comments that throw
into question Australia's stand and supposed inconsistencies in
dealing with..
PM: Look, no inconsistencies. We've always been concerned about
violations to human rights and we express our concern forth rightly
whenever we have the opportunity. In the case of Indonesia, the way
to express that concern is in the context of an environment of a broad
relationship that matters to us and matters to Indonesia. I think
throwing stones from a distance doesn't have any impact at all. It's a
matter of whether one wants to be effective in registering ones disquiet
of these things or to feel good about it.
J: Do you think it's quite strange that we are standing on Aboriginal land
as you're saying those things?
PM: Why would it be strange? I mean, that's another thing where I think
Australia's record is second to none. We've just passed into law
that's the Labor Party, and some elements of the Senate one of the
largest pieces of property and cultural law that any government has
ever contemplated which is giving justice to Aboriginal people.
J: Will the skills training that we are going to have full employment, there
has got to be jobs there. How do you answer claims from the
Opposition that you have got to have job creation, if you've got to have
trained people?
PM: Well, you've got to have growth, economic growth, and that's where
the jobs come from as the economic growth of the last year has proven
5 per cent economic growth and 3 per cent employment growth.
There is no substitute for growth, but the Opp osition has always
proven it can't manage a growth economy. Whenever it's around
inflation reares its ugly head and the only way they know to stop
inflation is to kill the growth. They are saying well, growth is terrific,
but it brings inflation so we can't have that so lets not have the growth.
When we don't have the growth we don't have the employment, so it's
no accident that Australia is leading the pack in terms of internationel
change, in terms of international growth rates, in terms of employment 
growth and it's in this way that we'll get Australians back to work. We
have already had 150,000 job growth in the last year.
J: Mr Keating, do you agree though with the Reserve Bank's concerns by
limiting home loans and funding for home loans, that that is the way to
control inflation?
PM: There is a relationship there between the Governor and the banks
which is a banks relationship and I'm not privy to all this and that's
what we have a Reserve Bank for to manage this sort of relationship.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH SPENCER HOWSON, RADIO 4RK, ROCKHAMPTON,
TUESDAY, 19 JULY, 1994
E OE PROOF COPY
SH: Prime Minister Paul Keating, thanks for coming in.
PM: A pleasure, very good to be here.
SH: Well, welcome to Rockhampton, have you seen our new bull statue,
we now have a fifth statue, did you see it as you arrived?
PM: I did in fact, yes I did. I mean, I'm quite familiar with Rocky, I've been
here many times over the years. It's a lovely city.
SH: -What did you think of the new statue. Did you take any notice of it or
just sort of disappear past you?
PM: No, I just sort of, well, I just noticed it and went on, but it is a, I mean,
it's a very important centre this and it's very nicely situated on the river
and that's a very beguiling place.
SH: You spent time this morning with local Year 12 students. What did you
learn and what did they learn from a discussion like that?
PM: Well, I think there's a great freshness of mind about young people,
there's no humbug about them. They're interested in argument, the
facts, they've got views, they express them. They're not reticent, I find
actually speaking to them they are a tough audience. I mean, they are
very tough, they are very tough judges, hard assessors but, one has
a chance to talk about how I see it. I mean, that's what I'm invited to
do talk about how I see Australia, where it will be in 10 years time,
what the opportunities are and, you know, and I was making the point
I've never seen us so well placed and particularly the lives and the ' life
cycle of young people today in the new Australia, the one that's got 
international linkages now it never had, I mean a young person could
today be working in Rockhampton one month, in Shanghai the next,
and then be back into Sydney or Melbourne. You know, we've now
international ised the country so much these very high participation
rates in school are producing a huge body of educated people and
where ever we see an educated nation we see an interesting one.
SH: You say a tough audience. I believe one of the questions was
regarding East Timor, was that the sort of thing that you were
expecting?
PM: No, in fact it wasn't one of the set questions, it was on the outside, but
no, I think, tough in a sense of that they listened for value. I mean they
don't want hypocrisy, they want value.
SH: So, they're very educated when it comes to politics you think?
PM: Well, I think they're doing politics, they're doing economics and they
probably follow current affairs more than say, my generation at the
time did. So, I always give them as good as I can. That is, I try and
tell them things directly because not many people get a chance to talk
to the Prime Minister directly, you know, they get it filtered through the
media in some way, of course, you always have a chance to meet
people both coming and going. They all say things to you and the bits
and pieces, if you're a good listener, the odd little gem sticks with you.
SH: Yes, what do you get out of this sort of thing. I mean, in the last week
we've seen the Premier, Wayne Goss, visiting a school in
Rockhampton and the cynics would probably say that they are turning
18 next year, it means they can vote. Do you get more from it than
that?
PM: It's got nothing to do with that. I mean, we do it for the fact that I think
it is important that regions believe that they are as central to the way
the nation functions as the cities are and the point I've been making up
here is that often, if you look now around the country the areas of
greatest employment growth is actually in the regional areas. It's not
in the cities. Now, there is an absolutely greater number of jobs in the
cities because the cities are bigger, but the employment growth rate is
often higher in regional areas. So, I think it's important for Premiers
and Prime Ministers to come to regional centres and that's why I'm
here. I'm not here because a group of children, students are turning
18 years of age. I think that important as that is, I'm here to say ten
years ago, if I'd been here only half as many students would be there
because only 4 in 10 completed secondary school. This year it is 8 in
It will soon be 9 in
SH: And have you had much chance, you've been in Rockhampton very
briefly today, you got in I believe about 1 1: 00am and it's now just 
coming up on 3: 00pm. Have you had much chance to talk to local
interest groups, the conservationists about Shoalwater, the
Cattleman's Union and the drought?
PM: I have. I've just attended a very broadly attended function and quite a
few people asked me about Shoalwater Bay and about the drought. I
mean, you do get a chance if you're in public life to meet people at
functions like this and garner some views and I always try and do that.
I always try and meet as many people as possible. I don't just come
and give a speech then walk away. I try. and stay and meet everybody,
have a talk, see what they want to say and obviously Shoalwater Bay
is quite an issue here now and it deserves to be an issue because it is
one of the loveliest, pristine areas of the coast. I mean, not many
countries even have the option of preserving an area like this.
SH: Shoalwater Bay as you say, has been in the news. We've had the
Environment Minister, Senator Faulkner up here. We've had the
Resources Minister, David Beddall up here. Neither of them are
saying much about what they want. They say that it's to go to Cabinet.
Are you saying any more than that at this stage?
PM: No, but of course, I was the one who established the review,
Committee of Inquiry, and I did so because, I think, an area this large
and with environmental values as important as they seem, deserve to
be considered properly and we've done that. We've now got a set of
recommendations and now the Cabinet will have to weigh that report,
it's recommendations, the environmental values versus the economic
potential.
SH: Do you have a personal view on it at this stage?
PM: Well, I'm not entitled to a personal view about it, but I don't mind
saying that, I think, that Australia's been very well placed being able to
reserve some areas. I supported, as Treasurer, Graham Richardson
when he sought to bring forward the proposals to preserve the
Daintree and to declare it to make a World Heritage declaration.
Essentially that was about money and I was quite happy to be finding
the money for that. Recently, of course, the Commonwealth
government has decided not to build an armaments depot at Jervis
Bay. Jervis Bay which is, sort of, an equivalent sort of area on the
NSW coast has beein now preserved from economic development. So,
I think the Labor government has a very proud record in these things
and Shoalwater Bay is being considered properly. I mean, there is a
thing called due process, I mean, there is an issue here. There has
been an inquiry established. There's been a report. The report now
has to be considered.
SH: How much of that can you do though. The protecting the environment
Jervis Bay you mentioned Shoalwater Bay, the other side of the 
argument is, of course, that every time you do that you are losing out
on jobs potential. Is that a hard balance for you to try to achieve?
PM: Well, I don't know that that is true. It's true in some cases, but not
necessarily true in others. If you take, let's say, the Daintree,
something we know something about all of us, there is no doubt now, I
think, that the economic impact of preserving the Daintree has far
outweighed the costs of the loss of forestry activities within the
Daintree. It has become, outside of the reef, the principal focus of Far
North Queensland. Tourist attention has-still; I think, a lot of economic
up side about it. So, it is a moot point about where the economics lie.
SH: All right. On the point of the drought. You have been criticised today
by the Cattleman's' Union for not going out and seeing droughted parts
of Queensland as part of this tour.
PM: Well, I've seen droughted parts of Queensland and I've seen
droughted parts of NSW on plenty of occasions over 25 years of public
life. The issue is not to doubt that the drought is there. Of course it's
there and it's there probably because of climate change effects. What
the Commonwealth Government has said is look, rather than simply
this be part of the natural disaster relief arrangements, disaster means
it is intermittent and unlikely and therefore where it comes it has to
have an arrangement which reflects those kinds of circumstances.
Whereas what we know is with these climate change effects, is it is
much less intermittent than it was, it's becoming a permanent feature
of the Australian landscape in one place or another each year and
therefore, rather than simply dealing with it on a, sort of, natural
disasters basis it's best dealt with as an on-going agricultural
management problem and hence we have included it in the Rural
Adjustment Scheme in the RAS scheme.
Now, what my colleague Senator Bob Collins has said recently is look,
if we think that these drought arrangements are not adequate then we
can review RAS and, I think, he said that today. We can review RAS
and see whether it is working. Now, I think that's the way to go.
SH: All right, on a second point on rural issues, the National Farmers
Federation has been pushing for a commitment from the Federal
Government to make the family farm exempt from Austudy asset
testing which, I believe, was an election promise. So far no
commitment on that though. What's going on with that?
PM: Well, I think, this is a complex matter. We have sought always in
establishing Austudy arrangements to try and overcome the fact that
some people have got quite a lot of capital tied up in farms though not
necessarily a lot of income. So, on an assets basis they could be quite
comfortable. On an income basis this is not so. It is a matter of finding
the balance in these things, I think. 
SH: Well, is something going to be done about that?
PM: Well, it is not something which is across my desk at the moment, but
that's not to say I think that the Minister for Education, that is Simon
Crean and his colleague Minister, won't have this as other issues
under, if you like, a permanent watch.
SH: All right, it all sounds very political that. I mean, does this mean that
we are going to get some sort of answer some stage this year or is it
PM: I can't tell you. It's not a Cabinet ranked matter at the moment and I'm
not sure whether we can design an arrangement where simply the
capital values of properties completely, you know, have a very
diminished impact upon the granting of Austudy arrangements. I
mean, Austudy has been extended as you know to Years 11 and 12.
During the period of this Government we have improved Austudy at
home and away from home and the level of the payments are
comparatively generous to what they were when the Government came
to office. It's again, a case of cutting the cloth.
SH: All right, from Queensland to a couple of national issues. The Reserve
Bank has warned today that banks are lending too much money to the
housing sector. Do you share that concern?
PM: It is a matter for the bank to make a judgement about this I think. It has
stewardship of the financial system and it watches the call on the
capital of banks in the devotion of their capital to certain areas of
lending. I think there is also another impact, that is the impact of
housing lending on the economy. It depends where the lending is. If
the lending is in new housing, of course, it adds the supply. If it is
simply bidding up the price of the existing stock of housing well, that's
a horse of another colour. It may be this, I think, that concerns the
Governor and he's the appropriate person to take this up with the
banks.
SH: There has been reports today that the Reserve Bank wants to push for
re-regulation. Do you think that this is all an argument for that?
PM: No, no. I don't think the bank thinks that at all. I mean, heaven forbid
if we were to go back to the time when savings banks couldn't take
deposits over $ 100,000, that banks couldn't accept deposits under
days, all these silly regulations which existed in the past. It has always
amazed me that people have actually even thought about going back
to them. I'm sure the bank has no idea to do those things at all.
SH: What about a compromise. Say, increasing the capital adequacy
requirements from 50 to 60 per cent? 
PM: Of banks or on housing lending?
SH: On the housing lending.
PM: Well, it's a matter of really how much at the moment the so-called
risk weights are the amount of capital that a bank would need to
commit to a certain size housing lending book and these weights have
been largely determined by the BIS Convention this is the Bank of
International Settlements Convention. Whether they reflect really
prudential risks in Australia I don't know, but again this is something
for the bank to make, it's something within its charge.
SH: All right, a couple of brief ones more. In the Sydney Morning Herald
this morning a report that the Government is to overhaul family policies
to counter the Opposition's plan to sell itself as the pro-family party. Is
that the reason for the planned overhaul?
PM: No, I mean, the Government has lead on family policies all across the
last decade. I mean, starting with Medicare, universal access of all
Australian families to health protection regardless of income. The
Coalition party the Liberal and National party want to basically give
a free kick to the medical profession and private hospitals, charge what
the market will bear and cover it with gap insurance. We won't be in
that. The Family Allowance Supplement, probably one of the leading
income support systems in the world came from this Government in
1987-88. The child support agency, the generalised child care rebate
which I promised in the last election and which we have now
implemented, the Home Child Care allowance which will paid in
September this year was a commitment by the Government in the last
election. The Coalition will have to run awfully hard to catch the Labor
party on family policy and the reason is, basically, because the Labor
party is a party and a government which is worried about the general
needs of the community. The Coalition is basically an elite
organisation that is interested in people with high incomes.
SH: One of the major components of this new government plan to give
women up to 12 weeks maternity leave at the existing dole rate of $ 140
a week, can you tell us a little bit about that, how would that work?
PM: Well, that is something that we are going to look at in next year's
Budget as a consequence of our on-going discussions with the ACTU
and the Accord. They have been regarding this for a long time as an
important thing, that is, that there is some income protection there for
maternity leave. Now, we are very sympathetic to that. It is all about
means, it is all about being able to do it at the time. But, if you look at
the improvements, the massive improvements to the income of
families, particularly lower income families from the governmenit's
policies, compared to say where they were in 1983, I mean they are
not to be compared. 
SH: This idea of giving women the 12 weeks maternity leave, would that be
for all women regardless of whether or not they have children because
there has been some talk that all women should be eligible for it.
PM: We haven't designed it, we said that we will we said to the ACTU
and we announced this at the time, recently, when we had just agreed
to two $ 8 payments for the bottom third of the workforce in these next
two years that we will look at it next year and that will, of course, be
one of the design issues whether it is income tested et cetera.
SH: Would you be interested in looking at some sort of equivalent scheme
for gay families bringing up children?
PM: It has never been proposed.
SH: Well, how do you feel about that yourself the idea?
PM: Well, I've never thought about it to be honest. It's not on the top of my
agenda and may never be.
SH: If someone were to propose it to you
PM: I don't normally just make decisions about these sorts of things. These
are things that we think about in terms of a framework and the big
framework for us is basically looking after families in need.
SH: All right, Prime Minister Keating, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you.
ends 



7
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, TULLY STREET PRIMARY SCHOOL, TOWNSVILLE,
WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, I believe you've been confronted by people about the
Hinchinbrook development. Are you sympathetic to their concerns?
PM: Well, the Commonwealth has now a very long history of environmental
concern for Far North Queensland. You know, most obviously with the
Reef, the Daintree rainforest, we've now got a review going in
Shoalwater Bay and I had the pleasure this morning of launching the
strategic plan fo'r the Reef which, of course, goes to questions such as
development which effects us. So, Commonwealth interest in this is
pretty manifest, pretty profound.
J: environmental impact study on..
PM: Well, again, there are processes for considering these things and we'll
give it appropriate it will have due process attached to it. That is, if
there is a heritage issue here in terms of the World Heritage area and
where the Commonwealth needs to make a decision, well then a
process will ensue in the normal course of events it's not a
Commonwealth matter.
J: How long will it take to get some answer..
PM: I don't know, but I mean, again, the Commonwealth is only involved
here on the basis that if there is in some way an area of the heritage
area in which some authority by the Commonwealth is necessary
which would bring the Commonwealth into it. I mean, because the
Commonwealth has got such a great environmental record, every
environmental issue that becomes a problem around Australia,
everyone says ' oh, what can the Commonwealth government do for
Well, the answer is we will do where it is appropriate for us to
do. 
J: Changing tact on the Federal Airports Corporation, a lot has been said
and written, but very little from yourself. I mean, what is the situation
with the airports, are they going to be sold?
PM: Well, they are in the Budget over the next few years that we will sell
the Authority or those assets which we deem are better serviced by
private ownership. But, again, this will be a process. This is not going
to happen immediately, it will happen over time.
J: But is it shaping up as a battle at Federal Conference. You've got the
Left unions lining up.
PM: At every Federal Conference, there's always got to be one or two
issues that people jockey around. It's part of the sport of it all.
J: Can you tell me Prime Minister, when a decision will be made on the
troops going to Rwanda?
PM: We've sent a team to Rwanda to look at the position and see whether
any plan by the United Nations is feasible and one which is safe for
Australian service people and when we get that report we'll make a
judgement about it.
J: When do you envisage getting that?
PM: It can't be far away.
J: What sort of a role would you anticipate for the troops there?
PM: Well, again, I'll have to see what comes back. If it's a role in protecting
humanitarian efforts, well, it is has to be a well defined, clearly
articulated one by the UN and we would then consider that seriously.
J: There is concern that the Rural Adjustment Scheme won't meet the
drought relief needs of the northc-s more money forthcoming?
PM: Well, I notice the National party running around saying I should be
standing in a paddock in some ' drought affected area see, they are
all show and no substance. I mean, the substance here is is drought
a recurring issue in Australia? And the answer is that it is. And,
therefore, how should we treat it? Well, the Government's view is it
should be treated under the Rural Adjustment Scheme programs
rather than, say, natural disasters' relief because it is not an
intermittent disaster. This is coming now quite regularly with climate
change effects.
J: The drought we have in Central Queensland at the moment isn't
regular. It is the worst in history, there's never been one like it. 
PM: I know, but there was one the year before that and one the year
before. I mean, drought is around now in Australia all the time so,
we've said let's try and cover this as a normal recurrence of rural life
and use the Rural Adjustment Scheme to manage it. Now, my
colleague Senator Collins has made clear that we are now going to
review the RAS scheme so that it can adequately deal with the
problems of drought and so that there is rural recourse by the farm
community to assistance there. That, I think, is what we should do
keep the review on the situation and announce a change to the RAS
arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States that actually
does fit the bill.
J: The State governments are saying that the Rural Adjustment Scheme
doesn't address core debt that builds up over the years.
PM: Well, it depends what interest rate it services. I mean, RAS, I think,
from memory can involve subsidies of up to 100 per cent of the interest
rate cost, so effectively it's carrying costs are being met and its real
value declines over time.
J: Prime Minister, the State government this week has appealed to the
Commonwealth for some extra drought assistance. Is that likely to be
met?
PM: We do things systemically. I mean, that's the way if you want
assistance from the Commonwealth it's got to be part of a systemic
program and, I think again, I'm repeating myself, but I think that's
where RAS comes in. But having National party politicians wandering
around drought affected areas, crying crocodile tears about them is not
going to help people. What's going to help is a proper program, well
funded, that actually works.
J: But, producers are saying similar things too. Are they crying crocodile
tears?
PM: No, no, producers are effected, producers have got a genuine interest
in this and, of course, they will be treated genuinely.
J: So, you see no need for you to visit drought affected areas?
PM: No, I've been in drought affected areas all through my political life. I
understand what there are drought affected areas perpetually in
Australia. Now, I can go and visit them and see them and say ' yes,
this is a problem', but what do you do about it? The answer is a
systemic response.
J: On the broader environment, last month John Faulkner sent out a
broad response to issues like setting aside Tasmanian forests
biQdiversity, export wood chip licence controls. Given the criticisni of
that, do you support the thrust and aims ofJohn Faulkner's statement? 
PM: Well, we operate as a Cabinet and we develop, over time, forestry
management plans with Tasmania and with New South Wales in
particular, and we adjust these from time to time. Now, we have a
policy on wood chips, we want to get to higher levels of processing
and value added and we've put a requirement on companies in the
industry to do this by a certain time. That is the general direction we
are going in.
J: Prime Minister, the social justice package. Can you tell me when that
is going to be implemented?
PM: Well, I think you had better decode that one. Which particular variant
do you mean?
J: The social justice package itself Mabo?
PM: Well, there isn't a social justice package itself. I mean, there is a Land
fund, which essentially , Mabo is about land. It is not a catcti all
policy for an unlimited amount of funds for so-called social justice
measures. It is about justice for Aboriginal people in their access to
land particularly those who have been dispossessed of land and can't
avail themselves of land under Mabo. Now, we have got the Land
Fund legislation, I introduced it into the Parliament about two and a
half weeks ago and that will lay on the table of both Houses of
Parliament and be debated in the spring session of the Parliament. I
am confident that it will pass notwithstanding the miserable opposition
of the Liberal and National parties to it. Now, when it does pass that
will be a great leap forward for social justice for Aboriginal people in
this country because they'll have access to land via Mabo where they
can make traditional connections to the land and where that
traditional connection can't be made, owing to their dispossession,
they can avail themselves of land under the land package.
Now, beyond that, there may be some other issues which the
Commonwealth may involve itself in in respect of social justice or
heritage issues for Aboriginal people, but that's down the track.
J: Just going back to privatisation, Brian Howe is skating on thin ice with
the comments..
PM: Well, he has made his comments in the context of the Cabinet's
decision to do these things.
ends. 



7
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESENTATION OF CHEQUE FOR WET TROPICS TREE PLANTING
SCHEME AND OPENING OF THE KAMERUNGA ENVIRONMENTAL PARK
CAIRNS, WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
Ladies and Gentlemen
Its a pleasure to be here today in such a beautiful location to demonstrate my
Government's support for such a worthwhile shceme as the Wet Tropics tree
Planting Scheme and to officially open one of the fruits of the scheme's
labour, the Kamerunga Environmental Park.
As many of you will know, the Wet Tropics Tree Planting Scheme has been
operating successfully since 1989 when it was established as part of The Wet
Tropics Structural Adjustment Package. Commonwealth funding for the
scheme has totalled some $ 6.3 million. When you consider the benefits both
in terms of the employment generated and the environmental improvements,
to my way of thinking, that has been money well spent.
To date the scheme has operated successfully in four shires, Hinchinbrook,
Eacham, Douglas and Mulgrave. Through the development of infrastructure,
ii~ luding f6ur nurseries', and expertise in nursery operations and tree
planting, the scheme has done a superb job in reducing soil erosion,
improving water quality and replacing lost rainforest habitat. These
achievements are a credit to the commitment and energy of all those who
have participated in the scheme.
But the scheme will not stop there. Like any dynamic program, the scheme is
experiencing exciting changes, changes that will see the scheme restructured
into a community-based employment company, providing training and work
experience opportunities for long-term unemployed people.
I have to say that the scheme's track record in environmental repair and
management and the enormous amount of expertise that it has developed
gives me great confidence in its ability to provide on-the-job training and'
supervision as part of the Commonwealth's Labour Market programs 
especially the regional environment employment program announced as part
of the announcing the White Paper on employment.
I also have great confidence in its ability to operate independently of
recurrent Commonwealth funding from the 1996-97 financial year.
As an illustration of my Government's confidence in the scheme, I am here
today to present the first instalment of a total of $ 3 million that the Federal
Government has committed to assist the scheme in its transition to
independence.
As part of the new arrangements, the management of the Wet Tropics Tree
Planting Scheme will be transferred to the North Queensland Afforestation
Program joint board. This will see seven councils Thuringowa, Cardwell,
Johnstone, Cook, Mareeba, Atherton and Herberton -join the original four
participating shires to manage the scheme. The joint board is well placed to
manage the scheme. It was established in 1992 specifically to pursue and
coordinate tree planting throughout the region, for both environmental and
commercial purposes.
The board will now have responsibility for the future restructuring, operation
and success of the scheme. The Government trusts that the new
arrangements will see a continuation of the cooperative approach that has so
far characterised the scheme's operations in employment, environmental
successes and training.
I'd like to congratulate all participating councils in the scheme for having
taken such positive action in addressing the environmental challenges of your
region and through this, doing so much for the region's unemployed. It would
be difficult to find two more deserving activities than creating jobs and
reversing environmental degradation.
But as you all know I am not only here today to hand over a cheque. I am
also here to officially open the Kamerunga Environmental Park, a perfect
example of the kind of work being done by the Wet Tropics Tree Planting
Scheme. This glorious 54 hectare park which you can see all around you,
extends for more than 2 kilometres on both banks of the Barron River. It is
here that the Mulgrave unit of the scheme joined forces with the Queensland
National Parks and Wildlife Service and others to involve community groups
in'preserving, restoring and reconstructing the naturally occurring vegetation
along this part of the river.
I've been told that when they first began work, the river foreshores were in a
terrible state. Rubbish had to be removed, exotic plants controlled, noxious
weeds removed and the area where sand had been mined, filled and levelled.
Since that time, more than 30,000 trees have been planted to restore the
river foreshore, and paths and picnic areas have been developed. 
From what I have seen today, I can say that the original aims of the project
providing a mixed forest demonstration plot and education site, enhancing the
public amenity of the area, and improving the scenic value of the park
have been well and truly met.
The restructuring of the Wet Tropics Tree Planting Scheme will enable the
valuable work of replacing lost rainforest habitats to continue. It will also
provide opportunities for additional projects to be undertaken by local
councils and other Commonwealth and State agencies, adding to the
scheme's potential to create long term employment in the region.
The scheme has built up a significant store of expertise and has become a
very popular initiative. Restructuring now offers great potential for meeting
environmental, labour market and industry development objectives in the
region. In ' Working Nation' the Government spelt out its plans for providing
support for the regional coordination of labour market initiatives. The Wet
Tropics Tree Planting Scheme has the potential to be a model for other
regions. I am very pleased to launch this new phase of the Wet Tropics Tree Planting
Scheme and have great pleasure in handing over this cheque for 1/ 2 million
to Mike Berwick, the chairman of the North Queensland Afforestation
Program Joint Board.
I am also very happy to declare the Kamerunga Environmental Park open. 



i7
A
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF STRATEGIC PLAN,
TOWNSVILLE, WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
Ladies and gentlemen, may I begin by saying what a
pleasure it is to be here with you today for the launch of
the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority's strategic
plan. It is always a pleasure to visit an area as beautiful as
Townsville and the welcome you have given me today
makes my visit even more enjoyable.
I don't think that anyone who has experienced the
magnificence of the Great Barrier Reef would deny its
significance, nationally and internationally. It ranks as
one of Australia's greatest and best known natural
features. It constitutes the world's largest marine
protected area, extending for some 2,000 kilometres along
Australia's northeast coast and covering an area of
344,000 square kilometres about the same area as
Victoria and Tasmania combined.
While the reef is an area of stunning natural beauty, it is
also an extremely fragile habitat for thousands of different
species of marine life, and has been declared the world's
first particularly sensitive area by the International
Maritime Organisation.
The reef is not only significant for its natural beauty and
as a habitat, but also for its recreational, cultural and
economic relevance. This encompasses commercial and
recreational fishing, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
heritage and activities, and tourism.
Economically, the reef is estimated to be worth an
estimated $ 1.4 billion per annum in tourism and fishing
income, with tourism income growing at an estimated 10
per cent a year. The significance of an environmental
feature unique in the world can never be measured in
monetary terms, but I do think it is possible to note that
the regional and national investment in the Great Barrier 
Reef has an economically measurable facet, in addition to
its other dimensions.
This collective investment is underpinned by a
responsibility to protect and preserve the reef for the
benefit of future generations of Australians and, indeed,
for all those from around the world who are yet to marvel
at the beauty of the reef.
Managing the reef in an ecologically sustainable way has
been a priority for the Commonwealth and the Queensland
Governments. I am pleased to be able to say that the
peace and harmony which the reef can inspire have
extended into Commonwealth-State relations when issues
of protecting the reef have come up. Several
complementary management agreements for the reef have
been concluded between Queensland and the
Commonwealth, and I thank the Queensland Government
for its very welcome continued co-operation.
Recognition of the need to protect the reef dates back to
1975 when the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act was
passed with bipartisan support. Formal international
recognition of the reef's universal value came in 1981,
when it was inscribed on the World Heritage List.
To further protect it, the Commonwealth enacted legislation
in 1991 making it compulsory for all large vessels,
particularly those carrying oil and environmentally
hazardous chemicals, to carry a pilot while navigating the
northern section of the reef. No other country in the world
has been able to obtain international acceptance of the
need for foreign ships to carry pilots in international
waters, and I think this acceptance indicates the
international recognition of the need to protect this unique
natural wonder.
It is this need for protection and ecologically sustainable
management of the reef that prompted the Great Barrier
Reef Strategic Plan. The plan itself is an achievement
unique in the world, and perhaps rightly so given the
unique nature of the reef.
It represents an ambitious and farsighted effort to develop
a long term vision for the Great Barrier Reef World
Heritage Area, by formulating appropriate objectives and
management strategies for ecologically sustainable
development. Creating the plan involved a comprehensive..
consultative process in which more than 60 peak
organisations and representative bodies from a wide cross
section of the community participated. An independent
chairperson was employed to ensure that competing
interests were considered and to facilitate the joint
decision making process. 
A draft plan was widely circulated for public comment and
the final plan has been endorsed by the Queensland
Government and the 60 or more government and nongovernment
bodies. This, of course, reflects what
ecologically sustainable development is all about,
achieving an agreed and workable balance underpinned by
maintenance of the ecological systems on which life
depends. It is a great example of an Australian solution to an
Australian challenge. The challenge was one which no
other country had faced, the solution is one which other
countries and other regions of Australia can take as a
model. I must congratulate Kayt Raymond on her
considerable work as facilitator and leader of the
negotiation and discussion process.
Even at this early stage the strategic plan has already
proven to be a useful and valuable working instrument.
The plan formed a key component of the proposal for a Cooperative
Research Centre to which my government
pledged $ 12.8 million over seven years in 1992. The
centre carries out research into the sustainable
development of the Great Barrier Reef and focuses upon
enabling tourism and environmental managers to
successfully address the stresses which impact upon the
reef. The plan was employed in formulating the Marine
Conservation Strategy devised by the Australian committee
to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature.
It also played a role in the Queensland Government's
decision to ban petroleum exploration and production in its
area of responsibility within the wider World Heritage area.
I want to take this opportunity to extend my congratulations
and thanks to all those involved in formulation of the Great
Barrier Reef Strategic Plan, particularly the Great Barrier
Reef Marine Park Authority and the Queensland
Government. I wish all of those involved with the plan
every success in achieving their objective of long term
ecologically sustainable development for the Great Barrier
Reef. It is an objective all Australians share and one of
significance to the world. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESENTATION OF THE IBM ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH PROGRAM
AWARD TO THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MARINE SCIENCE
TOWNSVILLE, WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is extremely gratifying to be able
to announce an IBM Corporation Environmental Research
Program award to the Australian Institute of Marine
Science. I have just had the pleasure of launching the Great Barrier
Reef Strategic Plan, a milestone towards the ecologically
sustainable management of a world treasure. This is
becoming a very satisfactory and environmentally friendly
day for me.
The Institute has every right to feel a little bit pleased with
itself about receiving this award. IBM is a corporation that
sets and expects the highest standards. IBM also
possesses and values highly its reputation as a good
corporate citizen. Its very generous sponsorship, through
the IBM International Foundation, of programs such as the
one which has produced this award amply illustrates that.
IBM has offered the Institute assistance in the form of
funding and computer techn0ology to the value of $ AUS1.4
millibn. Now, they used to let me deal with large sums
when I was Treasurer, and I can tell you that is a very
generous figure. The award is one of only four granted
worldwide, so is not only generous and practical but also
very good for the Institute's reputation.
I understand that the project outlined in the successful
proposal submitted by Dr Eric Wolanski will significantly
boost the research work being done at the Institute. Dr
Wolanski's proposes to undertake multi-disciplinary 
research to model oceanographic, environmental and
fisheries problems on coral reefs and mangroves. The
project will produce new conceptual tools to assist
managers in their understanding of these threatened
marine environments for conservation and sustainable
management. Information from this project will be passed on to
collaborating universities, and marine modellers from a
number of developing countries will be trained. The
project will greatly facilitate communication between
scientists and environmental and resource managers both
here working on the Great Barrier Reef and in South East
Asia. The benefits of this award are not restricted to the
Institute alone.
I believe IBM is to be commended on its corporate
responsibility and foresight and I am pleased to extend my
government's warmest thanks to the corporation for its
generosity. The Australian Institute of Marine Science, ( or AIMS for
short) makes a very important contribution to the national
environmental research effort. Like the IBM Corporation,
the Institute enjoys a high international profile for
professionalism and excellence. It is acknowledged as
Australia's foremost research body in tropical marine
science, and is the world leader in areas including coastal
dynamics and the oceanography of coral reefs and
mangroves. It has a proud record of achievement in a number of
diverse and complex areas.
The Institute, with Commonwealth support, has also
recently begun a research program in a part of northwestern
Australia containing not only the nation's most
intense marine industrial activity, such as gas and oil
production, but also some of our most spectacular and
fragile ecosystems. The research focuses on the key
marine science issues relating to sustainable management
and regional development.
The importance of the Institute's work is acknowledged in
the most sincere way in the 1994/ 95 Federal Budget.
AIMS was included in an increase in base level funding for
three major Commonwealth research agencies by $ 34
million over three years. 
The Institute is also a major partner in two Cooperative
Research Centres, or CRCs: the CRC for aquaculture and
the CRC for ecologically sustainable development of the
Great Barrier Reef. Both play crucial roles in formulating
ecologically sustainable development and management
strategies for their particular areas of concern.
I mentioned earlier the scope for regional cooperation that
the successful AIMS project proposal offers, and this is an
area where the Institute already plays a part through its
membership of the International Tropical Marine Resource
Centre, or INTROMARC.
INTROMARC is currently providing training in the
ecologically sustainable management of tropical marine
ecosystems to countries including Malaysia, Vietnam,
Indonesia, the Philippines and Papua New Guinea.
The Commonwealth Government places a great emphasis
on environmental management and cooperation in our
international region, reflected in our involvement with
International Environmental Cooperation mechanisms.
Memorandums of Understanding on environmental
cooperation have been, or are being, concluded with
regional neighbours including Indonesia, Singapore and
Brunei. We play a role already in several regional cooperative
bodies, and look forward to co-operating with
ASEAN in their new projects. As well, we are members of
APEC, whose March meeting of Environment Ministers in
Vancouver resulted in an environmental vision statement
and a framework of principles for integrating economy and
environment in APEC.
Let me again thank the IBM Corporation and congratulate
all those involved in the successful project from AIMS. I
wish both organisations every success with their future
endeavours. They have given much to the world already,
and show every sign of giving much more in an area where
it is certainly needed and where an island nation like
Australia should hardly be afraid to take the lead. 



/ 9
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MPD
INTERVIEW WITH DAVE HARRISON, RADIO 4T0 TOWNSVILLE,
WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: the story and the picture was in The Bulletin today, they don't do
colour.
DH: We'll have a little chat to them. Mr Keating, welcome to Townsville. I
hope you have a great stay here. If you can just put on the
headphones, I've got our very first question for you. Certainly a
statement that a lady made and I think you'll like this.
C: I think I'm speaking for the kids, because, look, I consider myself a
dinkum Aussie right back from an Irish convict and an Aboriginal lady.
And look, I think Mr Keating is doing great wonders for this country and
I hate to see people putting him down and honestly, if they vote in a
Pommy, you know who I mean, I think we are all going to be sorry.
You know, I think that Paul is doing a great job, leave him alone and
he'll do even a greater one.
DH: Well what do you reckon about that?
PM: Well it doesn't come any nicer than that, thank you very much indeed
for those sentiments.
DH: Mate, I must ask you, you did mention the good relationship we do
have with Canberra, due to Ted Lindsay, but he hasn't got a Cabinet
post as yet.
PM: Well, Ted is sitting beside me.
DH: Ted you can make a comment there if you want, there's the
microphone.
PM: We've got four Queenslanders in the Cabinet and that in the Ministry is
a pretty substantial number. Ted is a Parliamentary Secretary and H'e
has been sworn in by the Governor-General as the Ministers are sworn
in to administer a certain department or certain departments and he
does that work in fine style. But the most important work, of course, he
has done is respect of Townsville of course is for the people of 
Herbert. As I said last night, when one looks back to the things which
Ted has secured for Herbert such as the dam and the pipeline and the
One Nation funding for the port more recently, the tax office, the
Commonwealth buildings, I mean it just goes on and on and on. So as
I said whenever the Finance Department see Ted wondering in the
corridors they always wince because he has cost the Commonwealth
budget so much.
DH: Well, mate, if I could ask you just to put the headphones on just once
more. I asked a couple of kids to call this morning and ask you a
couple of questions.
C: Hello, this is and I would like to know what Paul Keating does with
the taxes and what is his favourite food?
DH: Now I know that is a pretty heavy question, sir, what do you do with the
taxes and your favourite food.
PM: Well what we do with the taxes is we try and do the things, all the
things, first of all the principal thing we do in this country is always to
seek to protect the physical security of Australia through defence, so
we spend money on defence and we spend money then on health and
on education, on schools, on universities, in support for the aged
through pensions, and aged care. These sorts of things are the things
we do. And we do it, I think, well.
DH: Indeed, your favourite food, mate, now that is the important one, the
kids want to know.
PM: My favourite food, well I'm not sure what my favourite food is. I think it
is probably a good rare steak.
DH: Fair enough, Port Hinchenbrook , getting back into the serious thing
again. What will the Feds do if Valentine's report shows there is cause
for action over the famous Oyster Point?
PM: Well I'm not really across the issues here. I know there are
development issues involved here and there will be, as in all these
major environmental things, whether it be the wet tropics or the Great
Barrier Ree or whatever it is, there is due process. And I mean, any
development application will be considered properly and we'll look at
all the environmental aspects.
DH: Right. Now if you would like to ask Mr Keating a question 723777.
OH: Mr Prime Minister, have you ever been to Magnetic Island across the
road here?
PM: I have years ago.
OH: How many years ago. A long time?
PM: Oh yes, about 15 years ago. 
DH: Did you like it?
PM: Oh yes, the whole area is lovely.
DH: Changed a little bit.
PM: Yes, well the whole Pacific has changed a lot since. But the coast,
there is a much greater emphasis on the natural values of the coast, I
think, and particularly with tourism growing the way it is. So these are
great assets.
DH: Indeed they are. I notice in the Financial Review this morning, Mr
Downer labelled as Mr Practical and interesting stuff on the detailed
policy.
PM: Well it was very interesting I thought because it said that, about the
policy outline, he says the outline also confirms a statement will avoid
detailed policy. You see, Mr Downer wants to be in the public debate
but not into policy. He said 6TY 4QR in May, he said I think,
" Australians are entitled from the two major political parties to have
reasonably detailed policies." Well now he is telling us he is going to
avoid any detailed policy. He said, they are talking about
Itcommonsense goals including focussing on those things that unite not
divide us, a maintenance and strengthening of the federal system," just
a series, essentially a series, of motherhood statements. So, I think
what we are going to see is just a bunch of cliches sort of wrapped in
the flag. And that is about all we are going to see from Mr Downer.
Yet he has promised policy detail. The Government, of course, when it
announces a White Paper has all the policy forensically displayed for
everybody to read-and-uinderstand and those policies have an impact
on the country and on society. The Liberals now think they can skate
through without policies, they have been so burned, they think, by Dr
Hewson's policy articulation they are going back now to no policies.
Well this is just in contrast, in contr distinction, to what Mr Downer
said, the public were entitled to with detailed policy announcements.
DH: I think we might let a couple of North Queenslanders ask you a couple
of questions. Morning Elizabeth.
C: Hello how are you.
DH: How are you mate?
C: I'm fine.
DH: That's the way, say good morning to Mr Keating.
C: Good morning Mr Keating.
PM: Elizabeth, how are you doing. 
C: I'm well thank you. The question I have is my husband and I are
getting the money together for a deposit on our first home but are
concerned with talk of rising home loan interest rates etc. So what are
your plans to ensure interest rates don't skyrocket?
PM: Well, it is not a matter of skyrocketing, they are not going to skyrocket.
The thing that basically governs the price of money is two elements.
One the inflation rate and two, the real rate of lending above the
inflation rate. Now, as you know, we had housing loans at around
or 16 per cent in the latter part of the 80s and they are now down to
somewhere between 7 1/ 2 to 9 1/ 2, that sort of area. But while ever
the inflation rate remains low, interest rates will remain low too.
C: Well I understand how interest rates work, my concern is more so
comments about the Reserve Bank meeting with the banks. I mean,
making it harder to get a home loan. Like will our chance of obtaining
a first home just be shattered now.
PM: Well I think there are two things here, there is the loans for first homes
and those who build them and there are loans that go to the existing
property market. That is, where no houses are being added to the
stock, but the loans potentially just simply driving up the prices make
housing less affordable. At the moment, housing is very affordable on
the basis of price and on repayments through the interest rate. And
we were last, I think housing, you have got to go back a long way to
find housing more affordable than now. And need I say, that the
reduction in interest rates in the last few years has meant a big
increase in disposable income for families because the repayment rate
has come down. I don't think there is going to be a problem about first
homes. I don't think there is going to be a problem at all in fact. But
we don't want to see, if you like, housing institutions, lending
institutions, driving up the price of existing properties which is not
going to help anybody get a house.
C: Okay, thanks for your help.
DH: Thank you very much Elizabeth. Morning Gina.
C: Morning
DH: How are you going on your North Queensland morning, alright?
C: Very well thank you.
DH: Say g'day to the boss.
C: Good morning Mr Prime Minister.
PM: How are you doing?
C: Good thank you. I don't really have that many questions. The one
question that really interests me is how you feel about the commitment 
to the UIN in the Rwanda situation. I mean, are we going to do
anything about that do you think?
PM: Well, we have been very firm supporters of the United -Nations
particularly when the Cold War finished and the s6rt of oIr'rity
between the United States and the Soviet Union disappeared. A lot of
regional tensions have emerged as a consequence. And the body that
has, if you like, filled some of the gap is the United Nations so
Australia has been very supportive of the UN in peacekeeping
operations, most famously, of course, for us in Cambodia and Somalia
etc. So we are prepared to participate in peacekeeping operations
providing they are well planned, where the objectives are clearly set
and where we think there is a start, a middle and a finish point. That is
where we understand the environment we are coming into and the one
which we will leave. In Rwanda these things are not yet clear and it
has not been easy to devFo-p a response, although we have been
looking at evaluation on the ground there and we have sent a small
team to do some evaluation. When we get that report, the
Government will make further judgements about it. I mean, the
Foreign Minister hasd this matter under notice, virtually now
permanently because of the difficulties there and the Government will
be considering what it might do in Rwanda in the next few days, to
week.
C: That is excellent to hear. I'd also just like to make a comment, I think
you are doing an excellent job.
PM: Well thanks very much.
C: I hear people bagging you out all the time, you know, like sort of on
unemployment and I just really appreciate the situation that Australia is
in with our social structure, our hospital benefits, I mean you don't
have to suffer with tooth ache, and you look at these poor people over
there and then you look at what we've got and I think a lot of that has
got to do with your stature as a leader.
PM: Well thank you very much. A couple of years we had problems, we
are now growing at 5 per cent. Australia is growing faster than any
Western country. We've got inflation at 1 per cent, we've had 3 per
cent employment growth in the last year. So on growth generally,
inflation and employment growth, we are ahead of the Western world
countries now by a big margin. Now my opponents were telling us in
the last election campaign, Dr Hewson and now Mr Downer at the time,
we were heading for a recession, double dip recession and a
depression. In fact, we are growing faster than any Western economy
and we have done it without tearing to bits that social wage you refer
to. Access and opportunity to health, access and opportunity to
education and all these things.
C: Well, that's right and I just think, you know, it's like Nehemiah said
when those guys went to the War when he was rebuilding the wall to
Jerusalem he said look, don't bother me now, I'm doing a job and I
think that's pretty sad that you should take with your opponents.. 
DH: OK, thank you Gina. One more from the kids and what is his favourite
food?
C: Hello.
DH: How are you going?
C: Good thanks.
DH: What's your name?
C: Cameron.
DH: Cameron, what did you want to ask the Prime Minister?
C: Why doesn't he have normal cars?
PM: Well, I do.
DH: Why doesn't he have normal cars? What sort of car could you see the
Prime Minister driving? What sort of car to you reckon? A mini moke.
C: A limo.
DH: Do you reckon he'd look all right in a mini moke or something like that?
C: Yes.
DH: Yes, what do you reckon about a pair of roller blades?
C: Yes.
DH: Well, that's one from the kids too, what do you reckon? What sort of
car do you drive?
PM: Well, I get about in a normal car. That is, a normal coloured car when
I'm in Sydney and Melbourne and Brisbane. In Canberra I have a
white one, but again, it is just a standard Australian made car a
Holden.
DH: Good stuff. I did have a couple of guys ring me up this morning, as
you know we live on the shores of the great Coral Sea, they ask does
he enjoy fishing? Does he go out and ever have a bash at a bit of
proper fishing?
PM: Oh yes, I give fishing a nudge occasionally.
DH: Do you ever get time?
PM: But, they have got to jump on the line quickly. That's the only
insistence I have. That is, if I put the old hook down, I want them to
jump on rather fast. 
DH: Speaking of that, the plan for the next 25 years for the Great Barrier
Reef, can you give us a little bit of a hint?
PM: Well, I've got the pleasure this morning of announcing the new
strategic plan for the Great Barrier Reef. I think, we've got a wonderful
asset in this country, but of course, it is a World Heritage item and it's
listed under the World Heritage list and it ought to be because it is part
of the international heritage. But, we are in charge of it and it is
important, therefore, what we do with it and the Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park Authority which has had basically charge of this and the
research programs which have been operating and, of course, now
more in concert with businesses, I think, gives us a really good chance
to think about the Reef and its long term future. The details of that
plan will be released today.
DH: And looking forward it to, we in Townsville so very close to the Reef,
from the trawlers point of view, the fishing point of view, commercial
fishing and, of course diving. Have you ever gone for a little bit of
diving?
PM: Yes, I've been for a little bit of a dive.
DH: What part of our Reef here?
PM: I've been off Port Douglas, north of here and on the Reef south of here
off Gladstone.
DH: All right, mate, I noticed you mentioned last night that regional areas
like Townsville lead the Australian economy, as industrial and
population growth shifts from the cities.
PM: That's right. I think that there is a view that people in regional
Australia think well, they are remote from the centre of the action and
they are not always considered or thought about. In fact I think, it is
worth repeating the point that the growth is greater in many regional
areas of Australia than it is in the capital cities. This is certainly true in
Queensland. I mean, Queensland not only has the, sort of, nature
running for it, a temperate climate, it has also got a shift of population
from the south and it has had despite that, lower levels of
unemployment and faster levels of employment growth because more
is happening here. So, regions such bs Townsville are growing faster
than the cities and the industrial basis of the place, if you like, the
things which Ted has been involved with over the years whether it be
the port or the water supply or the rail system or, you know, the
general facilities provided by the Commonwealth like a regional tax
office, all these things which are encouraging to business and, I think,
a commitment by the community to see the place advance. Local
leadership has mattered a great deal and that's why I think regions are
kicked along.
Anyway what we said in the White Paper is we are out there
supporting regions. We want to help them help themselves. We will 
fund them in terms of developing strategic and regional plans and we
will also make infrastructure funding available through infrastructure
bonds for those bits of public infrastructure which are important to
regions at a particular time.
So, I'm very bullish about the regions of Australia and I think the ones
which are engaged in trade with Asia, we've now made such an
enormous leap into Asia, we've been exporting our heads off, and we
need the facilities like the port here at Townsville, but beef, agriculture
generally, minerals, coal, all these sorts of things are important in
trade and, I think, as the business community gets its pecker up about
its capacity and its confidence to do trade and do it well in Asia, I think,
particularly the northern regions of the country are going to really fire.
DH: Not shifting Canberra up here are you?
PM: A bit of that warm weather would do us all a lot of good.
DH: Good morning, Dutchy.
C: How you going mate?
DH: Good mate. Say g'day to the boss.
C: How you going sir?
PM: Good, how are you going?
C: What I'd like to know and, I think, a lot of people ask this question, is
why do the politicians and ex-politicians continuously get lurks and
perks while we're in so many economic problems?
PM: Well, I don't think people get lurks and perks. I mean a back bencher
is paid a salary and an allowance, most of the allowance they spend
and, I think, Government works in this country. If you look at the last
ten years, I mean, Australia has changed more than any western
country. Ten years ago we'd never had, for instance, a major
international tourism industry which has come by virtue of the
deregulation of this economy. We never had an efficient
manufacturing sector as we have today. We never had internationally
traded services like education and health as we have today. And, it is
no accident therefore we are growing at 5 per cent and our inflation
rate is 1 per cent and that we are leading the western world in these
growth rates and in this economic performance.
Now, a lot of that has come from leadership in the political system. A
lot has come from the community joining with those policies and
making it work. So, I think the notion that the public is poorly served
by their system of government is wrong. I think Australia has shown
that its system of government works and it works effectively and it
works well. 
C: No, I'm not saying that the government isn't working well. I'm just
saying that back benchers for instance, they've got an annual õ alary of
$ 74, 000. I mean, haven't they just vote on it whenever they want.
PM: No, no, it is set under wage principles. It is set, in the case of Federal
MPs, the Remuneration Tribunal. It is set independently and it has
been now tied to a division of the public service. So, it doesn't move
really until public service salaries move and, of course, public service
salaries move with general movements in salaries across the
economy, across society. So, MPs essentially caught up in, if you like,
community wage shifts and can't simply I mean, technically the
Parliament can vote itself a rise, but it doesn't do that. It has given this
power to a tribunal which gives it then increases under wage
principals.
DH: Ok, Dutchy, thank you very much, good on you mate. Mate, the
Australian Institute of Marine Science is getting a big grant. What's
happening there?
PM: Well, it is I'm very pleased to say and today I'm announcing that too,
but let me tell your listeners that the IBM company an linternational
Business Machine company is giving one of four grants world wide to
the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority for research and, I think,
this is a great feather in the cap of the Authority and a substantial
grant as well. And, again I think, proves the point that we do seriously
manage the Barrier Reef and the authorities we have doing it are
getting international attention and international support.
DH: Well, it's a beautiful spot down there. Have you been down to AIMS,
it's great down there.
PM: Yes, I've been a couple of times in the past. I've had a few looks over
it. Ted and I were down there about a year ago.
DH: And with all the prawns. The aquaculture there is great you get big,
big prawns. Go to the phones once more. Good morning.
C: Good morning.
DH: How are you going?
C: Good, how are you?
DH: What is your name mate? Ok Harry, say g'day to Mr Prime Minister.
C: Hello, Prime Minister, how are you?
PM: Good.
C: I was just wondering why is it necessary for you to be hitting Mr
Downer over the head with a warm lettuce rather than, in fact, what is
required would be a pair of bolt cutters. 
PM: Well, look, the public will take care of Mr Downer. We have these
people who shoot onto the scene and they are going to do wonders
with the big stick and then we find that their detailed policies are only
going to be basically what shall I say, not detailed at all but just
rhetoric and some intimation of where their policy directions are going.
Now, public life in this country, the public of this country demand
change and they keep the political system up to it and if you are in the
market place, but you don't have any ideas, you soon get found out
and no amount of, sort of, conservative waffling by Mr Downer is going
to safe him from a harsh judgement at the next election by people who
say well, hang on, we've got competitive disciplines and pressure on
the government, we are going to have it on you too and you are not
going to be exonerated. But, you see, what's happened to the Liberal
party, they had Andrew Peacock in 1984, they've had blanc mange
policies. He lost, so they said we better go to harder policies so we'll
take John Howard. So they went to harder policies and they took John
Howard and he lost. And, they said, well, that's pretty bad, we better
go back to not really standing for much, that way we can't be attacked
so they put Andrew Peacock back in. He lost again. So, they said,
that's no good, we better go to something harder. Let's get us some
real policy definition. So, they took then John Hewson on. And then
he lost. Now they're saying well look, he lost because he had policies,
so we are better now with somebody who doesn't. So, we'll take on Mr
Downer. So, its soft, hard, soft, hard, soft. You see, you get the
sequence soft, hard, soft, hard, soft, so we've got another softie
there.
DH: Ok mate, thank you very much. One more call, good morning.
C: G'day.
DH: How are you mate?
C: Good. I'd just like to ask Mr Keating a question.
DH: Ok, make sure you finish every sentence with an ' ay' you know that.
That's the great North Queensland way.
C: OK. I've just read that the Labor government takes 32 cents in tax in
every litre of fuel, but only about 10 per cent of this goes back into
road funding. Why would this be Mr Keating?
PM: Well, let me just say this about tax generally. You've got to look at tax
across the board. This is the Idwest taxed country in the western
world. Now, that's a big statement, but let me just repeat it again.
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, that's the western world, if you like, economic research
secretariat the OECD. Of the 27 member states of the OECD, that's
all the industrialii&amp; d cauntries, Australia has the lowest rate of tax in
the western world and that comes by way of income tax, company tax,
excise, et cetera. Now, all of this goes into a pool and then it is
allocated back to the States by way of financial assistance grants in
part and to Commonwealth functions such as pensions et cetera, 
including road works. Now, the Commonwealth does the national
highway and the States do the arterial roads and the city arterials and
the country roads. So, you can't really look at it and say, so many
cents per litre comes here and so much goes there because we don't
hypothecate every dollar that comes in petrol back onto roads because
we pay it to the State. They spend money on roads, they spend it on
hospitals.
C: So, were does the balance of the 90 per cent of all that tax go to?
PM: Well, that figure is not right. The fact is the money goes to
consolidated revenue and when you go down to the doctor and you get
your 85 per cent rebate, you're getting part of it back there. When you
drive on the road, if it's a national highway, you're getting part of it
back there.
C: Ok thanks.
DH: I've got to ask you one thing. The commemoration last year, you
couldn't make it up.
PM: No, because I had functions either side of that.
DH: OK next year year we've got our year celebrations of the peace. Do
you think you could come and say g'day?
PM: Let me just say this, we've got last year we had the well, through
1942 50 years later 1992/ 1993. We had the 50th anniversary of the
Coral Sea battle and the battles of Kokoda and I went to Papua New
Guinea and to Kokoda as I've been in many parts of the pacific to the
Solomon Islands, but you can't do everything and I've just been this
year to D-Day celebrations in Europe, in Britain and France, for the
anniversary of the landing at Normandy and, of course, next year
will be the VE-Day victory in Europe and VP-Day victory in the
Pacific. So, victory in the Pacific, the Government is very committed to
making clear that it was in World War II that Australia was threatened,
that continental Australia was under threat from the forces of Japan in
World War II which was not the case in World War I and we want to
make clear that the battle for Australia and the battle for the Pacific
was something that our nation should never forget and should rejoice
in our victory and appreciate the people who were involved with it.
So, next year will be a big year for remembering those involved in the
Pacific war.
DH: Well, being in services and proudly a services city, it's good to hear.
We look forward to seeing you up then. Mate, I know you have to go.
Thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you.
DH: Next time I watch Parliament I expect to see that tropical Friday shirt. 



TEL 20. Jul. 94 17: 51 No. 015 P. 01/ 08
L PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, KAMORUNGA ENVIRONMENTAL PARK, CAIRNS,
WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 1994
E&amp; QE PROOF COPY
J. Prime Minister can I ask you, first you were approached by the
gentleman on the way in and he discussed Sky Rail with you, do you
see that as a bit of a contradiction in terms to be planting trees on the
one hand and, as they say, pulling them down on the other.
PM; We are working on a bigger front than that. I mean, the declaration of
the world heritage area was, I think, a huge leap forward for North
Queensland and the Commonwealth, of course, committed, I was the
Treasurer at the time, we committed the better part of $ 90 million to it
and established adjustment schemes for those who were formerly
employed there. And what I am doing today is announcing the further
development of those adjustment schemes where we've taken forestry
workers and put them into re-establishment of forests and
rehabilitation of forests. So i think, you know, one has got to look at
the big gestures because they are the ones that matter and as far as
the specific projects go, I think Senator Faulkner is coming up anyway
in a week or two's time and he can debate that then.
J: Mr Keating, can you tell us why so long between official visits here to
Cairns?
PM: I have been here three times this year.
J: But they were private visits though..
PM: They are all the same when you drive through, whether it is public or
private, they are all the same. I was here, I had a long inspection of
thDe ~ ireo about a year ago and as a result of that the
Commonwealth Government has now committed with Queensland
million to buy back the hole in the heart on the other side of the
Daintree river and to try and repair the damage done by the Bjelke 
TEL 20. JuI. 94 17: 51 No. Ul1) r. uz/ uo
2
Petersen government in that disgraceful development on the other
side of the river. So that came from my last unofficial visit. So I do
things here officially and unofficially.
J: ( John O'Farrell) Your concern about the development of Cairns the
last time you were up here.
PM: I haven't seen you for years, how are you going?
JO'F: Long time.
J: You thought he was dead didn't you?
PM; No, he's too smart for that.
JO'F: Since then there have been major developments either started or
announced, is this getting worse. Is Cairns getting as bad as the Gold
Coast, is that the way it's headed?
PM: Well I don't think so. I think that I'm very encouraged by what I see as
a renewed interest, you know, a more mature interest in the
management of our heritage areas and the understanding that to
preserve the heritage is not only intrinsically important, important in its
own right, but because the region has such huge tourist potential that
everything that then is done in the built environment as well as in the
natural environment becomes important. There is a point of harmony
between the two and I think people are getting to that and what we are
seeing here today is a further example of that.
J: What about change to the city itself though, I mean you had some
harsh words about development in Cairns, that it was looking like
another Gold Coast.
PM: And I think people take some notice of those sorts of views and maybe
change their attitudes a little. I'm optimistic that I think that Cairns can
grow through another phase of economic growth. Just remember this,
the Federal Government has got the economy growing at 5 per cent at
the moment. The Australian economy is growing faster than any
economy in the Western world. One per cent inflation, 5 per cent
growth and 3 per cent employment growth. Now that sort of growth will
bring its development pressures with it and, I think, you know, a
municipal government has got to be alert to that and say right there is
going to be another phase of development how do we handle it.
J: Those factors for growth, do they include low interest rates and loans
for houses?
PM: Well they include the maintenance of low inflation principally, and -the
fact that the country is now imeasurably more competitive. I mean,
Australians have done a lot to produce their own cornucopia of growth 
TEL:' 20. JU1. 94 1 K: t~ l NO. U IZ r -1I
3
and opportunity and one of the points I always make about my
opponents, they are always trying to sort of cruel the pitch. They are
now trying to say the recovery is too strong: " too good, too good, the
recovery is too good. We might have to have higher interest rates in
there shocking." What we have got to do is preserve the recovery and
preserve low inflation and that is, I think, going to be important to all of
us. And it is going to be no less important here in Cairns where I think
there is tremendous potential. For a start, there is a shift of population
to Queensland and beyond that, of course, the carriage of very large
visiting communities of tourists. And we want to do that and do it well
and still preserve the best of what we have.
J: Ralph Willis said this morning that the sale of the FAC is very
important to the success of the Budget, do you agree with that?
PM: Well I got asked about that down in Townsville.
J: Does it worry you, the way, that the Coalition is targeting the seat of
Leichhardt the number of senators and opposition spokesmen they are
sending up here?
PMV: Well they can do their best, but basically it is the Commonwealth
Labor Government that put international tourism on the map. I mean,
the growth in the prosperity of Northem... Queensland was there
because of the Commonwealth Labor Governmnt. iI It was there from
the early 1 980s and it is now being helped by a sensible State Labor
Government who we work together with very well, I mean, Mr Downer
is out there in the Financial Review saying today: " I won't be giving
detailed policies, they are saying we won't be giving detailed policies,",
where a month ago he was saying the public are entitled to some
detail about policies. They want to be in the debate, these characters,
without any policy. And, at the same time, trying to claim from you that
which a real government has put into place over ten years. That is,
you know, this area has been completely changed for the better
because of the policies of the national government.
J: Rockhampton, Townsville and Cairns are all part of the itinerary, Prime
Minister, everywhere that you have gone, protests, are you happy with
the welcome you have received?
PM: Oh, absolutely. It's an amazing reception. I had 1,100 kids turned up
to have a general talk down at one of the principal schools on the
itinerary and I really enjoyed that, I mean, I think particularly year 11
and 12 students, they are as sharp as tacks, they are a tough
audience. And I really enjoyed a chance to talk to them. I met another
very large community group in Rockhampton, I got a wonderful
reception. I had a tremendous civic reception last evening in
Townsville and then a bumper party function in the evening and I have
had the same sort of general goodwill here in Cairns. So I couldn't be
happier. I mean, you will always get the odd person with a placard 
20. Jul. 9 417: 51 No. 015b . ua/ uo
TEL: 4
about this or about that. You know, it will be Hinchenbrook(?) Island
or it will be something else. But I mean, look at the big mass of
people, how they respond and the answer is very well.
J: Well the issues up here like this Sky Rail and the Hinchinbrook issue
you just mentioned there, environment issues. How important is the
environment generally going to be at the next election?
PM: Well I think it is going to be important and I think the Labor Party is
going to be the best at it. Because we are the only ones that care
about it. I mean, here we are in the national Budget just a month or
two ago, announcing the fact that we are going to buy back the land in
the hole in the heart which was, I think, disgracefully developed and
sold in the 1970s and 80s and these sort of, if you like, broad ticket
issues in the environment are the ones that matter.
ENDS 



TEL 22.6 . Jul .994
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RAY MARTIN, A CURRENT AFFAIR
JULY 1994
RM: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM-: Good, Ray.
RM: Now the UN Commander said today of Rwanda, said today, that had
countries like Australia responded more quickly there would be
hundreds and thousands of people alive there. How do you respond to
that?
PM: Well, we were one of the first countries to respond. We put our first
funds in there in April, that's now some months ago, and I think, and of
course, we've been preparing for a substantial commitment to the UN
Force which is about clearing the way for the refugees to go home.
You see, the best way of deafling with a refugee problemh, Ray, is to get
people to actually go back to their houses, and their villages. They
won't do that unless there is a stable scene there, so we've been
preparing to make the major commitment we made today there, and as
well as that, as you know today we've made a major commitment to the
humanitarian aid. Now, I had a cable in last Friday, in fact I'll read it to
you it's directly from AI1DA-B that's Australian aid abroad officer
said: " The situation in Goma has deteriorated since my visit there on
Wednesday", and he said, " what is clear is that Goma is apocalyptic".
Now that came in on Saturday. So, we've had a deterioration here, a
very speedy one, unforseen really, in the last few days and what we've
now decided to do is bring our commitment up to $ 1lOm in all, which is,
which will be if not the largest, just about the largest, of all the financial
commitments, and then we are sending two Hercules with water
filtration equipment, and re-hydration equipmept, rehydration kits for
8: 09 No. 001 P. 01/ 04 
TEL: 26. JuI. 94 8: 09 No. 001
2
people, and food aid and medical supplies, as well as the big force of
over 300.
RM: So this equipment is going into the camps, as against going into
Kigali?
PM: Going into the camps. Now, Kgli is where our officers will be with the
5,500 strong UN Force. That's basically about letting the refugees
come home. See, they're too afraid to go home, and that's why they're
stuck in these camps with all of this destruction and death and
disease.
RM: What about those people, such as CARE and so on, who say that
these people are too sick to travel Wfi~ t need is to prop them up
for some months before we do anything back in Kigali?
PM: Well, some will travel Ray, and some would need to be propped up. I
think what we need to do is do both, and what we're trying to do is
respond to both challenges along the term one of getting the people
back into Rwanda, which is now made somewhat more likely and
easier by the fact that the Patriotic Front there now controls the country
and there isn't a war still raging so it's possible to resettle people
and then, to get as much support as we possibly can in food aid and
medical supplies onto the people, on a humanitarian basis, in the
border camps.
RM: Well, PM, if we accept that what you've done, that what the
Government has done is very generous, would you agree though that
for whatever reason we were pretty late in moving?
PM: No, well, I think..
RM: The western world..
PM: we sent over an observer team about a month ago to see whether
the UN plan was feasible. See, Ray, we can't put Australian troops in
a position of jeopardy, and there had to be a feasible scheme by the
UN that worked. We went basically to case that out, to see whether
that would happen, whether it was feasible. In the meantime, the
Patriotic Front has actually succeeded, so the temperature within
Rwanda politically has dropped and militarily has dropped. Our
judgement is now that the plan can succeed and we are committing
over 300 people. I don't think we could have done it any earlier.
RM. But do you accept what the UN Commander says, that had we been
able to, for whatever reason, had we been able to get in earlier, the
western countries, we may have saved hundreds and thousands of
lives? 
EL: 26. Jul. 94 8: 09 No. 001 P. 03/ 04
3
PMV: That could well be possible, but, I think, nobody foresaw the build up
on the borders the number of people leaving the country, that have
built up on the borders and, I think, it is to that we are now
responding.
RM:. Mr Keating, you have got a small family as lots of us have a young
family. I mean, what do you say to them as they sit and watch
television each night. How do you explain to your eight year old
daughter that we can't just go in and feed them?
PM: Well, I think, my family probably the same with your own Ray, they sit
there very quiet when they see this, very quiet very sad and quiet.
They know there is a bad thing going on here. I mean, I think, you
know, some of that scenery over the weekend made me very
determined, that I know Australians feel compassionate about these
sorts of events and I wanted the Government today to respond to that
compassion. I wanted us to be able to say well, we're there and we're
doing our very best. Now, we have some influence, we have some
financial power and some organisational ability and we are going to
use it. So, the answer is my family's reaction, Ray, which was, you
know, a sad one and one saying that, well, there is a certain
helplessness about us in the face of this. I mean, the Government is
not helpless and we've made, I think, the appropriate steps today to try
and do our part as Australians.
RM: I'd like to personalise that a little further. Obviously, if you sit there
with your daughters and your son and your wife, do they say hang on
dad, this Is terrible, this unforgivable, we've got to do something?
PM: Well, the reports over the weekend, I mean, I was only with them
probably on one occasion where the news reports came in which
showed the big helicopter pictures of the people there and the close
ups and there was just the, sort of, I think, quiet and latent expressions
of sadness. I think they were overcome by the pictures. Annita and I
were talking about it saying how dreadful this scene is and how we
ought to be getting something cracking there as quickly as possible.
RM: You've suggested that they impacted on you so much that while you
would have come in anyway for the Cabinet decision today, that it
made you more determined to actually make a serious effort than you
were?
PMV: Well, I think, more determined to be effective. More determined to
make sure our presence was being felt. I mean, I think I know how
Australians think about this. They would see this group of people in
this desperate position with their loved ones dying around them and in
their arms. Our sense of democracy and support for one another
doesn't countenance those sorts of things. So", I wanted our response
TEL: 
TEL: 26. Jul. 94 8: 09 No. 001 P. 04/ 04
4
today to be one the Australian people thought was both appropriate
and they felt proud about.
RM: Alright, but the $ 10 million figure, which is a very significant figure in
world terms, would that have been as high as it is had you not been
affected over the weekend?
PM: Probably not, Ray. Probably not.
RM: Why is it, it seems, that, every time in this wealthy world of ours, this
world of plenty, it is always an African catastrophe? It always seems
to if it is not the Sudan, it's Somalia, if it's not Somalia, it's
Ethiopia, now it's Rwanda. Why is that? What do you say to your
children?
PM: Well, I think it is about politics and it is about prospects for growth.
There are enormous pockets of poverty and deprivation in Asia. But,
the Asian economies are at least growing and gradually income
standards are rising. This is not true in parts of the African continent.
RM: If perceptions is what we deal in, it seems easier, somehow, to forget
black Africans when they die, than white people?
PM: Well, I think what Australians are saying today, certainly what I am
saying and what the Government is saying and, I'm sure, all
Australians are saying this should not be so. That, when there is a
human tragedy, those of us who are able to respond should, no matter
where it is.
RM: It seems, as well, you know, people saying that where there is oil at
stake, for example, the West responds far more quickly than when it is
just, simply, black Africans dying?
PM: Well, that, I think, is probably true. But, it is not right and it is events
like these which test those sorts of attitudes.
RM. Alright, we thank you for your time.
PMV: Thank you, Ray.
ends. 



TEL: 25. Jul. 94 16: 32 No. 006 P. 01/ 02
k, A UST11 L1
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
EMERGENCY RELIEF FOR RWANDA
The humanitarian crisis in Rwanda deepens each day. Australians have
been shocked by the pictures of horror and suffering in the refugee
camps on the Rwandan borders.
The refugees of Rwanda have issued an international distress call, and
Australia must respond.
There are two challenges facing Australia and the rest of the
international community. The first is to deal with the crisis on Rwanda's
borders. The second, equally important, is to create the circumstances
inside Rwanda which will encourage the refugees to return home.
Federal Cabinet has today decided to respond to both these challenges
by boosting Australia's total humanitarian relief to $ 10 million, and by
providing an Australian Medica Support Force of more than 300
personnel to support the United Nations Assistance Mission In Rwanda
( UNAMIR).
The Cabinet decision provides an additional $ 6.5 million aid package,
on top of the $ 3.5 million already committed to humanitarian assistance.
Of the additional spending announced today:
$ 3.25 million will be provided to Australian aid agencies working in the
field. Of this, $ 1.75 million will go to the public appeals conducted by
Australian aid agencies, With the remaining $ 1.5 million going directly to
specific relief programs.
$ 3 million will be provided to the UN consolidated appeal announced
last Friday. This will address immediate humanitarian needs, the
repatriation of refugees, and the long-term rehabilitation of Rwanda. 
TEL: 25. JuI. 94 16: 32 No. 006 P. 02/ 02
The Government has also arranged for the immediate despatch by the
first available plane of urgently needed medical supplies, Including oral
rehydration kits, vitamins and anti-malarial drugs. These are valued at a
further $ 250,000.
In addition, the government will deploy as soon as possible two RAAF
C-130 aircraft to Rwanda with water purification and other aid
equipment.
As I said, there is an equally urgent need to make it safe for the
refugees to return to their homes in Rwanda. The deployment of the
Medical Support Force is directed to this end.
The force, based in Kigali Central Hospital, will be deployed for a period
of six months, with an option for a second six-month deployment.
They will be supporting UNAMIR in its mission to contribute to the
security of civilians at risk in Rwanda, and to provide security and
support for the distribution of relief supplies and humanitarian
operations. The Australian Medical Support Force will also be able to
provide assistance to Rwandan civilians at the nearby King Faisal
Hospital. An advance party will leave Australia on 6 August. with the remainder
leaving two weeks later.
In sum, this represents an appropriate response from the Government to
an unprecedented humanitarian crisis. It builds on the very generous $ 7
million already donated directly by the Australian community.
CANBERRA JULY$ 1994 



IELL: 1 I1 ~: 2N .2
r.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
THE COALITION'S CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM AGENDA
It is littlo wondor thc Coailition heis split over its cobbled together
Constitutional reform package.
In their poll-driven haste to find an alternative to the Government's
considered interest in Constitutional reform, the Liberals have come up with a
mish-mash of measures, some of which nobody could accept not even the
National Party.
Over the past 48 hours we've seen Mr Reith isolated as the only supporter of
Citizen Initiated Referenda described by National Party Leader, Tim
Fischer, as " law-making cancer."
Mr Downer a born-again Constitutional reformer has walked away from
Mr Reith on CIR, after originally countenancing the idea.
Mr Downer reportedly continues to support a range of measures, none of
which addresses the principal flaw in the Constitution that our Head of
State is not an Australian.
So the Opposition's approach to Constitutional reform seems to be that if the
Government has an agenda, they had better have one too never mind if it
is a zany and untenable one.
Just when it looked like the Opposition had finally come up with a policy
the first since the arrival of the " new" leadership team it turns out to be a
divisive and untenable pot pourri.
Sydney 27 July, 1994 17 i 4 1 4 N 0 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NEW SOUTH WALES ALP DINNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, SYDNEY,
WEDNESDAY, 27 JULY 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Bob ( Carr), Terry ( Sheahan), John Della Bosca, Neville and Jill ( Wran),
Lionel and Clare ( Bowen), my parliamentary colleagues, Mr Speaker and
distinguished ladies and gentleman.
Well, it is a bumper audience. It's the largest I've seen in this room, and I've
been to many of these over the years, and I thank you very sincerely for the
tribute you pay us in coming. I thank Bob also for his very generous words
towards me and for the thought, the good thought, that the things we have to
do are to do things together and to get things done because as we all know in
public life, and in business, the system runs itself. What matters are the
changes. And the changes are promoted in the public sphere by Ministers
and, in the case of leaders, by Prime Minister's and Premiers, by
Governments, and that whole co-operative notion that Bob has just raised is
of course, central to that.
Now, I want to see Bob Carr as the Premier of NSW. It's not particularly
because I don't get on with John Fahey, it's just that he won't do anything.
Now, the thing is, this is not a partisan remark, you go to Queensland all
sorts of things happen. You go to Victoria, you can get things to happen, but
you can't get them to happen in NSW. Because, this is the state where major
when is the last time you ever heard of a major project starting in NSW?
this is the state where they crimp them off. This is the state where there's a
scandal a week. There's someone falls out of the ministry every second
week, and out of the Parliamentary liberal party every off week. And that's
how it goes along. But above all else, the public interest doesn't get a go
because the place isn't going ahead. And here we are, with the most
conducive circumstances and it's not happening. 
But Bob touched on a theme when he started to speak, saying we've always
had and I think we, the Labor party, or certainly, certainly since the period
when Neville was Premier, beginning with his governments a great
relationship with business in NSW, particularly in Sydney. And we think, I
know it's unfashionable, that we've got to earn our freight. And we try and be
relevant, and we like you to be relevant too. And we see a relationship
between us. But Jeffrey Kennett is down there hopping into the business
community in Victoria today, I don't know if you read that, those little bon mots
there saying, you see if you're not part of the Ron Walker squad, well you're
not in it. If you can't join o1' Potato-face Ron and his crew, you're not in the
game. And if you don't line up the way they like, well then you get a serve
from Jeffrey.
And then of course, you had Mr Downer a couple of weeks ago, saying to a
question from some journalist naive it must have been saying: " well, Mr
Downer, what have you got to say about what the Christian churches had to
say about you today?", and he said:, " Oh well, the key point here is the
Christian Church are in my good book at the moment." You see, you've got to
have a lot of front to say a thing like that.
But it comes from, you know, those days when he was in Stoke Lodge in
London for so many years, going down to see the British Conservative Party
in the House of Lords. And of course, there, all the Church elders sit in the
front pews. And it's a case of who's running who. It's a case of whether the
State sort of runs the Church, or the Church this is the sort of game he's in.
Now, that's his view of life, of course this is right at the time, dare I say, that
Prince Charles is saying well I don't think there should be just one official
church in Britain, but Alexander Downer says well, the Christian Church is in
my good book at the moment. Giving them a hint that, you know, all those
Bishops out there, they better stay there. Meanwhile, in the great southern
state, the business community has got to line up with Ron's little team
otherwise Jeffrey will not approve of them and he'll admonish them as the
case may be. Now, the Labor Party I mean, poor silly us we're out there
saying look, can we do some more for you? 5per cent GOP growth, 3.5 per
cent employment growth, under 2 per cent inflation, we're still working at it,
stock market back to 1987 levels. The profit share in the economy, with no
historic precedent, spreading enterprise bargaining through the workforce,
creating structures in the Asia-Pacific for trade, but somehow there's a game
we're not on to, you know.
I mean I thought today, sort of said something about it. You know, here was
the news from the conservatives that the Citizen Initiated Referendum was
now off the agenda, that the potpourri of constitutional changes was to be
scrapped. Now this was Mr Downer's sole policy since becoming the
Opposition Leader. The Citizen's Initiated Referendum, the support for 4
year terms after Mr Reitli, by the way, was promoting these, was the
principle opponent of the 4 year term measures to prevent the
Commonwealth signing international treaties. Now this is the potpourri of
reforms. I mean, some reform. You see, clip the Commonwealth's wings so 
the Commonwealth can't sign international treaties, and put a time limit on
double dissolution bills. Well, that's really going to change the way we live.
Now, and I thought, well here I was this morning at the launch of the
wonderful history of the Australian Olympic movement written by Harry
Gordon it was a very nice event and here were these journo's rustling
around for a comment about the Citizens Initiated Referendum, and of course
overnight we had Tim Fischer saying it was a law-making cancer, and then
Alexander Downer stepping back from it, giving the journo's the hint that
during the day that he would walk away from it. And they're all asking, you
know, is the Prime Minister going to give us a comment? And of course, silly
me, I'm interested in the inflation rate. You know, I'm such a dag, I'm actually
interested in the inflation rate. And there it came out at under 2 per cent.
Decelerating the trend inflation down from 2.1 to 1.9 per cent in the face of
the fastest growth in the Western world. With all the attendant influences for
inflation for interest rates and for everything else. And I thought, I normally
give you know one hopes you know a studied.. . well the underlying rates
are down to such and such and such and such, meanwhile back at the
coalition ranch, they're hopping out of these Citizens Initiated Referenda
and you've got to say, what's going on in the public debate in Australia,
really? What is going on in this country? I mean, what about a bit of rejoicing
in the fact we got 5 per cent growth? And Western Europe has got about
per cent. What about a little bit of rejoicing in the fact that our workforce has
seen the value of wage restraint for employment and we are sitting today with
further confirmation that inflation is decelerating and we've broken the back of
a 20 year scourge with double digit inflation, and comprehensively broken it,
and watching this year, 3.5 per cent employment growth. I saw buried on
page 2 of the Australian and the only paper that reported it last week from the
IMF: Australia and Canada leading the world in employment growth 3.5 per
cent OECD leading us. Not page one, not splashed over the front page of
the Herald, down on page two. But at least Tthe Australian reported it. On
the back page of the Economist, where they have the OECD, the 27 member
states of the OECD economies, each month, this month what's the little
banner flash across it? ' Australia . dot. dot. dot... still ahead of the pack.'
Still ahead of the pack. Well God you wouldn't know it here. You wouldn't
know it. But people in business know it, and people in the community know it
because we are coming back very strongly and we are doing it in a way that
is going to be great for Australia, with low inflation.
People say to me, I had someone ( journalist) ask me today, you know, " The
polls say you are arrogant, what have you got to say about that?" I said,
' Well, if people knew me as much as you do, they would like me much more
than they do now, and when you get to know him, you sort of can't help but
like him" that sort of thing. And they said, " oh yeah, ok, well that's the
answer to that one, what about the next one? And, it went on like this. They
got down to saying, " well look, you know, Mr Downer is ahead of you." I said,
" yeah well that's very strange isn't it, because this guy is a policy free-area.
He hasn't got any policies." I said, " let me just tell you something here, it was
only six months ago that Bronwyn Bishop was ahead of me". And she was, 
she was. She was preferred Prime Minister. So you see, you cannot react to
this stuff, you've got to let it wash over you a bit, but I think it is worth, you
know, worth actually saying.
You really wonder what has happened to public comment in Australia, where
it used to be the case the news was where the weight was. An editor wrote
his stories where the weight of the news was and people would give you the
story and let you read it. And you would make your own mind up about it.
But now, it's never the weight, its the angle. You know, its the poll, its
someone new, its not the weight. And the reason why the weight is the
weight is because it affects everybody. And so the Government has been
concentrating on weight while the coalition and other people are into floss
and nonsense and I think the weight matters but you feel like getting out on a
loud haler because its almost a dark secret about the things that really
matter. Now, I just want to say a couple of things about the Government in this term
of office because, I think, it is worth saying. In the last election campaign,
John Hewson said we would have a double-dip recession and a depression.
He said we had all the workers in the gun sights. Remember the gun-sight
ad?. In fact, we are growing faster than any western economy and we have
had 3.5 per cent employment. growth. The Government focused on that
recovery. The One ' Nation spending is now running strongly. We are
spending $ 1 million a day on the rail system right this minute. From
Brisbane to Melbourne and a standard gauge across to Adelaide, all that
spending is going on. We pulled the right policy lever with One Nation, when
private spending was down, we put public spending up and we pulled
Australia out of the recession faster than any other Western country. We've
now got it up and running and we are still yet to have, in full measure, the
investment phase come through and I'm pretty sure its going to come through
strongly. So it is going to go on. We've had first public demand, then public
demand in housing, then consumer spending and housing, and now,
investment: a rolling recovery. So we concentrated on that recovery. And
it's coming through. And you can imagine the claims, had the coalition won
the election. It would have been all their doing. They would have said " oh
remember the Government the former Government members were down
there, has us in a recession all this growth is because we're in office. The
growth is here because of the policies of the Federal Government the
Federal Labour Government and the success is there because of the
commitment which the Australian people have given to the recovery. And I
think Australians deserve the chance to rejoice in their own work and we
should acknowledge the fact that the place is coming up very strongly.
Now a number of things have occupied us since the election, since March
1993. Let me just run through them quickly: there was Mabo, APEC, Hilmer,
the White PapeRr Working Nation the Accord and the new jobs
arraii-emrents and the-Republic. Let me just say a couple things about each
one. Let me say something -about Mabo. Now, for a lot of people, Mabo is an
extraneous matter, it doesn't affect them immediately, they live in the cities, 
it's not a matter which comes their way. But ask yourself this. How many
Governments and how many countries could cope with the fact that its most
supreme of Courts said that native tradition and custom is a source of
national common law and that there's a native title in the common law? What
do you do with a decision like that? That means that every title in this country
issued, and certainly since the Racial Discrimination Act of 1975 was
introduced, was under question. And in mining, that's most of it. That's the
great mining tracks of Queensland and Western Australia and New South
Wales and South Australia and there's big pastoral areas and it could be
resolved by one court case after another, one claim after another, which
would take 20 or 30 years, but how would we go for certainty of title? How do
you resolve all of the legal uncertainties? What happens when a bank says
"$ we are no longer supporting your facilities, because you can't guarantee us
title?". That is what it meant. But the opportunity of Mabo was to make right
a wrong. To overturn the fiction and the untruth of terra nullius and to repair
something which should have been repaired in our history long ago. And that
was to say to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians we will be the
stronger, and this place will be the fairer when we are all as one and we
share in this country equally. That was the promise of Mabo and the
Government took it up. And the other thing is, we were not going to leave the
High Court out to dry. Now, you often hear these Tories tell you, we believe
old law and order, they get law and order out every half a dozen years.
They're always in favour of the law and the rule of law but remember the catcalling
and the attacks upon the Court from those who formally were great
supporters of this institution until it happened to say something that they
didn't like. And we had the Justices make what I think was a courageous
decision; not one that could work in terms of an administrative solution, but as
a point of principle, a courageous decision and it was for the Government to
take the opportunity and to preserve the Court's prestige and encourage them
to make such decisions.
And so from a clean sheet of paper, we put together one of the largest pieces
of property and cultural law of its kind in the world with lovely straight lines of
logic after long consultation with Aboriginal people and as a consequence,
we brought certainty to all those titles; we have given the opportunity for
those with the traditional association with the land to claim it, we got a chance
to hold our head up and say that we are no longer going on with the lie that
there were no people here at the time of European settlement. Beyond that,
of course is the land fund which extends the rights to land for those who can't
avail themselves of Mabo. In doing all that we did it in 13 months. It would
have taken, I'm sure, the United States 10 or 12 years, or somewhere else.
And there are a lot of lawyers in this room. Look at the property laws of New
South Wales a great collection of tomes it's a most complex area of the
law. But to start from a clean sheet of paper and say " how do we build this
structure?" We've done it. And we did it with the consultation with the
Aboriginal community who for the first time negotiated with the national
Government as never before, and both Houses of Parliament passed it. And
we will now see it coming into affect the tribunals are being established. 
Now apart the inherent decency of it, when you go to Asia now, people say
" that's very interesting because these European tribes never give anything
away and maybe the Australians have turned over a new leaf. Maybe they
really mean what they say. They want to be in it with us and we approve very
much of the way they treat their indigenous." Now I think that is important to
Australia. I think Mabo was important for what it meant, it was important to do
for our self-esteem and for the simple justice of it and it was not just done, but
it was done in a way that I am sure most Governments couldn't have
contemplated. It was one of the things we have done in the last 15 months
and a coalition Government wouldn't have done it. They opposed it tooth
and by jowl all the way and John Hewson described it, as we brought the Bill
from the Senate then back into the House of Representatives to support the
last amendments, as " a day of shame".
Now, that's the difference between weight and quality and no quality and
nonsense and it is one of the things we have done. Let me move on.
APEC. Neville is Australia's eminent person on the APEC Eminent Person's
Gr7. Weaeseigt ul nAi-Pacific economic community. We
are seeking, from our country, to interest others in a structure which turns
what was a co-operative sort of mini OECD information sharing secretariat
into an executive head of government body. Now, we worked this initiative
up. I pedalled my way around the Pacific through most of 1992. Neville
worked on the Eminent Person's Group. Our Foreign Affairs Department put
their shoulder to the wheel and gradually we got people to support it. So
much so, with some real confidence, I was able to say to President Clinton
that I believe that it's possible to put together a head of governments' meeting
for the Asia-Pacific, but we needed a catalyst for it to happen. That catalyst
came when Bill Clinton extended the invitation for people to attend in Seattle
last year.
When those fifteen leaders sat down, half the world's production and over
half the worlds population sat down there with them. And, for the first time in
our long history, Australia was at a very big table. But, not only that, a table
which it, in some substantial part, had put together itself. This Labor
Government did that.
I had Alexander Downer a couple of weeks ago saying ' I don't think we ought
to be having foreign investment in the measure we're having it'. He caballed
the fact we are investing abroad. Last week he was saying ' we belong to
Oceania, we don't belong to Asia.' Now, if one wants to get technical and go
back to the atlas, we are in the bottom end of the South-Pacific and we
belong to Oceania or what used to be called Oceania. But, 75 per cent of
our exports are in the_ Asia-Pacific. That's where the markets are growing 6 to
8 per cent a year. So, wFitfprice the Liberals being able to conceive, much
less put it together, when they are even disputing the fact we're in the region
that APEC is all about. But, the Government has pursued it. Neville has just
come back from an Eminent Persons' meeting and I've just met President
Soeharto to talk further about the upcoming meeting which is in Indonesia in 
November at Bogor and we have every prospect there of advancing the
APEC agenda.
And, when Australia is linked and linked well into the Asia-Pacific, when are
exports are growing as they are now rapidly by these bilateral linkages, but
as we multi -lateral ise, multi-lateral agreements within the Asia-Pacific area
then we are really going to see Australia plugged in in a way it has never
been plugged in before. Because, we are not part of natural growth areas or
big markets like the European Community. We don't have contiguous
borders with France or Spain or anywhere else, or North America. We are
not part of NAFTA. We are an island continent. We've got to do it ourselves.
We've got to be part of something if we can we must create or be a part of
something someone else can create with us. But, if we get set in the Asiapacific,
we are set for at least a century.
Now, that's what this Government is about. It is about that sort of weight. Not
citizens initiated referendums and mucking around over treaties or saying the
Queen doesn't matter, she is irrelevant and quaint. It's not about that sort of
babble. We are about things that matter.
Then there is Hilmer. Hilmer is an attempt to the Hilmer Report on
competition polity--is-an attempt to make the States' authorities as open to
competitive pressures as the rest of us are. I mean, there are a lot of unions
here tonight. They have been open to competitive pressures. They have had
to find themselves a productive place in Australian enterprise. They have
had to adjust the way in which they are organised. They have had to adjust
their awards. They have had to amalgamate unions. They have had to
restructure. They have had to accept productivity related wage adjustments.
They have had to adjust. Business has had to adjust. But, the States are
sitting taking hundreds of millions in monopoly rents, out of electricity, out of
water, out of gas, out of ports, and sticking them into State budgets. And
what the Commonwealth is saying is " well, hang on, we'ye now opened
Australia up by knocking the tariff wall over, removing exchange control, we
have got a free flow of funds, a free flow goods, we've got natural advantages
in this country. We have got a coal seam right down the east coast of
Australia. We've got quite a large supply of natural gas. We have got natural
advantages, we can actually promote ourselves, give us a comparative
advantage. God knows how hard it is to get a comparative advantage and we
are trying to open this up". And we got the States to agree at the last COAG
meeting the Council of Australian Governments to do that.
But, I got a letter in the mail this morning from Jeffrey. He is on my mind
today Jeffrey. Most of the time I like him, but I don't much today. But,
anyway, he said we are not going to be in this reform unless the
Commonwealth pays for it. Well, when we cut tariffs in the 1 980s, I don't
remember the Americans giving us a cheque. When we did things that cost
the Commonwealth budget, no one paid for us. So, they are saying well look,
we'll introduce these reforms, but if you pay for it. Well, anyway, we are
going to argue about that, but the important thing is the quality of the reform. 
Get these competitive changes in the States authorities of this country and
the Commonwealth authorities and we've already got the competitive
disciplines in business and we are off and running. You know, you are flat
out holding Australia back. It is another issue. We are going to debate it
soon at COAG. It is another issue of enormous weight.
And then there is, of course, the White Paper Working Nation. I said on
election night that we wouldn't forgiet the long-term unemployed. People may
say " well, that's the Labor Party, it is a party of compassion, it believes in
these things, these people are part of its natural constituency." All that is
true. But, what's also true is that we will make a tragic mistake as a country
believing you can have an underclass. Believing that we can move on those
of us who are well off, got a job, some incomes, some assets that we can go
off and pick up the joy of a recovery, but the people who carried the shock or
the absorption of a lot of the change are left as long term unemployed people.
And, we are yet to see how societies live with underclasses. The United
States is now trying to handle it. So is Britain and the British people have
shown over the years they'll take a hell of a lot of pressure and a lot of social
stress because they are a very strong and robust people.
But, this is a new era, a really new era of two speed societies. What we
decided in March 1993 at that election is that Australia would be one society.
Now, it is all very easy and well to say " oh well, yes of course that is decent
rhetoric, you expect the Prime Minister to say one society". But, while, we
say one society, we mean one society. When the Liberals say one society,
they don't mean it. They mean one society for those well off and the others,
well, they can just take their place further down the queue. And, you have got
to draw a line under it and you've got to say, well, should 350,000 people be
long term unemployed? And at any rate, where is our labour market
complementation, skills formation going to come in this recovery? It is not
going to come from migration as in others. It is going to come from the labour
market. We have to train, re-train those 350,000 people and get them back
into work.
In the next four years, we will spend $ 10.5 billion on labour market programs
creating 650,000 places a year. Now, the unemployed I can't remember the
exact number, it is around 900,000 odd 650,000 places will actually be
created by the Commonwealth. We are going to be spending $ 10.5 billion
over four years an enormous contribution but one which we've put with a
declining trajectory of our deficit to go and do that. We will be personally
case managing that is one to one one person talking to another person
about their employment background, their educational attainment's, their
skills, their aptitudes, one to one we are going to be case managing, next
year, 560,000 people. This is an absolute revolution in social policy. This is
the first country in the world which will have done this and as always, it will
only be done by a Labor Government.
And, it will mean, that we will get people back into work. We are also saying
that we won't accept the fact that any young person under 18 slips out of the 
9
system. If they slip out we will personally case manage them back into the
mainstream education system or into training or into work.
The same with the training wage. In terms of apprenticeships and
traineeships, there is going to be a huge expansion in apprenticeships and
tranineeships and, of course, all of this comes on top of these massive
participation rates in schools. Ten years ago the Liberals were happy
enough to see four kids in ten complete secondary school. This year it is
over eight in ten. Next year it will be nine in ten 40 per cent of them are
now streamed through university and we are now building the TAFE system
beside the universities to take the balance so that the whole of that group
to 19 which we will regard now as a period of vocational preparation, will go
on to become part of the clever country, the smarter society, the trained
workforce and the ones that drop out the young people who drop out we
will pick them back and put them back in. And, in secondary school, in Years
11 and 12 for the students who know they are not going on to a tertiary
education, we are going to start to give them accreditation for TAFE courses
in Years 11 and 12, for units of TAFE in Years 11 and 12 and some work
experience. So, their lives pattern starts in Years 11 and 12.
I mean, these are the things that the White Paper means. It is not just a one
day Parliamentary flash in the pan. It is a change to the way we live. It is a
restatement of our values Labor values that say, one nation we will be, an
inclusive society we must remain.
Finally a couple of words about the republic. I'd turn no, we can't turn the
pictures over, it would be rude. We will never fully appreciate or exercise the
full limits of Australian sovereignty and Australian aspirations whileever our
head of state is the monarch of another country.
It stands to reason that the Australian head of state should be an Australian
person. It is as simple as that. It is not some frumped up, phoney
constitutional set of grab-bag potpourri like the citizens initiated referendum,
or crimping the Commonwealth's right to sign an international treaty, or
mucking around with the time a Bill can qualify for a double dissolution which
is a little bit of political nit picking and messing around. It's the real thing. It's
the real thing that matters to us. Now, here we are with all these great
changes in this country and the whole country has been in them knocking
down exchange controls, watching our investors go off shore. You know, 12
or 11 years ago, we have 3 per cent of our GOP invested abroad. This year it
is 20 per cent. This year it is $ 80 billion in"-esfed abroad $ 80,000 million of
Australian funds are invested abroad. If it wasn't you could cut our debt by
$ 80,000 million. But, are we better with the debt and investment abroad.
Well, of course we are, because we are in those markets building organic
positions. Now, we have seen those chances. We've seen the tariff wall come down.
People are saying if you do that you will kill our manufacturing. What's
happened? Manufacturing production has doubled. Manufacturing exports 
have tripled in the time since. I mean, there was a time in that crazy debate
with John Stone, you know, the great Treasury guru saying " well, we don't
think you can have a competitive manufacturing sector beside an
internationally competitive primary exports sector because wool, wheat and
minerals will over value the exchange rate and that will produce cheaper
imports, so you can't have a manufacturing sector." Well, you didn't have to
be a political scientist or a graduate of the London School of Economics or
somewhere to know that that was absolute balderdash. And, we've knocked
the tariff wall over and what's happening? All the innovative companies are
going for it look at the McKinsey Report. Hundreds born global. Didn't
starve domestic industries at all, just straight out into exports.
I was up there in Indonesia two weeks ago at a huge trade fair which had
everything from St Vincent's Hospital and the Austin Hospital in Melbourne to
the water authorities to the electricity authorities to the big product companies
like BHP and Pacific-Dunlop to the smaller innovative companies and the
telecommunications companies like AWA, represented here tonight, the
retailers, and there is Australia out there, going out to the world to do all
these things. And, we put these changes into place, but we can never really
say " here we are.. ". here we are," borrowing the monarch of another country.
So, here we are, we're not quite certain of ourselves, not quite sure, but look,
we are getting our pecker up, we are getting our confidence up, but we are
not quite confident enough to put an Australian in the job. So, for the moment
we will keep on borrowing the Queen of Great Britain. But, when she goes
abroad she promotes Britain and British goods. But, when the Governor-
General goes abroad, and he went recently to some of the old Soviet States
as you know, and they had to ring the British Embassy to find out whether
they could receive him. Ding-a-ling, " Mr Ambassador, look the Australian
Governor-General wants to come and see us, is it ok?"
Now, this is the head of state that Alexander Downer wants us to have the
deputy of a foreign monarch. And, of course, we can't have it. That
nonsense has got to stop. So, the Government is saying this and we will, in
this debate, at the appropriate time and some of that is going to be sooner
rather than later, put down very clearly where we think the debate should go.
So, you round the things up. Mabo, APEC, Hilmer, the White Paper, the
spread of enterprise bargaining which is now we expect to see 80 per cent
of federal awards by 1996, turning this rigid labour market into a flexible one,
the republic, all of these things are the things of weight and of value. And the
Liberals, there they are out with their Alexander Downer said, and let me
just quote him here, he said ' Australians are entitled to reasonably detailed
policies from both parties'. He said that eight weeks ago. This week he said
' the forthcoming policy statement will be only very general in nature'. So, in
other words they are going to hand us pap.
And, of course, you know why with the Liberals, you see, in 1984 they had
Andrew Peacock as the Leader. Now, Andrew went around pulling faces
serious faces, happy faces, funny faces right throughout the 1984 election 
and he lost it because he didn't stand for anything. And, the Liberals said
ofoh, well, I suppose it's only one loss, but we ought to learn our lesson. Let's
not get in the habit of having the Labor Government around, we'd better get
someone with some policies." So, they said " we'll get John Howard." Now,
John was a former Treasurer, he had a bit of a clue about the economy
made a bit of a mess of it but still a clue about it. A few crude notions, a tax
bribe he had in the so-called ' Boxhill tax package', out he went and we blew
the tax package to pieces, his numbers fell away all over the place and he
started articulating his policies, particularly some of his immigration policies
and he lost. They said, " the problem is here you don't go fighting elections
with policies. You don't fight elections with policies, you fight the Government
who has got policies, you have notions and you attack the Government. You
don't have policies." So they went back to Andrew Peacock. And, Andrew
was out again a bit older, a bit smarter, but not much and in the 1990
election, you know, flim-flam again stuff, no policies, you know, as sure as
night follows day remember that one you know, as sure as night follows
day. The went through that for three weeks and they lost again. So, it was
really then back to the drawing board, all the hard heads the Petro Georgios
and the all back to something. With, really, three elections on the trot lost,
they can't have that, " look the problem really is we have got to have policy.
Let's find a policy guide. Now, there is Hewson. There he is, a professor of
economics, he went all right in the election campaign, we will get him." So,
they give him the job. He is the Leader. Before he knows it he is shadow
treasurer and next thing he is the Leader. And, then he starts and he thinks,
" well, what I'll do, I'm really on a roll here so I'll really go for the big one
Fightback, the consumption tax, I'll take a big slap of income form the low
paid, kick it up the wealthy, we'll knock off Medicare, give the doctors a break,
the lot, we'll really have dot pointed policies -T'is dotted and ' T's crossed." He
had policies, but they were the wrong policies and, of course, he lost. So,
they said, " you can't win with policies, you've got to go back" so they've got
Alexander. That's what I said the other night. See, if you go Peacock to Howard soft,
hard Peacock to Hewson soft, hard, soft. Soft, hard, soft, you get the
pattern. Now the pattern is that Downer is the softie again and, of course,
this is where the flim flam polices come from.
Meanwhile, the Government, naively is back on the weight Mabo, APEC, the
recovery, Hilmer, the White Paper, enterprise bargaining, the republic, but,
he is going to give you feeling about his policies. Give you some little things
and meanwhilePeter Reith will run off with some and if they don't go to well
they'll get pulledbackiJ__ he republic, the monarchy, he was going to take the
Government to the wall and, me in particular, on the monarchy and when I
had an opportunity and I did in France, I was encouraged by Francois
Mitterand, I mean, he can be a bad influence on people Francois sometimes
about republics and I come out and said that I think Australia should be a
republic, that we can't have the monarch of Great Britain and straight away
Alexander one step back, two steps, two weeks later the Queen didn't matter,
she was irrelevant and only quaint. 
12
The thing about Alexander Downer is he stands for nothing. Seriously, he
stands for nothing. He is a policy flake and he'll go the way of policy flakes,
and that is to the political graveyard. Now, there is some distance between
now and then, but I've got a route mapped out for him.
Now, they have had a tremendous go, and of course, they think that's what
the game is. So, this thing about Alexander Downer is is he thinks he is
currency. Well, he is, but he is pre-decimal. He is back there in the 1950s
and so whenever they have a new idea the Liberals it is always back to
some idea. It is never forward. They always believed in going back.
So, there it is. This is going to be an interesting period for Australia because,
I think, we are on the verge of a change of quality to our economy, to our
society and inflation is, I think, a measure of that, of our social compassion, of
our sense of inclusion, for the first time living near the biggest and fastest
growing markets in the world, with linkages we've never had before, we've
never been in a decade of this promise not ever.
So, what I say to Australians is let's take up the challenge. Let's rejoice in the
challenge. Let's take it up and let's go for it. And, let's get the weight back
into the newspapers. Let's get the real issues back in the public debate and
let there be some understanding about the merit of big policy outcomes and
not see great national achievements, like today, again with inflation frittered
away in the flim flam comments what passes for the public debate, covering
an Opposition that have run out of ideas, with a leader who hasn't the
courage or the wit to fabricate any.
That's why the Labor Party is the great party of change in this country. It's
already made huge change in the last decade and we'll go on to make more.
And, in this State let me finish were I began in this State, as Bob Carr said,
you'll never do better than a really conducive working relationship between
the Prime Minister of Australia and the Government of the Commonwealth
and the Premier of New South Wales and the Government of New South
Wales. And, when Bob Carr is the Premier and a Labor Government is here,
New South Wales will join the recovery which it's not doing to date and then
when the bigger State kicks along, the whole of the country will kick along.
And then, when you come again, we can report further progress. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUTOMOTIVE, FOOD, METALS AND ENGINEERING UNION CONFERENCE
SYDNEY, 27 JULY 1994
Let me begin by saying how good it is to be with the members of one of
Australia's great unions, the AFMEU.
As a Labor Prime Minister, I very much welcome this opportunity to speak with
you today for yours is a union that has led the way in workplace reform.
You have played a vital role in preparing the Australian workforce for a new
century.
You were the first union to put in place skills-based career structures.
You were at the forefront in implementing occupational superannuation.
You were at the forefront of restructuring unions.
I understand that you will soon be making another attempt to amalgamate with
the PKIU.
From what I hear the PKIU is ready to take a positive approach to the issue,
and that's encouraging for all concerned.
We are now less than six years away from a new century.
Clearly, what we do for the remainder of this decade will determine the sort of
Australia that enters the twenty-first century.
This Government has been out there driving the changes that will make sure
Australia remains a great place to live and bring up kids.
Over the past year, we have undertaken more activity than probably any other
Federal Government be it securing the Mabo legislation, getting agreement to
implement the Hilmer Report, building up APEC, or introducing the raft of
initiatives contained in the White Paper. 
We have sought to build structures both inside and outside Australia that will
deliver long term gains for all Australians.
If, as a nation, we can remain comfortable with change keep change our
friend then change won't be forced upon us.
If we can anticipate and prepare for change, then we will have greater control
over our future.
It will be our future and not an imposed future.
As you well know, with an increasingly global marketplace, the waves of
change are growing larger each day and they're coming more frequently.
That can seem very daunting at times.
It can leave many people unsure about the future.
What all Australians must learn to do is surf the wave of change.
That calls for new skills, new capabilities in our working people.
It calls for new thinking, new attitudes and a renewed commitment to doing the
right thing by those who will come after us.
That goes for employers and governments just as much as it goes for workers.
As we prepare for a new century, we must prepare for it in a way that only a
Labor movement can.
That means we keep on board our sense of fairness, decency and
compassion. This is what Working Nation is all about.
The policies we put in place in Working Nation are Labor policies to the core.
Only a Labor Government could have cared sufficiently to make the changes
that will ensure ours is a fair, decent and prosperous Australian community.
Consciously or unconsciously, and I'm not sure anyone has worked Alexander
Downer out on this one, the Liberal's prescription is for two Australian societies
one for the haves, the other for the have-nots.
What's more, the conservatives are frightened of change.
And when they reluctantly choose to embrace it, it's a change backwards
rather than forwards. 
Only a Labor Government could have had the imagination that created the
programs in Working Nation.
And only a Labor Government could have the commitment to see those
programs through.
Where were the Tories in all this?
All they could muster were a few miserable and misplaced comments about
cutting the deficit.
And we all know what that really means.
That's Toryspeak for cutting more Australians out of the picture.
Working Nation is designed to ensure that unemployed people share in the
economic recovery.
But it will only come about with the support of all Australians including the
employers and unions.
In order to expand the opportunities available to young Australians and to
provide Australian industry with the skills needed in a modern economy, we
have committed funding to support an additional 50,000 entry-level training
places by the end of 1995-96.
These additional places will be created in training programs such as
apprenticeships and traineeships, in institutional pathways and in labour
market programs with a significant training component.
To prevent the very young falling into long term unemployment, the Youth
Training Initiative combined with individual case management, will help ensure
newly unemployed young people gain access to a suitable education, training
or work experience opportunity.
Over a four year period from 4 July 1994, we will spend a total of $ 10.3 billion
on employment and training initiatives.
Under Working Nation, there will be some 645,000 labour market and entry
level training commencements a year by 1995-96.
Under the J. obCompact, we will assist over 550,000 people who have been
unemployed for 18 months or more over the next four years at a total cost of
$ 4.6 billion.
During the 1995-96 financial year we expect to place some 160,000 people in
the Job Compact, with around 100,000 in subsidised jobs under either Jobstart
or the National Training Wage, and 35,000 in New Work Opportunities. 
A training wage will provide an important option for employers and another
avenue of choice for young workers and unemployed people.
The training wage will be particularly valuable for those without existing entrylevel
skills or qualifications.
And it will only apply where the training is structured, portable and certified.
By 1995-96 there will also be some 360,000 labour market program places
available for non-Compact unemployed people a year.
And Government funding will provide support for some 94,000 apprentices and
trainees. Of course, all this won't happen overnight and it won't happen without the
support of unions like the AFMEU.
With your backing we can deliver the outcomes of Working Nation.
Where would we or, more importantly, where would long term unemployed
people have been under the Liberals?
Even the warm and fuzzy version of Fightback would have cut $ 790 million
from support for unemployed people.
Fightback 2 wanted to delay the savings by 12 months.
That would have meant they'd be introducing their cuts about now!
Fightback would have reduced spending on labour market programs by more
than 25 per cent that's the equivalent of 150,000 places.
Under the Coalition's AUSTRAIN proposal, unemrrpjpye~ d people would have
been paid as little as 7per cent of the award wage but ( with no obligation on
the employer to provide any training.
Would the Coalition have been capable of implementing an enterprise
bargaining system that protected workers but was also good for the economy?
Would the Coalition have been able to map out an Accord with the union
movement that would have as its minimum goal 500,000 new jobs in the three
years to 1996?
Would the Coalition have delivered an agreement with the union movement to
support a package providing two Safety Net Adjustments of $ 8.00 a week, one
in this year and one next year?
Would the Coalition have agreed to work with the union movement to look at
new ways to assist families? 
It is through the Accord that we are cementing low inflation as a feature of the
Australian economy low inflation critical to creating more jobs and rising
standards of living over the long term.
We've been able to make progress on enterprise bargaining because of the
support from the union movement in the broad and the AFMEU in particular.
It has been the Metals Industry that has led award restructuring, workplace
reform and enterprise bargaining.
Since 1991, we've seen around 700 finalised enterprise agreements in the
Metals industry covering around 160,000 employees and accounting for close
to 40 per cent of all enterprise agreements.
And while much of the reform has been in the medium to large enterprises, I
understand the AFMEU is discussing with the MTIA how enterprise bargaining
can flow through to the smaller enterprises.
Enterprise bargaining has become the primary focus for wage fixing and a vital
catalyst for workplace reform.
And that's why we want to see 80 per cent of employees in the Federal award
sector covered by direct bargains by the end of 1996.
It's also why we've set up a new program that will help unions and business
alike to negotiate workplace agreements.
We've ratified a number of ILO conventions and changed the way the
Industrial Relations Commission functions.
We now have an industrial relations framework that will deliver the labour
market flexibility and productivity growth that is essential for strong and
sustainable growth.
The whole thrust of these labour market and education and training reforms is
to ensure unions have an organic role in the labour marketplace.
These reforms are backed up by a superannuation system that will ensure all
Australians, and not just the wealthy few, have greater security in their
retirement. We've also introduced a child care rebate, a home child care allowance and a
parenting allowance.
And last November we cut taxes.
But we didn't stop there. 
Would the Coalition have been capable of introducing industry policy initiatives
that will build competitive firms and create more growth and more jobs?
Working Nation recognised that industry policy can't be developed in isolation
that industry policy depends as much for its success on macro-economic,
industrial relations and trade policy, as it does on specific industry
development and support measures.
Industry policy is about encouraging the development of those characteristics
critical to success in the global marketplace.
It's about creating secure and rewarding jobs in flexible high productivity
workplaces. The raft of Working Nation industry initiatives are good for industry, good for
employment, and good for Australia.
Improving small firm access to finance and increasing research and
development incentives will enable small firms to grow and employ more
people. Giving industry better access to the government purchasing market will also
lead to more jobs.
And because it is new business new products and new services that are at
the forefront of global economic growth, we're embarking on a major campaign
to promote the fundamental need for innovation in everything a firm does.
And that includes seeking out the ideas of those who are down there on the
workplace floor.
It's about tapping into the imagination of all workers.
We want to drive the industry innovation debate over the coming years.
The policies we are embarked on are Labor to their core.
The task we now face is to drive home the White Paper changes over the
coming 12 months.
We want to make the policies outcomes.
It's a big ask, but it's one both I, and my Government, are committed to
achieving. Unions, such as the AFMEU, have a big role to play in meeting this challenge.
And I see the AFMEU playing a leadership role in developing flexible high
productivity workplaces. 
7
You have already taken major strides in the right direction.
And your continued support for change will ensure that this Labor Government
delivers the sorts of outcomes that only a Labor Government can.
Thank you. 



/ 0P
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINSTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, THURSDAY 28 JULY 1994
E&amp; EO PROOF COPY
JL: Good morning, Prime Minister
PM: How are you John?
JL: You were firing away there last night. We only played 1 minute,
seconds of it, but I think it went about 45 minutes, or something didn't
it?
PM: Oh yes, we had a few funny bits in there.
JL: Obviously, you were in a good frame of mind.
PM: Well, I think that you know, we've got to get away part of the message
I was giving was we've got to get away from these sort of shadow
debates and back to real things. I mean, the job of people in public life
is to deliver outcomes, and what I was saying yesterday was that in
seeing the confirmation of decelerating trend inflation in the face of
economic growth, which is the fastest in the western world, Australia
has not only achieved growth again of a very high order, but it's broken
the back of a 20 year scourge of inflation, and yesterday morning the
debate was about whether Mr Downer would sort of pull off his Citizen
Initiated Referendums.
JL: Yeah, well you see, this is the part that confuses the people. When we
have good news, such as the news we had yesterday, and not even
Terry McCrann could say it was bad news why don't we get a run on
that? Why don't we enthuse about the success of our very own
country instead of doom-boosting all the time?
PM: Well, I mean, listen we sort of, it's as if, you know, there's a sort of
moratorium on any kind of rejoicing about the fact that the Australian 
people together have busted inflation and secured their future. I
mean, let me just make this point John, under the Liberals, inflation
never got oh it got once below 10% at We've got inflation
now in trend terms at about slightly under That's an 8
percentage point differential on whatever interest rate structure the
country will have. That means that all Australians have got that 8
percentage points of advantage in inflation and in interest rates than
they would have had had the sort of policies of not pulling together, not
having accord with the trade unions, not trying to systemically bust
inflation. And that makes all the world of difference, and that's the
point I'm trying to get across to Mr Downer this is not about what I call
political ping-pong: one smart answer to meet another sort of slick
reply, and another one batted back, another quick answer it's not
about answers and slick replies, it's about substantial outcomes.
JL: Yeah. The comments now being thrown over, about the Citizen
Initiated Referenda your thoughts on that, I imagine, would be with
most of Australia that if you elect a government surely it's there to
govern, and doesn't have to ask the people how to do it once it's
there?
PM: Well, it's like when they have these Referenda, Citizens Initiated
referenda in California..
JL: I was talking about those, dreadful.
PM: Yeah. Cutting the, so called cutting the tax rate and what have you.
Then they found there was a paucity of police people on the beat,
there was a decline in public services and, of course, there's got to be
some government. See in this country, John, we have elections every
three years. In fact, we generally have them slightly less than three
years. So, the public get a chance to adjudicate on the government
within a very short space of time. So, you know, there's not much I
agree with Mr Fischer about, but I agreed with his comments
yesterday, that Citizens Initiated Referenda is law-making cancer, and,
but again it just shows that Alexander Downer's leadership is not
leadership at all. I mean, he lets Reith run this thing out, he tells
everybody in the press yes, he's supporting it. The moment it gets into
trouble, he falls away from it, the same as he did on the monarchy and
the republic. We didn't get low inflation falling away from fights. We
got low inflation and high growth through determined policy efforts
standing the heat when the heat is on.
JL: Yep. Just back to inflation during the Liberal years. During that entire
7-year period it only came under 10% on one occasion?
PM: From my recollection, it got to 9.8% in the early
JL: And when Labor took government, unemployment was about 10% too,
wasn't it? 
PM: It was, unemployment was, inflation and unemployment were the better
part of 10.5 or 11
JL: Yeah. Well, why is it that we don't in our own country enthuse
about our ability to succeed? I was interested to hear you say then
that the people of Australia had collectively been able to do what's
been done, and they have done it. Why don't they rejoice in the fact
that they have?
PM: Well, they're entitled to the recovatry, which has come, and to the wage
restraint which has put the low inflation and the higher profits into
place which engendered that re-overy. Now, the government can
direct the policies and it has but it's had the co-operation of the
whole organised workforce through the Accord, it's had the
cooperation of the workforce in wage restrain-ts, agnd it's now, we're
now, producing the highest rate of growth in the whole of the OECD
western world area, and we're doing it when inflation is actually
slowing down, not going up. Normally when growth goes up, inflation
goes up. We've got growth going up and inflation coming down, so my
point is, let's give the nation a tick when we get it right, and also, see
John, can I just make this point you just made a very interesting point
about unemployment. In the early 80s we had unemployment at
around 10%, and we've got unemployment today at around 10% too.
The difference is though, we kept the nearly 2 million jobs created in
between times. In the early 80' s we had a workforce of 6 million, today
we've got a workforce of nearly 8 million. So, there's always this
confusion in the public minds between rates, like the unemployment
rate, and levels the level of employment. The level of employment in
the early 80s was 6 million, the level of employment now is
approaching 8 million. So, we got 10%, nearly 10%, unemployment of
8 million is a damn lot better than nearly 10%, over
unemployment of 6 million.
JL: Yeah, and particularly when you couple that with the inflation rate?
PM: When you couple, see, we've had from 1983 until now we've had, I
think, about 26-27% employment growth. That's about twice as much
as most western world countries.* And we've got it now with fast growth
again. Looking at the 90s, you've got already a strong take off for
growth. We are yet to see the real strength of the investment phase
come through so we've got more to come we've got inflation under
control, and we've got linkages into Asia and product growth and
export growth we've never had in any other decade. So the position of
the Australian economy, and the outlook for Australia in the 90s is
better than it's been, I think, certainly in any decade since the war
and I think before that.
JL: Do you concede that there is still plenty of people in our society who
are not yet feeling the benefits of the recovery? 
PM: Oh, absolutely. And I think that's why we've got to nurture it and bring
it along. And it means keeping an eye on all the elements of our
competitiveness. But that's one of the reasons why the Government's
been about extending enterprise bargaining through the workforce so
we're getting now productivity related wage increases which is
protecting the inflation rate. See, in the old days we had what was
called " wage push inflation". Someone would claim a wage increase,
it'd go straight into prices and straight into inflation.
JL: Absolutely..
PM: What's happening now is, the wage increases are covered by
productivity. That's why the inflation rate yesterday is moving down,
not up.
JL: Yeah, but you'd have Alexander Downer saying to that, and I suppose
other critics saying to that, well, if you've kept wages down for all this
time, is that really something to be proud of? In a country like
Australia, shouldn't the standard of living be increasing all the time, not
remaining static?
PM: Household income has risen in every year the Government has been
in office simply because there's been more people in households, in
work. So, we've spread the wage restraint to 26% employment growth,
and it's that stronger employment growth which has lifted family
incomes. But, as well as that, we've had in the last few years, strong
increases in real incomes because the inflation rate see for any,
look shall we say, nominal level of wages.. if you've got lower inflation,
your real wage is higher...
JL: That's right, because the dollar is more valuable.
PM: Yes, because the dollar is more valuable. So people have actually
had a, with the real wage increases with low inflation and the tax cuts,
they've had a big kick along and lower interest rates for housing real
disposable income of Australians has risen quite strongly in the last
couple of years because of the lower devotion of family income to
interest for housing, because of the tax cuts, and the low. inflation
making real wages higher. So, in other words, the aim of the game is
to give to people a higher standard of living, and that's what we've
been doing as well as creating 3.5% employment growth over the last
year. The only country in the world which shares our employment
growth rate at the moment or is near us is Canada. We're way
ahead of the pack...
JL: What do you...
PM: of OECD countries. 
JL: What do you say the people who will ring this radio program after I've
finished talking to you and say well, it's allright for him, it's still lousy for
us. I'm still unemployed, things are crook and there are people who
are now entrenched in that sort of thinking. What do you say to the
people who haven't yet felt the good of the recovery?
PM: Well that's where the White Paper comes in, John. That's where we've
got this revolution where we'll spend in the next 4 years, $ 1.4b on
labour market programs, and in next year, they will reach 650,000 of
the unemployed. That's the great bulk of the unemployed. 650,000
will be picked up and half of them will be individually case-managed.
And that was the great breakthrough of the White Paper of Working
Nation which I announced a couple of months ago saying we would not
leave the unemployed behind. But you see, for the Liberals, John, this
is all just so much, they think, " well, that's the Labor Party, they're out
there with their sort of so-called compassionate policies worrying about
the unemployed". They're basically saying " the recovery is on, let's
hope the joy goes to the top-end". They don't care about an
underclass, that's why the Government said Australia will not go the
way of the US or Britain we will have a White Paper, we won't let the
unemployed slip between the cracks. But, you see, the point Mr
Downer has got to get through his head is this smart, radio cracks,
repartee at the door-stop, is no substitute for policy. He doesn't have
policies. He doesn't stand for anything. And that's the problem.
There's no Liberal leader since 1983 who has stood for anything. And
we don't have one now.
JL: I talked yesterday to Bob Collins about the drought, and it was good to
talk to him, too. He seemed to be...
PM: Well, I mean he understands. He's an agricultural scientist, he's been
around all his life agriculture.
JL: He also went broke in the drought, didn't he?
PM: Yeah. And he worked for the CSIRO in agricultural science in the
Northern Territory.
JL: He concedes that more needs to be done, he concedes that the
drought as it stands now is a disaster. Are you prepared to allow him
to introduce the legislation which is there under the Natural Disasters
legislation for the drought-stricken farmers, particularly in
Queensland?
PM: Well, he's bringing a submission to Cabinet which I've encouraged him
to do, and Wayne Goss and I had a conversation about this during the
week..
JL: Yeah... 
PM: See, what we've got is a very.... we've got this unusual circumstance
John. We used to have a thing called the.. N. A ( the Natural Disaster
Relief Aqgency You would have normal seasons'and ' tFen for a year
or so6,!-you would have an extraordinary condition like a drought or
something else...
JL Yeah, but they usually accommodated that themselves, the farmers,
didn't they?
PM: Well, the NDRA helped it put money into particular localities. The
problem with this drought is that it's been on and off for around now,
about 8 years. It's a medium-term problem. It's not just an annual, or
an 18 month or 2 season, problem. Now certainly it's way out of the
ordinary with the climatic conditions of the century, over the century,
because we've now seen not just marginal farmland, but really good
farmland in trouble. So, what it needs is a medium-term solution, and
that's why we think that the structural adjustment type policies under
the Rural Adjustment Scheme, a modification of those, recognising the
severity of this and the medium-term nature of it, is the way to respond.
And that's what I think Bob Collins will do.
JL And will you permit that to happen?
PM: Oh, I think, I said in Queensland last week that's what I think should
happen. I mean, I just think it's a, you know, it's very poor for people in
these communities to have someone in public life, like myself, or
somebody say " oh well, look, you've got a problem we'll slip some
one year money into the NDRA arrangement".
JL Oh yes, I agree with that, but you....
PM: Do you understand? Where in fact the problem is a medium-term
problem and requires a much more systemic kind of approach.
JL yeah. You seem to get them off-side a bit with some comment, I don't
know exactly what it was....
PM: Well look, some of the grain-growing council people..
JL Yep.
PM: . they want you to say this is the biggest disaster ever, and we'll throw
inordinate amounts of money at it in an unstructured way. Now, no
government could do that, or should do that. When you say to them,
" look, I understand the nature of this problem it's a medium-term
problem, and it needs a systemic approach" they try and then argue,
it becomes a word game about what they think the medium-term is,
and what they think is an intermittent disaster..
JL Yeah... 
PM: . so instead of these people running grain councils, actually getting off
their tail and having a real valuable conversation with the Government,
they want to have little pot-shots on radio programs. I mean, they're
just not representing their own people well.
JL So, you believe that they do need help, and you will encourage the
Government to give them help?
PM: Well, I told...
JL ' Cause you only lend them the money, don't you?
PM: I told the public that yes, it's all about whether it's serviced, what the
rate of interest is. A lot of it's at nil rate. Some of it's at nil rate.
JL Well, so it should be.
PM: And therefore it's got no servicing cost. So what we've, what I've said
to the public of Queensland last week is that I think this is a serious
situation, I said the same to Wayne Goss. And Bob Collins had
already said that before I had, so Bob and I have agreed that he
should bring the matter to Cabinet.
JL Okay, just one final thing. What's happening with the Cahill
Expressway, and have you heard from the Premier of NSW?
PM: Well, I notice there's a press report today that he's written to me. I
haven't seen the letter yet, but I will, no doubt. And I'm happy to sit
down with NSW and talk about it. But, you see, we've got to talk about
the expressway and not a wish list. See, in the so-called $ 400m of
cosfsbf the expressway. I mean, look John, you don't have to be civil
engineer to know, it doesn't cost $ 400m to cut down a steel structure.
JL Well I wouldn't know that.
PM: Well, of course it doesn't, you know. I mean, the demolition job is a
very low-cost thing it's a matter of where you put the railway and a
couple of other things...
JL Yeah, because they would have to implement replacement measures
to get that traffic across the city of Sydney?
PM: But the thing is the traffic is largely ta ken up by the tunnel, by the
tunnel. What comes across the expressway is the lower north side
traffic from Kirribilli and places like that. And what John Fahey has
said in the $ 400m, is they want to put a tunnel from the Town Hall to
the Museum in Druitt Street, under Park Street, coming out at William
Street. Well, OK, that's a project that the city should consider, but it's
not part of the expressway cost. 
JL Well, I suppose they would say it was because they can no longer get
traffic from the west to the east of the city.
PM: Yeah, but of that traffic, only about 5% of the traffic that would use that
tunnel comes from the expressway. In other words, look, what they're
trying to say to me is, " look, seeing you are in a conversation with us,
let's really load it up to see if we can screw from you a new
expressway to take the east traffic to the west, which is a state
responsibility, and we'll park it onto you the Commonwealth". All on
the basis that 5% of the traffic that might use it formerly used the
expressway. Now, if you take that tunnel out, the cost comes down
from $ 400m to $ 1 50m, even with a gold-plated underground railway
station! So, if you think of another solution for the railway, you're
talking about under $ 1l00m here.
JL Okay, but you're still at least prepared to discuss it with them?
PM: Oh, I am, I am. But the thing about John Fahey, he's got to realise
there's a difference between a pro for-ma coffersation and a real
conversation. And a real conversation says, " look, allright, we've got a
claim on you there about this expressway from the Town Hall to
William Street, lets put that to one side for the moment, and discuss
the expressway, see if we can come to an arrangement on that, and
then we can discuss these other matters later".
JL Yeah. Well, lets encourage that and hope that it comes to fruition.
PM: It should happen, John, it's the most important precinct in the city of
Sydney you've got the Olympic Games coming up, there's going to be
after Atlanta enormous concentration on Sydney. When the Atlanta
Games are finished, the concentration on Sydney is going to be
immense, and we should use the opportunity to at least take this area
which is, you know, we're now looking at the question of World
Heritage listing for the Opera House..
JL Yes.
PM: and the Sydney Cove and treat it with the respect I think it deserves.
JL Well, let's hope it's financially viable. Okay, Prime Minister, thank you
for your time. It was good to talk to you.
PM: Right John, thank you.
ends. 



TEL PRIME MINISTER 0/ A
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP AND
THE BUSINESS COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA
COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS
The President of the Business Council of Australia, Mr John Ralph and I have
agreed on the critical importance of implementing a national competition policy
along the lines recommended in the Hilmer Report. A t our meeting in Canberra
today we discussed the benefits to the Australian economy that would flow from
further microeconomic reform.
Mr Ralph stressed that the BCA's top reform priority is the implementation of a
national competition policy. I emphasised that the States had an important role to
play In furthering Australia's economic interests. I said I hoped that, at the meeting
of the Council of Australian Governments In Darwin next month, Premiers and Chief
Ministers would agree to:
national competition legislation, which would
extend trade practices law to all businesses, including Stateowned
ienterprises and unincorporated entities
establish a national access regime for essential infrastructure
facilities establish a national prices surveillance system
establishment of an Integrated national approach to competition
administered by one set of Institutions; and
continued progress In specific reforms such as to electricity and gas.
I have assured Mr Ralph that business and other interested parties will be consul ted
on the details of national competition policy legislation.
CANBERRA 29 July 1994
BCA Contact: Paul Barratt PH ( 03) 274 7700 T2E9L:. Jul. 94 11: 01 No. 004 P. 01/ 01 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE SEX DISCRIMINATION ACT
SYDNEY, 29 JULY 1994
It's a great honour to be with you to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Sex
Discrimination Act.
When this Labor Government enacted the Sex Discrimination Act ten years
ago, it did so against opposition that was vocal, hostile and ignorant.
This Act was one of the most fiercely contested legislative measures in
Australian political history.
But then again, this seems to be the way of politics in this country: on the big
issues the ones which carry real weight it is always, and only, the Labor
Government that is capable of taking the bold policy step.
The Sex Discrimination Act stands as one of the most significant pieces of
legislation in our history.
But when the Bill was first brought to the House, it was pilloried as the
brainchild of radical feminists radical feminists supposedly intent on
destroying the nuclear family, creating a unisex society and, most dangerous
of all, defying the laws of nature.
Women would be forced into the workforce where they would wreak havoc
because of what one Senator described as " compulsory close cohabitation"
with men.
I should add this enlightened Senator went on to express the grave concern
that husbands would be surrounded by glamorous women intent on
seduction. Of course, the Sex Discrimination Act did not force women into the workforce
women have always been in the workforce.
What the critics at the time failed to understand was that women themselves
were embracing change. 
The dramatic changes in women's lives weren't being forced upon them by
the Government or the women's movement, it was the women themselves
who demanded more choices, better opportunities and freedom from
discrimination. But ground breaking legislation always brings out the high emotions in those
who want to remain locked in the closets of the past.
You only have to go back to last year and the racism and fear drummed up
over Mabo.
And we should always remember that when the Native Title Act was returned
to the House of Representatives for final passage the people's house
the Leader of the Opposition branded that day " a day of shame".
If we didn't have the Tories still with us today, it would probably be hard to
believe the Sex Discrimination Act caused the controversy it did just ten years
ago. The Act's underlying purpose was and remains very simple: to end
discrimination on the basis of sex, marital status or pregnancy, and to
promote community respect for the principle of the equality of men and
women. Since the Act's inception, more than 7,000 complaints have been lodged
the overwhelming majority of these employmyiitnf-elated:
And, contrary to predictions that the Act would only benefit an elite group of
women, complaints have come from all spheres of employment.
The Act has been used by young women many complaining of sexual
harassment by older women, Aboriginal women and women from non-
English backgrounds.
The Act has also been used by men.
But numbers of cases or complaints can never fully capture the impact of this
Act. This Act has helped bring about a change in Australia's cultural
infrastructure.
The values, it encapsulates, have found vocal expression in the working lives
of women and men, in all areas of activity and in all workplaces.
One journalist described it well when she referred to the " accidental
feminists" those women who do not consciously identify with the feminist
movement but who articulate feminist expectations and aspirations. 
These women, who tend to shy away from the " IF word", ardently support
equal pay and equal opportunity.
So, despite a remark from a member of the Liberal Party ten years ago that
" this Bill means nothing at all", the women of Australia know that this Act
means a great deal.
But this Act can't be effective in isolation it must co-exist with other social,
economic and political strategies for improving the status of women.
That's why the Government has consistently supported strategies such as the
provision of affordable, quality child care; the payment of family assistance
directly to women caring for children; greater access to superannuation;
affirmative action for women in employment; and better access to training and
education. On this tenth anniversary, I think it's appropriate that we pay tribute to the
many women and men who fought hard for the sex discrimination legislation
and who, in the ten years since, have supported the Act and continued the
fight for equality.
But I'm sure no one will mind if I signal out for special attention the pivotal
role played by the trio of Susan Ryan, then the Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister for the Status of Women, Anne Summers, Head of the Office of the
Status of Women at the time the Bill was debated, and Chris Ronalds who
was the legal consultant to the Office of the Status of Women.
Their work in conceiving, drafting and guiding the Bill through Parliament
earned them the label " Ryan's ruthless juggernaut".
At the time, I suspect it was meant to be an insult, but it soon became a
badge of pride, an apt description of the fierce and unrelenting determination
and energy of three women who wanted to make a difference, to change the
social order for the better.
In all this, it is important to emphasise that their battle for the rights of women
is part of a broader vision for a more egalitarian and socially just Australia
a vision this Labor Government shares.
This is a crucial point: by arguing for equal rights and equal opportunity,
women are not pleading for special favours, they are fighting for a better
Australia for both women and men.
The Sex Discrimination Act is often portrayed as radical and ground breaking
legislation.
And so it is. 
' p 4
But it is also a very pragmatic document.
Ten years ago, the Government had to concede a number of issues to get the
legislation passed.
The strategic victory at the time was to enact the legislation, to ensure we
had in place a solid foundation on which we could build.
And that's what we have done.
In 1992, in responding to the Lavarche Report Halfway to Equal, the
Government made a number of significant amendments to the Sex
Discrimination Act. We also foreshadowed other amendments.
Today, I am pleased to announce a further five proposals to improve the
effectiveness of the Act. I
First, the Government believes it is necessary to make a strong legislative
statement that clearly expresses our commitment that sex discrimination and
sexual harassment will not be tolerated in our society.
To this end, a Preamble will be inserted into the Act incorporating a general
prohibition on discrimination and a statement proclaiming the equality before
the law of women and men.
Second, to combat discrimination on the grounds of pregnancy, potential
pregnancy will be explicitly proscribed as a ground of discrimination and the
reasonableness defence in relation to direct discrimination on the grounds of
pregnancy will be removed.
These amendments will afford better protection to women in public life and
send a clear message that this type of discrimination will not be tolerated.
Third, we will extend the definition of the proscribed ground of marital status
to cover the identity or occupation of the complainant's spouse.
Discrimination on the grounds of spousal identity predominantly affects
women and is unjustifiable except in very narrow circumstances.
Fourth, we will simplify the definition of indirect discrimination and place the
onus on the respondent to justify the reasonablenes -s of tii-discriminatory
requirement. Tackling indirect discrimination is a key element in the elimination of
discrimination because the barriers to equality are often the result of
apparently neutral practices. 
However, due to the complexity of the Act's test for indirect discrimination and
the lack of public understanding on this issue, there have been only 11 such
complaints in the Act's ten year operation. I hope that these amendments will
raise awareness of this provision.
Fifth, the exemption extended to the Australian Defence Force for the
employment of women will be narrowed so as to only apply to combat duty.
In making this amendment, I'm happy to say the Government is' sirnply
reflecting the change which has already occurred in the Australian Defence
Force.
Women can now serve in all Defence Force positions except those involving
direct physical combat.
This has opened up many employment and career opportunities. Back in
1984, around 10 per cent of Defence Force positions were open to women.
Today, women can be employed in over 65 per cent of the positions in the
Army and over 90 per cent of those in the Navy and Air Force.
The sixth and final amendment concerns the special measures provision.
This provision recognises that there are situations where exact parity of
treatment between men and women cannot eradicate discrimination and that
extra steps are often required to facilitate equality.
Unfortunately, the rationale for this provision has often been misunderstood
by the community and narrowly interpreted by courts and tribunals.
To remedy this, the amendment moves the ' special measures' provision out
of the " Exemptions" Division of the Act and relocates it in Part 1 dealing with
definitions of discrimination.
It is hoped that this shift will foster recognition that such special measures do
not constitute discrimination but are a key part of the process of ensuring
equality.
The Sex Discrimination Act was a landmark piece of legislation when it was
passed. But like most laws, it needs to be scrutinised to ensure it is in tune
with current realities. It is good law, but we want to make it better.
The amendments I have announced today have the dual purpose of attacking
the structural inequalities that continue to exist and making the Act more
accessible. No doubt these proposals will encounter opposition as the original act did.
We must resist that opposition as we did then. 
I 6
I congratulate the thousands of women and the many men who fought
for the introduction of this Act.
I congratulate the thousands of women who have used the Act to redress
discrimination.
And I urge all Australians to support the Act in our stand for the full equality of
women and men.
Thank you. 



PRIME-MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ON ARRIVAL AT SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
BRISBANE AIRPORT
SUNDAY 31 JUILY, 1994
J: Prime Minister, how do you think this forum will make a difference to the
economic and environmental problems facing South Pacific nations?
PM: Well, I hope it does. I think, this is probably, in some cases, in some
places in the Pacific one of the last opportunities we'll have to do
something about forestry. I think we might be able to, we'll certainly be
able to talk about fisheries resources, about development of human
capital and tourism things which are of material assistance to the
community of the pacific. So, the South Pacific Forum has been a
useful forum in the past for discuissing these issues. I hope,
particularly with it In Australia on this, its 25th meeting, that we can do
something useful again, for the welfare of the Pacific Island
community.
J: But there's been a lot of talk in the past and not much has resulted,
how can you actually improve things this time?
PM: Well, I wouldn't say that I don't agree with that. I think we've made
progress on particular issues. The theme of this is managing
resources. This is the theme which has been generally promoted by
Australia and accepted by the leaders of the Forum countries. And, I
think, under the theme of managing resources be it in fisheries,
forestry, tourism, human development this, I think, is an apposite
and appropriate theme for now.
J: Why aren't you spending more time on Bougainville? Why has
Bougainville got such a low profile?
PM: Because it is a matter for Papua New Guinea. It Is not on the agenda
any more than aboriginal reconciliation in Australia Is on the agenda.
J: You've called for an urgent need for something to be done about the
environment in the South Pacific. How do you think youre going to be able
to convince the South Pacific that they should take some urgent action-now? 
PM: I'e already had a number of bilateral discu ssions with leaders and
prime ministers of some South Pacific countries about this subject
And, Australia has a lot to offer, I think, in terms of assistance we might
be able to advance in terms of management of resources and that will
be one of the things we'll be, certainly, suggesting.
J: Prime Minister, Pacific countries have criticised Australia for saying
that the South Pacific has to pick up its socks, are you concerned
about that kind of criticism?
PM: Well, I've never heard any serious criticism about that I think that
Australia has had to adjust itself in the last decade, of course it has,
enormously. This is a totally different country than it was ten years
ago. It is now an outward, competitive, confident place where before it
wasn't So, the adj * ustment task is one which Australia has worn and
Australians have worn and succeeded in. Arnd, it is a similar message,
I think for countries who we are giving substantial support to.
J: How willing are you to give them more aid, give them more of the
means to combat the. environmental degradation?
PM: Well, we already provide a lot of aid and I think it is a case of countries
have got to, themselves, articulate a program to manage their
resources on a sustainable basis.
J: How do you justify to the Australian taxpayer that we spend some thirty
per cent of our foreign aid budget just on the fifteen nations of the
forum given that population-wise, they don't really amount to a very
large number of people?
PM: Well, they are part of our responsibility, I think, as a developed country
in this part of the worid, in terms of aid and, particularly with Papua
New Guinea, with the former trust arrangements which we had for most
of this century. And, thats where that responsibility comes from and
by and large we seek to administer it sensibly, creatively. Other
developed countries, of course, have other priorities. Look at Africa,
for instance. France, for instance, has a substantial foreign aid budget
in the African region. We happen to live in the Asia-Pacific and it is in
this area that most of our attention is turned.
J: You are asking for a fair bit from these countries. Do you think that
they do have the resources to come up with. the solutions without...?
PM: Well, I don't think it is asking countries much than to keep an eye on
the sustainablity of their own resources. I mean, to not make that point
is to say, well, let resources get to the point where they are
unsustainable and then where do they go then?
ends. 



I PRIME MINISTER ( OVA~
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIVE TITLE ACT
Mr Downers position on abolishing the Native Title Act has revealed that he is a weak
leader without vision, without policies and without a commitment to social cohesion and
social justice.
Mr Downer saw the opportunity to deliver a cheap political line in Western Australia and took
it at the expense of one of the most important pieces of legislation ever enacted in this
country. He is attempting to create damaging uncertainty for what he sees as short termn political gain.
He has treated the Aboriginal people with contempt in exchange for some fleeting applause
at a party conference. He is clearly trying to be all things to all people and told the Western
Australian Uberals what he thought they wanted to hear.
It is a further indication that Mr Downer has no policies and stands for nothing.
What are the implications of Mr ' Downeres position on Mabo? Is he saying that he d ioes not
accept the High Court decislon on Naiv~ title? Is he' saying that worse than having no
policy he is simply happy to do what state Premiers, "' especially Richard Court', tell him to
do? What would he do after the Act was repealed?
What now of his coming PR stunt in the Northern Territory? Will he tell the aboriginal
people of the Northern Terrior that he is going to wipe out Native Title? Will he tell the
aboriginal people that land is no longer important to them? Will he tell them that they can
have health and education but they can't have land, either through native title rights or the
Land Fund?
Is he going to tell the aboriginal people that Richard Court knows what is best for them?
Mr Downer says he will announce his policies when he wants to, not when the press or I
want him to. Apparently, now he plans to announce policies when Richard Court wants him
to. Not now, not before the election but after the election.
I AUGUST 1994
BRISBANE 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
I AUGUST 1994
PM: Thank you for your introductory remarks. I think the first thing I would
like to say is that we've had an excellent day of informal discussions
at the Leaders! Retreat. This Is a day without officials, so that its not
as if there is the distraction of, if you like, documentation and notes et
cetera in the course of presentations and discuissions. Rather, an
informal discussion where the leaders can sit down and discuss
problems and review the progress of the. region. Now, we had a long
discussion this morning about economic growth rates in the region,
about per capita GDP growth rates relative to other similar regions in
the world, looking at ways in which we might improve our economic
performance, looking at some of the inhibitions to that economic
growth 2nd deciding that in some areas we ought to focus agin on
the theme of the conference which is resource management or how
to manage resources better. So, we had quite a lengthy discussion
about fisheries, airlines, forestry, tourism et cetera. And also I'll
come back to those in a moment also, we agreed to re-appoint the
Secretary-General, leremia Tabsi, and to decide that the Forum next
year will be held In Papua New Guinea, and the year after that in the
Marshall Islands, and the following year, in the Cook Islands. SO, I
think that the forum has produced some substantial outcomes and let
me just go to them.
In fisheries, leaders have agreed on the merits of a multi-lateral
approach to negotiating access to their exclusive economic zones on
the basis that they can better and adequately improve the terms by
negotiating on a multi-lateral basis, and where we believe existing
bilateral arrangements are adequate, they can be maintained in a
multi-lateral context This, I think, would be a substantial departure
from the nature of bilateral arrangements between Pacific Island
countries for the exploitation of their economic zones with some of
the major fish-conisuming nations, and tha the aim would be to lift
income in the area for what is one of the largest fishery regions, and
fisheries, of the world. So, we've agreed to agree on the merits to a
multi-lateral approach and we'll be using our, we believe we need to 
strengthen our forum fisheries agency capacity so it can ensure more
effective national control and management of the region's fisheries.
So. that of course will ensue in the next year.
On airlines, there was general agreement about the need to deal with
airline losses and the combined airline losses of the Pacific area now
equate to the aid which Is being provided by both Australia and New
Zealand, which means there's a very large drain on the net income of
Pacific Island countries. So, we agreed to look at the airline losses to
examine the option for a rationalisation of air services among Forum
island countries, perhaps on a sub-regional basis. That is, on a basis
where air route and air route management would be in zones that
made sense in terms of reach, access, service, price etc. Taking into
account, of course, the needs of sub-economic clients, that is, the
needs of some distant island countries where the service will be
perpetually sub-economic.
On forests, leaders have agreed to take further steps to prevent
unsustainable rates of logging and to ensure a reasonable return to
land owners and governments. During the afternoon, Prime Minister
Hilly and I made a separate statement and some Important
commitments which will assist Solomon Islands to manage its forests
more sustainably And, as a consequence of that, leaders strongly
expressed a strong concern about the exploitation of tropical forests
in the region and welcomed the recent initiatives by Vanuatu and the
Solomon Islands to halt the spread of unsustainable logging practices
Including the introduction of independent monitoring systems and
an agreement on the need to secure better and adequate returns for
the exploitation of this resource for national income purposes. The
forum also endorsed the undertaking of leaders to the Melanesian
spearhead group to examine uniform legislation procedures and
practices in forest resources and there, Australia and I think New
Zealand have offered assistance where that may be valuable.
We also had a discussion about the contribution which tourism can
make to the economies of the region and noted, in particular, the
need to protect the region's fragile coastal zones so that, again, with
some focus on the need to maintain coastal zones and also to try and
adopt better coastal zone management practices wherever it's
possible, for some assistance to be provided there. The recent report
by the Australian Resource Assessment Commission has led to a
number of conclusions and recommendations, which may have
application to the Pacific Island states, and the Government of
Australia has provided a booklet which is a guide to where these
sorts of services might best be assisted in Australia, or from Australia,
but with a renewed emphasis on the need to preserve attractive
coastal zone regions. I think it was in that vein that Prime Minister
Hilly made his announcement about the Marovo Lagoon, which is, of
course, one of the most attractive regions of the whole Pacific. And, I 
3
think it bodes well for the understanding which leaders have, of the
need to protect important parts of the environment
So, could I just sum up by saying that I think its been a very
productive day. Coming to conclusions about such things as
fisheries, the need to lift national income from them, airlines, the need
to reduce the call on national budgets, forestry the need to, again,
lift national Income and take steps to prevent unsustainable rates of
logging was. I think a very good and important outcome of the
meeting. And. of course, we will go into formal session tomorrow.
J: Prime Minister, Chris Hammer from SBS television, this new fishing
arrangement, could that be described in any way as a cartel
arrangement?
P: No. I think that it is important for wealthy nations like Japan and
South Korea to understand that they can't secure valuable resources
at sub-economic rates of return. And, what the existing arrangements
have shown is there has been a considerable exploitation of Pacific
Island countries, under-reporting of captures, insufficient monitoring
the multilateral nature Is not simply for any negotiation. But, rather,
also to look at fish stocks, the prospects for aquaculture in adding to
fish stocks and. also, better monitoring and better reporting so that
these small states can get a better return from their valuable, and one
of their few, natural resources.
J: Mr Keating, lan McPhredran from the Canberra Times. I'm wondering
if you expect any sort of a backlash from Malaysia on the issue of
environmental, combating environmental piracy, and will you be
raising that matter with Dr Mahatir or President 8uharto in the future?
P: I haven't mentioned Malaysia but I've just said that I think the
important thing is, that, again, Pacific Island companies are not
exploited by unscrupulous companies who then, not only pay
inadequate rates of return but also carry out logging practices which
would not be tolerated in a developed forestry culture. Now, I think
that, an understanding by wealthier countries who use these
resources and who exploit them, of the smaller countries, is
important And, whether, at the moment, of course, many of these
companies are Malaysian companies and Korean companies and
also some Indonesian companies. But, whoever the companies
belong to, I think that they should be encouraged to be good
corporate citizens, to not see an opportunity for exploitation arise and
then take It to the full. At any rate, the national governments involved
here are concerned about rates of exploitation and modalities of
forestry and are obviously taking rdmedlal steps to change it
J: Kelinga Seneviratne from IPS Newsagency. 
PM: Where are you from?
J: IPS Newsagency. Australia has been very strong on asking the
Pacific Island nations to restrict logging because of its environmental
impact. Now, also, now some of the foreign countries are going to be
wiped out from the map in a couple of generations because of the
greenhouse emissions and rising sea levels. As the Chairman of the
Forum and also as Australia is one of the major users and supporters
of coal, for example, would you, Australia, be willing to take the
initiative at this Forum to offer restricting mining and export of coal
and if not would Australia also be willing to consider opening up the
borders for environmental refugees from the South Pacific?
PM: Well, I don't tht~ s a very broad question. Lot me tell you this though,
that Australia's interest in this matter is not so much protection
against global warming. That is, the implication of your question is
that the forestry, Australia's moves on forestry, are self interested
ones which go to the international environment in which it lives. Well,
this is not so. I mean, that is a natural interest, but the predominant
interest is seeing a sustainable rate of exploitation of forests in the
Pacific Island countries, because at the current rate of exploitation
these reserves are going to go. But not only are they going to go, but
in the doing of it the exposure to high rainfall of the resuling terrain
will mean that a lot of the topsoil will end up in coastal waters and in
lagoons and in reefs, and affect the fishing stocks as well. I think that
Australia's interest in this Is to see that a. that there is a sustainable
basis for alogging; b. that the environmental despoilatlon is one
which is contained and manageable, and c. that national incomes are
rising. We are not doing this because of what one may see as some
threat to Australa in global environment terms. Now, the subject of
our greenhouse gas emissions and water levels is a subject way
beyond the capacity for me to detail at a press conference like this
and involves, of course, commitments by other countries and the
whole progress of international climate change conventions and the
commitment to those conventions by the major developed countries.
J Craig Skehan, from AAP. To what extent do you accept that
corruption by some Islands' officials and politicians has been a large
contributing factor to unsustainable agreements in resource areas
such as forestry. Was that discussed today at the retreat and, what
measures could be taken at the regional level to deal with corrupt
practices in resource areas?
PM: Well it was discussed today, but I couldn't say to what extent. That is
a cause of the rates of exploitation and modes of exploitation on now.
I think a lot of it is, perhaps a lack of comprehensive understanding of
the impacts of the agreement of logging licenses and exploitation
rates, which may seem feasible at the early stages of the exploitation
of a forest, but then seem more worrying later. I think that's what has 
happened now, and given the fact that at least two of the island
states have now taken action to introduce moratoriums on further
exploitation in certain regions and articulated a willingness to
renegotiate licences, I think gives an indication that whatever is the
reason for the permissible exploitation as to date, thats now being
reviewed. In the case of Papua New Guinea, of course, Papua New
Guinea is a much larger country with a much deeper resource base
and a multi faceted resource base and has much more of a capacity
therefore to be able to make judgements or professionally manage
the development of resources and to deal with the more predatory
behaviour of particular resource exploitation companies.
1: Victor del Rio from Eco Television in Latin America. Mr Keating,
about three months ago I attended a conference in which they were
inviting mining companies, Australian mining companies to invest in
Latin America, and during the conference they said that Latin
America was surprised because of the few restrictions that the
environmret using another task force. Is Australia willing to put
some kind of code of ethics to the Australian companies, when they
are investing in regions like Latin America to stop this practice of
using the in Latin America?
PM: Well, I am not aware of where one may say Australian companies
have, as a class of investors, exploited regions. They will certainly
exploit mineral and other opportunities in various parts of the world,
but. I should hope their international corporate citizenship and their
regard for the interest of other co untries and their communities is as
high as their regard in Australia. Thaes not to say that any realm of
commerce unfettered, and certainly unfettered by commitments of a
company to best practice in, particulary in resource exploitation,
won't be important So at this stage, I don't think we have seen the
case for Australia needing to say to its corporations that there should
be a code of conduct under which they observe, but I don't think youll
find an example of an Australian company that's involved In the
wholesale exploitation on an unsustainable basis and despoilation
that cause concern in this context Now, I mean, I'm sure all
companies around the world can be better corporate citizens and you
can take environmental concerns to the nth degree. It all a matter of
what the, proponents are prepared to do, what the licensing authority
wishes, and in that case it's mostly national governments, what their
concerns are. By and large, I think it's fair to say, Australian
companies will take heed of concerns expressed by national
authorities about particularly large extracting developments. I mean, I
wouldn't think, -in fat I know of no Australian company, certainly a
major one, involved in wholesale exploitation and under reporting of
Income, and that's one of the problems here. 
J: Janice.. from Radio New Zealand. Mr Keating, the decisions on the
airlines today, wilt this, do you expect closure of some national flag
carrying airlines?
PM: Well, I think it means that there is a willingness on the part of the
leaders to think about ways in which, I mean, let me put it this way,
what they are interested in is air services. not airline ownership
necessarily. They ame interested in the provision of air services and
air services at an effective and efficient pricing. Now, whether that
can be done, by, if you like, Pacific sub-regional carriers who service
a region of the Pacific including those places which will always
remnain sub-economic, or whether in fact this will need to be carried
on National budgets, is a moot point. Thats the point that needs to
be, that will be examined. I mean, I think what may arise, is tat, sub-
Pacific carriers could service a region and even so * inso me areas it
will be completely commercial, in others it will be sub-economic, but
not requiring the subsidies of the magnitude they require now. So it is
that willingness to look at multi-lateral, multi-lateral regional solutions,
and the drain on budgets which, I think, is causing leaders to
consider such an outcome, such an approach.
J: Richard Breeze from APP. Very simple question, you mentioned that
the combined losses of these airlines equalled the aid given by
Australia and New Zealand. Would you care to point out an
Australian dollar figure on that?
PM: Its around about $ 100 million or thereabouts. That is the combined
operating losses of the eleven airlines, which is around about, a bit
over $ 108 million dollars.
J. 0 Mr Keating, Sid Mart, Brisbane Couriar Mil. How would the fishing
contracts, the new multi-lateral fishing contracts be policed?
PM: Well, already the Forum Fisheries Agency has the capacity for some
monitoring facilities and as you know that one of the reasons why
Australia has developed a Pacific patrol boat program Is for policing
of maritime areas and maritime boundaries. But again, one of the
things that the review can address is how there can be better
monitoring and policing, and of course, with better income, all this
becomes more possible. I mean the fact is, I think many countries are
not receivng adequate returns and therefore, of course, diminish any
on budget costs for surveillance et cetera, a more mature structure
allows for that and I think that's the point
J: I'm Gladis Nofkn from the National ( inaudible) Mr Keating, the
FINKS delegation to the Forum were, yesterday, prevented from
attending the opening. Is there any reason why, and also what is the
Forumn stand on the FINKS issue push for self determination? 
7
PM; Well, that' not being dlsoussed today, I can only say that well, the
reason they did not attend Is because they are not members, that's
the reaso, and, but again, there-Is a dlose, a relatively close
association between Forum members and ema organisation, and of
course, that will be seen tonight, at tonight's dinner whli is being
hold, and wich Forum representatives will be attending.
J: Mr Keating, Susie Grey from Fiji National Video Centre. I was just
wondering if our Prime Minister, Mr Rabuka, sWoke to you about
SPARTECA Is there is any possibility of. Australia following Now
Zealand's example of a 6% reduction in rules of origin.
PM: No. I haven't had 2 discujssion with the Prime Ministe on this
occasion. I did at the last Forum, I think there has been soma talk
between our countres over the course of the last yewr, and there was
I think, some fear in Fiji that Australia was going to, if you like,
toughen the conditions under SPARTECA of rules at origin. That is
not so, but nor have we made them more conoesslonal. I mean rules
of origin exst for apurpose. If goods are being made In terms of the
rules in Fiji therm is not a problem in Australia.
Mr Keating, do you have anything to say on Mr Dowr's comments
today on Aboriginal health and your governmnenits record on that
Issue?
PM: well, ri just say this about Mr Downer, the thing Is that, the Liberal
party has again, the Liberal party of Australia, the conservative party
of Austraia has again demonstrated that it has no philosophy for
office, It has no policy virtually on Australia's identity. ft claims to
support the constitutional monarchy. it then says it's irrelevant and to
be ignored. ft seeks to deny justice to indigenous Australians by
saying it would overturn the histc Mabo agreement Wts not for
Alexander Downer to say what Aboriginal people hold dear, and like
most indigenous communities in the Pacific the spiritual link between
Aboriginal people and Islander people and the land is a profound
one. and the right to their traditional way of life and happines is tied
up in their access to land. It is not simply about health and oducation.
These are functional Issues whichi are dealt with under fuinctonal
appropriations from the Commnwealth either through ATSIC or
direcly. A reliance on health and eduction by Mr Downer is simply
an obfuscation for a policy to try and remove the opportunity for
indigenous Australians to have aoccss to land via Mabo. And, it
means that Mr Downer is being run by the worst elements of
consrvatve Australia and they, amongst other places reside in a
very generous measure, of course, in the state of Western Australia.
Sham an him, shame on him for contemplating it go much for Mr
Downers fresh start.
ends. 



P RIME-MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PIME MINISTR, THE HON P J KEATIG MP
SOUTH PACIFI FORUM RETREAT, KOORALBYN QID.
I AUIGUST 19U
PM:. Let me jst ay a couple of words abot Alexanr Downer over the weekend
and his remarks about Mabo. ttink the first thing it reveals is thW the
Liberal Party, agaln, has deosrtdthat It Is a party that has run out of
puff~ lts a party w* thou Ideas and, withou a philosophy. f t hopes to govern'
Aushralia but it has no philosophy. It has no policy an AuWWslIdentity a* d
what Wr Downer has * revealed over fte weekenid ti it 4oe 41 have any
policy of sodea cohsin either. He said he wovuld dismantle te MIbo
legisaif, aftr an efecfon vidory, stats promim reqired him to do so.
For ast; Kt he is not hisownm person scodly,. Mbois an hstpie= eod
legislation basd on an Important paec of Austrla law. That i, t
dedion by the figh Court What does Mr Downer think hie Is going to do?
Overturn fte High Court decision an Mabo? And, if not how wouid he give
certainty to tWte and Vive Ws to Aboriginal people without It? it Is amazming
that to Libeal Party, In this day wnd age. Is thnigof overturnin Mao at
9 tVow when othw Ulbeal gvnmtsof cotxrse, have extended land rights.
Andf4 ft W. s showa, I thnM9ta Ajmarier Downer is intent upon taldng
Austaa back'to * the. Mois. Alexande Dowiw is an old fashioned 1950s
LlJpolitican. The* problen for Rexder Downer is tatwe are ( n 1994
and the world has moved om
Could I say fiat not only that, but at this South Pwfic Forum a number of
leaders have complemented-Austraft aon the. Mabo legislation, on the fad
that we have mo* dour kndgens and , the essential quhmnent the
havm to reehrbish thi eainhpwith the land and Ut tite to Bmei land
and whee fthy wish, nrw atraditional riestyle. Anc, to make Maes
061.0nt for simply, somea passing -applause at a Libera party torlre
dispaying again, tht sort of esenial wiertyng bigotry abot giving
AborighMa people WWn when the--Pedfic Waders we heas wig only, I thik
souir thei view about whther Austal tie really s e light in comiing to
terms wfth their itidgeres. At any rate, it prve WhD~ oow~ n~ e r is
simpy about regressive policies, taking Astralia bc t fte IM. And.
not only Vi4t saying, not that we'll wee their policies in toe election but If alte
de eleotIon after he has supsdywon, then It comes up his bac to 
d-wg WfCY-hell chanoo it than So, ft public don't evan krw goin
moan eleon. wha? ti~ Policies rnlgt be.
J: You've used the ptmue, % ndMlin bigecy. wre you saying thtW Down
is bigtu?
PK_ I tdnk whiat ru haough the Westem Ajna Liberal pety isW~ tk
blgoy. Ane, to be puwKim ig 11c # W displays the worst kofincb lot me
say tise, displays Vou Liberal Party at ft wt. And, Wt Dvu Is alWays
toq i about NM1Wk FRau. luw ta Wksl up to. hhii walL rm qufb vm
Mr Froser would not have a bar at due sot eWN
J: Wbiud I be posibl to a. dzally claanl Op Mabo, egilan?
PM Wai W possible. WhaI toe pauiamlerti Ga do ft perfi~ amr~ m undo. But
by that stage, of moms, " wM-11 be dedtoars fe tuv~ w It. if. is toe
whole cormpaet nawimot of Woisat tam from &amp; t An toe HOgt Cout
dcision said w= s VWuIfum w= a uuative Wei In One Wfcfomm law. Rt dkhrt
any whd t of Me5h. ow-at wotu be dispersed, howA mut d be heard how
diakn viguid be agiated-. AM that wa done by the tegdbm and you've
got ariumbr of Coa~ ftIn rmw s~~ ipoftU 1 NSW, Vkdiii arsd so whom,
does it bay, I&amp; Downr? -It Mese him wdh go taistic oft Weft
Ausballan Lbera paty.
3: Prkvn Mkriser, can I jui ask you a. question on tou foniwn? How recephve
taim yui found Wiand leadr to yor msage tait sueinabe
PM: Witt I VMugt the opening sesion vrs very enwglng. We had sofme, I
dikvery winUftted &amp; W d nkgiig apeeches tm vorlms teadere
about MtMy and fisherles; mid hwun resoiau deekpnert utidi I an
sue ft wimruust VM WC got mWy tM a flying Stt olid I tnrV., today, OWu
WoftImhpMVe tUN1
J: You I* uk tw1 co an board taigN with yaw view?
PM: Well, 1 dortt partculaffly hove I, haven't got a pautcular se at pxoxps to
put to m Ifs about, a view. And, wo re ady seeing. in a so m firm
support fo tout view I hit nighs umprsabnru
I And how imorlait Is fts reftat today. and wWi do you hope to addeve
Pht Wak, I ft* Vtm r seE Is Iu1oort because It does give thm leaders a
duarms to spook kIrniaiy abou ct alv MhIcet eir econouis ond
' iafr smdile AnM, I tik bjildvn ft forum aound! a theme has been
very helpfu In mwentreta g ton debuie 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINSTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
PARKROYAL HOTEL., BRISBANE
TUESDAY 2 AUGUST, 1994
J: You've made some pretty strong criticisms of Greenpeace, are there
other factors involved?
PMV: Well, I didn't want to extend the Forum press conference out here but I
will take some domestic questions.
J: Are you concerned that Australia's willingness to train Indonesian
troops will in any way undermine the American human rights push in
that country?
PM: I don't think so. I think that the President has made his policy clear in
respect of China. That is, that one has a bigger influence on countries
when you are relevant to them and that is when the United States
made a decision on MFN for China in the same way as Australia has a
more relevant relationship with Indonesia than Wts had in the past on
all Issues including human rights.
J: Mr Keating, John Fahey has announced a public consultation into the
future of Circular Quay, today. You've got some strong personal views
on that what would you like to see done, and do you think a public
consultation is the way to go about it?
PM: Well, it's no substitute for leadership, and I hope the Premier has
written to me saying that he wants to engage the Commonwealth again
In a discussion about the financial costs of a chang to Circular Quay,
and we're quite happy to have the discussion. But we want a real one
and we want all the facts on the table.
J: So, you're prepared to. put some money in?
PMV: We are. But under certain conditions.
J: Whats your reaction to Alexander Downer's letter involving the
Ciftiens Initiated Referendum? 
PM: Well, I thought there was a very revealing piece in today's Canberra
" times where he admitted he had not told the truth six years ago when
questioned about his attitude to the Citizens Initiated Referendum. Of
course, this bogs the question, when is he telling the truth? -He will
have to let us know. And he told a press conference, he told an ABC
journalist recently, Paul Lyneham on the 7.30 Report he said, " I'm the
most open and honest person you'll ever find." Well, I mean generally,
if any of us in public life me, or John Hewson, or Bob Hawke, or
Malcolm Fraser came out and said, as Alexander Downer has said, " I
am the most open and honest person you'll ever find", yoU~ d get. a
horse laugh right through the cou~ ntry. He said this, and then has
admitted that he has told an untruth on this question of* Citizens
Initiated Referenda... which means you can't tell when he is telling the
truth. But, more than that the notion of him being the most honest
person around is actually debunked by himself, on his own admission.
Can I just say, though, that about his defence yesterday in respect of
Mabo where he says itVs all about Aboriginal health the Liberals
always put this in these terms: you can have Aboriginal health, better
health and better education, or land, but you can't have both. Where,
in fact is about improved. health and education and land. And, as any
number of people wise about this subject will say, irs the alienation
from the land which affects the welfare of aboriginal people. Now, this
Government has vastly improved funding for aboriginal health and
education, and of course last obviously so, in the response to the
Deaths In Custody Royal Commission. But, what he's about saying is
you get one or the other. And really, what ifs all about is essentially
appealing to the redneck group in the West Australian Liberal party
upon whom he has relied for support in his challenge.
So, ifs not surprising that today the mining and farming leaders are
concerned about Mr Downers ill-considered remarks because
repealing the Native Title Act or even saying you will, creates great
uncertainty as to tenure and as to title. Now, I know Richard Courrs
trying to do this with the High Court challenge. But they say no-one
will know the mining companies and the pastoralists say that no-one
will now where they stand if the act is repealed. So, the tribunal is, in
operation we're watching closely how it's working, and we think irs
working effectively. So, this notion that it needs to be repealed can I
Just say in seeking to help him, the Leader of the National party said
today in a press statement that Alexander Downer said he would
repeal the legislation, as an option, if iK proved the Act was unworkable
But thats not what Alexander Downer said at all. What he said was, " If
I have to repeal the Act to achieve our goals, then thars what I'll do."
No mention of unworkable that's only the spin being put on it by Tim
Fischer as a Coalition partner. So, the fact is, here, the Liberals are
up to their usual business say to the Aboriginal community, ' We know
better. We know what's beat for you. Ifs better health and better
education, but it's not land' When the Aboriginal community * say, " No, 
no, no, what we need here is access to land", and what-anybody in the
debate about aboriginal policy knows, Ws the alienation of aboriginal
people from their land which produces most of the problems in their
welfare. So, you know, the Liberals the point I made yesterday, let
me repeat the point the Liberal Party has lost its way as a political
party. It has no policy on Australia's identity, and even on things like
social cohesion, going as they must to how we relate to our indigenes,
they prove again even after the Mabo debate has been had, and the
Bill hat, been initroduced and passed they prove again that basically,
they are. about the policies of social division and can't give the lead as
a political party which Australia now needs. The Liberal Party is not
capable of giving a lead on these big issues of identity and culture and
on social policy, and Alexander Downer has displayed that again in the
last 24 hours.
J: Is Mr Downer himself a bigot do you think Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I made it quite clear yesterday. I noticed a bit of sloppy reporting
on this point I said that he was givng support to, you know what I
think is unrestrained bigotry on the part of the Western Australian
Liberals. Now, I don't know quite in the end where Alexander Downer
stands on this, but I hope that upon reflection, he'll recant from his
views of giving succour and support to these unworthy rednecks.
ends. 



T2EL.: Rug. 94 12: 45 No. 016 P. 01/ c
PRIME MINISTER 6/ 4
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P4 KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA-PACIFIC 2000 PROGRAM
I am pleased to announce today the establishment. of an
Australia-PacifC 2000 Program under which Australia will help Forum
Island countries participate In the Sydney 2000 Olympics.
The Games will be a significant event for the region and $ 1 million a
year will be spent on prograrns aimed at maximlsing opportunities for
South Pacific nations to be Involved and their athletes to participate In
the Olympics and, to benefit from them.
The program will involve assistance for sporting and cultural
vlsittexchaflges and youth activities.
It will include an Oceania Sports Assistance Program to be administered
by the Australian Sports Commission. This program will assist a range
of sports development activities within the countries of the region In the
lead-up to the Games.
The Commission program will enable elite athletes In the region to
develop to their full potential and so achieve maximum participation at
the 2000 Olympics.
Forum Island countries strongl supported Sydney's bid for the 2000
Games an Imporant element or which was a commitment on
Australia's part to extend the benefits of the Olympics to our region, and
to highlight the unique cultural heritage of the region.
The program fulfils this commitment.
Island countries also stand to gain significantly from the expected
tourism boom generated by the Games. Forum leaders in their
statement yesterday recognised the excellent potential for tourism
development In the South Pacific.
BRISBANE 2 AUGUST 1994 TEL 



SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
PRESS CONFERENCE BY FORUM SPOKESMAN
THE HON P J KEAING, MP, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
PARKROYAL HOTEL, BRISBANEt QUEENSLAND
TUESDAY 2AUGUST, 1994
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, I might say thank you indeed. I think that the Pacific leaders feel
quite proud of the achievements of this Forum. The outcomes have
justified our confidence in changing the format to bring the retreat to
centre stage. Allowing leaders to discuss privately real issues of
significance to their economies and societies has proven, I think that
the leaders are very much up to grappling with the big issues. And, I
think on the theme of managing our resource, which was the theme of
the Forum, they have shown that concrete actions go beyond words,
and there have been plenty of those, On the big topics I mentioned to
you yesterday, for instance, forestry, during the morning we held a
separate meeting of Forum Uimber producing countries thafts
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands
and Vanuatu and agreed to work towards a common code of
conduct on forests, to which companies operating in those countries
would have to adhere, and agreed to increase urgently the monitoring
of logging. And, we've agreed that forestry officials will meet within
two months to work on this, although we will be progressing the
monitoring more quickly than that This is in addition to that to which
we agreed yesterday about common legislation et cetera, which we
gave you notice of last night On fisheries, of course, leaders have
agreed on the merits of multi-lateral approaches in order to get fairer
returns than at present On airlines, leaders have agreed to examine
options for rationalising airlines in order to reduce losses, which are a
point which I advised you of yesterday. On tourism, leaders agreed on
the need to protect fragile coastal zones. Al offhk was confirmed
again today in the plenary session in ihe communique.
During this morning's meeting, we also agreed that South Pacific
finance ministers would meet to discuss ways of dealing with common
problems of public sector and fiscal mismanagement, where it might be
a difficulty, and to put remedial changes into budgets, which all of us
need to do from time to time. Finance ministers generally have the
burden of being at the hard edge of all change in governments,
particularly where the public sectors of governments are the
predominate sectors and, we think. therefore, a meetin of finance
ministers might be an appropriate thing to be doing. and where we 
might be able to share each other's experiences and look at trend
behaviour in fiscal policies. Other matters discussed and agreed
during formal sessions are covered in the Forum communique, which
of course, you have. Australia made two announcements, a South
Pacific 2000 program, which will help South Pacific countries
participate in the Sydney Olympic Games and benefit from them
because the South Pacific gave very stong support to Australia in its
Olympic campaign. And, also, additional support to South Pacific
countries under the SPARTECA trade arrangements for export
development and foreign investment promotion.
Overall, I think the meeting clearly shows the understanding that South
Pacific leaders have, of the urgent challenges we face. And, the thing
that impressed me, I must say, particularly, was the political will that
they all showed in seeking to manage those challenges, and their
willingness to actually grasp the nettle on big problems. I think the
Forum has again proven its value as an institution. The drive for better
management of our natural resources is something that each of the
leaders feels strongly about, and I think the results of the Forum reflect
a collective commitment to use our resources in a sustainable way. I
think the Forum concluded with the leaders fairly pleased with
themselves that in a much more concentrated period of time, in two
days, and with a theme for the Forum that they have been able to
maximise their time and the opportunity of their meeting together to
grasp these larger problems, and we now have a year to consider
those problems before the next Forum meeting in Papua New Guinea:
Now, rd be glad to take questions.
J Phillip Williams, ABC, one of the leaders I spoke to expressed concern
about Australia's record on greenhouse gas emissions and called on
Australia to make specific comfittments to adhere to the convention
and not to seek any exemptions from the individual conventions. Can
you give those guarantees that will take place?
PM That argument has been put about by Greenpeace and Greenpeace
wouldn't know a win if they tripped over it. Let me just tell you this
How many meetings of groups of countries like this are there, deciding
to monitor forests, deciding that they will look at sustainable
development in forests, particularly tropical hardwood forests, deciding
to look at replenishment of stocks in fish and management of fish
stocks, worry about sustainability of fishing fields, putting in place
mechanisms to approach major countries who deal in them? At some
point, organisations like Greenpeace, have got to say, well look, you
go around the world, you talk about climate change, you talk about the
big issues, and you don't get the response from industrial countries,
and you don't get them from the resource rich countries. On this
occasion you've got them, but you'd have to put it up in fluorescent
lights with neon tubes to get the message through to Greenpeace.
Now there is no doubt they will go around hawking their views to forum 
island countries who are sitting six to nine feet, two or three metres
above the surface of the sea, saying, well, and telling them
erroneously that tomorrow they'll be doomed. And then saying Where
does Australia stand? Well Australia stands very firmly on the
question of greenhouse gas emissions. It has been part of the lead in
the western world and industrial countries in doing this and again the
communique supports this. But again, this has to be a global
approach-All greenhouse gas emitters have to be treated in an
equitable way and thats where we're going to make a difference but I
think Greenpeace thinks that because the Australian Government has
a proudih envirimntal record and is keen about environmental issues
that Greenpeace will ride Australia to alone not in concert with
industrial countries to alone meet international greenhouse
emissions without others being inclined to that Well, they're wasting
their time. Because what we need here is a global approach and, not
a selective approach. But, more than that, isn't it about time that
Greenpeace and these other environmental bodies actually know when
they've kicked a goal? I mean they're all push and no pull. They're all
push on all these communities but when they actually get a win on
forest and they never know they've got one. They on their big
amorphous subjects. So so much for Green peace. Thank you for the
question.
J Stewart Parker, AAP, the Marshall Islands raised the issue again
today of turning a couple of their islands into some sort of dump for
nuclear waste. I think the President also suggested there may be
some sort of compact among the Pacific Island countries on this issue.
What's been the reaction of the Forum to the question.
PM I specifically asked the President whether he was seeking any
endorsement by the Forum. He indicated no he wasn't That he was
simply telling the Forumr advisedly that he'd set up a national
commission to look at these issues. Now that is within the realm of his
national sovereignty and of course it's the Marshall's prerogative to
consider these issues but its another thing to seek support for them at
the Forum. That he didn't do.
J Paul Smith, Ten Network, Whilst some of the leaders have endorsed
your concern over environmental matters, they've also raised the
question of compensation and seem to be indicating that they'd be
looking to Western countries, such as Australia, to help with
compensation of environmental issues.
PM Well it was never raised with me at any stage, not at any stage. Thas
not to say Australia won't help and do what it can, where it can. But
and as you know, I mean in respect of as the case in point the Marovo
Lagoon in the Western Solomons Australia has In fact agreed to write
off the servicing of a certain amount of-debtas a way of actually
encouraging that to happen and in financially assisting albeit in a 
modest way the Solomon Islands Government. But there hasn't been
any general approach by Prime Ministers or Heads of Government to
Australia about compensation.
J Chris Hammer, S05 Television. There's been quite some progress, as
you mentioned, on fishing and forestries but not on some of the other
issues outlined by Gordon Bilney earlier this year, namely population
growth and land reform. As Australian Prime Minister, are you
disappointed about that lack of progress?
PM I don't think you should see it as a lack of progress, I think everyone at
the Forums understands that these are problem issues for some
small island states but the conference had a theme to it and the theme
was Managing Resources and in that theme, we've sought in the two
day period of the conference to try and get some positive outcomes,
and the ones weve got Are very positive indeed and theyl require
work over the course of the year. Now, it may be at the next...
( inaudible)... thars: not to say that some of these other issues are not
being attended to by their national governments as time goes by, or it
may be that at the next Forum or the one after it, if we agree to
continue this, if you like, this focus on themes, that human resource
development education, population, et cetera may be a theme. But,
for the moment because there is an urgency about resource
exploitation resources an acute urgency resource exploitation,
and resource management was the theme, and it was of course
naturally to that we devoted our attention.
J Michael AFP, just to take you back to the Marshall Islands.
Although the President didn't seek endorsement of the Forum, did you
on behalf of Australia or did any of the Pacific leaders actively express
opposition to what he was proposing to you?
PM No because he was very politely advising the Forum of the fact that he
thought, given the fact that certain parts of the Marshall Islands had
been rendered by former nuclear testing as being uninhabitable, that
there may be a purpose and given the geological stability of the area,
in this study being undert aken. Well, these arre views, that's all they
are. These are views, but they are more than views from him, they are
advice that he set up a National Commission. This was not a debate
about the merits of this issue. It was a contribution to the preliminary
session, but I did-ask the President to be clear at the end, was he
seeking any endorsement by the Forum and he said no.
J Victor Larear from Mexico. Four countries from America and three
countries from South Pacific are members of APEC. Is there any
prospects of linking APEC with any organisation lik eFoufr
example? 
PM Well, Papua New Guinea is a member of APEC as from the next
meeting and of course Australia and Now Zealand are members of
APEC. So there is a fairly strong, if you like, some very clear
relationships there, between countries with South Pacific interests and
APEC so I've got no doubt that in any APEC context anything which
has a particularly South Pacific focus and needs to be put, there are
enough of us there to be able to put any view we think Is relevant to
the South Pacific
SCraig Skehan, AAP, Mr Keating, The Solomon Islands said they object
to a separate dialogue meeting with Taiwan being held down on the
Gold Coast rather than here in Brisbane, Is that a case of pandering to
the sensitivities of the PRC, and should organisations like the Forumn
allow differences between countries like Taiwan and the PRC to
interfere in normal discussions in AID programs and so o . n.
PM Well, we're the host of this meeting, and I think unusually as host we
are the first among a few who actually recognise the Government of
China as the Government of China, all China, and therefore, it
becomes germaine to any invitation we might be associated with, if not
issue, for Taiwan to come here. As you know, the PRO wanted any
dialogue with Tiwevan to take place in countries which recognise
Taiwan and outside of Australia. Now, as it turns out, we're having the
dialogue on the Gold Coast tomorrow, I think it is, and China will be
attending, that's the PRC will be attending the dialogue partners
meetings and will be attending tonight, the dinner which I am hosting
for dialogue partners and Pacific leaders, so I think honour is being
settled all the way around. I mean, China wanted the meeting outside
Australia, it isn't, they're still coming, Taiwan wanted it here, Wts not
getting its way, its down at the Gold Coast and I think thats a
reasonable compromise of interest and a reasonable outcome for
people who wanted benefit to from the dialogue.
J John Uri, Sydney Pacific News. Earlier on, Prime Minister, I raised the
question with Prime Minister Francis Hilly and the question was that
there is an agreement to provide 2 million dollars to the Solomon
Islands and he stipulated that there is a condition to that offer. Can
you stipulate what that condition is and also can you tell me whether
the Government was actually happy about that If there was any
condition attached to that offer.
PM No, I spoke to the Prime Minister some months ago saying that I was
concerned that one of the prospects for long term tourism in the
Solomons, that's the Marovo Lagoon area, may be deposited in some
way by forest practices and logging and that he said that this was a
concern of his and his Government's and the matter was essentially
left In his hands. What I said was that he also, at the same meeting.
approached me. about some outstanding loans to Australia, and I said
if he incurred costs in dealing with logging in the Marovo Lagoon area 
we might meet him part of the way by carrying some of these charges
ourselves. Now, I said that to him. There's been a debate in the
Solomons; about this issue and the Prime Minister at his own behest
made an announcement yesterday saying there'd be a termination of
all logging in that area and then went on to make a further
announcement which you now have details of. Let me just say I
congratulate him for it, I think it shows a lot of leadership and this is the
kind of Government I think the Pacific needs and particularly a country
like the Solomons who now find themselves faced with unscrupulous
practices in logging.
J: Maniko Horokawa from Yomiyuri Shimbum, Japanese Newspaper.
Regarding the fisheries Issues, I've heard that not from the Japanese
side, but the countries that have bilateral agreements wittJapn on
fishing at the moment are quite happy with what they have, so, how
soon do you think that they would get into multilateral agreements, and
have you set any timetables?
PMV: No, just that there is a general view that multilateral management of
this fishery area will produce better results for the countries concerned
and for, those who buy the product Because, we won't reach a point
where we have over exploitation of certain fisheries, and a long term
decline of fish stocks, which, for instance we've seen with the southern
blue fin tuna, which is a very popular, large, species of tuna in Japan.
IWs now not as plentiful as it used to be, and countries which consume
a large level of fish in their diet and Japan is one, is, I think will be
well served by an approach which says, let's make sure that we are
thinking about the habits of t hese migratory fish. What are the
influences on them? How might we protect them? How do we
guaratee the stocks exist? And, the other thing, how do we get a
decent price for the product? Now, its all of that, I think which has
encouraged people to take the view. Now, some bilateral agreements
may suit individual countries, others may not. As a rule, they don't
because, their proceeds are very greatly diminished compared to
some other bilateral arrangements. Understandably they want to
improve these.
J: La Monde from New Caledonia. The Kanak people from New
Caledonia have expressed, since a few years, that they want to
become observers at the Forum. Has this been considered at any
stage? -And, the second thing, what do you think of the right wing not
answering the invitation at the Forum since they have been invited a
few years ago?
PM: Well, look can I just say, it was not discussed at the Forum although of
course we, the -FLNKS come as unofficial observers to the Forum, and
have on this occasi'on. I mean that's fine, that relationship, I think is
working well, and this all depends in the long run on domestic
outcomes in New Caledonia. I think the Forum in a sense is, we are 
an interlocutor, we're not deciding, we're not playing a vital role, and
can't play a key role, in their political future.
J: Thank you Mr Keating, my name is Benito Falu from so much for
Greenpeace organisation. Just one question, are you going to honour
your commitment? Yes or no?
PM: I gave you an answer before, and that is that Greenpeace ought to
wake up to itself and work out where there's some value in the world
and not realise when Ws actually got a win like it has over the
weekend it just puts that straight in its pocket and goes onto the
next amorphous issue. Now, I think the Australian government has an
environment record, second to none in the western world. And, it
doesn't need to be kept up to the mark by Greenpeace. Nor are we
encouraged by the fact that a lot of the moderates have been largely
expunged from Greenpeace recently, which I don't think bodes well for
Greenpeace's influences on governments like Australia.
J: Mr Keating, are you concerned at Australia's willingness to train
Indonesian troops is in any way undermining..
PM: Well, I think we'll, I crossed the border yesterday, but I don't think I
should today.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THE HON PETER BALDWIN MP
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, THURSDAY, 4 AUGUST 1994
E &amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Well, thank you very much for coming. This is a, quite a proud
moment for the Government in honouring yet another election
commitment. I'm pleased and proud today, with my colleague Peter
Baldwin, to officiate at the start of what's going to be a large change to
income support in this country. And that is, with-the Home Child Care
Allowance, which is a substantial reform and one which will now
funnel, I think, transfer a $ 1000m from the budget and from what was
formerly the Dependent Spouse Rebate, to the daily carer of the
children usually the mother. So, that's to say, there's about $ 1 b
transfer from the wallet to the purse, and it's important to appreciate
that this is not all. All of this new payment includes $ 230m which the
Government has added additionally to the old Dependent Spouse
Rebate to make the Home Child Care Allowance a more progressive,
responsive payment. It means we will, for the first time, have built a
system of payments, in the main to mothers, directly to their bank
accounts upon which other changes can be built. And, as you know,
the Government is also contemplating has announced, in fact the
parenting allowance which will be built on the same administrative
system. Now, there's also an improvement in the way the allowance worked,
compared to the DSR and my colleague Peter Baldwin will go into
that in a moment but it will mean that up to 120,000 more families will
be assisted by the new measure. And there is, I think, 55,000 families
who will be eligible for the Home Child Care Allowance who were
ineligible for the Dependent Spouse Rebate. So, 55,000 families who
were ineligible for the Dependent Spouse Rebate will get the Home
Child Care Allowance, and up to 120,000 more families will be assisted
because of the new income test. 
The general point in all this is, of course, is that the Government has
delivered mightily in income support to Australian families. In the
period when the coalition was in office, the real value of family
payments for low income families in particular, fell by more than 2%.
Under this Government, we've given large real increases over 30%
in payments for low income families and let me give an example: a low
income family with two children now receive $ 153 per week. We've of
course indexed all family payments for the first time and we deliver
payments directly into the hands of carers. And this means that under
this Government nearly $ 6b has been transferred to carers, usually of
course, mothers.
And of course, we're committed to doing more, and in the context of
the recent Accord negotiations, I announced the new maternity
allowance for women who are not entitled to paid maternity leave. So,
there's an important social change here. A set of payments directly
a week directly paid to the carer at home, usually the mother,
and this will be apart from the value of the income support it will be
a step forward in developing a new payment system and a new
relationship between the Commonwealth and carers, usually mothers,
in this country. Now, I'd like you to see the advertisement which is a
simple one. We're now going to run it for you, I think probably one or
two times, and then I'll invite Peter Baldwin to say a few words, too.
Thank you.
( advertisement shown)
PM: Well, I invite Peter Baldwin now to add to my remarks.
PB: Thank you, and this, the Home Child Care Allowance is yet another
major structural reform to the system of assistance provided by
government to families with children. If you look at what's happened
over the past few years, there has been a major effort in this area by
the Government. We've seen the introduction of additional family
payment and it's very substantial real increase over a period of years,
and if you look at that part of the assistance to families there is a huge
improvement. This payment takes that a step further by replacing the
old with child rate of Dependent Spouse Rebate. It increases the
amount of assistance available and there will be about 840,000
families that will benefit from that somewhat increased level of
assistance for each.
But more significantly, I think, the payment is made directly to the
carer, as the PM said. And furthermore, there are about 55,000 low
income families that don't have a sufficient taxable income to benefit
fully from a tax rebate who will be on average, some $ 20 a week better
off as a result of this payment. It's also the case that it's a much more
flexible arrangement whereby a partner who might come in and out of 
the workforce, say that the child is sick for a number of months and a
person needs to leave the workforce, they can go right straight back
onto this payment rather than having to wait for the end of the financial
year and reconciliation through the tax process.
So, in those respects it is a major improvement. It does represent a
net significant addition by the Commonwealth in spending on
assistance for families. It's worth around $ 230 million a year more
than the old Dependent Spouse Rebate and a lot of that expense is
because, as I said, those low income families that couldn't benefit fully
from the Dependent Spouse Rebate will gain significantly from this. If
you look at the totality of assistance to families now, it is very
significant particularly that targeted assistance to low income families
where a low income couple with a couple of dependent children in
aggregate can end up with around about $ 150 a week in extra support
provided by the Commonwealth.
So, it is very significant. It is not the end of our agenda in this whole
area of assistance to families. In the White Paper we announced from
July next year we will be paying the new Parenting Allowance which,
as well as overcoming some significant disincentive effects to people
joining the workforce, we will also provide significant additional income
to low income working households up to $ 130 a week through the
Parenting Allowance. When the Parenting Allowance is introduced the
Home Childcare Allowance will be integrated into it. So, what we are
calling at this point, the Home Childcare Allowance, will in effect be the
base level of the Parenting Allowance that will be free of any income
test on the partners income and it will also be nontaxable.
So, as from July next year, significant further boost through the
Parenting Allowance which will then subsume and integrate the Home
Childcare Allowance. Put all that together and it is a very major
agenda and in addition to that, of course as the Prime Minister has
said, we are intending to look at a maternity allowance type payment
as well.
It is a very major effort in this whole area of assistance to families. We
pay enormous attention to equity in the structure of these things, which
I might say, is a sharp contrast with the Coalition. Every proposal that
has surfaced from them whether it be income splitting, whether it be
lumping together all the child payments and childcare assistance and
splitting it up on a per capita basis means significantly dramatically
lower levels of assistance to low income families and additional
assistance to families with incomes over $ 100,000. In vertical equity
terms there is simply no comparison between our approach to this
issue and that of the Coalition party. So, I think this should be
recognised for the major reform it is. We are exceeding our election
commitments in this area. This is a more costly package than the one 
we described during the election campaign and, I think, that is another
important point that needs to be recognised. Thank you very much.
PM: I think we would be happy to take a few questions if you would like.
J: Mr Keating, the Catholic Bishops have accused your Government of
using women as guinea pigs in the tests on the contraceptive drug
RU486 and say they are going to take their fight directly to you. How
do you respond to that?
PM: Well, I am in receipt of no approach by the Catholic Bishops at this
point. They may approach me, but as I understand it the drug trails
will be conducted in accordance with proper procedures and in the
informed consent documentation has been complied with under the
rules of the National Health and Medical Research Council. Anyway,
I'll wait and see what the Bishops have to say.
J: It could be assumed Prime Minister, that the Bishops are targeting you
on this issue because of your Catholic background. Are you entirely
happy with the testing?
PM: I'm not here to be debating that principally, but this.
J: Prime Minister, on another issue, Alexander Downer says that you
haven't visited Aboriginal communities and he has thrown out a
challenge for you to follow his footsteps.
PM: What? Visit them and take their land while I'm at it. Is that the idea? I
should visit while I announce they are going to repeal the Native Title
legislation. We saw Dr Hewson visit them in that sham a year or so
ago when the Aboriginal people of this country opened their hearts
and their hospitality to him and when we brought the Bill into the
House of Representatives to pass it, he said ' it was a day of shame'.
A day of shame. And, can I just say, yesterday when Alexander
Downer was credited with softening his stand on this he said ' 1 have
said that if we have to, we will repeal the legislation and put new
legislation in place, but let's just see how things pan out.' In other
words, he will repeal the Native Title Act and the Liberals will put a
new Native Title Act in place. That's softening his stand. Well, if that
is a softer stand, I mean, the thing he might tell us is what he is going
to tell the Western Australian Liberals next time he visits there.
J: How far are you prepared to go in terms of modifying the legislation to
meet the concerns of Justice French and also of the NFF and the
miners?
PM: Well, the Government has always been, I think, very sensible about
the Native Title Act. I mean, it was a complex piece of property and
cultural law that was written from a clean sheet of paper, developing a 
very large body of legislation and we've always said that at some point
in time as we see the Act operate there may be cause for remedial
changes and the person we would take advice from in this, of course,
is the Mr Justice French amongst others.
J: Mr Keating, do you think the Childcare Allowance is part of a wide
stream of family assistance the Government seems to have brought on
tap over the last few years. Can you explain the rationale for the
continuation of large funding into the family groups particularly when
quite a lot of it is unmeans tested
PM: Well, I don't think that much of it is unmeans tested. The very large
payments, I think, something like $ 3.6 billion which is the additional
family payment or the old Family Allowance Supplement has a very
tight means test about it. The whole point of it was to deliver very
strong payments, but within a defined income range. And then, of
course, the basic family payment or the old Family Allowance is
income tested because the DSR was non-income tested, it's being
paid across the board at $ 30 a week, but the basic structure of the
payments has been they are income tested therefore the Government
is capable of delivering much greater amounts to particular categories
of families. And that is, I think, one of its strengths. It's one of the
points that Peter made a moment ago about the equity in the system of
family payments under the Government under the Labor Party has
been to basically to help those who need the help most.
J: So, what do you have to say then to the suggestions from people like
Peter Walsh that the tendency in the growth of welfare payments that
will have implications for the tax base downstream, that the tax base is
simply too narrow to sustain the..
PM: I don't I mean, Peter might want to add some words to this. What
the Government has done over, now, a decade is to dramatically
change the priorities of former governments in their spending and
direct it to where we thought the priorities might best lie. And, quite a
deal of this has gone into targeted social security and family payments.
But, I don't see any demographic trend which is going to change this
other than, of course, with the aged pension which, of course, is
income tested and asset tested and for which we now have
occupational superannuation. So, the notion that we have got a set of
payments that are going to put up some inordinate pressure on the
Budget, I think, is wrong. I don't know whether you want to add to that
Peter.
PB: Well, just by way of addition, there have been a number of studies
done of the impact of the changes that have been made in the social
security system over the past decade and there is not the slightest
doubt that we now have a more efficient and effective instrument for 
poverty alleviation than we did at the start. We have around about
per cent in net terms, when you take account of tax clawbacks of social
security payments, now going to people who would otherwise be in
poverty. It is a very carefully targeted scheme and it has become a lot
more targeted over the past decade with the result that we do have the
resources to raise the real level of assistance to those who actually
need it.
J: But, you would have to concede though with this home childcare
allowance there is no benefit to equity or to income redistribution?
PB: What we are doing with the home childcare allowance is replacing the
old Dependent Spouse rebate which was seen as, if you like, a
horizontal equity measure rather than a vertical equity measure. It was
seen as being something there to recognise the additional costs to
families irrespective of their overall income of having children. So, it is
bringing across into the outlays side the Social Security side a
measure that has a strong horizontal rather than a vertical equity
dimension. But, you can't look at that in isolation. You have to look at
the totality of what we're doing and, as the PM said, the great bulk of
our payments are highly targeted with a strong vertical equity aspect to
them. They are focussed on the low income families, but this as the
DSR it replaces is part of the rationale is a horizontal equity one.
J: But, on the revenue side, you've got the customs base coming down..
PM: Look, Tom ( Burton) we are not here to go through the Budget. Surely
you are not saying at a launch like this we ought to have a discussion
about budgetary trends on the revenue and outlay side.
TB: I'm just trying to explore what's the durability of this sort of round,
talking in the general funding..
PM: Well, it's paid as the Dependent Spouse Rebate. It was there anyway,
but for the $ 230 million we've added to it. But, the important point is,
it's paid directly to, in the main, the mothers and that is part of the
reform. There is a transfer here within families and it's going to the
ones who need it most obviously and that's mothers. But, you know, to
beg the question then about I mean, I know you are short of things
for the column, but I mean, to get us here for 20 minutes talking about
the the state of the budget.
J: One area of child care that has been identified as being deficient is
long term day care places for babies and younger infants. What is the
Government doing on that one?
PM: Well, we have extended apart from the building of long day care
places we've also extended to the private sector, encouraged the
private sector, to be in the child care business. And, that's where we 
are going to see the substantial addition to places. There has been an
absolute explosion in places for child care under this government, and
after school care. And, of course, we have later in this financial year
the generalised child care rebate which you might see in a similar
presentation.
J: Is the aim to increase kids... ( inaudible)?
PM: Well, I think we're now into column space. Is there
J: I think, perhaps, Tom's point is, we've had a tax cut war on both sides
of politics, driven the tax base down, now we seem to have a lot written
about both sides competing for the family...
PM: That's wrong, that's wrong. What has, in recent times, driven the tax
base down, was the decline in economic growth. The notion that
you've got to hang on to fiscal drag to actually lift the tax and if you
give it back, you're in some way driving the tax base down, is for those
who want the biggest possible surpluses and the lowest possible
deficits in any circumstances. A group, I can say, well represented in
this room, today.
J: My attendant question is, is the family going to be a policy
battleground for the next election and are you planning more initiatives
for families?
PM: Well, let me just say this, the Government now, over a decade, has
carefully, studiously put into place enormous, equitable, beneficial
changes for families. The most obvious being the additional family
payment which is running at $ 3.6 billion. And, as well as that, of
course, there has been rent assistance and there are other things
which go to families. There is Medicare, there are a whole lot of things
which affect families other than direct payments. And, of course, there
have been the tax cuts which have gone, the great bulk of them, to low
income earners. When the Government was elected in 1983 the
bottom rate of tax was 30 per cent. It is now 20 per cent. And the tax
free threshold is greater. So, for families, there has been an equitable
shift of income to low and middle income families and the last tax cuts
were directed towards middle incomes. That's knocking the rate down
to $ 20,500.
So, the government has now, over a decade, put in steps, one after the
other, into building blocks, to build a system of payments to families
with particular focus on vertical equity. Now, this is another such
building block reform. This sets up a system of payments directly in a
linkage between the Commonwealth and the carers, mostly mothers.
We're not doing it because the Liberal Party have another idea about
how they could sneak their way back into office. It is being done, and
it has been done over a decade, consistently, with a view to equity. 
We're not responding to a set of poll driven things in research as the
Liberal Party does in its tax cut policies of the past and as it may
well be doing, now. The fact is, it should be obvious to everyone,
particularly everyone covering public life in this country who is in this
room today, that this has been on now, for a very long period of time.
We committed ourselves to the family allowance supplement, as it was
then called, in 1987, the 1987 election. And we introduced it in 1988.
J: Mr Keating, what do you think of the States' attempt to reassert
themselves in the federation, the new federation document they put
out on Friday?
PM: This will be a useful discussion at COAG. COAG has become quite a
useful body, I think, for progressing non-financial matters. And, ahead
of each one of these meetings there is a certain, you know, ritual
like the dance of the brolgas, everyone is out there doing their
particular dance and theirs came out last week.
J: What's going to be the biggest test? Is it going to be the rights and
responsibilities, is that going to be the real stumbling block or is it
simply the question of money, how big a bribe you have to pay?
PM: I think the Commonwealth-State relationship is a complex one,
particularly as the Commonwealth is now quite heavily engaged and
involved in micro-economic change and getting the states to the
barrier on micro-economic reform. And, also seeing, as I think we
believe, that the delivery of programs is best accomplished when there
is particularly in the social area when there is a unanimity of view
between the Commonwealth and the states about how that might best
be done. Now, in working through these program reviews, as we have
been in functional areas like health and community services and
housing, we are making, I think, a lot of progress. And, we are getting
better program delivery for the people who are to receive the programs
while, at the same time, overlaying that is a discussion about the
states' authorities and their efficiency, and competition policy. So, it is
a complex set of interrelationships and that is the point of the
discussion and the point of the meeting. Thanks very much.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE GRADUATE SCHOOL, INAUGURAL DEAN'S
LECTURE, 5 AUGUST 1994
1 am very pleased to have been asked to give this, the first of the Dean's
lectures, at the new University of Melbourne Graduate School.
This new school is a very good idea. It is bound to raise both the quality and the
quantity of research at a great University.
Because it is multi-disciplinary, it should be the scene of creative dialogues: who
knows what social and scientific benefits might flow when research into art or
history or literature crosses currents with engineers, mathematicians and
architects? The new school will create a much more pronounced research focus at the
University of Melbourne. It will of course make life easier and more rewarding
for the University's 7,500 post-graduate students. It will boost the general profile
of what is already a renowned institution both at home and abroad.
I would not like to be seen encouraging vulgar competition, but I should imagine
it will help Melbourne claw back some ground from Monash.
The School is an idea for the times we are in our future depends so much
upon knowledge and the use we make of it; our ability to secure a rewarding
place in the world depends upon it; our standard of living and quality of life
depends upon it; the sort of material, intellectual and aesthetic environment we
leave to our children depends upon it.
In fact this new Graduate School is so obviously a good idea we might wonder
why it took so long.
Not that I would pass judgement. When you have been in politics for as long as
I have you are no stranger to the phenomenon of good ideas passing by
ungrasped. Politics is a contest of ideas and for ideas. It is a contest between the ideas of
the rival parties between the greatest of all Australian political ideas, the Labor
Movement, and its opponents. And there is no greater contest of ideas than the
one which occurs within the Labor Movement itself. 
But politics is more than a contest of views. It is at times a contest between
those with ideas and those without them.
And in turn between those with the wit and persistence necessary to see ideas
made into reality, and those who are content to merely spout them and argue
about them. It is a contest between the pragmatists and posturers; the doers
and the talkers.
It is between those who want to go to the heart of things and those who forever
tinker at the margins.
Ultimately it is between those who are excited by the challenge of change and
those who recoil from it.
We should never underestimate the do-nothings and the think-nothings. They
are a formidable foe. For substantial periods of our history they have held
sway. Against obscurantists victory is never assured.
For myself, I find it difficult to comprehend any purpose for a political life other
than reform. I remain genuinely puzzled by those familiar parliamentary figures
who seem dedicated to no better cause than improving their smiles or perfecting
their rendition of the two-fingered sloth.
It pains me a little to say it, but I have been in Federal politics for a quarter of a
century. That is half my life and it doesn't take a mathematician to tell me that
the longer I stay the worse the ratio will get.
But a mathematician will not be able to explain why it is that the longer I stay the
greater grows my conviction why the experience of 25 years in the Federal
Parliament has turned a belief in reform into a thirst for it.
For instance, after twenty five years, I ask myself if I could not be forgiven
sidestepping the Hilmer Report on competition policy. Those States can be so
perverse. It would be so much easier to roll over to them.
How many Australians would notice if we did not insist that the State authorities
accept the same competitive disciplines as those borne by Australian business
and Australian unions.
The Commonwealth will get no credit for success, and all the blame for failure.
In political terms the States have nothing to lose either way.
So why take it on? For the same reason that we take APEC on. Or vocational
education and training. Or Mabo. Or Regional Development. Or the Republic.
Because the times demand it, the next century demands it and you can't do
justice to one without the others.
.-nI any -event,-4udge-the-job-n ow-and posterity will catch up with you. After twenty
five years in the Federal Parliament I cannot think of a single item of reforming
legislation not even the most flawed which has damaged the fabric and the
future of Australia in a dimension comparable to that caused by inaction or
regression. 
And what is true of this last quarter century is even more true of the one before it
it was not what they did, it was what they failed to do.
In a perverse way I thank them for it whenever I feel a bit run down I think of all
those years through the fifties, sixties and seventies when good ideas passed
Australia by. When the world passed us by. And it stirs me into action again.
In a healthy democracy you can defend to the death the right of governments to
do things you disagree with. But you can never defend their inaction they have
no right to slough off that responsibility.
You cannot defend a government which continually fails to see what's coming or
what's begging to be done.
If I have one hope for posterity it is that the Government in which I have played a
part since 1983 will be judged to have recognised and confronted the huge
challenges Australia has faced, and continues to face, in the last decades of the
century.
The politics of reform is a gruelling business and I confess to wondering
sometimes why we do it.
I also confess, entirely without apology, that power has a fair bit to do with it. I
never met a good politician who didn't like using it wrestling with it.
On the other hand I have met a lot of bad ones who shrank from it. And never
trust the ones who say they are not politicians would you trust a dentist who
told you he was really a boilermaker?
The best politicians make no bones about it. The best politicians want power
because they know that, for all its imperfections, as a vehicle for turning ideas
into reality a political career has no equal.
How you could get hold of power and just sit on it is beyond me.
In the end it is probably a matter of instinct. I mean in the end good politicians
and good governments are obliged to obey the human instinct to provide
security for succeeding generations.
In a very real sense politics boils down to a contest between ideas about how
that is best done.
In an ideal world, this would be too obvious a point to make. In the real world
the truth of it is pretty thoroughly obscured.
In the real world, all sorts of media and other imperatives combine with a
perfectly natural scepticism to create a climate in which the political system is
generally deemed at best a deeply qualified success, and politicians sometimes
strugU3Acz-rnatajn the! r-status as -normalVmembers of the species.
It is not a particularly bad thing it manifestly can't be. For the truth is that even
through the mists of cynicism you can see the contrary indications: by and large,
our political system serves us very well; by and large, our traditions serve us
well; by and large, as a nation and a people we have succeeded. 
And, in my view, we have never succeeded so well as we are succeeding now.
It is true we have the best conjunction of economic circumstances in memory.
It is true that we are now a competitive and outwardly-oriented economy.
It is true that we think differently about the world and our place in it.
It is also true that we have sophisticated and effective social policies and
programs with few equals in the world.
These are all measures of success. But there seems to me an even more
profound measure I mean the cultural shift, the shift in attitudes.
We are proving that as a nation we can live with change. We can adapt. We
can initiate change.
Who would have thought a decade ago that we would number universities
among our leading export earners?
Just as I am painfully aware of how rapidly my twenty five years in Parliament
have passed, I am conscious that many of you those of you who are still in your
twenties will have no memory of the things which used to plague Australia.
I mean things like one of the world's worst strike rates. Notoriously inefficient
work practices in key industries. Inflation dragging us down. Financial
regulations gumming up the works. A weak and uncompetitive manufacturing
sector. You need only go back another decade to find the White Australia Policy still in
existence. The great task of the eighties was to make Australia an international player in its
own right. To make it competitive, outward-looking, phobia free.
It is very useful to be reminded that within half a generation such things fade
from the public memory.
It comes as a bit of shock, for instance, to think that the great majority of this
year's first year university students were not born when John Kerr dismissed the
Whitlam Government.
It is a reminder of how quickly generations pass, and of why one generation
cannot waste time in getting the ground prepared for the one to follow.
And why governments must not sit on their hands. Why governments must
provide for this generation and the next. Why they must, therefore, be prepared
to embrace change and encourage the people to embrace it.
The pace of change quickened in the eighties. It is moving even faster now.
But we can keep up. A decade ago we couldn't. 
A decade ago you wouldn't see, up the back of The Economist where they keep
the economic indicators, Australia leading the world not just in growth at
present, but in the international forecasts for growth and for inflation.
In December 1983, Australia's growth was the lowest in the industrial world.
Australia's inflation was among the highest. Today it is among the lowest.
Quite unthinkable a decade ago. And no less unthinkable was a manufacturing
sector with exports to rival those in agriculture and mining let me tell those of
you who were not present at the time, in the 1970s the orthodoxy was that
Australia could never succeed as an exporter of manufactures.
We could never be sufficiently competitive, it was said, at least not without
adopting the wage rates of the developing world.
No one then imagined that a decade later Australia's fastest growing exports
would be elaborately transformed manufactures. Or that overall exports would
represent 20 per cent of GDP.
Or that, whereas in the early eighties about 3% of our GDP was invested
abroad, today it is 20%. Or universities and colleges would become principal
players and principal earners in the new export culture, the new era of
internationally traded services.
I could go on for a long time about these remarkable changes, including those in
education and training. I could point out that whereas 4 in 10 young Australians
completed secondary school in the early eighties, 8 in 10 do now. And I could
point out that we are about to expand vocational education on the same scale.
But the most important lesson to be drawn from these changes is not their
individual dimensions but the general revolution they imply. It is not just what
they have won for us so far it is what they assure us of winning in the future.
For they have meant that we are competitive. They have meant that we are
players. That we now have a presence where we didn't before. That, as markets
became global, we have adjusted quickly enough and dramatically enough to get
into them.
As Asia became the most dynamic economic region in the world we have
directed our national focus there, and our companies have moved to take
advantage of the extraordinary opportunities. It is no accident that as I visited
Jakarta to talk to President Soeharto about the forthcoming meeting of APEC
leaders in Indonesia, a huge Australian trade exhibition was being held there.
The fact is that we are on the threshold of an unprecedented era of opportunity,
one in which by our own efforts and according to our own lights we can deliver
the great promise of Australia. We are in with a huge chance.
We. have . only. got-to.-this-stageby overcoming our inertia. In an article in the
Australian on June 1 this year, Xavier Pons wrote the following: 
Is there a common point between, say, Mabo, the Industrial Relations
Reform Act, multiculturalism, the push for an Australian republic and the
upgrading of Australia's military cooperation with Indonesia? Could there
be some logic to it all?
Beyond the diversity and specificity of these recent developments, one
can detect the premises of an unprecedented cultural shift as Australia,
somewhat reluctantly, leaves behind the comforts of illusion and braces
itself to face reality on its own terms.
Xavier Pons is right. There has been a cultural shift. There is a common point
between those legislative landmarks. There is a thread of logic binding them.
And it is most definitely about facing reality.
And I would say there is another thread: one which links the Government's
willingness to legislate on these big issues with the willingness of Australians to
make changes of comparable dimensions in their own lives in their workplaces,
in their schools, in the way they go about their enterprises, in accommodating
multiculturalism, in recognising the new realities.
If I might regress for a moment to the matter of the contest between inertia and
reform: we got this cultural shift by exposing ourselves to necessity. That is the
essence of it.
There remain a few people on both sides of politics who disagree, but the fact is
undeniable only by establishing an environment of necessity did we get these
changes. Nothing else would do.
The recognition of necessity has driven change in the past decade and it will
drive it in this one. There is no greater weapon against the tendency to inertia.
No better way to expose and defeat those without ideas and policies or the will
to realise them.
In doing so, it has been essential to maintain the social equation. In fact we are
in the vanguard of progressive social policy.
Compare our health system with other countries; our welfare system; our
legislation protecting womerrand programs to expand their opportunities; our
system of family payments; our recently introduced " jobs compact" and other
measures to assist the long term unemployed announced in the White Paper
compare our social legislation with the advanced countries of the world and you
will see that we have recognised change will not work, and is not worth
attempting, if the social and cultural fabric of the nation cannot be kept intact.
And we have kept it intact. Most importantly we have to make sure the
measures announced in the White Paper are effectively delivered, and the longterm
unemployed are brought back in touch with the labour market.
There. is-a. great-deal more we can do to-make our social system deliver more
opportunity and more security. And there is a great deal we are doing reforms
like the Home Child Care Allowance I launched yesterday. 
7
The important thing is to keep the equation in balance we must maintain the
social safety net and extend equality and opportunity through progressive social
legislation, but the same purposes are also served by measures to make the
economy more dynamic and competitive.
Without them, there would be infinitely less opportunity, infinitely less chance for
the next generation of Australians.
Deregulation taught us not just what was needed, but what we were capable of.
It brought out the creativity in us. Non-restrictive immigration policies and
multiculturalism brought out the tolerance, and the capacity to build a much
richer society.
The new openness of the 1980s exposed us to the world and in so doing, as
never before, exposed us to ourselves. We see ourselves more clearly now, I
think. We have a better understanding of our capabilities.
I think we need to bring the same principles and the confidence we have
developed from exercising them to every significant realm of our national life.
I believe Australians have every right to see their era as one of unparalleled
achievement. Our history is often said to be built on a succession of noble
failures, and our national character is said to reflect this.
Romantic and agreeable as this interpretation is, I think we can now aim to
launch Australia into the next century on a tradition of success.
As a politician I believe in stirring Australia's economic and social broth. I think
we should engage the whole of it. I think it puts more strength in the brew, and
brings out our best, most generous and creative qualities.
I have always thought that there are more of these in the Australian community
than the polls and the media would generally have us believe.
I profoundly believe in Australians belief in themselves their seriousness of
purpose, their capacity to rationalise their way through problems.
That is why I was confident we could pursue the just cause of Mabo and win
and why I remain confident that the legislation we introduced will survive every
petty and mean attempt to undo it.
The Native Title Act will deliver to the Australians of the twenty first century what
we have not enjoyed the foundations of justice in the relationship between
indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. It will be a foundation for greater
confidence and national self-esteem.
The same of course can be said for the Republic.
There. arerany. number. of. reasons why. Australia should become a Republic. The
simplest one and I think a perfectly sufficient one is that an independent
nation with an independent destiny, and with traditions and a way of life which
are uniquely its own, ought not to have a foreign Head of State. 
8
And those who believe this is not the case should tell us why. I have not yet
heard so much as a shred of a good reason other than the weak refrain that the
Queen is irrelevant.
I hear them say " if it ain't broke don't fix it". This of course is a doctrine of
inertia. It is an argument for the perfectly preserved horse and cart.
Or I hear them say there are more important issues. This is true, just as there
were more important issues a century ago when the Federation was designed
and passed by the people.
Or I hear them say as John Hewson said the other day having an Australian
as Australia's Head of State is not important. Yet as recently as the 1950' s
having the Queen of England as our Head of State was considered to be terribly
important " the crown as an abstract notion" united us, Bob Menzies said.
And it is true in the 1950' s that British monarchy constituted a significant element
of Australia's national sentiment and national cohesion. Our Head of State then
commanded great respect, affection and loyalty.
But there is no denying that the British monarchy no longer commands that
respect, affection and loyalty. It is equally true that our interests have grown
increasingly away from those of Great Britain, and that the proportion of our
population who have come from non-English speaking backgrounds has
dramatically increased.
And it is just as true that these trends will continue.
So what do we say to the next generation of Australians? What do we say to the
Australians of the 21 st century?
That, even though the British monarchy has little or no relevance to your lives,
values and aspirations, we will leave it with you?
Or will we say we had the wit and the will to bequeath to you a Head of State
who stands for the things we believe in? Who stands unambiguously for
Australia? An appropriate Head of State, in other words.
So I say it is important that Australia's Head of State be an Australian. I say that
it will be an appropriate mark of our achievements as a nation not least of our
achievements in recent years.
As you will have gathered today, if you have not gathered before, I hold an
emphatic belief that politicians and governments should lead. That is what they
are elected to do and paid to do.
And recent experience leaves me in no doubt that when a lead is given
Australians will respond businesses, unions, communities, institutions like this
one. will -respond..
But governments work within a system which has been determined by the people
and which cannot be changed in any fundamental way without their approval.
The Government has invited the people to change the system and the people
are now responding. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE, FRIDAY, 5 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, what are your comments on Mr Downer's statements
on land rights over the past twenty four hours?
PM: Well, despite all the comic fumbling, as entertaining as that has been,
the harsh reality is that at the end of it, what does it mean for
Aboriginal people? What he says he will do is that he will repeal a
Commonwealth Native Title Act and replace it with some other act
which is confected between himself and the States and in the case of
the Northern Territory, that he will rewrite the Northern Territory Land
Rights Act which must mean that the unfettered right of the veto which
Aboriginal people now have would be taken away. That's what it
means. So, people may be amused by the fumbling and the stumbling, but the
hardness underneath it is he would repeal the Commonwealth's Native
Title legislation and has not resiled from that. Will replace it with
something that he puts together with the States while at the same time
knocking around the unfettered veto that Aboriginal people enjoy
under the NT Land Rights Act. That's the hard news of it. And, of
course, when he was pressed about why he had made all these
policies stumbles he then said ' I was pretty tired and pretty emotional
and I made a slip'. Well, when you hear me say that you can write me
off. Say ' that's the end of Keating. He said all these things, just write
him out of the action.' I mean, I would be ashamed to say something
like that. But, the thing about Mr Downer is he doesn't express any
such sense of shame about not knowing his work, but in stumbling
through it, keeping the thread of the hard message in tact. And, that
is, in the end there will be less rights for Aboriginal people.
J: Do you write him off now as Opposition Leader?
PM: No, no, I don't write anyone off in this game. No, no. 
J: But, can you understand that he might have been a little bit overcome
being actually out there with the communities and going to a
corroboree and things like that?
PM: You either know your work and have your principles set or you don't.
The fact is he went out there after having said on the week-end he
would repeal the Native Title Act which provides a title to Aboriginal
people who have a traditional association with the land. Now, there
can be only one point in that. That is to deny them land. You see, the
old Liberal refrain, they get out there talking about health and
education and/ or not and/ or but, or land. And, the truth is it is
health, education and land. They want to say it's health, education or
land and that's where, I think, the callousness of Mr Downer's view
emerges.
J: Do you think he has learnt anything from the trip?
PM: Well, I think, he has probably learned that you need to have a defined
position about where you see the rights of indigenous Australians.
How you see their role in society in this country, their role in the social
compact that we have, the unwritten one we have. And, Mr Downer
regresses back to those views held by the conservative rednecked
part of his party.
J: a complete lack of understanding?
PM: Well, I don't think it's a lack of understanding. I think it is a callous
disregard of their interests. I think he understands what it means. I
mean, if you go and say to an Aboriginal person, ' you now enjoy a right
under the Native Title Act which you may not in the future enjoy when
we repeal it or you have a right of say over development on your land
in the Northern Territory which we will take away.' I mean, he
understands that.
J: Mr Keating, have you actually visited the Aboriginal communities
yourself?
PM: I have visited Aboriginal communities over the years in various parts of
coastal New South Wales and western New South Wales, but more
than that I put my money where my heart is in the years I was
Treasurer and Prime Minister. Last, of course, with the response to
the Deaths in Custody Royal Commission where we made an
enormous further contribution to funding for Aboriginal people. Now,
that's what it is about. I mean, it is about knowing where your values
are and where your principles are and putting them into effect.
J: Prime Minister, Justice French's remarks suggest a prima-facie case
that the Mabo law, the Native Title Act is somewhat flawed. 
3
PM: No, look, if you look through the property law of Australia get the
property law of Victoria out or of New South Wales it will be a
massive set of volumes. Writing a large piece of property and cultural
law from a clean sheet of paper, which is what we did with Mabo, was
an enormous undertaking. Like any major piece of law it will change
over time and need to be fine tuned, but the principles won't change
and the Government won't entertain changing the principles. So, for
those who are working in the system, working with it, we'll listen to
what they have to say, but I'm sure nobody working in it will want to
change its principles. And, were anyone working in it recommend to
the Government that it's principles should be changed well, of course,
the Government would resist such a change. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
1995 PAPAL VISIT
His Holiness Pope John Paul 11h as approved a program for the Papal Visit to
Sydney In January 1995 to commemorate the Beat ification of Mary MacKillop
as Australia's first saint.
The ceremony of Beatification, which will take place at an open air Mass at
Randwick Racecourse on Thursday, 19 January, 1995, will mark the
achievements of an Australian woman who displayed a rare appreciation of
Australia as a nation. She encouraged thousands of young women to follow
her example of creating a better standard of living for all Australians,
especially the dispossessed.
His Holiness has the following engagements in Sydney:
0A public Ecumenical Welcome on the Festival of Sydney stage in the
Sydney Domain, will be held shortly after his arrival at Sydney Airport
during the early evening of Wednesday, 18 January, 1995.
0 On Thursday 19, January, His Holiness will meet members and
associates of the Josephite Order at a service at St Mary's Cathedral.
a His Holiness will also visit the Josephite Convent Chapel in North Sydney
where he will pray at the MacKillop Tomb before the Mass at Randwick
later that day.
Pope John Paul will leave Sydney Airport early on Friday, 20 January.
I hope all Australians would join in welcoming the Pope to Sydney for this
historic occasion.
CANBERRA 8 August 1994 



-7.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MOURA MINERS
The mine disaster at Moura touches us all. Today the hopes and prayers of
all Australians will be with the eleven men and their loved ones.
What has happened there Is a terrible reminder of the dangers which
mineworkers continue to face, and the anxiety which their families and
communities must endure.
In recent years the people of Moura have suffered more than their share of
tragedies. So long as a glimmer of a chance of rescue remains we earnestly
hope that they will be spared another.
CANBERRA 9 AUGUST 1994 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SYDNEY CASINO
The decision by the New South Wales Government to build the new casino In
pyrmont Is regrettable and I call on Premier Fahey o reconsider this move ' in
light of thie widespread criticism it has attracted.
A major casino has the potential to significantly benefit Sydney through
Increased tourism, more jobs and a wider range of entertainment. It could
help make Sydney an even more lively city.
But, the casino has to be the right building in the right location. The middle of
Pyrmont is patently the wrong location for such a large structure.
The decision to site the Casino in Pyrmont runs counter to the character of
the area and to the finer textured development that we are trying to achieve
under the Commonwealth's Better Cities Program.
The Better Cities Program for UltimolPyrmont also aims to reduce traffic
congestion and pollution and increase the residential population of the area
in a way sympathetic to its rich heritage.
Today's press reported that the Sydney City Council Intends to challenge the
plan for the casino In court. I trust that the parties will work towards a
satisfactory resolution that will be of lasting benefit to Sydney.
CANBERRA 9 AUGUST 1994 



SPEECH OPENING OF THE ROYAL PERTH HOSPITAL NEW WORK -A
OPPORTUNITY Ladies and gentlemen. I must say its nice to be in a hospital to talk to
healthy people: people here because they are being armed against the ills of
unemployment I am especially delighted to see trainees from the Royal Perth
Hospital Youth Program and from the hospital's Jobskills intake in the guest
list. Today we are here to launch Western Australia's first New Work
Opportunity. In so doing I'd like to reflect on what the White Paper on Employment and
Growth means for the unemployed, for employers, and for the community in
general. Working Nation was released some months ago, yet the press, employers,
and the public have not yet realised the full significance of the White Paper.
The extent of the Government's commitment, and what it means for the
unemployed, has yet to be brought home.
The Job Compact creates for the first time a definite end to the
unemployment experience of individuals. This is a significant extension of
the social safety net for unemployed people.
By giving the long term unemployed a job, through either New Work
Opportunities, Jobstart, or the training wage, we are saying that we will not
let the unemployed stay in unemployment indefinitely.
We will help you. The job offer, the central component of the Job Compact,
will replace drifting and lack of motivation with hope and a real chance of
finding permanent work.
This is not something that has happened before.
Solving unemployment is not easy. While most Job Compact jobs will be in
the private sector, we will not be able to place all Job Compact clients with
private employers. 
New Work Opportunities provide the chance for local communities to develop
solutions to their regional development and employment problems.
New Work Opportunities are designed to provide work and training to
unemployed people placed on them and to produce social benefits as well as
growth in local communities.
New Work Opportunities are one element of the 160,000 jobs that will be
provided to long term unemployed people under the Job Compact each year.
Working Nation will ensure that the unemployed share in the economic
recovery, The Green Paper Restoring Full Emnployment noted that some 80 per cent
of all long term unemployed people who obtained full time jobs in 1992 did
so through their participation in labour market programs.
This tells us a lot.
If long term unemployed people are going to share in the economic recovery
and find jobs then they need active assistance to do so. This is the basis of
Working Nation.
In keeping with our election promise to not turn our backs on the
unemployed, there will be some 645,000 labour market and entry level
training commencements a year by 1995-96.
Over a four year period from 4 July 1994, we will spend a total of $ 10.3
billion on employment and training initiatives. This represents an enormous
extension of training positions and active labour market assistance.
Government commitment and money, however, is not enough.
To achieve the White Paper objectives we need the commitment of the
community, unions, and employers.
Royal Perth Hosvital
The Royal Perth Hospital's commitment to the unemployed is a tremendous
example for employers. 
The Now Work Opportunity is only the latest in a series of employment and
training projects at the Royal Perth Hospital.
It follows the success of the Royal Perth Hospital Youth Program. The youth
program initiative was funded by the hospital. Through it, 20 long term
jobless young people got a foot on the employment ladder.
Most of these young people went on to find permanent employment or to
enrol in full-time study.
This year alone, the hospital has provided 10 unemployed people with
Jobskills, placements. Five of these participants have remained with the
hospital. Royal Perth Hospital has found what many employers find when they hire
long term unemployed: contrary to the myth, the long term unemployed
have a lot to offer to employers.
Of course, we do not expect people who have been unemployed for a long
time to walk straight into a job without any help to make the transition.
We know that long term unemployment affects motivation and health and the
ability to cope with the demands of employment.
Case management will ensure that unemployed people are able to make the
transition from unemployment to work mrid be aii a~ jet to their employer.
Job Compact clients will receive one-to-one assistance with training and
other pre-employment needs prior to placement in a job.
Since case management of Newstart clients began in March this year, over
65,000 unemployed people have entered case management. Success stories
are already emerging. People that have been unemployed for periods of
three, five, and ten years, have been gaining full time employment.
Employers should keep in mind that long term unemployed people they take
on under the Job Compact will be provided with support by case
management before, during, and after their placement.
We are also going to enlist the help of private sector, community, and
industry case managers who know industry and understand unemployed
people. 
The RPH New Work Oogortunity
The New Work Opportunity we are launching today will provide placements
for 100 Job Compact clients over a one year period. That is 100 people who
have been unemployed for over 18 months will receive a job and training for
a period of six months under this project.
The positions will be new job opportunities and will focus on employment and
training, both on and off the job, in a range of occupations.
Positions will be filled as; laboratory assistants; pharmacy assistants;
orderlies; clerical and medical records management assistants; and in stores;
sterilisation and autoclaving9; patient care; and landscape gardening.
Clients participating in the program will be able to apply for permanent
employment at the hospital as positions become available.
And they will receive job search assistance at the conclusion of their New
Work Opportunity placement.
New Work Opportunftie8 Else1where in Australia
The Royal Perth Hospital project is the first New Work Opportunity in
Western Australia. It will be the first of many.
In New South Wales two New Work Opportunity projects have already
begun.
The Parkes and Forbes projects involve the creation of major tourist facilities.
The Parkes project will provide employment opportunities by the creation of
Memorial Gardens to commemorate Australian soldiers who have served
overseas. The Memorial Gardens will be based on overseas battlegrounds and will link
in with other tourist attractions in the area such as the Cowra Japanese
Gardens and the Botanical Gardens in Orange.
The Forbes Local Council will build on the town's profile as Australia's tidiest
town to attract a larger proportion of tourists arnd travellers in the area. 
Other New Work Opportunities in the pipeline include bush tucker farms and
processing plants in outback NSW; landscaping and re-planting of industrial
sites; and expansion of home-based care to people in need.
New Work Opportunities will be concentrated in the growth areas of
environmental repair, eco-tourism, and community services.
Area Consultative Committees are being set up around Australia to align with
local government areas and natural labour markets.
A major aim of Area Consultative Committees is to devolve some ot the
responsibility for DEET programs and services to the regional level. As they
are established they will provide the means for local communities to
participate in the development and selection of New Work Opportunities in
their region.
In short, New Work Opportunities provide a a chance for innovative
approaches towards regional unemployment to be explored. And they
provide local people with the chance to choose, develop, and manage the
project. Conclus2fn So may I encourage everyone, especially employers, to respond to the
Government's challenge in the spirit of the Royal Perth Hospital to start
thinking about how they can help unemployed people in their local region.
There is so much work to be done: we have the workers, we are providing
the funds. All we need now is your commitment and imagination.
I wish the Royal Perth Hospital and the Centrecare SkillShare every success
with this project. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
REPORT OF THE CENTENARY OF FEDERATION ADVISORY
COMMITTEE I have received the report of the Centenary of Federation Advisory
Committee, 2001: A Report from Australia.
Premiers and Chief Ministers have also received the Committee's report,
which was launched today by the Chairperson, Joan Kimer.
The Council of Australian Governments ( COAG) agreed last year to establish
a broadly based committee to advise it on goals and strategies for the
centenary of federation in 2001.
COAG decided that the Committee should comprise representatives of each
State and Territory, a Commonwealth appointed Chairperson and such
further persons, appointed by the Commonwealth, as might be needed to
ensure that the Committee as a whole was broadly representative of the
community. The report provides the basis for public debate, consideration by COAG and
consideration by Individual governments on how best to commemorate the
centenary of federation.
Importantly, the report represents the results of a consultative process in
which the Committee has visited all regions of Australia and held wideranging
discussions with governments, with local authorities and community
representatives. It canvasses a range of proposals to help Australians understand the
meaning of the centenary of federation, to celebrate our achievements as a
nation since federation, to strengthen our national identity and celebrate our
diversity as a people.
In addition, the report discusses a number of social, economic and
environmental projects of national significance. 
2
COAG and Individual governments will now study the report carefully.
The commemoration of the centenary of federation, and the events leading
up to it, provide an opportunity for all Australians to celebrate the
achievements of the first hundred years of federation and to reflect on the
challenges facing our nation as we approach the 21st century. I hope the
entire community will participate whole-heartedly in it.
I would like to commend Joan Kirner and her colleagues on the Committee
for their work and to thank them for the energy and commitment they have
brought to their task.
CANBERRA August 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO JAPAN
I will pay a short working visit to Japan on 5 and 6 September.
Japan is Australias single most important economic partner and we have an
increasingly close and broad-ranging dialogue on key regional and global
Issus. I have not yet had an opportunity to meet Prime Minister Murayama and I
attach importance to regular consultations between us. I will also have
discussions with other Japanese political and business leaders.
I expect my talks in Tokyo to focus on regional issues, especially APEC. as
well as on our strong and diverse bilateral relationship.
CANBERRA 11 August 1994 



TEL
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF " AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS 1945 1995"
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, CANBERRA, 14 AUGUST 1994
1 am very pleased to be here once more at the Australian War Memorial.
I don't think I have been to any public building more than this one in the
past two and a half years.
This is understandable enough. World War 11 is fifty years away and we
have had a series of commemorations not just here in Canberra, but in
Darwin, Kokoda, the Coral Sea and Thailand. And in Great Britain and
France just a couple of months ago.
But the Memorial has been doing more than merely observing the
passing of these anniversaries. Their Initiative has brought me here for
the inauguration of the Vietnamn Memorial, the Entombment of the
Unknown Soldier and the Children of the Holocaust exhibition.;
I have been deeply honoured to participate in these occasions, and like
everyone else, deeply moved.
This Memorial is one of Australia's great public institutions: a
storehouse of our collective memory and an icon of our faith.
It does its job superbly and for that, obviously, a lot of credit has to go to
the leadership and staff.
Yet I'm sure those same people would agree that there Is something at
work in the Australian community which makes their job easier.
For the fact is the sentiment that emerged from Gallipoli, the Western
Front and the Middle East in the First World War, does live on.
TEL: Huq 4 9 : 21 No .003 F 1 -' 0j 
TEL: 1 u. 94 9 : 2 INO.-003 P'. 02/ 04
2
The nation has no forgotten. In fact, I have grown quite certain that the
tradition of Anzac ' will inspire and unite us through the next century no
less than It has in this.
The national response to the Entombment of the Unknown Soldier alone
suggests that new generations will find in the legend of Anzac powerful
symbols for their own faith. For an enduring Australian faith.
Our celebrations of the fiftieth anniversary of VP Day and VE Day will
express that faith and we hope will significantly strengthen it among
young Australians.
The generation we will commemorate and thank was a heroic one.
They were born of the Australians who had endured World War I and
the Great Depression, and who had been denied so many of life's
opportunities by those tragic events. From where we stand we might be
tempted to think it understandable if they had lost their belief in Australia
and humane and democratic values.
They didn't. They fought a war in defence of the country they loved, and
they bequeathed to their children the opportunities which they had been
denied. They were nation builders.
Our freedom was their legacy: the robust democracy we enjoy, the
security, the marvellous continent which is ours, the unequalled personal
freedoms. But they left us more than that. They passed on a tradition and a faith
for us to live by the Ideals of courage and sacrifice, the principles of
mateshlp, and the conviction that wherever we come from on this vast
continent, whatever divides us, we are Australians. By their example
they taught us about the ties that bind us, and our common cause.
And by the same example they compel us now, not just to remember
them, but to pass on the lesson to our children.
We hope that the commemorative events we plan for next year will do
this. We also hope, of course, that at the end of these celebrations
Australians will have a much more thorough appreciation of the War
itself and the nature and extent of Australia's Involvement.
Today I launch " Australia Remembers 1945-1 995": a program of
activities that will culminate on August 15 next year, the fiftieth
anniversary of the final peace. 
TEL: 15. Au9.94 9: 21 No. 003 P. 03/ 04~
3
It is a substantial program which I hope will engage the attention and
involvement of all Australians, which will honour our veterans and all
those others who served In non-military roles, and which will deepen our
understanding of events which so profoundly shaped the story of
Australia. The focus of the program will be on Australia and Australians: the
veterans of battles like those In the Middle East and Greece and Crete
and In the air war over Europe: and those who fought in the Pacific War,
the war to save Australia from Invasion.
We will remember their service, and the grief of those they left behind.
We will remember all those who lost their lives and those who lost the
ones they loved.
We will remember those who served at home in factories and on farms
that generation of Australians who stoically endured the dislocation of
their lives and the hardships which the War necessitated.
We will remember the great achievements and the great spirit of the
times. We will also remember those who came from war torn Europe to make
their lives here, and who by doing so made all our lives so much richer.
When I opened the Children of the Holocaust Exhibition here at the
Memorial earlier this year, one of the survivors told me that she had
made her home In Australia because it was as far away as possible
from the terrible events she had witnessed.
Over the next year we will celebrate the contribution such people have
made to Australia. And we will re-affirm our faith in Australia as a place
which has opened Its heart and mind to people seeking refuge from
wars in many parts of the world.
I hope " Australia Remembers" will add to our nation's understanding and
confidence about our place In the world and our capacity to play a
creative and humane part in It.
I hope it will encourage us to recognise how important It Is for a nation to
believe in great ideals to have them at the forefront of our ambitions.
And I hope It will help us recognise how important it is to believe in
ourselves. 
I EL 4
We want to involve every Australian community. We want all
Australians to be touched by it.
All who contributed to winning the war and making the peace and all
who benefited from those triumphs.
We want Australian women involved as never before in such a
commemoration. The great sentiment which this Memorial embodies must never be
allowed to drift away from them, or any group of Australians.
If those ideals are to continue to provide inspiration and faith for
Australians in the twenty first century the story must belong to every one
of us as the peace which came in 1945 belonged to us.
Thank you 15. Aug .94 9: 21 No. 003 h. U 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
PRIME MINISTER'S RURAL AND REGIONAL TASKFORCE
I am pleased to announce that the Rural and Regional Taskforce headed by
the Member for Page, Mr Harry Woods, will be visiting Launceston tomorrow,
to discuss the Federal Government's range of business improvement
programs.
The taskforce will meet local government, business and industry
representatives. The taskforce will discuss the formation of AUSINDUSTRY and the existing
Department of Primary Industries and Energy Agribusiness program, which is
now incorporated within the AUSINDUSTRY framework.
The taskforce will also visit several enterprises and facilities funded under the
Agribusiness program.
For further information: Mr Harry Woods, MP ( 066) 426 356
CANBERRA August, 1994
111.8 1/
71/ 94 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ERINA FAIR, CENTRAL COAST, NSW
WEDNESDAY 15 AUGUST, 1994
J: today's cash rate rise, is it the last for this year?
PM: I think the main thing is the Government wants to see the recovery
remain sustainable. And, that means that we want to be able to
maintain low inflation and the way to do that is to keep a watchful eye
on inflationary pressures. And, I think, the fact that this is happening
around the world, in the United States, in Australia, is a very good
thing for a prolonged recovery, more jobs and lower inflation.
J: So, do home owners need to batten down the hatches?
PM: I don't think so. I think that some of this may flow through to housing
some, some. But, I think there is a very competitive housing market
now. The chance of all this three quarters of a point going to
housing rates, is pretty slim.
J: What's this going to do to business investment and employment
growth?
PM: Well, I think it will encourage the investing community to believe
inflation is truly in check, in Australia; that we'll maintain our
competitiveness; and, if anything, I think it will just encourage people
to believe the recovery will be longer.
J: With the economy growing faster than government forecasts, can we
expect another government financial statement later in the year?
PM: No, the Government brought a Budget down in May and the economy
is growing in the sort of, general, region of the Budget forecasts. But,
I'm happy to say that we're the fastest growing economy in the
Western World. The main thing is, though, we want low inflationary
growth and that's what today's decision is about. 
2
J: Won't the rise in interest rates take some of the steam out of that
growth?
PM: No, because I think the profit share in the economy is so high, the
strength that underlies the business community now, for investment...
Remember this, we've had a recovery now for a couple of years I
think, for about ten or twelve quarters and yet the investment phase
is just coming. So, we've got all of that to enjoy.
J: But, there's pressure now on the Accord, won't that also create...?
PM: I don't think so. There's not a lot of pressure around the wage market
at the moment, we've just not long ago done a deal with the ACTU for
the bottom end of the workforce two lots of eight dollars. So, at the
moment the Australian economy is ticking over, in terms of wages and
inflation, very nicely. And, of course, most particularly with growth and
jobs employment. That employment growth we saw a week or so
ago 90,000 for the month and unemployment falling half a
percentage point is indicative, I think, of our capacity to maintain
reasonably strong employment levels.
J: Prime Minister, is Mr Hawke's book receiving the attention it deserves?
PM: Well, I said something about that yesterday and that is all I want to
say.
ends. 



4" I,,
4
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ECONOMIC PLANNING ADVISORY COUNCIL NEW ARRANGEMENTS
Today I am announcing changes to EPAC. Its tenth year of operation
provides an appropriate time to make changes to enhance its future role.
EPAC has contributed substantially to promoting a broader consensus
and understanding of Australia's medium and long-term economic and
social prospects.
There has been a convergence of views among major groups in Australia
that was unthinkable a decade earlier.
EPAC discussion and consultation was the early linchpin for that process.
Similarly, EPAC's reports have helped inform and shape debate on a wide
range of issues including: foreign and public sector debt, savings and
investment, population ageing, growth potential, productivity, public
sector benchmarking, enterprise bargaining and micro-economic reform.
I now wish to build on these achievements by creating a new advisory
group, by developing and focusing the public information work of EPAC,
and by establishing a capacity for related special projects in order to
extend EPAC activities.
In order to improve my access to new ideas and new ways forward in
business and economic matters, I will be appointing a new " Eropornic
Round-Table", to replace EPAC Council. The members of this small1 group
will include the Treasurer and creative business achievers and
independent-minded individuals who are thinkers and doers. The aim is
to avoid simple interest group representation and to have flexible
. memberskip-afrangements-in order-to -keep -the ideas flowing. I will chair
the Group and relevant Ministers will be invited to attend. The Group will
give attention to the possible role for the Government on key strategic
issues and to links to broader social concerns. Initial composition of the
Group will be announced soon when members have agreed to their
appointments. 72/ 94 
I thank all present and past members of the EPAC Council for their
contribution to developing our medium and longer-term thinking and
policy. I will be. meeting with many of these members in the numerous
other fora which have emerged for interchange of views, and I look
forward to those continuing associations.
Turning to the Office of EPAC, it is my intention that its widely respected
work in producing public reports on medium and longer-term issues
should continue. For many today, the name of EPAC is associated more
with these studies than with the meetings of Council. The small group of
past and present staff of the Office of EPAC deserve credit for this
achievement. The acronym EPAC will continue with the re-establishment of the Office
of EPAC as the Eoaomic Planning Advisory Commission. The
Commission will continue to publish accessible and authoritative studies
as in the past, but I wish the opportunity to be taken to develop a more
thematic focus, with EPAC producing fewer but high quality reports. For
1994-95 the Commission will look at three themes of fundamental
importance for Australia's medium and longer-term future: Globalisation,
Investment and Growth, and Work Patterns.
In addition, I am asking Professor Glenn Withers, the head of EPAC, to
establish a capacity for related special projects which will allow EPAC to
broaden the range of its activities to include provision of policy advice on
medium-term issues in selected areas. EPAC will retain its wellestablished
role in co-ordinating for the Commonwealth submissions on
the Budget by business, trade union and community groups and reporting
publicly on their content. It will also strengthen public discussion on
medium and long-term issues through seminars and conferences.
In particular I am asking EPAC to convene a major conference on Long-
Term National Strategies to be held in Sydney on November 24-25. This
Government has long taken a farsighted view of the country's direction
and has acted upon that. At the same time, it is appropriate that we
take stock periodically beyond the immediate political arena. The
Government-has a--commitment-to hearing-broad debate before policy
decisions are made. This Conference will do this and will itself help
define the longer-term work program for EPAC. More details of this
Conference will be announced soon. 
Finally, I intend that the Commission be able to undertake task force
work on suitable projects as requested by Government. These could
cover a. wide variety of topics with a medium-term focus. They would
mainly be directed at reporting over 3-6 months periods and tapping the
best talent from outside the public service, including as task force heads,
and obtaining transfer or secondment of top expertise from within the
public service. The projects may often have a sharper policy focus than
for regular EPAC studies, but will still benefit from EPAC's remove from
policy implementation responsibilities. I will announce the initial projects
of this kind shortly.
The Commission will be responsible to the Prime Minister, as is the
present Office of EPAC.
The changes I have announced today will increase still further the
contributions to be made by EPAC in identifying the issues underpinning
our future, for filtering the arguments and evidence and for discussing
the issues in a balanced and authoritative way. I also look forward to
meeting with the new " Economic Round-Table" as a new source of
insights for the Government.
CANBERRA 16 August 1994. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE OPEN LEARNING AGENCY OF AUSTRALIA'S
INTERNATIONAL TELEVISION PRODUCTION " THE GLOBAL
ECONOMY", PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 16 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed Tony ( Pritchard), as Executive Director of Open
Learning, Professor Logan, Vice-Chancellor of Monash and David Hill,
Managing Director of the ABC and other distinguished representatives of the
Embassies that Tony has mentioned and other people who have been
dramatically involved with the Open Learning Initiative and ladies and
gentlemen. Well this, of course, is not the only launch today. But, I'll bet pounds to
peanuts this one has a longer term influence on Australia than the other one.
And, particularly as we are now, I think, as a country so well placed to
understand what multi media combinations can do, what telecommunications
technology is capable of, to understand that in these instruments we have a
device, which fashioned properly, can extend particularly educational
learning opportunities to thousands, indeed millions, of people who wouldn't
otherwise have had these opportunities available to them.
Australia is, I think, at the forefront of technology change in the western
world, particularly in the OECD area, and in my notes there is a reference to
the fact that of a survey done recently of many countries in the region, the
survey showed that Australians felt more comfortable with technological
change than was the case with many of the communities in our region. A
chart in the Far Eastern Economic Review last week showed that Australia
was.-tbe.... ority-regional. country comfortable with the rate of technological
change. By contrast, the people of South Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines,
Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Thailand and Japan all thought
the rate of technological change was too fast.
I think this is a very encouraging statistic and, I think, it is particularly as we
are now starting to learn about broad banded services and convergence and
that in not so many years from now we'll work, learn, shop, play and 
communicate in ways most of us can't today imagine. We've already
developed and are developing networks in Australia and, of course, anyone
who goes to automatic teller machines knows that that is so. And, in its
myriad forms the information highway has found its way into Australian
schools and universities already, into libraries and hospitals, into government
departments like DEET, into local governments, and as a consequence, we
are really starting to understand its spread and its opportunity.
It is for that reason, with some substantial pleasure that I established, last
year, the Broad Band Services Expert Group headed by Brian Johns whose
interim report I have now just received. It is a very good report. I think
everybody who wants a window into the future should read it. It is an exciting
report and one which for all the challenges it presents, should give us
confidence that Australia can be at the forefront of change in the global
economy and the information highway, because of the fact that we have
natural skills in content, in software, just as today we are launching the
telecourse " Global Economy". That kind of software product is the sort of
thing that Australians are capable of and the information highway is going to
be very much about content. The debate now is principally about hardware
and whether the cable is going to be rolled out here or there or how many
channels can be put on it, but it is essentially about content and we are a
content strong country and education has been one of our greatest strengths
and one of our primary strengths and it's a matter of exceeding pleasure to
me that our educational institutions are right into the information highway and
the opportunities to advance learning via these particular technologies.
So, it is against that background I am very pleased to be here today to launch
the " Global Economy" and it is, I think, a great example of the quality
intellectual merit and international co-operation rolled into one. Let me at this
point congratulate the three major Australian players in the enterprise. The
ABC whose staff made this co-production with their United States, Swedish
and Dutch partners such a success. Monash University and in particular
Professor Richard Snape and his colleagues for their distinguished academic
contribution and Open Learning for showing that co-operative endeavour and
higher education can produce material equal to any in the world.
So, " Global Economy" I think we can say, is a truly global product produced,
in the main, by Australians and it will earn export dollars for Australia and
more than that it will present to the world the face of Australia in the 1 990s. A
country with a global perspective and a pervasive belief in learning and
innovation. Tony. -Pr4thard-said-An -This-introductory -remarks that the " Global Economy"
and, in a sense, the distance learning movement are heralds of the future.
And, when Peter Baldwin first approached me in 1992 about Open Learning
and the Open Learning Initiative I thought there was a great opportunity here
to establish a facility whereby we could encourage students who may have
not qualified for matriculation, who may not for any number of reasons been
able to go on to university at a particular time, that we could by the Open
Learning Initiative develop curricula where students could join it and, that is, 
anyone could enrol in a course regardless of their background, prior
experience or educational qualifications and having then succeeded in
picking up units in the course, if they wish, stream themselves back into
mainstream campus activities. In other words, they get a second go, a
second shot at education.
You see how the Government is thinking in these terms. First of all the high
participation rates in schools, the additional places in tertiary institutions,
then spreading open learning beyond that as a catchment for people who
may have dropped out of the system and then building beside the universities
the TAFE system so that in vocational education there could also be career
opportunities mapped out. Tomorrow we are speaking about that very thing,
that is, how students in Years 11 and 12 can start to take on units in TAFE, to
start streaming themselves and get TAFE accreditation for their longer run
education. So, there is an exciting panoply of options there and a large part of that, I
think, apart from just the primary strengths of the participation and the higher
commitment to places in tertiary institutions in this country, I think, that the
Open Learning Initiative and Open Learning has a tremendous potential and
particularly for students who don't, because of parental circumstances or
geographical circumstances, can't find it easy for themselves to get
themselves into mainstream tertiary education or tertiary institutions.
Now, the White Paper on employment and growth Working Nation was
also at pains to stress Australia's future depends on ideas, skills and
knowledge of the workforce. And, if we are to be a high value added export
oriented economy, we need to continually upgrade our skills and we will also
need to find new and more effective ways of developing skills into the future.
In all of this, I think, it is incumbent upon us to take responsibility for our own
learning and this is where, I think, distance learning again comes through
with flying colours. Through distance learning programs such as Open
Learning anyone interested can learn about economics through productions
such as this one or learn a language, gain skills in statistics and marketing or
learn more about our own history.
One of distant learning's great strengths is that it can help break down the
artificial barriers between various education and training sectors. It is going
to take a lot of the, if you like, formality and structure out of our educational
structures and institutions. Just as businesses are increasingly making use
of outsourcing and telecommuting, Open Learning is increasingly utilising
information technologies and telecommunication advances to expand
educationraI--services in-the -home and"-, he office. Distance learning
techniques have also important applications for entry level training, for youth
education as I made a point a moment ago, and for the training market in
general. I was very pleased to see the ABC's rivals at SBS offering
vocational oriented training in diverse fields such as health, education and
journalistic ethics. I could make a little contribution to that software package
myself, maybe that's something I can do later. 
Not surprisingly, Open Learning's flexibility and strong client focus, I mean, I
think these words are important flexibility and strong client focus pose
challenge for our more traditional educational institutions. I think that is why,
I mean, I'm not just simply mouthing words here saying, I think, that is why it
is exceedingly encouraging that the main stream institutions are interested in
this challenge. The challenge being posed for flexibility and a stronger client
focus away from formal structures. Students can now study at times which
suit them and they can study in various settings. It doesn't matter if you are
from a rural area or you want to study specialist subjects not taught nearby or
have disabilities that prevent easy access to classroom study Open
Learning comes to you. And, the fact that of course it lets anybody enrol,
makes quality education more accessible to the many groups in society not
well served by traditional forms of education and it gives access to Australia's
best institutions, lecturers and tutors.
Open Learning is inclusive accessible learning, but we want to make it even
more accessible and that is why the second stage of the Government's Open
Learning Initiative is the new Electronic Support Service. This service will
enable students to communicate with tutors and other students through
electronic mail to search library catalogues and to access course and
administrative information.
Eventually, the service will enable educational institutions and industry to
access national and international education and training programs for use in
workplace training. We can already see that with programs such as Internet
where people are already accessing Internet and drawing quite a lot of data
out of it for particular areas of educational research.
Access points will be established in community based centres around
Australia to ensure that all students have access to the service. I mean, I just
think this is a terribly exciting thing that a student can go to a point in a
suburb and then have this communication with a tutor or the institution in the
broad. By putting Australian education and training onto the information super
highways it will put more education and training at the fingertips of more
Australians. And, of course, I think we all know that our future as a country is
going to be more and more in areas of added value, of education, of change,
of continual retraining and, of course, in flexibility and less formalisation in
the way education is delivered.
So, it is about equipping our children with the education, skills and
infrastructure-that-wi l-allowthem-to create a future for themselves. It is about
building a future that is more secure. So, perhaps let me conclude by saying
how gratifying it is that the concept of Open Learning is gaining widespread
acceptance. Its educational advantages are quickly being recognised, but it
doesn't surprise me as I have said many times in recent years, this country is
profoundly capable of change for the better and the embrace of change in
Australia in the last decade or so has, I think, been profound and why should
we not think that we can meet the challenge of the revolution in information 
and in technology when we so successfully have met the challenge of the
global economy? When we are successfully meeting the challenge of the
region. When we have learned that there is nothing to fear and so much to
gain from having the courage to embrace change and the wit to manage it.
So much to lose by retreating from it.
But, providing such a practical and positive answer to these rhetorical
questions, I thank the Open Learning Agency of Australia and all the other
people associated with this production. It is a marvellous, again,
collaborative initiative by the educational institutions, by the ABC, it continues
to demonstrate it's changing its role in this country, by the Government, and
of course, here particularly with collaboration with other production units
abroad and we certainly applaud that kind of collaboration.
Let me congratulate all involved, particularly the three people represented
here on the rostrum for getting out there and catching the wave that is now
with us that lets Australians say that the information highway is a great
opportunity for Australia, that we are strong in education and we are strong
on software and that we will master this technology and be first amongst
equals in getting out there on the highway with the sort of products as we've
seen today. But in doing that, make sure that that highway starts at home
and that the first wave of people to benefit from it are Australians who can
take up thes opportunities that formalised structures in the past have denied
them. Congratulations to one and all. 



At'
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE " AUSTRALIAN STUDENT TRAINEESHIP
FOUNDATION", GOSFORD,
17 AUGUST 1994
Well let me say it's great to be out of Canberra and here in Gosford on the
New South Wales Central Coast.
I hope you don't mind if I begin by referring to another launch that took place
yesterday. Yesterday, I launched the international television production " The Global
Economy" a distance learning production, put together by the ABC,
Monash University and the Open Learning Agency.
One of the great things about that production, and Open Learning in general,
is that it allows anyone who wishes to enrol in a distance learning course to
do so regardless of background, prior experience, or educational
qualifications. What Open Learning does is to bring higher education to those who want it
it's flexible and it's customer-focused.
It's a similar story with the Australian National Traineeship Foundation which
we announced in the Whit6&amp; Paper on Employment and Growth, Working
Nation. But whereas the Open Learning initiative is focused on those Australians in
higher education, this initiative is focused on younger Australians in years 11
and 12.
The whole aim of the Foundation is to get schools and industry together to
combine work experience with high quality vocational training.
It's about equipping our senior schools students with the skills they'll need if
they are to have satisfying and rewarding jobs in an increasingly competitive
global economy. 
We want to see senior school students with recognised vocational skills as
part of their standard school program.
This is a fundamental shift in Australia's approach to vocational education
and training. It's a shift that will benefit the careers and life chances of
thousands of young Australians.
But to make the shift we need leadership in our local communities, and
particularly from industry.
To help chart the way, a number of outstanding Australians, each with a
strong background in the vocational training field, have agreed to serve as
members on the Foundation's Board. And it's a great pleasure to welcome
the Board members who are with us today.
I won't refer to each Board member individually, but let me just mention how
pleased I am that John Goodman will chair the Board.
John has had extensive industry experience as Chairman and Chief
Executive of Baulderstone Hornibrook. He has also had extensive
involvement in promoting education and training for young people through his
Chairmanship of the Dusseldorp Foundation which has pioneered student
traineeships. One of the most important things about this Board is that the majority of its
members are from industry.
This is critical because under the Foundation, it will be industry, and not
government, that has control over the funding for entry level training.
It will be industry, and not government, that has responsibility for selecting
the training to be undertaken.
And it will be industry, not government, that provides the work experience that
will make the training meaningful.
Under the Foundation, local management committees, chaired by industry
and with majority industry membership, will be able to choose the most
appropriate forms of training from a range of public and private sources.
Students will acquire the skills that industry needs because industry will teach
them. So why are we doing this?
In the White Paper, we were at pains to stress that Australia's future depends
on the ideas, skills, and knowledge of our workforce. 
As we said then, if Australia is to be a nation with a high value-added exportoriented
economy generating rewarding jobs for all Australians who want
them, we must find new and more effective ways of equipping the workforce
of tomorrow with the skills they will need.
The fact remains that despite great gains in the last decade that have seen
school retention rates almost double, around 14 per cent of young people still
drop out of school.
The risk is that these people might be left behind as we head towards a new
century. I don't want that to happen. I want us to approach the new century with
confidence, but above all else, with one another, together, as an inclusive
society, as an Australian community.
That's the philosophy that underpinned Working Nation. And that's what we
are giving expression to today through the launch of this Foundation.
Student traineeships must be quality courses that enable young people to
find satisfying and rewarding jobs.
But while the traineeships are important, it's what they lead to that really
counts. So, why come here to Gosford? Why not announce this new initiative in
Sydney, Melbourne, or Canberra?
Well, I suppose we could have travelled to a number of places in Australia
there are many innovative and successful student traineeships already
underway right around the country.
We could have travelled to Alcoa's plant in Geelong, where student trainees
complete their Victorian Certificate of Education at the same time they
complete 16 engineering modules.
But the reason we've decided to come here to Gosford is because the Central
Coast TRAC Program is one of the most successful in Australia and thaimakes
it the best place to launch the Australian Student Traineeship
Foundation. Run from this shopping centre, the Central Coast TRAC is independently
managed and operated by a joint industry, school and TAFE committee.
Not only does industry help develop the TRAC curriculum, it also contributes
towards the running costs for the program both financially and through
assistance in kind many of the businesses represented here today have
trainees working with them. 
But it's a real joint effort: the local newspaper, the Central Coast Express,
plays its part by providing a weekly student profile free of charge and the
local councils and Rotary clubs also chip in with their support for the program.
And the reason why the Central Coast TRAC program succeeds, why all of
the TRAC students who left school last year are in full-time jobs, is because
of the combined efforts of the schools, the students, TAFE, industry and the
wider community.
It's a story of students with initiative and enthusiasm responding to
opportunities created by leaders in the local community.
It's the story of S teven Macarthur who participated in the TRAC program in
1993 and earlier this year beat more than 1,500 other applicants in gaining a
hospitality traineeship at the Sydney Hilton.
And it's also a story with an international profile thanks to Lesley Tobin,
Nichole Ford and Natalie Cruikshank. Last month, these three women the
TRAC coordinator, a TRAC student, and a TRAC workplace supervisor
attended the Second International Conference on Education Business in
Paris. There, they presented the Central Coast TRAC as a best practice
model for school industry partnerships.
That's a great achievement, particularly for someone like Nichole who only a
short time ago was on the verge of quitting school. It's the sort of
achievement that deserves to be celebrated.
What we want to do now with this new Foundation is to have stories like this
one echo right around Australia.
Through the student traineeships we want to encourage more young people
to stay on at school and acquire the skills they need for the jobs of tomorrow.
Let me finish up on the important theme of leadership. By launching the
Foundation what we are hoping to tap into is the vast leadership reserves
that lie within our local communities, in our local schools but primarily in our
local business communities.
As the recent Mcinsey report on regional development pointed out,
leadership within a regional community is often the key reason why one
region prospers while another fails.
It's that sort of leadership that has been exercised here on the New South
Wales Central Coast. 
I congratulate all those associated with the Central Coast TRAC program and
I take great pleasure in formally launching the Australian Student Traineeship
Foundation what I think is a truly major step in vocational training in this
country.'
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FAREWELL OF TROOPS TO RWANDA
I will visit Townsville on Saturday 20 August 1994 to farewell the main
contingent of Australian peacekeeping forces who will be leaving that day for
Rwanda.
The troops are part of the more than 300-strong Australian contingent which
will provide medical support for the United Nations UNAMIR operations in
Rwanda.
The force will also provide assistance to Rwandan civilians.
The advance Australian party arrived in Kigali on 8 August.
Their role and that of the United Nations force as a whole will be vital in
creating conditions in Rwanda which will enable refugees to return from the
border areas and resume normal lives.
The Australian troops will go with the good wishes of all Australians.
CANBERRA 17 August 1994 73/ 94
r 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
Tomorrow's Council of Australian Governments meeting in Darwin will
concentrate on the roles and reponsibilities between tiers of government, and on
competition-policy. The Premiers, Chief Ministers and I will discuss important
reforms in electricity, gas, workers' compensation and the legal profession. We
will consider reports on maritime reform, the National Strategy on Violence
Against Women, regulatory reform and the Review of Commonwealth and State
Service Provision.
It will be will be an opportunity to reach agreement on matters of profound
importance to the future of this country.
Broad agreement on government roles and responsibilities will create more
integrated health and community services, with better results for clients and
greater value for money for taxpayers.
Implementation of a national competition policy the principles of which we
agreed to at our last meeting in Hobart will have many enduring benefits for the
Australian economy and the Australian people.
Agreement tomorrow will mean more economic growth, and more jobs. It will
mean cost savings for exporters and better services for everybody. It will mean
not just a more competitive and stronger Australia, but a fairer Australia.
Implementation of a national competition policy will also mean that the States
and their utilities have joined Australian business and the people they employ
working Australians and their families in opening themselves to competitive
pressures in pursuit of productivity, efficiency and comparative advantage. It will
mean that the States have joined the rest of Australia in adjusting to the
necessities of our era. 74/ 94 
The Commonwealth Government is determined to press on with implementation
of a national competition policy it is nothing less than our duty to Australia and
Australians. It is our duty to this and future generations. The States, surely,
have a similar duty.
State Premiers and Chief Ministers come to this conference knowing I seek their
cooperation, knowing that in pursuit of the great gains which stand to be made
both sides may need to surrender ground. It is not a question of State rights. It
is a question of making the Federation work as it was intended to work in the
interests of a stronger Australia and, above all, in the interests of the Australian
people. Tomorrow we have an historic opportunity to help Australia work as one for the
benefit of all.
CANBERRA 18 August 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
RAAF FAIRBAIRN
THURSDAY 18 AUGUST, 1994
PMV: This could be quite a defining moment in the history of the Federation,
but it can only be so if the states embrace the challenge of competition
as outlined by the Hilmer Report. There is a real test here. There is a
Labor government, federal government, going to a, largely, a group of
Liberal-National party states that is, nominally pro-market
governments and saying, " Please embrace the market. We want
you to embrace competition and competition policy." Now, as I say,
this could be a defining moment in the federation but they will have to
grasp it. And, the federation is not a device which is about
aggrandising the status of the states. The federation was an event
which took place to form the nation so there can't be any notion of the
states hiding behind so-called federal rights or federal imperatives to
turn back what is a central thrust of extending the Trade Practices
legislation to guarantee that all Australians benefit from competition in
states' authorities like electricity, like water, like gas.
So, much can be done here, a great benefit for the Australian people,
a great benefit for Australian business, for Australian competitiveness
but the conservative states will have to grab the notion of
competition in business. So, that's what it is about and there are other
things on the agenda roles and responsibilities, that is the delivery
of programs between the Commonwealth and the states. But, it is
about, principally the Hilmer recommendations for free and fair
competition by the states and their authorities, access by business,
lower prices to Australian consumers and a better go for all Australians
all ' round.
J: Does that mean no compensation for the states, Mr Keating?
PMV: No, it means a discussion about a real regime of putting these
competitive changes in. In other words, the Commonwealth will be in a
real discussion. But, if we have conservative governments trying to
hide behind state parochialism, on the basis that they don't want 
competition, while they are telling the rest of us we should be
embracing the market, and they are pro business... They are pro
business but if they show any problems about the embrace of business
and competition well, then, of course, this moment will be lost.
J: They want compensation, how far are you prepared to compromise on
that?
PM: Well, we want competition, that's what we want. What they want will
be about what makes the deal go around.
J: The Commonwealth games and the furore over Arthur Tunstall, your
reaction to that?
PM: Well, I think Mr Tunstall's remarks are to be regretted but, I think he
regretted them, didn't he? I think he has apologised for them and I
think that is appropriate.
J: Are you concerned that Australia's reputation as a sporting nation
could be damaged by these comments?
PM: Well, he's an independent sports administrator and, in a sense, not
representing the Commonwealth government. But, the fact that he has
recanted, I think, is the important point.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, DARWIN, 19 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: You want some general comments, I think, about the meeting and its
prospects. Well, let me begin by saying, I think, we've now been for
most of the last decade embarked on a program of opening Australia
up and inducing a productive ethic into the way in which the Australian
economy operates. The Commonwealth Government this Labor
Government took huge decisions in the 1 980s, removing exchange
cpnj~ qjs in 1953 and starting to knock the tariff wall over in 1 968-t6the
point where we'll have tariffs down by about five per cent by 1997.
The competitive breezes which then come with that through input,
competition, through a free flow of goods in the economy, a free flow of
funds all needs to be complemented by productivity change at the
workplace, by productivity change in all of the areas of commerce
including that of the big state utilities.
So, one of the principle matters under discussion here today is the
competition principles which are part and parcel of the Trade Practices
Act which under the recommendations of Professor Hilm-er should-be
extended to States authorities. In other words, we-got the same
competitive elements into those parts of the economy which formerly
have had them locked out. Because we know to keep the Australian
economy growing, to not run up against a Balance of Payments
constraint in the future, to produce more goods and services, we are
going to need to have the Australian economy supple and that means
electricity authorities, it means rail authorities, port authorities, just as
It has meant for the Commonwealth telecommunications and airlines.
Now, at our officials discussions we are at the point where there can
be a full embrace of the program which we adopted in principal in
Hobart at the COAG meeting. Now, there is some trepidation on the
part of some S5tates about this. I mean, in a sense, as there was with
the Commonwealth Cabinet when we decided to start knocking the
tariff wall over in the 1 980s. But, competition matters and competition
works and I hope it is not too ironic that a Labor Prime Minister has to
say to a collection largely of Coalition Liberal and National Party
Premiers who are always telling us about the virtues of the market, that 
2
there is actually a virtue in marketplace competition. Now, I think,
they're saying ' well look, we can swim, but you are now asking us to
dive into the deep end of the pool. Now, I'm sure we're going to make
it, but let's think about it first.' So, they are coming to the edge and
standing back a bit, then coming to the edge and standing back a bit.
But I think, there is a tremendous opportunity to be seized here and
one that's really going to mean that for consumers we are going to see
lower prices, for businesses lower electricity charges, better water
charges, better gas access, all of these sorts of things.
Now, this is not a revenue matter. When the Commonwealth started to
pull tariffs down there was a tremendous cost to the Commonwealth
budget in lost customs duty. So, we didn't say ' oh well look, we are
going to lose custom duty here we'd better not do it.' We did it
because we wanted a new industrial society and that's what we have
got as a consequence. We've now got high technology companies
being born all over the country. We've got a massive shift in the
nature of our domestic producers who are now finding export markets,
you've seen the McisyRpr on the 700 exporters, all of that has
come because largely w've knocked over protection and we did it not
because of Influences on the Commonwealth budget.
Now, the States are saying to us now ' well look, there is going to be..
they have a number a $ 5 billion budgetary benefit for the
Commonwealth here and you should split that with us and this is
basically a money matter.' Well, it's not a money matter because
largely what is going to happen here, most of the benefit ought to go to
consumers. It is not a budgetary thing, it's not going to go to the
Commonwealth or the State budgets. It's really about getting some of
the monopoly profits back into the hands of business with lower prices
and consumers with lower prices. Now, the change is worth doing for
those competitive and efficiency reasons and not for any
consequential revenue effects.
Let me just for a moment give you an indication of how this $ 5 billion
number, for what that's worth, is way wide of the mark. The States say
there Is a $ 5 billion benefit to the Commonwealth in this. Well, as
Professor Hilmer said on the radio this morning, even if you add up all
of the States authorities water, gas, electricity, ports their Income to
States, it doesn't amount to $ 5 billion. But, were the Commonwealth to
collect $ 5 billion on it through its corporation tax you know the
corporate rate is 33 per cent to collect S5 billion at the rate of 33 per
cent we would have to be taxing $ 15 billion of profits. Now, what does
the State authority get? Would it get 10 per cent on turn over? So, if
they have got $ 15 billion worth of profits, what is the turn over? $ 150
billion. Now, the whole economy is only $ 400 billion. The whole
Australian national economy Is only $ 400 billion. So, nobody is going
to accept the notion that a behavioural change or a competitive
change is going to add $ 150 billion of economic value which would 
translate to profits of $ 15 billion taxed at the Commonwealth rate of 33
per cent to a $ 5 billion benefit to the Commonwealth. It is just an
absurdity. Any benefit to the Commonwealth would be lucky to be
per cent of the $ 5 billion the States are speaking of and for our part, if
it is of those orders of magnitude, and it is, we don't mind to let the
States have a substantial proportion of that back.
But, there Is another agenda here, can I just say this. The other
agenda is that a number of Premiers have said ' look, this is an
occasion to sit down and give us a chop at the Commonwealth's tax
base, let's get, you know in the bonhomie and fellowship of the human
race and the rest of it, why don't we decide how much of the
Commonwealth's tax base goes to the States?' Now, no one can quite
say the phrase ' revenue sharing', but that's what they mean. Now, let
me just say this about revenue sharing. If the States were revenue
sharing with the Commonwealth in the last three years, they would
have lost $ 2.3 billion. So, now the recession is past and growth is
back again, they are saying ' well look, we wouldn't have shared with
you in the recession, but we will share with you in the up side.' I would
say well, that's very interesting. Whereas we said look, look what we
have done, you gave some ground in February at COAG in adopting
the Hilmer competition policies in principle. At the Premiers
conference in May we showed our bona fides by giving you a new
financial deal for three years. That was real terms guarantee per
capita. That is the maintenance of your revenues with inflation
adjustment in real terms plus a population factor. This has given the
States more certainty than they have ever had, certainly since 1983
and I believe before that. I said, so, you gave a bit in February, the
Commonwealth has given some in May, now is the time to drive the
Hilmer reforms home and when we sit at the next Premiers conference
we can have a sensible discussion again about these things.
So, from my point of view there is no reason why all the States can't
agree to the elements of the proposals outlined in our draft
communique. That is, for competition principles, extending the Trade
Practices Act, the access regime, the pricing and cnie surveillance
regime, the competition council to look at the way in which mon-opaIes
might be treated in the future and with the transitional provisions there
is all the protection in the world in there for the States. And, really,
what we've got here is a bit of fear about the marketplace. A little bit of
fear about competition. Now, that is understandable, but it shouldn't
be enough to deter States from actually picking this up.
J: In the spirit of give and take that you talk about then, can you
genuinely proceed with Ralph Willis' threat to legislate the competition
measures without the States co-operation. It may be legal, but is it
practical? 
PM: Well, one of the notions that is around they are saying, well, let's say
for what's called State Mandated Conduct, this is where a State agrees
to a particular activity be it an egg marketing arrangement or a sugar
marketing arrangement or something like that, that the States should
have an over ride of the Trade Practices Act. But, they can mandate
any activity. For instance, someone could mandate the Coles Myer
take over of Foodland and then we would be suspending the Trade
Practices Act, so we wouldn't be moving on from here in a progressive
way to reform with good competition principles, we'd be actually taking
the Trade Practices Act back before 1975. Now, one thing for sure
here, we are not going to go backwards. If the Commonwealth already
has these powers in this Act, then seeking to co-operatively extend it is
the way to go. But, we are not going to co-operatively go backwards
and I think that is the point.
J: But without co-operation will you go forward. Will you legislate
whether or not you have the States approval?
PM: Well, I think that there is enough respect for some market disciplines in
this meeting to get a degree of agreement, but I think States have got
to face this fact and particularly Coalition States. They can't go
embracing free enterprise and the marketplace and the moment a
Labor Government says ' well, what about trying a dose of it' they say
' oh, no, no, we won't have that.'
J: But, every Premier, even the Labor Premier coming in today has said
that they want a fair share of the benefits of this and they all talked
about billions of dollars. Now, is that just not on the table?
PM: Well, I've given you the answer to that. The value of the revenue
change here is not the issue. The Issue is whether the consumers of
Queensland and NSW and Victoria, say in electricity, get lower
electricity prices. Whether the business, the aluminium smelters and
other people get lower electricity prices. Whether the water
authorities, whether businesses which use water, including consumers,
get better prices. I mean, that Is the issue.
J: But, do you accept that revenue may not be the issue for you, but it
certainly is to them. They see you getting more money.
PM: Their budgets at the moment are growing much more rapidly their
revenues than the Commonwealths. That Is, state stamp duties on
property, on shares. Their budgets are responding, their revenue
growth has outstripped ours enormously in the last two years. So, the
States are now in a very look at Premier Fahey's spending in the
last six weeks a railway line to Parramatta, $ 400 million for a railway
line to the airport. Premier Kennett is telling us about the surplus in
the Victorian budget. I mean, the Commonwealth carries the cost of 
the economy in the recessions. It takes the shock absorbing affect. It
has got to have the capacity to get back into surplus in the good times.
J: What about the argument for transitional assistance from the
Commonwealth as Professor Hilmer suggests. Any financial money
there and if so how much?
PM: Well, that's what we are talking about. I think we are prepared to talk
about that, but again, taking some notional GDP effect and then trying
to divide that into Commonwealth revenue is, you know, the games
that shouldn't be played on an old war horse like me.
J: Are you going to talk to Mr Fahey about Circular Quay, Prime Minister,
today?
PM: No, well, maybe I will, but that would be a side event.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7: 30 REPORT, 19 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Let's set the scene by going back to the start of this day. When you
arrived at the new Parliament House here in Darwin, what was at stake
did you think then?
PM: Well, I think, what was at stake was the whole notion of ca-operation in
a real sense In the Federation. That's what was at stake. Because, I
think, there was a chance here today, and I think we've seized it, to
see that all Australians come out winners, but the notion that we might
fall and that these large areas of the States enterprises, in electricity,
in gas, In water, in rail were not to be opened to competition means
that it would ultimately stultify the long run recovery and we just
needed to get a win.
PL: So, if these State monopolies, like electricity for example, open
themselves to competition, what does that do for Australia as a whole
and how do I know about it in the end, how do I feel?
PM: Well, I think, it is very much like the Commonwealth's reforms In
telecommunications. You can see the competition now between
Telecom and Optus. People can see a quite dramatic reduction in
telephone call charges. That will be as obvious in electricity, in water,
in gas and businesses, competitive businesses get the opportunity of
cheaper supplies and therefore they are more competitive. They get
an edge over someone else somewhere else in the world.
PL: So, I get smaller bills perhaps as a consumer, a business gets smaller
bills can compete with other companies overseas better.
PM: And, we maximise our advantages. For instance, there is a coal seam
all down the east coast of Australia. That is a national asset. That is a
national comparative advantage. We've got gas throughout the
Commonwealth, this is another natural comparative advantage. We
want to employ, I mean, Australians all of us we need everything on 
the line to keep ourselves competitive and we need to employ all these
advantages and we simply couldn't while ever they were locked up in
monopolies. So, this is a win for the whole Australian nation, not just
for the Commonwealth and the States and the State governments and
the Premiers et cetera. but mast importantly, for all Australians.
PL: But, the battle here in Darwin today between you, the Premiers and the
Chief Ministers has been based on the fact that they say they are out
of pocket by all this because they lose the monopoly dividends that
they have become so comfortable with.
PM: Yes, well, they are in a sense, some of them are on the drip of profits
that come out of these electricity and water and gas authorities and
they wonder how their budgets will run without them. But, just as the
Commonwealth Government, this Labor Government, has cut tariffs in
the 1980s and 1990s and had a massive loss in customs duty, we've
picked it up In a more active economy, a more efficient economy. And,
the fact is, if we do pro-competitive things, the natural economic
system works for you and States will end up, I don't think, with a very
great loss of revenue at all.
PL: But, they said their opening gambit was that you would be $ 5 billion
better off at the Commonwealth level.
PM: Well, I think, we very quickly dispensed with that and as you know,
there was a lot of intransigence at this meeting until lunch time, but I
think, the important thing is that it is all credit here to the Premiers and
the Chief Ministers who took the longer view, the larger view, the
bigger view, the national view. I think, all of us coming together means
that we have secured a benefit for the whole country and for all
Australians and that is the key point.
PL: Now, you have agreed in this meeting which you at one stage today
described as ' insufferably polite', you have agreed that you will try to
work out what the gains to the Commonwealth are as a result of this
new competitive spirit and give the States some share of It.
PM: That's right. We are saying there Is obviously going to be some
benefit to the Commonwealth. It won't be as much as the States think
it will or have said it would, but we have agreed to assess it and we
have agreed to share it with them In the event that they sign up to
extending the Trade Practices Act to States authorities and to other
pro-competitive changes as encompassed in the Hilmer Report.
PL: And, meanwhile, you'll bring in legislation into the Parliament which
you will show to everybody and not enact until there is a lot of
community discussion. 
PM: That's right. We will then table draft legislation and circulate draft
legislation to the States, to business, to consumer groups..
PL: This year?
PM: this year probably and over Christmas and into next year for the
February meeting of the Council of Australian Governments. So, by
the time we get there we ought to be able to agree more about the
parameters of funds and how we should split them, we've had a
chance to work over the legislation to see a pro-competitive regime
come In on July 1 in that year that's next year.
PL: Now, not all States have agreed to all things have they?
PM: No, no. Some have agreed to the core things, others not.
PL: What happens if a State tries to stand out of all this?
PM: Well, can I just say this Paul, the Commonwealth had a chance to,
because of Its constitutional power, could for a very large part of this
go it alone.
PL: What legislate forcefully?
PM: Legislate, use its constitutional power under the corporations power to
legislate, but I think, it is important that this is done co-operatively and
I wanted It done co-operatively. I mean, one of the Premiers said to
me today, I don't know how you sit there with so much patience. Well,
I'll set there until midnight if I have to to get a result and if we inch the
debate along the road, inch by inch, if you pick up converts and you
know, people who support you along the way
PL: The Keating cart rumbles on?
PM: Well, It's a change Isn't It? I mean one of my jobs, Premiers jobs, is to
introduce changes and get them successfully executed.
PL: And, this talk of perhaps a national dividend in total of around the
billion a year mark by the end of this decade, is that a fairy tale?
PM: I think that is, but that is from all micro-economic reform, not just that
which we are thinking about today, that is from the ' changes to
telecommunications, to ports and wharves. to ailines et cetera. But,
even then, I think, it is a little over stated. But, the fact Is, there wAil be
. I mean, this Is the last nut to crack. In the competitive breezes in
this country which started in the 1980s when we removed the
exchange controls, when we started knocking the tariff wall down,
we've really now got some really we've got low inflation, we are a
very competitive country now. One of the last bastions of resistance to 
4
competition were the States authorities and so we want this recovery
in the 1990s to keep on going and when we get to those supply bottle
necks like we did in the 1 980s, we don't want to see it spill Into imports
and that Is why we've just got to get a better supply, a better response
from the supply side of the economy. That is, from industry, from the
States industries. That Is what this is about.
PL: And, what's In place today now, this agreement to go ahead and the
draft legislation coming in, that's not going to come unglued?
PM: Well, I don't think so. I mean, we had a crack at It in February In
Hobart. We got the States to agree in principle. In May we put some
money on the table at the Premiers Conference to give them a much
better financial formula. We've come back now and got the agreement
of most of them to the core principles. I don't think some of the others
can stand out. You know, once I think this legislation is drafted, there
is popular community acceptance for It and we meet our commitment
on sharing the income with the States, I think, we'll end up with a
uniform result.
PL: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, AFTERNOON BREAK, COAG, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
DARWIN, FRIDAY, 19 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: In the early afternoon, as you know, at lunch time, we hadn't made
much progress here. The States wanted a fundamental realignment of
Commonwealth payments to the States before they would discuss the
Hilmer recommendations. For the Commonwealth's part we said well,
we wouldn't agree to that, we would be prepared however as we said
this morning to try and quantify the benefit to the Commonwaath
budget flowing from competition policy changes, but this is not, of
course, economy wide changes on the Federal budget. And, were that
not to be agreed by the States, we, the Commonwealth, would go back
to the drawing board and think about what position we should take
ourselves ie, whether we would legislate ourselves.
At that point, I think, the States thought that, well frankly, thought
better of ht and said that for their part, a number of them NSW, OLD,
WA, the ACT said that they could actually agree to some of the core
matters if, indeed, we sought to quantify the funding, the extra revenue
the Commonwealth might receive from the Hilmer competitive
changes. So, we said that's fine, ok, we are prepared to think about
that, but we have to have agreement to the core issues and, of course,
I then started to move down them.
Now, the primary one is the first point. Council agreed to a package of
reforms that comprised
the revision of the conduct rules of trade practices legislation
and their extension to cover business and state and local
government business enterprises and unincorporated
businesses.
That is your essential core Hlimer principle. The second dot point 
2
establish a national system to carry out surveillance and to
provide access to essential facilities such as electricity grids,
pipe lines, airports, rail networks under an agreed set of
national principles.
That was agreed by the same group of States. The establishment of
an Australian Competition Commission has been agreed. So, those
core bits are there. Now, there is many more elements of them, but
they are ancillary to, they tend to round the points out. They are the
core points. Now, if we get throughout the balance of the day, further,
if you like, written confirmation of the agreement of a majority of States
to these points, we will then look at the legislation, amend it where
necessary and then circulate it for discussion with the States so that
when we come to our next meeting, by that stage we'll also have a
financial offer on the table based on some quantification of the value to
the Commonwealth of competitive changes.
Now, what all that means is we are making progress. This is a very big
issue and it is hard to make progress on. The States authorities are
one of the last places left where monopolies exist and where free
competitive disciplines are curtailed. It was never going to be easy to
crack that nut, this was the way to do it I think. And, we were, sort of,
giving the nut a bang all morning and we got a crack through It in the
afternoon.
J: Why did it take five hours to come to the point which the States
already wanted? Why did it take five hours to nut out?..
PM: Because they thought they would stare us down on the claim that half
of future gains to Commonwealth revenue would go to the States.
Nothing to do with Hilmer, just general economy wide revenue
changes. And, of course, we were not going to agree to that.
J: Prime Minister, the States say that they have got from you a guarantee
that they'll get a percentage of the revenue gains. Is that right in
principle?
PM: What I've said to them is that we are prepared to share with the States
the benefit to the Commonwealth budget that might flow from
competition changes as a consequence of these discussions.
J: On a fixed percentage though?
PM: but that is a whole lot of difference than half of the future growth of
total Commonwealth receipts to the States.
J: But how do you guarantee them fixed a percentage share? 
PM: No, no, it Is not a fixed percentage. It is a matter of us trying to assess
what the value to the budget is. Now, let me just repeat the point
again. This is a tough set of issues and the first thing the States did
was walk away from the communique and say well, that was only our
officials. Well, you know, the Commonwealth has been encouraged by
the fact that States officials have agreed broadly with the communique,
but the Premiers are making it clear, no, well, officials say one thing
and we say another. OK, well we understand what an argy bargy is all
about, but let's try and get some national progress here. Now, I think,
we are going to get that, but we are going to get it around some decent
principles because the thing you do in here, I mean, I'll sit here all day
and night if I have to to screw the points down and get them out of
there. Just like we did at subsequent meetings of COAG and I hope
that we can get enough core principles adopted here to say that one of
the last bastions of privilege and position in commercial terms in this
economy is going to be opened up.
J: Prime Minister, do you concede that the revenue share that you are
now considering will be more than the $ 700 million that you originally
offered the States?
PM: No, it may not be, but It may be.
J: Prime Minister, are you saying that some States haven't signed on for
this yet?
PM: That's what I'm saying. Just-like that.
J: Which States Victoria and Western Australia?
PM: Godi I like your questions. ( Fran Kelly, ABC Radio)
FK: I'm glad.
J: Prime Minister, they've all said It was a fairly acrimonious meeting.
PM: There hasn't been a tough word exchanged all through it to be honest.
J: No voices raised?
PM: No, no. in fact it's what shall I say. I'm searching for adjective. It is
very, very polite. It's a very polite meeting. It is exceedingly polite. It
is insufferably polite.
J: Is there any great ( inaudible) for the general revenue sharing or is
that what you think you've knocked on the head this morning?
PM: Well, we have knocked that on the head. Look, bear this in mind and I
think this Is an important point. You might remember after the 
February meeting of COAG we said the States have agreed in
principle to Hilmer, they've not adopted it, but they have agreed in
principle to the issues. Therefore, we will show some bona fides at the
Premiers Conference financial meeting when we consider
Commonwealth payments to the States. We did that. We gave the
States a completely new deal, real terms per capita which will cost us
about $ 1 billion. So, we've actually made a commitment already about
revenue sharing and we are happy to make it in the context of cooperation.
But, we are not about to say, when we've now got five per
cent economic growth In the economy, we'll hand to the States, here's
half the revenue and what, for the Hilmer changes because they are
not going to come through for a couple of years, but as from now, we
were never going to agree with that.
J: But, do you believe you will reach a figure today?
PM: No, not today, but look, there is going to be some consequential
benefit at the Commonwealth budget. We are quite happy to share
some of that, quite happy to, but that is a world of difference in saying
to the States well, here's half of our future revenue growth. I mean,
we've got to bring the Commonwealth budget into surplus and the only
way we are going to be able to do it is to make sure that when the
economy does pick up and the revenue yield does rise, that it gets
devoted to turning the deficit Into surplus.
J: And what are the implications to the States that didn't sign onto the
agreement today?
PM: Well, I think, their position is not very strong because they have got a
majority of states signing on, we'll have a national Act and if they are a
co-operating State under the Act they get a whole lot of benefits
including money. The first thing the State doesn't get who doesn't sign
up is money.
J: Who hasn't signed on?
PM: Well, there's Victoria and Tasmania and South Australia at this stage
to some of things but, some are on some points and others are on
others.
J: Western Australia has signed.
PM: Western Australia has on the main point, yes.
J: Is the political reality that the agreements you are getting now on these
substantive points are conditional on this money being sorted out in
February? 
PM: Yes, I think that is fair enough. I mean, how do you know and how
could you accurately access how much the Commonwealth budget will
benefit from this. Well, that is pretty hard to say, but we can make a
good guesstimate at that.
J: Did I hear you say that Western Australia was one of the main
PM: No, no, Western Australia is part of the agreed on the principle
point, is one of the agreeing States, but on other points is not. You
see, some agree on some points and not on others.
J: Mr Keating, can I ask you what you think of the new Parliament
House?
PM: I think it is a very nice building and with a wonderful view too.
ends
I YL Y 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
FAREWELL TO THE MAIN CONTINGENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
MEDICAL SUPPORT FORCE TO RWANDA, TOWNSVILLE,
AUGUST 1994
Well let me start by saying how pleased I am to be here in Townsville. It is
an occasion for great national pride to farewell the main group of the
Australian Defence Force that will travel to Rwanda as part of the Australian
Medical Support Force.
And it is yet another example of Australia responding to an international
humanitarian emergency.
You see, one of the great things about this nation of ours is that it boasts a
people with a profound generosity of spirit.
And it is a fundamentally Australian generosity of spirit.
It is a generosity of spirit that extends from what we do for our own people
be it fighting floods or bushfires to what we do for those in other parts of the
world who face even more devastating events like the death and violence, the
disease and starvation of Rwanda.
When Australians are faced with a humanitarian crisis, we respond
immediately, instinctively and we do something practical.
We are a nation of doers and helpers, not talkers and watchers.
There are many great stories of individual Australians giving of themselves
for the people of Rwanda from well known artists like John Farnham, to the
Darwin nurse Judith Chappell a veteran of Cyclone Tracey who now, at 59, is
making her own way to help in Rwanda. And, of course, there's the many
other Australians already working with Australian and international aid
agencies on the ground in Rwanda.
i 
2
As a nation, Australia has responded to the crisis in Rwanda: the people of
Australia have given more than $ 12 million in public appeals and the
Government of Australia has given $ 10 million in humanitarian aid.
Worldwide, that easily puts Australia among the top five aid donors to
Rwanda. But it's not merely a question of dollars our assistance will help the
Australian individuals and agencies working under enormously difficult
conditions in the camps. And it will also help the United Nations to repatriate
refugees and rehabilitate Rwanda with projects for its longer-term economic
development. This humanitarian aid is vital. But it can not do the job by itself.
What is needed just as much is the creation of conditions inside Rwanda that
will encourage the refugees to return to their homes.
After what so many of them have seen and experienced, it is not surprising
that they are reluctant to return and suspicious of Rwandan authorities.
This is where the United Nations Assistance Mission In Rwanda ( UNAMIR)
comes in, and it's whe6reyou come in.
You are part of a group of around 300 men and women of the Australian
Defence Force who will serve in Rwanda some of you in the medical group,
some of you as infantry and support personnel or in headquarters and liaison
positions.
Those of you who are leaving today will join the 76 members of the Australian
advance party who arrived in Kigali on 8 August and who are already at work
preparing the Kigali Central Hospital for your arrival.
Your main job will be to provide medical support which will keep UNAMIR
effective. Elements of your team will provide support to UNAMIR forces deployed
outside Kigali through the provision of mobile casualty collection posts.
And any of your excess capacity will be directed to helping ordinary
Rwandans.
The next six months will be tough. Your experiences may be unpleasant.
They may be dangerous.
They will certainly be different from anything most of you have encountered
before. 
But I know that you will rise to these challenges and draw great fulfilment and
satisfaction from your work because that's what the members of the
Australian Defence Force do.
You are well trained and well prepared for your operation.
And you follow in a fine tradition of outstanding Australian service to many
United Nations operations, in places like Cambodia, the Middle East,
Mozambique, Somalia, Cyprus and the Sinai.
In all of these places, Australian service men and women have been known
for the practical way they get on with their job with discipline, good humour
and innovation.
Each of you will be changed by what lies ahead of you. But more important
than what what we do for ourselves is what we do for others what you do
will help change the lives of many people in Rwanda, it will help build a future
for Rwanda.
It's as simple and as powerful as that.
And what you do is also part of a broader national effort.
At the end of the day, yours is a very practical contribution, and, for mine, that
makes it a distinctly Australian contribution.
On behalf of the Government and on behalf of all Australians, I want to say
how proud we are of you.
I want to thank you and wish you every success in the tasks before you. And
a safe return to your families and loved ones when your tour of duty is over. 



I E L
PMM MINISTER 76194
STATEtJEN 3Y THE I1" LIME MLNISTER, THE NION P. J. K( EATING, MP
EAC NATIONAL STRATEGEES CONFERE~ NCE
As part of the changes that I announced last week for EPAC, I indicated that I would
ask the Economic Planning Advisory Commission to convene a major Conference on
Long-Termn National Strategies to be held in Sydney on November 24-25.
In my view, it is appropriate that we take stock of our national ambitions fromn time to
time in a clear-sighted way beyond the immediate concerns of the day.
Various strategic analyses have been prepared over the past year by major industry and
community groups. The National Strategies Conference will offer the opportunity to
assess these ideas and to canvass our national goals,
Using the theme " shaping our future", the conference will seek to assist the
government and others in developing medium and long-term economic and social
policies, to look at their integration with environmental concerns, and to assist in the
development of better social decision-making. The aim of the Conference is to provide
guidance on the high priority issues for Australia as we move towards the 21 st century
and beyond.
I will be attending the Conference and look forward to benefiting from its
deliberations. The Conference will provide an important occasion for the
consideration of our national priorities. I have asked EPAC to ensure that the
conference proceedings are made available to members of the public,
NOTE: The Conference program is the responsibility of EPAC and details will be announced
later this month once speakers have been finalised. Conference registration is being
handled by AIC Conferences, on an invitation basis given the limnited space available.
The EPAC contact officer is: Lynda Tin, Executive Manager, National Strategies
Task Force, ( Tel: ( 06) 270 2471 or 270 2448; Fax: ( 06) 270 2442),
The AIC contact officer is: Bryan de Caires, General Manager ( Tel: ( 02) 210 5700,
Fax: ( 02) 223 8216).
C ANBERRA
22 August 1994 I22 LL.: H L19.' 94 1(: 6b~ No. U2b F. Ul/ Ul 



Kr
PRIME MINISTER
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING THE JUSTICE FORUM, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
22 AUGUST 1994
Last October, the Government commissioned a major report on reform of our
legal system.
We did that because the Australian public was losing confidence in our legal
system.
We have in place a system of government that gives Australians access to
universal health care, quality education, improved training opportunities,
affordable child care, and a safety net of benefits and pensions.
But if we are to count ourselves as one of the world's truly great social
democracies we need to ensure Australians have appropriate access to their
legal system.
We asked the Access To Justice Committee, chaired by Ronald Sackville,
how to enhance access to justice and make the legal system fairer, more
efficient and more effective.
And that's just what the committee's done. It's an excellent report and for that
our thanks go to Ronald and his fellow committee members.
This Justice Forum is a very important part of the consultative process arising
out of the Access to Justice Report. And I very much see your attendance
here today as evidence that, like the Government, you want to see
Australians regain confidence in their legal system.
Later this year, we will take another important step down the reform path
when I deliver the Government's Justice Statement. 
We are committed to access to justice and equality before the law. The
Statement will ensure that we put in place the sort of justice system
Australians expect and deserve.
One area where we can make a start is with the criminal law.
Over the course of this Labor Government, Australia has led the world in
designing laws to combat organised crime. But we have been let down by the
provisions of our criminal laws, which are fragmented and vary between the
States and Territories.
If we are to reduce the chances of criminals escaping justice by exploiting
technicalities in the law, if we are to ensure fairness and consistency, if we
are to reduce legal costs, we need a uniform, simplified and reformed criminal
law a Model Criminal Code that all Australians can understand.
I want to see the Commonwealth implement the Model Criminal Code well
before 2001 so that the States can have ample opportunity to have the Code
up and running on a national basis by the target date of 2001.
1 think it's also time to supplement traditional, reactive enforcement strategies
with a more sophisticated emphasis on prevention, and to deal more
effectively with the underlying causes of criminal behaviour.
And I applaud the recently announced intention of Premiers and Chief
Ministers to meet later this year to discuss a concerted approach to
combating crime.
Clearly, the Commonwealth is ideally placed to accept a leadership and
coordinating role in issues of such importance for all Australians.
That's why we have been directly involved with the States and Territories in
developing new policies on issues such as firearms and domestic violence,
which deal with anti-social activity at the community level.
Co-operation between governments, law enforcement agencies and the
community is the key to controlling crime.
The Commonwealth will continue to support consultative arrangements that
lead to effective national crime prevention programs. We will sponsor
research into the causes of crime and the development of appropriate
preventive strategies.
The aim is to build a safer Australia.
We will work in partnership with the States and Territories, the profession and
the judiciary to facilitate reform. 
With my firm support, the Attorney-General and the Minister for Justice are
identifying the barriers to accessible justice and developing a major legal
reform package to make access to justice a reality for all Australians.
Let me say a few words about those areas where I think we can really make a
difference.
A major barrier to justice is its cost.
The cost of justice excludes most Australians from using a lawyer or the
courts to enforce or defend their rights.
That's not acceptable.
Freeing up the legal market is one way to reduce costs.
We are working with the States and Territories to reform the legal profession.
We want it to become more competitive, more accountable, and geared to the
needs of the people it serves.
Extending the Trade Practices Act to the professions under a national
competition policy would ensure that consumers and competitors in the legal
market enjoy the same protection available to people in other sectors.
Other reforms would make the legal services market more flexible.
Lifting restrictions on advertising would allow consumers the best possible
information on the services they need.
Improving regulations for the disclosure of fees and for the independent
assessment of costs would protect consumers.
The ability to opt for contingency fees would extend access to the legal
system. More difficult areas, such as opening up areas of work reserved to lawyers,
also need further examination.
The Council of Australian Governments will consider in February 1995 reform
proposals to make the profession more accountable and accessible than ever
before.
We are not talking about leaving the cost of justice purely to market forces.
Legal aid is another important factor in the cost equation.
An effective national legal aid scheme remains central to the Government's
social justice strategy. 
As the major provider of legal aid funding, the Commonwealth has a clear
leadership role to play. We can and should influence the way legal aid
funding is directed.
Of course, it is vital that legal aid reform is achieved in a true partnership with
the other key players the States and the legal profession. Successful
reform depends as much on their contribution as on ours.
Proposals for contingency fee arrangements with private lawyers could meet
some of the need of middle Australia for legal assistance.
And litigation lending funds and legal expenses insurance also have a place
in giving Australians a fair go when they need legal assistance.
How we spend our legal aid dollars must also reflect our commitment to
equality before the law. We must ensure that, in practice, the legal system
delivers justice evenhandedly and does not enshrine inequality.
This means making concrete commitments to fix the inherent biases in the
system. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and people from non-English
speaking backgrounds face particular difficulties and fears when dealing with
our legal system.
They should have access to interpreters and information in a language they
understand and they should be dealt with in a culturally sensitive manner.
Cultural sensitivity also requires knowledge and training. The Government is
supporting cross-cultural training initiatives by the Australian Institutes of
Judicial Administration to promote this.
Women should have greater access to appropriate and affordable advice and
support about the legal problems that affect them.
And the specific problems faced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
women in gaining access to legal aid must also be addressed.
These reforms are fundamental if we are to ensure all Australians have
access to justice.
Every day in our courts people test their rights under the law. Matters that
have the potential to touch us all are often under dispute.
The establishment of important legal precedents, for example, in human
rights, consumer protection and environmental law must be supported.
Improving access to justice must also include reforms to the means we have
available for resolving disputes in short, more choice is needed. 
While access to our courts must, of course, remain available to all, it is clear
that many cases would be better resolved without resort to expensive and
adversarial court action.
In family law, for example, the Government has begun a fundamental shift
away from litigation towards a simple and more affordable process of
mediation and counselling in appropriate cases.
We must work to expand alternatives to litigation, while ensuring that dispute
resolution remains just and fair.
Of course, reforms should also continue to be achieved in the courts. I am
very interested in proposals for the development of court charters which
would set out the courts' commitments to ' user-friendliness' and the delivery
of accessible justice.
Clearly, we all support the need for reform. And I think I can safely say that
we are all committed to rebuilding Australians' faith in their legal system.
I wish you well in your deliberations over the next two days and am pleased
to declare the Justice Forum open. 



TEL PRIME INIST.
* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INDONESIAN MINISTERIAL FORUM, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 23 AUGUST 1994
Well, it's a great pleasure to welcome our Indonesian guests to Canberra for
this Ministerial Forum.
As you know, in 1992, President Soeharto and I agreed that it would be to our
nations' mutual benefit if our Ministers from across the whole range of
government activity got together on a regular and formal basis.
We agreed on the Ministerial Forum because we both had a very strong
sense that, by being a bit more creative and enterprising across a wider
range of Ministerial portfolios, we would find new avenues for cooperation.
Back in 1992, President Soeharto and I realised that the relationship was
moving beyond the single purview of even the most activist Foreign Ministers
and they don't make them much more activist than Gareth and All.
I should mention that the outstanding work that Gareth and All have put into
this relationship over a long time their intelligent and persistent efforts
have been critical in constructing the foundation on which we now build and
our thanks go to them for that.
But Gareth and All would be the first to agree that the A, ustralia-indonesia
relationship is growing richer and deeper by the close engagement of their
colleagues from other portfolios.
Nothing brought this home to me more clearly than the Australia Today
promotion, which I and a large number of my cabinet colleagues attended in
Jakarta in June this year.
And let me again thank Coordinating Minister Hartarto for his great support
as patron of the promotion. E24 Aug .94$' 05 N0 .001 F. 01,-04 
TEL 2
The business forum and the trade exhibition, which together formed a key
part of the Australia Today promotion, showed an Australian business
community eager to expand its commercial links with Indonesia.
More than 200 Australian business people made their way to Jakarta in what
was the largest business mission ever to leave Australia.
But in many ways we shouldn't be surprised by this level of interest after
all, our two way trade has grown at a trend rate of 22 per cent for the past five
years to reach $ 3 billion in 1993. And Australia is one of the top ten investors
in Indonesia with investments of over $ 2.5 billion.
Maintaining that strong growth in the commercial relationship is one of the
key aims of this Ministerial Forum. And even in its short life, the Forum has
been a catalyst for growth in new areas.
Let me briefly touch upon just some of those areas because they show us all
just how much is actually being done.
Through the Forum we have developed bilateral agreements on copyright
protection, education and training, customs and health.
We have also set up a program of training and technical assistance to
strengthen Indonesia's intellectual property regime.
The Forum's Working Group on trade, industry and investment has helped to
resolve a number of impediments on the trade and investment front while also
promoting industry collaboration in sectors as diverse as shipbuilding,
aerospace, automotive components, medical and scientific equipment, and
textiles, clothing and footwear.
The Working Group on agriculture and food cooperation has already
facilitated three joint ventures in meat and livestock and two potential joint
ventures in horticulture. And the joint venture in cattle breeding involving the
Australian Heytesbury Pastoral Group should be operational this year.
The Working Group on education and training has promoted cooperation in
areas ranging from university management to training in tourism.
And under the Memorandum of Understanding on Education and Training, we
have identified legal education as a priority area for cooperation.
As part of the reform of its legal system, Indonesia has identified a need to
build its legal teaching profession.
So I am very pleased to announce tonight that the Australian Government will
establish an Austral ia-Indonesia Legal Education Fellowship. 4 i u 9 4 C5, N0 0 C1I R 0 0 -4 
TEL 3
This fellowship will enable an eminent Indonesian nominee to undertake a
period of study in Australia which will contribute to legal teaching in
Indonesia, Of course, the things that are happening in the Austral ia-Indonesia
relationship are not confined to the Forum and its Working Groups.
Our Transport Ministers who met here in Canberra last month have laid the
ground work for greater cooperation on transport links between northern
Australia and eastern Indonesia.
In the science and technology fields, we have had an active program of
collaboration and I am delighted that Foreign Minister Alatas and Senator
Cook will tomorrow sign an umbrella agreement on science and technology.
My colleague Brian Howe and his Indonesian counterparts have also been
exploring opportunities for cooperation in housing and urban development.
In the past two years, we have exchanged ministerial-led tripartite industrial
relations missions with Australia supporting trade union training and
occupational health and safety projects in Indonesia.
Following Senator Ray's recent successful visit, our Defence Ministers have
agreed to hold annual meetings.
As you can see, there are few areas of government activity where we're not
doing something new. The relationship is growing in all directions.
For Australia's part at least, it's hard to think of any single bilateral
relationship where so much is going on.
But, of course, our cooperation is by no means confined to the bilateral
agenda. We are working together on many multilateral issues. Links between AFTA
andCER, the ASEAN Regional Forum, regional issues such as Cambodia,
and global issues lke the World trade Organisation, are all areas where
I ndonesi! an -Australi! an cooperation has helped shape productive outcomes.
We are, of course, particularly looking forward to cooperating with Indonesia
and our other APEC partners in ensuring the success of the very important
APEC leaders' meeting which President Soeharto will chair in Bogor in
November.
As I have said before no country is more important to Australia than
Indonesia. The relations between us have never been better or more broadly
based than they are now. T24. Aug. 94 : C0 5 No 01 F . C1 1'. 
TEL 4
That's not to say that we won't encounter problems from time to time, or that
we don't have to work hard to make the relationship work. Nor is it to
understate the differences between our societies.
But it is to say that the compelling logic of our geography and our economic
development will continue to open up more and more areas for cooperation.
I have no doubt that this Forum will be fruitful. What we are learning from
each such meeting, from every new contact, is that this relationship between
Australia and Indonesia has much more to give us than we have yet taken
from it that the more things we do together, the more we discover what new
and exciting opportunities lie within our grasp. 24. Hu9.94 6 Ut) No . UU I F U4/ 11 4 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY, 23 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: I'm very pleased to announce that the Government has decided to
reopen the Australian-Embassy in Beirut and to reopen it by June
1995. As you may recall the Embassy was closed in 1984 because of
the deteriorating security position at that time, but the Government did
take the option of opening a non-diplomatic office particularly for
migration and visa clearances in 1993 and we took that decision after
the circumstance and situation in Lebanon had changed from the time
of the Accords.
We now believe the security situation, although by no means perfect,
has improved to the point where re-opening is possible, and of course,
we'll be taking every precaution to protect the staff who will be there.
I think this is going to be an important decision and an important
facility for the 250,000 Australians of Lebanese origin who have a
strong interest in the ease of communications between Australia and
Lebanon and the other thing, I think it does is it gives us a natural
opportunity to grow the linkages between Australia and Lebanon which
have been growing, though small, growing quite smartly from an
almost non existent trade of $ 3 million in 1991 to $ 13 million in 1993.
We have got Austrade and a number of Australian companies there at
a trade exhibition in Beirut for the first week of October of this year.
We have recently signed an air services agreement with Lebanon
which will help commercial and people to people links.
So, I think, the decision represents confidence in Lebanon's future, a
desire by Australia to provide an ease in the relations, particularly for
those, as I say, quarter of a million of Australians of Lebanese origin
and to underpin the fact that we want to see better commercial and 
trade relationships with Lebanon and, of course, this will be perhaps
facilitated by the fact that we have a full mission there.
So, there has been, as you know, much lobbying in the Lebanese
community over time for this. The Government has taken note of those
concerns and we said, always, that in due time we would act upon
them and we think that due time is now.
I'd be happy to take questions.
J: Does this move suggest that we might be increasing pressure on Israel
regarding their occupation of Southern Lebanon?
PM: No. I think, since 1989 when the TAlE Accords were signed we've
seen a very marked change in the fortunes of Lebanon and, of course,
more recently with the Middle East Accords between the PLO and
Israel a change there as well and I think that I would like to see
Lebanon take part in that peace process and that negotiation with
Israel and to extend the whole co-operative climate throughout the
region.
J: Have you chosen who will be the Ambassador?
PM: No, we haven't not yet.
J: Would the Ambassador be residing in Beirut?
PM: The Ambassador will be residing in Beirut.
J: So, there will be two Embassies one in Damascus and one in Beirut?
PM: That's right. One in Syria and one in Lebanon.
J: Has anybody's Government guaranteed the safety of personnel there?
PM: Well, we will as we do, I mean, missions in this country rely upon the
Australian Government to provide the protection. In the same terms
we open up such discussions with any country where we have a
mission or where we are about to have a mission. So, we'll have
discussions with the Government of Lebanon to see that every
protection and every consideration is extended to the enhanced
security of any staff who are based there.
J: Why did it take so long to reopen given that a lot of other western
nations reopened their embassies some time ago?
PM: Well, I think, they are all judgements about the environment and also, I
think, in opening in January 1993 a lot of the immigration work was 
effectively being done, anyway, through that office. So, in a sense,
we've had a staged process.
J: Prime Minister, it's not usual for you to make an announcement
personally of this nature, do you feel the need to increase your profile
amongst Australia's ethnic community?
PM: No, it is just that I have had a long association with the ethnic
communities and particularly a long association with the Lebanese
community. Particularly in Western Sydney and I have had many,
many hundreds of representations on this issue over time. The
Lebanese community in Australia, those of Lebanese origin, are a fair
proportion of our country and something as central to their interests as
this, I think, deserves an announcement by the Government and, in
this case, by me.
J: Mr Prime Minister, would you be yourself opening the Embassy in
Beirut?
PM: I wouldn't make that commitment, but it will be opened with some
aplomb I can assure you.
J: Is it your decision to ( inaudible) Accords, Prime Minister?
PM: I don't think so. I think the Syrian Government, on the contrary, I think
the Syrian Government, the whole point of the Accords and the
sovereignty of Lebanon which has arisen from it is best recognised by
diplomatic recognition.
J. Mr Keating, are you satisfied with the way the Cambodian authorities
are handling the hostage situation in Cambodia and what was your
rettahcteonA ustrlianhostg-e asking for Adistralian authorities to
take over negotiations?
PM: Well I think that this has been a difficult issue for us and any of these
hostage situations are difficult, particularly in the context of the
discussion we're having. The tensions between the interests of the
Khmer Rouge and the Government of Cambodia and negotiations
between Australia and Cambodia over other different issues. I mean, I
think we can only rely upon their best endeavours to see that we can
get the hostages free.
J: Mr Keating, do you see the Government's decision to override
Tasmarna on the gp~ lwaws issue as some sort of test for Alexander
Downer in terms of his policy position on the family and those sorts of
liberty issues?
PM: Well, I think that we have to come back to an essential truth here. And
what the coalition are always trying to speak of is the rights of the 
States and sovereignty for the States. This is the right of a Tasmanian
cabinet to decide a matter like this, in the face of an international
treaty. Now, this is a treaty that Australia relies upon when it makes
remarks around the world about human rights, and rights and liberties
of people. One can't invoke it in those circumstances and not invoke it
at home. So therefore, the Commonwealth has particularly after the
UN's action an obligation here. And it's an obligation under an
international treaty. Now, there is this notion afoot within the coalition
thaFthbre is something illegitimate about international treaties, and the
Commonwealth role. The foreign affairs power was given to the
Commonwealth at Federation. And we have to keep, I mean, I think,
we have to remind people particularly in the Liberal Party, and in the
States that Federation was an act of creation of the nation. It was not
a set of protections for the States. I mean, the debate is now so
warped, people think that Federation is in some way in the mouths of
self-serving arguments by Premiers a set of protections for the
States, that they are the foundation stones on which the nation is built.
This is not so. TheFederation was an act of creation of the nation,
and these powers are powers given to the operation of the nation, and
that's why, you know, phoney calls for sovereignty for States, and
trying to hide behind them, Mr Downer trying to hide behind them,
given his expressed views on this subject, is going to, I think, again
test whether he has any policy substance.
J: Mr Keating, on one other matter, Mr Jons position in Victoria do you
support Mr Jones attempts to stay in the seat of Laor, and r~ tain the
Presidency?
PM: In every boundary change, set of bQundary changes, there is always a
reshuffling of interests. And this has happened-to all of us over the
years. Nobody is immune from a change in these things. Senator
Evans has expressed an interest, I think, in seeing whether he should
make the transition to the Lower House. That's his perfect right. He's
a senior Minister, he's a major contributor to the Government and to
the country, and he will do what I am sure everyone in the political
process does, and that is, find themselves a spot. Now whether that
spot is Mr Jones' spot or another, remains to be seen. But I don't think
any MP has immunity from the pressures the day to day real world
pressures of their party at these particular moments.
J: So, if it came to a choice between Senator Evans...
PM: OK. I think..
J Mr Jones
PM: Let me just say.
J you'd be prepared to see Mr Jones... 
PM: I'm not here to be giving you Labor Party open-heart surgery, even
though I know you think if I cross the threshold a footpath, a doorway
then one should open one's heart to the media. Now you know I'm
generally a kindly person, and I open it more often than I should.
J: Prime Minister....
PM: But the thing is I don't think I can be,... except let me just repeat the
point. That these are a real-world set of pressures in what Senator
Evans sees and which I would concur in some legitimate aspiration
by him to move to the central cockpit of Australian politics, the House
of Representatives. Now, whether in fact, how this is accommodated
in the Victorian scene you know, time will tell.
J: But you understand that those comments will be interpreted as support
for Senator Evans, vis a vis Mr Jones?
PM: No. Well, I don't think they are entitled to be interpreted that way, but
I.. let me make very clear my support for the senior Minister's of the
Government and in Senator Evans' case, you know, very obvious and
clear support for his continuation in a very central position in
Australian public life. Thank you.
ends. 



TEL: &amp; Au .94 1 : I5 No. 009 P. 0
PRIME MINISTER 77' 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY BEIRUT
I am pleased to announce the Government has agreed in principle to re-open the
Australian Embassy in Beirut in 1995. The Governiment is planning that the Embassy
will be operational by around July next year.
The Embassy was closed in 1984 as a result of the deteriorating security situation
caused by Lebanon's civil war. Since then, Australia's interests in Lebanon have been
handled through the Australian Embassy in Damascus. A small non-diplomatic office
was established in Beirut in January 1993 to assist with visa processing and consular
services. The decision wil be of immediate assistance to the 250,000 people of Lebanese origin
who live in Australia and who have a strong interest in ease of communications
between Australia and Lebanon.
The Government's decision to re-establish an official Australian diplomatic presence in
Beirut represents an expression of confidence in Lebanon's future and in the prospects
for Australia's relations with Lebanon,
Australia has welcomed the recent positive developments in the Middle East peace
process and hopes that these developments will1 provide the impetus for the early
conclusion of a comprehensive settlement, including a peace treaty between Lebanon
and Israel. Australia also hopes that the Lebanese Government will press ahead with
its program of national reconciliation after nearly two decades of sectarian conflict.
The presence of an Australian Embassy in Beirut will help to foster trade and
commercial links between the two countries. Lebanon's reconstruction program offers
many opportunities for foreign construction and engineering companies. The
Government hopes that Australian companies will be able to compete more effectively
for a part in Lebanon's reconstruction with the assistance that an official Australian
presence in Beirut can provide.
CANBERRA 23 August 1994 I IDi-. 



i
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, " GENAREN", NARROMINE, 24 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: You acknowledge that drouth! is frequent what programs can the
Federal Government put in place to make the job easier for farmers?
PM: Well, I think my point was let's not regard drought as an entirely
exceptional thing. Let's deal with the exceptional circumstances when
they arise, but let's keep long-term programs in because drought is
around most of the time now in one form or another. I think, that's
what we're trying to do. That is, to try and design the. RAS scheme
the Rural Adjustment Scheme in a way where we can actually support
people who are viable and carry them help carry them through
difficult drought times.
J; Does that mean there won't be any more emergency aid during this
drought?
PM: No, no. That's no, I think there will always be hard hit areas that do
need emergency relief. And I think you've got to do two things you've
got to have an emergency facility, and you've got to have a longer term
facility.
J: Will there be further funding coming? The Government has offered
$ 14 million two weeks ago, is there any more coming?
PM: Well, I think that we will see how that applies. I mean, we're now
starting to review the application of the RAS scheme across the States
to see that it applies that the generosity of the scheme is uniform, and
to make sure in the review of RAS that the criteria for payments and
assistance in drought affected areas, you know, is really a workable
program. 
J: What about suspending the assets test a lot of producers would like
to see that happen?
PM: But then, what do you say about the assets test for people in the rural
towns? And everywhere else? You see, that's a. . that means
suspending the assets test in general. That's what that means.
J: So that proposal that will go to Caucus next week is likely to fail?
PM: Well, I think that's a very difficult one to manage. I mean, we've
already got now substantial concessions in rural home excluded, fifty
per cent of the value is, I think, is only taken into account.
J: The athletes success at the Commonwealth games yesterday a lot of
people are saying that Australia.. ( inaudible)..
PM: Oh well, I think that Australians feel justifiably proud of their athletes
with the tally of gold medals we've won and as with these games, I
think, most of the people the Australians thought would be stars have
not disappointed them. And Australia is a great sporting country and
it's further confirmation of this fact.
J: Cathy Freeman won the, I think, 400 metres this morning and she ran
her victory lap with the Australian flag and the Aboriginal flag. What
are your comments on the flag over there at the Commonwealth
games?
PM: Oh well, she had the Australian flag. I mean she's an aboriginal
person. Anyone of prominence, ' andabkoriginal person of prominence,
they associate with the aboriginal flag from time to time. I mean, I
don't think we can be too critical of that.
J: She's one of our most successful aboriginal athletes at the
moment.. ( inaudible)?
PM: I think of course it is. I mean aboriginal Australians have distinguished
themselves down through time, and they're still at it.
J: Prime Minister, business leaders are placing pressure on Alexander
Downer to release more details in his directions statement. Do you
think he will capitulate?
PM: Well, you can't be in the game of politics and not have policies. Mr
Downer wants to be a player in the game of politics without policies.
And to have, you know, sort of feelings about policies or directions, but
not actually have them. The reason he doesn't want to tell us is not
that he doesn't have them, he thinks that we won't like them. I mean,
obviously, he has a whole lot of hardline policies. It's not that he
hasn't thought about these policies, it's just that he doesn't believe that 
the public will like them. So he's being monkey-cunning and sitting on
them.
J: Is he in danger of alienating the business community?
PM: I think the business community is taking a dim view of the coalition.
Look at the.. I said at the time he was elected they've changed the
jockey but not the horse. I mean the problem about the liberal party is
it has institutionally had it. It doesn't know anymore what it wants to do
with Australia, and doesn't know how. Even if it knew, it doesn't know
how. It couldn't control inflation in the seventies, it had no policies for
faster rates of growth, it certainly had no trade policies of substance.
And when the business community now see the growing economy, four
per cent employment growth, five per cent economic growth, low
inflation, high profits, they say well before we shift from this, the
coalition have got to give us a coherent strategy. And of course, no,
Mr Downer doesn't have a coherent strategy. Dr Hewson didn't have
one, Mr Peacock didn't have one, Mr Howard didn't have one, and
that's why I think the business community is saying we better stick with
the party we know, and the Government we know.
J: Barry Jones has got ( inaudible)
PM: Well, I'm not here to answer any more..
J: Just one more local story. I believe this is your first time to the area Mr
Keating. We were just wondering the perception is that people in
Canberra are neglecting the situation out here with the drought. Do
you think it's important for you to be able to see it first hand and see,
you know, what the situation is here?
PM: Yes. Well, I do, and I think it is important to get a feel, a local feel, of
drought affected areas and drought conditions. I mean, I've seen it
many times over my parliamentary life, and it's a matter of trying to
tailor the programs and policies to deal with it. But we're also seeing a
lot of leadership. And what we're seeing here today is a lot of
leadership about preservation of the country-side concern about
salinity, concern about soil erosion, innovative farming policies to
minimise erosion, to improve the yield from pasture, sensible stocking
levels, you know, preservation of remnant forests. I mean, this is the
lesson that we're seeing, I think, with the leadership of a lot of people
in farm communities. That's our hope. That's going to be our hope.
Now the Commonwealth can play a role we can play a role in
Landcare, we can play a role in trying to encourage the farm
community into better practices. But we're now starting to see that
come naturally, and I think that this is when we will see this blossom.
When the farm community's leadership is such that this becomes the
norm in rural Australia. And as well as that, we're seeing an
improvement in prices, which is always a cheering thing, that is,
something to cheer people up. I mean, wool Prices have improved, 
4
and as rural incomes start to shift up, that's going to cause a bit more
joy.
J: Do you think the personal effects of drought do you think they're
starting to hit home with people now? Like, do you feel that more and
more politicians are realising that this is the situation we can't pretend
it's not as bad as it really is out here?
PM: I don't think anyone is pretending that at all. I think that people know it
is, it's just the bewildering problem of an absence of rain, and how you
keep viable people on the land until the drought conditions break.
That's the point of getting these Rural Adjustment Schemes and that
right, so they truly are helpful carrying people on. Okay, thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 78/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
NEW LANDCARE PROJECTS FUNDED
More than 700 new community environment projects are to be funded under
the Federal Government's National Landcare Program.
The $ 5 million in grants which will be funded under the Land and Water, One
Billion Trees and Save the Bush elements of the National Landcare Program,
will make it possible for communities to make a significant contribution to
repairing the land.
Land degradation is one of our most serious national environmental
problems. But this is an area where there is an historic alliance between
farming and conservation groups and between all levels of government in
support of a common aim.
Of the total funding $ 2.5 million has been allocated to Land and Water
projects, almost $ 1 million to the One Billion Trees and $ 1.5 million to Save
the Bush.
The projects have been recommended by State and Territory Assessment
Panels which are made up of community, state and local government
representatives.
The remainder of the grants under the $ 112 million Landcare program in
1994/ 95 are allocated to joint Commonwealth/ State projects and research
activities. Senator Collins will announce further details today of the $ 72.95
million grants for new and continuing projects under the land and water
elements of Landcare.
The National Landcare Program is a catalyst for mobilising information, skills
and resources to improve the capacity of all land holders to manage their
land in an economically viable and environmentally sustainable manner.
The Government has committed more than $ 420 million during the Decade of
Landcare ( 1990-2000) for Landcare and related tree planting and remnant
vegetation conservation programs.
NARROMINE, NSW
24 AUGUST 1994 



' 2
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT " GENAREN", NARROMINE NSW
LAUNCH OF THE NATIONAL LANDCARE PROGRAM GRANTS 1994-95
24 AUGUST 1994
Well thanks very much, Michael and Kylie. Don and Megan Sutherland, the
Shire President, Robert Wilson. Robert, thank you for coming out today. The
other 12 neighbours who have supported this project, and the volunteers, the
LEAP volunteers and the Australian Trust for Conservation volunteers, and
ladies and gentlemen.
Well, it's a great pleasure to be involved with a project like this as the
occasion for announcing the grants for 1994-95, that is the community grants
component of the National Landcare. Progra m of $ 5 million to fund 711 new
community environment projects around the country. And there needs, with
any such announcement, some indication of what these funds are for, and
how they are spent, to communicate what they mean and to enthuse the
country and the community with the need to be doing these things. And I'm
delighted to be at " Genaren" today to see the preservation of this remnant
bush, which has been in some respects, preserved by the fact that the
Sutherland family have farmed this area for so long, and where they have
very low stocking levels, and the consequence of all this has meant that there
is something here that we can draw from and build upon in seeing this project
some to. fruition. And it's a great thing, I think, that Australians are so
committed and to see volunteers as we are seeing them, help in erecting this
fence which, already five kilometres of which is built, and it's going to be, I
think, six, around 400 hectares, or if you still speak in acres as I do, 1000
acres, which is a large lump of country. To see what can happen when we
allow nature to prevail and the natural species to live in harmony with the
property. I suppose it's a commentary on where we've come as a country in rural terms,
that we are celebrating the preservation of 1000 acres of remnant bush. One
would have thought that with a country so large as this that there would have
been many areas so preserved. But this has not been so, with land clearing
and with the practices over the last century, and particularly with the 
introduced species the foxes and the rabbits and the feral cats which have
done so much damage to the native species, and that effects of course the
flora, and that changes the whole balance of the area. And I'm very
interested in Michael saying that they intend now to introduce wallabies back
into the area, which have an impact upon the flora which itself will then set up
other balances in the area. It's such a large piece of land, it's going to be a
very interesting experiment, I think, to see what exactly can be done and what
can be achieved in something so representative as this.
Now, in announcing these projects for 1994-95, it means that we'll be doing
similar things across the country. The important thing, I think, is the
awareness of the land and the respect for the land which the Landcare
program is, in a sense, inducing. But of course the program is one thing it
means nothing without the people. And leadership always matters it matters
everywhere, and it matters in this as in everything else.
And I think that the leadership which Michael and Kylie are showing here is
going to be important to this district because there is a view that the city
slickers have sort of got hold of this issue and we people on the land
shouldn't really be, basically, pushed around by these sort of programs. But
when you see people who have farmed areas for so long, as is the case of
this family for a century or so, showing that leadership and also beyond
simply the Landcare project itself into enhanced conservation of the property,
of the sensible management of water, of care and protection against erosion,
care about stocking levels, balancing that part of the property which is~ a6detJ
pasture and that which is not, this is the sort of leadership that Australia
needs in rural Australia. And that, I think, is going to make the difference
across the country. The Commonwealth can help, with it's programs, but this
is essentially a community thing.
And it's where, I think, rural Australia and people in the countryside of this
nation of ours are saying that the community alone can do this, we need
some financial assistance from the government but it is not a claim or a call
on the government to go and do something. It is, essentially, a call to an
enhanced understanding and appreciation for the land which is ours. So, I
am absolutely delighted with the level of commitment and the leadership
particularly by young people such as Michael and Kylie and the interest in
the species of flora and fauna which is so evident in Michael's remarks. This
is the sort of, if you like, educated enthusiasm which is going to make this
program and this sort of thing, work.
I hope that as we grow and prosper, as we learn more, that we come to know
that the indiscriminate clearing of land is a danger to us, that it threatens the
ground, that we have developed ourselves now as a major producer of wool
in the world, that the country has actually made the transition to hard hoofed
animals, from the native soft ones. And yet, we can do that and survive the
experience of that change if we are careful about how we do it. And, it is that,
I think, engendering that sort of spirit that is going to make the difference.
I 
Now, I know that it is hard to engender spirit in difficult times. And,
particularly with the drought. Drought coming and going in some areas, in
one year, off the next, back the following year... It is very dispiriting,
destroying farm incomes, creating a lot of rural poverty. And, the point I was
trying to make a week or two ago is, I think, that we have to regard the
drought as something that is around, in places, most of the time, coming and
going. And, we need programs to deal with it as well as the funding which the
Commonwealth announced my colleague, Bob Collins, announced a week
or so ago $ 13.89 million for exceptional circumstances funding for the
drought where it hits an area particularly hard. And, as you know, we are
adjusting the Rural Adjustment Scheme -( RAS) seeing where you have viable
farms but they take a knock in some particular year, that there is some
financial assistance to be able to meet some of those costs to keep the bank
happy and to keep the business on the road. That, I think, is the challenge.
It is probably true, though I'm not the one to say, that weather patterns have
changed, that we are in a cycle we may have been in at other times in this
century where drought is around quite often. And, I think, we owe it to the
rural community of this country, to those people who are in very viable
country, particularly, and even those at the margins who can generally
survive from one season to another, to help them through with assistance.
That's why we're keeping the RAS scheme and its application under review,
and why we are seeking to get some sort of uniformity in its application
across the states so that in one state, and not another, people are being
treated more generously than somewhere else.
So, there are a few bright spots on the horizon. Wool prices have picked up
and that is going to make a difference to rural incomes. We've been seeing
prices around 700 cents for certain categories of wool which is a substantial
improvement on what we've seen. We're still living, of course, and have
been, with the overhang of the wool stockpile but that is being managed and
we've got, after all, the premium fibre in the world. We produce it in this
country and we're the best at it. So, that is a strong thing for us and, of
course, the grain markets of the world are essentially insatiable and that
depends, of course on good seasons and some innovation in the way we
crop this country. At any rate, one has to be, despite the problems, an
optimist about the future in terms of rural industry with an improvement in the
general understanding of the marketing of our various major commodities.
And, a willingness certainly on the part of the federal government and I am
sure the state governments too to help farmers where help can be really
valuable in getting them through a difficult period where drought has been
about. So, today, I think, we have some things to celebrate and this project here at
' Genaren', the preservation of this remnant vegetation of what it would have
been like... We're seeing here what we might have seen right across this
region of NSW, in various ways, the natural bushland, which has, because of
enlightened management been preserved enough of it preserved to let it
regenerate back. And, I certainly congratulate Michael and Kylie, all those 
4
owners nearby who are committed to this and to the volunteers who have
their heart and their faith in Australia, in the value of the land and our respect
for it and wanting to put something back. It is your leadership that is going to
make the difference. And, congratulations to you, one and all.
ends. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL CAPITAL APPEAL
THURSDAY, 25 AUGUST 1994
When I launched the ' Australia Remembers' program here only last week I
expressed my affection for this place and my high regard for the work that is
done here.
For a long time now the Memorial has been the most visited museum or
gallery in Australia. Attendances this year are booming. I understand that
more than 900,000 people will visit this year. They come, I think, as Manning
Clark once put it, ' to understand what it means to be Australian'.
This Memorial is a great national institution which touches the lives of millions
of Australians and we want to see it continue to grow.
It must never get out of touch with the times, or grow inward looking and
parochial. The message of the Memorial must remain powerful and persuasive from one
generation to the next. Therefore its galleries are bound to need regular
renovation and renewal.
I am pleased to say that over the last decade the Commonwealth government
has played its part in seeing that we meet this responsibility.
The Memorial has a professional and well-qualified staff and a collection that
is well-housed, well-documented and secure.
But a much greater challenge now presents itself. Over the next decade all
of the Memorial's major galleries will be renewed in order to tell their stories
coherently and comprehensively in a language that today's visitors and
tomorrow's will understand.
The Memorial has embarked on an exciting and ambitious program and today
I announce the launch of a Capital Appeal which aims to raise the necessary
million over the next three to five years.
The Commonwealth Government has given the lead gift of $ 2.5 million to
renew the Pacific War Gallery. We announced this in the May Budget. 
2
In addition the Budget also allowed for an increase of $ 2 million annually to
the Memorial's base funding.
This injection of funds will guarantee that the building is sound, that there is
an adequate and qualified staff for the tasks ahead, and that the collection is
properly managed and developed.
A great deal of work has gone into the preparations for the launch of this
appeal. In each state and territory the Memorial has established advisory groups
made up of business and community leaders. These men and women are
giving their time freely and generously and I thank them for that.
The first stage of the appeal is aimed at corporate Australia. Only in the
second stage will the general public be called on for donations. I have no
doubt that both stages will meet with a generous response.
In launching the appeal today I also invite state governments to demonstrate
their support perhaps by collectively matching the Commonwealth's gift of
million.
While we cherish what has been achieved at the Memorial, we cannot fail to
see what needs to be done.
This Pacific War Gallery is a perfect example of the story half told.
It was at Milne Bay and on the Kokoda Track that Australian troops turned
back the Japanese. It was in the Pacific War that the battle for Australia was
won. The story of those battles and the spirit of the Australians who were engaged
in them must be told here at the Australian War Memorial and with
government and public support it will be.
I congratulate the Council, the Director and his staff for deciding to embark
upon the challenge of renewal, and all those who have worked so hard to
establish this Capital Appeal.
I sincerely hope that state governments, business and the community at large
, will respond: and I am confident that they will because each year, by coming
here in such numbers, they prove their affection for the Memorial and their
respect for the Australian men and women whose great sacrifice is honoured
here. It is a great national cause, and it is with pleasure that I now launch it.
CANBERRA August 1994 



PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH TO THE TOURISM TASK FORCE, PARK GRAND HOTEL SYDNEY
FRIDAY 26 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
This program has already brought about the splendid restoration of the Old Treasury
Building in Melbourne, a great example of what can be achieved when We get cool~
e-rtion from State Governments. I know that Jeffrey Is going to do his best to
claim all that for himself, but that's par for the course.
The Customs House here In Sydney, which Is now I'm happy to say, part of a very
important public debate, is one of the city's oldest and best loved buildings, is another
heritage building receiving assistance. Under the program the Federal Government
Is providing $ 24 million towards its restoration so It can serve as an important tourist
and ' cultural c-entre, and I'm very pleased can I say, that with the debate that we have
had on this building, that It's engendered the debate about East Circular Quay and I'm
delighted that we are able to work with the Lord Mayor who has shown a tremendous
amount of leadership In this, and the various authorities and the owners, to get a
really first-class result on the buildings that abut the Opera House, which Is arguably
the most Important building easily the most Important building in the country anid
arguably the most important building built In the 1960s anywhere in the world.
And I think It Is you know that the debate now about Circular Quay and the
government of New South Wales has Invited public comment about how it might be
developed but I will be seeing the Premier next week and I think it should be
possible for the NSW and Commonwealth Governments to agree on a regime which
gives some focus to Circular Quay, and makes the Customs House the central focus
as the central civic building of the Quayside, and hopefully develops a square In front
of it that lets all the people of this country come to the Quay not to view it, if you like,
at the margin from the overseas terminal, or on the way around the Opera House, but
centrally, In the central part of a central site of the city. 
And this Is going to take some... think it~ s a proposition that can really come to life,
but it does mean removing the Cahill Expressway and I think we can remove it at a
very acceptable cost. At any rate, the Commonwealth is prepared to do this. And I
think the Important thing about it Is that with the Olympics coming in the year 2000,
it's Important that when the Olympics come and go~ that we leave things behind for
the city and for the country, and this key tourism site in Australia Circular Quay, the
Opera House I think getting that focus now and the opportunity of the Games, is
something that we shouldn't let pass. There are other things that I'm speaking to
NSW about, which are about the city of Sydney the Expressway as it leaves that
part of the city and goes down towards Woolloomooloo Bay, as you know divides the
Domain from the Gardens, which were once one single area, and there's a discussion
going about burying that roadway so that it no longer divides that green space in the
city. All these things, I think, are going to be important. But as well as East Circular
Quay, we've got the GPO and Martin Place, and the Commonwealth has been
involved I've been involved myself to see that It Is sympathetically developed, and
that again, in this key precinct of the city and Martin Place, in what is one of the most
important heritage buildings, the uses not yet defined, probably a hotel, but one that
will sit with some sympathy and comfort with the site. And again, I'm indebted to the
Lord Mayor and the Sydney City Planning Authority, in dealing with this and of course
Austr-alia Post which has cooperated in trying to -get a decent development.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
Please check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCH, PARK GRAND HOTEL SYDNEY
FRIDAY 26 AUGUST 1994
When I first entered Parliament you would have been hard pressed to find a reference
to the Australian tourism industry in any of our newspapcrs.
If people wanted to visit Australia and find thcmselves a spot on the beach, that was
fine by us, but we didn't go out of our way to sell our country as a tourist destination.
And once thc visitors arrived, well it was up to them to make their own way around
Australia, It was, at best, marketing by osmosis.
Back in 1973, the main reason international visitors made the trip to Australia was to
visit friends and relatives.
Three in every four visitors made their way from either Europe, North Amierica or
New Zealand while only one in eight came from Asia.
It was a case of visiting the safe and failiar with just a twist of the exotic.
Of course, that's all changed now.
And, in so mnany ways, what's happened to our tourism industry reflects the wider
internationalisation of Australia and its economy.
As Australia has opencd up to embrace the world, and particularly Asia, so too has our
tourism industry.
It's clearly one of our great success stories and it holds great hope for the future.
A decade ago we welcomed I million visitors, today it is 3 milion and by the centenary
of Federation it should be more than 7 million. 
The image we now present to the world is of an extraordinary array of natural beauty and
charm backed up by a sophisticated and diverse multicultural society.
It's a niche shopper's holiday paradise.
The World Travel and Tourism Council has forecast that between now and the year 2005
travel and tourism combined will create 112 million jobs in the Asia Pacific alone.
Obviously, Australia is very well placed to capture a slice of that action we have one of the
most competitive tourist industries in the world.
And as the focus of world economic activity has shifted to Asia, so too has our tourist
promotion. Today, one in every two visitors comes here from Asia.
Obviously, globalisation is driving the tourism boom.
As global communications and information highways increase our exposure to other cultures,
languages, and landscapes, so grows our desire to experience these things first hand.
The more time we spend at home with our televisions and computers, the more we want to
travel and experience the world.
That goes some way to explaining why tourism is, and will remain, one of the world's fastest
growing industries.
But what is particularly exciting for us is the rate of growth in Australia -in 1993 our tourism
market grew at three times the world average.
Tourism now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earnings and is, without doubt,
central to Australia's economnic prosperity.
But I don't need to remind anyone here that many others are in the race, with a good number
of them just as desperate to capture the global tourist dollar.
So what can the Government do to facilitate the continued expansion of the industry?
Well, let me touch today on just four areas where I think the Government can make a
difference. And they are training, regional tourism promotion, infrastnructure development and the
preservation of our heritage buildings.
Let's start with training because this decade tourism should create around a quarter of a milion
new jobs in Australia. 
If our tourism workers display world class service standards, there's no doubt we'll secure a
place in the front rank of tourist destinations.
As we demonstrated in the White Paper on Employment and Growth, Working Nation,
training more highly skilled workers and delivering a more flexible and productive workplace is
a Government priority.
Indeed, we have no higher priority.
In Working Nation, We suspended the training guarantee, introduced a training wage,
increased fuinding for the Australian National Training Authority, doubled the number of labour
market and vocational training places and increased the number of entry level training places by
50,000. And let me take this opportunity to congratulate the tourism industry and the Tourism Task
Force for their role in leading the way in workplace reform.
It was, after all, the Tourism Task Force that brought together some of Australia's leading
hotels to draw up new workplace agreements that should come into place later this year.
These new agreements will benefit staff, management, and tourists.
I should also mention that in May this year, under a new Workplace Bargaining Program, we
decided to provide an additional $ 27 million to further promote productive and cooperative
bargaining in Australian workplaces.
This should lead to a range of agreements across the tourism industry from high profile 5 star
hotels to smaller properties in the hotel-motel sector, both unionised and non-unionised.
In Working Nation we also paid particular attention to the regions of Australia. We did that
for the fuindamental reason that forms the basic philosophy of Working Nation. that is, we want
all Australians to share in the recovery.
And that means we make sure we bring the people of regional Australia along with us.
Clearly tourism provides regions with an excellent opportunity to create jobs and diversify their
economic base.
And Australia offers a host of diverse and unique holiday experiences away from our capital
cities and major tourist gateways.
Through responsible planning and management, regions can develop tourism opportunities that
guarantee sustainable tourismn enterprises and long term employment.
To this end, we included a $ 42 milion regional tourism package in the Federal Budget, eight
million dollars of which has already made its way to some 89 projects right around Australia.
And the cornerstone of this package, the Regional Tourism Development Program will help
regions develop integrated tourism plans. 
Extension of the EMDG scheme to tourism operators, which we also announced in Working
Naion, should also make a difference in the regions.
But if more regions of Australia are to benefit from the tourism explosion then we need to
ensure we have a world class infrastructure.
That's why, in Working Nation, we allocated $ 70 million dollars to a Regional Strategic
Infrastructure Fund and freed up the arrangements governing infrastructure bonds.
It's also why we introduced greater competition to our aviation industry.
Several years ago now, this Governuent recognised the need to restructure our aviation
industry. We amalgamnated Australian Airlines and Qantas and opened international services to
competition from Ansett so as to increase the range of marketing opportunities for the tourism
industry. And I might mention that I'll be back here in Sydney on Monday to attend the acceptance
ceremony for Ansett's first Boeing 747 aircraft.
These reforms to the aviation industry have already delivered major benefits to Australian
consumers and our international visitors.
Since 1990, the number of domestic passengers has more than doubled, air fares have
decreased by 25 per cent in real terms, and flights have increased on our 50 busiest routes.
But the reform must continue.
And that's why the Government has announced its intention to sell all the Federal airports and
the airport at Badgerys Creek, subject to the outcome of a scoping study.
The in-principle decision to sell the Federal airports is directed primarily to improving the
efficiency of airport investments and operations.
This should result in Australia's airport system developing into one of the most innovative
private airport industries in the world.
But to those of you here who are concerned that the benefits from the sale of the ' big' airports
may be outweighed by the impact on some of the so called ' loss makers', let me say I am
confident that we can adequately address the issue of loss making airports without
disadvantaging local commiunities.
The final area that I want to touch upon is the importance of heritage buildings to our tourism
industry. 
By preserving the best of our heritage buildings, by looking after those things that give our
cities their special character, we give to future generations a sense of place, a sense of our
urban heritage, and a sense of our unique national culture.
At the same time, we make Australia an even more attractive place to visit.
This was the thinking that lay behind the Historic Properties Restoration Program which we
announced in Onte Nation,
Importantly, this was the first Federal initiative specifically directed to the preservation and
restoration of significant heritage buildings.
This program has already brought about the splendid restoration of the Old Treasury Buildinig
in Melbourne, a great example of what we can achieve when we get co-operation from State
Governments. The Customs House here in Sydney, which is one of the city's oldest and best-loved buildings,
is another heritage building receiving assistance.
Under the program, the Federal Government is providing $ 24 million towards its restoration so
that it can serve as an important tourist and cultural centre.
Through programs like this one, we're giving Australians, and international visitors, a better
appreciation of our history and culture.
At the same time, we're providing jobs and investing further in our cultural and tourism
industries. The Government initiatives that I have touched upon today are all designed to build on the
hard work of the industry to ensure that tourism continues to be a driving force in Austaa'
economi~ c and cultural development.
And while the Government has played an important role in all this, it has been largely a
facilitating role.
The credit for the current strength and the potential of tourism in Australia must go in the
main, to you, the industry, who have worked so hard to establish Australian tourism as a
dynamic, prosperous and internationally competitive industry.
Irm very excited by the prospects for our tourism industry and I have a very strong sense that if
we can build on our many great competitive strengths, we can go a long way to passing on a
much better Australia to those who come after us.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
SACKING OF DR HEWSON
The striking down of Dr Hewson by Mr Downer today means that the divisions
in the Liberal Party which have persisted since 1983 are destined to remain.
The Liberal Party has one elected leader and three former leaders in the
wings, and the only thing they can agree upon is that their interests will never
coincide. This continues to rob the Liberal Party of cohesion, coherence and
a sense of purpose.
Dr Hewson correctly believes that policies are the stuff of politics: that without
policies there can be no substance to public debate and no political morality.
Mr Downer told a business dinner in Sydney last week that Dr Hewson's
mistake in 1993 was to reveal his policies and that he has no intention of
doing the same. It is not that he doesn't have policies it is simply that he
knows that the public won't like them.
Mr Downer believes that he can participate in the public debate without
policies that is, without revealing his policies.
This action today shows Mr Downer in his true colours as a 1950' s style
politician who believes that it is sufficient to serve up political rhetoric and
loose ideology without addressing Australia's continuing need for reform.
Mr Downer is as far removed from the needs of the modern Australian
political system as it is possible to be.
The contest between Dr Hewson and Mr Downer is a contest over the central
idea that modern Australian society needs change and that the contemporary
electorate deserves a right to evaluate and adjudicate on policy.
Mr Downer may have displaced Dr Hewson from the front bench, but he
cannot displace the need for policy substance and policy integrity.
CANBERRA
26 August 1994 79/ 94 



PRIME MINISTER
Please check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TOURISM TASK FORCE LUNCH, PARK GRAND HOTEL SYDNEY
FRIDAY 26 AUGUST 1994
When I first entered Parliament you would have been hard pressed to find a reference
to the Australian tourism industry in any of our newspapers.
If people wanted to visit Australia and find themselves a spot on the beach, that was
fine by us, but we didn't go out of our way to sell our country as a tourist destination.
And once the visitors arrived, well it was up to them to make their own way around
Australia. It was, at best, marketing by osmosis.
Back in 1973, the main reason international visitors made the trip to Australia was to
visit friends and relatives.
Three in every four visitors made their way from either Europe, North America or
New Zealand while only one in eight came from Asia.
It was a case of visiting the safe and familiar with just a twist of the exotic.
Of course, that's all changed now.
And, in so many ways, what's happened to our tourism industry reflects the wider
internationalisation of Australia and its economy.
As Australia has opened up to embrace the world, and particularly Asia, so too has our
tourism industry.
It's clearly one of our great success stories and it holds great hope for the future.
A decade ago we welcomed 1 million visitors, today it is 3 million and by the centenary
of Federation it should be more than 7 million. 
The image we now present to the world is of an extraordinary array of natural beauty and
charm backed up by a sophisticated and diverse multicultural society.
It's a niche shopper's holiday paradise.
The World Travel and Tourism Council has forecast that between now and the year 2005
travel and tourism combined will create 112 million jobs in the Asia Pacific alone.
Obviously, Australia is very well placed to capture a slice of that action we have one of the
most competitive tourist industries in the world.
And as the focus of world economic activity has shifted to Asia, so too has our tourist
promotion. Today, one in every two visitors comes here from Asia.
Obviously, globalisation is driving the tourism boom.
As global comm-unications and information highways increase our exposure to other cultures,
languages, and landscapes, so grows our desire to experience these things first hand.
The more time we spend at home with our televisions and computers, the more we want to
travel and experience the world.
That goes some way to explaining why tourism is, and will remain, one of the world's fastest
growing industries.
But what is particularly exciting for us is the rate of growth in Australia in 1993 our tourism
market grew at three times the world average.
Tourism now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earniings and is, without doubt,
central to Australia's economric prosperity.
But I don't need to remind anyone here that many others are in the race, with a good number
of them just as desperate to capture the global tourist dollar.
So what can the Government do to facilitate the continued expansion of the industry?
Well, let me touch today on just four areas where I think the Government can make a
difference. And they are training, regional tourism promotion, infrastructure development and the
preservation of our heritage buildings.
Let's start with training because this decade tourism should create around a quarter of a million
new jobs in Australia. 
If our tourism workers display world class service standards, there's no doubt we'll secure a
place in the front rank of tourist destinations.
As we demonstrated in the White Paper on Employment and Growth, Working Nation,
training more highly skilled workers and delivering a more flexible and productive workplace is
a Government priority.
Indeed, we have no higher priority.
In Working Nation, We suspended the training guarantee, introduced a training wage,
increased funding for the Australian National Training Authority, doubled the number of labour
market and vocational training places and increased the'number of entry level training places by
50,000. And let me take this opportunity to congratulate the tourism industry and the Tourism Task
Force for their role in leading the way in workplace reform.
It was, after all, the Tourism Task Force that brought together some of Australia's leading
hotels to draw up new workplace agreements that should come into place later this year.
These new agreements will benefit staff, management, and tourists.
I should also mention that in May this year, under a new Workplace Bargaining Program, we
decided to provide an additional $ 27 million to further promote productive and cooperative
bargaining in Australian workplaces.
This should lead to a range of agreements across the tourism industry from high profile 5 star
hotels to smaller properties in the hotel-motel sector, both unionised and non-unionised.
In Working Nation we also paid particular attention to the regions of Australia. We did that
for the fundamental reason that forms the basic philosophy of Working Nation: that is, we want
al] Australians to share in the recovery.
And that means we make sure we bring the people of regional Australia along with us.
Clearly tourism provides regions with an excellent opportunity to create jobs and diversify their
economic base.
And Australia offers a host of diverse and unique holiday experiences away from our capital
cities and major tourist gateways.
Through responsible planning and management, regions can develop tourism opportunities that
guarantee sustainable tourism enterprises and long term employment.
To this end, we included a $ 42 million regional tourism package in the Federal Budget, eight
million dollars of which has already made its way to some 89 projects right around Australia.
And the cornerstone of this package, the Regional Tourism Development Program wili help
regions develop integrated tourism plans.-
Extension of the EMDG scheme to tourism operators, which we also announced in Working
Nation, should also make a difference in the regions.
But if more regions of Australia are to benefit from the tourism explosion then we need to
ensure we have a world class infrastructure.
That's why, in Working Nation, we allocated $ 70 million dollars to a Regional Strategic
Infrastructure Fund and freed up the arrangements governing infrastructure bonds.
It's also why we introduced greater competition to our aviation industry.
Several years ago now, this Government recognised the need to restructure our aviation
industry.
We amalgamated Australian Airlines and Qantas and opened international services to
competition from Ansett so as to increase the range of marketing opportunities for the tourism
industry. And I might mention that I'll be back here in Sydney on Monday to attend the acceptance
ceremony for Ansett's first Boeing 747 aircraft.
These reforms to the aviation industry have already delivered major benefits to Australian
consumers and our international visitors.
Since 1990, the number of domestic passengers has more than doubled, air fares have
decreased by 25 per cent in real terms, and flights have increased on our 50 busiest routes.
But the reform must continue.
And that's why the Government has announced its intention to sell all the Federal airports and
the airport at Badgerys Creek, subject to the outcome of a scoping study.
The in-principle decision to sell the Federal airports is directed primarily to improving the
efficiency of airport investments and operations.
This should result in Australia's airport system developing into one of the most innovative
private airport industries in the world.
But to those of you here who are concerned that the benefits from the sale of the ' big' airports
may be outweighed by the impact on some of the so called ' loss makers', let me say I am
confident that we can adequately address the issue of loss makcing airports without
disadvantaging local communities.
The final area that I want to touch upon is the importance of heritage buildings to our tourism
industry. 
By preserving the best of our heritage buildings, by looking after those things that give our
cities their special character, we give to future generations a sense of place, a sense of our
urban heritage, and a sense of our unique national culture.
At the same time, we make Australia an even more attractive place to visit.
This was the thinking that lay behind the Historic Properties Restoration Program which we
announced in One Nation.
Importantly, this was the first Federal initiative specifically directed to the preservation and
restoration of significant heritage buildings.
This program has already brought about the splendid restoration of the Old Treasury Building
in Melbourne, a great example of what we can achieve when we get co-operation from State
Governments. The Customs House here in Sydney, which is one of the city's oldest and best-loved buildings,
is anbther heritage building receiving assistance.
Under the program, the Federal Government is providing $ 24 million towards its restoration so
that it can serve as an important tourist and cultural centre.
Through programs like this one, we're giving Australians, and international visitors, a better
appreciation of our history and culture.
At the same time, we're providing jobs and investing fiirther in our cultural and tourism
industries. The Government initiatives that I have touched upon today are all designed to build on the
hard work of the industry to ensure that tourism continues to be a driving force in Australia's
economic and cultural development.
And while the Government has played an important role in all this, it has been largely a
facilitating role.
The credit for the current strength and the potential of tourism in Australia must go in the
main, to you, the industry, who have worked so hard to establish Australian tourism as a
dynamic, prosperous and internationally competitive industry.
I'm very excited by the prospects for our tourism industry and I have a very strong sense that if
we can build on our many great competitive strengths, we can go a long way to passing on a
much better Australia to those who come after us.
Thank you. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SYDNEY AIRPORT
MONDAY 29 AUGUST, 1994
J: Mr Keating, you mentioned moving into Asia and jsiness. Do you
think Australia's interests would be better served by a free trade area
in Asia or a GATT consistent area?-
PMV: Australia's interests are going to be buffered by getting trade barriers
down. There are so many of them in the Asia-Pacific these days that
getting them down is what it is all about. And, it is going to be a
difficult task, to do it, but something which we'll all benefit from. So,
the whole question about whether this is MFN or preferential is really
ancillary to the main point, let's get the barriers down.
J: Are you too far ahead of business, given the Asia-Pacific Business
Network's opposition..?
PM: I've never heard of that organisation so therefore, obviously their view
doesn't matter very much.
J-You were talking about airline competition which has freed up but has
remained largely a duopol1y, are you concerned about that?
PM. I think one of the things Australia has got from aviation, it has got
lower prices but it has kept its companies intact who have learned to
be in a competitive environment. This idea that you need to smash
companies up to deregulate, and have then, a whole multiplicity of
companies which then eventually evaporate is the messy way the
Americans went through deregulation. I think, the way we are doing it
is far better for consumers, for safety and for airlines.
J: Do you welcome Mr Cowley's support for the privatisat ion of the
Federal Airports Corporation?
PM.-I'm not here to go around the world for sport, are there any other
questions? 
ends. TEL: 29. Aug. 94 12: 30 No
2
J: How do you think Mr Hewson will go as the policy conscience of the
Liberal Party?
PM: The thing about the Liberal Party is, I think, it is irretrievably divided.
And, It Is no wonder they've got no policies because they run around,
they spend all of their time fighting themselves. I mean,-Alexander
Downer, if he wants to look strong and command loyalty and respect
you do it by inducing it, you don't do it by petulantly striking people
down. And, I think, what's going to happen here is that the sort of
divisions that we've seen in the Liberal Party in the eighties are going
to continue. .010 P. 02/ 02 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ACCEPTANCE CEREMONY FOR ANSETT AUSTRALIA'S FIRST BOEING
747 AIRCRAFT, MASCOT, 29 AUGUST 1994
Well, I think today's a great day for the Australian aviation industry.
It's also a great day for Australia.
Ansett Australia's acceptance of this, its first, Boeing 747 shows that we have
truly broken the traditional distinction between domestic and international
services, It also shows we have a robust internationally competitive aviation industry
that delivers a quality service at a competitive price.
And we've reached this milestone for two main reasons.
The first derives from the Government's decision to deregul ate the aviation
industry and the second derives from the way the industry, and its people,
have responded.
Some time ago, the Government took the view that we needed to restructure
our aviation industry.
We wanted competitive arrangements that would deliver significant benefits
to both Australian and foreign consumers.
We wanted competitive arrangements that would enable Australia to realise
Its enormous tourist potential.
We wanted an aviation industry ready for a new century.
And that's what we've got.
Since 1990, the number of domestic passengers has doubled.
T2E9L:. Fluy. 94 10: 34 No. 001 P. 01/ 03 
TEL: 29. Rug. 94 10: 34 No. 0) 01 P. 02/ 03
2
Domestic airfares are now 25 per cent lower in real terms.
And, on a comparable basis, that makes them among the lowest in the world.
There are now more carriers offering services Into and out of Australia, on
more routes and city pairs, and with greater frequency, than ever before.
These achievements have gone a long way to driving the growth of the
Australian tourist industry an industry that last year grew at three times the
world average and now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earnings.
Clearly, Ansett Australia has embraced the commercial opportunities
provided by deregulation.
It has expanded its services to Bali to six a week.
This week, with its new 747 Spaceship, it will commence five 747 services a
week to Osaka.
And next week, It will commence three 747 services a week to Hong Kong.
But the reform that has occurred in the industry can't just be measured in the
number of new flights.
Change in the industry has been anything less than " micro" for those
organisations and people most directly involved.
And it is individual people in organisations such as Ansett and Qantas that
have given us a world class aviation service at a competitive price.
You will excuse me, of course, if I make the observation how impressed I am
by Ansett's new livery.
The Southern Cross incorporated into the gold and set against the blue
background will give the airline an unambiguously Australian face in both
Australia and Asia.
For mine, that's a smart move.
I'm also pleased to know that the service offered to Asian consumers, who
now account for one in every two of our international visitors, will be tailored
specifically to their needs.
After all, you can't expect to gain a good slice of the world's fastest growing
market without a strong customer focus.
And that's exactly what Ansett offers with its specially trained and multilingual
flight attendants. 
TEL: 29. Aug. 94 10: 34 No. 001 P. 03/ 03
3
All up, it's a very impressive performance.
It shows an Australia serious about doing business in Asia.
And it shows an Ansett Australia very much an integral part of our robust
internationally competitive aviation industry.
Congratulations to one and all, and long may she fly. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 30 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Less than an hour ago in one of the most cynical and provocative
speeches I have ever heard delivered in Parliament the Leader of the
Opposition, who has opposed the Native Title legislation and who said
in Western Australia he would repeal it and who has opposed the Land
Fund Bil has, in a speech attacking the Government and its mofi-vs7-,
-saicfth~ t unless the Government fundamentally restructures the Land
Fund Bill to give priority to health and housing only on that basis and
subject to amendments by the Opposition would they support the Land
Fund legislation.
So, the Leader of the Opposition has attempted to fool the country by
saying in the wake of Dr Hewson's dismissal, he is embracing a softer
line on Aboriginal affairs and the Land Fund. In fact, he has done no
such thing. He is putting up a set of sham amendments, weasel words
from which he will then say if the Government doesn't accept the
amendments he will vote against the Bill. Because fundamental to his
objection is the same fundamental objection the Liberal Party has had
all along to this, they don't want Aboriginal and Islander people to have
access to land. They'll talk about anything but land and in the speech
he implied that land was an issue, but not a fundamental one.
So, three weeks ago the Leader of the Opposition said ' if necessary
we would overturn the legislation.' His Deputy said on the Sunday
program two weeks ago ' well, there would then be the opportunity for
the States if they so wished to set up their own mechanisms for
dealing with it'. The States who are managing land in all other areas
as well and many of whom have been managing land in this area in
the past to put in place their own mechanisms. And, when asked ' so
you would happily abrogate your responsibility and give it back to the
states' he said ' well, when you say abrogate, the responsibility
traditionally has been there for the States all along and the question is
for land management yes, for land management. 
So, we have got the Leader of the Opposition three weeks ago, the
Deputy Leader a week ago saying that they would overturn the Native
Title legislation and give this right back to the States and now the
second arm of the Government's land measures that is, giving
Aboriginal people who can't avail themselves of the benefit of the
Native Title legislation by cause of dispossession can now, through
this fund buy land this is a complete anathema to the Liberal Party.
Mr Downer would have been better coming and saying " I am opposing
this Bill." " I don't believe that we should have a fund of over $ 1 billion
being dedicated to Aboriginal people for the purchase of land." What
he has done and how Ms Gallus can support his actions I cannot
understand what he is i-aying-Ts, here is some sham amendments
about health and education and unless you basically completely
change this Bill so it essentially has a welfare orientation rather than a
land orientation, we will oppose it.
J: Have you seen the amendments, Prime Minister?
PM: No, I haven't, but he..
J: But how do you know they are a sham?
PM: What he said was, I'm actually quoting him he said ' subject to our
amendments.'
J: But how do you know they are shams if you haven't seen them?
PM: Well, because they are about functional spending on health and
education.
J: Wouldn't it have made more sense to have seen them before you
came out and condemned them?
PM: No, no it would not. I mean, this is a Bill about land. This is a Bill
about land acquisition. This is a Bill about the central measure in
justice for Aboriginal people, access to land. Now, the Native Title
legislation provides land to Aboriginal people if they have a traditional
connection with it. But, if they have lost the traditional connection they
can only get it by acquisition. These are the two prongs of the M abo
legislation. That is, the Native Title Act and the Land Fund and to try
to cynically tear up the Land Fund by saying ' oh, it should be spent
functionally on health and education and subject to the Government
accepting our amendments we will oppose it' is high cynicism from
somebody who never supported the principle in the first place.
J: That's the end of the matter, you haven't looked at the amendments,
but you are going to reject them? 
PM: No, I made it clear it in my Second Reading speech that the
Government would consider the amendments, but I said that the only
test of the Opposition's veracity is whether they will vote for the
Second Reading speech in the House of Representatives and in the
Senate.
J: Are you saying that there is no place for any money in the Land Fund
to go to health or education?
PM: No, because the Land Fund we've now made very large functional
appropriations to health and education and I might say the Opposition
opposed these, they wanted cut backs in health and edu~ catn
spending in their Fightback. proposals that's health, education for
Aboriginals in their Fightback proposals. The way to address these
issues is through functional appropriations and functional
management. This is about land and it is land which is central to
Aboriginal dispossession and Aboriginal culture.
J: What do you say to the general proposition that Government is placing
more emphasis on land than on issues of health education and..
PM: Well, I'd just say that is nonsense. I mean, when has the
Commonwealth Parliament placed this sort of emphasis on land?
Never. This is the first time. I mean, this is a good thing that is being
done.
J: But it could be ( inaudible)..
PM: This is a good thing that's being done and the Government will not
have some Opposition Leader with tawdry motives seeking to do it in.
J: But Prime Minister, given that the Government broke Graham
Richardson's promises on Aboriginal health and made a liar out of him,
haven't you left yourself open to this sort of attack?
PM: He never made promises which were Graham Richardson never
made specific commitments and the nature of the commitments he did
make, they have been honoured. You remember there has been the
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody Royal Commission response, there has
been the Budget funding, the Government has and I have some
figures here committed between 1989-90 and 1993-94 $ 1 billion.
Between 1994-95 and 1998-99 we will spend a further $ 1.5 billion on
health for Aboriginal people. Now, look, in the professionalism of
public life and in Canberra, if the Opposition believe that more money
should be spent on health that's something they can argue in the
Parliament, that's something the Government can reasonably consider,
but to try and strike down the one bit of decent law that has come the
way of the Aboriginal people in this country for land is a dreadful thing
to do. 
J: You're saying that this is a good thing that the Parliament is doing,
wouldn't it be even better if it were achieved in a bipartisan manner,
wouldn't it be even more powerful and isn't it your responsibility as
Prime Minister to try and achieve that end?
PM: Well, I offered that bipartisanship to Dr Hewson. He came in and said
on the Third Reading of the Native Title Bill, ' it was a day of shame'. I
offered the same thing in my Second Reading speech which was not a
political speech, I mean not a political speech, in today's House to be
met with what? You know, essentially a provocative political speech
which said now if -you don't cop the amendments subject to our
changes they are the terms on which we will pass it.
J: Are you ultimately confident of the support of minor parties in the
Senate or do you think we'll see another repeat of last year?
PM: Well, I'm confident that a Bill of this merit will pass. I mean, this has
been debated with the Aboriginal community and Islander community
in this country and with other groups. I mean, there has been a long
process of negotiation here which went back to the original Native Title
negotiations. But, I mean, go back to what Mr Downer said in Perth.
He made it clear he may repeal it if necessary. Mr Costello has
confirmed that, saying that they regard land management as a matter
for the States. But, they overlook the fact that in 1967 the nation gave
the Commonwealth, Parliament power to legislate in respect of
Aboriginal and Islander people and it is under that power, and facing a
High Court decisionQ' that the Commonwealth did legislate with the
Native Title Bill. Now, I can only say this to you, let me repeat here
what I said in the House, the Government will consider the
Opposition's amendments. There may be some elements of them that
we can accept, but there is only one test about this whether the
Opposition vote for the Bill at the Second reading.
J: Wouldn't that put the acid right back on, if as it turns out they are
somewhat more benign than you fear?
PM: Well, the Leader of the Opposition I've made a Second Reading
speech and so has he. He has said subject to our amendments. They
were his words. The Land Fund needs to be restructured to give
priority to health and education. In other words, restructured not to
give priority to land.
J: Given the Opposition's concern about health and housing, do you now
expect their support of the social justice package next year?
PM: Well, I don't know what to expect from them. I mean, let me repeat a
point I made to you earlier. It would have been better for Alexander
Downer, at least people would say ' well, he has a view and he is
standing by it, he doesn't believe there should be wholesale
acquisition of land by Aboriginal people and he is opposed to it'. 
Instead of that he gives the press this story they are going to be softer
on the Land Fund and that gets written all over the place and this is
basically to pull over moderates in the wake of Dr Hewson's dismissal.
And, what do we find in the end? It is really just a device to knock the
Bill over.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
31 AUGUST 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'll make this brief. Mr Downerhas gone out of his way to.. has gone
out in 1987 and associif-d himself with an organisation which is the
most notoriously racist and anti-Semitic in the country. In 1987 it
would have been impossible for any active person in politics not to
have known that he was addressing the League of Rights. Particularly
when all his colleagues knew about themaiid-had already in the
Hansard record and elsewhere reacted angrily to them. Sitting as he
was, I understand, next to Eric Butler and Jeremy Lee the person who
had escorted David Irving, a man who denies the Holocaust, around
the country. In speaking at a meeting organised by avowed racists
and anti-Semites, he has failed every principle of his political duty.
And by his failure today to explain his actions, he's failed again.
I can tell you I've never seen a leader of the Opposition in the House
display so little courage as Mr Downer did today being protected by
the likes of Wilson Tuckey, and Peter Reith and the leader of the
national party, when he stood up and made a personal explanation, or
ducking out of back doors from journalists after indicating that he
would in fact gave them an interview. When John Hewson said to
Alexander Downer, when he rang him and said that he was going to
run for the leadership of the Opposition, he said " You don't have what
it takes, Alexander", and the truth is he was dead right.
J: Do you think Mr Downer should resign, Mr Keating?...( inaudible)...
PM: Well, he has failed I think, the principle of political duty and he has
failed to explain his circumstances at the time. I mean, this is a
notorious organisation. When you look at some of the remarks which
have been made by... in April 1988, by Senator Peter Baume: " There
can be no doubt that the League of Rights espouses values 
inconsistent with the Liberal-Democratic traditions to which so many of
us are committed. It's not surprising, indeed, it's almost inevitable that
serious political leaders should find the League of Rights message to
be anathema to them.", and it goes on with others. Senator Boswell:
" The League's public face is for God, Queen and country, and support
for States rights, free enterprise, the Constitution, the family farm and
small businesses. It's only natural that many decent men and women
are attracted to these objectives which are laudable and noble.
However, the more extreme side of the League is introduced
insidiously by degrees through its extensive network of organisations."
Now, if you are a member of Parliament, and you are an aspiring party
leader, you shouldn't be one of the gullible men and women who are
attracted to the objectives and yet not understand what the
organisation is.
J: So do you condemn with equal vigour the support from members of
your own party, like Graeme Campbell, for right wing groups?
PM: Graeme Campbell is not the leader of the Labor Party. That's the
difference.
J: But he is an ALP politician and he did address a League of Rights
meeting, will you seek to have him expelled?
PM: No. And I don't endorse his political views either... r his social views.
J: But do you condemn his views?
PM: Well, some I do. But most, of course, are consistent with the Labor
Party's objectives.
J: Do you really think that Alexander Downer has anti-Semitic views?
PM: Well, it's hard to explain that he has addressed a League of Rights
meeting. In the late eighties, the League of Rights was an active
organisation. I mean, any of us you in journalism, or any of us in
politics at that time knew this to be so. It shows very, at best,
exceptionally bad judgement to be in their company.
J: Is the crime that he addressed the meeting, or that he won't own up to
it?
PM: Both. I think he shouldn't have addressed the meeting, and he
should've today said he did and what the circumstances are,
instead of ducking and weaving, and cowardly hiding behind people in
the House of Representatives when it was raised. And, of course,
having it defended in the Senate. What he should have done was
come out and said so said what the circumstances were, and at least
given the country some explanation of his position. 
3
J: Have you, in your long political career, addressed or shared a platform
at a party or group of people, that you didn't share those views later
on? Perhaps you were embarrassed about later on?
PM: Not that I can remember. Not the League of Rights. You won't find me
with the League of Rights.
J: Have you seen the video, Mr Keating?
PM: No, I haven't.... which video?
J: The one of this event?
PM: No, I haven't seen it, no.
J: What of his explanation that he thought he was addressing a Christian
Youth Rally at the time?
PM: Well, Senator Boswell says this... that it goes through the established
fronts; " The most established front organisation would be the Institute
for Economic Democracy, Ladies in Line Against Communism, the
Christian Institute for Individual Freedom, the Australian Heritage
Society, and the Conservative Speakers Club". I mean, you've got to
be either incompetent, or a fool to turn up to a show like this and not
know what it is. And if you are that, you shouldn't be the leader of the
Opposition. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RELEASE OF APEC PERSONS GROUP REPORT " ACHIEVING THE
APEC VISION FREE AND OPEN TRADE IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC"
am pleased to welcome the second report of the APEC Eminent Persons Group,
" Achieving the APEC Vision", which was presented to President Soeharto, the 1994
chair of APEC, in Jakarta today.
Last year at their Seattle meeting APEC leaders welcomed the challenge to achieve
free trade in the Asia-Pacific set by the EPG in its first report, " A Vision for APEC".
The EPG's new report responds to APEC ministers' request in Seattle that the EPG
suggest ways in which that goal might be achieved.
I am very pleased by the general direction of the report and its recommendations.
Australia warmly welcomes and supports the report's central proposal setting a date
for achieving free trade in the APEC region. I also agree wholeheartedly with the
EPG's emphasis on the role APEC must play in stimulating and contributing to
multilateral trade liberalisation.
Further trade liberalisation both in the APEC region and globally will be essential if
APEC's members, including Australia, are to sustain their high economic growth rates.
We have the opportunity in APEC to create a mutually reinforcing process of regional
and global liberalisation that would enhance the multilateral trading system.
It is pleasing to note that much of what the EPG proposes on trade and investment
facilitation is already underway within APEC. For instance, leaders agreed in Seattle
to draw up a set of APEC non-binding investment principles and work on this is
progressing well. APEC is also actively addressing standards and conformance
arrangements. Both should be of considerable benefit to the Australian and regional
business community.
APEC leaders will give careful consideration to the report when we meet in Bogor,
Indonesia in November. But it will be important for APEC leaders to draw on the
widest possible range of ideas the EPG report will therefore be only one of a number
of inputs into our deliberations. In addition to reports from forthcoming ministerial
meetings, leaders will also have before them the report of the APEC Pacific Business
Forum group of APEC business representatives, which they established in Seattle.
Other business groups such as PBEC and the newly-formed APB-NET will also
contribute input.
I would particularly like to thank Australia's EPG representative, Neville Wran, for his
important contribution to the work of the Eminent Persons Group.'
CANBERRA August 31, 1994 80/ 94 



PRIINMISET E
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
LAUNCH OF NETTFORCE SYDNEY, THURSDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER
1994. 1 am very glad to be here.
And giad to see so many Australian companies represented here.
The CEOs outnumber the trainees and, in a way, that is appropriate, because
the driving force In vocational training is going to be private industry.
Government can provide Initiative, funds, strategies and structures.
The ommunity at large has a responsibility as I have said many times, as
the Government Employment White Paper says every Australian has a
responsibility, every Australian has an Interest In the outcome of the national
effort. But for all that government and communities and unions must do, the engine of
success will be the private sector of the economy.
For once at least, the acronym is appropriate NEiTT~ FOCE.
When we created It In Working Nation, we had force In mind.
Not brute force.
We had in a mind a body with enough skill and finesse and worldliness about it
to get results.
I think that is what we have.
The National Employment and Training Taskforce is designed for effect.
For practice rather than theory. 
In the White Paper we decided in advance of all but a very few comparable
countries that we could not leave the long-term unemployed behind.
We couldn't leave them behind and still keep faith with our human and social
values our national values.
And we couldn't leave them behind and still claim that we observed principles
of rudimentary common sense.
If for rio other reason than the waste of human energy, ambition and potential, it
make-s no economic or social sense to leave the long term unemployed behind.
In the White Paper we also recognised somewhat in advance of many
comparable countries, somewhat behind others that vocational training Is not
an oprtIon for a nation In the nineties, but an Imperative.
Not a might do, or a should do but a must do.
We have set out to build a vocational training system to rank with the best in
the world.
Quite simply, we don't have a future, and the next generation will not have a
future without a first class system of vocational education not, at least, the
sort of future we want, the sort of future we have it In our power to earn.
The people who make up NETTFOROE Bert Evans, Bill Kelty, Lindsay Fox,
Ivan Deveson, Ted Wright, Joan Kimer are nothing if not practical people
with practical experience.
They are not people one associates with bureaucratic bottlenecks, or
ideological strait-jackets.
They have that In common and I know they also share a passion for their
country and faith in its future.
Bill Kelty and Lindsay Fox, of course, have recently re-affirmed that in their
extensive study of Australia's regions a landmark study whose influence can
be seen in the Regional Development policy in the White Paper.
Ted Wright, of course is the Director and General Manager of the Regent Hotel
which in part explains why this launch Is occurring in what otherwise might be
considered a somewhat incongruous place.
But the venue might be considered appropriate for another symbolic
reason. 
The Regent Is an element a very successful element in the vast mosaic of
Australia's most successful growth industry.
Tourism and hospitality.
Tourism now employs nearly half a million Australians.
No industry of the last decade has grown on such a scale. None has more
potential for further growth.
And none provides more dramatic evidence of the fact that in a highly
competitive environment success depends on the quality of our human
resources on trained, skilled r~ oil
It is one of my duties today to announce the formation of a number of new
industry training companies under the umbrella of NEiTTFORCE and Tourism
Training Australia will be among the first of these.
To some extent tourism is a model of the direction Australian industry is going
towards the exploitation of our natural advantages, towards International
markets, towards ever greater levels of service and efficiency, and, I am
pleased to say, towards vocational training.
Today I think it Is worth reminding people of the size of the task we have set
ourselves. No one should underestimate the dimensions of the White Paper it is the
princi pal vehicle by which the Govemment intends to reform and invigorate the
Australian labour market.
It is the principal means by which we intend to make this an economic recovery
which reaches all Australians.
I doubt if any other country has yet produced a program as comprehensive and
ambitious as Working Nation.
Whle a number of other countries have introduced, or are considering
introducing, reforms to their labour market and training programs similar to
those in the White Paper, none has integrated them into a major reform
strategy. In thol plainest terms, the White Paper announced that the Government would
provide funding to create 50,000 new entry level training positions by 1995-96,
and find jobs under the Job Compact for over 160,000 long term unemployed
people a year. 
When they do, it would be as well to understand that training is not a welfare
issue. It Is not a particularly selfless or charitable enterprise though if employers
come to it with these motives no one will complain.
Nor will anyone complain if they engage with this national effort out of a sense
of national duty or concern for the future of our children.
Success will serve those interests admirably.
But the essential truth about it Is that vocational training Is a mainstream
econoi issue.
And it is in the interests of all us government, business, unions, communities
to ongage with it.
We do know that employers' reservations about hiring the long term
unemployed can be overcome.
Last year, of the 150,000 people who gained lobs under the JobStart program,
around 70 per cent were long term unemployed.
Through the JobStart program the Government is picking up a substantial
proportion of an employer's wage bill while new employees prove themselves.
Of NETTFORCE's various roles, the most important relates to the training
wage. The training wage aims at giving the unemployed opportunities to break the
cycle of their unemployment.
The wiage has been set at between $ 125 and $ 333, depending on the workers
experience and the skill level of the job.
And we will reduce the cost to the employer further through subsidies.
For employers the training wage offers labour paid at a rate which genuinely
reflects productivity levels.
For employees, it means avoiding being trapped in low-paid jobs forever.
I cannot let pass this opportunity to urge employers to get behind the scheme.
No less, I call on the unions to recognise that our intention is not the creation of
a pool of cheap labour, but a pool of opportunities a vast and lasting pool
for their fellow Australians. 
Unions and employers alike must recognise that what we are doing must be
done in a modem economy.
If we don't do it, we will fail not just ourselves but the next generation.
I know Undsay Fox and Bill Kelty have been passing on this message to their
respective constituencies.
I hope everyone else here today will follow suit.
NElTIFORCE has been created to ensure that the training system is
respornsive to industry demands and that industry is mobilised in support of this
training initiative.
NETTFORCE Is promoting the speedy recognition of training and will give
interim authorisation of training packages to underpin the new award where
there are delays.
For thea vocational training to succeed, there needs to be industry involvement
at all levels.
NETTFORCE's new training companies can help make this happen.
For those who have not heard the term before, a training company is an
" Industry company", meaning it is drawn primarily from employers and employer
groups and unions in various industries.
Each of these training companies will meet the specific needs of their industry.
They -will develop new traineeships and adapt existing traineeships to meet the
NETTFORCE requirements for implementation under the National Training
Wage. They will provide employers with one-stop shops to put together training and
industrial packages.
Among others, these companies will be established in the automotive industry,
in building and construction, manufacturing and engineering, the timber
Industry, retail, warehousing, electrical and electronic, media, arts and
enterltainment and of course tourism and hospitality.
Obviously, there are a great many people here who deserve our
congratulations for the progress that has been made so far.
From the Governments viewpoint, it is very gratifying. The indications are that
the confidence in Australian employers and unions on which these programs
have been built will be vindicated. 
But none of us should be in any doubt that the story has just begun.
As I said at the beginning, so much depends on employers.
In a sense, the programs now in place provide a measure of compensation for
this. But in any event, it is in employers' own interests to take steps now to avoid
skill shortages which will Increase their costs and hold back their growth.
Equally, as a nation, if we are to improve our standard of living and maintain
our economic growth without inflation, we need to continually improve
productivity and pivotal to that is an investment in skills.
All of us here today have taken up that challenge the members of
NETTFORCE, the employers, the union representatives and not least the
young trainees.
For that I want to thank you all.
You have engaged with a great national undertaking and future generations of
Australians will have reason to thank you for it.
So It is with great pleasure and pride that I now officially launch NETTFORCE.
ENDS 


PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPDOORSTOP, ALP HEADQUARTERS, CANBERRA, 2 SEPTEMBER 1994
E &amp; O E&nbsp; - PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, do you think that today's Saulwick poll confirms that Alexander Downer is finished?
PM: Well, the problem is the Liberal Party. I mean, I said this at the time he was elected they changed the jockey but not the horse. The problem here is the horse. The Liberal Party is institutionally past it. It has no structure. Look, here they are trying to cobble together a policy statement. They don't know where they are going. They have no structure, they don't know where they think Australia should be, how society has changed and how it should be managed. So, whether it'sAlexander Downer or John Hewson or John Howard or Costello or whoever, it doesn't matter. The Liberal Party has got to go back and do all the hard things that Parties have got to do to decide how to manage their affairs and how to construct policy. That's their problem. And this is just another manifestation of the same problem.
J: Do you think Alexander Downer will be able he's dropped 30 points in the last month....
PM; Well, look, polls come and go. I wouldn't put all the store in the polls. And I never do. But it's the straws in the wind that matter. No policy on Mabo, the Native Land Native Title Act, the Northern Territory Land Rights Act it doesn't matter where it is, there is you know, no obvious policy. And that's what the public is picking up. They're picking up the vibrations of a party leader who is out of his depth. But the reason he's out of his depth is because the Party is out of its depth. There is only one party of government in Australia at the moment, and it's the Labor Party.
J: Would you be happy to see Carmen Lawrence as your Deputy Prime Minister next March?



PRIIMNIES 2E
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE STUDY INTELLIGENT EXPORTS AND THE SILENT
REVOLUTION IN SERWICES, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 2 SEPTEMBER 1994
For too long now, we've tended to think of exports purely as things that are
transported to our wharves, put in the holds of ships and sent overseas.
In the same way, we've tended to underestimate the critical importance of
services to our national economy.
Services are our economic oxygen.
But because they're all around us because they account for 70 per cent of
our GDP and 80 per cent of our employment we often forget just how
important they are.
I am very pleased, therefore, to launch this report Intelligent Exports and the
Silent Revolution in Services because it goes a long way to putting our
services trade in the national spotlight.
It goes a long way to redressing what I think has been a failure to appreciate
the importance of our services trade.
And it gives us a new platform from which we can move forward.
Services directly account for 20 per cent of all our exports.
And when you look at the services input into our manufactures, mining and
agricultural exports, you see that services contribute up to another 20 per
cent of our exports.
All up, that means services account for around 40 per cent of the total value
of our exports, that's two in every five export dollars.
But, as this study points out, you wouldn't know about it from our media
only one in ten articles about exports relates to services. 
When last Tuesday's Financial Review ran a piece on the balance of
payments figures, it used the images of ships and mineral conveyor belts as
backdrops for its charts on the current account and export figures.
These images, while not inaccurate, do nonetheless reinforce the perception
that trade, and more particularly export, is only about physical goods, the
things you put in the holds of ships.
What they miss out on is the importance of the services side to our exports
either as exports in their own right or as vital components in our traditional
exports.
They miss out on the intelligent side to our exports, that part of our exports
whose value has been added by the skills, creativity and ingenuity of
individual Australians.
And this goes some way to explaining why the revolution in services has
been a silent revolution.
The silence is a concern because services are going to play an increasingly
important role in our trade.
The information superhighway will see to that.
As we pointed out in the White Paper on Employment and Growth, Working
Nation, Australia's future depends upon the ideas, skills and knowledge of
our workforce.
With services the fastest growing category of world trade, and with Australia
producing highly-skilled, well-educated workers, we are ideally placed to gain
a greater share of the expanding services cake, particularly in the Asia
Pacific region.
When Indonesia's Foreign Minister Ali Alatas needed vital heart surgery
recently, he didn't fly to the United States to find one of the world's most
sophisticated medical centres, he came here to Australia, to the Austin
Hospital in Melbourne.
The service Ali Alatas received was an Australian export, an Australian
services export.
When IKEA put out a world wide tender for a stock management system for
its operations in Singapore, it was won by Price Waterhouse's Australian
consulting arm. 
And the reason the Australian team won the right to lead the project was
because it was multi-disciplined, it had the necessary expertise in software,
retailing, marketing and distribution as well as the experience in doing
business in Asia.
Importantly, it's a project that should lead to many others in the region.
When I visited Thailand and Laos earlier this year, I formally handed over the
Friendship Bridge which spans the Mekong River and links Thailand and
Laos by land for the first time.
This Bridge stands as a testament to the quality and capability of Australian
engineering and construction services it was designed, built and funded by
Australians. Already two companies associated with the bridge, John Holland Engineering
and Construction, and Maunsell Sinclair Knight have won flow-on work in
Laos.
They will join the likes of other Australian exporters like Transfield which
recently secured the development rights for the $ 1.2 billion Nam Theun
hydro-electric dam project.
Engineering and construction companies have won major international
tenders to design hospitals in several countries and a Melbourne based
healthcare consultancy company has undertaken a host of joint ventures
managing hospitals in the Middle East, India and Malaysia.
Our education exports are now running at $ 1.3 billion a twenty six fold
increase since 1986.
And tourism now accounts for 12 per cent of our total export earnings.
This report contains many more impressive statistics like these and countless
stories of Australian services companies out there winning against the best in
the world.
Let me then turn to the report and congratulate its authors, the LEK
Partnership, and the ten organisations which funded the project.
In particular, I want to acknowledge the role Ralph and his steering
committee played in overseeing the study.
Let me also acknowledge the role that the Australian Coalition of Service
Industries ( ACSI) has played over the past few years in upping the profile of
the services industry and also for its work with the Government on the two
vitally important areas of the Uruguay Round and APEC. 
With the publication of this report, I think ACSI has gone from a fledgling
organisation to one now on a par with its international counterparts.
One of the great things about this report is that it's an international first for the
services industry.
And it builds on the McKinsey report on our emerging manufacturing exports.
It shows that services exporters are typically small, innovative and flexible,
that they rely heavily on exports to survive.
In the six years to 1991, Australia bettered both the world and regional growth
rates for the export of services.
Australian exports grew by 17 per cent per annum while the Asian average
was 14.6 per cent and the world average 13.6 per cent.
This is impressive when you consider that over the same period services
exports increased their share of total global exports from 18 to 21 per cent.
As the report points out, the competitive domestic economy that is, this
Government's opening up of the Australian economy was a big contributing
factor in the growth of our services exports, with most services exporters
pointing to our great strengths in our workforce skills, telecommunications,
education system and information technology levels.
And once the Hilmer reforms are in place this will give us an even more
competitive services sector.
Add to this economic prospects about as good as you could ever hope to get,
and the future looks very bright indeed.
Not surprising then that the companies which participated in the study expect
their export revenues to double in the five years to 1998 to reach $ 33 billion.
Not surprising also that total services exports are forecast to generate an
additional $ 18 billion and 109,000 jobs by 1998.
And as the economies of Asia continue their high growth, as APEC continues
to grow as a force for trade liberalisation in the region, we can expect to see
many more opportunities opening up.
In fact, the report predicts that by 1998, Indonesia and China will become our
most important services markets.
Japan, of course, will remain one of the most significant destinations for our
services exports.
And as you know on Sunday, I'll be heading to Japan for a short visit. 
And let me emphasise it will be very much a working visit without formality or
ceremonial trappings.
I will be meeting with Prime Minister Murayama and his senior colleagues to
discuss the forthcoming APEC Leaders meeting which President Soeharto
will chair in Bogor in November.
I want to make sure that the Japanese Government understands what
aspirations Australia holds for APEC and I also want to make sure that we
understand Japan's views.
I'm particularly looking forward to renewing my contacts with senior Japanese
business people, Japan is, after all, our largest trading partner and our
largest export market.
Clearly, as this report shows, the growth in our services exports is very good
but it could be great.
Only 5 per cent of Australian service sector production is exported.
The report suggests that an export share of 8 to 10 per cent of production
could add an additional $ 10 to $ 15 billion to Australian service exports each
year. The way we're going I'd say that the 10 per cent is well within our reach by
the turn of the century.
We have an economic recovery well and truly underway.
It's a strong recovery.
With business investment now coming through and inflation locked in low, it's
a very sustainable recovery.
As we move ahead down the growth path, we can't afford to sit back and
coast along.
That would be to waste the opportunities now before us.
That would be to deny future generations of Australians.
But I don't think that will happen because competition is now well and truly
locked into our national economic psyche.
More and more potential exporters are coming to realise that if they're
competitive in Australia, odds are they're competitive internationally. 
What this report has shown is that there is enormous scope for Australian
service companies to lift their export game.
It's difficult to see how the circumstances could be much better.
And that makes the export imperative greater than ever.
The world economy is growing and it's looking for the sort of high tech, high
value adding services the intelligent services that Australia can provide.
Government can help by creating the right environment and encouraging
firms. We've got the right macroeconomic settings in place and as the report
notes, in the White Paper we took additional measures to build more
competitive services firms.
We're putting in place major training initiatives to lift our skill levels and
improve productivity.
We're introducing tax initiatives to encourage investment in small to medium
sized enterprises and bring more regional headquarters to Australia.
We're making it easier to get access to finance.
We're encouraging innovation through a more generous research and
development tax concession, through assistance for the commercial isation of
new technology and through a national technology diffusion network.
We're giving industry better access to the government purchasing market
while also extending the operation of the EMDG scheme to include tourist
operators. But, as important as these measures are, at the end of the day, it's really up
to business to show vision and leadership by getting into the export game.
As I see it, it's simply a question of more Australian business people in the
services industry saying " Well, let's look at this export game. Let's give it a
go1 I don't for a moment preten~ d that it's easy. It's not.
But there are a hell of a lot of service exporters already out there making it
happen. I commend this report to anyone who's interested in our services industry and
I urge the business community to lend its support to the series of national
seminars commencing next week. 


81/94
The Government awaits with keen anticipation the launch of Mr Downer's self-styled " Directions" statement.
Since his elevation to leadership of the Liberal Party Mr Downer has talked a great deal about his " honesty". He said he was " the most honest and open man you would ever meet". He has also talked about his qualities as a leader. He has promoted an image of himself as a man devoted to " common sense".
Yet Mr Downer's leadership has been distinguished by none of these things it has been notable for vacillation, and for a lack of honesty and common sense. He said Aboriginal policy would be a defining element of Liberal Party policy and then bowed to the West Australians. He said privacy of the individual was very important to him and then bowed to the Tasmanian Government which denies privacy of the individual. There was no sign of common sense in his handling of these issues, and no more honesty in his handling of them than there was when he said he did not address the League of Rights.
Common sense should tell him that honesty demands that he present to the people of Australia the policies he would pursue in office. That is where honesty in politics begins. It is where leadership begins. Policies are an expression of what a leader and his " team" stand for. Because they are the only means by which the public can judge what the Coalition stands for, in the end they are the only expression which matters.
This morning Mr Downer said he would not present detailed policies because the Government would "unpick" them. He proposes, with shameful timidity, to introduce them close to the election so there will be no time to subject them to scrutiny. This is "honesty and openness"! This is leadership!
We therefore wait to see what he will offer in the way of social and economic policy. In particular we will be interested to know if the Coalition will commit itself to the policies and programs implemented in the Government's Employment White Paper. Or will he say, as he did at the time of its release, that the labour market and training programs are a waste of money? If he would not maintain them, with what would he replace them?
All Australians have a right to know what existing policies Mr Downer proposes to change. If he proposes to cut Government expenditure, what programs will he cut? If he proposes to change the direction of economic policy, what consequential change in social policy does he propose?
It will not be enough to say that the Coalition is " for" employment and " for" the family or " for" anything else. Nobody has ever been not " for" them. Being " for" something means nothing without explicit policy expression. If Mr Downer intends to use the words " honesty" and " leadership" with any credibility in future, he will have to offer credible alternative policies tomorrow.
CANBERRA4 SEPTEMBER, 1994



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, THE IMPERIAL HOTEL, TOKYO, JAPAN
6 SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, I'm speaking here about the Liberal's policy, about the Liberal's
announcement today. Well, the first thing I would say about it is,
we're probably seeing the last of the end of Mr Downer here. I don't
think I've seen a more pathetic document in the last 20 years. After
11 years of policy reform which is now remarked upon, around the
world in a common-place way -after all those budgets and major
economic statements, to see this blancmange of nonsense, is to say
that the Liberal Party is either institutionally had it, or Mr Downer has
come to the end of the line. I mean, to publish a document which
says they are pro-fami lies", mpro-Australia', " pro-communities", " projobsu,
I mean, begs the obvious question, would they ever say they
were anti-family, anti-Australia, anti -communities and anti-jobs?
Offered the chance to state the substance of his leadership, Mr
Downer has offered us a catalogue of platitudes an insult to the
intelligence of our fellow Australians. I've never see, I think, a more
fatuous document than this one. And just by merely publishing it, it
puts down the quality of public debate in Australia. In fact, John
Hewson must be wondering what his dismissal is all about because
" Fightback* looks like a " War and Peace" document compared to this,
which is a " Mills and Boonp economic and social guide. Mr Downer
says that this is " a cornerstone, a building-block of coalition policy", in
fact it will support nothing of weight because there is nothing of
weight in it. And I think it will haunt him as long as he lasts, or as
long as it lasts, whichever the case may be.
Now, he said of course that I would make a make a comment on this
without reading it. Well, it's not exactly like getting across a major
work on time or the theory of relativity I was able to knock over most
of this and then still finish of my sushi within 25 minutes.
The thing is, I just had a most interesting conversation with Mr Hata
and Mr Watanabe about the politics of social change in Japan, and 
2
economic change imperative economic change and we were
relating our respective experiences. I mean if this were to be
Australia's trip back down the time tunnel to the sort Of policies of the
sixties and seventies the Rip Van Winkle years of the Liberal Party
then we would not only not keep up, but certainly not have a lead In
change, as we have in Australia now over the last decade. I mean
the document is sprinkled with nonsense, like this: " The coalition will
implement a practical, common-sense" how many time have we
heard that " a practical, common-sense approach to labour market
reform". Well, what does that mean? Does It mean that the coalition
can hold wages during a period of high growth? Does it mean that
they would ever have reduced inflation to under And what does
" 1practical, common-sense" m mean when you have got economic
growth and demand running and pushed along by very high rates of
economic growth? It goes on to things like this: " tax and family
payments will ease family pressures". Well, what does that mean?
Tax cuts? What does it mean? And if it is, what is the fiscal impact
of these things? And that family payments?
And then it says in the document that so many of the costs will by
cutting out waste. All of this will be met by dealing with waste and
other changes to efficiency. Well, you can make all the efficiency
changes you like in the public sector of Australia in the delivery of
services, but it won't cover the costs of these sort of things. And then
I thought the Bobby Dazzler of all of them was that, he says in his
press statement; " Let me be equally clear what this statement is noto,
and he goes on to say what it isn't. Well never in all the statements
that I have delivered from memory, nine or eight budgets, and about
ten economic statements have I ever said what they were not.
Because I thought proudly they said eloquently what they were.
I didn't expect much from Mr Downer, but what he has given us is
even less than I expected he would.
J: One of the criticisms from Alexander Downer is that why should he
play your game and be very specific about the policies?
PM: Well, I said that yesterday. Policies are the substance of politics.
This is the place where they are the things that one attaches oneself
to, and articulates to the public in seeking to provide a proper basis to
our public life, and to advance our society. If they are not about
policies, what are they about? See, the thing about Mr Downer is he
has his policies, but he doesn't think the public will like them. So,
he's going to keep them hidden so they can't come under scrutiny
until the closing weeks of an election campaign.
Now, he talks about honesty, that he's an honest politician. He
actually goes on to make that statement that I recorded yesterday
saying that " I'm the most honest person you will ever meet'. You 
have got to have a lot of front to say something like that. Now, having
said it, he doesn't follow it through by honestly telling the public what
he has in mind. So we have this sort of sham document which will
then, in a sense, disguise the policies which he won't reveal until the
closing days of an election campaign.
J: ut why should he reveal them now? It will only give you 12 months
to knock them down.
PM: Why should he reveal them now? Because if he wants to be in the
business of the public debate if he doesn't reveal them now, he's
out of the public debate. I mean, if he doesn't have policies, he's not
in the public debate. If he's not an agent of change, he's not in the
public debate. He disqualifies himself by saying " I don't have
policies' in which case he's disqualified or " I'm not prepared to
reveal them" in which case, he's deceitful.
J: But isn't it fair to say that an opposition Is there to scrutinise the
Government to criticize and analyze what the Government is..
PM: No. The Opposition is there as the alternative government. It's there
to become the alternative government. You see, Australia can't
afford, now, if ever but certainly not now, to go back to this sort of
period of policy paralysis that the Liberals had through most of the
sixties and seventies. I mean, the Australian community now wants
the common wheel advanced. They want change, and they know
they've got to get it. And to be saying, " oh, just by the way, I don't
think I'll give you any for the moment because that nasty government
might take the mickey out of me", is not going to be tolerated by the
public and nor it should be.
J: I don't recollect the Labor Party putting its policies out twelve months
in advance of a federal election.
PM: We had, in the 1982 election, in the 1980 election, changes to fiscal
policy. Quite specific addition to the deficit in 1982 of SI .5billion a
whole lot of other details. But whatever the then opposition did then,
the whole national debate has moved on so much. I mean, you do
get remarks from people in Japan, in Europe, how Australia is among
the leading nations for change in the OECD in the world. And it is.
J: Is John Hewson right then in saying that what he did in OFightback
last summer really lifted the benchmark in terms of oppositions and
what they need to deliver in terms of policy development?
PM: Well, it was a set of policies. Whether you liked them or not, it was a
set of policies. As I said, it was a veritable tome compared to this lot
it was a " War and Peace" compared to this being on offer. 
J: Mr Keating, references to the republic and the constitutional change
do they set In place now the coalitions positions?
PM: Well, I don't know. But you can always, I mean it's got things like this
in it; " We'll restore a world-class education and training system*.
Restore. Now, as you remember, three students in ten completed
secondary school in 1982 it's now eight in ten, So he'll restore us
back to three in ten. He'll restore us back to pathetic rates of tertiary
places. He'll restore us back to the absolutely Cinderella status of
technical and further education. He's going to help with savings and
productivity, but he's going to afreeze the superannuation guarantee
charge while working to provide effective superannuation care for
retirement". In other words, he claims to be interested in families, the
one bit of additional support for savings for a better standard of living
in retirement for families has come from the Government's
superannuation legislation. The only reason that Alexander Downer
wants to freeze the superannuation guarantee charge* is that they
don't want to see the empowerment of trade unions sitting as trustees
of hundreds of billions of super-fund monies, and also they don't want
to see any shift from business to individuals by way of enhanced
income in retirement. So, they're going to help savings but they have
got a very snakey policy on ordinary people, who are getting for the
first time ever, a bit of a benefit a substantial benefit in fact from
superannuation. I mean, it's full of those sort of inconsistencies.
Look, let me just conclude my remarks on this point. It's the worst
thing I've ever seen from them. Certainly, in the years I've been in
office, and as I said the other day, they must be saying * we've done it
again". They must be. They have to be saying, " we've done it again
we've picked a dud".
J: Tempted to go early, Mr Keating?
PM: No. No. But you notice that Mr Downer has released this in my
absence. I did make the remark that I would try and ping him, even if
it was from the foyer of the Imperial Hotel. But, he has released it in
my absence well, I'll just say this to Mr Downer, don't get too tricky
with me. Mr Downer, we can all be tricky. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
PRESS CONFERENCE, IMPERIAL HOTEL, TOKYO
8 SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, can we ask you some questions In relation to the
shooting overnight In Sydney first up, If you don't mind?
PM: Well, that's what I was going to say something about. Well, I was
very naturally I knew John Newman. I was very depressed about it
and, you know, somewhat at a loss for words, I think, about the sort of
impact of this on someone In public life who had served thie
community there very well. Of course, he was quite committed to the
community In Cabramatta and was involved in all facets of it. And as
you know, often quite fearlessly. So, it's a bad day for life in New
South Wales when this sort of thing happens.
We don't know what the motives are yet, of this, and we don't have
any details of what happened other than the sketchy ones. We know,
that Is, the circuImstances, but not any of the background, and the
Australian Federal Police will be co-operating with thie Now South
Wales police in the investigation.
J: Are you concerned that this may be a case of politically motivated
killing?
PM: Well, I would be concerned if it was politically motivated, yes. But it
may not be. One doesn't know, and I don't think it is really useful to
speculate about it.
J: Mr Newman has been campaigning for more police.. ( inaudible)., and
an Asian Taskforce, will you move to see if any of those things are
now put in place, given this shooting?
PM-Well, it's not a matter of me moving. This is a matter for New South
Wales government, and the New South Wales Police force, and it's
their Investigation it's essentially their matter. But we will certainly
co-operate with them. 
J: He was also campaigning for tougher deportation laws, Mr Keating,
do you think that's something that...
PM: All that begs the question about the crime being a political one, and I
just don't think one should add any credence to that at this point.
J: Do you sympathise, though, with his arguments that there was a
great...
PM: Well, there's no point in speculating I'm not speculating about it at
all.
J: Have you communicated with Premier Fahey today?
PM: No, I haven't, no.
J: There's some report going around back home that you have been In
contact with the police in New South Wales...
PM: No, no. Bul the AFP have identified liaison officers in Sydney to cooperate
as a conduit for the NSW investigations, and of course,
naturally any Intelligence holdings which the AFP have, which may be
useful to the NSW police, they are welcome to.
J: Are you at all concerned that there might be a backlash against the
Vietnamese community?
PM: No, I think this is a very mature society in Australia, and I think
Australians will see this killing for what it is that is an unacceptable
act of criminal violence, whatever it's motivations.
Well as you know I've still got a day of meetings to go, but I was very
pleased with discussions I had yesterday with Prime Minister
Murayama and his colleagues. They covered issues of Importance to
Australia-Japan relations, such as changes in the Japanese political
system, social policy in each country, resource issues in the South
Pacific, and Japan's global role, including membership of the ( UN)
Security Council. But the main focus was on regional development,
especially on APEC
I was able to explain to the Prime Minister why I thought APEC was
so important to Australia, and we think the rest of the region,
including Japan It was a very encouraging conversation in all.
Japan is a great supporter of both APEC and trade liberalisation in
the region, so I'm sure this will help our discussions will help in the
run up to Bogor. It will for me to know the Prime Minister, to have run
across these issues with him so that when I soe him in Bogor of
course, we'll know one another and have some solid background in
the issues before us. I think I'll leave it at that and invite questions. 
J: Prime Minister, last night we were told that you were pleased to see
that the Japanese Prime Minister was committed to a " good outcome"
in Bogor can you explain what that means? What's a good
outcome?
PM: Well, I think they want to see a commitment to trade liberalisation in
the region. But, I didn't have a technical discussion with the Prime
Minister, I mean, I have been in and out of the APEC issue now for
so long and all the little nuances and eddy currents and the rest, one
can't expect a Prime Minister just appointed to have an Infrastructure
of knowledge meetings past and all the events and the nuances of it,
and I didn't press him on it. Just the general political Issues I mean,
what we're looking for in Bogor Is political authority there are
enough people particularly after the Uruguay Round experience just
behind them there are enough people now quite expert In trade
matters and in trade liberalisation mnatters. As always, as in Uruguay,
the problem was political authority anid it was that which I was
speaking of, and seeking, rather than an~ y other, if you like, detailed
response.
J: Did you hear anything from the Japanese Prime Minister that might
discourage you from pursuing any agenda that you have in mind for
Bogor?
PM: No. no. I mean, I think that the Prime Minister was quite remarkably
cross all the principle issues. I say quite remarkably, I mean, with a
fair degree of sophistication.
J: Did hie put the traditional Japanese position for preference for some
sort of MFN process?
PM: No. The acronym MFN was never mentioned.
J: Were timetables mentioned, Prime Minister?
PM: No.
J: So did you seek in any way to get some sort of commitment from him
to a specific date?
PM: No.
J: Without debating the actual date?
PM: No. No, because these things are all about starts, they're not about
finishes. They're all about starts, and it's like our own tariff changes
in Australia, I mean, we started the tariff reduction program in 1988
and we put the second phase in 1991 and 1997.. but by 1991, 
everyone understood what the game was. And most people have
adjusted to it much earlier than 1997.
J: Did he Indicate he's prepared to look at an earlier start than perhaps
the EPG group...
PM: I didn't press him on those sorts of details. I mean, I had the chance
to go to those sort of details with other people.
J: Mr Keating, APEC has been described as a potential catalyst for a
fresh round of International trade negotiations did you get any sense
of the Prime Minister of Japan's..( inaudible)... arguments?
PM: Oh, I think that the Japanese see... I mean, remember this that the
Prime Minister was at the Naples Summit the G-7 the open
markets 2000 initiative didn't travel so well there, and I think he
understood right up close what the trade liberalisation international
discussion is like. I'm sure Japan understands very clearly that
APEC is half the world's production and half the world's population.
So, what APEC does matters simply because of its size.
J: Did he indicate that the Japanese have preference for negotiating tho
details of how free trade will continue before committing to a date of
some sort?
PM: I don't think so. Japan is worldly wise about this stuff. I mean, they
have been in the Uruguay debate now for years, and they see, I think,
the value of APEC. The G-7 is very much an elite thing, trying to sort
of, you know, kick off or direct some sort of trade liberalisation
beyond the GATT, whereas APEC is a broadly based bottom-up
thing. I mean, it's something where the countries all understand the
debate, they all talk to one another, you get that sense of a
community view being brought to it. Which is not the case with the G-
7, and I think Japan understands that well.
J: Are there any countries In APEC that you feel might be... not want to
join any consensus on moving it forward?
PM: Not that I know of.
J: Are you confident that you can win China's support to some sort of
specific timetable?
PM: Well, the Chinese are pragmatists. I mean, there was always some
doubt that they would come to Seattle. There was no doubt in my
mind that they would come. I mean, they are pragmatic, and they do
see the value, I think, in opening up markets in the Asia-Pacific for
their products. 
J-On the domestic side, are you confident that you could win support
for an export tariff regime in Australia by the year 2000, for example?
PMV: Well, we're almost there ourselves. That's the point. I mean, one of
the things in the EPG report about staggering the stuff Is for the
developing countries first, and the developed countries later, Is that
we will be down to a level of 5% of general manufacturing protection
by 1997, and the plant areas are around 15% in terms of tariffs but
this is going to be more than about tariffs. It's going to be about nontariff
barriers, and it's going to be about services. I mean, It's going to
about trade in the broader sense, not simply tariffs.
J: For example, on the auto makers have they been consulted at all onl
this question of bringing their 15% tariff further down?
PM: No, but we haven't said either that it would necessarily come below
that. See again, what happens in any of these rounds is that
countries give offers you remember the Uruguay Round offers
people try and look at ( heir sectors which are difficult for them and
they provide offers. They have got to be acceptable in the general
round and we're a long way from any of that.
J: Did the Prime Minister last night outline what Japan actually wants
from the Bogor meetings? Any specific outcomes?
PM: No, only in the sense in agreeing with me that it's a great opportunity
to advance the velocity of trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific,
and it shouldn't be missed.
J: Mr Keating, on security did the Prime Minister outline Japan's
current thinking on UN Security Council seats there seems to havo
been a bit of movement on that recently?
PM: Well yes. I said Australia maintains the position we have had that we
thought it was an anachronism that Japan the second largest
economy in the world, a large nation of 130 million people were not
represented in the Security Council, and you couldn't adequately
reflect on world opinion without that being represented, and I put the
view to him that I thought there was a consistency between Security
Council membership and, well certainly, let me put it in the negative
no inconsistency in Security Council membership and Japan needing
to play a military role. I didn't think these things one necessarily
followed the other, and that Japan could play a role in this world body
because it's consulted always on major issues even if it isn't part of
the security council.
J: What was his view? 
PM: Well, I think hie was probably a bit more interested in my view at the
tirne and thei-e has obviously been a difference of view in Japan
about this, obviously coming from it's long constitutional history, and
the impediments to military engagement, and military involvement.
But I think Japan is sorting Its way through this, I mean, it's a very
great change going on in Japan at the moment I mean, you can see
that with the changes at the last election, and the Hosakawa
Government, the rise of Shinselto these things are, I think, straws In
the wind of a greater change, and that change has been about Japan
playing a role commensurate with its size. This is just another
manifestation of that debate.
J: Did he give any indication of his assessment of security issues on the
Korean peninsula?
PM: No.
J_ Just one last question what did he say about the South Pacific
issues?
PM: Well, I raised these issues with him. I said that I thought that, as
Chairman of the South Pacific Forum, I should tell the Prime Minister
what had transpired. I thanked him for Japan's continuing interest In
the Forum, and where Vice Minister Yanagisawa came, and for It's
aid to the region, but said there were specific difficulties In forestry
and fisheries, and particularly In fisheries where the Pacific fishery is
the principal source of fish stocks to Japan, that it had an interest in
seeing that the fishery was well conducted, that there was adequate
research about replenishment and that the member states were
assisted, at least, in the first instance by getting an adequate return,
and the returns historically have been low And that in everyone's
long-term interests, we should try and make the fishery a viable thing,
over a long period of time, and that Australia would play its role in
fisheries research and I look forward to Japan playing a collaborative
role with us.
J: Finally Prime Minister, would you clarify there's been some
confusion back in Australia in regards to your comments yesterday
about an early election?
PM: I gave you the answer. I gave it as soon as I was asked, so if you're
confused, you're easily confused.
J: Is an early election on the timetable?
PM: No. No. With a capital ' n and a big nought behind It.
ends. TflTOI P ta 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
PRESS CONFERENCE, IMPERIAL HOTEL, TOKYO
I SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, can we ask you some questions In relation to the
shooting overnight In Sydney first up, If you don't mind?
PM: Well, that's what I was going to say something about. Well, I was
very naturally I knew John Newman. I was very depressed about it
and, you know, somewhat at a loss for words, I think, about the sort of
impact of this on someone In public life who had served the
community there very well. Of course, he was quite committed to the
community in Cabramatle and was Involved in all facets of it. And as
you know, often quite fearlessly. So, it's a bad day for life In New
South Wales when this sort of thing happens.
We don't know whet the motives are yet, of this, and we don't have
any details of what happened other than the sketchy ones. We know,
that Is, the circumstances, but not any of the background, and the
Australian Federal Police will be co-operating with the Now South
Wales police In the Investigallon,
J: Are you concerned that this may be a case of politically motivated
killing?
PM: Well, I would be concerned if it was politically motivated, yes. But it
may not be. One doesn't know, and I don't think it is really useful to
speculate about it.
J: Mr Newman has been campaigning for more police..( inaudible).. and
an Asian Taskforce. will you move to see if any of those things are
now put in place, given this shooting?
PM. Well, it's not a maeter of me moving. This is a mailer for New South
Wales government, and the New South Wales Police force, and it's
their Investigation it's essentially their matter. But we will certainly
co-operate with them. 
J: He was also campaigning for tougher deportation laws, Mr Keating,
do you think that's something that...
PM: All that begs the question about the crime being a political one, and I
Just don't think one should add any credence to that at this point.
J: Do you sympathlse, though, with his arguments that there was a
great...
PM: Well, there's no point in speculating I'm not speculating about it at
all.
J: Have you communicated with Premier Fahey today?
PM: No, I haven't, no.
J: There's some report going around back home that you have been In
contact with the police in New South Wales...
PM. No. no. But the AFP have identified liaison officers in Sydney to co.
operate as a conduit for the NSW investigations, and of course,
naturally any Intelligence holdings which the AFP have, wilch may be
useful to the NSW police, they are welcome to.
J: Are you at all concerned that there might be a backlash against the
Vietnamese community?
PM; No, I think this Is a very mature society In Australia, and I think
Australians will see this killing for what it is that is an unacceptable
act of criminal violence, whatever it's motivations.
Well as you know I've still got a day of meetings to go. but I was very
pleased with discussions I had yesterday with Prime Minister
Murayama and his colleagues. They covered Issues of Importance to
Australia-Japan relations. such as changes in the Japanese political
system, social policy in each country, resource issues In the South
Pacific, and Japan's global role. Including membership of the ( UN)
Security Council. But the main focus was on regional development,
especially on APEC
I was able to explain to the Prime Minister why I thought APEC was
so important to Australia, and we think the rest of the region.
including Japan It was a very encouraging conversation In all.
Japan is a great supporter of both APEC and trade liberalisation in
the region, so I'm sure this will help our discussions will help in the
run up to Bogor. It will for mo to know the Prime Minister, to have run
across these issues with him so that when I soo him In Bogor of
course, we'll know one another and have some solid background in
the issues beforo us. I think I'll leave It at that and invite questions. 
J: Prime Minister, last night we were told that you were pleased to see
that the Japanese Prime Minister was committed to a " good outcome"
in Bogor can you explain what that means? What's a good
outcome?
PM: Well, I think they want to see a commitment to trade liberalisation in
the region. But, I didn't have a technical discussion with the Prime
Minister, I mean, I have been in and out of the APEC issue now for
so long and all the little nuances and eddy currents and the rest, one
can't expect a Prime Minister just appointed to have an Infrastructure
of knowledge meetings past and all the events and the nuances of it,
and I didn't press him on it. Just the general political Issues I mean,
what we're looking for in Bogor Is political authority there are
enough people particularly after the Uruguay Round experience just
behind them there are enough people now quite export In trade
matters and In trade liberalisation matters. As always, as in Uruguay,
the problem was political authority anld it was that which I was
speaking of, and seeking, rather than any other, if you like, detailed
response.
J: Did you hear anything from the Japanese Prime Minister that might
discourage you from pursuing any agenda that you have In mind for
Bogor?
PM: No, no. I mean. I think that the Prime Minister was quite remarkably
cross all the principle issues. I say quite remarkably, I mean, with a
fair degree of sophistication.
J: Did he put the traditional Japanese position for preference for some
sort of MFN process?
PM: No, The acronym MFN was never mentioned.
J: Were timetables mentioned, Prime Minister?
PM: No,
J: So did you seek in any way to get some sort of commitment from him
to a specific date?
PM: No.
J: Without debating the actual date?
PM: No. No, because these things are all about starts, they're not about
finishes. They're all about starts, and it's like our own tariff changes
in Australia. I mean, we started the tariff reduction program in 1988
and we put the second phase in 1991 and 1997.. but by 1991, 
everyone understood what the game was. And most people have
adjusted to it much earlier than 1997.
J: Did he Indicate he's prepared to look at an earlier start than perhaps
the EPG group...
PM: I didn't press him on those sorts of details. I mean, I had the chance
to go to those sort of details with other people.
J: Mr Keeling, APEC has been described as a potential catalyst for a
fresh round of International trade negotiations did you get any sense
of the Prime Minister of Japan's..( inaudible),.. arguments?
PM: Oh, I think that the Japanese see... I mean, remember this that the
Prime Minister was at the Naples Summit the G-7 the open
markets 2000 Initiative didn't travel so well there, and I think he
understood right up close what the trade liberalisetion international
discussion is like. I'm sure Japan understands very clearly that
APEC is half the world's production and half the world's population.
So, what APEC does matters simply because of its size.
J: Did he Indicate that the Japanese have preference for negotiating tho
details of how free Irade will continue before committing to a date of
some sort?
PM: I don't think so. Japan is worldly wise about this stuff. I mean, they
have been in the Uruguay debate now for years, and they see, I think,
the value of APEC. The G-7 is very much an elite thing, trying to sort
of. you know, kick off or direct some sort of trade liberaliselion
beyond the GATT, whereas APEC Is a broadly based bottom-up
thing. I mean, it's something where the countries all understand the
debate, they all talk to one another, you get that sonso of a
community view being brought to it. Which is not the case with the G-
7, and I think Japan understands that well.
J: Are there any countries In APEC that you feel might be... not want to
join any consensus on moving it forward?
PM: Not that I know of.
J: Are you confident that you can win China's support to some sort of
specific timetable?
PM: Well, the Chinese are pragmatists. I mean, there was always -some
doubt that they would come to Seattle. There was no doubt In my
mind that they would come. I mean. they are pragmatic, and they do
see the value, I think, in opening up markets In the Asia-Pacific for
their products. 
J: On the domestic side, are you confident that you could win support
for an export tariff regime In Australia by the year 2000, for example?
PM: Well, we're almost there ourselves. That's the point. I mean, one of
the things in the EPG report about staggering the stuff Is for the
developing countries first, and the developed countries later, Is that
we will be down to a level of 5% of general manufacturing protection
by 1997, and the plant areas are around 15% in terms of tariffs but
this is going to be more than about tariffs. It's going to be about nontariff
barriers, and It's going to be about services. I mean, It's going to
about trade in the broader sense, not simply tariffs.
J: For example, on the auto makers have they been consulted at all on
this question of bringing their 15% tariff further down?
PM; No, but we haven't said either that it would necessarily come below
that. See again, what happens in any of these rounds Is that
countries give offers you remember the Uruguay Round offers
people try end look at their sectors which are difficult for them and
they provide offers. They have got to be acceptable In the general
round and we're a long way from any of that.
J: Did the Prime Minister lest night outline what Japan actually wants
from the Bogor meetings? Any specific outcomes?
PM: No; only in the sense In agreeing with me that it's a great opportunity
to advance the velocity of trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific,
and it shouldn't be missed.
J: Mr Keating, on security did the Prime Minister outline Japan's
current thinking on UN Security Council seats there seems to havo
been a bit of movement on that recently?
PM: Well yes. I said Australia maintains the position we have had that we
thoughl it was an anachronism that Japan the second largest
economy In the world, a large nation of 130 million people were not
represented in the Security Council, end you couldn't adequately
reflect on world opinion without that being represented, and I put the
view to him that I thought there was a consistency between Security
Council membership and, well certainly, let me put it in the negative
no inconsistency in Security Council membership and Japan needing
to play a military role. I didn't think these things.. one necessarily
followed the other, and that Japan could play a role in this world body
because it's consulted always on major issues even if it isn't part of
the security council.
J: What was his view? 
6
PM: Well, I think he was probably a bit more interested in my view at the
time and Uhere lias obviously been a difference of view in Japan
about this, obviously c6ming from it's long constitutional history, and
the impediments to military engagement, and military involvement.
But I think Japan is sorting Its way through this. I mean, it's a very
great change going on In Japan at the moment I mean, you can see
that with the changes at the last election, and the Hosakawa
Government, the rise of Shinselto these things are, I think, straws In
the wind of a greater change, and that change has been about Japan
playing a role commensurate with its size. This is just another
manifestation of that debate.
J: Did he give any indlcation of his assessment of security Issues on the
Korean peninsula?
PM: No.
J: Just one last question what did he say about the South Pacific
issues?
PM: Well, I raised these Issues with him. I said that I thought that, as
Chairmen of the South Pacific Forum, I should tell the Prime Minister
what had transpired. I thanked him for Japan's continuing Interest in
the Forum, and where Vice Minister Yanaglsawa came, and for it's
aid to the region, but said there were specific difficulties In forestry
and fisheries, and particularly In fisheries where the Pacific fishery Is
the principal source of fish stocks to Japan, that it had an Interest in
seeing that the fishery was well conducted, that there was adequate
research about replenishment and that the member states were
assisted, at least, in the first instance by getting an adequate return,
and the returns historically have been low. And that In everyone's
long-term interests, we should Iry and make the fishery a viable thing,
over a long period of lime. and that Australia would play its role In
fisheries research and I look forward to Japan playing a collaborative
role with us.
J: Finally Prime Minister, would you clarify there's been some
confusion back in Australia in regards to your comments yesterday
about an early election?
PM: I gave you the answer, I gave it as soon as I was asked, so if you're
confused, you're easily confused.
J: Is an early election on the timetable?
PM: No. No. With a capital and a big nought behind It.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, IMPERIAL HOTEL, TOKYO, JAPAN
6 SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: I thought It might be useful to give you an impression of the meeting I
had this morning with Minister Hashimoto, I have been quite friendly
with Minister Hashimoto now-for many years when he was Finance
Minister and we have corresponded at various times over the years
since and I am delighted that he has come back Into the government
as the Minister for International Trade and Industry. This Is a country
which takes a quarter of all we export and It's our largest trading
partner, and having, well certainly, an associate a relatively a close
associate in the job here makes things somewhat easier for me.
We had a very good discussion today about the international scene
In general and about APEC in particular. And, as you know, Japan
was one of the founding forces of APEC and with Prime Minister
Miyazawa and MITI back a couple of years ago. They played a very
significant role getting the change in APEC from an informationsharing
secretariat to a leaders body, a heads of government body,
and to be able to give it a greater role in trade facilitation and
liberalisation. So today we had a talk about this and about the
importance of the Leader's Meeting in Bogor which will require and
this is a very large undertaking that is going to require a lot of
spadework over a period, and a lot of dialogue and a lot of
discussions but, I think I say today that our discussions were very
positive and, as you know Minister Hashimoto particularly from the G-
7 Meeting, you know that he is a very strong advocate of free trade
and we have shared views on the need for free trade In the region,
and we agreed on the need to make the Bogor Meeting a success. I
think they are very conscious of the fact the that there is a great
opportunity here with President Soehartoe's leadership.
This is a quite unusual circumstance where the leader of a
developing country and a large one representing developing
countries In ASEAN are, in a sense, providing the lead, to a very
substantial International undertaking In trade. In the past we have 
expected these things to come from the developed countries and the
G-71 this is In a sense coming the other way it's coming from
developing countries, and I think that Japan understands and values
this. But, of course, I'm looking forward to the meeting with Prime
Minister Murayama later in the day, and it Is after that that I can
say.. give you an Impression where I think Japan Is standing on some
of the issues coming up to APEC and some other issues as well.
J: Prime Minister, do you believe that the 2020 target set out by the
Eminent Persons Group, do you believe that target is ambitious
enough? Do you think it should be improved upon?
PMV: Well,' the Eminent Persons Group Report Is an Indication of the
direction, I think, which leads to things because all the people on it
are private people who have come back to their respective
governments and, in a sense, what you have Is the sort of, well, both
a coalescence in the EPG Report and, I think and a bit of a a
compromise. The leaders will do something else again, and I think
the strength of the Seattle meeting was that the Leaders met without
officials, and they decided where they want to kick the baill
themselves. So, In a sense, the EPG process is useful in fleshing out
the Initiatives and trying different issues on different constituencies
within APEC, and trying to see how far that can be generally agreed.-
it's then really up to the Leaders to see what they do with it. So, the
EPG report took us in the right directions, but I think the Leaders will
give that more precise expression.
J: From an Australian. own point of view, would you like to see a more
ambitious target?
PM: Well, what I want to see Is something which Is generally agreed. I
mean, In terms of industrial protection, Australia can make these
targets much earlier.. ( inaudible). But, we want to see this be a
discussion not simply about tariffs, but about services and non-tariff
barriers as well. It Is not simply a matter about, you know, target by a
certain date. I mean, I think everyone understands the value of ths,
that Is all the participants, and they're thinking hard about what they
can contribute at Bogor.
J: The Malaysians have been lobbying hard over the last few days
Deputy* Prime Minister Ibrahim has been here trying to push EAEC
along. Are you concerned about this competition with the Malaysian
proposal?
PM: Look, I didn't mention the EAEC. I mean, APEC is the main event
and the one that matters. Why should I bother with the EAEC,
particularly, I mean, in terms, you know, the notion you put which is
some sort of competitive thing. 
3
J: Prime Minister, last week senior Japanese Foreign Ministry officials
were Indicating that because GATT wasn't even through the DIET
here yet, In their words " the bruising hadn't healed from GATT", it
wasn't time yet for Japan to start on another free trade round. Did
you get any signs of that this morning?
PM: No, and in fact Japan played a very positive role at the Naples
meeting so, I don't think you can assume that is right. I mean, look at
what they did at the G-7, and what they did there was really argue for,
you know, further liberalisation. All countries will have their pressure
points in pushing the GATT Round through, but the GATT Round was
Important for the fact that it did advance the process of trade and
lower levels of protection and to facilitate investment in sectors which
were formerly off-limits. So, every country that signed up to Uruguay
will have this during the ratification process. But it's done and we
expect it to be ratified.
J: What was Minister Hashimoto's view about the fixing of the firm date
at Bogor?
PM: Well, we didn't go into specific dates. Only to say that one of the
clear objectives of Bogor will be to talk about free trade, you know,
within certain time frames. But these are matters I want to discuss
more fulsomely with the Prime Minister.
J: What was his general sort of response though to a more agressive
push?
PM: Japan has been right on board the APEC bus from day one. Prime
Minister Miyazawa, as I said earlier, MITI and the Galmusho ( MFA), I
mean, it was important in getting support for the Leaders Meeting in
the first place, and for the objectives which Prime Minister Hosikawa
helped push through, and the work program at the Seattle meeting.
So, you have got to see Japan as basically a positive player in this.
J: Prime Minister, what's changed? You said on Friday that Japan now
is more enthusiastic about APEC as a vehicle for trade liberalisation
what evidence do you have for that?
PM: Well, I think that Japan... I mean, a view was put to me a few years
ago that in terms of APEC and any liberalised trade, that Japan would
be the first beneficiary. And I think that is right, and I think Japan
sees that too. I mean opening up East-Asia and North-Asia to
products and multi-lateralising the interests of the United States in
Asia, multi-lateralising with China, is something which must naturally
fall to Japan's advantage. 
-4
J, Mr Keating, what's the difficulty In trying to manage the Japanese
desire to MFN, and the American desire to do everything more
unilaterally.. ( inaudible)..?
PM: Well, I don't see that certainly with Bogor. I mean I think the
likelihood is there that there will be a further meeting, and I should be
pleased if the next Leaders Meeting was actually held concurrent
with a Ministerial meeting In Japan. And, I think, once there are
generally agreed principles at Bogor, I think, it Is then a cme of
bringing In the ministries for some of the, sort of, beauracratic weight
to try and solve some of the other problems. I think this is where the
leaders can provide the value, I mean to kick the thing along. There
are then plenty of agencies to sort of scrabble over the details.
J: But they're fairly important details?
PM: Oh yes, sure. But It's not so important that, I think, anyone is going to
let the thing go.
J: Do you think they are prepared to sign off without actually knowing
how they..
PM: Well, I can't say that without speaking to the Prime Minister.
J: Mr Keating, on the wider level the issue of Japan's international
role, typified by questions such as its membership of the Security
Council. Previously Australia has stated it supported Japan
becoming a permanent member. What Is Australia's position on that
now, and also extending that to the peace-keeping question?
PMV: Well, our position remains the same. I mean, we think Japan can
play.. . it's the second-largest economy in the world, it's a large
country, It's a major player In the world we think Japan can be a very
positive force In the Security Council. That's always been our view,
and remains our view.
J: When My Murayama became the Prime Minister, he announced a
freeze on their bid for Security Council membership, and there seems
to be some tensions between his Socialist Party and more
nationalistic ( inaudible) Is that a problem for Australia, evaluating
that?
PM: None of this is a problem for Australia. It's about where we see vis a
vis Japan and the Security Council issue. I mean, we see ourselves
as being essentially supportive of this. And I think that, you know, the
coalition., has, despite the predictions of the pundits, is getting some
real standing and potential longevity, and the decisions by the Prime
Minister's party over the last weekend In some of these major issues
such as the US Alliance etc, nuclear power Is clearing away a lot of 
P
the Inhibitions for his party the Socialist Party to participate more
fulsomely In Japanese politics and Japanese policies. This, I think, Is
a very good sign. Now, in this clearing away of issues, probably one
of the issues which the Prime Minister will clear his mind on Is this
question about the Security Council. Now, It would fit very much in
with the constellation of Issues which his Party discussed last
weekend.
J: Mr Keating, did you discuss bilateral issues as well this morning with
Mr Hashimoto?
PM: No, no. Because I think we both understand that Mr Hashimoto
visited Australia a few times, I mean, he knows where we stand. He
knows about the clearly about the weight of our trade, our
importance to Japan as a raw material supplier and now unilaterally
as a supplier of food and high technology products. They know about
Australia's economic performance, and you know, in the time I have
with him, we want to concentrate, I think, on International issues.
J: At the South Pacific Forum you had some fairly strong things to say
about some Asian resource companies In the forestry and fishing
areas exploiting Pacific Island nations. As the Chairman of the
Forum this year, how strongly are you pas-sing those concerns you
articulated on in Brisbane onto Japanese in terms of their
companies?
PM: Well, forth-rightly. And when I get a chance to tell the Prime Minister
I think it Is part of my role as Chairman for the year, of the South
Pacific Forum, to actually transmit some of those messages. And,
you know, frankly I think that a mature Industrial state like Japan will
understand where the message has come from and why they have
come. But again, I look forward to taking that up at my meetings this
afternoon and with my meeting with the Prime Minister.
ends. 


9 September 1994
&nbsp;Every so often we come across an opportunity to celebrate an important national achievement one that has played a defining role in our national life.
&nbsp;The 20th anniversary of the establishment of the Office of the Status of Women marks one such achievement.
&nbsp;I think it's important that we celebrate it for two reasons.
&nbsp;First, it's important to celebrate what has been, without doubt a fundamental shift in the way that Governments, the community at large, and women themselves regard their role in society.
&nbsp;I that way, we celebrate a profound shift for the better.
&nbsp;Second, I think it's important to take stock of what we've done and to draw strength from what we've achieved.
&nbsp;And we do that, not to congratulate ourselves, but to remind us of what we are capable of doing, to give us more confidence on which to build the better, fairer Australia we, on this side of politics, are always pursuing.
&nbsp;Twenty years ago, Australia was a very different place.
&nbsp;Women's lives were very different.
&nbsp;But change was in the air.
Women were breaking down barriers and demanding equality in their lives.
Gough Whitlam had already appointed Elizabeth Reid as a special adviser on matters -relating to women, the first such position in the world.
The Federal Government had just begun its involvement in child care, but there were virtually no child care centres for working parents.
&nbsp;It was still legal to discriminate on the grounds of sex and marital status the Sex Discrimination Act was ten years away.
&nbsp;Equal pay for work of equal value remained a contentious issue.
And those seeking to escape violence in the home had almost nowhere to go in Sydney, Anne Summers, Katrina Harrison and Jen Levy had just set up Elsie, the first Women's Refuge in Australia.
No woman had ever headed a Commonwealth Department or an Australian political party or a State or Territory Government.
Deborah Wardley, Helen Williams, Janine Haines, Rosemary Follett, Carmen Lawrence and Joan Kirner were unknown along with countless others I could name.
We've come a long way since then.
It's a tribute to all the women and men who have worked for equality for women.
And it's also a tribute to the work of those associated with the Office of the Status of Women.
I think the progress we've made in elevating the status of women over the last twenty years is a hallmark of our political development.
There is scarcely a better measure of how far we have come.
The changes are here to stay.
And, as a nation, we're all the better for it.
A firm and practical Government commitment to women's equality now lies at the heart of our policy and program development.
Australia is now recognised as an international leader in integrating status of women issues into the ongoing business of government.
I rank these achievements with those with which the Labor Government is more generally associated.
I mean the processes by which we have now an economy that is one of the most open and competitive in the world, an economy that leads the world in economic growth and low inflation, and an economy that offers a great deal of hope for future generations of Australians.
I also mean our dramatically expanded secondary and higher education systems.
And, with the Employment White Paper, we will do the same with vocational training.
The fact is Australia is in the vanguard of progressive social policy with our health system, aged care services, child care provisions and social security system.
We are at ease with multiculturalism.
We are a nation mature enough to find a just reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
And confident enough to want an Australian Head of State for an Australian Republic.
Among the many threads which together make up the great tapestry that is Australia today, none has been more critical to the overall picture than the contribution of women.
This country could not have advanced to where we are today, could not have achieved so much, nor hold so much promise for the future, if women had not been in there driving the debate and shaping the change.
&nbsp;From its beginning, as a five person group in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Office of the Status of Women had great ambitions.
It set its sights on two things: making sure that Commonwealth policies and programs took account of over fifty percent of the population; and giving women a powerful voice in government decision-making.
Over the years, 0SW has been central to making real change and delivering real reform: whether it was bringing the 1984 Sex Discrimination Act and the 1986 Affirmative Action Act to fruition; or taking up the national challenge to end violence against women; or making child care more affordable and accessible; or pushing for a national strategic approach to fighting breast cancer.
OSW has brought real change to women's lives.
I hope you will allow me to single out Ann Sherry, who leaves OSW today.
Ann has been the force behind a major shift in the focus and direction of the Office over the last twelve months.
Thank you, Ann, for your contribution, and we all wish you well.
But I also want to say that the Office is not, and never has been, a one-woman show. It is a team of talented people and the momentum of their work will continue.
And it will continue because this Government is committed to achieving equality for women.
This Labor Government has already made great advances in women's employment, in women's education and in women's health.
We've also made great advances in assisting women caring for children. But, of course, women's equality is not yet a reality.
And one of our greatest challenges is to ensure that women become full participants in making the government and private sector decisions that affect us all.
For a country with such democratic traditions as ours, I think it is incongruous that we have a national house of parliament with ten times as many men as women.
It's an unacceptable waste of talent.
For the same good reasons that we require affirmative action of the bureaucracy and corporate Australia, it should be required of the Labor Party.
And I'm delighted that, in future, it will be.
Last year, I called on the Labor Party to begin a process of reinvigoration.
We needed to broaden the base of our membership, open our forums to more ideas, make sure we selected the best candidates for office, and make the changes " necessary to increase the number of women in State and Federal caucuses.
Last Friday, we took a significant step in that process when the National Executive recommended to National Conference the adoption of mechanisms which will substantially increase the number of Labor women in our Parliaments.
It was a just and wise decision.
It will be passed by National Conference at the end of this month and we will have more women in our Parliaments.
We need women shaping and sharing our future.
As someone who relishes the challenge of policy making and making real change stick, I am delighted to celebrate this twentieth birthday with you today.
I look forward to the next twenty years of 0SW though, who knows, twenty years from now, we might have got it right.
Twenty years from now, the need for an Office of the Status of Women might have passed.
In the meantime, congratulations to everyone associated with OSW for twenty years of leading the way.
Thank you.
&nbsp;


I am very pleased to announce that the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea,&nbsp;Sir Julius Chan, will be making a working visit to Australia from 13-14&nbsp;September. It will be Sir Julius's first visit to Australia since being elected&nbsp;Prime Minister on 30 August.
I am delighted that Sir Julius has been able to take up my invitation to visit&nbsp;Australia. That he has chosen to do so so soon after assuming the Prime&nbsp;Ministership reflects the importance he attaches to the bilateral relationship. I&nbsp;will, of course, be reaffirming to him the importance Australia attaches to&nbsp;relations with Papua New Guinea and the warm regard Australians have for&nbsp;his countrymen and women.
Australia has a close and multifaceted relationship with Papua New Guinea&nbsp;and I look forward to discussing with Sir Julius recent developments in the&nbsp;bilateral relationship.
We will also discuss the situation on Bougainville and, in particular, how&nbsp;Australia might assist the peace process. Sir Julius, both in the last few days&nbsp;and before as Foreign Minister, has played a leading role in advancing the&nbsp;cause of a peaceful long-term resolution to the Bougainville conflict and the&nbsp;Australian Government welcomes the leadership he has provided.
I will also be taking the opportunity to discuss with Sir Julius developments on&nbsp;APEC and on the outcomes of the recent South Pacific Forum meeting in&nbsp;Brisbane.
CANBERRA9 September 1994


I am very pleased that the Prime Minister of Singapore, Goh Chok Tong, will&nbsp;be visiting Australia from 12-15 September as a Guest of the Government.&nbsp;During his time here, he will visit Canberra, Sydney and Queensland.
Australia's relations with Singapore are close, broad-based and long&nbsp;standing. Singapore is our largest trading partner in ASEAN (total trade was&nbsp;over $ 5 billion in 1993-94) and our eight largest world-wide. Australian&nbsp;investment in Singapore is the largest we have in any ASEAN country and&nbsp;Singapore is the largest ASEAN investor in Australia.
We have a particularly close defence relationship with Singapore, notably&nbsp;through our common membership of the Five Power Defence Arrangement&nbsp;and through an extensive bilateral defence cooperation program.&nbsp;We also work together very closely on wider international and regional issues&nbsp;especially in APEC, where our mutual commitment to an open and liberal&nbsp;multilateral trading system makes us natural partners. Singapore and&nbsp;Australia share a similar vision for the bilateral relationship and of the Asia-Pacific region more broadly.
I look forward to discussing both bilateral issues and important regional&nbsp;issues with Prime Minister Goh. Of note, we will be looking to advance the&nbsp;strategic linkages initiative which I launched during my visit to Singapore in&nbsp;1992. The initiative aims to promote links between Australian and&nbsp;Singaporean companies with a view to developing joint business&nbsp;opportunities in third country markets.
We will also be looking to see how we can further develop our defence&nbsp;cooperation. On APEC, we will discuss our common interest in ensuring a&nbsp;successful APEC leaders meeting in November in Indonesia under the&nbsp;chairmanship of President Soeharto.
CANBERRA9 September 1994



( 0
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP ON THE MARITIME DISPUTE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 12
SEPTEMBER, 1994
PM: Well, as you know, the Government has met tonight with the maritime
unions and the ACTU, and as a result of the discussion and the negotiations
the unions are going to recommend to their members tomorrow a return to
work. This is on the basis of a set of agreements between the Government
and the maritime unions about the future of ANL, which we think will improve
the prospects of the Australian shipping industry, and ANL itself. This is a
dispute well settled. We can't afford any prolongation of shipping disputes or
stevedoring disputes in a country which relies upon its maritime trade. I'll be
pleased to see the union membership accept the recommendation to return to
work. J: What are the details of the deal?
PM: Well you'll have to wait till tomorrow so that the unions will have an
opportunity to present this to their members and explain to them what
arrangements they've made with the Government, and that will be revealed
tomorrow.
J: Can you tell me how much money the Government is prepared to
PM: No, it will all be revealed tomorrow, in that respect. They're entitled to go
back to their members and say what they have negotiated with the
Government without it being telegraphed on the media.
J: How would you describe the talks?
PM: Oh, it was a tough discussion, but an honest one.
J: And how crucial was your role, Mr Keating?
PM: Well, I think all Prime Ministers would say " entirely crucial". Let me say
very crucial. 
J: Was Mr Brereton rolled?
PM: Mr Brereton played an absolutely tip-top role through this and stood his
ground right the way through, and added confidently to the various proposals
and fashioned and re-fashioned them as needs be.
J: Some in the union movement are questioning his handling of his portfolio,
and this dispute in particular...
PM: Oh, well that will always happen in every dispute.
J: But you're standing right behind him?
PM: Exactly... well, not exactly ( standing) right behind him at the moment... of
course I am, yes. It's not a matter of me standing behind him you shouldn't
be putting the question in the first place, it has no basis to it. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AND HIS EXCELLENCY MR GOH CHOK TONG, DOORSTOP,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, TUESDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PJK: Well, the Prime Minister and I have had a chance of a discussion now
for over an hour and I wanted to take this opportunity again to say how
pleased I am to see him in Australia with a number of Ministers. The
relationship between Australia and Singapore grows more important as
the years go by and I was making the point to the Prime Minister, now
that Australia has really opened up its economy by reducing tariffs,
removing exchange controls, by investing abroad where the whole
culture of Australian business is now to go out rather than remain in,
the linkage with Singapore which is itself, of course, a very famous
trading entity is naturally a closer one. So, our interest is to improve
that closeness and the Prime Minister proposed this morning, and I've
agreed to develop a Singapore-Australia Business Council which we
think can help put partnerships together for developments and
investments by Australians in Singapore and Singaporeans in
Australia. And as well, do things together in third countries and here
the Prime Minister also proposed that we the Governments of
Australia and Singapore through our development organisations
invest in a fund which would do feasibility studies for joint participation
by our industrial companies in third markets. Because the thing about
Singapore is it's now highly developed in many fields in Australia,
businesses at the top of their market share, and it makes no sense to
be trying to expand businesses in some cases in saturated market
environments. So, the obvious thing is to look at the tremendous
potential of third markets and we think that Singapore and Australia
can do just that. So, what we call strategic linkages, we are going to
seek to do that.
We had a long discussion about APEC and our respective positions
going to the Bogor meeting. I think it is fair to say Prime Minister Goh
and I have a fairly close view on how we think APEC should develop 
and included in that view is our very strong belief that we should give
President Soeharto every support in making the meeting a success.
Not just for him and for Indonesia, but for the region as a whole.
We've also discussed our defence relations and I am delighted with
the fact that they are progressing very reasonably, in fact quickly.
We'll soon start flying training for the Singaporean Airforce in Pearce
in Western Australia and we are speaking of further collaboration in
army training and as well as that in general exercises. So, I think, we
are both very happy at that development.
We discussed the proposal for closer integration of AFTA and
Australasia and that is something, I think, we see on the medium to
longer term agenda and, I think, we are both happy to see that
progress. The other thing we discussed at some length is the possibility of
tourism and tourism opportunities in Australia for Singaporean
investors, but also and most especially and importantly for the people
of Singapore, and particularly young people. To see young people
come to Australia and get to know the place and to be able to enjoy it
and to have facilities here that they can come to rather than simply find
themselves lost in the tourism market. That they have actually tied
facilities. So, we have discussed that and, I think, we intend to try and
do something about that and make it work and, I think, that is a really
encouraging thing for us to be doing. We have got our respective
airlines with Qantas and Ansett and Singapore Airlines already flying
with some frequency in and out of Singapore and it means, I think,
where Singaporeans are very strong in real estate, we can actually do
a lot here, I think, together in the tourism industry and particularly with
our young people.
At any rate, I would be pleased if the Prime Minister would say some
things to you and I'm sure he'll agree we will take some questions.
GOH: Yes, as you can see we have had very good, substantive discussions.
Prime Minister Keating has very ably summarised the main points
which we've agreed on. We have a very warm, friendly and solid
relationship. Not just between Australian and Singapore, but also on
the personal level between ourselves and between our Ministers.
The future looks good for us to work together in the many areas which
Prime Minister Keating has just outlined. I would be pleased to answer
any questions that you may have or you could ask questions too of the
Prime Minister.
J: this fund that you are referring to how much are you talking
about? 
GOH: We are thinking of putting in AUS$ 1 million each and the fund will also
require participation by the companies concerned. It will be a three
way sharing 50 per cent by the joint venture company and 25 per
cent from Australia and 25 per cent from Singapore. It will serve as a
very concrete symbol of co-operation between Australian and
Singapore to encourage our business sectors to work together in third
countries.
J: Prime Minister Goh, you've arrived here just as the damaging shipping
strike has ended. In your perspective as being the head of one of the
major shipping nations in Asia, can Australia really compete when
we've still got these sorts of industrial problems?
GOH: Well, if your industrial problems continue then, of course, Australia
would find it more difficult to compete, but the Australians understand
the problem and, I think, the problems that you have will be solved. It's
got to be solved, otherwise you are going to be left in the back waters.
It will be solved.
PJK: I think it is worth adding Prime Minister, this is the first, we've only had
two of these generalised water front stoppages in our history and this
was a short one and it was essentially about the future of the
Australian National Line. But I think, the image of Australia abroad in
terms of its industrial relations should square with the general facts
and that is, say compared to a decade ago, industrial disputes are a
third of what they were. You cannot run a country with an inflation rate
of around 1 per cent unless the work force are productive and cooperative
and that's, of course, what we have here. But, people also
have a general interest in trying to mark out territory for themselves
and this was a strategic matter for the water front unions, but I think,
can I say I'm very glad they have gone back to work, but more
importantly, part of that has been the general new culture of Australia,
I think, which has sort of encouraged them to understand that this is
not the 1970s and they can't behave as though it is.
J: Mr Keating, given the increased defence links that you just talked
about, do you see any possibility for conflict given Singapore's arms
trade with places like Burma in the region?
PJK: No. I think that Singapore and Australia have been partners in
defence now way back to the Second World War and beforehand, and
since, with the 5-Power defence agreement, and we do many things
together for the intrinsic worth of lifting the proficiency and joint
operations of our respective defence forces, and the policies of the
government of Singapore in respect of it's relations with other
countries in the region is a matter for Singapore. I mean, our point is,
what is our relationship with Singapore? And everything in our
relationship with Singapore augers well for this defence relationship to
grow. 
GOH: And may I add that we have a responsible arms sales policy.
J: Prime Minister Goh, do you... given the momentum now towards APEC,
does this leave Dr Mahathir's EAEC proposal out in the cold? If so,
how do you think he is going to extricate himself from that at the Bogor
meeting?
GOH: I have just met Dr Mahathir in Langkawi before I came here. He
believes in EAEC much more than APEC that's on public record, I'm
not revealing a secret and I think Dr Mahathir would still like to see
EAEC move one or two steps forward, and Singapore's position has
always been that we support EAEC provided it is kept consistent
provided that it doesn't undermine ASEAN and it is compatible with
APEC. To us, APEC is a very important organisation, and the EAEC
must not in any way affect the progress of APEC.
J: Prime Minister Goh, given that, would you support any moves at the
Bogor summit to set specific start and finish dates for free trade in the
region?
GOH: We should try and aim for that, but we should also be sensitive to the
other concerns, or concerns of the other countries. So we will
approach this with some elasticity in mind. It can be a range of dates,
starting from 2005 and ending 2020 for countries in various categories.
But we should aim for some dates.
PJK: I have made the points to my colleagues in this country, Prime
Minister, that the important thing is the start dates. The finish dates
tend to be something that local industries very quickly pick up the
changed environment and they arrive much more quickly than the
nominal end-points set by governments it's really about getting a
beginning.
J: In the light of that, Prime Minister, how early do you think you might be
able to get s start date? What's your best estimate?
PJK: Well, the big start is going to be the GATT ratifications. I mean, that's
when we start to see the barrier falling, and that is going to be 1
January ' 95. I think that's the... I'm sure the Prime Minister will have
heard from President Soeharto that one of his objectives is he thinks
one of the most useful that in the first instance, the very first instance
that APEC can do is that the APEC members declare that they are for
ratifying, quickly, the GATT undertakings.
J: Do you believe January' 95 is a date that might be able to be agreed at
Bogor? 
PJK: I think that January ' 95 will certainly be the... a commitment by APEC
members, I think, to GATT ratifications, and that will start the protective
devices falling. I think we might leave it at that Prime Minister.
J: Prime Minister are you pleased with Senator Evans's move to the
Lower House?
PJK: Well, that's a domestic, purely a domestic issue, and I'm not here to go
around the world for sport, so thank you Prime Minister.
GOH: Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LUNCH IN HONOUR OF PRIME MINISTER GON OF SINGAPORE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 13 SEPTEMBER 1994
Prime Minister Goh and Madam Goh, it's a great pleasure to welcome you
both to Australia.
And let me say at the outset how much I personally value the very close
working relatiorlship that I have enjoyed with you, Prime Minister, since my
visit to Singapore In September 1992.
I also welcome our other distinguished guests from Singapore for what is
indeed a propitious visit.
You are visiting at a time when relations between Australia and Singapore
have never been better.
We have strong historical links, shared economic and trade interests, an
excellent defence relationship and, perhaps most important of all, a similar
vision for the future.
I see Singapore and Australia as two very forward-looking and optimistic
nations with many reasons for moving forward together, in partnership.
One of the reasons for my confidence lies in our shared history which
stretches back to before World War Two when Australia's first overseas
representation in Asia was established in Singapore.
I think It's important to remember that our friendship is an old friendship that
predates the birth of modem Singapore.
The content of the relationship has changed, but its closeness hasn't.
just on fifty years ago, Australia participated in the defence of Singapore. 
Today, the defence links still lie at the heart of the relationship, but tey're
much more geared to the future.
This morning, Prime Minister Goh and I discussed the excellent In some
ways remarkable progress our defence relationship has made over the
past few years.
We announced a number of Important new areas of defence cooperation.
And later this year In November, our Ministers will open the Royal Singapore
Air Force flying school at Pearce In Western Australia.
But, as critical as these defence links are, they are only part of the picture
for ours is indeed a broadly based relationship.
More than 6,000 Singaporeans are studying in Australia today while others
who come here to holiday have made Singapore our fifth largest tourist
market.
Singapore is our most Important investment partner in ASEAN.
Singapore is our most important trading partner In ASEAN.
With two-way trade at more than $ 5 billion a year, Singapore is our fifth
largest export market worldwide and our eight largest trading partner overall.
And what is important about this trade, from an Australian perspective at
least, is that a great deal of our exports are high value added manufactures
and services.
In fact, Singapore is our third largest export market for sophisticated
manufactures and a growing market for our services.
But we each want to do better.
And as we look to the future, we look to joint opportunities in third markets.
We share an understanding that strategic alliances can be critical to winning
contracts In the world's fastest growing region.
This is the thinking that lay behind the Strategic Linkages Initiative which we
launched during my visit to Singapore in 1992.
By com bining the respective strengths of Australian and Singaporean
companies, we are better placed to take advantage of major business
opportunities In the region.
Today, I'm pleased to say we have moved this initiative Into an important new
phase with the decision to focus our collaboration on Infrastructure projects. 
And here were looking at a potential market in the order of hundreds of
billions of dollars.
In thie five years to 1997, Infrastructure spending in East Asia is estimated to
exceed $ 730 billion.
While we are searching out joint opportunities in third countries, our wider
regional interests are also converging.
In this regard, Prime Minister Goh and I share a similar vision for the Asia
Pacific region.
It is a vision of optimism and abundance.
And APEC is part of that vision.
We are both looking forward to supporting President Soeharto in bringing
about an historic outcome at the APEC Leaders Meeting in Bogor in
November. Clearly, there have been enormous changes in our region over the past
decade, but I suspect they are nothing compared with what Is to come.
In the run up to a new century, I think it is critical that optimists be they
individuals or nations form partnerships.
I say this because it is optimists who can imagine a better future.
And it is optimists who are thereby more likely to create that future.
Obviously, the best optimists are also pragmatists they are the ones who
bring about positive change.
In this regard, I think Singapore and Australia have much in common.
Both our countries have undergone enormous and positive change in recent
times. And, In this regard, it's vital that we guard against the sort of familiarity that
prevents us from clearly seeing how much both our countries have changed.
You represent, Prime Minister, a country that is one of Asia's pre-eminent
success stories.
Singapore has achieved remarkable economic growth accompanied by a real
social concern for its people for good housing, for education and training,
for high standards of health care. 
Singapore will continue to make a vital contribution to the region.
Prime Minister, I'm sure that during your visit here to Australia you will see
how much Australia has changed how we have transformed our economy
into one of the most open and competitive in the world, how we have
refocussed our attention to the Asia Pacific region.
I believe our two countries share a real optimism for the region and our
respective roles in it.
For my part, I want to see Australia make its contribution wherever it can in
partnership with Singapore.
I wish you all well for what I hope is a very enjoyable and constructive visit to
Australia. Thank you. 



L L
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ADDRESS AT " TIMBAROO", DUARINGA. QUEENSLAND, THURSDAY,
16 SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
. John and Thelma, Ian ( McFarlane), Don ( McGauchle) President of the
National Farmers Federation and my colleague the Premier, Wayne Goss,
Marjorie H-enzell my federal parliamentary colleague, John Purcell from the
Cattleman's' Union and distinguished representatives of rural organisations
and ladies and gentlemen.
Well, let me at first, on behalf of the Premier and myself, thank John and
Thelma for this opportunity to see the drought as It affects them and for the
reception they have given us, which Ian has said, is one given on behalf of
the rural communities of this country and of Queensland. So, we thank you
most sincerely for that, to be able to come here and see It.
A century ago we had the worst drought end the worst of depression In
Australia's history. And, It was also the century where the nation was born
with the Federation of the Australian States and where much of the Australian
legend was created. A large part of the Australian legend Is the legend of the
bush and the fortunes of rural Australia and the bush have been very much
tied up with the fortunes of the country. Each time we have faced adversity
we have invaribly weathered It and over come It. We are now, I think,
experiencing whether it is for the moment, this is for these last three or four
years or whether it is actually a sea change in climate at least a substantial
change in the weather patterns In this country. And, it means that large parts
of our rural communities and our farm and grazing communities have been
devastated by it. Their lives have been hurt. Their Incomes have been
slashed. Our national Income has been reduced and now we are facing not
simply'an economic matter In the bush, but a social matter where families
have been under pressure, where children have been withdrawn from school,
where genuine hardship and sustained hardship Is a part of daily life.
During the election campaign or at the end of it in 1993 I said that we would
never leave the unemployed behind. Well, let me also say In the same terms,
. L D Ic k J UUQ r Ui 
L L 1 o, qu uuU
2
we won't leave the country people of this nation behind the farmers and the
graziers and their families who have been beset by this drought and have
faced difficult conditions after a prolonged period of bad seasons. And, I
think, that that can be said and should be said because the country
notwithstanding this epoch is wealthy enough to say that we will help people
through. That we won't forget them. That we will put Into place Some
systematic support for them.
I think, one of the real worries about this drought Is the Impact it Is having on
the psychology of the bush, on the psychology of farming and on families and
on family breakdown. I was telling Jan Darlington the other day a parish
priest who used to give sermons where I went to mass as a boy, used to say
when poverty flits In love flits out the door. It is very true, I think, that when
families are put under financial pressure you see a lot of marital breakdown
and a lot of stress and it Is particularly, I think, sad when you see It starting to
Impact on children and on their education.
So, there Is a real worry here, I think, about the vaibility of the farming family,
the rural family and, of course, the people In the towns who live from this sort
of generated wealth from the land. And, it is the holding of those family units
together, I think, which becomes our principal concern and seeing people
able to work through their financial problems and stay In the business of
' farming and grazing when the drought breaks and to see them ease through
It and back Into better times in the future is what we have to do.
So, I have taken this opportunity to look at first hand, at the impact of the
drought. I have been In drought affected areas before, but each area tends
to be different, In this case it is so prolonged, it followed a period of high
Interest rates ( inaudible) knocked cash flows around. So, each epoch is
different. This one is different and I am pleased to have the opportunity to
hear what farmers and graziers and farm and grazing organisations have to
say about this and to try and take that In and to think about some way we can
have some sort of tiered support. Be it In Income support or Interest
subsidies to deal with debts taken on In carry through periods or the funding
that is necessary to actually kick off after a drought, restocking and what
have you. And, It is that, I think, that the Federal Government is now
considering. We have already, under the RAS scheme, seen In a joint
arrangement with the States funding for rural adjustment assistance needed
to carry on finance. And, I think, already since 1992 the Commonwealth
spent about $ 100 million there. The Premier was telling me yesterday, I
think, In Queensland between the Commonwealth and the State
Governments we spent about $ 130 million in Queensland for that period.
So, It Is not as if there isn't funding going in. It is a matter of whether it Is
targeted well enough, whether it's of the kind that is actually helping people
out with income support, where their own financial capacity is simply run out
with the prolongation of these conditions.
So, this is, I think, a first rate opportunity for me to come. As I said I very
much appreciated the hospitality which John and Thelma have given us this 
LL~ 3
morning and their friends who have come around and those of you who
represent rural communities and the towns, the Mayor, I appreciate seeing
him here and the businesses who rely upon the growth of incomes off the
land. It gives us a chance to get a handle on ( inaudible) to see It at first
hand and to listen to what people say. You have got to be a good listener In
public life and let me assure you I am and to always listen to those ideas, the
odd jewel that comes through, that you can build upon or marry up with
something else, to end up with a better ( inaudible) policy.
I think in this country, because drought has now become somewhat endemic
to the country, that areas are drought declared for six months, out of it for a
year, then back In for six months. We really need, I think, a long term policy
in place. ( inaudible drought or a flood is ( inaudible) it is an easy
enough thing to do. Taken by some to mean that one has a heart. Well..
( Inaudible) I think It is better to have a head about it and a heart, that Is,
put the two things together and perhaps a consistency in policies and a
proper and appropriate funding.
That Is what we will try and do, but thank you all very much indeed to give us
a chance to try and to it better.
ends -4 uuu r
ILL 



i L L
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT " TMAROl DUARINGAI QUEENSLAND
SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: .( inaudible)
PMV: .( inaudible) it's got very expensive, I think, because of the fact that It
has gone on for so many seasons. You know, It's got to the point
where there is virtually.. . the grass has disappeared and you're really
Into very dry country, and I think ( Inaudible) What it means Is that
the breeding stock Is starting to go, and this is a long term problem for
the cattle industry.
J: You have talked to some of the hardest hit farmers in Central
Queensland in that room there what are they demanding?
PMV; Well, they're not demanding anything. I think they are very sensibly
saying that this is a major economic and social problem and what we
have got to do Is think our way through It to make sure that whatever
measures we put Into place are most effective. Now, the point I made
to them Is the thing that has motivated this Government Is the policies
of Inclusion, that Australian society goes on together and we don't let
one group slip behind. I said at election time we wouldn't let the
unemployed slip behind, and I don't want to see the rural community
slip behind, so I think this Is a chance In the face of this drought to
sort of rennovate some of these policies to see that we do stay
together In our society, and that the country is wealthy enough and
compassionate enough to make sure that rural people are not denied
income support and the sort of support they need to carry on their
businesses.
J: There are reports that the Federal Government will commit to a $ 100
million package... a I--4 1 1' 4 U U U L. r v 
I Li.. 2
PM: Well look, I mean I'm reeking in questions about money I get every day
of the week, frankly. Wait and see. What you want here are really, I
think, thoughtful appraisals of policies to see whether they work rather
than how much money Is it going to be. I mean, it will be as generous
as we can make it but, most Importantly, more effective, as effective as
we can make It.
J: Did you expect it to be this dusty?
PM: I did, but I didn't expect it to be so denuded of stock, end also to see
some of the regrowth dying off. I mean, I think that's a pretty ominous
sign to see some of this regrowth from species of scrub that can
virtually exist on anything and they're dying too.
J: Did you hear some sad stories in there today?
PM: Well, now, I don't want to say they're sad stories, but they're
meaningful stories. You know, they're stories that are looking for hope
and want some sensible appraisal of their circumstances and that's
wh~ at I'm here for.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well, again, we've already spent $ 100 million In the last.. slnce ' 92 on
the RAS Scheme for drought. Thats the Commonwealth, and of
course, we've stated, Queensland receives more. But It's not enough.
It's a matter of how much we can do, but then how effectively we can
-see it come down to where people can use It best.
J: Do you think ( inaudible)...
PM: Well, If we can get some handle on this In time, 1 will. Otherwise it will
be a little later.
J: And you spoke about a long-term drought strategy what was that?
PM: Well, that's what I mean. There Is a set of .( inaudible In
assistance that looks Into Income support, carry-on support, where
they go after the drought financially those sorts of things that are In
place year-in, year-out. They are there perpetually.
ends A _ e L V j 


16 September 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: I was just wondering what you thought about Mr Peacock?
PM; Well. I wish him well. He has had a long parliamentary career. I think he has been a real ornament to his party and there Is no doubt that In the future the Liberal Party Will see the seat of Kooyong as an opportunity for them. He has been part of their highs and their lows and he has had a few highs and a few lows and he Is young enough to embark on another phase of his life.
J: You have been quite critical of hlm In the past. Your souffle comment Is now legendary. How would you actually sum up his political career?
PM: I think he was part of that tradition of Liberal ministers who largely saw thescheme being run by the bureaucracy essentially. You know, that theywere there presiding over what was a largely, whatever changes weremade were done by the bureaucracy. It's before the period of greatchange In Australian economic and social life In the 19809. This Isanother epoch of Australian policies and politics and, I think, probably,Andrew belonged to the eariier one.
J: So, you don't think he has actually had a huge contribution to Australianeconomic or..
PM: Thats for other people to decide. Certainly. I think, he has been part ofthis Interregnum In the Uberal Party going from the oid politics of Australiato the new politics and the need for economic reform and social reform.J: What would you think about Mr Kroger being In Parliament? Would youwelcome perhaps taking him on? -C v
PM; I don't worry about the Liberals these days. We need them around for a bit of light entertainment.
J: When'Is the by-election going to be?
PM: Well, that's up to the Speaker, I think.
J: bring up a candidate as well?
PM: Again, that's up to the Labor Party.
J, What about the prospect of Mr Kennett going to Canberra and being In Parliament?
PM: Well, you ask Mr Kennett about that. He does his regular radio show, you can ask him there or someone else can.
J: Mr Keating, how do you see our situation if the Americans decide to Invade Haiti
PM;. Well, there Is a UN sponsored resolution on this. I think, that thePresident now, In that UN sanctioned opportunity, told the Haitiangovernment that It has to either respect democratic norms or get outAnd, I think, the President apparently made this warning and we'll seewhat takes places from there, but there has been more than enoughopportunity here from the time of the UN having carried Its resolution forthis government or this group to take heed of their International opinion.So, I think, they should take due warning from the President.
J: Do you see any chance of Australia getting Involved there?
PM: Not in a combat sense, no. It Is possible that we may commit a small group of police officers were the position to obtain where there Is a combat period and where a government is established thereafter.ends


I am very pleased to announce that the Taoiseach, Mr Albert Reynolds, will be visitingAustralia from 17-25 Septcniber as a guest of the Australian Government.
I am delighted that, following my own visit to Ireland in September 1993,Prime Minister Reynolds has been able to accept my invitation to come here. He willbc in Canberra from 20-22 September and he will also visit Perth, Melbourne andSydney. Australia's relations with Ireland are close, friendly arnd longstanding. The Irishcommunity in Australia has played an important role in the development of Australia'shistory and its culture. Bilateral cultural links are strong and tourism flows in bothdirections have increased in recent years. I look forward to discussing both bilateraland international issues with Prime Minister Reynolds and to hearing his views on theNorthern Ireland peace process, in which he has been closely involved.
Mr Reynolds will be accompanied by his wife, Mrs Kathleen Reynolds.CANBERRA 16 September 1994



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP AND
THE PRIME MINISTER OF IRELAND, MR ALBERT REYNOLDS, TD
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 20 SEPTEMBER, 1994
PM: Let me begin by saying what a pleasure it is to have the Taoiseach with
me in Australia and to be able to repay some of that exceptionally
generous hospitality he extended to me just a year ago, almost to the
day. We've had a very useful discussion about our bilateral
relationships, about development in Europe and the Asia-Pacific area
and I also had the benefit of the Taoiseach's view on the peace process
in Ireland, in Northern Ireland, and I thought I would just take this
opportunity of saying that a very large measure of the congratulations
for this development go to his very courageous role and the risks that
he has taken to promote peace within the island of Ireland and
Northern Ireland. I think I can discern from his remarks his appreciation
of the positive role that John Major and the British government played,
and I think that all Australians hoped that there will be a genuine and
lasting peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland and this is a matter
of great interest in Australia as such a large proportion Of the naiorn
has Irish ancestry. I told the Taoiseach that Australia will offer
assistance wherever it can you might recall Sir Ninian Stephen's role
in the process, earlier process, in 1992 and naturally our moral
support for the process which the Taoiseach has undertaken.
So, on our bilateral relationship could I say that it is continuing to
improve, we are seeing more investment in Australia from Ireland and
vice versa. We're both in very advantageous positions, Australia
relative to the Asia-Pacific, Ireland relative to Europe, and we are
attracting investment and doing things because of those two factors.
So, for me this is a matter of great personal joy to have the Taoiseach
and his wife in Australia and, I think, the Australian people will get a
chance to see him and talk with him, and to renew this friendship and
acquaintance which the people of Australia have with the people of
Ireland. It is a very timely visit and I am sure that, as a consequence,
Australians will get to know Ireland better and, most particularly, at this
important time, in this very significant moment in history in which the 
Taoiseach has been so critically involved, himself. So, I would just
invite him to make some introductory comments, should he wish to and
then I am sure we'll both take questions.
Thank you very much, Prime Minister. I certainly have enjoyed my visit
to Australia, in the first few days I have been here. There is a
traditional warmth and, as an Irish Prime Minister coming here, I feel
like I am coming home because that is the type of warmth and welcome,
indeed, that has been extended to me and, indeed, here today by
your own Prime Minister.
It is just a year ago, as he said, and it seems a very short year but a
very momentous year as far as events in Ireland are concerned, in that
both the Irish and the British governments have been involved in
negotiations to try and bring peace to the island of Ireland after
years of non stop violence and armed conflict. It is a centuries old
problem in Ireland that we are trying to address and, first of all we had
the success of the Downing Street Declaration which addressed all of
the concerns of both communities, which, indeed, looked at the
uncertainties for the future, as both communities saw it; which set out a
set of principles on which a future agreement could be constructed;
and, indeed, it has received overwhelming support from the Irish
people, North and South, and, indeed, has been tremendously well
supported by governments throughout the world as well.
We, of course, because of our historic links here going back to the
early days of settlers, indeed, people who came here not voluntarily
and some of them who tried to get away in a hurry out of here, I am not
one of those. But, I think that it is important that we're here, to explain
to the Australian people who have a deep and abiding interest, indeed,
in seeing peace return to Ireland after centuries of conflict and I believe
we're well on the way to do that. We had, of course, a momentous
decision by the IRA to stop violence for good and we're now entering
the third week and despite provocation it has not broken down and it
will not break down and it will be there. And I think we can build on that
position and hopefully as the others who are involved in armed conflict
in the other community will see the way to join the peace process and
make a reciprocal decision on their part.
So, I am delighted to be here, indeed, with Prime Minister Keating, I
know that he enjoyed going to Ireland to seek out his roots as, indeed,
so many Australians do, we have seen a development on the economic
front, between Australian companies coming to Ireland and Irish
companies coming to Australia. Because, we're both part of areas of
the world where trade is expanding, where economies are expanding,
and, indeed, the Australian economy is now growing as the Irish
economy is growing. And, there is a lot more to be gained by bilateral
cooperation, by economic cooperation and both of us, indeed are
strongly of the view that as world trade expands the market is a global
market. We indeed, manage an economy that has to export 70 per cent 
of what we produce to make our way in the world. It is a very
successful economy in Ireland, at the moment one of the most
successful in the OECD, with a growth rate of about five and a half per
cent, a low inflation rate of between two and two and a half per cent,
very strong balance of payments and balance of trade situations all
building a good situation to expand as Europe, indeed, begins to come
out of recession. And, of course, down here in this part of the world it is
the same where world trade is growing, where the Pacific rim, indeed, is
very strong economically. The development of trade always, at the end
of the day, comes back to provide a better quality of life and a better
standard of living for people and I think that is what both of us are in
politics for. Thank you.
J: Mr Reynolds, could I ask you today we've heard Gerry Adams and
Sinn Fein reject the notion of a referendum as put by John Major saying
it's premature and inappropriate do you have any reaction to that at
the moment?
AR: Well, it's implicit in the Downing Street Declaration that when and if we
get an agreement, you know, a broadly structured agreement in a
balanced constitutional manner, I have always said on behalf of the
Irish Government that we would put to the Irish people in a referendum
possible changes in the Irish Constitution that it would make its own
contribution to a just and lasting settlement to the problem in Ireland,
and that the British Government indeed have intimated on a number of
occasions that they would be holding a referendum in Northern Ireland
concurrently with the one in the South. So, what both Governments
want to do is to transfer the decision making process for the future of
Ireland to the people of Ireland North and South, and take away the
Governments from getting involved. As you know, the Government of
Ireland Act of 1920, section 75, is really the Constitutional basis on
which partition was imposed in Ireland. That's their constitutional basis
our constitutional basis is Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish Constitution.
We have said that in a balanced constitution and overall settlement, we
would be putting the case to the Irish people, and they would be doing
the same. That's the way forward and at the end of the day, the people
will be the deciders, and not politicians and not governments.
J: Prime Minister, you spoke about offering help to the peace process
whatever help you can give did you discuss with the Taoiseach the
possibility of giving financial aid to Northern Ireland?
PK: I did, and I'll be saying something further about that tonight.
J: Mr Reynolds, did you ask the Prime Minister about the question of
Visas to Sinn Fein people coming to Australia?
AR: I explained to the prime minister in relation to our overall discussion on
the peace process and how it's developing, and in relation to possible
applications I understand he doesn't have any applications for Visas 
from any members of Sinn Fein at the moment that the position of the
Irish Government was that we now treat Sinn Fein as a fully
constitutional party. I have personally met Gerry Adams, I have
personally involved them in the negotiation process because one of my
obligations under the Downing Street Declaration is to set up a forum
for peace and reconciliation in Ireland. Recognising that you must first
of all reconcile the people that have been driven apart by the last
years of Irish conflict. That you must get people to unite in mind and in
soul and in heart before you can talk about territorial reunification, and I
believe that is the way forward. And to do that I am setting up
hopefully by the end of October a forum for peace and reconciliation
in which all parties are invited to participate, and that includes Sinn
Fein because I have made it clear all along that if Sinn Fein, IRA and
the Republican Movement were to make a decision to leave behind
violence for good which they have done I was prepared to make way
for them and find a place for them in the political process. I have done
that, and they're now a constitutional party in so far as the Irish
Government is concerned. But at the end of the day, if they make
applications to come to Australia, it would be a matter for the Australian
Government to make their own decisions in that regard.
J: Mr Keating, what would be Australia's response?
PK: Well, as the Prime Minister said we have not had applications at this
point but, obviously, we will take account of the changed climate in
Ireland the ambience there. Our interest always was the likelihood of
some sort of discord here in the past in the event that the ambience has
changed, and changed to the point the Taoiseach has made clear that
he regards Sinn Fein as a constitutional party the mere fact of him
saying that makes a difference, I think, to the attitude we would take
were an application by a representatives of Sinn Fein to be received by
us.
J: Would you go as far, Mr Keating, to say that we could draw from that
the inference that in principle representatives of Sinn Fein are now
welcome?
PK: No. Well, we'll see what happens if we get an application at this point
we haven't got any.
J: Mr Keating, the ALP National Conference is expected to consider the
question of British troops being withdrawn from Northern Ireland do
you believe they should be?
PK: Well, I think the Taoiseach has made very clear to you today that this is
a matter that should be left to the people of the island of Ireland. That
the matter shouldn't be resolved, in a sense, by the politicians in
parliaments as has sought to be done now for so long, unsuccessfully.
And that if that sovereignty is restored and returned to the people
where decisions can be made by referendum in Ireland or by change to 
an Act of Parliament in Britain, and referendum in Northern Ireland
then those events can pave the way to a settlement here. The
important thing, I think, is that life returns to as near as normal in this
environment, and that would, I think, tell me that troops would be better
withdrawn as this position of trust improves, and where I think,
particularly the British Government take the view that this is a durable
cease-fire.
AR: I think to add to that the reason the British Army are there is to support
the security forces, and it's because of the conflict over the last
years between the 2 communities, and between para-militaries on both
sides. So if you get a situation where a definitive decision has been
made on behalf of the IRA to cease violence and hopefully that
decision will emanate from Loyalist para-militaries in due course then
the need for the British Army in the large numbers that they are present
on the streets of Northern Ireland will be no longer required. And I
have no doubt that the British Government will be only too delighted to
withdraw troops back out of Northern Ireland as soon as the security
threat as they see it de-escalates. And it has been de-escalating over
the last couple of weeks, and as days and weeks go by, I have no
doubt that they will be assured that there is less and less need for
British Army on the streets, and possibly the first step in that would be
when they feel that the security threat is gone from para-militaries on
both sides, that they would withdraw the troops to barracks as a first
step, and after that it is a matter for them to withdraw them in the
numbers as they see the threat de-escalate.
J: Prime Minister Reynolds, could I just direct your mind to the APEC
issues for a minute. There's been a lot of concern among the European
community about the way APEC might go and develop. In your talks
today have you been reassured about the way APEC is likely to evolve
in terms of European relations with Australia?
AR: Yes, we have had a good discussion on APEC and how the Prime
Minster and the other members see it developing, and what both of us
want to see is that whatever groups whether it's APEC and the
European Union, NAFTA on the other side of the world, and all the
others that in the end, we all contribute to the development of world
trade, to continuing growth in the various economies around the world,
and if that can be the end result, it can only be good for this part of the
world and for Europe as well.
ends. 



4. f-Emarrgoevd'l~ j~
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER FOR MR ALBERT REYNOLDS, TAQISEACH OF IRELAND
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, TUESDAY 20 SEPTEMBER 1994
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to Australia.
Our two countries share so much history, so much
tradition and culture, so many attitudes.
There is a sentiment we share.
We Australians feel it when we go there.
Prime Minister, we hope you feel it on your visit here.
I have fond, indelible memories of my visit to Ireland
last year.
The day I spent in Tynagh, the place from which my
forebears migrated to Australia, was quite simply one of
the great days of my life.
Addressing the Irish National Parliament was one of the
great honours of my life.
I have been to Ireland before and been enchanted.
Nowhere outside Australia have I felt more at home.
I suppose this is not surprising.
The tragedy of Ireland in the nineteenth century was in
some way's Australia's blessing.
The mass migration of Irish to Australia in the 19th
century and the preservation of their values in the
institutions of the church, politics, the law, academia
and many other other realms of our national life, mean
that Irish tradition has fed and will go on feeding our
own and that the friendship and affection between our
two countries will always endure.
Yet it would be a mistake to think that the regard in
which we hold Ireland is built entirely on the past, or
is nourished entirely by the past. 
These are not dead traditions great ideas whether they
are legal, political, religious or literary live do not
readily die.
Traditions adapt to circumstances. They find new shapes
and new expressions in new places and new eras.
Irish songs become Australian folksongs. Irish football
becomes Australian football. The Irish St Leger becomes
a practice race for the Melbourne Cup.
Prime Minister
Down the years Ireland and the Irish have contrived a
powerful place in the international landscape.
They have contrived it from literature from their love
of the creative and the life of the mind.
They have contrived it from their energy and genius at
home and abroad.
We are not talking only about past glories. Irish
literature continues to flourish. Films and music
emerge from modern Ireland with the power to charm and
excite people all over the world.
The essential point is that the Irish are still creating
this place in the world. on cultural and economic fronts
in the European Community and beyond they are
consolidating and expanding their place as never before.
Ireland is becoming a modern nation a sophisticated,
competitive and dynamic economy, an outward looking
economy to serve the aspirations and rights of the Irish
people in the next century. To bring new opportunities
and prosperity to Ireland.
And, what is to be celebrated most, Prime Minister, we
are now seeing the creation of that on which the future
of Ireland most critically depends the foundations of
peace. For so long the Irish place in the world has been defined
by tragedy as well as genius by inhumanity as well as
humanity.
For so long to think of Ireland has meant to think of
violence of the violence done to the Irish and the
violence the Irish have done to themselves.
We now have cause to hope that those days may have ended
that we might see economic modernity and integration
with the world married to peace at a home, to a triumph
of the Irish passion for fraternity over ancient
animosities, to the Irish genius for humanity over
inhumanity. 
Prime Minister I know what a pivotal role you have played
in the peace process in Northern Ireland.
Your determination to succeed in this great endeavour,
allied to your understanding of the human and political
issues, your skills as a mediator, your courage, and the
trust in which you are held, has been crucial to the
progress which has been made so far.
We congratulate you for this.
And we also congratulate Prime Minister Major and the
British Government for the constructive role they have
played. The Australian Government welcomed the IRA's announcement
on September 1 that military operations would cease. The
Australian people welcomed it.
You have said that the opportunity now exists to take the
gun out of Irish politics forever.
All Australians hope that the opportunity can be seized,
and that peace comes to Ireland.
They hope as people throughout the world would hope
that the parties on whom peace depends understand that
because Australians love Ireland they hate the war that
goes on there.
Unionists and Nationalists now have an opportunity to
build relationships of trust, to pursue the goals of
cooperation and reconciliation.
To help this process I am very pleased to announce
tonight that, following my discussions with Prime
Minister Reynolds, the Australian Government will
contribute $ 7 million over five years to the
International Fund for Ireland.
Not everyone here tonight will know about the Fund.
The Fund was set up in December 1986 following an
agreement between the British and Irish governments to
promote in its own words " economic and social advance
and to encourage contact, dialogue and reconciliation
between nationalists and unionists throughout Ireland".
The Fund does this by stimulating private investment and
enterprise, supplementing public programs and supporting
voluntary effort, including self-help schemes.
The Fund's role in economic development, particularly in
disadvantaged areas, will help to underpin progress
towards peace and reconciliation in Ireland. 
It is the most valuable material assistance we can give,
and we are very pleased to join the United States, Canada
the European Union and New Zealand among other
countries in giving it.
Prime Minister
We have a great deal of shared history and shared
traditions upon which to build our relationship.
It is essential that to the warmth of our relationship we
continue to add the threads which join our common
interests and ambition.
We need to build on those people to people relationships,
especially tourism.
We need more of the kind of institutional cooperation
which saw that great exhibition of European Masters from
the National Gallery of Ireland come to the National
Gallery of Australia.
We want to see the two way flow of investment grow. We
are each of us primarily concerned with our own regionsbut
that does not mean we turn our backs either on old
friends, or on new opportunities.
We hope that Irish business people will increasingly use
Australia as a base for doing business in Asia and that
Australia will use Ireland as a springboard to Europe.
We need the sorts of exhanges which will help our young
people get to know each other.
And we need, Prime Minister, visits like this one.
Visits which strengthen the bonds between us and remind
us that we share not only an extraordinary past, but a
future which really has never been so promising.
I began by saying that we share so much history. It
might be appropriate to this occasion and to the times we
live in if I close by saying that nothing in our history
is so important as the future.
on behalf of the Government and people of Australia I
welcome you and wish you a most enjoyable and rewarding
stay. ends 



47
SIc~ aa~
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AND THE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRIES AND ENERGY, SEN
THE HON BOB COLLINS, PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, 21 SEPTEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Some weeks ago I said that the seriousness of the drought, the
exceptional circumstances of the drought required a new systematic,
systemic response from the Government to deal with it. To put in
place a system of arrangements that would stay in place for the
intermittent attacks of exceptional drought which we have been seeing.
As you know, the Government put into place a drought policy in 1992
and that policy is, outside of the areas of exceptional circumstances,
working well. I also said, last week, when visiting Queensland that the
Government takes an approach which is an inclusive one; that we
won't see segments or sections of the community distressed as we
saw with the unemployed, in the long-term unemployed, and that we
would not leave them behind. And, I made these comments in relation
to distressed farm families that we wouldn't forget them, that we
wouldn't leave them behind.
Well, today the Government, in the Cabinet, in submissions introduced
by my colleague Senator Collins, has adopted a set of measures which
meets those two criteria. That is, a systemic approach to the problems
of exceptional drought circumstances and meeting the commitment not
to leave farm families in distressed circumstances behind.
As well as that, principally of course, the package is about meeting the
immediate needs of these people and also to help them set
themselves up for when the rain comes, when the drought finishes.
Let me just run through the major elements of it. There are five major
elements. One is income support. Another is looking after the
education of children, of farmers in drought affected areas. Providing
additional financial assistance for farms for carry-on finance and 
increasing dramatically the limits for maximum levels of assistance.
Improving the ability of farmers to access RAS without first selling off
all off-farm assets and the development of incentives for the provision
of farm storage and water facilities. Now, let me go down these points.
There was income support in the first instance that many distressed
families on the land needed. They just simply needed money to put
bread on the table and to feed their families and to look after
necessities. We are introducing that with a new payment called the
Drought Relief Payment ( DRP) which will provide farm families with
funds to cover those necessities. Payments will be made to farm
families in exceptional drought declared areas. The payments will not
be subject to a farm assets test, so we are removing the farm assets
test in respect of that payment, but the income will be subject to the
JobSearch Allowance income and off farm assets test. And, we will be
also paying that payment for six months after the exceptional
circumstance conditions are terminated. That is the principle income
support measure.
The second item is, of course, education. You know that many farmers
have been very disturbed by the fact that they have had to take kids
from school, pull their children out of school and take them home
because they couldn't afford to maintain them. To deal with that very
human situation, a real problem for families, the Government is
removing existing Austudy farm assets test for all families in
exceptional drought areas. The current Austudy income test, which I
might say, is more generous than the JobSearch Allowance income
test, will apply.
So, what we were being asked Senator Collins and me in these
various meetings we have had with farm communities, what we had
been asked is that the farm -assets test be removed in respect of
Austudy. We are removing it for families in these excepntional drought
areas. Now, the third element and can I just say, I think, one of the real
problems in this is and I'll come to the third element about providing
financial assistance to farms there is a real stress, I think, upon
families in rural Australia, in the bush, in these exceptional drought
circumstances. And, the risk, I think, we run is that we would start to
see a real change in the nature of the, if you like, the family structure
of Australian farming particularly as young people look at what has
happened to their parents and decide to walk away from the land and
where we see if farmers think they can't make a go of it, in the end
their land is bought at a discount by industrial companies and we see a
lot of, if you like, large company farming and we loose that whole
social infrastructure which we have always known in this country. I
think, the drought does present that risk and these exceptional 
circumstances present that risk. So, the income support and the
education is to deal with that immediate problem.
Now, on farm finance we are saying this: In a very large change in
respect of these exceptional circumstance areas that RAS the Rural
Adjustment Scheme and carry-on finance under RAS will be demand
driven. It will not be cash limited. Now, what happens now is
someone could actually qualify for RAS, but only get a part payment
and they could only get a part payment because there is only so much
money in the bin. So, what the Government has decided today is to
take away the cash limiting and let it be demand driven which will
mean that those who are eligible will get the full amount due to them,
which can be up to 100 per cent of the interest rate subsidies for viable
farms. You know the problem that many farmers have. They have now had
seven or eight crops put in and they have failed. Depending on the
size of the farms, crops can cost $ 60-70 ,000 a season and you don't
have to be a mathematician to work out that very quickly you can run
into debts of $ 300-400,000. It is the capacity to meet those debt
interest obligation that we are seeking to do here. So, we are
expanding the pool so that eligibility will be met, but we are doing
something as well as that we are dramatically lifting the limits for that
which a farmer can receive under RAS. From a maximum annual
amount of $ 50,00-$ 100,000 and from an accumulative amount over
five years from $ 100,000 to $ 300,000. So, $ 50,000-$ 100,000 in
respect of the maximum for annual assistance and the cumulative over
five years from $ 1,00,0004$ 300,000. That is an enormous extension to
the limits and it is in a system which will then be demand driven and
not cash limited. So, that is the third principle element for financial
assistance. We are also extending anoth er concession. Many people on the land
try to provide some retirement assets for themselves or a retirement
home. This happens where, if you like, parents get to the point where
they think their farming life is over and their children take the farm
over. They have to go somewhere, and, what prudent farmers do, they
buy themselves a house in a town or on the coast or somewhere else.
As things stand now, a farmer would need to sell that house or
liquidate bona fide retirement assets such as superannuation funds or
a pool of superannuation assets to qualify for RAS. In other words,
they have got to dispose of all those assets before they can get RAS.
Well, we think this tends to fly in the face of the need for this turnover
in the farm sector and for a retirement income for farmers who leave
the land at some point in their lives. So, we are excluding bona fide
retirement assets and off-farm assets from the RAS assets test. That
is the other element of the farm finance. And, of course, I have said
that in the recovery phase these payments are not simply there until
the termination of the drought declaration, we have now decided today
L 
to leave them six months after that. So, in other words after it rains
and they are back to some sort of normality, we are leaving the
payments there for six months until they can start to get some income
in. Now, on top of that one of the things which, I think, farm leaders have
said to Senator Collins and they have certainly said to me that outside
of these things such as income support, education, farm finance
support, there is also the question of the future about fodder, about
improving fodder storage and water storage to make farms as drought
resistant or as drought proof as possible.
The Government decided today that we would develop a set of
incentives for the provision of farm storage and water facilities and
we're thinking of a generous investment allowance; we're also
prepared to look at a faster depreciation of certain assets. But, we
don't want to see a position as we saw with the earlier tax incentives
for tree pulling, that there is major despoilation of the landscape or
people trying to turn impossibly marginal land into useful land by an
indiscriminate policy of water storages. So, my colleague, Senator
Collins and the Treasurer and the Minister for the Environment will sit
down with farm leaders and work out what we think can be an effective
package of incentives for the future for the encouragement of storages
for fodder and also for water.
Now, there are other matters such as counselling and support services
which are mentioned in more detail in the press statement. But, I
would just like to conclude my remarks on these points then invite
Senator Collins'to make some to you as well; and it is this, this
package is necessary in the interests of fairness, cohesion, in the
interests of the whole Australian economy. Because, there is a
substantial risk here that with prolonged drought in exceptional
circumstances such as these that we will see large sections of our
farming and grazing lands either poorly attended or unattended. And,
what has been a tremendously powerful industry for this country and
a way of life which has been part of the ethos of the country at some
substantial risk. It is for these reasons that we think this package, as
exceptional as it is in terms of the changes which it introduces and the
new principles which it encapsulates, is necessary for all Australians
and is in the interests of all Australians.
So, I said earlier and let me repeat this, we are not going to leave
these people behind but we don't want to pick them up and then put
them down without a chance of them getting back on their feet and
being able to reestablish themselves on the land. And, this is what this
package is about. It will total about $ 169 million over two years but if
the drought continues and more areas are declared, of course, the
cost will rise because the scheme will be available, generally
available, it will not be cash limited. So, it could be up to $ 200 million 
or it may exceed it. With those comments I will invite Senator Collins
to make some points.
SC: Thanks Paul. I think the first thing to say about this package which will
certainly be obvious to the rural writers in this room is that it is a very
significant package. Not just significant in terms of dollars although
it certainly is significant in terms of dollars it is significant,
particularly, in terms of the policy development that this represents.
Farmers are going to recognise this package because it has been
developed out of the extensive, on the ground consultations that we
have had, including, I might add, the Prime Minister's visit to
Queensland. The caveat, I might add farmers certainly haven't got
all they want in this package and never will is that all of this,
although it addresses the identified problems, as the Prime Minister
has said, which have been brought to us by farmers, is all consistent
with a rational, national drought policy, the one that was developed in
1992 and we will adhere to that. That is, that the Government's major
attention will continue to focus on assisting farmers to plan and
manage for drought whilst acknowledging the fact that in a drought
which, without question in parts of Queensland and NSW is now the
worst on record we are extending special assistance in terms of that
crisis. Again, I know that there will be people in this room that will recognise
that a great deal of work and, indeed, thought has gone into this
package in a very short time. And, I have to say that I am extremely
grateful for the full blooded support that this submission received in
Cabinet from thePrime Minister. It may not have got through in the
style that it did, otherwise. So, I would finish with those few remarks
but the one thing that I do want to say is this: anybody who looks at
this policy will see where it is directed. It is going to provide significant
assistance directly to the families concerned in a targeted way.
Drought policies in the past have delivered significant assistance, and
a lot of it has been wasted and abused. There is no question about
that. The three substantial differences between this approach and the
approach that is still being advocated by the Opposition on it, there are
three substantial differences between this and the Opposition's
approach. First of all this has been developed after extensive
consultation with Australian farmers and the Peak bodies that
represent them. Secondly, it is carefully targeted to address the real
need and thirdly, of course, it is actually costed with real dollars. And,
with those concluding remarks, perhaps, we could take questions.
J: Do you reject outright the fodder subsidies which have been put up by
some people?
SC: Yes. Because it is an extremely ineffective measure and as you know
they are not just my words. It was attacked the day it was produced,
by organisations such as the Grains Council, the National Farmers 
Federation and, indeed, the Cattle Council of Australia presumably the
people who would represent the lobby that would, presumably, benefit
most. Because, they all know the huge flaws in it. Even the
Opposition when they advocated it, on the day they launched it,
conceded that it was open to abuse, but that they would wave a magic
wand and fix that. This is far more targeted. If I just give you an
indication of how better this The JSA ( Job Search Allowance) the
family assistance that we are providing, if you take a typical example
the Prime Minister and myself have seen plenty of them recently a
farm couple with two or three kids, farm couples in fact tend to have
more than two or three kids but let's take that as an average, this is
going to put, in terms of disposable income into that arrangement
around $ 25,000 a year, in disposable cash income with no strings
attached, like fodder subsidies, that wasn't there before. And, that
really is the benefit of this.
In addition, and have a look at the package, as the Prime Minister has
said, we have significantly enhanced the RAS component of this and
there are large dollars attached to that, as they have to be. The
benefit of that is that there may well be farmers in extreme drought
situations, who take farming decisions that mean that something else
has got a greater priority than fodder. This kind of assistance is going
to give them the flexibility to do that instead of us determining that
fodder is what they need. And, of course, as you well know, at the end
of the day the last time this was used in 1982 the chief beneficiaries
were the suppliers of the fodder and the transport companies and not
the people on the ground. Because, go back and have a look at that
scheme because people have actually forgotten what it actually was...
It not only was'capped but it was capped to a particular price per
tonne. As the price increased the value of that subsidy continually
decreased over the life of the subsidy. So, in fact it is a totally
unacceptable approach, this one is much better.
J: How many farmers will benefit from RAS
SC: Well, to take a broad figure there are around 12,000 families currently,
farmers, out of about 125,000 that are in extreme difficulty. And, they
are the people that this package is designed to help. We would expect
that there would be two to three thousand farmers who would be
directly assisted with substantial additional assistance, through RAS,
in a way they haven't been before. But, it goes beyond that, the
Austudy changes will be particularly welcome in the bush, I think
people will be very pleased about that. And, that Austudy assistance
and, of course, the family disposable income that is going to go into
those households addresses that as well. But, two to three thousand
families at least but I expect that it will be considerably broader than
that in terms of the total benefits of this package. 
7
The one thing that I do want to stress at this point is that this does
have to be strictly administered, this does apply to farmers who are in
crisis. This is not a scheme that applies to the farming community
across Australia. It is a special range of assistance measures that will
help farmers who are in extreme trouble. That is, farmers who are in
drought now and who have been droughted for a number of years.
That is, essentially, farmers in Queensland and at this point in time,
farmers in Northern NSW.
J: Do the states support it because ( inaudible)
SC: I am glad you have asked that question because I did want to say, the
states have got a very significant responsibility in this which they have
to discharge. And, I don't think that any state minister for agriculture
or, indeed, Premier, could look at a package as well targeted and
substantial as this and, with a straight face, say that the
Commonwealth was not doing its bit. Now, this is particularly
important because there is a meeting of all of the primary industry
ministers on Friday, being convened here in Canberra. And, this will
go right on the table. They have got a role to play, as you say, in this
and one of the things that I think has been happening in the past is this
and this is something that has been identified just in terms of the
examination we have made of this. The way the scheme works, as you
know, is that up to a fifty per cent subsidy the Commonwealth provides
the lion's share of that support. Ninety per cent as against ten per
cent. Over fifty per cent we match that dollar for dollar with the states
and we have put a very large additional sum of money in here to do
that. But, the states have to match that dollar for dollar. I think what
has been happehing in some states more than others, is that there has
been a deliberate move made to concentrate the assistance on our
dollars and not the states' dollars. Now I have to say that some states
have dramatically not been doing that, and I would mention
Queensland, which has got an extremely well-administered RAS
scheme. That's generally conceded across Australia. Now,
Queensland in fact matched us dollar for dollar to take subsidies up to
100 per cent when New South Wales in fact at the time refused to do
so. And I hope that's not the case this time. So I would be, there are
farmers who need the 100 per cent subsidy. Now as you know, that's
been identified as a problem with RAS in a crisis. As the Prime
Minister said, RAS works very well in a pre-crisis time. It's got some
acknowledged deficiencies and the biggest one we have now
addressed. That is, to allow farmers to get a 100 per cent subsidy
when they need it, that is, an interest-free loan. Now the States will
have to play their part in delivering that. I hope they do.
J: farm management
BC: Well, that's all part of a long-term examination of the scheme. But can
I say to you, I think this is a far more effective way of dealing with it 
than the taxation system. And the Prime Minister in fact has
mentioned a far better approach than taxation measures and that is an
investment allowance which is properly constructed, carefully put
together in consultation with the farming community, that will provide
an incentive. And the reasons are obvious. Tax breaks only work if
you are paying tax. If you are a crisis farmer that hasn't had an income
for four years, a tax break for you is useless and that's one thing that's
been identified with us. What people do want to do when times get
better is to have a positive incentive provided to put in water storage
and to put in fodder storage and that's what we have given a
commitment to look at.
J: money is also useful in bad times?
BC: I'm not suggesting that it isn't and can I say that despite all the rhetoric
to the contrary, the lIED scheme is significantly used. I mean there
currently is in excess of 130 million. I think the last time I looked $ 135
million comprising of about 6,500 deposits in that scheme right around
Australia. So as distinct from the rhetoric about it's got to be better, if
it's not much good, I can tell you there's a lot of farmers currently using
it.
J: Prime Minister, your statement mentions that you are going to be
talking to the banks and the pastoral houses. What are you going to
be asking them to do?
PM: Well, they are the recipients of the interest rate subsidies, are they not.
I mean they've got properties, and even if they take the view that they
won't turn people off them, if they took the view they would turn people
off them, what good would it do them, in many cases. So getting the
interest subsidy is a clear benefit to the banking sector from the
Commonwealth via the farm sector and we'll be having a conversation
with the banks about what their policy and attitude is to Supporting
farmers through this period and what longer run view they are going to
take in the event that the drought persists, and in the face of the
accumulations of debt they already have.
J: asking for moratoriums on the debt or interest ? 7
PM: We are going to have a conversation, that's what we'll do in the first
instance. That is to see they have a problem on their hands, the
farmers have a problem on their hands, we are part of the solution and
I think we are prepared to talk to them and see what general policy
they wish to follow and whether they want to be part of the solution as
well.
BC: Could I just mention two things that are particularly irrelevant to banks
but farmers are going to greatly welcome about this package. One of
the key issues that banks are interested in, because this is a subsidy 
on interest rates, is what degree of assistance the Government is
going to provide. Now in the past, there has never been any
mandated time period for the extension of these benefits beyond the
breaking of a drought. An extremely important policy development that
has been delivered here is, as the Prime Minister has said, a
mandated period of six months of continued assistance for exceptional
circumstances and on top of that, twelve months of access to the
normal Rural Adjustment Scheme. So eighteen months of continued
support after the drought stops. Now that is going to weigh very
heavily, I think, in any bank's consideration of what they might do with
an outstanding farm loan.
J: There's been some talk about a regional unemployment scheme,
getting people in regional Australia to work on farms, on landcare
activities. You didn't mention that in the package is that not on?
PM: Well, we just committed 1.8 billion in a full year to labour market
programs in the White Paper and I think it is a matter of whether we
can use some of that funding to extend and perhaps better provide in
areas such as LEAP or REAP[?], particularly as they are working in
some of these exceptionally drought affected areas. So in a
commitment that large to the labour market, and labour market
programs that are already up and running, we think the thing to do is
basically try and work some of that funding into it for existing
arrangements. That is schemes that already exist. Labour market
programs already on the ground.
J: Where's the money coming from for this? Will there need to be offsets
or is it simply' out of
PM: No, this is a commitment by the Government to a group of people in
the community just as we would make a commitment to any other
group as we did the long-term unemployed earlier in the year.
BC: There were no offsets from the Department of Primary Industries and
Energy, I can tell you.
J: your support for this submission got it through to the'Cabinet in a
way that might not otherwise have happened. How profound was the
effect on you of your visit to those farmers last week in terms of the
position you took today in Cabinet?
PM: Well it obviously had an influence on my thinking about this, but
perhaps one of the factors is that there were not the Winter rains for
the crop that would be now, that farmers would be putting in now. And
even were that to have been the case, farmers would have to find
another $ 60,000 or $ 70,000, maybe that much, to put in another crop
on top of the six or seven or eight that already failed. So there's a
point where even for say someone who's got a farm with assets of a. 
million or a million and a quarter dollars, once they start clocking up-.
three or four hundred thousand dollars of debts and then adding
another sixty and seventy per crop, again you can see what the
looming problem is there. And also the fact that so many of them haver
virtually no savings, no income and no income support. Now that wast
very apparent to me last week and that's why this is such a very large)
change. Never before have we extended income support outside of,
that JSA income and assets test. We're suspending the assets test$.
the farm assets test here, which is a very big public policy decisions
But it's part of a set of arrangements. And that's what I was sayingp
some weeks ago, to deal with a drought like this where it is in these
exceptional circumstances or where it moves in and out of regions six.
months at a time, where a region is drought declared and then nondrought
declared and then drought declared, you need a systemic
approach. This basically I think does that. This is essentially directed,
well it is directed to the exceptional circumstance areas. For those
areas which are not exceptionally affected but which are droughted.
We've got the 1992 package. I mean I think this is the point about the
comprehension of it, vis a vis what Bob Collins said about the National
Party's approach which is basically to throw a fodder subsidy in. Well
a fodder subsidy is not going to help a farm family who have got no
income. It's not going to help them deal with their existing debts. It's
not going to help them with the education of their children.
BC: That's right.
J: Prime Minister, a fodder subsidy would help a cattle producer keep
together a breeding herd and the breeding herd is being run down
rather drastically'-
BC: That's correct, it would. And it would also cost us a minimum, a
minimum, of $ 100 million to implement it, if you were lucky. And I have
to say if I was a farmer, and I was a farmer, and I was given a choice of
a 50 per cent fodder subsidy capped on the price, which it was, on a
maximum price for the tonne of grain, which was then inflated of
course naturally after the market was distorted with the interest
subsidy and this, I would take this every time. This provides
significantly more assistance than the fodder subsidy would and in a
way which is far more flexible for the farmer.
PM: And the other thing
J: What do you think the national cattle herd will be at by about, or for
next year?
BC: Well what I'd suggest you do, and the information is available without
getting bogged down with that, is go back and have a look at the very
extensive analysis that was down on this in the last major drought and
in fact I will be happy to provide you with that information. 
J: In the last major drought the cattle herd was kept going by fodder
subsidies.
BC: In the last major drought, the cattle and indeed the sheep flocks did
not, at the end of the day, benefit particularly in terms of the national
maintenance of that herd from a fodder subsidy. What I'd point out to
you is that this comprehensively addresses additional income. As the
Prime Minister has just said, in order to get a fodder subsidy, you have
got to buy the fodder in the first place. What we have done, is provide
enhanced packages of assistance for farmers to get an interest-free
loan with significantly enhanced RAS assets. We've lifted the caps on
RAS that have limited it in the past. And in the case of worst hit
families, put $ 25,000 in disposable cash into that arrangement, which
of course, they'll be able to spend what they like on as any other JSA
recipient can, that was not there before. That's a far more significant
package of assistance in maintaining the national herd than a fodder
subsidy.
PM: And one of the reasons why the National Farmers Federation and the
Grain Growers and others bucketed the National Party proposal a
week or two ago, is because the last time these things they were
rorted. rorted to hell. I mean, in the end there was a you know, the
major beneficiaries of the fodder subsidy were people who basically,
were marketing fodder. I mean, you're better off to say to the farmer
you use your money as you yourself see fit, and we will give you
interest subsidies to help you through, rather than going the other
route of saying well look, we won't really help you, but only to the
extent that you ' buy fodder will we help you, and therefore we will
mostly help the people that own the fodder.
BC: I'll tell you what I said to som e National Party Senators look, before
you have a go.. before you sell me on a fodder subsidyv and 1 am open
to ideas, and I was before you sell it to me, why don't you try and sell
it to the National Farmers Federation, the Grains Council of Australia
and the Cattle Council, then come and see me.
J: Prime Minister, currently you are matching dollar for dollar the funds
raised in the Farml-and Appeal they have currently raised $ 5 million,
so that means you owe them $ 5 million ( the Appeal $ 5 million) that's
largely been distributed for household income support, will you
continue to match that dollar for dollar given the generosity of this
commitment?
PM: Yes, we have said we will and again, there will be people affected by
drought who may not be " exceptionally affected" where the FarmHand
Appeal can actually help. In other words, it's going to be a parcel of
money that can be quite useful in some of the spots that mightn't fit,
some of the criteria here. 
J: Mr Keating, you mentioned the figure of $ 150 million to be the cost of
this is it not the case that it will help budget bottom line that NSW
Government rejected your offer of $ 150 million for the Cahill
Expressway?
PM: Well, it's got nothing to do with it Geoff. I mean, the Cahill Expressway
was a nett $ 70 million over 5 years it's about less than $ 20 million a
year for what is an essential public work for NSW, and which the
NSW...
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: I know, but look these puny fiscal points that financial journalists insist
upon raising, let me just put it down immediately in this respect. We
are talking here today in respect of over $ 100 million thereabouts
$ 160 million over 2 years...
BC: Nearly $ 170 million.
PM: Nearly $ 170 million nearly $ 90 million ( this year). All the barrackers
for lower deficits are the, you know, the failed newsletter writers and all
the others that are out there still peddling their morbid tales are
suggesting that maybe we should let that $ 70 million go to the market,
and that the market would use it better. It will go in plant and
equipment. Well, how much of it will go in plant and equipment, and
how much will add to the capital stock, and how much will add to
national growth and employment, current account etc, or how much of
it goes chasing rseal estate, property prices and what have you? So, if
you have got to make a judgement about whether the $ 100 million
dollars here is better used, or the $ 100 million at the Quay is better
used thrown to the market the judgement is as clear as day. They're
better being employed in these schemes. In this case, in and of
course, this sort of point which emerges in journalism occasionally that
governments and nations can't do more than one thing at once. Well, I
mean, today we did about 5 things at once.
J: Prime Minister, would you suggest from Senator Collins' comments
about your help and assistance to get the package through a few of
your cabinet ministers shared the same views of these failed
newsletter writers..
PM: No.
BC: That's not, in fact, the case at all. It's just a fairly tough forum, Cabinet,
and it is no matter what the submission is.
PM: Well I mean, look, let me just tell you I've been around the fiscal
game here nearly longer than anyone in the room and let me tell you 
this the people writing this stuff have been arguing for the lowest
deficits and the biggest surpluses for as long as I have known them,
they have been arguing for the lowest wages, some with famous
expressions like " the real wage overhang" while they themselves are
taking massive wage overhangs, we all know them, and we are all sick
to death of them.
J: To overcome the reaction...
BC: Well, if you're not going to talk about drought or farmers anymore, I
might leave, actually.
PM: Now look, we're not going around the sport about fiscal policy. I mean,
have you got any other questions about this thing?
J: Senator Collins, just looking at things is there any possibility there will
be other areas other than Queensland and NSW that could move into,
or become eligible, for this package?
BC: Well, I think you would have to say only if the worst case scenario that
the Met Bureau is forecasting comes to pass, and I hope that doesn't
happen. On the forecasting that has been done so far, and let me tell
you it's been extremely accurate to this point in time the weather
bureau is predicting that there may not be significant easing of the
situation across Australia until March next year. Now, if that is the
case, and if there are drought-breaking useful rains at that time, this
package will be sufficient. But should the worst happen, and the
drought extend beyond that, the Prime minister has already indicated
this assistance W~ ill follow. I might say that at that point in time, if the
drought does extend for another full year beyond what we have
already had, it will be a significant crisis at that point in time in any
case.
J: Can you point out areas where the... . that could be affected by that?
BC: Oh, all that information is in fact freely available. In fact, I must say,
it's been on the front pages of a great many newspapers for about 3
weeks now. The Northern area of NSW and extensive areas of
Queensland are really the worst hit. At this point in time, that's who
this addresses, and there's no question that in respect of those areas
they have now, at this point in time, experienced the worst drought on
record. And I might add this is a literally, a week by week situation. If I
can just give you an example of what I'm talking about we expected to
harvest about 12.5 million tonnes of wheat nationally, down from the
18 million tonnes last year. That would have been changed ad rain
fallen a fortnight after that prediction was made. If we don't get rain in
the next 2 weeks.. the next 2 weeks then the current 10 million tonnes
will have to be down-graded again because of the crops that are in the 
14
ground now. So, it's a weekly situation, literally, so you can't make
those kinds of predictions.
PM: Can I just finish with this comment I'd like to, on behalf of Senator
Collins and certainly myself, express my appreciation for the interest
which the peak farm bodies have had in this, and for the consultation
they have given us, for those people on the land who have generously
given us of their time and their views. This is quite an important,
indeed for social policy, revolutionary change in policy, and it extends
principles that in the past outside of these circumstances, the
Government has resisted. We've done it on this occasion thoughtfully,
and in a way in which we think protects all the lines of policy, yet gives
material and substantial relief when it matters, and where it matters.
Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP A t/
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE
With my colleagues, the Minister for Primary Industry, Bob Collins, and the
Minister for Social Security, Peter Baldwin, I am pleased to announce the
Federal Government's measures to help rural communities through the crippling
drought in Queensland and New South Wales. The measures are designed to
provide rapid relief to families and communities experiencing " exceptional
circumstances" in the worst drought areas.
Following a submission from Senator Collins and Mr Baldwin, Federal Cabinet
endorsed the measures this morning. They will be implemented immediately.
In some areas this is the worst drought on record. Farmers and their families,
farm businesses and rural communities are suffering extreme hardship. Without
immediate assistance, the hard work and personal investment of many
thousands of Australians , might well be wasted.
We cannot leave these people behind. The measures we announce today are
designed to ensure that they will not be. They create a safety net to provide for
their immediate needs and create the circumstances in which they will be well
placed to recover when rain eventually comes.
If only for the sake of fairness, we must take these measures. But it is also in
the interests of the national economy to take them. It is in the interests of the
long term sustainability of our rural industries. It is in the interests of the
environment. It is in the interests of all Australians to take them.
Today, in responding to the human and social consequences of the drought, we
are also conscious as are the farmers' organisations and the farmers
themselves that we must address the long term needs of the drought affected
areas. For this reason we have taken care to ensure that the measures are
consistent with the objectives of the National Drought Policy and the Rural
Adjustment Scheme. 
L 2
The package has been costed at $ 164 million over 2 years. This amount will be
exceeded if additional " exceptional circumstances" declarations are made, or if
the drought persists well into next year.
In addition, we will provide a generous tax incentive for farm storage and water
facilities to encourage farmers to better prepare for drought.
The key elements of the package are:
a Drought Relief Scheme to address the immediate cash flow needs of
the worst affected families;
further measures under the Rural Adjustment Scheme to assist farm
businesses;
further resources for financial and social counselling.
Other longer term measures will be dealt with in a later submission to Cabinet
consistent with the Government's systemic approach to drought policy and may
include further initiatives in the areas of taxation, income equalisation deposits,
landcare, and climate research.
In coming weeks, I will also meet with the major banks and pastoral houses to
discuss the important role they have in helping rural businesses and
communities now and in the period of recovery.
The Government will continue its consultations with the States at a special
meeting the Commonwealth has convened later this week of the Agriculture and
Resource Management Council of Australia and New Zealand.
CANBERRA
21 September 1994 
SUMMARY OF MEASURES
Drourtht Relief Payment
The Drought Relief Payment ( DRP) will provide farm families with sufficient cash for
basic necessities and services. Payments under DRP will be available to farm families
in areas assessed to be in exceptional drought and will be subject to the income and
off-farm assets tests that apply to the Job Search Allowance ( JSA). Farm assets will
not be subject to assessment for DRP eligibility. Payments under the DRP will be
available from mid-October retrospective to the start of the month and will continue
until six months after Exceptional Circumstances conditions are terminated. Farm
families eligible for DRP will also be eligible for Family Payments and Healthcare card
benefits. The accompanying table provides a summary of entitlements.
Austudy The existing Austudy farm assets test will be removed for all families in exceptional
drought areas. The current Austudy income test, which is more generous than that for
JSA, and off-farm assets test will apply.
Farm Business Support
An additional $ 74.25 million for the Rural Adjustment Scheme ( RAS) over 1994-95
and 1995-96 will be available to assist farm businesses during drought exceptional
circumstances and the recovery period. Normal RAS support has been supplemented
by $ 8.25 million, while support under exceptional circumstances has been increased by
$ 66.0 million over the next two years.
In a significant improvement to RAS, we will ensure sufficient resources for all farm
enterprises eligible for exceptional circumstance RAS to be fully funded. In the past,
limited resources have meant many farmers have not been able to access their full
interest subsidy requirements. The changes mean that for exceptional circumstances,
RAS will be demand driven.
The package also includes measures to help farms recover from drought. There will be
a six month period after the termination of the exceptional circumstances declaration in
which applications can be made. In addition, through a supplementation to normal
RAS, eligible farms will be able to apply for some further assistance for an additional
twelve months.
Farmers have not been able to access the exceptional circumstance provisions of RAS
without first selling all off-farm assets. This has created difficulties where farmers have
taken steps to provide for their retirement. In recognition of this, investment in bona
fide insurance and superannuation funds have been excluded from the assets test for
the exceptional circumstances support while an assets test of $ 163,500 will apply for
other off-farm assets.
Finally, the maximum individual annual assistance limit on RAS interest payments has
been lifted from $ 50,000 to $ 100,000, while the cumulative limit over five years on
assistance has been lifted from $ 100,000 to $ 300,000. 
These improvements to RAS will require matching funding by the States.
Counselling and Support Services
Further resources are being provided for rural financial and social counselling in areas
affected by exceptional drought to assist farmers and their families manage the financial
distress and social trauma dimensions of the drought. Provision has been made to
increase the total number of Commonwealth funded rural financial and business
counsellors to 140, and give farmers and their families access to additional personal
counselling. The Rural Counselling Service is also to get access to further
administrative assistance to accommodate the higher workload. The State
Governments will be asked to help ensure that adequate social counselling is provided
in drought affected areas.
Drou2ht Preparedness
The Government will also provide incentives for farms and rural communities to better
protect the agricultural resource base during drought and encourage improved land
management. The Government will consider providing a generous investment
allowance for farm storage and water facilities. In addition, we will consider faster
depreciation on storage facilities. In developing these measures, we will take into
account the need to ensure that any such investments take full account of their
environmental impact. The Treasurer, the Minister for Primary Industries and Energy
and the Minister for the Environment, Sport and Territories will work with peak farm
groups over the next few months to develop such a scheme.
The Government will also examine the possibility of providing further funding through
its labour market programs to address land degradation and environmental protection
in drought prone areas. 
DROUGHT RELIEF PACKAGE
PROGRAM FUNDING DETAELSM1
1994-95
Farm Family Welfare
Drought Relief Payments
Austudy exemption
Family payments
Health Care Card
RAS authority administration
Total 43.45 3.69
4.36 0.25 0.24 1995-96
19.31 2.77 1.93
0.11 0.10
51.99 24.22
Farm Business Support( 2
Normal RAS
Drought Exceptional Circumstances
Total
Drought Counselling
Matching " Farmhand"( 3
TOTAL 3.00
25.00 5.25
41.00
28.00 46.25
1.4572.40
10.00
91.447 72.87
Excludes the Governent's further consideration of investment and depreciation allowances
relating to fodder and water storage
Excludes matching contributions from the States for the Rural Adjustment Scheme.
Anticipated Government contribution 
MAXIMUM DROUGHT RELIEF PAYMENTS per week)
Single
Couple Couple Couple Couple Couple Couple
Couple Couple Couple Couple person 1 child under 13
1 child aged 13-15
1 AUSTUDY 16-17 yo at home
1 AUSTUDY 16-17 yo
1 AUSTUDY over 18 at home
1 AUSTUDY over 18 away
2 children under 13
1 child under 13 1 child 13-15
2 children 13-15 $ 148-65
$ 268-20
$ 310-95
$ 324-15
$ 334-35
$ 377-40
$ 347-75
$ 388-95
$ 353-70
$ 366-90
$ 380-10
MADE UP OF
Couple Rate $ 268-20
Basic Family Payment,-$ 10-65 per child for first three children;
$ 14-20 for each subsequent child
Additional Family Payment $ 32-10 per child aged under 13
$ 45-30 per child aged 13-15
TJDY (-JSA) $ 66-15 tor each 16-17 year oi" -alt hoe--
$ 109-20 for each 16-17 year old away from home
$ 79-55 for each 18+ at home
$ 120-75 for each 18+ away from home. 


22 September 1994
&nbsp;I am pleased to be able to open this 1994 National Seminar of the Australian Royal United Services Institute of Australia.
I am particularly pleased that Vice-President Sutrisno is here.
As I have said before, it is difficult to exaggerate how much Australia's security interests have benefited from Indonesia's stability and economic growth over the past 30 years.
It is very appropriate, Mr Vice-President, that you should be at this seminar.
Indonesia and Australia share strategic interests.
The security of each benefits the other.
That is why our defence relationship is an active one.
Moreover, cooperation between us benefits the security of the region as a whole.
I would like to thank Brigadier Grant for his warm welcome, and the Royal United Services Institute for their continuing contributions to an informed defence and strategic debate in Australia.
I am also pleased to welcome Admiral Richard Macke. Commander in Chief, US Pacific Command, among the other distinguished guests.
We stand at the edge of history.
The strategic structure of our region and Australia's strategic circumstances are changing fundamentally.
Asia is a formidable powerhouse.
Its economic potential is enormous.
By the year 2000, some 400 million Asian consumers three times as many as today will have disposable incomes at least equal to the current OECD average. Asia will continue to change the global economic balance. Global structures and institutions have to respond.
This has profound consequences for our region.
It's why the Australian Government prepared its Strategic Review 1993.
And it's also why we shall soon release a Defence White Paper which will draw the consequences for the future nature of our defence capability.
The essence of our defence policy is that increasingly Australia has to find its security with Asia.
As Asia's growing economic power makes it more important to our prosperity, so Asia's growing strategic weight makes it more important to our security.
The decisions Australia and other regional countries take now will shape the future of our region.
Looking ahead five years, we can say with reasonable confidence that despite the magnitude of change our region has every prospect of remaining stable.
That presents us with an important opportunity to shape our defence forces, to build regional structures and to develop cooperative linkages which will create a framework within which strategic change can be managed beneficially.
Economic growth, stronger political institutions, greater self-confidence, and nations' increased stake in regional harmony all represent positive forces for the future stability of the region.
Still, there are uncertainties.
Economic growth is uneven.
The Chinese economy, for example, is expanding by the size of Vietnam's economy every three and a half months.
But that explosive growth is localised, straining the low level of Chinese infrastructure and its institutions.
Many regional countries, some of which have been experiencing fast growth for close to 30 years, are now encountering economic bottlenecks caused by infrastructural weaknesses, inadequate capital flows and labour imbalances.
History has left a range of territorial disputes which, should they be left to smoulder. may flare into regional confrontations.
Separatism and ethnic aspirations. like fundamentalism. may find fertile ground in unfulfilled promises of political freedom and economic wealth.
So we can't exclude tensions or frictions arising, perhaps even tempestuously. Increasing economic prosperity is also leading many nations to modernise their defence forces.
That can enhance security.
If nations are better prepared to resist and punish an attack, potential aggressors are deterred.
The Gulf War demonstrated the potency of high technology weapons.
The technology, expertise and data once available only to the superpowers are now readily accessible to a wide range of countries.
Next-to-cutting edge technology is available to those willing to pay, and there are many willing suppliers.
Such modernisation can strengthen, arcurit1i and stability, but it can also increase the intensity of any conflict.
Still, we are not facing any regional arms race.
Growth in regional defence expenditures remains below rates of economic growth.
More worrying, however, is the potential proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The Chemical Weapons Convention, in which Australia played an important role, and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty have proved useful.
But international regimes need to be strengthened and tightened.
All of us in the region have good reason to help make these regimes more effective.
The risks of proliferation threaten not only the security of the immediate North Asian region but also that of Southeast Asia and Australia.
That's why Australia supports the efforts of the United States, South Korea, Japan. and China to encourage North Korea to accept its international obligations and account for past nuclear activities.
In many the ways, the evolution of the relationship between Japan and China will determine the future of Asia.
Japan is defining an international role for itself.
The region and, in the first place. Japan's own people must feel comfortable with that role.
A beginning towards that comfort should be a full understanding within Japanese society of the history of the Pacific War.
That will help generate confidence in the region about Japan's ability to play a constructive global role, commensurate with the size of its economy.
In this respect, the recent statements by Japanese prime ministers, and in particular Prime Minister Murayama, have been welcome.
Japan's alliance with. the United States continues to play a pivotal stabilising role.
We welcome Japan's contributions to UN peacekeeping activities and its active participation in regional security discussions.
Inescapably, the extent and nature of China's engagement with the rest of Asia will be a key determinant of regional security.
China's size, population and fast growing economy mean that it is likely to be the strongest country in Asia.
That makes its policies, and other countries' perceptions of its intentions central to the region's security.
As others have said, we have to help China find a place for itself.
China's GATT application and its full involvement in APEC are signs that China is choosing directions congenial to stability and Australia actively supports these moves.
China's increasingly active participation in regional security exchanges provides another important way for China to reassure the region about its policies.
These developments are all the marks of a region changing dramatically.
New forces and powers are emerging from the end of the Cold War an era of tension but also of stability.
Now, more than ever before. the future of the region's security lies in its own hands and not on a balance kept by others.
In meeting this challenge, countries in the region including Australia have come to understand that their security has to be found with their neighbours rather than against them.
New forms of security cooperation are emerging.
The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is one such important example which Australia strongly supports.
In due course it might lead to other initiatives, such as meetings of regional defence ministers, which could tackle common military and security problems.
Regional countries are also building up their bilateral contacts and cooperative defence activities.
&nbsp;This is something that Australia is actively engaged in as I shall mention shortly.
As well, the United Nations can now play a more direct role in improving security in our region as elsewhere in the world.
Australia has made a tremendous effort to support UN peacekeeping activities, and most particularly in Cambodia.
That said, the region has to be more self-reliant in securing strategic stability.
But it will not be entirely self-sufficient nor should it try to be.
I started by mentioning the significance of the powerful engine of economic growth in Asia.
This growth still depends greatly on links with the United States despite the spectacular growth in intra-Asian trade, the United States remains Asia's largest single market.
US technologies and innovative strengths will remain essential to further economic development in the region.
As the United States is critical to the region's economic health, so is its engagement pivotal to the region's strategic stability.
US military power and engagement in Asia provide the necessary deterrence and balance to create confidence during periods of change.
Thus Australia's alliance relationship with the United States is an important component of regional stability.
And we welcomed President Clinton's assurances last year that America was a Pacific nation, and that it would remain an active presence in the region.
But just as Asia needs the United States, the United States needs Asia. US exports to East Asia are growing at three times the rate of East Asian exports to the United States.
This conjunction of economic and strategic interests explains why APEC has an important role to play.
One of the chief values of APEC is its capacity to engage the major economies of the United States, Japan and China.
It does this within a cooperative framework that fosters trade and economic growth and in a way that underpins strategic stability.
President Soeharto will be hosting the APEC leaders meeting at Bogor in a few weeks time.
With his vision, and under his leadership, APEC is poised to take an historic step towards free trade in the region a step which will lock in the trend towards trade liberalisation, impede protectionism, open markets, strengthen commitment to multilateral trade approaches and promote global trade liberalisation.
If we can achieve this, it will be a turning point for the region, and perhaps the world.
It will certainly have beneficial strategic consequences.
How is Australia responding to the challenge of change in our region? In short, with well-founded self-confidence.
For a start. Australia is one of the most naturally secure nations on earth. Our geography is an enormous asset.
We are a one-nation continent, sharing no land borders.
Our long maritime approaches make it easier to ensure that hostile forces can not reach our shores or operate on our territory.
We can increase the cost to any potential aggressor by maintaining a credible capability to defeat any attack on Australia.
And the government is committed to maintaining Australia's military power to do just that.
Crucial to our self-reliant defence capability is our alliance with the United States which gives us access to intelligence, technology and training that would be beyond our capacity to provide independently.
But Australia's national security depends on more than military power.
It is inseparable from our sense of national purpose, our economic vitality, the coherence of our policy-making, our human and natural resources and our infrastructure.
From these we draw a confidence which, combined with our defence capability, gives us the scope to help develop security arrangements and understandings in the region.
Indeed, we have the responsibility to do just that: to engender strategic stability and thereby prevent the emergence of threats to our territory.
In this way, our choices about the sort of society and political and economic structures we want will be based on a sense of opportunity and not fear.
Australia's defence capability and our stability and security as a continent anchoring the southern bounds of Asia ai a tlimsvive3 i important regional asset. The Australian defence industry crucial for our self-reliance is also an important regional asset.
It is always looking for new approaches, employs the most up-to-date technology, and has developed world-class expertise and skills.
Only last week, I attended the launch of the first of ten ANZAC frigates -a collaborative venture between Australia and New Zealand.
And not long before that, I attended the launch of the first Collins-class submarine, the most formidable conventional submarine in the world. 1928
As many of you know, we are currently exploring the scope for cooperation with Malaysia in developing a new patrol vessel and have commissioned a design which we hope will be the basis for such cooperation.
We are also interested in joint ventures with other regional partners, and we are prepared to transfer our technology and invest our capital. Our active participation in a web of alliances, commitments and cooperative activities help to underpin the security of our region and offset any uncertainties.
Our commitments to Papua New Guinea and New Zealand are important to each country's security and that of the region.
Our defence links with the island nations of the South Pacific are an important reassurance to them.
And, as I mentioned at the outset, we have an increasingly close and cooperative defence relationship with Indonesia.
With both Malaysia and Singapore. we have very active defence relationships including through the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
Singapore already trains its pilots and soldiers here in Australia, and last week I discussed with Prime Minister Goh how we might expand our cooperation even further.
This is the sort of activity that the Government labelled " strategic partnerships" in the Strategic Review 1993.
As I said earlier, the Government is committed to maintaining the capability to deter and defeat any attack on Australia.
We must have the ability to defend ourselves without aid from other countries' combat forces.
The Defence White Paper, to be released later this year, will set out a framework for achieving that goal over the next 15 years. The Australian Defence must be versatile.
It must be able to contribute to achieving a stable strategic environment. It must also be able to meet the challenge of a wide variety of tasks above and beyond the territorial security of Australia, often at short notice.
Adaptability is also key.
The Australian Defence Force must be capable of responding quickly to changes in our strategic environment.
That requirement also extends to our industrial, scientific and technological base, and to the skills and capacity of our people.
And its why the White Paper will focus on making defence a national effort by building links between defence and industry and between defence and the community. Let me conclude then.
Looking ahead to the year 2000, we can be reasonably confident the region will be benign and stable.
Economic integration and interdependence will help underpin that stability.
But stability is not guaranteed.
An effective defence force remains vital for our security.
Because, in the final analysis, each nation must be responsible for its capacity to defeat attacks upon its own territory.
At the same time however, all nations in the region must cooperate to help build a stable and secure region in which armed conflict is less likely.
We must all work to secure our future not against our neighbours, but with our neighbours.
We should take the opportunity we now have to put in place assurances against future uncertainties.
For Australia’s part, these assurances are to be found in the three intertwining strands that I have covered today:

the capability and flexibility of our defence force
the broader national effort to strengthen national security in its widest sense
and the efforts we make with our neighbours; to build cooperation and trust in the region

And let me say, I have every confidence that the actions the Australian Government is now taking in each of these three areas will strengthen the security of Australia and the region.
Thank you.
&nbsp;



c'c
jZ
PRIME MINJISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ALP NATIONAL CONFERENCE
HOBART, 26 SEPTEMBER 1994
A century of Australian nationhood has almost passed.
The Australian Labor Party was there at the beginning. It is still here and in 1994,
we can truly say, it is stronger than ever before.
We were born with the Australian nation. We were born of and for the Australian
people. Our tradition is with them both the nation and the people.
Our responsibility is to them both.
Through wars and depression, through triumphs and calamities, through every chapter
in the story of Australia the Labor Party has been there.
We have gone through all manner of travail with Australia and for Australia. And
now, a hundred years after our foundation, we Lk-a Australia.
That is one magnificent fact the fact we should not forget this week.
And I'll tell you one more great fact: if we have the courage the love, the labour and
the imagination we can lead Australia into the twenty-first century.
And I mean lead. I don't mean manage, or re-arrange. ' I don't mean occupy time and
space. I don't mean talk until the people of Australia stop listening.
I mean do the things which need doing. Live up to our ideals of what a good society
is and how great a country this can be.
It is the most extraordinary party, the Australian Labor Party. I am in no doubt it is
one of the very great political parties in the world lumpy, grumpy, difficult thing that
it is, no party in the world of its faith and vintage looks so strong today.
In the 1 890s the men and women of the Labor movement had enough faith in
themselves and their ideals to imagine that they the working people of Australia
could determine the shape of their country in thie twentieth century.
And in the 1 990s this is the remarkable thing, and I might say, for the leader of the
Parry, the humbling thing we are superbly placed to determnine the shape of our
country, according to mn ideals and = jj faith, in the twenty-first century.
Our responsibility is as great now as it was then.
The dimensions of the task are just as great. 
But we could scarcely be better placed to succeed.
In the hundred years of our history the Labor Party has been all but mortally wounded
once or twice. We have been lost. We have stumbled. we have split, we have been
becalmed. But not now.
We are in office. We are doing what we do best which is making the changes,
preparing Australia for the fu~ ture. And we are bringing the people with us.
And let me pause here to recognise and applaud the contribution of the party and the
trade unions those who kept the faith and who made such a mighty effort in 1993 to
see that Labor was returned.
We are doing what we said we would do. We are doing what Labor shu do. With
the unemployed, employment and training. With child care. With Aboriginal
Australians. With industrial relations.
And it is because we are doingz what we do best that we have run the Opposition
ragged. We should not forget that. Modern politics might look like a game of personalities,
but it is really a matter of policies.
What won the last election for Labor?
The things we stood for won it for us.
The social policies, Medicare. the rights of Aboriginal Australians, the rights of
women, the central place of the arts, the republic. We won it with our vision of
Australia. And that's what ultimately brought John Hewson down this year.
Not his personality, or mine, or anyone else's. The Native Title legislation brought
him down. The White Paper on Employment brought him down.
When the Liberals were called on to support legislation to right Australia's oldest
wrong the lie that the continent had been empty before Europeans came nothing in
their hearts and minds could make them do it.
It was beyond their moral reach. They said the passage of the Native Title Bill was " a
day of shame".
When they were confronted with a thoroughgoing package of programs to bring the
long term unemployed back into the mainstream the people on whose backs they had
attempted to ride to power they sneered. They said it was " irresponsible" to reach
back for the unemployed.
The Coalition response to those two initiatives made plain for all to see that the soul
of the Liberal Party is an empty place a vacant lot, a void once filled by the solid
bluestone face of Australian conservatism.
And what has brought our opponents to this sorry state? Putting our convictions on
the line. 
If we have one thin,-to thank John Hewvson for it is that his brand of radical
conservatism created a contest between fundamental beliefs and. even with the
effects of recession all around. ours were stronaer.
Let's not forget what our opponents intended to do. And let's not forget what
defeating them meant.
Ten billion dollars cut from public expenditure one billion from social security,
$ 400 million from public housing, a 25 per cent cut in labour market spending.
Youth wages of $ 3 an hour, a training system under which unemployed people could
have been paid 70 per cent of the award, with no requirement that the employer train
them. Full fees for university, the abolition of bulk-billing under Medicare for most people,
a $ 1I. 3 billion cut in funding for public hospitals.
Never did the Australian people have a clearer reminder of what profound differences
lie at the heart of the political contest.
Our opponents have now poured a blancmange into the hole John Hewson dug for
them. They are trying to soften the debate. They are spouting embarrassingly
juvenile and disingenuous flim flamn.
But pleasurable as it is to defeat our opponents and re-affirm. our political ascendancy,
the real pleasure is in what we have done. And what is now open for us to do.
What we have done in regard to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders is a case in
point. I dare say we have done more of a profound kind than any other Government
since Federation and by doing it we have left the way open to do a great deal more.
1 count the Native Title Act as one of Labor's great achievements. It is legislation of
which every member of tfiis party should be proud.
With the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Land Fund, which will enable
Aboriginals who will not directly benefit from the Act to purchase land, we now. have
the legal and moral foundations of a new era for indigenous Australians.
There is a great deal more to do. The $ 500 million allocated in this year's Budget to
improving the health of Aboriginal Australians will go some way to doing it.
No-one believes that change to the law or the expenditure of vast amounts of money
will get us there alone. But both are essential. What matters between now and the
turn of the century is good will and uncompromising application on both sides.
We have lived with this shame throughout the first century of our nationhood. I don't
believe that any Australian indigenous or non-indigenous should have to live with
it in the next century.
As long as I am Prime Minister, ending that shame wiW be one of the great goals of
the Labor Government.
And so will be ending the blight of unemployment.
When I said on election night that we would not leave the unemployed behind. I have
no doubt that there were people on both sides of politics disinclined to believe me.
Some may have doubted the Government's intent, some the Government's ability. 
The White Paper on Employment which we brought down in M'vay was proof that we
had both.
I am not sure that the dimensions of Working YNation have been properly appreciated.
But it is a document of infinitely more prescriptive detail and sophistication than the
famous White Paper of the 1 940s.
For the Labor Party, jobs have always been the highest priority. For the Labor Party,
unemployment is the greatest pain. So the White Paper is a quintessential Labor Party
Labor Gove~ rmntn document.
No other country has produced an integrated strategy as wide-ranging and ambitious
as Working iMation. No other country has; created such a complete employment
package. And it has already helped thousands of Australians.
The White Paper rests on the basic principle that while economic growth is the best
way of generating new and worthwhile jobs, by itself it is not adequate to the task of
reducing unemployment, particularly long-term unemployment.
That growth is creating jobs is beyond doubt 340.000 new jobs have been created
since April last year.
But what is also beyond doubt is that Government policies are helping to find work
for the long-term unemployed.
In the 1980s only 7 per cent of the 1.6 million jobs created went to the long-term
unemployed, compared to 22 per cent or 76,000 of the 340,000 new jobs since the
last election.
Overall, we've seen the number of long-term unemployed drop to the lowest level in
31 months.
This is not an accident; it's in part a consequence of a better performance from the
CES. and in part a result of the White Paper which has seern 116,000 people enter case
management under the Job Compact.
I want to remind the Conference of just how ambitious this Job Compact is.
Essentially it offers a job guarantee to the most disadvantaged group in the workforce.
It means that all people unemployed for more than 18 months are entitled to a job,
training or individual case management. It means that the Australians worst hit by
restructuring and recession and least able to share in the recovery will be brought into
the mainstream.
It is an argument about both equity and efficiency.
Re-skilling the unemployed means a greater pool of resources with which to fill new
jobs. It means more employment and, therefore, less unemployment benefits and
more tax revenue. And because it means a more effective labour supply, it means the
economy can expand more rapidly without running into wage inflation pressures.
it means, according to one academic analysis, that the annual net production of goods
and services can be increased by around $ 2 billion a year. 
It is one of the distinauishing features of conservative ideology that it will not admit
that there is efficiency in equity.
We say the two go hand in hand. We say that no society can afford to leave large
numbers of people on the margins it cannot be justified on moral grounds or social
grounds or economic grounds.
We say that not to strive to bring the long term unemployed back into the mainstream
is to betray both our own principles and this and future generations of Australians.
The White Paper is not merely a matter of salvaging the unemployed from hardship
and despair, and preventing the development of an underclass.
It is about developing a training system to match any in the world and, eventually, a
workforce as skilled as any in the world.
The measures of the White Paper are the means by which every young Australian will
have a place in education, training or employment.
We often talk about the social safety net. No broad policy commitment so
distinguishes us from our opponents.
We see it as a measure of a sophisticated society. We say sophisticated societies are
cohesive and inclusive. Put another way, we say they are measured by the degree to
which the bonds of care run through the social system.
We say that as we measure families and communities by the degree of effective care
and security they provide, we measure countries.
And we say those who talk about the virtues of families and communities while
advocating a reduction in the size and effectiveness of the social safety net are talkng
humbug. On this side of politics, we believe in the family and in the community. And we say
that the safety net is essential to their well-being.
Medicare is essential to the health of Australian families and communities. It is one
of the world's most successful health systems. Before Medicare, nearly 2 million
Australians had no health cover. With Medicare, every Australian has health cover.
And, with Medicare, health expenditure as a proportion of GDP has been kept well
below most comparable countries.
So is child care essential to Australian families and Australian communities. From
46,000 places in 1982-83, we have grown the national child care system to 242,000
places and we are committed to meeting all demand for work-related care by 2000.
We are providing fee relief for lower to middle income families and assistance for all
working families through the Child Care rebate.
Support for working women is essential to the health of Australian families and
communities. Child care is one major means of support. So is the Superannuation
Guarantee Charge which has increased superannuation coverage for women working
full-time from 47 per cent to 87 per cent, and for those working part-time, from 19 per
cent to 65 per cent.
The Child-Support Scheme is essential to the health of families and communities.
Before the Scheme, only about 30 per cent of non-custodial parents paid child support
now 75 per cent of liabilities are collected. 
The Labor Government's achievements in promoting the rights and status of women
have made Australia a world leader.
It was Labor which introduced the Sex Discrimination Act in 1984. Ten years before
that, a Labor Government established the Office for the Status of Women which is
still going strong in its 20th year.
There is a great deal yet to be done. We must get more women into the parliaments of
Australia and we are now committed to doing that. When half the population is more
strongly represented we will all be stronger for it.
For all our shortcomings, wherever you look for milestones for women in Australia in
the past 20 years it is Labor which has put them there.
Just as it is Labor which has put the vast majority of social programs there.
We have created social policies and programs with few equals in the world. Our
emphases have shifted in many regards, yet the thrust of our thinking today still
echoes the aspirations of those who founded the Labor Party 100 years ago.
What we have delivered is a real. measurable, felt degree of social justice. A tangible
slice of the fair go. And by fostering stability and cohesion, broadening opportunity,
and calling on all the skills and ambition of all our people, that fair go will help
deliver us the future.
The safety net has another function which our opponents seem not to recognise It is
not just a component but a condition of change.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the Accord.
The Accord delivered a truly effective social wage. It enabled us to cut inflation, lift
employment and reduce strikes.
We can measure its value over the past decade in terms of a 30 per cent reduction in
labour costs on the one hand, and a 35 per cent increase in real disposable household
incomes on the other.
Over that same decade we have seen inflation reduced ' from. more than I11 per cent to
less than 2 per cent; the number of working days lost reduced to a figure which last
year was the lowest since the Australian Bureau of Statistics began publishing the
series in 1967; and we have seen the creation of 1.7 million jobs.
The debt which this Labor Government and the Australian nation owes to the modemn
labour movement is immeasurable.
Far from being a matter of discomfort to us, our close relationship with the trade
unions is a matter of great satisfaction. I can think of few relationships which have
delivered Australia so much.
Now as we reform Australian workplaces and develop an industrial relations system
based on enterprise bargalning, the Government's Accord with the unions is providing
the essential transition mechanism.
The Accord is allowing increased Labor market flexibility without the high costs of
strikes or wage breakouts that might be expected to accompany such substantial
change. 
The Accord is also providing the safety net to protect lower paid workers who would
otherwise miss out on wage increases. Enterprise bargaining alone cannot protect
lower paid workers. It will not protect the industrially weak. Only enterprise
bargaining under the Accord will provide both flexibility and a de'cent level of
protection. Last week with the IRC decision to grant a $ 24 a week increase to low-paid workers,
we saw the system working the system which this Government has put into place
since the election.
Yet,* just in case any of us needed reminding, we heard the employers caviling against
the decision. There they were, complaining about a wage increase for the low-paid
which will see wages increase by only half a per cent, while executive salaries have
risen on average more than 4 per cent, and the profit share is at record levels.
And there was John Howard saying that the award system was a terrible thine.
Australia has economic growth the equal of or surpassing any in the OECD.
Employment growth is high. The profit share is high. The inflation rate is low. We
have new flexibility in the labour market.
Yet they are carping about the benefits of this recovery flowing through to the
Australian people. You have to ask what meanness inspires them?
It really could not be more ironic. Working Australians have been made to respond to
competitive pressures. Unions have had to adjust and re-structure. They have had to
accept productivity-related wage adjustments.
Business has had to do these things too.
But those who preach competition loudest, who condemn the safety net and parade up
and down flexing their laissez-faire muscles the Liberal-led states shrink from
implementing competition policy.
Never mind about the rights of the vast majority of Australians who stand to get
cheaper services and more jobs out of the implementation of competition policy. And
never mind about the nation which will be made that much more competitive by it.
The conservatives ask us to believe that the Federation was Qreated for the purpose of
enshrining the unassailable rights of the states.
Wrong. Federation created an Australian nation and the purpose of the nation is to
protect and further the interests of the people the Aiistralin people, not Victorian
people or West Australian people, or Northern Territory people, but th-P people.
It seems to me the difference between the Labor Party and its opponents is that we
draw strength from the past while they seek refuge in it.
It seems to me that our opponents are drifting further and fuirther away from the
direction Australia is going. They are losing touch with contemporary Australia.
My reading may be wrong, but I think there is a new mood emerging a renewed
concern with our national identity and national destiny which reflects the changes in
the social composition and economic structure of Australia, and an awareness of the
opportunities which await us in the next century. 
I think that as a Government and as a Party we have to move with the mood. I believe
it is the mood of younger Australians and that it may well be defining the direction of
our history.
I am sure it is taking us toward a Republic.
In recent times, effectively we have handed the baton of the Republic to the
Australian people and I am in little doubt that they will carry it across the line.
A healthy debate is now underway. We want to see the idea of the republic become
clearer in the public mind. As it becomes clearer the resolve will grow stronger.
So we have the economic fundamentals, the social fundamentals and increasingly, I
believe, we have a spirit at large not dissimilar to the one which 100 years ago created
the Australian nation.
We have as well, for the first time in our history, the world's bliggest and fastestgrowing
markets at our doorstep.
Australia's public policy Labor's public policy is for the first time comprehending
this development by seeing it as part of the national policy reach.
That is why we have so vigorously pursued the development of APEC.
Perhaps APEC does not at first glance sound like a Labor agenda item.
But I assure you it is.
The Australian Labor government has been a driving force in APEC. We have taken
on this role because APEC offers the means by which Australia and other countries in
the region can keep the dynamics of growth going among half the world's population.
To put it simply the great growth in our trade, including our trade in manufactures,
has been in Asia and the Pacific. That is where our future prosperity lies.
It is on growth there that our opportunities substantially depend.
A more liberal regional trading environment will encourage. and sustain that growth.
The APEC leaders' meeting in Bogor in November is therefore of importance to a lot
more people than Paul Keating or Gareth Evans or Bob McMullan it is of profound
importance to Australian exporters, Australian farmers, Australian workers.
The Labor Party should not underestimate these sorts of initiatives from Labor
Governments. Our role as a convener of the Cairns Group of agricultural producers was instrumental
in getting a Uruguay Round result which is likely to add $ 3.7 billion to Australia's
GDP. No one can estimate what even modest success with APEC might be worth. But we
can readily guess what the consequence of not trying would be it would be to live
with the knowledge that we saw necessity and turned away, that we had a chance to
provide opportunities for succeeding generations of Australians and passed it up.
I count it among the Government's most important achievements that we have
established a creative role for Australia in the region; and whether it has been in
APEC, or the ASEAN Regional Forum or the South Pacific Forum, we have built that 
role around promoting prosperity, limiting friction and encouraging cooperation and
stability. If the national interest means the interests of the Australian people. and the interest of
the Australian people is in their future and the future of their children, then there are
two other less traditional Labor subjects the Labor Government must address.
You will be aware that in the last few weeks I have visited some of the drought areas
of Queensland and New South Wales.
You will also be aware that we have delivered a comprehensive drought package to
those farmers in the worst hit areas.
The problems for those farmers and communities are acute they are human and
social problems, as well as financial and economic ones.
Our response. I believe, has been an appropriately comprehensive, compassionate and
intelligent one.
And I might say in passing that for this Bob Collins has received less credit than he
deserves. It is ailways easy for a Minister, when faced with a problem, to turn up with
the hand extended. It is one thing to ask for money, another thing altogether to
develop good, constructive policies.
Drought. of course. is a familiar problem. Generation after generation of rural
Australians have had to endure them, and so have the national balance sheets.
Yet as a nation we may be able to contrive something positive from this drought.
Perhaps it can remind us that the bonds between Australians are much stronger than
the divisions.
Rural Australians may nC~ t always vote for us, but that will not prevent us providing
help when they need it. The unemployed are no less unemployed for living in the
bush. Frustrated ambition is no less painful there than it is in the cities.
What this long drought has put at risk is the future of the family farms which sustain
and in large part define the bush. There is an element of ourculture at stake here, a
way of life, as well as a vital element of our economy.
And perhaps it can be the spur to recognising an even greater problem than the
drought itself.
No one can visit these drought affected regions of Australia or virtually any region
of rural Australia without being struck by the degree of land degradation of one kind
or another.
You do not need expert training to recognise it. Nor do you need to be a particularly
conscientious environmentalist.
You only need an eye and an ear.
The eye will tell you that this is not the way the country used to look, nor how
productive land is meant to look.
The ear will tell you what the farmers say themselves these days: that we are losing
great tracts of land to salinity and erosion. That there has been too much clearing.
That our streams and soils are degraded. That along with the natural environment we 
are losing productivity and that. in some cases. is threatening the foundations of
regional economies.
Through a variety of programs, including the extraordinarifly successful National
Landcare program. the Government has been combating these problems.
In Working Nation we took a major initiative with Australia's regions: we decided to
help regional development organisations find the best way to sustainable. long-term
productive land use.
Through the Rural Adjustment Scheme we will help to create a more rational and
environmentally-sensitive pattern of land use. We will help people to get off land
which is not viable. We will help people use viable land in more sustainable ways.
I am sure that we will be helped in this process by the dramatic change in thinking
which is occuring in rural Australia. We have a new breed of farmers aware that
good environmental practice is good farm practice, and good business practice. And
we want to encourage them.
The drought might just spread the message wider, and it might get the whole country
on a path to sustainable development.
It might be that another generation will look back on this drought and say that it was a
turning point. That it was the drought which made us aware of the need to renovate
and restore the land, to use it sensibly and sustainably that this was the moment
when rural industry and the environment got onto the same track.
The land is a major challenge for our generation. It is a major challenge for the
Government. There are some uncanny parallels between this challenge and that of a century ago: in
this one, as in that one, economic downturns and drought have been accompanied
somewhat paradoxically by themes of national identity and nationhood.
In this decade I hope, as in that earlier one, we have grown more conscious of the
values and interests we share that for all our differenc es and the vast distances which
separate us, our primary loyalty and affection is to this nation and we are remarkably
close. In the 1890s. the spread of telegraph and railway lines gave a material dimension to
the national sentiment.
In the 1990s it is the information highway.
Someone wrote in the American magazine, " Harper's", last month that the information
revolution is " the most transforming technological event since the capture of fire."
We do not know quite what the dimensions of this change will be. But we do know it
is already upon us, that it is going to change our lives profoundly, and that it is all
going to happen very quickly.
Whether we like it or not, it will change the way we communicate with each other, the
way we learn, the way we do business, the way we create the way we lead our daily
lives. 
Perhaps some of us don~ t know. But if we don't. our kids do. We know what a CD is.
but they know what a CD-RONI is. We know what a VCR does, they know how to
program it.
What the Government knows is that we are fast approachingz a moment in our history
where how well we play the information game will determine how well we prosper.
We know that the information superhighway has the potential to create great new
industries and new jobs for Australia. It has the potential to serve us very well.
The important thing is to make sure that we don't become too obsessed with the
highway itself. Building the highway is important, but inventing the things that go on
it is more important.
The production of content is the key for Australia. If we can use the information
highway to find better ways of. say, delivering our Social Security programs, teaching
our children, getting health programs to all Australians, taking art and science beyond
the major cities the information highway will not only improve the quality of our
national life, it will create a whole new industry, a whole new milieu.
And given our natural advantages, that industry can export to the rest of the world.
Those natural advantages include an advanced film and television industry, a highly
educated population. th English language and the many other languages Australians
speak. You will see these sorts of issues addressed in the Government's cultural policy which
will be launched next month.
The immnediate challenges are to find ways of linking our creative and software
communities. We need to get more PCs and CD-ROMs in our schools. We need
more university and TAFE-programs focussed on multimedia.
There is a lot more we need to do. But none of it is beyond us, and if our children are
to have the best possible chance as the information revolution unfolds, we simply
have to do it.
Most crucially, the superhighway the optic fibre highway must be a highway for all
Australians. If we can readily share and disseminate information among ourselves, we will be a far
stronger and more prosperous country. We will avoid becoming a nation of the
information-rich and the information-poor.
That reason the access and equity reason is one of two principal reasons why the
information revolution is a primary concern for a Labor Government.
The other principal reason is that it represents an enormous challenge an inescapable
challenge for any Government which believes its duty is to Australia and the
Australian people.
As I said when I began, the Australian Labor Party was born with the Australian
nation and the Australian people as they were defining themselves.
And those two elements still detine our role.
The people depend on us. We are in Government because a lot of people depend on
our being there: the people who would not have medical cover without us; the people 
who would not get the necessary help to restart tneir ilives after a period orf
unemployment: the people who would not have the protection ot an industrial award:
Aboriginal Australians.
We need to be in office for these people for Australian working men and women.
For those who fall behind.
But that is not the only reason.
We need to be there to lead Australia into the next century. To deliver on the promise
the future holds. To state the common purpose above the parochial. To project our
nationhood. To take uptth e social and economic challenges, the challenge of the
region, the challenges of technology and the environment. To meet the twenty,-first
century with confidence. To do justice to the rightful expectations of our children
and to the memory of those who have brought us through.
It is daunting, but certainly not beyond us.
I think we should delight in the prospect.
The great thing is that at the end of a century we have earned the right to lead
Australia into another.
And our faith is as strong as it ever was.
ends 



4 4.,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ALP NATIONAL CON FERENCE9 HOBART, TASMANIA
29 SEPTEMBER, 1994
PMV: Well, I thought I would give you some impressions of mine, of the
conference and give you a chance to ask some questions, if you wish.
We're getting towards the end of it and this wAil be probably the last
opportunity to get something to air for news. The first thing I would say
is I think the conference has reflected the general policy unity in the
Labor Party and the general willingness to apply the task of getting
things done to move the Party into the next three years. These
conferences are on every three years and there is. I think, something
which was commented on through the week, a generally business-like
attitude by the Party to its work. Some have said it is too dull. Well,
the fact is, it is aboLlt making the policies. A lot of these debates are
had earlier, as you know, and you can say lots of things about the
Labor Party, but never that it Is dull.
There are a couple of what I call headline issues, which will come out
of this conference. One, in particular, which I think will be around
when all of us are gone and that was the decision, a very historic one,
to increase the representation for women in the parliaments. That is
the keynote change of this conference. That is the one that will
change the character of Australian politics, it's the one which will lift
the opportunities for women to participate in the parliaments of the
country. So, this, I think and I will come back to it: in a moment
was a very historic change, and one that I think we had to have a rule
for. Not a principle, but a rule. And, as a consequence, we have a
rule.
The next major issue was the privatisations. This has always been
somewhat of a difficult issue for the Labor Party. Of course, we've had
a number of these debates, we had it with a competitive Telecom, we
had it with the privatisation of QANTAS, we've had It now, again, with
the privatisation of the major airport assets of the country. In agreeing
to It, It will mean that we will be able to expand airport facilities to meet
tourism in particular, which is growing rapidly. W. are in the fastest
growing part of the tourism Industry world wide, in the Asia-Pacific. 
The growth In tourist destinations to Australia is profound, and we
really need the asset growth in these particular investments and they
would not have come from the Commonwealth Budget. They need to
come privately and they now will. But, as well as that there will be a
yield to the Commonwealth Budget which is coming from the proceeds,
which is important in the Government's medium term fiscal strategy.
Now, this was a must issue for the government and one which I am
pleased to say, the Party faced up to, and sensibly. But, I will come
back to it if you like.
Industri al Relations, again I think an acceptance of the directions the
government has been taking. I was very pleased at the embrace of
enterprise bargaining which was part and parcel of the amendments
and the debate, which we haven't had in full measure until now. And,
an understanding that the award system is there as an underpinning
and, I think, a general, broad appreciation of that.
Now, the other issue which, of course, you are getting yourselves
worked up about today, uranium. Uranium is one of those issues
which I think attitudes change in, over time. But, it is one which is
deeply held in the Labor Party and one which I think, as a party, and
for my part as the leader, one has got to make a decision about
whether you really put a tear through the party in changing it at this
point. And, even if one wanted to do it, taking a running jump at it.
well, in this respect I have not taken a running jump at this issue
because to have taken the running jump I would have had to have
started running about four to six weeks ago. And, I would have been
well and truly in the air before the conference stared. As it turned out,
the thing I was running on was the vote for women, the vote in favor of
the representation of women, and the thing that the Government just
had to get through, the privatisations. So, what will happen is uranium
will be referred off to the National Executive for a report to the next
conference. By and large, beyond that Labor Party conferences can be a great
strength for the Labor Party. They can be a problem for it, mostly in
years gone by they have been a strength for it. I think this one has on
this occasion. Now I think the Party does realise what a tremendous
opportunity in government it has and I made these points, I hope
clearly, in the industrial debate, at least as far as the industrial
legislation was concerned today. So, it is a case then of the timing of
these conferences fitting in contemporaneously with each parliament.
It means that, In terms of policy, the board is set up to the next election
and beyond. And, we get a chance then to review where we go from
there. So, I'd be glad to take questions from you.
J: ( inaudible question about PM's role in uranium policy discussions) 
PM: No, I had a few discussions with people but again people have had
some discussions with me as well I didn't, before I came I basically
decided not to touch uranium because I wanted to be sure that the
airport FAC package would get through and that the vote for
representation for women would get through and I just might remind
you that that was only a very close thing. The Left Caucus only
decided to agree to it about 20 minutes before the vote.
J: The FAC?
PM: No, the vote for women. And, basically to try and run the uranium
discussion as well, in that environment, wasn't really worth doing. And
when I was here a few people were saying, " Look there is still a
chance to change this", and I had, then, a couple of discussions with
people but, you've really got to have your heart and your back in one
of these changes to get them through.
J: But, Prime Minister, you say that the present policy on uranium is
outdated. I mean, you would like a change, wouldn't you and you did
have discussions with people. Brian Ede said you were quite helpful...
PM: Yes, Brian Ede approached me, I didn't approach him, saying he
wanted my support for it. And, I said, " Look, I don't think there is a
majority here for it, I don't think people are prepared to make the
change yet. u But, I said we'll see as the week goes on wthat people
have got to say. Now, you know the AWU's position in Queensland,
they were flatly opposed to it and by the time that they could see that
their tactic with CRA was not going to change CRA's industrial
position, then they yeilded their position. But, to get a change like this
up you've really got to go full bore at it.
J: But regardless of that dispute within CRA and the AWUI what does the
fact that there has been no change say to large companies like CRA,
and foreign investors?
PM: Very little, very little Indeed. Look, let me just give you some data here
which Is worth recording. Ranger has got a capacity of 3,000 tonnes
this year, it is producing 1,335. Olympic Dam has a capacity of 1 ,900
tonnes and it is producting 1,325. If you had all the prospectives up,
the lot of them, they come to about 7,300 tonnes in a year, if you add
the lot together. That's everything, Kintyre, CRA, Koongarra, Veelirie,
North Ranger, Ben Lomond, Beverley, all these together. Wherein, at
the moment we are producing 5,000 tonnes the truth is, we can't meet
the capacity of our mines to produce now. Now, were this to have
changed, the mine that people would have had the greatest
expectation for was Pan Continental. The old Pan Continental mine, it
has got tremendous environmental problems. And, there would be no
guarantee, far from a guarantee that that would ever begin in the East
Alligator Rivers region. So, you're talking about really, Koongarra, 
which has got 15,000 tonnes of reserves compared to Ranger and
Olympic Dam which have got 427,000. So, in economic terms it
doesn't matter very much at all. And, that's the point. Essentially, in
economic terms, it Is not a pressing matter, it is not a pressing matter
in political terms.
J: Prime Minister, this motion didn't seem to be dead until some time this
morning. Were you prepared for a motion to be put but, basically, it
looked like a fairly transparent attempt to lock out a company like CRA
because it didn't please the union movement?
PM: Well, let me make my position clear about CRA I don't support their
tactics of trying to squeeze unions out of their mines. But, be that as it
may, these companies have done very well out of the Government and
its industrial relations policy, in the profit share in the economy, in the
competitiveness via the exchange rate, in everything that has come
with it. And, part of it is, I think, not picking the eyes out of the policy
mix, which, I think, Is their intention. But, no proposal was ever
agreed. And, therefore, in general terms, the only place you can go
with uranium after the current policy is to go to a policy where they just
get up, individually, on their merits. Now, that basically means, maybe
Koongarra, maybe this Kintyre thing in the future. But, the truth is that
the existing operators can't sell their product.
J: Isn't this a case of by pushing this off to the National Executive once
again, which you 41d after the 1991 conference you face the
prospect of simply having the same mess that you've had this lost
week, revisited In three years time.
PM: Yes, but there are always some issues that will drag along. This was
not an issue two weeks ago, this was not an issue one week ago, it
was not an issue last weekend. There were only two issues that were
issues over those timeframes: that was the vote for female
representation in the parliaments and the FAC and the assets. Now,
each conference has its purpose, this issue has been hanging around
since I'm not quite sure when we changed the policy to
accommodate Olympic Dam I think, 1980. This is 13 years later yet
we've had privatisation of QANTAS, telecommunications, each
conference has served its purpose. This conferences purpose has
been, in the broad, in the big issues, to be the representation issue
and the privatisations.
J: Would you like to see the policy opened up in the future?
PM: Well, look, a policy which has no arbitrary quality to it is better than
one without it. But, again, in economic terms, it matters very little.
Certainly at this point The world market is over supplied and we've
got more capacity than we can handle. 
J: There was a late amendment carried which appeared to be related to
the uranium debate, allowing exploration in National Parks, it was
carried by 51 votes to 50, and during the debate the Environment
Minister, Senator Faulkner, said that there was a direct nexus between
exploration and future mining... ( inaudible) which would constitute
an administrative, legal and political nightmare for the Labor Party.
What do you say about that and the fact that the amendment was
carried?
PM: Well, I was told it was carried just as I was coming up here and I didn't
hear all of the debate, obviously. Well, what is in the Party policy in
respect of say. National Parks, without seeing the words of the
amendment, the sense of it as I understand it, is that the Party may
provide for exploration in National Parks. But, that doesn't mean to
say that the Government would or should.
J: What is your attitude?
PM: Well, I'll have to have a look at it and see what it says and take some
advice. My attitude, generally, has been that National Parks are
declared to be National Parks for that very reason. That is, to
preserve them.
J: ( Inaudible)... a uranium policy that half the Cabinet has described as
absurd. Is the the symbolism in that, is there not a problem in that..?
PM: I don't think so. I don't think so. There are lots of if you want to
track through the great document of the Labor Party's policies and the
one the Coalition had and tick off the ones you think are absurd, there
would be a lot df ticks on the pages, I can tell you.
J: Do you think that basically the change in the platform to allow
exploration in National Parks should be ignored?
PM: I will have a look at the. change and I will make a judgement about it. I
am not going to respond to it without knowing what was said and what
was meant.
J: Mr Keating what did you think of Bill Ludwig's attempts to link it with
industrial relations?
PM: Well, I think he worked out that that was not a goer. And, the reason it
is not a goer is that you can basically fit this Kintyre reserve in your
eye. It is basically a fleck of dust in the eye compared to a decent
deposit and there was no way that CRA were going to change their
Industrial relations policy to mine a thimble full of uranium. They were
never going to do it and I am surprised that Bill ever thought that they
would. 
J: What sympathy do you have for local Aborigines in Kakadu who have
been pushing for the opening up of Koongarra and ( inaudible) and
how do you think it sits with the whole native title efforts of the last
couple of years?
PM: Well, native title never gave Aboriginal people the right to minerals.
These are always issues of larger national moment and larger national
moment they will always be. Including in that, of course, the rights of
Aboriginal people and their views. But, I mean, that's about the only
weight I would put on it.
J: Mr Keating, given you said that if this was an issue to get through
you'd have to approach it four or five weeks before the conference...
PM: Well, not four or five, a couple of months at least.
J: a couple of months, do you think it was handled badly by the people
who were pushing for a change?
PM: No, you mean the uranium issue here?
J: Yes.
PM: Well, look, the thing was, if you look back a month or three weeks ago,
what were the issues? The major issue, I thought, two issues, the
ones that I mentioned. I didn't believe we could go through this
conference withoUt setting a rule rather than a principle for the
representation of women. Now, I told my faction that at the National
Executive meeting in Canberra. Some people were still hankering
after a principle, I said, " Well, if you do, I will stand you up at the
conference, as long as you understand that." And, I will say this, for
people on the right of the Party, they came to the party with a rule.
That rule was not accepted by the Left, in general. And, the Left
Caucus, of course, were having, there was a lot of gnashing of teeth
minutes or so before the decision. I think their concern is that seats
which may go to the Left will go to women on the Right. And,
therefore, there was not equanimity of view. There was, in the end, I
am happy to say. So, the notion that you know, they were saying that
this was a pro-cooked result, this was a foregone conclusion... It was
not a foregone conclusion at all. And, they knew that unless it was
going to be agreed there would be a very tough battle on the floor of
the conference in which I would put my views, very firmly. Now, I am
delighted with the fact that the whole party has agreed to this and It will
change the face of Australian politics and the Labor Party. And this is
a very great change and when, looking back over these conferences
with some hindsight, this will stand out as a very large and significant
change. 
On the other issue, of course, the privatisation, it was imperitive for the
government that we get this change through. That's in fiscal terms,
imperitive that we get it through. And, we basically were making clear
that just for efficiency reasons and servicing these airports as well as
the fiscal reasons, we really needed this change.
J: What is your reaction to the Current Account deficit announced today?
PM: Well, it is one month's deficit. It is higher than we'd like it to be but it is
crammed full of capital goods and probably at this phase of the
recovery that is what one would expect to start to see. Certainly, we
need a lot of capital equipment to try and keep the supply response in
the economy cracking. What is one of the big issues in the
sustuinability of this recovery and that is the supply capacity of the
economy. The supply capacity of the economy will only be there with
investment goods and particularly plant and equipment and there was
a lot of that in these. There were a few lumpy things as well. Now,
there is a bit of extra debt in there and there is a bit of lost earnings
coming through from the drought but, by and large, you can't ever take
a month's number as being indicative of the trend
J: Does it put more pressure on the Budget policy?
PM: No, no.
J: Mr Keating, on what do you base your confidence that the affirmative
action rule ( inaudible)?
PM: Oh, because I think that by and large that the Party has decided that
the time has come, that we will be a stronger and better party if more
women are represented. And, it is going to take a lot of changes,
particularly in states where you've still got rank and file preselection
systems. People are going to have to, factions are going to have to
decide who gets particular seats and how they get them, some time
ahead of them getting them. So, it will take a bit of doing but I think
there is a lot of goodwill towards the doing of it and nobody is going to
leave themselves vulnerable to a National Executive decision.
PM: Do you have any sympathy for men who might miss out on
preselection because of this rule change?
PM: Well, I think, by and large, the men, as you put it, have had more than
their share of the market for most of the century so I don't think feeling
sorry for them is quite the term.
J: Mr Keating, would the symbolism of Carmen Lawrence as your deputy
serve the Labor Party well? 
PM: Well, what's the point of me debating the deputy leader of the Labor
Party, here? None.
J: Prime Minister, despite uranium, which You say was not really an
issue, this was a really stage-managed conference, everything was
sewn up. Do you think that sort of sterility of debate is a good thing for
the Labor Party, why aren't things more vigorous now?
PM: You mean you'd like more pictures for the television in the evenings?
J: No, no, just more vigorous debate.
PM: Well, what you have is not sterility, I don't think, at all. That Is, that
was there a real debate at this conference about the representation of
woman? Well, you're damn right there was. And, it was happening
right under your nose, out there, but it was inside a locked room where
people were debating their future and whether they could live with this
rule change. I mean, that is a really live Issue and It was a really live
debate. The same with, you know the to-ings and fro-ings over the last
six weeks or so in respect of the FAC and privatisation. It has been on
and off and on and off, people saying yes and another proposal being
put; then the idea of leasing etcetera. And, finally, a resolution. It is
the antitheses of sterility. Now, the fact that they are agreed by the
time that they are here only means that the whole pressure cooker
atmosphere of the conference coming produces the result. In other
words, the vitality which should be there in policy determination, is, in
fact, there. And, I think the notion that the conference is, I saw a bit of
comment this morning that if there are not fights on the floor then we
don't have a vigorous debate. Well, there is obviously a vigorous
debate here and there has been.
J: Where was passion on the floor, though?
PM: Well, I thought there was a fair bit of passion when the representation
for women went through and there was a passion not only from the
women in the Labor Party but also female journalists as well. I thought
even you were passionate about it. Maybe I was mistaken but I
thought you were getting a bit teary eyed about
J: No, no, no, you've got the wrong girl.
PM: You don't get teary eyed?
J: I wasn't teary eyed in this instance. Please.
PM: Oh. Thank you.
J: Is Bernie Fraser setting a move for you on fiscal policy. do you think? 
PM: Well, I don't think so but central banks will always put as much weight
on the government as possible. And this is central banks the world
over. But, the government has a medium term fiscal strategy which we
adopted when we expanded fiscal policy with One Nation in 1992. We
want to be able to show that we had a ballooning of outlays for the
purpos es of a fiscal stimulus, to lift the economy up, and we wanted to
be able to show, demonstrably, graphically, that it would come down.
So, you can't do that with just the forward estimate for just one year.
Until 1992 we only had a forward estimate for one year. And, we went
to the medium term projectory to show that what we Intended with One
Nation was a stimulus and we would then withdraw it. Well, basically,
that's what we've showed and that's what we've done and that strategy
was based on solid economic growth and low inflation and that's
exactly what we have. So, we don't have demand growing now like we
had it growing In the eighties. That's just not the case. And, of course,
we don't have inflation now, as in the eighties. So, the elements of
that medium term strategy which we laid down are being met almost in
a copy book way. So, the question is, why change it?
J: Normally through a recovery governments will progressively tighten
fiscal policy?
PM: But, let me just say a couple of things to you. We've got
unemployment at nine and a half per cent. We'll have the deficit back
to two and a half percent of GDP in this financial year, in 1994-95.
That's a very big juxtaposition of numbers. Nine and a half per cent
unemployment and two and a half per cent on the deficit. The deficit
peaked at over four per cent in the early eighties when unemployment
reached ten per cent and it was almost five per cent in the mid..
seventies when unemployment was under six per cent. Here we are
with unemployment at nine and a halt per cent, that is arguing the case
for a continuing stimulus and we've got the deficit already, this year, at
two and a half per cent of GDP.
J: Why then, does Bernie Fraser keep ( inaudible) to keep the pressure
up?
PM: I think that central bankers always want as much, if they can have
more of a hand from fiscal policy, as they see it, the better. But, I just
think that one has got to look back and that is why I think the OECD
made it clear when it made those remarks a couple of weeks ago in its
report, it said the Australian proposal to get back to one per cent of
GDP as a deficit, by 1996-97, was realistic and better than most other
OECD countries.
J: So, Bernie Frasers wrong..? 
PM; Well, if the notion is that we have to and he hasn't said this but if
you're reading into it the notion being that no deficit Is too low and
no surplus too great, yes that Is wrong.
J: Prime Minister, do you think the next conference will be as easy to
manage as this one, with twice as many delegates at Vt
PM: Well, I don't know, the NSW conference has always had 1,000 and
we've always managed that. Maybe the bigger they are the easier
they are. I don't know.
J: Prime Minister, on industrial relations you seem to be suggesting that
some of the bigger unions were dragging the chain again.. ( inaudible)?
PM: Oh look, I think the happy hunting ground of the central wage fixing
system has been exactly just that, happy hunting grounds and people
have wanted to keep it as long as they could. But, the better unions, I
think, see the opportunity of enterprise bargaining to really be relevant
to their members, to get themselves higher real incomes and also to
make the companies more profitable. And, that is why this change
they don't like the flexibility agreements because they are non union.
In other words, let's take a business, maybe a cake shop with eight
people, which is paying under a federal award but is not unionised.
That proprietor and those employees can agree to vary the award.
Now, the unions don't like that. This has induced them into a real love
affair with enterprise bargaining. Well, I reckon that is just a terrific
outcome if they push that harder, certified agreements as they're
called. And, this will mean that unions will earn themselves and I
say earn earn themselves an organic place in the labour market.
So, instead of simply just rolling on to pick up subscriptions they* are
actually helping people get wage increases, enterprise per enterprise.
And, that is the kind of change that the labour movement has to
embrace so that it is, in a sense, free of the industrial relations
commission. Less vulnerable to a change in the IR Act.
J: Mr Keating. .( inaudible) the Access Economics report/
PM: I don't even know what they are, Michael, what are they?
J: Well it suggested there was very substantial scope for expanding
exports, or are you saying that can be done within the ? 7
PM: Well, there is either a rebuke to be handed out to the sales people at
Ranger and Olympic Dam because there is 600 tonnes spare
capacity at Olympic Dam and there is 1,700 tonnes in Ranger.
J: Just on that point, Mr. Keating, it will be another two years before it
comes back from the. 
PM: I don't think the uranium market is going to change iii two years, three
years
JX Add to that another six years of lead up time for starting the new mine
and then you have eight or nine years, isn't that time for markets to
change..?
PM: Well, we haven't seen It. This policy went into place in 1976 in the
Labor Party, it was changed in 1980 as I remember it, inl respect of
Olympic Dam, that's 13 years ago and we've never seen a buoyant
market from that day to this.
J: Are you also saying on uranium and women and the FAC, that once
every three years the Labor Party can't keep more than two balls In the
air at once?
PM: Oh, sometimes we keep a lot in the air at once...
J: Yes, but this time.
PM: But it is a matter of how you rank them. I mean, the women's
representation ona was a big issue, the FAC was a completely
necessary Issue. But, whether in fact for a mining policy which already
allows mining which is already oversupplied and mines are working at
under capacity, where do you rank it in the ranking of Issues? The
thing is, you can't rank it highly. So, you may say it is numerically
three balls but it is really two soccer balls and one ball bearing.
J: The companics seem to think they can make some money out of it or
they wouldn't be in there pushing it, so whiy not let the market decide?
PM: Well, who is here pushing it? I think, in the main it has always been
FRA who have now bought the Pan Continental interest at Jobiluka.
And, mining companies will always try and have as much flexibility as
they can get. But, there wMl always be, for that mine and the flood
plain of the East Alligator River, there will always be a big
environmental Issue. Okay, thanks.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL 12. O1AM 1 OCTOBER 1994
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RECOGNITION OF PALAUIAN INDEPENDENCE
I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government has extended
formal recognition to the Republic of Pa -lau following implementation of its
Compact of Free Associati-on with the United States.
Palau becomes the latest independent state in the Pacific and I look forward
to the development of close links between our two countries.
I also welcome Palau's intention to join the South Pacific Forum and I hope
we can co-operate closely in the Forum and-in other regional organisations.
Australia will be represented at the Palau independence celebrations on 1
October by the Honourable Ben Humphreys MP. We will be establishing
formal diplomatic relations with Palau as soon as possible.
On behalf of the Australian Government and people I offer my warm
congratulations to President Kuniwo Nakamura and all Palauans at this
historic moment.---
CANBERRA 1 OCTOBER 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE 1994 SUPERMARKET SHOW. DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY,
MONDAY, 3 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Jim Fleming. distinguished guests and ladles and gentlemen.
Well, it Is a very groot plooure Indeed to come to the 1004 Supermarkot Show. My
contact with supermarkets Is fairly thin these days, but I occasionally dash in to buy
something mostly something for my children but. one Is always been Impressed with
the competition and the quality of the things which are sold In Australian supermarkets and
the way they are presented, the nature of the stores, and it comes as really no surprise to
me at all that the Australian Supermarket Industry in presentation, in competition, in
pricing, as Jim Fleming remarked in turn-over, ranks up there with the best in the world.
In fact. I'm sure some in Australia would believe better than any in the world. And, this has
been a good thing for the Australian consumer and again, as Jim Fleming remarked, a
good thing In restrainlng the prices In Australia and restraining Inflation because this Is a
very large Industry which turns over something like $ 17 billion a year and it has a decided
Impact on the standard of living of Australians the way they live and the quality of the
things they bury.
So, we have got much in this country to celebrate, I think, in the way in which our retail
sectors have developed over time and its, I think, a wonderful thing that the Australian
Retail Institute has developed this Supermarket Show so that the Industry can get togothor
and look at trends and discuss changes and we can also invite colleagues from around the
world including. of course, the Asia Pacific area where now Australian retailers and
wholesalers are starting to do business, and to try to make those connections and
underwrite some of the things we might do together.
I think that those of you, particularly from abroad, would have some idea of the perhaps
quiet sense of confidence that Australians currently enjoy about themselves, about their
country and about our economy. We were the first western country out of the world
recession. We are now growing somewhere between four and five per cent and as a
consequence we are seeing now a lift in employment and prosperity resuming once more.
By contrast, most of the western economies are growing at the moment on an average of
per cent. So. Australia's growth Is nearly double that of comparable countries and as a
consequence there Is a feeling of confidence about the place and Investment Is starting to
pick up again and wo are ltaiting to sco a long run, low Infltiounary recoveoy ahead of us
through the 1990s. And, I think, this is very encouraging for Australians that this position is 
here because we have changed much about Australia In the last 10 years. Ten years ago
this was a very Inward looking economy with a ring fence, bound by tariffs, with a
managed exchange rate, wilt a scleiowUi; fnancial market, with a government budgetary
policy which was out of sorts with private Investment in this country and as a consequence
we were growing at a very small rate and we had very low omployment growth and high
unemployment Today we have still got high unemployment, but It Is off a massive level of participation In
the work force. If we had the same number of people looking for work today as we had in
1984 we would have unemployment at under 6 per cent. But now, because there are so
many people looking for work, particularly women with an enormous increase In the
participation rate for women we still have relatively high unemployment, but we are now
starting to see tremendous employment growth. In fact. over the last year we have had
employment growth of about four per cent.
This, I think, matters a great deal to greta because evory year the Government has
been in office real household disposable income has risen because there are more people
In households In work. So, while there has been a change in relative wages over the
decade, the relative price of labour tias changed and been reduced. The number of
people in households working has risen so that there was a very strong growth In
household disposable income over the decade and that has driven retail sales and it has
driven consumption which in turn has driven Investment And, I think, if one looks to the
growth of the supermarket Industry through the 1980s and early 1990s one finds that what
is the driving force behind it not simply population growth but the workforce growth and
the rise In household disposable income which has come with It thats resuming again
with, as I say, four per cent employment growth this year. So, we are going to start to scc
again a fairly strong pick up in household disposable Income during the period.
The other thing I think that Is worth saying to our partners from abroad Is that by and large
the Australian economy is in size just under the combined GDP of the ASEAN economies.
A couple of years ago we wore about the somo. I think the AS. economies together
are slightly now ahead of Australia. That Is, In Australian dollars at aboLt $ 410 billion of
product. So. when you get an economy of this sl7a growing at four or five per cent one is
creating thu equivalent of $ 15 to $ 20 billion of extra value, extra wealth every year and that
is driving a tremendous amount of investment and consumption In this counly. ILit lw one
the reasons why there Is no substitute for growth for employment and there is no substitute
for growth for wealth and why, I think, the retail sectors have done very well and why, I
think, it is a good place to do busine. ss. In this country we have a corporate tax rate of 33
per cent about the same as Singapore, but this Is not a city state. This is a nation
continent with a very sophisticated level of public services and to provide that with a
corporate rate of 33 per cent is really at the leading edge of tax rates around the world for
corporations. As well as that, as domestic share holders will know, we have In this country a system of
full dividend Imputation. That is, we don't tax dividends twice, we do not classically tax
company income. So, we give our shareholders a tax credit for the company tax paid
when they rocolvo a dividend In their hands. This, along with vast acceleration and
appreciation makes this just about, In western world terms, the finest corporate tax system 
In the western world and certainly comparabla to any country which is even near
comparable with Australia In the Asia Pacific.
So, all these things, I think, are bull points for growth and for the future and we have, as
Jim Fleming said, been able to provide Australian consumors with high quality goods at
very fine margins. I mean, a few years ago one would have to go to speciality shops to
find sophisticated foods and pay a very high margin on them. Today you would expect to
find these In supermarkets and that Is because, I think, of the ambition, thU aubitiuus
attitude of supermarket proprietors In this country and food wholesalers and retailers, that
they want to stock those Items and deal In them. And this, of course, improves the spico of
life for Australians and the food they consume and, of course, it guarantees them these
products at much finer prices and thinner margins.
So, retailing has done a lot for Australia, but competition here is very Intense and one of
the by-products of that Intonsity is, I think, it has distractcd some of the major companies
from looking at the Asia Pacific in particular or further afield to North American and West
European markets. As a consequence. I think, we are missing opporhinities now in this
part of the world partlcularly. Yuu nutic heur we have had a substantial history of
mergers and acquisitions In retailing now over an extended period of time. In fact we have
the heaviest retailing sector companios In the world. Companies like Colcs-Myer and
Woolw [ ths have unprecedented market shares in world terms. I think Coles-Myer has
something like ten times the size of market penetration as say a comparahln, the first
comparable US corporatiun. So, Lhre Is a very heavy concentration and the Government
has made It fairly clear to the major retailers, competition is one thing, but attempts at sort
of monopolisation of tho market in the end dont do any of us any good.
So, In a sense punching each others eyes out for another one per cent of market share Is
rairly counter productive when one can open themselves up to retailing in China, in
Vietnam, in the established markets like Singapore and Thailand wlere Ausltalian retail
capacity and rotailing skills can really lay down the foundations for the retailing sectors of
countries and regions.
So. I'd say that the Government would be urging Australian retailing and wholesaling
companies to go abroad and to find opportunities and relieve Uteumselvus arnd the Trac
Practices Commission of the burden of reminding them that large market shares are fine,
but to go beyond that essentially establishes a real tyranny for food supplors and clothing
suppliers and others who have to deal with very large quasl-monopoly businesses.
Now, I am delighted we au starting to see this trend. We have seen Davids' Holdings
John David Is here this morning go to the Asia Pacific area into co-operative ventures, in
Singapore in Indonesia and In other places. And, it is this sort of outward view that while
the Australian economy is growing quite fast In western world terms, in terms of population
growth we will still have modest popuilatin and a modest absolute size to our consumer
markeutt copared with the growth in population In some of the countries I have mentioned
and, of course, the absolute size and rise of Incomes in those markets. So, the markut
opportunities abound vory cloce to Australia whore it Is possible to ship food stuffs chilled
not frozen, perishables things which years ago we couldn't consider and where we can
establish the style of retailing or it not establish it certainly amend and change and adapt
the style of retailing In those markets. And. I think, this Is a very important thing and I 
certainly congratulate those companies that have gone out there and have taken those
first steps to establish real market and growth opportunities for themselves, realising that
to stay In Australia and try to take over another wholesaler or another retailer, to have
another argument about competition policy, to fuither cunsrain the options of
manufacturers, to squeezo further wholesalers from the business and in the case of the
retail mergers Is by and large a pretty counter-productive activity.
So, I hope that our retailing sectors will now really understand that they have developod
here something really competitive and really good and that they can lake It out as a
product. That their systems, their warchousing, their retailing, they can take out as a
product to the Asia Pacificare Indeed, they can then buy market share In other countries
or develop buslne. sss in other countries, say in North America and Europe, where
retailing Is no more a developed art than it Is In this country.
So, at any rato, we arc told that there Is $ 160 billion of growth In Asia In food a lot of it
western foods and there is a great opportunity here and a great opportunity exists, not
just to retailers but, for our food Industries In particular the Agri-Foods business and It is
woith, I tliik, noting that growth In Australian high value food exports currently exceed 18
per cent a year and the Industry looks set to pass our Agri-Food Council's target of $ 7
billion of high value food exports by the Year 2000. So, there Is a tremendous, I think,
chance to sell what Australia does best, that Is high quality food, foods with disease free
status which Is fairly unique In this part of the world and to capitalise on tho food
technologies which Australia does well. So, there Is no rason. I think, why we would
leave the growth of these products and the growth of retail to the Sogos or Makros or
Park'n Shops or any of these other people, we have got to be out thera basically doing
these things ourselves.
Now. In terms of our own Industry, retailing acrrmnts for a very great number of
employcos, I think in the orde or hal a million plus people, and it Is continuing to adapt
and change and the Government has now sought to try to change the training agenda so
that retailing can pick up and train young people and actually pick them up from school
and train them while they are at school. A couple of weeks ago at a shopping mall in
Gosford I launched the Australian Student Traineeship Foundation which is letting young
people in years 11 and 12 pick up TAFE training technical and urther education,
vocational training while at school to give them accreditation in a TAFE coursesoey
can also do on-the job training while they are In their school years. So, wo can start to
stream young people In years 11 and 12 into vocational education and Into work and work
experience. And, the kny change In all of this is that In vocational education the
Government wants to see Industry essentially shaping the training agenda. Once it was
true In this country that In our vocational education, In TAFE as we call it. technical and
further education, the product of the system was the product divined by the suppliers or the
education themselves formerly trades people or spoclaliscd people who were thon
teaching what they knew to their student bodies and that was the product which Industry
then took. What we are trying to do is to get industry to decide what product they want and
then change the training profile of thu vocaional educational Instltutns to give them the
kind of trainees and people with the ss they nood and this Is whlum, I think, the
Involvement of let's say In retailing, the rotall sector in vocational education and in the
student foundation traineeships is, I think, going to be a very Important dovelopment in
Australia.
L 
Now. we have now developed a body called NE-XF l and NETTFORCE is to seek
the development of trainltig comrpanles In particular sectors of Australian industry. So. In
the metals Industry there will be a training company. In tie ritail industry there will be a
training company. In other induotrlcs, In the motor car Industry, there will be a training
company. That will mean that any company In that sector can actually go to tho company
which it owns shares In and be advised and directed how It can best train young
Australians for their own purposes, for the purposes of that Industry or that particular
business. This comes as an initiative from the White Paper called ' Wurking NaUton' that I
had the pleasure of Introducing some months ago and, I think, we will see with
NETTFORCE and I know there is already a retail training company establishcd that we
will start to see some real progress In companies seeking then advice and direction for
their own training nueds from their very own Industry training company.
Now, in this you know tho Government has been committed to the long-term unemployed
In the White Paper Working Nation'. And this has two very important things about it. The
first thing IS we are saying as a society we won't have an underclass. If the Americans
want an undeiclass they can have one. If the British want an underclass they can have
one. But, we won't have one. We are not going to have a section of the community drop
off and find thomselves living on charity or living In the streets or on sub-poverty Incomes.
And the other thing about It Is why should just a proportion of the workforco carry the butt
of Structural adjustment or in the past. the recession? Why shouldn't we get them back
Into thU labour market? Why should the new jobs only go to those new entrants to the
workforce? And, we are having a great deal of success. We have got a program here as
many of you know colled JOBSTART which Is a Government subsidised labour maiket
program. Last year 150,000 people got jobs under JOBSTART, 70 per cent of them were
long-term unamployed and the retention rate, that is the rate of retention by businocscs
after the subsidy finishes Is exceptionally high indeed. So, we are s. oing now In this last
year more long-term unemployed people picked up Uhan we have evor seen. certainly In
the last 10 or 15 years.
In the past three years nearly a quarter of a million in this country with a workforco of just
on eight million, this Is a big number nearly a quarter of a million long term unemployed
people have bccn hired by employeis Uthuugh JOBSTART subsidies alone. And, as you
know we have introduced as part of Working Nation' a new training wage which is set
between $ 125 and $ 333 and payable to all unemployed people and new entrants to the
labour force. Together with JOBSTART the training wage means an employer con receive
subsidies ranging from $ 5.000 to for taking on a long-term unemployed person.
So, that Is $ 100-$ 160 a week subsidy If an employer takes on a long-term unemplnyed
person. By doing this, by changing the nature of TAPE, by getting the balance right between
tertiary education and vocational education as we see that four per cent employment
growth we want to be pulling up tho long-term unemployed with it because, I think, the
other thing that people have got to understand In ite Industy, and this Is Including
retailing, and that is skills formation in this recovery Is not going to come from migration. It
Is going to come from our own labour market So, to avoid bottlenecks and wage
pressures as the recovery continues to strengthen we have to have a greater complement
of trained people coming In to the labour market and that has tn come. amongst other 
places, from the body of 300,000 odd of long-term unemployed people. But, the whole
focus or traineeships and training Is there because the Government and it is worth
recalling this ten years ago only three children In ten completed secondary school In this
country. Last year that was eight in ten and the Government has now added 65 per cent
of extra places to univorsities since 1985. So. we now have not just a very high retention
rate In secondary schools, but we have also provided the university places for those
students as they leave. So. our proportion of university places to tha school aged
secondary population Is as high as any In the wurld. The weakness In Australian
education has boon the Cindcrclla status of vocational education TATE. That is why In
' One Nation' in 1992 I announced the formation of the Australian National Training
Authority which has a national system of TAFE and where we are trying to develop TAFE
Into a national system to bring vocational education up to equal status with the universities.
So, a student has a real choice, that is, an accredited nation wide certlficate of status from
TAFE or a tertiary education and a tertiary degree.
In this way, we will be able to meet the training needs of Australia as we continue to
produce elaborately transformed products and elaborately transformed exports be they in
manufacturing or in food or ulucliunics or whereever It Is we will need a trained workforce.
One of Australia's great comparative advantages is education. There is only one other
country In the Asia Pacific with an education systom like Australia and that is Japan and
we should play to our comparative advantage and our comparative strengths by making
certain that the output of our education system kicks along product innovation In this
county and allows us to sell exports competitively to the rest of the world.
So, this, I think, Is an important thing for the country, for the economy, for the workforce
and for retailing because retailing is such a large employer and the skills changos are
going to need to be there to koop it at the forefront of ratailing techniques and abilities
throughout the balance of this decade.
So, perhaps let me wind up on thcoo points. To say firstly thank you very much for inviting
me to come. I think it is a very good thing that the Supermarket Show exists, that people
can actually exchange views, talk about developments In their Industry whore matters of
moment can be discussed, but It Is a particularly Important opportunity, I think, for
International visitors to come to Australia and to get to know our retailers and our
wholosalers and our diotributors in the various sectors and to see what opportunities they
can take and also our manufacturers, to see what products can come from Australia and
go on the shelves of supermarkets in thA region In which we live. This, I think, is very
Important to us.
I'd like to underline again just how competitive our supermarket and retail industry In this
country is and just again make the point, as Jim Fleming did, this Is a bull point for lower
prices and for restraining Inflation. We have got inflation now at somowhore between
and 2 per cent and we want to keep low Inflation very much in the torafrnnt of our mind In
terms of economic policy and prices in relailing Is an Important component and will always
be an important component of that And, the other thing is we will continue to wuik on
training and finally the Government will continue to encourage the development of an
outward looking retail sector as these rapidly growing markets in Asia emerge and where
we can obviously see or see obviously our capacity to participate in thnse markets and not
simply to participate, but In actually slaping them and shaping their fUture. 
7
So. perhaps Ict me finish by congratutadng the Australia ' n S&amp; perrrkt Institute once
again for this veiy Impressive superiuiarkel show and I look torward With some substangal
relish to the exhibits and to meeting somne of you who make this industry tkk.
Thiank you very much Indeed.
ends 


c{ 2~TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPSPEECH AT ALP FUNDRAISING DINNER, TERRACE INTERCONTINENTALHOTEL, ADELAIDE, 7 OCTOBER 1994E OE PROOF COPYMy Cabinet colleagues that I am pleased to have with me tonight, Leader ofthe Opposition Mike . Rann who I am also delighted to have with us tonight,John Hill, Party Secretary, and most particularly you, ladies and gentlemen,thank you for joining us and being with us. It is an occasion to come to aState and to focus upon its problems, and to get to understand it, perhapsbetter than its fortunes being touched in the normal ebb and flow of events, ofnational events, be they in Canberra or elsewhere. And no doubt, theCabinet coming here today as Nick has said has focused us up on SouthAustralia: its strengths and its weaknesses, its capacities and its needs andI think that as a consequence of doing that, and as he said, getting thebuearacracy focussed on it as well, is a good thing for us and a good thing Ihope for South Australia because I think, as he said, in the next day or two,some announcements will come from it. But the real value is probably, whatwe get through gatherings such as these: an idea of what is happening inSouth Australia, and how we can better integrate it into the mainstream of theeconomy and society in this country. So, that is why we're pleased to behere, and I'm sure and know that we will enjoy the opportunity.I think that there are a lot of superlatives thrown around in public lifeadjectives are dreamt up every day of the week but I'm quite sure that onecould say truthfully, almost advisedly, that this is probably going to be themost exciting decade in our history. Because I don't think that there has everbeen a time when we are more, see ourselves more, as a nation with anidentity of our own, I don't think we have ever enjoyed the confidence wecurrently enjoy about our capacity to do things in the world. We have never,ever had markets the size we have, with the proximity we now have them inthe past our markets were always in Europe, and some in North America.Now, the fastest growing part of the world is on our doorstep in Asia. We aremore appreciative, I think, of Australia and what we have been given of theopportunity we have had than perhaps any generation has ever been. Wenow know, because of the mobility our generation enjoys through the 747 andtelevision, we can appreciate what Australia is, and know that not all nationshave been endowed as we have. And it is unique. We are the only nation inthe world that has a continent to itself, and that big moat of the Pacific
2around us gives us that security, that natural security, and of course thetemperate nature and the tolerant society we have bred here makes this I'msure, the best place in the world to live.It's certainly going to be the best place to be living and doing business,particularly in this part of the world. And I don't think you could have saidthese things in the decades past. And I like to think and I was speaking to aLabor audience earlier tonight saying it was a century ago you started tosee some of these things in the 1890' s. The parallels between the 1890' sand the 1990' s are quite striking it was the period of the great drought, itwas the period of our deepest recession, it was a period when Australiannationhood was really brought together, when the threads were boundtogether. When the States and the nation decided to federate to cedepowers to a greater national government. And the social experimentation,and the sense of being an Australian that developed in that decade, and wenton to the First World War. I mean, we have all lived with the consequencesof the First World War it having automatically introduced the Second. Butone of the great consequences sad consequences for us was it snuffed outAustralian nationhood, and we went back into that conservative sort ofcocoon. And even after the British Parliament passed the Statute ofWestminster and said, " look, you can actually have the place and run ityourself', we said " oh, no no thank-you not quite yet". They said " we'reactually going to give it to you." " Oh no, no, no, we don't quite want it." Andwe then went through the torpor what I call the Menzies years. The Rip VanWinkle years, when the place culturally went to sleep, and we regardedBritain as home etc. And, you know, people say there was quite a nice thingon Menzies last week on 565 and they say well, you shouldn't be too hardon Menzies for his time. You know, this was a view that was about that wedidn't assert our Australian identity we didn't assert the notion of being anAustralian, we didn't have that inner confidence about ourselves. We didregard ourselves as a Branch Office and as some sort of derivative place.Well, this may be fair political analysis, but George Washington wouldn'thave had a bar of it, I can assure you. And he had the jump on Menzies byabout 150 or 200 years, and so I don't think it necessarily follows that youhave got to say that but it was a state of mind. And a state of mind not onlythat was one that tied us up, in a sense, to markets in the NorthernHemisphere, as sensible as that was, and as understandable and obvious asthat was at the time, but it sapped our confidence in ourselves. And thereassertion of Australian values and our confidence, we saw a glimpse of itduring the Whitlam Government, and it basically faded again, and that is whyI think that now, with the great changes of the 1980' s behind us the, openingup of Australia, the knocking down of the tariff wall, the removal of exchangecontrols, the free-flow of funds, the free-flow of goods, the competitiveculture, the Accord, the change in relative wages, the lift in the profit share,the strong rates of employment growth, the development of the sophisticatedSocial Security system all of that has put us in a position where now we canactually understand that our identity and our confidence can be not simply anadjunct of what we do, but a central power-house, a central poweringelement, that pulls into it all of those changes, and uses and springs from the
3changes that were made in the 80' s and are still being made. And that's whyI think that you can go back through the decades but there are none whereyou could see Australia in the position where it can be quite as excited aboutthe prospects as now. Because here we are, opened up to the world. Nolonger sitting behind a tariff wall. No longer sitting with double-digit inflation.A competitive country where competitive breezes have been well and trulyflowed through the economy, where people good managers, investors,people with some clever instincts can now do well because when weopened up the financial markets in the 80' s, we gave a freedom to the cleverthat was formerly, under regulation, only enjoyed by the wealthy. This is thegreat levelling up of de-regulation it actually gives the clever a chanceagainst the wealthy who formerly were able to take more than their share ofthe rations supply of savings that came out of this banking system of the day.It is a great irony that it took a Labor Government to give Australia a marketeconomy, but it did. And that is why if there is to be the outwardmanifestation of this change, it is as I said in the last election that is,outward meaning into the growing markets of the Asia-Pacific better to havethe authors of the policy running the policy than the usurpers. That is why itwas important as Nick said to win the 1993 election. Important for Labor,important for the country.Now, I think that if we take stock of where we are and understand thechanges which have been made, a number of important ones come to mind.One, I think, is education. This has been in the past Australia's greatcomparative advantage. There is only one other country in Asia that has aneducation system like us, and that's Japan. But in 1983, only 3 kids incompleted secondary school. This year it's 8 in 10, and it will soon be 9 inAnd we are streaming 40% of those students into universities where wehave added 65% of places since 1985, and we are now building up theCinderella of Australian education Technical and Further Education,vocational education to play the proper role it should have always played inskills formation in this country. This great change which is going to powerproduct innovation and opportunity in this country is also doing one otherthing. And that is this massive participation rate in schools is now beingenjoyed by Australian young women who were not enjoying this before. In mygeneration, young women invariably mostly didn't go on to completesecondary school, and the number of university places granted to them werefew. Now there are more women in universities than there are young men.So, this is a very liberating change as well as one which is innovating andpushing the economy along. And it is, I think, playing to our real strengthsand our comparative advantage, which is not basically the wool we shearfrom the sheep, or the coal we dig from the open-cut mines, or the iron-oremountains we wear down, but rather from the skills which we have, and thecapacity to do innovative and clever things. And we are now seeing that, andwe are seeing it in places like South Australia where smaller companies andeven larger companies are doing things of world class in a worldenvironment, and being competitive. And that is off the back of goodmanagement, which is essentially powered along by innovations andeducation.
4Education is one of these things which gives communities a chance. Wehave, as a party, said that we believe that Australia will be stronger if wemove along together that we believe in the policies of inclusion. That's aword which is now dropped around the political landscape most parties sayit and don't mean it. We say it, and mean it. That is, that we will be strongerif we are together. That is why the Government, in the course of the electioncampaign, said we would not leave the unemployed behind that it isinsufferable for a society to damn around 300,000 people who through nofault of their own find themselves to be long-term unemployed. And why it isalso an economically inefficient thing as well as an inequitable thing to allowpeople to drop off the end of the queue and become an underclass. We aretoo wealthy for that to happen, and when the Government decided and I hadthe pleasure of introducing the White Paper, Working Nation, which devoteda very large parcel of resources to the long-term unemployed we drew a linein the sand which said we will not have an underclass. If America wants anunderclass, it can have one. If Britain wants an underclass, it can have one.But we wont have one. And as a consequence, we are already starting tosee a very high proportion of long-term unemployed people taken up in thelabour market we have had 4% employment growth this year, over 360,000jobs 75,000 of those have gone to the long-term unemployed. If we werelooking at comparable numbers in the 80' s, it would have been only 7 to10,000 jobs that went to long-term unemployed. So these programs areworking they're starting to work now as a large systemic change, and theother important thing from it is that we are going to need skills formation inthis recovery as it burbles along, there is going to be pressure in the labourmarket, and we can't afford to have a block of people unemployed, or theirresources under-employed their skills under-employed. We are not going tosee skills formation from migration as we have done in other recoveries, andthat is why in this one it is important that we bring this category of peoplealong, and bring them back into the mainstream of society, So the WhitePaper is one thing it's an equity issue, it's a social justice issue, but it is'alsoan economic issue.Another is Mabo. Now, some may say well, it doesn't affect us very much.The High Court said that there is a Native Title coming from indigenouscustom title a native title in the common law but that the title is subordinateto the Crown. That is, that the title is subordinate to issues of interest in landby land managers or land ministers of the States. So in other words, afreehold title extinguishes native title. And therefore, one would say, in thecapital cities, well, why should I worry about that? Mabo doesn't mean muchto me. Out in the back blocks, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders canhave access to land if they can establish the traditional connection with it.The important thing is that the principal, perhaps defining feature ofAboriginal culture, is the association that Aboriginal people have with theland. And we cannot, absolutely cannot, go on saying that we are a fairsociety, that we believe in justice, we believe in inclusion, but we don'tbelieve in inclusion for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Youcan't say that, and give meaning to the word inclusion. And you can't go on
in this part of the world holding your head up particularly in Asia saying," well, here we are, the largely European tribe who happened to inherit acontinent, but we're here, but our indiginies aren't. There's no equal place forthem". Now, Mabo was a wrong that needed to be... the whole notion of terranullius, that the continent was basically without people and without a culture,was wrong and needed to be righted. And the High Court made thatdecision, and the Government supported the High Court by putting thelegislative framework to give effect to the decision into place. That is, theCourt didn't say what the title was, how it will be dispensed etc, who shouldhave it all those mechanisms were put into place in the Mabo legislation.To have not done it would have been to have denied Aboriginal peoplejustice. To have not done it would have been to hang the High Court out todry. Now we often hear our conservative opponents talking about the rule of law.They are always interested in the rule of law until it affects them, and when amajority on the High Court found in favour of Mabo, they sailed right into theChief Justice and all the other judges and the former position of respect thatthe Court had was very quickly being assailed by those who basically didn'tbelieve that black people should be given land. Now, it is very hard to createinstitutions in any country, and as you know in our constitution we establishedthe High Court in a position of some substantial pre-eminence underseparation of powers from the legislative branch of the government, and wehave seen for an 1890' s constitution in a period of telecommunications andtelevision and aviation and all these things that were not really around inthose days we have seen a change to the powers of the Commonwealth anddelineation of powers by the Commonwealth and the States through the HighCourt. And so, therefore, I thought, and the Government thought, that theHigh Court having made an historic and courageous decision, that we shouldkeep the institution strong, and in the doing of it, provide justice to Aboriginalpeople. That has happened it's a very great change in our society. It'sanother element of the inclusion that I speak of in saying that if we are to goalong together, it has to be together.So you look at these things Mabo, Aboriginal and Torres Strait IslanderAustralians, long-term unemployed these are all the sorts of things that willbind Australia together. And as we grow as this recovery comes through,this low-inflationary recovery we will be able to hold our head up high, andwe will approach the world we live in and say, " here we are as Australians,we are a unique people with an identity of our own, at peace with each otherin a society where we will not have underclasses. Where we are as one".Not everybody will have an equal distribution, an equal lump of the wealth orthe opportunity, but at least we will be committed truly committed to thenotion of equality, and with it of course, fraternity. This gives us the entryticket to play in the bigger game on the world stage, and this Government hasthought about that, and it has thought about how we can not only createstructures within Australia for Australia, but outside of Australia forAustralians.
f IAnd this is where we have committed ourselves in international forums tothings like the Uruguay Round, and the GATT, in which Australia played avery important role over 7 years putting the Cannes group together andprosecuting the fight against the Europeans on agriculture, and other nationson services and property rights etc, to get a result which will change the worldin terms of free trade and opportunity. Particularly now we are seeing for thefirst time since the First World War, Russia rejoining the world economy,South America rejoining the world economy and for the first time ever, Indiajoining the world economy, China joining the world economy, and providing aback-drop set of rules under GATT which will allow that to happen. That isone thing that this Government has been involved with, and it will mark out fora trading nation like Australia huge opportunities over the longer run.Another is APEC. APEC is the development of an Asia-Pacific economiccommunity. It started off as a fledgling information exchange body we havenow got it up to a Heads Of Government body, and its second Heads OfGovernment meeting is in Bogor in Indonesia next month, and that will beattended by the 18 leaders of the 18 member states of APEC, including ofcourse the President of the United States, the Prime Minister of Japan, thePresident of China, the President of Indonesia of course is the Host, and allof the other Heads of Governments from around the region. Why have weinterested ourselves in this? Basically, to see that Asia, that the big decisionthat is going to be made in Asia in the next 5-7 years, is an Asia-Pacificdecision, and not an Asian decision. In other words, Asia thecomprehension of Asia is a Pan-Pacific view, and not simply a continentalAsian issue where we see largely the world developing into three blocks theEuropean Union, NAFTA travelling through Central and South America, theAmericans extending their dialogue with the Latins and running into SouthAmerica, staying at home, and China becoming the dominant centraleconomic force in an Asian economic union of some kind. It's in our interestto see that the United States economically and strategically engages in Asia.Now one of the ways we can do this is to open up trade and investmentopportunities for all the countries of the Asia-Pacific, and this will mean'thatthe United States will not then be focussing on South America, but will befocussing on the opportunities of the great growth of the Asian markets, andin the doing of it, maintaining that unique strategic relationship it has withJapan, and in the doing of that, keeping the strategic environment in NorthAsia much more passive. This then becomes a very strong point for us interms of the environment in which we live.As APEC goes on and we adopt a trade-liberalising agenda, we then open upin our immediate neighbourhood as we get trading barriers tariff and nontariffbarriers down so we are doing something above the GATT. We gotthe GATT as a back-drop, but we add to that through APEC, so APECbecomes a GATT-plus outcome. Now, it is a very big issue and it's a veryhard thing to do, and it may take us some time. But we are in there trying,and that is why President Soeharto's Chairmanship of this meeting inIndonesia in November of this year is going to be so important. So there isAPEC.
The other issue is the developing of our relations with Indonesia. This is thefourth largest country in the world it's just on 200 million people. It is anarchipelago 8 flying hours across. It has been held together by PresidentSoeharto's new order Government now for over a quarter of a century. In myview, it poses no strategic threat to Australia. We pose no strategic threat toit, therefore we should be friends, and that is what this Government isseeking to do to develop a relationship of trust, understanding and valuewith the Government and the people of Indonesia. This will open uptremendous trading opportunities for Australia, and will develop a relationshipwhich will make us stronger, and them stronger. And then, as perhaps weopen up the opportunities of AFTA the ASEAN free-trade area where wehave a proposal to look at Australasia that's CER, the trade agreementbetween Australia and New Zealand being part of AFTA, an extension ofAFTA, we would then not only see a people to people relationship withIndonesia, but a trading relationship with ASEAN. ASEAN, with Australia it'sworth remembering that the Australian economy is about the same size of allthe ASEAN economies combined -that's Indonesia, Singapore, thePhilippines, Malaysia and Thailand -they are together just larger thanAustralia. Put Australia and New Zealand together, and we are as large asASEAN, put the two together and it is a market of $ 1000 billion and 300million people. When we make that connection, Australia's tradeopportunities will really blossom.And that is why I say, think of any other decade where this was possible, andyou can't think of one. So, the structures inside Australia the opening up,the great social changes like access and opportunity in education,universality of access in health, age care, child care, occupationalsuperannuation for the workforce, strong rates of employment growth,economic policy focussed on employment, wage restraint for economicgrowth and employment growth via the Accord, a change to thecompetitiveness and the competitive culture by low tariffs and the removal ofexchange controls, the inculcation of a competitive culture inside Australiaand the opportunities of that abroad, the opening up of the structures and thedevelopment of the structures outside of Australia for Australia all of thesethings are things which this Labor Party, and this Labor Government havefashioned for this nation. So, when we come to South Australia and we seethe things we are doing here, and people say " where is South Australia'splace in this?" And I say, " in the centre of it". Because the culture here hasalways been one which has been about making do, changing, adapting,finding a role for itself in the country where natural opportunities haven'texisted that's happening today. That is happening in the innovativeproducts we are seeing from this state. We are seeing it in services, we'reseeing it in regions and we say, if we create the environment botheconomically, socially and we get that right, we get that sense oftogetherness, that sense of inclusion right, and we are accepted as a nationwith a culture and an identity of our own in Asia, South Australia will have notrouble at all finding its place in all that. So, when we come here and we talkto you, we try to listen for those little bits of information which have their placein the matrix, but the matrix is the much bigger picture of Australia's place in
8the world. And that is why, when you hear our opponents say the republic isbasically a distraction, you say that's wrong the republic is central to oureconomic fortunes. Because otherwise, you go around Asia with the Queenof Great Britain the Head of State of another country as your Head ofState. That is, for this country, untenable. Untenable. And that is why, overtime, the whole question about identity, inclusion, inclusiveness, social justiceand social democracy rejecting the hard-hearted views of Thatcher orReagan, or the centralised economies of the old Eastern Bloc but going forsomething new and better, a good competitive economy grafted on with anequitable social policy and an enlightened foreign policy, are concurrences ofpolicy events that I don't think Australia has ever had before. This is why Isay, this is the most exciting decade in our nation's history, and why I thinkSouth Australians should think that too. Thank you.ends.


PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPPRESS CONFERENCE, HILTON HOTEL, ADELAIDE, 7 OCTOBER 1994E EO PROOF COPYPM: Well as you know the Cabinet has been meeting outside of Canberrafor the first time this year, and in quite a long time, to get the feel ofsome of the economies and the societies of the States and to considerparticular State problems in the places where the Cabinet meets, and achance for my part to see members of my own party this evening,and then to attend a fairly major dinner does give you thefeedback.. you have the consciousness of the atmospherics, theambience, of a particular State, and it reminds you of the problems andopportunities, and I think, this has a lot of value. At today, s Cabinetmeeting, we also considered some South Australian related issues, butthe main body of the meeting the list of business was on generalnational issues, as in all other Cabinet meetings. But let me just runthrough the issues for you today.At the top of the list was the question of the clean-up of thePatawalonga area, and the transfer of funds under the Better Cities= P~ d oiit, and I'll be saying more about that tomorrow: with theDeputy Prime minister, and I think there will be more details releasedtomorrow. We also had a discussion about the MFP, and had a fairlyup-beat report from Senator Schacht on progress onfthe MFP. Of thepeculiar South Australian issues, we renewed the CommonwealthGovernment's commitment to a target of 50% of women forovernmentappointments to the Commonwealth Boards andCouncirs,and all Ministers will be looking at their own particular portfolioenvironments and taking concrete steps to improve the participation ofwomen under that commitment at 50% up to the year 2000. Onanother matter, the Government also decided to increase funding forchild care places in the JET program the Jobs Education andTraining for sole parents. Y -u ighr-iemember this was introduced inthe late ' 80' s it has been a very successful program, and it is ofcourse, demand driven. It needs more funding for child care places
and we provided that funding today. But it has been a particularlysuccessful program for finding employment training for sole parents.The Cabinet also considered, had a long discussion, about theeconomic situation in Papua New Guinea some of the particularproblems of Papq@_ New. Guinea. That, I think, was the general resumeof the Cabinet meefing, and I will be very glad to take questions.J: Prime Minister, how do you get the ambience for a State like SouthAustralia at a $ 150 a head dinner wouldn't you be better off perhapsgetting out and meeting some of the wage earners of Adelaide?PM: Well, I think when one goes to Ilet me tell you this, when you go to aLabor Party gathering, you see a good cross-section of the community,and you got an idea when people come up and talk to you aboutthings. In terms of investment and employment, you get a chance tomeet members of the business community. You see, I think, we havegot the economy growing at 4 and while South Australia isn'tgrowing at that pace, it has every chance now to lock in to the nationaleconomy. And a lot of that is about confidence a lot of it is about howthe business community perceive themselves here, what theiropportunities are, and so, you know, I find that in such circumstances,the chances of finding out what people think getting a feel of the placeis a fairly easy thing to do. That is, people are quite forthcomingthey do tell you things.J: What can you tell us about the discussion about Papua New Guinea?What was the upshot about the discussion about Papua New Guinea?PM: Well, it was a concentration on Papua New Guinea's finanicialproblems for the moment and, as you know, irs looking at a change ofits exchange rate system, it has budgetary problems, and we had ageneral discussion about how we see those problems, how we relate tothem, and that is, of course, over and above the more obvious oneslike the place conference of _ Bouganville, and the, you know, thevolcanoes etc in Rabaul.So was there any decision about Australian action or was it just adiscussion?PM: Well, it was a discussion about.. . a Government has to have an attitudeof mind to these long run relationships, and longer running issues.And they change from time to time. So the cabinet, to organise itsmind about these things, has a discussion from time to time. And itwas one of those sort of discussions.J: So you don't expect any action to be taken?
3PM: Well, there is a lot of action being taken with Papua New Guinea all thetime. We have just been involved and are currently involved withthe training of the group that will assist with the peace negotiations onBougainville. And in the last month when I saw Prime Minister JuliusChan recently, we advanced Commonwealth Australian Governmentbudgetary payments to Papua New Guinea by a quarter to help themthrough a liquidity problem. So there's quite a bit happening in therelationship, but you need to re-focus every now and again, and findyour bearings again, and then move on.J: Any further discussion about financial injection in Papua New Guinea?PM; No, no.J: Prime minister, there was a poll out this week which suggested SouthAustralians were the most pessimistic about the future of the State.With the change of government, do you think the presentadministration is going in the right direction in terms of turning thestructural problems that the economy has?PM: Well look, as I said earlier, I think South Australia has every opportunityto pick up on things happening in the national economy, and to focuson the things which the national economy itself is focusing on onexpo~ s, on added value, on product innovation, and that is graduallyhippening in South Australia. You are seeing the product basechange towards exports, you are seeing the car companies focussingon exports, you'can see it with specialised manufactures. And one ofthe things I think, or certainly one of the things I wantied'to do, was totry to bring South Australia more into the Eastern States' economy, andthat is one of the reasons why I proposed the building of the standardgauge railway out from Melbourne to Adelaide. Now, without that railiink-there has always been a rail link but of a different gauge, andthat's always been a problem, and I think to do those sorts of things is,you know, going to be important. But in everything, the important thingis confidence and direction, and I think that as the business communityhere picks up the general confidence of an upswing in the economy,and also the linkages into Asia, the prospects for exports I don't thinkSouth Australia is going to have any problem latching onto that.J: Do you think, though, the fear of another round of interest rate riseswould prevent South Australia from locking in?PM: No. Why? Interest rates are only 0.7% off their base in the lastyears or something.J: Prime Minister, on female representation on boards and that, is it fair tosay that some Departments aren't exactly getting anywhere near thetarget at the moment?
PM: Well, its because it's the, I think, there are a number of reason for this.One is that a lot of some of the so-called " boards" ( in invertedcomma's) particularly, say in Primary Industry where there arevirtually dozens and dozens of marketing and statutory marketingboards -the producer representatives come to a notionallyCommonwealth Board, but there is no Commonwealth Cabinetdiscretion about who comes. Now, we can encourage them, and we doencourage peoplo to, particularly industry sectors of groups, to have abetter gender balance in the representation, but often you will findthese Boards send along the people that they think are most involvedwith their industry. And that may not be with a large complement ofwomen. Thon there is the discretionary commitments by theCommonwealth, or appointments by the Commonwealth to thoseBoards. So in a sense, if you look at the totality, it is very hard to movethe representation up rapidly because a large part of the complementof these Boards are not there at the discretion of the Federal Cabinet orthe Commonwealth Government. The other thing is, there are a lot ofso-called Boards that are not Boards they are essentially justDepartmental meetings. You know, it can be the sort of, you know, thesomething the Defence Procurement Advisory Board, and you havegot a number of officers and Senior Public Servants sitting on it. Imean, in a sense, it shouldn't have the status of a Board. So all thesethings are changing the weighting and complement of what I think itis going to be, and what has already been, a substantial change by theCommonwealth in terms of the representation of women. Much greaterthan say the Private Sector, and I think we're trying to encourage bothour own Departments and certainly, the view of ministries towards it'sconstituency in terms of the representation of women, and at the sametime, encourage the Private Sector to do its bit.J: Does that mean that the 50% target isn't really achievable in a lot ofareas?PM: Well, if you say that blanket 50% only a relatively modest proportionof the total numbers involved are there at the discretion of theCommonwealth Government. So I think it's a case of objectivemeasurement, you know.J: But isn't it, I mean some Ministers have been arguing that perhaps weshould be moving a bit quicker and perhaps that the target shouldbecome a definitive figure now?PM: Oh, that's what in a sense we decided today; that we remaincommitted to this objective. What we are going to do now is to improvethe options that ministers have for appointing women to particularBoards, and then say to the non-Government organisations, we want tosee when you give us a clutch of nominees for a particular Board, or
where we have ex-officio members to a Board, we would like a bit ofgender balance.Would you be in favour of legislating that in the Private Sector as well?PM: No, I don't think so. No, I'm not in favour of legislating. I think this issomething that has to change over time, because its such a hugeundertaking to get this change through business, but it's happening, Ithink. And it will happen better with the leadership of theCommonwealth.J: Mr Keating, Dame Joan Sutherland yesterday took a spirited stand onthe subject of the republic were you impressed by her arguments?PM: No. I wasn't impressed by her arguments. I mean, look, I think DameJoan is a person a most celebrated Australian and a mostappreciated one, but I think it is a long time since she has been part ofthe contemporary Australian debate, if ever. And it is probably a littleunfair, I think, on her, to be asked to step into a debate which is shapedby contemporary circumstances, and ask her to give, if you like, a setof relevant and contemporary views. I mean, I just think that in her sortof expatriate position, she's not really able to do that.SBut she volunteered to be involvedPM; Well, all sorts of people volunteer for things. It's a case of goodintentions are not always good enough, and I think this is a case herewithout detracting from the standing that she has earned for herselfwith the country.J: Is the Cabinet Sub-Committee making much progress in relation toGovernment's response to the Turnbull Committee report?PM: Well, I think the answer is that we have been thinking about it, and wehave been thinking about it in the context of the public debate. I mean,we did say that we wanted a public debate we've got one, quite aspirited one, and you know, you do pick up the threads of that debate.I mean, all of us in this room, all your views would have changed todayfrom say, 6 months ago, about what elements of the debate are themost interesting than perhaps was the case 6 months ago. And thisdoes help, I think, in forming your views. Now when we think our viewsare informed to the point where we can say something that is veryconcrete, then I think we will.J: And do you know when that might be? Is there a timeframe?
PM:-No, I wouldn't want to commit us to a timeframe, but certainly we willsay something about it in the life of this Parliament. I was hoping to dothis before the end of the year, but I probably won't be able to.J: Prime Minister, on the MFP do you think that South Australia was theright choice, in retrospect? It has been a long time getting off theground.PMV: Well, again I think you have got to look at the world economy. Thereare very great influences on Japan to change. I mean. and to look atother locations. I mean, Japan is going through a structural recession.Japanese savings are so strong, The exchange rate has beenappreciated so much that large sectors of Japanese industry are nowuncompetitive, and it is simply an imperative for them to put thoseindustries and services off-shore. And you see this in car companiesin Australia, and you're seeing it with other electronic plants aroundNorth America and Asia, and you'll see it with, I think, the MFP. Imean, that is the genesis of it. But also in any recession as Japan hasbeen through, an uncharacteristically long one, it's not inexpiable thatthey have wound back somewhat, but then now started to say as theycan see their way more clearly to see what sort of change Japanshould have in terms of its industrial structure and industrial sectors,how the MFP opens up as an opportunity, and that's is why I thinkthere is more interest, and more genuine interest.J: You don't think that the Japanese economy has become too wealthy forits own good?PMV: Well, what Japan has got to do is lift domestic demand, and-startcomnsu m tojm ports and running down savings. And it his been at thesavings game for now, what, all the post-war years, and the savingsare so enormous that obviously it has reflected now on the exchangerate, and the exchange rate is now rendereing large slabs of Japaneseindustry uncompetitive.J: Just to go back to Dame Joan Sutherland are you concerned that thecomments she made about being served by Chinese and Indians inthe Post Office are sort of fostering racial tensions?PM; Only concerned for her. I think that those sort of, you know, I don'twant to see her in this period of her very distinguished and trulyillustrious career, caught up in a political debate which she really isn'tfamiliar with. And I think it's a reflection on the organisers of this, asmuch as it Is on her.
J: South Australia has been described as Labor's black hole how do yourate Labor's chances of winning back much support by the nextFederal election?PM: Well, the way we're going, pretty well. I mean, and I think also, I meanno party in an election there's always, you know, we're always outthere with the binoculars looking for the silver lining. They arebouncing around the clouds finding the lining. Because in someelections you do poorly you know at the next one there's a chance todo better, and I think this is true for the AtrIahaLabor Party in anumber of States it's true in South Australia, I think.J: Prime Minister, given that you have one woman out of 8 federal repsfrom South Australia Senator Rosemary Crowley you wouldobviuosly see South Australia as very fertile ground for fast-trackingwomen in the next round of pre-selections is that correct? Do youthink South Australia needs more work than other States?PM: No. I think the committment by the Federal Conference of the LaborParty is pretty clear, and State branches are now going to ex . ercisetheii-mind about meeting that commitment. And this is going to be justas true in South Australia as any other place.J: Mr Keating, what is your attitude to widows of Vietnam ' Vets followingthe Governments decision today to accept the links between cancerand Agent Orange?PM: Well, there will be a process about the claims and their relativity toexposure to these particular agents and defoliants, and you know, theywill be handled in the way in which other claims war-related claimsare handled.J: But earlier today Con Sciacca said he wasn't sure if people would beable to even make claims?PM* Well. I haven't seen that detail yet, no. I haven't seen what he saidabout that yet.J: Prime Minister, what happened to make you to defer your assesmentto the Turnbull Report from this year to next year?PM: Basically just pressure of work. I mean, I have been running that longso hard for so long, you know up to Japan and Indonesia and we havehad Parliamentary sitting weeks, and the visits I did in relation toputting together the drought package, and then Cabinet considerationof theso sort of things, and the National Conference. It's very hard toget the collective mind of Ministers and sit down on a subject asesoteric as this and say now where are we dragging all these threads
together where are all the bits, how can you tie the bits up? Youknow, we'll get around to it.J: How important is the Committee's decision to respond to the variousreccommendations or suggestions thatPM: Look, I think that the Tumbull Report was a first class report it did go,as it was asked to go to the real issues in the debate, and put viewsdown. Now often you don't quite got that from some reports, but thisreally did address them, and I think it is a valuable document for thepublic debate, but it is also valuable for the Government irs one ofthose reports that you don't have to just take, look through and put onthe shelf if s one you go back to, and I think we will go back to it inconsideration of this.J; Prime Minister, you mention the Patwalanga.. .( inaudible)PM: Well, just to say that I think that this has the repuation of being one ofthe worst polluted waterways in the country it obviously has very largeinfluences on this region of Adelaide, and I think that if we can dosomething to remove pollution and improve water quality, the area willagain be used for recreational uses for leisure and I think it willprobably have other spin-offs as welt, in terms of a demonstrationeffect of being able to show people what we can do with watertechnology in Australia.J. And you are confident that the package you announce tomorrow will beable to ( inaudible)?PM: I think so, and there are other elements of it which I think FI leaveuntil tomorrow.J: Is there anything more we can be doing for Cambodia in the light of thedevelopments over the last 48 hours?PM: No, I think they require some mature reflection Peter. There are, therehas been a great opportunity for Cambodia with the democraticelections, but the system has got, the country has got to be made towork, the system of government must be made to work, and you know,I think any governemrnt certainly a government like Australia wouldbe at first looking to see how that political system might work betterbefore one embraces some of the other solutions being bandied about.J, Prime Minister, the worst river you talked about flows past the worstairport in Australia ( inaudible) some detail about the Conferencedecision last week while you are in town this weekend....
9PM: Well, I thought, can I say that for a new man in the job, ke Rann didvery well at the Conference for South Australia with the Airport, and asa consequence, Adelaide will have in the course of thesearrangements, an extension of its runway, and that will be part of thescoping study. We can't at this point know who the lessee's of theairport will be. The arrangements aill be such that the extension goesthere. Now, that's the commitment that I think matters to SouthAustralia. The detail will get worked out over time. Thank you.ends.
THhN: E3NlIS S10N REPORT Date 01/ 10/ 96 12: 29Date/ Time 1-10 12: 29Dialled number 80732231682Durat. 800"node Name Pages 0Status Code 01Code 01 Busq or no fax answer TH DEPAR MENT OFTHE PRIME MINISTER ANO CABINET u. m &amp; ct -DUBRARYNATMONA CIR( VITBARTON. ACT. 26MX.FAX NO: 6 27155MZDATE: I / 1 1rh PIONFN0. 06-271FRM: TD C~.FAXNO( 07) 32Z3~' QPIONE N0:MESSAGE7 ) 19p ~ r,: hdsC ' iANvmUF.R oF PArES [ No tInrNG VER PAGE:S. 1 . D.


The Government will shortly be recommending to the Governor-General the&nbsp;appointment of Professor Stephen Duckett as Secretary to the Department of&nbsp;Human Services and Health.
Stephen Duckett, 44, is Professor of Health Policy and Dean of the Faculty of&nbsp;Health Sciences at La Trobe University, a position he has held since&nbsp;November 1993.
Professor Duckett is an economist with a Masters degree and a PhD in health&nbsp;administration from the University of New South Wales. He is a Fellow of the&nbsp;Australian College of Health Service Executives.
Between 1983 and 1993, Professor Duckett held senior positions in the&nbsp;Department of Health and Community Services in Victoria, including as&nbsp;Director, Acute Health Services, and Director, Policy and Planning. From&nbsp;1974 to 1983, he was on the academic staff of the School of Health&nbsp;Administration and the University of New South Wales.
On behalf of the Government, I would like to express appreciation for the&nbsp;valuable contribution made by Mr Tony Cole, the outgoing Secretary to the&nbsp;Department of Human Services and Health.
The Government will recommend that Professor Duckett's appointment take&nbsp;effect on Monday, 14 November, 1994.
ADELAIDE7 October, 1994


; 1PRIME MINISTERSTATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE MON PJ KEATING MPXPATAWALONGA CLEAN-UPThe Federal Goviernmnent has toay commiftad $ 11I million to clean upAdelde~ s Patrwalonga Esbiary an area identified as Austalia's worstpolluted wa~ rway.The funding, under the Federal Govermeonts Better Cl~ zes Program. willremnove pollution and improrve the water quality of the Patawalonga 3o it canagain be used for recreation and leis. zr acvitiesThis will be a joint project wth toe MFP, the South Australian Government andlocal coundfl:Patawalon Esuary, which has a cathmentt of over 200 square ilometrftand flows through 11 coun= 1 areas. was kdentifted by the CaalZone inquiryas Au* Wilrns wrt polutd watwevy.Stormwater rn.-4W rubbish and pollutat from ftc hrn ara hawi hadan adverse s ori impact on Gleneig Beach which has lost developmentand tourist oppornileit has resulted In toe Patewalonga effe~ v* l becoming a cow poLThe cdean up oftoe Patrwalonga is part of a much larger project of urban waterman. awedent toe Pabawalaogs catftnent which could become a model fortoe res of Austraia.The program will set out an overall plan for the proper colIacon, treatent andma1 emn of water.The 26 CitiesAWrea Stagies around Auistralia demonstrate how urbanregner an occ. zr and how pruviously irisurmountable problems can beovercome to give tims ara a new lemoan life.ADELAIDE 7 OCTOBER I1S942218


Thank you very much for the invitation to open this&nbsp;International Conference, the centre-piece of the&nbsp;celebration of the Centenary of Women's Suffrage in&nbsp;Australia.
Australia was a pioneer in women's rights. It is&nbsp;surprising, really, that among the facts of Australian&nbsp;history, this one is less yell known than Ned Kelly,&nbsp;who was a horse-thief, and Phar Lap, who was a horse.
I am all for icons like these. But I do think that it&nbsp;would be at least as salutary and uplifting if all&nbsp;Australians knew that their country had pioneered the&nbsp;rights of woman.
It would remind us that one of the defining characteristics of Australia is social progress.
&nbsp;It would signal that our attachment to democracy and fairness is as deep as any attachment, as a nation, we feel.
&nbsp;It might demonstrate to the unknowing and the unconverted that the Australian character, which is said to have been born in the 1890s, was not quite so chauvinistically male as generally believed.
&nbsp;And it would reassure the doubters that the decisions we in the Labor Party have taken in recent years and recent weeks maintain an Australian tradition.
All but obscured for long periods grown over with prejudice and myopia, and with events like two World Wars which tended to create or re-assert male national stereotypes the thread is there.
I hope this conference will uncover more of the thread. I hope it will be seen as a step along the way to an Australia where the rights of women are uncontested, unambiguous, inalienable.
Here in South Australia in 1894, women fought for and von two fundamental rights the right to vote and the right to stand for Parliament.
Here most Australian women were granted right &nbsp;to vote by the new Federal Government in 1902, it was in no small way attributable to the victory in South Australia eight years before.
I say “most Australian women” &nbsp;advisedly. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women were denied the rights they had earlier gained in South Australia and they didn't get these rights back until 1962.
That is one of the more notorious facts of Australian history and it should not be forgotten.
About nine months ago, I opened the Women Power and the 21st Century Conference in Melbourne: many of you here today may have participated in this Conference. I said then that the fact that our national parliament was still overwhelmingly sale was the great flaw in Australian democracy.
I went on to say that in a country renowned for its democrtic spirit, it was a sad fact that the party which has always seon itself as embodying that spirit has a record which is only marginally better than the rest.
Last year, I called an the Labor Party to begin to reinvigorate itself: to widen its membership, to open its form, to find a better process for selecting candidates and, most importantly of all to ensure a much more active participation by many more women.
&nbsp;We know there were barrier to this, and you all know how strong those barriers can be.
&nbsp;I said nine months ago that getting the barriers down required political power and political will.
&nbsp;It is a matter of great pride to ae that the ALP has taken up the challenge not just in word, but in deed.
&nbsp;The ALP has agreed that women will be Labor candidates for at-least 35 per cent of winnable seats by 2002.
&nbsp;And I ' m pleased to add that yesterday Federal Cabinet reaffirmed its commitment to have equal representation of men and women as Government appointments on Commonwealth boards by the year 2000.
&nbsp;To meet this target, Cabinet backed a strong and comprehensive strategy. All Ministers will be looking at the situation in their own portfolios and taxing practical steps to boast women's representation.
We will also be encouraging the other agencies who nominate people to these boards the states, unions, businesses and so on to nominate an equal representation of women.
&nbsp;It is worth looking at the reasons for the changes we are making.
&nbsp;First, it is about leadership and talent.
&nbsp;As a nation and as a democracy, we simply cannot afford to lose the skills, experience, energy and outright talent of half our population. We need women like Carmen Lawrence, Joan Kirner and Rosemary Follett, and many more like them, in our parliaments.
We need than in our businesses, too. I hope corporate Australia has taken note of what is happening. It has been happening in the co ity for a very long time. It has been happening in families, schools and universities, farms, factories and offices. Women have been making an equal very often much more than equal contribution to the economy and society for a very long time. It is now happening in our parliaments.
It really ought to be happening in board-rooms.
We need women to be full participants in the great national debates and in national decision-making.
We need their contribution to economic, social and cultural policy; to information policy, human rights, foreign affairs, to finding a just reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians, to an Australian Republic.
We need women to bring to these forums not simply their experience an women, we need them to bring thei judgements about Australia; their feelings about Australia.
I was struck by what Poppy King had to say in Sydney recently at the seminar “The Australian Republican Movement A Women's Perspective.”
&nbsp;She said: “Women should not become involved in the debate with the one agenda of " women's issues". Women should become involved because we are living, breathing, thinking individuals, an integral part of the population that makes up this country. we have opinions, ideas and solutions that are worthvhile when deciding on issues that affect all Australians and, after all, the republic is not a gander issue it's an Australian one. “
We need women as full participants in decision-makinq, simply because we need to make the right decisions.
&nbsp;We adopted affirmative action in the Labor Party because we believe it is just and right and because we believe in merit and ability.
&nbsp;I think it is time that we challenged the platitude that the existinq system, whatever it is and however discriminatory its outcomes might be, somehow represents decision-makinq on merit.
&nbsp;I don't believe it. And I'm sure many of you don't believe it either.
&nbsp;I don't believe that, on any real assessment of ability, only 10 percent of women have the qualities necessary to be a member of our House of Representatives.
I don't believe that only 22 percent or women have the ability to be Members of the Senate.
&nbsp;And I don't believe that only 3 percent of women have the capacity to be members of this country's private sector boards either.
&nbsp;I think that ability is important. And that is why I called for the affirmative action rule changes in the Australian Labor Party.
&nbsp;We moved to affirmative action for the other good reason that we must demonstrate to young women to those who will come after us that they have a real opportunity to contribute to decision-making.
&nbsp;This country is changing.
&nbsp;By our own efforts and imagination and confidence we are reshaping Australia.
&nbsp;The deepest cynic could not deny that we have made enormous strides in recent times.
&nbsp;We are building a tolerant, cohesive, culturally diverse society.
&nbsp;We are establishing a dynamic role in the region, a creative and rewarding role in the global community. We are more comfortable with our role in the world and, I sincerely believe, more confident and assured about our future.
&nbsp;I vould like to think that a lot of Australians are beginning to share a sense of excitement.
We have dramatically expanded our secondary and higher education systems. The increased participation of women and girls in education is just as dramatic.
&nbsp;We are reforming our labour market programs and our vocational training systems.
&nbsp;We are strengthening our health and social security systems and reforming our aged care services. We are making child care more affordable and more available.
&nbsp;We are making the Sex Discrimination Act even stronger, by tackling such issues as indirect discrimination. I have absolutely no doubt that these changes in Australia are due in significant ways to the ideas and energy floving from the increasingly prominent role and status of vomen.
&nbsp;Nor do I have any doubt that the changes will be more profound and the future more exciting as their role grows. Women have been a major driving force for these changes. And part of the reason for this is that Australia has been able to bring a genuine commitment to vomen's equality into our practical policy and program development.
&nbsp;I am very proud that Australia is internationally recognised as a world leader in integrating status of women issues into the practical business of government. But we realise that this means continuing to work for positive change.
&nbsp;For example, this year we celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Sex Discrimination Act with a range of amendments to expand it and strengthen its impact.
&nbsp;The Act was a major milestone for the status of Australian women. But for younger women it is already rather like the vote an everyday fact of life.
&nbsp;Survey research shove that young women think very differently from their mothers and grandmothers.
&nbsp;Ninety-five percent of young women surveyed expect equal pay. Only 6 percent thought their lives were less satisfying than young men of the same age.
&nbsp;Around 83 percent want to have a family of their own AND a paying job interestingly, the younger age groups held this view much more strongly. And 93 percent thought men and women ought to do an equal share of the housework.
&nbsp;But there was another side to the young women's responses.
Just over 60 percent thought they had they had been treated unfairly because of their gender.
&nbsp;The younger age groups ( the 18 to 24 year olds) generally thought that women got a fair go at work, but in the 25 to 30 age group, just under 50 percent thought women at work did not get treated fairly.
&nbsp;It seems that more experience in the workforce can include some sad surprises. Clearly, there is some way to go in ensuring women do not experience discrimination in the workplace.
&nbsp;Most fundamentally, nearly 70 percent thought that their own lives were more satisfying than their mothers' lives and this squares with other research findings.
If the notion of equality is something that young women nov take as a given in their lives, we have come a long way.
And it is exactly the reason why governments cannot sit on their hands. We have a responsibility to respond to this generation and to recognise the place of the next.
&nbsp;We celebrate our history, and we build for the future.
&nbsp;We recognise that woman's gains over the last 100 years have been of profound benefit to all Australians, to the quality of society, to the life of the nation.
&nbsp;The story of the struggle to win those reforms is a rich part of our history.
&nbsp;The first chapter was written here 100 years ago. It is my hope that in the next few years we can write some big chapters of our own and, if the story is still not complete, that at least we will enter the next century agreed on what the ending should be.
&nbsp;I hope that not just the struggle but the reality of women's rights, women's role and women's status are part of our democratic consciousness-a part of our identity.
Your Conference, and the celebrations of the centenary of women's suffrage in Australia, is a step towards that end and I thank you for inviting me to speak.
&nbsp;It is now my privilege to declare this International Conference open.
&nbsp;



* TEL: 1O. Oct. 94 17: 55 ND. 018 P .01,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
RECEPTION FOR COMMONWEALTH GAMES ATHLETES
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF SPORT, CANBERRA
MONDAY 10 OCTOBER, 1994
Thank you very much. It is a very great pleasure to be here in the AIS for this
welcome home. One amongst many, I know, but one nevertheless very
heartfelt. Because, for most of you this has been the place where that extra
bit of tone and interest and commitment has made all the difference. But, it is
a chance for us all to say directly, rather than through newspapers or motions
in parliament, a simple thank you for the dedication and the commitment that
you have shown, each of you, in representing this country with such
distinction. I think all of us understand the enormous personal commitment
an athlete makes to excellence that doggedness, that
sustenance... sustaining power when your body is telling you to stop, when
you're wondering about your life's choice when all those pressures are on
you and you keep on going. And that is, I think, a mark of a champion and
champions, It is, as Jim said, sport is about excellence, and it's about a celebration of
beauty it's about a celebration of spirit and the human form. And it, I think,
in that celebration, transmits so much to this country about what we are and
what we have become. And no doubt, when you stand on the winning
rostrum and you are saluted as Australians, it must run through your mind
that you stand there representing the country and what it is, and I think that is
we are proud of Australia, we're nationalists all of us, but fortunately
nationalism has never got the better of us. And we have it in its proper place,
but pride is always something that Australians deserve to hold dear, and one
I know that if you are an Australian athlete comes by natural instinct by pure
instinct.
I want to say that I think it's a tremendously important thing for the
Government to commit itself to Australian sport, because sport is so much of
the ethos and culture of this country but beyond that it is a celebration of
young Australians, of what most people in their youth are capable of. And
even those not so youthful. But the fact is, I am delighted that we have been
able to build all of us an Institute of this standing because, Jim said earlier, 
TEL: iO. Oct. 94 17: 55 No. O1S-P. O2,
2
that I think the institute is an important body in world terms the fact is, there'
is probably nothing better than this in the world. There may be things its
equal, but there Is certainly nothing better. And it's a great tribute to the
coaches, to the sport scientists, the support staff, arnd to the Director Deek
for the tremendous job which the AIS has done on this occasion. I think
something I've got some statistics here in the sports with an AIS program,
87% of our medal winners were receiving or had received direct
Commonwealth support from the AIS, and an overall two-thirds of the medal
winners received direct AIS support. So, there are statistics, " statistics and
damn statistics" as they say, but I think they are fairly compelling ones, so
much that I think all of us in this room believe that they reflect the value of
this effort. So, they are great results and let me congratulate you all again
the AIS and the individual members of the team. And I know that with the
Olympics coming up and the Olympic athlete program, which I announced on
behalf of the Government, we are going to make just that extra special effort
to bring our athletes... to give them that world competitive edge coming up to
the 2000 Olympics.
Now, I know a lot of you have had since the Games other welcomes home,
other terrific performances around the world with the World Championships in
other events, and while there is no particular welcome homes for that, let's
congratulate you those of you who have been involved, particularly AIS
sports men and women in those world championships, and those other
events for which you have created world records in some cases.
The main thing in all this is that what a great role model you are for young
Australians. Now, I'm sure that everybody says that to you every time that
one of these events are on, but that's true. And I think it's not just because
you can excel at sport, or win a gold medal, but rather for your character and
your personality. Because I think that if one goes back through the great
sports men and women of this country, the thing that stuck by most of them
and to us as a result is what fine people they have been, and what a great
sense of joy their character has been to the country. And I know that when
Lew Hoad died this year, I wrote to his wife saying how proud she must have
been of Lew, and what a fine ambassador for Australia he had been. And I
mentioned how Pete Sampras had said often that he was inspired by, and
modelled himself, on great Australian players such as Lew Hoad and Rod
Layer. He loved their style, their attitude and their manner the aura they
gave, not simply the medal or the win. And I think that is the point. In fact,
Jenny Hoad wrote me a very nice reply, and I'm sure she wouldn't mind me
relating a little story in the letter she sent back. She said, Lew always felt
totally Australian," and she told me a great story, ' When Low and Jenny had
just married and were living in a housing commission flat in Sydney, the man
living opposite approached Lew one night and told him his wife had just had a
daughter, and would like Lew to be the Godfather, but they couldn't decide on
what to call it. And Lew said, ' Well, I have just seen a great movie, and
there's a good name in the film for a baby call it Shane." And she later
became one of Australia's great sporting heroes Shane Gould. So, it just
shows you that these sporting connections weave the most unlikely stories. 
* TEL: 10. Oct. 94 17: 55 No. 018 P. 03,,
3
But the fact of the matter Is that great sports people do become icons for the*
country not simply sporting icons and the Low Hoads of this world and
other great sports men and women obviously are going to do that as many
of you are now doing. So, could I just say thank you most sincerely for your
efforts in Victoria. It's a great pleasure, I'm sure, for Jim Ferguson and Deek,
and all of the people in AIS who are committed to you, to see these efforts
actually be rewarded, but most particularly, that of course would all go to
nought if it weren't for your grit and determination that instinct to press on
when a lot of things are telling you that time is up. And I think it is that
leadership and that strength and courage, and that strength of conviction
which we all salute. As Australians we all owe you a great debt this is our
most successful Commonwealth Games ever and I am sure on behalf not
simply of those in the ACT but on behalf of the nation in general thank you
sincerely one and all for a great effort for Australia.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC ' PM' PROGRAM, TUESDAY,
11 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minister, in his book, Bob Hawke accounts how at the time in
1991, you were not interested in sending Australian troops to the Gulf
War, yet now you say at the time that you were saying that they should
go after Saddam Hussein and finish him off. Did you support
involvement in the Gulf War or not?
PM: I did. That is just a straight lie. A straight distortion. There were only
two Ministers at the original meeting this was about whether we
committed people to Desert Shield that was Hawke, Michael Duffy
who was acting Foreign Minister and me. Without any notice I was
asked around and he said " I might get a call from the United States,
what do you think we'll do?" Typically Bob Hawke, he didn't say ' look,
I think this is what we should do, now what do you think?' The
question always is ' what do you think we should do?' You know, will
the real leader please tell us what we can do here. And, I said.'. well, I
think, that we are going to continue to see this sort of criminal activity
from this regime and I think we should be in a position to respond
positively to a commitment on the interdiction role in the Gulf. That
was the first meeting of course Gareth was away and Michael Duffy
was there as his acting Minister. The second was whether we
committed troops to Desert Shield and it was a meeting between
Hawke, Button, Robert Ray and the Foreign Minister Gareth Evans
and me. Robert had just been to Washington, Gareth had been in
touch with the United States and had also been in touch with other UN
members and we had a discussion and Bob Hawke was encouraging a
discussion which was some advice from Robert and Gareth that maybe
it would be better if we take the four ships up to the top of the Gulf and
commit a squadron of FAI 8s. They said their piece, Hawke sat back
again not indicating a position. John Button was then asked what he
thought. He gave a very negative response, generally negative
response and they said ' well, what do you think?' I said ' well, look, I'm
just listening, you people'are the experts.' And Hawke said to me 
1come on, come on.' And I said ' what, you mean I should say again
what we should do here? Well, I'll tell you what we should do. I don't
agree we should put a squadron of FAI8s there, but I do believe we
should commit to Desert Storm, but I'd leave two ships up the top of
the Gulf and bring the other two home.
Now, that's what happened. To that, he has reworked all that to say
because I didn't want to put a squadron of FAI8s in and leave four
ships up there. Because the American's wanted a commitment both
moral and material, that two ships were enough, we didn't need to
expose needlessly Australian planes or Australian ships. But, at no
stage was there any recommendation from Hawke. He sat there while
Gareth and Robert spoke and the decision was made when I said
' look, I believe we should put two ships up the top of the Gulf and let
the other two come back.'
Now, Bob Hawke parades himself around as somebody who sort of
backed the Americans in, well, he wanted to put them there. I don't
deny that. But, like a lot of things Hawke wanted to do, he never had
the courage to say so when it mattered and he didn't on that occasion
and he hasn't since.
FK: Well, the comments you made yesterday, have caused some stir.
When you say that Saddam Hussein should have been finished off the
first time around and we wouldn't be where we are again today, what
do you mean? Do you mean that he should have been assasinated?
PM: No, no, politically, just his regime should have been, essentially,
rendered inoperative, defunct, I mean call it what you like, I mean
defeated. No, I don't mean personally, I mean politically.
EK: The other attack the Opposition has been making on you, Prime
Minister, is about this purchase of the new house.
PM: Hang on, before we get onto that rubbish let's just stay on the main
thing. I mean, look, the lot of the Iraqi Kurds and Shi'ites in this
country has been a very sad and dismal one in all the periods since
and there was a position and there was a strategic capacity to finish
this regime off and that wasn't taken up. Now, I said in the Cabinet
room at the time I think we should do that. So did Kim Beazley and
Gareth Evans said ' well, that's not part of the UN mandate.' It wasn't,
but there was still a strong body of opinion that thought that around the
world and essentially what I did the other day was repeat that.
FK: Back to the House and the play the Opposition has been making of
that. They say it is ironic for a Labor Prime Minister to be buying a $ 2
million house in inner Sydney. In the game of politics, that is a fair
enough point to score isn't it? 
PM: Look, Alexander Downer, he's not going to make it. I mean the poor
silly thing, he is wondering around tied up now with Michael Baume,
you know who is a piece of, essentially, parliamentary filth. I mean,
look, the thing is and that is what he traffics in filth, under privilege.
Let Alexander Downer cut his own cloth. I mean, look, I've got a house
in Sydney I've had for twelve years, I am moving one mile away to a
larger house, that is the full story.
FK: But, for them to make a play of it, isn't it similar to what you have done
in the past with John Hewson buying and selling houses and the
Ferrari?
PM: No, I have never referred to, I have never said to John Hewson ever
where did you get money for this? or where did you get money for
that? We've said look, he lived in Bellevue Hill and had a Ferrari, but
nobody said " well listen John, hang on you paid this for that and what
was it that you put down here and what margin did you have there and
where did you I mean, that's never been done. I mean, at the time
John Hewson was embarrassed with his family affairs not a word came
from me or the Government. At a time when Mrs Downer absolutely
put her foot in it about the passports of her children, not a word other
than an oblique reference from Gareth Evans which he apologised for.
These people never stop and the thing about it is this Fran they must
think I live under a rock. I know all about them, about their personal
lives, about their finances, but I never use it.
FK: Is this sale going through in eighteen months time, is that a sign that
you considering resigning from politics?
PM: No, just as that suited the vendor and it suited me. I've got no
particular purpose at this point living in the house and I won't have
after then. So, what I'll basically do is sell the one I have and rent it
and that suited I mean, the cheek of these characters is just
unbelievable. But the gutlessness of Downer not to raise it in the
House of Representatives when I was there, but to go and get
somebody like... without any credibility, a person whose reputation is in
tatters Senator Baume, Michael Baume to go and do it in the Senate
with a couple of other Senators on the instructions of Alexander
Downer, is the sort look, we have all got to make our political bed
in life and then lie in it. Well, the public is making a judgement about
him.
FK: In the House tomorrow the Government's Privacy Bill comes up the
Opposition will vote with the Government, but they're planning to move
an amendment calling for consultation with the Federal parliament,
State governments and the community about the implications of
international treaties before they're signed on to do they have a
point? Should there be more discussion about these kind of treaties
before... 
PM: No.
FK Australia signs on?
PM: No. Well, when I say do they have a point about international treaties
no. Do they have a point about discussions? We already consult
with the States, industry groups and community groups, and we do it
extensively. What is their point of objection? They're snakey on the
external affairs power of the Constitution. They're saying " how dare
these Commonwealth governments usurp the roles of the States?"
See, this gets back to the old debate was the Federation an act of
creation of the Nation, or was it basically a set of arrangements for
States? Well, it was the former, not the latter. But the Liberal Party
years after its birth, going nowhere, still messing around with States
rights, and still trafficking in that nonsense is trying to say this is an
incursion of States rights if the Commonwealth of Australia enters into
an international treaty. Are they going to say that when the
Commonwealth ratifies the GATT Agreement, the Uruguay Round, that
it is going to effect some industry and some state, and that's some
transgression of State rights? I mean, when does this nonsense
finish? This is an island continent nation when does this rubbish
about States rights finish?
EK Well, there is some confusion still I gather in the Coalition about
whether some MP's will call for a vote on the Bill if they don't, is the
Government tempted to call for a vote to try and force those ones who
don't support the legislation cross the floor?
PM: Which legislation are you speaking about now?
FK This is the Privacy Bill.
PM: Oh, the Privacy Bill I thought you were talking about the treaties. On
the Privacy legislation look, Alexander Downer said remember he
had his great coming-out press conference a week or two ago: " I have
got the coalition to agree not to oppose the Bill"? I mean, you could
hardly bring yourself to announce it, could you? " We have agreed not
to oppose" not to support, but not to oppose the Bill. He sacked John
Hewson for arguing that the Coalition should support the Bill, he fired
him because Hewson had the temerity to come out and say he
supported the Bill. Now the National Party are going to stand him up
they are directing their members to vote against the Bill what is he
going to do? Sack them Or look like the turkey he has become? I
mean, how does he look on this he has come out and said " I have got
the Coalition to agree not to oppose the Bill". Wrong. He got to the
Coalition to agree to nothing because the National Party are now
saying that " we'll do what we like". I mean his leadership... 
FK: National Party MP's are still holding their cards pretty close to their
chest on whether they will actually force a vote and cross the floor
would you like to see that demonstrated? Would you help them call on
a vote?
PM: His leadership has no credibility and no strength, and that's is
apparent in the National Party thumbing its nose at him. If it was up to
him to fire John Hewson if any front-bencher from the National Party
vote against the legislation, then he should fire them too.
FK: There's no sign though that front-benchers will be the ones voting
against him, only those on the back-bench...
PM: It doesn't matter his authority is shot to pieces whichever way it goes.
He made an announcement on behalf of the coalition that the coalition
wouldn't oppose the legislation. They are going to oppose it some of
them.
FK: The Land Fund also goes into the Senate this week the Aboriginal
Land Fund. The Greens are saying they won't support it unless it's
amended substantially they have called your legislation a hoax and a
hall of mirrors paternalistic. Is there going to be another agonisingly
drawn out debate like we had with the Native Title debate, over the
Land Fund?
PM: Well, there shouldn't be because this is a most highly consulted... . this
has been a consulted over piece of legislation, and there is no notion
here that the Aboriginal community certainly not the big
representative bodies I have met believe this is some paternalism on
the part of the Commonwealth. I mean it wasn't that long ago that
Senator Chamarette made a submission in the budget context
proposing certain details about the fund it wasn't so apparently
paternalistic then. The commitment to self-determination is evident
right throughout the Bill, it's set up under the ATSIC Act, Senator
Chamarette says she wants a billion dollars committed in 3 years. We
are committing well over a billion, but over a longer time frame
because we think that is just simply more wise that you can't spend
that money I mean, how could you spend $ 300 million a year on
land?
EK: Well, are you going to try and talk to the Greens about this will you
try and persuade them?
PM: And then the other thing is that she is taking her lead from the NSW
Land Council. Well, it has a land fund which Premier Neville Wran
established which is very well endowed, and maybe they're just not as
interested in the federal fund as some other people in Aboriginal
Australia are, and she shouldn't take that much notice of them. 
FK: Will you be talking to the Greens about that?
PM: Well, I don't mind talking to them I have sent them a letter, they have
written to me, I have communicated back to them trying to cover the
points off, and I am happy to talk to them. But I right from the
start I said when we introduced the Native Title legislation that there
would be a Land Fund to cover the interest of indigenous Australians
who couldn't avail themselves of the Mabo Native Title Legislation
who couldn't establish that connection with the land. That has been
part and parcel of everything that the Government has said it is even
in the fist Bill, that is the Land Fund is in the first Bill. Now, it is being
amplified in this Bill, and it was on that basis that the Aboriginal
community expected us to proceed with it, which we have after
extensive consultations. So it's a very... it's very high-handed for the
Greens to say " oh, no, well look we know better what Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Australians need best here. We know better,
and we are going to exercise our perogatives in terms of our own
view". I mean, I just think that the Greens should do a bit of consulting
too, but a bit of broad consulting and not just with particular groups
with an axe to grind.
FK: So you're not... it sounds as though you're not too interested in their
amendments?
PM: No, I'm not real interested to be honest, no.
FK: Prime Minister just finally, the polls are looking very good for the
Government there's much talk about the Government setting up
trigger legislation are you tempted to pull on an early election?
PM: Now did you write this question out Fran, or did you work yourself up to
it?
FK: I have been working up to it Prime Minister.
PM: No. Nope. N-O-P-E. Nope.
FK: So we won't be going to the polls early?
PM: Nope.
FK: Prime Minister Keating, thank you.
ends. 


Much has been made of questions raised two months ago in the Hawke&nbsp;Memoirs concerning my commitment to Australia's involvement in the Gulf War.
I do not wish to prolong this I simply make the following points:
My considered support for Australia's involvement in the Gulf has been corroborated by a number of sources today. Namely, by the recollections of&nbsp;Senator Evans and Senator Ray, my speech to the House on 21 January&nbsp;1991, a report by Mr Grigson of the Sydney Morning Herald at the time and&nbsp;an office note taken by a member of my personal staff.
That part of Mr Hawke's personal record which refers to " what has the US&nbsp;done for us" also appears in my office note but the person who said it was not&nbsp;me.
It is clear that my recollections of those events conflict with those of the&nbsp;former Prime Minister in some respects. This is regrettable but not a matter&nbsp;of earth shattering importance. The main thing was and is that Mr Hawke and&nbsp;I both supported Australian involvement in operations Desert Shield and&nbsp;Desert Storm.
Mr Downer has now climbed into this debate. If this helps in any way to&nbsp;preserve his leadership Mr Hawke and I should drop some other bon mots&nbsp;which might attract his attention.
Easing Mr Downer into the New Year is a high priority for me.
Mr Downer has had ample opportunity to question me on this matter over the&nbsp;past two months and has failed to do so except on a day when he knew I&nbsp;would not be in Question Time. Mr Downer to this date has still raised no&nbsp;matters of public importance.
Meanwhile, the real news today is not the continuation of any minor hostilities&nbsp;between myself and Mr Hawke but the avoidance of major ones in the Gulf.
CANBERRA12 October 1994


PRIME MINISTERSTATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTERs THE HON P J KEATING MPAPPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN STATISTICIAN01I am pleased to announce that Cabinet has agreed to the proposedappointment of Mr Bill McLennan as Australian Statistician. The appointmentwill be submitted for approval by the Governor-General in Council.Mr McLennan will replace Mr Ian Castles, who will retire on 25 November1994.Mr McLennan has had a distinguished career as a statistician. He wasDeputy Australian Statistician from 1986 to 1992 after having worked in awide range of areas in the Bureau since joining the organisation after hiscompletion of his undergraduate studies. lHe graduated with an honoursdegree in Economics from the Australian National University.In 1992, Mr McLennan accepted an appointment as Director of the CentralStatistical Off Ice and Head of the Government Statistical Service in theUnited Kingdom. The appointment reflected Mr McLennan's Internationalstanding in the field of statistics and the excellent reputation of the AustralianBureau of Statistics as one of the world's leading statistical organisations.The Government is looking forward to continued high levels of achievementby the Bureau under Mr McLennan's leadership, confirming its place as aworld leader in the field of statistics.Mr McLennan will take up his appointment on 3 April 1995. The appointmentis for a term of seven years.Following the retirement of Mr Castles, Dr Richard Madden will act asAustralian Statistician until Mr McLennans arrival.The Treasurer and I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Castles forhis service to the Australian Government and people over the course of hislong and distinguished career.
2Mr Castles was appointed Australian Statistician in April 1986 after sevenyears as Secretary of the Department of Finance. Before that he had beenUndersecretiry to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and servedyears in the Commonwealth Treasury.Mr Castles was a member of the Royal Commission on AustralianGovernment Administration Task Group on Processes of Economic Policy inAustralia, 1974-75, President, International Association of Official Statistics,1991-93 and was elected a Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences ofAustralia in 1989.CANBERRA 13 OCTOBER 1994



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGO: MIDNIGHT, FRIDAY 14 OCTOBER, 1994
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RELEASE OF APEC PACIFIC BUSINESS FORUM REPORT: " A BUSINESS
BLUEPRINT FOR APEC: STRATEGIES FOR GROWTH AND COMMON PROSPERITY'
I am very pleased to welcome the report of the APEC Pacific Business Forum, " A business
blueprint for APEC: strategies for growth and common prosperity", which will be presented
to President Soeharto, the 1994 chair of APEC, in Jakarta today ( Saturday).
APEC leaders established the Pacific Business Forum in Seattle last year because we
wanted APEC business people to tell us what they think APEC should do to facilitate
regional trade and investment liberalisation. We thought that bringing together thirty-six of
APEC's top business people would result in some forward-looking and challenging
recommendations. And we were right. The PBF report is an ambitious, wide-ranging and
stimulating one.
I would particularly like to thank Australia's PBF representatives, Philip Brass. ( Managing
Director, Pacific Dunlop) and Imelda Roche ( Managing Director, Nutri-Metics) for the time,
vision and commitment they gave to this task.
Central to the PBF's vision for a dynamic and prosperous Asia-Pacific is the need for rapid
movement toward free trade and investment liberalisation in the APEC region. Perhaps
this is not surprising exports have driven Asia-Pacific growth over the last decade but it
is good to hear business voices speaking out in favour of trade liberalisation in their own
and other APEC economies.
As I have said before, Australia fully supports the idea of setting a serious, but realistic
date for the achievement of free trade in the APEC region. And APEC must achieve free
trade in a way that is consistent with GATIWTO principles and contributes to further
global trade liberalisation.
At our meeting next month in Bogor, APEC leaders will also give careful consideration to
the steps the PBF suggests on investment and the wide range of other issues which the
report covers ( many of which investment principles, standards and customs for example
Tsm--. 
2
are already being addressed within APEC). The PBF report will be an invaluable
resource.
More generally, I consider it essential that APEC leaders ( and APEC generally) continue to
draw on the advice of the business community. I will be discussing possible mechanisms
for achieving this including the PBF's suggestion that APEC leaders establish an APEC
Business Advisory Forum with my fellow APEC leaders.
CANBERRA 14 October 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS AT PRESENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN ARTISTS
CREATIVE FELLOWSHIPS, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
MONDAY, 17 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Michael ( Lynch), my colleague Michael Lee, Hilary
McPhee, Senator Kernot, distinguished ladies and gentlemen and awardees,
fellowship winners. It is a great pleasure to be here on yet another occasion
associated with the fellowships and thank you Hilary indeed for the invitation.
I am so chuffed these days about the Australia Council and the way it has
changed over the years, adapted to the needs of this country, to the arts, to
the community and one doesn't have too many occasions to say nice things
about people, but let me say, I generally try and make them you see. Let me
say though I am delighted with the leadership which Hilary McPhee and
Michael Lynch are providing and to have people of this calibre follow Rodney
Hall and Max Burke and them following after Donald ( Homne) that continuity,
that tremendous commitment which they bring gives the Government, I think,
great confidence that the arts are in very good hands in this country.
So, thank you indeed for your efforts, both of you, and for the Council in,
again, stewarding the change through this year and for bringing these
fellowships on. I am hoping that the coincidence of the awards and the
fellowships and tomorrow's statement on the arts will mean that this is a great
week for the arts in Australia because rarely does a Government have an
opportunity to make a contribution, a renewed contribution to the arts in this
country. We already have this week the Australian National Festival of
Theatre on, so many people connected with the arts are in this city and we
have our distinguished artists this morning and the Tasmanian Symphony
and it should'be, I think, a great occasion tomorrow. I hope it is and I want it
to be because what the statement is about is not some routine announcement
or some routine change, but rather a statement that the arts and the belief of
the Government that the arts are not peripheral to Australian life, but central
to it. And, that is the cause of the statement being made and to redefine and
redirect the way in which the arts are funded by the Commonwealth and how 
we can do co-operative things around the country with the arts community
and with the States to redirect artistic endeavour in this country.
So, I hope when this time tomorrow comes those of you who have been
waiting for it will be pleased with it and that we will truly have an opportunity
to make very clear that the arts are entirely central to Australia and matter to
us economically and socially to our identity et cetera.
When Governments make statements they get a lot of press and, of course,
everyone expects them to be economic statements or mechanical statements,
things about industry policy and the like. Well, there is going to be a lot of
that in there too, but it is about the essence of the defining nature of the arts
in Australia and the definition it brings to this country.
The Fellowships are part of that, of course, as well. And, what they are about
is saying clearly and I hope lucidly that for people who have made a
contribution to the arts and to the culture of this country that they are
important and that the Government wants to continue to support them, to
make a contribution so that their commitment to date can be continued for
them often in mid career. This is essentially a scheme for artists of
accomplishment in mid career and I am delighted that the quality of it, that the
people who have been awarded the fellowships, now 45 of them since its
inception, have been of such a high calibre that the prestige of the scheme
remains as it was on the day it was first announced. As a consequence, we
have seen people develop themselves, to take either the time out from an
active and busy career or to continue as they had been, doing things that
they might not have otherwise been able to do, but needing to worry about
funds and money and how they can keep their life together.
These are for two years, three years, up to five years, they are now at
$ 66,000 a year which is an income which will encourage, we hope, those
artists who have already, as I said, made a substantial contribution and who
already are noteworthy for their work to continue on.
So, it is a great pleasure to me that there has been so much interest in the
Fellowships by the artistic and cultural community in this country and that
they remain, in a sense, the prestige and important awards that they are.
I hope that we will see these grow in the future, we are even saying
something about them tomorrow and as I say, at this time tomorrow I think
these awards and that which they stand for, but the arts in this country in
general will have been seen by the community as being supported by the
Government because of their innately important role in our society. Thank
you very much for having me along.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ABC LATELINE INTERVIEW
TUESDAY 18 OCTOBER, 1994
KOB: What, for you, is the philosophical core of this statement?
PK: The simple proposition that the arts are central to Australian life and
culture and that as our identity becomes more obvious, as we make a
greater claim on our own sovereignty, as we project ourselves into the
world, as we rejoice in what we become, the arts will be an obviously
central ingredient to all of that.
KOB: What we've grown used to in the past, in governments, plural, attitude
to the arts, has been encouraging the arts for arts sake, which would
deliver some indefinable benefit for us in terms of cultural richness.
But, this one, this time, represents a different ball game, doesn't it. An
enormous emphasis on links from the arts to business, to exports, to
an economic dividend?
PK: Well, there is an economic and a cultural dividend and a social
dividend, that is true. And we are building on the arts and our
education. I have said before on this program, one of Australia's great
comparative advantages in the world is its education system. And, the
confidence which the arts now have, the rejoicing about our own
culture which there now That flux with our education system is
going to produce... I'm sure this is going to be one of the countries
where the arts have a most profound impact on the way this country
develops. Artists feel that, people were telling me that today. People
were saying, " You can feel it", artists can feel it. I think the community
can feel it.
KOB: OK. I'd like to try and get to some of the essence of the spirit of our
identity and our culture that you talk about later in the program, and
there are many areas to try and cover. But, I'd like to focus for the next
few minutes on what you identify as the new multi-media age because 4-
PRIME MINISTER 
you seem to identify that as the big new challenge that this country
faces. You talk about a fundamental conceptual shift, you say
information technology has crossed the ' technical Rubicon into the
realm of consciousness, the realm of culture'. What exactly are you
getting at?
PK: I wrote that line myself so thank you for picking the best line in the
document...
KOB: What exactly does it mean?
PK: What it means is that we are at a stage where the dissemination of art,
culture, news and education is going to be very profound in the sense
that we are going to go past... We are going to go beyond the people
who package information, we are going to go beyond the networks, we
are going to go beyond the newspapers. This technology has the
capacity to take the creator's product straight to the person. And,
getting that right and being in that, being in the product and benefiting
from the system is, I think, important not only to the country and its
development but because so much of it is going to be creative and so
much of it, at this point, is a phenomena of the English language
countries, we're so well placed to be a part of it in a productive sense
and someone who is a receiver of the wisdom which this can
communicate.
KOB: So, how do you put flesh to that? You capture the breadth and depth
of Australian creative output on CD-ROM, you digitise our poets, our
artists, our musicians, our film makers and flog them off to the world?
PK: Well, I think we stand a very great possibility of doing that. I think we
are going to see... The difference in this age is interactivity, it is not
just passive listening and passive viewing. There is the capacity to
talk to this and be part of it. And, therefore, the system that is going to
be developed is going to carry a whole range of services; pay
television, inter activity, telephony et cetera. So, we're on to
something here, now. If we are not part of this... We cannot miss this
as we missed, say, the hardware phase of computers. You could
afford to miss the hardware phase of computers, we missed it. The PC
came in our time, in the last decade and we missed it. Because we
had to prepare for it a bit earlier than we normally do.
KOB: But it is still somewhat vague in terms of what exactly this is. Is it, for
example in terms of trying to value it, in trying to place it does it
have the potential to be our new mining industry, our new wool
industry?
PK: Oh, absolutely and much more so. I think so. Much more so. 
KOB: So, when people put an estimate in the medium term of a three trillion
dollar market which I think Michael Lee, the minister, mentioned
recently, that's not an exaggeration?
PK: Well, I wouldn't want to quantify it in our terms but there is no doubt
that we have a very deep artistic inheritance in this country, a unique
culture. We have the capacity to develop product for this highway, so
called, and the things we are doing today, in part, go to further develop
our capacity to do that. And, to bring in the creativity of a lot of young
people. This is not going to be a business that people of your age and
my age are going to be in. This is going to be, basically, young people
who have, I think, the chance with that creativity and the technical
opportunity which comes with this medium. Now, this will not be true of
film and television because that will be a highly developed business as
it is in every other country. But, there is a tremendous, that sort of
blossoming of creativity one sees -particularly with young people
today who are computer literate -we are going to see this
opportunity.
KOB: Because, really, you would agree would you not that the bulk of adult
Australians would not even know what CD-ROM is?
PK: No, but let's make this clear. It's not just about CD-ROM. This is
about film and television product, it is about extending the possibilities
for telephony....
KOB: But it is also about having a fundamental grasp of potentials and the
realities, the looming realities of the super highway as well?
PK: Yes, well, the fundamental earner, the first primary, basic I think,
fundamental earner on the super highway is going to be pay television.
And we are going to build layers of services on top of that; telephony,
education, all the other things, banking, specialised products. You're
talking here of the possibility of hundreds of channels, specialised
products which people can subscribe to. They can subscribe to their
favourite journalist who can talk to them directly. You can have your
own program, Kerry...
KOB: Thanks, Paul...
PK: You'll go straight down the tube without anyone chopping it around.
KOB: And we're also talking about a lot of emphasis on international
markets. Your statement draws on a recent report called ' Commerce
in Content', looking on our international future in the interactive multimedia
markets. One of the prerequisites to success that that report
stresses is that Australia must develop, and I quote, the world's
best intellectual property and copyright environment". We are a long 
way from that with our existing laws protecting intellectual property,
aren't we?
PK: I don't think so, no. We've said a lot in the statement about it, this very
day.
KOB: So, there's not much to fix?
PK: Well, put it this way, if you are in the business of producing this is
an OECD mainline country... If you are in the business of producing
product the first thing that you guarantee is that your copyright system
is a good one. That's a basic thing to do, I would think.
KOB: So, we're close to world best copyright law in this country, protecting
our artists and our intellectual property?
PK: Well, let me say this to you, by the time that we are producing product
which has the capacity for broad dissemination in mass markets, we
certainly will have.
KOB: Can we bridge back from the super highway and the CD-ROM to the
core of this statement as it applies to what we are as people. You pay
homage to our diversity, but how genuinely diverse is the patronage of
our arts, the spread of our arts?
PK: I think it is very diverse, support for artists is by peer group
assessment through the Australia Council. We've now added to that
capacity, we're diversifying, again, further, by giving the Australia
Council a major organisations board and picking up other bodies...
KOB: It's centralising much more, isn't it?
PK: No, oh no...
KOB: Well, the Australia Council is now a much more powerful body, it is
almost the supreme body in determining the flow of government funds
to the arts.
PM: To artists. But not necessarily to the arts, and the other thing we
envisage it doing is instead of just it being a grant-giver, we see it
basically providing markets for our products abroad, improving private
sponsorship for the arts in other words, giving it a bigger role, but a
role which in a sense disseminates some of the power away from the
centrality of simply just giving grants.
KOB: Because you know of the criticism that has been levelled at the
Australia Council over the years, that it has developed into a club
dispensing patronage a club that it has fostered creeping political
correctness, that its links to the Keating Government are too close for 
comfort, and yet they do now have this super-power status. How do
you guarantee fair play and a healthy remoteness from Government,
and it is important in you terms that they have a healthy remoteness
from Government?
PM: Yes. Absolutely. We have always thought that...
KOB: Well how do they do that?
PM: well, by the quality of the people that are on it, and by it's charter.
You have got the current chair Hillary McPhee, arguably Australia's
foremost publisher, certainly of Australian product, and Michael Lynch,
a respected arts administrator that sort of talent you
rarely Governments are very lucky to have people like that. And the
notion that they are, in some way, going to sign up to what? Anyway,
what does the Government what politically, other than that the thing
flourishes....
KOB: Votes.
PM: No
KOB: Votes in the end.
PM: no, no, no, no.. other than it flourishes and works that is what we're
after we are after a good outcome.
KOB: You presented eleven prestigious creative fellowships to Australian
artists yesterday they all came from NSW or the ACT, such a small
part of this diverse country in a sense. Didn't that raise some question
mark in your mind about whether the Australia Council is really on the
right track in terms of the diversity...
PM: Who says they're...
KOB: . the national diversity.
PM: But they're not chosen by the Australia Council they are awarded by
the Australia Council, but they're chosen by a panel, a very broadly
representative cross-d isci pl inary panel who chose those people
looking at.. so it wasn't simply the literary grants people looking at a
writer, it wasn't a visual arts person looking at visual art it was a
cross-disciplinary, cross state thing..
KOB: OK, well lets say everything...
PM: . but they chose... 
KOB: let's say everything was absolutely on merit and these were the
eleven best artists that you could have chosen, what does it say about
the health of our artistic diversity if all eleven of them came from the
one area?
PM: Well, it depends last year that wasn't the case, and the year before
that...
KOB: But it was this year?
PM: the one thing, let me say about the fellowships they are chosen
exclusively on merit. The one thing the Government said from the
inception this is not a triers scheme this is for people of excellence
in mid-career, and so this was the first time we had, if you like, open
nominations. So there were plenty of nominations, and obviously hard
choices, but they have never moved away from choosing those that
they thought were best. And in this case, by doing it, they have kept
these fellowships to such a standard that the people that get them are
obviously from that calibre of achievement. So, you might see a
preponderance from NSW this year it will be mixed up other years.
We have now got 45 of these if you track through them I think you will
find that it's very broadly spread.
KOB: Some specific initiatives $ 60 million to develop new Australian
product for commercial television in the next three years how do you
guarantee that product will be the high quality that you seem to have
as your goal in giving the money, and how do you avoid the
commercial networks abandoning any pretence at quality in their
existing obligations to meet Australian content quotas?
PM: Well, Australians are interested in their own culture. They are
interested in Australia every time that someone runs an Australian
series, or a mini-series it always has tremendous ratings. Australians
respond tremendously well to their own culture....
KOB: Yes, but we're also talking about products like " Man Man", and quiz
shows...
PM: I know, but this will not be going to that, but we have all appreciated
the " Brides of Christ" and " The Dismissal", and these sorts of programs
and mini-series, and it is to this top-end of the product that this fund is
directed.
KOB: Ok, so that funding is directed to the top-end so let's say the networks
are able to use that money to give that quality gloss to their overall
product would it concern you if you then also saw more productions
of local quiz shows, more kind of " Man Man" type programs 
PM: Well all that would happen then is that networks would get less of the
money and more would go to the... . we're saying about half of this will
go to independent producers of product for television...
KOB: But this is on top of the quota material?
PM: On top of the quota material. So, this doesn't lessen the quotas, but
let's say the networks did as you said, and said " look, we're getting
some quality here, so let's drop it off there", what we would do is simply
take the residual away from the networks and give it to the
independent producers. And it may well be Kerry that independent
producers get the lion's share of it because they have got more ideas
and are more prepared to produce than the networks are in house.
Now I would like to think we can get the networks to produce higher
quality products like this in-house.
KOB: You have allocated $ 13 million to SBS over 4 years to commission
quality material of a culturally diverse nature but the priority has to go
to product that can be sold overseas so you are saying to artists
" please produce your best, as long at its commercial", Is that really the
way to go?
PM: Not necessarily, but I think that a reflection of Australia's multiculturalism
on SBS in drama will be received well in Australia, and
interestingly I think, it will play well abroad. I don't have any
problem look, we have had art-house release cinema here in this
country for God knows how long. It doesn't... . getting into the big league
is what it's all about. Selling, and getting out there transmitting
Australian culture to the world. Film has been one of the things which
has allowed us to actually put a view of Australia....
KOB: I mean part of the Australian culture of the world is " Neighbours" L.
PM: Yeah.
KOB: That sells overseas. So SBS might foster a product like " Neighbours"
which has a bit of cultural diversity in it and flog that overseas? Is that
what you would want?
PM: Well they might, but they might also and I think the SBS is a quality
organisation I think SBS will understand why this money is given and
do something with it. I mean people are intelligent aren't they? If they
say " well the government has given us this money, now what we'll do is
basically squander it or waste it or we'll do something", well in the end
it will dry up, and I don't think people will do that. And can I just say I'm
sure " Neighbours" was never produced for sale abroad, it just
happened to sell abroad. 
KOB: You say that a creative infra-structure will only be effective where all
existing players in the industry this is the television industry I think
we're talking about identify and pursue common ends content will be
the defining element. Do you think that people like Kerry Packer and
Rupert Murdoch driven above all else by commercial imperatives
will really embrace what you are saying there?
PM: Why should they I missed your point... . what's your point?
KOB: You're talking about all existing players in the industry identifying and
pursuing common ends.
PM: Well I don't think....
KOB: This is the cultural statement about promotional culture.
PM: I don't know where in the document you read that, but if it's to imply
that there is some sort of uniformity of commitment a common goal...
KOB: It was under Film and television.
PM: . on the part of all these people, of course there won't be. But again, I
think that a lot of what we produce in Australia has come from network
television, and it might also come through major organisations like
News Limited.
KOB: But you say that will only be effective the creative infra-structure will
only be effective if all players are committed to the common end.
PM: The common end being?
KOB: That content will be the defining element.
PM: Yes. I think that's making a separate point that content I don't know
whether the text...
KOB: You have emphasised in this report that content is all
PM: Well that's what I'm just trying...
KOB: . that content is all. But you're saying that the Kerry Packers and the
Rupert Murdoch's and everyone else in the industry has to be
committed to a common end, and your common end seems to me is
quality...
PM: Yes, well Kerry the distributional systems are under challenge aren't
they? Free to air television is under challenge from pay television, and
it's under challenge from terrestrial systems. We're going to find with
this revolution in information technology that traditional distribution 
9
systems newspapers are under challenge. What sticks to you in the
end? Content. I mean, this system is hungry for product, it's hungry
for content and that is why part of this statement is lifting the content.
KOB: But, how much of the system will be hungry for quality content?
PM: Well, enought of it and that is why there is a commitment to the high
quality end of the production fund with television and that is why,
again, with the multi-media it's on content for the information highway
products. But the whole essence of the statement is about bringing
forward the essence of our culture and translating that into content for
transmission to us, to others.
KOB: You talk about the great power that the media has and you say that
cross media ownership rules provide a check on this power. Our
national broadcasters this is all in the statement have a special
independent role to reflect the nations diversity. Now, in terms of
those cross media ownership rules which you say provide a check on
this power, does that mean an ongoing and indefinate commitment to
cross media rules by this Government?
PM: Well, it depends where convergence goes.. I mean, we are seeing
now and very obviously, I mean if Telecom lays an optic fibre cable
which is going to carry interactive services and pay television, they are
going to have telephony on it. It's very obvious isn't it?.
KOB: Yes.
PM: So, we are seeing a convergence, there is no doubt about that. But,
what the cross media rules have done is separate radio from
television, television from print et cetera.
KOB: But, there is pressure coming on the Government?
PM: Indeed. But, it is coming naturally. It is coming because of this
change.
KOB: Well, can you see a natural step from cross media which responds to
the new imperatives, but at the same time checks the power that you
acknowledge?
PM: Well, I think, Government's should try to do that.
KOB: Well, it's bad luck if they can't isn't it?
PM: The technology does run ahead of you often. I mean, you should try to
do that and then adapt public policy to the imperatives of the
technology and I hope we can do that, but there is no doubt.. 
KOB: But, you are saying that it is possible that you won't be able to do that.
PM: The cross media rules went in in 1984 or 1985 and since then, I mean,
the rise of personal computers, the change in photonics, fibre optics, I
mean, all of these changes are changes, which are in a sense, running
ahead of the policy.
KOB: But, you seem to be saying quiet clearly that the technology is such
that you are not confident that you will be able to maintain the kinds of
checks of power that you feel you have so far, that you may not be
able to control the technology.
PM: Well, one would be confident that one could be reasonably effective in
maintaining a diversity of power bases in the Australia media, but I
don't think one should even try to be confident about resisting the shift
of these technologies. I mean it is not going to be very long, I mean,
here's Newslimited with Star Television Star is actually now going to
broadcast from the Middle East to the Russian Far East and down to
Queensland. Now, what are you going to do with that? Poke your
tongue out at it, through a bill up in the air, table a motion in the
House?
KOB: The ABC is still the biggest single recipient of funding for the arts. Do
you believe that the $ 500 million a year is money well spent at the
moment?
PM: I think so, yes.
KOB: You are happy with the ABC's performance?
PM: By and large yes. There is a debate in this country about the ABC,
whether it's a bit too precious, a bit too confident of its own remit. But,
by and large if the question is, is the money well spent? Yes. Could it
be spent better? Probably, the answer is yes to that too.
KOB: Where?
PM: It is a very large budget and I am not here to dissect the ABC and I
wouldn't want to try, but
KOB: You talk about the importance of pay for example, generally in this
country. This was a lot of angst inside the Government at the time
about whether the ABC should or shouldn't be involved in pay and it
was well known at the time that you were opposed to the involvement
that the ABC itself was
PM: No, no, I was not opposed. I was happy to give the ABC a couple of
channels. Say, you don't have to bid for them, you have got them.
Happy to do that. But, what I wasn't happy to do was to see the ABC 
launch itself with a consortium, say like Australis. The ABC on the
original plan would have been part of Australis.
KOB: But, are you happy with the course that the ABC is now plotting on pay
television?
PM: Let me just finish this point, I don't think it could have basically got in
there and bid $ 80-i OOM and then bought product from around the
world. I mean, the ABC never had the capacity to do that and I don't
think it should have.
KOB: OK
PM: Whereas, I think, the solution we have now is an acceptable one.
KOB: OK When you go back on your stewardship as Prime Minister, when
you do look back on you stewardship as Prime Minister, where do you
think you'll place this document in terms of your achievements?
PM: Well, these are strands of our national life that one looks at whether it
is fidelity to the unemployed, whether it is a focus on our creativity and
our culture, whether it is on the truth of Mabo, whether it is on the shift
to Asia with APEC, it's plaiting the strands into a whole. So, I see this
as an important strand in the rope of Australia.
KOB: But, what is important to you is that the Australia Council, for example,
understands those imperatives and pursues them too isn't it?
PM: I think it understands them perfectly, I honestly do. I think, the arts
community have always understand this better than most other
communities.
KOB: Of course, there are those who say that you are using this as another
tool to assist your republican push. The foundation for Australian
cultural development, you say of this in the statement, that this
particular body the foundation for Australian cultural development
should aim to extend Australian's understanding of their own country
and its future and it will play a particularly important creative role in
preparations for the 2001 celebrations Now, why wouldn't that be
seen, why shouldn't that be seen as a foundation to help you promote
your republican push?
PM: I think, there is a very obvious distinguishing point there. The 2001
celebrations are the celebrations of the centenary of the country's
federation, of our sense of nation, of our nationhood. What the
Constitutional overlay is on that is another matter altogether. Now, I
mean I think, we are heading for the big identity and cultural round-up.
Let me not mix words about that. I mean, you have got the Olympics in
the Year 2000, three months from the centenary, we've now got a great 
12
cultural shift into Asia. We are now starting to understand, I think,
better these questions of identity. We are rejoicing in our own culture.
I mean, the country feels good, that a right has been wronged with the
Aboriginal community. These things are important feelings. A nation
is about its feeling about itself, to itself, of itself and that is why, I think,
I haven't got to worry about the people with a maudlin interest in the
past who are like the Liberals celebrating 50 years ago. I mean, that
is all going to happen for us. We don't need any little foundations to
change that Kerry.
KOB: Last question, to what extent is this perhaps personal foible is a bit
insulting, but to what extent is this a personal indulgence of the Prime
Minister's the emphasis that you are putting on the arts in terms of
the philosophy that is driving it because this would seem in many
instances to be a very interventionist policy. It is almost an industry
statement about the arts and I would suggest is far more interventionist
than many other areas of business.
PM: But, if you said it about sports, you would say it would be completely
normal. The fact that the arts now have such an enormous following in
Australia and the fact that people are enriched by them, uplifted by it,
means that its structure should be such that it can accommodate these
national aspirations and feelings. So, I don't see it as an industry
statement. I do see it as a cultural thing and if the culture, important as
it is to us, can be important to others around the world, if we can
project ourselves as a society of worth, of a deep democracy of values,
well, why shouldn't we?
KOB: Paul Keating, thank you.
PM: Thank you, Kerry.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MIPCOMMONWEALTH
CULTURAL POLICY LAUNCH
TUESDAY 18 OCTOBER
This is a very great pleasure.
No government has ever delivered a national cultural
policy for Australia on anything like these dimensions.
I'm not sure many national governments in other countries
have delivered cultural statements.
The Americans are in the process of formulating one at
the moment for delivery towards the end of the century,
I understand.
We need this statement.
As the document says, it is long overdue.
We have had a cultural debate running in this country for
a very long time.
our post-colonial status guaranteed that there would be a
lot of questions asked about who we are, what level ofculture
we might reasonably aspire to, whether we should
be transplanting European culture or fostering an
indigenous one, what the worth of such a strange hybrid
would be.
These arguments run right through our history in this
century.
At the extremes it was " evening dress and the opera"
versus the " wattle and bottle".
Anglophilia and Anglophobia.
The debate tended to lurch between the cultural cringe
and cultural swagger.
It has taken us a long while to find what Robert Hughes
recently called " a relaxed uprightness of carriage."
The two extremes don't make much sense. 
Both are narrow, both inclined to xenophobia.
And both fatally missed the point that our development
was bound to reflect the accumulation of cultures which
of necessity an immigrant society creates and that from
such variety great riches flow.
The simplest truths can be the hardest to grasp.
The idea that a cosmopolitan Australia might be a
worthwhile aspiration and not a nightmare was a long time
coming. To imagine a culturally diverse Australia and enjoy the
idea meant overturning a lot of received wisdom.
The notion that we were a country without history, for
instance. It meant recognising that, far from lacking history and
culture, we were the beneficiaries of an extraordinary
heritage: that settlers in Australia, whether they
arrived from Great Britain and Ireland in the nineteenth
century, or Europe, or the Middle East or Asia in the
twentieth century no settlers in this country ever
entirely left their culture behind.
To recognise that was to recognise the depth of our
history and heritage.
And in the last twenty years we have recognised it.
Essentially, I think that is what multiculturalism means.
We have recognised that from new settlers we can derive
more than raw energy, skills and ambition there is a
cultural dividend.
In recent years we have also come to the realisation that
it is our great good fortune to share in the magnificent
heritage of the oldest civilisation on earth.
These are watersheds in our cultural development.
It has been truly a sea change the tide of our national
consciousness has turned.
And nothing, it seems to me, has done more to free us
from our insecurities.
Yet recognising the great wealth of culture we have
inherited cannot obscure or deny the fact that culture is
built in large part on the experience of the last two
hundred years of living in this continent.
Our traditions are still firmly fixed in that experience,
and they remain alive in our art and literature and film. 
3
That is a heritage which we must preserve, a set of
recognisably Australian values which must continue to
inform the creative life of the nation.
That these intangible things are powerful forces in the
national life might be measured by the inclination of
Australians to watch Australian television shows, or read
Australian books.
You might see it in the huge success of the Golden
Summers exhibition a few years ago, or films like
Strictly Ballroom, or at another level the impact
which the Entombment of the Unknown Australian Soldier
had on the nation last year.
Australians do still read Henry Lawson and Banjo
Paterson.
They do still look at Streeton and Roberts.
They still love them.
But these days they know there is so much more in the
cupboard.
And what is so encouraging these days is the new
confidence the unashamed enthusiasm.
It distinguishes some of those recent films.
It was there in some of the acts I have seen yesterday
and today.
It is there in the reviews the Australian Ballet just
received in Washington.
I wouldn't want to pretend to argue the finer points of
dance technique with Clive Barnes.
I am very pleased that he finds them technically in the
forefront of the world's ballet companies.
I like that, but I love it when he says that they have " a
very real spirit, an individuality that is fresh and open
and quite original.
It is the sort of energy and open freshness that people
associate with Australia itself."
I find myself pleased to hear Clive Barnes approving of
our dancers and absolutely delighted to think that our
dancers might convey to the world the message that there
is a great optimistic spirit at large in Australia.
The first is satisfying, the second is moving. 
4
Creative Nation does not attempt to impose a cultural
landscape on Australia but to respond to one which is
already in bloom.
I hope that in time this statement will be seen as the
day we drew a line under our post-colonial era and said
good-bye to it.
I don't think we should look back in anger to the
generations who conducted the cultural debate in that
era.
We've come by stages to where we are and a lot of
cultural wealth has come with us.
We may even be a lot wiser for having been through the
cringe, and even censorship.
Just the same, as the statement says, today I hope we are
also saying a final goodbye to all those manifestations
of cultural insecurity including cultural jingoism.
And goodbye forever to the days when our best talents
left Australia because there was not enough here to
persuade them to stay.
The statement is not about looking back.
It is very much an attempt to lay the foundations of a
new era: to pull the threads of our national life
together, so that we can ride the waves of global change
and create our own.
I've said elsewhere that as a government our great
ambition has been to bring cultural issues into the
mainstream of our national life, and national decisionmaking.
That's why, for instance, we brought the arts into the
Cabinet, and subsequently combined the arts with the
Department of Communications.
We emphatically believe that cultural issues should be at
the core.
on the one hand, this is because no economic or social
decision is without a cultural consequence.
The quality of our lives, the opportunities for self
expression, the integrity of our heritage cannot be left
to chance.
They can no longer be the last consideration.
That, it seems to me, is one of the responsibilities of a
mature country and one of the imperatives in this era
of globalisation and the information revolution. 
On the other hand, we are putting cultural issues at the
centre because the more we succeed in encouraging a
creative spirit and the flow of creative ideas, the more
we will succeed as an economy and society.
There are huge economic benefits to flow from a confident
and secure, innovative and imaginative culture.
And direct social benefits direct national benefits.
There are still a few people who believe that culture
belongs on the margins.
We take this opportunity to say that they are wrong.
This statement does not cover every element in our
national life.
It does not go to every city and every community.
But we hope it signals our intention.
It is a national policy.
It will have a national effect a national benefit.
The statement aims at excellence at creating the
conditions in which Australian talent can reach the
highest standards and Australians can ejy the highest
standards.
No cultural policy could aim at anything less.
The statement is also concerned with access at making
our arts and heritage accessible to everyone.
We aim to do this through partnerships with State and
other levels of government and through private
benefaction wherever possible.
As an example of the pursuit of excellence we are
creating with the Victorian Government a National Academy
of Music in Melbourne.
A school of music of the highest standards for students
from Australia and overseas.
With the Queensland Government we are establishing the
National Indigenous Performing Arts Institute, a centre
of excellence to preserve and foster Australia's unique
indigenous art forms and heritage.
Here in Canberra, in association with the ACT government,
the Gallery of Aboriginal Australia will be established
on the Acton Peninsula on the shores of Lake Burley
Griffin. 
6
The Gallery will be co-located with new premises for the
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Studies.
I should here pay tribute to Rosemary Follett for her
initiative and vision, and not just so far as the Gallery
of Aboriginal Australia is concerned.
Here at the NGA, the ACT governent will partner the
Commonwealth in the construction of a purpose-built
exhibition space to house major national and
international exhibitions.
In the pursuit of both excellence and access to it, we
will continue to develop the National Museum in ways
which will enable maximum public access to the nation's
cultural heritage, through a combination of touring and
use of new multimedia.
New museum gateways are being developed at Old Parliament
House Canberra, and Sydney Customs House.
In time I hope the National Museum will be an umbrella
organisation which provides access to the holdings of all
our national collecting institutions.
The National Sound and Film Archive is the repository for
much of Australia's audio visual history and therefore a
unique and valuable history of the evolvement of
century Australia.
The premises which the Archives currently occupies do not
provide an adequate facility from which these treasures
can be viewed or heard by large numbers of visitors.
We will rectify the difficulty that the archives
presently faces of a shortage of exhibition, display and
laboratory space.
In Melbourne the Australian Cultural Foundation will be
established to gather more effectively into the cultural
development of Australia the humanities and social
sciences.
To give the Foundation a firm base from which to start it
will operate as part of the Australia Council, at the
same time providing the Council with a Melbourne
presence. The Australia Council continues to be pivotal in the
nation's artistic life and cultural development.
It has played a crucial role in our reaching the levels
of excellence and wide participation in the arts we
currently enjoy.
Important though it is, it cannot however continue to be
merely a grant giving body. 
7
The Commonwealth believes that the Australia Council must
now spend more of its resources in audience development,
creating linkages with new broadcasting technologies,
market development here and abroad and in stimulating
more participation in the arts from the private sector.
The Government is confident the Council is determined to
take up the challenge but recognises it cannot hope to
succeed without additional funds.
We want a Council which continues to do the things it
presently does so well: so we are providing an increase
in base Council funding of $ 18 million over four years,
particularly to assist individual artists.
This will also help to meet the cost of increased wage
obligations caused by a recent arbitrated wage increase
for actors and dancers.
But we want it to do more and that is why, among other
things, we are introducing triennial funding, and a new
major organisations board.
We have long recognised the need for the Council and its
clients to operate in an atmosphere of stability and
predictability so that they may undertake better forward
planning in the same way as any other business enterprise
does. The Council has already done some preliminary work to
identify organisations which will be funded through the
new board, and I expect that they will be announced
shortly. The Government continues to believe adamantly in the
principles of peer assessment and arms length funding-so
it will not be intervening in the selection process,
though the Minister will be consulted.
However, it is reasonable to expect that two
organisations which will become part of the MOB are the
Australian Chamber Orchestra and the Sydney Symphony
Orchestra. The ACO is an orchestra of international quality, and a
world leader in its field.
The Sydney Symphony Orchestra, we also believe has the
potential to be one of the great international
orchestras. In keeping with other truly great orchestras, the SSO
will be allowed to operate under its own local control
allowed to draw on the resources, enthusiasm and
character of Sydney. 
8
The Commonwealth will maintain its funding in real terms,
but through the Major Organisations Board of the
Australia Council, rather than the ABC.
The Government will also be providing additional
assistance to augment the Orchestra to full international
size and enable it to enhance its current touring and
recording program.
By agreement, the Orchestra will also maintain
facilitational and media linkages with the ABC.
We have begun with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra.
The way is open, however, for the other orchestras to
follow if they wish.
If these initiatives are taken in the pursuit of
excellence, several others announced in this policy will
create access to excellence in music for many thousands
of Australians.
There are extra funds provided for Musica Viva's schools
program enabling it to tour Australia wide.
We are also providing extra funds for opera on tour.
In another initiative, calculated to join music to our
national life, I am pleased to announce today the
Commonwealth will provide a prize of $ 100,000 for an
original symphony to commemorate the centenary of our
nationhood in the year 2001.
Film and television production constitute another great
success story of our recent history.
No other medium, perhaps, offers ordinary Australians
such insights and access to the national character,
heritage and identity.
And no other medium carries the image of Australia so
pervasively abroad.
The film and television industry is a vital resource, an
essential element of the national culture.
Australians have demonstrated their desire to see more
Australian product on screen, and Australian producers
have amply demonstrated their capacity to deliver quality
programs, provided funds are available.
Therefore, the Government will establish a special
Television Production Fund providing $ 20 million per
annum for three years from the next financial year. 
The Fund, which will be located in Melbourne, will
support the production of Australian drama, children's
programs, documentaries and the developing and marketing
and multimedia applications.
It is aimed expressly at the quality end of the film and
television market.
At least 50 per cent of the Fund will be available to
independent producers, the balance will go to the
networks for in-house productions.
And productions financed from this Fund will not count
towards existing Australian content quota requirements.
SBS too has suffered from a shortage of production funds
and has had to rely increasingly on overseas material
which does not of itself reflect the Australian
multicultural community.
The Government, therefore, will provide $ 13 million over
four years to SBS to commission high quality Australian
programs. This will enable SBS to utilise the language skills base
of contemporary Australian society and make programs for
sale into Asian and European markets.
I am also pleased to announce today that after
negotiations with the Commonwealth Government and subject
to the settlement of some final details, The News
Corporation Limited and its film production company,
Century Fox, have agreed to establish a movie studio in
Australia to produce major international length feature
films. The establishment of the studio offers large potential
benefits to Australia.
With distributional links through Fox and other world
distributors, Australia can become a larger part of the
world trade in entertainment, while establishing itself
as a hub for content in the rapidly growing Asia-Pacific
markets. Linkages with internationally integrated multimedia
companies will also help Australia become a greater
participant in the burgeoning markets for content that
will be carried over the world's information highways.
The planned facility will include three sophisticated
sound stages equal to any in the world, with all the
associated pre and post production facilities.
The studios will be available to independent Australian
film makers and are expected to attract independent
production companies from overseas. 
S-*
The Commonwealth Goverrnent and 20th Century Fox have
discussed locations for the studio in Sydney and believe
the Showground site to be the most suitable this, of
course, is a matter for discussion with the
government. The Commonwealth will assist with site preparation and
development. Our cultural policy directly addresses the challenges
which confront Australia in realms of information
technology and multimedia.
It was in recognition of these challenges that the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts were combined.
The move was made to deal with the convergence of
broadcasting, telecommunications, computing and creative
industries and technologies.
It is true that we have in Australia one of the more
advanced telecommunications networks in the world, and
there has been substantial investment in our information
highway. Australians will have access to the interactive
multimedia which is already changing our lives and
creating extraordinary new possibilities in education,
the arts and information; the way we learn; the way we do
business. In 1993 the Commonwealth established the Broadband
Services Expert Group to report on the implications for
Australia of developments in multimedia and broadband
services.
The group nominated content as the critical issue for-
Australia. Indeed Australia has the opportunity to become a world
leader in the production of content.
We can, for instance, if we move rapidly, gain a
significant share of the CD-ROM market.
In the longer term though not very much longer we can
create a dynamic multimedia industry in Australia.
our strengths in film and television, literature, music
and art, in combination with our highly educated
population, give us an excellent platform on which to
build.
Multimedia thus creates the potential for expanding our
cultural industries.
It provides new opportunities for people especially
young people with creative talent. 
So that we can take full advantage of the opportunities
open to us, and guarantee that we enter the 21st century
in the front rank of nations, the Government has
announced in the cultural policy five specific and
complementary measures costing $ 84 million over a five
year period.
We will establish a coordinating body known as the
Australian Multimedia Enterprise; several Multimedia
Development Centres; and a series of national Multimedia
Forums.
We will also be commissioning CD-ROMS involving material
from our major cultural institutions for Australian
schools.
And we will provide specific assistance to foster our
film agencies move into multimedia.
If we are to rely on talented Australians using their
imagination and creativity to provide us with the content
for new media, we have to ensure that they get a fair
return for their efforts.
You will find in the document a range of measures that
we've taken to protect the intellectual property of our
content providers.
As this launch is taking place in the National Gallery,
it is particularly appropriate to mention one of them
the Government will be providing $ 1 million to assist
with the setting up of Viscopy a copyright collecting
agency for the visual arts.
This copyright society will ensure that artists,
including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artist&amp;,
whose work is particularly prone to unauthorised use,
will obtain a proper financial return for the use of
their work.
With the growing ability to reproduce visual images
through digitised technology, an increasing source of
income for our artists will be the fees collected from
such reproduction.
This policy has taken some time to formulate.
That is no bad thing.
We think it will boost the quality of Australian life now
and in the future.
It will boost the creative element in our national life.
It will create new cultural industries.
It will mean more work and opportunities for Australian
artists, writers and other creative people. 
12
It will make us a more cohesive country.
It will enrich us for years to come.
I hope it will be seen as a landmark a moment which we
confirmed our faith in the life we have built here, and
our ability to meet the challenges which the future
holds. In the preparation, many people deserve our thanks.
Not least among them was the Cultural Advisory Panel we
appointed and who provided, in a sense, the kernel of the
Statement. It has grown like Topsy since but their report was an
essential starting point, and I thank them for their
efforts and wisdom.
I must also thank the three Ministers who preceded
Michael Lee David Simmons, Wendy Fatin and Bob
McMullan.
And I must thank Michael for his contribution.
Many Australians contributed to the formulation of the
policy through the submissions they made to the
Government, and through their attendance at public
forums.
There are many others.
Most of all I want to thank the creative artists of
Australia and I mean all of them, from the stars and
the major organisations to the people in communities all
over Australia who engage in works which enrich theirlives
and countless others.
This cultural policy of necessity has addressed some of
the great questions now facing Australia.
And, by and large, that is what I have addressed in this
speech today.
But you will find there is a good deal in this policy for
all those engaged in the creative life of the country a
good deal I truly believe for all Australians.
With this policy we have set out to devise a better
creative climate in Australia.
With it we recognise the value of creative effort and
what it means to our future.
We are spending $ 252 million to build the infrastructure,
boost the funds, create the industries which will employ
and reward creative effort. 
This statement goes a long way towards bringing culture
and creativity into the mainstream.
The opportunities will be there in the future. The
openings will be there for talent and industry.
It will be a new environment, and one in which success
will depend less on governments and more on the creative
initiatives of Australians.
We will all be richer for the effort all so much more
aware of what it means to be Australian.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPCOMMON
WEALTH CULTURAL POLICY LAUNCH
TUESDAY 18 OCTOBER
This is a very great pleasure.
No government has ever delivered a national cultural
policy for Australia on anything like these dimensions.
I'm not sure many national governments in other countries
have delivered cultural statements.
The Americans are in the process of formulating one at
the moment for delivery towards the end of the century,
I understand.
We need this statement.
As the document says, it is long overdue.
We have had a cultural debate running in this country for
a very long time.
Our post-colonial status guaranteed that there would be a
lot of questions asked about who we are, what level of
culture we might reasonably aspire to, whether we should
be transplanting European culture or fostering an
indigenous one, what the worth of such a strange hybrid
would be.
These arguments run right through our history in this
century.
At the extremes it was " evening dress and the opera,,
versus the " wattle and bottle".
Anglophilia and Anglophobia.
The debate tended to lurch between the cultural cringe
and cultural swagger.
It has taken us a long while to find what Robert Hughes
recently called " a relaxed uprightness of carriage."
The two extremes don't make much sense. 
Both are narrow, both inclined to xenophobia.
And both fatally missed the point that our development
was bound to reflect the accumulation of cultures which
of necessity an immigrant society creates and that from
such variety great riches flow.
The simplest truths can be the hardest to grasp.
The idea that a cosmopolitan Australia might be a
worthwhile aspiration and not a nightmare was a long time
coming. To imagine a culturally diverse Australia and enjoy the
idea meant overturning a lot of received wisdom.
The notion that we were a country without history, for
instance. It meant recognising that, far from lacking history and
culture, we were the beneficiaries of an extraordinary
heritage: that settlers in Australia, whether they
arrived from Great Britain and Ireland in the nineteenth
century, or Europe, or the Middle East or Asia in the
twentieth century no settlers in this country ever
entirely left their culture behind.
To recognise that was to recognise the depth of our
history and heritage.
And in the last twenty years we have recognised it.
Essentially, I think that is what multiculturalism means.
We have recognised that from new settlers we can derive
more than raw energy, skills and ambition there is a
cultural dividend.
In recent years we have also come to the realisation that
it is our great good fortune to share in the magnificent
heritage of the oldest civilisation on earth.
These are watersheds in our cultural development.
It has been truly a sea change the tide of our national
consciousness has turned.
And nothing, it seems to me, has done more to free us
from our insecurities.
Yet recognising the great wealth of culture we have
inherited cannot obscure or deny the fact that culture is
built in large part on the experience of the last two
hundred years of living in this continent.
Our traditions are still firmly fixed in that experience,
and they remain alive in our art and literature and film. 
That is a heritage which we must preserve, a set of
recognisably Australian values which must continue to
inform the creative life of the nation.
That these intangible things are powerful forces in the
national life might be measured by the inclination of
Australians to watch Australian television shows, or read
Australian books.
You might see it in the huge success of the Golden
Summers exhibition a few years ago, or films like
Strictly Ballroom, or at another level the impact
which the Entombment of the Unknown Australian Soldier
had on the nation last year.
Australians do still read Henry Lawson and Banjo
Paterson.
They do still look at Streeton and Roberts.
They still love them.
But these days they know there is so much more in the
cupboard. And what is so encouraging these days is the new
confidence the unashamed enthusiasm.
It distinguishes some of those recent films.
It was there in some of the acts I have seen yesterday
and today.
It is there in the reviews the Australian Ballet just
received in Washington.
I wouldn't want to pretend to argue the finer points ofdance
technique with Clive Barnes.
I am very pleased that he finds them technically in the
forefront of the world's ballet companies.
I like that, but I love it when he says that they have " a
very real spirit, an individuality that is fresh and open
and quite original.
It is the sort of energy and open freshness that people
associate with Australia itself."
I find myself pleased to hear Clive Barnes approving of
our dancers and absolutely delighted to think that our
dancers might convey to the world the message that there
is a great optimistic spirit at large in Australia.
The first is satisfying, the second is moving. 
4
Creative Nation does not attempt to impose a cultural
landscape on Australia but to respond to one which is
already in bloom.
I hope that in time this statement will be seen as the
day we drew a line under our post-colonial era and said
good-bye to it.
I don't think we should look back in anger to the
generations who conducted the cultural debate in that
era. We've come by stages to where we are and a lot of
cultural wealth has come with us.
We may even be a lot wiser for having been through the
cringe, and even censorship.
Just the same, as the statement says, today I hope we are
also saying a final goodbye to all those manifestations
of cultural insecurity including cultural jingoism.
And goodbye forever to the days when our best talents
left Australia because there was not enough here to
persuade them to stay.
The statement is not about looking back.
It is very much an attempt to lay the foundations of a
new era: to pull the threads of our national life
together, so that we can ride the waves of global change
and create our own.
I've said elsewhere that as a government our great
ambition has been to bring cultural issues into the
mainstream of our national life, and national decisionmaking.
That's why, for instance, we brought the arts into the
Cabinet, and subsequently combined the arts with the
Department of Communications.
We emphatically believe that cultural issues should be at
the core.
On the one hand, this is because no economic or social
decision is without a cultural consequence.
The quality of our lives, the opportunities for self
expression, the integrity of our heritage cannot be left
to chance.
They can no longer be the last consideration.
That, it seems to me, is one of the responsibilities of a
mature country and one of the imperatives in this era
of globalisation and the information revolution. 
On the other hand, we are putting cultural issues at the
centre because the more we succeed in encouraging a
creative spirit and the flow of creative ideas, the more
we will succeed as an economy and society.
There are huge economic benefits to flow from a confident
and secure, innovative and imaginative culture.
And direct social benefits direct national benefits.
There are still a few people who believe that culture
belongs on the margins.
We take this opportunity to say that they are wrong.
This statement does not cover every element in our
national life.
It does not go to every city and every community.
But we hope it signals our intention.
It is a national policy.
It will have a national effect a national benefit.
The statement aims at excellence at creating the
conditions in which Australian talent can reach the
highest standards and Australians can njy the highest
standards. No cultural policy could aim at anything less.
The statement is also concerned with access at making
our arts and heritage accessible to everyone.
We aim to do this through partnerships with State and
other levels of government and through private
benefaction wherever possible.
As an example of the pursuit of excellence we are
creating with the Victorian Government a National Academy
of Music in Melbourne.
A school of music of the highest standards for students
from Australia and overseas.
With the Queensland Government we are establishing the
National Indigenous Performing Arts Institute, a centre
of excellence to preserve and foster Australia's unique
indigenous art forms and heritage.
Here in Canberra, in association with the ACT government,
the Gallery of Aboriginal Australia will be established
on the Acton Peninsula on the shores of Lake Burley
Griffin. 
The Gallery will be co-located with new premises for the
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Studies.
I should here pay tribute to Rosemary Follett for her
initiative and vision, and not just so far as the Gallery
of Aboriginal Australia is concerned.
Here at the NGA, the ACT government will partner the
Commonwealth in the construction of a purpose-built
exhibition space to house major national and
international exhibitions.
In the pursuit of both excellence and access to it, we
will continue to develop the National Museum in ways
which will enable maximum public access to the nation's
cultural heritage, through a combination of touring and
use of new multimedia.
New museum gateways are being developed at Old Parliament
House Canberra, and Sydney Customs House.
In time I hope the National Museum will be an umbrella
organisation which provides access to the holdings of all
our national collecting institutions.
The National Sound and Film Archive is the repository for
much of Australia's audio visual history and therefore a
unique and valuable history of the evolvement of
century Australia.
The premises which the Archives currently occupies do not
provide an adequate facility from which these treasures
can be viewed or heard by large numbers of visitors.
We will rectify the difficulty that the archives
presently faces of a shortage of exhibition, display and
laboratory space.
In Melbourne the Australian Cultural Foundation will be
established to gather more effectively into the cultural
development of Australia the humanities and social
sciences.
To give the Foundation a firm base from which to start it
will operate as part of the Australia Council, at the
same time providing the Council with a Melbourne
presence. The Australia Council continues to be pivotal in the
nation's artistic life and cultural development.
It has played a crucial role in our reaching the levels
of excellence and wide participation in the arts we
currently enjoy.
Important though it is, it cannot however continue to be
merely a grant giving body. 
The Commonwealth believes that the Australia Council must
now spend more of its resources in audience development,
creating linkages with new broadcasting technologies,
market development here and abroad and in stimulating
more participation in the arts from the private sector.
The Government is confident the Council is determined to
take up the challenge but recognises it cannot hope to
succeed without additional funds.
We want a Council which continues to do the things it
presently does so well: so we are providing an increase
in base Council funding of $ 18 million over four years,
particularly to assist individual artists.
This will also help to meet the cost of increased wage
obligations caused by a recent arbitrated wage increase
for actors and dancers.
But we want it to do more and that is why, among other
things, we are introducing triennial funding, and a new
major organisations board.
We have long recognised the need for the Council and its
clients to operate in an atmosphere of stability and
predictability so that they may undertake better forward
planning in the same way as any other business enterprise
does.
The Council has already done some preliminary work to
identify organisations which will be funded through the
new board, and I expect that they will be announced
shortly. The Government continues to believe adamantly in the
principles of peer assessment and arms length funding so
it will not be intervening in the selection process,
though the Minister will be consulted.
However, it is reasonable to expect that two
organisations which will become part of the MOB are the
Australian Chamber Orchestra and the Sydney Symphony
Orchestra. The ACO is an orchestra of international quality, and a
world leader in its field.
The Sydney Symphony Orchestra, we also believe has the
potential to be one of the great international
orchestras. In keeping with other truly great orchestras, the SSO
will be allowed to operate under its own local control
allowed to draw on the resources, enthusiasm and
character of Sydney. 
The Commonwealth will maintain its funding in real terms,
but through the Major Organisations Board of the
Australia Council, rather than the ABC.
The Government will also be providing additional
assistance to augment the Orchestra to full international
size and enable it to enhance its current touring and
recording program.
By agreement, the Orchestra will also maintain
facilitational and media linkages with the ABC.
We have begun with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra.
The way is open, however, for the other orchestras to
follow if they wish.
If these initiatives are taken in the pursuit of
excellence, several others announced in this policy will
create access to excellence in music for many thousands
of Australians.
There are extra funds provided for Musica Viva's schools
program enabling it to tour Australia wide.
We are also providing extra funds for opera on tour.
In another initiative, calculated to join music to our
national life, I am pleased to announce today the
Commonwealth will provide a prize of $ 100,000 for an
original symphony to commemorate the centenary of our
nationhood in the year 2001.
Film and television production constitute another great
success story of our recent history.
No other medium, perhaps, offers ordinary Australians
such insights and access to the national character,
heritage and identity.
And no other medium carries the image of Australia so
pervasively abroad.
The film and television industry is a vital resource, an
essential element of the national culture.
Australians have demonstrated their desire to see more
Australian product on screen, and Australian producers
have amply demonstrated their capacity to deliver quality
programs, provided funds are available.
Therefore, the Government will establish a special
Television Production Fund providing $ 20 million per
annum for three years from the next financial year. 
9
The Fund, which will be located in Melbourne, will
support the production of Australian drama, children's
programs, documentaries and the developing and marketing
and multimedia applications.
It is aimed expressly at the quality end of the film and
television market.
At least 50 per cent of the Fund will be available to
independent producers, the balance will go to the
networks for in-house productions.
And productions financed from this Fund will not count
towards existing Australian content quota requirements.
SBS too has suffered from a shortage of production funds
and has had to rely increasingly on overseas material
which does not of itself reflect the Australian
multicultural community.
The Government, therefore, will provide $ 13 million over
four years to SBS to commission high quality Australian
programs. This will enable SBS to utilise the language skills base
of contemporary Australian society and make programs for
sale into Asian and European markets.
I am also pleased to announce today that after
negotiations with the Commonwealth Government and subject
to the settlement of some final details, The News
Corporation Limited and its film production company,
Century Fox, have agreed to establish a movie studio in
Australia to produce major international length feature
films.
The establishment of the studio offers large potential
benefits to Australia.
With distributional links through Fox and other world
distributors, Australia can become a larger part of the
world trade in entertainment, while establishing itself
as a hub for content in the rapidly growing Asia-Pacific
markets. Linkages with internationally integrated multimedia
companies will also help Australia become a greater
participant in the burgeoning markets for content that
will be carried over the world's information highways.
The planned facility will include three sophisticated
sound stages equal to any in the world, with all the
associated pre and post production facilities.
The studios will be available to independent Australian
film makers and are expected to attract independent
production companies from overseas. 
The Commonwealth Government and 20th Century Fox have
discussed locations for the studio in Sydney and believe
the Showground site to be the most suitable this, of
course, is a matter for discussion with the NSW
government. The Commonwealth will assist with site preparation and
development. Our cultural policy directly addresses the challenges
which confront Australia in realms of information
technology and multimedia.
It was in recognition of these challenges that the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts were combined.
The move was made to deal with the convergence of
broadcasting, telecommunications, computing and creative
industries and technologies.
It is true that we have in Australia one of the more
advanced telecommunications networks in the world, and
there has been substantial investment in our information
highway. Australians will have access to the interactive
multimedia which is already changing our lives and
creating extraordinary new possibilities in education,
the arts and information; the way we learn; the way we do
business. In 1993 the Commonwealth established the Broadband
Services Expert Group to report on the implications for
Australia of developments in multimedia and broadband
services. The group nominated content as the critical issue for-
Australia. Indeed Australia has the opportunity to become a world
leader in the production of content.
We can, for instance, if we move rapidly, gain a
significant share of the CD-ROM market.
In the longer term though not very much longer we can
create a dynamic multimedia industry in Australia.
Our strengths in film and television, literature, music
and art, in combination with our highly educated
population, give us an excellent platform on which to
build.
Multimedia thus creates the potential for expanding our
cultural industries.
It provides new opportunities for people especially
young people with creative talent. 
So that we can take full advantage of the opportunities
open to us, and guarantee that we enter the 21st century
in the front rank of nations, the Government has
announced in the cultural policy five specific and
complementary measures costing $ 84 million over a five
year period.
We will establish a coordinating body known as the
Australian Multimedia Enterprise; several Multimedia
Development Centres; and a series of national Multimedia
Forums.
We will also be commissioning CD-ROMS involving material
from our major cultural institutions for Australian
schools.
And we will provide specific assistance to foster our
film agencies move into multimedia.
If we are to rely on talented Australians using their
imagination and creativity to provide us with the content
for new media, we have to ensure that they get a fair
return for their efforts.
You will find in the document a range of measures that
we've taken to protect the intellectual property of our
content providers.
As this launch is taking place in the National Gallery,
it is particularly appropriate to mention one of them
the Government will be providing $ 1 million to assist
with the setting up of Viscopy a copyright collecting
agency for the visual arts.
This copyright society will ensure that artists,
including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists-,
whose work is particularly prone to unauthorised use,
will obtain a proper financial return for the use of
their work.
With the growing ability to reproduce visual images
through digitised technology, an increasing source of
income for our artists will be the fees collected from
such reproduction.
This policy has taken some time to formulate.
That is no bad thing.
We think it will boost the quality of Australian life now
and in the future.
It will boost the creative element in our national life.
It will create new cultural industries.
It will mean more work and opportunities for Australian
artists, writers and other creative people. 
12
It will make us a more cohesive country.
It will enrich us for years to come.
I hope it will be seen as a landmark a moment which we
confirmed our faith in the life we have built here, and
our ability to meet the challenges which the future
holds. In the preparation, many people deserve our thanks.
Not least among them was the Cultural Advisory Panel we
appointed and who provided, in a sense, the kernel of the
Statement. It has grown like Topsy since but their report was an
essential starting point, and I thank them for their
efforts and wisdom.
I must also thank the three Ministers who preceded
Michael Lee David Simmons, Wendy Fatin and Bob
McMullan. And I must thank Michael for his contribution.
Many Australians contributed to the formulation of the
policy through the submissions they made to the
Government, and through their attendance at public
forums.
There are many others.
Most of all I want to thank the creative artists of
Australia and I mean all of them, from the stars and
the major organisations to the people in communities all
over Australia who engage in works which enrich theirlives
and countless others.
This cultural policy of necessity has addressed some of
the great questions now facing Australia.
And, by and large, that is what I have addressed in this
speech today.
But you will find there is a good deal in this policy for
all those engaged in the creative life of the country a
good deal I truly believe for all Australians.
With this policy we have set out to devise a better
creative climate in Australia.
With it we recognise the value of creative effort and
what it means to our future.
We are spending $ 252 million to build the infrastructure,
boost the funds, create the industries which will employ
and reward creative effort. 
13
This statement goes a long way towards bringing culture
and creativity into the mainstream.
The opportunities will be there in the future. The
openings will be there for talent and industry.
It will be a new environment, and one in which success
will depend less on governments and more on the creative
initiatives of Australians.
We will all be richer for the effort all so much more
aware of what it means to be Australian.
ENDS 
ENT: 19-10-94 : 9: 23A : 6162754499--l
CREATIVE NATION ADDITIONAL OUTLAYS SUMMARY
TABLE 949595-96
$ rm 96-97
im-97-98
Australia Council
Increased Funding for Australia
Council Increase in base funding to the Australia
the greatly expanded arts industry
Major Organlsatlons
Board of Australia Council Council to enable It to support
2.0
Establishment of a Major Organisations Board which will provide stable
and predictable funding to major performing arts organisations
Commonwealth Support for the Arts
National Institute for Indigenous
Performing Arts Trainino0.45 5.2
Establishment of National Institute for Indigenous Performing Arts
Training
Regional Festivals
Support for regional festivals, including touring of high quality arts
activities
Musica Viva in Schools0.35 0.35
Extension of the Musica Viva in Schools program to Queensland, South
Australia, the Australia Capital Territory and the Northern Territory
5.3
SENT BY' 062715300:# 2 
~~ 19~ B-E1YN0:-T 9 4 9: 23AM 6162754499-6750;
-2-
National Ogera Touring
Consortium 1.15 1.85. 1.85 1.85
Additional funding for the Australian Opera and the Opera and Ballet
Orchestras and for the establishment of a national opera touring
consortium National Academy of Music
Performance 2.0 2.4 2.2 2.2
Establishment of a centre of training excellence for musicians of
outstanding talent
Enhancement of Sydney
Svmnih-ony Orchestra 0.0( a) 2.5 2.5
Transfer the Sydney Symphony Orchestra from the ABC to a local
management board and provide increased funding to enable its
enhancement to world standing
Educational Lending Rights
Scheme 0.15 0.3 1.0
Extension of Public Lending Right Scheme to educational libraries
National Gallery of Australia
Construction of a New Galler 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0
Construction of New Exhibition Gallery for travelling exhibitions
Visual Arts Copyright Collecting
Agny0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1
Provision of seed funding for the establishment of a visual arts copyright
collecting agency
, SENT BY: 06271c300; 9 3 
SENT 5y: ; 19-1O-94 9: 23AM 6162754499-. 062715300; a 4
-3
Film, Television and Radio
SBS Production Fund4.04.0
Provision of funds to SBS for the production of multicultural drama and
documentary programs
Television Production Fund0.020.020.020.0
Establishment of a Television Production Fund to provide for additional
quality Australian content on commercial television, with international
export potential.
Multi Media
Australian Multi-Media Enterprises45.20.00.00.0
Funding for the creation of a multimedia product and services fund to
accelerate their development and comnmercialisation in Australia for
regional and global consumption
Interactive Multimedia Forums0.675 0.625 0.35
Funding for forums to bring together individuals, agencies and enterprises
from the cultural and multimedia industries
Cooperative Multimedia Development
Centres0.117 4.078 8.04
Funding for the development of a number of co-operative multimedia
centres for tertiary institutions and industry groups to work together on
research, development and marketing of multimedia product
Australia on CD Proaramn3.683.680.0
Production of a series of multimedia CD titles which display a wide range
of Australian cultural endeavour, artistic performance and heritage
subjects 8.04 0.0
' BY:; 19-10-94 9: 23AM 6162754499-052715300; 4 4 
SENT BY: 9~:; 241A9M-10-94 61527544Si-O675O; 5
-4-
Film Industry Participation in
New Media 1.08 2.18 2.08 2.08
Package of measures aimed at stimulating the development and
production of new media projects in the film industry as -well as targeting
training needs in the audio-visual sector.
Heritage Our Past and Our Future
Review of Commonwealth
Heritage Progertles 0.2 0.4 0.0 0.0
Establishment of a Committee of Review to examine the management of
Commonwealth owned heritage properties
Old Parliament House
Refurbishment 1.1 3.2 0.0 0.0
Provision of funding for the refurbishment of the Members' Dining Room
and Kings Hall
Old Parliament House
NFSA programs 0.5 0.15 0.15 0.15
Funding for National Film and Sound Archive ( NFSA) display and
outreach program at Old Parliament House
Gallery of Aboriginal Australia
and relocation of AIATSIS ( b)
Construction of a Gallery of Aboriginal Australia incorporating the National
Museum of Australia's indigenous collection, to be located at Acton
Peninsula and for the new accommodation for Australian Institute of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies at the same site
National Film and Sound Archive
Long Term Accommodation 0.0 8.0( a) 1.0( a)
Funding of for the development of long term accommodation for the
National Film and Sound Archive in Canberra
BY: 062715300;; 
ENT BY: ; 19-10-94 S: 24AM 6162754499-062715300; 6
Transfer Australia II to, and enhance,
WA Maritime Museum 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.2
Provision of additional resources to the Western Australian Maritime
Museum and for the return of Australia II to Fremantle
International Projection of Australian Culture
Visual Arts Tours Abroad 0.25 0.3 0.15 0.15
Elite Performance Tours Abroad 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9
Funding to enable elite performance and visual arts tours overseas.
Integrated Australian Promotions 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0
Funding will provide for an integrated campaign promoting Australian arts
and culture in specific overseas markets
TOTAL ($ 252.705m) 62.477 74.913 58.745 56.57
Notes: Indicative only. Actual outlays to be confirmed following further
consultations.
To be determined following discussions with the ACT Government,
ATSIC and AIATSIS. 


PRIIMNIES TESPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATLNG, MPPRESENTATION OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S EMPLOYER OF THEYEAR AWARD, PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, 19 OCTOBER1994. 1 welcome the opportunity to be with you today, for the presentation of thePrime Minister's Employer of the Year Awards.These awards help all of us communicate a very important message to theAustralian community.That message is about the economic and social benefits of employing peoplewith a disability. It is simple and uncontroversial, but we have to repeat it oftenbecause it is often ignored. It goes like this:To grow, as an economy and as a nation, we have to make the most ofall our resources, and this includes the talents and energies of peoplewith disabilities. We must ensure that everyone has an opportunity tocontribute and share in Australia's growth.This message under-pins our broad commitments on social justice and access andequity. It also meshes with the " Working Nation" agenda, outlined in the WhitePaper on Employment released in May this year.Through the Employer of the Year Awards we help to turn the message intoreality by acknowledging and supporting Australian employers who lead theway in encouraging and assisting people with a disability to join the workforce.We also recognise and demonstrate, practically, the significant contributionspeople with disabilities make.
2People with a disability have shown that they are willing and able to take up thechallenge of working in mainstream employment.People with a disability have proven they do bring special attributes to theworkplace, in terms of dedication to the job, low levels of absenteeism and staffturnover. In the right job, with the ight training and support, they offer as much as anyworker. People with a disability want, and have the right to, a fair go to compete in theopen labour market and employers need a skilled and reliable workforce.The Employer of the Year Awards recognise that once barriers to equalemployment opportunity are overcome, everyone employers, employees andthe community stands to benefit.Over 300 employers around Australia have been nominated for this year'sawards. This is a record number of nomdiations and shows the real advancesbeing made in human resource management practices by Australian businesses.It also shows our message is being received.The Awards have been part of the Government's wider process of reform indisability policy over the last ten years.By changing existing supports, and introducing new services, our reforms havehelped people with a disability to have many of the same opportunities toparticipate in the life and work of the community as anyone else. These areopportunities which many without a disability take for granted.The Disability Services Act of 1986 went a long way to address long-standingbarriers faced by Australians with disabilities.The Disability Reform Package brought fundamental improvements toassistance provided for people with a disability. This included the developmentof further measures to assist open and supported employment for people with adisability. A key feature is the linking of income support for people withdisabilities, with education, training and work opportunities.
Many of you will know of a more recent development, the Supported Wagesystem, which involves wages based on skills and productive capacity andincome supplementation through the Social Security system. This will allowemployers to employ people with a disability on a pro rata award wage, wherenecessary, and will greatly increase job opportunities for people with moresevere disabilities.The Disability Discrimination Act, which came into effect in 1993, makesdiscrimination on the grounds of disability unlawfiul, including in employmentsituations. Now, through work in developing an Australian Disability Strateg, we areembarking on a comprehensive and systematic effort to address barriers toaccess, equality and participation for people with a disability.The Strategy will provide a plan of action across Government programs tocomply with our own Disability Discrimination Act and the United NationsStandard Rules on the Equalisation of Opportunities for Persons withDisabilities. Under the Strategy equal opportunity goals for people with a disability will beset out and we will define ways to achieve them over the next ten years. A planof action has been developed covering Federal programs and responsibilities.We are also working with State and Territory Governments to develop anational Australian Disability Strategy for the next ten years.My colleague, Carmen Lawrence, as the Minister for Human Services, hasrecently announced the formation of the Australian Disability ConsultativeCouncil, to advise the Government on the development and implementation ofthe Strategy.In the Employment White Paper, we expanded the employment assistanceavailable to people with a disability through:a better access to labour market programs through the Job Compact;
S greater emphasis on individual case management with relevant casemanagers having a lighter case load and greater resources;more employment assistance through additional places in theCommonwealth Rehabilitation Service and Disability Services Program;andS ongoing funding for specialist psychiatric pilot units.Before I hand back to Dr Lawrence, I want to thank everyone who has helpedwith these awards.I would like to thank the ACTU, and the Australian Chamber of Commerce andIndustry, for their support. You are key players in this work.Finally, I would like to thank and congratulate all those employers present, andthe Awards finalists in particular, for their outstanding effort to ensure thatpeople with a disability have the rights, choices and opportunities that mostAustralians take for granted.Your efforts and these awards demonstrate the benefits of harnessing the skillsand abilities of people with a disability.In this way we are all contributing to building a fairer and better Australia.



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, 20 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: the rain is pouring down.
JL: Well, that's terrific news because I just had a call from somebody in
Yarrawonga, it's raining there and I rang the valley this morning, it's
raining there, they had some thunderstorms in Brisbane last night and
maybe some more today. So, perhaps the rain has returned, Prime
Minister.
PM: Well, I just hope it is widespread. That's the main thing, John.
JL: Yes, pretty important. So is Creative Nation, creative Australia. It
seems to have been pretty well received. There are a few knockers
there. Some saying it was an electoral bribe, I suppose there has to
be elements of that in anything don't there?
PM: Well, I think the arts are so central to where Australia is going to not
just the formation of our identity, but the expression of it and that so
much of the transmission of what Australia is in film and in other things
we do, dance, theatre, that this was the right time to give a new
direction to the arts and to support it.
JL: Yes, I agree with that and it is something, of course, that we should
always be looking to. Somebody has got to have a view of Australia,
not everybody might like your particular view, but at least you have a
view. We have got to have a vision for our country and we need a
cultural vision for our country as well and that is why it should have
been well received.
PM: This is not simply my view of Australia, John, by funding the various
agencies of the arts whether it is the Australia Council or the major
institutions or film and television or multi media or what have you it is 
then up to individual creative people to then manage their interests, to
define their own view of Australia and their own view of particular
elements of the arts. So, in a sense, all the Government can be here
and all the Government should be here, is a facilitator.
JL: Yes, why the emphasis on the information super highway as it's called.
Is that tremendously important to Australia's future?
PM: It will be John because I think we are moving into an information age. I
think that we are going to see very refined product of very high value
transmitted around the world and at this point in time a very large
preponderance of the product is English speaking. We are an English
speaking country with a tremendous capacity to develop software and
as you know we have a sophisticated film and television industry
JL: Yes, we do.
PM: And a very high standard education system. So, it seems to me we
are really well set up if we take the advantage, take the option, of
actually producing product for international dissemination on the fibre
optic highway and satellite.
JL: It all amounts to an awful lot of money, but I suppose money shouldn't
be taken into consideration at this time except that you are going to
have the knockers and they are there, who will say and, I suppose, to
a degree correctly, it might have been unfortunate timing because of
the drought, but maybe today's rain puts pay to that criticism.
PM: I think you can do more than one thing at a time.
JL: Well, that's what you and I have talked about before. I mean, it is a
strange sort of government that can't handle more than one thing at a
time, but people quite often want it not to be that way if it doesn't suit
them, but governments must be able to, obviously, all governments at
all levels have got to be able to handle more than one thing at a time.
PM: I met the banks yesterday about the drought and the banks were
saying that they think the structural policy is right, following that
package that I announced on behalf of the Government about three
weeks ago. Now, in respect of the arts we have got a $ 250 million
policy over four years which is roughly $ 60 million a year. Well, the
budget is $ 110,000 million so $ 60 million is not going to break the
bank. But, what it does for the arts is to encourage them, give them
direction and the financial support that, I think, things like, for instance,
John, let me just run through a few of the things: We are establishing
a production fund with the networks and independent producers to
produce higher quality mini-series type, higher quality in television
products for Australian television. Now, I think, that is a thing worth
doing. It is going to create work for our creative people, our 
3
producers, directors, actors, writers, in the same way we're doing the
same for SBS. In the Australia Council we're picking up a major
organisation's board to pick up bodies such as the Australian Chamber
Orchestra, the Bell Shakespeare Company, perhaps, the Sydney
Symphony Orchestra...
JL: Who is complaining the loudest?
PK: As you well know, once you do anything with the arts there is always
some criticism but, really, the criticism has been very mooted. There
has been tremendous support for this statement. I am delighted with it
and I'm glad that we were able to do it.
JL Yes, well, I think it is tremendously important. Just back to the banks,
quickly, what was their reaction when you asked them to go gently with
the farmers?
PK: Well, they have been, generally, going gently with the farmers. That is,
from... JL I tell you what, a lot of farmers out there would not agree with that.
PK: No, but if all the farms who could not meet their way, meet their
obligations, had their properties tipped into the market, you would
have a collapse in farm values. Now, the banks, sensibly, have not
done that. And, I think that given the fact that under the exceptional
circumstances arrangements that I announced a couple of weeks ago,
we are meeting up to 100 per cent of the interest cost on borrowings.
And, under the non exceptional circumstances RAS that's the Rural
Adjustment Scheme we're meeting partial interest payments. That's
keeping the banks going, that's keeping them in the game, and it is
keeping the weight off a lot of farmers.
JL: Yes, well, let's hope that today's rain perhaps might be the beginning
of the end of the drought, at least in some areas. Just before we leave
each other, back to the Creative Nation statement, are there changes
in the pipeline for the cross media ownership rules?
PK: No. There are no changes in the pipeline. But, what I was saying the
other night is we're going to see a time not far away, John, when the
cable that comes under your fence is going to be an optic fibre cable
or a coaxial cable which hangs from it. And, that will give you the
capacity for somewhere between fifty and a couple of hundred
channels of product. And, when that goes in, one of the products is
going to be telephones. So, you're going to have telephones and pay
television and other kinds of interactive products on the one line. The
expression for that is convergence. And, as we get convergence the
separation we now have between radio, television, print and telephony 
4
is going to change. That was my point. The technology and, of
course, above all of that, the satellites.
JL: So, there are not going to be any changes in the regulations for.., the
reason I'm asking the question is it is a question being asked by a
few what does Rupert Murdoch want in return for setting up the big
film studio?
PK: Well, he has asked for nothing. I have got to say that, I think, what he
would procure from this is because he has the Star Satellite now
transmitting from the Middle East to the Russian Far East and down to
Queensland, and that huge part of Asia, a lot of it will be not all of it,
obviously English speaking product. And, Australia is standing in
that part of the world, the unique nature of our film and television
industry means the system is hungry for product. I think he sees it
as a great opportunity to take, if you like, non American, English
speaking product out of Australia and put it on, basically, that
international system.
JL: OK. Well, thank you very much for your time, let's keep our fingers
crossed about the rain for the sake of the farmers. Is it raining heavily
in Canberra?
PK: Yes, we've got thunder here and it's coming down in sheets.
JL: OK. Well, let's hope it spreads all over Australia and thanks for your
time.
PK: Good, John.
ends. 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
REPORT ON ONGOING REFORM IN THE A US TRALIA N PUBLIC SERVICE
I am very pleased to welcome the Report of the Australian Public Service
Management Advisory Board ( MAB) on ' Ongoing Reform in the Australian Public
Service', tabled in Parliament today ( Thursday).
The Report is the first of its kind by MAB a body which advises the Government,
through the Prime Minister, on significant issues in the management of the
Australian Public Service.
The Report highlights, in particular, the role of the public service in advancing
Government initiatives in the past 12-18 months, including the development and
preparation of the Discussion Paper, Restoring Full Employment, and the
Government's White Paper, Working Nation, the implementation of the
Government's decision to re-focus industry policy through the establishment of
AusIndustry, and the development of measures in health policy to improve the
responsiveness of the private health insurance sector.
I am especially pleased that the Report notes improved levels of service to clients
by the public service, as seen for example, in recent refinements to the
Department of Social Security's claims processing and the Australian Taxation
Office's new Electronic Lodgement Service for taxation returns.
The Report concludes that, while the APS has made good progress in focussing
on results arising mainly from public sector reforms over the past decade there
remains scope for further development in some areas.
Among the main challenges ahead are the promotion of public service values,
particularly the importance of ethical conduct, the continuing evolution of a more
flexible public management framework, and adaptation to social, technological
and demographic change.
I would like to thank the members of the Management Advisory Board for their
Report. It demonstrates that the Australian Public Service is an institution which
has an important and valuable role in serving the interests of all Australians.
CAN BERRA
October 1994 TL: 20.-Oct .94 17: 05 NOo011R '. U01G 



PRIME MINISTER 93/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
Premier Fahey's new plan for the so-called " greening of the Cahill
Expressway" gives everybody an indication of the complete botch Premier
Fahey and his Government are making of the founding site of the nation.
Premier Fahey is on the record a number of times saying he knows the
Expressway should go but he now wants to spend money retaining it and
apparently knocking out one traffic lane for landscaping.
If this Expressway is as important to traffic as he alleged it was when the
Commonwealth Government proposed removal of the Expressway, how is the
State Government now able to reduce the traffic capacity of the roadway?
The NSW Government is apparently now issuing a questionnaire to Sydneysiders
asking them how to beautify the Quay. No decision making just
questions.
The obvious way to beautify the Quay is to take the eyesore down.
This hotch-potch proposed by Mr Fahey will not do anything to reduce the
widespread perception that Mr Fahey's stewardship of the City is bereft of
any of the vision needed to celebrate the foundation-site of the country as the
new century and the Olympics approach.
Canberra 21 October 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO MTIA ANNUAL DINNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, TUESDAY, 24 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Let me thank the Association very much for this invitation and Graham for
those words of introduction. I have always liked coming to MVTIA dinners. I
have been doing it now, on and off, since the early 1970s which is probably
too long, but there it is. But the fact is, I have always believed in the
Australian manufacturing industry. I have always believed in the capacity of
Australian managers to take up challenges and do well. And, as you know, in
my own family we were in the heavy engineering business and I've had, from
boyhood, a fairly unique opportunity to understand how innovative Australian
companies can be and how hard they try. So, as a consequence, I am very
gratified by the success which the industry has had in recent years by its
leadership and by its confidence and I am delighted to see the title of the
program " A Dynamic Year for Australia'' and the sense of confidence which
Graham mentioned in his introductory remarks.
One of the nicest compliments I have been paid in recent times was paid to
me by Bert Evans. Bert is a nice person and he does pay compliments, but
not that often to me. But he said look I'm a member of the 180 degree club.
And I said what's that Bert. He said well I'm one of the people that
believed in tariff protection, I'm now one of the people who believe that the
policies introduced over the last decade have given us a future we could
never have had in the past. He didn't go on to say he is a true believe, but
he's a believer. And I thought this was a tremendous admission not just of
honesty and frankness, but of somebody who is prepared to see an
opportunity and grasp it and speak for an industry which has seen an
opportunity and grasped it. Because it is true and I think Bert would
acknowledge that if we were having this discussion, or a meeting such as this
years ago or even 10 years ago, the tariff drum would be well and truly
beaten. And doubters would be admonished. But the fact is, now, with tariffs
coming down, we've seen in the period since, manufacturing production
double, we've seen manufactured exports triple. And as a consequence, one 
of the things which is giving us a greater capacity to trade into the world and
to reduce our debt and to service it is our capacity to produce goods and
services. And that, of course, we are seeing very strongly with manufacturing
industry. Graham gave you the figures. In the middle 1980s we were
exporting 14 per cent of our GDP, that's today 22 per cent of our GDP. But
we only need to go through a change such as that, continue that change and
it won't be that long before we are well and truly above the ratio of
comparable countries. That is, somewhere between 22 and 30 per cent of
GDP. So we are well and truly on the way I think and we are seeing such
great sophistication come into manufacturing as the competitive breezes
have come into the economy, as the place has loosened up. As the
competitiveness has changed, as the wage profit share changes, as the focus
on productivity improved, as the exchange rate garnered competitiveness for
us, all of these things have seen tremendous change. And one gets a
tremendous, I think, boost of encouragement going to things like the launch of
the Collins Class Submarine: the quietest, most effective conventional
submarine in the world, made in this country. And when you look at the
sophistication of the weapon systems, one can't pretend that such a thing can
be whistled up out of nowhere, or that we claim it to be first class but it really
isn't. In fact, it is. And that, along with the capacity to produce frigates, and
other categories of naval vessels, sophisticated aeronautical products and
everything then from super computing to remote sensing and all of the other
technological things which we have managed to do, all proves, I think, that
given the challenge, Australian manufacturing can get in there and measure
up to it and also seeing what is coming. I mean, it is delightful for me to hear
references to APEC at a dinner such as this. Or to see the MTIA set up in
Indonesia, which it has, and to participate in the Australia Indonesia Today
exhibition which is on this year, the largest trade exhibition we've ever had.
To see the MTIA there and actually going hard at it does give one
tremendous confidence that we are actually going to do something pretty
clever in this country.
Now I took on board Graham's remarks about microeconomic reform and I
think microeconomic reform has to continue. A lot of it's behind us, but there
is still a lot of it ahead of us, in all sectors. But we shouldn't forget, I think,
that so much has been done in the labour market, even if more is to be done.
In telecommunications, in air transport. Just take air transport as an example.
Fares have declined by 30 per cent, passengers have risen by 80 per cent in
2 1/ 2 years. Or in telecommunications if one looks at the tariffs now in
telecommunications and the services it is a revolution we are seeing there.
We've seen it in the ports and wharves, the trouble is that the yeilds are not
going to the people who needs them, that is the shippers, they are staying in
the hands of stevedoring companies and state government bodies. But the
primary change is behind it and the Commonwealth Government this
government has paid for much of the redundancies and the trade union
movement has made most of the adjustments. We're now turning containers
around here, in this country, equivalent to ports like Rotterdam. We've got
lower than OECD crew manning levels on our ships and going lower, but we
are not yet seeing this in lower freight rates and we need to. 
But we need other changes too, and that is in places like power and water
and gas. And I notice the Leader of the Opposition saying to you today. He
said that ' four or five years ago, he thought of microeconomic reform' that's
me ' and would have told you that it was on the top of the Government's
agenda. Today he has almost completely forgotten about it.' Well I didn't
forget about it at the COAG meeting and I didn't forget about it trying to push
Hilmer past a whole lot of conservative Premiers and finding an uphill battle
all the way. And I have always thought it a great irony that a Labor Prime
Minister should be in there saying to a set of Liberal and National Party
Premiers to believe in competition and try and get them committed to it in
places like electricity, water and gas. I don't mind late converts providing
they come on board. But it is in these areas where the micro reform has to
continue. Graham also mentioned the labour market. And I think one needs to reflect
there upon the success we have had to date. And that is we've now got a
labour market which is much more supple and flexible than it has ever been.
We've moved off centralised wage fixing. We are now moving strongly down
the road of enterprise bargaining, particularly with certified agreements with
companies and trade unions. And we are opening up this field, the non-union
field, with enterprise flexibility agreements. Now I know that the recent
decision of the Commission rankles the MTIA and they are, I think, appealing
the decision about absorption into over award payments of payments in the
safety net. But importantly, I think the MTIA's position isn't that there
shouldn't be a safety net, they believe there should, but they don't want it
caught up in other agreements which are not certified. Well these are things I
think that a view is capable of being put upon. But we are told that of these
enterprise flexibility agreements, that is in areas where unions are not
involved but covered by federal award conditions, that they can be varied and
suspended and that, though some unions have opposed their suspension, of
the 12 so far proposed, only one has been rejected and there are another
or so in the pipeline likely to be approved. So I don't think that the MTIA
should shy away from enterprise flexibility agreements, even if some smaller
companies are at pains not to have unions involved. And the reason, I think,
why we have this condition that unions have a right to be heard, is because it
is the suspension of the award which is material to their interest in other
sectors or other companies within the same sector and hence, is of interest to
them.
At any rate these are things, which I think, in which time is going to tell. I
think the enterprise flexibility agreements are going to be an important field of
change for business and for the MTIA membership, as is indeed the larger
companies who actually make green fields agreements with trade unions
under the certified agreement area. At any rate, it's all light years from where
it was even half a dozen years ago. And, of course, eons from where it was
in the late 1 970s and the early 1 980s where we had 16 and 17 per cent
wages growth with no productivity cover. Just banging its way right in, 
hammering its way into the inflation rate and hammering its way into interest
rates, low growth and with it, of course, low employment.
Now I want to saying something tonight about monetary policy, interest rates,
and the budget because today was an important day with the adjustment of
interest rates up by 1 percentage point. I think the thing to say is that we
should draw confidence from today's decision. That is, confidence in two
things, that we are growing strongly but we are going to manage the growth
and that the interest rate rise is basically about smoothing the growth and
prolonging the period of growth. That is, prolonging the period of this
recovery right through the 1990s. Not letting it get to an explosive cocktail
where more drastic remedial surgery would otherwise need to be undertaken.
Now, I notice the Leader of the Opposition today has attacked us for this
saying that the Government has gone, he told you, on an extravagant
spending spree and as a consequence, they are ending up now with rising
interest rates. Well this is the same Opposition that told you when the
government introduced the One Nation package that we would destroy the
economy and that the 4 per cent growth forecast were fairyland stuff. Well it
is no accident that Australia has pulled the right policy levers in recent years.
It is no accident we have been right at the top of the OECD league table of
growth and inflation and employment. It is no accident that in that survey by
the Economist magazine each month, we are at the top of it and we have
been at the top of it now for the last 15 months or so. And that is because we
are growing in excess of 4 per cent or thereabouts and we are starting to see
a lot of attendant employment growth come through as well.
You need to have a bit of memory in this game, even a short term one helps.
But at the last budget when we said that our forecast for investment growth
was 14 1/ 2 per cent, that was ridiculed too. But now it is coming through,
everyone is saying well it's too strong what are you going to do about it?
Well the answer is we are trying to clear the decks so that investment can
continue, at the same time smooth it and make clear that the interest rate
adjustments which we have are ones which will, as I say, maintain the
recovery and make it even longer than it might otherwise be.
So the simple message is that we have worked so hard so far to bring about a
durable recovery, we are not going to throw it away now. At its core, this
decision to lift rates shows that the Government is determined to manage the
growth and manage it well. As I said earlier, we should draw confidence from
it. Now let me say this about the markets, because, I was just saying to Graham,
I think it is very important when commentators for industries such as the MVTIA
go onto radio or television, they should make the distinction between
business, the employing bodies of this country, and the financial markets.
Because a lot of people in the community think markets is business. In fact
markets are the financial markets, the people who shuffle the paper all day.
And the markets, I suppose, are entitled to be dubious about inflation in this 
country after many years of an indifferent inflationary performance. But as we
consolidate low inflation, markets should recognise the change and factor it
into the equation. Ours today is a low inflation economy, but you would never
know it from the bond rates. If you look at the bond rates, they appear to be
factoring in an inflation rate 5 or 6 per cent. That is, with bond rates over
per cent and real interest rate of 4, gets you back to an inflation rate of 5 or 6.
Now I don't think there would be a person in this room in business that
believes there are wage or price pressures out there that would give support
to that 5 or 6 per cent assessment yet it is there. It is there in many other
countries too, but it's here and it shouldn't be. So it's 5 or 6 per cent, when
the underlying rate of inflation is 2. And this week we will have another
consumer price index out and we will have a further indication of whether
inflation is getting away. I don't think it is. But to be considering 5 or 6 in the
face of 2 is a very long bow on the part of the markets indeed.
We have become a low inflation economy and we should draw credits for that
and it should be reflected in lower premiums. So, at some point, if we
continue to churn out low inflation numbers the markets are going to have to
cut their cloth accordingly. That is, the bond yields will have to come down if
their implicit inflation forecast is not realised.
Some commentators are saying that we should tighten both fiscal and
monetary policy as the economy strengthens, that we should not rely
excessively on monetary policy. Well, let me say, I couldn't agree more, but
let's get clear what this means. It doesn't mean that we need to change the
budget every time we hear a piece of good economic news and it doesn't
mean interest rates have risen because fiscal policy is not tight enough. As
the Governor of the Reserve Bank said last week, interest rates are there
now to smooth the recovery. As I said earlier, to prolong it. They are not
there because of pressures on the supply of money. The higher rates are
there basically to have their effect upon activity.
So, as I say, it doesn't mean interest rates have risen because fiscal policy is
not tight enough. What it does mean is that the fiscal stimulus we provided to
get the recovery going should be progressively withdrawn as economic
activity strengthens. And, that is precisely what our medium term fiscal
strategy does and the deficit target of 1 per cent of GDP by 1996/ 97 is at the
core of it. So, monetary policy will play its role, but fiscal policy has that
medium term strategy.
If economic circumstances change fundamentally, sound economic
management dictates fiscal policy may need to be modified, but the important
thing is that is not the case now. The economic outlook has not changed
significantly from our May forecast when we framed the ' Working Nation'
initiatives and reaffirmed our program of fiscal consolidation. We therefore
do not intend to bring down a mini budget or to adjust the current fiscal
strategy as the Opposition and some financial commentators have been
demanding. 
We will review policy in the context of next year's budget, but at this stage
there does not appear to be a case for a large change. Now, let me just
briefly explain why. We are already tightening fiscal policy, not that we are
getting much credit for it. Some people conveniently forget the 1993/ 94
Budget. They conveniently forget all the hijinx in the Senate. They
conveniently forget all the attempts to try and stop the tax changes and tax
bills going through. They forget the fact that in that Budget we announced we
would be pulling a massive $ 9 billion out of the economy by 1996/ 97 $ 9,000
million out by 1996/ 97. That is, we were prepared on a discretionary basis to
cut $ 9 billion from the economy to pull the budget deficit back by almost 2 per
cent of GDP. That is in world terms an absolutely enormous cut. And, it is
not $ 9 billion that will be coming from higher growth. This is not $ 9 billion
coming in from the proceeds of activity. That is, more people in employment,
higher company profits, more tax receipts, $ 9 billion coming from there. This
is a discretionary $ 9 billion $ 9 billion which has been decided on by the
Government. But, when you tell that to the deficit daleks and the others what response do
you get? ' Oh well, we know about that, we have stuck that in our pocket, now
what about the next $ 9 billion?" Well, of course, they never tell you how to do
it, they just tell you you need to change it and, of course, most of these
people are tired retainers on the old broadsheets they have been there for
years singing the same tune that is, no deficit could be too little, no surplus
too large regardless of the economic circumstances. These are the same
people who said our growth and deficit reduction forecasts were
unachievable. You see, there is a great injustice in public comment in this
country, probably in most countries, but it is particularly true in this that they
are never accountable. So, if you drag these people like Max Walsh and
Paddy McGuiness and Terry McRann and all these other characters back
and say ' but what did you say at the time?'. They said that growth was
unachievable and the deficit reduction forecasts were unachievable. That is
all wrong. They have all been proved wrong, but they have now moved on
hoping that the community forgets what they said in the first place. Well, the
community probably does, but I don't. I tend to keep an eye on them. It is
pretty easy to keep an eye on them, they have been in the same place for
years. Well, what are we to do? Remember this, the public sector of Australia is the
third lowest in the OECD. This Labor Government has turned a relatively
large public sector into a small one. Are we to slash the social welfare
system that is carefully targeted? That is recognised internationally as
equitable and effective and holds our nation together. Are we to increase the
rate of company tax when we have, at last, a rate that is comparable to our
Asian neighbours? Just remember this, that the tariff cuts, the cost to
revenue from the tariff cuts and the company tax changes of 1993, cost the
budget $ 12 billion and the tariff cuts and the company tax changes cost us
about $ 5 billion every year. So, what do we do? Put them back up? Rebuild
the tariff wall? Jack up the company tax rates or increase the personal
income tax rates? Is there anyone out there looking for something higher 
than 47 per cent? Because that is one of the options that people speak of.
Or, are we to scrap the tax concessions for superannuation that encourages
Australians to provide for their own future or hop back into the long term
unemployed by knocking the White Paper changes out to leave a permanent
underclass buried away out there while the rest of us move on to prosperity.
Or, introduce a GST which was knocked over so comprehensively by the
public at the last election.
So, that is what these things are about. They are not jokes. Hopping into
spending in education or in TAFE or into universities or cutting back the
growth rate or cutting back, absolutely, payments to the aged or any of the
other targeted areas of family assistance, these are the sorts of things that
the Government, if accepting this advice, would have to do or stick up the tax
rates which I've just mentioned to you. So, the fact of the matter is that we
are maintaining fiscal consolidation at a pace appropriate to our economic
circumstances. Let me repeat that, appropriate to our economic
circumstances. The forecast deficit for 1994/ 95 is 2.5 per cent of GDP at a
time when unemployment is about 9.5 per cent. So, if you want a
comparison, the last time unemployment was 9.5 per cent, it was in 1984 and
the deficit was 4.1 per cent of GDP. Now, with the same unemployment rate,
it is 2.5 per cent. So, it demonstrates that, I mean if unemployment and the
need for the economy to grow and create jobs is an indicator here, it means
that the deficit is already substantially consolidated when compared with that
period. And, from 1993/ 94 to 1996/ 97 we will have cut the deficit by 2.5 per
centage points. That is pulling 1 per cent of GDP a year from it nearly
$ 5,000 million a year stimulus taking it out as we go along.
So, it is for that reason that we have received an appropriate
acknowledgment from the OECD which says that the Australian fiscal
consolidation is amongst the fastest in the world and our deficit reduction
target is only tougher, certainly tougher than all G7 member countries except
for Japan. So, I think, these things should be kept in some sensible
perspective. Let me say a couple of things about superannuation. When I became
Treasurer in 1983 we had $ 40 billion in super funds. As a result of the
Government's policies under the Accord with the ACTU and the
Government's superannuation guarantee charge we will see super funds
rising from $ 180 billion where they are today to around $ 350 billion by the
year 2000 $ 40 billion in 1983, $ 180 billion now, $ 350 billion by the year
2000. By the Year 2013 the guarantee will be adding two percentage points
of GDP to our national savings each year. It is difficult, I think, to overstate
the significance of this. It is a breathtaking reform and it is hardly surprising
that it has been acknowledged internationally as leading the world. We have
got, in fact, the World Bank imploring other countries to adopt a retirement
incomes policy similar to Australia and, again, the Economist Magazine said
recently that Europe would do well to consider our system as a way of dealing
with the budgetary impact of increasing pension costs for their aging
population. 
So, this is an enormous reform, one that the Government is very proud of and
one that complements fiscal policy and the adding to and the addition to
domestic savings in this country. The one, I might say, that our opponents do
not support because they want to go back to a superannuation system which
doesn't have a guarantee charge, where there is a contribution by each
employee in the country accessing their superannuation tax provisions, but
rather it being basically for those in the public sector and those in well off
private sector employment, but for the great mass of people they could only
get there by way of certain tax incentives and not under a specific charge.
Now, all of these things, I think, are important when one tries to look at the
totality of policy. So, perhaps let me conclude on these points and to say
this, that, I think, Australia has come an enormously long way in the last
dozen years or so. As Graham remarked earlier '. We are now exporting 22
per cent of our GDP instead of 14 per cent. The debt service ratio on our
debt that is the proportion of our exports that we commit to servicing our
national debt has fallen from 22 per cent to 11 per cent. So, our capacity to
service our on going debt has improved dramatically. That has come about
by greater exports and lower interest rates.
All this means, I think, is that we. continue to grow the Australian economy,
but again we want to see private sector investment move in there and we will
gradually withdraw the government stimulus as the private sector investment
comes in. But, we are not going to pull the rug out of the pace where the
whole thing collapses and, I think, this is one of the key points. While
monetary policy and interest rates will apply a proper supporting role in
smoothing the growth and extending the recovery period,
The Metal Trades Industry Association and its affiliates can play an even
greater role than they role they have played to date in growing out our
manufacturing base and going into exports, but there is just one point that I
might take issue with Graham about and that is, it is not simply microeconomic
reform that is slowing the growth. If you like, that is an inhibition to
a faster rate of growth in exports. One of these studies, done by McKinsey
and company recently, showed when they looked at the 700 exporters of
those with the fastest growing rate of exports in the categories of production
they found that they were not very different to thousands of other companies
the products weren't different, the structures of the companies were not
different, the balance sheets were not different it was just that one group
was enlightened and saw the opportunity and another group didn't. It
underlines what has always been a problem in Australia and that is a real
problem with entrepreneurship. That is, we are getting to the stage now were
in the period of an open economy and deregulation the good managers are
now climbing to the top, but we have been through three or four waves of
people on the way through.
Obviously, in the great body of companies there is a lot more potential there
that hasn't come out which has got nought to do with ports and wharves or 
telephones or anything else. It is just the fact is that they are happy to sit
here in Australia and work off the domestic economy, not understanding there
is a greater economy abroad. Now, we have got to tell them about that and, I
think, the Metal Trades Industry Association and its focus on Asia is one of
the key bodies in doing that and as a consequence more companies will be in
the business. If then we can help them with a more supple economy, better
micro-economic reform and the rest well then, we really are, I think, in there
for the long run.
So, don't mistake this point. There are very few, as Ralph Willis said last
week eloquently in the House of Representatives, there are very few
industrial countries that are anywhere near us at the moment in fiscal policy,
in growth, in employment, in cultural change so we shouldn't underestimate
our success, but it has been put there by a decade of hard work and change
and it is only by doing it together and, I think, this is one thing the MTIA does
well. It does talk to the trade unions, it talks to the government, it
understands there is a place for it in this society and it tries to work things
out. It is this sort of approach, I think, that pays results. In a consensus
economy you will always do better than one which is basically adversarial.
As I said, I always enjoy speaking to the MTIA. It is a body of substance, of
people who actually do things. To get out there and make things, go and flog
their wares around the world and there is always the objective test if you are
a manufacturer it either works or it doesn't. This tends to concentrate the
managerial mind on some of the other more esoteric areas of the public
debate and that is why, I think, speaking to an industry organisation certainly
beats the hell out of speaking to financial markets every day of the week.
Thank you again for inviting Annita and me along tonight and as I say, I have
been coming a long time now and I want to keep coming back. Arthur Calwell
said to me when I first came to Canberra he said ' you know the thing to do
after each election Paul, when the caucus meets be in it, because it is pretty
hard to be in the game if you are not there.' Well, I could just put a little
variation on the theme and say after each election at the Metal Trades
Industry Annual Dinner, I hope I am invited to speak, of course, as a Minister,
as Prime Minister and to see my party the great vehicle of Australian social
and economic reform chart the way to the end of the century. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, SYDNEY TOWN HALL, WEDNESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Today's inflation rate of .6 per cent for the quarter and 1.9 per cent for
the year, I think, indicates that Australian inflation is broadly in check.
That we again, in an underlying sense, have an inflation rate at 2 or
around 2 or under 2, this squares with the point I have been making
and the Treasurer has been making that this is a long way from the 5
6 per centage points of inflation which the bond markets have now
factored into rates. So, as the country keeps producing low inflation
rates, I think, people have got to accept the fact that Australia has
changed its form. That is, that it has broken the back of inflation and it
is capable of a low inflationary performance, though of course, that
inflationary performance will always need to be monitored and worked
on in this country as in other countries. But, what we have here is
what a lot of other countries don't have and that is relative price
stability and strong employment growth. Now, a lot of countries which
have a premium only on price stability don't have employment growth.
This is true in Europe and it is true of other countries which focus only
on price stability. The trick is to get both and by the mix of policy we
have I am happy to say that Australia has both. It has got a relatively
strong rate of economic growth, 4 per cent employment growth and
around 2 per cent inflation. This is a very magic mix, but we have got
to keep working on it, be vigilant about it.
J: On those growth rates, Prime Minister there seems to be a bit of a
difference between yourself and Mr Willis
PM: None what so ever. This is just a beat up from The Financial Review.
It is not in any other newspaper and why should I bother with it,
frankly.
J: ( inaudible) the drought 
2
PM: The drought will obviously knocka' bit out of our GDP probably about
half a percentage point over the course of the year and depending on
how long the drought goes, of course, it can have broader implications
for the country as a whole. The good thing is that the non-farm
economy is performing strongly and, of course, there's low inflation.
ends 



1k4J4J-L 1i-kJlkdeoLzk
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION FOLLOWING LECTURE TO THE
ASIA-AUSTRALIA INSTITUTE, BRISBANE, 26 OCTOBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Q: I notice when you were talking about the focus of Australian trade you
spoke of the Asia-Pacific and including the United States, but India
was not included. Now, India is a country of 600 or 800 million now
with projections to be quite possibly the fifth largest economy in
years, you did not refer to that, is that intentional or
PM: Well, India is not a part of APEC, not that the talk was solely or
exclusively about APEC. I think there are substantial opportunities in
India, but I think that it is a market, probably, we have been a bit late in
accessing and one can't deduce from that that the opportunities have
gone. I'm sure that is not true and some Australian companies are
drifting there, as you know, one of our banks has got a major banking
facility there. But, it is only, I suppose, in recent times that the Indian
economy has started to really open up and that is probably where the
interest is starting to come. We have had Indian Prime Minsters and
Ministers coming to Australia periodically and periodically we have had
these commitments and declarations of interest in one another, but
they tend to fade away and change as Prime Ministers change.
Therefore, to get the consistency of interest there is, I think, quite a
challenge and would require a very large effort on behalf of the
government and on behalf of the private interests in this country. It
just seemed to me that for as far as I am concerned the more
immediate and obvious place to start this sort of effort in the region
was with Indonesia which is strategically more significant to us and
one which, I think, politically had languished over the years.
So, there has been that focus, the focus on ASEAN because it is part
of ASEAN and we trade with Singapore and Thailand et cetera and we
have got the big established trading linkages with Japan, Korea and
increasingly with China. And, the fact that APEC in some respects
defines them too has, if you like, sharpened our focus. But, it is not to
say that I don't think there are opportunities in India or that we won't be
exploiting them. But, I do think that working closer to home as we are 
and working within the framework of APEC is a case of prioritising
one's effort I suppose.
Q: Prime Minister, I wonder if we could publicly have a response from you
to Professor Fitzgerald's response to your speech?
PM: You mean the last part of his remarks about east Asia?
Q: I mean the remarks about the potential for new and alternative
groupings to APEC to appear?
PM: I think what Stephen was speaking of was at some point an emerging
confidence in Asia about Asia itself. About an Asian Asia. That is,
one where there is a notion of some perpetuality in economic activity,
that is, self sustenance about their economic activity within the area
we broadly describe as Asia and a more intuitive understanding of
culture, cultural differences, even cultural sensitivities within an Asian
context. I think that is entirely possible and to some extent that has
always been there. APEC is not there because it is the first thing we
thought of. It is there because we don't want to see the United States
stay at home with NAFTA, we don't want to see the United States
become more inward looking, we don't want to see it's Latin agenda
overtake its international ambitions and to keep it more strategically
engaged in Asia means that we don't see the world drop into three
blocs Europe, the Americas and Asia. So, there is a sense to APEC,
it marries the United States to East Asia, it keeps the United States
from going protectionist and unilateralist and it gets them involved in a
multilateral way, it extends that strategic cover for Japan which keeps
Japan away from the development of its own strategic force which, I
think, keeps the temperature down in North Asia and at the same time
APEC gives Japan a chance to rebuild and change its political
structures and find a new place for itself in Asia and the Asia-Pacific.
Whereas, I think, an exclusively Asian structure today would subjugate
Japanese interest, or attempt to, which is not good for Japan and it is
not good for us and it is not good for the United States.
Therefore, APEC fits the bill, I think, in terms of the economic
imperative for the Asian economies, the need for strategic peace in
North Asia, keeping the US out of home and well and truly on the
streets is a very important thing, I think, to be doing at this point and
before there will be any notion of an emerging group as Stephen sees
it, will be a time further down the trail when China's power as an
economic and military power will be greater. Such a region will have a
very heavy influence on China and one couldn't be sure that everyone
else is going to sign up to that. I'm quite sure the Ambassador would
be quite happy for people to be more influenced by China over time
which is a completely reasonable national aspiration.
So, with Japan, we often say it and it is worth saying again, Japan is
Asian, but it is not part of Asia and before it signs up to be part of Asia
there is going to have to be a lot of political change in Japan and it's 
not here yet. The very interesting thing is the Stephen referred to
the Malaysian proposal which has a lot of the antecedence about it
that APEC has. But you see Japan won't touch it, because for the
reasons, I think, that I am saying and that is that Japan wants to keep
US strategic cover and US engagement militarily and economically in
the region, though, I am sure it has sympathies with the general
proposition which Malaysia has put.
Q: Prime Minister, this is not so much a question as an addition to your
comment on India. That is, that now as you said the doors are being
opened, Austrade is in the process of establishing three trading places
in India for the first time. As you know it all costs money and
fortunately you gave me a very generous minister in Bob McMullan
and when we submitted to him the need to be represented more
directly in India he agreed to meet the bill. But this is happening right
now, so I thought you would might like to..
PM: Interesting for the audience and for me.
Q: Prime Minister, I am delighted at your enthusiasm for APEC which we
are all familiar with. As you know we invented it at our research
school.
PM: Everybody says that.
Q: That's right, but I think Ross Garnaut and Peter Drysdale would make
a claim to it.
PM: No, I think the people that make a claim to it I could tell you where
APEC came from. It came from Sandy Hollway in Bob Hawke's office
and it came from someone in the department. That's where it came
from and the Heads of Government meeting came from me and that is
the end of the story.
Q: As a professional historian I find it very interesting to watch history
being created. The question I was going to ask was when we look at
APEC, of course, we are all inclined to a great enthusiasm and
optimism. But, there are those who look at our region and see other
more worrying things on horizon in particular there are some people
very concerned that about extensive defence modernisation programs
in the region, whether or not one feels this really constitutes an arms
race. Certainly there are offensive capacities being built and I wonder
if you would like to speak for a few minutes about your picture of the
strategic environment of our region over the next few years?
PM: That is a very tough subject, I think, to be crystal ball gazing about or
to be talking prescriptively about how that will change. I don't find it
too difficult to understand that with the cold war, bi-polarity taken away
and some of the regional tensions becoming more manifest that people
take some defensive steps in terms of their own strategic capacity. It
doesn't surprise me. We are seeing some substantial expenditures in I 
the area, but again, where it matters in North Asia the Japanese
political system is largely confining its interests again to a self defence
force. It still spends a substantial proportion of its GDP on it, but
again, it is a very clear political commitment to maintaining the force as
a self defence force without an offensive capability. China is spending
a substantial proportion of its national income on modernisation of its
defence force. This, countries generally do. There is some concern in
the region about the extension of Chinese maritime capacity. I'm sure
everyone will continue to keep an eye on that. The nuclear capacity of
North Korea is a matter of concern, but again, I think the agreement
which has been brokered with the United States will go a substantial
way to coming to terms with that and I think the other sub-regional
expenditures within ASEAN and those other places are such as I think
probably most countries with any financial capability will choose to
upgrade their armed forces and to select modern and appropriate
equipment. I think the change in the capacity of countries in this
region to improve their military capabilities is, in fact, a function of their
wealth. As their wealth has risen so has their capacity to do things.
Not everyone has done it well as you know. There is a lot of junk
around the world and the thing not do is buy junk because in the end if
what modern conflicts are showing us is that it is the razor's edge that
matters. But, because the strategic environment is so quiet, I think,
people can see the effective life of the stuff through and they'll come
out the other side during a phase when, I hope, Australia will be a
substantial supplier of defence products.
So, I don't find a remarkably uncertain or inexplicable development on
our hands.
Q: Prime Minister, I just wonder if I could ask you a question about the
forthcoming APEC summit. There was a report that China has rejected
the notion that APEC should promote binding agreements that it would
only agree to a general goal rather than any binding agreement. My
question is in two parts. Do you see the APEC leaders producing a
binding agreement or merely a loose declaration of a general goal and
what is your position, in principal, on the debate about whether APEC
liberalisation should be on a Most Favoured Nation ( MEN) basis or on
a preferential basis?
PM: The very nature of the APEC meeting is that it is unstructured that the
leaders meet themselves without officials. And if one looks at the
success in Seattle with the adoption of a second meeting therefore
giving the APEC leaders some form as a forum, and the adoption of
trade investment, investment agreements, trade facilitation issues et
cetera, I think, the lesson from that is that the leaders when they get
together, if they wish, can get things done and that is what I hope will
happen at Bogor.
Again, this will be a very fluid thing and it will be fluid right until the
moment it meets. It is a most ambitious undertaking. Two years ago,
let me tell you this, I first raised the notion of the APEC area meeting 
at heads of government or leaders level with George Bush when he
came to Australia on new years day 1992. That is to answer my
friends question here, that is where it started. I then opened it up with
President Soeharto, with President Kim Young Sam and others around
the region. That was just a couple of years ago, but already we have
got it to the point where we have been able to have a first meeting at
President Clinton's invitation where it has gone to a second meeting at
the behest of President Soeharto and where we have already adopted
a substantial trade liberalisation agenda. Now, this is taking APEC a
long way in a very short time, but, I think, Australia has been hungry
for change and ambitious for it. We have supported President
Soeharto in his attempt to move the agenda to trade liberalisation.
There is now quite a deal of support for that. One of the things that
surprised me is how quickly this has been internalised in Australia.
People have stuck that in their pocket as though it is a fait accompli:
' oh that's that bit done, what's next?' The sort of rampant naivety of
this and I am not suggesting this is your view Greg ( Sheridan) because
it isn't, but the rampant naivety of this is I mean it is a terrible thing
in the Australian media that everything has such a short span of
attention now, that serious and complex issues are dealt with quickly:
one night on television, a follow up story in the day's paper done
that's it. Well, big issues like this just go on and on and I hope that we
can get to a declaratory position at Bogor. At this stage, it looks like
there is every possibility that we will, but let's get there first before we
accept it and internalise it and take it as part of the commercial wall
paper of the region.
So, there is that about it. When leaders meet and decide something
like this, it is not a loose or waffly declaration, it will mean something.
When you sit half the world's population and half the world's GDP
down and they agree to something, what greater authority needs to be
brought to bear to make it firm? Now, what happens then in its
facilitation is a different question, but that's an entirely subordinate
question to the primary one about the doing of it in the first place.
There are some who in this country who argue about this question
about MFN ( Most Favoured Nation) and preferential, that this needs to
be decided first before you can make any declarations. Well, none of
these people have ever been around cutting tariffs. I'm the only one in
the Australian debate still around who has been in the tariff cutting
business and it is a pretty tough caper to be in let me tell you.
Therefore, the observation I would make is that when one looks at the
very high tariff levels in Asia and the non-tariff barriers, the task of
getting them down is so great that what I say is let's get cracking on
the task, make sure the task whatever we do is GATT consistent and
then worry about whether a particular country wants to extend the
preference or not. That is, whether it's MFN or its preferential. But,
you would swear blind the way some people speak, we have already
got the tariffs down and we are now deciding whether we are going to
let the world in to have a crack at it, have a piece of it or are we going
to keep it to ourselves. At the moment, the task is untouched. So, I 
think the first thing is to in the minds of the APEC leaders, understand
that the velocity of trade and investment will be improved by lower tariff
and non-tariff barriers, to declare that they wish to bring them down on
a phased basis over a period of time and then the third task is to get
on and do it and including in that whether in fact countries want to
extend the preference outside or to contain it.
Now, for my part, I have said tonight and let me repeat. I don't think
that there is any value for us in seeking to develope a bloc in Asia
because that is the thing we are trying to avoid. The whole point of
putting the Americas together with Asia in APEC is not to produce a
preferential area. But, not all countries will take that view. Well, that's
all right, the world isn't simple, but some of this academic debate that
says we've got to tidy that up first before we can move on with the
primary debate is naive and immature in my view. This is a real world
tough issue and it is going to take a long time to work our way through,
but the end result can be a massive improvement in wealth in this
region and we have just got to take the chance and go and do it.
Q: One of the hallmarks, I think, of your Government and Prime
Ministership has been the opening up of trade and links with Asia and
so on. I think that has been something which is very desirable, but
one of the pieces of legislation which has been passed has been the
foreign investment funds legislation or ElF, I think, the intention that,
quite admirably, is to try and capture the Bonds and Skases of the
world, but the way that it has been implemented has been to, on the
ground, to greatly restrict the range of choices for ordinary Australians
to invest in overseas markets and particularly the Asian markets and I
wonder if you'd like to comment. I don't know whether you are aware
of that, but the reality is that we now have, the business that I am
involved in, an enormously lesser choice available to us as a result of
that legislation and I think that the costs of it are far greater than the
government would ever earn in terms of tax and whatever was
intended to be achieved by the passage of it.
PM: Essentially it was a tax efficiency thing. I mean, the alternative is to
run a foreign tax credit system where you bring your dividends home
upon which the local tax has been paid and then you top it up to the
Australian corporate rate. So, if you pay whatever it is, 18 per cent in
Hong Kong or where ever it might be and you bring the dividends
home you top them up to 33. Now, the problem for us was that if you
look at the OECD area, you have Australian companies in Germany, in
France, in Britain running a European business say, where in one
country the corporate rate is 36, the rate in another country is 35, in
another country it is 38, so there is an enormous accounting task
bringing these dividends home and accounting for it if there isn't to be
any primary tax paid here. So, what we said was let's make this
simple, we'll have a white list, if you bring dividends home from
countries on the white list we will assume that the company tax has
been paid there and you don't need to top it up here. But, if it is not on
the white list it is obviously on the back list. The white list extends 
through all of the OECD area, that's the 24 member states of the
OECD, and a large part of Asia and we also have an active income
test and a passive income test so if you are a hole-in-the outfit in Hong
Kong with your name on an accountants door, you don't pass the
active income test, but if you are like Pioneer Concrete and you are
making concrete in Hong Kong you do pass it. So, even though it may
be regarded as tax haven, we don't require a topping up to the
corporate tax rate for the dividends here if you are actively involved in
that country. But, if people are involved there because it is simply a
tax haven or it is low taxed then if it is not on the white list we tax you
on an accumulations basis. That is, not even on a distribution, we tax
you on an accumulations basis.
If you ask most Australian companies are they better off with that
system than a foreign tax credit system, I'm sure they'll answer they
think they are better off with that system. Let me say in some places
take Indonesia where they have specific tax holidays for tax free
development zones or in Malaysia where there are development
zones, under our double tax agreements we recognise tax sparing. In
other words, we regard as legitimate for the purposes of development
of those countries, income earned in those particular parts which are
free of tax or have very low tax rates. So, if you go through the white
list, all the OECD, a large part of Asia, no problem about bringing
dividends home. If you are in a tax haven and you can pass the active
income test, no problem. If you are in a developing country which has
got a development preference, if we give it tax sparing under our
double tax agreement you have got no problem either. That means
that if you have got an active business somewhere and you believe
that the country should be white listed or alternatively that you can
pass the active income test, then I don't think it is much of a problem.
But, there is no doubt there are some countries that are not on the
white list and people can still operate there, it's just that they are taxed
on an accumulations basis as they earn their income and they'll get
assessments from the tax office as that income is declared.
The alternative is to junk the system and go back to a foreign tax credit
system. For major public companies accounting for tax variations of 1
or 2 or 3 per cent across say Europe, or even around this part of the
world is, I think, too much of a burden. Largely I thought this system
was largely working not too badly. I'm not saying that your example is
not without some justice, it may well be, but in all tax things there is no
perfection. You have got to make some rule of thumb issues and the
rule of thumb in making this work is a white list and if you are not on
the white list, well, you know what list you are on.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 94/ 94
MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER TO MEMBERS OF THE
NATIONAL MULTICULTURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL, TO MARK THE
COUNCIL'S INAUGURAL MEETING: 26 OCTOBER 1994
I thank you for agreeing to serve on the National Multicultural Advisory
Council. The task ahead is a very important one for members. I look forward
to the Council's contributions to the Government's efforts to achieve further
advances in our multicultural agenda.
We are a truly multicultural society, and deeply conscious of the fact.
Importantly, there is a widespread view in Australia today that multiculturalism
is a positive thing.
However, it would not be wise simply to rest on the achievements of the past
we must build on them.
To do this we need to re-assess our current policies and what our priorities
are for the future.
A re-assessment of our multicultural policies is of central importance to
Australians as we debate the relevant social, economic and political issues of
today including the issues related to national identity.
The formation of the Council comes at a critical time in this debate. I place
great importance on your task of updating the National Agenda for a
Multicultural Australia.
I look forward to hearing your views about the policy relevance of
multicultural issues leading to the year 2000 and beyond and wish you well in
your work.
PJ KEATING
CANBERRA 
NATIONAL MULTICULTURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
TERMS OF REFERENCE
1994-95
TERIMS OF REFERENCE
NAi mu( m r I
The Council has a mandate to:
provide advice to the Prime Minister on policies and programs under the National Agenda for a
Multicultural Australia, including matters referred to the Council by the Prime Minister;
advise on the cultural diversity elements of the Centenary of Federation and the Sydney 2000
Olympics, and develop and maintain appropriate working relations with relevant bodies on
these issues including the Centenary of Federation Advisory Committee, the Sydney Olympic
Organising Committee and the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation.
promote, through education and discussion ( particularly at the local community level), a more
complete understanding by Australians of the existing and potential benefits of the diversity of
contemporary Australia; and
In cairying out its mandate the Council is to consult widely, including at the local community level. 
NiEMBER4 OF THE
NATIONAL MULTICULTURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
The Hon Mick Youngp AO Chairman NSW
Mr Joseph Assaf NSW
Professor Cora Baldock WA
Professor Stephen Castles NSW
Ms Helen Cattaliru WA
Mr Martin Ferguson VIC
Ms Carmel Guerra VIC
Mr Tac Tar Lam NT
Mr Laj Marinos, OAM NSW
Mr Giancarlo Martini-Piovano VIC
The Hon Ian Macphee, AO VIC
Mr Prakash vfrchandani NrT
Mr Saleh Parkar, QAM TAS
Mr Noel Pearson QLD
Ms Janet Powell VIC
Mr Vic Rebikoff, OAM ACT
Mrs Heather Ridout NSW
Mr Kevin Sheedy VIC
Ms Helene Teichrann VIC
Mr Henry Tsang, QAM NSW
Dr My-Van Tran, OAM SA
Ms Agnes Whiten QLD
Mr Harry Zacharoyannis SA 
'( EI RLAE Paniamen[ toue ., anuerra e, o
Senator Nick Bolkus ( 06) 27 78o
MINULTICULTURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
Former Immigration Ministr , If. ck Young will chair a new Multicultural Advisory Council
launched today by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Multicultural Affairs.
Senator Nick Bolkus.
* he role of the Multicultural Advisory Council ( MAC) will be to advise the Government
on how to advance muldcultural policies into the 21st Century, and ensure that we maximise
all its benefits, Senator Boikus said.
* In particular, it will have a role in advising the Government on the cultural diversity
dimension of the Centenary of Federation in 2001 and the Sydney 2000 Olympics.
" I am very pleased chat Mick Young has accepted the position of chairperson, bringing to
it his knowledge and experience as a former Minister responsible for Multiculrural Affairs.
The appointment of the 23 members of the MAC was ba-s. 5 on their significant personal and
professional achievements, and their own contribution to multicultural debate. Drawn from
all over Australia, they represent the breadth of the impact multiculturalisr has had on our
lives from academia and the workplace to the media and sport.
' Much has been achieved since the Government produced its National Agenda for a
Multicultural Ausralia five years ago," Senator Bolkus said.
' Today, multiculturalism is a way of life. The benefits of our cultural diversity are being
experienced in every walk of life.
' The MAC will play an important role in ensuring that a wide range of views from the
Community are reresented and considered in the policy debate, promote cooperation between
bodies concerned with ethnic affain and multicultural issues, and foster a better
understanding of multicultural Australia.
MAC members have been appointed for a three-year term and the Council is cxpected to
mee for the first time in Sydney in late August.
A full list of members and their biographical details are attached.
CANBERRA JULY 26 1994
Contact: Ruth Dcwsbury ( 06) 277 7860
Aik MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC
A-AIRS AND MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME
MNISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ASIA LECTURE TO THE ASIA-AUSTRALIA INSTITUTE
BRISBANE, 26 OCTOBER 1994
I wanted to give this speech in Brisbane, and I wanted to give it to the Asia-
Australia Institute, because in their respective areas of government and
education Wayne Goss and Stephen Fitzgerald are showing the way forward
for Australia and its institutions in dealing with the region around us.
From the start, the Asia-Australia Institute has been working to bring together
the emerging leaders of the region from Government, business and
universities in order to shape the region and help to create an ' Asia
consciousness', not just to stand back and comment on developments.
Similarly, among our state Governments, Wayne Goss and his colleagues
have been pre-eminent among those working to strengthen ties with Asia and
the Pacific. They have had a strong sense of Queensland's place in the
economic life of the Asia-Pacific and have worked with business to build the
State's trade and investment links. Their active support for the teaching of
Asian languages in schools has had a nation-wide impact in time it will
have a profound influence.
So I am very pleased to be delivering the first Asia Lecture to have been held
by the Institute in Brisbane.
I am also very pleased that we have with us tonight Mr Huang Ju, the Mayor
of Shanghai, whom I had the pleasure of meeting when I was in China last
year. As evidence of the dynamism and ferment of economic growth in Asia
we could hardly have a better example than Shanghai.
My speech tonight will be about Australia's foreign policy and it will be about
the Asia Pacific.
Because, in a way which has never been true before in our country's history,
we are talking about the same thing.
I don't mean by this that Australia has no interests outside the region now, or
that we haven't been interested in Asia before. 
Our economic and cultural links with Europe and the United States, for
example, are very important to us.
The interests we have in preventing the spread of nuclear or chemical
weapons, or in supporting multilateral approaches to economic co-operation,
or in helping respond to humanitarian crises like Rwanda, are not confined by
regional boundaries.
Above all, the globalisation of the world economy makes it impossible for us
to ignore what is happening outside our region.
Nor am I claiming that Australia has not been involved in Asia before.
For the most part, our record of engagement is long and honourable, from our
support for Indonesian independence, through the establishment of the
Colombo Plan to the development of our great trading sinews with Japan and
later Korea, which helped to fuel literally the astonishing economic growth
in north Asia.
But that said, it is also true in a quite different way from the past a deeper,
more urgent and more intense way that Australia's economic, strategic and
political interests now coalesce in the region around us.
If we do not succeed in the Asia-Pacific, we succeed nowhere.
East Asia's economic explosion ranks with the end of the Cold War as one of
the defining developments of our time.
Beyond all other things, its consequences will shape the 21 st century for
Australia. In the twenty years from 1970, East Asia's share of world GDP rose from 12
per cent to 25 per cent.
At present, three of the world's ten largest economies are from the APEC
region. But by 2020 the World Bank estimates that seven of the top ten will
be APEC members. China, the United States and Japan in the top three
positions will be joined by Indonesia at five and Korea, Thailand and Taiwan.
By the year 2000, the APEC region will generate nearly 55 per cent of world
trade. These developments represent a profound shift in the balance of economic
power in the world from Europe to Asia, from the North to the South.
And it is an economic transformation which over the longer term will have
deep implications for strategic power as well.
Coming to terms with this change and taking full advantage of it represents
the single most important challenge for Australia in the 1990s. We need to
shape ourselves and our region to prepare for it. I 
We have no great and powerful patron in this. We have to make our own
way, in our own way.
In the past, it was possible for Australian governments and business people
dealing with Asia to take the policy equivalent of a five-day package tour to
Bali. But dabbling in Asia is no longer an option for Australia. Our engagement
with the region has to be uncompromising, unfailing, tenacious.
The task ahead requires a Government with a creative policy sense a sharp
awareness of the national interest and, indeed the national identity.
As I have often said, there is a cultural element at work in this confidence,
creativity an appropriate sense of national purpose and appropriate symbols
for it these are all part of the effort.
We will need to create abroad the structures and institutions which match the
new times, just as we have done at home.
This Government opened Australia up to the world.
We dismantled the ring fence of tariffs and foreign exchange controls
Australia had slumbered behind. We did it because we knew Australia did
not need to fear the world, and that we could prosper with competition.
The result of that succession of policy reforms has been dramatic. This
country is now far more integrated into the world economy.
Over the decade of reform, the ratio of our exports plus imports to GDP has
risen from 30 per cent to 40 percent. Australian equity abroad has grown
from around 3 percent of GDP in 1983 to almost 20 percent today.
The effective rate of industry protection in Australia is now about one-third of
what it was in the early 1980s and yet our exports now represent 22 per cent
of our GDP compared with less than 14 per cent in 1983.
Our exports to Asia have been booming, growing at a rate of 20 percent per
annum to the ASEAN countries and 12 percent to East Asia as a whole.
Three quarters of our exports now go to other APEC members.
But we also understand that just dismantling the barriers is not enough. All of
us government and business have to go out into the region and help to
shape it in ways which serve our interests.
And that is happening with a gathering momentum.
Our relations with the individual countries around us are in excellent shape. 
In Northeast Asia we have relationships of the highest importance. They are
grounded in economic complementarity but are growing well beyond that.
Japan remains overwhelmingly our largest trading partner and a country with
which our longstanding economic links are being matched increasingly by a
broad policy dialogue and partnership.
Japan is now going through fundamental change, both political and
economic. I am convinced from the discussions I had in Tokyo last month that the reform
process which is now reshaping the Japanese political system will have over
time a very positive impact on Japan's role in the region and the world.
Policy debate will become a much more important element of Japanese
politics. This will help nurture stronger political leadership with greater
initiative over the bureaucracy and a clearer sense of Japan's modern
international role.
Simultaneously, the Japanese economy is becoming more open and marketoriented.
Business is demanding economic reform and deregulation.
Consumers are taking advantage of wide-spread price discounting. The
economic integration of Japan with the rest of East Asia is proceeding apace.
Above all, there is a need for Japan to unleash some of its 157 trillion yen in
savings and to invest in itself, in the living standards of its own people.
Australia's relationship with the Republic of Korea is one of great potential.
Korea is now our third largest export market and may soon be our second.
In addition to a thriving bilateral trade relationship, Korea has been one of our
key partners in developing APEC and we have a security relationship dating
back to the Korean War.
I am looking forward to the opportunity to set new directions for future
cooperation when President Kim Young Sam visits Australia immediately after
the APEC leaders' meeting in November.
Our relations with China are deep and growing. China has more foreign
investment in Australia than in any other country a mark of the deep
complementarity in our relationship.
By some measurements, China is already the third largest economy in the
world. The World Bank expects it to be the largest within 25 years. Its
economy has been growing at an average of 9 per cent each year over the
past decade.
As China's economic weight grows, so will its military and political power.
If anything is inevitable about the 21st century, it is the growing weight and
influence of China in the region and the world. 
Australia has nothing to fear from this. We have been a firm supporter of
China's full integration into world and regional institutions. We regard it as
essential to engage China productively in the global economy.
But China's growth is nevertheless one of the great shifts to which the region
will have to adjust in the coming decades.
In Southeast Asia, our core relationship is with Indonesia. As I have said
many times, no country is more important to us.
The progress we have made in the past couple of years in broadening the
relationship is a matter of great satisfaction to me.
But we can do more. There is great potential for more Australian businesses
to establish themselves in Indonesia.
Neither Australia nor Indonesia has designs on the other and our strategic
interests in the broader region are similar. Our defence relations are growing
rapidly and I think they can be strengthened further.
We have deep and solid relationships with all the other ASEAN countries
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Brunei. Each of these
relationships has its own distinct strength, history and potential.
With Singapore, for example, we have a very close defence relationship
involving regular exercises and training.
And Prime Minister Goh and I have agreed to press ahead with building
strategic linkages between Australian and Singaporean companies operating
in third markets.
With Malaysia, we have an old and deep relationship, strengthened by the
fact that more than 100,000 Malaysians have studied and trained in Australia.
This is already having its impact in the business area.
Outside ASEAN but not for long Vietnam is a country of growing
importance to Australia. It is a strategically significant country with a resilient
hard-working population of 70 million and a strong national sense of purpose.
It will become a much more important influence as it becomes steadily more
integrated into the region.
For Australia, the island countries of the Pacific are an important part of the
Asia-Pacific too. In August, I chaired the 25th meeting of the South Pacific
Forum here in Brisbane. The emphasis at the meeting was on ways in which
we can address the pressing practical problems of sustainable development
in the area. I 
Papua New Guinea and the other countries of the South Pacific will continue
to deserve Australia's careful commitment as they confront the pressures of
development. New Zealand is a firm partner with Australia in the Pacific, as well as in
APEC. But beyond these bilateral links we need to create and sustain a multilateral
framework which can engage all the interests of the region.
Over the next few years the countries around the Pacific face a major
decision about what sort of region this should be whether its institutions and
structures should be focussed on East Asia or on the broader Asia Pacific.
The signs of this debate are evident on both sides of the Pacific and its
outcome will have a profound effect on Australia's future.
The growth of regionalism has been one of the great global trends since the
Cold War ended and ideological competition between East and West ceased
to be a determining influence on regional developments.
We have seen it at work in the expansion of the European Union, in the
speedy development of economic co-operation in Asia and Latin America, in
the creation of the ASEAN Regional Forum.
Regionalism should be a positive force, building on the common interests
between neighbours. But it can also have a darker side if it promotes the
emergence of competing and exclusive blocs.
My own very strong view is that the sort of region Australia wants to see, and
the sort of regional structures we need to encourage, are trans-Pacific.
This doesn't stem from any lack of comfort on my part with Australia's place in
Asia, but from my conviction that Australia and the western rim of the Pacific
all of us are better off in a region which is shaped by, and sustains, our
major economic and security linkages. And these remain heavily trans-
Pacific. Despite rapid growth in trade between Asian countries, trade and economic
links across the Pacific remain important to all of us in this region.
The United States remains Asia's single largest market, its major source of
capital and a vital supplier of technology.
One fifth of all East Asian trade is with the United States. And in 1992 the
United States accounted for more than a quarter of the total stock of foreign
direct investment in East Asia.
Because, despite the astonishing growth of some of the emerging economies,
the United States remains a formidable economic power. An economy of nine
thousand billion dollars growing at three per cent a year generates a lot more 
purchasing power than smaller economies growing at six to eight per cent a
year. The United States remains central to the region's security as well. Its
alliances with a number of regional countries, including Australia, are a vital
part of the regional security network and its capabilities provide strong reassurance
to the countries of the region that a balancing military presence is
available in the region in time of crisis.
At present we have a highly unusual situation in which the world's second
largest economy, Japan, is a strategic client of the world's largest economic
power, the United States. This is unprecedented historically. Try to imagine
Britain and Germany being in such a position early this century.
And all our interests those of the United States, Japan, Australia and the
other countries of the region are served by the preservation of this
relationship of strategic co-operation.
It is the core of US strategic engagement in the Western Pacific. It
legitimises Japan's defence role. And it removes the need for Japan to
acquire strategic capabilities.
Without the alliance, the pressure for Japan to throw off the constitutional
restraints on its defence posture would grow. The risk of regional instability
and a spiralling arms build-up would increase.
Australia strongly supports a more active international role for Japan. We
believe it has much to contribute to regional and international affairs.
I have said before that Australia regards it as an anomaly that the world's
second largest economy is not one of the permanent members of the UN
Security Council. But, as I have also said , it does not have to be " in uniform"
to perform this role.
These are some of the important economic and strategic reasons why I hope
we will continue to see the active engagement of the United States in the
region, and I believe we will.
But it is not pre-ordained.
The United States always has choices about its role in the world and where
and how it plays that role for example, the extent to which it focuses its
energies in the western hemisphere. We have seen it exercise such choices
in different ways in the course of this century.
Trade tensions between the United States and the North Asian economies
have the potential to fester and to attenuate the existing bonds across the
Pacific. Inevitably in an economy that size, a tension exists within the United States
between those who think that unilateral pressure is the best and easiest way 
to achieve trade results and those who see the broader virtues of a
multilateral approach.
This is where APEC fits in.
In the background to all my thinking about APEC has been a conviction that
the greatest danger to the economic dynamism which has been so important
to Australia's development and the region's, would be a fracturing of the post-
Cold War world into competing blocs.
By bringing both sides of the Pacific into a broader partnership, APEC offers
the best way of avoiding this sort of outcome.
It helps to lock in US economic and commercial interest in the region, which
in turn helps ensure US strategic engagement. It provides a framework to
help contain or manage competition between China, Japan and the United
States. And it gives the smaller countries of the region a greater say in the
nature and shape of the trading arrangements in the region.
It should be clear from what I have said that the last thing Australia wants is
for APEC to develop into a protectionist or inward-looking trade bloc. That is
just the sort of global outcome we think APEC can help to prevent.
But that does not mean, in my view, that APEC does not have an important
role to play in regional trade liberalisation in this part of the world.
So long as APEC's approach is GATT-consistent, and equally importantly
so long as it contributes to global trade liberalisation, it seems to me that, as
the weight of economic development in the world shifts towards Asia and the
Pacific, we have a responsibility to show that countries in this part of the
world can take a decisive step towards a free trade goal.
I am equally convinced that anything that we do inside APEC will have
beneficial consequences in bringing closer a new global trading round.
But it is not only in the area of trade liberalisation bringing down tariffs and
non-tariff barriers for goods and services that APEC is important.
It also has a very important role in trade facilitation that is helping to
eliminate administrative and other impediments to trade and investment in the
region. Indeed, matters like the harmonisation of product standards and certification
arrangements, which make it easier for manufacturers in one part of the
region to sell in the other parts of the region, will have even more importance
as trade barriers come down.
It was in my first speech to the Asia Australia Institute in April 1992 that I first
put forward publicly the suggestion that a process of periodic meetings
between leaders of the APEC economies should be established. 
Even at my most optimistic I did not expect that a little over two years later I
would be about to attend the second such meeting.
In two weeks' time the leaders of eighteen economies, representing more
than half the world's production and nearly half of its trade, will meet in
Bogor, as in Seattle, in a room without officials or a detailed agenda, to talk
about the economic challenges in our region.
I don't think there has been a more important meeting held in Southeast Asia
since the Bandung Conference of 1955 established the Non Aligned
Movement. In part, its importance lies in the very significant issues the meeting will
address how we can maintain the velocity of trade in this region by getting
down the formal and informal barriers.
We have been shown a path forward in two important reports from the
Eminent Persons' Group, and the Pacific Business Forum. The Australian
participants Neville Wran on the EPG and Philip Brass of Pacific Dunlop
and Imelda Roche of Nutrimetics in the Business Forum made a very
important contribution to the development of the APEC vision and I am
grateful to each of them.
For our part, what we hope to see come out of Bogor is a commitment to free
trade in the APEC region by a realistic date, in a GATT-consistent manner.
I'm not worried about the end date we set, so long as it is not too distant. As
we have seen in Australia, the main thing is to get the political commitment to
make a start. Then, with business factoring further liberalisation into its
decisions the momentum builds up and becomes unstoppable. That is the
process we want to start at Bogor.
Free trade through the Asia-Pacific is a huge enterprise. There are
commentators who are already talking as though it is an accomplished fact. It
isn't it will require major adjustments from all the APEC economies.
Free trade in the APEC region would bring Australia benefits several times
those of the Uruguay Round. And the benefits in terms of increased
competitiveness and integration with the region would be far greater.
It can underwrite Australia's future. It can give us sustainable growth,
employment, a role in technological innovation, cultural stimulation and
enrichment. It can substantially underwrite the democratic, rich and dynamic
nation we want to be in the 21st century.
But the Bogor meeting is important at another level too.
It represents a new level of leadership from Asia and a new level of
leadership from the developing world. 
In the past, the great initiatives in trade liberalisation have come from the
industrialised countries. For the first time in Bogor, one of the leading
developing countries is issuing the challenge. This vision is President
Soeharto's and it is vital that we respond to him.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It could be argued that the end of the Cold War has changed the world more
profoundly than any other single event since the Napoleonic Wars since
Lachlan Macquarie was Governor of New South Wales.
None of us has any experience of the sort of world we are moving into.
It will be more integrated than ever, a globalised environment in which
commerce is freer than ever in history; in which communications are
instantaneous and open to all; in which more and more aspects of national
government have an international dimension.
This prospect frightens some people, as change always does.
Our opponents, for example, wring their hands because Australia is party to
an increasing number of international agreements. They fret that these
agreements sometimes shape our domestic policies. They complain that our
sovereignty is being infringed and pine for a clearer, simpler world in which
foreigners kept a decent distance.
But it's not like that any more. From saving Antarctica as a wilderness park, to
protecting our security by banning chemical weapons, to expanding
Australia's access to other markets through the Uruguay Round negotiations,
to getting agreements on the harmonisation of product standards, we need at
an ever-increasing rate to talk and deal with the rest of the world.
That is the sort of international system we are now entering; with fewer clear
lines between domestic and external interests, and one in which these
external interests economic, strategic, political are intertwined in a way we
have never seen before.
The best guarantee of our national sovereignty will not be any walls we build
around us, but the resources we can call upon within ourselves. The degree
to which our industrial culture operates to principles of world's best practice
and within a culture of innovation and creativity will be essential to our
national sovereignty: the degree to which we are able to engage and
compete on the international front line will be essential. Our national
sovereignty will depend on our worldliness and integration with the world.
Equally it will depend upon the less tangible resources of tradition and
culture: the values of democracy and tolerance will continue to serve us well,
so will our language, so will all those things which remind us of our common
heritage and interest.
We have no need to be defensive about our place in the Asia-Pacific. 
Australian engagement with the region is important to us but, equally, it is
important to the region.
Our relationships with Japan, China and Korea show how important the
economic complementarities between Australia and our neighbours are. And
they will continue to be important as economic growth spreads to the
countries of Southeast Asia.
Our services like education have long made an important contribution to the
development of the region, and we are now seeing other Australian services
like health, housing, engineering, communications and law being exported to
the region and helping to sustain its economic dynamism.
Our skills in basic scientific research, and increasingly in the application of
that research through government initiatives like the Cooperative Research
Centres, are a regional resource.
Information technology will play an increasingly important part in our
relationship with the region and the multi-media initiative among other
elements of the Government's cultural statement will significantly boost our
role in the information revolution, particularly as an international software
provider. Our security links, both bilateral and multilateral, make an important
contribution to regional stability.
But we also contribute because we think broadly about the region. We are a
source of ideas and we are good at implementing them. Our contribution has
been seen in many regional initiatives including APEC, the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the Cambodia settlement.
And, beyond that, Australia itself the sort of society we have created here
is an asset to the region.
I make this point not out of national vanity but because we see too often in
Australians the reverse of this an excess of national self-deprecation.
Australians can take a justifiable pride in the achievements of this country, in
the egalitarian, multicultural and humane democracy we have built.
It is a society in which the rights of the individual are protected against the
demands of the state.
This sense of human rights is intrinsic to our sense of ourselves.
The difficult task is not deciding whether human rights are universal. Of
course they are. It is deciding how to apply our own beliefs in the
international arena. 
It is not surprising that many of Australia's neighbours have different
standards from our own.
Sometimes that is the result of different levels of political or economic
development.
Sometimes it is the result of a belief that the good of society at large is more
important than the rights of individuals.
Sometimes, there is no question that human rights are abused, by any
standards. Picking our way through this moral thicket is one of the most difficult things
we have to do.
But I am utterly convinced of one thing. We will get much further in advancing
human rights by talking to our neighbours than by shunning them. Cutting off
contacts is less likely to succeed than making human rights part of a broadlybased
relationship in which we are able to talk freely and openly about our
differences.
We do not, and cannot, aim to be " Asian" or European or anything else but
Australians. But we can and should aim to be a country which is deeply integrated into the
region around us. Which understands that our neighbours are increasingly
proud and justifiably proud of what their societies have accomplished the
amelioration of poverty, the growth of education, the massive improvements
in health standards.
By the turn of the century, by the centenary of our nationhood, I hope this will
be a country: in which more and more Australians speak the languages of our
neighbours in which our businesspeople are a familiar and valued part of the
commercial landscape of the Asia-Pacific
in which we are making full use of the great resource of the growing
number of Australians of Asian background
in which our defence and strategic links with the countries around us
are deeper than ever
in which our national identity is clearer to us and our neighbours
through the appointment of an Australian as our head of state
in which our national culture is shaped by, and helps to shape, the
cultures around us 
Political scientists have recently been asking themselves what will be the next
big thing in global conflict to replace the ideological struggle of the Cold War.
Much of their discussion has centred around the prospect of a " clash of
civilizations" with suggestions that the coming great strategic divide will fall
between the western, Confucian and Islamic worlds.
If that is in any sense a real prospect, it is one which Australia, by nature and
inclination, stands strongly against. Contemporary Australia itself is evidence
that cultures can coexist and build on each other to create a strong and
cohesive society.
The enterprise in which we are now engaged, the creation of a thriving
community of nations across the Asia-Pacific the enterprise of APEC is an
extension of this model.
It is the best assurance we have that this will be the model for the world as
the next millennium approaches.
ends 



I
4
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP,
OFFICIAL OPENING OF KURILPA PARK, SOUTHBANK, BRISBANE
THURSDAY 27 OCTOBER, 1994
Well. I'm delighted to be here on this occasion, but most particularly to have
been able to have joined with Brisbane City Council in doing some of the
things that we thought we could do together during the worst of the recession,
to provide some hope and some value to young people, in particular, who
were unemployed or long term unemployed, over the course of the recent
past. And, it's not really part of one's experience that city councils take on
with such fervour, with such a sense of decency and humanity, the interests
of young people in particular and even mature aged unemployed people, to
find tasks for them that lift their self esteem, give them a place in the scheme
of things and, as an end result, achieve something on the way for the city and
the people.
And, this has happened and the collaboration between the Commonwealth
and the City Council has been a matter of great pleasure to me. And, I
congratulate the Lord Mayor on taking this initiative. Because, it's one thing
for the Commonwealth to have the money to do some of these things... we
can't do it unless there is the help and assistance on the ground, the sense of
ambition, locally, for these things to happen. And, I'm delighted to say that
we've seen it with Brisbane City Council. What we have seen here is, I am
sure, just another, further manifestation of the concentration on the river
which we are seeing in Brisbane in recent years certainly since Expo'
some years ago. I think, now, most people in Brisbane regard the river as a
major asset where I'm not sure this would have been true all that many years
ago. And, Kurilpa Park is going to be a further asset to the river and a place
of solace for people to come because cities need some open space and
some breathing space and this is a bit of breathing space another part of
the lung of the city. And, it wouldn't be here without the efforts of these
young people.
The Lord Mayors statistics, I think, are pretty impressive. That is, the
number of trees put into place, the tonnage of garbage which has been taken
away, the lawns, the stonework, the footpaths... all employing, over the
course of it. 2000 people, 700 of whom have found full time employment. So, 2821 
it's a pretty successfui strike rate when one is considering that the young
people mainly young people involved here are amongst the longer term
unemployed. And, that sort of work experience is terrific for them, it makes
the community feel good about itself, but most importantly it makes them feel
good about themselves.
The Lord Mayor was kind enough to congratulate the Government on the
White Paper and I think the White Paper is one of those things... I was saying
last night the attention span of the media is so short these days. When I first
went into Parliament 25 years ago stories would be developed in the print
media and would then be picked up by television. Something like the White
Paper would go for weeks, people trying to digest it. Now, the reverse is the
case; television picks it up for a night, you get a one day follow-up in the print
the next day and that's the end of it. Done. Now, we're still building the
White Paper and I see Neville Bonner has joined us I have just been at
ACOSS where he was present, this morning, saying that we are going to be
case managing 560,000 people this year. We're setting up in what is a world
first, a system of case management where an individual person will be
relating to an unemployed person, unemployed 12 months or more, and
understanding their aptitudes, their educational qualifications, what they'd
like to do and getting a plan in place and a subsidy to get them back into
work. So, you can imagine setting up a system where we are actually, personally
case managing over half a million people. It is going to be an enormous
challenge. But, one that will mark this society out from other comparable
countries where we will not have, and will not accept that 300,000 people
should go on the labour scrap heap while the rest of us move off to
prosperity; that we will keep the country as one, inclusively, inclusive and
together and that we will get the longer term unemployed people back into
mainstream jobs. Now, we've already had tremendous success in the last
year; since the election 413,000 jobs have been created in this country. We
were heading for a target of half a million over three years, we're four fifths of
the way in two thirds of the time, or just over half the time.
But, importantly, 80,000 of the 400,000 jobs have gone to the long term
unemployed. If you were looking at 400,000 jobs in the eighties, that 80.000
would be more like 15,000 or 20,000. So, out of 400,000 jobs, 15,000 or
20,000 might have gone to the long term unemployed. This time, out of
400,000, there are 80,000 which have gone to the long term unemployed so
we are really starting to get them back into the mainstream of the labour
market. And, as the economy picks up and grows and as we bring more
growth to the labour market, hopefully, we'll really start chopping that long
term unemployment back.
The other great thing about the White Paper is that we're saying that we will
not let any person, any young person under the age of 18, slip through the
system. If someone drops out of education we will case manage them back
into it. And, if not into mainstream education secondary education into
TAFE, and if not into TAFE into a subsidised workplace and on the job
2822 
training. In other words we just won't let somebody leave at age 16 and,
basically, drop out. We're going to try and get them back in because I think a
country which does not care about its young people is not a country with a
future. It is as simple as that. So, this is very important to us and the
innovation that we had in there we're now starting to stream kids in years
11 and 12, the last years of secondary school, into TAFE accreditation so
they can actually get their career path set in years 11 and 12 and do things in
secondary school which give them accreditation for TAFE, thereafter.
So, you might ask what this has got to do with the park? They are all a
common theme. That is, we won't leave the unemployed behind
particularly the young unemployed and whether it is work experience under
JOBSKILLS, LEAP or the other labour market programs in the White Paper,
they are things that, I think, a country as wealthy as this should commit itself
to. Now, one may say, " Well, that's entirely reasonable", but not many
people were sticking their hand up in the depths of the recession saying,
' Well, look, we'll take young people on, we'll put our own money in and we'll
do it." Now, Jim Soorley did this and so did his council and we'll be forever in
their debt for it. And, the young people who have got those jobs, whose lives
have been restored will be in their debt. And what pnice? The product of 700
jobs in the economy versus the cost of 700 unemployed people. The obvious
benefit in terms of product of having those people engaged compared to
being unengaged is, of course, manifest. So, not only have they been taken
up but they produced quite a wonderful change in an area such as this and
when this gets to maturity and those trees get larger and it gets a bit of patina
about it, this will be a very lovely space for the city.
And, I'm actually delighted with the way Brisbane is changing. There is
tremendous growth behind Brisbane now, as one of the growth capitals of the
country. The fact that it has a greater Brisbane Council area and is not
broken up by small municipalities means that there can be city planning and
you have a Lord Mayor who understands the potential of Brisbane, the
demands which will be placed upon its infrastructure in the future, and how it
can, with the growth and particularly its temperate climate and its
relationship with the Asia Pacific become a very significant part of
Australia and one where we can do some things with city planning that will
make Brisbane one of the beautiful places in this country. One of the great
joys to me is some of the worst architecture of the sixties and seventies
and we've got more than our liberal spread of it right around the
Commonwealth: there's a great dollop of it here, of course, in Brisbane it
will be mulched in because the sites are more valuable than the buildings.
So, we get a second crack at it. That is something which I think is going to be
terribly good for Brisbane. I was delighted with the Commonwealth Law
Courts just across the river there, that we've been able to add a quality bit of
architecture to the city and a lot of the packing case rubbish which surrounds
it will go as the years go on. And, we'll be able to build some decent
buildings along the river front here and maybe get the height limitations right
and make this a very lovely city. 2 823 
4
At least. I think, we'd like to be involved, with Better Cities to see the
Commonwealth involved with some of these things, which we are now, of
course, in the greater Brisbane area and to see a partnership between the
government of Queensland and the Commonwealth in doing these things, but
in a tripartite relationship with the Council of greater Brisbane. So, there is, I
think, a great optimism about Queensland, a great sense of opportunity, of
the future and a sort of civic pride returning to the place where it is not just
simply a developers' melee but, where the public interest gets a look in
and there is an understanding that there is a greater interest in doing it right.
I certainly salute the Lord Mayor's efforts in this respect.
So, could I thank everyone associated with today, with this project, but more
particularly with the JOBSKILLS and LEAP projects around Brisbane and for
the many people involved in the supervision and design of these projects.
But, most particularly, to those unemployed people who have joined them,
who have benefited from them and who have given something back to the city
as they go off then into permanent employment. And, those who are
unemployed, we'll be case managing them back into a job and back into
training. So, again, congratulations Jim, on a job really well done and I am
delighted that my colleagues and I could be here on this occasion to declare
Kurilpa Park open. Thankyou.
ends.
2824 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP,
DOORSTOP, KURILPA PARK, BRISBANE, 27 OCTOBER 1994-
E OE PROOF COPY
PM: You wanted a comment about David Wilson. We have unconfirmed,
but we understand fairly authoritative reports that David Wilson and
his two associates were killed in Cambodia and, I think, this has been
communicated to his parents. If this is true, this is a very tragic
outcome and I would like on behalf of the Government to extend my
condolences to David Wilson's parents and to anyone so affected by
this tragedy. There is obviously a substantial risk for young
Australians travelling in Cambodia, particularly in some parts of the
country and it is something that we will need to be more vigilant about.
J: What about the state of the military aid for the Cambodian defence
forces. Where does that stand now?
PM: That is nought to do with this. That is a broader question about how
best Australia can continue to help the process of democratisation in
Cambodia and how we may be able to help the government of
Cambodia establish itself as a government of the people which
commands the respect of the people.
J: What response now are you expecting from the Cambodian
Government?
PM: Well, I don't know. We'll wait and see what they have to say, but
again, they are unconfirmed reports but they have a ring of authority
about them.
J: Do you have any message to the Khmer Rouge?
PM: Well, it's not for me to have a message to them. My message has
been consistent, I think, that is that the best process for Cambodia is
to see the reflection of the peoples wishes in the government of their
affairs and where all factions in the country should come together and
try to make a success of their future. This basic stand out position
which the Khmer Rouge has taken can't, in the final analysis, produce
anything but more hardship and problems for the people of Cambodia.
ends 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRIME MINISTER'S Xl
This years Prime Ministers XI team, to play England at Manuka
9 November, has been chosen. The team is:
Allan Border ( Captain)
Mark Atkinson
Greg Blewett
Michael Di Venuto
Shane George
Brad Hodge
Brendon Julian
Shane Lee
Darren Lehmann
Martin Love
Greg Rowell
Mark Higgs ( 1 2th man) Oval on Wednesday
Queensland Tasmania South Australia
Tasmania South Australia
Victoria Westemn Australia
New South Wales
South Australia
New South Wales
Queensland ACT
This year, the Prime Ministers XI match provides us all with three great opportunities.
First, to honour one of the game's all-time great players Allan Border.
I am truly delighted that Allan has agreed to captain the side. This will be the tenth time he has
done so, and I am sure his special retumn to the international cricket scene will prove to be a
momentous occasion. I heartily agree with the comment by PM's Xl co-selector Laurie Sawle that
" there will never be another Allan Border'.
Second, the game will give us a chance to see no less than ten PM's XI players who have been
associated with the AIS Commonwealth Bank Cricket Academy, six of them graduates of this
very successful institution.
It will also be an important opportunity for the young PM's Xl players to gain match practice
against the English side, and to press for selection in either of the two Australian one-day sides
and the Test team.
Third, it will provide a chance to witness yet another great clash in the long-running rivalry
between Australia and England.
I am sure the match will be entertaining, and, with Allan Border captaining a fine Australian side
against the English, an historic occasion.
The day before the game, I will be launching, for the Australian Cricket Board, the Intemnational
Cricket Season, featuring four teams: Australia, England, Zimbabwe and Australia A.
CANBERRA October 1994 



I y
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF NEW FECCA HEADQUARTERS
CANBERRA, 31 OCTOBER 1994
In a recent UNESCO address, the distinguished French sociologist, Alain
Touraine, said the most important task facing the world was " to learn how to
live together" and that, above all, this means we need to learn how to
" manage diversity".
I don't think anyone would argue with this. It is a challenge to the international
community in the post Cold War world, and it is a challenge to our own
communities. We are entitled to say I think that we have done better than most others in
this regard.
The creation here of a rich multicultural society built on traditions of
tolerance, freedom and fairness is one of Australia's great contemporary
achievements. So much so, I'm not sure I am altogether comfortable with the expression
" managing diversity".
To me, it sounds too technocratic for our purposes.
It may have been appropriate a decade ago when Australia was coming to
grips with the principles and practice of what we know today as
multiculturalism. I don't think most Australians any longer view our diversity as something that
must be managed.
We don't think of it as a problem.
We think of it, increasingly, as one of our greatest assets. 1 
The multitude of different ethnic communities is one of our strengths not just
in the realms of culture and the arts, but in commerce.
I think what should really be exercising us is the task of tapping into the
resources of creativity and energy which multicultural Australia can deliver.
We are a country with links to more than 150 different cultures, religions and
traditions; twenty per cent of Australians were born outside Australia, and
these people added to their children constitute almost half of the Australian
population. In economic terms, therein lies great potential.
In recent years we have come to acknowledge this. We call it " productive
diversity". By this we mean that we recognise there are advantages inherent in the
understanding so many Australians have of the culture, languages and
business practices of many of our trading partners.
As we pointed out earlier this year in Working Nation: the White Paper on
Employment and Growth, this knowledge is now an integral part of the
Government's industry, trade and investment strategies.
Astute business people have moved quickly on this resource.
For example, the law firm, Phillips Fox, has used one of its Vietnamese-born
lawyers to help establish a presence in Hanoi and win contracts to translate
Vietnamese foreign investment laws into English.
The food exporter, Tixana, uses the business networks and market
knowledge of its Asian-born management and staff to tailor its snack foods for
export to South East Asia.
And there are, of course, many more examples like these.
The encouragement of real cultural pluralism has made our national life more
complex and dynamic. It has contributed a great deal to the artistic and
intellectual life of the nation.
I couldn't help noticing with some pleasure the other day what the great Irish
poet, Seamus Heaney, had to say about Australia after his recent visit. He
said he saw it becoming a " cultural magnet" for the world.
He said without " a trace of humour", according to the reporter that
Australia might become the centre of a " new humanism".
" I got this notion", he said, " that with the sun and population and good
management it could be the Tuscany of the 21st century". 
I think it's very significant that he counted the population as one of the key
elements. It was not with Tuscany in mind that we delivered the cultural policy
statement, Creative Nation, a fortnight ago.
But we did have in mind pulling together as many of the creative threads in
Australia as we could.
We had in mind encouraging the cultural ferment and giving a creative,
humanist ethic the chance to thrive.
We recognise the profound and fundamental contribution that our cultural
diversity will make in this process.
Creative Nation strengthens the inclusive basis of cultural policy in Australia.
We want to and must draw all those cultures into the mainstream; we must
draw upon them for strength at home and for our image abroad.
As we approach the 21st century, we should be projecting Australia as what it
increasingly is tolerant and pluralist, innovative and creative, rich and
diverse. For this our cultural agencies will need the capacity to develop high quality
products and expertise which reflect the emerging reality of Australian life
and Australian identity.
That is why we allocated an additional $ 13 million to SBS Television to
produce documentaries and drama.
I expect that the funding will enable SBS to produce quality programs whose
principal market is Australia, but which will also appeal to people in the
countries of Europe and Asia.
This sort of initiative seems to me an essential means of encouraging that
trend in Australia towards the development of a highly contemporary identity.
I have remarked on this several times before, and others are also making the
observation that our identity is being significantly shaped now, that it is
what we do today which defines us.
As the Reverend David Gill of the World Council of Churches told the
Centenary of Federation Advisory Committee:
" Our identity is not something inherited for good or ill, like it or not,
from years gone by. It is something we are creating. It is one of the
very special aspects of being part of contemporary Australia." I 
The Centenary of Federation Committee found " a clear consensus": there is
now a genuine desire to belong to a united, cohesive nation, and yet also a
real sense that tolerance, respect for difference, reconciliation and the old
Australian principle of a " fair go" are defining elements of contemporary
Australia. If it is true to say that these are the values we share and which, broadly
speaking, constitute our identity, it follows that we should want to see them
reflected in our concept of citizenship and in what we teach our children.
The Centenary of Federation Committee found " a chorus of voices urging a
shared political culture in which people were agreed about the
responsibilities of citizenship as well as the rights of citizenship".
It is for these kinds of reasons that we established the Civics Expert Group,
under the chairmanship of Professor Stuart McIntyre, to provide the
Government with a plan for public education and information on Australian
government, citizenship and the constitution.
The Group will be delivering its report on 30 November.
Among other things, multicultural ism is a significant advance on the concept
of social democracy and I think modern Australia conclusively demonstrates
that it is a concept with practical advantages.
I have outlined how it gives us economic advantages abroad, particularly as
the global economy emerges.
Globalisation is more than an economic phenomenon.
To the extent that we are celebrating and redefining our nationhood in this
decade, we are doing it at a time when national and cultural lines are being
blurred in the global community.
To me and I think to many others that means we are uniquely positioned to
shape an Australia which sits comfortably and works creatively in the new
world environment of the 21 st century.
In this context I might say it is, therefore, perfectly appropriate that next April
Australia will host the first major international conference on global cultural
diversity. We must encourage the existing tendencies in multiculturalism.
And at the same time, we need to push on with the task of ensuring that all
Australians understand the foundations on which our nationhood is built. 
It is essential that we build into Australian democracy an appreciation of
democracy. That we build into multicultural Australia an appreciation of the tradition of
tolerance on which it stands and depends.
That is why we are addressing the issue of citizenship: not just through the
Civics Expert Group, but through the National Multicultural Advisory Council
whose first meeting, under the Chairmanship of Mick Young, I attended last
week. The Council will play an important role in ensuring that community views
inform the policy debate and help to frame the National Agenda for a
Multicultural Australia.
I hope the Council will address the issue of citizenship because ultimately it is
through the symbols and reality of citizenship that cultural identities are
included in our national life.
The concept of citizenship we have in mind is one that generates shared
values and a common understanding of achievements and aspirations.
It is now 45 years since the Citizenship Act was passed.
As we head to the centenary of Federation, it is time to re-examine our
citizenship legislation and look at how citizenship might enable all Australians
to participate more fully in the life of the nation.
There is, as you know, a report of the Joint Standing Committee on Migration
which examines this issue and the Government will respond in coming
months. But let me make take this opportunity to say, without prejudice to any of the
principles of multiculturalism, the Government believes that whoever takes up
residence in Australia should also make a commitment to Australia.
The first loyalty of all who have made Australia their home should be to
Australia. And it is not in anyway inconsistent with the principles of multiculturalism to
expect people to take out citizenship.
Australian citizenship enshrines tolerance and diversity.
Of course, the values embodied in citizenship do not of themselves make
good citizens.
Ultimately citizenship is a voluntary act, albeit one dependent on every group
and individual recognising that freedom and tolerance come with obligations. 
This, of course, is something which FECCA recognises.
They have made a great contribution to the success and development of
multicultural Australia.
The point I would like to make today is that by doing this, they have made a
great contribution to contemporary Australian nationhood and identity.
And the demand is there for FECCA to do much more.
You have been successful in dealing with many of the needs and aspirations
of those who have migrated to this country.
FECCA has played a valuable role in the establishment of the Australian
Multicultural Foundation; the National Language Policy; and the National
Office of Overseas Skills Recognition.
I am pleased that FECCA has deliberately sought to develop stronger links
with national non-government organisations such as the ACTU, the
Australian Consumers Federation, the Council on the Ageing and ACOSS.
But no organisation can afford to rest on its laurels and it is, therefore,
entirely appropriate that FECCA consolidate its role as the umbrella body for
ethnic communities' councils in Australia by establishing its national
headquarters in the national capital.
It is also appropriate that FECCA's executive is moving away from total
reliance on Commonwealth core funding, to one based on a mix of
Commonwealth and other sources of funding for achieving specific outcomes.
In this regard, I am particularly pleased to see the sponsorships from
organisations such as the Commonwealth Bank and Telecom. I hope others
in the private sector will follow their lead.
I am also pleased to learn that FECCA is developing an agenda for reform.
It has established a constitutional committee to look at ways of broadening its
constituent base; and its membership is currently contemplating expansion to
encompass Regional Ethnic Community Councils.
We think that any initiative to broaden the representative base of FECCA is a
good one.
As new migrant groups arrive in Australia, it is obviously essential for your
organisation to establish links with these people. 
7
Such reforms, together with those initiated by Senator Bolkus, could lead to
FECCA becoming the peak umbrella body for all residents of Australia from
non-English speaking backgrounds.
The Government would applaud this move and we would encourage you to
achieve the goal sooner rather than later.
Today's opening of this new national headquarters in Canberra is, I believe, a
major step forward for FECCA.
It marks a new stage in the Federation's history and I take great pleasure in
declaring this building open.
Thank you. 



PRIMEMINISTER___
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, 3 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome.
PM: Good morning, John.
JL: How are you?
PM: I'm good thank you. It's nice to be here.
JL Good to have you here. When you talked about the banana republic
on this program back in 1986, you remember it as well as I do.
PM: Yes.
JL: You were worried about the size of the current account deficit. Are you
worried about It now?
PM: Well, it is always something to keep our eye on, but the difference
between then and now Is that Australia is a much changed, much
reformed economy. The tariff barriers are down, we have broken the
back of government spending In the past and in that period we were
exporting about 14 per cent of all we produced and today we are
exporting 22 per cent of all we produce.
JL: OK but just back to the qupe-t ion. IS it 2 worry, are you worried about it
now as you were In 1986?
PM: No, I'm not because our capacity to service our current account debt
has improved dramatically. Let me make this point to you clearly,
John. In about 1985, about 21 per cent of our exports proceeds went
to servicing the debt. Today, that is just about 10.5 per cent, it's about
half that. And, the reason for that Is because we have now been 
2
exporting very strongly all through this period and that is the point I just
made a second ago. We are now exporting 22 per cent of our produce
instead of 14 per cent so our capacity to pay our way has improved.
That is not to say I am not concerned about the current account deficit
and we don't keep our eye on It, but it is basically a savings issue and
what we have to do in the medium term is to improve Australian
savings and the big boost to that will come from two places. That is,
the budget returning to surplus In the 1990s and occupational
superannuation which now has In Australia's super funds, under the
government scheme owned by Australian employees of $ 180 billion
$ 1 80,000 million.
JI: Graham Richardson writes in his book about that banana republic
comment. It is very interesting and I'm interested. to hear your reaction
to the way he puts It and I quote him by May Keating was really
worried about our growing balance of payments deficit. It was no use
trying to explain it away again as we had done by declaring that
Qantas had brought another plane. Keating needed to issue a shock
warning to Australia and to overseas investors. On the John Laws
show he told the radio audience that Australia was importing about
$ 12 billion more than we were exporting every year and that if the
government couldn't get manufacturing going again and keep sensible
wage and economic policies we were basically done for and would end
up being a third rate economy." Then the current account deficit for
the year went to $ 14.8 billion. But, now it could go to $ 22 billion, so
shouldn't you be even more concerned than you were in 1986?
PM. Well, we are forecasting it at about $ 18 billion, but the thing is that was
$ 14 billion then in the size of the economy as it was then, It is now
very much greater. I mean, Australian GDP, this is the total economy,
is now about $ 400 billion. Then it would have been something in the
order of $ 300 billion. So, as a proportion of GDP, and we were then in
the late 1980s John, we were looking at the current account, deficit
heading up to 6 per cent of GDP. Now, we are looking at rates of half
that. So, that is the key point. Can I just make this other point, when I
spoke to you at that stage, we had the worst terms of trade, the worst
commodity prices since the Depression and that Is what lead me to
make that remark. Our national Income had fallen so sharply from
wheat, wool, Iron ore, coking coal and all these other things, that now
commodity prices are much stronger and, of course, we have had this
enormous transformation in our industrial base. We are now exporting
elaborately transformed manufactures. In fact, the fastest growing
component of our exports is elaborately transformed goods.
JL: The thing that I don't understand, pardon me if I don't, but I doubt that
our listeners understand either, as a percentage of GDP, doesn't it
mean that it could still go to 6.1 per cent of national output? 
3
PM: No, I don't believe that because I just think that we are not going to
have the sort of crazy credit growth we had In the 19809. When we
came to the end of the 1 980s boom we had credit growth of nearly
per cent a year and that sort of spending by the banks just lit the whole
economy up like a Christmas tree and, of course, we started sucking
the imports all over the place. We are now growing at a pace we can
manage and, of course, the banks after being stung so badly in the
1980s are now so abstemious In rationing credit growth, that sort of
problem is not going to arise.
JL: OK, I looked at the figures because people are now going back to the
1986 comments because of Its revival in Graham Richardson's book
Back In 1986 inflation was higher, I think about 8 per cent.
PM: Yes, it is now 2 per cent.
JL: That's right. Now, does the lower inflation figure make any difference
to the way In which the current account deficit should be looked at?
PM: It makes a tremendous difference because for a start world Interest
rates are lower so, basically if you take our current account and take It
to pieces there are two elements of it. One is called the trade surplus
or deficit and the other is called the payment surplus or deficit. One is
called the merchandise trade deficit and the other is called the net
Income deficit. Let me just explain those. One is basically whether
you are importing or exporting more goods and services that is goods
and services well, that Is basically about balanced. At various
periods now we have a merchandise trade surplus. That was never
the case. I mean, where our debt came from, it came from the fact that
In the 1970s, we dropped our guard on our manufacturing base and
were so massively uncompetitive. So, we were running huge
merchandise trade deficits so the debt came from an incapacity to
trade goods. Where the debt comes today, where the current account
deficit comes today is from the net income deficit, from the interest
payments. Now, that low inflation rate that you just referred to and the
low inflation rates and lower Interest payments around the world
means that in the 1 990s the Interest payments on our debt are much
lower than the 1980s so therefore the likelihood of the current account
deficit blowing out because of high debt payments and high interest
rates on that debt Is, of course, noth ing to be compared with the
1980s.
JL: OK now we hear the doom boosters and there are plenty of them,
saying that we have to level out the amount of exports compared to the
amount of imports, that they have to be about even. You say they are,
but the cry that we are hearing from quarters is that is not the case,
that we are importing a good deal more than we are exporting. But,
even if that was absolutely balanced, that doesn't solve the problem
does it? r 
PM: No. it doesn't solve the problem. In the end what we have had to do is
we have to export even more and that is why next month I am going to
the APEC meeting In Indonesia which is about lowering tariff
protection and trade barriers around the Asia-Pacific. Australia has
already made this great transformation, John. We have got tariffs
coming down to about 5 per cent by 1997. The whole culture of the
Australian manufacturing has changed to a competitive one.
Manufacturing production has doubled since the 1 980s, early 1 980s.
Manufacturing exports have trebled, we now export as much
manufactures as we do primary products.
JL: Well, I imagine even more this year with the drought.
PMV: Even more this year, and this is, of course, the first in our history and it
is that higher added value, these elaborately transformed products
which is basically coming from our education system and our research
and development and by more entrepreneurial management and a
willingness to actually ship product into the Asia-Pacific and the rest of
the world which was never true when the tariff wall was there. It is that
change which will give us the capacity to meet our trading imperatives,
but the basic fundamentals underlying the current account deficit mean
that we have got to lift our savings during the 1 990s and the two things
that I say that will do that is basically a shift of the budget back into
surplus and a very large change in savings coming from the
government's policies of award or occupational superannuation.
JL: OK, what about government spending, that should be cut surely?
PM. I Well, not so much spending. I mean, the deficit is being reduced and
let me just make a point, John. At the moment we have 9.5 per cent
unemployment. The last time we had 9.5 per cent unemployment was
in about 1984-85. Then the budget deficit was 4 per cent of our total
national production. At the moment it is 2.5 per cent. So, if you are
comparing apples with apples we are miles in front of where we were
in the 1980s because if the budget was in surplus today we would be
running the economy back into a recession. That's the point, we have
got the economy I noticed yesterday by the way, on 2UE Alan Jones
was saying he was talking to Mr Costello saying " the dramatically bad
circumstances we seem to be in at the moment". I mean, it is just
outrageous this sort of talk. Let me lust explain this to you, we have
got 4.5 per cent growth. We are growing as fast or faster than any
other western economy. We have got 2 per cent inflation which came
out last week. Now, the last time we had growth like that 4.5 per cent
growth and 2 per cent inflation would have been 30 years ago. As
well as that we have had 4 per cent employment growth when western
Europe has had around 1 per cent employment growth. As the
Treasurer said recently the last time we had a conjunction of
circumstances like this was 30 years ago. And yet, you have got 
people talking about dramatically bad circumstances. Look, the
average person is not to know all these numbers and to make all these
comparisons and It is irresponsible in the extreme to be addressing a
broad audience saying we have got dramatically bad circumstances or
it is a " sickening confidence trick" and all this sort of stuff. The fact is
two and a half years ago the economy was still in recession. This
government has managed to get it back to growth, but not just back to
growth, back to massive levels of employment growth. I mean, the big
issue in the last election was unemployment. Unemployment has
come down from 11 per cent to 9.5 per cent and we have had a
massive increase in people looking for work and we have had 4 per
cent employment growth. The other thing is, in the mean time, John,
we have absolutely exported our heads off. So, Australia is at the top
of the OECD league table and lot me just say this to you, The
Economist magazine, a conservative economic publication one of
Britain's foremost economic publications it has a league table in there
every month of economic performance versus inflation and
employment. We are at the top of that table and we have been there
for 14 months.
JI: Now, just quickly back to unemployment. How many of those jobs, you
say that we have created or you have created all these jobs
PM: Well, the policies h ave created this.
JL: I mean most of it has been private enterprise that has created the jobs.
PM: Well, of course it is, but it didn't just happen. The ' One Nation' policy
of 1992 got the country moving again. When we put that money into
rail, road, the ring roads around the capital cities, the highways, the
trunk rail network, all that government spending at the time was there
when private spending had stopped during the recession. That is what
kicked the place along.
JL OK, well when you talk about the jobs and the job rate being increased
how many of those are government subsidised jobs because there are
many who are going to say ' well, the government created the jobs.'?
PM: Very few, very few, the great bulk of them, 90 per cent of them would
be in the private sector 90 odd per cent in the private sector. And, of
course, need I -say John, with 11 per cent unemployment and 4 per
cent employment growth, the unemployment rate, if everyone stood
still, would be 7 per cent. The reason it Is 9.5 per cent is because we
have got new entrants to the workforce and in the main, people
optimistically looking for work and In the main the people joining the
workforce are women. So, there is a tremenidous boost of what we call
the participation rate. That is once things start to improve those who
are not registering for work or looking for work go out looking for it
again and that is why you don't get a clean translation of the 4 per cent 
6
employment growth off the 11 per cent which would otherwise give you
7 per cent.
JL: Yes, 1s there any indication of how many of those in the private sector
P M. It would be 90 odd per cent.
JL: Yes, but how many of those in the private sector are still getting
government assistance?
PM: In terms of?
JL Subsidies.
PM: None of those other than those who are longer term unemployed who
get wage subsidies.
JI: But, there would be a percentage.
PM: Only those unemployed over 12 months or more.
JL: Yes, well, there are a few of those aren't there?
PM: That is one of the great successes, I think, we have had in the last
year. Of the 400,000 jobs, 90,000 went to the long-term
unemployment that is people unemployed 12-18 months. Now, if we
were comparing 400,000 in the 1980s about only 25,000 of them would
have gone to the long-term unemployed. So, the government's White
Paper changes and the labour market programs where we actively
support those who have been longer term unemployed, we are now
finding we are having, well, you could say, roughly a quarter of the
jobs that have been created now are going to the long-term
unemployed and that for this country is just terrific.
JL: OK all the news according to you and understandably is good news,
one would like to think that everything that you are saying is right.
Graham Richardson has caused us, of course, to raise our eyebrows
on that subject again, but if everything Is as you say, if everything in
God's great garden is as rosy as it sounds when you talk about it, why
then do we have other people decrying the situation in which Australia
finds itself at the moment.
PM: Well I noticed that you, yesterday apparently referred to the Australian
Financial Review story where one of the largest US American bond
dealers said Australia had gone bond-kers and amongst other things,
you said this, ' the glass is never half full in Australia, its either seen as
empty or overflowing", and Isn't that just dead right. In other words, we
can never say, look, here is a recovery, we are going to maintain it and 
ILL: ~ j: 7
7
extend it with low Inflation. We have got 4.5 per cent growth. We
have 4 per cent employment growth and low inflation. Now lets do the
right things to extend it and give all Australians a chance at it right
through the 1 990s. No, Its either a feast or its a famine. We are either
all ' rooned or its a bounty heading our way. And you can't seem to get
from the commentators here, that sort of latitude that says " look, we've
actually done it right this time".
JL: Present company excepted please.
PM: Well, present company excepted, absolutely. And I think that is part of
the point. I noticed in the same story, let me just give you a couple of
quotes.
JL: You see, that's the point I made yesterday and I read parts of that from
the Financial Review that's what it was wasn't it yesterday page 37
PM: Well there were a couple of can I just read you a couple of
JI: But let me just finish I read that, and said that these fellas are
into bonds and this is the way they are talking about our country,
Australia. And then you get people on the phone saying " oh yeah, but
so what. They are only buying bonds". I mean its intelligent people
talking about our country for God's sake.
PM:. Well its more than intelligent people, its the people who watch the
major western countries who handle billions dollars of bonds and
basically buy them on the back of the prosperity and their Judgements
about those countries. So its not just a judgement about Australia, by
Australians, Its a judgement about Australia by people who buy similar
securities, In Germany, In Britain, In the United States right through
Western Europe. Let me just read what two people had to say in that
interview. One said ( this is a New Yorker), " Aussie inflation is fine, its
going to pick up a bit, but its still quite low by OECD standards. The
budget deficit has got a little bit worse but I'm willing to believe that is a
timing issue. The currency is going to appreciate it in the next couple
of years". Another said " we think the inflation fears in Australian are
exaggerated and we don't think Australia has the political uncertainty
of many countries. The currency is strong, the commodity prices* are
strong, and I have to say that it does look a bit like the bonds are
mispriced". The key point is the underlying sentiments of the remarks.
Forget the focus on the bonds, I mean, here you have the really hard
assessors of Australia saying, look basically the Inflation rate is fine,
they are ticking along with quite high rates of growth, the place is
stable, commodity prices are high and the currency is strong. Now,
you wouldn't get that out of the doom sayers, And that's the point. I
. mean, its quite wrong for these people. I mean you can never quite
win with the Jones' and people like that. A year ago eighteen months
ago It was all doom and gloom. It was unemployment; we're all 
B1 No -N 1
ruined; where are we going: we've had it; and within six and ri'n
months transition, we are all ruined again. This time its for growing too
fast. Because Interest rates have moved up slightly, and why are
interest rates up? They are up to sustain the recovery. So all
Australians can enjoy it for longer. That is, to keep inflation down, and
therefore keep our competitiveness up, to keep our exports going and
to get and maintain now this Investment phase in plant and equipment
which we haven't seen for three or four years. We are seeing it
coming back strongly, and with it of course, a long run recovery Into
the 1990s.
JL: OK Well you say that Inflation Is under control, we would like to
believe you. But we've got unions now, going for unbelievable wage
increases; increases have got nothing to do with productivity but based
on the fact that the interest rates to which you just referred are going
up. Now if they get those increases, and they flow through to other
sectors of the economy and normally that's the way it goes. We have
precisely the same situation that lead to the recession we had to have.
PM: Well, what you do what Governments do all the time is manage
things as they arise. We are now in a growth economy. In a growth
economy, you get price taking, you get people who want to put their
prices up. You can see various strength in the housing sector. It's
possible that things like bricks and tiles and kitchens and all these
sorts of things will have a little premium on them now where they didn't
two years ago, so the Government has got to watch that. Its got to
watch claims in the labour market, given the fact that most people in
the labour market did no better but probably worse over the last couple
of years, in some cases in the Inflation rate, so they're out there now
saying " well this is the time to get a wage increase"
JL: And of course they are using interest rates as the hook,
understandable.
PM: Well, some are. Basically they are just using the growth. And the
other thing Is, some of the states in the public sector are starting now
to offer wage increases they shouldn't be offering. For instance, the
NSW Government, John Fahey was under attack up at Darwin at the
Council of Australian Governments, not so much by me but by some of
the conservative State Premiers of the other States saying, " listen
John you better chop it out, offering 7 per cent to teachers and 5 per
cent to nurses" and on top of that, he's now got another 8 per cent
hanging about. So that sort of public sector lead coming out of NSW,
there is this notion you can buy your way back into office by offering
the public sector employees up to 15 per cent wage increases, is very
dangerous indeed. I can assure you that the Commonwealth Public
Sector, that is my Government employees -we will not be making
those sort of settlements. 
9
JL: Well, you have no control over -wbat hiaPPens in NSW. So if those
wage demands go ahead, how are you going to control inflation?
PM: Its not the wage demands, its the complicity of the Government in
meeting them.
JL Well assuming that happens in NSW, you have no control over it.
PM. You will always get wage demands, its a matter of whether you have
some bunny to actually say yes to them.
JL; Well if one of the bunnies does say yes, you have no control over that,
so how do you control it?
PM: Well, basically what we have done over the years is that we have had
an Accord with the Trade Unions. The reason we have got 2 per cent
inflation and remember this John, we have been growing now for about
12 quarters for three years, we have been back into positive growth for
three years and we have still got 2 per cent inflation. And the reason
for that is, basically we have had reasonably a good restraint on
wages and good productivity arrangements. The great change now
compared to the eighties, Is that we now have enterprise bargaining.
We've got a decentralised labour market and all wages are not fixed
by the Australian Industrial Relations Commission. There Is no such
thing as a National Wage Case today. So a lot of companies, what
they are doing is basically saying " look alright, we will give you an
increase, providing you give us some productivity".
JI: OK Well what about our mates at the TWU. 15 per cent they're
demanding and that has been sanctioned by the ACTU.
PM: Well, It depends on for a start, what's agreed by the companies.
Whether the companies want to cut their throats by agreeing to it and
secondly, over what period of time? If its over a couple of years or two
or three years, it becomes eminently affordable in national economic
terms. So John, you know the debate we have had in this country
about industrial relations. You've had the conservative side of politics
for years and the business community are saying " give us a
decentralised labour market. Give us labour market flexibility. Give us
enterprise bargaining." Well, now they have got it. And what they've
got to do is basically make It work. So when they pay a wage
increase, they have got to get something in return. That's more
productivity, that is, more product and lower costs.
JL: Its seems that they are having some difficulty making it work because
only 45 registered non-union enterprise agreements have been put in
place since the new industrial relations laws were introduced, but in
that same period of time, 2694 claims for unfair dismissal have been
lodged. : I i, 4 j 
PM: Well, Its the full enterprise bargaining stream, not the non-union
enterprise flexibility area that's important. Its the full what we call
' certified agreement area' that matters and we've now got about 55 or
per cent of all federal award employees subject to enterprise
agreements. In other words, the system is working and a lot of good
businesses with good managers are doing good productivity deals.
They are getting higher profits for the company which they then share
between profits and wages. And the employees walk away with a
wage increase and the Inflation rate doesn't suffer. Now in any
recovery, there will always be a bit of what's called ' economic
adjustment'. That is, to cover off the bit of the joy and even modest
inflation. Well, the economy can afford some of that, providing there is
a bit of productivity around and what the Government is about and
what the ACTU and our Accord partners are basically about here, will
be trying to manage that wage outcome, through the next few years, so
that we can have what most countries don't have. That's growth with
employment. Now let me just repeat this John. Western Europe is
growing at about 1.5 per cent. We are growing at 4.5 per cent. They
are getting about 1 per cent employment growth. We are getting 4. In
other words, our society is going to be more fully employed and
therefore, much more fulfilled and I hope happier. Therefore, the
Government's job is to extend the recovery, but listening to all the
doom sayers saying " it's a disastrous state of affairs" because interest
rates have risen by 1.3/ 4 percentage points from a 30 year low, to still
be low is extravagant doomsaying.
JL: There is so much of it, people do tend to become brainwashed by it. I
mean, how do you stop it? You see, if you look at what the former
head of the Treasury, John Stone, has to say about your statement
that $ 9 billion taken from the Budget represents the fiscal responsibility
of the Government, and he says it's all... . this figure is arrived at by
sleight of hand that you have included as so-called savings $ 3.6
billion by deferring the second instalment of the tax cuts. Now, nobody
can understand what he is writing about except that he is talking the
place down again that all this Isn't really happening, that you.. . have
you indulged in some sleight of hand?
PM: No. And when John Stone was secretary of the Treasury,
Commonwealth spending was 30.5% of our total product 30.5% of
our GOP.
JL: When he was head
PM: When he was secretary of the Treasury.
JL: Yep. 
TEL: 3. OV 14 : 17 No .014 P. 11/ 1
PMV: When " Paem Fraser left the Treasury to become Governor of the
Reserve Bank, the Government spending was 23.5% of GDP down 7
percentage points. Now, I'll tell you what that is 7% is just on
billion. Thirty thousand million each year less spending when Fraser
left the Treasury compared to Stone. So, the thing about all these
fellows is to look at what they did at the time. Stone believed in the
tariff wall, he believed in a managed exchange rate and when he left
after giving us all these high faluting ideas about his economic
capacity when he left the beauracracy, where did he go? Of all
places, to the National Party. To the Country Party which built the
tariff wall In the first place. These guys are classic under-achievers.
They failed In their public life, walk out and then want to be
commentators about people who realty achieved something. Putting
at no time during John Stone's Secretary-ship of the Treasury
was there ever 4.5% economic growth and 2% inflation. Never. He
could have only dreamed about It.
JL: Why do we need a racial hatred bill?
PM. Well, basically because we do see outbreaks of violence against
people... . persons and property for reasons of race. And at the moment
under the law, if someone throws a brick through your shop window,
they can be prosecuted only because they have broken your window
and not because It was racially Inspired.
JL: But violence of any sort. should be kept under control by any
governments anywhere...
PMV: Exactly.
A: Irrespective of the motive of the violence?
PMV: Here we are talking about incitement's to racial hatred and threats of
racial violence or damage . or such as damage to property etc.
Because basically having people running around saying " I'm going to
throw a brick through your window or bum your building down because
of your race" should be an offence. And that's what we're making it.
JL: out now it's being said by Michael Lavarch and others that ' Well, this
won't be enforced really there won't be any charges laid against.. If
this is true, why have it there?
PMV: Well I don't know that's true. But we have legislation of this nature in a
number of the States already. This is basically just the Federal
Government doing what is already around in some places, but having
a national law here.
JL But you can't legislate emotion. 
TE. 3. Nov. 94 NO -1 F. 12,
12
PM: Of you can't legislate emotion, and the operation of . when I say
that you can't legislate emotion.. that is, If they're emotions that don't
lead to an infringement of someone else's liberties you can legislate If
it starts to infringe someone else's liberties. If they had this sort of
legislation in Western Europe in the 1 930s, of course, it would have
mattered a great deal indeed.
JL: Yeah, but you still wouldn't have changed attitudes legislation can
never change attitudes.
PM: It can't change attitudes, but there's no way that the nation or the
community or the Government should regard offences against persons
or properties for reasons of racial hatred as being something to be
condoned.
JL: It's got a lot going for It as far as the Government is concerned in as
much as it has obviously shored up the ethnic vote?
PM; Look, it's not for that reason. The Government, I can say, has had a
lot of support from ethnic communities over a period of time for years
we don't need a racial hatred bill to maintain that. It's there because
It's a proper adjunct to our laws in respect to people's liberties.
JL: Is it something that is in place in most Westemised countries?
PM. I'd say most countries would have something very similar.
JL: It's going to cause... put the cat among the pigeons in the Coalition,
because they will be at loggerheads with each other on the issue.
That too would be to the Government's advantage, wouldn't it?
PM: Well, I should hope it isn't because I should believe that most people
in the Coalition would support this sort of legislation.
JL: Yeah. Out of all strange people, one of the Western Australian Green
people seems to be opposed to it does that surprise you?
PM: Well, they were opposed at one point to the Native Title legislation
when they were claiming an interest in the welfare of Aboriginal
people, and now they're seeking to upset the Land Fund legislation.
So again It just makes this point Independents wandering around the
Senate with no rhyme or reason about their political existence no
depth of policy analysis, no track record, no yardsticks, no sheet
anchors have no particular consistency in their approach to particular
pieces of legislation.
JL: OK Something else that we have been hearing a great deal about,
and we have been hearing hysterical cries about how we have dudded 
TEL: 3. ov9 14: 17 No. 614 F. 1.
13
Now Zealand as far as the aviation policy is concerned what i3 the
real story?
PM: Well, we haven't dudded New Zealand at all.
JL: Didn't New Zealand dud us?
PM: What happened here was I said in the One Nation statement.... we
offered New Zealand... . John, you would be familiar with the Airline
SAS the Scandinavian Airline System?
JL: Yes.
PM: Now that's basically an airline which operates around the countries of
Scandinavia you don't see a Swedish airline, and you don't see a
Danish airline, but you see SAS. Do you understand?
JIL: Yes, I do.
PM: Now what we were saying is " let's have a single aviation market for
Australasia". And in One Nation, I offered the Government of New
Zealand a common Customs border that is, Australia's customs laws
would be the same as Now Zealand's, and therefore the carriage of
passengers between our two countries could then be domestic to
domestic terminal. In other words, you would travel from Auckland to
Sydney, or Christchurch to Melbourne, and you would go just as you
would go from Perth to Melbourne, or Brisbane to Sydney.
JL: Ok. So New Zealand would become part of our domestic air market,
and we could become part of theirs.
PM. Yes. Now, New Zealand refused that. They said they wanted to keep
particular Visa arrangements with Taiwan and Mexico and other
countries, and they refused that. So we then said " Aliright. OK Well
listen, let's talk about then... it would be better to have a single customs
union a single set of customs arrangements let's then talk about a
single market." Now, what a single market means is that we have a
single market for passengers, and we organise that market in terms of
a single market for the capital for the airlines. In other words, there's
no particular reason why one of the airlines should be a New Zealand
airline or an Australian airline. That idea we have not been able to
make progress on. Basically I think, the view from New Zealand is Yes
they want a single aviation market for passengers, but not a single
aviation market for airlines. In other words, they want to keep a
national flag carrier.
JI:. So that's why you have terminated the arrangement? 
14
PM; At this point, Australia... . there were to be agreements about airline
ownership and rationalisation about airline structures. We have had
repeated conversations over the course of the last 18 months I have
had a number with the New Zealand Prime Minister, my colleague
Laurie Brereton has had a number with the New Zealand Transport
Minister, the Australian airline companies here Ansett and Qantas
have had a number with Air New Zealand, and because this
memorandum we had together had certain indicative dates In it, Air
New Zealand has already done very finely out of It. It's got now 14
jumbo flights a week out of Brisbane, which is a very large number of
passengers, which they can pick up Australian passengers and take
them to Japan...
JI: So that's taking away from Australian airlines?
PM: Yes, that's taking them, and they also then the contemplation was in
a single market, we would move them to domestic flying In Australia
between Brisbane and our capital cities our trunk routes and then
further beyond rights, that is further rights for say, Air New Zealand to
pick up people out of Sydney and Melbourne and carry them to other
countries. But that's only on in the event we have a single-market. In
other words, what has happened in Australia's terms is it's been all
give, give, give, and New Zealand has been all take. And as the sort
of trigger dates for these things were coming up, we were looking for
some kind of change on the part of New Zealand to recognise the
imperatives of one market, but it didn't come, and so therefore Mr
Brereton wrote to, Laurie Brereton wrote to his counterpart saying in
terms, seeing as you basically in spirit rejected the proposal, It's off.
JL: So this was done in the main to protect Australia as they had, in part,
reneged on the deal?
PM: Well, if we went, say flew to San Francisco and said to the United
States Government " We'll pick up American passengers in San
Francisco and go and fly them to London and Paris..."
JL: They would tell you tell you to go jump.
PM; Exactly. But we're giving Air New, Zealand the right to pick up
Australian passengers and take them to Japan. Now, they wanted that
right, plus more plus to be able to fly domestically, but to put nothing
back in return.
JL: So you said enough Is enough?
PM: Yes, that's wh'at we said enough Is enough.
JL: Okay. I know you're not much into polls, but you might be into this one
-the Bulletin poll that says 50% of Australians favour a republic, but 
3 N&gt;. C 4 No. Oi0s1
want to elect the Head of State. Would you proceed with the
republic plan if you can't get up your preferred option of Parliament
selecting the Head of State which I believe is the only way it should
be done, and could be done, because otherwise the Head of State
would appear to have more power than the Prime Minister, and
obviously that is what you have got in mind?
PM: At the moment people often say " you know, the Government and
Keating wants to appoint the Head of State even though there has
been some discussion about Parliament appointing such a person". At
the moment, of course, upon the expiry of the current Governor-
General's term....
JL: Yeah what's going to happen?
PM: Well, I would make a recommendation to the Queen and it would be
accepted the Government, and me as Prime Minister, would appoint
that Head of State without any reference to Parliament whatsoever. So
at the moment, the ball is right in my court, so It's obviously not for that
reason that I am saying Is what we need to do is to consider a republic
constructively. But more importantly than the modality of the
appointment John, is the notion that Australia will never really go its
way in the world while ever we're following the monarch of another
country. And I have said, one of the things that I wanted to see in this
year in 1994 was a genuine public debate about the virtues of a
republic versus a constitutional monarchy. Now I think we have well
and truly got that debate going, and that's a very good thing for the
country.
JL: Yeah. Still on the subject of poll. s It appears that the gap between the
Coalition and the Government is now narrowing some are saying that
Alexander Downer after his recent performance is going to bounce
back in the polls. Do you still have the future for Alexander Downer all
mapped out as you claimed you had In the past?
PM: Well I think I have, John. But again, these polls fluctuate, and the only
poll that ever matters is the poll on polling day. But again, the
Government has done all the things it said it would do at the last
election we said we would restore growth in the economy and it's
growing faster, or as fast, as any economy in the world. and western
economy In the OECD economy. We said we would restore
employment we have got 4% employment growth. The only country
that Is as high as us In the western world is Canada at about 4% itself
no other country Is up in that league. We said we would give effect to
the High Court decision on Native Title we have gone and done it.
We said we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind we set up the
White Paper to do that. We said we would support the arts we have
gone and done so. I mean, the Government has done all the things It
said it would do. 
16
JL: Just back to the arts thing again you know that to the chagrin of
many? I mean you have got a lot of criticism for having done that In a
lot of quarters?
PMV: Yes. Well, I notice your friend and colleague on the morning program
having his one final . you know I was listening to him while I was
coming onto your program, and they're saying " Oh, there was
Turandot", he said, " None of Mr Keating's art money in that". Well the
fact is, unless there is support for the Australian opera, and for the
opera companies In this country from the public purse, and the ballet
and the other major companles, you can't have a Turandot. It doesn't
occur to these guys that an Investment In arts and culture In the public
infrastructure In Australia is one of the things that we should be doing,
and we happen to do It well look at the rave reviews we had for the
Australian Ballet In Washington. The Australian Ballet went to the
Australian Festival which was held at the John F Kennedy Centre in
Washington and it was a great success 40,000 people came on the
first day, half the American Senate was there, some of the Justices of
the High Court, a number of American Ministers were there, members
of the Cabinet were there, and Clive Barnes the noted New York dance
critic had such glowing references to the Australian Ballet. I mean, we
are getting international acclaim for the standards of our arts, and to
be whlngelng about that Is really to be blinkered and mean-spirited.
JL: Yeah. I can understand to a degree and it's difficult to say this
because 1 have to refer to a friend in the form of Reg Livermore who I
think Is a tremendously talented fella and I think he has done a great
deal but Reg Isn't actually on the breadline, and when those artists
who are struggling a iittle bit trying to get on, and I mean you have
seen many of them around you, and endeavoured to help many around
you, and they hear that a fella like Reg who is fairly well gainfully
occupied and has done pretty well and has got himself set up pretty
well that he gets a grant of some $ 60,00 odd dollars for a couple of
years in a row in order to write his biography that smarts a little. You
must be able to understand that?
P M-The Australian Artists Creative Fellowships are for artists of
accomplishment mid-career. These are for people who are in the
broad, In the main, uncommercial, and in commercial terms
unsuccessful, but in artistic terms of course, are very successful.
JL: But you couldn't say that Reg was uncommercial?
PMV: No, Reg is commercial, but again, he is going to take time off to make
a contribution back. I mean, just the same as John Olsen at the
presentatlon of the awards this year as a former awardee, presented
works back to the Commonwealth. Frank Moorehouse has
w V-.1 r 
I LL: s. rO. Ui 17
produced a first-class nave?, yo have got... I mean, it has gone to
people like Garth Welch in dance and....
JL: Yeah, but surely these people could have made the contribution
without the taxpayers having to foot the bill?
P M. Well let me just tell you this John when the first group of Fellowship
awardees went through, and there were on that occasion 7 or 8 of
them now these are people at the absolute top of Australian artistic
ability, and of international standing. Their average income is $ 9000
for the year, the previous year the average Income of all of them is
$ 9000 and that was 1988, and now we have 45 people, I think, in the
group. I don't know exactly what the average figure would be, but I
wouldn't mind betting it's not much beyond $ 12-1.3,000. This is a very
sad fact that people need to understand about the arts that somebody
who is a sculptor or a dancer or a pianist or whoever It might be,
unless they fluke that commerciality, they can be absolutely world best
and be basically broke. Now, this Is an acknowledgment of saying to
people who do what they do best, but do it with the greatest possible
commitment to this country, who have never walked away from it and
gone though it all and given Australia up, but stay here and stay with
the low money It's a way of saying for 2 or 3 years, or 4 years if you
like you can block out these years and put something back right at
the peak of your career, and not have to worry about putting food on
the table.
JL: Yeah well all that Is fine, and I say that I don't want to go into it too
much because I am not mean-spirited, but you could never say that my
friend and he Is a terrific fella and a terrific talent you could never
say that Reg Livermore Is down in the low wage earning. I mean, he's
a pretty commercial character and very successful and very good at
what he does, and that does smart a bit with people you know. I really
do understand people saying " well come on, hang
PM: Okay, but I don't think it is possible to just take one out of...
JL: Well, it's not fair
PM: out of forty....
JL: Well he's the only one I can think
PM; One out of forty odd, or maybe a couple out of forty odd....
JL: Well, you know there Is another one that springs to mind as well...
PM: Well what contribution has Livermore made to Australian theatre? An
enormous contribution.... 
PM: . and he will put something back. And what we are paying him is
$ 60,000 for the two years that he is going to do it.
JL: But one could also ask what contribution have I made to Australian
radio?
PM; True.
JL: Nobody offered me 60 grand.
PM; No. But they have offered you much more than that, and that is the
point.
JL: No, I offered it myself.
PM: Welt it's like our friend on the morning program I don't want to seem
obsessed about him, but he seems obsessed about me. The tact is,
hearing his blaggarding Australian artists most of whom, in this
category without any Government assistance are getting $ 12-14,000
a year. That is, they're not getting what someone at the bottom end of
the wage market is getting, when he is picking up probably around a
million a year or better. Now, is there any justice in that? I mean,
reading out transcripts and vetting opinions and picking up multiples
and multiples of what people of international accomplishment are
actually getting. You see look, I don't mind people getting greedy, as
long as they are not mean-spirited about it.
JL: I think it's terrific.
PM: I mean good on Alan. He's got a good rating program even though
it's basical ly.. . most of the stuff is middle of the road fascism I don't
mind if he's doing his best and he's getting his money for it, but let's
not blaggard everybody else who is accomplished and who is basically
living on a pittance.
JL: Would you consider taking the House of Representatives to an
election without the Senate?
PM: I'm not interested in early elections, John.
JL: No, that wasn't the question.
PM: Well, to take the House to an election without the Senate means that
the House has got to go before next August, and that's just not my
intention.
JL: Have you.... 
IEL3. Nv. 91 9 1 17
PM: I want to see the Government enjoy this Parliament to do the things we
promised the Australian people we would do restore the growth and
employment, keep the inflation rate low and get on with the big ticket
Issues like the republic, APEC, Mabo, the White Paper all of these
major milestones in Australia's political history, get working on those
and at the end of it we'll say to the Australian people " This is what we
promised, and this is what we have done, and we want you to return us
again".
JL Okay Prime minister, thank you for your time. Good to talk to you, and
I hope we get to talk again very soon.
PM: Thank you very much John.
ends. 



EMBARGO. 8.30PM, 3 NOVEMBER 1994
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN QUALITY AWARDS
SYDNEY, 3 NOVEMBER 1994
Well, it's a great pleasure to be speaking to you all right across Australia.
The involvement of so many people in these National Quality Awards is as
good an indicator as any of just how far Australian business has come since
the Awards were first initiated in 1988.
Australian business has well and truly made the leap to international best
practice and quality is now a central plank of Australian business culture.
Of course, the Australian Quality Council has played a critical role in all this.
And I congratulate the Council for all it has done to build a quality culture, to
create a culture of excellence throughout Australia.
I think Australian business should also take great comfort in knowing that it
has the wherewithal to match it with the best in the world and, in many cases,
to be the best in the world.
Of course, Government too has played its part.
The many reforms we have introduced, and with which you are no doubt
familiar, have opened Australia to the world and provided an environment in
which business could flourish.
As indeed it has.
We've seen manufacturing exports grow by an average 15 per cent a year
over the last decade.
We've seen our exports of services, which place a premium on quality, grow
by more than 10 per cent a year to now account for one fifth of our total
exports. 
2
And, over the same period, we've seen our exports increase their total share
of GDP from 14 to 22 per cent.
These are all big achievements for which both business and government can
take credit.
Ten years ago, most would have seen achievements like these well beyond
our grasp.
And events like this one tonight would have been equally unthinkable.
Back then, you would have been more likely to assemble these sorts of
numbers for a national debate on how high the tariff wall should be.
And the overwhelming majority would have argued the higher the better.
Thankfully, that debate is now well behind us but it does have important
lessons. I think one of the most important lessons it has taught us, and it's borne out in
our export performance, is that we are right to have faith in ourselves in
one sense, that's what tonight's awards are about.
When we have faith in ourselves, we feel more optimistic about the future.
And feeling optimistic, having a sense of the possibility of a better world,
leads you to build that world.
Whereas if you don't share the optimism, you won't see any point in making
an effort.
That's why when people are confronted by big changes, like the opening up
of the Australian economy, they quickly fall into two camps.
There are those who don't have faith in our ability to meet the new
challenges. They fall back to supporting the status quo, or worse still, they advocate a
retrograde return to a supposedly glorious past.
These are the ones who once we start to grow strongly ask not " How can we
sustain the growth?" but " When will it end?"
These are the ones who when we have low inflation ask not " How can we
keep it low?" but " How high will it go?" 
And then there are the people, like those associated with the Australian
quality movement, who believe in our capacity to ride the waves of change
and to ride them well with excellence.
These people realise that in an increasingly competitive world you are more
likely to provide for those who come after you if you embrace the future not
with fear and loathing but with confidence.
And it's into this second camp that the majority of Australians are flooding
there's a real sense of confidence about the place.
It's a sense of confidence that we haven't had for a while.
And, in terms of our place in the world, it's a sense of confidence that we've
never had before.
You can certainly feel it among the business community, and particularly on
nights like this.
And it's not a sense of confidence that is boastful or short-sighted.
Nor is it of the sort paraded by the buffoons of the 1980s.
Rather it is a quiet confidence, a quiet confidence in business's ability to
produce world class products and services and the government's ability to
run a low inflation economy.
It's the sort of quiet confidence that leaves me feeling very optimistic about
the country's future.
And you can see it in the new class of business leaders that have emerged in
recent times.
You can see it in the leaders of small to medium sized firms identified in the
McKinsey Emerging Exporters report and the LEK Intelligent Exports report
leaders who had a vision of their companies as global exporters, who
searched out new markets and who then set their companies on the path to
winning those markets.
You can also see it in the leaders in the big firms like Tubmemakers, Toyota
and BHP Steel, firms that have picked up Australian Quality Awards in recent
years.
Tonight we honour all these leaders.
But by " leaders" I don't mean just the chief executives, just those who come
up to accept the awards, I mean those people that are committed to quality
and excellence right throughout an organisation. 1 
It doesn't matter whether you are a CEO, a line manager or a stores assistant
or for that matter a Prime Minister it's what you bring to the position
rather than the position itself that really counts.
Great organisations have great people throughout the organisation from
the bottom to the top.
And that's one reason why these Awards are so important they
acknowledge excellence right across an organisation.
Great organisations, be they firms or governments, will always welcome new
challenges.
And this is where APEC comes in we have to ensure that our world class
products and services aren't denied access, particularly in the booming Asian
markets.
There's no point in having a quality product if you've got nowhere to sell it.
What we are seeking to do with APEC will deliver significant long term
benefits to many generations of Australians.
We are looking to the forthcoming APEC Leaders' meeting in Bogor to make
a commitment to free trade in the region by a particular date.
Once the political will is expressed, business will factor it into their
calculations and the export success of businesses like the ones we honour
tonight will depend not on the extent of their access to the world's fastest
growing markets but rather on the quality of their products and that's as it
should be.
Harmonised standards are a smaller part of the picture and, through APEC,
we are already working to harmonise product standards and to secure mutual
recognition of standards and conformance arrangements throughout the
region.
And as we seek to improve our external environment, we continue to do the
same at home because we know that economic reform is a process of
continuous improvement.
That's why, in partnership with the States, we are putting in place a national
competition policy that will create a single market for Australian goods and
services. It's something that will be of major benefit to business and I hope those of you
in business keep up the pressure on your State political leaders to embrace
national competition. 
Together with the reforms in electricity and gas, already well underway, the
new national competition policy will give a huge boost to our international
competitiveness. Let me finish up.
Two weeks ago, when I launched our cultural policy statement, Creative
Nation, I referred to the raw energy, skills and ambition of Australians as
sources of great riches.
From them flow the creativity, innovation and dedication needed to bring the
value and quality of our products and services up to standards competitive
with the best the world has to offer.
Underlying Creative Nation and all the other government initiatives I have
referred to tonight is one thing confidence in our ability to excel at what we
do. It's as simple as that.
There are few other developed countries that can match present day
Australia. But we shouldn't be content with that, there's no excellence in parity.
As I see it, the goal of this Labor Government is to ensure that in the 21st
Century there is no better place in the world to live and do business than
Australia. This is a highly ambitious goal but it is achievable.
What's reassuring about the Australian Quality Awards is that they show we
are a nation rich in excellence, that Australians have the ability to deliver on
quality. Tonight's awards should give us every reason for approaching the new
century with a quiet but deep-seated confidence.
Thank you. 



K
( f
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DEATH OF DR PETER WILENSKI, AC
Peter Wilenski died this morning after a long struggle with a very difficult
illness. He leaves behind his wife, Jill, and two young children, Michael and
Katy. I offer to them heartfelt condolences on my own behalf, and on behalf
of the Government, its ministers and the public service as a whole.
In a long career in many different positions as public servant, academic,
ministerial adviser, arnd diplomat he made an enormous contribution to
Australian public life. He played a key role in the revolutionary changes
which transformed the face of Australian public administration, beginning with
his involvement in the Coombs Royal Commission on Australian Government
Administration in 1974 during the Whitlam Government. During his
subsequent career, he headed four different government departments under
three Labor governments as well as being chairman of the Public Service
Board. The necessity of change was something he saw very clearly and articulated
persuasively. Successive Labor governments availed themselves of his
capacity to design and implement change.
It was also a very important part of how Peter saw himself, and in that regard
as in the happiness he found with his family his life was one of immense
personal fulfilment.
Throughout his life he was passionately committed to advancing social
justice. His intellectual talent and his skill at public administration were
illuminated by a strong sense of fairness. He was instrumental in creating a
pmuebnl. ic sector inw hich women could begin to have the same opportunities as
The pioneer Australian feminist, Edna Ryan, said today about Peter that ' he
was a most unusual bureaucrat and a well-informed feminist. Probably no
man gave more than Peter to the cause of the status of women in Australia'. 29 Cl 3 
2
As Australia's ambassador to the United Nations in New York from 1989 to
1992 he applied these same management skills and social commitment to
advance the cause of reform of the United Nations and to focus the attention
of the international community on to the needs of women and human rights
icI sac
He was a person of many dimensions. He had a great love of art, and a
staggering array of interests in issues as diverse as his first profession,
medicine, development assistance, and higher education.
Australia has lost a national figure. We mourn that. But at the same time he
has left us much for which the Government and country can be deeply
thankful. CANBERRA 3 November 1994
4 2964 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
INTERVIEW WITH RAY MARTIN, " A CURRENT AFFAIR",
3 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RM: Prime Minister, thanks for your time. Now you're buying a house, as I
understand it, like a lot of other Australians. What home interest rate
have you allowed for in your budget?
PM: Well, I'll take it as it comes, but I know it's coming with low inflation,
so it's not....
RM: You wouldn't handle 18% or 19% like you had a few years back?
PM: Well this is not going to be the 1980s. We're not sitting on an
inflation rate of or we're last week we had an inflation rate
of and that is what in the end drives interest rates. So, interest
rates will rise in the recovery you have seen that already
RM: Right. Are these the rises we had to have?
PM: The answer I think is yes but again, they won't be like the 1980s.
They won't be as high as the 1980s, they won't go up like the 1980s.
RM: Well we hope not, wouldn't we?
PM: Well we would.
RM: 14 or 15% is what Alexander Downer is predicting today he says
they're going to explode.
PM: Well that is just irresponsible, mindless behaviour that's what it is.
That is unnecessarily trying to frighten people when at the moment,
the official overnight cash and call rate in the Reserve Bank is
and that's what drives the bills and drives everything else.
RM: But you have people today that are paying 9.5% plus.
PM: Yes, but that is not 16%. 14 Z71
Q-D 
RM: Do you categorically rule out 14
PM: Well I can't be the interest rate ruling out business, Ray. But one
thing for sure the 1980s are not here.
RM: Do you scratch your head though, when you read the papers and the
economics experts not just the pundits, but the experts who say
" well, despite this positive news, I think there is still a boom-bust
cycle around the corner"?
PM: You see, we have got the same local group of commentators we have
had for 20 years you and I know who they are and they are still
saying the same thing: " we're all ' rooned it will never be any good",
where the fact is that this is the best conjunction of economic
circumstances we have had in 30 years.
RM: So the people who rang up A Current Affair today when it was
announced that you were coming on tonight, and said " ask about
home loan interest rates" in a word what would you say to them?
Don't worry?
PM: I would say this that they have seen already a modest increase in
interest rates, part of that has flowed through to housing, a bit more
maybe but we will not see a repeat of the housing rates of the
1980s.
RM: If I asked you how a man who has been a politician all his working life
for 25 years can afford to pay over $ 2 million for his house what
would you say to me?
PM: Easy, from my point of view. Basically, I'm like most other people in
the Sydney market your house goes up in value and you end up
with a big mortgage at the end of it.
RM: So you are very much watching as everyone else is you're
watching these interest rates because you could....
PM: Well, I know what it's going to do to me. I mean, there's at least more
than an observers interest there. I mean, I have one house in the
whole of Australia a terrace house in Sydney the whole world has
heard about it, and I'm intending....
RM: Not a bad sort of a terrace house though....
PM: No, but it was a flop-house when I bought it. It had 40 beds and
hypodermics and joints laying all over the place when I moved in...
RM: There's about 16 million Australians who wouldn't mind having it
though would they?
PM: No, but again, I bought it 12 years ago, and you know what has
happened in the Sydney property market in 12 years. And it's 
because I own that, that I can go from that house.... basically what I
am doing is moving houses by one mile, and I'm moving up a bit with
a mortgage.
RM: Up a bit, with a $ 2 million place...
PM: With a mortgage from one worth about $ 1.25 million to $ 2 million.
RM: But you don't think that as a dyed in the wool Labor man a working
class man that you have got to go sort of in the dark at night to go to
Woollahra where
PM: No. Because I have had 2 houses in my life. I had one in
Bankstown....
RM: How long ago was that?
PM: I sold that in 1983 when I became Treasurer...
RM: Right.
PM: and I bought the terrace I now own at the same time, and that's all I
have. And I will sell that as time goes by, and move into this other
one. But again, I am not moving into it it's there for later. I'll let it
because I'm quite happy with my current accommodation.
RM: So you will rent it? You are quite happy to rent it and...( inaudible) all
that sort of stuff?
PM: Well you can't live in The Lodge and live in Woollahra at the same
you have got to make your choice, and my choice is a pretty easy one
to make.
RM: How much rent can you get for a place in Woollahra?
PM: Oh, a couple of thousand a week $ 2,500 $ 3000 a week.
RM: That's not bad for a working class boy from Bankstown?
PM: Well, that's what an old friend of mine used to say: " in the Labor Party
Paul, we don't want to push people down, we want to bring them all
up".
RM: Have you ever lied in politics, like Graham Richardson?
PM: You don't need to tell lies. I'm surprised....
RM: Well, Richo says you can't be successful unless you tell lies?
PM: I'm surprised Graham thinks that, frankly. I think you can I tend to
take it on the chin and say it as it is. I mean, I'd rather say the thing
that is less popular than mislead people. 
RM: How do you tell of a politician is lying, Paul?
PM: I don't know whether you can tell, but you can look at their work, that's
the best way to do it. I don't know whether Graham put this line in the
book for notoriety or not, but it is not a line I subscribe to.
RM: Have you ever lied in politics?
PM: No, I have never gone and said something I believed to be untrue.
RM: How about the challenge, the first challenge against Bob Hawke,
where you lost it and you came out on television and said that ' I have
only got one shot in the locker and I've used it', but in fact you had two.
PM: Well, later I had two, but I didn't at the time. At the time I thought that
was it. You see, it is very hard to dislodge a Prime Minister. You can
have one go at it and then what happened was, what basically beat
Bob was Fightback. That's where I came from.
RM: So, when you said that you meant it?
PM: I was prepared to, when the Parliament rose at the end of 1991 that
was the end for me. By early 1992 I would have left the Parliament.
RM: Lazarus.
PM: Well, they got me right at the end, but they knew they did too.
RM: Are you pleased to read today in the paper or to hear that Prince
Charles sees you as a kindred spirit?
PM: He says I have got an interest in architecture and aesthetics.
RM: And urban design?
PM: There is not much in terms of central interests we share, but that is one
of them.
RM: But, are you pleased that he regards you as a kindred spirit?
PM: Glad he has acknowledged the fact that I have I mean, his criticism
of modern architecture in Britain has been somewhat akin to the
criticisms that I have had in the design of our cities here.
RM: The Cahill Expressway and so on?
PM: Well, the Cahill Expressway is just an example, and I think he has
done quite a lot for the architectural debate in Britain and I am quite
happy for him to nominate me as a kindred spirit. 
RM: Well, how about what he said, he told Jonathan Dimbleby that he was
relieved to find you not as bad as he had imagined.
PM: He got a very nice reception from me and my family and I from him
when I visited him and his family at Balmoral. I have always found the
Royal Family, in terms of personal relations, exceptionally nice to deal
with.
RM: What about when he said ' what do you mean when he said that you
were a great exponent of the art of monologue'. Does that mean you
wouldn't let him talk?
PM: He is a good talker, I don't know that too many people get too many
words past him. So, maybe he'll regard it as a bit of tussle, I don't
know.
RM: Would you accuse him of the same thing?
PM: Yes, he is a good chatterer. He has got a lot to say, but good on him.
RM: A republic by the Year 2000, has the pace quickened as we read?
PM: I don't think the pace has quickened, but I am delighted to see more
Australians believing that we can only go our own way with our own
head of state.
RM: Have the Royal scandals added to that, increased the number of
people believing?
PM: I think so, yes. I think that is part of it, but I think underlying it, that's
part of it. But, I think the underlying thing is that, I think, Australians
know we are making I am going to as you know Ray, to APEC in
Indonesia in a week and a half from now and you can't get around like
that saying ' oh, excuse me, we are just borrowing the monarchy of
another country.'
RM: You would like our own flag and our own head of state at a time like
this?
PM: I want our own republic. That is the first thing I want.
RM: All right. Now, it is clear certainly from The Bulletin this week, that
per cent of Australians want to elect the president, not allow politicians
like you to decide who it is. How are you going to turn them around on
that?
PM: Sometimes people say ' well, that Keating, he wants this republic so he
can appoint the president'.
RM: Or maybe be president 
PM: You know how interviewers are always asking you to rule things out
well, let me rule that out.
RM: OK.
PM: And that you will give one of the popular guarantees I'll give a
guarantee on that.
RM: Never be president?
PM: Never be president.
RM: OK.
PM: But, on the issue itself, I think, this is a terribly strong thing for our
democracies that you don't have figures who are walking around,
hearing voices, saying ' I've been anointed by the Gods', I'm wearing a
national mandate, I have some position of supra authority above the
Parliament and the whole embodiment of a nation is invested in me.
RM: All right, last question. Jeff Kennett, I know you will want to answer
this, says that you made no real attempt to save David Wilson in
Cambodia a tough charge.
PM: And a very low grade charge at that. Jeffrey has got a big mouth and it
runs away from him every second week. We did everything we could
possibly do. We sent an AFP officer out there, the diplomatic effort we
mounted on this through the Cambodian government was as strong as
we have ever done, but again, you are dealing with rebel forces in a
dangerous part of the world.
RM: All right. We thank you for your time and good luck in Indonesia too.
ends 



C-)
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATINJG MY
VISIT TO0 AUSTRALIA BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
KOREA, KIM YOUNG SAM, 16-19 NOVEMBER 1994
1 am very pleased to announce that the President of the Republic of Korea,
Kim Young Samn, will visit Australia from 16-19 November 1994 as a guest of the
Australian Government. During his time here, he will visit Sydney and Canberra. He
will be accompanied by Madam Kim.
President Kim's visit will follow the APEC leaders' mneeting being hosted by
President Soeharto in Bogor, Indonesia. President Kim and I have worked together
closely in promoting APEC and our discussions will provide a good opportunity to
follow up the outcomes of the meeting. We will also discuss other important regional
economic and security issues in which we share significant common interests.
In the bilateral area, I am particularly interested in examining the scope for developing
further our very healthy economic links and broadening the base of our relationship
through close co-operation in fields such as education and industrial technology.
The ROK is our fifth largest trading partner, with two-way trade totalling $ 6.6 billion
in 1993-94. It is our third largest export market and our exports grew by 18.6 per cent
in 1993-94 alone. Our exports to the ROK are not only growing fast, they are
diversifying. Where manufactures accounted for 10 per cent of exports a decade ago,
they now forin one quarter.
Australia's relations with the P. 0K are am~ ong our most important external linkages.
President Kim's visit is an important further step in the decpcning Of OUr bilateral
relationship. CANBERRA 3 November 1994 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
CITIZ: ENSHIP PROMOTION LAUNCH
SYDNEY TOWN HALL, 4 NOVEMBER 1994
It Is a great pleasure to be here, on this very happy occasion.
My flr~ t duty is to congratulate all those who are becoming Australian citizens
today. I have no doubt it Is a great moment for all of you. And I can also say it is a
great moment for all of us who are sharing it with you.
Words like pride come to mind. It is a proud moment. But there is much more
than that at work here today. The feelings go much deeper than pride.
Today we are seeing people from an extraordinary variety of cultures and
countries, and an extraordinary variety of professions embrace Australia. And
we are seeing Australia return the embrace.
It is a ceremony with the elements of a marriage about it and a homecoming,
and a family reunion, and a graduation ceremony.
Whatever it is, the feeling Is a very warm one.
Perhaps " sharing" is the operative word.
People who decide to take out Australian citizenship decide to share in the
responsibilities of being Australian.
And in return Australia offers a share of the rewards.
And a share of the pleasure too, I hope.
We sincerely trust the pleasure will be lasting that whenever you say " I am
Australian" you will feel proud to say It. That it will mean to you something
special. 
It does not mean that you are accorded some elevated status in the world,
rather that you now acknowl edge as your home a country which is free and
democratic, tolerant and just.
It doe~ s not mean that you have renounced the inheritance of custom and
tradition you brought with you to Australia, rather that you have adopted as your
homeD a country which respects the diverse cultural Inheritance of all its
citizens. You have lost something, but, we might say, you've gained a whole country.
Nothing is asked for in return except your loyalty, that you keep faith with the
pledge you are taking.
There Is a real sense in which it can be said that when you take that pledge all
Australians take it.
The rights and responsibilities which you have taken on are borne by all
Australians and no Australian and no Australian government can ever take
them f~ or granted.
It is not enough to merely say we subscribe to these values we should live by
them, we should teach them, we should pass them on, we should enshrine
them in our institutions and laws, we should be prepared to defend them.
We have an extraordinary opportunity in Australia.
We have the chance in the last decade of the century to pull the threads of our
nationhood together: not into a monocultural, monolithic society, or into the
shape of the classical nation-states of the past century and a half.
The catchword is not uniformity, but difference. It is not conformity, but
creativilty. It is not exclusive, but inclusive. Not closed to the world, but open to
it. It is tru' 3 we need the things a nation needs.
We need a sense of common purpose, we need the ties of fellow feeling to
unite us, we need belief and loyalty.
But these days we must surely recognise that we are increasingly united by the
pride and the pleasure we take In multicultural Australia: our respect and
enthusiasm for cultural diversity has become a defining element of Australia's
nationat sentiment. 
That is what we find so moving about this ceremony. That is what unites us
today. I am sure the warmth is the warmth we feel when we welcome someone to our
family. The pride is in seeing Australia in idea and reality mediate such
vast cultural difference. So that men and women from Egypt, or Bangladesh,
or England, or Russia, Indonesia or Peru can, without losing any of their
individual identity, Identify themselves in common as Australians.
If this does not inspire warmth and pride, what does?
I have a feeling it is a variety of what one writer, Mary Kalantzis, recently cailed
" la postnationalist sense of common purpose"
This is not to cast off older Australian traditions or Institutions which serve us
well. It Is not to devalue the culture that has grown here.
In fac: I am quite certain we will see those traditions strengthened in coming
years modified in places, inevitably, but strengthened in their essentials.
BecaUse it is those essentials the essentially democratic, tolerant and
pragmatic nature of them which has made the transformation to a
multicultural Australia possible.
Contemporary Australia is built upon them.
Now we have the chance to make our multicultural society, and the tolerance
and openness on which It has been built, a recognised and recognisable
element of Australian nationhood.
If we can do this It will fit us very well for the modem world in which the barriers
between nations are dissolving and culture, communications and services
number among the most valuable commodities a country can have.
It will serve us marvellously in this regard and it will guarantee an Australia
which is not only culturally rich but socially cohesive and harmonious.
Just as Importantly, it will mean an Australia which counts among its primary
values the capacity to find practical ways to mediate differences not just
ethnic or cultural differences, but the differences between men and women.
between urban and rural Australians, between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
Australians. 
BecaLuse we want to invigorate our national life and national consciousness this
year we established a Civics Expert Group, Invested with the task of finding out
how much Australians know about their country and its traditions and
Instititions. We have also asked them to tell us what is the best way to fill in
the gaps in their knowledge.
For the same reason we have taken on a major promotion of citizenship. We
want to see a very large percentage of the million residents who are eligible for
citizenship take the step that the people here today are taking.
It will mean no less to their heritage and Individuality, but a great gain to the
country In which they make their livelihoods and homes.
The country which demands they leave nothing of their heritage behind unless
it Includes hatred and violence.
That 1: 3 another step we have taken: we will introducea Racial Vilification Bill to
protect Australians against those few who would incite racial hatred.
The Bill is not for the purposes of punishing common prejudice. It is to protect
Innoce'nt men, women and children against fear and intimidation. All
Australians are entitled to freedom from fear.
The legislation embodies a warning to those who might attack the principal of
tolerance on which our society Is built, and an assurance to those who might be
their victims.
It is something of a safety net for multicultural Australia. The expression in law
of those things which today we pledge our belief in.
Laws like pledges are necessary expressions of belief.
But ultimately what matters most is the energy and imagination of people.
In the Australia of my imagination people will continue to believe In their
citizenship deeply, yet wear it lightly.
I hope that is the message we all take from here: let us not be too pious about
it, and let's keep the flag-waving and drum-beating to a respectable minimum.
Let's simply rejoice in the fact that being Australian is a very good and fortunate
thing to be.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE THIRD RUNWAY AT SYDNEY AIRPORT
4 NOVEMBER 1994 * CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*
Well. today's a great day.
It's a great day for Sydney but it's also a great day for Australia.
The opening of this third runway means that we now have the sort of airport
you'd expect in one of the great cities of the world.
It's the! sort of airport worthy of a city, and a country, hosting the 2000
Olympics. But perhaps more important, this third runway will create a huge number of jobs
and deliver enormous benefits to the Australian community.
According to the Federal Airports Corporation, this runway will generate an
additional 26,000 airport-related jobs in the next five years, and an additional
one million jobs in the tourism industry over the next ten years.
I mean it's difficult to think of many projects that are going to generate these
levels of employment.
On top of the jobs, there will also be majqor benefits to consumers be they
business people or people on holidays.
And It won't be too long before they no longer have to factor in inordinate
delays -to their travel into and out of Sydney. 
2
Of course, making this a world quality airport that will generate enormous
benefits, not just for Sydney but for the wider Australian community is
something that's not without it's cost.
And, unfortunately, it's a cost that doesn't fall equally.
As we all know, there are a good number of people who live in the surrounding
areas, who will be adversely affected by noise.
For thiose people, we have put in place a $ 183 million package of measures to
reduce the Impact of aIrcraft noise on the local community.
I might add that these measures aren't cosmetic they go further than many
similar programs at airports right around the world.
They acknowledge that the burden doesn't fall equally.
The noise control measures include
* the voluntary acquisition of 112 properties in the area of highest noise
exposure the 40 Australian Noise Exposure ( AN EF) contour
the Insulation of schools, colleges, hospitals, churches, and child and health
care facilities the 25 to 40 ANEF contour based on the ultimate capacity
of the airport
and the Insulation of 3,500 residences exposed to projected noise levels
above 30 ANEF.
Further, there will also be a study to assess whether insulation should be put in
residences exposed to lower levels of noise ( below the 30 ANEF contour) arnd a
pilot insulation scheme will be undertaken as a matter of priority.
This third runway is also a major accomplishment in construction and industrial
relations. Not only has the project involved the dredgi ng of 14 million cubic metres; of
sand from Botany Bay, the reclamation of 170 hectares and the construction of
kilometres of taxiways, but it has all been achieved six months ahead of
schedule and $ 32 million under budget.
Further, because of a ' co-operative contracting approach' between the runway
consortium and the Federal Airports Corporation, not one day has been lost to
industrial action during the entire life of the project. 
That's a great achievement and a tribute to both the workers and the
management. In constructing the runway, we haven't lost sight of environmental
considerations. To prevent silt fouling Botany Bay, a specially fabricated seven kilometre long
' turbidity barrier' has been built.
And Kl's the first time this technology has been used on a major project like this
one. In addition, 30 hectares of seagrass have been created in the embayment
between the runways.
Of course, it's also important to see this third runway in the wider context of the
Government's aviation policies to deliver a quality service to Australian
consumers. With this runway up and running, we can now rightly lay claim to having a
robust, integrated and Internationally competitive aviation industry one that
has decreased average air fares by 22 per cent since 1990 and has increased
passenger numbers by 58 per cent on our most Important routes.
But the reform needs to continue and that's why the Government has moved to
lease all FAC Airports and Sydney West airport at Badgerys Creek.
At its heart, this decision reflects the need to improve the efficiency of airport
investments and operations.
It should lead to Australia having one of the most innovative private airport
industries in the world.
All up these reforms, coupled with the construction of this third runway will
deliver enormous benefits to tens of thousands of Australians both in terms of
jobs arid additional business.
Today is a major step forward for the Australian aviation Industry.
And it's the sort of step we have to take if we are to ensure that 21st Century
Australia is the best place in the world to live and do business.
Congratulations to all involved in the completion of this critical piece of national
infrastnicture. Thank you. 



3'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE ABC SOUTHBANK CENTRE, MELBOURNE
NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; EO PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed Mark, Mrs Armstrong, David Hill, Haddon Storey and Mrs
Storey, my ministerial colleague Michael Lee, Senator Alston, the City
Commissioner, distinguished members of the ABC board, the Melbourne
Symphony Orchestra and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here at this, the opening ceremony of the Southbank
complex because for too many years the ABC has lived in rabbit warrens in
Sydney and Melbourne Melbourne the same as Sydney and I was delighted, in
the years I was Treasurer, to try and assist the ABC into a major focus facility in
Sydney and we have been able to do it as well here in Melbourne, and I
congratulate the board and the Managing Director for seeing these great
developments come about. It is, as the Chairman said, a delight that it is in
Southbank, and Southbank is a delightful area. It is an area Melbourne has
always had the view. there has always been the view that Melbourne has had
the lungs of the great parks around the city, and it has. But I think Southbank
proves another point, and that is the breadth and the breathing has got to be in
the built environment too, and we see it in the great cities of the world like Paris.
and we have seen it in cities that have seen their best and may be coming again
cities like Berlin, where the built environment matters, and Southbank has
shown this to Melbourne. And there is, I think, now somewhat of a celebration
about it, and I was also pleased to be involved if only in a small way -with a
number of Premiers who have been developing this John Cain and Joan
Kirner who is with us today and now the current Government of Victoria.
This is a great development for Melbourne, and I felt the other night when the
Festival was on the opening of the Festival at the Canadian Opera, where I
might say that the MSO sounded tremendous strength was coming from them. 
Afterwards we went down to the Riverside, and there was a real celebration
there. And there was even a clap for the Melbourne Casino they even got
their hands together as the candles lit up, everybody put their hands together, so
there was a great feeling of joy about the place. And why shouldn't there be?
The fact is, to have the ABC here right in the centre of all this is, as Mark
said, we're going to see Southbank become the area a focused area for
television production and multi-media as well. Indeed, a real milieu of arts and
culture, and it's entirely significant that the ABC should be here as Australia's
pre-eminent cultural organisation, because the ABC is undoubtably and
absolutely Australia's pre-eminent cultural organisation, an essential part of the
cultural fabric of this country. There is a word that is being thrown around at the
moment called convergence. You now, in this day and age of acronyms and
words, every couple of years there is a new big one that floats around the
current new big one is convergence. It means many things, but I think in this
context it means the convergence of what the ABC has to offer, and what
Melbourne has to offer. Because I think there is a real convergence here, and
we saw it the Festival which was directed very competently by Leo Schofield in
the last few weeks we saw it in that flood of energy, and we have seen it over
the years with the fact that Melbourne is a great city a city of ideas, of art of
music, of football, of sport and the convergence of these two gives us a
chance if Creative Nation means anything, we'll certainly see a lot of creativity
here at Southbank with the ABC.
In the Creative Nation statement I had the pleasure of launching just a few
weeks ago, it was my very great pleasure to see and to announce that the
Commonwealth would establish a national music academy here in Melbourne,
that Melbourne would be the home of the $ 60 million television production fund,
and also the home of the Australian Cultural Foundation and six multi-media
centres. And I am hoping that, along with all things else which Melbourne has in
terms of art and cultural sophistication, that these things will add new dimensions
to Melbourne, and see it emerge as in South-East Asia as one of the places
where art and culture and particularly Australian culture can emerge. There
is a great chance for Australia in the information technology, and in art and
culture, because we have always had whether it be in literature or in music or
in film and television and last night we were celebrating our film awards the
capacity to really add something to the technological availability of educational
and entertainment materials. Entertainment has been an industry which has
largely been locked up with the United States I think we now have the chance
to challenge that, and we can challenge it in the market to which we are closest
and which shares the same time zone as us. And that must give us enormous
opportunities to be up there, because many other cultures.. . the information
tech , nology culture has, and it will not be exclusively an English-speaking
culture, but there is a very large component from the English-speaking countries
there. And I think there is a real cultural impediment certainly at this point of its 
development of some countries which have mastered very great technological
advances, such as Japan, running into something of an impediment in dealing
with information technology. But there is no such impediment on Australia.
So that's why I think it is important to get our culture and our technology
together, and I suppose as Mark and David said earlier, eloquently, this building
is going to be a mix of the two fifty studios, eight of them entirely digitalised
being the home of all this creative capacity. It's the very essence if we have to
find it in a building of what this jump into multi-media means, here at
Southbank. But I think this capacity to project ourselves into this world is very
great indeed, but that's why I say " you can't do this unless you're confident about
yourself". You can't be out there as some sort of derivative culture saying " oh, is
there a place in here for You have got to go out there and bang the doors
in, and you can only ever do that when you are entirely confident about where
you are and what you have become. And that is why I have always thought the
republic means so much to us not simply so much for the constitutional
change, but for the sense that it brings. You can't go around the world saying
" here we are, here's our culture, here's what we can add, but by the way, we're
borrowing the monarch of another country while we're at it." Now, we all know
that act is over, it's just a matter of when it runs out. And I always say to my
Tory friends, " come on board, better late than never there's always a place for
you"-. Anyway, what we are talking about is energy it's the energy of the city, of
Melbourne here, it's the energy of the ABC, it's the energy of the creative people.
If multi-media, the transmission of our values, the transmission of our thought, of
our culture is about anything, it is about energy. And we are seeing a real stir in
the energy of this country someone has put a big acupuncture needle into
Melbourne and Sydney, and in Perth and Adelaide, and the energy is well and
truly flowing. And so what we have to do then is sort of direct it around the world
so we can enjoy it and so can others. The ABC, of course, has been a bearer of
culture and tradition for this country for as long as any of us can remember, and
not just that, a trailblazer it's not just the bearer, it's also a trailblazer. And its
charter has been to focus on Australian culture, and I think this charter is going
to be more important as the years go on as we see homogenised
entertainment around the world, as Hollywood tries to extend its hegemony over
the world information highway. As we -start to see the capacity for major
broadcasting companies to actually have that sort of impact, standing by one's
culture is going to be, and promoting one's culture and developing one's culture
is going to be exceptionally important to this country. Not just for what we can
do abroad, but most particularly, what we do at home. So the charter values of
the ABC its charter role in news, current affairs, sport, drama, ideas,
information all the things it does, and does well, we will need it to do even
more of* as the, if you like, the international assault comes, and come it will with 
pay television, and with satellites and with the computer linkages through the
information highway.
So let's think that in developing this building at Southbank, we are getting ready.
We are getting ready to be able to project our culture and to develop it in the
context of this great international change which is with us. The ABC, of course,
has responded to this challenge not just now, but has in these years and in a
number of ways with Australian Television International as a case in point,
which is an entirely valuable projection of our values and our culture. And I am
often told, when I go to Indonesia for instance, that the Indonesian cabinet
many members of it watch ATVI news of an evening, and if you are really
lucky, if you get the time right, you can even watch Question Time it comes
through, and then you appreciate that part of the Standing Orders which takes
the interjections out and all the rest. But it's there. And that healthy, robust
celebration of our democracy we have on our news services and in our
Parliament, is out there and the values are being transmitted. And I think that's
a tremendous thing.
And the same with pay television the Government, with the Board and the
Managing Director, have seen a role for the ABC in pay television. It's going to
be tricky getting it right, as it is for anybody in this business. Whether it's going
to be satellite delivered or terrestrially delivered, the fact is the Government
believes that the ABC if we're going to have pay television transmission into
homes then the ABC should be there. It will be up to the ABC as to who it
packages its product with, how it does it and where it gets the value. But the fact
is it has got two channels there, and of course, in the end as many channels as it
likes as the fibre-optic cable is rolled out, and as much as it can sell in programs
and packages. But it should be there, and it can be there, and I think it is
important that it is there.
We have also seen remarkable changes with radio. I think it has been a great
job done with radio across the continent great variety, great quality. In the last
year we have seen five major international awards to ABC radio, fifteen major
Australian awards and in the last five years, we have seen an increase in the
audience reached from 25% to 40% of the population. That is a tremendous
change that is a revolution in communications really for a medium which has
been around a very long time. And all of the networks lead in Australian content.
Of course with that, Radio Australia is now, still at this point, broadcasting to
about 50 million listeners, and JJJ that ground-breaking network for young
Australians is now being extended to rural Australia. So there has been a
tremendous change in radio, and we all appreciate the quality of ABC radio
because I think almost one-third to half the country listen to it every week. So
this -isa nother thing. 
But the ABC has its history also in what it does in drama and in music, and let
me say a couple of things about the orchestras, given that we have made them
the subject of some discussion in the Cultural Statement, and the MSO is with us
today. I have always doubted whether Australia could actually with 18 million
people build an orchestra of the standard of the Berlin Philharmonic or the
Vienna or others, but it has always been my great ambition that we could. And
given the fact that because the ABC started the city orchestras as radio
orchestras, we have over a period of time, been able to give our cities very high
standard orchestras, and that has been a great thing for Australia. We are a
tremendously urbanised country, with two very large concentrations in Sydney
and Melbourne, and the SSO and the MSO have sought to service those
communities with their orchestras. So the Government has had two approaches
to this: one, that we try and establish a national music school that can actually
feed an orchestra by the people who operate and teach in it, and by its product,
and maybe build one organically continue to build an orchestra organically or
another approach, which is essentially to try and encourage the individual
development of an orchestra by getting the cheque book out and trying to
develop it and to buy in the skills we need to make it into that international
standard. We have chosen that route for the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, and
that option is available for the MSO. My advice to the MSO is to say to Aunty
" thank you Aunty, we love you, but we are leaving you but please leave us
room to come home occasionally". But that is a matter for you, and you can
make your mind up about that.
One of the things we are seeing from this lI'm delighted that the ABC has said
that the MSO will be its flagship orchestra that has already encouraged the
Victorian Government to donate $ 600,000 a year towards it, to expand its string
section and make it stronger. Well today, I would like to top that up to $ 1 million
so at least the orchestra can expand its string section, and we can see what the
ABC is prepared to do with it. I will be very interested to see, we have always
had some competition between the SSO and the MSO, and what a good thing
competition always is, and we are going to see more of it, and the nation will be
the winners from that and not just here, but abroad as well, so good luck to you.
Could I just say a couple of things about the Managing Director, because he has
been in the news these days? I say this David, after 8 1/ 2 years you have got
the right to leave anywhere. When I walked into my Chairman after 8 1/ 2 years
as Treasurer and told him I was leaving, he wasn't particularly pleased, but I still
left. Admittedly I came back a bit later to do something else. An old friend of
mine, Jack Lang I'm always getting Jack Lang quoted back to me by my
opponents said to me " The only reason they will ever take you Paul" he said,
" is if they really want you". Well, you can make those sort of comebacks in
public life I'm not sure if you can leave as Managing Director of the ABC and
then make a comeback probably that is a bit of a tall order. But, 8 1/ 2 years is
a very long time, and for an institution.. . and David has certainly knocked a lot of 
the rough edges off the ABC, and all the developments I have spoken of this
building, the building in Sydney, and they are not just buildings they are
actually the bringing together of hubs of creativity the shift into Asia, the growth
in radio, the changes in the management of the ABC are very great changes
indeed, and they should be logged in the national consciousness as we see the
ABC move through these various eras of change, at the pace of change today
with multi-media coming the way it is, with pay television coming the way it is,
getting ready for that, and working it out and let me tell you this, nobody quite
knows where all these technologies are going, and trying to keep a foot on all of
them is one of the things which the ABC has done under David's leadership, and
I think this is something well done on its behalf. I did see today across the
headlines in The Australian: " Hill forced out says Downer". Now I thought he
was referring to Robert Hill. Now I know it is a teensy-weensy bit horrid of me to
say that, but the fact is moderates I don't know what price they have on the
scalp of moderates in the Liberal Party, but it is very high. At any rate, it
wasn't it turned out you had to read down the story to see he was talking about
you David, and that's is why I thought I would say that whenever you go and I
think you have said you were going in June after 8 1/ 2 years, it is one hell of
an innings, and good on you.
So perhaps let me conclude where I began and say it is more than a pleasure to
be here. To see these complexes put together, and to know it is such a
tremendously strong underpinning of the ABC, and to know what the ABC has
meant to Australia down throughout the decades, and to know now as we see
the threat of homogenisation heading towards us, just how centrally important
this unique cultural institution is. To be here, at Southbank, in this year, when
these changes are right upon us, there's a sense of poignancy about it which I
think we all feel and understand. Annita and I are delighted to be here today,
and it is with very great pleasure indeed that I declare the Southbank Complex
open. Thank you.
ends. 


E&amp;OE PROOF COPY
PR: Thank you very much, Prime Minister for being with me, giving your&nbsp;time.
PM: Good, Peter.
PR: When you consider ' Creative Nation', the cultural statement measured&nbsp;against Mabo it seems almost as big. It is as though they are the two&nbsp;big political initiatives in the last, say, six months. I wonder why it was&nbsp;so important for you and your Government?
PM: I think the arts define any nation and this is most particularly true of&nbsp;Australia at this time and, I think, to put what the Chinese call ' chee'&nbsp;the life force, the spirit into the country, I think, Mabo was one of&nbsp;those issues. People now feel good about Mabo, they think that&nbsp;something wrong has been righted or put right. In respect of the arts,&nbsp;the arts pick up these edicurrents in our national life and it actually&nbsp;pushes them along as well. So, I see all these things as a flux, but it&nbsp;seemed to me that the arts, we needed to put some air, some breath&nbsp;into the structure which has got a bit monolithic and open it up a bit&nbsp;and give it the capacity to push itself along. Whether it be in the&nbsp;performing arts or in some of the newer areas such as extending arts&nbsp;into the electronic realm.
PR: You gave the impression of being particularly comfortable when&nbsp;delivering that speech. I guest it is fairly close to you isn't it?
PM: I was involved with this right the way through, but I have had a lot of&nbsp;good helpers, of course, starting with Michael Lee, but our personal&nbsp;staffs made very large commitments here and the end result is, I think,&nbsp;a good one.
PR: I suppose you are often confronted by the sheer fact of the privilege&nbsp;that comes with office where you can initiate things and see them&nbsp;come to pass. That must be very rewarding for someone who has an&nbsp;aesthetic for example?
PM: It is, but you have got to be around a while to be able to do it. I mean,&nbsp;we have been in office now since 1983 and for my part I have been&nbsp;Prime Minister for nearly three years, I mean, it is not something&nbsp;everything fits into its time. One needs to be around to be able to ( a)&nbsp;know what should be done and then be able to do it, but in the right&nbsp;part of the cycle, in sync, in if you like, political, economic and social&nbsp;sync.
PR: So, how do you judge that?
PM: This is all part of the Minister or the politicians craft getting thosethings right. But, you can and, of course, the thing about power, thething to do is use it, but use it wisely. Power is about drawing downinfluences and power other people have to a common good. Now, alot of that went on in the statement, but in doing it there has been,really, a couple of years of thought in that. These issues and ideashave been brewing in the minds of some us now for a couple of yearsand in some respects longer. But, the fact that you are going to makea statement makes you concentrate on them, bring them up, refinethem and finally get them into a package.
PR: It has never been a cause of concern to you that a government shouldor should not support the arts. It has always been clear in your mindthat the arts need support and the government is there to do it.
PM: I think the nation needs the arts and given that we don't have a greathistory of private philanthropy in Australia there is probably a greaterrole for government than might other wise be the case in othersocieties. At any rate that which we have spent, I think, has alwaysbeen spent wisely and well and indeed with say this funding of theAustralia Council, part of that funding is actually to get more privatesponsorship. I mean, part of what we are doing here is actuallybringing a bit more private sponsorship in. So, as we roll on it won't bejust the government funding these major organisations or artists, butother people as well. But, your point is correct. I have always seenthe government having a role in the arts and rejoicing in the arts. Ithink it is important for the government to say to the community that thearts are fundamentally, intransigently important, that they do pick upthe drum beat of Australia, they do reflect what we are and what wehave become and then most important now, especially important now,as our identity is becoming much more clearly set in the public mind.
PR: I have friends in the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, they had a big party&nbsp;on the night of the Cultural Statement. I wonder whether Melbourne&nbsp;was quite so ebullient?
PM: Well, I don't know, but I mean the thing about the Sydney Symphony&nbsp;Orchestra is Sydney is the site of the Olympics in the Year 2000, it will&nbsp;certainly be part of the centennial celebrations of federation, we have&nbsp;got all this coming along internationally, probably because of the&nbsp;Opera House and the Opera House being associated obviously with&nbsp;music and opera. In a sense Sydney marks itself out as a place&nbsp;internationally in Australia. Therefore, I think, we ought to be giving&nbsp;the Sydney Symphony Orchestra every opportunity to live up to its&nbsp;accommodation.
PR: That's one way of putting it.
PM: And, it is a very good Orchestra already.
PR: Sure.
PM: But, it can be better. So, what we did was add money to expand it, tobring it to super Orchestra size and given that this kind of change willallow a change to the remuneration arrangements and selectionarrangements bring the Orchestra's quality up. A couple of years agothe USSR's State Symphony Orchestra came to Sydney and it playedamongst other things Tchaikovsky Manfred Symphony, but it had asound about it. This is one of the things that has happened around theworld. There has been the homogenisation of orchestras. One timeorchestras had an idiosyncratic sound, one could tell the Chicago fromthe Vienna and the Vienna from the Berlin, now there is a somewhathomogeneity about them which I think is a pity. So, I am hoping thatAdo Devart? can actually put a stamp on this orchestra and bring it upand that the players themselves will commit themselves given theopportunity that the government is now funding them, adding to it,giving them a real terms guarantee and really saying you are on yourown, but you are not on your own.
PR: Yes, I understand.
PM: You are free to do your best, but you are going to get a lot of help.
PR: He was very insistent on more string??..
PM: Yes, that's what we funded in the Cultural statement. We are&nbsp;prov iding them with ( inaudible) to bring it to the super size, to get the&nbsp;large sound, but as well as that maintaining that vote in real terms over&nbsp;the next five years.
PR: I won't canvass the rock and roll days of Paul Keating, but somewhere&nbsp;along the road to Damascus, something happened to you didn't it,&nbsp;something twigged and you decided that you loved and had a passion&nbsp;for the classics?
PM: These things are not easy to discern back in your life, but for me it is&nbsp;quite easy this. I was at a friend of mines place, we arrived at his&nbsp;place on bicycles and he said come inside. I met his parents and his&nbsp;father had a classical record on and it was the Warsaw Concerto&nbsp;which is actually..
PR: It is actually..
PM: Yes, and it is not really a classic piece. It was a mini concerto writtenfor a movie played by Lenard Peniro.
PR: This is going back a bit.
PM: Yes, this is back a bit and the other thing on the disc wasRachmaninov's Second Piano Concerto, also played by him. So Icouldn't keep my ears away from the thing. So I bought the disc thevinyl myself a week or two later. I think it was a world record club...
PR: You're right.
PM: and that's where I started. And then I started on other, I bought otherthings and, as you do, you then start to get your ear in. And of course,in my happy days with EMI in the sixties, I used to rat the library.
PR: I get the set-up..
PM: Well they used to say to me I had a very nice fellow who was the&nbsp;Chief Executive Officer of Management, Kevin Ritchie who used to&nbsp;invite me to go through and sort of basically take what I like. Those&nbsp;were the great days of Walter Legge, who was the producer of&nbsp;probably the best titles of EMI library. His wife was Elizabeth&nbsp;Schwarzkopf he had Callas, he had Otto Klemperer and the London&nbsp;Philharmonia which was then just-about the best recording orchestra.And so I had stacks of that product nearly all of my vinyl library has&nbsp;factory sample not for sale stamped across it.
PR: It's a great archive.
PM:. So that's how I got into it.
PR: I see.
PM: I got into it in the salad days of the sixties when Legge was triumphant.&nbsp;I mean he was a tyrant, but the quality of the sound was fantastic. I
PR: Mrs Legge could sing as well, beautifully.
PM: Beautifully. She was terrific.
PR: In terms of popular culture, do you have time to watch TV?
PM: A little bit. But I mostly watch current affairs, or I'll get into some other&nbsp;program which is...
PR: Like " The Liberals"?
PM: No. I didn't see it. I mean, I will probably see bits of it. No, they're not&nbsp;really my interests. I go for things which are I like nature programs&nbsp;" The World We Live In" and this sort . all these sort of programs. I&nbsp;can't remember the titles " Nature's World" and all that sort of stuff.&nbsp;They're the things I like most. I also like if I watch films I like happy&nbsp;ones. I don't like the very heavy sad ones when you finish you're a&nbsp;bag of nerves and you don't know whether you feel good about it or&nbsp;not.
PR: It's not good for you?
PM: I like it nice and happy.
PR: OK I'll just finish on a couple of questions about architecture and&nbsp;design.. ( inaudible). What are the forces that are still there that prevent&nbsp;good buildings going up and good designs happening?
PM: Oh, I think the fact that there is no notion of precinct development. Itsall single block development, so of course the worst example is theworst of suburbia where the quarter-acre block dominates andeveryone builds their project house to suit themselves. If you look atthe great blocks of Australia where you have got some uniformity ofhousing styles but some variations like Paddington in Sydney andparts of Melbourne they have invariably been precinct developments.One developer has developed a precinct. But we have now gotarchitects who want their monuments, so they don't care often aboutthe particularly in the CBD they don't care about the precinct, theyjust want the tower or their stand-alone thing. They don't care aboutit's relativity to the streetscape.
PR: I think I know who you're talking about without mentioning names.
PM: Certainly not litigious names.
PR: No.
PM: And the other thing is, I think is there is no unlike European cities&nbsp;we don't have aesthetic directors like most of the European citiescertainly in the 19th Century and part of the 20th Century have had.&nbsp;It's inconcievable today that planning authorities would say, " look, wejust don't like the look of the building we're not having it. You have todo this or that with it, or we won't take it". This would bring a greatcry...
PR: ( inaudible)
PM: The other thing is I think grandeur comes from uniformity. If you look&nbsp;at a mountain chain, it's grand because it's got massing and uniformity.
PR: True.
PM: Or a beach view same. Or a Paris Boulevard same. Six stories andnot every building the same, but it's got the massing, and therefore thegrandeur. Variety is, I think, the antithesis of grandeur. Tall buildings,short ones, different set-backs, different styles is the antithesis ofgrandeur. And I think we look for the grand, but we're not getting it. Ithink the..
PR: So how can we ( inaudible)?
PM: Only by centralisation I don't believe there is a place for " the market"in town-state development. I don't. I think developers should onlyhave the right the community confers on it. No other rights. Whereasin the broad economy I think the market and market-forces matter agreat deal, but developers dragging clock ratios out of little sites thatthey happen to get on with the City Engineer Planning Department...
PR: At that particular time.
PM: At that particular time, or they happen to get on with the CityDevelopment Committee and what have you all of that sort of thing isthe reason why we have got, basically, why we are getting cities whichare less human scale, more impersonal and even uglier.
PR: There is nought we can do about it?
PM: Well, what you can do about it is you can...
PR: Maintain the rage?
PM: It's a bit like Peter Finch in that movie " Lifting Up The Windows" saying&nbsp;" We have had enough and we're not taking any more".
PR: That's right.
PM: That's the thing for people to do to say we have had enough. And&nbsp;this is why I speak about. I think the word " beauty", or the notion of&nbsp;" beauty", has gone out of life. People now think beauty is confined to&nbsp;whatever thing they can see within their own house or within a studio,&nbsp;or within a conservatory of some kind. A picture maybe...
PR: But no expectations of seeing it publicly?PM: No. Not publicly. And while ever we have got State Governmentsdishing us up mush which is basically what they do and LocalGovernment Administrations where you have got the separationsbetween health, building and surveying, but no overall responsibilityfor the final product and what it looks like while ever we have thatdichotomy of power in local Government, I don't think we will see it.So, you have the City unless you have a consolidated CityGovernment with very clear notions and people with some ideas..
PR: Yes, sure.
PM: about consolidation and beauty I don't think we will see it. But we&nbsp;should keep talking about it.
PR: Last question then. What big project what grand project would you&nbsp;like to see happen in this country, in one of our cities?
PM: Well the one I have been concentrating on is getting the CahillExpressway down in Sydney. Circular Quay is the founding site of thenation, and it seems to me that the founding site of a nationparticularly with the Olympics coming up needs special attention.And particularly where it's contiguous to the Opera House. So that'ssomething I think...
PR: There is a compromise going on at the moment?
PM: No. What's going on at the moment is a hotch-potch that's what isgoing on at the moment. But I think consolidating for this internationaloccasion is a good thing to be doing that's not to say from my point ofview. We might do that under that Better Cities Program we're doingit in Perth, we're doing it in Brisbane, we're doing it in Adelaide, we'redoing it in Melbourne etc. You have got major projects there, and I'mspeaking to State Governments perpetually about those.
PR: We should finish on a high note, but I'm not quite sure how. Suggest&nbsp;an idea, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, the high note is I think that this period you and I have been&nbsp;speaking about a bit this is towards the end of this decade and the&nbsp;end of the century I am sure we will be a republic. I think the person&nbsp;to open the Olympic Games should be an Australia person. And in the&nbsp;Cultural Policy the other day, we made $100,000 available for the &nbsp;writing of a national symphony for the occasion of the centenary. So,&nbsp;what I like to think is if you and I get the chance then to be involved,&nbsp;we would hear that symphony played in an Australian republic.
PR: I look forward to it. Many thanks indeed, and good luck.
PM: Thank you. Anyway amongst other things, let me congratulate you on&nbsp;eight years of bringing arts and culture to Australians, because maybe,&nbsp;your program has been the first CD-ROM of it's kind, on-line service,because you do think that just from my own viewing experience over&nbsp;the time, watching the variety and the diversity of the subjects you&nbsp;have covered in music, in decorative arts, in culture generally have&nbsp;been, I think, a real eye opener to Australians and making the arts&nbsp;much more accessible than perhaps they would have been.ends.



Q
PRIME MINISTER
( CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PF J KEATING MP
INAUGURAL NATIONAL GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
NATIONAL CONVENTION CENTRE CANBERRA
7 NOVEMBER 1994
Well, it's a pleasure to address this your first National General Assembly.
And let me congratulate those of you who took the initiative, who exercised the
leadership, to make this historic meeting possible.
Although it is IG0 years since the first local council was created in Australia, I think it
is timely that you should come together to identify the key issues facing Local
Government. After all, these are times of great change for all levels of government, times that
demand we take stock of whcre we are so that we can have a bigger say in where we
go. I think it's particularly appropriate that it is a Labor Prime M~ iister that speaks to your
first National General Assembly because Labor governments have long recogniscd the
key importance of Local Government in our Federal system.
it was the Whitlam. Government that first introduced direct untied assistance to local
government. It was the Hawke Governmcnt that proposed the Constitution be amended to reflect
the critical role of Local Governiment in our national life.
Despite that referendum not getting up, the current Labor Government has continued
to work to strengthen the role of Local Government.
We have sought to give it a status in the community that it descrvcs, a status
commensurate with a tier of government that employs around 160,000 Australians and
spends around 10 billion a year. 
It's why we introduced the annual consultations between Local Government and the
Commonwealth in 1989.
And why we also moved to give Local Government fMl membership of COAG.
This Government is committed to seeing that your aspirations and needs, and those of
the people you serve, are heard in the highest forums of the land.
But it's more than just giving you a forum in which to speak * important as that is.
It's also about making things happen in partnership.
Back in 1992 when the Federal Government was looking to give the economy some
much needed stimulus the Statcs were found wanting.
It was Local Government wh~ ich stepped into the breach to join up with the Federal
Government and deliver a Capital Works Program on time and beyond expectation.
It was a -major exercise with Local Government and community groups putting in more
than S$ 120 million to match the Commonwealth's contribution of $ 350 million.
This was a great example of the Commonwealth working with Local Government to
harness local knowledge, comrnitmcnt and organisational strengths to achieve an
important national objective.
And it reminded us that programs work best when they are delivered at the local level
and reflect local needs.
That's something people in both Local Governmcnt and the Labor Party understand.
We also both understand how important it is to bring thc people along with you, to
hold a community together when times gct tough.
This is the case now for many communities, particularly the rural communities in
Queensland and New South Wales which are experiencing the worst drought on
record. For them, times have never been tougher than they are today.
There will be some of you here who have firsthand experience of the devastation that
the drought has brought, of the enormous personal and financial burdens it has placed
on so many ini our rural communities.
Being in Local Government means that you have that special sort of relationship with
people that only a local person can. 
And more often than not it usually means you too shoulder part of the burden when
things are tough, that you too lend a hand way beyond your professional
responsibilities because that's the way things are done in the bush.
To those of you here and to the many others in Local Govcrrnent who have played
such an important role in helping to ease the hardship of the drought, let me take this
opportunity to express the Government's great appreciation for all that you have done.
Yours is a contribution that will be remembered.
The drought is a big issue for the Labor Party -we're determined not to leave the
people on the land behind.
We're concerned about the future of family farming, of the impact of the drought on
rural society.
That's why we put in place the drought package that we did, a package which includes:
the establishment of a Drought Relief Scheme which provides familics with
cash for basic necessities and gives thcm access to Family Payments and the
Healthcare card
the removal of the existing Austudy farm assets test for all families in
exceptional circumstances
increased resources for financial and social counselling-,
and further measures under the Rural Adjustment Scheme to assist farm
businesses both now and during the recovery phase.
Since we announced the drought package just over six weeks ago, we've already been
able to make a substantial contfibution to helping farming families in the most severely
affected areas.
So far, nearly 1,000 fanilies have had their claims approved under the Drought Relief
Scheme, and another 2,000 plus have lodged their claims with the Department of
Social Security.
On top of this, another 6,000 families have applied for a certificate for the drought
relief payment which is the first step in the process.
So, we are getting the payments out there, but we need to push this process hard to
make sure all those eligible receive the assistance they so desperately need, and
quickly. 
To those of you that will be returning to communities experiencing severe drought, I
would urge you to keep up your efforts to encourage those who are eligible for
assistance to apply.
And also to let the local people know that if thc situation deteriorates further that the
Government is prepared to provide additional assistance on top of the $ 164 million
that has already been allocated.
The drought is a good reminder that the activitics of Local Governent extend right
across [ lie Australian community, that what might be a burning issue for some one in
inner suburban Melbournc might have little relevance for someone in far north
Queensland. But whatever different challenges we might face from time to time, there is, I think,
one challenge that we all face continuously.
And that is the challenge of Icadership.
For my part, I have always thought that one of the keys to leadership is imagination,
having a sense of what's possible and taking the odd risk
Because if you don't have that you won't be moved to chance your arm, to push for the
big changcs, the ones that really matter, the ones that affect peoples lives for the better
and over the long term.
Leadecrship is not, and never has been, the preserve of any one person.
Nor is it somcthing that flows from occupying a particular position.
It's about getting things done and being effective.
Its about generating and maintaining miomentumn
It's about making sure the place is better off for your effort a sense of stewardship if
you like.
In sum, it's about recognising and seizing the right opportunities to make a meaningful
difference to people's lives.
That's the thinking that lay behind the drought assistance measures and it's certainly the
thinking that. lay behind Working Nation, the White Paper on Employment and
Growth. In Working Nalion we wanted to ensure that unemployed people, particularly long
term unemployed people shared in the economic recovery. 
We also wanted to ensure that regional Australia got its share too, that this wasn't just
a recovery in the big cities.
And it was for this reason that we aninounced thc Regional Developincnt Strategy, a
strategy designed to harness the enormous leadership potcntial that lies in the men and
women of rcgional Australia.
It not a strategy that seeks to replicate the quick fix solutions of the past or to adopt
a scatter gun approach.
Nor does it see throwing buckets of money as the answer to the regions' most pressing
problems. As McKinsey revealed in their Lead Local Compete Global study, given the task of
rejuvenating a region, regional leaders said they would far prefer $ 2 million and
committed local leaders rather than $ 50 million minus the local leaders.
And that's why I believe the challenge of regional Australia is primarily a challenge of
leadership. As McKinsey also pointed out, you can take two different regions in Australia with the
same factor conditions, the same level of infrastructure, the same level of human and
natural resources but one region will prosper while the other fails.
And the reason one region succeeds is because it has leadcrship.
It has leaders who share a vision for their region and who arc prepared to bring all the
key players together to chart a common course.
And what's true of the regions is just as true for local councils that go to making up
regional Australia.
Of course, adopting a Regional Devclopment Strategy that focuses on leadership
assumes that the lcaders exist, that regional Australia has within it a real wealth of
talented men and women.
Well, it has.
it's something that was clearly borne out in the work of the Regional Development
Taskforce which was chaired by Bill Kelty, and included your energetic President,
Councillor Peter Woods.
The Taskforce itself played an invaluable leadership role in getting regional
communities to think about their long-term future. 
It found that right across the country there were people looking for new opportunities
to quicken the pace of economic development in their region, people who wanted to
build on the strength of their region and find their region a place in thc international
economy. And I think this is something that will come increasingly into play as more local
councils become involved in competitive tendering, contracting out, resource sharing
and enterprise bargaining.
Our overall economic policy objectivc of sustainable low inflation growth can only be
achieved if the right conditions for growth can be created in the regions.
And in this endeavour, the Commionwealth and local government share considerable
common ground.
We agree that effective local government participation is vital to the success of
regional developmcnt activities.
We agree that the three tiers of government should work in partnership to plan for
economic and regional development and to deliver appropriate programs.
And we agree that the need for effective local government has never been greater.
And it's because of this common ground that we want to see Local Government take a
leadership role in implementing the Regional Development Strategy.
Since its announcement in Working Nativ-1, the Regional Development Strategy has
remained very much on track.
By Christmas, we hope to have around ten regions active in the program.
And over the life of the program we hope to extend it to around forty Regional
Economic Developmntn Organisations.
The first region to take advantage of the program is likely to be the Northern Rivers
Region of New South Wales which I visited earlier this year.
During my visit, I was particularly heartened to see how the people around Lismore
share a common vision for their region and are committed to breathing life into that
vision. They have got themsclves together and are now planning a regional development
strategy based on sustainable, value adding agricultural production and niche export
marketing. 
7
Importantly, they have developed bi-partisan political support for the regional
developmcnt activities.
Thcre are also a number of other regions in Queensland, Victoria, Wcstern Australia
and South Australia which are getting ready to participate in the program.
This is great news.
It shows a nation with regions that are prepared to work on a future for themselves
rather than rely on outside funding only,
Recent analysis of economic data shows that quite a number of regions are strongly
outgrowing the capital city areas in activity and employment.
And some of the regions have even greater potential with significant growth in
population. These are the areas giving the lead to regional Australia.
Before I finish let me make reference to one other area where Local Government can
support the cfforts of the Federal Government and that is in the area of social justice.
I'm thinking here of two groups whose potential to add to our national endeavour has
not been sufficiently recogrniscd or tapped
I am thinking of our indigenous peoplc and our women.
Over recent times, the Federal Government has taken unprecedented steps to accord
our indigenous people a proper and just place in the nation.
So I'm pleased to see that your National Agenda reflects that same objective.
And I trust that it's something that you will give effect to in the course of your
deliberations at this historic meeting.
I'm also pleased that Local Government has more women representatives than for most
other Australian governmcnts.
But at around 20 per cent it is still too low.
Achieving more equitable representation of men and women in Local Government, as
elected representatives and mayors, and also in senior managemcnt, is about keeping
faith with our democratic and egalitarian traditions.
It is also, fundamentally, about recognising and using the full array of leadership and
talent at our disposal. 
8
I would urge you to look carefully at this issue, to consult with women Councillors and
women Local Government staff, and to put in place a practical strategy to increase
women's participation in Local Government decision-making and management,
Let me wind up.
As a key player in regional Australia, Local Government bas both the opportunity and
the responsibility to provide the sort of leadership that the Commonwealth's new
approach to regional development seeks to encourage.
It is an opportunity arnd a challenge I know you arc more than capable of accepting.
And through it, I want us to continue to work together in partnership -for the
good of the nation.
How etfectively we work together will, however, depend to a great deal on the
outcomes of this first National Gcneral Assembly.
And while I know your diversity makes it difficult, Local Governent will play a far
greater role in achieving national objectives if it speaks with a unified voice.
That is the challenge before this first National General Assembly.
But whatever the outcome, the Federal Government will continue to look for a Local
Government system that plays an increasingly important role in the affairs of our
nation, a system that combines local priorities with broader national goals.
Thank you. 



0 , C
PRIME MINISTER
( CHECK AGAiNST DELIVERY)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE HUNTER ADVANTAGE EXHIBITION
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA
7 NOVEMBER 1994
Well, let me say what a real pleasure it is to open the Hunter Advantage Exhibition.
And the timing couldn't be better.
Only this morning I was speaking to the National General Assembly of Local
Governments about the enormous wealth of talent that exists in regional Australia.
And now we have it on full display here with the Hunter region a region I might add
that is one of great beauty and character.
The Hunter is a very old region, one of our oldest, but one which has certainly
rejuvenated itself and now looks to the fu~ ture with great confidence.
I think it's also worth making the point that in the great countries of the world, it's the
regions that define them.
It's the regions, rather than the political boundaries of their states, which give countries
their character.
It's certainly the case for France, Germany and Italy.
In Australia, this is also true, though it's not so well recognised.
But not only does the Hunter give this country character, it is also a region with a
strong export profile, a region that knows what it means to Lead Local and Compete
Global. In fact, the picture of the Hunter today is very impressive indeed. 
And it bears a little looking at.
Some of it, of course, is very familiar.
Most Australians will know about the Hunter's coal mines and coal export port one
the locals claim is the largest in the world but one that is certainly the largest in the
southern hemisphere.
Most Australians will be familiar with the Hunter's enormous variety of agriculture.
Most, I imagine, will have quaffed the odd glass of world famous Hunter wine.
And not a few Australians will have caught waves on Newcastle's great surf beaches.
But I suspect far less Australians know about some of the other aspects of the Hunter,
that it has in fact an increasingly diverse industrial profile with significant growth in it's
high value added goods and services.
That's something borne out by this exhibition which includes some of Australia's best
companies. In fact, last Thursday I presented Hunter Valley Rewinds with one of only 12
Australian Quality Awards to be given this year.
The Hunter is also a region with a fine University which is playing its part in the export
drive. It has developed a water purification system, the TUNRA Jetfiote, which is destined
for export markets.
And its Centre for Industrial Control Science has developed a special computer
controller for use in the mining, chemical, engineering and car industries.
This controller which has already generated considerable interest from many
international firms will be chasing a share of what is potentially a multi-billion dollar
export market.
But innovative products are by no means the preserve of the university sector and I
couldn't but help noticing the Medicab, the automotive stretcher, that forms part of this
exhibition. I understand that the Joint House Department has already expressed interest in
purchasing one for use here in the Parliament.
But if the developers want to double their sales here at Parliament House, they midght
do well to give the Leader of the Opposition a call. 
Although the way things are going at the moment, I'm not sure whether he should
station it near the House of Reps or the Senate.
I think it's also worth making the point that one of the reasons for the Hunter's success
is that it has a very healthy industrial relations profile that may have something to do
with the fact that the Australian Centre for Best Practice has its head office in
Newcastle.
But I suspect it's got more to do with the fact that the Hunter has developed a detailed
enterprise agreement, one developed between the region's councils and unions, and one
which McKinsey in their regional development study cited as an example of a
sophisticated performance measurement driving changes in behaviour.
Over the years, the Government has sought to tap into the enormous assets of the
Hunter and when necessary to give the region a hand up.
Through the Better Cities Program, we are providing $ 70 million over a four year
period to the Honeysuckle redevelopment, which has already begun to revitalise
Newcastle, providing jobs and attracting private sector investment.
For my part, I should confess some involvement in the decision to set up a tax office in
Newcastle, although I hear a few of the local business people will never forgive me for
that. But whatever assistance might have flowed to the Hunter from the Commonwealth and
State Government over the years, this is little compared to that which has come from
the leadership exercised by those people living and working within the Hunter itself
This theme of leadership is one that I addressed in some detail this morning when I
pointed out that, faced with the choice between $ 2 million and 20 local leaders and
million and no local leaders, regional leaders would opt for the former because local
leadership is something that can't be bought.
In fact, the Hunter has a fine tradition of leadership and one which has been
particularly strong in recent times.
It's leadership that came to the fore in the aftermath of the Newcastle earthquake.
It's leadership that continues today.
And it finds its expression in the many companies that are on display here.
Let me congratulate those who had the initiative to stage this exhibition, particularly
Mrs Jill Wyborn from the Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Of course, this exhibition complements the other great work that is being done by
many people and organisations right around the Hunter. 
I'm thinking here of the contribution of the likes of Dr Margaret Bowman, the former
Chairman of the Hunter Institute of Higher Education who participated in the Regional
Development Taskforce chaired by Bill Kelty.
I'm also thinking of the work done by Rotary as part of the Employ Australia initiative
which has seen more than 2500 vacancies notified to the CES over the past 3 weeks.
With leadership like this, it's difficult not to feel optimistic about the Hunter's future.
And it's something that will be given a huge boost when a Regional Development
Organisation is shortly established in the Hunter.
This Regional Development Organisation will have a major role in harnessing the
enormous leadership reserves in the Hunter and putting into place a strategy for the
region. It is, as you know, one of the major Working Nation initiatives designed to ensure that
regional Australia also participates in the strong economic growth now underway.
I suspect this commercial may have run a little longer than it should have but then there
are so many good things to say about the Hunter.
Perhaps I might leave any further comments to others here.
So let me finish up with my own vote of confidence in the Hunter and my
congratulations to all those associated with the putting together of this fine exhibition.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER 98/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY CHILEAN PRESIDENT FREI
I am very pleased to announce that the President of the Republic of Chile,
His Excellency, Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle, will make an informal visit to Australia on
12-13 November on his way to the APEC leaders' meeting in Indonesia. I will be
meeting the President on Saturday 12 November in Sydney.
The visit by President Frei will provide an opportunity for us to discuss our common
goals in APEC as well as other matters of mutual interest, including the growing trade
and investment links between Australia and Chile.
Australian trade with Chile has grown around 35 per cent in the past decade with
exports in 1993-94 valued at $ 111 million. Australia is one of the largest foreign
investors in Chile with total investment of $ 704 million. Australian investment in Chile
is expected to exceed $ 1 billion in the next few years. Over 24,000 Australians were
born in Chile.
I warmly welcome President Frei to Australia and look forward to my discussions with
him. CANBERRA 8 November 1994 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 8 NOVEMBER 1994
THE DEFENCE WHITE PAPER
Mr Speaker,
The White Paper on defence which is being presented in this chamber sets
out a framework for developing Australian defence policy over the next
decade, and for making force structure and capability decisions which will
shape our defence force well into the next century.
All Australian Governments have a core responsibility to defend this country.
Uniquely among the nations of the world, we have a continent of our own to
protect. In defence terms, this gives us some real advantages, not least the moat
around us. But it also imposes enormous responsibilities. The way we meet
those responsibilities is in a very real sense a measure of our sense of our
nationhood. Defending Australia is a substantial document, and I congratulate the Minister
and those officials and members of the Defence Force who were involved in
its preparation.
It is a document for this time a time of rapid change in the region and the
world. A period of less obvious threat than the Cold War years, but of less
certainty as well.
The White Paper reflects that underlying strategic uncertainty. The rapid
growth in the Asia-Pacific region and the changes in regional relationships
confronts Australia with both opportunities and challenges in its defence
planning For example, the very fluidity of the post-Cold War world gives us an
opportunity for the first time to build 6p organisations like APEC and the 
ASEAN Regional Forum. But that same fluidity makes it even more important
that we succeed.
Mr Speaker,
The White Paper therefore reflects this Government's strong determination to
ensure that Australia maintains the most effective possible defence
capability. Defendinq Australia sets out comprehensively how this will be done, and the
details have been outlined in this House by my colleague, the Minister for
Defence Science and Personnel.
The Government will sustain defence spending at about two per cent of GOP,
and for the first time ever we will institute a five-year defence budget
commitment from 1996-97.
At the core of Australian defence policy is self-reliance, by which we mean
the capability to defend ourselves against any credible attack on Australia
without relying on the combat forces of other countries.
The White Paper's defence equipment decisions are all directed towards
strengthening that self-reliant capability.
These decisions include the purchase of airborne early warning and control
aircraft, the replacement of the Macchi lead-in fighters, new transport
aircraft, helicopters for the ANZAC frigates, minehunters; and improved
command, control, communications and intelligence networks.
We will also review the need for additional Collins class submarines in the
context of our first five-year defence budget.
Mr Speaker,
Just over a year ago I attended the launch of the first of the Collins class
submarines in Adelaide, and earlier this year I saw the launch of the first
ANZAC frigate.
Both programs are clear evidence of how Australian design, technology,
construction techniques and workforce skills can excel against the best in the
world. Collins is the most advanced conventionally powered submarine in the world
a clear demonstration of this country's ability to produce world-class
technology at competitive prices.
I believe that by building up our national ship-building base through projects
like these, and the coastal minehunters, we are also building up a capability
that can be a real resource for co-operative programs with our neighbours. 
And the capabilities of Australian industry are not limited to large-scale
construction programs. We are also developing state-of-the-art skills in high
technology areas such as weapons and sensors.
The Jindalee Over-the-Horizon radar system and the NULKA active
expendable decoy are both examples of the innovation and ingenuity of
Australian defence science.
Mr Speaker,
The White Paper is about more than enhancing our defence self-reliance,
however. Our security also depends on the extent to which we can improve our
strategic environment, both by building bilateral regional defence
relationships and working multilaterally to enhance regional and global
security. The White Paper outlines how the Government is doing these things.
Multilaterally, we continue to support the United Nations, both its preventative
diplomacy and its peacekeeping operations.
We do not structure the Australian Defence Force for such operations, but
the ADF has shown that its force structure and readiness levels are sufficient
to undertake United Nations tasks. Men and women from the ADF, as well as
from the Australian Federal Police, have already served with distinction and
effectiveness in many peacekeeping operations around the globe, and
continue to do so today.
Regionally, we have been working to build institutions which will provide a
framework for co-operation in the very different environment we now face.
APEC is one important development. Although it does not itself have a
p6litical or security role, and Australia is not seeking this, APEC certainly has
strategic benefits. By bringing both sides of the Asia-Pacific into a broad
economic partnership it makes less likely the attenuation of security ties
between the United States and its Asian allies as a result of trade frictions.
Australia has also been a very active proponent and supporter of the ASEAN
Regional Forum. When this group met for the first time in Bangkok injulythis
year, it was the first time the countries of the region had sat down at the
same table to discuss security issues.
The Forum is still at a very early stage of its development, but we think it has
the potential to help us deal more effectively with future problems or tensions
in the region. 
Mr Speaker,
The strength and durability of our bilateral defence relationships with our
neighbours has been critical in underpinning the growing regional consensus
on security issues which in turn made the ASEAN Regional Forum possible.
One of the key elements in the White Paper is the Government's commitment
to strengthening defence links with the countries of the region to strategic
partnership.
The general approach outlined in the White Paper has been welcomed by our
neighbours.
A senior adviser to the Indonesian Defence Minister recently described
Defending Australia as a ' watershed in the strategic outlook of Australia,'
paving the way for a strategic partnership with Indonesia.
I agree. And I agree with the Indonesian Defence Minister, General Edi
Sudradjat, who said' a good relationship between Indonesia and Australia is
not a matter of choice. It is a must.'
In my view, that is true across the board, not just in the defence area.
Earlier this year the Indonesian and Australian Defence Ministers agreed to
hold annual meetings, and the potential exists to expand areas of practical
co-operation between our military forces.
We are also building our defence relationship with other neighbours in the
Asia-Pacific.
Singapore is already conducting air force and army training in Australia, and
Prime Minister Goh and I have talked about other areas of defence cooperation.
With Malaysia, too, we have a long and mutually rewarding defence
relationship, both through the Five Power Defence Arrangements and
bilaterally. In 1995, for the first time, regional countries will participate in our major
military exercise, Kangaroo.
And the White Paper underlines the continuing importance of our defence
alliance with New Zealand, involving mutual commitment by each country to
the security of the other. 
Mr Speaker,
Some commentators have seen a tension in the two objectives of defence
self-reliance and greater strategic engagement with the countries around us.
But no such tension exists.
In defence policy no less than in other areas of Australia's engagement with
Asia, our efforts to improve our own capacities as a nation and our ability to
operate successfully in the region are two sides of the same coin.
Mr Speaker,
The security and stability of Asia will be increasingly determined by the
policies and activities of countries in the region.
But in the Government's view, this cannot, and will not, be achieved without
the continued and constructive engagement of the United States, which
remains the world's largest economy, Asia's largest single trading partner,
and the world's most capable military power.
This Government believes that continued engagement by the United States in
the Asia-Pacific through its network of alliances around the Western Pacific is
important to regional stability and security. As I said earlier, our concern
about the consequences for strategic links across the Pacific of any increase
in trade and economic friction is one of the reasons we think APEC is such a
good economic model for the region.
But the United States alliance is important for reasons much more particular
to Australia. Although we do not rely on the United States for the defence of
Australia, the deterrent effect of the alliance to any possible enemy makes a
central contribution to our national security. And it also provides Australia
with very important access to intelligence and technology.
Mr Speaker,
The White Paper underlines the importance not just of equipment and the
strategic environment, but of our people.
That is exactly as it should be, because the highly trained and highly
motivated men and women of our defence force are the key to the ADF's
capabilities. And in the new environment our capabilities will depend more
and more on the human factor better commanders, higher levels of skill,
more individual initiative and more effective teamwork.
I was very proud earlier in the year to be able to farewell in Townsville some
of the Australian forces going off to Rwanda to serve with the United Nations
mission there. 
6
The men and women at the airport were on their way to conditions which very
few Australians have experienced, and many would find difficult to imagine.
But the enthusiasm and morale of the troops, as well as their obvious high
level of competence was very evident. It reflected very well on them and on
those who recruited and trained them. And it has been reflected, too, in their
performance since they arrived in Rwanda, as their colleagues have shown
earlier in Somalia and Cambodia and elsewhere.
The Government understands that military life continues to place particular
and difficult demands on those who serve in the ADF and on their families.
So the Government will provide Australian Defence Force personnel with a
package of pay, conditions of service and other benefits, including housing,
designed specifically to address the special features of military service.
Mr Speaker,
Defending Australia also includes the most comprehensive and significant
statement on reserves ever made by an Australian Government.
The reserves are important indeed they are an integral and essential part of
the force structure comprising more than one-third of the uniformed strength
of the ADF.
As the White Paper makes clear, the reserves are no longer just a back up to
the regular forces, or an expansion base, but with the regular forces, form a
total force in which all elements work together in a coordinated and
complementary effort. That is an important change in the structure of the
ADF. Mr Speaker,
National security depends on more than the capacity of our defence force. It
depends on the strength of our economy; the cohesiveness of our society; the
effectiveness of our national institutions, the unity, sense of purpose and
confidence of our people.
' Defending Australia' is, therefore, closely related to other government
policies. The White Paper on Employment and Training, ' Working Nation',
and the Cultural Statement, ' Creative Nation', and no less-the development
of APEC, have the same overall purpose of this Defence White Paper to
strengthen the fabric and resolve of Australia, to enlarge our capacities and
to create a more prosperous and secure future for our children.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MANUKA OVAL, WEDNESDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, who would you like to see as your opponent at the next
election Mr Howard or Mr Downer?
PM: I see Mr Howard is out there on the air waves today, as I said, once
there is any whiff of mortality around, he starts hearing voices,
becomes a visionary again. But, as you know, Mr Howard's vision is a
vision of the 1950s. So, if you want to really tune into his thoughts you
need a big trip down the time tunnel.
ends
r I 


Today I have asked EPAC, the Economic Planning Advisory Commission, to&nbsp;establish a task force to investigate and report on private sector involvement in the&nbsp;funding, management and control of public infrastructure.
It is critical for Australia's economic performance and social well-being that we have&nbsp;adequate public infrastructure, in the form of facilities for transport, communications&nbsp;and the provision and transmission of electricity, gas and water, and that these&nbsp;facilities are used in the most efficient manner.
Governments will continue to have the major role in provision of public&nbsp;infrastructure. However, it is appropriate to examine the opportunities for increased&nbsp;private sector involvement.
In my recent announcement of changes to EPAC I indicated that it would develop&nbsp;the capacity to undertake task force work as requested by the Government.
This is the first task force project, and follows my earlier request to EPAC to&nbsp;convene the major National Strategies Conference to be held in Sydney on 24-25&nbsp;November 1994.
The task force will consider the scope for increased private sector funding,&nbsp;management and control of public infrastructure, and impediments to increased&nbsp;involvement. It will also consider the appropriate form of interaction betweengovernments and the private sector, and measures for reducing impediments,&nbsp;including implementation strategies.
The task force will comprise Glenn Withers, the Director of EPAC, Fred Argy, a&nbsp;former Director of the Office of EPAC, Kerry Schott, of Bankers Trust, and Derek&nbsp;Scrafton, the Director General of the Office of Transport in South Australia. A small&nbsp;secretariat for the task force will operate within EPAC.
The task force will release an issues paper in November, receive submissions by&nbsp;the beginning of February and report its findings to the Government by March 31&nbsp;1995. The Government will release the report and will also use the findings in its&nbsp;subsequent discussions with the community on this subject.
CANBERRA November 1994
Terms of ReferenceEPAC TASK FORCE ON PRIVATE SECTOR INVOLVEMENT IN PUBLICINFRASTRUCTUREHaving regard to benefits of efficient private sector involvement in thefunding, management and control of public infrastructure, EPAC will establisha Task Force to investigate and report on the opportunities for expandedprivate sector involvement; the areas in which increased involvement canbest occur; and the measures governments can take to facilitate an expandedrole for the private sector.
For the purposes of the inquiry and report, public infrastructure is defined astransport and communications facilities, and production and transmissionfacilities for electricity, gas and water.
In reporting on these matters, the Task Force will focus on:the scope for future expansion and potential benefit in private sectorfunding, management and control of public infrastructure underexisting policies;
the appropriate form of interaction between government and theprivate sector;impediments to efficient private sector involvement;measures governments can adopt to reduce those impediments,including implementation strategies.The Task Force is to have regard to the established economic, social, andenvironmental objectives of governments; to the expectation thatgovernments will continue to have the major role in provision of publicinfrastructure; and the anti-avoidance provisions of the Income TaxAssessment Act.
The Task Force is also to have regard to measures already taken bygovernments to facilitate private sector involvement including, but not limitedto, initiatives in relation to infrastructure bonds, the Commonwealth'sproposals on a National Competition Policy, and Loan Council Borrowingarrangements. The Task Force is to report to the Government by 31 March 1995.The Task Force's findings will be released by the Government and used inthe Government's subsequent discussions with the community on thissubject.
For further Information contact: Nell Ferry at EPAC 270 2439


PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPINTERVIEW WITH ANN SANDERS, RECORDED 3 NOVEMBER 1994 FORAUSTRALIAN NATIONAL TRAINING AUTHORITY AWARDS,NOVEMBER 1994E&amp; EO PROOF COPYAS: It's easy for us Australians to pull down the so-called tall poppies doyou think that energy would be better spent paying tribute to our greatachievers?PM: Well, getting poppies up is what it is all about, and there has been a lotof concentration on tertiary education in this country and notunreasonably but seeing people come through with real attainment'sin vocational education is wonderful for them, the institutions and thecountry.AS: One of the first things you did as Prime Minister in the vocationaleducation and training area was push for the establishment of anational body why was this such an important goal?PM: Because vocational education, or TAFE, has been the Cinderella ofAustralian education, and we had 60% of the output of our Year 12students coming out other than into tertiary education and many ofthem being left untrained. The point of getting TAFE up to a Nationalsystem, and giving it national standing was so that anyone with avocational certificate should have not just an equal, but perhaps evenbetter chance of finding work and standing in educational terms in thecommunity, but to do that we had to bring TAFE together as a nationalsystem. And so the Australian National Training Authority was adevise we used to do that.AS: Because TAFE courses and vocational training are often compared touniversities and schools does the former get the recognition that itdeserves, from the Government?r 1(: Lj
PM: It's getting it from the Government, but it hasn't had the standing andthe recognition in the community. And this is a great pity becauseoften the people who are trained, more often than not indeed, thepeople who are trained vocationally are entirely useful, andimmediately useful to their employer, and they can start chartingstrong career paths for themselves. There is a bit of snobbery stillabout a tertiary education, where in fact the strength and the diversityof courses now in TAFE really gives us a tremendous opportunity tobring the whole vocational education system up, and to give youngpeople a real chance to not only set a career path, but change it whenthey feel like it to do something else, and to keep that relevance towork.AS: You have often connected the future of young Australians to the Asianmarket, telling students to get smart, get a job and help us win marketsin Asia. On the eve of the APEC Forum, how important are skills to getus into Asia?PM: They are entirely important. Australia's great comparative advantagein the Asia-Pacific is its education system there is no country in Asiawith an education system as strong as ours. And selling innovativeproduct, elaborately transformed goods, internationally tradedservices, are all the things that Australia can do if we can open thesemarkets up. The point of APEC is to open all these markets up, butthen we have to follow through, and of course, we will follow throughbetter if we have a trained and skilled workforce. Again, all the roadslead back to vocational education.AS: We are already technologically smart and leaders in some of thesefields how far can we go?PM: Australian pure research and applied research and innovation is reallyat the cutting edge. What we have now got to do is improve ourmarketing and our access to markets, and Australia is nowconcentrating on the Asia-Pacific, and market access as never before.So, if the Government keeps a premium on education and training andparticularly in those areas where the premium hasn't existed in fullbefore such as TAFE and vocational education then we will be infirst-rate shape to really fully participate in this growth.AS: Finally Prime Minister, do you have a personal note to the finalists ofthe Awards tonight?PM: Well first of all I would like to congratulate each and every one of them.Those who are coming through as trainees, who have come through acertificate course, to those who are the trainers, to the institutions thisis the sort of acknowledgment I am glad to see being attached to TAFEand vocational education because Universities are very strong now,and they're strong enough to look after themselves, so I don't mind
saying that I am a TAFE champion I'm a vocational education person,and so tonight is the sort of recognition that I am very pleased to see.AS: You're a dad too, what about encouragement to the parents of thestudents here tonight?PM: I think parents are now getting onto TAFE. I think they areunderstanding that there are tremendous career paths here, and thatstudents can change them and there is that view that if yourchild.... you have ambition for them becoming university students, andperhaps they don't, there is going to be a system sitting beside theuniversities just as strong, and just as good, and I think that is a veryoptimistic point for many Australian parents today.AS: And a good point on which to end. Thank you very much for your timetoday.PM: Thank you.ends.


K.4PRIME MINISTER"* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPFOREIGN CORRESPONDENTS ASSOCIATIONSYDNEY, FRIDAY 11 NOVEMBER 1994I am a well known enthusiast for APEC but when I first started talking about it,it wasn't an acronym which sprang readily to the lips of most Australians.But things are changing. I was very pleased recently to come across the firstreference to APEC I had seen in an Australian newspaper cartoon.Once the cartoonists get hold of something you can be pretty sure it is sailingdown the mainstream of public consciousness.
I am glad that is happening, because it is where APEC deserves to be.It has always seemed to me to be the right idea for Australia, the right idea forthe region and the right idea for the world at large.
It is the right idea for Australia because it defines a region which is critical tous. It includes the economies to which we sell 75 per cent of all we export,and our key bilateral relationships on both sides of the Pacific.
It is the right idea for the region because it encompasses its most importanttrade and economic links. It helps lock in United States economic andcommercial interest in the region which in turn helps to ensure US strategicengagement. It provides a framework to help contain or manage competitionbetween China, Japan and the United States. And it gives the smallercountries a greater say in the nature and shape of regional tradingarrangements. It is the right idea for the world because it links both sides of the Pacific in aco-operative endeavour and helps to prevent the division of the post-ColdWar world into three competing blocs.And it is the right idea because it is not intended to be, and will not become, acapital " C"-type Community which closes itself against the world, but a small11c" community of common interests, seeking prosperity with its internationalpartners through trade liberalisation rather than closed barriers andsubsidies.
One of APEC's great advantages, which we are seeing fully in play inPresident Soeharto's proposals for Bogor, is that it spans not only both sidesof the Pacific but the full spectrum of the world's economies from the mostindustrialised and developed countries, through the dynamic Asian tigers, todeveloping economies like Indonesia.So when APEC talks about trade and economic issues, when it frames itsactions, it has to take into account the full complexity of eighteen economies,all looking for growth and liberalisation but at different stages of development.That is important, because it is the way the global economy is going. Cooperationacross different levels of development is the way we will have toaddress these trade and economic issues in future. In this sense, APEC is atemplate. On Sunday, I will be leaving for Jakarta to attend the second informal meetingof APEC leaders. As I said recently, it promises to be the most significantmeeting to have been held in Southeast Asia since the Bandung meetingestablished the Non-Aligned Movement in 1955.When I first suggested, less than three years ago, that APEC leaders shouldget together to discuss the challenges facing the region, I hoped in this wayto give the organisation some political horsepower and help it deliver somereal benefits to business.I must say I am well and truly pleased to be attending the second suchmeeting in November 1994. That it is happening is a reflection of the realbenefit regional economies have seen in the APEC process.The meeting at Bogor will include the leaders of eighteen economiesrepresenting half the world's production and nearly half its trade. And theyare growing fast.By 2000 these same economies will account for almost 60 per cent of worldGDP and 55 per cent of world trade.By 2020, seven of them China, the United States, Japan, Indonesia,Thailand, Chinese Taipei and Korea will be among the world's ten largesteconomies. So what happens in APEC can have a long-lasting impact on how the worldoperates into the next century.As in Seattle, this will be an informal meeting. Ministers and officials aremeeting over the next few days to sort out APEC's formal work program. A lotof valuable work will be done there.But the leaders, when they get together on Tuesday under PresidentSoeharto's chairmanship, will have no formal agenda, no set texts. We willbe alone in a room for several hours, without advisers, talking about our own
economic problems and opportunities and what we can do collectively aboutthem. No wonder the beads of sweat are breaking out on the brows of bureaucratsall around the region.This is an unusual model for an international gathering, and as we showedlast year in Seattle, it can deliver creative results.We will be coming to Bogor with a real sense that APEC is beginning tocoalesce. In the year since Seattle a lot of progress has been made on the initiatives weset in train then.Most of the recent press coverage of APEC has focussed on the tradeliberalisation debate. This is understandable. It is a large and importantissue. But it is also important not to forget the progress being made incleaning out the region's trade arteries by removing administrativeimpediments to the flow of goods and services the trade facilitation agenda.This is important to business and will become more important as tariff levelsdecline. Differences in standards can add between five and ten per cent tothe cost of entering a particular market.So it is good to see the work on standards going well. We are now movinginto the stage of negotiating Mutual Recognition Agreements between APECeconomies. An APEC network of these agreements will mean that any product testedonce will be accepted as having been tested everywhere. And standardsthroughout the APEC economies will be progressively harmonised withinternational standardsWe have also made good progress on a set of APEC investment principles.Investment is an urgent issue for the APEC economies. Foreign investmenthas been one of the driving forces behind APEC's growth.But if that growth is to continue, it is critical that foreign investment to andwithin APEC keeps flowing. For example, over the next decade East Asia willrequire an estimated US$ 1.7 trillion for investment in infrastructure alone.Much of that will have to come from foreign investment.At the same time, we will be seeing intense competition for investment fundsfrom Eastern Europe and other economies outside APEC.So there is a growing appreciation that to keep investment coming, the APECeconomies need more open and transparent investment regimes. Thereforms which Indonesia introduced in July reflect this recognition.
I hope we will be able to announce at Bogor a set of non-binding APECinvestment principles. That will enable us to take forward the dialogue withinAPEC about how we can improve our investment regimes.It is also worth noting that the first meeting of APEC Finance Ministers washeld earlier this year. As the Asia-Pacific becomes the world's new centre ofeconomic gravity the economic dialogue instituted at this meeting will beincreasingly important.APEC is also building people-to-people links. We decided at Seattle toestablish a network of APEC study centres throughout the region.I am happy to announce that we have decided to establish the Australianstudy centre in a joint operation between the University of New South Walesand Monash University in Melbourne.These two universities not only have a high standard of academic researchon APEC-related issues but they will be pursuing some innovative ideas foreducating Australians about APEC for example, through Monash'sexperience with the Open Learning scheme.APEC's progress in these and other areas, such as small and mediumenterprises, has been useful and welcome.But I have been convinced of the need to lift the APEC debate to a higherlevel. If we are to maintain the region's remarkable growth rates we need totackle the task of bringing down tariffs and non-tariff barriers for goods andservices. President Soeharto shares this view. He has suggested that APEC set at theBogor meeting a far-reaching objective of free trade in APEC by a specificdate and on a GATT-consistent basis.I have spoken with President Soeharto several times during the year and Iknow how committed he is to achieving this goal. He knows from Indonesia'sexperience just what the benefits of liberalisation can be.I told him recently that my support for him on this is total and unqualified.Because this is a remarkable development.Past pressure for trade liberalisation has come from the industrialisedcountries. They have set the agenda. They have put the pressure on.Now, for the first time, a developing country has said we should commitourselves to a free trade outcome. It is vital that we respond positively to thischallenge. Over the next few days something like a sense of awe would not beinappropriate such is the boldness of what is being proposed.
This is no simple task to get down all barriers to goods and services in theregion by a defined date.It is an extraordinarily difficult thing for most Governments to contemplate.The benefits of freer trade are clear but they are spread throughout oureconomies. The impact on special interest groups and protected sectorsoffers immediate pain. This is a problem we were very familiar with inAustralia as we cut our own levels of protection.So as Bogor has got closer, and the scale of the proposals has becomeclearer, it is little wonder that around the region a slight clearing of the throathas turned into the odd nervous cough and then, in a few cases, intosignificant breathing difficulties.I have been in touch with leaders from most APEC economies over the pastfew months and I hope we will get the commitment we are looking for atBogor, but I am certainly not taking it for granted.For Australia, the important thing is to get the process going. The end-datematters less, so long as it is not too distant. Because, as we have seen inAustralia, once the decision is made, business will begin to incorporate it intoits planning, and things will begin to move.No one is expecting fine detail out of the meeting in Bogor.Even if we reach agreement on a free trade outcome, some very importantquestions will remain: What form will the liberalisation take? What coveragewill it have? Will it extend to all GATT members under an MFN arrangementor will it be preferential?I don't underestimate the importance of these questions or the difficulties infilling in the gaps. Some long and arduous talking lies ahead.But getting the political commitment by leaders is the immediate requirement.That decision would set the region's economic agenda for the next twentyyears. None of what APEC is doing should be seen as a threat to the global system.I have said all along that anything APEC does should be GATT-consistentand equally importantly that it should contribute to global tradeliberalisation.We understand fully that the growth of the Asia-Pacific economies has beenunderpinned by the open multilateral trading system, which itself has turnedlargely on the United States's willingness to lead the world in tradeliberalisation. Now it is the Asia-Pacific's turn to lead the way. This is where the growth is.And despite strong liberalising moves, protection remains high in many EastAsian economies, offering them great scope to benefit from liberalisation.
Our ultimate objective, and our best interest, lies in global free trade.But there is no enthusiasm now for a new global and comprehensive round.We have to look for other strategies, and APEC is the best we've got.APEC trade liberalisation will lock in an outward-looking sense of regionalismand will reinforce global trade liberalisation.An APEC-wide approach would bolster the economic gains we would get fromunilateral trade liberalisation, and it would reduce the political costsbecause governments will be able to point to new opportunities opened up bytrade liberalisation elsewhere in the region.The benefits of APEC trade liberalisation for Australia and the region wouldbe enormous. Economic modelling tends to understate the gains because itdoes not capture the full effects on competitiveness and productivity.But initial Australian modelling work shows that, while APEC members do wellout of the Uruguay Round, they would do even better if APEC was toembrace full free trade. The annual gain to APEC aggregate national incomefrom the Round is around $ 112 billion by 2002 when the Round effects haveflowed through fully. But this rises to $ 366 billion by 2010 if APEC free tradeis achieved by then.Under APEC free trade, Australia's real output would rise by an estimated 3.8per cent and real national income by 1.2 per cent or $ 6.8 billion annuallyThis would more than double the projected real income gains for Australiafrom the Uruguay Round.The scale of APEC's advantages to Australia is something which, notsurprisingly, few Australians have yet appreciated.But already three-quarters of our exports go to APEC, and 31 per cent ofthese are manufactured exports. Over the next two years, increased exportsto APEC members are expected to create 70,000 new jobs in Australia.For Australian business, APEC trade liberalisation is good news, becauseAustralia is already so far down the path towards free trade.We have eliminated quotas and, by 2000, average trade weighted tariffs willhave fallen to 2.9 per cent. Motor vehicle and textiles, clothing and footweartariffs will be the only stand-outs.Clearly, going further would be in our interests if other APEC economies alsoliberalised. When and at what rate we did so would be a matter fordiscussion after Bogor.Australia's agricultural and minerals exports would flourish in open regionalmarkets. But our manufactures and service industries would also be well-
7placed to take advantage of the opportunities that would open up. Thedecade of trade liberalisation has made them much more competitive. Ourexports of elaborately transformed manufactures to APEC have been growingat 18 per cent a year since 1988-89.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The future trade and economic agenda will be the core of our discussions atBogor. But the meeting has other less obvious advantagesIt facilitates contacts between leaders which would otherwise be difficult toarrange -either for political reasons, as we saw in Seattle last year whenPresident Jiang Zemin met President Clinton, or for geographic reasons.For example, in Sydney tomorrow I will meet President Frei of Chile on hisway to Jakarta. After the meeting President Kim Young Sam of Korea willvisit Australia.
And at the meeting itself a lot of bilateral work will be done. I will be havingseparate meetings with President Soeharto, President Jiang Zemin. PresidentClinton, President Ramos, Prime Minister Chretien, Prime Minister Chuanand Prime Minister Bolger.I will have opportunities to talk informally to the others as well.And this sort of thing is multiplied eighteen different ways.Ease of communications between political leaders is important and thedynamics of international relations within the Asia-Pacific have, in my view.been changed fundamentally by APEC. The leaders meetings offeropportunities for contact which can cut through problems and resolveuncertainties. And, as we are seeing with the visits here of President Freiand President Kim, they can facilitate contacts between our business people.So I don't doubt that this will be two and a half days well spent.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Today, of course, is Remembrance Day.
There is something appropriate about the fact that I am talking to you aboutthe future of the Asia-Pacific on the 11 th of November, when we rememberthe sacrifice of those Australians, and the countless millions from othernations, who fought and died in the wars which shaped this century andwhich, for better and worse, shaped Australia's history.What comes next the legacy of peace, security and prosperity, we owe toour past will in no small way be formed by what happens in Bogor over thenext few days.ends



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP AND
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE, HIS EXCELLENCY,
EDUARDO FREI RUIZ-TAGLE
KIRRIBILU HOUSE, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
SATURDAY 12 NOVEMBER, 1994
PM: Well, I might just begin by saying how delighted I am to have the President
in Australia and delighted that we've had a chance to have a discussion
about our bilateral relationship and about the meeting we'll be attending at
APEC. The President has very kindly given me an introduction into the
economics, politics and societal issues in Chile and they are, in some
respects particularly with the development objectives of his country
very similar to Australia. And, I was very glad to have had that point of view
put. The President said to me that he would like to see a stronger bilateral
relationship and I agreed with him that Australia could well do with a beach
head in South America, and Chile rather obviously picks itself on the Pacific
coast. And, we agreed that we should expand that bilateral relationship
and, in Chile's case, use Australia also, as an entree to the Asia-Pacific.
The President impressed upon me the value he sees in developing the
bilateral relationship and getting the political relationship right. And, I
certainly concur in that view. I think, certainly in this part of the world, a
number of good bilateral relationships makes up a larger multilateral
structure and APEC, which we're both going to this weekend, is the end
product of those many bilateral relationships. So, I am delighted to have
met the President, I am delighted that he has given us the honour of coming
to Australia on the way to Indonesia and I will be delighted to be working
with him over these next two or three days, on APEC and further
strengthening our bilateral relationship.
P: For us it was a great pleasure that we were invited to come to Australia so
that we may discuss these matters and discuss areas of common concern.
For us, Chile is a country that for the last few years has looked for
development that included the concepts of justice and equality and, for us,
our presence in APEC is very important, since a great proportion of our
exports seventy five percent of our exports go to the Asia-Pacific 
region. And forty percent of our imports also come from the Asia-Pacific
region so this concept of APEC is particularly important to us.
I am very glad we have discussed many of the important themes that will
take place within APEC and we will have other opportunities to discuss
these further. I think it is important that we have a consolidation of our
bilateral communication, that should be based on a political background and
further the development of these relationships between our two countries. I
have mentioned to the Prime Minister that we have a number of
businessmen and academics, a great number who are with us, and we will
actually meet with Australian businessmen later this afternoon. I think that
these sorts of exchanges are very important so that we can have a firm
basis for further bilateral discussions between the two countries, with regard
to investment, particularly.
PM: I think we will take some questions if you would like.
J: I would like to know what is Australia's position, at the moment, with regard
to Chile's entrance to APEC, given that last year you opposed it?
PM: Yes, we did oppose it, I said to the President, not because of any
judgement about Chile, but, rather, about the manageability of APEC. If
APEC grows too greatly before it gets down to undertake its substantial
work it may have its capacity to undertake that work, diminished. But, we
took the view that we would not stand out against Chile's membership, and
we didn't. And, as a consequence, Chile is in APEC and we are delighted
with that and we will work with Chile and, particularly, with the President, to
see that we can do as much as possible together.
J: Do you think that you could do something to improve the relationship
between the two countries, particularly with regards to transport, given that
there are some disadvantages to the current situation with the fluidity of
exchanges between the two countries?
PM: Well, the President and I discussed this. And, I think we agreed that one of
the first things that we have to get right if we want to develop this
relationship further and we do is to get the transportation right. And, I
think that means that we ought to, at the earliest opportunity, develop the
appropriate protocols so that we can establish an air link between Australia
and Chile. So, I think this will be one of the priorities in our relationship.
J: ( inaudible question re investment)
P: The first thing we said was that we have to create the conditions and the
opportunities for these sort of investments to be able to occur. There are 
certain areas that the investments could take place in, and we have
specified these. At the moment the Australian investments are principally
to do with mining in our country but we believe there is potential there for
investment within the sector of telecommunications, the infrastructure, and
including the possibility of improving the exchange of advanced technology,
also.
J: ( inaudible question re APEC bettering 20-20 timetable)
PMV: Well, this is one of the things I said yesterday. The Australian. press
intemnalise every advance so quickly, without seeming to understand how
difficult it is to put them in place. No communiques, such as these
declarations, are ever foregone conclusions, particulaly going to such
important matters as trade, across such a vast area of the world. So, I
think the President and I would take -the view that it is first things first. That
is, let's get a very clear declaration from Bogor and, when we have that,
work and see how that can be implemented effectively.
J: Mr Keating, what is your level of concern about Malaysia's possible
dissension from the ( inaudible) timetable?
PM: Well, as far as I know, just as we've had the reporting of reactions to
President Soeharto's draft declaration, that there hasn't been any point of
objection to it. And, why should I or anyone else go grasping at problems if
they don't exist?
I think we may, perhaps, leave it at that and let me conclude by saying by
how absolutely delighted I am to see the President in Australia and how
much I am looking forward to working with him over the course of these
next few days, and in the future on our bilateral relationship.
P: I would like to thank the Prime Minister, again, for the opportunity to discuss
these matters with him and I would like to extend an invitation to him to visit
Chile, when it suits him, so that we can further pursue our discussions and
develop our relationship. We can also show him the reality of Chile and
Latin America as we have seen the reality of Australia and we think that,
also, we could be a gateway into Latin America and into developing a
relationship between Australia and the Latin American continent.
ends. 



52
9-
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT FAIRBAIRN ON DEPARTURE FOR JAKARTA
SUNDAY 13 NOVEMBER 1994
PMV: This is, I think, an historic opportunity for the region, this meeting of
APEC. It represents half the world's production and half the world's
population the whole of the Pacific rim and it has never been
organised before with anything like a free trade agenda. So, with this
adoption of these objectives APEC would become an institutional ised
force for freer trade in the area. And upon the adoption of these
proposals it would give Australia a seat at the largest table it has ever
sat at because we have never been part of any area dedicated to free
trade, we have always been on our own. So, that is what we are
hoping from this meeting, that President Soeharto's draft declaration
will be adopted and then in subsequent meetings we can get on to
working out how and when we put these things into effect.
J: ( inaudible Optimistic?)
PMV: Well I think so. I think there are very good feelings about it. You can't
hope to span an area like the United States, Japan, China, South East
Asia, and have everyone agreeing to every dot point. But I think most
people take the view that they have got to give something to get
something and that there is a greater good to be served here, so I am
reasonably optimistic about it.
J: ( inaudible what will it mean to Australia?)
PMV: It will mean multiples of what the Uruguay Round meant for us, and I
gave some of the figures on Friday.
J: Mr Downer faces an important party room meeting on Tuesday how
much longer do you think he'll last?
PMV: Well I hope the Liberals don't do anything rash while I am away. I
always like to be in town when they get up to their tricks. And I want to
concentrate on the events at hand in Bogor, in Indonesia. So they
should think of the country and not provide any distractions.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, JAKARTA CONVENTION CENTRE, 14 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, I'll just give you a couple of minutes and a few impressions. During
this APEC meeting we have the opportunity of bilateral discussions and
today I have already had bilateral discussions with Prime Minister
Mahathir, President Jiang Zemin, yesterday Prime Minister Chretien. I will
be seeing President Clinton for lunch. I am seeing Mr Chuan from
Thailand and I will be seeing other leaders through the afternoon.
President Soeharto's draft declaration is, of course, a document of great
moment and because It Implies Important national commitments by
countries as people contemplate those commitments, they are pressing to
see what everyone else is doing and to see what it means for them, what
they secure from It and as one would expect with something of such huge
moment, it is not being thoughtlessly agreed. There Is a lot of discussion
about what this means for people and whether than can accommodate It.
So far the discussions have gone well. So far, I think, there is gathering
support for the dedcaration and I think Leaders are having a chance to
discuss amongst themselves what It means, what other people believe it
all means and who we will proceed from here in the case of it being*
adopted. Now, this Is the sort of discussion I thought there would be today, but I am
happy to report at this point, it Is moving positively and 1 think well.
J: Did Dr Mahathir indicate he would come on board this APEC process?
PM: Well, itIs not a matter of coming on board. He is already on board.
Malaysia Is a. member of APEC and I think they are also offering to host
the 1998 meetings. These are matters yet to be decded, but all the 
2
nuances here are by degree and it is a matter of seeing whether all of the
degrees add up to. if you like, a circle.
J: How did you get on with him?
PM: Very good, very well, but I always have whenever I've meet him in the
past and as I did in Cyprus a year or so ago and on this occasion we had
a good meeting about our bilateral relationship, about the growth In our
trade, about the exchange of people, about the students in Australia,
about out capacity to do things together in third markets. It was, I
thought, a very positive discussion.
J; So, he is no longer recalcitrant?
PM: Well, it was a discussion about there were two features to It the
bilateral discussion, that is the things Australia and Malaysia are doing
together end our role In the larger game of APEC. I thought It was a
valuable and frank discussion.
J: Will he support target liberalisation?
PM: 1 think you will find out exactly what people support, probably this evening
and tomorrow. People are trying to, at this stage I think, feel out
everybody else to see what all these words really mean In the minds of
the major players. But, I think, Malaysia certainly sees advantages in the
developed countries committing themselves to an earlier date for
liberalisation. I think, that is a very large matter with the developing
countries.
J: Mr Keating substantial change to the draft in the next 24 hours?
PM: I think President Soeharto has taken the view that we have now had a
year to put this together.. There has been a tremendous amount of
discussion across that year, feeling people out to see what should go Into
a draft declaration and, I think, the judgement has to be made then Is
this basically likely to accommodate most peoples aspirations? I would
think the President thinks it does. and his inclination, I haven't seen him
yet I will be seeing him this afternoon of course, his inclination is that it
does and that he should stick by it.
J: Are the Chinese ready to support a timetable?
PM: . I think China understands.. Australia did some economic modelling of
APEC benefit versus Uruguay Round benefits and they far outstripped the
Uruguay Round benefits for China. In fact, . China Is probably the largest J 
3
beneficiary of the APEC change and in my meeting with President Jiang
Zemin a few moments ago I gave him some of that material. I think, what
it in fact does Is confirm China's own view that APEC provides
tremendous economic opportunities for China and as well as that in the
draft declaration it will have the United States In agreeing to the
declaration to also do so with the words In there which say that all APEC
members should be members of the World Trade Organisation which
means also China. So, I think, China would see that as a fairly clear
benefit for them.
J: the protests on streets of Dili today, there is still at the US embassy.
To what extent do you think East Timor may, at least, partly overshadow
what's going on here at APEC?
PM: Well, let me assure you, this is always an issue and has been an Issue for
years, I have raised it mapy times with the President, and It is an Issue,
I'm sure, for many countries here, but it Is not overshadowing what Is
happening here. You get no sense of that speaking to any of the
Leaders. So, this may be a media view, It Is not a view here in reality.
That Is not to say the Issue isn't important or that it is not something that
we shouldn't work on and you know in Australia's case we are doing
something material and tangible in seeking to develop East Timor and
that whole province. To try and make economic opportunities,
employment and living standards better in that part of Indonesia. So, I
think, as these things progress and there Is also, I think, Indonesia Itself
manages this region perhaps better In the future than it has in the past,
that it will be better at managing this problem.
J: ( further question on Timor and demonstrations)
PM: You're aware of the demonstrations and I am by news, but not by
moment. I mean, I don't think it is fair to present a picture to Australian
viewers or anyone else, that somehow the meetings are being set in a
climate of these demonstrations going, because this is not the climate
here. Now, there is no doubt with the world in town those who want to
make a point about Timor will seek to make It But, the point, I think, we
should understand is that if there is any moment of history here, It is the
fact that this meeting would In any other decade have occurred In
Washington or the United States or Western Europe, this Is occurring In
Asia and it is occurring here in Indonesia and the United States President
has come to Indonesia to conclude this business on behalf of his country.
I think that point of significance shouldn't be lost on any of us.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, GRAND HYATT HOTEL, MONDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, since I saw you last I have had meetings with Prime Minister Chuan
and lunch with President Clinton and a meeting this afternoon with
President Soeharto. So, I would be quite happy to take any questions from
you.
J; Lets start with President Clinton
PM: We had a lunch, we reaffirmed our country's strong support for the APEC
commitment. The President was very complimentary about our role In our
APEC and I was of his decision last year to hold the Leaders meeting. And
we have acknowledged both the central role that President So eharto has
played in getting the communique together and negotiating it to this point.
We agreed on the Importance of developing an action plan for free trade,
that is the Importance of deciding whien next we meet how we then start
giving effect to some of the content and decision taken In Bogor. We also
agree on the Importance of APEC Loaders continuing to meet regularly.
The President thought it was a tremendously good thing that the Asia-
Pacific was meeting at Leaders level and that you can see just from one day
how many countries and just how many leaders can meet one another so
effectively and quickly and efficiently. We shared other views on the region
Including Japan, Korea and China. Then we had an Interesting and amiable
discussion about domestic political issues and developments In both
countries. I'm not sure the Liberal Party of Australia would have been
terribly -pleased with. my contribution. but it certainly amused the President.
And, he had a few things to say about his opponents as well.
So, that was the sort of general discussion. I think that the President, I
made this point to him that the likelihood of an American President being In 
Indonesia for the development of a free trade agreement, free trade
declaration across the most developed and developing countries is so novel
as to indicate very clearly that the United States obvlousiy sees a large part
of Its future in Asia.
J: Mr Keating, can you give us a sense of how you feel less than 24 hours
away from an agreement...
PM: I think that for a start this issue has been well and truly debated now over
the year. Each of us have got a stake In it. I have spoken to various
Leaders. President Soeharto has, I think, put together a very cogent, well
worded, thoughtful communique and It has got the hard decisions in It and
he stuck to it. I think this has been a very big factor and will be a big factor
in its success the strength and determination which he has committed to it.
One gets the sense that gradually peoples fears are being assuaged. That
Is, those who believe they have I mean, there has been quite a bit of
gnashing of teeth with ft because It Is quite a decision of such moment. This
is not just verbiage, this Is not just some sort of communique, some piece of
empty rhetoric, there Is a whole lot of decisions being taken here and when
the weight comes on, people do start thinking what consequences it has for
them and that Is why, I think, that there has been on the part of some
countries some real concerns. But, gradually, I think, they're concerns are
being settled and the communique Is looking stronger.
J: Would you say It is fair to characterise this as possibly the most Important
process that you have been Involved In?
PM: Certainly the most important I have ever been involved with.. Because this
is the birth of a free trade agreement, of a community of countries coming
together to introduce and support the benefits of free trade and it gives
Australia, as I have said before, a seat at the largest table It has ever been
at. So, one can't be other than struck by the sense of occasion.
J: How do you explain the significance of It though to ordinary Australians who
can see something happening very far away?
PM: It will matter to Australians in terms of jobs, of opportunities, of the fact that
Australian products and services will be more freely traded in the Asia-
Pacific, it will mean interesting jobs for many Australians and younger
Australians in particular, It will mean mobility that my generation didn't have,
S it willmean all those things." It will mean Australia has gof a stake In a very
large market that tt has never had a stake In before.
J: Do you expect to. see a Leaders meeting in Japan next year as a result of
your meeting with Clinton 
PM: I think so. I think there Is now fairly clear support gathering for a succession
of meetings and the next of ci rce would be In Japan. But still, this Is for
the Leaders to discuss tomorrow, but just from the informal expressions I
am getting I think we will probably see this becoming If not permanent a
semi-permanent feature of the landscape.
J: Do you see APEC as being a process for, If you like, a reform of US foreign
policy in this area moving away from the hubs and spokes Involved In five
or six years ago In the multi-lateral
PM: I think so. I think as the cold war has evaporated and the American
Presidency is less about control of a strategic force and more about regional
dispute settlement of the kind you have seen in Central America and the
Carribean in the Middle East, North Korea et cetera I think we will find the
expression of American foreign policy perhaps more and more in trade.
Therefore, It Is, I think, a very bold step for President Clinton to Imagine a
free and open Asia-Pacific in which America takes part and trying to turn
that sense of imagination Into a reality.
J: Prime Minister, after your discussion with Mr Clinton today has he come
further around to the view that you have had on the relationship between
human rights questions and development In trade?
PM: I think we have a concurrence of view about this, but we didn't discuss It at
lunch. But, let me say I couldn't be happier with the nature of the discussion
I had with him. It was relaxed, It was informal, it was one which not
unreasonably was one between countries which are very friendly and who
have a common set of objectives here. But, can I also say. I have just
recently finished a meeting with President Soeharto and that was the most
relaxed, informal meeting I have had with him and the President Is. I think,
feeling good about this meeting and, I think, he Is entitled to feel good about
it. Prime Minister, on Friday you said you were Just looking for perhaps a
political commitment from the APEC members to an organisation program.
Do you have more detail than that?
PM: The words In the communique are fairly hard words. They are not alms and
endeavours, they are hard words. I mean, this Is being approached by the
APEC4eadership-as a set of executive decisioris that chart a course which
will then have to be facilitated. So. this, if you like, this communique Is like
the Cabinet decision, it will then have to be fleshed out and that will happen
probably over the next couple of years. 
J: Prime Minister, on your talks with the Thai Prime Minister, is Thailand still
Intending to boycott defence sales coming through?
PM: I had a most amiable discussion with Prime Minister Chuan and I told him
how delighted we had been with not just the work his government has done
in the course of Its charter for Thailand, but coming at a time when it has
been the first democratically elected government likely to be running its term
Is a very encouraging development and I said while we had had concerns
about the certainly more in the past than at present, this support for
groups In Cambodia he said that it was his government's express policy not
to nurture, support or give succour to the Khmer Rouge, certainly In a way
suggested by ourselves and others and that he would bring to book and to
account any officer who was engaged in such activities. So, he expressed,
I think, a very firm view on the part of the government of Thailand against
any material support in this way and again we agreed together that the best
way, of course, consolidating Cambodia under a democratic regime was for
the government of Cambodia to perform to the expectations of the
Cambodian community.
J: Mr Keating, how close is the draft communique to the Eminent Persons
recommendations?
PM: I'd have to go back and try to thread them across one to the other. The
Eminent Persons Group was there, I think, to run a debate amongst the
government trade economic forces of each particular country, to focus on
these questions and to try to develop some sort of coherent consensus of
view. But, it was never, ever Intended to be the draft, if you like, of any
such communique. This was always left to the Leaders. So, It has helped
flesh out opinion within the community of the Asia-Pacific, but it In no way
substituted for the Leaders own work, but it has been a very useful adjunct
to . that work.
J: Prime Minister, do you have any plans to meet with Dr Mahathir?
PM: I met him today and I have since done a press conference about that.
J: So, can I Just go back to that question about the rifle sales to Thailand, did
you talk about that, did you get any Informatlon about that?.
PM: No, he said that apparently some parliamentarians in Australia had made
. some reference to rifles, were Thailand to buy rifles from Australian being
passed across to other forces and I told him this wasn't the view of the
government and that we didn't put any weight on that view at all.
J: Did he then say that he would lift any restrictions on possible sales 
I L
PM: There are no restrictions to lift I don't believe.
J: Do you expect sales will go ahead successfully?
PM: I don't know, but who knows. I mean, all the world tenders for these sorts of
things.
J: What is President Clinton's assessment of the recent mid-term
congressional elections?
PM: I think his views were very ably expressed in his Georgetown speech, I
mean more comprehensively than he expressed them today and I think it Is
obviously leading to some rethinking of his political positioning in the United
States, but again some of the more what one may say intuitive views he put,
I think, were put In the context of a private meeting.
J: What were his views for example on getting the GATT through the
Congress?
PM: We didn't discuss It. I think he would think, as I do, that getting the GATT
through was central to the US's role In the world In terms of the International
trading community. So, It just never arose as any point of discussion.
J: Australia's exports to all APEC countries are growing, but ASEAN
Interregional trade is growing faster than that, so Australia is losing market
share. Does that concern you, have you brought up that with any of the
ASEAN leaders that you have met?
PM: I don't quite understand the. question, just put it again.
J: Interregional ASEAN trade Is growing extremely fast, cutting Australia's
market access.
PM: Inter-ASEAN trade.
J: Yes, does that concern you, have you brought that up with any of the
ASEAN leaders.
PM: Well, they have got a free trade agreement. They have got an agreement
called AFTA and one would. hope that that would have the effect of
speeding up intra-ASEAN trade. We trade with ASEAN countries on a
bilateral basis and also we trade Into the Asia-Pacific more broadly and as
you know, there Is a very lively debate now between us about whether
Australia and New Zealand should join AFTA. This would be a good 1 
development I think, but it would seem to me fairly normal that Intra-ASEAN
trade is growing given the fact that they have a policy there to make it grow.
Are we upset about that? No more than they would be upset about CER
between Australia and New Zealand.
J: That would be concern though, if you are losing market share?
PM: It is not a concern that Is keeping me awake at night I can tell you.
J: Prime Minister, can you tell us a bit about your discussions with President
Soeharto
PM: He was in a very good frame of mind, I think, and feeling that he Is gradually
winning the day on his communique and, I think, appreciated the role
Australia has played in backing him In because I told him and I told you we
would stick with him absolutely In this communique, So, to say relations
have never been better Is to understate, I would say.
J: You spoke with President Clinton about an action plan for free trade to be
discussed does that mean that basically you have only got to nail down a
couple of details tomorrow
PM: No, tomorrow's meeting will decide amongst other things where we meet
next and what we do. Now, what we do obviously will be to start to think
about some of the machinery to give effect to what we are now deciding
and that Is what I meant by that remark.
J: Mr Keating, you said President Soeharto is gradually winning the day who
is yet to be won over?
PM: I think we are at the point where there are few to be won over.. But; again,
I'm not about making the winning over of people harder by making them the
focus of attention.
J: Mr Keating, can you comment a little more on how much comfort China has
In getting WTO membership
PM: Well, the fact that the communique. explicltly says that all members of APEC
should be members of the WTO and the US signs on to that means that
there Is a point of principle where the US Is saying that China should be part
of the World. Trade-Organisation. -Now, there Is a negotiation still to be had
and for any of us joining these bodies there are commitments to be given,
obligations to be met for benefits to be gained. But, In principle, I think this
is a very strong piece of paper for China and they understand that perfectly
well. 
* 7 J: the Chinese were saying at their press conferences that they still want a
Sbit more comfort on the way the free trade agenda Is Implemented
PM: They will be raising some of these things with the President, but it will be all
in the wash tomorrow when you get the communique.
ends 



QJ9
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. MEATING MP
PRESS * CONFERENCE, GRAND HYATT HOTEL, JAKARTA, TUESDAY,
16 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF QOPY
PM: Can I begin by saying that I think fth events In Bogor today, the
decision of the Leaders to carry their support for the communication Is
an absolute triumph for the Asia-Pacdfic. It Is a triumph for the world
trading system and it is a triumph for Australia bemause It will be a very
clear beneflclary from this and It has played a very Important and
significant role in it. But, President Soeharto's statement may well be
seen, I think, as the beginning of te Pacific century and Australia is
set up for it. I want to commend President Soeharto on his leadership
in putting the communique together and drivng It home.
Free trade * int. h e Asia-Pacific by 2020. was the stuff we were only
dreaming about two years ago. A decade ago It was beyond our
dreaming. Today, 18 countries have signed up to It and the sense of
restrained euphoria amongst the members knowing the weight and
moment of what had been undertaken was something for one to
experience. This area, 6f course, encompasses more than two billion people, by
the turn of the century it will be 57 per cent of world trade and by 2020
seven of the top 10 economies In the world will belong' to it In*
Australian terms It means about $ 7 billion In extra Income each year,
extra trade each year, about 70,000 nlew jobs, ft means exponential
growth. 1in opportunities for young Australians. But, I think, much of the
meani~ ng* of it can'tri be* meisured. For Australia's terms, how do you
measure the value of a permanent seat at a table of this size? A seat,
which I might say, we have In this Instance truly earned. A
coonstrctive leading edge role In the region, the knowledge that we are
not only masters of our own destiny, but truly ready tq seize it It
means all the reform and realignmerft that we in Australia have 
undertaken In the past decade will now have their rewards, It means
economic growth will be secured by expanding trade, It means cooperation
on other vital issues, It means a collective regional Interest In
peace and security underpinned by a common economic Interest.
I don't think the next generation would have blamed us for not having
done this because this did not have to be done. But what is, I think,
extraordinary about It Is that as the Cold War finished, as that bipolarity
changed, as that bi-polar overlay was taken away, regions had
a chance to do things together or to remain In the same sort of
alignments. And, out of a process of sheer co-operation and
Imagination we have seen developed here a commitment to free trade
in the Pacific rim amongst these vast countries. Something that just
simply didn't have to be done, something which, I think, most people
thought would have been beyond our thought and our imagination.
But, the fact Is It wasn't and it was done. It is a rare achievement, I
think, 18 countries here have seen the future and they have seen the
moment and they have seized it now not in another generations time,
but now and, I think, this is a very extraordinary thing.
So. we have all today lived through a bit of history. And, when we see
the great post war changes such as the Bretton-Woods Agreement or
the establishment of the IMF and the World Bank in the same terms
what has happened today, larger In its Impact than the Uruguay Round
by a factor of two or three, will change the worlds trading system and
mean Instead of having three blocs one In Europe, one In the
Americas and one In Asia we will have an Asia-Pacific dedicated to
growth and co-operation and ultimately a better world where cooperation
and achievement underpins what used to be there with the
frightening polarity of the Cold War.
So, this means much and it is a great achievement by everybody
Involved.
J: Mr Keating, what did you have to offer to Dr Mahathir to get him to sign
up?
PM: I think Dr Mahathir expressed some reservations and Intends to
express them himself, but President Soeharto made this clear that this
was a ' flexible -consensus' as he put it. That was that he wouldn't
accept the view that one dissenter was able to change this and so, I
think, Malaysia commits itself to this, but any reservations it has Is, I
think, for it to explain and for its Prime Minister to explain.
J: Mr Keeting. how Important has Australia's role been In the process? 
PM: We started the idea off in 1992. That is, the idea of APEC meeting at
leaders level because we took the view that Ministers, no matter how
committed and no matter how conscientious couldn't draw down the
authority to make these sorts of decisions. This could only be done
to adopt a free trade agenda like this could only be done by leaders,
by heads of government and by leaders and we needed therefore a
leaders forum. It is that process that Australia put In train, but that was
taken up ambitiously by President Clinton and I thank him sincerely for
that for his meeting In Seattle last year and then by President
Soeharto agreeing to host the second meeting end he said he would
only do It on the basis if something positive came from It and then
picking up the free trade agenda and running very hard with it So,
Australia has been Involved I am very happy to say with this for its
inception and we have worked closely now with President Clinton and
President Soeharto and the other 18 leaders who have seen the
opportunity of this and were prepared not to let the moment go.
J: ( French Newspaper) If APEC is not going to be a free trading bloc as
stated In the statement, does it mean that you extend benefits to
Europe without having anything in return, without having to open its
markets?
PM: We think that this Is a proposal to help ourselves and in the doing of it
helping others. Now, the open markets 2000 proposal which President
Clinton proposed during the G7 was rejected by Europe. What has
happened here Is a much more cooperation and conscientious
undertaking and this will change the worlds trading system I'm happy
to say, but the Initiative came from the Asia-Pacf and what is
unusual here, the Initiative has come from the leader of a large
developing country. This has not come from the G7 down or the
OECD or anywhere else. This has come from a group of people
meeting together and the leader of the developing country proposing
to a dutch of developed countries US, Japan, Australia, Canada,
New Zealand et cetera a free trade agenda. So, it is almost a role
reversal for . President Soeharto to have done this, but he has and we
have and the world will be a freer, more supple, more productive
place. Now decisions have to be made in the future about whether
this is MFN or preferential, but any of you who are familiar with the
GATT will know that if this is a QATT consistent policy and it is we
made that very clear, that an adoption of such a policy under the
GATT leaves the option for each individual country of deciding whether
it is MFN or preferential. But again, that Is a broader question that
may be decided In the broad and we decided to have the next Leaders 
4
Meeting again, in Japan In Osaka In 1995 and that will be, of course,
one of the Issues which we will be discussing.
J: Mr Keating, did you say there was no unanimity or consensus on the
free trade timetable?
PM: No, let me just make these points to you from some of the paragraphs
of the communique. At paragraph six it says ' we further agree to
announce our commitment to complete the achievement of our goal of
free , and open trade no later than 2020.' This is not an aim or a
general direction,. this Is we agree to complete the goal by 2020. And
then it goes on to say that is, that industrialised economies will be
achieving the goal no later than 2010 and developing no later than
2020.' So, in the parlance of intenationalcommuniques there are no
weasel words here. These are firm executive decisions, this Is an
executive decision taken by the Asia-Pacific Leaders. And, at
paragraph seven ' we decide to expand and accelerate APECs trade
and Investment facilitation programs'. Not we might decide or we are
thinking about it, we decide. So, these are a very firm set of decisions
and we will now need to give effect to those and think about the plan
of how we will do that coming up to Osaka, during Osaka and beyond.
J: There has been some sort of talk about this 10 years what happens
in this ten years between 2010 and 2020, do the developing nations
get free access to the developed markets...
PM: We are already seeing a lot of unilateral changes in protection. For
instance, Indonesian tarffs have fallen from 35 per cent In 1982 to
per cent In 1992. In Korea they have fallen from 32 per cent to 10 per
cent. Chile's average tariff Is now 11. Australia In trade weight at
average terms will be at 2.9 per cent by year 2000. So, they are going
down, just that some will have further to fall than others because they
start from a higher level. But, again the modalities of this are to be
decided up to Japan and during the Osaka meeting.
J: ( International Herald Tribune) Mr Keating, when this agreement
speaks of free trade, does that mean zero tartffs and how many of the
countries or economies participating will take advantage of that opt
out clause point nine?
PM: Well, It is not an opt out clause and that was discussed by members
today and there Is, I think, a very clear commitment to the paragraph
six language here the first part of your question was? 
J: Can 1 just follow up, If there was a very clear commitment, as you say,
why is this point nine Included?
PM: I think it was included originally for those who found trouble with some
of the feature of itb, u t as It was agreed there would be no annexure to
the statement. In other words, Leaders were not going to be deterred
from publishing the statement as s, that paragraph nine largely
becomes redundant in the decision in terms of any import that you
might attach to it of the kind you are speaking of.
J: Does free trade mean zero tariffs?
PM: The coverage and the determination of free trade will be something
which has to be decided in Osaka in 1995 and maybe beyond, but
under the GATT, of course, the notion of GATT consistent free trade Is
where markets are substantially liberated substantially is the word.
And, that may be a formula that the APEC Leaders take up, it may be
that they say zero to five per cent, t may be something else, it may be
zero, but again these are all Issues which. I think, in the doing of this
it's competent for the Leaders to discuss in Osaka In 1995.
J: Mr Keating, does point nine where It refers to Implementing co.
operative arrangement imply or require another formal agreement by
the Leaders before this whole exercise of free trade might be
embarked upon. And second question, can you tell us whether there
was or was not consensus on the MFN question and is that why that
also has been
PM: The MFN question was not discussed. The only reference to it came
from myself sayrng It is one of the issues which we will need to debate
in Osaka in 1995, no one else discussed MFN. So, that wasn't an
issue there. There was a notion, I think, at some point that In these
negotiations there may be some not yet ready to participate or may
join later. For Instance, countries that are not now In APEC, but who
may join it are not necessarily signed up to these things and therefore
can elect not to do. But. let me make this very clear; this was
discussed, this paragraph nine was discussed at some length in the
meeting today and it is not for the purposes of any of the members
who expressed their support for it an option to move away from the
very clear undertakings of paragraph six.
J: Mr Keating, you say that Soeharto, if I got it right, you . said that
Soeharto wouldn't accept the view that 
6
PM: That's right, he talked about the notion and I'll give you some of his
words from my notes, he talked about the notion of a flexible
consensus If the majority of the members are ready to c-operate they
can carry it out and not wait for members who may not be ready.
J: So, does this mean that he convinced Mahathir to go along or did
Mahathir
PM: Don't ask me about Prime Minister Mahathir's position, you had better
ask him, I think.
J: Was it in the meeting though, was it discussed?
PM: You had better ask him about his position.
J: What sort of adjustments win this mean for Australian Industry over the
next ten years?
PM: It depends what the climate is. We have always adjusted Australian
Industry In the context of relatively high tariffs in the Asia-Pacific, but if
you have got a commitment like this given the fact that we have
already had the bulk of our adjustment behind us, and as I say we are
going to a trade weighted level of tariffs of 2.9 per cent by the year
2000, Australia's large adjustment task is basically behind it. So, this
opens up an opportunity for Australia obviously, but I think, about any
of these sorts of arrangements they are basically win-win
arrangements. And, that is why I think the developing countries are
bringing their tariffs down unilaterally, removing non-tariff barriers and
being involved In trade liberalisation In general.
J: There has been some expressions back in Australia, they fear that this
may end up with a swamping of footwear, that sort of Industry in
Australia. Are there any guarantees for those workers in those types
of industry?
PM: This is the sort of fears people have expressed down through time and
certainly over the last decade. People said when we removed tariffs,
manufacturing In Australia would close up. What has happened?
Manufacturing production has doubled and manufacturing exports
have tripled. -And, we are now seeing In a lot of competitive areas of
the Asia-Pacific such as motor cars, even with existing levels of
protection we are now producing vehicles for the world market,
competitively of a very high quality, so I am very convinced of the
capacity of Australians to compete in any of these markets and
particularly in the environment of lower tariffs all around us. 
J: ( The Daily Telegraph) If given that you are saying that paragraph nine
is overridden by paragraph six in effect, what is the relevance of
paragraph nine?
PM: The thing is, as these meetings go on you could sit down and try to
redraft some of the sections as you get a coalescence of view around
particular points. But, you have got to understand how great this is,
how big this Is. You have got the big Industrial economies of the
United States and Japan, developed economies such as Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, huge developing markets like China and
Indonesia and the ASEAN economies, the industrialised economies
like Singapore and Hong Kong, Korea, et cetera. I mean, this is an
enormous panoply of countries and interests and to secure a thing like
this is done, if someone wants to unpick the threads of a communique
and you find yourself sitting there another day or two haggling over
every point, I think, President Soeharto's instinct was to get the
communique up and he did.
J: Can you just describe from a personal point of view what it was like in
that room with all those leaders, what were the atmospherics there?
PM: The thing I keep trying to remind myself of is that two and a half years
ago there was none of this, none of this existed, but, this has come
together in this very rapid time. You could feel a sense of buoyancy
from the Leaders Knowing tnat iney are in something as large as mis
and it would mean so much for their communities and so much to their
nations. The other thing was I can't think of a more tangible
expression of the north south dialogue In any practical way than this
because APEC is not like the European Community, Which is largely a
community of developed countries. This has got the most developed
and developing countries, it is a huge spread of countries from the
United States to Papua New Guinea through to Indonesia, Korea, the
differences here are so great that how long in all over our lives.
Scertainly in all of my political life, we have heard about the north south
dialogue. Well, this was the facilitation of that dialogue in the most
tangible way that I could ever imagine. I think being part of that cooperation,
I mean, seeing the President of China adopt these
proposals along with the Prime Minister of Japan, the President of the
Unites States along with the President of Indonesia, I mean this is cooperation
and good sense triumphing over the tight polarity we used to
Shave not just a few years ago. So, as I said to you in the opening
remarks, I think, the Leaders have seen the opportunity here and
seized It and this is leadership. This is what politicians can deliver. I
, mean, politicians often are disparaged in this world, but In the end they 
are the ones that make the decisions. This is a leaders meeting ati,
this could only have been done by leaders and there was a lot of
leadership on the line today.
J: Did either Japan or China raise any reservations because they
expressed plenty before?
PM: No, there was basically nothing but support from China and Japan.
But, before I leave you again on this paragraph nine, you asked me
about It, If you read back through that you will find it is referring to the
area above which Is largely about trade facilitation and standards
agreements et cetera. That was largely the mood with which it was
discussed in this group about trade facilitation, countries doing that
which they sought to do while others were not yet ready to join. Let
me assure you and you can go over this with a fine tooth comb and
ask the other Leaders, those key words that I referred to you earlier
about ' we agree to complete the achievement of our goal of free trade
by 2020, industrialised economies achieving It by 2010. developing
economies no later', you can't get it any harder than that. That is why
it Is a great achievement.
Could I just complete by thanking a number of people on the
Australian side who have been associated with this for a very long
period. of time, In the Australian bureaucracy, let me Just say about
this, we have had a lot of debate about trade, there are trade
theologians sprinkled all over my country and probably most countries,
certainly in the Australian universities, but with the Uruguay Round and
now with APEC, all the heavier hitters have got into the game. And,
the game has gone way beyond polite papers being delivered at
seminars to massive achievements of this variety by people who could
imagine something bigger and better and had the horse power both
political and bureaucratic to go In after it and get it.
I'd just like to record a special thanks to my foreign policy adviser Allan
Gyngell. To Michael Thawley In the Department of Prime Minister and
Cabinet and his colleague David Ritchie who have worked on this with
might, and tirelessly over a couple of years. Before that their
predecessor Ashton Calvert, who is now our Ambassador to Japan,
who worked on this for the first 18 months with Allan Gyngell. I'd like
to particularly mention also my former private secretary and
Ambassador to the United States Don Russell who has worked with
the United States closely on this issue. My private secretary Geoff
Walsh who has worked closely with Indonesia and I would like also to
thank our Australian Ambassador to Indonesia for the relationship
which he has created with the Indonesian government which has 
V 9
helped facilitate this. And. the many other members of the
bureaucracy who have supported this, my colleagues In the ministry
who have played their role right through these ministerial meetings
Gareth Evans and Bob McMullan and officers of their department.
There are many more I could mention and probabty many more I
should and there may be some I have forgotten, but this Is the largest
thing that I have ever been associated with or likely to be and I couldn't
let a moment like this go by without acknowledging all of those who
have put their shoulder to the wheel and kept it there with might and
main. Thank you Indeed.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
BOGOR DECLARATION
The Bogor declaration charts an extraordinary new path for the region towards
extraordinary new goals.
The economies of the region have committed themselves to achieve free and open
trade and investment no later than the year 2020. The commitment is to free trade in
goods and services; the path there is removal of tariffs and non-tariff barriers. Just as
important is the commitment to remove obstacles to doing business in the region by
harmonising and simplifying customs procedures, standards, and regulatory
structures. The significance of this commnitmnent is enormous. It is stronger than that made by
parties to the GATT or by G7 countries.
The benefits for Australia will be huge. And our economy and businesses are
increasingly set up to reap these benefits.
By 2020, APEC will include seven of the ten largest economies in the world. The
declaration commits advanced economies such as Japan to bring down their barriers
to trade by 20 10. It engages the United States in a process of liberalisation in
cooperation with the rest of the region. It commits developing economies such as
China to have fully opened their markets by 2020. Australia's trade ties with the
region are sinews in an economic body which will grow faster than any other in the
world. The commitment is to achieve free trade nolt than these dates. Leaders have asked
ministers to begin immediately preparing proposals to implement the decision. At our
next meeting in Osaka I hope we will be able to agree on a comprehensive action plan
for achieving the free trade goal.
Of course, many difficult issues will need to be negotiated. But we are building on
directions which APEC economies have already chosen. For example, as a result of
its own deregulation programs, average tariffs in Indonesia have already fallen from
per cent to 20 per cent and are continuing to fall. In Korea, they've fallen from 32
per cent to 10 per cent. And I am confident that, because moving together multiplies
the benefits, many member economies will liberalise even faster. 
2
We estimate that the Uruguay Round outcome will increase annual real income in
APEC economies by $ 112 billion. We will do even better from APEC free trade,
over three times the Uruguay Round result.
It is no accident also that pressure is coming from Asia for further global trade
liberalisation. The fact that President Soeharto, the leader of one of the world's largest
developing countries, has taken the initiative is a sign of the fundamental
transformations which are taking place in the world economy.
I want to record my esteem for the leadership President Soeharto has shown the
region in preparing the Bogor declaration. I also want to recognise the vision and
courage I should say that has been shown by the other APEC leaders. Many have
had to make difficult decisions and overlook short-term considerations for a greater
long-term good.
It is also no accident that the lead has been taken by APEC, which has shown how
economic diversity can be a strength. The future of the world's economy is going to
depend in no small part on the capacity of the industrialised economies and
developing economies to integrate in a way which promotes growth and encourages
change.
The commitments made by the APEC economies will see new streams of technology
and capital flowing to the developing economies of APEC. We will all benefit.
These will be flows driven by ineluctable economic forces, rather than trickles from
Government-directed aid programs.
The undertakings in the declaration will mean that barriers will be reduced not only
within APEC but also between APEC economies and the rest of the world. Free trade
in APEC will be reached in a way which will be consistent with the GATT, will
strengthen the multilateral trading system and will promote further trade liberalisation
in the world economy.
APEC members have committed themselves not only to carry out their Uruguay
Round obligations and support the WTO but to achieve them earlier and to go beyond
them. We have invited other countries to respond.
I hope that the agreement to a standstill that is, not to increase existing levels of
protection will be respected by APEC members and so become a clear signal to our
business communities about the seriousness of our commitments.
All this is of enormous significance to Australia and Australians.
We are entering a new epoch as a result of the strategic shifts that will occur in this
region during the next 25 years. The process of liberalisation and economic
integration that the Bogor declaration will encourage is an important insurance of
security and stability as we cope with these shifts. Through their informal meetings,
the region' s leaders can help ensure the process of economic integration stays on
track. 
7.
f 3
For Australian business, the Bogor commitments hold the prospect of vastly improved
access for their products and services to the fastest growing markets in the world. The
day-to-day task of doing business will be easier. Our business people cannot expect
good results automatically. But the structure is being put in place which will allow
Australian business to plan on the basis of access over the next 25 years to an
increasingly large and integrated regional market.
The importance of this can be seen from the fact that in the past four years our
merchandise exports to APEC grew at more than 9 per cent per annum, more than
twice the rate of growth of our global exports. Manufactures accounted for over
per cent of our exports to APEC. And APEC takes two-thirds of Australia's services
exports. And Australia's growing trade links with APEC will make Australia more attractive to
investors from the rest of the world.
What does Bogor mean for Australians? It means a more prosperous economy. It
means a better lifestyle. It means not only more employment opportunities but also
more interesting ones. It means wider horizons for our young people and more scope
for them to exercise their skills as they learn the languages of a wider family and
become part of it. Not only business and industry will be challenged, but also
education and culture.
The Bogor declaration will help ensure that Australia, this generation of Australians
and its successors have a dynamic role in their own region.
JAKARTA November 1994 
APEC, ECONOMIC LEADERS' DECLARATION
OF COMMON RESOLVE~
Bogor, Indonesia 1
November 15, 1994
We. the economic leaders -of APEC, came together in. Bogor, Indonesia
today to chuxt the future course of our economic cooperation which will
enhance the pro specis of an accelerated, balanced and equitable economic
growth not only In the Asia Pacific region but throughout the world
as well.
2. A year ago on Blake bsland in Seattle, USA, we recognized that our
diverse economies are becoming more interdependent and are maoving
toward a community of Asia Pacific economiles. We have issued
a vision. statement in which we pl edged:
-to find cooperative, -solutions to the challenges of our rapidly
changing regional and global economy',
to 6upport -an expanding world economy and an open multiateral
trading system;
-to continue to reduce baffiers to trade and In-vestment to enable
goods, services and capital to flow freely among our econies; 
2
to ensure that our pcople share the benefits of economic growthi,
improve education and training, link our economies through advances
in telecmmunication and transportattion, nd use our resourcou
su~ tainubly.
3. We set our vision for the, community of Asia Pacific economies bmasd
on a recognition of the growing interdependence of our economnically
diverse region, which comprises developed, newly industrializing and
developing economies. The Asia Pacific -Industrialized economies will
provide opportunities for devoloping economies to increase further
their economic growth and their level of development. At the. same time
developing. economies will strive to maintain high growth rates with
the. aim of attaining the level of prosperity now enjoyed by the newly
industrializing economies. The approach will be coherent and
comprehensive, embracing the three pillars of sustanable growth,
equitable development and national stability. Thbe narrowing-gap in the
stages of development. among the Asia Pacific economies wHi benefit
all. me mbers and promote the attainment of Asia Pacific economic
p~ rogress. as a whole.
4. As we -approach the twenty-first century, APEC needs to reinforce
economic cooperation in the " sa Pacific region on the basis of equal
partnership, shared responsibility, mutual respect, common interest,
and common benefit, with the objective of APEC leading the way in:
strengthening the open multilateral trading system;
enhancing trade and investment liberalization in Asia Pacific; and
intensifying Asia Pacific development cooperation. 
3I
the foundation of our market-diven economio growth has beeon
the open multilateral trading system, it Is -fitting that APEC builds on
the momentum generated by. the-outcome of t Uruguay Round of
-Multilateral Trade Negotiations and takes the lead in strengthening the
open multilateral trading system.
We are planed to. note the significat. contribution APEC made in
briuiging about a successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round. We
agree to caMr out our. Uruguay Round commitments fully and without
delay and call on all participants in the Uruguay Round to do the -same.
To strengthen the open multilateral trading system we decide to
accelerate tie implemnentation of our Uruguay Round commitmntsi
and to undertake* work # Ined. at deepening und broadening tie out
comec of-the Uruguay Round. We also agree to commit ourselves to our
continuing process of unilateral trade And investment llberallzadon.
As evidence of our commitment to thie open multilateral trading system
we further agree to a standstill under which we will endeavour to refrain
from using measures which would have tile effcct of increasing levels
of protection.
We call for the successfuil launching of the World Trade OrganIzation
( WTO). Full and active participation In and support of the WTO by all
ecnomies Is key to our ablity to lead the way in strengthening
the multilateral trading system. We. call on all non-APEC members
of the V/ TO to work together with APEC economies toward further
multilateral liberalization. 
4. CI
64With respect to our Objective of enhancing trade and investment in
Asda Pacific, We asre to adopt tho long-term goal of free and open trade
and Invostment, in Asia Pacific. This goal will We pursued promptly by
further reducing barrics to trade. and investment and by promoting
the ftee flow of -goods, services and capital amnong our economies. We
will achieve this goal in a OAIT-consistent manner and believe. our
actions will be a powerful Impetus for further liberalization at the
multilateral level to which we remain fuly-committed.
We further agree to announce our commitment to complete the achievemerit
of our goal of free and open trade and investmnent in Asia Pacific no
later than fth year 2020. The pace of implementation will take Into
account the differing levels of economic development amnong APEC
economies, with the industriilized ecnomies achieving the goal of free
and open trade and Investment -no litter tihan the year 20 10 and developing
economics no later d= a the yea 2020.
We wish to emphasize our strong opposition to the creation of an
inward-looking trading bloc that would divert from the pursuit of
global free trade. Wo are-detetmined to-pursue free and open trade and
Investment in Asia Pacific In a manner that will encourage and strengthen
trade and investment liberalization In the world as a whole. Thbus,
the outcome of trade and investment liberalization in Asia PacifIc will
not only-be the actual reduction of barriers among APEC economies but
also between APEC economies and nion-APEC economies. In this
respect we will -give particular ailcotion to our trade with non-APEC
developing countries to ensure that they will also benefit, fromn ouir
trade and investment liberaLzation, in conformity with GATTIWTO
provisions. 
4
7. To complement and support this substantial process of liberallsaeioa,
we decide to expand and accelerate APEC'a trade and Investment
facil itation programs. This will promote further the flow of goods, services
and capital amons APEC economies by eliminating administrative
and other impediments to trade. and investment.
We emphasi:. the importance of trade facilitation because trade
liberalization efforts alone arm Insufficient to generate trade expansion.
Efforts at facilitating trade -are important if the benefits of trade arc
to -be truly enjoyed by both business and consumers. Trade facilitation
has also a pertinent role in fuirthering our goal of achieving the fullest
Uiberalizadon within tho global~ context.
In paricular we ask our ministers and officials to submilt proposalsS On
APEC arrangements on customs, standards, Investment principles and
administrative barriers to market access.
To facilitate -regionial Investment flows and to strengthen APEC's
dialogue on economic policy issues, we agree to continue the valuable
consultations on economic growth strategies, regional capital flows
and, other macro-economic -issues.
8. O~ ur objective to intensify development cooperation among the community
of Asia Pacific, economies will enable us to develop more effec
tively the human and natural resources of the Asia Pacific region so
as to attain sustainable growth'and equitable development of APEC
economies, while reduicing economic disparities among them, and
improving the economic and social well-being of -our peoples. Such
efforts will Also facilitate, -the growth of trade and investment In the,
Asia Pacific region. 
6
Cooperative programs in this area cover expanded hunian resource
devalupmout ( such as education and training and especially improving
manasemcnt and technical sklils), the development of AY'EC study
Centres, cooperation in scienci and tchnology ( including technology
transfer), measures aimed at promoting small and medium scae enter.
pises and steps to improve economic Infrastructure, such as energy,
transportation, information, telecommunications and tourism. Effective
cooperation wil also be developed on environmental issues. with the
aim of contributing to sustainable development.
Economic growth and development of the Asia Pacific region has
mainly been market-driven, based on the growing Interlinkages between
our business sectors in the region to support Asia Pacific economic
cooperation, Recognizing the role of the businiess sector in economic
development, we agre to Integrate the business sector in our programs
and to create an ongoing mechanism for that purpose.
9. In order to facilitate and accelerate our cooperation, we agree that
APEC economies that are ready to initiate, and implement a cooperative
arrangement may proceed to do so while those that axe not yet ready to
parficipatc may join at a later date,-
Trade and other economic disputes among APEC economnies have
negative implications for the implementation or agrced cooperative
arrangements as weU as for the spirit of cooperation. To assist in resolving
such disputes and In avoiding 1W recurrencc, we agree to examine the 
possibility Of A Voluntary Consultative dispute mediation service, to
supplement the WTO dispute settlement mechanism, which should
continue to be the primary channel for. resolving disputes.
it]. Our Soul is an ambitious one. But we are determined to demonstrate
APECs leadership in fostering f~ jrter global trade and investment
liberalization. Our goal entails a multiple year effort We wil start our
concerted liberalization process from the very date of this statement.
We direct our minister$ and offcial to immediately begin preparing
detailed proposals for implementing our present decisions. The
proposals are to be submitted sQQoh to the APEC econom~ ic leaders for
their consideration and subsequent decisions. Such proposas should
also address all impediments to achieving our goal. We ask ministers
and officials to give serious consideration In their deliberations to the
important . recommendation contaned In the reports of the Eminent
Persons Croup and the Pacif~ c Business Forumn.
11. We express our appreciation for the importatit and thoughtful recommendations
contained in the reports of the, Unitiont Persons Groups and the
Pacdf&amp; Business Forum. The reports will be used as valuable points of
reference in formulating policies in the cooperative framework of the
community of Asia Pacific economies. We-agree to ask the two groups
to continue with their activitles to provide the APEC economic leaders
with asmesments of te progress of APEC and -further recommendations
for * wpplng up our cooperation. 
f
W -also ask the Eminent Persons Oroup and the Pacific B uiness Forum to
review the interreazonghps betwesn APEC and the existing sub-regional
anigimtitis ( AFrA, ANZERTA and NAFTA) and to examine possible
options to prevent obstacles to each other and to promote conslstency in
their relations. APEC Economic Leaders
Bogor, Indonesia
November 15, 1994
I' 



y
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP ON ARRIVAL FROM INDONESIA ( APEC), FAIRBAIRN,
16 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, will domestic politics be a little humdrum after the APEC
summit?
PM: Well, a bit humdrum, I think, a bit humdrum I'd have to admit. This was
a tremendous outcome for the Asia-Pacific and for Australia. What
struck me was the unrestrained co-operation and good will arraigned
around that room from what just a few years ago was with the tension
of the Cold War to this tremendous opportunity of North America
coming to join Asia in a trade pact which we have never seen in the
world before with developed and developing countries.
J: Is the Australian economy in a position to take full advantage of the
agreement?
PM: Yes, absolutely. We couldn't have thought of this had we not taken the
decisions 10 and 12 years ago to open Australia up and having
opened it up we now can take this on with giant strides.
J: What is ahead of Australia to be able to put the declaration into effect?
PM: We are going to be down to an average level of manufacturing
protection, trade weighted tariffs of about three per cent by the year
2000. So, the task for us is largely behind us. The task is really to try
to organise the best possible set of arrangements next year in Japan
and to let the countries of the Asia-Pacific get themselves ready
those with high tariffs and non-tariff barriers get themselves ready.
But, what this means is more jobs for Australians, more wealth, more
interesting jobs and opportunities for a generation that I never had
when I was young, particularly for young people. 
2
J: The Opposition says to reap the full benefit of this you are going to
have to get very serious about deregulating the labour market.
PM: Well, they were the people who gave us increased tariffs through the
1970s. They were the people who had us with a managed exchange
rate. They were the people who saw foreign policy in Washington and
in London. So, the truth about them is we'll leave them to the market
as they say that's the political market and the big market.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH GRAEME DOBELL, ABC 16 NOVEMBER 1994
TRANSCRIBED BY DEPT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
ANNOUNCER: According to Mr Keating, the Asia Pacific free trade agreement,
announced In Indonesia last night will change the way that Australians live, and it
marks the start of what he's calling, the " Pacific Century". The Malaysians, however,
are again trying to rain on the Prime Minister'sparade by pointing out that the free
trade timetable Is non-binding. The 18 APEC leaders have set out a timetable to
slash tarif by 2010 or 2020 at the latest. And they have agreed to meet again In
Japan next year to finalise the details. Last night, after the Bogor signing, Paul
Keating spoke to " AM's" Grasme Dobell.
DOBELL: Prime Minister, why for Australians do you think, perhaps a sense of
triumph, perhaps some sense of euphoria?
KEATING: Yes, I think this Is genuinely an occasion for same euphoria. Australia,
for all of Its; history, has been largely by itself, had this question of Imperial
preference. Many years ago, in its earlier trade relationship with Britain, that was
mostly about British products coming to Australia at Its; height. Largely, we've been
trading by ourselves, on our own, making bilateral relations or relationships. This is
a multilateral structure. This Is the first time that Australia has ever belonged to a
community of countries where It would enjoy the opportunity of trade without tariff
and non-tariff barriers. So this puts us at a permanent seat at the largest table we've
ever sat at.
DOBELL: How would you say to Australians that they might live differently or work
differently under this free trade agreement? 
KEATING: I think it means, for a start, more jobs, more wealth, more interesting
jobs, greater frequency of arrangements and visits. etc to the region. It will change
the way in which Australia, not only does business, but the way it lives. This Is one
of the big changes In the post-War world. And what is particularly unusual about it Is
most things, like the European Union, are with countries that are largely of
equivalent development. This is so different because you've got the big economies,
like the United States and Japan, in with developing economies, like Indonesia, and
probably later Vietnam, Papua New Guinea
DOBELL: On that point,' can a state, like the United States, have free trade with Its
economic foes with China, with Japan?
KEATING: Thats the enormity of the change. I mean, the President of the United
States knows what he's committing himself to. It's a competent country. It knows
what the draft means, and the draft is very explicit about free trade. And the
Chinese know what It means. So this Is why, I think, the agreement is so
breathtaking. DOBELL How much store do you put by the standstill, by this commitment to
actually not making any more protection Increases? How Important Is that to you as
a starting point?
KEATING: I think that's important, but bear In mind this. I'm quite sure that the
Uruguay Round, the GATT the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, as
important as that Is, I don't think would have happened without the APEC meeting
having met In Seattle last year. I think when the Europeans saw APEC coming
together, they said, what have we got to do here to sign up, lest there's a preferential
bloc developed In the Asia Pacific. Now that didn't happen, but the people involved
with APEC were committed to the Uruguay Round, we reaffirmed it again today the
early ratification of the Uruguay Round. So you don't do those things and then start
increasing protection again. So that's why the standstill is no worse. No increases
in protection has, I think, credibility.
DOBELL: You've had a couple of meetings over this in the last day and a half with
Dr Mahathir. You talk about commitments. You say that these commitments are
stronger perhaps than GATT or the G-7. He says that they're not binding. How far
apart are those positions? 
3
KEATING: That's for him to make his judgment about that's for him to say where
his country stands. But all of us have got to make judgments about this factor the
countries with lower protection develop faster, and the reason they do is they
generally attract more Investment You can put your hand up and say, we're not
going to reduce protection. I think investors say, therefore, the propensity of us to
invest In you will be less therefore, you will grow less. We've all got that choice.
But the choice of the people at this meeting today was to commit themselves to a
very explicit set of undertakings, like from the text I'll read to you now. These words,
" We further agree to announce our commitment to complete the achievement of the
goal of free trade In the Asia Pacific no later than 2020". ' The operative words there,
" we further agree to complete". This is an executive decision.
DOBELL So APEC moves on from a consensus to some sort of executive body
now? Some sort of leaders' executive Cabinet-type sort of approach?
KEATING: This is like a Cabinet decision, but a Cabinet decision of Prime Ministers
and Presidents. That's, In fact, what it Is, and that wiil then be fleshed out at the next
meeting of the APEC leaders In Osaka In Japan In 1995. So it Is, I think, a very
enthusias'tic support for this today, and you can feel the moment of the meeting.
People knew that they ware doing something because you have got to go back a
long way to find the equivalent of this. Maybe it was with the Bretton Woods
agreements after the War, maybe it was with the IMF and the World Bank that's the
last time you had a very large agreement across more than one region. That was
nearly 50 years ago.
DOBELL: Finally, you said that this was the most important thing you've been
involved with. What would you say to the Australians listening to this about why you
think it matters to them?
KEATING: Nov spent a decade of my life with my colleagues, opening Australia up,
making it more competitive, introducing the culture of productivity, seeing a shift to
manufactures, a shift to exports. But we needed the mechanisms we are running
into very high levels of trade protection, both tariff and non-tariff barriers around
various parts of the Asia Pacific. Sixty per cent of our exports go to this region, so
we just had to prepare the structures in Asia for ourselves, and contribute to the
preparation of those structures. So I see it as very much as an extension of my work
through the ' SO&amp; to not only make Australia an International place, but to give it
internationalI opportunities. I don't think any of us could have believed we could 
have got this together in two-and-a-half years. And the fact that other leaders saw
the opportunity and seized It that sense of opportunity. You see, the Cold War
bound so many countries together in a sense, fear of the other camp. With that
gone, this has just come from a spirit of cooperation. This speaks volumes, I think,
about the future of human history in this part of the world.
ENDS 



A-.
4, ~-1,~ A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
PRESENTATION OF " WALKING TOGETHER: THE FIRST STEPS",
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 17 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Sir Ronald, Pat Dodson, Mr Speaker, Mr President, my colleague the Leader
of the Opposition, the Leader of the Australian Democrats Senator Kernot
and Ms Lois O'Donoghue the Chairperson of ATSIC, Ministerial and
Parliamentary colleagues, members of the Council most particularly and
ladies and gentlemen.
I am very pleased to be here today for the presentation of the report " Walking
Together The First Steps" which describes Australia's progress towards
reconciliation after the first three years of effort by the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation. I think the fact that has been remarked already by the President, the Speaker
and Pat Dodson, that this Council was met with the approval of both houses
of Parliament, of the parties in the Parliament. The Council is a broad
representation of community and political interests and, of course, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander interests and it is a fine thing that we are so certain
of the process that the Chairperson of it Patrick Dodson, can actually
present with some pride the report to the Speaker and to the President.
It wasn't that many years ago when Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people had lost heart in any process of reconciliation. It wasn't that long ago
when the whole notion about land rights had fizzled out to nothing in some of
the places where people were still living a traditional life, in some of the large
states. And, there was a feeling of despair, I suppose, about the process, but
I think, that that has changed and that is the great thing. Because, something
token, a token process of reconciliation is worse than no process at all
because it makes a mockery of something intrinsically important.
But, I think, we all think now that there is nothing token about this and, I think,
that it is probably true that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
community feel better about themselves today than a few years ago and the 
Australian community feels better about reconciliation than it did just a short
time ago.
I think wherever principal strikes out, wherever a truth is spoken is like rain
falling on the ground things grow, good things happen and, I think, that
non-Aboriginal Australians have recognised the truth of what has happened
to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in this country. They recognise the
deprivation and the crimes and the rest and that has been said and, I think,
the High Court's decision in respect of Mabo righting a wrong, putting clear
a truth that this was not a continent of no one, that there was a civilisation of
people here, that there was an expropriation of their property and their rights
and that later, much later indeed, the High Court recognised that Aboriginal
custom and tradition would be a source of Australian common law. Now this
is a significant breakthrough, but of course, as we all in this room know, that
decision had legal power, but no facilitation and even in parts of it where it
was clear, or unclear where the power of it was there was an obligation on
the Parliament to legislate and say where it was and how it might be
exercised. That has happened with the Native Title legislation.
I think this community of ours feels much better about reconciliation because
of the passage of that Bill. I think they think that a wrong has been set right
and though there has been disagreement in a political sense about it, in the
end fundamentals invariably triumph and truth prospers and I have got no
doubt that our community today is more at one with itself than it has ever
been not totally at one, otherwise I'm sure Pat and the Council would
believe their work was finished and they couldn't possibly believe that. And,
we will have much to do in developing that reconciliation further, but now
there is that force to it. It is not just a Council meeting in the, sort of,
amorphous problems of Australia and trying to reconcile the interests and
aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with those of non-
Aboriginal Australians.
Land, of course, has always been central to an understanding of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander culture. The Native Title Act is about land, the
Land Fund Bill we are currently debating is about land for those who have
long ago lost a traditional association with the land, but shouldn't be denied
the right to acquire it or to live with it. So, that has got to be put right and
over time there will be in these fundamental things a basis of reconciliation
which we can then draw down for broader community support. I particularly
noticed the report of the Centenary of Federation Advisory Committee in
August which found that reconciliation is central to Australia's aspirations as
we approach the next century I think, a wise observation Premiers, Chief
Ministers, Opposition Leaders, RSLs, CWAs, youth councils, womens
electoral lobbies, local government, religious leaders, unions and business
organisations all nominated reconciliation as a major goal. This is a gigantic
step forward. This wouldn't have been so not so long ago.
As you know, I have just come back from a meeting of the Leaders of the
Asia-Pacific area who have done an important thing in deciding to bring the
Americas into a linkage with Asia so that we have an Asia-Pacific community 
and that we don't see the world break up into three trading blocs in Europe,
in the Americas and in Asia. We have had this debate all my political life,
anyway, about the north south dialogue and for the first time one can see a
real and tangible expression when a group sits down as this group did this
week to see the big powerful economies of the United States and Japan
dealing with and comprehending the problems and making arrangements to
deal with them with developing countries like Indonesia and China and Papua
New Guinea and some others.
You get the feeling that there is something good happening in the world, that
the Cold War which left these tremendous polarities and tensions, where
countries were bound up by this strategic tension, that having gone what has
blossomed is that which was most unlikely because this body APEC just
never had to happen. There was no logical reason why it happened, there
may be some logics in it, but it did happen and it has happened out of good
will and co-operation. We can only play a part in it if we go to the world as
one nation, as a nation united and not a nation in any way divided. That is
why Australians need to be clear about their identity and proud of it. But, that
identity must include the identity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders.
That is why you can't go hobbling to the world saying, " please put us in the
big race, but by the way, our indigenes don't have a real part of it and by the.
way, we are still borrowing the monarchy of another country."
So, feeling good about yourself doesn't happen unless it is genuine. It can
only be genuine if there is, I think, a goodness of spirit and something where
things are done, things are given, concessions are made and these, I think,
we are seeking to do with the Native Title Act and with the Land Fund and
other things, but more obviously, perhaps, by giving of ourselves, each of us,
towards something better.
So, that is what it must mean reconciliation it must mean that we reject the
notions that there is some sort of preordained right to the benefits of this
country to non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, that we have
really got to basically do it together and in the doing of it, that the
metamorphosis will mean we are a different country than the one we have
always been. No longer a mono culture and particularly with our multicultural
community and reconciliation with our older community we then, I think, do go
as one.
That means, I think, that the work can go on. Because there have been times
during the Council's life where we wondered whether work would go on,
whether it wouldn't peter out, just another attempt, add good will, basically
drying up in the face of intransigence and bias and prejudice. Well, I think,
there is enough around now and the fact that we can, in all honesty, receive
this Report with what it means, and have the President and the Speaker
accept it on behalf of the Parliament and the-nation is a logical interim step, a
report on the progress of reconciliation.
So, to all those people who have been involved the community
organisations, the industrial companies, the mining companies, the 
4
pastoralists, the Land Councils, the Aboriginal and Islander communities and
those who have served on the Council might I add a congratulations and the
very best of good wishes for the future of the council and its important work.
S' Thank you. 



I I r'.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
STATE DINNER FOR PRESIDENT KIM YOUNG SAM
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA
17 NOVEMBER 1994
Mr President, we meet again.
On this occasion it is here, in Australia, where you and
Mrs Kim are very welcome guests and friends.
For me it is a real and personal pleasure to welcome you
and your distinguished party to our country.
Before I turn to our very healthy bilateral relationship,.
I must say something about our work together on APEC.
In many respects nothing nearly so important would have
come from Bogor Mr President had it not been for your
vision, and persistence.
From its inception there have been APEC doubters and
critics. Korea has never been in that company.
More importantly, you Mr President, have been at the
frontline of our efforts to make something substantial
and significant of APEC.
We have shared a view about what was needed and have
joined our efforts to get the best possible outcome.
Through your efforts you have stamped Korea and yourself
as leaders in the Asia-Pacific.
That we were able at Bogor to agree an historic
declaration for free trade throughout the Asia-Pacific by
2020 is evidence of this.
Our agreement there is, of course, just the start of the
work and effort that is needed to turn this commitment to
reality.
One thing you can be sure of, however, is that we would
never have secured a result as significant as we did had
leaders not had the will to lead. 
As we now develop ways of taking forward and acting on
the Bogor declaration I know I will work closely again
with you Mr President.
While APEC is a broad regional body, it also stimulates
the development of bilateral relations. We saw in
Indonesia dozens of meetings between Asia-Pacific leaders
which preceded Bogor all ensuring better understanding
and co-operation between countries in the region.
Mr President, your visit to Australia, like mine to Korea
last year, is a sign that we both believe now in the time
to take the relationship between Australia and Korea to a
new level.
Our ties go back many years and are of the deepest kind.
Between 1950 and 1953, 17,000 Australian men and women
served in Korea to help defend its people from
aggression. More than three hundred died there. I paid
tribute to some of them when I visited the United Nations
cemetery in Pusan during my visit to Korea last year.
I am pleased to announce tonight that the Australian
Government will contribute $ 200,000 towards the
construction of a national monument on Anzac Parade in
Canberra to mark the sacrifice of the Australians who
served in Korea and to commemorate the links between our
two countries.
Australia has been a firm supporter of Korea's security
since that time. We are also conscious that, despite
recent hopeful developments, the security problems of the
peninsula continue to require vigilance and the active
interest of all nations in the region.
While an earlier generation of Australians knew Korea as
a country ravaged by war, the current generation knows a
very different country a strong democracy and one of
the most dynamic economies in the world.
Australia has been a partner in that growth.
In the late 1960s, for example, Australian engineering
support and consultancy helped to build POSCO's Pohang
steelworks. Australia has been proud to be associated
with POSCO and with the development of other Korean
industries.
There is a natural complementarity between our economies
which benefits us both and adds breadth and depth to the
relationship. Over recent years, our economic links have grown at an
astounding rate.
The Republic of Korea is now our third largest export
market and is likely to be our second largest in the next
two years. It is our eighth largest source of imports. 
Two way trade grew by 16 per cent in 1993-94 to more
than $ 6.5 billion.
Korea's growing status as a world trading nation is one
of the reasons, in addition to Trade Minister Kim
Chul-Su's long experience and personal qualities, that
Australia is supporting him for the post of Director
General of the World Trade Organisation.
We are also encouraged to see Korean and Australian
companies increasingly working together in a range of
major projects.
I attach real significance to your decision to bring with
you a distinguished group of senior Korean
businesspeople. I have no doubt they will find new
opportunities here for trade and investment, and that
their Australian colleagues will find new opportunities
in Korea.
Investment both ways has lagged behind our trading
relationship and is one area which we should work to
strengthen over the coming years.
Scientific research, industrial technology and energy cooperation
are other fields in which we can do more
together.
Each of us has the sense, I think, Mr President, that
this vital and growing economic relationship needs still
to be matched by greater bonds between our people. We do
not yet know enough about each other although we are both
working hard on this aspect of our relationship.
For Australia's part, we have nominated Korean as one of
the principal Asian languages to be taught in Australian
schools under our national languages strategy.
Nine Australian universities now offer a degree program
in Korean, compared with only one in 1988.
Education and closer human contact, through tourism for
example, will help to reinforce the economic
relationship. But it will do more: it will enrich the
lives and deepen the cultural understanding of those who
take part.
So the President and I have much to talk about tomorrow.
I began by saying that it was a great personal pleasure
to welcome you to Australia, Mr President.
One reason for that is because of my admiration, and the
admiration of Australians, for your deep commitment to
democracy, expressed at times at considerable personal
risk. Throughout your career you have stood unwaveringly and
courageously for civil and political freedom, for 
I r4 democratic parliamentary institutions and for the
observance of human rights. Your political life has left
a lasting legacy to your country, and a lasting example
to the world.
For this reason, it is particularly appropriate for me to
welcome you here in our country's Parliament House on
behalf of the Government and people of Australia and to
invite you to speak to us.
I now call on the leader of the National Party,
Mr Fischer, to join me in welcoming you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AND HIS EXCELLENCY MR KIM YOUNG SAM, PRESIDENT OF THE
REPUBLIC OF KOREA, JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA, 18 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen, could I perhaps begin
with a short statement. I would just like to repeat what I said last night,
that it has been a personal as well as an official pleasure to have
President Kim Young Sam visit Australia. Not only because we have
worked together closely on multi-lateral bodies such as APEC and on
regional issues, but because of my very deep respect for the
President's very distinguished commitment to democratic reform in
Korea.
The President and I talked over dinner last night, we have had a formal
meeting this morning, we have just joined our Cabinet colleagues and
come from there and we are having a private lunch after we see you.
We got through quite a lot of work today and I just thought I might
repeat to you those bilateral issues which we discussed.
First of all, the President was kind enough to give me an indication of
the relations between South Korea and the DPRK and I was pleased
to have that information and view about how the President sees
relations on the Korean peninsula. I said to the President that I
thought that the inter-Korean dialogue was extremely important, not
only to Korea and relations on the Korean peninsula, but to those of us
in the region to know that there is a dialogue going on, that there is a
relationship, that progress can be made, and that we regard that that
is the dialogue as a matter of necessity.
On bi-lateral relations we have agreed to support stronger investment
links. We are negotiating now an investment protection and promotion
agreement and we hope to bring that to conclusion. We have agreed
to establish a joint fund to facilitate industrial technology projects of
about roughly half a million each side over three years in priority areas 
such as the information super highway and clean energy. We have
agreed to upgrade science and technology co-operation through a new
science and technology agreement. We have agreed to promote
closer co-operation on energy through a ministerial level energy
symposium looking at such issues as long-term supply and potentially
joint investment. We further agreed to co-operate on environmental
matters. We have agreed to also expand our tourism relations, that is
expand our tourism sectors to try to facilitate the carriage of more
people between both countries. We had a brief discussion about
submarine technology given Australia's program and we have also had
discussions generally about trade issues and the trade deficit.
The President was kind enough to say that he was very moved by his
experience this morning at the Australian War Memorial and that he
would join Australia in making a contribution to a monument which we
would see in Anzac Parade a monument to the involvement of
Australians in the Korean War during the 1950s.
I think that is a resume of our discussion, but I would like to again
repeat that we are delighted to have the President in Australia. I am
particularly delighted to have him here after this bi-lateral co-operation*
we have had in the greater story of APEC. Very shortly Korea will be
Australia's second largest trading partner. We have a very high
premium on the relationship and I am exceptionally delighted that the
President was able to come to Australia after APEC to get to see our
country, to get to know us better and to make our relationship just that
much stronger. With those words I might invite President Kim Young
Sam to make an opening statement.
SAM: Not translated.
PM: Thank you very much, Mr President. I think, after that opening
statement by both of us we might take questions and perhaps we might
have a question from an Australian representative and then we will try
to alternate it.
J: Prime Minister Keating, did President Kim express an interest in
purchasing our Collins Class submarines?
PM: We didn't have a discussion about purchasing submarines. Korea is a
very confident ship building country, it is probably now building more
tonnage than any other country in the world, it has its own submarine
program. I think, what is significant here is that as with each program
the technology improves and Australian technology, particularly the
sophistication of the weapons fit could lead to a basis of co-operation
between us on some of these specialised areas of submarine
technology. That is the direction to go rather than any notion, certainly
at this point, of anyone buying anyone else's submarine.
J: Korean question not translated. 
SAM: Not all translated this issue will be discussed and the solution will be
found and this issue will be definitely very positively revealed Prime
Minister Keating and I discussed the specific issue and based upon
the growing partnership between the two countries I expect that the
Australian government would consider this issue in a very favourable
perspective and after the working level discussion on this specific
issue we will get a response from the Australian side.
J: Robin Poke Voice of America. Just prior to APEC the President
mentioned the possibility of North Korea becoming part of APEC, was
that discussed between you either in Bogor or has it been discussed
while you have both been in Canberra?
PM: North Korea becoming part of APEC. It wasn't discussed in Bogor
because the President and I didn't meet there bi-laterally, we only
meet there in a multi-lateral context and new members were not
discussed other than to say that the current membership of APEC
thought that APEC needed to be consolidated before it opened itself
up to new membership. As you know, Mexico and Papua New Guinea
and Chile joined on this occasion, but I think, APEC members see a
case for being a little abstemious about membership until we get some
further consolidation of APECs work and that includes North Korea.
J: many schemes to reduce tariffs between Korea and Australia
especially for textile and automobile industries.
PM: The President raised with me the trade imbalance between Korea and
Australia. We are conscious of that trade imbalance, but we have
taken uni-lateral steps to reduce our industrial protection. Australia
will have an average level of trade weighted tariff protection of 3 per
cent by the year 2000 which is not so far away and already tariffs are a
long way down and there is no quota protection in this country. So, we
are opening Australia up, but I think, Australia probably will be a raw
materials supplier and a supplier of some specialised high technology
goods and services to Korea and the likelihood is that that will keep
the trade relationship in deficit. But, I have always seen as is the
case with Japan a triangle of trade. That is Japan for instance enjoys
we enjoy a very large surplus in trade with Japan, it enjoys a large
surplus of trade with the United States, and the United States enjoys a
large surplus of trade with us. Korea is in the exact same markets.
The likelihood is that we will enjoy a surplus of trade with Korea.
Korea, I think, enjoys a surplus with the United States and the United
States certainly has a surplus with us and a heavy one.
But, because the President and I have seen the virtue of opening up
trade in the Pacific through APEC, we do see the possibility of letting
markets equilibrate, to even themselves out, and this is the best
approach we could take. 
J: Prime Minister, a question for both you and the President. You
mentioned the new Industry Investment Fund $ 500 million over three
years from both of you in what specific industries and in what specific
steps do you intend this fund, how do you intend it to operate?
PM: We will probably begin, first of all looking at where we can co-operate
industrially, but also in the initial period looking at the information
super highway in ways that we can facilitate technology between us.
As you know Australia is doing a lot of primary research into areas
such as photonics, fibre optics and generally is encouraging the
development of information products. I think, the President is also
struck by Australia's atmospheric conditions and the question of clean
energy comes to mind as one of the early things that we can cooperate
on in terms of industrial projects given Korea's energy
demands and the premium that President Kim places on the
environment, that clean energy is perhaps one of the areas where we
would first look under these arrangements, but at any rate I will ask the
President to add to that.
SAM: With regard to this issue we have exchanged our views fully,
environmental issues, mineral supply and the long term staple supply*
of energy all these issues have been discussed and we agreed to
establish a joint fund to promote these activities and detailed Yes, I
discussed with Prime Minister Keating in very much detail the c* ooperation
in the areas of energy supply, high tech industries and
mineral resources and environmental co-operation especially we are
very much interested in having a stable long term supply of the energy
sources from Australia and we have decided to leave the matter for
further consultation between the related ministers of both countries.
PM: We'll just have two final quick questions one from the Korean side
next. No one from the Korean side? Australia.
J: Camille Funnell Radio Australia. Was the issue of access of
Australian beef to the South Korean market raised in the talks and
secondly, there is also a suggestion that South Korea is not going to
ratify the GATT legislation until after the US decides what it is going to
do and was that issue raised?
PM: The President and I are about to have lunch and we haven't at this
stage discussed beef, but may well do over lunch. But, on the
ratification let me make very clear that the President has very
forthrightly, in the APEC context, spoken about ratification of the GATT
and, indeed, the communique urges each member country of APEC to
ratify the GATT, but that is a matter for him and I will ask the President
would he answer that part of the question.
SAM: I would like to tell you that we didn't discuss this time specifically the
issue of import of Australian beef to Korea. Regarding the WTO
ratification, the government policy is to actively support the launching 
of the World Trade Organisation, but we are not in a hurry to rush to
the ratification. Possibly, I think, that as you have mentioned we can
ratify this important bill after the United States has confirmed the
ratification. We are taking a very comfortable approach to the
ratification, we don't like to hasten passage through the national
assembly.
PM: Any more questions from the Korean side?
J: The Korean Minister of Trade Mr Kim Chul Su is going to run for the
Secretary-General of WTO, I would like to know whether Mr Keating
would support him or not?
PM: We do, I made clear to him last evening that we would be supporting
Kim Chul Su for the Chair of the World Trade Organisation. I thought
originally the question was about the Organisation itself, but I am very
happy to say that we are supporting your Korean candidate because
we think it is important that these key positions in the world fora are
not continued to be held by Europeans, that they are actually, these
major positions, are spread around the world and particularly where
most of the growth is in Asia, it is entirely appropriate that a person
from Asia lead this liberalising body which has so much to offer the
world and so much for our region.
J: There was also the point about the United Nations Security Council.
PM: On the Security Council, let me again say, I am happy to confirm that
Australia supports Korea's position in respect of the Security Council
and the President was kind enough to say at some point in the future
when Australia puts up its hand we might have some support from
Korea too. Ladies and gentlemen, could I finish our press conference
there. Thank you very much for attending. I thank the President for
his time.
ends 



( 1; 7~
MEDIA MONITORS
Media Monitors ACT Ply Limited ACN 008 597 939
5-7 Lawry Place. Macquarie ACT 2614. Australia
Telephone ( 06) 251 5611 Facsimile ( 06) 251 5074
CHANNEL 10 MEET THE PRESS 11.00 20-11-94
Subject: INTV PAUL KEATING, Prime Minister
INTERVIEWER Barrie Cassidy:
Hello and thanks for joining us on this special edition of
Meet the Press coming to you from the cabinet suite
inside Parliament House in Canberra where our guest is,
of course, the Prime Minister, Paul Keating.
Good morning and thanks for joining us.
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: Good Barrie.
We'll talk about the APEC agreement very shortly but
first, on wages: should Australians be bracing
themselves for a period of industrial disputation in the
leading up to Christmas?
I don't think so except, you must know and I think most
Australians know, we've changed from the centralised
wage fixing system. We've now got the sort of system
that I think most people in public life have believed we
should have had for a long time. That is a broadly
decentralised system which is industry for industry, plant
Agency Report. For private research and niot to be di~ ssemninated. Every effort made to ensure accracy
for the benefit ofour clients but no legal or other responsibility is taken for erros or omissions. I 
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy: for plant. And because people are making agreements
which go for a year or a couple of years or three years,
it's likely that there will be some disputes but that's the
nature of the system.
And does that mean that disputes will be enterprise to
enterprise, that we shouldn't expect to see a blanket
strike a national strike by the Transport Workers
Union, for example?
I don't think so. But, again, if they are bargaining for
what they see as a sort of industry-wide adjustment of
some kind, some segments of that industry could be
subject to disputation.
They are certainly talking tough aren't they? Steve
Hutchins, the President of the TWU, said, for example,
that he'll roll right over the top of you if you get in his
way when he's going for these wage claims.
But he's running for election, Barrie, you see. They've
also got an election on so you get this sort of talk in
union journals when the campaigns are on. You get it in
national election campaigns, indeed.
Well what about the merits of the claim? They are going
for 15 per cent 71/ z per cent a year. How much of that
do you think could be made up of both productivity and
profiteering? 
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: There is an assumption, I think, in a lot of the
commentary about these claims that what is claimed will
be given. But, remember, this is not the centralised
system where largely what was claimed came from it. A
claim is one thing but an agreement is another. So, in
my view, 7/ 2 per cent a year is too high and
It's an ambit claim.
And I think employers will think that too.
So what percentage? Is there a percentage that you can
point to that accounts for productivity? Because some of
this is retrospective of productivity, of course, in its-
No, I can't disaggregate the claim and I'm not going to
do the employers' work or their bidding for them. In
this system the employers have got to, for the first time
in decades, actually stand up and be counted. They've
actually got to defend their own profits and seek to draw
a productivity from the arrangements. In other words,
this is a grown-up system. It's not a system where the
government and the ACTU under the Accord through
the centralised system fixes wages. The employers
wanted us out of that system. We are now out of that
system and the employers now have to manage the
system and deal with claims and try and deal with them
in a way that protects their profits and keeps the
inflation rate low. 
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: But then you, as a government, you have to take the rap
if the claim is too generous if what they get in the end
is too generous, and that feeds into inflation, and then in
turn puts pressure on interest rates.
The government doesn't take the rap because this is a
system where it's all up to the participants. But, by the
same token, we will keep our eye on the total outcomes
and the portents for inflation and competitiveness and it
is in that respect, and for that reason, that Ralph Willis
made the remarks I think yesterday saying the
government will look at fiscal and monetary policy in
the context of wage settlements which we think are
unreasonable. All right. While they're trying to sort this out and you
are looking on from the sidelines, how much sympathy
have you for the Transport Workers Union, for
example, because they are among some of the lowest
paid workers in Australia?
Exactly. And there's going to be some pressure inside
that union for adjustments. And I think the other thing
that's worth bearing in mind: it's also true it's been
some time since they've had an adjustment. So there is
an element of catch-up here. But, again, it's a very
competitive industry and a productive one and it's for
the employers to draw the productivity from it. 
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: And for political reasons you don't want to see those
wages kept down anyway because it just feeds this
perception that the opposition is putting out that in
Australia the poor are getting poorer.
That's just patently untrue and this comes from the
humbugs in the opposition who oppose every wage
increase since 1983. All the years that I've been here as
Prime Minister and as Treasurer, Barrie, in every
national wage case, in every wage round, they opposed
the lot.
We have to take a break. We will be right back with
Meet the Press. Stay with us.
( Commercial break)
We are back with Prime Minister, Paul Keating, here at
Parliament House in Canberra. It does appear quite
obviously interest rates will go over 10 per cent very
shortly. Are these rates going to go up through next year
and then the following year? When can we see an end to
it? It depends what you call 10. We're
The housing industry.
The yardstick of the Government's what we call ' cash
rate' you know, the Reserve Bank's cash rate? I think 
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: the commentary to make here, Barrie, is that it would be
most unlikely that in any recovery of strength you could
keep the interest rates that you had while you were in
recession and we've now adjusted the cash rate by 11/ 4
percentage points, to about 6'/ 2 per cent. But, again, it's
amongst the lowest cash rates in the last 20 years.
Yes, sure, but can you say to the people of Australia
that there will be end of this; that it won't go on all
through next year; that we're looking at an
There'll be no repeat of the eighties here. For a start
That's in terms of the top limit of interest rates. But in
terms of this constant rise that we expect every three
months? Well, again, we'll see what happens in activity. We'll
see what happens with the economy and activity. I mean
we're already starting to see a slowing in housing
lending, for instance, since the last rate rise. That's been
reported fairly comprehensively by financial institutions.
So, again, I think we'll look at activity and we'll look at
wages. We'll look at the inflation outcomes. Remember
this: that it was just a week or so ago that the inflation
outcome for the last quarter came through and for the
year it was 1.9 per cent. So we're still sort of keeping
There's very strong productivity in here about 3 per
cent productivity at the moment. So that's keeping the 
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy: inflation rate low and that lower inflation rate is the
driver of interest rates and competitiveness.
What is the optimum growth rate above which you
cannot go without having to ratchet up interest rates
again to bring it down?
It depends how much capacity we can see installed and
how efficiently we use it. I mean you can see some of
the East Asian economies growing at six and seven per
cent a year without inflation sort of jumping
We go over 4 per cent and there's a problem, isn't
there? That was because under 30 years of the Liberals our
capital stock fell to pieces. I mean, I used to say to the
Liberal Party in the last few years, ' You should hang
your head in shame', in the late eighties; that as soon as
the economy gets a burst on If it gets over about four
to 4 1/ per cent it spills into imports. The reason for that
is because we had such a poor over 20 or 30 years
development of the capital stock. Now, that's changing.
It's changing under Labor. It changed in the eighties
with a big addition of investment, and it will change in
the nineties.
Now I'll come back at you and talk, of course, about the
budget deficit. I think this coming budget in May next 
year is going to be one of the most analysed in the
country's history, certainly in advance of it. Are you
warming to the view now that you need to do more on
the budget deficit, you need to get it down at a sharper
rate?
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy: I think people should understand what's already been
done to get it down in the future. That is, the decisions
which It's as if we'd been through a little time warp
here that people haven't noticed. You might remember
John Dawkins' budget of last year and the difficulties we
had getting that through the Senate the tax changes
through the Senate. Well those policy changes are worth
about $ 9 billion to the budget over the next two years.
That's around two per cent of GDP. A lot of that hasn't
happened yet. A lot of that is still coming through.
Now, a lot of people who focus on the deficit put that
straight in their pocket and say, ' All right, what's next?'
What I say is ' Well, just remember what's coming.' It's
not a matter of what's here. It's what's already been
provided for because what was legislated were triggered
That is tax changes which were triggered to come into
effect on petrol, on wholesale sales tax, and other things
over the next couple of years.
Well, even allowing for that and the growth dividend, of
course, there will still need to be tax increases and
spending cuts, won't there? You won't be able to avoid
either one of those? 
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: As I often say in commentary about the budget, we'll do
our usual housekeeping job on the outlays. Remember
this, Barrie, that the outlays in Australia are as low as I
think you could possibly have them in an OECD country
and deliver the sort of services we have. Apart from the
spending on the jobs compact, the 1992 One Nation
spending has now all largely been unwound. So this is
not as if there's been a spending spree here. The outlays
are still largely as they were at their low point in the
eighties largely at their low point in the eighties. This
has been essentially a revenue problem. About $ 3 billion
has gone to the business community in lower company
tax and accelerated depreciation and in tariff cuts. And
of course with the slower growth over the last few years
we've had a smaller tax base. But that will improve.
All right. We have to take another break. We'll be right
back to talk about the historic APEC meeting in
Indonesia. ( Commercial break)
We are back with the Prime Minister, Paul Keating.
You've said this APEC meeting last week was the most
important thing that's happened to you as Prime
Minister. Why should people at home share your
enthusiasm? Simply because in the past, Barrie, we've never been
part of a free trade area. Australia has simply been a 
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy: sole trader. But as the world is getting a tougher place
to live in, with the US signing preferential agreements
with Canada and Mexico, under NAFTA; as Europe has
its borders closed behind the European union, life's
pretty tough out there. So getting Australia to become
part of a free trade area is obviously a change that
Australia has never enjoyed before.
But are the benefits at home going to be fairly mixed?
It's not going to be particularly good news for those
who are working in highly protected industries, is it?
I think it's going to be tremendous news for the whole
country because what happens with a trade round is you
get not just your own decision to reduce protection that
is a unilateral decision you get a multilateral decision.
So everyone is coming down at the same time. So you
are comparing then apples with apples. The problem
we've always had is when we've reduced protection
other people haven't. If you look through the tariff and
non-tariff barriers of East Asia, they're very high. So if
we get them to come down we are going to open up
enormous opportunities for Australians.
How does that work when you are all coming down
from different bases? Do you keep an eye on what the
others are doing and act accordingly, or do you like to
try and lead the region? 
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: That will be the basis of the negotiation which we will
begin establishing processes for in Osaka in 1995.
But you've signed onto a very big agreement here. You
must have given some thought to how it works from
now on.
Absolutely. Because we're already Most of this is
behind us. We will have an average level of trade
weighted tariffs of 2.3 per cent by the year 2000. So for
us the bulk of the work is behind us. It's the other
countries. I mean we've opened Australia up. We've
made it competitive. We've reduced tariffs. We've got a
productivity culture and we've had a big throw to
exports. What we had to do in public policy was get
something in place to get the tariffs down around the
Asia Pacific, and that's what APEC does.
But, as you say, the heaviest responsibility is now with
the other countries, not with Australia. You obviously
have faith in the resolve of the present leaders but
leaders come and go. Is there not a possibility that this
will get a bit of a head of steam up and it just might run
out of steam in two or three years?
I don't think so because I think certainly East Asian
leaders know that the countries with the lower tariffs
grow faster and they do because the countries with the
lower tariffs get more investment. Now, with South 
Africa coming back into the world economy; China for
the first time really in the world economy; South
America, Russia, the Russian Far East, India there's
going to be an enormous competition for capital and
countries that keeps their tariffs up are not going to get
capital. It's as simple as that. And that's why, for
instance, in Malaysia last week we saw a reduction in
tariff protection. In Indonesia three months ago, a
unilateral reduction in tariff protection. So what we're
doing here is saying, ' Listen, if we club in together and
bring them down together, the political cost and the
difficulties of economic restructuring will be much
easier.'
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy: You spent a lot of time with Bill Clinton this week.
What do you think of him?
I think he is what one would always hope an American
president is, and that is a person into good works and
deeds. I think Bill Clinton is a very conscientious
person. He's not simply about sitting back watching the
world go by. He's trying to address the policy issues
that a lot of people either never had the courage to
address or found great difficulty in addressing.
And it's tougher for him in many ways, isn't it, because
getting up the GATT round and APEC in the United
States is a tougher shot for him than it is for you here in
Australia. 
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: He has the difficulty of the Congress to deal with, but
he's got NAFTA through. He's now got the GATT
ratifications going through but he comes to the GATT
ratifications with this APEC agreement in his pocket. In
other words, what Bill Clinton can say, and* I think say
with voracity, is that he's the one who has opened up
the opportunity in Asia for the United States. That's got
to be a bull point, I think, in getting the GATT round
through the Congress.
Why do you think he is so unpopular at home, then? It's
not a personality problem. The country seems to think
that he's failing them in terms of leadership.
I think that probably he was a bit like I mean there's a
moot point here. The Democrats blame him for their
difficulties but I think probably he's entitled to blame
them. I think it was like marrying into an unpopular
family. He picked up all the dross of the Democratic
Party and he's had it sort of round his neck over these
last 18 months. I think this is going to give him a
chance for a very clean break.
We'll see the real new Democrat, do you think, in the
next two years?
I think he is a new Democrat but he tends to look like
an old one because of the demands which the
Democratic Party make of him. You see, when he came 
Barrie Cassidy:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: to Washington I don't think the Democratic Party said,
' Oh, here's the new Democratic President. Let's see
what we can do for him.' The view was: here's a new
Democratic president, can we knock him into shape?
Okay. Still a lot to talk about. We'll be back in a
moment. ( Commercial break)
Back with the Prime Minister, Paul Keating. Clearly,
you're not going to tell me when you are getting out of
politics but have you made up your own mind? Have
you got a ball park idea about when you plan to get out?
No. No I haven't.
Because you have said that you've got at least a
strategy, if not a time table.
I've always said that I think there is a time when you've
done your best and you should basically clear off. But
I'm still I think kicking goals, so
I suppose a week like you've just had would encourage
you to stay around even longer?
Well you do get that sort of feeling with a week like this
I think. I've been here 25 years last month but I came 
early, Barrie, so I can sort of stay on, if you see what I
mean.
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: And you can't set up something like APEC and then
walk away from it because, as you say, there's so much
follow-up work to be done it could take years.
And it's so interesting as well. I mean it's so interesting
to get these countries together and put all the blocks
together; to see all the blocks coming together in a sort
of a change. I mean APEC didn't have to happen. There
was no logical reason why it had to happen. It happened
simply through cooperation and goodness basically
some people seeing something better, which I thought
was tremendously encouraging. I think it's the most
encouraging thing that's happened in the last probably
years.
So I presume from all of that you can go to the next
election and promise Australians that you will serve the
full term?
Indeed. So that's at least four years, and perhaps longer?
I think it's silly to be saying, I'm here for the next
decade, and all this sort of stuff. I've always taken the
parliaments parliament at a time. I started thinking about 
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy: my life in here after I was here about three years. Well
I've been here 25 now and so I'll obviously think about
it and carry on.
What do you think you will do next, when you put all
this behind you?
Well I don't think anyone knows really, do they, when
they're in public life? I mean it's such a high wire act,
public life, you just wonder how you go off the wire.
You joined, as you said, at 25. You cut off your options
at a very early age in many respects. From someone
who has worked and lived overseas for three years, it's
one of life's great experiences have you ever felt that
you denied yourself some of that? The opportunity to
work overseas
That's the thing about Australian politics. You can't hop
out and hop back in. I mean, in the US if there's a
Democratic administration, the Republicans all clear off
to their private lives and they come back a few years
later. You can't do this in Australia. You sort of grind
on till you're finished. I'm a stayer, I hope, so I'll stay
on. But would you look forward one day to experiencing life
overseas and perhaps living over there for a while? 
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating: Not necessarily. I would look forward to a life without
the attendant pressures and strain and stress of public
life. It's not the hours, ever, it's the responsibility. It's
the responsibility but, again, I've had it as a Minister
now for 12 years, as Prime Minister, and one gets a bit
case hardened to it I think.
I know, again from my experience working with a
former Prime Minister, that this invasion of privacy is a
constant problem. Is that something that you struggle to
cope with?
Oh everybody does I think, because the media today is
so intrusive and there's so much of it and everybody
wants a little piece, like you're trying to get a little piece
now, Barrie. I mean everyone wants a bit.
Can I ask you about your kids and whether you think
there are any positives for them in having a father as a
Prime Minister? Or, from their point of view, is it just a
damn nuisance?
I think it's uplifting for the kids, but is it advantageous
in the long run? Well, I wouldn't know. I mean it's very
hard to make a judgment about that, I think. There's no
doubt it certainly is an added pressure on them in their
young years they could do without. But, again, they do
see things and hear things and are part of things that
other kids aren't. So there's an advantage there'. 
Providing it doesn't affect them adversely, that's
probably not a bad experience for them.
Barrie Cassidy:
Paul Keating:
Barrie Cassidy: Okay. We're almost out of time. With the next election
coming up next year perhaps into 1996 who do you
think you'll be facing John Howard, Alexander
Downer, Peter Costello?
It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. The problem, as I've
always said, for the Liberal Party is it's not the jockey,
it's the horse. The problem is the Liberal Party has had
it. So I don't think it matters whether it's Alexander
Downer or it's John Howard or whoever it is. I mean I
think the Liberal Party constitutionally is in trouble. It's
basically not a national party. It's just a party of six
state runts and that's why you hear all this talk about
state's rights all the time state's rights in the Liberal
Party because all the Liberal Party thinks about is the
rights of the states because it is just a states' party.
Okay. We are out of time. Thank you for giving up part
of your weekend. We appreciate it very much. Next
week's program will be the last for the year. I hope you
can join us then. So it's goodbye from Meet the Press.
ENDS I 
For private research only. Whilst every effort is made to ensure accuracy for the benefit of our
clients, no legal or other responsibility is taken for errors and omissions.
Transcript by MEDIA MONITORS ACT PTY LTD. 



K
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE OECD CONFERENCE " CITIES AND THE NEW
GLOBAL ECONOMY"
MELBOURNE, 21 NOVEMBER 1994 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Well, let me start by welcoming you to Australia.
And let me say how pleased I am that this major OECD conference is taking
place here in Australia.
It's a welcome development not just because it provides us with an
opportunity to showcase Melbourne and our many other great cities cities
that some have called the most livable in the world but because it is one of
the very few occasions that a major OECD conference has taken place in this
part of the world.
And clearly, it's the sort of thing that should happen more often.
Over the years, the OECD has been criticised for being too Eurocentric in its
focus, that it hasn't paid sufficient regard to the economic dynamism of the
Asia Pacific region.
And I think there has been an element of truth to the criticism.
So the decision to hold this conference here in Australia, in the Asia Pacific
region, is very much the right one because world attention is now well and
truly focused on the Asia Pacific region.
And in a way that it has never been before.
Last week's historic APEC Leaders' Meeting in Bogor has made doubly sure
of that.
33154 
And while the full ramifications of the Bogor Free Trade Declaration won't be
felt until well into the next century, I think history will come to judge the Bogor
Meeting a most significant event.
The fact that APEC has travelled so far in such a short period of time
indicates the wish of this region to become the world's economic powerhouse.
That, and the fact that the region already accounts for half of the world's GDP
and almost half of world trade, makes this the right area of the world to hold a
major OECD conference.
Another reason why the location of this conference is right is because it's a
conference on cities.
Governments in this part of the world, and the Australian Government in
particular, have a strong sense that building livable and sustainable cities is
one of the greatest challenges we face.
In fact, no region in the world has faster growing cities.
From 1970 to 1990, Asian cities accounted for half of the world's total urban
population growth.
And they now total more than half of the world's 30 largest cities.
Beijing, Bombay, Calcutta, Jakarta, Seoul, Shanghai, Tianjin and Tokyo
already have populations close to 10 million or more.
And they're set to grow even larger.
One estimate has it that 80 per cent of Asia's economic growth this decade
will take place in its major cities.
This has staggering implications for urban population growth.
For example, between now and the year 2000, China is estimated to add
more than the entire population of the United States to its cities.
Developments like these place an enormous responsibility on governments
and urban designers throughout the region.
Making sure you have cities that are functional seems to me to be
fundamental to participating in the region's growth.
But theres a bigger challenge and it is more than just making cities work.
It's about building cities that will endure through the next century. 33,5 
And that, in many ways is a creative adventure, for, as the Australian artist
Lloyd Rees once put it " Cities are the ultimate work of art".
We may well wonder as to what makes a great city, or for that matter a world
city. I think it's an almost indefinable thing.
But you certainly know a great city when you're in one.
Perhaps it's cities that are friendly, cities with generous public spaces and
street faces that are welcoming.
Cities like Melbourne and Sydney.
Or perhaps it's cities that give their dwellers a sense of joy and involvementcities
that are engaging.
Whether it's the boulevards of Paris, New York's skyline, the buzz of Hong
Kong, the raw energy of Shanghai or the splendour of Sydney Harbour,
places of beauty and function really strike at the heart.
A great city gives off its own resonances.
A great city above all else has a soul.
A city without a soul is a barren landscape that draws its sustenance from its
people rather than the other way around.
A great city nourishes one's sense of self, gives one a peace and a
communion with the built environment.
It creates a milieu which encourages endeavour and creativity, and
achievement and peace.
A great city's power comes from the power of its people, the intellectual life,
the business of its people, their attitudes to one another, their attitudes to
others, their principles their sense of mission.
These are indefinable things but they are as real as the cityscapes
themselves. The human relationship with cityscapes and the architecture is, I think,
central to the chemistry of fulfilment and belonging.
Ugly cities affront one's eyes and dull one's faith in the enlightened progress
of our civilisation.
3356f 
Huge cities of cold monuments slashed by expressways depersonalise life
and reduce one's self esteem.
Inefficient cities wear people down and diminish the community's capacity for
growth and wealth.
By contrast cities of structure and beauty lift people up, engage them and
encourage them.
Planning has such centralised connotations these days yet without
planning the developers often ignore the streetscape and sometimes leave
their indifferent product and its problems to another generation.
The traffic flows, the reliance on automobiles, the short half lives of buildings,
the altered balance, the alienation lies in the wake of private reward largely
unencumbered by civic pride or commitment.
It seems to me that we have to consider our cities. Think about them, care for
them, be proud of them, adapt them plan for them.
Not sterile conformity to plan but enough structure to provide the form for the
natural bacteria of the city to etch its pattern.
This sort of approach informs the way we think about our cities in Australia.
We want cities that are special places to live and great places to do business.
You can see it in projects such as Southbank which lies just across the Yarra
River here in Melbourne.
As you will see, one of the best things about the Southbank development is
that it provides a spectacular platform from which to view the city of
Melbourne in much the same way that the Champs Elysee allows you to view
Paris and the Statue of Liberty New York.
It wasn't so long ago that this was a dilapidated industrial and commercial
area. Those of you visiting our other cities will get a chance to see similar
rejuvenation projects right around the country.
I think it's also important to understand that despite the postcard images of
Australia as a vast continent, we are in fact one of the most urbanised nations
in the region with our cities accounting for 85 per cent of our total population.
And not only is our population concentrated in the cities, it's also
concentrated in a few major cities. 3 3 57" 
Sydney and Melbourne alone account for almost half our total population and
provide the great bulk of the nation's employment.
These two cities which aspire to world city' status however you might
define it are critical to the long term future of our nation.
Increasingly, we are coming to realise that it is the quality of our cities, and
our city networks, that are key to our ability to generate wealth.
The growing recognition of just how important our cities are is borne out by
some of the major Government programs now underway.
There is the Better Cities Program and the Australian Urban and Regional
Development Review which the Deputy Prime Minister spoke to you about
earlier today.
But there is another reason why we are now embracing our cities in a way
that we never have before and that has something to do with a new and real
sense of confidence.
It's a confidence in our long term future, a confidence that, if we put our minds
to it in the century coming, Australia could be one of the best places in the
world to live and do business.
And at this stage in our national history in the run up to the centenary of
our nationhood I think it's also important that we step back a little and take
a big picture perspective on how we can best tackle urban environment over
the long term.
That's certainly something that I have an interest in and it's part of the reason
why late last year I decided to establish an Urban Design Task Force
involving some of the nation's most eminent architects, planners, landscape
designers and academics.
My purpose in setting up the Task Force was a simple one: to find ways how
we might improve the urban environment.
The Task Force has just completed its report and I'm very pleased to formally
launch it today.
It's a good report which I know will be of great interest to the many people
involved in urban design in Australia.
I think the main reason it's a good report is because of what it will do to really
push the national debate on how we can best foster quality urban design in
this country.
As I see it, the debate will be a very necessary and healthy exercise and one
which I am looking forward to participating in.
3358 
So, thank you very much to each of the Task Force members many of
whom are here today for all you've done, particularly because you have
given your valuable time on a voluntary basis.
Let me also express my very deep personal appreciation to John Mant, the
Convenor of the Task Force, who had the major task of bringing together the
views of this diverse range of creative professionals.
I trust our international visitors will allow me the indulgence to take up three
key points from the report.
First, to achieve excellence in urban design it's imperative that we draw
together all those responsible for urban design, and I mean at every level of
government. As the report points out, the fragmentation of responsibilities for urban
planning at the local level makes it very difficult to allocate clear
responsibilities. It's a case of everyone, and therefore no one, being ultimately responsible.
And that makes it virtually impossible for the community to demand
accountability for the management of its urban spaces.
That, of course, is inimical to excellence in urban design and it, therefore,
raises the big issue of whether we need a major restructuring of government
agencies if we are serious about achieving high quality urban design
outcomes that benefit all Australians.
This is, of course, an issue that extends beyond the sole responsibilities of
the Commonwealth Government and I will be writing to Premiers and Chief
Ministers to see how we might work together on this issue.
Second, at its heart, good urban design is a multi-disciplinary activity.
I think this is something that not everyone involved in urban design fully
appreciates. For too long, good urban design in this country has been frustrated by
competing disciplines, professions, and government agencies which have
approached the issue in a narrow way thereby leading to a less than optimum
outcome. That needs to change.
But I'm pleased to day some are getting it right. 33a59 
An excellent example is the Design Studio that will run for a week at the end
of this month in Sydney.
The Design Studio, which will develop urban design schemes for Homebush
Bay for both the Olympics and up to the year 2020, is the largest design
workshop of its kind to be held in Australia and the first ever for the Olympic
Games. The Studio will take an integrated multi-disciplinary approach incorporating
leading national experts and specialists from around the world some of whom
are attending this conference.
The third comment I wish to make is that we need to give appropriate
recognition to the joint efforts that produce inspired and creative urban
design. For this reason the Government intends taking up the Task Force's
recommendation to establish an Australia Prize in Urban Design.
This is a first in that it will reinforce the multi-disciplinary nature of quality
urban design.
Thats why the award will be not about individual projects but about places.
It will recognise excellence in the building and sustaining of urban
communities. It will recognise the achievement of the many individuals who create places
that provide significant benefits to the environment and the community.
Further details of the award will be announced in due course.
So, those are some of my initial reactions to the Task Force report but, as I've
said, you can rest assured I'll be having a few more words to say over the
coming months.
So how do we pull all these threads together'? What lies at the core of good
urban design? How do we create livable cities in a global economy? How do
we create great cities that people want to live and do business in?
I think the best way we can answer these questions is to start by thinking of
our cities and imagining something better.
We want cities with both efficiency and beauty.
Quality of life is just as much bound up with the development of cities as is
economic advancement.
3360 
Our cities must enable us to respond effectively to developments in the global
economy. But they must also offer us a quality of life that enhances our work and
recreational well being.
They must be great places both to live and do business.
The two go hand in hand. They're self -reinforcing, a virtuous circle if you like.
Therefore, the way we manage and develop our cities is crucial to our
economic future.
It's crucial to our social future.
And it's just as crucial to the quality of our environment.
Getting it right is primarily a question of striking the right balance.
We don't want cities that are monuments to Mammon but neither do we want
cities that are museums of the past.
We will try to strike the right balance in Australia.
I am quietly confident that, with sufficient will and imagination on our part, not
too far down the track people throughout the region will come to see
Australian cities as ideal places both to live and do business.
To an extent, that's already happened with the many international firms which
have already set up their regional operations and regional headquarters here
in Australia.
Corporate executives in the Asia Pacific are coming to realise that if you live
to work you'll work anywhere in the region, but if you work to live there's a
good chance you'll choose to live in Australia.
There's already many that have come to Sydney and Melbourne and there
are an increasing number finding their way to Perth and Brisbane.
This move is just starting to build up a head of steam and I'm sure that, come
the next century, there will be many many more because our cities offer some
things that our competitor cities never will and that's likely, I believe, to make
our cities more sustainable over the long term.
We have some great cities, but we want to make them even better.
We want our cities to be more even hospitable, to be even more inviting. ~ 3U I 
9
We want cities that preserve the best of our past, that celebrate the best of
the present and give a sense of the future.
Cities that people live in because they want to and not because they have to.
Organic cities, breathing, changing, living cities whose progress is infused
with memory.
So let me wind up by saying what a pleasure it is for Australia to host this
major OECD conference on cities
I am sure the conference will promote a greater understanding of how we can
all build better cities in our respective nations, cities linked to the global
economy but cities which are great places to live in cities by and for the
people. Thank you. 



to reinvest
and drug
m" Feu nAdc. t and
Fund. In
ojects. In
3672.000 ially sold
1d but be
icular use
' Cigation the
establish in the
' ation md ) StS.
he use to
ttecting
iSSETS PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AAP CONFERENCE OF ASIAN, AUSTRALIAN AND PACIFIC MEDIA
EXECUTIVES, REGENT HOTEL, SYDNEY TUESDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 1994
* CHECK AGAINST DEUVERY'
I am very grateful for the Invitation to speak to such a distinguished audience as
we have here today and I welcome all of you from overseas to Australia and to
Sydney. It is somehow gratifying that within a week of the Bogor Declaration we have a
conference of media executives drawn from the Asia-Pacific.
Less than a decade ago, the Asia-Pacific was just a concept.
Increasingly today It is a defining reality.
With APEC all the more so, of course.
Mind you, had they read some of the Australian media at the weekend, the
uninitiated could be forgiven for thinking that the Asia-Pacific and APEC were still
unproven concepts, or realities of no great consequence.
Those of us with long experience know that this was the obligatory spray of
scepticism to prevent ary hubris sprouting.
The Australian media are conscientious in keeping us In our places and reminding
us that good works are never an excuse to draw more than a breath of
satisfaction. But in fact. like everyone else, they know that change j1 upon us.
No one I suspect knows it better than the Australian media. 3,137 
And if it is a political leaders prime responsibility to anticipate and manage
change, and confront the necessities change brings then I amr sure they aiso
know that the political leaders al Bogor did this as It has rarely been done before.
That was where the sense of euphoria came from: from doing something with
some genuine vision about it.
Not a mandatory genuflection or theatrical squint into the future, but an act which
might actually mark this generation as one with sufficient wisdom, care arnd
foresight to lay the basis of a better world for millions of people In the fUtue.
And sufficient resolve.
That it should have happened and that it should have been so rapidly taken for
granted perhaps testifies to the transforming times in which we live.
It seamns to me that these are times when the most pessimistic among us find ft
difficult to escape the possibilities on offer.
We might even call it an age of possibility.
So much changed with the end of the Cold War.
We watched, millions of us around the world, as its most powerful symbol the
Berlin Wall was broken down.
We all knew that we watching a long chapter in the history of the modern world
come to an end.
How we read its fail depended, I suppose, on our natural disposition.
Pessimists will tend to see only t problems which flow from the collapse of an
old order.
Optimists will fail to see them.
The near-sighted and the nostalgic will see a symbol of a century at it end;
romantics and visionaries will see the start of a new one.
My vote is with the pragmatists.
Pragmnatists will see the possibilities.
And seize them.
3 43 8 
It is a great era for those with an eye for possibilities in trade and investment the
envionment cultural development, information technology.
Namie your Interest.
We all know an era has ended.
We all speak of a new " Post Cold War world".
And In Bogor we took a practical step towards defining it.
It Is a cliche to say that much remains to be done, and many hurdles will have to
be jumped but it is just as true to say that an extraordinary amount w-as done
and an extraordinary number of hurdles were jumped.
We cid niot define the next century, but we gave ourselves a chance to shape it as
it should be shaped, which Is to say in all our interests.
In fact a clue to the shape of the new post Cold War world lay hidden In the drama
of events leading up to the end of the Berlin Wail.
While we watched the collapse of the Soviet Union on television and perhaps
secretly wished that CNN had been there in 1917, teenage students in California
were communicating by another means with teenage students in Moscow and St
Petersburg.
As tho Soviet Union disintegrated. and the legacy of older generations fell apart
before our eyes on television, a new generation was talking to Americans on
Internet unfiltered and unedited.
It gives us a glimpse of what awaits us in the 21 st Century.
And I think it gives us a hint of why we are more Inclined to think In terms of the
possible why agreements like the APEC agreement can be credibly pursued.
The barriers of distance and communication awe down and, In the end, It is not
easy to say why others should not follow.
We only need the courage to ask the question.
In APEC we did ask t.
And suddenly we are talking as a region in many forums, like this one. thinkm
as a region. ' 143: .9 
That was the source of the little puff of euphoria.
Thol feeling that what we had just done could be done again.
We can break down language and cultural bamers and Increase the
understanding and respect between us.
And we can break down the barriers to trade and Investment
We can prevent bottlenecks before they develop.
We can find creative ways to deal with issues before they become problems.
Global communications. for instance.
it is difficult to overestimate the impact that global communications wiil have on the
daily lives of all of us.
And, for that matter, on the daily operations of the media.
Interactive multimedia. In particular, now has the potential to become a new force
In education, art, culture and the media.
That Is why In the Australian Government's cultural policy, Creattve Nation, we
took a number of major Initiatives to generate a vibrant multimedia Industry as part
of our push into the information age.
These specific Initiatives seek to build on our creative abilities: a substantial and
innovative film and television Industry; our software skills and our entrepreneurial
traditions. They also seek to utilise what is one of the more advanced telecommunications
networks In the world as a platform upon which the multimedia Industry can be
Most of you here will be aware that our two major telecommunications players,
Teistra. and Optus. have plans to Install broadband cable to millions of Australian
homes before the turn of the century.
The plans involve some of Australias biggest and best known media corporations
which should come as no surprise given the convergence taking place across
media, information and telecommunications industries. 
These developments have profound implications for media organisations right
around the world and I am sure that all of you here are already grappling with the
challenges they pose.
I think It is worth making the observation that in all this, there is the real possibility
that those large media organisations. which have traditionally relied on the
broadcast nature of their medium, are going to come under Increasing pressure as
the ' iemocraisatlon of our information-gathering via networks like the Internet
takes effect.
That Is not to say that the major media organisations won't remain global players.
They will because some people will prefer to have their information handed to
themn In an easily digestible form.
In fact, there will be so much Information available that it may well be those who
can h~ est package and tailor it to specific needs who will gain a large share of the
globil information gain.
But for those who actively search for Information arnd news. the means of
communication available will enable them to sidesiep the hierarchical nature of
broacast newis and entertainment.
Via th~ eir PC they will be able to pick and choose publications and author at will.
This wIll also lead to an explosion of communities of interest groups of people
interested In a particular topic macroeconomics or microbiology. Chinese
medicine or the music of Chile will have access to all relevant Infbrmation on the
subject world wide and the ability to communicate with others expeut and
Interes-ted worldwide.
Recipients of information will have far greater choice In the information that they
choose to receive, and this will have considerable effects on media orgariLsatlons
whch are not used to the nature and level of their competition.
As the technology becomes more sophisticated, anyone with a small camera and
notebook computer will be able to show the whole world events taking place
virtually anywhere on the globe.
And, even if they clon't have a camera, they will still be able to descrbe events
taking place as they occur.
Broadcast will continue to exist, but it will be broadcast from the bottom up ralther
than th, 3 top down. 3 4 ' 1 
6
And anyone who wants to will be a journalist,
As the technology becomes more Sophisticated more parts of the globe will open
up.
This will, of course. have profound effects on the extent to which individual
governments can regulate the flow of Information both within and Into their nations.
In some cases, It may well be near impossible.
Governments can take steps to restrict the flow of Information and ideas: but they
do so at the nisk of limiting access to the very communication technologies that, in
the information era of the next century, will be so critical to national economic
development. This Ison e of the key challenges facing governments inthe region, particularly
if those~ governments which are less open than others.
And in one sense, this is why last week's Bogor Declaration of APEC leaders was
so profound.
It committed the developed APEC countries to achieving free trade by the year
2010 and the developing APEC countries by the year 2020.
It was a recognition that In the coming century. economic advancement will be
inextricably lInked to the openness of national economies.
Those who embrace the world economy and the information revolution now driving
it will prosper.
Those who don't will pay a heavy price.
I don't for one moment want to underestimate te task of translating the political
commitment of Bogor into an economic reality.
I don't underestimate the challenges we face.
But Bcgor means we will face them.
It means we " a faced the future.
I The commitment we made Is an enormous step forward.
For instance, it can hardly have escaped anyone's notice that the Bogor
I Declaration involved both developing and developed counties.
34 42 
It wasn't a case of developed countries trying to drag developing countries along to
a taible they didn't want to sit at.
To the contrary, the Bogor Declaration was very much the initiative of the
President of one of the worids most Important developing countries.
It is a great tribute to President Soeharto's leadership and standing in the region.
it is also a measure of his vision and grasp of the possibilities on offer In the next
century. The fact that Australia was able to play such an Important role in the whole AP EC
process, by launching the initiative in 1989 and then by turning it Into a Heads of
Government and leaders' meeting embracing a free trade agenda, shows just how
much Australia has changed In recent years.
While I am sure that many people In the region have a reasonable appreciation of
the nature of contemporary Australia. there is no doubt that the vast majority are
not so well informed.
That Is something we want to rectify.
I know, for example, tht it is still widely believed that the White Australia policy
still operates.
It was abolished more than twenty years ago.
Australia is, after all, a country where one In five of our population was born
overseas. And Hyt ou add to that number all the children of overseas-born parents you have
44per cent or almost half, of our total population.
While Australia Is neither a monocultural nor a monolithic society. and while
Australian communities ame separated by vast disances; and vastly different
regional and cultural affections, profound ties of fellow feeling unite us.
These days we ae Increasingly united by the pride and the pleasure we take In
the difference itself In multicultural Australia.
Our respect and enthusiasm for cultural diversity has become a defining element
of Australia's; national sentiment. 3 ' 14 3 
It was some indication of this fact when a recent poll revealed that a clear majority
of Australians viewed the recent wave of Asian immigration as of significant benefit
to Ajstralla.
Whatever way you look at it, the contrast between the Australia of today and the
Australia of thirty years or even twenty years ago could not be more marked.
The economic changes have been as profound as the cultural ones.
A decade of reform has given us one of the most open economies In the world.
Some time ago now, we floated the dollar, deregulated our financial markets,
knocked down the tariff wall and pushed ahead with a widespread program of
industry and mlcroeconomic reform.
That reform process has delivered substantial benefits.
We are now growing at 4 to 5 per cent. The Economist believes that next year we
will continua to grow faster than the other major industria. 1ised economies in the
world. We also have increasing business Investment, a big rise in employment, an
underlying inflation rate of two per cent and continued growth In exports.
In fact, 60 per cent of all Australian exports are to t Asian region a share that
has doubled In less than thirty years.
Exports to the ASEAN countries, for example, are at least equal to those going to
either the United States or Europe.
Trhis major shift of national focus to t region has also seen the reach of the
Australian media extend further Into the Asian region.
Radio Australia, which has been bro dating to the region for many years, now
has an estimated sixty mrillion listeners worldwide.
More recently, we have seen the establishment of Australia Television
International which now broadcasts to millions throughout the region.
Its charter Is to build on Radio Austr-alias reputation as an authoritative,
independent and Impartial provider of international news and information, and of
high quality entertainment which Is sensible to the cultural mores of a highly
diverse audience.
3,' 144 
9
Accompanying this whole push into Asia has been a large increase in the numbers
of Australan journalists based In th~ e region.
On% 3 problem with the coverage of Asia and the Pacific in the Australian media is
that, In my view, there Is not enough of it
But things are improving as the foreign pages of most of our newspapers show.
All of us get deluged with Information about the US or Britain, but if greater
regional coverage generates only a regional equivalent of an 0 J Simpson or
House of Windsor media soap opera, we're better off without ft.
But what we really need is better coverage: and that depends on first, ensuring we
have a flow of information fro a wide variety of sources and second, that those
sources are well-informed.
This works both ways.
Coverage of Australia in the Asian media also tends to be limited and to fall too
easily Into caricatures of Australians preferring the beach to work.
In this ignorance stakes, things are pretty well matched.
Not surprisingly, the reportage of Australian journalists has sometimes created
difficulties in our relations with some regional countries, particularly those where
the views and policies of the Australian media are seen by some as
interchangeable with the views and policies of the Australian Government
Media freedom Is a fundamental and unalterable tenet of Australian democracy
and Australian life.
Here in Australia, from time to time, those on both sides of politics may wish it
were a more positive and altoether less irksome and contrary beast, but these
sensibilities only exist at the margins.
At the centre, Australians hold the right to be objectively and critically informed
about current political developments as inalienable.
We do think, however, that when our media go to the region to the extent that
thy are ' our media they should be responsible and sensitive to the specific
circumstances of different nations.
Objectivity and knowledge about a regional audience which constitutes a mosaic
of different ethnic and linguistic groups Is essential if the Australian media are to
gain widespread respect I44.14 
However, as we seek to understand our Asian neighbours we are equally Justified
In expecting that they should do the same of us that the tolerance and
understanding should be applied equally to Australia anid its media.
At the same time, it Is important not to overtook the positive role that our media
can play in building a sense of community among regional countries.
With the advent of multimedia as a means by whch culture can be delivered, there
Is a real risk that local culture will be swamped by Imported products.
That Is even more likely to be the case where the Imported culture is of a higher
technical quality: In education and information programTs, for Instance, our children
are more likely to learn through a medium which Is more intuitive, and more fun to
operate.
That places a great responsibility on us to provide programs which take account of
cultural diversity and sensibility.
That was one very Important reason why we launched the multimedia initiatives
we did to build within Australia a multmedia industry which will ensure thal we*
continue to sustain and originate our own culture.
Given Australia's strong links to many of the Asian countries In the region,
Including the great link of migration, I think there is significant scope for Australia
to develop content for the region, content which Is sensitive to local cultures and
promotes them.
While we should seek to use the new communications technologies as a vehicle to
develop greater understanding and a greater regional Identity. we should also
encourage the maintenance of distinctive and diverse cultural values.
Australia Is perhaps better placed than most to do ifuls.
In this. as in so much else, technological change will have greater Impact than
government flat.
In the end ' cultural sensitMWi if we mean by that a thoroujgh understanding of
the cultural and political background within which events are taking place can
only come from the media themselves from journalists, editors and managers
who know what they are talking about and appreciate the complexity of the region.
3,146 
Most Importantly, It will come from informed consumers whose knowledge of jhq
countries they are reading about or heaing about Is deeper than what they pick up
from a five paragraph news story about riots or political change or economic
growth. That is why Austrailla has been putting such emphasis on Asia In our education
system.
We are developing a national Asian Languages Strategy designed to Increase the
number of Asian language teachers and to develop teacher training courses as
well as national student proficiency levels in languages such as Mandarn.
Indonesian, Japanese and Korean.
We are very conscious that we must continue to Increase our understanding of the
countries In the region that we will become a more effective player and a more
effective partner as we do so.
Obviously, the Bogor Declaration has commnitted us all to this.
It committed us all to a greater level of regional consciousness.
It therefore committed us Irrevocably to paths of change.
In this we feel confident that we can say we are at least as well advanced as
anyone even, maybe, that we are more advanced than most.
It is now more than a decade since we saw the need for major structural reform In
Austraiia. In tha* time we have learned a lot about change both about implementing it and
about managing It
We learned that it Is a tOring process, but it is also an exhilarating one.
And because it Is so rich In possibilities for all our countries and all our people,
surely none is more exhilarating than the process which so rapidly took us to the
declaration In Indonesia last week.
Perhaps the most important element at work in Bogor and Seattle was the one too
obvious to earn much reporting.
It was that all the countries of the region, in all their diversity, were talking to each
other, In a common forum, with a common interest.
The ac: of communication was the important one. 34 4 7 
r1 12
Ultimately it is from this that all those vast post-Cold War possibilities derive.
We need to keep the communication going.
We need to keep it expanding and deepening.
That Is why you, the region's media, have such a crucial and creative role to play
and why I am so gratified to see you here in Sydney.
Thank you.
3448 . iX 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING OF MANUFACTURING PLANT OF MERCK SHARPE AND
DOHIVE PTY LTD, SOUTH GRANVILLE, SYDNEY, 23 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Paul Bell, Managing Director of MSD, Jim Beattie, Lee
Ausbumr, Lesley Russell, Jim Gazilas, other distinguished members of the
management and ladies and gentlemen the employees of Merck, Sharpe and
Dohmo Australia.
It Is a great pleasure for me to be Involved with this. Not simply because it is so
proximate to my awn constituency here in Sydney and part of the general area
of Sydney where I am from and which I have represented now in the House of
Representatives for over a quarter of a century, but more particularly what has
happened here and is happening here is the very essence of what I have been
seeking to do and trying to bring about In the House of Representatives, In the
Government over the last 12 years.
I think It is entirely true, as Paul Bell said, there was a time when the investment
in this business had ceased and It was to be, as he put It, ' mothballed' or run
down and where it would soon be merchandising or wholesaling, distributing
products made by other arms of the company abroad. And, to see such a
change from that to one where we are seeing a very large Investment, a world
class production facility and packaging facility and distribution and a very strong
change and commitment on the part of the employees to the business is the
kind ol model that Australia needs and the model which will, of course, change
our industriaJ culture and Improve our levels of wealth, our capacity to employ
people. their rates of pay and, of course, our relationship with the rest of the
world. I was partIcularly pleased In the briefing I had a few moments ago to see
that exports had risen to about $ 125 million a year now, rising towards a
forecaint $ 250 million a year In a few years from now from virtually nothing not
that long ago. And, it Is part of that sea change in Australia looking out rather
than looking in. 
Now, what has obviously happened here is that there was a real conversation
betwee3n this industry the pharmaceutical Industry and the Government in
the 1 SSOs and, I think, Governments have got to make key decisions about
whether they want particular industries or whether they don't, what they can do
to try mnd make the environment more conducive to them staying and investing.
And, In a major policy change in the 1980s across a range of areas, we
improved the atmospherics for the pharmaceutical industry in Australia. I
suppose the most well understood part of that by those people In the Industry
and probably members of the public is the factor Tf scheme which was one of
the things which underpinned the future of the industry.
Now, governments can do those things, but if companies don't take them up
well, riot much Is likely to happen. But, I think, that at Merck, Sharpe and
Dohme they have seen a willingness on the part of the Government to say ' yes,
we want this Industry and it can make a contribution to our national product and
to our exports' and the company said ' in that case, we will see what we can do,
get a strategic plan together, a corporate plan and make some Investments and
try to make it all happen.' As a consequence we have seen this very large
investment here $ 75 million the most modem developments in the
production of pharmaceutical products and what I can see around the plant,
tremendous camaraderie and esprit de corp between all of you who work for the
business and those who manage it.
I suppose, this Is part of the sea change in Australia too. It is no accident that
we have an Inflation rate of just under 2 per cent. That Is there because of cooperation
from the workplace and because of some wisdom on the part of
employers not seeking to charge what the market will bear. These things have
changed the culture of industrial relations in Australia and there Is a commitment
and I hear Paul Bell say about a number of unions committing themselves to the
business here. I think there were 13 originally, there are now five and there has
been that commitment and, I think, when one looks at a lot of other societies
which have succeeded in production and in exports and probably Japan
obviouIsly comeS to mind, the management of great companies in that country
always seem to get this conducive relationship with the workforce. I suppose
this Is one of the points of difference we have with the Coalition in this country.
We say let's get people committed in a group way, to group objectives and let's
all travel In the same direction together rather than singling people off for
Individual wage contracts. If they pipe up they lose their job, If they don't sign
up for particular things they lose their jobs. That is not the environment, I think,
which produces the kind of outcome that you really need In a group sense to
make a business work, that is, a commitment right across the business and not
simply people taking employment contracts out of fear or out of pressure or out
of something else. The way to get the change and to improve the productivity 
and the culture of the business Is to get that commitment from the employees
and the management to work together.
I was delighted when I was taken around and just shown parts of the plant to
hear a number of the people demonstrating it to me say ' Well, some of our Ideas
are In there'. In other words good Ideas are appreciated rather than good ideas
being, In a sense, rejected because they haven't come from the top down. I
mean, there has been a sea change in Australian management. There was a
time when the boss saw the workers for a cup of tea and a scone on Christmas
Eve and that was that end of It or a beer maybe, then they charged off and all
came back to their being their grumpy self for the new year. Now, that has
changed and, I think, where ever you see managers enlighten people, who want
a goodJ relationship with their employees, people of good will can get It and, I
think, ' this business proves that too.
I'll just say one thing about the factor P scheme, I have been urged by Paul Bell
to continue to support it and part of the value of coming to a plant like this is to
see it in action. I think, we are providing something like $ 1 billion worth of
assistance and in return 17 companies have committed themselves to
undertake nearly $ 8 billion in additional exports. Now, when one looks at the
nature of the products here, there Is not just the added value and this is the sort
of added value that Australia can use, but there are also products that actually
make you feel good about producing, you are producing something that Is going
to help somebody and you are doing something socially useful as well as
something as productive and economically sensible.
So, this is, In a sense, part of the model that we see for Australia, being driven
by thei thing that Is our great comparative advantage-that is our education
systern. Because if you ask many Australians what Is Australia's comparative
advantage? they will say Well, it Is our minerals or it is our wool', but I would
say It is our education. As you know, 10 years ago only three kids in
completed secondary school, this year it is eight In 10, and we are streaming
per cant of those through universities and we are now building vocational
education to sit beside the universities so that we can have a very high
participation rate in school and a competent tertiary and vocational education
system which will feed businesses of this kind. Then, with our Incentives for
research and development I am delighted that we are actually seeing primary
research in pharmaceuticals undertaken here in Australa and here particularly
by Merck, Sharpe and Dohme.
So, congratulations to the Company. I mean, it Is always a tough task master
being the local subsidiary of an International parent company, singing for your
supper, trying to get a commitment by the international board to capital. It is
one thing committing it yourself, but when you have got to get someone else to
commit it, it is pretty hard and you have got to have a good story to tell and I 
4
hope that the story that Paul Bell and his colleagues have been able to tell
Merck In the United States is a story of Australia. The story of a modem,
sophisticated country with a strong base in education, that Is Interested in doing
productive things and doing them well and shipping to the part of the world
where we know we can be very competitive.
So, when you hear the term added value, this is what we mean and you see It In
these modem surroundings. And to see that commitment and, obviously, the
very good will that exists between all of you Is a real pleasure for me Indeed. It
Is with even greater pleasure that I now declare these facilities open and to
draw the curtain on the plaque. Thank you Indeed.
ends 



**** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY""* (( 2A
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
NATIONAL STRATEGIES CONFERENCE
SYDNEY 24 NOVEMBER 1994
It's a great pleasure to be here tonight to open this
very important National Strategies Conference.
It is an auspicious curtain raiser for the revamped EPAC,
and I congratulate the organisers, particularly Glen
Withers. I think a couple of comments need to be made at the
start. The first is that this is a conference of ideas: it is by
way of a think tank, a discussion among a very wide range
of Australians about where our opportunities lie, what
our ambitions should be, and what are the best ways to
realise them.
In other words, it is a means of creating some national
strategic ferment. If we create enough of it, new
policies will follow in due course.
The second comment that needs to be made is that the
focus here is not on economics alone.
The focus is on the things we need to do ( and need nct to
do) if we want Australia to remain a very good place to
live a pre-eminent and improving place to live and
work and raise our children.
While the strength and flexibility of the economy is
fundamental to this goal, a strong economy will not by
itself generate a strong society, or a compassionate and
creative one.
If the various aims of this conference can be boiled down
to one, it might be this: how do we balance economic
imperatives with human ones for security and peace of
mind, for a decent environment, for cultural nourishment,
and, particularly in this era of relentless change, for
confidence, hope and belief.
On the one hand, I imagine, this conference will be
examining where change is needed and the best way to
achieve it. 
On the other, I should hope you will be looking at ways
to ca; 1 with change.
Perpetual motion is stressful. The new is exciting but
we know it also has an element of shock about it.
This conference will make a contribution to our national
life if it can help us find solutions to these problems
which beset modern life. If it can help us keep moving
at a respectable clip, but with everyone on board and
without too much motion sickness.
In fact, we are doing this better than most. In the past
year, the Australian economy has grown at more than 4 per
cent.
At the same time, we have added to one of the most
sophisticated social security systems in the world a
revolutionary Job Compact and other education and labour
market programs, to extend opportunities to the long term
unemployed and make Australia's safety net more secure.
There is every reason to be positive.
We have an outstandingly favourable conjunction of
circumstances, the best for 30 years economic growth
combined with rapid employment growth, falling
unemployment, low inflation, record profit levels and
continuing high levels of international competitiveness.
The foundations of Australian society are very strong
they have never been stronger I believe and the
opportunities have never been greater.
I know some people have been saying in recent times that
things were better a generation ago.
It is true that unemployment was lower then and there is
no doubt that Australians enjoyed a high standard of
living. But it is also true that the labour force was
much smaller and a smaller percentage of Australians
participated in it.
This is not the time to enter into a debate with the past
and those who continue to prefer it to contemporary
Australia. But some of the nonsense should be shown for what it is.
Real household disposable income is about 50 per cent
higher now than at the end of the 1960s.
And we are surely much richer in the less tangible
things. 
In cultural terms so much less provincial, inward
looking and xenophobic. Much more open to the world and
very much more worldly.
This is an infinitely more interesting Australia and
one much more in charge of its destiny.
I hope you bring to this conference a sense of
achievement and optimism which Australians are entitled
to feel.
Not smugness or complacency, because too much remains to
be done and because, in this very competitive world, the
process of change and adjustment never ends.
But we have every reason to feel proud of what we have
done in recent times and confident about what we can do.
And it would be as foolish to leave this sentiment out of
your equations as it would be to leave out that other
great intangible of Australian life I mean a people
who, by tradition, recognise that cohesion, tolerance,
and fairness are the greatest social virtues.
Tie these things to the unprecedented opportunities which
now exist particularly those opportunities in the
region and the conclusion is inescapable.
The starting point of this conference should be that at
this point in Australia's history, things are very much
in our favour.
So what we need and what this conference can help
provide, I hope, are practical, coherent strategies to
consolidate our gains.
It would be inappropriate, of course, to pre-empt any of
your deliberations; but perhaps I should spell out what
are, broadly speaking, the Government's priorities.
First, of course, we need to maintain a competitive
growing economy if we are also to maintain steady
improvements in living standards and lower rates of
unemployment. For this reason we continue to seek greater economic
and political engagement with the region where the
opportunities are greatest the Asia-Pacific. That
is an essential element of Government strategy.
Our physical environment is our greatest natural
asset and a defining force in our national life and
character. It is crucial to any national strategy
that we redouble our efforts to achieve sustainable
development across the continent.
Finding paths to social and economic justice for
groups that have long been disadvantaged has, I 
think, been a hallmark of this Government. Because
it makes not just for a fairer society but a more
cohesive, confident and productive one, it remains a
policy priority.
We will also continue to encourage a creative and
cultural environment which enriches all Australians
and fosters ideas and innovation in an era when, as
probably never before, such things determine the
success of individuals and nations.
And because we are always stronger when we are sure
of our identity and we will continue to do those
things which are necessary to encourage a better
understanding of our democratic heritage, a deeper
faith in it and a deeper sense of what it means to
be Australian.
Australia's success self-evidently depends upon the
faith and belief of its young people, and that in
large part depends upon their education and skills
their capacity to create and to seize opportunities.
Education and training are fundamental to the
Government's national strategy, particularly the
development of the TAFE system.
Let me take you briefly through these objectives one by
one. The challenge to economic policy is to sustain the
favourable conditions we now have while reducing
unemployment to the level of around 5 per cent we have
set as a target by the end of the century.
This obviously implies a need both for effective monetary
and fiscal policies and for continuing microeconomic
reform to increase our productive capacity.
We have set out a program to reduce the budget deficit to
around 1 per cent of GDP by 1996-97.
Not only is this one of the most stringent targets set by
any OECD country, it is also being pursued by an economy
which has one of the strongest public sector balance
sheets in the world.
On the monetary side, we have reacted quickly to emerging
trends, and clearly the authorities will continue to
monitor developments closely and take whatever action is
necessary to sustain the recovery.
We have achieved a great deal in the area of
microeconomic reform but the forward agenda remains
prodigious.
We will soon have the report of the National Transport
Planning Task force. 
In December, the Broadband Services Expert Group will
deliver its final report, which I will discuss a little
later.
But the central microeconomic game at the moment is
competition policy, including the proposed reforms to the
electricity and gas sectors.
The ball is very much in the States' court. Their case
for so-called compensation is more strident than
reasonable and if they try to drive too hard a bargain
the Commonwealth will simply go it alone.
We will pursue it in the national interest.
As I have said more than once in recent times, the States
are a permanent part of the political culture and their
sovereignty and integrity are not in question.
What is questionable is the constant " States rights"
refrain, as if the federation was created for this
purpose rather than to make an Australian nation.
The rights on microeconomic reform, like every other
issue, pertain to the rights of Australians and the
Commonwealth's responsibility is to protect and advance
those rights.
The Commonwealth's responsibility is to continue the
campaign for a more competitive and productive nation.
Every one of us knows that microeconomic reform is
fundamental to this. It is, therefore, fundamental to
our continuing success in the region and the world.
Last week's APEC leaders meeting in Bogor was a critical
turning point for Australia and the region, and really no
one should be in any doubt about it.
First in Seattle, then in Bogor, we have settled some
fundamental questions about the shape of our region and
the institutions that will serve it into the next
century. APEC makes less likely the division of the post-Cold War
world into three competing blocs. By engaging China,
Japan, the United States and the developing economies of
ASEAN in a multilateral economic framework, it also gives
us greater political and strategic assurance during a
period of very rapid change.
The firm commitment which leaders made in Bogor to free
trade in the region by 2010 for developed countries and
2020 for developing countries, is the best sign we could
have that the dynamic growth which has characterised East
Asia over the past ten years, will continue. 
APEC, as I have said recently, did not have to happen.
There were many other alternative futures for the region,
and among them the most likely candidate was drift. All
of them, I am convinced, would have been less happy
outcomes for Australia and for the countries around us.
But APEC is not the only or even the primary, means of
our engagement with the region. Strong, trusting,
bilateral links with our neighbours are essential both
in their own right, and if APEC's ambitions are to be
sustained. In our strong and diversified ties with Japan, our
rapidly deepening relationship with Indonesia, our longstanding
links with China and our growing relations with
Korea, our ties with the region have never been better.
This is a strong foundation on which to build.
Building a bilateral relationship of substance and trust
with Indonesia has been a prime aim of the Keating
Government. Indonesia is our largest, nearest neighbour much of our
future and theirs will be governed by what we are able to
do together.
At the cultural, commercial and strategic level,
Indonesia is the country of the greatest importance to
Australia; hence building that co-operation and
interdependence is central to Australia's long run
interests. The development of APEC will have important consequences
for the way the countries of this region interact, and
therefore for Australian security.
The maintenance of a strong, self-reliant defence
capability is a central requirement. We must be able to
deter and defeat any attack on Australia.
The Government will shortly be tabling its Defence White
Paper which will look at the way the Australian Defence
Force should be shaped over the next fifteen years. The
White Paper will build on the changes we have instituted
over the past decade to ensure that Australia can protect
its security in a rapidly changing external environment.
A critical element in maintaining defence self-reliance
is the role of Australian defence industries, We have
already shown in the construction of the Collins-class
submarines and in our Anzac Frigate Program that
Australia has the technological capacity to match the
best in the world.
We want to build this into a core capacity for defence
procurement, for our own needs and for the region as
well. 
Our economic success and, no less, maintaining our
quality of life into the next century depends on
sustainable use of the environment.
We have been blessed with a superb physical environment
and our responsibility to sustain it is total and
inescapable. We owe it to more than ourselves we owe it to future
generations of Australians and just as certainly we owe
it to the world.
This is an enormous challenge.
We need to address the emission of greenhouse gases and
the management of our coasts, the treatment of our
sewerage and the management of our forests, the control
of feral pests and woody weeds.
This evening let me concentrate on just two the
management of our coasts and land management.
The drought has highlighted the destructive effects of
past land management practices.
Our soils have been degraded. Too much of our more
sensitive land has been over-used.
We have not looked after our inland rivers properly.
We could well face a serious problem with blue-green
algae again this year because of the high level of
nutrients we are feeding into the rivers and the lack of
water flow.
These are large problems and ad hoc solutions will not
do. That is why we established the National Strategy for
Ecologically Sustainable Development ESD.
The Strategy embodied the twin goals of economic
development and conservation of the natural ecosystems on
which life depends.
The Strategy is not an end in itself, but a framework
within which governments are expected to work when making
decisions about development.
I know there is a feeling abroad that there has been much
more talk than action on sustainable development but I
believe we are about to see some dramatic signs of
progress. A prime example is in agriculture. 
Across the country farmers are adopting a more scientific
and conservationist approach to land and water
management. The prime mover, of course, has been the National
Landcare program.
Landcare has reached a lot of rural Australia but it
should reach all of it.
A general consensus has emerged that the past four or
five years of raising awareness and planning should now
be translated into action.
Together with participants in the Landcare movement, the
Government is now looking at how we can advance the
overall Landcare objective by promoting sustainable
agriculture and better management of natural resources.
Earlier today I announced a new Land Management Task
Force whose aim is to promote and facilitate the adoption
of property management plans by the farming sector.
At present it is estimated that more than 80 per cent of
farmers do not possess a farm plan including information
on soil and land capacity.
We want to draw into the sustainable development effort
all levels of government and elements of the private
sector, especially the banks.
The results will be five years or so in coming, but they
will be real and tangible.
Among them will be better water quality in our rivers, an
end to declining yields and new more marketable products.
Sustainable development bears a direction relationship to
our strategy for regional development, which is to say
that the great deal depends upon the capacity of local
communities and individuals to take responsibility for
their own future.
We see a lot of Australia's future energy and direction
coming from the regions.
This is where real affections and attachments reside. If
we can get the skills, the strategic infrastructure and
appropriate financial instruments to them, regional
Australia will play a dynamic part in our national
development. The development of regional industries should be matched
by the development of regional identity.
Because it encourages both greater variety and greater
protection, it seems to me good sense to associate
products ( particularly food products) with their regional 
source good sense for the industries and the regions
and good sense for the national economy.
I think there is little doubt that regions with a
stronger sense of identity and common interest will also
see more readily the need for sustainable development
practices and will more conscientiously adopt them.
Another environmental issue of great consequence is the
Australian coast.
In fact, there is probably no better example of why
national strategies are necessary.
Historically responsibility for the settlement of our
coast has rested with various levels of government and
various levels of administration without any underlying
direction or unifying objectives. The effect of this
lack of vision is now painfully apparent.
The overwhelming beauty of our coast is marred by urban
sprawl, poor planning and pollution.
We have generally lost the balance between conservation
and development. The number and complexity of issues and
interests involved make this a huge task.
The nature of this problem was documented in the Coastal
Zone Inquiry conducted by the Resource Assessment
Commission. The Report set out ways of steering decision
making at all levels of government towards the same
principles and the same goals.
This is not a master plan, more of a map which lays out
our journey.
We need more maps.
We need them in the cities to keep them both highly
liveable and exciting.
The Urban Design Task Force whose Report was delivered by
its convener, by John Mant, earlier this week offers us a
comprehensive map of the future of our cities which
means nothing less of course than the future for the
great majority of Australians.
On the subject of maps, right now we are engaged in
devising and implementing a strategy for the information
highway in Australia.
In the future, information will be the crucial element,
the key resource for Australians.
As I have said before, how well we play the information
game will determine how well we prosper as a nation. 
That is why the Report of the Broadband Services Expert
Group is so important. The interim report has already
significantly influenced our thinking.
It has highlighted the importance to Australia's cultural
development of our content providers having maximum
access to the information highway.
My colleague, Michael Lee, earlier today set down some
principles on broadband cable networks which will help to
ensure that we have such a competitive and open system.
These are fundamental principles we will not divide the
country up into regional monopolies for our carriers; we
will ensure that there is non-discriminatory access to
the broadband network; and there will be open access for
Pay TV usage of cable after a period of up to 5 years.
The leeway is to encourage the rollout of the cable by
allowing those concerned to share in the initial revenue.
The interim BSEG report also stressed how well placed we
are to be a major content provider. I am confident that
in the next few years, there will be unparalleled
opportunities for many talented young Australians in this
industry. The initiatives in Creative Nation will help them to get
a start.
To co-ordinate our efforts in this rapidly changing area,
I will be chairing a new Council on Broadband Services.
The Council will provide a focal point for examining new
developments in information technologies or opportunities
for broadband services and it will advise on issues
including the Government's own use of the new
technologies or various regulatory issues.
These things are essential. They are to this moment in
our history what railways and roads were a hundred years
ago. Earlier, I said that social and economic justice for
disadvantaged groups remains one of our priorities.
I think people have heard me talk about the principles
underlying the Native Title Act and the Land Fund for
Aboriginal Australians.
I also think they are familiar with the Government's
programs for the long term unemployed and the principles
underlying them.
It will be enough to repeat that we take the view that
the social and economic reasons for bringing the long
term unemployed back into the mainstream workforce are
compelling. 
Compelling because it is both a massive waste of
resources and an invitation to alienation and social
discord to leave them out.
The principle underlying the Government's social strategy
remains for want of a more elegant word inclusion.
Among other things, that means calling on all of our
talents and energy.
It is in that context, among others, that our continuing
commitment to multiculturalism may be viewed.
And the same might be said about Government policies to
promote the equality and interests of women.
Women have been a profound force in the changes of recent
years. They make decisions every day which profoundly
affect the life of the nation. They make them in
families, communities, schools and universities,
factories and offices. They ought to be making them
more of them in parliaments and boardrooms.
Most of you have probably also heard me recite the
Government's record of achievement in this realm as well.
I suspect you are also well versed in the reasons ' why
this year we delivered Creative Nation, the first
thoroughgoing cultural policy in Australia's history.
And I will not again regale you with the obvious reasons
glaringly obvious I would have thought why Australia
should in this last decade of the century substitute an
Australian for a British monarch as our head of state.
Broadly speaking, these things are all related to
encouraging in young Australians a deep faith in their
country belief in its best traditions and its future.
Creative Nation is about enriching the climate in which
they live. The republic is about leaving no room for
ambiguity if we cannot express our faith in Australia
through the ultimate symbol of our nationhood, what
message are we sending to the next generation?
Not, surely, the wholehearted one we ought to.
The symbolic gestures are important. The real ones are
more so.
The most important initiative we have taken for young
Australians in the past three years has been the
extension of technical and further education of the
TAFE system.
In the 1980s we greatly expanded secondary and tertiary
education. We increased secondary retention rates from
around three in ten to eight in ten. 
That was a great achievement and we need one of similar
dimensions, perhaps greater dimensions, in vocational
education and training.
The Youth Training Initiative announced in Working Nation
under which fifteen to seventeen year olds will be case
managed into education, training or work is one step
toward that goal.
The creation of the Australian National Training
Authority to drive the expansion of the TAFE system is
another. The Australian Student Traineeship Foundation, a scheme
delivered through regional partnerships between schools
and industry is yet another.
All these initiatives go towards meeting the great
education challenge for Australian in the 90s to bring
vocational education and training up to the level which
our economic and social ambitions demand. Ultimately, it
should be to a level the equal of any in the world.
It is more than economic and social ambition which drives
this, however.
In the end, meeting those ambitions translates into that
same faith in Australia I mentioned in another context.
Reduced to its fundamentals, the strategic aim of the
Government's policies on vocational education is giving
young people a reason to believe in Australia.
It is our most basic responsibility to give them a reason
for believing. And the best way to do that is to give
them the capacity to grasp the opportunities that now
exist. Nothing is so important to the Government as this and
nothing should be more important to this conference.
This conference which I am now very pleased to declare
open. Thank you. 



g)~~ t
I PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
LAND MANAGEMENT TASK FORCE.
I am pleased to announce that the Federal Government will establish a Land
Management Taskforce to investigate ways to improve the adoption and use
of property management plans by the farm sector.
The impact of the severe drought in large areas of Queensland and northern
NSW has highlighted the need for improved property management practices.
The drought has also highlighted the need for all levels of government, and
other sectors such as the banks, to tailor their programs and services to
enhance sustainable production and resource protection in the rural sector.
The application of an effective property management plan is the best way to
prepare for, and deal with, drought and to manage our land and water
resources over the longer term.
But a majority of farm businesses continue to operate without integrated
management tools. A 1992-93 ABARE survey of land management practices
found that approximately 80 per cent of broadacre farmers and 90 per cent of
dairy farmers did not possess a farm plan with information on soil and land
capacity. The Commonwealth considers the increased use of property planning would
achieve greater integration of economic and ecological and regional decision
making by the farm sector.
The Commonwealth also considers there is scope for increased use of
property management planning by the banking sector in determining risk and
viability of farm businesses.
The taskforce will be asked to develop a strategy to encourage the use of
appropriate property management planning in the farm sector. 
It will also investigate means through which public and private sector
organisations servicing this sector can ensure their programs and services
enhance the development and application of farm management plans.
The membership of the taskforce will be drawn from the farm and financial
sectors, government and experts with landcare experience.
The taskforce will report to me by 30 May 1995.
The Taskforce will:
1. Examine the extent of property management planning and implementation
and identify options for improving adoption
2. Investigate the scope of property management planning to advance
sustainable production in Australian farming
3. Identify means by which property management planning can assist in the
development of farm business strategies and operations
4. Examine the scope for increased linkages between property management
planning and catchment based or regional plans
Review the relationship between property management planning and the
provision of government programs and advise on options for further
integration where appropriate
6. Examine the scope for financial institutions to incorporate property
management planning in assessments of long term farm viability and
lending policies.
The taskforce will be assisted by a small secretariat based in the Department
of Primary Industries and Energy.
CANBERRA 24 November 1994 



PRIME MINISTER 102Pi4
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
SECOND WORLD WAR CIVILIAN MEDAL
I am pleased to announce today the establishment of a new Medal the
Civilian Service Medal 1939-1945 which will be awarded to thousands of
Australian civilians who served their country during World War 11.
Final approval for the Medal has now been granted by Her Majesty the
Queen.
The award's aim is to recognise the contribution of those civilians who served
in arduous circumstances in Australia during World War Two in organisations
subject to military-like conditions. Its creation was one of the
recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry into Defence Awards which
reported to the Government earlier this year.
The Government has so far approved four organisations as meeting the
criteria for the award of the Medal. They are:
The Australian Women's Land Army;
The North Australia Railway;
The Civil Constructional Corps; and the
Voluntary Aid Detachment ( for VADs who did not go on to military
service during the War).
Other organisations are under consideration for the Medal and if they are
found to meet the criteria their members will be eligible to receive the award.
All Australians who served in one of these organisations for 180 days or more
may apply for the Medal, to be awarded by the Governor-General on the
recommendation of the Minister for Administrative Services. The Medal will
also be awarded posthumously to next-of-kin, so close relatives of deceased
Australians who served in these organisations may also apply.
It is estimated that around 68,000 people will qualify for the award.
Recipients can choose to have their Medal personally presented by their
local Federal MP or Senator, or have it posted to them. 
Designed by Mr Horst Hahn, Chief Engraver of the Royal Australian Mint, the
Civilian Service Medal will be made of bronze. The Medal is ensigned with
the Federation Star and its design features the Southern Cross, symbolising
Australia, and Golden Wattle, symbolising the civilian population combined in
the defence of the nation. The accompanying ribbon will be three broad
vertical bands of opal green, ochre and opal green, separated by two thin
white stripes.
The Civilian Service Medal will be placed immediately under the Police
Overseas Service Medal in the Australian Order of Precedence of Honours
and Awards.
Application forms for the Medal can be obtained from:
electorate offices of Federal MPs and Senators; or
the Medals Validation Unit, Department of Administrative Services,
GPO Box 1331, ACT 2601. Phone: 06 275 3653 or 06 275 3654.
CANBERRA November 1994 



N
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, EPAC NATIONAL STRATEGIES CONFERENCE,
CONVENTION CENTRE, SYDNEY, 25 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Jeff Kennett has been fairly scathing of your so-called intervention
tactics. Do you have any response to those comments?
PM: Well, I think, when the Premiers get together the herd instinct takes
over they are braver together than they are individually. The fact of
the matter is, that there is a sort of immature view that the
Commonwealth should pay for everything the States do including
improving the efficiency of their public sectors. Now, the fact is, it is a
matter of record that at the Hobart meeting and at the Darwin meeting,
the States dragged the chain on competition policy. We kept it alive
on both occasions and, largely, different people at different meetings,
bludged on the endeavour and they are still at it. So, no noise from Mr
Kennett is going to disguise the fact that at the Darwin meeting he
lushed out on competition policy. At the first meeting in Tasmania, it
was Mr Fahey and Mr Brown. Mr Brown also did the same number in
Darwin. So, we will see what happens in the February meeting.
J: Aren't you getting a little bit sick of the States. I mean, would you like
to really get rid of them?
PM: No, I think there this a role for the States -a good and a strong one
but, there is also a role for the national economy. There has to be a
national policy on competition and no amount of wriggling and twisting
and turning and claims for money will remove that sensible demand.
J: If the States don't co-operate how do you go about circumventing their
PM: I said that last night and in the general application of trade practices
legislation we would do it ourselves. 
J: Why would he be blaming the Federal Government for the economic
PM: Well, why wouldn't they. That is part of the standard stock in trade of
Premiers most days. But, we have got the economy growing at around
per cent, we have got an inflation rate under 2 per cent, we have got
one of the strongest public sector balance sheets in the world. I mean,
if there is any problem around the place, it is the fact that we have got
these very large state instrumentalities which are not behaving under
sensible competitive rules.
J: Doesn't it just hold things up though when the States want to keep
attacking the Federals and it just turns into
PM: You are not a coverer of Premiers Conferences are you, you are a
cheerful person. Well, you should come to one and see what it's all
like.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CHARLEVILLE, QUEENSLAND, 29 NOVEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: ( inaudible) What do you think the significant strategy is for other
areas in western NSW and Sunraysia?
PM: Well, let me say I was disappointed about the NSW Premier who didn't
join us in this. We thought that NSW would join us in this strategy and
they didn't. They said they have left it up to the market, but as we
know the market doesn't work in this way, it does need this assistance
and that is why, I think, the enlightened approach from Queensland
and, I hope, the Commonwealth is going to make the strategy work.
But, this has important implications, I think, for the Murray-Darling
system as a co-operative approach. So, some good, I think, will come
of it beyond here.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: I think that these drought conditions lead to such financial. hardship
that it is often better for people to leave because they will not be able
to recover. But, they need some financial assistance to leave and they
need support after they do leave, but then they leave behind a
property which may then be viable in the hands of another owner, as
an amalgamation. So, that's in part what it is about that is giving
people the counselling, giving them the support, giving them some
financial assistance and caring about them as they make the
transition.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well, that is all central to it, I think.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: Exactly, people won't leave unless of their own free will.
J: Prime Minister, the package that goes before Cabinet next week is
critical for the long term, are you confident that it will get through? 
PM: It is a matter of what we want to get through, that is, how we think
these measures ought best be designed to fulfil their purpose and we
are speaking of, certainly from the Commonwealth's point of view, in
terms of the tax system and these other things, how we can do things
which help in the long run. In other words we put into place a system
of policy, a background in policy that will be there in the good times, in
the bad times and the in between times and these are some of the
matters we discussed with the peak farm organisations in the course of
the development of the drought relief policy.
J: There is no point in only half doing it right with these sorts of changes
to the tax system.
PM: Well, when you say half doing it right, there is some sort of implied
implication that the Commonwealth is only half doing it right. I mean,
we have had all of this century to get it right and the irony is that this
will be up to a couple of Labor governments to try to get it right for
rural Australia. But, we will be getting it more right than anyone else
because, I think, we are concerned for the people and we are prepared
to put our heart into it.
J: How long ago was Treasury and Finance..
PM: I've worked pretty well to the Treasury for nearly a decade, so I think
we can handle them.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: Well, if the Opposition has said it is a stunt, well it is an awfully time
consuming and expensive stunt, but they are now so out of the general
game of the Australian community to be, essentially, a political rump. I
mean, if Bob Menzies didn't vote for them in 1972 and 1975 what
would he think of them now?
GOSS Can I just supplement that. The Queensland Primary Industry Minister
and the Government have been working on this for a couple of years.
There has been a lot of work go into it. Anybody who says that it is a
stunt is not having a go just at the Government, they are having a go at
also a lot of industry people who have worked very hard to get this
together and to get it up today and the other thing that has brought it
together is our approach to the Federal Government which has been
positively received in terms of their support, their financial support.
So, you have got a lot of work by two Governments to try to deal with a
long term problem and you have got a lot of work by local producers
and industry groups and a lot of money. That is not a stunt. It is a lot
of work.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: It is just that the conditions are so harsh and the financial problems
that come with them focus peoples minds about longer term
approaches and solutions. I think, this is probably as the Premier said,
this strategy was being put together well before the drought started,
but it is probably the fact that the drought has been with us has 
accelerated the thinking of governments and communities about how
these things will be done. This wouldn't be the first time that difficult or
catastrophic conditions have created a large community change or a
change in government thinking.
J: Prime Minister, are you looking for other communities to give similar
packages and work out similar strategies?
PM: We think that wherever I mean the comprehensive study we have of
regional Australia, wherever you see regional leadership you see
progress economic and social progress. What would give us heart
from this is that there has been regional and community leadership
here and if that happens governments have got something to work with
and you can work with people who want to refashion their lives and
refashion their communities. So, I think, the message from this is
regional progress is all about regional leadership and that is what we
are seeing here.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: Providing they work, we have had these lED schemes, variations of
them, over the years and for some people they have been attractive,
they have probably been more attractive for the higher income
earners, that is farmers and graziers with larger properties. The main
thing with any of these income averaging instruments is to get them
right and I think we will try to do that.
J: Prime Minister, we have got the threat of double dissolution
PM: I get asked that question at every press conference and I always give
them the stock answer and that is that we are not intending to have an
election, but nor will we see our important legislation trodden into the
ground by idealogical nonsense. But, as I have said, the Government
is working and working productively and we don't want to see that
interrupted at this stage by a poll.
J: So, no election before 1996?
PM: Well, Prime Ministers would be complete fools to tell journalists about
their options about elections or to give them away. Now, I am not a
complete fool and so I am not giving you anything.
ends 



TEL 2. Dec. 94 7: 57 No. 001 P. 02
C
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, UNIVERSITY OF WOLLONGONG, WOLLONGONG, NSW
THURSDAY I DECEMBER, 1994
PM: I am very glad to be in the Illawarra today with my Parliamentary colleagues
and to be opening a Regional Development Organisation because it is
through local and regi6-nal leadership that We are seeing regions, now, kick
on. There's been a great history of this in the Illawarra, in the past, and, as a
consequence this is a region which has now got a very great future, And,
probably, the beating heart of that future is right here on this university
campus. We are seeing a great proliferation in the various industries and
opportunities in mining and agriculture, in high technology and education
( inaudible). And, these are the sorts of things which will not just simply give
regions a future, but also make life interesting for people and provide
interesting jobs.
Let me just say a couple of things, also, about the growth figures yesterday.
It is a great thing for this country that it is growing strongly. There are people
who, not so long ago, said this couldn't be done and wouldn't be done and we
are doing it now with low inflation, as well. And, you've probably got to go
back the better part of half a century to find growth of this order plus inflation
under two percent. So, the challenge now is to keep it going and to see the
nineties unfold before us as a period of unprecedented opportunity. And,
we're starting to see that in unemployment, with very strong employment
figures; we're starting to see it in productivity and we saw it yesterday with
very strong investment figures. And, let me just have one little piece of the
critics who said there was at the time of the Budget all of these
investment figures were over estimated. Well, there they are, flowing through
very strongly, now.
J: ( Inaudible)
PM: Well, the government's task is to maintain the recovery.., well, I'll tell you, you
and I are not having a debate, you've asked me a question... What we're
about doing is to most efficiently maintain growth, with low inflation. And, first
of all it was about getting the growth -it's not that long since the last
election, during that campaign the issue was unempioyment, what we could
do about unemployment. It's now just over 18 months ago. Since then, we've
seen the unemployment rate come down, we've seen growth pick up, we've 
T2EL.: D ec. 94 7: 57 No. 001 P. 03
2
seen very strong employment figures and the growth is now so strong and the
consumer sentiment is high, business investment expectations are high, the
actual investment realisations are strong... The aim is, then, to smooth it so
that we can keep it longer than we have in the past.
J, ( Inaudible)
PMV: You can't put a question in those terms. The same question would have
come... for those who suffered unemployment in the recession, would they
get a job in the recovery? Answer, yes. And, the jobs are coming through
now, very strongly. And, we're also now dealing with the long term
unemployed who are now getting very strong jobs and, 1 think, the trick is for
the whole country to realise that we've got to keep productivity up, keep
inflation down, get competitiveness going and to keep demand at levels that
we can satisfy.
J: ( Inaudible)
PMV: Well, just enough to keep it going. We don't want to see we've been in
a recession and we don't want to see us, obviously, do anything other than
try and maintain this strength.
J: ( Inaudible)
PM: Only anecdotally, but we weren't seeing it in the figures. The revisions,
basically, have supported all those who have said the investment's there,
there'll be a few people eating crow about them. But, nevertheless, the point
is they are there and that simply means that when we have something that's
valuable, we've got to try and keep it.
J: ( Inaudible)
PMV: Well, you asked me that before and I gave you an answer.
J-( Inaudible)
PM: Sorry? No, no you asked me a second ago about revenue and I gave you an
answer.
J: ( Inaudible)
PMV: Do you? Isn't that sweet of you. Let me just say, the government the
Treasurer said, I thought quite eloquently the government's focusing on
the next Budget which is not, now, in August. The Budget comes down
before the Budgetary year and the Budget is set in May. So, coming up to
May we will make our judgements about what shape the Budget should be.
But, the Treasurer also said that it may also mean that some particular
measures, that suited it, we may take. But always been the position you
can see that with the monetary policy adjustments of the last month or two.
TEL 
T2EL. D: ec. 94 7: 57 No. 001 P. 04
3
J: ( inaudible re third runway)
PM: It is the gateway to Australia. Sydney Airport is the gateway to Australia and,
getting capacity and getting it on a basis that people are comfortable with is, I
think, the challenge.
J, ( Inaudible)
PM: Southern Copper? Well, this is a business which I think, in the long run,
probably wasn't viable. But, the job displacement which is to be regretted, at
least comes at a time when there is a lot of aggregate employment around, a
lot of growth in the economy and a lot of general employment. And, I am very
pleased to be able to announce today that the government has deemed these
people who will be unemployed as a consequence of this decision as at
risk of being long term unemployed. And, therefore, all the Working Nation
package will apply to them that is, we will now send in a CES team to case
manage the people individually, to try and place them back into jobs, to give
them the job subsidies under labour market programs where appropriate, and
to retrain them, where appropriate. So, in other words, the whole White
Paper and Working Nation changes, perhaps, you'll see applied in a
microcosm to the people at Southern Copper so that they can take the
opportunities of a better region and stronger growth and better activity and be
placed and be helped and be individually case managed and cared for. I've.
spoken to my colleagues about this today and we're delighted to be able to
announce the fact that CES officers will be on the site, helping people
immediately and applying the full White Paper package to them. Need I say,
of course, our opponents said the White Paper was an extravagance and
they'd cut it away as cuts in government spending. These are the very sorts
of things that give people a future in work.
J: ( Inaudible re COAG)
PM: Premiers babble every day, don't take any notice of that. It would be
impossible to have a COAG meeting which is about the electricity grid, it's
about trade in gas, it's about-water, it's about competition policy to have
that within a month of the NSW election. I mean, what could a NSW Premier
commit to when he would not know whether he'd be the Premier three weeks
later. So, the sensible thing is to have it when that particular deck is cleared.
But, we've had early election talk around, now, John Hewson was telling
me I'd have an early election last year, do you remember that one? And
then, of course we had Mr Downer, he was talking about it earlier, he's not
now, no, not now and now the Premiers are. But, I've said that elections
are hard enough to win without giving the time away. So, that's why we want
to maximise our opportunities here but, again, this is a government to
manage Australia. And, when you look at the little boy antics of the Leader of
the Opposition, today saying how he will obstruct things if he gets a chance,
in the Senate... Well, John Hewson did all of that last year and you saw what
happened to him.
ends. TEL: 



TEL: 2 . Dec 4 16 : 13 No .013 01/
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE YOUTH TRAINING INITIATIVE PROGRAM,
PARRAMATTA TOWN HALL, PARRAMATTA, 2 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much for that Introduction, Eden. Caroline and Ian, my
ministerial colleagues Simon Crean and Ross Free, and Paul Elliott, the
Member for Parramatta and his wife Julie, the Sarah Redfern High School
and young Australians. It is a very great pleasure for me to be involved today
with my colleagues in this initiative which came from Working Nation.
Because, I think the thing you have to know is that 11 years ago when those
of you who are now completing High School were 7 years of age, or those of
you who are in Year 11 were 6 some of us were thinking about a new
Australia. We were Imagining a country completely different than the one we
had at the time. Because you know enough about our history to know why we
inherit this vast continent, and have it as one to ourselves, we were part of
the old industrial culture of the West European/ North American world under
what used to be called Imperial preference. And we built up an industrial
base in this country which became antiquated and out of touch and
unproductive, and when the countries we traded with went into trade blocs
like Britain went into the European Community -Australia was left with this
ring fence of tariffs, and inside it a great heap of industrial archaeology.
Before that, of course, as the clip said, there were jobs aplenty. But, they
were unskilled jobs for low-value products. But, the history of the post-War
world with the rise of the great states like Japan and Germany, and the
continuing growth of the big industrial economies like the United States has
put the wealth into value added and into production which had with it
Innovation, and we in this country have had to now try and re-adapt Australia
in a relatively short period of time.
Now, that meant two things: how to employ our people what do they do, and
what sort of jobs will they have? And particularly our young people how
can we encourage them to be part of a society which produces good and 
T2EL.: Dec. 94 16: 13, No. CiI6 P-. 02/ 05
innovative things, a clever. country that has an international future? One
thing we all did know, was that we could never hope to be a clever country
when those of you in Years 11 and 12 were 6 and 7 years of age, we knew
that only 3 out of every 10 of you completed secondary school because that
is as it was. And that the rest that went back out were largely untrained 7
out of 10 untrained, Now, how can you develop a smart society with that?
And how could you look a young person in the eye and say, " We have a
place for you"?
So, we had to do 2 things remodel the Australian economy quickly,
rebalance It and take away all the ring fences, open Australia up to the world,
and at the same time, start to bring up the education of our young people.
Now, it is one of the great matters of pride to me, that in this year that same
cohort of young people it is not 3 in 10 completing secondary school, it is 8
in 10. 8 in 10. And 40% of that output is going through universities, and all
of those thousands of places have been added to the system since 1985.
Indeed, about 16 universities of the size of Sydney University have been
added to the system by this Government since 1985. But, because that is
you don't have to be a mathematician to work out the great majority of
young people were coming out of the system and not going to university, and
many untrained. Indeed, the majority untrained.
So, what we have focussed on in the last few years is developing vocational
ed -ucation, or as you would call it, TAFE. So that we have a national TAFE
system, and a national system of accreditation and a training certificate which
will give you mobility in this country, and the capacity to pick up a job. Now,
Simon Crean, Ross Free and I have been working now for a number of years
with some of our colleagues to build up that TAFE system. Because we have
got the universities well and truly up and running, the challenge now is to
build that TAFE system up, and to have it there so that as you leave school in
Year 12, you go in to that training and this period is the period we focus on
to 19 as a period of vocational preparation. In other words, the school to
work transition. So, this is what the Youth Training Initiative is about.
We had 2 things about young people in Working Nation: one was the
Australian Youth Traineeship Foundation, which is about encouraging young
people to start streaming themselves into vocational education in Years 11
and 12, while at school. That Is, to start taking on work experience and away
from school training, and picking up units for accreditation in TAFE while at
school. And Simon, Ross and I launched that in Gosford about 3 months
ago. Today, we are launching the second part of It, and that is the Youth
Training Initiative. And, the reason we are doing that is that about 14% of
students are dropping out of both school and further study. In other words,
they are not going to TAFE even if it is there, they are not going on) to a
tertiary education they are simply dropping out. Now, we have a view, and
that is that we are optimistic about this country. You saw this week we are
growing now at about 6% GDP growth, we have got inflation at under we
have had 400,000 job growth since the election. Now, this is a workforce of 8
million 400,000 jobs since the last election is a phqpomenal rate of
TEL 
TEL 3
employment growth. But we want to -stream young people ' into that flow of
jobs, and we believe that there is great cause for optimism about Australia
wo have never been mora w. mpatitive, wie have rievw Ucwi muiis iiriuvallve,
our education system is up and really driving product innovation, we are now
exporting to the Asia-Pacific as we have never done before we are actually
sitting beside the fastest growing markets in the world for the first time in
Australian history, and you might know that with APEC Asia Pacific
Economic Co-operation in a very historic declaration I was involved with in
Indonesia 2 weeks ago that we have agreed all of us the countries of the
Asia-Pacific, to develop a free trade area. Now that means that Australia will
be part of a large market that it has never been part of before, and the
exciting possibilities are there for young people to look at some of these
countries, and some of these great cities like Shanghai in China where you
see this enormous activity, or in Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam, or Jakarta in
Indonesia these are all the possibilities. You could be working for an
Australian company and very easily find yourself there, then find yourself
back in Australia, then find yourself in North America the range of
possibilities for you now Is endless and entirely invigorating.
So, with that sort of prospect and this sort of growth, we want all of you, that's
every one of you, to take the opportunities of a tertiary education, a
vocational education, and we don't want you slipping through the cracks of
the system into unemployment where your self esteem drops, where you think
the world is not interested in you, and you start turning your back on society.
This place is too rich and it has got too much going for it, for that to happen.
So, the Youth Training Initiative is something we've thought up which will start
from the first of January next year and it will work in this way: if you're under
18 and you've been unemployed for 13 weeks you'll be eligible for
assistance. Now, that assistance comes by way of a case manager. A case
manager is a person who individually makes a relationship with you and
starts to understand your educational attainments, your personality, what
your aptitudes are, what you might do. So, you have that one to one
relationship, you don't just go down to a CES office and give your name
across the counter looking for a job, or worse, not go at all. We actually have
this case management, one to one relationship where the case manager
helps you to Identify your needs, to search then for suitable education,
training and work opportunities and to help you coordinate access to services
such as labour market programs.
Now, a labour market program is something where there is a job subsidy and
there Is structured training. So, this person assesses you, tries to understand
what you are capable of, gets you back into structured training or education
or into work. In other words, we don't let you fall through the system,
somewhere. So, the Youth Training Initiative is one of those links perhaps
one of the last links in this hierarchy of changes to take young people who
are part of that 14 per cent, who run the risk of falling out of the system and
believing that nobody wants them and society isn't interested in them. This is
our way, the government's way of saying, we are interested,. we will pick you
_ Dec-, 94 140-ui, 0,5 0 S 
TEL: 2 . Dec .94 16 : 13 No .013 P. 04/* 05
4
up, we will individually enquire about you, we'll take a personal interest in you
arid we'll put you back in the system. So, this is what we are launching today.
We're launching the Youth Training Initiative. And, it also means if you're
assessed as being at high risk, that is, the likelihood of you being at high risk
of long term unemployment because of, say, your attitude, your attainment,
your family background or something a combination of factors leads one to
assess such a person as being at high risk of long term unemployment
then the case manager will start managing you immediately. In other words,
there is no 13 week wait.
So, we think that this is a great social improvement, The whole of Working
Nation was about a social Improvement. It was about saying that those
people who've been out of work for 12 months or more and that can be
people In their middle age, or young people who may be unemployed 18
months or two years that we say that this is not good enough for Australia.
This Is not good enough for a country which believes in fairness and equality.
And, we will pick you up, case manage you, train you, give you a job subsidy
and get you back into work. Now, I told you a few minutes ago that since the
election just under two years ago, we've had 400,000 job growth. About
100,000 of those have gone to the long term unemployed. This is the cause
of much satisfaction on the part of the government. Because, were we
speaking about this 10 years ago and we had 400,000 jobs, maybe 20,000
would have gone to the long term unemployed, or 25,000. Now, we're talking
about 100,000 so a quarter of the jobs are going to the long term
unemployed. And, that is because of what we call the labour market
programs and those labour market programs are actually focusing these
people up.
So, Working Nation was about that. It was about streaming the long term
unemployed back into work, it was about saying as we all move on as a
country we will move on together, we won't have an underclass where the
long term unemployed are the shock absorbers in the system who carry the
burden of economic change. But, rather, we bring them along with us and we
move them along together. But, whatever we do in this respect, as a
government, we are entirely certain we must do that and more, with our
young Australians. That is, if we believe that Australia has such, now in the
nineties, a low Inflation and high growth future producing innovative products
and exports and linkages to the rest of the world, we know that, properly
trained, the jobs are going to be there for young Australians. Because, our
experience In the eighties was the same in the last ten years we've created
nearly two million jobs. Young Australians got more than their share of those,
but those who are not trained can't, and won't. And, that's why we want to
train them. Now, I don't know that there are any other countries that have
programs quite like this, we think this is a pretty revolutionary approach.
Because, we are saying, as a matter of national policy, we won't let one
young person slip through the system if it is avoidable, and that we will go
and case manage them and strike up a personal relationship with them, and
get them back into structured education or training, or into work experience. 
ILL: 2. LJBC 16: 13 No. 013 F. C~/ C~
So, you look at that panoply of things: tertiary education, the massive
participation rates now in schools, the growth in tertiary education, the
building of vocational education, the Australian Traineeship Foundation, for
students in years 11 and 12 to start streaming their way into work experience
while at school, setting up their career path while at school. And, then, those
who are untrained, the 14 per cent, the ones who drop right out of education
and training this initiative is about getting them back in. So, you run right
across the spectrum, from those with the highest TERs going on into tertiary,
to those who have fallen out of the system, we say the system should have
everybody. So, that's what It Is about, that is what we've been seeking to do. And, I am
delighted to find so many people in education, so many young people
responding to these programs and doing so with a confidence, that I
believe young Australians must have. One of the key things I would like to
see this government achieve, indeed the country achieve, is that the optimism
we have is passed on to every young Australian that they feel good about
Australia, they feel good about themselves, they feel good about the nation's
identity and its sense of self confidence, and they believe that there is a place
in there for them. This is what this is about. So it is with very great pleasure
Indeed, that today, I launch this Youth Training Initiative on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government, and believe that every young Australian, as a
con-sequence, can have the hope that if the system doesn't work quite right
for them, in double jig time, we'll have them back on the track and back in this
society that cares for them, that nurtures them and that loves them. That's
the sort of country we want.
ends. TEL 2 Uec .* J416 13 No. 013 F* 05/ 0c-" 



i2.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE TRIPLE J TRANSMITTERS INTO REGIONAL
AUSTRALIA, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 6 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It's so hot my make-up is running. I borrowed someone's make-up in the
office and she said to me " do you want the lippy too?", and I said I'm not
doing an impersonation of Julian Clary, I am only impersonating myself.
It is wonderful to be here and see this extension of Triple J's network. I
suppose if you like the present and you are inclined to the future, and you
look forward to the future, then you are inclined to Triple J. But if you are
stuck in the past and you have got old fogies for friends then you are inclined
against Triple J. And I suppose that probably marks out the Triple J
supporters from those who are not. But what we have seen here is the
development of a marvellous, authentic stretch of Australian communications
and Australian radio. As David said, or Michael Lee said, that is from a small
studio in Darlinghurst not so many years ago to now a national network of 1.8
million people. And now with the extensions into 22 regional areas, a much
greater network altogether. And of course, their grearTeg-fi-7Australian
music and comedy I mean HG and Roy were a couple of bodgies not so
many years ago, now the most fabled social commentators in the country.
Even Paul Lyneham and some of his colleagues in the ABC are feeling the
pressures these days... . the Kerry O'Briens of this world are feeling the
pressure from Roy and HG. And they came along with Triple J.
But I think it also tremendous that Triple J's big contribution has been in
breaking in new Australian bands and not just the Coral Snakes today, but
INXS, Yothu Yindi, Midnight Oil, and more recently they first recorded and
broadcast the Newcastle band Silver Chair which I now understand are on
top of the charts. I mean, with that support, just imagine what I could have
done with The Ramrods back then in the 60s. I mean I did take them from
nowhere to oblivion, and with this sort of support... . the battle that I had to get
them on the Parlaphone and I did and to get them played I knew every
manager of every radio library in Australia. And I would always have the 
sitting on the edge of the desk, trying to get it played the D-45' s as they
were then.
At any rate, the fact is that this is a great thing that Australia has become one
of the music capitals of the world in popular music, and Triple J is of course,
playing a tremendous role in all that. And of course, for apparently only 18
cents a year it costs each of us only 18 cents a year, which is a little more
value than 8 cents a day. Probably not, because I do think the ABC has
stuck to its last and stuck to its charter, and I am not ashamed to say I am
very proud to say that I am a core supporter of the ABC and Triple J.
And of course, the other thing is it's about the only station -in the country
where you would expect to find a woman disc jockey, which is also a
breakthrough for Australian radio because it is rather monopolised.
I would like to just say that this you know, you wonder when you pass these
budgets, and the appropriations go out, whether it is money well spent, but I
think this extension which is $ 20 million worth to these 22 regional areas,
and I am told we go something like by 1996 Triple J will reach 44 regional
areas and cover an additional 4.7 million people, then with 80% of the
population. A far cry from the thing which Moss Cass kicked off in 1975 and
which has come along from as someone said earlier that small studio in
Darlinghurst. So, the Government is delighted to be involved with it to find a
place where young Australians can identify certainly a radio station they
can identify with, something that is not a bit provincial or parochial, that is
unmistakably Australian, and to see this development is a great pleasure for
all of us.
Last week I had the pleasure of launching what we call the Youth Training
Initiative, and this is about saying to young Australians that we in this country
care about them, we want to pass our sense of optimism on to them, that we
won't let them slip out of the school system to be unemployed, that we will
pick every one of them up and case manage them that is individually relate
to them and try to get them back into mainstream study or to work experience,
or into a job and that comes as well as the linkages now between secondary
school and TAFE, the building of a proper vocational education system with
TAFE, and the massive extension of the university system. But I think the
commitment which we have made to young Australians that nobody under
the age of 20 should basically drop out of the system without being cared for,
without being someone an individual person case managing them, talking to
them, finding out about their aptitude, their educational standards, their
interests, and getting them back into study or work is the sort of commitment
a country this wealthy ought to make to its young people. That was launched
last week, and I know that Triple J has a program of its own the Triple J
Extension which is about much of the same thing, and that is giving young
Australians a voice, and a role in the future.
So I can think of no better medium than Triple J to talk about issues which
affect young people, to let them listen to the music that they like, to discover
the Australian bands that in the past were there but incapable of discovery, 
3
and to punch out a peculiarly and authentically Australian mssage and
sound. This is a tremendously good development in our communications.
Let me congratulate everybody associated with Triple J and the ABC to
David Hill and his colleagues and to say that the Government will continue
to support the ABC and Triple J, and let's hope that by 1996 we see this huge
extension into provincial and rural Australia, and we see truly a national
network come from it. It is with great pleasure that I launch this shift to 22
regional areas this broadcast to 22 regional areas as a further affirmation
of our faith in Triple J and its message to young Australians. Thank you.
ends. 



)( 03
PRIME MINISTER
PARTIAL TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING MP, INTERVIEW WITH DEBBIE SPILLANE AND IAN
ROGERSON, TRIPLE J, 6 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
IR: It is about 10 minutes past 5 and we are coming to you live from the
beautiful mezzanine area here at the Parliament House complex, and
we are joined by a special guest now, Deb?
OS: Yes, we have the Prime Minister Paul Keating we were calling him Mr
Keating off-air, but on-air we are going to be incredibly familar and just
call him Paul. After all, we are on first name terms with Slim Dusty,
you know.
PM: Well, why not?
DS: We know all the legends on this program. Now Paul firstly, we have
been listening to all your talk about Triple J, and the expansion we
know what is in it for us what is in it for you guys?
PM: Well I think what is in it for us is that the nation's young people get a
network a broadcast network they wouldn't have otherwise had, they
get the chance of innovation, to hear people put their views, to hear
new music that's enough I think.
IR: It's not part of the deal that we have to have Parliamentary Question
Time at any stage, is it?
PM: No. Well that's a sort of area of light entertainment that you are not
required to have. There's enough coverage of that we have got a
whole bunch of junkies in this building that cover that.
IR: Now, of course that has been going on all day today, and it will go this
evening, won't it? 
PM: The real show is only on Mondays and Thursdays that's my show.
But you are welcome to tune in and pick the highlights. You can ask
Mr Laurie Oakes he will tell you what the highlights are. Or Mr
Lyneham, he will know.
DS: I must admit that we are pretty relieved at Triple J today that the
Coalition didn't do anything about the leadership today, because we
didn't want our announcement swamped, and so they have been very
polite.
PM: Yes, I thought this this morning there is a great danger that if they
actually dump Alexander today he'll blot you right out.
DS: Were you worried about Triple J not getting enough publicity?
PM: I was. And I wanted to make sure that at least he made it through until
tomorrow. And it looks like he is going to make it.
DS: How much longer, do you think?
PM: Well, he will get to tomorrow.
IR: You were mentioning the fact that you were white hot just a day or so
ago....
PM: That is for Mr Howard. I have a special attachment, not to Mr Howard,
for Mr Howard, and...
DS: Where will you be putting the attachment in?
PM: Well, there are a few obvious places. But the thing is he does bring
out the best in me, I have got to say, and when he bobbed up in 1986
and 1987, I made sure that I didn't miss him. And I will just give him a
cheerio call to let him know that I am still there.
DS: Give him something to look forward to, that is what I reckon...
PM: I am. Give him some encouragement... let's bring him out...
IR: It's a bit like Avon calling..
PM: Absolutely. Ding dong it's Avon calling.
ends. 



PRIME MINVISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 6 DECEMBER 1994
THE APEC INFORMAL LEADERS' MEETING, BOGOR, INDONESIA
I want to report to the House on the results of the second informal meeting of the
leaders of APEC economies, which I attended in Bogor, Indonesia, on 15 November.
It is not overstating the case to suggest that the Bogor meeting, and the Declaration of
Common Resolve which leaders issued afterwards, has permanently changed the nature
of our region and the fu~ ture of Australia.
For nearly forty years, Australians have spoken loosely about what we have called " our
region" of the world. We have regularly talked about our " northern neighbours". But
until now these phrases have been statements of aspiration or hollow cliches rather
than descriptions of reality and real national intent.
What our region was, where it extended, who was in it, whether the others we claimed
as partners accepted that role, was always uncertain indeed unknowable.
With Bogor, however, Australians can say for the first time that the region around us is
truly " our region".
We know its shape; we have an agreed institutional structure; we share with its other
members a common agenda for change.
Historical turning points are rare and, like phantoms, they are seen more often than
they are found to exist.
But I am certain, Mr Speaker, that the Bogor meeting will be seen as such a turning
point as the beginning of the Pacific century.
Just as the Bretton Woods agreements after the Second World War established
structures in the LIMF and the World Bank which enabled the world to grow and
prosper, so in APEC we have established a model which will serve the interests of the
post-Cold War world.
It brings together in one multilateral framework a grouping which by 2020 will include,
according to some estimates, seven of the world's ten largest economies, and which by
the end of the century will account for 57 per cent of world trade. 
It gives all the economies Iof this region developed, newly industrialised and
developing a stake in a cooperative enterprise whose aim is to maintain the dynamism
and growth in this part of the world.
It offers business people the opportunity to plan with confidence as Governments work
to remove unnecessary blockages to trade and investment.
It engages the United States, China and Japan in a structure which minimises the
danger that trade frictions will eventually lead to strategic tension.
Between my arrival in Jakarta on 13th November and my departure on the 16th, I held
bilateral discussions with Prime Minister Chretien of Canada, Prime Minister Mahathir
of Malaysia, President Jiang Zemin of China, Prime Minister Chuan of Thailand,
President Clinton, President Soeharto, President Ramos of the Philippines and Prime
Minister Bolger.
The day before I left, on 12th November, 1 met President Frei of Chile in Sydney. And,
of course, President Kim Young Sam of Korea visited Australia immediately after the
Bogor meeting.
APEC was, of course, a central element in all these discussions, but they also enabled
me to cover some important bilateral issues.
Dr Mahathir and I were able to agree, for example, on the need to improve exchanges
6RN67en'Nalaysia and Australia in the area of science and technology.
Pre sident Frei and I agreed to encourage Chilean and Australian business people to use
each counti-y as a base for expanding business in South America and Asia respectively.
I was able to have a very frank and productive discussion with Prime Minister Chuan
about Cambodia and Thai-Australian relations.
My own experience was replicated by the other leaders. The easy opportunity to hold
high-level discussions like these gives APEC leaders' meetings a value additional to
APEC's economic agenda.
The informal leaders' meeting was hosted by President Soeharto on 15 November in
Bogor. I want to pay tribute, Mr Speaker, to President Soeharto's chairing of APEC during
the year and at the Bogor meeting. A consensus of the 18 APEC economies on these
very large issues was an extraordinary achievement. It required great leadership and
vision, and President Soeharto provided that. We would not have achieved this
outcome without him.
As was the case in Seattle last year, the Bogor meeting was held without officials
present and without a pre-set agenda. 
Following consultations between leaders' assistants, President Soeharto had prepared a
draft declaration covering our common ambitions for APEC and its economic goals.
These subjects formed the focus for much of our discussion.
The central element in the Bogor Declaration of Common Resolve is a commitment to
free trade and investment in the region by 2010 for industrialised economies and 2020
for developing economies.
And what underpins that commitment is our recognition of the growing
interdependence of regional economies and the need to work together if we are to
maintain high rates of economic growth.
APEC's commitment to free trade was made in the context of our support for the
multilateral trading system and our desire to strengthen it.
In other words, Mr Speaker, APEC leaders showed that they were opposed to the
establishment of a closed and inward-looking organisation, but wanted whatever we
did in APEC to be additional to the GATT agreement GATT-plus.
We agreed, for example, to accelerate the implementation of our Uruguay Round
commitments and to undertake work aimed at deepening and broadening the Round's
outcome.
We called for the successful launching of the World Trade Organisati' 1on in January
1995 and for all APEC members to work with non-APEC members to achieve further
multilateral trade liberalisation through the WTO.
One of APEC's major benefits, in fact, is that by engaging the United States and East
Asian economies in a common framework it helps prevent the spectre of a world
divided into three hostile trade blocs in Europe, Asia and the Americas.
We agreed to a " standstill" commitment on a best endeavours basis to refrain from
increasing measures of protection.
We also decided to expand APEC's trade and investment facilitation program.
As a result of a proposal I made in Seattle, for example, we have now endorsed nonbinding
investment principles for the region which we will develop to make investment
flows in the region easier.
The trade facilitation program, on which a good deal of progress has already been
made, will become even more important to our business people as tariffs in the region
come down.
Ministers have been asked to draw up proposals for APEC arrangements to improve
customs procedures, establish common standards and lower administrative barriers to
market access. In this area of trade facilitation, APEC economies that are ready to
implement a cooperative arrangement may do so, while those that are not yet ready to
participate may join at a later date. 
In Australia's case, for example, we are already discussing with a number of APEC
economies, such as Malaysia, Korea, Canada, New Zealand and the United States, the
possibility of an agreement under which we would mutually recognise each others'
testing and conformance arrangements.
The Bogor Declaration also gives further impetus to the dialogue on economic policy
which began with the first meeting of APEC Finance Ministers earlier this year. In my
view, these consultations on economic growth strategies, regional capital flows and
other macro-economic issues will become more important for APEC over the next few
years. Another new approach in the Declaration comes in the decision to examine the
establishment of a voluntary consultative dispute mediation service, to supplement the
World Trade Organisation's dispute settlement mechanism. APEC's informal and nonbinding
approach offers a useful, non-adversarial way of dealing with regional trade
disputes. One of APEC's most valuable dimensions is the way it brings together developed
economies, newly industrialised economies and developing countries.
When APEC talks about trade and economic issues, when it frames its actions, it has
to take into account the full complexity of eighteen economies all looking for growth
and liberalisation, but at different stages of development.
As I have said before, this is important because it is the way the global economy is
going. Co-operation across different levels of development is the way we will have to
address these trade and economic issues in future.
That is what made theBogor agreement remarkable it was an agreement reached
within the framework for the_ future. Bogor was not about catching up or rectifying
past mistakes. It was visionary in a rare sense and a true sense.
We agreed at Bogor, for example, that in addition to our trade liberalisation and trade
facilitation agendas we should expand co-operative activity across the fields of
education and training, science and technology, small and medium enterprises,
economic infrastructure including energy, transportation, telecommunications and
tourism and sustainable development.
In all these areas, in fact, APEC is already building linkages and discovering new areas
for co-operation.
Leaders at Bogor recognised the important contribution made to regional debate by
the Em~ inent Persons Giroup and the Pacific Business Forum, representing large and
small businesses throughout the region.
It was decided to ask these two groups to continue in operation to advise us on ways
we can step up APEC co-operation.
I am pleased to announce that Australia's participants in these groups Mr Neville
Wran on the EPG, and Mr Philip Brass, Managing Director of Pacific Dunlop and Mrs 
Imelda Roche, Managing Director of Nutri-metics on the Pacific Business Forum
have accepted my invitation to continue in their positions.
All three of them have put enormous effort into the APEC task and I thank them for it.
I am confident that their experience and commitment will help us meet the new
challenges APEC has set itself
But the most important new decision to come from the Bogor meeting was on trade
liberalisation. The Bogor commitment is precise, wherein the leaders agreed to " complete the
achievement of the goal of free and open trade in the Asia Pacific no later than 2020",
with industrialised economies achieving the goal no later than 2010.
The goal involves a multiple year effort but, as the declaration says, " we will start our
concerted liberalisation process from the very date of this statement. We direct our
Ministers and officials to immediately begin preparing detailed proposals for
implementing our present decisions."
We have a long way to go before free trade is implemented in APEC. Much detailed
work remains to be done before we get an agreed plan of action for our meeting in
Osaka next year. No doubt there will be difficult negotiations and hard talk as we
chart the way forward.
Complex issues will need to be addressed, including modalities, coverage and whether
benefits will be extended on a Most Favoured Nation basis.
It may be that APEC will need to approach these issues in quite a different way from
past trade negotiations.
But contrary to the belief of some commentators, I do not think these next steps will
be the most difficult part. Perhaps the most complicated. Perhaps the most timeconsuming.
But not the hardest.
That part was getting the political commitment to a free trade goal for all APEC
economies made by the 18 leaders at Bogor.
That was what has given the region the negotiating agenda which will carry us
forward. My views of the Bogor outcome were shared by my colleagues there. As Prime
Minister Bolger has said: " The level of commitment from leaders was remarkable it
is truly going to change the nature of trade in the world in the next five years."
President Ramos has described the Bogor declaration as " A truly momentous decision
a very solid road map that we are all committed to follow." President Clinton said
he was convinced the declaration will be of historic importance. Prime Minister Goh
of Singapore said the declaration has " sown the seeds for prosperity in the region".
Like Mr Vincent Siew of Taiwan, Prime Minister Goh has committed his country to
the 20 10 timetable for free trade for industrialised economies. I 
The advantages for Australia and the region of the commitments made in Bogor are
very great.
Modelling by the Office of National Assessments and the Industry Commission
suggests that free trade in APEC would more than triple the national income gains
from the Uruguay Round outcome alone to more than $ 300 billion.
For Australia, we estimate that under APEC free trade, Australia's real output would
rise by 3.8 per cent and real national income by 1.2 per cent.
This would include a 27 per cent increase in Australian exports and a 20 per cent
projected rise in imports. Once the effects of APEC trade liberalisation have fully
flowed through, we can expect a permanent increase in employment of over 200,000
jobs. The great advantage for Australia will come from the opening up of the fast-growing
APEC markets that already take three quarters of our exports.
It will come, too, from making Australia more attractive to investors from the rest of
the world.
For Australian business and workers, APEC trade liberalisation is good news because
Australia is already so far down the path towards free trade.
As Philip Brass of Pacific Dunlop has said " For Australia, it is all up-side."
By 2000, a full decade before we are committed to achieve free trade, Australia's
average trade-weighted tariff will be just 2.9 per cent. In 1986/ 87 it was 10.7 per cent.
Even in industries we have come to think of as highly protected, such as textiles,
clothing and footwear and motor vehicles, tariffs will be low by 2000 only 15 per
cent in the case of motor vehicles and between 5 per cent and 25 per cent for TCF.
This is amongst the lowest in the region. Tariffs on passenger motor vehicles range
from 100 to 300 per cent in some APEC economies, for example, and non-tariff
barriers are common.
So a great deal of our adjustment has already happened. Australian industry has
already shown it is more than capable of competing in a low tariff environment.
While average trade-weighted tariffs have come down by 44 per cent over the past
decade, Australia's exports of manufactures have grown by more than 17 per cent a
year in the case of elaborately transformed manufactures.
Even in the areas of passenger vehicles and textiles clothing and footwear, companies
like Toyota, which plans to lift exports from Australia from $ 47 million in 1990 to
$ 600 million by 2000, will benefit from lower APEC barriers.
I have said before that APEC gives Australia for the first time a seat at a very large
table. But the extent of the benefits we or any of the others will gain, and the extent to 
which our voice is heard at this table, will depend on each of us; on our recognition of
the need for change and improvement; on our ability to use the resources we have
effectively and efficiently; on our imagination and creativity.
This is a large challenge that lies ahead for all of us in Australia for governments, for
business, for our unions, for our education and training system.
Our officials at home and abroad will have to liaise even more closely with industry.
Our business people across the board will have to understand the region better.
We will have to maintain the pressure for micro-economic reform.
To coordinate our response to these challenges, the Government has decided to
establish an ad hoc APEC committee of Cabinet.
I will chair the committee, with the Minister for Trade as Deputy Chair. Other
members will include the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Treasurer, the Minister for
Industry, Science and Technology, the Minister for Employment, Education and
Training, the Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, the Minister for Transport
and the Minister for Communications and the Arts.
Detailed sectoral consultations will be undertaken by all the relevant Industry Ministers
to make sure we understand industry concerns and aspirations.
The Government's White Paper on employment, Working Nation provided for TCF
and PMV assistance arrangements to be reviewed sdfdecisions iia-nie taken in 1997 on
post-2000 arrangements. These reviews will take account of what progress is being
made on trade liberalisation in APEC. Through my colleagues Senator Cook and
Senator McMullan the industry will be fu~ lly involved in these decisions.
APEC has consistently confounded the sceptics.
Just twelve months ago the British journal, The Economist, described suggestions that
APEC should aim to form a free-trade area as " the stuff as dreams are made on".
In a sense they were right, but not in the way the Eurocentric editorial staff meant.
Last year, Australian newspapers were claiming that my ambition for APEC to become
an Asia-Pacific community was premature.
Yet, this year, without the slightest controversy, the Bogor declaration spoke of our
" moving toward a community of Asia-Pacific economies".
Why has APEC continued to go fujrther, faster, than the doubters expected?
Because it makes sense for all the diverse economies of the region.
I have said before that APEC did not have to happen. When the Cold War bindings
were removed, the development of a cooperative structure like this was neither
predictable nor inevitable. The next generation would probably have forgiven us for 
failing to see the possibilities for letting the opportunity pass because it was
" 1premature" or the " stuff of dreams".
There was certainly nothing inevitable about the Bogor declaration. It was an act of
will by regional leaders and an act of goodwill. It was the result of imagination and
co-operation.
Alternative Asia Pacific futures were possible.
We might have seen the growth of a self-confident but inward-looking Asian grouping,
building on East Asian trade and investment flows and excluding Australia.
In my view that would have had the most serous consequences not only for the
economic growth of Asia and the Pacific but for the strategic stability of the region.
Over time it would inevitably have attenuated the defence and security partnership
between the United States and Japan with a broader impact throughout the region.
On the other hand, the region might have drifted along as before, buffeted by internal
and external frictions, but developing no institutional framework to deal with them.
It is true that the economic integration of Asia was underway before APEC began and
that even in the absence of such a structure it would no doubt have continued.
But it would be a very different sort of integration more ad hoc, driven by companies
working in their narrower interests and less open to Australia and Australian business.
We would have failed to engage the rapidly developing Chinese economy, or Indonesia
and the other South East Asian countries, in a broader regional framework. A critical
opportunity and one which is open for only a very short time would have been lost.
For Australia, either of these paths would have made for a stultified Australian
economy, strategic uncertainty and political isolation.
Instead, this Government chose the path of shaping the future for ourselves and the
region. Australia proposed APEC. We worked with other regional countries like
Korea to develop it. And now we have given it new institutional focus and energy by
proposing regular meetings of leaders to give it the executive authority that the
ministerial level meeting could never have had to give it the power to make the sort
of decisions taken at Bogor. I am very proud of what Australia has been able to do.
The Bogor declaration will help ensure that this generation of Australians and our
successors, have a dynamic role in their own region.
I said recently at the National Strategies Conference in Sydney that our most
fundamental responsibility is to provide for the next generation as we were provided
for to provide the conditions for security and prosperity and opportunities for talent
and energy.
Simple hard work and earnest intentions will not of themselves deliver these things.
The world has changed and we all must change with it. 
The Bogor agreement was a recognition of this fact.
It is, of course, no reason to make less of our effort here in Australia. On the contrary,
because Bogor has, in an unprecedented way, taken on the responsibility to provide a
better world in the 21st century, the challenges for us are more obvious and immediate.
The Australia in which I grew up was a prosperous and secure place. It was then and
it is now an extraordinarily good place to live.
But if we are to maintain our way of life, the Australia of the 21st century will need to
be built on different foundations. Our success in the world will depend on our
effective integration with it. Our success in the world's most dynamic region will also
depend on this.
Bogor does not assure us of prosperity. It does not guarantee the future for the next
generation of Australians. That will continue to depend on the efforts of Australian
governments, Australian businesses and Australian workers.
But Bogor creates a massive opportunity and I think every Australian should be aware
of it.
I think every Australian should know that the chance really is there. In the next
century, to be Australian should mean not only the privileges we currently enjoy, but a
share in the extraordinary economic and cultural riches of the Asia-Pacific, and a
creative role in our region's remarkable progress. This opportunity is, I think, an
exciting prospect. I 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
REPORT OF THE CIVICS EXPERT GROUP
It is my pleasure to announce that I have today received the report of the
Civics Expert Group.
The Report is appropriately entitled Whereas the people which is the
opening phrase of our Constitution and declares the popular basis of our
national government. Yet there is a sting in the tail of this title, as it reminds
us how few people in the general community or even in this place would know
the source and importance of these words.
The Commonwealth established the Civics Expert Group in June 1994 to
prepare a strategic plan for a non-partisan program of public education and
information on the Australian system of government, the Australian
Constitution, Australian citizenship and other civics issues.
The Group is Chaired by Professor Stuart Macintyre, the Ernest Scott
Professor of History in the University of Melbourne. The other members of
the Group are Dr Ken Boston, the Director-General of the New South Wales
Department of School Education, and Ms Susan Pascoe of the Catholic
Education Office in Melbourne.
The report reflects considerable credit on them all. They have completed
their task with considerable style and thoroughness. It is obvious that a great
deal of careful thought has gone into the report's recommendations, and that
the Group has genuinely come to grips with the difficult subject of educating
Australians about our system of government.
The Report sets out a program to help Australians participate more fully and
effectively in the civic life of our nation. It reflects the wide program of
consultation undertaken by the Group, which met with State governors;
representatives of State and Territory governments; leaders of federal
political parties; Australia's government and non-government education 
sectors; community groups and interested bodies in the field such as the
Constitutional Centenary Foundation and the Parliamentary Education Office.
I endorse the view of the Group that an active and informed citizenship
should be " the mortar that holds together the bricks of our contemporary,
multicultural Australia". For this, Australians need a better knowledge of how
our government works, they need skills to become involved effectively, and
they need an appreciation of the benefits of active citizenship.
Education is the key. As part of its inquiries, the Group drew on a national
survey of community understanding of civics issues. The findings of that
survey, which are detailed in the Report, indicate widespread ignorance and
misunderstanding about the structure and function of Australia's system of
government, about its origins, and about the ways it can serve the needs of
citizens. The ignorance is not just of matters of detail, it goes to a basic lack
of understanding of the system and the principles on which it is founded.
This reflects a fundamental failing in our education system which the
Government is determined to address.
The remedy is to build an active and informed community through our
education system. The Group has put the view that education for citizenship
is an essential component of a liberal education and should rank with English
and mathematics as a priority for school education. I agree that it has been
neglected for far too long. To feel confidence in our future, to be active
participants in our national life, to feel pride in our democratic and inclusive
society, people must understand our democratic institutions and have a
sense of their history and the ideals on which they are based. To participate
fully and effectively to be good citizens, in other words they must
understand both the role of those institutions and the way they can become
active participants in our civic life.
This will require cooperative action by Australian governments. The
Commonwealth government recognises that Commonwealth financial support
would assist the State and Territory education authorities to implement
proposals along the lines recommended. The nature and extent of the
Commonwealth's support will be considered following consultations with the
States and Territories.
The Group has recommended that its report be made available for public
comment and discussion for three months. I am happy to agree and would
welcome comments on the report and its implementation by the end of
February 1995.
7 December 1994
CANBERRA 



PRIME MINIISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TO THE NATIONAL TRADE AND INVESTMENT OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE 7 DECEMBER 1994
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"*
It is a great pleasure to be able to address the National Trade and Investment
Outlook Conference again.
When I spoke at the inaugural meeting last year, 900 people were present,
representing 162 Australian companies. We were very pleased with that
response and we are even more pleased with this one.
This year we have 1500 delegates representing 450 companies.
And twice as many international delegates are attending the conference this
year. This is an excellent result. It reflects the growing interest among Australian
companies in going off-shore, in exporting, in looking at a global market rather
than a market of 18 million people.
A real change is taking place in Australian business culture.
Export performance, best practice, international competitiveness are all
increasingly central tothe approach of Australian businesspeople and
Australian workers.
Already, around one in eight Australian manufacturers is involved in exporting.
But the important lesson and one that is getting through to more and more
Australian companies is that, irrespective of size, these manufacturing
exporters outperform their non-exporting counterparts.
In fact, firms which operate internationally are 65 per cent more productive
than those which operate only in the domestic market and they consistently
invest more in new capital equipment. 
The people in this room understand this. There really is no more important
message for Australian business and for the Australian community at large. If
it was not apparent before, the APEC leaders' meeting at Bogor certainly
should have driven it home.
That is what I want to talk about this morning APEC, Australia and our trade
priorities. I have spoken a good deal about AP-EC.. over recent weeks, and I know you
have already heard from Bob McMullan on the subject, so I only want to put a
few simple propositions to you7
First, the commitments made at the Bogor meeting to achieve free trade
between the APEC economies by 2010 for industrialised economies and 2020
for developing economies will change fundamentally the way the countries of
the Asia-Pacific work together and the climate for business in the region.
Second, Australia is well placed to take advantage of this change.
Third, while APEC provides a tremendous framework for growth in the region,
the trade and commerce it facilitates will take place bilaterally. In other words,
we must not ignore our bilateral links with individual regional countries. And
when I say " our" I mean both of us governments and business.
And, fourth, while Australia's policy focus has been on the Asia-Pacific and
APEC, this does not mean that we will ignore the great importance to us of
other markets and other international relationships.
The term " historic achievement" is thrown around very loosely about
international meetings. But I think the Bogor meeting which President
Soeharto chaired was one by any measure.
The Declaration we agreed there commits us to establish free trade no later
than 2020 among a group of countries which already account for half the
world's production. It establishes an Asia-Pacific association which makes any
fracturing of the world into three contending trade groupings less likely. And it
offers an unprecedented opportunity to maintain dynamic economic growth in
Asia and the Pacific, while preserving strategic stability.
A good deal of work remains to be done as we fill out the details of the trade
liberalisation process in the lead-up to the next leaders' meeting in Osaka.
But the critical part getting the political commitment to trade and investment
liberalisation is now behind us. All the APEC economies have accepted that
we are working towards a common goal. 
And I am convinced that, as was the case when this Government began
dismantling the ring fence of protectionism behind which Australia had
slumbered for so long, the timetable we are now talking about will come
forward as businesses begin to factor the decisions we have made into their
planning.
Most of the public attention since Bogor has been focussed on the free trade
aspect of the declaration.
That is understandable because the benefits from APEC-wide free trade for
Asia-Pacific economies are huge according to our estimates, around three
times the size of the Uruguay Round outcome alone.
But it is important not to lose sight of the other part of APEC's work the trade
facilitation agenda.
In this area, a lot of work is underway which will be of real benefit to business,
especially as formal barriers in the region such as tariff rates begin to come
down. At Bogor, for example, we agreed on:
a set of common investment principles, a first-step in a region-wide
effort to make investment flows easier
a commitment to improve customs procedures, establish common
standards and lower administrative barriers to market access
a " standstill" agreement, committing regional economies to refrain on a
best endeavours basis from increasing protection measures
the need to examine a voluntary dispute mediation service which could
supplement the WTO's more formal requirements
and support for the growing economic policy dialogue taking place
under the auspices of APEC Finance Ministers
All these decisions, together with the trade liberalisation commitment, add up
to an agreed agenda which has set the pattern for regional co-operation over
the next twenty five years.
This is a fundamental change in the political, economic and strategic dynamics
of the Asia-Pacific region. It offers enormous opportunities to businesses that
are creative and flexible and understand the wider environment. They can
plan on access to an increasingly large and integrated regional market,
representing forty per cent of the world's population. 
The Bogor commitments have in my view changed the way business will have
to operate in the region. They will have to conceive of their operations in a
more integrated way. And, naturally, as they work to the new agenda, they will
do best if they work more closely with government. And the Government you
can be sure wants to work very closely with business.
Bob McMullan and Peter Cook and other Ministers will be consulting very
dro-sely with ' business -in thie period ahead.
And I have asked two distinguished Australian business people, Philip Brass of
Pacific Dunlop and Imelda Roche of Nutri-metics, to continue to represent
Australia on the Pacific Business Forum group, to which APEC leaders will be
looking for further guidance on what business needs from APEC.
The second point I want to make today is that Australia is very well placed to
meet these new challenges set by APEC.
By 2000 a full decade before Australia is required to achieve free trade under
the Bogor commitment our average trade-weighted tariff will be just 2.9 per
cent. Even in industries traditionally regarded as highly protected, such as textiles,
clothing and footwear and motor vehicles, tariffs will be low by 2000 only
per cent in the case of motor vehicles and between 5 per cent and 25 per cent
for TCF.
Much of our adjustment has already been made.
The effective rate of industry protection in Australia is now about one-third of
what it was in the early 1980s and yet our exports represent 22 per cent of our
GDP compared with less than 14 per cent in 1983.
Elaborately transformed manufactures, which now dominate world trade,
account for 21 per cent of Australia's merchandise exports. And services,
which will be increasingly important as economic growth in the region
continues, account for 20 per cent of our exports.
All Australian industries will benefit from lower barriers in a region where
formal and informal trade barriers have geine6-riily been' higher than our own.
This brings me to my third point:
Although APEC provides a structural framework for co-operation throughout
the Asia-Pacific, the actual business of commerce is conducted country-tocountry
and company-to-company.
When we talk about the opportunities which Bogor creates, that is what it
translates to on the ground contact between Australians and their Asia-
Pacific counterparts. 
APEC can be an important accretion to but never a substitute for the
development of strong bilateral links with individual regional countries.
The process is mutually reinforcing.
At the time of the APEC leaders' meeting in Bogor, for example, I was able to
have a very useful series of meetings with ten other heads of government to
discuss bilateral issues.
And good bilateral relationships, in turn, make it easier to do things cooperatively
in the APEC forum.
The Government will continue to look for ways of strengthening relations with
individual regional countries.
A good example has been Indonesia, where we have established the Australia-
Indonesia Ministerial Forum, which has helped broaden the whole focus of the
rela'tionship, and where the Australia Today promotion earlier this year was
such a success in getting the message through to business and the public.
We have been working on the same sort of pattern with other regional
countries, too.
During my visit to Singapore in 1992, for example, our two Governments
agreed to support the efforts of Australian and Singaporean companies to
develop joint business opportunities so-called strategic linkages elsewhere
in Asia.
When Prime Minister Goh visited Australia in September we agreed to
contribute $ 1 million each to establish a Joint Venture Feasibility Study Fund
under this program to assist companies operating jointly in third markets.
We also agreed to establish a Singapore-Australia Business Alliance Forum
which will play a strategic role in developing commercial relations between
Australia and Singapore and business partnerships in third country markets.
We will each be nominating a select group of CEOs to the Forum, representing
companies with strong track records in the Asia-Pacific region.
We will retain close stewardship of the forum to ensure it meets each country's
aims. At the Strategic Business Partnerships session here tomorrow, I hope business
people from Australia and Singap~ e will decide on a destination for a joint
mission next year which will be led by Senator McMullan.
Initiatives such as this can be applied to other countries. 
In Australia last month, both President Frei of Chile and President Kim of
Korea, expressed interest in developing linkages between their business
sectors and Australian companies. And I have also discussed such
opportunities with Prime Minister Mahathir of Malaysia.
My discussion with President Frei envisaged Australia as a gateway for
Chilean companies into Asia and Chile as a beach-head for Australia into
South America.
President Kim Young Sam and I also talked about the tremendous potential for
b6--o-perati-on betvween Australian and Korean firms in the science and
technology area.
We agreed to negotiate a new science and technology agreement and to
jointly invest in industrial technology projects in areas like the information
superhighway and clean energy.
These are just some examples of initiatives we are taking to develop bilateral
relationships in ways which facilitate closer private sector links as well.
The story here is being repeated with all our neighbours with China, with
Thailand, with Japan, with Vietnam and around the region.
The fourth point is one I want to make particularly clearly, because the
message sometimes gets lost.
It is that, despite the importance to Australia of APEC and regional economic
linkages, we fully recognise the continuing importance of our relationships with
other countries and other regions.
In other words, we are quite able to walk and chew gum at the same time.
That is why we particularly welcome the delegations here from France, India,
Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Mexico ( although Mexico is also a partner in
APEC). The message we hope you will take back is that this country has a lot to offer
you and your businesses through trade and investment, in Australia itself and,
through Australia, into the Asia-Pacific.
Because this is a very good place to do business an information-rich,
technologically advanced country, situated in the fastest growing region of the
world and with a highly trained multicultural workforce.
Business conditions here are the best they have been for years. The
Australian economy is growing strongly six per cent per annum over the past
twelve months. 
And inflation remains below two per cent, less than the OECD average. For
the first time since the early 1960s, we have seen inflation under 2% per cent
for nearly three years.
Wages growth has been very subdued in the past few years, and we have
seen significant improvements in productivity.
These favourable business conditions have been reflected in high profits and
high levels of business confidence. Corporate profits rose by over 11 per cent
through the twelve months to the September quarter. The profit share is now
at its highest level since 1985.
Business investment, especially in plant and equipment, is mounting a strong
recovery which will upgrade and expand the productive capacity of the
economy. This in turn will boost the prospects for Australian exports.
In 1993-94, our volume of exports of goods and services grew by 9 per cent,
more strongly than the Budget forecast, while exports of elaborately
transformed manufactures grew by 16 per cent.
And it is important to appreciate that although Australia is still best known
overseas as an efficient producer of agriculture and minerals, this is a
technologically sophisticated country with a first rate scientific research base.
The image of Australia is to some extent divorced from the contemporary facts.
To give you some random examples:
We have more computers and processing power per head than any country
other than the United States and have invested a higher percentage of our
GDP in telecommunications infrastructure than any country other than Korea
and Germany.
Hundreds of Australian information technology and telecommunications firms
are exporting successfully worldwide.
Australian software runs the tracking, reservation and booking systems for
Lufthansa and other airlines, for example.
Buses in the UK and Denmark use ' smart card' ticketing developed by an
Australian company.
In March I will be attending the CeBIT' 95 Trade Fair in Hanover where 130
Australian companies will be participating. 
Australian research and technology is leading the world in areas like gene
shears, which have huge benefits for plant, animal and human health; an antiinfluenza
drug which offers real hope of treatment for all strains of flu; and a
multibeam antenna, capable of communicating with twenty satellites at once
and which makes communications links more cost-effective.
A Co-operative Research Centres program linking universities and research
insfiflitions with industry is pioneering world-class technologies in Australia.
But although Australia has many great attributes, none is more important than
our people. The ethnic diversity of Australia's people gives this country a
natural network for doing global business.
All of the world's nationalities, cultures, religions and traditions are represented
here, but in a uniquely Australian blend.
Here again I suspect the image abroad is a little behind the reality.
Forty two per cent of Australians were either born overseas or have at least
one parent born overseas. Seventeen per cent of Australians speak a
language other than English at home.
We are implementing strategies to make effective economic use of our cultural
diversity which is becoming integral to our approach to industry and trade
development. There are more than 160 ethnic chambers of commerce and bilateral business
organisations around Australia, all actively engaged with Australia's
international commercial relations.
To help businesses get access to these networks, the Government recently
commissioned a study to identify the organisations and their networking
potential. I am pleased to announce that the associated database is available at this
conference for the first time. It is a resource which will help Australian
companies tap into global business networks by providing them with easy
access to people with inside knowledge of markets, first-hand experience,
fluency in their languages and an intimate knowledge of their cultures and
consumer preferences.
There are already many examples where astute Australian businesspeople
have drawn on this resource.
Among manufacturers, for example, Vulcanite and Utilux have utilised
Chinese-born Australian employees to capitalise on market opportunities in
China. 
Of the more than 90 international corporations who have set up significant
regional activities from Australia, a number including Data General, the Hong
Kong Jockey Club, IBM, Novell and Oracle have cited Australia's multicultural
population as an important factor in making a decision to locate their regional
headquarters in Australia.
The final point I want to make is about the relationship between business and
government. The world we are moving into is very different from what we have known in the
past. It is more integrated than ever, a globalised environment in which more and
more aspects of our national economy have an international dimension to
them, and in which our external interests economic, strategic, political are
intertwined in a way we have never seen before.
In this sort of world, it is increasingly important that business and government
each understand what the other is saying and work in a complementary way.
That is a very important aim of this Government.
For example, a major part of the work of Australia's overseas posts is now to
assist Australian firms take advantage of trade and investment opportunities.
The Government's overseas trade support network, particularly in China,
Vietnam and other key Asian countries is being strengthened.
Our overseas network is also now increasingly specialised to cater for the
specific needs of Australian exporters. As well as a wide network of Foreign
Affairs and Trade posts, and Austrade staff here and overseas, we have
education counsellors promoting the export of education services and industry,
science and technology counsellors stationed around the globe.
And nine investment commissioners are encouraging foreign firms to set up
operations in Australia, either independently or as joint ventures with
Australian firms.
Government officials here or overseas can't make your deal happen. They
can't write the contracts. But they can help you through their local knowledge
and put you in touch with the right people. Using them can save time and
effort, open doors to opportunities and remove obstacles to doing business.
You should use the next two days to meet with the Australian Ambassadors
and Austrade overseas officers who have returned to be at this conference.
Let them know how they can help in your chosen markets and keep in touch
with them when they get back to their posts. 
I hope all of you Australian delegates and international guests find this not
only an interesting couple of days but profitable ones.
Because, in the end, the purpose of this conference is not to listen to speakers
but to do business to help link our private sector with potential partners
overseas. As the theme says: to create networks for global business. 



JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT
JOINT STATEMENT
Prime Minister
Minister for Transport
T76/ 94 8 December, 1994
NOISE MANAGEMENT INITIATWES AT SYDNEY AIRPORT
Sydney residents worst affected by aircraft noise will have immediate access to
compensation measures under the Federal Government's $ 183.4 million noise
amelioration package.
The package, announced on 1 November, was originally intended to be spread over ten
years with the voluntary acquisition of 112 houses within the 3 0 to 40 Australian Noise
Exposure Forecast ( ANEF) contours and the insulation of 3,500 houses above the
ANEF contour.
Prime Minister, Paul Keating, and the Minister f6r Transport, Laurie Brereton, said
Cabinet had agreed to bring forward the package so that the acquisitions and insulation
will be completed within three years at a cost of around $ 60 million each year.
" Residents in the most noise-affected areas, in the 40-plus ANEF contour, will be
contacted immediately about acquisition of their properties under the Government's
voluntary acquisition program," they said.
The Department of Administrative Services will assist in the early start to the program
to soundproof schools and colleges down to the 25 ANEF with the aim of completing
the necessary works by the end of the first term of the 1995 school year.
" The noise treatment program will be the subject of continuous evaluation to ensure
that its objectives are being met."
Mr Brereton said the cost of the program will be met by a tax on the jet aircraft using
Sydney airport. Legislation to implement the tax will be introduced early in 1995 and
the tax will apply from 1 July, 1995.
Cabinet also approved a number of other measures aimed at tackling the noise
problems" at Sydney Airport. The measures include designated flight paths, penalties
for flight path violation, increased penalties for curfew violation, and a proposal to
introduce slot times for peak periods. 
In future, jets taking off to the north will be required to taxi to the southernmost end of
the runway and attain as much height as possible prior to reaching residential areas.
The following attachment, with maps, details the measures approved today.
Media contact: Kate Hannon ( 06) 277 7320 
NOISE MANAGEMENT INITIATIVES AT SYDNEY AIRPORT
OPERATIONAL MEASURES AT SYDNEY AIRPORT
The Government proposes a number of steps to minimise the number of people
affected by aircraft noise in Sydney.
1. Establishment of designated flight paths
The Civil Aviation Authority ( CAA) has developed new flight paths associated with
instrument approach and departure procedures designed to international standards.
These are designed to confine overflights to the narrowest flight paths in order to
minimise the number of people affected by aircraft noise.
These paths will apply to all jet take-offs and landings given that:
jets produce the most noise; and
to constrain propeller aircraft to the same flight paths would significantly
slow throughput of traffic and constrain airport capacity.
Copies of the new approach and departure paths are attached.
2. Penalties for flight path violation.
The experience since the opening of the parallel runway at Sydney Airport
demonstrates that the previous flight paths allowed aircraft to spread out over wide
areas of Sydney's most densely populated suburbs.
Adherence to the new flight-paths will be closely monitored. New Regulations
under the Air Navigation Act will be introduced to provide a legislative basis for jet
aircraft, which operate outside the tolerances set for the flight paths, to be liable for
prosecution under the Act. The Regulations will provide for substantial financial
penalties for offenders. Corporate operators will face a maximum penalty of
$ 25,000 for each violation. The Regulations will be introduced this year and take
effect as soon as aircraft navigational systems can be programmed to fly the new
flight paths.
3. Requirement for jet aircraft to depart from the southern end of the
main north-south runway ( northerly takeoffs on 34L) and attain as
much height as possible over residential areas
When prevailing winds make it necessary for jet aircraft to take off to the north on
the main north-south runway ( 34L) they will be required to depart from the farthest
point of the southern end of the runway. This will ensure that aircraft are at a
greater height above residential areas on take-off. 
Jets will be required to attain as much height as soon as possible after take-off prior
to reaching residential areas.
4. Curfew enforcement
There is to be a stringent enforcement of the curfew arrangements.
The Curfew Regulations under the Air Navigation Act will be amended to provide
for financial penalties for unauthorised operations, rather than the present
administrative penalty whereby the operator can be prevented from using the airport
for a specified period of up to 12 months. This administrative penalty was never
applied. The Regulations will provide for substantial financial penalties for
breaches. Corporate operators will face a maximum penalty of $ 25,000 for each
breach. The Regulations will be in place by Christmas.
Demand management at Sydney Airport
In order to ensure that demand on Sydney Airport matches the capacity of the
airport during peak hours of operation the Government will propose the introduction
of a system of slots for aircraft movements to and from the airport during certain
peak periods of the day. The appropriate mechanism for allocating slots will be
developed in consultation with the airline industry.
6. Reaffirmation of Government Policy on operational noise controls
The Government reaffirms the strict enforcement of the following operational
controls at Sydney Airport:
unless otherwise required on safety or weather grounds all take-offs must be
to the south of the airport over Botany Bay;
no take-offs to the north from the new runway;
the east-west runway will remain available for use when weather conditions
preclude take-offs and landings on the parallel runways for safety reasons;
existing controls on times and locations of ground running operations to be
retained
NOISE TREATMIENT MEASURES
On 1 November 1994 the Government announced a $ 183.4 million package of
measures over 10 years to reduce the impact of aircraft noise on residents around
Sydney Airport. The package includes the voluntary acquisition of homes within the
Australian Noise Exposure Forecast contour ( ANEF) and the insulation of homes
between the 30 and 40 ANEF contour. Schools, colleges, hospitals, child and health
care facilities will be eligible for insulation down to the 25 ANEF contour.
It is now proposed to accelerate this program and have it completed within 3 years
at a cost of around $ 60 million each year. The voluntary acquisition program and 
the insulation program for schools and colleges will commence immediately. It is
expected that the school and college insulation program will be completed by the
end of the first term of the new school year.
The Department of Administrative Services will assist in the early commencement
of the noise treatment program.
The cost of the program will be met by a tax on the jet aircraft using Sydney
Airport. Legislation to implement the tax will be introduced in early 1995 and the
tax will apply from 1 July 1995.
MONITORING AND COMMUNITY CONSULTATION
To improve monitoring, information and consultation with residents affected by
aircraft noise the Government will establish a new community consultative
committee to monitor noise abatement and amelioration measures.
SYDNEY WEST AIRPORT
The Government has reaffirmed its commitment to the construction of a major
runway at Sydney West Airport and the construction of road linkages between
Sydney West Airport and Sydney Airport ( KSA) by 1998/ 99.
To date the Government has:
expended $ 150 million to acquire the* airport site, purchase forecast noise
affected properties, build local access roads and undertaken preliminary
concept design
committed a further $ 120 million for the building of a 2900 metre runway
which will be capable of accommodating medium haul operations by B747
and B767
commenced an EIS on options for the National Highway between Prestons
and Cecil Park. Construction of the road link will be undertaken at an
approximate cost of $ 200 million to coincide with the opening of the 2900m
runway. commenced a joint Commonwealth/ State engineering study to secure a rail
corridor as a basis for effective rail links between Sydney West Airport,
KSA and the city.
A project team is currently preparing detailed submissions for the Government on
how the airport can be developed to an integrated master plan to provide for
modular development and expansion to meet demand. 
SYDNEY AIRPORT JET DEPARTURE FLIGHT PATH
/ RUNWAY 16 LEFT
VISUAL DEPARTURE
I 4l-LIMIT OF NAV1GATIO
TOLERANCE
SNORMAL DEPARTURE TRACK. MA1P941
RUNWAY 16 LEFT VISUAL towards the South East
RUNWAY 34 LEFT INSTRUMENT towards the North
RUNWAY 16 RIGHT INSTRUMENT towards the South 
SYDNEY AIRPORT JET INSTRUMENT ARRIVAL FLIGHT PATHS MAP 9412
RUNWAY 16 LEFT AND RIGHT from the North
RUNWAY 34 LEFT AND RIGHT from the South 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AND THE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRIES AND ENERGY,
SENATOR THE HON BOB COLLINS, JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE,
8 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: the statement just released to you which is a decision taken by the
Cabinet on submissions lodged by my colleague Senator Collins in a
set of proposals which have been worked up by the leader of our Rural
and Regional Task Force Harry Woods, Member for Page, Bob
Horne, Member for Patterson and Dick Adams, Member for Lyons as
well as with extensive consultation with the farm sector and the
leadership of the major farm and grazing groups.
I think the first thing we want to say about this is that the Government
regards this drought as probably the most serious ever. I said at the
election that we wouldn't be leaving any section of Australia behind
and that included farming families. So, in 1994 we have introduced a
White Paper for the long-term unemployed because of their plight. We
have now focussed, I think, systematically on the difficulties faced by
rural Australia particularly those people affected by severe drought.
As a consequence, the Government, in a quite revolutionary change of
policy announced some time ago that we would remove the farm
assets test for the purpose of income support, for people in farm
communities and improve also the capacity of the Rural Adjustment
Scheme to adjust farms who are in marginal conditions at the best of
times away from the sector now that conditions have become far more
critical and also to improve farm management capacity and Senator
Collins and I gave a commitment that we would look at the possibility
of structural improvements to the tax system to encourage for the
future the putting away of money for difficulties. circumstances or the
putting away of fodder and the storage of water. These are things that
we gave a commitment to the farm leaders on and the farm
communities on at the time of our last major package.
Now, that was $ 164 million of assistance over time and this package is
$ 112 million over four years which adds to the cost of the scheme, but
again, seeks to try to deal with the problem. 
2
In a nutshell what we have today, we have the RASAC giving us
advice upon what areas are exceptional circumstance areas drought
exceptional circumstance. Now, it has to be a scientific evaluation, it is
one away from the political fray, it is one that looks objectively at the
problems of particular localities in respect of drought and the qualifying
criteria. The submission which Bob Collins brought to Cabinet
yesterday extended that drought exceptional circumstance area down
the north coast of New South Wales. There is a map here and you are
welcome to it which shows in orange the general, Bob, maybe you
could show them Bob. Have you got the map?
BC: They are coming.
PM: Here it is here, that is the new area. All of this pink area is already
receiving drought exceptional circumstance support, but where we
have taken the policy a little further is in the areas which are here in
primrose, these are the areas if you like, in central western New South
Wales from the Hunter back in through to Dubbo and to Nyngan.
Those areas don't qualify for the drought exceptional circumstance, but
they are severely drought affected and they are structurally depleted in
terms of the way in which the sector has been managed in that part of
New South Wales. So, what we have sought to do to overcome this
problem, we are enlarging the regional RAS program which will help
ensure that those areas outside of these drought declared areas are
sensitively managed. The other declaration, of course, is in the
eastern side of Tasmania which is also an area recommended by
RASAC. So, we are doing two things. We are extending the drought
exceptional circumstance declarations down the New South Wales
coast and into Tasmania. We are also, in areas which are severely
drought affected but don't qualify for technical reasons, be it late rains
or other things, and where there are structural problems, to extend
regional RAS for adjustment there and because the people in that area
don't qualify for income support under the exceptional circumstances
what Bob Collins has recommended is that the Cabinet allocate a
further level of funding for the Farm Household Support scheme, which
is an income support scheme which is not part of the social security
system as is the availability of income support under the exceptional
circumstances drought arrangements. The Cabinet has agreed to
provide a further $ 5 million in 1994/ 95 and 1995/ 96 to enable the
Minister for Primary Industry and Energy to exercise his discretion
under Section 5.3 of the Farm Household Support Act 1992 to extend
the grant period under the scheme for eligible farmers in the western
division and central west of New South Wales from nine months to a
maximum of 24 months.
In other words, what the Government is seeking to do here is to cover
off the areas of exceptional circumstance, to provide the income
support that comes with it and where the drought extends itself to have 
RASAC examine the areas and make appropriate declarations. But,
where we have a critical situation on our hands and -we do in some of
these areas, particularly in the central west area of New South Wales
which hasn't caught the southern rains in the way the ACT has, we
have sought to extend the policy further by putting another, if you like
backup, to the drought exceptional circumstances policy.
Let me say that our Rural and Regional Task Force has been quiet
significant in this, that is, the touch that they have had with the rural
farm communities around Australia including in New South Wales and
in this area out in central western New South Wales, Bob Homne has
been in touch with the farm community and getting an assessment of
how we can deal with farm degradation, how we can deal with
overstocking, how we can deal with some of the problems which are
now making itself pretty obvious.
Can I just say we have had criticism here from the New South Wales
Ministers Souris and Causley and the gall of them is that less
payments are going to New South Wales farmers, say compared with
Queensland, because New South Wales won't provide the funding.
New South Wales won't provide the funding. The hypocrisy of Souris
and Causely is manifest. So, as always, as in most things in this
country, to get a structural change in this area of policy, it has come as
always, from the Labor Party. But, we are guided by the thing that
always guides us and that is if people are in trouble, no matter where
they are or where they are from or who they vote for, let me say that,
we are there to give them a hand. But, give them a hand with a policy
that will stick under pressure and one that is rational and sensible and
that is why, I think, generally the farm leaders have supported this
change. One final thing and that is on the future. Bob and I gave a commitment
to the farm sector that we would look at farm management bonds and
the IEDs and we are increasing the limit on the farm bonds from
$ 80,000 to $ 150,000 per tax payer, which is $ 300,000 for a two tax
payer farm family which means that they can save for tomorrow, if you
like, when they get income they can start to put money away. They get
a choice, they could either save money or in some respects if they
wanted they can save fodder, they can do the things that help them
through the tough times and we. have also introduced a 10 per cent
investment allowance for fodder storage, livestock water storage and
water conveyancing subject to investments being consistent with farm
management plans. That I might say, is a further change. In other
words we will encourage more water storage, we will be encouraging
greater provision for fodder and beyond that we will be encouraging
provision for finance for people to put funds away as they need it.
You might recall just a couple of weeks ago I put out a statement
introducing the Land Management Task Force to investigate ways to
improve the adoption use of property management plans for the farm
sector. What we want to see come out of the drought, out of this 
4
period of stress for people, is in the future we look at w~ hole of farm
planning: management of the soils; stocking rates; provision of water;
advice about what -sort of crops should be sown, how the contour
ploughing should take place. And we are trying to encourage the
banks to get into this so that they lend only when there is a competent
farm management plan. In other words, they are not just lending on
marginal land, that is marginal at the best of times and completely
lacking viability at the worst of times. So, that coupled with what we
are doing here today means quite a large change to agricultural policy
in Australia and let me complement my colleague Bob before he says
a word to you on understanding all these things, having the wit to put
a policy like this together, for his linkages and touch with the farm
community and the grazing community out there and, again, working
as he has in co-operation with our own colleagues in the caucus who I
have mentioned. This should mean that a lot of people in rural
Australia will know that whatever else happens, there is going to be
income support there for them in difficult circumstances, where they
are in exceptional or as we described very difficult circumstances and
for the future we'll let them put more funds away, we will help them
build their fodder and water capacity and we will get some real whole
of farm planning into the farm sector.
BC: With the delivery of this component for long term handling of drought
which we committed ourselves to in September, what this Government
has in fact done is we have delivered to primary producers across
Australia the most comprehensive and the best structured package of
drought assistance that any government has ever delivered to primary
producers in Australia. For both short term measures and for longer
term measures. One of the reasons for that is that we have worked
hand in glove with all of the major* farming organisations in Australia.
This has been developed in full co-operation with them. They haven't,
of course, got all they wanted, but they have got a substantial part of it.
They have got the parts of it that we thought were good policy. I
expect the FMBs that Paul has just referred to in particular will get a
huge tick from farmers right across Australia because the constant
demand from the primary producers, and they are fair dinkum about it,
is that they want the government as well as helping us now in the short
term to attack the underlying structural policy problems with the
existing short term measures of drought relief and what we have been
doing for 100 years in this country. is running in when there is a crisis
and slapping band-aids all over it, we have done it for a hundred
years. It hasn't been until this package has been delivered that we now have
a structured, comprehensive package that will target the assistance
properly and will help farmers help themselves.
One of the criticisms can I say of the FMBs has been, in terms of these
enhancements, ' oh well, this is going to help the very good farmers'.
Yes, it will and the reason I stress that is there is a very strong social
underlay to this package, very strong. In terms of maintaining the 
integrity of that bush community that really provide the wfioe spirit and
heart of Australia. The FMBs are absolutely crucial to that which is
why the farm organisations asked for this as their major priority and it
will help the best farmers survive the worst times in Australia and keep
them on those family farms.
Just to give you a quick example, the farming community, the NFF, the
Grains Council, the SA Farmers Federation, NSW Farmers
Federation, asked in respect of the taxation arrangements, the
investment allowances, that they be extended. Not just to water
storage, but also importantly to water conveyancing, that is actually
reticulating crops, reticulating it across the property, that made sense.
They also asked for it to be extended to minimum tillage equipment as
well, we have delivered on all that.
I would just like to take you quickly through the actual structure of what
has happened in New South Wales, which is important, again, in terms
of the social underlay of this. The Government has adopted in full all
of the recommendations of RASAC. Every single recommendation was
supported. RASAC, I have to say, have done a herculean task over
the last month or so, getting this into Cabinet in time. They have not
only done the massive analysis that is required, but they have been on
the ground as well, in all of these in places. And they have
recommended that this strip and you have got the maps now down
the East Coast of NSW and if you have a look at the historical Met.
patterns you will see why that has happened we have declared
exceptional circumstances and we have done it, a little consistent rain
shadow in Tasmania has also been allocated exceptional
circumstances. All of this area, of course, is currently getting it, and I
might add, in the short time this scheme has been working -since
September, basically 5 weeks from a running start, or a standing start
it has been dramatically successful. We now have 5000 farm families
receiving farm household support, or drought household support,
where they were getting nothing before. 5000. There'hasn't been a
hitch in the delivery of this.
PM: And that is worth about $ 6 million.. million.
BC: Now, the green area here is the Western Division of NSW which we
have already allocated funding for, for rural restructuring, in exactly the
same way as the package that has already been delivered and was
signed off by the Prime Minister in Charleville for South West
Queensland. I am heartened by the fact that George Souris in
response to a few complaints we made last week did say on the ABC
radio that the NSW Government is committed to deliver the assistance
here. Now, we were left with this band here in Central Western NSW
Nyngan and Dubbo and so on and this in fact was the basic request
for assistance this band here. This has been delivered.. . we were left
with this in here. It did not qualify, on the recommendation of RASAC,
for exceptional circumstances assistance. But there are hard problems
in here, I mean this area is essentially only been droughted since the 
beginning of the year, but because of massive structurar problems -I
mean a lot of these places are ex-dairy farmers that are now running
cattle and so on. There are massive structural problems, and RASAC
reported all this, massive environmental problems being caused in this
area, but also there are welfare problems. So we were faced with the
difficulty of getting some help to these people that's needed, while
maintaining the structural integrity of this approach. What we did was
this: we are going to incorporate the entire Central West area that is
yellow into this are as a Structural Adjustment Package for NSW, and
we will put that offer on the table immediately with NSW. Now what
that means importantly of course, are, enhanced re-establishment
grants $ 45,000 to $ 75,000 across this entire area for those people
that want to exit but also importantly we will provide you with the
detail of this later all of the productivity enhancement assistance that
is going to be put into here as well. But, what we have also done the
farm household support scheme which is the equivalent money to
JSA and the Drought Relief Payments it's the same amount of money
is currently only available for 9 months. At the end of that 9 months,
you either exit, in which case the loan is converted to a grant and you
don't have to repay it, or if you don't exit, that has then got to be
repaid. What we have done is we have extended for this are the FHS
qualifications from 9 months to 2 years. In fact, it has become a
central part of the reconstruction part of this area. So farmers in this
region will be able to go on farm household support in this whole
region for 2 years now. They will be able, if they wish to exit farming,
and indeed some of these farms without question are not viable, and
they will still get the re-establishment grant of $ 75,000 on top of that.
If, of course, they want to stay, they will be able to do that and that
grant will then be converted into a loan. So, we have delivered
fundamentally on everything we have been asked to deliver, in terms
of the major asks of the farming community, and as I said before, in
doing so, and addressing the social needs of farmers in a difficult
situation, this is the most comprehensive and best structured package
of drought assistance that has ever been delivered.
J: What happened to the appeal by the various state's to be included in
Exceptional Circumstances?
BC: They were all assessed by RASAC one important thing, we also said
as you recall when we launched the package, that we had adopted
a criteria of 24 months out of 36 as an immediate fix. The reason is it
has been used in Queensland now for 2 years now and we have to get
this assistance on the ground quickly. We acknowledge then the
deficiencies of it, and said we would go out with the co-operation of the
State ministers hopefully, and we did that. At the ARMCANZ meeting
in Adelaide, all Ministers signed off on this everyone, including Ian
Causely from NSW. This is the criteria, and I will just indicate that it is
available if you want it, and it is now being used by RASAC. All of
these assessments were made on the new criteria. 24 out of 36
( months) is finished, Cabinet has adopted the new criteria for future
assessment and RASAC is now using that. If you are interested in 
what RASAC is and I just recommend that you have a rook at the list
of membership of RASAC it is a very, very good bunch of people.
The President of the South Australian Farmers Federation is on it, a
board member of the NSW RAS Authority, one of the rural managers
of the National Bank is on it it is a very independent and expert group
of people. What will now happen, we will get applications, they will be
given to RASAC and this is what was agreed in Adelaide RASAC
will use the new criteria, and provide the Government with independent
advice on whether these areas should be granted. I stress again,
Cabinet supported every recommendation of RASAC. RASAC has not
recommended that Victoria should be included, it has not
recommended that the Northern Territory should be included, but is
has recommended that the areas that we have granted in NSW and
Tasmania, and in the report to me pointed out that although this
area didn't qualify, it didn't qualify because of the massive underlying
structural problems in this region that have simply been exacerbated
by the drought, and we have acted on that recommendation as well, in
putting in this rural restructuring package. And I might add, there are
when you see the detailed costs later there are significant funding
implications of this. There are quite a few million dollars are now going
to go in here. I am happy to say, that a significant amount of that is
Landcare, and I might add, this package costing does not include the
labour market programs of course that are administered by Simon
Crean that is, the programs specifically directed to environmental
damage. The money that is in this package for Landcare is for the
project funding, that is actually for the hardware that will be needed to
help farmers put these measures into place to try to stop the
environment problems in this region. The enhancement of the FHS
arrangements will cost $ 10 million over 2 years that it is going into this
region. But I might add also, that there is no need for the NSW
Government to match that the only matching funding we need from
NSW is for the Structural Adjustment Package the family household
assistance package that we fund.
PM: What we need from NSW is some matching goodwill and some
matching concern for the farmers that is what we need from NSW.
BC: And an agreement like tomorrow....
PM: And can I just say on this question about the Landcare programs
apart from their values in terms of dealing with environmental
degradation, the labour market component of them which as Bob has
said, is funded under the DEET programs of Simon Crean the extra
$ 14 million over 2 years for the National Landcare Program in drought
affected areas will also help those people who work on farms who are
not farm owners that is the farm workers and the townspeople who
find themselves in a great difficulty of finding work. So, there is the
environmental benefit, but there is also a social benefit too. 
J: Mr Keating, you have given an awful lot of money to a mob of people
who will never vote for you, in a fairly tight fiscal situation as well
why?
PM: For the same reason that we have given a structured set of policies to
the long-term unemployed wherever they might be I am quite sure
that a lot of them are in the areas where they have not been
traditionally supporters of the Government. But the Labor Party has
always had that sense of society about looking after people in difficult
circumstances when events have overtaken them through no fault of
their own, and they find themselves rather to deal with it. And let me
just reiterate what Bob Collins said about the farm family he said we
are supporting those who have got viable farms with these tax
arrangements we are, because we have to maintain the core of the
family farm, and the family farming business, and the towns and the
communities that arise as a result of it. Otherwise, you will just see
massive aggregations to industrial companies, which may be owned by
Australians, and may not be owned by Australians. And therefore you
have got a change in the nature of rural society. So this is a large
issue, as far as we are concerned.
J: You have said that you will speak to the banks, or encourage the
banks to lend only to viable farmers to what extent do you think the
problem of non-viable farmers exist, and won't one consequence of
that be further de-population of rural Australia?
PM: There has been, over a long period of time now, an aggregation of
larger holdings, and that has been true as farm efficiencies have
needed to increase particularly in the face of polluted markets around
the world, and price competition so that has happened. And there
has been a drift away from the country-side to the towns and cities, but
we still want to maintain viable units. The banks, by and large, have
taken a view that there was no point in throwing a lot of properties onto
the market as through 1990/ 91 etc and that has been a wise view,
and I think now they want to seriously remain in the business of
lending to the farm sector, but they now understand as we
understand, and as the peak farm organisations understand that we
have got an obligation not simply to the incumbent farmer, but to the
land that they farm and graze, its long-term viability, to soil erosion, to
wind erosion, to adequate water arrangements on farms, and therefore
the business of the whole of farm planning will start to consultancies
drive all around the country helping and providing whole of farm
management plans, and which I think
J: Do you have in mind further specific drought initiatives to bring that
about?
PM: We have got a lot of extension and advisory services running now, and
a lot of it is funded here, and as you know, I was in Charleville last
week with the South West Queensland strategy with the farm
community out there, which is just about that. You see, this can't just 
9
be done by Governments is got to be done by farm communities, and
I think what was very encouraging about the South West Strategy was
that you have got that essentially coming from the farmers and graziers
themselves in this case graziers; themselves saying " look, we are
overstocking, we are putting the land at risk, a lot of us are not viable,
if some leave, the rest of us can be viable, and if they leave, if you the
Commonwealth give them income support and labour market programs
and some financial adjustment, you can get them out, help them, focus
them, and get them a job". In other word, it makes possible that which
could never happen were we not around, or were there not a strategy.
So I think this is going to be the mood of it, ( inaudible), the Murray-
Darling basin and you could perhaps see the South West Queensland
regional strategy as being part of what we call a drift down the Murray-
Darling Basin as we continue to improve these strategies right through
the area of that system.
BC: Can I just say in advance of your question that there is one important
part of this package that we haven't dealt with a lot of the detail, that is
have a look at the detail, there is significant money for additional
scientific research. We have already put money in which has
produced a real result the Rain Man Package which has been a real
winner was produced with the funding we provided last time, we have
extended that. But there is an important component of the funding -I
think it's close to $ 0.5 million it is $ 480,000 I think what we are
going to do, it has never been done before, is the Department of
Primary Industry and Energy, DEET and Social Security, are going to
conduct face to face surveys with 3,500 farmers right across Australia.
It has never been done before. We are going to develop a data base
from face to face interviews with 3,500 farm families across Australia
about the full range of their problems, the Government Assistance, the
Social Security system and all the rest of it. And I think that will
produce an extremely invaluable result for Government in terms of any
future policy decisions we take.
J: Mr Keating, now that we know what you are going to do for the country
people, when are we going to
PM: Can I just say...
J: what are you going to do about those people in trouble because of
the operation of the third runway?*
PM: I'm not here on this occasion. l know you would like me to stay here
for the rest of the afternoon to answer all the questions that come into
you head....
BC: How about 10 minutes attention on the bush instead of the towns all of
the time? I 
PM: How about 10 minutes attention to any one subject that would do us?
But before I I hope you noted that Alan for your Saturday column
Alan...
J: How are we going to know when you are going to do something about
the third runway.....
PM: Well, I am about to I should have at 10.30am been delivering a
speech on the Defence White Paper in the House, and I have got to
go, we will be considering the third runway today in Cabinet, and at the
appropriate time today, we will be saying something solid about it.
J: Will you come back and say something Prime Minister?
PM: I don't know... just as Bob Collins in a sense doesn't need me to explain
this change, nor does my colleague Laurie Brereton need me to
explain the others. And....
J: You have chosen to explain this policy....
PM: I have.
J: You can choose to explain the one about the third runway?
PM: I have a completely deep interest in the third runway, and all the
corridor chit-chat and scuttlebutt about it just for you Alan, I will think
about it. But only just for you.
J: That is very kind of you Prime Minister.
PM: It is a sign of my concern.
J: Prime Minister, it has been reported that you are responsible for one of
the key decisions that diverted planes over the suburbs, rather than
the sea is that accurate?
PM: You will have to wait ' til after Cabinet.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP AND
THE MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND TRANSPORT THE
HON LAURIE BRERETON MP, JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 8 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: and compatibility of the operation of the airport for passengers and
for residents. Now, you will be aware that this been a matter which
has been around for at least 15 years, and the Government in 1989
with the then encouragement and support, indeed pressure of the
NSW Liberal Government decided that Sydney's expansion required
a second parallel runway. That runway was built, built efficiently
again, under time and under budget and it was opened about 4
weeks or so ago. In the meantime we have had a substantial amount
of disquiet about its opening and today the Minister has brought a very
comprehensive package of measures, in addition to those already
announced for noise abatement, to the Cabinet after having heard the
concerns of the community and residents of the surrounding area of
Sydney to the issues. Now, the runway, as you know, was opened
about 4 weeks ago. Before that for most of the last 20-odd years
since the north-south runway was opened into Botany Bay we have
had a cross-intersection of traffic, and we have had the flight plan
arrangements so arranged by air traffic controllers and the Civil
Aviation Authority to accommodate that cross-traffic. It should come as
no surprise to anybody that once that changed and the air traffic
control system had to accommodate 2 parallel lines of traffic or
landings and take-offs to the north and south there had to be a rearrangement
of air traffic control, and a re-arrangement of flight paths
in the area.
You will also be aware that the new control tower and the new control
equipment in the tower is not yet available, and it means that given the
first few weeks of the opening of the airport, there has been a view on
the part of air traffic control managers and operators of aircraft that 
they wanted a broader spread for safety until* they became
accommodated to the new environment. In other words, you can't
change a traffic pattern around a major airport that existed for 15 or
years overnight and find everybody back in line on the new runways in
the new systems without a trial and error process a transitional
process. And the transitional process is the one that has basically
brought a lot of residents produced a lot of disquiet, indeed anger,
amongst residents. And they are looking for solutions to ease the
noise burden on them, and to be certain about where the future traffic
movements will be, and how the airport will operate in terms of curfews
etc. Laurie Brereton and I understand those concerns, and today we are
here to do something about them additional to that which we have
already done. Now, in the statement I think you have, you will find
there are a number of key changes here. One is the establishment of
designated flight paths before this we haven't had designated flight
paths we have had a deviation of about 7.8 degrees from the centre
line. But in the past in the last past month, that has been all over the
place, and that has been part of the problem they have been
traversing areas they have never traversed before. These paths will
apply to all jet take-offs and landings there will be penalties for flight
path violation. That is, the adherence to the new flight paths will be
closely monitored and regulations introduced under the Air Navigation
Act to provide a legislative basis for their effective policing, and for
penalties for violation and heavy penalties.
The third element is requirements. for jet aircraft to depart from the
southern end of the main north-south runway, and obtain as much
height as possible over residential areas. In other words, instead of
taking off to the north when the prevailing winds are blowing instead
of taking off to the north from halfway down the runway, they will need
to go right out to the end of the seaward runway which is another
couple of kilometres and take-off from there, and then gain as much
height as possible, which is less fuel efficient for them and more costly
to the airlines. So they have got more time in the taxiing, and costinefficiencies
in the gaining of altitude, but we will be requiring them to
do that. And we are going on then to reaffirm the Government's policy
on operational noise controls, saying that unless otherwise required on
safety or weather grounds, all take-offs must be to the south of the
airport not to the north to the south over Botany Bay. And there will
be no take-offs to the north from the new runway, and the east-west
runway will remain available for use when weather conditions preclude
take-offs on the other parallel runways.
And there are then further decisions about noise treatment measures.
What the Government has decided to do to is to accelerate the
program we have already announced, but instead of it being completed
over 10 years, having it completed over 3 years at a cost of around 
million each year. The levy will still stay on the airline industry,
but we the Commonwealth will carry the upfront costs and collect the
levy later. And the insulation programs will commence immediately for
schools and colleges, and we will expect that the school and college
insulation program will be completed by the end of the first term of the
new school year. We are particularly concerned that schools and
colleges and children who have, of course, experienced this noise in
the past, but may now experience it more frequently will find
themselves much more relieved of it, and we will be having the
Department of Administrative Services assisting in the early
commencement of that program.
We go on to talk about Badgerys Creek, saying that we have already
spent $ 150 million acquiring the airport, committing a further $ 120
million to a 2,900 metre runway, commence the EIS and the operations
for a national highway out to there, and also a study to secure a rail
corridor and on how the airport might be developed in the future.
Lastly and importantly, there will be a stringent enforcement of the
curfew arrangements. The curfew regulations under the Air Navigation
Act will be amended to provide for financial penalties for unauthorised
operations under the curfew because we have seen, on occasions,
some substantial incursions into those arrangements. Now, we have
got some maps on the wall behind me I'll point out some points to
these in a minute and then I will invite Laurie Brereton to add to my
remarks, and perhaps deal with some of the points that I haven't. But I
would just like to make these points to you this decision was always
taken by the Government in terms of getting the balance between
social and economic imperatives right. The airport was going to be
built at some time better for the residents to have it built more on their
terms than less on their terms. There were 180,000 people affected by
Mascot airport noise that is now reduced to 90,000. So that has been
cut in half. Now the aim of the game is to reduce the burden of the
change on that 90,000. And the other point I would like to make is that
in the month that the airport has been opened, we have had most
unseasonal summer winds persistent northerly winds which are
unseasonal for this time of year. And once the northerly winds go over
knots, for safety reasons the aircraft are required to take off to the
north. This is unusual so we have got an unusual concurrence of
events. Firstly, the change pattern of air traffic movements which is a
great change from the past and spreads which have come from that
which in any other operational circumstances would be unlikely,
prevailing northerly winds which are way, way different than the
year average with many people in the industry remarking about the
unseasonality of the persistent northerly winds and the take-offs to the
north and also the silly season of a state election campaign, which is
bringing out the worst absolutely the worst in all the political players,
and most particularly of course John Fahey and his ministers. And as 
a consequence we have had a very large public debate and a few
public meetings.
Now, before I invite Laurie Brereton to make some points, I will make a
couple of points off the charts and then I will leave the discussion over
to him. But let me repeat the points these are major changes, and
they make a major difference to a lot of people living in the vicinity of
the airport, or certainly under the flight paths.
( discussion of maps)
LB: If I can supplement those remarks, and say the key in terms of the
restriction of the flight path, is that by the time planes arrive on takeoff,
at the Parramatta River, the spread of planes will be restricted to .8
of 1 nautical mile, and that is about a third of the spread that was
allowed under the old arrangements that is the 7.8 degree deviation on
either side. So you can see, at that point, where as the Prime Minister
has said, planes fully laden jumbo's and 747' s will be at about 14 or
1500 feet, it will be flying in a much tighter configuration than has
previously been the case. And of course, that is, that, for the first time,
will be a configuration enforceable at law, in that a corporation that
flies outside of those guidelines will be liable, for prosecution with a
maximum penalty of up to $ 25,000, and this is a significant measure
introduced to make sure that we not only have tight patterns, but that
we have adequate policing of them as well. I might say something
about the curfew as well, because, the Prime Minister has indicated
that Cabinet agreed today to a much tougher approach in respect of
the curfew at Mascot Airport. The curfew at the moment of course
applied between the hours of 11 at night and 6 in the morning, subject
to certain classes of planes being able to fly during the night, and
subject in addition to that, to some exemptions between 11 and 12 at
night and 5 and 6 in the morning, and only to a total of 14 per week.
We found that the exemptions have been taken up as part of the norm,
in the last 12 months there were 257 dispensations granted for flights
in the curfew hours and we intend to take a much tougher approach to
the whole question of the curfew and it will also, for the first time, be
enforceable with penalties of up to $ 25,000. All told today we -have got
a package agreed to by Cabinet of great significance. The bringing
forward of the funding amount to $ 180 million being spent over three
years not ten, paid for off the budget, recouped over the ten years by
the tax on the airlines. The new tight flying paths will restrict greatly
the number of people affected, and indeed, the new arrangements for
maximum climb in commencing take-off from the southern most end of
the runway will also greatly alleviate the noise nuisance that people
are experiencing at the moment. So we think that these measures
combined as they are in this package will tackle the difficulties being
faced by people in Sydney quite comprehensively. It is a fact that the
overwhelming majority are better off at the moment, but that does not 
for a moment lift the burden on those who are suffering increase noise
nuisance as a result of these arrangements. But just let me say
something finally about the question of safety, it needs to be
remembered that one of the key benefits of this new parallel runway
configuration is not just a question of extra capacity, lifting it up to
approximately 85 take-offs and landings per hour, but they're take-offs
and landings that are operating on the one axis, without intersecting
flight patterns, and the sort of incident that we saw only in the last
couple of years, we have seen a couple of them, but there was one in
particular with a Thai Airlines DCI 10, a Qantas 747 and an Ansett A320
which could easily have ended in a very considerable disaster, will be
avoided as a result of these arrangements, because simultaneous
take-offs and landings, which is a less safe mode of operation will be
eliminated, so that's a plus for safety. This package is a plus for the
residents affected by noise nuisance in Sydney and if I can just add
one final thing, and that is, I was told this morning that the operators at
the airport had the airport now operating at very close to the capacity
that existed prior to the new arrangements coming into place. In fact, if
you take out the second two weeks of the operation of the new
arrangements, we recorded this year 52 take-offs and landings per
hour, that compares with the same two weeks of last year at 54 per
hour, there has been a further improvement over the last two weeks
and we are very confident that the airport will be operating without any
reduction in its capacity and operating more safely for Christmas. So
are there any questions.
J: Mr Brereton you don't appear to have sped up the building of
Badgery's Creek any faster than what was announced in Working
Nation?
LB: Well I think there has been a great deal of work done, on the contrary,
in respect of Badgery's Creek since the Working Nation Statement
advanced the timetable for Badgery's Creek construction by some
years. The commitment in Working Nation of $ 120 million to build a
full operational strip, that is a 2900 metre strip of sufficient pavement
thickness to accommodate any class of jet up to a 747, was a very big
dollar commitment, and it is one that has been reinforced with our
subsequent commitment of some $ 200 million in road works linking
Badgerys Creek with the national highway system and in turn with the
so that there will be a link between the two airports Kingsford
Smith on the one hand and Badgerys Creek on the other end as is of
course, the study that is already under way with the NSW Government
on reserving a rail corridor so that we can have a public transport link.
So that you genuinely in the future can have these two airports
hubbing back to back. But having said that, we only got that go-ahead
in May of this year and it is a great planning job to be done to make
sure that Badgerys Creek is properly planned and is sequentially
planned so that it can open at the earliest possible date and can be
added to to meet demand over time. Now we have a task force 
working at this very moment on that and it is pulling together all of the
disciplines necessary to guarantee that that master planning is done
and done perfectly and that we don't have a half-baked airport out
there, that we have a properly designed and built airport that can meet
the future airport needs of Sydney and take some of this load off
Kingsford Smith, because as the Prime Minister has said, we have had
an expansion in demand between February and November of this year
of 50% on the peak hours of the peak days, and with that demand
coming through from the airlines, it will only be a matter of months
before all of the capacity of Kingsford Smith is used up again, even
with the new ground radar, even with the 85 take-offs and landings per
hour. So, that makes it all the more important to get the planning right,
to build the road, to get the rail link reserved, to build that runway, and
we're committed to doing that and then to get on and open Badgerys
Creek as soon as possible.
J: The spending in the Forward Estimates set aside for Badgerys Creek
into this year's budget
LB: Well the job this year of course is to spend a lot of money on planning,
because it is fair to say that there has not been anywhere enough
planning done on Badgerys Creek to date. I mean, up until April of this
year, no-one had so much as thought of putting a line on a map to
reserve a road corridor to link the two airports. The NSW Government
had simply not accounted for an airport link, road or rail, in its planning
arrangements. Now that's the sort-of fundamental planning I want to
make sure we get right. That's what the master planning must
encompass. That and every other element of development. We don't
want to have an airport that is other than the absolute optimum design
and that Taskforce is working to deliver that result for us now.
J: Does this plan turn the Liberal voters of the North Shore into victims of
winner take all politics as Mr Howard alleges?
PM: Well, there is only one way you can take-off from the north/ south
runway, which has been built for twenty years and that's north over Mr
Howard's electorate, and knowing that, Mr Howard said, when asked
" do you think the Government will go for a third runway?" -this is in
March ' 89 " I think it will, I hope they do, they should have gone for it 6
1/ 2 years ago. There's an overwhelming case for building it", he said,
and, you know, " if they don't build it, they will have totally betrayed
Sydney's interest in the interest of the tourist industry". So that's the
members own views.
.:... i. tn naowrr osow th at it's more concentrated
LB: Can I say something on this score of Mr Howard's comments today.
Mr Howard's electorate is more than 6 nautical miles from the airport.
To get to it you have got to travel over three Labor electorates. The 
seats of Grayndler, Sydney and Lowe, and as the Prime Minister has
said, by the time they get to Mr Howard's electorate, under this
arrangement, a Boeing 747 will be travelling at approximately 2250
feet as opposed to the current practice of 1400 or 1500 feet. And if
any, either Mr Howard or his constituents are troubled by that, and I
know that many will be, they should come down to Sydenham and
Tempe and see what real noise nuisance is all about. This is not a
case of doing anything other than getting the optimum efficiency, the
optimum safety and minimising the noise impact, and it will be Labor
electorates that bear the burden now as they always have, and will
continue in the future. And breastbeating from John Howard is really
the last thing that we need now.
PM: hypocritical breastbeating. Can I just say, before I do just make this
point though, John Howard's as are other constituents will benefit from
this because the aircraft will be higher the track that they have had
over their electorates for twenty odd years. So, they will be higher and
therefore the noise profile will be better.
LB: Could I just, I know that John Howard aspires to be Leader of the
Opposition once again, but it is worth recalling what he published last
time he was Leader of the Opposition on his ' Leader of the Opposition'
letterhead in 1989 when he said this in the interests of safety,
airport facilities should be upgraded immediately", including he said
" the construction of the third runway, a decision is needed and the
Government has to face up to its responsibilities". So, it is a bit late in
the day for him to be putting on the performance that we have seen
from him today.
PM: The core point is that aircraft have always taken this track ever since
the seaward runway was built, the original north-south runway. What
we are doing today is making it better, for not only Mr Howard's
constituents but others by getting more height, by making aircraft take
off further back down the runway at the seaward end and obliging the
airlines to spend more money on fuel by getting height and, of course,
we are doing as few governments in the world are doing, none are
doing in fact developing the most comprehensive noise abatement
procedures out through those affected areas.
J: Prime Minister, do you think now that may be you made the wrong
decision five years ago, instead of fast tracking Badgerys Creek,
instead of building the third runway now. All the problems the Minister
and yourself have outlined noise and traffic congestion. I mean you
could get rid of that if you accept what the minister said five years ago
when he didn't want the third runway built and you, chief amongst the
lot of them, was hot and strong to build it.
PM: The consensus was with the NSW government, Mr Greiner 
J: ( inaudible) it was a Federal government decision.
PM: No, just a second, it was a decision of the Federal Government at the
urging of the NSW government that had to provide a lot of the
surrounding infrastructure and who had no intention of doing anything
for Badgerys Creek, as the Minister has already told you, they didn't
even have the wit or the sense to at least plan a corridor for traffic out
to it. Even at this point. So, let's go through the thing. ' NSW
Government Swoops on the Runway'. Premier Nick Greiner said ' work
on a third runway should start as soon as possible' 20 September
1990. In 1989 the Premier, Mr Greiner urged the Federal
government to cut the red tape and start preparing the runways EIS.
Certainly the State will do all it can and will hasten the study', and he
goes on in that vein. And, there are half a dozen press releases from
him. Then we had John Fahey the current Premier on 18 January
1993 saying about the curfew, that w e should reinvestigate the curfew.
He said ' I think, we have got to remember that when the curfew was
put on it was in relation to a certain decibel level of aeroplanes. That
decibel level of aeroplanes has dropped significantly and it is time we
had the debate.' Ti'me we had the debate about suspending the
curfew.
J: But Prime Minister, I'm not suggesting that you listened to Nick Greiner
and not Laurie Brereton ( inaudible)..
PM: Just a second Alan ( Ramsey). I picked up all the nuances of your
question, I don't need additional help, thanks very much. John Sharp
who is the Opposition's spokesman said I have repeatedly called for
the commencement of construction of a parallel north-south runway
and a new international terminal. The quickest, easiest most cost
effective solution to this problem is the construction of a third runway
at Kingsford Smith, not at Badgerys Creek.' Mr Fischer, Leader of the
National Party any further delay in deciding on a third runway at
Mascot would mean loss of life as well as economic insanity'. Charles
Blunt who was then spokesman for transport said he was joining a
petition campaign to add to the mounting pressure on the Hawke
government to build a third runway at Kingsford Smith.' And it goes on
and on. Then, you have got Mr Jull who is the shadow spokesperson
for tourism, aviation and sport the construction of a new third
runway for Sydney should be commenced immediately', he said in July
1989 and Mr Howard saying it should have been built six and a half
years earlier'. I mean, that was the general consensus of the political
parties about this.
LB: Can I just add that it was also the consensus of all the assembled
journalists at all those press conferences that I attended in the days
that I was campaigning about Badgerys Creek. Because, press
conference after press conference people said ' well, aren't you just 
interested in local parochial issues, isn't this just a case of looking after
your own backyard?'
PM: We were being urged to introduce a major micro economic reform
question by many of you in the room today.
J: Do you still think
PM: And, any questions from you Geoff ( Kitney) on the basis that some
tricky little ploy about whether a decision is right or not is basically
hypocritical. Of course it is. It needs to be rejected with the contempt
it deserves.
J: No. I still think it's the right decision. I'm asking if you still do.
PM: Well, the airport has been built, it is an actuality.
J: Exactly.
PM: Exactly. Therefore, the decision of the Government, what we have to
do is to make sure that the airport operates effectively, efficiently and
with much more compatibility with residents' interests.
J: What was the advice to you from the airline companies of the double
effect of the designated flight paths and the take offs from the extreme
southern end on their schedules?
LB: It has been indicated to me by my officials that it is likely to lead to a
very minor reduction in the optimum number of planes that they can
squeeze in and out of Kingsford Smith. It will, at the margin, have
some affect, because aeroplanes will have to cross the major northsouth
runway to get onto the taxi way to proceed to the very southern
most tip of runway 34L. That said, it will give us a much better
environmental result and, I think, it is certainly worth the effort.
J: So, the effect of this is that fewer flights will be able to come in and
out?
LB: But, I think you should see that against the backdrop of the tower
coming on stream in February or March of next year and of the ground
radar coming in later next year and the capacity of the airport being
lifted from its present capacity of the high 50s up to 80 to 85 take-offs
and landings per hour. So, this will give us safety and will give us a
good environmental outcome and will not be a great burden for the
airline industry to bear, especially with the very good efforts of the air
traffic controllers that have already seen capacity recover to that which
existed under the old simultaneous operations at the airport. 
J: Was any consideration given to allowing take-offs to the north off the
new runway in order to spread the burden of take-off noise?
PM: A policy decision was made about that in 1989 at the time and that has
never been altered.
J: It was a political opposition rather than..
J: There's a hotel in the way!
PM: There is now a hotel in the way apparently, but there we are.
J: Well, that's factually correct, but..
PM: Well, it's there. I don't know whether you haven't seen it as you drove
past.
J: But, it doesn't prohibit take-offs.
PM: Well, you can occupy the top floor.
LB: I think the reality, you need to see this airport for what it is. It is a
parallel runway airport now which will have a maximum capacity
operating those parallels with take-offs to the south preferably, but to
the north when necessary 85 take-offs and landings. But, when there
are big cross winds, it will of necessity drop to about 40 because they
can only use the east-west runway which will remain open. But, to
suggest that we should add to the air port with take-offs to the north on
the new parallel runway, to squeeze it from 85 up to 90, with all of the
environmental consequences that would have for take-offs, twice as
noisy as landings, to the north in a new area, I think, would be a very
bad deal for Sydney. I would much prefer to get on with the
development of Badgerys Creek and see it as the supplementary
airport for Sydney.
J: There is a suggestion it would spread the noise rather have it all
running off the old north-south, having it run off both north-south..
PM: Tom ( Burton) you have got a debate now about the additional noise
affects of a parallel runway system, fair enough. Imagine the debate
we would have had if the Thai's DC10 had collided with the A320
Ansett plane. The vectored directions of their collision would have
then picked up a 747 which Qantas had and the whole lot of them
would have ended up in the overseas terminal. That's what we had on
our hands here. And, as the demand for air traffic out of Sydney has
risen along with all traffic movements of Australia, it was getting
impossible to run that system. The whole system is based on the fact
that only pilots familiar with the system and certificated for it can use it.
So, an international pilot cannot use the cross runway unless that pilot 
has flown in and out of Australia, been to the CMA and has a certificate
about the use of the runway.
Now, even with it, I mean, I just picked up a Sydney Morning Herald
report of that incident and it said this, on the day 13 August 1991
simultaneous landings are standard on the two main runways at
Sydney airport. When two planes land at once with one stopping short
of the intersection to allow the other plane to land safely'. So, in other
words if the pilot overflies and then for either water, rain, breaking or
anything, can't stop short of the intersection he collects the one on the
other runway. I mean, that is the system we have had.
J: But, it never happened.
PM: It nearly happened. They were in the international journal Flight
International, I mean Alan ( Ramsey), you would be wringing your
hands, the rhetoric would be dripping out of your column, the papers
would be soaked with the feigned indignation that that cynical remark
you have just made subsumes. Now, the fact is..
J: ( Ramsey) Prime Minister, I would argue you are making cynical
political..
PM: I'm not here to debate with you Alan. Flight International said this
investigators believe that the A320 passed about 33 feet above the
DCIO0'. Now, not long later my predecessor in a VIP aircraft also had a
problem with aborting a flight on the cross wind runway. The fact is,
you don't have to be an air traffic controller to know that a parallel
system of flights in and out of Sydney is far safer than a set of cross
runways and you can have this debate, but if we had a collision on the
cross wind ' runway it would be the incumbent Minister for Transport
right in the slot, we would have hand wringing on a scale that we have
never seen before. So, the parallel system is the right system and the
key is to get it into place and it is, I think, a great pity that John Fahey
has shown no leadership in this, that he has run off hiding with a little
bit of poor politics when in fact he knows the safety issues as well as
Laurie Brereton and I know and he knows that his government
supported it all the way through. I mean, there must be some public
decisions in this country that deserve some integrity of treatment, even
from people like John Fahey.
We have got about three minutes and we have to go off. Question
Time is at 3: 00pm. So, two more questions.
J: What penalties apply to the airlines if they ignore the directive to takeoff
from the southern most end. You say penalties will apply if they
ignore the deviation from the main take-offs to the north. Will they
apply if they.. 
LB: They will be directed to the southern most point on that runway and
they will have no option but to take-off from there. That will be the
standard operational practice for where jets commence their take-offs
at Mascot in future.
J: How much will the extra fuel cost and do you think that will fit into
higher ticket prices?
LB: I was told it might cost $ 20 a flight to get these arrangements in place.
PM: Not a ticket is it?
LB: $ 20 a flight, not a ticket. That is $ 20 for the plane, so I suppose it will
depend on the number of passengers, but I don't think it is anywhere
near too great a price to bear for the sort of benefits that will flow from
it.
PM: We will leave it at that. Thanks very much for coming.
ends 



JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J
KEATING MP, AND THE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
AND ENERGY, SENATOR THE HON BOB COLLINS
ADDITIONAL DROUGHT RELIEF.
Federal Cabinet has agreed to introduce a further significant package of measures to assist
drought affected farmers.
This package, which is costed at more than $ 112 million over the next four years,
complements the $ 164 milon assistance package announced by the Government in
September and provides generous incentives for farmers to plan and prepare for future
drought.
The package announced in September was aimed at providing immediate welfare assistance
and farm business support to those suffering drought " exceptional circumstances". That
assistance will continue to be available and will be extendded automatically to other areas
should they be declared by the Commonwealth to be in " exceptional circumstances". This
latest package has a longer term focus and aims to encourage all farmers to better plan and
prepare for drought.
Drought is a recurring feature of the Australian environment, and while short term relief is
needed to ensure that those farm families suffering severe hardship in exceptional drought
areas are not left behind, sound risk-management planning and preparation is the key to long
term profitable and sustainable farming".
An enhanced Farm Management Bonds Scheme and an investment allowance for fodder and
water storage for livestock, water conveyancing and minimum tillage equipment, will
encourage farmers to adopt a self-reliant approach to drought consistent with the National
Drought Policy.
Protecting the natural resource base and the environment during drought is also a priority of
the package. Better links between labour market programs and local landcare groups and
additional funding for on-ground project costs amounting to $ 14.4 million over two years
will enable priority natural resource management works and measures to be undertaken in
drought affected areas. 
The package approved by Federal Cabinet comprises:
An enhanced Farm Management Bond Scheme to encourage farmers to build cash
reserves for downturns such as drought. The scheme provides for tax deductibility in
the year of deposit, and includes an investment component raised from 80 per cent to
100 per cent, no withholding tax paid on withdrawal and an increase in the deposit
limit from $ 80 000 to $ 150 000 per taxpayer.
Taxation incentives for building up physical reserves for drought. An investment
allowance of 10 per cent for expenditures of up to $ 50 000 per taxpayer per annum, on
fodder and water storage for livestock, water conveyancing and minimum tillage
equipment will be provided until 2000.
Provision of an additional 10 million over two years for adjustment in drought prone
regions. Regional strategies will involve property restructuring and productivity
enhancement and will thereby enable better drought preparedness and recovery from
the current drought. The program will utilise the Rural Adjustment Scheme and
Commonwealth and State Government social welfare, labour market programs and the
National Landcare Program.
Strengthened arrangements to encourage local communities in drought areas to develop
landcare projects with labour input assisted by Commonwealth labour market
programs. Eligibility conditions for the JobSkills and JobStart programs have been
eased for farmers, farm family members and farmn hands in drought exceptional
circumstances areas.
Funding of $ 14.4 million over two years to the National Landcare Program for
landcare projects in drought areas to prevent resource and environmental degradation.
This will provide additional assistance for on-ground project costs.
Removal of the restriction on farmers who are receiving job search allowance from
eligibility for the RAS re-establishment grant.
Additional funds of $ 5 million over three years for continuing research into climate
forecasting and drought management techniques to assist farmers better prepare for
drought. million over two years for extension of the grant period for farm household
support recipients in the western division and central west of New South Wales.
Extension of exceptional circumstances declaration to Tasmania and additional areas of
New South Wales.
CANBERRA 8 DECEMBER 1994 



.7
. i.
I
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MEETING OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
COUNCIL At today's meeting of my Science and Engineering Council, Profesor Fiona
Stanley, a member of Council and head of the Institute of Child Health
Rdsea:' ch in Perth, presented a report entitled Research fo?-a7Re-athy Society.
Tfe-report wa . s prepared by an independent working party of which Prdfedsor
Stanley was convenor.
The key message of this report is that health and medical research have a
great impact on the health and quality of life of all Australians. It focuses on
the way health and medical research feeds into clinical practice and the
delivery of health services, reducihg the rates of preventable illness and
premature death, and improving the cost-effectiveness and equity of supply of
services. The report presents a number of case studies to illustrate its arguments. For
example, it points to the success of Australian scientists in identifying the link
between peptic ulcers and the bacterium Helicobacter pylor. It now appears
likely that 80-90% of peptic ulcers can be cured with two weeks of antibiotic
treatment. A particular emphasis is the need for more private sector funding for health
and medical research. The report notes that backing by philanthropic and
industry sources on the major scale common in other countries is still rare in
Australia. The working party has identified a number of important issues. I have asked
my colleague the Minister for Human Services and Health, Dr Lawrence, to
respond to its recommendations.
A second item concerned high performance computing and communications
( HPCC).
HPCC is an exciting technology, and a powerful tool for tackling a vaniety of
industry and other problems, such as designing complex engineering
components, or modelling the greenhouse effect. It comprises the ' top end' of
computing power and performance, ranging from high performance
workstations to the latest and most powerful supercomputers.
938 4 
Page 2
An independent working party chaired by Dr John O'Callaghan, Chief of the
Division of Information Technology in CSIRO, drew the Council's attention to
the need for an Action Plan to develop HPCC in Australia. Their report
identified a need to develop internationally competitive HPCC capability in
Australia. It also noted that industry has been very slow in taking up the
technology and realising the considerable benefits it offers.
The Government wants to encourage inoustry to make the most of the
increased competitiveness and Cost savings that can be gained from the
application of HPCC. It already has in place a number of strategies for
supporting HPCC technologies. These include funding through the Australian
Research Council, through Cooperative Research Centres, and through the
National Research Facilities Program announced in Working Nation.
I have asked the Minister for Industry, Science and Technology, Senator Cook,
and the Minister for Employment, Education and Training, Mr Crean. to advise
me on the future development of HPCC capability in Australia.
The Council meeting also indluded an Innovation Forum, chaired by the
Minister for Industry Science and Technology and Ministbr Assisting for
Science, Senator Peter Cook.
This forum involved a number of short presentations from industry and other
leaders, on their expeniences of the innovation process. Topics addressed
included the innovation in the mining industry, in universities, in technology
based companies, and the global environment for innovation.
The session was part of the Government's consultation process in the lead up
to the 1995 Statement on Innovation.
The Council is a forum which allows me and other Ministers with responsibility
for science and technology to meet leaders of industry and members of the
scientific community. It meets twice a year.
Today's discussions at the Council emphasised its important role in the
science and technology consultation process, and in bringing in science,
engineering and technology matters to the attention of Government.
CANBERRA 9 December 1994 39 Ili 



108/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
CONCLUSION OF THE SECURITY INQUIRY
On 7 October 1993, 1 announced that I had commissioned Mr Michael Cook AO, a
distinguished senior public servant and diplomat, to inquire into various aspects of
national security. The inquiry was initiated following Government concerns about
aflgtior-niolving the unauthorised removal of material from ASIO.
Mr Cook has completed his inquiry and submitted his report. I am grateful to him for
the rigorous and perceptive work reflected in his report, which included extensive
consultations with a number of agencies.
The Government has considered the recommendations contained in Mr Cooks
report and commenced implementation of the most appropriate follow-up action.
Because the circumstances which prompted this inquiry involve questions of
national security, I do not propose to make any further comment. I can add,
however, that the Government has noted allegations made in a recent book by a
former KGB official. Any allegation of this nature is taken seriously. Those
contained in the book, however, do not seem to add substance to matters which
have been the subject of the Security Inquiry.
The Leader of the Opposition has been briefed on the Security Inquiry by Mr Cook.
CANBERRA 9 December 1994 



0%
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR THE LAUNCH OF THE " WALTZING MATILDA"
CENTENARY, NATIONAL ART GALLERY, 12 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It is the parallels between the last decade of this century and the last decade
of the last century are almost uncanny as they reveal that in times of hardship
of economic change that in these times, the spirit of Australia and our
sense of ourselves, has become so much more obvious perhaps than at
times certainly in the 19th Century after the great growth and wealth in the
gold era of the 1860s, 70s and 80s, to the recession of the 1 890s to the
familiar problem of drought, to problems in the countryside. We saw in this
decade of the 1890s this great period of Australian social experimentation
which was, of course, snuffed out by the FIrst World War. But in this period,
as Ken (-Cowley) has just mentioned, we saw the pulling together of the
Federation, in the midst of all this difficulty those thinking through the screen
of troubles to see a nation emerging from the other side and not losing the
opportunity with the chance to federate. At the time this song was written
itself part of the ethos of the period the Labor Party was formed, and we
then see the quite amazing period of social change leading up to 1914. Now,
you would wonder it would take another century to do these things again, but
of course as we know, there was a bout of prosperity between the Wars, and
then the Second World War basically took the gloss off all that, and then we
had a period of gr6_ withiaiid Orosperity, but all set in the terms of the post-War
era, not particularly about us, but about us being part of the western world as
it then became. This is probably the first time, the 1990s, where the world is
returning to the sort of world it was before the First World War, with these
great states joining the world economy for the first time since then, like
Russia first time since 1917, but again partly a consequence of the First
World War and we are seeing these other great states joining it China,
India and South America. So we are entering a period again somewhat
similar, but we are doing it at a time when Australia's confidence about itself
pride in itself has I think coalesced and come together, perhaps as we might
not have expected a decade ago and it is that confidence and that 
expression of ourselves that is powering on now our national identity and
our place in the world, particularly the world we live in.
Now, all these threads tend to come together, and it is a most unlikely thing
that Ken Cowley from News Ltd well I think it is unlikely anyway is one of
the driving forces of the Stockman's Hall of Fame, and is the proprietor of
Australia's most famous riding boot and country shoe R M Williams and
that he is mixed up with Hugh Sawrey and the brushmen of the bush,
because that in itself is a celebration of the great ethos of rural Australia. But
here we are with Ansett one of our two great airlines celebrating the
centenary of this, what has become our national song " Waltzing Matilda"
and doing it with these painting so evocative of the time by Hugh Sawrey.
This is a very good thing to do it is an important thing to do in it's own right
because in this country where we for so long were left as an outpost of Britain
and the British Empire, the bits that were ours we tended to hug and keep,
and one of them of course is this song " Waltzing Matilda". Now, apparently
no-one quite knows who wrote the music, but we know that Banjo Patterson
wrote the lyrics, and Ken said he went out to a property, but apparently it was
sang at the North Gregory Hotel in Winton on the 6th April 1895. Now, I don't
quite know where that was recorded, but I am sure it's true. And it was
apparently sung throughout Western Queensland, but there is no doubt that
Banjo Patterson wrote the words, and famous words they have become. And
it is a sonl tfiat has been chosen by the Australian Olympic Federation as our
National Song at the Montreal Olympics, it has been recorded by over 400
artists I'm told, it has been sung by Harry Belafonte and Bill Halley I mean
for just trivial bits of information Tom Waites and almost every generation
has sung it and there is no doubt that all of us, where we are in a place where
it is sung are very moved by it. Now, the p! ace I was most moved by it was in
Ireland about eighteen months ago, where the whole stadium sang it and see
if that doesn't grab you. I can tell you it does. When they had mass bands
who then played it and apparently all of the verses are well known in Ireland
and they were all sung. Anyway, as they went from one verse to the next
nobody missed a beat and it was a terribly moving thing.
So, I think that it is, again, an evocation of the rural ethos of Australia and
Ken Cowley made the point about people doing it tough on the land now and
that is true probably never tougher this is without a doubt, I think, probably
the worst drought we have ever had. I think on of the great challenges for
Australia is to understand that the rural family, the farm family, the grazing
family have been so much the backbone of our country's way of life,
particularly outside of the cities, that we have got to do now those things
within our power to keep it together while this natural phenomena exists and
to give them a hand through it and to give them a hand out the other side and
that is why the Government has taken now the opportunity of announcing
particular policy packages to try to keep ahead of the problem and we can
only hope that widespread rains in breaking the drought solves the problem.
Because that, indeed in the end, is the only thing that will solve the problem,
but it is important, I think, that the people in the country understand that they
have the sympathies of all of us, especially those of us who live in the big 
' U 3
urban aggregations, the cities and the large provincial cities to say that we
haven't forgotten them and that we are with them.
So, to have the song this great song, this great rural song celebrated for its
centenary and to have it done with this spectacular array of pictures which
Hugh has painted for us. I had quite a bit of contact with brushman of the
bush because being the member for Blaxland around Bankstown in Sydney
they have a sister city relationship with Broken Hill and has a great contact
there and each year they have a great exhibition of the brushman of the bush
pictures. So, I am somewhat familiar with them and I have always thought
that they have been capturing, in a very contemporary way, that feeling of the
bush and that part of our history that might have started to fade or be it
somewhat lost to us.
So, let me first of all, congratulate Ken and Ansett for this initiative which is a
good thing to do in national terms and thank Graeme McMahon who runs
Ansett with Ken for that too. I would like to congratulate Hugh on his pictures
and, of course, also did the 737, the people of Winton, the Waltzing Matilda
Centennial Committee and everyone else associated with the e events. As I
say, this is a mood, I think, in the 1990s very much as we found it 100 years
ago and we should lose for a second the opportunity to drive home the fact
that Australia is a unique place, what we have created here ourselves is
completely different than what it was, what Australia has become in a country
with an enormous power about it and a huge sense of confidence. We have
got this debate now about the republic, we'd often say to people ' the republic
is not the instrument of our confidence or our identity, but rather the
manifestation of it'. It will be the cherry on the top rather than the cake itself.
The cake being our own confidence about ourselves and what we are and
who we have become.
So, this song has been right through these years, part and parcel of whatever
we are, because it always brings the hair up on the back of our neck most of
us. So, I would like to, again, thank Ken for inviting me to launch this today
and to officially launch the Waltzing Matilda Centenary at Winton in 1995 by
declaring this exhibition formally open and unveil the plaque which I will have
much pleasure in doing for the Ansett 737. Thank you indeed. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, THE NATIONAL GALLERY, 12 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: I think we ought to give Mr Downer the holiday period, don't you think
so?
J: How would you feel, though, about facing two separate Opposition
parties next year?
PM: Well, they have always been two separate Opposition parties this
has always been the great ruse of the Coalition. I mean, no-one has
ever elected them as a majority in their own right, ever. They have
always been a rural political rump, and the other now are, sort of, a
throwback to the past. I mean, basically, what is wrong with the
Coalition is, as I always say, it is not the jockey, but the horse. I mean
the horse the Coalition as a set of parties don't know what they want
for Australia, and that shows, and it doesn't matter who leads them.
J: Prime Minister, we have just seen retail growth at 9.2% is that too
fast?
PM: You must be joking.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 109/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
If imitation is the highest form of flattery, I should be overwhelmed by Dr
Hewson's remarks today.
On the other hand, plagiarism is a symptom of intellectual and professional
bankruptcy and in the case of the Liberal Party, yet another symptom of
terminal decline.
A week ago it was Mr Downer talking incessantly about " Mills and Boon"
fictions, a phase borrowed directly from my own description of that less than
monumental work of fiction, The things that matter.
Today it is Dr Hewson telling his fellow liberals that it is " not the jockey but
the horse" my very own words of advice to the Liberal Party on several
occasions this year. And Little Sir Echo, Mr Downer, says he agrees with Dr
Hewson, which is the same as saying that he agrees with me that it is his
party which is the problem and its incapacity to race.
The Liberal Party is not a national party with policies for a nation, but a
composite of state fractions run by the most reactionary of states.
As the last 12 months have made clear, for the Liberals the leadership issue
has become a form of entertainment, a distraction, a means of forgetting the
awful fact that the party is no longer a credible or viable conveyance.
Mr Downer may console himself at Christmas by telling himself over and
over: " It's not me that's really the problem, it's my party".
And they can quote me on this.
CAN BERRA
13 DECEMBER 1994 



PRIME MINISTER 110/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR MCLACHLAN AND ELDERS IXL
The dschslon of the Victorian Supreme Court to grant the Bank of New Zealand leave to
Issue claims against fo-mer Elders-AXL board members, Including Liberal frontbencher [ an
McLachlan, casts a cloud over Mr McLachlan's Shadow Ministry role as a former direct&amp;-
of thtiicompany.
Mr McLachlan likes to portray himself on television and In the print media-as someone
who resigned from the board, after ten years, because the situation had become
overheated. But as yesterdays decision confirms, he was a director years earlier when
Elders bought 20 per cant of BHP as part of that company's attempt to block the late
Robert Holmes a Courts takeover bid.
As the public now knows, the tactic apparently was that Elders would hold about 20 per
cent of [ 3HP, denying Mr Holmes a Court any chance of compulsory acquisition above
ninety per cent of the stock, and in return OHl-would protect the Elders Board by holding a
large block of Elders stock stock later sold by BHP to Harlin Pty Ltd.
Mr McLichlan might tell the public what contribution he made and how he voted on the
board on these matters whether he supported the move to buy stock in BHP, and if so,
why? Given his frontbench position in the Federal Opposition, he should tell the public if he had
any role in the Hawkins transactions, or if he had any knowledge of those transactions.
The Lealder of the Opposition should insist on knowing the full details of the McLachlan
involvemnent on the board of Elders IXL as it relates to these transactions.
As a board member of a major public company, his contribution on the board of Elders
affected many thousands of public shareholders.
If Mr McLachlan is not forthcoming about his role he should be stood down from the
Opposiiion frontbench until these matters are heard and until evidence of the discharge of
his fiduciary responsibilities confirms that he acted with propriety.
CANBERRA 13 DEC: EMBER, 1994 



c/ I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CONDELL PARK PRIMARY SCHOOL, 14 DECEMBER 1994
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What is your response to interest rates?
PM: Well, this is the fastest growing economy in the western world. This is
a great thing for Australia and for Australians and our most earnest
wish is to keep it going right through the 1990s. If we can keep this
sort of growth up that is, strong rates of growth but rates of growth
so that we can sustain low inflation and then the recovery. So, the
point of today's rise in rates is to shave the top off demand so we keep
this recovery sustainable, to keep all those thousands of jobs coming
through and we keep Australia with a great future.
J: two and a quarter per cent in four months, are you touching the
brakes or are you jamming them on?
PM: Nobody would expect to have the interest rates at this stage of a
strong cycle that we had at the bottom of the cycle and that is why we
have had a change. But; it is a change, I'm sure, that all Australians
will understand over time, it is going to give them much greater
prospects. For instance, this year we have had 4.5 per cent
household income per capita growth which is a phenomenal level and
that is because of low inflation producing higher real incomes. We
don't want to see that put asunder and we don't want to see too much
pressure on resources including the labour market, we don't want to
see too much pressure on wages. So, this is the way, if things are
getting a bit too strong, this is one of the ways we can smooth it out.
J: But, have you given the earlier rate increases a chance to flow through
before acting again?
PM: These are judgements. Monetary policy is as much an art as a
science, living off both the published data and anecdotal evidence
about the strengths of the recovery and I am sure the Government and
the Reserve Bank think that we are getting this right to give 
Australians that chance. That is, a chance that very few countries like
us in the world have a chance of reasonably strong growth.
J: Are you looking at cutting expenditure at all?
PM: I hear today that Alexander Downer has committed himself absolutely
to cut expenditure. Now, when the Government brings down the
budget and when we have brought down budgets and statements we
explain everything, all the detail is there. Alexander Downer can't go
wandering around the countryside saying he will cut spending and not
say whether he will cut payments on health, pensions, schools, all of
the other areas of Commonwealth expenditure, income support, labour
market programs, so if he wants to say that he is about cutting back
the size of government, he has got to say where he wants to cut it
back.
J: interest rate rises for low income earners
PM: Well, there hasn't been a full flow through of the past interest rate
adjustments to housing. There has been quite a lot of competition in
the banking sector, but the point of the rise is actually to shave some
of the top off spending, that is the essence of it. So that we keep the
recovery going, so that people low income people, middle income
people, high income people can find in three or five years from now
we have still got a strong recovery, we have still got low inflation and
we have still got great opportunities which, as I say, if you look at a
comparable European country to Australia we are growing at the
moment at 6 per cent, they are growing between one and two. That
makes all the world of difference about jobs. We have had now
430,000 jobs growth since the election. Since the March election of
1993 we have had 430,000 job growth. Our labour for the first time
ever is past the eight million mark there are eight million people in
the workforce, ten years ago that was six million, so we have kept all of
those jobs and added to them and that is the key to it.
J: Do you think the demand for places will go up now?
PM: I think that there is a lot of competition in the workforce and in the
economy and, I think, a lot of the key people in organised labour know
that restraint in spending, some restraint in wages will keep low
inflation and what happens with low inflation your wage rise buys
more your wage rise turns into a real wage rise which buys more real
goods and that is not lost on the ACTU, on the workforce in general
and that is why they have been committed for so many years now to
low inflation.
ends 



( r I
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
RELEASE OF BURGESS REPORT
I welcome the release of the report of the Burgess Review of the
Commonwealth's Enterprise Improvement Programs.
I would like to take the opportunity to thank Mr lan Burgess for preparing a
comprehensive and authoritative analysis of the many complex issues
surrounding these programs.
The Government was fortunate to be able to secure the services of
Mr Burgess, a prominent private sector businessman and chair of the AMP
Society, to lead the Review.
The Review was announced in the White Paper, Working Nation, in May this
year. Its terms of reference focused on the efficiency and effectiveness of
program delivery arrangements for Government enterprises.
I have asked the Minister for Industry, Science and Technology,
Senator Cook, to prepare a prompt response to the recommendations in
consultation with other relevant Ministers and I expect further announcements
on these matters will be made in the early part of 1995.
CANBERRA 16 December, 1994 



f
PRIME MINISTER 112/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
I was surprised and disappointed to read remarks attributed to Mr Dick
Warburton in today's Australian Financial Review.
Mr Warburton is quoted accusing me of making vitriolic attacks on corporate
critics, and of victimising companies.
This accusation is unfortunate and untrue. It is also regrettable that the
Financial Review chose to give Mr Warburton's remarks such uncritical
prominence without seeking comment on them from my office, and without
requiring Mr Warburton to illustrate his case with any facts or concrete
examples. Indeed, given the opportunity to substantiate his case on the radio program
AM, Mr Warburton said he personally hadn't had such an attack, and that his
experience " has been very good." When asked to give examples of
companies which had been victimised, he could not name any.
I prefer to be judged by what I have done for the business community, rather
than by what one of its members might say of me. Low inflation, high growth,
record profits and a sharply reduced corporate tax rate are, I think, more
substantial and verifiable measures of the relationship between my
Government and the private sector.
CANBERRA DECEMBER, 1994 
THE AUSTRALIANAuikA -A6/ AA tled:
how Keating bullies business
) ck IRC ruling
my forced to deal with unions
DAVIS
lations Commis-
) wn a controveri-
unionised comgally
forced to
agreements with
s Industry Associlecision
yesterday
i of union power,
eaL the IRC decision
small non-unionturing
firm, Asahi
will become a
ral Government's
aining legislation.
rrol Hodder yeskhi
to bargain in
ain metal industry
x cent wage claim,
mpany's employmtw
r My anger over
this is almost
uncontrollable. If
this decision
stands, then this is
one of the blackest
days in the history
of industrial
relations.)
Mr Bert Evans
The chief executive of the MTIA,
Mr Bert Evans, said that if the law
required a company to enter negotiations
with unions that did not
represent any of its employees " then
we ought to burn the act".
" My anger over this is almost
uncontrollable," Mr Evans said. " If this decision stands then this is one of
the blackest days in the history of
Australian industrial relations."
He said that Asahi, an MTIA
member, had about 60 employees,
who had been approached by the
Automotive Food Metals and Engineering
Union but had said they were
not interested in joining the union.
" Now the company is supposed to
sit down and negotiate with the union
officials on a wage rise for people
who have refused to join the union."
The Asahi case arose out of moves
by the AFMEU earlier this year to
use the new bargaining provisions
under the act as part of a strategy for
recruiting members in non-unionised
factories in the manufacturing sector.
The AFMEU served a 14.5 per
cent wage claim on about 3,000
manufacturing companies that had
Coninued pag 6
OTWU wis more wag rises-pas 6 By PAMELA WLAMS
ImaaoalConepondertnt
THE Prime Minister, Mr Keating,
has silenced influential critics in the
business community by practising
the politics of hate and victimising
those who disagree with him, according
to a prominent member of the
Business Council and chairman of
Du Pont, Mr Dick Warburton.
In an interview with The Australian
Financial Review, Mr Warburton,
who is also a member of thb
board of the Reserve Bank, says the
vitriolic attacks by the Prime Minister
on his corporate critics have
resulted In a " Cold War" since the
last Federal election that has only,
recently begun to thaw, with senior
businessmen still recoiling from serious
debate with the Government over
public policy issues.
" We have been getting in much
closer to the politics of hate," Mr
Warburton said. " In other words: ' If
you don't agree with me, I'll not only
hate you, but destroy you.'
" So one of the problems business
has Is that while an individual h
prepared to stand up and say what be
means, you have to run a business
And you can't afford to have your
business destroyed. So you have got
to be very crcmspect"
The president of the BCA, Mr lan
Salmon, said yesterday that the
organisaton had refused to buckle to
attacks from the Government: " At
the end of the day, if Paul Keating
can't have a relationship with business
which is based on reasoned
argument, then the country will be
poorer for It"
Mr Warburton said the tactics had
stifled debate because of the concerns
of corporate leaders that their own
businesses could be targeted for
retaliation by the Government.
There had been a thawing in the
" Cold War", " but it's been because
of the strength of individuals like
John Prescott and Bob Joss".
Mr Warburton's comments will
come as a shock to the Government,
because he is widely regarded as a
moderate and supportive business
leader and has been appointed to a
string of government boards and
advisory bodies. He is a director of
Cnitnued pip
OeFeahBe: I bum ess vKeafs-pg 12
OM aolsn Mcen ALPpybadlt-papgl
O Eiari: FrdM o speec-p l14
O-
I thought elections were
id I would have liked to
heard the squeals from
menplirytheWorld
I _ cil of hurches and a
Ai others in the event that
Hewson had won that
on . andi systematically
ddated and punished the
ans who had poured
ins of dollars and count-
, oursof work into Labor's
ie ACTU would probably
trun off to the United
ions complaining of
, an rihts abuses. And in
view it would have been
-led to do so.
ecouse that's the whole
At about the really iniporo
inalienable rights
doni of speech, freedom of
. mbly and the right to
1Ma justice. They are suped
to be universal and
visiblc; not subject to the
d= sa whims of a governat
that excels at dishing out
s. wand punishment but has
emariably thin skin itself.
? Sul IKeating's hero,
oum Jefferson, thought all
3ws acW evident. Given the
Of commentators and
tess about the HIA experi-
.4e, vpy few people in
saimpublic life seem to
Theme is much I admire
31st Keating. He has passion
: i sion. But his major
italian is an apparent
~ 19 outgrow the plastic
that evMs-
Hbstperiod of
' du~ waitshim f he can
~ hi tolerance that he
Votamms* voyone will be
e ofAmtNh e Australian
* is -raid Domingo
Neeck, Kziftig reflected on
* W Astue ot true leadership.
-11c same that he invoked was
. iat of Abraham Lincoln.
Wellk the American Civil
lar was a wee bit nastier than
le Federal election of 1993.
et in his second inaugural
-ddres Abraham Lincoln
2agflafimously pledged to
bind up the nation's wounds"
and to govern -with malice
3ward none".
After a war in which nearly
IDO million people perised.
hat took a bgman. Paul
Cetigh ighL We still
' a" Nt Produced a leader that
113. Revealed: how Keating
bullies business world
Frm pae
the Reserve Bank of Australia,
dialnnan of Wool International,
chabrmn of the National
Occupational Health and Safety
commission, chairman of
Ausindastry, and chairman of
the Australian Best Practice
Dem~ aton Proram
Mir Salmon said the DCA
intended to continue Its role of
pushing for reform. " Our task
is nchngig -which Is to
bring to the attention of
Government changes we
believe are needed for good
government and the longterm
successi of Australia. And
that Includes being critical of
its CEO, who in this case is
Paul Keating."
The origins of the " cold war"
lie in the immnediate aftermath
of the lSt Federal election,
when the Prime Minister, Mr
Keating, and the Treasurer, Mr
Dawkins, made it known there
would be ' paybrack" for organis
atlon they believed had
bakdthe LbeAs in the
elcton campaign.
According to Mr Warburton,
the SCA and other industry
lobby groups were pet
shattered after the election by
the politics of hate, when Keating and Dawins came out
and said, ' Well, that's the end
of those organlsations'."
The Business Council
found the going particularly
tough during the election
campaign caught between
its non-party political objectives
and the political use
made by thf then Opposition
leader, Mr John liewson, of
the organisation's long-term
support for a* bnmdl based
consumption tax.
There were also pointed
attempts to tough up then BCA
president and CRA chiefeec
utie, Mr John Ralp^ after he
agreed to serve on two Coalition
committees If the Coalition
won government.
" Mh BCA, going Ito the
election, as a totality, would
more openly have supported the
Liberals," Mr Warburton said
" But this was because of the
overriding issue of tax reform.
Not the GST, but broad tax
reform. Many individuals
were saying, like me, that we
still support a tax reform
package as we did In 1955.
" On dhe other handl, John
Hewson got very cross
because the ICA was not
standing up overtly supportlag the GST. iwson's rections
Ia the end started to
alilenate the very people he
was needing support from.
" And then It was after the
election that Keating slammed
UL He just lumped everybody
in and had a go. After the
election, there was a mixture
of response in the BCA. It was
fets ufair that because you
da. red to critiise, you were
attacked Kest* i ends up
Stiflng debate because most
peopl dislike being persona&amp;
By attacked, and they also
detco~ gee t augh up in the
counter attack.
" If -you can't get up and
have a debate without being
pilloried vindictively, then
you just can't have debate. It
stops people coming forward
to enter the debate."
The Federal Government's
negative response to the
BCA's recent " scorecard"
criticising the pace of reform
in Australia had also bitten
within the business community,
Mr, Warburton said.
,~ pagain, thi n
meat doesn't mind the ticks,
but. boy, they sure get upset
about the crosses."
imited access angers Harris
IHE NSW Auditor-General,
Wi Harris. has renewed his
mflac on restrictions on his
woCS to Cabinet documents.
laying that his office was
' veerluyr aild" by* p rovidow
o the Public Finance
kad Audit Act.
mr Harris has warned that
al a&amp; di opinions in the NS5W
public sector may have to be
uaiedbecause of restriotloaan
015s to lega does-By La ROOM
The " unfettered ability" of
the NSW Auditor-General
was curtailed by the proviions,
he said.
The restriction " means that
Tnca hid hitrs
ssetdillegaliaw
thy donot wish
disclosed to the Government
ot to Padlamews by refusin
I&amp; H'ara said.
Tfl IN% esar. he wMS atarited reaffirm its * right to know", he
said " the lega right to access
documents relevant to audit is
so basic to the audit task that
lack of access represents a real
impediment to my acquitting
the responsibilities that
Parliament expecisj."
The third volume of his
ret for 1994 notes major
qualificaion n the ~ t
of omzwm. g 8 etar
agencies, c
M The exclusion by te160= e do not " adequately represent"
the authority's interest in the
Sydney Harbour Tunnel, on
the basis that the RTA carries
-the risks and benefits and is
therefore an asset of the
authority. OUncertainty in the Sydney
W' 9er Doard's accounting trammet
for ; sa consruced by
-dt seto etis'Which
ould' bae ft. e 1 of
fiacn arrngns
Mir Harris Said diw War .07Y .37
3.55 .9a
20 5C
.24 .13
.07
4.1 .16
.07/ .30 .06
.32
* 33 15
.0i .82
1 85
.66
A29 1.60
1.00
*. 97 .75 33
.33
22
393 .27 .04 .38 .60 .29 .38 .18 .11
.76
*. 44
2.50 1 15
5.75 *~. 36
.19 .13
45 .85
1.49 15 .09 27
48
1.3'
2 16
-~. 31 B
~. 35
28 3.70 25 .2
130 0 .02 E
.06 E
.02 E
.098E .23 E
2.056G .14 C
I 08A C
1 73 C
1 15.60 C
.09/ 1 CC
.02 C
00'/ C
.04 C
.00' C
.07 C
,04 C
.20 C
.02 ' C
09 CC
.01 C
.30C 33 C
.07' C
.03 C
.07 C
160C A3 C
1.00 C
02i C
.20 C
.12 C
04/ C
27 C
.18 C
03,/ .01 .06 .07 .04 .38 .38 .44
4.04 .07
.061/ .01/ 20. .53
. Is .03 .16 .051
01
.054. 28 .761
1: 55
32* 053
.13
220 -047 20 09
.05 _ W1
.18. .71
.0 .0 .1
2.0 ,3 .3
lx . C.
32.1* 1 



PRIME MINISTER 113/ 94
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
WOODCHIP EXPORTS
I am pleased to announce that the Government is to implement a firm
program under which Australia's native forests will be properly protected and
preserved. Under the program, the amount of woodchips exported from native forests not
covered by Regional Forest Agreements will be reduced by about 20 per cent
per year to nil in the Year 2000.
The decisions I am announcing today are calculated to meet our obligations
to the environment and at the same time, protect the interests of communities
which presently depend on forest industries.
For 1996, the maximum permissible level for export will be 5 million tonnes,
about one million tonnes less than 1995. In 1997, the figure will be around 4
million tonnes and declining, except where the conditions outlined in this
statement are met in respect of Regional Forest Agreements and domestic
downstream processing.
By the year 2000 the Government will ban the export of woodchips from those
areas of Australia's native forests which are not covered by Regional Forest
Agreements incorporating a reserve system that comprehensively represents
all forest types.
The decisions taken by the Minister for Resources in relation to the 1995
woodchip licences are legally binding and irrevocable. But the conditions
in the licences which protect the environment those relating to the national
estate and endangered species, for example will be rigorously enforced.
Importantly, the Government is considering rescheduling existing logging
operations in some situations to protect environmental values and broaden
the options for future reservation of forests. 
2
The Tasmanian proposal referred to the Minister for Environment, Sport and
Territories for environmental impact assessment for the export of up to
700,000 tonnes is not included in, and will not be added to, the base figure
for 1995
Export woodchip licences in future will only be granted in relation to areas
where there has been significant progress towards, or the completion of, both
a Regional Forest Agreement ( RFA), as required under the National Forest
Policy Statement ( NFPS), and the establishment of a comprehensive,
adequate and representative reserve system. The Regional Forest
Agreement will include appropriate environmental protection measures to
ensure ecologically sustainable development. In these areas companies
which increase their domestic downstream processing capacity, or have a
demonstrable commitment to doing so, will have this taken into account when
the Government is determining export licence quotas from 1996 2000.
Under the current policy, the Commonwealth is required to be invited by a
State or Territory Government to participate in an RFA. However, in the two
years since the NFPS was finalised, no formal requests have been received
by the Commonwealth and so no agreements have been reached.
A strict timetable will now be developed for each Regional Forest Agreement.
These agreements will be developed on the basis of scientific and technical
assessments of the values of all forests, particularly old growth and
wilderness. The Government is aware of the possible regional economic and social
effects of these measures, and will consider helping industry make the
transition to greater use and development of plantation and re-growth
timbers. The woodchip export phase-out will not apply to plantations.
These policies represent a significant step towards a sustainable forest
products industry by the end of the century. That industry will operate within
a framework of agreements which protect environmental values and at the
same time maintains an active value-added wood products industry.
The Government is to alter the process for considering the terms, conditions
and size of woodchip exports. In future, the process for advising the Minister
for Resources will be coordinated by the Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet. The Minister for Resources will formally consult me before
making his decision.
Reaching the Government's goal on woodchip exports will require an orderly
transitional process. The Government recognises that all parties must be
provided with incentives to work together. 
3
The Government will also consider measures to improve administrative
arrangements available to the Commonwealth to undertake Regional Forest
Agreements. Today's announcements move us significantly closer to a regime under which
Australia's native forests will be. protected forever; and it should leave us in
no doubt that with goodwill on all sides we will take the final steps by the year
2000. CANBERRA 22 DECEMBER 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
22 DECEMBER 1994
PM: As a result of the disquiet has been occasioned by the decision by the
Government on export woodchips in the last few days, I have taken the
opportunity in consultation with the senior members of the Cabinet
to advance the Government's thinking and policy on the question of
export woodchipping from native forests. Now, as you may know,
there is a persistent circularity in these arguments about
woodchipping. The Government has had a policy since early 1991 of
phasing out export woodchips by the year 2000, or soon thereafter.
And at this point, there hasn't been a phase-down in volumes. What is
said to the industry is this phase-down will be diminished if you
downstream process. The industry says " we won't invest in downstream
processing without resource security, we can't get that without
Regional Forest Agreements under the National Forest Policy
Statement", but the Commonwealth can't produce the Regional Forest
Agreements because under the statement we can only do so if the
Commonwealth is invited by a State into the arrangements. The
Commonwealth is not invited in the 2 years since the Statement, has
not been invited into any arrangement by any state not NSW, not
Victoria and not Tasmania. And one of the reasons we are not invited
is because the industry doesn't encourage the invitation. So, it is a
phase-down in exports unless they're in secondary processing, but
there isn't secondary processing without the security coming from
Regional Forest Policy statements, but the Commonwealth can't get
into them without an invitation from the States, and we don't get an
invitation because the industry doesn't want it. So that's the circle.
Now, what I have decided to do is to throw a grenade into that circle,
and to get that particular log-jam moving. What I am doing now is
announcing on behalf of the Government that we are implementing a
firm program under which Australia's native forest will be properly
protected and preserved. As a consequence, from 1996 we will be
reducing the maximum permissible level of exports by about 20% a 
year, so that for 1996 the maximum permissible level of export of
woodchips will be 5 million tonnes about 1 million tonnes less than
this year. And the next year it will be around 4 million tonnes, and the
next year around 3, until it is phased out by the year 2000. Now, save
for and except where conditions outlined in this statement are met
that is in respect to Regional Forest Agreements and domestic
downstream processing. Now, where-that happens, the arrangements
will then reserve for domestic consumption woodchipping in areas
which are now currently going to export. So, in other words, instead of
this process where we have had just evaluation of coupes each year
which has old growth environmental values as to old growth, rare
species etc but where the tonnages are still moving, what we will be
doing is actually ratchetting the tonnages down. So by the year 2000,
the Government will ban the export of woodchips from those areas of
Australia's native forests which are not covered by Regional Forest
Agreements incorporating a reserve system that comprehensively
represents all forest types.
Now, export woodchip licences in the future will only be granted in
relation to areas where there has been significant progress towards, or
the completion of, Regional Forest Agreements. Let me just decipher
that for you, because these take about 18 months to 2 years to put in
place. There has to be significant progress towards the completion of
Regional Forest Agreements, as required under the National Forest
Policy Statement, and the establishment of a comprehensive,
adequate and representative reserve system. In those areas,
companies which increase their domestic downstream processing
capacity and have a demonstrable commitment to doing so in other
words, where it is very clear that they are actually going to do it will
have this taken into account when the Government is determining the
export licence quotas between 1996 and 2000. So, we are now
developing a strict timetable for each Regional Forest Agreement, and
these will be developed on the basis of scientific and technical
assessments of the values of all forests, particularly old growth and
wilderness. We are also saying here that the Government will also
consider helping the industry make the transition to a greater use and
development of plantation and regrowth timbers. At the moment they
are saying " let's hop into the native forests and get as much of it out of
the road as we possibly can while the window's open, and we will think
about the future of plantations and regrowth". We're saying that
perhaps you ought to think about that earlier, and I think that approach
will represent a significant step towards a sustainable forest products
industry by the end of the century. Because this is a quite significant
employer, and we in the Government wish to see this industry
continue, but on a basis which is sustainable.
As to the process for the actual coupes that is, there are 2 questions
here the volume of the timber, and the quality of it and where it
comes from. As to that, as I make clear in the statement, the 
Government is to alter the process for considering the terms,
conditions and size of woodchip exports in future the process for
advising the Minister for Resources will be co-ordinated by the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, and the Minister for
Resources will formally consult me before making this decision. That
would mean that all of these.. . that there will be a broader process
where we are actually looking at the conservation values and the
environmental values at particular coupes, albeit in the context of a
declining level of volumes. The two things would amount to the
implementation of certainly an advance of the Government's policy
in respect of native forests, where in fact this conversation has been
running now to the States for years. But where we haven't seen any
movement on the National Forest Policy Statement towards Regional
Forest Agreements, and in implementing a firm program under which
Australia's native forests will be properly protected and preserved,
while at the same time, keeping an eye to the regional employment
consequences, and trying to refocus the timber industry into regrowth
areas or into plantations. Now I'll be glad to take your questions.
J: Prime Minister, given that all these problems were apparent before
Tuesday's decision, wouldn't it have been wiser for full Cabinet
consideration of this phasedown and also the problems surrounding
the annual decisions on woodchip licences to have been done in an
orderly fashion by Cabinet, rather than waiting for a botched decision
from a junior Minister to force your hand?
PM: Well, the thing is you can always you know, if I have got enough
time I can strip the tariff barriers out of Australia, open up the financial
markets, deal with native title issues, fix the old growth forest policy
problems, and then move onto some of the bigger, broader identity
issues into the bargain. I mean, it is all a matter of what one can
reasonably do. This is an area which is essentially run by the States.
I mean lets be clear about this the principal authorities in forest policy
are the States
J: Not in exports
PM:.. not in exports, but this is not about simply exports -a lot of this
argument is about what is being logged and what isn't. And we
entered into the National Forest Policy Statement with the States,
which is as a document of principle a good document. But it has got
to be made to work. Now, in the event that these processes show that
it is not working, at some point probably in the next 12 months, as we
head towards that 2000 target we would have to do something about
reducing the volume of exports of woodchips. I think all that has
happened with this is that we have decided to do it now. I think better
earlier than later. 
J: Do you agree with the decision announced by Minister Beddall and if
not, did you make your views known to him before he made it?
PM: Well, I made my views clear to him but, in the end, and under the
arrangements we had for this decision the final judgements were his.
We set this up in the Cabinet process last year where Michael Lee
actually went through this process on advice from the then
environment Minister, Ros Kelly. I might say, by the way, when Mrs
Kelly went out and said she scored a victory in Cabinet, being able to
offer advice to the Minister for Resources, her antagonists in the
Environment movement dismissed it. This year, of course, it is of
major importance.
J: Are you saying Mr Beddall ignored your advice?
PM: I made my views clear to him but he was the one that had to go
through the coupes and make assessments from information which
was, in some respects, arriving. I think what was happening here was
a problem, perhaps, of process rather than anything else. And, as I
have just announced that change to you, we'll change the process over
next year. So, we'll change the process and we'll change the process
in the context of a much clearer policy about where we are actually
going.
J: Mr Keating, are you pleased with Minister Beddall's decision?
PM: Well, look, I have made my position clear about that. Within the
context of the responsibilities to make these judgements, as he
understood it, he made the best decision he could make. And,
therefore, what I am about is rather than giving any of you
characters any cheap lines is moving on with how we actually do
something good about the forests and how we draw some strength
from this discussion, this debate.
J: interpretation that can be put on it is that he misunderstood your
guidance?
PM: Well, you're a good interpreter of things, normally, Jim. That's why
they pay you all that money.
J: Prime Minister you say that the Government will consider rescheduling
existing logging operations in some areas. Does that mean that some
companies might not be able to fulfil their licences?
PM: Well, there are licences and licences, here. There are licences which
are just a tick on the previous year's licence, where there is no
discretion by ministers, at all, as to coupes, etcetera. Where there is a
discretion, what we are saying, the government will consider 
rescheduling some of the operations. In other words, where we are
looking at volume and quality I use the word quality in the broadest
context of environmental values.... Where we are talking about, say,
volume and environmental values, where the licences are a pro forma
reissuance, well, that's done. Where they are not that, where there is
a discretion, where environmental values are an issue, yes we will
consider rescheduling some of the operations while, at the same
time trying to maintain the volumes.
J: Mr Keating, is the fact that your department will now have a role in
advising the Minister for Resources, a sign that there was a problem
with the way John Faulkner handled the process?
PM: It is, rather, the process, I think. Look, what happens here is, there is
the pressure from those interested in native forests in this country to
transfer the state forestry problem to the Commonwealth. And, the
device is export controls, which means Commonwealth ministers who
don't run forestry departments then have to offer advice and take
advice on which coupes are important in environmental terms and
which are not. OK, it's not perfect, we live in a federation, there is a
division of responsibilities, there is a lot of intransigence on forests,
everybody does their best. But, better in the context of knowing where
we are going. The policy has been about phasing out wood chipping
in favour of downstream processing. If there isn't to be downstream
processing, if there is to be simply a jamming up of those issues, then
something has to change it. This is what is going to change it. We're
simply going to reduce the volumes.
J: But, you said that was always your policy, to take it down to zero by
2000?
PM: Well, I think it was first announced by Bob Hawke in the thing called,
Building a Competitive Australia ( 12 March, 1991). And what he says
is that it is the government's objective, in cooperation with the states,
to phase out the export of woodchip by the year 2000 and soon
thereafter be replaced by the manufacture of pulp and paper and other
value added products for domestic use and export. And, then, later on
we said at a Premiers' conference, " And after that, on a case by case
basis."
J: Mr Keating, were you surprised by the outcry that this decision
triggered?
PM: It's on every year, now. It's like a ritual, the incantations are starting
while the paper is still shuffling. And, everybody's ready to do their
best or their worst when it is published. Now, because these decisions
were perceived to have cut across the interests of environmentalists,
well, they've gone into as is their right, to make their case... 
J: Do you think the government miscalculated the backlash?
PM: I don't think the government has miscalculated anything at all, here.
The problem here is the protagonists for, or the antagonists to logging,
lack all influence with the states who run forest policy. Now, Bob
Brown's up there talking about, ' What's the difference between this
Prime Minister and a National Party figure?' He has no influence
whatsoever, with Premiers Fahey, Kennett and Groom, who make the
decisions, primarily, about forests. And that is the fact of it. All this
huffing and puffing and incantations, when it comes to the cutting
edge, he is useless except for running around the corridors here in
Parliament House, Canberra. OK, the Commonwealth has a split
responsibility, we will give further, definition to our part of that
responsibility. But, in the end, the Commonwealth has some control
over wood chipping but it has none whatsoever over saw log. If
someone wants to fell a tree for saw log, it's entirely a matter for the
states. So, what's he going to do down at Parliament House,
Macquarie Street? Poke his tongue out outside St Stephens Church?
I mean, do a little war dance in Spring Street? What is going to bring
the State Premiers around to some influence other than banging out a
press statement in the Canberra gallery? That's pretty easy.
J: Don't you have to keep these people on side for the next election, Mr
Keating?
PM: Bob Brown is an opponent of ours. He's running for a seat in the
senate.
J: But, in terms of green preferences?
PM: I don't want to keep him on side, I want to sideline him. Sideline him.
J: Is this the best way to do it?
PM: Well, it has generally been effective as a policy.
J: What about your own caucus, Mr Keating, do you thinK this will stave
off the proposed motion for the new year?
PM: Oh well, there are caucus processes we all understand about, there is
a bit of incantation going on there, too. That's true on most issues.
J: Prime Minister, John Devereaux, accused you, yesterday, of conning
the 43 backbenchers and two ministers who wrote to you urging the
protection of high conservation areas. What is your response to that
accusation?
PM: I think John basically likes me, to be honest, and I like him. But, I'd
prefer that he didn't take his obvious and conscientious interest in the 
forests to the end of leaving the Labor caucus because this is where
he can be most effective.
J: But, did you give them the impression that...?
PM: No, No. Because I was not involved in that process under the
Cabinet's arrangements.
J: Did your office give backbenchers that impression?
PM: No.
J: Well, that's a difference because they thought it was, " under control".
PM: Well, that's what most people say when something comes out that they
think isn't right, in their terms.
J: Why shouldn't Mr Beddall take it, as a vote of no confidence in him,
that you've had to change the process after his decision?
PM: Well, I think he thinks that the process was fairly limited, too as to
judgements about coupes and no, if you like, overall guideline as to
volumes. That's now come in here.
J: If you had any faith in him you wouldn't have to change the process?
PM: Well, that's not right. Faith in him and the process are two different
things.
J: So, you have complete faith in him?
PM: Well, there is no doubt that he exercised his responsibility in terms of
that which he perceived to be his judgements, to be made about the
imperatives of volumes versus the issues of environmental values.
And, you can only do that on certain advice.
J: But he didn't listen to advice, did he?
PM: Well, you're only going over old ground, so...
J: What stage of the process, Prime Minister, did you communicate your
views to Mr Beddall and how did you put that to him?
PM; Look, I have told you I communicated my views, and that is enough.
J: With the benefit of hindsight would you have communicated your views
to him, more strongly...? 
.18
PM: No, but in the end, what's come from this, but a very large change.
Where is the news in this. The news I mean, let me go through my
own little incantation the news is where the weight is, right, for those
of you who didn't go through the appropriate formalities of training as
journalists. The news is where the weight is, the weight is a policy
change, here, that cuts the volumes down.
J: You've talked about incentives, when and what sort?
PM: I think when the industry comes back seriously and knows they're in a
serious game, we can talk about in which way they might move
towards plantations or regrowth. But, at the moment they think, if
they've got a closing window, they'll go for the things of greatest value
in the greatest quantity. And, I think they've got to know that a) the
government does want the industry to keep going and b) that it is best
on a sustainable basis, and if they get into regrowth and plantation
we'll be of a mind to help them. But, nothing we can do, though, will
transpose ourselves over the primary responsibility of the States for
running forestry. And, this is in the division of responsibilities, under
the Constitution, they are there. Now, we're into it because of our
environmental interests and our export powers, our external affairs
powers. But, they are in it, primarily on a function basis and that is
going to be, always, the key determinant. Thank you.
Ends. 



STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE HON BRIAN HOWE MP
LAND MANAGEMENT TASK FORCE
In November the Prime Minister announced the Government's intention to
establish a Land Management Task Force to investigate ways to improve the
adoption and use of property management plans for the farm sector. Today I
announce the membership of that Task Force.
The Task Force will comprise representatives from the farm sector, the
financial institutions, experts in the areas of Landcare and farm management
and from State and Federal Governments.
I am pleased that the Government has been able to draw together people
with a wide range of experience and expertise to serve on the Task Force.
The Task Force will report directly to the Prime Minister and will be chaired
by his Senior Economic Adviser, Dr Ric Simes. The full membership is set
out below.
The Commonwealth considers the increased use of property management
planning will achieve greater integration of economic, ecological and regional
decision making by the farm sector.
The terms of reference for the Task Force are:
1 Examine the extent of property management planning and
implementation and identify options for improving adoption;
2. Investigate the scope of property managiemenit-ptannfingto-advance
sustainable production in Australian farming;
3. Identify means by which property management planning can assist in
the development of farm business strategies and operations;
4. Examine the scope for increased linkages between property
management planning and catchment based or regional plans;
Review the relationship between property management planning and
the provision of government programs and advise on options for
further integration where appropriate; 
6. Examine the scope for financial institutions to incorporate property
management planning in assessments of long term farm viability and
lending practices.
Task Force membership:
Dr Ric Simes, Senior Economic Adviser to the Prime Minister,
Mr Jock Douglas, a Queensland farmer and Chairperson of the Queensland
Landcare Council,
Mr Alex Campbell a Western Australian farmer and Convenor of the National
Farmers Federation's Conservation Sub-Committee,
Mr Chris Shearer, National Australia Bank,
Mr Barry Buffier, Westpac Bank,
Mr Max Ormsby, General Manager, Financial Services, Elders,
Mr Noel Dawson, Executive Director of Land Use and Fisheries, Queensland
Department of Primary Industries,
Mr Peter Sutherland, Acting General Manager, Rural Policy and Marketing,
Victorian Department of Agriculture,
Ms Helen Alexander, National Landcare Facilitator,
Mr Noel Fitzpatrick, immediate past President of the Murray-Darling Basin
Commission, Mr Peter Huthwaite, President of the Australian Farm Management Society
and the Director of the Rural Management Development Centre at the
Queensland Institute of Technology,
Ms Sue Salmon,. Consultant -to. the Minister forthe-Environment. Sport and
Territories, Senator John Faulkner,
Mr Bernie Wonder, First Assistant Secretary Rural Division, Commonwealth
Department of Primary Industries and Energy.
Contact: Bill Nagle 277 7520
Tony Melville 277 7744
CANBERRA 11 January 1994 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
ARCHBISHOP JAMES CARROLL
Archbishop James Carroll, a prince of the Catholic Church, was by every instinct
and inclination a kindred member of the working community of Australia and who
by his grace, charm and humility was a very special Australian and a very priestly
man. He served the Catholic Church with distinction and materially progressed its
interests in education, being always influential in the direction and delivery of
government aid to the Catholic school system.
He was always a believer in a moderate Labor Party, a party in touch with the
aspirations of working Australians and one able to advance their interests.
He was deeply committed to the poor, the low paid, to the families living
perpetually with the tyranny of debt. He saw government support for them as
central to their well being.
Those who knew him well will miss him as a person and as a priest whose values
and priestly qualities made him a paragon of the church to which he devoted his
life. SYDNEY 14 January 1995 



.37
EMBARGOED 7.00 PM 18 JANUARY 1995
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
ARRIVAL OF HIS HOLINESS, POPE JOHN PAUL 11
WEDNESDAY 18 JANUARY 1995, SYDNEY
Your Holiness, Your Eminences, Your Excellency, Premier, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen
Your Holiness, it is my great pleasure to welcome you to Australia.
I welcome you as the spiritual leader of one billion people worldwide, and of five
million Australians.
Your Holiness, I welcome you on behalf of all Australians.
I welcome you as a man of faith and as a respected and admired international
figure one, surely, known to more people, Catholic and non-Catholic alike, than
any other Pope in history; one who has given moral leadership in the pursuit of
peace and justice; in the interests of the young; in defence of the family; and in
the cause of ecumenism.
We are honoured by your presence. We thank you for making the long journey
to Australia to bestow a great honour on an Australian woman whom we hold in
the deepest affection and regard.
You have come to honour Mary MacKillop for her goodness, her heroic virtue,
her dedication to the poorest of the poor. In doing so, you renew in all of us the
message she brought to those she encountered in her own lifetime.
In a great many ways she is a woman of our time.
In the last century as in this one, people came to Australia from all over the world
in search of better lives. In the remote areas of Australia, Mary MacKillop
helped the children of the poor to find them.
She established communities of hope. 
2
It is partly because she worked in the bush, in many ways the cradle of our
tradition, that she became a legendary figure for Australians.
Mary MacKillop's sympathies were with those we call the underdogs of society
which is where, by tradition, Australian sympathies lie.
If we have not succeeded in converting those sympathies to an entirely fair and
just society, they continue to constitute an ideal and an inspiration and Mary
MacKillop continues to embody them for us.
Through her work she spoke to all Australians and she spoke for the kind of
tolerant and diverse society we aspire to today.
She readily crossed denominational boundaries. Protestant and Jewish
Australians supported her and were her friends.
She was the daughter of Gaelic-speaking Scottish migrants, but her voice
became a distinctly Australian one. When she wrote to the Vatican she began
with the words: " It is an Australian who speaks".
Today, the Order she founded, the Josephites, continue to serve the children of
the poor. Today, they bring hope to those on the margins of society in the
suburbs of modern multicultural Australia, and, increasingly, to those in need in
the countries of the Third World.
Your Holiness, in the next two days, many thousands of people who have
journeyed from all over Australia and New Zealand, will gather in Sydney to
greet you and be present at Mass and the beatification of Mary MacKillop.
These will be great days in the lives of all who attend. They will be very
significant days in the life of our nation.
The presence of so many reflects both their continuing affection for Mary
MacKillop and the Josephites, and, Your Holiness, their great regard for you.
I said we feel honoured to have you here among us: I dare say many of us also
feel stronger.
Stronger for having among us a man whose steadfast defence and unremitting
advocacy of Catholic faith and Christian ideals is a source of comfort and a
guiding light.
Again, on behalf of all Australians, I welcome you.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
FAREWELL TO HIS HOLINESS, POPE JOHN PAUL 11
SYDNEY AIRPORT FRIDAY, 20 JANUARY 1995
Your Holiness, we are sorry to see you go.
Your visit will leave memories which millions of Australians will always cherish.
It is a pity that we were not able to share you with more of Australia.
But had you been able to travel more widely I can assure you that the warmth of
Sydney's welcome would have been repeated in every other city and community
across the continent.
I trust that you will leave us in the knowledge that Sydney welcomed you on behalf of
all Australia.
And I know all Australia will join with me in thanking you for making the long journey to
bestow a great honour on Mary MacKillop.
It is true that women as much as men pioneered this country, but their contribution
has not always been truly acknowledged.
The labour and love, the courage and perseverance, and not least the moral strength
that women brought to the frontier of Australia, and now bring to the modern
Australian community, have been fundamental defining forces in Australia's
development. In honouring this great Australian woman you have honoured all Australian women
and all Australians.
Your Holiness, you have also reminded us of where greatness in nations lies.
In Mary MacKillop the greatness was, as you said, in her openness and generosity to
others, in her sense of justice and in the unconquerable courage which she brought to
the task of seeing justice done. 
We recognise that it is much the same with nations: that the promise and potential of
Australia principally lie in these great human qualities.
In other words, the promise lies in our people.
When you spoke of the need for harmony and solidarity with one another we heard
you very clearly.
This is a country of deep democratic traditions. It is also a society of many cultures.
These days we are very conscious of the need to marry our traditions and institutions
with tolerance and openness towards others.
This is what we mean by multiculturalism in Australia.
In recent years we have concentrated our efforts on developing policies of inclusion,
by which we mean policies which draw all Australians into the mainstream of our
national life.
This has driven our response to the challenge of Aboriginal Australia, in which you
expressed particular interest yesterday and on your last visit.
The same sentiment drives our approach to building a culturally diverse but cohesive
society. We recognise that we will not create a more cohesive and stronger Australia without
creating a fairer and more just Australia.
When we talk of inclusion, therefore, we mean that the poor and disadvantaged must
not be left without care. We mean the basic comforts and opportunities to lead
fulfilling lives must be extended to them.
We do not say we have done enough, but these are our priorities and we know very
well what you mean, Your Holiness, when you say that our response to such human
needs now will largely determine the kind of society we pass on to future generations
of Australians.
We know that there is no greater challenge facing us than the challenge of our youth.
There have been developments in the modern world which have the potential to
greatly improve the lives of people and yet those same developments have the
potential to impoverish them.
We know that technological progress, like the wealth that will flow from our economic
growth, will never be enough. 
Experience tells us as the lesson of Mary MacKillop tells us that our young people
need both a sense of purpose and a sense of belonging.
They need what Mary MacKillop understood so well they need hope. And they need
what she had so abundantly they need faith.
We recognise the truth in what you say when you speak of " a growing sense of the
need for a moral and spiritual renewal".
And we know that it demands of all of us in positions of influence from political
leaders to parents and teachers that we address the spiritual needs of our children.
Your Holiness, you leave us conscious of the great honour you have done us on this
brief visit and mindful of the message you have brought.
On behalf of all Australians I thank you and wish you a safe return. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
JAPAN EARTHQUAKE
All Australians will have watched with sadness the tragedy unfolding in Japan
following the powerful earthquake which struck the Kansai region in the early
hours of 17 January.
Soon after the earthquake I wrote to Prime Minister Murayama expressing our
profound sympathy towards those affected by this disaster. The Japanese
Government was also asked if Australia might be able to assist in some
practical way.
I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government will contribute to
the relief effort by supplying about 200,000 litres of bottled Australian mineral
water, valued at more than $ 150,000. The mineral water is already in Japan
as part of a commercial shipment, and therefore is available for immediate
distribution in the disaster area. We will also assist with some internal
transport costs.
The provision of fresh water to affected areas has been identified as a high
priority by the Japanese emergency authorities.
SYDNEY 21 January 1995 2/ 95 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIA DAY 1995
ADDRESS GIVEN TO THE AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS, SYDNEY,
JANUARY 1995 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
* EMBARGOED UNTIL 8. OOPM, 25 JANUARY 1995*
This last year has been a good one for Australia and for Australians.
Think of the individual success: in sport, the unprecedented triumphs at the
Commonwealth Games, great performances at the World Championships,
Kieran Perkins, Cathy Freeman, the Kangaroos, the wallabies, the cricket team;
and in the arts, the Australian Ballet triumphing in Washington, the Australian
Opera in Edinburgh, Priscilla and Muriel's Wedding in Cannes, Toronto, New
York, everywhere.
Meanwhile the Australian economy grew faster than that of any other developed
country.
And whatever necessities of careful management such growth may impose upon
us, growth is without question what we want.
We want it to get unemployment down and employment up; and we managed to
do that, too. In fact we have seen 450,000 jobs created in the past eighteen
months, and long term unemployment has fallen and fallen much faster than
after any other recession in our history.
Our obligation to unemployed Australians and those who will be seeking to enter
the workforce in the next few years obliges us in turn to keep the growth going. 
We must also remain true to those principles of fairness and equality which we
have always held to be definitively Australian.
The truth is Australians do hold to them and that fact continues to shape the
way we are. It shapes policy. The Australian community would not let an
Australian government leave the unemployed behind: the radical steps that
were taken to bring them with us in last year's White Paper, Working Nation,
were taken in response to that sentiment.
This remains one of the great things about Australia: the weight of public opinion
continues to come down on the side of that broad set of values we summarise as
the " fair go".
Through all the changes in the shape of our economy the imperatives of
international competition, and against the ideological tide of unrestrained selfinterest
which pervaded the 1980s, in Australia the notion has persisted that the
pursuit of personal success ought to be balanced by care for others, self-interest
by the common interest.
We have had a perfect example of this in the last year.
The extraordinary public response to the drought was a heartwarming reflection
of Australia's national consciousness; it was also a persuasive reply to anyone
who believes that individualism and materialism, or global mass culture, or state
parochialism, or multiculturalism has replaced our sense of belonging to one
nation and with it our national identity and national feeling.
It was also reassuring'evidence that a common sentiment continues to flow
between the city and the bush, that the legend lives on, that the bush and its
recurring themes her beauty and her terror, as someone once said still grip
our imagination.
The bush is undoubtedly one of our great challenges: probably our most
profound duty to the Australians of the next century is to leave the land both
more productive and intact.
That means we have to establish a regime of sustainable development across
the country: the process has started and, what is most satisfying, the impetus is
coming in large part from farmers and farming communities from the regions.
Sustainable development clean profitable Australian industries for the twentyfirst
century allied to a concerted effort to conserve and restore the natural
environment will need to be a national effort, and between now and the end of
the century that is what we can make it. 
Regional Australia has an essential role to play.
In fact, this seems to me one of the most significant contemporary developments
in the life of Australia: the regions are developing a life and identity of their own.
They are developing futures of their own.
They are defining themselves in terms of their unique advantages and the niches
they can find in the modern Australian and international economies.
It is a development we certainly should encourage; not only because it will be to
the nation's economic advantage, but because the more varied and vibrant the
regions become, the more people will be drawn into our national life and the
richer and stronger will be the cultural and social fabric of Australia.
A revitalised regional Australia has the potential to enliven and enlarge our
national life in ways comparable to the role played by immigration and
multiculturalism.
The lesson is the same there is strength in diversity: and in the tolerance, care
and imagination required to build and maintain it; in the mixture of mutual aid
and self-reliance on which modern multicultural Australia has been built; in other
words, in our best traditions.
It seems to me that in this era of unprecedented and necessary change change
which we must make ourselves and changes which will inevitably be foisted on
us it is essential that we hang on to these traditions, remind ourselves of them,
teach them to our children.
Nothing has ever served us better, and or will serve us so well in the future, as
these things which are grown from our own experience.
I need hardly say that that is why, I think, we should be teaching these values in
our schools; why Australians of every generation and every national and cultural
background should know something of Australian history and tradition; why our
national symbols and institutions should more unambiguously reflect them; why
we really must, before the end of this century, appoint for the first time an
Australian as our Head of State.
There has always been a dark side to Australian egalitarianism, of course: we
have had this tendency to hack at tall poppies.
It is hard to say whether in general this thwarts ambition or makes it burn all the
fiercer. Those Australians I mentioned who have succeeded so brilliantly in the
past year, suggest the latter. 
Better still, perhaps it means the tendency is fading.
The crucial thing is to keep up the ambition of Australians, encourage their
creativity, delight in their invididual efforts and acheivements and not just in
sport and the arts, but in science and technology, business, in service to the
nation and its people and yet maintain the ties that bind us to this country, to
our communities, our families, our human values.
In the next year, as in every other one, we may expect to hear daily examples of
where we are failing, where we are going wrong, where we should do better.
In all this criticism there will be one consistent theme the voice which, in
various guises, urges us to abandon our collective egalitarian values in the
name of liberating the forces of rugged individualism.
We will hear it in debates about unemployed Australians, Aboriginal Australians,
Australian women. We will hear it in debates about the economy, the
environment, the arts, health and education.
We should of course heed all reasonable criticism and never lapse into
complacency. But nor should we forget that very few countries have managed so well in the
difficult art of balancing individual freedom with collective responsibility and
collective strength. And we should not forget that, largely as a result of this, few
countries are so good to live in and have so much potential to get better.
That might be the lesson to draw from our commemmoration this year of the end
of World War II. For all the countless individual acts of initiative, heroism and
sacrifice, what we remember most of all is a great collective effort a communal
effort in a common cause.
I think that is always the way in the end real success depends on finding what
we have in common, because in the end it depends on all of us.
So in congratulating the Young Australians of the Year and the Australian of the
Year I am inclined to say that perhaps tomorrow all Australians might take a bow
and resolve to make this year even better than the last. 



PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MUSEUM OF CONTEMPORARY ART, SYDNEY
JANUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: I am quite happy to respond to any questions you might have.
J: Mr Downer~ s difficulties how do you feel about the prospect of facing John
Howard across the floor?
PMV: I keep saying and let me be entirely consistent and say again the
problem with the Uberal Party Is not the jockey, but the horse. The Uberal
Party Is now seriously rent by divisions, even In this latest episode more
bad blood has been created It Is a party divided In Itseif, It now lacks a
philosophy, It doesn't know what It wishes to do with Australia. It Is in much
the same state as the UAP was In the early 1940s, and Mr Howard's return
will only continue the fracas that has existed every year since he claimed
the leadership for the first time.
J: Would you be determined in your own words to crucify him?
PMV: I will not respond to silly pap questions like that.
J: But would you....
PM: But let me just say John Howard will try to take Australia back to the
country and the values he believes In, which will all be about rugged
Individualism Initially, and then private reward fracturing that sense of nation
and unity, that sense of compassion for those not as well off those
egalitarian values which make Australia. The Important thing Is In this
turmoil In the U-beral Party I think It Is Important for the public to know that
the Government has Its hand well and truly on the rudder. And that
Australia has just completed probably Its best economic year since the War
W1% growth and 2% Inflation, the highest employment growth after any
recession we have ever had, the highest productivity growth probably In
years, and I hope to see the continuation of that through 1995. So, they 
may be the cork bobbing around, but the Government has a sure hand In
the directions the country is taking.
J: Prime Minister, do you expect to see the resurfacing of the immigration
debate now that John Howard Is back In town?
PM: John Howard will try and remake himself when he was asked after those
remarks on Immigration to withdraw them, he said " not on your life". The
Australian pamphleteering for him a week or so ago gave him the
opportunity of what he called an apology... look, John Howard hasn't
changed his views. When John says he didn't mean it, you say : sure you
didn't Johnny sure you didn't".
J: Prime Minister, are you tempted to go to a snap poll?
PM: Well about as tempted as I have been by every other question Inviting me
to do that.
J: Prime Minister on Arthur Boyd as Australian of the Year?
PM: Arthur Is a great Australian a great figure and a great interpreter of the
Australian landscape, and of the Australian soul I think. A person who
understood much about the ethos of Australia, and created that diversity
perhaps unity in his painting between Australia the old ancient country
of Australia. this landscape, and the European civillisation where most of us
are from. And I think he has been singularly successful at that, and the
prodigious energy in his retrospective just a year or so ago, you could see
how over 60 years just how much this man has produced, and how he has
Interpreted our lives.
J: It's true, though, that he is more of an English resident these days?
PM: But look at the pictures they are all about the Australian bush, they're all
about Australian legends, and they are all about things that seek to define
this country.
J: What did you think about. inaudible. comments about changing Australia
Day do you have any sympathy for that?
PM: Well, the 26th of January has that historic presence about it, but I think that
the whole country is understanding more now particularly post-Mabo
about reconciliation, about us being one nation and one country, and this Is
a matter, no doubt, that over time Australians will think about and maybe
meet John's view.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, COMMONWEALTH GOVT OFFICES, SYDNEY
27 JANUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Let me just say a couple of things about it on December 22nd last
year I made a statement about forest policy, and I said at the time that
the Government would implement a program calculated to preserve
the forests of high conservation significance and environmental
significance, and that the Government would undertake a rescheduling
study to establish which of those areas or coupes as they are called
actually fall in that category. Now that study was undertaken through
the Christmas period, with the Department of the Environment
conducted by the Minister for the Environment, Sports and Territories,
and he along with the Minister for Resources have met and
discussed these various coupes and judged it As a consequence, I
can announce today that the Commonwealth has identified 509 such
areas or coupes and will do everything in its power to ensure their
protection pending more detailed assessment of their values. In other
words, we are setting aside 509 coupes for study. Of these, about
roughly half 222 in fact are in the register of the National Estate,
and the others are part of wilderness regrowth and part of the
conservation area forests. Our policy is to protect these areas until
their values are properly assessed as part of a national reserve system
through a regional forest agreement. You will recall in the National
Forest Policy Statement, the aim is to get away form coupe-by-coupe
assessments, and to go to Regional Forest Agreements whereby we
have got a comprehensive and adequate reserve system, so we don't
have to say well is this category of wilderness trees adequately
represented in the reserve? That would be the case if an RFA
between the Commonwealth, the States and the industry were in fact
constructed. But what we will be doing is putting aside these coupes fo e 
until their values are assessed in the context of Regional Forest Policy
Agreements. You may know that since I made that announcement, the Federal
Court made a decision about licences, and the validity of their issue
which has created some uncertainty as to their validity. So the
Commonwealth is saying to these companies that they can consider
their position, and I know that they are many of them unhappy about
the uncertainty which that decision has brought, and the offer that the
Commonwealth makes to them is that we will re-issue their licences in
the event that they give up the licence that was issued before
Christmas. And in the event that they do, we will very quickly re-issue
licences which comply with that Federal Court decision. Now can I just
say in that context, that the Minister for Resources though agreeing
to licences before Christmas didn't write to companies about areas
reserved for his decision in respect of areas of old growth conservation
values. He will be writing to companies in terms of the 509 coupes
and the companies can make a decision as to whether in fact overall
they are advantaged by actually giving up their licence, and then
seeking a new one from the Commonwealth.
I think the key point in all of this is that the Government's goal is to put
into place over the next 5 years a program to adequately protect old
growth wilderness and other high conservation value forests in a
national reserve system, in a system of Regional Forest Agreements.
And to ensure that a high value-added wood products industry can
operate sustainably. In other words, we have an industry primarily
based on plantations and regrowth forests that is the aim. And the
Government is prepared in that context to look at the impact of
these decisions, how we can best advance the regional forests in the
National Forest Policy Statement of Regional Forest Agreements, to
move towards that kind of forest products industry and that kind of
conservation policy. And we will be meeting with the industry, with the
trade unions, with the conservation movement to see how best that
can be done, and what sort of package should be put into place to
encourage those things to happen.
Now I said before Christmas that we will be reducing the overall
volumes, and I'm not sure the significance of that was picked up in the
brouhaha at the time. But it would mean that areas which were part of
Regional Forest Agreements would get first chop at the tonnage, and
those that were not part of the Regional Forest Agreements those
that in fact that basically decided not either add value or to put into
place a comprehensive reserve system would be at the back end of
any priority on that tonnage. For many years, we have been speaking
of phasing out the raw woodchippping and moving towards higher
value-adding. The Government in getting the National Forest Policy
Statement together has the framework in place to do that with the
concept of the Regional Forest Agreement. But it needed the screws 
turned on it to make it work, and that screw was turned when I
announced the volumes were coming down.
So by and large, I think that this decision when I say the decision, it is
the judgements that both Ministers have brought here, the Minister for
the Environment and the Minister for Resources are good and
balanced judgements and in the best interests of the country and in
terms of the conservation of important stands of trees, and the longrun
interests of the industry for certainty and for the future in terms of
sustainability are best served by measures of this kind. I am happy to
take questions.
J: Prime Minister, what portion of the licences do you expect to
automatically re-issue, and for those that don't get those licences
automatically re-issued, will there be any form of compensation?
PM: There is no question of compensation. Understand this the point I
made earlier the Minister for resources never wrote to the companies
not to this point saying which coupes would be reserved or set
aside for study, which is a right he enjoys. That is in terms of the
existing licenses. But the companies would themselves probably
believe that the certainty is a key matter for them. I can't tell you how
many of them will actually give back if you like, or give up, their
licences, but I should imagine the need will be for certainty.
J: Prime Minister, given what you have said in the past... inaudible what
is the process by which you protect these areas?
PM: The Commonwealth will not be agreeing to the exporting of woodchips
from those coupes. But this gets back to the central point that I made
in December I mean you have all been around for the Christmas
break, you have probably all driven through if not all of you, then
some of you will have driven through parts of NSW and Victoria you
never see a Commonwealth forest. They are State forests. This is a
State-run industry the Commonwealth gets in there only on strings
and mirrors through the export powers, and the saw-log industry we
have essentially no control over, other than to try and urge the States
to be party to Regional Forest Agreements, so they have got to make
judgements themselves about where they might and try and make
volumes for companies in the event that product can't be exported
from these coupes. Now sensibly, they should do that. If they say " Oh
well, we can't find the volumes", it means the whole notion of
sustainability was a ruse in the first place, so I think they will they will
get to it and try to make this work.
J: If they can't find the volumes, then you will accept compensation
requests?
PM: No. There is no requirement for compensation here. The
Commonwealth has a right to decide in the national interest what 
product can be exported, and in what terms. It in no way is agreeing to
these decisions before Christmas, made clear its preferences that is
why I said that Mr Beddall didn't write to companies at that time,
reserving the right to write to them after the re-scheduling study.
J: Do you still have confidence in Minister Beddall?
PM: Look, this is a difficult issue a very difficult issue. As always, we
have got the environment there riding the Commonwealth, but not
riding the States. And the pressure point comes, as I say, round the
incidental power the Commonwealth government has over exports.
And the Ministers will take positions in terms of their portfolio interests,
and at the same time we did last year, make a key decision on the
Minister Ros Kelly to have the Minister for the Environment to have a
right and a power in here. Now, at the time the environment movement
dismissed that as pap. This year, of course, it is all-important, though
of course she received no credit for it. Now, we were trying to develop
a process where we can sensibly consider export licences reasonably,
and the conservation values of particular coupes. But it will always be
difficult, and I hope we can get that process better. But it is much
better if we have Regional Forest Agreements where we are not going
coupe-by-coupe, where we have in fact areas where we look at
adequate reserve systems so this coupe issue doesn't come up.
J: Prime Minister, given that the Environment Minister was ignored,
doesn't that prove that the process was pap?
PM: The Environment Minister I don't think was ignored, it was just a matter
of whether in the advice which the Minister for Resources received, he
was able to adequately discern what the priorities were in that advice,
and at any rate, both public opinion and opinion within the Government
within the Caucus and the Cabinet has made very clear the areas of
high conservation value are important in national terms, and I think he
has certainly accepted that message.
J: So you won't be taking Gough Whitlam's advice?
PM: I didn't hear... I mean Gough has advice for many people that is not a
bit I heard, actually.
J: Isn't it arguable that Minister Beddall has completely botched this
process?
PM: I like to think that if a good thing happens here and I think this is a
good thing happening here I like the notion of Ministers sorting out
the way they make decisions and coming to the right conclusions. I
mean, I think it is healthy.
J: Regardless of processes and how the processes might have been? 
PM: It is like you lot doing mea culpas for any stories you got wrong -I
mean, you wouldn't consider it.
J: Do you think that this statement will satisfy the Democrats in terms of
the.. inaudible....
PM: I think so. Let's call a spade a spade in this if there had been 200 or
230 coupes reserved here before Christmas, the environment
movement would have thought they kicked a tremendous goal. As it
is, there are 509, and they are all important areas....
J: inaudible
PM: . and this is a very significant decision.
J: Already this morning I am getting calls from....
PM: Who are you and where are you from?
J: James Woodforde from the Sydney Morning Herald. Already this
morning we are getting calls from environmentalists and industry
saying that this compromise will solve nothing that
PM: You don't say? You shock me you have really slayed me.
J: They are arguing that this is just a compromise.. . there is no basis for
it?
PM: Well, see what the serious people say.
J: Prime Minister, in Caucus on Monday ( inaudible)
PM: Well, the Caucus is master of its own destiny always, and part of the
democracy of the Labor Party is that people have got a right to put a
view, but I think that most people in the Caucus will think that this is a
very fair and balanced outcome.
J: Prime Minister you have mentioned that you will invite the companies
to give back their licences and you will re-issue the bulk of them have
you got any idea on how swiftly that can be done?
PM: I think reasonably quickly. Now that this work has taken place, and
that we are in a position to know which coupes have these values, so I
think the answer to that is very quickly.
J: Prime Minister, do you.. inaudible do you think perhaps you
should be more involved in the processes of these decisions?
PM: There are matters of law here, and so as that Federal Court decision
very adequately shows Ministers who make judgements and issue 
licences must do so conscientiously to have conducted the work
themselves and come to the judgements. And that I have implicitly
understood, and that is why in the context of this process because we
are dealing overall with about 3,500 coupes it is very difficult for
either the Prime Minister or the Cabinet to be sitting there looking at
little purple or green dots, or red dots various others and saying we will
have half a dozen of those and, and 6 of those and 12 of those -I
mean, in the end it requires Departmental effort here to go through a
system of evaluation and after all, for a whole lot of values about
forests which are not in the Commonwealth charter there is no
Commonwealth Department of Forestry we do not run forests.
J: How exactly do you propose to protect these 509 coupes, given that
there are already licences issued allowing them to log?
PM: I made it clear to you Mr Beddall has not yet written in terms of those
reservations he is able to enter into those licences, and he is obviously
being guided by the study and is concurring in its outcome.
J: Isn't this a slap in the face for Senator Faulkner I mean there is still
less than half of the areas that he put forward as being those requiring
protection?
PM: I know that Senator Faulkner is very happy with this outcome. And he
is for the reason that I said earlier that if in the first instance it had
been 200 250 reservations coupes this would have been general
regarded as a good decision. I think that at this number and at these
values, I think he is well pleased with the study.
J: Would it be better to be a decision made by the entire Cabinet and will
that be the case in 1996?
PM: Probably not, and for the reasons I just said. I think it is very difficult to
get into it although we have in the past but it is very it is not to say
that the Cabinet can't do it, but it is very tedious and onerous because
Ministers then have to.. the whole Cabinet has to be up to speed on
the values of particular areas across the Commonwealth, particularly
down the East Coast, and trying to inject themselves into some
judgements about values in forests which we, of course, have no
responsibility for.
J: It is a fair guess, I'd suggest, that NSW, Victoria and Tasmania
Governments will not be enamoured?
PM: I don't know that would be true.
J: Do you believe Mr Beddall is conscientious about this decision, Prime
Minister? 
PM: I am announcing on behalf of him and Senator Faulkner this is their
joint decision, Of course he is conscientious about it.
J: Did he follow all the proper steps do everything that he was
supposed to have done?
PM: Well, the Federal Court took a view that environmental values should
have counted more heavily in the decision, but the Commonwealth is
still yet to take a view about that decision.
J: Prime Minister, can I ask some crude political stuff now?
PM: If you want to be crude Laurie, sure.
J: I was wondering how you feel about having your new opponent?
PM: It's 3 in 10 months for me. And for the Liberal Party of course, John
Howard will be their third preference John Hewson, they passed over
Howard for Hewson, they passed over Howard for Downer, and they
are taking him because they have got nobody else.
J: It has been suggested this morning that you are relishing the prospect
of the contest?
PM: The thing to do is forget all the hyperbole about triple-bypasses and
relishing the contest go and ask him about this decision. Start tough
with him, and ask him about some policy ask him what he thinks
about these 509 coupes, and whether he supports them. Because
what you might find is that you will get a repeat of what he had to say
in the 1987 election for what it's worth, he said he would leave
decisions to State governments, the Queensland rainforest nominated
for World Heritage listing would only be listed if the Bjelke-Peterson
government approved it, he would hand over Kakadu and Uluru to the
Northern Territory Government, and he would abolish the Department
of the Environment. So go along and ask him let's leave the political
theory out because none of us are too strong on that, are we? So, just
ask him what he thinks of this it's not a bad starting point I would
have thought.
J: inaudible
PM: Well, I think that Mr Howard was a failure as Treasurer, and a failure
as an Opposition Leader. He left an inward looking, moribund, lowprofit,
low-employment, high inflation economy behind, and as
Opposition Leader, he had no clear policy of change for the country,
and the one he did fell apart at Box Hill in Victoria.
J: Prime Minister, Senator Bolkus has raised the Asian immigration
( inaudible)... . are you going to put you shoulder to the wheel on that 
kind of attack on Mr Howard, or do you think those sort of devices
PM: You mean reminding Mr Howard of what he said is an attack on him
is that what you are saying?
J: Well, I think it is.
PM: I know you are close to him Glenn, but you shouldn't be that close.
J: Well, he has made an attempt to move away from those remarks he
has apologised for them....
PM: And for years he said he wouldn't change his position on this John
Howard hasn't changed his position. When he tells you that he didn't
mean it, all I say is don't believe him. Of course he meant it.
J: So that is going to be an issue?
PM: It will rank with the great constellation of issues out there.
ends. 



T2EL7: . Jan. 95 12: 29 No. 027 P. 02
' I
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
WOODCHIP EXPORTS
On 22 December last year I announced that the Government would implement a
program calculated to preserve the environmental values of our native forests
and protect the interests of communities which depend on forest industries.
As part of that program I announced that the Government was considering a
rescheduling study of existing logging operations with a view to identifying areas
of high environmental value which should be included in a comprehensive forest
reserve system.
Today I can announce that the Commonwealth has identified 509 such areas
( coupes) and will do everything within its power to ensure their protection
pending more detailed assessment of their values.
Of the identified areas, 222 are on the Register of the National Estate. The
remainder nevertheless have very significant wilderness, old-growth or other
conservation values.
Government policy is to protect these areas until their values are properly
assessed as part of a national reserve system through the Regional Forest
Agreement process.
When applications for woodchip export licences are considered in future, and in
administering licences, the Minister for Resources has indicated he will have
regard to this policy and to the results of the rescheduling study.
The Government also recognises that the recent Federal Court decision brings
into question the validity of the 1995 licences.
TEL: Oi. 
TEL: 27. Jan. 95 12: 29 No. 027 P. 03
2
In view of the uncertainty this has created, the Government will invite woodchip
companies to give up their licences and apply for new licences that will be
Issued in conformance with the Federal Court decision.
The Federal Court recognised the significant role for the Minister for the
Environment in the process of considering export licence applications. In future,
any new applications for licences will be considered by the Minister for
Resources, and the Minister for Environment's role in this process under
environmental legislation will be meticulously observed.
I have asked the Minister for Resources to inform all woodchip companies and
State governments of the areas the Government intends to protect.
The Government believes that in future forest values should be assessed on a
regional not coupe by coupe basis, to establish a representative reserve
system and protect the future of communities. This underlies the Government's
immediate concern to protect the 509 coupes already identified.
The Government will work with the States to find the most effective way to end
logging in these areas, pending their full assessment through the Regional
Forest Agreement process.
This will involve verification of the values of each area to ensure that all coupes
proposed for rescheduling have retained conservation values sufficient for their
incorporation into a national reserve system.
In some instances, after all possible attempts at rescheduling have been made,
the resources remaining to industry may be inadequate.
In such cases, and in any others where the effects of the policy are detrimental
to companies and communities, the Government will work in consultation with
the industry, unions and the states to assess the need for industry assistance.
The Government will consider the measures necessary to create a vigorous and
internationally competitive wood-products industry. In developing such a
restructuring package we will be concerned to keep the degree of economic and
social adjustment to a minimum.
Our principal aim is to end the present uncertainty so that workers and
companies alike can feel secure about their future and investments can be made
in value-added processing.
Accelerating the Regional Forest Agreement process was a step in this direction. 
TE: 2. a. 5122 o07P0
3
The Government's goal is to put in place, over the next five years, a program to
adequately protect old-growth, wilderness and other high conservation value
forests in a national reserve system, and to ensure that a high value added wood
products industry can operate sustainably outside these areas.
As soon as possible the Government will meet with the leaders of the woodchip
industry, unions and the conservation movement to work out the best ways of
refining and implementing our approach.
National issues of this kind never have a simple solution. A great many people
have a passionate interest in it, but it is the national interest which the
Government must serve.
And the national interest lies in finding the means by which an industry that is
moving towards an ecologically sustainable future will not be curtailed and our
forests will be adequately protected.
SYDNEY 27 JANUARY 1995 TEL: 27. Jan. 95 12: 29 No. 027 P. 04 



Or&amp;
PRIME MINJISTER 4/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, ! 4P
OLD JOCKEY, NEW COLOURS, SAME HORSE.
I congratulate Mr Howard on his election once -again to
the leadership of the Liberal Party.
No one has ever doubted Mr Howard's ambition, his
persistence and his willingness to stay long enough to
see everyone else off the scene though in the post-
Menzies Liberal Party that has not necessarily amounted
to an exceedingly long time.
I said after Mr Downer's election, the problem for the
Liberal Party is the horse not the jockey, and I was
pleased to see Dr Hewson, among others on the
conservative side, take up the refrain. But nothing in
the election of Mr Howard or his remarks at today's press
conference suggests that the Liberal Party understands
what it means.
Having put an old jockey on board the horse, the Liberal
Party is now trying to change his colours. Mr Howard has
declared himself the most conservative leader the Liberal
Party has ever had. In the 1980s he was a leading
advocate of the New Right. Essentially, he sounds
little different these days.
Today he attempted to skirt the issues on which his views
reflect the deeply reactionary basis of his politics. But
it is hard to say what sounded more improbable Mr
Howard talking about I'modernising' Australia, or
suggesting that he was a little liberal after all.
Mr Howard is the Liberal Party's most experienced
parliamentary member. He is said to be its most
articulate spokesman. Yet in his era in office and out
the Liberal Party has been a comprehensive failure.
No one speaks more eloquently of that failure than Mr
Howard. No one speaks better for the fact that the
Federal Liberal Party lacks national vision and a
national perspective.
And no-one speaks better for the dry, regressive, deeply
conservative spirit which has driven every moderate
influence from its senior ranks.
CANBERRA 30 January 1995 



~/ YJ
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN STANLEY, 2UE
31 JANUARY 1995
J: Good afternoon.
PM: How are you John?
J: Very good. This is the beginning of ' 95 for you. You have a new
Opposition Leader, we'll discuss that in a moment, but this afternoon
the Treasurer has confirmed you will be increasing taxes in the May
Budget. Isn't that going to make your task of winning the election that
much harder?
PM: What he confirmed is we will tighten policy and he said this for this
reason. He's also published a set of forecasts and what they show is
that in the Budget, at the time of the Budget last year, we forecast
growth in the economy at four and a half per cent. We are now
forecasting five and a half. We were forecasting business investment
at fourteen and a half per cent, we are now forecasting twenty-four.
We were forecasting two per cent inflation, we are forecasting two and
a quarter, about the same, and on unemployment we were forecasting
nine and a half, we are now forecasting eight and a half. So five and a
half per cent for growth, twenty-four per cent for business investment
and eight and a half per cent for unemployment and 450,000 jobs
since the election. We want to keep that going.
J: What about the current account deficit?
PM: The current account deficit is rising because we are in a very strong
investment phase. In any investment phase, Australia always imports
producer goods. We don't make digitally operated machine tools. We
don't make mainframe computers. These things come in at rises. But
the thing is, this country is the fastest growing, western OECD style
economy with low inflation. Five and a half per cent growth and two 
per cent inflation we've never had any year that good, I don't think
since the war.
J: We haven't had a year with a current account deficit of 26 million...
PM: The Government was re-elected to produce growth in employment.
We've had now just on half a million jobs since the election. It must be
the fastest rate of employment growth in the OECD area of the western
world. Let me just say this. I think without a doubt the best economic
year for Australia since the war. What we will do is keep that going.
So what the Treasurer announced today is how we keep that going
and that means we've got to make sure that that current account deficit
you speak of comes from a paucity of our savings, so we want the
public sector to save some more by getting the Budget back into
surplus earlier.
J: Yes, so you will be doing that in a couple of years' time, but will you be
doing it by raising taxes?
PM: Well, as in all Budgets, you can do it by changes in taxes, changes in
outlays or changes in the asset position of the Commonwealth. We
will be examining that in the way that the Government has done since
1983.
J: So you are not ruling out any of those three selling off Government
assets, raising taxes and cutting Government spending?
PM: No, but let me just make this point because I heard on your news
service somebody saying, I think it was Mr Costello, well this is a big
tax-munching Government. This is the lowest taxing Government in
the western world. This is the lowest taxed country, outside of Turkey
which is not as developed as this country is, this is the lowest taxed,
developed country in the western world and we gave tax cuts as we
promised in the election at the end of 1993. So I think people have got
to understand and balance this off if they want to keep that job security
when they see those job numbers coming out strongly and
unemployment coming down. If they want to see the pick up in
business profits and the general prosperity in the economy with huge
rates of productivity growth and low inflation, you've got to run the
place sensibly and I like to think we can do that.
J: And running the place sensibly then means ratcheting up the tax rate a
little bit from that...
PM: Well I can't say what we will do precisely on tax, it's just too early, but
the Budget will be down in May and the Government will consider its
position between now and then.
J: Can you rule out increases in personal income tax rates? 
PM: Well I'm not ruling out anything except to say have a look at our record
in these things and it's been pretty strong. I mean we'ye delivered on
every tax commitment we've made since 1983. 1 had Mr Howard
running around telling us about broken promises and how I can't be
believed, when Treasurer in 1977 he introduced a tax cut, I don't think
you can remember it John, ring up and find out...
J: I do remember it the fistful of dollars but then you...
PM: Just remember, ring up and find out how much your tax cut will be and
then they took it away five months later.
J: And yet you said your tax cuts were L-A-W law.
PM: Yes, and they were, they were paid.
J: But you didn't deliver all of them did you? The second lot's still to
come.
PM: We paid the first half early and we put the second half back.
J: So when are they going to come in?
PM: The Government will consider that as well in the Budget round.
J: But isn't that a credibility problem...
PM: No not at all.
J possibility of increasing taxes, and you still haven't delivered that tax
cut.
PM: No, we delivered the tax cuts in December 1993 as promised. In fact
we delivered them earlier as I said and we've put the second round
back. But again, we were forecasting the Budget at four and a half per
cent growth. We're actually doing better, we're doing five and a half.
Now, what all thinking Australians will say, well look we're doing now
even better than we expected, what should we do now to preserve
that? How do we keep that going? And that means that we have got
to make sure that the demand and the savings equation the economy
sets us up for the rest of the ' 90s so that all of us and all of our kids get
a chance at a job and good strong growth.
J: Do you acknowledge that in the broad community today and possibly
because of your efforts over the last decade, there's more of an
understanding of the economy and people understand that if the
budget deficit isn't cut back, if public spending isn't pared back, that
they may have to pay higher interest rates? 
PM: Well I think we've seen three monetary adjustments last year, three
interest rate adjustments last year, I think people have got to say this
is a premium I pay for my job security, for the employment growth we're
seeing, for the phenomenal rates of economic growth and for the pick
up in company profits which is underpinning our big investment phase
for the future. It's a bit like paying the insurance on your house. You
can take the risk that it won't burn down, but you're awfully sorry after
the event if it does and you're not insured.
J: Could you expand on that because a few people I've heard on this
station, on open line calls, they say, " Why is it good for the economy
that we should have to pay say, sixty dollars a month more on our
mortgage rate?" How is it directly helping them?
PK: Let me say this, John, housing interest rates fell dramatically over the
last, say, three years, by sixty or eighty dollars or more in some
cases, like for a $ 60,000 or $ 70,000 dollar mortgage, by $ 120 a week.
Those low interest rates reflected the low activity in the economy and
the low premium in the interest rate market, if you like, of that low
activity. Once the game started to get stronger and there was more
demand out there, what that does is take away some of the spending
capacity in the economy. If we don't take it away, we can't sustain the
growth, we can't sustain the employment growth and so the certainty
that people are looking for... I think Australians are very mature about
these things they say look, we re-hired the government in 1993 to
give us growth back and strong employment. The government has
done more than it could even reasonably be expected to do, with that.
Now, they know that you just can't have that sort of strong growth and
employment growth and have growth in the current account deficit
etcetera, without some tempering of the pace. And, what the interest
rates do is simply temper the pace.
J: Well, you described it, I think, as a premium that they have to pay for
all of these...
PK: Well, for economic security, growth, employment....
J: So, to get all of that people may have to pay higher interest rates and
pay higher taxes in the short term?
PK: Well, they've already paid some of the higher interest rates but, can I
just say this, that the big fear 18 months ago was that your job was at
risk, alternatively you might have been unemployed or, at best, your
job was at risk. You've now got the security of knowing that that is not
true, that your job is much more secure. And, this is part of the
premium on that security. I 
J: So, those people, therefore, you're asking them, look you're going to
have to pay, perhaps is the word ' premium' perhaps a replacement
for the old, ' you have to tighten your belt a bit more to gain the
benefit'?
PK: Well, just look at the substantial growth in real incomes. When you
get a wage increase, and we've seen wages running at about three
and a half to four per cent this year and in some cases, because of
the previous year, six per cent and you end up with two per cent
inflation, you end up with three to four per cent real growth in income.
Let me explain this to you... if you had wages at four per cent and
inflation at four per cent your real income growth is zero. But, if you've
got wages at four per cent and inflation at two per cent or inflation at
one per cent or inflation at nearly zero which is what we had for
most of the last year you've got a four per cent real increase in
income. Couple that with the reduced interest rates over the last three
years for housing, we had a huge increase in real income, for
households. And, that has now reflected itself in a big splurge in
spending.
J: So what you're saying is they've got to pull back a bit?
PK: Pull back a bit..
J: Through interest rates or tax rises?
PK: Whatever it is, but it pulls it back a bit. But, what is the purpose in
pulling it back? The good purpose in pulling it back is to sustain it
right through the nineties.
J: The bottom line, I could use a tabloid way of putting it, you're going to
have to take a little bit of money out of people's pockets for the longer
term benefit?
PK: Well, after having put a fair bit in. That's the point. Where did the
income growth over the past couple of years come from? It came from
a tremendous result in inflation which meant that the wages growth
ended up being real wages growth. It wasn't eaten away by inflation.
The second thing is it came from reduced interest rates and it came
from the tax cuts of 1993. If you put the three of those things together
you've got a lot of income. Now, the government has given a lot of
additional income to the community in the last three years. What is
happening now, to sustain this growth and employment growth and
security some of that is coming back.
J: It is a hard message to put to people though, to say, look, your income
has got to be pared back a bit. 
PK: But, how would they like to be living in Europe where the rates of
growth are one and a half per cent, not five and a half; where there is
not three per cent or three and a half per cent employment growth but
three quarters of a per cent; where their job has the sword of
Damocles hanging over it, perpetually? How would people like that
alternative? And, by the way, that's the sort of alternative that the
Liberal Party have got... Low growth, jack up the interest rates, hold
down the growth, don't have a wages policy, don't talk to the unions...
Labour market reform, cutting real wages, that's the alternative.
J: The foreign debt though, $ 180 billion dollars, we've got $ 26 billion
coming up in the next financial year, are we ever going to be able to
even stabilise it, let alone?
PK: There is only one way for us to get out of our foreign debt, that is,
invest our way out by increasing the capital stock that's plant and
equipment, productive capacity and saving more. But, why are
Australian private savings relatively low? Why does the government
have to increase the Budget surplus? The answer is, to make up for
the paucity of private savings. And why are private savings low?
Because two decades of double digit inflation taught people not to
leave their money in the bank. And, John Howard who has now been
anointed as the new Liberal leader is responsible for nearly one
decade of that high inflation.
J: But, you've been there for nearly 13 years...
PK: Oh yes, but have a look at the inflation rate, it's two per cent.
J: And, what about the savings, though, we've got foreign debt at $ 180
billion dollars?
PK: The thing is, we broke the back of inflation in 1989-90 after five or six
years of wrestling with it and you can't say to a community of 18 million
people, " Look all of your lifetime experience is that if you put your
money in the bank it will go down in value particularly in after tax
terms we've had, now, three years of really good inflation
performance so change your saving habits". People take a while to
change.
J: So, when is it going to happen, when are we going to see the change
in saving habits?
PK: I think you will see it. You can see it now, you've got real income
growth, you've got modest wage growth and you've got that becoming
real wage growth because of low inflation. 
J: OK, can I turn to Mr Howard and can I put it to you that there is no one
who you would less like to hand over the Prime Ministership to than
John Howard?
PK: Well, I spent ten years of my life cleaning up after him, ten years of
cleaning up his mess. He left me as Treasurer and as Prime Minister,
an industrial graveyard closed factories, ten per cent
unemployment, eleven per cent inflation, smashed profits, low
employment. That was the legacy of John Howard.
J: If he was here, he'd hit back with your recession.
PK: No, no, let me just say about, if you put my recession, for a start, we
are out of it and growing firmly. John Howard never had, at any time
he was in government, growth at five and a half per cent and two per
cent inflation. Never. Not ever. The best he could ever do was about
two and a half per cent growth and ten per cent inflation. So, he was a
weak Treasurer, and as Leader of the Opposition, when he got down
to that 13% bottom approval rating he demonstrated in losing the
1987 election that he was a weak leader. Now, whatever you think
about this country, it has changed completely as a result of this
Government's tenure of office this is an outward looking, confident,
engaged, international, low inflation, high productivity competitive
economy. What John Howard left behind was an inward looking, tariff
enclosed, regulated, high unemployment, high inflation country.
J: But, you know that many of the policies that you undertook as
Treasurer, he would have undertaken as Treasurer if he had still been
there?
PM: Look, he couldn't beat time in the Cabinet room. John Hewson wrote
those stories this little myth goes around. This is a bloke who was
Treasurer for 5 years, and who let me give you an example, last
night he said this on the 7.30 Report, about the republic, he said, " If
you want to know how I would vote in 5 years time, ask me in 5 years
time. If I can be persuaded, and the Australian community be
persuaded that a republic would benefit Australia, that is something
that deserves support". In other words, if muggins me if Keating
gets out there and really leads and convinces me and the Australian
community that we should be a republic, then maybe I will support it.
Just like, if Keating floats the dollar, de-regulates the financial markets,
knocks over the tariff wall, makes the leap into Asia, introduces best
practice, lifts the participation rate in schools, then I might support him.
I mean, this Government has done all the hard work, and if the public
of this country want to continue the great change of Australia, well,
they keep to the authors of the policy.
J: If you look at John Howard's record, that was 13 years ago you would
have to acknowledge 
PM: He left the leadership in 1989.
J: You would have to acknowledge though, that he has been the driving
force behind many of the changes to industrial relations in Australia?
PM: And, what is his policy? What is his policy on Industrial Relations?
What is his policy?
J: A lot of his policies of 10 years ago are now adopted by your
Government....
PM: No, they're not. When he talks about wage flexibility, he is talking
about cutting the wages of people under $ 35,000. That is what it
means. It is code for cutting the wages of the low paid and middle paid
people. That is what it means. And, I will just remind you of what
President Bill Clinton said in his State of the Union Address in the
American Congress about a week ago he said " There is an army of
American working poor who haven't had a real wage increase in 17
years" now, I just told you that in this country people have had a 4%
real wage increase over the last year that is ( in America) because of
the sort of policy that John Howard believes in, no adequate safety net,
and you take the contract and go home, or you go home empty
handed.
J: And, yet, he said yesterday he believes in a safety-net, he outlines his
policies....
PM: He has opposed every wage increase since 1983. All those increases
which came through the centralised wage system he opposed. He
says he believes in families, but he doesn't believe in family support.
He doesn't believe in help for the unemployed they thought the
money that we spent in Working Nation on getting the
unemployed.... when I said that we won't leave the unemployed behind,
we dragged them up behind us, we would include them in this huge
growth and employment, when I introduced last year the Working
Nation White Paper and Statement, the Liberal Party said it was an
extravagance we were spending money.
J: But, isn't there a danger for you in looking at his past record, talking
about what he has done in the past, instead of joining the battle now in
the....
PM: ( inaudible)... but you asked me John Howard is a known quantity.
The Liberal Party he is their 3rd preference. They had a chance, in
this Parliament, to say " Look, John Hewson lost the election, so we will
take John Howard back", and they said " no, no we're not having
Howard", so they gave it to Hewson. He fell over, and they said, " Well,
Hewson has gone maybe we should have Howard?", and they said, 
" No, no we are not having Howard, we're having Downer". As the
Liberal Party's third choice they want it to be the country's first
choice....
J: But, are you going to sit here with a straight face, and look at me now,
and tell me that you find Alexander Downer a more potent opponent
than John Howard? John Howard is surely a more difficult opponent
for you than Alexander Downer?
PM: Don't ask me what I think why did the Liberal Party pass over him 3
times? I just say this to people: All this stuff about colour pictures of
everyone in harmony on the front, this is the guy that said a couple of
weeks ago he'd pole-axe his leader right at the last minute, he said
you swear support for the leader and when he's dead you tell him you
pole-axed him. I mean he did this to Downer...
J: But that doesn't that make him a more dangerous opponent...
PM: How long ago was it they brought us the dream team? Downer and
Costello. The dream team. And before that the Messiah, Dr Hewson.
You can't take that sort of media pap in, seriously.
J: I'm not asking the media, I'm asking one of the most experienced
politicians in the country...
PM: I'm telling you...
J: Who's the tougher opponent out of Downer and Howard?
PM: John, I take them as they come. You see, remember all this debate
about early elections? All this last year, Keating's going to have an
early election. Keating was never having an early election.
J: All this tricky stuff he's going to slip in while Downer's in trouble.
PM: The public deserve an even break to make good judgements at
elections and I didn't do anything tricky so I take them without
manipulation, I take them as they come. Hewson, Downer, Howard...
the media are now feeling a bit poorly about themselves because they
thought they were a bit hard on Alex, has decided now they will give
John a free ride. All leaders get a free ride for a while, but the thing
about John Howard, he's a known quantity, and what we know is he
was a weak Treasurer, he couldn't get anything through his Cabinet,
he left us with a moribund inward-looking economy and he was a weak
leader who lost an election and ended up at thirteen per cent.
J: This is the final question. He says he's made mistakes, you've made
mistakes, he's prepared to admit his. 
PM: I've admitted heaps of them, I've admitted to many mistakes.
J: Could we have a couple of them?
PM: Well, one was we tightened up too hard in 1988/ 89, I've said that
plenty of times. But you see, John Howard wants the epitaph of
" Honest John" yet he will always use a distortion every day of the week
to suit himself.
J: We go back to ' 88/ 89, people said you tightened up too hard because
you left tightening up too late. Isn't the concern now that you've done
exactly the same thing...
PM: I think the charge against us at the moment has been we've tightened
up too early but I think the numbers today reveal that that's not right.
We've just about got this, I think, reasonably right. I mean the criticism
last year was that the interest rate adjustments were too early. But I
think if you look at today's forecasts, I think we've got them pretty right.
J: All right. Paul Keating, we've run out of time, thank you.
PM: Thankyou John.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH NEIL MERCER, " TODAY TONIGHT", CHANNEL 7
31 JANUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: First up tonight though it's back to business for the Prime Minister Paul
Keating. Today we find out the economy's boiling over, a tough
Budget is now being predicted. Prime Minister Paul Keating joins me
in the studio. Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you Neil.
J: What do you most admire about John Howard?
PM: Just the view that if you hang around long enough you might get asked
a second time, that's all. If you're tenacious and you stick there.
When Peacock left somebody said well you know if you leave, you
might leave the job, but Johnny said I've been there that long I don't
care any more.
J: But you would have to admire his resilience, the fact that he has hung
in there.
PM: Yes, I think that's to be admired but I don't admire his lack of policy
ambition or his lack of achievement.
J: He's surely though the most formidable opponent you've had in the last
few years?
PM: That's what they said about John Hewson. That's what they said about
Alexander Downer. Ten months ago it was the dream team, the young
turks, Alex and Peter Costello. See the Liberal Party, this is the
Liberal Party's third choice and you're asking the Australian people to
be their first choice. In other words, when John Hewson lost the
election they had a chance then of making a clean break and saying
well look, John's gone we'd better go to John Howard. No, they said 
no we won't do that, we'll go back to John Hewson. When he fell over
they said maybe we should go to John Howard. No, no we won't go to
John Howard, we'll go to Alexander Downer. They've gone to him
because there is no one else.
J: But surely he's a more formidable opponent than Alexander Downer
was?
PM: I just don't accept that...
J: He's a better parliamentary performer?
PM: He is a better parliamentary performer but one of the things I'm very
pleased about Neil in Australia is the Government has at least over a
decade now lifted the policy debate and the policy expectations. The
public want value. They don't want parliamentary hijinks, they want
Government policies. So that's where I think we're strong and he's
weak.
J: You're not the best of mates with him though and I'll just read you a
quote that you said in the 1980s and it was this: I will do everything I
can to crucify him, obliterate him from the leadership. They are very
strong words. Do you still feel that strongly?
PM: But why did I say that? Because he had one of his backbenchers in
one of the most sleazy attacks ever raising personal matters about my
personal life. That's why I said it.
J: Have you forgiven him for that?
PM: Everything has its place. You see, I don't refer at all to the personal
lives of Liberals. Never have and won't do it.
J: Have you forgiven him for that?
PM: Oh it's way back in the dark ages, yes.
J: Will you still crucify him?
PM: I don't think it's fair of you to ask me that question. What I'll do is, look
John Howard has got three policies. One is income splitting for
families, the other is to cut the wages of people under $ 35,000,
average weekly earnings, what he calls labour market reform, and the
other is a sort of corner shopkeeper's crankiness about red tape. You
know, knock over the Government sector. They're his three policies.
Nothing's changed in twenty years.
J: But to be fair to him on income splitting, he said he's now prepared to
be more flexible, the Liberal Party is going to be a broad church. 
Surely that makes him a lot more difficult for you to combat than
Alexander Downer who was clearly accident-prone.
PM: Let me make this clear about him. John Howard left an inward-looking,
moribund, low-growth, high unemployment, high inflation economy.
J: And he would say you gave us the recession.
PM: That's what he left us. Ring-fenced by tariffs, a managed exchange
rate, a wage explosion, eleven per cent unemployment and ten per
cent inflation. It took this Government to open Australia up, to do all
those things and knock over the tariff wall, to float the dollar, to open
up the financial markets, to get back to back best practice, to get nine
kids in ten completing secondary school, to give us a future as an
educated country. That's why the Government will always beat a John
Howard Opposition.
J: He also says you're, and this was just recently, a part-time Prime
Minister. That in recent times, you've taken your hands off the wheel.
PM: In the last year I've had Working Nation, the largest package ever for
dealing with retraining and reskilling the labour market and dealing
with the long-term unemployed. The cultural policy, with support for
the arts and multi-media. The Budget of last year. APEC, sewing
Australia up in the Asia-Pacific. The drought policy, develop income
support for farmers. I mean we couldn't have done any more last year.
In fact we did more last year than I think any Government since the
war.
J: Alright Prime Minister, we have to leave it there just for the moment.
We'll be back with more from the Prime Minister right after the break.
Stay with us.
J: Prime Minister, just before the break, we were talking about John
Howard saying, you had taken your hands off the wheel and indicative
of that was the shemozzle over woodchips.
PM: Well woodchips is a complex issue and there are three thousand, I
mean I reject absolutely this hands off the wheel notion, as I said this
was the toughest year and the biggest year last year I think any
Government's had, certainly since the war. But woodchips is a
complex issue. We've got what we call a coupe, 150 metres square.
There's three and a half thousand of them and picking which ones
have got high conservation value and which haven't, is very hard for a
Cabinet.
J: But in terms of a political problem, you said I'm going to lob a grenade
in there you have dropped a grenade on your foot, and you have
alienated both the Greens and the timber workers? 
PM: Well that might suggest to people look, what we have got here now
is a decision for the nation. It doesn't suit the timber workers, and it
doesn't suit the Greens but it is right for Australia. What it does is
preserves those high-quality, high-conservation value stands of trees,
which I think it is a crime to see cut some of these stands of old trees
that can be protected and ought to be. What we have done is to set
these aside for examination, to see which are truly in that position.
Now, if before Christmas 200 coupes were set aside, the Greens
would have thought it was a fabulous decision. I have set aside 500,
and because they think they have got the Government under pressure,
they are saying " Oh no, we're not having that", the timber workers are
saying " oh no, this is too much", so maybe it gives the public the
inkling that we have probably got this about right now.
J: Alright Prime Minister, lets move onto the major economic statement
today can you guarantee say to us tonight that in the coming May
Budget, there will be no increase in taxes?
PM: What I can say to you Neil is that this is the fastest growing Western
world economy, with the lowest levels of tax and low inflation. What I
can say to you is we will be keeping that going, and the Budget is
about keeping that going. This Government was hired and rehired in
1983 to produce growth, job security and employment. We have done
that. But we have now got a very strong economy, and basically have
to temper it and that is the job of the Budget.
J: Ralph Willis said today at his press conference, apparently, " there will
be some resort to tax increases". Do you agree with that?
PM: None of us can pre-empt what the Cabinet will do, but
J: But it has to be one or the other?
PM: Well that is what I am trying to say it will come this way it will come
by either some increase in revenue, cuts in Government spending, or
sales in Government assets.
J: Which do you favour?
PM: You'll see. I did, as Treasurer, 9 Budgets and 7 May Statements I did
16 Budgets, virtually, and we'll be doing another one.
J: Can you understand why a lot of people would be apprehensive about
what is happening we saw 3 rises in interest rates, the economy is
supposedly going well as you say why are we seeing the rises in
interest rates, and Government spending about to be cut?
PM: Neil, let's get this on the record 6% growth and 2% inflation in the last
year is the best economic year since the War, fullstop... 
J: But you can understand that people are hurting out there?
PM: the interest rates are basically a premium for the security for the
future in other words, how we do we keep this growth and
employment running so that people don't have to worry about their
jobs, where they are seeing unemployment come down, where they
are seeing growth and incomes rise, where they are seeing company
profits and investments rise. The increase in interest rates that we
have seen are basically a premium on that security.
J: Will we see any more increases in interest rates in the near future?
PM: Well, I don't believe that.....
J: They would be appropriate?
PM: I don't believe there is a cause for any adjustment, and that is why the
Treasurer again stressed today that in terms of policy, we will be
looking at the Budget.
J: Okay Prime Minister, we have to wrap up very quickly are you looking
forward to the year?
PM: Absolutely. This is the ultimate high-wire business this is my 26th
year at it there has got to be something about it that keeps me going.
J: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Good luck with the program.
J: Thank you.
ends 



ru'% 1uVuff. UVINIEUIM I IE'I 6/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TIMBER INDUSTRY
Cabinet met tonight to discuss the woodchip issue.
As I said last week, the Government is determined to find
a means by which the timber industry a vital part of
Australia's economic future and the economic foundation
of many Australian communities will be supported and
encouraged in its growth and progress towards ecological
sustainability. As I also said, we are determined to see that our forests
are adequately protected for this and future generations.
This is a major national issue, and a complex and
passionate one. There is no simple answer which will
satisfy the demands of those on the extremes of the
debate.
The Government is in no doubt that the vast majority of
Australians wish to see the issue resolved in a way which
will enable an Australian timber industry and its workers
to prosper while our native forests are preserved.
Without qualification, the Government believes its
responsibility is to find such a solution in the
interests of both our timber industry and our
environment. A solution, in other words, which is in the national
interest. Accordingly, Cabinet has tonight decided that the
following assessment process will apply in relation to
509 coupes identified as requiring further consideration
before logging should proceed:
priority attention will be given to resolving the
status of those coupes which meet all three of the
following conditions
are currently being logged in accordance with
their licence conditions ( ie following
correct forest practice, preserving identified
endangered species etc);
have licences which were renewed in 1994 ( ie
were originally issued earlier than 1994); and 
are not registered as part of the National
Estate.
Following consideration by officials from the Departments
of DEST, DPIE and PM&amp; C, and consultation with the
relevant State Departments, next week Cabinet will
consider the status of these coupes, with a view to the
statutory decision maker, the Minister for Resources,
making a final decision on them.
As to all the remaining coupes, the following
assessment process will be followed:
a preliminary assessment of the conservation
value of each coupe will be made in
accordance with the criteria laid down in the
National Forest Policy Statement by a team of
officials from DEST, DPIE and PM&amp; C working with
relevant State Departments;
these assessments shall then be the subject of
consultation with representatives of the forest
industry and unions, and the environmental
movement; Cabinet will then consider the appropriate
status of all these coupes in the light of this
advice; and
the Minister for Resources, as statutory
decision-maker, will decide the final status of
the coupes, taking into account this
consultative process and Cabinet's
deliberations.
In order to reduce uncertainty as much as possible, it is
proposed that this process be completed within eight
weeks. This week in Canberra has provided ample and reassuring
evidence that Australia remains a robust and tolerant
democracy. By their demonstration outside the national Parliament
people engaged in the timber industry have been able to
express their concerns, but nothing will be gained by
continuing the action.
Certainly, the Government will not allow its decisions to
be influenced or enacted in an atmosphere of
intimidation.
Cabinet's resolutions will be acted upon immediately and
I urge those involved to return to their communities so
that this issue can be resolved in their interests and in
the interest of Australia.
CANBERRA 2 FEBRUARY 1995 



N
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, 2 FEBRUARY 1995
BEATIFICATION OF MARY MACKILLOP
On behalf of the Leader of the House, I move that this House:
Acknowledges the Beatification by His Holiness, Pope John
Paul 11o, f Mother Mary MacKillop, founder of Australia's first
religious order, the Congregation of the Sisters of St Joseph;
and Recognises the contribution to the people and society of
Australia by Blessed Mary MacKillop and the beneficent and
enduring work of the Congregation of the Sisters of St Joseph
Mr Speaker
The recent beatification of Mother MacKillop by His Holiness the Pope
bestowed a great honour on a great Australian.
Mary MacKillop's aid for the poor, particularly the rural poor, and her
creation of the Order of the Sisters of St Joseph to spread and
maintain her vision and her work is now, of course, a part of the
Australian legend.
I hope that hereafter it will form a much larger part.
I say this in the first place because the qualities of charity, sacrifice,
courage and perseverance are qualities for a nation to live by and
ideals to encourage in future generations of Australians.
We would all hope to see them inform the lives of Australians,
including the lives of governments those whose privilege and
responsibility it is to make policy. 
Mary MacKillop's sympathies were with those of the underdogs of
society, the people on the margins and that is where, traditionally,
Australian sympathies have lied.
We should never lose, I think, those sympathies or lose sight of them.
We should be guided by them. They are as relevant now as they were
c 6L1 , i y aego.
That seems to me the great contemporary lesson of Mary MacKillop, to
look after those on the margins, to care for them, to bring them in, and
to give them hope.
I hope Mary MacKillop becomes a prominent figure in our history and
our consciousness also for another reason. And that is because she
was a woman.
As I said on the arrival of the Pope in Australia, while women
pioneered this country as much as men, the contribution of women has
not always been adequately acknowledged.
Women brought their labour and courage and moral strength to the
frontier of Australia, which in earlier times needed some moral
strength, and they continue to bring it to the modern Australian
community. They have been defining forces in our economic and social
development and in our national character.
That is why I say that, in honouring Mary MacKillop, his Holiness has
honoured all Australian women and I believe he has honoured us all.
Indeed, in moving this motion today, I want to stress the broad appeal
and significance of Mary MacKillop.
In a sectarian age, she was avowedly non-sectarian.
She drew support from Catholics and non-Catholics alike. Protestants
and Jews were her friends and supporters.
Years before the federation of the nation, her view was national. She
thought as an Australian in Australian terms. Born into a Gaelicspeaking
Scottish family, she spoke as an Australian. She began in a
letter to the Vatican, and one has to remember it a century ago, with
the words: " It is an Australian who speaks."
For a century ago, though most people would refer to themselves as
Australians, the notion of writing as an Australian would, I think, have
been somewhat unusual. She said as an " Australian who speaks." 
I trust honourable members will see what I mean when I say that the
beatification of Mother Mary MacKillop rings with significance for all
Australians. The qualities she embodied openness and tolerance, courage,
persistence, faith, care for others are quajiiies for individuais,
'-UIii II LIC6 dI1t. J ( N2iauuiS 1U IIVe LUy.
The Josephites continue to practice these virtues in their work for the
poor in Australia, New Zealand and, increasingly, in the countries of
the Third World.
I think all honourable members will agree that we will serve Australia
well, and future generations of Australians well, if we allow the values
which inspired and guided Mary MacKillop's work to inspire and guide
our own.
There is nothing to be gained from pretending that religious faith and
the place of the church in our communities has not declined since
Mary MacKillop's day.
Yet the message of her life easily translates to our much more
sceptical and secular society.
And it would bring a blessing on Australia and on future generations if,
as a result of the beatification of Mary MacKillop, that message spread.
Societies, I think, always need faith, they certainly need hope and
charity and they are the things which Mary MacKillop had in
abundance. Our children will always need a spiritual dimension to their
lives. A point His Holiness made very poignantly during his visit to
Australia and one I'm sure everyone in this House endorses.
I happen to think that in the traditions of this country and the quality of
our people and institutions there is fertile grounds for these ideals to
flourish. I think people are looking for guidance and a spiritual
dimension to their lives and the lessons which we take from that great
strength that Mary Mackillop had is something, I'm sure, the country
can emulate into the future.
I commend the motion to the House.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FISCHER HOLDS THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES IN CONTEMPT
The Leader of the National Party, Mr Fischer, has displayed contempt for the
institution to which he was elected by inciting demonstrators to disrupt
Question Time today and on Monday.
Remarks by Mr Fischer to timber industry protesters this morning, as reported
on ABC radio, are particularly unfortunate and irresponsible.
His provocative remarks are also hypocritical, coming from such a
conservative political leader. He recently feigned great attachment to the
traditions of the Parliament by opposing a decision to end the wearing of wigs
by the Clerks. Now he shows complete contempt for the more important
traditions of the Parliament by urging members of the public to disrupt
proceedings. Mr Fischer should apologise to the Parliament.
CANBERRA 2 FEBRUARY, 1995 5/ 95 



VL42, q
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
NATIONAL STRATEGIES CONFERENCE FINDINGS c
Today I wish to announce the publication of Shaping Our Future, the
proceedings of the National Strategies Conference of last year.
The themes emerging from this benchmark review of our long-term goals
show that the priorities and concerns of Australians are recognised and are
being acted upon by this Government.
The necessary strategic direction for shaping a rewarding future for Australia
is being firmly set in place by our past, present and future policies.
I commissioned the National Strategies Conference convened on November
24-25 1994 by the new Economic Planning Advisory Commission ( EPAC)
with the aim of defining national ambitions and opportunities, and considering
long-term strategies.
According to the EPAC overview, a basic vision for Australia that emerged
was of a country that is both creative and productive and inclusive and
ecologically sustainable. There was broad agreement on these as national
goals, and these are endorsed as goals by this Government.
Also according to EPAC, key future priorities for the achievement of these
goals were defined at the Conference as the following.
" consolidation and enhancement of Australia's emergence as a Global
Nation; further development of Australia's capacities as an Innovative Nation in
each of the economic, social and environmental spheres;
reinvigoration of the commitment to a Sustainable Australia through
ecologically sensitive activities and policy development; and
redefinition of a Social Charter to provide for social security, personal
and community development and civic engagement'. 4647 
The proceedings of the Conference evoked a great sense of optimism. Many
participants spoke of Australia's great potential and opportunity. Australia
was seen as having the promise to be a role model for other countries. For
young Australians this is the most important message of all.
CANBERRA 9 February 1995
For further information on the Conference contact Glenn Withers, Director
EPAC, or Lynda Tin, Executive Manager, National Strategies Task Force,
( 06) 270 2444.
4( 34 18 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
TO THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL TRAINING AUTHORITY CONFERENCE,
BRISBANE, FRIDAY 10 FEBRUARY 1995
I am very grateful for the opportunity to speak to you,
at this first Australian National Training Authority
conference. The National Training Authority has a special
significance for me: I might say a special place in my
heart and in my mind.
Vocational training is like that warm hearts and cool
heads are what we need.
And I don't think I have to tell you I'm a TAFE person.
I was an early leaver a normal leaver in those days
and I picked up a formal qualification at Belmore
Technical College.
ANTA was one of the first major creations of the Keating
Government: prefigured in One Nation of which
vocational education and training initiatives were a $ 720
million centrepiece and announced at a Youth Summit
later in 1992.
It seems an eternity ago three Budgets, a major
economic statement, the White paper on Employment, the
statement on the arts and the new media, an election,
three Opposition leaders and much else.
Even in those three years there have been quite
remarkable changes in the lives of our people, in our
national life: changes both in our economy and society,
and in our understanding of ourselves and the world
around us.
Unemployment is at last falling, employment growing more
strongly than ever before in our history, we have the
fastest growing economy in the OECD, investment is
booming. Our perspectives and expectations have changed. our role
in the region has materially altered and appreciation of
it is deeper and more sophisticated. 
The information highway is upon us. Much more than we
did three years ago, we talk about information
technology, information highways, new media, Internet.
Because it is happening before our eyes, we are more
aware that our children will learn things we never knew,
by means we never had and I fear we will never really
understand. The same goes for work: the revolution in work we are
living through, particularly the rise of knowledge-based
industries, is changing much more than our working lives
it is changing the structure of our society.
And if we do not address and facilitate these changes, we
will disastrously fail the generations of the next
century. That is why ANTA is so important it was created to
address and facilitate the changes. Its success is
crucial to our future.
That is why I said ANTA has a special significance for me
and for the Government: because there is nothing more
gratifying in a political life than to have created
something for the times ahead.
Governments do not always discern the currents of change.
This time I know we have.
When we do these things there is a buzz of approval and
enlightened interest and it lasts about 10 minutes and
fades.
But the reality doesn't fade with it, and nor do the
challenges which face us.
And now, three years later, we have in ANTA a body to
meet and confront them.
I think of AI4TA as a bridge by which Australians can get
from the old to the new into the realm of new
opportunities, into the new jobs, into the new
technology. From fading industries to the industries of the future.
It is a bridge, but not an unchangeable, inflexible one,
I hope not an impregnable bureaucratic edifice.
It needs to reflect the change it is dealing with. That
means it must be adaptable, flexible, portable,
approachable. It has to get women across, working mothers, new
migrants, poor Australians and their children, Aboriginal
Australians. 
It has to be a bridge f or people in the growing number of
industries where retraining of various kinds is necessary
as often as every two years.
It is not the only bridge we have, but it is an essential
one. It provides the framework for the journey.
As our economy and society changes it has to give
Australians the training they will need to keep up, to
make the transition from unskilled to skilled, from
manufacturing industries to knowledge-based industries,
from school to work, from unemployment to employment.
In the last Atlantic Monthly, Peter Drucker declared that
in future there would be " no poor countries. Only
ignorant countries.",
Australia simply cannot afford to be an " ignorant
country". Nor can we afford to stand still. We can't afford to let
old ways of thinking govern our response to present
needs, or let old institutions administer to the future.
Remarkably enough there are still influential people in
Australia who tell us that the 1950s was a period we
might usefully try to imitate. There were so many jobs
in the fifties, after all.
For once a bureaucratic answer is the right one. " Not
applicable".
Certainly there were jobs in the fifties.
I can personally vouch for it I left school to take
one. But, I hardly need to tell this audience that my job and
most of the others of that era have gone gone as
emphatically forever as those in farming, which a century
ago were still the most numerous of all.
I may not need to tell this audience but it is very
important that all Australians know the way the wind is
blowing. It is likely that by early in the new century a third or
more of jobs in Australia will be in the so-called
knowledge-based industries.
That does not mean our manufacturing industry will shrink
quite the opposite.
In the past ten years our manufacturing output has
increased by over thirty per cent, but the number of
people directly employed in manufacturing is actually
less than it was a decade ago. 
In manufacturing, we produce more vastly more but
with fewer people.
Increasingly those people need skills and training. And,
of course, so do the people in the industries where the
new jobs are the service industries, the
knowledge based industries.
The unmistakeable fact is that, if we are to serve this
and future generations, we need ANTA; we need the
initiatives in Working Nation; we need NETTFORCE; we
need a vocational education and training system as good
as any in the world.
We need more of these things to be a competitive and
efficient country, a country in the front rank of nations
and a fair and equitable social democracy.
ANTA is more than a bridge between old industries and new
ones, old lives and new ones it is a bridge between the
past Australia and the future. It will be an essential
underpinning of our success as a nation in the 21st
century. I said before that there had been dramatic changes even
in the three short years since ANTA was first proposed.
One of those changes has been in education and training
itself.
We pledged those $ 720 million dollars in One Nation
because we had reached an impasse: schools and
universities had grown rapidly, but TAFE was actually
declining. And budgetary problems left the States unable to expand
the system.
The changes have been remarkable. We all might take a
little uncomplacent pride in them, and even allow
ourselves to think that, if we can do these national
things in vocational education, we can do them in other
spheres of great national importance.
In short, we now have national strategic planning of
vocational education and training; cohesion and
cooperation in place of the dislocation and
inefficiencies of the past.
We have certainty of funding for the States triennial
funding and through-growth funding.
We have two spheres of government working through a
ministerial council; employers and unions working
together on an industry-controlled board.
And, in what may one day be seen as a landmark in our
national development, we have ANTA established in 
Brisbane, one of the dynamic regions of Australia: one
of the regions of the future, with many of the industries
of the future.
Over the period 1993-97 the Commonwealth will have
contributed $ 1.5 billion to vocational education and
training.
We have more than doubled our expenditure since 1989.
Most importantly of all, by the end of this year we will
be able to say that in the last four years the number of
people enrolled in TAFE has grown by 25 per cent that
more than a quarter of a million Australians have entered
the system.
This expansion of training will soon be transforming the
Australian workforce.
To illustrate this: in 1986, 45 per cent of Australian
workers held post-school qualifications. In 1995 we are
on track to a figure of 65 per cent by 2001.
In other words, from a country where a significant
majority of workers held no post-school qualifications to
one where two-thirds do.
In addition, ANTA is now spearheading the implementation
of Australia's new entry-level training system the
Australian Vocational Training System which will
combine education and training with experience in
workplaces. This will mean a more integrated framework for existing
training pathways, such as apprenticeships and
traineeships; and it will enable young people to combine
more traditional academic school subjects with vocational
education. I think we can say now that we are well on the way to
making a reality the concept of an employment, education
and training entitlement for young people leaving school.
And I might say in passing, that while Governments bear
the ultimate responsibility for achieving that objective,
we should set ourselves the complementary goal of seeing
it become a community value one held by parents,
schools, employers and, of course, young people
themselves. Nor should we forget that in the modern economy the need
for retraining among older workers and older unemployed
people can be as profound as that of our young people.
The process of workplace reform and enterprisebargaining,
and the drive to high quality and best
practice, is generating demand among companies demands 
and opportunities f or people in occupations regarded in
the past as semi-skilled or unskilled.
You have clients who have had no formal education and
training for perhaps fifteen or twenty years.
Many will have had no education or training in this
country. There can scarcely be a greater responsibility than the
one which is placed on those who provide it and I
suspect that, whatever short term frustrations you may
encounter, in the long run fulfilling that responsibility
will be a uniquely rewarding experience.
You are involved in a quiet revolution, one which is
recognised and admired abroad; and, more importantly,
one which will significantly shape the Australian economy
and society in the next century.
Now I could spend the remainder of this speech listing
further achievements like the fact that today almost
the same number of young people are studying at TAPE the
year after leaving school as are going to university.
Or I could instance some of the many benefits of growth
in the training sector.
The kinds of benefits which flow from the Vehicle
Industry Certificate which has been developed at Ford.
Or the on-site training which is providing skills
and learning opportunities to workers in food processing
companies in the Murray Goulburn area.
I could itemise the progress and talk at length about
some of the more remarkable achievements of recent times.
I could, for instance, talk about the initiatives in
Working Nation the most comprehensive response to the
aftermath of the international recession of any country
in the world.
But it is mandatory on occasions such as this to point
out that there is still a great deal to be done and many
obstacles to overcome along the way.
Mandatory and necessary.
We have made tremendous progress, but not yet as much as
we made in expanding secondary and higher education in
the 1980s.
We transformed the university sector from an elite to a
mass education system, and we doubled retention rates in
secondary schools. 
We need a revolution of at least the same proportions in
vocational education.
If it is true that, as Peter Drucker says, " knowledge is
the only meaningful resource today", we have to deliver
knowledge to the workforce as a whole.
The imperatives of economic success demand it. The equal
imperatives of social equity and cohesion demand it.
To provide it, we will need to dissolve the boundaries
between schools and training, and between training
institutions and industry.
We are competing with countries like Germany, Sweden and
France, which have well developed links between employer
associations, training institutions and schools.
Asian economies like Taiwan and Korea are rapidly moving
in the same direction. We must move just as quickly.
If we want a high wage/ high skills economy with high
levels of employment, a world class training system is
absolutely essential.
Let me, then, briefly address three areas which it seems
to me, we will need to tackle if we are to develop and
maintain such a world class system.
First, we will need to improve the quality and
responsiveness of the system.
Second, we will need to expand it expand it to the
point where vocational education and training is the
norm, not the exception.
And third, we will need to get the balance right the
balance between different types of education and
training.
Quality, understandably enough, is often measured by the
standard of buildings and the qualifications of staff.
Given the standards of a few years ago compared with the
world class facilities and teachers we now have, we could
be forgiven for thinking that we are rapidly approaching
our quality goals.
Ultimately, however, the quality of our training system
has to be measured by its responsiveness to clients its
responsiveness to industry and students alike.
I am well aware that over the last few years industry has
sometimes complained that the training reform agenda is
hard to comprehend, and that the system assumed a
knowledge of industry's requirements instead of taking
steps to actually find out what they are. 
The skill needs of industry and individuals are changing
so rapidly there must be mechanisms to ensure that
training and industry are moving hand in hand.
Consider for a moment just two statistics: in the German
metals engineering industry knowledge turns over every
five years, and in the German information technology
industry it turns over every two years.
We need to ensure that training reform keeps up with the
astonishing rate of industrial change. We therefore need
to ensure that training reform is industry driven.
Working Nation set us on that course and since then ANTA
has undertaken its own review of the reform agenda.
I am pleased to say a number of key reforms are in train.
For instance, an Enterprise Stream has been developed to
cater for the special training requirements of larger
enterprises. And ANTA will be undertaking a series of pilots of
userAchoice which will allow firms to choose the provider
for off-the-job training.
The second great challenge is to expand the coverage.
By 2001, 95 per cent of 19 year olds will have completed
Year 12 or an initial post-school qualification, or be
participating in formally recognised education and
training. That is the goal agreed to by all Australian governments.
In Working Nation we announced a series of measures to
extend the coverage:
The Youth Training Initiative, to enable fifteen to
seventeen year olds to get into education, training or
work through individual case management;
The Australian Student Traineeship Foundation to
enable Year 11 and 12 students to receive vocational
training and work experience; and
The National Employment and Training Taskforce
NETTFORCE which, under the leadership of Bill Kelty and
Lindsay Fox, has already approved the establishment of 21
industry training companies and consulted with State
training authorities to streamline their accreditation
arrangements. These reforms will make a difference, but they need the
support of other players.
Employers will have to take on more trainees, and State
school systems will have to become flexible enough for 
students to combine vocational training with academic
study. It seems to me we should consider moving towards a
European model where employer associations take a key
responsibility for training.
It may be possible to encourage larger employers to pool
their incentive payments with an employer association, so
that projects can be undertaken to improve training
within an industry.
When we speak of coverage, we also need to recognise that
the current system is not doing enough for women.
Women are woefully under-represented in trade training.
And only half as many women as men receive financial or
other support from their employer when they undertake
education. No doubt there are complex reasons for this imbalance.
But one thing is perfectly clear we will not be able to
say that we have reformed training if we have replicated
the inequities of the old system.
It may be that we should give priority to developing new
training arrangements for industries which do not
currently train their employees.
We know that it is in these industries, like community
services, that the largest number of women work women
who have not had access to recognised training.
It may also be possible to encourage the establishment of
group training companies for women only. Such companies
might coordinate the placement of female trainees and
apprentices between small businesses, and give trainees
the support they need to enter training and see it
through.
The third great challenge might be expressed as a
question: have we been expanding universities at the
expense of vocational education and training?
Parenthetically, I might acknowledge that there is an
irony to this in Queensland which has a deficit of higher
education places a deficit, I can assure you, which we
intend to rectify.
Nationally, however, the figures are a cause for some
satisfaction. Commonwealth funding available to higher education has
risen from $ 3 billion in 1983 to $ 4.8 billion in 1995
an increase of more than 60 per cent. 
In the same period, student numbers have increased by
more than 70 per cent.
There is no question that over the last two years, across
Australia, it has become much easier to get into a
university. The fact is we need more entrants to the labour force
with trade and vocational qualifications.
In every recovery up to now we have found ourselves
importing trade qualifications and vocational skills.
To reverse that phenomenon we probably need to reverse a
popular attitude: we need to raise the status of
vocational training both in reality and in the minds of
our young people.
For, while some surveys show us that more than half of
Year 12 students aspire to professional status, only 14
per cent of the workforce have professional status.
The point is vocational skills and the teaching of them
should have a comparable status.
There is every reason to believe that the perception and
the reality are both changing.
Unmet demand for TAFE places is now 36 per cent higher
than unmet demand for higher education.
ANOP surveys show that the proportion of students who are
choosing TAFE over university entrance has increased from
to 25 per cent.
There is no question that TAFE is gaining acceptance as
one of the two major pathways in tertiary education.
So, by way of coming to a conclusion: we are doing well,
no one should doubt our resolve or our belief that the
direction we are taking is the right one.
But we are also very conscious of the size and complexity
of the task and the hurdles we have to negotiate.
Of all the points I might stress this morning, I would
choose this one: the issue of vocational education and
training transcends all other loyalties whatever they
might be to States and Territories; regions; social
groups; gender, race or ethnicity; and personal political
affiliations. It is truly a national issue.
It is in the first place, a national issue of equity. 
Expanding vocational education to the degree that we are
expanding it, is very likely to assist those among our
young people who are relatively disadvantaged.
And it is certainly the case that once individuals
acquire post-school qualifications, their lifetime
incomes and opportunities are significantly increased.
Without doubt, it will be the best investment they ever
make. In other words, the challenge we have taken on all of
us in this room is probably the single most important
policy initiative we can take to redress lifetime income
inequalities in Australia.
Vocational education and training is, in the second
place, a national issue of efficiency.
There is a parallel here with the Job Compact. The Job
Compact works by assisting the long-term unemployed back
into the mainstream of the workforce, a move which helps
not only some of the most disadvantaged in the community,
but the economy itself to reach its collective full
potential. In the case of vocational education and training, we have
to recognise as a nation that we are not just
increasing the life chances of the disadvantaged, but
guaranteeing our economic competitiveness.
Technological change does not drop from the sky or emerge
from the mind of a particularly brilliant professor of
physics or sociology.
We now know that, in the main, technological change comes
from the adoption of innovation in ways that suit
particular workplace environments.
And there is now considerable evidence that the level of
training of a firm's workforce substantially determines
how efficiently new processes are converted into
productive output.
That is to say, skill formation begets technical change
and we all know that technical change begets
productivity, and productivity begets prosperity and
material well being.
That is what I mean by saying we need warm hearts and
cool heads.
So this is a great enterprise: not so much a
revolutionary one, as one which must keep pace with the
revolution which is already taking place. 
I think we all know that there is going to be no end to
the challenge, and that success itself will present new
challenges. We should tell ourselves that this is in the nature of
our era.
The reward will not be a day when we can say the task is
done. Rather, it will be knowing that by our efforts countless
Australians of this and future generations will have
opportunities that would be otherwise denied them.
That they will have crossed the bridge to the 21st
century and Australia will have too.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 7/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENTAL SECRETARIES
Mr Graham Evans AO, Secretary to the Department of Transport, will shortly be
retiring after twenty-seven years in the Public Service. I would like to acknowledge
his outstanding work at senior management levels across the Service.
Faced with difficult administrative challenges, Mr Evans successfully led the
Department of Transport and Communications and more recently the Department of
Transport through the implementation of major legislative and administrative changes
which were an essential part of the Government's microeconomic reform agenda. The
substantial record of achievement in the transport and communications sector over the
past seven years is a measure of the effectiveness of that leadership.
Mr Evans has been in his current position for almost seven years, which is well in
excess of the period after which a departmental Secretary would normally be expected
to transfer to another department. While it was not possible at this time to offer him a
suitable alternative position of departmental Secretary, the Government would like Mr
Evans to continue his distinguished contribution to the public sector in this country.
Accordingly, he is to be appointed to the Board of Australia Post. I wish him success
in his new endeavours.
The Government has decided on some changes to departmental Secretary
arrangements, and I will shortly be recommending these to the Governor-General, to
take effect from 20 February 1995.
The new Secretary to the Department of Transport will be Mr Peter Core, currently
Secretary to the Department of Industrial Relations. Mr Core will be replaced in the
Department of Industrial Relations by Dr David Rosalky, who was appointed Secretary
of the ACT Chief Minister's Department in 1994. He served as ACT Under Treasurer
from 1992. Dr Rosalky previously held senior posts in the Commonwealth, including
in my Department and the Department of Finance.
I wish them both well in their appointments.
CANBERRA 13 February 1995 



I' .1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, CANBERRA, 13 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL And on the line from our Canberra studio, the Prime Minister of
Australia Paul Keating. Good Morning Prime Minister.
PM: How are you John?
JL What a good thing you didn't want to come and visit us in our studio's
in Sydney because you would have had some difficulty out at that
airport.
PM: Yes, apparently I would have. But I think it is clearing
JL: No, I'm not talking about a fog, I am talking about a protest.
PM; Yes, so am I.
JL Well I hope the protest is clearing is it coincidental that the control
tower for the East-West runway won't be opened until after the NSW
State elections? It wouldn't be politicking on Mr Brereton's behalf
would it?
PM: No. There is a brand new control system a completely
system and it is important that it goes into place in
guarantee's everybody's safety and the efficiency
operations. It is a very large change from a cross runway
parallel runways... new control
a way that
of aircraft
pattern to 2
JL Plus a cross one....
PM: And a cross one on the bad cross wind days.
JL So it is just coincidental? 
PM: Indeed.
JL: OK I also hear on the rumour vine that there's a possibility that you
may announce today that Ricky Stuart will Captain the Canberra
Raiders? Any truth in that?
PM: Well it may be true, but I won't be announcing it.
JL You won't?
PM: It's not for me to announce, but I.. Prime Minister's are made of many
parts, but announcing the Captains of rugby league teams isn't part of
it.
JL Well I think your predecessor might have been delighted to do it. He
liked that sort of thing.
PM: Well, he had a great interest, and maintains a great interest but so do
but not to the point of announcing the Captaincy of teams.
JL: Anyway, if somebody offers you a wager, I would put money on...
PM: Yes, get your money on Ricky I would say that's right.
JL: I would say it's right, too. OK, when you or when the Government
framed the Budget last year, you said that the deficit the gap between
your revenue and your planned spending would be $ 11.7 billion.
There were no spending cuts there, there were no tax increases
despite the " deficit daleks" as you called them calling for stronger
Government action to reduce the size of the deficit, have you now
become a " deficit dalek"?
PM: No. A " deficit dalek" is somebody who believes that the Budget deficit
can never be small enough, or the surplus large enough, in any
circumstances even in the recession, these people, when the
Government deficit.. when the shock absorber effect of the Budget
should be to let Government spending run somewhat to help the
economy when private investment is low the daleks always believe in
surpluses. In other words, stick it to them, make them take the
medicine it's almost like a knee-jerk response, and there's a fair few
of them they're in the financial markets and what have you, and the
reason they are John.... . see, these are people who are basically
punting securities around the world, and trading in foreign exchange
and their interest is not in the Australian economy, in growth or
employment, or the lot of Australian business, but only how they can
protect the investment that somebody has made in Australia via the
exchange rate or the interest rate... 
JL Ok, well when you say that their attitude is " stick it them, make them
take it" there would be a lot of people out there listening to us across
God's great garden who would reckon that you have stuck it to them a
bit, and that you have made them take it, and now there's talk about
interest rates and tax increases as well isn't that kind of sticking it to
them a bit?
PM: We gave more tax cuts in our period of office than any Government in
history, and including the last one which we gave in the end of 1993,
so...
JL But you were going to give some more that were going to be that
boring " l-a-w tax"?
PM: We had 2 tax cuts legislated we brought one forward, and we have
put one back, and the one we put back you will hear about in this
year's budget.
JL But are we going to hear about it happening?
PM: You will hear about it. But let me just make this clear to you because
the Government said we will put it back probably until 1998 that is
what I said, and what the then-Treasurer John Dawkins said 2 years
ago.
JL But prior to the election, they were and they were going . you
didn't put I mean, people anticipated that they would happen shortly
after the election, not several years after.
PM: No. The first lot happened earlier than planned after the election, and
they were paid at the end of 1993. But when I said that they were I-aw
law", that meant that they had passed the House of Representatives
and the Senate to be paid...
JL Yeah?
PM: . to change them, the Government had to secure the support of the
House of Representatives and the Senate. Which it did by paying one
lot earlier and putting one back.
JL Well nobody's knocking back the second lot are they? You're just not
giving them?
PM: Well again, we paid the first lot, and what's happened since then is
that the requirements of fiscal policy that is, because the economy is
growing even more strongly than we estimated, and employment's
growing even more strongly than we estimated means that to put a
second round of tax cuts in the market say this year, would have been
the wrong time for everybody. So are you doing people a favour you 
pay them a tax cut this year which they then lose with wage or price
inflation.
JL Well I don't know if you are doing them a favour or not, but obviously
somebody whether it was you or somebody else under-estimated
the growth that this place would take on it escalated rapidly, and
obviously somebody made a mistake with the " l-a-w law" tax cuts?
PM: Well listen ( inaudible) the person I opposed at the last election, John
Hewson, told us in the last week of the election campaign that we
would now be in a depression he started with a double-dip recession,
and then a depression. Well we have now got the fastest growth of
any western world economy, with low inflation.
JL: But you try and explain that to the people out there who are hearing
about interest rate rises, and the possibility of not tax cuts but
tax rises they don't quite understand why if this place is blossoming
the way it is and it is on paper why it isn't....
PM: John; let's forget the " on paper"' business it is everywhere. We have
had the largest fall in unemployment ever in the last 12 months. We
have had the largest fall... . let me just make these points to you. The
unemployment rate fell by 1.7% in 1994 the largest calendar fall year
in our history. We have now got over the highest number of
Australians ever in work over 8 million since the election, the
Government has created 494,000 jobs from its policies. That is 700
jobs a day.
JL But the Government hasn't created those jobs the private sector has
created those jobs.
PM: It has come from if anything goes wrong, it's Government policy, if
anything goes right it's the private sector, Of course it's been the
Government's policy with the private sector. One Nation stimulated the
economy and got the growth back essentially John, the Government
was re-hired in 1993 to restart growth and employment. That was the
key issue of the election, that was the key commitment, and the key
issue, and the key commitments have been met.
JL OK but at what cost? The size of this deficit?
PM: Sorry?
JL: At what cost? I mean, these things are... . theoretically forget on paper
theoretically, all those things that you're saying are absolutely
correct, but the people who are listening to us across Australia now
feel that something is wrong, and can't understand why there have to
be hikes in interest rates and why there have to be possible tax 
increases and why there have to be perhaps cuts in other areas when
everything is supposedly rosy in the garden?
PM: Well they feel that something is wrong because the media has now
stopped talking about unemployment, and they have started talking
about the current account deficit. You see, a balanced appraisal of
Australia's circumstances shows us to be very greatly advantaged
compared to comparable countries.
JL: Yes.
PM: I mean, here we are in Europe where the average rate of growth is
about 1.6% the Australian rate of growth is 5.5% 6%.
JL: Yes, but it is hurting us.
PM: Well it's not hurting the people getting a job, John. Tell them that try
and get that message over.
JL: OK, but it is hurting somebody, otherwise you wouldn't have to talk
about proposed tax increases or interest rates rises?
PM: Let me come to that in a moment, but all I'm trying to say to you is let's
get the balance right what was the Government's principal
commitments in the election campaign? To restart growth and
employment. How did we do it? By bringing the One Nation spending
arrangements into place, and the One Nation tax cuts into place, in
1990, and those tax cuts were paid at the end of 1993. That kicked the
growth along, and it kicked the employment along. But what it has also
kicked along is a very big investment phase. We have now got 24%
growth in investment, and because investment is essentially about
producer goods and this country, in the main, doesn't produce
producer goods like mainframe computers, computer-operated
machine tools, this sort of thing there is always a bulge in any
investment phase in the trade accounts in the current account. That is
what we are seeing now, and we have seen quite a bit of spending
-private consumption over the last year or so. What the interest rate
rises were about, was essentially smoothing that. That is, taking some
of that spending out of the economy, and the reason the Government
believes that it is prudent now to tighten policy for the Budget, is to
make that growth and employment growth sustainable. In other words,
the hardest thing that we can do and to give Australians is a
maintenance of this strong growth, strong employment, low inflation
recovery.
JL: OK Now it isn't true the investment that you talk about, which has
provided the growth has come about because of considerable
borrowing from overseas, which has cause the blow-out if you want to 
call it that, and they do in the deficit? That the money has come from
overseas because there's not a large enough saving pool in Australia?
PM: That's true.
JL: So if all that being true, why is it then that you make it tough for people
to save because if you had $ 100 and somebody said to you and
meant it that unless you spend that $ 100 in the next few minutes, I'm
going to take $ 20 away from you, you would spend it wouldn't you?
PM: No. Why does the country have a relatively modest propensity to
save? I mean, why is there that modest likelihood to save
JL: Because, I believe, you tax savings.
PM: No. The answer is because of 2 decades of double-digit inflation.
That's why. We have so inculcated into people's minds that they
shouldn't keep money in the bank, they couldn't keep money in savings
accounts, they shouldn't keep them in fixed-interest securities they
should have them in real property they should have them in a flat, a
holiday house or something else because what the last 2 decades
have shown is that if they hang onto it, inflation will tear the hell out of
it. Now that's the point I make...
JL: So it's got nothing
PM: Well that's the point I make about our friends in the Liberal and the
National Parties. I mean, they left it to the Labor Party to break the
back of Australian inflation. I mean, in the recession on 1980-81, we
came out of it with 11 inflation. We came out of the last recession in
1989-90-91 with 2% inflation.
JL: Yeah. So, are you telling me that people are so pre-conditioned and
they're so bovine in their attitude to things like their own money that
they just out of habit, don't save it.
PM: Well forget the bovine description. One thing is very clear. There is
an inculcation in the public mind of this country that anybody who had
a lump sum in cash in 1970 or 1980 now finds that has been massively
cut to pieces by it's purchasing power through high inflation...
JL: So what do you do...
PM: . and they believe that the neighbour next door, the person next door
who bought a flat or a second property or something like that, actually
saved the value of their savings. Now this comes from the high
inflation mentality. The Government has broken the back of inflation,
and we have got inflation somewhere between And we have it
there for about 3 years, and in 3 years you don't change the savings 
mind of the country. In other words, there hasn't been a long enough
period of a return to the good times of low inflation to convince people
that basically they ought to increase their discretionary saving. So
what happens when you have a big investment phase like we're having
now which we need for the jobs, and which we need for our
productive base....
JL: Yeah, but the money is borrowed from overseas, so why don't we
encourage a savings pool in Australia?
PM: Well, we have done that...
JL: Well it hasn't worked.
PM: . well, we're doing it in a non-discretionary way from the middle
with Award Superannuation. And we have now got 6% of everybody's
income on the 1 st of July this year the taxi meter turns over again,
and another 1 to 6% the whole nation saving 6% of their income.
Now, without that... . and that has now added to the pool of savings
about $ 300 billion $ 300 thousand million. So, we are getting it up.
And one of the other ways that you can save is for the public sector to
save by going back into surplus, and what the Treasurer said a week
or two ago, and what I have said in this period, is that as we go to the
second half on the 90s, in the medium-term the requirement is going to
be to add to our savings, and the public sector can do a bit more by the
Budget moving back more quickly than it might have otherwise into
surplus.
JL: OK Well now all the headlines after the 1994-95 Budget was that it
was a gamble on growth. I always felt that the 1994 Budget was a
make good for the 1993 Budget that caused you some problems,
particularly with the Independents from the West is it true that the
1994-95 Budget was bothersome to you because you didn't want to go
through the ritual that you had to go through to get the last Budget
cleared?
PM: No. We made.... . there are 2 points about the 1994 Budget worth
making. The 1993 Budget the Budget John Dawkins presented you
are right, we had so much trouble with in the Senate because John
Hewson's Opposition opposed every measure and we relied on the
Democrats and the Greens to get it passed, that Budget...
JL: But that took a bit of talking, didn't it?
PM: It did. And why did it? Because for the first time in history the
Opposition the Liberal Party and the National Party took the
unprincipled stand of opposing the Government's Budget measures in
the Senate. 
JL: But didn't you think that there was a possibility that might happen again
in 1994-95, so you made it a bit softer?
PM: You have already asked me, let me just give you this answer in 1993,
we put in changes worth to the Budget, to the Fiscal Policy over time,
of $ 9 billion. Now, those changes came in, that was increases in sales
tax, petrol prices etc, they came in at various other times in 1994 and
in 1995 this year. So in other words, we believed that in 1994 we had
a fiscal change already embedded from 1993s sufficient for the growth
which we had forecast. But remember this John, we forecast in the 94
Budget an increase in private investment of 14.5%, and we had
you're right, as you said a moment ago the headlines the Government
gambles on growth they have got these overly optimistic growth
assessments, and we had Mr Costello running around saying " where's
the investment, where's the investment?". Well it turns out we had
24% investment. Not only did we make 14.5%, but we exceeded it by
And it's that big bubble of investment, which has come because
of the very propitious conditions of low inflation and competitiveness,
and the tax system and everything, which has produced now a big
bubble of investment which has put pressure on the current account,
which now our policy that is fiscal policy and monetary policy etc
has been responding to that...
JL: OK
PM: in other words, the Government has been doing the perfectly
reasonable, sensible thing in the circumstance.
JL: OK, but explain now why you want to reign in Government spending,
for which I incidentally applaud you, and think you should do it more,
and why you want to put up taxes, for which I don't applaud you? I
mean, why is that happening if growth in the economy was better than
it was forecast to be?
PM: Let's say that the Government does nothing about it. Let's say we
haven't adjusted interest rates, and we don't touch fiscal policy. And
we keep blasting along at and we have spending running at 2
percentage points faster than our production in the economy. That's
what we have had we have had spending running at and we
have production running at Well obviously if you are only
producing growth at and you have got spending at 2% is
going to fall into imports in the current account. So in other words, the
thing has got a " get up and go" about it, which is even stronger than
anyone believed....
JL: Well that's
PM:.... which is a good thing, a good thing but let's make sure it's a
sustainable thing. 
JL: OK But that forecast that growth forecast for a 5 year period will
this 24% keep going for 5 years?
PM: Investment?
JL: Yes.
PM: No we had 14.5% in for private capital investment....
JL: Yes.
PM:' That's where the jobs come from when businesses invest, that's
where the employment comes form. We had 14.5%, and we had all
the pundits as usual " Oh, the Government gambles on growth the
Government gambles on growth" turns out, as always, we were
conservative, and the growth came in at 24% for investment, so the
sensible thing is, John, if people want a pro-growth, a strong growth
and low inflation economy where inflation is not tearing the hell out of
their savings, and ruining their competitiveness, and ruining the
Nation's competitiveness to export and sell abroad the thing to do is
to modestly reduce it. And that is what we'll be doing.
JL: OK The expectation was that businesses would start to use those
increasing profits for capital investment, and generate job growth,
which they did to a degree.
PM: Which they did massively. I mean the point is that the biggest fall in
the unemployment rate ever fullstop. We have had John, let me
give you the figures again since the election, and it's not that long
ago it's 2 years next month we have had half a million jobs. When
the Government came out in the election and said our target is
500,000 in 3 years, the Liberal Party laughed at it, John Hewson said it
was a hoax. We have met the half million in 2 years in other words,
we have met the target in two-thirds of the time. It's been the largest
growth in employment that we have seen, and that is a great thing for
this country a much more fully employed society than we have now
got the unemployment rate at around from 10.7%, which is a
tremendous achievement for the country.
JL: Define full employment in Australia?
PM: Well I know it is very hard to say what full employment is because in
an economy where there is so much structural change you know, to
the information industries, to information technology, out of some of the
older low paid unskilled jobs that you will always have a pool of what
was once called " structural unemployed", and it is very hard to say now
how large that pool is. Some people believe it is about 6%. 
JL: Do you?
PM: Well, it's not zero. And what the Government has said is we want to
get unemployment around 5% by the year 2000, and we are well and
truly on the way.
JL: And would you call that full employment?
PM: Well it's going to be in terms of the debate about structural
employment, it's going to be, I think, relatively near to it.
JL: OK So somewhere between zero and
PM: Well, it may be it may 5.25%, it may be 5.5% I mean, who
knows? If you look at every economy in the world today, where you
have got this flux in the labour market, with this huge change in the
productive base, and increase in the service industries etc, information
industries you have just got a tremendous structural change all the
time.
JL: OK Talking to the people to whom I talk on this radio program around
Australia, it would appear to me that unemployment would be
considerably improved if we didn't have the problems that we have in
the industrial relations area?
PM: Before I leave the Budget, can I just say this we have got all this
debate about what the Government will do and not do, and this is
because of some document which has been leaked to the Opposition.
Now, you realise John, every year that I have been a Minister, we have
had such documents produced they have no status, they have the
status only of being documents that come from the bureaucracy. Now,
I would just like to make a couple of points about this. John Howard
got a communication from Andrew Robb his Federal Director from
his advertising agency that said " surely the object until budget time is
to make every welfare recipient feel like they're about to lose it, and if
they don't lose it this time, they'll lose it next time". Howard then
started opportunistically leaking this sort of material, and you might
notice in the Sydney Morning Herald today in Mr Gittins' column and
which says " Howard sabotages expenditure cut", and it starts off " John
Howard's unprincipled attack on the Government's alleged spending
cuts carries a warning to all those people who want the budget
returned to surplus, but are implacably opposed to tax increases.
Their stand and that is the Liberals " is a recipe for fiscal failure.
Let's be clear from the outset: Mr* Howard's behaviour is unprincipled.
It is unprincipled because it is hypocritical. Here are the party and the
man who've been insisting for years that the Government slash its
spending, turning all the guns on it [ the Government] at the first sign it
[ the Government] may follow their advice. It's unprincipled because it's
a blatant campaign to scare' the electorate, particularly the most 
financially vulnerable: the elderly, the sick and the jobless." Now, that
is what he says Mr Gittins and before I go on, can I make this quote
from the weekend, the Sunday Age, and it says this " Canberra is
awash with pre-Budget leaks courtesy of the Federal Opposition, but
you are not supposed to know that. Continuing its pre-Budget policy of
scaring the wits out of welfare recipients, the Opposition yesterday
tried to convince media that it had further damning evidence of cuts
planned by the Keating Government. This may or may not be true, but
Opposition officials would not permit the Sunday Age to view the
documents, and it said that they had to be anonymous: ' we will give
you details of further proposed Budget cuts worth millions, but you will
not under any circumstances source it back to us' and it goes on to
say, " the question is, if not then can I source the information to the
Opposition? ' we do not want it to be connected in any way to us.
Why not? Because we do not, we do not want you to approach our
Leaders office or any of our Shadow Ministers.' Now in other words,
here is the Opposition running around Parliament House, handing this
stuff out in this case Mr Paul Daley, the National Affairs Commentator
with the Sunday Age saying these things to them, and then saying
" look, can I say that it came from you, and this is the source of the
documents?" They won't show them the documents, and they don't
want them to say that it came from them. See, John Howard wants
everyone to think Honest John Howard, but if John gets a choice
between doing something the slick and slippery way, he will always
take it, and what we're seeing here... he could have started his
leadership off with a stand of principle and said " I do believe in cuts in
Government spending we had been advocating $ 5-10 billion
ourselves, therefore we will see what the Government now does with
this Budget", and then attack the Budget if they want to. But what they
are trying to do is run around and scare people about cuts to welfare
recipients and other people which the Government has traditionally
looked after.
JL: Yeah, but these are scare tactics John Howard told me on this
program that he believed in the cutting of Government spending, I think
he has made it quite public that he does but tell me, how did you win
the last election?
PM: By saying that the Government will restart growth and employment
growth.
JL: But also, by saying just prior to the election, perhaps not you as an
individual, but certainly collectively, by scare tactics about the GST, so
people do tend to use scare tactics.
PM: Yes, but the GST was a fact, it wasn't a scare. I mean, the difference
between a scare and a fact, this is a list prepared by officials of a
whole lot of draconian measures which the Government has shown in
the past when these lists have been presented, it has not accepted. 
The GST was a fact of life, it was going to add 15 per cent to
everybody's cost of living.
JL: Apart from all the indirect taxes that were going to be removed.
PM: Yes, but the net gain to the Budget from it was enormous. And, people
would have found that the beneficiaries of the GST would have been
those on high incomes and the people on lower and middle incomes
would have carried the burden. So, I mean, what you are saying John,
how dare we or any of us had the hide to say ' this GST will actually
hurt you.' Well, it was fact of life, it was their direct promise, it would
have been implemented and it would have hurt people. So, I don't
accept the fact that was a scare tactic. It is a truth.
JL: In light of what Brian Howe said yesterday, do you think that the
Opposition may change its attitude. I mean, he said the Government
had already done and I quote " all the hard work" in reference to finding
out where to cut expenditure. Again, I defend your right to continue to
look at ways to cut spending, but there are members of the Cabinet
who continue to argue that all the hard work has been done, that the
job of the Government is now to be generous with the tax payers..
PM: No, that wasn't what he was saying. Look, he was paraphrasing
something I think I've said before. In the 1980s we cut spending back
by $ 30,000 million and we cut it back carefully having clear regard for
the most needy and without hurting those who shouldn't be hurt.
That's what we did. We cut it back, I think, intelligently, carefully,
compassionately. Now, we are now back to a relatively small public
sector with outlays around 25 or 26 per cent of GOP and what this
savings list the Opposition has shows is all this nonsense about lets
cut out $ 10 billion of spending from waste and duplication. Well, there
is no waste and duplication worth $ 10 billion on the list. What's on the
list is all hard tack. In other words, there are no easy savings left and
that is because we did cut back $ 30 billion in the 1980s. Now, the
people who go on saying, and you often hear Peter Costello and you'll
hear Howard " well, we'll get into outlays cuts, but we will cut out the
waste and duplication" and it sounds a slick easy line, but wait to they
run into a finance official and they see a list. They won't find anything
that approaches that sort of money from waste and duplication. You've
got to cut programs. You have got to cut payments to people.
JL: So, what are you going to cut?
PM: Well, we will do, just back us in on our record. I mean, when I became
Treasurer in 1983, when I followed John Howard, Commonwealth
spending was 30.6 per cent of Gross Domestic Product. When I left, it
was 23.6 a full 7 percentage points that is $ 35 billion a year
reduction. In other words, John Howard was the biggest taxer and the
biggest spender in Australian history, he had a 60 per cent top 
marginal rate, a 46 per cent company rate, he had revenue to GDP at
26 per cent, he had outlays to GDP at 30.5 per cent, he was the
biggest spender and the biggest taxer ever and we've now produced
the lowest revenue share in the western world, this is the lowest taxed
country bar one country, Turkey, the lowest taxed country of the 27
member states of the OECD and we have got outlays such now that we
have got a very small federal public sector. So therefore, any further
cutting has got to be very carefully done.
JL When Brian Howe was talking he was also talking about spending on
public housing, but I think he used words similar to " I would like to do
to public housing what we did to Medicare" or words to that effect.
Does that mean he wants to put a levy on public..
PM: No, not necessarily. I mean, I think, a lot of it is about using the public
housing stock more efficiently perhaps than it has been used in the
past. We have had a thing called the Commonwealth State Housing
( CSHA) Agreement which pumps a lot of money into the States every
year and I think there has been a lot of misgivings about how well the
CSHA money is being used. That is, whether or not the housing stock
has been officially managed. It is not all about extra money.
JL Well, what will it be about if he says that he wants to do to public
housing what he did to Medicare?
PM: What it will be about is making certain that those who are less well off
and disadvantaged can reasonably believe that their housing needs
will be accommodated, either in the public or the private sector.
JL Should the Government have a greater say over how ATSIC spends
the tax payers money in the delivery of health and welfare to
Aborigines or should it be the other way around or should ATSIC be
partner with Government on health spending?
PM: Well, I think, I mean ATSIC was a very large change in the way the
Commonwealth administers funding for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people. Formerly it was done by a Commonwealth
department and while that Commonwealth department had some
indigenous influences about it, by and large it was like every other
Commonwealth department. So, the change to ATSIC was a change
to give Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people a say in the
spending that goes to their communities. The problem with health is
that it is for a start, long standing arises from primary health
problems such as water, sewerage and basic infrastructure as well as
medical care. So, trying to deal with it is complex and I think what the
ATSIC funding for health probably shows is that unless we deal with
these primary health matters as well, such as infrastructure, no single
agency is going to be able to solve the problem. 
JL: So, you haven't answered the question. Should this be handed over to
Carmen Lawrence's department?
PM: Understand this John, like most things, my life is a life of complex
issues.
JL: Yes.
PM: Yours is often a life of simple statements. Life isn't simple here, it is
complex. That's why I'm saddled up with this job and your saddled up
with yours.
JL: My life is a life of simple questions, the simple question is, should it be
handed to Carmen Lawrence's department or should it not?
PM: But, they are not simple answers and that is the point I am making.
There was a very good piece in the paper today from Noel Pearson
from the Cape York Land Council in The Australian talking about the
complexities of health delivery for Aboriginal people. For a start you
have got to get the communities interested and into it. You have got
communities that are not into the habits of health protection and health
care as the non-Aboriginal community of Australia is. So, for a start,
you have got to sign the community up to be in these things and
secondly, you have got to have the infrastructure there. So, the
Government will be examining the whole issue of Aboriginal health
again in the Budget because the Budget is the annual occasion where
we set the expenditure priorities of the Government and the policy.
JL: Because a lot of money is spent on Aboriginal health, but obviously
from what one reads it is not being spent the right way. I mean, there
is $ 54 million and it appears the health of the Aboriginal people is
getting worse and not better. So, it is being mishandled and I mean we
have a responsibility to look after the Aboriginal people in the area of
health because they have great problems there.
PM: Well, I accept that absolutely of course I do. But I think, Pearson
makes a point today, there has been substantial advances in
Aboriginal health, but are the advances sufficient? No, I don't think
they are, but the remedies are complex.
JL: Yes, the remedies are complex, but they are necessary and I would
think that they were necessary quickly in light of what we see. $ 54
million being misspent it would appear, wouldn't it be better if
Aboriginal health was cared for the way that the health of all
Australians, and they are supposed to be Australians, is handled and
that is by the one organisation?
PM: Well, that is a matter for discussion for us and evaluation, but one
thing is clear. Let's say we had the, if you like, standard health 
arrangements in Aboriginal communities, for a start as you know, you
often don't get the sort of medical officers, you won't get the medical
service we get with general practitioners in these remote communities,
that's for a start. You haven't got Aboriginal communities signed up for
this sort of treatment, this is a complex social as well as professional
problem.
JL You see there are three medical services in the Northern Territory
Aboriginal medical services that apparently are in danger of closing
down, one of them is being supported by the white doctor who takes
care of it, a fellow called Dr Scott Bell, he has used $ 3,500 of his own
money to put petrol in the ambulance and the Alice Springs hospital
won't give them anymore medical supplies because they owe $ 9,000,
the Royal Flying Doctor can't land because of the state of disrepair of
the strip, so it is being mismanaged isn't it? And it is tax payers
money.
PM: Well, put it this way, I don't know of those issues you raise, but it is
very clear to all of us that we have not solved the problem of Aboriginal
health in general and so whether particular programs are adequate or
whether ATSIC is funding the petrol bill inappropriately for that
particular medical centre I don't know, but what we do know is that we,
all of us, have to do better that is the non-Aboriginal community, the
Government and the Aboriginal community to see that we improve
absolutely the health and welfare of Aboriginal people.
JL Yes, it is tremendously important and as I say $ 54 million is a lot of
money and if you want to cut down on wastage it would appear that it
is being wasted when the poor Aboriginal people really are not
improving as far as health is concerned.
PM: John, I couldn't say to you, how could I say to you, that not a dollar of
that is being wasted, some of it may be. But, the likelihood is that a lot
of the problems in this area are primary problems. They are to do with
water and they are to do with sanitation and they are to do with things
that are not in the health budget at all.
JL OK so if it is not being wasted, if it is not being severely wasted then
does that mean it is not enough and more money should be given?
PM: Well, it may be that in some of these infrastructure programs that more
should be done and again that is something to be looked at. But,
again, there is another layer of problems there, normally these are
handled by the States. Normally water and sewerage, drainage and
these things are handled by the States not the Commonwealth, so
there has got to be the States signed up for this as well as the
Commonwealth as well as the Aboriginal community as well as the
Australian community in the broad. 
JL: OK, as far as Aboriginal health is concerned, whether or not it should
be run by the health department under Carmen Lawrence or whether it
should be controlled by ATSIC what do you favour?
PM: I said to you, this is a matter I think the Cabinet will have to take advice
upon, but we will take advice, we will actually see what we are
spending, how it is being spent, how we believe ATSIC is able to
spend it. I mean, I don't think a lot of Aboriginal people would care
particularly about whether it is exclusively ATSIC or the health
department provided that there is a substantial influence from
indigenous Australians about how their health care is provided. Now,
you know, so therefore if that is their mood and it may be the mood of
some and not others, but if that is the mood, then it is for the Cabinet to
try and work out arrangements where the dual objectives of self
determination so-called for Aboriginal people and adequate health
protection and program delivery are met.
JL: OK
PM: In other words, it is like every other problem, John, it is complex and it
needs to be gone through and we will go through it, but a lot of people
are trying to discover Aboriginal health being a problem as though it
wasn't a problem last year, the year before last, the year before that
and the decade before that, and the decade before that.
JL: Yes, but it seems it is not getting any better and that is a tragedy for
the Aboriginal people and it is also a tragedy for Australia. I mean, we
do have a responsibility.
PM: I think it has got better, but not fast enough.
JL: OK, another real concern of business is wage demands. I think it
might have been the last time you and I talked you said that wages
demands in the area of 14 or 15 per cent were affordable. I didn't pick
you up on that, the world however did.
PM: No, I didn't say that. I said it depends on what the productivity growth
is. Let me just make this point John. Normally we have, productivity is
the amount of extra output that comes from efficiency in the labour
market and obviously if you have got high productivity you can pay
higher wages. What I was saying to you then when you asked me
about the 15 per cent..
JL: Yes.
PM: I was saying that is fine depending on the number of years it is over. If
it is two years it is 6 to 7.5 per cent that is not fine.
JL: What is affordable now? 
PM: If it is three years that makes a hell of a difference because let me just,
again, repeat this is another key good news point, the reason that 2
per cent inflation rate is sitting there 2 to 2.5 per cent is because of
the high productivity growth of the last year. In the last year we had
productivity growth of 4 per cent. You know what our long term
average is? About 1.6 per cent, about 1.5 or 1.6, that is the 60s,
about 1.5 or 1.6. This year we have done 4 per cent. This means
that the cost of employment to firms has been falling even though real
wages for employees have been rising. So, there has been an
increase in wages for people, but it hasn't had the normal effect on
profits and inflation because of this presence of high productivity. This
is the point the Treasurer and I have been making. When can you
remember a year that had 6 per cent growth in production, 2 per cent
inflation, 3 and 3/ 4 per cent employment growth and 4 per cent
productivity growth. I mean, not in any post-War year was this the
case and this is why it is so wrong to have this impression put about
that we have got sort of economic troubles or some sort of economic
malaise when we have just completed the best economic year since
the war.
JL Yes, all that is true, but again, let me say..
PM: I'm afraid it is true.
JL: Yes, don't be afraid, I mean..
PM: How dare I daily with the truth.
JL: Yes..
PM: Isn't it shocking that I should even mention it.
JL: But, the people out there are still going to have difficulties
understanding why if everything is rosy as you say it is, which it is in
the garden, why is it not affecting them in a favourable way instead of
an unfavourable way? Why have I got business men ringing up and
saying I am terrified to employ people because of their stupid industrial
relations law because if I have to fire somebody they will be off to the
court and I'll be in for a fist full of dollars to recompense them because
I had the temerity to dismiss them because they were incompetent.
PM: John, you will always have somebody say this, but look at the overall
outcome. How can you have an industrial relations system which is
failing yet is still producing an employment rate of 2 to 2.5 per cent. I
mean, the two just cannot sit in harmony together. The fact is the
industrial relation system is working better than at any time in our
history. It is more flexible, more productivity related than any time
ever. 
JL: Do you know how many claims there are for unfair dismissals since
that was introduced by Laurie Brereton?
PM: No, I don't.
JL: 5,862.
PM: Well, there is eight million in the work force remember.
JL: That's right, but it grows at the rate of 140 a week. 140 people taking
their ex-employer to court and he has got to foot the bill and he has to
prove that he is innocent. He is guilty until he proves himself innocent.
Now, if it is growing at the rate of 140 a week what is that costing the
nation?
PM: Well, go to the overall policy as you have to in anything in this
business and what the overall policy is delivering is more flexibility in
the labour market, a better capacity for employees to be suited to jobs,
to multiskilling, the award restructuring, the enterprise bargains. We
have now got enterprise bargains in 55 per cent of the federal award
area under enterprise bargains which we never had two or three years
ago and that is why there is 4 per cent productivity growth and that is
why we have got low inflation. Can I just say this, John, that people
say, you asked me the question legitimately ' well, what does all this
mean to people?' Well, let me just give you what I think is a really
riveting statistic the combination of employment growth and increases
in real wages since 1983 has meant that real household, real that's
after inflation, real household disposable incomes have been growing
impressively by 40 per cent since 1983, so the real income of
Australian households is 40 per cent greater than when John Howard
left as Treasurer. Now, that is through low inflation, strong
employment and decent wages growth and I might say John Howard
opposed every wage increase since 1983 every single one. And, if
we had taken his advice you wouldn't have that strong growth. So, that
is what it means. That's what good policy means. That's what high
productivity, low inflation, strong employment growth because there
are more people in households in work.
JL: Listen, it is very interesting to note, I've just been out of interest taking
a note, I haven't asked you one question directly about John Howard,
but you have brought him up 10 times. Is he becoming a thorn in the
side?
PM: No, I brought him up because every radio interview he will do will be
full of negative stuff about the Government and about me and when I
get on, I mean, the last interview I did on 2UE was not with you but
John Stanley, it was all about productivity, it was about dealing with the
inflation rate, it was about how we maintained the growth et cetera, I'm 
the one that always focuses on, I think, gives the answers, I mean I
give facts not argument and what I get is always these transcripts full
of abuse. So, when I have the opportunity, I just want to make this
very clear, when John Howard has the front page story in the Sydney
Morning Herald which is those journalists not having the principle of
the person on the Sunday Age and saying ' if you don't give me the
information or let me attribute it to you I won't publish it' when he does
that and when Ross Gittins says that Howard is sabotaging the
expenditure cuts that is an important public point to make. Here we
are about to put together a budget which is going to be central to
maintaining growth and employment and what is the new Opposition's
policy? He believes in expenditure cuts, but the moment the
Government thinks about it, he'll run around trying to bag the
Government and scare the wits out of every recipient, pensioner,
elderly person, sickness beneficiary or what have you.
JL: Isn't it true that it wouldn't matter what Government was in power, that
spending cuts would have to be introduced? I mean, if John Howard
suddenly became Prime Minister tomorrow, it wouldn't make any
difference to the fact that spending cuts have to be made don't they?
PM: In this Budget, they will have to be made, but it is a matter of how you
make them compassionately, sensitively, creatively or whether you
just go for people. At the last election the Liberal's said they were
going to kick people on unemployment benefits off after nine months. I
mean, what do you do to somebody who is unemployed through no
fault of their own, that has got a family, say after nine months ' there is
no income for you'. It is down to the St Vincent de Paul or the
Brotherhood of St Lawrence and if you can't basically feed and clothe
yourself there it is too bad. I mean that was their policy and then under
pressure in the election, as the election came on they had to abandon
it. I mean, could you imagine this Government adopting anything like
that?
JL: No.
PM: That's why I say it is all about compassion and creativity and sense.
JL: Of course, there are many people, me included, who question why if
the plans as utilised by not just this government, but governments
before, whether they be of the Liberal persuasion or a Labor
persuasion is immaterial, but if those plans are working and if welfare
as such is beneficial to this country or any country why does the
welfare bill keep increasing, why does the number of unemployed with
the exception of this country in the last little while keep increasing, why
does the number of homeless people keep increasing and why does
the number of illegitimate births keep increasing if the policies are
working? 
PM: Well, the Government can't regulate family values or change the norms
or mores in society. I mean, it can do its best to cope with them, it can
design policies to deal with them, but in the end, I mean the resort to
divorce or to single parents, these sorts of issues are issues which go
to the society as a whole.
JL: Why do you think, and we will have to be very quick I just looked at the
clock, why do you think we have an illegitimacy rate of about 24 per
cent in Australia almost a quarter of the children are born out of
wedlock?
PM: Well, I don't know the answer to that.
JL: You don't think the fact that it is made easy for people to be able to
support these children when they are brought into the world
contributes to it?
PM: Well, if you ask about people having children illegitimately because
there is support for children in the social security system I think the
answer to that is no.
JL: But you don't think if there wasn't they would avoid having children?
PM: But, I mean, what is the principle? The principle when I had the
pleasure of introducing the Family Allowance Supplement for low
income families in the 1 980s or any of these changes, the principle is
you support the child. I mean, remember this John, we have still got a
budget sector just about as small as any in the world. We are doing all
of this with the spending level overall just about as small as any in the
world. Are we that callous when in the face of high profits and the
good times, I mean there has never been more Porches and Mecedes
Benz's and everything sold out there than this last 12 months, are we
saying that we can't afford to support a child regardless of its
circumstance?
JL: No, it must be catching, now you are making simple statements. I
didn't say that.
PM: I'm dealing with the simple implication behind the question. I mean,
this is where I make very clear, I mean, it's another point I make about
the Liberals, they are always saying support families..
JL: We've got about 60 seconds, Prime Minister.
PM: They say we are for families, I mean as if the rest of us, I mean the
arrogance of that statement is as if the rest of us are not, apparently
they think we are martians, we came from somewhere else but a
family, but they don't support family support. They are for families, but
they are not for family support. 
JL: Yes, well, one would hope that everybody would support families
support. I suppose it depends again on how you define the family.
PM: Look, as you and I know families are now complex. People opt out of
marriages, there is a lot of single parents about and it is very hard to
say, any of us to say, why this trend is there, it is the same in Britain, it
is the same in the United States, it is the same in many developed
countries that we have got to try and make government policy respond
in a compassionate and humane way, but on a basis that the nation
can afford. I submit we have done that.
JL: OK, Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time, you have been
very generous.
PM: Thank you, John. It is your first day in Canberra broadcasting into the
ACT I believe.
JL: Yes, so now they won't have to run around with
PM: Well, now the Gallery won't have to eavesdrop. That will make them
terribly happy.
JL: I look forward to talking to you soon.
PM: Good luck. Good bye.
JL: Good bye.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
POW CEREMONY, AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, 14 FEBRUARY 1995
I am honoured to speak to you today at this commemorative service for
Australian Prisoners of War.
This year we are commemorating the 50th anniversary of the end of World War
II. In Europe they are commemorating the liberation of their countries from
occupation and tyranny; the end of a war which took the lives of millions and
wrought devastation on a scale unequalled in history.
They are celebrating freedom and honouring the dead including those 6 million
Jews who died in the Holocaust.
Because many thousands of Australians fought in Europe and the Middle East,
we in Australia are sharing in this commemoration.
We are also commemorating the end of the war in Asia and the Pacific, which
was no less a fight for freedom over tyranny, and the price in death and suffering
was just as high.
It was also, for a time, a fight to save Australia.
In all, more than 27,000 Australians died in the Second World War. Their
sacrifice, like those who have died in every war, will never be forgotten.
We pledge this as Australians.
Here at the Australian War Memorial and at memorials in communities
throughout Australia we remember those who made the supreme sacrifice.
They are also remembered at memorials overseas. 
In the past three years I have visited some of them in Britain and France, New
Guinea and in Thailand.
In Thailand last year, at Kanchanaburi. I attended a service for the Australians
who diedi as Prisonprs of War on the Rpijrmp-Th qi land Railwav. Their story is
legendary.
Thirty thousand Australians were POWs in various parts of the world. It is they
who we are honouring today: the Australians who died in captivity.
We are paying tribute to the Australians whose desire to serve their country and
the cause of freedom led them to leave their country and / ose their freedom.
Their privations were profound.
To remember the sacrifice of our POWs today we need to imagine not just the
physical suffering they endured, but the psychological suffering the terrible
loneliness and the sense of loss, the homesickness and the helplessness they
had to live with.
And we need to ask ourselves what gave them the faith and courage they
needed to live with the adversity and fight off the despair.
How did they keep hope alive?
We know from accounts like those of Barney Roberts and Weary Dunlop, and
from what Max Jagger has said this morning, that paramount among the
sustaining values of Australian POWs were those indefinable bonds between
them which we call mateship.
Today we should remember the basis on which those bonds are built the love
of freedom and fairness, the pragmatism, resourcefulness and perseverance and
above all the love of this place. The love of Australia.
They are sustaining values for this generation too.
Perhaps, then, we should bring two messages to this commemoration.
One is the message of faith and courage, the victory over adversity which can
teach us and inspire us now.
The other is that we should never forget the evil that was done in these prison
camps. 
3
The outrage we feel about what was done on the Burma-Thailand Railway or on
the Sandakan Death March should never fade.
Our children should know about these things.
We must not forget.
Yet, as the life of Weary Dunlop tells us, we must allow the wounds to heal.
If Australians sacrificed their lives and freedom so that we could be free, we owe
it both to their memory and our children to see that Australia is kept free of old
hatreds and bitterness.
Today, and throughout this year, these are the messages I think we should
convey we honour the sacrifice of that heroic generation and we give meaning
to it by making real their hopes for us and those who follow. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, THE 7.30 REPORT
14 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you Paul.
PL: Do you endorse the decision to have the Federal police investigate the
leaking of the Department of Finance spending cut options?
PM: The Federal Police go chasing Commonwealth property generally
stolen Commonwealth property and this is stealth of highly
confidential and important Government information.
PL: If the leakers are found, what should happen to them, in you view?
PM: Well they will be handled by the law, or whatever.
PL: Prosecuted?
PM: However it applies.
PL: Peter Costello says you are trying to use the Federal Police to " rough
up the Opposition".
PM: Well he would, wouldn't he? I notice he is saying today it's not stolen
property well it's the very essence of stolen property. And if the
Opposition wants to handle stolen property, then that's their business.
But the more important thing is the way they are handling the issue,
and I think what this reveals is that John Howard hasn't changed one
jot since the last time he was Opposition Leader the
opportunism.. he is now opposed to interest rate increases, he is
opposed to tax increases revenue rises he's opposed to spending 
cuts. He's opposed to everything that makes for changes and
variables in budgets. Yet he knows that getting the nation's budget
right is one of the most important thing a Government can
PL: Don't Oppositions often do that sort of thing?
PM: Not when you get a second go a second chance, as Mr Howard has
been given you would think he would . it's the same opportunism
that had him in the eighties in 87 when we were in the middle of a big
structural change and a big fall in commodity prices say smugly " the
times will suit me", in other words I will climb up on the back of public
distress the same opportunism that had him say we should cut the
Asian intake, and it's the same opportunism now that says " What I'll do
is I actually believe in spending cuts, but I'll try and scare the wits out
of everybody who might be a beneficiary, and so I don't".
PL: He's backed totally off that Asian stuff he said he got that wrong, he's
done a big mea cu/ pa on that, shouldn't you let that one go?
PM: My claim is not that he is a racist I don't believe that at all it's just
that he couldn't resist the temptation the opportunism of saying
when he thought it was palatable, that we should cut the intake. You
have got to remember this it was 20 years since the White Australia
Policy had been suspended, he was the only significant national
politician to say, in any way, that race should be a factor in the
selection of the migration intake. It's just that John Howard was
dismissed from the leadership in 1989 they didn't take him in 1990
they gave it to John Hewson. In 1993 when Hewson lost, they gave it
to Hewson again they wouldn't have Howard. In fact, they rejected
Howard when he ran against him. They then gave it to Alexander
Downer. So for 6 years they have said he is not good enough, but now
all of a sudden he is all they have. And what does he do? Within 2
weeks of getting the job, back on the old track of opportunism trying to
suggest that the Government shouldn't be cutting outlays when it's the
very thing he has been enjoining us to do.
PL: He says the leaked material shows you have been hypocritical about
the scope for spending cuts, and the sort of cuts that you're prepared
to consider.
PM: Well you and I know what a nonsense that is, Paul, because these lists
are produced I mean, I have been a member of this Government for
12 years, and in every year, there is some sort of primary list
developed by officials of this variety. But I'll tell you what it does
reveal you notice that there is no big easy they will notice.. . you all
now know there is no big spending option which says: " Waste and
duplication $ 5 billion or $ 10 billion". All this is about is cutting
programs, cutting benefits, and that is what we have said for years if
you want to cut outlays so when John Howard walks around saying
or Mr Costello " we should cut $ 11-12 billion out of outlays", what 
they're saying is we ought to be cutting into these programs. But I'll
give you a little tip a little bet when the Budget comes down, you
know what they will say then? " Wimps. Wimps"....
PL: In a way, they have softened the ground for you?
PM:.. they're saying " here's all these big spending cuts", they're now
saying to people " they might make against you", when in fact the
Government has always been very careful about equity. And when the
Budget is presented when we don't take most of those options, they
will say " oh, they have wimped out".
PL: But how are you going to meet the imperatives of equity on one hand,
and the market on the other, which wants to see that budget deficit
down in a hell of a hurry now?
PM: The Government will do, as the Treasurer said Paul, we will... . we have
got a lot of experience at this. This is our twelfth Budget we have
had 8 May statements that is 20 major economic statements, and if I
put One Nation, and Investing in the Nation, and then Working Nation,
then that is about 23 major budgetary-type statements. So we will do
the professional job that I think we have always done, but we will get
the balance right.
PL: And unless you catch the leaker soon you could have leaks against
you much tighter in the budget process when you are making real
decisions. That's your big worry there, isn't it?
PM: Mr Howard had the biggest leak of all. His actual budget was leaked.
So, this is options not seen by Ministers and not taken by the Cabinet.
PL: But what if we get past the options phase and they are still leaking?
That's a real security problem.
PM: Well, it is a problem. The thing I would say to John Howard is it's
important for the country that the country gets the budget right. He can
make a judgment about it when it is presented but he is back in
Opposition and he should do at least one thing right. And that is not
run around and make the process harder and spread to the four winds
of the media trying to pretend that beneficiaries and the sick and the
elderly are somehow going to be preyed upon or their income savagely
reduced.
PL: He is having a pretty good honeymoon in the opinion polls today, isn't
he? I mean it does suggest, surely, that there is a desire out in the
community for a strong alternative to Labor?
PM: Well, it's the honeymoon poll isn't it. Alexander Downer had an even
greater margin. By the way, the Sydney Morning Herald had two front
page stories on the poll: one ten days ago and one today. The same 
story with Mr Downer. It is almost in the same print style and the same
words, only the name has changed.
PL: But it may reflect the same desire in the community to see someone
who can take the fight up to you.
PM: You have got a new Opposition Leader although one who is well and
truly been around before. The Government has had a couple of weeks
of difficulties, but let me remind you of this Paul from The Bulletin, " Mr
18 per cent. Why does this man bother?". He got the Opposition
approval rating, his approval rating, down to 18 per cent. People
should remember, as I said, he tries to pretend Mr Howard, he hasn't a
past, the sort of Ronald Biggs of the Liberal Party, you know " I haven't
robbed a train. I don't have a past. Here I am in a tropical shirt. It's
not really me" It is really him and all the nasties that he supported in
the 1980s are going to be back there now: cutting people's wages,
individual wage contracts, the works.
PL: Prime Minister against Bob Hawke he campaigned very well in ' 87. He
is going to give you a run for your money.
PM: I gave him the king hit in ' 87. That was the Box Hill tax package. At
the time, of course, he was hopping into me in the Parliament. I
passed him in the corridor one day and I said to him in the Parliament,
I said, " Well, you know you hurt me with those remarks." He put a list
out of all the nasty things I was supposed to have said over twenty
years and I said " But I blew you apart back in Box Hill and denied you
the Prime Ministership." Fair exchange I would have thought.
PL: Yesterday's violence in the Southeast forests of New South Wales has
been widely deplored, not apparently though by Mr Cole Dorber, of the
New South Wales Forest Products Association. What is your
response?
PM: I thought it was deplorable. People who belt people in the face ought
to be charged. And people who encourage them to belt should be
charged too.
PL: But if your Ministers hadn't had their own rivalry out there in public and
got everyone into fixed positions and got the temperature up so much,
surely the whole thing would be a lot more calm and reasonable?
PM: It's not the Ministers, it's the issues.
PL: They handled it well?
PM: If we had a chance of doing this over again, of course, we would. But
remember this. The issues are that we've got a diminishing number of
stands of native forests. Now what I want is what most Australians
want. That is, I want to see the best stands of native forests protected 
and yet I want to see a continuation of a sustainable forest products
industry. There is a halfway house in there but it isn't with the
extremists of the Wilderness Society or trying to pretend there are 800
stands being desecrated which is untrue. There are not 800 stands of
pristine trees left off the...
PL: All of the so-called Eco-terrorists sabotaging logging equipment,
putting spikes in trees. One can understand a certain amount of
frustration on the part of these logging people.
PM: Absolutely, you can understand the frustration. But again, the society
we have is one that doesn't condone that sort of violence and to have
an industry association condoning it is, I think, pretty pathetic.
PL: Is Kerry Packer testing the Government's resolve on the issue of
cross-media ownership with his 16.4 per cent stake in Fairfax?
PM: I have no idea. I didn't know he had 16.4 per cent of Fairfax. I knew
he had 15 per cent but if as you say, you're asserting, are you, that he
is the one who has bought the stock?
PL: But, he put out a statement?
PM: Oh, did he? I didn't see it.
PL: If the ABA said it was OK for him to have more than 15 per cent, what
would the Government say?
PM: Well, the Government would think about it but the ABA has got to
make a judgment about this. There is a set of statutes in place called
the cross-media rules and they are administered by the ABA.
PL: He reportedly believes he can't be seen to have effective control until
his holding gets a bit closer to Conrad Black's and surely that does
make sense, doesn't it?
PM: It depends whether he has got Board representation, I think.
PL: There are reports that Conrad Black has told your Government that
unless he can lift his stake to 35 per cent, he is off?
PM: Well, not that I know of. Let me say, I have been happily, I might say,
above this particular fray.
PL: Thanks for your time.
PM: Good.
Ends 



1&gt;.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RON EDWARDS, RADIO 6PR, 14 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RE: I would like to welcome to the 6PR microphone the Prime Minister
Paul Keating. Paul, nice to talk to you.
PM: How are you Ron?
RE: Very well indeed. Paul, you are coming to Perth why are you visiting
Perth?
PM: Why would you visit anywhere in Australia?
see how things are, to see what they have to
are at the moment, what their concerns are,
routinely. To meet the people, to
say, what their feelings
and I make these trips
RE: Yeah Paul, has it been a concern of yours that in Western Australia
your general standing hasn't been as high as it has been in NSW or
Victoria?
PM: I think it is a concern of anybody you like to think that you're as
approved of or however one wants to describe it wherever you are
in Australia. But it's not something that has overtaken me in the last
week and that is why I'm coming I actually decided to do this trip in
November.
RE: The Premier Richard Court said here today on 6PR with Howard
Sattler that he didn't know about your visit he feels that you should
have let him know that you are coming to Perth.
PM: Oh dreadful. Isn't that shocking? I mean, he must be the only Premier
in the country that insists I tell him when I'm coming. I mean, what is
he? An air-traffic controller, or a Premier? 
RE: Would you like to have a meeting with premier Court when you are
here?
PM: I go to Sydney, to Melbourne, to Queensland wherever I go, Premiers
never insist, or even suggest, that I should see them. I'm not coming
into his constituency my constituency is the Commonwealth of
Australia he is a permanent constituent.
RE: There would be issues, for example, like Native Land Title, that he has
taken a strong line on that you might want to talk to him about?
PM: Yes, but as a matter of fact he sent me a letter he is trying to politicise
my visit he sent me a letter which I received 5 minutes ago asking for
a meeting with a whole lot of things to discuss, including inflammatory
talk about Native Title etc. Well look, I have got the itinerary set if I
have got some time I'll see him, if I haven't, I won't.
RE: So at this stage you can't tell him yes or no?
PM: No.
RE: Paul, the question of the carbon tax that was on the agenda that was
put on the agenda in recent times is it the case that the Government
has now dropped a move for a carbon tax?
PM: It wasn't on the agenda it is only on the agenda, Ron you know,
because you have had the experience of it when it comes to the
Revenue Committee of the Cabinet, and the Cabinet agree to it. We
were looking at the response to the greenhouse gas issues, and the
commitments we made under these international conventions, but the
Government has not got any sort of manic determination to be trying to
impose taxes of that particular variety. I think it is important that we
succeed in diminishing the growth of greenhouse gas emissions in this
country, whether taxation is the best way to do that, or direct measures
or conservation, is a moot point.
RE: The business community was concerned, because we of course are
very large exporters of carbon-based resources, such as coal, and you
would have taken on board their concerns?
PM: Absolutely. That is one of Australia's strengths is that we are one of
the primary exporters of these basis commodities, and I think we can
mount a fairly strong argument that because of the quality of our lowsulphur
coals etc, and the fact that we can burn them more efficiently
than perhaps in other words, the energy supplied by Australia can be
used more efficiently than energy provided from other sources for
products of other countries that in fact Australia can make a
substantial contribution here to this international problem. 
RE: Paul, the response of the environment movement of course was they
believed that a carbon tax was necessary do you share the view that
a lot of people have in the community that the environment movement
have this endless agenda that you can't ever satisfy them be it on the
carbon tax, the woodchipping issue, be it world heritage recognition
that in fact their agenda is almost overwhelming?
PM: Of course, because you never deal with one group at one time this is
part of the problem. For instance, last year Ron, the Government
without any real pressure from the environment movement put away
forever for this country Shoalwater Bay in Queensland, which is one of
the most pristine and beautiful areas of the Queensland coast, Jervis
Bay in NSW where we deferred placing an armament depot and took it
to Victoria, and then made clear that we wouldn't be putting any
developments in that it is pretty much as the day when Cook sailed
past it. We put $ 20 million in the Budget on a dollar-for-dollar basis
with Queensland to buy back what is called the " hole in the heart of the
Daintree Rainforest". So in one year the Daintree, Shoalwater Bay,
Jervis Bay not one word of praise from the environment movement,
and when we get down to the annual renewal of a relatively small area
of forests, we have these claims fallacious claims that we are
desecrating forests, when in fact we have now sought to reserve for
examination the areas likely to have important heritage values.
RE: If you had your way through that woodchipping debate again, would
you have handled it differently?
PM: I don't think..... the answer to that is that none of us would want these
things to be a controversy, but I don't know that you can avoid it with
the Wilderness Society for instance. I mean, I think that part of the
problem here is that I am like most Australians I want to see the best
of our forests kept, and at the same time, I want to see those jobs
which exist in the timber industry be kept on a sustainable basis. Now,
how do we do that? We sought to get that balance right in the
decisions we have taken, but we have to deal with facts and truths, and
the claims which the Wilderness Society have made that 1300 coupes
or compartments of trees are pristine stands of trees, is simply
untrue. The claim that the Commonwealth is desecrating these... and
when people see the film footage on television, Ron, they're not the
same trees, they're not the same areas that we are speaking of. See?
RE: That has been put by some of the protesters who actually live in the
timber areas that they believe that the image created is that every bit
of forest is being woodchipped.
PM: And of the forests that will be woodchipped this year, 800 of those
compartments nominated by the Wilderness Society and others, have
been logged before, logged recently, logged out, and in no way that 
which they represent to those people those conscientious Australians
who believe in looking after the forests. I am sure that most people
are in the same situation that I am in. I mean, it pains me to see an
important area of trees desecrated by logging.
RE: So your eventual goal as Prime Minister would be to have a large area
of plantation timber that we would harvest?
PM: Basically, a sustainable industry built on plantation and regrowth. That
is, native forest which has been logged in the past, substantially
logged in the past, and where we have got a lot of regrowth, and
plantation. And we are very close to getting to that. It is important, I
think, at this late stage to be able to save the important stands of trees,
but we have to agree which stands are significant, important and
pristine, and we can't have some people running around essentially
with fallacies telling people that there are a whole heap of areas that
the Commonwealth is going to allow woodchipping in, which in fact
have been logged over before, and logged over recently.
RE: Are you happy that the States really will have the carriage as they do
constitutionally of the custody of these forest areas, and their forest
management practices are up to the standards that you would set?
PM: One would hope that Ron, but this is what part of the point we do live
in a federation, and the States manage forests. Now, I notice on the
ABC news last night there was a scuffle at a NSW forest, and on
probably the commercial news as well. The people agreeing to the
logging of those areas is the Government of NSW the Government of
John Fahey. And that is where the pressure should be brought to bear
the Commonwealth gets into this only through this external affairs
power which allows it to approve or disapprove of export licences for
woodchips. But that doesn't mean that we in the Commonwealth can
stop a State Forestry Minister from agreeing to cut saw-log major
trees for logs unless that State, or that Minister, has respect for the
forest. Now, if they don't, then the environment movement should be
on their back to get onto the back of the people who have actually got
the chainsaws out, not onto the back of the Commonwealth.
RE: Can you understand why young people want to see a future where
largely, our forests are as pristine as possible?
PM: Not just young people.
RE: Young people certainly say that to me that they kind of worry about
the environment, and they are looking for a promising future?
PM: But Ron have a look at what the Government has done first of all we
put away the Daintree. I was Treasurer at the time, I helped Graham
Richardson get it through it cost us $ 86 million in adjustment 
assistance to do it. Since then, the south west forests of Tasmania
same story again. The southern forests of NSW, and then these other
important areas like I mentioned, which are not only to be not logged,
but not touched. Such as Shoalwater Bay; such as Jervis Bay. I
mean, the Commonwealth record in this and of course, before that
the Gordon below Franklin, our advocacy for the turning of Antarctica
into a wilderness park the Commonwealth Labor Government sought
to get the right balance between forestry, the imperatives of the
environment, and keeping the best of our forests and the interests of
the forest industries. But that will never be served by the untruthful
recitation of argument which is not fact. Insisting that certain stands of
trees are pristine, when they have not been for years.
RE: Do you think you can get back to the stage when Graham Richardson
was the Environment Minister when there was an accord with the
environment movement in Australia?
PM: They were given in a sense, there were so many things done in that
period, the environment movement believes it was then so much
easier. And as you know Ron, there was a very big backlash inside
the Commonwealth Government at the time after that period, that the
development ethos was being lost, and too much was given to the
environment. The answer is to come down the middle, and meet all
the imperatives in a sustainable way that is what we are trying to do.
And by putting these 509 areas aside for further assessment, we
believe those areas are the ones that are important. But they're
coupes. they're largely on average about 150 metres square, and
there is 500 of them 150 metres square it's a relatively small part of
the native forests of this country and I think people need to take that
into account. But small or not we will seek to analyse them, classify
them and protect them where necessary. But, we will not protect areas
which are now not worthy of protection just because we have got some
talking head from the Wilderness Society. I think a lot of Australians
have got to understand that the Federal Government will in a practical
way, in an effective way, protect more important areas of forests than
the leadership which they otherwise may take from outfits like the
Wilderness Society who will basically hand them pap good objectives
and good sentiments, but a wholly unprincipled approach to managing
the issue and in the end relying upon information which is not fact.
RE: Paul, on the question of information and its factual basis, the
Opposition has made great play in recent days about what are referred
to as " the leaked documents" from Finance and other departments on
budget projections. These would be worrying you in terms of the
Opposition's use of them.
PM: Well, I think the Opposition is seeking to worry the country, particularly
beneficiaries and pensioners and anybody who relies upon
Commonwealth payments. You see, John Howard has been running 
around saying, for years now the Opposition has been saying, the
Government should cut spending. We should cut, they said, $ 11.5
billion out of the budget through spending. But, what we find now
about John Howard is he is in the job two weeks and he is returning to
the same sort of opportunism he was involved with in the middle
1980s. The opportunism which said when we were struggling, all of us
as a nation to restructure the country rapidly in the 1980s, the times
will suit me. The opportunism which said when no other Australian
politician said race should in any be part of the basis of selection for
migration, he said for reasons of opportunism not of race, but for
opportunism, he said that he thought there were too many Asians
coming here. Now for the same reasons of opportunism he says he
opposes higher interest rates, he opposes higher revenue and he
opposes spending cuts. In other words, here is somebody proposing
themselves to be Prime Minister of Australia, to run seriously the
national economy and the national budget, saying he opposes any of
the elements of variation, the elements of change in national budgets.
RE: However, if the documents fall in John Howard's lap, you couldn't
blame he and Peter Costello for using them?
PM: Yes, you can. You can blame anybody who takes an unprincipled
stand against the things they claim. They claim the Government
should cut spending, now they are saying it is a shocking thing. Let
me just quote perhaps one of the most widely read Australian
commentators on the economy, Ross Gittins in The Sydney Morning
Herald, he wrote yesterday a major column Howard Sabotages
Expenditure Cuts He starts off John Howard's unprincipled
attack on the Government's alleged spending cuts carries a warning to
all those people who want the Budget returned to surplus, but are
implacably opposed to tax increases: their stand the Opposition's
stand is a recipe for fiscal failure And he goes on to say " Mr
Howard's behaviour is unprincipled. It is unprincipled because it is
hypocritical. Here they are as a party and a man who has been
insisting for years that the Government slash its spending, turning all
guns on the Government at the first sign that it may follow their advice
RE: Couldn't John Howard, however, point to The Australian's Newspoll
today saying, look, he's doing all right thank you very much, he might
be accused of sabotaging budgets, but in terms of the electoral
outcome he is travelling all right?
PM: But you remember Ron and I remember that front page in The Bulletin
in 1 988: the picture of John Howard with the front cover saying Mr
18%: Why does this man bother? Do you remember it?
RE: Yes, I do. 
PM: Why was he at 18 per cent? Because of this naked opportunism. I
mean, John Howard knows that it is important to get the country's
budget right. He ought to be saying to the Government: " you produce
your budget, we'll see what the result is. But, we believe the
Government's budget should pass through the Houses of Parliament
and that we will take our criticisms or lend our support as the case may
be." Now he has had a reprieve and a second opportunity at national
leadership, for once he should do the right thing.
RE: Well, he says he is remaking himself, he is taking a positive stand on
multicultural ism and the immigration issues, he is going to be more
positive on the Aboriginal Land Fund and he will be a tenacious
character to deal with I would argue.
PM: But Ron, does it look like he is remaking himself. I mean, here he is,
second week out, in an issue of real substance and weight the
national Budget he picks up a leak from the bureaucracy and he
behaves appallingly with it, trying to scare the wits out of anybody who
will come along and that is the very point that Mr Gittins says it is
unprincipled because there is a blatant campaign to scare the
electorate, particularly the most financially vulnerable the elderly, the
sick and the jobless I mean, here is John Howard remaking himself
with these sorts of tactics. I don't believe he is. You see, I said in the
House the other day, John Howard wants to pretend he doesn't have a
past he is the Ronald Biggs of the Liberal Party. He sort of
absconded saying I am not really the same John Howard I used to be,
just like Biggs says, I'm not really a train robber, I'm only a fellow in Rio
with a Rio shirt, with a tropical shirt. I mean, the fact is, John Howard
does have a past. It was to leave Australia as an inward looking, high
tax, high inflation, low growth, high unemployment economy. That is
what this Government inherited from him and when he was Opposition
Leader he brought no more policy certainty to the country than he did
when he was Treasurer and, in fact, he left in such poor state that the
Opposition removed him from the leadership in the Parliament
between 1987 and 1990 in 1989 in fact.
RE: Paul, does it worry you, the electorate's reaction to Parliamentary
behaviour, what they see of question time, has it caused you to rethink
your attitude towards the televising of Parliamentary proceedings?
PM: Well, they are televised Ron and that is a fact of life. I think it has
changed the debate somewhat, but I suppose life is about changes.
There is a lot of information, a lot of mood, a lot of balance, in a sense,
it is the fulcrum of Australian public life as well as the cockpit of
Australian public life and I think the nation has been served well by the
political system. Australia has been through a change in the last 12
years, probably greater than any other OECD country. We have
stripped away the tariff walls, we have opened up the financial
markets, we have now got a high productivity competitive economy 
with a low inflation rate, we are exporting half as much again as we
were 10 years ago and by and large the public system, I think, has
served the country well. I think, the Parliament is reflection of this.
RE: Can we turn around the current account deficit?
PM: Well, we will only turn that around in an absolute way when we save
more. But, the reason we are not saving as much these days is
because of two decades of double digit inflation. I mean, Australian's
have had inculcated into them, the notion that if they put their money in
the bank or put it into a fixed interest security, within 10 years it will be
worth much less. So what you do is you buy a flat or you buy a holiday
house or a second property and we have now had tremendous inflation
performance for three years, but three years doesn't change the
psyche and the propensity to save after 20 years of lessons that you
can't trust cash.
RE: Wouldn't it help people to save if they were able to deposit, let's say
$ 5000 or $ 10,000 in a bank using their tax file numbers so companies
couldn't do it and that that sum of money, the interest on that would be
quarantined for tax and social security purposes. Wouldn't we get
back to the day when you and I went to school where we were
encouraged each week to go and put a penny in your Commonwealth
bank book?
PM: Well, it is the after tax treatment that is the problem in the past. I
mean, it is high inflation and the after you see, let's say Ron, you
have got a real rate of interest of 3 per cent and you've got inflation of
say 10 per cent. You are picking up 13 per cent interest on your
deposit. This is the form in the 1970s and 1 980s. You are taxed on the
13 roughly for most people, a third of that goes, say 4 per cent goes.
But remember, that 11 per cent of it was actually fairy floss, it was
inflation. So, you are actually paying tax on the inflation, so the after
tax income of the saver was very poor. You will only really repair this
problem with low inflation, and who delivered low inflation to Australia?
This Labor Government. I mean, we have got a 2 to 2.5 per cent
inflation rate and where did it come from? It came from this
Government.
RE: Right. Would you deliver, if you have delivered the low inflation which
is on the record, would you deliver something like that really
encouraging people to save because, obviously, superannuation is
helping the national savings..
PM: We introduced that. That is the thing we did to encourage people. We
introduced award superannuation I did with the ACTU in 1985/ 86 and
on 1 July 1995 and again only because of this Government the tax
meter turns over on 6 per cent. We go over one more percentage
point on 1 July. So, as of 1 July this year the whole of the nation is 
saving 6 per cent and as a consequence we have now got $ 330 billion
in superannuation savings that is $ 330,000 million. That is the
vehicle the Government has chosen. But, if we give tax relief in one
place, often you are giving tax relief for savings which will be made
anyway and it just encourages there and discourages saving
somewhere else. So, these are not easy questions. You have got to
get a net addition to savings. I contend, Ron, you won't get that net
addition, it only comes from two places a better inflation performance
in the long run and the Government moving the budget back into
surplus so we have what we call public savings.
RE: Right. Just finally Paul, the debate about the republic, it moved ahead
and then it slackened off, are you happy with the way it is going at this
stage, will we see a republic by the time we have the Olympics in
Sydney?
PM: I think so. I hope so and I am sure many Australians now believe that
we can't go on forever without being represented by an Australian
head of state. But again, this is a debate. People are warming to the
issues, they are discussing them. It takes time, there is a certain
chemistry about it, there is a certain sort of flow to it and the
Government will be responding, this year, to the Turnbull Committee's
report which was the report of the Republic Advisory Committee and
the recommendations which were made there. So, there will be some
material additions to the debate, but the real debate will be in the
hearts and minds of Australians and, of course, any changes to an
Australian republic can only come by way of referenda. That is, a
majority of electors in a majority of States.
RE: At the same time, do you think we will see a change to Australian flag
flying in Sydney for the 2000 Olympics?
PM: Well, I think that is still, in a sense, a subordinate matter to the
principal things, that is the principal issue, that is whether Australians
can be fully represented by somebody who is not an Australian person.
RE: So, Paul, we look forward to you joining us here in Perth this week. A
lot of issues will continue to be debated. I thank you for joining us
today on 6PR.
PM: Thank you, Ron, I'm looking forward to coming.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PERTH, WA, WEDNESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What brings you to Perth, Prime Minister?
PM: What brings an Australian Prime Minister anywhere in Australia? The
responsibilities of the Prime Ministership, of course.
J: You have been under a bit of stick though for not coming here often
enough.
PM: I was coming in August as you know, I got a bout of
the east it's basically two days and I come here as
South Australia or Tasmania. the flu, but from
often as I go to
J: Are there any plans yet to meet Premier Court?
PM: I don't think he is serious about all of that is he?
J: He's been a bit miffed
PM: I'm sure he is.
J: But, you didn't tell him you were coming?
PM: He knew, in fact we invited him to the launching of the REDO the
Regional Economic Development Organisation so he must have
known I was coming because Hendy Cowan was coming and he sent
his apologies, but Hendy is a nice fellow, he did the show. So, he did
know I was coming weeks ago.
J: Do you take the polls seriously, the polls that show you are so
unpopular in Western Australia? 7 F, 
PM: Well, part of that is the sort of within Parliament ethos of governments
and they are always polls are up and polls are down, there is only
one poll that matters the big one.
J: But the fact that you are touring the marginal electorates obviously
highlights that doesn't it?
PM: Well, I, probably hope it should.
J: Do you accept that your popularity is different here than it is in the
east?
PM: Well, it could be but, you know, we did reasonably well in West
Australia in the last one. Now look, let me make this point. In this
Government I have been the Treasurer and the Prime Minister, most of
the things that I have been associated with have been in favour of the
primary exporting states. The big claim of Western Australia for
years was to take the tariff monkey off West Australia's back and I was
one of the principal people involved in that. I gave a statistic which I
thought was pretty compelling at the last function today saying
Australia's competitiveness is 40 per cent improved since John
Howard was the Treasurer. That is why the ship building is working,
that is why we have just saw a specialised steel facility in the aircraft
industry Western Aerospace working, it is because of
competitiveness. That comes by the exchange rate, inflation, wages
and productivity. That is why Western Australia is growing faster than
or as fast as any other State, faster than most in Australia because of
the policies of the Federal Government. And so, that being the case
and where we have had tremendous employment growth, why wouldn't
the Federal Government be doing well in Western Australia? Why
shouldn't it be doing well? I mean, if our policies are principally
responsible and they are for Western Australia's economic strength,
why shouldn't we be doing well?
J: Do you think West Australian's understand that?
PM: Well, maybe not everybody does understand it as well, but let me
assure them that the things that matter the exchange rate, interest
rates, inflation, wages, all of that structure which underpins this growth
economy comes from the Federal Government policies. I mean, you
know we have got new industries developing, the one I was at this
afternoon making alloys for aircraft engines. Could you imagine that
years ago? Really, it is there because of the Federal Government
policies. So, I think that people are starting to understand that a
sophisticated manufacturing, a sophisticated service sector, greater
strength of traditional industries like mining and agriculture come from
the Federal Government policies. 
J: But, Do you understand the struggle you've got knowing that you have
got a Premier in WA who is belting you across the head at every
opportunity?
PM: Well, I mean, people put a bit of discount through all that stuff. The
public are very smart.
J: He put up petrol 4 cents a couple of weeks ago and basically blamed
the Federal Government.
PM: Well, if you are silly enough to believe that you will believe anything
won't you?
J: Well, I'm not.
PM: Well you're not? Well, that's good. I mean you are answering your
own questions.
J: The West had a poll ( The West Australian newspaper) saying that..
per cent of the public thought that the Federal Government, not the
State Government put up petrol.
PM: Richard Court put the petrol prices up for no other reason than he
wanted the money for his revenue. Nothing to do with the
Commonwealth and the story that in some way we have diminished
Commonwealth road payments is completely untrue. The underlying
payments have been growing.
J: The Western Australian Premiers have bashed Prime Ministers
forever, but he seems to have made an art form out of it. Has it
affected ( inaudible)..
PM: Well, I don't know, he hasn't quite got it perfected, I know his father,
the old story about lightning not striking the same place twice, Charlie
used to say ' Western Australia", he hasn't got that part of it right yet. I
mean, he has got the rest of the bits, you know, it is all Canberra and
they are fighting the centralists, but he needs to go around to Charlie
for some lessons in ' Western Australia", because Charlie used to get
that whoosh to the word.
J: The Head of the Native Title Tribunal has said that there are moral
shortcomings in the principles by which native title is recognised in
a ruling yesterday.
PM: I haven't seen the ruling, but what the High Court said that Aboriginal
custom and tradition was a source of Australian common law. What
the Commonwealth has fleshed out is a major piece of property and
cultural law in the Native Title Act. It will take a while for teething
problems to see it into place. The place it's not in place is Western
Australia because the Western Australian government is wilfully going 
against the rest of the nation. Richard Court's government is doing
what the government of Queensland isn't doing, the government of
New South Wales isn't doing, the government of Victoria isn't doing,
the government of Tasmania isn't doing, the government of South
Australia and the Commonwealth. That is, trying to go it alone in a
very unfair policy and one which I think is going to be very disruptive
for business in Western Australia.
J: Do you have any plans at all to alter your native title legislation?
PM: No, but we have said that in terms of any review we might have down
the track coming from some of the case law, we would look at it but not
to its principle.
J: Would the cuts be as savage as Mr Howard is trying to make out?
PM: Well, Mr Howard doesn't believe in, all the variables in economic
management interest rates, revenue and cutting spending he
doesn't believe in any of those things he said, there should be no
increase in interest rates, there should be no change in revenue and
we shouldn't cut spending. This is the same fellow that wants to be
taken seriously as somebody who can put a national budget together.
Now, Mr Howard is a lucky fellow, he has been given a second go.
You see Andrew ( Peacock) got a second go, he wanted a second go.
Now, he has got the second go, but you think he would stick to a few
principles and one of the principles should be what is best for the
nations budget is best for the nation, obviously, and that he should
help rather than hinder the processes of budget preparation.
J: Prime Minister ( inaudible)..
PM: I'm quite sure, I said yesterday, that when the Government presents its
budget a lot of people in the Liberal party who have supposedly this
list will say oh, we wimped out: " the Labor government has wimped out
because we haven't taken the savage options". So, this week we are
taking the savage options, when the budget comes out they'll say ' ah
ha, you never took the savage options'.
J: Which one are you going to choose?
PM: Well, wait and see.
J: Prime Minister, what do you say to the people in West Australia who
are deeply concerned about what is happening to our forests in the
South West?
PM: What I want is, I think, what most Australians want and that is the most
important pristine stands of trees to be saved for our heritage and our
posterity, yet at the same time, the capacity to have a sustainable
timber industry and getting that balance right is what it is all about. 
That balance will not be struck properly when you have got Wilderness
Society people at one side saying every group of trees are pristine
when it is not true or the timber industry people on the other side
getting the chain saw out too. There is a policy down the middle and
the only party at this stage following the middle course which will look
after both those imperatives is the Federal government.
ends 



ñ 4
PRIME MINISTER
*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE SOUTH METROPOLITAN ( WA) ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT REGION, WESTERN AUSTRALIAN SPECIALITY ALLOYS
PTY LTD, CANNINGVALE, WA, 15 FEBRUARY 1995
It was with real excitement that I accepted the invitation to come here today
and ' launch the region', the first in the West.
This is a first step, taken by some very industrious people, to contribute to
their community by applying certain of the ideas articulated by this
Government in the White Paper, Working Nation.
One of the landmark initiatives in the White Paper was the Regional
Economic Development Program.
Many of this nation's economic problems, and the solutions to those
problems, are to be found at the regional level.
The idea behind the Regional Economic Development Program is simple, but
ambitious. The idea is to take a region and empower it.
To isolate its talents, to harness its energy, to coordinate its resources, to
bring together its people.
The Program is not about plying regions with extra funds, but allowing
regions to articulate their own visions and helping them to achieve those
visions, through business collaboration and development of regional
strategies, priorities and projects.
This agenda can only be achieved if the local stakeholders have a high
degree of participation in the regional institutions, and ownership of the
regional processes. 
That is what differentiates this Program from the failed 1970s concept of
regional development based on urban growth centres. In those days,
economic strategies were dreamed up elsewhere, and imposed on regional
communities. The decision makers misread local conditions, and lacked local
support. By contrast, the Regional Economic Development Program has been
developed on a platform of broadly-based community participation. The
strategy is anchored in the regions themselves, and draws heavily on their
resources. Ideas and initiatives derive from the regional communities.
And as we see today, they are springing forth.
That's not to say the Commonwealth Government is a mere passenger.
In the initial stages, the Commonwealth is a catalyst a spark plug. It draws
all the parties together, and focusses community dialogue.
Where a core group of regional leaders emerge and form a Steering
Committee, the Commonwealth will establish a Regional Economic
Development Organisation ( a REDO) to help with directions.
Where required, and at the request of Steering Committee, the
Commonwealth will fund regional conferences to identify the strengths and
resources of the region, the capacities of its institutions, and possible bridges
to other regions. We will help to enhance those capacities, and build more of
those bridges.
The development and implementation of strategies to increase employment
and investment requires both vision and the commitment of resources. The
Commonwealth will commit up to $ 240,000 over three years to fund the
operation of a REDO, to support that vision.
Where infrastructure bottlenecks are impeding regional economic
development, the Commonwealth will help overcome them.
We will do it either by direct funding or by Infrastructure Bonds which
encourage private sector investment through Commonwealth tax
concessions. To accomplish all this, the Commonwealth will spend $ 150 million over four
years under the Program.
And this does not represent the totality of Commonwealth assistance to
regional economic development. 
The Regional Economic Development Program will be a vehicle for the
delivery of other Commonwealth assistance and services to the regions.
These services will be channelled in focussed and imaginative ways, and
their impact will be profound.
I said on Australia Day that the development of regional Australia along these
lines has a potential comparable to our immigration programs.
It can make Australia more dynamic, adventurous and outward-looking; more
diverse and much stronger.
If we can get regional economies going with a place in the mainstream of the
national economy and indeed the global economy we will get stronger
communities in every other sense, including the social sense.
Above all, of course, we are going to get jobs and jobs with a future.
The Commonwealth Government's regional development strategy boasts an
ambitious agenda.
Such an agenda is only achievable if we work in concert with local and state
governments, as well as with business, unions and education research
bodies. The Commonwealth does not seek to duplicate or usurp the economic
development programs undertaken by other governments. Rather, we seek
to build on and add value to these already-existing programs.
Deputy Premier Cowan and his department have cooperated in the initial
steps. I am also pleased to hear that these initiatives in the metropolitan area have
been supported by the Western Australian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry, the Western Australian Municipal Association and the Trades and
Labour Council of Western Australia.
So this region, embracing the municipalities of Melville, East Fremantle,
Fremantle, Cockburn, Kwinana, Rockingham, Gosnells, Armadale,
Serpentine-Jarrahdale and the proposed municipality of Shepperton, now has
an opportunity to work more effectively towards employment and investment.
To Kyle Abbott, thank you for making this venue available today. A most
appropriate venue for a program promoting Australian exports.
To the business and industry leaders of the region, thank you for accepting
the responsibility of leadership. 
Your investment of knowledge and skills in the community is an investment in
the future. It is like applying the old agricultural axiom return to the soil what
has been taken from it.
The most extraordinary resource of this region is clearly its people. The
South Metropolitan Region is fortunate in having a very dedicated group of
community leaders who form the Steering Committee:
Mrs Charlotte Stockwell of the South West Corridor Development and
Employment Foundation;
Mr Jay Hardison of the Heritage Country Development Agency;
Mr Lyn Metcalf of the City of South Perth;
Mr John Hardwick, also of the City of South Perth;
Ms Lorraine McKeig of the Kwinana office of the Chamber of
Commerce and Industry;
Professor John Wood of Notre Dame University; and
Professor Peter Newman of Murdoch University.
To this pioneering Steering Committee, I offer you my congratulations and my
Government's support.
As tangible proof of this support, I am pleased to announce a major
Commonwealth Program Delivery Initiative in this region a result of
recommendations made in the Kelty report, subsequent studies by
government officials, consultations with regional communities and a study by
Price Waterhouse.
A group of Commonwealth officials will be formed here to assist with your
regional strategies, to search for partnership opportunities and help address
problems impeding the region's growth strategy.
This group will consist of the senior officials from key Commonwealth
agencies involved in the region such as the Departments of Employment,
Education and Training, Housing and Regional Development, Social Security,
Defence, Industry Science and Technology, the Australian Technology,
Science and Industry Council, and Austrade.
As this Initiative is progressively established it will provide ballast for your
regional strategy, broadening and deepening the region's capacities. 
I am pleased to hand over a cheque for $ 23,800 to fund the regional audit
and search conference process to help the Steering Committee to identify the
region's strengths, possible social and economic linkages between the
various municipalities and to develop a proposed structure for a REDO for
your region.
I wish you well in your endeavours. 



N
1~*
'' 4
S
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL 9.00 PM 15 FEBRUARY 1995
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TO THE CHINESE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE " AUSTRALIA AND ASIA:
THE NEXT STEPS", PERTH, WEDNESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 1995
It is a real pleasure to be at this coffee shop forum and to see so many
people here.
This is now a Perth institution. And I hope groups like it will soon be an
Australian institution. Because all of you here are participants in a great and
important enterprise the shaping of our involvement with Asia.
I have said before that this engagement with Asia is not a take-it-or-leave-it
affair for Australia. Asia is not a target of convenience for us. It is not a
fashion, or a flavour-of-the-month, or a political gimmick.
I have long believed that Australia's relationship with Asia has to lie at the
very centre of our external interests.
I am convinced that we came perilously close in the 1960s to marginalising
ourselves in the world. The White Australia Policy and the barrier of
protection and regulation behind which our industry and financial institutions
slumbered were all of a piece. Both were the product of the same defensive
and inward-looking cast of mind.
Just in time, I believe, we saw the need to open ourselves out to the world, to
break through all those protective barriers which held Australia's economy
and our minds in check.
A sea change has since taken place in the views of all sorts of Australians
and I am very glad of it.
It has been common in some quarters to hear Australia's interest in Asia
portrayed as a simple example of economic determinism: the charge,
crudely, that our policies have been foisted on us by the realities of our
markets. 
Of course it is true that our economic links with Asia are vital. The
percentage of our exports going to Asia has risen from around one third in
1965 to about 63 per cent in 1993. And Asia's importance to us will continue
to grow.
But it is a profound error to see that as the whole story. For me and for this
government our interest in Asia has a much broader focus and a much wider
purpose. Success in the efforts we make in Asia will affect not just Australia's
prosperity but our security. As the Government's recent White Paper on
defence made clear, strategic partnership with regional countries will be an
increasingly important part of our security policy.
And, more than that, closer engagement with Asia is already helping to
transform Australian society: the face of our society, as anyone who has
looked around the streets of our major cities knows. But also the heart of our
society.
Asian culture and Asian values will, in a very short time I believe, begin to
work their impact on mainstream Australian culture just as earlier waves of
European migration have done.
It is not surprising that this Chamber, which is part of this whole process, has
flourished here in Perth.
On this side of the continent, more than almost anywhere else in Australia, a
strong sense exists of Asia's proximity and its relevance.
Western Australia has long provided the sinews of our great trading links with
Japan and China. Over a quarter of our exports to Japan and more than
per cent of our exports to China come from this state.
And both Japan and China have major investments here, ranging from mining
interests to food.
We should never lose sight of the importance of our traditional commodity
exports, but it is also important to keep the economic relationship moving into
new areas.
We need to continue the push into manufacturing exports, services, tourism
and investments.
But for success to come in these areas we will need to depend much more on
personal contacts, on the creation of denser networks of contact across all
areas of our society business, education, government, culture.
The role of groups like yours will be critical to this process. 
Your 450 members and supporters have already formed contacts with a
whole network of Chinese Chambers of Commerce and business groups
throughout Asia.
You have taken business missions to Vietnam, Indonesia, Laos, Hong Kong
and China and have hosted incoming groups from countries in the region.
And in the long tradition of Chinese philanthropy you have also been trying to
put something back into Australian society with your Foundation to support
exchanges of junior executives in the region.
In other words, your Chamber is an outstanding example of the advantage
that cultural diversity gives Australia.
It used to be argued that the appropriate image for Australia's policies
towards newly arrived migrants was that of the melting pot, simmering away
the differences of our ethnic communities until they became part of one great
Australian soup.
But if we need a culinary metaphor for Australia's approach to migrants in our
society, a much better one is the Chinese wok, in which all the ingredients
retain their own distinct identity but become part of a harmonious and
balanced whole.
Contemporary Australia thrives on difference. It imposes few conformities
beyond the one that says the first loyalty of all Australians is to Australia and
to its fundamental democratic values including, especially, tolerance.
One of the most significant productivity reforms this country can make is to
make full use of the knowledge and energy of all our ethnic communities.
To take an example relevant to all of you in this room, the East Asia
Analytical Unit of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade which the
Government established to increase our store of expertise on Asia will soon
be publishing a comprehensive report on Chinese business networks in Asia.
The report will provide a compendium of information for Australian business
people to help them use these networks to do business in China.
The report points out that overseas Chinese are the largest source of
investment in China. Around 98 per cent of all foreign investment in
Guangdong province, for example, is from Chinese investors living overseas.
Clearly, one of the best ways of getting into China is by having an overseas
Chinese partner.
I know your members have been involved in the preparation of this report and
will recognise the sense of its conclusions.
Groups like yours are critical to developing commercial relationships, and
State Governments also play a complementary trade and cultural promotion 
role. But in the end there are some things that only the Commonwealth
Government can do and that it must do well if Australia's national interests
are to be properly protected.
It alone can establish the environment of trust with neighbouring governments
within which business can flourish; it alone can create the structures which
will support the development of a more prosperous, more secure region.
And that task has been central to the Government's foreign policy efforts over
the past couple of years. It has been a period as busy and productive as any
Australia has experienced.
I wanted to take the opportunity this evening to reflect on how far we have
come over the past twelve months or so and to look ahead to the next stages.
Because our agenda in Asia is far from finished.
With the end of the Cold War, the structure of the international system has
changed as profoundly as at any time in modern history. Technological
developments, particularly with information and communications, have
magnified the force of that change.
And although the changes have been most immediately obvious in Europe,
with the break-up of the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc, developments in
Asia are in some ways more remarkable. The economic growth of Asia is one
of the dominant themes of the late 20th century.
In the twenty years from 1970, East Asia's share of world GDP rose from 12
per cent to 25 per cent. It is inevitable that over time this economic shift will
bring with it strategic changes as well.
To take the most obvious examples: China's weight and influence in the
world will inevitably increase; Japan will continue to seek a political influence
more commensurate with its economic importance ( one reason we support its
permanent membership of the UN Security Council); the inevitable
reunification of Korea will change the political dynamics of Northeast Asia;
and Vietnam's membership of ASEAN will just as significantly affect
relationships in Southeast Asia.
In these circumstances, it is vital that we have in place structures which give
Australia and the region a sense of certainty, which keep countries talking
about their common concerns, which provide a framework for the containment
or management of tension.
That is why I have placed such importance on APEC, which encompasses all
the most important regional economic and trade links.
And it is why I suggested in 1992 that we should give APEC a bit of
horsepower by establishing meetings between the leaders of the APEC
economies. 
President Clinton took up this idea in Seattle in 1993 and then President
Soeharto hosted a second meeting last November at which leaders of all
eighteen APEC economies were present.
That meeting at Bogor, and the visionary Declaration of Common Resolve
which it produced, has permanently changed the nature of our region. It has
cemented APEC's status as the key regional body and has ensured that we
maintain a trans-Pacific approach to the region. This avoids the danger of
the world dividing into three contending blocs in Europe, Asia and the
Americas. The central element in the Bogor declaration is a firm commitment to free
trade and investment in the region by 2010 for industrialised countries and
2020 for developing countries. This will create a dynamic and integrated
market of 2 billion people.
The leaders' meeting also decided to expand the trade and investment
facilitation program, on which a good deal of progress has already been
made. This will become increasingly important as tariffs decline and services
trade is liberalised.
Also at the regional level, we began last year the process of discussing
possible links between the ASEAN Free Trade Area and the Australia-New
Zealand Closer Economic Relations arrangement, following a suggestion
from the Thai Deputy Prime Minister, Dr Supachai, which I discussed during
my visit to Thailand in April.
In the security area, Australia has played an important role in the
establishment of the ASEAN Regional Forum which held its first Ministerial
meeting last year. The ARF engages the countries of the broader region for
the first time ever in a dialogue about security issues.
And we made similar progress in our bilateral relations with regional countries
over the past twelve months.
To take just a few examples.
With China, in addition to a steady stream of high-level Ministerial visits, we
had a visit in November from Mr Qiao Shi, the Chairman of the National
People's Congress and the third most senior member of the Communist
Party. In June, the largest ever Chinese trade and investment delegation
came to Australia.
Qiao Shi's remarks at the end of his visit that Australia-China relations have
" extremely good potential" are ones I can only endorse. China is now our 6th
largest trading partner and China has more foreign investment in Australia
than in any other country. 
Both Hong Kong and Taiwan, the other two Chinese economies represented
in APEC, remain very important to Australia. Taiwan is our seventh largest
trading partner and Hong Kong our tenth largest. The Government is
committed to building our commercial relationship with both. The Australian
Commerce and Industry Office in Taipei has been expanded and last year my
colleague Michael Lee made an unofficial visit as Tourism Minister. Hong
Kong will lose none of its importance to Australia after 1997.
I visited Tokyo for the second time as Prime Minister in September last year.
Japan remains, of course, overwhelmingly Australia's largest economic
partner. I was struck by the fundamental nature of the political and economic
change Japan is undergoing. As this change progresses, Australia's broad
policy dialogue and partnership with Japan will become even more important
to both of us.
I have said before that there is no relationship more important to Australia
than that with Indonesia.
I visited Indonesia twice in 1994 and the Austral ia-I ndonesia Ministerial
Forum, which President Soeharto and I established during my first visit to
Jakarta, met for a second time.
Our purpose with the Forum has been to broaden the relationship into new
areas of activity.
And it is quite clear that this is happening. In areas like energy, defence,
education, health, trade unions, transport and communications, the
environment, science and technology even sport we have never found so
many areas for cooperation.
Our trade has trebled over the past six years to more than $ 3 billion and we
are one of the top ten investors in Indonesia. A number of West Australian
companies Clough Engineering, the John Holland Group, Heytesbury
Holdings, Environmental Solutions International are all major forces in the
Indonesian market.
The very successful Australia Today Indonesia ' 94 promotion, at which 200
Australian companies and the West Australian Government were
represented, was another step in broadening the relationship.
We were also very glad to receive Vice President Try Sutrisno in Australia
last September, the most senior Indonesian to visit Australia since President
Soeharto in 1975.
Our burgeoning relationship with the Republic of Korea reached a new high
point with President Kim Young Sam's visit to Australia last November.
Korea has just passed the United States to become Australia's secondlargest
export market. 
President Kim and I have been determined to find ways of consolidating and
broadening this relationship.
Among the outcomes of his visit were an agreement to establish a joint fund
to support technology projects in areas such as the information superhighway
and clean energy.
We also agreed to upgrade science and technology cooperation and to hold
a Ministerial-level symposium to look at long-term energy issues, one of the
issues at the core of our relationship. We are also committed to building up
people-to-people contact between Korea and Australia.
The relationship with Singapore also made rapid progress last year. Prime
Minister Goh visited Australia in September and I was able to meet him again
at the APEC summit in Jakarta.
We established during his visit here a high level Singapore-Australia
Business Alliance Forum to assist business and investment in both countries
and also in third markets.
And both governments have put money into a fund to support feasibility
studies for joint participation by our companies in third markets.
Prime Minister Goh and I agreed to look at ways of further encouraging
Singaporean investment in tourism especially ( and I was very pleased to
support this) in providing opportunities for young Singaporeans to come to
Australia. Already the number of nights spent by Singaporean visitors in
Western Australia grew by 33 per cent in 1993-94.
Links between Australia and Malaysia are also growing. Our two-way trade
increased by 26 percent in 1993-94 to reach almost $ 3 billion. And our
exports have been growing by an average of 17 per cent over each of the
past five years.
One of the particular strengths of our relationship has always been in
education. More than 100,000 Malaysians have been educated here no
doubt some of them are in this room tonight and this provides a broad base
of understanding and goodwill which is unique in our regional relationships.
Malaysian companies, including the Malaysian Mining Corporation, are active
players in the Western Australian economy.
And local companies such as SBF Shipbuilders, John Holland and high-tech
companies like Working Systems, are performing well in the Malaysian
market. I had a couple of useful meetings with Prime Minister Mahathir at the APEC
meeting last November. Each of us saw considerable potential for further co-
operation between Australia and Malaysia, particularly in areas like the
environment and in scientific and technological research. I would like to see
some practical steps forward on this during the year.
Our relationships with Thailand, Laos and Vietnam also offer substantial
opportunities to Australia. I visited all three countries in April 1994 and have
since had further discussions with Prime Minister Chuan, when we met again
at the APEC meeting in Jakarta. And I was glad to be able to talk to
Vietnamese Foreign Minister Cam during his visit to Australia last week.
We have now opened a new Consulate in Ho Chi Minh City which will help
expand the commercial and consular services we can offer Australians there.
So we have been making very good progress on all these fronts. But the task
does not end. This year's agenda is equally heavy.
In the APEC forum, the challenge this year is to put real flesh on the
commitments entered into at Bogor.
We have already set the end point for APEC trade and investment
liberalisation comprehensive free and open trade in goods, services and
capital. So, unlike the lengthy trade negotiations in the Uruguay Round, we
will not be haggling about the extent to which we will reduce barriers.
What we will be addressing at our Osaka meeting and what we expect to
come out of the meeting is a comprehensive action agenda for getting to
free trade and investment
This action agenda will set out the key principles to guide APEC trade
liberalisation and put up some signposts along the way to 201 0/ 2020
No one pretends this will be easy. But I am confident that the hard
commitments we made in Bogor will be translated into action.
Japan, as this year's APEC chair, will have a key role in this task and officials
have begun a whole series of preparatory meetings.
Australia is ready to assist Japan in whatever way we can over the next 12
months.
At Osaka, we want to be able to announce some commercial ly-relevant
results on issues of concern to business such as standards harmonisation
and conformance and customs simplification
Australia strongly wants APEC trade liberalisation to feed into and fuel further
global trade liberalisation
So I hope APEC leaders will spell out at Osaka how they will accelerate the
implementation of their Uruguay Round commitments so that by the time 
World Trade Organisation ministers meet in Singapore, probably in late 1996,
APEC will have established a very solid trade liberalisation agenda.
And I hope that the rest of the world will enthusiastically take up the
challenge. Next month, the first informal consultations between Australia and New
Zealand and the ASEAN countries about possible links between CER and
AFTA will be held in Jakarta. Our first step will be to explore with the
ASEANs how we can promote investment links and closer business ties and
develop practical trade facilitation measures.
I also want to explore in the year ahead ways in which Australia can
consolidate our co-operation with our Southeast Asian neighbours in areas
like science and technological co-operation, and medical education. A great
deal is already happening in these areas, but I believe more can and should
be done to strengthen these ties and to ensure that we are drawing on the
mutual advantages we can offer each other. I will be working on some
specific proposals.
Bilaterally, we have a heavy agenda of follow-up work with individual
countries. I will be meeting Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong again in Singapore on
March for a further round of discussions about regional developments and to
monitor the progress we have been making with the bilateral relationship.
Our defence relations with Singapore, for example, are a first-rate example of
strategic partnership with regional countries at work. On Friday, I will visit the
Singapore Airforce Flying Training School at Pearce RAAF base, and we
have other areas of possible defence co-operation with Singapore under
discussion. This year is the fiftieth anniversary of Indonesia's independence. Australia
played a role in that process through the international support the Australian
Labor Party Government gave to the independence struggle.
The Indonesian people have much to be proud of. Over the past quarter of a
century, Indonesia's economic growth rate has averaged almost 7 per cent
per annum, and the number of Indonesians living in poverty has decreased
from over 60 per cent of the population to just 13 percent. This is expected to
fall to 6 per cent by 1999. We will want to mark this important anniversary in
an appropriate way.
China is likely to go through a leadership transition this year. When Deng
Xiaoping dies, a degree of uncertainty will no doubt enter Chinese politics.
But Australia and Australian business need to be clear that we are engaged
with China for the long haul. 
Its importance will only grow. But doing business there will be an
increasingly complex task. The reforms which Deng Xiaoping unleashed
mean that the simple days in which businesspeople could deal with the
central government have gone. More and more decisions have been
devolved from the state to the private sector and from the centre to the
regions.
That is why it is important to sustain the ties we have in China. More than
100 Chinese corporations and organisations have opened representative
branch offices in Australia and the number is increasing rapidly. We need to
encourage that and the reverse process of Australian investment in China.
I want to say something about India, too. There is probably a clearer sense
here in Perth than anywhere else in the country of the potential for closer
economic links with India.
The Government is enthusiastic about building this relationship. India's
economy is growing around 6 per cent annually and our own exports have
grown by about $ 300 million in the past five years.
I was planning to visit India myself next month, but domestic developments in
India have unfortunately forced the visit's postponement.
Even so, Senator McMullan has been in India this week, leading a
trade mission with a very strong West Australian component, and Senator
Evans is also planning to visit later this year. So we will be keeping up the
momentum. For this reason, I am pleased to announce that we will be holding a major
promotion in India in the second half of 1996.
We will be putting our finest arts, scientific, technological and educational
achievements on show in order to build Australia's profile in India and
promote our trade and investment links. India's selection as the venue for
this promotion underlines the importance Australia attaches to the bilateral
relationship. More broadly, there is growing interest in exploring possible areas of cooperation
around the whole Indian Ocean rim and the Government will be
holding an important conference here in Perth in June to look further at these
options. Ladies and gentlemen,
Foreign policy can no longer be isolated from other aspects of public policy.
Australia's success internationally depends not just on skilful diplomacy but
on our having in place the right economic policies to make our country strong
and competitive, and the right social policies to ensure that we make the best 
use of all our people and that our children are educated with the knowledge
and skills they need.
On all these fronts we are making significant progress.
Economically, we are the fastest growing of all major industrialised
economies and forecast to remain so throughout this year. Business
investment is expected to grow by 24 per cent in 1994-95 and the profit
share has seldom been higher.
And despite this growth, underlying inflation has remained steady at around 2
per cent.
Employment is expected to grow by 3 3/ 4 per cent in 1994-95 an increase of
300,000 jobs through the year.
This is an enormously strong foundation on which to build sustainable growth
and it makes us an increasingly attractive partner in growth for the countries
around us.
We need also to ensure that we are making the very best use of our people.
I have already spoken about the need to unleash the economic capacities of
our ethnic communities. We will be discussing this whole issue more broadly
in April when, as part of our contribution to the 50th anniversary celebrations
of the United Nations, we will be hosting in Sydney a major international
conference on Global Cultural Diversity.
We have also put in place major reforms to Australia's training system to
ensure that our work force is prepared for the new, more intensively
knowledge-based, world we are moving into.
That is why the Commonwealth Government is spending $ 68 million under
the National Languages Strategy to improve the teaching of Asian languages
in Australian schools, focussing in particular on Chinese, Indonesian,
Japanese and Korean.
The demand is already there. Between 1987 and 1991 enrolments in
Australian languages increased by 86 per cent. In 1969, 429 primary and
secondary students were studying Chinese; the figure today is more than
25,000.
All this is very good news for our children's future in Asia.
Finally, another dimension of our domestic policy which will shape our
international standing relates to our constitutional arrangements and national
symbols. 
In my view, it is important that Australians are able to represent ourselves
overseas in ways that are appropriate to the twenty first century. I have no
doubt that this means moving to have an Australian as our head of state.
In its report released just last month, Western Australia's own Constitutional
Committee considered the changes needed to provide for this. It should be
no surprise that the committee confirmed that there need be no concern that
any changes would affect Western Australia's position in the federation.
I take issue with those who say that this question does not matter in our
dealings with Asia.
Of course our current constitutional arrangements do not prevent our
business people from making deals or the Government from developing
cordial and productive relations with our neighbours. And the reason we
need to make these changes is because they are important to our sense of
ourselves as a people, not because of the sense others have of us.
But it is totally wrong to imagine that the fact that we share with a number of
other countries a Head of State who resides in Europe does not have an
impact on the attitude which our Asian neighbours have about the
fundamental direction of this country.
The Singapore Straits Times, for example, wrote recently that one of the
things Australia had done right in its drive towards becoming an integral part
of the region was ' preparing the people for a constitutional break with the
British sovereign to become a republic' President Kim Young Sam of Korea
made the same point in an interview after his return from Australia.
We have, of course, many foreign policy interests outside Asia, many
relationships of substance and importance. In a globalised world, that it is as
it must be. I am looking forward, for example, to visiting Germany and the
Netherlands early next month.
But, as I have said before, the simple truth for Australia is that unless we
succeed in Asia, we succeed nowhere.
The challenges we face are great. But it is as exciting an enterprise as
anything Australia has ever been involved with. And on its outcome depends
nothing less than the future of this country as we enter the twenty first
century. Australia's Asian community will be a key to that process. But I want to
emphasise that I do not see this as the only role of that community, or the
sole preserve of that community.
What is needed, above all, is for Australians of Asian background to take
their full place in all aspects of our national life in politics, in the arts, in 
St 13
entertainment and communications, in business and the professions. This
process is already well underway, but it has further to go.
Only when it is complete will we be able to say that the contribution of the
Chinese and other Asian communities to Australian life matches its enormous
potential. ends 



06/ 03 * 95 15: 07 V06 273 2923 P IESOFC
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO ROCKINGHAM HIGH SCHOOL, PERTH, WA
16 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I'm always delighted to speak to young people particularly at schools but
young people in Australia anywhere, because you often wonder what a Prime
Minister does. Well let me tell you what this Prime Minister does most of the
time, most of the things I am doing are about you, because I have
tremendous faith and great excitement about young Australians. I believe in
them 1 believe in you. And I know if we give you the opportunities, you will
make this a more interesting and exciting country than the rest of us have
made it. So, the greatest thing we can do for you is to give you the cOance to
show what you can do for the rest of us and that means instilling ' in you a
faith in this country, a belief that you have a unique opportunity, and the
enthusiasm to go out and do things that when I was old as you I could only
have dreamt about. In this country we have I think a unique opportunity,
because there is one thing unique about us we are the only people in the
world that have a continent to ourselves. And given the pressures of
population, and the problems of ethnicity, the conflicts and the problems we
have seen over the years, to have a continent to yourself gives you a chance
as a nation to fashion a life and a future that few peoples have ever had. And
we're not just about that continent, and how we develop it with all the
opportunities to have a focus and a conscientious about the environment
which gives us a style of living perhaps in the future unique among nations.
But also, because we're a society with a well-developed set of values we
should be putting a marker in the sand to say that in this continent of ours, we
will be unique, and that we will create a unique social democracy.
Now, you may say " well what does a unique social democracy mean?" What
it means is that we will relate to one another, and have values about one
another, that will lift the quality of this society above most other comparable
societies. That is, we will reject the notion of a dog-eat-dog society, that the
strongest take the best and the Devil takes the hind-most, and that we will
together go forward as a society not with an underclass or sub-groups, but
as one group. In other words, we have a loyalty to Australia, to the notion of
what it has become, and a loyalty to one another. And through that strength
we go on. PM PRESS OFFICEQ00 97
P4" i
( ic 
2
and now with the ASEAN regional forum we are starting to look in strategic
terms at the region. Australia is becoming much more a supplier of defence
material, both in the maritime area with destroyers and frigates and
submarines and as well as that we are working on some quite revolutionary
other products such as over-the-horizon radar and we are also looking at
some of the guided weapons as well.
So, Australia is going to be a more significant force in the defence equipment
area and, I think, this has now been recognised in south-east Asia and what
better way of demonstrating it than to have you here being involved with us.
So, I am absolutely delighted that you are here and that things are working
well and I know how well this transition is taking place and how well you feel
about it.
So, I look forward to this becoming a bigger and better thing between us and
these first tentative steps in your new facilities being here, we can sit back a
bit and watch it grow and see these exercises together and see what we can
do in the future. Defence relationships are always a tremendous friendship
building thing because if the defence forces of various countries feel
confident and relaxed with one another it just means that the whole
background environment is better and so for that reason and no other, I am
glad this is working. But, I appreciated being shown over the FAI Bs. To be
buzzing around in one of those for most of the week probably beats the hell
out of being Prime Minister I don't know although there is always
somebody wanting my job you can never shake them off.
But be that as it may, could I again, thank you very much for the hospitality,
for coming to meet me, I have enjoyed having a chat to you. I'll talk to a few
more of you before I leave and I couldn't think of a nicer way to end a West
Australian visit than to come here. Thank you very much indeed.
06/ 03 * 95 15: 06
ends 006 273 2923PM PRESS OFFICEQ0O02/ 007 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH HOWARD SATTLER, RADIO 6PR, 16 FEBRUARY 1995,
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
CALLER: Welcome Mr Keating, and I think half of these people that have rung
up should go to the UK and live under a conservative government and
then they would know it's not easy. This is a very, very good country
under Mr Keating's government, it's absolutely magnificent and that's
all I would like to say. Welcome Paul.
HS: Did you hear that?
PM: Thank you very much.
HS: That was a nice introduction.
PM: Absolutely.
HS: The rest of it wasn't all so good. Thank you very much for your call.
Look, the Prime Minister has joined me in the studio early, how are
you?
PM: I am good Howard, thanks.
HS: Where have you been is a question I must ask you before the news
because we haven't seen you here for 11 months, where have you
been?
PM: I would have come in August, but I..
HS: What happened?
PM: Got a bad attack of the flu as you know.
HS: Well, people are making much of this fact that you appear to show us
little regard. 
PM: What they should be making much of is the fact that the economy has
grown here 10 per cent in one year. It took 150 to 200 years to get so
big then it got 10 per cent bigger in one year. Now, that is what I am
here for, that's what I do. I am about making Australia grow more
strongly and the last election the Government was rehired to restart
the growth and employment. That's what we have done. That's what
the community have got to worry about. Is he over there getting me a
job? Answer yes.
HS: Well, Richard Court would say he has done all that because it's all
happened since his government came to power.
PM: So, in other words the rest of the growth around the economy is all his
too? In Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland..
HS: No, it's Jeff Kennett in Victoria and..
PM: What has happened, it's come off the Federal government's policies.
This State has been growing, it's had 10 per cent economic growth in
this last year which is just phenomenal and 5 per cent employment
growth and 2 per cent inflation. It's come off the back of the Federal
government's policies.
HS: But, would you agree, I don't want to labour this too much, but there is
a perception that if you are not here you don't care, and you agree
there is a perception?
PM: Perception from all the people who generally try to give us a boot in
the tail at their ballot box, but from the people who are serious and are
on side I don't think that is..
HS: Do you know we are parochial Western Australians?
PM: I know, but why should you be? I mean here you are, you're
contributing a very large proportion of the country's growth. I mean
much of the economic policy for the last decade had been set up in
Canberra for Western Australia, the exporting states of Western
Australia and Queensland and we have got here Carmen Lawrence
and Kim Beazley and Peter Cook and our Ministers who are constantly
here and putting me and the Cabinet in touch with Western Australia.
I mean this is a we have got modern communications, it is important,
I think, for Prime Minister's to visit parts of the country. I try to do that,
but as you know to come west it's at least 2 days. So, it's 2 days out of
any week and in this case it's 3, so given the pressure of the job it's
not easy to do it all the time.
HS: Well, I have got lots more questions to ask you and we will do that
after the news and we will take some talkback, as much as we can. 
The Prime Minister is in the studio with me and it's good to have him
here after a gap of 11 months so we have got a lot of catch up on,
haven't we?
PM: It's your call.
AD BREAK
HS: We have the Prime Minister in the studio today, he is here in Western
Australia for a three day visit and some of the issues which I know that
most people want discussed are the Mabo land rights legislation, how
it is going to impact on Western Australia, there is health and housing
of Aboriginal people, there is the upcoming federal Budget, there has
been a huge blue over road funding and a nice old set too over that,
petrol prices and the fact that the Federal Government takes about 33
cents in the litre and the suggestion that it might take more and forest
management. Prime Minister, will you be discussing all or some of
those issues while you are here and who will you talk to about that?
PM: Well, you if you want to Howard.
HS: Thank you.
PM: Go for it straight away.
HS: That puts me ahead of the Premier.
PM: Well, in these things you probably are.
HS: Good, thanks very much. Now, you made the point before the no
I'm happy about that you made the point before the news that to
come across here takes at least two days out of your time. The
Premier, I guess, would contend that if he is going to go across to
Canberra or his Ministers and see their counterparts, the same thing
applies to them.
PM: Well, that is true except there is half a dozen States and moving
around them requires a substantial commitment of time, but
nevertheless this is what we are all happy to do.
HS: Now, can we expect, although I don't want to make everything of this,
but more regular visits from you in the future?
PM: It depends what the time is, when the Parliament is sitting, what the
issues are. I mean, last year we had a May Budget we changed it for
the time from August, we've always had August Budgets since the
war. Last year we changed that and that changed a lot of the
schedules. I had a number of overseas commitments, of course, one
of them was APEC in Indonesia in November and a number of others 
in the second half of the year and it is just pulling the better part of a
week out, you know, you can do it, but you can only do it at the cost of
basically keeping ones eye on the ball.
HS: This business about the Premier won't see you and you won't find time
for him, can you appreciate that electorate thinks this is a little bit
puerile?
PM: Well look, it is on his part. I mean, what normally happens to me is if I
am coming to Melbourne Jeff Kennett will call be a week earlier or
something and say ' I hear you are down next week, have you got any
time?' and I'll ' yes', or John Fahey the same, and we'll have a meeting
and hardly anybody knows and we'll sit down and do a bit of business.
What Richard Court does is firstly go on your radio station then write
me, essentially, a sort of rude letter, then release it to the newspapers
and then send it to me and I'm supposed to say ' oh, yes, here I am
Richard, now what do you want me to discuss?' I mean he has got to
be joking.
HS: So, you are saying that if he had written a..
PM: If he was dinkum, if he is genuinely interested in the issues of his State
and his people he would ring me and say ' look, you are coming over
next week' he knew I was coming.
HS: He did know you were coming?
PM: Oh yes, because we had invited him to the Regional Economic
Development Organisation launch yesterday. He knew I was coming
and if had said to me ' look, can you make some time for me' I would
have seen him. But, if there is a genuine wish to talk about some
things, but you see, there is essentially no co-operation from him and
what he does is he comes on your radio station, then he says he wants
to see me. He then publishes a letter to the newspapers and then he
sends a copy to me. So, he is not serious and if he is not serious why
should I if he is in to playing games, I'll lend him a little snakes and
ladders set before I leave. Another thing about him is, the terrible
thing about him is he'll probably use it. In the quiet time up there he
would probably get into it.
HS: OK, but are we going to be punished for all of this? The West
Australian..
PM: No, just understand this, let me just take..
HS: You don't hate us because we have got a Liberal government do you?
PM: Look, don't confuse my association and good wishes and work for the
Western Australian community with what I do with Richard Court. If he 
wants to, essentially, deprecate their interests and discount them by
these sorts of antics the point I made before the news Howard is this,
Western Australia grew by 10 per cent economic growth last year. In
other words, if we kept that up for 10 years, everything that has been
created in the 150 to 200 years here would be recreated in full in
years. Can you just imagine what speed of growth that is.
HS: But, you won't let that happen anyway.
PM: But, 10 per cent economic growth and 5 per cent employment growth
and 2 per cent inflation, the growth and the change in Western
Australia is coming off the policies of the national federal Labor
government. Now, they are the things I mean essentially, in the last
election campaign the issues were all about growth and employment. I
said that we would make the economy grow again and we would get
employment growth started. We started that with the One Nation
package where we started spending money in 1992. When private
spending was down we lifted public spending. Now, they are things
that matter most to West Australians. I mean, this is a big primary
exporting State, it has got minerals, it has got agriculture, it is now
selling ships, ferries, sophisticated metals like the place I was at
yesterday. That can only happen with the competitiveness, the low
inflation, the exchange rate, the wage outcomes coming from the
federal government's policies.
HS: Sure, but just when it looks as though Australia is going to take off and
we record a growth rate of 6.4 per cent, which in the Asian region
wouldn't be considered anything special, you've loped the top off it
with interest rate rises 2 and 3/ 4 per cent in five months.
PM: But what we want is a sustainable rate of growth. Let's record this fact
HS: We just want to enjoy ourselves.
PM: Yes, but we want to continue to enjoy ourselves. We don't want to
enjoy ourselves for one year, we want to continue to enjoy ourselves.
This is the fastest growing, the economy of Australia, is the fastest
growing western world economy by a big margin.
HS: But, not as high as the Asian region countries?
PM: But, the Asian region do not have a developed economy like this. I
mean, for instance let's take Malaysia which is an important economy
in this area. It's GDP is $ 40 billion, their whole national output is
billion. It is growing at about 8 per cent a year. Australia is $ 400
billion and we are growing at 5.5 to 6 per cent. You try and lift a
platform of $ 400 billion and make it grow at 5.5 to 6 per cent. There is
or $ 30 billions worth of wealth there. 
HS: OK, but what's sustainable, I mean what will you allow to happen?
PM: Well, if this was a European country and we were having a discussion
on European radio, the average rate of growth would be 1.5 per cent
for the nation. Here in Western Australia it is 10 per cent. In the
whole of Australia it is 6 per cent. But what we are saying is to keep
that going we have got to be able to produce the goods and services
so it is not spilling into imports. In other words, we can't grow at a
pace where we can't provide the product for it.
HS: But, how would you like to be working in the housing/ building industry
and all of a sudden interest rates go up 2 and 3/ 4 per cent in five
months, they might go up more in the next few months then suddenly
your work has stopped, that is what's happening.
PM: It will slow down..
HS: No, it's stopped in many cases.
PM: But, overall it will slow down and it is coming off a massive high which,
in the large, is unsustainable. But, if you take, I'm not sure what the
medium priced accommodation market is like here in Perth, I certainly
know about Sydney. Sydney is now becoming over supplied, hugely
over supplied with medium priced, medium density housing. So, public
policy slows it down and it makes the recovery more affordable so that
when we are talking about 1996 and 1997 and 1998 we've still got
good growth and low inflation. What we don't want to see is the
growth go at such a pace that it blows the inflation rate and we are
back into difficulties again.
HS: Ok, but can I ask you what is sustainable, what would the Government
allow to happen on a regular basis 4 per cent, 5 per cent, what?
PM: We are saying, our target is to get to an unemployment we think it is
feasible to get to an unemployment rate of about 5 per cent by the year
2000.
HS: That is your target is it?
PM: Well, that we think is within our reach and you can only do that
growing roughly at around 4 per cent a year nationally. Now, some
States will do less than 4, others will do higher, but the average will 4
per cent. At the moment the average is 6 per cent. So, we are slowing
it down for the good of everybody. In other words, it is to everybody's
benefit that their job security is not an issue, that they can look forward
to their children getting jobs and they can look forward to their savings
not been torn apart.. 
HS: So, these are the interest rate rises we have to have are they?
PM: Remember how low they have been. I mean, we took interest rates
down to Reserve Bank cash rates, bill rates of 4.5 to 5 per cent and
they are now around 5 per cent. They are now around 8 per cent, but
they are still low..
HS: But, we do remember how high..
PM: The last 20 years, I mean they are very low rates.
HS: We do remember how high home loan interest rates got under
Treasurer Paul Keating, don't we about 18 per cent.
PM: No, they never got to 18 per cent.
HS: Maybe I went to the wrong bank.
PM: Well, maybe you did Howard, but they never got to 18 per cent. But,
at the moment they are around 10 per cent. Now, all of that reduction
in interest rates meant a big lift in take home pay to people because
they weren't paying it out on mortgages. So, what we have done is put
a modest increase in there which will actually slow the economy and
make the growth more sustainable for people and give it low inflation.
As I said a week or so ago, it is a premium that Australians are paying
to guarantee the longevity of growth. But, the core point is it is the
Labor government in Canberra that delivered this growth to Australia
and to Western Australia and getting these big competitiveness issues
right and the linkages into Asia and the business which is coming
down to Western Australia from Asia is in large part because of the
Federal government's policies.
HS: Can we talk about the leaking of the Budget ' wish list'. A lot of people
think it is a bit rich for your government to be calling in the cops when
back in 1980..
PM: No, I'm not calling any cops.
HS: Kim Beazley did didn't he?
PM: No, no the police do all these things they make all this clear
themselves. If confidential government property is stolen, the police
investigate it, but they always have.
HS: So, who called them in?
PM: That would be done by the Commissioner. 
HS: So, no politician, no one in government said ' look, the Budget papers
have been leaked, or the wish list, will you investigate it', they just did
it.
PM: Obviously the police have been notified.
HS: By who?
PM: Well, they would be notified by the Secretary of the Department that
had them stolen, no doubt.
HS: And the Minister Mr Beazley, none of the other Ministers would have..
PM: Look, don't fall for this line, Howard, that the Liberal's have..
HS: I'm just asking questions.
PM: I know, but you are repeating a line from the Liberals, you know, the
Costello line " Keating has put the police on us". The fact is they
have got Budget documents which have been stolen and when
something of core value to the nation's interest has been stolen,
pilfered, the Commonwealth police will always..
HS: It is only a wish list isn't it?
PM: It is a wish list by Departments, but it still is a document from the
process of the Budget.
HS: But, back in 1980 Treasurer John Howard's entire Budget was leaked.
Now, I didn't hear anyone on your side complaining about that.
PM: No, but it wasn't leaked to us. It was leaked to Laurie Oakes, a
journalist. This has been leaked to the Opposition. This is a
completely different matter, I mean, this has been leaked to the Liberal
party.
HS: So, you think there was nothing wrong with what happened in 1980.
PM: Well, I don't believe the Budget I think it is a dreadful thing that the
Budget should be revealed. It was a dreadful thing then and it is now,
but it was done then by somebody to a journalist. This has been given
to the Liberal party and then they want to pretend that they are not
stolen documents. Well, of course they are stolen documents.
HS: There has been a 40 per cent let's get on to road funding because
this is another issue that does certainly affect Western Australia and
the figure that I have been shown shows a 40 per cent reduction in
Commonwealth outlays for roads in Western Australia during the past
three financial years. Can you justify that? 
PM: That is not true. The base funding, I mean Kim Beazley made this
clear. Look, Richard Court has put on a 4 cents per litre petrol tax for
his own reasons, for himself and his budget.
HS: Nothing that needs $ 100 million extra to spend on roads.
PM: It is nothing to do with the Commonwealth, nothing what so ever. The
base funding is in fact gone up, well, I'll read from 1991 to 1994-5,
$ 149 million, $ 155 million, $ 136 million, $ 149 million, $ 153 million, so
in the last year it has gone up from $ 149 million to $ 153 million. What
has come out of it are the One Nation spending which I said to you a
few moments ago, which we introduced in 1992 to give the economy a
boost and then withdraw it. The blackspot program which was part of
that as well, that is the black spots which are those parts of particular
roads where we have a lot of traffic accidents and when we want to
give the economy a bit of a kick along we spend money to try and
move these things out and we have a program to try and take out the
most dangerous. That program came to and end, but the base funding
and as Kim Beazley may also have made clear, that in terms of the
Grants Commission recommendation this is the money which is paid
to the States by the Commonwealth led to the inclusion of road
maintenance expenditure in its assessments, along with various road
related charges. He said this in a letter to Richard Court. The
Commissioner accordingly recommended positive adjustments to
Western Australia by amounts in the order of $ 69 million in 1993/ 94
and $ 72 million in 1994/ 95.
So, in other words, Richard Court has bunged on a 4 cents per litre
petrol tax by himself, for himself, for his budget.
HS: Are you going to add on any more to your petrol tax take in the
Budget?
PM: Well, I'm not going to be talking..
HS: Can't you talk about what you are not going to do in the Budget?
PM: No, the government is not there is a Budget process and the Budget
will be produced in May. The Cabinet has not met on the Budget or
any of the core, main issues of the Budget, so I am not in a position to
be saying yea or nay to anything.
HS: Not even nay.
PM: Because it is just not intelligent to say nay. I mean, people ask me for
three months, I'd be saying yea, nay, yea, nay all around the place. 
HS: All right now Mabo you know that's a big issue over here you would
easily have gleaned that. Major projects, which I'm told by the
Government here, have been held up by Native Title legislation
include completion of the Ord River scheme, new hotels proposed for
parts of the Kimberley, tourism projects in Broome no-one wants to
invest until they know whether or not the Native Title claims are
legitimate or not?
PM: Well you know what's happened Richard Court's Government is the
only Government in Australia not to sign up under Mabo. Now isn't it
interesting he says this is all Canberra, and Keating and the Keating
Government, but why did Jeff Kennett and John Fahey and Dean
Brown and others introduce State Legislation to dove-tail in with the
Commonwealth Native Title Act?
HS: Maybe because it didn't affect them?
PM: No. It does affect them. And the same with Queensland they have
done it to provide certainty to investors. The lack of certainty comes
from the wilful rebuttal of national interests which comes from the
Western Australian legislation. But let me just tell you this Howard
this is the serious part of it Richard Court has now issued 8000
grants of interest in land over the last year, over which a large part of
which may be unlawfully issued. That is, they have been issued
ultravires of the Native Title Act. Now I wrote to him one year ago
saying to him: " if you issue these grants of interest, be warned that you
do it at your own expense at your own behest and at your own
expense and that you will put the interests of the people you are
giving these land grants to at risk". The prospect is, Howard, in this
next year this coming financial year there will be another 8000. So,
by the time the High Court hands down its' decision on the Western
Australian challenge to the Commonwealth Mabo Act...
HS: When will that be, by the way?
PM: Probably in the next couple of months he'll have in the pipeline
somewhere between 8000-16,000 grants of interest in land. Now,
some of these are exploration licences 3000 of the 8000 are
exploration licences and they are not actually title. But there is 5000
titles there. Now not all of them, of course, will be over aboriginal land.
But some substantial number will be, and...
HS: What's going to happen?
PM: Well the day it all goes sour on him, you will then be on your program
saying to me " this is all the Commonwealth's fault". So I'm just telling
you, there is a lot of villainy here on the part of the West Australian
Government and a lot of wilful villainy, putting the interests of Western
Australians and West Australian businesses at risk by granting interest 
in land which is ultra vires of a Commonwealth Act of Parliament
agreed to by every other state bar Western Australian.
HS: But he would take some comfort from yesterdays decision of the Native
Title Tribunal it ruled against a claim by the Waanyi people for 250
hectares of land in North-West Queensland he would say that is the
beginning of the end of the Commonwealth's case?
PM: No. No it's not....
HS: He would say that.
PM: Yes, I know. But what he would say would be wrong. What that
decision reveals is pretty much as we have been saying.. . we say in our
Act. That is, where there has been a previous grant of interest in land
that is, a freehold title, or even a pastoral lease that extinguishes
the Native Title. Now, that is what the Native Title tribunal announced
yesterday that there was some other interest granted over that land
which extinguishes Native Title....
HS: But they're now going to go to the High Court over it. I mean, what's
the point of the Native Title Tribunal?
PM: but there was always the question about whether pastoral leases
extinguished Native Title. We have asserted this in the preamble to
the Act, but no doubt, on the first decision which this thing is some
interest group will take it to the high Court to have it cleared up once
and for all.
HS: But they might just keep doing it all the time. Every time they lose they
go to the High Court? I thought...
PM: No. Because there will always be a test case on some of the principles,
and that will be that. And there is no point in going back twice
because the High Court won't take the cases on. But that buttresses
my side of the argument what I have said all the way through is, when
he had the scare campaign " oh, we got all these pastoral leases, and
those people will lose their pastoral leases", and we have said " no, no.
Our presumption is that pastoral leases extinguish the native title".
And what yesterday's decision does is buttress to Commonwealth the
Labor Government's case. But what he is doing is something
altogether different he is issuing, willy-nilly every week, grants every
week grants of interest in land which are probably in the main,
unlawfully issued.
HS: All right, lets go to talkback you have got about 10 minutes left, so
David is you first caller good morning David. The Prime Minister is
here and he is listening to you. 
C: Good morning Mr Keating.
PM: How are you David?
C: I'm just wondering there is a lot of emphasis placed on looking after
the family in the Social Security safety nets I believe the forgotten
people of the community are the single unemployed, and when you are
talking about living off $ 145 per week, and after paying $ 110 for your
weekly rent, you know, we're talking absurd living standards and I'm
just wondering can the single unemployed please get a better deal, Mr
Keating?
PM; David, let me tell you, you are far from being forgotten. Last year we
introduced the largest policy change in any western country with the
White Paper on unemployment, called Working Nation. Working Nation
is a job compact for those who are long-term unemployed. That is, the
Commonwealth will give you work and a job subsidy, in return for an
unemployed person taking it. That is for the long-term unemployed.
For the shorter term unemployed, we are paying unemployment
benefits, we are seeking to encourage people into training but as well
as that, we are creating so many jobs. Since the election which is
just 2 years ago next month we have 496,000 jobs in this country-just
on half a million jobs in 2 years. And in Western Australia, the
employment growth rate in the last year was 4.7% just under
That is a huge number of jobs. So in terms of the commitments which
the Government and I made in the last election that is, not to forget
the unemployed, and to focus on the creation of jobs and to give
people job security we had the largest fall in unemployment in this
last calendar year ever recorded in Australia The
unemployment rate came down from 10.7% to which was the
biggest calendar year fall on record. So, we're finding the jobs, we're
trying to train people to take jobs, and to give them labour market
programs and work subsidies, and we're doing it for the long-term
unemployed by giving them a compact you take the job, we'll give you
the job and the job subsidy.
HS: All right David, thanks for your call. Paul's next he wants to talk
about the flag. Good morning Paul.
C: Good morning Howard, good morning Mr Keating.
PM: How are you, Paul?
C: I'm a young person in a young country, and I respect the office of
Prime Ministership, unfortunately you have lost my respect in one
particular area, and that is being your public denigration of our
symbols of history and tradition. I believe that in a young country such
as ours, these should be given nothing less than the highest regard, 
and the way that you have gone about things has been a particularly
damaging form of vandalism.
PM: You think you can't trust an Australian as our Head of State. You're a
young Australian, but you are saying to me that you think we shouldn't
have an Australian person as our Head of State? Is that right?
C: That's my question and I'm sure Howard would be pleased maybe
an answer could get us an answer would get us on the 6 o'clock news
tonight. And that is will you give a firm guarantee here and now that
nothing less than a constitutional referendum be held to invoke any
change in the flag? It's quite simple....
PM: Let me just make this point I know what is simple and what isn't, and
let me make this clear to you. The flag is ancillary to the main point,
and that is Australia's constitutional arrangements....
HS: It's like the anthem, isn't it?
PM: . that's right. It's a representational thing, but the core matter is
should we be borrowing the monarch of another country not
withstanding the respect which I hold the Queen in, which is
substantial regard on a personal basis, and for the job she has done
with this country over time. But as a young country as you have put it
we can't engage Asia in particular and walk around truly representing
ourselves while the Head of State of Australia is the Sovereign of
Great Britain. Now, your view is a very conservative view for a young
person...
C: How are you going....
PM: . and I think your the one out of step not me. I mean, I would be very
surprised if your view is held I'm not surprised, I can tell you your
view is a minority view among Australians.
C: I asked the question I agree that you want to change how are you
going to do it?
PM: There is only one way to do it by constitutional referendum. A
majority of electors in a majority of states. What we have said is let's
have our., our objective is to Australia see Australia become a republic
by the year 2000, let's have a national debate. I raised all this openly,
publicly in a policy speech in the last election 2 years ago, we now
have a national debate of substance it's being talked about all the
time and at some point of time, the Government will put a referendum
to the public, and it will need to be carried by a majority of electors in a
majority of states. But let me tell you this, even the Western Australian
Government has commissioned and this is Mr Court's Government 
HS: The Constitutional Commission...
PM: yes, the Constitutional Commission said there would be no problem
in their view in terms of the federation if there was a change to an
Australian republic.
HS: But if there is a change in Government which you don't want to
happen do you think we would get that referendum? If there is a
change at the next election within the next 12 months will we still get
the referendum?
PM: Well I don't think there will be, and
HS: I thought you would say that.
PM: . and therefore, we will be putting... . continuing this debate.
HS: All right. Trish Townsend is on the line, I believe she is with the Forest
Protection Society yes Trish? Big issue for the Prime Minister, this.
C: Yes indeed. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: How are you Trish?
C: All right. Look, just a word of thanks for your recent efforts to try and
help resolve the crisis facing the timber industry, and the rural
communities, in WA and elsewhere. Mr Keating, in your latest
statement on this issue of woodchipping, you say that in the future,
export woodchips forests can only come from forests that have been
assessed by under a Regional Forest Agreement between the
Commonwealth and the states. I just have two questions the first is
are you aware that in Western Australia we already have such an
agreement in the southern forest region, and that a joint assessment
between the Australian heritage commission and the Department of
CALM has already taken place? And secondly, most of the timber
harvesting areas or logging coupes withdrawn by your Government
for re-assessment have already been assessed under the joint
agreement between CALM and the AFC, so will your Government as
promised in writing by your Environment Minister, Senator John
Faulkner, give full faith and credit to the agreement between CALM
and the AFC, and allow access to those timber harvesting areas?
PM: I think we continue to recognise the worth of CALM, but the
assessments we're doing at the moment are wider, and includes
national state values as well as others, and I think that is one of the
issues which need to be taken into account. We remain committed to
the National Forest Policy statement, and the commitments in the One
Nation document, and I think the quicker we get to a system . for the 
benefit of the listeners who don't understand all these terms, what we
have had in the past is a compartment by compartment assessment of
whether woodchips should be allowed from particular places. We
have said the best way to run the forests is not to have a debate over
an area of 150 square meters at a time, but lets have representative
reserves of trees, of species, of forests, and then the balance of it can
be logged. That's what the National Forest Policy Statement says, and
we want to move to Regional Forest Agreements across the country
with clear definitions which include national estate values as well as
others, and when we have got that, we will have a sensible
industry...... first of all we will do this: we'll have, I think, what most
Australians want that is, the important stands of trees protected, the
trees which have got heritage and national estate values will be
protected, but at the same time we will have the basis for a sustainable
timber industry, and not have this internecine battle over small
compartments of trees every year under these annual licence
renewals. Now that's where we're heading this is what I think will be
the value coming from this debate, and it should have happened
years ago.
HS: Could it have been handled better?
PM: It's about the issues there are smaller... we are seeing smaller and
smaller reserves of pristine trees. The smaller it gets, the more the
environment movement gets agitated about it, and the smaller it is the
more the loggers want to basically take what's left. So, I believe that
we are not a long way away from a plantation based and a regrowth
forest based sustainable timber industry. But we have to protect the
important stands of trees. Now part of the problem of this debate,
Howard, has been that some people in the environment movement
and some in the Wilderness Society have run around saying " there is
1300 compartments or coupes which are pristine stands of trees, and
the Commonwealth Government is not protecting them, and they're
desecrating them" that is just not true.
HS: Well some of them have already been logged?
PM: Exactly. And that is why of that 1300 that some people in the
Wilderness Society are going on about, probably less than 500 are
important stands of trees, and others have been logged once or twice,
or completely logged, in the last half a dozen or 10 years. So, while a
lot of Australians conscientiously do want the Commonwealth... or they
do want to see their forests protected, they have got to know that the
lead for them will not always be coming from the Wilderness Societies
of this world. It will only come from the people who want the balance
between looking after the important trees, and maintaining the forest
products industry which of course we should be well able to do. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PETER KENNEDY, RADIO 6WF, THURSDAY,
16 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KENNEDY: Mr Keating, Tom Jones is he your sort of singer?
PM: He is my sort of singer, not necessarily my sort of songs but he
is my sort of singer.
KENNEDY: What is it about him?
PM: It's that huge bluesy voice big black bluesy voice and he was
doing all this 30 years ago, that's whet amazing about him. I mean he has still got the
horsepower. KENNEDY: Alright he has got the horsepower and I guess the question is
he has been doing it for 30 years you have been doing it for 25 or 28 years. Have you
still got the horsepower and the question I suppose associated with the fact there is
no prime minister who has probably promoted Australia as a nation and our position in
the world more than you nave done in the past couple of years. But yet as f1 as
Western Australia is concerned you are still a relative stranger. Why is that?
PM: I don't think that is right Peter. There Is a conventional wisdom
written by journalists, you know they go to polls and what have you and look at these
things. Now when It comes to forecasting elections and forecasting popularity most
journalists couldn't pick their nose frankly and they are all writing what's happened but
very poor at writing about what is prospective. Remember this, the Labor Party has
had a majority of seats here for most of the period of this Government, a majority of
federal seats In Western Australia ana we are not far away from that even now after
last election. I ne conventional wisdom Defore the last election Is that In some way you
know for various reasons we wouldn't win the election and we did. So I just think the
public are quite discerning, I mean the key thing to think about me and Western
Australia is what policy changes are In the place, why Is Western Australia growing at
a year, this year, 10% growth which is just a phenomenal figure and 6%
employment growth end tho answer is because of this Federal Labor Government's
policies. 
KENNEDY; Alright but it's undeniable that the state is growing very quickly.
as fast as any other state in the country but yet as far as Western Australia is
roncemed you very rarely venture west This is your first tip west In 11 months.
PM: But how many times have I been here in 20 years, dozens of
occasions. KENNCDY; But now you are Prime Minister.
PM: Yes I know, I was coming in August as you know, the Cabinet
came in August but I picked up the flu for the first time in 5 years and It laid me down
for about 10 days and so I missed the August thing but ira two days, a day over and a
day back and I generally make it two or three if I can which really means blanketing
out most of the week, most of the working week and In this job irs very hard to do
that. KENNEDY; But do you acknowledge the fact that Western Australia, a third
of the continent feels somewhat miffed by the fact that you don't seem to be able to
spend as much time here as they think you should?
PM: Look it's not a third of the continent, In terms of the people we
don't go talking to bare hills we talk to people. Its an important constituent part of
this country and for 12 years I have been a minister and mnst of the policies I have
supported pealing away the tarff wall. opening me exchange markets. getting sort of
best practice into Australian industry. competitiveness In other words. All of that has
been in the main favoured Western Australia and Queensland. So In reality I don't
think Western Australia has had any minister In key positions as I have been who has
in rfa favoured it more.
KENNEDY: Yet the same sort of message seems to be coming out of
Queensland because only this morning your Attorney General was reported as having
said that he believes that you should visit Queensland more often. Queensland and
Western Australia the resources rich states and it appears you are neglecting them.
PM* That was a beat up I think and these things happen from time
to time. That story we wont take too much notice of. I was in Queensland last week.
week before last. last week In fact I was In Queensland, I am In Queensland quite
often because It's the same time zone and the distance means that the time you fly
over here you haven't lost a day but the important thing Is, is Western Australia
benefiting from the policies of the Government I lead? Why has it got 10% economic
growth and 6% employment growth? Is it because of the policies of the state
government or the Federal Government and there is only one answer to that? The
Federal Government. Its competitiveness, the exchange rate, inflation, productivity,
these are all the things that make all the bulk trader commodities of western Australia
competitive. They are the things that is ving western Australian manufacturing
base, they are the things which am giving a decent competitive service sector and
tnars wnat matters: Not whether I am over here doing radio programs or going from
this place to that place. I come when I feel I have to and that is to pick up the issues
and get a feel of the community but the core thing for West Australians is, does the
Federal Government implement policies which are of benefit to Western Australia and
the answer to that is very strongly In the affirmative.
KENNEDY; Prime Minister this is a very important year for you I think you
would agree and you seem to have. given the crsis that you nau just a week or two 
ago in Canberra, you seem to have lost patience with the Greens over the
woodchipping row?
PM: No not the Greens, I can't have any truck with the recitation of
untruths which some of these people in the Wilderess Society have been saying.
That is there is 1,300 compartments of forest which are pristine trees, that Is Just
untrue. They say our objoctivos of such a high moral purpose we can actually, how
dare you say that our spiel is wrong. I mean the day I actually accept the fact that
1,300 stands of trees are pristine when in fact less than 500 are we are all In trouble
so we have to deal in facts and truths and a lot of people, I mean from my point of
view there are two comparatives In this debate. One is like most Australians I want to
see the important stands of native forest protected but where they have been logged
through once or twice, where they are no longer pristine there is no point In pretending
they are. So there is an Imperative here to protect the native stands of trees but on
the other hand make sure we have got a sustainable forest products Industry. I think
we have come right down the middle in that debate and all those Australians who
want to see those trees protected have got to know that the Federal Government Is
doing the right thing In protecting them and much of the blurb, much of the rhetoric,
much of the hysteria is basically factually wrong.
KENNEDY: You might say you haven't lost patience with the Greens but
what about the report that you refer to the Greens because of ceaseless demands,
you refer to them privately as neo fascists.
PM: Not even privately I am Just saying some of this sort of bald
recitation of untruths by some people in the Wilderness Society is sort of, you know as
I said Goebbels like behaviour. The sort of recitation of basically untruths and how is
that going to help the debate? I mean how can we pretend that 800 stands of trees
are pristine when in fact they are not How can you have a debate when people, now
what happened in the past we have always had the leadership of the environment
movement with the conservation society where you got more weight and gravity and
gravitas and people got a lead. People interested In environmental issues got a lead,
now the noisiest have taken over and soma of the most extremo elaments of the
wilderness Society and remember this that Bob Brown is running for a Senate seat.
Its not as It he Is any more campaigning Just for the preservation of forests, he Is
competing with other Liberal and Labor candidates for a Senate vacancy, a Senate
seat, a Senate quota. So what Is happening of course the rhetoric has changed to
suit his political ambitions and the ambitions of the Wilderness Society which has
become a political party.
KENNEDY: Well the Green's rhetoric certainly seems to have hardened
towards your government?
PM: No the Wilderness Society not the Greens, the Greens is a
very large expression. Green means the people Interested in green. Could I Just say
last year. do you want me to say this Peter. last year without any real pressure from
the environment movement this Government put aside Shoalwater Bay In Queensland
for ever, Jervis Bay in NSW for ever, and put $ 20 million of the budget to buy back the
whole and the heart of the Daintree. How much have we heard about that? Not a
word. KENNEDY: Are you confident that you will get Green's preferences at the
federal election similar to what former Senator Richardson achieved In 89? 
PM' Look at what we saw yesterday from the Liberal and National
Party. There is the leader of the National Party saying that ho disagrees with Mr
McLachlan he will not support the abolition, the abandonment of the policy of clear
relling uf trees. McLacnlan came and saia tat they the Liberal Party and the Coalition
wouldn't support clear felling. Fischer came out and said we would, I haven't got his
exact expression in front of me but we would not support that policy and we won't
support that policy, so if you look at the people who are interested In the preservation
of the Australian environment and forests. I mean obviously the tail of the National
Party has always wagged the dog but if Fischer comes out and says we are still in
favour of clear felling you can bet pounds to peanuts that's the way Coalition policy
would go in office.
KENNEDY: So you would expect to get Greens preferences?
PM: We are the major party that can form a Government in this
country, we also happen to be the major party that has the environment up ther as
one of the main core issues. Of course I expect that.
KENNEDY: The tight between the media giants for the lucrative Fairfax
media group in Sydney obviously is going to test your media ownership rules. Would
you consider lutting the current major shareholder, that is the Canadian Conrad Black,
increase his stake from 25 to 35% 7
PM: That's a matter for policy and we will think about It as we do In
any of these processes. If he applies for It we will think about it.
KENNEDY: On the other hand do you have a preference for Australia's
media being controlled by Australians?
PM: The nationalist In me always has that preference but we have
already allowed Mr Black's company to buy Telegraph newspapers, to buy 25% of
John Fairfax and Sons.
KENNEDY; Now Kerry Packer has been interviewed on A Current Affair
this evening and during that Interview ha said In part with regard to the Opposition
Leader John Howard, he said John Howard Is a good honest man who has leamed
from the mistakes of the past and he added he believes Australia needs a changing of
the guard.
PM: Well that's the opinion of one, I mean so what
KENNEDY: Just one, not an influential one?
PM: Just one. I mean last time Kerry Packer would tell anybody
who listened that we had no chance of winning the 1993 election. He told me
personally we had no chance of winning the 1987 election and as far as I can
reowlleut his view was the Labor Party wouldn't win the 1990 election. So what more
need I say?
KENNEDY; You don't attach any significance to those comments?
PM: Not really no.
KENNEDY; You are not suggesting or seeing that perhaps he might be
putting a little bit of pressure on you in his bid for control of John Fairfax? 
PM: I am In the pressure business I am in the conflict business
Peter, it would take more than a dozen Kerry Packers to put any pressure on me.
KENNEDY: But I mean he has been friendly tu Labor over the last
years hasn't he?
PM: Not in news management or media terms he hasn't, no. But
you know is ha somebody who believes the Government has done a reasonable job, I
think that is right but is the Channel 9 network programmed to support the
Government. It never has been. I mean are the current affairs programs set up, never
has buen. So Is he a friend or the Govemment In news management terms, no he is
not. KENNEDY: So with regard to Fairfax you wouldn't rule out any attempt by
or any attempt by Conrad Black to come to you, to come to the Government and say
we would like you to lift the percentage limit that we can take in John Fairfax to
PM: I think the Important thing here is process, I mean we are
seeing a tremendous change In media policy with convergence and cross media and I
think process is important that governments have a right to consider these issues,
property consider them.
KENNEDY: Will you be bringing forward your planned review of the
government's media policy because of this?
PM: No I don't think so, no.
KENNEDY; So no reviews planned or what, until after the election?
PM: I am not sure when we would expect this review to be
considered by Cabinet.
KENNEDY: Can I Just ask you about Mabo and Aboriginal land rights? Of
course they are back in the news with the president or the national Native Title
Tribunal saying this week there was significant moral shortcomings In the principles by
which native title was recognised. An observation I would Imagine which would
concern you?
PM: Observations by judges, I obviously read and take some notice
of but I think what led to the point, led to the remark being made was that If some
parcel of land has in the past had some sort of title over it, it has the potential to
extinguish native title. Well mars in the preamble of the Commonwealth Act we have
always understood that the High Court made that clear. I think any suggestion that in
some way land which might otherwise nave bean natve title land but for the fact for a
couple of year it might have had some other lease or something over It Is really about
a statutory base for the granting of native title in the broad. We used to call that land
rights so if the remark is to be taken to mean that we should move the Mabo native
title legislation to statutory land rights I don't support that and that's what I took the
remark to mean.
KENNEDY: He Is the president though of the Native Title Tribunal
Yes and I am the Pnme Minister. 
KENNEDY; And pointing out what he believes to be moral shortcomings in
the legislation.
PM: Well in that case he has got a point to make to his fellow
judges on the High Court bench. It may be that a parcel of land which has had if you
like habitation by indigenes but which for a period had through just a quirk of history a
lease of say 6 years or 10 years or 12 years, that may have extinguished the native
tide. The important thing is to get the land fund bill through because the
Govemments policy was never all about native title, it was all about a combination of
the two. That Is where a grant of interest in land, where a grant of interest in land has
extinguished the native tite and there Is a pastoral lease in this very large fund which
the Government is now proposing that the Parliament should agree to and which of
course was emasculated by the Greens and the Liberal Party in the Senate last year,
would allow Aboriginal people to buy that pastoral lease, you see. So what Justice
French is saying, he is making a comment about the Impact of the vagaries of native
title but to make a social comment you have got to look at the land fund because the
land fund has such a complementary purpose in being able to provide in buying land
and seeing that go to a synthesised native title.
KENNEDY: You have said that you will be looking at amendments to the
native title legislation just after it's been in operation for a while, when is that likely to
be? PM: Operational amendments, not go to the heart of its principles.
You know what the Australian media is like Peter its all blacks and whites and no
greys, well when you are in Government and you ae running a Parliament, running a
Govemment and you have got to legislate, one has to look at the greys and all the
subtle colours. We are not just blacks and whites, amendments do not mean gutting
the native title legislation. What they mean are process issues.
KENNEDY; Well you managed to get the national farmers federal support
of course for the legislation on the basis that the pastoral lease grant didn't extinguish
native title. So what you are saying is you wouldn't want to consider changing the bill
to change that?
PM: In the preamble of the bill the presumption is that pastoral
leases have extinguished native title. Now I think what Justice French's ruling has
said is that in this case with the Century Mine it did extinguish the native title. He
perhaps is musing about the fact it may be shouldn't have. Well that point I
understand the remedy we think is for the land fund to be buying land, do you
understand? In other words if you want perfection here you go back to 1788 and
invest title across the country in the names of the Aboriginal traditional owners, then
you work backwards. Now none of us are in that position. The High Court made a
decision 200 years after first settlement and that may not suit the indigenes obviously
but what we sort to do is to legislate so that they could get the maximum certainty
from that legislation. Notwithstanding the fact that the High Court pretty well made it
clear although no doubt this matter will be tested whether In fact a pastoral lease
extinguishes native title.
KENNEDY; Prime Minister how do you think Labor is travelling in the west?
PM. I made the point to you earlier Peter we have had a majority of
seats in Western Australia pretty much most of the way through since 1983 and if it's
all a matter of delivering the jobs, I mean what was the primary issue upon which the
Government was elected at the last election. It was unAmployment Growth and 
omployment growth and unemployment. The Government has taken that issue up,
adjusted Its policies and we ame now growing faster than any other western world
economy with very low inflation and in Western Australia. Western Australia is actually
growing much faster than the national average with low Inflation and with very strong
employment growth so on the basis of what we said we would do, what we wore
elected to do and what we have done, why wouldn't Western Australians return the
Government again?
KENNEDY: You take the credit for that, Promier Richard Court said today
Western Australian people Should taKe the credit for that Itfs not being reflected in
support for
PM: The policy frameworK comes fom the Federal Government. Of
course it's done by people and by the West Australian people and business and
others but the framework Is what maks the difference and Irs like wandering around
a casino with your pockets full and saying but where did It come from. I mean where
did the growth come from, it came from the right cast of national policies from the
Labor Government thafs where it came from.
KENNEDY: When will we see you back in the west?
PM; I don't Know Peter, out I always like seeing you.
KENNEDY: Won't be 11 months?
PM: Probably not but I mean go bacK over 25 years. I mean let's
not go on about this too much. This silly game that Premier Court plays and the rest I
have been coming to this state for 25 years and I didn't 3ee anybody saying Mr
Keating has been here 3 times tho year or 4 times this year as I have In some otheryears.
it just depends on the load of business and how you can manage your
engagements. KENNEDY: When you make it back look forward to talking to you again.
PM: Thank you Peter.
ENDS 



06/ 03 ' 95 15: 05 % Y06 273 2923 MP SSOFC
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS AT THE PEARCE RAAF BASE, PERTH, 17 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I would like to say how much I have enjoyed coming here and having a look
at the base. I have had a long interest in the development of the Australian
Airforce and from my first years in Parliament 25 years ago I used to go to the
Commonwealth aircraft factories and the Government aircraft factories in
Melbourne when we were still putting together the Mirage and the Macchi and
I have taken an interest in the defence procurement issues over the years
and I am always, I suppose, keen to see the new types of equipment and
listen to what people have to say about them, about their capability and about
which particular aircraft they like and why. Even though we can took at a
technical specification of what they can do there is always that pilot feet that
you can only get by talking to people who fly them and use them.
Here in Perth, this is a major base in Australia for flying training and it is
another one of those things which, I think, impacts well upon the economy of
Western Australian. That is, the fact that we have a substantial defence
presence here in Western Australia, both maritime and the presence here at
Pearce and this is good for the economy and given the fact we have now
transcontinental east coast and west coast defence bases and bases across
the north of Australia, we can see the sophistication of the Australian
Defence Force and its capabilities becoming evident to anybody that takes
even a cursory interest.
I am particularly delighted to see our friends here from Singapore with the
Singapore Flying Training School. We are delighted to be able to be hosts to
Singapore in the area of flying training and, I think, this has to be a
forerunner of further defence co-operation between us and that we can in the
future see with not simply the amenity of this field and the facilities here for
Singapore, not just getting them to work right, but getting the relationships
working completely and fully and co-operatively between the members of our
airforce and your own. This means, I think, we can then take those next
steps because we are both members of the Five Power Defence
Arrangements, we have a lot in common we do joint exercises together
PM PRESS OFFICEQ00O1/ 007 
08/ 03 ' 95 15: 09 eY06 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE It 0 04 / 1177
2
Now this year we are celebrating remembering the 50th Anniversary of the
end of the Second World War. VP Day Victory in the Pacific, and of course
in Europe it is VE Day Victory in Europe: 1945 1995, half a century later.
But it is not only a celebration of the democracies over fascism, it is a
celebration of the combined community values and effort of that period of the
War. We are celebrating the fact that as a nation we did something together,
and they're celebrating in Europe that as nations they did things together.
So, it is the action of communities together that bring the memorable social
phases, and the memorable social changes. So that is why we say we move
forward together we have values and considerations of one another, as a
group, as a community and it is these cultural values which mark out the
quality of our social democracy.
So that goes to things like giving young people a chance to a full education,
opportunity, inclusion. So university for instance and we just had Mr
Flannagan tell us about Murdoch. When I was a young man, Universities
were there for basically an elite a small elite. Now, as result of the policies
of this Government, it's more generally available but I will come to that in a
moment. And it is those opportunities, and the other thing about our social
democracy is to say that in all of these things like access and equity access
and fairness to health, to education, to aged-care, to support for the young
that we have a community which has something nice about it something
sweet about it that isn't about only giving the values to the values to the
smart ones, or the rich ones and leaving the poor ones or the
disadvantaged ones behind. In other words, again the sense of inclusion,
the sense of community. Now, that's what we have a unique chance to do,
and one of the reasons we can do it is because in this country we have
strong rates of employment. In Western Australia, in the last year, we have
had 5% employment growth. If we compare that, say, to any European state,
they would be having 1 So you have got this huge growth and employment
coming from the recovery which the Federal Government has sought to
induce. And in the economy in this state this year it grew 10%. Now, you
may say " well, is that a lot?". WellI I say to you that it's a real lot. Because of
we kept it up for 10 years, we would on 10 years replicate that which has
taken 150-200 years to produce. So, if you look at Western Australia over a
century and a half, it has taken us that long to get this big, but in one year we
have got 10% bigger. So if we did it for 10 years, we would actually
reproduce the whole thing in terms of wealth in 10 years. That phenomenal
growth, and phenomenal opportunity and phenomenal employment is the
thing which gives us egalitarian values. Because you can't believe that you
have a right to that sort of society without everybody having a right to a job.
So, we have this great chance I can't think of any time when any young
group of West Australians would have ever faced a period as exciting as this,
or with opportunities like this. We're now for the first time in our history
closest to the fastest growing markets of the world, that's in the Asia Pacific
near us. When I was your age the markets we sold to were Western Europe
and North America. We were a long way from the markets of the world. Now,
the markets have shifted, and two-thirds of all we produce goes to Asia, and
is right on our doorstep. So, all of you have that opportunity which I didn't 
06/ 03 ' 95 15: 10 IM06 273 2923 P RS FIEt 0/ 0
3
have, or most of us up on this stage didn't have, and as well as that, you have
got the opportunities of education to go out into a clever country and take
clever opportunities here and abroad. Ten years ago, only 3 young people in
completed secondary school. That was an appalling statistic for any
country that prided itself as being a smart country with good opportunities
only three in ten completed secondary school. This year, it is 8 in 10, which
has been a revolution in Australian education, and 40% of those young
people are streaming their way into University. Forty per cent did also in
1983, but it was 40% of 3 in 10, not 40% of 8 in 10. This Government has put
around the country the equivalent of 16 Universities, the size of the major
city universities, to take up the extra intake. And now we're reforming
vocational education or TAFE through the Australian National Training
Authority because the numbers speak for themselves. If 40% are going to
university, what were the other 60% doing what were the majority doing?
Well only a small proportion were being trained. But if we can train young
Australians, and give them the chance through university, or through TAFE,
then you could participate more fully in this country, and you can go out into
the world and do it too. Now, none of that was available some of that was
available to me but not all of that was because we never had these markets
in this proximity to Asia, in terms of our trade, at that time.
The other great change that makes this possibility, I think, the excitement of a
social democracy of quality, is the participation of young women in education
the high participation of young women in education. And it is a matter of
great pleasure to me that in this year more young women have gone to
universities than young men. Because always, it was young men who had
that title, by a long margin. It is a measure of how far we have come. And
the notion used to be, in families, that the boys or the young men were the
ones who had to be the breadwinners, and where the opportunities and the
effort and the family effort was given, but not so young women, or the girls.
Now, there is something intrinsically unfair about that blatantly unfair. Why
shouldn't the life opportunities and the excitement that this country can offer
be equally available to women as to men, to young women as to young men.
So, this huge participation in secondary schools from young women, and now
them going into university is a measure of out social democracy. It is a
measure of our fairness it's an essential fairness. It is a measure of the
opportunities we must extend to our community as a whole.
So, if you look at where we have come 10 years ago this was basically a
country locked up by what are called tariffs protection for manufacturing.
Western Australia was a mining and agricultural state we sold minerals
because the Japanese needed it for steel. Had they not needed it for steel,
we wouldn't have sold minerals. We would have basically been relying on
agriculture with a few services in the city. The employment opportunities
would have been vastly limited the chances of a full participation in
education would have been simply a dream. But now you can see that
because this Government has opened Australia up taken away the tariff
barriers, opened up the financial markets we now have in Western Australia
sophisticated manufacturing yesterday I was at a business that makes alloy
steel for the Pratt and Whitney Jet Engine company for Boeing 747s. Could
you imagine that there 10 years ago? Or making world-classed aluminium
PM PRESS OFFICEQ 005/ 007 
06/ 03 * 95 15: 12 0' 0' 6o 22733 229223 MPESOFC
4
ferries for the world? It just wouldn't have happened 10 years ago. Or a
sophisticated tourist industry, with high quality tourism services? All of these
things have come because Australia has opened up and we are richer and
smarter and better for it. But we can't drive this sort of change without an
educated, trained population. And you know I gave some numbers for
Germany the other day in Germany, for instance which is a highly
developed country the information base of manufacturing lasts 5 years and
then it is obsolete. And in information technology it lasts 2 years and then it
is obsolete. So every 5 years, or 2 years, you have got to turn it over. This
will be the same in Australia, which means that training will be the essence
training and education will be the essence of your life opportunities, as
technological change speeds up. But we are ready, and we have got the
effort and the commitment and the financial commitment to give you that
education, and that change.
But one of the other thing I think it is important for you to know is this: I have
always felt somewhat sad for young people who try and get their tertiary
entrance examination, and then find they miss and they lose out on a tertiary
education. Or worse, they have no vocational education. What we have in
place now, with the Australian National Training Authority and vocational
education or TAFE, is that you can go off to TAFE and do a course, and get
accredited units to return to the mainstream of a university campus. In other
words, it's not sudden death it's not a case of missing the TEE and missing
out for life you can actually stream your way back as a mature student a
couple of years later. You can say " look, I didn't do as well as I should have
done with the Western Australian Certificate of Education, I haven't got my
TEE, but what I'll do is I'll get into TAFE, and I'll get those marks, and I'll get
that accreditation, and I'll go back to university". Or, alternatively, you will
say ' look, in TAFE there are better courses for my place in the workforce than
there are for me in university, so I am going to get a Diploma from a TAFE
college". Now what we're trying to do the Federal Government is to keep
the resources up to the university system and with the states to TAFE, so
that you have got that chance. It is one thing us saying to you stay in
secondary school, complete Year 12, but then after that we haven't got
enough places for you. What we have had to do is build not only your
participation in school, but the places for you. Now all that is there, and we
have seen this great change ahead of us where you can participate.. . where
you can go straight into university or to TAFE, or to TAFE and work your way
back to university, or to open-learning and learn at home and those of you
who have got a PC and given the fact that as we extend the fibre-optic cable
network we are going to have PCs in many Australian homes you will be
able to do the open-learning course at home. And that won't be for people
just in remote areas, but actually for people in cities as well. So the
educational opportunities are going to be profound, and then if you can get a
link to somewhere like Murdoch University or the Maritime Industries, or the
Navy, where you have got a particular focus as you have here in
Rockingham on the Maritime Industry, and work associated with it and study
and learning associated with it, then you have got another string to your bow
another life opportunity. PM PRESS OFFICEQ~ 006/ 007 
06/ 03 ' 95 15: 13 006 273 2923PM PH PRREESSOSF COFFICE
So, let me recap on all that. What do we face? We face a high growth, high
opportunity country with low inflation. You have got opportunities in school
and in post-school education that no generation before you ever had. You
have got proximity to the fastest growing markets in the world, you have got
the chance of learning another language in school, you have got a chance of
using that language in Indonesia or Malaysia or Hong Kong or in China or in
Japan or in any of these countries around us, and you can do it in the
context of knowing that when you leave school, that huge employment growth
that is just coming through is going to give you a fairly good chance of finding
an interesting job. And doing it in the context of a society that cares about
itself and has mutual commitments to one another where we actually say " if
you're sick, we will look after you, if you're aged, we look after you, if you're
from a low-income family, we give you income support. If you're a young
person, we encourage you to stay in school, if you drop out, we give you
training and work opportunities. If you are long-term unemployed, we pick
you up and give you a job subsidy and we get you back into work'. In other
words, policies that produce a society that has a kindliness about it, and a
sense of decency about it.
I think one of the great challenges for Australia is to infuse our young people
with that sense of excitement to let you believe that the future is as exciting
as I think it is. And to stay that we won't let any of our young people down,
and we won't let them drop out of the system. Because a country that doesn't
love its children has no soul at all. So, this is the future we are speaking of
for you one which is about you, because the rest of us most of us we've
had our corner of the action already, and their is already someone ready to
pension us off, particularly in public life. Mind you, we resist it and fight it, but
the fact is the wave that matters is you, and that's why your faith in Australia,
and its ideals, become central to the sort of life you will have in the future. It
is my pleasant duty here today to not simply talk to you, and have a chance to
meet you, but to also underline this link you have with the Maritime Industries
and with the Navy, and just to remind you of what a great opportunity that is.
Now, Richard Flannagan asked me to unveil a plaque to make this point, and
remember this event, and that for me, of course, is going to be a great
pleasure, and which I'll do in a moment. But before I do, let me say the
greatest pleasure here today for me is to talk to you because I always look
forward to every opportunity to talk to young people, because you have got
an open mind, you're hard thinkers, you're hard assessors you are not
interested in nonsense and fairy floss, you want some real facts and some
argument, and you're listening and you're hoping, and what more could any
national leader want? Thank you very much indeed, and I will now unveil the
plaque. ends. IQj007/ 007 



KXPRIME
MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, VIETNAMESE BUDDHIST TEMPLE, LANSDALE, WA
17 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: While I have been in Western Australia, we have had some political
reshaping going on in the east, with Mr Howard trying to do the political
chameleon number and almost vanish against any background the
budget paper, society, his history, his past, his old policies and I now
notice with a round of print interviews yesterday, they again reek of
the opportunism which he displayed all last week in trying to say; " isn't
it a dreadful thing that the Government has got spending cuts", yet he
in fact favoured them. You will have noticed that with the slightest bit
of pressure, which I applied to him last week a little bit of the
blowtorch on the belly and straight away he is now saying that he
only tried the spending cuts racket on the Government as a way of
putting pressure on the Government, and today he is backing off he
says: " he's got to be realistic, and revise his position about big
spending cuts". So he's out there last week saying " isn't it shocking
all these spending cuts", and I say to him " there he is being the same
opportunist about this that he was about all of those things in the
1980s his views on migration, his stand on various other policies",
and straight away he is out there dropping it. But, in these interviews
today, what we can't find if you dredge through the tonnes of wasted
newsprint just from the Howard interviews there is not one single
idea. What I think we can only deduce from all this all of these interviews
is the only plan is to hide his policies. His interviews are dominated by
backflips, indecision, policy weakness and a lack of vision, and as
Geoff Kitney in the Sydney Morning Herald said, " John Howard
remade may be unrecognisable", and then we actually have the
Courier Mail saying " vague is best" " vague is best". So John Howard
thinks he can win a national election by standing for nothing, and by
being as vague as he possibly can. As I said, he keeps trying to
remake himself I described him last week as the Ronald Biggs of the 
Liberal Party, that he didn't have a past and now he is trying to
remake himself again this week. He says he is now going after the
blue-collar vote, but who can forget the contempt in which workers
were held with his " JobsBack Policy"? Or who can forget the recent
trouncina of his candidate which w as suffered in the Communication
Workers Union election? I mean, this was only a few months ago. So,
he expects I don't know whether he thinks working Australians are
silly, or gullible but this guy is out to rip their wages to pieces he has
opposed every wage increase since 1983, yet he says he is going for
the blue-collar vote.
He said he would support sensible spending cuts, but then refuses to
nominate which ones he would support, even though he has a primary
list of proposed spending cuts by Departments. He says he denies in
the Telegraph, in Sydney, that he has an inability to make tough
decisions he denies he has the ability to make tough decisions and
then he appoints both Crichton-Browne and Prosser as his delegates
in Western Australia because he won't make the tough decisions about
which one it should be. He says history is important to him when it
comes to the monarchy, but he tells the Telegraph that when it is his
own history, history is not important. When we talk about his history
it's not important, but history is important to him. He tells journalists he
may change his mind on the republic, but he's against it now. In other
words, if the Prime Minister Mr Keating will actually lead Australia
towards a republic, he might make his mind up and he might follow.
Some leader! He indicated he may change his mind about the republic
while he was still opposed to it now he could not say what his view
might be in 5 years. In other words, " if Mr Keating will show
leadership" as usual " I might consider my position, and I might
fol low',.
But as we go through these amazing acrobatics, he says that there
was a reform fatigue in Australia, and in the Australian electorate that
he believed there was a desire for gentler policies. In other words, no
more reform. So if you look at the headlines ' Vague is best", Mr
Kitney's view that he may become unrecognisable, that he is walking
away from all these policies you wonder what he actually stands for.
Some of my critics and his supporters like Mr Alan Woods from The
Australian, or Mr Steve Burrell from the Financial Review, of Mr Des
Moore what do they think of their great dry hero now? When he is
opposed to revenue raising, he's opposed to interest rate rises, and
he's opposed to large spending cuts in other words, he is opposed to
all the variables of an Australian Budget. So where does he stand? I
mean, where is the hairy-chested Budget keeper of old? Where is the
dry Mr Howard? Well, he has dried up. He has almost dried away.
So, it was very revealing... . there is Mr Howard backing off budget cuts,
but then he said Mr Howard said that he would oppose in the
Senate any tax increases in the Budget as an exercise in political
accountability. In other words, he will try and wreck the Government's 
budget, but is opposed to tax increases himself, he's opposed to large
spending cuts he says and he is also opposed to using monetary
policy or interest rates to slow the economy.
He says the countrp, has ot reffrrrn fatique. and he mtpnts be a
political chameleon. The question has to be then asked why do we
need him? If we think Australia should become a republic, he says
he's not sure he will see where Mr Keating leads us, and if he leads,
he may follow. Well, I don't mind leading. I don't mind leading and I
am after followers, even if it's him. But he goes on to say that he has
expressed serious reservations about the Racial Vilification
Legislation, casting doubt on the Coalition's promise to produce it's
own Bill, where they would not support the Liberal and National Party
would not support the Government's Racial Vilification Legislation,
but introduce their own, he is now saying they may not even introduce
their own. They may not even introduce their own. So, on that he has
sort of moved backwards. So, I think, I can only, I mean, I'm not a
great admirer of sub editors in this country, but The Courier Mail did
pretty well today and ' Vague is Best' from Mr Howard. I mean here he
is with a round of interviews ' Vague is Best' is about all that people
could drag from Mr Howard's chameleon like stunts over the last
couple of days. So, as long as we now know that the sort of
government which Mr Howard is proposing to Australia is one which
has no policy specificity, no strength in any of the fiscal or budgetary
instruments, no clarity in where he stands ideologically and only an
opportunist view that he is goina to support, look after, the blue collar
people who he spent half of working life trying to down in every
wage round and every tax Lnd every benefit that ever came their
way. I don't know whether he thinks they are silly or gullible or both.
At any rate, at least I now know what I am dealing with a political
blanc mange and one thing about him, I'd probably be able to stretch
him around a bit. If he is pliable and rubbery, that will do me fine.
J: Maybe he thinks all he has to do is tread water.
PM: Or melt. Tread water or melt. Change shape again.
J: You don't seem to be very impressed with him, but Mr Packer does.
PM: Well, that's all right. I mean, he and Mr Packer have obviously had
conversations.
J: Do you think Mr Howard has promised something to him?
PM: Well, I think, there is no doubt that Mr Howard has given him the nod
that he would remove the cross media rules.
J: Are you going to have to make some decisions about that in the near
future? 
PMV: Well, I may well do, may well have to.
J: There are reports that Mr Murdoch has bought more Fairfax shares.
PMV: Well, who knows, who knows.
J: Are you going to be intimidated by Mr Packers remarks last night?
PM: No, I told him yesterday, I am in the conflict business. I don't take the
troubles I give them to people like that.
J: Are you going to have to enforce the 15 per cent law though?
PM: I'm sorry, you look taller than yesterday.
J: With people buying shares, Mr Packer and Mr Murdoch, the
Government is surely going to have to step in.
PM: Well, the Government will make policy wherever it needs to be made,
wherever we come to a policy fork in the road, we will go one way or
another.
J: Are you at one at the moment?
PM: Not necessarily, no.
J: There are elements in Caucus that want to tighten the cross, media
ownership laws.
PM: We have got elements in Caucus that want to do most everything, but
anyway.
J: Is that just an anti-Packer thing?
PM: I think there is a genuine desire in this country for plurality in the media
and ownership and it is a good thing. Look here in Western Australia,
you have got one newspaper and one newspaper only, you know the
Pravda of the West. You can have a day out here and not even be
recognised, just obliterated, just like a Pravda sub editor. That is why
we need plurality. That's why I'm glad to see you all here.
J: Is this a nationalistic argument? Is this an argument about Australians
owning Australian newspapers?
PM: Australians obviously should have, at least, as many rights as
foreigners, but again, there is another overlaying thing with that and
that is the concentration of ownership and plurality. 
J: Is he just flouting the laws?
PM: I don't know. I'll have to take advice about that. Ok, well let's leave
that bit there. What else have you got?
J: Can I just ask you one more on that.
PM: Well, maybe, just one. Promise, cross your heart and hope to die.
J: Is Mr Packer thumbing his nose at the Government?
PM: I don't know. Did it take you long to think that question up.
J: Have you enjoyed your stay here?
PM: I have actually, but Richard got very snaky yesterday, didn't he? Not
making a pun I mean, snaky and he came and said, he come out very
ashen saying, what was the word he used, he said ' no, I'm not thin
skinned' or words to that effect.
J The Premier has come out this morning and accused you of using tax
payers money to campaign in marginal Labor seats.
PM: Oh shucks, did he? Shucks.
J: What do you mean by that?
PM: Shucks.
J: Have you seen reports this morning that the Ford Motor Company is
considering closing its operations in Victoria?
PM: I haven't seen it.
J: Last time you were here Mr Keating, I suspect you may have been a bit
more reserved about the Premier. You didn't try and upset him.
You're comments were a bit less provocative. Have you changed your
attitude?
PM: I think Western Australians should note that when the Prime Minister
of Australia comes to Western Australia, the West Australian Premier
should try and do business on the things between us. But, you have
got a Western Australian Premier who is so arrogant and puffed up
with his own importance that he thinks he doesn't need to do any real
business with the Commonwealth Government. Well, that's fine with
me, I mean, I think that is a mistake, but that's the way he has chosen
to make it.
J: Is it just words or is it affecting the relationship? 
PM: Let the people of Western Australia make a judgement about these
sort of antics that he puts on. I mean, I come over here it is a planned
visit, the itinerary is well known, he was invited to at least one of the
fuJnctions and I do see . jeff Kennett. I do see John Fqhey, I do see
Wayne Goss and half the time the media don't know I'm seeing them.
We go in, just have a talk about various things, try to get things
resolved. But here it is grand standing and little boy games and that is
why I said, if he wants to play games, well we can give him a game.
J: How successful do you think your message was? That is, that the
Federal government is responsible for Western Australia's growth?
PM: Well, that is, I think, the central message that West Australians should
understand. That is, the growth in Western Australia is coming from
the Federal government's policies, but these State Ministers wonder
around cutting ribbons on projects and they say where did these come
from. You know, they are cutting ribbons saying where do these come
from? Well, they came from the Federal government, that's where they
came from. I think it is important that Western Australians know that
the central plank of the last election campaign wherein I committed
myself to growth and employment growth has been faithfully honoured
by me and the Federal Labor party. Thank you.
ends 


19 February 1995
Compere: The pressure on the Prime Minister is intensifying. The&nbsp;latest opinion poll show him well behind John Howard&nbsp;and Labor trailing in voter support. Now Paul Keating&nbsp;is engaged in a titanic clash with Australia's richest&nbsp;man, Kerry Packer, over media ownership laws. But&nbsp;Mr Keating has never been one to flinch from a fight&nbsp;and this morning he is in our Canberra studio. To talk&nbsp;with him Sunday's political editor, Laurie Oakes. Goodmorning Laurie.
Laurie Oakes: Good morning Jim.&nbsp;Mr Keating welcome to the&nbsp;program.
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Thank you Laurie.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;It's been a long time.
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Well there's always quality whenever you and I meet, it&nbsp;is always a quality event.
Laurie Oakes: &nbsp;Prime Minister are there any votes in media ownership&nbsp;or is it the kind of esoteric issue that only interests&nbsp;politicians and journalists and media proprietors?
Paul Keating: No, I think it is a matter of great interest to the public.&nbsp;You can see that whenever this issue ever arises, the&nbsp;amount of emotions which it stirs, and that's why I think&nbsp;the reason that we see so much antagonistic debate about&nbsp;the proprietors is because these rules are there for a&nbsp;purpose and they work.
Laurie Oakes:What do you think of Kerry Packer?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Well I think Kerry Packer is a hard headed business&nbsp;person who has gone about building his life and his&nbsp;empire with great certainty but this fracas has got a&nbsp;history to it and the history is that to do with Optus.
Laurie Oakes&nbsp;In what way?
Paul Keating&nbsp;Well the Packer camp put on the government the notion&nbsp;that we should award to Optus exclusive franchises&nbsp;across the country. Now what that means is this that if&nbsp;Optus lies a fibre optic cable for pay television andtelephones Telecom can't lay a cable in the same street&nbsp;so we would have a gid system. For instance Optus&nbsp;would have Darling Point, Telecom would have Point&nbsp;Pipe; Otpus would have St Kilda, Telecom would have&nbsp;East Melbourne. Now if you take that out over six or&nbsp;seven years what you would find is that as the telephony&nbsp;comes with the pay television half of Telecom's market&nbsp;share, half of the existing market value, I sorry, of&nbsp;Telecom would have been transferred to Optus. Now&nbsp;that's somewhere around $ 7 billion.
Laurie Oakes: But surely what the government elected to do meant&nbsp;there was a continuation or a monopoly?
Paul Keating: :&nbsp;No what we said was, we would allow Optus and&nbsp;Telecom to lay cables in the same street in competition&nbsp;with one another and we gave them a five year period&nbsp;within which both companies could get their licences up.Now it's a long time since any company has come to the&nbsp;Commonwealth of Australia and said, we want you&nbsp;under pressure to grant to us what will be, over time,&nbsp;the equivalent of six to seven billion dollars. In other&nbsp;words the de facto privatisation of Telecom. Now the&nbsp;government said no, I said no, and Michael Lee said no.
Laurie Oakes&nbsp;But what about the situation where News&nbsp;through its deal with Telecom has public&nbsp;financing Rupert Murdoch's pay TV aspirations.Surely&nbsp;&nbsp;that's of concern as well?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;No. The propositions from Mr Murdoch and Mr&nbsp;Cowley let me say their relation with the government&nbsp;have been completely proper what they have proposed,they will never own the cable, it will be owned by&nbsp;Telecom, Telecom will charge the pay TV business a feeand it is front end loaded so that the returns come backto Telecom first. So there is no problem about that and&nbsp;let me just make this clear, that News Limited wasprepared to have a competitive system but Optus, or thePacker version of the Optus proposal, was that Telecomshouldn't be able to lay a cable in the same street asOptus. Now I said this to them, the last scam I had runpast me that was ever this large to transfer seven oreight billion from the Commonwealth public purse to anindustrial company, the last thing I saw like that when Isaw reported Murray Farquhar's reported attempts totake the gold reserves from the Philippines NationalBank. I mean that is the last seam that large.+
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;Prime Minister that is a bit harsh isn't it?
Paul Keating: &nbsp;No, honestly, that is the last seam that large. I mean&nbsp;that was the sort of weight put on us by the Packer camp&nbsp;and Optus and Mr Mansfield from Optus went and said&nbsp;that on the Allan Jones program because Mr Jones hasbeen running their propaganda said that we were part&nbsp;of the conspiracy to keep Optus out. That is, how dare&nbsp;we say that there should be competition in every street&nbsp;in the country. How dare Telecom have the right to laya cable beside Optus. Now this appearance the other&nbsp;day by Mr Packer has this antecedence about it and&nbsp;understand that the integrity of public policy, the&nbsp;integrity of the protection of the national interest, this &nbsp;government was not found wanting I can assure you.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;But Allan Ramsay yesterday, and Allan Ramsay is not aknown sycophant of Mr Packer, he wrote yesterdayabout the perception of the government doing favoursfor Rupert Murdoch and his business interests in thiscountry.
Paul Keating: But Allan is a corridor vacuum cleaner Laurie, you&nbsp;know that. I mean he's down there picking up gossip&nbsp;and nonsense around the corridors. Allan gave&nbsp;journalism away 15 years ago.Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;But do you deny there is that perception?
Paul Keating:Look the perception is wrong. Let me just make thisclear, if Telecom's made a joint venture with Microsoft,with Mr Gates, is there anything wrong about that?Why did Telecom do this? Telecom did it becauseOptus vision decided Optus would go into the visionbusiness and become a pay television business. Andeverywhere around the world wherever you can get yourpay TV cable under somebody's door the telephonypiggy back is on it. So to protect Telecom's telephonybusiness they decided quickly to find somebody whocould run a pay television business and they wentthrough a selection process and came up with NewsLimited. News Limited will never own the cable andthe revenues are front end loaded for Telecom.
Laurie Oakes:Paul Keating:Laurie Oakes:Paul Keating:Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;Well let's get back to the Fairfax question which waswhere we began. Do you agree that the presentsituation at Fairfax is so unstable that it can't last, thatsomething has to give?
Paul Keating: Well no I don't. I don't agree about that at all. At themoment Mr Black has control of the business withof the stock.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;But Kerry Packer has announced that he is going tomove up to just under 25% of the stock. RupertMurdoch is a player. You've got three media mogulsnone of whom by law can really exercise proper control,can really take it over. That is unsustainable isn't it?
Paul Keating: I don't think so. I mean how many public companies doyou know around the country where people have gotof the stock Laurie? I mean, nearly every publiccompany, the largest shareholder would have five or 10%
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;Well Mr Black has made it pretty clear he is going tocome to the government and ask to increase his holdingsfrom the present limit of 25%. What is your attitude tothat?
&nbsp;
Paul Keating: &nbsp;Well when he comes we'll look at it. But can I just say,&nbsp;Mr Packer's great claim is that it is a dreadful thing that&nbsp;a foreigner can control this medium. This was the&nbsp;whole import of his address the other day. Well let me&nbsp;just read from the House of Representatives Select&nbsp;Committee where he appeared. It starts off:
Kerry Francis Bulmore Packer, Chief Executive,&nbsp;Consolidated Press Holdings, 54 Park Street, was sworn&nbsp;and examined.So under sworn oath he says this: The Chairman says:Do you not agree with the view that there is some threatto Australia's national interest if too many of ournewspapers are owned or influenced by foreigners?He says:Who owns the papers in England? The Daily Telegraphis owned by a Canadian, Today is owned by anAmerican, the Sunday Express and Daily Express areowned by an American, the Mirror is owned by anEnglishman who was a Czech. Lord Robomere isthe only one I can think of who is actually British. TheExpress was owned by Breaver Brook for fifty years,the newspapers in England have always been owned byforeigners, Lord Thompson, the whole lot. It is anonsense argument.And he goes on to say:Nowhere in the English speaking world are yourestricted from owning newspapers except here for someextraordinary reason we're sitting down and saying youcan only have 20% ownership. It is absurd.So under oath he is telling us, sworn, what he's sworn,he's telling us that it's absurd to have foreign restrictionson foreign ownership. He's saying it's a nonsense
Laurie Oakes:Paul Keating:Laurie Oakes:Paul Keating:Laurie Oakes: argument but in his Walt Disney like appearance onDisneyland on a Sunday night in more benign modeKerry is telling us it is a shocking incursion into thenational interest. Now how does he reconcile his swornviews to the House of Representatives Committee andhis views the other day?
Laurie OakesWell he sounds a bit like a politician I suppose.
Paul Keating:No, it sounds a bit disingenuous which is what it is.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;But are you concerned about Kerry Packer moving up tojust under 25%. Is he breaking any law by doing that?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;No. Look let me make this clear how it works Laurie.At 15% under the rules Mr Packer is deemed to havecontrol unless he can prove otherwise and what ishappening before the ABA at the moment is anexamination where the onus is on him to prove hedoesn't control it. So there has always been somethingin the public mind that at 15 you're sort of barred. Atwhat happens the onus of proof changes and he'sdeemed to have control. Now he's got to prove, theonus is on him to prove, not the ABA, the onus is onhim to prove he doesn't control it.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;So what he's doing his increase in the shareholding istotally above board as far as the law is concerned?
Paul Keating:&nbsp; In terms of the ownership and control provisions he hasto establish that. He has to establish he hasn't gotcontrol but the ABA can always examine how theownership and control provisions are actually workingand if it finds them inadequate advise the governmentand, of course, this could include the associated actionsof the takeover provisions.
Laurie Oakes&nbsp;How does that come into it?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Well the takeover provisions have an impact of aroundand I'm not certain whether Mr Packer will haveone company at 20% or two companies dividing thatstock.
Laurie Oakes&nbsp;&nbsp;Prime Minister we'll take a break and return in a&nbsp;moment.
Welcome back. Prime Minister were suggesting that if&nbsp;Mr Packer reaches the 20% holding that he will have to&nbsp;make a formal takeover bid, that the 25% is irrelevant.&nbsp;
Paul Keating:&nbsp;No I'm not suggesting that. That is for the ABA to&nbsp;make a judgment about Laurie and they obviously will.
Laurie Oakes: There is a review of the television and&nbsp;broadcasting&nbsp;industry scheduled to happen before ' 97. What is the&nbsp;future of that review now in the light&nbsp;of what is&nbsp;happening?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Well the government must under the Act have a review&nbsp;before July 1997 amongst other things to decide whether&nbsp;to assess the benefits to accrue if more than three&nbsp;stations were given licences. In other words to assesswhether there should be a fourth network. Now let me&nbsp;just say this Laurie, we will have that review, and can I&nbsp;just say for my part I think one of the absent things in&nbsp;Australian television is a family channel. A channel&nbsp;where you're not deluged with violence on the news&nbsp;services. I mean, if you look at the Channel 9 news&nbsp;every night the first two or three stories will be a road&nbsp;accident or a murder or something violent.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;Or something out of the House of Representatives.
Paul Keating:Well that generally takes number four or five. And it isthe same with most of the other channels as well. Ithink there is, I mean we're pumping violence into ourkids, we're pumping it in news, we're pumping it insome current affairs programs, we're certainly pumpingit in drama and I think that we should be thinking in thiscountry about whether we can have a channel whichdoesn't affront everybody's sensibilities with murders,rapes, killings, road smashes and maybe fourth networkLaurie Oakes:&nbsp;Is there such a network anywhere else?
Paul Keating: I think in the US there are stations, whether you wouldcall them a network, are actually doing this. But if wedon't take some stand against this, I mean, if we were tothrow the system open as John Howard suggests wewould have the American bilge coming in here, wewould wipe out Australian drama, we would have ourkids subjected to this sort of American dramaticproductions and that is why it is important that we keepcultural control of Australia's drama and mediaindustries, and can I just say on that very point, don't letJohn Howard tell you he denied or sought to deny myclaim that he has made clear to Mr Packer that he willsuspend the cross media rules. I can tell you thisadvisedly, Laurie, he has made that clear, he has madethat clear, and when asked by the Herald Sun on Friday,if he was perturbed about Mr Packer owning bothChannel 9 and Fairfax he said:" There's some case given the changes in technology forquerying the continued suitability of the current crossmedia ownership provisions."He went on in the Financial Review to say:" I think technology has rendered the cross media rulesredundant." Isn't it coincidental that when all of this is on after hehas had a number of conversations with Mr Packer all ofa sudden the cross media rules are to go to make theway clear for Mr Packer to own the two nines and theNine Network and John Fairfax and Sons.
Laurie Oakes:
Laurie Oakes:
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;&nbsp;I would have thought the word John Howard is saying is&nbsp;it is nearly self evident, technology has moved on.&nbsp;You've said similar things yourself. But on the subject&nbsp;of John Howard
Paul Keating:Technology has moved on but that is not to say that weshouldn't have rules to give us plurality in the media.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;&nbsp;Well on the subject of John Howard. It seems to mostpeople that this row was partly because Kerry Packergot your nose by saying John Howard would be a goodPrime Minister.
Paul Keating:&nbsp;I've made the point Kerry being a poor judge at the lastthree elections. Now I like Kerry but one thing he isnot good at is picking election outcomes.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;But he didn't pick an election outcome. He said thatJohn Howard is decent, John Howard is honest. Nowthat is the perception that most people have of JohnHoward isn't it?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Well I've always thought it was basically an ironic&nbsp;remark this remark about honesty. He was quite happy&nbsp;to sit it out when the Tax Commissioner was bellowing&nbsp;almost on a loud hailer about the criminal avoidance of&nbsp;the tax system. He is now playing monkey cunning
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;But he's the bloke who killed bottom of the harbour and&nbsp;one of the reasons he was out of the leadership was&nbsp;because of that.
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Yes, after the McCabe Le Frankie report and the&nbsp;Costigan Royal Commission made it impossible for him&nbsp;not to act and now he is running around monkey&nbsp;cunning after making clear to the media proprietors he&nbsp;knocked the cross media rules off just as in the last three&nbsp;weeks of the ' 83 election they signed up the two airline&nbsp;policy again for five years. Look Mr Howard is a fixer.&nbsp;He is in the fixing business. He understands, he is in&nbsp;that Menzies tradition: you hand out TV licences, you&nbsp;hand out tariff protection, you hand out two airline&nbsp;agreements, that is the sort of approach[?] he comes&nbsp;from.
Laurie Oakes: &nbsp;The perception of John Howard, though I believe, is that&nbsp;he is an honest, decent man and perceptions in politics&nbsp;are all important. Thank makes him your toughest&nbsp;opponent yet doesn't it?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;&nbsp;I don't think so because John Howard does have a&nbsp;political past. He did get down to 18 as the Bulletin&nbsp;reminded us in 1989 and why did he? Because he was&nbsp;an inadequate leader and he was a poor Treasurer. So&nbsp;there's a history here and I think, and what did he say in&nbsp;these interviews on Friday Laurie. Have a listen to this.He said:
" There was reform fatigue in the Australian electorate"in other words those Australians are right out of reform,those lazy Australians are right out of reform,"... reform fatigue in the Australian electorate",and he believed&nbsp;" there was a desire for gentler policies, i. e. not changepolicies" In other words here he is back with ' 70s politics,politics, reform fatigue, no change, he says that he isopposed to tax increases, he is opposed to big spendingcuts, he is opposed to interest rates rising, he is opposedto all the variables in the Australian budget and as theCourier Mail made quite clear, they said:" Vague is best"Vague is best.
Laurie Oakes:John Howard says he is in favour of sensible spendingcuts and hasn't he got you where it hurts with his lineabout five minutes of sunshine. Aren't people frustratedthat after the pain of the recession after five minutesthey are back to rising interest rates and looming taxincreases?
&nbsp;
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Well you go and tell the 500,000 people who found ajob in the last two years, which has been for them asummer of sunshine, that it was for five minutes. Or goand tell the business community you have got five and ahalf to six per cent growth and two per cent inflationthat it is a summer of sunshine. This is the problem&nbsp;about John Howard glib lines will not change Australia&nbsp;and make it better and for a man, I mean, what use can&nbsp;Australia have in the 1990s after a period of great&nbsp;change with a modern externally oriented economymaking the change into Asia for somebody whodescribes himself as the most conservative leaderAustralia has ever had. I mean what use can Australiahave particularly when he is saying, now, last Friday,that the country has got reform fatigue. I mean, wheredo his acolytes like Allan Wood and Des Moore and allthese other people stand now?
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;But there's a chance he's right isn't it? Australians maybe sick of pain. May be sick of changes. If he's rightyou're in trouble?
Paul Keating: &nbsp;Well you can't have any pain Laurie with a 40% realincrease in household disposable income since 1983.You can't have real pain with strong real growth in takehome pay in real disposable income. You can't havereal pain with the largest rate of employment growth inany year on record. What he's saying is, I don't wantto see Australia I'll sit it out. My judgment is, hesays, that we don't need any more reform, we'llbasically sit it out and see if we can cruise into office.In other words a ' 70s solution for a country in a periodof great flux in the 1990s in the middle of Asia.
Laurie Oakes: We're just about out of time but there was an election&nbsp;yesterday. The Labor Party is in trouble isn't it when a&nbsp;town like Canberra votes against it?
Paul Keating:&nbsp;Laurie it's basically a municipal election, a municipal&nbsp;election under the Hare-Clark system and it is still not&nbsp;clear who will end up being the government. There was&nbsp;a swing against the Labor Party but in national terms, ifthat is the point you're making, so what.
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;Well what about in New South Wales? If Bob Carr fails&nbsp;to get up in New South Wales I'm sure the Press&nbsp;Release the day after the election will blame your&nbsp;government, blame looming tax rises, spending cuts and&nbsp;the performance of your government. You won't be&nbsp;able to dodge that will you?
Paul Keating:Well Bob Carr didn't get up last time but we got up two&nbsp;times since, I mean, one time since, so I don't know if&nbsp;there's any logic to that remark. Actually I think Bob&nbsp;Carr will win because I'll tell you this about the Faheygovernment, not a thing happens in New South Wales,&nbsp;no projects start, ministers are falling out of the&nbsp;government through one scandal after another and this is&nbsp;a government absolutely dead on its feet and the quicker&nbsp;that Bob Carr can put it in a coffin the better.&nbsp;
Laurie Oakes:&nbsp;Prime Minister thank you very much.
Paul Keating:Thank you Laurie.
Laurie Oakes:Back to you Jim.
ENDS&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER 8/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
PRIME MINISTER'S RURAL AND REGIONAL TASKFORCE
I am pleased to announce that the Rural and Regional Taskforce headed by
the Member for Page, Mr Harry Woods, will visit Rockhampton and
surrounding areas this week.
The Taskforce, which will be accompanied by Marjorie Henzell MP, Member
for Capricornia, will meet local government representatives to discuss
regional development issues. It will also take the opportunity to discuss with
local farming groups and interested bodies the ongoing problems caused by
the drought.
CANBERRA February 1995
For further information: Mr Harry Woods MP ( 066) 426 356 



PRIME MINISTER 9/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
HONEST QUESTIONS FOR HONEST JOHN ' I
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr Howard, should tell the Australian public
exactly where he stands on cross media ownership.
The Government has a view on the issue, and has the courage to stand by it
regardless of who chooses to grumble about it.
John Howard once said that he opposed cross media ownership rules, and
that he thought the competition provisions of the Trade Practices Act were a
sufficient safeguard against media monopolies.
Then, in 1991, he was party to a unanimous shadow cabinet decision that
diversity of ownership should be the paramount consideration when drafting
media legislation.
Now he says the cross media ownership laws are out of date, but he stops
short of saying what he would do, claiming that doing so is " a mug's game."
If Mr Howard is serious about being Opposition Leader, he must stop being
vague and offer a view. What does he believe? What has he said to others?
What has he promised interested parties, including Mr Kerry Packer?
In Sydney last Wednesday, Mr Howard said: " I haven't spoken to Mr Packer
for some weeks."
Mr Howard should say precisely when he last spoke to Mr Packer, and on
what subject.
Mr Howard has contended and I agree with him that it is not intrinsically
improper for political leaders to meet senior business people, including media
proprietors. Mr Howard said:" It is normal for people to talk to senior people." 
However, the extraordinary nature of Mr Howard's recent contact with Mr
Packer, the timing of Mr Packer's assault on Fairfax, and the level of disquiet
about the matter among some Liberals requires an explanation from Mr
Howard. I have made it clear to Mr Packer, and to the community that I am in favour
of plurality in the Australian media, and that I will not allow the national
interest to be bulldozed.
Mr Howard should make his position clear. Is it a policy of surrender? Is he
opposed to cross media ownership rules? Is he opposed to media diversity,
and in favour of further concentration of ownership of the Australian media?
The public has a right to know his view. Vague is not best; vague will not do.
CANBERRA FEBRUARY, 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 10/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
CROSS MEDIA RULES
On the radio program PMV this evening the Leader of the Opposition, John
Howard, has confirmed that he has been putting to media proprietors the view
that the 1987 media prohibitions, known as the cross media rules, are
unnecessary and unjustified.
Mr Howard said his public and private views were consistent on this matter.
The public stance he took in 1987 and reaffirmed tonight is that the cross
media rules are unnecessary.
He seeks to skate over the fact these private expressions from a would-be
prime minister become policy expressions, while at the same time saying that
his party's current policy supports the maintenance of the cross media rules.
Mr Howard says his party will at the appropriate time review their current
policy. All this belies the point that he is telling media proprietors privately
as he admits-that he does not agree with the cross media rules.
Where is the public interest?
On the one hand he points to Liberal Party policy which supports the cross
media rules, on the other hand he says his private expressions are consistent
with what he said in 1987, which was that the cross media rules are too
restrictive and unnecessary.
What would any proprietor be entitled to take from his private expressions?
The answer is clearly only one message that John Howard would abolish
the 1987 cross media rules.
CANBERRA FEBRUARY, 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
JOBSBACK 11-ATHING OF THE PAST ~ L Jr
The statement yesterday by the Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations
effectively re-launched the failed Coalition industrial relations policy,
Jobsback. The new " evolutionary" policy has ostensibly lost the more nasty elements
which made Jobsback so unpopular in 1993. On the face of it, one could
interpret this as flattery: Mr Howard and Mr Reith appear to be admitting that
Labor's policy of measured change in the labour market is right. But in truth
the " admission" comes as a disguise for their traditional nasties.
We are told that the three dollar per hour youth wage has been dropped, and
current employees will only be on individual contracts if they choose. In other
respects Jobsback is essentially intact.
The only difference is the camouflage. The old wolves in wolves' clothing
have reverted to being wolves in sheep's clothing.
It is, of course, another step in the re-packaging of John Howard as an
ideological cuddly, another ingredient in the making of a Coalition policy
blancmange. Mr Reith appears to be selling the new policy on the basis that Australian
workers who do not choose individual contracts will be protected in the future
under current awards. Awards which under the Howard/ Reith system will
apparently be frozen in time.
Mr Reith either fails to understand or deliberately fails to address two
fundamental problems with his policy. 
First, contrary to Mr Reith's apparent assumption, the labour market is not a
pool it is a river. There is a constant turnover of jobs. Each month 130,000
new positions are filled. The people chosen to fill them new entrants and
re-entrants to the labour market, those changing jobs will be fair game
under the Howard/ Reith system.
Employers will naturally take on those new workers under the cheapest
individual contract.
Presumably Mr Howard and Mr Reith are not oblivious to these facts.
Presumably they know that in the last year over 1 1/ 2 million new job
openings were filled. And because they also know that those wanting the
award will not be preferred, they must know that under their system in time all
employees will be subtly coerced into individual contracts.
That means not a free labour market, but one based essentially on the Master
and Servant provisions of the English Common Law. It does not mean a level
playing field in the labour market: rather, it means a return to the inequality
and authoritarianism of the past.
Under the Howard/ Reith policy the safety net of minimum conditions will be
much reduced. Among the conditions up for grabs will be overtime rates,
shift allowances and holiday loadings.
The essential difference between the new Jobsback and the old can be
illustrated by the case of Mr Howard's driver. Under the old Jobsback his
driver stood to lose the extra $ 100 a week he earns in overtime. Under the
new Jobsback he can keep it he can stay on the award. It is the driver who
replaces the present one who stands to lose; because he will be employed on
an individual contract a contract he will have to negotiate from a position of
profound weakness. In short, he can take it or leave it.
Under the Howard/ Reith plan, the paid overtime and penalty rates on which
so many Australians rely to make ends meet will increasingly become a thing
of the past.
Which is precisely how the new Jobsback might be described. It is a thing of
the past. It is the old Jobsback in a cheap disguise.
And what is the justification for these draconian plans? Low profits? No.
Low employment growth? No. Low productivity growth? No. Industrial
discord? Hardly. Mr Howard and Mr Reith have no case. What they have
instead is the same ideological obsession they have always had.
CANBERRA 22 FEBRUARY 1995 



P9,! ME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO HOPE VALE COMMUNITY, QUEENSLAND
24 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you members of the Hope Vale Council, other distinguished members
of communities in the Cape, my colleague Peter Dodd and mostly of course
members of the Hope Vale Community, men and women, and boys and girls.
It's a great pleasure for me to come to Hope Vale I'm very much in your debt
for opening up your community and your hearts to me and my colleagues, to
get to know you, and to get to understand you, and to, see how you are living
here, and what your aspirations for yourselves and your community are. This
is a valuable thing, and one which I have taken an opportunity... . which I have
taken on earnestly. Notionally, I came to lend support to the Cape York
Health Council. For all the reasons that Noel ( Pearson) just said, that to make
a health strategy work or any strategy work it can't be just the leadership or
the Government it has to be everybody. And just as we are speaking about
health, the non-Aboriginal community has seen a dramatic change. For
instance in the incidence of heart attacks in the last 20 years. That change
didn't come simply because there were more doctors in each suburb, or that
people were more likely to go them, it came because of a change in the way
Australians have responded to their health needs as a community. They have
changed their diet, they have changed their exercise, they have changed their
levels of stress, and they have sought to live longer. So they have been given
leadership by the medical community, but they have followed it through as the
broader community.
This is the central point the, Noel made to you, and the point that I
would endorse that whatever we do in Aboriginal Australia, has to be done
between the Government, the Australian community, and you as a community.
In other words, it will never be done simply by one group only it will always be
a group effort. It is about basically cooperation and organisation, as
Gerhardt ( Pearson) made the point. And it is about all of you being a part of it. 
Now, great changes have been made. In 1967, Aboriginal people didn't have
the right to vote in this country they were not recognised in the Constitution.
That changed. There was an enhanced consciousness about that. There has
been progress since more recently, you have seen the Commonwealth
Parliament enact the Mabo legislation, coming from an important decision that
said that your customs and tradition were not just something that the
Australian community had to assimilate and accommodate, but that it was
actually a source of the Common Law. That your traditions and customs were
a source of Australian Common Law. That was a declaration, but for it to be
law, the Government had to make a law. Anid we passed that law with the
help of a lot of you a year ago" We are now trying to.. . this week I
will introduce the Bill for theiL and Fund, that gives you the chance
to buy land that formerly has been . anated from you, and that you can't
secure under Mabo. Now why are we doing these things? Simply because
we feel that a wrong has been done yes, we do. There was the historic
denunciation of your rights, the removal of your land, the attack upon your
population this community is seeking to right those wrongs, and we are
seeking to right them in land. Land we know is important to you, because it is
a part of the course of empowerment of Aboriginal people. That because of
this spiritual connection you have with your lives and the land, the land is
important to you. For us to make a reconciliation with you, the land must be
part of the parcel it must be part of the package.
But part of that is also about giving you the right to live a traditional lifestyle.
That is, having the capacity to use that land. And as Noel said eloquently,
" living long enough to use it as well" That is, not just having it but living on
it, enjoying it, and living lone this is what I think most Australians
wish for you as a Community thtse things are possible. And I think that
while it is entirely true that the Mission stations have now become Aboriginal
Communities and they do have their leaders, and you do have your
strategies, and you are getting your land we know that whenever Aboriginal
people move towards a traditional lifestyle, their connection with the land not
only empowers them, but changes their psychology, and it also changes the
quality of their life. It changes their health, and it means that their health
improves, their well-being improves their sense of well-being their sense of
mind, and so the out-station movement is an important movement in the return
to that traditional style of life which the land gives you the capacity to create.
So, can I say that as Prime Minister, I see the whole story of Aboriginal
Australia and the reconciliation as being in a number of parts. The
recognition, the vote, the land, the helth, the leadership, the empowerment,
the enjoyment the happiness. ~ i~ use the whole point of public policy is
human happiness, and what greatsr cbjective could we have for you that you
are happy and well?
Now, health is a problem. It is a problem because of congregation in part, it is
a problem because of inadequacy of resources, and we know crowded
accommodation in communities, former mission stations areas produces all
sorts of health problems. And we have not seen the public facilities there in
the environmental health: like the roads, the sewerage systems, the hospitals,
the immunisations, the various things that the non-Aboriginal community has. 
But we are also seeing a less than complete understanding on the part of
Aboriginal communities about the way they live their own lives about their
diet, about how they actually.. . about their hygiene, about how they actually
diminish the incidence of infection, about prevention once infection comes
along. None of this, of course, can be separated from education, and one of the
things I was delighted about today was to see in this school which has
produced now so many quite famous people, and articulate people, leaders
indeed of the Australian community to see so many young Aboriginal
Australians learning those skills: literacy, numeracy and empowerment. It is
that education which is going to underpin any community understanding and
strategy about how Aboriginal people join with the Government of the
Commonwealth and the Government of the States and Local Government in
improving their health and life opportunities. So, I come here to Hope
Vale... . first of all I come to a community which is welcoming, I come to one
which is open, I come to one which has a sense of enjoyment and pleasure in
its own company, and I come to one that is trying to grapple with its change of
its history, and its' opportunities, and to do something about the problems of
health. And I have been told about the problems that you can't get the Flying
Doctor in if the airport is bad. That there is no point in trying to protect
yourselves from things like scabies, or from diseases of the kidneys, or
nephritis, if in fact there is a run-over of sewerage. So the sewerage system
has to work it has to be adequate. It's not good for Aboriginal women to be
leaving their communities to have their children none of our women do that.
Why should you? Because you have the nurturing and you have the support
that you need but you don't have the midwives, you don't have the facilities,
and you don't have the doctors when you need them, because you don't have
the facilities to get the doctors here, and they won't work here. All this implies
to me that there is a reasonably comprehensive strategy to take this on.
First of all, a recognition of the problem. This is what. the Cape York Health
Council is doing it is recognising the problem. It knows that the solution is in
all of you adopting it. It knows solution is in better coordination with
the Commonwealth, and the iid. Local Governments. And it is not a
matter, as I think Gerhar' tther it is ATSIC or the Commonwealth
Health. Department, or: .1 ueensland or it's the Local Government or the
Health Council, or the Lancu Council it is a case of everybody coming together
in the delivery of a coordinated strategy. That is what we are seeking to do
here. But we can't do it without you. None of us can do it without you. If you are not
interested in health in a primary way and when I say primary, I mean in terms
of your own personal health to the point where you are part of a strategy, just
as any community works to alleviate disease or the likelihood of certain
complaints we can perhaps help you if you help yourselves, in joining in a
strategy that actually tries to make it work. And so that health and hygiene,
and that the strategy is to if you like ease the congregational pressures on
communities by moving from towns to out-stations, or taking positions on the
periphery of Aboriginal comminutes, all these things which lower the
temperature of infection and disease and maladies are the things which are 
going to make the difference. It is not going to be simply an immunisation
program. It is not simply going to be lights on the runway. It is not simply
going to be the mid-wife. It is going to be the whole combination of things.
So, I think this is a period of great opportunity for all Australians, because I
have said and I mean it that when we are as a nation together, we are
stronger. When Aboriginal Australians and non-Aboriginal Australians are
together as a nation, we are stronger. And there is no doubt that the passage
of Mabo has made the Australian community feel better about the Aboriginal
Communities futures, and better about themselves as a community for making
this opportunity and this gesture in land. We have now got to do another thing
another perhaps more complex thing. And that is, to weave into our health
strategy the life and lifestyles of Aboriginal people, and to join with the
administrators of the Commonwealth and the States in -seeing those strategies
come to pass. It is not simply a matter of money -if the Commonwealth
Government wrote a cheque tomorrow morning in the Budget, it will not solve
the problem. It may help in particular ways, but it will not solve the problem.
So I think one of the lessons I would learn from this very welcoming visit to
Hope Vale is that you understand here in Cape York the problem. You
know it is a sophisticated problem which means all of you every one of you
have to be part of the solution. That your leaders can articulate it, but you
have to be part of the solutic then have to develop those strategies
out for housing, for health p , for access and transiting, for medical
support but we have to be aware of all of the dangers and incidents of the
traffic of disease, and to do the things which are customary in developed
societies to deal with scabies with ointments. To deal with nephritis. And to
do these things which can be done, and which should be done.
So, I am delighted by the sense of community I have found here I am
heartened, buoyed by the sense of community that I found here, by the
vigour and the intelligence and the verve of your young people which I could
see today in school, by the dedication of those who teach them, and inculcate
these truths and this learning to them, who can provide this future on-going
understanding and leadership to the community. And in seeing that, knowing
that all of you want to live, and want to recapture that traditional lifestyle, that
was denied to you for such a large part of our history. I think this is now a
possibility not everybody will take it, not everybody should. But those who
do, will have the benefit of it both spiritually and environmentally, and in terms
of their health and longevity, the challenge therefore is to deal with the
communities. So, I would like to take this. opportunity of saluting what has
been done in recognition of this problem with the Cape York Health Council, of
all the Communities of the Capc' no to say that the Commonwealth
Government will be cooperating in seeking to find the right course and
strategy to get the problem solveo.
Some of them are location specific and they can be done. And you have got
to wonder why they haven't been done whether it Is the road through from
here that should have been tarred. I mean dust is a problem dust is a
problem for respiratory complaints, of which Aboriginal people have many.
Access through strips and things like that through airports these are simply
a matter of funds and the doing of it. 
These things can be done but what has to be done is to put the strategy
together, and not be territorial about it. So for my part, I said in Redfem in
1992, we this community of Australia want a new relationship with the
Aboriginal Community. We understand the history, we understand the sins,
and we want to make reparations, and we want a reconciliation. Of these we
have now sought step-by-step to do. Mabo, the Land Fund, now health. And
with health will be the environmental issues housing, sewerage etc. We
should be able to do it together, but together is the only way to do it. And I
think that is the message of this visit. Thank you very much for having me,
and for the welcome.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 12/ 95
E M B A R G 0 E D: 1700 Sunday 26 February 1995
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO GERMANY AND THE NETHERLANDS
I will pay official visits to Germany and the Netherlands from 6 to 15 March
1995. During a stop-over in Singapore on 5 March I will hold talks with
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. I will take the opportunity of my presence in
Europe to travel to Copenhagen on 12 March to speak at the United Nations
World Social Summit.
My visit to Germany will be the first by an Australian Prime Minister since
re-unification in 1990, one of the central events in a period of profound
change in Europe and the world.
Germany is the world's third-largest economy and the biggest country in the
European Union. It has an important and growing international role. It is
Australia's ninth-largest trading partner, with bilateral merchandise trade
worth $ 4.76 billion in 1993/ 94, and our seventh-largest source of foreign
investment. Our relationship with Germany is very important economically and politically
for Australia, but I believe it has not yet matched its potential. Both countries
have changed greatly in recent years and I hope my visit will help to give the
relationship a new direction.
I am looking forward to discussions with Chancellor Kohl, President Herzog
and senior ministers of the German Government as well as the state premiers
of Lower Saxony and Brandenburg and the Governing Mayorof Berlin.
An important element in my program in Germany will be my participation in
the opening of CeBIT, the world's largest information technology and
telecommunications exhibition in Hanover on 7 March.
I am very pleased Australia has been chosen as this year's partner country at
CeBIT, an honour given to only one country at each exhibition. More than
150 Australian suppliers of information technology and telecommunications 
software and equipment will be represented. This is an unprecedented
opportunity for Australia and Australian manufacturers to demonstrate to an
international as well as a European audience our capabilities as a supplier of
world-class high technology and services.
I will have further discussions with senior German business people and
financial leaders in Berlin.
In this fiftieth year since the end of the Second World War, I will also lay a
wreath on the graves of Australian servicemen who are buried at the
Commonwealth war cemetery in Berlin.
In Potsdam, I will launch a new Australian Studies Centre at the University of
Potsdam. This multi-disciplinary centre, which will work closely with German
and Australian business and industry, will assist our objective of making
Australia and Australian capabilities more widely understood in Germany.
I will visit the Netherlands for official discussions on 13 March at the invitation
of Prime Minister Kok. I will have talks with the Prime Minister and his senior
Ministerial colleagues and I will meet senior Dutch business leaders. I will
also pay a courtesy call on Her Majesty Queen Beatrix, who visited Australia
in 1988.
Australia has an old and important economic relationship with the
Netherlands. It is the sixth-largest foreign investor in Australia and our
18th ranking trading partner. In addition to our traditionally robust exports of
primary products, Australia's exports of manufactures to the Netherlands are
growing strongly. We also share a wide range of international interests.
In both Germany and the Netherlands, I will be emphasising Australia's
potential as a commercial partner and as a regional trading base for
European firms wanting to enter the Asian market.
I will visit Copenhagen on 12 March to speak at the United Nations
World Summit for Social Development. Australia has been involved heavily
in the preparations for this meeting, which a large number of Heads of State
and Heads of Government will attend.
I expect my discussions with Prime Minister Goh, which follow his very
successful visit to Australia in September last year and further talks we had at
the APEC leaders' meeting in Bogor, to focus on the wide range of regional
and bilateral issues, including APEC, on which Australia and Singapore are
co-operating very closely.
CANBERRA
26 February 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
RECOGNITION FOR WWII DEFENDERS OF DARWIN AND VETERANS OF
THE SYRIAN CAMPAIGN aQ.. 0/ i 01 Iqv()
I am pleased to announce that defenders of Darwin during the Japanese
bombing, and previously unrecognised Australian servicemen who took part
in the Syrian Campaign are to receive campaign awards.
As we commemorate the 50th anniversary of the end of World War 11i, t is
fitting that these two groups of Australian veterans will at last receive their
due recognition and that Australia will thereby reclaim some of the history of
her involvement in World War 11.
Her Majesty The Queen has, at my request, approved the expansion of
conditions under which two campaign stars, the 1939-45 Star and the Africa
Star, are awarded. Eligible veterans should be able to receive their awards
by Anzac Day this year.
Expanding the conditions for the awards was one of the recommendations of
last year's Committee of Inquiry into Defence and Defence-related Awards
chaired by General Peter Gration AC OBE.
The Committee considered there were parallels between the intense air war
fought over Darwin and the Battle of Britain and Malta. Australian aircraft
were often outnumbered and expected to repel an enemy believed at the time
to be intent on invading Australia, and like Malta, Darwin was isolated,
difficult to supply and under prolonged attack.
Personnel who served in the Darwin area during the time of the Japanese
bombing ( 19 February 1942 12 November 1943) and who meet eligibility
requirements will receive the 1939-45 Star, a medal which they have been
seeking for 50 years.
It is fitting that approval to issue this medal has occurred so recently after
Australia remembered the 261 people who were killed in air raids on Darwin
which began on 19 February 1942. 13/ 95 
2
The committee also recommended that all Australian servicemen who
participated in the Syrian Campaign ( 8 June 11 July 1941) and who did not
otherwise receive the Africa Star should now receive the medal.
Because of its brevity, the Syrian Campaign had been excluded as qualifying
service for the award. The Committee of Inquiry found that the intensity and
importance of the campaign more than compensated for its brevity, and the
Government has now taken steps to ensure that the Africa Star will be
awarded to the campaign's veterans.
CANBERRA 27 February, 1995 
ATTACHMENT Persons who wish to lodge claims for either the 1939-45 Star or Africa Star
should contact the appropriate Service Records Office as follows:
Army Medals Section
Soldier Career Employment Management Agency
Central Army Records Office
GPO Box 393D
MELBOURNE VIC 3001 Tel: ( 03) 326 5633
Airforce Directorate
Administrative Review
Air Force Office
Department of Defence
PO Box E33
Queen Victoria Terrace
CANBERRA ACT 2600
Attention HA1 ( E-3-14) Tel: ( 06) 265 2388
Navy Director Naval Personal Services
Medals Section
Navy Office
Department of Defence
D-3-32A
Russell Offices
CANBERRA ACT 2600Tel: ( 06) 265 3321
Merchant Mariners
Marine Crews
Maritime Safety Authority
PO Box 272
World Trade Centre
MELBOURNE VIC 3005Tel: ( 03) 685 5777
Fax: ( 03) 685 5700 



/ 1
PRIME MINISTER -f
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RAY MARTIN, A CURRENT AFFAIR, CHANNEL NINE
27 FEBRUARY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RM: Would you agree that we have wasted, let's say, $ 232 million in the
last five years as has been alleged?
PM: Well, if statistics are the measure, the answer to that is yes, but we
have quite dramatically improved the mortality rates of children.
RM: There was a baby die of dysentery just up the track here a week ago.
It didn't even make the papers. There was a baby die of meningitis
two weeks ago, didn't make the papers. It is just taken for granted,
who cares?
PM: Well, I think, we care. You care and I care for a start. I think lots of
Australians care.
RM: Certainly Aborigines have to care, that is why they flew in from the
bush. More planes than this little dirt strip has ever handled. And,
they stood waiting in the rain for the big fella, like a water colour. Mr
Keating is clearly more relaxed small talking to kids and soaking up a
bit of culture. Despite 12 years of Labor doing next to nothing for
Aboriginal health, everybody was polite and very grateful.
GRAB: Thank you for coming here. We are all happy to see you
here and happy to have you here.
PM: Thank you indeed.
RM: They say there is only one bloke who can change this and that is you.
PM: Well, I thank them for their faith in me. I will do my best. 
RM: Are you conscious of that responsibility, because they have had
politicians promise all kinds of things tell them they have got to get
healthy.
RM: This is why land, I think, we know the history of Mabo, we are now
introducing the Land Fund Bill to let Aboriginal people buy back land. I
think land gives them empowerment, the opportunity of a traditional
lifestyle and whenever they have a traditional lifestyle the diabetes
drops, the state of their mind improves, the diet improves, the health
improves. But, I think we have then got to move on these issues on
environmental health like for instance, the state of the sewerge
systems, the state of their general water supplies, most of them live-on
bore water, they don't actually have town water. They don't have
storages, they don't have dams.
RM: But this is hundreds of millions of dollars are you prepared to commit
that?
PM: Well, I think we are prepared to commit that which can be spent in a
strategy which is co-ordinated and sensible. That is, one that works.
RM: But let's just say that I'm a father of two children, and I live in one of
these outback towns in Australia, and I see my mother has gone blind,
and my father is about to go blind, and I have got diabetes, and the
kids have got dysentery, and you're talking about " hopefully the States
will do something for us".
PM: No,
RM: We're going to be dead before the State's do something for us.
PM: No. I'm not saying that we sit back and let the States do it I'm saying
that we all have to join in on the problem. I mean...
RM: But isn't it time for a shake-up? I thought that's what you had been
saying, that the time has come now to change the way we do it?
PM: I think that's right I think we do have to change the way we do it.
What is the catalyst for the change? The involvement of the
community themselves. I think their willingness to be in it means that
there is some basis for the rest of us taking a different look, and a new
approach to it.
RM: But you know State Governments they're going to look where the
votes are? They will look up into Cape York and they will say " not too
many votes up there a bunch of Aboriginal people. Right then, let's
put the $ 100 million down into Brisbane, or lets put it in Sydney, or lets
put it somewhere else". 
PM: There is a sub-division which is out of a provincial town a suburb of a
provincial town, somebody puts in a 10 acre sub-division there will be
a water line out there in double-jig time. There will be the sewerage
line out there, there will be the road the works. If it is an Aboriginal
community, which has been in the same location for 50 years, there's
nothing.
RM: So, what are you going to do?
PM: You have either got to encourage them to do it, pay them to do it,
shame them into doing it a combination of all these things.
RM: The political experts will tell me that there are no votes in Aborigines in
Australia, so I presume that you are not doing it for votes?
PM: It's done because it should be done.
RM: Because you're committed to it?
PM; Because it's a stain on our community to have this, that's why.
RM: I could sit here and say " well, you have been in Government for 12
years you have been Prime Minister for a couple of years how long
do you want? Twelve years not enough? Do you want 20 years?"
PM: That criticism is valid, except I think you have got to see we have
got to get back to this thing about the division of responsibilities in the
Federation to try and get that division better.
RM: Is there more money for the Aborigines in the Budget?
PM: That will depend on whether we think we can spend it wisely, quickly,
and how we can wind programs up.
RM: So, maybe?
PM: Maybe. Probably.
ends. 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP f
LAUNCH OF " NETWORKING AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE", THE FINAL REPORT
OF THE BROADBAND SERVICES EXPERT GROUP, FILM AUSTRALIA,
LJNDFIELD, SYDNEY, I MARCH 1995
It is a great pleasure to be here if not quite among visionaries, then at least
among those who speak the language of the future, and who see as the
authors of this report see the shapes and patterns of the future in an
information age.
That age, of course, Is already upon us.
If I might offer an Image from the past the future at our doorstep is a bit like the
encyclopaedia salesman, standing there proffering solutions to our educational
shortcomings; entreating us to invest in knowledge of the things we never
learned or had in life, but can now render to our children; tempting us with
worldliness. The children, mind you, know more about it than we do. The chances are
they've been clicking away at Interactive media for years. Chances are they're
playing a virtual reality game while we are standing at the door.
tut the game has really just begun, and we can't leave them stranded with a few
scraps of technology which by Christmas will look like something from the Dark
Ages. So, despite our reasonable doubts about the capacity of technology to change
the things which really matter like love, laughter, life and death we say ' Yes".
We're not sure that technology gives us much more than a stress-related illness
and a sense of inadequacy but we say " Yes". I Mar .95 13-: 516_ P40.012 P. 01,, 11 
T C L-a. 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 02/ 11
2
Al Gore says the-new information age is the equivalent of the Gutenburg Bible,
but we know his emphasis is not on the Bible, but the technology which printed
it. We know it is no substitute for belief.
We know in our bones that it will not, of itself, give us knowledge or happiness.
It will no more change our essential human needs than it will alter our bodily
functions though I've met a few zealots who would have us believe that it will
do these things.
But for all our reservations, we look at the kids, and we think we cannot irt
conscience deny them these things. This is their future. It's what the salesman
says it is it's the best investment we can make.
Now I don't know if there exist any reliable statistics to show that those who buy
encyclopaedias end up with happier and more successful children than those
who don't.
But it is pretty obvious that merely buying them is not enough.
It depends on buying, if not the best, then the best we can afford, and the one
which is most appropriate to our needs.
It also depends on whether we use it and, if we do, what we use it for as an
icon of our learning for visitors to admire, or for the practical education of
ourselves and our children.
So long as we buy it for the content and not just the leather binding: so long as
we bought it for what it says Lo us, rather than about us: so long as we were
interested in the content rather than the appearance I think the chances are
that with the encyclopaedia we q~ make an investment in the future.
And I think the same is true about the new communications technologies.
We really do have to embrace them now, so that we, our children and future
generations of Australians will not be left behind.
Lo that Australia will enter the 21st century where it should be, in the front rank
of nations.
And, when we do it, we should not be under any illusion that the act of embrace
will, by itself, create the future we want.
The technology itself is marvellous, of course; but it is only the means to an end. 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 36 No. 012 P. 03/ 11
3
Like the encyclopaedia, it is a beautiful thing.
Like the encyclopaedia, it contains the means to worldly knowledge; to useful
practical knowledge.
Like thle encyclopaedia, it can be the means of self-improvement, it can bring
people from the margins into the mainstream.
But, of itself, it is not a better education; or a better health service; or a better
life.
This technology will not teach us how to think. It will not teach us logic or
argument or how to put a case, or how to work effectively in the world.
It will not teach us how to write but all these things will be as Important in
information age as they have ever been.
In fact, of itself, technology contains a few serious risks. It presents us with a
great challenge.
The initial excitement might be in the technology, but what matters is what we do
with it.
The real excitement is not in the highway Itself, but in where it can take us.
It can, for instance, take us to a more democratic and equitable society, or one in
which injustice is intensified by unequal access to knowledge.
The same can be said of the global context.-it can help to bridge the gulf
between the developed and the developing world, or it can make the gulf wider.
It can strengthen our national culture and those of other countries, or, by the
flood of homogenised " global" product, it can fatally weaken them.
There is a lot at stake nothing less, in fact, than the shape of the society and
the world we inhabit in the 21 st century.
411-The great challenge is to make sure that the new communications technologies
enrich and strengthen us.
For instance, they can be a powerful educational tool.
We now have the opportunity to fully realise the educational potential that
television never delivered. 
TEL 4
We can link schools to share information.
We can make it possible for schools in regional Australia to share the vast
resources of our great institutions,
We can expand the realms of these institutions.
There are possibilities we have not yet thought of.
The technology has the ability to help us meet our education and training needs
in a world in which the turnover of knowledge in industry will soon complete a
cycle every five years and sooner in the so-called knowledge-based induslies.
If Australia is to get the vocational training system we need, the effective
deployment of the new technologies is essential.
We can teach history, brick-laying, civics, hairdressing, physics and football
around the clock, around the continent.
We can deliver better health services to all Australians all the time: better
diagnosis, better staff training, better care.
We can deliver rehabilitation programs national rehabilitation programs into
homes and community halls right across the country.
We should be able to surely make the delivery of government services more
efficient. Both the operation and our understanding of government should be improved by
the application of these technologies.
Again we can see the challenge: if we let it, the technology can be alienating, but
if we are clever we can strengthen the bonds between us and raise our level of
mutual understanding.
We have to decide, as from now, that access to the national information
4: infra structure will be no less a general right than access to water, or public
transport or electricity.
It must not and need not be in any way the preserve of business, or the better
off, or those who live in the major population centres, or who attend better
schools. It has to be a fundamental right of all Australians. TE. L: M ar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 04/ 11 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 05/ 11
We should recognise it as being to the 1990s what the railway and the telegraph
and the mechanics institute were to the 1890s.
The only difference need be that, unlike the railway, the information highway will
not run through the seats of influence and privilege and you won't have to
change trains at Albury.
It goes without saying, of course, that the more rapidly and effectively we take on
these technologies, the more competitive Australia will be.
In fact, our competitiveness crucially depends on it.
These days we talk about knowledge being the principal source of a nation's
wealth. With the new information technologies, we must recognise that we are talking
about more than the distribution of that wealth we are also talking about Its
creation. We can use this technology to greatly increase the productivity of our existing
industries, and we can develop industries which produce or adapt the
technology. We can export the technology.
We are doing this now.
But the greatest potential lies in content.
An educated, English-speaking, multicultural, outward-looking country in the
fastest growing region in the world has enormous advantages In the information
market place.
All those new channels and services and networks and systems will need
programs and ideas and software.
Australia can be a significant provider.
Creating content for our own channels will be an essential part of protecting and
enriching our national life.
It will also be an export industry.
We can trade In Ideas and culture as well as minerals and manufactures. 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95' 13: 56 No. 012 P. 06/ 11
6
That Is why this is a very appropriate place to launch the Report.
Film Australia is creating product for the highway and exporting it the potential
to do more is virtually unlimited.
It is a reminder that we are already engaged in the new technology.
Australia is not simply receiving the new technology and the product it carries,
but actively creating and shaping them.
Last week In Brussels the G7 held an information society summit. f
Among other things, they concluded that realising the potential of the global
information society depended on governments promoting:
the universal provision of and access to serv ices
equality of opportunity
diversity of content, Including cultural and linguistic diversity, and
open access to networks.
They also stressed the importance of " defining an adaptable regulatory
framework",
" To succeed", they decided, " governments must facilitate private initiatives and
investments and ensure an appropriate framework aiming at stimulating private
Investment and usage for the benefit of all citizens".
Most of what they said, we have been saying in Australia for some time.
Much of it we have been doing.
And, of course, there is no better example of this than this Report by the
Broadband Services Expert Group.
BSEG's work rivals, and in most cases surpasses, the work being done by any
other government in the world.
The work of BSEG in the past year has helped to put Australia in the best
possible position to take advantage of technological development particularly in
their social applications. 
TEL: I. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012
7
The Report recommends the implementation of a national strategy: a strategy
based broadly on the joint development of technical and creative infrastructure.
i ne tecrnroai inrasiructure is aireaay on tne way. vur teiecommunications
networks provide the platform for new interactive services to operate, and offer
access to networks like Internet.
Teistra and Optus are investing billions of dollars which will guarantee a firstrate
telecommunications network in Australia next century.
Later this year, a new dimension will open as optical fibre cable networks begin
to reach substantial numbers of Australians. T
It is no less a significant advantage that the Australian population is computerliterate.
More than 40 per cent of Australian households own a personal
computer, which, with the exception of the United States, is the highest rate in
the world.
Last year we went a long way to developing the creative infrastructure when we
produced the cultural statement, Creative Nation.
A substantial part of that statement and a substantial part of the money it
provided was directed at information technology and the new media.
A significant precursor of Creative Nation was the decision to combine the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts in other words, to link the
technologies of the future with the creativity of our people.
In giving a substantial boost to Australian cultural development, the statement
recognised the need to encourage the growth of industries producing content for
the now media.
The creation of AME the Australian Media Enterprise whose board will be
announced by the Minister within the next few weeks, carries the process
significantly further.
The BSEG Report recommends a " whole of government" approach. I am
' pleased to say that that Is the direction we have taken.
Last year I wrote to Ministers seeking Cabinet Submissions on the effect of new
technologies on key portfolios.
I'm expecting those submissions to be discussed in late March at a special
Cabinet meeting which will be dedicated to government use of information
technology. P .07/ 1 
TEL: 1. Mar-. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 0~' 11
8
Information technology concerns education and training, it concerns industry; it
obviously concerns telecommunications and the arts.
It Is, therefore, a major interest of Simon Crean's, Peter Cook's and Michael
Lee's. It is a major interest for Ministers and Departments of Health, Human
Services, Social Security, Administrative Services, Finance, Trade and others.
it is certainly an Interest of mine.
That is why I want to implement the BSEG recommendations as quickly as
possible. f
The fundamental recommendation is a national strategy for new communications
networks.
We have in part commenced that work.
However, to take it further, I have decided to establish a National Information
Services Council as the Report recommends.
The Council will comprise Ministers and leaders from relevant fields, and will be
established under the auspices of the Prime Ministers Science and Engineering
Council.
The members of the Council will be announced within the next few weeks.
It will meet in April and October this year and, following the meetings, Cabinet
will be convened to formally coordinate the Government's policy responses.
By the end of the year we will have a blueprint for the next century.
There is a great deal more I would like to say: but I don't want to sound like a
zealot. Like all new technology and new encyclopaedias for that matter this new
information technology does inspire a sort of messianic passion in the early
stages of conversion.
Yet, as the Report makes so patently clear, we need most of all a very
considered and rational approach.
So I will limit myself to saying this the opportunity for Australia is probably
unprecedented. TEL 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 08,, 11 
TE : L 9
We have the chance to dramatically improve the performance of our existing
Industries while creating a plethora of new ones.
New industries which will integrate us with the region and the world and, at the
same time, strengthen our national life, culture and identity.
We have the chance to deliver services more equitably and efficiently than ever
before. In other words, we have the chance to make Australia significantly wealthier an
more democratic: culturally richer and socially more cohesive.
It is an extraordinary opportunity and it can be truly said that we are superily
placed to take advantage of it.
Coming as it does, between the G7 meeting in Brussels and the CeBit Fair at
which Australia is the partner country in Hanover next week, this launch of
BSEGs Report is also well-placed.
Let me close by congratulating Brian Johns and everyone who served on the
Group and contributed to the Report.
Above all, I want to thank them.
They have made a very substantial contribution to their country.
We know what the challenges are. We know that we can meet them, and that
when we do, we meet our responsibilities to our children and the Australians of
the 21 st century. I. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 09/ 11 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 10/ 11
ANNEXURE 1
P-7 CONFERENCE ON THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
Government ministers of the Group of Seven ( G7) industrialised nations and
representatives of leading technology companies met in Brussels over last weekend at
a conference on developments on the information society.
Summary of principles agreed by ministers of G7 nations:
The smooth and effective transition towards the information society is one of
the most important tasks that should be undertaken in the last decade of the
century;
Our action must contribute to the integration of all countries into a global
effort...;. To succeed, governments must facilitate private initiatives and investments and
ensure an appropriate framework aiming at stimulating private investment and
usage for the benefit of all citizens;,
In order to realise the potential of the global information society in the future,
the G7 partners agreed to collaborate in the areas of:
-promoting dynamic competition
-encouraging private investment
-defining an adaptable regulatory framework
-providing open access to networks
while: -ensuring universal provision of and access to services;
-promoting equality of opportunity to the citizen;
-promoting diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic
diversity; and
-recognising the necessity of worldwide cooperation with particular
attention to less developed countries.
In addition, the G7 launched I11 projects aimed at stimulating and promoting the
application of information technology. The projects encompass education and training,
electronic libraries museums and galleries, global health care applications, environment
and natural resources management, government on-line services, and broadband
networking. 
TEL: 1. Mar. 95 13: 56 No. 012 P. 11/ 11
ANNEXURE 2
HANOVER
CeBIT is the world's largest information technology and telecommunications trade fair,
held annually in Hanover. It has grown at an extraordinary rate since its inception in
1986. In 1993, the fair was attended by over 660,000 visitors, with 5,800 exhibitors
from 45 countries.
One partner country is selected each year this year, Australia has been selected to fit
that role. The partner country is given the opportunity to create an exhibit featuring:'
Information Technology
Network computing
Computer integrated manufacturing
Software
Consulting and services
Office technology
Banking technology
Security equipment
Research
As partner country, Australia will present a conference program to promote our
technological achievements and potential, and the opportunities for investing and doing
business in Australia. Australia's exhibit will also include economic and trade
development agencies, industry associations, consulting firms, investment and
technology brokers, and banks and other financial institutions.
The theme " InTelligent Australia" has been chosen for the partner country
involvement. It is aimed at highlighting the following benefits.
Australian skill in creating and using IT applications: in finance, banking,
mining, education, health, environmental management, transport, hospitality
and government.
Australia as a source of innovation through federal and state programs of
research and development.
Australia as a destination for investment by overseas firms whether they seek
equity interest in leading edge companies, or partnerships to access new
markets. Australia as the ideal location for US and European firms to establish their Asia
Pacific regional headquaters.
Australia as a gateway to Asia, combining proximity with stability, competitive
costs and a sophisticated telecommnuincations infrastructure. 



V S
4 PRIME MINISTER It
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF " NETWORKING AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE", THE FINAL REPORT
OF THE BROADBAND SERVICES EXPERT GROUP, FILM AUSTRALIA,
LINDFIELD, SYDNEY, 1 MARCH 1995
It is a great pleasure to be here if not quite among visionaries, then at least
among those who speak the language of the future, and who see as the
authors of this report see the shapes and patterns of the future in an
information age.
That age, of course, is already upon us.
If I might offer an image from the past the future at our doorstep is a bit like the
encyclopaedia salesman, standing there proffering solutions to our educational
shortcomings; entreating us to invest in knowledge of the things we never
learned or had in life, but can now render to our children; tempting us with
worldliness. The children, mind you, know more about it than we do. The chances are
they've been clicking away at interactive media for years. Chances are they're
playing a virtual reality game while we are standing at the door.
But the game has really just begun, and we can't leave them stranded with a few
scraps of technology which by Christmas will look like something from the Dark
Ages. So, despite our reasonable doubts about the capacity of technology to change
the things which really matter like love, laughter, life and death we say " Yes".
We're not sure that technology gives us much more than a stress-related illness
and a sense of inadequacy but we say " Yes". 
Al Gore says the new information age is the equivalent of the Gutenburg Bible,
but we know his emphasis is not on the Bible, but the technology which printed
it. We know it is no substitute for belief.
We know in our bones that it will not, of itself, give us knowledge or happiness.
It will no more change our essential human needs than it will alter our bodily
functions though I've met a few zealots who would have us believe that it will
do these things.
But for all our reservations, we look at the kids, and we think we cannot in f
conscience deny them these things. This is their future. It's what the salesman
says it is it's the best investment we can make.
Now I don't know if there exist any reliable statistics to show that those who buy
encyclopaedias end up with happier and more successful children than those
who don't.
But it is pretty obvious that merely buying them is not enough.
It depends on buying, if not the best, then the best we can afford, and the one
which is most appropriate to our needs.
It also depends on whether we use it and, if we do, what we use it for as an
icon of our learning for visitors to admire, or for the practical education of
ourselves and our children.
So long as we buy it for the content and not just the leather binding: so long as
we bought it for what it says to us, rather than about us: so long as we were
interested in the content rather than the appearance I think the chances are
that with the encyclopaedia we did make an investment in the future.
And I think the same is true about the new communications technologies.
We really do have to embrace them now, so that we, our children and future
generations of Australians will not be left behind.
So that Australia will enter the 21st century where it should be, in the front rank
of nations.
And, when we do it, we should not be under any illusion that the act of embrace
will, by itself, create the future we want.
The technology itself is marvellous, of course; but it is only the means to an end. 
Like the encyclopaedia, it is a beautiful thing.
Like the encyclopaedia, it contains the means to worldly knowledge; to useful
practical knowledge.
Like the encyclopaedia, it can be the means of self-improvement, it can bring
people from the margins into the mainstream.
But, of itself, it is not a better education; or a better health service; or a better
life.
This technology will not teach us how to think. It will not teach us logic or
argument or how to put a case, or how to work effectively in the world.
It will not teach us how to write but all these things will be as important in
information age as they have ever been.
In fact, of itself, technology contains a few serious risks. It presents us with a
great challenge.
The initial excitement might be in the technology, but what matters is what we do
with it.
The real excitement is not in the highway itself, but in where it can take us.
It can, for instance, take us to a more democratic and equitable society, or one in
which injustice is intensified by unequal access to knowledge.
The same can be said of the global context: it can help to bridge the gulf
between the developed and the developing world, or it can make the gulf wider.
It can strengthen our national culture and those of other countries, or, by the
flood of homogenised " global" product, it can fatally weaken them.
There is a lot at stake nothing less, in fact, than the shape of the society and
the world we inhabit in the 21st century.
The great challenge is to make sure that the new communications technologies
enrich and strengthen us.
For instance, they can be a powerful educational tool.
We now have the opportunity to fully realise the educational potential that
television never delivered. 
We can link schools to share information.
We can make it possible for schools in regional Australia to share the vast
resources of our great institutions.
We can expand the realms of these institutions.
There are possibilities we have not yet thought of.
The technology has the ability to help us meet our education and training needs
in a world in which the turnover of knowledge in industry will soon complete I
cycle every five years and sooner in the so-called knowledge-based industries.
If Australia is to get the vocational training system we need, the effective
deployment of the new technologies is essential.
We can teach history, brick-laying, civics, hairdressing, physics and football
around the clock, around the continent.
We can deliver better health services to all Australians all the time: better
diagnosis, better staff training, better care.
We can deliver rehabilitation programs national rehabilitation programs into
homes and community halls right across the country.
We should be able to surely make the delivery of government services more
efficient. Both the operation and our understanding of government should be improved by
the application of these technologies.
Again we can see the challenge: if we let it, the technology can be alienating, but
if we are clever we can strengthen the bonds between us and raise our level of
mutual understanding.
We have to decide, as from now, that access to the national information
infrastructure will be no less a general right than access to water, or public
transport or electricity.
It must not and need not be in any way the preserve of business, or the better
off, or those who live in the major population centres, or who attend better
schools. It has to be a fundamental right of all Australians. 
We should recognise it as being to the 1990s what the railway and the telegraph
and the mechanics institute were to the 1890s.
The only difference need be that, unlike the railway, the information highway will
not run through the seats of influence and privilege and you won't have to
change trains at Albury.
It goes without saying, of course, that the more rapidly and effectively we take on
these technologies, the more competitive Australia will be.
In fact, our competitiveness crucially depends on it.
These days we talk about knowledge being the principal source of a nation's
wealth. With the new information technologies, we must recognise that we are talking
about more than the distribution of that wealth we are also talking about its
creation. We can use this technology to greatly increase the productivity of our existing
industries, and we can develop industries which produce or adapt the
technology. We can export the technology.
We are doing this now.
But the greatest potential lies in content.
An educated, English-speaking, multicultural, outward-looking country in the
fastest growing region in the world has enormous advantages in the information
market place.
All those new channels and services and networks and systems will need
programs and ideas and software.
Australia can be a significant provider.
Creating content for our own channels will be an essential part of protecting and
enriching our national life.
It will also be an export industry.
We can trade in ideas and culture as well as minerals and manufactures. 
That is why this is a very appropriate place to launch the Report.
Film Australia is creating product for the highway and exporting it the potential
to do more is virtually unlimited.
It is a reminder that we are already engaged in the new technology.
Australia is not simply receiving the new technology and the product it carries,
but actively creating and shaping them.
Last week in Brussels the G7 held an information society summit.
Among other things, they concluded that realising the potential of the global
information society depended on governments promoting:
the universal provision of and access to services
equality of opportunity
diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic diversity, and
open access to networks.
They also stressed the importance of " defining an adaptable regulatory
framework". " To succeed", they decided, " governments must facilitate private initiatives and
investments and ensure an appropriate framework aiming at stimulating private
investment and usage for the benefit of all citizens".
Most of what they said, we have been saying in Australia for some time.
Much of it we have been doing.
And, of course, there is no better example of this than this Report by the
Broadband Services Expert Group.
BSEG's work rivals, and in most cases surpasses, the work being done by any
other government in the world.
The work of BSEG in the past year has helped to put Australia in the best
possible position to take advantage of technological development particularly in
their social applications. 
The Report recommends the implementation of a national strategy: a strategy
based broadly on the joint development of technical and creative infrastructure.
The technical infrastructure is already on the way. Our telecommunications
networks provide the platform for new interactive services to operate, and offer
access to networks like Internet.
Telstra and Optus are investing billions of dollars which will guarantee a firstrate
telecommunications network in Australia next century.
Later this year, a new dimension will open as optical fibre cable networks begin
to reach substantial numbers of Australians.
It is no less a significant advantage that the Australian population is computerliterate.
More than 40 per cent of Australian households own a personal
computer, which, with the exception of the United States, is the highest rate in
the world.
Last year we went a long way to developing the creative infrastructure when we
produced the cultural statement, Creative Nation.
A substantial part of that statement and a substantial part of the money it
provided was directed at information technology and the new media.
A significant precursor of Creative Nation was the decision to combine the
portfolios of Communications and the Arts in other words, to link the
technologies of the future with the creativity of our people.
In giving a substantial boost to Australian cultural development, the statement
recognised the need to encourage the growth of industries producing content for
the new media.
The creation of AME the Australian Media Enterprise whose board will be
announced by the Minister within the next few weeks, carries the process
significantly further.
The BSEG Report recommends a " whole of government" approach. I am
pleased to say that that is the direction we have taken.
Last year I wrote to Ministers seeking Cabinet Submissions on the effect of new
technologies on key portfolios.
I'm expecting those submissions to be discussed in late March at a special
Cabinet meeting which will be dedicated to government use of information
technology. 
8
Information technology concerns education and training; it concerns industry; it
obviously concerns telecommunications and the arts.
It is, therefore, a major interest of Simon Crean's, Peter Cook's and Michael
Lee's. It is a major interest for Ministers and Departments of Health, Human
Services, Social Security, Administrative Services, Finance, Trade and others.
It is certainly an interest of mine.
That is why I want to implement the BSEG recommendations as quickly as
possible.
The fundamental recommendation is a national strategy for new communications
networks.
We have in part commenced that work.
However, to take it further, I have decided to establish a National Information
Services Council as the Report recommends.
The Council will comprise Ministers and leaders from relevant fields, and will be
established under the auspices of the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering
Council. The members of the Council will be announced within the next few weeks.
It will meet in April and October this year and, following the meetings, Cabinet
will be convened to formally coordinate the Government's policy responses.
By the end of the year we will have a blueprint for the next century.
There is a great deal more I would like to say: but I don't want to sound like a
zealot. Like all new technology and new encyclopaedias for that matter this new
information technology does inspire a sort of messianic passion in the early
stages of conversion.
Yet, as the Report makes so patently clear, we need most of all a very
considered and rational approach.
So I will limit myself to saying this the opportunity for Australia is probably
unprecedented. 
9
We have the chance to dramatically improve the performance of our existing
industries while creating a plethora of new ones.
New industries which will integrate us with the region and the world and, at the
same time, strengthen our national life, culture and identity.
We have the chance to deliver services more equitably and efficiently than ever
before. In other words, we have the chance to make Australia significantly wealthier and
more democratic: culturally richer and socially more cohesive.
It is an extraordinary opportunity and it can be truly said that we are superbly
placed to take advantage of it.
Coming as it does, between the G7 meeting in Brussels and the CeBit Fair at
which Australia is the partner country in Hanover next week, this launch of
BSEG's Report is also well-placed.
Let me close by congratulating Brian Johns and everyone who served on the
Group and contributed to the Report.
Above all, I want to thank them.
They have made a very substantial contribution to their country.
We know what the challenges are. We know that we can meet them, and that
when we do, we meet our responsibilities to our children and the Australians of
the 21st century. 
ANNEXURE 1
G-7 CONFERENCE ON THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
Government ministers of the Group of Seven ( G7) industrialised nations and
representatives of leading technology companies met in Brussels over last weekend at
a conference on developments on the information society.
Summary of principles agreed by ministers of G7 nations:
The smooth and effective transition towards the information society is one of
the most important tasks that should be undertaken in the last decade of the
century;
Our action must contribute to the integration of all countries into a global
effort To succeed, governments must facilitate private initiatives and investments and
ensure an appropriate framework aim-ing at stimulating private investment and
usage for the benefit of all citizens;
In order to realise the potential of the global information society in the future,
the G7 partners agreed to collaborate in the areas of:
-promoting dynamic competition
-encouraging private investment
-defining an adaptable regulatory framework
-providing open access to networks
while: -ensuring universal provision of and access to services;
-promoting equality of opportunity to the citizen;
-promoting diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic
diversity; and
-recognising the necessity of worldwide cooperation with particular
attention to less developed countries.
[ n addition, the G7 launched I11 projects aimed at stimulating and promoting the
application of information technology. The projects encompass education and training,
electronic libraries museums and galleries, global health care applications, environment
and natural resources management, government on-line services, and broadband
networking. 
ANNEXURE 2
HANOVER
CeBIT is the world's largest information technology and telecommunications trade fair,
held annually in Hanover. It has grown at an extraordinary rate since its inception in
1986. In 1993, the fair was attended by over 660,000 visitors, with 5,800 exhibitors
from 45 countries.
One partner country is selected each year this year, Australia has been selected to fill
that role. The partner country is given the opportunity to create an exhibit featuring:
Information Technology
Network computing
Computer integrated manufacturing
Software
Consulting and services
Office technology
Banking technology
Security equipment
Research
As partner country, Australia will present a conference program to promote our
technological achievements and potential, and the opportunities for investing and doing
business in Australia. Australia's exhibit will also include economic and trade
development agencies, industry associations, consulting firms, investment and
technology brokers, and banks and other financial institutions.
The theme " InTelligent Australia" has been chosen for the partner country
involvement. It is aimed at highlighting the following benefits.
Australian skill in creating and using IT applications: in finance, banking,
mining, education, health, environmental management, transport, hospitality
and government.
Australia as a source of innovation through federal and state programs of
research and development.
Australia as a destination for investment by overseas firms whether they seek
equity interest in leading edge companies, or partnerships to access new
markets. Australia as the ideal location for US and European firms to establish their Asia
Pacific regional headquaters.
Australia as a gateway to Asia, combining proximity with stability, competitive
costs and a sophisticated telecommuincations infrastructure. 



III C1/
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7.30 REPORT, CANBERRA
2 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, welcome to the program,
PM: Thank you, Paul.
PL: John Howard says that you didn't stare him down on the Land Fund Bill
indeed, he would welcome a double dissolution tomorrow.
PM: I put the weights right on him. He had a chance.... . we have been
saying " when will the real John Howard stand It has taken only
four weeks to show he is the same person he was in the 80s. He had
the opportunity to say " I'm going to get rid of this Downer nonsense
about the Aboriginal Land Fund, I'll clean it out, I'll support the
Government's amendments the Government's Bill and we will have
a principled Land Fund for Aboriginal people". Instead of that, he
adopted all the Downer nonsense all the Downer amendments
brought it to the House, and I said no we will have a principled Bill,
and if we don't, we will have the option of presenting it after a double
dissolution". And he went immediately to water.
PL: You could call his bluff pretty easily Yarralumla is just down the road.
PM.-I called his bluff, and as a result, this is going to be a great day for
Aboriginal people. They will now have the twin parts: that is, the two
bits the Native Title Legislation for those who still have a traditional
association with the land, and for those dispossessed of the land, they
will have the opportunity to buy land through a cogent, coherent
Aboriginal Land Fund. 
TEL: 2. Mar. 95 19: 01 No. 019 P .02/ 03
2
PL: And he says if and when he becomes the Prime Minister, he will
change it, and he will have the mandate to do so,
P M' In other words, ( he will say) I1 won't give black people land I will do
everything I can in the Senate to stop them, and even though this
Prime Minister has bailed me up for the moment, if I get back into
office, I will undo all of these things, and deny them this opportunity'.
You see, Howard never learns he never wipes the slate clean, he is
the same person as he has always been. This is the point he is out
of his age.
PL: But if he goes to an election saying clearly to voters that he wants to
make this change, and if he were to win, then he will have such a
mandate, won't he?
PM: To what? Strip the most dispossessed of Australians of the land the
Commonwealth Government Labor Government has given them? I
mean, what an ambition.
PL: Well he says that one of the changes he wants is to make sure that the
most dispossessed get the land.
PM: And he knows, and I know, where that sort of putrid cynicism... as if we
could have courts saying " are you more dispossessed than another
person?", so land is given away an Aboriginal person then
challenges that other Aboriginal person's right in the courts, and we
have a debate in the courts about whether one is more dispossessed
than the other. It's appalling.
PL: He says such judgements are made all the time in public life.
PM. They are not. He had a chance to cut a new cloth John Howard that
was to come clean and say ' I want a better relationship with Aboriginal
Australia, we can't have an inclusive society without the first
Australians being part of it'. But no, he has picked up the old rightwing
Tory reactionary agenda which Mr Downer was powerless to stop
and he is powerless to stop and has supported it. It came to the
House and the Government said ' no, no we won't have it'.
PL: What of the Coalition's desire to enable individuals to have an
entitlement to land and if they so wish be able to sell it. He says by not
doing so, the Government is being patronising and ignoring the needs
of urban Aborigines,
PMV: That is another slick argument from a slick person without principle.
An Aboriginal person has the same right that you and I have to buy a
piece of land this very day. But, what this Bill is about is the
Commonwealth Government, the Parliament, conferring on an
Aboriginal person and communities land which is paid for by the public 
ends 9~ ic: 01 No. 019 P.
3
for the express purpose of giving them that right to land. You can't talk
about Aboriginal health or Aboriginal welfare without talking about
land, because when Aboriginal people are living a traditional lifestyle
on their land their morale improves, their health improves, their whole
style of life improves and to be saying that we are denying an
individual a rightness, they want it in this Bill. One of their other
amendments was to say to an Aboriginal individual person you can sell
the land to someone else and keep the money. Well, the Parliament is
conferring on Aboriginal communities these funds. The very point of it
is for community rand.
PL: On another matter Prime Minister, Mr Howard says push polling is un-
Australian and should not be used here, do you accept his statement?
PM: I have been saying that and he was condoning or was seen to
condone it by not pulling Andrew Robb up. 1 mean, this is the most
sinister development I have seen in 20 odd years in public life.
PL: But, he has now publicly rejected it.
PM: Well, I saw today someone asked him ' Does Mr Robb still have your
confidence?' ' Yes'. ' Are you opposed to push polling?' ' Well, I'm
opposed to anything that I think the Australian people regard as
undesirable.' In other words, I won't get out there in front, I'll hang
around behind and see what the reaction is to this. This is the worst
elements of right-wing America. Insidiously saying to 400 people in a
supposed poll, trafficking defamations which are completely untrue to
try to spoil the candidate's reputation and chances. I mean, he should
have just completely wiped his hands of it the moment it arose, but the
cynicism, again, the real John Howard did stand up. He hasn't
changed that Mr 18% at the end of 1989 and we saw him today. He
had his worst day in Parliament today, his worst week in Parliament
since he has become Leader and this honeymoon is ending very
rapidly.
PL:-Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM.-Thank you, Paul. 



TEL: 3. Mar. 95 17: 21 N0.013 P. 01/ l'
L PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF SUE ROBINSON'S CAMPAIGN, ALP CANDIDATE FOR
CANBERRA, ERINDALE LEISURE CENTRE, CANB3ERRA
3 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It is a pleasure for me to be here with Sue Robinson, opening this campaign,
because we are at at the most about a year away from the election. And
let me assure you, I am going to make this the hardest year of John Howard's
life I can tell you that. And that shell of an organisation they call the Liberal
Party, we are going to put more stresses and strains on that creaky old thing,
on that remnant of Australia's failed upper class, that organisation that
thought it had it's dead hand on Australia and did for so long they will need
more than a bit of political engineering when we put some stresses and
strains on that thing. TFhey will need every technique they have got push
polling, the lot to try and save their miserable political hides. Because, here
we are John Howard he's here as the Liberal Party's third choice. John
Hewson took them to a poll, lost, and Howard contested an election against
him, and they said " no we don't want you" because it was only in 1989 that
they defeated him for Peacock, and then they had another chance, of course,
when John Hewson basically lost his way, and they knew they had to change,
and so they had to think long and hard about their future. And they said " no
we're not going back to the past, we can't go back to Howard, he's a man of
the past, his views are of the past, his whole mindset is of another age, we've
got to make a new break and go for a new team the Dream Team. Downer
and Costello." But they made a conscious decision to reject him. Of course,
Downer came to nothing, and they went around looking around, and they
have given us John Howard because he is now the only thing they have left.
And we're supposed to say " oh here he is reborn and remade". They have
got to be joking.
And I said in the Parliament a week or so ago, if you look at Australia now
an open, competitive, confident, country, much more of an inclusive society
than ever, and much more confident I think about itself I mean, we are
coming to terms with our identity, coming to terms with our indigenes, finding
a place in Asia, making the leap out there and you have got to say to 
TEL: 3. Mar. 95 17: 21 " o. 013 P. 02/ 1lU
2
yourself what possible use could Australia have at this time for a man who
describes himself as the most conservative leader the conservative parties
have ever had. Is this the time in our history as we come to the next
millennium to in the closing years of this century to say " well what we need
is somebody who, in the 1 970s was comfortable with the policies in the
1950s"? And he was. It's not mis-representing John Howard to say that
when he was a minister between 1977 and 1983, he was looking for his guide
to the Menzies years and the Menzies Cabinets, and the policies, and the
views. And I notice some commentator said last week which I thought was a
terribly pithy fine he said " when John Howard talks about one Australia, he
means one Wollstonecraft". And he is right the Edwardian houses, and the
picket fences, and the big off-street alignments, and the old trees, it's an
older version of old and central Canberra. That's his view of the world.
And I see him up yesterday it said it all against him he said " I'm against
anything in politics that's regarded as unacceptable by the Australian
community". In other words, " you tell me what you don't want, and that's what
I'll give you. You lead and I'll follow". It's a bit like the republic he said
" look, don't ask me about the republic ask me in 5 years time and I'll tell you
what I think about it. If I think the Australian people believe there should be a
change, then I will maybe modify my position" it is really code for " if that
Paul Keating will get out there and lead them and convince them, I might
follow. If he will lead, I will follow"'. It's just another version of the same thing
against anything in politics that is regarded as unacceptable". So, " if
push polling is unacceptable even though I tried it on if it's unacceptable, I
will give it away. If the community don't believe there ought to be a racial
basis in the selection of migrynts, I'll give that up. If they think our industrial
relations policy is too hot, I'll give that away, too". In other words, " I'll dovetail
in I won't lead, I will follow".
Now, yesterday was an instructive day about Australian politics. We are in
the Labor Party because we believe in things, and we get things done. We
have a touch with the society, I mean Sue described herself correctly as
somebody who likes people, who talks to people, is of the community, talks to
the community she is, as a Labor person, is and should be. We are a Party
that is in touch with the community. This is not true of the Coalition. The
Coalition has got no community sense. John Hewson walked out of that
Parliament the other day is he going to go away with any sense of sodality
with the Liberal Party? Any sense of longevity of his sort-of comradeship with
them? Well of course not. They just drift into the thing like a sort of a minor
business organisation, and they drift out of it again. In other words, there is
only one real political party in this country, and it is the Australian Labor
Party. That's right the other thing is an organisation that picks up the non-
Labor party, the non-Labor forces. that's how they always used to describe
themselves the non-Labor party. Always in the negative they know what
they are against, not sure what they are for. Or, as Arthur Calwell said' " the
Labor Party is a party of conviction, the others are parties of convenience".
And, here they are, now out of office for a very long period of time, no sense
of binding, no sense of cohesion, no touch with the community, and definitely 
ILL 3
not a national party. Isn't it ironic, here's John Howard wandering around
Canberra in the shopping centre trying to address himself as a national
leader, but he leads a party which is not a national party. It is a party of six
state complexions. And when they are always talking and every one of
them does the same a new deal for the States means a bad deal for the
nation. That's the flip side of that coin a new deal for the States is just code
for saying a bad deal for the nation for the federation. And then we get all
this stuff federation was a set of arrangements to protect the States, It was
no such thing federation was an act of creation of the nation. That's what it
was. And this notion that we then fracture a nation of 18 million who have
been given the great oood fortune of inhipritinOi A crntinont of giving uo thio
unique place in the world, as one nation in a continent, to ourselves they
said " oh no we are not going to take that advantage we will slice it up like
a big sponge cake you know, cut it into 6 pieces, and they will all have their
taxing powers, and'they will all run their provincial governments" why?
Because they know the national character of the country, and the national
parliament, moves the common weal forward moves the society on and
that's what they are against. They are against these progressive changes
that's why they describe themselves as conservatives, and John Howard an
arch-conservative. So, it is ironic that here they are in the national capital
the seat of the nation campaigning for an important constituency, when their
policy is basically to try and fracture the place, and hand back powers to the
States, and remove that sense of nation, which we have all fought for, and
which we now have. And of course Canberra. if you look at the difference
with their icon Menzies who never gave taxing powers back to the States
and thought that one of his achievements was the building of Canberra this
mob actually want to smash Canberra. And if people think now they are
running through a sort of a d~ in-property cycle, well they have seen nothing
yet if the Liberals got hold of the national Parliament they would flatten this
place like a flap-jack. By the time they hop into the public service, and push
people onto individual wage contracts, and then cut the numbers, and cut the
Government spending while this is a more complex economy than it used to
be, and it has got now a private sector of some substance, give the public
sector a very large hit and the ricochet through this community I think
would be very obvious.
And just don't ask John Howard what he might do, look at what he did.
Between 1977 and 1983, the only building in this city under construction was
Parliament House. The construction sector was absolutely dead dormant.
There was no building, the housing sector had dried up, the business
community was shrivelling away and moving back to Sydney and Melbourne
this is what they did between 1977 and 1983. Now, this Government is a
growth government we believe in growth. And that growth has, in a very full
measure in the nation, attached itself to the ACT. And over these years
1983 til now there has been a lot of growth in the ACT, a lot of employment
growth, and a lot of prosperity and that is what this Government will
continue to provide. We are sort of going through a reality by-pass at the
moment we have got 5.5% GOP growth, and 2.5% inflation. But you have
these little pumped up tories running around saying " oh, the mess in the
economy" a mess? 5.5% growth and 2.5% inflation they have never seen
. Mar .95 17: 21 No .013 P. 03' 1 
TEL 3. Mar .95 17 : 21 No. t) 13 P .04,' 1
4
numbers like that in their history. 4.5% productivity growth, 500,000 jobs
since the last election, 4% employment growth a year we are the fastest
growing country in terms of employment in the Western world. In terms of
growth and inflation, we are on the top of the league table of the 21 member
states of the OECD. But, all this doom-saying they go around with John
Hewson was telling us at the end of the last election campaign that we were
going into a double-dip recession, then a depression. And John Howard
endorsed his remarks about the recession.
And here we are now growing as we have been so strongly, and the
challenge for us is to make this growth sustainable and to keep inflation in
its place, after having put it there after so much effort and we all know what
that's about it's about wages, it's about having a relationship with the trade
unions, it's about our Accord, it's about our whole co-operative model these
are the things we can do and these are things which are now happening. But
the Current Account Deficit is high for the moment it is absolutely laden with
capital goods. We are a country of 18 million we don't produce capital
goods, we don't produce mainframe computers, we don't produce the big
pneumatic or digitally operated machine tools which come from countries like
the United States and Germany, so whenever we start adding to that capital
stock after a few years of paucity of investment, of course this will reflect in
the Current Account. But are we going to build our capacity and keep on
growing, or do we lay dead in the water? So they are saying " oh hang on,
let's chop that off", and we say " all right, chop it off but you chop off all the
equipment that lets you fight the battle". And it's just worth reminding people
-as I did in the House yesterday of a few things: 10 years ago we were
exporting 14% of our product, this year it is 22%, which puts us right in the
middle of the OECD league 41 proportion of ) xports to GDP. Our capacity to
service our debt has fallen that is, the proportion of our exports which we
devote to paying the interest and outgoings on external liabilities was 21%
of our exports, and is now 11 In fact the numbers were out today they
confirm it again at 11 In other words, that growth in exports and our
capacity to service our debt and pay our way like anyone's capacity to
service a mortgage you know, you say " well, I have got a mortgage of
$ 1 50,00 that's pretty big". But if earn $ 150,000 a year, then you are fine.
So it all depends on your income. And our income has risen. In other words,
if you are in a problem, you fight your way out of it you invest and work your
way out of it. But they want to close it down " the growth is too much", they
say. Their charge against us in the election was ' not enough growth and not
enough employment", so the Government earnestly and honestly said " OK,
that will be our priority growth and employment". We were re-hired by the
country to get the place growing, and to get employment going again, and we
have done that. They said, " oh no, that wasn't the trick at all we didn't really
mean that, what we really meant was that we need really a pool of
unemployment around to keep downward pressure on wages, and we don't
want to see the Current Account moving up". This is Howard this is a
person who presided over the industrial archaeology of the 1 970s, when the
factories closed, when that other great economic genius John Stone was
saying " you can't have a competitive manufacturing sector sitting beside an
internationally competitive primary export sector. If you want minerals and 
TEL: liar .95l 17 : 21 No .013 P. 05/ 11
agriculture, you can't have manufacturing". Now this was the creed this was
around he signed Howard up to this.
So, here we are, with a burgeoning primary export sector, and a burgeoning
manufacturing sector manufacturing exports have tripled in the last
years. The fastest growing component of our exports are elaborately
transformed goods, and we now have a very large internationally traded
sector in services which didn't exist when John Howard was the Treasurer. It
has all happened because of us. And yet here we are, with 5.5% growth and
inflation, and he's saying " No good. No good", and in Europe you say
" what is the average growth rate in the European Union?" and
maybe 2.25% next year." And you say " is that right?" " Oh yeah". " What's
your employment growth rate like?" " 0.75% 1 what's Australia's?"
They have got to be joking. Now, I know all new leaders get a free ride for a
while, but faced up to a bit of fact and argument other than rhetoric does
anybody think there is a better substitute than these sorts of policies? Of
closing the place down to a low growth economy again because a low
growth economy simply means those who are doing well stay doing well, and
those not doing so well do less well. And that sort of unfairness is what we
don't need.
And I'll tell you this about Howard he stands for nothing. He was a weak
Treasurer, and he was a weak Leader, and he has no policies. And we saw it
yesterday with the Aboriginal Land Fund. They said... . he had a chance he
was out putting the spin all around the galleries, on every radio station, doing
that sort of Jimmny Cricket number, bouncing up all over the place " yabba
yabba yabba yabba yabba, yabba yabba yabba yabba" everywhere. As if the
glib, clever line will.. he re~ ons he can say " yes" but mean " no" and
someone reading the transcript can't quite work out what he means... . he was
trained in the John Carrick school of cynical politics. This is where push
polling came from, and all those other sorts of things in his days, he had the
big red arrows from China, and they were coming to get us in the sampans,
and remember all that? And he was Howard's mentor. And this is the sort of
cynicism that you get from this guy he had a chance to say to the Senate
and to his party " look, you selected me because you have got nobody else,
and these are my terms I want to make a new start with Aboriginal Australia,
I don't believe we can be an inclusive society without that happening. So I
am out of all these amendments that my predecessor was going to consider
in the Senate", trying to suggest for instance that we can make judgements
about the degrees of dispossession, or try to invest individuals with the land
and then give them the right to sell it, so that they actually leech away any
fabric of an inheritance in land. All these mangy tricks that they wanted to
write into the Bill. He could have said ' look, I am a lucky fellow, I have been
given a second chance in public life simply by dent of hanging around long
enough, and at least I am going to do the right thing and start clean.' And
what does he do? He sends the Bill back from the Senate full of all of these
compromising provisions. And some people said to us, ' well, look, maybe
you better take the Bill as it is, at least it is a Land Fund Bill.' To which we
said ' well, do the Aboriginals really I mean we have got the Native Title Act
and Mabo, but it is really available to people who still have a traditional 
TEL: 3 Mar .5 17 : 21 No. 013 F'. ub'' I
association with the land. For those dispossessed, the Land Fund was a
central ingredient to justice in land for Aboriginal people. So, if we let this
through it is just another shabby compromise, so we said ' no, no we won't'.
So we put the second Bill, the new Bill back into the House on Tuesday, our
original Bill with some of the procedural amendments we were able to accept
from the Senate rejecting all of the tawdry ones and said to Howard ' knock
this over and we have got a double dissolution trigger and we will propose at
an election that this issue be resolved by a joint sitting of both Houses there
after, giving the Labor Party the option of a double dissolution. He went
straight to water. He goes around saying ' oh, I'll have an election any time'.
Pigs he will. And, all this puffery in the polls he knows it is just like a little
helium balloon, you stick a pin in it and away it goes. He knows in the hard
tack of an erection that we are going to be right on his tail, so he didn't want
to be fighting any elections now.
So, he dropped off. But, instead of dropping off saying ' well, look, I will let the
Government's Bill through', trying to suggest he did turn over a new leaf with
Aboriginal Australia, what did he say ' I'll let it through, but if we become the
Government we will put all the bad amendments back into it'. Because they
don't want to give black people land. That is the long and short of it, You
can take all the science out of this and in the end what sits underneath it is a
deeply seated prejudice against them,
So, don't doubt this Government's strength or its principles or its resolve or its
sense of purpose or its capacity because we will, as we have, take on all of
these big block problems in Australia. Be it Australian competitiveness, be it
opening Australia up, be it the rights and prerogatives of Aboriginal people,
be it the status of women, you name it, we are the ones that have been doing
it and those opposed to us still stand for the same old tripe, the same old
conservative nonsense that they have always stood for.
I said in Caucus the other day, think of some issues in the last 15 years. On
the environment Howard said when he was Leader that the states would be
left to decide the future of forests and wilderness areas. On Aborigines, you
can't think of one positive thing he has ever said or done for them. On the
republic he is the Colonel Blimp of the Liberal Party, the staunch monarchist.
On Asia his only position was that he thought too many Asians were coming
to Australia and that there would be a social backlash against them. On
South Africa he corrected me the other day by saying ' no, it is not true that
Nelson Mandela would still be in goal if it were left to my view. I called for his
release in 1986'. That is 25 years after he was goaled. He opposed the ANC
and he opposed the sanctions. I mean, this guy is from another age and here
they have this obscurantist being proposed as the leader that can take this
modern, confident country of ours into the next century. Well, of course, it
would be a terrible shame for Australia and an unjust thing to do to the place.
I want to make a couple of extra points about the ACT and the labour market.
I made this point yesterday about their industrial relations policies. A week
ago Peter Reith said we now believe in an evolutionary policy. We believe in
gradualism and incrementalism. That's so, the average person says ' oh, well, 
.7M 0517: 21 No. 013P. 07/ 11
MMMMMMMMMMMTEL: Q. I'O
7
they have changed their tune a bit. Before they had individual wage
contracts and they were going to slot us all, now they are just going to move
on something and they believe in minimums.' But, when John Hewson
resigned the other day and the speech that John Howard made following his
departure he said ' well, there has been great changes in Australia' said
Howard and he gave the Government credit for them in opening up the
financial markets, in opening up the product markets with lower tariffs, he
said ' but, the great reform yet to be done is in the labour market'. So, the
week earlier Reith is saying ' don't worry, it is incrementalism and gradualism.'
Howard is saying ' we have got the big block buster policy change for you.'
Now, it is one or the other and we all know what it is. It is the big one,
The thing you have got to know about the labour market is that it is not like a
pool, it is more like a river. There are people changing their jobs every year.
Last year 1.7 million Australians changed their jobs or entered the workforce
out of eight million. When they do, they lose all of the award protections,
they lose overtime, penalty rates, and it means that a lot of people in society
are going to lose $ 100-$ 150 a week on low and middle incomes by losing
those capacities and they will take either the contract or they won't be
employed. So, if you look at that policy after four or five years, most
Australians would be on contracts and they would be out of any enterprise
bargaining framework or any set of award minimum protections which have
got, of course, ajustments there for cost of living or protection for cost of living
and the maintenance of these other things like overtime et cetera.
Now, interestingly, in the ACT, 15 per cent of the labour force about 25 to
30,000 people change their jobs each year or people join the labour market
from school. So, give that over the life of one Parliament, you are talking
about 75,000-90,000 people. Now, they will have the guts cut away from
their working conditions and that will mean, of course, that if you start putting
pressure on the whole industrial relations system it starts to degrade in that
respect. Couple that with, of course, the fact that they are going to cut
government spending and cut aggregate employment and you can see how
quickly that would change the society here. Yet, they are running around
saying to what is a very large public service town ' look, basically our policy is
to cut you to ribbons and to put you on contracts'. And people are supposed
to say ' oh, thanks for that, we will give you a vote, thanks a million.'
We saw Kennett do it with the Victorian public service and we would see
Reith and Howard do the same.
So, the thing is, I think, that in looking at this election I mean, here we are
standing on the very platform that we said we would in 1993 at the election
growth with employment, with productivity, with the country growing. And, we
have done all the things we have said. We said we would do justice to the
Mabo decision, we have done it with the Native Title legislation, yesterday we
did it with the Land Fund legislation.
They are out there now on the environment trying to represent themselves as
being in some way, I mean, they have opposed as I said the Gordon below 
TEL: 3. Mar .951 1~ LN o
Franklin would have been flooded had it been left to John Howard and the
Coalition. All the great changes in the environment we have made they have
opposed and McLachlan came out as their environment spokesman saying
he is opposed to clear felling of trees in this country and immediately Fischer
came out and said we won't have a bar of that policy, in fact that will not be
our policy, he said, very firmly.
So, they have no credentials and, I think, it is very important for people in this
country to know that the only party that has the interest, the commitment and
the strength to protect the environment is the Australian Labor Party there is
no other. Now, we have seen the two Greens from Western Australia up to
their chicanery on the Land Fund Bill as they were in the Native Title
legislation. They are not going to be doing anything for the environment and
Bob Brown and the Wilderness Society, there are some good people in the
Wilderness Society, but Bob Brown is now running for a seat in the Senate
because he thinks he can play corner politics with the continuing low quotas
that the Senate is offering under the proportional representation system.
So, people have got to put a big discount through the things he says. He try's
to misrepresent my position and he knows that without my support the
Daintree reservation which Graham Richardson put together wouldn't be
there. In th e last year, just in the last year, this Government has put aside for
ever, for this country, Shoalwater Bay one of the most attractive areas on
the Australian east coast, one of the most attractive areas in the world
Jervis Bay in New South Wales, by spending $ 30 million locating the
armaments depot to Victoria so that we could leave that pristine. And, we put
million in the Budget to buy back the hole in the heart of the Daintree that
disgraceful subdivision Bjelke Petersen let through which is sitting there now
in the forest, but all cut up into quarter acre lots, to buy that back. No credit
did we get from that none and we have got this year's quota of logs and we
are now seeking to establish the coupes and the quality in the stands and we
have had a deluge of attacks on us by people who, frankly, should know
better and who want to reach the same position we want to reach and that is
to see that we are preserving our best stands of trees, our pristine forests,
but at the same time having a sustainable forest products industry.
These are things governments have to do. A lot of noisy people on the
outside think they can do other things, but governments have to do serious
things and we can do it. So, our environmental credentials won't be found
wanting and I don't think can you imagine any year when the Liberal's put
away something like Shoalwater Bay and Jervis Bay or protected Daintree,
just in one year. This ; Government has got a long and, I think, proud
environmental record and one of the things that we have never really had
adequate credit for is the saving of Antarctica. Let me just say one little thing
because Bob Brown runs around saying ' I saved the Gordon below Franklin'.
Well, I was principally involved in securing the protection of Antarctica. Let
me just tell you a little story.
In 1986 I went to see Michel Rocard, who had become a friend of mine over
the years and he had just become Prime Minister of France and I called on
rii-z 0 00/ 11 
TEL: ' Mar-S No UI hU'
9
him six weeks after he became Prime Minister and we discussed the
Matignon Accords in New Caledonia. At the end of it he said President
Mitterand and I want to do something next year of an international flavour to
celebrate the bicentenary of the French Revorution. Not something simply
French, but something international. He talked about an environmental
protection agency and I said to him ' look, it is a good idea, but we will be both
old men before we ever see it, you know, getting a world environmental
protection agency together.' He said ' well, as a fraternal party you might
think about what we might do'. I said ' well, I have got an idea right now, but I
must tell you that I am in a minority of two in my Cabinet about it', and my
sole supporter was Peter Cook and he said ' what's that?' I said ' it is not to
sign the Minerals Convention in Antarctica'. So, he asked his officials when
they were going to sign this and they were to sign it in seven days from the
time of our conversation. This came from the OPEC oil price rises when they
decided to put a Minerals Convention into Antarctica to go drilling for oil, but
since the oil pressure had gone, the foreign affairs departments of the world
kept grinding away with the Minerals Convention. And, I said ' they will make
a mess of Antarctica and were you to join us we have a reasonable chance of
stopping it and put Antarctica away for 50 years as a wilderness park'. Now, I
said ' I would have to convince Bob ( Hawke) about this, but if you give him a
suitably flattering letter, I'm sure I could get him into it'. He did and then it
was the Bob and Michel show from there on, but we gradually worked on the
Japanese and the Americans and we saved Antarctica from being ripped to
pieces. So, when Bob Brown says he saved the Gordon below Franklin, we say ' yes,
and we saved a continent'. Don't worry, we will have the political amalgam
back together, all the people in this country that have got some ticker. I
noticed at the Australian Creative Fellowship Awards recently, John Olson
said ' look, there is only two kinds of people lovers and others', and we all
know what to think of the others don't we'. Now, the lovers are the people
that have got an interest in this country, that have got good will towards their
fellows, a sense of compassion, a sense of inclusion, a sense of commitment.
That is where we are. We are on the lovers side of Australian politics and we
know where the others are.
So, let's kick off a long hard year for John Howard with this campaign
opening today. And, say to Sue Robinson that with courage and decency
and style she has washed off all this dreadful unAustralian behaviour with
push polling and that the worst instincts of the Liberal party won't get the
better of her. And, they won't get the better of the people of the seat of
Canberra either and let them know that if the Liberals get up that this won't be
the city that it is now and it won't be the country t -' at it is now and that there
can be no substitute to continuing the great reformation of Australia its
economy, its society, its place in the world. And, while the going gets a bit
hard on or -, asions and it gets a bit complex we must, we owe it to ourself to
press on and we don't want to go back down the time tunnel to reactionary
politics and one Australia and one Wollstonecraft and one Menzies and one
dead hand, we want to keep this progressive change coming through. 
I am happy to begin this fight for this election with Sue Robinson and a
victory here in Canberra because the thing we must know in this country, you
get social progress by victories, like we did in the Land Fund Bill yesterday.
You get social progress by wins, you don't get it by unseemly compromises,
So, let's not compromise here in the ACT and lets have an unambiguous
victory for the lovers in Australian politics and we will leave the others to their
miserable brand of politics and their miserable approach to this country.
Best wishes to you, Sue, and the campaign.
ends 



T~ l 4. Mar-. 95 14: 30 No. 001
TRtANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J .( EATING MP
DOORSTOP, RAAF FAIRSAIRN ON DEPARTURE FOR SINGAPORE
4 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Principally, I am going to the opening of the exhibition the CeBIT Fair
because Australia is the guest country, in Germany, because this is
the largest electronics and... its the largest communications and
electronics fair in the world. We have got 160 companies exhibiting
150 to 200 companies. Ten years ago we would have had maybe 2 or
3 companies only being able to be in this. I think this is a
demonstration of the new Australia it's the way the world is going,
and we are not being left behind. We are up there with the best of
them, amongst the toughest competition, the most concentrated Fair of
the new age the e' 1ectronic and computer age we are up there this
week, and we are the host country, the guest country. So, that is why I
am going in a sense to promote Australia, but also to celebrate our
achievements, and to see that we are in the mainstream of these
technologies.
J: What are~ you trying to achieve at the World Summit for Social
Development then?
PM: To put Australia's view, to record the fact that we have put together a
social democracy here I think second to none around the world a
counl: y with high employment and a good social wage, where equity
and 7-galitarianism are important milestones in ecz: nomic and social
policy. They are things worth saying in this context.
J: What do you hope to achieve through your talks with Helmut Kohl?
PMV: Germany is the third largest country in the world, it is a very big trader
with Australia, we have got substantial two-way investment I think we
would like to improve that. Germany united is a much larger country
it has now got probably an even greater destiny in Eastern Europe as 
well as Western Europe, and it's simply an important relationship to
keep going.
J: It used to be our fourth largest trading partner, and now it's ninth
that's slipped over the last five years....
PMV: It depends on how much we have grown, and how much other
countries have come in, but I think the point is that Germany is now
focussing to the Asia-Pacific again after the reunification they are
really getting their gaze on the Asia-Pacific, and I think a lot of
companies think that Australia can be the platform where they launch
themselves in the Asia-Pacific. And, of course, we agree with that.
J: Just on another matter should Fred Many have been released from
9aol?
PM:, That's a matter for the New South Wales government it is not my
affair. Can I just make this point, though let us record that this week
a great milestone in Australian social history was agreed, and that was
the Aboriginal Land Fund Bill. Because of the to-ing and fro-ing, it's
now as if it's coming and going, hardly to be noticed. But let's
understand, that because this Government decided that there will be
justice for Aboriginal people, and there will be land for them which is
central to the way they live the passage of the Land Fund was a great
victory for Aboriginal people, and a great victory for the Government.
it's a pity that John Howard, and the Coalition, couldn't have seen their
way clear to agree to the original Bill, and know that stain is on them,
and though they have tried to wash it away it remains. But, the happy
part is that justice Was done, and the Aboriginal people will now have
their fund.
J: In the sense that it will ease some pressure off Mr Howard, are you
disappointed to be leaving the country at this time?
PM: No look, Mr Howard... I have got him on simmer. And when I come
back to him, he will be just I'm sure warming along nicely.
ends. 



1K!,
1 STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR PACKER, MR HOWARD AND MEDIA MONOPOLIES
ov. On, My attention has been drawn to a statement issued by Mr
Olive's Kerry Packer, in which he has categorically denied any
deal with Mr Howard on cross media ownership rules.
Well, of course he would.
ivering . ociety. The truth is that Mr Howard. stands for the relaxation of
on with rules which would allow Mr* Packer to control a television
network and major metropolitan newspapers in the same
city. And he has said so. His statements have provided
irrefutable evidence of the position he has taken. and
ive lost would take in office.
Mr Howard has stated that his public and private views on
ted the this matter are the same. His public view is that the
killa nd cross media ownership rules are unnecessary. He has
galan and ienxcplreusdsiengd Ktheer rys amPea ckveierw. privately to media proprietors,
Whether he expresses it publicly or privately. Mr
arnng of Howard's view is jarringly at odds with his Party's
/ as her policy and with the public interest.
I her toAs I said on Sunday. the Australian public will judge who
is the Packer candidate regardless of Mr Howard's
coyness, or Mr Packer's bizarre pretence that he is being
3gainst intimidated.
-iaison
e First The Labor Government stands for media diversity, and the
icil and Coalition under John Howard does not.
I will be spending the next five days in Germany the
world's third largest economy promoting Australia's
is also Irole as a modern economy at the forefront of information
* ote as technology use and development.
. n andAmong the things I will be saying to German business
ittees. people and others is that this technology must be used to
increase diversity, opportunity and equality. It is a
point which both Mr Howard and Mr Packer should note.
BONN 8 MARCH, 1995 5103 



TEL: 6. Mar. 95 9: 54 No. 004 P. 01/ 0
© e
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ. KEATING MP
JOINT DOORSTOP WITH PRIME MINISTER GOH CHOK TONG, ISTANA. SINGAPORE,
SUNDAY, 6 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
GOH: I am delighted to have Paul Keating visit us in Singapore. This is essentially a
continuation of our discussion in Canberra when 1 was there a few months ago.
Today, we reviewed the progress In the implementation of APEC kept our meeting
going, We also explored bilateral relations In particular we agreed that we should set
up a committee of oficials to see how we can maximize our strategic partnership.
Your focus on political, security and economic relations. The committee will be set up
in a few weeks time and to be asked to submit a report to us a blue print of action
in about six months time.
We have also agreed that Singapore should send a tourism mission to Australia to
explore several investment possibilities in either Queensland. Northem Territory or
Western Australia. Essentially again, It Is an idea which we are following up on, we
discussed It In Canberra when we met the last time.
PJK I just re-emphasize the point the Prime Minister made about Osaka, We made very
great progress at Bogor. The importance now Is to keep that momentum going and to
actualty give tangible expression to some of the elements of the Bogor Declaration.
So, I think, he and 1 see this as a great priority and we are happy to say and to know
that It Is going well at this point,
On the bilateral relationship, I think, we see a great future for Australia and Singapore
co-operating in third markets, In countries around the region where we can get
together, that is our skills and our technology and our capital, to do things together
and as the Prime Minister has said, we will now arrange our respective departments
to get together and come up with an action plan within six months to say which
markets we think we should be moving towards and In which sectors.
The Prime Minister's reference to tourism is. I think, the notion that many
Singaporeans are now going to Western Australia and the Northern Territory the
nearest part of Australia, four and a half hours to Perth and there Is, I think, the
opportunity of opening up tourism developments across the north of Australia, that is.
In Western Australia, the Northern Territory and in Queensland. We think we ought to
be exploring the ways in which we can facilitate this and bring pleasure to
Singaporeans end further co-operation between our two countries and, of course, the
people to people contact which Is the underlying fundamentals of any relationship. I
am sure we are both pleased to take questions.
J: Has there been any change to whether there'e to be preferential trade within APEC 
TEL: 6. Mar .9S, 9: 54 No. O0i4 F. 02/ 03
PJK: I don't think we think this Is a sort of semi ideological dogmatic thing. The Prime
Minister can speak for himself, but I'm pretty sure Nis view and mine would be Mth~
let$ s get on with the APEC agend$, let's give real expression to the Bogor Declaration
rather than overly worry at this point about whether it is MFN or preferential. Ithink
oaet In this part of the world we would prefer to be dealing as we deal now on a Most
Favourel Nation basis with the rest of the world, but we do want to at the same time
develop APEC as coherent, with a cogency to its plans for freer trade. So. all of the
trade ideoogies of putting their sticky fingers In here, in this one, I think the key thing
is for the organlsational people to get on and make Osaka a success. That ranks
more critically than whetber it is MFN or preferential.
J: IS it disappointing that the Malaysians have Indicated that they don't berieve in APEC
the agreement, the Bogor' Agreement?
PJK: I think the Prima Minister can probably do more justice to that than 1. I mean, his
contacts with Malaysia are more extenstve than mine, but ', he !-oticn of concerted
unilateralism, the notion that we can all head down a path together but not do It In an
overly regulated way Is, I think, the way forward anc; President Soeliarto's concept of
the flexible consensus Is, I think, the appropriate one. That plus a concerted.
unilateralist approach will not only take care of any concerns Malaysia has, but
anybody else. 0o you think so, Primes Minister?
GOH: Yes.
J: Mr Keating, is there going to be an election in Australia this year?
PJK: We have to have an election oy about March 1996 and generally we have elections
when we have to have them.
J: Prime Minister, what level would you like to set this committee b; eing set up?
GOti. This is to be set up at the departmental secretary level the departrents of Foreign
Affairs and perhaps other ministries.
J, I wonder it boll of you could make any comment on the Sairings situation. Prime
Minister Goh in a sense of whether you are satisfied that Singapore has done enough
In the regulatory area and Prime minister Keating whether this raises any concerns
about yovr own markets.
GOH: No, I think looking at the reports from the investigation we felt that we have done very
well. The authority has regulated the transactions, they knew what was coming, they
forewarned the people involved, the mid margin calls paid up and as you have read
in the paper's today it Is essentially an internal problem of the Barings group -a lack of
control over ohat. As far as the market is Concerned there has been no impact The
stock market IS up, SIMEX Is trading and there has been rio losses for Singapore.
J: Prime Minister, coming to defence, what Is your assessment about relations with
Australia as far as defence concerned, what more do you think can we have?
GOH: Well, excellent relations. We are very thankful that AUStralia has given Singapore
space, As you know we need space to train our airforce, we need space for the army
and we haven't got a space in Singapore, Australia has the space and is kind enough
to offer that space to Singapore. That Is because, essentially, both countries see a
coincidence of Interest over the long term, we share strategic Interests In the area.
So, Australia has been very helpful and we are very grateful for that
J: To follow on up that question, was there any discussion of the recent events In trie
Spratleys, signs of some confrontation there? 
TEL: 6. la r. 54i~ N o. 0 C4 P. 0 31,
3
GON: No, we didn't discuss that.
J: Mr Keating, will there beea hike In interest rates in Australia..
P. JK: Do you work for the financial market do you? Knight-Ridder7 In Australia we have
been growing at around 5.5 to 8 per cent and we think there is now some natural
slowing In the economy and that the monetary adjustments that Australia has made
have produced perhaps a reward on demand even greater than the actal mechanicai
impact of the measures, that is. with substantial announcement efferts. So, we are
now waiting to see* just how our national accounts are looking as we get more partial
data In.
JMr Keating, back " o~ e thiS morning Senator Aiston has accused you of running an
anti Packer vendetta since he appeared or, Channel Nine and endorsed Howard, do
you have any comment. 3?
PJK: Only to make the obvious comments that they are crawling to Kerry Packer. Not a
good strategy for anybody I wouldn't recommend.
J: They are denying any deal with Packer.
PJK; Of course they will, but they have signed up. I mean, work out who Is the Packer
candidate the mani who walks in and says he will remove the cross media rules or
th~ e man who sayi he won't?
J: So, you stiii think there is a deal with
PJK:. Absolutely.
4: Mt Keating, on one other subject, could you describe your feellh'gs at the cemetery
this morning and your impressionl
PJK. I think I am always perpetually mindful of the reality of the commitment of Australian
men and women to the defence of Australia end to the defence of democratic values
and states such as Singapore during the Second World War. We have been
reminded of this because of the 50th anniversary of the Fall of Singapore in 1942.
being in 1992, and then In various other parts of the regions through 11993. 1994 and
1995. This year with Victory In the Pacift. I invariably take the opportunity to visit the
graves of Australian service men ond womnen and I was particularly struck today that
the Secretary of my DepartmTent his father is buried here and there was on the roill
two other Keatings, from Tasmania and my uncle was captured here and, of course,
died on the death March betweem Sandakan and Ranau. Sc, there Is a poignancy
and remarkably, In a sense, but probably not remarkably that in a visit to the Prime
Minister and speaking two of us here have lost relatives in the defence of Slngap~ s.
I think that speaks volumes about this ori-going relationship and the defence
relationlship in the fact that we will not 1orget. It is Important that we remember, and be
seen to remember, and it Is Important that the relatives of those who were lost here,
relatives In Australia of those who were lost here, know that it was not In vain and that
they are riot forgotten.
ends 



TEL: 8. ar. 95, 10 : 24 No. 007 F. 01 03
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MION P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MARITIM HOTEL, BONN, TUESDAY, 7 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMVI Ihis morning I met with the Presidlent of the Federal Republic and, of
course, a meeting and iuflcn with the Chancellor. Perhaps I mnight deal
wih the Chancellor's meetiNg anid lunch first and say I think rarely have I
had a discusiv1 as good as this one, we found substantial common
cause in Germany and Australia doing more things together. This3 is the
third largest economy in the world. Our investments here are reasonably
small so too are they in Australia. There is no cause why this should be
so. They are now interested in the Aoia-Pacific 03 Wc are. They want to
do more things there. I think they are inclined to be doing more with us.
The Chancellor proposed some things and so did 1. One was ho thought
that wc should have a cultural agreement between our two countries. He
couldn't understand why this hadn't happened in the past. I told him that I
thought we should be underpinning investment more strongly between us.
saying that there is going to be an Australian German Rusiness
Association Convention later in the year, which I will be attending and I
asked him wh~ ether one of his senior Ministers mightr attendl and he
concurred inl that
He was surprised nlow much of a common) view uf tha wui Id we had. We
had a long discussion aout Europe, about Germany's role in Europe,
about Itic future of the European monetary system, about how Curope
mlight develop in the future, Germanys historic opportunity and we had a
long discussion about the Asia-Pacific, about the role of thio various
countries, how we saw the Asia-Pacific and thon, of course, how we
might do more together. 
TEL: . Mar. 95 10 : 24 No .007 P. 02/ 03
We also had a discussion about Germany and German history which is
one of my interests and German architecture and a few other things which
he was very interested in. He paid me the compliment at the end by
saying sometimes I do these things as a chore, this has been a real
pleasure and it was for Me too.
I met the President this morning and again I had a very good discussion.
one of the paints I made to the Chancellor and the President was that on
this question about the convergence criteria in Europe to join the
European Union, the only three countries in the OECD who fit the
convergence criteria are Germany, Luxenburg and Australia. So, it is a
measure of how competitive Australia is and a measure of the standing of
our economy that in this rigorous convergence criteria in Europe, outside
of Germany and Luxenburg, the only other country in the developed world
that would qualify this year is Australia. I hope my opponents In Australia
might take some note of that.
This was a telling point, I think, with the Chancellor and the President, but
I also asked the President about his role, the role of an appointed
President, in the Federal Republic. He made a couple of telling points
about it being a non-political position, that him not being a member of a
political party, that speaking for the country was something he thought
Germans wished him to do, but doing it in a way which didn't bear upon
the executive prerogatives of the Government. He said these things had
all been thought about in 1949 and he was sure that Germans had
designed their constitution well, looking at past history. 1 told him we
were having a similar debate in Australia and was very interested In his
view of his role here in this constitution and then in this Republic.
I think they were both, the President and the Chancellor, very agreeable
in terms of me telling them the changes In Australia and of our economic
circumstances of our outward external orientation, our commitment to
growth with low inflation, the fact that at CeBIT we will have 200
companies high technology companies that we are no longer just a
producer of coal and iron ore and wool and wheat and tourism, but also of
high technology products and they see. I think, Australia being a really
useful interlocker for them in the Asia-Pacific.
So, I rated both meetings highly successful.
J: Mr Keating, do you think the German model of a non-elected President is
one worth examining more closely in the Australian context?
PM: I think his point was that were It to be an elected * person, the political
parties would operate the election and that a political person would be 
TEL: S PIa r .9c 11) : 24 No. 00j F . C$,' Cji3
wamwite He thought German's felt more comfortable with somebody who
could speak for the nation but was not partisan,
J: Prime Minister. itituteslingly enough in Singapore now they have gone the
othier way. They nlow have an elected President.
PM: This is the largest republic in Europe and It has got a long history and tho
1949 coflStitution was eY, very well thought over, comprehensively
thought over and thought through. There are all sonls of models of
presidencies around tho world wh'ere there is a lot of executive power in
the Amorican Presidency and the French Presidency, but this is a
parliamentary democracy, with parliamentary reprsentativA Government,
at, we have it. It was just interesting, ttwAr are not too many of these, so
when one Meets the President one at least asks.
J; Do you think our P'arliament couldI ever agree?
PM: I think, this Parliament In Germany agreesj, anid it'Ut Geii Parliament
can, tho Australian Parliament could.
J: What albuut the Australian people, Mr Keeting, there seems to bo a
preference at the moment for an elected prosidcnt ratheir than an
appointed president
PM. We are having a debate on this as a motion wnd there will be 2tages in
this debate end one of tho stages will be whore the Government says
where it stands on this issue and the public will then debate these thing. s
But, I have got no doubt that when one invests the nation in a person, In a
reprosentative sense as it the mae here with the German Presidency, the
fact that that person isn't elected and draws political authority In a
partisan way, a party political way from the constituency of the country,
moans that our system Mf Government doesn't chlange and the systein of
government didn't mnange here and It wouldn't U itnge under those
circumstAneps In Australia. In other words. the representative democracy
we have where members of Parliament are actually relating to their
Constituency know the oirgenisation. know the municipal authority, know
the parents and friends association, know all the representative groups, it
is a very comprehensive represetation process. That is what they have
here and, at least, President Herzog said that he thought that the German
people wished him to speak for them, but not in a partisan way.
J. Prime Minister, what is your reaction to Graham Richardson's suggestion
that ho had spoken to you about dealings with Packer anti r12aiming that
he had tried to convince you there was no deal? 



TEL ?. Mar. 95 16: 14 NO. 009 P. 02/ 10'
44 ** Embargoed Until 8.3.95
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH VY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OFFICIAL OPENING OF CeBIT
HANOVER 7 MARCH 195
I am very pleased to take part in the opening of
It is a particular pleasure to be in Hanover a3 the first
Australian Prime Minister to visit Germany wince
reunification. We are good friends, with a long history
of close co-operation and ties which go well beyond the
commercial. You are, however, also one of our ten
largest trading partners and investors.
The relationship with Germany means a lot to us. I hope
my visit this week will lay the foundation for
Australia's co-operation with Germany well into the next
century. I could have faxed this speech, of course. or used the
modem. I could have E-mailed it: or, as some remote
Aboriginal communities do these days in outbaCk
Australia, I could have video-conferenced it.
I could have used the highway Instead of the aeroplane.
E-mail is quicker, cheaper, more comfortable and doesn't
separate us from our families.
But for all its extraordinary power and convenience, all
its seemingly limitless potential, there will always be
some things the information highway cannot do.
Among them is the need to make personal contact of the
kind I will make in Germany Inl the next few days, or the
kind you are making here at CeSIT 95. Nor will it ever
relieve us of the need to make judgements and decisions
and to have the will1 to act upon them.
In fact, right now, no decisions are more important then
the ones we are reaching in regard to the revolution In
information technology and communications which is
transforming our lives.
CeBIT 95 is taking place at a time when policy makers all
over the world are having to grapple with new and complex
issues raised by Information technology, 
TEL: 7. Mar-. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P. 03/ 10
2
Last week, I launched the final report of an Australian
Government inquiry into the technical and commercial
preconditions for the delivery of broadband services to
homes, businesses and schools throughout Australia.
There is a striking similarity between the Issues we have
been investigating and those considered by the G7 at its
summit on the Information Society in Brussels last week.
The G7 meeting addressed the social consequences of the
revolution in communications technology: the democratic
imperatives. They asked the question what sort of
Society will the information society be?
Among other things, they concluded that government3
around the world must promote the universal provision of
services; diversity of content, including cultural and
linguistic diversity; open access to networks and
equality of opportunity.
In Australia vie have been saying things for some time.
In fact, wie have been doing the.,
The G7 Conference Theme Paper spoke about the " enticing"
potential rewards of the global information society:
" better social integration: the recovery of our sense of
community; enhancing the progress of democratic values
and sharing as wiell as preserving cultural creativity,
traditions and identities; improving the quality of life;
a stimulus to economic growth, job Creation and higher
economic efficien'cy 1 and so on.
In Australia, vie know what these things mean. The
Communications revolution suits our ambitions.
It suits our social ambition~ s which are social democratic
egalitarian and -inclusive.
It means that vie can deliver soc'i program5 more
efficiently and that we can reach the margins with them.
That is another amoitlon wie can pursue with the new
technology: we can overcome the vast distances which
separ-ate Australians and deliver, even to the most remote
areas, education, training and health services, including
medical teaching, rehabilitation programs and rapid long
distance diagnosis. we can deliver employment programs.
The new technology will enable us to take to the more
remote communities of Australia the nation's arts and
heritage.
Australians live in a relatively loose federation on a
continent the size of western Europe. ' We have a
population of just 18 million an extraordinarily
diverse multicultural population the vast majority of
whom live in Cities on the coastal fringe, we see In the.
Communications revolution an opportunity to effectively
reduce the physical, social and cultural distances 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P.
3
between Austral ians and to r-reate a more equi tablea and
cohesive nation.
If the distances between Australians have always been a
concern, so too have the distances which separate
Australia from the rest of the world.
Some years ago an Australian historian coined the term
" 1the tyranny of distance" to describe the way in which
our isolation from each other and the world has shaped
our national development,
Overcoming this " tyranny of distance" has been, if not
Quite a national obsession, a powerful theme in the story
of Australia. Information technology and the
communications revolution is bound to be a decisive
Chapter in the story.
It will be all the more decisive because it Complements
another ambition of ours that is to integrate Australia
with the global economy and, in particular, the fastest
growing economies in the world those of the Asia-
Pacific. I know that this region is Of growinji interest
and importance to Germany.
For Australia, Asia is not the Far East but the Near
North. Our economic integration with the region has been
growing fast: a decade ago less than half of Australia's
merchandise exports went to north east and south east
Asia. The figure is now 60 per cent.
Nine of our twelve largest export markets are in Asia.
Australia supplies almost half of east Asia's Coal, iron
ore and beef and over hal f of i ts, wool and al umi n ium
ore. Australia has, to a very substantial extent,
literally fuelled east Asia's economic boom.
But although these commodity exports remain very
important to us, exports of elaborately transformed
manufactures to the Asia-Pacific have more than doubled
in the past decade. And we expect services exports to
double over the next five yea-s.
In the Asia-Pacific we are seeing the emergence of a
sense of community, an understanding among the countries
of the region that we need to work together if we are to
maintain high rates of economic growth.
This is what nas beer) driving the development of the Asia
Pacific Economic Co-operation organisation APEC.
In fact, the proportion of trade between the APEC
countries Is greater than that within the EU, In
Indonesia last November, leaders from the 18 APEC
economies committed themselves to the goal of free trade
and investment in the region by 2010 for industrialised
economies and 2020 for developing economies, 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 N0.009 P. I
4
When we meet again 11M Osaka later this year, APEC
Government leaders will be talking about the best ways to
implement their free trade goals anti working together oil
Issues like the harmonisation of standards and customs
regulIation.
ror both Australia and for the region the potential of
APEC is vast. Yot it is important for more than the
materi* 1al benefits it will deliver: It is important for
the message it contains. It is a watershed in the
region's history; and in Australia's history it marks a
change of the same dimensiaons it encapsulates the
effort we have made in the past decade to transform our
economy, redefi~ ne our independent identity and re-Orient
ourselves towards that part of the world in which -we live
and our future very substantially lies.
The communications revolution plays a defining role in
this Australian revolution,
Wo are very conscious of the fact that it offers us the
chance to dramatically improve the performance of our
existing industries and create new ones new industries
which will integrate us more thoroughly with the world
economy, and at the same time strengthen the fabric of
our national life, culture and identity.
Information technology is already a major Australian
industry and one of the most rapidly growing sectors of
the Australian economy. It is a significant export
earner now and the industry has set itself a target of
quadrupling those earnings by the year 2000.
That Australia has been chosen as Partner Country for
this year's CeBIT Exhibition, we regard not only as a
great honour, but as a very w'elcome testimony to
Australia's advanced capabilities in information
technology and communications.
I am 3ure that the 170 or so Australian companies
represented here will not mind if I say that their
presence speaks for more than the excellence of their own
operations and their own success it speaks for the now
Australia. Their presence speaks for a country which has radically
transformed its economy in the past decade and is
competing successfully in the modern global economy.
We hvpe, of course, that this Exhibition will1 help these
companies to expand their operations in Germany and
Europe. But more broadly we hope that our participation
at Cebit 85 will help the international perception of
Australia to catch up with the contemporary reality.
we are under no illusions about this: many Europeans
continue to think of Australia as a remote country -I
remote not only in the geographical sense, but removed 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P. iC
also from the modern international market place of ideas,
innovation, technology and industry.
It is true, Australia is a long way from Hanover. It is
also true that we live in a country whose unique phySical
characteristics, along with its pas~ toral and mining
industries, have long been its defining characteristics.
And so long as those traditional industries continue to
flourish, and tourists come from all over the worldincluding,
I am happy to say, Germany to see the
outback and the rain forests and the beaches, we will not
be discouraging these perception5. J
Rather, we would like to add to them an appreciation of
the change that has taken place the change to an
outward-looking sophisticated manufacturing economy,..;
I could point to any number of examples of that change.
But none is more striking than that in information
technology and communications the field in which the
Australian companies represented here at CeBIT 95 are
excell1i ng.
It is to detract not at all from the energy and efforts
of these companies to say that they now work in a
domestic environment that could scarcely hav. e been
imagined a decade ago a much more favourable domestic
envi ronment.
Lot me state a few of the facts as briefly as possible.
One way of summ'arising our position is simply this: at
present, vith the exception of Germany. no country in the
EU meets all the convergence criteria set out in the
Maastricht Treaty for Economic and Monetary Union.
Australia does.
Modern Australia is a deregulated environment of low
tariffs, low tax rates and low inflation.
Last year~ the Australian economy grew by 6.4 per cent and
we forecast growth of 5.5 per cent in 1994-95. Labour
productivity increased by 4 per cent in the year to
September 1994, employment grew by 4 per cent and the
inflation rate was 2.5 per cent.
Over the last 10 years exports of goods and services As a
proportion of GOP have grown from around 14 per cent to
22 per cent. Cur international competitiveness has
increased by 36 per cent.
Over the last 5 years exports have grown by more than
7 per cent per annum. Our exports of elaborately
transformed manufactures have grown at more than twice 
TEL: ?. Mar. 95 16: 14 No. 009 P. 101
The export base is diversifying rapidly in 1993-94, for
instance, exports of Australian-made computers and office
machinery, parts and accessories increased by almost
per cent. Exports of telecommunications equipment
increased by 34 per Cent in the same year.
Australia has a 540 billion IT and telecommunications
industry, with more computers and processing power on a
per capita basis than any country other than the United
Exoort earnings from our information industry at present
total $ 2.6 billion, and the industry expects the figure
to reach $ 10 bi llion by the year 2000 equal to our
annual exports of iron ore and coal.
Australia is indeed a remote continent. We are
accustomed to vast distances. But this has had its
advantages: it has taught us to innovate.
A century ago, for instance, it made us pioneers in the
science of refrigeration so that we could get our meat to
European markets. it put us among the pioneers of
aviation.
And in more recent times it has led us to develop one of
the most advanced telecommunicat ions networks In the
wiorld: networks which connect nearly all the households
and business premises in Australia.
Australia has more telephone lines per head of population
than Germany, Japan, Britain or the United States. One
in eighteen Australians use mobile telephones, the second
highest per capita rate in the world.
The Australian telecommunications 5ector is the eighth
largest in the world on per capita basis it is the
second largest.
These figures need to be understood in the context of the
Australian services sector-, a major user of IT and
telecommunications products, which accounts for 70 per
cent of the total output of the Australian economy and
employs three quarters of the workforce. As much as
per cent of the value content of everything Australia
exports involves services.
After Japan, it is thes largest services sector in the
Asian region, arnd Asia is a major user of Australian
services.
AS I said before. Asia is basically where Australia's
future lies.
what is equally important, Australians now recognise this
fact and, with the shift in perception1 has come a
rapidly expanding awareness of the potential to do
business in the fastest growing markets in the world. 
TEL: 7. Mar. 95 16: 14 N. 0,
So too are there Opportunities for overseas companies to
establish their businesses in Australia as a gateway to
Asia and as a site for Asia-Pacific regional
headquarters.
Over a hundred international organisations have already
done this, including such European companies as Hella of
Germany, Ericsson, Vodaphone, SITA and Thomson CSF.
They have found In Australia that Government policy is
directed to maintaining a competitive domestic
environnrt, a strong international orientation and, in
particular, an intensified engagement with Asia,
They will find one of the lowest company tax levels in
the world; generous depreciation allowances on plant and
eqwipment; exemption from dividend withholding tax; and
1.50 per cent tax concessions on research and development,
They will also find that Australia has a standard of
living with very few equals in the region, or the world
for that matter, and a quality of life which is second to
none. Europeans w'ho choose to move there will find that
Australians have become familiar with Asia-Pacific
markets and skilled at doing bUSiness there.
And if these advantages do cause international companies
to decide to set up in Australia, they will find
streamlined immigration procedures for their employees
and tax deductions for their relocation expenses.
They will also find that there are considerable
advantages in working with Australia In areas of
information technology and communications.
For a nvmber of years now, we have been actively seeking
co-operative relationships with multinational companies
as a means of developing the expertise of Australian
firms.
Today, more than 40 multinational companies participate
in a program through which they invest a percentage of
their Australian sales in local joint ventures with
Australian research centres, in new product development,
and in assisting Australian technology firms to enter
International markets,
Overseas com~ panies coeitemplating a move to Australia
should also bear in mind that Australia is the second
biggest market for information technology and
telecommunication$ in the Asian region, and that
Australian governments are major customers for
international IT companies. 9 
07/ 03 ' 95 17: a
when overseas companies come to Australia, they will find
that we have decided that IT and communications will be
one of the nation's great industries. They will find
that we are very confident of our technological
capacities. In rural communications, airport design and equipment, or
the design and management of nationwide telephone
systems, Australian engineers number among the preferred
suppliers throughout South-East Asia.
But it is not only in Asia that we aim to succeed.
Many of you may not be aware, for example, that
reservations, tracking and booking systems for Lufthansa
and other airlines are run by software developed in
Australia.
Or that telephone systems in Germany and other European
countries rely on Austral ian-developed switching systems.
Those systems are a product of expertise in ISON and data
communications technology which Australia implemented at
a very early stage. Indeed, we now have a highly
sophisticated network with one of the most extensive
optical fibre netwrorks in the world.
Australia's demographic pattern is almost certainly a
reason why we excel in remote communications, electronic
data interchange, geographic information systems,
computer systems for mining and mineral processing and
satellite navigation systems.
Far from the IT development centres of Europe and the
United States, Australians have had to develop
sophisticated solutions of their own.
As a result, wie have built powerful and flexible software
applications in areas such as banking, transport and
retail markets; and Australian accounting, banking,
insurance and treasury management packages, have become
world standards.
We discovered quite some time ago that living in the
Southern Hemisphere had the advantage of enabling us to
supply primary products to the Northern Hemisphere in the
off-season.
Today, the fax and modem have made us consciou5 of a
different fact: that the time zone difference between
Australia and Europe, which has always seemed to work
against us, can now work for us because now Australian
software firms can analyse problems while their European
clients sleep, and send the solutions before the start of
business in the morning,
03 fAb ( I a -j [ 001oI
Ir 0 4.) rX PRESS OFFICE 
TEL: 7. Mar2~ 5 16: 3~ No. 012 P. 01/ 01
9
There Is perhiops iso better aymbol of how change3 ' in
informatio~ n technology present themselves As
possihilities for Au3tralia.
Autstralia is nlow integrated with thin global economiy in
wAyR which unil now have always LUvvii denied u4. We see
uur-future in Asia, but not cxclusively. It is surely a
truism that in the inforn'atinn agp no-one's future will
be exclusive, if % mere is u blfilyle salient fact about
the information 3oc'mety, it is that our futur* is shared
it can be and it nuaght to be.
Our " A3ian futurc" can serve yours: Germany and tho
other eoikintriAX cit Europ2e can Use Australia as a bdse
from whiCh Lu einLer' thce V&amp; 3t new niarketu.
Moreovpr you wil I ino Australia is a market Iii iiel, 1r
and a uredLive partner In develooing new tcchrmologies.
A-the Australian companies at CeP&amp; TT 95 hear witness, you
will tirid that we are very deterrnine(. 1 Lo be a
p~ layIer in the information age.
We are very ConScIous that vie t. diiivt ;, Iaim to have
succeeded without succceu in Europe. That is why we pre
hera. It iS why Thc; 170 Australian companies are here.
And it i3 why I am very pleased to join in the opening o'f
C&amp; BTT 9A. TEL 7. Mar. 95 16: 38 No-012 P. 01/ 01 



I I . IydI J ~ I INL. U r. ul'ui
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MIR
DEATH OF SENATOR OLIVE ZAKHAROV
I was deeply saddened to hear of the untimely death of Olive Zakharov. On
behalf of the Government and the Australian Labor Party I extend to Olive's
family and friends my deepest sympathies.
Throughout her life, Olive Zakharov showed a selfless and unwavering
concern for and commitment to improving the welfare of Australian society.
Her interests were many, and she will be remembered for the passion with
which she strove for those things she believed in.
With her tragic death the Australian community and the Labor Party have lost
one of their most tireless fighters for social justice.
Olive Zakharov was elected to the Senate in 1983 and represented the
people of Victoria, especially the women of Victoria, with great skill and
distinction. Her deep and abiding commitment to improving the legal and
social position of women will be her legacy to Australia.
From her own personal experience, Olive Zakharov knew the suffering of
women who were victims of domestic violence and abuse. It was her
understanding of the consequences of domestic abuse that enabled her to
persuade government to do more to attack the causes of the problem.
Olive Zakharov was also one of the earliest fighters in the struggle against
HIV/ AIDS. She was an original member of the First Parliamentary Liaison
Group on HIV/ AIDS. She actively supported the development of the First
National HIV/ AIDS Strategy and the work of the Victorian AIDS Council and
other community groups involved in HIV/ AIDS.
Her invaluable contribution to the parliament and people of Australia was also
shown in her role as Temporary Chairman of Committee's and she wrote as
Chair of the Senate Standing Committee on Employment, Education and
Training. She also served as a member of various other Senate Committees.
Olive will be sadly missed.
BONN 7 March 1995 



TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 01/ 05
"* EMBARGOED UNTIL 6.3Opm
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TXI! WON P J KIATING, MP
OPENIN43 OF AIJSTRAUAN STAND AT
HANOVIR 8 MARCH 1995
It Is a Pleasure to be in Hanover opening this Australian stand at CeBIT'
it Is also a source of pride which I trust Is shared by all the Australian
companies represnted here.
We are sharing tha exhibition with sorme of th'e world's best companies, in
some of % he word's most competitive Industflex.
It Is a signal honour that Australls has been chosen as tis year's Partner
Country for CeaIDT, and Aumtrlia's information technology and
telecommunicationa companies have responded with unprecedented
enthusiasm to the opportunity this fair presents to show Germany, Europe
4nd the world what the Australian inidustry has achieved.
One of the problems faced by Australian manufacturers and service
lidustries In marketing themselves abroad Is the absence of intemationally
recognised Australian brand names.
Our companies are doing remarkable things in information technology and
communications, but their achievemeant. often go unrmarked and
anonymous. Often they are masked by fth names of the overseas
companies with which they are connected.
Theo fact Is Australia does not live In the internallonal mnind as a famously
technological society. We do not have companieS which fly the flag In, the
way that aI Siemens file&amp; It for G~ erm~ any, or Phillips for The Netherlands or
Microsoft for th~ e United States,
I have no doubt that Australian companies of thiS kind wvill soon emerge.
Teistra, to ofler one example, Is becoming a well known Australian brand In
Asia. Intellect, a CaBIT veteran which sells advanced point of s8la wW
smaert card technology, Is nlow a multinational firml opststing in Scanldinavia
and elsewhere in Europe. 
TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 02/ 05
2
It will take time, but the l1'" Pott'rt thing is to ruC40gnis that the Process has
begun. and that the emergence of Such companies will signify not only their
Individtial succss but another Step in~ the transuformation of AsIjstai.
The presence of 170 Australian companies at CeB3IT was unimaginable lust a
few years ago. It demonstrate* how much the enivironment has changed In
Australia, how much it has adapted to the changed International
environment. CoSIT' 96 will change it that much more. For your companies and for
Austraiae It has, I believe, an historic dimonsion.
It Is not too much to say that you carry the future in your hands. Not alone,
of course: those traditional sectors of the Australian economy which have
served us so well down the years will continue to underpin our economic
success, at least So long as they continue to moderrilsa end adapt to
tachnologloui and globl change. So too will other now and sophisticated
elemnents of our manufacturing Indus" r.
But no other inidustry carries such reel and symbolic importance as the one
In which your companies are working. And no Industry serves all other
Industries, or isuso fundamntal to their fitur success, as your Industry Is.
It Is * iso true to say that more trian any other sector of the economy,
Information technology and communications will define the sort of society
we become In the 21 at century.
On your success, and on how we Austrlan governments apply the now
technology, subsiantally depends th achievement of our national
ambitions, Your work fits our strategy.
We need an Innovative, competitive modam manufacturing Industry. You
are providing us with one.
We need an export-oriented economy initegrated with our region and Mhe
world, You are helping us to build It.
We need to re-vitalise our regions. Your industry can help us do It.
We need to overcome the distances wnicm separate people and * Ommunities
from each other and Australia from the world. T1hat Is what you are about
TEL 8. Mar. 95 15: 39 No. 021 P. 02/ 05 
TEL: 8. Mar.~ 5 15: 32 No. 021 P. 03/ OS
3
Yo make Australia competitive and to expand the realm of opportunity for
Australian$ now and In the future, we need comorehenalve and elfecove
vocational education and training. Your industry will play a crucial role.
Information technology arnd communicationsl isa baslc and defining element
In our economic and social ambitions -a world competve economy
underpinning an egalltarian. inclusive society.
It 13 an Industry with vast potential for good. It can make us a more
productive nation, make all sectofu of our economy mnote efficient, inettase
our exports. It Can deliver better health and other social services.
To quota just three examples of this potential: among the companies
represented hare are some like Mincom. which has developed sophisticated
systems for managing capital Intsnsive industris Including mining,
mnanufactuing and defence: and Rosemt Laboratories who have developed
Bralle computers, optical character reading machines that road to the blind;
anid Earth Resources Mapping. whose spectacular graphics packages for
visualisirig and analysin~ g Satellite piCTUres of the earth for applications like
mineral exploration, mapping end city planning, have set Il world standard.
Yet we shouldn't forget the moat fundamental foct about these new
technologies I mean the fact that properly applied, they can make all our
lives easier.
They 9o directly to the most commonplace and essential of our activities.
This is emiphatically not " bay* with toys" teochnalogy. it is technology to
make shopping easier, banking simpler, Teaching more effective, transport
" for, our public service more efficient. It can give Us better h* Spitals and
health services. It can enlarge our experience of the arts, open new
channels of creativity, deliver now and better realms of entertainment.
It has profoundly democratic possibilities.
Yet none of these benefits are inevtabtle. They will not happen by
themselves. They won't happen In Australia and they won't happen In the
world unless we decide ftat tey should happen and re-iolve to find the best
ways to rmake them happen.
Recenty I heard &amp; bow% a startling fact which I think we igowla uaefully beer
In mind when we talk about communilcation's end informaTion technology: It
Is that half the worlds population has never made a telephone call.
We will fall ourselves and future generations If we allow the new technology
to compound the difference which nlow exists between developed and
developing counules if we allow Information technology and
communications to be as unfairly distributed as the world's other resources.
TEL 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 NO. 021 P. 03/ 05 
TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 04/ 05
4
And what is true of t-16 glaol application of th flaw tochnQlolO$ Is true In
different degrees lor Australia. We need a strategy which wIIl ensure that
the great potential of IT and T Is realised In the Interests of out democratic
end social goals.
I think I can may with some certainty that Australia has considered more fully
then most countries 4ll the Implications regulatory, technical and social of
the information society.
Last weak I launched 8 major report Commissionled by the Goverme~ nt Into
the provision of broadband services. The repo't lay* the groundwork for the
Government to be a leadingeodge user of the new technology. Our objective
Is not just to Improve the way we perform the existing functions of
Government but, much more broadly, to re-engineer Its work to deliver in
completely new and more effective ways services ranging from health inl
remote areas to the kinds of entertainment we &amp; so every night In our
suburban homes.
Many of you will also be aware that lost year we dlivered two major
statements: the first on employment, the second on AuMalln cultural
development. Both expressly took account of the new technologies. Both
wer* designed to stimulate and give democratic and socIall direction to the
IT Indus" r.
Australia may not yet be well known tar Its technological Innovation and
excellence, we may not yet have that Siemens. or Sony or Microsoft, but
the companies represented here at CeSIT may reasonably think of
themselves as being leaders sm~ ng those who are establishing such a
reputation for us.
These 170 companies collectively carry one message to the 700,000 people
who are expected to visit this exhibition: It is that Ausuala knows the way
the world is going end will not be left behind.
Let me then congratulate thorn far their enterpriso and wisti them good luck
In their ventures.
Lot me also congratulate all those who worked so hasrd to put this together,
of AWTRADEao Dieter La Crn. e end his teem.
As I hove said so many times in the 082t, Ausualla's future is very much
tied to our close engagement with the economies of the Asia-Pacifc, not
least with our export to themn of Information technology and
tolecommuncstiofls. For that reason I want to welcome In paricular the
rmembers of business delegations who have Come here from Ousngzhau and
Japan especially to meet with Australian exhibitors. 
TEL: 8. Mar. 95 15: 32 No. 021 P. 05/ 0O
I also want to say how pleased I am that Australian State GOovemments re
giving this exhibition their full support; and thet the Premier of Queensland.
Wayne Goes, Deputy Premier Cowan from Westemrn Australla and Minister
Gude from Victoria have all made the effort to be here today.
And finally let me thank our German hets, whose generosity and hospitality
have made this visAt so rewarding and enjoyable partcularly the people of
Hanover. Since European settlement In 1788 Australiana have always known Hanover
as the place from which the British and, therefore, the Australian
monarchy came. When that connection passes., as I am sure It soon must,
this new link may well remain the link formed between Australea and
Hanover by this most 21st century event,
It is now my pleasure to officially open tills Australian exhlbtt at 



TEL: 1Mr 9 No. 003 P. 01/ 01
U) 1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, BRANDENBURG G ATE BERLIN, 9 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I would just say that It Is always a matter, a great feeling of history to
be In Berlin. to be with the Mayor In this, what may be and probably
will be the city which more than any other typifies the new Europe.
The reconstruction of Germany, the reunification, the draw from the
East, the prospect of a United States of Europe, I suppose, the future
of this city as much as any other, its future says as much about that
as any other city in Europe. And, with the reunification and with the
Federal Government coming here there is a chance to repair Berlin's
broken heart and I think that is something we all look forward to. So,
I appreciate the welcome that the Mayor has given us, to see the
reconstruction of the city and this famous place here, the
Brandenburg Gate and Paniser Platz, to see Berlin come to life again
as the central city of the German state,
J: Mr Keating, what about the future of Australia?
PM: The future of Australia at the moment is we have just passed
560,000 jobs In two years. That is a record in the western world, I
think, for employment growth and that is not a bad fuure.
ends 



KQ
. J,, AUSTAIg~
VS RELEASE
69/ 95
* P IN
is a
rv
.1y in
: ralia
raiian
to said.
A7 , ar
ial Ippo-t STAMMM" T DY TIR PRIME MINISTER, THE RON P J KEATXWG NU'
MR XCLACHLAN'S RESIGNATION
The Member for Barker has paid the appropriate price for his
gross impropriety. His actions reflected at best a failure
to comprehend the culture and rights of Australian
Aboriginal people, at worst a cynical disregard for them.
The attempts to escape the implications of his actions in
Parliament, beginning with his attack on the Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs, only compounded his offence.
Kv Howard can take no credit in this matter. He showed no
more understanding of the significance of the stolen
documents than Mr McLachlan did in using them so offensively
in Parliament and elsewhere.
His press release and letter to Mr McLachlan indicate that
he still has not grasped the nature of the offence. In both
he refers only to the " political sensitivity" of the matter,
as if the hurt and offence it has caused Aboriginal people
are of no consequence.
It would be reasonable to conclude that while the member for
Barker has run on his sword, neither he nor his leader
understand the implications of the impropriety, and
Australians particularly Aboriginal Australians could be
forgiven for asking if the Coalition itself has any
understanding of them.
BERLIN 10 MARCH, 1995 5.187 



TEL:
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINSTER, THE MION F
THE UNITEID NATIONS SOCIAL SUMMIT
COPENHAGEN 12 MARCH 1995 jl. ar 5 10 : 44 No .009 P .01104
J4 KEATING, MP
In a worid which is changing at extaordinary speed, the central fact of our age is
Interdependence,-from the giobalisation of the world economy to the Informaton
revolution, our prosperity and se= urty are now linked Inextricably,
We Australians know that our future depends on equitable and sustainable
development In the rest of the world,
And we know that such development depends In part an flows of development
assistance from t rich to the poof 4untriles, partly on opening up the world's
markets to trade and Investment and partly on the efforts of each individual
country to support its own social and economic development,
No nation's experience Is likely to be directly transferable to another's needs, but! I
think Australia's experience has some relevance to our concerns at this
conference. I certainly do not pretend that Australia has solved its problems, but
we have made progress in developing a social democratic society where equity
and egalitarianism are integral elements of economic and social policy-making.
We believe that our experience of the lost decade furnishes unmistakeable proof
that the pursuit of equity within and between nations is not an option but a
necessity; that greater equity and productivity are not opposed but
complementary; and that the best means of delivering both Is to empower people
and communities with the means to swlve their own problems, Somnetmes the
social task is more to steer than to row.
The first principle of Australian government policy Is inclusion, We believe that
our country's success Is best measured and best achieved by policies which
enable -oll to share in the bounty of the nation.
And we believe that the starting point Is economic growth which is the means to
creating a bounty big enough to share, Economic growth not ortly enlarges the
bounty, it creates employment which Is by far the most effective means of
distributIng wealth and opportunity. 
S" EL: 13 . Mar. 95 10: 44 No. 009 P .02/ 04
Employment is the principal means by which developed and developing countries
can share the bounty and alleviate poverty.
Employment requires economic growth and education. In the moder world, In
both developed and developing countries, education is more than ever the great
liberating force. Equal access to education is therefore an essential foundation of
opportunity. These have been the primary goals of the Australian government for a decade:
an inclusive philosophy made concrete by economic growth and strength,
employment growth, and greater access and equity in education.
Just as we know that social development and social justice are crucial to national
progress and well-being, we also know there is a two-way relationship between
economic efficiency and social justice. In the words of Arthur Okun: " Isocial
justice and markets) need each other, to put some rationality into equality and
some humanity Into efficiency."
In other words, we need cool heads and warm hearts.
The international trend towards the globalisation of economic activity is both
dazzling and demanding. Through both competition and cooperation between
nations It will promote efficiency and create wealth.
Yet we will fail every test of our maturity if, as we make economic progress,
because of their gender, race, cultural background or any other reason beyond
their Influence, large numbers of people are left behind.
Governments used to think it possible to pretend that economic growth alone
would eventually sort out our social problems. But it was never a genuine option.
For example, we know that economic growth alone will not get jobs for the longterm
unemployed new jobs tend to go to new entrants to the labour force and
the longer people are unemployed the less " employable" they become.
There is more than a human dimension to this, and more than a social dimension:
it is an economic folly. Unemployment is a waste of talent and energy. What is
more, the greater productivity and more flexible labour market which flows from
getting people back into work leads to lower Inflation and increases the speed at
which the economy can safely grow.
We cannot disown responsibility for the unemployed; but any honest assessment
will tell us just as emphatically that the days when setting up another government
bureaucracy could be offered as the answer to every social need have also
passed. We are all familiar with inefficient government services and their lack of
responsiveness to individual needs. 
TEL: 15. r .95 10 : 44 No. 009 P. 03/ 04
3
passed. We are all familiar with inefficient government services and their lack of
responsiveness to Individual needs.
Last year, in a comprehensive Government White Paper on Employment, we
introduced a Job Compact a scheme by which the longer term unemployed are
offered appropriate training or assisted to find employment through short term
wage subsidies. Two basic notions underly the Compact: the obligation of society
to help the most disadvantaged, and the obligation of the disadvantaged to take
up this assistance or lose their entitlement to income support,
Our aim is not punish or coerce but to encourage and empower.
It Is a valuable lesson of the past decade that governments alone are not
responsible for delivering desirable social outcomes. We work in partnership with
many people: community groups, business, unions and individuals. This
approach engages more people in finding solutions to social problems, It delivers
services which are tailored to individual needs, and it is an antidote to the
unproductive relationship between bureaucracy and " victim".
Many Aboriginal Australians live in communities whose unconscionable standards
of health have long defied the efforts of governments to improve them. It is a
situation we must change. We have begun by giving indigenous Australians that
which will most empower them legalrecognition of their prior title to the land,
and a Land Fund as the means by which they may get land back.
Following the same principle, that we must give people the means and incentives
which will help them solve their own problems, we are determined that the next
step the delivery of adequate health and education will this time be effective.
Just as transfer payments are necessary within nations, they are necessary
between them. As far as possible, Australia provides aid according to the same
principles which inform the provision of our social services: I mean we design
them for effect, especially the effect of breaking the cycle of poverty.
unemployment and marginalisation.
To give just one example, our $ 130 million population policy will expand the range
of choices available to women by giving families the ability to decide the number
and spacing of their children.
Improving the education, health, living and working conditions of women is not
only a humanitarian ambition, it is essential for economic and social progress.
We know the benefits of development will not flow to women automatically, so
our assistance programs address their needs directly.
One area where Australia's efforts are particularly concentrated is the South
Pacific. 
Tn, i . Mar. 9b 10: 44 No. 00
4
The 22 island countries of the South Pacific comprise only 0.1 per cent of the
world's population. They are among the world's smallest and most vulnerable
societies vulnerable to limited resources and fragile eco-systems, to population
pressures and global warming
But these countries have proud cultures and robust social systems.
They are working together in the South Pacific Forum to strengthen their capacity
to manage their limited resources effectively and sustainably.
Some of them are represented here in Copenhagen where they will tell their
stories for themselves.
But they cannot succeed alone and in this meeting I want to add Australia's voice
to theirs. As Chair of the South Pacific Forum this year, I want to ensure that
their interests and the interests of the world's other small island states are not
forgotten. Let me conclude on the theme with which I began. Social progress depends on
economic growth. It depends in part on access to markets. Nowhere in the world
has this been more obviously the case than with our neighbours in the Asia
Pacific. That is one good reason why we have worked so hard to secure a good
outcome in the Uruguay Round of the GATT, and why we have been promoting
APEC. The GATT outcome is by far the most tangible and effective step to be taken in
recent times toward international equality of opportunity. APEC represents a step
of comparable dimensions for our region: by moving towards a community of the
most developed and developing countries it is turning the so called North-South
dialogue into a functional reality.
Ift. here is one general comment we would make at this Summit, it is that
governments must strive for economic growth. Not to do so is to deny their own
citizens jobs and security and to deny the citizens of other, poorer countries the
opportunities they deserve. Most certainly it is to deny the ambitions of this
Summit. This will be called an historic meeting because of the number of heads of state
and heads of government who have met to endorse the declaration: but history
won't judge it an important meeting if, afterwards, governments squander their
resources and do not treat their people well.
End P. O4/ OZ
I I 



7 PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTERl THE HON P J KEATING MP
BUSINESS SPEECH AT KASTEEL DE WITTENBURO
THE HAGUE -MONDAY, 13 MARCH 1995
It is a groat pleasure to speak to you today here In The
Hague. Au3tralia has very old links with the Netherlands. They
go back more than 350 years but it has to be said that
your countrymen in those days refused to see the
potential of the place.
In two years' time it will be the 300th an~ niv~. ersary of
the landing on the West Australian coast by the Dutch
explorer Willem de Vlamingh. Next month Her Majesty
Queen Beatrix will be launching a replica of Lhe Batavia,
the Dutch ship which was wrecked off the coast of Western
Australia in 1629.
In between those two events the most famous of Dutch
explorers in Australia, Abel Tasman, visited our southern
shores and discovered what is now known as Tasmania.
Tas-rian's impression unfortunately was not a favourable
one: he is reported to have said as he sailed away,
" There Is no good to be done here." And he went on to
trade with Japan,
One of the reasons for my coming to the Netherlands today
is to tellI you that Tasman was wrong there is much
good to bo done in Australia.
Tasman of course was exploring out of Indonesia. So a
nice circle has been turned. Australia's relationship
with Indonesia these days Is deep and full of commercial
promi se.
We recognise that the Netherlands itself has very old
connections with Asia; but these days Australia's active
engagement with the burgeoning economies of the region
can provide a perfect environment for European businesses
wanting a base in the fastest growing markets of the
world. Of course, our links with your country are already well
established. They are more than simply commercial. In
the year3 after World War II Australia welcomed thousands 
of Dutch migrants, and they have made a great
contribution to modern Australian society. We feel at
home among the Dutch and I hope you won't mind me
saying, very much at home in the Netherlands.
We share a set of social and political values. In
politics we incline towards the liberal, egalitarian,
social democratic model. There is plenty of room for
differences within that broad philosophical canvas, of
course; but I think it is true to say that we share the
same notion of what constitutes a good society. And I
think that, in our own ways, we have both gone closer
than most to creating one.
So we have a lot in common including business.
We have been doing business in fact for years, and very
successful business.
The Netherlands is the sixth largest investor in
Austral ia and, amrong the countries * of the EU, the second
1largest. The great Dutch companies like Shell, Unilever and
Philips have been established for a very long time in
Australia. These days companies like Rodamco, Flexovit,
ABN AMRO, and the ING Group are among the 70 other Dutch~
companies who are active.
And increasingly Australian companies are setting up
their European operations in the Netherlands. The
transport firm, TNT, has its headquarters he~ re. Another
Australian company, Mayne Nickless, I understand is about
to become a logistics supplier in the Netherlands for
Unilever.
Goodman Fielder Wattie is another Australian company
operating here in fact it has become the largest flour
miller In Europe and the largast bread maker in the
Netherlands. The Australian company Boral, which has
recently made a $ 100 million investment in Germany, is
also a substantial investor in the Netherlands.
The point I want to make today is that these examples of
the substantial two-way investment which already exists
between us can be multiplied many times over. If we
seize the opportunities which now exist, in time in a
very short time I am sure we will be able to say that
this was just the beginning.
For on the eve of the 21st century Australia is uniquely
placed as a country in which and with which to do
busi ness.
We have made great changes in the past decade. I am
talking about a new Australia: with an economy which
grew at more than 6 per cent last year and is expected to
grow at 5 per cent this year; with employment growing at 
3. S per cent; investment forecast to grow at 24 per cent;
and with an underlying inflation rate at just over 2 per
cent. We are a pro-growth Government, and my visit to Europe
has more than ever convinced me that we are right to be
so. We are right to aim for high growth, in a low
inflation environment. We were also right, I believe, to
pull down the tariff walls which for so long constrained
our industries.
Australia is now open to the world and competing in it
successfully. in the past decade our exports of goods
and services have grown from about 14 per cent to nearly
22 per cent of GDP. Our international competitiveness
has increased by around 38 per cent since the early
1980S.
These figures also speak of a cultural change. We are
talkirig about a country which has been prepared to make
the changes necessary to engage successfully in the
global economy.
We know about change in Australia. We have developed
something like a culture of change. As never before In
our history we are conscious that our future is in our
own hands, and we are extremely confident of our ability
to succeed.
I can tell you this Australia in the first decades of
the next century will be very strong.
We will still be a competitive and reliable producer of
minerals and energy, and of the products from our great
pastoral and zgricultural industries,
But we will be much more than this. We are much more
than this already. Let me give you a couple of examples
which in a sense tell the story.
Australian exports of elaborately transformed
mariufbctures have nearly tripled in the past decade and
tourism exports have doubled as a share of GDP. In
1993/ 94 Australian exports of computers and office
equipment increased by around 30 per cent. Our exports
of telecommunications equipment increased by 34 per cent,
We find that it sometimes comes as a surprise to European
audiences that Australia is in the forefront of
information technology and communications.
I was at the CeBIT Trade Fair in Hanover last week.
Australia is the partner country this year. There are
170 Australian companies represented none of them,
perhaps, quite so famous as Philips, or Eriecson, or
Siemens, but every one of them a measure of Australia's
expertise in information technology and communications.
Collectively, they are helping the European perception of
I 
Australia to catch up with the contemporary reality of
Australia. It is true to say that Australia is not seen in the world
as an outstandingly high technology country. But in fact
it is. Australians enjoy one of the most advanced
telecommunications networks in tho world. What is more,
they export their expertise.
Telephone networks in Germany and other European
countries rely on switching systems developed in
Australia. Australians have developed high-tech
solutions in fields like geographic information systems
and satellite navigation. They have developed the
world's most advanced traffic monitoring and control
systems; and built pcwerful, flexible world class
software applications for banking, transport and retail
industries,
AUStralian software runs air and ground traffic control
at Schiphol Airport. The " smart cards" and PIN pads used
in banks and sup -markets throughout the Netherlands were
produced by an AL, tralian company called Intellect.
I could list many more examples which w. ould illustrate
this essential point about contemporary Australia: that
we have taken on the information revolution with a
passion. And with great success.
Perhaps It has something to do with our being for so long
remote from the world and, living ort a vast and sparsely
populated continent, remote from each other. In such
circumstances people learn the value of communi cations.
Our embrace of the information revolution is certairly
related to the boost we have given in recent years to
research and development through such measures as tax
concessions; the establishment of Co-operative research
centres to link various strands of business arid industry
with our scientific institutions; and to the Governmnent's
encouragement of information technology and
communications and the new media In a wide range of
policy initiatives including last year a major
statement on employment and industry, and another on
cultural development.
There are myriad reasons why Australia has developed its
interest and expertise in information technology and
telecommunications. We have a healthy independent film
and television industry which increases our potential to
provide content for the new media. We have a highly
sophisticated system of closely targeted social services
which the new media can serve; and we have people in
remote communities who are entitled to the sorvices in
health and education and the arts which mainstream
Australia enjoys, and which the new technology can
provide. 
I said In Hanover, and I know the Dutch would understand,
the new information technology switz cur tncial ambitions
as wellI as our economic ones. Notwithstanding its traps
and limitations, it has enormous democratic potential.
And it is where the jobs of the 21st century are going to
be. The outstanding reason for our enthusiastic embrace of
information technology and communications is the future.
The information highway is the highway to the world
Australia has always needed. It eliminates the
disadvantage which distance has always imposed upon us.
With instant international communications our handicap is
gone. Along with the new markets of the Asia-Pacific, the new
information technologies are the keys to Australia's
success in the 21st century.
it is only natural that we should have pursued both. As
I said, we are at the doorstep of the fastest growing
region on earth. Indeed, we are rapidly becoming part of
it; and for this reason we are uniquely placed to help
Dutch business people like yourselves to pursue the
extraordinary opportunities which lie there.
The explosive development of the Asia-Pacific may well be
the most important phenomenon of the second half of the
century. Asia's development will shape the 21st
Century. It will shape the world's economy, its culture,
environment and security.
You will be aware of the development of APEC Asia
Pacific Economic Co-cperation. The member countries of
APEC account for half the world's production. By the
year 2000 they will account for 60 per cent of world GDP,
per cent of world trade.
I am sure you will all know about the historic decision
which APEC leaders made in Bogor, Indonesia, last year:
they agreed to achieve free and open trade and investment
in the region by 2010 for industrialised countries and
2020 for the developing countries. This is an
extraordinary development, It will mean a dynamic and
integrated market of two billion people.
I don't think APEC's objectives and rationale are
sufficiently understood in Europe. It has developed very
rapidly and in quite a different way to the EU. It Is
not a community in the EU sense. It has little
infrastructure and few bureaucrats.
But it is no less serious. One of its great strengths is
that it brings together both developed and developing
economies in one framework. It sets a new standard for
co-operation in what is known as the North-South
dialogue: it turns that dialogue into a concrete
creative reality. 
understand the sc ,' 1snism about APEC which exists in
Europe. But then twelve months ago there were sceptics
saying that what was achieved at Bogor wculd never be
achieved; and, twelve months before that$ there were even
more sceptics saying that we would never get the leaders
of Japan, the United States, China and the other 12
together for a meeting in Soattle.
Scepticism is a healthy sentiment of course, but APEC has
defied it and I expect the pattern to continue when the
Heads of Government meet again in Osak~ a in November this
year I expect that we will agree on a comprehensive
agenda for reaching our free trade and investment goals.
The comnmitment we have made is not like any other trade
negotiation. We have set the end point for
liberalisation -comprehensive free and open trade in
goods, services and capital. So, unlike the Uruguay
Round, we will not be haggling about the Sxqn to which
we remove trade barriers.
We are not about to form an inward-looking or
protectionist trade bloc. All APEC leaders agree that
the trade and investment liberalisation we are
undertaking should feed into and fuel further global
trade liberalisation. What we want is a more open and
liberal multilateral trading system.
I think it goes without saying that Australia would like
to see non-APEC countries come to the same view and match
our efforts.
Australia's fut~ ure is in the Asia-Pacific. That is
unde~ rstood these days by all Australians, 6S per cent of
our exports now go to east Asia, and about half of our
mi grants now come from the region. In the process of our
integration we have learned a good deal, and that is one
of the reasons why Australia is a good place for European
companies to establish their headquarters in Australia.
They will find that Australians are comfortable doing
business in Asia.
They will also find a great many other advantages,
including a standard of living and quality of life
comparable to their own. Becaulse We share a long
tradition and a common cultural heritage, they will find
that they are working within a very fami liar frame~ work.
They will find commercial advantages, such as a highly
competitive corporate tax rate, generous research and
development concessions and, perhaps most valuable of
all, that sophisticated telecommunications system and
highly developed information technology which I have
already described to you.
It seems to us that a circle really has been completed.
Australia has spent the best part of 200 years on the 
7
outer reaches of Europe's influence. We are no longer in
that rbit. We look to Asia and the Pacific. And it is
precisely that shift In our priorities which now makes
the potential for a productive and mutually beneficial
relationship with European countries so much the greater.
In other words, nothing In our European past comes close
to matching the potential which now exists to do business
with Europe in our Asia-Pacific future.
And In that future, it goes without saying, we see the
Netherlands as a most important partner. 



( 9~
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP ON ARRIVAL AT RAAF FAIRBAIRN, CAN BERUA
MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM.: I might just say a couple of things about the trip it was, for me, as
successful as I could have had, this visit to Germany the third largest
economy in the world and then to Holland where we have a good bilateral
trade and investment relationship, but where the relatior; hip
needed to be w-armed up, and I think that has happened too. The visit
I had with Chancellor Kohl couldn't have been better the policy
discussions couldn't have been better I think there is a wider
appreciation now of the policy innovations in Australia, the grow-th wye
are having with low inflation which most Europeans could only dream
about the high employment in Australia, how we have done it, and
what we might do with Germany and with Europe. At the same time, of
course, I went to the CeBIT Fair, which is the largest information,
technology and telecommunications fair in the world, and we
Australian companies are already writing tens of millions of dollars of
business. We had 170 companies there ten years ago in this
country, before this Government came to office, we would have been
lucky to have had ten companies there. So it's an indication of the
huge technological chE nge and product innovation which Australians
have been able have been capable of and we had very warm praise
for the quality of the exhibits we had there.
J: Should you have raised domestic issues while you were over there?
PM: There are always domestic issues being raised there, on overseas
visits, and so we will be dealing with those as we come ho) me. But as
far as Mr Howard is concerned, I will be just leaving him to his
conscience.
ends. 



TEL: I6. Mar. 5 13?: 19 No. 018 P. 01/ 10
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
16 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I would like to begin by saying that the High Court decision is an historic
decision a great decision for the Aboriginal community of this country, and
a huge endorsement of the policies of this Labor Government, in respect of
the Native Title Act. It means that, as a consequence of this matter being
decided once and for all that, as a consequence of this Government's
legislation, more will have been done in the last two years than was done in
the last 200 years to guarantee justice for Aboriginal people in terms of their
access to land, with land coming to them as an inherent right, rather than
simply a statute right delivered by some Parliament. It also endorsed fully the
Commonwealth approach to protecting Native Title recognising it, protecting
it and ensuring that workable process exists for land management across
every State and territory. It found that the whole of the West Australian Act
was inoperative and Inconsistent with the Racial Discrimination Act, and
thereby invalid. The West Australian Act failed because it was racially
discriminatory, that is, it failed because it was inconsistent with the Racial
Discrimination Act. The West Australian Government has no choice now but
to fall into line with the High Court decision, and again I remind people that as
I did in Western Australia a couple of weeks ago, that there has now been
some 8000 grants of interest in land been issued by the Western Australian
Government, a large proportion of which are probably invalid. I have pointed
that out I wrote to the Premier 18 months ago thereabouts telling him that
a continuation of grants of interest in this way was probably Invalid, and now
that has been proven to be the case. The only thing I would say is, the
Commonwealth is, nevertheless, prepared to work with Western Australia to
ensure that issues arising from this decision are addressed cooperatively, and
already we have had preliminary talks at Ministerial level with the Court
Government. But can I say that this reaves a real question for the Federal Coalition it is
impossible for the Federal Coalition to maintain its stated opposition to a 
TEL: 16. Mar. 95 18: 19 No. 01
2
balanced approach to the Native Title Legislation. Now you know the
Government has got now two pieces of law into place the Native Title Act
and the Land Fund. The Native Title Act gives Aboriginal people the right to
access to land where they can establish a traditional connection with the land
-a right which has existed before European settlement. Where those rights
have been extinguished, and where Aboriginal people are desirous of reestablishing
that connection with the land, the Land Fund gives them the
possibility of buying that land and making it. These are always the two parts
of the Act, and again I just make the point that I have made to you often we
get progress in this country by victories, by wins. The Native Title Act, and
the Government's Insistence upon It in the Parliament against the
intransigencies of the Senate, was a victory for the Aboriginal people and for
the Government, and so too was the case with the Land Fund which was,
upon its return to the House of Representatives, an unacceptable piece of
proposed legislation. And the Government then introduced it again for the
second time, and the Coalition decided they could not obstruct any further.
It's because of our insistence that the Aboriginal people have now got these
two pieces of legislation into place, but the stated policy of the Federal
Opposition at this point articulated last by Mr Downer -is that he would
consider the repeal of the Native Title Act upon coming to Government. Now
John Howard has made it very clear that he will repeal the Land Fund
provisions when he comes to Government. He now must say where he stands
on the Native Title Act. Do they continue to take the view the wrong and
misguided view that a right of Aboriginal people inherent in the Common
Law, a right which has existed now since before European settlement should
be denied them, and we go back to some sort or statutory provision for the
basis of land? Because what the High Court made very clear, was that the
Western Australian legislation took away these inherent rights, and
substituted a very minimum statutory right, and the taking away of these
inherent rights and the replacement with a minimum statutory right, was not
only contrary to the Racial Discrimination Act, but morally was bankrupt, and
now is the case for John Howard to say where he stands. Is he going to
repeal the Native Title Act, as he says he will repeal the Land Fund Act, or
change it beyond recognition? Or are they finally going to say there ought to
be some justice for Aboriginal people that they are entitled to land which was
theirs as the High Court has said since before European settlement? Are
they finally going to come to terms with the oldest Australians the people
who inhabited this continent before any of the rest of us arrived, and desist
from this sort of view they have that seems to permeate all of their attitudes,
and that is that any inherent right to land for Aboriginal people, runs against
their grain? This is the test for them a test of principle.
I might just complete my remarks by saying that the High Court found 7 to 0
7-nil that the West Australian Act failed because It was Inconsistent with the
racial Discimination Act. It has not only endorsed the Law, It has endorsed
the policy adopted by the Government, and as a consequence, for the first
time In the history of European settlement of this country, Aboriginal people
have now got an Inherent right to land in this country. 8 P. 02/ 10i 
TEL 3
J: Prime Minister, are you prepared to talk to the Court Government on the basis
of your original offer that is, including compensation etc even though the
deadline passed in December?
PM: The original offer which we made for compensation and carrying the costs
stands. But it doesn't stand for grants of interest made after the cut-off date
the ones which were done against the Commonwealth law, and against advice
from me.
J: When is that date?
PM: Well you go and look that up I haven't got it in my head right now.
J: Is it still possible.... would it still be possible for the West Australian
Government to attempt to obstruct the workings of the Native Title Tribunals In
some way, and if you think it is, is there anything the Commonwealth
Government can do about it?
PM: It would be very wilful obstruction, It's obstructing against the operation of a
piece of law firstly agreed by both houses of the Commonwealth parliament,
adopted by all of the States of Australia bar Western Australia, against now
an express decision of the High Court, and a very clear one: 7 to zero, 7 to
nothing. At what point does the Western Australian Government feel it has
any legitimacy in its view, and capitulate to what Is very clear national
sentiment of this issue?
J: So, back to the cut-off date you were just talking about would you the
Western Australians might be disadvantaged because of that...
PM: Only by Richard Court...
J: isit fair to disadvantage them because of the actions of their Premier?
PM: This is the advice I gave Richard Court I said on 6PR on Perth, so I am
telling you, " there is a lot of villainy here on the part of the West Australian
Government, and a lot of wilful villainy putting the interests of Western
Australians, and Western Australian businesses, at risk by granting interest in
land which is ultra vires of the Commonwealth Act of Parliament, agreed to by
every other state bar Western Australia". Now, the Western Australian
Government the Premier went out of his way to issue these grants of
interest against the Commonwealth Act under the shadow of what he thought
would be a successful appeal. But against the advice of my letter to him -I
wrote to him, saying don't do this. You must start thinking of the private
interests of Western Australians and not your interests.
J: Isn't he entitled to have his day in court?
PM: He's had his dlay in court, and lost. But, while he was having it, he was
issuing grants of interest, against the law. And, he was told so.
T1EL6: . Mar. 95 18': 19 NO. 018 P. O7'/ 10 
TEL: 15. i'ar. 95 i &amp;: 19 No. 018 P. 04/ IC
4
J: So, you're own legislation, the Brandy case which was handed down by the
High Court recently, means that the Native Tribunal can't actually make
binding decisions. Are you going to fix that?
PM: Well, look, at some point, some of the procedural issues In the law, the
Commonwealth will look at but not to the principles. Some of the
procedural issues, but not to the principles.
J: Will that be done this year?
PM: I don't know. I think we need more time to see how the Act is working.
J: Mr Keating, Jeff Kennett today challenged you to adopt the German
presidential system. Would you like to see....
PM: Jeff's becoming a republican is he?
J: . No, he said he was still a monarchist but, he said he would favour the
German system.
PM: He's confused isn't he, poor old Jeffrey.
J: Would you like to see a system where he got a say in who was head of state?
PM:-Let him put his hand up as an Australian and say the Australian head of state
should be an Australian person when he says that he can have a
conversation with me, but, if he wanders around with some sort of attitude
which says that we should still be borrowing the monarchy of another country
but, then, want to be taken seriously in the debate.... no, thank you.
J: He said aspects of the German system appeal to him. He's obviously shifting
ground...
PM: Is he, well, like the rest of us, let him make a shift and we'll see how far he's
shifted.
J: Are you attracted to Sir Zelman Cowan's suggestion of using the selection of
the next Governor General as a test case...?
PM: I haven't thought about the next Governor General, the next Governor
General's position, but, it does make one very clear point; I thought Sir
Zelman's remarks made one very clear point, at the moment, the prerogative
to appoint the Governor General rests with the Government and, fairly
exclusively, with the Prime Minister. And, that's never been the case under
any other option discussed by me, that is, in the future. In other words, at the
moment, the Prime Minister has the right to propose to Her Majesty who the
next person should be. So, all of these people going around saying, well, the 
TEL
Prime Minister wants to hang on to this... in fact, the Prime Minister is giving
this away, obviously.
J: How fast do you think the economy is slowing, has the need for tighter Budget
and interest rate policy eased since the end of last year
PM: I think the economy has slowed somewhat, I'm not sure how much. I don't
think that diminishes the case for being vigilant on policy.
J: Has the case for tightening before the Budget diminished from the point of
view of those who are arguing that it is still over heating?
PM: Well, the Government has made it.. The Treasurer spoke, I thought,
eloquently, at the time, about the need for an appropriate stance on fiscal and
monetary policy and I don't see anything that has happened since that should
change that.
J: Is the Government indulgent and complacent?
P M: I don't think it is, but, again, if Gary Gray had issued those things in a press
statement it wouldn't have even been reported in the Sydney Morning Herald.
The fact that it gets front page lead is a commentary about the news
judgement of the Herald.
J: Prime Minister, John Howard, from what he is saying, is obviously not going to
tell Mr Mctachlan to give back the documents, they're just going to leave it to
McLachlan and his legal team, apparently. What does this say about
PM. Well, I thought his interview, this morning, on John Laws, was extraordinary.
It demonstrates a completely dishonest approach, it says he was party to the
whole tactic in the House. He, as you say, hasn't returned the documents, the
question Is, why does he wIsh to hang on to the documents. He, I would have
thought, had a duty to give us a full list of the recipients of the documents and
a categoric assurance that only one copy was made of the so called ' womens'
document'. He has done none of these things.
But, some of the pieces of the transcript, I thought, were unbelievable. He
says and this is the blatant approach, the glibness, the belief that glib
remarks dressed up in long sentences can somehow obscure what he Is
saying such things as:
" Did you go to the Opposition parliamentary tactics committee
about it? ( JH) Oh, It was discussed among a number of us, yes.
And, did they agree at that meeting, that it should be used?
16 Mar 5 18 I j No .0i8 F .05/ 
T E L: 1 Mar 5 1&amp;: I9 NO 18 P. O06i1O
6
( JH) Oh, Ian had the authority to ask questions, there's no
argument about that.
And, then he goes on to say:
( JH) " But, I don't feel at least, a bit apologetic about that.
Now, understand what he is saying, there. He's saying: " we discussed the
parliamentary tactic, I understood that Ian McLachlan was intending to
mislead the House of Representatives, and I was party to its misleading".
This is my point, Ian McLachlan resigned because he misled the House, John
Howard knew he was going to mislead the House and was party to It,
therefore, it follows, logically, doesn't it, that he should resign, too. And, I
include the tactic, agreed also, was the throwing of the womens' document
across the Chamber which must have been discussed in the tactics
committee which he agreed to, as well. And then he says, of course, he's
completely sensitive to Aboriginal people. He goes on to say and I thought
that this was exceptionally breathtaking:
( JH) " No, Ithink there is enormous difference between a gratuitous
invasion of privacy of a third party and coming upon some documents
which are involved in a highly controversial dispute."
This is not a highly controversial dispute, this is a regal case. This Is a legal
case, these are legal documents. But, he's saying that because they are
disputed, it is a free-for-all. And, then, Laws is saying:
" I wouldn't use it"
and Howard says:
' You wouldn't use It?"
and he ( Laws) said:
" Well, I'd have to work it out but I think it is a very bad thing."
" So you say you wouldn't use it", says Howard.
( JH) " Well, let's not be too moralistic about it."
No let's not John ( Howard), lets not be moralistic at all. it's incredible, this
stuff. And, then he said:
( JH) " I think Ian McLachlan behaved correctly and I defend
him." Can you believe that? I mean, the gall of it. 
TEL: 16 . M ar. 951: 1 NO. 018 P. 07/ 10
7
you endorse the actions?
( JH) Well, yes, I do."
In other words, he endorsed the misleading of Parliament.
J: ( inaudible)
PMV: That Robert Tickner was not the photocopier and the source of dissemination
of the information. He knew that, at the time, when the questions were being
asked. And, he's going on today, this day:
( JH) " I think Ian McLachlan behaved correctly and I defend
him. So, you endorse his actions?
( JH) Well, yes, I do."
J, Mr Keating, going back to the native title...
PMV: Can I just make a couple of other points before I do. He said.-
( JH) ' There were questions asked about it but the nature of
these discussions about any of these questions Is, you always
have to-ing and fro-ing and then the decision is made. I accept
the fact, and I have never disputed it, that I authorised the
asking of those questions.
I believe he told some of you that he wasn't involved in the tactics
committee. ( JH) And I have never disputed it".
You see, the glib... Is it any wonder Bill O'Reilly, the former tax
commissioner, had trouble with him? Is it any wonder, when I lined up as
Treasurer in 1983, desperate for some decent law, desperate for some
integrity in the law, they looked to this government to clean up the tax system.
Then he says:
( JH) And I have never disputed that I authorised the
askingof those questions, I don't try and shift the responsibility
of the blame on to anybody else."
In other words, he's now virtuous, you see. He is now virtuous. And let me
just make a couple of other points I made abroad. He talks about the right of
parliamentarians to represent a constituent. But, Mr McLachlan's obligations
were to his Aboriginal constituents as well as what he might have seen to be
the obligations to the constituent involved in the Hindmarsh court case. How 
TEL: 16.1-Har. 95 j : 19 NO-018 P. 08/ 10
8
come his obligations to a constituent were only an obligation to the
protagonist in the Hindmarsh Bridge case. And then, I made the point, and I
make it again, here, neither Mr Howard nor Mr McLachlan were solicitors for
the protagonists in the Hindmarsh Bridge case. They had no obligations to
give them documents. None. Not as a regal obligation, not as their legal
representatives. And, as their constituents, the protagonists had no more
right to support from them than the Aboriginal people had right to protection
from them. So, I think Mr Howard should be returning the documents, giving
us these assurances about who received the documents and, remember, we
are now having a discussion about an envelope which was in another
envelope which was in a box. There are eight kilos of documents.
J: Mr Keating, would you support Mr Tickner's letter to the Aboriginal
communities call for them to jump into the debate?
P M. Well, I was abroad when he wrote it but, the thing is, what he has said I don't
have it with me is that and he wrote it before Ian McLachlIan resigned
J: Do you support Mr Tickner's letter to the Aboriginal communities calling for
them to jump into the dilemma?
PM: Well, I was abroad when he wrote it. But the thing is what he said I don't
have it with me what he said was and he wrote it before Ian McLachlan
resigned, remember this, this was when at the height of their dishonour they
had these documents and had opened them and disseminated them, he wrote
to the Aboriginal communities telling them and saying that they should take
whatever action they think is appropriate with the Coalition. Hardly an
outrageous thing to do. But you see, our friend the wordsmith, Mr Howard, is
out there and he thinks this is something you can jump on to but you always
know with Howard, let him talk and he will dig himself into a deeper hole like
he has done again today on John Laws.
J. Mr Keating, near the end of the judgment today, the Justices conceded that
there was practical difficulty in administering the legislation of Western
Australia because of its size and, I guess, the amount of unalienated Crown
Land. Just wondering, are you prepared to sort of accept with Western
Australia there might be some special circumstances which the
Commonwealth would take into account when negotiating with Western
Australia in applying the Federal Act?
PM: I have said that we will deal cooperatively with Western Australia and I have
said that now for 18 months and we have already had preliminary talks at
ministerial level. I don't want to give you a line which makes it other than
completely clear that the Western Australian Act is held to be wholly invalid
and inoperative because it was racially discriminatory and counter to the
Racial Discrimination Act. That is the key news point. The associated news
point is at last Aboriginal people have had justice in respect of land. The 
TEL: 16. tlar., 95 18: 19 NO. 018 P. 09/ 10
9
ancillary point is that we will cooperate with Western Australia but we will not
excuse Western Australia for wilful breeches of the Commonwealth law.
J: Do you think there are any grounds for Western Australia claiming some
special circumstances that make it distinct from.?
PM: No. Other than to try and make it work. But not special in terms of the way
the law applies.
J: Prime Minister, are you saying that with Ian McLachlan giving the documents
to his white constituents and not to his black constituents that that is a racist
act?
PM: No, you are saying that. What I am saying is that the notion that he felt an
obligation to . Mr Howard would argue that MP's are all the time called upon to
look after their constituent's interests. This is one of the weak and
unprincipled areas of defence that Mr Howard had out last week. I am just
making the point. How do they distinguish between their obligations to the
Aboriginal constituents and to the protagonists of the Hindmarsh bridge case.
If it is an obligation to a constituent, to which constituent? If not an obligation
to all constituents.
J: Well, they say, of course, that the protagonists in this case was the
Commonwealth not the Aboriginal....
PM: And they are Commonwealth Members of Parliament. As well you would have
thought there would have been some identification with the interests of the
Commonwealth seeing as they are desperate to become the Government of
the Commonwealth, you would have thought at least the justice of the
Commonwealth position in this. These were the documents of a court case
being returned to the Commonwealth. This argument that Howard goes on
with talking about the matter being a matter of dispute therefore, if it is a
matter of dispute you can throw anyone's documents around. The fact that it
is a legal matter and that now these documents have been published to other
people who can now mount another appeal with these documents means that
the rights of Aboriginal people have been transgressed here.
J: ( inaudible) inclined to use legal action to get the documents back?
PM: There is no reason why Mr Howard should keep the documents. What is he
doing hanging on to the documents? What Is the game plan? Are there
things there that he thinks the rest of the world should not see or we should
not know about? Why does he not return the documents?
J: Mr Keating, at what point will you make good the threat of legal action? How
long does he have to hold on to them?
PM: There was no threat of a legal action, as far as I know. 
TEL f 1 Mar 1i: b 19 110uñ 01
J: Is there any legal recourse open to the Government, Mr Keating?
IPM: There may well be but I have had no advice of it. There is a simple point
hI-1*. Mi, I I'z'VO1' J * hvuId 91Ve LtiQ dci'Uont~ oc Dut thii rcater po'int i-3, of
course, what he has done today is to admit out of his own mouth that he knew
Ian McLachlan was going to mislead the Parliament and he was party to the
misleading.
J: You have been hammering Mr Howard and yet his poll rate keeps going up?
P M: Well, he has had a reasonable run for the period he has been leader but so
did Mr Downer and so did [ Dr Hewson]. Last night my Press Secretary, Tony
Melville, was at the airport and he was telling me that journalists waiting for
me to land were talking about Howard and someone said, jocularly, there was
no point asking Howard any questions, he has got no policy positions.
Everyone sort of nodded in agreement. But that is right, isn't it? Here we are
today, I am here announcing a decision by the High Court of Australia
endorsing 7 to 0, a piece of legislation, probably one of the most far-reaching
pieces of legislation acted since Federation. The week before I left to go
abroad we had a huge victory in the Coalition's capitulation on the Land Fund.
I can go around Europe talking about 6 per cent GDP growth and 2 per cent
inflation and 4 per cent productivity growth and 3 3/ 4 per cent employment
growth, no other Head of Government in the western world and the OECD
area can do the same. The Government stands for things. The Government
represents things. John Howard's policy Is to make himself so small a target
as to be not noticed but then to be lauded as some sort of new-age person. I
am only repeating now lines I have been through here before. He left
Australia as an industrial graveyard in 1983. He left it to me amongst others
to clean it up and make it into the modern, sophisticated, externally oriented
country it now is. He should have been drummed out of the regiment, out of
public life after 1982. The fact that he is the only leader they have after they
twice passed over him with Hewson and then Downer, ought to be ringing
bells in people's minds. But the media always wants a contest and are
prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt. I have told you a week or so
ago he would not change. I used the analogy of being in the calypso shirt
saying " It's not me, it's not really me, I am not the same one" and he is doing it
again today. And you have got to understand this about him. He never
represented anything, he was always completely indecisive and I know, as I
did as Treasurer, go back through the economy and the tax system, where his
integrity stood. This is only further confirmation of it, this shabby affair of a
week or two ago. So, the Australian people will come to acknowledge these
things but winning elections in this country is never easy. One of the good
things of Australian public life is you have always got to go out and earn it and
I think we will earn it. But there should not be free rides for him either from
anywhere, including, of course and most especially, the Sydney Morning
Herald.
Ends P 1u, 1 



TEL: 16. Mar. 95 14: 4 No. 013 F. 01/ 03
F PRIME MINISTER I'
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
HIGH COURT DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE NATIVE TITLE ACT
The High Court has upheld the validity and legitimacy of the Native Title Act,
one of the most far reaching pieces of legislation enacted since Federation.
In doing so it has endorsed this Government's approach to recognising and
protecting native title, while ensuring that workable processes exist for land
management across every state and territory,
The High Court has delivered a clear rebuff to the approach adopted by the
Western Australian Government.
Premier Court attempted to extinguish inherent rights and replace them with
statutory rights which were much more vulnerable to interference and
extinguishment by Governments than the property rights held by other
Australians. The WA Government now has no choice but to fall into line and accept that
the High Court in Mabo recognised the existence of a new set of property
rights; rights which pre-dated the acquisition of sovereignty by the Crown,
and continued in place after that time.
This decision makes it impossible for the Federal Coalition to maintain its
stated opposition to our balanced approach to Native Title Legislation and
policy. It will force John Howard to accept that the Coalition's opposition to
the Native Title Act was wrong and misguided.
Will Mr Howard now repudiate statements made by his predecessor who
threatened to repeal the Native Title Act? 
1 Ac~ : / ms rn01 P .02/ 01
TEL: ria. II
2
The Commonwealth is concerned about the uncertainty created by the
Western Australian Government relating to the new titles issued in WA since
1993. Premier Court has deliberately ignored the processes set down in the
Native Title Act and must take ultimate responsibility for the effect of this
decision in Western Australia.
The Commonwealth Government is nevertheless prepared to work with the
Western Australian Government to ensure that issues arising from this
decision can be addressed cooperatively.
Preliminary talks have already been initiated at Ministerial level with the
Court Government.
We will want to ensure that Western Australians are not disadvantaged by
the actions to date of the Court Government but we will not backtrack on the
fundamental principles which are embodied in the Native Title Act.
CAN BERRA
16 MARCH 1995 
TEL: J 5M a r .95 14: 40[-
.3
Key components of the Native Title Act
it recognises and protects native title
it provides a mechanism to establish the existence of native title
it establishes a regime for dealing with future acts which affect native
title it provides a mechanism for states and territories to validate existing
interests with complete certainty
it provides for a ' right to negotiate process' for mining activities on
native title land
it provides for a non-extinguishment principle to apply in certain
circumstances it provides for States and Territories to put in place their own
Tribunals and regulatory regimes providing they adhere to principles
set down in the Native Title Act
it provides for compensation to native title holders whose title is
extinguished as a result of validation.
The Act represents a balancing of interests across the Australian community
but is premised on the fair and equal treatment of Aboriginal people
It will increasingly be recognised that the Australian people, in enacting this
landmark legislation, have effected an extraordinary achievement.
a a A 



-0D
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RECEIPT OF SUBMISSION FROM THE COUNCIL FOR ABORIGINAL
RECONCILIATION, MURAL HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
FRIDAY, 17 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am very pleased to be able to receive this today. I thought it was important
when we were negotiating, and I use the word negotiating, with the Aboriginal
community over the Native Title legislation that in terms of the social justice
response to the High Court decision, that there was a process of adequate
consultation with Aboriginal communities around this country and that no one
group or one self-appointed group was sought to or seen to represent their
views or their interests and the extensive process of consultation which has
followed in the Report going forward by the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation I think does justice to that wish that there was to be a
widespread consultation and that this document truly represented the views
of, the representative views of, a majority of Aboriginal people. I'm sure this it
adequately does.
And it is true, as Ian Viner said in his introduction, this Report is passed on
today by Patrick Dodson to me representing the Government on the day after
this historic decision again by the High Court confirming a constitutional basis
of the Commonwealth Parliament's Native Title legislation. This is, I think, an
important milestone in the struggle for legitimate rights for Aboriginal
Australians. I think that in the time since I first spoke to the Reconciliation Council three
years ago, just after I became Prime Minister, I said that I thought we ought to
get on and get some results. And that the best way of providing or meeting
some genuine aspiration for a reconciliation was on the basis of the fairmindedness
of the Australian community, that if they see some practical
things happening, some results happening, and they think they're rational,
they will support it. I have always believed this is a most conscientious
community in a most conscientious electorate. And that you can as a
Government or as any group go to them, talk to them, appeal to them, reason
with them and they will listen to you. But they're looking for tangible results.
In that sense there is something solid about them which goes past any 
2
perceived notions of difficulty, whether it be in the economic or the social field
or whether it be in terms of relations with our indigenous community.
Now, as a consequence of that I made clear then at that meeting that this
would be the intention of the Government I was privileged to lead. And at the
so-called Redfern Speech in Redfern Park at the end of 1992, 1 made clear
again that the Government would be seeking to make, first of ali to
acknowledge, and I think it is very important that as Head of Government I
acknowledged in a very public way, the wrongs done during the period of
European settlement to our indigenes and said that reparations need to be
made including of course giving expression to the notion that there was title
and prior ownership of the land to that of European settlement.
Now, I believe that that Redfern Speech and the results which have flowed
from them Mabo, the Native Title legislation and now the Land Fund are
results for which I think Australians have felt good about and I think it has
reduced rancour and it has reduced racism. Because rather than it just being
a skittish debate that never seems to go anywhere, all of a sudden there are
tangible milestones where people understand that something good has been
done and something just has been done and that the community has been
able to reflect upon it and believe in it and feel good about.
So, I think by these results, we have actually reduced any propensity not to
recognise the rights of indigenous peoples and it has reduced what most of
us in this room would call racism in Australia. Now this is a good thing and it
has come as the Reconciliation Council was given a nigh on impossible task
to simply, through the fact that it was a representative body sought to by its
work and by its deeds and by its expressions, preach the gospel of
reconciliation with practical results. It was too big a task without some help
and I think the help needed to come by the Government and the Parliament
taking its responsibilities onwards to do these things.
So I think results are the key words, not pap and nonsense. And if there is
one thing about this debate that I reflect upon, it is that there is no place for
bleeding hearts in it. You know if the Aboriginal community, every time they
see somebody with a bleeding heart, they ought to say thank you but just
please move to the side. It's because of that sort of attitude that it has taken
so long to get this far and it is why now, I think, we have got to continue in the
way we are going.
Now Pat ( Dodson) talked about a policy based on rights not welfare and I
concur in that and we have got to establish what those rights are but of
course we have made some very important headway in that principal right
which, of course, is the right to land and the moral strength of the inherent
right. Whether the Native Title Act applies in only a limited way to those who can
still establish a limited connection with the land is so or otherwise, its force is
that it is an inherent right. That it has quality about it far above a statute
right. But with the Land Fund, where people have been dispossessed of the 
land, the Land Fund gives them the capacity and we know in this country
essentially Australia, particularly in areas where Aboriginal people are still
living a traditional lifestyle, or are still able to live a traditional lifestyle, or live
particularly remote from the urban areas, Australia's a patchwork quilt of
pastoral leases and where it's not pastoral leases of freehold title.
The Land Fund allows the purchase of those titles and it means that with the
inherent right coming from the Native Title legislation and the right to
purchase coming under the Land Fund, the satisfaction of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people being able to get access, get themselves
access to land, becomes, I think, the significant issue of empowerment that
Pat Dodson spoke about a few moments ago. Because we understand that
there can never be justice for Aboriginal people while they live on the margins
of the cities, or they live congregated in former mission stations around the
country or areas we call Aboriginal communities. They have to, I believe,
have that access to land.
Now, I'm very pleased about the fact that we've got a lot of bipartisanship in
this from people who have always had their heart in the right place with
Aboriginal people; Ian Viner is one and I'm glad to see him in this capacity
today, and he refers to our period in public life in the past on opposite sides
of the house, and Fred Chaney who has taken a role with the Native Title
Tribunal. These are good people and they are after good things. But, we
have to be vigilant about this matter because Richard Court has made clear
yesterday that even after the knock out decision seven to nothing of the
High Court, he is going to fight the matter politically.
I was disappointed that John Howard said today the decision confirms a
significant shift of power to the Federal Government on matters previously
within the direct authority of the states This is not a States/ Commonwealth
matter. It is a matter about our indigenous community and it is very clear that
the community of Australia wanted the Federal parliament to have this
authority in indigenous affairs with the carriage of the referendum in 1967.
There is always this discussion about the rights of the States. It is because
this Government believes the States have prerogatives in land management
and have the capacity to manage land, given they have the records and the
data base and the systems that we have under the Native Title legislation
giving them the right to establish their own tribunals. They just have to be
consistent with the Native Title Act and then it is theirs. There is no dispute
about this. There is no reasonable dispute about this.
But, I will tell you this. Beware of the whispered word ' workable', because
this is now the pass word of the die-hards. Not procedural because I get
asked about Justice French saying ' look, there is this procedure and that
procedure' and, of course, the Judge sitting atop of this tribunal is able to
recommend to the Government that this procedure or that procedure be dealt
with, but procedure is one thing, ' workable' is a word that goes to the
structure of the Bill. So, when Richard Court talks about workable, he means
a change to the structure. He doesn't mean a Western Australian tribunal set 
up under a Western Australian act of Parliament consistent with a
Commonwealth law, he means something else.
Now, when John Howard said today, I notice The Age said ' Howard softens
line on Mabo' by referring to he won't repeal the Act he says, but he
wants to make it ' workable'. Workable. Just like the Land Fund. He said he
would pass it but when he got to government he would amend it to make it, of
course, workable.
I just say this, that there has been great milestones made here and this has to
be a bipartisan matter between those who believe in justice for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, that is historic justice and future justice
historic justice and future justice and let's be clear about what we have in
front of us and the results we have and let's go on and not brook any
opposition to the structure of these historic pieces of legislation on some
prejudicial basis that black people shouldn't have title to land. That they
should have only minimum statutory rights and that the whole notion and the
continent where they were possessed of it or had associations with it, they
had the title to it before European settlement is to be put to one side and they
get just minimum rights under statute as proposed in the Western Australian
Act. Now that, we are not having a bar of and I think we have got to press on and
make sure the country understands the difference between procedural
change and procedural improvement and as I say the whispered word
' workable' because workable means burrowing in to overturn progress and to
put these things down.
Let me say something about Aboriginal health and other issues of welfare
which, amongst other things, are included in this Report. I think that as with
all intractable problems it will be dealt with by taking it piece at a time. There
is no big ticket, magical solution, we are not going to get a large Australian
consulting organisation or a major international firm and let them a contract to
repair the lifestyles and living conditions of Aboriginal people, it can't be
done. I was in Hopevale as you may know a couple of weeks ago in
Queensland, Cape York, what struck me about that was that the Cape York
Health Council came into being in recognition of the fact that there won't be
improvements in the health of Aboriginal people unless the Aboriginal people
themselves are committed to the improvements and are part of the solution.
It is another form of empowerment and I think that is right and I think we have
now got to do practical things to make that work. For instance, Aboriginal
people in these parts of the country don't have Medicare cards, completely
unsustainable. They have a right to go to a GP and be treated, but you know
in these places there are no GPs. There are partly no GPs because there
are no cards, there is no booty and there are no pharmacies so there are no
pharmaceuticals. But then we all know there is no point in pharmaceuticals
and drugs if, in fact, we have still got 15 people living in a house with a
transmission of diseases or inadequate sewerage or if there is an acute
problem that there is no air strip to land on for a doctor to give help. 
So, these are things that we have got to do, but we must bring the States into
this and local government because this is a tripartite thing. The
Commonwealth whatever it wants to do doesn't build arterial roads in remote
places. It doesn't build municipal roads. And we have to work with the States
to make sure that roads go to Aboriginal communities, that we actually
encourage out stations and we find that when people move on out stations
their morale improves, their state of mind improves, their health improves
which only proves a point the more we move back, the more closer we get
to the natural order of things the better.
These are all things that I think we can do and the same with things like
sewerage, but you know this to be true, if there is a sub division on the
outskirts of Canberra the first thing that will go out there is a road and the
second thing will be the sewerage line and the water supply. This is not true
of Aboriginal people because the States have not done it and when ATSIC
has got the funding they have said it is all over to you, you got the lot and, of
course, it can't do it. So it has to be a tripartite arrangement and something
we go at and perhaps we start trying to prioritise the areas that need help
rapidly and start doing it, again, with results. So people say ' well, there is
something happening here and it is good.'
So, the land matters as we know because the titles matter and then, I think,
we move on these other problems but let's not be starry eyed or dewy eyed
about it, let's get out there and do it. That is what it means and I think that is
what this Report is about, but there is hope in this Report. There wouldn't
have been three years ago, this could not have been produced three years
ago because I don't think the back drop existed within the Australian
community. To receive such a report, it could be produced but would it have
meant anything? One wonders, but I think it means something now.
So, I am quite bullish about the prospects of us being able to deliver justice,
that we can think about social justice in response to the High Court decision
in harmony with the decisions that have been taken in respect of land and
that we can produce results that, I think, all Australians can feel proud of.
The extensive consultation has meant something, that it has come together
under the stewardship and leadership of the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation, that it has substance and it has meaning, I am delighted to
receive it on behalf of the Government and we now think about how we
respond to it, it won't all be done obviously quickly, it won't be done as a
package all of it but like this intractable problem of 200 years in the making
we will hop into it with substantial fervour to try to see that justice is done, as I
say future justice and not just historic justice.
Thank you very much for the Report. 



PRIME NINWSTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE COALITION AND THE ENVIRONMENT
In selecting Senator Rod Kemp as Shadow Minister for the Environment,
John Howard has made a truly shocking appointment. Not only are Senator
Kemp's views completely hostile to a proper handling of this portfolio, it has
now unbelievably been relegated from the Shadow Cabinet.
But we should not be surprised. Mr Howard has again demonstrated the
Coalition's contempt for national environmental responsibilities and policy
making. Anyone concerned about the environment and casting a vote in New South
Wales or Canberra this Saturday, should bear in mind the full significance of
John Howard's appointment of Rod Kemp to this portfolio. It demonstrates a
disregard for this immensely important area of policy, and the Coalition
should be given the message that the community will not wear it.
As an interview in today's Australian confirms, Kemp is blindly opposed to
Australia signing up to international treaties. He regards the Commonwealth's
use of the external affairs power to make and use environmental treaties to
protect our environment as an abuse of the Constitution, and particularly of
the rights of States. He wants the States to have the right to veto Australia's
accession to international treaties.
The Federal Government's ability to protect our environment depends to an
enormous degree on the external affairs power and the international treaties
we have entered into. These include the World Heritage and Climate
Change Conventions, and the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species.
If John Howard and Rod Kemp had their way, those Federal protective
powers would be knocked aside. With .! rs around with the instincts of
Richard Court and John Fahey, the erivii rnental consequences would be
as devastating as they would have been for the Franklin, the Daintree and
the Tasmanian Forests in 1987, or the Great Barrier Reef under
Joh Bjelke-Petersen. 
At that time, under Howard's leadership, the Coalition's environmental
oolicies hit rock-bottom. If he had won that election, he would have abolished
the Environment Department, handed over control of Kakadu and Uluru to the
Northern Territory, let the Franklin be dammed and logging go ahead in the
Lemonthyme and Southern Forests, and only nominated the Wet Tropic
rainforests for World Heritage listing if Queensland " approved". All
environmental decisions would have been left to the States.
Obviously, nothing has chan^.-.
The Coalition, under the Howard-Ker'n oolicy regime, is still wedded to
States' rights, at the expense of the national interest and proper
environmental protection policies.
CANBERRA 21 MARCH, 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 620/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MILITARY SERVICE MEDAL
I am pleased to announce today the formal establishment of a new award in
the Australian honours system the Australian Service Medal 1945-1975
which will be awarded to a large number of Australian service personnel who
did not receive any award for their service in this period.
The creation of this award was one of the recommendations of the Committee
of Inquiry into Defence Awards which reported to the Government in March
1994 and final approval has now been granted by Her Majesty The Queen.
The award' s aim is to recognise service in prescribed peacekeeping or nonwarlike
operations during the period 1945-1975 where recognition has not
extended previously through an award.
The Government will be recommending that the following service will qualify
for the award of the medal:
Service in the occupation of Japan during the period 3
September 1945 to 30 June 1947 with a qualifying period of
days; Service in Korea from 28 July 1953 until 26 August 1957 with a
qualifying period of 30 days;
Service of Australian troops in anti-terrorist operations in the
Thai land-Malaysia border area between 1 August 1960 and 16
August 1964 with a qualifying period of 30 days;
Service of air crew who took part in operations in support of
ground troops during the same period with a qualifying service
of one operational sortie. In addition any member of air crew
who in the period 17 August 1964 to 30 March 1966 flew an
operational sortie in the Thai land-Malaysia border area but did
not qualify for the GSM " Malay Peninsula"; 
Service of Australian personnel at the Royal Thai Airforce Base
Ubon during the period 1 May 1962 to 31 August 1968 with a
qualifying period of 30 days;
Service as a member of 2 Field Troop Royal Australian
Engineers and other Australian personnel who participated in
Operation " Crown" and served in Ban Kok Talat, Thailand
during the period 1 May 1962 to 31 August 1968 with a
qualifying period of 30 days;
Service in the Territory of Papua New Guinea-from the
formation of the Pacific Islands Regiment in 1951 until
independence of PNG on 16 September 1975 with a qualifying
period of 180 days. This also applies to personnel of all
Services including RAN personnel posted to HIMAS Tarangau
and attached vessels;
Service from 13 August 1948 to 13 February 1975 with the
United Nations including the Military Group in India and
Pakistan ( UNMOGIP) and the United Nations India-Pakistan
Observer Mission UNIPOM with a qualifying period of 90 days;
Service with the United Nations Temporary Executive Authority
( UNTEA) force in West New Guinea during the period I
October 1962 to 1 May 1963 with a qualifying period of 30 days;
Other peacekeeping operations during the period 1945 to 1975
are being examined by Defence authorities with a view to
establishing whether equivalent service warrants recognition by
the award of this Medal. Announcement of which other
operations will attract the Medal will be announced as soon as
the Government has considered recommendations.
The Medals design features the Commonwealth Coat of Arms on the obverse
and is ensigned with the Crown of Saint Edward. The reverse of the Medal
features the Federation Star overlaid with a plinth on which the wearer's
name will be engraved. The obverse and reverse are decorated with clusters
of mimosa blossoms symbolising the presence of Australian service
personnel in overseas peacekeeping and other non-warlike operations. The
accompanying ribbon will have bands of dark and light blue, khaki, green and
gold. The Australian Service Medal 1945-1975 will be placed on the same level as
the current Australian Service Medal in the Australian Order of Precedence of
Honours and Awards.
CAN BERRA
21 MARCH 1995 
Application forms for the Medal can be obtained from:
Navy Director Naval Personnel Services
Medals Section
Navy Office
Department of Defence
CANBERRA ACT 2600 Army Medals Section
Soldier Career IvManagement
Agency Central Army Records Office
GPO Box 393D
MELBOURNE VIC 3001 Air Force
Director Aun1inistfative Review
Air Force Office
Department of Defence
PO Box E33
Queen Victoria Terrace
CANBERRA ACT 2600 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, 21 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: After that 10 day overseas trip, you leapt right into domestic issues.
Didn't talk once about what was achieved while you were away. What
did you achieve while you were away?
PM: Well, the purpose of the visit was to re-establish Australia's
relationship with the third largest economy in the world, that's
Germany, and also to again try and rebuild further our relationship with
The Netherlands, and to attend the UN Social Summit in Copenhagen.
JL: When you say rebuild with The Netherlands, has there been a problem
with The Netherlands?
PM: Oh no, but again the last Australian Prime Minister to go to The
Netherlands went there in 1975. So that's a long time ago and I think
even though they regard us as people they can rely upon and we the
same with them, there is a point in going and I had a terrific
conversation with the Dutch Prime Minister, and I had a very, very big
meeting and discussion with the German Chancellor.
JL: Okay, are they of equal importance to us, The Netherlands and
Germany?
PM: Europe is the largest economy in the world. The European Union has
a gross product of about 6.6 trillion. The United States is about 4 and I
think Japan is about 3, so it gives you some idea of the size of the
thing, and Germany of course is the largest west European country.
It's now reunited with 80 million people, I mean before that it had
million people.
JL: And they were all sort of around 60 million weren't they England,
France, Germany they were all somewhere around that number
weren't they? 
PM: Yes, they have been sitting at around 55-60 million since the war
which has meant there has been a sort of equality between them. But I
think what is happening now, the new dynamic in Europe, is that with
West and East Germany united, at 80 million and with enormous
investment by West Germany in the east, in Eastern Germany, their
national accounts came out the week I was there and they had the
West German economy growing by about 2 per cent and the East
German economy growing by about 10 per cent. I think what all that
means is that Germany is going to be a united stronger state and its
economic performance is going to see it pull away from countries like
France and The Netherlands, particularly France, and I think that
therefore the imperatives of the union, that is tying for instance, let
me just make this point...
JL: Just back to the growth in Germany, you said 10 per cent?
PM: 10 per cent in the east.
JL: Well, if you were running the joint, you would have to lift interest rates
wouldn't you to slow down the growth?
PM: Well, the whole country is running at 2.9 per cent because the east is
still a relatively small part of the German economy but it's going to be,
because it is much the same sort of land area and it's got still a large
population, what's going to happen is Germany is going to continue to
grow quite strongly and modernise via the east and I think that this is
going to put tremendous growth potential into Germany. And the
whole point of the Helmut Kohl-Mitterand discussion of the last ten
years, and the whole point of the post-Second World War
arrangements in Europe with Conrad Adenauer and Schuman and
these people, was to tie Germany into Western Europe because
Berlin, where I went as well, is 40 miles from the Polish border.
Germany sees essentially a relatively invisible border between
Germany and Poland which means the German economy will drift into
Poland.
JL: How many people in Poland, do you know?
PM: I think it is about, from memory, about 40 million. It really means that
we are seeing Germany start to return to where it was before the First
World War, that is it's starting to go east again. So it's got to get a
sheet anchor in western Europe and the sheet anchor is the European
Monetary Union. And it was that that I had quite a long discussion with
the Chancellor about and let me say that means that basically there is
one currency, what they call the EMU, one currency which would be in
France, in Germany, in The Netherlands, in the Benelux countries. In
other words, we would just not have simply a single market in Europe,
but a single currency in western Europe.
JL: How does that affect Australia? 
PM: Well, how it affects Australia is two ways. One, that it would mean for
the first time really since the 19th century, welt the first time ever, we
would have a united Europe. Certainly in the West with these key
economies of Germany, France and the Benelux countries. That
means there's a much more stable set of currencies because when
there's a flight out of the American dollar, people buy Deutschmarks.
But Deutschmarks only have the monetary base of one country, that's
Germany. If there's an EMU, there's a bigger monetary base but the
most important point is this John it means that Germany will not, in
that circumstance, find itself drifting east towards Poland and Russia
as was the case in the past. Unless that monetary link comes
together, Germany will simply grow away I think from France and all
the old suspicions start again.
JL Yes, exactly.
PM: So, nobody in Australia should ever think that what happened in
Europe doesn't matter to us. I mean here we are, we are in the Asia-
Pacific, it's nice and peaceful here.
JL That's very important.
PM: You can see what's happening already in Bosnia. I mean look in 1895,
100 years exactly ago, in Europe, the Balkans were a problem then,
they're a problem now. People thought they faced the new century,
the 20th century, with great hope and expectation. I just think that the
Europeans have got to work quite hard now to pull this monetary link
together.
JL What do we do, just keep an eye on it?
PM: Well, let me say, it comes at a time when President Mitterand is retiring
so this great partnership which Chancellor Kohl has had with him is
going to change.
JL There's no love lost between the Germans and the French anyway, is
there?
PM: I think there's a big commitment now, not simply by the Governments,
by the communities to work together. I just don't think they can
countenance ever again the problems of internecine strife between
them, but while ever the Deutschmark puts pressure on other
currencies and we have different rates of growth in Germany, different
rates of workforce growth in those countries, I mean there is a case, I
think, for getting it together. One of the interesting things, John, I'm
sure you may be surprised to know, but you know there's a thing called
the Maastricht Treaty, you know of that?
JL Yes, I'm aware of that.
PM: This has very, very tight disciplines about who can join the European
Monetary Union because the Deutschmark sits, in a sense, and the 
Bundesbank sit at the moment on the top of that particular heap and
you've got to be in first rate condition to join. Now at the moment, the
only two countries in the OECD, that's the western world area, who
meet the Maastricht Treaty criteria are Germany and Australia.
JL: Is that right?
PM: Australia is the only other country in the world that could actually join
this year the European Monetary Union on the convergence criteria.
JL: Will Australia do that?
PM: No, well of course we're not in Europe. So we're not joining.
JL: But if you were able to, would there be any advantages in doing so?
PM: Well, for us, no. It's just completely different economies and we're just
too far away. But a key point is on inflation, on productivity, on
Government debt to GDP, on a whole lot of criteria I think we're the
ones who could join with Germany and I think Luxembourg comes in
next year. So, it's a measure of how we're going. The Chancellor, can
I say, was quite surprised at this but I gave him a little note with the
various criteria, he didn't doubt for a moment what I was saying was
right. But it just makes this point, it makes two points: they've got
to get the link together quickly and that political stability, because the
monetary union in Europe is not just a matter about the monetary
system, it's a political imperative, it's not just an academic exercise to
central banks, it's a political imperative to basically tie West Germany
into western Europe as it continues now historically to start to look east
and to works its economy east-ward.
JL: Okay, on the subject of money. The Australian dollar is being sold off
dramatically at the moment against the US dollar. Our dollar, I think, is
6 per cent lower in value now than it was at the start of the year. I
presume you're going to tell me it has got nothing to do with the
concern of the financial world about the size of the current account
deficit?
PM: Well, it's always got some of that in it, but by and large, the currency
has been a commodity driven currency and I think that they look at
what they think was going to happen to commodity prices, basically, I
think that's part of it. But again, I mean these fluctuations come and
go. We have appreciated quite substantially over the last 18 months
and I always believe let the market fix this price. It's the most
important price in the economy, it's the thing that governs our
competitiveness abroad.
JL: If it's 6 per cent lower than it was at the beginning of the year, what is
the reason?
PM: Well, all sorts of reasons I think. Commodity prices, where they see
demand going, an important thing will be the message the Government 
sends to the financial markets about the Australian budget, and let me
just make this as clear as I possibly can: we will be introducing a
budget which does all that I believe it should to make a contribution to
public savings by bringing the budget deficit back more quickly.
JL: Are you going to increase tax to do that?
PM: We are in the course of preparing that budget now, it will be
announced in May, and I think markets will be waiting for that to
happen. But I mean John, there have been a lot of shifts in the
currency market lately a lot of skittishness with the collapse of the
Mexican currency and with the upsets in the US dollar market.
JL: OK. Another concern of the money market is that interest rates are
being deliberately held at the current level because of the NSW
election.
PM: Well that is just nonsense that is absolute nonsense, I can assure
you that is absolute nonsense.
JL: So after the forthcoming NSW election you won't back off the shackles,
eh?
PM: No. Monetary policy is set by the Reserve Bank in conjunction with the
Government, and I can assure you I and the Treasurer have had no
such conversations with the central bank to do with the NSW election.
And again, the NSW election is largely being fought out on state
issues.
JL: As it should be.
PM: As it should be, exactly.
JL: Will the spending cuts you announce in the May budget be deep
enough to satisfy those who are yelling loudly for deeper cuts in the
budget deficit?
PM: The problem is not that we need the budget to meet a short-term
demand management task, but rather a medium-term savings task.
That is, what we need to do is see the public sector save some more,
mainly because Australian private savings are lower than they need to
be for the level of Australian investment.
JL: Yeah.
PM: In other words, we want to keep this level of investment up we need
to save more. If private saving is not as strong as it ought to be, then
the Government has got to play another role it wouldn't ordinarily be
expected to play. That is, to actually add more to public savings
themselves. 
J L OK, so are you going to add more to public savings by cutting
Government spending further?
PM: We will be cutting government spending, but again, it's all a matter of
degree, remembering John, that this is now the lowest taxed country in
the western world, it has one of the smallest public sectors in the
western world, and that happened because of the cuts in Government
that this Government put into place in the 1980s.
JL Yeah, but there will be more cuts?
PM: There will be more cuts, but there is every year, and we will be seeking
to bring the budget balance back.
JL You see the tax payers get pretty upset understandably when they
realise it costs them more than $ 50 million a year which, in the overall
scheme of things probably isn't a lot of money to pay performance
bonuses to senior Government bureaucrats, and another $ 50 million a
year is needed to compensate bureaucrats for the stress they suffer
doing the job. Now, surely that sort of thing could, and should be,
looked at?
PM: Well, I am not sure where those numbers came from..
JL From your people.
PM: well, there is an enormous..
JL That's $ 100 million we are talking about.
PM: We are talking about a public sector of a couple of hundred thousand
people, so $ 50 million might should a lot but it doesn't go very far
spread across that number of people, but..
JL But if you add a whole bunch of $ 50 million together, it goes a long
way.
PM: the key point is this John we cut Government spending from 30.5% of
GOP down to 23.5% in the 1980s by 7% of Gross Domestic Product.
JL What is it now?
PM: It is about 25.5% 26% but it's heading back to around 24%. In other
words, on a no policy change basis, it is heading back to around 24%
of GDP. Now, that's . now GOP this year that's the total
economy, what we call Gross Domestic Product the total value of our
goods and services is about $ 420 billion, 6% is about $ 24 billion, so
every year, this Government has cut back around $ 24 thousand million
as a result of what we did in the 1980s. That's why Australia that's
one of the reasons why Australia would meet the EU Convergence
criteria. 
JL: Yes, but you know as well as I know that it is all about perception, and
million mightn't be a lot here, there or some place else. Another
million even might be important but it is about perception. And if
the people who are going to vote or not vote for you or any political
party, keep hearing and they do hear constantly because we tell them
that $ 50 million a year is paid into performance bonuses over and
above a high salary that those public servants get anyway and another
million goes for stress when there are people listening to us
across Australia now who are pretty stressed trying to pay the
mortgage, the perception of the Government is not really very good.
PM: Well, the federal public service is the largest employee group in the
country and $ 50 million may sound a lot of money but spread across a
very large number of people I don't think it is. The point is, John, there
is no point in you and me trying to work out how we cut government
spending on 2UE. I mean, in the end these are things we have proven
that we can do over a long period of time and that is why Ralph Willis
and Kim Beazley, the Minister for Finance, have been sitting in our
Expenditure Review Committee now for weeks running through these
line items of outlays so as to get it back. But I think the important thing
is that we will produce a Budget which is appropriate to Australia's
economic circumstances and keep this competitiveness rolling.
Let me just make this point again about Australia in Europe. I was able
to go to Europe and say amongst other things, I am walking around
with five per cent economic growth, two and a half per cent inflation,
three and three quarter per cent employment growth and four per cent
productivity growth, I am the only leader of a government in the OECD
area, in the western world area, able to say those things. You know,
three and three quarter per cent, we have had now 590,000 job growth
since the last election, I mean, what happened at the last election
John, essentially the Government was signed up again for three years
to restart growth and get employment going. Now, if you look at the
NSW election John Fahey is running around spending the state
budgetary monies on this project, that project, but essentially it is
coming off the Federal Government's growth policies. In other words,
who has introduced the growth and the wealth and the change in the
last three years? It is has been this Government.
JL: OK, just back to this Budget, talk continues about taxation increases.
One tax being talked about in the NSW election campaign is death
duty or an inheritance tax, long-term goal of the Left wing of your party,
everybody knows, and it was also one of the key recommendations put
to you in the Fitzgerald Report on a national savings strategy. Are you
ruling that out absolutely and totally?
PM: I ruled that out at the last election.
JL: But what about now? 
PM: I mean, I made that very clear, but John, these old furphies have been
around for a long time. The biggest taxing outfit around at the moment
is NSW. Did you see that..
JL: Yes, but hang on Prime Minister, you still didn't answer the question,
are you ruling this out totally?
PM: I am. I ruled it out last time, but John, I am not in the business of ruling
in and ruling out taxes on radio.
JL: Well, you did last time.
PM: That was an election campaign.
JL: I see, it is different then?
PM: Well, you can start then on the excises, you know, beer, cigarettes,
liquor, all these sorts of thing, I mean we could be sitting here for half
an hour going through it. Look, the proof of the pudding is this John,
which is the lowest taxed country in the developed world? This is,
Australia, under this Government.
JL: Yes, I am aware of that. But just back to what I said about death duty
or inheritance taxes. When you say you are not in the habit of ruling
things out on radio, you have done it before with me frequently, ruled
things either in or out.
PM: You get up to it, but I don't often come in on it.
JL: Well, you have a few times, but listen I would have thought that this
was the best place of the lot to rule it out when you have got about
million people listening to you.
PM: Well I have just made that one clear. What I suspect you are at is to
go through another heap of them.
JL: No, no, I am simply asking you about the death duty or inheritance tax,
is it ruled out completely? I won't ask another question about that tax.
PM: The answer to that is yes.
JL: OK, so what does Ralph Willis mean when he talks about the need for
action on both sides of the Budget, what does that mean?
PM: That means receipts and outlays.
JL: There is a lot of talk about company tax increases and you have just,
again, cemented the fact firmly in our minds that we are a low taxed
country, does that indicate to us that company tax might rise?
PM: No, it doesn't, and again that is the point I am making, I can't go
through the Budget here on radio. 
JL: No, I don't want you to do that.
PM: Well, I think you are trying to, you are getting around to it.
JL: Well, I'll get as close as I can.
PM: Let me just say this, one of these sorts of debates in this country, you
have got Mr Howard running around saying ' oh, I think we ought to
have lower taxation in this country'. He was the highest taxing
Treasurer since the war and revenue to GDP was much higher under
him. We have cut it. And, there you have got his mate in NSW, John
Fahey, who has got the highest State taxes and charges than any
other state in Australia.
JL: Yes, a panel of economists today
PM: I mean they are good.
JL: Yes, well I suppose they are all in the same business. A panel of
economists today are saying Australia can't sustain growth of over
three to three and half per cent because higher rates of growth push
up the rate of imports and imports on consumer products don't help us
to much, we have got to get capital equipment in here. How do we
escape this growth trap. I have been looking at some of the people
who are saying it. Peter Costello is saying it very loudly and
PM: Well, you can just discount anything he says. You wouldn't trust him
with a jam jar full of five cent pieces.
JL: " After 12 years of Keating rhetoric the fact is that everytime growth
picks up it spills over into imports and Australia is faced with another
current account deficit crisis, the current crisis is the third in the last
decade and the second blow-out since the days of the ' banana
republic'." Now, what do you say to Mr Costello?
PM: What I say is this, that what we have to do in this country is to improve
the capital stock. You can't do anything but produce your way out of
your difficulties. Now, what happened in Australia in the 1970s with
double digit inflation and in the earlier part of the 1980s is that the
capital stock, that is the stock of equipment with which we produce our
goods and services, fell into antiquity. We ended up with an industrial
museum here by the early 1980s. John, one of the other things I was
in Germany for was for CeBIT the information technology fair we
had 170 Australian companies with leading edge technology as the
guest country of that great international exhibition. This would have
been inconceivable 10 years ago. We would have had maybe three
companies there. There is now 170 with software, all sorts of niche IT
technology. All this has come from the renewed industrial base of this
country, but it has to be put into place. 
Now, Australia does not have a mainframe computer manufacturing
industry. It does not have a mainframe manufactured tool industry and
so whenever we have an investment phase of strength we always see
the current account move out of line. At the moment, I think the
economy is slowing naturally. It is starting to slow down and that is
fine.
JL: If it slows down naturally, does that automatically mean that you won't
increase interest rates?
PM: We have already increased interest rates last year and, I think, at the
right time to slow it so that it becomes sustainable with low inflation.
JL: OK, but if it slows of its own accord, it is unlikely then that interest
rates will rise?
PM: Much more unlikely that interest rates will rise and that is why the
Budget becomes, again, important. In other words, what we want is
the highest rate of growth we can have which is sustainable with low
inflation. What the Liberals would have given us is 1.5 to 2 per cent
growth, like John Howard did through the 1970s. They had one fifth
the level of employment growth that we had. Now, we averaged, I
think, over 4 per cent GDP growth right through the 1980s. They
averaged less than 2 per cent about 1.7 or 1.8 per cent. Anyone can
hold inflation down by squeezing growth and employment out of the
economy, but not anyone can hold inflation down with growth, that is
the hard part.
JL: OK, the Green movement is keeping up its pressure over what it sees
as some sort of back down by you on the woodchip issue. Have you
lost your patience with the sight of these fool protesters deliberately
sabotaging forestry workers who are attempting to earn a living in a
free country?
PM: I think there has to be, as always, a balance in these things, but that
story you are referring to says, you know, the Government has given
up on the processes again. I mean, it is sort of a pro-green anti-forest
story. Then the next story you will see will be a pro-forest anti-green
story. I mean, the problem about The Sydney Morning Herald, it can
never get that nice place in the middle where the Government and the
community must be. That is, how do you have a sustainable forest
products industry while at the same time looking after, as best you can,
these important stands of trees and our national estate. That is the
aim of the game and there is nothing that the Government is going to
be doing that will detract from that.
JL: I think it is a bit unfair to give The Sydney Morning Herald a bake, it
was the ABC news.
PM: It was on the front page. The story is on the front page of The Sydney
Morning Herald saying.. 
J L: Probably from the ABC news last night.
PM: No, I don't think so. I think one is from the other and I think it was the
other way around, but basically I mean, it is either all bad news for
greens or it is all bad news for forests. There is nothing inbetween
with them. In fact, what the Government has to do is do what, I think,
most Australians want done and that is to have a sustainable forest
products industry, but at the same time protect those important areas
of native forest and forest with heritage values which are important to
us all.
JL: Are you going to reserve seats in Parliament for Aboriginal people?
PM: That was a recommendation in the Justice Committee Report. That is
something that we have got to think long and hard about. Can I just
say though John, the Government and I think all Australians, including
Aboriginal Australians have two very great victories in the last couple
of weeks. While Mr Howard was in there asking improper questions
under privilege with his mate Mr McLachlan, we had passed the Land
Fund legislation and we had in the High Court the validation of the
Native Title legislation. I mean, two huge landmark social and cultural
changes in this country.
JL: Will that do for a while or are you going to look at the idea of having
reserved seats in Parliament for Aborigines?
PM: We are now looking at the pressing problems of Aboriginal health and
housing.
JL: That's good. I hope you looked past ATSIC.
PM: Well, I am just saying this. Have a look at the substance, I mean, you
see all this crazy elements of the public debate, of people throwing
muck around in the House, in Parliament, just see what the
Government has done seven to zero on Native Title, Land Fund Bill
passed and now we are moving on to Aboriginal health.
JL: OK, we'll keep an eye on the Aboriginal health because, I think, that is
an area that obviously needs great assistance and I don't believe they
are getting the right assistance from ATS IC, but we'll talk about that on
another occasion. Thank you very much, as usual, for your time.
Good to talk to you.
PM: A pleasure. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 22/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY
The Government has decided to recommend to the Governor-General in Executive
Council the appointment of Mr Ron McLeod AM, Deputy Secretary in the Department of
Defence, as the next Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security. It is proposed that
the appointment will take effect on 6 April 1995. The Leader of the Opposition has been
consulted on the proposed appointment.
Mr McLeod has had a long and distinguished public service career. He has served the
Government in a number of senior positions, including most recently as Deputy Secretary,
Budget and Management in the Department of Defence and, during 1994, as Chairman of
the Review Group which reported on possible changes to the Public Service Act.
The office of Inspector-General was set up by the Government in 1986 following the
second Hope Royal Commission into Australia's security and intelligence agencies to
ensure that the agencies act with legality and propriety. It occupies a central place in the
arrangements for the accountability of Australia's security and intelligence agencies. The
office is a demanding one requiring the highest standards of ability. I am confident that
Mr McLeod's skills and experience make him well suited to the task.
Mr McLeod succeeds Mr Roger Holdich AM, who has almost completed two terms as
Inspector-General. Mr Holdich has decided to resign his appointment some six months
early in order to give his successor time to settle in before he is required to put into effect
whatever changes the Government decides upon as a result of any recommendations
concerning the office of Inspector-General that may arise from the Commission of Inquiry
into AS IS.
Mr Holdich has had a long career of public service, including in my department, the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Public Service Commission. As
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security since 1959 Mr Hold ich has served the
Government with distinction and integrity and has made a particular contribution to the
further development of arrangements for accountability in the intelligence community. I
wish him well in his retirement.
CANBERRA 21 MARCH 1995 



Ctio)
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RANALD MCDONALD, RADIO 3L0, 21 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RM: . and on the line now is the Prime Minister Paul Keating. Good
morning to you Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Ranald, how are you there?
RM: Just back from your trip to the meeting . well, the international
meeting on poverty, but you also went to a number of other countries
on the way. Just a quick question about your trip and the way that you
kept in touch with what was happening on the local scene were you
in any way perhaps, did you feel that you needed to take your
points and land your punches from overseas that you couldn't wait
until you came back?
PM: It was just that the travelling media roadshow feel that if they don't
have a domestic story running at the same time, somehow they are
dis-enfranchised from reporting news. I think that's more the problem.
RM: One of the comments you made which of course did make headlines
related to the appointment of the next Governor-General under the
Presidency, and also the question of whether we should follow the
German example I am just wondering whether you now have had
second thoughts about the way that the Governor-General should be
appointed whether you will go along with the suggestion I think Barry
Jones feels is a good idea?
PM: -Well, lam-saying this Ranald if people-want me to essentially give up
the exclusive right to recommend to the Queen the appointment of the
next Governor-General, I am happy to give it up. But it's in the context
of an appointment of an Australian person as the Head of State, that
is, to a republic. And that's why I believe... . more than ever, you go to
these countries in Europe and what have you, Australia is now so well
regarded not only in the Asia Pacific, but also in Europe as a
country. One of the points, for instance, that I made to Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl was that you know this notion of the European Monetary
Union of the Maastricht Treaty and the so-called convergence criteria
for countries joining in a single currency in Europe? The only two
countries in the world this year that meet the criteria are Germany and
Australia. Now, we're not in Europe, and we don't want to join it, but
we are the only other OECD country that could. So Australia's
stanaing in Europe in Asia is very, very high indeed, ana to say " just
by the way, we are borrowing the monarchy of another country". See,
when I turn up to see the German Chancellor, normally when
Australian Prime Ministers have been through, they have had a little
chat with the British Foreign Secretary, and the Germans say " well,
here comes not simply Britain across the Channel, but some chip off
the block". I'm saying well forget all that that's all past. This is now
well and truly a country with an independent identity, culture and by
the way, we are thinking now of moving to an Australian republic with
an Australian Head of State, very similar to yours where you have a
Head of State, but you also have a Parliamentary Government.
RM: Just as though talking about Bill Hayden's retirement which is coming
up pretty soon do you therefore feel that it would be appropriate to at
least run a test and have an appointed or elected by the two houses
together the Senate and the House of Representatives in other
words, that you don't select him?
PM: I notice... . my very clear view of all this is the people are suggesting -I
notice Jeff Kennett I think he was suggesting on your program last
week, saying " well, this is not a bad idea", and I said " well look, when
Jeffrey decides that we will have a republic, then I will take his
suggestion seriously", and then he said " oh, it's outrageous raising
these matters overseas". This is the character that has gone across to
Greece and made an absolute meal out of trying to invest himself with
some support with the Greek community of Melbourne by trying to take
on a foreign policy issue in Greece, as a State Premier. He has then
got the front to say to me that I shouldn't raise, with the German
President, the fact that we are considering a republic ourselves, and in
that Republic in that structure we are thinking of these options,
including the appointment of the Head of State by both Houses of
Parliament, or in other ways.
RM: Of course, the other matter that you did discuss while you were
overseas was the Packer deal, and just where that was is that going
to continue? Is that debate between yourself and Kerry Packer going
to follow on, or do you think that should be left?
PM: I think we will just leave that and see what happens here. The thing is,
it will be not me condemning John Howard it will be John Howard
doing it himself . the position is this: I believe in media plurality. I
believe there should be a separation on the ownership of these great
media assets, and John Howard doesn't. So time will tell the proof of
the pudding of this will be in the eating. 
RM: Well of course, the question is whether a deal was done, and I think
your own President Barry Jones said perhaps you put two and two
together and did it logically and then drew a conclusion rather than
actually having evidence that a deal was done do you have
evidence?
PM: It's just like any front page story in the Melbourne Age, or the Sydney
Morning Herald you say to the journalists " what proof have you got of
that?", and the journalist says " well, I have got plenty of proof of that"
and you say " well, give it to me" and they say " oooh we are not
revealing our sources". You know....
RM: You're not revealing you sources?
PM: On these things, don't worry about Barry's view on this. The key view
on this is my own, and we do have media plurality for instance, we
have got now an independent radio industry we never had 10 years
ago, we have got television ownership which is now not associated
with newspapers, as is mostly the case with radio. We have now got
distinct rumours of private ownership diverse ownership of the
media, which I think is a good thing for Australia.
RM: Can I just move to your call for higher growth, and the discussions
about Australia's recovering economy overseas how can we achieve
higher growth without blowing out our current account?
PM: It depends the economy is now slowing from the 6% growth we had in
the September quarter of last year, because I think that was for us
unsustainable. But we don't want to go back my point was in a
European context I was really saying to a European audience where
European economies grow by 1.5% saying get yourself locked
into the Asia Pacific where the general growth is higher, and where in
Australia in the 1980s we averaged 4% and at the moment we are
growing somewhere between 5% That's the context of my
remarks.
RM: Can you put a figure on it though what's the figure we ought to look to
as a satisfactory growth for the next decade perhaps, coming out of
our recession?
PM: We have got to grow at something like 4-4.5% to keep unemployment
coming down. And that seems to me to be a social and an economic
imperative to keep unemployment coming down. Now, part of the
European problem, of course, they have nothing like the employment
to growth translation that we in Australia get. If we have 3-4%
economic growth, we get 3-4% employment growth, whereas if they
have 3-4% economic growth in Europe, they might get 1 employment
growth. So, we are getting a much better translation, and that's why at
the moment we have had in the last year, 3.75% employment growth. 
And when we had 590,000 job growth since the election which is
phenomenal.
RM: Well, what John Howard has just said on another station, can you
guarantee that there won't be an interest rate hike soon after the or
immediately after the NSW election? Is there going to be an interest
rate increase?
PM: This is one of those other shabby he said this in the 1980s after an
election then, that the Reserve Bank had connived with the
Government to hold interest rates down during the State election this
is in 1987. And Bob Johnson the then Governor said of John
Howard he rebuked him at a private lunch and said of him " relations
with this Government" he said in his departing speech, " with the Labor
Government, have been entirely proper, but one has to be an insider
to know that this was not always so', this is a reference of course to
Howard when he was Treasurer. So, after Mr Howard's disgraceful
performance in the House of Representatives, being party to the
asking of a question he knew was intended to mislead the House of
Representatives by Mr McLachlan...
RM: About Hindmarsh?
PM: He admitted on John Laws' program last week that he was at the
tactics meeting that he sat down with Ian McLachlan, that he agreed
that Ian McLachlan should ask a question which had no truth in it, that
had no integrity to it, which said that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs,
Robert Tickner, had photocopied and disseminated information that
was the charge in the question when in fact, they both knew it was
them. I mean, if I did a thing like that Ranald, you would never hear
the end of it it would be on for weeks, months, months and months.
Here is John Howard caught red-handed caught red-handed at a
sort of smart little tactics meeting throwing a question around which
had not a shred of integrity to it, and of course, now he wants to forget
that it happened McLachlan has resigned. And the question we say
is " if McLachlan resigned because he asked a question he knew to be
misleading in the House of Representatives, why too shouldn't John
Howard do the same, given the fact that he authorised the question to
be asked?".
RM: There is a certain irony, isn't there, John Howard is down here in
Melbourne for most of this week and you have not exactly played any
significant role, I would have thought, in the NSW elections both of
you come from NSW, both of you come from Sydney why have you
not actually weighed into the state election up there?
PM: I was on the John Laws program this morning, which is basically a
NSW based radio program, and I discussed a number of issues in
NSW. Could I just say the problem with NSW is that the Government
here is dead on its feet we are having a sort of pretend election, that 
once we can sort through the election, the thing will come back to life.
I mean there is more Ministers fallen out of this Government.. . you
know there is this question about the film studio. In the Cultural
Statement, I got Rupert Murdoch to agree to do up to three feature
films in Australia, and he wanted to do them in Sydney. John Fahey
can't even get the studio built he can't even give him the space to get
the studio built to start off an international feature film industry through
Fox in Australia.
RM: Might it come down here to Melbourne, as Jeff Kennett said?
PM: Jeffrey is out there touting for business I know he has got the Grand
Prix, and he's got Lloyd Webber. I1 mean, you wonder these days
whether State Government is show business or what it is.
RM: Looking at the NSW election it is interesting, surely, if you say that
the budget, sorry the Government is dead on its feet, that on the
opinion polls, they look as if at least they are slightly ahead, and may
have a sporting chance of remaining in power do you think they will?
PM: Last time the polls showed the same, and Bob Carr came within a seat
or so of winning, and I think he has got a better opportunity on this
occasion. But there is that fellow Pickard, the former Solicitor-General,
there was Packard, there is Terry Griffiths there is that many
Ministers and MP's Smiles who have fallen out of that Government.
It is staggering along nothing happens in NSW, I can assure you.
The only thing that happens are basically Government projects there
is no substantial private projects occurring there, and it is also as if we
are saying " ooooh, let's not talk about that let's see what they can do
later". Well, what they will do is they will fall in a heap, I think. This is
a Government which is, basically, the quicker it gets put down, the
better.
RM: All right. You are talking about a tired State Government what about
Federal Government you have been in power for 12 years I know
you have only been Prime Minister for a few of those, but as a
Government, would you say that how would you reject a suggestion
that you have had a long time in power, and perhaps you are tired as a
Federal Government?
PM: Have a look at the last three weeks look at us, look at the Coalition.
The week I was away, John Howard's antics his principal trick was
throwing dishonest questions in the House of Representatives. The
week before that when I was there, he was asking me about
supposedly dishonest how-to-vote tickets proposed by the Labor Party
in the local Canberra election, which was not dishonest at all. In the
same period, we have had in that same week I had him cave in and
pass the Aboriginal Land Fund Bill a social and cultural milestone in
Australia. Last week, we had 7 0 the High Court supporting the
Native Title Legislation, also the week before that we had 91,000 job 
growth for the month. So, if you are looking at substance and quality
and change the thing about Howard is you can't get him into the stalls
on any major issue until the field has jumped, Ranald, and when he is
in there, he goes in backwards.
RM: As an alternative Prime Minister, you reckon you have got his
measure, do you?
PM: The thing is, look, the key-point about Howard is that he is no different
than he was in the 1980s, and it won't be me who says it it will come
out of his own mouth. You could see that in the House of
Representatives two weeks ago when he did this stunt with
McLachlan, you could see it the previous week when he was trying the
stuff on me. There is no policy substance all of the changes.... I can
walk around Europe with the German Chancellor regarding Australia
as one of the countries which has really made great changes in the
last decade, we can walk into APEC which we have had a large part
in creating and have the same view of ourselves right throughout
South-East Asia, we have got an international standing that we have
never had, we have got 170 countries at CeBIT the technology fair in
Germany -we have got great social and identity changes in Australia
and this has come from the Labor Government, and it is still
happening. What has come from Howard think of one national
initiative you associate with John Howard just one.
RM: All right. I'll have to leave it on that note, but many thanks for talking to
me.
PM: Thank you.
RM: Thank you Paul Keating, Prime Minister of Australia.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 23/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
CZECH REPUBLIC, H. E. MR VACLAV HAVEL
am very pleased to announce that His Excellency Mr Vaclav Havel,
President of the Czech Republic, accompanied by Mrs Olga Havlova, will visit
Australia from 26 to 30 March as a guest of the Australian Government.
President Havel will visit the Northern Territory as well as Canberra, Sydney
and Melbourne.
President Havel has been a central figure in the political and cultural life of
his country. His courageous political activism was instrumental in the
revolution which restored democracy to Czechoslovakia. He has since
played a vital role in guiding the Czech Republic. He is also, of course, a
distinguished playwright.
I am looking forward to discussing with the President on 28 March ways in
which Australia and the Czech Republic can enhance our economic, political
and cultural ties. Our links are underpinned significantly by the thousands of
Czechs who have migrated to Australia since 1945 and who have made such
an important contribution to the life of this country.
The Presidential party will include Mr Ivan Kocarnik, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Finance, Mr Vladimir Dlouhy, Minister of Industry and Trade,
Mr Josef Tosovsky, Governor of the Czech National Bank and
Mr Alexandr Vondra, First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs.
CANBERRA 23 MARCH 1995 



, d~~ J y
PRIME MINJISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO " AM" PROGRAM
23 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
EK: Prime Minister, isn't it fair to describe Ian McLachlan's resignation as
being over a technical issue because he unwittingly misled the public
over the secret Aboriginal women's documents?
PM: Well, that's your question to get me started Fran, you couldn't possibly
believe that. I mean the documents made up the Commonwealth's
entire case file in litigation between the Minister for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Affairs and the developers in this Hindmarsh
Bridge case, and an appeal was lodged in the Federal Court in this
matter last Friday that included the report on the secret Aboriginal
women's evidence. Now, this box was marked confidential, it was then
opened, the mail was pilfered and then in another envelope marked for
women's eyes only, that was then opened and then another one,
inside that was the envelope which had the women's secret advice and
evidence. Now, this was then photocopied and sent to the developers,
amongst others, and to newspapers.
EK: But the secret women's documents weren't sent to the developers?
PM: There were 800 documents 800.
FK: Yes, but those ones, those particular ones, and that's the issue that Mr
McLachlan resigned over isn't it?
PM: Well, Mr McLachlan and Mr Howard should tell us who got the copies
of the women's letters, who have received those, but the other thing is
this...
FK: Well, Mr McLachlan says no-one did, that only one photocopy was
held in his office. 
PM: He resigned for this reason. That he and John Howard, and John
Howard admitted on a radio program in Sydney last week, that he was
at the tactics committee. He and John Howard agreed on a series of
questions they knew were misleading of the House of Representatives.
And they then asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, and charged in
the question, that he had opened up the mail, he had done the
photocopying and he had sent them around when they knew full well
that it was themselves. So, not only is there the dishonour of breaking
into this mail which was obviously not for them, but as well as that they
then tried to frame a Minister, alleging of the Minister, that he, the
Minister, was the photocopier and disseminated information when
John Howard and Ian McLachlan knew it was them. Now, this is
dishonour on very large scale and to have this sort of smarmy stuff
from Costello, I mean, " he's a talent, and I think this will be seen as a
technical issue", I mean these people have got the political morals of
alley cats.
EK: But, Mr Keating, no matter where you see the dishonour, isn't the truth
that, or isn't it reality that Mr McLachlan in fact resigned because he
said he misled the Australian public over the markings on that
envelope containing the secret women's documents? That's the issue.
PM: He misled the House of Representatives. This stuff about misleading
the Australian people, he misled the House of Representatives, and he
can't come back as a Shadow Minister and John Howard was party
look, he resigned because he misled the House of Representatives.
John Howard sat beside him knowing that the question he was asking,
the question that misled the House, was one he approved of. They
both misled the House and that's why we ask for Howard's resignation.
And here they are a week later, I mean they have got nobody on their
front bench, you see the whole Opposition is a shell down there, in
Canberra. There's nobody there.
FK: Yes, but why shouldn't he be able to come back at some point though,
I mean...
PM: Come off it Fran.
FK: Ministers do this all the time. Senator Graham Richardson was
brought back into your Cabinet after he had to step aside over the
Marshall Islands affair.
PM: You know what they said, these people, I mean the gall of them. They
said they had a duty as an MP, Mr McLachlan said to his constituents,
to developers in the Hindmarsh Bridge affair. But was it no less of a
duty to his Aboriginal constituents in the same constituency? I mean
then they said they had an obligation to pass the information over to
these developers. John Howard and Ian McLachlan are not solicitors
for the developers, they had no legal obligation no obligation at all. 
And when asked on a Sydney radio, Mr Howard was enjoined by the
questioner to say, " well I wouldn't do that if I came across legal
documents that were on the other side of the case to me, I would send
them back". And Howard said, " would you?". It was John Laws in fact.
He said " yes I would". I mean, there's no morality here. But you
understand, Fran, their front bench has nobody on it. They are now
trying to get McLachlan back because, look, they appointed the other
day Kemp to the environment portfolio who now says we shouldn't be
using international treaties to protect the environment. They are now
down to backbench Senators.
FK: Yes, but Prime Minister, you have to concede that Governments do
bring back Ministers who have slipped aside for some reason or other
and you have done it yourself?
PM: Yes, Graham Richardson came back after being out the better part of a
year after a general election. Not the better part-of a week after one of
the most dishonourable episodes.
FK: Yes, but Mr Costello was talking about if the Coalition won
Government.
PM: They're talking about trying to bring him back beforehand they're just
softening the ground. Ian McLachlan had to resign because he was
caught red-handed trying to fit a Minister up for something that he,
McLachlan, had done and the great injustice in this is that Howard was
in it right up to his ears, admitted that he was at the tactics committee
meeting, knew the question that McLachlan was going to ask, was just
as culpable of misleading the House of Representatives as McLachlan
was, but you see you couldn't get him to resign he just sat there and
sat it out. He thought he would wear the rest of you out and that he
could burn you off. And now they are so brazen that he thought he
could burn the press gallery off and the media and public opinion off,
and now within a week, they are so brazen, within a week, Costello is
saying we ought to have him back.
FK: Mr Keating, if I could turn briefly to the economy. The Australian
newspaper reports today that your own internal polling is showing the
next election could hinge on keeping interest rates down. Can you say
now that you can manage the economy without the need for further
rate rises?
PM: You have not got to be a polling whiz, have you, to know that people
don't like interest rate increases. I mean you don't have to be an
insider to work that out. Well, the Government is in the course now of
producing the Budget, and the Budget will be a Budget which will be
appropriate for the economic circumstances of the moment, and for the
medium term. We have got a medium term paucity in savings we
want to address that in the medium term. I think the economy has 
slowed and is slowing and I am waiting to see by how much when we
get the next national accounts data. But in the meantime, the
Government's going to do a first-rate job on the Budget because I think
that's the important imperative now.
FK: Well, are the clear signals coming from you now that the budget deficit
will be cut by tough spending cuts rather than tax increases?
PM: Well, the clear signal coming from me, don't put words in my mouth
Fran.
FK: Well, coming from you and your senior Ministers...
PM: I know you are bright-eyed and bushy-tailed at this hour of the
morning, but look, what we are saying is the clear message coming
from me is the Budget will be right.
FK: But, will the Budget be right through tough spending cuts rather than
more tax increases?
PM: Well, you just wait and see.
EK: Is there room given the strong employment growth to cut spending
from some of the money put aside for Working Nation?
PM: Well, I think it is worth just recording, I mean people go on about the
Budget and the economy, I mean, the Australian economy is the
strongest in the OECD area. We have had strong growth with low
( inflation) and we have had 590,000 job growth since the election. I
mean, essentially the Government was re-elected to get growth started
and employment started. We have had 3 and 3/ 4 per cent
employment growth. And that is one of the reasons why household
disposable income these strong levels of employment of this
Government why the disposable income of Australian households
have risen by 40 per cent since the Government came to office, which
is a huge number.
FK: Does that strong employment growth then translate though into you
having some room in the money you had set aside for Working Nation
to now put into bringing back the deficit?
PM: Well, you are asking me about whether there is any spending room to
reduce outlays under Working Nation, well, I'm not sure. I mean,
analysis of all this in the ERC round will reveal this. The key point is,
Mr Howard is running around saying we have had five minutes of
economic sunshine. We have had 36 months of growth, 36 months of
growth, go and tell the 593,000 people who have got their jobs that it
was only five minutes of sunshine and go and remind them that the
economy has seen one of the strongest investment phases in recent 
years which is setting us up for more goods and services into the
future.
FK: Yes, but the question for the voters, I suppose, is can you tell them
now that you can get the Budget so right that there's unlikely there will
be a need for further interest rate rises?
PM: Well, I won't have to tell them. That will be all apparent to them by the
election, won't it? I mean, they are mature, they are conscientious,
they will make their own judgements about all that. They will see, I
believe, that the Australian economy will continue to grow and prosper
and it will do so with low inflation and with all of the attendant changes
of recent years in productivity and the rest. That's the key here.
FK: And further rate rises though?
PM: Well, look, these sort of questions about, you know, are you ruling in
or are you ruling out interest rate rises. I mean, you have seen the
change in the world monetary system over the last three weeks. I
mean, no Government can say, well, there will never be another
increase in interest rates, or that it is unnecessary. But, I am just
saying that the Budget will be a key factor in that and we will be getting
that right.
EK: Mr Keating, thank you.
PM: Thank you. Fran, before you leave now I know Mr Fahey's coming
on, and he has been caught out with these non-existent costings of
New South Wales Labor promises in New South Wales just ask him
how does he defend that porky, that enormous porky?
FK: We'll put that question to Mr Fahey. Thank you, Prime Minister.
PM: It's an enormous porky. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH KEITH CONLON, RADIO 5AN, ADELAIDE, 23 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KC: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: How are you Keith?
KC: You might have been interested to see what the BBC thinks about
Parliament this morning, have you read The Sydney Morning Herald
yet?
PM: Well, I heard a report about it, but I mean, talking about the cultural
cringe, there is The Sydney Morning Herald proposing itself as a
newspaper of substance running what some cub reporter puts on a
BBC newsflash. Could you imagine The London Times running
something that is on page three of The Sydney Morning Herald or The
Adelaide Advertiser?
KC: Well, they do say however it looks more like the Australian show
Heartbreak High with school children bickering at the assembly rather
than a parliament and they say that it is ' bull ring of bellowing
vulgarians' in which the Prime Minister, you ' set a snide tone' and the
Speaker is a ' Labor party poodle' with no moral authority. How do you
respond to that?
PM: What I say is let them look back over their history in the House of
Commons where people who have come to fisticuffs, I mean we ought
to be urging the time just to turn back over some of the speeches of
Winston Churchill or some of the other greats of the House of
Commons and just see how rough the debate was. When you look at
some of the debates that have been there over free trade, over the role
of the House of Lords in 1912, I mean it would make hair stand on end.
KC: What about a leaf Prime Minister, from the Commons Book though in
making the Speaker truly independent, resigning from the Party, going
for a long term.
PM: It doesn't work in our system. Our system, I think, works quite
effectively and, I think, to have a robust parliamentary debate where 
the issues of Australian public life are debated and where they are felt,
heartfelt by those who represent positions is a good thing. For
instance, let's take one of the current issues the Aboriginal Land
Fund I mean, am I right to sit there and say ' oh well, if you want to
destroy it in the Senate, that's all right, I'll take back a second hand
bill, I won't say anything harsh', I mean, the fact that all title of the land
was regarded as, put it this way, they were regarded as having no title
to the land after European settlement and now we are giving them the
chance under the Native Title legislation to establish that and where
they can't, to buy it back. That is called progress. You get social
change by victories, not by shilly-shallying compromises. The BBC
would be better talking about British productivity, about how they are
going to cope with the Deutschmark, about how they are going to join,
if ever, the European Monetary Union and get their parliament onto
some of the things like we get onto and that is the substances rather
than the hub-bub of nonsense.
KC: That gets us to matters economic. There is concern in the community,
I know you are aware of it, some people believe perhaps that John
Howard the five minutes of economic sunlight, others perhaps go for
your line that the economy is slowing naturally. What is a rate of
growth that is not too hot and is sustainable?
PM: Let me deal with John Howard's line because it is basically just a bit of
poll driven pap. They get told these things by their pollsters and they
repeat it. They do what they call ' focus grouping' and someone says
' oh, it doesn't seem right to me that we've had that much joy since you
know so then it gets re-told back. The fact is Keith, we have had 36
months of growth, we've had 12 quarters of growth. The Australian
economy is growing now faster than any other OECD economy and as
a test of its quality, I was with Chancellor Kohl in Germany a week ago,
now you know there is this treaty called the Maastricht Treaty in
Europe the tough conditions for joining the single currency with the
Deutschmark that is called the convergence criteria. The only other
two countries in the world who could meet that strict criteria at the
moment and join is Luxemburg and Australia. Out of the 27 member
states of the OECD the only two that meet the convergence criteria
outside of Germany is Luxemburg and Australia. That is on
productivity, on inflation, on government debt to GDP et cetera. On
the sustainability in other words of your economy.
KC: What does that translate to in terms of rate of growth?
PM: What all that means is that the Australian economy, we have had the
best run of statistics in the last year we've had in 30 years.
KC: But aren't they too good?
PM: Well, the economy has been growing at around six per cent which we
think is too fast, but it has slowed back and we will soon see in the
next quarterly accounts how much, but it has slowed back. It is still
with low inflation and with massive employment growth. Last month we 
had 91,000 job growth. If you go back to the election Keith, what the
Government was asked to do was to re-start the economy and re-start
employment and that is what we have done.
KC: Frank Gelber from BIS Shrapnel was just talking to us a few minutes
ago on the program before you came in saying he thinks that there will
have to be more slowing of the economy, he is talking mortgage rates,
home mortgage rates of 13 and 14 per cent next year.
PM: Look, the fact that you mention his name and organisation is why he is
on there saying that stuff. It is all a free plug for them.
KC: So, they don't have credibility..
PM: No, a lot of them don't no. There are ex-Treasury economists laying
around, State and Commonwealth Treasury economists and other
people laying around these institutions putting out blurb and they are
all attempting to be noticed. The fact of the matter is that interest rates
rose by two and a half per cent last year to slow the economy so that
this was sustainable for people, so that they had not just three years of
growth, but a decade of growth with low inflation and employment. Let
me make this point, that in the period that this Government has been in
office household disposable income has risen by 40 per cent in real
terms, that's after you wash the inflation out 40 per cent real
improvement in household incomes because more people in
households are in work. Now, that is called income growth and social
progress and you get it by consistency. I would much rather be
managing a strong economy and making it sustainable than managing
an economy in a recession.
KC: So, when Senator Evans said this week that interest rates are not
likely to rise in the foreseeable future, how long is that a month or
two?
PM: I think a good budget, and I am very confident the Government can put
a good budget down, is going to make any move in interest rates far
less likely.
KC: You now don't think as the market seems to think there will be an
interest rate rise in April or May?
PM: I think markets are starting to say and make some of these noises
because of movements in the international monetary system. You
know, movements in the US dollar, movements in the Mexican
currency, movements in Europe and they are looking at Australia and
making some judgements about us. But, if the Government gets the
budget right it will make any monetary movements far less likely.
KC: Prime Minister, with the budget coming up I know that you are not
going to get into what's on and what's not in detail, but there must be I
suppose an annual dilemma here especially with an economy that is
still maybe a bit too hot, you can slow the economy with interest rate 
rises, you can wind back government spending or you can raise taxes
or perhaps all three, which is fairest to most Australians?
PM: Well, it is a matter of getting the balance right. Two years ago at the
election my opponents were saying we were going to be in a double
dip recession to John Hewson and a depression and John Howard
endorsed his remarks. Now, if you say the economy is a bit too hot, if I
had said at the election two years ago ' look, in two years time the
economy is going to be very hot and strong and our real problem will
be managing it' people would have said ' oh, tell us another one'. Now,
that is the state of it. So, it is a matter of making certain that the
budget, I mean what do we need? We have got strong investment and
that strong investment soaking up our savings and more, it is flowing
over into overseas savings. So, to stop that we have got to actually
add to public savings and we do that by bringing the budget deficit
back more quickly. That can be done by cuts in government spending
or changes on the receipt side.
KG: Both sides are you looking at?
PM: Well, we will look at both sides, as we do on every budget.
KG: Services taxes for instance as called for by the Metal Trades Industry
Association?
PM: That is another runner for the consumption tax.
KG: But, it is a big area that isn't taxed isn't it? It is a huge part of our
economy.
PM: Then there is food not taxed and clothing not taxed, there is heaps of
big areas that are not taxed.
KG: So, services tax is not on?
PM: I'm not saying, you said correctly at the start I'm not ruling things in
and ruling things out because there is no point. Once I start on one
you've got to continue to go through them and one can't put together a
budget like that. But, the business organisations are very incredible
when they want the incomes of the lowest income people in the
country cut back, they want transfer payments cut back, but they don't
want any business welfare cut back, they don't want any spending on
business cut back and remember, I think Keith, you should recall that
the government gave business about $ 3 billion a year of benefits in the
year after the election, but none of that is to be cut back. So, you
know, you say ' well ok, well you have put your views out and you have
given us your little press statement, but thank you very much'.
KG: Prime Minister, just one more area on the budget, something has got
to give and you have told us you are looking at all sorts of options. Is
there a way in which you can insulate those states, at least partly, that
are not keeping up with the heat. South Australia, for instance, is 
patchy in terms of its recovery compared with the east, so do we see at
risk something like say the money for the Adelaide airport runway?
PM: Keith, let me just say this Government's treatment, my treatment of
South Australia, I don't think has even been slightly acknowledged at
this point. Coming into the last election, I gave South Australia off the
budget as direct real money, not loans, $ 640 million.
KG: That was the State Bank bail out?
PM: Yes, the largest payment by the Commonwealth Government in the
history of our federation to any one State. Now, $ 640 million is an
enormous amount of money to go into anywhere, but for it to go, not as
a guarantee or as loans but just cold hard cash.
KG: As you understand Prime Minister, that sort of helped us get out of the
$ 3 billion well, so we had a fair way to get out, so we are still looking,
the Adelaide airport money?
PM: I know, but people say ' well, thank you for that', but a lot of don't even
say thank you. I mean, the State Premier has never even
acknowledged it. I mean, where would his budget be without it?
Imagine the tax burden on South Australians without that $ 640 million.
I mean it would be at least another $ 60 million a year in charges every
year.
KG: ( inaudible)..
PM: Yes, well look, on the question about the airport, that is part of the
scoping study we are doing at the moment. We are selling the airports
which includes, of course, Sydney and Melbourne and Brisbane and
we are currently looking at the future of Adelaide as part of the scoping
and regulatory studies which are being undertaken preparatory to the
divestment of those airports.
KG: Can we look at the promise that came out of the ALP conference that
there will be money attached to help with that divestment?
PM: It really depends on how the whole scoping study goes.
KG: So, it is not guaranteed that extra money, the money is perhaps not
guaranteed in the short term?
PM: It may well be that we do the things which the conference spoke about,
but again it will be in the context of their sale. We are preparing this
airport for ownership by another group or body and so whatever we do
is in that context.
KG: Mr Keating, another area that is of direct concern to South Australia,
you will know that there is now bi-partisan support to stop any
acceptance of the Industry Commission's wine tax recommendations,
are you wanting to comment on that? 
PM: Only that when I became Treasurer of this country the wine industry
was a relatively small domestic industry. It is now a large international
industry. So, I think, if you look at the wine industry under this
Government in terms of that competitiveness, our support for it and the
fact that we have now been able to open up market opportunities
around the world and actually make very big indentations in some
markets attests to, I think, the Government's regard for the industry.
KC: Industry says however that if you don't provide the domestic basis then
you kill the golden goose.
PM: They have always been saying that and when wine was untaxed
completely they said if you put any change to the tax treatment of wine
that will be the end of the industry. It just stronger and stronger and
stronger. That is not to say that we are about to accept the Industry
Commission's view or
KC: Prime Minister, the Hindmarsh Island bridge affair has been raised
again. Mr Costello predicts a return of Mr McLachlan because he says
the breach was a technical issue. What do you think?
PM: Well, I think that is a disgraceful remark. What he did was intercept
mail that was part of all of the legal documents in the Commonwealth's
case for and on behalf of the Aboriginal people there. They
intercepted them and copied the mail and sent it around and lan
McLachlan was forced to resign because he mislead the House of
Representatives suggesting that the Minister had copied it and sent it
around. Now, only a couple of weeks later you have got Mr Costello in
the most brazen outburst saying he thinks it is only a technical breach
and lan McLachlan should return to the front bench. They have got no
morals these people.
KC: Prime Minister Paul Keating, thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thanks very much.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH CHRISTOPHER CORDEAUX, RADIO 5DN, ADELAIDE,
23 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
CC: Paul Keating is sitting opposite me, good morning.
PM: Glad to be here.
CC: Thank you very much for your time. I understand you are here for
some fairly high powered stuff.
PM: Yes I am here to, basically, start off this investment and strategies
conference this morning, looking at the future of South Australia and
what strengths it has and how we might advance them.
CC: From our sample that we have here, the people who we contact
through the telephone, we never see them mind you, but we hear
them. I have the impression that the ordinary person is more
interested in politics at the moment than he or she has possibly ever
been before. It is becoming the next nouvelle thing, I think, is to be
involved and to want to be more involved and to have actually looked
up democracy and public servant in the dictionary and been surprised
at the meaning of those words.
PM: Look, I think, there is an enormously healthy public debate in Australia.
For instance, the fact that you just made this point and you can be
discussing on radio things about the economy or social policy or the
environment or whatever it might be, this doesn't happen in the United
States, it doesn't happen in Britain. You don't get the same general
involvement by the community in public policy issues. So, there is an
enormous conscientiousness about the Australian electorate.
CC: Well, they are very interested in you at the moment.
PM: Well, they are always interested in Prime Ministers.
CC: But they are particularly interested in you, I think, you have one of
those jobs. Did you ever go to Luna Park in the old days? 
PM: I did, yes.
CC: Remember those faces that stood there day after day having things
thrown at them, that was their job.
PM: I know.
CC: I think they have kind of put you in a position a bit like that at the
moment. I have suggested to people that they get a picture of you and
a picture of the Leader of the Opposition, who ever that may be at the
time, and put them both on the fridge and put underneath the question
" Is this man headed for the 21 st century?" And, answer it privately for
themselves every day. Now, I think that is the question don't you?
PM: I think it is. The system basically runs itself. The job of Ministers and
Prime Ministers is to nudge it along and change it. That is all it is
about. I mean, to be sitting around, to be sitting in a government job
with the white car and the rest, but not changing anything, well it is to
just waste your life away and kid people that you are actually doing
something for them. I think we have just got such an enormous
opportunity, we are the only nation in the world that has a continent to
itself, we are in a temperate part of the world, we are close now to the
fastest growing markets in the world, we have got an opportunity we
have never had before in our history and to not recognise the
opportunity and not got for it is to really sell yourself short.
CC: Well, I think, people do in fact perceive that at the moment and
everyone who has asked has and who have been overseas recently
particularly says that they are astonished at what a good place
Australia is really compared to the situation in the rest of the world, but
I think that entitles them to give more trouble to the people who are
running it because if something is pretty good, you want it to be
perfect. If it was totally out of control, you would think well, what the
hell it doesn't matter. But the difference between how it felt to be on
one of Magellan's ships and how it feels to be the captain of a cruise
ship is significant isn't it?
PM: Absolutely.
CC: And, I think a lot of people feel that these days when you talk about
things like, those words that have become I think probably the worst
cliches of the present era, which is development, growth, and
employment and interest rates you can throw in as well, but it is like a
cruise ship the answers are no more interesting than the question
and contain no more information, the questions sometimes have more
information in them than the answers that you actually get but can't
we start talking about, when you talk about growth and development,
about growth of human imagination, growth of optimism and
development into developing the new ideas, I mean developers think
they are doing new things. They are not, they are doing old, boring
things. 
PM: Old, boring things, exactly.
CC: Well, we could lead the world.
PM: This is why, Christopher, I have been speaking about our identity. I
don't think you can feel confident about yourself as a country or about
ourselves as individuals if our sense of ourselves and the creative
spirit of ourselves isn't both there and being harnessed and being, if
you like, used in a corporate way to identify us as a nation. It is all of
those cultural, in a sense, spiritual things about the country which I
think you are getting at.
CC: Well, why don't we hear more about it?
PM: Because we have got a whole set of media reference points about
' now Prime Minister, can you give us a guarantee that interest rates
won't run up tomorrow morning?' You say ' oh, well ok' and that is your
point. Where the real question is is this a different sort of society? Is
it getting a real sense of its own self importance and capacities? Are
we trying to bring the most creative people forward and free rein to
those who can add something new and in the making of something
new can we make that linkage to these massive markets and societies
and old societies around us and be part of them?
CC: Like Indonesia for instance. Surely it is a bit old fashioned to be
selling rifles isn't it?
PM: Well, maybe it is old fashioned, maybe it's right, I don't know.
CC: But there are some very good things that we could be selling
Indonesia that will help all of us.
PM: One of the things we are selling, obviously, is going to be health
services, we are going to be selling them all sorts of internationally
traded services, education, things like that.
CC: Let's just take solar power for a second. We actually lead the world in
that department and if more solar hot water systems, just as a simple
example, were made 4,000 jobs I've heard, straight away. Something
useful, doing something clean, doing something that people can
actually be proud of. But instead of that, you hear this job
development goes into things like making new cars or something.
PM: As you know, we have had a number of break throughs in solar
technology and solar power lends itself, particularly to these many
islands in the Archipelago of Indonesia, where they don't have a
national power transmission system. Where they have got to have
local power which either runs on diesel or kerosene or something else.
They are the sort of things we can do. But we also do a lot with water
up in those countries, that is, the producing of water and its
cleanliness. I think, we have got a fairly and I hope now, a proud 
record with countries like Indonesia, but the main thing is
understanding that these are very old societies and they have their
own mores and traditions and while we have been given the great
opportunity of inheriting this continent, we have to come to terms with
them, they live next door to us.
CC: It would be great to talk about that, just that one subject all day, but
there is a whole list of things, everybody has given me a different
question in here..
PM: I can hear the fax machine, grinding away behind you.
CC: There is a full board of questions out there, the one last thing that I
would like to say is and I suppose everyone is saying this so there is
not much point in saying it again, but that business over there with the
BBC, I think probably people appreciate hearing..
PM: Which was that?
CC: It was a piece of parliament, is sounded more like a soccer game or
something like that. There was a thing, I don't know which tribe it was
or maybe it was all tribes of the north American Indians, had
something call the speaking stick and when something had to be
discussed, the person who held the stick was the only one who could
speak at the time. If you wanted to speak you had to get the stick.
Now, in the end things degenerated a little bit and eventually people
possibly were even killed to get the stick from them, but nobody dared
to speak without the stick. Now, maybe that would be a good idea.
PM: Well, one thing is for sure, that this notion of trying to talk over people,
if you have got something to say generally, if it has got some value, it
will stand up. But, I mean, television in some respects has changed
the way the House of Representatives works because now everybody
thinks that they are on television and they want to get the tuppence
worth in because they know it gets into a 30 second grab and that's
that. But I don't think the BBC should be going on about it. The
Hansard records of the House of Commons would make your hair
stand on end. Our place is just so tame compared to that place.
CC: I think people have been surprised since they have actually had
access to it and I think actually that parliamentary station on the ABC
tv and radio is going to suddenly turn up as a top rating station in the
near future. People weren't aware it was there and they weren't aware
of what it sounded like.
PM: One thing about pay television, of course and those other things, you
will have these, particularly fibre optic cables, you will be able to just
have that channel permanently if you want it. If you wanted to be a
glutton for punishment, but if you wanted it.
CC: I think people think really that Parliament should be more like a court
or a church. 
PM: Absolutely.
CC: Or something like that. This business of concerted almost organised
crime in the back benches of just shouting people down.
PM: It means if you are a Minister trying to answer questions
extemporaneously you can hardly hear yourself think.
CC: OK, we can probably hardly hear ourselves think with all the things,
that people are actually saying waiting on the other end of the
telephone lines around the place if we could hear them, so we had
better go to those people.
Q: Good morning, Mr Prime Minister. I have a question about the up front
fees for students. I am the future of South Australia, I am a mature
aged student doing a higher degree in indigenous education and the
up front fees for me is going to mean I can't continue with that study, I
can't influence my children, I can't be an active participant in my
society with what I am getting from those studies and I would like to
know how the Prime Minister can justify this unempowering so many
people like me with these up front fees.
PM: I think that first of all that the government does not support up front
fees for domestic undergraduate students. First time entrance to
university or a particular university course, I don't think, should be
hindered by a student's financial circumstances. During our term of
office we have overseen quite dramatic expansion in the number of
higher education places and they have risen by about 65 per cent
from 350, 000 in 1983 to nearly 600,000 today. So, in response to
university wishes this Government has given institutions greater
flexibility and responsibility in managing their own affairs including
allowing charging of fees for post graduate students not receiving
scholarships. But you are talking about up front fees for domestic
under graduate students and we don't support up front fees for
domestic under graduate students.
Q: Good morning, Prime Minister. I am an ex-allied serviceman, I fought
in the Pacific against the Japanese, became a POW on the Burma
Railway for three and a half years and in 1950 came to Australia and
became a naturalised Australian in 1954. My wife is an Australian, my
children and grand children were born in this country. I would like to
receive the same entitlements of an Australian ex-serviceman, but my
most concern is for my wife who is Australian, who became a war
widow after and received the same entitlement as wife from
Australian ex-serviceman. I put my life on the line to defend this
country against the Japanese, what is part of my life now, why can't I
not receive the same treatment after all I am an Australian now?
PM: Let me tell you this, I sympathise most sincerely with all of the people
who served in the war as prisoners of war. It is one thing, not only the
enormous sacrifice in combat, but being interred, to be locked away 
and to be deprived is, I think, a singular burden which people have
carried and, of course, many didn't survive it. They made, as we all
say, the ultimate sacrifice. We do make special provisions in our
treatment of veterans' entitlements, for those who were prisoners of
war, but I think your position probably is that you are supported by The
Netherlands, are you not in some sort of veterans' entitlement and you
have come to Australia subsequently. You would find Australian
service men and women around the world getting service pensions
from here in other countries, by and large most of these things equate.
They are very similar to one another and in some places we top them
up as we do with some of the British pensions. But, I'm just not certain
about The Netherlands.
Q: Good morning Prime Minister and welcome to our State. I know it is
easier for others to criticise and for the person running the country,
I'm not here to criticise. My question is, would you know the reason
behind the dumping of NSW's nuclear waste on South Australia?
PM: The nuclear waste is mostly low level waste which is in the suburbs of
Sydney. It is at the Lucas Heights establishment originally and it went
to St Mary's which is, again, out in the western suburbs in a housing
area. This waste is going to be transported to the Range Head site at
Woomera where until the Commonwealth decides what the long term
site will be for a national repository. That is, the plan of disposal of low
level radio active waste. The Range Head site is owned by the
Commonwealth, it as you know, has a history of being associated with
weapons development and I can assure you that all safety procedures
are going to be observed in the transportation and storage of it and the
fact that it is geographically within the borders of South Australia
means, in terms of any problem it might have, is very greatly
diminished there than it is with other people in the suburbs of Sydney.
CC: Dean Brown doesn't actually want it on his roads he says.
PM: He said that, but he has also written to me asking me can he use the
same repository for his nuclear waste.
CC: What, yours?
PM: Use ours. So, he is telling the public here this is a dreadful thing and
then he is writing to me saying can I use the site too.
CC: If I can just throw a question in here, this is something that has been
on peoples minds because, I think, unfairness is one of the things that
produces the biggest result in anyone from a child to an adult and you
probably know that business a few years ago. Those three men who
risked their lives to save an environmental disaster on the boat, the
bow fell off a boat or something and there was the possibility of all this
oil going into the sea of Western Australia. They were rewarded for
their heroism with varying amounts of money and now the tax office
wants to take half of that. Now, that seems terribly unfair to people in
their minds. What is the thing about taxes, I mean, a lot of people 
consider taxes are there basically as sticks to hit people with or carrots
on the other hand to encourage them to do certain things, some
people think that. How do you think about taxes?
PM: I think they are something nations bear for the, I mean, we are all part
of the social contract. The contract is that we expect to have health
services and roads and telephones and the rest and there is a
minimum level of taxation that keeps all that going and we try as
Governments and a society to keep that balance about right. In the
case of these people, I mean, I can well and truly understand their
disquiet and disappointment about this. I didn't know about this
Christopher, until you mentioned it. You can take a lottery win and its
not taxed, it depends on whether it is income or paid as income or
whether it was paid as an ex gratia payment or whether it was an
award. I mean, I don't know enough about it, but if they received it for
heroism..
CC: Well, that's what it was, but the trouble is that it was part of their job it
was seen as, but on a broader level surely while taxes are what you
say they are obviously, isn't it possible to also use them as a device to
encourage certain things in the economy and the society and
discourage others and still get enough money to keep the roads being
built?
PM: I think so, well just take Australia. This is the lowest taxed country in
the world, in the developed world. We are running this country with a
share of revenue, that is all revenue to the size of our economy,
revenue to GDP the economists call it, it is about 26 per cent.
CC: What I'm saying is, couldn't it be used more like a controlling device
rather than just a way of raising revenue?
PM: I think it does have, for a start the income tax system is progressive, it
means that those who earn the greatest incomes pay the most, the
rates rise as your income rises, there is a user charge component say
of petrol taxes, I mean they are not without their social import.
CC: Some people think that a very influential control the taxes are
having is the payroll tax is, in fact, having the effect of reducing the
incentive to employ people and they also think it is unfair.
PM: That may well be true although employment has been rocketing along.
We have had 91,000 job growth last month, we have had 590,000 jobs
now since the election and while there is no doubt a cost there, if you
look at the overall level of wage cost, that is salaries and supplements
and on costs which may include payroll tax, by and large the
Australian wage bill is now we are regarded as basically a very
competitive country and that is why so much investment from abroad is
coming here.
Q: Good morning. What I want to say is I'm on a disability pension and
after I pay my rent I am left about $ 95 a week to live on and I have to I 
go to a naturopath or physio and you have to pay full price for that.
Isn't there some way you could just do something for people on
disability pensions, so they can go to naturopaths or something like
that and get it cheaper?
PM: Naturopaths and some people in those fields, of course, are not
covered by Medicare and they are not deductible and you don't get the
per cent rebate or you don't get bulk billing so it becomes a cost.
As you know, this Government has introduced rent assistance for
people renting privately
Q: Yes, I get all that.
PM: I might add my opponents want to take it all away from me, of course.
They think it is all too much Government spending. That is code for
ripping that sort of stuff off people. I always wonder why they always
want to hurt the people at the bottom end of the queue, but they do.
Q: They were saying they want to bring in an inspection on cars over five
years old and things like that, it only hits people with no money.
PM: Anything that is a flat charge doesn't take account of capacity to pay.
That is why most of the things the Commonwealth does with Medicare
for instance, you don't pay a cent of the levy until you are over a
certain level of income in the odd $ 20,000, it is why we try to protect
those who are disabled or who are on age pensions with, for instance,
with the pharmaceutical discounts et cetera. But when State
governments levy charges like car registration fees and things they are
just flat costs. It costs the same to register a car whether you are a
millionaire or whether you are on a very low income.
CC: A fax has just come in and this is the other question that is around, the
republic. Everyone seems to have an opinion about that, it must be a
good topic because everyone thinks something about it. I would like to
ask you the question, which kind of republic do you consider the best
for Australia Austria, Spain, France, Portugal, Italy, Argentina,
Philippines or Irish republic or Canadian. I didn't know Canada was a
republic but it says here they changed their flag and cut the size of the
members of government, but kept their constitution in tact.
PM: We are now currently, Christopher, in our Cabinet discussing some of
the modalities of Australia moving to an Australian person as our head
of state. I think we would like to see that accomplished in a way which
doesn't fundamentally alter our current system of government.
CC: So, what difference would it actually make?
PM: Well, it gets back to the point I think you made earlier, that is we are
gathering about ourselves much more confidence about our identity
and who we are, pride in the fact that we can do things both culturally
and economically we have got a relationship now with these old and
large societies around us like Indonesia and China and turning up 
saying ' look, we know all these years you thought that we were just a
chip off the European block, but really we are here in our own right, but
excuse me, by the way, we are borrowing the monarchy of another
country, do you mind?'. They say ' come on, you can't be serious'. So I
think, in the end and, of course, the other thing is I notice last week
Prince Charles, while I was in Europe there was a report in the British
press that he is leading a trade delegation to Islam representing, he
said, he is going to spend more of his time promoting British business.
Not Australian business, British business. Not Commonwealth
business, Canadian business, Australian business British business.
This makes the point again. Basically, the Governor-Generalship is
the deputy's office of the Queen, it is out there on a sort of
constitutional limb, it is hurting us in this region and we are saying not
only that it is hurting us, it is actually diminishing our own sense of
ourselves.
CC: Wouldn't you have actually been offended if he had been promoting
Australia, wouldn't you in fact be saying that it is none of his business,
that we should be promoting ourselves, if in fact he had been..
PM: No, I don't mind him promoting Australia, but it just makes the point
that the Queen of Great Britain is essentially, her principal task is as
Monarch of that great country and that is fine because she is Queen of
Great Britain and she is their Queen just as I met the Dutch Queen in
The Netherlands. But the thing is she is not our Queen, she is not an
Australian. It is not an Australian monarchy.
CC: It is some kind of nostalgia or something if a lot of people feel very,
very connected to that and the passport and things, this latest bit I
think people find I don't know how many people have even looked at
their passport and seen the Queen mentioned in it, but the idea of
taking her out of it seems to have upset a lot of people.
PM: The thing is, let's keep on the substance and not the shadow. The
substance is whether an Australian person is our head of state,
whether we are grown up enough, enough about ourselves to have as
our head of state an Australian person. That is the key point. All the
other symbols, I think, are ancilary points.
Q: Good morning. My question is a social policy question and it is related
to principles of democracy and it is related to family law. Since 1975
we have had no thought? divorce in this country, but we have seen a
preponderance of court orders made in the preference for sole custody
and this is in the majority of cases for children with little relationship
with their fathers. We know that this is currently being debated in the
Senate or about to be, but I would ask the Prime Minister what his
position is on the value of families in Australian society and whether he
sees that replacing the Office of the Status of Women with an Office of
the Status of Family is a progressive step to make because I would
suggest that the Government runs the risk at the moment of
formulating social policies that have very much to do with the feminist
movement. 
PM: Cut that out, no. Just understand where we are coming from. I mean,
I mentioned on the program earlier we have had 590,000 jobs since
that last election and over two million since the Government came to
office. That is jobs inside Australian families. That is increasing the
income of families, in fact, household this is a very important number
this household disposable income, that is the disposable income in
an Australian household has risen by 40 per cent since the
Government has been in office. That is after you have washed the
inflation out of it, 40 per cent in real terms which is a staggering
statistic. Now, that is about binding Australian families together, a
priest I knew once said to me when poverty flips in, love flips out the
door and I have always thought this has a lot of truth to it. I think,
stability in family incomes and more employment in households are
one of the things which helps hold them together. That is why our
support for families goes to these things, our support for children. If
you look at the Family Allowance Supplement or the additional family
payments as it is now called, it is support for low to middle income
families with children and it goes per child. So, it is about binding it
together. But, you can't cavil at the change in the status of Australian
women. The role and status of Australian women today is nothing to
what it was 10 or 15 years ago and why shouldn't it be as it is now
improved when women were disenfranchised from getting jobs in the
workforce and interesting jobs and interesting lives. I mean, it was the
worst kind of discrimination and I don't think repairing that
discrimination means in some way disinforms the Australian
Government's family policy. Whether it is the Family Allowance or the
Family Allowance Supplement or the additional family payments or it is
the general support for greater participation in education amongst
children or it is employment in the household or it is Medicare, all
these things are supportive of Australian families. I have got my
opponents, John Howard is running around talking about his support
for families, but he doesn't support family support. He is for families,
but not family support. The Government is for family support. I think
that is the key point.
Let me just go to this point about fathers. I think it is terribly important
for a child to keep that linkage to a father if there is a separation or a
divorce. I think it is terribly important that that should happen. That
that balance in the relationship should be maintained. One can never
be judgemental about people and why they divorce and the fact that
they can't keep their lives together, there are a lot of people who think
of themselves and not their children too.
CC: Yes, grandparents..
PM: And I think people should think about it. There is quite a degree of
selfishness in society, well listen, I'll toddle off, I'll walk out and I'll do
this or I'll do that. Fine. But then the children are left behind and I
think that if there is a greater commitment to children and to families
and to actually working at marriages and holding them together, we
would be all better off I think. Some effort and some commitment, but I 
don't think governments can make that sort of a difference. I mean,
you can ask of things of the Government by all means, but don't ask
them to keep marriages together, don't ask them to keep peoples love
for one another together or their concern for their children or their
sense of responsibility to their children. That is something which is a
community thing.
a: Good morning. I would like to know and I do believe many others do, if
this golden hand shake and the gold passes given to ex-Prime
Ministers are subject to the same tax as what you, Christopher,
mentioned just recently regarding the three seamen risked their lives.
PM: Let me just say as far as I am concerned, I have long given up caring
about these issues years ago, but everything that I receive, that is
income, salary, allowances are all fully taxable. Now, there is a travel
benefit for parliamentarians and ex-parliamentarians, but it is there so
that people in positions such as my own can come to South Australia,
can learn about particular things, can meet parts of society, that we
are one country and it is a large country and if you rely upon the
private resources of MPs to move themselves around the country, well
obviously, they won't be moving very much. That is why that is there, it
is not as some sort of a freebie because when most parliamentarians
have been to Adelaide 20 times and Perth 20 times and Brisbane
times, they are not particularly travelling around for the sport of it.
They are doing it because there is a point to it. So, rest assured that
all income of parliamentarians and ministers and allowances are fully
taxed as everybody else is.
CC: A lot of people seem to find it distressing that ex-politicians seem to,
so often, even if by coincidence finish up in top overseas postings or
those kind of what people call ' cushy jobs'. Maybe they are very
difficult jobs and hard to fulfil, but people think they are cushy at least.
PM: I don't think they are cushy and if someone has given 25 or 26 years of
their life to public life or 20 years of their life, it is essentially a life
given, it is the major part of ones working life given to the service of
the public and they have lost the opportunity to continue a career in
business or in the law or in some profession or teaching or where ever
they come from. So because their specialisation is public policy,
public affairs, in some cases international relations, they become first
choices for some of these diplomatic appointments. But again, they
are very few, they are mostly career appointments within the foreign
service, mostly.
CC: Well, maybe there is something there or maybe it is just one of those
things that the media points out because none of us know anymore
than the media tells us, really, about anything. Including our health,
our future, anything and it is something that is definitely talked about a
lot and it is pointed out as though it was a problem. Why should you
finish up in Geneva if simply because you have done a job in the
government? If you had done a job for BHP you wouldn't necessarily
on retirement finish up in an overseas posting. 
PM: No, but you would also walk away with the golden handshake, you
would need the barrow out the front for.
C C million dollars.
PM: Walk away from the government, you don't do that. People are on
salaries and they remain on salaries, they have severed all their
working arrangements with the rest of society and really they do
develop skills which are very useful in representational posts.
CC: Well, what do you make of the things that the media does in fact pull
out to put on the front page because that is all we ever get to discuss
amongst ourselves is, in fact, what is put up there. Why doesn't the
Government somehow have more of a public access facility attached
the more people
PM: ( inaudible)..
CC: Yes, more people can talk more often to people like you.
PM: I think one of the things about the fibre optic cable and the enormous
opportunities of a digital fibre system is that it will be possible to get
stacks of information from the Government about government services,
about pensions, about benefits, about things the Prime Minister says,
things that are in the Prime Minister's record of things said in the past,
seeing what the Foreign Minister said in some place, you will be able
to punch it up on the screen, all of this is going to be available. And as
you said earlier, Christopher, there will be some dedicated channels
also for television and what have you where you don't have to switch in
and switch out of normal programming. This will make a difference,
but it is a sad fact of life that the quality of broadsheets are down the
bottom of the pecking order in world terms. You go abroad, you pick
up whether it is the UK papers or the International Herald Tribune or
any of the major internationals or the New York Times and you realise
then how poorly we are being served by our broadsheets. Now,
unless people travel they can't see that, but those of us who do travel
can see it and you say one of the problems is we are not getting
enough investment in human resources in the media, there is not
enough investment by proprietors in people, journalists and there is
not enough continuity or depth so it is all flim flam in the daily news,
what passes for comment pieces is just poor second rate opinion or if
you get in these closed markets like say South Australia has frankly
one paper The Advertiser. Western Australia one. Queenlsand
one. There is no choice.
CC: That is something people are concerned about as well and it is another
topic we could spend another hour on. But, the sorts of things that you
are saying about the newspapers are the kinds of things that people
are saying about Parliament and what goes in there too, is in fact that
the issues are sometimes completely obscured by the ping-pong. 
PM: By the ping-pong, that is right. That is why there is the difference
between Parliament and the Government. The Government runs 24
hours a day regardless of whether the House of Representatives is in
session or not. That is the serious work of running the business the
nation carries on and that is why those of us who have both the
responsibility and the burden and some of the job of doing that focus
on the issues of depth and substance. You go to Parliament so you
take the flim flam questions, but this is the value of what I was talking
about earlier, about radio. At least we can say these things. This
wouldn't be being said in Britain or the United States
CC: It certainly wouldn't be being said in some Asian countries either, we
would all be in gaol now.
PM: Or getting a reprimand anyway.
CC: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: It is a pleasure, I have enjoyed meeting you. Thank you very much
indeed.
ends 



IPRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ELIZABETH JACKSON, RADIO 2CN
23 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
EJ: Prime Minister, welcome back to 2CN.
PM: Good, Elizabeth. Glad to be here.
EJ: Now, I recall the memorable chat that you had with one of my
predecessors the last time you made an appearance on 2CN, but I
don't think time permits this morning to ask you about your pj's
perhaps we should go straight to the Saturday by-election. Now, John
Howard yesterday morning was talking about a 5 per cent by-election
swing to the Liberals are you expecting that it will be decided on
Green preferences?
PM: Well, I don't know. I mean, I never get too clever or prescriptive about
elections or by-elections. I always give the public the right to make
their own decisions about these things and to evaluate the Parties, but
by-elections always do give electors a chance to send signals of some
kind to the Government of the day and no doubt some opportunities
will be taken here.
EJ: So how important will the Green preferences, in particular, be do you
think?
PM: Well, I -think, this is a 50 -per -cent -plus 1 system it's a preferential
system. Therefore, the preferences add up and they matter, so all
preferences which flow to the Labor candidate, of course, matter.
EJ: Now, internal Party polling, I understand, indicates that for the first
time in 18 years, the result will go to preferences. The Party is in
some trouble isn't it, if in a traditional Labor town like Canberra, it's the
preferences that ultimately decide the outcome? 
PMV: Well, look, in the middle of Parliaments, and this is the middle of a
Parliament, I don't think any Government ever gets to the point where
it's travelling so well it can just tick up by-elections with ease. But in
the ACT, I think, we are entitled to have our candidate returned. I
mean, for a start, we've got a woman replacing Ros Kelly, who was a
member of the Cabinet. Sue Robinson is a Labor person who is in
touch with the community, she works with the community, she talks to
people, she's a representative person, she would behave like this as a
Member of Parliament, and if you look at the ACT, I mean, under this
Government, it's essentially not even a carbon copy of what it was in
the past. I mean, it's a stronger, much more privately oriented
economy than it's ever been in the past and, as you know, we have
always put a premium on the employment conditions of the people in
the public sector here in Canberra. And I think, perhaps, one of the
strongest things to say about the Government's stewardship of the
ACT is that, right at the moment, the ACT unemployment rate is 6.9
per cent it's the lowest of any of the States or Territories.
EJ: Prime Minister, let me ask you about Sue Robinson, seeing as you
have mentioned her. She has called now for a moratorium on
woodchipping. Do you support that?
PM: Well, I haven't seen exactly what she said. I mean, but if she is talking
about a moratorium....
EJ: She wants to see an end to the exporting of woodchips.
PM: I think her view and mine is basically the same. That is, we are saying
that we want to phase woodchipping out.
EJ: No, but she wants to stop it now.
PM: Well, what one wishes to stop now, I mean, I haven't seen her words,
but the policy of the Party is, and the policy of the Government is, that
we should phase woodchipping out. And you know that just in the
early part of the year I said we would cut by 20 per cent a year
woodchip volumes, which is the biggest single policy initiative that's
been made to actually reduce the volume of woodchips to virtually
nothing within five years, other than to see them used in some way
which adds value. I think the more important point is, and I think this is
where Sue and I are at a complete agreement, that is that we think
what the public wants is these important stands of trees to be
protected. That is, where there is heritage and old growth values.
EJ: But, Prime Minister, can I put it to you that she wants more than that.
She wants to stop the export of woodchips and she wants to stop the
logging of old growth and wilderness forests right now?
PM: Well, if that is her aspiration... 
EJ: Will she get it?
PM: Many Australians will share her view and she is entitled to argue that...
EJ: Will you give it to her though?
PM: in the councils of the Party and the Caucus. But if you are asking me
for an instant Cabinet decision, of course, you know I can't give you
one.
EJ: Prime Minister, the Greens say that this looks very much like a last
minute desperate ploy for Green preferences.
PM: Well, last year, before this matter became an issue, at this
Government's initiative, and let me say at mine, we reserved for the
nation forever Shoalwater Bay, Jervis Bay, and these are major areas
of the Australian east coast. You can compare them with any areas of
the US coast, or the European coast I mean these are huge areas,
important areas of the coast of Australia. And in the Budget of last
year, at my initiative, we put in $ 24 million to buy back the so-called
" hole in the heart" of the Daintree Rainforest. Now, this didn't take any
prodding from the Greens, as you call them, or anybody else. This
was done by the Government. Now, we had the support of the
Conservation Foundation on Shoalwater Bay, but what magnificent
changes that that wonderful thing at Jervis Bay has preserved forever.
The Shoalwater Bay, which has been in Defence hands for years, with
all of its pristine quality is kept. And we keep one of the most
important of the rainforests, certainly where it meets the sea, in the
Daintree without the subdivisions Joh Bjelke-Petersen put through it
ripping it apart. Now, this, I think, underlines the Government's
credentials in terms of the environment. What we have been having a
debate over is about the licence renewals for this year. But in the
context of that debate I've also made the huge change of saying, well
next year we'll be cutting the volumes by 20 per cent and then the
following year after that by 20 per cent. I mean, no other Prime
Minister has ever made those decisions.
EJ: Mr Keating, let me ask you about your now, I guess, infamous " so
what" remark. Now, a lot of people who talk to me and I think....
PM: Just hang on Elizabeth, I'm just having a cup of tea and a lamington
here.
EJ: Alright, well, I'll ask you this while you're having a munch.
PM: No, it's not lunch, it's afternoon tea.
EJ: A munch. 
PM: Morning tea.
EJ: I think Bob McMullan pointed to this on my program during the week,
you appeared to be very dismissive of the ACT election outcome.
PM: No, no, nothing to do with the ACT but dismissive of an argument that
said, in what was exclusively a set of issues in a campaign in an
election fought out on local issues, that we were to then read
immediately into it huge national implications. Of course I dismissed it.
EJ: But, Prime Minister, it was perceived here in Canberra through letters
to the Editor, through phone calls that we got, people took offence to
that. They said that you were incredibly arrogant in the way you did
that.
PM: It's not a matter of any arrogance. It's just that nobody should try and
ascribe to me or the Federal Government a whole lot of national
sentiment coming out of one local election. I mean, of its essence, it's
unreasonable, is it not?
EJ: Well, even Bob McMullan, when he spoke to me said, " look, you know,
had Paul Keating asked me for advice I probably would have told him I
don't think it's a good idea to say that" I mean it's the perception that
counts isn't it? And this is the perception that people have been
talking about for a long time now about you. They see you as being
arrogant. Do you think that's a problem? Are you arrogant?
PM: But I get the mail through, don't I? I mean, I got the Native Title Bill
through didn't I? I got the Land Fund Bill through didn't I? I mean,
look at John Howard. He was on your program yesterday talking over
the top of you, uittering away, jabbering away. What we saw from him
was a complete lack of leadership and a backflip over the Land Fund
Bill. We have now got his veiled threat that he will gut the Mabo Bill to
make it workable, as he puts it. He has shown no leadership over the
Racial Hatred legislation. There's that sordid affair with Mr McLachlan
where he was party with Mr McLachlan in misleading the House of
Representatives. McLachlan resigned but he wouldn't. And then the
disgraceful push-polling exercise in the ACT. I mean, that's his form
what's my form been?
EJ: So you just don't think you are arrogant?
PM: Well, don't confuse arrogance with pride in one's craft, or an urge to
see about getting things done. If I sat here and passed the parcel like
a lot of Liberal Prime Ministers in the past, not taken on Native Title,
not taken on the Land Fund, not taken on APEC, not taken on the
inflation rate, if I had said, look I won't go too hard here, I mean, I won't
take risks or show any urgency here, I'll make this very laid back so 
nobody will say of me, oh he's arrogant. I mean, he actually wants to
get something done. I mean, I think it's about time people understood
that pride in one's work and a sense of urgency about the nation's
progress and not dropping one's bundle is not arrogance.
EJ: Prime Minister, you spoke about push-polling and I would like to ask
you something else about that. Now, some commentators have
publicly stated their belief that by latching on to push-polling, you have
effectively sacrificed Sue Robinson in return for having a go at John
Howard's leadership abilities because, ultimately, inevitably, some of
the mud that was thrown at her will stick.
PM: I think that's a contorted piece of logic. To defend her name, and to
attack what was a most vicious tactic, that is spreading to 400 or 500
people at a time, severe defamations. If one doesn't rebuke that, what
does one do? I reject out of hand any notion that we sacrificed Sue
Robinson. I think that's your point and I don't think it's got any veracity
to it.
EJ: But you were very keen on turning the whole thing on to John Howard
weren't you, as an attack on his leadership?
PM: Well, we don't do those things. The Labor Party doesn't spread
defamations of people. And when the Coalition does while he wants to
parade himself around as Honest John, a decent guy and the rest, it is
completely valid for me to say: this is unAustralian, it's
unacceptable and you the Liberal Party shouldn't do it.
EJ: But, Mr Keating, I bet some people would accuse you of playing dirty
by making unsubstantiated claims about John Howard doing deals with
Kerry Packer. I mean isn't that casting aspersions on his integrity?
PM: But that is in the public marketplace. I make my claims right up front. I
mean, I'm not about getting some pollster to claim as true, because
that's what the polls said, the following statements are true, and then
list a series of defamations and then put them out to private people. I
mean, that's what Andrew Robb did and you notice Andrew Robb took
the responsibility. Howard had him up there over at the old Liberal
Party headquarters taking the rap to give Howard a clean bill of health.
But, of course, we caught up with him a week later, when he was at the
tactics committee, agree that Mr McLachlan should try and frame the
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs for photocopying and disseminating
information, which Mr Howard knew, was done by him.
EJ: Prime Minister, just briefly on another matter. The Liberal Senator for
South Australia, Nick Minchin, has issued a statement claiming that at
least 41 Australians have served prison sentences for failing to vote in
the 1993 election. Now, in his view this is offensive and undemocratic 
and an inevitable outcome of compulsory voting. Should we be locking
people up for failing to vote?
PM: I know nothing about it, and while you've got me on here Elizabeth,
stay on the main game. I mean, chasing madcap South Australian
Coalition Senators down every rabbit hole with every claim they make,
has got no interest to me.
EJ: But, I mean, Prime Minister, if 41 people have served gaol terms for
not voting, is that acceptable?
PM: I have no idea whether that's true none.
EJ: And you don't wish to comment any further presumably?
PM: No, I'd have to find out about it.
EJ: Alright. Can I finish up then by asking you about the Governor-
General. Now, I noticed you didn't like Sir David Smith's suggestion of
allowing the Parliament to elect what could be Australia's last
Governor-General, but you in fact want to advise the Queen on who it
should be. Who do you have in mind?
PM: Well, I'm not telling you.
EJJ: Go on.
PM: Go on?
EJ: No clues?
PM: Not any. But, I do like talking about my opponents though, and I've
still got a few minutes on them if you want to keep cracking.
EJ: Well, Bill hasn't been in touch with you has he seeking an extension
before he goes farming?
PM: No, the Governor-General is entirely proper about his future and I was
delighted that he was able to serve or extend his term and I was very
grateful on behalf of the country that he so did.
EJ: Prime Minister, just before I let you go, did you ever end up wearing
those silk pyjamas you were given on the Midday Show?
PM: I don't think so. I think the silk is a bit too cold on the old skin, isn't it?
In the ACT, I mean, you put the silk on it, and one thing about every
Canberra night, of course, you open that window and after the sun
comes down and the cool breeze comes in, which I always find a
delight, but I don't want a little dose of pneumonia out of it either. So, I 
keep rugged up in the Canberra winters, I can tell you. And in the
summer, well the summer is a bit different, but there we are. But you
know, let me say this, I've lived now in the ACT for 12 years and one of
the things of great pride to me is that the ACT, the national capital,
looks like the national capital, growing like the national capital.
EJ: You like the way it looks? Because you spoke of course about
architecture in Germany not so long ago. Do you think we've got it
right here?
PM: I think the work of the old NCDC and the successful bodies in the
interests of the Government and the community in the ACT has, I think,
made it a good place to live and it's had a lot of growth and a lot of
employment. Let me just take you back. When we are talking about a
by-election coming from a seat which was part of the election of 1993,
in that election, the Government was essentially re-elected to restart
growth and employment. And we've had, since the peak of
unemployment in the ACT, employment here has grown by 11,600. So
there's 11,600 people in work, or that's just under 8 per cent
employment growth in three years, which is a tremendous number. In
fact, in the last seven months, we've had 5,500 jobs in the ACT.
EJ: Didn't do Rosemary Follett much good though did it?
PM: But it was the Federal Government that made these changes. So,
when Mr Howard goes around saying we've had five minutes of
sunshine, let him go and tell that to the 11,500 who have got jobs. Let
him tell it to the 590,000 in the nation who have had jobs since the
election, or the 36 months of growth we've had since the recession
that's three years of growth with very low inflation. I mean, the one
thing the people of the ACT have got to know about the Liberals
they'll cut Canberra to ribbons. I mean, just yesterday, Mr Costello
was talking about, you know, Canberra and Canberra-bashing and
how much money is being spent, and the fact of the matter is, the
Liberals would rip Canberra to pieces. They would cut the Federal
appropriations to this part of the world. They would cut back in areas
which would be very meaningful to the community of the ACT. So that
per cent unemployment rate, you know, really corresponds with
just about the best performance around the world in OECD-type
countries.
EJ: And, Prime Minister, Ralph Willis then, you're saying, won't make
those cuts?
PM: Well, no, we will not rip the public sector to pieces as these people
propose to do, and particularly, show the contempt they had for the
ACT in Malcolm Fraser's day. I mean, you need to be around here a
while. This place was like a graveyard in the 1970s, under Malcolm
Fraser. You know the only building that was going when Fraser left 
8
office was Parliament House. The only one. There were no private
buildings. There were no private developments. There was no other
public development. There was just Parliament House. Now, you
compare that to the city we see today, and the capital we see today,
that's what's at risk in putting liberal Government Liberal MPs into
Parliament.
EJ: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thanks very much Elizabeth.
ends.
I 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE DANDENONG RAILWAY STATION,
FRIDAY, 24 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Distinguished colleagues and we have many of them here today Michael
Duffy, of course, well known to everybody here as the Member for Holt and
my colleague Gareth Evans, who before too much longer will be the Member
for Holt. I mean it's a good thing for Senators getting out and meeting
people, but he does it so well. And Rob Maclellan, Minister for Planning, Ian
Cathie and Mrs Cathie, and distinguished guests, and Members of Parliament
from both sides, and ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much for a very nice welcome and most particularly to
Worawa Aboriginal College. I met a group of Aboriginal people in Adelaide
yesterday and the one thing I think, you can say about Mabo or the Land
Fund, the Native Title and the rest of it, it has no doubt got us to the point
where if not in the past most Australian people think when they see an
Aboriginal dance group or Aboriginal people they say they are our people
our people. And it has made us one country and one nation, more than we've
ever been and thank you very much for that welcome.
But you get all sorts of welcomes. I had a pretty mixed welcome yesterday in
Adelaide. I was clutched and grabbed by admiring and devoted supporters in
one place and attacked in others. And then I had Tim Fischer, of course, Tim
was running around picking up the lines from some toffy little stringer for the
BBC, bagging our Parliament and I said, I thought about saying, fair crack of
the whip Tim, when it comes to the House of Commons, I mean, Tim still
thinks a fishnet is for catching yabbies, of course. But for the rest of us, we
now know and, of course, in our Parliament, we used to often wonder what a
three line whip was in the House of Commons well, we all know about that
these days. 
At any rate, thank you very much for the welcome today and for coming to
this, I think, very important event. Transport and intermodal transport is a key
to modern living, particularly as the motor vehicles and with the capacity for
the rail system to do new things and I was very interested in a couple of
things that Alan said, most particularly, his point I think about Dandenong
being, where once it was on the periphery of Melbourne, now being much
more part of the centre of what will be this development out at Pakenham and
Cranbourne and Berwick. And so we need here in Dandenong, and we see
just behind us the Australian Taxation Office which has seen the
decentralisation of the tax administration to the central place just as he made
the point about Parramatta being in a similar position in Sydney which has
these decentralised facilities, the Tax Office, the transport and what have
you. This is going to be the case here. Under the Better Cities Program of
the Commonwealth, it is a way of bringing and changing some of the gloom
about urban decay and how we make urban areas better. Now Alan Brown
said to me, this place, this railway was an armpit of a place. Now, that is very
descriptive, I'll use that one in the House, Alan. Can I have that one? And it
probably was because mostly I take my media etiquette from Jeff Kennett
these days, but I'll take some of the lines from you.
But, the station and the capacity to do this, I think, shows that we in the
Commonwealth believe that urban planning and urban problems or urban
decay can be overcome by dealing with the three tiers of government State
and local and to get something done which is good. To have a building like
this which will not only be functional and efficient, but which is light and bright
and airy and there are no dark corners where people could be molested and
we have got something like 25 television monitors around the building so that
it can be watched, there are people coming in and out of it all of the time.
I think urban renewal is critical to the happiness of most people. We talk
about it a lot in the Federal government because 85 per cent of Australians
live in cities and so to make life better for them is about making life more
comfortable, more pleasant and to live in areas which are more beautiful. So,
that is why the issues like the quality of life and peace of mind matter and it is
why my colleague, Brian Howe, has been steward of this program Better
Cities and why we have around the country and urban areas, such as
Dandenong, been able to move towards improvements in areas which are
getting beyond the capacity of State governments or local governments. So,
this interchange is, I think, going to be an important one for the regeneration
of transport in this area and it means that we can make public transport more
competitive, more efficient and more likely to be chosen as the mode of daily
movement than motor cars. Of course, with motor cars we are continuing to
destroy a lot of urban areas with arterial roads and we all know the better the
road the more cars that move on them. So, this is an important thing to be
doing. I must make a few remarks now about the design of this station and just thank
the community for being part of the extensive public consultations about it
and to the architects Hassall Pty Ltd/ Forbes Fitzharding and the structural 
engineers Ove Arup and Partners. They have done a great job marrying
together function and technology into producing a new and important place
for Dandenong.
This is a model of co-operation in what can be done with the State and
Commonwealth governments together with local government as well and
what we see as a consequence is in a very key part of the city of Melbourne,
in this area of great growth, in this hub of Dandenong, we see this capacity to
do something good. And, now with the recovery in full swing, with the job
growth coming through strongly, with again where Dandenong has suffered
quite substantially in terms of unemployment, we are starting to see that
improve and see new businesses starting again and we can make some of
these key centres core centres in our capital cities as is happening here with
the Taxation Office, other state and commonwealth facilities in Dandenong
and with this intermodal change to make it easier to go from rail to road to
bus et cetera.
So, can I thank lan Cathie and Alan Brown and Michael Duffy who has been
involved with this project from the beginning and to those other members of
the community who have been involved with it, this is quite a great and a
good thing to be doing together in the city of Melbourne, in the city of
Dandenong where I am very pleased to be on this very happy occasion. It is
my pleasure now to join with Alan in unveiling this plaque.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBSERRAo 26 MARCH 1995
PM. I just thought I would give you a few words on the election and take a
couple of questions. It was obvious the election in the ACT was a
disappointing result for the Government. I think that the community
has wanted to give the Government a message that it wants to be clear
that it's considering its concerns and worrying about its needs I think
that message is well and truly recieved. The important thing is for
people to understand, though they may feel that the Government has
not been closely focussing on their basic needs, it will be important for
the Government to communicate that it has been, that it is no accident
that we have a strong growth, high employment economy out there, but
we are in this sort of twilight land debate as if it is not happening. It is
happening, the Government is now sitting down to do its Budget, and it
will do a serious job as it has done on all the other Budgets before.
And the aim of that will be to preserve the recovery. There has been
this line that we have had 5 minutes of sunshine we have had 36
months of growth. Three years of growth, and over half a million jobs.
And glib poll lines sent out to people reinforcing their fears is unfair,
and I think one of the important things to say to Australians is the
recovery, the chances of recovery being entirely sustainable, are high,
and the Government will be doing things in the Budget to maintain that
sustainability. But, the public want the Government to do better, in
terms of these economic and fundamental things, and better we will
do. Now, can I just say though, I think the poll does not reflect well on John
Howard to be associated with this sort of push-polling technique, and
Michael Baume running around releasing peoples' tax returns is an un-
Australian way to behave. And, can I just make this other point:-when
there is a real election on as there was in NSW that goes down to
the wire on the big issues, the Green vote has been important. There
has been a perception that the Government hasn't had control of this
forestry debate ' though I think about 60% of green preferences will
come back to the Government. I just make these two points about the
Greens one, we will be, over five years, phasing out woodchips, and 
TEL: 19 No .0I03 P. 02/ 04
2
two, doing everything to protect native forests. But, they should
understand that John Howard has just nominated as his Shadow
Minister somebody who does not believe in International Treaties, so
the Gordon below Franklin would have been flooded, there would have
been no reserves in the wilderness areas of North Queensland, and
the things that they hold dear would not be satisfied under those sorts
of policies. But, it is important, not just for the Labor Party but for the
nation, to get these Green issues right because global warming is here
with us whether we like it or not, this will be an important international
issue from here on in, and we have a unique opportunity here to
preserve our Australian environment, and I want to do that.
Can I just say about NSW, I think that Bob Carr has done
tremendously well in NSW. He has got a better than even chance of
forming a Government, and I will be looking forw~ ard to doing as much
as I can with him and his colleagues.
J: Prime Minister, there may have been 36 months of recovery, but the
people of Canberra seem to be mighty ungrateful do you think that
says something about the fundamentals of economic policy, or simply
your ability to get the message out?
P M; We have gone.... the facts are that the economy is growing at around
and there was the largest fall in unemployment last year than any
year on record. We have got 600,000 jobs that was the principle
matter the Government gave commitments on in the election on that
we have delivered, in very full measure. Now, interest rates have
basically spooked people, they think that in some way we are heading
for the sort of 1980s interest rate changes we are not. We are not.
What we are heading for is the sustainable economic recovery. And
the doomsayers who have switched straight off jobs and
unemployment, straight onto interest rates and the current account,
have got to be held accountable for at least misleading the public
about the value and quality of the recovery we have had. Now, you
have got to remember this about the ACT, too there has just been a
local election here, there has been a substantial swing against the
Labor Party here, the property market here is flat they are a bit out of
sorts. There is a bit of that in it, but whether it is or not, the message is
clear there In the ACT election, and I am taking that message on
board.
J: Do you take any personal resposibility for this, given that....
PM: I am the Prime Minister, and what Prime Ministers do is they take
responsibility for things, and I take it for any loss we suffer. I hope to
be also taking it for the next election when we win.
J: Graham Richardson said you have got to take a big mea culpa on this
election? 
TEL: 26. Mar. 95 15: 19 No. UU
3
PM: f-Laurie Oakes addressing Graham as Mr Richardson, as a paid
employee and a surrogate I mean he had the Federal Secretary of
the Labor Party on there, but a paid employee of Mr Packer trying to
represent himself as the Labor Party sorry, he had the Federal
Secretary of the Liberal Party and a paid employee of Mr Packer trying
to represent himself as the Labor Party I mean, a lot of credibility
went down he drain this morning on that performance.
J* ( inaudible)...
PM: Look, Graham has taken his thirty pieces of silver let him have them,
but don't give advice to me.
J Do you think the message, though, in the Canberra
election... ( inaudible) about your personal style, Mr Keating do you
think there are any lessons you should take from that?
PM-I think % A/ P 211 tgko loccon~ c 00IAo go through public life and Iifc'a
experiences, but remember this look at the social changes of the last
few weeks: seven-zero on the Native Title, Mabo, the Land Fund.
They are great social and cultural victories for this country. We are
now putting together a Budget, and the Budget will be a good Budget,
but as always a well thought out Budget. And it is these matters of
substance in the last year since the election we have had APEC
threading together the Pacific Rim these are the matters of substance
and the extent that style and the way the Government is working
affects the perceptions of the substance, that is an important matter for
us.
J: There is a line now coming out of NSW that you personally your
image cost the Labor Party 2-3% of the vote?
PMV; We have got a majority of Federal Seats in NSW, and I just say this
about NSW the view being taken that the the problem that the NSW
Labor Party had with Mr Fahey's incumbency, Mr Fahey was
expropriating the growth and jobs delivered to him by this Federal
Labor Government. But, by the Federal Labor Party not being
involved in the campaign, it meant that Mr Fahey was able to claim
that, and in being able to claim it, I think, that's the difference in the
campaign.
J: ( inaudible)... change your style of leadership, Mr Keating?
PMV. I have never sought to be an outrageously popular Prime Minister, but
I have sought to be a very good Prime Minister. I have sought to do,
and push through, all the policy changes that people lushed out on in
the last 30 years. The people that passed the parcel in Federal
politics on opening the country up, of giving us an identity of our own,
of giving us a place in Asia, of making us an innovative, high-tech,
educated society they are the issues that are important. And, I will go 3 P. 03/ 04! 
4
for the substance rather than the shadow every day of the week when
it comes to those things.
J: With the Budget, are you going to reconsider the Government's
general frame of the Budget now to put more emphasis on
the... .( inaudible)
PM: The Government has a mature process running on the Budget, it has
from the start, and we are still in the Budget round now. And, all this I
think will confirm our view that we have got to do an exemplary job of
it, as I hope we have done in the past. One more question.
J Do you think Federal Labor should have taken a greater role in the
NSW campaign?
PM. When you are fighting an incumbent Government, you have got the
problem of incumbency. The incumbency in this case attached to it
was jobs and growth that was delivered by the Labor Party not the
divisible Labor Party, the one Labor Party. So, a campaign that ends
up being essentially a marginal strategy, suffers from one fact and
that is, you can't claw that basic commitment of the public of
understanding that the growth and jobs in NSW came from Labor.
There is not one major private sector project in NSW that the Fahey
Government can lay claim to the only thing it can lay claim to are
railways, or public sector construction jobs there is not one major
private project in NSW. The growth that is there the growth that is
coming through the general economy, and the employment is coming
off the policies not of the Fahey Government, but of this Government.
I though that was an important point.
ends.
I 



K' 2
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT PRESENTATION OF A REPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT ON
NATIVE TITLE SOCIAL JUSTICE MEASURES ' RECOGNITION, RIGHTS
AND REFORM", MURAL HALL, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 27 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
One of the things that very greatly pleases me about receiving this is not so
much for every detail that is written here, but for the fact that we are seeing
the public manifestation of the esteem that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people hold for themselves, have always held for themselves, but
which in other times when that sense of justice and sense of decency in the
country has not focussed on their concerns such a report like this would
never have appeared.
It is a great pleasure to me that Lois O'Donoghue is presenting it to me as
head of the government because in this modern world today and as in any
complex society, leadership is always everything and in the complex
discussion over the High Court decision, it was Lois O'Donoghue who
showed that leadership in pulling together that group of people who
negotiated with the Government. I remember saying to her in one of these
early meetings that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community must
learn to negotiate. In saying that I was saying they must regard themselves
as a force of such power that they are capable of negotiating and
understanding what negotiation means. It means understanding what your
core interests are and what is not in your core interest and that which you can
see in the other persons point of view and trade away to come to a
negotiated settlement or arrangement which reflects the broad interests and
doesn't compromise the specific interest.
That leadership has, I think, been reflected in the peak Aboriginal and
Islander bodies and as a consequence we, together, wrote a very effective
Bill with Native Title. It was a great victory for the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people and for social democracy in this country when the High Court
held its validity seven judges to nothing a couple of weeks ago. And then
on its heels, of course, we bailed up the Opposition with their manipulative
approach in the Senate to try to destroy the integrity of the Land Fund Bill
and despite the Leader of the Opposition's cockiness when faced with the 
prospect of an early poll he caved in and passed it. So, we got the double of
the century in a week. Seven to zero on native title and the Land Fund Bill.
These are things which, I think, have made a great difference to the ambient
climate out there in the community. I said here a week ago when Pat Dodson
was presenting the Report of the Aboriginal Reconciliation Council that I think
Mabo and the land fund, that the passage of Mabo has made Australians feel
good about themselves. They know a right thing has been done. A just thing
has been done and it has reduced racism. It has reduced racism. I think now
that the wind behind the sails of the reconciliation council is part of that wind
and it is the old thing: one good act begets, one good influence begets
another. And, we are seeing with now a lot of horse power and much pride
the presentation of that Report and similarly here today with this Report
' Recognition, Rights and Reforms A Report to the Government on Native
Title Social Justice Measures'.
These were proposed when it was agreed amongst us, the Government and
those Aboriginal people who we were negotiating with over Mabo, to say ' well
look, these things shouldn't come down from on high, they shouldn't simply
come from a group of representatives, but rather come from a broad basis of
consultation.' I think ATSIC and the Aboriginal Reconciliation Council have
gone out and done those things and ATSIC has certainly done it here by
consulting with Aboriginal people around the country. The result is this and I
promise you this Lois that the Government will consider it, we will look
through it, we will follow the threads of the policy we have been following
which says that Australia will never be one nation while ever the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people are one apart from the rest of us.
That is our policy and the things that fall within that, that we can get support
for and that we can do we will do. If there is more in this than we can digest
we will certainly be digesting that which we can and every bit will make
progress along the way.
Now, Lois said something important which shouldn't go above peoples heads
and, I think, in a sense I tried to repeat that a week ago, the same thought.
That is, what we are talking about here, about support for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, is rights not welfare and this is about rights.
Social justice is about rights as well as it is about specific things. We are
now talking about these intractable problems of health and housing and what
we need is specific effective action. A week or so ago with Pat Dodson here I
talked about some of the things we could do to be effective and when we get
progress we get the snow ball affect. Just as we did with Mabo, we will get it
with the other things and we do, as you say Lois, need to bring the States in
and we need to bring local government in because the Commonwealth,
through ATSIC, can't solve all the problems of the environmental situation
with Aboriginal communities or environmental health, we can do things about
direct health. I think the main thing is to get the generation of Aboriginal
people out of the mind set. That some how it's welfare: it is a right, but we
need to do it effectively and we need to do it together. 
One of the lessons that came to me from the Cape York Health Council and
my visit to Hopevale was that there, the community on the Cape, have
regarded a commitment repairing the problem of health as needing a
commitment by them to participate in the policies. Not just something that
comes from outside, but something they are part of and without them being
part of it, just the same with the non-Aboriginal community in this country,
there is no way that their health can be attended to unless they are part of the
solution and I think they need to be there as well.
So, I want to guarantee that the next generations of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people are not victims and are not treated as victims, that
rather they are there to see this change, this shift in moral and to see that
many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people assert their culture and
their rights and their standings and determine not to be victims and to get out
there and play a role in this community. I think that is happening and this is
what this is about.
I noticed in today's press, of course, with the by-election result in the ACT
and elsewhere we have got all the pundits giving us the value of their views.
One of the views I notice from one of them today is that Mabo and Aboriginal
rights is a distraction. The republic is a distraction. Our identity is a
distraction. It is really down to the grind stone in the mortgage and nothing
else. Well, the person who wrote this, just as an example, I said to this
person after the 1993 election ' how did you get it so wrong, how couldn't you
pick the trends?' And the result was ' oh, that is what Hoggie told us. That's
what Hoggie said to us.' Not that we are paid to think and to absorb the
culture and to write, but no, like Mr Midnight, that is what Hoggie dropped in
their ears. That Labor had no chance of winning and that the pundits should
be clever and write us off.
Now, one of them is today saying ' look, the Prime Minster's obsessions with
the interests of Aboriginal and Islander people is a distraction'. They couldn't
be more wrong, couldn't be further from the truth. That couldn't be further
from the truth than that view because unless Australia understands that it
succeeds as a society that is its economy and its community go together as
a society unless all that happens together then there is little prospect of us
reaping the economic rewards that bind all this together and getting those
social commitments we need, whether it be from the broad workforce or from
the Aboriginal community or where ever.
So, let's say this. Three years ago, I think I am probably right in saying this
Lois, we wouldn't have seen this Report. While the esteem was there always
with the indigenous community about themselves and their indignation was
there we wouldn't have seen this Report. It has come because the
community has basically decided that these wrongs are going to be set right
and these historic wrongs are going to be set right, to the extend that we can
ever set them right, but at least acknowledge that the wrongs have taken
place and seek to set them right. And, to follow the land change through
which is, as you say, central to the future of indigenous people, with this
Report which goes beyond that to look at a broader articulation of rights. I 
4
think that is what this means. That is what the Report which Pat Dodson
presented to the Government means. It is what I think the Australian
community means and it does feel better about itself and it does meet the
notion of multi-culturalism in its broader sense have more meaning when the
nation, as a society, decides that our indigenes will be taken to its heart
forever. That is what the Report means and that is why I am so delighted to
receive it.
ends 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF PRESIDENT VACLAV HAVEL OF THE
CZECH REPUBLIC, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 28 MARCH 1995
It is a great pleasure to welcome you here to Australia as the President of the
Czech Republic.
And it is a double pleasure to welcome you here in your own right.
In other words, for who you are as well as who you represent.
You are, of course, a very well known figure in Australia, as the public
interest in your visit here shows.
Because, despite our very different history and geography, Australians have
long watched with sympathy and concern the struggle of the Czech people
against the terrible varieties of repression which have afflicted Europe this
century. And in recent years we have watched with admiration as you and your
colleagues fought a tyrannical system, with great personal courage, without
moral compromise.
And we rejoiced when finally, remarkably, in one of the happiest events of the
century, you brought that system tumbling down in the ' velvet revolution'.
The critical act for any Government or people is the act of imagining.
That has been one of your great contributions to your people, even at times
when what you were imagining must have seemed unattainable.
Yesterday, I received from the distinguished Australian novelist and poet
Rodney Hall these remarks.
' Vaclav Havel has contributed greatly to world literature. 
Through his plays he speaks out courageously, with warmth, tolerance and
good humour. They take us straight to the heart of the matter and involve us
in the middle of situations we feel we already know to be the truth yet this is
the truth shown in a totally new light.
He gives us chunks of life, cut from their context with a scalpel, and set up in
the limelight as a medical sample might be put under the microscope. It is
art at the threshold of being the very life it reflects.
Vaclav Havel can be funny and tragic in the same breath ( this is a rare and
enviable talent) revealing a comic side to the tyranny of closed minds. As his
audience, we come out of the theatre energized, convinced that we can do
something about society and the way we are, which is a mark of exceptional
quality." Mr President,
Your essays, lectures, letters, and other writings are among the most vivid,
sustained and searching explorations of moral and political responsibility
produced anywhere in the world.
At the heart of what you have written is your belief, as you have said, that
' Society can be enriched and cultivated only through self-knowledge, and the
main instrument of society's self-knowledge is its culture.'
This truth is just as relevant to Australia in our different hemisphere, and
with our different history as to Europe, as we address the task here of
creating a tolerant, diverse, inclusive society open to the world, but true to
our sense of ourselves.
Central to this has been the issue of righting the dispossession of Australia's
indigenous inhabitants.
You are, I am told, the first state visitor from Europe ever to ask for an official
program which includes the culture of Aboriginal Australians. That is a matter
of pride and pleasure for us.
Throughout your life, moral and intellectual accomplishments have been
fused with a deep understanding of and concern for the lives and welfare of
ordinary people.
If I may say so, these are just the sort of qualities a President should have.
Professor Robert Manne told the readers of the Melbourne Age last week that
Czechs ' will eventually count as a singular blessing that their first President
after the stale nightmare of communism, was a man of tolerance, taste,
humour, curiosity, courage and honour'. 
I am sure this view is shared by all Australians who have met you.
Mr President,
The timing of this visit to Australia could not be better.
It was inevitable that the uncertainty which followed the 1989 revolution in
Czechoslovakia would lead initially to a decline in our trade and commercial
relations as old patterns changed.
But that same event has created the strong base from which we can build a
much closer relationship.
Already our trade and investment links are growing.
Australian businesses such as Brambles, Coca Cola Amatil, ADI,
Pioneer Concrete, Bowral, Mincon and Blackhill Minerals are trying to build
their operations in the Czech Republic.
There is no doubt we can be doing more together.
I made the point to European and Australian business people during a recent
visit to Germany and the Netherlands that Australia's closer engagement with
Asia, which has been at the core of this Governments approach to foreign
policy, is not something we pursue at the expense of good relations with
Europe.
On the contrary, we are convinced that the more directly and fully involved
Australia is with the countries of our own region, the more relevant, the more
productive, our links with Europe will be.
And beyond the commercial and economic relationship, I know there are
opportunities for Australia and the Czech Republic to develop closer ties in
cultural and social areas
Australia has benefited enormously from our association with the Czech
people. Directly, of course, from the thousands of Czechs who have made Australia
their home and who have made such a valuable contribution to our national
life to our manufacturing and mining industries in particular, to the
professions.
And to the arts. A Czech, Eduard Boravansky, was the father of the
Australian ballet; Rudy Koman was almost as seminal a figure as a patron of
Australian contemporary art; Czech musicians have been made a
disproportionately large contribution to Australian music. 
4
But we have also benefited indirectly from what the Czech people have given
the world from your musicians like Dvorak, Janacek, Smetana; and writers
like Hasek, Kundera and Havel.
Mr President,
You have paid us a great tribute by coming to Australia, and by your interest
in our country and our culture.
I hope that over these few days you, Mrs Havlova and your party can take
from Australia experiences which will live with you, as your words and
experiences and those of the Czech people live with us.
ENDS 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AND HIS EXCELLENCY, MR VACLAV HAVEL, PRESIDENT OF THE
CZECH REPUBLIC, JOINT DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, 28 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Can I begin by saying how pleased I am to see His Excellency, the
President, here in Australia. He does us a singular honour in coming.
He's the first Head of State of the Republic to visit this country and,
that is, way back through this century, and he, as I said, does us a
singular honour. We've had the opportunity to speak today but I could
not let this opportunity pass without paying tribute to the great moral
courage that he has displayed in years past in his indignation at the
denial of rights and liberties and his courage in fighting for them and
speaking out, and now his role in trying to pilot with others the Czech
Republic's future in the modern world. We salute you for your role in
the past, and now, and we wish you well. Can I say also that I was
very chuffed that the President stopped into Darwin and visited
Kakadu and took an interest in Australia's oldest archaeology the
rock carvings and paintings of our indigenes. In saluting them, you
salute us. That was very kind of you, and in that way, you have seen
more of Australia than perhaps any other Head of State. We did have
the opportunity to discuss economic and social policy matters, both
within our countries and between our countries, and within Europe and
between Europe and the Asia-Pacific, and I think it was a, for my part,
a very useful exchange of views and I hope that the President enjoyed
it also. I might now invite him to make some introductory comments.
VH: First of all, I thanked Prime Minister Keating for this opportunity for me
to visit Australia and I expressed my gratitude for the warm welcome
given to me and for the excellent organisation of my visit. During our
talks I informed the Prime Minister of the situation in the Czech
Republic. I mentioned our economic reform as well as the
opportunities that we see for intensifying our co-operation with
Australia. We also discussed the situation in the present day world
and in that respect, we fully agree that in a world covered by one
global civilisation, no isolation is imaginable any more. And just as the 
APEC nations are interested in the developments in Europe, we for our
part, take an interest in what is happening in this region. The Prime
Minister has raised the subject of the European situation and we have
discussed the European integration processes and the role that
individual countries are playing in that, and he has expressed his hope
and his support for the Czech Republic and other central European
nations to be admitted soon into the family of European democracies.
Let me also stress how profoundly I appreciate the multicultural
dimension marking the Australian policy at present. As Prime Minister
Keating explained to me, this dimension grows out of what I perceived
as the most important thing it grows out of respect for the human
individual, for the individual human being and his human rights.
PM: Well, I think we might open briefly the questions because as you may
know, the President and I have a luncheon appointment with other
people which is really about now, so, maybe we should have just a
short question period.
J: have you discussed also confirmation of Australia into a republic
and possible role of President Havel..
PM: No, I didn't, but I take the opportunity in your question to note that in
His Excellency, he more than adequately represents his country as
Head of State, and it's my great wish that an Australian person should
also too represent their country as Head of State, and not the monarch
of another country.
J: I noticed in a very short time you moved from being a intellectual for
head of your country who has dedicated himself to giving the
Government back to the people, how difficult has that task proved?
VH: It's true that unlike most of the best of politicians, I came to politics
virtually overnight. I was just thrown into the river and had to start
swimming. It was a tremendous, interesting experience.
PM: Maybe it's the best way.
J: ( inaudible) eastern Europe.... Czech Republic?
PM: The economic links? Well, I think, I mean, your country has always
had a deep democratic tradition a latent, deep democratic tradition
that the best foundation stones for any bilateral relationship for this
country. Secondly, in the past you have been a fully developed
country. You are heading back to that status now. We've got a
number of our major companies investing in the Czech Republic. I
would like to see more but I think the Czech Republic's full
membership, if you like, of the European Community will give it its best
opportunity to not only trade with Australia and with Asia, but also with
Europe. So, we regard it as a very obvious country for us to do 
business with in eastern Europe and I think the investments we have
on the ground now demonstrate that point.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: Well, I think that he regards he made the point himself about the
dignity of every human person, about the rights of people. He's
indicated his interest in our older society our indigenes. These are
all common threads, I think, between the policies that this Government
pursues and I know that in this country, some commentators would like
the Government to keep its nose to the, sort of, mortgage grindstone,
forgetting all of these great things that President Havel has himself
stood for when it comes to the interests of people and the important
interests of culture and identity. I think that might probably be the end
of it, thank you. We would like to make this press conference longer
than perhaps we are able to make it, but could I take this opportunity
to thank the President most sincerely for participating and thank you,
and no doubt he will see you tomorrow at the Press Club. Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL BARBER, RADIO 3AW, 28 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PB: Prime Minister, good afternoon.
PM: How are you, Paul?
PB: I'm okay, thanks, but you're a man under siege at the moment.
PM: Oh well, that happens to Prime Ministers from time to time it's an
occupational hazard.
PB: You can wear it?
PM: Well, I have in the past.
PB: Can you understand why people call you arrogant and unwilling to
listen?
PM: Well, I mean, let's not mistake what people mean. If it's arrogant to
have pride in what you're doing and want to get the things done, then
that's a label I suppose I have to wear. But, I mean, I've been here for
26 years and I've seen a succession of Prime Ministers pass the parcel
on all the big hard issues of Australia, that is, opening it up, making it
competitive, reducing a contestable economy inside a country,
breaking the back of decade-long inflation.
PB: So, what, you're determined to be better than any of the other previous
Prime Ministers?
PM: Well, I'm determined at least when it's all over, whenever that is for
me, to say that I never shirked the big ones.
PB: Are you the best Prime Minister in your 26 years? 
PM: Well, just get this point about arrogance, I mean, there are other
people here who, I mean, my argument is, I suppose, don't mistake
pride in one's craft and getting things done. I mean, you look at the
last couple of weeks. There's the Native Title Act seven votes to
zero, seven Judges to zero on the High Court. There's the Land Fund
Bill passed. There's 91,000 job growth last month. I mean, the
economy is growing at 5 per cent and we've had just on 4 per cent
employment growth. I mean, they're real, I mean, you understand,
they're real things and to get the real things done, if you throw the
fights up here or be soppy, let everybody tread all over you in the
system, then the Australian public lose out.
PB: Yes, but with respect, I mean, what is more important this is what the
critics are saying Mabo and the Republic, or a fragile economy and
interest rates? It appears to be interest rates is the thing....
PM: No, but it's not fragile. Understand this I mean, the economy, if
anything, has been too strong. I mean, that's why the interest rates
were increased in November and December because the economy
was running too strongly.
PB: Except you're being forced to bring in a tough Budget next month?
PM: But, what would you rather be handling? A strong economy with low
inflation or the thing that I was handling back in 1991/ 92 of a recession
and trying to get out of it? I mean, we're growing faster than any other
country in the world with low inflation and we've got a couple of
problems. But I would rather be attending to problems in the context of
high growth. I mean, the Government was rehired and
recommissioned in 1993 to start growth and employment. I mean, you
give me that, that the main thing in the election was employment, was
it not? Well, here we are, we are now at 590,000 jobs since the
election. We are 90,000 jobs passed the Government's 500,000 target
which we achieved in two years, not three. You know, I think, we've
had this dreadful sort of debate running the sky's going to fall in,
interest rates have risen, we're all ruined, it's all over where in fact,
you know, I walked around western Europe a couple of weeks ago as
the only head of government in the western world able to say that
we're growing at 5 per cent with 2 per cent inflation.
PB: But you told them how to improve their architecture.
PM: No, I didn't that's again another bit of urban myth.
PB: You told them how to improve their economy?
PM: No, no.
PB: Signs of arrogance? 
PM: No, you get asked, you get asked. I mean, if you go to Europe where
the rates of growth are 2 per cent and the employment growth is threequarters,
I mean, are there no things Australians are proud of? I
mean, do you really think, Paul, we ought to have the cultural cringe to
the point where European growth is 2 per cent and employment growth
is about three-quarters of a per cent, and we've got 5 per cent growth
and 4 per cent employment growth and you should shut up about it?
Oh, I won't mention that, oh no, I'm not going to tell you we're growing
well. No, no, I will definitely not tell you we've got 4 per cent
employment growth because it might look like that we're telling you
how to run your affairs you get asked.
PB: Well, this comment today you made about you didn't want to be locked
into a mortgage grindstone. Well, you mightn't want to be, but I mean,
millions of Australians, they haven't got any choice.
PM: No, but understand what I said. I said, my opponents believe that they
can reduce the whole national debate of Australia down to simply a
discussion only about interest rates. In other words, Australia's place
in the world, APEC Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation opening up
markets in this part of the world, changing training and retraining in
Australia through Working Nation, getting the arts into the high-tech
end of multimedia, or the Republic, or Mabo, or any of these things
should all go out the window and the only discussion we should have
should be about interest rates despite the fact that we've had the
largest fall in unemployment in any one year in our history last year.
PB: But isn't that the message from the massive rejection you got in the
Canberra by-election? I mean, what lesson is to be learnt?
PM: Well, I don't know that that's the sole message. Well, the Canberra
by-election was a complex election. I mean, we had a 10 percentage
point shift from the Labor Party to the Liberal Party in the ACT
Assembly elections. Now, part of that is to do with the fact that
Canberra used to be funded Federally, and generously funded, and
when the ACT moved to Statehood funding under the Grants
Commission, it's now had three or four years of very large reductions
in Commonwealth payments to the ACT. The local community hate the
sight of the Assembly up here, and I think Rosemary Follett unfairly
carried that burden. Now, that's obviously....
PB: Did you have the wrong candidate as well?
PM: That obviously switched across to the Federal by-election as well as
the, what you may call, national influences which were there, which I
accept were there.
PB: But you see, you've just called those voters, today, Canberra fat cats. 
PM: Who did?
PB: You.
PM: When?
PB: This afternoon. I did not at all. Where did you get that from?
PB: I was told that after the reception for Mr Havel that you described them
as fat cats.
PM: Well, you are quite wrong about that.
PB: Well, I apologise if I'm wrong ( inaudible)
PM: I mean, this is the thing, I mean, we've got this sort of low-grade media
debate which runs on scuttlebutt and nonsense. I mean, you know,
you're talking to a Government here who's doing things in social terms
employment and growth. Look, you know the Liberals couldn't beat
inflation. Ten years we had double digit inflation. You know, that was
one of the nasty jobs that was left to me. That's why we've got now
comparatively low interest rates. You've still got interest rates around
9-10 per cent out there in the commercial world.
PB: It's not just the media, I mean, take Graham Richardson. I mean, has
he really become a Judas? You described him as taking the 30 pieces
of silver has he really become a Judas?
PM: Well, Graham can't represent himself as a Labor person giving Labor
comment when he is being paid to represent a network.
PB: Has he ratted on the Party though?
PM: Well, look, that's for other people to make a judgement about.
PB: Oh, what, you can make that judgement?
PM: Well, yes I can. But I'm not making it for you.
PB: Why not?
PM: Because it doesn't suit me to.
PB: He hasn't ratted on you?
PM: Just go on to other things. Look, I can talk about any number of
commentators I could move through half the Press Gallery if you
wanted me to. 
PB: And what? ( inaudibie)
PM: Well, there's just no product in it. I mean, there's no product. We're in
the middle of this sort of debate which is seeking to deny the
undeniable, and that is, that Australia's economy has been, if anything,
too strong and that the Government has taken the right action at the
right time to slow it down. As I said a couple of weeks ago, those
interest rate rises have been done to protect people's jobs in the
longer run the guarantee that there's a recovery that goes on right
through the 1990s.
PB: Alright, well, Prime Minister, Caucus today, what was it like going into
the lion's den? They're pretty ( inaudible)
PM: Well, it wasn't a lion's den at all. That's another bit of hype and
nonsense, you see. It wasn't a lion's den.
PB: Did they all get up and applaud you when you walked in?
PM: No, they were fine. They were like they were every other meeting and
I gave them my thought, I addressed the issues of the week, and the
issues of this week include the by-election loss, and I addressed them
I thought directly and frankly.
PB: You've got this Sylvia Smith from Bass threatening to resign because
( inaudible)
PM: Well, there's always some comment. You get a Caucus of nearly a
hundred people, you are always going to get someone say something.
PB: Well, have you hosed her down?
PM: No.
PB: What if she resigns?
PM: She's not resigning, I mean, where did you get that nonsense from? I
mean, do you just think this stuff up, Paul? Do you work at it or does it
just come naturally? I mean, you know, do you sit up there, I mean,
what do they put in your coffee, down there?
PB: I'm drinking water here at the moment, actually.
PM: You've obviously got a mickey finn in the coffee.
PB: I'm not dreaming this stuff up. You know that she is threatening to
resign over ( inaudible)
I 
PM: She's not threatening to resign at all. She passed a critical comment,
but so what? She's entitled to have her view.
PB: What lessons have you learnt then from NSW and from Canberra on
Saturday?
PM: Well, from NSW there is one lesson and that is the John Howard
lesson. He said it is completely critical to the future of the federal
coalition that John Fahey win in NSW. Well, one lesson out of that is
they lost, or it seems they have lost and it looks like Bob Carr will form
a Government that is one lesson. Out of the ACT I think there are
multiple lessons.
PB: Just before we go onto Canberra, even there you have got members of
your own faction saying they would have won much more easily or Bob
Carr would have won much more easily had it not been for you.
PM: Yes, well that is a bit of analysis, but all the people that give us the
analysis have not won an election themselves.
PB: But, this is your own faction.
PM: I know, they are not all wise. They may all be inclusive Paul, but they
are not all uniformly wise about deciphering election results.
PB: Yes, but the NSW Right falling apart, I mean you have got Carr,
Loosley, Della Bosca, all of you sniping at each other.
PM: No, no, I just think that it is never really right that the public will never
accept one part of a party denying the other. It was like when Joan
Kirner was in her last days as Premier, she was never denied by me.
Because I think the notion of saying ' oh look, they are in the Labor
Party but they are not ours' people say ' come off it, don't be so
dishonest, of course they are yours'. So you go together for good or ill,
you go together.
PB: Do you regret that Ros Kelly went when she did?
PM: Obviously, if she hadn't have gone we wouldn't have had a by-election.
So, we would have been better off.
PB: Are you disappointed that she put her interests before the interests of
the party?
PM: There is another thing here. Look, the Government has won five
elections and at every election there is always somebody that moves
out. In this cycle we had John Kerin and we had Neal Blewett and the
system has got to be able to let people go and bring other people in.
The Government is substantially renewed with a big influx of new and 
young members including over half of the ministry having changed
since the last election. There has got to be some process where that
happens. Now occasionally, in the transition, as is the case here, the
public will take hold of an issue or a set of issues and give you a
message.
PB: But you reckon you can win the public back despite what the polls are
showing?
PM: I think so, because I think this is the Government of post war change in
Australia. This is the Government that broke the back of Australian
inflation. This is the Government that opened Australia up to the world
by removing the tariff walls.
PB: Is it the best government you have seen?
PM: Well, it is the best of the ones I have belonged to and it is certainly the
most conscientious and effective government in the years I have been
in public life which is 26 now. Look, the thing is, let me just make a
little point to you. One of the things I was able to say to Helmut Kohl,
you know the European Community have the Treaty of Maastricht, you
have heard of it?
PB: Yes.
PM: It has terms and conditions tough terms and conditions about who
can join the European Monetary Union with the Deutschmark with
Germany. At the moment there are two countries which can qualify
only two Luxemburg and Australia. Now, it says something about us
doesn't it? That we can meet the toughest economic convergence
criteria, probably in the world, to join in what would be were we to be
Europeans in the Deutschmark area. So, I think Australians should
understand that this quite malicious debate that John Howard and the
Liberal party are running, that there is something wrong with the
economy and that we have had five minutes of sunshine. We have
had three years of growth 36 months of growth, 12 quarters of growth
and will go on having growth and the whole claim is fallacious and
untrue.
PB: Yes, but there again, you see I am sure that half of the people listening
to me at the moment, whilst they might think ' oh well, it is a feather in
your cap there to be able to give a bit of advice to the " old Koh lie" over
there' on the other hand they are saying ' hang on a sec, Keating
should be back here doing something about interest rates.'
PM: No, what I was doing, well, I was over there doing something about
interest rates. I was over there at the CeBIT fair where we were the
guest country with 170 companies, high technology companies, on
exhibit. I was over there trying to inculcate in the European business 
mind that Australia is a high technology country and given the fact we
had this great opportunity to be the guest country at the largest
information and communications fair in the world, I took the opportunity
to go and drive that message home so that as we export now, higher
value added, and we wrote tens of millions of business coming out of
that and we will, no doubt, build relationships now for years to come.
When we write those higher technology values in and their higher
exports, you write down any attendant pressure on you for interest
rates. I mean, you have got to understand this, that Australia's way for
the last ten years out of its difficulties, is by exports and by product and
it doesn't just happen with the wave of a wand. You have got to
basically earn your place in these markets and if the Prime Minister of
Australia is not interested to make the point in the largest market in
Europe that Australia is a competent, high technology country, but
rather sit back here and do radio programs talking about interest rates,
I mean, there is not much of a judgement to be made there is there?
PB: Will you completely rule out an election for this year?
PM: I get asked these questions by journalists and I take no notice of them.
Why would any Prime Minister give up any option he or she enjoys?
PB: So you are just going to say nothing about it?
PM: No, just that I will do, I will give you my general view on this. All last
year I had this claim made firstly by Dr Hewson, then by Mr Downer
and more laterly by others, that the Government is about to have an
early election. We were never having an early election. Never ever.
The reason I don't believe in early elections is, [-think, the public want
value from the political system. They want the government to get on
and do the work and not run tricky polls against them.
PB: All right and will they need time to, the public, will they need time to
absorb what appears as going to be a pretty tough budget?
PM: I don't think time, but understanding of what the Government has done
to preserve the recovery and to keep it going. I think that is the
important thing. The important thing is that you look people in the face
and say ' look, we did all the things we thought we needed to do to
keep your jobs secure and to give another member of your family a
job.' Now, as I said to you, we have had this remarkable number
590,000 jobs since the 1993 election. Our opponents were saying,
when we mentioned 500,000 in the election, they were laughing and
going on. John Hewson told us we would have a double dip recession
and then a depression. Remember those ads, the gun sight adds that
were on television, how through the gun sight we were going to shoot
people out of jobs. Well, we have shot people into 590,000 jobs. 
PB: All right, this good news you are telling me now, are you going to make
a stronger effort, if I can put it that way, this year to sell your message
more than you have in the past?
PM: One thing the Canberra by-election has brought home is this sort of
doom saying and this dishonesty that Howard and his cohorts are
running, that we have just had five minutes of economic sunshine and
it is all shutting down. It is completely untrue. It is a distortion. It is
completely untrue and the fact that it ever had any currency is to be
regretted. So, obviously the Government will make a bigger effort to
make sure that people understand that they have, for the first time in
years, a strong low inflation recovery with high productivity.
PB: I know you have got to go so just a couple of quick ones. I am sure
you would describe John Howard as ' recycled' but are you none the
less surprised by the good impression that he is making so far,
particularly in the polls?
PM: I don't think he is making an impression in policy. I think what's
happened is
PB: People like him though.
PM: I think what happened is this. That consumer sentiment turned down
when interest rates changed. They thought ' hello, there is something
going on here' and that was right at the time that he came to office and
he has just surfed his way along that wave. But he has got nothing to
say. You couldn't identify one policy with him and he believes that if
he makes himself as small as possible a target and says nothing until
the next election, he can win. Well, I think the Australian public have
walked way past that. They don't want no policy change governments.
They don't want policy free zones. They want change. They want it
explained. They want you to be in there doing their bidding for them
and doing their work for them. That gets me back to the principal
thing: what was I principally asked to do at the last election? That was
to start growth and employment again with low inflation and that is
what I have done in full measure.
PB: Another quick one, and you are probably aware of this anyway, but
have a listen to this Mr Murdoch speaking on ' 60 Minutes' the other
night -" Question: Would you do business with John Howard"
Murdoch " Absolutely, I don't want to do any business with him and I
don't want to do any business with Paul Keating. Do I think John
Howard would be a good Prime Minister of this country? I think it
would depend on can he control his back benchers who don't look to
me like conservatives or anything other than to me moderate Labor
politicians, half of them. But, John Howard if can be the John Howard
we have been hearing from for the last five years, he might present a
very real alternative and a good one. On the other hand you have got 
say about Paul Keating, that he is one of the very few strong leaders in
the world today. You couldn't use all the fingers of one hand to say
who lead their countries and are strong, why, and know what they are
doing and are on top of their own political scenes". Would I be right in
suggesting that you would sooner have lunch with Rupert Murdoch at
the moment than Kerry Packer?
PM: Not necessarily, it is just that I think Rupert Murdoch does meet many
heads of government in Europe and in north America. He has got a
business that operates in the United States and in Europe. He owns
The London Times. He had got major assets in the United States. He
has interests in Europe and he has interests in the Asia-Pacific. So,
he makes his own judgements and that is a matter for him. But, being
an international company, I suppose those international comparisons
spring to mind.
PB: A final question, I asked it earlier on. Are you the best Prime Minister
we have ever had?
PM: Well, I will certainly be, you could say this about me. I will never have
gone home of a night, ever throwing a policy fight. The public can
know about me and say at least when the big issues are on, this
character will actually represent us. In those late Cabinet meetings or
in the discussions or in any of the economic debates or the social
debate, I will be in there doing the things that other governments in the
past shirked. Whether it be in the big issues like land rights and Mabo
or whether it be in breaking the back of inflation or whether it be in
training and retraining or any of these issues I won't be in there
throwing the fight. Now, I think that is the thing the important thing to
me is to be a good Prime Minister rather than be someone out there
chasing cheers.
PB: So, you are the best Prime Ministerial fighter we have had?
PM: Well, don't try to put words in my mouth Paul, don't be too obvious
about all this.
PB: I am looking for a headline.
PM: I know you are. The fact that I am on your program is important to you,
I think.
PB: All right, I am very appreciative of that. It has been a long wait, but it is
good to have you on. I hope you will come on again.
PM: OK, thank you very much.
PB: That's a deal is it? 
PM: Well, I think it is.
PB: Good on you. Thanks very much.
PM: It's not too bad, I mean, they do put something in the coffee there. But
all things considered, it is reasonable enough.
PB: Thanks for your time.
PM: Good, thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 2q3 25/ 9
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PJ KEATING MP
ERRORS IN THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
The Federal Government has no plans to introduce a permanent honour
guard to officiate at ceremonial welcomes and no such plan has been
considered by me.
The story in today's Sydney Morning Herald suggesting that I asked the
Defence Department to consider forming such a permanent honour
guard is riddled with errors and omits a specific denial issued by my
office last night.
My office told the newspaper such a guard would be " out of the
question" due to the high cost of establishing such a unit.
I understand that the newspaper made no effort to contact Senator Ray
or his office about the story.
I have not suggested to the Department of Defence that it consider
forming a " permanent honour guard" for visiting dignitaries.
Last year I asked PM&amp; C officials to look at the question of welcoming
ceremonies to see if their form was still relevant to contemporary
Australia.
As a result, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet had some
official level discussions, including with the Department of Defence,
about these matters.
The Defence Department advised PM&amp; C officials that the ADF is finding
it increasingly difficult to meet the traditional requirements for honour
guards to greet high-level civilian and military visitors as growing
numbers of uniformed defence personnel are now located out of
Canberra. 
Defence advised that one option to meet this need would be the
formation of a permanent ceremonial guard unit, but that this would be
costly. This Defence proposal was not taken up by my Department and I was
not made aware of it.
I have not been " highly impressed" with " French ceremonial welcomes"
because I have never had a French ceremonial welcome. I have not
made a state visit to France.
No RAAF VIP fleet Boeing 707 has " had a $ 14 million refit", nor is any
$ 14 million refit underway. The newspaper did not ask my office about
this matter. I have in fact specifically ruled out the construction of a
permanent VIP suite in the aircraft.
The only work currently being looked at is on noise mitigation for the VIP
fleet. CANBERRA 29 March 1995 



/ b
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED 6.3OPM 29 MARCH 1995
* AS DELI VERED*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
SIR JOHN MONASH MEMORIAL LECTURE, REGENT HOTEL, MELBOURNE
29 MARCH 1995
Thank you very much, Race, for inviting me to give this lecture.
Sir John Monash stands among the highest order of Australians and I count it as
an honour of the highest order to deliver the lecture which bears his name.
Let me also add my voice to Kim Beazley's when he gave the inaugural address
last year, and say how pleased I am to see the Monash Graduate School of
Government up and flourishing.
It is mandatory these days to judge the worth of things by the degree to which
they increase a nation's " competitiveness". I will not take issue with this. You
will hear me use that word more than once tonight. We do have to be
competitive world competitive and we cannot be that without an efficient
government sector.
But let me also say that an efficient government sector a knowledgeable,
professional, imaginative government sector is equally essential to the creation
of a good society; and, because it is an investment in our human resources and
is bound to make us stronger and more cohesive, it will in itself make us more
competitive.
And let me just say this I hope the direction of your thinking is pragmatic. I
hope it is about imagining what might be done and how to do it. I hope it is
about what can be done, not what can't. 
The world and especially bureaucracies. public and private is full of people
who learn first to cover themselves off against all misadventure, and only
afterwards address the task. And, of course, the worst misadventure is to have a
mistake pinned on them.
This is a very conservative and debilitating phenomenon.
It is a short step from avoiding risk, to avoiding responsibility, and a very short
one then to avoiding doing anything at all.
The disease of carefully disguised inactivity or professional nay-saying can
afflict any organisation, including political parties. It is no better or less irritating
than professional idealism that is the habit of talking loftily without the faintest
intention of acting practically. That is why I say I hope that the Monash
Graduate School of Government will inject into the culture of government an
ethic of doing. Not finding the obstacles to achievement, but the paths to it.
Dare I say that I have a strong feeling that John Monash would have approved of
nothing less.
Monash was nothing if not a doer. He was a man of true greatness. He made a
mighty contribution to our military history, of course, and in doing that he was
one of those who forged the great tradition of the first AIF
He remains Australia's most famous soldier.
When we ask why did he succeed in so much? we can find all kinds of
reasons. Clearly he had a powerful, logical mind and superb gifts as an
administrator. Lloyd George called him " the most resourceful General in the
whole of the British Army", the " greatest strategist" and said that he would have
and should have become Commander-In-Chief.
Yet for all his success as a soldier, few gave the country more than Monash
gave us as a civilian.
In fact, it is difficult to think of another Australian who left behind such a unique
combination of memorials to his work. I doubt if anyone ever left so many in
such a small area.
There is the Anderson Street Bridge which he built across the Yarra and, within
a mile of it, a statue commemorating his service as a military commander. Then,
within the same small precinct, there is the Shrine which he helped to build. All
of this just down the hill from the Richmond school he attended. And all of it
connected to the power supply he founded in the 1920s at Yallourn. 
Now, of course. I wouldn't venture a guess at what he would make of the plans to
privatise his creation, but I have a feeling that he would not let sentiment or
ideology stand in the way of the most practical means of delivering electricity to
Victorians. He seems to me to have been an eminently practical man, and I imagine quite
immune to ideological fashion. I can no more imagine him in the New Right than
in the Old Left. I suspect he was of the camp which says so long as It is a
useful idea which will help us meet our goals, it does not matter what we call it.
Of all the things John Monash bequeathed us, I'm inclined to think that at this
stage of our history none is more important than his pragmatic philosophy.
In fact, we can safety infer from his remarkable achievements the qualities which
must have most distinguished him: self discipline, the courage of his convictions,
an enormous capacity for work, vision, decisiveness.
Seen from our vantage point what strikes us most about the man is something
like an absence of doubt.
I dlaresay there have been many Australians whose intellectual powers matched
Monash's and whose ambitions were the equal of his.
But very few achieved what he achieved.
I hope you get my drift. In Government one is always trying to narrow the gap
between vision and realisation, between policies and implementation, between
ideas and their concrete manifestation in effective and useful reform.
So when we look at a career like that of John Monash, we ask what lessons can
be drawn for government, for public policy in the modern era.
Now I might say, inter a/ ia, that I was struck by something he said in a letter he
wrote as a young man to his first love. He said that many people had tried to trip
him up, tried to stop him in his youthful ambitions, and that he had been forced
to leave those so-called ' friends' behind and had become unpopular. There will
be others in the room who have had this experience.
Of course the problems of governments is that they can't afford to be unpopular
at least not for too long. But nor can good governments afford to merely pursue
that which is popular.
Good policy is not always popular not at first, at least.
Yet I suspect more general and more productive conclusions can be drawn than
this one. 
Ever since the war in which Monash played so illustrious a part, the same
question has been asked: how different would the world be if all that youthful
ambition, energy and intellect had not been wasted on those battlefields? How
many scientists and engineers; how many artists and philosophers; how many
leaders were lost?
How many Monashs?
Of course, it is not so much a question as a melancholy reflection. It is really a
statement of despair.
A more useful question for our times might be what gave Monash that certainty
what gave him the confidence which enabled him to achieve so much? What
gave him the ability to inspire the same confidence in others?
All sorts of largely imponderable psychological possibilities aside, we might
reasonably conclude that this characteristic flowed from a clear set of values to
live by: from an unshakable respect for the democratic institutions of this country
and for the cultural traditions Australian, British, Prussian and Jewish he
inherited; from a profound sense of civic duty; and an equally profound belief in
his country's future.
Marry these beliefs to talent and ambition, and you have at least the beginnings
of a great nation-builder.
The question begs to be asked can we, in the altogether different country we
now live in, marry them to the talents and ambitions of contemporary
Australians? Can we put the same certainty, the same absence of doubt, into the lives of
young Australians?
I don't know the answer to that, but I believe we must try.
For example, if you ask me what is my best reason for replacing our present
Head of State with an Australian, it is that the affections of young Australians for
the British Monarchy are not what they were in Monash's day or my father's
day. And they will diminish further we can be sure that within the space of half
a generation the affection will not be as great as it is today, our day.
But Australians will continue to need a Head of State who inspires their respect
and affection. They will need someone who embodies the nation's ideals and
aspirations. 
Someone who is to their generation what Monash became to his. He would, of
course, have made a splendid Governor-General. His equivalent today would
make a splendid President and you will forgive me for making the observation
that it is hard to imagine him contesting a general election for the office.
The move to an Australian Head of State will of course help to define us to
ourselves and to the world.
And it is important to define ourselves just now.
Some of the reasons for this seem to me self-evident. We are living in an era of
extraordinary change both within Australia and in the world and in our
relationship with the world. Knowing who we are and letting others know will
surely be a useful aid to our success.
We are not talking in terms of the ideology of 19th century nation states or
century nation states for that matter.
We are talking about drawing a line around the loose, pluralistic, federal
democracy which is contemporary Australia and having that line define our
loyalty, our values, our identity.
We are talking about a definition of ourselves which embraces not just the
multicultural facts of our contemporary existence, but our increasing integration
with the cultures of the region and the world, and with their economies.
We are talking about definitions of a people who are in many ways more worldly
than their predecessors, whose tastes and values are less vigorously defined,
and whose greatest need in the 21st century may well be the capacity to cope
with change.
Most of you will know that last year we commissioned an expert group to provide
us with a report on civics education in Australia on the community's
understanding of our democratic values, institutions and history and on the best
means of increasing it.
We received an outstanding report which left us in no doubt that we should
proceed to adopting civics education on a nationwide scale.
It is reasonable to think that by this means we can invest Australians not only
with more knowledge of their country but with more faith in it who knows, with
some of the certainty that Monash and his generation seem to have felt. 
But again we would stress that the values will be different to those of earlier
generations. We can and should teach our best traditions the democratic,
egalitarian traditions. We should make sure that our great institutions are
understood, respected and appreciated.
We should teach our history and give all Australians the means by which they
may understand themselves as part of the Australian story.
But some elements of the old tradition will be left behind, or at least the
emphases must change. Some of our old traditions, for instance, cast women in
a roles which are entirely unacceptable and inappropriate today. Some do not
speak of the tolerance which underpins modern multicultural Australia.
The creation of this extraordinarily diverse contemporary Australian culture is
perhaps our greatest post-war achievement, and I believe we should enshrine
the values which sustain it for the generations of today and tomorrow.
Monash and his generation felt an attachment to the British Empire and British
civilisation which we can neither share nor emulate.
Yet I'm inclined to think that, properly understood, our contact with the world at
large and our increasing ability to understand and communicate with different
cultures offers a future which is just as fulfilling.
We will never feel about our region what earlier generations felt about the
Empire; but there is a growing sense of excitement about Australia's Asia-Pacific
future which matches the promise it holds. If it is true that earlier generations of
Australians felt it was a blessing to have inherited the Empire and its institutions,
the next generation might yet see their own region as conferring something
similar on them.
I think I hardly need to say again that this is why we have pursued the goals of
APEC with such determination.
I said after the Bogor Declaration last year that this was something which future
generations might thank us for. It was not something which had to happen: it
was something we decided to make happen.
It will mean greater prosperity and more jobs in the future. It is a big step
towards setting Australia up in the 21st century. It is a big step towards setting
the countries of the region up. Yet it should be recognised that the benefits are
by no means all in the future. 
They have already begun to flow. most importantly in the fillip that the process of
developing APEC has given to a regional consciousness. In Australia I think this
has been a quite profound development. Just three years ago to talk about our
future in Asia still produced scepticism and even hostility. It doesn't any more.
Two years ago to talk about getting all the heads of government together, from
Washington to Tokyo to Beijing to Jakarta, was commonly met with cynicism. To
suggest, even just 12 months ago, that at Bogor those heads of government
would agree to free trade between the developed countries by 2010 and
between all by 2020 was to invite derision.
But these things happened and Australia played a leading role in making them
happen. That in itself should give us confidence. But nothing comes close to
the confidence we can draw from the burgeoning business we are already doing
in the region and, especially as APEC develops, the limitless potential for doing
more. If John Monash set one example it was that each generation has a responsibility
to the next.
Yet that heroic generation of Monash's did not see Aboriginal Australians as part
of the country's future. We do. And it seems to me that the next generation
could reasonably ask of ours that we do all we can to finally set things right with
the original inhabitants of this continent. So we are doing it with Mabo; with the
Land Fund, with the process of reconciliation; and, by every practical means at
our disposal, with solutions to the problems of Aboriginal health.
On the other hand, Monash's generation did not have a moment's doubt about
projects which were deemed to be plainly in the national interest. Irrigation
projects, land clearances for farms, forest industries all proceeded without
hesitation or impediment. It is not so now and we should be thankful that it's
not: even if it means we must accommodate the rather unsettling thought that
our generation might have thwarted Monash's efforts to develop the brown coal
resources in the La Trobe Valley it certainly would not have happened without
an Environmental Impact Study.
But the truth is we can no longer pretend that the pursuit of ecologically
sustainable development is an option for Australia rather it is an imperative, a
challenge we have to meet, an obligation we have to the Australians of the 21st
century. Now there are a lot of commentators out there some incessant, some periodic
who say that all these government concerns are only marginally legitimate. 
In waves they descend upon the political debate saying we must only address
the economy. Everything else, they say, is a diversion or an indication that the
Government has jumbled its priorities.
It is humbug of course. We cannot successfully attend to the needs of our
economy without attending to the social fabric, to cultural and human needs, to
national cohesion.
We delivered an arts statement last year because in the next century nations will
increasingly succeed or fail according to the capacity of their people to think
creatively and creatively adapt new technology.
We delivered it for any number of other reasons, but none were so important as
this and probably none so plainly illustrates that governments cannot separate
the economic from the cultural or social.
These efforts are of the same character as building bridges or power stations or
even shrines of remembrance they are all parts of contemporary nation
building. And all successful nations make these efforts.
But the commentators are right in so far as it is true that we can do none of these
things unless we create a competitive, adaptable, successful Australian
economy and therefore it is no less true that this is our greatest responsibility
to future generations.
If we are talking about putting certainty and faith and belief into the lives of
Australians, we are talking about an economy which in an uncertain world
delivers opportunity and security to Australian families.
Above all we are talking about jobs.
Nothing erodes belief in a society as efficiently as unemployment: nothing
sustains it as efficiently as jobs.
This is something which has not changed. Employment remains by far the most
effective way to distribute the nation's wealth and the most concrete proof that
we continue to take our egalitarian ideals and traditions seriously.
Today it is being put around that the economic recovery is over. It is, we're told,
just a fleeting moment and now the sky is falling in. For those who have fallen
prey to this notion, and have begun to walk around with heads bowed and
thinking tomorrow will never come, let me provide the antidote. I mean the facts.
Let me start with the growth in employment and the decline in unemployment. 
The recovery has created 560,000 jobs since March 1993 on average 720 new
jobs every day.
Over 1994, unemployment has decreased by 1.7 per cent, the greatest one year
reduction since the Bureau of Statistics began the Labour Force Survey 30 years
ago, and the second highest reduction last year in the OECD.
Last month the figures were as strong as they have been at any time in the last
two years, with 90,000 new jobs created. So long as we are vigilant with the
macroeconomic settings, the indications are that this is sustainable. And vigilant
and active we are being.
This extraordinary job growth is occurring against a backdrop of restrained
wages growth. Wage inflation is very much under control the last quarter's
data show an overall annual increase of about 4.1 per cent. This is entirely in
keeping with the Accord commitments of the Government and the unions.
It has happened in part because the new industrial relations system gives a high
priority to enterprise-based bargaining an essential response to internationally
changed circumstances which require the Australian labour market to be taken
into the modern competitive environment. Enterprise-based bargaining is one of
the reasons for employment growth.
There are now 1.44 million people covered by certified agreements 56 per cent
of those covered by Federal awards.
These agreements recognise the mutual interests of companies and workers.
They have delivered responsible and mature wage outcomes on average,
increases of 4.2 per cent in agreements signed in 1994.
And those increases have usually been offset by considerable increases in
productivity. These recent changes need to be put in the context of the sustained progress
which has been made in real unit labour costs over recent years.
The story is this: the costs of production in Australia have fallen from what was
close to a record high in 1982 to less than the average of 1966-73.
Real unit labour costs today are 13 per cent lower than they were in 1982. So
long as we maintain the momentum towards enterprise based bargaining and
other structural economic reform, the sustained low level of labour costs since
1986 will continue into the future. 
In other words, we have seen long term gains. And we are not about to let them
slip. While some people are talking about a change in the weather, what we are
experiencing is in fact a change in the climate.
The move to enterprise bargaining is occurring in a climate of industrial peace.
In the period between 1975 and 1983 the average annual number of working
days lost per 1000 employees due to strike activity was 590. Since 1983 the
figure is 208 a reduction of 65 per cent.
From 1988-94 the era when formal enterprise bargaining began the average
was 185 days.
These figures are well under the OECD average and the rate of reduction is very
much faster.
In short, we used to be seen as a notoriously strike-bound country. That is
emphatically no longer the case.
As I said, the whole climate has changed. We have seen and we will continue to
see structural change which will deliver to the next century an Australia with a
modern, flexible, competitive industrial relations system an essential
underpinning of a modern, flexible, competitive economy.
I won't recite in detail the other major structural reforms to the Australian
economy of the past decade which are fundamental to our present
competitiveness and which set us up to be competitive well into the future.
It is enough to say that the deregulation of our financial markets, the lowering of
tariff barriers, the relaxation of exchange controls, and the floating of the dollar,
were essential steps. The effects on our competitiveness have been both
profound and irreversible. So long as we follow through what has been both
profound and microeconomic reform, we will have sustainable growth into the
future. No microeconomic reform we have undertaken has been more important than
our investment in vocational education and training.
You will hear it said these days, usually by the same people who insist that the
sky is falling in, who are generally the same people who insisted that we were
about to have a double dip recession or a depression, that the Government has
lost its enthusiasm for microeconomic reform.
Of course to say that we haven't even to point to proof of our endeavours is to
invite the charge of complacency. It is a serious charge. But it cannot be
sustained. 
Not if you look at the introduction and operation of the Industrial Relations
Reform Act. And not if you look at our investment in vocational education and
training. I won't go into training in detail. But the future is the focus of this address, and
the future depends on education and training our economic success vitally
depends on it.
The information highway is already here. A revolution in work is occurring before
our eyes. By early in the next century as many as a third of all jobs will be in the
so-called knowledge-based industries.
Today, without question, knowledge is the most valuable resource a nation can
have. And the knowledge keeps changing: in the German metals industry it
turns over every five years; in their information technology industry it is every
two years.
For all these reasons, the $ 1.5 billion the Commonwealth will spend on
vocational education and training between 1993-97 is an essential investment.
We have to move as quickly as our competitors and develop a world class
training system in which employer associations, training institutions and industry
are directly linked.
That is what we are doing. We are working as fast as we can to build the bridge
by which Australians can get from the old to the new into new opportunities,
new jobs, new technology. From school to work, unskilled to skilled, from the
social margins to the mainstream, from manufacturing to knowledge-based, from
unemployment to employment.
We established the Australian National Training Authority in 1992. In Working
Nation last year we established the National Employment and Training
Taskforce; introduced a Youth Training Initiative to enable fifteen to seventeen
years to get into training or jobs through individual case management, and
created the revolutionary Job Compact.
The initiatives are working. There is a major cultural change under way a
change in the climate. By 2001, 95 per cent of 19 year olds will have completed
Year 12 or an initial post-school qualification or be participating in some form of
education or training.
And the shift is towards vocational training. Unmet demand for TAFE places is
now 36 per cent greater than it is for higher education. The proportion of
students choosing TAFE over university has increased from 15 to 25 per cent. 
This is an investment a massive investment In our human resources. in what
Peter Drucker calls "' the only meaningful resource today" knowledge.
Training is a wealth transfer. It is a profoundly democratic and just investment
and in the times which are coming it is essential to the maintenance of the social
fabric. It is probably the most important initiative we can take to redress lifetime
income inequalities.
It is also essential to a healthy economy. A better trained workforce is a more
productive and more innovative workforce. Skill formation begets technical
change, and technical change begets productivity and on productivity depends
the competitiveness of companies and nations.
Microeconomic reform continues with the recovery. And let's consider the shape
and size of that recovery.
Last year the Australian economy grew faster than that of any other developed
country. And it grew with low inflation. Job growth, as I have said, was
exceptional beyond the most optimistic forecasts. And only Canada recorded a
fall in unemployment at a rate faster than Australia's.
When I was in Europe recently I was able to point out that, under the
convergence criteria set down under Maastricht, we would meet the targets for
economic and monetary union where every other European country, with the
exception of Germany and Luxembourg, would fail.
The criteria concern inflation rates, interest rates, deficit ratios and government
debt. At present Australia meets every one of those. And it is worth looking at the
comparisons of government debt. Only one European government has debt
lower than 50 per cent of GDP that is France with 49.5 per cent.
Australia's government debt is 34 per cent of GDP. It is very low.
There is a lot of scaremongering around at present. This is utterly predictable
and totally familiar behaviour, but it does create anxieties in the community
which are very often baseless. And it does deny to Australians the confidence
they are entitled to enjoy after the work they have put in. And I believe it also
makes it significantly harder to efficiently deal with the real problems which
remain.
And there can be no doubt that the real problem remaining for Australia is the
current account deficit. 
Yet the fundamentals of the economy are strong, and that the medium term
settings and underpinnings for a sustained recovery are well in place.
The uncertainty, the apprehension about the basics, the notion that the good
news may not last for long derives almost entirely from the recent increases in
the current account deficit.
I want to devote most of the time that remains to addressing this subject.
As a percentage of GDP the current account deficit is now at a high level, but not
the highest historically. In fact Australia has always run a current account deficit
for the simple reason that the investment opportunities here have generally
outweighed our savings capacity.
Our increasing integration with international financial markets in the 1980s has
increasingly encouraged us to call on foreign savings rather than our own, and
as a result we have seen the current account become not just a fact of our
economic life but frequently a problem in it.
The actual size of the current account deficit should not be the sole focus of
debate about our external position. What matters are the much more
complicated issues of the composition of the current account, the circumstances
that have led to its change, the confidence of overseas investors in Australia's
economic fundamentals, and the outlook over the medium term for both exports
and imports.
We cannot deal with the problem without an understanding of these issues.
As far as the recent large increase in the current account deficit is concerned, it
has to be understood that now, as at such times in the past, the growth is
stemming in large part from a surge in imports of capital equipment. It is, of
course, part of the general surge in productive investment.
The data are instructive. In the first 7 months of this financial year the current
account deficit grew by $ 6.1 billion compared to the same period a year earlier,
with capital equipment imports increasing by 23 per cent. By comparison
intermediate goods imports grew by about 10 per cent, and consumption imports
by around 12 per cent.
Increased capital equipment imports reflects a general view that the prospects
for growth are excellent and that the fundamentals for future prosperity are in
place. So the increase in part reflects our economic success and the confidence
it has created. At the same time, to some extent it contributes to further
economic success. 
The productive investment we are experiencing is crucial to the continuation of
Australian structural reform, to the modern isation and expansion of our
underlying private economic base.
It also should be noted that when strong investment surges have dissipated in
the past, so too has the level of the current account deficit decreased.
Nor can we ignore the fact that foreign business has been willing to finance the
relatively high deficits, and they are doing this because they believe it to be
good business. At this juncture, with our strong credit ratings intact, the
financing of the deficit can be understood to have a sound financial basis in
which overseas lenders fully expect to receive healthy returns.
In other words, financing the deficit reflects continuing financial market
confidence in Australia.
But it is not confidence the Government takes for granted. It is not something we
are complacent about, It is a continuous, hands-on process. Maintaining
confidence in our external financial situation depends on having policies which
deliver sustained and balanced economic performance.
At the same time it needs to be recognised that there are structural reasons for
the increase in the current account deficit. Some of these the Government can't
influence, but there are important ones we can.
To begin with, over the last several decades Australia's terms of trade have
been falling with world commodity prices. This means that without structural
progress on the export side it becomes increasingly hard to balance our trade.
And there have been significant developments on the export side. The
proportion of GDP coming from exports has increased from 13 per cent in 1982
to 22 per cent today.
Again, it is important to understand the composition of economic data, since in
large part this increase is due to a highly desirable change in the make up of
exports. Our traditional export base, of rural and resource commodities, has declined as
a percentage of all exports from 62 per cent in 1983 to 46 per cent last year. By
contrast, our exports of Elaborately Transformed Manufactures have increased
from 10 to 17 per cent in the same period. This last area is one which will
become of even greater significance as world economic development proceeds.
As an exporting nation we are now much more solidly placed than we were in the
past. This has come about in part from an extraordinary improvement in our
international competitiveness. 
The index of international competitiveness has risen by 40 per cent since 1983.
You will forgive me for making the point that in the eight years before 1983 there
was no change in the index in other words, we were no more competitive in
1983 than we had been in 1975.
You see what I mean when I say that these are not fleeting changes. they are
long-term structural gains sea-changes.
As with the fundamental developments in the labour market, the reorientation of
our export base enhances our capacity to grow and deal more confidently with
adverse international economic circumstances.
As I suggested earlier, another factor contributing to current account pressures
has been significant international moves towards financial deregulation. World
capital flows are much greater these days, and it stands to reason that more
financing in Australia will be drawn from overseas funds.
We should not forget that this is a two-way flow. We opened up the Australian
financial system to the world in 1983/ 84, and now about $ 76 billion of Australian
private capital is invested abroad. This phenomenon is rarely mentioned, but it
is a significant consideration in any useful interpretation of our overall
international financial situation. Seventy-six billion is not an insignificant amount
when the net debt is around $ 160 billion.
Another fundamental but complicated issue when it comes to understanding the
current account challenge is the distinction between the short and medium term
prospects for both exports and imports.
As a percentage of GOP our current account deficit is high and it is not likely to
decrease for some time. But decrease it will and for several reasons.
One is that recovery from the drought is bound to increase our export revenues.
It will also decrease some of our recent imports caused by grain shortages.
Another is that some of the countries which are significant importers of
Australian goods are recovering from recession and we can expect our exports
particularly non-rural exports to grow as they do.
Finally, partly in response to current account pressures, the Government moved
to dampen domestic demand at the end of 1994. When these effects flow
through we can expect significant decreases in the growth of import demand. 
Yet nothing in the circumstances I have outlined diminishes the Government's
responsibility to manage our external position. The current account deficit has to
be addressed.
Perhaps the major issue is that the larger our foreign borrowings the greater our
exposure to fluctuations in economic sentiment in financial markets abroad.
The advantages that come from overseas borrowings need always to be
weighed against the adverse possibilities arising from changes in market
perceptions and activities.
The obvious way to diminish these risks is to increase national savings. We
have been concentrating on this for some time. You will recall the introduction of
the Superannuation Guarantee Levy in 1992.
Our policy commits us to increasing the overall level of Australian
superannuation contributions to 9 per cent from employers and 3 per cent from
employees by the year 2002/ 3.
Obviously these savings increases will promote the potential for financial capital
needs to be met from domestic sources, and the risks associated with borrowing
from overseas will be proportionately decreased.
National savings increases through superannuation also mean that it will
become easier to meet the financial needs of Australian retirees, whose
numbers will swell in coming years.
We take the issue of the current account deficit extremely seriously. We are
consistently assessing policy and in the forthcoming Budget we will be
addressing elements of structural change which have the potential to reduce
both internally and externally derived pressures.
There should be no mistake about our intention to use the Budget to resolve the
outstanding issues in economic management. It is an excellent opportunity to
fine-tune the recovery and put in place longer term reforms which are consistent
with our needs for sustainable and balanced economic and social development.
As I said earlier in this address, we are living in a period of unprecedented
change. It is much more likely to accelerate than go away. Change breeds
change, but it also breeds success in turn it develops the capacity to cope with
and even lead the changes.
But that does not alter the fact that in times of change there is uncertainty. And
let me say that every effort of the Government is directed towards removing that
uncertainty creating in every way we can the elements of a national life in
which all Australians can find a place. 
17
A job, training, health and education services, security, a sense of belonging and
a sense of loyalty to the country, dare I say it a sense of excitement about
Australia these are the goals.
Inevitably the whole picture of our intent fades from time to time. But I can tell
you it does not vary.
And I can also tell you that we know we won't get there if we allow our the
political culture to be clogged with timidity and prevarication.
As a Government we know that we won't do anything for the cause of certainty
by allowing opinion polls or media opinion to drive policy. Governments which
do not listen are not good governments. Governments which only listen are not
good governments either.
I think the same sort of spirit Should pervade the public sector. The task of
government is to make good policy and deliver it. It is to anticipate necessity,
not wait for it to dictate the terms of our existence.
I have a very distinct feeling that John Monash would have offered similar
advice. 



PRIME MINISTER 24/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE OFFICE OF NATIONAL ASSESSMENTS
The Government has decided to recommend to the Governor-General in
Executive Council the appointment of Mr Philip Flood AO, Director-General of the
Australian International Development Assistance Bureau ( ALDAB), as the next
Director-General of the Office of National Assessments ( ONA). It is proposed that the
appointment will take effect on 24 April 1995.
Before being appointed Director-General of AIDAB, Mr Flood was Ambassador to
Indonesia from 1989 to 1993. He was Deputy Secretary in the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade from 1985 to 1989. Amongst other earlier appointments,
Mr Flood was Chief Executive Officer for Special Trade Negotiations from 1978 to
1980. He was a member of the Administrative Review Council from 1986 to 1989,
and headed a review of the Australian Customs Service and a review of the Schools
Commission. ONA is responsible for advising the Government on international political, strategic
and economic developments affecting Australia's national interests. ONA also has an
important function in advising the Government on the adequacy and coordination of
Australia's foreign intelligence activities.
Mr Flood's substantial experience as a manager and his expertise in politico-strategic,
trade and economic matters qualify him very well to give ONA strong leadership in
providing accurate and timely assessments that will help the Government pursue
Australia's political and economic interests in a rapidly changing regional and global
environment. I wish to record my appreciation to the outgoing Director-General of ONA,
Mr Geoffrey Miller AO. Mr Miller has been Director-General since 1989, having
agreed to extend his original term of office. Before becoming head of ONA, Mr Miller
had a distinguished career in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade where he
was Deputy Secretary from 1984 to 1986 and as Ambassador to the Republic of Korea
from 1978 to 1980 and to Japan from 1986 to 1989. Mr Miller will be undertaking a
new appointment which will be announced shortly.
CANBERRA 29 MARCH 1995 



PRIME MINYISTER 27/
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
FORESTS POLICY
Cabinet met today to discuss the Government's strategy for the protection of
Australia's native forests and the long term future of our forest industries.
The management of Australia's forests is primarily a State responsibility.
However the community looks to the Commonwealth for leadership in the
protection of what are national assets treasured by all Australians.
Cabinet agreed to implement a number of important measures which will
ensure Australia has a system of reserves comprehensively representing all
forest types, and at the same time a diverse, internationally competitive wood
products industry.
As a first step, I am releasing today a discussion paper detailing the
Commonwealth's position for a future forest reserve system. The aim of the
paper is to stimulate public comment on appropriate criteria for establishing
the reserves. During the six week consultation phase, the Commonwealth
will also be working with State and Territory governments to develop
nationally agreed criteria for application in the development of forest
agreements for all regions.
With the cooperation of the States, the Commonwealth will use these criteria
to undertake a preliminary reserve analysis to set aside areas pending
completion of regional forest agreements. This will enable applications for
1996 woodchip export licenses to be assessed on a regional, rather than
coupe-by-coupe basis. Our strategy will also make sure that the
Government's policy of protecting high conservation value forests in
perpetuity will not be compromised while regional forest agreements are
being developed, and industry will enjoy more certainty about the availability
of resources.
These regional forest agreements will identify areas for incorporation in a
national reserve system that adequately and comprehensively represents all
forest types, and areas which may be harvested on a strict basis of ecological
sustainability. 
The Government takes the view that the best policy for Australia is one which
at once protects forever our unique and irreplaceable native forests, and
develops and maintains a profitable and ecologically sustainable forest
products industry based on re-growth forests, plantations and other fibre
sources. The two ambitions are compatible and mutually re-inforcing. An
ecologically sustainable forest products industry is consistent with our
environmental ambitions, including that of reducing the degree to which
ecologically unsustainable industries develop in other countries. The
development of a model industry in Australia can be a tangible expression of
thinking globally and acting locally.
As an integral part of the overall strategy I am releasing an industry
discussion paper and consultations will be undertaken over the next
weeks, prior to its finalisation in the middle of the year.
Central to the Government's position for the future of the industry is the need
to turn around Australia's $ 1.8 billion trade deficit in forest products by
encouraging greater downstream processing, more intensive plantation
production, and international best-practice forest management.
Relevant Commonwealth departments will be taking this opportunity to bring
together labour market programs and industry programs aimed at improving
the competitiveness of the wood products industry.
We have also agreed to recommend to the Minister for Resources that he ask
export woodchip companies to refrain from sourcing woodchips from 264
coupes that Cabinet believes might be required for a future reserve system,
and that were originally proposed by States for logging in 1995.
1 will be asking the States to fully protect all these coupes, including the nonnational
estate coupes we have set aside, pending finalisation of the regional
forest agreements.
The Government recognises that requesting companies to stay out of areas
proposed by States for logging in 1995 will have consequences for the
livelihoods of some forest workers. The Government will provide income
support under existing programs for those workers. For any self-employed
workers the Government will consider the payment of transitional assistance.
Local CES offices will be active in ensuring that workers are aware of
programs they are eligible to join, and other forms of assistance that are
immediately available to them.
The Government has developed a tailored package of assistance available
immediately for self-employed workers, employees and their families affected
by structural adjustment to the industry. The Forest Industries Special
Assistance Package will provide individuals with access to training and 
employment programs under Working Nation. including the National Training
Wage, JobStart and JobSkills and assist with relocation and travel costs.
These programs will be individually designed to address the training and
employment needs of people affected by the decision and will assist them to
find alternative employment opportunities as quickly as possible.
In partnership with State and local government, industry, unions and
communities, a range of projects will be identified in regions to provide
employment opportunities in areas such as plantation and farm forestry and
value-added forestry related industries. These projects will be initially
facilitated through the Working Nation initiatives.
CANBERRA MARCH 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH MINISTERS COLLINS AND
FAULKNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, MARCH 30 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: As most of the people in this room are very well aware, we have had a
somewhat seminal debate in Australia about the twin objectives of
being able to protect those areas of native forest and wilderness that
are pertinent to the heritage of Australians, and the need to maintain
and develop further, a sustainable wood products industry. This
debate, of course, has raged in Australia for a very long period of time,
and while the Commonwealth Government doesn't operate the forests,
they are operated by the States. The community looks to the
Commonwealth for leadership, to see that these great national assets
are protected, or at least define the basis in policy upon which we can
arrive at a system where we can seek both to protect them and at the
same time, allow a wood products industry to prosper. Today the
Cabinet met to consider a strategy for the long-term future of
Australia's native forests and its industry, and agreed to a number of
measures I suppose prime amongst them was to ensure that by the
year 2000, Australia will have a system of reserves comprehensively
representing all forest types, while at the same time, a diverse wood
products industry. As the first step in this and this is against the
backdrop, of course, of the National Forest Policy Statement, and the
commitment of States to it the first step in this is a discussion paper
which will be released by the Government, detailing the
Commonwealth's position for a future forest reserve system. The aim
will be to stimulate public comment on the appropriate criteria, and
during the six-week consultation phase, the Commonwealth will be
working with State and Territory governments to develop nationally
agreed criteria for application in the development in Regional Forest
Agreements for more regions. Now, we think that with the co-operation
of the States, the Commonwealth can use these criteria to undertake a
preliminary reserve analysis to set aside areas pending completion of
Regional Forest Agreements. And this should enable the 1996
woodchip export licences to be issued on a regional rather than a
coupe-by-coupe basis, which of course you will know is a change from
that which we have had. 0 1 201 
So our strategy will be to make sure that the Government's policy of
protecting high conservation value forests, in perpetuity, will not be
compromised while Regional Forest Agreements are being developed,
and industry will enjoy more certainty about the availability of
resources. These Regional Forest Agreements will identify areas for
incorporation in the National Reserve System, and adequately and
comprehensively represent all forest types and areas which may be
harvested on a strict basis of ecological sustainability. And we hope
that we will be able to undertake over the next ten weeks consultations
with a view to finalising this document by the middle of the year. Now,
can I also say that Cabinet today has also agreed to recommend to the
Minister for Resources that he ask woodchip companies to refrain from
sourcing woodchips from 264 coupes that Cabinet believes might be
required for a future reserve system, and that were originally proposed
for the States in 1995.
Now, I will go to those in a moment, but let me take you through quickly
for our own memory a little bit of mathematics: originally the
Commonwealth set aside for investigation as to the representativeness
or otherwise, 509 coupes. During the course of that setting aside, 110
coupes were released for logging on two lots there were 57 and 53.
This left 399: of the 399, 37 have been withdrawn but the states,
because they no longer want to log in those areas for woodchips,
which left 362, and of that 362, the Commonwealth is seeking or the
Cabinet is seeking with the agreement of the Minister for Resources,
to oblige companies to refrain from sourcing from 264 of those coupes.
So, I will . as a consequence of that change, I will be asking the
States to fully protect all those coupes, including the non-national
estate coupes we set aside pending finalisation of the Regional Forest
Agreements. Now, the Government recognises of course that
requesting companies to stay out of areas proposed by states for
logging will have consequences for the livelihood of some forest
workers. The Government will provide income support under existing
programs for those people. For any self-employed people, the
Government will consider the payment of transitional assistance. And,
of course, local CES offices will be active in ensuring that workers are
made aware of their programs and are eligible to join, and that other
forms of assistance are immediately available to them. The
Government has developed a tailored package of assistance available
immediately for self-employed workers, employees and their families
affected by structural adjustment to the industry. The Forest Industry
Special Assistance Package will provide individuals with access to
training and employment programs under Working Nation, including
the National Training Wage, JobStart and JobSkills, and assist with
relocation and travel costs. And so we will then talk with the States
about a range of projects that may be employed for employment
opportunities, such as plantation and farm forestry etc.
So, perhaps I might return to this theme, and say that what we are
seeking here is to take the view that the best policy for Australia is to 
have both of these things: one, a policy that protects forever the
unique and irreplaceable nature of our forests, and develop the
profitable and sustainable forest industry. Now we think there is a
point of computability here, and mutually reinforcing quality to that. It
is possible that Australia can develop a model industry, and in the
development of representative reserve systems, do so with the
injunction to think global and act local. Because I think it is possible
for Australia, at this juncture where we have had this debate running
now for so many years, it will get back to the development of these
Regional Forest Agreements around the comprehension of the paper
the discussion paper we are now to present while in the interim,
keeping those 264 coupes until their qualities can be assessed in
terms of those representative reserve systems. Were we able to reach
that point, Australia would truly have a representative forest system,
where all species are adequately represented. And I think you will
find, also, we are talking there about a broad benchmark roughly of the
order of 15% of the pre-1788 distribution of each forest community,
and that is in terms of representing it in statutory conservation
reserves. So, we are talking here to a very high standard about the
representativeness of any such reserve system, while at the same
time, seeking to move the industry into a position of sustainability and
so we avoid this position of coupe-by-coupe discussions every year,
rather than discussions on a regional basis where we can actually
agree to regions having a capacity to export and not simply us looking
or being obliged to look coupe-by-coupe.
Now, there have been many critics of this process, but you have to
understand that the Commonwealth is not the manager of forests. The
Commonwealth database could only and always depend on the
information given to it by States, forestry authorities and by scientific
analysis and re-analysis of the information which is sent. These are
the things that Nations have to do to move towards that sort of a
system, but let me say it is a far better approach than the approach of
our opponents who believe and this is the belief of the Spokesperson
for the Environment that the Commonwealth shouldn't be using its
external affairs powers, should not be signatory to international treaties
and wouldn't be using the export powers to advance this debate in any
way, shape or form, and where the coalition is taking the view that
even a policy of restraining clear-felling is not one that they should
adopt. This is difficult as it is the only way to move towards this sort
of a system, and let me say clearly, building on, what I think is the very
significant and internationally significant environment record of the
Government over now a long period of time, that it was only ever to be
this Government that would come to terms with our native forests and
the timber being taken from them, in the context of some sustainable
reserve system. And those who have been chortling at the difficulties
of evaluation, should understand that no great endeavour such as this
would ever be easily attained, and it can never, of course, be secured
without there being a systemic approach to forest management in
Australia. So I think that says in the general that which I wish to say.
Could I just say I would like to express my appreciation to my two 
colleague Ministers beside me for a long process of consultation and
negotiation and discussion that they have had including, of course,
with the Minister for Resources, and the Minister for Industry, Science
and Technology towards arriving at this position, and I think again
this is what marks out the Government from the Coalition that we have
people of this calibre able to take on these sensitive tasks, who
understand the nuances of them and try to reach at a position that they
can defend. Now, I'm not sure whether either of them wish to
complement my remarks they are very welcome to, and I would invite
Senator Collins should he choose.
BC: I'll just take questions Paul.
JF: I'm happy to take questions.
PM: Well, they are happy to take questions I think we all are.
J: Prime Minister, you have announced 264 coupes which won't be given
approval for woodchip exporting the State governments still have
control over land-use matters in terms of logging how confident are
you that logging won't go on in any of those coupes, or could it be that
logging will go in some of those coupes?
PM: What we are saying is this we have asked the States to protect these
coupes until we go into this broader discussion about representative
reserve systems it has always been a State prerogative to the
Commonwealth export powers have only ever gone as far as
woodchips, and if the States wish to continue to give approval to
logging for saw-log or veneer they are able to do that. This still
remains the position, but I think States do want to get on with the
development of a representative reserve system and I think we are at
the stage where a number of projects which value-add to the pulp and
paper and timber industry in this country are in the offing, but may
never come to fruition without the development of such a system. So I
think States will bear upon, will consider this question. Can I say that
some of these coupes, of course, are in NSW that is to be released for
export woodchipping, and these will be the subject of discussion with
the incoming Carr Labor Government in NSW.
J: Prime Minister, what is your estimate of the employment impact of this
decision?
PM: It varies in certain places, I think we do have a compilation of the
number I don't have it with us. I don't think we can accurately say
that here....
BC: It would be impossible, at this stage can I say to accurately predict
that, but it is clear that there may be some job losses, and that is
acknowledged in the Statement in the sense that this is the
consideration Cabinet has given to what we do about that, but a lot of
that will depend, I have to say, on a fairly intensive period of 
discussions we will now have to embark on with the States in terms of
what arrangements can be made to minimise that effect, and there will
be arrangements that can be made in terms of rescheduling where it's
possible and so on. But, I think the important thing to note and I don't
know if you have got them yet but there are two important discussion
papers that are being released here this afternoon. One on the criteria
that will be used to establish reserve systems, and the other on an
industry plan. Now, both of those papers I have to say have been
developed after a very intensive period of consultation. The criteria
paper is an important one that was developed after a high-level
scientific group chaired by the Chief Scientist reported to the
Government, and indeed, the Government has drawn very heavily on
that report, in putting that criteria discussion paper together. And it is
important to understand, I think, just how vital a document that is
because if in negotiations with the States we can achieve that, it will be
a world best in terms of reserve systems there is no question about
that. The International Union of Conservation an Nature which is the
international body that determines World Heritage status has
recommended a 10% reserve system of existing resources. Canada
which is a heavy forest nation has around 13% of its existing
resources in reserves, the United States [ has] around This
recommendation will secure 15% of Australia's original forest resource.
Now the reason that this has happened, is that we are in the unique
position in the sense that we still have 60% of that original resource in
Australia, but that equates to around 25% of the existing forest
resource in aggregate in reserves, which will be world best practice.
J: Prime Minister, you said that this system that you have just outlined
should be removed by 1996, you need the coupe-by-coupe
assessment because there will be regional agreements in place does
that mean in 1995 there will be another coupe-by-coupe assessment,
will we have to go through this process again?
PM: Well, I'm saying that if we are able to advance this process at the
speed I think we would like to, that is, that we are able to detect the
position before we actually get to RFAs, it may be possible to do that.
But again, that would depend on co-operation.
BC: And I might add, as I am sure you are aware, the situation in
respective reserves differs widely across Australia from state to state.
Some states are in far better shape than others.
J: Which states... . of the protection . coupes?
PM: Well, I think you will see that in the broad when we publish information.
But of course, this will be published after the decision by the Minister
for Resources.
BC: The important thing, I think, in that consideration is the same criteria
applied across the board, and that is the central criteria of putting
aside those coupes which the Government considered necessary to 
establish a comprehensive, adequate and representative resource
system in Australia. So even though there are regional differences it is
important to note that those regional differences are reflected in the
different states of the reserve systems in those states.
J: Is it true that coupes were in New South Wales and most of the
( inaudible)
PM: Well, I think you will have to wait for the publication of the decision. As
I have already indicated to you that we will be speaking to the New
South Wales Government, so obviously we can't be saying to you what
we might do in New South Wales before:
a. the Minister the for Resources having made a decision and
b. the New South Wales government being consulted.
J: Loggers are threatening to bring their trucks back if they are unhappy
with the result. Are you confident that this is the end of the ramble
over the 1995 logging
PM: Well, I said at the time to representatives of the timber industry that it
is only under this Government will they get the option of having a
sustainable wood forest products industry because I think only we
have the inclination and the capacity to deliver a reserve system and
you have already seen that. You are already seeing the Coalition
spokesperson saying that they believe, he believes that these
questions of land management are exclusively state issues. He is
saying that he opposes any use of treaties or the external affairs
power. Now, if that were to be the position of any Coalition
government, I think it does follow logically that this Government is the
only one capable of delivering any system that resembles
sustainability in forest products.
J: Mr Keating, are you saying that the Minister for Resources hasn't yet
given a tick to these Cabinet decisions?
PM: No, this is the Cabinet's recommendation to him and he will consider
that and he will announce the decision.
BC: Which is the statutory process.
J: How confident are you of state co-operation particularly with
Tasmania?
PM: Well, I think there is a general willingness on the part of the Premier to
sign the Forest Policy Statement and to be in the development of a
regional forest agreement. But there is no doubt a lot of stresses and
strains within the Tasmanian cabinet with the former Premier, Mr Gray
and others seeking to undermine the Premier. But, again, everyone
there must think about the long-run interests of Tasmania and its 
forests and its forest's industries. So, I think the nature of these
decisions will encourage the Tasmanian government to be part of the
process.
JF: I think the other thing that ought to be said in relation to state
co-operation is this, that the most recalcitrant state in terms of working
with the other states and the Commonwealth to develop a
comprehensive, adequate and representative resource system has
been New South Wales. From the middle of last year, New South
Wales has refused to even release a discussion paper developed by
the states on the criteria for a comprehensive, adequate and
representative reserve system. We do have a change in government,
of course, in New South Wales, a new Premier and new government
elected on a platform of protection and conservation of areas of high
conservation value of native forests and I think the Commonwealth can
look forward to a lot more co-operation from the New South Wales
government and in the area of the development of the Carr reserve
criteria and comprehensive regional assessments where the
Commonwealth had offered to fund New South Wales on old growth
and wilderness surveys, all the offers of Commonwealth funding and
assistance have been rejected now for a number of years. I think we
can confidently look forward to a very different attitude and a very
positive attitude from the incoming New South Wales government.
J: Prime Minister, do you think... original list is something like 1300?
PM: Well, did the original list have any veracity in terms of
representativeness and in terms of the other qualities that were
ascribed to and I think that the answer to that is no. There has been
the development here of an approach which has been consistently
applied. As Senator Collins has said, where there has been multiple
checking with the states between Commonwealth offices and
Commonwealth agencies and the states. Under that criteria of the
status of these coupes and again, I think one of the outcomes in this is
that those who are going around saying there were 1300 pristine
stands of trees etc, can't defend that position. So therefore, their
credibility must suffer accordingly.
J: Prime Minister, does the credibility of those who go around saying
there were only 86 that should be protected, they must also suffer
given you have now decided
PM: Well, I don't think that the Cabinet took the view that it accepted that
view. It took the view that was not acceptable.
BC: I might add all those lists had the caveat on them, all of them, that they
were all subject to further assessment. That assessment has now
been concluded.
J: Prime Minister, how much... what is the estimated cost of the
assistance package to the timber workers? 
BC: No, that hasn't finally been determined but the Cabinet did determine
today that there will be a substantial package of financial support for
the industry and that will be announced in the Budget in terms of the
actual quantum of that amount. But there will be a substantial amount
of support provided by the Government. I might add the central
premise of that industry statement which is available for you and to get
back to your previous question, the central premise of that whole
industry statement is that it is a fact that you will never satisfy the
extremes in both sides of this debate. Of the industry paper, in fact,
says is what we know can be done, that is that we can establish in
Australia a vibrant and a value added timber industry in Australia at
the same time as maintaining the conservation values that must be
protected. It can be done.
J: Prime Minister, when exactly do we find out about this...( inaudible)...?
PM: That will be soon, but there is statutory process here and it is important
that it is followed.
J: How do you propose to deal with the hostility of Green groups on this
and other environment issues in the lead-up to the next election?
PM: Well the Green groups have got to be able to sustain, if one wants to
make an extravagant argument, you have got to be able to sustain an
extravagant position. I think what this evaluation reveals is that the
extravagance of the claims of about 1300 coupes could not be
sustained and was incredible. And also remember that I said in a
statement last year that we will be moving to phase out woodchipping
outside of those places from whence timber comes under an RFA. So,
the first, if you like, substantial steps to changing the nature of this
industry has always in this country come from the Labor Government,
this Labor Government.
And I just might add again, for those who think this is of no account
that in the last year we did reserve these important areas of the
national estate such as Shoalwater Bay and Jervis Bay and we put
$ 24 million in the Budget to buy back the Hole in the Heart of the
Daintree and seek to move down the path of developing a sustainable
basis for the wood products industry in the context of the preservation
of important heritage of native forests and forests of heritage value.
BC: I might add that a central element for the conservation movement in
terms of their interests and Australia's interests is the extension of the
reserve system in Australia and a number of weeks ago, I publicly
supported Tricia Caswell's statement of the ACF about the importance
of this central element in this package and I will just reiterate that the
Government has accepted the advice of Professor Pitman, the Chief
Scientist, and the committee that he gathered around him in terms of
the 15 per cent criterion, I have just indicated with two brief examples, 
one Canada and one the United States, the criteria the Government
has adopted is way in front of the word's best in terms of resources.
JE: If I can just make a very brief comment. The number of coupes that
the Prime Minister has indicated that the Cabinet has recommended to
the Minister for Resources is far and away the greatest number that
have ever been protected through an application of the export
woodchip licence renewal process. There is no other number of
coupes in any previous year that is in anyway close to that same order
of magnitude.
J: Why couldn't your Government come up with this number last year?
JF: The key thing that needs to be remembered here is that the National
Forest Policy Statement has as its fundamental conservation element
or objective the establishment of a comprehensive, adequate and
representative reserve system. There has been slow progress on the
establishment of criteria for that reserve system, particularly courtesy
of the New South Wales government, but we have really been able to
progress that over the last few months and that is the key conservation
objective of the NFPS and it is going to deliver as well in my view, the
industry plan real and tangible, long-term environmental benefits. That
has been the very significant move forward that we have seen and I
think it really is a demonstration that we are serious in terms of
delivering on an environmental agenda.
PM: Can I just add to that. You need to understand also, I think, that the
days of locking away areas which, I suppose were never easy but
much easier than development a federal compact between the
Commonwealth and the states on forests, there was a very large
transition from that and the high expectations have generated as
always to the hard tack of a sustainable system. Now this has
happened over the period when Ros Kelly was Minister for the
Environment with a National Forest Policy statement and now with
John Faulkner. But there is always an expectation, particularly
amongst Green groups, that we can be kicking goals on reserves
which has in fact happened when there was a much easier delineation
of important stands of areas of the national estate now. Just the same
as it's fallen to this Government to deal with Aboriginal land rights or
Aboriginal health. It is into the hard areas of change and I think the
co-efficient ( inaudible).., rises when you try and get into a
sustainable system of this variety. And those who seek to easily
criticise Ministers should understand that the degree of difficulty is
very much greater than it has been in the past.
J: Prime Minister, just on the reserves, would you agree that there could
be widely different impacts depending on the region of Australia we
are talking about because of different patterns of land clearing since
white settlement, for example a 15 per cent minimum reserve in
northern New South Wales or parts of northern New South Wales and
Queensland could mean reserving all the remaining forests or where in 
Gippsland, for example, where there are large stands of certain types
of forests, it could lead to a big increase in the amount of logging
simply to be kept because it is 15 per cent of a much bigger area of
type of forest?
PM: Well, I think we have just seen a big state plebiscite run on some of
those policies with Bob Carr. He said quite up-front where thinks that
the balance of that argument should go.
JF: Our approach is in Australia, from a Commonwealth Government
perspective with the release of this paper, to see a high-level of
biodiversity conservation. As Bob Collins has said, it is 15 per cent. It
is virtually higher than anywhere else in the world. We are also
developing specific criteria for wilderness and old-growth levels of
reservation and they are very significant steps forward in this particular
debate and obviously will have application as we move through into
the future in further rounds of decisions in relation to the issue of
export woodchip licences.
PM: Can I perhaps conclude on this point that is that the Minister for
Resources will consider the Cabinet's recommendation and make a
decision and that of course will be published. The broad numbers in
that recommendation have been given to you today and I am confident
that if we can get down to the consultation period finished by mid-year
we will have a reasonably firm basis to make decisions for 1996 other
than on a coupe-by-coupe basis which will be important to us. But
perhaps I can conclude on this very last point, of thanking Bob Collins
and John Faulkner for a very large and sustained committed effort to
this very intractable problem and trying to see that in this country we
can do something the rest of the world has not been able quite to do
and to do it well.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, ALTONAl MELBOURNE, 31 MARCH 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Today we have seen the National Accounts come and I have said that
they are a beautiful set of numbers, and they are because they prove
the recovery is sustainable. it's not me claiming the recovery is
sustainable they prove the recovery is sustainable through low
inflation, low wages growth, high investment growth and a slowing in
GDP. The economy is slowing just as we hoped it would, and the
interest rates effect of last year are working just as the Government
had hoped. So why they are good numbers is because they hold the
promise of Australia having a low inflation, sustainable long-run
recovery, and they give the lie to all the doomsaying that John Howard
and Peter Costello and all the others have gone on with. The proof in
economic policy, as always, is in the eating. And today's statisticians
National Accounts mean that the doomsaying by the Opposition has
been just that doomsaying and entirely wrong. Now more work still
needs to be done, and that is why the Government will bring down a
Budget which will enhance Australian savings and play a further role in
fiscal policy in just getting a further little slowing there in the economy
to make this entirely sustainable. But wages growth of 1.6% over the
year is a phenomenal figure It means that all Australians are pulling
their weight in making sure we keep low inflation, and on the broadest
measure of inflation the broadest measure inflation is less than 1%
for the year, and that is coupled with 5% growth and 21 investment
growth. I have never seen numbers like this in my political life. But,
the promise is that they will get better, and they will get better as we do
more work on the Budget, and we bring the recovery home through the
1990s. The Government thought that the September quarter accounts
were unrepresentative of the state of the economy, and the December
quarter accounts proves the point.
J: Mr Keating, what do you make of Mr Fraser's comments that no matter
what is in the Budget, there still might be interest rate rises? 
iEL: 31 . M1ar. 95 13: 54 No. 0 s FP. O 2/ u,
2
PM: He was substantially mis-represented there. If you read the speech
and I invite you to read it what he said was one can never say, at any
stage, that interest rates won't rise. But what these numbers today
reveal, is that the likelihood of interest rates rising, after these
numbers today and the Budget are much, much less likely. Thank
you.
ends. 



I, j
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH DAMIEN MURPHY, 2WEB, BOURKE
APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
DM: Mr Keating, good morning and welcome to Bourke.
PM: Good on you, Damien. Nice to be here great to be here in the name
of Fred Hollows.
DM: Ever been to Bourke before?
PM: No. I have been, of course, all over being a New South Welshman -I
have been all over NSW, but I have always wanted to come to Bourke.
DM: A number of people have said over the last couple of days that really
with Fred Hollows the recognition hasn't come until his death it has
really sort of been since Fred Hollows died that, you know, all the
news about the good work that he did has come about. Now, you
actually met Fred Hollows what are your memories of the late
Professor?
PM: I don't think Fred was after recognition he was after results. And I
think that's why people admired him, and what I remember of him was
a very no-nonsense, straight to the point fellow who was a member of
the community. Though he was a professional, he dedicated himself
to people and he was a no-nonsense, down to earth, straight down to
the job sort of person.
DM: You have come a long way you have come up from Canberra last
night why have you made the effort to be here today for the launch of
the Fred Hollows race?
PM: I think that it is important that people who do good things like Fred
did, and where it is now being continued by the Hollows Foundation
with Gabi and Mike Lynskey and others that this sort of community 
2
activity should be celebrated and supported, because it is going on not
simply in Australia with disadvantaged communities like the
Aboriginal community but it is going on now in Nepal and Eritrea and
Vietnam and all these other places where hundreds and thousands of
people are going to be given back their sight. It is also a model for the
way we can approach the problem of health well, certainly health
problems of disadvantaged people direct, on the ground,
compassionate, practical. So these are the reasons we are here to
remember Fred and to support the Foundation.
DM: Professor Hollows was heavily involved in health care for indigenous
Australians, as you just mentioned, and made it his priority to care for
those free of charge who could afford nothing else are these the sorts
of values that are maintained by the Federal Government today?
PM: That's why we say the values one of the primary things that drives
Government policies is inclusion. That everybody... this is where
Medicare comes from you get medical support regardless of income,
and regardless of your circumstances but we want to make sure that
this universality of care and compassion goes to the most
disadvantaged. So that's why we are interested in the Aboriginal
community, that's why we are interested in the long-term unemployed,
it's why we try and say that this country the policies are there for
everybody. It is one nation, and it is inclusive. And I think Fred made
that very obvious he was doing he could have been a professional in
a ritzy house with a Mercedes under instead of that he was out
in the scrub looking after disadvantaged people. I think that same
spirit should pervade Government policy, and I can say that with this
Government, it does.
DM: Fred is buried at Bourke, of course that was his request it's a harsh
environment out here we have had the drought for the last 18 months
or so, and we did get some rain back in January. However, that rain
hasn't continued the drought is still a bit of a problem up here any
chance of a review of financial assistance policies for farmers?
PM: Let me tell you the Mayor said the moon looked pretty good last night,
and he thinks that the rain is coming there was half an inch overnight,
so was it half an inch, Wally? (" further out") Further out. Well
anyway I'm banking on him I think he is the best weather man I know
around here. And it's rain, of course, that matters in the farm analysis,
but what we have sought to do is to extend the Commonwealth's social
security system to farmers who have been severely affected by
drought, by removing the on-farm assets tests. Now, what that means
is that we discount the value of the assets to give people income
support. And I think we have now got about 10,000 families farm
families getting income support, where they weren't before. Because
the argument used to be you have got all these assets, but as we
know, those assets can't be eaten, and you can't dispose of them, so
then we have got of course the structural adjustment assistance 
through RAS the Rural Adjustment Scheme. And we have been
continuing to improve that over time. At any rate, I am going to meet
some of the people here today who have been affected by drought
just have a discussion with them.
DM: Just yesterday, newly elected State Premier Bob Carr announced that
he would be touring the State tomorrow and Friday if he determines
that there is more assistance required, will you be heeding that?
PM: We have a set of what we call national disaster relief arrangements,
and we have got an even more sophisticated set of arrangements now
with the drought because there has been this sort of impact on the
seasons that seems to have changed, and we have had more drought
than perhaps we have seen in a long time, and policy has adjusted
accordingly. So we have got a regime running with the States
particularly Queensland and NSW. But NSW was dragging the chain
on drought payments, and I hope Bob Carr does put the right amount
of time and attention to it.
DM: Liberal Senator from Western Australia, Noel Crichton-Browne, with
the domestic violence restraint order there should he stay, or should
he go?
PM: That's something for himself and the Liberal Party.
OMV: If there was somebody in the Labor Party who was involved in the
same sort of scandal if you like, what would you be suggesting they
do?
PM: These are basically personal matters, and they are for Parties to make
decisions about who they have representing them. I don't want to be
judgmental about Mr Crichton-Browne and the Liberal Party he has
got his own family and his own party to think about, and I'm afraid it is
a matter for them.
DMV: Top story of the day this morning is the super-league what do you
think about that?
PM: I think it has added a lot of spice to football, obviously. It's the biggest
news since World Series Cricket.
DM: Do you think there is any role for the Government in the super-league?
PM: A good role as a spectator, I can tell you that.
DM: Any deeper role than that Government intervention?
PM: I don't think so. 
DM: Okay. You wouldn't be worried then if the Rugby League split and
there were two competitions running concurrently?
PM: As long as league fans think there is a live, energetic competition out
there... when Rugby League moved to other States there was bound to
be some sort of change in the League, I think. But anyway, that is for
them to manage.
DM: You're a Canterbury supporter how would you feel if the team is
knocked out of the League next Tuesday?
PM: It depends whether the Sydney clubs which are now getting where
you can run a competition with the Bronco's and the Raiders with the
Sydney clubs the way they were I think probably what has happened
might have been inevitable, maybe it happened a bit faster with a
couple of big cheque books around.
DM: Prime Minister, super league or no super league, thanks very much for
your time today, and I hope you have a great day in Bourke.
PM: Good on you thanks Damien, good to be here.
ends. 



C:
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, BOURKE, WEDNESDAY, 5 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Well, I have just had a meeting with the farm community here and we
have just been talking about the problems of drought and drought
protection for the future, problems about water storage and how areas
like the western region here and NSW can survive drought into the
future. We discussed some of the measures the Commonwealth has
already introduced, some things that we might change and they are
going to give me a submission about that. But, I am happy to take
questions by and large.
J: You said this morning that you wanted to take the ' spirit of Fred
Hollows', of getting things done, to Aboriginal health. Can Carmen
Lawrence do that in control of the Department of Health?
PMV: I think that we spend $ 34 billion a year on health and the important
thing is to let the Aboriginal community into those big programs. I think
also the Commonwealth Department of Health has the possibility of
being able to deal with the State health departments to try to get some
of these services delivered. Anyway these are matters the
Government is currently reviewing.
J: You said you didn't want to interfere in the super league, but doesn't
the Government have a role in ensuring that the best football is free to
air?
PMV: The Government has got a thing called anti-syphoning rules, so that
the public are able to watch all the things that they currently see the
Winfield Cup is part of that and it is subject to it but this is not really a
matter for the Government. It is a matter for the courts, it is I think, a
matter for the rugby league and News Limited and the courts and we
will see what happens. We are seeing, obviously, a change in the
organisation of football, but the Government has always said and has
done what it said in protecting what one would term, supporters and
viewers interests in terms of sport and, of course, not just football. 
2
J: So, if it got to the stage where it wasn't going to be on free to air, you
could intervene?
PM: It is not a matter for us. This is really a matter for, as I say, News
Limited, the rugby league and the courts, I think.
J: Is Senator Noel Crichton-Browne someone that you feel should be in
the Senate?
PM: I think the important thing about this is that other people have been
saying correctly, I think, about Mr Howard that this is a test of his
leadership and he put around a day or so ago that he obliged Senator
Crichton-Browne to resign. In other words, ' look at me, what a strong
person I am'. It turned out that it's not true. I think Senator Crichton-
Browne resigned himself and notified Mr Howard. What this reveals is
what we have always known about Mr Howard he is utterly indecisive
and lacks strength. This was most obviously revealed when he had
two representatives representing himself on the Western Australian
executive and now, when faced with this sort of problem it gets
resolved by the Senator resigning himself, not being obliged to by Mr
Howard. This will be the same in every matter Mr Howard touches
lacks decisiveness and lacks strength.
J: Do you think Labor will do better in the Senate now in WA?
PM: The next Federal election is quite a way off, so I'm confident that when
we get past the fairy floss of polls and the rest down to the real issues
the Labor party didn't win five elections on the trot for nothing. It won
them because it was better. Thank you.
ends 



3
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
START OF THE WESTFIELD FRED HOLLOWS 500 INTERNATIONAL
RELAY RACE, BOURKE, WEDNESDAY, 5 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am delighted to be in Bourke, it is one of the few places in the far west of
New South Wales I always wanted to see, but somehow never got around to
it. I have today and what a lovely day it is too.
Could I say what a double pleasure it is being here associated with the spirit
of Fred Hollows. We look at the town of Bourke which has been riven by the
drought, where it has had to try to fight its way back. With all of its troubles it
has still got a big enough heart to do something like this, sponsor this race,
and to remember again Fred Hollows.
It is a great pleasure to be here with Gabi because, I think, the Hollows
Foundation typifies the thing that Fred was really great at and that is getting
on with it. He was unconventional and practical, but he got the job done and,
of course, we have another great challenge in Australia and that is, of course,
with Aboriginal health and a lot of the spirit of what Fred was about we want
to employ in dealing with that problem. That is direct attention to the problem
at hand. So, I think, that is a celebration of what Fred was able to do and
what now Gabi and Mike Lynskey and the Foundation have been able to
follow up. That is why we are here to support the run and to also remember
that international fraternalism that Fred sponsored in Nepal, in Vietnam and
in Eritrea and, of course, we have some runners here from Nepal and Eritrea
and Vietnam on this occasion today all three countries represented.
So, it is a great chance to renew that international fraternity, I think, that Fred
sponsored and to come to the place where Fred wanted his ashes scattered.
I know Bourke takes that responsibility, as the Mayor said, very seriously and
it is a great pleasure for me to be here, to be part of that fraternal spirit, part
of the spirit of Bourke and part of the spirit of Fred Hollows. I would like to
thank the Mayor, Wally Mitchell, and Frank Lowy from Westfield for
sponsoring this and it is a great pleasure for me to be associated, again, with
Fred Hollows and Gabi Hollows who has followed Fred's vision and work with
great fidelity.
Thank you very much indeed. 



PRIME MINISTER
"* EMBARGOED UNTIL 8: 30PM**
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
WALTZING MATILDA CENTENARY CELEBRATIONS
WINTON 6 APRIL 1995
This is a great honour. It is one to tell our grandchildren about: we were in the
North Gregory Hotel when Australia celebrated the first performance of Waltzing
Matilda 100 years ago.
And we were all in evening dress. Which is something the swagman would have
found amusing but maybe the squatter, the troopers and Banjo Paterson would
have appreciated it.
I'm sure they all would have liked the irony in it.
It is a great pleasure to be here and to see for the second time in two days the
spirit of rural Australia.
I was in Bourke yesterday another place in the romance of the swag. And
another place suffering the drought.
Yesterday in Bourke the town was gathered for an extraordinary event an
international marathon race from Bourke to Parramatta to raise money for the
Fred Hollows Foundation.
Fred Hollows is buried in Bourke and they celebrate his memory as a man who
loved the bush and the values of the people who live there.
His work was, in many ways, an extension of the old idea of mateship, and
through it he lifted all our spirits and raised our goals.
Here in Winton, in an altogether different way, these ceebrations are reminding
us of the same things. 
They are reminding us of the spirit of the bush and commemorating a song which
has lifted our spirits for 100 years.
There are no limits to the power of a good song.
I read on the way up here that 10,000 people would be in Witon this weekend:
so this has to be a very considerable boost to Winton as it struggles through the
drought. You see, music has more than charms it has profound economic effects.
In times like this it is not as good as rain, but it may well be the next best thing.
Waltzing Matilda was born in a drought era of course, and it is not hard to imagine
that this might have had some effect on the melancholy theme of the song. And
there is equally no doubt that in all the varieties of hard times Waltzing Matilda
has galvanised the spirit of counless Australians.
If culture is that which defines a people, if it is the expression of their collective
sentment, Waltzing Matilda sits at the centre of gI~ culture it's a well-spring of
the national sentiment, a pool, a billabong.
I suspect there is no one here who has not at some time, somewhere in the
world, heard or remembered the tune and felt deeply affected by it
I'm sure it has brought Australians home before they intended to, and given
others the strength to stay away a bit longer. For a century it has caused
Australian hearts to beat faster.
I venture to say it has caused more smiles and tears, and more hairs to stand up
on the backs of Australian necks than any other thing of three minutes duration in
Australia's history.
It has long been our unofficial national song. Not our anthem as I've said
before, one can't sing too solemnly about a jumbuck. But Waltzing Matilda is
Australia's song and it always will be.
Think what it has withstood down the years. Wave after wave of American and
British popular music. The cultural cringe and all that post-colonial posturing.
The urbanisation of Australia which might have been expected to dilute the old
bush sentiments. Mass immigration and multicultural Australia which changed
the face and the fabric of our society.
Watzing Matilda has endured them all. It has endured through wars and
depressions, good years and bad. It has endured some terrible renditions by
both local and overseas performers. 
I don't think we should make it official and issue some kind of decree; but I think
% w all know that Waltzing Matilda is at least as beloved as the anthem. It is to we
Australians what Land of Hope and Glory is to the British, or AmerIca the
Beautiful and God Bless America are to the people of the United States.
Anid, entirely without prejudice to the status of Advance Australia Fair, we might
sing Waltzing Matilda at a lot more public occasions than we presently do.
I hope these celebrations serve as a bit of a trigger for this.
I have no doubt that all through these celebrations people will be talking about
why Waltzing Matilda endures. Why ft means so much to us.
I know some will also be asking who the swagman was and what, therefore, the
song was meant to signify. I won't be buying into the historical debate, but I
suppose every Australian is entitled to say even obliged to say what the song
means to him or her.
I don't think I was the only Australian kid who wondered when he learned the
words at school what sort of swagman is this? Jolly one minute, drowning
himself the next?
These questions about the psychology of the swagman have never had the
weight of the social and political interpretations the ideological interpretations.
Paterson's words describe a class struggle, and if ever there was a class struggle
in Australia it was in the 1890s.
Its not hard to see the song as an affirmation of the idea of the fair go, which still
strikes a powerful chord in Australians. And may it always do so.
It is also about freedom. The swagman is a free spirit.
We can interpret Waltzing Matilda as a celebration of our rebellious nature, as
part of the tradition which began with the convict rebellion at Castle Hill and runs
all the way through Frank the Poet, the Eureka Stockade and Ned Kelly. We can
think of the swagman's jump into the billabong as an Australian statement of
liberty or death.
But, the truth is, none of these things come into my mind when I hear it sung.
They didn't come into my mind when the entire crowd gathered in Croke Park in
Dublin sang it before the Gaelic football final when I was there two years ago. 
I don't know what came into my mind then I think the experience emptied it of all
rational thought. But afterwards I was aware of the extraordinary power of this
song on an Australian's senses.
All sorts of music can move us, but to hear Waltzing Matilda sung so fervently
and beautifully by the people of another country 12,000 miles from home is to
know that nothing can move us like our own song.
It is to know that a national song is not something to be interpreted intellectually.
When you hear it, you don't think about a political position, or social and
psychological issues. You don't think about the historical context.
What Waltzing Matilda tells us in an entirely uncomplicated way is that we are
Australian. And it tells us in a way that I think is equally Australian in character it
tells us without beating drums or waving flags, or pounding our chests. It tells us
with a simple melody and a story, and a whimsical and ironic story at that.
There is no national song I know of quite like it in the world.
I'm sure what happened with Banjo Paterson and Waltzing Matilda happened in
the realm of the spirit.
I think he wrote a story to a tune which quite mysteriously in ways we'll never
know picked up the spirit of the place as Awt as then; and, like the ghost of the
swagman, it never died.
And it touches us as a ghost might. As the spirit of the bush might.
When we were kids the other line I think we used to wonder about was the one
which says that " his ghost may be heard as you pass by the billabong". I confess
to wondering what you would hear. What sort of noise would the old swagman
make what does it sound like when you stuff a jumbuck in a tucker bag?
It took me ages to realise that this was Banjo Paterson's whole trick the son is
the ghost of the swagman, and a hundred years later we are hearing it as loud as
ever. 


28/ 95
&nbsp;
The Government has agreed to implement a national strategy aimed for the adoption of&nbsp;new information and communications services and technologies the so-called
' information superhighway'.

These new services and technologies will change the way we live, work and play.&nbsp;Their effect on our businesses, our schools and universities, our hospitals, our
governments, and many other aspects of our daily lives, will be profound.

We have the opportunity to plan for a fairer, healthier, better educated and more&nbsp;productive ' information society, through a managed and consultative approach to the
use of information and communications services and technologies.

In building a national strategy, we will draw on a number of recent expert&nbsp;investigations into Information and communications services and technologies such as&nbsp;the Broadband Services Expert Group, the Australian Science and Technology Council&nbsp;review of the provision of Internet services in Australia, and an independent review of&nbsp;the Commonwealth's acquisition and use of information technology.

The best way to address the issues raised by these reports is through a coordinated and&nbsp;whole-of-government approach, particularly in the areas of formation of national
policy, the Government's own use of technologies, and industry development.

To achieve this, we will establish an Ad Hoc Committee of Cabinet, which I will chair,&nbsp;which will consider the development of a national strategy on information and
communications networks and services.

We will also establish a high level policy body within government, reporting to the Ad&nbsp;Hoc Committee of Cabinet through the Minister for Communications and thc Arts.
This body will provide advice on broad national policy issues, and also identify matters&nbsp;for discussion by government, industry and the community.

At the June 1994 meeting or the Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council,&nbsp;many of these reports were discussed, and significant national issues raised. Building
on these discussions, I have established the National Information Services Council&nbsp;under the auspices of this peak body. 
The National Information Services Council will be a high level discussion forum for&nbsp;broad policy issues, providing industry and community input into the Government's
consideration of the issues.

An important part of any national strategy will be addressing the Government's own&nbsp;use of communications services and technologies. We have decided to establish a
Government Information Services Policy Board to coordinate a user-driven whole-of- government approach to the Government's use of these important services and
networks. This Board will be chaired by a new position of Chief Government&nbsp;Information Officer in the Finance portfolio, and supported by an Office of&nbsp;Government Information Technology.

We are also considering ways in which we can stimulate the use of information and&nbsp;communications services and technologies in various sectors of the economy including
industry, education, employment, social services and other areas. We have agreed&nbsp;that: 
We will pursue the use of information and communications technologies to&nbsp;deliver government services to business, foster the development of information
technology and telecommunications industries in Australia, and explore ways of&nbsp;ensuring we have an effective science base.
We will explore ways of networking schools and TAFEs, and of making&nbsp;available educational services and content on public access networks.

We will develop the use of networks to improve the delivery of social and&nbsp;employment services to Australians, and as communication tools for&nbsp;communities. 
We will encourage best practice in the use of information and&nbsp;communications services and technologies in government, and as part of this
press forward with the staged implementation of electronic commerce by&nbsp;Commonwealth agencies.

These activities are a beginning. Clearly, much more will need to be done.

We have agreed that, over the next year, we will consider further the various issues&nbsp;relating to industry, social services, education, research, regulations, access, privacy,
security and a wide range of other factors affecting the uptake of the new information&nbsp;and communications services and technologies.

We aim to address these issues in a systematic way, and put in place, by the end of this&nbsp;year, processes and policies which will provide the leadership and framework for
moving into the next century.
&nbsp;
CANBERRA
6 April 1995 
&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
INTERVIEW WITH ANDY COPERMAN, RADIO 4RK, ROCKHAMPTON,
FRIDAY, 7 APRIL 1995
E OE PROOF COPY
AC: Mr Keating, good afternoon.
PM: How are you Andy?
AC: Very well. I guess because Waltzing Matilda is on everyone's lips, you
have just come from the Waltzing Matilda Centenary celebrations at
Winton yesterday, what was the feeling like there?
PM: There was, no doubt, all the feeling you would want to expect with a
centenary celebration and I said last night, this really is our national
song, it is not our national anthem but it is our national song. And
whenever you hear it sung particularly in a crowd, I was in Ireland
about 18 months ago at a place called Croke Park which is where they
hold the all Ireland football grand final, Gaelic football final, and there
was probably about 120,000 people there and they had six bands, at
any rate I was a sort of guest of the Irish Prime Minister and after I had
spoken and he had spoken the band struck up Waltzing Matilda and
the whole of the stadium sang it through all the verses, the five I think,
verses.
AC: I can't remember how many myself.
PM: Yeah, but they know all the verses and if you are an Australian, you
are sitting there and there are 100,000 people up singing a tune it
makes the hair stand up on the back of your neck I can tell you.
AC: Well I must ask this question, were you given a bit of a surprise when
Ted Egan shoved the microphone in your direction yesterday
afternoon or not. Because the grab that was played on the news this
morning perhaps wasn't all that flattering. Was that a bit....
PM: I didn't know what the grab was, what did it say? 
2
AC: There has been suggestions going around that you don't know the
words to Waltzing Matilda.
PM: Oh, he said let's sing the first verse. But it was a matter of, he had
such a big booming voice and he had the microphone and we let him
sing it, that was all.
AC: Yes, I think that is the case with Ted Egan. Well a celebration like this
with a song like Waltzing Matilda raises the issue of whether we got it
wrong at the referendum about the National Anthem, do you think that
perhaps we should put that vote to the people once again or not?
PMV: Oh no, you can't be solemn about someone putting a Jumbuk in a bag
can you, I mean, you know a jolly Jumbuk, jolly swagman he wasn't too
jolly when he jumped in the river so I mean, in a funny kind of way the
song has picked up a lot of national sentiment but it is not a solemn
song, it is not the Anthem and the Anthem is fine as far as I'm
concerned.
AC: Although you could look at it as if it is an unemployed person who
steals some food and then commits suicide to avoid being captured by
the police, I mean that is one way of looking at it isn't it?
PM: Or, it could be a defiant person, a sort of liberating message and sort
of egalitarian message. The thing is, I don't think the song needs to be
dissected and say what does this really mean, what did Paterson mean
when he wrote this line, but rather it is the emotional impact of the
thing. It is a song that I'm sure most Australians have felt emotional
about at some point or another.
AC: I'm sure we agree with you there. Before we go to some calls a topic
which has been raised here today and, perhaps, you might be
interested in giving us some comments and an issue perhaps that is
more dear to the hearts of us is the super league football competition.
What is your feeling on that?
PM: Well it is a matter for the league, that is my feeling about it. What is
driving this is one television medium competing with another. I mean,
it is a medium change issue. That is, free to air television has been
the medium in Australian television and the medium that is coming via
fibre optic cables and satellite is pay television. And the other thing
about pay television, of course, is it is traded internationally, products
traded internationally. So obviously News Limited which runs an
international pay television business is wanting product for its system
and for Australia and the free to air stations, in this case Channel 9, is
seeking to protect the franchise it has over the existing rugby league.
Now entering into that also the dynamic of the fact that you have got
the Broncos and the Raiders and these other out of Sydney clubs has
changed the nature of the competition, seen more stars develop and, I
mean, what's happened now is the catalyst of the television change is
producing change which picks up the shift to the big regional and city
state clubs.
I 
AC: Michael Lee has given a commitment that the existing major sports will
always be shown on free to air television. If the Super League does
take over from the ARL as the major rugby league competition in
Australia, and that is only to be shown on pay-television, won't that
throw that commitment to..
PM: I don't think so, because I think Mr Cowley said on behalf of News
Limited they had no intention of flouting the syphoning rules and this is
basically not a matter for the Government this is a matter for the
league. As far as we are concerned, we've said that we have this thing
called anti-syphoning which means, taking the code out of it, really
means that somebody can see the rugby league, in this case the
Winfield Cup, on free-to-air television and it isn't taken and syphoned
onto pay-television. So we have what's called anti-syphoning rules.
Now they will cover all of the major things but they won't cover every
contingency of course. And the other thing about the existing
television of football is that, you know, on a Sunday night you might
see 40 minutes of the game of the day. You don't see all the other
matches. But, of course, with pay-television you will be able to see
nearly all the matches.
AC: I'll just repeat that, if the Super League does take over, enforces the
end of the ARL, will that mean that people will have to pay to watch
any rugby league coverage?
PM: Well News Limited, which is now the one promoting the Super League,
say that they won't be doing anything which is contrary to the
syphoning rules so I don't think it will arise.
AC: All right, well on that note we might go to our first caller which I guess
will be back to Waltzing Matilda, this is Richard.
C: Good afternoon and good afternoon Mr Keating.
PM: How are you Richard?
C: Mr Keating, I've just released this week my fourth history of Waltzing
Matilda Waltzing Matilda Ballad of the Fair Go And in that book I
quote what Banjo Paterson wrote about the song and I'd like to read to
you and ask your opinion on Banjo Paterson's account. He refers to
the origins and history tells us quite definitely that he wrote the song in
January 1895 and that was just 14 weeks after the burning of
Dagworth woolshed and the death of Samuel Hothmeister. Now I will
read what Banjo Paterson says, it comes from a story called Golden
Water from a radio broadcast in the 1 930s.
AC: Could I interrupt you here and ask you to be quite brief please Richard
we do have a lot of people coming afterwards?
C: Okay, well this is what Banjo says. He says that the striking shearers
burnt down MacPherson's woolshed and a man was picked up dead, 
this engendered no malice and I've seen MacPhersons handing out
champagne through a pub window to these very shearers and here a
personal reminiscence may be worth recording while resting for lunch
or while changing horses on our for and hand journey Ms MacPherson
used to play a little Scottish tune on the zither, I put words to it and
called it Waltzing Matilda. I'd just like Mr Keating's comment on that,
what Banjo said.
PM: Well I think he has obviously got a catchy tune regardless of its
Scottish antecedence and he's obviously had some impression or
some impact on him on this person who supposedly put the Jumbuk in
the bag and been chased by the police and written this thing. It is not
clear what he meant to say other than the words, that is what the
meaning behind the words was, but as I said a bit earlier in the
program I don't think the song is to be dissected or psychologically
analysed. I mean the thing is in its melody and in its words and it is
very much, I mean you see the British sing land of hope and glory and
the Americans sing God bless America, I mean, this is the Australian
equivalent. And I think it is the emotionalism of the song it is now the
main message, and I said last night, the ghost of the swagman's ghost
I think the ghost is the song, it's still around. That is, the song is still
around so the ghost is still around.
C: Do you think it's the ballad of the fair go, Mr Keating.
PM: I think it has got these egalitarian tones through it. And I think I agree
with you about that. Yes I do.
AC: To move on to the next caller if you don't mind. This is Len.
C: Good afternoon.
PM: Len, how are you.
C: Not too bad, yourself?
PM: I'm good thanks.
C: I've just got a quick question in respect to reconciliation and I'm just
wondering why it is not possible for the Aboriginal community to induct
or initiate all Australians into their tribes and cause a one united new
nation to be formed in Australia. I mean it is our practice in Australia to
do this we call it naturalisation, but the Aboriginal community tell me
that that is impossible to do, I was just wondering if Mr Keating could
tell me why?
PM: I don't know why. I mean, it is like a pole trying to induct you and say
that you are Polish or a Scotsman trying to induct me and say that I'm
a Scot, I mean I'm not. I suppose that is the reason. Beyond that I
don't think the argument follows that therefore we can't be one nation.
I think that the multicultural ism of this country, I mean we have
accepted here people from all over the world living here in great 
harmony and to accept them but not accept the first Australians would
be a real damnation of the whole spirit of cooperation, of assimilation
that we are now so proud of and I think the whole notion of racism
towards Aboriginal people has declined recently I think that things like
Mabo have made Australians feel better about the fact that we have
come to terms with these terrible wrongs and that they are being put
right, if late, and that sense has given the reconciliation council and
the whole process of reconciliation some real wind behind it.
C: What I'm saying is that we as Australians like you say, we accept
people from all over the world into here and we have accepted the first
nation people as far as we're concerned. But it seems to be that they
have initiated white Australians into tribes before it is a practice. But to
put it up and say well look we've taken this step, why not a step from
your direction which is a practice of your culture and initiate us all into
the Aboriginal community, all under the one flag?
PM: I don't think you should try and assume or paint the argument that
they, the victims, in some way are now doing the wrong. They are the
people who have been wronged. They, very clearly have been the
victims. And if there is magnanimity it is to flow from us to them and
not the other way around. Not that they haven't participated in this
country in its sports, in its civic life, in its defence, all the things that we
have required of ourselves, we have required of them and they have
done. I don't think one can take the view and say because some
Aboriginal tribe isn't initiating the whole Australian nation there is
something wrong with them. The fact that they may have given entry
and initiation to some non-Aboriginal people is a tribute to those
people I guess.
AC: I'm afraid we have to move on from you Len, thanks very much for your
call this afternoon to the Sunshine coast now and Judy joins us.
Good afternoon Judy.
C: Good afternoon.
PM: Judy how are you doing?
C: I'm well thanks. How are you doing?
PM: Good.
C: First of all just on the subject Waltzing Matilda I think you really hit it
on the head there when you said people are trying to dissect it far too
much. It really is a song, its a great song and I think people should just
accept it for that.
PM: That's right. For its emotional value.
C: What my question was actually about Mr Keating, was with work that
I'm involved in I come across the question a lot from my clients about
the current negative gearing laws and I'm being continually asked if the 
6
Government is going to change that and I would just like to know if the
Labor Government has any plans to change it?
PM: We did change it in the 1980s, but we changed it back and the reason
we did was because that is negative gearing is where people write
off against other income the costs of holding some asset like property,
a rental property, and they deduct the costs against their other income.
When we turned our back against it in the mid 1980s it was because
the people who were doing it never intended to pay any tax. That is,
when the rent and say the interest became the same, they would then
sell the property so at no stage did the Tax Commissioner or the
Commonwealth ever get we recognised the cost, but the
Commonwealth never got a benefit. But when the capital gains tax
was introduced it meant then that once they sold the property
C: That's when they pay their tax.
PM: they paid their tax then. So, there was some symmetry in the
negative gearing on the one side and capital gains on the other. And
that is why it has stayed the way it has ever since.
C: And there is certainly no plans to change that?
PM: Well, there has been none on our part.
C: All right, thanks for your time.
AC: To Jeff in Harvey Bay.
C: Hello.
PM: How are you Jeff?
C: Not too bad. I'm visiting Australia from England. I am an Australian,
but I've lived abroad for 20 odd years and I want to say how pleased I
was to see how Australia has developed. But I want to get onto this
question of nationalism and pride in one's country and how I feel that it
can go overboard and become quite dangerous particularly in Europe,
in Bosnia for example and in the Soviet Republic..
PM: And Germany in the Second World War..
C: Of course.
PM: The most obvious example of it, Japan in the Pacific in the 1940s. I
mean I think we agree, I think nationalism, that is misplaced sense of
national sentiment, self importance, superiority breeds contempt for
other countries.
C: It does, it breeds intolerance. 
PM: It breeds intolerance whereas I think, you know, one's got to have that
and that is one of the great things about Australia. We have never had
that sense of self importance about ourselves that was in some way
menacing someone else. But one thing we have had, that is a sense
of tolerance and a sense of identity and I think it is important that the
country understands itself, understands what it has become and is
proud of what it has become. I think that is a different thing altogether.
C: Well, it is. I am very pleased to see more and more multi-racialism in
Australia and very pleased to see Afro-Carribeans and all sorts of
different races on the streets, in the cities and in the country too, I think
it is a great thing.
PM: It is, our most successful post-war change perhaps has been this
change to a multi-cultural, multi-racial country and the fact that we
have made the change so smoothly and so well attests, I think, to the
great tolerance in this country which comes from our sense of
democracy. The reasons, I think, Australians give other Australians
intellectual room and space and respect comes from that sense of
democracy which is very deep rooted here.
C: I want to say too how much Australians are admired abroad,
particularly in England and in Europe, generally they have a very good
name and it makes me very proud.
AC: Just on the subject of multi-culturalism, do you think that perhaps the
celebration of Waltzing Matilda, getting back to that, is celebrating an
Australia which is no longer there, in that now we have this incredible
multi-culturalism which we didn't have 100 years ago?
PM: A lot of what was there then isn't here now, but Australia has gone on
to become a different country than that which it was, I guess all
countries do this in 100 years, but we certainly have. But, the song
has gone on to become part of the modern us, the modern Australia.
So, it is just as capable of being celebrated, I mean look, countries
rarely pick up, I mean most countries have national songs, they don't
have too many of them.
AC: You don't think that the people who are going out to Winton are going
1wow isn't it wonderful, we have got Waltzing Matilda', are crying for
the days before multi-culturalism. Is that reading too much into it?
PM: I don't think so. There would be a few conservatives around who decry
the change in the place and wish we could, sort of, wind the clock
back, but winding the clock back has not got much going for it.
C: Hello, Mr Prime Minister.
PM: Theresa, how are you doing?
C: Very well. I just wanted to let you know that I think you are not doing a
bad job. 
PM: That is kind of you, thank you.
C: Yes, and I hope you continue to do so.
PM: Well, we had some interesting data out last week. We had what is
called the National Accounts that is the dip stick we put into the
economy every three months and that showed that the Australian
economy is growing at five per cent and with about one per cent
inflation.
C: Yes.
PM: And you have got to go back, well probably I can't remember any year
much in the post-war years where we had the concurrence of five per
cent growth, one per cent inflation, four per cent employment growth.
So something good is happening out there.
C: Of course it is, and I wish you and your family all the best.
PM: That is very kind of you, thank you.
AC: Betty in Longreach.
C: Good afternoon, Mr Keating.
PM: How are you Betty?
C: Very good thank you and yourself?
PM: I'm great.
C: That's good and you are doing a good job and the other one said the
same thing. What interests me the most is tourism. Tourism is a great
industry for the people of the interior, no matter what state we live in,
and they expect an increase from 15 million to 42 million in the year
2003 I heard on the news this morning which is another great thing.
But the thing which we think of a lot is trying to get tourists from every
area in Australia out here and we would like to know if there is
anything being done on the Kennedy development road between
Winton and so we can get some of our tourists from up around
Cairns. We hear a lot about strategy, eco-tourism, infrastructure and
what have you and we all know the cost of these all weather roads are
enormous, but there is other alternatives and some of the Shires have
come up with, especially the Shire, they have got an innovative and
economical efficient alternative where they use geotextiles
reinforcement seal and the cost then would only be $ 12 million
compared with $ 148 million for bitumen. And I was just wondering if
we could have this road, so we would have an all weather road right up
to Cairns and there is a lot of people on the coastal regions who would
love to come out here and we haven't got a road that would bring them 
9
through into Longreach to our heritage centre in Barcaldine. I was just
wondering if there is anything you could possibly do about this?
PM: When the One Nation package was introduced in 1992 we were
building and sealing a highway running up from South Australia, up
through western NSW and into Queensland. Now, a lot of that is
sealed, a bit of it is yet to be sealed, my geography lets me down here
a bit, I'm not just certain where this connects up to the arterial roads
and highways out through Longreach and Winton. But, I do
understand the points you are making and can say that, I think, still a
lot of the ethos of Australia is a celebration of the bush and the bush
values.
C: This is right.
PM: And I think the places you mention, Longreach and Barcaldine
C: You see, they are talking about stopping the train because it is not
economic run between Winton and Herindom, and if we had an all
weather road there they could use that for the train and then also we
can get our tourists down, we have got an all weather road then from
right up in Cairns to right down through this region here and another
thing there has been four generations of my family lived here in and
still no all weather road.
PM: No, no, well you have been waiting a while haven't you.
C: Yes.
PM: You really have. Well look, we have made great strides with the
national highway system which the Commonwealth runs.
C: Yes, I know, the Matilda Highway is one of the best.
PM: We run the national highways, the States run the arterial highways and
arterial roads and we made this division some years ago. That is, the
national highway system the Commonwealth funds and runs. The
arterial roads the States do. But we have taken over some of the
bigger state roads and turned them into highways and that was the one
I mentioned in One Nation. Any rate I'll look my geography up as a
result of your call and see whether you are actually in this system. It
may be you are there and are just waiting for the favour to turn up.
C: Just waiting for that. Thank you Mr Keating.
AC: Mr Keating, you had a meeting this afternoon with some Central
Queensland University students, I understand there was a bit of anger.
PM: No, there wasn't.
AC: It was foreshadowed that there might be a little bit of anger regarding
HECS. 
PM: No, they were really very sweet, very polite.
AC: Can you reassure them that HECS will not be increased in the Budget?
PM: No, I think you have got to understand what the issues are. They are
that there is a fear on the part of students that the Government will go
for up-front fees for under graduates. This has always been a furphy.
I don't know how it has got around and I made very clear today and I'm
happy to make clear here that this Government does not believe in full,
up-front fees for university students. By contrast, my opponents in the
last election, the Liberal party in the last election, wanted full fees for
university students which meant that only the children of the wealthy
could go to university. Now, I made the point to them, one of the ways
we've taken university places from 320,000 in 1988 to 560,000 today
and that is a 36 per cent increase in funding in places and the reason
that has happened is because we now ask students to pay about
per cent of the cost of a university place in the higher education charge
HECS but they pay it back when they get into work. But, all of that
money is not kept by the Commonwealth government. It all goes back
into places. So, if you take the university where I was today, Central
Queensland here, about a third of those people on campus wouldn't be
there without HECS. So, one of the points I'm making, you know, I've
had people objecting to HECS, well HECS is the way where the young
people, the children of working class people get into university. Before
that it was basically preserved for people on high incomes. That is
why HECS is such a fair arrangement.
The altercation I had a couple of weeks ago was with not an
unemployed person, but with a student who didn't want to pay HECS.
And I made the point, well, if you don't want to pay HECS give your
place in university to somebody who does.
AC: Fair enough. Later on today you are heading to the Capricorn coast,
what will you be doing there?
PM: Today, can I just say a couple of things, one of the things that I was
very pleased to do today with Majorie Henzell who is with me in the
studio is that we were with the Vice-Chancellor of the University
opening the computer communications centre which the
Commonwealth has just funded $ 5.5 million of a $ 7 million centre at
the University which will virtually connect the University through the
information highway and provide Central Queensland this capacity on
that campus for information technology and computer technologies.
That is one of the principal things I was doing today. Later on I am
seeing a group of people down on the coast just to have a talk to them
and to have dinner tonight with some of the business community and to
just talk about issues. For instance, generally that is, business tourism
and in the discussions this afternoon when I leave here I am seeing a
group on the coast to talk about Shoalwater Bay which I was very
pleased to be able to be involved with in preserving that wonderful 
area for this community here and for posterity. So, I am looking
forward to a good discussion down there.
AC: We have got one minute left, we'll go to one final call.
C: Good afternoon, Prime Minister. I would just like to say I think you are
doing a pretty good job over all. However, the Government doesn't
seem to be doing very much to promote ' buy Australian made', you
know to promote supporting Australian companies, Australian owned
companies and to buy Australian made because if we did I thought we
would improve our balance of payments problem pretty quick.
PM: Well, we do encourage it, but you see, where we encourage it most is
with exports. We get other people outside of Australia to buy Australia
and that is where it matters most and it may just be worth your while to
know this, that ten years ago we exported 14 per cent of all we
produce. Today it is 22 per cent. That is an eight percentage point
difference, but eight per cent of our economy is worth $ 30 billion a
year. So, we have got somebody buying $ 30 billion of Australia out
there around the world and that is the best buy Australia program I can
think of.
AC: Mr Keating, thanks very much for coming in this afternoon.
PM: Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CENTRAL QUEENSLAND UNIVERSITY, ROCKHAMPTON, QLD
7 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'm happy to take the odd question from you.
J: Mr Keating, there still seems to be some student anger at your recent
comments?
PM: Not very much, I don't think, because they now know that I wasn't
addressing an unemployed person, I was addressing a University student
who didn't wan to pay the HECS fee. And, I made the obvious point if
you don't want to pay your HECS fee, give your place to somebody who
does. And, as a consequence, it means that the nation is investing fourfifths
of the cost of every University course in a young person who can
then go out in the top deciles of wage and salary earners. So they have to
repay the Commonwealth for one-fifth of the cost of their education after
they start work. So, it is eminently fair, and of course, we have put all that
money back into University places. so roughly one-third of all the students
in this campus wouldn't be here without HECS.
J. Do you regret the comment in the first place, though?
PM: Well, the comment was directed to some person who wanted us to pay for
their fees exclusively, and of course that would just take us back to the old
system where only the wealthy had places in universities.
J: The High Court has handed down a decision today which means that State
public servants can switch to the federal award do you feel vindicated?
PM: Well, I think we have extended as the States have adopted obscurantist
laws and policies we have extended the Federal industrial relations
jurisdiction. And, we have left it to employees and unions to decide 
whether they want to be Federally registered, and of course, they have
voted with their feet in seeking to be so registered. And, so, I think this
decision is probably a vindication of the Commonwealth's position.
J, Mr Howard on the Noel Crichton-Browne affair earlier this week you said
that he should show some strong leadership, and today he has come out
and said that you can do that with a softly-softly approach do you feel the
same way?
PM: If Mr Crichton-Browne leaves his Senate place, it will obviously have
nothing to do with Mr Howard's leadership it will just be sheer attrition.
And, therefore, it proves the point that it is not thoughtfulness... .1 mean Mr
Howard he is a real wordsmith. He is out there now trying to say, " Well,
it's thoughtful I'm taking a thoughtful, conservative approach to this".
What he has taken is a weak and indecisive approach to it, and if the
Liberal Party insist that Mr Crichton-Browne give up his Senate place, it
will have nought to do with Mr Howard's leadership.
J: And child care you made that promise in 1993
PM: I'm not going through Budget things here. The whole of the outlay system
is under review. This Government has extended child care as no other
Government before when we became the Governiment, there were
45,000 childcare places. We are well on our way now when we are getting
to the point when all the childcare places on demand in this country will be
met.
J: But will you be breaking that election promise?
PM: I just said I'm not going through outlays discussions anything else?
J: What message do you have for the Central Queensland home-owners
struggling with the interest rate hikes?
PM: I am just saying that we have still got relatively low interest rates by
Australian standards it is just that they got to be so low that they were
probably unsustainable. They have now come up a bit but only by a
couple of percent and now the Government is working flat out on the
Budget, and a good Budget will make further increases to the interest
rates far less likely. And, I think that's what most people are worried about
they are worried about the prospect of future interest rates, rather than
what has happened. And, last week we had some national accounts data
-zhnwinn the eoanory slowing a the Govemnmont wntohod it would and
which has proved that the earlier interest rate adjustments are working,
and that coupled with a good Budget means that interest rates rising in 
the future will be less likely, and that must be good news for home owners.
Thank you.
J: And just lastly on the drought?
PM: On the drought I will give you a comment the Government has already
acknowledged the difficulties of the drought, and when I came here with
Marjorie Henzell in the later part of last year, we made quite revolutionary
changes to income support. And, as a consequence, we have removed
the farm assets test for the receiving of Social Security support. We now
have 10,000 farm families getting that support. But, nothing can support
them like rain, and so we are hoping that there is now some reasonable
follow up rains to the January rains. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER: S. 29/ 9'
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ1 KEATING MP
PROPOSED TRANS-TASMAN MUTUAL RECOGNITION AGREEMENT
I am pleased to announce today a decision by the Council of Australian
Governments ( COAG) to release, in conjunction with the New Zealand
Government, a discussion paper on ' A Proposal for the Trans-Tasman Mutual
Recognition of Standards for Goods and Occupations'.
The objective of the proposed scheme is to reduce regulatory barriers to the
trans-Tasman trade of goods and movement of people practising registered
occupations. The release of the discussion paper marks the commencement
of a public consultation period lasting until 31 July.
One of the early initiatives of COAG was the signing of the Mutual
Recognition Agreement ( MRA) in May 1992.
The MRA was a significant reform for Australia. For the first time, an
enterprise could sell its products anywhere in Australia without having to
comply with a range of different State regulations relating to product
standards, testing and certification, packaging and labelling.
In many instances, this has led to reductions in compliance costs and
increased economies of scale for business as well as greater choice for
consumers. Similarly, a person registered to practise an occupation in one State or
Territory is now able to obtain automatic registration to practise an equivalent
occupation in any other, without having to go through the whole registration
process again.
A Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Agreement would extend the application
of mutual recognition to New Zealand, leading to benefits for Australian and
New Zealand businesses, consumers and service providers.
Tariff barriers having been eliminated between Australia and New Zealand
under the Closer Economic Relations ( CER) Trade Agreement, a mutual
recognition agreement would reduce barriers to trade arising out of divergent
regulations and standards. 
For Australian business, a TTMRA will create a market of over 20 million
people in which they can sell their goods free of tariffs and regulatory barriers
to trade.
Initiatives to support the reduction of regulatory barriers to trade are being
considered by APEC.
A Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Agreement would put Australia and New
Zealand at the forefront of reducing regulatory barriers to trade and set a
positive example to other APEC members as to what is achievable.
CANBERRA 11 April 1995 



7
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7.30 REPORT, 11 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Well, despite such misgivings, the PM and the Premiers struck a deal
in record time today over lunch and I have now been joined by the
Prime Minister. Paul Keating, welcome.
PM: Thank you, Paul.
PL: Well, it must have been a very convivial lunch, or did you just produce
a bigger bucket of money?
PM: Well, it's taken a couple of years and three meetings. You might recall
the Darwin meeting where we didn't agree and it was a case of then
trying to quantify these benefits and then go back to the drawing board
to see how we might divide potential future revenue streams and
what's happened today is a very historic thing. I mean, it's probably
the most productive Premiers' Conference, Council of Australian
Governments meeting, that I have attended and it is because I think
that competition has worked for Australia. One of the reasons why we
have got low inflation and high productivity is because of the
competition which this Labor Government has introduced to Australia.
Now, on this occasion we had the Premiers, that's Labor and Coalition,
and let me say Premier Wayne Goss and Jeff Kennett, not just Jeff
Kennett or Richard Court as described by your guest, helped in this for
the main reason because it will benefit all consumers.
PL: Yes, but what of David Bund's argument that the Industry
Commission's estimate of the benefits are vastly overblown and you
could live to regret this agreement?
PM: Yes, well it's just conservatism it's just what the Telecom unions had
to say before we set up Optus as a competitor. I mean, Telecom is not 
privatised, yet Telecom tariffs have come down enormously, service
has gone up. At this point, Australian Airlines, Qantas, is not
privatised but air fares have fallen by 25 per cent and passenger
movements have increased by 65 per cent. Competition works and
those who bode ill, you know, [ and say] " beware, beware" it's just
naked conservatism and, from the point of view of the unions, selfinterest.
PL: Well, you have offered the States a big bucket of money over the next
ten years what have they got to do to earn it?
PM: Well, they have to meet certain benchmarks. They have got to
introduce competition, they have got to allow the Trade Practices
Commission, which has applied to the Commonwealth's regime all
these years to apply to their own, and they have got to meet certain
benchmarks which includes the reform of electricity, of water, and of
free and fair trade in gas amongst other things.
PL: So how will your average Aussie family tell the difference we'll get a
smaller electricity bill, will we?
PM: Like you get a smaller phone bill. But more than that, because we've
got a coal seam right down the east coast of Australia, it ought to be
one of our great natural advantages. It hasn't been because of these
large monoliths like Pacific Power and the SECV. When we make
them competitive, you will find the cheaper electricity brings the bigger
industries and it becomes a real national advantage for the country.
PL: But is it cheaper for big business, or cheaper for mums and dads?
PM: It's cheaper for everybody. It will be cheaper for consumers generally
and it will be cheaper for business consumers of large licks of
electricity, or large licks of water or gas, and they're the things which
give you an advantage in the world. I mean, all countries have got to
find their comparative advantage. One of ours happens to be energy,
water these sorts of things. Now, it's a big undertaking, but again,
that's why today's reforms are very historic and don't let any special
pleading diminish the strength of them.
PL: It won't mean lots of job losses, it won't mean losers as well as
winners?
PM: Well, in a more competitive economy you end up with more growth and
more employment. In the last year we've had four per cent
employment growth. We've had over just since the last election, we've
had over 560,000 jobs growth. If you take Telecom as an example,
Telecom over time has put people off to make it more efficient, but they
have gone and got jobs elsewhere in the economy. Because an
economy which is growing and which is efficient produces new jobs. 
That's the essence of a revitalised economy. See in the National
Accounts that came out last week, Paul, we had five per cent growth,
inflation running at one per cent, four per cent productivity growth and
four per cent employment growth. I mean, I have never seen figures in
the 26 years I have been in public life like that. It's not happening by
accident it is happening by pian.
PL: When are we going to see the benefits of this regime coming through,
and how are we going to know like benchmark it as it happens?
PM: The competition council will basically be required the National
Competition Council, which is to be set up will be required to give the
tick to each State to say whether they pass the threshold points for
electricity, for water, for whatever, ports, wharves, et cetera. And, at
that point, they get the next tranche of the Commonwealth payments.
In other words, it is a performance related set of payments for States
that do want to change things.
PL: There is a big carrot hanging out there in front of the Premiers?
PM: Yes, there is and it is more than the carrot, I think. Well, to some
extent it is a carrot, but perhaps more than that, it is to say that there is
an incentive here, but there is also a clear benefit. Remembering that
some States have done some of these things without any carrot. They
have done them for the same reason that the Commonwealth did it in
telephones, in ports and wharves, in tariffs because, basically, it is
good for Australia, good for the community, good for employment and
good for living standards.
PL: You talked earlier today of a fairer as well as a more efficient
economy. What happens to community service and consumer
interests in this drive for competition?
PM: Well take motor cars, lower tariffs have given Australians cars at about
$ 8,000 $ 10,000 per car cheaper. That is fairer because they get a
better go. That means your living standards are higher because you
can afford vehicles you wouldn't otherwise be able to afford. We have
had a 65 per cent increase in air travellers in the last two years. There
is a whole community of people that haven't travelled before, that is
fairer. Why are they travelling Paul? Because it is cheaper. Why is it
cheaper? Because of competition policy in airlines.
PL: On another matter, what is your reaction to the comments by Labor
backbencher Russ Gorman, that when domestic violence is alleged
restraining orders are too easy to get?
PM: Well, I got asked about this today. I mean, what's happened here is
we have had an internecine civil war in the Liberal Party in Western
Australia and the device they have used to gemmy Senator Crichton-
Browne out of the Senate, claims about his private life. The Labor
Party doesn't run those sorts of arguments in its party. We don't run
people's private jives up and down to remove people and what they
are now trying to say is we are all besmirched by this and now we will
besmirch others.
PL: They are implying that Labor MPs have a few dark secrets as well.
PM: Well, no doubt, there is quite a few people who have dark secrets,
including all the way up and down the Press Gallery here and right
through the bureaucracy, out there in the community.
PL: Is there any room in your Caucus for men who bash women?
PM: Well, I don't approve of these things obviously. But again, we are not
about to have a witch hunt which is begun with an internecine war
inside the Liberal Party.
PL: Is the Health Minister's role in the tragic Penny Easton affair a witch
hunt?
PM: I think so. It is the same thing. I mean, the Liberal Party is full of
rancour and this is one of the points I have been making, nobody
should assume that this motley outfit which has never been a national
party, which is just a complexion of states, that John Howard can run it,
there is hatred amongst these people like none of us have ever seen.
PL: But, these allegations about Dr Lawrence are coming from Keith
Wilson, a former Labor State Minister.
PM: Yes, but the claims have been made earlier by the Liberal Party.
PL: Well, he was an Anglican Minister through the years, he is a man of
some reputation. Don't you take them seriously?
PM: She denies those claims and I take her word.
PL: Finally the Japanese Yen, are we seeing some sort of blip here or is
this a watershed with big implications for Australia?
PM: I think this has been on a long time. The Yen has been strengthening
from 150 yen to the dollar to now 80 odd yen to the American dollar.
This is going to produce huge fractures in Japan, it is putting all of
their production off shore.
PL: They buy a lot of raw materials from us, does this affect our..
PM: It will affect us, but by the same token what will also affect us will be
the fact that a lot of their production will be in other places and we will 
be still sourcing that. But, this comes from the fact that there has not
been enough domestic spending in Japan savings too high and
domestic spending too low. In the United States its domestic spending
too high, savings too low. And those two things have been driving the
gap between their currencies and no amount of central bank mucking
about, trying to set a rate will fix this other than a change of
fundamental policies in both countries.
PL: But that takes time, of course.
PM: That is going to take time.
PL: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.
ends 



D
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 11 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: I'm sure you would like a comment on the Premiers' Conference just
to say that we have already agreed to the... . the States and Territories
have agreed to the offer document, in relation to the annual Loan
Council Premiers' Conference component of this meeting. This is, as
you know, a joint meeting in a sense, a dual meeting it's the
Premiers' Conference, Loan Council and a Council of Australian
Governments meeting. On the first part of the meeting the Premiers'
Conference and Loan Council the Commonwealth provided an offer
document, and that offer has been accepted. We have now begun to
consider the Council of Australian Governments agenda, and the first
item on that agenda is competition policy, and we are now discussing
competition policy and its implementation, the Industry Commission
Report, and what financial commitment the Commonwealth may make
to the States. Now, you would be aware that yesterday late last
evening we circulated an offer document to the States, in respect of
the competition policy changes. Now, this is in response to their
expectations about revenue from the Commonwealth in lieu of changes
they might make under the competition principles. You will recall that
there has been a report by the Industry Commission looking at
potential benefits to the Commonwealth and the States from these
things. Now, the Commonwealth said very clearly that we don't believe
there is any reason why one Commonwealth dollar should be paid to
the States for competition policy, any more than we have asked the
States to pay the Commonwealth for the $ 7 billion we have already
forgone on tariff cuts, for the $ 5-6 billion a year we will continue to
forgo on tariff cuts, let alone all the other micro-economic changes.
But we do want to see this document agreed, you know now we have
been to two previous meetings, and in Darwin the Commonwealth's
attempts to have this agreed to were thwarted by the States
intransigence. This time they are in a better mood to adopt I mean,
it's always an irony that a Labor Government has got to extol the 
virtues of competition to conservative governments, but that has been
par for the course now for a number of meetings, and now we would
like to see it agreed. So, we are having a discussion about the
likelihood of the Commonwealth paying funds in satisfaction of a whole
set of benchmark commitments, to the implementation of broad ranging
reforms in electricity, water, gas etc. And we have broken for lunch,
and we will be just picking up the discussion over lunch, and in the
afternoon.
J: Does that mean you're willing to compromiseible?
PM: Well, we've been prepared all the way through to try and meet the
States on matters of legitimate concern to them and gradually we're
narrowing the field of disagreement down. But, were this to happen,
this would be a great change for the country. That is, one of
Australia's great natural advantages is a coal seam down the east
coast of Australia. It's not been one of our national natural advantages
because it's been controlled by monopolies. Whenever we've seen
market prices for gas and competition rules applying for gas, we've
seen more gas reserves and more gas. So, seeing these sorts of
changes come in would be good for the country, good for the States,
and good for the nation.
J: Did the Commonwealth have to make any changes on the grants
outcome to its circulated offer?
PM: On the Premiers Conference outcome?
J: Yes.
PM: No, no, basically, I think, in there of course we have real terms per
capita. This is the second year where we have, well certainly the time
that I was either Treasurer or Prime Minister, it's the second year only
that we've had not simply the real terms maintenance of the payments.
So there's a maintenance of the payments from the Commonwealth to
the States in terms of inflation-proofing them, but also adding a
population factor. So, what we call real terms per capita increases the
size of the pool on offer today and the States have accepted that offer.
J: Has there been an amended proposal from the Commonwealth on the
competition policy stuff this morning?
PM: No, no, there was one circulated though last night.
J: You mentioned tariff policy, are you pleased that Mr Howard has
embraced your tariff policy?
PM: Well, you know. this is follow-the-leader game. I mean, Mr Howard,
banner headlines, banner, banner, " Howard adopts the Government's
tariff policies". Well, he adopts nearly all of our policies. I always say 
to people, why then if they are looking for the next Government of
Australia after the next election, take the authors of the policies and
not the pretenders, not the copycats.
J: He says you have stolen half of his.
PM: Name one, name one.
J: So, do you believe Dr Lawrence's version of the Easton affair?
PM: She's denied I don't know much about the details of it, but she's
denied the role ascribed her by the Western Australian Liberal Party.
J: Do you accept that?
PM: Yes, I do.
J: Prime Minister, one of your backbenchers says that restraining orders
in domestic violence situations are too easy to secure. Do you think
that is a defensible position in this day and age?
PM: Well, we all stand on our own views in this business. But I think, the
great pity about this debate in recent times is that, well the
antecedents of the debate rather, is a political one not a moral one. It
is a civil war going on in the Western Australian Liberal Party and this
is the way they believe they should fight it and smear everybody on the
way through.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 31/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TASMANIA AND THE NATIONAL FOREST POLICY STATEMENT
I welcome the signing by Tasmania of the National Forest Policy Statement. The
signing means that the Statement is now truly national, with all States and
Territories party to it.
The Federal Government and the Tasmanian Government are now in a position to
work together to provide a long term future for an ecologically sustainable timber
industry and to put into place a system of comprehensive, adequate and
representative reserves to protect Tasmania's unique forests.
The Commonwealth and the Tasmanian Government have also signed a Statement
of Intent on forest management. This will enable an early start to be made on the
environmental, heritage, social and economic studies necessary for the
development of a Regional Forest Agreement ( RFA).
Importantly, it also guarantees protection of extensive areas of high conservation
value forest, pending the development of the RFA.
Subject to the outcome of the Commonwealth's statutory processes, Tasmania and
the Commonwealth have agreed to a rescheduling plan. This will maintain
employment in the industry, by shifting logging activities to coupes of lower
conservation value than those on the Commonwealth's interim protection list.
Tasmania has agreed to protect all areas on the interim protection list and the
Commonwealth will provide bridging assistance to Tasmania for road expenses
resulting from the rescheduling.
These agreements are sound outcomes for both Governments, and for the
environment and the industry.
( Note: The NFPS was signed by the Commonwealth and the other States and
erritories at COAG in Perth in December 1992).
CANBERRA 12 APRIL, 1995 



I L. II 1 LX VJ -JL% IIU I Jñ' VI.
OFFICE OF TriE PniME MINI51. R
CANBERRA
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME M IN ISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
JOHN HOWARD AND THE EASTON AFFAIR
There is no new evidence in Easton matter to Nvaritnt an eIXIInsIve independent inquiry into Carmen
LUwrence's invotveicnia.
Dr Lawrence's accomnt of the mantter is far and -mwaly the most crediblk.
This flltticr boils downr to the rcptit ioni of eaiiS by one former minister.-a former minister apparently
intent upon doing Dr Launce dAngc.
For Mr Howard to cngage in this s; habby call for an inquliry so soon afler his involvcment in the In
MeLacan aTairl is transparntlly hypcriical, lIe is seekinlg to use this aintter in a bid to cover the
gaping rinl which now exists In thle Westerr Australian Liberal Party
Mr Howard would like to distract from v hat is now one of the central facts of Austi-alian political life
that in one Stte or Australia thel iberal Party is coiipltlclv ad irreocably divided.
The Governmnt im'ill nor be playing NTr I lov: rrd's gairw by holding an inquii-y into this matter.
11 MI I loward Is interested in intrl des, he shiould run one in0o OW CChois1p llcityI n) t h S( 141lId Tan
McLaclhan aiThir te one from clch he hamsos glibly SliilrcJ ax% 1) a.
CANBERRA 17 APRIL, 1995 



TEL: 18. Apr. 95 1: 50 No. 012 P. O.
PRIME MINISTER 32/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
CAIRNS JOBSKILLS PROJECT
I am pleased to announce a $ 1.5 million project to train 135 unemployed North
Queenslanders to meet skills shortages in the region's building industry.
The plan Is the first Jobskills project In Australia to train unemployed people for
the private sector construction industry.
The continuing commercial construction boom in the region has resulted in a
shortage of skilled workers In the domestic sector. This project, funded by the
Federal Department of Employment, Education and Training's ( DEET)
Jobskiils program, will give job seekers the skills and experience needed to be
employed in the domestic construction industry.
The Government's employment White Paper, Working Nation, has increased
opportunities for training unemployed people to take up jobs in industries
experiencing labour shortages.
Trainees in the new North Queensland project will have six weeks training at
TAFE followed by 20 weeks on-the-job work experience and training with local
employers. This combination of on-the-job and formal training has proved
highly successful in helping unemployed people back into the workforce.
The Jobskills project was made possible through the cooperation of the
Queensland Master Builders' Association, the Australian Workers' Union and
the Federated Ironworkers' Association, with support from TAFE, Construction
Training OLD and DEET.
A full-time manager will be appointed to the project, supported by a
Management Advisory Committee comprised of representatives from the
Queensland Master Builders' Association, the AWU, TAFE, Construction
Training Qld ( CTQ) and DEET.
CAIRNS 186April, 1995
( For further Information: Lorraine Brophy, DEET Regional Manager,
07042 2222) 



TEL: 18. Apr. 95 0: 46 No. 004 P. 01/ 1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN MACKENZIE, RADIO 4CA, CAIRNS
18 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JM: With me in the studio today is the Prime Minister of Australia, Paul
Keating. Good morning and welcome.
PM: Good morning John good to be here.
JM: You are up here frequently I would imagine 2 or 3 times a year there
has got to be somethng about the place. I notice today front page of
the Cairns Post we are considered to be the best place in Australia to
live, as far as capital cities are concerned you have had the message
for a couple of years now?
PM. I have. And I think one of the reasons, of course, is the climate, and
the easy-going nature of the place. But, whether you are wealthy or
relatively poor, you can still enjoy the good weather and this is the
difference between living In a really nice temperate place than a cold
place. Here, nature Is available to everybody, and that Is the great
strength of It. It is also a growth area, and there Is an excitement
about Far North Queensland that there wasn't 6 or 8 or 10 years ago,
and by and large, people are doing it well up here that is, they are
developing the place well, sensibly and keeping the best things the
rainforests, the core tourism assets, but at the same time developing a
strong commercial hub. So, it's a good place to come, and I am quite
sure It's a good place to live. I'm not surprised at that finding, at all.
JM: You had a crack at the hill slopes last time you were up here, and
when you left Tom Pyne reloindered by saying next time he's going to
have a crack at the hill slopes, tell him to bring his wallet with him.
PM: Tom's a good fellow, but it is all a matter of taste rather than wallets.
Anyone who carves the side out or a hillside to put a brick veneer up
there, ought to be severely rebuked. 
18. Apr .95
2
JM; I Well, Tom would like a buy back scheme.
PM: In fact, we have got... . the largest buy back scheme we have got
running was the money I put In the last Budget $ 24 million scheme
to buy back the land in the Hole in the Heart of the Daintree: that subdivision
In the Daintree, which Joh put through in the 70s, and that
threatens, of course, one of the core tourism assets of Cairns and the
surrounding area and that is the Daintree rainforest. If the power
cable had crossed the river, you would have seen a town develop
there and it would have made an absolute mess of the Daintree, so in
terms of bringing your wallet with you, I brought a $ 24 million wallet to
that one. By the way, the Queensland Government is supporting us
here dollar for dollar on that Wayne Goss and I worked this out
together to try and save the Daintree. But the Daintree is one of the
great assets, and of course, that came on top of the $ 86 million that I
provided as Treasurer to Graham Richardson when the thing was first
declared. But Itis one of the great, great places of Australia as a
consequence, so we have . and can I just say that I gave Mike
Berwick $ 9 million for the road the sealed road up to the Daintree-so
I had my wallet out again then.
JMV: Have you had a drive along that yet?
PM:-I have, and 1 think they have done a tremendous job on the road and
the shoulders, and of course, they are putting the native species of
trees back, and Peter Dodd who is with me In the studio we went up
there last time I was here and had a look around, and the important
thing is that when the heavy rains come, the shoulders don't run away
you don't lose the road. I think It is a good quality road, and putting
those native species of trees along it, really means it is going to give
tourists the effect of a rainforest right through, instead of just a broad
acre dusty place as itw as.
JMV: Even though you spend a lot of time here and you are not actually on
the job, you would get to talk to a lot of people in the tourism industry
you would realise how crucial It is here, but I wonder from your own
perspective how important you see the industry, you know, on the
national scale is your Federal Government really conscious of the
Importance of it?
PM: Can I just say, on behalf of the Government, this is the industry we
largely created before the dollar was floated in 1983, there was no
tourism Industry to speak of, other than small motels etc. You ' look at
Port Douglas for instance, or Cairns, before 1983. Financial
deregulation, the capacity of businesses to acquire funds, the strength
of the stock market through the period, plus the competitiveness of
Australia Australia today Is 40% more competitive than 1983 that
means that every time you sell a touiism place to a foreign person, you
have got a 40% better chance of doing it today than in 1983. That
TEL T0E: L4: 6 No8.0.. 0R94p5 P. 02/. 
T1EL8:. Rpr. 95 0: 46 No. 004 P. 03/:
3
created a new Industry In Australia International tourism. And I think
It Is very Important to keep that the Labor Party takes a iot of pwld Im
the fact that we created it, and that we have had the support of the
main players In the Industry. And let me just tell you this John, that
recently I had a meeting with Goh Chok Tong, the Prime Minister of
Singapore, and he was saying that he would like his community to
travel more outside of Singapore, and to come to Australia
particularly young people, particularly during their holiday periods
and he is going to be leading a tourism mission to Australia in the
middle of the year. So In other words, I think and I said to him that
Far North Queensland was a place which was accessible by plane
from Singapore to Cairns Is a reasonable short flight and it has
tremendous opportunity for, If you like, tieing a fair bit if you like,
tieing traffic to this part of the country.
JMV: It might all be very fine but we have got the accommodation problem
we have got this problem here now that we are rapidly running out of
beds, and this conjecture almost perpetual as it is about the
prospects of a bed tax Isn't encouraging people to invest in that area.
Can you give us anything definitive on the future of that bed tax.,
PM: Well, John Hewson and the Liberal Party tried to put the bed tax in last
election, with the consumption tax, which would have applied the
to all goods and services, including beds. And we made the point at
the time strongly -that this would be an impost on the tourism
Industry. And given the fact that was emerging from a slow period, one
it could do without. I can only reiterate the sentiment I made on that
occasion.
JMI: All right, I want to stick with local issues now, so we are going to go to
local calls there Is a fair bit of pressure, as you can well Imagine, from
the Southern media on the line this morning saying " can we find out
more on the Carmen Lawrence Issue", but we will get back to that after
some local calls. We have got a few minutes up the sleeve...
PM: That's not even news.
JM: All right. We will go to our first call go ahead.
C: Hello.
PM. How are you there?
JM. You are talking to the Prime Minister.
C: Oh, am I? This is Sandy Warren from the sub-contractor and suppliers
association, Mr Prime Minister.
PM: From the sub sorry?
TEL 
TEL: No8. R. p0 .0945 0P: 4.064 /.
4
C: The sub-contractors and suppliers association. We are very, very
concerned at the Bankruptcy Act, and he 0eoDle go bankrupt
and only come back shortly after to get back into business again, and
then promptly go bankrupt again, and they are ripping our people off
by millions and millions of dollars, and causing great hardship. We are
also very concerned as how the Federal Government can give them
half a cent In the dollar tax and say ' Well, you can be back in there
soon and do It again"? 7
PM. I We don't say that these arrangements are largely agreed between
creditors. You have seen the more famous one recently with Mr Bond?
C: Yeah.
PM: It's nought to do with us -I mean, what's to do with us is the
prosecution of wilful acts, or criminal acts, against the companies
code. But where a set of creditors agree with somebody who owes
them money they will accept 10 cents In the dollar, or a cent in the
dollar that person then escapes the bankruptcy. So then that person
he or she is not a bankrupt, and then can carry on.
C-But surely the Government has some control over the Taxation
Department? That's taxpayers money, and nobody asked me if I was
happy with it.
PM: I don't follow your point about the taxpayers?
C: Well, that Taxation Department let him off on half a cent in the dollar,
the other thing is that in many other countries in the world once they
are bankrupt, they stay bankrupt until such time as they have paid all
their bills off.
PMV: Can I just say, Governments try to be sensible and friendly to people
one of the great claims in the past has been the Tax Office has gone in
to take Its claim first, leaving sub-contractors and other people like
yourself out in the cold. Now, that's been changed over the years, so if
the Tax Office if you like comes to a discussion amongst other
creditors, and there is a scheme of arrangement which everybody
agrees to, well then the person then escapes the bankruptcy. ft's a
matter, really, of how hard cend how little if you like people will take
from somebody who Is In this circumstance. I don't really think that the
Government can go and say " now, this person will be a bankrupt
forever"...
JM: We will have to move on we have got a few other people....
PMV: Mind you, there would be plenty of candidates for it, I can assure you.
I appreciate'the call.
JMV: Go ahead. TEL 18. Apr .95 
TELS:. Apr. 95 0: 46 No. 004 P. 05/ 1
C: Hello?
PM: How are you there?
C: How are you? It's Steve here. I'm Ju st ringing up about the Oyster
Point development do you know what's going on here, because I was
born In Cairns and brought up In North Queensland and I think it's
shocking that Keith Williams should be allowed to build that resort
there. Do you know what is happening In the project with that?
PM: Well, the Commonwealth because it's got heritage implications we
are going out of our way to see that... . you know there was originally a
clearing away of some of this area some years ago...
C: Yeah.
PM. . and it was left in a very unsatisfactory state, including the clearing
away of the mangroves. Mr Williams is seeking to build this project,
but he will build it with the only with the the clearing of these kelp
beds and the rest will be done with scientific evaluation and monitoring
under the Commonwealth responsibility. Now, John Faulkner the
Environment Minister has made that abundantly clear. So, given the
fact that the Queensland Government too doesn't want to see a repeat
of the island development Hamilton Island or anything like it, which
Joh permitted In the 70s, the weights are on Mr Williams to produce
something which is far more environmentally pleasing, and does
justice to this wonderful place Hinchinbrook Island. Now, the
Queensland Government has taken principal responsibility for It but
we are in there looking after our responsibilities .( tape failure)., world
heritage areas.
JM: We are going to move straight on go ahead.
C: Hi John, its Kelly ( inaudible) here and I would like to speak to Mr
Keating.
PM. Yes how are you?
C: Paul, look, I'm just wanting to ask a question about vertical integration
could you explain to us what actually it is?
PM: What do you mean vertical integration In respect of any one thing, or
what does the concept mean?
C: We are talking about the tourism Industry, you know, like you say for
example, at Cairns Central School, a Singapore company bought the
site, and they are going to build a hotel there, and perhaps Singapore
Airlines Is going to fly people In a couple of years here to have
holidays here like you just said about the students travelling?
TEL 
I: 16 . Ap r 0: 4o No Uu4
PM. In relation to...
C: Will they book their hol idays In Singapore, and pay for them there, or
how will our economy benefit from the sale of Cairns Central School?
PM: The economy benefits many people try to have what is called these
vertically Integrated arrangements, where they own the tourism
property, they own the buses, they own fth gift shops, they own if you
like the whole kit and caboodle.
C: Right.
PM: But people do have to fly In, they fly in on all sorts of airlines
Including Australian owned airlines...
C: Right.
P M. A hey use the passenger facilities, they do end up spending money
outside the ( inaudible) resorts, so I think the whole notion of vertical
Integration Is a bit overdone. It's like, for instance, if you look at the
Shippan and Mitsui ownership of Mirage Port Douglas, many of those
people who have come from Japan end up in the Daintree or end up
out on the reef and lots of other places...
C: So, ( inaudible) we are going to benefit?
PM; Absolutely. I think....
C: Well wouldn't you think then that a bed tax would probably be a good
idea, so that the Government is gathering more money to compensate
for what they have lost by t people buying their tickets overseas?
PMV: I think the main benefit to Australia comes from the general Gross
Domestic Product that comes from the provision of these services. So
youj Add In n~ tinn:% I pmndur-by making thinge, you add to it by
providing things and that's where the Commonwealth gets the benefit.
It doesn't need a bed tax to get the benefit of tourism
C: you're breaking up, I can hardly hear you.
PM: I'm just saying it doesn't need to get a bed tax for the benefit of
tourism. This Is the point I made to Dr Hewson in the last Federal
election when he wanted to Impose one on the industry.
C: How do you feel about the fact that public assets like Cairns Central
School have been sold to overseas Investors?
PM: Well, I wasn't aware of that but again it depends where the school
populations are and where the assets need to be. It's like the closure
7EL: 
ILL-' 7
of hospitals being sold public hospitals sold to private operators. The
reason they have been sold Is because the usage of fth hospital has
changed and the public need has shifted. This may be the case with
the school, I don't know.
J: We've got to move on now go ahead.
C: Good morning, Mr Keating. My name's Angela.
PM: Angela, how you're doing?
C: Not too bad. According to the Cairns Post, this morning you're
opening a JobSkills projec?
PMV: That's true.
C, Why is It that you're on the job creation band wagon up here in the
north now, when previously we've been ignored. You know, Cairns
and the far north region has had one of the highest unemployment
rates in Australia.
PM: No, you've never been ignored, never been ignored. I mean, the very
things I was saying about the core tourism things which Is a very
labour intensive Industry. You do admit that a lot of the jobs that have
come In the last six or eight years have come from tourism as well as
from some of the manufacturing* and agricultural businesses In the
area. And 1 will just mention to you, just in the last year we have spent
something like, we are spending something like about $ 15-20 million
on some of the core tourism assets here, just simply on the
Commonwealth's own account. But the main point is one of the core
reasons for the Government's return to office in 1993 was to restart
growth and employment. And we've done that, and we've had now
560,000 jobs since the election, which is a phenomenal rate of
employment growth that Is around 4 per cent employment growth
since the election. And that's, of course, coming to Queensland as It Is
to most other States. In fact, Queensland's unemployment rate overall
Is lower than most States of Australia.
C: I can't agree with you there, Mr Keating. In February, in the far north,
we had 7,563 unemployed people but yet in March, we have 7,612
unemployed people that's an increase. And you're talking about
tourism ( inaudible).
PM: Can I just say to you, I don't know if those numbers are right, but let
me just make this clear to you. Let me tell you what is clear across the
country. In the last year, 12 months, we've had just on 300,000 job
growth in Australia. It's about three times the western world average.
We've had 560,000 jobs since the last election. And you might
remember at the election, I was saying our target was to get to
500,000 jobs In three years. Our opponents were saying, " oh that's 
ILL: I
malarky, don't take any notice of that". Wefll, In fact, we got to 500,000
jobs In two years. We got to 500,000 jobs In two-thirds of the time.
That's spreading right around Australia and again, I think you've got to
look at the seasonal adjustment of these things. If you take the raw
data of any unemployment number like you just did, but not seasonally
adjusted for the seasonal changes, you can always make an argument
out of these statistics. But there's only one direction that
unemployment has been going In Australia In the last two years and
that's down, I'm very happy to say. And this JobSkills project today,
which Peter Dodd and I are opening, Is a $ 1.5 million project to train
135 unemployed North Queenslanders for jobs in the building Industry.
And that comes on top of technical and further education In TAFE, In
vocational education, on top of tertiary education In universities.
That's the sort of things which the Commonwealth Government has
done. I mean, the whole of the North Queensland economy has
changed forever under a Labor Government.
J: We're going to have to move on, I'm sorry, because we have got a
heck of a queue up here. I've got to bring you back to an issue that's
been bubbling on for years In North Queensland that's the future of
the Tully Millstream Hydro-Electric Scheme. We've got a situation
here where the Premier of the State, in exactly the seat you're In, has
said on two occasions he can't see anything wrong with it. We've got
a situation where the Labor Minister here, the Member for Mulgrave,
also can't see anything wrong with It. He's a strong proponent of the
scheme, yet we have this situation where State Government and
Federal Government cannot agree. Wayne Goss' excuse is it's finally
up to Mr Keating's Government In Canberra whether or not we have
the scheme. What's going to happen with it?
PM; I don't know what Wayne's said to you but Wayne and I get a lot of
things done co-operatively. I just mentioned a couple the Daintree
and last week, at the Council of Australian Governments, where he
amongst others and I agreed on the Hilmer competitive changes which
affec the electicity, water, gas systems right across the country. And
we will have an east coast electricity grid as a consequence of all that.
And that means that if there Is a surfeit of power in Victoria, or In New
South Wales, that is piped Into Queensland. In other words, Instead of
having this, if you like, uneconomic abundance of generating capacity
going to waste In some of these States, It will actually be smoothed out
across the grid running from Queensland through New South Wales,
through Victoria to South Australia. That's the core matter and I think
that's the reason why the Queensland Government has had second
thoughts about the Tully Millstream. That Is, It's got World Heritage
connotations about It. Any of these water storage and hydro-eectric
power projects, their economics in the long run Is always subject to
question and given the fact that we have now got the prospect of
having an east coast electricity grid which we have never had before, I
think Queensland, basically, has probably changed Its mind about it.
But again, can I say, it is a matter. the Commonwealth is not the
1 t HP F D U : 410 140 uo,, t' .06/. 
9
proponent here. The proponent of any such project would be the
Queensland Government. But as I understand It, John, I think that
Issue has gone off the boll. I mean, I don't have, Wayne Goss has not
raised Tully Millstream with me, I don't think, ever.
J: Yes, It may have gone off the boil down south, but it hasn't gone off the
boil here.
PM: I know, but It depends who's It on the boil with, though? If the
requirement is to bring electricity Into North Queensland to meet the
region's power needs, if that electricity can come more efficiently and
cheaply from the coal deposits of central Queensland or New South
Wales, why is anyone jumping up and down about the Tully
Mill stream?
J: Well, they're jumping up and down partially because they feel we're
vulnerable to cyclones and the contact Is going to be lost. Well, you
talk to people In those cyclones ( inaudible)
PM: Yes, I know, cyclones are strong but I mean, there are lots of places
that have cyclones but they don't lose their power systems and if they
do, you are just as likely to lose the power cables from the Tully
Millstream as you are the power cables from somewhere else.
J: Now, the job scheme $ 1.5 million, 135 north Queenslanders to be
given job opportunities can we have the details of that? We're
running out of time. How It's going to work?
PM: Basically, what we do, we give people six weeks of training at TAFE,
followed by 20 weeks on-the-job training with local employers. So, the
Department of Employment, Education and Training has put this
scheme together with the assistance of the Queensland Master
Builders' Association, the AWU, the Federated Ironworkers, TAFE and
Queensland Construction Training. So, in other words, what we are
trying to do, because we are running into skill shortages in the building
Industry, we're trying to pick up 135 unemployed people to train them,
give them skills, give a subsidy In support from the Commonwealth to
the employers and as a way of moving longer-term unemployed
people. And could I just say to you, John, the last year of those
400,000-odd jobs that we created, a bit over 400,000 In the last year or
so, a bit over a year, 100,000 have gone to the long-term unemployed.
That Is, unemployed people, unemployed 12 months or more. So the
description of a long-term unemployed person Is someone
unemployed 12 months or more. A quarter of the jobs of the last 12
months have gone to them. Now, In the 1980s, for Instance, only say,
7 to 10 per cent of the jobs would have gone to them. So, these labour
market programs such as JobSkiIls the one that I am opening today
with Peter Is actually pulling up the long-term unemployed and giving
them a place back Into the main labour market and getting the skill
Hp r 0 U 
complementation and skill formation we are going to need, you know,
particularly In the building industry as the building Industry goes on.
J: One final point because we are running out of time this Is on behalf of
the southern media people, whom 1 know you love..
PM: They're such a sweet bunch.
J: The situation in Western Australia. Obviously pressure would be seen
to be mounting on you here. It's now gone to an issue of the credibility
of Dr Lawrence as against the credibility of Keith Wilson and the
former Minister, Graham Edwards. Whore are you going to draw a line
here? Because Wilson is not backing off, Edwards Is not backing off
ultimately you have got to do something?
PM: Well, no I don't because there's no news In this. There's no new
matter here than there was a year ago, or two years ago. And since
then, we've had a State election in Western Australia and we've had a
Federal by-election. All this stuff came up, drifted up to the top again,
all this material drifted to the top again, during the by-election In which
Carmen Lawrence was elected to the House of Representatives. Now,
the reason it's up this week, John, Is because the Liberal Party has
now irrevocably divided In Western Australian. John Howard has just
had two of his House of Representatives Members knocked off over
there that's Paul Filing and Mr Rocher. They've just lost their seats In
pre-selection battles and they neairly lost a third. So, they are
completely and utterly divided. The Western Australian Liberal Party
is at war with itself, so what they've done is drag this red herring
across the trail and said, " oh here's Carmen Lawrence", and that
happened because Mr Wilson came out and repeated what he said
two years ago. But, what we find Is that a number of Ministers who
were Ministers of the Government of Western Australia at the same
period, support Carmen Lawrence's version of this and do not support
Wilson's. So, the fact of the matter is, I'm afraid John Howard and
here's John Howard talking about an inquiry. This Is the fellow who
along with Ian McLachlan about a month ago, asked questions in
Parliament which he knew to be false, he tried to suggest the Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs had circulated documents from Aboriginal women
when they themselves had circulated them. McLachlan resigned yet
Howard approved the tactic and admitted approving the tactic at their
tactics meeting but didn't resign himself. So, here's somebody calling
for, sort of, higher standards when he should have tendered his
resignation. I mean, if Howard wants any Inquiries, we can have an
Inquiry into his behaviour In the McLachlan affair. I mean, that's a
relevant matter. But the real story, I mean, what Is the story here?
There's only one story the Western Australian Liberal Party Is shot to
pieces. And they think they can smother the trail by talking about
some old, hoary old matter raised two or three years ago with Carmen
Lawrence. n r, -o i Cj vv-r iuj 
11
J: One final point The State Labor Party seems to be concerned about
the high profile of the Mabo Issue and the Republic Issue. They feel
that It's a liability electorally partially, I suppose, for them, bui directly,
they say for you?
PM: No, well, I don't agree with that. There's always people who lack
vision, courage, foresight to understand that what the Government's
doing at the moment Is engendering a steady recovery. And you
notice those fixed Interest rates coming off last week. Westpac
reduced its fixed interest rate by .3 of a per cent, and the National
Australia Bank. We are getting the economy slowing, we are getting a
steady growth. We've got 5 per cent economic growth at the moment
and we've got around 1 to 2 per cent inflation and 4 per cent
employment growth. They're the best conjunction of economic data
perhaps in 30 years. But, life is not just about those things. It's also
about justice for minorities, for disadvantaged people, the sick, the
unemployed, the Aboriginal community, and It's also about holding
your head up in Asia here. Here we are In Cairns, where you have got
people pouring into the place with travel, with tourism, where you've
got business in NQEA selling ships to China and all these other
places, and apparently some people believe we ought to be going
there saying, " oh, by the way, here we are an independent country,
Australia, proud of ourselves, proud of what we achieve, proud of
identity, but just by the way, we're borrowing the monarchy of another
country as our Head of State". I mean, the Chinese and the Thals and
the others say, " what? What are you doing down there? Are you
people for real, or aren't you?" So, this Is not a side matter.
Australia's Identity and our culture are as central to our economic
success as any other economic variable. And the only people that
don't understand are people that have never run a national
government.
J: Prime Minister of Australia, Paul Keating, thank you for your time.
ends. ic, rip" U 44 0 1116 U U .4 



TEL: 18. pr. 95 1: 23 No. 005 F. 01/ 0
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTERs THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CAIRNS INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, TUESDAY, 1S APRIL 19115
MWE PROOF COPY
PM: When you are ready, I am basically here for you. You ask~ thte quva Ions
and I'll answer them. I have a lunch to do, so we are not hema frevet, but
well try to do our best for you.
J ( Inaudible) Jobskille..
PM Welt, what it is doing Is taking the long term unemployed who withouli this
sort of program would be forgottn by society and giving them a useful role
in our lives.-In work. In training and bringing those skills to the laowur
market which are now becoming In short sup* t. And when skills g st in
short supply, say In building, building costs rise and you become
uncompettive. So, it is an efficient thing to do to get long iterm
unemployed people back Into the labour market and, of course, it. is a
humane and fair and decent thing to do as well. That Is, this Govern: nent
has said, I said after thie election, we are not going to leave the
unemployed behind. So. the Commonwealth labour market prog-arms
provide a Jobs subsidy ariJ training to got those people back to work and
that Is what we have seen today.
J: -( inaudible) Mr Wiser, intent on damaging Carmen Lawrence.
PM: Well, Mr Wilson said something today whiCh I thought was very reveliing.
He said this issue Is not capable of resolution. He sai t wIllealways b-tiy
word against othiers or others words against his. He admitted this "~ as a
meoeting where no notes were taken by note takers. So, by Mr WIsons3
own admission no inquiry can reveal more than his claim or C~ rmon
Lawrence's counter-clim. And, I think, that is the point about this, it Ii. just
one of those he-: kneyed political issues. The reewo It has been raiswd is
to obscure the fadt that the Wvestern Australian Liberal Party is tiflaliy 
TEL: 1 l. Hpr 5 1 : 23 NO.-005 F. 02/( l
2
divided. The Liberal Party is not a national party. It Is a collection of state
parties, but whets It has a State Government In Western Australia which is
Important to It Widmi11', fhe' ire hooelesi d~ v~ d~ d, Two of Mr Howard's
supporters wore defeated last week that is Mr Rocher and Mr Filing two
of Mr Howard's closest supporters were defeated. Can I Just say Mr
Crichton-Browne still hasn't resigned as Acting President of the Senate.
He Is still today Acting President of the Senate. me is still on the Saladie$
and emoluments of the Acting Presidency of the Senate. So, it shows you
the utter contempt he and the Western Australian Liberal Party hold for Mr
Howard, that he still hasn't resigned.
J: If Carmen Lawrence Is right, why are you not willing to call an inquiry?
PM: But the question Is why for? You don't have inquiries for nothing. This Is
essentially, I think, Mr Wilson's latest reference saying that he thinks this Is
Incapable of resolution, It will always be his word against others. I just
think the others have got a more credible case,
J: Do you think there is some Justification for an Inquiry then?
PM: No. Look, let me just say this. This Is all noise and no substance. Now,
what the Liberals think Is, If they can have three or four days of noise,
somehow that noise turns into substance. Noise, noise. Claim, claim.
Newspaper headline, nespaper headline. It doesn't amount to anything
unless there Is some substance. So, the substance here, why are they
running with it? Because of the divisions In the Western Australian
branch. Why Is that Important? Because unless they get them resolved
they have got nil chance of winning the next federal electon. That Is the
Issue here.
J: Why not prove it by holding an Inquiry?
PM: Well, there would be no point for an Inquiry. Why would the
Commonwealth want to hold an Inquiry? This is a matter In the State of
Western Australia, what is it to do with the Commonwealth? Nothing what
so ever.
J: So. do you think Mr Court should put his money where his mouth Is?
PM: No, I think, Mr Court should basically, I mean Western Australians I think,
are absolutely filled to the brim with Inquiries. The West Australian people
have had enough of Inquiries. They had the Royal Commission running for
years and I think no good is going to come from It. I mean, take the
claimant. The claimant has said today, that Is Mr Wilson, this matter is
incapsole of resolution. So, If he says it what is the point of any inquiry, 
TEL: 18Hpr .95 1: 23 No. 005 P. 03,.
3
J: Are you confident the Government's wood chipping policy is adecluate.
You are going to face a protest In just a moment?
PM: Well, lot me just say here. The Government's environment credentials are,
I think, more than adequate. I mean, for a start just take Cairns. This
Government put away the Paintree Rainforest for posterity. It Is one of the
great tourism assets of this city, of this region. In this lost Budget. we put
money away for a $ 24 million scheme to buy beck the hole In the heart of
the DaIntree. We hove given Douglas Shire the money to put the road
through, a sealed road up to the Daintree. In the last year, we put away
for posterity Shoalwater Say neaw Rockhampton. In the lest year Jervis
Bay of t coast of NSW and we have also said that we are reserving 264
coupes for further examination for a representative forest system. Last
year It was 17 coupes. This year it Is 284 and I have said that we will be
cutting the exports of wood chips down by 20 per cent a year from 6 million
to 5 million to 4 million et cetera. And we have just succeeded In-getting
Tasmania to sign for the first time, the National Forest Policy Statement.
So, It Is only Labor that is going to have the solution to set up
representative reserve systems under Regional Forest Agreements to look
after the native forests of this country. it will take a while for that to got
through, but peopl will understand that. The only party capable of
deliveting on the environment Is the Federal Labor Party.
J: Just with Jobskills, ACOSS has concerns you are going to be cutting back
onl funding
PM: Well, look, that is only a Budget question. Budget quastions are beat
answered on lBudget night.
J: You can't give any reassurances?
PM: Well, the reassurance is I sWd at the election we will not leave the
unemployed behind and we set up a $ 1.6 billion scheme called Working
Nation to support them. And it Is that which we were doing here today.
So, the proof of the pudding, I think, Is in the eating. Thank you.
ends 


The Prime Minister has today sent a message to President Clinton&nbsp;expressing Australia's condolences following the bombing in Oklahoma&nbsp;City. Text follows:
The shocking bombing in Oklahoma City has horrified all Australians.&nbsp;This was an act of criminal cowardice against innocent people, and&nbsp;we join you in condemning those responsible and calling for swiftjustice. 
My personal sympathies and those of the Australian people are withall the victims of this senseless act and with their families at this&nbsp;time of immense suffering.
You can be assured that if your authorities require any help from&nbsp;Australia in their investigations it will be readily and quickly given.
CANBERRA20 April 1995



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RETIREMENT OF THE HON ALAN GRIFFITHS MP
Alan Griffiths made a significant and valuable contribution to the Labor
Government, to the Cabinet, and to Parliament during his service as the
Member for Maribyrnong since 1983.
During his period as a Minister and senior member of the Cabinet, Alan
Griffiths worked tirelessly towards the development of good public policy,
especially in the areas of forest policy, oil and gas development, tourism,
and industry policy.
As he has acknowledged today, the allegations which led to his resignation
from the Ministry caused damage to his political reputation. It has always
been my expectation and hope that the current inquiry into those matters will
clear Alan Griffiths of any wrongdoing.
Alan Griffiths would have had sufficient support among his Parliamentary
colleagues to return to the Ministry in due course. I would certainly have
welcomed his return to Cabinet.
Now that Alan Griffiths has taken a personal decision to retire from
Parliament at the next election, I congratulate him on his contribution to
public life, and wish him well in his new career.
CANBERRA 22 APRIL 1995 33/ 95 



PRIME MINJISTER 34/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
APPOINTMENT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL
I will shortly be recommending to the Administrator of the Government of the
Commonwealth an appointment to the office of Auditor-General.
The new Auditor-General will be Mr Pat Barrett AM, a distinguished senior
public servant, and currently Deputy Secretary to the Department of Finance.
Mr Barrett has had major responsibilities across the range of Commonwealth
activity, including for such reform initiatives as the Financial Management
Improvement Program, Program Management and Budgeting, and Program
Evaluation. He is a Fellow of the Australian Society of Certified Practising
Accountants, and the Royal Institute of Public Administration in Australia. He
was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia in the 1992 Australia Day
Honours List, for his contribution to public administration.
Although the office of Auditor-General has been vacant since January when
Mr John Taylor AO retired, the Government has held off appointing his
replacement in the hope that it would be possible to do so within a
reasonable time in accordance with the provisions of the replacement
legislation currently before the Parliament. Amendments made in the Senate
to the Auditor-General Bill 1994 suggest that it may be some time before a
new Act is in place, and the Government has therefore decided that it cannot
leave this important position vacant any longer.
In accordance with the provisions of the proposed replacement legislation, it
is intended that the appointee's term of office be limited to seven years,
rather than to age 65 as the existing legislation provides. The Government
hopes that the Parliament will pass the necessary amendments as soon as
possible. I wish Mr Barrett well in his appointment, which will take effect from
2 May 1995.
CANBERRA 24 April 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
Embargo: 12.01 am 25 April 1995
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ANZAC DAY 1995
Today, across the continent and in many places around the world, we are
gathered to remember our countrymen and women who, because they
believed in Australia and saw their duty to it, were prepared to lay down their
lives in war.
This is the eightieth anniversary of the event from which Anzac Day derives,
the landing at Gallipoli and the tragic and disastrous military campaign which
followed it. Anzac Day is not a celebration of military victory, or a glorification
of war. But it is the most important and profound day in Australia's national
life. It is the day we pay tribute to Australians who died so that we could live in
peace and continue the task of building a good and prosperous country. It is
the day when we reflect upon the meaning of their sacrifice. It is the day
when we ask our children to reflect and learn what it means to love Australia
and have faith in it.
We took from Gallipoli, and we have taken from every subsequent war in
which Australians have fought and died, the message contained in that
sacrifice: that it is good to be brave and to endure difficulty, and that we are
bravest, most able to endure and most likely to succeed when we know we
can rely on each other, when we stick together.
Anzac gave us this creed to live by as Australians and as a nation. It has
given us strength in war and in peace.
The spirit lives on in the ceremonies taking place today. It is present in the
Australia Remembers celebrations to mark the end of World War II. It is
there among the young Australians who are presently touring the battlefields
on which their great grandfathers fought.
We hope and believe that it lives on in all our lives and that, by remembering
those who died, the faith will be carried on into future generations of
Australians. CANBERRA April 1995 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP OPENING
OF THE GLOBAL CULTURAL DIVERSITY CONFERENCE, SYDNEY
CONVENTION AND EXHIBITION CENTRE, WEDNESDAY, 26 APRIL 1995
Your excellency, Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali, distinguished speakers, ladies
and gentlemen.
It is my pleasure to welcome you to Australia, to Sydney and the 1995
Global Cultural Diversity Conference.
On behalf of Bob Carr, the Premier of New South Wales, and Sir James
Gobbo, Chairman of the Australian Multicultural Foundation, who are cohosting
this conference with the Australian Government we welcome your
participation in discussions of great importance and we hope, in time, of
great consequence.
We are very privileged to have with us so many eminent speakers from all
over the world. I thank you most sincerely for coming.
Mr Secretary General, it is a particular pleasure and an honour to welcome
you on your first visit to Australia, especially in this year in which we are
commemorating the 50th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
1995 has also been designated as the International Year for Tolerance and
the first Decade for the World's Indigenous People.
We are also pleased to welcome Dr Federico Mayor, Director-General of
UNESCO, which celebrates its 50th anniversary in 1995 as well, and the
Deputy President of South Africa, Mr Thabo Mbeki.
The conference has brought together knowledgeable and concerned
individuals to consider the ways by which we might make cultural diversity
less of an impediment to human progress and more of a means to it. Less
of a source of conflict, and more of a means by which the benefits of
tolerance can be learned or re-learned. Less of a violent and destructive
force, less of a vehicle for xenophobia and prejudice, and more of a means
to creating a more peaceful, creative and secure post-Cold War World.
In short we sen it as a contribution to the effort to make the 21st century a
better one than this. 
This conference was conceived as a means of marking all these milestones.
And, I might say, Australia is an appropriate place to mark them.
We are a country looking forward to the next century. We believe we have
a constructive role to play in those issues which concern the United
Nations. We have always believed that we were present and active at its
inception in San Francisco but we have never believed it more than now.
And we are nothing if not culturally diverse: more than 220 nationalities are
represented in our population. Forty two per cent of our people were born
overseas or have one parent born overseas.
Australian society is rich in linguistic, racial, religious and cultural diversity.
We have consciously devised policies to encourage and preserve this
diversity and gain in return benefits to the nation and community.
We count the creation of this rich, pluralistic and peaceful society we think
one of the most successful multicultural societies in the world as one of
our great national achievements.
That is why I say that Sydney is an appropriate environment for this Global
Cultural Diversity Conference.
Not because we presume to think that Australia can be a model for the rest
of the world the world is itself too diverse for that. But we have learned
some useful things about living together, we have a deep interest in these
questions and we think we can make a contribution in a world which
desperately needs answers to them.
Fifty years ago in San Francisco, a group of delegates, including Dr H V
Evatt from Australia, met to design the United Nations. They hoped that the
institution they were creating would ensure that the wars which had already
ravaged the world twice in just thirty years would never be repeated.
They wanted to construct a framework for a world in which international
stability was based on common values of justice, development and peace.
But in 1946 the lessons of the failed League of Nations were still fresh in
everyone's minds and the consequences of that failure appallingly real. So
there was a strong streak of realism as well as idealism in the blueprint the
delegates drew up in San Francisco.
They knew the United Nations needed to take into account the realities of
global power. And they understood the importance of the nation-state. 
The role of the nation-state was already cemented at the centre of
international affairs, and its importance was to grow even larger as the great
process of decofonisation got under way.
Not surprisingly, therefore, the framework the architects of the United
Nations developed had at its core the need to settle, or at least contain,
conflicts between nation-states.
In the event, as we know, the post-war reality fell short of the high hopes
of San Francisco. The emergence of the Cold War and a bipolar
international system imposed a very different dynamic on United Nations
operations. Still, despite the complications and set-backs of the following half century,
the United Nations managed to notch up substantial achievements. Not
enough of them, no doubt, but many more than some of its critics allow.
But fifty years on, the Cold War is over and there has never been a better
time to ask ourselves if the United Nations we now bia-u is what we now
need. And what we will need in the 21st century.
Given the scale of change in the world since the organisation was formed, it
would be astonishing if the answer was yes.
Many distinguished figures, not least yourself, Secretary-General, have been
engaged in juJst this task of renewal.
Australia, through Gareth Evans especially, has been playing a role in this
debate, as we did in Sani Francisco half a century ago.
I do not want to explore these important structural questions this morning.
There are many other forums at which that will be done.
But I do want to draw the link between what we are talking about at this
conference and these wider United Nations issues.
Because cultural diversity, which we in Australia value as a source of
strength and pride, has an external dimension, too.
And the manifestations of cultural diversity we see on the television news
more often seem to take the form of tragic and intractable conflicts.
We have been reminded horribly of this by the suffering we have seen just
this week in Rwanda.
I want to pay tribute hero to the role of the Australian peacekeepers in
UNAMIR, who were instrumental in providing medical assistance to the
victims of the terrible massacre at Kibeho. 
4
They have shown the finest traditions of the Australian Defence Force, and
richly deserve the Anzac Peace Prize they have been awarded,
Ironically, the end of the Cold War which was otherwise so welcome
made possible many of these new outbreaks of conflict around the world by
releasing the political iron bonds which had contained them.
So, in the former Yugoslavia, in the former Soviet Union, in Burundi, in
Somalia, we see tragedies unfold large-scale horror and appalling
inhumanity, stemming from ingrained, small-scale hatreds.
Anid these conflicts are shaping the international system, and challenging
the United Nations, just as profoundly as traditional disputes between states
have done.
They are the reflection of a world in which very often the ation and the
state are rio longer the same thing.
The nation-state, as it existed when the United Nations was founded, is
going through a period of profound transition, and the international
community has to respond.
We see this most obviously in the economic area, where the global market
place is already a reality.
The engagement of the developing world in the international economy is one
of the most far-reaching arid beneficial developments of our age but, as
Auistralians know, it is part of a process which challenges our former ideas
of economic sovereignty.
Similarly, responses to the degradation of the environment cannot possibly
come from one country alone, because both the causes and the effects are
transnational.
Arid the information revolution poses huge problems for laws of national
copyright, and makes the national regulation of what our citizens see and
hear almost impossible.
In short, one of the mantras of modern international relations noninterference
in the internal affairs of other-countries these days has a
greatly modified and much reduced meaning.
In this very different world, how should the international community
respond to the ethnic and communal conflicts which so mar international
peace, and properly disturb ouir consciences?
I dto not mean by this how should we go about the important tasks of
peacekeeping and peacemaking, or the immediate human responses of 
providing food, shelter and medicine to those who are suffering? Those,
again, are issues which require separate consideration.
Instead, at a different level, I think that responses lie in some cases in
redefining our idea of the state. In other cases, we need to rethink our view
of the nation.
Sometimes, the best response to intractable tensions may be the old
fashioned remedy of redefining the borders of the state.
That is what happened, peacefully, when the Czech Republic and Slovakia
split, and it is the answer that many of the component parts of the former
Soviet Union found.
Part of the answer may lie in a radical redefinition of what constitutes a
state. In Europe, the very homeland of the nation-state, and the source of much of
the national conflict which has so scarred our century, the European Union
is dramatically changing our ideas about what a state is, and how
sovereignty is distributed.
And after 1997, when Hong Kong reverts to China's control, China will
comprise one state but with two distinct economic systems.
A third response, and one I think that is important, is to build up the role of
regional institutions and identities.
Because the gap between individual states and multilateral organisations like
the United Nations can sometimes be too great for quick and effective
responses to humanitarian or security problems.
And the cultural and historical background necessary to resolve problems
will often lie more readily in the local region.
In addition, an important factor in democracies like Australia is that our
people will often more readily support commitments in our own region
Cambodia, for example than outside it, because they can understand more
easily how events there can affect them.
When the government of Papua New Guinea was searching for a solution to
the problems it faced on the island of Bougainville, for example, it found the
idea of a regional peacekeeping force useful.
Similarly, the United Nations operation in Haiti had a large regional element.
And I think the problem of conflicting claims in the South China Sea a key
security question in Asia is probably more amenable to a regional than an
international settlement. 
The greatest contribution of regional organisations, however, has so far
been seen in economic frameworks like the European Union, NAFTA and in
this part of the world APEC.
APEC brings together eighteen very different economies and cultures united
in the common purpose of sustaining prosperity and growth in the Asia
Pacific. It is a practical example of what used to be called North-South
cooperation.
And I have no doubt that here, as in Europe, the act of working together on
practical economic issues will have beneficial political and security
consequences as well.
So regionalism is central to the broader United Nations efforts to promote
peace and prosperity not an alternative, but an addition.
Finally, however, the answer to what we can do about troubling
humanitarian and security problems may lie not so much in rethinking the
state, as in redefining the nation.
The challenge in many cases is how we can create societies rich in cultural,
racial and religious diversity but do so in ways which encourage rather than
compromise a sense of national identity.
It is too glib to say that the answer lies simply in better understanding. The
problems in the Balkans or in central Africa do not stem from a lack of
familiarity with the culture of the antagonists.
This means that the redefinition of the nation is a complex task. It involves
economic and social development, justice, human rights, good governance,
inclusive institution building, tolerance, respect for difference, the
strengthening of civil society.
So it is not an easy job or a quick one. And I do not pretend that the
Australian experience is readily transferable to other parts of the world.
But, as I said, I am certain that some of what we have done here can lead
not only to the development of a culturally rich, diverse, and peaceful
Australian society, but may suggest to others ways of improving harmony
within and between states.
This would be a fitting contribution to the current debate about the future of
the United Nations and its operations, and to the International Year of
Tolerance., It is true that we count what we have done here as a great success.
Nowhere is that truer than in our changing relationship with Asia. 
Just a generation ago, the White Australia Policy was still a reality in all but
the technical detail.
Australia came perilously close to marginalising itself in our region and in the
world. Now, half of all our immigrants come from Asia.
They are adding immeasurably to the richness of our society, to our arts, to
our commerce, to the way we live our daily lives,
And their values, like the values of all those who have come here before,
will help shape our culture.
This is a much more tolerant society than that which existed just a
generation ago. Today, no Australian political party can hope to succeed
with an immigration policy which excludes people on racial or ethnic
grounds. Tolerance itself has become one of those words to which we
attach a primary democratic value.
Yet it is important, at this stage of our history, to put our multicultural
successes in perspective.
For instance, I think it would be a mistake for this generation of Australians
to persuade themselves either that the transformation is complete and
completely satisfactory, or, indeed, that all the achievements have occurred
since we first took on the idea the word and the policies of
multicultiralism. Under a different banner that of assimilation migrants from Europe and
the Middle East were welcomed in the decades immediately after World War
II and made a profound contribution to our national life and development.
There are regions of Australia where in the 19th century people from
Germany and Italy were more numerous and their cultures more pervasive
than any from the British Isles.
Today when we talk of the enrichment of our culture by people from all the
countries of the world we sometimes forget that people have been coming
from all over the world to this place for 200 years; that our landscape was
interpreted by painters, scientists and explorers from Germany, Switzerland,
Poland and France as well as Britain and that this artistic and intellectual
tradition was consolidated in the 20th century.
It seems to me we should remember that tolerance of cultural difference is
ultimately a necessary condition for a successful new world country; and
that those traditions of egalitarian democracy which emerged in the last half
of the 19th century had the seeds of multiculturalism in them. If it is true
that earlier generations of Australians traditionally took the view that where
and to what rank people were born should be no measure of their character, 
and that in Australia everyone should begin without these handicaps, then
we can see ourselves as building on a tradition.
And we can learn the lesson that the best traditions of a country, and the
best instincts of a people, can be the basis of radical change. I think that is
what we have learnt in Australia in the past couple of decades that
societies can be changed, that an inward looking culture can be made
outward looking, that what seems alien can be revealed as friendly, that
where threats always seemed to lie there are now rewards and
opportunities. And I think we must also always bear in mind that the dominant cultures of
our history those of the British Isles and Ireland far from being hostile to
the growth of a culturally diverse society, provided in democratic institutions
and ideas its essential precondition.
I make these points because it does not hurt to be reminded that our efforts
are part of a much longer story: a story in which progress has been
uneven. We do not know all the answers, and the story is far from over
and we should not assume that the rapid strides we have made in the past
two decades are a guarantee of success in the future.
There is no more profound example of the distance we still have to travel in
Australia than the position of Aboriginal people in our society and their
relationship with non-Aboriginal Australians.
Nor, of course, is there any better example of the fact that since 1788 this
continent has played host to a multicultural society.
This conference is not the place to offer a short history of the
dispossession, brutality and neglect, which accompanied European
settlement and which has continued in this century. Until we succeed in
our ambition to affect a permanent reconciliation with indigenous
Australians, our claims to have achieved a successful multicultural society
will always be compromised.
But we are at last determined on reconciliation a new partnership built on
mutual respect, justice and equity and we have in the last two years put in
place some long overdue foundations.
We have given legislative expression to a decision of the High Court of
Australia that the idea of terra nullius the farcical notion that no one
owned Australia prior to British settlement was indeed a lie. The High
Court established that there was a Native Title to land, rooted in traditional
law and custom itself, within the common law of Australia,
The legislation giving effect to this decision has survived criticism and a
legal challenge. It was confirmed in the High Court just last month. And I
might say what has also been confirmed is that Australians are prepared to 
support such a dramatic change in the law that they want to see the
relationship between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians put right.
The establishment of a Native Title will not of itself redress the
consequences of dispossession. In truth, of course, nothing will. But over
the next ten years the Government will allocate some $ 1.5 billion to a
permanent fund so that dispossessed indigenous communities will have the
means to buy land and in so doing regain the potential for spiritual and
cultural regeneration, as well as an economic base to improve their material
well-being.
The final step will be the implementation of social justice measures. We
now have before us two major reports which draw on extensive
consultations with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and in due
course we will announce the measures calculated to be most likely to
redress the wrongs and raise the living standards and life opportunities of
indigenous Australians.
There is no doubt that we will succeed best in this wherever we are able to
give Aboriginal people the means of solving their own problems. It is
equally true that we will make improvements in the quality of their lives,
including their health, and raise morale and self esteem wherever we can
deliver the means of their retaining contact with traditional culture and
customs. That, after all, is the most fundamental principle of
rulticulturalism. For us, the process of reconciliation is a basic test of our modern
nationhood on it depends our relationship with both our past and our
future. On it also depends a favourable measure of our achievements in the
realm of cultural diversity.
But to put Australia's progress towards a successful multicultural society in
perspective, to make reference to ambitions not yet fulfilled, is certainly not
to discount the scale of our achievements or the pride we take in them.
The Australia I knew as a child and the Australia of today are radically
different places. When we were growing up we did not and could not
imagine the Sydney of 1995. And even if we had been able to visualise the
city as it now is, we could not have conceived of the means by which it has
been brought about. We could not have conceived of the necessary policy
changes. Perhaps most importantly, we could not have conceived of the
necessary changes in ourselves.
That is at the heart of multiculturalism. It describes a response to the
diversity that exists in Australian society. It is a policy for managing the
consequences of that diversity in the interests of all.
This means a policy which guarantees rights and imposes responsibilities. 
The rights include those of cultural identity tho right to express and share
individual cultural heritage, including language and religion. The right to
social justice the right of every Australian to equality of treatment and
opportuinity, regardless of race, ethnicity, religion, language, gender or place
of birth.
The responsibilities might be summarised as follows: that the first loyalty of
all Australians must be to Australia, to its interests and its future; that all
Australians must accept the basic principles of Australian society, including
the Constitution and the rule of law, parliamentary democracy, freedom of
speech and religion, English as the national language, equality of the sexes
and the right of every Australian to express his or her views and values.
That is the essential balance iin the multicultural equation: the promotion of
individual and collective cultural rights and expression, on the one hand;
and on the other, the promotion of common national interests and values.
Arid Success depends on demonstrating that each side of the equation
serves the othpr.
In practical terms one side can be seen in Government programs to provide
people who have just arrived in AuIstralia with assistance to locate and use
the various welfare services, including health, housing and income support.
Or in, for instance, the Translating and Interpreting Service which, by phone
or in person, assists migrants to break down the language barrier they face
until they become fluent in English.
Or in the Special Broadcasting Service, whose daily television and radio
broadcasts in 67 languages help to maintain the threads which link so many
Australians to their n'ative culture,
These are eminently practical measures calculated to minimise the trauma
which migration has always entailed and make the transition to a new life in
a new Culture that much easier. They do not demand or enforce an
attachment to this country, they encourage it.
We take the same view on citizenship. We do not oblige new settlers to
take out citizenship but we actively encourage them to, and when they do
we ask them to swear an oath which expressly acknowledges the principle
of tolerance on which rMUlticulturalisni depends.
The dividend of cultural diversity is largely paid in the form of a society
which is both more rich and interesting and more harmonious and peaceful,
In more recent times we have discovered a new dividend a productivity
dividend. We have learned that cultural difference means different ways of looking at
the world. In an economic environment which demands of enterprises that 
I1
they use every possible advantage to be innovative and flexible this is likely
to be a tangible asset.
We have learned that being among the very few countries whose people
understand all but a few of the world's languages and cultures is a very
considerable competitive advantage.
In addition, we are discovering that our policies have provided us with the
most valuable links to countries where we can do business: personal links
and personal understanding between Australian enterprises and the markets
they wish to enter.
We are taking steps to capitalise on these connections and the great cultural
diversity of the Australian workforce through a Productive Diversity Agenda.
This is perhaps the most concrete example we could adduce to show that
the encouragement of cultural diversity is much more than an act of
benevolence it is an act of national self interest.
I am sure it is the hope of everyone here that over the next three days
persuasive arguments will be put to show that the global interest can be
served by the affirmation of cultural diversity.
We certainly do not say that what has occurred in Australia should be a
blueprint for the world., Cultural diversity, let alone human diversity, makes
the idea of a single template absurd. Nor do we expect this conference to
be a celebration of our achievements.
However, we do feel able to say that this very democratic, very open and
very forward looking country has learned a good deal about the benefits and
the management of cultural diversity. We are a country emerging, I think,
into a great 21st century future. We will not be a nation state in the old
sense of that term: we will be a more purposefully independent country
than before, yet we will be more integrated with the world and with the
Asia-Pacific region in particular than the Australians of 60 years ago, when
the United Nations was created, could ever have imagined.
We like to think that we might have in our modern nationhood at least some
of the elements of a 21st century model diversity, tolerance, openness and
worldliness within the boundaries of national purpose and cohesion. And
perhaps as we pursue those goals we can help the world pursue them.
I have very great pleasure in opening this conference and inviting the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to deliver
the keynote address.
Sydney 26 April 1996 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ALAN SUNDERLAND, SBS TV, SYDNEY, 26 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
AS: Prime Minister, many people are saying it's a great coup for Australia to
have this Global Cultural Diversity Conference here in Sydney why is
that?
PM: Perhaps it's some recognition of the success we have had with cultural
diversity ourselves, in what we call multicultural ism. That is, the mores
and tenets of our multicultural ism of our own democracy here as it has
developed. I think that the fact that the conference is here important as
the conference is in its own right the fact that it is here, pays us a
compliment.
AS: There is a sense in which global diversity, and managing cultural
diversity, is particularly important in the world at the moment do you
think Australia has something to say about how to achieve that?
PM: I think we have, and as I said in my remarks, I don't think there is any
single template here. You can't take the Australian experience and put it
somewhere else, but the interesting thing is, though, after the Cold War
when what is called the " bi-polar tension" the two camp tension which
held everything else tight where community differences, ethnic
differences, racial differences, religious differences were suppressed.
Now that tension has gone, they are coming out. And, so rather than the
United Nations, for instance or the rest of us being involved managing
trouble spots which are the manifestation of the tension what this
conference is about is dealing with the tension at its source. That is, what
is causing these things. And if you see quite large problems look at
Rwanda in the last week as a very express cause of these tensions yet
the underlying tensions are well understood culturally well understood
in that country. So, I think what we are about here is saying " well, in this 
country of Australia, we have handled various... what would otherwise be
various racial and religious tensions well". And probably one of the
reasons we have, is that we have a very great sense of democracy a
deep sense of democracy that our sense of democracy gives every
person space ethnic space, religious space, political space and that
tolerance lets it all work.
AS: Well, that sense of democracy was very much on show today of course
we had almost as many people outside the Conference protesting about
Macedonia, Bosnia and other issues, as we did have inside listening to
the speeches does that suggest that in some areas there is still some
tension to be resolved?
PM: There will always be tensions, but you made the point yourself it's the
sort that is par for the course they are out the front having their say.
And that itself is an expression of the very democratic values that make
Australia work. And you notice that the Secretary-General in his speech
talked about inculcation of the values of democracy. Not the models not
the models where you have a parliamentary system or a presidential
system not the models, but the values.
AS: Okay if we talk about the tensions, there is one group I wanted to talk
about briefly. It seems there are still, albeit a small group, but there are
some Australians who would feel excluded by the multicultural process
who would feel, rightly or wrongly, that they are not part of it, and they feel
rejected by it and that shows itself in some of the more radical right-wing
groups that demonstrate we have seen problems overseas, most
recently with the bombing in Oklahoma. Do you think that Australia can
afford to ignore this group of disaffected people who we can see we saw
in Adelaide over the weekend, National Action people -who have a
problem with the whole nature of our society?
PM: I don't think we can ignore them, and I think we wish that these people are
affected by the ambient attitudes of Australia the ambient societal
attitudes. That is what the remedy... that is what the antidote is to these
sorts of things it's not the Government's security forces crawling over
them, or in them, but rather that they know that their message, essentially,
is not to be generally accepted. But if the cause of the disaffection is
some neglect by the rest us, is some insensitivity by the rest of us, well,
that is something we should correct.
AS: Sure.
PM: But often these things are racist, intolerant in the case of Oklahoma,
criminal so no multicultural policy is going to deal with that. 
AS: Lets finish with a couple of brief, practical questions. You talked about
the need to include the Aboriginal community in this society through the
Social Justice package being an important part of reconciliation how is
the Government going to deliver on a Social Justice package of that
sense of proportion, at the same time as you have committed over the
next few years, to cutting back your own budget, and your own
discretionary spending, as much as you possibly can?
PM: I don't think this is about money this is about rights. It's not about
money.
AS: But at the end of the day it must come with a price?
PM: The bit that comes with a heavy price is land, and that is already factored
in. That's Mabo and the Land Fund, and what we will now be spending
on health but a large part of that has been factored in and community
services, but the rest of the Social Justice things are about rights. They
are not necessarily carrying a price ticket on them. So, I don't think
money is the problem in all this it's just a matter of getting it right, and
trying to move both the debate and the modalities of social justice for
indigenous people moving it forward so that there is no more
disappointment of one move forward and then slippage. But to move it
forward with certitude.
AS: Sure.
PM: That's the challenge it's not really money.
AS: Okay. Final question the republic has been a big part of the Keating
Government's issue of identity for Australia coming together. When you
went to Germany, the indications were then that we expected to see the
Government's response on a republic in a few weeks still not there, how
soon are we going to see that fairly important plank?
PM: You will be seeing it, and not so far away, but it is the key thing is
though is that it is central to the fabric of Australia to its society. You
can't get around as an independent nation when the Head of State
belongs somewhere else, and that should be pretty self-evident to
anybody. And the second thing is, it is central economically that I mean,
there is a sense about Australia now where people feel good about the
country, they feel up-beat about the country, they feel confidence, they
feel as though there is something special happening here they are
moving forward with a sense of identity. What the republic does is make
that identity clear it puts the seal on that identity. Because you can't get 
4
around the world borrowing the Head of State of another country. I think
that is the important thing my opponents say " this is a distraction". Well,
the ones who say that don't understand what it really means, and if they
don't understand, then they are not entitled to run the rest of us.
AS: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you.
ends. 



( I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE. PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FROM THE DINNER, GLOBAL CULTURAL DIVERSITY
CONFERENCE, SYDNEY, 26 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
We have already had, today, a very good beginning to this conference this
important conference on global diversity, and I think there was a unanimity
of view that the conference began well it certainly did with the diversity of
that percussion performance we saw this morning, and I'm not sure that the
Secretary-General and I were percussing people, but I know that the
musicians were. At any rate, one is told that as the day closed, that it was a
successful day, and we are very pleased about that. Because this is a very
significant and important theme for the United Nations, and the world, to
embrace, because as we have remarked to ourselves over the course of
this day many of the world's problems are not now super-power problems,
they are not nation state problems they are problems which arise from
little differences and differences of view that have been concentrated into
virulent, in some cases, strains of objection and Intolerance and prejudice,
which threaten the peace of countries, the peace of regions and the peace of
the world. And we find ourselves joining in the United Nations in the
endeavour of seeking to remedy some of these problems, to quell these
conflicts, and we are coming to the conclusion very obviously that we are
better trying to deal with the problems at the source, rather tn the
manifestations of them, when they already arise. And so, by the United
Nations and the Secretary-General giving this conference its endorsement
and its imprimatur, we are bringing to the world agenda an appreciation of
the importance of diversity as something to celebrate, rather than something
to fear.
Now, this evening, We are continuing the thefrie, and the performers tonight
the musical entertainment tonight Is again, another cause for the celebration
of diversity, and the fact that it has enriched u. s all so very much. And let me
say, that in this country, nothing has enrich~ ed Australian cultural life more
than the new diversity of this country, and the openness to other cultures.
And they are the cultures of our Aboriginal people, Asian cultures around us,
European culture all of these things have been the cause of enriching this
country. I know there is now a threat or a iperceived threat, rather to the 
internationalisation of culture, and we have seen this particularly in
entertainment, and we are very conscious of this because In this country, we
lost a film industry to Hollywood in the 1930s. I'm sure many of our
distinguished guests might not appreciate that there but for the grace of
Charlie Chaplin went the rest of us Charlie Chaplin, and Louis B Mayer and
the Warner Brothers were a hell of a team to beat, but we did have an
important Australian film Industry. We have lost one, and we are determined
not to lose another. You might know that, of course, we have the French
elections on at the moment, and we over the course of the Uruguay Round
we found ourselves implacably on the other side to the French in the Uruguay
Round, seeking to give the producers of the South a place in these big
agricultural markets, which unusually as a developed country, Australia
participated in. But, of course, the one thing we joined the French on at the
end of the Round was in protecting Intellectual property in protecting
cultural property. And, I think one can do these two thing that is, be proud
of one's own culture, and do the things to enrich it and protect it, but through
its strengths allow it to be open to others so we gain and secure a benefit
from them, So I think we shouldn't fear the international isation of culture -I
don't think it is a crude choice between selling ourselves or impoverishing
ourselves in the cause of cultural fidelity I don't think we need to do those
things. I think we take the general view that we can profit by being open to
the world, and if the proof of the pudding is In the eating, I'm sure that
Australia is an example. But we have seen it so often we have seen the
impact of Greek and Roman art and architecture on the world, we have seen
the power of Chinese culture, and the profound influence of Chinese art In
Europe in the 18th and 19th century, we have seen the Indian sitar infiltrate
its way into the music of Liverpool in the 1960s, we have every ' time we have
seen an openness to diversity, we have seen something better. And, of
course, let me say on our part, that here how we cherish in this country the
culture of Aboriginal Australians I think one of the great cultural phenomena
of recent Australian history has been the rejuvenation of Aboriginal culture,
and its integration with the non-indigenous cultures of Australia. And not only
that, but we are seeing it acclaimed around the world as well.
We welcome diversity it has been a cause of power to our arts and to our
culture, and it makes the point again that here we are having a conference
seeking to promote the idea that diversity is a cause of celebration, and can
be a cause of celebration, and something richer, and better, rather than
simply something that leads to division and fear and calamity.
Tonight, we are very appreciative of the fact that the Australia Council which
is Australia's premier arts funding body, the body most possessed of the
charter of promoting Australian art and culture has sponsored tonight's
performance, which we are about to enjoy, and has arranged with the
performers and the artists to come tonight to entertain us. I would like to
thank the Australia Council, and the performers, for doing this in the cause of
this great undertaking of increasing the awaren ess that we are seeking to
understand better at this conference about the value of global diversity,
worldwide. I would like to, most especially, thank the Secretary-General for
endorsing this conference, for coming here, for bringing his wife to Australia 
it is a great honour he does us. He has, without a doubt, the hardest job in
the world. I don't think there Is . some say " well, the Presidency of the
United States Is the world's hardest job", and it may be true. But, seeking to
resource this body the United Nations in its diversity, and in another form
of diversity in seeking to secure the consensus that is always required to
move it forward, to renew it, to consider its future and how it might be
reformed these are the things, the tasks, which have fallen in this age of
ours to Doctor Boutros-Ghaii. It is with those heavy responsibilities, that we
know he has, that makes us appreciate ever so much more his attendance
here. Could I finally thank you all for being so enthusiastic about the conference
for coming to Australia, for doing us that honour, for joining us, and for
coming tonight to celebrate this dinner with us, and to hear some of the
performers, and some of the music, that I know you will be pleased to see.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 36/ 95
Embargoed 1201 hours 27 April 1995
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
US PEACE PRIZE AWARDED TO SENATOR EVANS
I am delighted to offer my congratulations to Senator Gareth Evans who has
today been awarded a prestigious US peace prize.
The 1995 Grawemeyer Prize in Improving World Order, awarded by the
University of Louisville in Kentucky, is awarded annually for significant
contributions to international affairs by individuals or groups.
It has been awarded to Senator Evans for his writings on the subject of UN
peace-keeping including an article he contributed last year to the US journal
" Foreign Policy" and his 1993 book " Cooperating for Peace".
This prize, of US$ 150,000, gives due recognition to the outstanding foreign
policy leadership of Gareth Evans over more than seven years.
The prize is also a tribute to modern Australian diplomacy which has
established a new tradition of working creatively, sensitively and
comprehensively for the national interest.
Senator Evans will be proposing to the Government how the prize money can
be best used to help promote Australia's foreign policy interests.
CANBERRA
27 April 1995 



JA2W
PRIME MINISTERA
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE, 27 APRIL 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: How did the meeting go?
PM: It was very good I think. We've will run one of the most successful
income policies In the world. The Accord is now 12 years old when
we first started, people didn't think it would become 12 months old.
Now, it's 12 years old and we are now looking at this Budget and the
economy for the balance of the nineties, and this is the time to have
another discussion about the next variation on the Accord's model.
J; What issues did you speak about?
PM: The general ones obviously, the Budget specific ones about wages
the wage system about inflation we have h: cd very good
underlying inflation numbers today -we are very happy about that.
And going back where we were with Accord Mark VII recording the
progress we have made. We were seeking then half a million jobs
over three years we have got the half a million jobs In two years
we got to the target In two-thirds of the time. And so we went... . we
reconnoitred back over the Accord Mark ViIl looked at the success
we have had with it, what things we need to do differently.
J: Was there any understanding on the issues discussed?
PM: We had a good general natter, and we are going to probably meet
again and say more to one another.
J: Will there be a superannuation tax cut this year?
PM: I'm not here to discuss the Budget, and we didn't go to that sort of
detail at the meeting.
J: How happy are you with that inflation rate? 
PM: Well, the underlying rate actually came down, so it's a very good
result it vvy: 1.9% thP underlying rate and It's the underlying rate
that matters. The headline bounces around, depending on wh1ats in
ft in any particular month, but the underlying rate even though the
headline rate went up because It has now got mortgage interest
payments and other payments heavily weighted in the basket of the
index, the underlying rate, with those one-off's taken out of it. gives
you the steady view of inflation. And the steady view on inflation is
very steady, as those National Accounts in December showed. You
see the non-farm product deflator in the National Accounts was 0.9%
for the year. Can you believe that? The National Accounts in
December have the broadest measure of inflation under 1% the
private consumption deflator in the National Accounts puts Inflation
at And so that's why, in calculating the underlying rate at
1.9% that is, dis-aggregating the CP'I to look at the underlying rate
is confirming those very good numbers we saw about two weeks ago
in the December Quarter Accounts.
J: Do you have any concern that the Unions can push a wage claim on
the strength of the headline rate?
PM: We have, I think, so much... the wage policy of the Government is
working now very, very well indeed. That is, the Enterprise
Bar-gaining is working well there have been some terrific bargains
struck. There was one in the metals this week it might have been
yesterday a terrific bargain, and this is the sort of wage system we
could have only dreamed about a few years ago. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER 38/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO JAPAN
I am pleased to announce that I will make my first official visit to Japan from 24 to 28
May. I will meet their Majesties, the Emperor and Empress, and renew my productive
working relationship with Prime Minister Murayama and other senior members of the
Japanese Government. I will also have discussions with key Japanese business leaders.
This important anniversary year of the end of World War 11 provides an opportunity to
reflect on the unique partnership we have forged together over the past fifty years and
where we might take it in the 21 st century.
Japan is by far our largest trading partner as well as a major source of technology and
investment. In 1994 two-way trade between us was worth $ 28 billion. Through years
of human contact at all levels, our two countries have developed a genuine spirit of
friendship. Our relationship has become a significant and positive force in regional
and global affairs.
With Prime Minister Murayama I will be discussing ways of ensuring the relationship
between Australia and Japan maintains its vitality. We will also discuss our important
common interests in the region, particularly AiPEC which Japan chairs this year. Both
our governments are strongly committed to a substantive outcome at the Osaka
Leaders' meeting in November.
During my visit I will open an Australian Business Centre, bringing representative and
tourist offices of the Australian states together with Austrade into one commercial hub.
In the spirit of the Australia Remembers commemorative year, I will attend a special
ceremony at Hodogaya Cemetery and pay tribute to those Australian and other
Commonwealth servicemen and women who are buried there.
CANBERRA
28 April 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 39/ 95
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
AND THE ACTU.
Today the ACTU and the Government reaffirmed their Accord partnership
and their joint pursuit of progressive economic, social and industrial relations
reform. The meeting noted the significant success in meeting the targets set out in
Accord VII, signed in February 1993. At that time a commitment was made to
the creation of at least 500,000 jobs over the next term of a Labor
Government. This goal was met in March 1995, a year ahead of schedule,
with the number of extra jobs now being 550,000.
Accord VII also had an inflation goal of price increases generally not
exceeding those of our major trading partners. This target is being met
comfortably, and the on-going success on the inflation side was confirmed
fast week with the release of data showing that the underlying rate of price
increase continues to be lower than 2 per cent.
The trend to wage fixing through bargaining at industry and workplace levels
is an essential part of the current Accord, and the sustained, orderly and
accelerating movements in these directions are a significant feature of
contemporary industrial relations reform.
Over the last two years an additional 30 per cent of workers on Federal
Awards have registered enterprise agreements, with the number of
employees in these arrangements now standing at 1.44 million, or nearly
per cent of all workers under Federal Awards. The Accord partners regret the
relative lack of progress in enterprise bargaining under most State systems,
which itself is evidence generally of the lack of strong leadership outside the
-Federal sphere.
Safety net adjustments in the award system have ensured that all workers
who are not advantaged by the movement towards enterprise-based
bargaining are able to be protected from real income reductions and the loss
f cv, V 49 -d4 Fos V I1iI.. I 10. -r1 1 110~ 1 IC30 JC3 C1 l4I&amp; IeL dU L I 1I1-0C 12 110-L5 Ll-efl
compromised, even with a significant reorientation towards decentralised
negotiation. The Government remains committed to ensuring that the needs 
of women, migrants and young people are adequately safeguarded under
enterprise bargaining
Further improvements in the social wage have been achieved through
expansions of child-care, the new parenting allowance which was announced
in Working Nation and begins on July 1, and the Government's enhanced
assistance to the long-term unemployed through the implementation of the
Job Compact a commitment without parallel internationally.
As stressed in Accord VII, there is a need to continue building a solid
foundation for better retirement incomes, and progress has been maintained
in this area. The introduction of award superannuation combined with the
Superannuation Guarantee arrangements has meant that there has been a
doubling in the proportion of workers covered. Once the luxury of the
wealthy, superannuation is now a right not a privilege for all. Of course,
the Accord partners remain committed to the maintenance of an adequate
age pension as a safety net.
The Government and the ACTU will work towards establishing Accord VIII
shortly after the Budget is delivered. Like all previous Accord arrangements,
it will emphasise social protection in the context of progressive and efficient
economic and industrial relations reforms. Matters of detail and specific
commitments will depend on the initiatives of the Budget.
In the lead-up to the Budget, the ACTU and the Government reaffirm their
resolve to sustain reductions in unemployment, and to reduce long-term
unemployment in particular through the vigorous implementation of the
policies of Working Nation. A further minimum jobs target will be announced
in the new Accord.
Controlling inflation remains a priority of the Accord partners, and this
Statement further endorses the need to keep price increases at low levels to
protect workers' living standards. There will be a continuing commitment to
maintaining low inflation as achieved in Accord VII.
The need to boost both national savings and retirement incomes and to
achieve increased levels and coverage of superannuation are crucial
elements of medium-term economic planning. But in so doing the
implications for the contemporary living standards of lower paid workers must
be taken into account.
Similarly, progress is expected in other areas of the social wage.
Specifically, the Government has already acknowledged the case for publiclyfinanced
maternity leave, a position supported by the Accord partners. The
Government will be responding in this area in the Budget, and remains
committed to the implementation of progressive social wage improvements.
There are times when economic circumstances demand that the stance of the
Government's budget policy be reviewed. It is understood that this is such a 
time and that the Budget needs to redress the overall balance between
outlays and receipts. However, the important bottom line must be that
revisions to fiscal arrangements show the utmost sensitivity to the needs of
the economically and socially disadvantaged.
Partnerships between governments and the representatives of workers, and
the substantial benefits that they deliver, should not be taken for granted.
What has been achieved over the last twelve years would not have come
about under the Federal Coalition. Future gains in the social wage, and fair
and orderly transitions to more efficient working environments, would not be
possible under the Federal Coalition.
The Liberal and National parties have shown no interest in or understanding
of the Accord processes. They have opposed almost all wage increases
since 1983, they have rejected socially innovative projects to assist the most
disadvantaged, and they have consistently failed to support the
Government's progressive and long-range planning for retirement incomes.
Of most concern for Australian workers and families is the Coalition's
approach to industrial relations matters, in particular their hostility to the
award system and their advocacy of individual work contracts. Such
individual contracts would be implemented under the Coalition without any
guarantees of leave loadings, redundancy payments, superannuation,
penalty rates and paid holidays, and must mean lower rewards for the
majority of workers.
The Australian incomes policy is perhaps the most successful social,
economic and industrial relations reform partnership anywhere in the world.
Its achievements illustrate the extraordinary potential for progressive
improvement in the organisation of and rewards from work, and how these
changes can be enacted without sacrificing the traditional Australian concern
with a fair go for all.
CANBERRA 1 MAY 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 40/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
" HONEST JOHN" AND THE GST
Today Mr Howard has said that the GST is no longer Coalition policy and will not be
" lat any time in the future". Yesterday he said that there was " no way" the Coalition
could have it as their policy for the next election, but " as to what happens some
years in the future, I don't want to.. you know, I don't know".
Today Mr Howard said that the OST is " completely off" the political agenda. Off the
agenda but not off his mind. Mr Howard said yesterday that " there's nothing wrong"
with the GST. And it wasn't the first time. In March this year he said it was " a
shame" that they couldn't have a GST but they wouldn't be " having a GST or
anything remotely resembling it for the next election". He wants it off the political
agenda because he knows Australians won't vote for it but he wants to do by
stealth what John Hewson failed to do by fanatical advocacy.
In fact, Mr Howard is trying to get to the election without anything " remotely
resembling" a policy at all. He is trying to make himself a very small target. That is
why anything which " remotely resembles" a policy is poison to Mr Howard. The
same goes for anything which " remotely resembles" leadership.
We have seen it with his role in the push polling and Hindmarsh Island affairs. Mr
Howard will not take a position of policy or principle until he is forced to then, as he
has always done, he dithers and dissembles. As with the republic, so with the GST
" as to what happens some years in the future, I don't want . you know, I don't
know". Three months have passed since Mr Howard promised " headland speeches" which
he said would define his position " with greater clarity." But the only thing which has
become clearer is that John Howard has not changed a bit. Watch the polls and
adjust the rhetoric and make " people feel comfortable", to use his own words. This
is the attempt at a new electorally acceptable John Howard, but all the time he's
playing footsie with his old reactionary friends and the GST.
" I don't want to. . you know, I don't know", he says. He doesn't want to talk about it.
He doesn't want the Australian people to know what he thinks. He doesn't want
anyone to know what he intends.
CANBERRA 2 May 1995 



TEL T4E LM: a y .95
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF EMPLOYMENT SERVICES REGULATORY AUTHORITY,
WILLIAM ANGLISS COLLEGE, MELBOURNE, 4 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I'm very pleased to be here and I thank the William Angliss College for being
our very kind hosts on this morning to launch the Employment Services
Regulatory Authority. It is, I think, another one of those milestones in the
history of our country, of our society, and I made the point, I think, back in the
election in 1993, that the election was very much an ideological contest
between those that had one view of Australia and those with another. And
the view that we on this side of politics and society had was that Australia
was strong enough and rich enough, and we hoped wise enough, to accept
the notion of inclusion and to say that we move ahead as a society together,
that we should never, ever accept the fact that some people are allowed to
miss right out and fall off the back of the system, become an underclass and
try and meet their way, or battle along, basically in some sort of a rut of
assistance, or community assistance, or welfare, for the rest of their days.
Now, it turned out that that message was pretty well understood and received
in the last election and it is true as Joan Kirner said, that on election night I
said we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind, that the election was very
much about activity and employment, about the whole notion that the way to
fairness and equity in this country is through the right to a job and one's
capacity to share in the national bounty and have a piece of the cake which
comes generally through employment in this country.
So, we had a number of objectives: one to restart the economy and get it
cracking, to get employment going strongly, and at the same time to look after
those who have been particularly disadvantaged in the labour market the
long term unemployed. And we can say now, a couple of years down the
track, we are well along the way of meeting some of those objectives. We've
had 4.2 per cent employment growth over the last year, which in OECD terms
is spectacular. We have had the biggest fall in unemployment in the last
year, or year and a half, that we've had since we've be-en kieping the records
2: 01 No. 007 P. 01
lc1 
2
and we're now starting to see substantial inroads to the category of long term
unemployment, That is, those who are long term unemployed are getting a
bigger share of the employment action in this cycle than they did in any other.
That's because, I think, that we've had a lot of aggregate employment
because you can have Working Nation, but Working-Nakion without growth
and employment one feeds off the other, the fI~ xiThas got to come from the
employment. But not only have we had the raw employment, we've had, I
think, the success of the labour market programs and actually trying to bring
people who are long term unemployed back into the mainstream of the labour
market. Now, this is a matter of great pleasure to me, and to Simon Cxean who
manages these programs under his portfolio and also to the social security
system with our colleague Peter Baldwin it's a matter of great pleasure to
the Government as a whole tii-tNwe'v-e been able to see this transformation.
But the good thing is I think we're getting acceptance for the notion of the
equity of it all. Now, I mean, the thing about our Tory friends is when you say
equity it's like holding up the wooden stake to Dracula they're always
moving away from the word equity. But when we talked about Working
Nation, talking about equity and efficiency, well, the efficiency word, well, they
couldn't, you know, ideology meant they couldn't really leave that one behind
and we said, well, where are we going to get the skills complementation in
this recovery? I mean, as the recovery continues and we start seeing real
strength in employment and potential bottlenecks in the labour market, where
are going to get the skills formation from? And we are essentially going to
get them from the long term unemployed, you know, then a group of 350-
400,000 people. So we are saying not only is it an inequitable thing to do to
leave them behind, it's an inefficient thing to do. That is, that the labour
market will be stronger and better and that the point that Sue and others have
made this morning, people have skills. The fact that they have struck a poor
patch in the labour market, or they haven't been there at the right moment, or
they haven't been managed properly, or they have not been understood
doesn't mean that they can't be particularly useful back in the labour market
doing the things that they have done in the past or are able to do in the
future, or if they are trained to do in the future. And so as a consequence,
we've seen now an acceptance of, I think, the concept behind Working
Nation, which is a very revolutionary change because the whole concept of
cp e ranrigement and the Job Compact, that is, when someone is long term
unemployed, unemployed over twelve months or more, they have this right to
be case managed for an individual to get to know them, to understand their
aptitudes, their educational standards, their employment history, their
personality, and try and match them and help them, and at the same time,
then after eighteen months, qualify for the Compact where the nation makes a
commitment to give them a labour market place, a subsidised place in the
labour market, for a period of time provided they take it.
This is, I think, quite a revolutionary change and it did come from, as Joan
said, the Green Paper consultations and the White Paper, and were able to
put it into place. Now I notice today, you know-, we have people still 
TEL' 4. May .95 2 : 01 No .007 P .03
3
cavilling about. I notice, Vince Fitzgerald today talking about savings in
The Australian saying, '~ Well, you know, the Government should have
basically used the Working Nation money last year and put it off the Budget
deficit" you know, it's a view, but it's a pretty dull view, it's a pretty dumb
view. And you say, why? I mean, here we are, we're about to bring down a
Budget which is going to address the major problem the country faces in
the medium term and that is the sav ins icnbajance and the current
account deficit. That's what the Budget is going to be aimed squar'ly-at.
It's principal task is not demand management, so why did we, last year,
have to forget Working Nation and simply put the proceeds off the Budget
deficit? And there's only one reason ideology. Ideology, that is, out of
sight, out of mind. You know, the hard-hearted view, the rest of us can
move on into higher incomes and better standards of living and bad luck,
the sort of buffer at the end of the station, the cushion, the shock-absorber,
is that 300,000 or so people can be the long term unemployed and who
cares about them because politically they don't matter. I mean, that's the
view. You know, it's a view those of us who appreciate the sort of country
Australia is and has become should fight, that we should resist, that we
don't want the Newt Gingrich view of the world here and we are not going
to cop it being sort of basically parroted by people like John Howard, you
know, running around parroting little right-wing ideologies dfedupo
that they are more palatable. But basically down to the same thing, that is,
Mr Downer as Leader of the Opposition, said Working Nation was an
extravagance, they would hack into all the labour market programs upon
which it sits and basically say that it's dispensable. Well, we don't think it is
and I don't think the employers think it is because I think they see the clear
value of it. But more than that, it does make us a better, stronger society to
have these values. I mean, politics and national life is about values, it's not
just about the Budget balance, it's not just about the tax system, it's about
values. And you've got to make a determined effort when you've got
we've now international ised this country, you've got international price
earnings ratios being attached to our stocks, you've had, you know, great
increments in wealth. I mean, twelve years ago, when I first became
Treasurer, the all ordinaries index, I think from memory, was 451 that's
over 2,000 today. That's over a four-fold increase in real wealth for the
people holding stocks in this country, and you will see that. The
international isation of the place means that there is going to be more
wealth here, and its distribution will often be uneven. That's not to say that
we should comply in any induced unevenness. Rather, we should resist it
and try and bring up the people at the bottom of the queue. And whether
they come up via Working Nation or the transfer system, or support for low
income families, or the singular commitment to employment, I mean,
whatever it is of those we choose or choose together, these are all things
that a good society does in the name of equity, decency and justice. And
that's where Working Nation came from it came from those concepts.
But, like a lot of things the Government has done, we are now seeking to
sort of push the boundaries out further and what we are seeing here today
is really a quite revolutionary change to the way the labour market works 
TEL: 4. May. 3b 2: u UrINQ -U
4
and you've already seen, you know, the Job Compact come into place, the
Youth Training Initiatives are up and running, the Nation-alTraining Wage
has been implemented, the Australian Student Traineeship Foundation,
NETTFORCE, and now we are looking at the launch of the Employment
Services Regulatory Authority, with its contracted Case Management
launch. And here, we are seeing another important innovation in the way
the Australian rabour market works, because we are now seeking with the
basis of case management that close in, personalised attention and care
which we are able to give people. We are able, in that context, to start to
say " well, maybe we ought to be giving people a choice about who
manages them", and try and encourage some competition into the system
that manages them, so that there isn't just one monolith servicing them,
though the monolith that has done its very best under strained conditions
that's the CES but to open it out. Essentially, ESRA was an idea that
Simon ( Crean) and I dreamed up, and it came from the Austel model in
telecommunications. And that is, that we had Austel running a market
between Optus, Telecom and the resellers of telecommunications services.
And so what we sought to do with Austel was to create a private market,
but with the market tipped in favour of the duopolists in this country which
was Optus and the resellers, away from the former monopolists, Telecom.
In the same way, the same concept is here with ESRA that is, we will have
a body sitting over this labour market seeking to create a proper market in
training management, in case management and opportunity, and in the
labour market, and the delivery of labour market programs in such a way
that we will not simply see some monolith, and at the same time, involving
private sector companies. And we heard Sue's contribution earlier from
Drake amongst others that will be here, like, of course, the Brotherhood of
St Laurence and similar bodies we will see them proliferate right across
the country, and we will see these skills come up. We will see the skills
base of case managers come up, we will be able then to see people
moving between organisations, and we will develop truly an industry in
this particular field. Another good thing about it is that there is one good
thing about the Tories -they can always rip away at a labour market
program, but it is very hard to start tearing away at these things, once they
start being built up. One of the things you have always got to do when you
think about social reform in Australia is to make it Tory-proof you have
always got to Tory-proof them. It's not just do them, but you have got to
hermetically seal them so they can't get their nasty little right-wing
fingernails under them and tear them away. And this is another thing that I
think matters in this that is, that we can actually not simply develop it, but
we can, in the doing of it, get a lot of acceptance for it.
I think one of the things that Simon ( Crean) and I would like to see happen
here is that as we see this system continuing to sophisticate itself that
the case managers themselves can start to create their own labour market
programs. And that we might be able to relate to organisations and case
managers in a way where we fund those, built in a way which is wholly
different to the way we do it today. And that is one of the things that one 
TEL' y.
would hope to see come a much more flexible, efficient and effective
labour market program. Now, I was delighted when Joan told me that we
hava nlready got 271 private bvie accredited I think contracted is
probably the right term private and community organisations. Two
hundred and seventy one, who between them will help 100,000 job
seekers. A significant number of these accredited contracted case
managers specialise in services to clients with particular needs such as
youth, people with disabilities, mature-aged unemployed people, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people, people of non-English speaking
backgrounds, and ex-offenders etc. And I think that we are talking now
already about 600 outlets around the country. So, already we are starting
to see the thing blossom and as you know, the fact that Joan is also on
NETTFORCE means we can make that linkage to the companies and to the
industrial sectors. Because I think one of the great possibilities in case
management in Australia is that we actually get sectors like the metals
industry and the metal industry employers with the metal industry unions
talking about taking up case management themselves, so that when some
firm in that industry requires somebody, there is a much easier matching
process, and that there is, if you like, people tending to gravitate towards it
for jobs in that particular industry. We start to get some segmentation in
the industry. I think the notion is of a training company, and I think we are
seeing this in a sort of NETTFORCE concept arising there. So, I think that
is going to be an important change too, So, the whole case management
notion providing private sector as well as government involvement needs
to be applauded and further promoted.
Can I just say a few words here about the CES much maligned, but it has
done a terrific job over the years, under difficult circumstances, often with a
system a weight of unemployment which it was never really designed to
manage. But, at the same time, managed it well, and now referring people
to private case managers. It's a cultural change there, and I know that we
in the Government are very proud of the changes which have been taking
place in the CES in its capacities, and let me just take this opportunity to
record our appreciation of that organisation.
I would like to also take the chance while I am here of just complimenting
Simon on the job he has done with Working Nation it has been a mighty
job a mighty job. It is really the hard tack of public policy itfs one thing
announcing it, designing it and announcing it and getting it out, it's another
thing making it work. Putting all the bits together, seeing that they fit
logically, trying to get their efficiencies up, get them moving together it's a
tremendous task, and I have got many reasons to feel proud of this
Cabinet, and proud of the Government, but none more so than Working
Nation, and the job that Simon has been able to do with all of you who are
involved with these programs. I mean, it's a great tribute to the sort of
system of government and the society we have that we can take something
like this on, and get it up quickly and get it running effectively you can just
imagine the sort of debate you would have in the United States with a
program like this, well, you wouldn't have a program like this in the United
A tit~ S: 01 No. 00OU~ U 
TEL: 4 . IMd~* Z'-
6
States, or in other parts of the world. And I do hope that what we have
done here in Working Nation is going to be a bit of a trail-blazer in the
OECD countries as something better in terms of how the long-term
unemployed can be brought into the labour market, and to have their share
of the nations bounty, their share of the opportunities, their share of the joy,
their share of the happiness, because they are entitled to it as much as any
of the rest of us are.
So, could I perhaps conclude by thanking Joan sincerely for taking the
job. She is a believer in community organisations you have got to say
that for her. And this is right up her alley, this one, because this is
community action at work in the very best sense of that phrase. That is,
going out there, and getting these linkages to community organisations in
the welfare sector, and other community and private organisations, and
getting that mix I think Joan's experience in government, and her own
experience in community activity, almost uniquely places her with ESRA to
see it really come good. And so I thank her most sincerely for that. I would
like to finalise by expressing my appreciation to everybody who has
enthusiastically taken Working Nation up who have seen it as an
opportunity, who have been of good spirit and good heart, and who have
got in to see what they can do, and many of those organisations are
represented here today, and many people who have done that are here
today they are too numerous to thank, but I sincerely thank you all,
because Governments can do some things, but without you, they don't
happen. Particularly in this area, and I think the fact that you have
embraced these programs holds out such great promise to people who are
disadvantaged and unemployed people we have heard from a couple of
them today, and you can just see this whole question about one's place in
society, one's esteem for oneself, how important it is to advance to a job.
and to make one's way in life. That can only come when one loses that
esteem through being rejected by society or seemingly by being
unemployed for a long period of time, or unemployed at all, indeed, and
then to be supported I think these are things which mean that people can
rise and their esteem can rise, and their whole sense of themselves can
change and they can soon become much more effective take a much
more effective place in our country and our society. The main thing is, with
all these things, as I said earlier good societies can do more than one
thing at a time, and good governments can do more than one thing at a
time we can attend to the Budget deficit, and the Current Account Deficit,
while at the same time we look after the unemployed. And not only is it
something we can do, it is something we should do. And we should
always reject the doom-sayers who, in the end, have basically a caraway
seed for a heart there is a very small thing ticking in the chest, which,
really, is all about being essentially when you get down to it all, when
you rub all the phrasing and all the polish of it, it's just a bit of meanspiritedness.
We are all, I hope, much bigger than that. Thank you indeed.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR COURT'S PROPOSED INQUIRY
The inquiry into the Easton affair proposed by the Premier of Western
Australia, Mr Court, and his Liberal Party should be abandoned because it is
a flagrant abuse of the State's statutory processes.
This proposed action would breach an important protocol of Australian
politics that the judicial process should not be abused in the pursuit of
purely political objectives.
No self-respecting judge, former judge, Queen's Counsel or barrister should
consent to be party to this flagrant abuse of the system. The politicallymotivated
inquiry threatened by Mr Court should be treated with the utter
contempt it deserves.
Mr Court and the WA Liberals know that in relation to the Easton matter, no
present or past member of the Western Australian Parliament committed any
illegality. Nor was there any maladministration, or fraudulent use of
taxpayers' money. The tabling of the Easton petition has already been
reviewed twice by the State Parliament, and the debate over it is now purely
a political matter.
There are absolutely no objective grounds upon which Mr Court can justify
the provision of public funds, and the abuse of the statutory process, for the
inquiry he now proposes.
It is an improper ploy, and such an inquiry would devalue the integrity of any
person who agreed to conduct it.
CANBERRA MAY 1995 41/ 95 



Th
( I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
VE DAY AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS COMMEMORATIVE CEREMONY,
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, CANBERRA, 8 MAY 1995
It was my privilege to launch the Australia Remembers celebrations last year
and I took the opportunity to say that I hoped all Australians would be
touched in some way by the commemoration. The program today has
certainly touched all of us, and no doubt similar events being staged across
the country this year are having similar effects on millions of Australians
including, I hope, millions of Australian children.
Here, and wherever we commemorate the service and sacrifice of Australians
in war, we at once pay tribute to generations past and remind ourselves that
our duty is as they saw theirs to the next generation, to the future of
Australia. Major General James and my colleague, Mr Sciacca, paid eloquent tribute to
the contribution Australia's servicemen and women made in the European
theatre during World War 11. More than nine and a half thousand Australians
died there: young Australians, men and women with the best part of their
lives still ahead of them.
They went to Europe as their parents' generation had gone before them and,
perhaps, under fewer illusions about the realities of war.
We know why they went. We know because Australians decided long ago
that they would not forget those who made the supreme sacrifice, and that
they would pass on to future generations of Australians the message that
sacrifice contains.
We know because our parents and our teachers told us, because we
attended ceremonies every 25 April.
We learned that these men and women had a notion of duty they believed
that so long as they wanted freedom and democracy, and loved Australia and
believed in its future, they were obliged to defend them and even lay down
their lives. 
It is an example we must keep alive for our children.
Our young men and women should know that Australians like themselves
believed so deeply in their country they were prepared to die for it. That
Australians like themselves crossed the world and joined forces with men and
women from many other countries to defend freedom against tyranny.
They should also know what we mean when we talk about courage and
perseverance and the immeasurable value of sticking together in hardship
and they will know it when they learn about these Australians.
It is important that they know these events occurred, that they engulfed the
whole world. They should know and we should remember today that vast
numbers of Allied servicemen perished in the war; that millions from what was
then the Soviet Union, millions of innocent civilians, millions in the
concentration camps, perished. They should know about and we must
remember the Holocaust.
They should know that, as people thronged in city squares to rejoice in the
victory, the horrors of Auschwitz were just being revealed. That as liberation
was being celebrated in one half of Europe, totalitarian rule was being
imposed in the other. And that on the battlefields and in the prison camps of
Asia there were three more months to be endured.
In knowing these things we hope that they will never forget that freedom and
democracy are hard-won and must be defended. That peace is the greatest
gift any generation can receive, and should never be taken for granted. They
should know that these things are to be cherished.
Yet it is no less important to see the message in the jubilation of fifty years
ago. What we see in those images is humanity triumphant. We see men and
women celebrating the victory of good over evil in the battle they have
fought. It is their victory.
Perhaps nothing makes the reasons for fighting the war so clear as their
happiness. For many thousands of Australians VE Day meant beginning their lives again.
It meant being reunited with their families. It meant going back to their farms
and factories and offices and restarting their lives.
Someone once said of the Americans of that time that they were an heroic
generation they refused to be broken by the Great Depression, they fought
the war and then they built a great country. Without a doubt, the same can
be said about that generation of Australians. They went about re-building
their lives with confidence and purpose and their efforts gave rise to a period
of sustained national development. 
Among the builders were many thousands who had endured the war in their
own countries and left their shattered lives and devastated homes to start
new lives in Australia.
I do not think we should let this day pass without reminding ourselves of how
much they have given Australia; how much we have gained by being open to
the world, generous towards those who have come here to escape
oppression and hardship, and tolerant of cultural differences.
In building new lives here they enriched us all. That is one of the great
lessons of the fifty years which have passed since the war ended, and one
that we should not forget.
Today we pay tribute to a generation whose faith was profound: not just
among those who served in the armed forces, but those who kept up the fight
at home and all those who carried the vigour with which they defended
Australia in war into building Australia in peace. Through this ceremony and
through all the commemorative events this year we hope to sustain their faith
in our own lives.
And I believe it does sustain us. This generation of Australians have
engineered great changes in their country and its relationship with the region
and the rest of the world.
They have coped with change imposed upon them global change of
unprecedented dimensions at unprecedented speed. They have adapted
perhaps as no previous generation of Australians has had to. And they are
building a country which is stronger, more confident of its place in the world,
and more able to play a creative role for peace and democracy than ever
before.
To continue to do this is to continue to honour those whose lives we
remember today.
It is to say in ways which our children will understand why the war was fought.
If we do that, in future we will be able to say that on the 50th anniversary of
the end of World War II Australia truly remembered. 



PRIME MINISTER 42/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
ROBERT HENRY JOHNSTON AO, CHAIRMAN OF AUSTRADE
I was deeply saddened to learn of the death of the Chairman of Austrade, Mr
Robert Johnston a true captain of Australian industry.
It was typical of Bob Johnston's commitment to Australia and to excellence
that after a lifetime building our motor industry he devoted his retirement to
strengthening Australia's export push as Chairman of Austrade.
His dedication to guiding Australian industry and promoting exports was
unparalleled. I last saw Bob Johnston at the CeBIT technology fair in Hanover. It was a
measure of his dedication that despite illness he worked tirelessly to ensure
the exhibition was a success.
The opening of the new Toyota production plant in Melbourne last month was
a testimony to his faith in Australia a legacy of his period as Chief Executive
Officer of Toyota Australia. The plant sets a new benchmark for the
Australian motor vehicle industry.
I wish to extend my personal and the Government's condolences to his
family. I also wish to offer the thanks of the Australian people for a life which helped
make Australia a more modern and productive place.
CANBERRA 8 May 1995 



A. 3 PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RADIO 2UE, 2GB AND ABC NEWS, CANBERRA
9 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Do you think the markets will believe the bottom line on this Budget?
PM; It's easy enough to believe. The starting point deficit was around $ 6
billion, there are $ 3 billion of discretionary changes by the Government
that's on outlays, spednad receipts and there is then the sale
of Government assets, which improves the structure of those
institutions, and removes long-term public debt-interest effects.
Altogether, $ 6 billion to $ 3 billion, to a surplus of $ 700 million it's all
there in the Budget papers.
J: The Opposition says it's a " fudge-it budget"?
PM: What else can they say? They are left without a feather to fly with
they were presented tonight with a Budget surplus, next year, a Budget
surplus free of any asset sales, and the biggest change in the nation's
history in terms of a private savings plan.
J; Is the extent of the asset sales justified given the Commonwealth Bank
decision?
PM: It improves the institution let's take the Commonwealth Bank what
was it? A couple of years ago, it was the old State Savings Bank of
NSW. Then, we bought the State Bank of Victoria. It is now a real
institution. Then, under this Government, we floated it we sold half of
it, it strengthened in the market, it's share prices strengthened. Sold,
completely, it will then have a strong capital base in the market it is
the right thing to do. It is the right thing to do for the institution -the
right thing to do for the Budget. And it is the same with Qantas
Qantas needs capital that the government can't give it, it has the
chance of being the primary airline in this part of the world of South-
East Asia and why shouldn't it have that chance? 
J: Is this an election Budget?
PM: This is a Budget that does as the Treasurer said, quite eloquently: " A
key objective of current policy is to address the national savings
investment balance, while maintaining strong economic growth". What
this Budget does is give the lie to John' Howard's cynical, opportunist
claim about " five minutes of sunshine". We have had now three and a
half years of growth, and the Budget forecasts are forecasting another
3 years. In other words, what is very clear to the Australian people
from this Budget, is that there will be 6 years of continuous growth,
with low inflation, but at the same time, filling that massive savings pothole
which is sitting up there around the late 1990s and the year
2000 with the biggest private change ever with superannuation.
J: Why haven't you gone harder on spending cuts?
PM: We have gone very hard. We have got net spending cuts in the
Budget of $ 700 million, but gross spending cuts of about $ 1500 million.
So, there are $ 1500 million of actual cuts, but there is a lot of new
policy a lot of it is unavoidable new policy, the spending on families,
leaves us with $ 700 million of net spending cuts, and that rises next
year. The key thing is that the $ 3 billion of changes we have in this
year, rises to over $ 4.5 billion next year that is the discretionary
receipts and outlays changes.
J: How do you overcome credibility problems with scrapping the second
round of On e Nation tax cuts, and bring in the superannuation tradeoff?
PM: I don't think there is any credibility problem. If you say to people " what
would they prefer $ 10 or $ 15 in their hands, or the chance to have a
decent income in retirement?". I think you will find in the Budget
papers, for someone on average weekly earnings, who has been in the
workforce for 40 years, they go out with something like $ 0.5 million
dollars. Half a million. That is a person on average weekly earnings.
So if you give that choice to Australians... . remember this the
Government paid and brought forward the first round of tax cuts, and
on this occasion will be paying more than the second round of the One
Nation tax cuts will be paying more. But they are paying it directly
into superannuation accounts, and then that will give all Australians
everyone, particularly the lower income earners a much higher
standard of living in retirement.
J: During the last election, you promised that the company tax rate would
come down to 33 cents in the dollar now you h7Ve -taken ifb-a-k up to
36 cents in the dollar what happened to our international
combativeness? 
PM: You remember that at the same time, John Hewson was going to take
the company rate from 39% to 42%. And we had the Business Council
all out there cheering a 42% rate, and we said " don't mind u s we are
going to reduce it to Not a soul gave us a point for it. We did
reduce it to 33% from 39%, but the companies it's the highest level of
profits in Australian history at the moment. And taking that up by 3
cents only to 36 cents is still a long way down from the 46 cents it was
when John Howard left it all those years ago...
J: But they are warning....
PM: . taking it up to 36% will bring in, I think, $ 300 million this year, and
$ 1500 million next year. Now, that is off the massive level of
profitability which companies enjoy, and that is where the burden
should be.
J: But they already warning about jobs growth and employment
prospects.
PM: But who some flapper from the Business council?
J: But what about the tax on motor cars going back up 5% we have
already had the motor traders saying that is going to hurt employment,
particularly in Victoria?
PM: What we did, we reduced it to 15% and 16% in One Nation for the
express purpose of kick-starting the motor industry in the recession. It
did that we are now up to as high a Tevel of s'ales as we have seen,
and now is the time to bring it back. It was cyclical policy then it was
counter-cycle policy then, and it is counter-cycle policy now. In other
words, we took it down when it needed to go down, we are taking it
back up to where it was because now the need has passed. The key
point in all this the Liberals don't know where to go with all this they
are now facing a Budget surplus this year, and a surplus next year
without asset sales or anything, and a massive change for everyone in
the country having 15% put away for their long-term savings. Mr
Howard almost shrivelled up tonight looking at it we have had
nervous giggles, we have had all sorts of rehearsed lines, extravagant
press releases the Liberals know that their cynical line that there was
only going to be 5 minutes of sunshine, and that the Government was
not going to have galloping interest rates, has now fallen for the fact
that it has no truth. And what this will mean with this Budget with this
very great change to fiscal policy, and to long-term savings, much less
pressure on any prospect on interest rate rises.
ends 



6
" p I I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC WEDNESDAY, 10 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minister, politically clever, but economically thin is the comment
your Budget is drawing today. What is your response to that?
PM: I don't think that is true and why would it be so. We have got a Budget
surplus there. It means that the public sector is not calling on savings_
of Australians, therefore it is relieving the pressure on the current
account deficit and the call on overseas borrowing's. That was the
very point of it and next year we will have a Budget ySkrlys which will
be arrived at free of any asset sales or redemptions in debt and we go
on then to produce huge surpluses into the future. So, it is a massive
change. This year a surplus of $ 718 million. Last year it was a deficit
of $ 12.9 billion and next year that surplus will grow to $ 3.4 billion and
the following year to $ 4500 million. So in other words, there will be a
huge contribution from the Commonwealth Budget to the task of
national savings which is taking the pressure of interest rates and
lowering the prospects of our borrowing as heavily into the future on
the current account deficit.
FK: What about your go for growth strategy though Prime Minister. Growth
is forecast to come down to 3.75 per cent. The markets think that is
even a bit optimistic. It is not a fantastic rate of sustainable growth is
it?
PM: Well, if you go to Europe where the q~ q hate in these last few years
has been half of one per cent or one, or in Japan where it is .25 of a
per cent, they would be shouting yippee at n-erty 4 per cent wouldn't
they? Just bear in mind we have just cleaned up nearly five per cent
over the course of this year and let me just read what the Treasury say
about this, he said the economy is now growing at a sustainable
rate and that three and three quarters is a very sustainable number
now growing at a sustainable rate and expected to remain in a growth 
phase over the forward estimates period . That is the next three
years.
EIK: But, isn't the rate of that growth phase what is important. You have
been talking about jobs, jobs, jobs now for the last 12 months.
PM: Yes and we have had jobs, jobs, jobs.
EIK: But, isn't it generally accepted that growth needs to be up around four
per cent before unemployment comes down?
PM: But it is, it is three and three quarters. We have had three and a half
years of growth and what the Treasury is telling us, we are having
another three years of growth. That is six and a half years of growth
and that, of course, gives the lie to that opportunist line of Mr Howard's
about five minutes of sunshine. I mean, we are going to have six
years of sunshine. We have had three and a half years of it already,
three and three quarter per cent coming up in this year and as the
Treasury say over the forward estimates period, that is three years,
sustainable rates of growth with low inflation. Now, that is what the
very essence of the Budget was about. It was about sustaining this
recovery into the balance of the 1 990s. Having it sustainable,
affordable, taking the pressure of the current account deficit, taking the
pressure of wages and inflation and giving us a sustainable rate. Now,
the economy has picked up from when the Government introduced it's
policies in 1992 and it has grown ever since and last year we had the
largest fall in unemployment in our history.
FIK: Yes, but this year the fall that you are forecasting is only .7 per cent
down to eight per cent. Is that good enough?
PM: Fran, the election was on in 1993. It is just two years ago.
Unemployment was over 10 per cent 10.5 per cent it is an amazing
fall in unemployment to be talking about eight per cent.
FK: That's right, but
PM: An absolutely amazing fall.
FIK: But now you are talking about falling only from 8.7 per cent to 8 per
cent in one year. Is that good enough?
PM: Absolutely because it is sustainable. It is sustainable. The point the
Treasurer and I have been making since late last year when the
September quarter accounts came out showing the economy growing
at 6.5 per cent for the year, that 6.5 per cent was unsustainable. That
is why the Government introduced those three monetary adjustments
quickly into the latter part of last year which has had the desired effect
of slowing the economy down. And now we have not only got the
economy slowing, we have taken all the pressure off interest rates that 
come from the public sector and deficits by getting the Budget back
into surplus.
FK: So, you think it is good enough to go to an election with an
unemployment rate of around eight per cent. In fact, you think it is so
good that you are able to cut programs for the unemployed?
PM: Fran, let me make this point. Last year, that is the last financial year
the one we are in, is the biggest fall in unemployment since we have
been keeping the statistics, since we have been keeping the series. I
mean, what more can I say.
FK: Yes, but why not keep that rate going?
PM: Because you can't keep rates of unemployment dropping at that pace
with employment growth at that pace unless you are growing at around
five or six per cent which is not sustainable on inflation or wages.
When we introduced Working Nation last year, it's aim was to get to an
unemployment rate of five per cent by the year 2000. We have gone
from 10.5 per cent now towards eight per cent and we are on our way
to five per cent. Now, we have just seen the French elections, you
followed some of that debate?
FK: Yes.
PM: There is 30 per cent youth unemployment in France. I mean, there is
huge long term unemployment in those societies and the reason is
because they have got one and two per cent national growth rates.
We have been growing here around four to five per cent and what
these estimates are telling you is that we are going to have another
year of three and three quarter per cent growth.
FK: Well Prime Minister, predictably the Opposition doesn't think much of
your Budget. John Howard says it is a pick-pocket budget because
you are snatct iig he siij you are snatching things away from
people that were promised like the L. A. W. law tax cuts. Don't you feel
bad letting people down on that promise?
PM: What are you talking about? We have already delivered the first half
of the tax cuts.
FK: There is a second half to come, people are not going to get it.
PM: $ 20 a week. They were paid at the end of 1993. The second half we
are paying into superannuation accounts. This is the first time the
nation has had a comprehensive private savings plan. The first time
ever and it could only come from a Labor government and it will come
now by building on the nine percentage points we have under the
superannuation guarantee charge, by three percentage points of
wages coming from the employee and three percentage points coming 
from the One Nation tax cuts paid into their superannuation account.
So, every person in the country will have a 15 per cent superannuation
income over the long run. In other words, so if you say to people ' what
is more useful, a hand full of cash now which will disappear or
something that goes in forever?' Let me just give you some figures
Fran, because I think it is important that you know this and this is from
the Treasury paper ' Saving forOur Future', someone on 100 per cent
of average weekly ov~ Fiiiea rniings, if th-ey join the labour market and
were in it for 40 years would, in today's dollars, pick up $ 461,000.
This is someone on average weekly earnings, $ 461,000 or if we
express it as annual annuity $ 30,500 a year. Let's take someone on
one-and-a-half times average weekly earnings, this is someone on
about $ 40,000 a year. They would have an accumulation of $ 674,000,
these are people that had nothing to look forward to in the past but the
pension.
FK: That's true, Prime Minister.
PM: What do you mean it's true? It is fantastic. What do you mean it is
true?
EK: Well, it may be fantastic, but isn't there also an element in there for
people who are expecting something that you promised them which
was a tax cut that would mean more disposable income for them now
and you are asking them to trade it off for something in the future.
That is a change in the promise isn't it?
PM: Fran, do your street corner poll and say what would you prefer?
$ 460,000 at the end of your working life or an annual annuity of
$ 30,000 a year or $ 10 or $ 15 in your hand now? I know what they
would say to you and let me just say this about the Opposition Fran.
They were like stung mullets last night. Poor old John Howard, he had
the giggles, he had a sort of plastic smile glued onto his face. They
must have picked up and read the first five lines of the Budget speech
and nearly died. Because what could they say? Here is the Budget
back in surplus. The second line in Mr Willisseech was surplus next
year without asset sales and then those huge surpluses going on to
the future, $ 3.4 billion, $ 4.5 billion and in 1998 $ 7 billion. And on top
of that the biggest, most comprehensive savings change in our history.
FK: But to be fair Prime Minister, the Opposition are not the only ones with
some criticisms of this Budget. There was concern last night from the
Democrats, the unions and others that, for instance, the massive boost
to superannuation funds that will come from this superannuation
strategy of yours with no guarantee that those funds will be used
productively and responsibly to invest here in Australia. What will you
do about that?
PM: I think we are going to build now a massive look, these figures, I
think, are worth going through too, this is the size of the savings and I 
think there is a genuine issue about how this money is spent and how
the superannuation industry manage it.
EK: And you develop a strategy for that?
PM: Let me just go through the numbers. In 1983 we had $ 40 billion in
superannuation funds. At the last count we had $ 186 billion. Now
remember this, the national debt is $ 160 billion. We have got, already,
$ 186 billion at the latest count. By the year 2020 on the Treasury
estimates, we will have $ 2000 billion. It was on the front page of the
Financial Review today $ 2tr. That is the first time I have ever seen in
an Australian newspaper the expression ' 2tr' that means $ 2 trillion.
FIK: But how are you going to make sure..
PM: $ 2000 billion and our national debt is $ 160..
EK: But how will you make sure all that money, all those riches are used
productively here in Australia?
PM: Fran, let me just make this point. Could you imagine the Liberal party
thinking of a thing like this. Could you imagine them having the wit
pack in 1985/ 6 to start off on superannuation to build it up to three per
cent then to five per cent then to six per cent then to nine per cent and
then to add this six per cent last night, three from the employees and
three from the Government via the tax cuts. Could you imagine that
bunch having the wit, the imagination, the courage, the sense, the
conscientious to build a thing like this?
FK: Well Prime Minister, if we can turn to the Budget more generally. A lot
of the bottom line you have achieved is reached by asset sales, in
particular selling of the peoples bank, the Commonwealth Bank, that
was last minute decision..
PM: We are into hyper-bole this morning aren't we. The hyperboles are
rolling. The peoples bank!
FIK: That was a last minute decision, I understand. Why did you make that
decision at the last moment?
PM: I didn't. I saw the Managing Director and the Chairman of the
Commonwealth Bank over Christmas and I had discussions with them
and I had discussions at the same time with the Treasurer, we had
discussions perpetually over the period and also with Kim Beazley, the
Minister for Finance, and we decided having sold 49 per cent -of the
Commonwealth Bank that particularly when it picked up the State
Savings Bank of Victoria for the first time we have created a irnational
institution. The Commonwealth Bank was formerly the old
State Savings Bank of NSW which went down in the Depression. It
was always flying on one wing the Commonwealth Bank. We gave it 
two wings when it picked up the State Savings Bank of Victoria. We
built a national institution then. At that time when I was Treasurer, we
sold half of it off or a quarter of it off and we sold the balance a year or
so ago. There is now a chance, a very good opportunity of making this
a full commercial bank which is what it is. So, there is no policy
reason why it should remain a publicly owned institution and every
good financial policy reason in building another firm, strong financial
institution out there. So, we have decided to sell the other half of it in
two tranches over a couple of years. The reason it didn't go through
the Cabinet because we were speaking until late in the piece, is
because we were speaking to the bank's management and its board
and once the board make a decision they are bound to notify the stock
market and they made a decision yesterday and I think you will find
they have notified the stock market today.
FK: Prime Minister, the markets haven't reacted very favourably to this
Budget, one of their concerns is that the current account deficit
remains high in your Budget, it remains at $ 27 billion. You have
identified the current account as the number one economic problem for
Australia, yet you leave it at that level, does that mean that this Budget
is not achieving what it is meant to?
PM: What the Treasury say in their commentary statement too, they say in
the 1970s the current account was running at about 2.5 per cent of
GOP. Since then, on average it is running at about 4.5 per cent. In
other words we have a problem of two percentage points of GOP in
size. In the Budget, we have changed the Budget balance in the next
year or so by two percentage points of gpeQ. We have gone from 2.8
per cent of GOP to a surplus of $ 700 million on this occasion. The
change in the Budget balance will be about two percentage points of
GOP. So, if you just leave superannuation to one side we already
have as a consequence of last night's Budget a change to the public
sector coming through in the next couple of years of around two
percentage of GOP, the size of the problem. Mr Willis and I always
talked about this being a medium term problem and it is a medium term
problem. Can I just say, those savings that I have just read out to you,
$ 186 bullion and can I say from the superannuation paper what the
Treasury say is that the addition to savings by the year 2000 coming
from superannuation will be two percentage points of GOP and by
2020, four percentage points of GOP. So, if we have got a two
percentage point problem on the current account how have we got it
covered? We have got two percentage points coming through on the
Budget and we have got two percentage points coming through on
superannuation.
FK: Prime Minister, just finally this will be the last Budget before an
election. If interest rates stay down, as you are confident they will, will
you consider..
I 
PM: I think this goes a long way to keeping the pressure off interest rates,
that is the very big shift in the Budget balance. Remember there is a
discretionary tightening in here of increases in revenue and cuts to
government spending of $ 3000 million in this Budget last night. That
will rise to $ 4500 million next year, free of any asset sales or anything
else.
FK: So, rates will stay down?
PM: I think with the economy at three and three quarter per cent and
inflation where we have it, I think, the prospects of rates staying down
are very strong indeed.
FK: Will you then consider going to an election before the end of the year?
PM: I keep getting asked that, but I always like squeezing the value out of
these election wins. They are too hard to win without giving half of it
away. John Hewson said I was going to have an early election when
he was leader then Alexander Downer said it and then John Howard
thinks it, everytime he thinks it, of course, he goes white. But the fact
is, no we will have an election in the cycle, in the proper time in the
cycle, but can I say Fran
FK: Is that a no though to the end of the year?
PM: Only the most silliest of Prime Minister's would ever paint themselves
into a corner when they don't have to and I'm not that silly. Can I just
make this point to you, much of the commentary says some of it talks
about election budgets and the rest, this is a Budget designed to deal
with the sustenance, the sustaining of economic growth in Australia
which it does and to relieve the pressure 6nt-fie-current account. It is
a very serious Budget indeed. But the fact that it is such a good
Budget, let me say, I am going to accept the complement. If the leader
writers think it is good enough for an election all I say to them is thank
you.
FK: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you indeed.
ends 



~ t~ x I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH NEIL MERCER, TODAY TONIGHT, CHANNEL 7
MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
NM: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you Neil.
NM: Do you accept that in many ways, this Budget is a critical test of your
own personal credibility?
PM: I don't think that is right at all. I was re-hired by the nation in 1993,
to re-start growth and employment and that is exactly what we have
done. I 1
NM: And the promised tax cuts of course, which you haven't delivered,
Prime Minister?
PM: No that's not right Neil. They were paid... . the first round was paid
a week probably doesn't mean much to you, Neil but it was
paid at the end of 1993
NM: The second round has been paid?
PM: . the second round $ 4000 million of it is going to be paid into
superannuation accounts. Now, let's take the two issues: on growth,
we have had the fastest growing Western world economy since the
election. On employment, we have had the largest fall in
unemployment in our history. On inflation, we are down to between
2% and We have paid the first round of tax cuts, and now on
the second round we are paying into people's supera ' nnuation
accounts so that every Australian working person will have what they
have never had before, and that is a massive pool of savings for
them in retirement. And the country will end up with a massive pool
of savings to relieve our call on overseas debt. 
NM: But Prime Minister, they won't have that $ 10 or $ 15 in the hand as
you promised. They will have something in 20 or 30 years time.
PM: Understand this in 1993 the Government suspended the second
round of the tax cuts, and we said " we would bring them back,
probably in 1998....
NM: What I'm putting to you is that....
PM: do you recall that?
NM: What I am putting to you, Prime Minister, is that a lot of people are
now very cynical, given that promise.... . you see, that promise has
been broken.
PM: Mr Howard has been running around saying that all day...
NM: . he's been saying that you are dishonest and a liar.
PM: Let me tell you this he was Treasurer in the 1977 election and
promised tax cuts, and he then took them away 5 months later and
he got in these headlines " Lies, lies, lies" do you remember that?
NM: I do indeed, Prime Minister. A lot of people would say that headline
applies to you today.
PM: How could they? Neil, don't be ridiculous if we are paying $ 4000
million off the Budget $ 4000 million off the Budget who do you
think we are paying it to? To Martians?
NM: John Howard says...
PM: No. Come on you answer me.
NM: John Howard....
PM: Leave John Howard you have made your little claim.
NM: No the point I'm making is, Prime Minister, is that you promised
voters 10 or 15 bucks in the hand they will not have that when you
said they would have it, and what I'm putting is that you are trying to
convince people that black is white.
PM: Let me just remind you, again. In the election campaign of 1993, I
couldn't get a line for the tax cuts. You know what they said to me?
" Oh, come on Prime Minister you promised those in 1992 in One
Natio! You know Neil, through the election campaign I was saying
to people like you " but what about the tax cuts" " oh, come on Prime
Minister, don't mention those". The tax cuts never rated a line in the 
1993 election this is all a bit of re-writing of history. But, they
certainly rated a line in peoples bank-books when they were paid at
the end of 1993. And let me just tell you this you ask your viewers
this question would they rather $ 10 a week in their hands, or $ 15 a
week, rather than this: a person on 100% of average weekly
earnings that is, someone on $ 33,000 a year will, as a
consequence of last night's policy change, mean that at the end of
their working life if they start their working life and finish it 40 years
later they will end up with a parcel of $ 461,000. This is a person
on $ 33,000 a year...
NM: We're going to ask that question, Prime Minister.
PM: . and then they pick up an annual retirement annuity of $ 30,000 a
year.
NM: We are going to ask that question.
PM; $ 33,000 a year.
NM: What I am putting to you you're confident that Australians will buy
that sales pitch?
PM: Neil, it's hardly a sales pitch.
NM: But it's a gamble on your part.
PM: It's not a gamble at all. What other Government would have the wit,
the conscientiousness, the imagination to actually build for the
average working person a big nest egg in retirement so that they
never have to worry again about their retirement. That is, a person
on $ 33,000 a year goes into retirement on $ 30,000 a year not just
the pension, but $ 30,000 a year. That can only come from a Labor
Government.
NM: Prime Minister, let's talk about families. John Howard says that the
big losers in this Budget are families Medicare levy is up, the cost
of a family car is up at least $ 1000, they have lost their tax cuts, and
there is a 12% GST on the home on buildings.
PM: There is not a GST on the home. This is from John Howard, who
wanted to put a 15% GST on the whole of the home that is bricks,
mortar, tiles, concrete this is an extension of the sales tax for taps,
copper pipes, drill bits, pieces of plumbing. In other words, some of
the products used in building not bricks, not mortar, not concrete,
not timber. But John Howard wanted to put 15% on them last year at
the election.
NM: We have to wind up, Prime Minister how do you rank this Budget in
terms of Budgets that have been delivered since 1983, very quickly? 
4
PM: It's a surplus, it takes the pressure off interest rates, it keeps growth
going through the 1990s, and it delivers the biggest savings nest
egg to fill the greatest savings pot-hole we have ever had.
NM: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thank you Neil.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, 7: 30 REPORT, ABC TV, 10 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PL: Prime Minister, welcome to the show.
PM: Thanks Paul.
PL: Before we get into the details, let's hear first from a well known critic of
yours. Howard: he has been there for 12 years. We have had so many
false dawns, we were promised the bacon would come home. We
were promised all of these things and we are promised it all again. I
think out there in main stream Australia, they are not listening
anymore." 1
Well, when we go now to the tax cuts that were offered in One Nation,
the forecasts in One Nation, why should we believe last night's
Budget?-
PM: Because basically they have all been, bar the first year of One Nation,
they have all come home to roost. Do you want the One Nation
numbers, I'll give them to you.
PL: What about the One Nation tax cuts?
PM: No, hang on, just a second. In 1992-93 we forecast four and three
quarter per cent in One Nation. We got 3.2 per cent. In 1993-94 we
forecast four and a half per cent in One Nation. We got four and a
quarter per cent.
PL: You also told us that the current account deficit wouldn't increase
didn't you?-
PM: Just a second, no, woo, I'm not letting you off that easy. Four and a
quarter per cent in 1994-95, we got four and three quarters and this 
year in One Nation we forecast three and three quarters and guess
what the Budget estimate is, three and three quarters per cent.
PL: Let's go to our number one national problem, our current account
deficit.
PM: No, just a second, we are not into theatricals. Just let me tell you this,
One Nation bar the first year has all come true. John Howard said
we had promised and we did and it has arrived.
PL: But it hasn't all come true at all.
PM: It has absolutely.
PL: You said in your statement to the Parliament that under your four year
plan the current account deficit would not increase. It was then 11.4
billion, it is now 27 billion.
PM: Ok, just listen. You asked me about One Nation, you asked me about
the tax cuts. In the One Nation policy we had two sets of tax cuts. The
first lot have been paid along with all the 1980s tax cuts, all four of
them, all five of them.
PL: Less than half of the total.
PM: And now the balance, more than the balance, will be paid into
superannuation accounts $ 4000 million will be paid to match
employee contributions giving the Australian working person for the
first time ever a massive retirement income. Here is John Howard's
tax cuts lies, lies, lies. In 1977 when he was Treasurer he stood up
at election, remember the fist full of dollars election campaign, ring up
and find out how much your tax cuts were. And five months later as
Treasurer he took them right out of the Budget.
PL: You went right through the last election campaign promising that your
tax cuts, the One Nation tax cuts would stay come hell or high water.
PM: Paul, in the election campaign, from the likes of you and others, I
couldn't get a word for the tax cuts. Let's not re-write any history.
When I used to say " what about the tax?" you'd say ' oh, don't tell us
about those Prime Minister, they were in One Nation a year earlier.'
PL: Because very few people ever believed you would deliver.
PM: Well, in that case, drop the debate. If you don't think they mattered,
why refer to them? I mean, I think they mattered and that is why they
have been paid here. When we suspended them, through the House
of Representatives and the Senate, we said they would return
probably in 1998. They have returned in 1998 and what this will mean
is because we will pay them now into superannuation accounts of 
people and they will keep them forever it will mean that a person on
average weekly earnings, $ 33,000, will in retirement have a $ 30,000 a
year income. Do you think that the Coalition would have any of the
imagination or the courage or the foresight to develop a massive
savings plan like this.
PL: Prime Minister, we were going to get $ 5.2 billion worth of tax cuts from
1995-96. Under the plan we are now told..
PM: No, that figure is wrong. It is $ 3.5 billion $ 3.5 billion and you are now
getting $ 4.2 billion.
PL: There were two lots of tax cuts. We were going to get $ 3.4 and we
were going to get $ 5.2 later. The $ 5.2 later are now into
superannuation.
PM: The second lot were $ 3.5 and they have now become $ 4.2 and they
are being paid as superannuation. Now, who do you think is getting
them out there martins? Who do you think is getting the $ 4 billion?
Martins or Australians?
PL: And when are you going to start distributing them, 1996-97, 1997-98?
PM: Paul, have a look at this. Here is the Government, we have brought
down a surplus Budget. A surplus Budget now right through the 1990s
with the biggest savings change, the most comprehensive savings
plan ever in the nations history. What have we heard from John
Howard? Not one policy point. He is just a little whinger, whingeing
around on radio stations attacking me personally, hour in, hour out and
when pressed about his policy he has none. Imagine him turning up a
savings plan putting 15 per cent of every bodies income away for their
retirement. Imagine him building a savings pool of $ 2 trillion $ 2000
billion.
PL: All this is assuming you get re-elected and assuming you actually do it.
PM: No, it's not. It's not assuming at all. We will legislate that in..
PL: This will be L. AW law will it?
PM: This will be legislated the same as the superannuation guarantee is
legislated which is now five per cent, will be six per cent.
PL: And the same as those tax cuts will legislate?
PM: It will be six per cent on July 1 and the only way it can be changed is
by the Government standing up in the House of Representatives and
the Senate and changing them.
PL: But, you did it with the tax cuts Prime Minister? 
PM: Yes, but it had to pass both Houses of Parliament, Paul.
PL: But, it was never going to happen was it, L. A. W law?
PM: May be a mere bagatelle, but it had to pass both Houses of
Parliament.
PL: And you went to the election promising that you would stick to that
pledge.
PM: And you never reported it. Neither did any of your colleagues.
PL: Never reported your tax cuts?
PM: Look, in the election they didn't matter a tinkers cuss.
PL: Well, let's look at your surplus. Your headline Budget surplus, $ 718
million..
PM: Can I just say, here is John Howard running around. Can I just say
this, he has run around all day talking about tax and asset sales. This
is the person who was in favour of at the last election a 15 per cent
GST on everything, on everything and wanted to sell, remember he
had the kitty of the $ 20 billion of Telecom and they were going to have
somebody dole it out. I mean, they have got to be joking.
PL: You are getting rid of the Commonwealth Bank assuming that share
holders will let you now.
PM: Yes, but we are not saying that the Commonwealth Bank sale isn't
something that can't be done or shouldn't be done. But what he has
was a completely unsaleable, un-doable thing of selling $ 20 billion
worth of Telecom. Now, this is two years ago.
PL: But, how do we know that this is doable because you have got to get
per cent of share holders to agree. Your whole fiscal policy is now
swinging in the breeze of a vote of share holders in the
Commonwealth Bank.
PM: Look
PL: It has got a $ 4 billion hole in it if they say no.
PM: Look, where do you get these lines? Up and down the corridor. I
mean, did you talk yourselves into this in the afternoon.
PL: It's not right? 
PM: I mean, did you get into a huddle down at the drink stall or something
and then come up with this nonsense?
PL: Well, what is the situation?
PM: I mean, where do you pick this up? At Aussie's cafe bar? I mean
where do you get this tripe? The Government is going to sell the
Commonwealth Bank like it sold the first tranche, the second trance
and not only that, the Commonwealth Bank is going to buy back into
Treasury the shares, just as Coles-Myer did recently. You know what
that is going to do? Have less shares. You know what happens when
normally you have less shares? The price goes up.
PL: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Good.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, SYDNEY, 10 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL Prime Minister, good morning and welcome.
PM: Thank you, John, good to be here.
JL Are you happy with the response to the Budget?
PM: Well, I think we've had a round of editorials as good as I can
remember for a while and I think that's because that the key aim of the
Budget was to keep the growth we've had for the last three years going
and I think it becomes apparent to any reader of it that the rate of
growth we've got now is sustainable, it's slowed as we wanted it to, it's
sustainable, we've got low inflation, we've got the Budget back into
surplus and we've got a major change in there on superannuation and
long term savings and retirement incomes.
JL Well, maybe you've been looking at different editorials. I've looked at
a couple and some of them are reasonably scathing, I suppose, would
be a way to describe them. Geoff Kitney; in the Sydney Morning Herald
says, let me quote it, " If Mr Keating gets away with this, he'll have
pulled off one of the greatest political escape acts".
PM: Yes, but that's not editorial, that's a comment from a journalist. Well,
but I think he in his article also pays credit for the change here. I
mean, what we've gone is from a Budget deficit last year of $ 12.9
billion to a surplus of $ 700 million. Next year we'll have surplus there
without reliance on any one-off effects, that's a recurrent surplus, and
the following year we end up with a surplus next year we end up with
a surplus of $ 3.4 billion, the following year $ 4.5 billion. Now, what that
means, John, is this it means that the public sector of Australia is not
out there bidding for Australian savings. Therefore we are not putting
pressure on overseas savings in the current account deficit. That's the
linkage. In other words, if the Commonwealth Government isn't out 
there in deficit bidding for Australian saving õ , we are not therefore
putting pressure on to bid for foreign savings through the current
account deficit.
JL But when Ralph Willis announced a surplus last night, you could hear
an audible intake of breath not just from the Parliamentary chamber,
but from around the nation. The best prediction has been for a deficit
of what, $ 2-3 billion, I think?
PM: Yes, and without the I mean, what you've got here is basically, we
want to make the point that the Budget was in surplus virtually
forthwith. That is, we are not out there bidding for savings right now
because we think while we've got a medium term focus on the current
account and our national debt and we've got the remedy in there on
the Budget change and superannuation to meet it in the medium term.
We also want to do it quickly.
JL The surplus is brought about really, I mean, if you look at the fine print,
to achieve this you've flogged off the family silver as they say, in
particular selling the Commonwealth Bank. Without the asset sales,
what would the deficit have been, because it would have been a
deficit?
PM: If you took the Commonwealth Bank out of it, we'd have a deficit of
around about probably two and three quarters to three billion dollars,
but next year we would have a surplus without any asset sales. So in
other words, see, in this Budget...
JL But you won't have any assets.
PM: Oh yes, oh yes there is.
JL Well, I mean Qantas...
PM: No, no we are only putting half the Commonwealth Bank in this year,
half next year.
JL But you've only got half the Commonwealth Bank, first half s gone.
PM: We're putting a quarter, well we're putting half of what we have left in
this year and half next year.
JL Okay, so you've already sold half the Commonwealth Bank, but that
means you've got a remaining half...
PM: We've got half to sell worth about $ 4.5 billion we'll put $ 2 billion in
this year and $ 2 billion next year. 
JL Okay, so that last half, in other words the remaining quarter, will then
be sold when?
PM; That would be sold in the year 1996-97 Budget.
JL Well, what happens when they're gone and there's no more assets to
flog?
PM: Well, that's what I told you. When they're gone we are still in surplus
without them. Next year, in 1996-97, the Commonwealth Budget on a
recurrent basis is in surplus without the asset sales.
JL Is the sale of the Commonwealth Bank anathema to you? It was in
1986 I think you used an expression, or Bob Hawke did, either one,
that Ben Chifley would spin in his grave if he knew that the
Commonwealth Bank was going to was that you or Bob?
PM: No, I didn't say that. No, the thing is, look, the Commonwealth Bank
was always a sort of show flying on one wing. It was the old,
essentially the old State Savings Bank of New South Wales which the
Commonwealth Bank, then a fledgling bank, took over in the
Depression and the preponderance of its assets was in New South
Wales. In the late 1980s, it bought the State Savings Bank of Victoria
and it was then flying on two wings in the two most populous States.
At that point, it turned into a real major institution. We then floated off
a quarter of it, we've since floated another quarter off and in an
institution which we began with being worth $ 3 billion, is now going to
be worth $ 7 billion and it's working now as a completely commercial
bank and there's no policy reason why we should keep it.
JL Why didn't you sell it in 1986?
PM: Because it wasn't, as I said, it was only flying on one wing it was
essentially, what Europeans call, a post office bank and it's not that
today. It's a full commercial bank and therefore we decided to sell it.
But, John, leave the Bank to one side because it's already priced and
in the market. The shares are in the market and everyone knows what
the price of them is.
JL Well, what about Qantas?
PM: Well, Qantas again Qantas has a great opportunity to be the premier
airline in South East Asia, but it needs capital which the Government
can't give it. I mean, we can't take money away from pensions
payments to families to put capital into Qantas. So, what we've done
is merged Australian Airlines into Qantas and we are now selling the
merged airline Qantas and when it goes to the market when it needs
capital for aircraft or for on ground facilities or route expansions 
around South East Asia it will be able to go to the Australian stock
market and get the capital.
JL: Okay, well you've talked about selling Qantas before, how many times
can you claim a return from the sale of Qantas is this going to be the
last time?
PM: Well, we're not selling things out of cycle we won't sell them when the
stock market is bad, we won't sell them when the profits of the
company are low. We wanted to get Qantas' profitability up and time
it. You've got to take some advice from the underwriters and we've let
that now go into this financial year rather than last financial year. But,
the key point, John, is there's a $ 3,000 million recurrent change in the
Budget. That is, a net $ 700 million from cuts in Government spending
and $ 2.3 billion on the receipt side. So, there's a $ 3 billion change in
the Budget on a recurrent basis. That's what brings the Budget into
surplus next year. So, if I give you this point the current account
deficit problem is about two percentage points of GDP, and that's
around $ 10 billion. The Budget will change, the Budget balance will
change, by 4 per cent of GDP in the next couple of years. That is,
from a deficit of around $ 2.5 billion to one of surplus of around 1.5 per
cent of GDP. So, we've got a fix in there for the current account
problem through the Budget. The other fix we've got in there is this
enormous change on superannuation. For the first time ever, every
Australian working person will have a 15 per cent superannuation
contribution coming into their account. That's 9 per cent from the
arrangements the Government's already put into place, the
Superannuation Guarantee Charge, and last night what we announced
is a further 6 per cent 3 per cent from people themselves and 3 per
cent from the One Nation tax cuts...
JL: Yes, well that seems to mostly be getting applause. That's where the
tax cuts that were L-A-W went?
PM: They're going to go to people's superannuation account and as a
consequence, for the first time ever, you're going to let me just give
you the figures because this is the first comprehensive private savings
plan...
JL: Okay, don't make the figures too big or too complicated.
PM: No, no, but let's make this point: this is the first Government that's
ever given Australia, all Australians, a comprehensive private savings
plan or scheme. What this does is, what it will mean is, that every
Australian working person will be able to build up for their retirement a
level of income which will be roughly double the pension. So, I will
give you an example of personal average weekly earnings: a person
on average weekly earnings, which is around $ 33,000, will end up with
a benefit of $ 461,000 if they joined the scheme today and were in it for 
years. Or, if they take it as an annual annuity, it's worth $ 30,000 a
year to them. So, you take a person on $ 33,000, they build up a bank
of $ 461,000 in today's dollars today's dollars and they go out with
$ 30,000 a year. Now, that could only happen with a big national
scheme like this, and let me say this John, it would only come from a
Labor Government.
JL: Why didn't you do it before?
PM: We did. We started in the ACTU, and the Government under the
Accord Mark V in 1985-86, that was the first 3 per cent. Then we went
to 5 per cent, then we went to the Superannuation Guarantee Charge
to go to 9 per cent, and now we're adding another 6 per cent 3 and 3.
JL: Well, as I say, that certainly is...
PM: Can I just add to the point?
JL: Sure.
PM: This is where, I mean, we get all these criticisms from our opponents,
but could you imagine the Liberal. Pa~ rty sitting down thinking of an
arrangement, talking to the workforce, getting them to agree to put
income away to save it and that working from 1985 to 1995 and then
under the arrangements to 2000, to come from nothing to 15 per cent
for every person in the country. Now, what that will do, not only will it
lift their retirement income, but it lifts our national savings. In 1985, we
had $ 40 billion in super funds. This year, we'll have $ 186 billion. In
the year 2020, we reckon we'll have $ 2,000 billion $ 2 trillion. And
you notice in today's Financial Review on the front page, it's a $ 2tr
bonanza. That's the first time I've ever seen that expression on an
Australian newspaper tr means trillions $ 2,000 billion. Now, what's
our national debt? $ 160 billion. So, the Government last night put the
seal on a savings scheme that will put for the nation $ 2,000 billion
compared to a national debt of $ 160 billion.
JL: Martin Ferguson, speaking of the ACTU, said it was a tough Budget a
bit better than saying it wasn't his job to defend the indefensible which
he said a couple of years ago but, tough. Where's the pain for Martin
Ferguson in there?
PM: Well, it's a Budget which, there's cuts in Government spending...
JL: Not too many.
PM: Well, yes, they're there...
JL: By .6 of a per cent 
PM: No, the Budget is around about, outlays are I think about $ 120 billion...
JL: And you've cut it by $ 700 million.
PM: And we've cut it by, we cut it in gross terms by $ 1,500 million this year,
$ 2,800 million next year, $ 2,000 million the year after and just on
$ 2,000 -million the year after that. But with the various new policy,
that's new policy and unavoidable new policy, the net change this year
is $ 700 million. In other words, we've saved $ 1,500 million gross, the
net saving is $ 700 million.
JL: Yes, it must seem strange to people, and maybe Martin Ferguson
meant it was tough when he sees things, not that he minds the left
wing too much, but when he sees things like a quarter of a billion
dollars suddenly being found for Brian Howe's pet project, this Better
Cities program. I mean, if you were really being tough, programs like
that would have gone under the razor, they wouldn't be getting extra
funding?
PM: No, that's not right, John. Look, let's take one of the projects it's doing.
The railway, we are funding in part the railway from Brisbane to
Robina on the Gold Coast. This is the fastest growing area of
Australia. It's an area of enormous development of sub-divisions,
there's enormous traffic build-up and blockages and that whole Gold
Coast area, that whole Gold Coast corridor is a real problem for
Brisbane.
JL: Yes, but isn't that a Queensland problem?
PM: Queensland is not going to be able to afford to do it by itself. So, we
are doing that. We're doing similar things I opened the interchange
recently in Melbourne at Maribyrnong which is giving a rail and bus
interchange for the new rail service out beyond Dandenong, and
without the Commonwealth money it just wouldn't happen. So, in other
words, there are parts of the country in, if you like, in public
infrastructure where the State and the municipal governments can't
afford it. I mean, but the key point is this, John, Australia's spending,
Australia's government spending is the second lowest in the world.
Now, I've got the table here in front of me let me tell you what it is.
JL: How do we manage to have the second lowest in the world when we
have far more politicians per head of population than any other
country?
PM: Well, let me politicians....
JL: Well, it's pretty important to us, we're paying. 
PM: Yes, I know, but it's a major diversion Let me just say this, look,
the United States has got 33.6 per cent of its GDP in Government
spending all sectors. Australia has 35.7 per cent. Now let me go
down the others: Germany 48.9; France 55; Italy 56; UK 43; Canada
48; Austria 52 et cetera and it rises up to 56 per cent. Australia is at,
this is the Commonwealth and the States, is at 35 per cent of GDP. In
other words, and the Commonwealth is at 24 per cent. So John, we're
delivering an efficient, effective public sector including great schemes
like Medicare, for 24 per cent of the nation's output.
JL: Well, imagine what we could do if we didn't have all those
unnecessary politicians?
PM: But, the thing is this, you can't in a country like this, you can't have
roads, rail, health services of this quality, at less than 24 per cent. All
these people, you'll have John Howard on the program later, he'll tell
you, " oh we haven't cut Government spending". But the thing is every
time you say to these characters, " well do you want to cut into
pensions? Do you want to cut into payments to families?" Because
that's what you have to do to go any lower than this. So, what the
Government did was a tough, reappraisal of the spending over
weeks, a 10 week meeting of the Expenditure Review Committee, and
as a consequence of all that, we have changed the Budget balance on
a recurrent basis by $ 3,000 million. And we've done it, I think, fairly
and while we've done that we've at the same time developed within the
Budget that wonderful change on superannuation, you know, which, I
mean, countries just don't get breaks like this. There are not many
national governments around the world setting up for their community
anything like a 15 per cent contribution to private savings.
JL Would it not have been possible to cut Government spending more?
PM: No, I don't believe so and Ralph Willis very eloquently, I think, took his
critics on in the Budget lock-up yesterday for those people to say we
ought to cut Government spending. We've got Government spending
back at where it was before the Whitlam Government came to office in
1972. Now, you know, we've had 1.3 per cent population growth on
average, we've had an enormous change in participation in schools. I
mean three kids in ten were completely secondary school in the early
1980s it's now nearly nine in ten. We've got this massive throughput
into universities, into TAFE. We've got the major sophistication over
years in the health scheme and we're still delivering Commonwealth
Government spending at around those early 1 970s levels.
JL Yes, I know you're not terribly interested in discussing the number of
politicians we have in the country because you see it as not being
important, but when you talk about our good record which is, according
to the figures you've given me, a terrific record, the amount that we are
able to do with the spending that we make, the Government spending 
we make, imagine what we could do if we didn't have the excessive
number of politicians that we've got who must have bureaucracies...
PM: But that's not a Budget debate, John, that's a debate about the States
and the Federation and everything else, and I've only got 40 minutes
with you so I want to keep it can I make this point to you: what the
Treasury said last night was this, it said the economy is now growing at
a sustainable rate and it is expected to remain in a growth phase over
the forward estimates period that's three years. Now, we've had 3
and a half years of growth since the recession, the Treasury is now
saying we've got 3 more years coming up. That gives the lie to John
Howard's cynical opportunist line that there were five minutes of
sunshine. I mean, what does he say now when we've had 4.5 per cent
growth for this last year and we've got 3.75 per cent coming up and the
Treasury is forecasting three more future years of low inflationary
growth. I mean, that's what the Government was re-elected for in
1993, to keep growth going and to keep employment going. What
we've done is make that growth sustainable and that's turning up here
in the forecasts. We've adjusted the Budget to keep it going, to keep
the pressure off interest rates so we don't need to grab the monetary
lever.
JL: Can you think of a Budget in the last ten years that's been brought
down by you or your Government or somebody else that hasn't been
applauded the way that you people applaud your own Budgets? That
hasn't been coloured to be the perfect solution to the problems of
Australia the day after the Budget's been...
PM: But I don't think they're perfect, but they work. Look, let me just say
this, here's Mr Fischer, the Leader of the National Party, last year
there's his last year's press statement, I'll leaWe it-wityou it said,
" The Government won't get it's 4.5 per cent growth if it doesn't get it's
forecast 14.5 per cent growth in business investment." What was the
outcome for the year? 4.75 per cent growth and investment was
per cent, not 14 per cent. He said, " and no-one, including Treasury,
believes that investment growth number", we nearly doubled the
number.
JL: Yes, but that's what I'm saying. All the Budgets that you've been
associated with, all the Budgets that have been brought down, have
been going to be the solution to the problems that the country has, that
people still believe that the country has problems. So what's going to
be different about this one?
PM: Well, John, we've been growing, we've been having this sort of
unreality debate, you know, that the country's got troubles. Well, it's
been growing at 4-5 per cent with 2 per cent inflation.
JL: Why do people perceive it has troubles? 
PM: Well, just record this fact, It's been growing at 4-5 per cent when
Europe is growing at 1 per cent with 2 per cent inflation and 4 per
cent employment growth. I mean, that's the sort of trouble that about
another 100 countries out there would like to have. I mean, that's the
sort of benefits that have come from the Government's policies over
the last couple of years. I mean, we've never been in a position of that
sort of growth with low inflation since the middle 1960s.
JL: Yes, I'm aware of this. But the question I put to you is why do people
perceive, because I hear it constantly, that this country has problems?
Why is it all doom and gloom?
PM: Well, I don't think it is all doom and gloom, but they saw the monetary
adjustments, the interest rate adjustments last year and they thought,
hello, here goes again, but in fact, what was happening was we were
slowing the growth down not killing it off slowing it down. That's
what the Budget forecast and the out-turn for the year, I think,
establishes that weha siuccessfully slowed it down. And the doom
merchants, I mean, take John Howard he's been running around now,
I mean, cynically, opportunistically saying, " oh look we've had five
minutes of sunshine." In fact, we've had three years of growth at about
four times the rate of Europe. Japan is growing at half a percentage
point. We're growing at around 4 percentage points, four times as
much, well nearly four times as much, and the Treasury is telling us
we're going to be growing now on a sustainable basis for three more
years. So, I mean, when you've got characters like Howard wandering
around saying, oh look don't worry, the sky's falling in, the sky's falling
in doing this Chicken Little number all around the country.
JL: But why do people believe it?
PM: Well, I don't think they do, John. I don't think they do, I mean, the
culture of criticism in the media today has become of, sort of, epidemic
proportions. I mean, nobody is prepared that's why I think that
programs like this are valuable because people can actually hear what
the policy-makers are saying, what the institutions like the Treasury or
the Reserve Bank are saying and they can make their own judgement.
They can hear what the unions have to say, they can hear what
business have to say better they hear that than these noisy, voluble,
opinionated comment pieces from people in the media.
JL: Now, tell me...
PM: Because they're a dime a dozen.
JL: Do you people hear them, however? 
PM: Do I hear the people? That's all I listen for. I mean, one has got to
listen through the screen of comment, the sort of culture of criticism, to
listen to what your conscientious Australian person is saying and
thinking.
JL: Are you aware, I understand you're a terribly busy man, but are you
aware of what people say generally on program like this, are you
aware of what the Australian feeling is?
PM: Oh yes, because I try and listen to them wherever I'm travelling around
and the other thing is, you see, when I go to things people sidle up to
you and they say, listen Paul, I'll tell you this and I always listen,
you've got to be a good listener in public life. I always listen because,
say over a couple of weeks, I do many functions, I see many people.
And each one, you pick up a little bit at each one, and you put it
together and you get a fair idea of what public opinion is and what
concerns people and what their aspirations are. Now, you know, I can
only say this to you John, I mean, this Government is listening all the
time and here we are last night, we've been in office 12 going on 13
years, this is a Budget from a Government that could have been in
office 12 months. I mean, it's got all the freshness in the world about
it.
JL: It's being called by some an election Budget, but that's not necessarily
criticism is it?
PM: Well, that's a great compliment. I mean, if they want to say they
thought the Budget was so good it was an election Budget, though it is
a serious Budget, a serious Budget to deal with taking the pressure off
interest rates and the current account, if they want to pay us a
compliment of saying it's so good it's an election Budget, well I'll take
the compliment and thank them for it. But the truth is the Government
sat down seriously to relieve the burden of higher interest rates on this
country by putting the burden onto the Budget's policy and giving us,
filling that savings pothole we've got outftHer-e a-round the late 1990s
and the year 2000, and the thing we got for that is the Budget surplus
and superannuation.
JL: Last year's Budget said that the deficit would be about $ 18 billion. It
turned out to be $ 27 billion. They're the sorts of things that I think
concern the public. They say, but oh but last year he said it was going
to be $ 18 billion and it blew out to $ 27 billion. What happened there?
PM: No, that was the current account deficit. Yes, well what happened
there was we had the drought which lost us a heap of agricultural
revenue and the investment, I already read Mr Fischer's comment, the
forecast in the Budget for investment was 14.5 per cent. It turned out
to be 25 per cent. Whenever you have a big investment bubble, the
investment goods, the producer goods, you know, the digitally 
operated machines, mainframe computers, which we do not make
here, all come in at once. So, if you look at, a couple of things
happening we've got a big investment bubble and we had the
drought. So that threw the current account out. But the main thing is,
John, not last year's current account or this, John, the main thing is the
trend.
JL: That's right, but it doesn't alter the fact that people are going to leap on
to a that the current account deficit is tipped to be...
PM: I know, but let's go back, you and I had these discussions in the
election campaign of 1993. It's just over two years ago. At that stage
unemployment was 10.5 per cent. It was all about employment and
jobs. I was elected as head of this Government and this Government
was re-elected principally to deal with growth and employment. That is
what we have faithfully done. Unemployment is now down to 8.7 per
cent from 10.5 per cent and we've got it going to 8 per cent in this
Budget. So in the space of three years, we'll have taken
unemployment from 10.5 per cent to 8 per cent and falling. And we've
done that with a high growth, low inflation economy. You know, it's as
if people don't want to hear that these good things are happening.
When we introduced Working Nation last year, that was to deal with
the long term unemployed. Do you know this year, John, we've had
100,000 long term unemployed people that's people unemployed
more than 12 months 100,000 back to work. I mean that's a fantastic
thing for this society.
JL: Yes, I agree and it's difficult to argue with that. Just quickly, the lift in
the company tax rate is as you say to cash in on the increasing
profitability of Australian companies but when you drop that company
tax rate, that was because you wanted to give the same sort of tax
regime for companies here that they could get in Asia. Does this mean
you're no longer worried about losing business, moving it offshore to
take advantage of lower tax regimes?
PM: Well, I think we worry about these things but again, you can only do it
years ago when I became Treasurer, when John Howard left me the
Treasury job, the company rate was 46 per cent. We reduced it to 39
per cent and we gave the shareholders full dividend imputation that's
no double tax on dividends which the Liberal Party never gave them.
Then we reduced the rate from 39 per cent in one go to 33 per cent.
This is when John Hewson was campaigning on taking it up from 39
per cent to 42 per cent. In the 1993 election, the Liberal Party's policy,
John Howard's policy, Hewson's policy, was to take it from 39 to 42 per
cent. We took it from 39 to 33 per cent and we're now putting it back
to 36 per cent because the Budget does need more revenue and the
big package we gave business in that tax cut plus two investment
allowances plus accelerated depreciation cost us $ 3 billion a year.
Now that the company profit share, the profit share in the economy, is 
a record high again, we think it's reasonable that companies should tip
some money in. And what are we asking them for? $ 300 million this
year and $ 1,500 million next year.
JL Okay, but if that...
PM; Which is pretty reasonable.
JL If that tax increase comes from companies, what's in this Budget for
jobs? I mean, the revenue is coming from companies so obviously
they're not going to be in the position to employ perhaps as many as
they could have been.
PM: Oh no, I mean, all those changes are taken into account when we
make the forecast. The forecast we have, the Treasury forecast for
1995-96, is for 3 per cent employment growth.
JL Yes, now, a lot of parts of the forecast last year were terrific but there
were a lot of parts of the forecast last year and the year before that
weren't too terrific, so...
PM: Not many, not many. I mean, the only thing that went astray on us is
the current account deficit. The rest of it, in fact, we did better than the
forecast. We did much better on growth, we did better on inflation.
JL We did too well then in some areas and had to increase interest rates.
PM: Well, I mean, better too well than not good enough. I mean...
JL Tell the people who are paying the mortgages.
PM: Yes, but I mean, also understand this, John, this was when we had
interest rates down to, we had mortgage rates down to 8 per cent.
They had an enormous increase in disposable income when
mortgages went from 15 per cent down to 8 per cent. They've gone
from 8 up to 10 per cent. I mean, and the job now is to stabilise that.
JL Do you believe that....
PM: And do you know this, in the last week you've seen two banks reducing
their fixed housing mortgage rates the National Australia Bank and I
think Westpac have reduced their fixed housing interest rates. So I
think there's a very good trend, there's some very good signs there.
JL Why the increased tax on building materials?
PM: Simply because the tax base has been declining on us. You see,
when we, let me explain this, for very good policy reasons, the
Government has taken down the tariff wall. But the tariff wall was 
expressed in Customs Duty which you paid on imports. That's now
costing the Budget, that policy change which is a tremendous change,
it's completely changed the nature of Australian industry for the better,
but that policy change is costing the Budget this year $ 6 billion and
every year $ 6 billion. The company tax changes I mentioned to you
cost us $ 3 billion a year. So just those two things have cost us $ 9
billion. We've got to get some of it back somewhere. So what we've
done is put what I think is a sensible expansion into the Wholesale
Sales Tax base into some hardware and building products.
JL: But why building products? I would have thought that...
PM: Because most other things, most other electrical goods and
whitegoods and those things, are covered. But it covers things like
nails and taps and...
JL: Yes, it's going to increase the cost of a house.
PM: Yes, I know, but it's not on bricks, it's not on concrete, it's not on tiles,
it's not on timber, it's not on the basic building, it's just on the bits and
pieces that go into it.
JL: Okay, well I appreciate your time very much. Maybe somebody in your
office could list off some goodies for us about Australia that we could
offer. I mean, I hear you deliver these figures and I know that the
figures that you're delivering are accurate and they are also interesting
maybe it would be an idea if we reminded people every now and
again, and surely the Opposition would agree to the odd reminder
every now and again, that there are areas that Australia in fact leads
the world and we should perhaps have a better opinion of our own
country.
PM: Well, we are, John. You know I was in Germany recently and I met the
Premier of Lower Saxony and that's in Hanover. And in Hanover, near
Hanover is the city of Wolfsburg which is the basis of the Volkswagon
plant, the Volkswagon city of Germany, and he said to me, you know
Mr Keating, he said, we've got great community spirit here, he said,
we've all agreed to work a four day week because we've got to put
people off at Wolfsburg to get the productivity up. And I said, but why
aren't they getting other jobs? He said, because there isn't enough
employment. They have three quarters of 1 per cent employment
growth in Germany, in that part of Germany.
JL: Three quarters of 1 per cent?
PM: And you know what we had last year? 4 percentage points. In other
words, we had five or six times as much employment as that country.
Now, how would I be talking on your radio program saying well, John,
I'll tell you what we want people to do, we want everyone to work a four 
day week. I mean, many Australians should understand that the
Australian economy has been one of the best performing in the world
in the last three years with high growth and low inflation and high
employment. And when you get around Europe and you look at 30 per
cent youth unemployment in France, long term, massive long term
unemployment, declining rates of economic and employment growth
and see what this Labor Government has since we introduced the One
Nation statement in 1992 to kick start the economy, and got ourselves
re-elected in 1993 with complete fidelity to reduce unemployment and
lift growth and now to put in a long term savings plan for the country
forever, that's the sort of policies you get from a Government that's
listening and thinking.
JL: You say that payments to the States will be rationalised does that
mean cut?
PM: No, it just means that we have these disparate indexes for how we pay
what is called Specific Purpose Payments and the Commonwealthowned
payments.
JL: Are they going to get more or less?
PM: No, they are going to be less and they are going to be less because
some of the indexes for instance, the CPI, when we pay, a lot of
these programs are simply, the costs are simply labour costs, the
labour costs elements of them are much lower real costs to the States
and to the Commonwealth than say a CPI adjustment which will have
in it fresh fruit and vegetables, mortgage interest rates all the things
that don't apply to States or Commonwealth delivery of programs. So,
in other words, we've put indexes in there which are better tailored for
the sort of programs that we actually spend.
JL: Would you think that the State Premiers are going to have to do
something about their own tax levels?
PM: Oh no, I think the States,.. we're running into a very good cycle at the
moment. I notice that Victoria has got it's Budget back into surplus,
Queensland is into surplus, Bob Carr, I'm sure, will grab hold of the
New South Wales' budget. As I said to you before, John, when I read
you those numbers earlier, that was for the whole of the nation's public
sector, the Commonwealth Government and all of the States and
Territories and we are the second lowest spending country in the world
that's all of us together. So, I mean, I think the happy news out of
last night and the round of State Budgets is that Australia's public
fiscal position is now going to be in surplus and this is a great thing for
the country at this stage of the cycle.
JL: Okay, Prime Minister, again thank you very much for your time. Good
to see, I'm sure you're in great demand today. 
PM: Thank you, John, I appreciate the opportunity and the opportunity, can
I say, particularly to talk directly to people and not have it sort of
filtered, cut, you know, shredded to opinion...
JL: Well, it will be by the time it gets on television tonight.
PM: You know, by the sort of sub-editors and the rest. The fact of the
matter is, on your program, as you say, dial-in democracy...
JL: You like that, don't you?
PM: I like that line, dial-in democracy, it's also dial-out conversation about
the things that really matter. And I hope your listeners have found it
valuable as I have. Thanks John.
JL: Okay, let's see if we can organise for you to come in in the not too
distant future and perhaps take some of these calls from some of these
listeners and speak directly to them. Is that possible?
PM: Glad to do it.
JL: Okay, well we will talk about that in the not too distant future. Prime
Minister of Australia, Paul Keating.
PM: Thank you.
Ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ANGELA CATTERNS, TRIPLE J, 10 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
AC: Welcome to Triple J.
PM: Thank you Angela. I have been before, but not here.
AC: Not to Triple J central.
PM: Not to Triple J central.
AC: Are you pleased with the way this Budget has gone down.
PM: Exceptionally. I think what pleases me about it is that it confirms that
we can continue growing through the 1990s. That is what the whole
thing was about sustaining the _. grQ~ wth and sustaining the
employment growth. We have had this amazingly high level of
employment growth'in the last year, four per cent, and we want to try to
keep those sorts of levels running through the rest of the 1990s. But,
we had to reduce the Government's call on what is called our savings.
And that means we have got to take the-. Budget from deficit into
surplus, so we are adding to savings, not subtracting from them to
kee p the growth going. That is what basically we did last night and the
other thing we did was we put into it the first ever comprehensive
savings plan for Australians. So, this will be the first generation, your
audience will be the first generation of Australians in our history who
will have security right through, that is economic security, right through
their working lives and beyond.
AC: This audience would possibly say to you that why should they be
forced to put money away for their old age when the oldies around
today didn't have to do that.
PM: Well, the difference will be that they will have an income twice, as you
put it, the oldies today have got. So, it means that they will be the first
generation ever that won't have to say ' well, what will I do later?' 
When you are in your teens or twenties, the last thing you think about
is your retirement.
AC: Absolutely.
PM: But, that all changes by about your mid 30s and you start saying ' well,
you know, I am 20 years away from retirement, what am I going to do?'
Last night that was all pretty much decided that is, by this great
change, as I say, for the first time ever you will have people, well if you
take someone on average weekly earnings that is about now $ 33,000.
At the end of their working life they will have a lump sum of just on half
a million which will give them $ 30,000 a year for going out into the
future. So, it is a very great change.
AC: Although, I wouldn't agree that necessarily young people see the
advantage of that right now. I'm sure that they would rather enjoy the
benefits of tax cuts now, for instance, rather than having to wait until
they are 60 when they can finally kick up their heels.
PM: Well, again we had the tax cuts, the first round, at the end 1993, but
the main thing to know is that this is a very lightly taxed country. This
is the second lowest taxed country in the western world, but again the
things that matter in this Buge o ntne i dcto hc
matters to your audience, we have got $ 16 and a half billion over the
period 1996 to 1998, we have got another 11,000 new places in
universities in Queensland and NSW and Western Australia by 1998
and that is on top of the massive funding we have got in TAFE,
technical and further education.
AC: Students do seem finally quite happy with you, would you agree their
protests worked in spite of you telling them to go get a job?
PM: No, no because we were never going to put up-front fees for
undergraduates. I mean John Howard, my opponent, he believes in
up front fees. He says if you can' t ' pay for it, you take the incentive out
of things. You have got to give people the incentive so therefore you
have full fees. Now, we have always said, I made that clear at the
time, I mean, at the time I made the remark you just referred to I had
someone walking beside me for about 500 metres yelling abuse at me
about HECS. I said ' well, hang on, all the HECS ' money is going back
into places. We have had a 37 per cent increase'-in places, we have
gone from 360,000 to 550,000 university places all with the HECS
money going back in and we only ask you to pay some of it back when
you get to average weekly earnings'. So, that is why I was saying to
somebody ' if you don't want to pay your HECS, give it to someone else
who does.' But, the big beef was erroneously that the Government
was about to introduce up front fees. So, the Budget has come and
gone, there is no up front fees for undergraduates, there is no increase
in the size of each students HECS debt and the repayment of HECS
still doesn't begin until the student hits average weekly earnings. So, 
I'm afraid it was a kafuffle for nothing. That was the point I was trying
to make at the time.
AC: Mr Keating, you mentioned unemployment, but there still seems to be
an awful lot of people still unemployed. How can you cut Working
Nation by more than $ 1 billion?
PM: That was about $ 200 million odd a year, we put in about $ 1.6 billion,
so we are cutting that money from $ 1.6 billion a year. The answer very
simply Angela is we have had such great success with employment.
Last year long term unemployment which Working Nation is directed
at, that is for people unemployed 12 months or more, dropped by
102,000. When we had the election just over two years ago we had
360,000 long term unemployed people, this year we have got 260,000
a huge fall and because that category of persons has changed so
much we just don't need the funding we had there, but it doesn't
reduce the target. The target is five per cent unemployment by the
Year 2000 and you might remember at the election we had 10.5 per
cent unemployment, we are now at 8.7 per cent and in the Budget we
are forecasting 8 per cent. So, we are, if you like, half the way to 5 per
cent in less than half the time.
AC: Mr Keating, how will you try and reduce youth suicide?
PM Well, I think, this is a big issue and I think we all understand and feel
deeply about it. I think the best thing that government's can do, I'm not
sure that government is the ultimate answer on youth suicide. I think it
is a phenomenon of personal debilitation and de~ i-i -thfink it needs
families, it needs the support of friends, I think those things matter
more than anything a government can do. But what governments can
do is provide opportunities for training and employment, to give young
people a very clear future, the fact that they have confidence, that they
can get a job and an interesting job and be trained, we can provide
support through the social safety net which, of course, this
Government has championed. In things like Working Nation we can
support people with labour market programs to get them trained and
back into work. Through Creative Nations to see them do interesting
things, through funding for TAFE to find these interesting programs
being opened up to them. In the Youth Training Initiative in One
Nation we are taking young people now in years 11 6nd 12 and
streaming them already into TAFE courses, into accreditation in TAFE.
In One Nation we said we won't let any young person between 15 and
19 slip through the system without case managing them, talking to
them and getting them back into education or structured training or a
job. So, I think that sort of Government support matters. I think case
management, the thing we did in One Nation. Let me just tell you
listeners about case management and what it means. It means that
somebody like you would talk personally to 30 or 40 people, you get to
know about their personalities, their aptitudes, their readiness for a
job, their educational attainments, their previous work experience and 
then you deliver to them the labour market program, the job subsidy or
the training. In other words, they just don't turn up to a CES. counter
and get the brush off or a social security counter and get the brush off
and go back in despair. They actually have somebody interested in
them. That is what Working Nation did and, I think, they are the sort of
programs we can help with, but I don't think that is the full answer. I
think it has to be as well, I mean opportunity, a brighter horizon,
interest by government, the community saying you are important and
we want to help you, that we are not going to let you slip through the
system, but they must have families and friends. I think there is a lot of
loneliness with many young people today that we are not getting this, if
you like, clannishness and I still actually think the family and that
environment is the best support system for any of us.
AC: And their radio station helps too, I might put in bit of a plug there. Mr
Keating, can you understand the cynicism of young people towards
politicians?
PM: Not really. No, I can't because the political system has in this country
made changes you could never have dreamt of 10 years ago. Ten
years ago, I mean look, let me just say this, we ran the risk of drifting
into the 21st century with the hang overs; from the 19th century. The
Queen, the great lie about terra nullius the land of no one that
Aboriginal people had no rights, had no property, the sort of values of
the 1950s, John Howard's dead end jobs. ' You know, in my day' he
said ' they could get a job at 15'. Well, yes, they could, but it was a
dead end job with low pay. This was the sort of attitude we had in a
closed country ringed by tariffs. Look at what we have got today. In
years we have seen ' such a dramatic change. It is now an
externally orientated country, it is trading with Asia. Ten years ago
only three young people in ten completed secondary school. This year
it is nearly nine in ten. And 40 per cent of those are being streamed
through universities where we have added 60 per cent of places. This
Government has created the equivalent of 18 universities the size of
Sydney and Melbourne university since 1985/ 86.
Now, that kind of change trained with interesting jobs, in a society
which is confident about its culture, which is coming to terms with its
indigenes, which is engaging Asia, the political system has done this.
This Government has done this.
AC: And you think young people should be grateful rather than cynical?
PM: No, not grateful, but you asked me why should they be cynical and I
said I can't understand it. I mean, in my day I started work at 15 years
of age as a clerk and all I had to look forward to was night school for
my higher school certificate and then if my parents could afford it to go
through university. There was really no TAFE system. I mean, look at 
the opportunities for young people today. As I say an 80 per cent
retention rate in years 11 and 12 and when John Howard left the
government to me it was three in ten. Only three young people in ten
completed secondary school in 1983. That is now eight and a half in
ten going on to nine. So, why should I accept the argument that
people have got a right to be cynical about politics.
AC: Well, the youth suicide figures certainly speak for themselves.
PM: I know, but what about all the young people who have got interesting
jobs, that are taking up these places in the labour market. I mean, I
think this generation is fantastic, the young generati~ n. The vitality,
the verve, the vigour, the confidence, I think you are right, there is this
sort of sliver or slice of concern alienation of what should we say,
despair et cetera. But, look at the ones who are actually out there into
it. I mean, the confidence of young people today in their teens, in their
early 20s compared to my time is just not to be compared. I got into
the House of Representatives when I was 25. 1 won the preselection
for one of the safest seats in Australia at 24, it was just a purgatory.
Where today the system is wide open for them.
AC: John Howard is taking young Australians very seriously, he has
actually promised a youth ministry and a minister that is part of the
Cabinet.
PM: Yes and he has also promised people $ 3 an hour for work. I mean,
that is John Howard for you.
AC: What do you think of his idea of a youth minister?
PM: Let me say, what John Howard would give you is the Queen, we would
have none of the truth of Mabo, we would have none of our pulling our
national culture together, our sense of ourselves, there would be no
way we would engage Asia, he would have us with only three young
people in ten completing secondary school, he would have full up front
fees for universities, he would have $ 3 an hour. That is what he would
have and if he wants to hand out the sort of, what you may think the
sop of a ministry, all we say is don't be so gullible.
AC: You think that is a folly, the idea of a youth ministry and a youth
minister?
PM: No, because you are better to do the things that really matter. I mean,
it is not the youth ministry that has created that massive participation
rate in schools. It is not the youth ministry that has got for the first time
young women taking the predominant number of places in Australian
universities, it is the edujcation. policy of the Government. This, if you
like, trying to tokenise things and particularly for people who have
shown, I mean, how could you when you when Howard was the
Federal Treasurer of Australia for five years and the leading member 
of a government, ieave office with only three young people in ten
completing secondary school. Seven in ten essentially going out to a
changing labour market untrained and then have the temerity to turn
up and so ' oh, yes, I will give them a youth ministry.'
AC: Mr Keating, how do you think your vision for young Australians differs~,
from that of the Liberals?
PM: I believe in the zing and zest and creativity of Australia. I believe in us
having an independent culture, a destiny of our own. I said in the last
election campaign it is always, with the Liberals, a contest between the
enlarges of life and the straighteners. John Howard and the Liberals
belong with the straighteners. You know, keep your head down, keep
working, don't answer back. Whereas my Party, what we believe in is
something bigger in life. Something better. If you give people a
chance, if you give them the opportunity, if you believe in them, if you
have faith in them, they will do better. Now, that is the essential
difference and you can't have the sort of straighteners view of the
world and believe in knighthoods and queens and European enclaves
and all the rest of it and they say ' oh, just by the way, we are really the
future'. I mean, as we always say in Canberra with John Howard it is
back to the future.
AC: Mr Keating, do you think young Australians though are more
concerned do you know about interest rates than they are about the
big issues?
PM: No, I don't think so. I think they are concerned properly with the things
that matter. They are concerned with the country's values. They are
concerned with their own values. They are concerned with their
creativity, with their education. They are concerned about the
environment. They are concerned about the nature of society, whether
we care for one another. I mean, one of the things I admire about
young people is they don't take the half hearted view, they actually
believe in inclusion. They believe in us going ahead together. They
are not saying survival of the fittest and devil take the hind most they
actually believe in inclusion and so do I. I mean, we are standing up,
Ralph Willis was standing up last night with a Budget which didn't rip
the guts out of payments to schools, payments to universities,
payments to TAFE, payments to families, payments to low income
families because we don't believe in those things.
AC: Have you got time to take some calls, to talk to some listeners, would
you mind putting the head phones on?
PM: I'd be delighted to.
C: Annita. Good morning Mr Keating, I would just like to ask you, you
were talking about sustaining growth before and I was wondering how
sustainable is the Australian economy going to be if governments keep 
on selling off all our public utilities when it comes up to election time
rather than cut spending?
PM: Well, Annita they are not the things that are sustained. What is
sustained is the capacity of the country to invest. That is, when the
business community go to the market to put Australian savings into
investments which create jobs, those savings should not be there with
a perpetual drain from the public sector. That is what makes the
growth sustained. The growth comes from investment and only from
investment. So, what we did last night was to stop ' the public sector
drain or the public sector call on Australian savings by getting the
Budget back into surplus.
C: It still seems to be a quick fix method.
PM: No, it is not a quick fix, no, no. This is a completely sustainable
change so the Budget will now be back into surplus through the
balance of the 1990s. Now, there are some asset sales in there, that
is what you were talking about, I think, but the Commonwealth buys
assets all the time and it also sells assets. That is not changing the
fiscal or budget picture. The budget picture is one of a structural
change which is seeing the budget back into surplus which means
those investment funds are going to be there for the jobs that keep the
growth going. And what the Treasury did in its forecast yesterday was
say that we will have now sustainable growth over the next three years
and we have already had it over the last three years. So, it does
mean, I think, there is more than a lot of hope in these documents,
there is a lot of concrete evidence that we are going to basically be a
relatively high growth, high employment society through the balance of
the 1990s.
C: Dave from Alice Springs. I am a registered nurse in Alice Springs
here. Now, you have allocated in the Budget pnrnar-y h ' ealtli care
million. In my opinion that is still fairly low, it is less than $ 5 per capita.
PM: Are you talking here for Aboriginal people are you?
C: Well, my wife is Aboriginal, but apart from that overall in Australia it
still seems to me that we are still working towards treatment services in
the health care system, tertiary and secondary treatment, rather than
aiming at primary health care to try to reduce that further down the
line.
PM: I think we are doing both. I think early diagnosis, understanding better
health and better well being, less reliance upon, if you like
pharmaceuticals, less reliance upon expensive diagnosis, diagnostic
imaging and pathology and these things. I mean, I think Australians
have generally taken this message on board. I mean, there is much
more today healthier lifestyles, you can see that in the change in
cardiac disease, I mean that lesson has been picked up and I think we 
are generally supporting that. And, also part of these programs we
have basically tried to inculcate the medical profession and GPs in
looking at, if you like, better practice in their own practices is about
meeting your point.
C: I quite agree with that, but certainly I still feel we are not really
attacking the issue of primary health care especially in line of
agreements we have signed with the ULN and also in line with things
such as the food and nutrition policy which your government
developed in August 1992 which is up for review this year which aims
at making healthy food choices easier. Now a lot of the communities
that I go out to, that is not happening because of the problems with
transport costs and so on because of particular store keepers, those
sorts of issues are not being addressed and certainly vegetables are
not an alternative out there because they can't afford them.
PM: They can't get them. I know that and the other thing is that we do have
to, I think, when I was up recently at Hopevale and Cape York, one of
the lessons from the Cape York Health Council was that the Aboriginal
communities themselves need to be part of the strategy. There is no
way a government can wave a magic wand and decide what an
Aboriginal person will feed to their children that morning or feed
herself or her family. They have to be involved in it to. I think we want
to approach Aboriginal health care on that basis. That is,
environmental health, better water, better sewerage, better drainage,
better housing and direct health, primary health, better services,
pharmaceuticals, better diagnosis and, as you say better diet, better
hygiene. It is a group thing, it is not something the government can
do, it is something we have got to do with Aboriginal communities.
C: Renee. I'd like to raise a question about HECS. I was really glad to
see that there has been some attention to the private students with
something like 72 per cent still living below the poverty line. But, I'd
also like to point out that within universities if you get out there and talk
to the students you will find that many of them are radically dissatisfied
with the quality of the education they are receiving and I'd like to know
why it is that our HECS can't be spent directly on education.
PM: Well, it is. All the HECS revenue, that is every dollar of it is ploughed
straight back into higher education. As a consequence HECS revenue
has allowed for a 37 per cent increase in places since 1988. So, we
have got roughly 600,000 people in universities 240,000 of those
people are there only because of HECS. So, in other words, if we
want the bigger participation, can I just make this point to you, there is
not much point the Government saying to young people ' stay in year
11 and 12 and when you qualify, sorry, there isn't a place for you'. So,
we have added this enormous number of places to the system 60 per
cent but 37 per cent since 1988. The reason we have been able to
keep up the high growth in university places is through HECS. All of
the HECS proceeds go back. I mean, there is this sort of notion 
around that it goes to the Government. It doesn't. It all goes back into
higher education and as I say, we only ask people to repay it when
they join the workforce, after they have graduated and their income
goes up to average weekly earnings. It is only then that in the tax
system that it starts to be repaid. So, it is the fairest thing you can
imagine and that is why a lot of other countries are now coming to
Australia to look at it, to think about adopting it themselves.
Remember this, I think this is also important to know, that HECS only
covers 20 per cent of the cost of the education, roughly 20 per cent of
a university degree is covered by HECS.
C: And so you are saying that all of our HECS goes directly into the
education budget?
PM: The lot, every dollar. Nothing goes to the budget.
AC: Mr Keating a fax came this morning, it has an interesting question for
you. You were quoted in The Age on the second of March as saying
access to the national information infrastructure should be no less a
right than water, public transport or electricity. Is there any money in
the Budget to fund access for everyone to the Internet through the
public library system?
PM: Well, we are extending through Creative. Nation, we are extending
access to multi media including through the Internet and we are
looking in the first instance at schools and such institutions as public
libraries. But, of course, the great access will come with the roll out of
the cable, that is the fibre optic cable. You know this
Telecom/ Newslimited venture is rolling out the cable which will be
largely paid for by pay television, but it will then be the telephony
revenues that will also help to pay for it. Now, once you have that
piece of glass under your front door you are then connected to the rest
of the world and that is basically going to be the great liberator. And,
that we are trying to do in a sensible way and you have got Optus
Vision which is also there and it will be competing with Telecom to get
your attention and for you to pick their piece of glass rather than some
one else's. So, I think that is how it is going to happen, but you are
asking me a question about the priority. The priority in our view has to
be for the educational institutions and for the dissemination of
information, but that is going to go way beyond that to everyone's
personal computer.
AC: Are you on the Internet?
PM: No, my office is on Internet.
AC: Have you got an Email address? Bill Clinton does. 
PM: Yes, we have an Email address. We are just getting a bank of stuff to
go on. I mean, Bill Clinton has something on there about his cat or his
dog or something.
AC: Well, you have got a dog haven't you?
PM: We have a dog, but we haven't got him on the Internet.
AC: Mr Keating, can I throw you a few hypotheticals?
PM: Sure.
AC: Apart from yourself, obviously, who would you like to see as next PM
of Australia?
PM: Well, someone who has faith in the country's identity and culture. That
is, someone who is a believer. Someone who believes in Australians
and can take the nourishment they all provide to make the country
stronger and greater and not somebody who is harking back to the
1950s and someone, if you like, excepting the leadership of any other
society. So, that is who I believe should be next Prime Minister of
Australia somebody who has those core believes. That is, faith in
Australians, faith in what we have become, confident about what we
have become as a nation and able to advance it at home and abroad
and not to be, sort of, picking up any derivative culture.
AC: Do any names spring to mind?
PM: Well, in my Party, there is a clutch of people. There is and I have
mentioned them before and I am happy to mention again, Gareth
Evans, Kim Beazley, Carmen Lawrence, Simon Crean, Michael Lee,
Michael Lavarch, Laurie Brereton. You can look at all these
contributors to our Cabinet, all of them in various ways could handle
that leadership role. And, of course, some of them have, you see
Simon has done it with the ACTU. Gareth has done it with his great
stewardship of foreign policy. Kim has done it in major policy areas
and now as Minister for Finance. Ralph Willis who has been an
outstanding Minister and Treasurer.
AC: Which other country of the world would you like to be Prime Minister of
given the chance?
PM: None. I mean, I think this is the only nation in the world that has a
continent to itself. We don't share a border with anybody. We have
got this great old country, this is one of the oldest parts of the world's
crust and the age of Australia and the colour of Australia and the light
of Australia and the flora and fauna of Australia are something, I think,
if you are born with you get to love and to appreciate and once one
has picked up the resonances of Australia, to go back to the old
societies of Europe, the old tribal wars, the old problems of Bosnia's et 
cetera, or even the difficulties of North America, I mean Australia is
now such a country of opportunity and such a great spirit of inclusion.
You know, this is still a kind society, this is not a winner take all
society. This is not a dog eat dog society. So, it is the values, the
landscape and this great opportunity. For the first time ever we are
living near the fastest growing markets in the world. Always they were
in Europe or North America. Now they are in Asia, right on our
doorstep so Australia picks itself out. I mean, I happen to be the Prime
Minister of Australia, but if I had had a choice it would have been this
country because, in a sense, it picks itself out.
AC: Who do you look up to, everybody looks up to somebody, who do you
look up to Mr Keating?
PM: Well, I think, there are people I admire and I look up to, but they are
all, in a sense, they are not public names, they are all unremarkable in
that sense, but they are quite remarkably personally.
AC: Who?
PM: Well, they are just people I know. Friends of mine, people who I think
have got good values, have shown great fidelity to, if you like I think,
core values, good principles. In my political life the two people in my
younger political life that I was interested in were Franklin Roosevelt
and Winst ' on-Churchill. One was a great builder, the other a great
adventurer and both great leaders. But, as life goes on and your set of
problems become complex and overwhelming the role models tend to
drop away because all of a sudden the role has changed and it keeps
on changing. So, I think, it is not a case of looking to people, but
looking to experiences, but being sustained by the joy of knowing
people who have got value and substance. I think that is the point, I
mean, all my friends, people if you like who nourish me, are names
that most people wouldn't know.
AC: Could you, given that this is radio after all, describe to the listeners
what you are wearing? Is it an Armani suit?
PM: No, I'm not sure what it is. I think it is a Zegna suit, what I normally
wear, they cut, but I'm sure of this. I know one thing for sure, the wool
came from Yass.
AC: Did it now?
PM: Yass, because this is where the superfine wool comes from and this
again is another point. Here we are with this tremendous industry
where we are almost alone, we have a monopoly on this particular
fibre and I just hope that fashion, we have got to be selling creativity, I
think, all the things that we need to do are to sell. Whether it is film
and television or clothing or fashion. I mean this is the thing to be in
selling our brains. 
AC: Ironic though that we probably export the wool to be
PM: But we are doing better now. We are now starting to make the fabrics
here, we are changing.
AC: Mr Keating, we have got 50 seconds. What finally made you come on
Triple J today?
PM: I think it is important, I mean, we had a debate, for instance, we had a
few questions, a debate about HECS and up front student fees, it is
important to say we were never going to do those, there is no change
to the size of each students HECS debt et cetera. It is important, I
think, to say what the Budget means for young Australians and to
make the point I made right at the opening. This will be the first
generation of young Australians who won't have to worry about the
security in the latter part of their lives. They might say ' oh yes' but
they'll know that this is something of value to them. So, I've got the
chance to come and say this and to talk to you so why not take it.
AC: Good on you and you had better come again or else! Mr Keating, it
has been lovely to meet you, lovely to have you on Triple J.
PM: Thank you.
ends 



TEL: i1. May. 95 1: 01 No. 009 P. 01
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ANNA REYNOLDS RADIO 40R, 11I MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
AR: The Prime Minister Paul Keating joins us from Canberra this
morning. Good morning welcome to the program.
PM: Good morning Anna.
AR: Before we get to the actual nitty gritty, how do you think the budget
has been received? You have had a day or so to talk to people
about it now.
PM: Very well, I think. The main point of it, of course, was to sustain the
gro wth through the rest of the 90s. And to do that, we had to
essentially take some off the pressure of interest rates, and reduce
the demand by the public sector or by the Commonwealth
Government on the savings of the country. And we have done that
by changing quite dramatically in fact, it's the largest Budget
change we have ever recorded the Budget balance into surplus,
which reduces that call on savings, which leaves more savings for
Investment, which means there will be more investment and more
jobs. Therefore, the recovery continues on Into the 90s. We had
John Howard running around talking about 5 minutes of sunshine
we have now had 3 years of growth, we have been growing faster
than any other western economy. And now the Treasury is saying
that in the forecast period, we will have sustainable economic growth
and the forecast period Is in the next 3 years. So, we will have had
3 years of growth 3.5 years of growth and 3 coming. it gives the
lie to that cynical line.
AR: Are you satisfied that the pressure is significantly off interest rates
now? 
TEL: 2
PM: As I say, It's a dramatic turnaround in the Budget the turnaround is
$ 12.9 billion. In other words, from the deficit we were running last
year, to the surplus this year we had a deficit last year of $ 12.2
billion, and we are going to be running a surplus of $ 0.7 billion so
there is a $ 12.9 billion...
AR: Yes, but the Democrats are saying, of course though, that it depends
on which figure you look at, and whether you actually take the
underlying figure excluding asset sales. Now, I mean, do you
understand the point they are making there, and their need their
indication that they want some sort of clarification with this Inquiry
In the Senate?
PM: No. Look, that's all. everyone tries to get their little tuppence worth
Into a Budget debate. As for the _ Remocats, the first thing they
always think of Is an inquiry about anything. So, what they don't
think about is the time and the waste in the Senate, and the public
expense. The fact is, the Commonwealth buys assets and sells
assets all the time. For instance, in Queensland, one of the things
we are building at the moment Is in partnership with the
Queensland Government the railways of Robena on the Gold
Coast. Now, that's an expenditure on the Budget. So, If we sell an
asset, it's a sale on the Budget, and the Budget is built on a cash
basis, and always has been. These things are only said by the likes
of John Howard to try to diminish the results. There was someone
on from Moody's in New York this morning on Australian radio
saying " look, we don't care how the Budget surplus Is arrived at
what it means is there will be a massive reduction In the bond selling
program In Australia this year". See, if the Budget has shifted by
$ 12.9 billion, it reduces dramatically the bond selling program the
number of Commonwealth bonds the Government will be selling
and that takes the pressure off Interest rates.
AR: Are you comfortable, though, with the way that sells the position of
the Australian economy to the Australian people I mean, the
Democrats are essentially saying you are being less than honest by
Including the asset sales In that figure.
PM: They are being completely dishonest In making that sort of
reference. I mean, you saw also the Secretary of the Treasury
publish a statement the other day saying that these numbers are all
basically put together I mean, the policies are put together by the
Government, and the collation of the numbers Is put together by the
Treasury. EconorniUpoicies are all about the degree of change one
year over th6-ityear, and the degree of change here is a $ 12.9
billion turnaround. And what that means is that we will be reducing
very dramatically out there in that marketplace every day, when the
Commonwealth is selling their tender Commonwealth bonds to
finance the Budget deficit, this year we will be selling vastly less,
and that will make... . that's why bond yields you will notice in the last
TL: 11. M1ay. 95 1: 01 No. 009 P. 02 
T1: E0L1: No1.. 0M. 0a99 5P .03
3
week, the long-term bond yields have dropped by almost a
percentage point, and that has been confirmed now. In other words,
yesterday they stayed... they dropped even further, so now we have
seen because the market thought the Budget was going to be
good, they have dropped long bond yields by 1 and that Is a
terrific sign for Interest rates in Australia. Can I just make this point:
the short-term interest rates.. . the influence of the short term Interest
rates comes from the markets and also the overnight cash and call
rates set by the Reserve Bank, but then the long rates are set just
exclusively In the market place they are all about sentiment about
inflation, growth, sustainability, Budget deficits, the works. What we
have had there Is a one percentage point reduction In the last week
In the long term bond rate, and that has been confirmed yesterday
with a further small drop. So, that's the judgement that matters.
AR: So you would think that would...
PMV: Not the Democrats. and a silly Inquiry in the Senate.
AR: Speaking of a silly inquiry I mean, presumably they will get it
through, and then they will call on Government people to actually
give evidence, that sort of thing will there be co-operation?
PMV; You have go'. I understand that this Is all part of the trivia and
nonsense of Australian politics now. I mean, when I became
Treasurer all those years ago when I was left that absolute cesspool
of problems by John Howard at that stage, the Coalition
published -one forward-ouDr year estimate of outlays. When they
produced a Budget, they would show you what the next year's
outlays figure would be In projection what we show, is the 2 years
outlays figures 3 years outlays figures in projections, and 3 years
of receipts. In other words, we publish 3 forward estimates of the
deficit or the surplus 3 years out, and the Budget documents all have
graphically Illustrated trend changes in all of the spending programs.
It's the Rolls Royce of Budget documents world-wide there is no
country that produces Budget documents in the OECD like Australia.
AR: Nonetheless, you do have to live with the Senate there is not much
choice about that, and It looks like they will be making some noises.
And noises, too, from the Green Senators about the Increase in the
corporate tax, and saying particularly, worried about the effect on
small business. I mean, can you understand their concern there?
PMV: The Green Senators?
AR: Yes.
PM: These are the people who actually wanted to bang tax rates up for
high Income earners, who wanted to push the company tax rates up,
who want a fixed 20% fiat company tax for all companies. I mean, it
TEL: 11 May .95 
TEL: 11. May .95 1 : 01 No .009 P. 04
4
wears a bit thin for them to be taking a point about the impact of
small business. We have made...
AR: I'm just wondering how you think that tax is going to impact on some
small businesses, who certainly in Queensland, are really feeling the
pinch at the moment?
PMV: If they're feeling the pinch, they are feeling it In the highest growth
economy we have ever had. We have been growing at 5% to 6%
with 2% Inflation, so If they are feeling the pinch, they ought to say
ofsmall business is not for me", because it Is never going to get any
better. This Is as good as It ever gets. To have an economy
growing at 5% with 2% Inflation is as good as it ever gets, so if they
are feeling the pinch, they have got to say " I had better go back to
PAYE employment".
AR: I mean, there are different sectors, obviously, performing differently.-
in the housing industry In Queensland, starts have been low, and
particularly In the growth areas where there has been a boom over
the last 6 months or so small businesses are worried about the
Increase In the tax on some building materials. Do you think that
could bite there, or do you think that impact is being overestimated?
PMV: The whole point of the policy has been to slow the economy down. I
mean, the Government.. . you have got to do some tdU~ ih things to do
kind things.
AR: So people have to suffer in that process?
PMV: No. Not suffer. Just understand this point we Increased interest
rates by 3 percentage points last November, quickly and sharply.
And that did have the effect of slowing the economy down. By now
Introducing a Budget with such a huge change as this a turnaround
of nearly $ 13 billion, taking the pressure off interest rates what that
means is that your average householder, and your average homebuyer,
won't be now In the position of fearing a sort of cascading
interest rate rises because of the decisions that the Government has
taken sensibly, correctly, timely, to change that spending profile in
the economy, and now to adjust the policy weights back on to
Budget policy away from Interest rates. That Is what Is going to
matter to the building industry the building Industry got to the point
where we couldn't keep the resources up to It that's material or
labour. And what happens then is the price of houses starts
rocketing away with price inflation. So, It slowed down yes, It has
slowed down, it will affect some builders, it may affect many builders
but in the longer run, It will pick up to a better growth trajectory, and
that will happen because of the policy decisions made in
October/ November last year by the Government, and by the
Government In the Budget on Tuesday night. 
TEL: 11. May. 95 1: 01 No. 009
AR: I noticed one of the resyonses this morning from the Bankers
Association to the increase in corporate tax Is that they say the extra
taxes they are going to have to pay will be passed on to consumers
in terms of higher fees I mean, is that the sort of outcome you were
actually predicting?
PM: That's just a bit of nonsense for the media. Their profits are at such
extraordinary levels, they will just take the hit on their profits, as they
should. In other words, they have got a licence from the
Government.... . you see, those big banks ANZ, the Commonwealth,
Westpac have got a licence from the Government to operate as a
bank, and they have got a great monopoly position, and because of
that, they have these very high profits. Now, what we are saying Is
that they can share some of those profits with the public.
AR: So you don't think they should have to pass on that extra cost they
they will have to bear by Increasing fees to consumers?
PM: They are already on the nose with people through Increasing fees.
People are moving to smaller banking institutions because they don't
like the way the indifferent way -Finey-are treated by the major
banks. And If they want to after a Budget poke their tongue out at
people and say "~ we'll pass some more charges -onto you", more
people will vote with their feet and leave them go to the smaller
institutions. Their profits are so strong, that they will take this
and say its a mere bagatelle for them.
AR: Thinking about the overall way the Budget has been received there
has been a fair bit of emphasis here In Queensland on the way it will
affect certain industries, and people talking about not being able to
buy a new car, increased car prices, this that and the other I mean,
what do you think is In it for the average person?
PM: The biggest thing In It for the average person Is the superannuation
change. What we have put into it Is that the 9% under the
superannuation guarantee charge which the Government put Into
the Budget In 1991 from the changes which were negotiated with the
Trade Unions under the Accord In 1986 we started 3% In 1986,
then we moved it to 5% on a voluntary basis under awards, then to
the superannuation guarantee charge where it became compulsory,
to 6% on 1 July this year. That rises to 9% at the end of this decade.
To that, on Tuesday night, the Government has added 3% by way of
employee contributions, and 3% by way of the One Nation tax cuts
paid Into their superannuation accounts. So, as a consequence of
Tuesday night, we will be adding 6 percentage points to the 9%
already available under the superannuation guarantee. So that
means that every person In the country every wage and salary
earner will have 15% of their wages and salaries going Into a
national superannuation scheme, and what that will mean I gave
the example yesterday of someone on average weekly earnings it 
TEL: 11. May .95 1: 01 No .009 P. 06
6
will mean that someone who was on say $ 33,000 a year, at the end
of their working life, will pick up a pension of $ 30,000 a year, coming
from a lump oum of juat on $ 0.6 million. go a porcon on $ 22,000 a
year, will end up putting away a kitty of $ 0.5 million, and that will
then equal an annuity over the rest of their lives of $ 30,000 a year.
Now,..
AR: It's a long-term, type of benefit for people, though, isn't it are you
confident you will be able to get the message through, or do you
-think It will be hard to sell In the run-up to an election?
PM: You have got understand this, Anna, that the time my generation
I'm 50, 51 the time my generation Is 65, this Is the post-baby boom
boomers, so called baby-boomers there will be twice as many
retired age people as there Is today. The pressure on the pension Is
going to be so inordinately high, that this scheme we put in Tuesday
night is going to protect the Income In retirement of not just all the
baby-boomers, but all of their children. And, even some of the
people older than the baby-boomers. In other words, this scheme Is
already going to be at 9% by the year 2000 that's only 5 years
away. And it will go on, but let me make this point to you could you
imagine the Liberal party having the courage, the wit, the
Imagination to sit down with a workforce over a 10 year period, and
piece together a national savings and retirement Income scheme?
AR: All right, we will take that up with them at a later date. Mr Keating,
we will have to leave It we're out of time. Thank you very much for
joining us.
PM: Thank you very much indeed, Anna.
AR: Prime Minister, Paul Keating.
ends. 



TEL: 11. May .95 0: 07 No. 004 P. 0
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW NiTH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO, TMURSDAYs 11 MAY 1995
&amp; OIE PROOF COPY
FK Paul Ker~ ihi, D) emocrat Leader, Cheryl Kemnot, is calling for a Senate
Inquiry' Mto the figuring of the Buddetand-th-0 iritegrity of the figuring
what's your response to that?
PM: Well, it's just a waste a waste of time and a waste of money. I mean,
the Senate is running around having inquiries they're a dime a dozen,
a dime a dozen. There are very few countries around the world that
produce Budget documents of this level of transparency. But there Is
some sort of Implied notion that the Budget documents are not the
Government's, you know, somehow they belong to the bureaucracy
and that the Government Is sort of shop-soiling them. They've got the
Treasurers name on them, every line In there belongs to the
Government.
FK: But given the whole thrust of the OpRqsiion's attack on your Budget as
being the credibility of the figures and whether they are believable or
not, wouldn't an Inquiry like this clear that up?
PM: But that's what they said last year, that the Investment numbers were
too high and the growth numbers were too high, and we doubled the
Investment numbers and the growth numbers were exceeded by a
quarter of a percentage point of GDP. I mean, these claims come
every year but the notion that the Senate should go. you know, with a
further, sort of, abuse of Its functions and wasting Its time and its
money Into the Budget's preparation is only something to get, I'm
afraid on this occasion, Senator Kemot a quick line in a newspaper.
FK Well, Senator Kernot said that she will support your Budget ultimately,
the bottom line of your Budget. If her job Is as they see It, and many of
the people see it, Is to keep the bastards honest, why not give an
Inquiry and that will show * that you're there to be kept honest, and
you're willing to be kept honest? 
TEL: 11. M1ay. 95 0: 07 No. 004 P. 02/
2
PM: But this Is the Executive Government of Australia, we won the election,
not the Democrats. For my part, I've presented eight Budgets and
seven May Statements and the Treasurers presented now two, and
you already had a note from the Secretary to the Treasury saying that
the forecasts were the Treasurys exclusively the rest of the
documents are the Government's, so it's not a matter, so what's she
trying to establish? Are these the Government's documents or are
they not? Well, they are, I can tell her.
FK Prime Minister, just before you go, we've just seen the latest
4nempLoyment figure, it's down .4 to 8.3 what's your response to
tIatTPM: Well, at the time of the election It was 10.5 per cent it's the largest fall
In unemployment we've seen since we've been keeping the records. It
means that the Government has kept faith with the unemployed and it's
kept its fidelity to its principal commitment In the election campaign -to
restart growth and to get unemployment down. And, this gives the lie
to the John Howard line that there was only five minutes of sunshine.
We've now had three years of growth, the Treasury Is saying we've got
three sustainable years coming up and you can see in today's
numbers how could there be simply five minutes of sunshine with
tremendous employment growth like this? It leaves Mr Howard without
a feather tofy'th
FK Should you be preparing to revise your Budget forecast already which
13 only 8 per cent for the year?
PM: No, we're saying 8 per cent for the year, It's a conservative estimate,
but again if we can drop unemployment from 10.5 per cent to 8 per
cent over the course of this three year period, it will be the biggest fall
we've ever recorded. Now, the participation rate jumps around but I
think in these numbers, about 90,000 job growth for the month, as I
said, the Australian people should be very happy with this. But I make
the political point, it leaves John Howard without a feather to fly with.
FK Prime Minister, thank you.
Ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
SUNBURY CAMPUS, VICTORIA, 12 MAY 1995
** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*
I'm very pleased to be invited to open the Sunbury Campus of the Victorian University
of Technology. It's a beautifiil campus, and a fine example of the emerging integration
of post-compulsory education.
The Sunbury Campus is proof of the potential which exists when the two essential
elements of tertiary education, TAFE and universities, are linked.
It is a natural development stemming fr~ om the reforms to post-compulsory education
initiated by John Dawkins in 1988.
New institutions like Sunbury been made possible by the increased revenue flowing
into higher education from the establishment of the fairest and most innovative
financing mechanism in the world, the Higher Education Contribution Scheme.
Since the education reforms in 1988, Australian post-compulsory education has
undergone extraordinary changes and expansion.
The previous separation of TAFE and higher education, which restricted the access of
the less advantaged to many forms of skills development, is now being broken down.
It is becomidng recognised that the distinctions between vocational and academic
education are essentially arbitrary and a reflection of history and inertia.
TAFE is no longer seen as the poor and distant cousin of tbe university system, and
propitious arrangements for credit transfer which no-one foresaw are now emerging.
And it is not only here: two months ago I visited the University of Southern
Queensland which has developed close and imaginative links with NSW TAFE.
Sunbury is going in exactly the right direction. We want a more complementary and
united formal skills development program and that is what Sunbury is doing.
The students who derive the advantages of Sunbury's innovative educational reform
can, in important ways, trace their good fortune to HECS. 
H-ECS was introduced in 1989 to a cacophony of student complaints. We were told
that: free education is a right; HECS will restrict the access of the poor to higher
education; higher education helps all society and thus should be fully paid for by the
Government; and that women will be discouraged from enrolling.
I want to spend a minute or two addressing some of these issues.
There is no such thing, of course, as " free" education somebody has to pay. In
systems with no charges those somebodies are all taxpayers.
This is a pretty important point: a " free" higher education system is one paid for by the
taxes of all, the majority of whom haven't had the privilege of a university education.
Ask yourself if you think that is a fair thing.
The most common complaint was that if we asked students to pay for some part of
their higher education, the poor would be deterred even if they didn't have to pay
until they were earning at least the average income. This most common argument was
in fact the hardest to believe, simply because HECS was designed to insure that
students paid nothing when they couldn't afford to.
Nevertheless, the Government has kept an eye on the disadvantaged. And there have
been several independent studies of this issue.
The evidence that HECS deters the disadvantaged is a bit lie a policy statement from
my opponents: the more you look, the less you see.
The most recent study, published in the Current Affairs Bulletin in January 1995, puts
it this way: introduction of HECS does not seem to have had any discernible
effects on the composition of the student body".
But a major effect of HECS has been to allow the system to grow at an extraordinary
rate since 1989, and this has unquestionably helped the disadvantaged by creating more
places. From 1988 to 1993, for example, the number of higher education students
from the poorest of backgrounds has grown by around 30 per cent.
igher education generally has expanded at a similar pace, with one of the major
reasons being that all of the HECS revenue has been used for this purpose for higher
education, as the Government promised. The increase in total outlays on higher
education of about $ 3 billion since 1990 has been underwritten to the tune of about
billion from HECS repayments.
This means that 50 per cent of the new places are here because of HECS revenue; that
up to 100,000 of today's students more than likely would have been doing something
else probably something far less interesting and beneficial. 
The capital provided for the Sunbury initiative has come from the Commonwealth
through AINTA, the State Goverrnent, and the university. As well, the Victoria
Institute of Technology will receive $ 15. 9m from the Commonwealth as part of the
incorporation of higher education capital funding into institutions' operating grants
over the 1995-97 triennium.
Without HECS, and the support from both ANTA and the Victorian Government,
then, it is much less likely that we would be able to open the Sunbury Campus today.
And is undoubtedly true that, without HECS, there would be far fewer students in
general, and far fewer disadvantaged students in particular.
But is it fair to charge at all when society derives considerable benefits from tertiary
education shouldn't this mean a subsidy? Certainly, education and training beget
technological change, and technological change is the only way in the longer term for
our collective incomes to grow.
Moreover, education and training are a fundamental part of governments' armoury for
breaking the nexus between parental poverty and childrens' access to material and
social gain through skills formation.
For these reasons the HECS charge is only about 23 per cent of the costs of a place,
and not 100 per cent. For these reasons TAPE costs are overwhelmingly met by
governments. Finally, female enrolments have grown relatively quickly since 1988. Women now
outnumber men in our universities HECS hasn't hurt here either.
The case for HECS is overwhelmning. Not charging means allocating scarce resources
provided by all to students who generally come from advantaged backgrounds and
who inevitably get the best and most highly paid jobs. But charging only when former
students are doing well financially ensures there are no barriers.
Now I have to come clean and tell you that HECS does have a problem: the Coalition
is not commnitted to it.
In the last election the Coalition's higher education policy was to allow universities to
charge up-front fees. Sure, they said, they would keep HECS places as they were and
just allow this as a top-up.
But, as sure as night follows day, HECS would have been eroded. Don't forget, the
Opposition is completely committed to drastic cuts in public expenditure. In time,
higher education would have become a very easy target, and up-front fees the norm. 
HECS is spreading throughout the world as the right way to charge for university
attendance ( and variants of it have now been introduced in the US, New Zealand, the
Czech Republic, and it is recommended by the World Bank for developing countries).
HIECS covers the vast majority of post-graduate Australian courses, and an extension
to cover even more has recently been offered as a possibility by the Stanley Committee
Review in the event that fees in this area which only apply to 15 per cent of students
present access problems in the future.
Sadly, the Opposition can't see the beauty of our financing arrangements.
For the next election, then, write this down: the Government guarantees HECS, the
Opposition doesn't. The Governent will not compromise access to post-compulsory
education, the Opposition will. The Government is repulsed by the notion of full upfr~
ont fees for undergraduates, the Opposition embraces them.
It is one of the more bemnusing refrains of contemporary Australian politics, to hear the
Opposition talk about microeconomic reform as a means to greater productivity and a
more internationally competitive economy, while refusing to commit themselves to
equality of opportunity in a sophisticated education and training system.
As if clearing the way for the development of all our human resources and the fullest
expression of all our human potential is not a microeconomic reform of the most
fundamental kind.
Nothing is so basic a prerequisite of our economic future and the future well-being of
Australian society.
It is an integral part of our economic and social policy, our national strategy and
vision, to establish an innovative and integrated formal skills system in Australia.
ANTA and higher education funding, with State government support, together
committed to the expansion of opportunities.
Education and training are the fundamental building blocks for our future prosperity.
Education and training are the answers to sustained and healthy productivity growth.
Education and training are the key to the break-down of entrenched inter-generational
poverty. As I have said before, for both the individual and the nation, education and training
constitute the bridge between the past and the future.
In last Tuesday's Budget the Government set out a revolutionary long-term retirement
plan for the nation. It will guarantee that the incomes of future senior citizens will be
higher and more secure.
The Budget means that there will be considerably greater domestic savings available to
finance our investments. This helps to provide insurance against adverse international
financial fluctuations. 
Australia's revolutionary new means to greater vastly greater national savings is of a
kind with the reform, expansion and equitable financing of post-compulsory education.
Both help to set the country up for the 21st century both are major investments in
our future.
Both represent progressive and imaginative policy: both are motivated by national
need, designed to develop the economic fundamentals, and delivered in ways that
improve the social and material circumstances of those with the least advantages.
Both, I might say, are Labor to the bootstraps.
The Sunbury Campus is an institutional manifestation of Labor's commitment to
educational, social and economic reform. It encapsulates the big idea.
And so it is with great pleasure that I formally open it. It is a great pleasure because I
know that this campus will well serve this community and thousands of tertiary
students from now on into the next century.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH TERRY LONG, ABC RADIO 7ZR, 12 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
TL: John Howard has had his reply and this morning Paul Keating, the
Prime Minister, is in the studio at The Lodge to talk to us about the
way he sees it, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Terry, how are you going?
TL: Good thanks. John Howard's performance last night eight out of ten
too generous?
PM: Oh absolutely, I mean, he did the whole speech off-the-cuff. I mean,
he had a great opportunity last night, within a year of an election, to lay
down what the Opposition's policies would be. He never mentioned
one policy thing on their part, he never even responded to a prepared
text. What he did was essentially give the Parliament the sort of
debate he'd have on, you know, any Tuesday or Wednesday or
Thursday afternoon on a Matter of Public Importance, a sort of raving
speech which was mostly about me and the Government and it left, our
members left you can always tell on the sort of balance that goes on
in the House of Representatives our Members left very buoyed
because they thought his performance was so poor, and his Members
left very glum. That's always the test.
TL: Do you see it as the start of the election campaign if he should have
been laying down policies?
PM: Well, he's been in the job now since the beginning of the year. We've
got no idea, any of us, what his policies will be on economic policy,
on social policy, industry policy, foreign policy we've absolutely no
idea. All he ever does is attack the Government and try to blackguard
the fact that we're seeing five minutes of economic sunshine which is,
of course, a completely untrue statement and this week's Budget and
yesterday's unemployment figures 90,000 job growth in the month,
640,000 jobs since the election give the lie to that statement and 
there's the Treasury forecasting another three years of growth, low
inflationary growth. So, that's about all he's been up to and last night
was his chance to put some markers down and he didn't do it.
TL: You didn't see him in any way as taking the fight up to you last night?
PM: Not at all. I mean, I don't think the fight.... . the public of this country
continue to want, fortunately, continue to want policy changes of the
kind, of the great superannuation change the Government had in the
Budget on Tuesday night, or the shift in the Budget balance or the
Hilmer changes the competition changes of a month earlier, or, you
know, the other big block things like APEC, Working Nation they're
the sort of things that people respond to. They don't respond to abuse
and rhetoric and these sorts of things. That's all cheap and easy but it
doesn't take you far.
TL What about that Mars Bar quote? Is that damaging to you? ( inaudible)
PM: No, no, it was a joke, it was a joke of ten years ago. That's the sort of
stock and trade they go on about. I mean, what I'm about is
employment. I mean, what I did in the last election was commit myself
solemnly to get growth going again and to focus on employment. I
said that we would not leave the unemployed behind, that we would
put an arm out and bring them up, and we've had, I think, now the
fastest employment growth in the OECD area, amongst the 27 nation
states of the OECD, Australia's employment growth has been the
fastest and we've had in the last year the biggest fall in unemployment
that we've ever recorded.
TL But did you actually say that to Donald Homne?
PM: No, not to Donald, I never said I was cracking, we were cracking
jokes with Barry Cohen in 1984 and Barry came down and we were
sitting down as guests of the ABC, I think, or the Australia Council and
he had a Mars Bar in his hand.
TL: So you've been taken out of context?
PM: Oh well, you always are in this business, I mean, but they can't take
the jobs out of context or the fall in unemployment.
TL: ( inaudible) as being removed from the people if that is seen as having
political advantage, in that respect, it was fairly smart, wasn't it?
PM: Well, I don't think, but who cares about it? I mean, it's just that another
bit of throw-away nonsense in the throw-away debate of Australia. I
mean, what they can't throw away is the drop in unemployment in
Tasmania yesterday, the drop in unemployment around Australia. You
see, that's what Howard is battling he's battling against substance 
and he can run around there blackguarding Australia and saying that
the place has basically had it and that we're not doing that well and
we've had five minutes of sunshine if people believe that gullible
nonsense, all it does is do damage to the country where the
Government has been focussing on getting things going.
TL Was that unemployment number a better number for you than the
Budget itself?
PM: Oh no. No, no, the Budget was a great document. I mean, it put us
into surplus three years earlier than we would have otherwise been.
It's taken enormous pressure off interest rates because notice
yesterday, the Treasurer gave the figures yesterday, last year we sold
$ 21 billion worth of Commonwealth bonds that's $ 21,000 million and
this year we'll sell $ 5.6 billion. So there's about, you know, $ 14-15
billion less pressure, less bonds that have to be sold in the Australian
market, so if there are fewer bonds, the price of the bonds, the value of
the bonds rises and if the value of the bonds rises the yield, or interest
rate, drops. And that's why we saw a 1 percentage point drop in the
long term bond rate over the last 10 days and confirmed again on
Tuesday and Wednesday. So, it's that great change in the Budget
balance, the largest swing ever from deficit into surplus, from a deficit
of $ 12 billion to a surplus of $ 700 million. That change and the
change in national superannuation are the sort of things that, you
know, one lives for in public life. I mean, the superannuation change,
we started on this in 1986. The ACTU and the Government put
together an Accord in 1986 for 3 per cent super. Then we sort of
inched it up to 5 per cent and then in 1991 we brought in the
Superannuation Guarantee Charge and that's taking it now to 6 and up
to 9 per cent from employer-based contributions by the year 2000.
What we were able to do on Tuesday night was, I thought, a very
innovative proposal, was to say to people, " you put 3 per cent away
yourself, and we'll match it, the Government will match it". So, in other
words, on that 9 per cent there will be a further 6 per cent. So, every
Australian working person will have 15 per cent put away for their
retirement and that would mean, I gave the example on Budget night,
that will mean that someone on $ 33,000 today, if the scheme was fully
in place and they were retiring today, would retire on $ 30,000 a year.
And they would have a lump sum of just under half a million dollars.
TL Are you happy though that you've delivered your tax cuts in that
fashion rather than straight out, saying, here you are guys and girls,
take the money and walk away with it?
PM: Well, we did. There were two remember? There were two from One
Nation. The first half we paid in full at the end of 1993. This second
half we said we would put them off, probably until 1998. Well, in fact it
is going to be 1998. But I think though that most people would believe
that they are better off being able to leverage up the value of that tax 
cut in a superannuation scheme that really provides for them in
retirement. Even if we take, let's say we take a couple in their 30s
years of age when they retire as a result of Tuesday night's changes,
when they retire, they'll retire on an amount three-quarters larger again
than the pension. And when their children retire, they'll retire on an
amount twice as large as the pension. So, I think if you say to people
well, would you rather that or you would rather, sort of, $ 10 or $ 15 in
your hand? I think they're going to say, well, in the long run, not to
have the burden of worrying about one's retirement income and at the
same time producing a huge pool of national savings for the current
account, is a better way to go.
TL: And what about the banks then, the banks now, as you are aware, are
saying that they can't absorb the additional charges that you put on
them through company tax and the like in the Budget, and they won't
give a guarantee that interest rates won't rise. How do you see that?
PM: Well, they would say that, wouldn't they?
TL: Do you expect interest rates to go up?
PM: No, no, they've got profits coming out of their ears, I mean, they've
never had such a beano, the banks, and really, what we're saying to
them, look, we give you a privileged position in the market by giving
you a banking license, what about paying us for the license, giving us
some money back, and taking it off the Budget rather than us find that
out of some other area of taxation. When you hear bank M~ s and
others saying, " oh this will affect interest rates", you can just dismiss
that with all the cynicism in the world.
TL: And what about the Commonwealth Bank? Does the sale of that, in a
way, signal the completion of a change in the Labor socialistic
principles? Are they on the block as well?
PM: Oh no, look, all the Labor empathy with the Commonwealth Bank came
when the Commonwealth Bank was, in a sense, the Reserve Bank of
Australia. You see, when King O'Malley and all these people in the
early part of the century introduced the Commonwealth Bank, it was,
you know, but not long before that you would have had the bank notes,
you know, printed by the Bank of New South Wales and other banks,
we then went to national currency but we needed a central bank or a
reserve bank and the Commonwealth Bank was that. That all changed
with the Reserve Bank Act of 1959. The Commonwealth Bank then
became just another bank, a Govern ment-owned bank, but just
another bank. Now, you might remember when the State Bank of
Victoria and Tricontinental had difficulties a few years ago, I was party
to the Commonwealth Bank buying the State Bank of Victoria. As a
consequence, we made the Commonwealth Bank into a real institution 
because formerly it had really only been the old State Savings Bank of
New South Wales, it had picked up in the Depression. Once it got...
TL: But nonetheless, taken together with the Hilmer changes which
introduced competition and so forth into government activities, and
which also mean that some State Governments are divesting activities,
the Labor Party at a national level had embraced those taken
together with that, doesn't that signal a change to the electorate in the
way that the Labor Party actually operates now, in fact, the nature of
the Labor Party?
PM: Oh the Labor Party has completely changed, but that change
happened in 1983. That change happened 12 years ago. That
happened when we removed exchange controls and floated the
Australian dollar. I mean, that happened when we started pulling the
tariff wall down in the middle 1980s. I mean, that's competition through
imports, which has now picked up our manufacturing sector and now
where we have seen exports to GDP rise by 50 per cent in the last
eight or nine years that's come essentially through the notion of a
competitive economy. It's a great irony that it's taken a Labor
Government to give Australia, for the first time ever, an open,
competitive economy, a free-market economy. And all that Hilmer is
doing is building those changes further into the State sector. See the
Trade Practices Act always applied to Federal instrumentalities but
they never applied to State Electricity Commissions or water boards or
maritime services organisations, and what we did was extend those
competition and access principles to the States under Hilmer. Now,
that's a very great change, but a change in the groove of a change in
the Labor Party from 1983. 1 mean, I think, this is one of the great
changes of Australian politics in the last decade because the Labor
Party will never regress to the views it had before 1983. In other
words, one of the reforms that the country has picked up from this
great period of change, is a change, a very change to one of its major
Parties and that's why, and where would we be with the Liberal Party
in its state without ideas, without personnel, without a view, without a
structure where would Australia be if the Labor Party had not gone
through this metamorphosis over the last decade?
TL: And finally, why are you not coming to Tasmania to sell the Budget? I
think the Premier down here thinks you might be hiding in Canberra.
PM: I'll be in Hobart in early June on a post-Budget visit so I'll be there
soon, and I'm in Perth on the weekend and Brisbane next week, so I
get around the country as much as I can and I do listen to what people
have to say. I think that there's such a sort of screen of criticism these
days coming, a sort of, a torrent, the whole culture of criticism that's
been developed in this country now is I don't think serving us well and
the public are listening through the veil or trying to peer behind the
screen to pick up some value to listen, to actually listen and hear some 
6
important information so they can make their own mind up and what I
do when I go around Australia, I take the opportunity when I meet
people just to listen to various things they say and you'd be surprised
just in a week the sort of things you can pick up. So I keep touch that
way and I'm very pleased to be able to have those opportunities.
TL: The Prime Minister, Paul Keating, thanks for talking to us this morning.
PM: Thank you very much indeed, Terry.
Ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
UNEDITED INTERVIEW WITH PRU GOWARD, ABC RADIO NATIONAL,
12 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PG: Prime Minister, Mr Howard's address in reply basically talks about
your broken promises the L-A-W law tax cuts, the rise in the
Medicare levy does that leave you " going into an election with a
credibility problem?
PM: No. Here he is, he has a Budget reply and he hasn't got a policy
he had 45 minutes 30 minutes, sorry to give the country his
policies, and he didn't have any. It was a sort of 1970s raucous,
empty policy-free speech, and I don't really think that hurling rhetoric
or abuse at a Prime Minister is any substitute for an opposition's
position or policy. Our people on our side of the Parliament were
very cheered up by Mr Howard's speech, because they thought it
was so bad. And when you think about the weight and content of the
Budget speech which Ralph Willis delivered on Tuesday night
and the empty, rhetorical Spe-eh-tha-John Howard replied to it with,
the difference between the Government and the Opposition was
plain and stark for all to see.
PG: All right, but what about the credibility problem that he argues is
yours?
PM: I don't think we have a credibility problem. In the election I said 2
things we would restart the growth in the economy, and that we
would get employment going. We saw the second largest fall ever
yesterday in employment 90,000 fall for last month. We have now
had 640,00 jobs since the election it's the largest fall in
unemployment in Australia's history the recording of the fall in
unemployment, the largest fall we have ever seen. They were the
principle commitments I made at the election not to leave the
unemployed behind, to put an arm out, to bring them up. We did it 
with raw employment and we also did it with Working _ Ngtion, with the
long-term unemployed. On the tax cuts, I said in the One Nation
policy that there would be 2 tax cuts one we paid in full, brought itforward
and paid it in full at the end 1993, the second, we have paid
more than it was worth $ 3.5 billion, we are going to spend $ 4.2
billion paying the second into superannuation accounts. And I
believe that most Australians will think it is better in the
superannuation account than simply paid as cash. Now, that means
that with almost complete fidelity to the things we undertook in the
election, we have done. Unlike most Australian Governments, we
have actually got these achievements into place growth
employment, the tax cuts, looking after long-term unemployed and of
course the other great issues like Mabo and APEC and Hilmer.
PG: I mean, he says though, technically, it is a breaking of a tax promise.
What you're basically saying is that you have changed the content of
the tax promise, but still delivered?
PM: That's right. We have spent more than the promise was originally
costed at $ 3.5 billion we will actually now spend $ 4.2 billion, but
it's a bit rich coming from John Howard who, in the 1977 election, the
Liberal party as their central policy, a program of tax cuts, and they
had as their logo a fist with a handful of dollars. And we were all
enjoined to ring up a certain toll free number to find out what our tax
cuts were. Five months later as Treasurer, he took them away
completely. And you might remember that famous front page in the
Illawarra Mercury which said " Lies, Lies, Lies". John Howard is up
there tonight talking about transparency and decency and budgetary
policy, yet it was of him that John Stone wrote that the fiscal
deterioration in 1983 was the most rapid since the war, and that he
had told then-Treasurer Howard about the $ 9.6 billion budget deficit,
but he wouldn't reveal it in the last 2 weeks of the 1983 election. So,
to be up talking about transparency of budgets is unbelievable. And
then of course, the other thing he did, he stood up with the Tax Act
he said " this is how big it was in my day, and this is how big it is
now". Well, the answer to that is sure John, it's bigger because we
caught up with all the people avoiding tax, and that is what he
should have done.
PG: But do you think the electorate will go back 18 years I mean, there
are a lot of kids who are voters who weren't born 18 years ago. I
mean, the focus is really going to be on your promises not his?
PM: No. But, there are plenty of people in public life, and in community
life, who remember the cynical commitment of John Howard to those
tax cuts, and he took them away, and the ones that he offered in
1982-3 and couldn't pay for, which then blew out the Budget in 1983.
this is twice he's had a go at this, but look at how many tax cuts that I
delivered on behalf of the Government through the 1980s about
of them all of them paid under the Accord to the letter. And then 
One Nation, the first lot paid to the letter. In this week's Budget, they
are to be paid for the betterment of everybody. In other words, they
add to savings, but it's the great historic opportunity to say to people
" 1you put 3% away yourself, and the Government will match it". This
will bring everyone in the country under the Government's
superannuation policies to 15%, and I gave the figures in the House
yesterday. And what they mean, and show, is that under this
scheme, someone on average weekly earnings which is $ 33,000
would, in today's dollars-, have-a parcel of money of just on half a
million, and that would guarantee them an annuity for the balance of
their life of $ 30,000 a year. So, in retirement, someone on $ 33,000
today would in the same dollars, in the dollars of the day have a
retirement income of $ 30,000. Now, is this not a more sensible,
better thing to do with the tax cuts, than simply just pay them off as
cash, and not take, if you like, the generosity of spirit, the
opportunity to build this great savings reform.
PG: Well, he listed a few broken promises, and we won't go through them
all now, but I mean his basic conclusion was how can you trust Paul
Keating to deliver the Government's promise on superannuation
when there have been these other broken promises and it is after
all, after an election?
PM: We reject absolutely the broken promises routine. You look at all of
the great bulk of the Government's commitments the generalised
child care cash rebate in and proposed the parenting allowance
in. The h-ome child care allowance legislated. It's very unfair for
people to make, for John Howard, to be making these points.
PG: What about the current account deficit, and he said " 9 years later
after banana republic, and it's still not fixed the electorate are
cynical"?
PM: The reason why it's not fixed, Pru, is because, there has been a big
savings hole in Australia. And that is, the nation has saved much
less than it did in the 50s and 60s. And the reason for that was,
inflation 10 or 12 years of high inflation established in everyone's
mind that the last thing they should do is put money away. Buy the
flat, buy a second house, buy a holiday house do anything but put
money away. Now, we are now back... . we have had 3 years of low
inflation, but 3 years doesn't change the sort of savings notions
inculcated in people. What the Government has done now, and it
did in the 1980s, is to make a very large change in fiscal policy we
have seen exports now go up by 50%, for 14% of GDP to 21 and
that's worth about $ 18 billion a year, God knows where we would be
without that and now, in Tuesday night's Budget, we are going to
see a 4 percentage point turnaround in the Budget balance, from a
deficit of 2.9% of GDP to 1.7% of GDP in the next few years. And
out of superannuation, we will see the Treasury estimates that the
super change will be worth 4% of the GDP by the year 2020. Well, 
let's say we are talking about 2000 rather than 2020, and call it 2%
of GDP. The current account problem is only 2 percentage points of
GDP that's how big the problem is that's $ 10 billion a year. That's
largely the size of the problem. So, the Government's put in, if you
like, a 6 percentage point fix in Tuesday night's Budget, for a 2
percentage point problem. And when we said to John Howard " well,
what would you do, John?", he wouldn't give us any policies. He
would...
PG: He said you steal them?
PM: Did we steal occupational superannuation? Did we steal the policies
of putting 15% into super away from him? He has
always opposed it always opposed it. The general change in the
Budget balance he said he was going to vote against the revenue
increases. That change that we put in there on Tuesday night will
basically, I believe, handle the current account problems and that's
what the long-term bond market told us in the last couple of days
when they confirmed that 1 percentage point fall in the long bond
rate. Let me just say this the pressure off interest rates that this
Budget will bring, will keep growth going through the 90s, and this
gives a lie to Howard's principal claim that we have had 5 minutes of
sunshine, which is just a cynical lie a cynical bit of opportunism.
PG: But it hurts, doesn't it? You keep biting on it?
PM; All lies hurt. So if a lie is effective, it doesn't mean to say it's right.
We have had 3.5 years of growth, and the Treasury is now saying
we have got 3 years coming up. So, we have got 6 years there. you
know we used to have a thing called the bond selling program? This
year because of the Budget going into surplus the bond selling
program will be about $ 15 billion less $ 15,000 million. Because
there are going be fewer bonds around, the price of bonds will rise,
and therefore the interest rate on them drops. That's why the bond
market confirmed the 1 percentage point fall so the Government
has effectively reduced the pressure on interest rates in this Budget
effectively, and the bond market has said so. Not John Howard
the bond market. These are the important things. But John Howard
had a chance to say where he would change the Budget Peter
Costello, on his behalf, has said they would not increase tax at all.
So, if he believes that the public sector should be saving more, and
he thinks that we have got to do a big change, like 2% of the GDP to
deal with the current account, in his terms, it all must come from cuts
in Government spending. Now, 2% of GOP is $ 10 billion how could
he cut $ 10 billion for government spending. And if that's his policy,
he ought to say he must know where it has got to come from he
had that Finance Department list he was running around with he
knows it has got to come from payments to families, or pensions, or
payments to schools or to universities, or to TAFE, or defence, or
payments to the States. They're the only places -you can get 
billion out of a Budget of just over $ 100 billion. And he was mum on
that subject last night he wouldn't say a word about it, and that's
why I think he has squibbed the opportunity.
PG: Well, he says that the next election is going to be based on who
people believe you or him. Are you going to take him up on that?
PM: The proof is in the pudding. When I came along, Australia was an
unconfident, inward looking, country ring-fenced by tariffs with an
uncompetitive managed exchange rate and rust-bucket industries.
That's what John Howard left me as Treasurer with double-digit
unemployment and double-digit inflation. What have we got today?
We have got inflation now at just a little over 2% 2.5% and we
have got unemployment just a little over It's a whole world of
difference. And you know, Australia today is 40% more competitive
than 1983 you can't believe that number, and that's the Treasury's
number. Not or 14%, 40% 40% more competitive. So, that
was the Australia that I was left, and look at what we have got today
a modern, international, competitive, low-inflation, economy. So, if
it's a case of believing me, or a guy that has had no policy guts he
got nothing done as Treasurer, who squibbed all the big fights and
financial de-regulation on the exchange rate, on tariffs, on social
policy, on savings, on superannuation, on productivity, on product
innovation, on education I mean, there shouldn't be a contest. And
so that's Government MP's last night were in very, very high
spirits at Howard's speech, and the Coalition MP's were very glum,
because they realised that feisty little sort of speech style that Mr
Howard employs on a Matter of Public Importance in the Parliament
or in Question Time, is not the material for a budget reply. But that's
as good as he could do, and it wasn't good enough.
PG: You did have terrific news yesterday on unemployment it has
dropped a lot, to 8.3% but if it's only going to be 8% by the end of
the year, I mean, is that enough? I mean, that's still a lot of people
out of work what else are you going to do?
PM: We have got 8% in the Budget, we may do better than 1 hope
we do. But again, I think the forecasts are erring on the cautious
side. We're at 8.3% now, 2 days after the Budget. Can we get to
8% in 12 months? There is some prospect that we will do better.
But employment could also.... . you can't keep jobs growing at 90,000
a month. That may slow down over the course of the year, and
participation rates change too. Our target is for 5% unemployment
by the year 2000. We would be the only western country within
cooee of it within cooee of it. And Working Nation is helping us
now get the long-term unemployed back to work there is 102,000
long-term unemployed people gone back to work in this last year. In
the same period in the 80s, it would have been 10,000, it's now
102,000. By being able to grate big chunks out of that pool of longterm
unemployed people and getting them back into the labour 
market, it really means that the target of 5% can be achieved. And I
think the forecast in the Budget for growth over the next 3 years to
be sustained on a low-inflationary basis means that we can basically
get there. That is what we are going to do about unemployment, and
that's what the Coalition can't do.
PG: You like forward forecasts, and it is a hopeful picture, but not
tomorrow not in the run-up to the next election which is presumably
less than a year away I mean, isn't that the problem for you and the
electorate? That it's a promise that doesn't start, really, in some
ways until 1997?
PM: Except that the job growth is there now the GDP growth is there
now and it's been there, really, since 1993, so 1993, 1994 and
1995. In 1994 and 1995, the Australian economy grew faster than
any other western world economy that's a great achievement. And
in this public debate, we have got a sort of unreality debate. Here
we are with an environment I can't recall at any time in my
parliamentary life where we have had 5% economic growth and 2%
inflation. We have got, sure this time, a little slower we want it
slower, about 3.75% 4% economic growth. Treasury is forecasting
3.75%, and inflation slightly up on that 2-3% range, but a
tremendous environment for growth, and I think a lot of people are
going to have to say " well, do we turn our back on that do we turn
our back on these long-term things like savings, or Hilmer, or Apec,
or the big social changes like Mabo do we that to go basically back
to a party with 1950s values, and a leader with a 1950s view of the
world?".
PG: So you think you can win the next election with the present
current... . with the current economic circumstances?
PM: The Government has set up a low inflation, contestable, high
productivity, pro-growth economy. And I don't think any community
in this country has ever turned a Government out on those
conditions.
PG: So do you reckon this year? An election this year?
PM: No there will be an election I have always said that I think it is
better when we get as much value I mean, they're too hard to win
elections here they are short terms, they are 2.5 to 3 years mostly
they are too hard to win without giving time away. And I think the
public expect value for their money from....
PG: are you calculating that the longer you leave John Howard there,
the harder it will be for him?
PM: I think that the more people see of him, the more they think he is just
the same John Howard from the 1980s. The only thing is, he is not 
the same John Howard from the 1980s the John Howard of the
1980s had a little more fizz to him, a little more bubble, sparkle. And
I think what last night's speech showed is that he can't cut the
mustard as he used to. He could never cut the policy mustard, but
now he can't cut the rhetoric either. So, I think that is going to
become apparent as time goes on. There was a very great chance
for John Howard last night on national television, within a year of
an election, well within a year of an election, of saying where he
stood. He took, rather, the opportunity to attack me.
PG: And just finally, I mean you do like forward projections big plans
what about yours? I mean, do you think you will be here to see the
1998/ 99 changes that you have promised?
PM: I joined Bill Kelty and his colleagues in the ACTU, working on
superannuation, in 1985/ 86 we put the 3% schem-e together then.
And then we were tickled pink with ourselves when we got it to
and then we got the superannuation guarantee levy in place, which
took it to 9% by the year 2002. And now we have been able to add
6% to that in Tuesday's Budget. You do like to think that great
things like this that take time to be around to see them happen,
and, as I say, to make them Tory-proof, so that some nasty little
right-winger won't get their ideological little fingernails under them
and try to remove them. It's not just a matter of reform in Australia
it's keeping it. And I think Bill Kelty and I will be long enough around
to repel boarders.
PG: Mr Keating, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you indeed.
ends. 



C ' 4
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT THE SUNBURY CAMPUS OF THE VICTORIA
UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY, VICTORIA, 12 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, do you have any comment on the National Australia Bank
half a per cent drop?
PM: This is certainly a good trend and I think it will come as welcome news
to home owners that some of the financial institutions are now starting
to begin to drop their rates after having seen the Budget. We've seen
now, I think, the National Australia Bank drop its fixed rate by about 1
per cent and, I think, Westpac by about half a per cent a week or so
ago and we are seeing the trend accelerate. So, that's a good thing
and an encouraging thing and this proves the fact that with the long
bond rate coming down after the Budget, and now these housing rates
starting to respond, that a lot of the pressure that we had on interest
rates, the Budget is starting to dissipate.
J: Do you think that will become widespread among the other banks?
PM: Well it's going to be a factor in the financial markets. The Government
this year, as a result of the Budget, is going to be selling $ 15 billion
less worth of bonds -that is, $ 15,000 million less worth of
Commonwealth bonds -and that's taken a lot of the pressure off
interest rates.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
POST-BUDGET ADDRESS TO THE COLLINGWOOD FOOTBALL CLUB,
MELBOURNE, 12 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It's great to be back with Collingwood again good ci' Collingwood forever.
They know how to play the game, and they do, and there's a thing about
Collingwood two things: commitment and loyalty. That's what I always
think when I think of Collingwood, I always think of commitment and
loyalty, and it is the great underdog club. And I always say, in the political
context, what's the best position in the race to be well, this is racing
parlance, not football parlance but one out and one back. One out and
one back not quite in front, but one out and one back, and make a rails
run at the death. And that's what you are doing at the moment Alan, I know
that. He's a cunning fellow, that Alan he's got a strategy here, and that's
the pendulum it's the same in politics when that pendulum swings up,
you get all that tear back, and then of course, we will see a great round of
Collingwood victories in the latter part of the season. Anyway, I hope I'm
there to see a couple of them And let's, at least, mark today as perhaps
one of those days. I think it's been a good week for the country, and if it's a
good week for the country, then it's a good week for Collingwood. And, so
let's mark this day as a day where maybe the pendulum has reached the
top of the swing.
Well, I'm here to talk about the Budget, and I know people think Budgets
are pretty dry things I suppose they are, but they do get your blood racing
on occasions. And this one has got John Howard's blood racing. Poor little
Johnny was in there last night doing his best, gesticulating and carrying on,
but they were a very glum little side behind him when they left. It was very
interesting, the House of Representatives: it has this it's a bit like a
football match the mood moves up and down the field. And always in the
high professionalism of politics the same as football you know when you
doing well, you know when you have been hurt I mean, you might walk
straight, but you know it's hurting like hell and you know when you have IN 
hurt the other guy. And they were a little hurt, little bunch this week, I can
tell you. And ours were a little happy little bunch. So, there's a bit of
something going on there in Australian politics.
But let me tell you some things about the Budget, because it is important to
all of us, as it is important to where we are in our economic history, and the
cycle, because Australia is really in a great position we are well-placed
today. We're now an open, externally oriented competitive country. We
are living near the fastest rowing markets in the world for the first time in
our history I mean, the markets for us, traditionally, were in Europe and
North America. They are now right on our doorstep here in Asia. We are
so competitive today we are 40% more competitive than in 1983. And
when you hear a number like that, you think " that's 4% or 14%" but it is
That's 40% more competitive that's the exchange rate, wages and
inflation. 40% more competitive since 1983, and that is what is driving the
exports they have grown by 50% in the last 6 or 7 years and it's what is
producing that competitiveness is producing the natural productivity
coming out of the pores of the economy, because we now have a
contestable market. In the days of high tariffs, when we had business
which didn't need to operate competitively to make a quid, but rather just
live behind the tariff wall as that went down, the natural productivity of a
business of a management of a business the tone improved. And we
have now got enterprise bargaining. And as a consequence, we are now
getting productivity related wage bargains in 60-odd% of the Federal Award
area. And so we have produced in Australia through import competition,
and by competition among import competers and non-import competers
we have now produced a contestable economy, or a contested economy.
And that is what is now naturally producing the low inflation.
In other words, if you get the structure right tariffs, competition policy
which we are doing with Hilmer, a completely open financial market, a much
more flexible labour market all of these things produce a natural
contestability which gives you natural increments to productivity and low
inflation. So that's the sort of economy we have got today. We could have
only dreamt about that sort of economy 10 years ago. So, here we are we
are in this great island continent, we are at the foot of the greatest markets
in the world, and we are so competitive, you could almost sell anything from
Australia these days. So, the aim was in this Budget to keep that going.
To keep the growth going. Now, you know in this country it has been the
Government's policy to run a pro-growth strategy. And you might say ' Well,
all Governments run a pro-growth strategy, don't they?". But, the answer
is, they don't. If you go through Western Europe, or most of North America,
the growth number drops out of the system it's not an objective, it's a
residual. In other words, all the bits and pieces go into the machine, and
get thrown around, and maybe 2% GDP drops out the back, or 1 if we
were living in Europe, it would be 1 if you were living in Japan, it would
be but if you lived in Australia last year, it was And the year
before that, and the year before that 4.25%. And the year to
September, that growth became 6.5% but 6.5% was just a bit too strong 
for us. So the Government moved interest rates up on 3 occasions late last
year to try and shave it off and slow if back to a sustainable rate. And in
the Budget forecast, we have got that sustainable rate of 3.75% for this
year. So what we needed to do then, was to look at the medium-term,
because we have now, basically, broken the back of inflation we have got
high rates of growth, we have had phenomenal rates of employment
growth, we have had 640,000 new jobs since the election. It's the fastest
decline in unemployment since we have been keeping records about the
labour market. So we have got employment we had 90,000 job growth for
the month announced yesterday. Our problem remains the current
account deficit. The one constraint on us really growing the place faster is
the current account deficit, and our reliance on overseas savings and
overseas debt.
Let me say a few things about this, because this is what the Budget is
principally aimed at it's not really aimed at slowing demands this year,
because the interest rate adjustments of last year have effectively done
that. So, the Budget is aimed at that medium-term, late 90s 2000 period
of pulling the current account deficit back so we can go on with faster rates
of growth, but the demand not spilling into imports. More of it being
satisfied by a bigger investment program here.
Now, let me just give you a little picture about the current account. In the
1 960s and 1970s, we always ran a current account deficit of about 2.5% of
GOP, so we had no debt. And the reason for that is we always had capital
inflow, private financial investment from abroad, equal to about 2.5% of
GOP per year. So, we are running a current account deficit of 2 and a half
percent and we picked up 2.5% capital inflow, so we end up with no debt.
What happened in the 1970' s and the 1980' s our savings went down quite
sharply, that's household savings and they went down sharply because of
over a decade of high inflation. See, once you put 10% inflation on the
people for over a decade, you can't kid them that there's any value in
sticking money away for savings because if there's 10% inflation and 4%
real rate of interest they're picking up 14% there being taxed on the 14 so
in reality they are being taxed on inflation and their real interest rate was
completely gone. So, we inculcated in a whole generation of Australians:
buy a flat, buy an apartment, buy a house, buy a beachhouse, buy anything
but don't basically save and then of course we had access to debt, to
housing very high level of home ownership, cars, software, whitegoods
etc and as a consequence our household savings declined. It's a very hard
thing to change the savings propensity that is the willingness or wish of a
nation to save. You can change it but low inflation we have got now will
change it, but how long we have had low inflation for three years, how
many more years before people get the message that savings are basically
worthwhile again and many years probably and the thing is we can't wait
that long so one of the ways we get that adjustment is through the budget
and the other ways government sought to get the adjustment is through
superannuation, let me just explain what's happened with the current
account. As I said to you in the 60' s and 70' s it ran at about 2% of GOP, it 
now runs on average around 4 and a half percent of GOP so we have
picked up 2 and a half percent of GDP on the current account that we
basically can't afford and we have been doing that that's been adding to
our national debt. We have got to then tailor it back to under three percent
to allow us to be sustainable and consistently on a very long term and
consistent basis.
So, we have to find essentially our problems is 2 percentage points of
GOP. Now this year GOP is about 500 billion, that's the total economy, five
hundred billion gross domestic product. Two percent of it is about ten
billion, ten thousand million, so our problem is ten thousand million paucity
of savings. What we did in the budget was take the budget on Tuesday
night to take last years deficit of 2.9 percent of GDP to a surplus of .7 so
you can say we are three-point six, in round figures call it four percent we
have made a four percentage point of GOP change to the budget balance.
The other thing we did in the budget on Tuesday night is we extended the
Government's award superannuation scheme from the six percentage
points that it is now under the superannuation guarantee charge which will
then rise to nine by the Year 2002 and what we have introduced on
Tuesday night were two elements: we have asked employees to put away
three percent of their wages and if they put three percent away we will
match it with three percent from the One Nation tax cuts and tip them both
into their personal superannuation account. On Tuesday night we added
another six percentage points of wages and savings to the system so
that's six on top of nine so as a consequence when the system gets to
maturity which will be now 2002 which is not far away seven years away
every Australian person will have superannuation contributions of
which is enormous change, it is the largest most comprehensive private
savings plan the country has every had. This is what it'll do to saving.
At the moment we have got 186 billion in super funds, by the year 2020 we
will have 2000 billion in super fund or two trillion. And you might have
noticed on the front page of The Financial Review this week " A 2tr
Bonanza" that's the first time I've seen this expression ' TR' enter the
Australian lexicon. Two trillion, two thousand billion, and our national debt
is one hundred and sixty billion at the moment so were we to get there we
would have thirty times the size of our national debt sitting in
superannuation funds assets. But let me put it in terms of GOP because
that's how I put the rest in so we are comparing apples with apples the
superannuation change is worth 4 percentage points of GOP, it will add
four percentage points of GOP as a proportion of GDP. That's by 2020 but
2020 if still twenty five years away, if we look at it by 2000, we're adding 2
percent so on the budget we've done four and we have done two on super.
So on Tuesday night we put in a six percentage point of GOP savings fix to
meet a two percentage point problem on the current account. Now you say
" that's going to do the trick isn't Well, it will but what we want is more
investment so to keep that growth up and to keep the jobs up and to keep
the strength up we need even more capital stock and more investment then
we have now. So, that two percentage point will get added to maybe by 
one, might even be one and a half, so we won't just have a two percentage
point problem we will have a sort of three percentage point problem but we
have still got a six percentage point fix, and even if our economists say oh
well in the budget change some of its cyclical in better times the budget
rolls back into surplus and bad times it drops out, all right, we will give them
the benefit of the doubt, we'll knock two of the four out, and say two of it's
long term and two of its cyclical so we have a solid two on the budget and a
solid two on superannuation in other words we've got an undeniable four
percentage points change on savings on Tuesday night to meet,
essentially, a two to three percentage point problem. So that's how central
and important last Tuesday night's budget was.
And what it will do is give us growth through the balance of the 90' s with
low inflation to get to the Government's target of five percent unemployment
by the year 2000. Now normally we could'nt get to five percent because as
much as we tried in the 80' s we couldn't get below six because we couldn't
get the people trained the long term unemployed trained to get back into
work so even if we had all the job growth in the world we couldn't get
below six because we couldn't find the people to take the jobs. We put that
fix in last year with Working Nation. With Working Nation, we're now casemanaging
the long term unemployed and the happy news is that this year
in the last twelve months 102 thousand of the long term unemployed went
back into jobs, unemployed longer than twelve months or more, so as the
economy grows and we take up all the school leavers, the natural entrants
to the workforce, migrants and we get down to that core pool of long term
unemployment where we have, even with our best endeavours, six to seven
percent unemployment couldn't do any better, this time we are going to
reach right into that number through Working Nation and we will a five
percent unemployment target is well within our range, now in OECD terms
there will be no country in the world get within cooee of us. Not within
cooee of us.
I was in Germany recently and I went to the Province of the state of Lower
Saxony for the CeBIT Fair where we had the largest international
electronics fair in the world and we were the guest country the partner
country and we had two hundred Australian companies exhibiting there
and one had to be very proud of seeing it there but I had the pleasure
while I was there of meeting the Premier of Lower Saxony. Lower Saxony
is the home of Volkswagen that's where the Wolfsburg is the capital of the
Volkswagon empire, and the whole of the state of Lower Saxony runs
around Volkswagons and the Premier said to me, " Mr Keating you know,
there is a great community spirit here in Lower Saxony" and I said " well,
that's wonderful to have that, you know, to get that sort of sense of
commitment". He said " Yes we've all agreed, we're working a four day
week. Very serious, they are working a four day week", he said " because
we've got to put people off at Wolfsburg to get the productivity up to keep
the cars competitive with the Japanese and everybody else". 
Yet in this country, in the last year, we've had 4 per cent of employment
growth. We basically got about one for one, for every 1 percentage point of
GDP, we get about 1 percentage point of employment growth so if we are
growing at about 4 per cent in GDP, we generally pick up about 4 per cent of
employment growth. He said, look, if we were growing at 4 per cent here,
we'd be lucky to pick up 1.5 per cent of employment growth. But if the labour
market program is not there, the training isn't there, and they also carry
enormous, enormous levies on employment which we don't have here. So,
when you look at us compared to Germany, say, and look at our experience,
we're growing around 4 per cent a year and we've got employment growth
running between 3 and 4 per cent, and it means that this country can get
within cooee of a target of 5 per cent unemployment. But the one
constraining element is the current account deficit and our debt. And that's
what the Government had to address the other night. Now, let me say apart
from the quality of the savings change, just let me tell you how it's going to
affect things beneficially. Last year, we had a bond selling program that's
covering the Budget deficit and maturing debt that's old bonds being
replaced and the Budget deficit being added on. Last year's bond selling
program was $ 21 billion. This year's bond selling program is $ 6 billion. So,
Tuesday night we took a $ 15 billion load off interest rates, and if there's going
to be fewer bonds, what happens? The price of bonds goes up. And if the
price goes up, the yield comes down. That's why the long term bond rate fell
by 1 per cent over the last ten days because of that great change in the bond
selling program. So, the Budget was a really important change that came
right when the country needed it. But let me tell you a couple of other things
about superannuation and we've done this through the Accord with the trade
unions Bill Kelty and I started on this long road back in 1985-86 when we
put the first 3 per cent scheme in. Then, the ACTU and the Government
moved it up to 5 per cent in the latter part of 1980s. In 1991 we put in the
Superannuation Guarantee Charge we put it up then to 9 per cent by the
year 2002, employer contributions 9 per cent paid in lieu of cash. We're now
at 6 per cent on 1 July, that's 7 per cent in two years' time, then 5, then 9 per
cent. But 9 per cent was not a mature contribution, you couldn't really get the
kind of living standard at the time that we really wanted people to have.
Remembering that when my generation, the baby-boomers, are 65 there'll be
half as many again retired aged people then as there are today and when our
children retire, twice as many retired aged people as there are today, and it
would put enormous pressure on the Budget and those that work. In other
words, we'd be asking those in work to carry this massive population of
people who have retired. So, we saw this coming ten years ago and started
the plan for it. As a consequence, on Tuesday night, under the Accord, we've
agreed that employees will put in 3 per cent and the Government will match it
with the tax cuts, paid as superannuation to take it to 6 per cent, and then
added on to the 9 per cent. It chops out at twice average weekly earnings, it
chops out at about $ 60,000 odd and then falls away.
But, anybody who is already making a 3 per cent contribution will get the
three per cent tax cut whether they are above these figures or they are not.
That is, between one and two times average weekly earnings anybody who is 
now contributing will get the value of the tax cut. They won't get it over twice
average weekly earnings.
But, let me tell you now, I'll give you the punch line, what it all means. It
means this, that a person on average weekly earnings that is $ 33,000 will
end up at the end of their working lives with a lump sum of $ 470,000 in
today's dollars. And they will have an annual annuity of $ 30,000. If we take
somebody on twice average weekly earnings, they will end up with a lump
sum of $ 670,000 and they will have a pension of $ 42,000. In other words, if
you take the person on average weekly earnings, they will have a pension, an
annuity of twice the value of the current pension. You might say well, look,
that is good, that is at the end of their working life and that is 30 years from
now, but let's take perhaps an even more relevant example, someone who is
in their 30s now, a couple in their 30s. By the time they retire, they will be
getting three quarters more than they were getting under the pension and
when their children retire they will be getting 100 per cent than under the
pension. So, this is a great change and as I said it puts away by 2020 $ 2000 billion in
national savings. Now, you see, you can understand why I get black about
John Howard. I mean, as if that team would have the imagination or the wit or
the common sense or the foresight or the courage to do anything like this.
They won't even talk to unions much less get you can imagine them
wandering up to the union movement saying we want you to put 15 per cent
of your income away as savings. They say ' oh yeah, sure, sure. Don't take it
as cash, take it as savings, oh sure'. Because you don't get respect and
regard and you can't build a relationship from people that you don't want to
speak to. They don't want to speak to the work force. It is a slight defect in
their economic policy they don't want to talk to the workforce and they said
' oh yes, you got inflation down to 2 per cent because you had a recession'.
John Howard had a deeper recession, do you know what inflation was the
year after the recession? 10.5 per cent. We had a recession and we came
out of it with inflation actually at 1 per cent, on average over the last three
years it has been 2 per cent and that was because of the tax cuts of the
1980s. As people went through that wage restraint in the boom of the late
1980s we said take 6.5 per cent for wages and not 15 or 16 per cent, like you
did when Howard was around, and we will give you tax cuts. And, those tax
cuts of 1988/ 89 saved Australia's inflation rate and we were able to go into
the recession at about 4 per cent inflation and come out at 2 per cent.
In other words that wage trade off, bringing down fiscal policy in the I1980s
has made all that possible. Now, John Howard let the cat out of the bag last
night in a speech which was free of policy. He had a great opportunity to say
within a year of an election and a Budget reply where he stood, and what he
was about, but John is going to run on Liberal party advertising gumph on
basically poll driven stuff and he thinks that the rest of you are silly enough to
take that gullible rubbish until polling day and see him take the job he thinks
was also due to him. But, what he did say was this, he said ' a Coalition
government would put a lid on the increases on superannuation contributions 
and rely on tax incentives for savings'. Well, we had him rely on tax
incentives for superannuation all the way through the 1 960s and 1 970s and
by 1983 only 40 per cent of people had superannuation and today it is 90 per
cent. So, here we are, here is the Labor party setting up the scheme these
characters couldn't even dream about, much less establish and he said ' no,
no, I know you are going to put away $ 2000 billion, I know people are going
to retire on $ 30,000 a year or $ 45,000 a year, I know the average person is
going to pick up a lump sum of half a million, but we are not having it. Not
having it'. Not having it because it is not ideologically right. If it is not done
by tax incentives, in other words if it is not done to the top end, you see John
wanted a scheme where in the last three years, the executives, remember the
thing called superannuation before we put on the reasonable benefits limits
were paid as a multiple of your final average salary over three years. So, the
executives would end up with $ 3 million, $ 3 million, $ 3 million and so you
would get seven times three and by the time you got your tax, you walked out
with your $ 15 million.
That is what they thought the superannuation scheme was about and that is
how it worked, it basically worked for people in the top end of business and in
some parts of the public sector. But, the great bulk of the Australian people
were not in it. Now, everybody will be in it and this is most particularly
skewed to the low paid and particularly to women in part time work. Because
part time people get a great benefit here. We pay them the $ 1000 tax cut
even if, let's take someone on $ 10,000 a year working part time. A woman
working in retail or clothing part time or something like that. Three per cent of
$ 10,000 is $ 300. They put away $ 300 and we put away $ 300. But we will
actually give them $ 1000, so if they want to save another $ 700 we will
actually give them $ 1000. So, that person could put not just their 3 per cent
away, but put another $ 700 away a year and make it a $ 1000, we will make it
$ 2000 $ 2000 a year over 30 years, $ 60,000, compounding let's say
$ 150,000 so, that person on $ 10,000 just as a result of Tuesday night's
policies could put a nest egg of $ 150,000 together. And they would have no
chance. These are people at the bottom end of the wage market.
So, these are the sort of policies that you get from a sensible, real
government. A government that actually has a touch with the community and
does the things that need to be done. Now, as a consequence of all of this I
think, I can say to you confidently that we are going to see growth continue
over the next three years, we have taken enormous pressure off interest
rates, we have successfully slowed the economy and we now want to see it
just come back to a nice sustainable level. But, importantly, we have got that
medium term current account fix in there by the budget deficit swinging back
into surplus on the one hand and superannuation on the other. And, that is
why our friends in the Liberal party were flat footed on Tuesday night. That is
why John Howard had a silly giggle at the table and that smile glued on. That
is why last night they were sitting up there trying to urge him on despite the
fact he had no framework to address the government's policies and it is why
the government won the 1993 election and why we will win the next one. 
So, I am glad you came today so I could tell you these things, so you could
get on us early. We were long odds, but we are shortening, a bit like
Collingwood long odds, but shortening get on to us now and get a tip right
from the horse's mouth. But, more particularly, I am pleased you have come
along to understand what, in fact, we are doing. It is not just a jumble of
numbers or an exercise in numerology or accounting, but there is a strategy
lying behind it because if we can lift our savings, we can lift our investment. If
we lift our investment, we lift our employment and if we end up with 5 per cent
unemployment or less, this will be one of the most united, cohesive and much
happier societies than most around the world and that is the Australia we all
know. The egalitarian Australia where the right to a fair go and a fair go
starts with a job and being in the society and not in an underclass. That is
what is going to keep Australia together. That's what is going to mean that
we are not going to have great extremes between the rich and the poor and it
will mean that you can live in this country without a barbed wire fence around
your house or a set of alarms or all the other things that people have got to
do in most other countries. And why this will remain a nicer country than, I
think, a lot of similar countries because government policy for over decade
has been about inclusion. Putting everybody in and looking after it from the
longest term unemployed to the people running the great public companies,
we in a sense, have tried to govern for all in a progrowth economy with low
inflation and now with higher savings.
Thank you.
ends 



dr C'
PRIME MINISTER 43/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE lION P J KEATING MP
I I OWARD AND CONNOLLY HUM I IIATED TOGETH ER
The preselection of Brendan Nelson for the seat of Bradficld is a humiliating defcat for
John Howard, and confirms the weakncss of his leadership.
Mr Howard's attempt to cling to the past has now becn repudiated by his own party in
a number of prcsclcction contests. Whatever he might say to the contrary, John
I loward endorscd David Connolly, and this defeat mcans lis support counts for little.
This leaves thc Parliamentary Liberal Party without a credible spokesman on
superannuation matters, at the end of a week in which the Government has introduced
one of the biggest savings changes in the nalion's history.
There arc at least two lessons in this. One is that the Liberal Party is now so moribund
that one of its safest seats can be hijacked by an opportunist.
It is also a lesson for David Connolly. Rifling through the garbage bins and household
expenses of the Lodge to which he devoted himself for the past couple of years
was no way to make a serious contribution to public life, and his electorate has made
him pay the ultimate price.
CANBERRA 13 MAY 1995 



( t,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINSTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PERTH, MONDAY 15 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: John Hewson said we were going to have an early election and
Alexander Downer said we were going to have an early election, but
we never did.
J: the Liberals are currently on..
PMV: Well, what passes for the Liberal party today?
J: Is that premature from the Liberal party to think that way?
PMV: Well, the Liberal party is not really, I don't think, a competent political
party any more. It is basically, it is front benches without anyone of
substance or quality and you can see with Dr Nelson, here is
somebody who has been in the Labor party for 17 years, they are so
moribund the Liberal party, they have given one of their safest seats to
an opportunist, to somebody who doesn't believe, it is like a business
club, the Liberal party, you join at the door. You know, those business
lunches and things you join at the door. Well, you join at the door with
the Liberal party. Walk in, they say ' who am I? 7 and I'll say ' I want to
be a Liberal member'. ' OK, come in'.
J: ( inaudible)..
PMV: He is not doing to well, he has lost Mr Rocher, he has lost Mr Filing
and now he has lost Mr Connolly who was his superannuation
spokesperson at a time when the Government introduced the most
comprehensive, long term superannuation change and savings change
ever. I was saying this morning, have a look at their front bench, I
mean look at the Government's front bench Ralph Willis the
Treasurer, Kim Beazley who have run the whole Budget with our ERC
colleagues and people like Gareth Evans and the Attorney General.
Who have they got? They have got Tim Fischer who is barely 
politically literate, Mr Costello who is like a crow on a fence, picking
the eyes out of any good news that comes along and Alexander
Downer who is a professional failure and that's their front bench.
J: Prime Minister election timing..
PM: We will be ready when we are due to be ready. At the moment, the job
for us is to get that Budget in and get it through and get it working. We
are already starting to see influences come from it and from the
interest rate reductions of late last week which, I think, should be a
good sign for the Australian public that the markets and the financial
system has basically approved of the Budget. It has taken enormous
pressure off interest rates. I mean, last year we sold $ 21,000 million
worth of Commonwealth bonds. This year, because of the Budget, we
will sell only $ 6,000 million of Commonwealth bonds. In other words,
we have taken $ 15,000 million of pressure off interest rates so
therefore there is less paper around. If there is less paper around the
price of it goes up and if the price rises, the yield or the interest rate
comes down and that is why long bonds or 10 year bonds fell last
week by one per cent and it is essentially why the housing rates
followed at the end of the week.
J: So, Prime Minister are you tempted to capitalise on the political..
PM: No, I think that the public will see John Howard's cynical, lousy little
line about five minutes of sunshine for the opportunism that it is. We
have had three years of growth to date and the Treasury is forecasting
another three years in the Budget, so if you take the period from 1983
to 1998, we will have had 15 years of growth with 18 months where we
were not growing.
J: So it doesn't really matter when..
PM: No, I think the public will pay on results. I mean, how many
governments around the world could stand up, make an enormous
change to the Budget, take it by 2.9 per cent of GOP or a change of
over $ 12 billion back into surplus, at the same time introduce the most
comprehensive savings plan where every Australian working person
will have 15 per cent put away for themselves, as a contribution to
superannuation in retirement giving them a retirement income roughly
the same as their income at work. At the same time building a huge
pool. That sort of change you get from governments that have got all
the vim and vigour in the world and, I think, the public will think that.
J: So, you are taking full credit for the fall in interest rates?
PM: Well, I would take, let's say last week the interest rate went up on
Friday. You would be reporting ' Budget rejected: Government takes a
hit'. Well, ipso facto, if they fall, the Government has been received
well. 
3
J: Do you have any plans for any more major spending statements
between now and the next election?
PM: No, the Budget is our major opportunity to resort the spending
priorities of the Commonwealth and we have done that, but the last
non-budgetary statement, large one, was working nation and its
success has been to get the long term unemployed back to work. You
see, the Government's principal commitment at the last election was
around employment. The thing I said on the night of the election was
that we would not leave the unemployed behind, that we would put an
arm out and bring them up. We promised there, we targeted 500,000
jobs in three years. We are already at 650,000 in two and a quarter
years. We reached our 500,000 target in two thirds of the time and
because we didn't want to see the long term unemployed become an
underclass we put Working Nation in there which has now seen
100,000 long term unemployed people back to work. So, that sort of
commitment to growth and to employment is the sort of thing that will
keep Australia a fairer and more equitable and more just society and a
better place to live.
J: Prime Minister, will the Federal Labor Party be challenging the..
legality of Richard Court's Royal Commission into the Easton affair to
try to keep Carmen Lawrence from appearing?
PM: Look, it is all this stuff about, can I just say, look, there is no question
about illegality here or maladministration, it is not anything like that, it
is just a political inquiry. It is just the same, I said on radio, and I'll say
it again today here, it is just the same as us deciding that we will have
an inquiry with a judge into the Asia diary scandal of the last
government, so we will get Malcolm Fraser along and we'll get Doug
Anthony along and we will get Peter Nixon along and we'll get Mr
Sinclair along and we will say ' now, what happened in that Cabinet
meeting, who said what to whom'. It is a political nonsense.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: But to happen or doesn't happen it doesn't matter. The inquiry's
findings won't matter.
J: Will your Health Minister..
PM: That is a matter of seeing, there are questions of law here about what
are the rights and prerogatives of members of Parliament and that is a
matter we will be taking legal advice on.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RON EDWARDS, RADIO 6WF, 15 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
RE: Did you enjoy the football?
PM: There was some very great football played there. I mean I have seen
better games in the sense closer games, but I don't think I have seen
better football. I thought that some of the playing by the Eagles and
the Dockers was just spectacular.
RE: The Dockers are noted for being bold which I suppose gives you a bit
of a thought in terms of your political strategy, but the thing to notice
that your team, Collingwood, is the one the Eagles have had the most
difficulty with in recent years because they seem to be a hard tackling
side. So there is hope yet Paul.
PM: Well the old Collingwood they need a good, old Collingwood forever,
as they say. They know how to play the game. But they have had a
run of bad luck recently. Of course, they got up on the weekend and
they will be playing at Victoria Park.
RE: That's right, they play the Dockers at Victoria Park next weekend.
PM: They play the Dockers at Victoria Park next weekend and that will be a
tough match because Collingwood on its home ground is a hard side to
beat. So I wish the Dockers well there.
RE: And it has really turned out to be a good stadium now hasn't it?
PM: The stadium looks terrific. We put that up under the One Nation
program trying to, at the time, get the economy started and get some
construction moving because normally the Commonwealth is not in the
business of funding $ 8 million into a football stadium, but we did on
this occasion and I think it was a lucky stroke for the Western
Australian Football Club and we were delighted to be able to play a 
role in developing the stadium because now that the game is a
transcontinental game, a national game, I think it is important,
particularly as you have got the Eagles and the Dockers playing
against one another here, to have a stadium that takes 40,000 or
50,000 people.
RE: That is our view too.
PM: And I think also the ground looked like a bowling green. It looked
fantastic. Apparently they took 1 1/ 2 metres of earth out of it, drained
it, and it will be a really great spot for the AFL and for really
competitive games here in the west.
RE: Well, certainly, off to a good start. Now on the question off to a good
start. The Budget is interesting, but what's been taking the minds of a
number of people in the last day or two is the question of election
speculation. Of course, that is reported today in the press. Are you
going to have an early election?
PM: Well I have never been in favour of an early election and John Hewson
was saying, last year, that we were going to have an early election.
Alexander Downer said we were going to have an early election and
we are still here. There has been no early election because they are
too hard to win, Ron, without giving the time away.
RE: So they are too hard to win so you
PM: The pressure and cost of winning a national election in Australia, have
an election 15 or 16 months after you won the last one, which is what
John Hewson was proposing we have and Alexander Downer, was ( a)
wasting the mandate and the public say hang on we elected you for
a term, you better get in there and do your best.
RE: It must be tempting though with interest rates good news on the
weekend, the unemployment figures, the Budget reasonably well
received.
PM: People are starting to see now that John Howard has made no
substantial policy. He has no substantial policy thought. He has made
no substantial policy changes or announced anything of substance in a
substantial way. That is now becoming apparent. He ran around with
a cynical little line about five minutes of sunshine. We have grown for
3 1/ 2 years now and the Treasury are saying we will grow for 3 more in
their forecasts. You can see, from 1983-1998/ 99, which is 15 years,
we will have grown all the time, bar 18 months. And really grown. We
averaged about 4 1/ 2 per cent through the 80s, where Europe is doing
1, Japan is doing 1/ 2 per cent. We are doing 4 1/ 2 per cent. And this
year we are doing 3 3/ 4. 
RE: He is now attacking your credibility and saying you can't be believed in
what you say.
PM: The principal commitment I made at the election was about
employment. The whole election was about unemployment and
employment and you might remember me saying on election night
Ron, we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind, we'd put an arm out
and pull them up behind us. And what was our principal commitment?
500,000 jobs in 3 years. We are at 650,000 already. In 2 1/ 4 years
we are at 650,000. We actually reached 500,000 jobs in two-thirds of
the time. That was our principal commitment. Then to the long term
unemployed, the people unemployed 12 months or more, who ran the
risk of becoming an underclass, this year because of Working Nation
and our labour market programs, we have seen 102,000 of them go
back into work, which is a phenomenal figure. You look at the 80s, we
would have got maybe 10,000 in this period of long term unemployed
people back to work. This year we got 100,000. So not only have we
kept our principal commitment, but at the same time we haven't the
long term unemployed behind. That was the principal thing and there
were all the other specific election commitments, the generalised Child
Care Rebate introduced, the Home Child Care Allowance introduced
and now, of course, we have seen the Parenting Allowance, it will be
introduced soon, and the one we have just recently announced the
Maternity Allowance.
RE: The Opposition is also saying that 12 years is long enough it is time for
a change. That must be fairly hard to counter.
PM: Well I don't think it is hard to counter. Ron, this Budget is so fresh, it
could have been delivered in 1983 from the Cabinet then. I mean what
Ralph Willis and Kim Beazley and my colleagues in the ERC have
been able to do on this occasion, and the whole Government indeed, I
mean look at what this Budget has got. It has got a massive return to
surplus, but more than that it has got the biggest and most
comprehensive savings plan the nation has ever had, laid in the
middle of it, is superannuation.
RE: It must worry you a bit though that the question of superannuation,
what we have seen already is that the funds can get in and rip into the
contributors in terms of charges. You must have some worries about
the management of funds and whether or not they are going to be
secure in the future because it hasn't all been plain sailing on
superannuation.
PM: The funds had a loss on the long bond market this year, but they did
all around the world because long bond yields went up and therefore
the bond prices came down. They took losses. But you have to look
at the longer run. The point though, at issue, was the question you
asked me about the Government. Now here is John Howard, he had 
a chance on Thursday night last to respond to the Budget on national
television. Not one policy thought did he put down. You see, what has
the Government given the public since the election? A strong
economy, huge employment growth, low inflation and now we have
taken all that pressure off interest rates. You see, Ron, what people
need to realise about the Budget is last year we had what is called a
bond selling program, you know the Commonwealth Bonds, we sold
$ 21,000,000,000 worth of bonds. This year we will be selling
$ 6,000,000,000. There is a $ 15,000,000,000 reduction in the bond
selling program. That means that there is less Commonwealth paper
out there. The price, if it rises, if the price goes up, the yield or the
interest rate drops. That is why long bonds, 10 year bonds, dropped
by 1 percentage point in the last 10 days and that pressure having
been taken, the banks then responded by dropping their variable
mortgage rates for housing. So here is the Government, which has got
an economy back into life through things like One Nation, the football
stadium, all these areas got it there with 2 to 3 percentage points in
inflation, not 10 as John Howard left us. We have had the biggest fall
in unemployment, since we have been keeping the records, in the last
12 months. We have had 650,000 jobs since the election. And you
look at the vitality and the verve and the spring in it and say how would
that come from John Howard who has got no policy clues and look at
his front bench. He has got Tim Fischer who is economically illiterate.
Costello who is like a crow on a fence, picking the eyes out of anything
that is good, carking along about any positive thing that comes along.
And, Alexander Downer who is a professional failure. That is his front
bench.
RE: They are revitalising. If we look at the events of the weekend, Brendan
Nelson coming in, he might add some new light to their front bench.
PM: Revitalising. Well, have a look at what has happened over here.
Rocher has been tipped out, Filing has been tipped out, Connolly was
their superannuation spokesman he has been tipped out. So
somebody, Nelson, who was in the Labor Party for 17 years, he
resigned because the Labor Party wasn't socialist enough. Look the
Liberal Party is like a club, you join at the door. You know some of
those business clubs that you see you join at the door. I mean you can
join at the door. Say here am I, 1 am Brendan Nelson, you have been
in the Party before. No, no, no. His principal backer is Bruce
Shepherd who is not in the Liberal Party and so the Liberals are so
moribund, they are so had it that they have given the safest seat in
Australia, Bradfield one of their safest seats to an opportunist.
RE: So you are not threatened by him?
PM: We had all this with Bronwyn Bishop. And we had it with John
Hewson. John Hewson bounded in as a sort of a Bent Street Sydney
economist into the Liberal Party. He was going to show us a thing or 
two. Out the door. Where is he? He is back in Bent Street or
somewhere else. Then it was Bronwyn Bishop. You know an old
friend of mine said to me years ago, he said " Paul, I tell you this, never
worry about the sky rockets of politics. At first a shower of sparks, but
a dead stick falls to earth." And this guy is a shower of sparks and a
dead stick if I ever saw one.
RE: Now, you created some sparks earlier this year with your exchange
with Kerry Packer. In hindsight do you wish that you hadn't had that
exchange?
PM: Well, Kerry is a professional bully.
RE: You don't think he would say that of you?
PM: I am not going to be pushed around by Kerry. Kerry is a fellow that
has a lot of good qualities. I mean I have known him a long time and I
counted myself as a friend of Kerry's not a close friend or one I see
regularly or anything like that, but somebody who I have liked over the
years and I have been disappointed by his attitude. But that is all I
can say about it. I don't wish him any ill.
RE: The Medicare levy is an aspect of the Budget that you had to change,
you had to increase. There is a real problem in the world, that is the
increase in medical costs, in pharmaceutical costs. Can you see that
you are going to cap the Medicare levy or is it going to be one of those
taxing measures that you will have to keep looking at depending on
medical costs.
PM: Well you see in this Budget, Ron, we lifted the Medicare levy by 0.1
from 1.4 to 1.5 and that was basically because the Medicare levy
proceeds have fallen from providing 30 per cent of the cost of
Medicare, to 24 per cent of it. See the levy only brings in 24 per cent
of the cost of the system. By putting that 0.1 on, we took it back to 27
per cent of the cost of the system. So we are not even back to the sort
of level that the Medicare levy formerly provided that was 30 per cent.
Now, why is this happening? Well, the answer is because the health
system is improving in its quality. Diagnostic imaging, pathology, all
these referral services of much higher quality than we had when you
and I were young men or boys, now there is much better diagnosis and
imaging et cetera and surgical procedures. So, the cost of the system
is rising then the aim, I think, always in the national health scheme like
this is to have that tension between quality service, fee for service,
private practice and price. Now, by and large we have kept Medicare,
the total cost, running at around eight per cent of the size of the
economy; eight per cent of GDP. The American system is running at
16 per cent which is really now unaffordable for them. 
So, we are all the time trying to keep the cost down and by and large
we have succeeded, but I don't have to tell you anything Ron or your
listeners to know that if you have let's say a serious ailment of some
kind these days, the likelihood is that you are going to be referred on
for further diagnosis which wouldn't have happened 20 years ago or
wouldn't have happened as frequently as prevalently. That means
higher costs and it is also the same with pharmaceuticals, a very large
part of the health scheme is in pharmaceuticals, the drugs are now
very effective, but they are also very expensive. Some can be $ 60 a
pop or $ 100 a pop which we are providing for $ 2.50, particularly to
aged people.
RE: On the weekend President Clinton attacked the Japanese for their
intransigence on trade matters. He said that they really weren't
coming to the party on questions of tariffs. What is your feeling about
that in terms of the Japanese because we have made a great play
about opening our economy and we have, in fact, been the good
performers here. The Japanese, if you talk to people anecdotally, will
say they get up to all sorts of goings, are you in President Clinton's
court on this?
PM: Well, you mentioned opening our economy, we have really opened our
economy up. We started reducing tariffs in 1988 and they will be at
five per cent by 1997, that is two years time. It is one of the reasons
why Western Australia, for instance, is growing so rapidly. National
economic policy is savoured. This Labor Government's economic
policy is savoured in terms of change, the two big primary exporting
states of Western Australia and Queensland because by taking the
tariff monkey off the back of Western Australia and Queensland they
have both grown and that is why now the growth is here so strongly in
Western Australia. So, tariff reductions work, you do it in your own
best interests. But, the Japanese have made somewhat of a mistake
by becoming very heavy savers, but not running the savings down their
own standard of living. Their levels of housing and the quality of their
housing is, by our standards, poor. The quality of their sewerage
system is poor. Their transport system the same and if Japan were to
lift its domestic demand and improve the life styles of Japanese
people, then there would be an automatic sucking in of imports which
would then ease the trade problem. But, it is a case of save, save,
save, save, save, and yet not spend on a higher standard of living
while in the case of the American community it is a case of spend,
spend, spend, spend and not save. So, what is underlying this
argument is a savings balance problem. The Japanese are very big
savers and the American's aren't.
RE: And, we are a bit more like the Americans if you look at our current
account deficit. 
PM: That is why we have introduced this great change in the Budget with
superannuation. You see, our current account deficit problem is two
per cent of GDP, it is about $ 10,000 billion, GOP this year is $ 500
billion, that is the total economy, two per cent of it is about $ 10,000
billion, that is the problem that we have for the year. In the Budget we
have done two things to deal with that. We have taken the Budget
from deficit to surplus with a turn around of around three to four per
cent of GDP and by buying the tax cuts into superannuation accounts
and getting employees to contribute to it, we will build on top of the
nine per cent we already have there to 15 per cent. So, every person
in Australia will have a 15 per cent mature superannuation
contribution. What this will do is two things. It will add four per cent of
GOP to savings so if we have got four per cent from the Budget and
four per cent from superannuation that is eight per cent, but the
problem we have in the current account is two per cent. So, we have
got an eight percentage points fix for a two percentage point problem.
If that four per cent happens in 2020, if we take the year 2000 as a
benchmark, we add two percentage points from superannuation and
let's say three to four from the Budget. So what we did last Tuesday
night in the Budget is put a six percentage point saving change in for a
two percentage point current account problem.'
Now, that is why this Government has given Australia the sort of
leadership it needs in these things. It is hasn't happened in America.
They don't have such a policy in America. Americans are not saving
while the Japanese are and we will be able to fuel our growth and
prosperity in employment through investment because we will have the
savings to pay for it where many countries like Australia won't. That is
why I say, Governments like this come along only very rarely to do
these sorts of things and it is the point you asked me earlier about
people taking the Liberal party free of policies, without policies, I
mean, who is going to walk away from a savings change of this quality
which is going to underwrite Australia's future and not only that,
underwrite our incomes. What it means is someone on average
weekly earnings $ 33,000 will, at the end of their working life, have a
pension or an income of $ 30,000.
RE: Provided we can secure the funds, the superannuation funds and then
managed properly, I mean, that still must be a worry for you.
PM: That is a challenge I think. I think we are now building a very big
system of savings, we now have to build a superannuation
management system as good as our savings themselves. I think we
can do that, I mean, they have had a rough time in the last year with
the long term bonds because that was a world wide problem, but by
and large their savings performance has been pretty good. Anyway,
on the Treasury's estimates we have got very moderate savings
returns in there, compound returns. 
RE: Can I just close on a couple of matters. Senator Noel Crichton-Browne
was subject to attacks upon his private life and he made those feelings
known in the Senate last week. How do you feel about this move into
the private lives of public figures?
PM: Well, I have no time for it what so ever. I have been in Parliament for
26 years and I have never ever supported, much less been involved in,
attacking someone's private life. I mean, I think it is the last card in the
pack. There are enough things to talk about, there are enough..
differentiation points in policy without going to these private attacks.
So, I don't see any value in that and, I think, it is a very bad
development in Australian politics.
RE: Does it worry you that with the Royal Commission announced by
Premier Richard Court that the timing of that Royal Commission is
about October and if the findings, in relation to Carmen Lawrence,
were adverse, that would make it difficult for you in terms of election
timing and also given Carmen's significant role in the Federal
Government.
PM: I have made my position clear about that in the past, even if it is found
against Carmen Lawrence, so what? I mean, it is a political matter.
The thing is there is no question here about any serious illegality or
misappropriation or maladministration of public duties, this is really
about an inquiry into what was going on politically in the former
Cabinet. It is like me saying well look, we will have a public inquiry
today into the Asia dairy scandal of the former Coalition government
and we will get Malcolm Fraser and John Howard and Ian Sinclair and
Peter Nixon, we'll get them over there and say ' what really happened
then? What did you say to him that night you met before the Cabinet
meeting?' It is a nonsense. So even if the thing " found against
Carmen" it doesn't matter a tinkers cuss. It is just, in a sense, an
inappropriate inquiry into not public administration or illegality or
maladministration of any kind, it is an inquiry into the politics of
Cabinet discussions.
RE: Did you get to talk to Richard Court, the Premier, at the football
yesterday?
PM: I did, yes.
RE: What was the exchange like?
PM: Good, but not about this. I mean, if he had got onto this I would have
told him exactly what I thought of it. He was talking about some other
issues that affect the economy and the state in general, we had a
discussion about the native title and some of those problems. I mean,
I keep a dialogue with him and we can progress matters. But, things
would be helped if he wasn't, I mean look, can I just say this, there is a 
sort of a snakiness and nastiness about it all. He was the Premier who
defeated Carmen Lawrence, but there is not grace in victory with him.
He has not only defeated her at an election and she has gone off to
make a career in public life, he has now got to run an inquiry into what
was going on inside her Cabinet. I mean, it is very bad behaviour and
it does nothing for the place. It does nothing for getting along with life
and dealing with the public, the real public is its problems and I think
that is why Hendy Cowan and Colin Barnett and others have made
their views known about this, they are not very happy with it.
RE: Well, Paul it is good to have you here in Perth. The weather is
beautiful, the economy is moving and it is good to have you visit.
PM: It couldn't be nicer, Ron. I had a lovely day yesterday, as I said, the
grounds at Subiaco look like a bowling green, it was great football and
I have had a very pleasant couple of days. Thank you very much.
RE: Thanks for joining us today.
ends 



Y
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RICHARD UTTING, ABC RADIO, 15 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
RU: Very good morning Paul, how are you?
PM: Good thank you. Good to be around.
RU: And a good game of football yesterday?
PM: Well, there have probably been better games, but I don't know there
has been better football. You know what I mean? It wasn't as close a
game as I think the Dockers would have liked, but there was some
amazing football.
RU: Well it was a historic event, I suppose, the first Western Derby and the
opening of the grandstand as well.
PM: The ground looked terrific. It was like a bowling green out there.
RU: Yes. Now I don't know if you heard it, but I have just been reading an
apology concerned with the behaviour of one of your MPs I suppose,
Graeme Campbell. How long can the ALP put up with somebody like
Graeme Campbell?
PM: I haven't heard anything about it, I am sorry. I didn't hear. I heard you
reading something as I walked in.
RU: Well you would be aware that Mr Campbell has made a series of
attacks on the Director of Public Prosecutions here, John McKechnie.
PM: Well I am not really aware of that, no.
RU: One of which involved allegations about Mr McKechnie's 17 year old
daughter and I am simply asking the question, is it appropriate for
Labor MPs to do those sorts of personal attacks? 
PM: Oh well I don't believe in personal attacks and I think there is enough
policy meat to get into, without worrying about individuals.
RU: Have you spoken to Mr Campbell about his allegations at all? The
way he has been conducting himself?
PM: Well, he often gets into me, of course.
RU: Yes, I know.
PM: So I don't talk to him too much at all these days.
RU: Alright, now, we talk about personal attacks and I guess after the
Budget you have had people like John Howard calling you a liar and
saying that the Budget is a pack of lies. I guess you are used to it, but
the sort of personal attacks there are in Federal Parliament and in
Parliament House itself, I mean it must have an effect on families and
those associated with politics.
PM: Well it is a barrage of abuse and by and large I think the Government
and the public system has served Australia well in introducing probably
the greatest range of changes of any OECD country whether it be in
economic policy, in education, in superannuation or in cultural policy
these dramatic changes over the last 10 or 12 years. What we get
from our opponents is a barrage of abuse and I will get more. You
know, John Howard has been Leader of the Opposition now since the
beginning of the year. He has not addressed an issue of substance in
a substantial way since he took the leadership and he is always talking
about honesty. Well you have got to ask yourself, what is honest
about somebody who won't tell the public what they are doing. I mean,
what is credible about that? Trying to sort of curl up and be the
smallest possible target, not saying what you stand for, where the
Government always whether it is Working Nation, Cultural Nation, the
Budget, the National Superannuation Scheme we are out there all the
time with the big positives. Every time you put a positive up like
superannuation or the Budget or the surplus, you duck under a hurl of
abuse. As they hurl the abuse.
RU: I suppose that is the nature of the beast in Opposition.
PM: But, look, the trouble is the Liberal Party have got no structures and no
ideas. If you look at their front bench. It is Fischer who is politically
illiterate. Costello, who is like a crow on the back fence, everything is
bad, he picks the eyes out of anything that is good. And, Alexander
Downer who is a sort of professional failure. I mean that is their front
bench. 
RU: But as far as the Budget is concerned, you have had the attacks by
John Howard. Now, I guess, you must have been very happy, for
example, that interest rates did drop when they did. It seemed to me
almost an act of God.
PM: Well, not really. What has happened is this. The Budget has gone
from a deficit of over $ 12 billion to a surplus of $ 700 million, but the
change in the Budget financing task that is the Commonwealth Bond
program that the Commonwealth has let me explain it to you this
way, last year we sold $ 21 billion worth of bonds $ 21,000,000,000.
This year, as a result of the Budget, we will sell $ 6 billion, so there is a
reduction in the bond selling program of $ 15,000,000,000. If there is
much less paper around, Commonwealth Bonds, or paper as it is
called in the trade, the price of the paper rises. As the price goes up
the yield comes down. The yield is the interest rate. So that is why
long term bonds fell about a percentage point last week and what we
saw at the end of the week was the short term rates of variable rates in
the housing market falling with them. So it is all rather mechanical in a
sense. The Budget was a very big swing from deficit back into surplus
and the bond selling program is a dramatic reduction and by taking
that pressure off interest rates. Amongst the first things to fall were
some of those fixed and variable housing rates.
RU: Well interest rates having dropped it seems then, whenever the next
election is, that the Government won't have to worry about further
increases between now and the next election. Would that be a fair
comment?
PM: Well, I think, there is a huge pressure being taken off interest rates. I
mean what we have done, we have reweighted policy off monetary
policy on to fiscal policy. In other words, we have reweighted it off
interest rates, on to the Budget. Now, I think, that is going to augur
well for investment and confidence into the future. Now we have seen
enormous gyrations in financial markets this year. I mean the long
bond yield went up all around the world one of two percentage points
in the last 12 months. I mean no Government can ever see what is
ahead of it in that sense. But what we can do is what we are in charge
of. What we are in charge of is bringing budgetary policy back into
surplus. That is the point the chap from Moody's made on the radio
here in an interview with the ABC last Friday, I think. What he said
was look all this discussion about the elements of the Budget, what we
look at is the bond selling program. If it is in surplus that is all we want
to know and that means there is going to be far less bonds sold, which
means the price of bonds are going to go up and the yields are going
to come down and that is where we make our money, or we lose our
money.
RU: As far as the average person is concerned, it all sounds a touch
esoteric, I guess. But when we look at the Budget, people are saying 
well you promised a reduction in taxes, the second tier of that now we
are not going to get a reduction in taxes. Instead, you are going to put
them into superannuation. However valuable that superannuation
program is, and you are clearly very enthusiastic about it.
Nonetheless, it is a broken promise is it not?
PM: No. Now look, what we said was this. The principle promise of the
election, I mean the Liberals run around talking about these things.
Most everybody saw the election.' They saw me on election night.
They saw me in the two debates and they saw me at the policy speech.
What was the principle policy the Government was re-elected on? It
was employment and unemployment. That was bringing employment
back to the Australian economy. Our target, we said, we are going to
try and get to 500,000 jobs in three years. We have already had
650,000 jobs in two and a quarter years. In other words we have met
our three year target and more in two and a quarter years. In other
words we got to our target. We actually got to 500,000 jobs in twothirds
of the time. We are now at 650,000. I mean that was the
principal commitment. Not to leave the unemployed behind, put our
arm out, bring them up and now, of course, with Working Nation we
have now seen 100,000 of those people come from the long term
unemployed. I said we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind,
particularly the long term unemployed. We didn't want an underclass.
That is the thing I said on the evening of the election. That is the
principal commitment we made. Now in One Nation, one year earlier,
that was in March 1992 not March 1993 we introduced One Nation
to stimulate the economy, including such things as the Subiaco Oval
which was part of the public infrastructure spending. The one I had the
pleasure of opening yesterday. And the tax cuts which we paid at the
end of 1993 were to stimulate the economy and it worked a treat. The
economy sprang back into life and we have been growing faster than
any other western economy. Now, what I said was there were two tax
cuts, one we have already paid at the end of 1993. We brought one
forward to the end of 1993 and we put one back. The one we put back
we said we would think about it again as fiscal conditions permit and
we will probably pay it in 1998. Well what we are doing, we are paying
it in 1998. But we are paying into superannuation accounts under a
policy that will give the average working person, every working person,
per cent contributions in superannuation. Now this is a
revolutionary change to Australian savings. It is the most
comprehensive savings plan the country has ever had because
superannuation was always for the high paid before we came to office
and it only covered 40 per cent of people. But now it covers 90 per
cent of people. What it will mean is this. When this scheme we
announced the other night is up and running, someone on $ 33,000 a
year, average weekly earnings, will end up with a lump sum at the end
of their working life of $ 470,000 in today's dollars and an ongoing
annuity, an income in retirement, of $ 30,000 a year. So they are on
$ 33,000 a year now and they are on $ 30,000 a year in retirement in 
today's dollars. In other words, there is no drop in living standards, a
very small drop in living standards. Now that is a very great change
and I think if you ask people well, look, would they rather have the
second tax cut as cash or would they rather have something that really
looks after them so that they never have to really worry again about
their standard of living in retirement, I think they will take the latter.
RU: If we can go back to the last election. Fightback, the Liberal Party
policy, there has been described as the longest suicide note made in
history. Wasn't it really a question of the Opposition losing the
election, rather than the Government winning it?
PM: I don't think so. The thing is the Liberal Party these days is without
any structure, or any ideas. I mean you saw Dr Nelson's election on
the weekend. I mean here he is 17 years a member of the Labor
Party. He resigned, apparently, because the Labor Party had
foresaken its socialist principles and next thing the Liberal Party gives
its safest seat to an opportunist. I mean here is the Liberal Party so
moribund, it has so had it that it gives its safest seat in Australia,
Bradfield, to somebody who is essentially in their terms an opportunist.
I mean this is the problem. Before that it was Dr Hewson. He bowled
into Wentworth and then he is off now back in some private career. I
mean what happened at the last election is this. The GST was just a
symptom of the problem. It wasn't the issue alone. It was a symptom.
I think the public looked at the Coalition and they said, well look have
these people got any real ideas for Government? Can they get us out
of the whole and growing again? Are they really dedicated to
employment? Do they believe in social equity? I mean, do they
believe in the culture and values of the country. Do they believe in our
identity? Do they believe in all these things? Do they believe in
access and equity in health and access an equity in education? And,
when Dr Hewson attacked the renters and the school teachers and the
churches and he also bowled up the GST I think people said look,
thank you but no thanks. I think the GST was just, if you like, an
example of the problem. I don't think the election was won or lost in
the GST. It was won on the fact that the Liberal Party in their
judgement wasn't up to it. That meant when we won it was a big
responsibility on us to do the things we said we would do and we have
done as many of them as any Government, more than any
Government, in history. That is, we have got the place growing again,
it was our principal commitment. We had the promise of a generalised
child care rebate, we put that into place. The Home Child Care
Allowance, we put that into place. The Parenting Allowance, we put
that into place. In this Budget now the Maternity Leave, that is going
into place. So what is remarkable about this Budget. You look at my
colleagues Kim Beazley who lives here in the West, the Minister for
Finance, a bloke with enormous quality and experience. Ralph Willis,
the Treasurer, Gareth the Foreign Minister, younger people like the
Attorney-General, Minister for Communications and others. You look 
at the strength of the Cabinet and you look at the sort of workmanlike
way that they have dealt with these problems in the
Expenditure Review Committee and people say well the Government
has been in office 12 years. But what a remarkable Budget for a
Government, all the freshness and the zing and the verve in the world.
Not just a Budget. Working Nation, Creative Nation and the Budget all
in a row, within six or eight months.
RU: Alright, but you run the risk don't you of a Government who has been
in power for 12, 13 years even though you have been turning over the
faces I suppose. But isn't there the risk the public are going to say well
look, you have had enough, it is time for somebody else and maybe
from a democratic point of view, that is not a bad thing.
PM: If that was the argument, it would have to be time for somebody who
has got a contribution to make. Here John Howard got up with the
Budget reply and didn't have one policy word to say. Not one policy
word to say. He has got no policies and he has got no ideas. One of
the things that always tends to annoy me about these debates is that
people compare Howard with me, or the Opposition with us, and you
say what have they done. Here we are, we have remodelled a whole
middle sized OECD economy. We have turned into an international
place. Ten years ago, only three kids in ten were completing
secondary school. This year, it is eight in ten. The throughput of
universities, the TAFE system, all these things have been enormous
and culturally and economically the whole of the economy has
changed. The Liberal Party has been in none of these things. So
whereas I say this. If you look at this Budget and the enormous
changes we have seen come through it and that is to try and deal with
major long term issues like superannuation and all these sorts of
issues to try and deal with them, we have introduced Budgets which
have dealt with these things. What other Government is likely to turn
up a national savings scheme which has 15 per cent of everyone's
income into it. This Government has got the Budget back into surplus,
it has got the economy growing, it has got the highest rate of
employment growth in the western world, we have had the biggest fall
in unemployment in our history in the last twelve months. But we will
turn them out and we will take a party that has got no ideas and no
structure all on the basis that we need a change. I mean I just don't
think they are going to do that.
RU: But people might say that it was your policies that were responsible for
the unemployment, the interest rates and all those sorts of matters that
were coming out. Now you do have to take some responsibility for that
surely?
PM: Yes, the policies we presided over for sure. But let me just say this to
you though. Let's take 1983-95. Yes, we had a rise in unemployment,
back to 10 per cent in 1992, but it got as low as 6 per cent by 1989. 
We had an average 4 1/ 2 per cent growth all the way through the
There are 26 per cent more people employed in Australia today, than
there were in 1983. If you compare New Zealand, which we are often
compared with, they have got now 2 per cent more people employed in
New Zealand than they had in 1983. In Australia there is 26 per cent
more people. Look at what the Liberal's left us with inflation double
digit inflation. That is where the massive interest rates of the 70s and
early 80s came from. Those huge inflation rates sitting under interest
rates, double digit inflation. Who broke the back of Australian
inflation? This Government. Certainly, the recession helped break the
back of it, but basically it was a Wage Accord sitting underneath it
which did it. If people look at it, we have now had 3 1/ 2 years of
growth. See John Howard has been running around with this cynical,
nasty, little opportunist line about five minutes of sunshine. We have
had 3 1/ 2 years of growth now, since the recession and the Treasury is
forecasting another 3 years of growth. Another 3 years into the future,
so we will have around 6 years of growth as far as we can see at this
point. If you go from 1983-1998, that is 15 years, it will only be 18
months where we were not growing strongly. 18 months out of
years. So what I would say to people is look at the record across that
period and look at the fact that the Australian economy has grown in
real terms by about 35 per cent real. That is after you have washed
the inflation out in that period. Another interesting figure, Richard, is
household disposable income. That is the disposable income of
Australian households has risen 40 per cent since 1983. Not 4 or 14
Now these are big achievements.
RU: Talking of big achievements. There is a launch, I think, coming up on
Thursday a justice or an access to justice package what can you tell
us about that? I think Ronald Wilson's part of that, inquiring into
Aboriginal children who have been separated and so on?
PM: It is basically that. You are going to have to wait for the
announcement. But essentially it is about access to justice, how
justice and access to the justice system is central to our sense of
democracy, our sense of ourselves, our sense of justice in general and
we will be looking at some of those issues and announcing policy
changes on some of those issues, which I think will make this a better
and fairer society. One of those things is the thing you mentioned, that
is Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander families and the inquiry we are
going to be having there under Justice Wilson looking at the removal
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their families and
the present policies and practices concerning indigenous children and
families. You see, a lot of these Aboriginal people that die in custody,
a very high proportion of them were removed from their families and
looking at some of those influences.
RU: Now, we have got a few callers that have some questions to ask of
you, Paul, so if I could get you to put those headphones on. 
C: Hi, Paul. In order to maintain our sense of nationhood, surely we
ought not to act like a vassal state and allow an American citizen who
changed his citizenship to get an American TV network to own a press
organisation in Australia and we shouldn't allow a Canadian to control
the other major press organisation. What about forcing them to
relinquish their control because it has a large impact on the cultural life
of the country.
PM: Well, at the time when judgements were made, this is when News
Limited bought the Herald and Weekly Times back in about 1987 or
1988, at that time, a judgement was made was the News Corporation
an Australian company? Well, it is incorporated in Adelaide, it is listed
on the Australian Stock Exchange, it is not incorporated in New York or
Washington or somewhere like that, it is incorporated in Adelaide. The
majority of the stock was held by Australians and although the Chief
Executive Officer, Rupert Murdoch, was by that stage an American
person having accepted American citizenship and relinquished
Australian citizenship, the judgement at the time was that it was an
Australian company and that a transfer of most of its assets from the
Herald and Weekly Times group to News Limited wouldn't in any way
alter, if you like, the questions of sovereignty in the exercise of news
judgement in Australia. I think, to a lesser extent, that has also been
true by some of the foreign ownership we have permitted of, say,
The Sydney Morning Herald and The Melbourne Age, bearing in mind
of course that Australians can in some places, for instance, in Britain
you might remember Rupert Murdoch's big breakthrough was buying
News of the World and News of the World newspaper in the 1970s.
Now, if there had been heavy foreign restrictions on Australians buying
or foreign interest buying British press that wouldn't have happened
and since then, of course, he has bought the Fox Studios in the
United States. He has bought into what is now the Fox Network, he
has put together what is called the Fox Network. So, we try and keep
a premium on our cultural identity and our cultural values, I think it is
just a matter of exercising some judgement and some sense when
these things come along. And they came along basically because the
current owners at the time in the case of Channel 10, the current
owner at the time sold from the business because they were not able
to make it fire. You know the story of Channel 9 of course and
Channel 7 and the same with Warwick Fairfax, who bought his family
interest out of The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age and The
Financial Review but then couldn't make a success of it. It was on the
market and in the hands of the banks. So I take your point but I think
we have just got to measure those things off against our national
interests and try and make it fit and make the money go around, make
it work. 
RU: Okay, thanks for that Robert. Let's now go to Ellen from Thornleigh.
How are you Ellen?
C: Well, thank you, good morning Paul.
PM: Ellen how are you there?
C: I believe I am typical of many pharmacists who are concerned about
the nearly 50 per cent rise in the safety net level for people who have
genuine medical conditions such as asthma, heart problems,
hypertension, arthritis. We are continually having to supply free drugs
such as valium, serapax and panadeine forte to the soft drug addicts.
The people who visit many different doctors for free, under the
Medicare scheme, and once they have got their $ 135.20 limit for
prescriptions, they get free scripts for the rest of the year and they go
from pharmacy to pharmacy and they are just abusing the whole
system and there seems to be no rehabilitation for them. We are
concerned for the patients and we are also concerned for the cost to
the Government and the taxpayer.
PM: Well, these are really legitimate worries and this is part of the issue
about what doctors should be prescribing, when and where. Of
course, if patients end up shopping around, there is only so many
doctors they can shop around. After a while doctors get to know them
and there should be more perhaps judicious use of the scripts for
these things as you say serapax and valium and panadeine forte and
these various drugs. Part of the reason why we have got the safety
net set at $ 600 is that people have got to find their costs up to that
level and after that it becomes free. So that is there to protect the
families that do have a couple of children and run into a bout of
sickness and so they are not put into some sort of financial stress
trying to find pharmaceuticals. Now you will also find other people get
on to that bandwagon and use that opportunity. Part of the problem is,
of course, that drugs are becoming more sophisticated, more effective,
but also vastly more costly and in any list of drugs where they are
provided at concessional rates, I am sure the authorities who make the
list up have always got to keep an eye out on the practical and
effective use of the drugs and what they bring versus the costs. So the
scheme is basically a scheme to limit the cost and put some cost on to
the patients and the pharmaceuticals, but at the same time not put
heavy penalties on families or other acutely sick people. Now there
always will be people who slip through and get their valiums, you are
quite right about that. But it is very hard to know how to deal with
them.
RU: Now we have got time for last one call, let's go out to Lyn at Lawson.
Hello Lyn. 
C: Hello, I will try and make it brief, but I have got two comments, not so
much questions, but comments so I will leave them with you.
Mr Keating, you are taking the credit for the current interest rate drop
will you then also take credit for them rising to 18 per cent a few years
ago when you were Treasurer?
PM: I didn't take the credit, I got the blame for them didn't I and let me just
make this point. Had interest rates risen on Friday, people would have
said " Budget condemned", the Government would take responsibility.
But if they go down, people say well it's not the Government's doing.
You can't win can you.
C: But they were 18 per cent under you.
PM: And they went up to 22 per cent under Mr Howard, so what.
C: Well neither is any good.
PM: But they are now down. They went up to 18 per cent and they dropped
down to 6. They dropped from 18 to 4 1/ 2 per cent.
C: But a lot of people were hurt when they went up to 18.
PM: And they went up because banks were lending money like there was
no tomorrow. That is why you saw the big blowouts in these private
financial corporations and the rest. That was unsustainable for the
country and we are now back to a sustainable low inflationary, low
interest rate future. That is progress.
RU: We have to leave it there, we are running out of time. Thanks very
much for your's today and you wouldn't like to tell us if there is going to
be an election this year, would you?
PM: I see a few people in my Party saying, I like their optimism, we ought to
be going to a poll earlier, rather than later. But the only person
fortunately in the happy position to decide that is me. ( Broadcast
interrupted for news.)
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT LUNCH HOSTED BY THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF
MANAGEMENT, PERTH, MONDAY, 15 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I very much welcome the opportunity to talk to you as most of you are
members of the Institute and to talk about the economy and the growth
prospects we find ourselves with and the, Budget. Because, this is an
important Budget, they are all important but, I think, this is particularly
important given the fact that we have succeeded in engendering quite a lot of
growth back into the Australian economy and the aim of the game is now to
keep it going at a sustainable rate, with low inflation and so that we can reach
our target which we have set for ourselves of five per cent unemployment by
the year 2000.
That means a lot of investment and a lot of investment means a call on
savings. Part of our problem has been, for many years now, that because in
the 1970s the increase in wages and costs, the broken profits of the period
and the big call by the public sector right through the 1970s dislocated
Australian private investment. We ended up for a decade, with a very low
level of investment and so that hole in the capital stock meant that we have
never ever got beyond the period since where we can grow at more than
about four and a half per cent without the demand spilling into imports. We
can get the economy up and running and it is really quite fast for a western
style economy such as Australia to grow at four and half to five per cent. But
after that, we get a spill into imports, and that is because there is not enough
plant and equipment, not enough strength in the capital stock for us to be
able to grow at five and six per cent and yet satisfy the production here in
Australia. So, the aim of the game from here on is to add to that capital stock. Now, we
have got a big boom in investment in the late 1980s, in the second half of the
1980s, but not all of it went into plant and equipment. Quite a lot of it went
into central business district towers, office towers and other things which
have been sub-economic and it is only now that they are starting to fill up and
(! t 
starting to produce a rate of return. In other words, we carried a big call on
our savings for not a commensurate increase in our productive capacity.
Now, this time it is different. You will notice that plant and equipment
investment in the last year was running at around 26 per cent. In the last
Budget we put the forecast in at 14 per cent. All the pundits said ' oh, too
optimistic, Budget built on all this optimism'. It turned out the rate of growth in
plant and equipment was about twice what we estimated and the economy
grew by even more than the Treasury had estimated. So, we are now seeing
a very large investment phase, but this time it is going to be adding materially
to our productive capacity where as the late 1980s cycle didn't so do.
The aim of the game now is to keep it all going and to keep that additional
capacity coming into our capital stock so as to bring unemployment down to
five per cent. This is a particularly important economic and social objective
because Australia has, I think, one of the opportunities, let me say it has
been one of the few countries in the world, where we have a quite fully
employed society and where we are more cohesive as a society, where our
values are as intact as they can be, that is our egalitarian values, and that we
move along as a society together. That the policies of inclusion matter and
that we regard it as a matter of national importance and national policy that
we have as many people getting a right to a job as possible. These were the
tenets we put together in One Nation in 1992, but indeed they have been the
policies we have followed since 1983. That is, there has always been a
premium on growth and on employment.
This is not true of many countries. In western Europe, employment is the
number that falls out the bottom of the system, it is a residual. And, the
growth is also a number that happens to fall out the bottom of the system.
Government's don't target growth. If you look at the West Australian
economy it is growing even more rapidly than the national economy and that
is because the whole of national economic policy is focussed towards growth
and the states that have had the tariff monkey lifted from their back, that is
Western Australia and Queensland are growing even faster than the national
economy. I was in Lower Saxony, Germany, about a month ago, this was where we had
the CeBIT fair and Australia was the guest country at the largest technology,
electronics fair in the world, and the Premier of Lower Saxony, Premier
Schroeder, met me and he was saying, we were having a talk about his
economy. He said ' look, we have got tremendous community spirit in Lower
Saxony. Everybody puts their shoulder to the wheel, it is a community effort.'
He said ' we are facing big problems because the main industry of the State is
Volkswagon at Wolfsburg and because of the continuing productivity of the
motor industry we are getting more output for fewer people. So, we have all
decided to work a four day week, the whole of the State is working a four day
week.' I said to him ' but, why don't they pick up other jobs, I know you
employment growth isn't what ours is, but isn't there enough?' He said ' well,
we have only got, basically, three quarters of one per cent employment 
growth'. Now, in the last year in Australia we have had 4.2 per cent
employment growth. We have had four to five times as much and that is why
we have actually got a chance now. We have seen unemployment come
down from 10.5 per cent to just over 8 per cent last week and we are
forecasting 8 this year, but we want to get to five per cent by the year 2000.
That will mean that this country is stronger, socially it will be much stronger
and, of course, there will be much greater levels of wealth. But you all know
in this room, that employment comes from investment and investment comes
from a set of variable which include profits, return on capital, the level of the
inflation rate, the competitiveness of the exchange rate, it comes from all
these things and it comes from national savings. The central point of last
Tuesday's night Budget was to improve and augment national savings.
When I first started speaking to you I talked about that 1970s problem of a
dislocation of private investment. What happened in the 1970s is the public
sector spending at the Commonwealth level went out from 23 per cent to
about 27 per cent under the Whitlam government and they went from 27 per
cent to 30 per cent under Malcolm Fraser and John Howard. When I became
Treasurer in 1983 Commonwealth Government spending was 30.5 per cent
of GDP and the year I resigned the Treasury it was at 23.5 per cent. It was
down 7 percentage points of GDP which in today's dollars is about $ 30-35
billion a year.
But, that big call in the 1 970s meant that it, essentially, suffocated the
capacity of Australian business to borrow and to invest. Now, you know, that
one of our principal problems now is that we are running a current account
deficit, on average, of around 4.5 per cent of GDP. At the moment it is
running around 5.5 per cent, but it averages around 4.5 per cent in the 1980s
and early 1990s. In the 1960s and 1970s it averaged around 2.5 per cent,
but then we had no debt. We had no debt because every year we had
private capital investment equal to about 2.5 per cent of GDP. In a country
this big there is always something going on whether it is ports, wharfs,
railways, mines or whatever it might be, manufacturing industry, and there is
always a level of private equity investment. That generally equalled our
current account deficit so, we could go on running a current account of about
per cent of GDP, but not build up any debt. What has built the debt up for
Australia is that extra two percentage points of GDP which is $ 10 billion a
year in today's dollars. GDP is about $ 500 billion, 2 per cent of it, is as I said
earlier, around $ 10 billion.
The problem and the challenge for us is to put in a savings change to meet
that two per cent and this is what we did last Tuesday night and in the doing
of it, making higher rates of investment in the future sustainable, higher rates
of growth sustainable and higher rates of employment sustainable. You
remember Ralph Willis saying that we went from a deficit of 2.8 per cent of
GDP to a Budget surplus of $ 700 million. The shift overall is around, if we
look in the next year or two out, the shift is around about four per cent of
GDP. In other words, we are in surplus this year, next year we are in even 
larger surplus, the year after that we are running a surplus of $ 7 billion. So
basically, we have got a change there of about four percentage points of
GDP and I will just do this little bit of arithmetic with you because there are a
lot of numbers in this, but it is quite easy to follow. The savings problem is
two per cent points in size. So, we have got to get a two percentage points
fix into the system. We have got, essentially from the Budget, a four
percentage point change and then the other great change in the Budget was
to build on the reforms we had introduced in earlier years to award or national
superannuation. This, I think, we can genuinely say is the most
comprehensive savings change or plan the country has ever had.
You know that the Government, in 1985-86 under the Accord Mark V, we
introduced there three percentage points of savings by the workforce, of
income put away as savings in superannuation or as we called it ' award
superannuation'. That was moving up towards five per cent when we
introduced the superannuation guarantee charge or the SGC as it is known.
That takes contributions by employers on behalf of employees under the
wage arrangements, up to nine per cent of wages and salaries by the year
2002. But, I think, most of you in this room would know, to get a mature
contribution to superannuation, something that adds a very substantial long
term benefit to retirement incomes, you need to be around about 15 per cent
of a wage and salary.
In the Budget we did two things. We said that we will be supporting the
inclusion and awards of three per cent of employee contributions and we will
pay the second round of the One Nation tax cuts into the same
superannuation accounts. So, in other words, as a result of last Tuesday
night's budgetary change, there will be a further six percentage points of
wages on top of the nine which exists under the Superannuation Guarantee
Charge. Put the two together and you have got fifteen. So, by the year 2002
everyone in the country will be putting 15 per cent of their wages and salaries
away. This is going to produce an enormous shift in savings. When John
Dawkins and I were sworn in as Ministers in 1983 we had $ 40 billion in
superannuation funds. This year we have got $ 186 billion and by the year
2020 the Treasury estimates we will have $ 2000 billion. We will have $ 2
trillion in superannuation funds by 2020.
Our national debt at the moment is $ 160 billion. Already we have a greater
level of savings in superannuation at $ 186 billion, greater now than our
national debt, but that will grow. This will do a number of things about
retirement incomes. Let's take someone on average weekly earnings now on
$ 33,000, at the end of their working lives, they will build in today's dollars a
lump sum of $ 470,000 and they will have an ongoing annuity in retirement of
$ 30,000 a year. So, they are on $ 33,000 a year now, in 1995-96 dollars, they
will have $ 470,000 as a lump which payed out as an annuity ends up at
$ 30,000 a year. Someone on twice average weekly earnings, around
$ 60,000, will end up with a lump of $ 670,000 and an ongoing annuity
payment of $ 52,000 a year. 
So, this is a great change to retirement incomes and to savings. When my
generation, the baby boom generation, is 65 there will be half as many retired
aged people as there is today and 10 years after that or 15 years after that
there will be twice as many retired age people as there is today. The problem
will then be; how does the cohort at work carry this huge group of people, this
aged group in retirement at that point without an erosion of the basic pension
or a massive change to taxation levels? Well, there is only one way start
now to put a scheme together. We started in 1985-86 and what you are
seeing on Tuesday night, in a sense, is the culmination of those changes with
another six percentage points added. This is not simply a great change in
social policy, but it is also a great change in savings.
Let me go back to the calculation, the two percent again. Remember I said
the current account is two percentage points of GDP, larger than we can
afford it to be. We have put a four percentage point change in on the Budget,
but that savings pool from superannuation is going to be worth four
percentage points of GDP by 2020. So, by 2020 we have got an eight
percentage point change in four in the Budget, four on superannuation but
the problem is more immediate than 2020. So, let's say, look at it in the year
2000, which is what we in this room are immediately interested in. Where is
the current account going to go in the year 2000, five years from now. In five
years from now those superannuation changes will be worth two percentage
points of GDP, the Budget will be worth four. But by then, some of that four is
cyclical, some of it is structural. If the cycle changes at any time and the
cyclical part starts to turn down, let's say ' let's put a discount into that and call
it two to three per cent'. Two to three per cent on the Budget and two on
superannuation. That comes to four to five per cent and that is what we did
last Tuesday night. We put a four to five per cent of GDP savings change in
for a two percentage point current account problem.
That is why the Budget is so central to the maintenance of this recovery
because the recovery can only be built on investment and we can't have the
investment without the savings otherwise it will spill over into overseas
savings, into overseas borrowings, into overseas debt.
So, the Budget in that sense, was a great change and one that is designed
to, you remember in the latter part of last year we had three quick interest
rate adjustments and that slowed the economy off from the growth rate of
then 6.5 per cent which was unsustainable back to something around four per
cent which is what we have now. In other words, we don't need this Budget
to restrain domestic demand. What we need this Budget for is for a medium
term change in savings because we have got the slowing from the monetary
adjustments. As a consequence, last year we sold $ 21,000 million worth of
commonwealth bonds. The bond selling program was $ 21 billion. As a result
of the Budget changes, the bond selling program this year will be $ 6 billion.
So, there is a $ 15 billion reduction this year over last year in the bond selling
program. You know you don't have to be an econometrician or a financial
market person to know that if you take $ 15,000 million of demand off the
Australian savings pool, there is going to be a lot less paper around than 
there was therefore if there is less of it, the price of it rises and if the price
goes up with the bond the yield comes down. The yield, of course, is the
interest rate.
So, as a consequence of the Budget, the bond market fell by one percentage
point. From just over 10 to just over nine for 10 year bonds in the last week
or so and that is the cue, I think, that some of the other people the banks
and others have taken in the financial markets. In other words, by getting
the Budget back into surplus quickly and decisively, we have taken an
inordinate pressure off the financial markets which is reflecting itself in that
shift in bond yields. In other words, what the Government is after is
sustainability. We have had three years of growth since the recession. The
Treasury in Statement Two is forecasting sustainable growth for three years,
for three years out. In other words, if we take three years from now we are
talking about 1998, if we look from 1983 to 1998 we will have had growth
right through the period bar for 18 months which was in 1991-92, in the
recession. It is going to be a very long period of growth, but after the
recession, of course, low inflationary sustainable growth and not pushed
along by a bubble of bank lending and indiscriminate lending of the kind we
saw in the later 1980s, now a far more abstemious financial sector with low
inflation, secure profits, a much more flexible labour market with enterprise
bargaining; in short a much more sustainable level of growth into the future.
That is what the Budget was about, but it was not just about that change in
the balance, but as I said, that huge change in savings coming of
superannuation. Now, I have got John Howard running around the country
talking about chicken little, the sky is falling in, we have had five minutes of
sunshine, la de da de da. But, the truth of the matter is we have already had
three and a half years of growth and the Treasury is saying we will have
sustainable growth around these levels through the forecast period and the
forecast period is 1995 to 1998. So, after the recession, we have had three
and a half years of growth and we are heading for six. We had 90,000 job
growth last month. We have had the largest fall in unemployment in the last
year since we have been keeping the records. The Government's principle
commitment in the election was to reduce unemployment. We said we would
aim for a target of 500,000 in three years. Well, in two and a quarter years,
we are already at 650,000. We got to the half a million mark in two thirds of
the time that we thought and not only that, we are now reaching into the long
term unemployed because 100,000 of them have gone back into the labour
market or where in any such period in the 1980s maybe only 10,000 would
have gone back into the labour market because what happens, when the
labour market picks up the school leavers the new entrants to the workforce
go into jobs, those who are longer term unemployed generally get left behind.
But, Working Nation, that statement I introduced on behalf of the Government
last year, the case management and labour market programs is now getting
into the long term unemployed, getting them trained and giving them a job
subsidy and getting them back permanently into the labour market. 
This is going to mean, where in the 1980s with all that growth we got
unemployment down to about 6.5 per cent, but we couldn't get any lower no
matter how hard we pushed with employment, we couldn't get any lower
because we couldn't train the people. Working Nation is actually going into
that body of long term unemployed people and training them and getting them
back out so that means that the five per cent unemployment target becomes a
real possibility for us.
In western world terms, there are very few countries with that prospect facing
them. That is, to be able to say we would be able to keep up higher rates in
investment and higher rates in employment. Because if we need to fill that
capital stock I first mentioned we would need even greater levels of
investment than we have today. It is not just today's investment levels, but
something greater than today's. That is going to call on savings and that is
why we needed the Budget change and the superannuation change together
because if we are to relieve that pressure on the current account, we are not
just simply relieving it in a static scenario. We are relieving it, but as we
relieve it we will then build up greater demands for investment because the
confidence effects will be greater, the needs for employment will be just as
great and so as we get more successful success breeds success and so
we will have even more investment. We have got to be able to pay for that in
savings too. So, we needed a big change, a really big change in Tuesday's
night Budget and that is what we gave you a large change on the Budget
balance and a large change in superannuation.
All of this, I think, means that as we move down towards the year 2000 we are
going to be able to see a further great change to the nature of Australia. This
is the first time in our history where we have been located at the foot of the
fastest growing markets in the world. Normally, for us, traditionally for us,
those markets have been in Europe or North America. They are now here at
our doorstep in the Asia-Pacific and to have that great opportunity we have
got to be stripped down, competitive and be in a position to go and get after
it. But you can't get after it without investment and you can't get after it
without investment if you are relying on the rest of the world for savings.
Can I just say there is a lot of gloomy stuff around about savings and you can
see how the Government is taking it seriously, but we are taking it
constructively. We are not out there with slogans and with incantations. We
are in there with some serious policy. But, I think, you need to remember we
have got $ 160 billion of off-shore debt, but in the period since the
Government removed exchange controls in 1983; you see before 1983 you
couldn't invest off-shore, the Reserve Bank wouldn't give you the tick under
the managed system to invest off shore. But in the period since 1983 to now,
we have now got $ 135 billion of off shore assets. So, we have got $ 160
billion of net debt, but we have got $ 135 billion of off shore assets. So, you
look at all these big companies like BHP and Boral and Brambles and the
TNTs of this world, they have all invested in North America, in Europe, in the
Asia-Pacific, and as a consequence we have now got a very large stock of
investments off-shore. 
So, all these things have taken in the minds of the financial markets when the
assess Australia. They don't just look at our current account debt, they look
at our assets off shore, but they more importantly, look and see what we are
doing in the longer run about savings. They say ' is this a serious country?
Yes, it has broken the back of inflation, but it got itself into a whole in the
1970s. Has it got itself out of it? Has it done the things to add to savings and
keep its competitiveness up.' Now, I think, after Tuesday night the answer to
that is a resounding yes. But, it wasn't just Tuesday night. It was also the
1993 Budget which John ( Dawkins) presided over as Treasurer and took a lot
of stick for in getting fiscal policy back into shape at that time and it was the
Budget's in the 1980s where we pulled, as I said, outlays down from 30.5 per
cent of GDP to 23.5 per cent.
Tuesday night was a big change in Australian public policy for the
maintenance of a long-run, low inflationary, high investment recovery. So,
when Richard Court tells you it is happening because the buses are running
on time or it is happening because he has got some project starting, all that
helps but it is principally happening because of the national government's
policies. It is principally happening because of the change in
competitiveness coming off the exchange rate, wages and productivity and
we are just signing up another Accord with the ACTU which will maintain
moderate wages growth into the future and protect that inflation rate. It is
worth remembering that Australia, today, is 40 per cent more competitive than
1983. Not 4 per cent or 14 per cent, 40 per cent. That is why Western
Australia is growing so strongly. It is coming off the big wage adjustments of
the 1980s which turn that big nominal depreciation of the exchange rate into
a real depreciation. I like the States we are doing quite a lot with the States
now at COAG, you can see it with the Hilmer changes I like the States to do
well. Victoria is starting to go ok and there has been some sensible things
done in fiscal policy there.
But a Lloyd Webber show and Grand Prix is not going to remake the Victorian
economy any more than making the buses run on time or ticking off real
estate developments is going to change things here. What is going to
change things is the big pulse of national public policy. The only thing that
ever changes anything and when you look at the Government, people say
' well, you have been in office 12 years, don't you think it is time for a
change?' I say ' what other government would be putting a savings change of
this quality and this dimension in, having this conversation with the workforce
to get people to put 15 per cent of their income away as savings, what other
government has done that? What other government has been able to break
the back of inflation and keep it there by the introduction of an enterprise
bargaining system in the labour market?' I have mentioned John a couple of
times, the last thing I did was on Friday was open another university at
Sunbury in Victoria. In 1983 only three children in ten completed secondary
school. This year it is eight in ten and we have added, as that eight in ten,
that massive through put has spilled out then into tertiary education, we have 
added about 65 per cent of places to universities in a big revolutionary
change in the 1980s which John ( Dawkins) presided over.
As a consequence, we have established about 18 universities of the size of
the principal state universities to the system and we are now building, in One
Nation, the TAFE system through the Australian National Training Authority
so that vocational education sits up beside tertiary education to provide the
horse power for the product innovation Australia is going to need to
participate in this world economy and to participate to the full.
I have got John Howard chasing around yak, yak, yak, yak on radio stations
around the country. I have got Costello like a crow on a fence carking at
every, picking the eyes out of every bit of good news that comes along and
Howard saying ' well, you know, test my credibility with the Prime Minster's.' I
say ' but hang on, what are you talking about? What have you ever done?'
Does anyone know of one thing that John Howard did as Treasurer that
mattered, seriously to this economy except other than increasing the levels of
outlays to GDP? I mean, he is now trying to remake himself by denying all
the policies he was associated with in the 1980s when he was Opposition
leader. I said ' well, hang on, I have been around during this period with a
Cabinet that has international ised the Australian economy, which has
changed its competitiveness by 40 per cent, which has revolutionised the
product markets, which as knocked the tariff wall over, which has totally
changed the face of Australian education, which is now changing the culture
of Australian management. We have had 50 per cent, we have nearly
doubled exports. Exports were at 13 per cent of GDP, they are now at 22 per
cent. That is what we have been doing and we have had 26 per cent
employment growth since 1983.' When you talk about credibility, you are
talking about someone who has got another set of things on the other side of
the ledger to compare himself with. But there is this side of the ledger and
then there is that side of the ledger. There is nothing else other than a few
empty incantations. Howard has only had three policies.
One is throwing tax benefits up to top end families. The other is kicking the
life out of low wage earners below about $ 24,000 a year. I mean, what a
great objective to have in public life. Say ' well, I want to get after those
characters on $ 23,000 a year and shake the living hell out of them.' And, the
third thing is to put in a GST. They are his three policies. They have never
been any different. The same three. He had a chance on Budget night to get
up, we are within a year of an election, he had the Budget reply to get up and
say ' hang on, there is the Government, it has put down this big change in
savings, big change in the Budget balance, they have introduced Working
Nation, Creative Nation et cetera, this is what I think should the be shape and
nature of Australia.' Nothing, just a bucket of abuse, a bucket of rhetoric and
in the end nothing else.
So, I don't believe the Australian people looking at this recovery and its
quality, not just the recovery, but the low inflation high productivity nature that
it has, and the linkages this government has made in Asia with APEC or our 
role in the GATT, are going to walk away and say ' well, here we are with what
has been the fastest growing western world economy with low inflation, we
will turn our back on that for John Howard, Tim Fischer, Peter Costello and
Alexander Downer that sparkling front bench of theirs that sparkling little
front bench of theirs. And now, of course, we have got Dr Nelson who has
been in the Labor party for 17 years, that is his claim to fame. The Liberal
party these days is like a business club. You join at the door. They say ' oh,
you want a safe seat in Parliament, ohh come in, come in. You want to be a
member of parliament in one of our best constituencies, just step this way.':
opportunism and brigandry, the stock and trade of a party without any guts
and without any substance.
The message I want to give to you is this that this is a very large savings
change coming from a government which has fundamentally altered the
nature of Australia to an externally orientated competitive trading economy,
but where when we let our guard down in the 1970s and let our capital stock
drop and at the same time with double digit inflation, punctured a whole in the
propensity of Australians to save, we have tried to repair the problem by the
public sector coming back strongly into surplus and making up for those
paucity in private savings by a set of savings arrangements through
superannuation which will guarantee us a lift in savings when we really need
it.
That is why, I think, the Budget was well received and why I hope you think
that it is a good document and one that will sustain the recovery into the
future. Thank you.
ends 
QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION
Q: Prime Minister, in light of the recent Karpin Report ( Enterprising
Nation), can you comment on how you rate Australian managers now?
PM: The old tariff barriers, the tariff walls produced a lot of easy profits and
when we had a less discerning securities market and stock exchange,
boards of directors could get away with over valued assets or under
valued assets and, essentially, modest profit performances. There
was not a lot of pressure for distribution of dividends, but most of the
manufacturing sector was protected by the tariff walls, its profits came
from the tariff walls. This produced a lot of sloth in the structure of
management in Australia and this has changed, of course, in the last
years or so with the tariff barriers coming down, with development
for the first time, really, of a sector of internationally traded services
which we have, and until we removed exchange controls, ever had and
that development has meant that we have developed whole new
sectors in the financial services, in education services, tourism, et
cetera which did not exist and they are internationally traded services,
so you have to be internationally competitive to be in it. The mining
industry had international competitive pressures on it because it had to
sell into an international market place against other countries, but most
of the manufacturing, of course, was protected by tariffs.
Like everything else, competition is a great thing and competition
works and much of what the government has done over 15 years, over
12 years is to introduce competition by way of imports with lower
tariffs, by way of competition generally in Australia, by now getting the
State and Commonwealth sector utilities out there and competing,
introducing competition into things like airlines and
telecommunications and what have you and by and large the
opportunities to success particularly in the turnaround of our
competitiveness and also the pressure which has come from the
recession has produced a lot of productivity changes and a great sea
change, I think, in management.
I think David Karpin was talking about not simply an improvement in
management, the capacity to manage, but also in genuine
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship got a bad name in the 1980s
when we had the world awash with money and people borrowing it,
buying up assets for, largely, non-productive purposes. That is not
what we have always thought that an entrepreneur was about. We
thought an entrepreneur was about building industries and building
businesses and seeing opportunities in market niches and exploiting
them. I think we are developing a class of managers and
entrepreneurs now as we are going about. I think, any commentary I
want to make is we haven't got enough of them and we need more
such people and, I think, the fact that the country is now so open and 
so near particularly South-east Asia that we are seeing South-east
Asian entrepreneurs coming to Australia and our entrepreneurs going
there and this flux that this is setting up is producing a more
entrepreneurial spirit in Australia because I certainly believe we need
it. You will always need the people to make the business decisions to
make the world go round and we have tried to give business an
environment in which to do that. High profits, a competitive exchange
rate, a competitive country in all, a competitive tax system, all of these
things are important as back drops to that sort of essential
entrepreneurial activity.
So, I think, David Karpin's point is yes, it has improved a lot, but of
course, we all know it had to, but we have still got quite a way to go
and I think I endorse that too.
Q: Prime Minister, last week I saw Cheryl Kernot's comment that of the
billion worth of asset sales that were projected for this year only
million had in fact been achieved. Is that in fact correct and how
confident are you that the $ 5.5 billion projected for next year will in fact
also be achieved?
PM: I am fairly confident because we have floated some of these larger
assets off in the past. We sold a quarter of the Commonwealth Bank
in 1991, I think it was, then we sold subsequently another quarter of it
and that is by far and away the biggest of the sales and now, of
course, it is a company listed on the stock exchange and it is priced
every day and part of the arrangements that we are now making with
the Commonwealth Bank Board is that the Board's considering
purchasing some of the shares back so that it makes the digesting of
the sale even easier to the market. So, I think, that is something that is
well within our grasp. Qantas was to be in this year, we have been
improving Qantas's underlying profitability and picking the right
moment to sell it. It is not just a matter of saying ' well, we had it in for
last year'. It is a matter of whether we sell an asset, but we pick the
right moment in the market to actually sell it and, I think, we are better
off selling it this year than last and that was a judgement we made
about the middle of last year and at the same time its underlying
profitability is improving. So, I don't think there is a problem there.
They are the main ones, and of course, next year we will have some of
the airports.
So, we have had, I think, a reasonably successful period with asset
sales. If we don't sell them often it is because we take a decision to
delay them for market reasons not because we can't sell them or in
same way we have misjudged the quantities or amounts. By and
large, they are fairly conservative estimates. But, can I just say that
next year, the Budget is in surplus without the asset sales anyway.
The quality of this change here is such that free of asset sales, the
Budget will be in surplus anyway. But, as a person from Moody's 
made the point on the radio last week, it doesn't matter whether the
asset sales are in or not. He said all we look for is the bottom line.
And, the reason they look to the surplus and not try to disaggregate it
is for the reason I said earlier, $ 21 billion worth of bonds we sold last
year, this year we will be selling $ 6 billion. It doesn't matter what the
source of it is, we are going to be selling $ 6 billion not $ 21 billion and
therefore the pressure off interest rates only is so much more obvious.
I think, that is what the financial markets will be looking for. The main
thing for us is that we have got the Budget comfortably back into
surplus and we reckon next year we will be running a surplus of about
$ 4.1 billion and the following year we will be running a surplus of
around $ 7 billion.
Q: Mr Keating, let's suppose Treasury gets it wrong in respect of forecast
on growth and the numbers aren't quite so big as they are forecasted
and let's say the weapon of superannuation doesn't yield the
difference of two per cent that is needed for the savings, how does
your Government plan to address next year, subject to you being in
power, of course, the balancing of the Budget once the national assets
have been sold off?
PM: I thought I answered that in the previous question. That is, next year
without the assets we will still be in surplus, but we are in surplus on
rates of growth which are far less than the ones we have had at the
moment. You see, in the year to September, when the September
quarter national accounts came out for the year to September, the
economy was growing at 6.5 per cent. We had 8.5 per cent for gross
national expenditure and 6.5 per cent for GDP. Because spending
was greater than product, it was spilling into imports and we know that
we know that we can't sustain a rate of growth around 6 1/ 2 per cent of
GDP. Well in this year we are forecasting 3 3/ 4 per cent. That is a
long way from 6 1/ 2 per cent, you see. So we have already got a very
heavy change in there. We have portended, forecasted, quite a heavy
reduction in activity as a consequence of those monetary adjustments
late last year. So, by and large, these are, at their best, only forecasts
and forecasts can be wrong. But, by and large, these ones now in a
growth phase, there is less risk to them in a growth phase and as well
as that they are quite conservative. So I don't really see that we run
any great risk of those numbers not being achieved.
At any rate, the superannuation changes are already in place. I mean
on 1 July this year, the metre ticks over to 6 per cent. So the large
companies will be paying 6 per cent in, another 1 per cent in on super
and the smaller companies then turn over at 5 per cent. From the year
1 July 1997-98, we start the 1 percentage point change on employee
contributions from superannuation and in 1998/ 99 we'll be putting in
the first 1 per cent from the tax cuts away. So you know there is going
to be a fairly big kick along to savings in all of this, even if to the
decimal point the Treasury estimates were not to be achieved because 
what has happened to us in this last year is we have hugely
succeeded them.
I mean in last year's Budget debate they were saying oh, oh, oh, the
Government's got this very upbeat assessment of 14 per cent for
investment. Well as I said to you earlier, we did 26 per cent this year
and we have come out of the year greater than our growth forecasts.
So, by and large, I think we have taken the conservative side of the
estimates.
Q: Mr Keating a lot is said of us, or Australia, being part of Asia Pacific
and competing with Asia Pacific. But it seems to me that the company
tax rate is going from 33 to 36 per cent, while the company tax rates in
our competing countries in South East Asia are actually decreasing.
Could I have your comments on that please?
PM: Well, I mean, I think Singapore is around 33 per cent, where we were
last year until we put this change through. I mean that is the sort of
general level of rates in this part of the world. But most of these
countries are not running an OECD style economy, you know, with a
general quality of services we have in a continent this large.
You see one thing worth bearing in mind here is that we are now the
second lowest taxed country in the western world. We are a decimal
point higher than the United States, who are the lowest, and we are
also the second lowest spending country of the 27 member states of
the OECD. We are the second lowest by a decimal point, again,
above the United States. So we are delivering a lot of high quality
services in health, education, roads, transport for a fairly small public
sector. But a number of things have changed in the revenue equation for us.
It was for good policy reasons that we wore away the tariff wall.
But that loss of customs duty is this year costing us $ 5-6 billion and
next year will cost a full $ 6 billion and it will have an ongoing cost of
$ 6-7 billion a year, every year, because we are just not getting the duty
because the barrier doesn't exist anymore.
The company tax change from 39 per cent to 33 per cent, the two
investment allowances and the accelerated depreciation package
which I had in that statement Investing in the Nation which we
published in February 1993 is now costing the Budget $ 3 billion a
year. So if we are losing $ 6 billion a year on tariffs and $ 3 billion on
companies, that is $ 9 billion, and Bass Strait is now running down
quite dramatically, quite sharply, at those very large, formerly efficient,
performing reservoirs in the Gippsland Basin are now into a secondary
recovery. So we are losing about a billion a year, over the last five
years, out of that. So you can say with just those changes alone, we 
are losing $ 10 billion a year or 2 per cent of GDP. Now it has got to
come from somewhere.
So what we decided to do was to put the company tax rate to
36 per cent, which is still well and truly competitive within the OECD.
In fact, it is on the bottom of the OECD, sort of, band of rates and still
reasonably competitive with the countries we trade with in Asia.
The other thing that I think is worth bearing in mind, is that Australia is
one of the few countries in the world which provides for dividend
imputation. We actually let private companies distribute and we give
them an imputed credit for the company tax paid. This is also now
delivering a benefit to shareholders of the order of $ 3-4 billion.
So, at the last election those great lions of business in the Liberal
Party wanted to stick the company rate up from 39 per cent to 42 per
cent. We have reduced it from 39 per cent to 33 per cent. So in the
last year they would have had a 42 per cent company rate, we had a
33 per cent company rate and we are moving it to 36 per cent. So, in
other words, we are getting from companies $ 300 million this year and
$ 1500 million next year.
In the climate of very high profits, the profit share in GDP, the
proportion of national income going to profits this year, has no historic
precedence. So if the companies can't pay another 3 percentage
points on the company rate, who can? I mean the people on wages
under $ 30,000. I mean who is it? And so that is why we have thought
it was the right thing to do.
Q: ( inaudible).
PM: Well APEC has a certain congruity to it. It is the countries who have
trading and strategic interests together and it is in the Pacific rim, it is
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation. It covers the two largest
economies the United States and Japan who have, of course, a huge
trade problem between them. It covers the largest emerging economy,
China, and it covers some of the fairly developed economies, like
Korea and, of course, the South East Asian, or ASEAN, economies.
Now from Australia's point of view, we trade with Japan. They are our
largest trading partner. Korea is our second largest trading partner.
We have a fairly big trade with the United States. We have strategic
relationships with the United States. The United States has strategic
relations with China, with Korea. So there is a congruity about APEC.
And I think the risk always with APEC is that it gets extended on a sort
of good-neighbourly basis, so well why not let the old Soviet far east
in. You know, the Russian far east, or India, or Peru. Well I think we
run the risk then that it is neither one thing nor another. It is not an
Asia Pacific body and these are countries that don't have the 
preponderance of their trade with the Asia Pacific. So I think it would
be wise for APEC to be fairly cautious about its membership into the
future for that reason.
Can I just say on the point about this other proposal, the East Asia
Caucus proposal. I mean I think our view has been that ASEAN is an
obvious sub-group of APEC and we are now having discussions with
the leaders of ASEAN about Australia, at some point, having a role
with AFTA, the ASEAN Free Trade Area, and in that way you would
have NAFTA being a sub-group of APEC, that is the North American
Free Trade Agreement. You would have Australia/ New Zealand CER
being a sub-group of APEC. You may have, potentially,
Australia-AFTA being a sub-group of APEC and then you would have
the other bloc economies, China, Korea, Japan.
So we think that sort of structure, basically, covers off the trade and
strategic interests in the area and I think, by and large, that has been
the view of most of the member states of APEC.
Q: ( inaudible).
PM: The question was for those who couldn't hear, it was about tax treaties
with Asian neighbours to avoid convoluted tax arrangements. Well,
you know, Australia we did have a foreign tax credit system. But in
such a system everyone has to account the rates of tax let's say
they are an international company. They have got companies in
Europe, companies in North America, businesses in Asia. You have
got to take the tax rates that apply in all these, aggregate it, bring it
back, we give you a credit for it and then you pay up to the corporate
rate or not.
When we reduced the company rate to 39 per cent, it was so close to
the average of the OECD countries some at 38 per cent, some at
36 per cent we thought we would remove this huge burden on
business of keeping this constant accounting going for
1 or 2 percentage points of difference. So we developed what we call
a white list of countries. If you invest in the countries which are on the
white list, you can bring your dividends home, no foreign tax credit
system, simple repatriation. If you are not on the white list, you are on
the other list, and the other list of countries which includes tax havens.
But in some countries which have very concessional corporate tax
rates and they have them for development reasons, we have a concept
called tax sparing and in our double tax agreements, we recognise tax
sparing. For instance we recognise tax sparing with Malaysia, we
recognise it with Indonesia.
In other words, if somebody wants to invest in those countries and take
the benefits of their concessional rates for a particular period of time, 
17
then we will give them a tax sparing credit. But if they want to invest in
Hong Kong and it is just a name on the wall of an accountant's door,
we have an active and passive income test.
So if you're Pioneer Concrete and you have been in Hong Kong
making concrete for 36 years, you pass the active income test. But if
you're pushing income through Hong Kong and you are just a plate on
a Hong Kong accountant's door, well then you don't pass the active
income test and therefore we tax you on an accruals basis when you
come home. Now what can be fairer than that?
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 44/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND
THE EUROPEAN UNION
Senator McMullan, who is leading the Australian delegation to the
Australian/ European Commission ( EC) Ministerial Consultations in Brussels will today
raise with EC Vice President Sir Leon Brittan, the development of a formal framework
for future relations between Australia and the European Union.
Last month, I wrote to EC President Santer to propose that Australia and the
European Union develop such an agreement in order to strengthen the already healthy
ties between us.
This follows on from fruitful discussions that I held in Brussels in June last year with
the then EC President Delors and some of his commissioners. An agreement would
help stimulate closer cooperation on trade and investment issues, and closer dialogue
on the many common economic and social policy issues that EU countries and
Australia face.
The European Union is a very important partner for Australia and a major source of
foreign investment. Two members the United Kingdom and Germany are among
our top ten trading partners. During my visit to Germany and the Netherlands in
March as to the United Kingdom and France last year I impressed on their leaders
the opportunities that restructuring and growth in the Australian economy offered
European companies, and Australia's value as an investor in Europe and supplier of an
increasingly diverse range of exports. This was underlined by the success of Australia's
participation in CeBIT, the world's largest information technology fair, at Hannover
earlier this year.
Apart from the prospects for expanding bilateral economic links, I emphasised that, as
a confident, competitive and technologically advanced economy closely integrated with
the Asia-Pacific region, Australia was ideal as a base for European business operating
in the region.
The Government's proposal of an agreement reflects our recognition of the important
interests Australia has in Europe. An agreement will help us build new and dynamic
relations with the European Union and its member States into the next century.
CANBERRA May 1995 



(-I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, INTER-CONTINENTAL HOTEL, ADELAIDE, 16 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: As you know, I am in Adelaide to talk about the Budget and the value
of the changes it brings to the economy and also to make a couple of
important announcements for Australia. One is the building of the
road, the Mount Barker road, and the other is the extension of
Adelaide airport. Now, you know that the Mount Barker road has been
a real problem for people travelling in this state, particularly travelling
to Victoria. It is a problem, of course, for heavy vehicles, it is a
problem for safety and the Commonwealth under its capital programs,
that is the National Highway funding program, in the Budget we
extended it by $ 835 million a year for three years or $ 2.5 billion. That
is what gives us the capacity to do this and we will build a $ 130 million
road through the hills with a tunnel about half a kilometre long, a six
lane dual carriageway highway back out to, I think is it around the
periphery of the city there. This will come just as in two weeks time we
will be launching the One Nation train. This is in the One Nation
project where we built the standard gauge railway across from
Melbourne to Adelaide, so there will be a time soon where you will be
able to travel from Brisbane to Perth via Melbourne and Adelaide on a
single standard gauge. That will be important for the transport corridor
of South Australia coming through into Victoria.
So, you will have these two things. A better road corridor between
South Australia and Victoria and the rest of the country and for the first
time ever an historic change to the rail system where that transport
corridor will be improved in rail as well as road.
The other thing that I am announcing today is that, you know that I
have had quite long and detailed discussions with Mike Rann about
the extension of Adelaide airport and you will recall the motion he
sponsored at the Labor Party Conference. The Government is giving
expression to that commitment at the Conference today, by
announcing that we will begin the site preparation, that is the
engineering design work, and the environmental assessments to begin 
the extension of Adelaide airport. In other words, we will build the
extension of Adelaide airport before the Government sells the airport
because we think it is important to get it down and this too will join the
road and rail corridor as an important improvement to the transport
access to South Australia by air, both domestically and internationally.
So, these are very big changes which, in a sense, could only be done
by the National Government and, I think, they will be important for
South Australia in terms of air carriage, air transport, linkages into Asia
and domestically and that important national linkage by road and by
rail back to South Australia and to the rest of the country.
Can I say, this comes as part of the Budget and the Budget is good for
Australia in many respects, but it is particularly good for South
Australia.
J: Mr Keating, you mentioned that you would like to start these projects
( inaudible)...
PM: The Mount Barker road, they will start buying land immediately for that.
We will probably turn the first sod sometime next year and about two
and a half years after that, it should be completed. But, it is going to
be a six lane dual carriageway highway and those six lanes will run
through a half mile tunnel, through the hills. So, it will be quite a
dramatic change.
J: Mr Keating, you said that these are big changes for South Australia.
and in fact changes which South Australians have been asking for for
many years, why have you decided to announce it at this particular
time?
PM: Well, they have come up, the One Nation change comes up from 1992
with the standard gauge. The National Highway program is something
that has come up in the development of the extension of that program.
We have these national projects be they in Queensland or New South
Wales or South Australia set at particular times. In the past we used
to provide this money to the States which was then fragmented and, I
think, under that road program South Australia used to receive
something like $ 50 million. Well, you can't do this with $ 50 million. It
needs a much bigger amount of money, so it needs a national program
and it has come up in this cycle now. But, the same with the airport,
you know that we discussed this at our national conference. I have
had a number of discussions with Mike Rann about it, I have had some
discussions with the Premier about it. I had a long discussion today
with Mike Rann about both projects and again we think this is the time,
given the interest in Asia in South Australia, these potential linkages
between South Australia and the rest of the country in Asia, now is the
time. So, they have come up and I won't say in a routine way, but they
have come up in a way which certainly suits South Australia.
J: election promises ( inaudible) 
PM: Yes, but only a silly person would say that because they have been in
the pipe for months and in the case of the train a couple of years. So,
let's not trivialise things. You get this argument sometimes in South
Australia ' well, we don't have enough done for us' and when something
happens you say ' oh, it is only a gift because of an election'. I mean,
look, I spent $ 600 million here, Commonwealth money, trying to relieve
the State Bank problem on the people of South Australia and now we
are doing these major projects that have got nothing to do what so
ever with elections which are not in offer anyway.
J: Prime Minister, what have you done for students considering that two
months ago you said to me at GleneIg ' go and get a job'. I would like
you to justify if you are going to cut $ 1.2 billion from Working Nation,
you have also
PM: Do you want a question or give a speech?
J: I want to ask you a question. Mr Keating, you never once addressed
the issue of post graduate spending to students on the cap
PM: Ok, the complaint was against HECS and undergraduate fees and I
made it very clear.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: It was against full fees and I said very clearly at the time, the Labor
party would not support fees and we haven't supported fees in the
Budget. All the huffing and puffing turned to nothing because in the
Budget there were no fees.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: Hang on, excuse me, you have asked a question and I will answer it.
The other thing is with HECS we have got the most democratic and
useful scheme where we ask students now to subscribe 23 per cent
only of the cost of a course. We recover it from them only when they
start to earn at average weekly earnings and every dollar, every cent,
goes back into university places. The Commonwealth spent $ 3 billion
on extra university places for Australian students in the last five years,
$ 1500 million of that has come from the returns from HECS. So, there
is about 100,000 students out there now who wouldn't have a
university place without HECS. Now, the Government does not
support full fees and I have made that clear and the Budget, of course,
makes it clear. As far as post graduate fees are concerned, we are
keeping an eye on post graduate fees. But again, this is a matter
which goes to the autonomous administration of universities and there
is now much greater autonomy in university administration than in the
past. So, the only party in this country that wants to impose full fees
on undergraduates is the Liberal party. At the last election the Liberal 
party was running around saying it is full fees and if your parents are
strong enough, financially, to be able to cover full fees that's fine. If
not, well then, of course, a person with a lot of educational attainments
and capacity just wouldn't be in that position.
J: Prime Minister, speaking about the Liberal party, what is your reaction
to Senator Alston's claims in the question of Conrad Black?
PM: That is a complete furPhy and why are they saying it today? They are
saying it today because Mr Connolly has spat the dummy. He is very
unhappy about having been dropped for an opportunist, he is now
saying that Senator Watson, the other person interested in
superannuation, is under threat from Mr Gray, the former Premier Gray
and Dr Shephard were both supporters of the Joh for Canberra
campaign. John Howard believes they cost him the 1987 election. So
there is a great schism at the moment inside the Liberal party about
the fact that Mr Filing in Western Australia had been removed, Mr
Rocher, now Mr Connolly, Mr Watson is under threat and the day's
smoke screen is some conversation I'm supposed to have had with
John Fairfax and Sons. The only party that offered Mr Black 50 per
cent ownership of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age is the
Liberal party. John Hewson offered it to him about two years ago. I
have never discussed any such thing with him.
J: The Opposition has ( inaudible)
PM: Who cares whether ( inaudible)
J: Richard Alston has three different sources...
PM: Oh God! they are as silly as a piece of string the three of them. You
couldn't trust them out of your sight. Poor old Howard, his nerves are
going. The Budget has cracked him. He is in a terrible state, he is
following me around radio stations, he must sit in his office dialling
them up as I leave them.
J: Have you been defamed by Senator Alston?
PM: I don't think he has defamed me, he just made another unsubstantiated
allegation.
J: Prime Minister, there has also been a group of pregnant mums
downstairs, stay at home mums who say they have been
disadvantaged by the budget.
PM: No, that is not true. We pay the home child care allowance to women
at home, but we pay support for child care for expenses incurred. In
other words if you have a child or two children in child care we will
refund you about, an upper limit of $ 60 a week. But, you have got to
incur the expense, do you understand. Whereas we pay the home 
child care allowance without any expense. We pay that as a right to
women at home therefore that this idea that we are paying twice as
much to women with children in child care as we pay to women at
home is just not true because the payment to the women at home is
not in satisfaction of any expense. The other payment is the payment
in satisfaction of the expense. So, if you have one child in child care
you get $ 30 support from the Commonwealth, but you have got to have
the expense. But, if you are at home with children, you get the
regardless of the expense.
J: inaudible
PM: But, it is not just pregnant mothers. It is mothers who have a
particularly ideological view of the world and we are the only party
supporting through the home child care allowance and the parenting
allowance direct payments to women and they are getting those
payments, but so too are women who have the expense of child care.
J: Mr Keating, did you make that call complaining about
PM: No, I said the answer to that is no.
J: But did you complain?
PM: Look, the inventions that the Liberal party make up are just
unbelievable. Go and ask them what Mr Connolly has got to think
about Mr Nelson. I made the point yesterday, the Liberal party is like a
club, you join at the door, if you want a safe seat they just let you in.
And Mr Nelson's great claim to fame, Dr Nelson, was that he was in
the Labor party for 17 years and there was that letter in today's press
which I thought was quite interesting that came from John Valder who
was a former President of the Liberal party saying, It is not every
day the Liberal party preselection winner has proclaimed, by loudhailer,
no less, that he has never voted Liberal in his life only to turn
around and say that was just a convenient lie at the time. Help! One
thing I thought Liberal party MPs still had was a bit of personal
integrity. David Connolly may not have known when it was his time to
go, but this is almost enough to make an old Liberal party president
vote Labor'. Signed John Valder. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JEREMY CORDEAUX, RADIO 5DN, 16 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
JC: Good morning sir.
PM: Good morning, I am very pleased to be here.
JC: Are you well?
PM: I am as well as I can be I think, Jeremy.
JC: It would seem to me that you are in election mode. You have just
suggested to us that we are going to get our Mt Barker road completed
and the airport extended. Can you give us a time at which this will be
commenced?
PM: We will be starting on the Mt Barker road under the Commonwealth's
national road program, the National Highway Program, and that will
virtually begin this year. We will start, now, the feasibility studies for
the airport. That is, extending the airport and doing the feasibility
studies, the environmental assessments, and getting the constructions
begun and completed.
JC: Now they are nice little goodies for us. It tells us that you have come
to town with some sweeteners which a politician doesn't do unless he
wants something.
PM: Can I say that the Mt Barker road goes through a heap of Liberal
electorates, so there is no value for us, the Labor Party, in that other
than the people of the State and, as you know, this is a thing that
needed doing and it is an eight kilometre divided freeway, including a
six lane tunnel, so I think that will be good. The other thing I should
mention to you is that in two weeks time when I am having the
pleasure of launching the One Nation train remember in the One
Nation policy statement we said we would build a standard gauge
railway from Adelaide to Melbourne so that will be launched in two 
2
weeks. So you can now carry freight or passengers from Brisbane to
Perth via Melbourne and Adelaide for the first time in our history. So
there is that, plus the airport. So all these things are about the further
integration of South Australia.
JC: Well, we thank you. These are nice goodies. Now you say that this is
as good as it gets. Now as a politician, if this is as good at its gets this
will be a good time for an election surely.
PM: Well the business environment has been very good. We have in the
last year just on 5 per cent growth and 2 per cent inflation.
JC: You see, it hasn't been that good for us here.
PM: True and there is a question in that, isn't there. I mean why is
Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia
growing?
JC: Well we have a lot of debt and we have had a bit of trouble, as you
well know?
PM: You have had trouble that is true, but I don't think the debt is a
problem. I think that South Australia has got to identify its strengths
and go and seek them. Being at the foot of Asia, as we are, we are
now closer to the fastest growing markets in the world, which was
never the case they were always in Europe or North America. We
are really now for the first time in our history and I think that South
Australia, I mean, this sort of developed economy, you realise that the
South Australian economy is about the size of the economy of
Malaysia, roughly, so if Malaysia is a tiger, then so can South Australia
and I have just got to get that message through Dean Brown maybe
he has got to start roaring a bit and doing something.
JC: Accordingly to this poll this morning, this Newspoll, more people
believe the Federal Budget will leave them worse off, rather than better
off. Does that surprise you? I mean, that perception?
PM: Well polls are a funny thing. The main thing that I think people would
understand is that the main aim of the Budget were two things take
the pressure off interest rates and fill the savings pot-hole out there in
the 90s and that is basically what we have done through taking the
Budget back into surplus and this big change to superannuation.
JC: What about all these economists who see it, and I think there were
only three dissenting voices out of 130, that they believe that interest
rates haven't peaked. What is your opinion of that? Do you think they
have peaked? 
3
PM: Well let me demonstrate this point to you, Jeremy. Last year we sold,
our bond selling program, the Commonwealth Bond program was
$ 21 billion $ 21,000,000,000 as a result of the Budget changing, this
year it will be $ 6,000,000,000. In other words, there is a reduction in
the Commonwealth Bond selling program of $ 15,000,000,000. That is
just an unbelievable figure and that is why the long bond yields the
ten year bond interest rates fell by 1 per cent. You see ten year bonds
two weeks ago were about 10.1 per cent and they are now at
9.1 per cent because of that big fall in the Budget bond selling
program and that is what has taken the pressure off interest rates and
that is why I think the housing rates fell at the end of last week.
JC: So the drop in the interest rates, you are definitely claiming as a result
of the Budget?
PM: Well I am certainly claiming the long term bond rate and I think the
housing rates, the whole environment. Well let me put it this way, if
they'd have risen on Friday the commentators which have said " Budget
rejected, absolutely rejected".
JC: Do you get the feeling you can't win?
PM: Well, sometimes.
JC: Well do you think, let me ask you again, the interest rates have
peaked, that they are not going to go back up again after this?
PM: I endorse what the Treasurer said the other day, I think barring a shift
in world markets, we have seen much of the strength in the propensity
of rates to rise taken from it now and that the Budget change and that
continuing low inflation and another Accord with the trade unions on
wages augurs very well for inflation and interest rates.
JC: I imagine you saw Terry McCrann's comments on the Budget, did you?
PM: Well Terry is a pre-Copernican obscurantist.
JC: Well let me see, he said you are like an old fashioned life insurance
salesman " Mr Keating is selling the Budget using figures which are
utterly misleading and arguably fraudulent this is over the
superannuation.
PM: I know. Look Terry is that far to the right he is out of sight and let me
just say in the Treasury paper Saving for the Future, what we did in the
Budget was put through the most comprehensive and revolutionary
change ever to Australian savings and retirement incomes. What it
will mean, Jeremy, is that every Australian person will have at least
per cent of wages and salaries going into superannuation. At the
moment, most of them have five. Now what that will mean, and these 
4
are the Treasury's numbers, is that somebody I have got the little
book here Saving for the Future, which the Treasury has published
on 100 per cent of average weekly earnings, that is $ 33,000 a year,
will end up with a nest egg of $ 461,000 and an annual income of
$ 30,000. So you take somebody who, and these are all in today's
dollars, is on $ 33,000 a year will at the end of their working life, in
today's dollars, will end up with an income of $ 30,000 a year, which is
about twice what the pension is.
JC: So he is totally wrong when he says the difference between the
promised tax cuts and the Government's contribution is $ 17 billion,
maybe more, and that is what we are missing out on?
PM: No, no, because what we did, we put the tax cuts into these
superannuation accounts and that grows over the years. So there is a
great benefit there. Can I demonstrate it this way as well. Apart from
the income of people, put it this way, when I became Treasurer in 1983
superannuation coverage was only 40 per cent, this year it is 90 per
cent. In 1983, we have $ 40 billion in super funds, this year it is
$ 186 billion and what the Treasury is estimating, as a result of this
change, by 2020 we will have $ 2000 billion in today's dollars that is
2 trillion in super funds, $ 2,000,000,000,000 ten times what we have
now in super funds.
JC: Well let's hope it is well managed.
PM: Well it has to be well managed. But see the thing is if the Liberals
thought of this, Terry McCrann would be out there like the daily blab
blah, yak, blah, yak, blah, yak you know, here ye, here ye is the great
change, but if it comes from a Labor Government, it wouldn't matter
what we did with Terry McCrann I can tell you.
JC: Well this is I guess the crunch question. Now the tax cuts in L. A. W.,
you changed your mind about that. What happens if you change your
mind about this?
PM: Well, no, understand what we did. I mean I want to just make this
point, what was the Government's principal commitment at the
election. The Government's principal commitment was get
unemployment down. On election night I got up and said we won't
leave the unemployed behind, we will put our arm out and pull them up
behind us, we will move along as a society together. Now the
Government's target in the election was 500,000 jobs in 3 years. In
2 1/ 4 years we have got to 650,000. So we are 150,000 over the
target in 2 1/ 4 years. So on that hardest commitment of all, the
hardest thing for a Government to deliver employment we have
exceeded our target, or put it this way we reached our target in 2 years
and it was a 3 year target and we are now 150,000 over. That was a
principal commitment. One year earlier than the election in One 
Nation, that was in March 1992, we said we have introduced two tax
cuts to get the economy cracking. What we did, following the election,
was bring one forward and pay it in full at the end of 1993. So the first
round of tax cuts were brought forward and paid in full at the end of
1883. The second round we said we would introduce probably in 1998
was the word and the Treasurer and I used. Well they will be
introduced in 1998 except they will be paid into superannuation
accounts and not as cash. The reason we are taking this opportunity
to do that is to say to people well what would you rather have, you
know, $ 10 or $ 15 in your hands or a retirement income, taking the
chance now of saying if the Government does this now I won't ever
have to worry again about my retirement income.
JC: But that average worker could be able to retire on $ 462,000, it applies
to somebody who actually starts work in the next century?
PM: No, no. To go to the full, to the end of their working lives, at the end of
their working lives, that is right it is at the end of their working lives.
But let's say, take somebody now who is in their 30s and is going to be
retiring, we have also calculated what it will be for them and it will be
that somebody who is in their 30s now, a couple in their 30s who retire,
they will end up with an amount 3/ 4 of the pension on top of the current
pension. In other words, they will retire on an amount of 3/ 4 extra to
the current pension and their children will retire on an amount 100 per
cent extra to the current pension. In other words, doubling the current
pension for their children 3/ 4 of the current pension on top of the
pension for them. So in other words there is a benefit in here for all
working people, from now on, it is just that the benefit gets to its full
bloom if you are in the system longer. So let's say you are 23 years of
age today, you will then pick up the full $ 30,000 in income at the end.
Or if you end up on twice weekly earnings, you end up with a lump
sum of $ 750,000 at the end. But, again, you have got to be in the
scheme 40 years. But the benefits are there for somebody who has
got 20 years to go.
JC: The Prime Minister is my special guest. I just want to ask one more
question and then we will take some callers. I don't know how much
time you can spend with us.
PM: I am right, we are okay.
JC: But we would be grateful. This story that is around this morning about
Senator Alston and Dick Warburton and Dick Warburton's article in
The Financial Review where it is said that you rang a senior executive
at The Sydney Morning Herald and complained about that article and
referred to how such an article, gutter press, might jeopardise
Conrad Black's desire to have a bigger share of The Sydney Morning
Herald. 
PM: The story goes on, apparently, that I then sort of said " oh well, Conrad
Black would otherwise have 50 per cent of the Herald".
JC: Yes. Did you do that?
PM: No. But do I call the media executives, well that is a habit I have got
into over the years.
JC: Did you object to that article on that particular occasion in that manner,
or not?
PM: Not that I can recall. But the article of course was without foundation,
but the weight of what Senator Alston is saying is that in some ways
the Government has offered Conrad Black 50 per cent of John Fairfax
and Sons that is totally untrue.
JC: The interest being if he laid off you.
PM: But it is totally untrue. It is a complete fantasy.
JC: So never at any time did you offer that sort of* a suggestion to a senior
Fairfax executive?
PM: No. Absolutely not.
JC: That article that Dick Warburton, who was a fairly heavy weight in the
business world, he accused you of being able to hate and get fairly
close to the politics of hate. What did you make of that?
PM: Well I thought that was just extraordinary. This is a man we put on the
Reserve Bank Board.
JC: Where would he get this feeling from?
PM: And if you look at the last election, a lot of the people who were
supporting the Coalition, we have appointed them to boards. I mean
we have appointed a number of people. Warwick Smith, the Liberal
frontbencher, we appointed as the Telecom Ombudsman. The former
Mayor of Brisbane, Sally-Anne Atkinson, we appointed as the Trade
Commissioner to France.
JC: When somebody gets stuck into you though, publicly or privately, do
you take that personally?
PM: No, because it happens all the time. In public life you have just got to
let it roll off your back, I am afraid. But can I just say what the Alston
thing is about is that there is a terrible argument going on in the Liberal
Party, right at the moment, over Mr Connolly's sacking at the hands of
Dr Nelson. And Connolly has hopped right in to this and said here we 
are, when superannuation is a major issue in the Budget and the
country, you've fired your superannuation spokesman and at the same
time he said Senator Watson, in Tasmania, is now under threat from
the former Premier, Mr Gray. So what is happening, Jeremy, is this,
there is a huge stoush going on in the Liberal Party remembering that
Mr Filing and Mr Rocher have been defeated in Western Australia, Mr
Connolly has been defeated in New South Wales, Senator Watson's
head is on the block in Tasmania with Mr Gray and Connolly is saying,
here I am a loyal servant of the Party, been it all my life, I am the
superannuation spokesman I get knocked off by Brendan Nelson,
who tried his luck in South Australia, didn't succeed there, has come
up to Bradfield. As I said yesterday, the Liberal Party is like one of the
sort of clubs you join at the door you know. As you walk through the
door you sign up. Oh you want to be in Parliament. Oh yes I would
like the safest Liberal Party seat in Australia. Well just step this way.
JC: So what Senator Alston is doing is a bit of a smoke screen?
PM: I think so. I think they said what can we do today to sort of get the
attention off Connolly and Senator Watson and this stoush we are
having over Brendan Nelson, and particularly that he is backed by
Bruce Shepherd, who was part of the Joh for Canberra campaign. You
see John Howard has got things in his head, he is still hearing voices
about the Joh for Canberra campaign and hates the sight of Shepherd.
Shepherd masterminded the Nelson victory up in Bradfield, so there is
a very, very big tussle going on and the bit of meat they have thrown
across the trail this morning is Senator Alston and this cocked up story
about me offering 50 per cent to dear old Conrad Black.
JC: Have you ever ordered a tax audit of anybody?
PM: No, of course not. Of course not. I was Treasurer for eight years and
you have never heard one word about the propriety of my stewardship
of that job. You can just imagine the private stuff I see. Here is John
Howard taking the legal documents from the Hindmarsh Bridge case in
South Australia, letting McLachlan open them, sending them to the
opposing side's solicitors and then dropping them in the newspapers.
I mean in terms of propriety, Howard and McLachlan have got the
morals of alley cats.
JC: Prime Minister if you can spend some time with us, we have got some
calls, but I would get you to put those headphones on and I shall turn
you loose on the listeners and the listeners loose on you. Hello, Del.
Are you there Del?
C: I am here.
JC: Here is the Prime Minister. 
PM: How are you Del?
C: Good morning Prime Minister. I am a sole, lone parent carer of a
young woman who is 30 years of age, with severe multiple disabilities.
I read last Wednesday that carers can now qualify for the Carer's
Pension, even if their family income is less than $ 61,000 and that they
can amass assets of less than $ 559,000, which is in effect if they get
$ 165 a week for a Carer's Pension and an income support increase of
$ 165 a week. Lone parent carers received nothing out of this Budget.
We are expected to provide 24 hours care for our severely disabled
children for $ 165 a week. We can't earn $ 61,000. We don't have
partners and on that amount of money, we can't amass assets of any
sort.
PM: Well that is not true, can I say. In the Budget we have increased the
allowance quite substantially not with the actual based pension, but
the allowance. You might have missed that in the news coverage and
I think that is an important change. But we have increased, of course,
that Carer's Pension over the years and it has the same free areas,
that is you can earn without losing part of it to a certain level, and we
have now got an increase in the allowance th at goes with it. Can I say
these are the very things that John Howard and Peter Costello want to
cut. I mean, you know Mr Howard has said that he doesn't believe that
the Budget should be addressed by any changes in revenue, he will do
it all on the out base side. Well this is one of the areas that they are
most snaky about. That is, single parents and people on single
incomes in the social security system. In contrast, we have increased
the Rent Allowance in the Budget and we have also increased the
Carer's Allowance.
JC: Okay, Del, let's move on. Malcolm, hi.
C: Oh, good morning Prime Minister, how are you?
PM: Good Malcolm, thank you.
C: Look direct democracy has been endorsed by all the major parties at
some time and I would like to know why Labor didn't introduce it during
the 80 years as part of their policies. At the moment, the unions have
extra input to the political process by the virtue of their numbers and I
feel that the rights of the wider community should be extended by this
means.
PM: What do you mean?
C: Well, Citizens Initiated Referenda is a way of combating corruption in
Governments in the present or future and it is being used that way in
other countries and also where people generally feel that the 
Government have their priorities wrong they can indicate that by
referendum.
PM: Well I think I speak here for the Coalition as well as for the Labor Party
and neither of us support Citizens Initiated Referenda and you might
notice that when this debate arose recently, the then Opposition
Leader, Alexander Downer, came out against it and so, as I recall, did
John Howard and the reason is I think that see what you have in
Australia is you have an election every three years and you also a
parliamentary system which means that your MP has an office and
your constituency, and you can go and see them and talk to them and
the political parties are affected by the ambient political climate of
debates as they come along, whatever that debate might be. There is
a very responsive, you have got a lot of participatory democracy in
Australia. Here I am, I am the Prime Minister, I am on a radio station
talking to you. You get Ministers, you get Opposition Leaders on radio
every day of the week and on television and you get a right to hire or
fire the rest of us every three years. So I think where we have seen
some of these things like the proposition I think it was proposition 41,
wasn't it in California, where they decided they'd reduce, by Citizens
Initiated Referenda, the revenue raising powers of the State of
California, they were going to put police off the beat, they had to cut * all
the public transport and it wouldn't take us very long before people
thought it was a bad idea.
JC: Proposition 13.
PM: Proposition 13.
JC: Anyway, thank you for the call. A quick one from me Prime Minister.
Did you see " 60 Minutes" on Sunday?
PM: No I didn't. No.
JC: They had a story about people living in Nimbin. They called
themselves " the ferals" and they made it quite clear that they couldn't
be there leading their pot-smoking lifestyle without the dole. Could we
get some assurance that if somebody places himself or herself in a
position where they can't get a job that there should be some pressure
on behalf of the taxpayers to stop that funding of a lifestyle?
PM: Absolutely. I mean let me say this, what we have is a work test. In
other words, they must apply for work and be seen to apply for work
and if they don't and if they don't actually apply for jobs and take them,
they get bumped off and we have review teams that goes through each
Social Security area to see that that is happening.
JC: Yes, well I praise you for that. But, obviously, this is something that
gets through that system or that net. 
PM: The second thing is this. In Working Nation, where people are
unemployed 12 months or more, we now give them the benefit of what
we call case management. So one person relates to about 30 people
who are unemployed 12 months or more. So they get to know their
educational standards, their work experience, their aptitude, their
personalities and then after 18 months we offer them a job, but they
must take the job. We give them a job subsidy in case management
that they must take the job. What that means is that anyone who is
unemployed 12 months or more is going to be case managed. So the
possibility of somebody in Nimbin.
JC: Not the whole colony?
PM: Not being known about haven't kept up their credentials under
the work test being case managed, but being unknown to the case
manager, is very unlikely. I have got to say to you, Jeremy, I didn't see
the program, but I would be most surprised in an area where we have
a lot of people who are living an alternative lifestyle, I would be most
surprised that the Social Security regional administration isn't applying
the work test to them. At any rate, I will inquire.
JC: I would be grateful. I think my listeners would be as well because they
were quite upset about it yesterday. Hello, Charles. Charles here is
the Prime Minister.
C: Good morning Jeremy.
PM: How are you Charles?
C: Good morning. I have just got a couple of quick questions. For a start,
in the Budget they increased the cigarette prices, I am not a smoker or
drinker, but why didn't they increase the alcohol because that does
more damage than cigarettes and how do they expect the pensioners
to save for their future when they have just gone and upped the
deeming rate on them?
PM: I am not sure that all the drinkers would agree with you about that, but
anyway. The cigarette and tobacco excise is just one of those things
that the Government has the option of increasing. You know we are
trying to discourage people from smoking because of the health
hazards. We now force companies to publish on the cigarette boxes
and we do think there is some buyer resistance to price and if the price
rises, fewer people are prone to be smoking. The deeming change is
a change in equitable terms to increase the fairness for pensioners.
That is, rather than look at each particular asset they have and deem
the rate to it, what we have done is taken those as a block, given it a
concessional deeming rate and then above a certain figure another
deeming rate and the pensioner groups came out I think after the 
Budget and were fairly laudatory of that change, so I don't think you
should fear anything from that. I think you have got a benefit there.
JC: Prime Minister I know you have got to go and I thank you for your time.
There is a question here on the screen that says availability of flags.
We were talking about a kind of Republicanism by stealth yesterday.
Is there something from Canberra that some desire to make the
Australian flag unavailable?
PM: No, we hand it out with alacrity. You can get one at the drop of a hat.
You can get some with a drop of a hat there.
JC: Now you do promise?
PM: Oh, absolutely. The Republic debate takes precedence over those
things. You can still get the flag with the union jack in the corner any
day you want to ask for it.
JC: Alright, okay. Now one last question about Mt isa. Now here we are
with a balance of payments problem and we are looking down the
barrel of a major strike that will cost this country dearly if we can't fix it.
Are you anticipating that you should intervene soon?
PM: Well I think the Minister for Industrial Relations is taking an interest in
it. But it is part of the new enterprise bargaining system. You know
when you hear people like John Howard running around talking about
we need a more flexible labour market, where employers and
employees sit down and work it out. Well, that is what's happening
right up there in Mt Isa at the moment. They have had a more flexible
labour market and they are sitting down working it out.
JC: Well it looks like the whole mining industry is going to go out because
of Mt Isa Mines.
PM: Well because, I think, in the agreement that will come out of it will be a
pacesetter for the industry and that is why there is a lot of interest in it,
but I certainly agree with you on this point, the quicker it is resolved
and they get to an agreement and get back to work, the better.
JC: Prime Minister thank you. You won't tell me when the next election is
going to be? It is going to be soon, isn't it?
PM: If they had certainty of knowledge, it would be a big help to me as well.
I mean even though I have the option of fixing the time, I have always
taken the view that these elections are too hard to win, to give a big
lump of it away. We are going to sort of get our value from it before
we turn in our badge. 
12
JC: But you will pull it on when you think it is most likely that you will win
and right now it must be very tempting?
PM: Well what I have said is that we will have an election in the cycle and
that means you know when the term, when we are well and truly
towards the end of this term and well we are two years and a quarter.
JC: So you haven't made up your mind or you have made up your mind?
PM: No, I certainly have not.
JC: September doesn't ring a bell?
PM: No, it doesn't ring a bell. I would like to give you a story here, Jeremy
but I honestly haven't got one to give you.
JC: Prime Minister stay well, thank you.
PM: Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 45/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
MOUNT BARKER ROAD AND ADELAIDE AIRPORT
I am -pleased to announce today that the Commonwealth Government will
undertake in South Austraia two major iftasfructure projedts, the Mount Barker
Road and the extension of Adelade airport
The Commonwealth will build an 8.3 kilometre divided freeway, including a sbx
lane tunnel, to replace the present 10.4 Idlorreftes of steep and winding
undivided road on Mount Barker the gateway to Adelaide on the Adelaide-
Melbourne National Transport Corridor.
The project~ the estimated cost of which is $ 130 miullion, will be funded from the
Commonwealths National Highway program. Planning and land auisition will
begi immediately and construction will commence as soon as this process is
complete-The freeway will make a significant conitribution to safet and will reduce travel
time for both heavy vehkies and commuters.
The Commonwealth w. 4ll also immediatey commission design work and undertake
any necessay environmental shzdies; to finslise plans to the extension of
Adelaide airporL
The Comnmonwealth will fund any shortfal between the South Australian
governmenes already declaed commiet of $ 20 million and the cost of the
extension., Constructin of the extension will proceed ahead of the leasing of
Adelaide airport. The South Austfwia government wigl have the opportunity to
recoup their investmnt through the proceeds of the airport when it is [ eased.
Taken together, these projects represent two of the most important infrastructure
works undertaken anywhere in the Commonwealth.
ADELAIDE 16 May 199S 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH KEN DICKEN AND SONIA FELDHOSS, RADIO
16 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
KD: I thought I recognised this face when he walked in. We have seen him
a bit on television, haven't we?
SF: He looks a little bit familiar, doesn't he?
KD: Yes, Paul Keating.
PM: Oh well I am clean shaven this morning, I look better in the early
morning. SF: Actually, it was interesting that was one of the questions that came up
from our Breakfast Show. Do you have to shave every morning?
PM: Well, I think most people do. I certainly do.
KD: You don't wear make-up? Not for radio anyway.
PM: Not for radio, no. I mean I have got my radio face on.
KD: Good stuff. We have got a couple of very amusing questions, of
course, from listeners to the Breakfast program. One, of course, straight
away was what was the line you used to chat up Annita on the plane?
PM: Well I can't remember but it was a good one though. It worked.
KD: Did somebody write it for you?
PM: It certainly worked. It worked like a charm.
SF: It wasn't one you used before obviously then?
PM: I don't think so, no. It was spontaneous, it wasn't refined. 
SF: Oh there you go.
PM: It wasn't developed.
KID: Was it love at first sight or the coffee was good?
PM: Well it was the nearest thing to love at first sight I think.
KID: On both sides?
PM: Well it was a going concern from day one.
KID: Of course, the good news is that work will start soon on the extension
to Adelaide's Mt Barker road which is a horror strip. Have you been aware of
this road Prime Minister?
PM: I have and I think this is a big change. It's eight kilometres of road and
we are putting a six lane tunnel through it. So it will be a very substantial
change to the system, built under the Commonwealth's National Highway
program. KID: And when will work start?
PM: It will start within the year.
KID: Can you give us anything closer than saying within a year?
PM: I can't myself, but I could get you a start time, maybe have it after the
program. SF: How long do you think this project is going to take, are you aware of
that at this stage?
PM: Well it is an estimated cost of $ 130 million, so a program like that you
are probably talking about a couple of years, I would say.
SF: Is this a program that you had a lot of lobbying from our Premier,
Mr Brown?
PM: No, no. We are building a highway from South Australia, back through
New South Wales up to meet the New England Highway. Again, I did that in
One Nation. In two weeks time I am launching the One Nation train, which
will have the standard gauge railway from Melbourne to Adelaide for the first
time in our history. You will be able to catch a train in Brisbane and go to
Perth via Melbourne and Adelaide and that was in One Nation too. They
were all done to get the economy started and, of course, it worked. The
economy got cracking. You are now seeing these things come to fruition. 
KID: That is encouraging from the point of view of rail travel. Whereas, say
locally, so many tracks are being closed down.
PM: Yes, and the other thing of course that I announced this morning is
that we are going to start immediately to commission design work and do the
environmental studies for the extension of Adelaide Airport. So if you look at
the further integration of Adelaide into the nation, both by air and by rail and
then just improve road access in the State, the Commonwealth is doing a lot
for South Australia in these things and I think they will be important for the
infrastructure of the State.
KID: So you don't regard us as a backwater as some people would say?
PM: Well the standard gauge idea was my own proposal in One Nation. It
didn't come from the bureaucracy or the State Government, it came from me
because I think we do need an efficient rail corridor if we are going to get
commerce up and I think given the fact that South Australia, as the rest of
Australia is now at the foot of the fastest growing markets in the world, it is
important to get this airport up to full capacity to take laden 747s and be able
to get the frequency up. I think that is important, so I have done these things.
The other thing I did, I gave South Australia $ 640 Million off the State Bank
debt, of course, in 1993 and that was the largest single commitment off the
budget by the Commonwealth to any State in history.
SF: You have announced this study into the runway, the Adelaide airport.
When will we get a decision on that?
PM: About building it. We are saying, we will build it.
SF: Right.
PM: What we are now doing is the engineering studies and the
environmental studies. Now South Australia has offered us $ 20 million
towards us, we will put that into it and we will refund the $ 20 million to South
Australia when we sell it.
SF: So it will be sold?
PM: It will be sold. But what we are doing is building it ahead of the sale,
rather than waiting to sell it and have some build it. We will build it now
because we think the State needs it.
KID: Obviously you have come under flak in this State because of the sales
tax on motor vehicles. Mr Brown would have lobbied you fairly extensively on
that, to the problems of increasing the sales tax?
PM: I can't recall he mentioned that to me. But you remember this, in One
Nation we took it down from 21 to 16 and try and kick-start the motor industry
which, again, we did. Motor vehicles are now running, again, at a very high 
level. So it was, what we call, a counter cyclical policy. When the motor
industry was doing badly, we reduced the rate to get it cracking. Now it is
cracking we have put it back to where it was. That is what has happened.
KD: But it's not going to take it back, you don't think, into the doldrums?
PM: No, no, I don't think so because there is so much more confidence
around. We were out of the recession three years ago. The Treasury has
said three more years of growth. So that is why we have done it. But I think
the biggest influence on South Australia will be the pressure we took off
interest rates. Last year we sold $ 21,000,000,000 worth of bonds and this
year, as a result, of the Budget we sell $ 6,000,000,000. So there is a
billion reduction and that is why interest rates have fallen on the long
bonds by 1 per cent in the last week and why we are starting to see banks
reduce the housing rates. That will give South Australia more impetus than
anything else.
SF: Just returning to the car sales tax. We have had interviews on this
show and calls to this show saying that it is going to make a big difference in
the industry. That it could mean the difference between some of these
businesses surviving and going. That it could cost jobs.
PM: No, I don't.
SF: What you dismiss that?
PM: By and large I do, yes. All industry spokesmen will give you the worst
view in the world about it all. But have a look at it. When the Government
picked up the car industry from John Howard and Malcolm Fraser it was dead
on its feet. It had no future. It was high cost, low quality. Four weeks ago, I
opened the new Toyota plant in Melbourne $ 400 million state of the art
plant, which this year will sell $ 400 million worth of motor cars in the Toyota
international network. I also worked with Mitsubishi here in South Australia to
get the Magna wagon and the extra engine plant capacity. We are also
looking at the Magna vehicle, the car. All this has come about because of
reductions in tariffs and the general cost efficiencies of the Australian
economy via wages, inflation and the exchange rate. So the car industry has
never been stronger than it is at the moment. It has never been stronger as
the quality, as the price and we are giving Australian consumers a better
price. SF: But shouldn't we get a stronger foot-hold before we increase those
taxes? PM: But we are not increasing in a sense, we are taking them back to
where they were. It is this thing. If the Government gives a benefit to the
industry, the argument they are putting is you can never return the benefit, in
other words it has to stay a benefit forever. We gave them a benefit because
they were in the doldrums in 1992-93. They have come out of the doldrums, 
so now basically we have put the tax back to where it was. But it is only a
percentage point change.
SF: That is quite a lot though isn't it?
PM: No, it is only going to have a marginal effect on car sales?
KD: You said that you would hold an election when you believe the Labor
Party could win. You don't believe you could win an election at the moment?
PM: No, what I have said is I think that these elections are too hard to win
to throw away a year or 18 months. You remember when John Hewson was
running and saying we are going to have an early election, there is going to
be an early election, and there wasn't. Then we had Alexander Downer
saying there is going to be an early election and there wasn't. I have always
taken the old fashioned view when the community elect a Government, they
expect to get value from the Parliament and the Government can go on and:
get its business done. Now we did this with the Budget last Tuesday, we did
it with Working Nation last year, Creative Nation, the. big APEC change,
Mabo. All these great changes have occurred in the last two years and that
is because the Government has had its eyes focussed on the work and not
on the polls and not on an election. Now, you know, this Parliament will run
its full course, that is it will go into that cycle where it is competent for the
House of Representatives and the Senate to go to an election together. This.
idea, which was put around now for a year, that we were going to have anearly
poll, I have never taken up and I have never intended to take up.
SF: When will we have an election?
PM: Well we'll have it at a point where the Government believes it is better
for us to renew our mandate and-to. seek that. further authority from the
community and it somewhere between now and next March.
KD: Senator Alston, of course, has been making, some fairly seriousaccusations
over the weekend regarding you and your dealings with-
Conrad Black.
PM: Look it is just a joke. You know what is happening; in-the Liberal. Part.
at the moment? Connolly has put-orr-astink for being. dtmped-irrthe safest.
Liberal seat. I mean he has been beaten by Brendan Nelsorn
KD: A former Labor Partymember.
PM: He was in the Labor Party for 17 years. I mean the Liberal Party is. somoribund
these days, it is like a: club-: You. join at the-door You. tur up at the
door and sign and tick it and you're aimember. Nelsorrtried-to: get-a seat
here in South Australia. Cbuldn't-do-it,-in-Boothby. Therr he-moved-t.
Bradfield. He has been backed by-Bruce Shepherd who-was-part-of the Jotr.-
for Canberra push. Now you have-got-tor understand this; John Howardtisi
i
_ jr, CLr.
r 4r
~ S. u 1
:~ s
trmmm. ra~, a~ iw-~ ~ un~ R~ RWrunrrn 
still hearing voices about Joh for Canberra and he knows about Shepherd's
involvement, so he would regard this outcome in Bradfield, last weekend, with
horror. Now Connolly said yesterday, went on television last evening,
complaining about his dumping and saying that Senator Watson in Tasmania
is now under threat by Robin Gray, who was also part of the Joh for Canberra
push and the two superannuation spokespersons for the Liberal Party are
now under threat. One has been defeated, one is under threat and this
comes after Paul Filing and Rocher were defeated in Western Australia. So
there is a big yike, a big stink, going on in the Liberal Party and their trick for
the day is to invent something about what I have supposedly said to John
Fairfax Sons about their ownership.
SF: Did you make a threat?
PM: No, no.
KD: You didn't make any mention that you were doing a deal with
Conrad Black?
PM: It is just complete fiction this stuff. I mean the only people who have
offered Conrad Black 50 per cent ownership was ' the Liberal Party. John
Hewson told Conrad Black he could have 50 per cent of John Fairfax Sons.
We have never said such a thing, never.
KD: Just harking away. Are you dismissing Brendan Nelson as a bit of a
joke because he is a very good public performer?
PM: He is a complete opportunist. I mean he resigned from the Labor Party:
because it. wasn't socialist enough and next thing.-he is. running. with a. right
winger like-Shepherd for the Liberal Party's. safest seat and defeating their
spokesman-on superannuation. Well, look at their front: bench; you. have-gptthe
front benct-behind-John-Howard. is: Fscher, who. frankly carrtbarely string;
a sentence together-whose_ incapacity is: such-that-he-can barely put hiss
grammar together. Then you have-got Costello, who is: like a-crow on a fence
picking, the eyes out of any good news, he. has got nothing positive to say.
And you.. have: got Alexander Downer, who. is; a-professional failure as: thee
foreign minister. Now you imagine-Alexander Downer; the Foreign Minister;,.
and. Tim. Fscher; the; Deputy Piime; Minister, and: compare: themn tam
Gareth Evans the-Foreigp Minister; and: Briarr Howe; OrCbostello. taoWillis:-I
mean they have got virtually nobody, soathey are saying; look we are basicallyg
bereft, e wewilltake, whoever comes:, along. They-say well'what about as
Labor-Party, member of lT years?' Wouldc you.. have him?-Oh yes; we. will?
have him; just bringhim in, give him our safest seat
KD: Btt: Brendarr Nelson-did-say, hea was: very, disillusioned with-thee
Labor Party. We: questioned him on this some months-ago. He: thought you.
were losing-track.. 2
S.
SI
c 
PM: Well do we look like we are losing track? There is a Budget back into
surplus. We have just introduced the biggest retirement incomes change and
comprehensive savings plan in the nation's history with superannuation.
With every person going to 15 per cent to give not only a very high standard
of living in retirement, but a massive pool of national savings and that follows
Working Nation where we have got the long term unemployed back to work.
Where we have had 5 per cent growth for the year and 2 per cent inflation.
Where we have had 650,000 job growth since the last election. Losing our
way?: My goodness. You know, an old friend of mine said to me one day,
never worry about the sky rockets of politics. At first a shower of sparks, but:
a dead stick falls to earth. Now that will be Brendan Nelson, just as it was
Bronwyn Bishop, just as it was John Hewson. See John Hewson left thefinancial
markets in Bent Street Sydney and dashed in, he was going to show
the rest of us in public life what it was all about. And where is he? He is
back in Bent Street again.
KD: You couldn't see the same happening with Carmen Lawrence?
PM: Oh no, Carmen is a professional politician.
SF: She is in a bit of trouble at the moment in the public opinion though,
isn't she?
PM: No, just because there is this stunt in Western Australia by a Western
Australian Government, trying to inquire into the politics. I mean look at the
Labor Party people, look at the solidity of the Cabinet.
SF: A Royal Commission doesn't sound very solid though, having a Royal
Commission into these affairs?
PM: But I could have a Royal Commission into the Asia. Dairy scandal. irr
the previous Govemment?-I: could say well let's hear from-Malcolm Fraserand:.
Peter Nixon and: lan Sinclair and Doug; Anthony and what reallyhappened:
in that Cabinet meeting, on that Thursday night. I; mean you
understand that a Royal Commission is not the law, it is not the judiciary ass
an extension of the Executive: It. is-a power to-extend: the arm of the
Government. So you. have got-the Government of Western Australia seeking,.
to, irr my view, improperly extend-: its-view into the: Cabinet of the-former
Govemment. SF: So have you given her your full support?
PM: Well, of course, I do.
KD: But you gave Ros Kelly your full support too, initially.
PM: No, but I gave. her my. full. support-initially and. finally. She. made the
decision to-pull out, not me-and: could I just say, how would: peopleigo if I said
well look, we'll go and spend $ 5 millibn and. we will have an-inquiry, a: judicial
WrW~-fW'Vytw^^ 
inquiry, into why and how lan McLachlan intercepted these legal papers in--
the Hindmarsh Bridge affair. Did John Howard know about it and when?
What did Howard say to McLachlan? And ask them, under privilege, why did
they send the papers to the opposing solicitor, why did they send the papers
to the newspapers and who authorised it? I mean we could have a judicial
inquiry into that.
SF: Are you confident she will come out looking clean?
PM: And what would people say about that?
KD: But it was her own Party that raised the issue.
PM: Oh, that doesn't mean anything.
SF: Why doesn't that mean anything?
PM: Oh a former Minister said something in a corridor or something. That.
doesn't mean to say that the finality should follow.
SF: That almost seems more damning though, surely?
PM: No, who cares. The general point is, the main point, look at the quality.
of the Government. I mean, what was our principal commitment at the last-.
election? It was to employment. The thing I said on election night is-we
wouldn't leave the unemployed behind, we would put our arm out and pull'
them up, we made a target of 500,000 jobs in 3 years. We have got tOr;
650,000 in 21/ 4 years. That is the hardest possible thing to do in Australia isi
produce employment. We have got to 650,000 jobs in 2.1/ 4 years way-;
beyond our target of half a million.
KD: But-Prime Minister these are not permanent jobs.
PM: Oh yes they are.
KD: But it can be an hour here or an hour there, can't it?
PM: No, no:. The bulk of that has&amp; been infull time employment. The. bulk
those 90,000: jobs last month were irr full time. employment; We-have
4-per cent-employment growth since-the election. Now look at John HowarEdñ
he is running; around talking, about my credibility. I ' mean to be-crediblepy, l
have been in-office for 12-years. I have-been-one of the. few people involvedi.
in-the-Cabinet in-internationalising the-Atstraliarr economy, removing.
exchange controls, floating the exchange. rate; opening up-the financia,.
markets, taking, the tariff wall down; lifting; the participation and educatiorr:
You. know, looking at-issues such as-our identity. Our relationship with-ouWr
indigenies: Gtting the growth back into the-economy with low inflationrr.
What has-Howard: ever done?' I mean he-isa professional failure, Howacdñ.
He-was-: afailure as Treasurer He-left us. with double digit inflation, doubles: 
digit unemployment and a massive structural weakness in the economy and
as Opposition Leader he came to nought.
SF: But we still have 8 per cent unemployment.
PM: But going down rapidly.
SF: Yes, but what do you think we will get down to? What do you consider
an acceptable rate of unemployment?
PM: Well the Government's target is 5 per cent by the year 2000 and we
are well on the way to doing that. You see, even in the 1980s when we had
absolutely phenomenal employment growth, we couldn't get below 6 1/ 2 and
the reason is we couldn't get to the long term unemployed. We couldn't get
them into the labour market because they were untrained and they weren't
job ready. With Working Nation, we are now case managing the whole of
that group of people, about 260,000. In fact, we are case managing 500,000
people, but 260,000 are unemployed over 12 months or more, 18 months, in
that area. So that means that we have one person that talks to an individual,
one person case manages about 30 people. They get to know their
educational attainment, their skills, their work background, their personality
and then we give them a job subsidy and then they have to take the job. In
that was, as a consequence of that, we have had this year 100,000, of the
650,000 jobs I mentioned to you, have come from the long term unemployed
and that means that in this recovery, where before we couldn't get beyond
6 1/ 2 per cent, we will actually have a capacity to get down to 5 per cent
unemployment because of that Working Nation program getting the long
term unemployed back into work.
SF: Mr Keating you have been quoted as saying Kerry Packer is a
professional bully and you seem to be trying to get out of it. Are you sorry
you said that comment?
PM: No, if you see The Australian today. Have you got The Australian
today? SF: Yes.
PM: The header there says " PM tries to heal rift with Packer'. ' The Prime
Minister, Mr Keating, tried yesterday to end his public feud", it goes on, " by
declaring he bore no ill feeling towards" him. Well I don't. I mean he has got
his interests and I have got mine.
KID: Is he a bully?
PM: Oh Kerry tries to get his way, but all media proprietors are like that. It
is almost an occupational hazard.
SF: You are not sorry you said that comment though? 
PM: Oh, of course I am not sorry I say things. I am not sorry when I say
things. What I said was, I said that, and I also said to him that he has, where
is it now? I said words to the effect look, Kerry is a fellow that has a lot of
good qualities, I mean I have known him for a long time. I counted myself as
a friend of Kerry's not a close friend, or one I see regularly or anything like
that but someone who I have liked over the years. I have been
disappointed by his attitude and that is what I have said.
SF: Do friendships affect your decisions regarding cross media ownership
rules? PM: Oh you don't have friendships in public life. You have acquaintances.
KO: But Mr Keating, what about when people, say, like Kerry Packer, very
wealthy, Sir Peter Abeles. What power do they have over Governments?
What power do they have over policies?
PM: They have interests and Governments have got to be alert to their
interests and make decisions in the public interest and I have always tried to
do that. But, again, you wouldn't want to be a shrinking violet, they would
absolutely walk over the top of you.
SF: So has there been any lobbying on this Fairfax deal? Was their a deal
struck? PM: No, well I answered that earlier. The Liberal Party are without people
and without policies. I mean John Howard stood up the other night in the
Budget reply. He had every opportunity to lay down some policies. He is a
complete policy free zone and their personnel are dropping out of the Party at
a rate of knots so they're embarrassed, they are on the back foot, so their
story for the day is some cooked up story about Fairfax. The only people who
have ever offered Conrad Black 50 per cent of John Fairfax Sons is the
Liberal Party.
KD: Although the polls would suggest that Mr Howard is not doing too bad
a job.
PM: Look there is no way the Australian people are going to go back to
somebody who has 1950s values, who has 1970s policies, who doesn't
understand the place where Australia is in Asia, doesn't understand the
importance of an inclusive society, hasn't made the commitment to equity and
fairness that need to keep this country together, has never made, ever, any
big public policy changes. Had all the opportunities in the 70s and 80s to
float the dollar, to open up the financial markets, pull tariffs down. He kept
them all regulated. He had tariffs rising. They are not going to go back and
say let's go back to the future, let's go back to somebody who is basically
from another epoch. They are not going to do that. They will go for the
Government that is the author of the policies of change. Look at him at the 
moment. He is saying I agree with the Government on tariffs now. I agree
with their policies on Asia. Well if he agrees with them, just step out of the
road and let the authors of the policies keep going.
KID: Mr Keating with the sale of the Commonwealth Bank, somebody
correctly pointed out it was guaranteed by the Government, the people's
savings, their investments. That will go by the by obviously.
PM: No. Years ago the Commonwealth Bank was Australia's Reserve
Bank. Until the Reserve Bank Act of 1959 it was a Reserve Bank and that is
why there is a lot of mythology around about it being the people's bank. After
the Reserve Bank Act was implemented and we established a Reserve Bank,
it became just another savings and trading bank and there is no more reason
for the Commonwealth to own the Commonwealth Bank than there is for the
State of South Australia to own the State Bank of South Australia no more
reason. And that is why we will do very well putting it on the market and we
will end up not do well, do exceptionally well as a country, with another
great private institution. I mean the Commonwealth Bank, which has now
picked up the State Bank of Victoria as well, is going to be for the first time
ever a really powerful and great institution.
KID: With all this money going into superannuation does that worry you?
Superannuation doesn't have an untarnished record?
PM: I am trying to do it.
KID: No, but there must be some reservations surely. I mean there have
been problems with superannuation over the years.
PM: But if you didn't have a Government doing these things, where would
we be? When my generation, our generation, reach age 65, there will be half
as many again retired age people as now. And when our children reach age
there will be twice as many retired age people as now. Can you imagine
what pressure that will put on the working people then at the time to sustain
this massive retired age population and the pressure it will put to reduce the
pension. So what we have done, ten years ago in 1985-86 under the Accord
and now on Tuesday night adding to it, is to provide for the first time ever a
comprehensive savings and retirement plan so when we reach those
numbers people will basically have a retirement income about the same as
their working income. So if you take someone on $ 33,000, which is average
weekly earnings today, in today's dollars that person would have a lump sum
on just on 1/ 2 a million and an ongoing income stream of about $ 30,000 a
year. Could you imagine the Liberals putting together a policy where a
person on average weekly earnings, on $ 33,000, ends up with a 1/ 2 a million
lump sum and $ 30,000 a year.
KID: I understand that, but people have lost money on superannuation over
the years. How can you be sure you will not be losing money? 
12
PM: No. They go up and down. In one half year they will do well, another
half year they will do less well. In the last year, they had losses because the
international bond market and a lot of these superannuation assets are held
in what is called Government gilts, that is Government securities, the long
term bond rates went up, therefore the value of the paper went down and
holders of Government paper in the United States, in Japan, in Germany and
in Australia had substantial losses. This happened to the super funds who
were holding that paper. Then look at the stock market, the All Ordinaries
has gone from 1500 to 2000 which is again on the other side of the ledger
because of that huge bonus in there. In the long run, superannuation will
give the country the earnings it needs to give ordinary Australians a good
standard of living in retirement. You see with John Howard, the only thing he
said in that hopeless reply to the Budget last Thursday, is that he would put a
lid on superannuation. You see, there is no way he is going to give a break
to ordinary working people. What a sensible person would say and you
notice Mr Connolly has been supporting the Government's policies about the
maintenance of the Superannuation Guarantee Charge supporting the
Government's policy. Here is Howard saying, look I wouldn't have had the wit
or the courage, or the imagination to do this. I didn't when I was Treasurer, I
didn't support it when I was Opposition Leader, at least a Labor Government
has given the country a decent savings plan. I will' just shut up about it and
let this one go to the keeper. What does he say? Oh no, I will put a lid on it.
I will put tax concessions in there so that the wealthy can get the benefits, but
not the ordinary working person. I mean this guy never ever learns. He
never ever takes a trick.
KID: Good to talk with you Mr Keating. Finally, have you been around to
Bob and Blanche's for a BBQ?
PM: No, I haven't had an invitation at this point.
KID: Are you expecting one?
PM: No, no, I am not.
SF: Thanks for coming in anyway.
PM: Okay, Sonia, thanks and good to see you.
ends 



N
PRIME-MINISTER'
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH KEITH CONLAN, ABC RADIO, 16 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KC: Prime Minister Paul Keating welcome to South Australia.
PM: Thanks very much Keith, glad to be here.
KC: Before we get onto some of those bigger issues, I know people
combed the Budget for news on the Mount Barker Road. I understand
you may be able to tell us something in Adelaide today.
PM: Yes, I am able to say and am pleased to announce that the
Commonwealth Government will undertake the building of the Mount
Barker road and also the extension of Adelaide airport. The
Commonwealth will build an 8.3 kilometre divided freeway which will
include, Keith, a six lane tunnel to replace the present road which is
steep and winding and undivided on Mount Barker which is thegateway
to Adelaide on Ade laide-MelIbourne national transport
corridor. I think the total cost is somewhere about $ 130 million, it will
be funded from the Commonwealth National Highway program.
KC: That has been in the queue for a long time as you know and we
expected to hear that within weeks. Does this tell us that you really
are, as many commentators suggest, very much in election mode?
PM: We are building this through safe Liberal party electorates. They are
not Labor party seats, so there is no electioneering in that. I mean, we
are building it because we see the need there and it has been a very
unsafe piece of road for a long time. The other thing which I think is
important to the State and that is we are prepared to commission
immediately design work and undertake the necessary environmental
studies to finalise plans for the extension of Adelaide airport. The
South Australian Government said they will propose $ 20 million
towards the extension. We will fund any short fall over that and
construction of the airport can then proceed ahead of the leasing of
Adelaide airport. 
KC: Can you help us with the picture there, Prime Minister, because the
Premier here, Dean Brown, is keen to offer you the sort of lock, stock
and barrel option. We will take it over, we will get on with it quickly,
how does this fit in?
PM: I think, this is even perhaps better for him and for South Australia.
That is, we are saying that we will sell it, but what we'll do is we will
then refund to South Australia $ 20 million from the proceeds. That
way we can keep it in the sale program with the other airports. So, in
other words, we will build it. South Australia puts in $ 20 million. When
it is sold, we will refund the $ 20 million back out from it.
KC: Now, Minister Alston in the South Australian government has been
looking at buyers for Adeiide airport. Again, how does that work, you
will talk to him about who is in the ring?
PM: No, well we'll talk to him perhaps, but the thing is we have announced
in the Budget that we will be selling the major airports which will
include South Australia. What, I think, the South Australian
government was after and, I think, what we would like to have seen
and we will now see is the building of this airport ahead of the sale
process. In other words, we will get cracking on the construction
extension ahead of the leasing of the thing and that way South
Australia will have this facility, it will get a bigger connection into the
rest of Australia and the rest of the world. Can I just also say, Keith,
that in a week's time I am launching the One Nation train. Do you
remember in One Nation we decided to put a standard gauge railway
between Adelaide and Melbourne? Well, I will be launching that in
about two weeks from now and that will mean for the first time ever
South Australia is linked via Melbourne to the east coast by rail. So,
you will get this new decision on the airport and those two things will
be important to further increasing South Australia's integration with the
rest of the country and the region.
KC: Listeners around the State are keen to raise budget matters with you
and I know you are willing to take calls Prime Minister, but can I just
tidy up that announcement which you have made this morning. The
money will flow in both cases immediately, they are this year's budget?
PM: Well, that is the case with the freeway. With the airport, the
construction will proceed as quickly as we can get the design work and
the environmental studies undertaken. But, we will commission those
immediately. So, in other words, we will start the airport project off
now immediately and we will be spending, this year, money on the
Mount Barker road.
KC: Can I look at two issues before listeners start to raise their matters.
This State has received the Budget somewhat coolly it seems and
perhaps that is because even before your comments about small 
business, company tax going up in a state like this with nought growth
in the last year as opposed to six per cent in Queensland, seven per
cent in the west, can you understand that company tax here on small
business, which is also the engine of our economy, will be seen as a
brake on going nowhere.
PM: Yes, well except the profit share of business, the proportion of national
income going to profits, is now so high it has no historic precedent. It
has never, I don't think ever, been any higher than this. It is as high as
the late 1980s and the late 1980s had no historic precedent.
Therefore, you remember Keith, just after the election the Government
dropped the rate from 39 to 33. A very big fall. To get the economy
going and to get it cracking. We are putting it just back to 36, so it is a
fairly affordable cost on business and if those very large profits are
coming through and the-Commonwealth needs to make up some
revenue, you mean should it be the business sector which is highly
profitable at the moment or should it be individuals or excise or
something like that, we took the decision that the company tax change
was basically one that was affordable.
KC: Do you concede that this is not as good as it gets in South Australia,
we have nought growth as yet?
PM: South Australia has lagged behind the other States, that is true. But
again, I don't think the company tax rate is going to change. There is
also very strong investment outlook for South Australia and in the last
year we about 34 per cent investment growth in South Australia, from
memory, and that is quite high. So, I don't think the company tax rate
is going to be a problem. The good thing for South Australia and all
the States is that we have taken the pressure off interest rates which is
going to have a much bigger effect than any modest increase in
company tax. If you ask yourself what is going to happen to big effect,
I mean, in the Budget we reduced the bond selling program. Last
year, Keith, we sold $ 21 billion worth of bonds, $ 21,000 million worthof
Commonwealth bonds. This year as a result of the Budget we will
sell only $ 6,000 million. So, we have taken $ 15 billion off the bond
selling program and that is just an unbelievable number; $ 15,000
million off one year. So, what happens, if there is less paper around,
less Commonwealth paper, the price of it rises. When the price of a
bond rises the yield falls, the interest rate falls. That is why 10 year
bonds fell by one percentage point in the last week or so and that is
why we are now seeing interest pressure come off on housing and
other things. So, for South Australia the big benefit is really that
pressure off interest rates and that weight off monetary policy onto
budgetary policy, outweighed by multiple and multiples any increase in
the company tax rate.
KC: Interest rates will no doubt get a guernsey sometime with our listeners.
Now Robert calling. 
C: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: How are you Robert?
C: I'm pretty hot under the collar, Paul, with your tobacco excise increase.
Now, why don't you get stuck into the and not the aged pensioners.
It is our only solace in life is to have a smoke and watch the rain
tumble down.
PM: Well, I mean, we are trying to get you off it, I think that is the thing. I
don't know whether it is real good for you is it?
C: Prime Minister, I didn't think you were one of these pathological types.
PM I'm not really, no. I'm not-Look Robert, is basically both a health and
a revenue measure. We have been trying to discourage people from
smoking, we have all these warnings on the boxes and one of the
other discouraging factors is price and again in a budget where we
needed to lift the revenue and cut the outlays, where we needed to
change the budget balance, it was just one of those things that has
been increased over the years and we took the opportunity to increase
it again.
KC: Robert, thanks very much. Student funding now, Prime Minister and
indeed there is a student funding focus event on the University of
Adelaide campus today and David wants to raise it with you.
C: My question is why should students support Labor, what have you
done to actually take the pressure of universities charging up front
fees for post graduate study?
PM: Why should we support Labor? Because we have added 65 per cent
of places to universities since 1985. We have added the equivalent of
about 20 universities the size of Adelaide to the system. It has been
the most enormous growth. There was 325,000 university places in
1985/ 86 and this year it is just under 600,000. That is the main
reason. That has cost, by the way, $ 3000 million, those additional
places have cost $ 3000 million and all of the proceeds of the higher
education charge the HECS charge all the proceeds, 100 per cent
of them go back into places. So, 100,000 of those places, of the
university places exist today are paid for by the return of the HECS
funds. So, it is not only equitable, it is participatory and all of the brewha-
ha about how the Government was going to put up front fees in the
budget or change the HECS arrangement, I told people we were not
doing it and it came to nothing. So, that is why I thought the Students'
Union and other student bodies were pleased by the budget's
reception. That is, that we didn't have any up front fees there because
the Government opposes up front fees for undergraduate courses.
We have made that as clear as day. 
C: What about the increase in the number of post graduate courses that
are charging full fees.
PM: Put it this way, we will watch the development of that and see how it
goes, but again we have given a lot more autonomy to universities and
we have, of course, provided many more universities themselves, but
the big thing is undergraduate fees. There was a notion being that we
would in some way and can I just say to you, the only people who want
to charge undergraduate fees are the Liberal party. At the last election
their policy was full fees. In other words, you get to university if your
parents can pay for it not that you get to university if you have the
educational abilities, the attainments in the matriculation or at year 12,
but whether your parents can charge full fees. Here we are virtually
more than doubling the system and at the same time having a most
democratic change with HiCS. You understand how HECS works.
C: Yes.
PM: We charge students about 23 per cent only of the cost of a course with
HECS, about 23 per cent and then we lend them the money, we don't
ask them then to refund any of it until their wages get to average
weekly earnings and then it is taken out through the tax system. So, inother
words, they only pay 23 per cent in the first place, they don't pay
it back until they get to average weekly earnings and when it is paid
back, 100 per cent of it goes into more places for students in
university. None of it is kept by the budget. It is a pretty fair and
reasonable scheme.
KC: If I can just interject, interest rates Prime Minister, it is an important
subject for us all, do you think they have well and truely peaked and
they will now keep falling?
PM: The best guide in that is the bond market. The short term interest rate
is set in the market, but it is set with reference to the Reserve Bank's
overnight cash and call rate. In other words the Government and the
Reserve Bank had a role in it, but the long term bond rate is set
exclusively in the market. It has nothing what so ever to do with the
Treasurer or the Governor of the Reserve Bank or the Board.
KC: So essentially, you agree that what happens in the United States may
have a lot to do with this?
PM: But also what happens here and I think that is why the chap from
Moody's who was on ABC Radio " AM" last week said ' look, what we
are looking for is a budget surplus and a big reduction in the bond
selling program' and that is basically what they got and the long term
bond rate fell from, I think, 10.1 per cent to 9.1 per cent in about eight
days which was a very large change and I think that is the influence
that has now affected the thinking of the domestic financial market
here, including the banks. 
KC: What about the notion John Howard puts that yes, they are coming
down now, but they will go up again and so you will be going in for
something in the way of an election before the end of the year.
PM: But, that is his usual line, the sky is falling in. He has been running
around with this cynical opportunist line that we have had five minutes
of sunshine. We have had three and a half years of growth since the
recession and now the Treasury is saying, forecasting that we will
have three more years of growth in the budget papers. So, three years
from now is 1998, if you take from 1983 to 1998, you will have
years of growth bar 18 months, bar 1991/ 92. Fifteen years of growth
bar 1991/ 92 and certainly six years of growth since the recession. So,
it gives the lie to that little sort of opportunist claim. And, this other
claim that the sky is f-ling, chicken little, the sky is falling in,
whingeing around radio stations trying to mislead people, the fact of
the matter is that the Government has made a very large change in the
Budget and people may say the change was not only about a change
in the budget balance from a deficit of over $ 12 billion to a surplus of
$ 700 million, but we have got the biggest change of all in there in
terms of the first comprehensive savings plan for the whole country
with superannuation. In this Budget we have left provision there for
every Australian person to have 15 per cent of their wages and
salaries put away for their retirement and what this will do, it will liftsavings
in superannuation funds from $ 186 billion now to $ 2000
billion, about 12 times our national debt. The consequence will be,
let's take someone on average weekly earnings now of $ 33,000. It
would mean that such a person, when the scheme is mature, will end
up with a lump sum of $ 470,000 and an annual retiring income of
$ 30,000.
KC: But, that person has to be 25 I think Prime Minister, isn't that sum done
on someone who is 25 and just coming into the workforce?
PM: Yes, but let me take somebody who is in their 30s now. Someone who
is in their 30s now and who retire would go out with an amount about
per cent greater than the age pension and their children will go out
with an amount 100 per cent greater than the age pension.
KC: To Rhonda on superannuation.
C: I have two questions actually. One really comes before that, there was
an earlier Labor promise that all recipients of social service pensions
and part pensions would be exempt from income tax by 1995. That
hasn't happed, but now we have the newly announced proposal of
income tax cuts to be taken as payment into superannuation funds.
Now, I'm not in my 30s, I can't look forward to that benefit. I'm in my
and those tax cuts are virtually eliminated in the budget for people
of my age who are already on superannuation, how does the 
government propose to compensate for that lot of tax cuts for a group
of people who really badly need it?
PM: Let me just remind you what we did do with pensions. For a start we
have got the level of the pension up to 25 per cent of average weekly
earnings. That was at 21 per cent when the Government took office.
It is up to 25 per cent of average weekly earnings and we have
maintained there. The second thing we did was extend quite
dramatically the free area, that is the amount of money that a
pensioner could earn and yet still keep full pension. The next thing we
did was to actually remove any taxation on money earned within the
free area. You see, once a pensioner could earn money in addition to
pension but you start to lose pension if you did, we have stopped any
loss of pension, but you then paid tax on the earnings. We have now
removed that completely tfom the tax system so that free area beyond
the pension where you can earn without losing a dollar of pension is
also now untaxed. Whenever the general pensioner groups and
representative groups of pensioners speak about changes to
pensioner values and the pension system they tend to focus on the
maintenance of the basic pension and the free area and those
arrangements rather than exempting any income for part pensioners
from the tax system.
So, we have focussed on those priorities. The benefit in all this is, of
course, that when my generation are 65 there will be half as many
retired aged people again as now and when my children are 65 there
will be twice as many retired aged people as now. That will mean the
working cohort then will have to carry a huge retirement population.
What we have done on Tuesday night last and beginning of 1985/ 86
with a three per cent superannuation arrangement then the five per
cent and then the nine per cent under the superannuation guarantee
charge and now rising to 15 per cent, is we will get to a position where
not only will the basic pension system which is the essential building
block of our retirements income policy be able to be maintained under
the weight of that huge growth in the retired age population, but the
actually population will have a much higher standard of living in
retirement than say you do now with a pension.
This should have happened 30 years ago, but that is point. Nothing
happens in this country unless a Labor government does it.
KC: Prime Minister, we will come to a question on families in a moment,
family allowance benefit. Can I just ask you a little on the
Commonwealth Bank first the people's bank and so on and how
very quickly that has turned around, the idea of selling the
Government's half. Just 20 months ago, the Treasurer said he had no
intention what so ever of reducing its share holding and there was an
iron clad commitment, absolute commitment that you wouldn't sell the
other half. Can you understand people saying that is getting cynical. 
PM: But why get cynical? Let's just go back. The Treasurer did say that
months ago and 20 months ago that was our view. We have changed
our view because we think we needed to get the budget into surplus
more rapidly. That big reduction in the bond selling program I
mentioned earlier was important for interest rates and to the ongoing
recovery into the future.
KC: It means for economic reasons, promises don't mean a thing.
PM: It is not a promise. If someone asks the Treasurer of the day, do you
intend to sell the Commonwealth Bank? And he says no, that is the
governments intention. It is not a promise, it is an intention.
Governments have a right to do things.
KC: It is an absolute commitme-nt.
PM: It was not an absolute commitment, no.
KC: He was asked that on Channel 9, ' do you give an iron clad
commitment?' Absolutely, yes.
PM: But understand this. Governments have prerogatives to do things in
the national and public interests, they don't need to respond to
Channel 9 reporters.
KC: He gave us the commitment, not just to Channel 9 a commitment.
PM: No, but again people ask for an indication from governments, whether
they say it is a commitment or whatever it is, I mean, all that
governments can ever do is say where they stand at the time. But just
understand this point about the so-called sale of the Bank, the
people's bank, it was a peoples bank when it was a Reserve Bank. I
mean the mythology about the Commonwealth Bank was developed,
particularly in Labor circles when King O'Malley and these other
people saw it develop and it developed in the 1920s and 1930s as
virtually the Reserve Bank. But when the Menzies government bought
the Reserve Bank Act in 1959, the Commonwealth Bank remained
then simply a savings bank and later became a trading bank.
Subsequently became just a commercial bank. I mean, the
Commonwealth Bank is just a commercial bank. You have got to say
what is the Commonwealth doing in the long run owning a commercial
bank? What is the South Australian government doing in the long run
or the short run with a commercial bank.
KC: Not for long.
PM: What were they ever doing with a commercial bank and what we have
done is price this. I sold the first quarter of it in 1989, then we thought
it was worth about $ 3 billion. By lifting its profits, getting some capital
into it, we have now got the second half of it valued at $ 4.5 billion and 
we have already raised $ 3 billion from it. So, we have turned an
institution we thought was originally worth $ 3 billion into $ 7.5 billion.
Now, that is a great benefit for public and that is what governments
have got to think about, not what some interviewer asks on the Sunday
program or something. What a conscientious Minister does in the
public interest.
KC: We are joined now by Michelle.
C: Good morning. I would just like to know why there is such a big
difference between the basic parenting allowance and the child care
rebate. It has been discussed and protested against and still there is a
great discrepancy between a two income family and a single income
family.
PM: I don't think the discrepancy is that great. What we did in the election
is say we would introduce a generalised child care rebate and we have
done that and as you know that is recoverable for people who are in
child care from Medicare offices. You go to Medicare and you pick up
the rebate. It was one of the important commitments in the election
and one that we introduced in legislation almost immediately after the
election was over. That is now operating. The parenting allowance is
a different concept again. It is looking at where we had a work test on
somebody who was unemployed and where the money was being paid
to a couple and the wife had to be work tested. In Working Nation we
abolished all that, we changed that and we have left it to the position
that that person can elect to stay at home, not need to qualify for the
work test and be paid half the married rate at home and that is only
then diminished once the partners income gets over a certain level.
Where once any income the partner received reduced the total family
income, what it does now is reduce only the partners income and let's
say, in most cases the wife's income, the parenting allowance ends up
being kept there and only starts to be reduced after the partner gets
over, I think, $ 320 a week, from memory.
So, it is quite a dramatic change which recognises the value, the fact
that many women who are looking after children and who are in such a
family, there is not much point in them qualifying under the work test
anyway and that way we give people a choice about whether they
leave home and if they do, they have got the child care support, both
in places. Remember also that when the government came to office
there were 40,000 child care places. There is now 255,000 child care
places and now as well as that we have got fee relief and now the
generalised child care rebate.
KC: Prime Minister, Paul Keating, thanks for coming in this morning.
PM: Good, Keith.
ends 



LL~ D
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, HYATT HOTEL, CANBERRA, 17 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
J: Prime Minister have you wimped it on the Republic?
PM: Well, no. Well given that I was the first one in Australian public life to
champion it at a Federal election, I am certainly going to continue this
change. But, again, the Government has been rather occupied with
the Budget and other things so that, you know, merchant bankers and
investors have more time on their hands than Prime Ministers and
Treasurers. So we will get around to it in due course.
J: When will we see the preferred option?
PM: Well not so far away.
J: When, before an election?
PM: Well not so far away, it will certainly be before an election.
ends 



x'
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL FARMERS FEDERATION ( NFF) ANNUAL
CONFERENCE, CANBERRA, 17 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Distinguished members of the conference.
I am very delighted to be able to come, on behalf . of the Government, and
speak to you and to record how appreciative I am, and I think the Government
is, of the fact that you are a body which does look beyond sectional interests
to the broader national policy issues and, as Donald said quite eloquently,
though some of these things are not universally understood in your
constituency, it is nevertheless a matter for you as a body to be able to
articulate them to understand, first of all to put together a comprehensive
approach to policy, to articulate it and to make it relevant to your
constituency. I don't think there is much more a Government could ask of you. But, more
importantly, there is not much more your constituency can ask of you
because we are in a complex world these days. A world of great opportunity,
no doubt, but a complex one and when we talk about agriculture today, we
are talking about all sorts of things not just commodity prices, but
competitiveness and we are talking about best practice and transport and
competition policy and infrastructure and the environment, the global
economy, the US Farm Bill, interest rates, the drought you name it. It is a
very large panoply of issues when one is speaking about rural industry and
its problems and the problems of adjustment.
But I think what is encouraging, certainly to me, has been a willingness on the
part of the rural community, the farm community, to confront these great
economic challenges and recognise the need to make greater changes and I
think one of the strong characteristics of Australia in this last decade or so,
has been not simply a willingness to change, but a willingness to keep it up,
to embrace change and to keep on going and I think that is very important. 
A lot of countries are somewhat resistant to change. Their political system
moves away from the prospect of change. As a consequence, their national
economies and societies are not getting the kick along they would otherwise
have if their community was more adaptable to change and more prepared to
listen.
Now I think that in your community, a lot of that has come from leadership, it
has come from the leadership of this body and let me just take this
opportunity to pay a tribute to the leadership of the NFF, in
Donald McGauchie and Rick who is leaving you I know, it will be a great
loss to you because he has played a really useful role in defining the issues
for you as a community, as a constituency and he has had the respect of the
Government and he has been able to relate to us in a way that I think has
been very effective indeed. So no doubt he will be missed.
Could I go on and say that it is probably very unlikely that the NFF and a
Labor Government find themselves as bedfellows, but in quite a number of
issues we have found ourselves in that position. Mainly because this
Government has always been interested in tackling hard issues and trying to
deal with them at source and, I mean, basically we have always been, if you
like, vulnerable to a good argument. If someone has got a good case, we will
listen and if the case is rational and its logical and it has all those others
societal characteristics that make it important, then I think we are always
there to listen and try and make adjustments and quite a few we have had.
We have made a few, of course, in this Budget and I will come to that in a
moment. But I was interested in Donald's speech and a couple of things he said.
He said, talking about the changes, the NFIF has already achieved
considerable success and he mentions the issues which affect in a very large,
and perhaps dramatic way, the whole of the rural sector. The decision to float
the Australian dollar, the deregulation of financial markets, reductions in
protection for all industries and this was always the big bug bear of course.
It was always a matter of great amusement to me in the 1 970s when I came
here. Of course Jack McEwen was still king of the castle round here and
Alan Westerman was still sort of one of the princes of the bureaucracy and
they had this scam running for years that they were going out to
manufacturing industry, doling on protection, while they were out there talking
to the farm community about what a terrible problem it was.
At any rate, we were the ones who finally knocked it over and in what became
obviously, through people like Bert Kelly and others, the identification of the
burden of tariffs on agriculture became very clearly understood in the late
and early 1 980s and by actually getting the tariff wall down, that has made a
very large difference to agriculture.
He mentions progress in the movement away from a centralised wage fixing
system towards enterprise agreements. Broad political recognition of the 
need to minimise pressure on interest rates by reweighting policy onto fiscal
policy. He mentions the changes in 45D and E of the Trade Practices Act
and the common law and negotiations of new trade arrangements such as, of
course, Uruguay and APEC.
And then he mentions the achievement of particular farm sector goals above
that, national competition policy but then income equalisation deposits, farm
management bonds, changes to drought assistance, review of the pastoral
industry award etc. Sales tax exemption for direct farm inputs, a better result
than other sectors in Native Title legislation, maintaining the diesel excise
rebate and extensive schools education program etc.
Well, the NFF has been involved in all these issues. But in making the point
about us being strange bedfellows, of course, they were all done by this
Government. All these decisions were taken by this Government.
So we have done a lot of things together and they have been of material
assistance to the farm community and they are the big brush things. You
could imagine how we would be going today at an exchange rate of
cents. And that, you see, getting that core competitiveness up,
Australia today is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 1983. Not 4 or
14, 40 and that has come about by changes in exchange rate, productivity,
wages etc.
But, the big challenge in the 1 980s, was to turn that big nominal depreciation
of the exchange rate into a real depreciation. I mean any country can have a
competitive depreciation of its exchange rate. We have watched Britain do it
against the European economies now for 20 years, but not anyone can have
a real depreciation, that is washing the price surge out of wages which is
basically what we did under the Accord.
So that core competitiveness which all of the primary export sector now
enjoys, from the exchange rate, happened because of the adjustment to
wages, a terms of trade adjustment for productivity to wages, in the course of
the 1980s. And under those Accords, the fact that we had pulled down fiscal
policy so dramatically, we were able to provide tax cuts and those wage tax
trade-offs of the 1980s, turned that large nominal depreciation of the dollar
into a real depreciation.
That happened, simply, because when I became Treasurer in 1983,
John Howard left me outlays at 30 1/ 2 per cent of GOP an Australian record.
And, as you know, it was a lift in the public sector in the 70s, under the
Whitlam Government and then the Fraser Government that dislocated private
investment and that put a very big call on savings. But by reducing it to
23 1/ 2 per cent of GDP by the late 1980s that is a 7 per cent of GOP
reduction and spending, and in today's dollars that is $ 35 billion we were
able through growth and through revenue and through those outlays changes
to fund a large continuing set of tax cuts and it is only by that way that we
didn't go the way of other countries with a set of competitive depreciations. 
So you were competitive for five minutes and you were uncompetitive five
minutes later as wages caught up with prices. And I think that is one of the
very great changes and I am very sympathetic to Bill Kelty and Martin
Ferguson and their ACTU colleagues, when they say we haven't had much
thanks for it, have we? And the answer is, they haven't.
But they did get in there for over a decade and try and manage it down. The
deal always was, of course, that we would compensate them by employment
and in the period between 1983 and now, we have had about 27 per cent
employment growth.
As a consequence, real household disposable income is 40 per cent greater
today than it was in 1983 because there are more people in households in
work. And so that is how that important national economic policy making was
made. The implicit arrangement of wage restraint for growth and employment
growth being the essential element of the Accord and it is by that method that
we have got that competitiveness back.
We are now seeing a much more, but lower tariffs, contestable economy. In
fact, a quite highly contested economy now. So now productivity is coming
out of the pores of the skin of the economy, naturally. In other words, we are
holding inflation down now, naturally. We are not holding it down with a
draconian monetary policy, killing growth and activity. We are holding it
down by the natural productive forces being, if you like, encouraged in the
economy and a change in the productive culture of business.
We have had very large productivity numbers in the last few years, as that
whole productivity surge and cultural change has gone through Australian
industry and it has gone through the farm sector as well.
I remember in the 1 980s, you know Margaret Thatcher was boasting about
and 6 per cent productivity and it was coming by massive lay-offs in British
industry by huge unemployment. But last year we had 4 per cent
productivity with massive lay-ons not massive lay-offs massive lay-ons.
4 per cent employment growth. Still producing 4 per cent productivity, which
is all the world of difference between the policies of this Government and the
policies of the British Conservative Government. So that at the end of the
section, she ended up with massive unemployment, an underclass, a divided
society and, in the end, no structural change to productivity. Whereas what
we are having here, is a long term structural change.
So I think that the way we can, if you like, help the farm community most
beneficially, is through these big brush changes to competitiveness,
exchange rate, wages, inflation, productivity, competition and, of course,
getting proper market access or the best market access we can through areas
like the GATT and, of course, through APEC. 
1 attended the OECD meeting in 1986 when we first got agriculture into the
OECD communique and I had a big brawl with Clayton Yeutter and
Malcolm Baidridge and a few other people at the time because this was the
moment of truth if it didn't get into the OECD communique of that year, it
wouldn't get into the G7 summit in Tokyo.
We pushed and shoved and stood the French up and the Europeans up, and
we did squeeze it in with the support of the United States and then as a
consequence of relations we tend to build up over time, the then
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, who was Reagan's Sherpa at
the summit, got it listed on the G7 agenda for the Uruguay Round and that is
how agriculture got into the Round.
Then we prosecuted that over seven years to get a result which while not all
we were seeking was going to take a lot of the pressure off the kind of
subsidies that we had seen growing and production and export subsidies we
had seen growing in Europe and in North America.
And here we are working together now Bob Collins and Bob McMullan with
you and others on the 1995 Farm Bill to try and again make certain, or ease
the pressure at least, against the Australian farm -sector from these other
sectors who won't expose themselves to the kind of competitive influences
that we have been prepared to expose ourselves, too.
So right through those years, we have learnt together and I think, again,
access remains one of the great issues for Australian agriculture and we have
sought to do our best with it.
Let me say a couple of things about the Budget and perhaps then come back
to some farm specific things.
The Budget, the other night, did respond to a desire and a wish by many
sectors, including your own, for a reweighting of the policy instruments off
monetary policy and on to fiscal policy and we have taken the Budget from a
deficit of over $ 12 billion to a surplus of $ 700 million this year and next year
we are into a surplus of about $ 4 billion and the following year a surplus of
$ 7 billion, in prospect.
What this means is that we have seen a great change in the bond selling
program of the Commonwealth. Last year we sold $ 21 billion worth of bonds
$ 21,000,000,000. This year, as a result of the Budget, that program will be
reduced to $ 6,000,000,000. So, in other words, as a consequence of the
Budget we have diminished the bond selling program by $ 15 billion, which is
a mighty sum and that is why long bond yields fell from over 10 per cent
ten days ago, to under 9 per cent today. And because if there is less paper
around, the paper gets more valuable, the price of it rises and the yield drops,
the interest rate falls and that is what, of course, engendered then further
changes in retail interest rates towards the end of last week. 
So we have already had that effect and we have this debate about whether it
is recurrent changes or asset sales, but I thought the man from Moody's not
that I quote them very often said look we are not particularly interested how
it's done, what we want is to know how the bond selling program is going to
be, what is the consequences for that. Well that is pretty clear form now. But
the other point is next year, without any asset sales, we will be in surplus on a
recurrent basis.
Now the changes we made to the recurrent budget are around $ 3 billion this
year and $ 4 1/ 2 billion next year. So we are over 1/ 2 per cent of GOP in
recurrent changes this year and next year we are just under 1 per cent of
GOP, which is a fairly big change.
And the important thing is that the underlying level of outlays drops to
24 per cent of GOP in two years. In other words, in two years time we will be
back to the outlays levels that we had before the Whitlam Government, or
around at the time of the beginning of the Whitlam Government. Back where
we were in fact in the late 80s, which was at 23 1/ 2 per cent of GDP.
Now you know you don't need to be a student of public policy to know since
those years you have seen an enormous change in the services the
Commonwealth provides in education, and in health, and in income support
and yet we are doing it. A much more sophisticated public sector, providing
much greater serves, yet we are doing it for the same outlays to GOP levels
largely and underlying terms as existed before the Whitlam and Fraser
Government's started spending a much higher proportion of GOP on
outlays. Now, this needs to be understood I know a number of you have
said " well, the Government should cut outlays more". Well look, there is
one thing I would say to you, and that is this: I have sat through, now I
have delivered 8 Budgets and 7 May Statements that is 15. We have now
had 13 budgets, 8 May Statements and 3 Prime Ministerial Statements.
That is 24 major budgetary statements, and barring 1 or 2 of those
exercises, I have sat through all the Expenditure Review rounds, across all
of the outlays. Ralph Willis, Brian Howe and myself are the longest serving
officers of the Commonwealth in public spending if you shook the Finance
Department by its toes, or the Treasury by its toes, no-one would drop out
of it who has served in more Expenditure Reviews than the 3 of us. And let
me just say this to you, because one of the things you ask us to do is to
listen and comprehend problems, and we do we listen to what you say,
and we take notice. And even if it doesn't fall on us obviously on the first
moment, we listen and we get the picture. And I want you to listen to this,
and just understand it you cannot cut 2% of GOP from outlays any more.
It is just not possible. You can't cut $ 10,000 million from outlays now. You
can't take the Commonwealth underlying outlays to 22% of GOP it is
impossible, without cutting into pensions.. for instance, one of the first
things that would go would be RAS, straight off the blocks. All of the
industry assistance things would go before income support goes.
Payments to industry the transfer payments, payments to schools which
are holding up these massive participation rates in secondary school, and 
into tertiary and vocational education they are all the sorts of things that
will get hit. Because payments to the States we now give them a real
terms per capita guarantee, which in a sense, isolates that area of the
Budget from reductions we have got long-term arrangements with
defence, so you take defence and the States out of there, to get into the
rest of it, you have really got to savage the outlays in a way which would be
unconscionable. Now, the underlying level of these outlays is now roughly 25.4% to 25% of
GDP. Now John Howard, my opponent, is running around saying ' We won't
touch revenue". He claims to want to lead the country, but wants to give up
one instrument of financial management he won't touch revenue " I'll do it
all on outlays". Then he says " we should be cutting outlays" or Costello is
saying for him " by up to $ 10 billion". Well, you can't cut outlays by up to
billion without cutting pensions, income support to the families,
payments to schools or the industry programs, which are important sectors
of industry. That game is up. You can certainly go back through it, and
continue to put pressure on the efficiency of delivery, you can change the
priorities of programs, you can yield savings we have done that with a
savings round this year of $ 1.5 billion. We cut outlays by $ 1.5 billion, but
there is a lot of unavoidable new spending in the Com~ monwealth, and there
are some discretionary policies so that the net changes and outlays were
$ 700 million, but the actual program of cuts was $ 1500 million. So, it was a
very large set of cuts taken by the ERC over 9 weeks, or 10 weeks. So, it's
just not... . you can go beyond it, but you won't have any political authority
no Government in this country would have the political authority to go
beyond it, and when the Coalition tell you they will cut waste and
duplication and they will cut $ 10 billion out of outlays, just don't believe
them. It's just tripe. Nonsense. And take it from somebody who had to sit
through it for 10 weeks a year, for 12 years it just can't be done. And that
is why we say that John Howard has given up economic policy, because
when you give away receipts changes to receipts and you are kidding
everybody you can make major changes in outlays, what you are really
saying is that you are abdicating your role as a financial manager, because
all the weight will then do is shift to interest rates.
Now, that change I have mentioned to you the bond selling program going
down from $ 21 billion to $ 6 billion has taken a lot of the pressure off
interest rates which is one of the things your sector needs, it's one of the
things of value to your sector and we hope that trend we have seen last
week will continue, and that there is a genuine change in sentiment in
financial markets as a consequence of the Budget. The problem we are
trying to meet is not to reduce spending this year it was not about trying to
hold down... . we didn't use the Budget as a demand management tool,
because the 3 monetary adjustments of late last year have basically done
that trick, you might know, that in the year to the September quarter, the
economy was growing at 6.5% a year, and expenditure all spending in the
economy was running at Now you don't have to be an
econometrician to know that if the spending is running at 8.5% and product 
is running at 2% is going to be satisfied by imports. And at it
was putting too much stress on the country's productive capacity. So, we
needed to slow it down. So, in the Budget, we are forecasting 3.75% for
GDP, so it's a long way from And those monetary adjustments last
year, were taken at the right time and we made them large adjustments
one percentage points, or 2.5 altogether: 2 of 1 and 1 of 0.5% to
actually get that slowing into place. So we don't need the Budget for an
immediate slowing of the economy what we needed in the Budget is a
medium term change for savings, because our problem is that we have got
a current account deficit which is running about 2% of GDP above the point
where it basically pays for itself. Each year, in the 60s and 70s, we were
running a current account deficit of 2.5% of GOP, but we had capital inflow
equal to 2.5% of GOP. In other words, we were able to afford a current
account deficit of 2.5% of GOP, and not aggregate debt. That changed in
the late 1970s and the early 1980s, when we got so uncompetitive, when
the terms of trade ran against us, when we had a wage explosion, and
double-digit inflation for most of the decade, by that stage the current
account was running it started at 6% of GOP in 1980-81 not the number
you will hear John Howard tell you about, but that's what it was, 6% of GOP
in 1980-81. In other words, the cat was out of the bag then. And we have
been running, on average, at 4.5% since.
So, if 2.5% is sustainable, and the average is 4.5% and that's not
sustainable, the problem is 2 percentage points of GOP. In other words,
our savings have fallen as to around that amount so as not to be able to
accommodate the investment phase we need for employment, growth,
activity. And the reason it fell, I think principally, was double-digit inflation.
Once double-digit inflation came to Australia, it took about a decade to
teach Australians that it wasn't any point putting money in the bank,
because the tax on the nominal interest rate, after double-digit inflation,
was negative reals, so they stopped saving and they started buying flats,
apartments, holiday houses etc. And we inculcated in a generation that
there was no point in saving. It is going to take now, with a much better
and lower inflation performance, some time to change that, so as a
consequence, we have developed a savings pothole, which started from
that period of double-digit inflation a decade or more of double-digit
inflation and what the Budget is about doing is doing that is to try and
overcome that problem. Let me just briefly explain how it happens. In the
Budget and the next couple of years, we will see a turnaround of about 4
percentage points of GOP. And let's say that part of it is cyclical, and part of
it's structural. The other great change we had in the Budget was to extend
superannuation beyond 9% to 15% for every working person, and we have
encouraged people to put 3% of their personal contributions away, which
we will then match with a 3% tax cut equivalent paid into their
superannuation accounts. This will add 6 percentage points of wages to
the 9% under the superannuation guarantee charge. This will take it to
Now, at the moment we have got $ 186 billion in super funds, and the
Treasury estimate that by 2020, we will have $ 2000 billion in super funds 
$ 2 trillion, It was $ 40 billion in 1983, it is $ 186 billion now, and they
estimate that it will go to $ 2000 billion..
But that's 2020, and our time horizon is a bit shorter than that, and if we are
looking at the year 2000, the savings and super would be less, but still very
strong. Now, what the Treasury estimate is that by 2020, we will add the
equivalent of 4% of GDP to savings, but they also estimate that by the year
2000, we will add 2 percentage points of GDP. So, lets say that on the
Budget side we have added 4% by the year 2000, on the super side we
have added 4% by 2020, but if we are talking about 2000, we have added
2% on super and 4% on the Budget. In other words, in the Budget of last
Tuesday week, we put in a 6 percentage point fix for a 2 percentage point
problem. Now, let me just say something about the Budget: not all of that is
structural, some of it is cyclical as the economy grows, the cycle changes,
revenue and outlays change, and at any subsequent slowing, that would
affect the cyclical part of the Budget. Well, let's take all of the cyclical
calculation out of it, and call the 4 percentage points of the Budget A
good solid 2% and underlying and super with an underlying 2% gives
you a very solid foundation for 4% savings to GOP to meet a 2% current
account problem. Now, that's why the Budget was important, and that's
why the Government can be relied upon to do a professional job as
always on-the hard problems.
And let me say about super now here's John Howard running around on
Thursday night last saying " we'll put a cap on super we'll put a cap on it
and we'll give tax concession to higher income earners". Well, he gave tax
concessions in the 70s, and by 1983, superannuation coverage was
Today, it's 90%. So, if we go back to tax deductions, what we will see is
superannuation contributions go up to the top end of the income range, and
not the lower and middle income earners where the great bulk of the
community is where the great bulk of the savings must come. So, we take
the view that by starting with a 3% case in 1985-86, and moving it up to
and then getting the superannuation guarantee into place taking it to 9% by
2002, and now adding 6% 3% and 3% from personal contributions and
the tax cuts, we have over a decade, put together a scheme that the
Liberals wouldn't have had the imagination or the wit to even approach,
much less implement. And you think there are some things.. . they don't
have any conversation with the trade union movement, and you can
imagine Peter Costello or John Howard going to say to the workforce of
Australia " please put 15% of your income away as savings", and they would
say " oh, sure we will sure. No problem". Well, of course, they can't do it.
You would think they would have enough sense to say well look, a Labor
government did what we could never do, let's let this one go to the keeper
let's at least lock this away. That's what Mr Connolly was saying a week or
2 ago, and saying in the press yesterday their superannuation
spokesperson who was defeated in Bradfield saying this one we should
let go to the keeper because there is a broad national change here. But
again, the ideology is out saying " oh no, we don't want lower and middle
income earners getting the benefit of the tax concession, so we will cap it 
and we will throw tax concessions again to higher paid earners". I mean,
some people never learn.
But, at least, there is here now a really substantial savings change. And
that's going to fund the higher investment we need for more employment,
and a more productive country. And we know, as we go through the
we are going to need more capital investment not less, more because
one of the problems of that 70s double-digit inflation, and the big call on the
public sector, is that it absolutely smashed to pieces the capital stock. And
we didn't have enough capital stock to produce goods and services, and
that's why we had a current account weakness all through the 80s. So we
have got to get the capital stock up that means more investment, that
means more savings to meet it but without those savings, that pressure
for investment will reflect itself in higher interest rates, and you know as
well as any sector, the problem those higher interest rates put on your
particular sector. So, the way to accommodate higher investment, and
higher employment, and reach the Government's target of
unemployment by the year 2000, is through more investment, but we can't
afford more investment if it only puts pressure on interest rates, therefore
we have had to augment savings. So, the Budget was a very important
document, I think, not just for the country, but particularly for the rural
sector, because it does the lay the basis of a very long-term and important
change to savings which we dearly needed and which we now have.
Let me just make one final point about outlays. In the Budget, the ratio of
outlays to GDP will decline by 2.7% over the next couple of years, which is
$ 13 billion to $ 14 billion. In other words, just left to themselves, they are
going to drop away to 24% of GDP. That's $ 13 billion $ 14 billion. But
revenue will increase by only 1 of GOP, so in terms of the structure of the
Budget, outlays are subsiding, and the revenue is only barely picking up.
So, in terms of the quality if you like, the balance between outlays and
revenue in the Budget you have got a $ 13 billion to $ 14 billion change in
the course of happening right at the moment.
Could I just go on and say that we want to be able to with this Budget and
this environment keep the environment up for the health of the rural
sector, this is not withstanding climactic hardships and the rest, and I just
want to say a couple of things about the banks. The banks have been
cutting back a lot of their operations in rural areas in the name of efficiency.
But I think they are being very short-sighted they are failing to see the
potential of Australia's rural industry, which is one of Australia's
comparative advantages, which represents one of Australia's comparative
advantages and the capacity of Australia's farmers to run profitable and
productive concerns. The banks have been cutting overheads, they don't
have the personnel necessary to provide farmers and farming communities
with the service they need. They seem to me to be almost incapable of
intensely managing typical rural loans in the region of $ 50,000 to $ 200,000
they don't seem to be able to get a handle on the management of those
loans at all, so they have taken the next best policy, and that is to basically 
back out. I think they need to take a longer term view they do have a very
privileged position in the financial community, and simply just resorting to
housing lending, and moving away from what I call intelligent rural lending,
is I think, a bad trend.
One of the things your President and Rick and I have discussed on occasions
is this question about whole of farm planning which, I think, is important. It
would be far better to get the banks interested in how a farm is managed to
be able to assess the quality of the loans by being able to assess the credit
being extended to farms, if in fact, there is a whole of farm plan. I think we
should be moving more towards this where we have consultants in each
district who are able to go and look at a farm and say what its capacity is,
what the soils are like, what it should be growing, how it should be grazing,
how the. farm should be configured et cetera.
Were that to happen and if whole of farm plans were advanced ahead of, if
you like, primary advances in loans the bank's security would be better and
we would have a far better relationship, a far more conducive relationship
between banks and farms and farmers and graziers.
So, when we look at our possibilities, the Asian markets around was and the
demonstrable ethic for hard work and adaptability which the farm sector has,
then they seem to me to mark themselves out farmers and graziers as
typically the sort of people banks should be lending to rather than cutting
back. So, I am going to take whatever opportunity I can to remind the banks
of their responsibilities here, but let's make their task a little easier by helping
them, if you like develop these relationships which make farm lending easier
rather than harder.
Can I perhaps finish my remarks by just saying, we have established a great
deal of common ground in recent years. We understand that our ambitions
are very much alike. I know from working in the last two years on issues as
diverse as Native Title and Landcare and the drought and regional
development that we can get a lot done together. I think we have become, as
far as the farm and rural communities are concerned, good listeners. We try
and earnestly work our way through the problems and see what we can do in
a systemic way and we will keep that up. As I say, we are working together
now at the moment in the United States on the farm bill and I think it does
show that the view the NIFF has taken, that it is not just simply a sectoral body
which is arguing for sectional interests but taking a broader view of national
interests, have served it particularly well because, I think, while ever it is has
adopted those sorts of policies it has been more relevant, stronger, more
influential and able to get, if you like, sector specific changes into place as
well as the broader, big brush issues.
So, I see enormous potential in our relationship. As hard at times as it has
been and in many places they still are, we have made great progress and I
think the points that Donald made about the drought are right. We are seeing
these rains, but we have seen them before, we've seen the beginning of rains 
for winter crops and yet the crops haven't materialised, but this time we have
an infrastructure of policy sitting behind, the problem of the drought and we
ought to be, perhaps, I suppose the term is cautiously optimistic about these
rains. They seem widespread and lets hope they are as good as they look,
but by the same token, let me endorse his remarks by saying let's not let the
pressure off on sustainability and drought management simply because we
have seen some change in seasonal conditions. We have had a major
structural problem here, cyclical problem, but becoming structural because it
is so long with the drought and now is the time to remember that we have
been making progress in drought management and these rains are a
reminder that it is a long term rather than a short term problem.
Can I thank you for having me over. Let me again, conclude my remarks by
commending Rick Farley for the role he has played. I wish him well in the
future. I know he is going to be a hard man to replace, but the organisation
has changed as a consequence of his being there and under the leadership
of people like Donald, I think, the future is yours, it is what we can make of it.
Thank you.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS SESSION
Q: On the theme of the drought and the fact that we have had some
useful rain in parts of the country and, indeed, some very big parts of
the country and that is very welcome. But, we do seem to have this
persistent problem in some areas and, as I said, those are some of the
areas that have been most badly affected for longest. I think, in the
pleasure that the rain we have had brings to those areas that it comes,
is always the concern by the people in other areas, in the areas that
haven't had it, that they will be forgotten and I think it would be very
much appreciated by those people, Prime Minister, if you could restate
essentially the commitment that you have given in the past that the
relief that they have got through the assistance measures that are will,
indeed, continue until such time as they actually do get back into a
position where seasonal conditions and production returns to some
sort of normality. And secondly, we have actually still got some
exceptional circumstances applications pending and we would like an
assurance that the Government will deal with those as quickly as
possible.
PM: Let me, Donald, say that I am quite happy to say that we had some
exceptional circumstance applications, I think, in Victoria amongst
other places pending and one will need to see with these rains what
the continuing assessment of these regions are. But, from our point of
view we don't regard the drought as being over simply because these
rains have come and that we would like to see these applications
progressed and we will be keeping these policies in place. We have
now got, I think from memory, about 6000 to 7000 and maybe more by
now farm families getting income support. We have seen about 4000
farm businesses received support under RAS and it is the sort of 
matrix of policy we have got sitting there now which is something, I
think, that becomes a real advance for the rural community because
now they are there they won't be going away. I mean, us having put
them there, I can't imagine the future if someone is going to basically
say no, the farm assets test is going to be applied regardless of
income in these circumstances. So, I would like to think we have made
a policy advance in some of these areas, but before we cry victory and
walk off the field, let's see what happens with the rains and let's
progress these applications.
Q: Prime Minister, interest rates have a major impact on farm profitability,
some comments made yesterday by the Treasury Secretary Ted Evans
and they have been interpreted by the media to mean that interest
rates may well have peaked. On the other hand, of course, there are a
lot of financial institutions that are providing other advice concerned
about higher inflation and perhaps a rebound in spending. Do you
believe that interest rates, especially those that are driven by Reserve
Bank policy on short term money market rates that have an impact on
business overdrafts and mortgages have peaked?
PM: Let's make these two distinguishing points. -That is, the long bond
rates set in the market without any reference to the Reserve Bank and
it is the long bond rate which has fallen by over a percentage point
and, I think, the large reduction in the bond selling program is probably
responsible for a large part of that. Short end rates are conditioned by
long end perceptions to some extent, but they are also governed by
demand management objectives. One of the points I was making to
you on my feet is that we have succeeded in slowing the economy
down so that now we are forecasting for the coming year three and
three quarters per cent rather than five or six per cent. Therefore, the
policy need of using further monetary adjustments to slow the economy
down seems remote. It would only come back into prospect if, in fact,
growth unexpectedly picked up to unsustainable levels again, but I
can't see it in the current environment.
Plus the change in the Budget balance is fairly substantial and that is
going to reduce quite a bit of public sector demand from the economy.
So, even if for instance, we were only conservatively estimating the
decline in GDP coming from private activity there is one thing certain
about the Budget, there is a further large complement in the reduction
of public demand. Put all that together and Ted Evans' view that the
underlying inflation rate may be a little on the up side in the Budget
estimates and that augurs quite well, I think, for the short run of rates
because, again, you have got always a demand in supply equation
there to be met and by such a very large change in the public sector
call on savings we are going to see a substantial change in that
demand supply equation and that should be good for rates. So, I think,
one of the objectives of the Budget was to take pressure of interest
rates and I think it has done that. 
Q: Prime Minister, up until now the. Industrial Relations Accord parties
have been exclusively the Government and the ACTU, given the
importance of progressing further industrial reform for competitive
reasons, what is in your view on the extension of the focus of the
Accord to include parties such as farmers, business, large and small
generally, in interests of progressing further constructive reform?
PM: If you go back over the history of the Accord, it started in 1983 from a
wage share in GDP that was inordinately high and the profit share in
GDP was well below the levels we had experienced in the 1960s and
as a consequence, investment had been sharply curtailed. So, in a
sense it was the ACTU constituency that had to give something away.
They were the people giving it away, the business community were the
people getting it from wages to profits. So, that is why of its essence,
in its original days the Accord was a matter between the trade unions
and the Government because the Government was seeking to redress
that shift in the profit share which had so dislocated investment. Now,
that was true for most of the 1980s. It is less true now because the
profit share is as high as it was in the late 1980s and, I think, now has
no historical precedent. This is the highest levels of profits, national
income to profits, I think, probably ever.
We are seeing a lot of, if you like, informal involvement of the business
organisations. You can see it in the change to enterprise bargaining.
You can see it in the support of the change. You might recall a couple
of years ago the MTIA were most sceptical about a movement to an
enterprise bargaining system because Bert Evans had a long memory
of what had happened with leap frogging in the late 1970s and early
1980s under the concept of comparative wage justice and so was, if
you like, less than confident that business could actually handle the
strengths which the Industrial Relations Act was going to give it. At
any rate, what we are seeing is a very great spread of enterprise
bargains, 65 per cent of all employees covered by federal awards are
now covered by a bargain of some kind or another and we are seeing
some very good bargains being struck and just a week or so ago the
metals' unions and the industry, I can't remember the place, made
what the Metal Trades Industry Association thought was a fairly good
agreement and as we see these, what you call, very good grass roots
agreements continuing to arise, they become industry standards. The
industry starts to get its pecker up and get its confidence, but people
are starting to really pull a lot of productivity out of the changes and
employees also are benefiting.
So, there is, I think, now a fairly conducive, informal involvement by
some of the industry bodies. The hotel sector, for instance, did a land
mark enterprise agreement with federal hotels and, I think, that
therefore the game has opened up. In terms of the Accord proper, of
course, because we have moved away from the centralised wage fixing 
system, there is less specificity if you like in the elements of the
Accord, rather broad commitments by the trade unions about
maintaining competition with our trading partners on inflation and
commitments by the Government about support for the safety net
arrangements for those people who can't access enterprise bargaining.
So, the Accord elements are becoming more simple. They are
because the system of wage fixation is less centralised and now more
complex. Now, I think, that it is possible for organisations like the NIFF
and the MTIA and the other business organisations, the Business
Council if they can drop their ideology, to actually be involved and be
relevant in this process as we see the continuing evolutionary change
to the labour market. I think this would be a very good thing, but in any
Accord process, with the government and the unions, there is a
commitment by the trade unions to low inflation, to competitiveness. A
commitment by the government to equity in wage adjustments. If a
business party joins it, there has got to be commitments too, it can't be
in a sense, there is no point in being in it with nothing to contribute and
that is why when we have mooted these things in the past, they have
never come to much because the business community has never
believed it was a principal party to the point where it was actually
giving something away or providing something. That has changed in a
more co-operative environment and maybe the time is arising where
that can be considered. I think we are about to move to another
Accord Mark VIII which will cover the next three years, but I think we
are seeing now, you can see for instance the ACTU's attitude towards
the NIFF or some of the other business organisations, how much the
game has changed, how less confrontational it is, how more
constructive it is and, I think, they would welcome expressions such as
the one you have made.
Q: Prime Minister, when APEC was formed trade was well and truly one of
its prime objectives, Is the reform of agricultural trade still on the
agenda and if it isn't, do you propose to make moves to bring it back
on the agenda because it is extremely important for agriculture in
Australia?
PM: The answer to that is very much in the affirmative and the value of
APEC is that, well you know this expression the north-south dialogue
we used to hear through the 1970s and 1980s, APEC is the first
tangible real expression of that dialogue. When you have got a body
in the pacific rim which are represented by countries such as the
United States and Japan, the first and second largest developed
economies. And then the largest, if you like, developing countries
China, Indonesia, smaller countries like Papua New Guinea so it
really is, in a sense, representing that north-south divide and, of
course, one of the things we argued all the way through the GATT was
that although Australia was a developed country it had a lot of the
trading profile of a developing country because of agriculture and 
therefore we put the Cairns Group together and successfully kept it
together for seven years to prosecute that argument. So, I think, there
is a lot of trust in Australia's position as an agricultural producer and
somebody who champions the cause of free markets or open markets
and freer trade in agriculture. That is going to matter in the Asia
Pacific where some of the agricultural nationals will want better access
and it is going to improve the living standards of developed countries
like Japan to actually improve access for agricultural products from
abroad. So, given the fact that the GATT took so long because we are facing
the subsidy problems of the European and the European Common
Market, APEC representing half the worlds production and about half
the worlds population, gives us a chance to do a far more precise and
refined approach to agriculture than we were even able to do with the
Common Agricultural Policy and the GATT. But, we are going to see
changes too and I think the other thing about APEC is that it will bring
on, over time, at least it will encourage a debate about another general
trade round because if half of the world is liberalising its trade, the
other half of the world has got to be thinking about it.
The other thing is, as these Visigrad countries join the European
community, where they have large scale common agriculture, once
those areas have been farmed with modem agricultural machinery and
the agriscience and the understanding of productivity becomes more
entrenched in those countries, the weight of product that is going to be
dumped onto the European financial system is going to be so great, I
think, in the end it will actually dislocate the Common Agricultural
Policy. I think that has been all right to the moment where we have
essentially small, in many countries for instance in France, quite small
farm agriculture, but once you get those broad acres of the Visigrad
countries coming to higher production, I think, the game is going to get
very nasty indeed for European budgets and they may be looking then
for an opportunity to start to see their problems being resolved in a
broader context and that is where I think APEC can be just the ticket.
ends 



IVI
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P4J KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF THE JUSTICE $ TATEMENT
BRISBANE 18 MAY 1995
Today it Is my privilege to launch the Commonwealth Government's Justice
Statement a $ 160 million program of reforms to improve our justice system and
make Australia a more equitable, democratic arnd just society.
It is another practical demonstration of the Commonwealth Govemmenfs belief
that Australia will be stronger and a better place In which to live if all Australians
are able to share In the benefits of this democracy and, equally, share a faith In
the ideas and values on which that democracy is built.
The Justice Statement outlineS action the Government will take right across the
legal system.-to reduce ctime, protect consumers, reinforce human rights, sImplify
legislation, improve legal aid serVices and make the resolution of disputes outside
the legal system a practical alternative to legal proceedings.
In launching this Statement today I will concentrate on some of the measures to
achieve our three main objectives for reform.
The first objective is to bring justice to people, not people to lawyers.
We want to help people resolve their problems before they get caught up in legal
action. Many Australians first encounter the legal system in the difficult and stressful
circumstances which almost invariably surround proceedings in Family Law.
We will substantially increase funding for those family support services that help
families through difficult times and, wherever possible, stay together.
With the right support, many families are able to resolve ' their problems without
legal intervention and its financial and emotional costs. 
TEL: 17. ay. 15 INU. ULL
2
In doing this, we will also enable the courts to deal more Promptly with those
cases which cannot be resolved by othor means.
In total, we will provide $ 54 million over four year* for the expansion of family
services throughout Australia: services which have been shown to help couples
enter reletionships witrn a oetter understanding of the oommitment they are
making, and families to work through protbleMS which May arise over the years.
We will doUble the iurnber or marriage and relationship courses, piovide a~ 50 pidl
cent Increase in family skills training, and " rate up to 20 new financial
Counselling services. The Family Court's counselling services will be increased
by 25 por oent andi more then 15,000 additional people each year will be assisted
by family mediation.
We will specifically extend these programs to assist families in regional and rural
a reas.
The Guvivinnint will also allocate an additional $ 2.4 million over tour years to
improve the way family support services deal with family violence. We know from
consultations with women in the communit that violence and fear of violence are
pr~ ority Issues.
One of the aims of the now funding will be to rind ways of preventing relationships
beomn violent. But Staff Will also be trained in the best methods of responding
to family violence, innClUdng the means by which they can help women who want
to leave a violent relationship, or people living In violent circumstances who want
the relationship to continue but the violence to stop.
Our strategy Is also geared to provide families with the means to resolve disputes
outside the formal proceose3 of the courts.
Aiternative proceses, such as mediation, have Increasingly proved to be
effective means of dealing with family breakdowns.
R'ecause mediation glvpq ppople a greater stay In Mhe dacdqlons whirh affism their
lives, the results are more likely to be acceptea and more likely to endure,
We will encourage the shift from litigation to mediation by increasing the numbier
of family mediators and funding the establshmient of new community mediation
services around Australia,
Alternative means, however, are sometimes inappropriate -for example, in
disputes where there is Inequality or bargaining between the parties or where
there Is a history of domestic violence, The Government will fund the Family
Court to train mediators and counsellors in ways which will -enable them to
recognise situations which demand resort to the legal system. r UZ/ V( 
TEL 3
As part of our objective to bring justice to the people we have developed ' Safer
Australia', a national strategy to reduce crime and build Safer communities.
Crime has debilitating, often devastating. effects on families and local
communities. It carries significant social and economic costs.
Although the State and Territory governments have primary responsibility for law
and order, the national government can play a role where it is appropriate to its
functions in the task of providing a secure environment for Australians.
We will continue working with the States and Territories on issues such as gun
control. We will tighten Australia's already stringent gun importation restrictions
and ban the importation of handguns that can be adapted to duplicate machine
guns. We will also provide $ 1.2 million over four years for community surveys to identify
problem areas and develop responses to reduce crime. We will support local
pilot projects which may make communities safer, such as improved lighting in
public areas and better safety and surveillance In car parks and public transport
centres. We will provide $ 2.8 million over four years to test local cdme reduction
measures that will have application elsewhere In Australia.
The second main objective of the Govemment's justice strategy is to ensure that
Australians have access to legal services which are affordable and responsive to
their needs and circumstances.
As a first step, the legal aid system will be reformed.
It was the Whitiamr Labor Government 20 years ago which first recognised the
Importance of comprehensive legal aid arrangements.
Through our funding of legal aid commissions and community legal centres, the
Commonwealth remains the major source of funding for community legal
assistance and the initiatives In the Statement reinforce that position.
But despite its level of financial contribution, the Commonwealth has had little say
in the distribution of the legal aid dollar.
This will change.
It is our view that the Commonwealth has an important role to play in ensuring
national consistency in the delivery of legal aid services. T1EL.: May. 95 22: 35 No. 022 P. 06/ U( 
TEL 4
Uniform eligibility criteria, Uhflhormf performance measures and best practice
principles will be developed to provide. as far as poSSie, equal acress to legal
aid, regardless of where people live.
An Australian 10901 Assistance Bonrd will be established to coordinate legal aid
planning and policy and increase access end equity.
We will also provide a total of $ 24 million over four years to Increase legal aid
. qprviceA~
At present there Is an Italance In legal aid funding. Criminal law cases currently
absorb the major proportiori of the budget. While the Government agrees that
anyone accused of a 6erious criminal matter needs legal representation, other
legal problems can have different, but equally -serous, consequences for the
people concerncd, For instance, women seeking protection from violence may
be in grave danger, and unemployed workers may faco eviction proceedings, and
yet not have access to legal assistan'ce.
Over the next four years, Thp Government will provide an 2dditional $ 16.8 million
to legal aid commissions to provide more ASSISncA In fgamily law and civil law
111tturs. Traditionally, legal aid has provided assistance for the most needy inOiw ui ty.
But many other Australians cannot afford private legal advice and representation.
Contingency fees offer one solution, Under thcso arrongements, in cases where
there Is a prospoct of an award of money, law~ yers provide their services with
payment contingent on a successful outcome.
But even when lawyers offer their services on a contingency basis, other uip-front
tfe ofteni have to be met by the client In order to take legal action, * Such as those
for expert witnesses arid medical reports. Those di.% buiserrierit costs can be
prohibitively expensive.
The Government will set up a $ 10.5 million National Disbursements Assistance
Fund to moot the up-front costs of litigation where lawyers are acting on a
contingency or no fee basis. These disbursements will only have to bo repaid if
the client wins the tAse.
WO knoQw tildt worirluriity legal centres are a cost effective and well-accepted
method of providingj help to thousands of Australians.
The centres are In touch with the needs of the local communities in which they
operate, and provide assistance on a varioty of legal issues, including credit
2dvice, family low, child support and social security matters. T1EL7:. May.' 95 22: 35 No. U22 IV. UL4/ u( 
TEL: ar. ic.
This Statement Provides a doubling of funding for Community legal centres, with
an additional $ 30 mill ion over four years.
Nine new community legal services will be established in high growth urban and
regional locations.
In a major new initiative, the Government will establish the National Women's
Justice Strategy to redress the inequities women face In obtaining access to
justice, The strategy will be part of the expanded community legal centres program. Its
centrepiece will be a national network of women's legal centres,
At least one specialist women's legal centre will be established to servie the
needs of women in every State and Territory.
The centres will provide advice through an Australia-w~ de toll free telephone
service. The centres will also be given funding to cater for the needs of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, the least well-served by the justice
system; and outreach services will be provided for women in rural and remote
areas. The third objective of the Government's justice strategy is to reform the legal
profession, courts and tribunals to make them more accountable and accessible.
Reducing the costs of legal services and promoting a greater consumer focus will
increase access to justice.
Competition reduces costs. And competition is coming to the legal profession.
Last month, the Commonwealth and the States reached an historic agreement on
the implementation of a national competition policy. The policy will apply to all
professions. It will ensure consumers in the legal market enjoy the same
protection as people in other sectors. Unnecessary regulation will be removed
and a more competitive and accountable legal profession created. Consumers
will have greater choice and lawyers will have greater flexibility to meet consumer
needs. Lawyers will benefit from these reforms through the creation of a genuine national
market in legal services so that qualified lawyers can practise freely anywhere In
Australia. But more needs to be done. ~ 05 00: 5 Wo 0F22 P. 05/ 07 
TEL' 17. May. 95 22: 35 No. 022 F. uU/ Uv
6
While the Commonwealth's constitutional power to regulate the legal profession is
limited, the Government will take action in areas that are within its power to
provide better services for consumers.
We will require lawyers acting In Federal matters to disclose to clients the likely
costs of legal action, and canvass with them the possibility of alternative
procedures. We will overhaul the fee scales that apply In Federal courts with a view to
developing a simpler structure and more accurate charging rates.
The Government will work with the States and the profession to accelerate
reform, but we will not hesitate to act if reforms are delayed.
If the States do not do so, we will legislate to permit contingency fees in Federal
matters, other than family and criminal law, and we will Introduce legislation to
permit advertising by lawyers.
The Government is also working to improve the operation of our courts and
tibunals. Justice Is not well served if people do not understand what happens in
our courts or have difficulty using them.
A t the Justice Forum held last year I expressed an interest in the creation of
charters for courts which would set out the standards of access and service which
people can expect In courts and how they might be treated,
I am pleased that the courts are keen to take up this idea, and we will be
supporting their Initiative with funding.
We will also provide funds to develop facilities in our courts which cater for the
needs of people with a disebility and people caring for children.
The Justice Statement also addresses deficiencies which have been Identified
within our courts, particularly in the Family Court,
Extra staff will be provided to the Family Court to deal with Its current backlog of
Cases and handle peak case loads. Additional funding will be provided to
increase Family Court services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
And we will fund an expansion of court translatino and interpreting ocrvices, to
etboth Indigenous peoples and people of non-English speaking backgrounds.
We will al~ so provide funding for professional development courses for judges,
focusing on Issues such as gender and cross-cultural awareness. 
TEL: 17. May. 95 22: 35 No .022 P. 07/ 07
7
This statement concerns Australian justice and the Australian people. it is 8
Justice statement and a comprehensive one but it goes much further than that.
It we can create a justice system which is simpler, cheaper and more accessible
we will extend our democracy and strengthen belief in it; we will increase respect
for our laws and the ideas and principles on which they are based. This Justice
Statement Is an Investment in Australian democracy.
It Is also an investment in the quality of Australian life. If we can reduce crime,
find solutions to domestic violence and family breakdowns, and mitigate the
trauma which accompanies these tragedies, Australian communities will be better
places In which to live and work and raise children,
That Is the bottom line of this justice statement-in the end our legal system is
much less about the traditions, -symbols and Institutions of the law grand as they
may be than it is about providing a safe and secure environment for all
Australians. There can scarcely be a better means of encouraging trust in the law and faith in
Australian democracy. 



N)
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH KATHY BORDER, ABC RADIO, BRISBANE
18 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KB: Prime Minister, this announcement today what difference will it
make for the average person, their complaint being more often than
not, that legal help is simply too expensive, and it's not worth going
through the legal processes?
PM: I think that's right I think it's very threatening for people, and they
feel as though the justice system is there for the wealthy, or for those
in the know, or those who have contacts, or what have you. And this
is a very poor basis for us to continue the sort of deepening of our
democracy, the sense of participation that people have in it, so we
think this is a major grass-roots change to change the access to
justice, by removing barriers to justice, to removing the resort to go
to court and to litigation by resolving and preventing conflict, and if
you like restoring confidence in the justice system itself they are
the 3 elements of it.
KB: And it will be cheaper?
PM: We are going to add it will be cheaper, because there will be more
competition among lawyers for services. People will have a better
idea what costs will be. In fact, in the federal jurisdiction, we are
going to ask lawyers to actually outline what the costs of a particular
course of legal action might be, so that a proponent could have
some other avenue available. And part of that is always better
conflict resolving approaches. But the other we are going to do, is
we are reforming legal aid and providing another $ 17 million in
additional funds over 4 years for more assistance for civil and family
law matters. At the moment, a lot of the legal aid money is
swallowed up in the criminal law. We are going to even that up a bit
with civil and family legal matters. We are spending another
million over 4 years to expand the community legal centres, and 
community legal centres are your really grass-roots access areas
the very things you are talking about. We're establishing 9 new
community legal centres in outer urban and regional centres, and
they will target more services to children and youth and human rights
and discrimination. So those sorts of things.
KB: Lots of initiatives. Can we move onto the Mt Isa Mines dispute it's
still in limbo there. management has agreed to talks, but only with 2
particular unions why do you think those 2 particular unions?
PM: I'm not party to the discussions. I think there is a demarcation issue
here, the one you identified about the unions, and there is also an
enterprise bargain going on at the same time so it's a bit of a mixed
grill. I think there's some good news in the fact that they have
agreed to talks, and I know that the ACTU s doing what it can to try
and bring the process along and so is my colleague, Laurie
Brereton.
KB: Do you think management should be giving more ground, though?
PM: I'm not party to the discussions, so I can't give you that sort of closein
comment. But obviously, the more goodwill there is from
management or from both sides towards a settlement people
have generally got to want a settlement. If they want a settlement, I
think we could probably get one.
KB: Variable interest rates lots of movement there lately. What do you
see happening in the near future up or down?
PM: I think for the moment it's down. I notice one of the Tasmanian
banks reduced its variable interest rates today. We saw a couple of
solid reductions from the major banks last Friday. The main reason
for that is, I think, that there has been a change in the financial
markets, and the long term bond rate has dropped from 10. 1% about
a week ago, to 8.9% it is now under The reason for that is that
the Budget changed the bond selling program the Commonwealth
sells bonds to fund the Budget deficit. Last year, we sold $ 21 billion
worth of bonds $ 21,000 million. Because of the Budget this year,
we will sell $ 6,000 million. So there is a $ 15, 000 million reduction in
the bond selling program of the Commonwealth, and that's what has
reduced the interest rate the yield on the long term bonds, and
that's having it's impact now on the variable housing rates.
KB: But isn't a bit of stability needed just today, we have got figures out
new housing figures showing that home loan approvals have
slumped. Will the Government be looking at stabilising that?
PM: The thing is, late last year it was running too strongly. It's either
going up, or it's going down. The aim of policy has been to slow the 
economy down from these exceptionally high rates of growth we had
last year. Last year, in the year to September, the economy was
growing at which is far too strong for us. In the Budget
forecast, we have now got 3.75% for the year. In other word, those
interest rate adjustments of late last year seemed like they have
done the trick they started to slow the economy down. But part of
the slowing is there is a change in consumer sentiment that comes
with it. That impacts into housing, but it will change. As this lower
rate structure is moving into place lower interest rate structure as
there is more confidence around since the Budget, this will start to
have it's effect on the housing industry a beneficial effect.
KB: So you're happy just to let things go as they are at the moment?
PM: Basically, there is no shortage of housing funds it's really up to
people to want to bid for them. Before I became Treasurer in the
1980s, you couldn't get the funds at any price, because they were all
regulated. There was a certain amount of funds, and that was it. It
wouldn't matter how credit worthy you were, you couldn't get them.
But after we opened the financial markets up in the 80s, you could
get funds for housing it's really just a matter of whether you want to
apply.
KB: There is some controversy surrounding that the Health Insurance
Amendment Bill last night here in Brisbane we had hundred of
Doctors meeting, and they decided that they won't be signing any
contracts with private insurance funds or private hospitals do these
amount to underhand tactics, and what effect will it have on the Bill?
PM: Well, you get, I think, this sort of behaviour where they resist these
sorts of changes. But in the end, what we think is unfair for patients
is they go in let's say they go in for a hip replacement, or an
appendectomy, or whatever it might be and then they have the
anaesthetist charge added on, they have the diagnostic imaging
added on, they have the support of ward attendants added on, and
what we are trying to do is get the one price. So when you take your
insurance out, if someone says " I have got to go in for a hip
replacement", there's one price. But that means that the health fund
has got to be able to sign up, and the hospital, has got to be able
sign up the doctors. So the doctors agree to do it at a fixed price.
Now, sometimes they will do it more inexpensively than the price,
other times with a complication it will cost more. But they will get
an average price. It's the one way we can start getting some
certainty into private insurance, and it's one of the ways whereby
people will know that if they actually take out private insurance, and
they go in for some elective surgery or non-elective surgery as the
case may be, they are not up for a heap of other unforseen
expenses at the end. 
KB: But if the doctors refuse to sign these contracts?
PM; Again, we are not going to get reform of the medical system quickly
or easily. I mean, you will always get these argy-bargies going on
in the end doctors want to protect... surgeons want to protect their
incomes, being able to charge as they see fit for the particular time
and attention they give a patient. And not to be party to, if you like,
arrangements with health funds, or with hospitals. If they want more
private people in private insurance and that's what you hear from
them all the time they're going to have to give some ground.
KB: On to the car war between the US and Japan you are, of course,
going to Japan shortly. Is the US, do you think, taking a too hard a
line with our Asian neighbours here?
PM; Well, the Japanese-US problem is basically a savings issue. The
Japanese are high savers, the Americans are low savers. And the
Japanese the high savings means that they have been able to run
very large investment programs, larger than the United States. This
has given their industries an enormous comparative advantage. The
Japanese, I think, also are at a bit of a crossroads. They want to
encourage greater consumer choice by buying products other than
those made in Japan and that is taking time. Probably more time than
it should of I think the Americans have probably got a point there. But
again, these are going to be evolutionary changes and they are not
going to happen by the United States taking a sledge hammer to the
Japanese. It is not really the way to get things done and we ought to
be concentrating on more open and freer trade generally and curing
some of these savings imbalances.
I think a lot of Japan's problems could be solved if more of their
savings were spent on themselves. That is, if they lifted domestic
demand, improve their housing stock, improved their infrastructure,
their roads, improved the environment. By doing that they would run
down these current account surpluses which would ease a lot of their
trade tensions they are getting out of a very high valued Yen. I think
that is the way it is going to come, it is not going to come by
bludgeoning.
KB: Just on that though, how do you think this car war will affect APEC?
PM: I don't think it will affect APEC. APEC is about the multilateralisation,
that is, getting the group of countries in APEC to agree to a set of rules
among them, that is, multilateral rules. The United States has looked
somewhat askance at all this because being the biggest dog on the
street, it has always taken the view that they will have what they call
unilateral rules: rules for one wherein they can decide what trade
deal they want to do or what trade deal they want to propose. The
whole emphasis on APEC is for multilateral solutions, that is, the 
solutions of many, of all the countries in it. APEC is just a bit too good
for the Americans to pass up. So, unilateralism aside, I can't see it
really being any impediment to the continuing progress of APEC.
KB: We have, of course, got the Federal and a Queensland election
looming, Is this going to be your last election campaign as Labor
leader?
PM: I hope not. My God, you are pensioning me off already. I thought I
was going all right here! I mean, you have got me on doctors and over
to APEC, then onto health, I thought I was cracking along all right.
Now you have got me in retirement!
KB: How much longer are you going to be at the helm then?
PM: Look, you know what happened? In the 25 years before I became an
MID nothing happened in Australia. What happened is the public
system threw the pass. In the Rip Van Winkle years of Menzies and
Holt and Gorton and McMahon, very little happened and very little
happened in terms of structural change. I have been in that generation
of MPs that had a chance of remodelling the Australian economy into
an internationally competitive, externally orientated country and kicking
the policy changes through like we did last week with the budget, with
occupational superannuation for the whole work force. Every person
putting away 15 per cent of their income for savings. The average
person going out on a pension of $ 33,000 a year. Those sorts of
changes are what makes it worthwhile or APEC which you have just
spoken of or Mabo or Working Nation helping the long term
unemployed back into work. These are the things that keep somebody
like me in the game.
KB: Are you serious, you don't think anything was achieved until your
generation came into politics?
PM: No, basically what happened was Australia went to sleep. We just
picked up the post war growth and said that is it. We have just got to
sell a bit of gold, a bit of iron ore and a bit of wheat and we will be
right. Well, of course, we were not right so by 1983 the terms of trade,
that is the value of the things we sell compared with the value of the
things we buy, had changed so dramatically Australia had a big current
account weakness and all this exposure to international debt. We had
only three kids in ten completing secondary school. This year we have
got eight in ten. We were rapidly becoming an unsmart country. We
were massively uncompetitive and we are now 40 per cent more
competitive today than we were in 1983. We have had 26 per cent
employment growth sine 1983, household disposable income has risen
per cent since 1983.
KB: If things are so good you will want to go to an election soon then? 
PM: Well, no, I am just making the point that good public policy look at a
country that has had a decade of good public policy and you'll see one
bounding ahead and Australia has had a decade of good public policy
and it is bounding ahead.
KB: Can you tell me what you see as the major differences between
yourself and John Howard?
PM: Answer in one word policies we have got them and he doesn't. You
notice Laurie Oakes in the Bulletin say this week of Mr Howard, it was
headed " Politics without Policies" and that really says it all in one
sentence about John Howard. John Howard thinks he can come back
into Opposition as Opposition Leader after having failed to distinguish
himself as Opposition Leader and as Treasurer and because we put
interest rates up last year, as we needed to do to slow the economy
down, he thought, " oh well, the Government will be a bit on the nose,
I'll slide in and become Prime Minister". Well, the thing about John,
what he is finding out is the public actually want some performance,
they want some policies, they are not going to give him the ticket
without knowing what he has in store for them-.
KB: What about as a person, are there any qualities about him you like?
PM: He is a fluffy enough sort of character. I don't mind having a chat with
him if I am sitting with him at something. But, the thing is, the problem
about John Howard is he belongs to the 1950s. He is a 1970s
politician with the 1950s values. Here we are in Asia, where for the
first time in Australian history we have the big economies of the world
at our doorstep. We are in the fastest growing part of the world for the
first time ever, but physiologically, John is still set up for Europe and
North America. He said ' if that Mr Keating can convince me about the
republic, why, in five years time ask me the question, I might be in
favour of it.' In other words, " if Mr Keating will lead again, I might
follow." That was the same on the floating of the dollar. That was the
same on deregulation. That was the same on breaking the tariff wall
down. That was the same on changing the education system. That
was the same on Mabo. That was the same on superannuation. So,
now he is saying ' oh, actually I agree with him on tariffs and I agree
with him about Asia' to which I say, well if you agree with me, if you
agree with us, why not let the authors of the policies be the
Government and not somebody who wants to appropriate their
policies. The thing is this, Australia has moved on from the Rip Van Wrinkle
years of Menzies when the country, in policy terms, was asleep. That
is John Howard's period. That is the period he looks to as a model.
Australians now want change and they know change has given them a
more interesting vital lives and higher incomes and more security and 
particularly that linkage to Asia. They know that. They know there is a
low inflationary culture now that wasn't there in his time. They know
that we have inculcated in the whole generation of managers and trade
unionists a productive culture. Product innovation is the order of the
day. We have doubled, just about, the proportion of our exports to
GOP in a decade. All of those things have come about and they are
not going to take somebody who says ' well basically, look, I have got
no policies, but I can give you a smart quip on ' AM' or ' PM' or on a
radio program..
KB: You are not into smart quips?
PM: and, you know, I can duck through without any real policy." Well,
you can't duck through. It is all over red rover. They are not going to
cop it.
KB: Of course, you are here in Brisbane today, have you met with Wayne
Goss at all to discuss elections?
PM: No, I haven't seen Wayne. No, I launched the Justice Statement and
then I have just had a lunch with the Lord Mayor and we had a
discussion about some of the problems of greater Brisbane, about
water supplies, about transport and I had a chance to meet some of
the distinguished members of the media on the way through and all in
all it has been a good productive day.
KB: Thank you for coming in, Prime Minister.
PM: Pleasure.
ends 



-N
A
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIE MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MIP
HOWARD'S POLICY VACUUM
Mr Howard's declaration after the Liberal Party's federal executive meeting on Friday that
he would not release any policies before the next election campaign was a declaration of
contempt for the Australian electorate.
He will not tell Australians what he thinks or intends to do,. or what if anything he stands
for. He tries to deny them by arguing that he will not respond to my agenda a lame
excuse for having no agenda himself.
This is the same tactic adopted by his most immediate predecessor, Mr Downer. It did not
wash for Mr Downer, and it won'&amp; w ash for Mr Howard.
The Australian people may now conclude that Mr Howard has no policies. Alternatively,
they may suspect that Mr Howard is attempting to invoke a policy " fifth amendment" he
will not say what he will do on the grounds that it might incriminate him. His recent GST
slip made this clear.
His call over the weekend for an inquiry into the Hindmarsh Island bridge controversy
firther illustrates his cynicism. This is nothing more than a transparent attempt to
rehabilitate Ian McLachlan, when the unalterable truth is that McLachlan had to resign
because he misled the Australian people and the Parliament. Whether the confidential
parcel contained sacred documents, or somebody's gas bill the fact remains it was not his
property, and he should not have tampered with it and tried to misuse it in Parliament. In
the circumstances, John Howard's call for an inquiry is merely the latest refuge of a policy
flake. In the meantime, the Coalition last week made more explicit how the it intends to
camouflage its giant policy hole. Apparently, they think it is clever to campaign
principally on a " get rid of Keating" platform. 
What they are trying to do is assume legitimacy for a campaign of personality politics with
no policy content at all. In other words, to the incessant talking down of the economy, the
Coalition will add the abandonment of policy.
The Liberal Party believes that from now until the next election they can survive on a hate
campaign. This means that after 12 years in Opposition, they are not only bereft of
policies for Australia, they have learned nothing about the political values of Australians.
CANBERRA 21 MAY 1995 



ThEL: 23. May. 95 3: 40 No. 007 P. 01/ IC'
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
23 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
PM: This is my third visit as Prime Minister to Japan, but it will be my first
official visit and, in fact, the first official visit of any Australian Prime
Minister for nearly a decade. So I think it has a symbolic as well as a
working dimension to it.
You know this relationship with Japan has been vital to Australia and
remains vital to us, which is a view which I have taken strongly now
over 20 odd years in my own relationship with Japan and its
companies and its governments. It is the second largest economy in
the world. It is our largest trading partner and it is the engine of
economic growth in East Asia.
Japan actually represents 70 per cent of the entire East Asian
economy. So the size of it should never be underestimated. What
happens in Tokyo, in fact, shapes what happens economically in the
region and will matter, always, to Australia and to our own lives and
the sort of lives our children will have as well.
More than ever, and more than any other country in the region, Japan
will be critical I think to our economic growth and our ability to create
high quality, interesting jobs for ourselves and our children.
Now, obviously, this visit is coming just about very close to the last
days of the 50th anniversary of the end of the war, which gives some
other dimension to the visit. The only thing I will say to you about that
is I think we should never forget the suffering and cruelty of that war.
But I think we need to remember, also, what has happened in the
years since and despite very different cultures and the legacy of the
war, we have, in the unlikely event, built a remarkable relationship with
Japan one of inestimable value to Australians and one which has, in 
T2EL3: Ma. 9 40 No. 00? P. 02/ I'u
2
very large part, also not only underpinned their post-war economic
growth, but underpinned Australia's as well.
So the relationship has grown from enmity through development of
trading rinks. It is now a very broad political and economic relationship
with growing, people -to-people, ties. Last year we had 720,000
tourists coming here from Japan and we have now exchanged 10,000
school exchange visits. So there are a lot of Australians who live with
Japanese families and the converse being the case here.
So I want to use the visit to reflect on that relationship in all of its
dimensions and look to the future where we are going in the region.
I will be having talks, obviously, with the Prime Minister. Mrs Keating
and I will be very honoured to be received by the Emperor and the
Empress for an official lunch. But with the Government I will be
meeting, not only with the Prime Minister, but with the MITI Minister,
Minister Hashimoto who, of course, I knew well in my Treasury years
when he was Finance Minster Foreign Minister Kono and other key
Japanese political, business and financial leaders.
I will also be visiting the Hodogaya War Cemetery where I will lay a
wreath to the 278 Australians who are buried there and the others who
died in the war.
In my discussions with Japanese leaders about our bilateral
relationship, I will be focussing on the things of economic and political
relevance in that and, also, the economic and political relevance in the
changing global environment. We will discuss regional, political and
economic developments, especially APEC. And you know that Japan
is hosting the third APEC Leaders meeting in Osaka in November of
this year and I will be urging Prime Minister Murayama and his
colleagues to work towards an ambitious and solid set of outcomes in
Osaka to carry forward, in a practical way, that historic declaration
which was agreed to at Bogor, in Indonesia, late last year.
So, in all, I see it as a chance to, again, get to understand Japan's
current thinking better, to advance our bilateral relationship and to
discuss these multilateral matters between us, particularly in this fast
growing area of the World, but multilateral both in the strategic and in
the economic sense and, of course, with APEC.
So I might leave it there and take questions.
J: Prime Minister what is the message that you will be giving the
Japanese about the trade dispute with America and will Australia be
taking sides on that?
PM: Well I think the side we'll be taking is Australia's side. rhat is, we want
Japan to continue to open Its markets. I think the Americans think that
TEL 
T: 23. May 95 3 : 40 No. 007 P. U0,/ 1 U
3
too. You know that Japan and the United States are both countries
with very low tariffs. We are not talking here about tariff barriers, we
are talking about informal barriers and they are of as much interest to
us as they are to the United States and many other countries. But I
think we would like these disputes settled multilaterally, not unilaterally
or bilaterally, particularly in deals which may harm third countries, in
which case in motor vehicles and motor parts, ourselves So, yes, we
understand the interest of the United States in trying to eat away at
that trade surplus by getting better market access. But one of the
stories about, particularly the United States which is the largest trading
entity in the world, wherever US investment goes, trade follows. In
Europe where there Is very strong US investment, the United States
doesn't have trading problems. It has it in Japan where its investment
is nothing like as strong as it is in other parts of the world and that gets
you back, again, to multilateral solutions like APEC. Trade facilitation,
opening investment policies, seeing a real and growing presence of
American investment in the Japanese economy and its manufacturing
and service sectors is the way, basically, to deal with these problems.
So, again, all pointers point to multilateral solutions and not bilateral
ones.
J: Will you be giving the Japanese Government an assessment of what
affect on Australia either them acceding to some sort of bilateral
arrangement with the US would have, or the US sanctions being
imposed how either of those scenarios would affect us?
PM: Well you might remember when I went there a few years ago, I said
Australia wouldn't be part of any trade agreement which would
disadvantage Japan and we will be reminding them of that and saying
we would appreciate the reciprocity, well if you like reciprocal,
sentiments. That is, they too take the view that in any settlement of
these disputes they don't impact on third countries like ourselves,
particularly countries which have a long and enduring trade and
commercial relationship with them and who have an important political
relationship with Japan. I mean I don't think anyone should
underestimate the strength of the political relationship Au~ t'a1ia enjoys
with Japan, or how useful it has been to both of us in : he recent past.
So all of these things, I am sure, will weigh on their minds.
J: If there are to be real solutions, though, the structural solutions are
going to take a long time and yet you have got, obviously, a lot of
impatience building up in Washington. Isn't there a collision of two
different timeframes?
P Well the problem underneath all of this is the savings balances. Japan
is a very strong saving country and the United States isn't and if you
look at Japan it has got a very big investment in their capital stock, in
motor vehicles, in quality, in price and that while there has been quite,
you know, substantial changes, really substantial changes in the US
TEL 
T2EL3:. May. 95 3: 40 NO. 007 P. 04/ 10
4
motor industry, by and large if you look at the US/ Japan relationship in
its totality, you are fighting all the time against the tide of those savings
imbalances. One of the ways that will change, of course, is opening
up more access in Japan and Japan spending more on domestic
demand, improving their infrastructure, their housing, these sorts of
things. That would tend to run down their savings and run some of
those surpluses away. But the other way where this is going to be
worked out is in the trade and investment opportunities in East Asia for
the United States and Japan and you can see just in the last six or
seven years how much there has been a weighing off by the Japanese
of their dependency on the US market as they have grown market
share in East Asia. All the more reason why APEC becomes important
and the Uruguay Round. That is, opening up opportunities in these
markets for the United States to invest and for Japan to invest into
trade and the same for Japan. Now you know that the United States
has a very large trade deficit with Japan. But it is not as large per
capita as the trade deficit we have with the United States. I mean we
have a much larger deficit with the United States, than the United
States has with Japan on a per capita basis. But we have a very large
surplus with the Japanese. So if the United States ends up with a very
large deficit with Japan but other surpluses around the area, it matters
much less then in the American current account than it would matter
today or mattered a few years ago. So that is why given the fact that
the propensity of people to change their savings habits is slow to
happen, then this is going to be particularly true of the United States
one feels and it will take a while, also, for the Japanese to change their
habits. That is, to start running down their savings and spending on
domestic demand and infrastructure. We have got to create other
trading opportunities and better trading environments for these large
relationships to be somewhat, you know, complemented by other
trading opportunities and you can see this very obviously in the
statistical change in the relationship between Japan and the
United States and Japan's reliance upon the United States market.
That has changed a lot in the last five years and I think it will change a
lot in the next five years.
J: Prime Minister, if you have got these two giant economies trying to
resolve their trade differences by way of trade war, doesn't that
undermine the very basis of APEC and put into doubt the Bogor
vision?
PM: Oh, I don't think that is right at all and you would have noticed in the
Financial Review today, Winston Lord, the US Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, talking about the importance of
the Bogor Declaration and how it ought to be advanced in Osaka.
In other words, you know, in what is another one of these disputes.
I mean we had the autoparts one a couple of years ago and now it is
fully built up vehicles and these sort of frantic 301 actions and the rest.
Then you have a high ranking American official coming out talking
TEL 
TEL 1.' 9y. 5 $: uNo. Cu7 P' 05/
about the global, or the blanket, solution the multilateral solution
tends to, I think, reinforce the point I am making. That is, that APEC is
one of the good things on the horizon given the fact that the G-7 is
doing nothing about any multilateral solutions to any further advancing
of reducing trade protectionism worldwide. The only group doing it is
APEC and I think Lord's articulation of that argument in Tokyo, a day
or so ago, underlines its importance.
J-Prime Minister do you have any evidence at all that Japan has taken
steps in any way to advance the vision of the Bogor Declaration since
it was made?
PM: Oh, yes, we have had a couple of quite good officials meetings at this
point and they have gone quite pleasingly for those of us who have
been Interested in really making certain that Osaka produces a good
outcome and I think you will find that also the influence of Indonesia
will be important in this, as President Soeharto was not only the host,
but, of course, the host during the formation of the Declaration in a
sense, passing on the baton to Prime Minister Murayama the strength
of his own position will not be lost on the Japanese either.
J: Prime Minister why did you agree to accept a Honorary Degree? What
is it for and would you look forward to being known as Dr Keating
afterwards?
PM: Well I am not particularly interested in labels and handles, I think you
would have worked that out by now. It's something which is an honour
to Australia, not simply to me and it is basically about our role, and my
own within it, in the creation of a multilateral framework for trade and
investment in the Asia Pacific and finding, if you like, structures which
include Japan and take account of Japan's place in the world and I
mean I think that is the antecedence of it and I am more than honoured
by their thought in so acknowledging that work in this way.
J: Mr Keating you talk about encouraging the Japanese to a set of
ambitious and solid outcomes for Osaka. But how do you benchmark
that? I mean it was relatively easy with 20-10 and 20-20 at Bogor, how
do you advance that agenda, what is the benchmark, what is the
minimum?
PM: Well, there are issues there about coverage for instance: how broad
the coverage is, whether there are exclusions or exceptions, how we
advance the process of national country offers, these sorts of things
will be the issues of substance in Osaka. It won't be a simple
headline.
J: So, it is much more technical?
I 
TEL: -4Na. OU . t, 1
6
PM: The whole thing is technical. Look at the Uruguay Round. It took
seven years to happen and this will happen much quicker than that.
J: Mr Keating, Dr Mahithir is foreshadowing some fairly dire
consequences of the debate over the Spratley Islands, will you be
talking to Mr Murayama about the Spratley's and if you are what sort of
Position will Australians have on that issue?
PM: I don't know. It may come up, not about the Spratley Islands in
particular, but just about the fact that the very obvious point, that is,
that China is emerging now as a major economy and a major force, it
has always been a major force in Asia, but it is now emerging as a
greater force with a stronger economy and all the more reason why
this is a great opportunity to multilateralise the interests of great
countries like China at this point in their economic history. I think that
is the main point.
J: Do you see this as a potentially volatile situation?
PM: I think Prime Minister Mahithir was simply speaking hypothetically. He
made that point clear himself about problems that can arise. Well, we
know problems can arise but, I think, the important thing is what we do
about setting frameworks up so that tensions between countries are
lessened, opportunities are increased.
J: Prime Minister, is this a good time for you to be leaving Australia
politically given that opinion polls suggested the Budget hasn't really
gone over all that well?
PM: You think I should stay home, maybe sit around in the office there and
talk to you on the telephone or something? Look, I am pretty happy
with the Government's progress. I think, what the Budget reveals is
that the Government is the only Party in this Parliament that has got a
set of structured policies. The change in superannuation will be
important to us all when all of us in this room are long gone from
Canberra, long gone from active duty. That superannuation change
will sit there in the service of the nation through into the next
millennium and also getting Australia back into surplus marks us out
amongst countries who have got discipline with low inflation. They are
things, I think, that were important taking the pressure of interest
rates these are all significant changes and the notion, in that context,
that the Government has got, if you like, long term difficulties beating
somebody who has got no policies. I mean, John Howard keeps
invoking the fifth amendment, he won't own up to any policies on the
basis that it might incriminate him or I won't show my policies because
that Mr Keating might pinch them. I think the public are going to say
' hey, cut it out, what are you playing us for?' 
T2E3L:. May. 95 3: 40 No. 007 P. 07/ 10
7
J; So, if you think the Budget is going so well and given the fact that
interest rates have been coming down and unemployment has been
dropping, given all of that, are you then disappointed or can you
understand what..
PM: No, no, I think it is solidifying the Government's it is like the base
note and the treble note, they both take the same time to play, but
which is the one that has the impact on you? Let's call that big thud
from the Budget, it has been well received out there in terms of the
political weight of it in the community, which is good for confidence in
the country and good for the Government.
J: But it is not showing up in the polls as being well received.
PM; I think it probably is. It is just making our two Party preferred vote just
more solid, but I have said to you before, it is only a politician who can
read the hieroglyphics of the polls, never, rarely ever journalists.
J: Mr Keating, is the Government still fully committed to the sale of ANL?
PM:-That is a process which is on at the moment. Laurie Brereton has
touch with it. I don't have touch with it and haven't had for the last
couple of days.
J-Are you concerned by the threat by the maritime unions though, that
you can not sell
P M. To be honest, I haven't been across that.
J: Is the Government going to call an inquiry into the Hindmarsh Island
affair'?
PM: I am not here to go around the world for sport. I was here basically to
talk about the visit to Japan.
J: Prime Minister, to Japan, next week we will have another alarming
balance of payments number.
PM: Are you sure it is going to be alarming?
J. Are you sure it Is not?
PM: But, you are making the statement. I'm not.
J: OK, I'll bet you it is alarming. I bet it is well over $ 2 billion. No?
PM:-Well, hype and hyperbole is the stock and trade of the ' 7: 30 Report'
these days. OK.
TEL 
TEL 8
J: We have a situation where you can see that the solutions to these
structural problems are not quick.
PM: No, they are not quick no.
J: Meanwhile the Japanese face the prospect of perhaps becoming less
of a customer of ours for commodities that have been implicit in their
having a big domestic manufacturing base which seems to be moving,
off shore, at some speed. In the medium to longer term, what does
that say about our balance of payments?
PM: The thing to look at is, basically, the trend improvement in exports.
Ten years ago we exported 13 per cent of GDP. We are now
exporting 22 per cent, but more I think, it might be 24 per cent from
memory. We are a long way towards doubling our exports to GDP.
Japan's industrial structure has changed, it has moved out of certain
industries, but other countries have moved into them. Korea is an
obvious one and where now, in the last three months, Korea has
become our second largest trading partner because we are exporting
products into that market. You know at Toyota, I had the pleasure of
opening the plant there about six weeks ago in Victoria, the day that I
went there they signed a $ 400 million contract, I think from memory
30,000 cars, to sell into the Toyota worldwide dealership. So, we are
getting the benefits of a change in the structure of trade with Japan
that is, in the so-called process of hollowing out, putting their
manufacturing facilities in other places and a shift in the nature of the
trade where in certain trades it is now, countries like Korea, are doing
more than they are doing. So, we are picking up the business there
even if we are losing it In Japan.
So, the main thing is* What runs our capacity to deal with the current
account? Answer savings and investment and competitiveness. The
savings are the point we tried to cover in the Budget. The
competitiveness, I have been telling you recently and I will repeat
again, we are 40 per cent more competitive now than 1983, that is with
driving the exports, R&amp; D and education are driving the product
innovation. As that Treasury graph shows very obviously in Statement
two, you can see where the call in the public sector in the 1970s and
the shift in the profit share completely dislocated Australian investment
and we ended up with a big fall in the capital stock. That started
producing the current account deficits for us. Six per cent of GDP in
1980 and that started building up the debt and it came from a
merchandise trade deficit. We are now closing that up by a big shift to
exports, what we have now got to deal with is the block of old debt.
And, in part, we are dealing with that by the big stock of Australian
assets off shore which Statement Two was also quite instructive about.
We have now got $ 136 billion of assets off shore against $ 160 billion
of overseas debt and, of course, as I have said and the Budget papers
also say, from the superannuation changes alone, by the year 2000 we
TEL: . May. 95 3: 40 No. 007 P. 08/ 10 
9
should have an additional two per cent of GDP in savings and in the
Budget probably more. So, in terms of medium term savings change, it
is really a very substantial one. That with the competitiveness should
basically see that change, but of course, in any investment cycle like
this, you will always see a jump in producer goods and by and large
they are things that we don't ourselves make and we will always have
a great bubble of those in the current account numbers and, I guess,
we will have to understand that as they come they will be producing
goods into the future. At least, they are going to give us a better rate
of return than the investments we had in the late 1980s where we were
using up savings, chewing up savings, but not for a great return in the
current account.
J: When will we see a stabilisation of the current account deficit under
the Keating strategy?
PM: You won't see it without a longer term change to savings which we
have now, I think, fairly solidly got into place and you won't see it
without the continuing entrepreneurship and access by Australian
business to markets around the Asia-Pacific in particular. That is what
the trip to Japan is about.
J: Is there a message In the polls that some of the Budget initiatives like
the savings strategy are going to take a while to sell to the electorate?
PM. I don't think so. I think the public were interested to see that the
Government actually put something solid under the economic growth
we have been having. They wanted to see a weighing off of pressure
off monetary policy onto fiscal policy. You have seen the bond selling
program dropped from $ 21 billion last year to $ 6 billion this year which
is, to call it a weighing off, is the understatement of the century. A
$ 15,000 million reduction in the bond selling program, is it any wonder
long bond yields dropped. And, I think, they think a good and solid
thing has been done and they have put that in their thinking and, as I
say, it just solidifies the Government's two party preferred vote.
J: The s elling of it isn't over, you had two weeks of very..
PM: Yes, and I think the Government had a very good two weeks. You
know that by nearly everyone you speak to. They thought the Budget
was well received. Frankly, John Howard, curling up and making
himself the smallest target possible, by saying nothing, as I say
invoking the fifth amendment saying ' I won't talk about policies
because they might commit me or incriminate me and I think I can go
to an election with no policies', I think he is kidding himself. But, the
public know he is kidding them.
J: Well, John Howard says everyone he speaks to though in main stream
Australia says that they didn't like your Budget?
TEL 23 May 95 3: 40 No. 007 F. 09/ 10 
TEL: 23. May. 9 5 3: 4u No. uur r. i-u/
PM: Well, if you believe that, then you believe in fairies at the bottom of the
garden. The fact of the matter is the Budget was, I think, very well
received around the country. In fact, most everywhere I went, be it
Perth, Adelaide, Brisbane, running into all sorts of people, they thought
the Budget was well done. The thing is, there can be no credibility and
honesty in politics without policies. That is the foundation touch
stones of credibility and honesty. And, a party which wants to go to a
poll, as the Liberal party does, without policies will be neither credible
nor honest. Thank you.
ends 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCH HOSTED BY JAPANESE BUSINESS ORGANISATIONS, TOKYO.-
THURSDAY, 25 MAY 1995
It is a great honour to address you today and I thank you for the invitation you
have given me.
This Is not the first time I have spoken to these important organisations and
to many of you in this room, of course.
Among the people here are some who have been active in Australia-Japan
trade for more than forty years.
Having been present at the creation of the Japanese economic miracle, you
know what radical change involves. You know that the need for change goes
on and on so much so that those who have been making the changes could
sometimes be forgiven for thinking that enough has been done. But you
know that this is not a thought a country can ever entertain.
If you have been watching Australia, or dealing with us in recent years, you
will be aware of the radical change which has taken place. The Australian
economy has been completely transformed; it is vastly more competitive,
more diverse and more integrated with the world and the region.
And you will also be aware, I trust, that the changes are still coming that we
have not entertained the thought that we have done enough.
Our old frends here know Australia's story. They have been part of it. A very
Important part of it, because the relationship between Japan and Australia
which has developed steadily over the past 50 years, is an essential thread in
Australia's economic development and, of course, in Japan's.
But it is to those of you who are new to our relationship that I mostly want to
address my remarks today.
Because I think we are entering a new, slightly uncertain, but very exciting
phase in this relationship. 
After the war ended fifty years ago, far sighted business people and political
leaders in each country recognised the complementarities, between our two
economies and worked to build those links between us which helped,
fundamentally, to fuel economic growth in both our countries.
Over the years these great business links the iron ore, coal and other
primary products have continued to be central to our trade. But in the
recent past new elements have entered.
Processed food, manufactures, high-technology and services have become
increasingly prominent. Sophisticated products like computers, software,
high-speed ferries and specialised medical equipment have joined the list of
our exports. And more than 20 per cent of all international visitors to
Australia, and 6 per cent of all international students in Australia, are now
Japanese. Our patterns of trade have changed as Japanese companies have begun to
invest elsewhere in Asia, and we have begun to supply them in these " third"
countries. Developments like these clearly point the way to the future of our
relationship. They reflect changes in Australia and Japan which are offering
us new opportunities as our 50 year old partnership enters a deeper, more
complex and rewarding phase.
The liberalisation and deregulation of the Japanese economy is one of those
changes. That process is now underway. and I believe it is irreversible and in
Japan's own interest as well as the world's.
I know many of you here, representatives of Japanese business, have been
at the forefront of the demand for thoroughgoing economic reform and
deregulation. I am sure that it is crucial for our Japan's future. But I have to
tell you frankly that much more needs to be done.
The Keidanren, for example, has estimated that deregulation could deliver a
net extra 740,000 jobs and increase the size of the Japanese economy by
about 40 per cent over the next five years.
In Australia's view, these reforms have not yet gone far enough. But we are
convinced that progressive implementation of reform will be a powerful
catalyst to free dynamic forces in the economy. Japanese consumers will
benefit.
And, reflecting smaller trade and current account imbalances brought about
by higher levels of imports and domestic consumption, the yen will fall.
So when we urge Japan to maintain the momentum of reform we are not
entirely altruistic. We know it will open up substantial new opportunities for
Australian exporters. 
Of course, it Is up to Australia, and our business people in particular, to take
advantage of the opportunities.
We know that Australian businesses have been heard to say from time to
time that Japan is " too hard' a market to penetrate.
We would not be urging these reforms on Japan Nwf e did not think Japan
should be " easise. But Australian business would be foolish to turn their
backs on a market of such a phenomenal size and where the rewards to be
had from success are so great. Bear in mind that a percentage point of
growth in Australian exports to Japan equals in value terms our whole current.
export trade to Vietnam.
There are obvious opportunities for our exporters: if Australian firms are
sufficiently hard-working and persistent, and their products and services are
of the highest quality as many of them are they should succeed, most
obviously in such sectors as construction, foodstuffs and health and
education services.
If the very real difficulties of the Japanese market still frighten too many
Australian business people, it has to be said that the Australian Government
does not have an antidote for fear. But the Government can help our smaller,
newer exporters to find niches niches in sectors of the Japanese market and
niches in the regions of Japan. I will be opening a new Australian Business
Center designed to address part of this problem later today.
But the fact remains we will all succeed more often and go much further
towards realising the opportunities inherent In our modem relationship if
Japan further deregulates Its markets.
So what does Australia bring to the partnership?
To begin with, we bring one of the industrialised world's ten largest
economies, a country rich in natural and human resources and a commitment
over decades to a partnership with Japan.
We bring a real friendship for Japan with us.
We also bring creative policies and the determination to implement those
policies. Beginning In the 1980s. we recognised that Australia could no longer live well
enough by exporting iron ore and wool and other primary products to the
world while our manufacturing industries grew inefficient and lethargic behind
high tariff walls. 
But we changed. We slashed tariffs, floated our currency, deregulated our
financial markets, eliminated import quotas and liberalised foreign investment
guidelines in all sectors,
All this was done within the context of an unprecedented accord with our
trade unions, under which we moved from a centralised to a more flexible
wage-fixing system.
Some of the results of this revolution because it was a revolution in
Australia are well known.
Last year we had the highest growth rate in the OECD at five per cent
while at the same time corporate profits reached historic new levels.
And while inflation has been running at around two per cent for the past three
years. Some of the other results are less well known. They relate to Australia's
competitiveness in the world.
Our international competitiveness Increased by around 40 per cent over the
past ten years.
We now have one of the lowest overall levels of taxation in the industrialised
world. Prime CBD rentals in Melbourne and Sydney cost less than in Singapore.
Less than in Shanghai or Ho Chi Minh City, as Well.
Living costs for expatriates in Sydney are lower than in any other major city in
the Western Pacific. And, for reasons I hope all of you already know, or will
soon know, Australia's Oquality of life" ranked second out of the 41 countries
measured In the World Competitiveness Report.
And we have not stopped. A country which abandons policy change
abandons its stake in the race for the future. I will give you just three
examples of changes we have made in the past 12 months.
A year ago, we took the decision to make a massive investment in the skills of
our workforce. We directed programs towards training young people and the
long-term unemployed.
We boosted our technical and vocational education system and made it more
responsive to business more suited to the modem economy in which the
knowledge and skills of a countrys workforce and its capacity to retrain
regularly, are basic determinants of economic success. 
The increased competition that has flowed from lower tariffs has made the
Australian economy much more dynamic; but the primary influence has been'
on those sectors exposed to foreign competition.
To extend this quite fundamental change to the rest of the economy, we last
month reached an historic agreement with our state governments to boost
competition in our utilities and our ports, in our professions and our
agricultural marketing authorities in water, airports, government services
right across the domestic economy competition will be intensified. The result
will be a much more responsive and dynamic economy and a significantly
lower cost structure for business.
Australia's most single important economic challenge is to lift our savings
performance. The need Is manifest in a current account deficit that has been
too large for the past 15-20 years.
We also need to lift our savings performance because, like Japan, our
population in Australia is ageing: not as rapidly as Japan's because of our
higher rate of population growth. But we stilt may see the proportion of our
population aged over 65 increase from 12 per cent to 18 per cent over the
next 30 years.
There will be a correspondingly shrinking proportion of the population in
employment providing for those in retirement. The appropriate response to
these changing demographic forces, of course, is to save and invest more.
This is what your government has done very impressively over the years.
According to OECD statistics, your public sector gross debt represents about
per cent of GNP. But the corresponding figure for net debt is just 8 per
cent, a difference of about 70 per cent of GNP.
This difference is largely accounted for by the accumulation of assets, in
retirement accounts.
We have taken up the challenge to increase our saving rates through
measures tailored to Australian circumstances.
First, we have tightened fiscal policy. By international standards, Australia
does not have a problem with a large amount of public debt on the books.
In fact, we have the lowest level of public debt in gross terms among OECD
countries, arnd one of the lowest in net terms.
However, the reliance of our economy overall on foreign savings requires us
to go further on the public accounts, and that is what we have done in this
years Budget. Our Budget will return to surplus In the coming financial year,
and be in surplus without relying on asset sales and the like in the following
year. 
The second element of our savings strategy is directed at retirement incomes.
A decade ago, we had only 40 per cent of our workforce in superannuation,
or private pension provision. Today, it is590 per cent. Today, our
superannuation funds hold about $ 186 billion in assets.
We are going to increase contributions from around 5 per cent of income to
per cent by early next century. This will mean that every Australian
person will be saving at least 15 per cent of their income. The result will be
superannuation funds, private pension funds, of about $ 2,000 billion by 2020
a pool of savings about double our GDP in today's prices. That is, 200 per
cent of our GDP.
So in one year we have taken major initiatives on national savings, vocational
training and domestic economic competition.
Australia has been for some time a high quality, cost-effective place to do
business. It is becoming a bete place to do business. We expect more and
more Japanese companies to recognise this as many already have.
Toyota, for example, invested some 30 billion yen in its Melbourne plant last
year. Mitsubishi are expanding their Australian operations on a similar scale.
The Shimadzu Corporation, makers of precision medical and laboratory
equipment, chose Australia for its new manufacturing and research operation.
In Japan's financial year 1993, over 30 per cent of Japan's foreign direct
investment in mining went to Australia and 70 per cent of its FDI in food.
Of course, it is much easier to reform when others are doing the same and
against a backdrop of a strengthened international trading system.
That is why APEC is so important to both Japan and Australia. For each of
us, APEC accounts for 70 per cent of our country's trade.
It is worth recalling the weight and seriousness of the historic declaration
made under President Soeharto's chairmanship at Bogor last year and its
boldness. The leaders of all the APEC economies met freely together, and after a
preparatory process involving our own special assistants, agreed to achieve
free trade in the region by 2010 for industrialised countries and 2020 for
developing countries in other words, an integrated market of two billion
people. Japanese business, with your vertically integrated structure in the region, will
be a major beneficiary of this process. 
This year, the task of co-ordination and chairmanship falls to Japan. The
meeting being hosted in Osaka in November will be critical to the region and
critical to Japan.
The job will be to give form to the APEC declaration, to guide the
implementation of the Bogor vision.
I am confident Japan will meet this challenge.
I am particularly confident because I know him that Prime Minister
Murayama, who played such a good role at Bogor, understands the historic
opportunity and will do all he can to grasp it.
I believe it is one of Japan's great post-war multilateral opportunities, the
benefits from which can greatly exceed the Uruguay Round outcome.
And, for its part, Japan can be confident that, in its efforts to consolidate
APEC's achievements and contribute to the emerging Asia-Pacific
community, it will have no firmer supporter than Australia.
I am grateful to all of you who came today for the courtesy you have extended
to me.
ENDS 



. TRANSCRIPT-OF THE PRIME-MIIT HEON P J KEA-TING MP
SPECH-AT'THE LANKO ! I E UT AA CSINE:
PROMOTON, NEWOTANI OT T OrI2MA195
E,&amp; OE ' PROOF! COPY
ls very igreat ' 06asure to bpi~ r ami utala n a ae rinds.:
tosapl atrlyunique culinary hfas f. sioetr, 4 mstfitha bo
ac6o mlihe by-MrNeil Pehr.*" amu4tmisiian,-chef frorru! dney Who~ i
d~ mnstaligtoyouthe cuisule, ne usieoAustralia.% Y : 04* ft6w that:.
S Autraia s. a very mu tc~ uzVcUntr. a ht~ h otWryasi a
cIianed damaically so that)*' oeA bf oulff~ a trets no I hat inutcultrls
an46 reflected lhiih sfoo teitrsi~ ie HSSt we: le9d,
-ghd Vthe interesting changei 1i. r AuWralia'. cusie W a-gvng you . a
sample oo~ o f this tonight' ' Idrt coun atik.-41j
ustr-iais enionment~ Ily.: vey ~ er onrac h od
Cdommensurably clean. S We~ hn n our.: stre nthsi u'caaiy
gr6o loa , i roduce food,-and. to.: prcsAd. Is oAefalaslr t
. Wrariftunng6' ndustry, and' eafreg~ exert, t t aid to.. tbl tS
OepPr s-by the. ar 2000.
Theq other feature which we 1h1ink~ is -asl t~ ghfrAsraH6a is. tat. rf
. ows! Jin * the : apanese off-season,* i~. s:: e'minently. suitWbe: for. use in.
It. aditibhnal Japanese cuisine.-*
omr ight. know' that Australi~ ns4 h~ v ciojj . itr -health*
oier. the last .20: years, and ci01d more moicious-of thwr .1et,. andaJpa
Iapodcsis increaiiungIf at that end-ofithe spectm. think. we
do' ant t clo our arteries, -ind weido Ntint -to: drog yours
Wth nk that our food can -be-used ~ as'pat of Japanesezcwsmne4 a4nhd -we. are.
ine'Igy moing towardsthe' , culie and. cu ture of o6' u ~ region iinfod
suh as.. Thai,: Chinese all thet mariettes:-hbhieecokn alyin 23) 
2'
and of course, Japanese. And leqt.. me as sure the audience, I have taken
many a decision over a sashimi and sUshi~ in my day.
I think Australians have a mucb -closerSwareness of the culinary interests of
the region, and. especially Japan do honestly believe that the kinds
of foods, and -varieties of food' Austaliaprduces, can suit not. only. traditional
cuisine,, in Japan, but also those -innoiovatidn wkwch you as a -community are
moving: towards, and which we thihk we ca~ encurage you in.
One of-the things we feel most prouda~ t n of the. beverages -we feel
mo st proud. about, is of. course;: j ie n utainw-inueta iisn.,.
retatively . Inexpnsv byw-d. tn Ard nd of a very. hig q: cuality, so we
wI 6seemore fit drunk here.; we a~ o' seeingi other: fresh,* cle aner
' live : prpdutts:;-: like abalon~ e, -ajio1 n, bters, asparags marigp'fth -and
. Wong ithepcSse f yeda: wre-' oxp Australians-:: nacd odIs
tike soba -,. nand kamabokb,
( i~ aubl). . uppte o foAuff~ o Japantban our exports . are growing -at..
abot." idia year. We are! -Jap' 1argsupplier0 odaypodcsw
suplyabout one-fifth of Japans irprsq ef'n eaei 1993 -just a.-
cor ot years ago 70% ofJ arn'soversas*&amp; e~ mnti odp troce
wen t' itrt. 8&amp; So, food gjs the 4astot growing area o o raewt
Japr, ind wthink we can 16b's~ liAl n~ g it.
01-course, -the-: best thing AbkA, M~ xotrfo Is not -simply. about.-trade
d611ar j. 4ri4 41( y:-as we alko abo turwal dxhng. VnheneOeO
weeat-with: peOple from othe' ' cou6 tries is .8lwaysacu ua exchne and
Itikthis: carrpaign we are' Ial 6N~ cing. to ' itt perfect -I faion of , thecultural
dimenion~ s offood.-
obrtMorley-j, 13. ri tish rawonte" onc -said: no-man is.: lone~ y eafing ; a bowl
of spaghetti. ' Well, I would tike; t o ay that*~ rm at aetesm es
of communwion wiha plate Of. s1ahir.
Sfoodis. a tUltural matter: isb: sen4s smero I woldl" f
oitt particularly thank Mr." Toydos ihe. -Chairma oJETRO, fr his.
particiatfon in thslunch, ahdf hepeni6g of teAustralian. Busines.
Cenre. Letme. again thn., c.~~ yfo oni to Jaa npeparingi this..
food toniht' -wer are all very nuch-' its; O1bLt Col lowlo the: 6
Japnesefood: wreiters who arei tedn ff ' on gourmoet. totkw of . Australia,
ad say.-thatbt agetpesr o st&amp; s any of yo6u have come along,
to einoled n hislanch-ofthb'NewAustralian Cuisine. oi snwm
plesur tolaunch the New Austrdfibn CUisuie campaign.
ends. 4~
41I 



Idary students
s hosting
inities to
tween wveen us
stra liens
vast -heir
; ns to
-ie the
jie who,
; ome the
that
i6 the
indi and
id that is
1surable to the
Keio has
6585 PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P J KEATING MP
NEW AUSTRALIAN CUISINE LAUNCH
THURSDAY 25 MAY 1995
It is a great pleasure to be here, among Australian and Japanese friends. to
sample a truly unique culinary feast.
The ' New Australian Cuisine' campaign reflects a number of important
elements in the modem Australia-Japan relationship.
At one level it is about contemporary Australian taste. At another it is about
our largest manufacturing industry.
In a sense, food is a touchstone of the change in Australia not abandoning
traditional culture or traditional industries, but modifying them. adapting them,
adding value to them.
The change in taste and style is increasingly towards the cultures of our
region Thai, Chinese, Malaysian, and of course Japanese.
Neil Perry who has prepared this selection today is one of a number of
leading Australian chefs who blend a Japanese influence into Australian
food. And food or food processing is Australia's largest manufacturing industry.
It will get larger we expect it to treble its exports by the year 2000.
Japan is a priority market and one of the key investors in the industry.
In 1993, 70 per cent of Japan's overseas investment in food processing went
to Australia.
For Australia's part, we are the third largest supplier of foodstuffs to Japan,
and exorts are growing at a rate of 10.5 per cent.
Australia is Japan's largest supplier of dairy products. We supply one fifth of
Japan's imports of beef. 
Food is the fastest growing area of our trade with Japan and as I said earlier
today the potential is there to dramatically enlarge it
Australi3n food is the product of a clean environmcnt. It is fresh and pure, it
grows inth e Japanese off-season and it is eminently suitable for use in
traditional Japanese cuisine.
Because Australia is one of the most efficient agriculture producers in the
world, Australian food is also cheap. And so, I might add, is the wine. And
the wine is as good as the food which is to say as good as any to be got. Al
These days we export less dried, canned and frozen food products and more 01
fresh, clean and live like abalone. lobsters and salmon and asparagus et01
margoes. Among the processed foods we export are Australian-maae T
noodles like soba, udon and kamaboko.
We see enormous potential in the Australian food growing and food
processing industry, and the trade with Japan at once provides the greatest
opportunity and the best measure of suc
Food of course. is not just about trode dollars it is also a cultural exchange,
It is a means, perhaps the best means of getting to know each other.
Maybe even getting to know ourselves: " No man is lonely eating a bowl of
spaghetti", Robert Morley once said. I have the same sense of communion
with a plate of seahimi.
This campaign we are launching tonight is a perfect illustration of the cultural
dimensions of food.
Let me welcome the six Japanese food writers who are heading off on a
gourmet tour of Australia. I wish you a very enjoyablo and productive visit
as I do the Japanese chefs, representatives of cooking schools and other
food industry leaders who will follow the food writers.
Once again, let me say thank you to Nail Perry for coming to Japan and
preparing this food tonight
And thank you also Mr Toyosnima, Chairman of JETRO for his participation
in this launch and the opening of the Australia Business Centre.
WA greatly appreciat JETRO's support
Now It Is my pleasure to launchi m New Australlan Cuisine campaign 6587? 6588 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J K] EATING MP
OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS CENTRE, TOKYO
THURSDAY, 25 MAY 1995
1 am very honoured that Mr Toyosbirna Chairman of JETRO, is
present today on the opening of this Australian Business Centre.
9 The Centre brings together in one location Australias
Commonwealth and State official export, investment and tourism
promotion bodies.
0 The Centre is the first of its kind for Australia
and it is fitting that it should be established in the capital of our
greatest trading partner.
It reflects our recognition of the continued importance of our economic
relationship and confidence in its future.
a And, it shows our determination to work hard in this market, to
diversify the base of our trade, to support long-standing business
relationships and to help new ones get established.
a Between 1990 and 1993 Australias exports of goods and services to
Japan grew by nearly 20 per cent in Australian dollar terms and by
over 4 per cent in US dollar terms
in either measure the growth in our exports exceeded the growth
in Japan's total imports of goods and services. 
Our highest value-added exports ( ETMS) grew at a trend rate of just
over 11 per cent in the five year period to 1993-94.
And our export of services for the five year period to 1992-93 grew at
a rate of just under 12 per cent.
Japanese figures for Japan's 1994 financial year say imports from
Australia grew by 11 per cent over 1993.
But there is no doubt we could and should do a lot better, The
Government can help: with initiatives of this kind, with Austrade and,
most importantly, by creating a competitive economic climate and one
favourable to exporters. But in the final analysis its success depends
on Australian business.
The scale of Japan's economy needs to be understood by Australian
exporters a one per cent growth in Japan's GDP increases Japan's economy
by the size of New Zealand's GDP
a small slice of a Japanese sectoral market, like housing or food,
can be worth many times more than a large slice of the market in
other countries.
There is no question about the opportunities which exist in the
emerging markets but no Australian exporter should ignore the
rewards of succeeding in Japan.
And it should also be understood that, while Japan's market is difficult,
it is opening up more and more
we must take advantage of the inevitable changes which are
taking place in the structure of the Japanese economy, which are
being speeded up by the appreciation of the yen.
The lesson for Australia is that our opportunities are growing faster
than perhaps many understand 
tme competition will be hot. There are no easy pickings. But the
proof is there that competitive and determined Austalian
businesses do succeed.
This Centre represents a further important step in focussing Australia's
marketing efforts in Japan
three years ago Australia opened four consulates throughout
Japan to service Japan's regional economies
we are now opening for business in the very centre of Tokyo,
making access for businessmen and tourists much easier as we
approach the Olympics in Sydney in the year 2000.
This centre also demonstrates the Commonwealth government's
determination to work closely with the Australian states to promote
Australia abroad.
I would like to congratulate all the centre's members and wish them
well in this important venture.
It gives me great pleasure to declare the centre open.
ENDS 



/ 1
PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
KEIO UNIVERSITY, TOKYO THURSDAY, 25 MAY 1995
It Is a very great pleasure to be here at one of Japan's most eminent
academic Institutions. I thank Keio University both for its kind Invitation
to speak and for the honour which has been bestowed on me today.
I am very much aware of the role that Kelo University has played In
Japan's history. Its fame parallels that of Its founder, Yuklchi Fukuzawa,
a man of remarkable vision who believed that Japan had nothing to fear
and much to gain from being open to the world, and through education,
economic development and modernisation, made an outstanding contribution to
this country.
Today, the University he founded continues to play an influential role In
the life of modern Japan. I understand that about one In every five of
Japan's Diet members and many senior business executives attended
this University.
I am pleased to see some of these illustrious Kelo graduates here today,
and I look forward to meeting others during my visit among them MITI
Minister, Mr Hashimoto, for whom I have a very warm personal regard.
Keio University has strong ties with Australia. Its Australian Studies
course is a constructive link In the relationship between Australia and
Japan and a practical example of our mutual recognition that we must
continue to broaden knowledge and understanding of each other.
We would like to see the ties made stronger, and I will be doubly
honoured by this occasion If In some way It serves to strengthen them.
For all these reasons this seems an appropriate place to offer an
Australian's view of modern Japan a very friendly Australian's view, I
might say.
It Is part of my privilege today to know that among this distinguished
audience are some of the next generation of Japanese leaders. The
young people here carry a share of the responsibility for Japan's future,
and hence for the f uture of our f riendship.
Today, In part, my remarks are addressed specifically to you.
I want you to understand the significance and the magnitude of our
relationship, the good It does now and Its potential for good. I want you
to form an understanding of Australia and Australia's view of the region
and the world. 
However, the weight of my remarks must be directed to the older
members of the audience. This is where the weight of responsibility fails
as It always does, In every country on the present generation of
leaders. Ultimately the future depends on their capacity and willingness
to renew their vision.
This visit my third to Japan in three years occurs against the
backdrop of the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Pacific War.
The Second World War brought vast suffering and destruction to the
peoples of the Asia-Pacific. Millions died, Including 2.4 million
Japanese. More than 17,000 Australians died, nearly half of them as
prisoners of war.
We should not forget these things or fail to reflect upon the reasons for
them not to keep an old animosity alive, but to strengthen the
foundations of understanding on which friendships are built.
We ignore history at our peril. I don't believe we can deliver a secure
future to our young people without coming to grips with the realities of
our past. That Is a lesson I think we are learning, In other contexts, In
Australia. I am encouraged to hear that Japanese students are also beginning to
learn more about the war. It is knowledge which will serve them well:
and it will serve Japan well as this new generation takes on the
responsibility for the future.
In particular, It will help as Japan seeks acceptance and legitimacy for
leadership in the region a status which Is In every practical sense
Japan's due.
I said on another occasion that among the countries of our region " a
common awareness of the history we share will strengthen the basis of
trust and cooperation between us." I am no less convinced of that now.
That Is why I think that, on this anniversary of the end of the war in the
Pacific, Japan can make a very substantial contribution to the region's
future If, as you decide upon the way forward, you also decide to
confront the past.
Learning the right lessons from the past Is, of course, the essential task.
I believe the lesson Is openness.
The global economy becomes a more and more pervasive fact of life.
The revolution in Information technology and communications speeds
that process while reaching Into all our lives.
Today we might be forgiven for thinking that openness is not a path we
can chos to take, but rather one we are being forced down. And, If we
take that view, we might easily take it as a corollary that the national
Imperative Is resistance that we must close our shutters and protect
both our Industries and our cultural differences.
I don't take this view. I think the Internationalisatlon of economies and
the revolution In telecommunications offer unprecedented opportunities,
not only for business but for cultural expression and creativity. 
It puts a premium on our cultural differences. It encourages cultural
definition and renewal. With such a rich and famously resilient culture
and such a strong sense of Identity, It therefore seems to me that Japan
has little to fear and everything to gain from an open, pluralist regional
and world environment.
The option certainly remains to turn inwards and shut out the world but
it was always a poor option, and It Is a worse one now.
It Is the option Australia took for years. For generations we Isolated
ourselves behind high tariff walls and racially based Immigration
policies. We looked through a narrow window on the world which
afforded a view of little more than the country in whose Empire we had
once been a colony.
Long after we became a nation we continued to look to there for our
political, economic and cultural sustenance.
We Australians were delivered an enormously rich British and European
heritage and the best of It we will always cherish and maintain but when
we began to lift our heads and looked to Asia and the Pacific we saw
how much more was open to us.
We saw how much more there was to being Austraiian.
This awareness of the region has been a major factor obliging us to
realise that economically and culturally, we have to be open. And that
we have to change. Indeed It was our awareness of Asian rates of
growth which more than anything else propelled us in the eighties into a
decade of radical economic reform.
We have pulled down the tariff wall, floated our currency, deregulated
our financial markets and restructured our Industries.
In short we have done the hard things we had to do if we were going to
succeed In the world and give new generations of Australians a chance
In the future.
There have been great rewards life-saving rewards.
Our productivity and competitiveness have dramatically improved In the
past decade.
Our culture has been enriched by new waves of migration, including
from Asia one half of our Immigrants each year come from Asian
countries and by vastly Increased awareness of other societies.
From our diversity has come strength. Australia Is a rich multicultural
society, a much more worldly one and a peaceful one.
The arts have flourished: exposure to the world has stimulated them and
with that we have seen a reappraisal of who we are, a redefining of our
national Identity.
At the same time we have begun to confront difficult truths about our
own past. The dispossession of Australia's Indigenous peoples and the 
destruction and brutality which accompanied It are notorious facts of our
history. In the past two years we have begun to set a few of the wrongs right.
Our courts have acknowledged the claims of Indigenous Australians to
land. And the Australian Government has responded by legislating to
protect those rights and to compensate Aboriginal Australians from
whom native title has Irrevocably passed.
In seeking reconciliation with indigenous Australians we are reconciling
ourselves with the past and, for all the legal and political turmoil It has
brought, I believe it Is making us stronger.
As the Japanese people well know, the process of change Is rarely easy
and never painless. But nothing Is so rewarding as a hard decision well
made. Change can be exhilarating as well as painful.
We have a lot more to do in Australia, but with such recent measures as
massive Improvement In our savings position through a new national
superannuation policy, the implementation of a national competition
policy, and a huge investment In training and education, we are doing it.
We are seeing the nation fundamentally re-shaped and re-oriented: reshaped
as a modern, multicultural society and a diverse, productive and
competitive economy; and re-oriented towards the countries of the
region In which we live and where we know our future so substantially
Ilies. For several years now, Japan like other developed nations Including
Australia has been faced with a complex range of economic, social and
political challenges.
As a friend and partner of Japan, Australia has a close and sympathetic
Interest In how Japan responds to these challenges.
While the process is some way from complete, Japanese politics and
society and the Japanese economy are undergoing an historic
transf ormation.
Political debate in Japan has Intensified In recent times. Some may see
this as a sign of uncertainty and a fissure breakdown In the cohesion of
Japanese society.
But I am firmly convinced It is a healthy development. Perhaps even a
necessary development.
Similarly, Japan's economy is gradually opening up to the world and to
the imperative of structural change, promoted by its own success which
Is reflected In the value of Its currency.
Japan has identifiled the challenges it must confront to remain a dynamic
mature economy in areas such as the taxation structure, the
agricultural sector, reducing government regulations and understanding
the key Ingredient of ministerial Initiative and political authority. 
Japan has also been feeling out a role in regional and International
affairs which will better align its responsibilities with Its economic power
in the United Nations, In APEC and through its generous development
assistance. As a friend, Australia warmly welcomes these developments.
And as a friend, we feel we can encourage indeed urge Japan to
sustain the momentum of reform
Only a robust and responsive political system which promotes political
accountability and Is capable of generating genuine political leadership
can make vital decisions of reform.
We are confident Japan can build on the foundations of political reform
it has laid over the last few years to establish both healthy public debate
about policy ideas, and a bureaucracy which Is not only responsive to
government leadership but capable of acting creatively with Ministers.
Political parties have to work hard to make themselves relevant to the
needs and the aspirations of the Japanese people especially young
people like those at this university. Cynicism about the political process
is not unique to Japan, but It Is corrosive wherever it occurs:
It dims a country's vitality and diminishes its faith in itself.
I have no doubt that Japan's young people want to make a contribution,
just as I know Australia's do. It Is not good enough to meet their doubts
with cynicism of our own, or to attempt to sell them stale goods from
another age.
It Is Incumbent on our generation, if not to f Ire their Imagination, then at
least to give them an environment where the Imagination can flourish
where the future can be imagined.
We have no greater responsibility than to give our young people reason
for confidence and optimism. Nothing short of that will release the
human potential on which the future depends.
Above all, it Is crucial that Japan's political and economic leadership
itself Is Infused with Imagination. to Imagine something better and to
craft the economic and social reforms which will make it a reality.
Success or failure In this will not only determine whether the Japanese
people are able to fully enjoy the high standard of living that they have
worked so hard to achieve: it will also determine whether Japan lives up
to Its full potential as a major financial and trading hub within the global
and East Asian economies.
Japan cannot rely on other countries to fix its exchange rate problems.
Only Japan can make the hard decisions needed to push ahead
vigorously with deregulation In order to release the energy It needs to
prosper as a mature economy.
Only Japan can tackle the structural problems which obstruct better land
utilisation and control the amount of savings that Is Invested In housing
and other social infrastructure. 
Australia, like all Japan's foreign partners, wants Japan to engage In
large-scale deregulation and economic reform because we know It will
Improve our access to your markets.
But the main stimulus for reform of this magnitude cannot come from
abroad. It must come from a conviction within Japan itself that this Is the best
way to break out of the current cycle, and the best way to improve the
economic and social well-being of Japan and its people.
I have no doubt that the wisdom which underlies Japan's phenomenal
success In the past 50 years will prevail again; that the people
themselves who are the source of Japan's great strength will
accommodate the change and embrace it.
Japan has one of the best educated, most innovative and hardestworking
populations in the world.
It Is no less a strength of yours In the present circumstances that the
Japanese people are committed to democracy; or that they are
generous enough to make Japan one of the world's largest aid donors.
And their stoicism is legendary I need only mention the dignified
resolve with which the people of Kobe have set about rebuilding their
city and their lives since the terrible earthquake.
Knowing this about the Japanese people, no one can ever doubt that
they will make these crucial reforms and profit by them.
Some argue that Japan's social and cultural traditions stand In the way
of far-reaching political and economic reform. I am sure that this Is not
the case. I have no doubt that, on the contrary, Japan's traditional
values and Identity will be a source of strength In seeing through
reforms. So will the national cohesion, that sense of national purpose and
community for which Japan Is renowned.
Japan's sheer economic weight should also provide Japan and Indeed
the world with cause for confidence about Japan's future. We hear a
lot about the growth rates of Asia's emerging economies.
But It Is important to remember that, at today's exchange rates, Japan's
economy still constitutes over 70 per cent of the whole East Asian
economy. An economy of that size will maintain its Impact on the global
economy and continue to command global attention and respect.
Japan has always been and remains a driving force behind the Asia-
Pacific region's economic Integration, It remains for many countries the
model. A heavy responsibility accompanies this Influence: Japan's weight In the
International economy means that policy decisions taken here have farreaching
effects. 
It also means that Japan's reform efforts should enjoy the support of Its
friends in the international community. Far from resenting Japan's
economic success, I am sure the world wants to see it continue. It Is a
balanced equation: Japan needs the world, and the world needs Japan.
That is why I am concerned about the present trade dispute between
Japan and the United States. This is not an easy issue and I understand
some of the frustrations on both sides.
But I would urge both sides to look beyond their present differences and
consider the ramifications not just for themselves and for smaller
trading countries like Australia which stand to get caught In the crossfire
but, more Importantly, for the entire Asia-Pacific region.
The US-Japan relationship is a linchpin of regional stability and
prosperity. The US-Japan Security Treaty Is absolutely fundamental to
the security of the Pacific and more widely.
Quite simply, no-one can afford to allow bilateral trading differences
between these key Asia-Pacific partners to jeopardise any part of
political and security structure of our region or to imperil the sense of
regional community which is now emerging.
The last countries to countenance this should be Japan and the United
States themselves.
And, of course, no one can afford the economic consequences of a
prolonged Japan-US trade dispute.
I believe these are key reasons for Japan and Australia's shared
commitment to APEC as the primary vehicle for regional economic cooperation
and Integration and, In particular, to implementing the APEC
leaders' historic agreement In Bogor last year to free regional trade and
investment. APEC Is, In many respects, tailor-made to meet Japan's Interests. A
former Japanese Prime Minister told me that Japan of all countries
stood to benefit the most from APEC. I would now go further and say
that Japan, for Its own economic and strategic interests, has to ensure
that APEC succeeds.
APEC provides a means for Japan to manage its trade problems with the
United States In a way which will strengthen the International trading
System.
APEC provides a regional framework In which governments can take the
hard decisions on economic deregulation and structural change.
Because this growth will always be able to show something In return a
reciprocal benefit.
This will help to ensure further opening of markets and continued high
growth rates in the region and thus enable structural adjustment to take
place In a multilateral context where everyone is a winner.
In a period when there seems to be no enthusiasm In Europe or the
United States for further global trade liberalisation, APEC Is the only
body In the world which can act as a catalyst for a new global round. 
In helping to meet these objectives, APEC provides a multilateral
framework, bringing Japan together with the United States and China in
a way which emphasises their common interests in regional stability and
prosperity. APEC can multilateralise the interests of these three great
states in the Asia-Pacific.
Japan has an unprecedented chance to take the reins of leadership
when it chairs the APEC leaders' meeting in Osaka. If it siezes the
chance it will secure its interests.
It is essential that we agree in Osaka on a comprehensive action plan for
implementing the historic decisions we took in Bogor last year.
This should, in my view, not only map out in as much detail as possible
how we each plan to meet our free trade and investment commitments
by 2010 or 2020, but also include concrete steps to address
impediments to trade and investment in the APEC region.
Our business communities now rightly expect APEC now to deliver real
results. This meeting points to a future in which all countries have a common
interest in peace and stability. Above all else, it demonstrates how far
the region has come in the 50 years since the war ended indeed how
far it has come in the last five years.
You can be assured of Australia's full and active support on this.
Australia has been delighted to play a role in the creation of APEC and
its transformation into an executive body without parallel In the region.
Australia also has confidence in Japan's capacity to take on a more
active independent international role beyond the region.
However great the temptations to resist the tides of globalisation and
economic integration, the logic of Japan's economic stature, its central
place in the international trading system, its importance as a source of
investment and technology and its post-war record as one of the most
democratic and stable countries in Asia, make it inevitable that Japan's
international role will grow.
It is for that reason that Australia firmly supports permanent Japanese
membership of the United Nations Security Council.
For while Australia sees Japan remaining a central player in Asia, we see
Japan's links outside Asia particularly with the United States, but also
with Europe as fundamental to its future role. As a trading and
investing economy, Japan has long recognised its critical interest in the
maintenance of an open international trading system.
Japan will remain pivotal to regional economic integration. But it will
also be a vital force for continuing global economic integration.
So Japan can be confident that its friends want it to play an important
role in the world.
And those of you here today who have personal experience or
understanding of the unique partnership between our countries will
know that Australia is one of the best friends Japan has. 
It Is entirely appropriate to enthuse about the bilateral relationship
between Japan and Australia, but we cannot take for granted what we
have achieved together over the last fifty years.
During this visit I hope to highlight this unique and dynamic partnership.
But having emphasised the value of our relationship, I also want to make
people think hard about what we have to do to sustain Its momentum
and vitality.
This demands that we build on the traditional complementarities
between our economies and find new areas for prof itable co-operation
as our economies evolve.
There Is no doubt about Japan's critical Importance to the Australian
economy. Japan was the earliest Influence on Australia's reorientation
towards Asia. In the late 1940s and early 1950s Japan took just 5 per
cent of Australia's exports.
By the mid-i 960s Japan had become Australia's largest overseas
market. Today Japan takes 25 per cent of our total exports.
Today, Japan Is by far Australia's largest trading partner and Australia is
Japan's third-largest source of Imports. Last year our exports to Japan
were worth $ 16 billion.
Bilateral Investment links between Australia and Japan have also been
extremely important, particularly for Australia's economic development.
Japanese Investment In Australia stands at just over $ 50 billion. And
Japan is Australia's fourth largest destination for foreign investment.
For its part, Australia has made a crucial contribution to Japan's
industrialisation and economic advancement as a leading supplier of
industrial raw materials and energy.
We supply over half of Japan's coal Imports and a growing proportion of
its LNG needs. Australia is the single largest supplier of Japan's non-oil
energy needs. Australia, quite literally, has fueled Japan's post-war
growth. But our trading relationship has expanded beyond Its traditional focus
on raw materials and energy. As Japan exports more and more hightechnology
manufactures and services, new complementaritles with
Australia are emerging.
Where once Australia just fed Japan's smelters and furnaces, we now
increasingly feed Its people for example we supply 30 per cent of your
beef consumption and are the largest supplier of your Imported dairy
products. Last year, Australia supplied 183,000 tonnes of fresh rice of the highest
quality to the Japanese market. The opening of this market was a very
bold step for Japan, but because of the decline In your own farming
population, a vital one.
The Australian rice Industry among whose founders in the early years
of this century was a visionary Japanese farmer named Jo Takasuka 
will be a reliable supplier of fresh rice between Japan's own harvests.
We want to build up this market.
" Food security" Is an Issue which has preoccupied Japan for many years,
and it Is an understandable concern.
But it Is a term which has to be redefined by the changes taking place in
Japan itself and by the realities of Interdependence In the global
economy. Food security for Japan needs to embrace the concept of reliable
suppliers of quality foods from non-Japanese sources. As the long
record of our economic relationship shows, you can have no better
partner In this than Australia. And it helps to have a partner with
complementary seasons.
Australia has become one of the most popular places for Japanese to
holiday. In 1994, nearly 730,000 tourists came to Australia f rom Japan,
and the Australian Tourist Commission estimates that more than one
million Japanese will be visiting Australia annually by the year 2000.
At the heart of the post-war expansion of Australia-Japan commercial
relationship lies a dense web of person-to-person ties. These are
essential to the future of our relationship. And there Is no better medium
for their expansion than education.
Australia now ranks behind only China and Korea ( and Japan itself) in
the number of students studying the Japanese language. In 1990, 50 per
cent more students were studying Japanese In Australia than In the
United States, the United Kingdom and Canada combined. In 1993 more
Australian year-12 students studied Japanese than any language other
than English. And Australia is unique in the proportion of primary and
high-school students studying Japanese.
Moreover, there is lively exchange of students between the two
countries. At the school level, Australia and Japan have exchanged
more than 10,000 students.
More Australians go to Japan to experience life in a Japanese secondary
school than from any other country. And more than 4,000 Japanese
students are studying In Australia at post-secondary level and above.
Australia's hosting of the 2000 Summer Olympic Games and Japan's
hosting of the 1998 Winter Olympic Games presents enormous new
opportunities to build a new range of personal, sporting and commercial
contacts between Australia and Japan.
It Is fifty years since the war ended. The friendship which exists between
us now was not then within the reach of anyone's imagination.
That It has grown Into relationship of such strength is a tribute to
Australians and Japanese who saw beyond the enmity and recrimination
and the vast cultural gulf dividing us.
There are always a few who see beyond the conventional wisdom of
their own generation: people who see the wave forming well before it
begins to break; who see necessity before it becomes oppressive and
who have the conviction to confront It, the wit and skill to make a virtue 
of it. People who, like the founder of this great university, do not fear
change and welcome the future.
We must leave the way clear for people of vision. We have to resist that
conservative pressure which, with age and experience, tends to close
the eyes and the minds of every generation. We have to keep our
minds and our eyes open.
This relationship of ours is the product of such a way of thinking. And
that is how it will be sustained. Our friendship has been a source of
immeasurable good for both our countries. It can be so for generations
to come.
We must never undervalue it, never take it for granted, never cease to
encourage and expand it. We must remain open to each other and to
the opportunities which exist for us.
And we have to keep alive the faith and engagement of the young.
This has been the role Keio University for a very long time. It is why Keio
has been, and remains, such a vital part of Japan's modern history.
And that is why I am so honoured by this occasion.
ENDS
L 



S47A/ 95 žKPRIME
MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE AUSTRALIAN INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION FOUNDATION
( AIEF) FELLOWSHIP
I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government has established an
Australian International Education Foundation ( AIEF) Fellowship, for doctoral
research by a Japanese scholar at an Australian tertiary institution.
The prestigious new award will provide $ 150,000 over three years for
doctoral research. Awards will alternate between the categories of science
and technology, and economics and business management.
The fellowship is designed to build on our long-standing and extensive
education links with Japan.
At post-secondary level and above more than 4,000 Japanese are currently
studying full-time in Australia.
The Australian International Education Foundation and the Department of
Employment, Education and Training will jointly administer the award. AIEF
is a government-industry partnership which promotes and markets Australia's
international education and training services.
TOKYO 26 May 1995 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
YOKOHAMA WAR CEMETERY AT HODOGAYA SATURDAY, 27
MAY 1995.
We are here to mourni the loss of the 280 Australians buried here and to give
thanks.
We mourn because they died young and far from home and did not have a
chance to live out their lives in the country they loved, among the people they
loved. We mourn because they were Australians like ourselves and they suffered
cruelly. We mourn because they remind us of the 17,000 other Australians who died
in the war against Japan, almost half of them as prisoners; and of the
millions of others who died in that war.
And we give thanks because it was by the courage and sacrifice of people
like these that our country was saved.
It is because they loved freedom that we enjoy freedom.
It is because they loved and believed in Australia that we have an Australia to
love and believe in today.
We give thanks because they set us an example by which to live. Their
graves remind us of our duty to Australia.
These Australians endured forced labour and imprisonment.
They died of inhuman treatment and neglect.
We know that what they went through others went through in prison camps in
other parts of Asia in Burma and Thailand, Borneo and Ambon.
We will never forget the evil that was done to our fellow Aus tralians. 
2
And we believe that Japan should not allow these events to be forgotten.
We believe that our friendship will be stronger if the truth about these events
is known to the Japanese people and we are pleased that the Japanese
government has taken steps to make it known.
As Australia remembers the end of the war this year we honour all those who
fought and died. And we remember all the innocent lives that were lost.
We pledge ourselves to see that these things do not happen again.
For that reason we also pay tribute to those who have had the vision and
faith to build a partnership between our two countries.
They saw that their duty to the dead was a duty to the living.
We could pay no greater tribute to the Australians buried here than to
dedicate ourselves to another fifty years of peace and friendship between
Australia and Japan.
Among these graves we remember the terrible suffering and destruction that
the war inflicted on a generation.
And we are reminded that our greatest gifts are peace and freedom and our
greatest duty to preserve them.
For that we give thanks to these Australians.
They died so far from home, but we know they are here and we will never
forget them.
ENDS 



48/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATION LINK
At our meeting today MITI Minister Hashimoto and I agreed that Australia and
Japan will establish a high performance computing electronic data connection
between the two countries. The initial capacity of the link will be l92KBit per
second.
This initiative will provide a foundation for the development of broadband
communications between Australia and Japan.
The network connection will allow close collaboration between Australia and
Japan in new generation high performance computers. A working group of
officials from both countries will be examining the further enhancement of the
communications link to at least 2MBit.
That capacity would support software research and development in
broadband and multi-media technologies and real-time simulation associated
with industrial design of new components. This agreement will help ensure
that Australia and Japan remain at the forefront of information technology
developments. We hope this bilateral connection will eventually become a building block for
a more extensive high-speed data network linking other countries in the
region. Eventual applications for the enhanced research collaboration which such
links can support include advanced climate modelling ( including prediction of
weather and global climate change) computational ocean science,
superconductivity and linked testbeds for research into advanced multi-media
applications such as simultaneous virtual reality modelling of 3-0 spaces.
International communications links, such as this, are an integral element in
the development of the Australian Government's national strategy on
information and communications services and technology.
The initiative builds on existing cooperation between Australia and Japan in
high performance computing and communications.
TOKYO 27 May 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE " TECHNOLOGY AUSTRALIA ' 95 EXPO",
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 30 MAY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Well thank you very much John ( Plunkett). Could I begin by especially
welcoming our very distinguished guest, Professor Habibie and members of
the Indonesian delegation.
It is a great pleasure to be launching this at a time when the Indonesian
Minister most closely associated with research and development is in our
country. Could I also acknowledge my colleague Senator Cook, the Special
Trade Representative John Button and, of course, our former long standing
Minister for Industry, and members of the Industry Research and
Development Board, representatives of companies exhibiting here today and
ladies and gentlemen.
Well this is a very nice honour indeed to be opening this the first of these
Technology Australia exhibitions which can showcase the innovations in
Australian industry which have occurred, in part, in association under the
IR&amp; D Board arrangements.
It is true that one of the great comparative advantages that Australia has,
probably its greatest comparative advantage, is its education system and by a
revolution in our education system by, huge participation rates in secondary
school, the creation of 60 per cent of extra places in higher education, the
development of a vocational education system of standing. This is the
foundation which our industrial development and research and development is
built upon.
The other change in the recent past is to recognise that Australia has always
had a fairly deep pure research base and to get to know how to apply that.
But we could never apply it adequately in the past when we were massively
uncompetitive because the size of our domestic market was not of sufficient
size to be able to carry the products we were able to produce.
So much of what we do now is focussed on exports and we know that in the
product innovation business, which is the business we have to be in, we can't
be in the export trade unless we are competitive and the changes in
Australian economic policy and industry policy, over the last decade, have
meant that Australia today is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 
1983. Not only that and important as that is in making opportunities for
exports and therefore developing products we have also had now a
substantial premium on private research and development, which is itself now
making a very great difference to the nature of the products we are producing.
Our excellent scientific institutions, long standing ones like the CSIRO and the
universities and the medical research institutes, have always been producers
of innovative, high quality technologies. But we have encouraged, and sought
to encourage, private research and development because we did lag behind
many OECD countries in the private R&amp; D effort as distinct from the public
R&amp; D effort. And back there in the 1980s, when we were wrestling with this
when John Button was Minister for Industry and Technology, we looked at
R&amp; D through grants and the IR&amp; D Board has been an important component
and, if you like, sifting through, finding those things that deserve support and
doing things in partnership.
In a tax system which is fairly free of tax breaks, where the benefits have been
passed along to a lower corporate rate, the one tax break we have left in the
system is the write-off of 150 per cent for research and development
expenditures. We have done that particularly to encourage and to be seen to
encourage research and development so that private companies will take it up
and we know that it has been a success and it is now one of the consistent
underpinnings of our private R&amp; D effort.
I think the other thing that the Government is particularly proud of are the
Co-operative Research Centres. I think we now have just on 70 of these,
maybe less 60 odd, and the range of things that we are doing is most
particularly pleasing. But I think as much so, is the fact that we have the
institutions like the universities and the CSIRO in there with industrial
companies, working on technologies and being able to apply them virtually
automatically and instantaneously.
So, in other words, instead of just an institution or some other private
company developing something and having limited capacity to apply it or,
even more perhaps importantly, limited capacity to maintain the research
effort, by funding Co-operative Research Centres by getting that private and
that public quality to this research effort. We have, I think, made a bit of a
breakthrough in the way research and development is done in this country.
Could I just say a couple of things about the IR&amp; D Board. It has made
1,000 grants totally over $ 250 million. We have got 4,000 companies
registered now for the 150 per cent tax concession involving total deductions
of $ 1.5 billion and registered syndicates involving research of approximately
billion. Add that, of course, to what we are doing in the Co-operative
Research Centres and there is a lot of induced research and development
going on and that is reflecting in the nature of the products we can see about
US. Now I am especially pleased that in the Great Hall we have some space to
showcase some of these things. I know just going around the country
recently, I was at Sola, a small Adelaide based company, it has grown into
one of the world's largest producer of plastic spectacle lenses, manufacturing
now in 11 countries. Or, Cochlear which is here, which is the leader in 
implants for the profoundly deaf, which exports 85 per cent of its product.
Hawker de Havilland is here with its new superlight fuselage for helicopters,
which again will have domestic and international application. I think our new
air traffic control system is on display.
All of these innovations, I think, do focus on best practice and one of the
things I am particularly pleased about with Peter Cook's involvement in the
trade portfolio and now in industry, is the way the Best Practice program has
grown and the way in which Australian companies have taken on
Best Practice, world Best Practice as being something very important.
Now we like to think that we can do things. We are developing not just
something in Australia, but something in South East Asia, a base, an
industrial base, some really deep industrial infrastructure and that is why I am
particularly pleased that Doctor Habibie is with us today. Because this great
nation to our north, Indonesia, nearly 200 million people, growing now
consistently between 6 and 8 per cent a year, offers great opportunities for
economic and industrial co-operation and there can be co-operation which
goes not only simply to the commercial applications of technologies, but doing
things together in the fields of defence. We already have a substantial
defence co-operation between us and there is no doubt in terms of equipment
procurement it may be possible in the future that we can do things together.
At any rate, I think, it is in South East Asia's interest to be able to develop, in
its own region, competent industries, apart from their commercial and trade
orientation, competent defence industries too that add to the security of the
region and give it a home grown capacity to be able to develop an industrial
base. So, again, I would like to most especially see these growing linkages with
Indonesia and particularly in this field of high technology and I am particularly
pleased and honoured that Professor Habibie could be with us today and has
taken the interest he has over the course of his visit in some of the higher
technology industries of Australia to see what applications they might have in
some joint co-operation.
At any rate, Professor Habibie I would like to, again, welcome you here to
Parliament House and to this exhibition and to the members of your party and
I am sure you can join with me and Peter Cook in offering our exhibitors our
congratulations at being able to demonstrate this today and to, again,
commend the Industry Research and Development Board for their initiative,
for their guidance, for their innovation in those things that will make Australia
stronger and better.
It is with very great pleasure that I declare open officially now this exhibition. 



* 2
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN STANLEY, RADIO 2UE, 1 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
JS: Mr Keating good afternoon.
PM: How are you John?
JS: I am very well. Has John Howard been a hard target for you given that
he hasn't given you much to hit at?
PM: Well I said the other day I thought, rather well, that there can be no
honesty or credibility in politics without policies. I mean how can
anybody go around saying I am honest and credible if they are too
cunning or too devious to say what they stand for. As John Howard,
wanting to be Prime Minister of Australia, says he is trying to say
" I am not going to show that Prime Minister my policies". What he is
really saying is " I won't show the Australian community my policies". So
it is not me he is being tricky with. He is tricky with the whole Australian
community.
JS: And yet he is saying that he will outline those policies in the course of an
election campaign and he says he is going to give his broad philosophy
which I think people do know that, don't they?
PM: Well, I mean, his broad philosophy he has only ever had three
outlooks, three political philosophies since he has been here. That is
cutting the wages of people under $ 30,000. What he calls true labour
market deregulation, meaning no award safety net. Letting them fall just
as theyfall 1in America and other countries. The other thing is throwing
top-end benefits to families on very high incomes. And the third thing is
a They're his three things since he has been in politics for twenty
years.
JS: Well can I just take those three things up? The first of those is lowering
wages. He would argue that the true believers, the people who support
Labor, have seen real wages fall under your Government. 
PM: That is completely untrue, completely untrue. The best measure of
average living standards in Australia is the measure we call real
household-dTsposable'income and the reason it is the best measure is
because it includes wdg-e salaries, supplements, pensions, social
security benefits, it is also after tax and it is per person. And between
1983 and 1995, that is the twelve years the Government has been in
office, real household disposable income increased by 40 per cent. Now
there wouldn't be another country comparable to Australia with numbers
such as that. I notice today that Peter CostelIlo was running on any radio
station that would take him. He was saying that incomes had fallen and
he said that, I will quote him, " we are as poor, in fact, Australians,
comparable to people overseas, are now as poor as they have ever
been". Well that is just a straight lie and let me just expose the point this
way. If we look at the per person change in real disposable income,
household income, it was 19.8 per cent per year, over the period 1983-
When the Coalition was in office, the best they could do was 2.1 per
cent. So we have been doing in every year that which the Coalition was
able only to do in seven years.
JS: But what people who might be on middle to low incomes who hear all of
these figures say well look I am not 40 per ient better off, I don't feel
better off, I feel like I have gone backwards? What is the problem with
them because you talk to them all the time?
PM: Well you might but the fact of the matter is we have got now very low
inflation, you have had wage adjustments through the period.
Remember this, John Howard has opposed every wage increase since
1983. 1 mean it is just a disgrace for the Liberals to be up there you
see their advertising agency has given them this word ' battler'. And this
is the people who were opposed to every wage adjustment since 1983.
In fact, Peter Costello went into the 1986 National Wage Case arguing
for a reduction in all award rates to $ 25 below the lowest award rate then
applying. You know that they wanted to abolish bulk-billing for the
lowest income people who go to doctors who don't charge them. They
want to put a GST of 15 per cent on their backs for everything. You
know they wanted to kick people off the dole after nine months in their
last election policy. And they are still telling us they want to cut $ 10,000
million from outlays and that will, of course, come out of payments to
families, transfer payments, payments to the aged, to pensions,
payments to schools and they are out there of all people, the Dollar
Sweets man, Costello, talking about battlers.
JS: And yet when they say I mean these are their policies which they say
were rejected at the polls and, therefore, they are not going to proceed
with them. I mean what is the difference when saying that, John
Howard, he wants to put a 15 per cent consumption tax on? Couldn't
that be equally said that you want to put a12 112 per ent one on? You
had your option C. 
PM: Yes, but we had over-compensation. We assumed that these people at
the time, low income people, were dis-savers. You know what that
means? That is not only were they spending all of their income, but they
were also spending extra income given them by relatives, or by debt
which they had, or by savings. When the consumption tax came out
from Dr Hewson, Mr Howard and his friends, they had these people on
the most modest income, with savings ratios of somewhere between
and 40 per cent from memory. I mean they never save. Do you
understand the point? In other words, they were saying " the impact of
this tax will be only modest on you because it is only hitting the part of
your income you have got for these savings'. The truth is, under our
arrangements in the 80s, we had massive over-compensation to make
sure that the lowest income people were most protected. These
characters, when they are putting a 15 per cent, right on their backs, at
the same time as they are knocking off bulk-billing.
JS: But that is why they lost the election. They are saying now that they
won't knock off bulk-billing, they won't bring in a consumption tax and, in
the end, isn't it you trying to dredge up their baggage from the past, to
match your baggage? People want to hear what you stand for now, not
what they stood for in the past.
PM: What do you mean people want to hear what we stand for now? What
we stand for now is a 15 per cent superannuation scheme in the Budget.
I mean that is what we stand for. We stand for a person on average
weekly earnings, picking up a lump sum of $ 460,000 at the end of their
working life. Hear what John Howard said about it, he'd cap it he said in
his reply to the Budget two weeks ago. I mean we stand for access and
equity in health through Medicare. Access and equity in education. Do
you know that only three kids in ten completed secondary school in
1983? That is now eight in ten. We have now added 60 per cent of
places to university. I mean, do you know that we have supported every
wage increase and we have now got, again, a safety net sitting under
the system that John Howard is opposed to?
JS: Sure.
PM: So on what basis is he going around talking about battlers, other than on
the basis of complete hypocrisy.
JS: Well what I am saying to you though I mean the opinion polls and I
mean you say you don't believe the opinion polls, but they are across
the board.
PM: No, I say, not that I don't believe them, that journalists don't understand
them, that is what I say.
JS: Well could you expand on that then because I mean they do seem
PM: Well because let me say in the last election, if you look at all the polls,
the Government would have lost the election and the Government was 
certain by the second last week of the campaign that they had the
election won.
JS: Well but with the poll ' s on the last day though of the last election, the
polls on the day before, suggested that you were going to go very close
to winning.
PM: On the last day. But our view was we had the election basically, we
thought, won a couple of weeks before the polls and at the start we
thought we had a chance of winning it. Whereas the commentators and
the polls gave us not a snowball's chance in hell.
JS: So the polls now don't reflect what is going to happen in the future?
Nobody is changing their mind?
PM: Well what happens is if you go and say to people I mean a lot of
members of the public have worked it out and they say they there might
be an election at some time in the next 12 months. Who would you vote
for, the Coalition or the Labor Party? And they say " well look there is a
way of sending the Government a message here". In other words, they
put a little needle into the Government always. Whereas in by-elections,
or whether it is in polls, they always underestimate and undferstatethe
results. And, of course, the other thing, a lot of these polls are taken by
telephones, which distort the result as well.
JS: Isn't there also an argument that the people have decided twelve or
thirteen years they want anyone but Paul Keating? That last time there
was a GST factor entered into it and if John Howard runs on basically a
very bland policy mix, he will get in?
PM: Well I think you are dead wrong about that, John. That is the simple
stuff that you might think. But look at yesterday's National Accounts.
Right on target under the Government's policies. A sustainable
3.7 per cent growth in GDP. In other words, not only have we done the
principal thing we said at the last election to get the economy growing
again, we have created 630,000 jobs, we've got the economy on a
sustainable rate. As The Financial Review said today, putting into doubt
completely Mr Howard's cynical line about five minutes of sunshine.
JS: But the people who pay interest rates. I mean mortgages, for instance,
most of them don't read The Financial Review.
PM: No. But, I'll tell you what, anyone who has got a memory will know that it
was 22 per cent under John Howard.
JS: Yes, but they also know that they have taken three hits of increases in
interest rates in recent times.
PM: But off very low levels, John. They were 4 1/ 2 per cent. The cash rate
at the Reserve Bank, at the bottom of the system, was 4 1/ 2 per cent. 
You have still got housing rates now at 10 per cent, or under
per cent.
JS: Yes, but it is still a couple of per cent higher than it was say twelve
months ago.
PM: But we were then coming back into strong growth. You can't expect
rates to be, now, in the face of 6 and 5 and 4 per cent economic growth,
what they were when it was 2 per cent.
JS: Yes, but I am simply saying that people who twelve months ago had a
higher disposable income, given that they were paying less in their
mortgage payments, are going to say well things are not better for me
today, than they were twelve months ago.
PM: Whoa, whoa. In 1993 we gave people a huge fall in interest rates for
housing a huge fall. And a huge increase in disposable income and,
because of the wage arrangements and low inflation you know we
had inflation running at 1.5 per cent and 2 per cent we have had
wage settlements running at around 4 per cent. People have had a
real increase in disposable income, from wages, and from disposable
income and lower interest rates. Let's not get away from the facts.
And that's why, I think many people understand, that in fact this is
happening. Why would somebody take John Howard, who had a
double digit inflation rate, a double digit unemployment rate, the
biggest Government spending in the history of 1the Cbfifri6ihwealth,
and where we had one-fifth of the employment growth in his years that
we have had under these years do you know we have had nearly
2 million jobs created since 1983?
JS: But that's....
PM: Just a second when I became Treasurer in 1983, there was a
workforce of 6 million. Today, it's just on 8 million it's just over
8 million. In the period of 7 years, they had one-fifth of the
employment growth under John Howard, that we had under this
Government.
JS: That's right. That may be right, but that was...
PM: It is right.
JS: But that was in the 70s and the early
PM: No up to now. Up to now. We have had 1.9 million jobs since 1983.
JS: But are you going to rely on the election campaign on continuing to
talk about John Howard's record?
PM; No. I'm talking about ours. That is, a good Budget a strong Budget
the Budget back into surplus strong employment growth 400,000 in 
the last year, 630,000 since the election I'm talking about the only
national savings scheme that the country has ever had, 15 per cent
contributions on behalf of everybody to occupational superannuation,
so that from here on, every generation of Australians will not have to
worry about their retirement income. That's what I am talking about
I'm talking about real progress.
JS: I guess what I'm talking about is in terms of the election is perceptions,
and there is a perception there in the community that people no longer
believe you they have heard you talk about bringing home the bacon,
they have heard....
PM: Hang on a minute we have had 13 or 14 quarters of economic growth
do you realise that? We have had about 13 or 14 quarters of
economic growth, and we have just had another one. Don't believe
me believe the record. Surely you are not trying to insinuate this
discussion conveyed to your listeners that there isn't a growth
economy out there?
JS: No. But what I'm saying is that there are people, and there is a
significant proportion of people, who no longer believe you that no
longer believe assurances. I mean, you may say that, but they will say
" oh, we have heard that before we have heard that things are going
to improve before"?
PM: They have though they did improve. Let me just take this go back...
JS: So why is this
PM: You put the question let me just get the answer. Go back to 1983
we have had growth every year, bar 18 months. And the 18 month
period was in 1991-92. From 1983 to 1995 now and the Treasury is
saying for the next 3 years to 1988 that is, for 15 years under the
Labor Government, you are going to have growth strong growth bar
18 months: 2 million jobs, enormous increase in the national income. I
mean, when we have said these things, they have happened.
JS: So why is there that perception, and why are you so far behind in the
polls?
PM: Because.. . well, this time in the last parliament, we were 20 percentage
points behind in the polls this time we are about what? 5 per cent or
6 per cent?
JS: A bit more than that isn't it I thought it was more like 8 per cent?
PM; No. I don't think so been on average about 6 per cent something
like that. Look, are they going to task John Howard, who had no ideas
as Treasurer? [ He was] a complete failure as Treasurer, didn't open
up the foreign exchange markets, didn't float the dollar, didn't
deregulate the economy, didn't lower tariffs, didn't deal with micro-
economic change, didn't touch education, didn't have a decent health
scheme are they really going to go back to that? Someone from the
1970s who believes in the policies of the 1 950s?
JS: So he is not entitled to have changed, to have learnt
PM: But he hasn't.
JS: We don't know what policies he is going to be putting forward, though,
do we?
PM: But you can hear him every day in the house the questions, the
intonations. Here he was yesterday, on Monday, up supporting this
character in Western Australia who is trying to lock these people out of
the Western Australian waterfront. John Howard never learns. This is
a country now with the lowest level of industrial disputes that probably
we have ever had. Did you know that in yesterday's National
Accounts, average weekly earnings was 2.2 per cent growth for the
year, and on the statisticians survey basis, they are running at around
4 per cent. So, somewhere between 2.5 per cent and 4 per cent. Yet,
these people want to adopt American style policies did you hear what
the American Labour Secretary said? I thought it was very instructive,
and I will just read it to you: this is the labour market system that John
Howard wants, and has spent all these years talking about he said
this Robert Reich, US Secretary of Labour: " We in the United States
are proud of our record in creating jobs", he said, " but not of the
continuing decline in medium wages. While we know lead advanced
countries in growth and productivity, and have lowered inflation, the
average hourly compensation of American workers trails 10 foreign
economies, and this average masks a more disturbing reality. While
inequality is growing in every advanced country, the distribution of
income and wealth in the United States has become most unequal of
all". He goes on to say this, " In contrast, the European Ministers
complained of very low employment growth, high rates of
unemployment, and high levels of long-term unemployment", he said,
" the choice between America's low unemployment with falling real
wages, and Europe's high real wages and high unemployment is a
diabolical trade-off'. Now, John, we have got the right mix right down
the middle. High employment growth, and decent wages growth,
because we have got award underpinning's in our enterprise
bargaining system the very thing that John Howard wants to take
away.
JS: So, if the situation is so good, and the polls aren't looking bad for you,
could you win an election today?
PM: I have never spoken about an election.
JS: No. I'm just asking. I'm just asking you 
PM: Why should I give an answer to it? I have always taken the view that
these elections are too hard to win without giving away time, and the
public want value from the Parliaments and from the government.
They have asked . what was the Government's principle
commitment in the last election? To restore the economy to growth,
and to deal with unemployment. Our target was 500,000 jobs in
3 years we got to the 500,000 in 2 years, we are now at 630,000, and
what yesterday's National Accounts show is that we have got a
sustainable economy. So, John Howard's line about 5 minutes of
sunshine is just a cynical, advertising agency lie.
JS: So really, there is no justification to have an election before next year,
is there?
PM: In this system, the Prime Minister has the option of going to the polls
at a time of his or her choosing, and that is obviously a prerogative
that I will maintain.
JS: But unless something extraordinary happens, from what you have just
said that you are going to give value for the mandate you have got
there is really no justification to go before next year, is there?
PM: The full Parliament so-called comes about when the House of
Representatives and half Senate can go to an election, so it is then a
matter of choosing by the Prime Minister of the day.
JS: But in terms of giving 3 years value, you would have to call next year,
wouldn't you?
PM: Value is when the 2 come back into the cycle, and they come into the
cycle sometime later this year.
JS: Yeah.
PM: But the key point is has the Government kept complete fidelity with
its commitment to get growth and employment back into this economy,
and has it produced a sustainable growth economy? And the answer
is yes, and yes.
JS: Well, let me just ask you one final question then on another one I
know you normally wouldn't answer on interest rates can you see
them falling later this year?
PM: John, one thing I always think about you is that you can ask a good
and sensible question recitation of questions about interest rates
don't do any of us any good.
JS: Okay.
PM: The thing is, let's get the conditions right. What are the conditions?
Basically, underlying inflation. Yesterday, we had the statisticians 
National Accounts for the economy, and for the year to the last
quarter, the broadest measure of inflation, and non-farm product
deflator, was 1.4 per cent, and the private consumption deflator the
measure of private consumption inflation was 2.2 per cent. That's
the best answer I can give you.
JS: Okay. And you agree with The Financial Review we are going to
have a soft landing?
PM: Well, 3.7 per cent means that we have got the sustainbability which
John Howard said was going to disappear with 5 minutes of sunshine.
I mean, there ought to be a lesson in this for Howard don't take you
lines from an advertising agency.
JS: So how much sunshine are we going to have, then?
PM: You have had 14 quarters now. And the Treasury says you have got
36 quarters coming up?
JS: 36 quarters?
PM: Sorry 12 more quarters coming up.
JS: So, 12 more quarters of economic sunshine coming up?
PM: They say the Treasury's best estimate is that we will have
3.7 per cent and 4 per cent growth in that order over the next
3 years, that was in the Budget forecast.
JS: Prime Minister, we are out of time. Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much indeed.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH DOUG AITON, RADIO 31-0, 1 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
DA: Mr Keating good afternoon.
PM: How are you Doug?
DA: Very well indeed, thank you. I can smell an election in the air.
PM: Well you have got too good a nose, Doug.
DA: Have I?
PM: You have indeed.
DA: Do you think that I am wrong in thinking that we are now into mild
election mode?
PM: Oh, y ou are indeed. I mean the Government brought down a serious
Budget, I would say a sober Budget, to deal with the economic
circumstances we faced. To get the Budget back into surplus to make
this adjustment and it was greeted as, you know, an election Budget
and the rest. That was the media's way of saying look this has really
been a pretty good Budget. So good that they thought the
Government could go to a poll on it. That doesn't mean that the
Government thinks about it as being anything other than simply a
serious policy change from which we can now carry on and see the
economy go on to the sustainable level, which we saw in yesterday's
National Accounts, 3.7 per cent for the year.
DA: Well we do know, though, that the election at its latest, I think, will be
in the early months of next year, won't it?
PM: The full Parliament runs to about March next year, it is something of
that order. 
DA: Are you yet prepared to give us any indication as to when you are
thinking of for an election?
PM: Well, I must say, one of the happy elements of incumbency in this
arrangement, Doug, is that in the Australian political system, there is a
discretion in the Prime Minister as to when the elections can be held
and none of them have been silly enough to give that away and I don't
think I will be the first.
DA: No, I don't expect you to be. But you can't blame me for trying.
PM: Oh, no, no, go for your life.
DA: I think also that one of the things that is taking our attention at the
moment, the voters of Australia, is what are we going to be voting
about. People are thinking in election mode, whether or not you can
tell us when. I would suggest that what I hear most of all is that the
gap between the rich and the poor is increasing. Now I am not all that
sure that that's the case. I'd prefer to say that the number of rich is
increasing and the number of poor is increasing and unemployment
doesn't change much and it seems to me that you being the
Prime Minister, that is the mood that you're going to face in an election
campaign.
PM: Well that may be right, but it is the wrong mood. You know we have
now had 1.9 million jobs since the Government was elected in 1983
and we have had, since the election, 630,000 jobs. Now if you go
back to that election, Doug, the principal commitment that the
Government made in that election was to restore growth to the
economy and employment ard we have had now a 6 per cent and a
per cent growth economy and now it is slowing to a rate sustainable
at about 4 per cent, roughly, and we have had 630,000 jobs since the
election, or 400,000 in the last year. So it is a much more fully
employed country. I think only the United States is up with us in terms
of employment growth.
DA: Where does that put us in percentage terms as to the number of
unemployed, the slice of the cake who are unemployed?
PM: Well that is down to about, I think, 8.4 per cent. But can I say to you
that is off a massive participation rate. I mean we have now got many
more people looking for work. You see the unemployment rate is a
proportion of those looking for work, the participation in the labour
market. If we had the participation rate that John Howard left me in
1983, we'd have unemployment I think around 5 to 6 per cent. If we
we're comparing apples with apples. 
DA: Yes I do. But is this the sort of figure that you would have hoped to
have for unemployment? At the time of the last election, is this the sort
of figure you would have hoped to have in June 1995?
PM: I couldn't have hoped for anything like this because this is the largest
fall in unemployment since we have been keeping the records. The
last twelve months is the largest fall in unemployment since we were
keeping the records. So we have gone from 10.7 per cent
unemployment at the time of the election to now 8.4 per cent. That is
a massive fall and picking up, of course, all those school leavers. See
to get unemployment down, Doug, you have got to pick up all the
people joining the labour market, as well as those in unemployment.
And one of the happy things about this is we now have got a quarter of
those jobs have gone to the long term unemployed, which shows that
that policy statement Working, Nation is out there working to get the
most disadvantaged people back-to work, whereas in the 80s we
wouldn't have got anything like that number.
DA: Well what do you see as the battles that you are going to fight the
election on?
PM: Well let me just say a couple of things about this question about,
you know, how people are going because I know that Peter Costello is
running around in the last day or so talking about battlers. I mean
someone in the Liberal Party's advertising agency has given them a
line about battlers. They said, " yes just keeping this line". So they are
cynical. He said, " Australians are as poor as they have ever been", he
said today on radio. Now let me just give the lie to that little claim and
just tell you this. That the best measure of average living standards in
Australia is real household disposable income because it includes
wages and salaries, and supplements such as overtime, pensions,
social security benefits and it is per person and it is after tax. So, I
mean, it is the best measure. We have had a 40 per cent increase in
household disposable income since 1983. In other words, a huge
increase in disposable . incomfe since 1983 and if we take that per
person, it was 19.8 per cent per person since 1983 and if we take the
per person rate during the seven years of Coalition Government it was
2.1 per cent. So we have had nearly as much growth in household
disposable income per year as the Coalition had in seven years. So
can I just make that point, therefore, that if you take that measure of
wages, salaries, supplements, pensions, benefits, after tax and per
person, household disposable income has risen by 40 per cent.
DA: And you are making the point that Peter Costello and John Howard are
saying that the battlers are turning to the Liberal Party.
PM: Well I mean this is the stuff they get from the advertising. This is the
Dollar Sweets man. This is from Peter Costello who went into the
industrial arbitration system and argued in 1986 at the National Wage
Case for a reduction in all award wages to $ 25 below the lowest award 
rate then applying. This is the same crowd who say they wanted $ 3 an
hour for teenage battlers. No award protection for adult battlers. For
unemployed battlers they were going to kick them off the dole after
nine months and for retiring battlers they want to knock off the
Government's superannuation scheme. I mean they are unbelievably
hypocritical.
DA: How are you finding facing up to John Howard? It seems to me that
they have put up against you, at last, someone who can match you in
debating style.
PM: Well they put him up against me and Hawke in 1985 to 1989 and it
didn't do him much good then.
DA: But you weren't both leaders then.
PM: No, I know. But, I mean, in the end I had the job of blowing the
Box Hill tax package apart in 1987 for John Howard. Look the thing
about John Howard is he has only ever had three views in twenty
years of public life. One is what he calls proper deregulation of the
labour market, that is taking away the award underpinnings. Letting
the whole lot fall out, particularly against the lowest paid. Kicking
family benefits to the highest income earners and putting in a GST.
They're the three general lines he has pushed in twenty years. So
what I say about John is this. I have just come back from Japan. We
have probably got now the best set of bilateral relationships with Asia
we have ever had. We have got the most advantageous multilateral
arrangements in things like ApEC. We are making the linkage to Asia
as never before. We have got an open deregulated economy.
We have got very low inflation in yesterday's National Accounts.
When you compare where the Government is and where Australia is
going, compared to somebody who has 1970s views coming from what
he thinks are the rosy years in the 1950s, for Australia to step back
down in that time tunnel and accept those views when we now have a
much more dynamic buoyant economy, is I just don't think a
proposition for people.
DA: There was a time about ten years or so ago when you were Treasurer
and he had been Treasurer where you and he seemed to have a
certain personal regard for each other. That seems to have
completely and totally evaporated.
PM: No. I'd just make this point. There can be no honesty or credibility in
politics without policies. And when John Howard runs around saying " I
won't show that Prime Minister my policies". What he is really saying
is " I won't show Doug Aiton, his listeners, or the Australian public my
policies". I mean what he is really saying is " I am so monkey cunning
and so tricky, they won't see the colour of my policies until it is too late
for them". Now I think this is the sort of Liberal Party 50s, you know,
" they are coming down to get us in their sampans, there are reds 
under beds, the Indonesians are about to overtake us". That sort of
cynicism is no longer a stock in trade of Australia in the 1990s.
DA: Talking about your accusation of John Howard coming from the 1970s
and inspired by the 1950s. Do you think that the Republic is going to
be an issue in this election campaign, whenever it might be?
PM: Yes, because there can be no complete expression of Australian
independence and sovereignty while ever we are borrowing the
monarchy of another country. So I go to Japan and say " here I am
representing a country which is completely independent, proud of its
culture, proud of its traditions, proud of its new role in the world.
But, by the way, our head of state is the Queen of Great Britain."
DA: I think that the pro-Republic argument seems to have stalked a little
and I emphasise thie word stalled for one reason: the pro-republic
people, even many of them are saying " but what sort of a republic
do we want", and no-one has yet come up with the complete definite
answer to that, and the Monarchists are making merry with that.
PM: Let me tell you Doug, I'll make an announcement on your program,
at 7.3Opm on next Wednesday night, I am responding in detail to the
Republican Advisory Committee report, and giving the Government's
policy on the republic, and it will probably be telecast on the ABC.
DA: And in that you will be saying exactly what style of republic you will
be pushing for?
PM: What style of republic, the shape and nature of it, and why we
believe it should be that shape. But let me just say, the republic
debate was a mints and coffee debate after dinner until the
Government took this up in the 1993 election. You know, people
talked about the republican movement, and I am glad to have them
there, but they weren't cutting any weight before a major political
party picked this issue up. But again, because it is an issue that is
going to matter to Australia now, in the future forever, it's incumbent
upon us to think it through and get it right. So, I would rather
respond after due consideration, than rush into it to keep
enthusiastic supporters no matter how enthusiastic or helpful they
may otherwise be to get this right.
DA: Is it a driving motivation of yours that you would like to be
remembered as the Prime minister who took us into being a
republic?
PM: I would like to be remembered Doug, as a person who had complete
faith in the nation we have become. Australians who have made
their own way in the world, who have changed in this generation
probably as no other generation has changed before it, who have
accepted the economic changes as never before, who have made 
the connection and the leap into Asia as never before, who have
found themselves at home in this part of the world, and who are now
living in an interesting, dynamic, multicultural society. That's what I
am interested in, and I don't think that can be reflected while ever we
have the Sovereign of Great Britain as our Head of State.
DA: Would you consider yourself to be a failure if you don't get us to be a
republic before your Prime Ministership ends?
PM: No. If you take a measure of my political life, it has been trying to
international ise the Australian economy, and to not only to change
structures here at home, but build structures abroad for Australia,
and I was doing that just last week in Japan.
DA: One other matter that is going to be brought up by the Opposition,
and they also find the Australian people often seem to talk about
against you, is what we might call Paul Keating's forceful, personal
insults towards the Opposition, made usually in the Parliament.
Are you going to continue that style, or do you think it might be
losing you votes?
PM: You see, it's all in a sense over-estimated. I don't believe in
personal attacks I don't ever talk about people's personal lives,
their family lives, their finances. When I say the Coalition may be
hillbillies, or something like this as I have said at some stage in the
past I'm talking about them in the sense of a corporate political
put-down of them. But what I regard as personal attacks are people
who go to personal lives, and the Liberal Party do that against me
perpetually they're doing it again today, yesterday it goes on here
all the time. So, when I refer to them in a corporate sense, I'm not
dealing and never have: nobody can say over the 25 years I have
been in public life, that anywhere have I referred to them in those
sort of, if you like, hurtful, personal terms. But I have had a lot of it
directed at me, and it has highlighted of course now that is, the
Parliamentary debate is highlighted by television. But you
notice... . you wouldn't have seen, perhaps, Mike Seccombe from the
Sydney Morning Herald said is a column a week ago that
Mr Howard's tactic is to disrupt the House of Representatives by
interjections under his breath, by interjections which are out of the
earshot of the microphone. He said that Mr Howard is a
parliamentary sneak, and he better own up to having either some
interest in the nature of his rhetoric about the Parliament, or simply,
to be described as somebody who is prepared to disrupt the
Parliamentary proceedings. So, this is the environment we live in
here, and I think it has changed since the Parliament was televised.
DA: A few years down the track, can you say that you still enjoy being
Prime Minister as when you took over from Bob Hawke? 
PM: I enjoy the policy changes. I was thrilled to be able to see the
Treasurer say on Budget night that we will now have 15% of
everyone's income going away in superannuation that no other
generation of Australians will need to worry about their retirement
income from now on. You know, that someone on average weekly
earnings will end up with a nest egg of $ 500,000. They are the big
changes that matter. Up in Japan last week, I walked away with a
declaration from the Japanese a joint declaration of partnership
between us, which said amongst other things that " Japan reaffirms
that Australia is an indispensable partner in regional affairs".
Now, when have you ever seen that sort of text, ever, in any
relationship we have ever had with the largest power in Asia the
largest economy in Asia or, let me read a couple of other points
from it: " Japan and Australia have a relationship of unprecedented
quality, they pledged to build on that foundation an enduring and
steadfast partnership." You see, this is the country that matters
most to us it is the largest in terms of trade, it's our largest trading
partner, and to walk away with that sort of declaration and
relationship, is the stuff of this job. And that's what gives you the
kicks, as they say.
DA: If you lose the election, are you going to stick around as Leader?
PM: I'm not in the business of losing, and we have won 5 elections in a
row, and I think we can make it 6.
DA: But nevertheless, just if the unexpected happens, will you stay on?
PM: Well, I would see at the time you see, I don't think the public are
going to take somebody recycled from the 70s and 80s. They are
too smart Doug, they have had too much quality in policy changes
put to them to say " oh well, we will stop all that we will go back to
sort of sitting back".. You know John Howard said a couple of weeks
ago that he thought Australians had policy fatigue. You know, the
only person who has got policy fatigue is him.
DA: What about if you win are you going to stay on for a long time?
PM: Long enough to do all the things that I think are consistent with this
international isation of Australia, and also giving us that cultural and
social identity which I think we now have. You know, 10 years ago,
only 3 kids in 10 completed secondary school. Now, we have got 8
in 10 completing secondary school, we have added 65% of places to
tertiary education higher education, universities. In One Nation, we
built up the TAFE system. In Melbourne this weekend, I am
launching the One Nation train we will have the standard gauge for
the first time from Brisbane through Sydney, via Melbourne to Perth,
which will make Melbourne the transport hub of Australia. I mean,
these sorts of changes of the nation coming together as we said at
the time: One Nation is the thing which I have most dedicated 
myself to. Because when I came here Doug, in the late 60s, the time
I became a person of some significance in the front bench of the
Labor Party in the late 70s, people had thrown in this Parliament
had thrown the economic and social fight for just on then 40 years
years. And all the policies to open the country up, to
produce a naturally low inflation rate, to produce productivity,
dynamism, import competitiveness, real product innovation, powered
along by our education system all of those issues, people had
thrown the fight on. And, for my part, I was not going to ever let
anyone say of me that I did it too. So, that's what I am about I'm
about, basically, kicking goals in policy. The other thing, let me say I
want to see this terrific front bench we now have here, bring these
people along. I mean, the number of people that can succeed me as
leader are now manifest in the front bench of the Government.
DA: Who are they?
PM: There is, I suppose, all the obvious ones.
DA: Gareth Evans?
PM: Kim Beazley, Gareth Evans, Simon Crean, some of the younger
members coming through as well, Carmen Lawrence from Western
Australia, Ralph Willis the Treasurer. I mean, the front bench is so
strong, the equivalent front bench is, of course, Tim Fischer,
Costello and Downer. From our group there is a number of people
who could be leader and Prime Minister and, I think, one of the great
changes of the last 12 years is to have modernised the Australian
Labor Party. The Labor Party will never regress to what it was in the
1950s and I 960is 7It -is -now a modern party, a modern social
democratic party, a modern party of government producing the sort
of people I just mentioned.
DA: How do you feel about Bob Hawke now?
PM: I don't see Bob much these days. He is out leading his own life and
good on him.
DA: What do you think his place in Australian political history is?
PM: I think, it will be one of somebody who was around presiding over a
government which was dedicated to making these changes and the
continuity of the policy changes I was just talking about a few
minutes ago.
DA: Mr Keating, thank you very much for your time today.
PM: Good Doug, it is a great pleasure to speak to you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MELBOURNE FREIGHT TERMINAL, 4 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I would like to make a statement just about the train behind us. Of
course, this is Dynon in Melbourne which in the One Nation statement
that we decided to make the transport hub of Austfr-alia to bring more
services into Melbourne, because Victoria was, in national terms,
somewhat light on in services, and freight is one of the essential
services of the country. Today, this will be, of course, the first train
that will come on a standard gauge from Brisbane to Perth, via
Melbourne and Adelaide. And it came from the One Nation program,
pulling the country together, and bringing South Australia into the
Eastern States' economy, and giving us a much better transcontinenta
l nk. 79 need I say, I have got my opponent Mr Howard
out around today they had 30 years to do that, the Liberal Party, and
they never did because they have got no ideas, and they rarely if
ever make any initiatives. At any rate, I am pleased to be here, and
you will hear more later, but I am happy to take some questions from
you.
J ( inaudible)...
PM: Well, we have now got the system in place where you know the
Minister for Transport last night talked about a national track, so we
will have a company which runs the rail, and then we-wiF~ e able to
have them competing for users on the system. So, instead of having a
railway company that runs the rail and the locomotives, we will have a
railway company that runs the rail, a track company, and then we will
have... . people will be able to bring locomotives. And, as you know, we
have also announced that we will be making in Australia this huge
refurbishment of the locomotive stock. So, we will see a much more
competitive rail and transport system. And this will take containers off
the roads, it will make our roads safer, it will make the country more
efficient and that's what we need. As we are a trading nation, we 
needed efficiency, and we needed this interface between rail, road and
port, like we have here.
J: .( inaudible)...
PM: No. That is already arranged. This is already a national system it's
called national rail it's already in place.
J: What's your reaction to Mr Howard's comments this morning?
PM: Which one?
J: Like extending the term of the Governor-General?
PM: Oh well, it's interesting that Mr Howard thinks that... . he has highlighted
the point that now, the Prime Minister and only the Prime Minister,
speaks to the Queen about the Governor-General. He is apparently
saying, towards the end of this term, that he thinks that we ought to be
doing something else. Well, on Wednesday night I will have some
proposals for him if he thinks that the Prime Minister only shouldn't be
appointing the Governor-General, I'll have some proposals for him,
and we will see how forthcoming he is about those.
J: What's your reaction, Prime Minister, to the fall in interest rates, by
Aussie Home Loans and ( inaudible)
PM: Well, I notice I don't know whether you have seen I have got a copy
of it here the Sun-Herald in Sydney this morning has got " Housing
Rates Tumble", and we are seeing a fall in variable housing rates, and
also we have now got most of the fixed. rates uinder 10%. So, again, I
think this confirms the strength of the Budget, and of course, it gives
the lie to Mr Howard's clairi, about 5 minutes of sunshine. You know,
he was telling everybody [ that] rates were going to go up last week,
we saw the National Accounts out: 3.7% growth for the year, the
broadest measure of inflation at Which means that, as the
Treasury say in the Budget statements, the recovery is entirely
sustainable. And that means, of course, that the notion that it's going
to peter out was, of course, simply an advertising agency's fib, which
the Liberals were happy to put about.
J: So, have the rates peaked in this current cycle?
PM: I'm not here to give you a commentary on the future of interest rates,
but to say to you, that the major determinate of it is inflation. And what
we saw in the National Accounts last week, is that the broadest
measure of inflation the non-farm product deflator was at and
the consumption measure was at 2.2% I think that's the best guide
people can get to interest rates.
ends. 



A
' I
S. n
PRIME MINISTER ** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
LAUNCH OF ONE NATION TRAIN, MELBOURNE, 4 JUNE 1995
1 think we might all be forgiven a smile of satisfaction today. From Tom
Hopkins who is 103 and first dreamt about this while driving locomotives
before the rest of us were born; to Gough Whitlam who is younger than Tom
but no less a dreamer of great things for Australia; to those of my own
generation who came to believe in them too and find ourselves privileged to
be the people who finally did it.
This is a great day for Australia and nothing less.
A standard gauge rail highway from Brisbane to Perth is a century old
Australian dream today it's an Australian reality.
Three years ago when we delivered a statement called One Nation. We
called it One Nation because we wanted to assert a simple idea that we are
stronger when we work as one.
One Nation imagined a stronger Australia an Australia that worked more
efficiently. The aim was to close the gaps between Australians the physical
gaps and the cultural ones.
To close them with railway lines and better road and airline systems; to close
them by social undertakings to help Australians on margins; and to close
them by reminding Australian men and women that for all the distance which
divides a West Australian from a Victorian or a South Australian from a
Queenslander, or a suburb of Sydney from a farm in Tasmania, we are all
Australians and we share a great common interest.
One Nation aimed at making Australia stronger and fairer. 
And I think in the past three years we have made a lot of progress in this
direction we've got extraordinary growth in jobs and national economic
growth, we've got a new national training system, we've got nationwide labour
market programs, we've got a national competition policy, we've got the kind
of agreement on national goals we haven't had in a long time and we've got
a six and a half thousand kilometre standard gauge national rail highway from
Brisbane to Perth via Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide.
There is nothing like a train.
There is no symbol of progress like it. No symbol of unity like it no symbol
of strength.
But of course this One Nation train is much more than a great symbol.
It brings all Australians much closer together in a material way.
It will produce material benefits.
It will give us in the next century what we have been denied in this an
efficient national rail system.
Over three years we have spent $ 429 million to upgrade and invigorate
Australia's rail infrastructure.
We erected new bridges which could support greater loads travelling at
greater speeds.
We added crossing loops in key locations to eliminate delays.
We laid new low-maintenance sleepers, and constructed new track
alignments with fewer tight curves and flatter grades for a better ride.
The centrepiece of the rail infrastructure investment program was the
standardisation of the line between Melbourne and Adelaide the missing link
in a national standard-gauge rail network. And that's what we celebrate
today. Sixty kilometres of new track has been built, 30 kilometres converted to dual
gauge, and 740 kilometres regauged by moving the rails 6.5 inches closer
together.
We now have a great national asset.
With the National Rail Highway we can more fully harness the energy of
Australia. 
It will buttress economic development and make us more flexible and
competitive. As our industry increasingly adopts a national dimension, so will
it be serviced by a truly national rail freight system.
Trains will be longer and their travel time shorter. The One Nation train slices
two hours off the Melbourne-Adelaide leg and eight hours off the Melbourne-
Perth trip.
It untangles Australia's railway tracks.
And it enables us to put the interstate rail freight system on a much more
efficient and competitive footing.
With the support of the States, we established the National Rail Corporation,
so that interstate shippers need only deal with one organisation rather than
four when moving goods around the country.
National Rail has set about renovating the institutional culture and work
practices of the Australian rail industry. With a ground-breaking enterprise
agreement and the introduction of best practices, the interstate rail freight
industry has been turned around.
And it will shortly be acquiring a lot more horsepower in the form of $ 400
million worth of new locomotives.
Locomotives which will be built and maintained in Australia: an investment
which is expected to create in excess of one thousand jobs. And the new
locos will be vastly more fuel efficient than the current fleet.
The Government is determined to press forward with efficiency gains. And
the surest way to increase in the railways is to promote competition on the
line. That's why the Minister for Transport has proposed that all the interstate track
be managed by a single organisation, Track Australia, ensuring competition
between existing and new rail operators.
That leaves rail operators to concentrate on the customers.
We devised One Nation to get Australia moving. One element of that was to
make the railways run more smoothly. But the commitment also required that
we improve air, sea and road transport, and dovetail them all together.
Today, after three years of work, the Australian people have a far more
integrated and cohesive transport system than ever before.
We have safer national roads, more efficient ports and a better aviation
system. And all these modes of transport are linked to each other. 
This Dynon Road Freight Terminal is a good illustration of the distance we've
come in a very short time.
Before the One Nation investments the place was heavily under-capitalised
and lacked both effective lifting equipment and long tracks for the efficient
assembly of trains.
Now, the Terminal has new assembly tracks and highly effective mobile
gantries. And the whole operation is safer and better lit.
Before One Nation, containers arriving at the docks and destined for the rail
station had to be driven along a roundabout route of 2.5km, crossing
Footscray Road, the busiest truck corridor in Victoria.
Now, goods are delivered straight to the tracks via the newly-built Dock Link
Road. The Road cost $ 5 million, and it paid for itself within weeks of opening.
National Rail estimates a saving of $ 20 per container.
So this is One Nation at work.
And it means we can transport people and freight across the continent and
get it onto ships or planes for export faster, cheaper and more reliably.
The train I am about to board the One Nation train will be first to cross the
continent, via all State capitals, without interruption from break of gauge.
Construction of the national rail highway began a long time ago, and as I said
we are privileged to be part of the generation which completed it.
It has been a difficult journey. But then, the most worthwhile things are very
often the most difficult.
Many people deserve our congratulations today.
I've mentioned Gough Whitlam, who has never let up in his pursuit of national
gauge compatibility. Let me also pay tribute to Laurie Brereton, the Minister
who got the work done on time and on budget.
And speaking of work, let me thank the men and women of National Rail who
planned and co-ordinated the gauge standardisation.
And let me also thank everyone of those 3000 Australians who did the hard
physical tasks of the project.
I hope today that their satisfactions matches that of their fellow railway worker
from another age who is with us today Tom Hopkins. 
Today is special because we have all been a part of a very long chapter in
Australia's story. And when we say that today we have ended the chapter,
we recognise that before us came countless Australians who down the years
worked towards the same goal and dreamt the same dream.
Our own and future generations of Australians will benefit from this One
Nation train, but I think we should launch it in the name of all those who came
before us.
As the train leaves Melbourne and moves on to Adelaide and Perth, Australia
will move with it.
It will bring Australians closer together, it will make Australia stronger.
And I hope it will inspire us to believe that much more in what we can do
when we think, plan and work as one nation.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP, AND
THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT, THE HON LAURIE BRERETON MP
DOORSTOP, ADELAIDE FREIGHT TERMINAL, ADELAIDE, 5 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
J: Prime Minister there is a concern locally about the future of Australian
National and the fact that up to 200 jobs may go later this year. Can
I get a comment on this?
PM: Oh well I think the Minister for Transport could probably do more justice
to it than me. But the Commonwealth commitment to AN has been,
I think, pretty profound. Our commitment to railways is a key thing.
Don't look at what we say, look at what we do and what we have done is
to give new life back to the Australian railway system and our belief that
rail is the answer for carrying these big containers across the continent,
around the place, means that we are going to improve the quality and
durability and longevity of the rail system. That must mean a longer run,
better employment, more secure employment. I don't know whether
Laurie would like to add to that.
LB: I think the most profound aspect of the weekend's announcement was
the decision of the Cabinet to back the development of Track Australia,
which is aimed at doing one thing and that is growing rail, making it more
competitive. But, in total, making it bigger and better and that means
more jobs overall and that is certainly the commitment that we have
given and it is certainly the plan we are going to develop and work
through with the States during the remainder of this year. That is good
news for AN and particularly good news for South Australia.
J: Prime Minister does this mean that the Alice Springs/ Darwin rail link
PM: Well that is subject to a study and that has got to stand or fall on its
commerciality and the independence of that commerciality. But what we
are seeing here today is the tangible step of putting a standard gauge
between Adelaide and Melbourne. That means that the port of Adelaide
can ship containers through to the port of Melbourne and Sydney and 
into businesses right around the country and it also means that the
heavier industries of South Australia will have better transport linkages
into Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland, as well as to Perth,
and this must be good for the industry of this State. The other thing
which I think is good is the psychology of it. To think that
South Australia is connected up now by a line which is a standard
gauge, so where we can now get the efficiency of the system up, has got
to be good for this State and got to bring more services to Adelaide.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Well Track Australia has got to be negotiated with the other States.
They have got a substantial interest with their rail systems. But, again,
there has been such a decline in rail investment in the last 30 years
unless we have a company its fundamental job is to run the
permanent way, the track, if there is a good track we will get plenty of
railway companies.
J: Say in six months?
PM: Oh, I don't know. I think these things take a while but I would think in
that time we would make considerable progress.
J: Mr Keating you have overtaken Mr Howard in the polls. Is that a case of
the hard sell
PM: It is not the hard sell, it is the hard do. The hard do. I mean that is the
economy is growing. It wasn't five minutes of sunshine. That was just a
cynical advertising line, from an ad agency, that they put in Mr Howard's
mouth. We have got a sustainable growth economy, we have got
630,000 jobs since the election and One Nation did get the country
moving. The One Nation program did get the country back to growth
and back to employment. Here, in rail, you can see it behind us with this
standard gauge. You can see it now in the removal of the distinction
between domestic and international carriage of air passengers. You can
see it in the rebuilding of the TAFE system, of the Australian National
Training Authority. These are all the quality things that are done by
Governments who do things. I mean Mr Howard's problem is he did
nothing as Treasurer and nothing as Opposition Leader and the problem
is if you are in the do nothing category, it is hard to polish yourself up as
a doer.
J: So you have always believed that you would overtake Mr Howard in the
polls?
PM: Good policy and doers always end up with their nose in front.
J: And what about interest rates then. What can we expect there? 
PM: Well the guide to that is inflation and we had the really good news out in
the National Accounts last week. The broadest measure of inflation, the
non-farm product measure, was 1.9 per cent. The consumption measure
was 2.2 per cent. There is your guide to how interest rates are going to
be. I mean what we have done is broken the back of Australian inflation.
That has been done by a Labor Government.
J: Prime Minister is our move toward a Republic as on track as the railway?
PM.-Well it will be very, I think, nicely on track on Wednesday night.
Whether it is on standard gauge, one will have to wait and see. But
I think it will be.
J: And the racial vilification legislation?
PM: We will be proceeding with that and it is up for Mr Howard to explain to
the rest of the community why he believes that minorities don't have the
right to protection.
ends 



TEL: 4.3un. 95 22: 11 ND. 008 P. 01
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW ON RADIO 5AN WITH KEITH CONLON, ADELAIDE
JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KC: Prime Minister, Paul Keating, good morning,
PM: How are you Keith?
KC: Good thanks what's the last station you passed, Prime Minister?
PM: We just got on at Belair...
KC: He's just checking now to see what's coming up, I guess.
PM: Blackwood was the last one.
KC: Okay you are well on your way. You are well on your way to Eden
Hills. Are you actually doing a Ben Chifley...
PM: Yes I'm at the wheel here. ( Toot toot). You can hear it.
KC: Was that you blowing the whistle?
PM: That was me. Whistle blowing Prime Minister, you see.
KC: Absolutely. Tell me, did you take some tips from Tom Hopkins the
103 year old train driver that surely you met, from Adelaide, in
Melbourne?
PM; That was his great dream, you see. He said it was the great dream of
all railway people to see the country united with a single gauge. And
this link this Is one of the key things in One Nation was to build this
link between Melbourne and Adelaide, to pull -Adelaide and South
Australia more... . to bind It In further with the Eastern States, and I think 
T4E. L: J un. 95 22: 11 No. 008 P. 02
2
that's what it will do. And it's quite a thrill to come and see this track
sitting beside the wide gauge the standard gauge being more narrow.
You can see It obviously out of the window here.
KC: Yes. What sort of cost savings do you think it will represent
eventually, Prime Minister?
PM:-I think it does tremendous things for costs, in terms of containers. But
the main thing Is mobility it will really mean that say, the port of
Adelaide will be able to compete with the port of Melbourne. Ships can
dock here, then load up on the train and move them to Melbourne and
Sydney quickly, and it will change the nature of South Australia as the
transport hub, and it gives South Australian industry... we're going
through a tunnel here Keith -just a sec..
KC: The noise level has gone up. The Prime Minister is going through the
first of the tunnels on the way down, and we have lost him completely
of course, because we are in the middle of the tunnel.
PM: Are you there?
KC: You're out again?
PM:-Yeah we're out again. It gives South Australian industry a great
chance to do things that bring products into Victoria, New South Wales
and Queensland, and of course, to go across to the West. So that
whole trans-continental traffic of goods, and particularly containers, will
be now for the first time ever routed through Adelaide and
Melbourne; Melbourne via Adelaide.
KC: Talking about that transport hub, Mr Keating, surely you are going to
get a question or two about the Alice Springs to Darwin extension any
further interest in that?
PM: I'm not sure that this is in South Australia's interests because we
have just gone through Eden Hills station, just one second ( toot
toot)
KC: The Prime Minister is just waving to. you have got the whole of Eden
Hills Primary School out there?
PM: They're right here excuse me a sec...
KC: Righto. We'll just let the Prime Minister attend to some formal waving
duties now, as he goes past the Eden Hills Railway Station.
PM: The Northern Territory have been talking about taking the line to
Broken Hill, and then to Sydney, which of course would see the whole
of the traffic by-passing South Australia. I think South Australia, with
TEL: 
T4EL.: Jun. 95 22: 11 No. 008 P. 03
3
this change, is in the box seat. I don't really know why people believe
that If we build a line up to Darwin, it will help Adelaide and South
Australia. All it would simply do even if it routes through South
Australia -is take the traffic to Melbourne, not coming through
Adelaide. But if it goes via Broken Hill, you won't even see it. And why
would somebody on a ship take a container to Adelaide, and then take
it by rail to Melbourne, If they could drop it at Darwin?
KC: Yes. Let's take a look at the next leap Prime Minister, because it has
been a huge leap to get the standard line in. But as well as that,
people In the transport game are grappling with this huge leap forward
of seeing private freight trains how soon so you think that will be?
PM: Our idea Laurie Brereton is on the train with me this morning our
Idea Is to set the track up, and call it the Track Australia. The track will
be owned by a company, and the railway locomotive.. we're just about
to go through another tunnel in a sec, Keith...
KC: Thanks very much Prime Minister...
PM; The loco's will be owned by somebody else.
KC: This is a longer tunnel, so we will hang on while you go in yep, he's
gone. He's in the long tunnel now, and in a moment he will come out
at Sleeps Hill1 that's naturally out towards the plain. Hello oh blimey,
we have lost him. We will try and get, by the way, because he is in a
very long tunnel at the moment, and it will take a second or two. We'll
take news headlines, and see if we can get to the Prime Minister, who
is shortly to come through Clapham on that first standard rail freight
train.
( news headlines)
KC: On the train and out of the tunnel, Prime Minister Paul Keating,
welcome back.
PM: Well, the city has just come into view, It looks marvellous.
KC: You would be heading towards Lynton Station and then next Clapham
and you will really be on the suburban run now.
PM: We have got one coming up now. There is a crossing so we have got
to blow the horn ( toot, toot) to make sure that nobody is on it and there
is a few people on the station and you are exactly right, it is Lynton
station.
KC: Can I just ask about the passenger head office, Prime Minister, there is
now, of course, a national passenger system that you can get on now,
TEL: 
TEL: 4. Jun. 95 22: 11 No. 008 P. 0k
4
the Indian Pacific and so on. Is there a chance Adelaide might be theI
headquarters for that?
PM: I think that is a possibility. I think, we can do a lot with the passengers
across the country, but just before we went Into the tunnel, we were
talking about Track Australia and, I think, people need to understand
this. It is a very Important concept. The track Is owned by a single
company and the company's business will be to keep the track going
and then the railway operators National Rail, TNT, or Brambles or
whoever wants to move freight can then hire a loco and pull freight
around the country on the track. So, the track Is separated from the
railway companies, so we get competition In rail and the railway
companies and, I think, this would really give us a very good track, an
even better track than we have got today, straighter, faster, better
maintained, and I think that would do a great deal for South Australia.
KC: Rail 2000, which Is a group here very Interested in the future of rail,
wants more money put In. They say One Nation has been fantastic,
but of course, that has come to the end now and It wants to see a
continuing commitment to the rail network. Are you, in effect, giving
that via this new Idea?
PM: I think so. That is why you get Investment money back Into the track
and, of course, as you know we have had so many deaths on the road
by these big container trucks carrying containers when many of them
should have been carried on rail, but the track has been so poor and,
of course, between Melbourne and Adelaide you had to change
bogies. We have had poor routing's, poor construction often in the
first place, and then no maintenance for 20 or 30 years. So, the rail
system has gone into disrepair over the last 30 or 40 years and I am
pleased this government has been able to bring it back to life.
KC: Prime Minister, you are going to get a lot more waving that you'll have
to do as you go through these suburban stations. Where are you
now?
PM: We are just coming down to a crossing. We went through Lynton and
we are just at a road crossing. Just one second.
KC: That sounds like Mitchim coming UP.
PM: Yes, we are just at Mitchim
KC: OK, Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time today. We will let
you get back to the driving duties. Is this the fulfilment of a lifetime
ambition?
PM: Well, Labor Governments are great building governments. People are
saying ' are we having an election?' Well, I'd rather build a railway 
4. Jun. 95 22: 11 No. 008
around Australia than have an election, frankly. Get the job done, get
the job over and a couple of weeks ago Keith, talking to you, I had the
pleasure of talking about and announcing the road through the
Adelaide Hills and I drove up on it today through that Devil's Elbow,
straightening all that out, extending the airport and giving international
carriage of passengers in here. So, we will end up, I think, having a
much better linkage to South Australia by air, by road and by rail.
KC: Much appreciate your time today. Thanks for taking the call on the
train. ( toot, toot). What a suitable way to go out, with another blast of
the freight train whistle.
ends TEL: 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
RESPONSE TO CIVICS EXPERT GROUP REPORT, 6 JUNE 1995
Thank you for your invitation to address this conference today. Your
discussions concern matters of great importance to Australia, and I am as
grateful for your interest in them as I am for the invitation.
That we set in train the process which has led to this investment in Civics
Education gives me great satisfaction. From the Government's point of view
it has been a special project: and it is one which has already produced
considerable rewards.
The big returns will come later of course: but to have received a report of
such quality from the Civics Expert Group and so promptly, and to have
generated such interest, activity and good-will has made this a particularly
gratifying initiative.
Sometimes in politics at least in the politics of reform you strike a seam
immediately. I have no doubt that we have struck one with Civics Education.
The response is proof of an urgent need better still, the report and your
presence here, proves that we have the capacity to deal with it.
One hundred years ago, the Australian people were engaged in a debate of
great moment. Whether the peoples of six separate colonies could find within
themselves the courage and confidence to come together as one nation one
indissoluble Federal Commonwealth.
These Australians were also engaged with the worst drought in Australia's
history, the worst depression, the most traumatic strikes and lockouts and
the usual business of living. They nevertheless found that it was possible to
cope with these oppressive circumstances and still carry out their democratic
responsibilities.
Their general education levels were much lower than those of today's
Australians: their means of personal advancement were much more limited.
The imperatives of daily life were at least as demanding. Yet they made a
decision about the future of Australia. They made a responsible political 
decision, an informed decision what we would call these days, a visionary
decision. While their political leaders attended conventions to thrash out their
differences and frame a federated Australia, around the continent ordinary
Australians talked about it in their homes and work places, in the pub and at
the races.
And when the referendum was put to them, they voted for the " one
indissoluble Commonwealth" of Australia.
From where we now stand one hundred years later that appears to have been
a most enlightened decision. What is more, on the basis of evidence which
the Civics Expert Group has discovered, we are justified in wondering
whether, with all their educational advantages and opportunities, our own
generation of Australians know as much about the virtues of democracy and
the potential of Australia as those of the 1890s. I suspect they don't.
That is not a reflection on Australians, but on our education systems. It may
also be a comment on the modern condition. There is no doubt that in
Australia, as elsewhere in the developed world, many people, especially
young people, are alienated from their political system and from their past.
We have to correct this. Governments alone cannot put meaning and
purpose into the lives of the young but they can help. They can certainly help
create the conditions in which faith might flourish. If you teach history well
you can help young people believe that they have a part in the nation's story.
If you teach politics well you can help them to feel engaged. You can help
them to feel that they have influence. We can help young people and
migrants discover their attachment to this country and its traditions, and give
them hope about its future and theirs. We can help them see that in the
fulfilment of their hopes lies the hope of the country.
Before the Civics Expert Group attempted to set down what Australians
should know about our system of government, they sought to find out what
Australians already know.
The results of the Group's research are distressing. Of the Australians
interviewed: Only 19% showed any understanding of the effect of federation on
Australia's system of government.
Only 18% displayed any understanding of the content of the Constitution
Only 40% could correctly recall the names of both federal houses of
parliament. Only 24% knew that the Senate represents the States. 
Only 28% perceived judicial independence.
And only 33% felt reasonably informed about the rights and
responsibilities of Australian citizens.
It is clear that the archive of civic knowledge is close to empty.
And it would seem that our education systems are doing very little to re-fill it.
I have been told about a survey in Victoria which reveals that the number of
Year Twelve students studying Australian history has fallen from 42 per cent
in 1972 to 6 per cent in 1993 and it is still falling. The same sort of pattern
reveals itself in the numbers studying politics.
Now, I probably don't have to tell this audience that we are currently engaged
in a much more modest undertaking than that of our predecessors one
hundred years ago. We are not creating a nation and writing a constitution
for it. We want no more than to persuade Australians that their head of state,
and the head of state they bequeath to the Australians of the twenty first
century, should be an Australian.
Remarkably enough, there are some in positions of political leadership who
find themselves unable to share this ambition or support us in our efforts.
This is making a relatively simple step a more complicated one and I
sometimes think we should give thanks that these people were not our
leaders in the 1890s.
By contrast we can give thanks to Stuart Maclntyre, Susan Pascoe, Ken
Boston and all those people gathered here who want to see Australian
democracy advance. Who want to see our young people learn enough about
Australia's history, traditions, values and institutions to feel that they have a
stake in our future and can play a part in shaping it.
The report of the Civics Expert Group, Whereas the People, may yet prove to
be the means by which we find the way to engage them.
As I said when I first received it, this Report is a credit to its authors.
It is also an invitation to Australian governments, and a challenge to the
Australian people.
In responding to Whereas the People I think we should set ourselves a
national goal. Not one that will be easily measured, admittedly; but one
which, if we come close to achieving it, will pay obvious dividends. I think we
should dedicate ourselves to seeing that by the end of the century the
Australian people know as much about their country and are no less engaged
in its political life than their counterparts a century ago. 
A comprehensive civics and citizenship education program is the best start
we can have.
We can give young Australians a knowledge of their past and a sense of
where they belong in the story. We can tell them about the gift of Australian
democracy and how it should be defended. We can imbue them with a faith
in the core values of Australia not a conformist ideology, but an awareness
of the principles of freedom and tolerance which are still emerging in our
community. If we can do this we can help to keep ownership of the Australian political
system with the Australian people. We can keep the democracy alive and
that old value of egalitarianism functioning and with new meaning, with
women and new migrants and Aboriginal Australians included in the ethos
that used to keep them out.
Let me tell you the Government regards Civics Education as one of its major
initiatives. In a tight budget we have provided $ 25 million for a civics and
citizenship education program in line with the expert group's
recommendation. The program spans all formal education sectors and the
broader community.
The centrepiece is $ 20.26 million for a program of Civics Education in
Schools, to be administered in close cooperation with State and Territory
Governments. The Expert Group said that schools are the key to this undertaking. The
Government agrees.
It should be an essential part of each child's education to learn about the
privileges and responsibilities of being Australian.
That does not mean an exercise in ideology, but lessons in democracy and
history. Civics, properly taught, is no more political than Maths or English or
Woodwork. And it is just as fundamental; in a society like ours it is just as
important.
The Government does not pretend that it will be easy to create an effective
schools civics program. As the Expert Group reminded us, other programs
have withered on the vine.
The challenge for the Curriculum Corporation is to develop a program which
is practical, comprehensive and engaging. It will have to look to the new
media for assistance and we welcome that.
But there will never be a substitute for good teaching, and the $ 5.2 million we
are spending on the professional development of teachers of Civics is
essential. It must all be a cooperative effort. School education is primarily 
the responsibility of the States and Territories, and we look forward to
working with them.
The Government will also be providing $ 2.4 million over four years to produce
materials on civics for citizenship applicants and to develop voluntary civics
and citizenship education courses for those who want to become Australian
citizens. There is also $ 2.3 million for community education initiatives, to be
administered by a committee with expertise in Australian culture, heritage and
government. Let me close these brief remarks by thanking all those who have contributed
to the Expert Group's report, this conference and what we might now
reasonably call a civics movement.
I said that I have the feeling we have struck a seam: there is no doubt about
the need for civics education, and equally no doubt that both educators and
parents want to meet that demand.
The Expert Group consulted widely and consultation will be a feature of the
Government's civics program. For more than three months we have taken
submissions on the findings of the Expert Group. Almost all of them have
been supportive.
My colleague, the Minister for Employment Education and Training, has
briefed all State and Territory Education Ministers on the Government's
package. And we now propose a series of consultations, of which this forum
is the first, to bring other key groups into the planning process.
This is a large investment in our children, our democracy and our future.
And I thank you all for contributing to it.
Most of the reward is in the giving. But posterity will bequeath a small one
too. As the Australians of the twenty first century look back on the 1990s they
will see that a democratic spirit was alive and well in Australia as it had been
a century before.
And it is not unreasonable to think that, like us when we look back on the
1890s, they might draw a bit of inspiration from it and be grateful that we
invested in Civics Education. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RADIOS 2UE, 2GB, ABC, TUESDAY, 6 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, in the end he had to come out and say something. He couldn't
hide forever and we waited and what did we get? Nothing. Nothing.
He is the same person he was in the late 1980s. There was nothing to
him then and there is nothing to him now. So, the ' headland' speech:
what was it about? The great changes in the international isation of
Australia? The great change in our culture? The assertion of our
identity? The shift into Asia? Nothing. It is about an independent
auditor general or an independent speaker. So what. So what. What
John Howard has proven and on television tonight he says with his
most statesman-like voice that he could propose, he said ' I'm sure that
the things that unite Australia is more important than things which
divide us.' The very thing he said at his defeat at the election in 1987.
So, he has done the full circle. What we got tonight was a hollow
collection of cliches, exposing his complete paucity of policies. He has
got no policy structure. He even goes on to say after a week of us
fighting for the interests of the Australian battler' a week the
Australian Labor Party has been fighting for them for 100 years and
this Government has been fighting for their interests for 12 years. He
said people may not want government out of their lives, but they do
want it off their backs'. That is an American republican line. It is
Liberal Party code for cutting government spending on welfare
payments, but you don't find any mention of spending cuts in there.
Then he talks about a pro-family industrial relations policy. In other
words, you should appreciate the right to be sacked more easily. Very
pro-family.
Then he says he would destroy the Commonwealth external affairs
power. That means no Gordon-below-Frankl ins. That means no
Daintrees. No Kakadu National Parks. He says the use of this is illicit. 
On foreign policy there is not a single, solitary policy about Australia's
engagement with the region. He says, and listen to this one the
next Coalition government will continue the pattern.' Could you
imagine anything weaker or more vacuous when this Government is
threading together the largest, free trade agreement in the history of
the Asia-Pacific area with APEC and making bi-lateral relationships
with countries like Indonesia and Japan of a quality that we have never
had in the past. What does he say? the next Coalition government
will continue the pattern'. You would be ashamed to put a statement
like that out.
Then he talks about the republic. But, he doesn't say whether he is for
it or against it. He can't even say it. He is afraid to say what his
position is because his position is against a republic. But now he
thinks that a majority of opinion are in favour of it, he is not prepared to
say, he is not prepared to say. Then he says a few interest groups
are driving the government', but he declines to say who the interest
groups are and to talk about them.
He talks about starting with economic honesty. This is the same
person who, for one week before the 1953 election, decided not to tell
the Australian public what the Secretary to the Treasury told him. That
is, that the Budget deficit wasn't $ 6 billion it was $ 9.6 billion. This is
the same person who talks about no more fiscal slight of hand while
when he was Treasurer he never, ever, published forward estimates of
receipts, ever. And, only forward estimates of outlays for one year.
This Government publishes forward estimates of outlays and forward
estimates of receipts and the budget or surplus balance.
He says he will provide a degree of predictability about the level
and stability of tax rates'. Peter Costello says they won't rise.
Apparently, he has now amended that upon more mature reflection
because he has been caught out.
It is the most empty vacuous set of statements that I have seen from a
major party leader. This is Fightback, the rhetoric of Fightback,
without the policies and the mathematics.
J: Mr Howard said he made it quite clear that this speech was never
going to include detailed policies.
PM: Because he doesn't have any. This was his big opportunity to tell us
where he wants to take Australia. What do you get from this? You
don't even get a direction from him. It is so vacuous there is not even
a direction. All these people in the media who wanted a contest at the
next election, I'm sorry you're not going to get one. You are not going
to get one because they are not up to it. To have a contest you have
got to have the other side with some policies. They are not in the hunt. 
This is the weakest effort I have seen by an Opposition Leader in the
years I have been here.
J: You are very quick to jump on it.
PM: Because I am very quick to read it. You could get across it in
pages. You could read the thing in a couple of minutes.
J: Is it Mr Howard's " Things That Matter"?
PM: The ' Things That Matter" that is, Mr Downer's " Things That Matter"
looks positively solid compared to this dross. And, of course,
Fightback! was an absolute mammoth of a document, compared to this
rubbish.
J: Mr Keating, Mr Howard said he was going to do a series of headland
speeches this is only the first, doesn't he shouldn't he be able to
take the chance to have a series of speeches outlining the broad detail
of where he wants to go?
PM: This is his first this was the one that was going to tell us the
directions. This was the one that was going to give us an indication
about the sort of government he would have, and you have got no idea
from him, about the sort of government he would have. And when it
comes to the hard things, about how would he cut $ 10,000 million out
of outlays? I mean, who would be cut? Payments to pensioners?
Payments to schools? Payments to the low-paid? And here he is
talking about supporting battlers, and during his period of office, lowpaid
people suffered enormously he has not supported any wage
increase for Australian workers since 1981, bar the last 2. That was 2
lots of So, he supported $ 16 wage increase in 14 years.
J; Does this strategy make it harder for you for the Government to pin
him down, to attack him, because he isn't presenting his policies until
closer to the election, and you are relying on attacking him from when
he was last in Government that was 12 years ago?
PM: No. I'm relying on attacking him for the fact that he wants to replace
to supplant this Government as the Government of Australia. He has
no right with rubbish like this. And though the media might want a
contest, they have no right in supporting rubbish like this.
J: He has challenged you to set out what you think the reserve powers of
a President should be under an Australian republic in your major
speech will you?
PM: My challenge to him is to say whether he is for a republic or not
simple enough question. Forget the modalities for the moment is he
in favour? I mean, it's not much of an ask, is it, to say " is it not 
unreasonable to ask the alternative Prime Minister whether he believes
an Australian should be our Head of State?"
J: But what about...
PM: And he won't answer it.
J: But what about his challenge to you?
PM: Just a second he will not answer that simple question it's not his
challenge to mine that is the core matter. Unless he says he is in
favour of an Australian republic, he disqualifies himself from having
any part in the debate for a shift to a republic. And, of course,
tomorrow night I will be saying precisely where the Government stands
on this issue.
J; So you believe Mr Howard has missed his opportunity to talk to
Australians?
PM: He missed his opportunity in the middle 1970s, when he left us with
double-digit inflation, double-digit unemployment, and the highest
Government spending in our history he should have been drummed
out of the regiment of Australian politics. He has hung around, and
waited to see all of his rivals retire, and in their paucity remember, he
is their third choice in this term: he is their third choice after Hewson
and Downer, and now you can see why he was their third choice. He
is recycled, empty and vacuous.
J; So, does seeing this make you want to call an election soon?
PM; To see it makes me a little bit sad about the state of the Liberal Party
and the alternative government. I mean, as an Australian, I have
always believed that it is in the nation's best interests always to
keep on the boil, two competent parties of government. What this
speech proves is that there is only one the Australian Labor Party.
J: Would you like to see a real contest?
PM: The media will, but how are you going to get one when you have got a
candidate such as Howard, who has got no policies? I mean, how can
you get a contest when you have got someone without any substance?
J: You say the journalists can't read opinion polls...
PM: I think the last election proved that.
J: Can you give us your reading of the 2 conflicting polls that came out
today? 
PM: I told you I think the Government is strengthening its underlying vote.
We have now got the country growing at a consistent and sustainable
rate, we have low inflation, we have the Budget back to surplus, we are
seeing the Government now continuing on its big social policies such
as Working Nation. We are having success with the long-term
unemployed, the Government is about to announce its response on the
republic, I have just come back from Japan building that bilateral
relationship, we are working again on the strength and growth of
APEC. I mean, these are the things from a Government of substance.
After having just passed the Land Fund, and the year before last,
Mabo. How could you compare a Government that is doing these
things, with this worn out Liberal party?
J: Well, how do you explain the poll that shows John Howard and the
Coalition streaking ahead?
PM: I think the public have always got a little needle into governments
they want you to earn your freight. They say " how are you going to
vote?", [ and they reply] " oh well, I don't know I might throw a vote to
the Coalition", and that's to put a bit of ginger in the system. That's
probably always been there, but we're in the position where we want to
be right now, and that is one out and one back the best position to be
in Australian politics.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR ARRIVAL OF ONE NATION TRAIN, ADELAIDE FREIGHT
TERMINAL, ADELAIDE, 6 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, Ted [ Butcher], Premier, my colleague Laurie Brereton,
Leader of the Opposition, Minister for Transport, Mayor, distinguished guests,
and ladies and gentlemen.
One can't but help feel the sense of history in this the poignancy of it
coming down through the hills. It's amazing how gentle those things are you
can pull the dynamic adjuster back, and slightly on the brake, and a little bit
up one, and it just sort of moves along for you as you like. But it gives you an
idea of what it's like to be a railway person railway men and women. And
the great job that railways have done in binding all sorts of nations together,
including this one. And it was, of course, the extension of the rail system
around Australia that brought the country together, and as Ted said, we read
in our schoolbooks about the broken gauge it's really a quite remarkable
thing that the gauge was broken, and we never had this a century or so ago.
But at any rate, under One Nation, we had the chance to do this, and I
wanted to make that point particularly when the nation was really feeling the
pinch of the recession, to know that we could come out of it with a strategy,
and also by doing things that would stand the test of time that we were not
simply throwing money at the problem, but doing things with it that would
stand us in good stead over time. Solid real things changing and binding
the country together, pulling together, and I though the concept of the
national rail highway was the one to adopt at that time.
And this is the first train that will go from Brisbane to Perth, via Melbourne
and Adelaide. And in doing this, it will not only link the continent, but I think
bind South Australia more fully into the Eastern States of Victoria, New South
Wales and Queensland, and I think this will have a tremendous impact upon
South Australia material as well as psychological. Important to know that
those linkages are there. 
Laurie is with me and, of course, he is the one who has principally been
involved in putting together the new construction through the Adelaide Hills,
up the Mount Barker Road, and I travelled through the Devils Elbow this
morning seeing what a dreadful problem it is, particularly those big trucks,
and the extension of the runway, so that by road, by air and by rail, the
linkages for South Australia will be better and stronger. And as a
consequence, I think the whole of this state will feel as though it is much
more part of One Nation than perhaps ever before. But, it does, I think, more
than that it does give South Australia a chance to become one of the freight
hubs of Australia. Because we will see containers brought across the
country, and I think the port of Adelaide will be given the opportunity to
compete with the port of Melbourne, and indeed the port of Sydney. And it
will mean more investment over time by national rail in the track, and to
getting that track into place, and keeping the stock up, getting the time down,
smoothing out the bends, and getting the maintenance into it, particularly in
some of the states where the track has run down. But by and large in the
doing of it, we ought to be able to see some real competition between these
ports, and see a new services and freight industry for this country.
So, I said this morning on a radio station people always ask me about
elections I said well give me the choice between an election and building a
railway around Australia, I'll take the building of a railway around Australia,
because it will be here when the elections are long gone. And it is the solid
things I mean, belief in ourselves, belief in what we can do together, and
filling in the gaps which is what One Nation sought to do, both those gaps
by distance and gaps by psychology it is important to believe that we go
together as a nation inclusively, and that we can do things together. And I
think that in a cooperative sense, national rail is about as good as that gets,
and we are really just on the threshold of seeing a much better rail service.
This means, of course, that a lot of those containers that are on the roads will
be off the roads, and onto rail. And a lot of the accidents, and problems of
safety that we are having with basically too many trucks on roads doing long
distance hauls are better done by railway. This is going to change that, too.
I think the railways are going to come of age as a result of this. I said
yesterday, it is going to be a trains spotters paradise. And, of course, with
our proposal to have Track Australia have one company owning the track
and then any number of railway companies operating it, well if you are really
keen about it, you can get into the railway business yourself you don't even
have to muck around with models any more. So, there we are it can't be
better than that. If you want to go and hire one of these things, you can go
and do it. So, that's the brave new world of the modem railway, and it has
started here with this single track coming through Australia, and through here
to Adelaide.
I'm delighted the Premier could join us this morning, and the Leader of the
Opposition, and the Minister for Transport, the Mayor, for what is a real
occasion, I think. And the fact is that this state has got tremendous
opportunities with the growth of Australia's economy into Asia, but it always 
3
needed those material linkages let's hope that this One Nation railway is
providing them.
Could I conclude my remarks by thanking Ted Butcher and his team at
National Rail for a job well done in taking up the One Nation challenge it is
one thing getting money available, it's another thing to use it. They have
used it, and used it effectively, and I'm sure it will be just another one of the
jewels in the crown of Ted's quite illustrious career in Australian transport,
and I thank him for it. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you one and all.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER495
( embargo: 9pm)
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR HOWARD'S EMPTY HEADLAND
The Leader of the Opposition's so-called " headland" speech tonight is a
hollow collection of cliches, exposing his complete paucity of policies.
Mr Howard has now been leading the Liberal Party for four months, and the
best he can produce in that time in a prepared text issued tonight is a
collection of lightweight truisms, which he calls " a framework for a future
Coalition Government."
Far from presenting serious, detailed alternative policies, the speech
confirms that Mr Howard has a bad case of policy phobia.
Along the way, he has also confirmed the cynicism of the Opposition's recent
poll-driven misappropriation of the word " battlers".
Mr Howard let the cat out of the bag when he said: . after a week of us
fighting for the interests of the Australian battler". The Labor Party has been
fighting for the rights and living standards of Australian workers for more than
100 years not just the past week.
Those same Australian workers indeed all Australians will also see
through Mr Howard's claim that they " may not want government out of their
lives, but they do want it off their backs." This is Liberal Party code for cutting
Government spending on welfare payments and other programs designed to
increase equity in the Australian community. But you won't find any mention
of spending cuts on this headland.
Nor will Australians be taken in by Mr Howard's smug reference to a " profamily
industrial relations policy". What is pro-family about ripping away
award protection and attacking unions?
Mr Howard has also committed a Coalition Government to the destruction of
the Commonwealth's external affairs power. Among other things, this would 
see the Federal Government's role in the protection of the environment
seriously impeded.
Mr Howard says that the use of the external affairs power by this Government
has been " illicit". Illicit means unlawful and forbidden. What an extraordinary
claim for the alternative Prime Minister to make. A claim which yet again
reveals how deep and irrational is his Party's obsession with States' rights.
On Foreign Affairs, Mr Howard offered not a single specific policy towards our
region, apart from saying " the next Coalition Government will continue ( the)
pattern" of stressing the importance of our relations with nations in the Asia-
Pacific region.
On health, Mr Howard has reaffirmed his commitment to Labor's policies.
Suddenly, he is a defender of Medicare and bulk billing. And, what's more, he
has endorsed the Government's long-standing policy aimed at lifting the level
of childhood immunisation. This year's Budget committed $ 24 million over
two years, in part to set up a national register to record how many children
are missing out and why, and to broaden the existing education campaign.
While we welcome his support for our policies, it is dishonest for him to claim
them as his own.
The republic issue is a prime example of the Mr Howard's determination to
follow, rather than lead. The only conclusion we can draw is that Mr Howard
is afraid to state his true position on the republic which is that he is opposed
to a republic, and therefore does not want an Australian to be our head of
state. He also attacks what he terms " a few interest groups" driving the Government
away from the " mainstream". Mr Howard should name the interest groups of
which he speaks; the interest groups which would be deprived of access to a
Coalition Government.
I have news for Mr Howard. The interest groups he so carefully avoids
naming are ordinary, decent Australians.
I did not see Mr Howard deliver his speech tonight, but surely he blushed as
he spoke. This was no headland; this was bluff.
CANBERRA 6 JUNE 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 51/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN REPUBLIC
( embargo: 7.3Opm 7 June 1995)
It is the view of the Government that Australia's head of state should be an Australian
and that Australia should be a republic by the year 2001.
I announced in the Parliament today the Government's approach to achieving the
transition to an Australian republic. The proposals involve minimal change to Australia's
system of government and institutions.
This is the final step to becoming a fully independent nation. It will permit the full and
unambiguous expression of Australia's national identity.
The Government is releasing its proposals as a focus for further public discussion and
debate. All Australians should participate in this important national debate.
The Government's package is outlined in the Attachment. The main features are:
the Commonwealth Parliament would appoint an Australian head of state by a twothirds
majority vote in a joint sitting of the Senate and the House of Representatives a
process designed to ensure that the office of head of state is not politicised;
serving Federal, State and Territory politicians would not be eligible for nomination
until at leat 5 years after their departure from Parliament;
all the powers possessed by the Governor-General would be held by an Australian
head of state, including the so-called " reserve powers"; and
the States should be free to determine their own constitutional arrangements.
However, the Government is confident that the Australian people will decide against
the constitutional anomaly of monarchical States existing within a republican
Commonwealth.
The proposals can only be introduced by referendum. Under the Constitution, the
changes will require the support of a majority of Australian voters and a majority of voters
in a majority of the States. 
2
The Government proposes to hold a referendum in 1998 or 1999. If the people agree, the
changes would come into effect no later than the centenary of Australia's Federation in
2001. Our course is simple and, we believe, irresistible as simple and irresistible as the idea of
a Commonwealth of Australia was to the Australians of the 1890s.
Our goal now echoes that founding sentiment of a century ago. It flows from the fact that
we are all Australians. We share a continent. We share a past, present and a future.
And our head of state should be one of us.
CANBERRA 7 June 1995 
ATTACHMENT
AUSTRALIAN REPUBLIC GOVERNMENT PACKAGE
" Commonwealth of Australia" would be retained as the title of an Australian republic, and " President of the
Commonwealth of Australia" would be adopted as the title of an Australian head of state.
The President would be appointed for a non-renewable term of office of five years by a two-thirds majority
vote in a joint sitting of the Commonwealth Parliament. following the nomination of a single individual by the
Prime Minister. The requirement for a two-thirds majority of a joint sifting will mean effectively that there
will need to be prior bi-partisan agreement to the nominee.
The President would be an Australian citizen of voting age and may not hold any other remunerated position
while in office.
Serving Commonwealth, State and Territory parliamentarians would be excluded from nomination as
President, and former Commonwealth, State and Territory parliamentarians would be excluded from
nomination until five years have passed since their departure from parliament.
The Commonwealth Parliament would nominate, by a two-thirds majority vote in a joint sitting, the office
holder( s) entitled to temporarily perform the duties of President should circumstance or need arise.
The Government supports the appointment of State Governors to act as President when needed, with those
eligible being from States no longer using The Queen to appoint their Governors. If no State Governor from
a republican State is available, the President of the Senate should act.
The President would have the right to resign. His or her resignation would be passed to the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, who would convey it to the Parliament. The resignation of a President would be
self-executing, with the Constitution to provide for an acting President to assume office upon the resignation
of the President.
The President would be subject to removal by a two-thirds majority vote in a joint sitting of the
Commonwealth Parliament, with either House to have the right to initiate the joint sitting by passing a
motion supported by a simple majority of its members. However, the President's removal would not be
contingent on a specified set of facts, circumstances or conditions.
The President would perform the ceremonial and representational functions currently performed by the
Queen and Governor-General.
The President would exercise the powers currently exercised by the Governor-General under
Commonwealth legislation, on the advice of the Federal Executive Council.
The President would exercise all the constitutional powers currently vested in the Governor-General and,
except in relation to the reserve powers, be expressly required to act in accordance with Ministerial advice.
The reserve powers currently possessed by the Governor-General would remain with the President, and the
Constitution would provide that the constitutional conventions governing the exercise of these powers would
continue, but the conventions would not be spelt out. The manner of exercise by the President of the
reserve powers would not be open to challenge in the courts.
All references in the Constitution to the Queen, the Crown and the Governor-General would be removed.
The States would be free to decide their own State constitutional arrangements.
Australia would remain a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. Currently, 29 of the 51 member
countries of the Commonwealth are republics.
Copies of the Prime Ministers speech are available from the Prime Ministers Press Office, telephone
( 06) 277 7744. 


PRIME MINISTER
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AN AUSTRALIAN REPUBLIC THE WAY FORWARD
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
7 JUNE 1995
* Embargoed until 7: 30pm, 7 June
It is the Government's view that Australia's Head of State should be an
Australian that Australia should become a republic by the year 2001. Tonight I
shall describe the means by which we believe this ought to be done.
Honourable members will recall that to fulfil an undertaking given during the last
election campaign, on April 28 1993 the Government established a Republic
Advisory Committee to prepare an options paper which would describe the
minimum constitutional changes necessary to create a federal republic of
Australia. The Republic Advisory Committee was chaired by Mr Malcolm Turnbull and
comprised Dr Glyn Davis, Miss Namoi Dougall, the Hon Nick Greiner, Dr John
Hirst, Ms Mary Kostakidis, Miss Lois O'Donoghue, the Hon Susan Ryan and
Professor George Winterton.
I take this opportunity to thank them. They consulted widely throughout
Australia, carried out their work with dedication and energy and delivered to the
Government and to posterity a most valuable document.
In the eighteen months which have passed since the release of the Report, the
idea of an Australian republic has come to occupy a central place in our national
political debate: not only in this Parliament but within the political parties, in
major representative and community bodies, in schools and universities,
communities at large and, I daresay, around countless Australian dinner tables.
In the process many Australians have come to favour a Republic. Just as many,
perhaps, now believe it is inevitable. 
Many may regret the prospect of change and be unsure about the means by
which it can be achieved, but recognise that sooner or later we must have an
Australian as our Head of State. That one small step would make Australia a
republic. Governments can wait for opinion to force their hand, or they can lead. They
can wait for the world to change and respond as necessity demands, or they can
see the way the world is going and point the way.
We are approaching the 21st century and the centenary of our nationhood. As
never before we are making our own way in our region and the world. For us the
world is going and we are going in a way which makes our having the British
monarch as our Head of State increasingly anomalous.
The fact is that if the plans for our nationhood were being drawn up now, by this
generation of Australians and not those of a century ago, it is beyond question
that we would make our Head of State an Australian. Any suggestion that the
British monarch should fill the role would not be entertained. This is not
because our generation lacks respect for the British monarchy, or the British
people, or our British heritage, or the British institutions we have made our own,
or our long friendship with the British in peace and war. On the contrary,
Australians everywhere respect them, as they respect The Queen. But they are
not Australian. It is so obvious, that if we were just now drawing up our
constitution, we probably would not even feel the need to say that the Australian
Head of State will be Australian it would go without saying.
That it does not go without saying today is an accident of history. We are
attached to Great Britain by long threads of kinship and affection which, to a
considerable extent, are embodied in the warmth of our regard for Queen
Elizabeth. Many Australians may well feel that to substitute an Australian for the
monarchy constitutes in some way a rejection of these ties. I think all of us can
understand these feelings.
But the creation of an Australian republic is not an act of rejection. It is one of
recognition: in making the change we will recognise that our deepest respect is
for our Australian heritage, our deepest affection is for Australia, and our
deepest responsibility is to Australia's future.
Nothing in the creation of an Australian republic will alter the facts of our
heritage and our affections. Indeed our relationship with Britain may well
become the more thoroughly " modern relationship" which the British Prime
Minister expressed a desire for two years ago. The development of a mature
and modern relationship will certainly not be inhibited by recognition of the truth.
We are friends with separate destinies to carve out in the world. We are not as
we once were, in a parent-child relationship. 
The people of modern Australia are drawn from virtually every country in the
world. It is no reflection on the loyalty of a great many of them to say that the
British monarchy is a remote and inadequate symbol of their affections for
Australia. And we can be equally sure that in the 21st century the British
monarchy will become even more remote from even more Australians.
Australia occupies a unique place in the world and makes a unique contribution
to it. Our destiny is in no-one else's hands but our own: we alone bear the
responsibility for deciding what the nature of our government and society will be,
what advantage we will take of our human and material resources, what kind of
place our children will inherit.
It is not a radical undertaking that we propose.
In proposing that our Head of State should be an Australian we are proposing
nothing more than the obvious. Our Head of State should embody and
represent Australia's values and traditions, Australia's experience and
aspirations. We need not apologise for the nationalism in these sentiments, but
in truth they contain as much commonsense as patriotism.
This is a point worth making: this republican initiative is not an exercise in
jingoism; it is not accompanied by the beat of drums or chests. It asserts
nothing more than our unique identity. It expresses nothing more than our
desire to have a Head of State who is truly one of us. It changes nothing more
than what is required to make clear and unambiguous our independence and
responsibility for our own affairs.
It is a small step, but a highly significant one. The government believes that at
this stage of our history it is a logical and essential one. And it can reflect that
stage in our history. An Australian Head of State can embody our modern
aspirations our cultural diversity, our evolving partnerships with Asia and the
Pacific, our quest for reconciliation with Aboriginal Australians, our ambition to
create a society in which women have equal opportunity, equal representation
and equal rights. In this decade we have a chance which few other countries
have; in declaring ourselves for an Australian republic, we can give expression
to both our best traditions and our current sensibilities and ambitions.
At present, under the Constitution, Australia's Head of State is The Queen and
her " heirs and successors in the sovereignty of the United Kingdom". Anyone
reading the Australian Constitution who is unfamiliar with the practical realities of
Australian government would assume that the role of the monarch was central.
In fact, the involvement of the British monarch in Australia's affairs is now very
limited. The Queen's role as Head of State is in most respects carried out by the
Governor-General. Of the responsibilities The Queen retains, the most notable
is her appointment of the Governor-General which, by convention, she does on
the advice of the Prime Minister. 
We are not quite alone among the countries of the world in having as our Head
of State someone who is not one of our own citizens, but we are in a very small
minority and a majority of the countries in the Commonwealth of Nations are
republics with their own Head of State. Of the 185 members of the United
Nations, only 15 do not have their own Heads of State and 14 of those 15 are
former British Dominions.
The Queen of Australia is also Queen of the United Kingdom and 14 other
countries in the United Nations.
Notwithstanding that The Queen is Australia's Head of State and fulfils that duty
conscientiously, when she travels overseas she represents only the United
Kingdom. Her visits abroad often tend to promote British trade and British
interests they do not promote Australia's trade and interests.
This is, of course, right and proper for the Head of State of the United Kingdom.
But it is not right for Australia. The right Head of State for Australia is one of us,
embodying the things for which we stand, reminding us of those things at home
and representing them abroad. We number among those things fairness,
tolerance and love of this country. It is a role only an Australian can fill.
Each and every Australian should be able to aspire to be our Head of State.
Every Australian should know that the office will always be filled by a citizen of
high standing who has made an outstanding contribution to Australia and who, in
making it, has enlarged our view of what it is to be Australian.
In these and other ways, the creation of an Australian republic can actually
deliver a heightened sense of unity, it can enliven our national spirit and, in our
own minds and those of our neighbours, answer beyond doubt the perennial
question of Australian identity the question of who we are and what we stand
for. The answer is not what having a foreign Head of State suggests. We are
not a political or cultural appendage to another country's past. We are simply
and unambiguously Australian.
If only by a small degree an Australian republic fulfilled these ideals it would be
worth it.
Measured against other stages of our development it is a relatively simple and
modest undertaking. A hundred years ago, despite their rivalries and the
enormous distances which separated them, the Australian colonies came
together and created a nation. In the course of a century we have evolved from
a collection of British colonies; to a single nation of limited independence; to a
Dominion in the British Empire; to a sovereign nation in all respects bar one. In
the same century we have come through great trials of our collective courage
and ingenuity. 
As Australian democracy and society have evolved and developed, the practical
character of Australian government has dramatically changed. For example, in
the 1930s the Governor-General ceased to be the representative of the British
government in Australia and became the representative of the British monarch
alone. In the same decade it was accepted that the British monarch would act
solely on the advice of the Australian government not the British government
in relation to Australian matters; and Australia assumed responsibility for its own
external affairs which had been previously the responsibility of the British
government. In 1930 for the first time, an Australian became Governor-General.
With the abolition of all remaining rights of appeal to the Privy Council in
London, in the 1980s Australian courts became the ultimate arbiters of
Australian law. Also with the passage of the Australia Act, the Parliament of the
United Kingdom relinquished the last vestiges of its power to make laws applying
to Australia.
In every instance, there was controversy. Today it is hard to imagine why the
changes were opposed.
And we are better for the changes. In the 1990s we are stronger, richer and
better placed in the world than ever before. At every stage in our development
there have been hesitations, but in the end we have always recognised
necessity and where our interests lie. If at times we have been cautious about
taking large steps forward, it cannot be said that we have taken any backwards.
That is what we seek with the republic: a small but important step forward the
last step in a process which began one hundred years ago. We think it is time to
embrace the necessary change.
We therefore intend to ask the Australian people if they want an Australian
republic with an Australian Head of State.
The change we propose has very limited implications for the design of
Australia's democracy. It is the so-called " minimalist" option. All the essential
Constitutional principles and practices which have worked well and evolved
constructively over the last hundred years will remain in place.
I stress that these proposals represent the Government's preferred position. We
do not suggest that it is the only position and not open to change. But it is a
position reached after careful consideration of the Advisory Committee's report,
and we believe it to be a wise position that will stand the test of time.
" Commonwealth" is a word of ancient lineage which reflects both our popular
tradition and our Federal system, and we propose that the Australian republic
retain the name " Commonwealth of Australia". 
Under the proposals the role of the House of Representatives and the Senate
will remain unchanged, as will the role and powers of the States. We will still be
a Federation. In virtually every respect, our governmental arrangements will be
exactly the same as they are now: the day to day handling of national
government will remain with Ministers led by the Prime Minister; the Cabinet will
continue to deal with the major issues; and Ministers will continue to be
responsible to Parliament and the Australian people.
Our membership of the Commonwealth of Nations headed by The Queen will not
be affected.
None of these things will change, but we will have an Australian as our Head of
State, and we propose that he or she be described by the term " President of the
Commonwealth of Australia".
The President will perform essentially the same functions as the Governor-
General. As with the Governor-General, except in the most exceptional
circumstances, these functions will be carried out on the advice of the
Government of the day.
A former Australian Governor-General, Sir Zelman Cowen, made some remarks
last week which I think bear repeating. They echoed those of a predecessor of
his, Sir Paul Hasluck; and in fact I should think they contain a sentiment common
to every Governor-General since Federation. Sir Zelman described the
Governor-General's role as " the highest single expression in the Australian
governmental structure of the idea that all Australians from all parties and all
walks of life belong to the same nation".
An Australian Head of State would perform precisely this unifying role; and, it
follows, would need to be of the same stature and integrity as we seek in our
Governors-General.
A significant element of the Head of State's role is symbolic; performing
ceremonial duties around the nation and abroad. This is the public aspect of the
office: the means by which the Head of State represents Australia and, by his or
her example and encouragement, provides national leadership.
The Head of State will also continue to perform the formal administrative duties
given to the Governor-General by legislation and which are undertaken on the
advice of the Federal Executive Council. The Head of State's duties here
include formalising government regulations and appointing public officials.
The Head of State will assume the Governor-General's constitutional duties,
most of which are, by convention, performed in accordance with the advice of
the government of the day. These include summoning and dissolving the House
of Representatives and the Parliament as a whole and issuing writs for Federal
elections. The Head of State will also take over the Governor-General's role as
titular Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces. 
In line with actual practice, we propose that the Constitution be amended to
make clear that the Head of State will exercise these constitutional duties on the
advice of the government of the day.
Finally, the Head of State will retain those very few powers now held by the
Governor-General which, in the most exceptional circumstances, may be
exercised without, or possibly contrary to, Ministerial advice.
These are the so-called reserve powers. The Republic Advisory Committee
identified these powers as: the power to appoint the Prime Minister; the power to
dismiss the Prime Minister and therefore the government; and the power to
refuse a request by the Prime Minister to dissolve one or both Houses of the
Parliament. The Committee made the point that there are a number of principles or
conventions underpinning our Westminster style of government and the practical
operation of our Constitution. These principles, which are not currently set out in
the Constitution, determine whether the circumstances exist for the Governor-
General to exercise a reserve power and what action would be appropriate.
Theoretically, it would be possible to fully codify or write down these
conventions, assuming one could foresee all the contingencies they might be
required to meet. I have no doubt that a great many people would like to see the
Head of State's discretionary, or reserve, powers tightly defined as they are, for
example, in the Irish Constitution so as to oblige the Head of State to act in
accordance with express rules in the Constitution, or Ministerial advice, in all
circumstances. The question is, then: should the reserve powers which are imprecise and
governed by precedent and convention be codified? Should they be
delineated, cut down or specified precisely in our Constitution, or should they
remain as they apply now, by unwritten convention?
The advantage of codifying the conventions, whether in whole or in part, would
be to bring a degree of clarity and certainty to the options open to a Head of
State in different situations.
However, after careful consideration, the Government has formed the view that it
is probably impossible to write down or codify these powers in a way that would
both find general community acceptance and cover every possible contingency.
As the system evolves there needs to be some capacity to respond to
circumstances quite unforeseen today. Tightly defined rules can themselves
have unforeseen consequences. 
Were we to try, by Constitutional amendment, to set down precisely how the
reserve powers should be exercised by the Head of State, those amendments,
even if intended to be otherwise, could well become justiciable that is capable
of being adjudicated by the High Court of Australia and required to be
adjudicated by the High Court.
Hence, codification would be likely to result in fundamental change to our system
of government and alter the status of the High Court in relation to the Executive
and the Parliament. Over time, Justices of the Court could well be drawn into
arbitrating purely political disputes whose resolution should ultimately be in the
hands of the electorate. The Court would thus be exposed to public pressure
and, in the inevitable event that a party to a dispute was unhappy with its
resolution, the standing and impartiality of the Court could be called into
question. For these reasons the Government believes that, on balance, whatever the
immediate attraction of this course might be, it would not be desirable to attempt
to codify the reserve powers; and that the design, processes and conventions at
present governing their exercise by the Governor-General should be transferred
to the Australian Head of State without alteration.
We are aware that with this option, there is a risk that Australian governments
may occasionally find themselves in conflict with a Head of State who exercises
political judgment without regard to the conventions. We are also, of course,
conscious of the possibility of a repetition of the events of 1975, when a
government possessing the confidence of the House of Representatives was
denied supply by the Senate. But the question of the Senate's powers over
supply is a very different issue from that of establishing an Australian Head of
State. It is an issue that deserves to be addressed, but it doesn't need to be
addressed at the same time.
If these reserve powers are to be given to a new Head of State, it is critically
important that the authority and source of the Head of State's power is consistent
with the national interest and the continued effective operation of our political
system. There has been considerable debate in the community about how the Head of
State should be chosen. As things now stand, the Governor-General is
appointed by The Queen acting on the sole advice of the Prime Minister.
It is clear that most people believe the Prime Minister should not have such
exclusive power in appointing an Australian Head of State. The debate is
principally between those who support popular election and those who favour
election by the Parliament. 
The desire for a popular election stems from the democratic sentiment which all
Australians including all of us in this place share. However, the Government
has come to the view that if a new Australian Head of State were to be elected
by popular mandate, he or she would inherit a basis of power that would prove to
be fundamentally at odds with our Westminster-style system of government.
It should be recognised that a Head of State, whose powers derived from a
general election, would be the only person in the political system so elected. His
or her powers would be nominally much greater than those of all other
Commonwealth office holders, including the Prime Minister and the Cabinet, who
are, without exception, indirectly elected via large elected parties. With a
popularly elected President, potential would exist for the representative and
democratically elected parliamentary chambers, the repositories of the diffuse
power of Australian democracy, to be gradually diminished, while the
embodiment of the nation and great powers were vested in one person. That
would constitute a very dramatic and undesirable change to a system which
all of us agree has served us well.
Whatever differences of opinion may presently exist about the most desirable
mode of his or her election, I think there is a consensus that the Head of State
should be, in some sense, " above politics".
With this the Government agrees. The Head of State should be an eminent
Australian, a widely respected figure who can represent the nation as a whole.
This in fact has been the character of the role of the Governor-General and it
should be protected and retained in the role of a Head of State.
Popular election guarantees that the Head of State will not be above politics
indeed it guarantees that the Head of State will be a politician. As Sir Zelman
Cowen pointed out in his speech last week, a " direct election of a President
would ensure political outcomes"; and he went on to say that people like himself
and another former Governor-General, Sir Ninian Stephen, " would not have the
resources or inclination to contest such an election". We cannot have a Head of
State who is " above politics" if we subject candidates to popular elections we
will get instead politicians, political parties and political campaigns. And we will
get a Head of State with an authority unheard of in our political system and
discordant with some of the basic principles on which that system rests.
We therefore propose, as the Republic Advisory Committee suggested, that the
Head of State be elected by a two-thirds majority vote in a joint sitting of both
Houses of the Commonwealth Parliament on the nomination of the Prime
Minister and the Cabinet. Such a joint sitting would be a unique occasion,
bringing together all the political parties, and both Houses of the Parliament, in a
spirit of bi-partisanship and cooperation. Obviously, before the vote was taken
the non-government parties would have to be consulted to ensure that the
candidate had their support. 
It would be impossible for any government to dictate the outcome of this
process. A two-thirds majority vote of both Houses would require bi-partisan
support and ensure that the Head of State had the blessing of all the major
parties. The RAC report makes the point that a two-thirds majority in the present
parliament would require the votes of 40 more members than the Government
presently has. In fact, no government since World War II has enjoyed a twothirds
majority.
A Head of State appointed by both Houses would be subject to removal by both
Houses if it was the opinion of a two-thirds majority that his or her conduct was
inappropriate. This is why, given the difficulties of codification I have described,
and given that we believe the conventions governing the reserve powers will in
large measure need to remain with the Head of State, it is imperative that his or
her mandate does not flow from popular election, but from the representative
power of the House of Representatives and the proportional power of the
Senate.
The other brake on any wilful or misguided behaviour by a Head of State is that
the process of removal should not be contingent on a specified set of facts or
circumstances or conditions. The joint sitting would be unconstrained in its
actions or in its decision by being able to consider squarely the behaviour of any
incumbent.
A further inhibition to misguided or inappropriate behaviour is the proposal that
either House may, by simple majority, initiate a joint sitting to remove or censure
a Head of State.
The Government believes that, taken together the authority and source of the
Head of State's powers coming from the Parliament, removal by the same means
as appointment, and the capacity to censure these elements provide effective
counter-weights to the substantial authority vested in the Head of State through
the reserve powers.
In addition, in the light of the events of 1975, any Head of State determined upon
a controversial course of action would do so in the knowledge that he or she
would be confronted with the weight of public opprobrium, and will be at pains to
ensure that every course of action is both warranted and capable of being
defended.
The Government proposes that, consistent with the convention for Governors-
General, the term of office for the Head of State be five years, and that Heads of
State be permitted to serve one term only.
To prevent any attempt to influence Heads of State by offers of subsequent
employment, we propose that outgoing Heads of State not be permitted to
accept remuneration from the Commonwealth in addition to their pension until
five years have passed since their departure from the office. 
As an additional step to ensure that the office of Head of State is not politicised,
the Government proposes that serving and former parliamentarians
Commonwealth, State and Territory be excluded from candidature until five
years have passed since their departure from parliament.
There are other detailed issues that will also need to be addressed. For
example, arrangements for unexpected vacancies would broadly mirror those
currently in place.
It is not our intention that the Government's proposals should affect the
Constitutions of the Australian States. It would be up to each State to decide
how in future they would appoint their respective Heads of State. It is
reasonable to expect that if the Australian people opt for an Australian Head of
State, the States would follow suit. But the question would be for each State to
decide. In this regard, we were interested that a committee commissioned to examine
the issue by the West Australian government concluded that, if the minimalist
approach proposed by the Republic Advisory Committee were to be adopted, the
position of the States within the federation would not be substantially affected.
The Government is ready to have senior Commonwealth Ministers brief State
governments on the proposals and we sincerely hope that all State Premiers will
make constructive contributions to the public debate.
The Government puts forward these proposals to provide a basis for considered
public discussion. The Australian Constitution cannot be changed in any way
without a referendum, and to succeed at a referendum a proposed change must
win the agreement of a majority of voters in a majority of States and a majority of
voters overall.
The Government proposes to put the question of a republic to the Australian
people some time in 1998 or 1999. Acceptance at the referendum will mean that
Australia can be a republic by the year of the centenary of Federation, 2001.
Before the referendum, there will be extensive consultation with the people of
Australia. But it should be clearly understood that nothing we can devise in
addition to the due democratic processes will match those processes in the
information they provide, the debate they stimulate or the power they give the
people. The passage of the Referendum Bill through both Houses of the
Commonwealth Parliament will be followed by an extensive campaign in which
arguments for and against a republic will be put. And the people's vote and the
people's vote alone will decide the issue. 
In short, the Constitution requires that the Parliament, the nation's representative
and deliberative body, alone can formally determine the proposals to be put to
the people in a referendum. I stress this point. The Parliament alone can
formally decide what is put in a referendum. At most, any suggested convention
can only be a consultative device and, in obvious ways, an elitist one.
There have been calls for a constitutional convention, but the limitations of that
procedure should be understood.
There were six Constitutional Conventions between 1973 and 1985 followed by
a Constitutional Commission. It is not unfair to say that they were unproductive.
And any future convention not limited to the issue of the republic and the Head
of State, would be a convention going over the same old ground as all the others
before it.
Some people have drawn comparisons with the consititutional conventions of the
1890s, but there is an essential difference between those and any current
proposals. Here, we are attempting a modest change to the Constitution in the
1890s they were attempting to write it. And among the things they wrote was the
requirement that any change to the Constitution must be submitted to a
referendum. That is the democratic obligation we are under today.
The 1890s conventions were proponents of change they were concerned with
one question how to create from the separate Australian colonies one
indissoluble Commonwealth of Australia. So would any convention on the
republic need to be a proponent of the republic, and concerned only with one
issue the best means by which the people of the Commonwealth of Australia
can have an Australian as their Head of State.
The detail of the changes we propose may at first glance obscure the meaning of
them. The meaning is simple and, we believe, irresistible as simple and irresistible as
the idea of a Commonwealth of Australia was to the Australians of a century ago.
The meaning then was a nation united in common cause for the common good.
A nation which gave expression to the lives we lead together on this continent,
the experience and hopes we share as Australians.
The meaning now is still a product of that founding sentiment it is that we are
all Australians. We share a continent. We share a past, a present and a future.
And our Head of State should be one of us. 


PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP 
Tonight I will announce the Governments proposal for an Australian
Republic. We will want to consult widely with the Australian people before finalising the proposal which will be put to the Australian electorate in a referendum in 1998 or 1999. 
Mr Howard last night told the Australian people that he would stage a
people's convention in 1997 to examine the Australian Constitution. 
There is every sign that this is a hollow promise. 
Three facts about conventions need to be understood.
First, a convention is not the only means of consultation and quite likely it is by no means the best. Inevitably only a small number of people would be involved. Even if popularly elected, at a cost of at least $40 million, it is not obvious why it would be any more representative of, or responsive to public opinion than the Parliament itself. 
Second, whatever the merits of consultation through a convention, it will only work if there are specific proposals for discussion. Mr Howard has no specific proposals but only vague promises that anything and everything is open for discussion. He has nothing of substance to propose. Mr Howard's convention will be like Mr Howard's entire speech a policy free zone. He is only talking about a process, but to work the process he describes requires a specific proposal. Mr Howard lacks that specific proposal. 
Third, unlike the situation in the 1890s when there was no Commonwealth
Parliament and the Constitutional Conventions essentially served in its place, today a convention cannot determine the questions to be put to the people in a referendum. Under our Constitution, this is the responsibility of the Parliament. At most, a convention is therefore only a source of advisory opinion. The Government will listen to what the people have to say, but in the final analysis it is the Government's responsibility to put to the Parliament the Bills which will frame the questions for the referendum. Only then will true democracy prevail when all citizens will have the opportunity to express their opinion in that referendum. 
If Mr Howard is suggesting to the Australian public that a convention can actually change the Constitution, he is wrong. If he is suggesting to Australians that a convention can make and implement
decisions, he is wrong. 
If he is suggesting that an Australian republic can be approved or rejected at a convention, he is also wrong. Mr Howard must know these things. In fact, last night he continued his ploy of laying a false trail. In fact, he is attempting to mislead Australians who
want a republic, and those who are still undecided, by offering them a
process without honest purpose. 
Mr Howard says that he will put the " decision" of a convention to a
referendum, but he reserves the right to oppose the outcome. This
compounds the democratic fraud. 
The fraud is, Mr Howard's suggestion that the democratic processes of
Parliament and Referendum, devised and enshrined in the Australian
Constitution a hundred years ago, can and should be by-passed.
The problem for Mr Howard is that he still does not believe an Australian should be our Head of State. He will do anything not to say so. 
CANBERRA 7 JUNE 1995 6917 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, 7 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
JL: And seeking a little democratic treatment, on the line from Canberra is
our Prime Minister Paul Keating. Paul Keating good morning.
PM: Howare you John?
JL: I wonder if Laurie ( Brereton) knows what he has done with this unfair
dismissal thing. Do you think he wakes up at night?
PM: What he is trying to do is protect most Australian workers from being
preyed upon by unscrupulous employers.
JL: You don't really believe that most Australian workers are preyed upon by
unscrupulous employers?
PM: Many are though, many are.
JL: Many are. But the majority aren't, are they?
PM: Well put it this way, if the unfair dismissal provisions weren't there, many
more would be unfairly dismissed.
JL: Yes, but they weren't there before, were they?
PM: Yes I think they were.
JL: Well I mean they were there to a degree, but not to the extent that we
have now got 6,000 cases, waiting to be heard, of unfair dismissal.
PM: Well I mean either people have their rights protected, or not. I mean
these matters are arbitrated.
JL: But don't you have a responsibility in your life to protect your own rights? 
PM: Well you can to some extent, but it is like you protecting yourself from
somebody coming into your house, or protecting yourself on the road.
You get protected by the laws of the State.
JL: And the laws of the State have always been in place to protect people.
PM: Exactly, but there wasn't any here.
JL: I mean how can we allow a situation to occur where we have got people
wanting to employ other Australians, those people should be rewarded
for wanting to employ other Australians, then you have a fellow who
resigns of his own volition because he can't physically do the work and
the company is taken to court for unfair dismissal when he resigned? I
mean that is just crazy.
PM: Look I don't know the detail of that case. You will always, with some of
these things, find all sorts of anomalies. The main thing is the principle
and the principle is that there should be, you know, fairness in treatment
of people when they have been put off.
JL: Yes, it seems to me it's very much in favour and it seems to the majority
of Australians, incidentally, that it is very much in favour of the
employee, not the employer, and the employer is the one who really
should be rewarded for wanting to employ other Australians, I would
have thought.
PM: Well they are rewarded by way of the fact that the economy is growing
strongly and the profit share is at the highest it has ever been in history.
I mean you have still got the workforce delivering a low inflation rate and
high productivity. So, by and large, something good's happening out
there.
JL: Oh, yes, a lot of good things are happening, no doubt about that, a lot of
good things are happening. But we would probably have a bigger
workforce if people were brave enough to employ others because many
are frightened by this unfair dismissal thing and other requirements.
Anyway we didn't want to talk about that in particular. What I wanted to
talk about.. I know you didn't get a chance to listen to the Howard
speech because it was delivered to a room full of the Party faithful at a
private function, not in Parliament. But have you looked at a printed
copy of it?
PM: Oh yes I read it. I mean he kept his word. He said there would be
nothing in the speech and there wasn't. It was completely empty. I
mean John Howard is the same person he was in the 1980s and the
interesting thing is when he actually stood up on the election night of
1987 conceding defeat, he said " well there are more things that unite
Australians than divide them". And that was a theme in his television 
remarks interview last night and in his speech. I mean not even the
cliches have changed in eight years.
JL: No, but to be fair to him, it wasn't his intention to deliver specific policies
last night and he said so. Headland is, I suppose, a landmark in terms
of dumping the past, several of the Liberal Party ideologies have gone
and I suppose it is a shift back to middle ground. So I suppose it is a
landmark to a degree.
PM: Well you can't tell what a person's policies are until you see what they
say, you know, and what the Government is always required to do, under
great scrutiny, is deliver every last policy change, and detail them, and
fund them, and say what the trend lines are, and the expenditures. And
to get up with this sort of waffle anyway, I think the commentators sort
of basically I mean Michelle Grattan, in The Age, said " by including a
bit of everything, but not too much of anything, the speech became a
blancmange, lost impact and gave the Government greater scope for
attack" and Mr Kitney, in The Sydney Morning Herald, said " it's
substance could only be assessed when he explains precisely how he
will achieve his goals, with a heading No policy is the best policy". So,
you know, I think honesty and credibility in public life, John, can only
start with policies. In only politics, honesty and credibility is all about
policies. To be going around saying I haven't got any policies is both
dishonest and incredible.
JL: Yes well to me it seems that way and Mr Howard and I differ very
strongly on this issue. I believe that the people want to know what his
policies might be. As I said to him the other day somewhere, it is like
having a fellow who has been pestering you to buy you a drink for years
and finally you say okay you can buy me a drink, I'll have a beer and he
says no, hang on I am not going to tell you what you are going to drink,
you might get poisoned.
PM: Yes, that is exactly right. That is right. And for instance, can I just say
this, just look he had one line in there which I think said it all and this
is about foreign policy. Now you know how over the last couple of years
we have made these much greater bilateral links with Japan, with
Indonesia, how we put together APEC through an Asia Pacific rim
trading body. He says " the next Coalition Government will continue the
pattern". That is it. I mean a backbencher who has been in the
Parliament a year would be ashamed to put a statement like that out.
JL: Well why do you believe the Liberal Party is loath to release any
policies? They must surely have them.
PM: No they don't. You see there is nothing going on. You see, John, it is
no accident when John Howard was Treasurer we ended up with double
digit unemployment, double digit inflation, the biggest Budget deficit in
our history and an appalling lack of international competitiveness. He
didn't have any ideas and he never has had. And when he got the 
leadership in the 1980s, it came to nothing. They tipped him out again
for Andrew Peacock.
JL: Yes, anyway that aside, just quickly back to what occurred in this
speech. I called it Cape Fear because he seemed to be terrified, rather
than a headland speech, because he seemed to be terrified to give any
policies. But in fairness I keep saying to myself he did say he wouldn't
give any policies, but he did interestingly say that he wouldn't govern on
behalf of vested interests. Is he having a go at you there, suggesting
that you do?
PM: No he doesn't say who the vested interests are because if he did he
would have to say they are the working men and women of Australia.
I mean that is basically the vested interests that the Government looks
after, the working men and women of Australia. Then he had that line, I
mean it was unbelievable, he said that he had been, wait until I find it,
" after a week of us fighting for the interests of the Australian battler". A
week! The Australian Labor Party has been fighting them for 100 years.
But I mean, John, he kept his word, he said there would be nothing in it
and there wasn't.
JL: The shift to a Republic But, again, in fairness to him he did say he
wouldn't give any policies.
PM: That is right because he represents nothing and he stands for nothing.
JL: The shift to a Republic is inevitable. I mean most people have come to
that conclusion. Do you think you are rushing it?
PM: Oh no, well, you know, I have had Malcolm Turnbull and others
criticising me for being too slow in responding to the Republican
Advisory Committee Report, which was brought down 18 months ago.
But can I just say, just before I leave Mr Howard understand this point
he wouldn't even say last night and I doubt very much whether he will
say tomorrow night, whether he actually believes that Australia should
have an Australian as head of state or not. I mean, it is a simple enough
question. You could say ' look, just leave the modalities to one side, how
we actually make the change'.
JL: Yes.
PM: Do you actually believe that an Australian should be our head of state?
A reasonable enough question. He won't answer it because he doesn't
believe that an Australian should be our head of state. He believes
Queen Elizabeth the Second of Great Britain should be our head of
state. But, he is now afraid to say it because he thinks too many people
believe in a republic, and he'll get off side with them. So, his policy is to
say ' we will have a constitutional convention to discuss the Constitution'.
Frankly John, any silly mug can go and discuss the Constitution. 
JL Well, it happens around dinner tables almost every night.
PM: Exactly. But I mean, as a political leader, at least in response to a
speech where tonight I am saying we should have an Australian
republic, an Australian person should be our head of state and saying
how we will get there. He gets a reply on the ABC tomorrow night, but I
bet pounds to peanuts he fudges the issue about whether he actually
believes in a republic or not. You see, because in the end, this man is
completely indecisive.
JL It seems to me that one of the problems that you confront, not you as an
individual, but is confronted by republicans is that there is a very strong
desire by the public to have a say in choosing the figure head leader of
this yet to be determined republic. How do you get around that?
PM: Well, I think, tonight we'll explain where we are coming from on the
issue. I think the main thing is that the Government is not interested in a
major change to our system of government. The Australian system of
government works very well, in my opinion. If you look at the policy
changes of the last 12 years, there would not be a country in the OECD
that has gone through greater policy changes or a community which has
so willingly participated in and accepted them. So, whatever we do, we
don't want to in any way alter that. But, what we do want, we can't, I
don't think, summon the sense of ourselves or our role in the world by
saying ' oh, just by the way our head of state is the Monarch of Great
Britain'.
JL Yes, incidentally, when was the last time the Queen countermanded any
decision made by any Australian Prime Minister, do you know?
PM: I think, probably, I don't know whether I could tell you what that is, but I
think, the issue is worse than that. And that is, by having a deputy the
Governor-General who the Queen makes very clear, she will not
remove or chastise, you have got somebody taking liberties that even
she wouldn't take. I think that was very obvious with Sir John Kerr in
1975. After he did what he did, she didn't remove him. So, where one
could rely upon, if you like, the common sense, the reserve, the
judgement of the Queen in relating to a constitutional issue, say as she
does in Britain, as she would do here if she was the direct head of state,
by having a deputy who takes all responsibility and if they choose, no
care, it seems to me we end up with the worst of both of worlds. You
lose the experience and reserve that the Queen herself has and you pick
up whatever is the whim and caprice of the incumbent Governor-
General.
JL You can understand the general public being a little reticent to allow
politicians to elect their head of state can't you. I suppose you can, I'm
assuming that? 
PM: Let me just say this. Tonight all will be revealed. But, let me just say
this John, what you have got in Australia is a representative democracy.
You have got each MP coming from their constituency to Parliament and
you can see how the Parliamentary system responds to public opinion.
It is a diffuse parliamentary system in which no person is elected ( at
large). For instance, I was not elected Prime Minister. I was elected a
member of my Party. My Party appointed me as Leader and the
Governor-General appointed me as Prime Minister. I am not standing
here speaking to you as the elected Prime Minister. Nor are any
Ministers elected. The obvious point in that is if one doesn't remain
relevant, one changes. The same with Opposition Leaders. Just take
the Opposition. They have had now three leaders in this term of
Parliament because the other two were no longer relevant or they
thought useful. The same goes for the Government. You saw in the last
Parliament, Mr Hawke removed by the Caucus where I was installed. I
could be removed myself.
In other words, there is a healthy assessment by a large group
representing the community in a representative way from each
constituency which gives a real living feel to our democracy day in and
day out.
JL: Yes, but the general public and you can't blame them, I suppose, for the
cynicism, tend to feel that there is room for manipulation within the
Parliament.
PM: Well John, just take for instance a couple of issues of the recent past.
Take the woodchip decision of last Christmas. A lot of people thought it
was unjustified. The Government was subject to pressure over it. Public
opinion changed over it. So, the Government remedied the policy. In
other words, the Parliamentary system of government responds. Take
an issue like Aboriginal health. People think it is appalling to find
Aborigines having a shorter life span than non-Aboriginal Australians.
That seeps into public opinion. It then comes into the Parliament. But if
one person is sitting in a position of popular election for a long period of
time, then they are impervious to opinion.
JL: Yes, I agree with what you are saying and I understand the theory of it
and the examples that you have given are very clear, but you can still
understand right or wrong it is all about perception. We have talked
about it often, it is perceived that there is room for manipulation if it is
going to be politicians who don't rate very highly in the minds of the
populous are going to have a say in who is going to be this figure head
leader.
PM: But John, just have a look at the effort in the last dozen years. I mean, a
per cent improvement in national competitiveness. An inflation rate
of 2 to 3 per cent.
JL: Yes, all this is terrific, I was talking about.. 
PM: But I'm making this point
JL: I don't quite know what it has got to do with the figure head leader of a
republic.
PM: What I'm saying, is the system is responsive. It actually works. Here is
a country which needed a major remedial surgery on its economy and
got it out of its system. I mean, I don't think anyone should have any
doubt, should be cynical about the system. The system works and the
other thing about it, can I say, and I'd say this for the Coalition and the
National Party and the Labor Party, I don't know of one corrupt person in
years in public life of the Federal Parliament. That is a remark John
Howard made the other day too. I don't.
JL: Yes, well I suppose all those things are to be taken into account. Prime
Minister I have got to leave you and I know you have got a commitment
as well. Thank you very much for spending some time with us.
PM: It is a pleasure, John.
JL: Good to talk to you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT
OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PRU GOWARD, " DAYBREAK", RADIO NATIONAL
8 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PG: Mr Keating, Mr Howard makes the point that a referendum for a
republic will only succeed if it has bi-partisan political support how
likely do you think that is?
PM: Well, I did hope that tonight John Howard would answer the essential
question does he believe an Australian should be the Australian
Head of State? Now, if he had answered that in any way if he had
said yes, then we are in agreement and we could then sort out
between us, at least, as political parties, how that might best be done.
If he said " no, I believe Queen Elizabeth 11 of Great Britain should be
the Australian Head of State", we could have then made clear where
both parties stood. What we had from him, in the event, was a
discussion about some process. That is, whether he would have a
People's Convention, and then he went on to tell us he would appoint
half the people. So, he's not going to make it easy he's not going to
make it easy. He's opposed to an Australian being head of state, and
he's going to rough it up I think in terms of having a debate about
process, within which he discusses not only whether Australia should
be a republic, but also the power of the States, Commonwealth-State
relations, 4 year terms, external affairs power, and all the other bits
and pieces.
PG: So in other words, so long as he refuses to take a position one way or
the other, the republic is doomed?
PM: No. I just think that the Liberal Party has got to take another defeat
before they come to their senses.
PG: So, can you win a referendum without Mr Howard taking a position?
PM: Mr Howard won't be the Leader of the Parliamentary Liberal Party if he
loses the next election, and I think that's the key point. It will take
another election defeat for them to understand that the well-spring of 
Australian sentiment in favour of us being independent truly
independent in every respect has to be satisfied, and it won't be
satisfied by obfuscation, indecision by the Liberal Party.
PG: Now, do you agree, though, that the worst outcome for a referendum
as John Howard says, would be a narrow win, or a narrow loss this
must be decisive?
PM: I think you can have a better gauge of that in a couple of years time. If
we were having this discussion two and a half years ago, you wouldn't
have given probably those in favour of a change as much chance as
they have in fact had, and come as far as they have been able, in this
time. In a couple more years, the debate and the mood of the debate, I
think is going is change dramatically. And I think... . you know, what I
think is a pity a pity for him, his Party, and the country is that it's like
pulling teeth out. You know, they have got to be dragged along to
everything. They believe that the Australia Act shouldn't have been
introduced. They believe that, you know, appeals to the Privy Council
that was a dreadful thing when that was dropped. Of course, all of
these changes have now gone on unremarked, and no-one would go
back on them. As no-one in fact will ever go back when we have an
Australian Head of State.
PG: So you are saying that you think it will be, in the end, overwhelming?
PM: I think so, because how can we go on with our Head of State being the
Monarch of another country, and yet try and say to ourselves seriously
" here we are, independent, representing that sense of ourselves, you
know, what we have become"?
PG: I guess what Mr Howard is saying, though, is that if you want an
overwhelming result, you are not doing the debate a service by
pushing it into a three year time frame too much too soon?
PM: No. I don't think it is. And you see, there's another important point
here too, Pmu the proposal I put last night was the minimalist change.
That's the minimal change that is, you virtually cross out the word
Governor-General, write in the word President, the system of
Government functions as it does now. What could a Convention do
that is more simple than that? What a Convention could only do is
something more complex than that, and that is what Mr Howard said
tonight. He said, " what we ought to look at, too, is Commonwealth
relations with the States, the external affairs power it's been abused
4 year terms" having voted against that a few years ago himself.
Whereas at the same time he says " oh, hang on this proposal of
yours is, you know, not going to be well understood". Yet, it is the
most simple one the most simple proposal. So, there is going to be
no process which is more simple than this, because any other
proposition must be more complex. I mean, if the head of state is to be
elected, and the reserve powers codified far more complex. You
know, almost any other modality of change any other mode of change
will be far more complex. Therefore, the notion that you have a 
Convention which makes it simple and better understood is, of course,
nonsense.
PG: So, in other words, you are saying you think that if you keep it simple,
you can get it up in three years?
PM: Yes. And the important value in keeping it simple is that it doesn't
change the relationships within our system of Government.
PG: Well, let's look at that because, of course, he argues that it will that
the reserve powers that you say can be just transferred to a republic,
he argues are vested in the Monarchy, not in a person?
PM: This is a sort of, what I think is, essentially a silly argument. That there
is some sort of mystical power there is a mystic transfer, you know.
Where, in fact, the Republic Advisory Committee report which I have
with me covered the point, I thought, very well. It said, in discussing
it, it had some proposed words. It had " the head of state shall exercise
his or her powers, and perform his or her functions, in accordance with
the constitutional conventions which related to the exercise of the
powers of performance of the functions of the Governor-General". In
other words, we say that expressly in new words to be inserted. And,
let me just remind your listeners, that a similar provision was included
in the South African Constitution in 1961 as the Republic Advisory
Committee Report reminds us. Where it became a republic with the
Westminster system and then it had this to say in their Constitution
the Constitutional Conventions which existed immediately prior to the
commencement of this Act, shall not be affected by the provisions of
this Act other words, those Conventions which existed while
South Africa had the Monarch of Great Britain as the Head of State,
those Conventions will not be affected by this change.
Now, as far as I know, Mr Mandela is motoring along quite well as
President of the Republic of South Africa. He didn't need some
mystical transfer from Westminster. That was just John Howard at his
manipulative worst trying to put a red herring legal argument across
the trail.
PG: But, of course, he says it George Winterton's, who is a republican.
PM: Yes, that is fair enough, but he did sign this report and in that report
he was party to the report he might have also been party to the
argument, but they suggest here that words the sort of
constitutional provisions which might be included Now, those words
came from the acting Solicitor General, the Commonwealth Crown
Solicitor who is our best, those words were his suggestion. So, we can
all pull our lawyers out and say he says this and someone else says
that, but in the end if Australia decides that the head of state shall
have the same powers as the Governor-General formerly had and
enjoyed and excised then we could do that. 
PG: But, it is divisive isn't it. The community isn't yet set on a course, there
is a range of views.
PM: I think they are very interested.
PG: They are interested.
PM: They are interested, I don't think it is divisive.
PG: There are a lot of people who still want to stick to the Monarchy.
PM: Yes, but that is an opinion. It is not division, I don't think. There may
be some people who feel hot and bothered about this, but by and
large, I think most people are interested and that is a good thing.
PG: But, I guess his point is that you can't have a divisiveness over
constitutional changes because it is better to wait until you can have
them.
PM: Yes, but that is the little implied threat. You see, unless you get us on
side, Prime Minister, you won't get any change here. You are going to
have to cuddle up and kid to us and by the way, we have got this black
hole convention where this issue will get lost along with arrangements
with the States, external affairs powers, et cetera. So, what do you
reckon about that? And, I'm supposed to say ' oh, that is profound.' It
is nonsense. All John Howard had to do tonight was provide just a
modicum of leadership. All he had to do was say was say ' look..
PG: Well, you call it leadership, he has shown his own leadership.
PM: No, no, he didn't show any leadership. Leadership would have been
him saying he was in favour of the retention of The Queen or he
was in favour of an Australian being head of state. Either position was
a position of leadership on the issue. I think the leadership can only
really be, in the national interest, that an Australian should be the head
of state. But, he wouldn't even say that. What he came at was a
colourless speech laden with cliches, about how it has all got to go to a
Convention and when we got down to it, it was a convention half
appointed by him. And, then just to make sure it was dripping with
cynicism, he then said that 10 per cent of them would be young
Australians between 18 and 25 years of age. Making certain in his
model that not any of them would ever be, that he would never let any
of those young Australians ever be the head of state of this country.
PG: How democratic is your proposal though? He says it is not, you offer
no choice, it is either a two-thirds vote of Parliament for the head of
state or nothing. Is he right that that will put people off right from the
beginning?
PM: I think Jeff Kennett said it all very eloquently today when he said there
is growing recognition, the issue is going to be resolved. Now, that will
be done through a referendum and the public, each and every one of 
us, will be able to make our own decision. That is the democratic act.
It is not me saying it, it is the conservative Premier. He was asked
' Why do you think Mr Howard is supporting a peoples convention?' He
said it is only going to be able to really express their personal
views. They may argue they represent a greater number of people,
but finally this is going to be decided by each and every one of us. A
convention to me is just another committee ' So, there is not much
point calling out 400 people out of a community of 18 million, sitting
them down saying ' now what do you think about that?'. In other words,
what he is saying is the democratic expression, the ultimate democracy
or democratic act is a vote we all get on this. There can be no greater
strength than that.
PG: But arguing a referendum, that is the only vote we get.
PM: That's it. That's the vote that matters. But, to have a rinky dink
convention, chosen half by a Coalition government and then sifting
down and saying ' oh, we might discuss that republic, but we have got
other issues to discuss as well, we'll make that item number five, after
we go through the States and the external affairs power.' I mean, to
use an old Australianism, he is not fair dinkum. He is not fair dinkum.
He doesn't want to do this and he doesn't want to help and he is like
every other conservative we have ever had. It could have been
Stanley Melbourne Bruce up there saying that today or anyone else
back in our history. It is like pulling teeth to get them to agree to
anything. I
PG: But, in the end, this is the big test as John Howard put it at the
beginning of his speech The system of government must produce
unity, stability and tolerance', all of which we have at the moment.
How can you better that with a republic?
PM: By making clear that we can never be the independent nation we
believe we are when one of us is not our head of state.
PG: Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you indeed.
ends 



VI(&gt; 1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, SPECIAL EDITION 7.30 REPORT,
ABC TV, 8 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
PL: Prime Minister welcome.
PM: Paul.
PL: Now John Howard says that under your system we won't get what we
the people want, we are going to get what you want in the end.
PM: I think his colleague Jeff Kennett said it very eloquently today.
He answered Mr Howard's point that what can be more democratic
than a referendum where everybody has a say. I mean the
Government and the Parliament could propose, or put a proposal to
the community, that every person in the community has a say, has a
vote, and they can reject it, or accept it.
PL: But what happens between now and the referendum, we just all sort of
mill around talking to each other do we?
PM: No, we will do what we have intelligently done since this debate began.
That is, we will consider the prospects of an Australian person
becoming our head of state, consider what it means for Constitutional
change, how it might be approached, how the change might be made,
what it will mean to the country. Now that's happened already. We
have seen a lot of debate, where now all of us, I think, are better in
touch with the issues than we were then. We commissioned the
Republic Advisory Committee Report, they consulted widely, that was
reported, that debate has been had. Now I have, on behalf of the
Government, put a set of proposals. This is promoting this debate
between you and me tonight, Mr Howard etc and that will go on. 
2
PL: But the Civic Experts Group presented you with a report recently that
said there is a great deal of ignorance in the community about the very
basics of our political system, isn't there?
PM: That is probably right. But you'll never have perfection about that. But
that is not to say that we are then incapable of changing anything.
Look at the changes Australia has made, both economically and
socially, over the last 12 years they have been profound.
PL: But how do we make sure that John Howard's fear that it is going to be
divisive doesn't occur. I mean we wouldn't want to risk the
PM: Well the thing is tonight, he squibbed the central question. There was
only one question to answer and that was does he, forget the
modalities, but does he believe an Australian should be our head of
state. He wouldn't answer that question. He did everything to skate
around that question, but he wouldn't come to the central question. In
the final analysis he had to say " let's go to a peoples' convention" and
then he had the temerity to say he would actually appoint half the
people going to it. And so you would have a small cabal, half
appointed by him, and in some way that supplants the rights of
18 million people, a nation of 18 million, of the electorate of this
country, the people of this country, to vote on a set of proposals in the
most democratic of acts.
PL: Nevertheless I think many Australians would have agreed with him
when he said that it ought to be as non-political as possible this
debate.
PM: Oh well I mean that is like saying we want the air outside to be as full
of oxygen as we would like it. I mean who is going to disagree with
that? What I said last night was that, and today, if we can get
agreement on the central point, that an Australian should be our head
of state, the rest of it will fall into place. But that requires some
leadership and he wouldn't provide it. You see in some respects I
have got more respect for the Leader of the National Party who says
he believes in the Constitutional Monarchy. He believes in the Queen
remaining the head of state of this country. What Mr Howard
wouldn't do anything. He is basically in favour of the Monarchy, but he
wouldn't come and say so because he thinks it will offend too much
Republican sentiment.
PL: He says the system is working quite well and you have got to prove to
him why it should be if it isn't broke, why fix it?
PM: In other words, if I have to lead and if I lead sufficiently he may follow.
Well, in that case, why does he want to supplant me as the leader. Let
me get on and go on keep on doing it. 
PL: Today in Parliament it looked like a real red-hot partisan issue, didn't it
though? I mean your side yes. Their side raising all doubts and
questions. I mean if this is the flavour we are going to have
PM: No, it's like it has been for all the years I have been here, the Party of
social attack. The Party of change, the Labor Party, keeps on
advancing Australia, moving it forward and the lead weight is dragged
along behind. Mr Howard always spotting the most conservative
position he can adopt and you remember they said that, you know, we
shouldn't have the Australia Act, appeals to the Privy Council should
be maintained. All of that baggage has gone, we are the better for it.
We will be the better for it for this change. I mean it is not just that
those of us who want to see Australia's culture, identity perfectly
reflected in this way should have to drag them along with us. But they
should at least provide some leadership and say we believe. I mean
here he was tonight talking about he said " I'm going to have a
convention with 50 per cent appointed and I am going to put some
people in there 18-25, young Australians". But he wouldn't let one of
those young Australians become the President of the Commonwealth
of Australia. He wants instead for Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain
to be our head of state and not one of those young Australians.
PL: Well let's hear from some of these young Australians. While
Mr Keating was delivering his speech to Parliament last night,
Andrew Olle went to James Ruse High School in Sydney's North West
to see what impact the Prime Minister had on the students and their
parents.
( panel discussion)
PL: Well, pressured into it? Keating's personal baby?
PM: That's called leadership. That's what leadership is about getting a
country a choice, and that's what is involved here. The choice is to be
exercised only by a majority of voters, in a majority of States, and a
majority overall. I mean, the first person who spoke [ in the panel
discussion] talked about " Keating's cronies". Well, the " cronies" are
the Australian people they are the only people who can carry a
Constitutional change. There's no way the Constitution can change,
other than by a referendum provided for in the current Constitution.
PL: There seemed to be a belief in that statement that you and your
cronies would be choosing this head of state, as distinct from the idea
that they wanted to choose this person themselves?
PM: No. I thought more that the question was put " what difference does it
make he and his cronies are choosing?" Well, for a start, the public
alone choose this, in the most democratic of acts, across the country
have a singular decision to make it, the point a referendum is put. 
That referendum will be some years from now, so some of these
concepts will be much better understood. But when it is put, then there
will be a process whereby a head of state will be selected. That head
of state it would be my wish that head of state is not a political
person. But, if it is, by the way by popular election, it has to be a
political person, because the candidate on the Labor side would be
chosen by the National Conference, or the Executive of the Labor
Party, and the same would go for the Coalition. Now, it is not
necessarily to say that they would win, but both parties have
demonstrated a capacity to out organise anyone else that has come
along. So, if people want a non-partisan, if you like, non-political head
of state of the kind of the last , say, numbers of Governors-General Sir
Zelman Cowan, Sir Ninian Stephen then the proposal that I have put
on behalf of the Government is the best way of getting that.
PL: There does seem to be some discomfort about appearing to reject or
deny the Queen, who, of course, has wide respect in the community?
PM: That's true. But somebody said " the Queen is not seen by anybody as
representing Australia" well, that is exactly right. That's part of the
problem. When the Queen travels abroad, she travels as Queen of
England, and the Monarch of Great Britain. She never travels as
Queen of Australia, other than to Australia. So, if the Queen goes to
Europe or North America, she doesn't go there as Queen of Australia,
she goes as Queen of Great Britain. But if an Australian head of state
were to go to Asia or to Europe the same as we have seen in
Australia [ where] the Irish President, or the German President come
here the whole embodiment of the country comes with them. And
that's the point, we lose that opportunity. When Governments or Prime
Ministers or Ministers travel abroad, they are there to represent
Australia and do the business, but they are not there to embody the
nation the way in which the head of state is able to do.
PL: All right. Let's go back to school for a few minutes. According to the
opinion polls, Australians overwhelmingly prefer to elect the proposed
President directly. It's one issue on which nearly all politicians agree
to disagree with their electors. The students of James Ruse High
School and their parents are no different. As Andrew Olle found, they
seem to be deeply suspicious of politicians.
( panel discussion)
PL: Well, what happens, if at the end of this whole process, you find the
people still saying we want to make this a direct election?
PM: Let's wait and see. The Government has put a proposal down and we
have put it down for good reasons and that is that you can see by
those comments Paul, people are saying they are suspicious of the
policitical process. One person there insisting that politicians are not 
to be trusted et cetera. But, there are in the Parliament roughly 200
people representing the constituencies of this country. It is a very
diffuse Parliament. Therefore it is a safe power. Diffuse power is safe
power. That is why the representative nature of the House of
Representatives and the proportional nature of the Senate, electing
Senators for a state at large, gives the people of this country a system
where no one is above it. The Prime Minister is not elected Prime
Minister by the people, but appointed by the Parliament, by the
Caucus. That is why the Government is saying don't elect a head of
state, that is not the preferred model because to do it you lose that
diffusion of power and you have one person only who becomes one
person who becomes the embodiment of the nation and is potentially
vested with substantial powers.
PL: Far more political clout than the Prime Minister of the day?
PM: Well, if you have an elected President and you were not to seriously
delineate the powers, you would have a complete change of
government. You would have a French presidential style system on
your hands and the power would move from the Westminster style
Cabinet and Prime Ministership and Parliament to that single person,
because that person would be the only person in the system who is
elected to it. I don't know whether it is generally understood. On
election night 1993, I wasn't elected Prime Minister, I was elected
Member for Blaxland. I was appointed Party leader at the subsequent
meeting of the Parliamentary Party which had a majority in the House
of Representatives and I was appointed Prime Minister by the
Governor-General. I could be unappointed. Ministers could be
unappointed. Opposition leaders could be unappointed. In other
words, one has to be relevant and at the same time there is a test on
you perpetually. But once one person and one person only is
popularly elected across the nation for, say, a five year period, they
are beyond the reach of the community and the power will gravitate
from the representative system we now have to that person.
PL: And you can only get rid of them by a vote of two-thirds of the joint
sitting of Parliament.
PM: Well, if they were elected you couldn't be rid of them other than
through a process of impeachment. As President Nixon had to
PL: Does this mean that we really ought to be writing down these powers,
spelling them out and isn't it really a political problem rather than a
legal one? If we sat down with goodwill couldn't Australians do this in
a weekend?
PM: No, I don't think so. Can we do it in a weekend? No. Could we do it?
Possibly, but you then have to understand, Paul, that we are writing for
the next 100 or 200 years, could you and I, in our crystal ball, see what 
contingency may arise, that some person in the system should have
power to address. I don't think it is necessarily a bad thing that that
power exists.
PL: But if they are not explicit, don't you become vulnerable to what
Professor Donald Horne has called the ' Queen Mother of all scare
campaigns'?
PM: I don't think so, no, because that is why we have proposed, last night,
that by providing some of these powers, not written, in other words,
reserve powers to the head of state, but where the source of the power
comes from the two Chambers of Parliament. No head of state can
wander around saying ' I am here by virtue of being blessed by
hereditary monarchy' or ' I am here, by the grace of God go It is only
by the grace of the House of Representatives and the Senate and the
House of Representatives and the Senate can unmake them. In other
words, there is a limited basis and source for the power, but there is a
substantial useful power there. But, if it is abused, they can be
unmade.
PL: And you can't be a candidate if you have been a politician within the
previous five years. Does that really, do you think, rule out the
prospects of President Keating?
PM: Well, it certainly rules me out. I have always, in this, ruled myself out.
This is not about me and it never will be. I would never ever contest
such a post however it was available. But, the important thing is, I
think, what we are seeking in the proposal that I have put on behalf of
the Government is basically people who have served the community
with distinction and who can enjoy the support of both major parties,
but there is no doubt as one of the younger members of that audience
made clear, if that person is elected you will have election campaigns
for President, just like you have in the United States and it is pounds to
peanuts that a politician will win. Whereas under the proposal that I
have put on behalf of the Government it will be a Ninian Stephen or a
Zelman Cowan or someone of that variety.
PL: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you, Paul.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ANGELA CATTERNS, TRIPLE J, 8 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
AC: In the Morning Show with Angela Catterns, and joining us now from the
Lodge, to fill us in more on his vision of an Australian republic, is the
Prime Minister Paul Keating. Good morning, Mr Keating.
PM: Good morning, Angela.
AC: What sort of person do you think should be President?
PM; Well, someone I think who commands the broad respect of the
community, who can be the embodiment of the nation while ever he or
she holds the office, and who can secure the support of the major
parties.
AC: Why should the Parliament choose the President, and not the people?
PM: Because I think that were we to go to a popular election, the President
would be the only person in the Australian political system who is
popularly elected, and enjoying wide powers. You see, at the 1993
election where people think I was elected Prime Minister, in fact I
wasn't. I was elected the Member for Blaxiand. I was elected a
member of the Labor Parliamentary Party. It's the parliamentary party
who chose me to be Prime Minister, and it was the Governor-General
who appointed me. And that goes for the Ministers they were elected
to their seats, and they were chosen by the Caucus of the
Parliamentary Party, and then appointed by the Governor-General.
So, the system is at the moment diffuse it is wide, and there is no one
person enjoying the preponderance of power. But if you elect
somebody who has an election at large, who is there for say 5 years,
and who can't be if you like unelected, and who also enjoys wide
powers, the whole system of Government that we have of
representative democracy, of people voting in their constituencies, of 
MP's relating to their communities, of shifts in public opinion becoming
very manifest and obvious on various issues as you see now that will
become a thing of the past. And we would go to a far more
Presidential system, such as France, where basically, the head of
government is the head of state, and a President can just bring on and
dismiss Prime Ministers as they see fit.
AC: But won't leaving the choosing to politicians mean that they will choose
a politician for the job?
PM: No I think the opposite of that is true. It has been left to politicians
now, and we have rarely ever chosen politicians for the job, other than
those who have distinguished themselves. But what I said last night
was that sitting parliamentarians can't run for office can't be
considered nor can MP's who haven't retired 5 years earlier. The
most likely because you would have to get the support of both major
parties the most likely situation would be that you would get people
like Sir Ninian Stephen, or Sir Zelman Cowan people who have long
periods of distinguished service to the public and the community, who
can command the support of say in this case, the Labor Party, the
Coalition or the minor parties that's the sort of person you would get.
But if you have an election, you will have the Labor Candidate for
President, you will have the Liberal Party Candidate for President, and
then you will have party election campaigns, and a party politician will
win it, probably.
AC: Mr Keating, so your suggestion is that the President be chosen by a
two-thirds majority of parliament at a joint sitting. John Howard and
Lloyd Waddy both pointed out past examples of where one party held
a two-thirds majority of both Houses, had a joint sitting been held how
could a President remain politically neutral then?
PM: There has never been a situation since the War where one party
has commanded a two-thirds majority.
AC: But that's not to say it might not happen in the future?
PM: It may not, and somebody made the point that if Malcolm Fraser had
won one more seat in 1975, that Party would have had a two-thirds
majority. Well, if the Liberal Party was then able to command such
wide community support then, it was entirely appropriate then that that
support be reflected in the choice of candidate for President. You see,
I mean that if they are really saying that all of the rest of the political
system didn't even add up to one-third in other words they had the
two-thirds why should the one-third decide less than one-third
decide who is to be the candidate?
AC: What about the idea of having a referendum to determine how we
choose the head of state, so that everybody at least has had a say? 
PM: Well, the problem about that is that it's not a simple matter if, for
instance, were we to decide to have a popular election, we wouldn't be
in a position to leave the so-called reserve powers with that person.
That is, were we to have a popular election, we would have to decide
what powers the President had, compared to the current Governor-
General. Now, under the proposal I outlined last night, they are the
same powers. So, we are leaving quite substantial powers with the
President, but we are saying the source on authority for the President
is constrained by the mode of his or her election by the two houses of
Parliament. But if it's to be a public election, where the president
would be above the Prime Minister and the Cabinet and the
Parliament, then we would have to seriously consider delineating the
powers. That means, by Constitutional change, so there can be no
simple referendum. Your question was why don't you let the people
decide what the nature of the appointment is, but it can't be say
popular election, or non-popular election, because to say popular
election comes with a heap of qualifiers. But who says.. . who is to say
what the qualifiers are? I mean, for a start the Liberal Party won't
agree, and remember this that every word, every dot point, dotted " i"
and crossed that goes to a referendum, has to go through the
Federal Parliament. And then to be agreed, it has to be agreed by a
majority of voters in a majority of States. So, in this one, you have got
to be fairly sure the first time around that you have got an adoptable
proposal. Because if you are not, the history of referenda in Australia
is a very poor one.
AC: You said you would let each State decide if they want to have an
Australian head of state. Couldn't that lead to a ridiculous situation
where the Commonwealth might be a republic, but certain States still
keep the Queen as their head of state?
PM: It would mean any State government that so decided that would have
to run the gamut of public opinion. I mean, we would have the
president of the Commonwealth of Australia and we would have the
governor equivalent position in a number of States and then we would
have somebody who was a representative of Queen Elizabeth the
Second. Now, I think, most States, all States, would probably once the
country decided to have a republic that they would quit on the idea.
But you never know, but it would only last until the next Labor
government came along and it would change anyway.
AC: Mr Keating, should we have the right perhaps as suggested by the
Democrats to at least make nominations for our president?
PM: Well, the Democrats and the Liberal and National parties with this
Government for instance, would have a right of consultation because it
would be intolerable for a candidate to have the government of the day
saying ' well look, we won't consult you, we will just propose at a joint 
sitting your name, we won't consult the parties, we will just propose
your name at a joint sitting'. What would happen is that person would
be defeated. So, it will mean that the government of the day, if we are
speaking of now, as Prime Minister I would need to approach the
Coalition parties and the Democrats and say ' look, this is what we
have in mind'. And so, that is the best form of consultation, I think, If
they say ' oh no, we don't think that is the right person, will you come
back with another person?' That is how a process like this would work.
At the moment, the Prime Minister alone can at his or her nomination
propose to the Queen the name of a person. For instance, as you
know the current Governor-General is reaching the end of his term.
Very shortly, I will open a process up with Queen Elizabeth about his
replacement, but I have to secure no support from the Coalition or any
other party. In this proposal it is a complete change. It would mean
that the government's nominee has to have the support also of the
other parties.
AC: What would the referendum ask in 1998 or 1999?
PM: It would be framed so as to competently make a constitutional shift to
the republic. I don't think I am in a position now to give you the words,
but the sense of it would be that the position of Governor-General
would be removed from the Constitution and in place thereof the words
' President of the Commonwealth of Australia' and there would be a
change to the Constitution saying that that person should act primarily
on ministerial advice and it would be framed pretty much as I said last
night.
AC: What is your reluctance about having a constitutional convention?
PM: Because they are basically just elitist and they are not the initiating
body. You see, the Constitutional Conventions nearly everyone in
Australia who doesn't want to do anything says ' let's have a
convention' because that is the great black hole of constitutional
proposals. They are the dark holes of constitutional reform. They
have nearly all failed since the war and we have held over a dozen of
the things and as a consequence we have to face this fact: that we
now have a Constitution this is not the 1890s in the 1890s the
convention was the proponent of the Constitutional proposal. But once
we adopted a Constitution and a Commonwealth of Australia, once we
had the Constitution the Parliament and the Parliament only is the
initiating body for a referendum. John Howard has been running
around saying ' oh, let's have a People's Convention', but the greatest
Peoples Convention is a referendum. We have got to get a majority of
electors in a majority of States and a majority overall. There is the
public expression, the democratic expression. But, to have a little elite
group of 10 or 12 parliamentarians from each State, a representative
sprinkle of the community groups, that is not a peoples convention, it is
just an elite discussion group. 
AC: But, if it transpires that that is what most Australians want, are you
open minded about the way that this republic might come about?
PM: Want, in which sense do you mean?
AC: Well, if it transpires that during the debate now, that most people do
want to have some kind of a convention, that they want to get together
and discuss it more in more formal ways, are you open minded about
they way it will come about?
PM: I don't think people will want to be in a ruse. That is, the notion that a
convention can propose a constitutional amendment when it can't. Do
you understand? We have a Constitution which says the only initiating
body is the Parliament. So no convention and no party leader not
me, not John Howard, not anybody can give a convention that power.
The power only resides with the Parliament. You see when pressed..
you have got to read Mr Howard's text finely, someone said to him
the other day and certainly to his predecessor ' does that mean that
if you had a convention, you would then adopt the outcome of the
convention?' ' oh, no, no, we would only take it as some advice to us.
We wouldn't be under an obligation to actually put it into place'. In
other words, what he wants is a talkshop. What he really wants is not
to say where he stands. You see, I put the simple question to Mr
Howard a number of times: does he believe an Australian person, an
Australian, should be the Australian head of State? It is not a complex
question. It is a very simple issue. He has a chance tonight to tell us.
He is more likely to tell us, on his record of the last couple of days, he
is more likely to tell us that he will have a constitutional convention
which will discuss the Senate powers or discuss the external affairs
power. In other words, he will do anything but say that he believes in
the monarchy which is what, I believe, he still believes in. He believes
in having the English Monarch as the Australian head of state and the
only way he can dispel that notion of belief in that system is to say he
stands for an Australian being our head of state.
AC: Mr Keating, how will you gauge public reaction and opinion and debate
about your proposals. How will you keep your ear to the ground?
PM: You can tell with these debates, all of us, you are in the broadcasting
business Angela, and you can feel the opinion change on your
program you can talk to people, you can say ' look, that's going poorly'
or ' that's going well' and if you look at the debate today, the ambient
climate within which this proposal has been launched compared to,
say, two and half years ago when I first mentioned it in the policy
speech at the election. It is a completely different climate. And, what
we are saying is from here to 1998 or 1999 which is a number of years
away, there is an adequate opportunity to debate for the first time a set
of proposals. Last night I gave the nation a set of proposals to debate. 
Not just a waffly idea about a republic, but actually saying what the
modalities of such a change would be. What the mode of such a
change might be. What we will do is listen to the debate, hear what
people say and cut our cloth accordingly. But, I bring you back to that
central point, the only body in the Constitution able to propose a
constitutional amendment is the Parliament. So, it must come back to
the Government in the House of Representatives.
AC: Mr Keating, was that an exciting thing to do, to give that speech in
Parliament last night? It was quite exciting to watch.
PM: I think it was a great pity, in a sense, that in the telecast the ABC
completed it the moment I stopped speaking, because they wouldn't
have seen the public galleries break out in spontaneous applause
which was very surprising and pleasing to me. Normally the public
galleries are very restrained in the Parliament, but as far as I could
see, it was unanimous. There would have been 700 or 800 people
there. So, it was a fair test, I thought, of whether the proposals in the
speech were capable of engendering, as I have said before, a touch of
excitement. I think, it probably did.
AC: Who do you think will be most resistant to change?
PM: I think John Howard. The reason I do is because I think he is a 1970s
politician with a 1950' s view of the world.
AC: Mr Keating, you said no former politician can run for five years after
leaving politics if they were to run for the position of president. If you
stepped down next year, that means you could be up for the post in
2001, is that an attractive career option for you?
PM: No, and I would never nominate for it, ever. Not ever.
AC: Why not?
PM: No, because, I think, this [ PM] is the paramount political job in terms of
the capacity to effectively change and reform an economy and society
and I also don't believe that anybody so associated with a
constitutional change like this should, in some way, exploit it or take
advantage of it. So, for my part, I would never consider the position.
This is not about me. This is about Australia being able to adequately
represent the country we have become. The people we are and the
clear notion that the head of state could only, really, represent
Australia well when that person is one of us.
AC: Mr Keating, just finally, who do you think might be the last Governor-
General, given that your model is accepted and goes ahead? 
PM: That is something the Government has got to think about in the next
few months.
AC: And assuming that there is an election before his term is up, might you
take into account Mr Howard's views and wishes regarding who would
be the Governor-General?
PM: If I asked Mr Howard or Mr Fraser in the last period of their office,
would they desist from making an appointment of Governor-General or
a legitimate appointment of that government within the capacity of that
government, within the gift of that government. They would reject such
a proposal out of hand. This is an appointment which the Government
will soon have to put into motion. Normally, the protocols are that the
Prime Minister starts to enter into a discussion with Her Majesty about
six months before the appointment is made and the position changes
and that period is coming up now and were Mr Howard to be Prime
Minister and were I to ask him to delay this into the next Parliament, he
would laugh at me.
AC: Mr Keating, thank you so much for your time this morning. It has been
terrific to have you on the morning show.
PM: Good Angela, thank you indeed.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO 8 JUNE 1995
Unedited version*
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
FK: Prime Minister, a minimalist position is the position you have put
tonight, is that a concession then that what we now have actually
works and doesn't really need to be changed much. Why bother if all
we are doing is a minimalist change?
PM: Why bother is, it is entirely inappropriate that the Australian head of
state should not be an Australian person. As I said last night, that
person should be one of us and only an Australian can represent the
aspirations of our people, of our nation and that it is, in the long run,
intolerable for us to be represented and to have as our head of state
the monarch of another country.
FK: You say that, but what is the pressing need for change? Most people
in their daily lives wouldn't think, gosh we must have an Australian
head of state.
PM: It makes us stronger. It makes us stronger as a country to know that
we are independent in all respects including this one. That we are
more complete. That we are more unified and that as a people we
engage the rest of the world knowing exactly who we are and what we
are. These things are tangible and real and it just has to change and
what we propose the minimalist proposition proposal is not a
concession, it is practical. What it is saying is our system of
Government has worked, we don't want to change the system of
government, but we do want to change the head of state and this is
how we might do that, but still maintain the benefits that we have
enjoyed from the system that we have developed.
EK: As you spoke last night, some members from the Opposition kept
calling out ' yes, isn't Bill Hayden doing a good job. Yes Bill Hayden is 
doing a great job'. What is the problem with the job currently being
done with the Governor-General, isn't that in essence, doing the same
job that you are proposing this person to do?
PM: But, the Governor-General in representing the Queen of Australia in,
and in all practical respects, the Queen of Great Britain can never no
matter who is Governor-General, represent Australia adequately. It is
one of the reasons why, frankly, the Governor-General rarely travels
because you might remember just a year or so ago, the Governor-
General was going to some particular country, and the Government of
that country rang the British Foreign Office to see whether they should
receive him. I mean, what a disgrace.
FK: If we could just look at some of the essential parts of the plan you
outlined last night. One of the key pieces of it that will attract a lot of
attention is the proposal that says no popularly elected president.
Why not?
PM: The answer is, that in our system of Government, the most democratic
institution is the diffuse power of the House of Representatives. The
diffuse democracy, representative democracy, that we see at the
House of Representatives where every member of Parliament is
elected from a constituency where they go home at weekends and
relate to it, where they have an electorate office and where you see
the great public issues come and go, where the parliamentary system
responds to it, whether it be the preservation of our forests or
Aboriginal health or whatever the issues you have seen in this last
year, the Government respond to, change its position because we are
all out there in a representative system feeling our way with our
democratic process. But, if only one person in the system is elected
and aggregates substantial power to that position the whole system
changes. The House of Representatives is diminished.
FK: So, what you are saying is they have more votes than say the Prime
Minister?
PM: No, no, not more votes just that diffuse power is better and more
trustworthy for the country. More effective, more practical, more
reliable, more sound than one person. That is one person being the
embodiment of the nation invested with great powers. So, if we are
going to vest considerable powers in such person, the source of the
power should be constrained. That is why the Government accepted
the Republican Advisory Committee Report's recommendation that the
House of Representatives and the Senate sitting in joint session,
should by two thirds majority elect such person. 
FK: Is there a danger in that position though for you electorally because it
immediately alienates the 75 per cent or more people who currently
say in the polls that they want to elect the president?
PM: No, I don't think so because they say that when asked: " do you want
to elect a president?" ' oh, yes'. But if you say to them ' well look, you
realise if you elect such person that the whole system of government
changes'. You see, I am the Prime Minister, but I was not elected
Prime Minister by the public at large. I was elected Member for
Blaxland. I was chosen by my party as the leader and appointed by
the Governor-General to be Prime Minister. I was not elected Prime
Minister and I could be unelected tomorrow morning. In the same way,
for instance, as my predecessor Bob Hawke was or his predecessor.
The same with Ministers. In other words, there is no one above the
system, larger than the system, so larger or so far above it as to
actually change it. As to make this representative democracy
impractical or do substantially shift the power from the executive and
the Parliament to one person.
FK: You mention in your plan it would need a two thirds Parliamentary
majority to elect the President. Some of your opponents have already
pointed out the fact that Malcolm Fraser was only one vote off that in
1975 and it could be the case that we have a two third government
majority.
PM: Well, if he had a majority of two-thirds in 1975, he was entitled to say
who the person was. I mean, if the Liberal and National Parties...
FK: So it could be, in fact, if we had a Government majority of two-thirds
that could just then go ahead and appoint the President of their wish?
PM: Just like Prime Minister's in the past have exclusively appointed
Governors-General by proposing to the Queen a certain person. Well,
technically, the Queen appoints the Governor-General, but on the
nomination of the Prime Minister. But frankly, if a party had two-thirds
but you understand, there has never been a case in the post-War
years when any party has had a two-thirds majority.
FK: One vote off though that's pretty close.
PM: Well, if Malcolm Fraser was one vote in both Chambers from a twothirds
majority, and he had let's say, 2 more votes, in my view he is
entitled to make the nomination. I mean, what's so terrible about that?
FK: You have also dismissed the idea of a people's convention it's a
notion that will sell well in the community it sounds good.
PM; Yes, but it's a fraud you understand, it's fraudulent? Because the
convention can't initiate the proposal. Under the Constitution, there is 
only one place of initiation, and that's the Parliament. There is no
power under the Constitution for a convention. You see, this is not the
1890s when we had a convention in the 1890s, in the 1890s the
convention's were the initiating body. There was no Constitution, there
was no Commonwealth of Australia, and there was no Parliament. But
now there is a Constitution, there is a Commonwealth of Australia, and
there is a Parliament. Under that Constitution, only the Parliament can
initiate referenda. So, that's why all of the Constitutional conventions
have failed they can only be, at best, advisory, and you heard what
Mr Howard said, cynically, and his predecessor " oh yes, we would
have a convention", " but Mr Howard, would you adopt that which the
convention says?", " oh no, no not necessarily".
FK: But it also allows Mr Howard to say that they would give...
PM: What do they think they are coming at?
FK: They say it gives them the opportunity for the people to have the
Constitution they want, rather than the republic Keating wants? That's
a very powerful line out in the electorate, isn't it?
PM: No it's not a powerful line at all it's completely fraudulent. The
people the greatest expression of the democracy of the people is by
referendum. I mean, the people are quite conscientious about this
thing they know that their power is in the ballot box. They know that it
is entirely their choice you can't have a republic, or any other
constitutional change, without securing the support of a majority of
voters, in a majority of states, and a majority overall. So, it is the most
democratic operation. But, a so-called people's convention what, a
state Government sending 10 MP's? Or a collection of their
community interest groups? I mean, they are of their essence elitist.
They are not people's conventions, and they never were.
FK; Well, you emphasised in your speech that their would be widespread
public consultation...
PM: Indeed.
FK: Is that an attempt to offset this criticism, or this line...
PM: No -just to listen.
FK: that a people's convention is a more democratic way of going?
PM: I have demonstrated, I think to you, categorically, that it is not
democratic. Because, for a start, under the Constitution, its decisions
can't be implemented. What's democratic about that? What can be
more democratic than a referendum and a vote by the Australian
people... 
EK: Well, after widespread
PM: . just a sec, if the Government is then prepared as it has been to
propose a model, and has listened now after having the Turnbull
Committee produce a report and adopted its principle recommendation
if after having done that and remember that Committee did consult
very widely, and was made up of a representative group of people, a
couple of people who are members of the Coalition, Constitutional
experts etc in the course of the period between now and when a
referendum is put, the Government will listen to community opinion. I
mean, there is no doubt in my mind that the presentation of these
proposals yesterday fall on much more receptive ears than say 18
months ago. There is no doubt that the vat is maturing.
FK: So you think the debate is happening out there in the community?
PM: We have got wine in there we mightn't have Grange Hermitage, but
we have got wine in there. And what we had was grape juice, 18
months or two years ago. I mean, the community opinion is forming,
and maturing, and therefore I think they will receive these proposals
well, and the Government will pay due regard to the shifts in opinion
about this, just as it did, say, recently, on things like the timber
industry, or the environment, or aboriginal health. In other words, we
will be listening, and talking but remembering that the Parliament is
the initiating body of a referendum.
FK: Well, how much change would you wear to this plan, then?
PM: It's not immutable, and we will listen to what people have to say. But if,
for instance, what the Coalition says that we want to bog it down in an
elitist Constitutional convention which has no powers, and for which
they say will not accept the decisions of such a convention because
John Howard is utterly indecisive and into obfuscation. I mean, it's a
very simple question, just by the way. The question is should an
Australian be the Australian head of state? It's not a complex
question.
FK: Isn't the next question it is complex?
PM: Just a sec why can't he say yes or no? I mean, I think what John
Howard has to tell us tonight is where he stands on the simple
question does he believe an Australian one of us should be our
head of state, or not? If he says, " I believe in a convention which
discusses, I believe in the current Constitution, and I believe in a
convention which will discuss the powers of the Senate, the external
affairs power', you know that he has basically passed the parcel he
has copped out. But he is, completely and totally, indecisive. Now, 
that's why, in this country, nothing happens unless the Labor Party
gets it cracking, and we have done this again with the republic.
J: But are you being slightly less honest here by saying the only question
is should we have an Australian head of state? Isn't the next question
one that is going to cause quite a lot of confusion potentially, what will
the powers of that person be? Don't we need to codify them, shouldn't
we write them down?
PM: No, what we will say in the Constitution is that most of the things the
Governor-General does now each day, the President of the
Commonwealth of Australia will do on ministerial advice. There will be
only those very few matters on those very rare occasions where these
so called reserve powers have to be used. And let's take the history,
we are five years off from the century and only once in the century has
there been any controversy over these powers and that was in 1975.
J: In 1975 it was quite a vicious and divisive controversy
PM: And it was resolved.
J: Why are you allowing that situation to emerge again?
PM: Well because you can't get agreement about writing these powers
down. I mean, you are saying why would I allow that? If I said to
John Howard tomorrow morning that the President of the
Commonwealth of Australia was not entitled to dismiss a Government,
who could not guarantee supply through the Senate, he wouldn't
agree. And, therefore, there will be substantial disagreements about
these things. Better to leave the power on a contingent basis and it is
I think no bad thing that in this country for the next 100 or 200 years,
and that is what we are thinking of, that there is a power there because
to try and write them down, how can you foresee what the powers
might need to be? But let's make sure that the source of the power,
that is the election of the head of state, is from the representative
chambers the House of Representatives and the proportional power
of the Senate and that way, nobody is walking around the system
saying " I am the deputy of an English monarch, I am hearing voices
from God, I have a higher duty". They are really getting the power
from those chambers and that power can be taken back by the same
two-thirds majority.
J: Talking about hearing voices of God, there are those who are opposed
to your plan, who think that that is how you want to set yourself up and
you want to do more than just a republic. You want to change the
powers of the Senate, reduce the powers of the Senate, change the
powers of the State. 
PM: Well I made it very clear last night that none of that is in the
Government's proposal. I mean it just a matter of record. The
Government's proposal doesn't go to any of those matters and you
might know that in the speech I referred to the report of the
West Australian Parliament, under the current Coalition Government of
Western Australia, which looked at the minimalist option and said that
it in no way changed the nature of the relationship between the
Commonwealth and the States. So, in the end, red-herrings sure,
opponents of this will drag the red-herrings out, but they won't last a
day those red-herrings.
J: Mr Keating what do you say to those Australians who passionately
don't want a republic, passionately are devoted to the English
monarchy? What do you say to those people if they do get left
behind?
PM: The first thing I would say is, I understand very well the basis of those
sentiments, but it can never be right that the Australian head of state is
the monarch of another country. It must be an Australian person, it
must be one of us.
J: Does it mean, though, that we now hate Britain, that we now don't love
the Queen?
PM: But you are not entitled to ask that question when you saw the
sentiments I expressed last night about our British heritage, the
strength of the Parliamentary system that we have had from it, our
affection for the Queen and our links with Britain, both in peace and
war, Prime Minister Major's recent view of a year or so ago, that we
should have a modern relationship. These are all things that I heartily
endorse. I mean for my part, I have a very good relationship with Her
Majesty and I wrote a letter to her yesterday, covering the speech,
indicating to her that some of the proposals there were things that I
discussed with her at Balmoral.
J: Mr Keating, just finally, where does this process go from here? How,
in your words, do you get this, turn this, into Grange Hermitage?
PM: Well, I think, now there is a set of proposals. You see if you just go
back a little bit, after the Republican Advisory Committee Report came
down and I said a few things about it and a couple of other Ministers
did, people said " oh look the politicians should stay out of this, leave
this to the public, leave it to a public debate". We said okay, right.
A year or so down the track, we have had Mr Turnbull and others
coming out saying " what is the Government doing about our Report?
It is time they responded." In other words, they needed a Government
proposal. Well last night they got one and that Government proposal
will now see the third stage of the debate. The first stage was the
presentation by me, in the policy speech in 1993, saying that the 
Labor Party believes we should have a republic before the turn of the
century. The second stage was the commission of the Republic
Advisory Committee Report. The second stage debate, finished last
night. That was the beginning of the third stage. A set of proposals
from the Government. Now there will be a process of consultation and
listening by the Government to see in which way those proposals
might be varied and how and when the Government proposes a
referendum.
J: And have you heard back from the Queen?
PM: Oh no I haven't and I wouldn't expect to. But not only courtesy, but
appreciation demands that she be treated entirely properly and taken
into our confidence.
J: Mr Keating thank you.
PM: Thank you indeed.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ANNIVERSARY OF THE RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT
MELBOURNE, 9 JUNE 1995
Thank you very much for inviting me to this celebration of the
Anniversary of the Racial Discrimination Act.
This was a very brave piece of legislation. It came at a time of great change in
Australia at a time when a lot of the old attitudes were beginning to show
signs of crumbling away, and some inevitably were resisting fiercely.
New ways of thinking about Australia and about social and economic issues,
and what sort of country we could establish here were beginning to get a
foothold. Quite a few of those ideas have stood the test of time. In their legislated form
they are now enshrined in our democracy and they go some way to defining
our civilisation here.
They stand as a bulwark against the old prejudices.
It is worth recaling the context in which this Act came into being.
It was less than a decade since the referendum which put Aboriginal
Australians on the census. It was only a few years since the practice of taking
Aboriginal children from their families had ended. The attitudes from which
those things flowed were still very common.
Australia was a multicultural society in 1975, but we had not yet begun to lay
the framework of programs which have made cultural diversity. a considerable
and distinct national strength.
Much of the progress we have made since then has been underpinned by the
Racial Discrimination Act.
That is not to say that anyone was ever under the illusion that we could
legislate to abolish prejudice. And opponents of the Racial Hatred Bill really
should not pretend that we are under such an illusion. 2) 
Legislation like this does not spring from any utopian vision of society or
human nature. It springs from recognition of the less than perfect reality.
And it doesn't spring from a wish to punish the perpetrators of racism, but from
a desire to protect its victims.
I think that this is the essential point: we come to understand the necessity for
this kind of legislation when we put ourselves in the position of the victims of
racial discrimination or vilification or worse.
Perhaps we understand even better when we ask ourselves how we would feel
if our children were made victims.
A Racial Hatred Bill is directed at more than the purveyors of racial hatred. It
aims to limit the hatred generally. If by warning people, or by sending them a
signal that it is not acceptable in Australian society, we reduce the incidence of
racism, we make for a society less divided and more at peace.
Legislation like this serves to remind the victims of racial prejudice that their
country will protect them.
It is a reminder to minorities that a democratically elected parliament has
decided that discrimination or vilification is unacceptable; that it is hostile to
the values of the majority of Australians, outside the boundaries of what
Australia is and what Australia stands for, that they are inside and the racists
are outside, that they are of the great majority and the racists are of an extreme
minority. I think opponents of this kind of legislation miss the mark.
When they say as they did in 1975 and as the same voices are saying about
the Racial Hatred Bill today that such legislation is " draconian" they are
thinking, it seems to me, in a context which is much too narrow and legalistic.
The Racial Discrimination Act followed the wording of the International
Convention for the Elimination of All Racial Discrimination and made it
unlawfuil for anyone to make distinctions or to afford preferences, on the
grounds of race, colour, descent or national ethnic origin.
Inevitably, Voltaire was trotted out. And, on the face of it, it does seem to
contradict the great liberal precept: " I disagree with what you say, but I will
defend to the death your right to say it".
I wouldn't presume to know what Voltaire would have made of this legislation;
but I do know that the notorious history of the 20th century makes very clear
that tolerating racial prejudice is extremely dangerous to all liberal societies. 
And I also know that as a Government we have a responsibility to protect our
citizens against words which are for them blows which inflict pain of a kind
that, if it were physical, would bring charges of assault.
In 1975 we might have been inclined to think, living such a long way from the
rest of the world, that somehow our responsibility in this was diminished.
But of course it was not.
We had among us then, as we have now, many Australians who are here
because of racial persecution in other countries.
And we have Australians among us who have been here for much longer
50,000 years or so longer and whose culture and lives have been all but
destroyed by racial prejudice.
We also have and we had in 1975 a society comprised of people from all the
countries of the world. And we had to make that society a peaceful and
harmonious one.
Remember, in 1975 we were only a few years clear of that policy which
embodied Australian racial prejudice the White Australia Policy.
Twenty years later, we can honestly say that our cultural pluralism is one of our
great national successes. That is not an exaggeration.
Those of us old enough to remember Australia in the fifties and sixties
remember some very pleasant things: it was, at least until the Vietnam War, in
some many respects a quiet, simple, seemingly innocent place.
But it also had the malaise of xenophobia. This was apparent not just in the
White Australia Policy but in much else in our thinking about the world. It was
also apparent in the attitudes which were most offensively manifested in
Aboriginal policy.
For those of us old enough to remember, the distance we have travelled as a
society since then is simply extraordinary.
I don't suggest for a moment either that we have made this progress because of
the Racial Discrimination Act, or that we can now sit back and congratulate
ourselves on creating one of the world's most tolerant multicultural societies.
This society is not free of prejudice, and we cannot not even say that the trend
is ineluctably towards tolerance.
None of us can ever justify complacency on this. All of us have to engage
ourselves in the difficult questions of how we make sure that Australia
continues to be a tolerant society and becomes one which is more tolerant. 
The role of the Racial Discrimination Act and for that matter the Sex
Discrimination Act and the Racial Hatred Bill is not to punish every act of
prejudice, but to make clear that tolerance and justice are things we live by and
goals to which we aspire.
These Acts and Acts and institutions like the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission, the Native Title Act and, say, Medicare in some
ways constitute our Bill of Rights.
It is a more pragmatic, less rhetorical, legislative approach but after 20 years, I
am a bit inclined to think that it works at least as well.
As I said, legislation alone is not enough. Education will take us a lot further.
Probably the best thing we can do to eliminate prejudice is to eliminate the
poverty traps; create opportunity; keep in place a safety net while
encouraging people to maintain their cultural difference, and give them every
reason to have faith in this country.
And seeing the advantages which flow from living without prejudice or envy or
hatred will take us further still. These things are building blocks their success
encourages more success.
That is why we encourage the notion of an inclusive society. It is why we talk
about bringing people in from the margins and not leaving anyone on the edges
or anyone behind.
It is also why, might I say, I think it is so important that before the end of the
century we decide to elect one of our own as Head of State why we should
become a republican Commonwealth of Australia.
It is because by doing this we have a unique chance to symbolically define
contemporary Australia and in doing so enshrine those attitudes and ambitions
and those social realities which now distinguish us.
By making an Australian our Head of State at the turn of the century, we can
say to the world and to our children this is a country which believes in its
contemporary self.
And the reality of that contemporary self is, among many other things, a belief
in the value of tolerance and the evil of prejudice.
Not a belief in our capacity to abolish prejudice or make tolerance the universal
condition of humanity in Australia, but a belief that these are things which must
be fought for.
And which Australia should number among its ambitions. 
Which say that racism is wrong, that racial vilification and incitement to racial
violence is wrong.
And because it harms our fellow citizens and the peace, cohesion and harmony
of our society, it is also illegal.
This is why the Racial Discrimination Act is a landmark Act and one we
should celebrate.
There are many people who deserve to be acknowledged today.
I can name only a handful.
I could begin with Eddie Mabo, or with a large number of Aboriginal leaders I
have come to know and immensely respect in the last few years.
I think it is appropriate, as we are acknowledging an Act which is now 20 years
old, to pay tribute to those who have made contributions along the way.
There are too many to mention, including a great many leaders from the ethnic
communities. I don't think any of us should forget that Malcolm Fraser was a founder of
multicultural Australia and a consistent supporter of the principals which
underlied it.
But the ultimate thanks must go to the people who engineered the Racial
Discrimination Act I mean the late Lionel Murphy and Kep Enderby,
Al Grassby and of course the leader of the epoch, Gough Whitlam.
The Racial Discrimination Act got through agaist great opposition. Almost by
definition, ground-breaking legislation nearly always faces bitter opponents.
But it was good legislation and it has done Australia good.
And I don't think anyone here doubts that it will be here in another 20 years
time and I sincerely hope in another hundred.
Ends 



Pif f
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
PEOPLE'S CONVENTION
The Opposition Leader's latest position on his so-called " people's convention" is further
confirmation that his plans are a blueprint for obfuscation.
It is now absolutely clear that he has no intention of answering the simple question: does
he believe Australia should have an Australian as its Head of State?
He now says he is taking his convention a step further by claiming he would put its
outcome to a referendum and a Howard Government would support it if his convention
reached a consensus. But he would make half the appointments to the convention
thereby determining himself whether he wished there to be a consensus or not.
And a consensus about what? The external affairs power, four year terms, relations
with the states? The Republic might not in this context even get a look in.
Mr Howard is now saying that if no consensus is reached a full range of options would
be put to the people including a choice for the present system or for a popularly elected
President. This sounds like " pick-a-box" politics or a multiple choice test a referendum
is a vote on a Government proposal, the question cannot be a set of choices.
All of this is subterfuge to hide Mr Howard from making a real decision. It is a complete
abrogation of leadership to suggest nothing and support nothing.
Mr Howard does not want an Australian as our Head of State but he does not have the
leadership strength to say it. Just as Mr Howard is trying to hide his economic and
social policies from the Australian people so too is he trying to hide his position on the
Republic.
The Government will listen to the people before a referendum is put in 1998 or 1999
and it will then be the people who will decide the future shape of an Australian
Republic not a hand picked elitist meeting claiming to represent the nation.
CANBERRA 11 June 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR 110WARD BENDS TO ANY BREEZE
Mr Howard's response to the Government's proposal for an Australian republic is a very
sad ctimmentary on the state of his thinking about Australia.
He has bad more than two years to think about it, but his contortions of the past few days
make it plain that it was too hard for him. Since last Wednesday night, he and the rest of
the Opposition have been making it up as they have come under pressure for a considered
response. What we have seen in the past week, with the headland speech and Mr Howard's republic
response, is a leader not only unable to lead, but one who lacks policy substance on any
front. On the republic, Mr Howard's position now seems to be this: he would hold a " people's
convention" ( to which his Government would appoint half the delegates); and if the
convention arrived at a " consensus", his Government would put that consensus to a
referendum. If no consensus was reached at his convention, he would put a series of
" 1options" to a plebiscite, with one of the options being the retention of the Monarchy. If
the pr%. ferred option arising from the plebiscite was a republic, he would put that proposal
to a referendum though he and any Government he led could not in conscience support
it because he thinks the Constitutional Monarchy is best.
Until yesterday, Mr Howard would not answer the question which counts above all others
in this debate does he want an Australian to be Australia's head of state?
In this morning's press he did provide the answer. He said he didn't want an Australian as
our head of state he wants the Monarchy.
Mr Howard now says: " If the Australian people want a republic, the fact that I support the
present system need not be seen to be in the way." 
All those Australians who believe an Australian should be our head of state should take
note: Mr Howard says you can only have a vote on that when you have been through a
convoluted process designed and steered by him, a monarchist.
What chance would those Australians who want a republic have if a Howard Government
only dleigned to put a republic referendum under a sense of obligation? No such
referendum would have a snowball's chance in hell without the full commitment and
enthusiasm of the Government of the day. Mr Howard's option therefore effectively
mearns no republic.
Mr Howard's attempt to justify his convolutions over the last few days on the grounds that
they are more " consultative" and " pro-choice" is a manifest fraud. The Government has
put a considered proposal which will be put to a referendum the most democratic of all
acts of consultation. The referendum we propose will not take place for at least two and a
half years, in which time there will be extensive consultation and debate throughout the
community. If the referendum is defeated, the Monarchy remains, as it is now. That is the real
democ* ratic choice, provided for in the Constitution.
Now, in his desperation, Mr Howard apparently has seized on the erroneous idea that the
Government would put its referendum proposal to the people repeatedly, until it was
passed. This, of course, is a complete furphy.
The Opposition's response on this issue has been an exercise in high farce. It has left Mr
Howard looking pathetic. We have not seen its like since The Thingi that Matter. But
this is worse. 3Th igs that Matterreally didn't matter at all the republic does.
So does much else matter in the lives of Australians but of course Mr Howard has given
his word that he will not have anything coherent to say on these things either.
CANBERRA 13 JUNE 199S 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM,
THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RESUMPTION OF NUCLEAR TESTING BY FRANCE
On behalf of South Pacific Forum heads of government as current Chair of the Forum,
I condemn France's decision to resume nuclear testing in the South Pacific.
Individual Forum governments have already issued statements and protests that reflect
the depth of their disappointment. The immediate widespread public antagonism to
France's decision right across the South Pacific reflects the resentment felt by our
peoples.
Forum heads of government understand and share these feelings. On their behalf, I
express our unequivocal opposition to France's decision.
The statements that have been issued by other nuclear powers, and by other countries
in Asia and in other parts of the world are welcome. Forum leaders hope that France
will hear and take note of what the world is saying.
France has exercised a choice about the nature of its engagement in the South Pacific.
Forum members had welcomed the improved relations between France and countries
in the region. France's decision is a major setback to this trend which was partly
founded on its 1992 moratorium on nuclear testing in the South Pacific.
The wider implications of France's decision are also of deep concern to Forum heads of
government. France's decision undermines the outcome of the recent Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty Review and Extension Conference ( NPTREC). The decision is particularly
regrettable in the light of agreement reached at that conference, including by France,
that negotiations on a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty ( CTBT) should be completed
by no later than 1996 and that, pending such a treaty, nuclear weapon states would
exercise the utmost restraint. t'Vi 
The South Pacific Forum remains strongly committed to a CTBT as a key step in
global efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation and eventually eliminate nuclear
weapons. It offers the prospect of ending testing completely in the South Pacific as
elsewhere. The heads of government have noted President Chirac's commitment that
France would sign such a treaty. They will hold France to that commitment.
Heads of government also called on France to abide by the Protocols of the South
Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty.
I am in contact with my fellow heads of government about arrangements for a Forum
delegation to convey to the French Government the depth of the Forum's concern. I
envisage that the delegation would be led by the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator
Evans. CANBERRA JUNE 1995 



/ 211
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JULES RETRO, ABC RADIO 7ZR, HOBART,
JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
JR: Prime Minister Paul Keating welcome to Tasmania.
PM: Thank you Jules.
JR: You finally made it after the Budget.
PM: Well, generally, after each Budget we try and do the rounds and I am
glad to be here again.
JR: Okay can I talk to you briefly about the topic of the moment, the
announcement by the French that they are resuming nuclear testing in
the Pacific? It is a pretty big poke in the eye for us, isn't it? I mean
there has been uproar, there is outrage. I saw Acting Foreign Minister
Senator Bob McMullan on ABC Television's " 7.30 Report" last night,
in effect throwing up his hands and saying look, you know, there is not
much we can do. We can complain officially and loudly, but that is
about it. Would you go along with ACTU President Martin Ferguson's
suggestion that we, as Australians, boycott any and all French
products?
PM: Well I think he made the point which I agree with if Australians wish to
do that, that is a very tangible way of showing their contempt for the
path that France has chosen. I mean for the Government's part we
have said that we condemn the decision, that we deplore it and I made
clear today that that is our position and also announced that we have
consulted with the nations of the South Pacific through the
South Pacific Forum and that we will be sending a delegation to
France of South Pacific Forum countries, lead by Senator Evans, to
express our condemnation and to urge the French Government to
desist from these tests. 
JR: Well we are not alone there of course. There are many other
countries doing that. But you would then throw your weight and
influence behind that call by Martin Ferguson?
PM: Well I think it is a matter of, as I say, if people genuinely feel or they
feel for genuine reasons that they believe that they shouldn't be
buying French goods, well that I think is a tangible, useful expression
of their rejection of this. I think from the Government's point of view, as
you know, we have had this battle with France running now for many,
many years over this issue. We were very pleased when Francois
Mitterand suspended testing a couple of years ago. I think the only
and important solace to take from this is that President Chirac has said
that France will sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, which
should be completed no later than 1996. Now I think the rest of the
world, given that France is a nuclear power, will want to hold France to
that commitment because that is the commitment that matters because
there are a lot of problems now in the world. The Nuclear Nonproliferation
Treaty was far more effective than most people thought it
would be when it was signed in the 1970s. But since the decline of the
old Soviet Union, or the disbandment of it, with a lot of nuclear material
laying about, with these very old and badly supervised power stations
in the Ukraine, the Soviet high seas fleet now rusting away in various
ports with their nuclear materials degrading, all of these things, it is
important that they be brought under a Comprehensive Treaty to see
that there isn't the illegal transfer of nuclear materials. Getting
France's commitment to that is going to be important. So the President
of France has said that this would be an eight test program and then
they will sign up. I think the signing up is going to be important. It is a
very bad call by France to have the tests in the first place. I think this
is very much the Gaullist view, you know, ' we have to protect France'.
The way to protect France is basically to engage it with the rest of
world, with the rest of Europe, in these things like Australia does
chemical weapons treaties, nuclear and non-proliferation and not to
try and develop more sophisticated weapons.
JR: I would like to talk to you briefly about the Republic and the issues
surrounding that. It is a week now, just over a week, since you
delivered your preferred model for the Republic speech. All sorts of
people have now declared their position. The word inevitability has
been mentioned by Liberal Premiers. John Howard has..
PM: Well he declared his position too for the Monarchy.
JR: from possible to probable.
PM: No, he sort of lined up and said I still believe that the current system is
the best.
JR: Okay, but lots of other people have leaned in your direction, you might
say. Are you surprised at the momentum that has been generated in
that past week and would you, had you known how things would pan
out this week, have altered the content of your speech last week? 
PM: Well let me answer the second question first. No I wouldn't have.
I think that the model that the Government has chosen and set as its
preferred model, that is of a head of state, a President, chosen by a
majority of two-thirds of House of Representatives and the Senate
sitting in a joint session, but that person enjoying the same powers as
are currently enjoyed by the Governor General, seems to me to give us
the best of all worlds. That is, we end up with an Australian head of
state. The source of that person's power is a derivative power from the
two elected chambers of the Commonwealth the House of
Representatives and the Senate and yet the person has the powers
they need, or may need at some point in the future, to cover some
contingency. So I was not really that surprised that some members of
the Coalition came out and supported it because I thought thoughtful
members of the Coalition probably would.
JR: Is the Republic going to be an issue at the next election?
PM: I think it will be because I think it is very hard for..
JR: You want it to be?
PM: Yes, because I think that..
JR: John Howard doesn't, of course.
PM: No, because John Howard is happy for the Monarch of another country
to be our head of state and he doesn't want to see debate about the
full expression of Australian nationality, sovereignty, individuality,
identity. He doesn't want that. It is a very curious position he is in.
I mean how do you walk around saying, " I want to be the Prime
Minister of Australia and I so believe in who we are and what we have
become that I believe that our head of state must be not one of us, but
the Monarch of another country". I mean it is a tough position to be
arguing and it is almost, I think as Australia faces the turn of the
century and that is the sense of ourselves and our place in the region,
it is almost a disqualifier from anybody who wants to be the Prime
Minister of this country to say that one of us shouldn't be our head of
state.
JR: At the next election John Howard has pretty well made it plain that one
of the issues that is also going to be significant and he has admitted as
such, he is going to make your personality an issue. Do you accept
that your style of politics, your prescriptive brand of politics, the way
you do things..
PM: And getting it done.
JR: do you think it is going to be an issue?
PM: I call it getting the mail through. You see I have looked at all these
people, like Howard, in the past. They had power for years 
themselves and did nothing with it. When John Howard left, he left us
with double digit inflation, double digit unemployment, the biggest
Budget deficit in our history, declining competitiveness, our
manufacturing industries closing in every city. We were nowhere and
the terms of trade, that is the price of our minerals and wool and these
other things declining, we were in a parlous position.
JR: He could enumerate a similar list of your record as Treasurer, surely?
PM: No, no he could not. I mean we have had now 26 per cent
employment growth since 1983. We started with a workforce of
6 million, we have now got 8 million. We had five times as much
employment growth per year that he had every year that he was
Treasurer. We are looking at an inflation rate of around 2 to
3 per cent, he was never looking at anything under 10 per cent. As a
consequence, I believe, that you give a country leadership, you take
risks, you point the direction. Howard believes that you follow.
He believes that you pick up the polling data from the Party Secretary
and you go glibly out running the lines that they have been given.
Just take, for instance, on this nuclear issue. Yesterday he was saying
" the Government's response has been entirely appropriate". He has
obviously got some mail from his pollster and today he is saying
" 1no, no, we have got to crank it up a little bit, we need to crank it up
some more". On the Republic can you believe this, he wouldn't give
an answer to that simple question: ' Mr Howard do you believe an
Australian should be our head of state?' He wouldn't answer. Then he
went on on with this obfuscation and wriggling about process and
finally after five days, he sort of pinned himself down to putting a
referendum, but only if he thought a majority of his stacked convention
would actually agree with it. In other words, he faced up to test about
a Republic and failed it. I mean in the last week there were two
statements by Howard. One was the headland speech...
JR: Do you feel sorry for him?
PM: No, he is just not entitled to seek the job I have.
JR: Well let's move on.
PM: I mean other people are entitled to seek it, but not him. It has got to be
somebody that can...
JR: Who meets with your approval?
PM: No. Who believes in Australia and has got something to say and do.
You know, his headland speech was described by one commentator as
mulch, the republic speech was completely empty. Why does Australia
need, essentially, a sort of political vagabond without ideas, with a
fifties view of the world, as their Prime Minister?
JR: OK. Twenty-two minutes past five on ZR ( inaudible) across the state,
and joining us on the program Paul Keating, Prime Minister, is our 
guest. Just a little bit more on the next election one of the most, in
fact the most, marginal seat in the country has got to be Bass in the
North of the state Sylvia Smith is holding it by a mere handful from
Warwick Smith, who is the re-endorsed Candidate. [ The] Labor Party
currently holds four out five ( electorates] not by wide margins at all
and Tasmania, of course, is an early very early indicator of how
things were swinging in the last election. It could be pretty important
how things go in the next one?
PM: Indeed. And I think we have earned the right to hold those seats,
Jules, and to win the fifth. Because if you look at the principle
commitments the Government gave at the last election, were to restore
growth to the economy, and employment. We have 630,000 job
growth since the last election. 630,000. The economy has been
growing somewhere between 4 per cent and 5 per cent through that
period. I mean, they are the most difficult things to deliver and to
deliver them with low inflation. So, in terms of the fidelity of the
Government's commitments to it's commitments at the last election -I
believe we have been faithful to them. And if you look at Tasmania, all
of the extra employment that has come in Tasmania since the last
election, has come from Federal Government programs. You have got
a Coalition Government down here, a Conservative Government, that
hasn't been able to do despite the national trend anything with
growth in Tasmania, and were it not for things like we did this
afternoon the Antarctic program, or the grants, or the Landcare
program I was associated with this morning, or the labour market
programs if you net out the employment in Tasmania from
Commonwealth programs, Tasmanian employment has actually shrunk
since the last election.
JR: Well, here's an idea for some extra growth, possibly, certainly in
tourism and to reduce the sense of isolation and separation from
Australia that many Tasmanians have take the case of a family
travelling across Bass Strait either direction, it doesn't matter. They
want to take the car, okay? It costs something like so I am told
$ 500 extra if you travelled the equivalent distance on the mainland.
Now, a scheme to equalise that cost, I'm told again, would cost
something like $ 29 million about the equivalent of building
kilometres of good quality highway a $ 29 million scheme to equalise
the cost of crossing that body of water, which would promote the tourist
trade, which would reduce, as I say, the sense of isolation that many
Tasmanians experience, and would do a tremendous amount for
growth. And it has got bi-partisan approach Bob Collins, Federal
Transport Minister, is looking at it at the moment....
PM: What is he looking at on that at the moment?
JR: Whether it's of sound principle?
PM: If he is, I mean, that's fine with us. I mean, we have kept the support
for cross-Tasman traffic going now for many years most obviously in
the freight equalisation scheme... 
JR: It's still more expensive to live here than in many other capitals.
PM: Yes, that may be true. But we have an efficient air transport system
which works right around the country you know, since the Federal
Government de-regulated the airline system, air fares have dropped by
per cent and the number of people travelling has risen by
63 per cent.
JR: But if you want to travel by a car across the Tasman...
PM: I know that. Let's take me I go to Queensland occasionally, I go there
for holidays, I don't take my car with me I fly. And
JR: It's a lot bigger than Tasmania?
PM; I know, but it's still a long way. I mean, from Sydney to Cairns is a lot
longer distance than from Sydney to Hobart. But, let me make this
point I think that what Tasmania... Tasmania has got some great
strengths it has some natural strengths, it has some developed
strengths you can see that in the technological base of the state, you
can see it in the innovation, you can see it in the scientific things I saw
this afternoon the Antarctic. You can see it in things like the
catamarans, you can see it in some of the other high technology
products...
JR: But what deters people from coming here is the cost.
PM: But I'm just making this point I think Tasmanians have got to believe
that they can do anything that can be done on the mainland, and when
that belief permeates through the state government which persists in
this sort of victim mentality: this Coalition view that the place is sort of
victimised just means that businesses stay away from it. They say,
" look, this is not a psychology I want to get tied up with this is not a
winning psychology". And I think all of this sort of general stuff that
says " you know, look, we are disadvantaged we want this and that",.
in other words " we are being preyed upon". Instead of taking the view
" look, we are as good as anybody, we can do our best, we have got
the scientific institutions here, we have got the educations system, we
have all the opportunities, let's think positively, and let's oblige our
state government to think creatively", then you will find businesses
both growing here, and businesses from the mainland coming here.
But, whenever businesses which can lift investment and lift
employment run into this sort of view, " look, basically, we are either all
' ruined, or we are victims, or we don't have a positive enough view of
ourselves" it's poison to them. They just stay right away from it, and I
think that's the thing that matters most. Just have a look at
Queensland Queensland has really got the wind behind its sails. We
used to hear this sort of talk from Queensland not in the last 4 or
years. Look at the result it's tearing away. it's growing way beyond
the national average. 
JR: Mr Keating, interest rates. Since the Federal Election, you and
Federal Treasurer Ralph Willis have, on any number of occasions,
said " look, it's all in place the climate is now established for a drop in
interest rates". Reserve Bank Governor Bernie Fraser to an
overseas audience said forget it he has ruled out a cut in interest
rates. He even said " look, they might even go up before they come
down" that's at odd with what you have been saying.
PM: Look, he was asked by somebody in the financial market in London,
and he said " interest rates could rise, fall or stay where they are we'll
just see'. The main thing he said is that the Government has put into
place a solid Budgetary change. And I think people need to
understand let me just give you these figures Jules: Last year, the
Commonwealth sold $ 21 billion worth of bonds, $ 21,000 million worth
of Commonwealth bonds. As a result, the Budget changed. This year
we will need to sell only $ 6 billion. So we have relieved the bond
selling program of $ 15,000 million. If you are selling fewer bonds,
what happens is the price of bonds rises and the yields drop. That is
why long term bonds have fallen by over 1 percentage point since the
Budget and that is a fall in the market. The ten year bond rate is set in
the market, it is not set by the Reserve Bank, it is set in the market.
So if the market, which has already dropped the long term interest rate
by around 1 per cent, over 1 per cent, and we have already seen the
banks drop their fixed rates by 1/ 2 per cent or there abouts. What
Mr Fraser is saying is we will be looking at the longer term portents in
the economy, for wages, inflation, before there is any further
movement. In other words, he is reflecting general Government policy.
Mr Howard ran out immediately with an opportunist line saying
" yakkety yak, yakkety yak, blah, blah, blah, if rates fall down, if rates
fall down it will only be Mr Keating manipulating them down".
The Government will be manipulating nothing. If rates fall, they will fall
for completely legitimate reasons, that is the reasons for a primary
change in fiscal policy.
JR: So Bernie Fraser and the independence of the Reserve Bank is
guaranteed, cast in iron?
PM: The Reserve Bank shares a responsibility under the Reserve Bank Act
to set interest rates in consultation with the Government and that is
where they have been set in the past, last year, that is where they will
be set in the future. But I think the Governor is wisely saying to people
. he is really saying to the markets here, who were getting a bit of a
sort of, what shall we say, thinking they were on the gold seam, " here
we come, rates just sort of plummeting as low as we would like to take
it". He is just reminding them, " hang on, look there is a few other
things here, wages, inflation. We have got low inflation, we have got
good wage outcomes, we want to keep them. Don't jump to
conclusions, just let the natural course of things go" and I can only
endorse that view.
JR: Mr Keating, final question. Freshly elected New South Wales Premier,
Labor man Bob Carr, proudly showed off his new Australian made 
wool suit just a couple of days ago and he rather pointedly said well
look what I have got, this is an Australian made suit Merino Gold
I believe the brand was, or the type of wool, I am not sure but, as
I say, he rather pointedly said I am supporting the Australian textile
industry. I wonder who he was possibly sending a message to? Might
it be time for you to hang up your Zegna, your Italian suit. Maybe
some
PM: Well I am not just supporting the textile industry, I am supporting the
coal industry, the petroleum industry, the agricultural industries,
secondary industry, product innovation. When I became Treasurer,
we exported 13 per cent of our GDP. We are now exporting
22 per cent. GDP this year is $ 500 billion. 9 per cent of it is worth
billion of exports.
JR: So wearing an Australian made suit
PM: So when Bob Carr he has probably got about $ 44,999 million to
catch up with me.
JR: You have got a good calculator in your head.
PM: I have, I know because these numbers have been running through my
mind for so long.
JR: Mr Keating thank you for spending time with us this afternoon. Enjoy
the rest of your short stay in Tasmania.
PM: Good on you Jules.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, SHERATON HOTEL, HOBART, THURSDAY, 16 JUNE 1995
6&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: You might know that overnight I wrote to members of the South Pacific
Forum, as the Chair of the Forum this year expressing Australias
condemnation at the decision by the Government of France to resume
nuclear testing at Mururoa Mtf and I have sinCe had communIcations
back frorm Forum country leaders wishing to join with Australia In a formal
statement and protest condemning France's decision to resume nuciea
testing In the South Pacific.
I proposed to the Forumn member countries and their governments that
there be a delegation from Australia, that Is led by Australia, with the
Forum mnembers to France seeking a meeting with the government of
France to say that we think this decision is deplorable and should be
desisted from. That Is, desist from any further program of testing of
weapons. Can I say more generally, this Is not a necessary thng. I believe, for the
government of France to do. It is a pity thot a country of such substance
should needlessl undertake such a program when the thing that will
protect the French people Is engagement with the rest of the world and
understanding and not a 1990s version of the Maginot line. What will help
Franoe most is enggement with bt neighbours In Europe end
engagement Wth the rest of the* world which, in the peidsince the
cestion of nuclear testing, France was seeking to do with some
sccnmpishment That is, to engage other countries and to be part of the
world dialogue, In doing this, in a sense, coming from that sort of Gaullist
view of the world, that part of the role of the French government Is to
protect the French people rings a little hollow now after the cessation of
the Cold War and the fact that the problems now to be dealt with are far
more complex such as remving the nuclear power stations in the old
' z
I J JU I I. 1) 0.4 1 * q U U I Cr 
. jurl ' D 0 0 iNO. UI r. L
2
Soviet Union, taking that threat away from continental Europe, removing
the stock piles of nuclear weapons, cleaning up nuclear sites all over
Europe and northern Europe and eastern Europe. These are the things, I
think, are more a danger to the French people than something which may
be deterred through the further development of an offensive nuclear
weapon capability.
So, it is a wilful and regrettable decision and one which will do the French
people and the French government no good. At any rate, we will be
expressing our opinion forthrightly and directly and doing so in the
company of Forum country representatives and Senator Evans will be
leading that delegation.
J: Prime Minister, what more could you say to those in the ALP, in particular,
who are concerned about the perceived softness of the Government's
original response especially by Gareth Evans?
PM: I don't think it was soft. We said we deplored the decision. I said that we
deplored the decision. Today we are saying we condemn it. There is not
much more we can say than that. What we are saying is that the way to
express our rejection of this notion of testing Is to do it in a way where we
make our views clear, but at the same time and I think the government of
France has made its position dear, that Is It is going to go its wilful way
unless world community opinion changes its mind. Now, apparently, I
haven't seen the text but President Chirac has said something about that
sort of an approach this morning something negative but that will not
deter us from sending a delegation there.
J: Do you believe there Is any case for concrete trade sanctions against the
French?
PM: Well. you have got to remember, I think, and this is what the Foreign
Minister has pointed to, what we want the French and all other people In Is
a comprehensive test ban treaty. Now, the world is becoming a much
nastier place. You have got a lot of ex-Soviet weaponry laying around the
place. You have got a lot of nuclear scientists from the old Soviet Union
wandering around the world with their wares. You have got the Soviet
fleet, Pacific fleet, rotting away up in Vladivostok and all those reactors
exposed to the atmosphere. You have got potential diversion of nuclear
fuels to some now non-weapon states. What is going to matter to the
world is getting a comprehensive treaty negotiated. President Chirac has
said France will be In this. We want to hold the French to it. So, let's
make sure our response is right and not a wrong headed response which
really does damage to the one treaty that matters.
I mean, when the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in the 1960s people
gave it very little hope of doing anything. In fact, it has been far more 
3
successful at containing weapons proliferation than many people ever,
ever imagined. But now, we are reaching another difficult epoch in the
nuclear story. That is, formerly the weapons of formerly nuclear weapon
states and the spread and drift of these technologies are such that we
need something more comprehensive than the NPT. That is what Is now
in prospect. I think, this Is a great interational opportunity, even the
French understand this. It is more the pity that they put their credentials at
risk In doing this before hand, but still the commitment Is there. That is
why, I think, Australia has the right response and to seek to move to trade
sanctions which will have no effect on the French, in fact, may end up
damaging Australian interest more than theirs Is not the right response.
People have also said, ' oh well, we should undo any co-operative mlitary
activity we have with them now', but a lot of that is about surveillance
activities in the Pacific for the benefit of Pacific island nations. So, there IS
not much sense In that either.
So, I think, we have got the response as we should have it. but let there be
no doubt In the minds of the French how wilful and unnecessary we
believe this is. How much it files in the face of a sensible participation by
France In a comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and how when the rest of the
world has always looked to France for International leadership, and often
has got it, this is not one of these occasions.
J: Do you think the union movement then has over-reacted by calling for
some bans on French companies and calling for consumer bans?
PM: It is not a matter of whether they have over-reacted. It is a matter of
whether one can deliver things that matter. Keeping the response
proportional to what they have done is important It Is a measure of our
maturity. And, can I say, that In many respects the relationship with
France in the last few years has gone quite well. I personally restarted it in
1988 with Premier Rocard and as a consequence of that I proposed to him
that we reserve Antarctica as a wilderness park for the next half century.
As you know, that actually happened and so while one can reasonably lay
a charge of environmental vandalism at the French in Mururoa, you can't
lay the charge to them about Antarctica.
J: do you believe ( Inaudible)
PM: Hang on, it is a news conference. It is not for you.
J: So how big a set back Is this to our relationship with France?
PM: It Is a set back because, I think, Australia Is developing an independent
and quite strong dialogue with the French, but this must be true of many
countries with France. But, President Chirac has put this at risk with this
action which Is now receiving international condemnation as it should.
-j -1 L I I ; d jz-iu ui r u 
4
J: But, does it soften our response, I mean he is not really worth putting at
risk because he gets to have his cake and eat it too?
PM: No, he doesn't get to have his cake and eat it too. This opinion will be
registered, but nor do we want to see one of the weapon states of the
world not be part of the comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and not be a
participant In the problems. I mean, these are real problems. The
problems that people In this country don't often think about like the rotting
carcasses of those power stations in the Ukraine, like the rotting carcasses
of those ships at Vladivostok. They are not on the lips of everybody, but
they are on the minds of the Australian goverment
J: Prime Minister, on a different issue, do you think that Bernie Fraser's
statements of a day ago about interest rates dampen the likelihood of a
further cut in the next couple of months?
PM: I just think the Governor was saying that which was obvious. That is, that
he was trying to warn markets of any notion of stampeding the
Government or the Reserve Bank along. That Is against the context of a
quite substantial fall In long term interest rates because you understand
that the long bond rate the 10 year bond rate is set not with any
reference to the Government, but in the market place and that has been
set because of the Budget parameters. Not in any artificial way. I notice
Mr Howard trying to glean some miserable political advantage from it
yesterday, what's left of his political hide after his fiasco on the republic.
Let me just say a couple of things about Mr Howard now that I have got an
opportunity. Two major statements in a week: The headland speech one
commentator described as mulch. The republic response completely
indecisive and incoherent. The thing to know about John Howard is he
stands for nothing. He looks pathetic because he stands for nothing. He
is just the same character he was in the late 1980s when the Liberal party
got rid of him as leader. A lot of people have been trying to reinvent him.
He is not capable of reinvention. And then yesterday, he came out and
said he is really for the Monarchy after all. Can you believe that? That
anyone today who believes In this country, what it has become, the notion
of what we think of ourselves, our complete right to be to independently
represent ourselves that somebody proposing of himself that he should
be the Prime Minster said ' oh no, by the way, I don't agree with that. I
believe that our head of state should be the monarch of another country.'
Can you believe that? That Is where he stands.
Then, in that fiasco he walks out and then tries to say that any fall in
interest rates will be politically motivated. The fall you see in interest rates
to date over one percentage point on 10 year bonds came not from
political motivation, but by the strength of a major economic change in the
.-1J U . Z I O U I r 
ID. Jun No. 017 P. O
Budget. In other words, falls in interest rates In this country, whether they
are ones we have had or any in the future, will come from the value of the
public policy changes. Not by some manipulation of the Reserve Bank.
These were empty charges which John Hewson used to make and that
former Reserve Bank governor said that relations with the Government
have been entirely proper, but he said you have got to be an insider to
know that this was not always so. This was a reference to Mr Howard's
period. So, what I would say to Australians is this: the Budget has eased the bond
selling program by $ 15,000 million. That is one of the reasons why the
long bond rate has fallen. It is one of the reasons why the fixed Interest
rates have fallen and any falls in interest rates, whenever they occur, will
come because of the soundness and quality of Government economic
changes. Not by any political manipulation.
J: Oo you think they will fall before the end of the year?
PM: I am not here to predict interest rates.
J: On the republican issue, what do you make of Ray Groom's move in
Tasmania. Is he moving too soon?
PM: I think it Is a refreshing change from the strait jacket which this
obscurantist Mr Howard has placed In the Liberal party in and for a Liberal,
in Mr Groom, to stand up and say that he believes it is inevitable that
Australia should become a republic and that Tasmania will test this notion
first In terms of the governorship, the replacement if you like, the
relationship between Tasmania and the British Crown is something which,
I think, is a position that the Liberal party in general should be taking. So, I
certainty support Mr Groom on this.
J; But is it reasonable for the State to go first?
PM: The greater purpose will be served with the nation making such a change,
but who are we to say and who am I to say ' oh no, Tasmanians have not
got a right to express an opinion about it and make a decision, if you like,
about'. They have and good on them.
J: Mr Howard was down here two weeks ago and has promised a special
package for Tasmania.
PM: Yes, well do tell me, do tell me. He has promised a special package for
Tasmania. Well, have a look at Tasmania under the hands of a Liberal
government. the only employment growth in Tasmania has come from
Federal Labor government programs. We have had this recovery on now
for three years and the only growth in employment in Tasmania has come 
6
from Federal Labor government programs. In fact, the private employment
base of the State has actually shrunk under a Liberal government in
Tasmania. This morning I was at a Landcare project and discussing with
some commonwealth officers in charge of Skillshare and some of the other
labour market programs the importance of getting young people trained
and into work. Could you Imagine Mr Howard gMng that any priority.
These are the very programs he actually wants to cut. So, when he comes
down here wandering around with his 1970s policies and his 1950s
philosophy saying ' he will give Tasmania a package'. Say ' sure you will
Johnny, sure you will'. Thank you.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE ALP BUSINESS DINNER, WREST POINT CASINO,
HOBART, 15 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am delighted to be in Tasmania again and I am particularly delighted to be
here with Michael Field. We were just saying some nice things about him at
the table. He wasn't hearing them, but we were saying nice things about him.
And what we were saying was that when Tasmania was really facing a great
difficulty just a few years ago with a tremendous problem in terms of its
expenditures and its receipts, in short its Budget, there were very few people
in the system, anywhere in this country, who could have taken that by the
scruff of the neck and made the sort of changes that this State really needed
to make and I think that the Tasmanian community is starting to appreciate
that now.
And I was Treasurer at the time and I certainly did and I can assure you that
when one went over the litany of State indices, by far and away the greatest
change in that period was under the leadership of Michael Field and I am
delighted now that we are seeing the polls changing here and they are for
one reason that is, that the Coalition Government here, the Liberal Party, is
again showing that if you end up with a Government adrift, the State goes
nowhere and I suppose that is best demonstrated by the fact that if you take
the employment in Tasmania that is here as a consequence of the
Commonwealth's programs, you take that out, in terms of, if you like, private
sector employment, employment has actually shrunk in the period of the
Groom Government and that is against that very big increase in employment
nationally.
We have had 630,000 job growth since the election of 1993. So it is an extra
special trick to make it go backwards. You know you haven't just got to be
mediocre to make it go backwards, you have really got to excel yourself. And
that drift, you know, all process and all show but no substance and no
change. 
I mean public life is only about change. I mean Duncan ( Kerr) was very
kindly paying me a compliment about change. But I do believe in change and
I just think we are only here for the changes in public life because the system
runs itself. I mean to be up here as a Minister saying well " here I am, I am a
Minister, I have got the car and I have got the office and the title but I am not
doing anything". You know what a way to live, what a way to live. But that is
how some of these characters live and in the Tasmanian Government that is
how they all live.
So public life is about public policy and about public change and if you are
not in the change business, well get out of the road and let someone more
enterprising, more ambitious, more courageous have a go. That is what
should happen here in Tasmania and that is what I think will happen. So I am
delighted, as I say, to be here tonight with Michael and I do really look
forward, sincerely, to a Tasmanian Government, under his premiership,
working with the Federal Labor Government because this State deserves
better than it is getting. It has got obstacles, but it has got very strengths,
Tasmania, and it deserves much better than it has had.
It wasn't that many years ago, 25 or 30 years ago, this State led the
Commonwealth just about in most things in industry, in labour, in most
things. This is not true today and there is no cause why that should be so.
So I am even more convinced of the need for the Federal Government's
programs to be operating here in Tasmania and we look at things Duncan
mentioned a couple of those statements, Working Nation is one. Getting the
long term unemployed back into work. Case managing people, getting to
understand their personalities, getting their confidence, understanding their
aptitudes, finding a place for them, giving them a subsidy, getting them back
into structured training.
These sorts of things are the things that will deal with problems of
communities that don't have that natural buoyancy and strength in
employment and where we owe this most particularly, of course, is to our
young people and I know in parts of Tasmania here youth unemployment is
very high and any community that is prepared to sacrifice the well being,
prosperity and peace of mind of our young people, isn't one that has a lot of
interest in its future and, therefore, I think again the things we have been able
to do, and I say we the Federal Government have been able to do, are
important. By the way, they are the very things that our opponents want to cut out:
labour market programs, the enormous spending on TAFE, all the things that
really go to the heart of communities in a position of economic disadvantage,
seem to be the things they want to be rid of. But they are the things, in
places such as this, in parts of this State where we need most.
You know I was talking this morning to a couple of officers who were
managing a couple of the Commonwealth programs, when we were looking at
this Landcare project this morning, and they were talking about their 
experiences and how successful they are in getting long term unemployed
people, including young people, back into training and back into work.
But nothing is ever going to take the place of entrepreneurship, of investment
and the raw employment that comes with it and I think all that means turning
around the sort of sense of self importance that Tasmania has, that sense of
prosperity about itself, and not being fed the line by sort of conservative
politicians that the State is in some way a victim of circumstances. It has got
every opportunity to really I mean you look at all the innovative things that
are done here, there is no reason why there can't be more of it and it doesn't
need to be fed patronising lines by politicians without ideas, as though the
State is in some sort of position of being, you know, victimised in the
Federation or not being supported nationally. It has every opportunity and,
in fact, the national Government the more it can sensibly do here, the better.
So, once again as I say, I look forward to having the opportunity to work with
Michael and really seeing it kick along and I thank you for joining us tonight.
I have the opportunity, obviously, with you to go over more generally some of
the directions that we are taking and why I think we are at a most exciting
time in our history. I mean a century ago, in this decade a century ago, was a
period of the greatest depression, the greatest drought and yet the greatest
sense of the nation, the greatest well-spring, the welling up of Australian
nationalism, of Australian endeavour, Australian identity and that went on,
of course, until it was snuffed out by the First World War and I only
reappeared again, briefly, in 1972. I hope it has reappeared more strongly in
this decade, one century later.
Because now, here we are at the foot of the fastest growing markets of the
world, we have never been in that position before. Our markets were
traditionally in Europe, with Britain, or in North America a long way from
here. We are now with them at the foot of these very large markets in a
country which is now so much more economically competitive than it used to
be. Australia today is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 1983, that is by
the exchange rate, wages and inflation 40 per cent. That is a phenomenal
number. Not 4, or 14: 40 per cent more competitive and, essentially, that is
what is driving our exports. A decade ago we exported 13 per cent of our
GDP. This year we are exporting 22 per cent and I was having a little
tete-a-tete on the radio tonight with a commentator at the ABC and he was
asking me about this and I said " well this year GDP is $ 500 billion. We are
exporting 9 per cent of GDP more, than we were before this Government
came to office. And 9 per cent of $ 500 billion is $ 45 billion." Just imagine
where our National Accounts would be if we didn't have that $ 45 billion in
there. We are now running a current account deficit of around $ 25 billion a year.
Just imagine where we would be without that growth. But just imagine the 
innovation that has been put there to make it happen and you can see it
happening right across the country in all sorts of things and the greatest
growth, of course, is in elaborately transformed manufactures. Things which
have innovation about them, have creativity about them, because one of the
country's great strengths, and I think our greatest strength, is our education
system and it is something that this Labor Government has put its back into
since 1983.
In 1983, only three kids in ten completed secondary school. This year that is
over eight in ten, which is a revolution really in education. We are streaming
per cent of those through universities, which means we have added to the
system about 18 or 20 universities of say 10,000 average campus size.
In other words, the capital city universities, we have added the equivalent of
18 to 20 of those to the system since 1985-86. And we have now in the One
Nation program, put about $ 1.2 billion into Technical and Further Education,
or vocational education, since 1992. So we are now seeking to build beside
the universities a competent and mature vocational education system so that
those 60 per cent who didn't go, who have never gone through and won't go
through, into tertiary education can find a place for themselves in the labour
market in vocational education.
And it is that, essentially, which will be driving and is driving our product
innovation. But it is driving it because we have got a country where we have
got a better alignment of profits and wages. Where we have got a
competitive exchange rate system in place. Where we have now introduced
a productivity culture which is naturally producing a naturally low inflation
rate. Just remember this, we had a recession in 1991-92 and we had a recession
in 1981-82. At the end of the 1981 -82 recession, we came out of it with just
on 11 per cent inflation. We came out of the 1991-92 recession, with 2 per
cent inflation. And the reason for that is because we have now got
productivity naturally occurring in the system and we have produced by low
tariffs, a contestable Australian market that actually for the first time probably
in our history, a really toey, competitive, contestable Australian market and
that is producing natural productivity which is holding the inflation rate down.
It is not being held down through a draconian monetary policy. It is not being
held down through high interest rates. It is not being held down now in a
recession because we have got growth running of the order of, you know, 4 to
per cent. We have had it there now for three years and yet we are still
producing low inflation and that is coming because we have made a
breakthrough in the whole competitive structure of the country.
And this is something. When I first went to Parliament, our Tory friends used
to put themselves up as the sort of managers, the money managers. You
know there was the Labor Party over here and there was the pin-striped suit
brigade over there. But, of course, once inflation hit, they were absolutely
dumb-founded and dumb-struck. 
When double digit inflation arrived, they had no grip on wages, they had no
grip on costs. Is there any wonder that the capital stock fell apart in the
middle 70s and we started with a very large current account deficit. We had
a current account deficit of 6 per cent of GDP in 1980, three years before this
Government came to office. The debt, the nation's debt, had moved from
virtually nothing to 30-odd per cent of GDP within three years of the.
Government coming to office as a result of the neglect of the 70s when
J W Howard was asleep at the wheel. You know giving comments, cocky
little comments, on the way into Parliament House up the steps like a radio
jockey every morning, commenting on his own work.
But that is when it all happened. That is when, about the time, that
Malcolm Fraser became Prime Minister was really when the weights were on
in terms of national economic change and he and Howard threw the pass and
as a consequence it was left to a Labor Government to turn Australia into a
market economy.
But we have turned into a market economy and produced this enormous
change, including in the labour market, and let's record this fact that we have
had now 26 per cent employment growth since 1983. In 1983 we had a
labour market of 6 million, we have now got a labour market of just over
8 million. We have had, outside the United States, the fastest rate of growth
in employment of any OECD country and per year we have had five times the
rate of employment growth that the Fraser/ Howard Government had in the
late 70s and early 1980s and we are still keeping it up.
In fact in the last year we had the biggest fall in unemployment we have ever
recorded. And, as I said to you, we had 4 1/ 2 per cent employment growth,
which I think is beyond any other country in the OECD, maybe the
United States is in there with us. That is in employment.
Household disposable income has risen by 40 per cent since 1983 and the
reason for that is there is more people in households in work and that is a
phenomenal change. And, of course, in the social wage if we take another
measure which is probably the most accurate measure of all because,
you know, we have had this debate, we have had in the last year were a
couple of phoney debates. One of them was John Howard told us in his
headland speech, " the Liberal Party have been battling for battlers for a
week". And I said " well that's interesting, we have been battling it for a
hundred years". And I am not misquoting him.
But the best measure of all this is real household disposable income
per head, per capita and it is the best measure. The reason it is the best
measure, of course, is it includes wages, salaries, supplements, pensions
and social security benefits. It includes the lot. It is adjusted for changes in
the size of the population, it is after tax and it is adjusted for changes in
purchasing power. So in Australia in the period 1983-94, real household
disposable income per capita increased by 16 per cent real. That is a real
increase 16 per cent in people's household disposable income and that, 
I think, is the measure of how important social progress and the social wage
is.
And I made reference in the Parliament recently that very telling remark by
the US Labour Secretary Robert Reich at an OECD conference on
employment and the social wage and he said " in the United States we have
had enormous employment growth and now in a period of high prosperity,
high profitability, a very high profit share in the economy and quite strong
economic growth, the median wages of Americans are still falling, still falling,
and they have been falling continuously for 15 years." So he said " you have
got this terrible choice, an American style economy which has got high
employment, but low wages, or a European economy which has got high
wages and low employment. What a choice," said Robert Reich.
Well in this country we have come right up the middle. That is, we have got
high employment growth and we have also had strong income growth and we
have got a social wage underpinning it with such things as Medicare, with of
course access and equity in health, in education. And in terms of payments,
just let me give you an indication, I have just got a couple of interesting little
numbers here. Let's take somebody.. well the social wage gives
considerable assistance to families. We estimate that a family with two
children is worth $ 200 a week. That is when you look at additional family
payments, Medicare, the lot.
Under our Government, spending on the social wage increased by 73% in
real terms, or more than $ 700 per year for every man, woman and child in
Australia. And what our research is showing is that this has narrowed the
gap of the social wage quite considerably. This is including strong increases
in the pension a single pensioner is receiving an additional $ 18 a week
more than if we had kept pensions for them in line with inflation $ 18 a week
more. An unemployed couple with 2 children, renting privately, under Labor
this family is $ 96 better off in real terms than when we came in office. So, it's
an indication I think let's take a single-income family with 2 children, and at
two-thirds of average earnings about $ 25,000 a year under this
Government, the disposable income of the family has increased in real terms
by $ 52 per week. Their income tax has fallen their family payments have
increased by $ 36 a week. Now, that's really helping battlers people who
need assistance, and why I think we have got this magic mix of a strong,
efficient, low inflation, high productivity economy, grafted onto an equitable
social wage, and it could have only come from a Labor Government. And I
think that's why I think when you see that sort of sense of you know, you
can't produce good policies without good motivation, and just talking to
people today about the way in which the labour market programs are helping
the disadvantaged and the long-term unemployed these good things come
from good aspirations, good inclinations, good feelings. And the Labor Party
has traditionally had these. It's always had them, because it is of the
community, and that's why, I think, only a Labor Government could actually
produce this mix and advance the country, but do it fairly. And that is what I
think is happening. 
We have got people trying to misrepresent us. John Howard is running
around all the time trying to talk about all these things but let me just run a
couple of things past you. In the last month look at what, in the last month,
the Government has done:
It has delivered a Budget in surplus, and in surplus for years to come;
It has established a national superannuation policy, which will at least
double the retirements incomes of Australians, and create by the year
2020, a pool of national savings of $ 2 trillion $ 2000 billion;
We have created a new maternity allowance;
We have delivered $ 158 million Justice Statement amongst other things,
with family service programs, extending Legal Aid and legal services, and
establishing a national women's justice strategy;
We have realised a century-old Australian dream to have a single gauge
railway linking the capital cities of the mainland that is, we saw the One
Nation train go from Brisbane to Perth via Melbourne, for the first time in
our history a week ago;
We have launched a $ 25 million national Civics Education Program for
our schools and communities, to tell our young people about the nature of
our constitutional arrangements, and their history;
And we have announced our proposal to make an Australian Australia's
Head of State, and for Australia to become a republic by the year 2001.
In one month. In one month a surplus Budget, a new national retirement
income policy 15% of all Australian workers put away $ 2 trillion in savings
by the year 2020 a maternity allowance, the Justice Statement, the One
Nation railway, the Civics program and the republic in one month.
Now, that's more on a month than the Tories did in the whole of their
Governments. Really. And I'm saying this advisedly. I used to be there
and I remember being there during the McMahon Government, and I was up
playing tennis with a journalist I knew, and I said " how are you going?', and
he said " oh well, it's been pretty boring", he said " you know, the Government
has put out one statement in 2 weeks", I said " is that right? What was that?",
and he said " to appoint someone to Repatriation Tribunal number And
that was the truth. I mean, people forget the Rip Van Winkle years of the
Coalition. You know, the torpor that Menzies left us in, through this period.
You know, old McMahon and people like that. And then, of course, with great
hope and expectation, the Fraser Government which did nothing. And yet,
in one month, this has changed, and we have got, yet, the Leader of the
Opposition running around saying " don't forget me". When it mattered, of
course, as far as he was concerned, he forgot us he left us with double-digit 
inflation, double-digit unemployment, the biggest Budget deficit in our history,
smashed profits. You know, appalling employment forecasts he was sort of
drummed out of public life out of the Treasury in 1983, and now after a
Labor Government has, with energy, foresight and ambition, put this model
together for Australia, and after this Government has done these things in just
a month, he is saying " what about me?".
And there we saw him at his best or shall we say his worst a week ago: we
had the " headland" speech. What was in it? Nothing. One commentator
senior commentator described it as mulch. And it was. you read through it,
and it was just a collection of press statements. You know, incoherent, and it
had no thread to it. The other thing is, they can't even write a decent
sentence. Now I know maybe I'm old-fashioned, but I actually think writing a
nice sentence down has a lot going for it. They can't even write can't even
write. I mean, they are supposed to be the Tories they once had people
from the great doyennes of the Bar, you know, men and women of letters.
And what have we got know? Words incoherence. This is the headland
statement. I mean, it was just all over and done with in a day. Waited, come,
gone finished. Over. Then, a couple of days later came the republic.
Now, the thing is, the thing about the republic I'll just say this about John
Howard: I respect John Howard's right to be an Australian monarchist, but I
do not respect his pretending for several days to be something other than
a monarchist. I don't respect him blowing in the breeze. Whatever else he
might be, he's supposed to be a Leader he's nominally and notionally, the
Leader of the Opposition. And least of all do I respect his attempt in the last
week to confuse and misrepresent the issue to cover his own indecisiveness
and divisions within his own party, and those divisions, of course, are very
evident here in Tasmania. Mr Howard has been talking about a " people's
convention" half of it appointed by him. As if another committee, as Jeff
Kennett called it, could help the process. Then you had him talking about a
plebiscite he began talking about options and choices, and the only choice
he didn't talk about was the one which the debate is really all about whether
an Australian should be our Head of State. But here is what he said the day
before yesterday I'll just read it to you: " Now, we are putting up a
convention a people's convention. If a consensus comes from that, we will
put it to the public for a vote for a referendum. If there is no consensus, we
will also put the issue to a vote, but in those circumstances, we would have to
offer people a range of choices, and we would have to say do you want this
or that?". So, " do you want this, this, or this?". Well, in other words, it is
down to this it's down to pretending this mind-numbing business of process,
rather than the simple issue. He can only try and survive the debate -I
mean, this is what this week showed that John Howard can only try and
survive the debate he can't constructively engage it. He is trying to survive
the debate by pretending that a referendum is a denial of choice, or that the
question is more complex than it really is, or that the Government which has
found support with a lot of people in the Liberal Party is up to some kind of
villainy by creating the conditions in which Australians can debate, and then
decide whether an Australian will be our Head of State in the 21 st Century. 
We have got Bronwyn Bishop of course she's out there saying it's a
communist dictatorship. We have got them saying that Keating wants to be
President. Well, let me tell you the day that Parliament gave me a twothirds
vote would be the day I knew that I had lost my political virtue. I only
want two things when I retire from politics one, I want to live in an Australian
republic, and two, I want a private life.
So, anyway, the Government's proposal is designed to ensure that the
position of President will not be filled by a politician that it is above politics,
and it will be filled by people who are universally esteemed by their fellow
Australians. The conclusion I draw from Mr Howard's behaviour in the last
week does not really concern the republic at all the conclusion that I draw is
this: I think the last week has demonstrated how sad it is that at this stage in
our history, the Liberal Party has resorted to a Leader who will not lead. As
one commentator put it this week " Mr Howard's leadership principle is " I'm
your Leader please show me the way". " I am the Leader I will follow"."
Remember this it's worth remembering that John Howard had two and a
half years to prepare himself for this debate he actually prided himself on
being a monarchist champion within the Coalition. This was one of the
subjects he understood. When he was running around needling and knifing
Downer, he was saying " I am one of the people that can understand these
bigger subjects like the republic". He had two and a half years to prepare
himself, but when it was announced in the Parliament on Wednesday, he was
utterly unable to coherently respond within three days, his first response
had dramatically changed to another response. I must say, even I was
surprised by his incapacity, and it takes a lot to surprise me about John
Howard's incapacity.
Now, in the last week, we have had people on the Conservative side Ray
groom here in Tasmania, Jeff Kennett in Victoria make decisions and say
where they stand. Even poor old Tim Fischer in his own way has been clear
about his position. But Howard's response has been only to erect a wall of
obfuscation and meaningless process. He is throwing out some fly-paper in
the hope that he will get the republic to stick. Which is, by the way, what
every constitutional convention and we have had many over the years has
managed to do they are uniformly expensive and unproductive. Now, Mr
Howard was saying that he doesn't want the republic to be the main issue of
Australia's political debate. Well, it's not the only issue I agree with him.
But, how does he face up to the fact that in a month, the Government has
produced these changes, as I have mentioned to you the surplus Budget,
the big national superannuation scheme? Imagine them, the Liberals, having
the wit or the courage to get every Australian person to put 15% of their
income away as savings? Or to link the country up with a national rail
system, or to launch te Civics Education program, or to indeed, launch the
republic? So, this is the thing the Government has that vitality about it, and it has the
bigger view. And let's just take that view in that month the one thing I didn't 
mention was the visit I had to Japan, and the very successful meetings I had
with the Government of Japan, and the statement I came away with endorsing
the relationship between Australia and Japan, with the government of Japan
saying that Australia was an indispensable regional partner of Japan this is
the second largest economy in the world, and our largest major trading
partner. We developed these bilateral linkages. At the same time, we are
developing the multi-lateral ones, like APEC. And part of that conversation in
Japan was about the value of APEC. I saw the Chinese Vice Premier in
Sydney yesterday, also talking about the value of APEC keeping the United
States strategically engaged in Asia, opening up markets around the Asia-
Pacific rim these and other things have come from the Labor Government.
So, not only developing the structures at home, developing them abroad.
Could you imagine I mean Gareth and I are working on these issues could
you imagine Alexander Downer working on APEC? ( No. No.) He's telling us
to send a gun-boat to Mururoa. I'm sure he still has battleships in the bathtub
with him, to sort of, create his own view of the world, you know. He would
have the Repulse or the Renown floating past his toe, King George V just
going over the ankles.
But, the thing is the truth is they faced up to any of it the big economic
model, with the graft of the big social wage, or any or the big social
outreaches be it participation in education or in health or the big foreign
policy gestures of the Government in APEC, or in chemical weapons, or in
Cambodia or in the big bilateral relationship with Indonesia or Japan they
can't get near the Government. And you can see that in the headland
speech. It came to nothing. It was his big moment, and what was it? A
complete fizzer. two nights later, the republic a bigger fizzer. So, this is
why we believe that the Labor Party it listens, it is of the community, it
understands community sentiment. But it has also got invention, and
creativity, and imagination the Labor Party has got that one ingredient the
Coalition has never had imagining something something better, and going
after it. and the other thing is, we have got also belief in Australia, belief in
Australians, and the notion that we believe that we will never be never truly
represent ourselves, or adequately express that which we have become,
unless one of us is our Head of State. Now, these are all things which are
the mark of a Party with imagination and with a vista about what Australia is.
And including, those big social questions, like reconciliation with our
indigenes, a greater role for women in our society, improving the status and
the participation of our women John Howard said we were falling prey to the
special interest groups the environmentalists, Aborigines and women. Well,
if they are special interest groups, if we don't respond to them, what sort of
Party would we be? That's why we are going to keep this growth sustainable:
you can see it now, 3 3/ 4% GDP growth, with modest inflation we are about
to put another Accord together with the ACTU to guarantee wage restraint
over the next 3 years, and good inflation outcomes. We are going to
continue with our education system adding to that program of innovation to
our exports, we are going to continue to build those relationships outside of 
11
Australia, and we want to do it holding our head up as Australians. All that is
a formula John Howard can't match.
And that's one of the reasons I will be working with Michael Field as Prime
Minister and Premier after the next election ( hear hear) ours and his, to see
the great craft of the Labor Party working again fully here in the state of
Tasmania as a full partner in the federation of this great country. Thank you.
ends. 



TEL
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM MISSION TO FRANCE
The delegation representing members of the South Pacific Forum, which I
foreshadowed yesterday, will have discussions in Paris with the French
Foreign Minister, Mr Herve de Charette, on Monday 19 June.
The purpose of the delegation's visit is to make clear directly and
unambiguously to the Government of France the deep resentment felt by
South Pacific countries at the French Government's decision to resume
nuclear testing in the South Pacific region and to seek reconsideration of that
decision. All the countries of the Forum deplore the decision and urge the
Government of France to reconsider.
The Forum has a long history of opposition to nuclear testing, reflected, for
example, in the adoption of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone.
The mission will be led by Senator Evans, representing Australia as the
current Chair of the Forum. Other members will include President Bernard
Dowiyogo of Nauru, the Immediate past Chair of the Forum, and a special
envoy from Papua New Guinea, which will assume the Chair of the Forum at
the next Heads of Government Meeting in September. The Secretary-
General of the South Pacific Forum, the Hon leremia Tabai, will also
participate in the mission, Mr Tabal is the former President of Kribati.
Discussions are underway with other Forum members which have also
expressed an interest in participation.
CANBERRA 16 June 1995 TL J~. un. 95 .013 F0' 



r-,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RANALD MACDONALD, RADIO 3L-0, MELBOURNE,
16 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
RM: The Prime Minister of Australia, Paul Keating. Good morning to you
Prime Minister.
PM: Ranald good morning on this your last day.
RM: Yes it is and thank you for fitting me in to your very busy schedule.
I would like to steer clear of the news events of the day if I can and
concentrate on, as you like to refer to it as, the bigger picture.
However, I was struck by the banner headline in The Australian
" Evans to spearhead Sth Pacific assault on Paris". What will our
assault consist of?
PM: I think it will be a representative group of South Pacific nations,
representing the whole of the forum island countries, the forum
countries of the South Pacific, expressing our condemnation at this
decision by the Government of France and to let them know that it is in
their best interests as well as ours, for them not to proceed with this
decision and to leave the Government with no misapprehension about
the strength of feeling in this region of the world.
RM: Is there anything else that you are going to do on top of that? I mean,
obviously trade boycotts have been talked about.
PM: Well I am meant to have a long talk to Senator Evans about it. I have
had a discussion with him, but I think he will consult with our
colleagues in the South Pacific and probably after that consultation we
ourselves will have a conversation and we will discuss what approach
he takes on Australia's part in these discussions.
RM: But how seriously do you take what the French are doing and that is in
our part of the world, eight nuclear tests? 
PM: Well again I don't think it is going to do the Government of France or
their interests any good at all. I think that the best way France, the
Government, can protect its people is not by some Gaullist weapon or
similar such approach, but rather engagement with the rest of the
world and to play an active international role because the bomb in
the post-Cold War environment is the 1990s version of the Maginot
line. It didn't work for them between the wars and it won't work now
and I think all it is doing is basically rupturing relations around the
region and continuing to put pressure on the ecology of this region.
RM: I want to talk about your vision for Australia and obviously that
incorporates the Republic, so we will start with the Republic. Is your
decision to embrace the minimalist position recognition of the political
reality. The fact that, if you look through the history, it proved really
difficult to get referenda up and particularly if there is opposition to it?
PM: Well look, not that. That is an issue I think Ranald. The main issue for
me is not to disturb the system of Government we have. I think that
which is broader, or broadest, is best. And in the representative
Parliamentary system we have, you have got 150 people who
represent the nation's aspirations by each constituency, they are in
touch with their electors, their voters, over the course of each
Parliament. You have got the Senate there representing the States at
large because they are elected at large. And, I think, what is healthy
about our Parliamentary democracy is that it is broad and no one
person has elected office across the country. No-one has a mandate
in their own right. You see at the last election, for instance,
on election night though the Government had won the election I was
not elected Prime Minister, I was elected Member for Blaxland. And
the Party then chose me again to be the leader and on that basis I was
appointed by the Governor General to be Prime Minister and I could
be unappointed tomorrow morning for all sorts of reasons, at the whim
of my Caucus, and I think that is the way it should be. People need to
be relevant and maintain their position. So the general cast, the
proposal Ranald, is about preserving that broad representative,
diffuse, basis of Parliamentary democracy in Australia and not have
some single person sitting above it.
RM: Why are you not actually codifying the reserve powers, you are not
detailing them? You are in this, as I understand anyway, effective job
description of the new President saying that you have got to consider
the conventions of the President's power?
PM: Yes and I think that given the fact let's look at the history, we are
five years short of a century, and only once were these powers ever
used controversially. That was in 1975 and even then it was resolved
at an election. So what I am saying is rather than delineate the
powers, or codify them, or reduce them, the function to purely a
ceremonial role, let's leave the powers with the head of state, but 
make certain that the head of state's source of power comes from the
representative chambers of the House of Representatives and from
the proportional powers of the Senate. In other words, let that person
whoever he or she may be know that the source of their power is one
given them by the democratic system of Australia, the representative
system, and that therefore the powers they have can only be as
powerful as their source.
RM: But the issue is that you are ensuring that it is really just a ceremonial
position, the President, aren't you because by establishing in the basis
under which the person is put there, the fact that they have to take
consideration of what has taken place in the past, that there are
conventions? You are actually adding to his power, or her power,
aren't you?
PM: The answer is that yes, but at the same time we are keeping those
conventions. I think the conventions matter. But the way in which our
system of Government has evolved, those who say to you let's keep an
interest in our traditions and our history, well this does that. It keeps
that continuity and link with those powers and there is a tension in a
system between the Government and the head of the Government, the
Prime Minister and the head of state. When I say tension, I mean by
that, I think, most of the time all of the time I hope a creative
tension. That is it is not simply a ceremonial post to be ignored. It is
truly somebody representing the whole nation as the head of state.
But in the Government's model they are not by popular election. He or
she will not walk around hearing voices saying " I've been invested by
the country, I am the embodiment of the nation and I will deal with this
Government, Prime Minister, or Parliament as I choose." I mean
I think this would be a very unhealthy approach. Whereas the
approach of the person being elected by the Senate and the House of
Representatives is a far more healthy approach if the powers remain
with the head of state to be used in the event of any national
emergency in the next couple of centuries.
RM: The Constitutional Centenary Foundation, under Sir Ninian Stephen
has put up many areas for discussion. I am just wondering where you
hope the debate will go? It ought to go surely, if we do embrace a
Republic, far beyond the question of President and how the President
is put there?
PM: Well you are probably right about that, Ranald, and maybe it should.
But in the first instance, as I said in my speech, let's make sure the
head of state is one of us. Let's make sure that the complete
independent expression of Australian sovereignty is just that
completely independent by having not the Monarch of another
country as our head of state, but one of our own. I mean I think when
people see the President in the place and know that that person
represents them, that the sense of nation that will come from that, the 
sense of us being one and together, represented by one person who is
one of us, will have a profound effect on the country.
RM: Let's just talk about, if we may, because I am discussing things with
the Premier of Victoria a little later in the program, the way in which
you work through the Premiers and also the question of local
Government? In Victoria, we moved from what 210 councils to 78.
Huge restructure of local Government. What is the role you see of the
third tier of Government? Do you think this will change the
relationship?
PM: Oh yes, I think this is a healthy development. I think that we have
picked up the sort of British borough system of local Government,
which has been largely inefficient and you don't get the continuity of
policies and I don't think that residents or ratepayers get the value they
would otherwise get from a system which is, again, more diffuse, more
representative, broader. So I think that is going in the right way and
I think local Government does play a significant role as a tier
Government which affects people's lives in a very close way, that is
the way in which they live, the services they have and that is why we
provide, the Commonwealth provides, grants direct financial
assistance grants to local Government, to complement the only
source of revenue they have which is an inefficient one and that is
municipal rating, property rating.
RM: It is true that Gough Whitlam, your predecessor ( sic), supported the
concept of a healthy local Government. What about
State Governments, obviously a different political complexion,
of course, with different baggage? But there are similarities between
Jeff Kennett and yourself on things, even though you both criticise
each other. Can you do business with them?
PM: Well I do and we have done quite a lot of things together and I think
what you find in this business is you are always looking past the Party
labels and the titles to the people who actually do things somebody
who can go and do something and agree to something and is
interested in doing things. And I have joined with the Premier and his
colleagues in terms of the quite historic decisions of the Council of
Australian Governments in respect of competition policy. We have
now, as you know, got a working party together on health. I think that
is going to be important and I think it is entirely critical that the
Commonwealth and the States are able to work together across these
otherwise distinct boundaries which we have for most of our history.
I think we are getting there now with that and at the last Premiers'
Conference, the Treasurer and I put together with the States, a
financial deal certainly which the States have never had. Certainly not
in the last 20 years or so and I think all of those things mean that you
can do things that are worthwhile and good, but it has got to be by
decisions and I mean this is my beef with Mr Howard, you know
obfuscation and indecision. This is the antithesis of the sort of thing 
the country needs at this point in its history. It actually has embraced
change right through the 80s and it wants change and I think it expects
Governments, both Federal and State, to continue those changes.
RM: Well I know you are rushing for a plane, so a very last question and
that is this, I am going away for a year, I am wondering by how much
I will miss the election? Is the election going to be pre-Christmas or
after Christmas?
PM: Well for your sake I would like to tell you for the news value, but I don't
even know myself. So I think the honest answer to that is to say that
I have always taken the view we ought to wring as much out of these
Parliaments as we can. For a start they are too from our point of
view hard to win without giving time away and I think the public
appreciate us getting on with the job and getting things into place and I
made the point just in the last month, we have turned the Budget into
surplus; we have introduced this huge superannuation scheme for the
nation, 15 per cent for everybody putting their savings away and a big
outcome at the end; we have seen, you know, the Republic
announcement; bilateral arrangements with Japan. All of that has
happened in a month and I think these are the things the public want
to see, rather than us getting sort of obsessed about elections and our
own survival.
RM: Alright Prime Minister, many thanks for talking to us.
PM: Well thank you, Ranald, and good luck to you with the change in your
life and I hope it's both rewarding and pleasing for you.
RM: It's very much appreciated, thank you again.
PM: Thank you indeed.
ends 



TEL I6 . Jun 2KSN. 1 Wu
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT INVERESK RAILYARD, LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA, 16
JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: I'll just take questions, I think that's the best way isn't it?
J: Mr Keating, what's your reaction to the Democrat's decision that they
are going to block the building industry sales tax from the Budget?
PMV: I wasn't sure that they had made a decision about it. Well, it's a
sensible extension of the base of the wholesale sales tax system, and
it's a thing that Government's do, and the Government announced this
In the Budget. And again, I think this is where the Senate needs to
think about its position, and not overplay its hand to maintain its
position as a House of review, but not to be there trying to knock out
bits and pieces of the Government of the days Budget, which is not its
function. The money function of the Commonwealth is with the House
of Representatives and the Cabinet, and that's as it should be. That's
the sensible measure, and I think that upon reflection, they will think
it's sensible too.
J: What impact will it have on the Budget if they go ahead with this?
PMV: I'm not sure of the numbers we have there I think it's of the order of a
couple of 100 million [ dollars], from memory. In year 1
J: Will it affect your surplus?
PMVI No. Well, it will affect it to some extent, but it won't affect the fact that
there is a surplus, no,
J: Can the Government afford to miss out on that revenue?
PMV: The Government is there to support its Budget, and to get it through.
J: If it's not passed by July 1, will you still collect the money? 
I L L 6 .13 1,40F-u
PM; Well, I just haven't had any briefing about it, and I am not anticipating
the fact that at this stage, that the Democrats will vote against the
measure in the Senate.
J: They have said today they will.
PM: They have said today they will?
J: Yes.
PM: Well, if they do, it would be a very inadvisable thing to do. I have
made these points about the Senate before It's continually overplaying
Its hand irresponsibly and unreasonably. This sort of measure
is just a bit of sort of populism at the expense of the national
management of the country, and populists won't be rewarded, I don't
believe,
J: How can the Government make up the revenue?
PM: We'll see what the impact of it is how the Senate debate goes first,
before we think about that.
J: The French Ambassador held a press conference this morning and
said that despite the delegation going, they won't change their minds
is it a pointless exercise?
PM: I don't think so. I think that there is a very clear point to it, that is, to
express our anger at all of this, the fact that we and the other the
nations of the Pacific feel it ( nuclear testing] is unnecessary, that it
advances nobody's interests, and the best way of conveying that is
directly. And, of course, the Foreign Minister will be with that
delegation in Paris on Monday.
J Is It an arrogant attitude they have, though?
PM: I think so absolutely.
J: Mr Keating, some Caucus members are reportedly preparing to put a
motion on Tuesday that the Government' broaden its response to the
French decision and to do things like recall the Australian Ambassador
In Parls and expel the Ambassador from here...
PM: I don't know that anyone is proposing measures such as that. We can
see, and we have these sorts of debates.. . we had a debate about
nuclear testing in the Pacific for many years in the Caucus. But I think
that by and large, the Caucus will do that which is rational and
sensible.
J: What about the protest action last night that saw a truckload of manure
dumped at the French Embassy? 
T EL: 16 3uti. 9 5 2: 3 No.-0 13 P0 4,-0 T
3
PM: I mean, people do these things, and it's an indication, I think, of the
objection that the people of this region of the world take to a decision
which is made, and is not really fundamental to the security of the
French nation, but something which is at the whim and caprice of
French defence planners, which have obviously got the agreement of
the French Government and President. And, you know, taking an
objection there's going to be many more of them, I am sure, around
the world, and you can see that with the reaction which President
Chirac has had in the United States.
J: You don't have a problem with that sort of protest?
P M. I'm not here to endorse each particular action or not. Do I encourage
people to be dropping loads of manure around? No, I don't. But, by
the same token, I can understand where this feeling has come from.
J: When will the delegation be going to Paris?
PM: Monday.
J: Will New Zealand be part of the delegation?
PM: The delegation is not settled yet the composition.
J: Would you like to see New Zealand be a part?
PM: It's not settled I said that to you.
J: The French Ambassador also this morning said that the French
Polynesia, where they are testing, is part of France, so therefore they
are doing it in their own backyard, and they have every right to do it?
PM: Well, as they say tell it to the Marines. Tell that one to the Marines.
J: Mr Howard has been critical of the Government's response he has
accused Senator Evans of being an " old pussycat"?
PM: Hasn't he become an old tart, John Howard, these days. Isn't he a
dreadful old tart? I mean, two days ago he was saying that the
Government's response is entirely appropriate, and after Mr Downer
has emerged from the bathtub with his battleships, he is now saying
that the Government needs to be tougher and stronger. This is
somebody who believes that we should have the Queen of Great
Britain as our Head of State who still believes in all those Colonial
vestiges. Who is now telling us today that we should stand up to this
power, France. This is someone who will be so obsequious in the
presence of the French Minister, or a French President. I mean, he
has been told this by his advertising agency. He's a shocking old tart.
J: With the green issue being very important to the Bass electorate, so
you think you have lost your seat already? 
I1.6 L Jun z 5 2 : 33 N o.' 02! i3 P 0 51i 0
4
PM: Cut it out I have got such strength beside me here. No. I think -as
always I mean, I was talking a moment ago about imagination, about
support for regions who's supporting regions in this country? Who is
supporting regional development? Who's rehabilitating the inner-cities
of this country urban renewal? Only the Federal Labor Government.
And also in the labour market programs support for those less
advantaged. I made a point yesterday take the Commonwealth
programs out of Tasmania, and Tasmanian employment has actually
shrunk. So, on that basis, why would we believe that any of the seats
that we hold are at risk? They're not, I'm sure.
J: Would you say that this is a tough seat?
PM: They are all tough, so what?
J: Bass is only held by 42 or 43 votes it's quite likely to go the other
way?
PM: Well, after Sylvia's incumbency here, we will hold it by a bigger margin
at the next election.
J: How will your visit here today impact on the next allocation of Better
Cities funding?
PM; You get a minds eye picture of things when you move around
Australia. I mean, I have been to most of the Better Cities programs
seen them and then, I mean, as these things are actually discussed
in the Cabinet room, as we talk about allocations, you see where the
energy is, you know, where the imagination is, and you get a chance to
make subsequent decisions. And often the things you think are going
to be the goers are not, and the ones that may not, become the ones
that work, for this reason. So, I think the job of Ministers and the Prime
Minister particularly In these sort of things are to get around, see
them, talk to people, get an idea of what is happening, and then you
can make a better decision the next time around.
J: But will there necessarily be any additional funding for this area?
PM: Well, I have just announced some dollars today for Northern
Tasmania, and you know, I think this will develop much the same way
the others have. Look at Darling Harbour in Sydney the amount of
private commitment to that now, is profound, but it wasn't true when it
started. But then as it gets to critical mass, people fell that something
is happening, and they are prepared to do more.
J: Prime Minister, back to Paris who will the delegation be seeing?
PM: That Is yet to be determined, but certainly the Foreign Minister
certainly the Foreign Minister. Probably the Prime Minister.
TEL 
TEL: 16 Juri. 9 5 2 33 No 013 P. 1) 6,' 1-1-
J: Carrying a message from you?
PM:, No. It will be a message from the delegation, obviously.
J: The international condemnation of the decision to resume the testing
do you see it strengthening with that protest here at all?
P M: You mean here in Australia?
J: Yes.
PM: I think so. I think that has happened already, and it is happening in
these other countries, too.
J, Just on a local issue, there is a billion dollar pulp mill proposal that the
developers are saying won't go ahead until the Federal Government
releases its pulp mill guidelines those were apparently going to be
released when the Wesley Vale was up. They were going to be this
month, but it has apparently been delayed what is happening with
those?
PM: They will be released I don't know exactly when they will be released,
but they will be released because the Government does want to see
the logical development of a forest products industry, and that means a
concentration on regrowth and plantations, and to see the valueadding.
I mean, our objection to woodchipplng Is that there is not the
value adding, so the policy Is about value adding, and therefore we
won't be value adding without these mills, and we won't have the milli
without the guidelines. So the guidelines will be there.
J: Given this proposal could be In doubt because the guidelines have
been delayed, would you be moving on it?
PM: Journalists say " the project's in doubt" you are not entitled to say
things like that, because I am somebody who has heard all those sorts
of claims over the years from journalists, and I know that they are
empty.
J: Do we know when these guidelines are going to be released?
PM: We probably do, I I had any notice of the question. But I haven't, but
let me say that I will take it on notice.
ends. A 



IfL i6. Junri .5 2: 3 1No 0 .1 F.;
57/ 95
Ib!, ^ Ii
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
THE HON. SYDNEY EINFELD AO
1 was deeply saddened to hear today of the death of Syd Einfeld who was a
person of great substance and compassion.
He always took up the lot of the under-privileged and the less well off.
Syd Einfeld was a valued member of the Labor family and a significant
Minister in the Wran Government in New South Wales.
He believed in social justice and he gave every expression to this as a
Minister. Hi wi iil ibutions to the Jewiah community woro oleo significant 2nd he will h.-
greatly missed.
I extend my condolences to his family.
CANBERRA 16 June 1995 



PRIME MINISTER58/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DESTRUCTION OF HONORARY FRENCH CONSULATE, PERTH
I am disturbed and disappointed by the destruction of the premises of the Honorary French
Consulate in Perth in the early hours of this morning.
I understand that police must ascertain the cause of the fire before it can be proved to have
been a wilful act of destruction However, if it is proved that this action is a violent
protest against the resumption of French nuclear testing in the South Pacific, it must be
condemned for the extreme form it has taken.
All Australians have been angered by the French decision-It is the right of every citizen to
voice their disapproval of the French Government's decision, including by peaceful protest.
However, the deliberate destruction of property is not part of the Australian way of life
and must be rejected on every occasion.
As a nation, Australia has made its strong protest to the French Government through
Senator McMullan, as acting Foreign Minister, calling in the French Ambassador on
Wednesday. Further, as the leader of the South Pacific delegation Senator Evans will
meet the French Foreign Minister in Paris on Monday to convey our condemnation of
their decision to resume nuclear tests.
CANBERRA 17 JUNE 1995 U CON
Con train-The alloc The i
Natic acro'
The I
indu.
The I
speci ' hi,
alloc Instit Mr S
mont proce " Thi,
" It w
Mr F;
excel educ; " It al:
indus
Conta
7110 



L 4
PRIME MINIS 1i. Jun. gS 22: No. 007 K. UI'u,
TER
0: 1 A-A I r::. Ma r-I I flt T I Mi-r I" KI MI::; a., h ltI t I AM 11" a HUN i-J KILA I INtj Mr"
PARLIAMENTARY MOTION ON FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I move that this House:
condemns the decision of the Government of France to resume
nuclear testing in the South Pacific;
calls on the French Government to reverse its decision and not to
resume testing;
shares the resentment of South Pacific countries at nuclear testing in
the South Pacific and endorses the statement condemning the
decision issued by the South Pacific Forum;
dopforoo r-ran= olo do iion tQ b, cu%, l= i i, I D Z I I ltu I I 1 Wn'icr' nauI
improved relations between France and countries in the region;
expresses its outrage that France's decision undermines the outcome
of the recent Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Review and Extension Conference, particularly the commitment made
at the Conference that, pending entry into force of the Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty ( CTBT), the nuclear weapon states should exercise
utmost restraint;
notes that Australia will do all in its power and urge all other countries
to hold France to President Chirac's statement that France would sign
a CTBT without reservation in autumn 1996; and
calls on France to sign and ratify the protocols of the South Pacific
Nuclear Free Zone Treaty.
This resolution-is Intended to convey as clearly as possible to the
Government of France the firm condemnation by the people of Australia,
acting through their representatives in this House, of the decision announced 
TEL 2
by the Government of France to resume the testing of nuclear weapons at
Mururca Atoll. It also expresses our hope that the decision might yet be
reversed.
The President of France, President Chirac, announced the decision to
resume underground nuclear testing on 1~ 3 June. He said that a program of
eight tests would be conducted between September 1995 and May 1996.
President Chirac said that the testing was essential in order to ensure the
security, safety and reliability of France's nuclear weapons. He said that after
completing this series of tests, France would intend to sign the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and to rely thereafter on simulation
techniques to maintain its nuclear capabilities.
The decision reversed the moratorium on nuclear testing announced by
President Mitterrand in 1992, a moratorium which had been widely welcomed
and which together with the earlier Matignon Accords which set up a basis
for reconciliation in New Caledonia formed the foundation on which a new,
cooperative partnership between France and the countries of the South
Pacific was emerging.
President Chirac's announcement on 13 June followed widespread
speculation in France about the future of the testing program during the
Presidential election campaign and afterwards.
In response to this speculation, Australia, along with many other countries,
had made known to the French Government our hopes that the moratorium
would be maintained. I wrote to President Chirac about this matter following
earlier representations made by the Foreign Minister, Senator Evans. The
French moratorium matched separate commitments by the United States,
Russian and British Governments to refrain from testing.
In the end, however, the French Government ignored the views of the vast
majority of members of the international community and decided to proceed
with its program. That is an Indefensible decision and the Australian people
and the Australian Government condemn it.
Australia's opposition to the resumed testing of nuclear weapons by France
stems from a number of concerns, of which the most fundamental is the
security implications of the decision for Australia, for the South Pacific region
and for the international community.
The end of the Cold War, having removed the spectre of global nuclear
conflict which had thrown such a dark shadow on the second half of the
twentieth century, gave new hope to the world that we might at last see a
world free of nuclear weapons.
An important sign post towards a safer world was the decision by the
international community on 11 May 1 995 in New York~ to extend indefinitely
the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Critical to achieving
TEL Jul 22 : 51J No .007 F .02/ CJ7 
TEL: 1 i. Jun .95 .22 : 59 No 007 F. 03CJ0T,
3
the indefinite extension of the NPT was the simultaneous negotiation and
adoption by all parties to the NPT, including the nuclear weapon states of a
" Declaration of Principles and Objectives on Non Proliferation and
Disarmament". This Declaration included, centrally, a commitment to the goal of nuclear
disarmament, with the ultimate objective of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons. It gave encouragement to the further development of nuclear
weapon free zones.
And it said that one important measure towards the elimination of nuclear
weapons was the early conclusion, no later than 1996, of a Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty. Pending the entry into force of a Test Ban Treaty, the
nuclear weapon states were committed to exercise " utmost restraint".
The French decision clearly contradicts this undertaking. ' Utmost restraint'
on nuclear testing cannot possibly comprehend a program of eight tests. The
decision is certain to raise in the minds of non nuclear weapon states
questions about the good faith of all the nuclear weapons states. It will add
to the negotiating difficulties over the Comprehensive rest Ban Treaty.
France's action might well provide a convenient excuse for others who might
want to join the nuclear club, and who will now argue that the commitment of
the nuclear weapons states to the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons is
a sham.
This is a critical time for the world. The cold war has ended but what will
shape our future security and prosperity is still uncertain. We are moulding
the building blocks now.
It is particularly important that all governents work together to ensure that
the international system we have in the twenty first century is one which suits
all of us better than the one we have had.
The French decision is a narrow decision, made according to a narrow
definition 9f narrowly French interests. It defies world opinion, but that is the
only bold thing about it. In every other sense it betrays timidity. It is an act of
retreat, not engagement.
As I said on 15 June, why should a country of such substance undertake this
program? What is there to fear in cooperative engagement with the rest of
the world? What will best protect the French people is not a 1990s version of
the Maginot line, but participation in the global dialogue.
The French Government claims that this nuclear capacity this force de
frappe is a deterrent. But in the post Cold War world, a deterrent to what?
It Is certainly no deterrent against the greatest nuclear threats to Europe and
the world now, including the emergence of new nuclear weapons states. 
' FEL 4
France, by its inflammatory action with regard to Its testing program, now runs
the greater risk of losing international support, both moral and material, for
cleaning up the rotting carcasses of the old Soviet reactors, whose presence
still hangs over Europe and France like a pall. This is one of France's and
Europe's great challenges. These dangers, like the stockpiles of degrading
nuclear weapons and weapons systems, and contaminated nuclear sites,
cannot be deterred through the further development of an offensive nuclear
weapon capability.
These considerations are international in scope. They also shape Australia's
opposition to nuclear testing by China.
But Australia and the other members of the South Pacific Forum have a
particular concern with French testing because it is not being conducted in
France's metropolitan territory, but in the South Pacific.
Most countries in this region are small island states. For many years they
have made clear their opposition to nuclear weapons. They have shown this
year after year in the resolutions of the South Pacific Forum and, most
clearly, in the creation of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone. The
Government of France is defying not only their wishes but their moral rights.
This action will call into question for many in the South Pacific the legitimacy
of the French presence there.
The French Government has defended the environmental safety of the tests
at Mururoa and it has alluded to the possibility that international scientists
might observe the tests.
But the fact is that accidents happen. And no one can foresee the longer
term dangers associated with possible leakage from the underground coral
structures housing the tests.
The fact remains that if these tests are perfectly safe, they could be made
perfectly w ell in France.
Condemnation of the French decision has not been confined to the fifteen
members of the South Pacific Forum.
Critical statements have been issued by Belgium, Chile, Denmark, Indonesia,
Ireland, Japan, Kenya, Luxembourg, Mexico, Norway, Peru, the Philippines,
Korea, Russia, South Africa, and Switzerland. On 15 June the European
Parliament in Strasbourg adopted a resolution expressing shock at the
decision and urging France to reconsider. Canada and the United States
have regretted the decision.
Australia's response has been strong and unequivocal. The Government has
deplored the decision. We have frozen defence relations with France and we
118 L J. ui . zi5 * 22: 5No 00? 7 P. 1 4/ Ui 
I LL 1 Jun-z : j 1 u
will not engage in any defence activity which would in any way assist the
testing program.
We have protested against the French decision in the International Atomic
Energy Agency Board of Governors meeting in Vienna, and other
international bodies, including the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva
and the United Nations in New York.
Australia has a particular responsibility in this matter this year because we
are Chair of the South Pacific Forum. I have been in close touch with my
Forum colleagues about it.
On their behalf, I issued a statement condemning the decision and
expressing our unequivocal opposition to it. I said that Forum leaders hoped
that France will hear and take note of what the world is saying.
To make sure that France does hear, we proposed to send a delegation of
members of the South Pacific Forum to Paris to put the views of Forum
countries directly and unambiguously to the French Government.
Because of the limited time available, and in accordance with Forum practice,
the delegation comprises the past, present and next forum chairs. So
Senator Evans is leading the delegation.
He is accompanied by President Bernard Dowiyogo of Nauru and Mr
Tsiamilili, a special envoy from the Government of Papua New Guinea, which
takes over the Forum Chair in September. The New Zealand Minister for
Justice, Mr Graham, and the Western Samoan Minister of Education, Ms
Fiami, are also represented on the delegation, as is the Secretary General of
the Forum, the Hon leremiah Tabai.
The delegation will meet the French Government later tonight, Paris time.
The passing of this resolution by the House will assist it to convey to the
French Government the depth of Forum countries concerns.
When the delegation reports back on the results of its discussions early
tomorrow morning, I plan to be in touch again quickly with my Forum
colleagues about what next steps we will take.
The concerns of the Australian people about the French decision have been
demonstrated clearly over recent days. I hope they will continue to be
expressed and in ways which help bring home to the French Government
how widespread is the opposition to these policies.
But, Mr Speaker, some Important things need to be remembered in this
debate and some have been lost sight of. UU 
FEL 6
The Government's position in this matter and I believe the position of most
Australians is not shaped by hostility towards France or the French people,
or to France's role in the Pacific. It is shaped solely by our opposition to this
specific policy of the Government of France to resume testing nuclear
weapons in the South Pacific.
France, and Australians who have come from France, have made a valuable
contribution to Australia.
I have spoken before of the opportunities which exist for French business in
Australia and for Australian businesses in France. I have also said that we
welcome constructive French participation in the South Pacific.
It is very important that the expressions of Australian concern about this
French policy do not flow over into racist attacks on France or French people.
It is this particular French Government policy which we object to.
It Is important for Australians to remember that many French people object to
this decision as well. A number of members of the French delegation to the
European Parliament voted in favour of the resolution I referred to earlier.
All Members of this House will, I am sure, share the view that terrorist acts,
like the arson reported to be the cause of the fire at the office of the Honorary
French Consul in Perth on 17 June must be utterly rejected and condemned.
It would be a very sorry consequence if our opposition to an act which
contravenes our every sense of fairness and decency, should erode these
values in our own society. Such acts as that which occurred in Perth, the
Government utterly condemns as both illegal and un-Australian. Such acts
are not only objectionable but counter-productive to our cause.
Those with influential positions in the community, in politics and the media,
must be aware of their responsibilities and when they voice their Concerns be
careful not to encourage acts of violence or acts which undermine the
legitimacy and moral authority of Australia's protest.
It does not'diminish our resentment of the French decision to understand
exactly what it entails.
It should be a concern of all members that Australians have an accurate
knowledge about the French proposals not least because our protests will
have more effect if they do not contain exaggerations and inaccuracies.
Our arguments will be more persuasive if they are based in reality and not
irrational fear.
I doubt if there is any Australian who does not feel anger about the French
decision. What we must take to the French Government is a collective
1~ õ J~ r~ zJ NO Ui f'UtD/ U 
TEL: 18 . Jun. 95 22 5 No . CJJ7 F.' 07/ 0-,
7
concerted response. The response of all the Australian people channelled
through the best means available to us.
This decision to resume testing is a bad decision by the Government of
France. It is bad because it endangers progress towards a world free of
nuclear weapons. It Is bad because it ignores the views of the people of the
region in which the tests are being conducted. It is bad because it sets back
so far the cause of constructive French participation in the South Pacific
region. It is bad because it is a decision which is essentially serf-absorbed
rather than showing a wider vision.
It is important that this Parliament, representing the people of Australia,
conveys clearly to Government of France the extent of our concern at this
wilful and unnecessary declsion by the Government of France.
I commend the motion to the House.
CANBERRA 19 JUNE 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF FRANJO TUDJMAN, PRESIDENT OF CROATIA
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, TUESDAY 20 JUNE 1995
It is a great pleasure to welcome you here to Australia.
This first visit by a Croatian head of state is obviously a significant event. It is
a cause for celebration among Australians of Croatian descent, who have
contributed so much to Australia in the past, and who are now especially
well-placed to help build a new and more substantial relationship with
Croatia. Croatian-Australians have played an important part in Australia's history.
Since the Ballarat gold rush of 1854, more than 100,000 Croatian-Australians
have contributed their labour, skills and innovation to Australia's economic
and social development.
Croatian immigrants and their families have helped to open up rural Australia
and to develop our resource and agricultural industries. Croatians became
K miners in New South Wales, cane cutters in Queensland, farmers and market
gardeners in Western Australia and other states.
Croatian fishermen from the Croatian Littoral and Dalmatia helped found the
Australia fishing industry.
Today in South Australia, a significant portion of the industry is run and
owned by immigrants from Croatia. The best-known fisherman among them
is Dean Lukin, the weightlifting champion who won a gold medal for Australia
at the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles.
Croatian grape growers and wine makers, who first arrived here late last
century from Dalmatia, helped found the Australian wine industry. Today that
industry is worth over $ 1 billion in exports annually. 
This year a Croatian-Australian, John Kosovich, received an award in the
Order of Australia, for his contribution to the Australian wine industry.
Croatian labourers and tradesmen, who came to Australia from the displaced
persons camps of post-World War Two Europe, battled the isolation and
hardship of the logging camps, mines, rural construction teams and the
Snowy Mountains Electricity Scheme. They helped to build the modern
Australia. Here in Canberra, the work of Croatian-Australian workers and craftsmen is
all around us, including in this Parliament House.
The entire marble work in the National Library of Australia was erected by
Croatian stonemasons from the island of Brac.
And the Embassy which you will be opening tomorrow, Mr President, is a very
tangible sign of this contribution.
Along the way, Croatian-Australians have introduced their love of soccer,
through players such as this year's player of the year, Mark Viduka.
And a number of Croatians are leading players in our own football code,
Australian Rules.
Croatian Australians have also been prominent in the arts.
Earlier this year I visited Berlin, where 1 was very proud to attend a
performance of Wagner's opera, Tristan and Isolde, conducted by a rising
Australian musician of international stature, Simone Young Simone has a
Croatian family background.
So the skill and talents of Croatian Australians have contributed in important
ways to the modern Australia you are visiting, Mr President.
The commitment shown by communities like the Croatian-Australians to
preserve cultural diversity and respect it, helps foster Australia's sense of
nationhood. Croatian-Australians have applied their skills and culture for Australia's
benefit. And they have done this, as Australians must, with their loyalty first
to Australia.
One issue concerns all Australians about the countries emerging from the
former Yugoslavia: the appalling loss of life and suffering taking place there.
Many Australians have been touched by it, not least because this country is
home to several hundred thousand immigrants from the former Yugoslavia,
and to their descendants. 
We understand the pain the conflict causes citizens of the Croatian-
Australian community and other communities with links with parts of the
former Yugoslavia.
Despite the suffering and the horrors which have been deeply felt here, it has
been a tribute to Australians of Croatian, Serb and other former Yugoslav
descent that they have not allowed the pressures and tensions of this
appalling conflict to spill over into their own country.
We share in Croatia's happiness in becoming independent.
That was not achieved easily. And as we ourselves know, making changes to
old practices and habits of mind, introducing economic policy changes and
building a prosperous and just multicultural society is not easy.
Independence carries with it responsibilities as well as rights and powers. It
must deliver security in the broadest sense to all the people of the country:
peace, prosperity, respect for the equality and dignity of all citizens
regardless of their ethnicity, religion or language.
The standing of Croatia and the former republics of Yugoslavia, and the
legacies of their leaders, will ultimately be judged by the success of
democracy within their countries, and the contribution they make to building
peace and stability in their immediate region through cooperation with their
neighbours. lIa m sure all those present here -and all Australians -join mein wishing you
well in contributing to these objectives and in our hope that you can use your
position to build peace in the former Yugoslavia.
You have arrived at a time when Australia is enjoying the results of
fundamental changes in our foreign, trade, economic and social policies. I
y hope you will find much that Croatia and its business people will want to
associate with.
Today, Australia is one of the fastest growing of all the industrialised
economies and forecast to remain so throughout this year.
We are a major trading nation, increasingly looking to take an active role in
the Asia-Pacific region, which now accounts for half of the world GDP.
Already three-quarters of our exports go to this region, over 30 percent of
them manufactured exports.
I believe these developments in Australia and our region are significant for
Croatia as well. Australia is a good place from which to do business in the
Asia-Pacific region. 
As the world's 13th largest economy, with a sophisticated research capacity
and a deep resource base, Australia has much to offer European countries
such as Croatia. And the Croatian-Australian community is well placed to
contribute to the development of trade between us.
I am sure all Australians will join me in wishing you and your country well in
your endeavours to secure a peaceful, cooperative and prosperous place in
the international community.
Finally, let me assure you that we look forward to building on the many
personal connections which exist between our two countries to create a more
vital and substantial relationship with Croatia.
I wish you and Mi s Tudjfrian well for your vlslt.
I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to join me in welcoming you to
Australia. Ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AND THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER, THE HON KIM BEAZLEY MP,
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 20 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM Well, I am very happy to announce that the Labor Party has a new
Deputy Leader and the Labor Government has a new Deputy Prime
Minister in Kim Beazley. He was elected unanimously and with broad
acclaim in the Caucus and I noted I didn't need to because
everybody understood that the seamlessness of the change, Brian
Howe's gracious resignation and Kim's unanimous election speaks
volumes for the unity and sense of purpose which the Government
has, the collective spirit and the genuine good will that was in
evidence today. I spoke in the room about the continuity in the Labor
Party and the fact that such a change and the manner of such a
change actually means something. In our Party which is a very
clannish organisation, personal relationships and the nature of this
change does matter and it matters to us and I am delighted that Kim's
father could be here on this occasion, purely by accident I'm told, and I
made the point that the oldest Labor Party in the world has this
continuity. When I first came here Kim senior was a member here and he took
John Curtin's place in the House of Representatives in 1945. At that
stage, he and I used to have discussions about my friendship with
Jack Lang who had attended Henry Parkes' rallies in the Sydney
Domain and with other leading people in NSW such as McKell and you
can see that continuity. And then, of course, I got know Kim before he
came to Parliament and now we have had a Parliamentary life together
and he has a long and distinguished record as a Minister from 1983,
sharing this period with me and his colleagues.
So, that continuity is there and in our Party continuity and sense of
history and commitment to common ideals matters and the mood and
sentiment and good naturedness of our relations together matter to us
as well. At any rate can I say this is a very strong result for the
Government. It makes the Government strong with a young man as a
Deputy Prime Minister who's had enormous and extensive experience. 
I think it is a very strong outcome for the State of Western Australia
who, again, have kept that great tradition of supplying significant
people to Labor Governments that have been there at the critical
turning points of the nation and Labor's history and I welcome Kim's
election as Deputy Prime Minister.
I look forward enormously to working with him. I think that this verve
and commitment that he will bring to the job and also as he is from his
state of origin Western Australia means I think again a sense of us
looking at the country and going at the problems with imagination and
vigour can only be reindorsed as a consequence of tonight's election.
So for my very public congratulation to him and I now invite Kim to
speak to you and say a few things to him and maybe ask him some
questions.
KB Well thanks very much Paul it is a great honour, a great opportunity. I
had an opportunity in the Caucus room, just a moment ago, to pay
tribute to Brian Howe's service, the extraordinary role that he has
played over a lengthy period of time now in the Labor Government as
a person with very clear cut comprehension of the social needs of the
nation and a real capacity in Cabinet to make a difference in argument
on the detail of policy issues.
I ought here to say how deeply flattered and grateful I am at the
opportunity to serve with Paul as Prime Minister. This is a government
with vision, it is now unique, I think, in the political process of this
country, it is also a government with policies. And the fact that we
have a very clear sense of direction, that we have an understanding of
the needs of our nation. That those needs go very much to the issues
of survival in an international community in which there is nobody who
feels that this is a country owed to living It is a tough hard fight for the
nation and it requires people with both vision, clarity and the
toughness and will to carry that through and the honestly to declare
their intent to the Australian people as to what there is intended in the
relationship between Government and the Australian people. I think,
from my point of view, my job is to listen as well as speak, to absorb
what those in the community wish to say to us about their experiences
and how they see life. I regard it as a particular challenge to get out
amongst our working people, the families to point out the social safety
net, the industrial safety net that has been put in to protect them. I
also feel that I do have a special role in the medium size and small
states.
The great engine of the political process in this country does reside in
the suburbs of our great cities of Sydney and Melbourne. There is no
question about that but in many ways the forward development of the
nation is a product of what is going on in smaller and medium sized
states, particularly my home state of Western Australia and
Queensland. And I do regard myself as having a special role to play
there in conveying the direction of the Government and ensuring that 
our message, our concerns have got across and that the concerns of
the people who are on the receiving end of Government policies and
directions have got across to us.
J Prime Minister you spoke about continuity in the Labor Party. Do you
now see Mr Beazley as perhaps your national successor?
PM Well, I mean I want to make certain first and foremost that if he is to
succeed me at whatever point that is that he succeeds in
Government. I think that's what we are both about: winning the next
election. They are always hard to win in Australia, as it ought to be. I
mean the public insists that the parties deliver quality to them in terms
of policies and obviously Kim's standing in the Party, his record as a
Minister in now so many senior portfolios and now his endorsement
unanimously as Deputy Prime Minister makes him, if you like, the
obvious person in the longer haul. We want that to be a longer haul
but that matter, of course, is up to the people as it should be in a
democracy.
J What about the career of Carmen Lawrence now, how would you
characterise her future prospects?
PM I think her future prospects are as good as the day she arrived here,
probably better now she has got the experience of time under her belt
in terms of health. She has a very large domestic portfolio
responsibility and anyone in the Labor Party who in any way damages
the Coalition will always be in for a personal attack. This has been
true of Whitlam, it has been true of Neville Wran, it has been true of
me, it will be true of her: anyone who can do them damage. So
extending the arm of the executive in Western Australia to try to prey
into the business of the opposing party shouldn't become a norm in
Australian Politics and shouldn't be rewarded. And she is, in standing
up against that sort of behaviour, standing up for all of us who believe
that there are protocols in this country to observe and there are
decencies which the Western Australian Government has not been
prepared to observe. Were I to announce a royal commission into the
goings on of the former Fraser Cabinet here they would be outraged
as we are outraged by the Court Government's behaviour. I think the
public have already given us the answer of what they think about that
and that is not very much. Premier Court's standing has fallen
dramatically in recent times. This is one of the reasons for it and the
vindication of the high standing of which he is held.
So, I think, she can take this in her stride and go on about her great
public career in the cause of the Australian people and in the cause of
Labor.
J: Mr Beazley, do you see yourself as the natural successor to Mr
Keating? 
PM: I don't see myself in any position other than I have already announced
previously. I see that as an interesting issue for the next century. I
think we are blessed in the Labor Party with a whole variety of
alternative leaders of which I happen to be one, but that situation has
not changed as a result of any events today.
J: Mr Beazley, in the past you and Mr Keating haven't always seen eye to
eye. I think the Telecom battle was one, I think you were the chief
numbers person for the previous Prime Minister, how are you going to
get on now?
PM: I'm glad he wasn't so good at that at the time.
KB: I don't think you could say that it was an outstanding success, if that
was true. We have always got on extremely well in Government and
prior to our being in Government. I first met Paul, when I used to come
over on regular visits as a youngster really and he was a young man in
Parliament and my father used to point him out to me as the person to
watch and I have been watching him ever since and have been very
impressed with the process.
J: Mr Beazley, when did you find out the Deputy's job would be vacant
and what were your reasons for standing?
KB: Well, there had been a few rumours around as you are well aware.
There was something run in the press over the weekend and there had
been some discussion, I understand, around the preselection
processes in Victoria. But, I don't think I was aware of anything final
really, until last night on that from recollection.
J: Mr Keating, do you have any regrets that it wasn't a woman, given
Labor's affirmative action policy, wasn't a woman who became the
Deputy?
PM: No, but we don't have an affirmative action policy for the leadership.
We are a mature party, we have a very big role to play and perform
and these positions will always fall to the people the Caucus believe
are best to fill them. I think, this is always a matter of choice for any
member of the Party and all the members chose, in a sense, Kim and
those who decided not to stand, if they were ever going to stand,
chose Kim by their actions and that includes Carmen Lawrence. I do
want to see a greater participation by women in the affairs of the
Parliamentary Labor Party and I think there is no doubt if there is no
formal affirmative action policy being undertaken by the Caucus, there
is certainly an informal policy and that is to try to promote women to
the Ministry and to the Cabinet and when the moment is the moment to
positions of leadership. On this occasion, the Caucus took the view
that Kim was the most experienced person and given his record here,
it is very hard to argue that point. 
J: Mr Keating, will you give an undertaking that if you win the next
election, you will stay the full term?
PM: There is no point in winning elections to give them away. I have kept
making this point over and over. A lot of you want me to trade in
months or periods of this Parliament, I keep telling you I don't want to
do that.
J: Mr Keating, did you ever contemplate in thinking about this change of
deputy leadership as an opportunity for a reshuffle given..
PM: This matter came, and I said to you this morning, from Brian Howe's
own view that he thought that this was the time for him not to nominate
again for his selection for the seat of Batman and having made that
decision thought about whether the Party's interest would be advanced
by him staying as Deputy Prime Minister as Lionel Bowen stayed as
Deputy Prime Minister until the poll. He thought, in these
circumstances, it was better to resign his position and it was, as Kim
said a moment ago, only really yesterday that he came to that
decision. So, there has been no forethought about ministerial
changes, but the point is that the Cabinet and the Ministry are working
well and as I said to you this morning, we have just produced a surplus
Budget, I think, about our fourth in our history. The Coalition never
ever produced one. We have introduced that massive change to
retirement income and savings in the Budget, Kim presided over with
root and branch examination of the expenditure programs with there
gross savings of the order of about $ 1.5 billion and you know more
recently we have had the Justice Statement released by the Attorney-
General and Minister for Justice with imagination, I think, and flair.
And, the structure for the republic the proposal that I put down the
Government has been doing many things and I hope doing them well.
So, there is no argument around and no need therefore for us to be
talking about a major reshuffle of the Government.
J: Prime Minister, will you be making another visit to Queensland before
the State poll?
PM: Probably, I will.
J: Given the achievements you have just been talking about, you must be
disappointed you are not getting a bigger kick out of the polls then?
PM: Well, it depends on what you think a poll registers. What you think a
poll registers and how you read it. I think, just look at the position we
are in at this stage of the last Parliament and we had other people
making similar observations, there is a much closer gap between
parties now and you can't ever, I think, assume that the Australian
public will take, as a government, a party that won't say what its
policies are. That somebody who stands for nothing. I mean, I think
the last month has made it clear that John Howard is out of his age 
and out of his depth with the problems which Australia faces now. This
is not lost on the public.
J: Mr Beazley, you said that the Labor Party had a range of alternative
leaders and the events of today hadn't changed that, Mr Keating also
made you the more obvious alternative in the long run, do you think it
has made you the more obvious alternative?
KB: I wouldn't disagree with anything that Paul says, but I think this is a
show that has real strength across the breadth of it. This is one of the
principle differences between ourselves and our political opponents.
We have any one of a number of people who could be made Prime
Minister, they have none. They have not got the bottom to them to
form a decent Cabinet. They have not got the capacity to carry the
foreign relations of this country. They have not got the capacity to
carry the very considerable requirements and difficulties there are in
fitting into a Budget with what we have available to us essential
social protection for the communities. So, we actually have a huge
range of people who are alternatives and a whole lot who don't feature
very much in the press, but are sitting there waiting in the wings. I am
not that much different in age from the Prime Minister and he is going
to continue for a very long period of time.
PM: We are happy, of course, to take questions. This is an occasion of
some celebration for us, we don't want to truncate it, but nor do we
want to stay on pointlessly or needlessly. Is there anything else you
might want to ask? If not, thank you indeed. Let me take the
opportunity of shaking your father's hand ( Kim Beazley Snr).
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP AND
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER THE HON BRIAN HOWE MP, PRESS
CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 20 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: and he said that he will not be contesting his seat at the next Federal
election, but wishes to continue in his portfolio and the Cabinet. I
addressed the Caucus about his life and career in politics and the
warmth and acclamation and recognition with which his contribution was
greeted by the Caucus, I think, said all that needed to be said about the
standing that Brian has had in the Party and in the Government. Before
I invite Brian to speak let me just record a couple of things.
I said of him and about him that he had been a major contributor to the
Government over the period from 1983, he joined the Expenditure
Review Committee which was basically the sorting house of priorities
within the Government and held major social portfolios at a time when
Government spending was being severely contracted. You might
remember that the Government inherited a level of outlays over 30 per
cent of GOP in 1983 and by 1990 that had declined to about 23.5 per
cent. That is a tough time to be a Social Security and Health Minister.
But, during that period, I think, we were able to say that through Brian's
leadership and commitment, that not only was social policy raised to a
much higher and more sophisticated level than had ever been
contemplated in Australia before, but we had actually been able to
support the people who we believe needed the support through a
focused policy, a targeted policy with across the board measures, but,
such things as the Family Allowance Supplement now called Additional
Family Support and the path breaking body of the Child Support Agency
where maintenance is collected through the tax system which is, I think,
a world first and is now being looked at and emulated by other countries.
Brian went on from there to the Health portfolio and then to Housing and
Regional Development and, of course, the programs which he has
become synonymous with ' Better Cities'. But, his commitment to the
Government and his leadership in the ERC when as the most senior
person in the Left in the Caucus and therefore Australia in the 
Government, playing a role at that level meant that the Labor Party has
had a unity about it that previous Labor governments never had. Not
only unity, but a sense of common purpose and that sense of common
purpose tracked its way down through the years to find, you know, the
putting into place of not simply great economic reforms, but great social
reforms to match them, to graft with them to make this both an efficient
and equitable place.
Brian's commitment to equity and to social justice has been profound,
but also his commitment to economic efficiency and economic change is
what has marked him out as a leader in the Left and why, I think, many
people in the Left today take the view that you look at the Government
as a totality and you look at its responsibilities as a totality. I have said
to you before and it is worth repeating: I think one of the great changes
in Australia in the years of the Labor Government has been to the Labor
Party itself. Not many countries are able to see the complete
reformation of one of its major parties to become the party of
government, the party of economic change, the party of social reform,
the party of nationalism, these are all the things that have happened to
the Labor Party in the period 1983 to 1995 and that has come from a
unity between the moderate Right centre sections of the Party and the
Left coming together in a commitment of common cause, the likes of
which the Australian Labor Party has never seen and it has been the
foundations of our success.
The fact that we can, in a way, contemplate now Brian's departure and
his replacement, within the business of the Caucus an in-the-groove
change, itself says a lot about the maturity of the Labor Party in
Government and the way in which the Caucus acts and the strength that
the Government has had through the foundation stone of the Caucus in
having sensible, committed Caucus members right from that period
from 1983 down to 1995.
Brain's leadership in that, I said today in the Caucus, that Brian has held
more effective power than any person in the Left in Australia probably
ever. Certainly in the post war years, no leader of the Left has enjoyed
more power in these major portfolios of Social Security, Community
Services and Health, Housing and Community Services and, of course,
crowning that as Deputy Prime Minister. For my part, I couldn't have
asked for a more loyal or committed Deputy than Brian. We went
through the last election with complete unity of purpose and we have
ever since, but there comes a time in everybody's life where they decide
that they don't want to contest another poll and to make that decision
and make it forthrightly with their constituency and he felt that having
made that decision that now was the best time to surrender the Deputy
leadership to another person who was going to contest their seat at the
next election. We both salute him and thank him for that.
So, could I perhaps just wind up my remarks by saying that there was a
tremendous amount of good will towards Brian and the Caucus today, 
across factions because, I think, part of the commitment is Brian's
commitment to social justice and the fact that he stands for something
good and solid and fair and equitable and decent in this country and this
community really counts well with that Caucus right across the board.
There was, as there always is in any of these transitions, a little touch of
melancholy about it, but again, for the change that it tells for the change
to another Deputy leader, Deputy Prime Minister of this Labor
Government, it is just another keystone in the continuity of the Labor
Party and the Government which we have seen from that period. So, I
would close my remarks now and just finally say that we will be holding a
Caucus meeting this evening to fill the vacancy vacated by Brian and we
will be, I might just also say, having another Caucus meeting tomorrow
to receive a report from Gareth Evans. On those two notes of business,
I hand over to Brian.
BR: Thank you very much Paul, I made a decision that I would retire at the
next election, hang up the Hansards as it were, and I thought the time
had come to do that. I think, this nonsense about mergers in Victoria
really has to be fought on a full time basis and the Hawthorn Football
Club is certainly not going to be merged as long as I am associated with
it the real issue. Apart from that I felt that once I had made that
decision that the second decision flowed from that and that I should
resign as Deputy and give the Party the opportunity to have a Deputy to
to in together with the Prime Minister to fight an election that I think we
can and will win and that, I think, really requires that degree of
commitment that obviously someone who is about to retire, you can't
really expect that. You can't be expected to do that, as much as I am
very interested in the result and will be very much a part of the
campaign. I continue in my portfolio and I hope that I will be able to
bring together the work that we have been doing in housing and some
associated urban areas of urban infrastructure in a month or so as a
fairly major statement and I want to complete that work.
I think, as Paul has said, my contribution to government has been very
much in the area of social policy and I would hope that social policy now
has a status and a standing that it didn't ever have before. When ever
you did any social policy work it was described as a hand out, as a bit of
trivia whereas, I think, now we recognise that Australia has one of the
most sophisticated social security systems in the world. That in terms of
our understanding of the links between social security and for example,
the labour market, so-called active social security policy, we were one of
the first countries in the world to comprehensively develop that policy.
That in terms of a whole range of areas of social policy we have been
able to not only bring about reform, but in the context of fiscal restraint
that produced Thatcherism in Britain which was described as inhumane
as vindictive, as having an enormous impact on lower income people, on
poorer regions in Britain, we never had any of that in Australia, I think,
because we had decent and respectable and reformist social policy and
I think over time we have been able to develop social policy in a whole
range of areas that have been quite, I think, path breaking and Australia 
has an enormous reputation in the OECD as a country of very, very
significant reform in the area of social policy. The fact that we produce
an annual Social Justice Statement as part of the Budget, may seem
some small thing, but effectively it means that the Government allows
itself to be judged in each Budget in terms of its record and, I think, that
increasingly we are showing that social policy is the partner of economic
policy. I think, working with the Prime Minister and before that the Treasurer,
has been for me a great experience. I think, as I said to Caucus
because the Prime Minister has always taken when he was Treasurer
and now as Prime Minister the long view, his interest is not in
opportunist politics, it is in fundamental reform and fundamental
economic reform. But, of course, fundamental economic reform presents
great social challenges and, I think, the task of time has been to match
economic with social and, I think, this Government has now established
a unity of purpose in terms of economic and social policy, which means it
is identified significantly with fairness and with the best Australian values
that I think are the best that Australia has. And so I think that this is the
time in which to make that decision to move on and I suppose as
someone who is identified with the Left, I would say that I leave with the
show in very much better shape than when I started and that to me, as
someone who is very committed to Left wing politics, is a matter of great
pleasure. I think we have got a lot to contribute to the Caucus and to
Governments in the future and I suppose that is my final point, which is
simply to say that one of the strengths of this Government is that it is
refurbishing and rebuilding and strengthening and when you look around
the Caucus this morning, you think my God there is a lot Ministers out
there that still aren't part of a Labor Government and I am going to be
working very hard to see that they become Ministers in future Labor
Governments.
PM: Well I think both of us will be happy to take questions.
J: Mr Howe when did you decide not to contest the next election, what
contributed to that decision and whose views did you take into account?
BH: Well, essentially, the Prime Minister's views I suppose. I mean the
Prime Minister and I have been talking about it over recent weeks.
I hadn't made a decision until last night and I made a decision then,
I think, because we felt this was the right time to resolve the matter and
to resolve it in the way we have just done in the Caucus.
J: Mr Howe there has been a degree of speculation about your departure
for some time. Have you felt under any pressure, whatsoever?
BH: Oh well I think you are not insensitive to what comments occur.
I suppose I, of all people, tend to be very sensitive. But, at the same
time, I think you know that there is a job to do and I came into the
Federal Parliament to pursue reform and I have had the opportunity to 
do that over a long period of time and I have got the opportunity to
complete the reforms in this current Parliament and I intend to do that.
And I have always tried to put what people say behind me and
concentrate on what I think is the main game and that is reform. I think it
is what you leave behind you, that really is important.
J: Mr Howe back to your first answer, are you saying that the
Prime Minister influenced you into your resignation?
BH: No I wasn't saying that.
PM: Michelle [ Grattan] will always look for the most difficult question.
J: Well could you elaborate on what you were saying when you said the
Prime Minister was the main influence?
BH: Well I had contemplated the possibility of retiring at the next election.
I thought I couldn't make that decision independently of the Government,
even though that is a decision for the Victorian Branch, so I took it up
with the Prime Minister and we have had several conversations over a
couple of weeks. We finally made the decision last night.
J: Mr Keating will you take the opportunity now to reshuffle your Ministry?
PM: Probably not. I think people are doing quite well and the Government's
performing, as I said, we have had more changes in the last month, than
we saw out of two decades of Coalition Government. The Budget in
surplus, they never got a surplus once, a Justice Statement, a framework
for the Republic. We are having another meeting on the Accord
tomorrow, with the prospect of another Accord Mark ViII which will mean
that this is the only Party in Australia able to deliver a low inflation rate
and keep it there. I think, by any measure, the Government is working
as well as it has worked at any time since 1983.
J: Who do you support as Mr Howe's successor?
PM: Well that is a matter for the Caucus, not for me.
J: Do you accept that anyone who succeeds Mr Howe could rightly see
themselves as your ultimate successor when you decide to retire?
PM: No I don't think so. I think there has been no pattern whatsoever to the
Labor leadership. But, of course, it has always been mostly about
leadership in Opposition, not leadership in Government and I think this
is what has marked this period out to be different. But there has never
been a pattern to it and I don't think you can ever induce one.
J: Mr Keating why shouldn't this move be seen as clearing the decks for an
election? 
PM: Because I mean you, Glen [ Milne], amongst others, have been reporting
an early election now since 15 months ago, haven't you? And there still
isn't one.
J: Will you now rule one out Mr Keating?
PM: Well I have said before only if a Prime Minister who has these options
would be foolish to rule for, in this case, myself, himself, out of a
discretion which the Prime Minister in this system always enjoys. But
there..
J: It is not what we are reporting.
PM: Yes, I know. No you have been reporting early elections and
John Hewson said there were early elections and there was going to be
an election. Alexander Downer said there was an early election and I
think we have seen in recent weeks and months speculation about an
early election. When many of you thought the Government wouldn't
jump the Budget hurdle. When we did jump it, you didn't say good jump,
you said " early election". You were wrong and if you write it tomorrow,
you'll be wrong again.
J: Mr Keating when Mr Howe approached you at first and said he was
thinking of stepping down, did you encourage him to do so then?
PM: No, I take the view this: Brian and I have lived as Ministers in this
Government now for 12-odd years, that is a very long time. It is longer
than any other group of Labor Ministers have lived with one another in
work and in respect and given the pace of the Government, two Budgets
a year virtually for every year it has been in office, major policy changes,
for 12 years of our partnership has-been like 20 or 30 years in the days
of the Coalition, in terms of work, activities, probably more. Let me not
put a discount through that, probably half a century. And, therefore, you
know because of the engagement and the work and the frenetic pace of
it, you know May Statements every year up to 1991, bar one, Budgets,
big contextual social policy changes, then the big statements we have
had since budgets One Nation, Working Nation, Investing in the Nation
all these other changes and now Brian's stewardship of some of these
areas which formerly the Commonwealth hasn't been involved with, with
Better Cities etc, housing, choice. We have had a lot to do with one
another over the years and you get to that point where we went to the
1993 election together and we succeeded at a poll, it has been my view,
it's entirely a matter then for Brian to decide what he wanted to do and a
matter of his discretion, without any prompting from any one of us
including and, perhaps, especially me. So I never, at any stage, raised
the Deputy Leadership with Brian, he raised it with me, and I wouldn't
have.
J: Mr Keating when Caucus selects Mr Howe's successor, what should
they give the most weight to, seniority or electoral appeal? 
PM: Well you had better get on the telephone and ring around and ask them
what they think?
J: Mr Howe it is probably likely the Left won't retain the Deputy Prime
Ministership. Do you accept that and do you think the Left should seek
any other compensation for losing the Deputy Prime Ministership, if that
happens?
BH: I think that we should choose in Caucus tonight who we think is the best
person to do this job at this particular point in time. In terms of the
positioning of the Left faction I think that occurs not around one
particular position, or one element of policy, but it occurs in a broader
context and you know I think the approach is not going to hang on the
particular decision the Caucus makes today. It will take account,
no doubt, of where that falls tonight. But then look to the next round of
decisions, maybe the policy stance on some issue. So I just don't think
that you can look at each position and each change in quite that way.
J: Are you happy with the level of representation of the Left in the Cabinet
and in the Ministry?
BH: Well I think we would always like to do better. I think we started off in
1983 with one Left Minister out of, whatever it was, 17. And today we
have four Ministers in Cabinet. But, more importantly, I think not just in
the Left, I think there is this enormous youth and enthusiasm and vigour
and intelligence that is there in the Caucus. So that I think, certainly,
following the next election there will be an opportunity for us to put
together an even more talented Government than we currently have.
J: Prime Minister could you comment on the Paris talks?
PM: Well just to say I was quite disappointed by the fact that the French
seem immobile about their decision. Gareth Evans will be coming back
giving a report to the Cabinet. We will be holding a Cabinet meeting to
receive that report and also report to the Caucus. I think we will
probably say more about it then.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
WORLD CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR
SMALL BUSINESS, SYDNEY WEDNESDAY 21 JUNE 1995
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I am grateful for the invitation to speak to you at the closing of this 40th World
Conference of the International Council for Small Business.
I want to use this speech to say some things about Australia's trade policy and what
we are doing to help our business people make the most of the enormous
opportunities which exist in this Asia-Pacific region, the fastest growing in the world.
The Minister for Trade, Senator McMullan, is today issuing a statement called
" Winning Markets: Australia's future in the global economy" and I want to use this
opportunity to formally launch this document.
This international conference about small business is an appropriate place to do this
because one of the things which has been very much on the Government's mind in
drawing the strategy up is the increasingly important role of small and medium
businesses in Australia's trade.
I also want to use the opportunity to speak to those of you who are here from
overseas about the opportunities for business in Australia. Because this country
offers overseas investors a very competitive environment, and is an ideal base for
companies including small companies wishing to tap Asian markets.
It is now a very familiar notion that the globalisation of production is dramatically
reshaping the way national economies work and businesses operate. More than
one third of world trade is now conducted by firms trading within their own structures
across national boundaries.
I am sure this has been a theme of many of the formal and informal discussions you
have had at this conference. 
The driving fact behind globalisation, of course, is the rapid movement of people
and information. Indeed, the movement of people and information rather than goods
is the fastest growing segment of world trade.
The information revolution has generated whole new areas of business many of
them created by small enterprises and it is transforming the way other business is
done. More and more firms, for example, are marketing their products and services,
locating their production, conducting their research and sourcing their materials
wherever in the world it makes the best economic sense to do so.
Your choice of Sydney as the venue for this conference reflects these changes.
The Council's World Conference has convened outside North America only three
times since it first met 40 years ago. And all three of those meetings have been in
the past five years.
The globalisation of production is confronting businesses with unprecedented
challenges. And small and medium-sized enterprises are no more immune from
these changes than are large ones.
Markets in most economies are becoming increasingly contestable. For small and
medium-sized businesses increasingly that means opportunities abroad and
overseas competition at home.
The result is that few businesses, including smaller ones, can afford to look to
domestic markets alone. This is especially so in Australia with our relatively small
population and an economy tightly integrated into world markets.
But despite these challenges, small and medium-sized enterprises may, in fact, be
the best placed to exploit the opportunities of globalisation.
They tend to be less bureaucratic than large firms and more innovative and
responsive. They have probably gained most from those improvements in
communications and transport which have reduced the cost and complexity of
international business.
Globalisation has also been driven and encouraged by the great growth over recent
years in direct foreign investment. In the second half of the 1 980s foreign direct
investment grew at an annual average rate of 30 per cent, more than twice the rate
of world exports.
The trend has been obvious for Australian investment. In 1980 this country's stock
of equity investment overseas was around $ 7 billion. By 1994 it was around
billion.
Australian companies have understood that, in a world of integrated production,
often the best way to secure entry into a market is by establishing operations there. 
And as we have seen here, such investment will often lead not only to increased
sales in the new market, but also to more exports from Australia.
This country's small and medium-sized enterprises have been vital to the success of
our shift towards an international ised economy. Around 4,500 such Australian
businesses are now regularly and actively involved in international trade. They
generate $ 6.5 billion in international turnover. And we expect this to double over
the next five years.
But a great many other small and medium businesses farmers, tourist operators,
hotel and transport providers are also responding to the challenges of international
trade. Their level of involvement is certain to increase.
Success in global markets is vital for Australia's continuing prosperity.
During the past decade this Government has reversed the long-term decline in
Australia's performance as a trading nation. In 1980 the proportion of our GDP
provided by exports of goods and services had fallen below the OECD average. In
1993 it was again above it.
Our exports of manufactures have been doubling every five years.
They now account for almost one-third of our total goods exports.
We have also diversified the composition of our merchandise trade. The most
dramatic shift has been in the value-added area precisely where it was most
required. Five years ago, elaborately transformed manufactures accounted for 16 per cent of
our merchandise exports. Last year it was 22 per cent.
Another major shift has been in the strong growth of our exports of services. These
now form a quarter of total exports. In fact, the services trade deficit is now less
than a third of what it was a decade ago. On current trends, we will soon have a
surplus. Tourism and education make an enormous contribution to services trade, but we are
also seeing rapid growth in telecommunications, financial services and legal
services. Australia now has a trade surplus in computer software, for example.
Earnings from exports of computer software have grown by 60 per cent over the
past five years to nearly $ 400 million.
The Winning Markets trade strategy which Senator McMullan is releasing today is
designed to improve on this performance. It reflects extensive consultation with
business, and is focussed particularly on getting smaller Australian firms exportready
and operating off-shore. 
Australia's natural resource-based exports minerals and agriculture are, of
course, the core of our export trade and they will remain so. Increasingly we are
adding value to these exports and tailoring them to particular markets.
Winning Markets gives greater priority than in the past to value-added exports, and
especially in manufacturing and services. This is in part because these are the
areas where the Government can add its own particular value for our exporters at
present. The Winning Markets study starts by acknowledging that the factors that will
determine Australia's success as a trading nation are our fundamental economic
policy settings, our access to overseas markets, and the extent to which we can
develop a trade and investment culture, especially among our small and mediumsized
companies.
It recognises that our trade performance depends, often crucially, on domestic
factors. In Australia's case, our macro-economic policy settings have provided a solid basis
for our exporters. We have kept inflation low, and growth high.
We have introduced greater competition through lower tariffs and, more recently,
the adoption of the Hilmer reforms on competition policy, thereby reducing the costs
of doing business.
We have a national commitment to invest in innovation and research and
development. Later this year, the Government will bring down a statement on
support for innovation and best practice in Australian business
Over the long-term, one of the things which will matter most for our future is the
investment the Government has put into upgrading education and training for our
workforce. Over the past decade the proportion of students completing year 12, and the
proportion of young Australians going on to university, have more than doubled.
We have opened up tens of thousands of opportunities in vocational training.
The skills base and the technical excellence we have nurtured, our world class
scientific and research base, our telecommunications capacity these are highly
prized assets in a fast growing region where individual countries are in fierce
competition for resources and wealth.
These are all quality reforms with lasting benefits.
But, of course, just as you need to continually meet new challenges to stay ahead in
your businesses, Government must be able to respond to current developments in
its policy settings.
And that is what my Government has been able to do time and again. 
I am pleased to say that you will see further evidence of this tomorrow when we
meet with the major union groups to conclude a further agreement under the Accord.
This will ensure a continuation of low inflation and job creation. It will provide the
means for us to radically lift our national savings performance.
I am also pleased to be able to let you know that it will address a particular concern
of many businesses domestically, namely the treatment of unfair dismissals.
It is crucially important that all employees can feel confident that they will be treated
fairly in their place of employment. After all, Labor Governments have been
traditionally concerned with the rights and protections of workers.
One of the most important areas where employers have considerable responsibility
is to ensure that in the event of dismissal of employees the action is not harsh or
unjust or unfair, and that the right weight is given to following correct procedures.
In the area of unfair dismissals, the Government is committed to shielding
employees from the small minority of unscrupulous or unjust employers who may not
at times be acting ethically in this area. The Government will maintain this principle
in its approach to questions of dismissal.
With this as background it may still be the case that some of the application of the
current unfair dismissal laws have not always been what all business, and small
business in particular, have thought is right. Indeed, there have been expressions
of public concern that the Government is interested in addressing.
The essential challenge in the area of unfair dismissals is to get the balance right
between the right protection for employees and making sure that the process is not
so legalistic as to mean that the system is not working properly.
Laurie Brereton and I have talked through this issue with both the ACTU and a
number of employers and employer groups.
As a result of these discussions it has been decided to take some action in the area
of unfair dismissals, and the Minister will be announcing further details this
afternoon. Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Government's policies have delivered tangible success.
Australia's international competitiveness has increased around 40 per cent since the
early 1980s.
This competitiveness is reflected in the number of companies establishing regional
headquarters in Australia.
I 
Since 1993, when the Government intensified its efforts to attract regional
headquarters here, another 54 companies have located operations and brought jobs
to Australia. These include firms like IBM, Oracle and Data-General.
The reasons are straightforward:
our management pool is 7 to 8 times bigger than Singapore's and 3 to 4 times
bigger than Hong Kong's
office accommodation in Australian capitals is some 6 to 8 per cent less
expensive than comparable space in Singapore and Hong Kong
we offer high quality, low-cost expatriate accommodation, health and
education
our international telephone calls are about the cheapest in the world
we have well qualified and highly competitive support services, such as
lawyers, accountants, management consultants and computer specialists
Australian salaries for qualified and professional executives are 60 per cent
more competitive than Singapore and 50 per cent more than Hong Kong
our rapidly expanding commercial and cultural ties with the Asia-Pacific
region help support business operations across the region
Our diverse multicultural population is another important asset for this country.
Many Australian SMEs are operated by people from non-English speaking
backgrounds. They often have skills, personal links and knowledge of business
networks in their home countries that can help companies win new markets.
One of the real advantages for Australia of our location in the fastest growing region
of the world is that, much earlier than in Europe, we understood the nature of
competition from the dynamic new Asian economies. We realised that we needed to
compare ourselves and compete not just with our own past performances, or with
other mature industrialised economies, but also with the ' Tigers" around us.
The second part of Winning Markets describes how Australia goes about improving
our access to overseas markets and exploiting these more effectively.
Australia has important traditional markets in Europe and the United States and
smaller emerging markets in the Indian Ocean region and Latin America.
But Asia remains our main target for export growth. The reason is that, by the year
2000, the East Asian economies will constitute the largest market in the world,
surpassing Western Europe and North America. 
Last year alone showed how things are changing. Australia's merchandise exports
to South-East Asia grew by 12 per cent. South-East Asia now accounts for about
per cent of those exports compared with 9 per cent a decade ago. Korea overtook
the United States to become our second-largest export market after Japan. And if
you add together the markets of China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, the China region is
now our third largest trading partner.
Because Australia's trade is diverse we need our trade policy to operate on a wide
range of fronts. For example, we need to address the obstacles that face our
exporters of agricultural and mineral commodities, of manufactures, our overseas
investors and our exporters of skills and ideas. They all have different problems
and need different responses
The best way of doing this is undoubtedly through the multilateral trade system of
the World Trade Organisation.
Australia alone cannot prise open markets. Even if we had the disposition to do so,
we don't have the clout that would enable us to operate unilaterally.
An effective and comprehensive multilateral trade system is our best protection
against the worst excesses of the unilateralists, or of inward-looking bilateral or
regional arrangements.
One of the goals set out in Winning Markets is that of rekindling global enthusiasm
for multilateral trade liberalisation. We saw at the recent G7 summit that support for
such liberalisation is pretty thin in Europe and the United States.
We hope that by the time of the first meeting of the World Trade Organisation in
Singapore next year, Australia can build support for an ambitious agenda that will
include the further liberalisation of trade in agriculture ( with the help of the
Australian chaired Cairns Group), the development of fairer global investment rules
and real movement on the liberalisation of trade in services.
This is a sector of great interest to many small and medium businesses. Australia
has already successfully shaped the course of global negotiations on
telecommunications. And we will be just as active in the negotiations on
professional services, where Australian firms, large and small, are increasingly
turning to export markets, only to find a bewildering array of barriers.
I am sure that the successful APEC leaders' meeting, which President Clinton
chaired in Seattle, did a great deal to bring about the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round. I think APEC can also assist in further global trade liberalisation.
Australia has invested a lot in APEC and we will continue to do so. The Asia-Pacific
region has the fastest growth in the world three times that of established
industrialised countries.
APEC encompasses a dynamic region that already accounts for more than 40 per
cent of the world's population, half of the world's GOP and 46 per cent of its exports. 
The enormous achievement of APEC so far has been to reinforce a region-wide
trend towards liberalising trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific.
It provides the framework in which regional governments can take the hard
decisions on economic deregulation and structural change. Recent deregulation in
Indonesia and China, and tariff reductions in Malaysia, indicate the direction Asia is
heading. These developments strengthen the region's dynamism and ensure
continued high growth rates.
And this process will be strengthened as a result of the historic commitment of
APEC leaders at Bogor last year to free trade and investment in the region by 2010
for developed countries and 2020 for developing countries.
APEC may be the most productive manifestation we have yet seen of what used to
be called the North/ South dialogue.
The commitment to free trade and investment in APEC goes well beyond the
liberalisation of tariffs. It will address a host of market access issues that
increasingly matter to Australia's traders and investors in the globalised trade
environment services, investment, transfer of technology and intellectual property.
Different standards alone add an estimated 5 to 10 per cent to the costs faced by
exporters entering a market for the first time. So APEC's work in areas such as
standards, the mutual recognition of testing procedures and the streamlining of
customs procedures can offer real gains to business.
It is vital that small business is in a position to take full advantage of the
opportunities provided by free trade and investment in APEC. This will be the major
theme of the meeting of APEC ministers responsible for small business policy to be
held in Adelaide later this year.
With many US business people here, it may be worth noting a fact that seems to
receive little attention in the United States: that US exports to East Asia are growing
at twice the rate of East Asian exports to the US.
US projections have put Asia, even excluding Japan, as the United States' largest
export market by 2010.
So APEC is important to the United States as well as to Australia.
The access Australia achieves to markets through multilateral activities like APEC,
the World Trade Organisation and other forums such as the development of links
between the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement and the Australia-New Zealand Closer
Economic Relations Agreement is supported by our bilateral activities with
individual governments.
A model of what we can do in this area is found in the many layers of government
and commercial cooperation Australia has built up with Indonesia. 
It is perfectly true, of course, that only businesses can do business. But sound and
creative govern ment-to-govern ment relationships provide a foundation of confidence
which is often reassuring to business people.
Another theme of this Government's work bilaterally and a direction we want to
continue to move in is encouraging the development of alliances and partnerships
between Australian and overseas companies. Linkages with other firms, particularly
large ones, is a key strategy for SMEs wanting to exploit the opportunities of
globalisation. Examples of what we already have done in this area is the establishment of a fund
to examine ways in which Australian and Korean companies with complementary
capabilities could capture opportunities in the " information superhighway" which
neither can do alone.
Similarly, we have set up a fund to help establish consortia of Australian and
Singaporean companies to bid for large projects to encourage involvement in the
expanding Asian infrastructure market.
The third key element of Winning Markets involves fostering a trade and investment
culture among local business.
Recent studies in Australia have found that a major factor distinguishing those firms
that export from those that do not is the presence, or lack of it, of an export culture
within the companies.
Such a culture has begun to take root in Australia but it still needs nurturing.
Recent studies of Australian manufacturers and service exporters have identified
huge untapped export potential in both areas. A relatively small number of firms in
these sectors is exporting at present.
The research also showed that the major constraints on the ability of SMEs to
operate internationally include difficulties in getting timely information on market
opportunities and managing uncertainty and risk.
The Government is already assisting exporters through our export assistance
agency, Austrade, and another body Ausindustry.
Ausindustry works to help businesses commercialise research and development
technology, and assist their activities such as product design and quality systems,
marketing and networking.
Austrade works to help exporters secure positions in overseas markets.
Following extensive client research by Austrade, Senator McMullan is announcing
today a new client service strategy which will mean more and better services for
Australian exporters. 
Austrade will now provide extensive information and advice free of charge to new
and potential exporters. This is a major commitment to the needs of potential
exporters among Australian small and medium-sized businesses.
A second group of companies seeking practical assistance to enter and build export
markets will receive subsidised services.
A third group, including experienced exporters building on established overseas
business, can receive tailored, intensive assistance from Austrade on a cost
recovery basis.
As a result of the work done on the Winning Markets strategy and the discussions
which have been held with business, Senator McMullan is also announcing a
number of other decisions which will help Australian exporters and strengthen the
trade policy debate in Australia.
Among these initiatives are a parliamentary enquiry into export-related airfreight
issues. Over half Australia's non-primary merchandise exports are transported by
air. The enquiry will examine Australia's airfreight infrastructure and recommend
how services to exporters, particularly of perishable products, can be improved.
To enable the Government to record and follow-up more effectively Australian
business concerns about export barriers, an export barriers reporting scheme will
come into effect from 1 July 1995 as part of a new unit within the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade.
To build a stronger export culture in Australia and to link trade research and
education more closely with business interests, a Chair and Centre in the Practice of
International Trade will be established, with business support, at the Melbourne
Business School at the University of Melbourne.
In response to the difficulties experienced by smaller Australian companies in selling
their products to some of the more difficult, unfamiliar markets such as Japan,
Austrade is examining the feasibility of setting up an Australian enterprise to
manage effective distribution for Australian processed and manufactured products in
selected markets. The project would draw heavily on private sector involvement and
would operate on a fully commercial basis.
Finally, consultations with industry have shown that the cost of market information is
an important barrier to the expansion of exports from small and medium-sized
enterprises. So a new integrated, electronic exporter and marketing service on the
Internet called the " Australia TradeBlazer' program will be established by
Austrade. In its first stage, it will provide on-line access to relevant export
information.
The Winning Markets strategy, and the associated announcements which are being
made are a further commitment by the Government to ensuring that Australian
companies and our small and medium-sized enterprises especially will continue
to be able to compete with the best in the world's markets. 
Governments commonly talk about their " commitments", I know. They talk about
them at least as often as small businesses talk about the failure of government to
actually deliver.
I suspect our relationship needs a different language: one which reflects the fact
that we are engaged in the same project, which is the creation of a dynamic export
economy. Perhaps we need to see the relationship as a joint venture and talk more
in terms of shared goals and common efforts to which both must deliver.
From the Government's point of view, small and medium sized businesses are an
arm of national policy and, notwithstanding the fact that we cannot act for you or
give you the ideas and courage you will need to succeed, we will do all we can to
make you stronger.
Thank you for having me with you today.
Ends 



TEL: 23. Jun. 95 0: 07 No. 001 P. 01
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING IMP
AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE ACTU, MR MARTIN FERGUSON, PRESS
CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 22 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, here it is, here's another one. Number eight, four years of low
inflation, four years of continuing low inflation with a two to three per
cent inflation commitment in there by the ACTU and the Government.
That means another four years of economic growth. It means another
four years of decent rates of employment. It is the difference between
us and the Coalition about how we run Australia and how they would
run Australia. The difference between Australia and most other OECD
countries because what you have seen from the Government and the
ACTU now In the last month or so, certainly in the last six months, is
appropriate weight on monetary policy, appropriate weight on fiscal
policy and appropriate weight on wages policy. A bit on monetary, a
bit on wages, a bit on fiscal. If this didn't exist, it would be all on fiscal
and all on monetary and as a consequence we would be like a lot of
other OECD countries, we would be sitting there as Robert Reich, the
American Labour Secretary, said, with that rotten choice between high
employment growth and lousy wages or high wages and lousy
employment. We have come right up the middle and the Accord has
taken us there on ever occasion.
This Accord, and it is I think, worth recording just over the years what
we have done with this instrument, this point of agreement with the
work force: the stabilisation of the economy in the early 1980s, the
Medicare adjustment, the productivity and skills formation Accord of
the middle to late 1980s, the enhancement of the change to award
restructuring and the enhancement there of skills, the devolution of the
wages system to an enterprise bargaining system, Accord Mark VII
which had the focus on jobs and employment and now this one Accord
Mark Vill which is, as we say, sustaining growth, low inflation and
fairness. 
TEL: 2.5 . Jufn. j, U: U( ND. UU1 F~. U.
2
And, Isn't it a maturity of Australia or of the great trade union
movement of this country, that it leads the anti-inflation constituency.
It Is the key player in the anti-inflation constituency. Not business, but
the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the trade unions
themselves they with the Government in this Accord.
So, what we will see out of this is what, can I say, the Liberal Party
could never deliver because they never want to. They never want to
talk to the workforce and they never want to talk to trade unions. What
they can never deliver is low inflation. Howard could never deliver it
as Treasurer, would never deliver it as Prime Minister low inflation,
sustainable rates of economic growth and good rates of employment
growth. We have got another target in here of 600,000 jobs over the
life of this document after having reached the other target of half a
million jobs in two thirds of the time in Accord Mark VII.
So, I would like to, again, just say how pleased I am to be able to be
doing this with Martin Ferguson. How delighted I have been with the
spirit of co-operation and the democratic participation of members of
the work force and trade unions in this process and to think that we
could come up with, again, something of this weight and quality when
we see last week how the Coalition were treating us with their
document about regional development. Announcing things that they
have no intention of ever implementing. Compare the immorality of
that with the high principal and morality of this and that is all the world
of difference between this Government and our arrangements with
ACTU and the Coalition.
I'll invite Martin to add to my remarks.
MF: Thank you very much Paul. As Paul has said, it is 12 years and our
engines are still running. I must say, what more does the Australian
community want? Sustaining growth which is about a better Australia,
low inflation and fairness. We are pretty proud of this agreement
because it effectively means that Paul Keating and the Government in
association with the union movement is about leadership, but more
Importantly, responsible leadership.
What are the key cornerstones of the agreement? A decent wages
system. We're going to deliver a competitive Australia, enterprise
bargaining going forward, more and more enterprise agreements. We
also understand and, I suppose, it is the Labor way, it is about a sense
of fairness at work and in the community and at home. So, we have
locked that up once again.
In essence, Australia knows that through almost to the turn of the
century, what the wages system is. It knows that enterprise bargaining
is going to go forward, but it is going to go forward in the context of
delivering to the lowest paid, and that is about fairness. But also 
TEL: N3o. Ju. .09051 0: P0-07-1
3
delivering on the jobs front 600,000 additional jobs and, I think, that
is pretty important because that is about economic prosperity for
Australia and also fairness. There is nothing better for an Australian
working person than a job.
But, I also say, it is about social justice. I go through the agreement, I
have a look at maternity payments, think about the needs of families. I
think Accord Mark VIII is family friendly because what do families
want? They want a decent social safety net and they want jobs and
they want safety net wage increases. So, to my way of thinking, we
hold our head proud today as a union movement. It is 12 years on. It
is a better union movement today because of the Accord process. It is
a better Australia today because of the Accord process. Because
without the Accord process, you know, John Howard couldn't deliver
this. We offered it to him once or twice and he ran away from it. He
was afraid of making the hard decisions and working through the tough
issues with the union movement and with the Australian community.
So, it is on the table. It is out there for people to debate. The same
way in which since, you know, February 1983, we have been prepared
to sit down and work out a decent structure and put it to the Australian
community for consideration. That is about democracy. That is about
an independent Australia.
Again, on behalf of the Australian trade union movement, thanks for
the opportunity to sit down in a responsible way, make the hard
decisions again, because I think that is what Australia wants people
who are prepared to lead in a responsible way. Create jobs, lock in
low inflation and create a better work place, not just a competitive work
place, but a family friendly work place. Thanks very much.
PM: We are happy to take questions.
J: Mr Ferguson, the Accord has been negotiated without the direct
involvement of the transport sector which is industrially and
economically one of the largest in Australia. How does that effect its
validity and viability?
MF: I tell you what, there is one peak council in Australia the Australian
Council of Trade Unions and I think, there are a few differences with
the Transport Workers Union at the moment, but they will be resolved.
This agreement is not just about unions, this is about the future of
Australia. I think, working men and women and their families will
welcome this agreement. Because what do they want? They want
jobs, they want low inflation, they want decent wage agreements,
enterprise bargaining and safety net improvements, the social justice
structure. So, we are offering something of substance. I believe that
this agreement, not only will be endorsed by all Australian unions, but
TEL: 23. Jun 95 
TEL: 26. Jun. 9t U: U( N0. UU1 r. U-
4
more Importantly it will be welcomed by the Australian community at
large.
J: Martin, given that we saw an 11 per cent wage rise in the vehicle
industry recently, how can you ensure a cap on wages growth?
MF: I'll tell you why, because since 1983 we have delivered on every
undertaking to the Australian Labor Government. We have locked
ourselves in, yet again, to an underlying rate of inflation of two to three
per cent. Don't worry about the outcomes. Have a look at the
productivity improvements. Have a look at the work place change.
Have a look at the reduction in industrial disputation of 65 per cent
since 1983. Have a look at in excess of 500,000 jobs in the last two
and half years. So, in essence, I say, we have shaken hands, we have
got an agreement and we will deliver. The vehicle industry workers
are entitled to nine, ten, eleven per cent, whatever they negotiate with
their employer provided they also continue to deliver as they have on
productivity.
J: Prime Minister, how do you believe the business community will
respond to this initiative?
PM: Getting the trade unions and the Government to commit themselves to
two to three per cent inflation over the period, I mean, what more could
they ask for, with all the other commitments to economic growth? And,
as you know, I met with the Metal Trades Industry Association as an
example of one group earlier this week on Monday who wanted to be
part of this process, who wanted to talk about it and, I think, you will
find that that body, a lot of the issues that they propose are actually
incorporated here. So, I think, business is going to treat this
tremendously well.
Frankly, what other, I mean, there would be no other government/ union
workforce relationship anywhere in the 27 member states of the OECD
where a thing of this comprehension and detail and strength
commitment would be available. The whole movement towards a
flexible enterprise based bargaining system, which is allowing the
productivity increases Martin speaks of, which is protecting them now
at the low inflation rate that is, the contestability of the Australian
market the fact that it is now a contestable market with low tariffs and
competition policy and where we are seeing shifts in productivity after
having got the aggregate wage movements in the 1 980s, to getting
within sector wage movements now flexibly, but with the safety net. It
is a model where virtually, because the Accord and wages are holding
such a strong part of the whole economic adjustment, this burden has
lifted from businesses back. Otherwise they would be doing it at the
company level and that is why, by and large, I think they will support it.
I mean they know one thing for sure. They know the Coalition would
never have proposed this. Do you remember this? Let me remind you 
23. Jun. 95 0: 07 No. 001
of John Howard's Industrial Relatiurs Bill. We were going to see it
beforo the last election. Do you remember that? Then we were going
to soc it two days before the last election. Do you remember all that?
We never ever saw it. It never, ever appeared and they know that only
Labor and the unions can basically give Australia a low inflation rate,
without a draconian monetary policy that crushes tile life out of the
economy. And, while some people in business may skip down to the
local polling booth to vote Liberal, they always hope that the Liberals
don't make it and that this sort of sense prevails. And I think they will
keep on hoping.
J: Prime Minister are you promising that when nearly 600,000 new jobs
are delivered, there still won't be upwards of 800,000 people out of
work?
PM: We are seeking to get to 5 per cent unemployment by the end of the
decade. And. as you know, the success we had with Accord Mark VII,
we had a 500,000 target in there. We have now had 630,000 jobs
since the election 630,000 We reached the 500,000 target in
two years and we have had the largest fall in unemployment, since we
have been keeping the records, In the last twelve months. One of the
things that made it difficult lu get to 5 per cent In the 80s. despite the
very high rates of employment growth, was that we couldn't get into the
long term unemployed. But Working Nation actually lets us through
the case management and the job compact, actually get the long term
unemployed back into the mainstream of the workforce. And that is
why, I think, we have been so delighted to have a quarter of this years
jobs go to long term unemployed people. So it means as we come
down that we won't reach that sort of, if you like. floor at around
6 per cent, or 6 1/ 2 per cent, we will be able to break through the floor
this time with the Working Nation type initiatives to get within reach of
that 5 per cent unemploymont rate.
J: How can you do that with the levels of growth that are forecast in the
Budget?
PM: Well we made it clear in the Budget Papers that these are over tho
cycle consistent with getting there. I mean we are still talking about
3 3/ 4, 3 1/ 2, 4 per cent GDP growth.
J: You have gut two levels of safety net rises here and they are timed
with the superannuation levy. What is the reason for the two levels
and how does that gel with the super payments.
MF: I'll tell you what the Accord is about, It's about fairness. In an
enterprise bargaining situatiur a lot of workers can do better than the
safety net because they can deliver on productivity. So what we have
effectively said in this Accord agreement is that we really want to share
the benefits of growth across the whole Australian community. So we
TEL: 
TEL: 23. Jun. 95 0: 07 No. 001 P. O.-
6
have created an opportunity now have a look at the different figures
but also the issues that go to the determination of these matters.
We are committed to trying to deliver a bit more to the lowest paid in
the community. John Howard is not interested in that. Go and have a
look at what he suggested, as you know, in Victoria. He is suggesting
an all-up hourly rate of about $ 9 per hour for an unskilled worker.
No overtime or shift penalties. So we are not just committed to
maintaining the safety net and a decent award structure. When the
opportunities permit, we are going to share the benefit of growth to the
lowest paid in the community.
PM. Yes, let me just add to that. That we have seen a level of profitability
almost now at unprecedented levels in the economy. We have seen
economic growth of the order of 4 to 5 per cent for the last few years.
In such an economy, it Is right that we support the people who are
living on award minimums, or award rates who are not picking up any
additional over-award payments. And not only is that there, but you
see on page 6 of the document that we, again, are opposed to any
actions to undermine the efficiency of the arrangements and the
no-disadvantage test. See, you understand what the Coalition are
about, they are saying people can have a choice of staying in the
award system. But if they get out of it, they lose all the award
protections. 1.6 million Australians change jobs a year. So in
three years, basically you have got the largest part of the workforce,
over half the workforce, will have already lost the award protections.
So, as Martin just said, whether it is overtime or shift penalties, or meal
allowances, they go by the board and you get back to base rates.
So what we are saying here is because the economy can afford it, let's
put more in there for people just on minimum rates, award rates, and at
the same time let's make clear the importance of the no-disadvantage
test.
J: Mr Ferguson do you believe industrial relations will be as big an issue
at the forthcoming election as it dominated the last one to some
extent?
MF: Yes, I think it will be because I think Australian people acknowledge
that we have come a long way in the 12 years. But, you know what,
we have held Australia together and we have delivered economically.
It is a better Australia. They also want a sense of security as we go
forward. They know what the industrial relations system is doing in
Australia at the moment, it is delivering where it counts at an
enterprise bargaining level. They also want a decent social safety net
in the form of the award structure and safety net increases. So I think
it will be an important issue because it is about Australia going forward
In a sensible and fair way. We don't want division and a lack of a
sense of cohesion and commitment to where we want Australia by the
turn of the century. 
23. jun .95
7
J: Prime Minister I have heard it said that you weren't initially a very
enthusiastic supporter of the Accord back in the early 80s. What is it
that has sort of swung you around to it and how important do you think
the Accord has been to you in all the elections that Labor's won?
PM: Well I think we started with what was going to be a one-off adjustment
to wages through the Medicare adjustment and that was, in essence,
about the totality of it. Where I think what has happened is we have
realised that people did know that the 1 970s and the early 1980s were
a disaster for Australia. John Howard had 18 per cent wages growth In
1980-81 18 per cent. We had a recession In 1982-83 and we came
out of it with 11I per cent inflation out of the recession with 11 per cent
inflation. Investment was smashed, employment had been dashed,
unemployment was in double digits and growing. So there had to be a
better way. And I think what has happened is with a lot of goodwill, on
all our parts, we have realised we actually had an instrument we could
do a lot with. I mean I think one of the things that matters in this Is
trust. There has to be a bit of trust between people. I mean the
Accord has always delivered. The ACTU has always delivered on
wages, always. We delivered on inflation. The Government has
always delivered for them. So when I say something to
Martin Ferguson, as Leader of the Government, or to Bill Kelty and
they say something to me, that's it. I mean we believe them and they
believe us. And, therefore, with that lubrication you can then go down
. look at the paths we have been down. I mean the Accord is now
doing things we could never have envisaged. You know, the change
to the award system, the movement to an enterprise bargaining
system, the development of occupational superannuation for the whole
workforce, meeting the terms of trade adjustment of the middle 1 980s,
the massive employment imperatives of three years ago. And, now,
we are talking about, you know, low inflation. I mean what
commitments do you get from the Business Council about low
inflation? Any restraint on executive salaries? Any restraints on
profits? I mean have they got a document that is headed " Sustaining
Growth and Low Inflation"? I mean when they are giving something
away, or they are making a commitment? Well, of course, they
haven't. I mean this Accord has been such a flexible and good thing
and it has been made to work by imagination and by trust and by
consultation and by a sense of democracy in the negotiations with the
workforce and I think this is the point. I mean the Coalition, they
regard this as poison because we have won, frankly, the industrial
debate in every election since 1983. And we will win it again. And
they know that. They know that and they regard it as poison because
In the end all they want to do is hop into working people. They want to
hop into working people, they want to take away the no-disadvantage
test, they want to push people out of the award protections and they
want to cut their wages. That is what John Howard has always been
about. He has opposed every wage increase since 1981, bar the last
TEL: T0E: L07: No3.. iu 0.9051 P. 07 
TEL: 23 . Jun .95 0: 0? No. 001 P. O.
8
two safety nets of ours. He has supported, weakly on the side, the
payment of $ 16 since 1981.
J: Mr Ferguson how do you explain the decline in union membership over
the last 12 years?
MVF: We, as a union movement, have failed to put our own house in order.
In the growth areas of Australian employment, there is no running
away from it, in the service sector, there was room for improvement
and that is what we are about now. We have put in place a
recruitment strategy and we have committed resources. So I am not
running away from that particular issue. But, I'll tell you what, we also
understand what working people want and working people in those
growth sectors want jobs, a low rate of inflation, the protection of the
award safety net system, in association with a decent social safety net.
So, yes, union membership is down. But I'll tell you what, we have
delivered on every other front, we have met every undertaking to the
Commonwealth Government.
J: Could employers be included formally in Accord Mark IX?
PM: They didn't want to be included. The MTIA said we want to be part of
the process and we said " fine, come and see us, have a talk".
They did. They brought a document to us. We had a long discussion,
but they made the point they don't want to be a formal part. They want
to put a view. Because they know that, in the end, the burden of
responsibility that falls on the peak body of th * e workforce, the ACTU, is
not their responsibility. You know, so they can be part of the process,
but, in a sense, they are not the ones who decide the issue about
wage outcomes. But being part of the process isn't, in a sense, being
in the process and that is what they want to be. In it, but not
essentially a formal part of the documentation.
J: Mr Ferguson, it's been suggested that some of the... . for most.. for many
low-paid workers, the subsequent pay increases that you're
announcing today will actually be eaten up by the superannuation. If
that's right, don't you expect them to be rather angry about that?
MVF: No. Because I think you don't understand the support out there in the
community for the development of a decent long-term retirement
incomes policy. Working people want access to superannuation it
was the Accord in the 80s that gave them access to superannuation. I
tell you what John Howard went missing when we wanted to discuss
these issues. They have suddenly discovered that this is an important
election Issue this is the polling again. So I believe there is an
overwhelming move by the community to embrace the Government's
announcements on the superannuation front. I would also say that's
why we have got two potential ranges of increases. It is about insuring
that working people especially the lowest paid as we move forward, 
TEL: 9
have access to the benefits of economic growths. So we will deliver on
superannuation, and we will also deliver to the lowest paid through the
award safety net, and decent safety net increases.
J: Can it be summed up that 19% of their income, for very low income
earners, could go on superannuation isn't that a very large whack?
MF: Well, 19% of their income a fair slice of It comes from employer
contributions, backed up by 3% worker contributions a pretty decent
offering from the Commonwealth Government. And that's what the
Accord is about it's about bundling up 15 19% superannuation, a
terrific savings pool for the purpose of investment in Australia, and
ensuring that we as a community go forward on the basis that when
you get to retirement, you can retire to some dignity, and I think that's
pretty important. That's about fairness in Australia.
J: How did...( inaudible)... in relation to interim wages to the employment
goal work, Mr Ferguson? Could it mean, for example, that if the
economy slows more than expected, through the next year, that those
safety net pay increases would not go ahead?
MF: What it effectively means is that we have committed ourselves not
just to delivering on the jobs front but also locking in a low rate of
inflation of an underlying rate of inflation over the cycle. And
they are Indicators that we are going to take into consideration when
we talk to the Commonwealth Government about the potential
implementation of the safety net Increases. And I am pretty confident
that we will deliver we delivered on jobs in the last 2 1/ 2 years, and
we delivered on the inflation front. So you know, you take us at our
word, you tell me in the last 12 years when we haven't delivered with
respect to our undertakings to this Government. with respect to the
implementation of the Accord?
J: So you wouldn't go ahead with the safety net claims if employment
growth is slow?
MF: That's not what I said. I said that we will sit down and we will talk to
the Government, in the same way which we talk in regular basis about
how we go about implementing the Accord undertakings. And we will
have regard to our achievements on the inflation and the employment
front. But you and I both know that the Union movement can influence
those outcomes, so can a lot of other groups and individuals in the
community. So, I think the message today is also " look, we are
prepared to pull our weight, but other people in the community have
got to commence to face up to their responsibilities on the executive
salary front, and associated activities". So, there it is full box and
dice on the table for consideration and debate We are committed we
are prepared to lead and make the hard decisions. Where are the
employers and some of the corporate representatives? 23. Jun. 95 0: 07 No. 001 P. 09 
TEL:
J: The document here says that the 600,000 jobs, Prime Minister, is an
achievable minimum are you suggesting that you might actually
overshoot the 600,000 target? And is is it possible to better the
target by 2000/ 2001?
PM: We have set the 5% target let's try and do our best with that. But we
did exceed dramatically the last target of half a million. Remember
that it was only 3 years ago in fact less, just before the last election
when Accord Mark VII was entered into. And when I came out about
negotiations, and talked about half a million jobs, we had all the cynics
saying " ha ha tell us another one". Well, we have got 630,000 jobs.
We got the half a million in 22 months. So this target here is one
which I think given the way the economy is performing a high profit
share, good levels of investment there's no reason to believe that we
can't keep on doing it. But just have a look it's been a little over a
month or so that we brought a surplus Budget in a surplus Budget. A
billion reduction In the Bond Selling program from $ 21 billion last
year to $ 6 billion this year with a long-term savings plan for the
country, which will put about a trillion dollars into the savings bank of
the country by the turn of the century by the end of this decade and
about $ 2 trillion by 2020. Fifteen percent from every person minimum
going in for every person in the workforce for their retirement. People
on average weekly earnings coming out in retirement with about
roughly a similar income in retirement. Within that short space of time,
we have now introduced this which has a commitment to a wages
system based on 2-3% inflation, the Award safety net protection's and
all the other advances in the industrial relations system, and in
enhancement of the enterprise bargaining flexibility stream. And also,
the improvements in the social wage.
I mean, I have been here for 25 years there's nothing like this under
the Coalition. What have they got? The pathetic Headland speech
which looked like it was written by a 1 st year backbencher you know,
a pathetic document. And this stuff the other day which was published
you know, from the Coalition talking about their policies ' this gives
us the flexibility of announcing a lot of major a long-term visionary
matters, but without committing ourselves to actually proceeding with
them". I mean, you know, it has become a joke, hasn't it? I mean,
there shouldn't even be a debate with the Coalition. The
Government's processes are so superior and particularly under the
Accord, with the whole workforce there is no discussion. If you jokers
didn't want a contest, there wouldn't be one whatsoever. There is just
policy mulch on the Coalition side, and rampant dishonesty. Imagine
sitting in a meeting where you could see a sleazy document like the
one like they produced lay on the table imagine that in a Labor
Cabinet, compared to the quality and morality and commonsense of
this stuff ( Accord Mark VIII). T2EL3: . Jun. 95 0: 07 No. 001 P. 1C 
T2EL3: . Jun. 95 0: 07 No. 001 P. 11
11
J: Prime Minister, does this document mean that you are going to an
election campaign promising to double the maternity allowance in the
next term?
PM: No. We have set an objective there. Again, if you look at what we did
superannuation we have said that, with super in 80s, we want to
move towards a much better provision of income and retirement for
working people. And we started off with then we got it to and
then we started moving towards and we got the SGC In, and we
gradually rattled our way with economic growth and with economic
capacity, up towards and now to 15%. We do things like this you
have seen the advances with the Family Allowance Supplement: we
started at a certain level, we improve the coverage, we lifted it to other
levels. That's what we are going to do here with the Maternity
Alowance we have started with 6 weeks, and we say on the
document that we will be reviewing the allowance during the life of the
Accord with the aim of improving it as economy and budgetary
circumstances permit.
J: Could you be announcing the first adjustment of that in an election
context?
PM; Well, as economic and budgetary circumstances permit.
J: Mr Keating,.. ( inaudible).. what do YOU see as the major constraint on
achieving this jobs growth... .( inaudible)
PM; What really you are seeing today is you are seeing is the whole labour
equation in the economy committing itself to that is, the l-a-b-o-u-r
side of the equation committing itself to a system based on inflation of
the order of That really means that our core competitiveness is
going to be maintained. That means we are going to have good
productivity growth in the economy, and hopefully, decent profits. And
hopefully from that, good levels of investment we are certainly seeing
it now. So, I don't think there is any problem in us believing that we
will see that reflect itself well, well and truly in jobs. Now, we are back
to, you know, a sustainable rate of economic growth 3.7% in the last
year in the National Accounts. You saw the Budget forecasts for the
next couple of years, and the constraint we have had with the Current
Account Deficit you can see going Into place there a 4 percentage
point of GOP change on fiscal policy and a 2 percentage point of GDP
change on superannuation between now and the end of the decade,
and a 4 percentage point change on superannuation between now and
the year 2020. The Current Account problem is 2 1/ 2 percentage
points roughly of GDP, so in terms of that savings equation, I mean,
long-term savings fell during that period of high inflation in the 1970s.
And Australians were burnt once it will take them a while to come
back to it, so therefore the public sector has to save, and we have to
TEL: 
TEL: 23. Jun .9t U: Lh NO. UU1 r'. i.
12
go through vehicles like superannuation. But they are there. That's
the point it's all there. The structure is all there.
J, .( inaudible). . given the OECD survey yesterday given what some
commentators [ like] the esteemed Maximillian Walsh, for example?
PM: I'm not talking about I think we better leave individuals out of this,
thank you. Don't provoke me. Okay thank you very much.
MF: Thank you.
ends. 



TEL: ' 22.3un .5 ' 2: 40 N o. 026 P. CuI1' Ci7
PRIME MINISTER 62/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME~ MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING
Cabinet met last night to consider further Australia's response to President Chirac's
announcement on 13 June that France would resume nuclear testing in the
South Pacific.
Cabinet's deliberations were against the background of the French rejection of the
efforts of the South Pacific Forum delegation, led by Senator Evans, to persuade
Franco not to proceed with the tests.
Australia's response to the French decision has been strong, unequivocal and concrete,
The Government has attacked the decision in very strong terms first in a statement I
issued on 14 June immediately following on President Chirac's announcement
deploring the decision. I announced in that statement that the Government had frozen
cooperation with France in the defence field. The language of that statement was
repeated by the Foreign Minister, in Japan at the time, in a series of press conferences,
and in a direct telephone conversation with the French Foreign Minister,
Mr Ilerve de Charette. The Acting Foreign Minister called in the French Ambassador
and issued a formal protest and our Ambassador did likewise in Paris.
The Government has also taken the lead in promoting a strong South Pacific regional
action. On 15 June, I issued a statement as Chair of the Forum condemning the
French decision, after consultations with my fellow South Pacific Forum heads of
government. On 19 June Senator Evans led a delegation of Forum reprcsentatives
which conveyed direct to the French Government the region's condemnation of the
decision and the deep resentment it has aroused in the whole region.
The Government gave instructions to its embassies abroad to make our position
known on the French decision. Many countries have expressed their opposition to the
tests, including a number of our closest neighbours.
Australia has also made active use of multilateral forums to leave no doubt as to
where we stand on this issue. We have expressed our outrage at the French decision
in the United Nations in New York, as well as the International Atomic Energy
Agency in Vienna and the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. 
TEL: 5 20 40 Ho .026 F'. 02,'
2
On 19 June I made a speech in Parliament setting out the Governimcnt's views on the
decision and Australia's relationship with France.
Concerned about flow-on consequences of the French decision, I have instructed our
Ambassador in Washington to welcome the continued US commitment to its
moratorium and urge the United States to maintain its leadership in negotiating a
Comprehensive ' Test B~ an Treaty ( CTBT) in terms acceptable not only to the nuclear
weapon statcs but thc widcr international community Our Ambassadors in Beijing,
London and Moscow will also be making representations to the other nuclear weapon
states in favour of the moratorium on testing and early conclusion of the CTBT.
By any measure this amounts to an unequivocal response. I am in no doubt that the
French are clear about our views.
Last night, Cabinet after hearing a report and recommendations from Senator Evans
decided upon a series of further measures now to be taken and in the light of the
outcome of the Forum delegation's visit to France. Covering actions at the bilateral,
regional and global level, thcse measures are in line with the Government's consistent
policy on this issue which has been to respond in a measured, graduated way, leaving
open every avenue for France to respond to South Pacific concerns.
The flil details of the proposed measures are set out in the attachment. In broad
outline, they are as follows:
The Government has decided that Australia's Ambassador in Paris is to be recalled
for urgent consultations and briefing on how Australia can best continue to react
to the French decision.
e The Government has decided to extend the curtailment of defence contacts with
France in the areas of ship and aircraft visits, training, senior officer visits, material
acquisition, and defence-related agreements and arrangements. The senior ADF
representative in Paris will be recalled. ( In relation to the curtailment of aircraft
visits, Defence will take the operational steps required to continue to provide the
samne level of maritime surveillance to the Pacific Island countries.)
a The Gove'rnment will convene a special meeting of South Pacific Environment
Ministers to discuss the environmental impact of testing.
9 The Government will be consulting with Forum countries on possible regional
measures including the suspension of France's status as a South Pacific Forum
dialogue partner for the duration of testing; a possible boycott by individual
Forum countries of the South Pacific Games to be held in French Polynesia in
August; and the formation of a Forum Regional Action Commiittee to coordinate
responses to France's decision, mobilise and support community campaigns in
Forum countries, and report to the Madang Forum in September.
' t'he Government will1 be conisulting with Forum countries on thc desirability of a
public information campaign being mobilised in France to sensitise public opinion
to the strength of regional opposition to French testing and the reasons for it. 
TEL: Jun 21): 40 rlo 0 F 0&gt;
3
a At a wider international level, Australian delegations and representatives will take
advantage of all available opportunities to register Australian and regional
opposition to French testing in the UN and all other appropriate multilateral
bodies, including where appropriate through the initiation of resolutions.
A high-level officials mission will be sent to nuclear weapons states to argue the
case for an acceptably drafted and quickly negotiated CTI3T.
While it is not proposed to embark upon any trade or other direct economic
restrictions, it should be noted that the existing policy of entering into no new
contracts for the sale of uranium to France until France enters into a Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty will remain in force,
The Government will keep the implementation and impact of the above measures
under close review in the months ahead. We are determined to do everything we
possibly and reasonably can to ensure that France understands the nature and extent
of Australian and South Pacific opposition to its test resumiption decision, and acts
accordingly. CANBERRA 23 June 1995 
IL: 2. urni 0 4S N1: o4 . W02i u' 6
AUSTRALIAN GOVE&amp; NM ENT RESPONSE TO FRENCH RESUMPTION OF
NUCLEAR TESTS: ADDITIONAL MEASURES
A. BILATERAL Diplomatic Recall Ambas ' sador Brown from Paris for urgent consultations and briefing on
the Government's response to date to France's decision.
Dercnce Recall the senior ADF Representative in Paris.
Restrict Australian bilateral defence contracts with France in the following manner
Ships and Aircraft Visits
Suspend ship and aircraft visits to France and French Pacific territories except
where such visits are related to humanitarian and disaster relief activities. The
suspension will remain in force until France ceases nuclear testing in the Pacific.
This will include the cancellation of:
a planned visit to Noumea by H-MAS NEWCASTLE in September to
participate in New Caledonia VP celebrations;,
two maritime surveillance Fremantle Class Patrol Boat visits planned for
latcr this year; and
Maritime Patrol Aircraft visits to Noumea.
French military ships and aircraft will not be permitted to visit Australia while
the Frcnch nuclear testing program continucs except where such visits are
related to humanitarian or disaster relief activities.
( ii) Training Suspend the following training activities until France ceases nuclear testing.
attendance by French students at the Joint Services Staff College in
Canberra;, attendance by an Australian officer at a French Military Staff course in
Paris;, ADF French language students visiting New Caledonia for language
training; and 
TEL
pii) ( iv)
( v)
B. REGIO-N the visit by the Army Technical Staff officers course to French companies
later this year.
Senior Officer Visits
Suspend visits by senior Defencc Organisation officers ( one star and above) to
France and by French senior officers to Australia.
Materiel Acquisition
Apply for the duration of French nuclear testing the following restrictions to the
Defence Major Capital Equipment Procurement program:
no new procurem~ ent arrangements will be entered into with the French
Government
proposals by French companieg to bid as prime contractors will be
considered for approval case by case by the Minister for Defence.
Defence Related Agreements and Arrangements
Not progress proposed agreements in the following areas while the French
nuclear testing program continues:
French-Australian collaboration on Naval Equipment;
a Cooperative Defence Logistics Support Agreement;
an MOU on the implementation of the existing agreement on Collaboration
on Defence Research and Technology;
an arrangement for the exchange of classified mnaritime information.
Constilt with South Pacific Forum countries on suspension of France as a South
Pacific Dialogue Partner for the duration of French testing.
Consult with the South Pacific Forum countries on the establishment of a
Regional Action Committee tocoordinate
Forum follow-up to the Forum Mission's talks with France;
( ih) develop a Forum campaign on nuclear testing in the South Pacific to
maintain a flow of information to regional governments and groups;
Jun .95 20: 40 No .026 
ILLJ U12u . i5 0 4 C' N
3
assist in channelling commnunity views to appropriate UN and other
international bodies; and
assist in channelling community views to targct French community groups
such as NGOs, political parties and schools;
( iii) report on the Committee's activities to the leaders at the Madang Forum
meeting in September.
Convene a spccial meeting of South Pacific Environment Ministcrs to discuss the
environental impact of testing8 and the possible establishment of a monitoring
program. Consult with South Pacific Forum countries on the development of a public
information campaign including, for example, exhibitions, newspaper articles,
television and cinetna advertisements to be undertaken in France to sensitise
French public opinion to the strength of regional opposition to French testing and
the reasons for it.
Consult with South Ptwiliw Forum countries on the possible boycott of the
South Pacific games to be held in French Polynesia in August this year.
C. GLOBAL Send as soon as possible a hieh level officials mission to the Nuclear Weapon
States to argue the case for a strong and effective Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
and accelerate the negotiating process for it.
( l0) Take advantage of all available opportunities, including where appropriate through
the initiation of resolutions, to register Australian opposition to French testing in LN
and other appropriate multilateral forums, particularly
the Conference on Disarmament;
the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Auckland in
November, the International Atomic Energy Agency;,
the World Ilealth Organisation, of which Australia is currently an Executive
Board member;
the UN General Assembly-,
the UN Special Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation;
the UN 50th Anniversary Summit in October; 
I E L .2 . J3u n .5 2 0 4u N o FFCu. 7t '
4
the High-Level Segment of ECOSOC, 4-6 July,
the International Oceanographic Commission which is currently meeting in
Paris from 13-27 June,
the UNESCO Executive Board and General Conference to be held in Paris
in October. 



63/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MEMBERSHIP OF THE NATIONAL INFORMATION SERVICES COUNCIL
I am pleased to announce the membership of the National Information Services Council
( NISC). The establishment of the NISC implements a key recommendation contained in
the final report of the Broadband Services Expert Group.
The NISC has been established as a high-level discussion forum for broad policy issues
associated with the development of the so-called ' information superhighway'. Its role
will be to inform the policy debate in government, by encouraging input from members
of the community, industry and relevant experts in the field. As with my Science and
Engineering Council, the NISC will be an important source of non-government views on
key issues.
The new council which I will chair with the Minister for Communications and the Arts
as deputy chair, will provide the Government with access to a range of views on
marketplace developments, technical issues and community views on the opportunities
and challenges that the evolving services and technologies will * present. There is
considerable interest throughout Government on these issues and I expect that a number
of my Ministers will also be involved in the discussions.
The membership of the NISC comes from a broad range of areas community,
industry, academia and government to encourage a comprehensive examination and
wide-ranging discussion on the issues.
A list of members is attached. Each person has been selected because of his or her
expertise on issues associated with information services, and potential contribution to the
discussions.
The first meeting of the NISC will be held on 10 August and will focus on fiimdamental
policy issues such as community access; the evolution of communications services and
technologies; industry development; legal and community standards; and the international
context and implications of new communications services and technologies.
The establishment of the council is an important part of the Governent's plan to
formulate a comprehensive national approach on information and communications
services and technologies. It will play a valuable role by involving Government in
discussion with the community and industry on the implications of the ' information age',
emphasising its relevance to broader economic and social objectives. 
The NISC is also a measure of this Government's commitment to the notion that we can
harness the enormous potential of the information age to achieve a fairer, healthier,
better educated and more productive society.
CANBERRA 23 June 1995 
NISC MEMBERS
Name Position
Mr Roger Allen Chairman, Computer Power Group, Chairman,
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute
Professor David Beanland Vice-Chancellor
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
Mr John Burke Director Centre for International Research on
Communications and Information
Technologies ( CIRCIT)
Mrs Lyndsey Cattermole Managing Director
Aspect Computing Pty Ltd
Mr Col Cooper National President
Communications Electrical and Plumbing
Union ( CEPU)
Dr Dennis Cooper Chief CSIRO Division of Radiophysics
Ms Alison Crook, AO Chief Executive
Department of State Development
Mr Doug Elix Managing Director
IBM
Ms Betty Hounslow Director Australian Council of Social Services
( ACOSS)
Mr Brian Johns Managing Director
ABC
Ms Judith King Executive Director
Australian Coalition of Service Industries
Mr Michael Lynch General Manager
Australia Council
Mr Sean O'Halloran Director, Network Development
Seven Network Ltd
Mr Frank Peach Director-General of Education
Queensland Department of Education
Mr Alan Petts Interconnect Manager
Optus Communications Pty Ltd
Mr John Riedl Chief Executive Officer
Techniche Ltd
Ms Judy Slatyer Business Development Manager
Telstra Multimedia
Mr Ron Spithill Managing Director
Alcatel
Dr Ockert Van Zyl General Manager
Telecommunications and Manufacturing
Siemens Ltd
Mr Peter Waters Chair Communications Law Centre 



PRIME INISTE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
PRESENTATION OF NATIONAL MULTICULTURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL'S
REPORT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 27 JUNE 1995
I am pleased to be here today to accept this report from the National
Multicultural Advisory Council and its Chairman, Mick Young.
It's particularly good to see Mick around these parts I've always thought he left
them much too early. But the talents he brought to politics his intelligence,
humour, his great love of his fellow Australians and his great rapport with them
suited him for this task, and I'm sure he has performed it superbly.
The 1989 National Agenda for a Multicultural Australia set the scene for the
Government's response to the changing composition of the Australian
population. If we are now able to say that our cultural diversity is one of our great national
successes and one of our great national assets we can also say that the 1989
Agenda is a document of considerable stature in our recent history.
Today's report marks another step along the way.
And it is important that we make progress that we pay more than lip service to
our cultural diversity.
I think sometimes we talk about multiculturalism as a mirror of our achievements
when really it should be seen as a mirror of the realities we have to face.
That is why, if multicultural ism is to continue to work for us, it has to continue to
evolve and adapt and, in communities, government and the bureaucracy, those
in positions of leadership have to keep their minds open and responsive. 
The success of this multicultural society does Australians great credit; and, as
Volume 2 of this Reports makes clear, the achievements since the 1989 Agenda
was handed down have been very substantial ones.
But the future certainly cannot be taken for granted.
Multicultural programs must continue to evolve to meet disparate and changing
needs. We must keep pace with contemporary issues, seek out the benefits and
opportunities as they arise and maintain a watchful eye on prejudice and
intolerance. The architects and administrators of modern multicultural ism must resist the
tendency of ideas to ossify and habits of mind to take on the shape and
characteristics of ideology.
. Every step towards ideology will distort the liberal aims of multicultural ism.
Platitudes and jargon will stunt its growth.
It is not just in the number of programs that multiculturalism must grow it must
grow philosophically.
It must look for new directions and be alive to the way Australia is going.
That is the function of this Report to keep the process moving.
I note, for instance, that the Report is concerned to acknowledge more fully than
before the place of indigenous Australians in the arena of multicultural affairs,
and that it attempts * to deal with areas of common concern and policy overlap.
And I think it goes without saying that this Government entirely approves of this
development. An altogether different recent example of the capacity for new thinking has been
the development of strategies for " productive diversity". This requires us to see
beyond the needs of ethnic communities to the advantages contained in their
linguistic and cultural understanding.
These days the designers of our investment, trade and industry policies, and an
increasing number of business people, are conscious that this unique human
resource offers a competitive edge in dealing with the world. 
At another level, as we approach the centenary of our nationhood and come to
grips with questions of our identity and our place in the world in the 21 st century,
multicultural policies must define themselves against our national interests and
ambitions. At the Global Diversity Conference in Sydney recently I proposed something
resembling a model of multicultural rights and responsibilities. None of these
mark in any way a departure from the fundamental multicultural principles laid
down in the 1989 Agenda.
The Australian Government continues to assert the right of all Australians to
express their individual cultural heritage and their right to equality of treatment
and opportunity.
But it also asserts that the first loyalty of all who make Australia their home must
be to Australia and that the tolerance on which multiculturalism is built must be
recognised as a universal principle of Australian democracy, and practised
universally.
As a practical expression of this ambition, we are keen for migrants to take up
citizenship we think it will build more national cohesion without diminishing at
all the liberal, tolerant multicultural qualities of Australia.
But in asking migrants to take up their democratic responsibilities we reaffirm our
own. We are very much aware that the best thing we can do for ethnic groups in
Australia is create an economy and society in which there is opportunity for
people of energy and ambition to succeed, to create, to build good lives for
themselves and their families.
At the same time, we have to maintain the kind of social safety net which will
give migrants and others the support they need when they are establishing
themselves and when things go wrong.
We are doing this through a social security system which is infinitely more
sophisticated and efficient than it was a decade ago even five years ago.
We are doing it through Medicare, employment education and training, housing
and community services.
These basic policies are not marked " multicultural" but on them, more than
anything else we do, a successful multicultural society depends. 
We can, of course, develop them in accordance with the needs created by our
cultural diversity. And that is what we do. It is what access and equity is all
about. It is why we take those steps to eliminate the barriers which arise from different
languages, cultures and religions.
It is why we insist on such practical steps as translating materials, targeting non-
English speaking communities in information strategies, and the cross cultural
training of government staff.
These things really do help, because they really do address practical realities.
They are part of a government's responsibility in a culturally diverse society.
But cultural diversity is a matter for all Australians.
It falls on communities, schools and businesses on every one of us to practise
tolerance and garner the talents and ambitions of all who live here.
It will help, I think, if we recognise that we have reached a point where it can be
said that in these things we have a proud tradition to uphold.
Among other things this Report makes that clear. It is an update, a report on
progress and a signpost along the way which began with the immigration
program fifty years ago.
Some would say the tradition began long before that.
Whenever it began, the tradition describes the evolution of a uniquely tolerant
and culturally diverse democracy in Australia and the lesson is, we must keep
working at it.
That is why I am very glad to receive this report.
The Government will give serious consideration to all the recommendations.
I thank the Chairman, Mick Young, and the members of the National Multicultural
Advisory Council for their conscientiousness and the work they have done for
Australia. 



TEL: 29. Jun. 95 20: 26 No .023-P-0 1
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF ARCHITECTS AWARDS
( NEW SOUTH WALES CHAPTER), SYDNEY, 28 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
Well Prime Minister's don't receive too many awards. There is only one is
really interested in and that is the one that comes around every three years.
But 1 am very honoured and very flattered to receive this.
I am very interested in architecture. I do have a bit of a fetish with temple
pediments and things like that, but you all know about that probably. But that
doesn't disqualify me from being interested in the environment In which we live
and I have always been interested in beauty. I know it Is a word out of the
lexicon these days but Itsh ouldn't be out of our minds because wherever we
look, wherever our eyes may fall, It should be something which cheers us up,
which gives us improvement in the quality of our existence, which encourages
us to do things.
I am sure you are all run by your eyes and I probably am too. And, I first
started to develop mine, pressing with my nose against Stanley Lipscombe's
Antique Shop in Bathurst Street, Sydney Stella to his friends. And Stella was
very obliging in terms of taking people in and teaching them things. And
Leo Schofield who is known to you all as another one of his students and
there were some other mentors I had.
But it all, in the end, for me got back to architecture and to the history of
architecture and to that I have been particularly interested. As you know my
interest has been in the Greek revival or the neo-classical and we are seeing
a bit of th~ at happen around these days too. There's a bit of revisionism that
has been going on.
One can take an Interest In the development of cities and the way people live
in the built environment. But I have always thought that the greatest challenge
has been with the modern architect who with the disposable society has been
stuck with the disposable building where we have had the mass congregation
of people in cities for work. That is changing a bit now and probably
Information technology will change it more as we go on where people will be 
TEL: 29. Jun. 95 20: 26 No. 023 P. 02
2
able to work other than in congregations, or in large capital city buildings,
which are put up for amenity and for function without any real premium on
their role in the streetscape or the cityscape and where they can be disposed
of after 20 years and something built in their place.
It is a great challenge, I think, for architects to live in that environment
whereas most of the people who have written the text books lived in an age
where great public buildings were built or, if not public buildings, by private
patrons who themselves developed architectural interests. There was a
premium on everything they did as there was in most countries and in most
cities and we have got a reasonable heritage in this country of them.
But as time has borne on, that premium has come back and you have seen it
come back in public buildings. Some of the worst buildings built these days
are public buildings more is the pity and that is changing too, I think.
But we have had our urban design taskforce, which has presented a first class
report to us about design in the cities and urban development and housing
choice and these, I think, ought to be important things for us. I think we are
probably entering a new epoch where a premium is going to come back on to
CBD-type development, or precinct development, and this will give the
interested patron, or developer, a chance to have an influence, a greater
influence, than we have seen with the sarcophagi that have been ordered-up
by provident mutual funds and other distinguished bodies who have not really
been Interested In what they have built, but rather the economics of It.
We have a very great country, a very Il'arge country, but as large as It Is, given
our strong urban configuration and consolidation, even this is not large
enough for us and we are running out of space. The Premies [ Cares]
remarks recently about the sprawl of Sydney are a case In point. And, I think,
another challenge there is for housing choice and style of our suburbs and the
quality of life we offer people.
These are real issues, I think, for Australians because we have such a unique
opportunity. We are the only nation on earth that has a continent to itself and
our stewardship of that continent should be such that whether it be the coasts,
or the native forests, or the river systems, or the cities, we should be now
nurturing it as never before, understanding now as never before what a great
opportunity and a singular opportunity we have been given.
I hope that the Commonwealth can play a greater role. We have never
formally had much of a role in urban planning but through the Better Cities
program we have been able to do some quite interesting things. John
mentioned Pyrmont. Last week I was at the railyards In Launceston and that
is a lovely city with a great architectural heritage. And we are doing things In
certain locations around the country which will spark development Interest
around them just as Darling Harbour, perhaps as a typical example, has done
here in New South Wales. The original public investment [ in Darling Harbour]
has now been multiplied many times over and if we can get good planning
regimes and Interested community participation, I think, we can really do some
interesting things with Commonwealth funding In some of these areas and 
TEL: 29. Jun. 95 20: 26 No .023 P. 03
3
doing it with the States and Local Government and bringing those three tiers
of Government together and bringing private developers to it as well. I think
this does offer us some opportunities.
I think we need to be very hard with developers.* I don't think developers
deserve to have many rights. I don't believe in leaving it to " the market" in the
development of cities, or In urban development. I think there has to be always
the predominant public interest question prevailing and, therefore, we should
encourage developers but we should encourage them within frameworks
which we as a community endorse and not to be held hostage to the things
that they propose to us.
Mr Grollo's proposal for the new hundred storey-odd building in Melbourne is
an example of what we shouldn't be doing or whiat we shouldn't tolerate.
So to the extent that I can say some things about this, or add to the
commonweal, to put a premium on architecture, to put a premium on the
creativity of people whose profession it is to think about the sort of buildings
we build, the way we live in them, those who occupy them, and those who
have to look at them and the environment in which they sit, these are the
things, I think, that Government's perhaps can do perhaps at a distance in
some respects but where we do have an influence ourselves, encourage the
best things to happen if it is at all possible.
At any rate, I suppose In many respects, the Sydney Morning Herald has
described me as a frustrated State planning minister but then the Sydney
Morning Herald has described me in many ways the truth Is there may be a
grain of truth In that.
At any rate, I am not going to while ever the wrath of democracy leaves me
standing I am not going to desist from arguing the case for good urban
design and thoughtful development of our landscape, of our coasts, of keeping
our eyes sharply on that great inheritance-we have been given. If that helps
this profession I would be very pleased indeed. But I am very honoured by
the fact that you have thought it might have already. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL, SYDNEY, 28 JUNE 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, you have taken the unusual step of getting a letter
published in Le Monde, why?
PM: As I said, the Government would proselytise on this issue in France.
That is, say to the French people why we think it is not in France's
interest and it is unreasonable that they should continue this program
when the best course of action available for the French nation is to
engage the rest of the world. And, if we want to talk about threats, the
threat to France is not someone dropping a bomb on France, it is
someone dropping a cloud on France a nuclear cloud. From those
old decaying power stations in the Ukraine and in Russia, these are the
real issues that face continental Europe and some sort of Maginot Line
of the 1 990s is not the answer. The answer is engagement. I think we
have tried to say that reasonably. -The other thing, I think, about the
French is, another reason why it gets up our nose is that we don't
expect democracies to behave this way. This is a democracy we have
twice gone to war for. This is a democracy that believes in liberty in a
very profound way and yet it is acting in a colonial way in the Pacific
and while there is no dispute about what is or what isn't French
territory, this is not part of metropolitan France, it is a colonial view and
one expects, in the end of the 20th century, for democracies to behave
in a way which other democracies can approve of.
I suppose it is this which particularly* annoys Australians and annoys
those other people in the world who believe the French are out of line.
J: President Chirac has told his fellow European leaders that the protests
against his decision are irrational your view? 
PM: Well, they are not and, I think, the content of my letter to the French
newspaper indicates in a very sober rational way the point of objection
by Australia, but again, we have got to point out what we object to and
what we believe is in France's interest while acknowledging that they
have committed themselves to a limited series of tests and signing the
comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. That will be important, not just to
them, but to all of us.
J: So are you going to target the French electorate now rather than the
French administration?
PM: When I announced last Thursday evening the range of measures which
the Government was prepared to undertake, one of them was
proselytising in France, articulating the government's view about this
subject and this is perhaps the first initiative in this respect.
J: Your letter to the people, is it in any way an admission that the
diplomatic channels have failed?
PM: No, I think, France is a sovereign country, it can make sovereign
decisions. That's not to say they are immune from criticism. This is
one of the ways of indicating that any criticisms that we might make are
reasonable and rational and letting the more critical group of people in
France take account of Australian views first hand.
J: Are you concerned that Robert Ray didn't sign the petition yesterday?
PM: I don't know who has signed the petition and who has not.
J: Prime Minister, President Chirac has said that the French government
will pay the costs of Australian scientists being sent to the test zone,
are we going to take that up?-
PM: We are not in the business of playing games. Any offer we would take
up would be for comprehensive assessment of the site. That is,
comprehensive on site seismic, not being part of some charade about
assessments of the impact upon sub-terranian corals and the rest. It
would have to be, probably, an international effort and it would need to
be completely comprehensive. I don't think there is any chance of the
Franch fobbing anybody off with games about the impact upon
Mururoa, we can establish scientifically what the impact is, if they wish
that to be so. But, the point of objection is the fact that the Cold War
has finished and the thing to get on with is the anti proliferation policies
of those countries who believe that weapons proliferation is a very grim
prospect and that a large part of the problem is actually in the old
Soviet Union and in other parts of Europe. That is the point of
concentration. Not on further developing the existing inventory of
weapons which the French already have. 
J: Prime Minister, is Kerry Packer being punished for his support of John
Howard when we are talking about cross media?
PM: No, I think, there is a very clear view on the part of the government that
the cross media rules have produced a lot of diversity. We now have a
radio industry which is almost entirely independently owned from the
newspapers. This was never so in the past. The Macquarie Network
was owned by Fairfax, the other big network was owned by the Herald
and Weekly Times. This is not true today, we have seen other
independent owners of the two big broadsheets The Sydney Morning
Herald and The Age with Conrad Black's group. We are seeing
different ownership in the free to air television stations. So, the
government's cross media rules of the 1980s have worked. What we
have seen is legal devices to move around them, by keeping it clear
that we will allow some ownership, some cross ownership but not where
there is control, not where there is virtually a co-incidence of interests.
This the government sought to do by tightening up its cross media
arrangements yesterday with the 15 per cent. This will apply to Mr
Packer's interest in print as it will to Mr Murdoch's interests in
television.
J: You are not just getting square with Mr Packer?
PM: Well, I was asked that earlier.
J: Are these the last changes to the rules?
PM: As we can see them at the moment, but again, lawyers will always try to
find ways around these things. The question is, is Australia
advantaged by media diversity? And, if the answer to that is in the
affirmative, and I believe it is, then we need a set of rules which bring
this about. Otherwise, simply the convergence of technologies and
corporate financial power will mean that we will have a continuing
concentration of ownership. This the government has resisted and, I
think, resisted successfully. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AUSINDUSTRY NATIONAL LAUNCH INTERCONTINENTAL HOTEL,
SYDNEY 28 JUNE 1995
This is a good thing that we do today.
I am very pleased, and very proud, to come together with representatives of
the States, the Territories and the business community, to launch
Ausindustry. I am proud because Auslndustry is another investment by the Government in
Australia, in a stronger nation and a more productive people.
I am proud because Auslndustry is the product of dialogue and cooperation
between Commonwealth, State and Territory governments. It is a strategic
partnership, between the different tiers of government, and between
government and industry, and it shows just how well the Federation can work
when there is good will all around.
I am proud because Auslndustry shows that there is room for innovation and
enterprise within the public sector, and reflects the Government's desire to
achieve world's best practice in the delivery of programs to the community.
Auslndustry was one of the initiatives announced last year in the
Government's White Paper on Employment, Working Nation.
In the White Paper, we asserted that the strongest and fairest kind of nation
is a working nation. We erected practical measures to increase employment,
because that is the most equitable, and the most efficient, thing to do.
Much of Working Nation was devoted to moving the long-term unemployed
and those at risk of becoming long-term unemployed into jobs: the Youth
Training Initiative, the Job Compact, the National Training Wage.
But we also recognised the long-term imperative: that in order to create more
jobs with higher wages, and hence improve the living standards of
Australians, the country has to be more productive and that requires
Australian industry to be extended and strengthened. 
For the last twelve years, the Government has been building the kind of
competitive environment in which Australian industry can succeed and
Australian firms can flourish.
We have done it by opening up the economy, and facing it for the first time
towards our own region.
We have done it by floating the dollar, and deregulating the financial sector.
We have done it by dismantling the high tariff walls behind which the
Australian manufacturing sector was crumbling away, and by putting in place
measures to help businesses engage the global market place.
And we are doing it through labour market reforms which increase the
flexibility and productivity of Australian work places without tearing at the
rights and living standards of Australian working people.
Today, the Australian economy is far more competitive, alert and dynamic
than at any time in the past.
Australia's communications network is smarter and livelier, our transport
system smoother and more efficient, and our financial sector infinitely more
sophisticated than a decade ago.
Overall, the economy is almost 40 per cent more competitive than it was in
the early 1980s.
We are finding that in this new competitive environment, new species of
successful Australian firms are springing up.
The McKinsey survey on emerging exporters, and all the studies since, have
remarked on these successes.
The studies have shown that the firms achieving the biggest wins all share a
similar character.
They are ambitious and alert, vigorous and adventurous.
They are exploiting the revolutions in transport and communications to get to
new markets, and they are operating very close to those markets.
They are innovative, and able to manage and respond to a wide range of
emerging conditions.
There are a lot of firms like this it's approaching a critical mass. Their
success depends on knowing what they are good at. And this is where
government has a very significant role to play by helping these firms to
develop their human capital. 
Many of the most mobile and energetic Australian businesses are small and
medium enterprises. Unlike their cousins in big business, they cannot afford
to maintain on-line access to the skills, information and resources that are
essential to business development.
By helping Australian firms obtain these services, governments can help them
identify their strengths, isolate their weaknesses, and harness and direct their
energies.
The advice and ideas might deal with skills, education and training, access to
finance, long-term planning, the application of technologies or the
development of trade opportunities.
The aim of industry development of this kind is not to pick winners, but to
keep the winners moving. Experience shows us that gover6nmen and
industry work better when they work in concert.
This kind of advice has always been offered by governments but through a
plurality of sources in a variety of agencies.
Before the Government brought down Working Nation, business people told
us they were confused about the range of services provided by governments
and, in some instances, were not even aware of the existence of key
Commonwealth Government programs.
An independent review of the development and delivery of government
business programs, conducted by Mr Ian Burgess, told us much the same
thing. Auslndustry is the Government's response to these criticisms.
Auslndustry will help our businesses to achieve world's best practices, and to
successfully engage world markets. It will serve as a single entry-point to the
array of government programs already in place to assist firms in developing
their managerial, technological, financial and marketing resources. And it will
help to build better Australian firms by allowing us to deliver an integrated,
cohesive and holistic service to each individual business client.
The most effective enterprise development programs are those which are
informed by the views and driven by the needs of business. To ensure that
Auslndustry maintains a strong client focus, we have appointed a private
sector-led Board, headed up by Dick Warburton.
May I commend the States and Territories for having the wit and vision to
sign on to the Auslndustry partnership. Bringing all our business service
activities under a single umbrella makes good economic and logistic sense,
and will allow us to draw on the resulting synergies. 
So, with the launch of Aus Industry, industry development assistance will be
delivered, for the first time, on an all-governments, whole-of-government
basis. Ausindustry will direct businesses to the government service most suitable for
their needs. These services have already achieved many success stories
stories worth telling.
Like the Victorian-based Moss Products, a manufacturer of technical plastic
and metal components, which called on private sector experts subsidised by
Auslndustry to stream-line its product development, renovate its corporate
identity and establish a strategy for the future.
Or the Adelaide construction firm, Glenn Industries, which deals in leading
edge building technology, and specialises in the manufacture of glass fibre
reinforced cement. Parliament Station in Melbourne and the Capita Finance
Building in Sydney are good examples of the work of this firm. Support from
Government industry assistance programs and Austrade helped Glenn
Industries form a joint venture with a Singapore firm, and eventually win $ 13
million worth of contracts, including the Singapore Merlion Tower.
Or the National Recording Studios, a business which has already gone a long
way down the information highway, developing interactive CD-Rom packages
for both the Government and corporate sectors. NRS accessed a
Commonwealth Government program which assists new and existing
exporters to strategically plan for and manage their exporting activities.
Sales into a range of territories, including the USA, Italy, Taiwan, Israel and
South Africa have followed.
In the final analysis, of course, the credit for their successes, and the onus for
achieving them in the future, lies with the businesses themselves. They must
make their own way in a very competitive environment. But as these
examples show, government can support them in their efforts.
Auslndustry will provide that support. It is a timely and intelligent policy
initiative which will help set up Australian industry for the future.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Earlier this month, with the standardisation of the rail line between Melbourne
and Adelaide, the Government completed the construction of a national
standard gauge rail highway from Brisbane to Perth, via Sydney, Melbourne
and Adelaide.
The establishment of Aus Industry is perhaps not of quite the same order, but
the intent is the same. Each will guarantee a more unified system, and
provide a better service to Australians. And each will, I am sure, come to be
seen as a national asset. 
I congratulate all those involved with the establishment of Auslndustry, and
wish them the best of luck for the future.
I am confident that Auslndustry will make Australia a much more industrious
nation, and I am happy to declare it open for business.
Ends 



271
OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
Attached is the English translation of the feature article by the
Prime Minister published on a full half page in the French daily Le
Monde on 28 June 1995. 
WHY AUSTRALIA SAYS NO TO TESTING
BY P. J. KEATING, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
Australia and its citizens, along with the peoples and governments of many other
countries, have been angered by the French government's announcement that it will
resume nuclear testing at Mururoa. I believe the French people will have no difficulty
understanding such feelings.
The sentiment in the countries of the South Pacific is all but universal: if France must
test these weapons, let her test them in metropolitan France. Whatever the French
government intends by these actions, they are read by the great majority of people in
this region as an assault upon the rights of small nations by a large one. Inevitably,
the decision to resume tests is seen as a regression to old colonial attitudes. This is
all the more tragic because in recent years France's relationship with the countries of
the region has become much more positive and fruitful.
Neither Australia nor the other countries of the region are motivated by a desire to
see France out of the Pacific. On the contrary, we want to work closely and
cooperatively with her. But it is one regrettable consequence of this decision that
many in the region will now question the legitimacy of France's role.
The anger and frustration which Australians feel is the more acute because of the
history we share with France. French ships were present at the birth of European
settlement in Australia. French explorers and scientists and artists are prominent
among those who mapped the Australian coastline and interpreted the Australian
landscape. French culture significantly shaped our own cultural development. And
twice this century Australians fought in France. In World War I Australian and New
Zealand casualties on French battlefields were the highest per capita of any of the
combatants and that experience was a seminal influence on Australia's
development. The names of those battlefields are part of Australia's history and
legend.
Australia's concerns are heightened further by the added responsibility which derives
from our role this year as Chair of the 15-member South Pacific Forum. In this
capacity we speak on behalf of all the countries in the region, many of them small
and ecologically vulnerable, all of them in a profound material and spiritual
relationship with the Pacific Ocean.
I am confident that I speak for the members of the Forum in continuing to press
France to reverse her decision, and in asserting that if she were to do so she would
gain greatly in prestige, not only among the countries of the South Pacific, but among
the peoples of the world.
The French government has defended the environmental safety of the tests at
Mururoa. But we are deeply concerned about the possibility of accidents. And noone
can possibly foresee the longer term dangers'associated with possible leakage
from the fragile atoll structures housing the tests. 
2
Australia's is not a hastily considered or reflexive reaction. Australia has a long
history of responsible diplomatic effort on nuclear issues. Along with the other
countries of the South Pacific, Australia opposed France's atmospheric tests in the
1970s, and on our initiative the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone was created in
1985.
Australia has also been consistently active on nuclear matters in the United Nations
and other international forums. We have often acted in close cooperation with
France, in particular since the very welcome decision by President Mitterrand in 1992
to declare a moratorium on nuclear tests. These efforts moved forward on 11 May
with the decision of the international community to indefinitely extend the Treaty on
the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons a vital element in the security of both our
countries. It is not for Australia or any other country to define France's security; but, in the
circumstances, I believe readers of Le Monde will permit me to say why we think
France's actions are not good for the world or for France.
We believe these tests pose a threat to our efforts to sustain the effectiveness of
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and achieve universal membership. Critical to the
indefinite extension of that treaty was the simultaneous negotiation and adoption by
all parties, including the nuclear weapon states, of a " Declaration of Principles and
Objectives on Non-Proliferation and Disarmament".
That declaration foreshadowed the early conclusion, no later than 1996 of a
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. And pending the entry into force of such a treaty,
the nuclear weapon states committed themselves to exercise " utmost restraint".
But " utmost restraint" on nuclear testing cannot possibly comprehend a program of
eight tests. France's decision is certain to raise in the minds of non-nuclear weapon
states questions about the good faith of all the nuclear weapon states. That will put
pressure on the credibility of the Treaty, which must be maintained if some of the
states which have not yet signed it are to be persuaded to do so.
The decision will also add to the negotiating difficulties over the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty.
Despite the very welcome declaration by President Chirac that France will sign the
CTBT, there is a real danger that the very difficult series of negotiations which lie
ahead in Geneva over the Treaty will be made even harder.
France's very position as a responsible and leading power in the world means that
each new test by France will give comfort to would-be proliferators, and each test will
give pause to many of those countries whose support we will need to conclude the
CTBT. We are familiar with the arguments for France's nuclear capability and the strategic
dimensions of nuclear power. We are not arguing from a merely emotive standpoint 
when we say that, for all of us, the greatest responsibility is to keep alive the hope of
a nuclear free world that was born with the end of the Cold War. The burden of that
responsibility falls most heavily on the nuclear states, particularly following the
indefinite extension of the NPT.
And, surely, for those with nuclear expertise in Europe, the greatest present test of
leadership is the one which lies at Europe's door. The damaged Chernobyl reactor
may now be entombed, but in the territory of the former Soviet Union there are
another twenty reactors with similar design faults. Scores of nuclear-powered
submarines from the former Soviet Fleet now lie idle. Nuclear materials and nuclear
expertise are seeping out of the former Soviet Union and into illicit markets.
These dangers, like the stockpiles of degrading nuclear weapons and contaminated
sites, will not be deterred by the development of further nuclear weapon capability.
But France's world class skills in nuclear science and technology can help. How
much more respect France would earn, and how much more sense it would make, if
instead of concentrating her skills and energy on combating a purely hypothetical
threat, she turned more of them to tackling a real one.
I have no doubt that Australians would want it known in France that their attitude is in
no way shaped by any hostility to the French people or the French nation. Our
opposition is specific to the French Government's decision to resume testing in the
Pacific. Sometimes in the past Australia's attitude has been read in France as an expression
of some Anglo-Saxon hostility to France.
But Australia is by no means an Anglo Saxon enclave in the Asia-Pacific region. As
the many French people who live in Australia could attest, this is a rich multicultural
society, half of whose immigrants these days come from the countries of Asia. It is
clear that among those same French residents of Australia there are many who
believe that the French Government should reverse its decision.
If they live on the eastern seaboard of Australia they will know that there is a world of
difference between studying a map of the Pacific in Europe and living on the shores
of the ocean in Sydney or Brisbane or Auckland or Suva. The map puts these places
a long way from Mururoa. But when you live in these places you know that, vast
though it is, the South Pacific is one environment and it binds all those who share it.
The sense of community which the Pacific Ocean gives us is not unlike that which the
idea of " Europe" gives France. It is the underlying reason for our opposition to
France's decision to resume testing and it is why Australia and our partners in the
South Pacific Forum will continue to press our views strongly to the French
government and to convey to the people of France, as far we are able, the depth of
our feelings. 
U. CU~ mO-. t3 E
O'Is
49 M-
"= NM
0 CL E~
M,
@ CA 3. b ill
III iii 
to~ 1 .1
0I 
ou~ 41
' IL IEJI jut tf It
' p S
ftd~~ d a d f 4 i s 0v I ZI Ia
oil 0 0 ! fg11ir,
4 I ai
i1d1 ~ 1. am ~ ah s'toP f8 



TEL 2Jun. 0 16 No . C006 P'. C1~
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER; THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
FAREWELL TO THE AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS PILGRIMAGE TO
PAPUA NEW GUINEA, SYDNEY, THURSDAY, 29 JUNE 1995
It Is my very pleasant duty today to farewell men and women from an heroic
generation of Australians who are embarking on a pilgrimage to some of the
sacred sites of our history.
The names of the places to which they are going Kokoda, Milne Bay, Buna,
Gona, Lao, Shaggy Ridge, Sattef berg, Wau, Bougainville and Wewak have a
meaning for Austraflans which will never fade.
They were the battlefields on which these Australians and others like them fought
to save their country and defend democracy against tyranny and cruelty.
Many had already fought In terrible battles In Europe and the Middle East. Many
were very young and scarcely out of school.
They fought with great courage, They defeated an implacable and ruthless
enemy. They fought and won the battles which saved Australia.
That Is why their place In our history is Immovable and indelible.
They are the names which remind us that they were once a generation of men and
women who were prepared to lay down their lives for Australia.
That Is the most profound thing my generation learned, and it will be as profound
to generations of Australians a hundred years from now.
I am very conscious that at times like this we must choose our words carefully.
We cannot pretend to know what you went through fifty years ago, or what your
thoughts are now as you return to the battlefields. 
TEL: 29 un .95 0 6 No .006P. 2
2
We were never tested as you were. We don't know if we would have come
through as you did.
But we do know from your example what bravery means.
We know from you what it means to love Australia.
Because of you we know better the value of democracy, peace and freedom.
So today we give thanks to you and all the others you are representing on this
journey. We give thanks not only to the fighting men, but the women who served: those of
the Australian Women's Army Service, those who nursed the wounded, allithose
women who gave their energies to the war effort at home.
And we acknowledge those whose husbands did not return. Some of those
women are making this pilgrimage.
Today we recognise the labours of the Australians who provided the supplies, food
and equipment needed to support the 200,000 Australians who served In New
Guinea and the surrounding Islands.
We pay tribute to the men and women of the Royal Australian Navy and the
Merchant Navy who between them transported over 450,000 people to Papua New
Guinea between 1941 and 1945.
We also recognise the support given to Australians by the people of Papua New
Guinea and the Islands.
Their courage and compassion itself forms a legendary part of our history.
Of the many things to be leamed from World War Two, none was more important
than the need to work closely and harmoniously with our neighbours In the region.
To continue to build a secure and prosperous future with them, and to maintain the
peace and protect the environment we all share, Is a duty we owe to the war-time
generation. So Is building a modem, prosperous, self-reliant Australia our duty to them our
greatest duty.
Because that is what they did. Those who returned took up their lives again and
went back to work. And by their efforts their ambitions for themselves, their
families, their communities, and their country they made Australia stronger. 
I EL urnz 0 : 556 N 0. 1) 0 F. 03C.'
3
They made this a place where ambitions could flourish and enterprise be
rewarded. They also made It a place In which the tradition of the fair go lived on,
and the Idea of supporting each other through good times and bad remained a
defining element of the national character.
They made a mighty contribution to Australia, and here today and throughout this
year we pay tribute to them.
We have a lot to thank them for and a lot to live up to.
It is my great privilege, then, on behalf of Australians everywhere, to wish
everyone of you a marvellous and rewarding journey,
Thank you. 



TEL: .3ufl.' 0: 45 No. 002 P. OiiCKPRIME
MINISTER 164/
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON Pd KEATING MP,
AND THE TREASURER, THE HON RALPH WILLIS MP
COMMITTEE ON DARWIN REPORT
The Committee on Darwin, chaired by the Hon. Neville Wran AC QC, today
delivered its report to the Commonwealth and Northern Territory
Governments. The Committee reported on the feasibility and potential of
developing Darwin as Australia's northern link to East Asia.
The approach adopted by the Committee is realistic and practical, and will
make a valuable contribution to Darwin's future development.
An important conclusion of the report was that while proximity to East Asia
was an advantage for Darwin, it was not in itself enough to guarantee
success. Nevertheless, the Committee considered that-as Australia's only
capital city in the tropics and with its already extensive commercial and
official links with countries to its near north-Darwin has considerable
potential to further develop as an important centre and that it can continue to
make an important contribution to Australia's overall relationship with the
region. To do this the report says that Darwin must expand its economic base, but
that this will depend primarily on private sector investment. An objective of
policy, therefore, must be for Darwin to convince investors that the city is a
competitive business location. The Committee has made a number of
constructive suggestions to achieve this.
The Committee's 77 recommendations range across a number of portfolio
interests' Obviously these shall need to be considered by relevant Ministers
both in Canberra and Darwin.
Released with the report are the findings of the 18 separate studies
commissioned by the Committee. These stud ies-coveri ng Darwin's
transport infrastructure, health and education services, business services,
tourism, defence, cost of living, business perceptions and development 
I L. L 2 . jun u: 4, N' 1 . UUz F. U-
2
prospects in East Asia-will provide valuable information for private investors
and government.
Of major interest is the Committee's conclusion that the Alice Springs
Darwin railway may become economically viable early next century.
Importantly, however, the Committee has also recognised that even then
considerable public investment would be required and that funding of this
project would need to be compared with other possible public sector
infrastructure projects.
The Government thanks Mr Wran and his Committee for its hard work in the
preparation of its report.
CANBERRA 29 June 1995 



6 6/ 9
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA AWARD FOR URBAN DESIGN
I am pleased to announce today the detailed conditions of entry for the
Australia Award for Urban Design and at the same time to invite nominations
for the 1995 award.
The award is a prestigious addition to the national awards system for urban
design. It will recognise multi disciplinary urban design excellence which
brings long-term benefits.
Entries for the award will need to show clearly how they are making life better
for Australians. The gains will need to be in the three key areas of social,
environmental and economic well-being.
Outstanding achievement will be measured against a range of criteria.
Categories include design excellence, community function and benefit,
ehnvironmental health, social equity, relevance to today's lifestyle ( including
the ability to adapt to changing lifestyle needs), innovationi and application to
other sites.-
The establishment of the award follows the 18-month review of urban design
carried out by the Government's Urban Design Task Force. It is the
first-stage of the Government's response to the Task Force Report, which is
being co-ordinated by the Minister for Housing anid Regional Development,
the Hon Brian Howe MP.
The annual award will alternate between two types of urban design initiative.
In 1995 it will be for projects which have already created a built environment
which people can visit. Nominations close on Tuesday, 29 August 1995 and
the award will be presented in November 1995.
In 1996 the award will be for ideas which significantly influence the built
environment. The ' idea' might be a project which is at detailed planning
stage and is likely to become a physical reality. It might be a piece of
innovative legislation which will have far-reaching impact on urban design. It 
might also be a design project which, through promotion that occurs because
of the Australia Award for Urban Design, has a significant impact on urban
design elsewhere in Australia even though the project itself does not come to
fruition. The award will make a major contribution to design excellence in Australia by
recognising urban design in the broadest sense.
Judging will be by a panel of eminent jurors which will make
recommendations to the Government. The 1995 jury will be announced
shortly. The award is the urban design equivalent of the Australia Prize, the national
science award introduced in the mid-1980s by the Government and now an
internationally recognised award.
The Australia Award for Urban Design will be a perpetual trophy which will be
unveiled at the 1995 presentation. In addition to the trophy, there will be a
range of promotional activities linked to the award, to encourage debate
within the professions and the community about the contribution which urban
design excellence can make to Australia's heritage.
CANBERRA
4 July 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT MORNING TEA, VICTORIA BARRACKS, MELBOURNE,
4 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you Kim ( Beazley), members of the Curtin family, very distinguished
guests, members of the Cabinet and Ministry and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a very fitting occasion, I think, for us to meet in this the 50th anniversary
of the end of the War and the 50th. anniversary of John Curtin's death.
Althoughi John Curtin's life was a life dedicated'to working-Australians in the
Labor movement, in the trade unions, in the Labor Party and in the Federal
Parliament, he found that his ministerial life, ' his Prime Ministerial life was
dedicated, of course, to the prosecution of the war. On this 50th anniversary
of the cessation of hostilities, of Victory in Europe and Victory in the Pacific
for the democracies over the fascists in Europe, in Japan and in the Pacific,
on this occasion, I think, it is important for all of us to remember those who
prosecuted that war, directed it and fought it and those who died in the
course of it and those who suffered and those who were left behind. Because
to have such a conflagration as the Second World War was and to have this
country under threat of occupation, to rest control of the region from an
enemy at great personal sacrifice has to be remembered. It must mean
something. It has to mean something and it has to keep on meaning
something. We always, be it Anzac Day or other times, remember these times, but this
anniversary has, perhdos, broken away from the stylised remembrance or
commemoration of the people and the events to something far more heartfelt.
It is because we know that we can identify in our lives with what half a
century means. It is not so long ago to know that these events were taking
place and, in a sense, coming here as we are today, we can somewhat
recreate them. If only by the reminiscences of the people who were involved
as we have heard from Jim ( Maher) this morning and the recollections of our
great leader at the time, John Curtin, as we have heard from his grandson.
I think that there is these constant linkages that the country seems to make
and certainly the Labor Party makes. Ki m Beazley is my Deputy and Deputy
Prime Minister. Of course, his father won the seat that John Curtin's death 
caused the vacation and he came here very praisewprthy of John Curtin and
kept that linkage going to pass it on to his son who has kept it going and, of
course, being both natives of Perth they have had that linkage with the Curtin
family over these years.
We have all appreciated those contacts and those linkages so that the
continuity is there. We feel that sense of continuity and it makes us stronger.
Today, when the Cabinet meets in the War Room, in peace 50 years later, I
think, there will be as there is already, a moving quality about it and we
appreciate the peace and we appreciate what we have been given and we
appreciate what Curtin and his Cabinet and his government and the people of
this country were able to do in those desperate times with much less to do it
with than we have today.
So, I think, it is an occasion for reflection on that and also on John Curtin. I
think it might have been John who said that not much is written of him and
that is pretty true. But, again, in this sort of society, what is written doesn't
necessarily matter. It is what is thought and what is felt. There is no doubt
that the great affection for Curtin has remained right through the post-war
generation and because they were the ones who taught it to us, that
generation my parents generations taught it to us, and it has come to us.
And, it may not be in the biographies or autobiographies or the histories, but
it is there. Maybe someone will write more of it down and pick up some of
Jim's Manuka reflections and the rest which are important to gauge the
personality of John Curtin.
I think the thing about him was he did feel for his fellow Australians. You can
see by the references we have and the knowledge we have of him, how much
of a burden the war was on him and how he felt responsible for the Australian
forces which were deployed at his direction. He felt a singular responsibility
for them. I think, that in such a desperate situation with a large continent with
a very small population under an assault from an implacable and
indefatigable enemy there is the singular loneliness of that leadership
position which must have borne very heavily on him. We know that he was
haunted by the knowledge of the suffering in battle and the deprivation and
captivity of Australian forces.
I think what we appreciate about him most was he was not only passionate,
but pragmatic and resolute. Pragmatism came in the 1970s and 1980s to be
a word which has been used in other respects in more derogatory terms, a
derogatory reference, but pragmatism if one denotes from that learning the
lessons of history and doing what is honourable and practical at the time,
John Curtin made the opportunities, took the opportunities to do things in the
best interest of Australia and he made new alliances the one with the United
States is the most famous and he did things which he thought were
calculated to best serve this country and the allied interests.
So, he was practical ( inaudible) is all sweetness and light, it never was. He
had many critics and he had critics when the stress on him was the greatest, 
which was more the pity. But, he was resolute, he was decisive and that is
what the country needed. It needed somebody who believed in Australia and
Australians and who was resolute, decisive, inventive and pragmatic. They
were all things that he was. That is, I think at its core why we appreciate him
most. He was genuinely a leader and he took decisions and he stuck with
them despite the criticism.
For a generation of people he became the embodiment of what it is to be a
good Australian. What it means to be a good Australian. If you say to
anyone ' who do you think was a good Australian?' Many people would say
John Curtin. They would think of him, perhaps, first because of the plainness
of his life, the simplicity, yet the strength of purpose, the passion, the love of
his country, his commitment to it, all of these things, I think, come to make
him perhaps the idealised view of what a good Australian is and that has
been a real guiding light for the rest of us, particularly the post-war
generation, who had to try to take some lessons from the ruins of the Second
World War.
Today, let's remember his courage and his faith and his virtue and the fact
that, I think, as most agree and even those most close to him agree, that the
burden of the war probably led to his untimely death and the great pity was
that we never saw his skills employed in peace time. That he never had the
opportunity to do the things in peace that his life was really prepared for and
that while we had the benefit of his leadership and his skills in war, we never
had them when he would have most liked to employ them. That is, I think,
sad but we were then, again, fortunate that the mantle was passed to another
great leader in Ben Chifley who took up the job of post-war reconstruction.
I hope that by holding this Cabinet meeting here today, will not only dually
honour John Curtin, but rekindle the memory of his leadership and that of his
government and the commitment of all those Australians to the war effort.
Some things have been said here today, Jim mentioned the reference to no
matter whether one was a messenger or Prime Minster, it was a national
effort and, I think, the commitment by people and Mr and Mrs Salisbury
amongst them here today who have served here, that sort of general
commitment to people in the war effort was a national commitment by all
Australians. He led that commitment and he died just as the war was
finishing and where his successful prosecution had been complete.
This is an opportunity to remember John Curtin, perhaps without the written
histories, but to remember and appreciate him and say for those of us in the
Labor family, in this government, that we are very proud to be here as the
Labor government of Australia in the War Rooms where the Labor
government of the 1940s won the peace for this country. To be here with the
members of the family of John Curtin and with those who worked with him
and were close to him. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE VICTORIAN ALP FUNDRAISING DINNER, CARLTON
RADDISON HOTEL, MELBOURNE, 4 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I think that when one looks at the last decade one sees the changes which
have taken place in Australia, it has been a very great challenge in Victoria
and New South Wales. And particularly on Victoria, I think, particularly with
the shift in the industrial base, the great challenge here is on the part of
individual busines õ people to measure up to that and make the change. To
pick up the opportunities and run with them. We are delighted to see so
many of you because people who run businesses have actually got to turn a
buck, they have got to open the doors the next morning, they have got to
make things work and as an objective test about whether you're doing it well
or not and, I think, we always enjoy the opportunity to talk to people such as
yourselves because it does give you a better touch, a better feel about how
the economy is running.
I think that we have been through a pretty great change in Australia, perhaps
not often well understood and that is, that we do and have since the 1980s
run a very consultative approach to government. John ( Brumby) made the
point in his introductory remarks about the opportunity of meeting so many
Ministers and politcy makers. As valuable as this evening and this afternoon
has been, we really do keep in touch most of the time, perhaps not as broadly
as we have today, but we do listen because we have taken the view that
running an economy and a society on a consultative basis lends itself to
running a more cohesive and comprehensive approach and that cohesion
gives you the chance to produce economic outcomes that you wouldn't in a
society where the institutional interests play their roles out, but they don't play
them together.
Now I think we can be very proud of the changes which Australia has made,
in the last ten or twelve years. Very proud indeed. I mean never before have
we been in a position as we are in now. We are sitting now juxtaposed to the
fastest growing markets in the world. Through most of our economic history,
those markets were in Europe, or they were in North America. They were not 
here. But, now, the 1980s opening of country, opening up the financial
markets that John mentioned earlier, knocking the tariff wall down, getting the
whole motion of productivity up, thinking about building our capital stock,
product innovationrunninig the education system to power the research and
development and innovation along. It has all happened just when the Asia-
Pacific markets have really blossomed. Led, of course, by Japan and later by
countries like Korea and Singapore, but now joined by so many Indonesia,
Malaysia, China and here we are sitting at the doorstep. I don't think we
have ever had a better opportunity and we now understand that that
opportunity is there and that we can actually go out and meet that challenge
and succeed in it. But, we can only go out together.
We are not going to really make it work straggling out if economic policy and
industrial policy and business don't see eye to eye. If there -isn't -a p'lan, if
there isn't -&amp; strategy, we won't actually make it. But, we face these changes
and they have been quite profound. I believe that the Australian people have
measured up to these economic changes and challenges in a way, probably
few societies would have and, I think, that if they believe that there is a
strategy and a plan they will follow. And, they will make the effort and they
will make the change. The transformation is quite profound. We published a
budget a month or so ago. It is forecasting growth right out until the end of
1998. If you take the period from 1983 to 1998 15 years in 15 years we
have had only 14 months of negative growth. That is, a modest reduction in
GOP in 1990 and 1991, otherwise 1983 until 1998 we will see a period of
sustained economic growth at about double the rate we were used to seeing.
Just over double the rate on the previous period of government in the
previous 10 years.
In other words, we have met a challenge and we are building up wealth at
quite a profound rate and we are doing it on a basis that we can actually run
the economy faster, but not see the proceeds of growth frittered away in
prices and wages. And, the test of that maturity of Australia is that low
inflation mass that two to three per cent inflation we have in place we have
had inflation under two and a half per cent now for three or four years and we
have just, the other day, signed up to Accord Mark VIII with the Australian
Council of Trade Unions, in probably the mos _ t consultative of the consultative
economic acts. Probably the most consultative.
Now, in the Parliament recently I have been quoting Robert Reich, the US
Labor Secretary, and I think it is worth quoting him to you because he said
recently at an OECD conference here in the United States, we have had
huge employment growth and let me say that outside of Australia the
United States is the only other country that has had the employment growth
we've had or at that sort level on the same base. But, he said we have
had high employment growth, but we have had a fall in real wages for 14
years He' said on-the other hand, in Europe, they have got very high
real wages, but lousy rates of employment. He said, I think that is a fairly
lousy choice.' What I say to you is we agree with that and that Australia has
come right up the middle with very strong rates of employment growth and
good and reasonable and sustainable rates of remuneration. 
3
So, we have had as a consequence, a 40 per cent increase in household
disposable incomes since 1953 which, of course, powered purchasing power,
powered demand through business and at the same time we have had now
over two million jobs since 1983. We have had 630,000 since the last
election. And, we are doing it because we can run the economy faster, we
are doing it by putting weight on three instances of policy fiscal policy,
moTnetary policy and wages policy. Almost in every other comparbie-ountry
you can forget the third one. It is only interest rates, monetary policy and
fiscal policy. But here, we have the third. So, instead of having inordinate
weight on the budget or inordinate weight on interest rates, we can spread
the load onto wages.
I brought with me a copy of last weeks Accord. Most of you wouldn't have
seen the document, you would only have seen reports of it. But, the maturity
of it, the common sense of it that the work force in the representation of it,
through its peak councils can sit down with the government and say ' how can
we run this economy better, how can we agree on faster rates of growth,
better employment growth and yet good profits, strong investment and good
presence in our export markets?' The way, of course, is doing it through a
consultative agreed basis and, of course, at the same time coming to terms
with that other point John mentioned and that is savings.
Now, let me just read this little piece from page two of the Accord, it says
' This Accord is based on and consistent with maintaining an underlying rate of
inflation of 2 to 3 per cent on average over the cycle. This will help to
maintain our competitive position and the real income of workers'. I mean,
you couldn't believe this thing, 12 years ago nobody would have given a
snowballs chance in hell of such a document being produced. This is the
trade union movement walking up to the government and with. thie
government sifting down and saying ' we will run a wage system which is
based on and consistent with maintaining an underlying rate ofi i nflation of 2
to 3 per cent on average. Not wage indexation or an enterprise bdrgaining
system which has got no inflation target underpinning it, but one which it says
will run an enterprise bargaining system, but will run it essentially in such a
way it will produce -2t o 3 per ceninf flation.
Then it talks about the safety net. It says if you can't get something done in
the enterprise bargain, you fall back and you get it under the safety net.
Within the safety net it is talking about $ 10 to $ 12 or $ 11 to $ 14 for people on
award wages. -It says ' The Accord parties will support an approach to ' the
AIRC to deliver three further annual adjustments of $ 9 to $ 12 per week
available at the award level and $ 11 to $ 14 per week for those on award
rates. In other words, there is an enterprise bargaining system where we are
growing that continually and for those who can't get a bargain, they come
back to the safety net.
At the back of the document talking about the social wage, health, family,
maternity leave it talks about superannuation and it has got a table. The
table starts at 1992-93. It has got superannuation guarantee, payroll of up to 
4
$ 1 million 3 per cent and . then iri'the ( total) column it has got 3 to 4.5 per
cent and then under payroll of $ 1 million or more 4 to 5 per cent. In this year,
on 1 July, it went to 6 per cent for payrolls over $ 1 million and 5 per cent of
those up to $ 1 million, next year it is 6 and 6 per cent. But then comes the
budget change, the change that Ralph Willis delivered on Budget night.
When we pay the tax cuts into superannuation accounts 1 per cent, 1 per
cent, 1 per cent. And, for that follows an employee contribution of 1 per cent
in 1997-98 one further per cent in 1998-99 and one further per cent in 1999-
2000 followed by 1, 1, and 1 per cent in the tax cuts. At the end of the table it
says 15 per cent. That means every Australian working person will have, at a
minimum, 15 per cent by the year 2000-2003. It is seven years away. So,
under this Accord, with this government since the middle 1980s we put
together a system which not only is now underpinning a low inflation rate on a
systemic basis in a much more flexible labour market, but at the same time it
is putting together a basis of retirement incomes for savings of up to 15 per
cent for every Australian person by the year 2002 seven years away.
Now, does that beat screwing businesses with high interest rates and
monetary policy to hold down growth and inflation? Does that beat beating
the hell out of working persons so that the Labor Secretary of this country
could get up and say we haven't had a real wage increase in 14 years? Does
this beat having a paucity of national savings? Well, I think it does because
what we are finding under superannuation is that we believe we will have $ 1
trillion in superannuation accounts by the year 2000 and $ 2 trillion by the
year 2020 that is $ 2,000 billion. Now, that is an almighty amount and if you
bring it back from GOP the additions to savings the Treasury believes it will
add 2 per cent of GOP to savings by the year 2000 and 4 per cent of GDP by
the year 2020.
This is a staggering change. Our opponents say ' oh, it's another Accord, it's
number eight'. It has been eight Accords coming from a highly rigid
centralised system needing a big change in real wages to accommodate a
massive depreciation of the exchange rate going to award restructuring,
going to productivity, going out from enterprise based bargaining systems,
focussing on employment in Accord Mark VII and then focussing on or locking
in low inflation in Accord Mark Vill.
It is just the sort of things you don't see from -national governments. It is the
sort of thing you don't see from the workforce. It is a revolution in the way we
run economic policy in Australia compared to most otherQECD countries. Of
course, John Howard says ' I wouldn't have a bar of it'. You say ' well, why
wouldn't you?-We-' v-eot enterprise agreements for 65 per cent of all people
covered by federal awards, why wouldn't you?' Well, of course, you don't
have flexibility downwards, you have a safety net. But, if you can't pay $ 11 to
$ 14 per week for someone on $ 22,000 in an economy with this sort of bounty,
have we got to the point where the profit share where it is in the economy,
with a stock market index of 2003, from memory. When I became Treasurer
in 1983, the all ordinaries index was 451. It is now 2003. It is four to five
times the real wealth in the stock market than it was then. Are we to say to
people ' well, we are so hung up against this, we are going to hop into the 
people under $ 22,000' because that is really what it means. Because there is
no way you are going to stop the people in the strong parts of industry in
metals, in construction but, what the Accord does is say we'll let them make
their productivity bargains, but if the productivity isn't coming through, we'll
hold the system to 2 to 3 per cent, but it is on the basis that the low paid get
treated fairly.
Now, what can be fairer than that? I don't think very much.
In the last two months we have introduced, amongst other things, this Accord.
But we have also introduced a budget surplus, that great change in
superannuation, the Justice Statement, the standard gauge railway linking
Australia for the first time, the government's proposal for an Australian
Republic and, of course, the Accord. The government has done more in two
months than you would have seen out of our opponents in two decades. That
is simply a fact.
As a consequence of this, we are seeing the capacity to run the economy into
the future and deal with some of the longer running problems like the current
account deficit. Now, let me just say something about some of these
subjects.
We are seeing an enormous amount of blatant goal post lifting going on now
in the economic debate. Two and a half years ago it was ' Prime Minister,
what are you doing about growth and employment one million people out of
work when are you going to get the economy growing again?'. Ok, we're
going to get building we put One Nation in we've got One Nation working.
We will try to lift the spending capacity of the economy. We will try to
promote more growth and we have got that growth now moving up and as a
consequence we have created 630,000 jobs in that two and a half year period
and we have the economy growing as fast as 6.5 per cent. Now, coming
back to around three and three quarters a sustainable rate of growth. In the
late 1980s, a couple of years before that ' what are you doing about inflation?'
Here we are, we have still got inflation of 5 and 6 per cent. We have come
out of the recession with inflation under one per cent. It is now in a high
growth economy around two to three per cent.
So, we have essentially broken the back of inflationary expectations and high
inflation in this country. And, we are back onto a growth path and we are now
seeing a hugely strong phase of private investment. And they say but look
we didn't really mean that, what are you doing about the current account
deficit? What we are doing about that is we are putting into place the only
change that will really matter, that is the big underlying change to our national
savings because we don't have the level of private savings to encourage and
hold together the strong capital investment programs we need to rebuild our
capital stocks for exports and our merchandise trade. We need to put those
savings into place.
So Ralph Willis' Budget, takes the Budget deficit from $ 13 billion last year to
a surplus this year of $ 700 million now reduced by John Howard's antics in
.4 
the Senate to about $ 400 million. By the next two years it goes to a surplus
of $ 7 billion. So from a deficit of $ 13 billion to a surplus of $ 7 billion, is a
billion turnaround. $ 20 billion is 4 per cent of GDP.
I have already told you in superannuation during the latter part of the 90s, will
add 2 percentage points to GOP of savings in super. That is 6 per cent. The
current account problem is 2 1/ 2 percentage points. It has been running on
average at 4 1/ 2 to 5 per cent of GDP and it needs to run at 2 1/ 2 to
3 per cent. So we have got a 2 1/ 2 percentage point problem with which we
met it with a 6 percentage point fix. Now that is what will make the difference.
But hysteria and incantations, and voodoo, and snake oil will not fix the
problem. The problem will be fixed by lifting our national savings and the
Government is lifting it in the only way we know how. That is we have taken
the Budget and swung it strongly back into surplus while, at the same time,
building a basis in award superannuation, in national superannuation, that we
never had before.
In other words, if we accept the fact that our discretionary private savings are
down, as it is in most countries like this, how do you get the savings levels
up? How do you deal with the current account?
I notice that terrible man, Peter Costello, saying the other day " I've got cold
anger about the current account deficit". But he didn't have any cold policies
to match it.
But you see, go back to September last year, and this is why I want to talk to
a business audience as distinct from purely financial markets audience,
because go back to last year. The September quarter accounts, for the year
to September, were 6 1/ 2 per cent. The financial markets said " horror, shock,
horror. We are growing at a pace we can't afford." And we said " Well we are
going to adjust monetary policy, put rates up a couple of points and then slow
it down."
They called for a major economic statement in February. They called for
another 2 to 3 percentage points of interest rate rises on top of the
November/ December rises. They did all these things and yet we have got the
economy now back at the last quarter to 3 3/ 4 per cent. So we come from
6 1/ 2 to 3 3/ 4 per cent. In other words, back to a sustainable level.
But they would have had us have a February statement, another
3 percentage points on interest rates. It would have been a smouldering ruin
out there if we had taken their advice. In other words, " you must panic, you
must be in a state of shock, that is the only condition to be in. Now get out
there and shock yourselves and shock everybody else."
Meanwhile, the people back running businesses are saying God, let's get on
with the business. How do we keep this place together." And, of course, the
same thing we're saying now just as we had that irrational reaction in
September which the Government, of course, in its wisdom saw through we 
are saying now with the current, account deficit, we have the policies in place.
We have a 4 percentage point Change of GOP on the Budget and we have
got about 2 percentage points of superannuation.
Now let's say we get into a slower phase around the turn of the century and
some of that cyclical revenue goes. Call a 6 percentage point change
4 per cent. I mean take all, if you like, the argument out. We have got a
4 percentage point fix in there, for a 2 1/ 2 percentage point problem. I mean
that is how we will get it done.
But in that context culled out competitiveness together we are sitting on a 2 to
3 per cent inflation rate for the workforce. We are sitting on a pile of savings
coming through to superannuation and, at the same time, we are still
promoting the structural change in the economy, as enterprise bargaining
goes and productivity bargaining. But we now have, for the first time ever, a
naturally contestable and contested Australian economy.
We pulled the tariff walls down. We started to get real competition in this
economy and that natural state of contest is producing natural productivity
which is holding down, in a much more natural way, the inflation rate. We are
getting these low inflation numbers more naturally to rise, than simply
resorting to high interest rates which would have been our stock standard
response in the 60s, the 70s, or even in the
In other words, it may be an irony that it took a Labor Government to give
Australia a real market economy because that real market economy is now
working for this country and it is giving us low inflation, high growth and high
employment. Now none of that comprehension is on the other side of politics,
none of it.
And here is John Howard out today, you saw them on the weekend trying
their hands. Now, John Howard says " I'll give you the economy of the future
by rebuilding the tariff walls". Then John Moore. The last we heard from
John Moore was the TV affair, back in the 1970s. He brought television.
It was of no real account just as he isn't.
But here is John Mooreand he is back with Bruce Stannard from the
Australian Business Monthly, who is now employed by John Howard. Now
you remember the ABM campaign against the tariff reductions? You
remember the Australian Business Monthly's big campaign, you know the big
push against the reduced tariffs? Well that view now prevails in
John Howard's office.
And so here we have come, 12 years of hard work in opening up the
economy, making it a contestable economy, inducing low inflation, setting up
the savings balance, opening the tariff walls, getting the industrial change to
meet it, taking the opportunity of doubling our manufacturing levels, trebling
our manufacturing exports. Doing all these things and then now in 1995 as
we face Asia as never before, as we face the market opportunities as never
before, what is John Howard saying? " We'll muck around with tariff walls." 
We only tried it for 40 years and produced a closeted, low growth economy,
slow growth in the economy, where entrepreneurship was virtually extinct and
we have finally seen the error of our ways and we are going out and putting
organisations together like APEC arguing the case inside the GATT for a
global and open multilateral trading system trying to string the Pacific Basin
together in a free trade area under APEC and what is the alternative
Prime Minister's view " let's start building the barriers again".
I mean you can't believe it. I mean you can't take them seriously, really.
I mean can you imagine here they are creeping out on some little press
release " oh yes, we might build the tariff barriers again".
Now the thing is I don't know why Labor Governments believe in competition
and the Liberal Governments don't. No I don't because I mean low tariffs
mean more competition.
It was like that at the Council of Australian Governments. The Treasurer and
I are battling through three Premiers' Conferences, three Councils of
Australian Governments, to get a group of Liberal Premiers to sign up to their
principles. But, finally, in the end we shooed all them into it and they signed
up, only to apply the Federal Trade Practices law to the State
instrumentalities. You know it should have been done 20 years ago, but we
got them into it.
But here we are now in the position where we are arguing for these tariff
changes and we are arguing for these competition changes and they are
trying to resist them and, as a consequence in seeking to resist them, they
would deal Australia a really great blow in terms of our industrial structure
and where we are heading.
Now you saw all their fulminations last week on the current account deficit.
The very day the figure came out, John Howard was doing in $ 300 million of
revenue in the Senate. The very same day. And if the Democrats would
support him, he would do in $ 2 1/ 2 billion worth of revenue in the Senate of
the Government's proposed budgetary changes.
In other words, the surplus and the importance of savings in the current
account equation would simply, to put in summary, be a bit of low brow
politics in the Senate. The very day that he is talking about the current
account deficit and his Deputy is coping with a cold sweat, with a bad attack
of cold anger. The very same day, just as the Senate bells are ringing to do
in the measures.
So at the same time he says he doesn't believe in compulsion in saving. He
would essentially, he said on superannuation, he would cap it at where it is
6 per cent and then he would introduce tax concessions for people who take
out private super. 
In other words back to the 70s, when we had 40 per cent coverage of
superannuation. That is $ 40 billion in fund assets $ 40 billion and we are
heading for $ 2,000 billion. No, no, bad luck, he doesn't want that.
He'd prefer $ 40 billion. So he is going to cap the super assets off and
basically crimp that particular one.
In other words, the only thing that matters now in terms of that one remaining
area of economic policy that we must surmount, that is our savings in balance
and current account deficit. He would drop off the revenue measures and at
the same time crimp superannuation.
So I mean I would have thought that the people in business who look at this
country and look at the opportunities and say, you are meeting a Labor
Government and a Labor Cabinet, who have run a pro-growth,
pro-employment, pro-profit economy, where we have now seen very strong
levels of investment and we are seeing into the future.
The current account deficit on Friday was loaded with investment goods and
just as we spiked the growth in September last year, in December with those
monetary adjustments in the Budget, as we brought the growth down from
6 1/ 2 per cent to 3 3/ 4 per cent, as the growth subsided, so shall the current
account deficit. It is a reflection of what the state of the economy was a year
or so ago. But in a lower growth economy, we will see a response.
I noticed Moody's the other day saying they thought the current account
deficit would decline to 4 1/ 2 per cent of GDP next year, where this year it is
6 per cent and in the forecasts in the Budget, we have it at 5 1/ 2 per cent.
So, in other words, as the economy gets back to its sustainable rate of
growth, so too will we see a subside in the current account deficit.
In other words, we have got the position covered. The Government has got
the position covered and we are not going to run around like chooks with their
heads cut off and we are not going to have a cold sweat, or a mock panic
We are actually going to go in there and govern the place like we have been
doing now and we will come out the opposite way, as always, in a pro-growth
phase only this time, in this cycle, with low inflation and higher productivity,
engaging those countries around us, and lifting our exports and lifting the
value of the things we produce, lifting the things we do and trying to do them
better. Now Mr Howard says you'd think I have got a bit of a thing about him, well
I suppose I have, he stands for all the wrong things he said, of course, when
I came out and said how can we go around Asia, taking the opportunities to
sell Australia. Say, " here we are, we are a multicultural country, we have
seen the light, we have opened our economy up, we are engaging you, the
best of Asia We are out there as a people, of independence, of strength of
mind, of clarity of our identity as a sovereign nation. But, by the way, we are
borrowing the Queen of another country. We are borrowing the Monarchy
from another country. 
He doesn't see the importance to Australia of Australia being fully
independent and representing itself. So he says he'll give Australians a
republic he says. But he is actually for the Monarchy himself and you know
how hard it is to get a referendum passed in this country. You know how
hard it is. It will be to get a majority of electors in a majority of States to agree
upon the structure of an Australian republic. Imagine doing it with the
Government of the day saying " look you can have a vote, but we don't
believe it". You know you can have a vote, but the Prime Minister actually
believes in the Monarchy
And I noticed that in the Sydney Sun-Herald, an article just a week ago which
said this it's by Alex Mitchell he said " Two years ago I had a private
discussion with a very senior Liberal and at that time Prime Minister Paul
Keating had nailed his republican ideals to the mast and I asked how are the
Liberal Party intending responding. Now worries he replied, we can kick the
whole thing into touch by calling for a people's convention. The people's
convention is the perfect talking shop. It will keep the issue off the Party
political agenda and the election agenda. With the people's convention up
and running the Liberal Party wouldn't have to say or do anything about the
republic. It would effectively bury the issue as long as we wanted." Later in
the conversation he announced " I am a Monarchist, I was born a Monarchist
and I will die a Monarchist." Of course, the journalist couldn't make the
attribution. But we now know it was John Howard.
In other words, the convention is just another device for him not to make any
decision because the thing you must know about him is that he is utterly
indecisive. He has no policy ambitions whether it is in terms of our identity,
whether in terms of economic policy, whether it is in terms of competition.
You name it, he will basically go for the smother and the smother is the same
on the republic as it is on any of the other subjects which I mentioned tonight
on economic policy, or on tariffs, or any of the rest.
I would like to say to you that when you get down to the policies of the
Opposition, they talk about labour market reform. John Howard says " people
know I stand for pro-family policies, for industrial relations reform, for further
micro-reform, giving people choice in health areas".
Labour market reform means abolishing the Accord and knocking out awards.
It means cutting the heart out of wages.
He says he is pro-family, but he is not pro-income support, he is not
pro-worker, he is not pro-wage increase, he is not pro-the annual leave
loading, he is not pro-super. He is definitely pro-cuts in Government
spending. When he talks about pro-choice in the health system, it means
what you read for that is Medicare gets ripped to pieces, the 85 per cent
rebate goes, bulk-billing goes. And when he talks about micro-reform, that is
code for running backwards on tariffs in what he calls a dose of reform
fatigues. That is it. That is all you know about him. It is just that prejudicial
ideological deficiency he has had for these years. 
But the clarity with which the Government puts its views, its policies, its
Budget, its Accord, its Working Nation programs, its One Nation programs,
the changes to education, the changes to TAFE, to higher education, the
whole training agenda, getting the long term unemployed back to work, all
that nitty gritty in policy is all foreign to them.
So I would like to say this to you tonight, that we appreciate the support of the
business community in this country. We, actually, are interested in you.
We are interested in your life, your life's experience, your business
experience. We want to see you benefit from a country which is governed
decently with good policy and we want to see you participate in it.
It is on you that our hopes depend on getting that investment into place,
on seeing those additions in product, in seeing that addition to employment.
It is on you, in fact, that the whole of now the very pro-market position of the
Government's policies rely. We rely on a youthful, ambitious business
community to go and make those changes work and when I say business
community I mean, in the broad sense, the financial markets and the
productive side of business, the businesses that give us service industries,
the lot.
And it is for that, which we have dedicated ourselves with you. That is in a
decade of consultation, in a decade of listening to what needs to be done, of
making changes that on many occasions has put the Government at risk
politically and particularly in proximity to elections. We have never flinched
from putting the big changes into place and we are still doing it.
But that same consultation we have with you, we have with the trade unions
and we have it to the point where they're prepared to underwrite a 2 to
3 per cent inflation rate and agree that their constituency put 15 per cent of
their income away for savings agreed to put 15 per cent of their income
away as savings and these are the sort of national goals, and national
achievements Australia needs.
And if we can not only make the structures together here in Australia, we can
also make the structures outside of Australia for Australia and that is why
whenever we see Austrade, or we lead a trade mission, or we sit down at the
GAT or we thread together a great institution like APEC putting the
Un-ited States into a compact with East Asia and putting ourselves in there
we do this with you and for you.
Now there can never have been a time in our history, never, when we have
faced such strong markets and such great opportunities to take our place with
the community of nations in this part of the world, with a high growth, high
productivity, low inflation economy. We have never been in this position
before. If we can just keep our gaze on the path and make the remedial policy
changes we need to put Australia in a place where we are going to need
them to maintain that strong investment through the 90s, then the 
opportunities for this country, one people in a continent, a nation sharing no
border with anybody, with the prospect of having an environment that many
other countries will envy, with a cohesive social society, where we don't have
an underclass, where we wield ahead together, where there is care for one
another with access and equity in health and in education, where we have a
commitment as Australians to one another and to society and to group, that
we move ahead strongly, that we have a reconciliation with our Aboriginal
people, we are clear about our identity, we move as a force into this
community in the area in which we live. This is the Australia the Labor Party
dreams of. This is the Australia we are now having and this is the future we
can have.
So in this city, where a great economic challenge has faced you and where
we have tried to ease the adjustment pressures to get you to another plateau
of growth and opportunity, we want you to come good with this and the fact
that you are here tonight, so many of you, supporting us, identifying with us,
gives us great heart great heart to know that out there, there are many
people who share this dream of this great opportunity for this nation, in this
continent of ours, in this region of ours.
That has got to be the way. We can't look backwards. We can't go back to
the past to high tariffs, or the 60s, or a society of two pieces, or lost
opportunities, or not understanding that we have to do it together because
I think if we do that we won't get the opportunities again. This is not an
opportunity where we can lose it and recover it again. It is one where we
have to keep on the front foot and keep on going.
At any rate, thanks for giving us some heart, thank you for supporting us and
supporting us tonight here and supporting us out there where it really
matters, in the spirit of it all, towards that bigger thing I think we all cherish.
Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PJ KEATING MP
JOHN HOWARD'S MEAN SPIRITED POSITION ON ABORIGINAL FLAG
With his mean-spirited position on the flags of the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples John Howard has shown he believes their flags
should have no official recognition.
He has again demonstrated that he cannot tolerate change.
The Government decided on the 20th of June that the flags of the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples would be proclaimed official flags bringing
them into line with at least 22 other flags in Australia.
Flags in this category such as the Civil Air Ensign, the flag of Norfolk Island,
and the Customs flag are all secondary to the National Flag.
The National Flag will still be flown in the pre-eminent position.
This change means that, for example, it will no longer be a breach of protocol
for a young athlete like Cathy Freeman to carry the Aboriginal flag with pride.
Recognition of the flags is an inclusive act. For John Howard to argue that
this move is divisive is to suggest that these flags are somehow less worthy
than other Australian symbols.
Official recognition of the flags is in line with a unanimous recommendation of
the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation in its recent report to the
Government on proposed social justice measures. The coalition is
represented on the council.
The only person seeking to play politics with flags is Mr Howard.
CANBERRA 4 July 1995 67/ 95 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
OPENING OF BUILDING 8 RMIT, MELBOURNE, WEDNESDAY, 5 JULY
1995
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today at RMIT to open Building 8.
It Is an extraordinary building.
It's conceivable that some people might hate It: but I think it suits the
environment and I'm persuaded that It definitely suits its educational and
cultural purposes.
It's slightly mad, but so are the city baths up the road.
It's bright and this part of Melbourne needs It and It kisses goodbye to both
the modem hideous glass towers and Victorian heaviness and hang-ups.
I like It and I congratulate Peter Corrigan and Maggie Edmond.
I hope they will come up to Sydney some time.
Our cities always need a bit of cross-fertilization.
I also must pay tribute to two other people: Ruth Duncan, the Director of
Physical Planning and Construction; and your Vice Chancellor, David
Beaniand who recognised that Edmond and Corulgan's building might be just
the flagship RMIT needed: an Image of optimism and change; an Image of
Australia In the 21 st century.
And I gather that already it Is effectively conveying that message In Asia and
Europe. We have seen an outdated building transformed into a significant contribution
to Australian architecture and education.
Old facilities have been improved and modernised to include state of the art
educational technology. 
2
What we have now is a bold and challenging building which serves as an
outstanding educational resource and statement about the direction of
Australian culture.
And the direction of RMIT It will be the flagship of the Institution, connecting
It with the city, a focus arnd a resource for its activities, an expression of its
perspective on the future.
This building can also be seen as a symbol of the dramatic changes that have
occurred In education and training over the past decade,
RMIT is proof of the potential which exists when the two essential elements of
tertiary education, TAFE and universities, are linked.
Since the education reforms In 1988. Australian post-compulsory education
has undergone extraordinary changes and expansion.
The previous separation of TAFE and higher education, which restricted the
access of the less advantaged to many forms of skills development, is now
being broken down.
It is becoming recognised that the distinctions between vocational and
academic education are essentially arbitrary and accidents of history and
Inertia. We have massively expanded the Australian higher education system it
now enrols more than 30 per cent of all 17 to 22 year olds.
Participation In formal education and training by people aged 15-24 has
increased from around 44 per cent In 1985 to around 53 per cent in 1992.
Commonwealth funding available to higher education has risen from $ 3 billion
in 1983 to $ 4.8 billion In 1995 an increase of almost 61 per cent.
It is of great Importance to reflect on the circumstances which have enabled
the higher education system to expand so rapidly In recent times, and worth
noting how substantial the growth has been.
Since the reforms of 1989, manifested In part in the considerable
developments at RMIT, there has been a 40 per cent Increase in the number
of Austiralian higher education students.
The reason this has been possible is to be found in a four letter word which
appears In no dictionary: HECS.
Revenue from the Higher Education Contribution Scheme over the last
years has been used only to enable the system to grow. 
This has meant that up to one out of every three students today would not
otherwise be here.
The students demonstrating about higher education charging policy might ask
themselves If It is reasonable to protest against such an extraordinary
expansion in higher education?
It does seem fair to hav~ e former students pay around 23 per cent of
taxpayers' subsidy, If and only when they reach average earnings?
And it is worth noting that this Australian approach, a world first, is now being
copied In many other countries the US, New Zealand, the Czech Republic,
Canada and Botswana, for example.
Dare I suggest to the demonstrating students that It was our Opponents in the
last election supported the Introduction of full up-front undergraduate fees.
HECS is only one of many innovations we have embraced.
The Government is in the process of redefining education and training to
reflect new forms of working and learning.
We are not livng In a static environment.
Types of work, the way we work, the way we learn and the ways we teach,
and what we learn and teach, are all changing.
We need to be flexible and adaptive, innovative and much over-used
though the word Is competitive.
Education and training are the bridges which will enable individuals to cross
over from obsolete skills to skills of the future; from poorly paid employment
to well-paid; from unemployment to work.
It will enable people to get Jobs and hold on to them, as training and retraining
become career-long experiences for all workers.
If it is a bridge for Individuals, it is also a bridge for Australia itself from the
to the 21 st century.
Of course, it is not enough to create new buildings what happens inside
those buildings must also be innovative and dynamic.
I know RMIT Is well placed to meet this challenge.
It stands out as an Institution of character. 
4
With higher education and vocational education combined In one institution,
RMIT embodies the great change in modem education that is, the old
divisions between school, vocational education and higher education no
longer apply.
I have been told that RM IT aims for practicality, excellence, relevance and
responsiveness seeking ways to continually Improve its organisational
design in pursuit of its educational objectives and welcome people from a
wide range of cultural, social and educational backgrounds.
The RMIT Mission Statement specifically Identifies the need to be at the
forefront of technical and professional education of the kind which develops
people for employment and focuses on research programs that address real
world Issues.
They tell me that RMIT Is also relentless In its efforts to ensure that it keeps
pace with technological change.
This all sounds very good to me and It will be even better if RMIT never
loses sight of the fact that Its first responsibility its most fundamental
responsibility Is to teach students well.
The issue does not go away with the new technology.
Australians have shown a remarkable capacity to embrace new technology.
More than 40 per cent of Australian households have their own personal
computers, second in the world only to the United States.
Australians also have one of the highest per-capita rates of use of Internet in
the world.
And there Is no doubt that the university and research community has led the
nation In the development of computer networks.
But, as I said when I launched the report of the Broadband Services Expert
Group earlier this year, the Information -society is not just about acquiring the
new technology.
It Is about how we choose to use technology to take us to a more democratic
and equitable society and a more knowledgeable and creative one.
The great challenge is to make sure that the new communications
technologies enrich and strengthen us.
Nowhere Is the impact of informabon technology, particularly multimedia and
networks, going to be greater than in the field of education. 
Education must keep up.
Education must prepare young Australians for life in an Information society.
This will require Imagination from our educators and planners In the
development of curricula and the provision of Infrastructure.
Building 8 houses some fine examples of how educational Institutions can
embrace the technology.
The RMIT Library is linked into world wide electronic Information networks.
Students of fashion and textile design learn with the aid of a computer
laboratory and specialist machine workrooms.
State-of-the-art educational technology is a feature of the teaching methods
used In the Bachelor of Applied Science in Mathematics, and in teaching
Engineering, Applied Science and many other subjects.
The computer laboratories on Level 9 of this building are some of the busiest
teaching areas at RMIT.
And RMmrs Department of VisuaJ Communications Is offering Diploma and
Masters courses in Interactive Multimedia and Animation.
The Government has taken a particular Interest in new communications
technologies. We recognise the challenge: if we let it, the technology can be
dehumanising, alienating, and counterproductive to our educational purposes;
but if we are clever we can use It to strengthen the bonds between us,
deepen the pool of our collective knowledge and raise our level of mutual
understanding. We must pursue policies which ensure that existing injustices are not
Intensified by unequal access to knowledge.
And we must not fall Into the trap of thinking thtat the technology will ever be a
substitute for thinking, writing, knowing, working, deciding and doing.
We have been making great progress.
In April. I announced that the Government would develop and Implement a
national strategy for information services and technologies.
The strategy Is being coordinated through a whole-of-government approach
particularly in the formation of national policy and the Government's own
use of technologies. 
Two weeks ago I announced the membership of the National Information
Services Council a high level discussion group to provide the Government
with a range of views on marketplace developments, technical Issues and
community views on the opportunities and challenges that the evolving
services and technologies will present.
I am delighted that Professor Beanland has agreed to serve as one of the
members of the Council.
Mnother aspect of the strategy is the establishment of a national education
network.
Through agreement between the Commonwealth Government and the States
and Territories, Education Network Australia, or EdNA, has been launched by
the Minister for Employment, Education and Training.
EdNA will:
encompass all sectors of education including schools, vocational
education and training, and higher education;
equip students and their teachers to participate effectively in the
Information society, regardless of location or soclo-economic status;
deliver educational services and products across the nation;
provide an overarching framework for the vast array of cooperative
smaller scale projects throughout Australia; and
ensure that governments work tpgether to achieve the best and most cost
effective outcomes for our education system.
A further component of the National Strategy was unveiled last week by the
Minister for Social Security.
Aimed at bridging the gap between the ' information rich' and " information
poor' In Australia, the Community Information Network has been established
to provide free access to government and community Information and
communication facilities and services.
Initially, this access is being provided through 100 Local Access Points
situated In DSS offices, libraries and community organIsatlons.
The Government aims to rapidly increase the number of access points over
coming months. 
7
Another area where the government has been very active is In the
development of multimedia.
Multimedia's combination of text, pictures, sound and static and moving
Images takes Information technology into another realm, offering unique
Interactive learning arnd cultural experiences.
We believe Australia has a real opportunity to develop a world competitive
multimedia Industry, particularly in the provision of content.
Fortunately, we have in place many of the necessary ingredients In our
creative people, our technical expertise, our well established film and
television industry and educational institutions like RMIT.
The development of an Australian multimedia industry was one of the aims of
the Government's 1994 Cultural Policy Statement, Creatve Nation.
The Australian Multimedia Enterprise has been established and will now
oversee the development of multimedia projects with the assistance of
million provided by the Commonwealth,
I am aware that RMIT Is working on the establishment of an Interactive
Information Institute a research facility dedicated to applied research into
the multimedia and telecommunications Industries.
This proposal is typical of the sort of interaction the government is trying to
encourage where the best creative minds of our universities are combined
with the investment power and market knowledge of the private sector.
And let me say that I am delighted RMIT is playing such a prominent part in
the process.
I am delighted specifically because it is a significant element in RMIT's
Involvement In developing this northern end of Melbourne as an educational
precinct. Historically, of course that Is what It has been a sort of knowledge precinct
and RMI's development will revive the tradition for the 21 st century.
It Is therefore good for Melbourne, and while I am from Sydney and for all Its
warts and what they've done to It, love the place I am also seriously
enamoured of Melbourne.
If my words aren't enough, know me by my deeds.
In Creative Nation we put the International Music Academy here, an arm of
the Australia Council, the Foundation for Australian Cultural Development, the 
8
Special Television Production Fund, and we put half a million into the MVSO
with the message divest from the ABC if you want to.
Not everyone in Melbourne noticed all these things, but everyone in Sydney
did. To me there are unmistakable signs that Melbourne Is on the rise again.
It is going to end -this century and enter the next one very strong culturally and
economically.
This development will play a profound part In the process all the more so If
you can make something elegant out of the old CUB site up there.
Thank you for having me here today.
ENDS 



3,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE AT THE VICTORIA BARRACKS, MELBOURNE,
JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: As you know the Cabinet has had a meeting here today in the War
Cabinet room, on this the 50th anniversary of John Curtin's death and
I have made remarks earlier about that. But it is an occasion which
I think the Cabinet is pleased to have had on this anniversary and also
we used the time to make a number of decisions and I have given you
a press statement about one of them. But I am happy to take
questions about any of them.
J: Prime Minister you have clearly changed your assessment, of
John Curtin, after five years ago you described him in a different way
than you have today. What has changed that?
PM: I haven't changed my assessment at all and I described him seven
years ago, at the John Curtin Lecture in Perth, in similar terms as
I have described him today.
J: So he is no longer a trier Mr Keating?
PM: Well I am not here to answer silly questions by you, Glen [ Milne], and
I have made my position about John Curtin clear. At the time it suited
the then Prime Minister to make a political issue out of it for his own
preservation and misrepresent my remarks. Curtin's position in
Australia's history is guaranteed, completely guaranteed, as it ought to
be.
J: Do you think he is Australia's greatest Prime Minister Mr Keating?
PM: Well it is very hard to rank people about who were the greatest people.
But certainly the only time Australia was threatened he was there to
answer the call. He provided leadership. As I said this morning, he
was pragmatic, decisive. He was a person who, I think, understood 
what needed to be done and got around to doing it and in that sense
the nation will always owe him a debt. He was the one who piloted us
through the period of our greatest peril successfully and the strain of it
probably killed him.
J: Would he have necessarily made a good Prime Minister in peacetime,
Mr Keating?
PM: Well I think so because he had the skills of leadership. I mean he
was, above everything else as I said, passionate and decisive and his
whole life was dedicated to civil issues. So I think Curtin is a person
who could have made a transition. He made, in fact, the transition to
the wartime leadership. It is not fair to see him, simply, as a wartime
leader. I am quite certain that in the peace he would have been an
enthusiast in the reconstruction of Australia.
J: Have you been guilty of underplaying his achievements though?
PM: I don't think so. I think he is very warmly regarded and, I think,
seriously regarded certainly by, what one may term, the Labor
constituency. But I think more generally in the country because I think
those of us who are now active in public life and the media, our
parents and our families appreciated John Curtin and I think that
flowed over to what we have learned of him and about him. So, I think,
it is more than just simply the Labor Party or the Labor fraternity. It is
actually quite a wide spread thing. Probably the most appreciated of
the wartime and post-war Prime Ministers.
J: Mr Keating what do you think about John Howard's comments on the
Aboriginal flag?
PM: Well there as mean-spirited as all his other comments are about
minorities. You know someone summed it up a few weeks ago when
John Howard was talking about this commentator said well
John Howard was speaking a few years ago about One Australia, he
meant One Wollstonecraft and they don't fly the Aboriginal flag in
Wollstonecraft generally. I mean, that is his view of Australia. It is a
dated view. As I have said of him, often, he is out of his age and he is
out of his depth and I think Mr Viner's remarks today only make that
point clear from the perspective of someone in the Liberal Party who
has kept touch with the aspirations of Aboriginal and Islander people.
J: What do you think recognition of that flag will mean?
PM: Well it recognises it for what it is. That is it is the flag that Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people gives a status as recognising them'
and their aspirations and the official recognition of it is to recognise
only that. It is no more than a recognition of what is so. To guarantee
its status. But I noticed, I mean Mr Howard he had a statement, I think,
yesterday, I have come across, and this is typical of him. He said 
3
" flags have special places in the affections of the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people. This was evidenced by the very positive
response to Cathy Freeman's gesture." In other words, he is now
invoking her use of it saying that she was entitled to be proud of it, but
by the way he won't recognise it. It is just the same as saying " you
want a republic, I might give you the chance to vote on one, but I am
actually for the Monarchy myself'. I mean he never stands for
anything. He is utterly indecisive.
J: But he says it downgrades the Australian flag?
PM: Well that means that every other official flag has some diminishing
status on the Australian flag which, of course, it doesn't have.
The Australian flag is pre-eminent in this country amongst flags.
J: Did you anticipate there would be criticism when you made your
decisions?
PM: No and, of course, can I say that the report this was one of the early
recommendations in the report was shown to Mr Howard before it
was published. He never took exception to any of it apparently. It has
been there now for a couple of months. No-one else has said a word
about it.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: Oh, again, you know the sort of I think the notion that the place is still a
sort of Anglo-Saxon monolith and any symbols that do anything about
the monolith, you know, he generally objects to.
J: But the Council for Aboriginal. Reconciliation recommended in order to
change the-fia6 the Government should seek bipartisan support for it.
Do you think it might have been a better tack to consult with the
Coalition beforehand?
PM: But there was bipartisan support for it. It was presented. The report,
which went to all of the aspirations of Aboriginal people, had been a
process of consultation with both parties. Mr Howard had been briefed
before it was even published. I received it in the Mural Hall at
Parliament House. When? 2 1/ 2 months ago, 3 months ago.
Did anybody come and say from the Coalition this is a
recommendation that we object to? Nobody did. That is only a
post-event rational isation by them.
J: The Council also recommended several other things like changing the
preamble to the Constitution and reserving seats in Parliament for
Aboriginal people. What do you say of those allegations? 
PM: Well the fact that the Government has adopted this recommendation is
not a signal that the Government is going to adopt holus bolus the
recommendation or do it now. I mean at appropriate times we will
consider the various recommendations and make decisions about
them. But not on all of them now.
J: Mr Keating what do you think this says about John Howard's attitude
towards the Aboriginal people?
PM: Well I think he doesn't understand the importance of when we talk
about inclusion, about Australians coming together and being together,
that when we think of our identity as a unique people in the world it
must be about the inclusion and a basis of reconciliation with
Aboriginal and Islander people. It must be about that as well as other
things. He has never had the premium on that. He has never thought
it was important. That is why his predecessor, but one, John Hewson
said that the passage of the Mabo legislation was a day of shame.
I mean the Liberal Party of this epoch and not the ones of past, but of
this epoch, haven't seen the importance of Australia being at one with
its indigenous population and coming to terms with them and
reconciling differences with them. And this is another reason why I
believe Mr Howard does belong to a period of Australian politics which
is past. Everything he says reflects these things.
J: You don't think he was trying to tap into any community hostility about
the Aboriginal flag, do you?
PM: I think the Coalition will say the things that they think are calculated to
give them greatest immediate political effect. You know, no remark
like this would be made without references to the Federal Secretariat
or the pollsters or the rest. It is a constantly poll-driven approach by
the Coalition and, therefore, it is all about what it means this week in
terms of garnering public support without saying what does it mean for
the country in the long rung.
J: Will this forest statement cause many timber industries to close?
PM: Well what it is about is forming a basis of negotiation for a regional
forest agreements which is the only basis on which we will have a
sustainable timber industry. That is if we have got representative
reserve systems in place, whereby we can then have a sustainable
forest products industry. This is the only way to have it and I think that
is why we have had the commitment of most of the stakeholders in
this. This is the way forward. We got the States to agree to the forest
policy statement and to regional agreements. But we need the criteria
and we have now adopted the criteria which will, I think as a
consequence, set the scene for the establishment of a world class
forest conservation reserve system and this I think will give protection
to the high conservation value native forests and at the same time give
us a basis for a sustainable industry. 
J: Just on the current account speech last night. Can we take it from the
speech that you don't think see the current account putting any
pressure on interest rates?
PM: Well I think the important thing is not what I say, it is what the market
says. I mean what has happened long bonds in the last week have
gone up from about 8.8, or 8.9, to 9.2 and there has been an even
smaller change I think in terms of short term interest rates. So I think
the market is giving us a fairly clear signal from that and reflecting on
the forecasts which the Government made earlier in the year when
Ralph Willis, the Treasurer, came out and said that the current
account would be greater in this year 1994/ 95, that is the year just
finished. In February was the week that John Howard came to office
and everyone said " oh, this has given Mr Howard fillip. The
Government announcing this." Well what you are seeing is some of
the numbers coming in and I think we made clear last night that within
that forecast there had to be a couple of large numbers otherwise, in a
sense, the Government's sense of that forecast wouldn't have been
met. Now, in other words, we were expecting some heavy numbers
through this forecast period. So, too, I think was the market and the
reaction of the market has been commensurate with its expectations.
J: Prime Minister can we be sure that that monthly peak has been
reached?
PM: No you can't be sure. But I think what we can be sure of is that the
current account deficit will decline as the growth in the economy
coming off last year has subsided, so too will the current account
deficit. That 5 or 6 per cent economic growth, which was producing. a
lot of import demand as that has come back, so too will the current
account. But the other important thing is the Government has put into
place the remedial policy changes on savings on the Budget swinging
in the next couple of years $ 20 billion back into surplus, about
4 per cent of GDP, there are a couple of per cent of GDP on savings.
We have got a good 5 or 6 per cent of GDP on savings to meet a
2 1/ 2 percentage point problem.
J: What is the timeframe though. I mean when do you see this impact?
PM: I think we will see that coming together in the, you know, balance of
the 90s the second half of the 90s. But that is a savings change. But
not the slowing. I think the slowing in the current account will come
with the next twelve months.
J: Your visit to Yarralumla on Monday. Did that have any implications in
terms of the timing of the decision for the next Governor-General and
the choice? 
PM: Not particularly. No I just had a general chat with the
Governor-General about a range of things.
J: You have said before that you don't have a short list in mind or a
timeframe. Is that still the situation?
PM: I haven't had. But I am starting to refine my thoughts about it.
J: Is Mr Hayden's departure time flexible or is February a cutting off
point?
PM: No, but we said at the time, Her Majesty, I recommended and she
accepted that the Governor General's time be extended to around
February, or to February in 1996 and that is basically still the position.
J: Prime Minister do you think the time is right for Australia to have its
first woman Governor-General?
PM: Well I think the time is right for a person to be appointed who will fulfil
the role and responsibility adequately, who understands the sentiment
in the country and the fact that the country is now in a very, has been
for a decade, in a very large transition. I think they are the
requirements rather than gender requirements.
J: When do you expect to make the decision?
PM: Well there is normally about a six month lead time on the process of
consultation and I have got no reason to depart from that. So it is not
that far away.
J: Mr Keating do you reckon Martin Ferguson would be the best
candidate for Batman?
PM: I have got no idea whether Martin has expressed any interest in
changing his role in life from the trade unions to the Federal
Parliament. Were he ever to do that, he would be a very valuable
member of any Labor Caucus because of his considerable contribution
to the labour movement and his experience, but that is a matter for
him.
J: Are we close to a resolution on the appointment of General Mantiri?
PM: Well it is not a matter of a resolution. I mean the prerogative is with
the Government of Indonesia to nominate who they think can best
represent that country and that Government in Australia. I think that
the intention has been to provide to Australia a high ranking person.
One who in this case whose rank comes from his military experience
and in proposing someone of high rank in their society, they believe
this is therefore giving both Indonesia and Australia the opportunity of
having their interests represented well and giving us the opportunity to 
have an influence in that country we might not have with a less high
ranking person. The fact, though, that the appointment has raised
objections in Australia, in particular quarters, in respect of some of the
things the General has said in respect of the events in Dili some years
ago, you know I think would be now well and truly reflected in
Indonesia. But this matter is a matter for the Government of Indonesia
to reflect upon.
J: There have been some reports out of Jakarta that the Australian
Government didn't put its disapproval forcefully enough, early enough.
Is that the case?
PM: Well I don't think it is a matter of the Government putting its
disapproval. I mean we rejected the remarks which General Mantiri
had made about Dili. What we have not done is rejected his
appointment. This is a matter for the Government of Indonesia.
Though now, of course, they will have recorded the dissension in
Australia that such an appointment will meet and if there is to be any
reflection on this it is for them to reflect upon.
J: Is it going to make it very difficult then though if he does stay on?
PM: Well again I mean he would be their representative, not ours. So it is
for them.
J: Is it your expectation though Prime Minister that the appointment will
go forward?
PM: At this stage, if you are asking me has Australia rejected the
appointment. It hasn't and not at any stage. But I mean given the
weight of coverage which it has had in Australia, there is no doubt that
President Soeharto and the Government of Indonesia would have had
that communicd t-d to them and if they are determined upon
General Mantiri representing them, that is as it will be. But it is a
matter for them.
Could I just finish on one of the points I mentioned last night, this
question of tariffs because it seems not a lot of it was reported. Just to
say, again, to repeat what I said about John Howard. In an absence of
policy statements, the one solid policy thing they have said is that they
still believe, they are still hankering after the idea of Australia with a
tariff wall around it. John Howard is saying I will give you the economy
of the future with a tariff wall around it. Now I can only put this down to
the fact that the influence of Mr Stannard in his office, leading the
Australian Business Monthly charge against tariff reductions, putting
this obscurantist view that if we put a barrier up we will be alright
safely behind it. For the Opposition Leader to be dallying with these
sort of policies in 1995, after we have been through the GATT and as
we go through APEC is, I think, remarkable and it is remarkable only to
reinforce the point, again, that John Howard is out of his age and out 
of his depth. That he still believes he is a 70s politician with
views, seeing the 1950s as the model and this is just as true here to
have John Moore and someone on his staff speaking and developing
policy in these terms, I think bodes very ill for the conservative side of
politics and whatever commitments they ever had to economic
rationality. And where we are talking about competition policy,
I noticed Mr Moore saying we have got to advance micro-economic
reform before we reduce tariffs. He doesn't seem to understand that
the very reduction in tariffs induces competition in the economy which
produces productivity and then brings on micro-economic change.
He wants to put the cart before the horse and the horse before the cart
is tariff reductions and competition in product markets which then lead
to micro-economic change. I mean you know nothing could say more
adequately, how inadequate the current Opposition is for Government
than these expressions over the last couple of days.
J: Some of your own backbenchers, though, of course are calling for a
more aggressive stance on trade and industry. Is there anything in
that?
PM: Well I mean the Government has always sought to facilitate industrial
change and we are doing it now with world best practice. We are
looking at which ways we might be able to improve product innovation
in Australia. But we are doing it in a sense in a generic way and I think
this is where the debate has changed and it has changed in the
Labor Party, I am happy to say, over the years away from particular
sectors with particular plans. But here we are threading together a
Pacific Rim trading arrangement through APEC with lower level of
protections so we can get into markets around the region while the
current Opposition in this country are saying " no, no, stop we want to
go back, we want to go backwards".
J: The Governor General you mentioned the new Governor-General
would be a person who supported the changes of the past decade,
presumably they would also be one who would be supporting the
change to a republic?
PM: Not presumably at all. I mean the Governor-General, whoever that
person may be in the future, will be somebody who is the Vice Regal
figure in this country. But still needing to understand what social and
economic changes have taken place in Australia. I mean I think that
just is simply a basic requirement for the job.
ends 



A A
PRIME MINISTER 68/ 95
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME NMISTER1 THE HON P J KEATING,
MP, THE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRIES AND ENERGY.
SENATOR THE HON BOB COLLINS AND THE MINISTER FOR THE
ENVIRONM: ENT, SPORT AND TERRITORIES, SENATOR THE HON JOHN
FAULKNER FOREST POLICY
The Government today agreed to a Commonwealth position on National Reserve
Criteria designed to esiablish a world class forest conservation reserve system.
These criteria fonii the basis for negotiation with the States on Deferred Forest
Assessments ( DFAs), Regional Forest Agreements ( RFAs) and on nationally agreed
criteria for establishing forest conservation reserves.
The National Reserve Criteria is a central plank of the National Forest Policy
Statement and the Commonwealth's commitment to identify and protect key forest
areas in a comprehensive, adequate and representative ( CAR) reserve system.
The Governmenr's decision took into account more than 50 submissions from
stakeholders as well as an extended process of consultation with thle States, interest
groups, scientists and the National Forest Policy Advisory Foruin.
The criteria reaffirmed the position set out in a Commonwealth Discussion Paper
which was released on 3 0 March 1995. In today's decisio the Government has
amplified and clarified some details regarding the application of these criteria.
The Commonwealth's National Reserve Criteria includes:-
a broad benchmark of 15% of the pre-1750 distribution of each forest
community to be protected within conservation reserves
retention in reserves of at least 60% of existing old growth increasing up
to 100% in some cases for rare old growth
protection of 90% or more wherever practicable of high quality wilderness
recognition of the role of " off-reserve management" to conservation
objectives. 
Y*
The Chief Biodiversity Officer of the United Nations' primary nature conservation
body International Union for the Conservation of Nature in his review of the criteria,
stated that it is " an excellent set of criteria which reflects extremely vell the current
art and science of reserve protected area sstem design. It draws on the best
available scie ce in Australia and elsewhere and appropriately reflects current
thinking at the internatlonal" level."
Implementation of a CAP, reserve system, appropriate management of commercial
forests, and the forthcoming wood and paper industries strategy will benefit industry
and regional communities through increased certainty.
The Commonwealth is also committed to ensuring that a high value-added wood
products industry can operate on an ecologically sustainable basis outside these areas.
This is being addressed through the Wood and Paper Industries Strategy to be released
in August.
These policy initiatives will ensure that Australia has both a vibrant forest-based
industry as well as a world class forest conservation reserve
It is recognised that the likely impact of the DFA and RFA processes may be the
withdrawal of some native forest resources. The Government has endorsed a set of
guidelines for consultations with affected businesses, workers and communities to
facilitate the transition to a sustainable higher value-added industry based increasingly
on plantation and regrowth resources.
It will not be possible to estimate detailed structural adjustment requirements until at
least the Deferred Forest Assessments have been completed.
Coupe by coupe assessment of forest areas for the 1995 woodchip licence renewal
process has been replaced this year by a regional approach to protect areas of forest
which may be required for the reserve system, pending the completion of RFAs.
MELBOURNE July 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOOD UNIVERSITIES
GUIDES 1996, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 6 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much Paul ( Kelly]. It is good to see you back in the portals
of Parliament House after all those years here. But still having an influence on
the debate as Editor of The Australian and, of course, a very particular
influence in terms of the coverage by The Australian newspaper of education.
As you say, your Wednesday supplement which is the place where I am sure
most people in Australian education go to read about their industry and what is
happening with it.
But could I acknowledge Dean Ashenden and Sandra Milligan who are with us,
the authors of the Good Universitis Guides; Professor Logan' Vice-Chancellor
of Monash; Professor John Hey, from Deakin; Pfofessor-Seqeantson, the
Acting Vice-Chanicellor of the ANU; and, Professor Wilmoth from the RMIT,
where I was yesterday. It is good to hae you -alo, ll of you-.
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to do these two things launch the
Good Universities Guides and to present the 1995 University of the Year
Award. I am particularly impressed with the Guide, it says at the first line,
" All nformation needed to answer the two big questions. Which course?
Which campus?" and then it goes through to describe the universities, the
courses, how you get in, how difficult it is for entry, what sort of courses on offer
and, if you have completed a course, what sort of standing it has. These sorts
of issues.
And I think what is particularly pleasing to me about it is that a decade or so
ago you wouldn't have needed this Guide because there just wasn't so many
people in the system and the fact that we have recognised that Australia's great
comparative advantage is its education system and that our greatest resource
is the creativity of our young people, of our students. 
Just knowing that fact, just a country coming to terms with that particular fact, is
important in itself. Rather than, perhaps, the sense of the cargo cult with
another paddock full of wheat, or another mountain of iron ore will do the trick.
Rather, we are saying no, no, what will do the trick is to exploit the thing which
is of greatest value to all of us and that is the creativity of our young people and
the growth of our education system and focussing the very great ability of our
educators and putting a premium on their capacity to educate.
I think it is this, the notion that we wish to be a clever country, but more than
that, rather than simply the amenity of technological capacity or wealth.
Just this question about the liberation which education brings, the sense of
democracy, the inter-generational opportunities. It is the great bridge in
Australian society from wherever one is from, in socio-economic terms, to
wherever one wants to go. You can go there by crossing this bridge and that is
why there has been such a singular commitment by the Government over 12
years to education.
As a consequence, we have now got just on 600,000 people in higher
education, compared to 325,000 in the middle 1980s a 60 per cent increase.
It is just a phenomenal number. One of the things which pleases us about it,
and part of the reason we can keep the numbers up is that we have made big
financial commitments and by introducing quite revolutionary schemes like
HECs equitable, democratic schemes like HECs where we are asking
s-tu6dents to refund, when they reach average weekly earnings, 23 per cent of
the cost of the course. When it comes back 100 per cent of it goes to other
students. I noticed yesterday there were a group of students demonstrating against HECs
and other things at RMIT, where I was. But a third of them out the front
wouldn't have been there Without HECs, which is a point lost on them I am
sure. But it is, I think, a very great innovation and many other countries are
now coming to pick it up. And it is equitable, it works through the tax system,
you don't need to pay anything until you get to average weekly earnings and,
yet, all of it goes back into higher participation rates in education.
I think that the option of higher education, something that is within the view of
most students, is a great thing. When I went to school, when I completed the
Intermediate Certificate in New South Wales, there were only very few students
I went to school with who had any expectation of going to universities. In my
day, people didn't know about them and despite the scholarships which were
around and many people in this room would have been advantaged by the
scholarships of the day, the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme, it was in the
end, nevertheless, a fairly elite system covering too few people. And, hence,
you know something like this Guide would have been basically unnecessary
because there wasn't the sense that everybody had the opportunity of going.
I think the other thing that pleases me about the change in participation rates in
schools and higher education, is the opportunities it has brought to women, to
young women, to girls to stay in higher education and then join that throughput,
so that we are now getting about the same throughput out of the higher 
education system that any comparable industrial country, like Australia, would
have. And part of that stream, which is about 40 per cent I think of the people who
complete and graduate from Year 12, about 40 per cent of that stream go
through higher education and, of course now I think a majority of them are
young women, which is ~ a great thing. It means that whatever people think
about the glass ceiling, the reality of it, the prejudice in the system, or the
absence of opportunity, the mere fact that education is going to be spread so
widely amongst women and the higher education opportunities are going to be
there, it means there is no ceiling which will contain them. In other words, they
won't be looking for the favour, they will simply take it and that is what I think is
important giving them the capacity to go and grab it.
So this is a very revolutionary change for us all and one that is now powering
along in the society we have, making it stronger and fairer and more equitable,
and giving us a chance to, in fact, see the universities become not simply
providers of education, but businesses in themselves.
I know there is a debate about this, but I am sure we are well able to keep this
balance between the core responsibilities and core tasks of a university and
their capacity to do things, which at the same time advance the economy and
advance their place in it.
I noticed yesterday at RMIT that being shown through the IT areas of
university, one can see that what was on offer was something that was likely
not to be repeated in too many places, not only in Australia, but around the
world. And you can see the obvious commerciality, or the commercial
opportunities, that the courses have on offer. And we have seen this in so
many other ways and in so many other fields as we have seen universities
change over the period.--
I would like to also just mention that just in terms of through-put in the
Budget of this year, we added another 11,000 places to higher education, and I
think that commitment, again, just underpins the fact that there is no
complacency on the Government's part about the challenge with higher
education, and keeping resources up to it. The other area, I think, that we in
the Government are particularly interested in, and I know higher education
institutions are interested in too, and that is the inter-face with TAFE. And
again, at RMIT yesterday we saw Universities and TAFE vocational education
sitting beside one another. And the capacity for people to stream themselves
through TAFE to University, to undertake Diploma's, to gather for themselves
accreditation for particular courses in Universities is, I think, a very welcome
trend and it means that the traditional ways we thought about higher education
are going to change, and that the career paths of students, or the paths of
students rather, is going to be different than it has been in the past.
The Cinderella of Australian education, of course, has been TAFE, and it is a
great challenge now before us with the training agenda so " much on the
Government's minds through Wyorking Nation and th," 4raineeships etc to be
able to lift the capacity of vocational educational so that the 60% of people who 
don't go to higher education are not cascading into a labour market to which
they are unsuited where job opportunities are curtailed, or constrained, and
where the large majority of them are untrained, which not long ago was the
case still the case, in fact. We're now getting to a point where, we have now
the Commonwealth since One Nation we have put $ 1.2 billion into TAFE, into
vocational education, and through ANTA, we expect to be able to tie the TAFE
systems of the State's together with vocational certificates, which will then have
currency across the country. And where, at the same time, outside the
formality of the state TAFE systems, develop a private training market, where in
particular areas, we can see private trainers being provided, and in particular
localities, where industries need a specific focus for training needs, we can see
them coming together and operating the training market. Getting business
involved in vocational education is, I think, the way for us, so that the labour
market demands have far more influence on the product of vocational
education, than does simply the providers the traditional providers of
education. This is, I think, a very exciting change for us, and I was pleased to
see the take up in vocational education in the last year as well, so that there is
a lot of discernment out there on the part of students about what may be
advantageous to them and the labour market, whether they are, in fact, they
are better off in higher education, or they are better off specialising through
vocational education. I mean, they are getting very canny about those choices,
which means the sophistication of the system is rising.
Now, I think again, this is where the guide will matter, because I am quite sure
that the most interested student just can't know about the courses which are on
offer, the choices, the combinations that are on offer around the country. And
with such a great stock of people now seeking a place in higher education, we
really need to have, I think, this sort of information available so that the whole
panoply of opportunities is made clear, and at the same time, I think though I
haven't read it comprehensively there is also some guide in here to vocational
education as well. I think that's very good...
In looking through the Guide, for instance on a University talking about a
University how they rate and compare status and standing, they have stars.
Quality committee views stars; research track record stars; getting in,
toughness to get in, and there's a guide; flexibility of entry there's a guide;
places for school-leavers; there's a guide; admission for TAFE graduates
there's a guide; the global connection, international students there's a guide.
And then it goes to teaching quality committee view, teaching innovation,
library holding, graduates course ratings, and then what's on offer the breadth
of offering: a vocational orientation, external study. And then the payoff
getting a job, proceed to further studies, starting salary etc. In other words, it's
the sort of guide that a young person needs or not even a young person
coming to look at a university. So I think it's a terrific piece of work, I really do,
and congratulations for it.
I have got two pleasant duties to do one is to launch this, the other is to
announce the University of the Year. Now, we boast now a great number of
Universities. In 1995, the focus of this award has been on the integration of
information and communications technologies into undergraduate education.
Now, I think the information highway which we hear about now every day, 
more than one time a day most days has enormous potential as an
educational tool. And I suppose it is probably in Universities and in educational
institutions where there is a fascination with the information highway because
of the amenity which it can obviously provide for teaching. We can use it to
increase the curriculum choices offered to students, and we can use it to
transport ideas and knowledge around the country to people who live on the
margins of our society, and it is obviously one of the instruments in Open
learning. Some Universities are already exploring it I mentioned RMIT
yesterday with a raft of courses and the ANU has created a sophisticated
network which is fully accessible to undergraduates a virtual campus in itself.
But the University making the best use of the new technologies, and the winner
of the Good Universities Guide 1995 University of the Year Award is Deakin
University. Deakin uses the information highway to provide world-class
distance education when the student can't come to the University, Deakin
takes the University to the student. Deakin students work from mines and
factories and offices, as well as from classrooms and lecture theatres, but
through the use of computers and e-mail and faxes and printed materials, they
engage in the dialogue that is the hallmark of the traditional university
education. Deakin is an unconventional university, but of course, a good one.
And I might say, that it is an illustration of the success of the Government's
higher education reforms that the Australian University of the Year in 1995
doesn't have a single block of sandstone to its name.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to extend my congratulations to Deakin,
the Vice Chancellor is here, of course, to acknowledge that, and also again,
repeat my appreciation and congratulations for the publication of this
document. Let me again repeat those congratulations to Dean Ashenden and
Sandra Milligan, and also to Paul Kelly, the editor of The Australian, because I
think no newspaper has tracked the course of Australian education quite like
The Australian has, and now with these continuing innovations coming through
in higher education, in vocational education as we are seeing such a ferment
and flux in our higher education and vocational institutions having the national
newspaper chart it, record it, talk about it, debate it, is, I think, the sort of thing
that newspapers are there to do. To be papers of record, to put information put
there that people genuinely need and gamner, and where they can understand
better about what they are doing relative to other people. So, perhaps I can
conclude my remarks by saying that in recent times I never seem to be out of
universities and vocational institutions. It is a great pleasure to me that we
continue to just power on in this area, and let me assure you that the
Governiment will be keeping the resources up to the sector, because it is our
great comparative advantage it is our great hope, it is our great liberating
force, it is one of the most democratic tools we have in our society, and I am
delighted to be involved again with some of the key people who are fashioning
this change in Australia. Thank you.
ends. A, 



TEL: 6. Jul. 95 3: 09 No. 012 P. 01
69/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MPD
GAS REFORM TASK FORCE
I am pleased to announce today that Mr Ric Chariton, the former Chairman
and CEO of Shell Australia, has agreed to chair the Gas Reform Task Force
which is being created to oversee the implementation of reform in the national
gas industry.
The Task Force will include a senior representative from the Commonwealth
and each participating State and Territory and an independent project team
to provide it with the necessary support.
It will be roquirod to oonsul closely all rolevdr: i i itutrted parties, Incluaing
all sectors of the industry and users, environmental interests, consumers and
unions. This means that the Task Force, through Mr Charlton, will provide
stakeholders in the gas industry with a direct involvement in the gas industry
reform process.
Their invol vement will be vitally important to ensuring that the arrangements
implemented for the natural gas industry are technically, commercially and
environmentally sensible.
The historic agreement on national competition policy reform reached in April
this year set the framework for guiding competition reform across all
industries. It is now essential to ensure these reforms are implemented In key areas,
such as the natural gas Industry.
The first activity of the Task Force will be to produce a scoping report which
identifies the actions required to implement the Council of Australian
Governments' agreement to achieve free and fair trade in natural gas by
1 July 1996. 
TEL: 6. Juil. 95 3: 09 No. 012 P. 02
2
These actions would be In light of the related reform processes underway,
including: the national competition policy reforms, specific reforms
undertaken by the States, Territories and the Commonwealth, and the
industry's own initiatives.
Part of this task will be to consider the extent of national coordination that is
appropriate for the Implementation of gas industry reform.
As well as large economic benefits, micro-economic reform in the natural gas
Industry will promote switching to gas from other fossil fuels and will therefore
contribute significantly to reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
The Government's One Nation initiatives recently resulted in the opening of
the standard gauge railway line between Melbourne and Adelaide, linking for
the first time Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth via a common
rail gauge. Through a consistent approach to reform in key areas, such as
the natural gas industry, Australian governments are now in a position to
ensure that these * rail gauge" problems do not re-emerge elsewhere.
CANBERRA 6 July 1995 



OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
The Prime Minister has sent the following letter, dated 7 July 1995, to Mr Christopher
Edwards, Chairman of the National Small Business Forum.
Over recent months issues affecting small business have become a particular
focus for community and media attention.
Sma business operates within an especially competitive and dynamic
environment and from time to time decisions of various Governments can have a
significant impact on operations. Interest rates and inflationary pressures are
probably the most important macroeconomic matters for small business and in
that area I am proud of my Governent's achievements. But, at any point, there
will always be a range of more specific concerns facing small business and,
accordingly, Senator Schacht, the Minister for Small Business, keeps me well
informed on the issues raised at the Small Business Forum.
One of those issues recently has been the legislation relating to unfair dismissals.
I was pleased that the Government was able to announce the proposed changes
to the unfair dismissals provisions of the Industrial Relations Act in the lead-up
to the Forum held in June. I have been told that the proposals were well
received by the members of the Forum and I am glad that we have been able to'
respond to the concerns of the sector.
A cooperative approach has been pursued by the Minister for Industrial
Relations, Laurie Brereton, in consultation with his State counterparts, the
ACTU and members of various employer groups. This demonstrates that the
Government is committed to ensuring that not only do we have a system which
provides workers with fair protection, but also an environment which is
conducive to pnivate sector activity and employment growth. We are confident
that the new unfair dismissal arrangements will mean that the system is
reasonable and balanced for both employees and employers.
It was also with the interests of small business in mind that the Government
introduced the Corporate Law Simplification Bill. Its essential motivation is to
reduce both the paperwork burden for small companies and the cost of
compliance with Government regulation.
I was disappointed, therefore, that the Senate failed to pass the Corporate Law
Simplification Bill during the final week of the Budget session. The Government
is commnitted to providing easier and cheaper access to the legal system for small
business, and the provisions contained within the Bill would have done just that. 205 
It is difficult to understand why the Opposition prevented the passing of the
legislation, especially when it knew that failure to pass the Bill in time for
commencement at the start of the 1995/ 96 financial year would delay
implementation of the legislation for a significant time. If I was in small business
I would be wondering why Mr Howard and the Coalition have chosen to deny
small business access to a simpler and cheaper legal system until at least I July
1996. This action punishes around 850,000 small businesses in Australia and
contradicts starkly the Opposition's claims to be red-tape cutters and to have a
special concern for your sector.
I welcome the role the Small Business Forum's continues to play in raising
matters of concern and exploring avenues to address them. Your discussions
with Senator Schacht form a valuable input into the Government's current
consideration of our response to the Gardini Review of the Franchising Code of
Practice as well as options for addressing small business concerns with
' unconscionable conduct' as it relates to the Trade Practices Act.
I understand that the Small Business Forum now has an agreed position
concerning the effectiveness of the ' unconscionable conduct' provisions of the
Act, and has called upon the Government to consider strengthening the
provisions. Given that this has been a particularly difficult issue for the Forum to
deal with, this should be seen as an important achievement.
The Government will seek to ensure that a cooperative and responsive approach
is adopted in addressing both the Franchising Code of Practice and the issue of
unconscionable conduct. We seek solutions which will enhance the business
environment for small and medium enterprises. That is, after all, our common
objective. ENDS
206 



PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
1995 NATIONAL SOCIAL POLICY CONFERENCE
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES, SYDNEY, 7 JULY 1995
It's good to be at a policy conference.
Policy is the stuff of government. It's why we are here. It's why we came to
government in the first place, it's why we are still here, it's why we will be here a year
from now.
We are still governing because, from the beginning, we have led a decade of
profound social, economic and cultural change.
And our first policy principle in guiding this reform is inclusion. As Samuel Johnson
said, " In a civilised society, we all depend on each other'.
Strange as it may seem for Sam Johnson to be writing Labors slogans, I have not
found a better broad definition of what this Government is about.
We take social policy seriously. We put social into the democratic equation. We
also put it into the economic equation at a time when other governments were
leaving it out.
Over the last 12 years, we have transformed the economic structure of Australia.
We are well known for this. It has been well advertised. What is sometimes
forgotten is that at the same time we transformed the social infrastructure of the
nation. Let me run through just some of our achievements:
the introduction of Medicare;
payments for low income families increased by at least 80 per cent in real
terms; an age pension set at the benchmark of at least 25 per cent of average
weekly earnings;
reforms to superannuation so that close to 90 per cent of the workforce
receive superannuation compared with less than 40 per cent in 1983; 
the introduction of the Job Compact which means that everyone unemployed
for 18 months or more will be offered a job;
the establishment of the Child Support Scheme;
a more than five-fold increase in child care places, with a commitment to meet
demand for work-related child care by 2001;
the extension of Child Care Assistance and the introduction of the Child Care
Cash Rebate;
the recognition and protection of native title;
more than 7 in 10 young people completing high school compared with only 3
in 10 in 1983;
more than 50 per cent increase in enrolments in tertiary education;
the establishment of a national vocational education system under ANTA;
a comprehensive network of community care services for older people and
people with disabilities through the Home and Community Care Program;
the enactment of the Disability Discrimination Act making discrimination on
the grounds of disability unlawful; and
the Government's landmark Sex Discrimination Act outlawing discrimination
on the basis of sex, marital status or pregnancy.
And in the last three months, the Government has brought the Budget back into
surplus; introduced a Maternity Allowance; reached agreement with the ACTU on
Accord VIII; significantly improved national savings and retirement incomes through
increased superannuation contributions; and delivered the Justice Statement.
I was interested to read in Stuart Macintyre's paper to this conference his
comparison between the reaction of the Scullin Government to the Great
Depression, and this Government's response to the recession of the early nineties.
It is something some of us have long been aware of that, despite much popular
opinion to the contrary, this Government is more " Labor" in most of its essential
responses and initiatives than its fabled Labor predecessors.
To Professor Macintyre's comparison I might add another one the famous post-war
White Paper and the White Paper of last year we called Working Nation. It is
enough to say. here that Working Nation was a document of at least comparable
breadth and imagination. That is not to belittle the achievements of Chifley and
Curtin, or underestimate the forces at work on Scullin. But it is to correct a common
fallacy about modern Labor's commitment to social policy and social improvement. 
It is a measure of our success, and a genuine reward, to think that in today's
Australia no one under the age of thirty has spent a year of adult life without
universal health insurance. It is part of the culture of this place. It is a tangible
expression of our traditional social values. Can you imagine Australia without the
new social infrastructure of the past decade without Medicare; without the Child
Support Agency; without Home and Community Care; without a national vocational
education scheme; without protection for women against discrimination.
The work we have done over the past 12 years establishes our good faith with the
Australian community. We don't think there should be an argument about that, but
it's not the same thing as saying that there are not real problems still to solve.
The policy process is a fascinating and challenging animal.
We often talk about policy-making as being like painting on a broad canvas. We
begin with a vision of what the picture will be: that is the first essential no
imagination, no picture. No faith in your ability to realise it, no picture. And, like a
painter with a vision and faith, you begin to fill the canvas in, step by step, layer by
layer.
And there the analogy ends because policy-making, unlike picture painting, is
never complete.
We can never finish the job of reform. We know that, with good policy, other
problems will come along, often uncovered by the good policy itself. And we know
that, with even the best policy, we won't solve all the problems.
But we also know that we will get better answers if we pay attention to the views of
people in the field.
All of you here today, from your varying perspectives of community workers,
lobbyists, public servants and academics, know this. You know your advice or
action or arguments will be better if they are road tested, as it were.
Forgive me for the political intrusion, but that is one reason why there should be a
very strong objection to political leaders who say they will announce their policies
only in an election campaign. That means the only consultation will be consultation
with the Coalition's research groups. The only listening will be to the polls.
Mr Howard has already said he will not be taking any notice of special interest
groups. He has dismissed the role of consultation between governments and representatives
of ordinary Australians as a legitimate part of the policy process. 
Included in his coverage of special interest groups is the ACTU, which represents
over two and a half million workers. If he dismisses consultation with the organised
labour movement, what about with organised business such as the BCA; or groups
such as ACOSS, the Australian Conservation Foundation, the Aboriginal Land
Councils, the Australian Consumers' Association, Women's Electoral Lobby, the
Farmers' Federation, the National Catholic Education Commission, or the AMA?
The Labor Government deals with interest groups, accords them status, learns from
them, and acts in partnership with them. We know that in combination they
represent almost every sector of the community.
Research and consultation have been the basis of our major social reforms, such as
Working Nation, the Social Security Review, the Child Support Scheme; the National
Housing Strategy; and the National Health Strategy.
Just now, in the research community and in the general community there is a lot
of interest in income distribution issues. A look at the program for this conference
confirms that.
Let me start by saying that a reduction in poverty and inequality is one of the
benchmarks against which the Government judges itself and will be judged.
And the fact is that under Labor, real wages and household incomes have increased
substantially and living standards have improved as a result. And Australia
continues to have one of the fairest wage distributions in the developed world.
We all know that unemployment is one of the greatest causes of inequality. An even
more certain and profound truth is that nothing a government can do in the way of
social services, or social policies of any kind, will so effectively distribute wealth and
opportunity as employment. Nothing comes close. Nothing is as good as a job.
And nothing increases the number of jobs like high, sustainable economic growth.
Since April 1993, over 600,000 jobs have been created. Over the year to May 1995,
the number of people out of work for more than a year dropped by 26 per cent. The
ABS has recently published figures showing that in 1994 Australia out-performed all
the world's major economies in reducing unemployment. That is a major contribution
to equality, a major contribution to social justice.
The most common measure of poverty in Australia is the Henderson Poverty Line,
which is now more than twenty years old and generally accepted to have some
misleading features. The Henderson Poverty Line is updated according to changes
in household disposable income rather than the CPI or average weekly earnings.
Since household disposable income per person has risen by nearly 20 per cent in
real terms since 1983, in real terms the poverty line has been rising.
Yet under Labor most social security recipients have moved from below to above the
poverty line. 
For example, since 1983, the income of an unemployed couple with one child renting
privately has increased from 11 per cent below to 1 per cent above the poverty line.
The income of a sole parent with two children renting privately has increased from 9
per cent below to 2 per cent above the poverty line. The Social Policy Research
Centre has estimated that, if the poverty line had been adjusted in line with prices,
poverty would have fallen by nearly 20 per cent between 1983 and 1990. And this
does not take into account the benefits of the social wage.
The National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling estimates that social wage
benefits from health, housing, child care and education are worth an average of
$ 195 a week for a family with two children. The research also shows that these
benefits are worth far more for the lowest income families than they are for the
highest income families and thus substantially reduce inequality.
This is a very different picture from the one presented by the Opposition of the poor
getting poorer. I'm sure that the social policy ministers would like to know that their
hard fights within Cabinet have been worthwhile, but setting the record straight is not
the main point of my discussion.
It is important for all of us interested in income inequality to get a clearer
understanding of what has happened and how the Government can help to reduce
inequality. To better understand the issues and to tease out the implications for
policy, the Government has commissioned research from the University of
Melbourne on trends in income distribution. The research presented at this
Conference will also add to our picture.
These days, I am constantly getting into trouble for having the temerity to talk about
John Howard's past. It is not something I want to do. There are much richer and
more diverting historical excursions to take. But with Howard, we talk about the past
because that's all there is to talk about. It's all we know about him.
We know this present Opposition only by what they did when they were last in
government and what they said they would do if they regained government at the
last election. We know them only by their record and what we can infer from it and
the record is, by any local or international measure, abysmal.
The record shows that when they were last in government, with John Howard as
Treasurer, the Coalition:
abolished Medibank, after having promised to retain it, and left 2 million
people with no health insurance;
reduced the value of social security payments in real terms, so, for example, a
single unemployed person renting privately lost $ 15 a week, an age
pensioner lost $ 3 a week, and the most needy families lost $ 4 a week;
slashed spending on health, housing and child care in real terms, reducing
expenditure on the social wage by more than $ 5 billion or nearly $ 500 per
person per year. 
And remember if the Coalition had won at the last election, they were committed to:
cutting a total of $ 10 billion from public expenditure, including $ 1 billion from
social security, $ 400 million from public housing and $ 1.3 billion from public
hospitals; introducing youth wages of $ 3 an hour;
establishing a training system under which unemployed people could have
been paid 70 per cent of the award wage with no requirement that their
employer train them;
full fees for university;
the abolition of bulk-billing under Medicare for most people;
a three week waiting period for unemployment benefits; and
removing the sole parent pension when the youngest child turned 12.
We don't know much of what the Coalition plans to do if they get elected next time.
But type generally wins out. And John Howard is a Type A Tory. A Type A
conservative of the eighties. He made friends with the New Right and that weird
specimen of extremism the H R Nichols Society. He has opposed all but two of the
wage rises since 1975.
Over and over again he says he is pro family and over and over again he is anti
wage-earners over and over again anti family support.
We must remember that 16 out of the 19 members of the current Coalition Shadow
Cabinet were members of John Hewson's Ministry.
So nearly 85 per cent of the current Shadow Cabinet put their hands up for slashing
spending on the social wage; for dropping unemployed people off unemployment
benefits after 9 months; for abolishing bulk-billing; for cutting the award wages of low
income workers. They put their hands up for policies which are Thatcherite in
principle and substance and which were most memorably expressed by John
Hewson when he said if we reach back for the weak they will drag us down.
And now we are meant to believe that they care about the " battlers" that group of
Australians they only discovered when their pollsters identified them.
We can see the true colours of the Coalition have not changed when we examine
the social policy areas where they have revealed their basic direction health policy,
family policy and industrial relations. We see the same old signs of regression. And
the policies fly in the face of the best research. 
The Coalition's health policy is to provide tax subsidies for private health insurance.
You would expect a Labor Government to be critical of this, but you don't have to
take our word for it. It flies in the face of the research of health economists and
analysts such as Jeff Richardson, Richard Scotton, Stephen Leeder, and most
recently, Kevin Forde, a health economist at this university, who has published an
analysis of the impact of subsidising private health insurance.
In his Headland speech, Mr Howard says that private health insurance deserves
subsidies because private hospitals are under-utilised and there are waiting lists in
public hospitals.
It is untrue that waiting lists are attributable to a contraction in the private hospital
sector. In fact, over the past five years, there has been an increase in both privately
insured hospital days in private hospitals and admissions to private hospitals as a
total of all admissions.
It is also wrong to suggest that people who take out private health insurance will only
seek treatment in private hospitals, and thus free up public hospitals. In fact, many
sophisticated procedures are only carried out in public hospitals. And most people,
including Kerry Packer, when involved in an accident or an emergency, are treated
in public hospitals.
As the researchers point out, there is ample evidence to suggest that the policy of
subsidising private health insurance to move patients from the public to the private
sector does not reduce health care costs, but merely shifts them from the
government to the patients.
Overall health costs are also likely to increase with higher levels of private health
insurance because of higher administrative costs, fewer controls on over-servicing,
and the reluctance of the private health funds to encourage cost-containment in
private hospitals. We would end up with more, not fewer, resources being spent on
health care.
And who would get the extra money? Private hospitals, specialists working in
private hospitals and the health insurance funds.
What people gain in tax deductions they lose in health insurance premiums and outof
pocket expenses. The simple fact is that the Coalition's policy would mean that
patients would pay more for health care.
In short, what the Opposition proposes would be neither an efficient nor an equitable
means of solving health care problems. The major beneficiaries of the subsidies
would be tax-payers who already have private health insurance people we know
are more likely to be higher income earners.
The underlying danger of the Coalition's support for subsidies for private health
insurance is that it is aimed at developing a two-tier health system: a rich, privately
funded health system alongside a poor, publicly funded system. 
We take the view that the solutions in health lie in improving the public health
system. It is also where our responsibility lies. It is not our responsibility to spend
over $ 1 billion subsidising the private health system and specialists at the expense
of Medicare.
It is a question of weight and priority. Put the weight in the wrong place and the
whole social balance is upset. And that is precisely what the political equation is
about. Family policy is another case in point.
When it comes to family policy we give priority to low income families. Furthermore,
we make sure the assistance is paid directly to the parent with the most daily
responsibility for caring for the children, usually the mother.
John Howard believes in income-splitting. He has believed in it since 1979. You
have to admire his tenacity, but not his judgement or priorities even his own party
won't take it on, and the tax and social policy experts reject it entirely.
Most recently, we have heard from Professor Patricia Apps from the University of
Sydney, who found income-splitting to be inefficient, regressive, anti-saving and
sexist. Her work clearly shows that tax would increase on the second income
earners in families, who are usually women. Conversely, the tax on the male
partners would decrease.
Dr Peter McDonald from the Australian Institute of Family Studies summed it up well:
" If the aim is to provide very large benefits to wealthy families and to make it very
difficult for women to work part-time then income-splitting is the right option."
The evidence against income-splitting is overwhelming and has been for years.
We know that it is regressive. The more you earn the more you benefit from incomesplitting.
A family on $ 100,000 would have their tax reduced by about $ 7,000 a year
while a family on $ 20,000 would actually pay about $ 200 more in tax under incomesplitting.
And the policy would not come cheap income-splitting would cost about $ 3 billion.
Or alternatively, as Professor Apps points out, if you wanted to introduce incomesplitting
without any loss of revenue, you would have to increase all marginal tax
rates by 3 percentage points.
The Leader of the Opposition who uses the " family" as his own personal mantra;
who says he is " pro-family", as if the rest of us were anti; and who now talks
sanctimoniously about " battlers", in fact advocates a $ 3 billion policy which is
regressive, which gives the greatest benefit to high income families, and under which
many low income families would actually be worse off.
When you look at John Howard's policy beliefs over the years it is a story all
fractured and disjointed. And yet there are these unrelated and almost arcane
elements consistently floating through it like odd socks. They are income-splitting,
employment contracts, pulling Medicare apart and the monarchy. 
This is John Howard's policy odd sock bag the ones he keeps in the hope that one
day a matching one will turn up in someone else's drawer and make sense of it all
and renew its purpose in life and, with it, the purpose in life of J. W. Howard.
But as we all know, you only wait a certain time with your odd socks and then you
hang them up at Christmas, or use them as dusters for your shoes, or stuff them with
other odd socks and kick them round the lounge room.
And to think that someone once said that politics is a contest of ideas a contest for
ideas and values. John Howard has been hanging on to these ideas for the course
of his political life, and, try as he might, he can't add to them unless it's to go back
to tariffs, or to resist according the Aboriginal flag the same status as that of Norfolk
Island. I am not opposed to all forms of conservatism. I like tradition Labor thrives
on it but I hate regression. In the 1990s we simply can't afford it.
The Labor Government's guiding philosophy is social democratic, by which I mean a
democracy in which the concept of rights and liberties is extended to encompass
both individual opportunity and social justice.
There is no question that successful economies have been free market economies:
it is scarcely less debatable that the most successful societies have been those
which have combined this with democratic freedoms and sophisticated and
integrated social programs.
In saying this I do not mean that we follow any model European or American.
We've developed our own. We do things a little differently, and I think a little better.
It is a model that balances the need for economic efficiency and innovation, with the
imperative of protecting and enhancing the material and social circumstances of the
disadvantaged. It is a model that is seen most clearly in the unique Australian
partnership with the union movement, the Prices and Incomes Accord, which
recently evolved to its eighth stage.
It is a model, incidentally, that shows some influence of academic research, and
indeed, the Accord itself has become a major subject of social science investigation.
It is now well understood by social scientists that countries face clear choices in
industrial relations, and that the choice made has fundamental implications for
macro-economic outcomes and income distribution.
On the one hand, unions can be left to pursue their agendas and will naturally do so
by bidding up the wages of their members, giving relatively little weight to the
broader economic and social consequences of these actions. Research in this area
has shown with great clarity that the results are high wage inflation and high
unemployment. 
On the other hand, countries without strong union movements typically deliver
relatively high employment growth with low inflation, but such countries are more
likely to offer less protection to the socially disadvantaged; this tends to be
manifested in growing income inequality. The United States is undoubtedly the best
example of such an arrangement.
The US Secretary of Labor, Robert Reich, recently lamented the strong tendency to
earnings inequality in that country and contrasted it with the social protection offered
in many of the countries of Western Europe. Yet in these countries, critics typically
point to poor employment performance and highlight the US as a superior model.
The Accord represents a middle ground. Under the Accord the ACTU has delivered
restraint in labour costs in order to ensure healthy US style employment growth.
And since 1983 the Government has been able to deliver a real and improved social
wage Western European style reflected in part in many of the policy
achievements I have mentioned today.
That term " social wage" is an instructive one. It makes the point that to go on
talking about the " economic" and the " social" as if they were separate and distinct
defies the reality. The social wage is both a social policy and an economic one. It
serves both social and economic ends. It is an expression of the fact admittedly
not recognised in some quarters that good economic policy has a good social
purpose, that social justice and economic efficiency are not only generally
compatible but generally complementary. This is why, I suppose, some of us grow a
little short-tempered with those who tell us that we are concentrating too much on
social matters, or cultural matters as opposed to economic ones or economic
matters as opposed to these others.
The fact is they are inseparable and properly so. In fact I sometimes think it is the
essence of good policy to find the points at which they fuse that the convergence is
very often disguised from us, and good policy means discovering where and how to
make them meet. Consider how long it took us to recognise that inflation not only
damaged our economic competitiveness but corroded social justice? And then
consider that, perhaps alone among countries today, we have a trade union
movement and the central bank working as one to the same low inflation ends.
And I might say this: I think among our social policy people and our economic
people it has generally been on the social policy side that the leap has been taken.
Our social thinkers became economists far more often than the economists became
social thinkers. That, it seems to me, puts a lot of our academic economists, market
analysts and economic commentators, a little way behind the contemporary reality, a
little way off the direction Australia is going.
I think we can look back on the past decade or more and see a whole new story told
in a whole new way. I think we can see the development here of a much more
sophisticated national equation. We have fashioned a modern Australian social
democracy: incomplete and imperfect, but a very good place to live and work, with
traditions, a spirit and a future that will not be denied. 



TEL PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE HON KIM
BEAZLEY MP
RAINBOW WARRIOR 11
The incident overnight in which the Greenpeace vessel Rainbow Warrior I1
was seized by the French Navy off Mururoa Atoll further illustrates the
serious damage being done to the international image of France as a result
of its decision to resume nuclear testing.
The root cause of this incident was the deplorable decision of the French
Government to resume testing in the South Pacific. Today's events should
send a message to the people of France that their Government has erred in
resuming the tests against the will of indigenous populations in the South
Pacific, and against the tide of international opinion.
The Australian Government is also concerned that excessive force may have
been used to seize the vessel, including the use of tear gas against unarmed
protesters. The French Ambassador to Australia was called into the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade in Canberra this morning to provide information
and an assurance about the proper treatment and release of the Australians
on board. Initial reports indicated five Australians were on board the vessel,
including two media personnel.
PERTH JULY 1995 T : 31 J u 9 5 2 1 4 6 N o ' 1 , j 1 



I EL: 13 . Ju1 .95 21 46 No 01ij F,
FOR MEDIA PRISONER VOTING
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr Kim Beazley, today announced that the
Government would not proceed with legislation to extend voting to all
prisoners. Mr Beazley indicated he had made his decision after discussion with his
colleague the Minister for Administrative Services, Frank Walker.
Currently, prisoners who have committed offences which attract prison
sentences of five years or less are entitled to vote. The recommendation to
extend voting rights to all prisoners was put forward by the Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters in its report on the 1993 Federal Election.
The recommendation was founded, in part, on advice from the Australian
Electoral Commission that the current system created administrative
difficulties. Mr Beazley said that while the Government had decided not to extend voting
rights to all prisoners, it would look at ways of streamlining current
arrangements. PERTH JULY 1995
Media Contact: John O'Callaghan
Senior Adviser
( 09) 4211 101 



TEL u4 0 02 0 1
OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
PROFESSOR FENNER'S AWARD
A GREAT HONOUR FOR AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE
Prime Minister Keating wrote last week in the following terms to Professor
Frank Fenner AC, of the John Curtin School of Medical Research at the
Australian National University, whose award of the Royal Society's Copley
medal was announced in Britain on 11 July:
" I was delighted to learn that you have been awarded the prestigious
Copley medal by the Royal Society for your work at the John Curtin
School of Medical Research in the Australian National University.
This award is a great honour for you personally and a great honour for
Australian science.
Your work in virology and, particularly, your contribution to the global
eradication of smallpox, have brought incalculable benefits to millions
of people around the world. Your achievements in this field, through
your work at the John Curtin School and in association with the World
Health Organisation, will be remembered in the history of medical
science. It i-s only fitting that the Royal Society has honoured you for it by
adding your name to those of other great recipients of the Copley
medal such as Benjamin Franklin, James Cook, Charles Darwin and
our own MacFarlane Burnet.
All Australians wilt join me in congratulating you on this great
distinction."
CANBERRA 14 July 1995 



/ l
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE HON KIM BEAZLEY MP
FORD MOTOR COMPANY INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA
The decision today by the Ford Motor Company to invest $ 1 billion in a Falcon
replacement and long term paint facility represents a ringing vote of confidence in
Australia. Against competing pressures for Ford's international investment dollars Australia
has come through a process of critical assessment with a decision which
endorses this country as a good place to invest.
This decision is unambiguously a vote of confidence in the Government's
management of the economy, for competitiveness, for industry policy and for
employment. The Government is committed to working with Ford and other
producers to enhance their competitive position in global markets.
Since March 1992, manufacturing employment in Australia has increased by
more than 53,000. Ford's decision will guarantee thousands of Australian jobs,
particularly in Victoria.
Manufacturing output in Australia is now at its highest level since the Australian
Bureau of Statistics started collecting these data in 1974.
If we include processed food, manufactures now account for around half our total
merchandise exports, bringing in almost three times the export dollars we earn
from rural products.
The tariff reduction program and consequent industry restructuring have given
rise to more competitive exporters in important sectors, including the car industry
and textiles, clothing and footwear.
The value of textile clothing and footwear exports last year was around $ 500
million more than a decade ago; the value of automotive exports is now $ 700
million more than a decade ago.
The go-ahead for the new model Falcon, and Ford Australia's integration in
Ford's international operation, is a clear signal that Australia has a strong
position in a truly global industry.
So much for Mr Howard's five minutes of economic sunshine.
PERTH 14 July 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CAIRNS PORT AUTHORITY, 16 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: How concerning is it to the Federal Government to have such a swing
against Labor?
PMV: It concerns me when there is a swing against Labor anywhere and, I think.
what is concerning in Queensland, this Queensland government of Wayne
Goss is a good government and it is rather disconcerting to see a good
government in any way suffering these sorts of problems from a protest
vote. It is quite obvious that the Opposition here without policies and
without a program urging only a protest vote, there could have been no
positive vote for them. In which case, there has got to be some appraisal
of again the point, that political parties must stand for something and when
they don't there can be no guarantee for the community that they are going
to get some value from it from such a protest or from such a change.*
J: You have made your own assessment here, whet does this mean
federally?
PMV: By and large state elections over the last 20 or 30 years have not had a
federal character about them and vice versa, I think this is true. The
Coalition lost in NSW, I don't think we were able to say that this is a major
turn around in federal fortunes anymore than I'd say a loss of seats in
Queensland would be a rebuke for the Federal Labor Party and, I think,
John Howard said the same thing a week or two ago heme in Queensland.
But, you don't like to see your party in this case the Labor Party, my Party
suffering admonition at the hands of the electorate and particularly with a
good, competent government as Wayne Goss' government is.
J: Mr Goss says that on these figures the federal government would lose in
Queensland and federally. 
PM: Well, we have had so many examples, take the 1975 federal election loss
of Labor. Neville Wran won in NSW a couple of months later and vice
versa. I don't think you can read any sorts of, these sorts of federal
implications into the result, but that is not to say that as a Labor person, as
a Labor leader I am not concerned about it.
J: Do you think a federal election is likely to be later rather than sooner?
PM: I keep getting asked by journalists about election dates. John Hewson
started talking about an early election 18 months ago. We still haven't had
an election. I still keep saying I believe the public should get value from
these parliaments and that it is too hard to win elections to be giving any
free time away.
J: So, is that a postponement?
PM: No, it is just the Prime Minister of this country exercising the sensible
prerogatives that are vested with the Prime Minister to make the election
timing a matter of the Prime Minister's choice.
J: Have you spoken to Mr Goss?
PM: I did. I rang Wayne this morning at about eleven o'clock and I had quite a
long talk to him. This result is in the box now, it will be revealed, of course,
when the final counting comes due. It is my very fervent wish that the
Goes government is retained in office and that people may see; yes, you
can register a protest vote, but it doesn't necessarily get you any value.
J: Could this, in fact, be good for federal Labor because the people in
Queensland would have got their protest vote off their chests?
PM: Again, you have to then think it is a vote for one party or another. I don't
really think it is. People do vote on state issues and they do vote on
federal issues, so I dont ever believe that a loss for the Labor Party
anywhere can be good for us.
J: Are you relieved that you weren't directly involved in this campaign?
PM: This is the fashion of a media which is oversupplied by cameras and
journalists and under supplied by issues. People are always asking all
these questions. It is like the old days. Did Bob Menzies campaign for
Henry Bolte? No. Did he campaign for Robin Askin? No. Did Bolte and
Askin campaign for Menzies? No. Did Malcolm Fraser campaign for Dick
Hamer? No. This is all a bit of mythology basically.
J: If Goss loses here, would you welcome him into federal politics? 
PM: I think he will win and I hope it will be a reasonably clear result in the end.
Let's talk about that scenario.
J: What do you think of the performance though of the Queensland
government?
PM: I look at the performance of the Queensland government, I mean, this has
been a State which has been growing in the order of somewhere between
four and six per cent over the last couple of years. This is a State which
has got very strong employment growth one of the strongest in Australia.
This State has been along with Western Australia, out performing the other
States. There has been, I think, a substantial change in Queensland.
Queensland is a much more national and internationally oriented State
now than it has ever been in my view, thanks to the Goss government and
it was for these reasons, I think, the government should be returned.
J: So, what does it say about their campaign?
PM Well, what does it say about the Coalition's campaign? It is that sort of
register a vote of protest against the Government. Don't register it for any
reason, don't register it because we the Opposition are better, but just
register ft. I think it is going to make people think about whether protest
votes have got any value to them. There is no prize for hurting a good
government.
J: Is there a risk for you that the some will happen at a federal election?
PM: Well, there is always a risk, but again, let people understand this about
John Howard. He is following the same policy, he is running around
without a policy. He is saying ' I'll have no policies, just concentrate on
them'. But, in the end, someone has got to run the country so as I say,
there can be no honesty or credibility in politics without policies. So, I
think, what the media has got to do with John Howard is line him up. Say
' OK John, you want to be Prime Minister, what do you stand for?' Not
some vague generalisation. He has got another one of these so called
headland speeches coming up during the week it will be the same as the
lost one full of vague generuilsations. And, if he wants to be Prime
Minister, he has got to say where he stands in policy. When I produce a
Policy document It has got the changes there, all the details. They are
there whether ft is the Accord of a couple of weeks ago or whether ft is the
outline of the Republic or whether it is the Budget or superannuation for
the whole workface. it is there in quality, In detail. And I think free riders
on the system and whether you are talking about Borbidge or Howard,
essentially they are free riders on the system. They are to be held
accountable for the things they really stand for, but want to keep hidden
until an election. 
., 4
J: Do you think Howard will fashion his campaign on the Queensland
Coalition?
PM: I think the policy has been the same. They represent nothing. They stand
for nothing and yet they seek to denigrate governments that do things. I
think, the public ought to be very careful about this and say well, hang on,
before we leave value behind, before we leave behind governments that
have got quality and substance and value, we have got to know what we
are going to get in return and not just, basically, the fluff that comes from
an advertising agency.
J: You said after the ACT elections that you have taken a message from the
electorate. Do you take a message from this electorate?
PM: That was a federal by-election. This is a state election. The only message
I take from this is that Labor has not done here as well as we would have
liked and I am interested for the Labor Party and, of course, for the federal
government that we try to understand the Queensland outcome and see if
there is a discernible view from the electorate.
ends 



-I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP AND
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE UK, THE RIGHT HON TONY
BLAIR MP, DOORSTOP, CAIRNS PORT AUTHORITY, 16 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PJI( Can I say what a pleasure it is to have Tony Blair in Australia. We are
both in the same business and that has been modemising Labor parties
which is a pretty tough thing to be doing at the best of times and I like to
think, and I have said in this country and am happy to repeat it here, that
one of the great structural changes in Australia in the last 12 years was
actually the change to the Labor Party itself. Turning the Labor Party into
a party of government has been a matter of enduring benefit to this country
because most countries don't have the opportunity of modernising * their
political parties. This I am doing and this, of course, Tony Blair is doing.
Beyond that can I say that there is a very strong modemn relationship with
Britain. Britain is the largest investor in Australia. We are the second
largest investor in Britain. We hiave long traditional links and I am
delighted to see the Leader of the British Labour Party in this country
renewing those linkages and giving us a chance to compare notes about
how we see both our domestic and our international policy outlooks and
again to talk about the things we have in common and to listen to each
others experiences and to know that we are on a very interesting and
rewarding endeavour in the things we are doing.
So, I'd like to say how glad I am to have Tony in Australia and it may not
look to the travelling British press like winter, but it is. It is a strange sort of
winter I know, but up here it is warmer than it is down south as you know
and I am sure that a change of climate as it is will give US a chance to get
to understand the Labour Party in Britain better and Tony we are pleased
to have you here.
TB: Thanks very much Paul. 
J: Mr Blair, what can you take back from your consultations with Mr Keating
and the Australian government back to Britain?
TB: Well, obviously, the fact that the Australian Labor Party has won, is it five
elections In a row? It seems to us a rather good record to take into
account and emulate if we possibly can. But there are also, I think, very
powerful lessons in the way that the Australian Labor government has
delivered greater economic efficiency, very high rates of growth at the
same time as keeping true to strong social values and the good social
wage. Also, the Australian Labor Party and the British Labour Party have
links going back over a long period of time. I was saying earlier this
morning, although it has been the case that we have often looked to Left to
Centre parties in Europe with which we have dialogue, in many ways the
ties between the British Labour Party and the Australian Labor Party are
even closer.
J: Has Mr Keating passed his recipe for electoral success at a'national level
onto Mr Blair and if so what's in it?
PJI( You have got to keep changing the recipe, this is the problem. We have
talked about our electoral success, but I think, Tony has in a sense,
summed up what we have been about. That is turning Australia into a
modem, a sophisticated market economy, but in the context of a set of
social policies which have underlined the premium we put on inclusion.
That is, we have tried to, by a process of strong employment growth and
equitable policies in such things as access and equity In education, in
health, the whole training agenda, employment of course the great liberator
of all, in these things, I think, we have produced a much more equitable
and fair society, yet we have had faster rates of growth double the rates
of economic growth of our conservative predecessors. If there has been
any formula for why Labor has won five elections I would say that was it,
that is we made a point of wanting to take the country along together.
That there is no underclass and that we think together we are stronger. If
we are together we are better, we are stronger, we are more cohesive and
I think, this has been well appreciated by our community.
TB: If I could add just one thing to that, I think, to me the record of the
Australian Labor government is one of combining economic efficiency with
a just and fair society. But it has also been one about giving a very clear
sense of direction and purpose to government and having a very clear and
profound understanding of Australia's place in the world and, I think, those
are all things that obviously have a resonance in British politics too.
J: You are at the head of a resurgent Labour Party in Britain, what do you
think you might have to offer to a Labor Party here? 
TB: I think the Labor Party here has resurged and the length of time it has
been in government shows that. -But, obviously, What wehavebeen tryinsg
to do with British Labour Party is not just update how we apply our values
to the modem world, but in particular our key message and the message I
will be delivering in the speech that I will be making tomorrow is that we
live now in a world of massive economic, technological and social change
and it is the Left to Centre parties that are best able to cope with that world
of change because we are willing to plan and invest and organise our
societies in order to cope with that. And if we fail to do that, the result is
massive insecurity and it is providing security through a process of change
which is what the modem agenda for the Left of Centre is all about.
J: Would that be the reason for what happened in Queensland this weekend,
a massive insecurity in the community, they want to see a differentiation
between Labor and the Coalition
TB: I like the link, but I really don't know that that is for me to comment upon.
J: You seem to be widely regarded as almost a certainty for the next Prime
Minister of Britain and yet we have seen here on the weekend once again,
a very unpredicted result, an unpredicted bad result for Labor in
Queensland, does that sort of thing make you nervous?
TB: As people back home know, I am the eternal warrior against complacency
and I don't take anything for granted at all. It is very nice when people tell
me about opinion polls and all the rest of it, but the only things that decide
general elections are general elections and that is why the British Labour
Party carries on working to deepen that bond of trust that it is establishing.
But we take nothing for granted and we work from now right until election
day.
J: You are both going onto Rupert Murdoch's conference, one of the things
you have in common unusually for Leaders of the Left is that Mr Murdoch
seems to like you both.
PJK: Once you get to know us you can't help but like us.
J: How important was his endorsement for you as a factor of your winning the
last general election? Can I also then ask, how important is it for Tony
Blair to try to get a similar sort of endorsement for Labour at the next
election in Britain?
PJI( I think all Labor parties ever ask for and I'm sure this is the case for the
British Labour Party is equality of treatment. The chance to disseminate
one's message nothing more, nothing less. No one needs preference or
asks for it. We have never had It and we were not endorsed by the News
Corporation at the last election. In fact the majority of their papers came 
out against us. But, I think, parties which are better win if they are able to
transmit their message. And, I think, the very things that Tony Blair has
mentioned about economic efficiency and social equity, these things make
our country stronger and having a set of values which the public can
identify with once they know what the policy structure is and the policy mix
is, they can make their mind up. Let me say about this country, what we
look for here most is dare I say it news. Our papers are too loaded with
opinions and what we need here is a straight recitation of the news. If we
can get that, then on that sort of wicket we can win. As News Corporation
goes we are seeing, both of us, the News Corporation executives from
around the world who meet every three years mostly in North America or in
Europe, it happen&amp; to be here on this occasion. You are talking to people
who are running media organisations in three continents, probably four
soon, and it Is a good opportunity to say, in our case where Australia is,
where it is going, how we see the Asia Pacific, why we think News
Corporation has done well to have its head quarters here and to generally
pick up some of their views too about the way' international
telecommunications are going, the way the information highway is
developing. I think it will be an interesting occasion.
J: Mr Blair, will you be laying down any base lines as far as the media is
concerned?
TB: In the speech tomorrow, we will be setting out how we believe the Left of
Centre can best respond to the massive economic, social and
technological change and, of course, part of that is media and
communications. But that is not all and what Is absolutely essential is to
show how we can provide the best security and stability economically and
socially during this era of change. And that includes the media, but Is not
limited to it.
J: But will you set up principles if you like, when you say this is what I believe
in as far as the media is concerned?
TB: Of course, and we wAIl be doing that but we will be doing many other things
as well. I think what is absolutely essential, the great task of all modern
governments and why I believe that today's Labour Party is best able to
achieve this is that we have to show how in this era of change,
revolutionary change, that is sweeping the world in technology, in media,
in communications, in terms of economic challenge we have got to show
how we can best meet that challenge and guide our people through it and
that can only be done by a government that understands the importance of
allying a strong and prosperous economy with a fair and decent society.
J: And regulating the market or not?
TB: Of course, but that is only part of what is a much, much bigger picture. 
J: Mr Keating, do you think that the columnists in newspapers are inherently
conservative?
PJK: No, it is just that they are full of views end 1 am one of those old fashioned
people who was brought up on newspapers where journalists actually
reported news and that is what I think is the best sort of journalism. But
we have now got around to, of course, where journalists interview other
journalists on radio and television programs.
J: When you were a young back bencher in 1972, there was a similar of
the Labor Party then which is occurring what advice would you offer in
the way of
PJK: I don't think Mr Blair needs my advice on these things. Again, I repeat my
point and I would be surprised if it wasn't his, that is without a handicap
that is being able to disseminate one's message Labor parties can look
after themselves very nicely thank you very much. Labor parties don't
need preference or bias, they just need a straight go, but one of things
which gives us a better go all of us is, of course, the diversity in the
media. This is true in Australia where we now have much greater diversity
than 10 years or so ago and the information highway itself holds out the
prospect of much greater diversity than we have ever had, allowing people
to take their news where they want it and not to have it wholesale or
filtered for them. I think, this diversity of Information in media is a very
democratic process and must be good for parties like ours.
J: Can I ask Mr Blair the message he has got for British people living in
Australia who are on the other side of the world when changes take place
in Britain.
TB: There are really three reasons for me being here. First, it is important to
build that relationship between Australia and Britain which is of Immense
importance both to trade and to foreign policy links between us. Second, of
course, it gives me the opportunity to address possibly the largest media
organisaton in the world and put the Labour Party's case there. Thirdly,
there are in some estimates, as many as a quarter of a million people living
here who have the right to vote In a British general election. Now, that Is a
pretty important constituency and we want to make sure our message gets
through to them. Thank you.
PJK: Thank you very much indeed.
ends 



STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE HON KIM BEAZLEY MP
ANOTHER EMPTY HOWARDITE HEADLAND
Mr Howard's second headland speech has much in common with his first: namely, an
absence of both originality and detail, a great deal of misinformation and distortion, an
unwillingness to acknowledge or concede any of Australia's remarkable achievements
in the past decade, and the repetition of tired and reactionary themes.
Indeed it is a classic Howardite speech meaning it is one part Old Right, one part
New Right, one part rank opportunism and the other part entirely empty.
The original offerings of a concrete kind consist of three committees. This is another
characteristic of Howardism: If the question is an Australian Head of State, have a
convention; if it's infrastructure, form a committee; if it's productivity, have a
commission. The golden rule for John Howard is under no circumstances commit
yourself to a position. Do not let them know what John Howard thinks, or what John
Howard would do form a committee.
Distortion and misinformation thread their way-throughout the speech. For instance:
The " unemployment rate has trended upwards under Labor". Untrue. In 1983
aggregate unemployment was 10 per cent. It is now 8.3 per cent.
" Our labour market institutions have proven incapable of making -the
necessary adjustments in response to the pressures of structural change
Untrue. Leaving aside the fact that the structural change was made by a
Labor Government, labour market productivity has increased dramatically since
1980, and this has substantially underwritten the 20 per cent increase in real
household disposable income per capita since the early eighties.
" Labor's promised [ unfair dismissal] amendments" are " all talk Untrue. In
fact the amendments, which have been uniformly applauded by the business
community, were introduced into the Parliament on 29 June. 
These untruths are compounded by other examples of monumental disingenuousness
and dishonesty. Mr Howard complains that real wages have faen: yet Mr Howard has
opposed virtually every wage rise since 1983 and if his social policies had ever
been implemented the income disparities he now complains about would be
infinitely worse. In fact, because of the Labor Government's policies, income
disparity in Australia is far less acute than it is in those countries whose
economidc models Mr Howard admires.
Mr Howard also deliberately ignores the fact that wage restraint through the
Accord has contained inflation and encouraged rapid employment growth. He
makes no mention of the fact that the fall in the unemployment rate in Australia
in 1994 was the largest in the OECD; or that job growth in Australia continues
to be outstanding.
Mr Howard has tried to change his spots but they reappear whenever he talks about
industrial relations.
He says " If workes want to stay in an award they can. This is Jobsback with
a new deceit built in. Mr Howard must know how the labour market works;
he must know that every year about 1.6 million Australian workers get a new
employer, meaning every two years up to 35 per cent of the workforce will not
have a choice between the existing award and a contract that suits the
employer.
He says " Alli workplace agreements will be subject to guaranteed minimum
conditions. But Mr Howard's minimum conditions do not include guarantees
of overtime rates, shift allowances or holiday loadings, and will abolish the
" no disadvantage" test which currently protects workers making new
agreements. When Mr Howard says that award conditions will remain he does
not say how they will be maintained in real terms and without penalty rates
those real terms could be cut by 10-15 per cent.
All this adds up to very bad news for those Australians Mr Howard has recently
discovered and called " battlers".
Mr Howard has also discovered New Zealand. He seems to want to import its
economic system as a model. It is not clear why he thinks New Zealand's example is
one we should folow unless it is because in New Zealand much less weight has been
given to the social results of economic policy or because the labour contract system
there approximates to the one he has in mind for Australia, or simply because he
cannot find enough fault with Australia without resorting to unlikely comparisons.
Mr Howard ought to say very clearly what essential elements of the New Zealand
economy he wishes to import to Australia. The New Zealand labour contract system?
The New Zealand social safety net? The New Zealand GST? 
3
Mr Howard says in various ways throughout his speech that he is for growth, low
inflation, higher productivity and competitiveness. We have to ask has he been
outside lately? We have economic growth and labour market growth. We have low
inflation. Labour productivity has grown by at least 25 per cent since the early
eighties. We are about 40 per cent more competitive.
Mr Howard's second " headland" speech is much the same confection of dishonesty and
distortion as his first. And to think that he is threatening to make more of them!
PERTH 18 July 1995 



C7-I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE HON KIM BEAZLEY
MP, DOORSTOP, DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, PERTH, 19 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KB: Well last night Mr Howard kept his promise to make no publication of his
views on just about any serious policy matter confronting the nation,
except one area. He did elaborate his position on industrial relations and
what he effectively undertook, or promised, was to remove an essential
underpinning to the wages and conditions of a very large number of
Australians. There is no reason why this should be so, we have just had
a set of figures come out on industrial disputation which shows it at just
about its lowest level ever historically. We have a very high profit share.
We have real productivity gains, some 25 per cent, over the last decade.
A 40 per cent improvement in our international competitiveness. Ordinary
working Australians do not deserve this uncertainty, this attack,
effectively, on their lifestyle. Any questions?
J: Do you think ordinary Australians should be paying Carmen Lawrence's
legal bills?
KB: I think ordinary working Australians should not be having to pay for this
Royal Commission at all not one cent. But this was started by Richard
Court as a political log-rolling exercise to the detriment of the taxpayers of
Western Australia and a cynical usei -on his part, of the Royal
Commission powers and it has proved nothing and there is, of course,
now a proceeding in the Supreme Court which puts us in a situation
where it is extraordinarily difficult to sensibly comment on these things
except, of course, to go to the motives of the Government in establishing
this Royal Commission.
J: What about her motives? Dr Lawrence has gone to extraordinary lengths
to stop this Royal Commission. Surely that must raise serious questions
about what she did. 
KB: This is the equivalent, on Richard Court's part, of when we came into
office we decided that it would be a matter of great public interest if we
inquired into the proceedings of the Cabinet, which had met and
repeatedly refused to address the ' bottom of the harbour' tax evasion
schemes. If a Commonwealth Government had decided to put a
Royal Commission on that in place, you would have accused us of
introducing dictatorial star chamber powers in Australia and you would
have been right.
J: How long can you support Dr Lawrence, given what has been said about
her in the Commission?
KB: Well you know very well that you shouldn't be discussing matters which
are obviously now going to be the substance of argument in the Supreme
Court. But Dr Lawrence has got over the years a very substantial level of
confidence amongst ordinary Western Australians and she has got that
by the dignity with which she held her office and the effectiveness with
which she ran a Government and I don't think that the proceedings of a
Royal Commission given the motives, the obvious political motives, that
went to its creation are going to alter that.
J: Does the Federal Government have a bottomless pit of money that it can
use to kick the ( inaudible]?
KB: Does Richard Court have a bottomless pit of money to keep putting one
fanaticism, or one obsession, of his after another up for public
expenditure, along with his taxation. I mean, the question is who started
it? Who started rolling in? You know very well when you set up a Royal
Commission that people are going to defend themselves before the Royal
Commission, they are going to take a legal position there, in fact, as I
understand it, Richard Court has offered those who are participants
before it, some form of legal assistance. So he has obviously anticipated
that the many millions of taxpayers money that is going to be spent on
this particular political exercise of his, is taxpayers money worth
spending. But there are consequences. Once you start that process
rolling, once you start a process that goes to the heart of the difference
between the Parliamentary operations and the judicial system, once you
go down the road of a Royal Commission that is based not on an
investigation of impropriety, illegality, maladministration or whatever,
which are the normal reasons why you call a Royal Commission, these
situations will occur.
J: Is it not an advantage to Carmen Lawrence, particularly as the evidence
already heard will go unchallenged for at least a week?
KB: Well I think that at the end of the day you are going to see, if there is any
discussion on these matters, there will be of course counters put into any
particular proposition which is raised. But I think you have got to take a
step back from the Royal Commission and its proceedings and go to the
issues that caused its creation, or the motives that underlay its creation.
And when you do that you are going to see I think the public have a
-71-. 771 .7. 
very considerable discount on any particular outcome that comes from the
Royal Commission.
J: The Commission is not about Richard Court, the Commission is about
Carmen Lawrence. If she has shown to have behaved improperly or
abused her power, will she continue to enjoy the Federal Cabinet's
support?
KB: No this Commission is about Richard Court. This Commission is a
Commission that was established for political reasons, by Richard Court
and for that reason there will be a high level of political discounting on
any outcome.
J: [ inaudible] for political reasons as well?
KB: Carmen is challenging to defend herself, which she is entitled to do.
If somebody sets up a political Royal Commission, or political basis in his
motive in setting up a Royal Commission, and sends it after you, do you
just stand mute?
J: [ inaudible]
KB: Look, don't ask me for analyses of public opinion. You go out there and
read it yourself. In so far as I can see public opinion around Carmen
Lawrence, two things stand out. The first is that she has a very high level
of public regard in this State, for good reason. Secondly, I think that there
is an understanding by the public of the political motivation that underlay
the creation of this Royal Commission and there will consequently be,
whatever the outcome, a discount attached to it and whatever is said in
evidence, a discount attached to it because of the underlying motives that
went into setting it up and I don't think anything that is going to be said at
the Royal Commission, if indeed-it proceeds, is going to make any
difference to that at all.
J: Can I just ask you about the funding again? Is there a limit? Has the
Federal Government set a limit on how much it will spend on these legal
challenges?
KB: Has Richard Court set a limit on how much it will cost for the Royal
Commission?
J: He has said 1.25, somewhere around there?
KB: Oh, yes, and the rest.
J: But I am talking about the Federal Government funding
Carmen Lawrence's challenge. Has there been any talk of a limit on how
much money people will spend?
KB: Obviously, nobody is going to go through an unlimitless exercise. But the
fact of the matter is, and this is not an exception in the case of this Royal 
4
Commission, it has been found in most of the Royal Commission's
established, that is why you need to have a very good reason to set up a
Royal Commission. That is why you need to have it as a Royal
Commission operating with serious intent. But when you set up a Royal
Commission it is going to be extremely difficult to put a price tag on it. It
is very important, therefore, to remember who started this.
J: merchandise imports What is your comment on that?
KB: Well the import figures are, of course, in line with the figures the
Government put out when it revised its views about the current account
deficit earlier in the year and that was announced by Ralph Willis. There
are some encouraging signs in the import figures that have come in.
Consumption imports are down. The capital imports are up to a degree.
But, overall, imports have fallen in the course of the last month and that is
encouraging.
J: Is it a sign that the economy is slowing down?
KB: Well, it is a sign that we was predicted by the Government in the Budget
that the current account deficit would peak during the course of this
financial year and start to decline in terms of a percentage of GDP is
probably going to come true. That, in part, does reflect some slowing in
the economy to the extent that it was predicted by the Government in its
Budget.
J: Mr Beazley do you still have every faith in Carmen Lawrence's version of
events leading up to the Commission?
KB: I have absolute faith in Carmen Lawrence. I mean she is a very good
person. She has been a very good Premier of this State and she
deserves better treatment by her successor.
J: So her press secretary is lying?
KB: Oh don't be silly.
J: [ inaudible]
KB: The question of the legal support for Carmen Lawrence was a matter that
was determined by Cabinet, yes. Now the extent to what those legal
costs involve is, of course, going to be a matter kept constantly under
review. But there are important issues at stake here and those issues, of
course, go in fact although I don't expect people to be terribly interested
in this to the very heart of the relationship between Parliament, the
Cabinet and the judicial system. These are issues which cannot be likely
glossed over by the initiative of one particular person involved in the
process. They are hard issues which, when they get raised, have to be
teased out and they will be teased out to their conclusion. Now, as I said
before, we didn't start this. It was started by Mr Court and we warned at 
the point of time when it started, Iall these sorts of ramifications were likely
to flow, now they are flying.
J: But has Dr Lawrence got Cabinet's unanimous support as far as the
funding goes?
KB: Oh well with her exception, of course, she wasn't there. But as far as the
question that she would be allowed to be supported in her legal activities,
yes that was the unanimous decision of Cabinet.
J: [ inaudible]
KB: It is not for me to characterise the Royal Commission. I mean the Royal
Commissioners are of course, have their own views about their own
integrity and I don't think it is appropriate if these issues are canvassed.
But what we can canvass is what went into their creation and that is what
I have been canvassing very solidly here for the last five minutes.
J: [ inaudible].. budget blow out in superannuation costs?
KB: What was assumed in that particular paper was a much high level of
growth in jobs than the Government was predicting and what it did its
figuring on. Of course if that was to occur, that would be terrific news and
were it to occur, it wouldn't just mean an increase in the amounts that the
Commonwealth would have to set aside for superannuation. Vastly
beyond that would have been a substantial increase in revenue receipts,
so there would be no blowout if those figures were in fact to be achieved.
J: So the article is too optimistic as far as job growth goes?
KB: Well it is not the Commonwealth's figures on job growth anticipation, no.
Well somebody was asked, some Treasury official was asked, well what if
the job growth is better than the Commonwealth thinks, what will happen?
Well, obviously, on one side of the ledger, the Commonwealth will have to
pay out more money for its superannuation undertaking. But, on the other
side of the ledger and vastly greater amounts, would come in revenue
from the taxation receipts with more people in the workforce.
J: Hasn't the Treasurer admitted that the Government has underestimated
the costs of superannuation?
KB: I think the Treasurer has said that the particular paper that was produced
was based on a set of estimates that was well beyond what the
Government's estimates were. But I mean that would be unmitigatedly
good news were it to occur. The increase in the cost of the
superannuation payout would be neither here nor there, alongside the
increase in the receipts, but would pay for it, they would pay for it many
times over if that was the sort of job growth that we were going to see. It
would be great if it happened. But we are not anticipating it happening.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
SPEECH AT LAUNCH OF ANZAC FRIGATE TE KAHA, WILLIAMSTOWN,
SATURDAY, 22 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much, John White ( Chief Executive, Transfield Defence
Systems), Prime Minister Jim Bolger and Joan, I'm very pleased to see you in
Australia on this occasion, our Defence Ministers Warren Cooper and Robert
Ray, Carlo Salteri ( Transfield Chairman), Rear Admiral Walsh, the Hon Bill
Baxter representing the Premier, parliamentary colleagues, members of the
Defence Force, Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Reverend David North
and Bishop Vercoe and ladies and gentlemen.
One of the last things that was just said was that ANZAC was a class, it is the
name of a class and, of course, as we in this country and New Zealand know,
it has always been a class name. It has always stood for the world's best
when it came to a fighting force and I don't believe there could be any greater
manifestation of our co-operation or the kindred nature of our two countries
than to be here for an historic launch of a collaborative project of this kind.
The things we have always believed about our two countries the common
ideals, the common culture, the threatres of war we fought in in defence of
liberty all of these things, I think, are in evidence today in the fact that we
have come together as nations in this collaborative exercise to build this
class of ships bearing that proud name ANZAC. I am delighted to be here on
this occasion for the launching of Te Kaha.
It is, I think, a magnificent ship, state of the art and world class. One of the
things, I am sure, that we do in Australia and New Zealand these days is
build good ships and maybe this will have more fighting power than an
America's Cup yacht, certainly more hitting power although no doubt we
could commission them America's Cup yachts that is with some
armaments. They would be a pretty fearful thing, but this, I think, represents
as good as it is likely to be world wide. 
What is important, I think, about this is a recognition by Australia and New
Zealand that in our own defence we need these capacities and capabilities.
The thing about this ship which will be true of no other, or very few we've had
in the past, is that it will be serviced here in Australasia because it is built
here in Australasia and one of the things about our defence will now be that
we will focus on our regional strengths, our industrial capabilities, our
capacity for research and development, for design not simply of ships but of
combat systems and weapon systems because with the finish of the Cold
War what we are now seeing, where once everything was international ised,
what we are now seeing is the regionalisation of difficulties, where regional
tensions come to the fore and where countries organise themselves
regionally. I think this is something which we are doing. We are building a naval ship
building capacity like this here in Australasia and, of course, in Australia's
case we also have a submarine program, we will soon have the Mine Hunter
Program and the hydrographic ship. There is a real core naval capacity
being built here and one that I think must be comforting to the peoples of
Australia and New Zealand, that this capacity exists within our countries. Of
course, we have built this and we have innovated the design and developed
further the weapon systems, but I think it also reminds us of our important
linkages to Europe. John White and Carlo Salteri have already mentioned
Blohm and Voss the Naval architects and let me also mention Celsius
Tech the Swedish Company that designed the combat systems in which we
have been able to augment.
But, beyond all that what I would like to do is to congratulate Transfield on
putting together this capacity to develop these ships, to be able to produce
them at this quality and on time. This is a great compliment to them as a
company and to the workforce of these yards that they could harness these
skills and give such commitment and such pride to the building of such a
vessel. Without them, of course, this ship wouldn't be here and we need to
think about them and to thank them.
I would like to, just again, dwell on the major point that having an Australian
and New Zealand Prime Minister together at the launch of a ship in which we
are involved collaboratively, I think, says again much about our relationship,
says how seriously we regard the first duty of any government and that is to
make certain of the security of its people and to have a competent Defence
Force. With this Defence Force here today, the Defence Force of our
countries in Australia and New Zealand, will see this augmentation coming
here today and I am very proud to be involved. I'd like to again, congratulate
everybody concerned and most particularly wish Te Kaha well and, of course,
naturally and especially all who will sail in her. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP, AND
THE NEW ZEALAND PRIME MINISTER, THE RIGHT HON JIM BOLGER,
DOORSTOP, WILLIAMSTOWN, VICTORIA, 22 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PJK: Well, you all know that the Prime Minister and I both made remarks for the
launch of the Anzac class frigate, Te Kaha. But I would like to just
endorse the remarks that the Prime Minister made and repeat the remarks
I made to and to say that I thought it was a very clear manifestation of the
cooperation between Australia and New Zealand. The fact that we work
together collaboratively on a single class of ship, like this, that bears the
name the proud name of Anzac, the history of which and the culture of
which we share says something I think about the modern relationship in
peace and how we can develop ourselves, develop a defence capability
here. How we can see technological spin-offs in both of our countries.
How, by improving and building on our defence material capability, we
can, at the same time, support other industries and while giving ourselves
a stronger defence posture. These are all sensible things and I made the
remark earlier, in the Cold War of course everything was internationalised
and all regional problems were subsumed into the bipolarity of the
Cold War environment. With its cessation, of course, we see much more
obvious regional tensions in the world. You can see it in many places and
therefore the solutions for these problems are tending to come regionally.
In this region of the world, we have taken that lesson I think and we are
doing things together and I was very pleased to be here on this significant
occasion and very pleased to have Jim Bolger in Australia for the launch
of Te Kaha. As you know, we have had a meeting together. We ranged
over a number of subjects. CHOGM which the Prime Minister, of course,
will be hosting later this year. APEC which we are collaborators in and
where we have another meeting coming up to advance the Bogor
Declaration, that is the Osaka meeting later this year. Of course we
discussed the testing program of the Government of France in the Pacific
and I think we have made it clear to ourselves, we are determined to
maintain the pressure on France to modify its program, that is to desist
from testing weapons and also to encourage further international focus
upon France. We have seen the South Pacific Forum already exercising
some substantial pressure on that country and as you know, the Forum 
2
will be also meeting later in the year and we will be having a continuing
dialogue with Forum partners about how we advance that pressure.
J: Will you be sending a warship?
PJK: I will just come to that in a moment. And I think that probably covers the
great majority of the things that we have spoken of. I would be happy to
take questions, but before I do I might invite the Prime Minister to say a
few words.
JB: Thank you, Prime Minister. And can I repeat my thanks that I expressed
at the launch that you came to Melbourne today to be associated with the
launch of the first New Zealand Anzac ship. We believe, as I said there, it
has been a very good project. There were a lot of cynics around that New
Zealand would not gain any material advantage in terms of construction
components being offered to New Zealand industry. We have, in fact, had
a very substantial spin-off into our industry from the Anzac ship project
and we think it has gone very, very well. The progress that we have made
since the agreement was signed in 1959, I think, has been very positive. I
think it has been an excellent example of a Anzac project, drawing on all
those elements of Anzac, and I was delighted to be able to announce
today that New Zealand will, in fact, construct a memorial in Canberra
recognising the shared sacrifices of our two countries. But in particular, of
course, the New Zealand component to that. So I will be very pleased to
put that together, obviously in consultation with those in authority in
Canberra. In terms of the meeting that the Prime Minister and myself
have just had, as Prime Minister Keating said, we looked at the three
major conferences coming up the South Pacific Forum in Papua New
Guinea; then we will have the CHOGM meeting, which I will have the
privilege of chairing in Auckland; and, almost immediately after, the APEC
meeting in Osaka. And there will be some commonality and, of course,
some unique elements to each of those conferences. Clearly, the Forum
we both expect will want to take a* v-ery strong position in expressing its
total objection to France on its proposal to recommence testing in the
Pacific. We will also want to maintain pressure on France to get the
firmest possible commitment and from other countries of a nuclear
weapons state, on agreement to sign up to a Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty. That is what we must have if the world is to stop the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and we have no difference, at all, between the
positions that we want to take in terms of those goals. And, as I have said
in New Zealand, that we also want to see the closure of the Mururoa
testing facilities, so that there is no possibility of France coming back to
test in the Pacific and the signing up to the protocols of the South Pacific
Nuclear Free Zone Treaty. So, in that area, we can see some progress I
think internationally. There seems to be a second wave coming through
with governments and Parliaments around the world now taking a stronger
position. Japan has come out very strongly in recent days in its proposal
to seek a resolution from the United Nations and we would certainly want
to support that. The Russian Parliament has come out condemning the
tests. Many of the European Parliaments have and so on. So there is a
second wave coming through of criticism, rejection, of the French proposal
and we hope that President Chirac and his Government will be taking 
some note of that. Both countries, both Governments, are certainly
looking forward to maintaining the momentum that was in the APEC
meeting in Bogor, where quite a historic agreement was reached in terms
of moving towards free trade, or freer trade, in our part of the world. We
want to maintain that in Osaka as well. Now those are the substantive
ones. We obviously expressed our satisfaction with the days events and
how they had gone and, you know I think in a very real way, underpins the
unique relationship between Australia and New Zealand and just the way
in which it was done there today, I think, is very practical in terms of the
business of developing a defence capacity. But, I think, very symbolic in
the way that the two countries have been able to develop these
procedures. That is about it.
J: Mr Keating, what specifically will New Zealand and Australia be doing to
stop the French?
PJK: Well we have already made, I think, well let me say, we have both led a
substantial campaign against the Government of France in this policy they
have, this needless policy. I mean I think the main object of both of our
Governments would be as the Prime Minister said, that is to stop the
spread of nuclear weapons. I mean the thing that matters most in the end
is how we deal with the end of the Cold War? How we deal with the
proliferation risk that the world faces from both the dismantling of old
nuclear programs and also the much freer availability of expertise and
materials, keeping the materials tight, keeping a check on the expertise,
are all the things material to containing proliferation and the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty is one of the ways that we can limit that
proliferation. But actually dismantling these facilities and dismantling
Mururca is just another example of that. In terms of how we go from here,
as you know the Government of Australia has proselytised on this issue in
Europe. I have published letters in French publications and we will be
now I think with Japan making its point of objection clear, a number of
other European Governments having done so, I think that President
Chirac would be now somewhat surprised by the reaction to the testing
decision and that sort of support I think we'll see how the debate goes in
the Pacific Forum. But within the Pacific Forum, we may be able to
advance further support, maybe for some United Nations resolution, some
United Nations action on which Australia and New Zealand participates.
J: Will you send a navy ship up to Mururoa?
PJK: No, we thought about this originally. You send navy ships when you want
navy ships to do naval things. And I don't think any of us want this on this
occasion.
J: Will you join New Zealand in going to the World Court?
PJK: Well I didn't know that New Zealand was necessarily going to the World
Court and we have looked at some of the issues with the International
Court of Justice. But there are two matters. One, it is not certain whether
or not any proceedings could be dealt with before the testing program was
completed. And, secondly, where the law of the matter lay. 
JB: Can I just say on that for the Australian journalists perhaps. We are
looking at the details of how a case might be taken to the World Court and
I am working in collaboration with the other political parties in
New Zealand. But it is a very narrow opportunity and it may not be
possible and I think from what I have heard, the Australians who already
looked at this prospect have found it a difficult one to fight. Just to find the
legal standing to take a case that will have some weight. But we are still
pursuing that and, if it is possible, we will. But we have to determine that
there is a realistic prospect there.
J: Mr Keating, how disappointed would Australia be if New Zealand did not
exercise its options to buy frigates 3 and 4?
PJK: Well this is for the Government of New Zealand, exclusively, to think
about. In terms of its defence procurement program over time and, of
course, that is some time out from here. There was no need and isn't a
need at this point to be coming to any resolution about that. But I think,
you know, the obvious point I would make and the Prime Minister in a
sense has joined me in this today, as we have a single class ship which
we are building together. So whatever option there is for New Zealand to
purchase ships in the future, this is obviously a strong point of the Anzac
program. But, again, that has got to be seen against the background of its
own defence force requirements and its own procurement program.
J: Prime Minister Keating, are you concerned with signals sent out yesterday
by the French Ambassador in Wellington that France is unwilling to sign
the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and that there might be more than
eight tests in actual fact?
PJK: I didn't see that.
JB: If the Prime Minister hasn't seen it, I think we should say there seems to
be some confusion as to the message the Ambassador to Wellington was
conveying. In the morning it seemed to be a very considerable measure
of doubt as to whether France, if there wasn't a Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty, wouldn't actually just continue to test. In fact there seemed to be
some enthusiasm in the presentation from the Ambassador that France
would want to test. But, by the end of the day, they had released a
statement to clarify, or to re-state, that they only had intention for eight
and they would sign up to the Test Ban Treaty. So I am really saying I
think there has been some quite confused message come from the French
Ambassador based into Wellington.
J: Are you satisfied by that [ inaudible]?
JB: Well I made my view very clear early yesterday that we would be
astonished and we would be outraged if there was a suggestion that there
was going to be any additional testing. We are totally outraged there is
going to be eight and if that isn't a firm position, then it would be a worse
position. But I have some surmised that, in fact, the Ambassador's 
presentation may have been inaccurate in the morning and hence the
correction later in the day.
J: Mr Keating, the New Zealand Government is saying that it wants no more
[ inaudible} in relation to the CTBT, whereas I understand that
Australia's position is to support the possibility of micro-yield or so-called
bench top tests? If that is correct what is the rationale for Australia?
PJK: Well I don't think we have yet articulated what elements we would like to
see in a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. Although, we have very clear
ideas about it. I think that we would like to see is, that we see the
post-Cold War era as an opportunity to rein in the proliferation risk and
that comes by way of testing weapons. But also, as I said earlier, the
diversion of materials and expertise. What is particularly objectionable
about France is that it is a democracy. This is not a totalitarian regime, or
a military regime, doing this or testing within its own metropolitan area.
This is a democracy affronting other smaller States distant from it. That is
the essential point of objection. Beyond that is the notion that right when
we are all trying to get a better non-proliferation regime, when this historic
opportunity has arisen at the end of the Cold War, a democracy is out
there testing weapons. I mean that is the problem and that is what we
object to. The French have as great an interest, a greater interest, than
we have in fact in seeing these proliferation risks diminished, given the
fact that they are situated in an area where there are a lot of weapons
battlefield weapons and strategic weapons. And, not only that, there are
14 reactors of the same design as Chernobyl sitting in the Ukraine and in
other parts of Russia, which have inherent design faults which are going
to have to be overhauled and decommissioned and there is no way those
States are going to go to coal or other fossil fuels. So there is going to
have to be a replacement reactor program. Now that is something the
Government of France, and all the West European Governments for that
matter, have got to deal with. So it is these sorts of issues that go beyond
simply a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. It goes to the opportunity and
a democracy flouting the opportunity.
J: But you are not ruling out the possibility that Australia would allow the
with some degree of physical testing?
PJK: Well I am not answering the question at all. I am not here to discuss
design issues in the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty whatsoever.
J: Was there any discussion on John Major's response to the nuclear testing
issue and what pressure Australia and New Zealand, combined, might
bear on Britain to speak up?
JB: I just noted in our discussion, Catherine, that Prime Minister Major had not
come out. Whereas a number of European Governments had come out
strongly against the French position and I presume the reason is that he is
also, of course, the leader of a nuclear power. They have their own
nuclear facility. But no as I said before I am disappointed that John Major
hasn't come out, but I have to say that Prime Minister Keating and myself
didn't spend much time on that at all. 
Malaysian journalist]. This collaborative venture represented by this
Anzac project breaks some new ground in this part of the world.
Transfield is proposing to do the same thing between the Australian and
Malaysian navies. Can I ask the assessment of both of you what this
means in terms of industry collaboration and what this collaboration can
contribute to its regional defence and regional security and its regional
relations?
PJK: Well maybe, perhaps, I will begin. The obvious thing is that we would
have a regional core naval design construction and repair facility, which
means that any defence arrangements within the region must be stronger
if the vessels are designed for tropical waters, if they are designed to
suit our particular naval requirements and their weapons systems and
their repair are not subject to long voyages to other countries of origin
obviously, it is stronger here. And I think we would see any program with
Malaysia being an adjunct to that sort of strength. And I think Prime
Minister Bolger will attest to the fact that we are seeing a fairly broad
spread of capability here. He made in his public remarks, references to
New Zealand industry for instance, the spin-off for New Zealand industry
from this program. There would be, of course, a similar spin-off for
Malaysia and we would all be the better for having a stronger naval design
and construction capability in this part of the world, in this region of the
world. So I think we are seeing something new. We are seeing the very
clear development of this facility and, of course, in Australia's case we
have also got the submarine facility in South Australia, where we are now
completing these 3,500 tonne, state-of-the-art, world class submarines.
So together we are building some real capacity and, of. course, were
Malaysia to choose the Australian design, then it too would benefit from
these arrangements.
JB: I think the judgement we have made-has gone very well, as I said earlier.
The New Zealand participation has been positive, it has been significant
so the work that has come back to New Zealand firms has been across a
range of areas and quite large in terms of the size of the contracts that
have been put into New Zealand. So all I can say is that from a New
Zealand perspective, working with Transfield here in Melbourne, we have
had a good relationship, our industry has had a good relationship.
Last question.
JB: Yes, I want to go and see the rugby.
J: Was there any discussion on the civil aviation market?
JB: Very briefly and in essence we agreed that if the two commercial
operators that are in discussion, which is Ansett Australia and
Air New Zealand, can find a commercial resolution that makes sense to
them, we would both welcome it. That is where it is.
J: Mr Bolger, are you happy about the degree of cooperation between New
Zealand and Australia on the nuclear testing issue? 
JB: Yes I am. I have had no difficulty at all with it and I feel certain, following
our discussions today, that we are going to see that cooperation move
forward in the various forums that are open to us to advance the objection
of this part of the world, but really I think the objection of the world, or the
great majority of the world opposes France breaking its moratorium and
recommencing nuclear testing. I am absolutely certain that is true. The
great majority, overwhelming majority of the world, wants to see a halt to
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. You only have to reflect back a few
months at the concern, almost fear, that has been generated at the
prospect that North Korea was going to develop nuclear weapons. The
only way we can prevent that is in fact to have a very strong test ban
treaty and for the nuclear weapons states to continue with a program of
reducing their nuclear arms and that is what we want to see happen. We
don't have any difficulty in pursuing that in tandem, wherever the options
are open to us to pursue it in tandem. Don't you reckon we should go and
see the rugby?
PJK: Thank you indeed.
JB: That will be the biggest battle of the day. Win it for us, well I have said I
think the All Blacks will be about ten in front, but Paul has got a different
view.
J: What is that Mr Keating?
PJK: Well what do you expect me to say.
JB: I mean the All Blacks have now got to sort of lift New Zealand's honour
after the Australian netballers beat the New Zealand netball team by one
goal yesterday. I mean I am sorry, Paul, we have got to win this one, we
are under some pressure now.
PJK: You have had too many wins lately.
JB: Thank you all.
PJK: Thank you.
ends T~ I 



70/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE HON P J KEATING MP
SITUATION 1IN BOSNIA
All Australians have been horrified by the bloodshed and human rights abuses in
Bosnia, and appalled by the misery that has been inflicted on the civilian population in
the former Yugoslavia.
In particular, we feel for those among us who have families and friends and ties with
communities caught up in the fighting.
The Bosnian Serb capture of Srebrenica and continuing Bosnian Serb attacks on other
UN ' safe areas' have provoked another exodus of families and a wave of suffering, with
horrific violations of human rights.
The latest acts of aggression by the Bosnian Serb forces are a moral affront to all of us.
They offend every international standard of decency.
The international community faces immensely difficult decisions about how to respond
to this critical situation.
Though often criticised, UNPROFOR's operations with the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees ( UNHCR) in the former Yugoslavia have helped protect nearly three
million people affected by the conflict. Despite the extreme difficulties imposed on
UNPROFOR by confused mandates, it can continue to make an important contribution
to the humanitarian effort and in restraining conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
The Australian Government welcomes the agreement in London among the countries
most involved in peace efforts in the former Yugoslavia and the UN to ensure access
for supplies to the civilian population in Sarajevo and to meet further Bosnian Serb
offensives with a decisive and effective response. 
In order to help relieve immediate suffering, the Government has decided to provide a
new $ 3 million aid package.
Australia will provide $ 1.5 million to the UN lead agency in the former Yugoslavia, the
UNHCR, and $ 750,000 to the World Food Program. We will also provide $ 350,000
to kick-start a joint appeal announced today by UNHCR and Austcare for cash
contributions to make up family survival kits with food, blankets, clothing and other
essential items.
The Government will give World Vision Australia $ 350,000 for its program to provide
food and care to displaced people in and around Zenica. And we will provide $ 50,000
to Austcare to support local women's initiatives to help women who have been subject
to violence.
This package of assistance is additional to the almost $ 5 million the Government has
already provided to the victims of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, including a
contribution of $ 500,000 to help civilians displaced by the latest fighting announced by
the Acting Foreign Minister on 18 July.
Since the outbreak of the conflict in 1991 Australia has accepted for resettlement some
14,000 victims of the war. This financial year, provision has been made for an
additional 5,600 people under the Government's humanitarian program.
Sir Ninian Stephen and other expert Australian staff work with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
It is in the interests of the entire international community that the crisis in Bosnia be
brought to an end and an enduring peace established in the Former Yugoslavia. That
means all participants must make a determined effort to negotiate a settlement.
CANBERRA 24 July 1995 



PRINIMISET E 71/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE GENERAL SECRETARY OF THE
COMMUNIST PARTY OF VIETNAM, MR DO MUOI, 29 JULY-4 AUGUST 1995
1 am pleased to announce that the General Secretary of the Communist Party of
Vietnam, Mr Do Muoi, will visit Australia as a guest of the Government from 29 July
to 4 August. The General Secretary is the highest ranking Vietnamese figure to visit
Australia. He will be accompanied by high level members of the Vietnamese
government and by a business delegation. He will visit New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland and Canberra.
The General Secretary's visit is a significant milestone in the development of Australia's
relationship with Vietnam one that is growing in importance. Two-way trade grew
by 10 per cent from 1993 to 1994, and is valued at $ 402 million. Australia is now the
sixth largest foreign investor in Vietnam.
The General Secretarys visit coincides with the accession of Vietnam as the seventh
member of ASEAN and the normalisation of its relations with the United States.
These developments underline the growing impoitance of Vietnam in the Asia-Pacific
region. I look forward to discussing these issues with the General Secretary, as well as
the bilateral relationship between Australian and Vietnam and ways in which Australia
and Vietnam can work to strengthen it.
CANBERRA July 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS WOMEN IN DEFENCE FORCES CEREMONY
CANBERRA, 25 JULY 1995
I am honoured to be delivering this address in another splendid ' Australia
Remembers' commemorative event
But this ceremony is different.
At the launching of ' Australia Remembers' almost 12 months ago, I said that
the Government wanted women to be involved in the commemorations to an
extent that women have never been involved in our major national
commemorations before.
We have not been disappointed.
It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to Parliament House. Thank you
for coming.
Today we remember what Australian women gave to their country and the
cause of freedom in World War 11.
They gave their labour and their love of this country. Many of them gave their
lives.
They gave themselves totally to the defence of Australia and the things
Australia stood for the principles of freedom, democracy and human
decency, the way of life Australians had constructed here, their communities
and families.
They worked at tasks Australian women had never taken on before. They
served in places where Australians had never been. They served as one,
regardless of where or what circumstances they came from.
They played an essential role in the defence of Australia. 
2
As Mr Sciacca said, the response to calls for enlistment in the women's
services was overwhelming some 67,000 enlisted in our armed forces.
Within a year of the declaration of war in Europe, almost a third of all
Australia's trained nurses had volunteered to serve overseas. The first of
them embarked within four months of the beginning of the war. They served
in Palestine, Libya, Egypt, Greece, Eritrea, Syria, the South-West Pacific and
in England.
Their experience is part of the Australian experience; it is inseparable from
our military history, our national legends and traditions, and the inspiration
and values we draw from these things.
Women served during the blitz on London. They saw war in the deserts of
North Africa. In Greece they served through frequent air raids and narrowly
missed the arrival of invading German troops.
In Malaya, Ceylon, Singapore, Papua, New Guinea, the Solomon Islands
New Britain and Borneo many became internees and suffered terrible
deprivations. Some were brutally murdered.
Forty-one Australian Army nurses died in the fall of Singapore or as internees
of the Japanese.
From these terrible experiences emerged many stories of heroism.
I think we are all familiar with the story of Sister Vivien Bullwinkel, who was
the sole female survivor when nurses who endured the sinking of the Viner
Brooke were put to death by the Japanese.
Less well-known is the experience of the-nurses who were captured on
Rabaul and, along with a number of civilians, sent to Japan. Here they were
lodged in the Yokohama Rowing Club and provided with a few items of
clothing and an inadequate diet.
One member of the group, Sister Anderson, described their imprisonment:
they worked at knitting small silk bags, making and gluing envelopes and at
heavier tasks such as constructing air raid shelters, carrying bundles of
firewood and clearing paths in the snow for guards to walk through in knee
boots the women were barefooted. Sometimes the women became so
hungry they cooked and ate the glue on the envelopes.
There are other stories we should record today. In the bombing of Darwin on
18 February 1942, Sister Margaret de Mestre and 11 other staff of the
hospital ship Manunda were killed.
Only one nurse was among the sixty-four survivors of the torpedoing of the
Hospital Ship Centaur. 
She was Sister Nell Savage who was awarded the George Cross for helping
others while they floated on debris and rafts waiting for rescue.
Fifty-five Australian Army Nursing Service members received decorations for
their Second World War Service, including two George Medals. Eighty-two
were mentioned in despatches.
Many other Australian women served in medical units.
Members of the Australian Army Medical Women's Service ( previously known
as the Voluntary Aid Detachments) served with our Army nurses throughout
Australia and in New Guinea and Borneo.
Their dedication was personified by Miss May Douglas, the senior
representative of the women's wartime services present here today.
Originally a nursing orderly for the AIF, Miss Douglas was commissioned in
1941 with the prospect that she might accompany the Army overseas.
But her talents were employed in Australia where, in 1943, she was promoted
to Lieutenant Colonel and appointed controller of the Australian Army Medical
Women's Service.
And in this capacity she travelled in Australia and New Guinea, visiting
hospitals where her troops were serving.
Today, I would also like to acknowledge the women of other medical units:
The members of the Australian Army Physiotherapy service who
served in the Middle East and the Pacific, on hospital ships and in
base and forward areas.
The women members of the Australian Army Medical Corps who
served in military hospitals both in Australia and overseas as doctors,
physiotherapists and masseuses.
The women of the Royal Australian Naval Nursing Service who cared
for Australian and Allied servicemen on bases throughout Australia, as
well as at Milne Bay and on the Hospital Ship Manunda.
And the women of the Royal Australian Air Force Nursing and Medical
Service members who served not only in Australia, but also in New
Guinea and in air evacuation units in Canada and the United States.
Not all the women who served Australia served as nurses, of course.
27,000 members of the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, fondly known
as ' the WAAAFs', worked in 72 of 120 Air Force trades.
I 
And we might note today that they received just two-thirds or less of the male
rates of pay.
The WAAAF changed the role of women in wartime.
The women were subject to rules which now seem at best curious.
For instance, they were not supposed to serve further north than Cairns and
Geraldton. Nevertheless some did serve in Darwin and the north-west of
Western Australia, and in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.
They were also not supposed to fly aircraft though I am told that two women,
Nell Palfreyman and Margaret Piddington were given some experience in this
traditional part of air force life.
In acknowledging the WAAAFs today I think it is true to say that we recognise
not only the great service they rendered to the country in wartime, but the
example they set for the peace the example of women's capacity and right
to play a part in realms of our national life from which they had always been
excluded. The same might be said of the Australian Women's Army Service, which was
formed in 1941 with the same objective of releasing men for fighting units.
Thousands of women rushed to enlist in what became known as the ' AWAS'
by 1944 the number totalled over 24,000.
Again, they were paid just two-thirds of the male rate.
They were grudgingly allowed the same rank as men and provided with the
same basic equipment: with one difference apparently they were allowed to
have " a vase of flowers on the cupboards by their beds".
In November 1944, the War Cabinet approved the posting of 500 members of
AWAS to New Guinea. I do not know if the same conditions applied.
When women were first admitted into the Royal Australian Navy in 1941, they
were admitted under the proviso ' that there be no publicity about this break in
tradition'. Over 3,000 women enlisted in the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service
during the Second World War. None went to sea because it was thought
inappropriate to have women on ships, but they played an extremely
important role not least in the Allied Intelligence Bureau and the Coast
Watching Service.
Then there were the 7,000 members of the Australian Women's Land Army
who, while not one of the Services, wore uniforms, were subject to discipline
and learned to take orders. 77-
They covered the loss of 100, 000 farm workers to the defence forces.
As John Curtin said, their work was hard, demanding, constant and vital to
the war effort.
Of course, ' Australia Remembers' honours all our veterans, including those
who stayed at home and kept the country running.
During the war, Australia turned to women as a vast untapped labour
resource. By 1944, 250,000 women were working in Australia's factories. Over 40 per
cent of munitions workers were women.
Much of the work was hideously monotonous and harmful to their health.
They suffered hardship and illness. But they made a huge contribution to
winning the war and therefore to our freedom and the preservation of our
democracy. They made a massive contribution to the story of Australia and I
hope that, after today, Australians will always acknowledge this.
Our own generation and generations to come should know that when liberty
was threatened, Australian women rallied to defend it. No less than
Australia's men, they were prepared to give their labour and their lives.
We all should know what we owe them to no small extent, our freedom and
our way of life, including that part of it which today makes it possible for
women to share much more fully in the work and the rewards.
This generation of Australian women were both pioneers and defenders of
the Australian faith.
And today all Australia salutes them. 



TEL: P0oA . 0P U
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE, 26 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM; How are you, John?
JL: Pretty good, how about you?
PM: Going well, thanks?
JL: Have a good break?
PM; Not too bad at all.
JL: Did you pick the right State? It was a pretty hectic time to be in
Queensland with Wayne Goss with his worries.
PM; I picked the right weather, I can tell you that, and that is what really
matters.
JL: And the right area too from what I hear.
PM: That is right.
JL: Listen, it is interesting when you look at the situation there in
Queensland, Now, had ten constituents in the Townsville seat voted
for the Opposition and not Labor, Wayne Goss wouldn't be
Queensland Premier today. It was pretty cfose, wasn't it?
PM: Yes, it was and I think, as Wayne said overnight, I mean this is part of
the problem of incumbency these days. So much is expected of
governments and they can, in a sense, do so much. But it is then a
matter of trying to adequately articulate what has been done.
JL: Yes. Looking at some of the questions what we have decided to do
here today is, you would be aware that on occasions in the past when 
TEL : 26uI. 5 13 .04P0iC
2
1 interview you though, are those people out there who say well you
just give him an easy ride, you don't ask him the tough questions.
PM. Well that is only the Tories.
JL: That is right.
P M; When you give Howard an easy ride, the Labor people don't say that.
JL: Yes, but nobody rings up to tell me I have done that.
PM: I know because a lot of the audience supports the Coalition.
J L Well I suppose that is the way of the country too, at the moment, if you
take any notice of the polls. But in order that it could be considered to
be all fair, so their friends can ring them up and tell them how easy
they were on you, I thought we'd
PM: But you have never been easy on me, that is the point.
JL: Well, no, I don't think I have been particularly easy on you.
PM: Well sometimes 1 get off air saying things under my breath about you.
JL: Sometimes you have said it and not even under your breath. I have
had to pick up the phone.
PM: That is right.
JL: Anyway we will do it this way and just see how it looks. Questions,
obviously, will be put to you that may well be outside your realm.
But if you can go close to the answer we would appreciate this.
This one comes from Robert Woods, obviously somewhere in Sydney,
" I wish to ask the Prime Minister why he persists with comparatively
unimportant issues, such as the republic, and side steps or avoids the
most pressing issues of the current account deficit, the balance of
payments and Australia's poor performance in controlling its
indebtedness? What is the Government doing to address these
issues?"
PM: Well it is doing the major things. The current account deficit is a major
issue for which we have put in a major change. And, that change is a
Budget surplus and a superannuation scheme, the likes of which the
nation has never seen. That is, that everybody will be putting away,
within seven years from now, 15 per cent and we are already at 6 per
cent, heading for 9 per cent, but will then be 15 per cent of their
Incomes which will add to $ 2 trillion in savings, that is $ 2,000 billion.
Now the national debt is about $ 160 billion. We are talking about
$ 2,000 billion and when you look at the Budget deficit change, that is a
change of about 4 per cent of GDP, that is about $ 20 billion. In other
26 Jul 51 33 No .004 P .0 
TEL: 26&amp;. Jul S 1 : 33 N o C' 4 R 0 3/
3
words, the two changes, John, that matter for savings are the Budget
deficit and super. But, look, the real point is this, our friends in the
Liberal Party run around saying " Oh, look at the debt and you know
the current account deficit". But the fact is this is a big island
continent. This is a country which is always going to need capital. It is
a bit like people saying " Oh well look at that fellow up the road, he has
Just bought a house for $ 200,000. you know, and he is finished. He is
massively in debt." What he is doing is borrowing to make himself
stronger in the future and to provide a benefit for himself, a roof over
his head and an asset.
JL: Okay.
PM: That is exactly what Australia is doing.
JL: Okay, except that when the fellow up the road buys the $ 200,000
house, he does pay it off and the amount that he owes does reduce.
Our's doesn't reduce, it keeps climbing.
PM: Oh, yes it does and remember this, our capacity..
JL: Well why do we have increases?
PM: Let me just make this point. Our capacity to pay it off has doubled.
Eight or nine years ago, only about 22 per cent of our exports
22 per cent of the proceeds of our exports were spent servicing our
international debt. Today, that is 11 per cent. In other words, we are
like somebody who has got roughly the same mortgage, but has a
doubling of income. It is all about your capacity to service it.
JL: But why do we see it constantly increasing?
PM:-Because there is more Investment in Australia coming through
because more Australian companies want to invest more in this
country. That is where the jobs came from. See, John, this questioner
says I don't concentrate on the big issues, on things like the republic,
I mean the republic actually is a big issue. But I will leave that to one
side.
JL: Apart from that, I think everybody has got to be aware that
governments have got to be able to, and are capable of, doing more
than one thing at a time.
PM: Exactly, exactly. But what was the big commitment that I made at the
election? What was the issue of the 1993 election? Employment.
The right to a job. And even though, perhaps, it is now I mean we
had these dreadful headlines last week. We had 50,000 job growth
and the headline in one newspaper national newspaper was
" Jobs surge dashes hopes for rate cut". In other words, isn't it terrible
we have got all these jobs, it is bad for rate cuts. And then the next 
TEL: 26 . Ju I .95 1 : 33 No.
4
one, another one said, " Dollar surges as jobless rate falls to
pre-recession level". John, what in the biggest commitment that the
Government has made and I made at the 1993 election was to restore
employment to Australia. We have had, since the election, 630,000
jobs. Now let me just put that in some sort of context. When I became
the Treasurer a decade ago, we had 6 million in the workforce. It took
us 200 years to get to 6 million. It has taken us 2 1/ 2 years to put
per cent more on that 600,000. 1 mean it is the most phenomenal
level of employment growth. But you see any opponent I have, and
the questioner you can bet is not a Labor voter, will say, " Well look
2 1/ 2 years ago employment was all the go, but now we don't want to
hear about it. The next test for you is the current account deficit."
JL: Okay, just back to this employment, the jobs that have been created.
Are they jobs that have been created on credit, from money borrowed
overseas?
PM: No, I mean they are jobs created by investment and the pick up in
demand in Australia. You see, John, you have got to understand this.
This is not Singapore, this is not a city State, this is not Hong Kong.
This is a country, this is an island continent. It has got long railway
systems, it has got power, it has got water, it has got ports, it has got
all sorts of things.
JL: Why do you mention Singapore? Do many people mention
Singapore?
PM: 1 I mention it because some countries run surpluses because they don't
have the need for that continuing demand for investment.
For instance, I mean you have just seen BHP announce a new iron
plant for Western Australi Another company announced the same.
That wouldn't happen in a country that doesn't have iron ore reserves.
Now what do we say, that we are better off with that billion and a half
investment, or we are not better off with it?
JL: But how does that billion and a half investment affect the people
listening to this radio program?
P M; It lifts their employment and it lifts their real wealth.
J L: And does it lift their debt?
PM: Well it may do, it may do but it really just depends. I mean it depends
whether we can add to our national savings. In other words, what I am
trying to say is we have a level of domestic investment, bigger than our
national savings, do you understand? In other words, we have got a
country which is now investing strongly and though it is bigger than our
national savings. Just as you have somebody who buys their home
down the road for $ 250,000, which is bigger than their personal 0 ) 4 P 0 4 -C 
TEL . u1. z
savings. But are they massiVely in debt and are they ruined?
Of course not, they are just building an asset.
JL: That is right.
PM: And we are building an asset.
JL: Yes, but we would be better if we built it with our own money, instead
of borrowing it from overseas and we don't have enough of our own
money because your Government doesn't encourage saving.
PM: Oh, well that is completely wrong.
JL: It is not.
PM: It is completely wrong.
JL: It is not. You tax people on savings.
PM: Oh come on, John, come on. But, listen, there are two sorts of
savings. There are public savings.
JL: But you do tax people on savings.
PM: Well, of course, we tax people. We tax people on income, mate.
JL: Well why is it..
PM: Hang on.
JL: H-ang on, well why is it wrong?
PM: Well, okay, let me tell you. You said, you know, we discourage
savings. Look, the biggest saver is the public sector if it wishes to be.
By pushing the Budget into surplus, we have pushed up the big
generator of savings, that is the public savings. So we are talking
about a national savings pot. So we are talk* ing about public savings.
Then we are talking about superannuation. Do you think my dull
opponents could ever get the workforce to put 15 per cent of their
income away as savings and give them a retirement income equal to
the one they retire on at average weekly earnings?
JL. But when will all this come to fruition and another question from, I have
got to give credit to the questioners, B and J Rathborne of
North Sydney ' will the foreign debt drop permanently, permanently
underlined, this financial year?"
PM. What was your first question, sorry?
JL: Will the foreiyri debt. I I Z i 4 o 0 0 4 P ID 5. 1, 
TEL . JI. 5 13 No. 0
6
PM: No, no, but you asked me something before that. Sorry, I was
concentrating on that. But, look, understand this point, John.
Superannuation is already at 6 per cent. On 1 July..
JL: The question was when will we see this come to fruition.
PM: Yes, that is right, that is what you said. On I July it was at 6 per cent
and then it goes up by I percentage point over the next three years, to
which the Government is then paying 3 per cent by way of the tax cuts
into superannuation accounts and then employees are paying
3 per cent themselves. So it is 9 per cent, plus 3 per cent, plus
3 per cent that is 15 per cent. That 15 per cent will give us, by the
turn of this century, $ 1 trillion in savings and by 2020 $ 2 trillion.
Now, John, that is a level of savings, private savings, this country has
never seen, has never seen. And not only are we doing it, if someone
retires on average weekly earnings, which is now about $ 33,000,
in other words their working income at the week they retired was
$ 33,000, they will actually have a retirement income of about $ 33,000.
In other words, we are giving people, through our superannuation
changes ours an income In retirement comparable to the one they
have been on at work and we have built up a pile of national savings.
What does John Howard want to do to that, put the slipper into it. He
said he wants to abolish award superannuation, he wants to go back to
tax concessions.
JL: Okay, well now let me just get to this other question because I have to,
I owe it to the listeners. Will the foreign debt drop permanently this
year?
P M. No. No, but the thing is it depends whether you are talking about
absolutes, or our capacity to pay it. The fact of the matter is what was
required of the Government was two things. Look, in 1993 people said
get the economy restarted. We got the economy restarted. We have
had strong rates of growth since that time.
JL: Okay, but..
PM. The main requirement was employment. We got the employment there
and that comes only from investment. We got the strong investment
there and the other requirement was to put a medium term fix into the
savings problem, which we have done with a Budget surplus and long
term superannuation. I mean that is the answer.
JL: We won't be seeing the effect of it in this year, or next year?
PM: Well, of course, we won't be seeing the effect this year because we
have still got a flood of investment. But see, John, look, you get all
these sort of Jeremiahs. Let me just take the last week.
26 Ju I SI 7-13 N0 0 0 4 P Ci 6 C 
TEL . uI. 1: 3N. 0F. 0, i
7
JL: Okay, listen I have got to hurry you up a little bit because we have got
a bundle of people who want to talk to you, a very popular man.
PM: Alright, but let me just take the last week. On Saturday I launched a
ship with Jim Bolger, the New Zealand Prime Minister.
JL: His dollar is good.
PM:-That is a world ranking, state-of-the-art frigate, an Anzac class frigate.
On the previous day, Rupert Murdoch announced the establishment of
the Fox studios, the Fox movie company 20th Century Fox, the largest
set of studios in the world, outside of Hollywood. Earlier that week, the
Ford Motor Company announced a $ 1 billion investment in a new
Ford Falcon and a new paint facility. Two weeks before that,
American Express announced that Australia would be the
headquarters of its whole East Asian operation. The same week we
had 50,000 jobs and the stock market hit its high for a year. I mean
what are people going on about?
JI: I don't know, but they are.
PM: Well, maybe they are going on about it because they hear all the time
this sort of morbid Tory stuff about we are all ruined and the fact is..
JL: We are not.
PM: the economy is at a sustainable rate, we have got low inflation, we
have just had an Accord which is going to run wages to produce a 2 to
3 per cent inflation rate, you have got huge endorsements by major
American and international corporations.
JI: And we tell people about it all the time. But it doesn't alter the fact that
they still want to have these sorts of questions answered. Let me just
take
PM: I am happy to answer the questions, as long as people understand
when I focus on them, this is not the whole scene. The whole scene,
the scene we have at the moment, of sustainable growth and low
inflation is probably as good as we have had in 20 years.
JL: Okay, we will take a caller. Hello.
C: Hello.
JL: Yes, you want to talk to the Prime Minister?
C: I certainly do.
JL: Here he is. 6 3u I 951: 33 N0.004 
TEL: 2 i6.3 uI. 51 j1: 3 No C04 F. C/ C
C; Hello Mr Keating.
PM: How are you doing?
C: I am doing well it is a great privilege to be able to speak to you.
PM: Well you sound nice.
C: Mr Keating, first of all I would like to say that I have a great admiration
for your political skills. I think you are a mastermind political strategist
and certainly without..
JL: Hey listen, you had better lay off this, or it will sound like some people
will be ringing up and saying it is a set up. Come on, get on with the
question. If you have got a question to ask, ask the question.
C: I am trying to be nice before I stick the knife in. Mr Keating my
question is I am an average man with a wife, paying off a mortgage,
and I am becoming quite disillusioned with the state of the economy in
our country in that you have been in power now, your Party has been
in power, since 1983 and I am wondering whether we have seen
another decade of lost opportunities? I have spent a lot of time doing
business with people in countries like Singapore where they have next
to no Inflation, full employment, zero debt and all they hear from
yourself and your colleagues over the past ten years is rhetoric that
just isn't matched with performance in the broad macro-economic
indicators?
PM: Well let me put it to you as politely as you gave me the introduction,
that is simply not true. Ten years ago, this was an industrial ruin.
Ten years ago, Australia was just a lump of industrial archaeology with
an old secondary industry that was completely uncompetitive, which
had a managed exchange rate which was massively overvalued, which
had a tariff wall which had no international competitiveness
whatsoever. Do you realise in that time we have added to a labour
market of 6 million, we have now added over 2 million jobs? We have
got the highest rate of employment in this country we have seen.
C: We have also got one of the highest rates of unemployment.
PM: No we haven't. We have got unemployment now at around
8 1/ 2 per cent against a massive participation rate, particularly
amongst women in the workforce, and we have got an inflation rate for
the last four years under 2 per cent. So when John Howard left office,
the inflation rate was just on 11 per cent. After the 1981/ 82 recession,
he left us an 11 per cent inflation rate. Ours has been, for the last four
years, 1.9 per cent and as I have just said earlier in the program, we
have had 630,000 jobs. Now let me also tell you this. Exports, which
is basically the meat and drink of our future, ten years ago we
exported 14 per cent of all we produce. Today that is 22 per cent of 
TEL: 9
GDP. Let me just give you a simiple number. GDP is a total economy.
This year GDP is at $ 500 billion. We have taken exports from
14 per cent to 22 per cent. So we have gone up by 8 per cent of GDP.
We have gone up by $ 40 billion in exports $ 40,000 million in exports.
Where do you reckon we would be if the Labor Government hadn't
been able to regenerate and modernise Australian industry, restore
our competitiveness and get all that export growth? What do you
reckon the current account would be now? And what do you reckon
interest rates would be? And where do you reckon you would be?
C: Well interest rates really aren't anything to be boasting about at the
moment.
PMV: Well they are a lot lower than they used to be when Mr Howard was
around by a very large margin.
C: Yes, but I think you know I can under-stand you need to make
comparisons with them.
PM: Well you're making them, why shouldn't I? You have made the claim
that nothing has happened in ten years, why can't I respond?
C: Well I think in terms of foreign debt a lot has happened.
PM., Oh, you are back to the debt. You see you have asked me about
growth in employment and basically I have given you the answer there.
We have had just about, next to the United States, the fastest
employment growth in the western world in the last decade. We have
had a huge, complete, change to our industrial base. We have had a
revolution in the labour market. The lowest level of industrial disputes
now since we have been keeping records back to the 1 940s. We have
got an inflation rate under 2 per cent and now after my commitments at
the last election to get employment back, the most solemn commitment
a Government can give to employment which has been more than
matched by any objective the Government had, you are back now to
the only other argument which is about the current account deficit and
the debt. To which I said, as I said earlier, we now have twice the
capacity to service our debt that we had ten years ago.
JL: Okay, Prime Minister and caller I think we have got to call it a day
there in light of the fact that we have got a heap of other calls there
and a whole rot of faxes. Thank you, Prime Minister. Dear Ralph
( that's me, when they fax me) please ask Paul Keating if he is serious
about creating more jobs why the Government punishes the small
business employer by making us pay employee superannuation
contributions and for heavens sake ask him to get rid of that stupid
17.5 per cent holiday loading. Just removing those two burdens would
immediately create new jobs. At least, I know I would employ more
people. 26 i u 1 c'l I ci 0 0 4 F 0 9 
TEL: 26.. Jul. 95 1 : 33 Njoi
PM: Well, the world is not made for, simply, employers to make the profit
share in the economy higher than it now is. John, I mentioned to you
earlier..
JL: But, it is pretty important to have people wanting to employ others.
P M: We have just had 630,000 job growth. We are neck and neck with the
United States as the fastest employing country in the western world.
JL But, we have still got 8 per cent unemployment, so we have got to take
care of the 8 per cent.
PM. OK, so we need to get more, but the way to do it is not to basically hop
into ordinary people again. During my break, John Howard had his
headland speech.
JL But listen, aren't small business people ordinary people?
P M: Yes, but the people they employ are ordinary people too. So, you talk
about the holiday leave loading, You take someone who is on $ 20,000
or $ 22,000 a year, they are just making ends meet. They have got a
couple of kids and they have their holidays. Without the leave loading,
In other words without the normal overtime and the various penalty
rates they enjoy in work across the year, when they go on holiday they
take a big reduction. That is where the holiday leave loading comes
from to protect their income during this period.
JL: Yes, but even the man who introduced it says that it was a mistake.
PM: John, it was not a mistake and let me just make this clear to you. That
is all taken care of in the overall wages system because this small
business person, if he wasn't paying the holiday leave loading he
would be paying more in aggregate wages. That is where the Accord
comes in. How do you reckon we have got an inflation rate of 2 to 3
per cent if we have got a tear-away wages system?
JL Russell from Albury Why is it the harder you work the more the
Government wants to take off you. If I was unemployed and not
working the Government gives you everything all the benefits
instead of me working three jobs seven days a week to try to stay
ahead, I'd be better off on the dole. It is very hard to keep the dream
alive. How do you feel about that sort of attitude?
PM: I can only say that we have given Australians a growth economy now
for over a decade, apart from 18 months of the recession. You know
that in Ralph Willis' Budget the Treasury are forecasting, not only
growth this year, but for the next three years. So, from 1998 back to
1983 which is 16 years, we have had an 18 months dip in growth in the
recession, we have had growth as high as and around the highest 0 0 4 F 10 2 C 
TEL: 26. Ju12.5 1 : Z13 No .0
levels of the western world for 16 years, we have had huge
employment growth and we have had reasonable income growth.
JL: But how do we keep Russell of Albury happy because I imagine that
there are hundreds of thousands of Russells listening to us. If he feels
and he is working three jobs seven days a week that he would be
better off on the dole. How do we accommodate the fears of Russell?
PM: When I came to government, again let me talk about Mr Howard who is
always talking about me. His top marginal rate was 60 per cent. It is
now 47 per cent. The middle rate was in the high thirties per cent. It is
now much lower and the bottom rate was 30 per cent and it is now
per cent.
JL So, all you are saying to Russell is it could be a lot worse?
PM: No, I am saying to Russell we have had huge tax cuts through the
1980s for people like him and they have stayed there. Those rates
have stayed there. The bottom rate was 30 per cent it is now 20 per
cent. The middle rates in their high thirties have declined. The top
rate has gone from 60 to 47 per cent. The company rate has gone
down from 46 per cent under John Howard to 36 per cent under us and
we provide full dividend relief for share holders as well. So, whether
you are in small business or you are an employee, John, this is second
lowest taxed country in the western world. Our tax revenue to GDP is
the second lowest in the western world than is an OECD statistic.
JL I understand all this, but it still doesn't placate the Russells of the
world who feel that they are getting a raw deal and he would be better
off on the dole. Not a healthy feeling to have is it?
PMV: But, I mean, that is not' the majority view obviously, otherwise we
wouldn't have a workforce of eight million people. It is a view, but I'm
telling Russell that revenue, that is all the revenue of the
Commonwealth under this Government has fallen sharply and that the
tax rates themselves have fallen, including the ones that most affect
him that is the tax free threshold which has gone up from $ 4500 to
around, from memory, $ 5400. The bottom rate from 30 per cent down
to 20 per cent, and substantial tax relief in the middle ranges which
affects him.
JL So, you are saying it could be worse? I mean, that probably is the only
retort it is not a bad one, I am not criticising it but that is what you
are saying?
PMV: I'm not saying it could be worse, I'm saying it is much better than it
was. Much better than it was. 0 4 P . IKIC/ 
T: 26. Jul .95 1 7 No0. CC4 P -C
12
C: I have three children and we are expecting our fourth child in January.
That means we will miss out on the maternity leave that will be coming
in in February, is that right?
PM . I'm not sure, I'd need to go and check that one. Let me just say I was
very pleased to be able to announce the new maternity allowance in
the Budget.
C: I'm just wondering how the country can afford to pay that and where is
the money coming from?
PM: We are not only paying it, but we are actually in surplus as well. I am
very proud of the fact that we have supported families.
C: But, wasn't this brought in before in the 1 970s?
PM: No, we have need had ever in this country, ever, a maternity
allowance. This is to help families through the period when a child is
born, when a woman has that time away from the labour market, from
work, in that period afterwards. It is for six weeks and our objective
over time is to move it up to 12. But, that fits in with a broader set of
policies to support families like yours. That is, the Family Allowance
Supplement or additional family payment, the general family allowance
and, of course, if you have a child in child care for instance, the
generalised child care rebate or the fee relief. Can I say to you, I have
seen much of my mission as a Federal Minister and as Prime Minister
of being out there on the front foot to help families, to help people on
low to middle incomes. Because the people on high incomes can help
themselves. I am talking about people on low to middle incomes.
Giving them a right to medical protection through Medicare, having
that income support when they need it, giving them support now when
they have a child and we'are doing all that with government spending
to GOP that is government spending in the whole economy at really,
In an underlying sense now, at early 1 970s levels. On the forward
estimates of this Government's budget in two years time, we will have
government spending back to the level that existed before the Whitlam
government came into office and yet we have got that targeted to help
the people who really most need it.
JL: Are you getting the answer you want here?
C: Not really.
PM; What would you like? What would you like me to say? We can't
afford it, it is a shocking thing to pay money to families?
C: Well, we decided to have this child because we think we can afford it.
PM: Good. TEL 
TEL 13
C: And I don't expect any money from the Government just because we
are having this baby, well we won't be getting it anyway.
PM: Do you class yourselves as a high income earner?
C: No. We are just an average family, we are paying a mortgage.
, JL: Can I ask how old you are?
C: 32.
JI. OK and you husband is working and you don't expect any money from
the Government, so what you are saying in essence is you have
decided to have this child because you believe you could afford it and
why don't other people wait until they can afford to have children?
PM: Well, your husbands income must be such that you can believe that.
But lets say
C: He works very hard, and he pays a lot of taxes.
PM: OK, but where our policies..
C: We are paying for it anyway in the long run aren't we.
PM: Our policies are directed, but it is a matter of who pays. It is a matter
of whether the tax treatment and the benefits of tax payers with
children are more advantageous than the tax treatment and payments
to tax payers without children. It is called horizontal equity. On this
question of horizontal equity, we believe that tax payers with children
or people that have children through direct benefits from the
government get supported. Our policies are directed towards one,
two, three and four children it ' is* paid per child. The Family
Allowance Supplement or additional family payment is paid per child.
The policy of the Government is to look after the children, but in doing
that, of course, we buttress the income of the family. I am surprised
you don't think it is worth doing.
JL I'm not sure that she doesn't think it is worth doing, you are just asking
can we afford it.
PM: No, the lady said to me that she doesn't think that the Government
should pay for it.
C: Well, the national deficit is so bad..
PM: No, but it isn't so bad.
C: on all these things and, I mean, If it is a great thing why can't we
introduce it later and why does it have.. T: 26. JuI2.5 1 33 N o. 00 4 1 3/ 
TEL: 26. JUI. 95 1: 33, No.(
14
PM: Let me just say, the national deficit isn't so bad. That is the Budget is
in surplus and government debt to GDP is amongst the lowest in the
western world.
C: Well, don't you think that money would go better towards
unemployment programs.
PM: We are already doing those and we have had this year a very big
underspend on government programs because we have got so many
more people back to work. You realise that in Working Nation which is
the big program I introduced when I said we wouldn't leave the
unemployed behind, particularly the long term unemployed, we have
just in this Budget yielded substantial savings from the forward
estimates because of the underspends here because so many people
have gone back to work. So, I don't think we should worry about the
state of the Budget. The Budget is in surplus and these are
affordable. Can I just say this to you, when John Howard said a week
ago in his headland speech he was going to have deep cuts in
government spending, he means on these programs. He won't pay for
payments to families, he'll cut payments of pharmaceutical payments
for pensioners which is the big burgeoning growth area of the health
scheme. He'll cut payments to schools because they are the only
places you can now cut government spending without really to raise
money and where there is the room to raise some money.
JL: There would be a lot of people who would think that you could cut
government spending in the area of welfare.
PM: Well, we are now delivering John..
JL: Are you still there?
C: Yes.
JL OK
PM:. You could have said that and made that stick in 1983 or 1984, but after
the 1980s reforms and the targeting of the social security system.
Remember the big fight we had over the assets test.
JL: Yes.
PM: After the introduction of those things, and the fact that we now have a
targeted system, for instance, just take the additional family payment.
We pay it from about $ 17000 and it cuts out at about $ 26000 or
$ 27000. In other words it is targeted. We don't pay it to people who
are getting $ 37000 or $ 40000. J004 P .141 -C0 
TEL: 26 JUI.' D5 1: 33 No 0C4 P. 1r. i
JL OK, would you just explain to our caller, my listener there, again what
you mean and if you could do it briefly because we have got a bundle
of calls, but I think it would interest her and it would clarify it, when you
talked about tax payers with children as opposed to tax payers without
children?
PM: It IS this notion of horizontal equity. Do you provide the same level of
assistance in tax and direct payments to a tax payer without children or
do you recognise the burden of a family having children?
JL Ok, is that clear to you?
C. I don't think it could help the people that are unemployed if they had
more children.
PM: No, that is a different argument again. Let me just assure you of this,
we have got an increase in unemployment benefits now which has
been a massive Improvement over what it was when John Howard and
company left office. We have now got these labour market programs
which he says he will cut, these are the ones that are directed towards
pulling the long term unemployed back into the labour market. In fact,
we are having so much success with them, a quarter of all the jobs this
year have gone to long term unemployed people. That is, people
unemployed for 12 months or more.
C: Well, you haven't bought my vote, Mr Keating.
PM: No, but I don't think I'm going to am I?
C: No.
PM;. That is the point. I don't* mind having discussions with people of the
conservative bias, but understand this, there are families out there that
need support and we are giving it to them.
C: Yes.
PM: Thank you.
JL: A fax from Queensland. Mr Keating, why does your government
contrive to discriminate against the white working class man in regard
to a number of issues, but not in the least Aboriginal legal aid,
particularly In civil cases such as the one at the moment regarding the
poker machine fiasco. Are you aware of the poker machine fiasco?
PM: No, I'm not John.
JL: Two Aboriginal women having a fight over who put the 10 cent piece in
the slot and who is entitled to the $ 48000. It is now in front of the
Supreme Court, both of them are in front of the Supreme Court 
TEL 26 . Ju I 951: 3N. 0 1F/
16
because of Aboriginal legal aid. H-e finds that offensive when he
couldn't get the same thing.
PM: Legal aid is generally available. It is set up on a criteria, we have
added financially to the budget of legal aids dramatically through the
1 980s and 1990s. It is there for people when they really need it, there
are tests of course.
JL:* Yes, but it is not there for civil cases such as this, but Aboriginal legal
aid is. That is the point he is making. If he wanted to have a fight
about who put the money in the poker machine, he would be paying
his own way whereas both these Aboriginal women in front of the
Supreme Court, which doesn't come cheap, are being supported by
Aboriginal legal aid and Aboriginal legal aid is supported by the tax
payers of Australia.
PM; I must have missed that one, but the fact of the matter is that, of
course, there are Aboriginal legal aid services there and they are there
because as a class of individuals they suffer more discrimination than
is the case with the rest of the community and so the Aboriginal legal
aid services have mattered enormously to improving the equity of to
the lot of Aboriginal people. But, I mean, there is not much profit on
this program going to every case and who has got what.
JL: No, there Isn't but you understand the point he is making.
PMV: I'd have to know the details to understand the point. John, I
understand the broad point he is making and whether it is right or not I
don't know.
JL: Yes, it is right, but to another fax. Can the Government assist private
health fund members through tax rebates. We are forced to withdraw
because of Increasing fees, the cost of Medicare will increase
dramatically anyway.
PM: Tax rebates will only do two things. It will lift the cost of private
hospital services and lift the incomes of medical practitioners
practising privately in those hospitals. It will not improve the overall
tone of the health system and that is the key issue. What will happen,
people will pay, they think they get a tax deduction, it will simply just be
paid away in higher premiums. This is the point we have been arguing
with the Coalition now for a decade,
JL: I understand the point he is making however. If people are In a
position to be able to afford their own health care, if they were
encouraged to take out their own health insurance, wouldn't that then
be for the betterment of the people who can't afford their own health
care, wouldn't it improve the quality of their treatment. I 3,3 N o 0 0 4 P 16 
TEL: &gt;. cju1. 1: f4lo. O04 F. 17/ 2L_
17
PMV: We have got a proportion of the community, a substantial proportion
taking private health insurance.
JL Yes, but again, like saving they are not given much incentive to do it.
PM. A lot of this comes back to the whole principle of community rating.
You have heard of this expression community rating and that is
whether Australia should have a private market in private insurance.
That really means whether young, healthy people pay less for their
insurance than older less well people. In other words, there is a
market. Now, this community has generally taken the view that the
private insurance rates should the be same for everybody and that
older people in the system were once younger people who have paid
for 30 or 40 years and now expect the system to support them in their
old age and where they have health problems. But, while ever that
situation remains the young and healthy people will say, ' well, what's
the point of me paying this premium when I'm not likely to be using the
system'. So, what happens is the system generally gravitates towards
older, less well people. So, It has more costs.
C: I'd just like to say to Paul that he is doing a great job. I have been all
over Australia with my job.
JL: Where are you now?
C: Emerald, Queensland. I've been up to the Territory and down to NSW.
I've seen what his money has done and where it has been, but a point
for the people is that what would they rather a government that does
the work with a bit of irritation or a government that bows to all of the
do-gooders and all the righteous groups? If they done that there
would be no progress, there would be no jobs, there would be no
wealth for the country, they would just be bowing to all the do-gooders.
JL: So you are happy with the Prime Minister?
C: Yes
PM: Well thank you for the compliment. I mean I am not sure there is such
a great body of Labor voters out there in John's audience. But you are
one. Thank you, indeed.
C: I have seen with the Aboriginal funding, I have been up to the
Territory, I have seen all the new houses in places like Elliott and
Katherine and Darwin and all that and there is a lot of funding there.
But if you bow to all the do-gooders, there would be no money for the
houses and the builders who build them well they wouldn't have any
jobs because there would be no houses to build.
JL: Okay. 
TEL: 2 L. Ju I. 5 1 : 337 N o. 004 F,. 1 2 C
PM; Thank you for the compliment, but the main thing is that this is
economy has grown at a clip for now 12 or 13 years, bar 18 months,
and it is going to grow for the next 3 years and we are now at a
sustainable rate of economic growth. You see how John Howard got
into the Governor of the Reserve Bank for having the temerity to ping
his cynical lie that we had five minutes of sunshine. Of course, we
have had years of high economic growth. We have had, now, nearly
3 and 1/ 2 years of economic growth since the recession and we have
got 3 years in the forward estimates ahead of us and we have now, I
think, succeeded with the policy changes this year of actually getting
the economy back to a sustainable growth rate, taking the pressure off
interest rates and getting the Budget back into surplus and seeing low
inflation pinned into place, of course, through productivity rising in the
economy and through the Accord with the unions. I mean, we have
got a most stable economic situation, growth situation, the likes of
which we have rarely seen.
JL: Okay, our caller in Emerald, thank you very much. It was good to hear
from you and I am sure the Prime Minister was delighted to hear from
you too. Just back to your statement about you wouldn't find too many
Labor voters out there in John Laws' audience. If you wouldn't, you
have got a big problem because this is a big audience, 70 stations
across Australia. What makes you think that there aren't going to be
too many of your supporters?
PM: I think there probably are, but they are not as noisy as some of the
others. They don't ring in and make faxes and needle you after the
program.
JL: Well I don't know that I am entitled to be needled today. I didn't ask
the questions, they did.. This one comes from Michael Tyres,
" A number of years ago you wanted to introduce", and we are going to
have to be very quick we have got'about a minute to answer this " a
GST package into our country. You failed to do so with your Party.
Why don't you bite the bullet, introduce a GST package into Australia
and fix the overseas debt problem?"
PM: Because that wouldn't fix the overseas debt problem. Rather than
simply put more revenue into the system, what I did then after that
policy change failed was to actually cut the size of Government
spending. So, now we don't need a large second base in the tax
system to fund the Government sector. It is now much smaller, it is
much smaller and doesn't need a second tax base. So, when I was
refused a 081-type tax in the middle 1980s, I took the hard way out
and that was actually go root and branch through the Commonwealth
spending and outlays and cut it back.
JL: Okay.
PM:-And now we don't need it. 
TEL: 26.3u1 .95 1 : 33 No .004 F 1'
19
J L. When will you be available to do this again, I know you can't wait?
PMR Well I don't mind doing it, as long as you make all the others do it too.
JL: What, John Howard?
PM: Well no soft rides for others.
JL: No, no, well I don't give anybody a soft ride.
PM: Okay, I will keep you up to that.
JL: Okay, well it would be good because there is a bundle of questions
here.
PMV: Well I mean, look,
JL: There is a board full of questions.
PM: I mean let me just repeat one of the things I started and just say, John,
you have just got to look at the last week, you know. A ship we
couldn't have hoped to produce 20 years ago; a world ranking set of
studios, the largest in an English language country outside of America;
$ 1 billion from the Ford Motor Company; American Express, the
largest credit card company in the world, basing its whole East Asian
operation in Australia; 50,000 jobs for the month; and, the stock market
hitting a high for the year. I mean it is not a bad week.
JL: No, it was a terrific week and I think the people should be aware of it
and proud of Australia too in these instances. But they still, obviously,
have a lot of concerns and it would appear that the main concern is the
overseas debt.
PM;* But that again, like we say, you move up in this country by getting a bit
of debt and buying a house and you move up as a country by getting a
bit of debt and buying some investment.
JL Interesting analogy and I hope the people take it to heart and
Prime Minister good to talk to you.
PM: Thank you, John.
JL Are you coming to my party?
PM: It's your party and you'll cry if I don't. Won't you and I wouldn't like to
see you in tears. I think there is somebody else who used to cry all the
time and I just couldn't stand it.
JL So does that mean yes? 
26. Jul. 95 1: 33 No. 004 P. 20/ 20
PM: I think it does.
JL: Good on you.
PM: Okay.
JL: Thanks for your time.
PM: But you have got to be choosy about the other people who are coming.
JL: Oh well, do you want to check the list, do you?
PM: Well if you offer it to me.
JL: Okay. Bye.
ends TEL: 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RON EDWARDS, RADIO 6PR, 26 JULY 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RE: There's a lot happening on the national political scene recently,
including the impact of the Queensland election. I'm joined on the line
by Prime Minister Paul Keating. How are you?
PM: How are you, Ron?
RE: Now, Paul, first of all what is your assessment of the outcome of the
Queensland election. We now know that Wayne Goss is back
narrowly, is that a setback for you?
PM: I don't think necessarily it's a setback. Put it this way it would have
been a clear setback for the Labor Party nationally had he lost but he
hasn't. It is a reduced majority and we always like to see our majorities
maintained and I just think it means that he has made clear he will try
to understand why there was such a vote of disaffection with his
Government and I think from a Federal perspective we will be
interested in what we believe that sort of inquiry brings.
RE: Yes, he certainly said that, there will be an inquiry. Ass you move
around the electorate, people like Wayne Goss and yourself get
messages from the voters about the things that are worrying them.
What are they saying to you at the moment, the worries that they have
got as far as the economy or politics are concerned?
PM: Well I think there is doubt about the economy and this is the great pity
I think because we have just had, you know, confirmation again today
of low inflation, in today's consumer price index. We have got the
economy running at a sustainable rate of growth. We are seeing, last
week, 50,000 job growth for the month, bringing employment, since the
last election, to 630,000, which is an enormous number. We are
seeing strong investment, the stock market hit its high for the year a
week ago. So I do think, though, there is this view about that, you
know, John Howard put around this sort of terrible little lie which the
Reserve Bank Governor exposed, that we are having five minutes of 
2
economic sunshine. Well after the next quarter, we will have had four
straight years of growth. Come the next quarter, we will have had four
straight years of growth since the recession in 1991 and I think the sort
of attempts by the Opposition to sabotage the economy, to say that all
is not well, it does eke its impact on the community.
RE: Are you satisfied with the gains on the interest rates front because
there was some doubt earlier in the year as to what the direction of
rates would be? We have seen recently some encouraging signs.
What does the future hold for us then?
PM: Well I think the most encouraging sign there was basically the long
rates which are set in the market place. We saw them come down by
about a percentage point, that is the ten year bonds, and that was
because of the Budget coming back into surplus and the main guide to
where interest rates will go in the longer term is inflation and demand.
We have got inflation today making clear that we have basically left
behind now high inflation, further confirmation of low inflation. You
would remember that we did the Accord a couple of weeks ago, which
says that the wages system will be run to produce 2 to 3 per cent
inflation.
RE: So you think you have been able to lock in some industrial stability and
reasonably moderate wage increases?
PM: I thought the Accord Mark VIII was a phenomenal document. I mean
here we are in a period of industrial disputation lower now than at any
time since we have been keeping the records and with the trade union
movement endorsing the Reserve Bank's inflation target of 2 to
3 per cent. That is a tremendously encouraging outcome for
Australians, I believe, and we are seeing the economy come to a
sustainable rate of growth, Ron. So you put all those things together
and I think people can look forward to, and of course that phenomenal
employment coming through, I think people can look to the
continuation of stable, low inflationary, economic growth with
employment.
RE: Does it worry you when we get our monthly balance of payments
result?
PM: Well some worry me more than others, of course. But the Opposition
are going around talking about the Current Account Deficit as if it is
the only economic indicator which matters. 2 1/ 2 years ago the only
indicator which matters was the right to a job unemployment and the
Government committing itself at the election to bring Australia, to bring
more employment to this country. As I said to you, we have had
670,000, I think I said earlier 630,000. It is actually 670,000 jobs in
2 1/ 2 years. So that is the hardest thing for any Government in
Australia to deliver, that is growth and employment. That is what,
in fact, we have delivered. And I think about the current account, 
people look at that and the debt and if they take John Howard at his
word, they would swear blind the debt was their's. If BHP decides to
spend $ 1.8 billion on a new iron plant in Western Australia, that is for
the BHP Board to decide. It is for lenders abroad to decide whether
they want to lend, that company, or this economy, on those sorts of
investments. In other words, they're consenting decisions between
consenting adults. For the Government to be saying to BHP how dare
you build a new iron plant. Of course if BHP wants to build an iron
plant, that is for them. But this notion that the debt belongs to every
Australian person. I mean when Alan Bond's company failed to be
able to meet its obligations to the tune of $ 3 to $ 4 billion, from
memory, there were no mums and dads picking that up. It was picked
up by the banks who lent from abroad.
RE: Well if we can talk tactics for a minute and about John Howard.
John Hewson gave you a large target with Fightback and all its
ramifications. John Howard has declared that he will give you very
little targets and when you look at it as a tactic, it seemed to work for
Mr Borbidge in Queensland and, at this stage, it seems to be working
for John Howard. How do you propose to counter that?
PM: I think the old hardline, right wing, John Howard is coming out, it is
seeping out from the pores of his skin because when he did the
Headland speech, his last one so-called Headland speech the
definition of a Headland speech is the thing you say when you are
saying nothing and get front page coverage. But it has worked so far
for him. But in this last one he said he is going to hop into labour
market reform and have big cuts in Government spending. Now that is
a confirmation that there is no shift in his policy position. Every
Australian person should understand when John Howard talks about
labour market reform, he is talking about cutting the wages of working
Australians. He doesn't believe there should be a no disadvantage
test. See at the moment, under our legislation, if someone makes an
individual contract, or makes an enterprise bargain, we have a no
disadvantage test to make sure that worker, or groups of workers, will
not be worse off. Howard will abolish that and basically push the
minimum, break the Award minimums, which underpin the Australian
industrial relations structure. So he is out there saying, and I think
people should understand this, whenever John Howard says " labour
market reform", read: cutting wages of low to middle income
Australians. That is what he means. When he says, as he did in the
Headland speech as well, " we are going to have a large cut in
Government spending", read: cuts to pharmaceutical payments for
pensioners; read: cuts in payments to schools; read: cuts in family
support payments because as Ralph Willis can tell you and I can tell
you having been through the Commonwealth Budget now on about
or 22 occasions, we know the outlays pretty well and the other
Ministers in this country. I can assure you there is no way you can cut
$ 8to$ 10 billion out of Commonwealth spending without cutting 
pensioners pharmaceuticals, or payments to schools, or family
support.
RE: Mightn't John Howard say that you are putting words in his mouth, he
hasn't said all of those things?
PM: No, but he has made that very clear. I mean he has made it clear that
he is going to have he said big cuts in Government spending in the
Headland speech. They're talking about a 1 to 2 per cent change in
GDP. That is somewhere between $ 5 and $ 10 billion. Those sort of
cuts can only come from the areas I am telling you, Ron.
RE: Right.
PM: And I am just saying that advisedly. There are no other areas where
that sort of money can come from. And what he has made very clear
about industrial relations, is that there will be no disadvantage test
that will be gone. The no disadvantage test will be taken away and
you will either take the individual wage contract, or you will take the
sack. Now he has this little twist on it saying " oh well, look, we will
leave people to opt out of the Award system if they wish". He is
presuming that Australians don't know that roughly 1.8 million of them
every year, change jobs. For a start you have got all of the people
leaving school taking up jobs for the first time. You have got migrants.
You have got the people who change jobs. About 1.6 to 1.8 million
Australians change jobs every year. Every time they do, they will lose
the Award protections, lose holiday leave loadings, they will lose the
overtime commitments, all of the other elements which make up the
Award will be put asunder and people will be pushed back onto some
unspecified minimum.
RE: Paul, can we now move to your side of politics? Carmen Lawrence
has sustained some political damage in recent days because of events
here in Western Australia. How do you propose to handle this?
PM: Well she has sustained some damage because you have got the
executive branch of Government extending its long arm by employing
a former judge to inquire. The former judge has been given a job by
Richard Court. It is just the same were I to appoint a
Royal Commission to inquire into what John Howard said to
Malcolm Fraser about " bottom of the harbour" tax schemes. What they
said that night after a Cabinet meeting. What they said on the way
into the Cabinet meeting. What they said in Mr Fraser's office.
RE: Wouldn't she be better advised to actually come out and say what
occurred because, at this stage, it looks as though she is trying to
avoid this inquiry process?
PM: No, I think, what she is doing is defending the right of a Member of
Parliament, a traditional right of a Member of Parliament, and 
Members of Parliament to go about their activities as an executive,
or as a Cabinet, against the wishes of the executive branch of
Government. In other words, she is defending the right of her
Government and her former Government and her former Cabinet
meetings to enjoy the Parliamentary protections away from an
incoming executive Government.
RE: So you would support her current tactic of going through the court
processes?
PM: Yes because you see Richard Court is abusing for a start he is
abusing the taxpayers of Western Australia by blowing this money on
what is essentially only and it is exclusively a political matter. There is
no question of impropriety here, illegality here. It is only a political
matter.
RE: He would say he is trying to get at the truth of what occurred at the
time.
PM: Well I can say I want to get at the truth. Why did John Howard refuse
the so-called telephone book of letters on the " bottom of the harbour"
tax schemes from Bill O'Reilly, the then Tax Commissioner. I could get
to the truth too and set up a Royal Commission into it. Get Mr O'Reilly
back, get Howard back, get Fraser back. You know what would you
think about that?
RE: So your view is, at this stage, you are standing behind
Carmen Lawrence and see how the events work out?
PM: Absolutely and what you have got here is a cynical abuse of power by
the Western Australian Government extending the judge sitting as
the Royal Commissioner is acting for the Government for
Court [ Richard], the Premier. It is not a legal matter. It is not the court
system. It is not the Parliament, or the court system. This is the
executive and this is a matter of principle. That is, whether the
executive has this power, or ought to have this power, to be able to
require a Member of Parliament to come and account, when Members
of Parliament have enjoyed these protections way back into English
and British history.
RE: Right. Paul, just finally very quickly, policy on France in relation to
nuclear testing. Are we doing enough?
PM: Well we have certainly, I think, made it very much more uncomfortable
for the French Government. I think that all Australians were affronted
by the fact that France, a democracy, is itself affronting smaller States
in the Pacific and we have now, by withdrawing our Ambassador, by
curtailing our defence arrangements with them, by now seeing what we
can support in the United Nations on this issue, by proselytising in the
press as I have in France. All these things, I think, have put pressure 
on President Chirac and that pressure is now also coming from the
European States and, more recently, from Japan. I think that is the
thing to do. I have got John Howard who is now these days running
around saying anything that he thinks will suit the moment. Yesterday
he was telling a group of school children that he would suspend
uranium exports to France, when he knows full well that it is not his
Party's policy. He is, at the same time, saying he is thinking about
sending a frigate to Mururoa Atoll. But what happens when the frigate
gets turned around by a French frigate? Do we walk off with our tail
between our legs or do we fire on it. Let me just say this Ron, I don't
think Australians want us to go firing on French ships.
RE: I don't think so.
PM: OK, thanks Ron.
RE: Thanks Paul.
ends 



TEL: I . HUi3. 1 u
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCH IN HONOUR OF SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THlE CENTRAL
COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF VIETNAM
HIS EXCELLENCY MR DO MUOl
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBEiRRA, MONDAY 31 JULY 1995
General -Secretary, it is a great personal as well as an official pleasure to welcome you
and your party to Australia.
I remember very well our first meeting in Ho Chi Mimli City last year. I greatly
appreciated your courtesy to mc that day in travelling a long distance from a provincial
visit you were making to meet me. But this time you have come even further in
support of friendly relations between Australia and Vietnam.
Our meeting in Ho Chi Minh City went well over the time our officials had scheduled,
because we found in our discussion as we have found again today how much
Australia and Vietnam have to learn from each other and how much we can do
together. You have brought with you to Australia a number of senior colleagues and business
people from Vietnam.
Their presence at this lunch and the presence of so many senior Australian
businesspeople reflects thc growing recognition in both our countries of the
importance of this relationship and its potential. They are also very welcome guests.
You have arrived here at an important time for Vietnam and the region.
Last Friday Vietnam became the seventh member of ASEAN. Australia welcomed this
historic development.
We now have a new range of opportunities to build our relationship regionally as well
as bilaterally.
Eventually, we hope Vietnam will participate in the discussions we have been holding
on links between the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement and the Australia-New Zealand
Closer Economic Relations arrangement. 
I ELL: 2
We also welcome the normalisation of relations between Vietnam and the United
States, which was announced early this month. As you know, Gencral-Sccretary, this
is a development Australia has consistently encouraged over manly years.
In fact, Australia's policy in the region has been guided by the conviction that the
region will be stronger, its institutions more resilient and its chanices for prosperity and
peaceful development greater if Vietnam is ffilly engaged in its development.
That is also why we think that in due course Vietnam is a natural member of APEC.
Both Australia and Vietnam have been through a period of deep economic and social
change in recent years.
In Australia, we have committed ourselves to an open economy. deeply integrated with
Asia. Our firture lies ftilly and unambiguously in the Asia-Pacific. For us, there can be
no U-turns.
We havc dismantled the tariff barrier which ring-fenced our country, opened up our
financial markets and embarked on a pro-growth, low-inflation policy with the
cooperation of the trade union movement.
These policies have given us rates of growth among thc highest in the industrialised
world. Vietnam's program of economic reform Doi Moi has also involved economic
restructuring on a large scale. Your successes are evident already, with growth rates
of more than 8 per cent a year, and a real increase in per capita GDP of 26 per cent
between 1990 and 1994.
In other words, the Vietnamese people are already experiencing the tangible benlefits of
this policy.
Your reform program reflects some of the qualities Australians admire most in the
Vietnamese people resilience, determination, an underlying pragmatism and
willingness to change. These are qualities that Australians share.
Australia's relationship with Vietnam is not new.
The war, with all its suffering. left scars which remain in both countries, but which I
believe are healing.
Australia was one of the first western countries to recognise the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam more than 20 years ago.
And we were the first to resume aid after the Cambodia settlement.
We have built a relationship of substance. In 1982 our trade was $ 2 million; ill 1994 it
was $ 402 million.
Australia is the sixth largest foreign investor in Vietnam, with over $ 920 million
invested last year. 
TEL: 3
The companies involved are some of Australia's largest and most experienced like
BlI-P, Teistra and the ANZ Bank as well as smaller innovative businesses.
Our aid program has grown too from $ 10 million in 1990/ 91 to $ 72 million in
1995/ 96. We arc working with Vietnam in health, education and major infrastructure
projects. We witnessed just a short time ago the signing of agreements covering our cooperation
in building the huge My Thuan bridge project and Australia's commitment to draw up
an integrated master plan for the economic development of the Southern Economic
Focal Zone, based on Ho Chi Minh City and Vung Tau.
But the major component of our aid program is education. Currently 450 Vietnamese
are training in Australia and I would like our education links to grow. Because I
strongly share your view that education is the key to both our countrics' fuiture.
Our dialogue has grown and deepened with Vietnam across a wide range of issues.
Ministerial and other official exchanges are miultiplying rapidly.
We were very pleased that the Australian Parliamntary Consultative Delegation was
ablc to visit Vietnam in April this year and to hold very constructive discussions
throughout the country, including opening up a dialoguc on human rights. This was an
important visit and we were grateflu for your cooperation.
I am sure that one great long-term asset in our relationship is the skilled and
resourceful commnunity of around 140,000 Vietnamese Australians. This community
has enriched our country, with people like Professor Ngo Van Long of the Economics
Department at the Australian National University and Thu Nguyen Hoan, the deputy
head of our Office of Multicultural Affairs.
And the community will, I am sure, also enrich our bilateral relationship.
The air services agreement which was signed this morning will help this process. More
than 32,000 Australians many of them Vietnaniese-Australians travelled to Vietnam
in 1994 for business or tourism or to see their families. These personal links will
expand and broaden our relationship.
Australia wants more than a relationship with Vietnam: we want a partnership. One
that reaches across a wide range of official business and people-to-people activities.
One which grows out of a deeper understanding of each other's culture and society.
Your visit is an important milestone to this goal.
We welcome you to Australia. 1 HUq . J zu " 4u vu 1 1 % J_ 



PRIME MINISTER
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
47TH ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE QUEENSLAND GRAINGROWERS
ASSOCIATION, ROMA, 2 AUGUST 1995
I am very pleased to be here, and thank you for inviting me.
Some people thought it was a rather eccentric thing for a Labor Prime Minister
to do to come up to Roma and open the 47th annual conference of the
Queensland Graingrowers Association.
" Not a vote among them", they said. People who mostly feel removed from the
centre of things.
By which I think they meant people who feel their voices are not being heard,
who feel alienated from the political system, who feel the Government is out of
touch. But then, that is an argument for coming not staying away.
It's nothing new for people to feel that governments are remote I daresay it
forms part of the popular definition, and it has done, I suspect, since
governments were invented.
Democratic governments included I reckon within a week of the first popularly
elected person being sent off to represent his electorate, there were people
saying " he's out of touch". Before he got there.
So I don't think that this is a new phenomenon. But nor do I think it is one to
be ignored. It is essential that governments understand what is happening in
communities. Essential that they listen to the people. Essential, above all,
that having listened and having understood, they make policies in the national
interest.
As I've said before: good governments listen, but so do many bad
governments. The difference is in what they do. 
In fact there is only one judgement to be made about all governments and
that is whether the government of the nation has acted in the interests of the
nation. And, by definition, in the interests of the people.
The judgement is when these people were in strife and when their industry
was in strife, did the Government do what a national government should do?
Did it do what was necessary?
Now, I think that in the case of Queensland's farmers, generally speaking, we
have.
And I'm pleased to see that lan MacFarlane said as much yesterday.
Speaking of listening, I was pleased to listen to lan when I first came up here
to look at the drought areas and in fact if you're within 50 metres of lan you're
listening to him. And I'm delighted to be up here listening to him again. He's a
passionate Australian and a formidable advocate for the farming community.
I know there is much more to do. There is always more to do. Whether it is a
farm, an industry, or an entire economy there is always more to do.
I think farmers like yourselves have that at least in common with Prime
Ministers and Treasurers we are both familiar with the sensation that the job
never ends, that we never get to the last chapter, the one where we are
entirely out of the woods.
But if we are diligent and adaptable and hardworking we do get to better times
we do get to comfort zones, we do work our way into a position where we can
begin to make the hopes realities, and a position where we can survive the
hard times.
Let me tell you that is what we have been working towards these last twelve
years. It is what the whole effort has been for: to get Australia onto a pattern of
sustainable growth, to make us more productive and competitive, to make our
economy more diverse and durable, to get more of us working in modern jobs,
more of us trained in modern skills all of us, farmers included, able to share
in the wealth of this country, and the future of this country. And all of us,
farmers included farmers especially able to survive the hard times.
Now I think we've made a lot of progress in this regard. I think we've made
remarkable progress.
But I am not in any doubt and never have been that a lot of Australians do not
share this view.
I am very much aware that the broad data on which governments are obliged
to make their assessments of the nation's economic health do not always tally
with the problems households and communities are having. 
I also know that a healthy stock market does not mean that the same
confidence abounds in Australian communities.
And I know that this applies to rural and urban communities around the
country. I have to say that the broad data have a lot to recommend them and I never
heard a good reason why a government or a Prime Minister should not
advertise national progress and say that in real and comparative terms
Australia is making remarkable progress.
Sure as hell, the Opposition won't say it.
I think Australians should know that Australia has grown in every one of the
last 16 quarters; and that with this economic growth we have had
unprecedented employmet grpwth; and that we have had this with low
* jnfi-atiorn-and we can confidently expect this low inflation growth to-Tcdhtinue.
As the editorial in The Australian said at the weekend " This may be the
healthiest recovery the nation has had certainly in modern times."
It is unprecedented in our modern history we have growth which shows every
sign of being sustainable.
At this point my more experienced listeners will no doubt be preparing
themselves for a recitation of government achievements.
I will spare you the unabridged edition it takes a long time: but allow me to
mention a couple of important recent developments.
Among the good news the Government feels bound to advertise is the level of
Australian productivity it has grown in the last three years at least twice the
rate of New Zealand's. Let me say beware the new cultural cringe to New
Zealand, and beware those who tell you that their labour market is more
efficient than ours.
The second bit of news we find irresistible is savings. For a generation we
have tended to substitute inflation for savings.
The double digit inflation we experienced in the 1970s and early 1980s did
lasting damage to the culture of saving for the future, and it has proved very
hard to re-establish.
But we are now doing that. We've got low inflation that's fundamental. And
with the reforms to superannuation we introduced in the Budget, personal
savings will rise, national savings will increase substantially and I think we
will see a savings ethic emerge in the Australian community. 
These savings directly address our current account problem.
The current account deficit won't go away immediately.
Whose mortgage ever did? Some people win the lottery, but nations don't.
The current account will turn not by a miracle or any stroke of luck or by
wishful thinking. It will turn by saving and investing wisely, by continuing to
work hard, by making the most of our resources by insisting, even if we make
a fetish of it, that we stick to the path of sustainable, low inflation long-term
growth. I will stop this good news bulletin there. I want to get back to farmers and, in
particular, grain growers.
And I'd like to get there by this means: I said that national governments ought
to be judged by what they do for the national interest and the nation's people.
I said, beware of those who only talk about listening. Beware of those who
pretend they can satisfy everyone's need, who pretend they can be all things
to all people.
Now I know that many Australians are not feeling the full effects of the good
news I have just broadcast.
And I know that there are people preying on their disillusionment, feeding their
frustration with messages of gloom and despair and by implication suggesting
that, if only the government would do a couple of simple things, there would be
bounties for everyone.
The fact is that just now we are all coming to terms with a new kind of
Australia. An Australia in which we have prolonged economic growth without
inflation not a boom, not another sequence of wage-price spirals, but
sustainable growth.
It is the sort of growth which will enable us to plan and invest as a nation;
realise more and more of our national ambitions and survive the downturns
much better.
And in the end that means personal returns more and better jobs, more
security, more prosperity, better services, better communities.
It is the sort of growth I might also say which has been made possible by
Australians' own hard work, sacrifice and adaptability over the last decade.
Low inflation, higher productivity, saving through superannuation these
require government decisions, and often difficult decisions; but above all they
have required a real effort from Australians.
The sort of effort for which Australian farmers have long been admired. 
Farmers surely know better than anyone the value of things I have been
talking about.
And I sincerely hope that they also know the Government knows the value of
farmers. There are two ways to measure their value.
You can do it with figures.
Rural exports contribute about $ 20 billion annually to Australia's export
earnings. That's about 35 per cent of the total.
Of that we estimate that the 1995 harvest of wheat and coarse grains will be
worth about $ 4 billion.
It means that for all the changes to the structure of the economy, and all the
essential diversification, rural Australia remains a very big player. And it
always will.
The other way of measuring the value of farmers is by their contribution to the
spirit of the country. By the example they set.
Some of these people who are growing the $ 4 billion harvest have been in the
drought for as long as five years.
They have endured extreme hardship and real despair.
But they have stuck in there and, with the rain, they have planted nearly
million hectares and, all being well, they will harvest about 25 million tonnes.
The toughness and spirit of Australia's farming families should be an
inspiration to the rest of Australia.
And I think it is.
And that is one very good reason as good as their productivity and efficiency,
as good as the value of their harvests why Australia's farming families must
survive. They are essential to the national psyche.
Some, I know, will not be able to stay on the land. But this Government is
determined to see that the vast majority do.
It is one of the great challenges of the next decade or so: to see that the
100,000 or so farming families of Australia are not replaced by a thousand or
so companies. 
I read somewhere that agriculture and grazing in Australia has caused the
extinction of 78 species of plants.
When you think about for it for a while, that becomes a very sad fact. Because
extinction is irreversible. These are bits of our universe, pieces of the great
design, gone forever.
And if you think about it a bit longer you think we have to make sure that what
has happened to these plants does not happen to our farmers.
It's a challenge for all of us and I'm sure we won't fail it.
I think the last year or so has demonstrated that the farmers of Australia and
the Government have the capacity to work effectively together.
In fact, looked at objectively, I think the last twelve years have demonstrated
that. But what is so encouraging is the expansion of our collaborative effort.
And I hope that the thinking on both sides has caught up with the
contemporary reality.
Canberra is indeed a long way from here. And here is not Labor's heartland.
But, whatever, rural Australia thinks of the Government, the Government thinks
well of rural Australia and when rural Australia needed help we did our very
best to provide it. We still are.
That is not a plea for thanks. What we are doing is no more than a
government should do. We should not just listen we should work in
partnership.
Among other reasons, I say it to make the point that the next time we hear the
fashionable anti-government refrain which has swept America and is getting
louder here, I hope we can agree to at least say hang on, where else but from
government will we get the help we need? I hope we can agree to eliminate
the irrational and misinformed and prejudiced from our political debate.
The fact is that while governments can't do everything, there is no substitute
for them when it comes to a lot of the essentials.
Here in Queensland, 5,500 farm families are receiving Government assistance
at the rate of nearly $ 2 million a week. Across eastern Australia we have
committed nearly $ 600 million.
Large areas of eastern Australia, including many parts of Queensland, have
received good autumn rains. 
But we recognise that some parts of central Queensland are again in
desperate need. We recognise that even those farmers who have got the rain
they needed, now need help to rebuild.
We are under no illusion that there is no more to be done.
There is always more to be done!
Nor do we think that helping farmers through the drought is the only job we
have to do in rural Australia.
I said earlier that Australia's rural industries continue to be of primary
importance to the national economy, and Australian farming families of equal
significance to the national fabric.
We want to see Australian farms and Australian farming communities flourish
and grow in the 21 st century.
Farming families are a great national resource. It follows that the land they
farm must be able to sustain their use of it.
There can scarcely be a more important issue for Australian farmers than this
and it is no less important for the Government.
I don't believe there is anyone in this room who does not believe that our
agriculture should be sustainable agriculture. And if by a simple snap of their
fingers they could make if sustainable,_ Fiar sure that is what everyone would
do.
We need a collective national snap of the fingers. Not to do it, but to resolve
to do it.
We should recognise at once that this will be a difficult process. It will be a bit
like farming; there will be ups and downs, set-backs, disappointments.
But if any Australians know how to live with difficulty and endure a protracted
struggle it is Australian farmers.
I think we should take to the effort for sustainable development this sort of
spirit. Whenever we talk about the degradation of our land we tend to sit in
judgement on earlier generations of farmers and often the judgements are
harsh. I am inclined to think that we should take a more positive view. They had the
courage, ambition and energy to take on the land, and their efforts were
substantially responsible for the nation's prosperity. 
Their efforts made them legendary Australians. We now need the efforts of
this generation of Australian farmers to make the country not only prosperous,
but sustainable which means that there will still be farmers on the land
and 100 years from now.
Do this, and to those farmers of the future you will be legendary.
The partnership between Australian farmers and the Australian Government in
the National Landcare Program has been one of the great phenomena of the
recent times.
And it has been phenomenal. Not only because it has drawn so many farmers
into the movement; and not only because this has had the effect of improving
our land management practices.
The remarkable thing about Landcare is that it has tapped the passion of
farming Australians for the land itself. We have seen an incredibly swift
change in the culture of Australian farming and that has created an infinitely
more fertile environment for further change.
A more scientific approach to the land has implications for productivity, for the
quality of our products and therefore their success in export markets, for the
viability of farms and therefore of farming communities.
Of course it has also had the effect of bringing farmers into the centre of the
debate about the environment and that is wher* e they should be, where they
must be if we are to reach the right decisions about the land we live in.
In recent times, Australian farmers and the Australian Government have also
worked together very effectively to put Australia's case against the market
distorting subsidies of the United States.
No doubt many of you here are aware of the work being done by the Farm Bill
Working Group to encourage change in US agricultural policies that
significantly affect our interests. We have had considerable successes. While
we should not over-estimate our influence, nor should we under-estimate our
successes. And we certainly must continue. In particular we have to press for the EEP
and the Dairy Export Incentive Program to be dismantled.
Again, what matters is the collaborative environment we have established
between the Government and the industry. It provides us with the necessary
condition for doing so much more.
In that context, I have to say that nothing has improved the environment in
which we work so much as those major early reforms of a Labor Government. I
mean those perennial structural problems which faced Australian agriculture. 
Progressively dismantling the tariff wall has reduced the burden that is borne
by our internationally competitive industries including agriculture.
Floating the dollar delivered the biggest increase in competitiveness ever
achieved in this country with labour changes, a 40 per cent increase since
1983.
And our greater competitiveness is not simply due to the nominal depreciation
of the exchange rate.
The Accord has meant that the depreciation did not simply translate into higher
wages. The Accord has meant permanent increases in our international
competitiveness. It has meant much more as well in productivity, flexibility
and creativity, and industrial harmony. The last year has not only been a year
of growth it has also been a year which recorded the lowest rate of industrial
disputes since World War II.
The benefits to Australia, including rural Australia, are immeasurable.
I wouldn't be doing the Government justice if I did not remind you as well of the
benefits that will flow from the Uruguay Round and APEC.
For example, the Uruguay Round provides for a total reduction of 36 per cent
in the quantity of subsidised grain exports and for a reduction of 21 per cent in
expenditure on export subsidies.
At the same time Australia has been leading the way in the formation and
development of APEC. With the Bogor Declaration we have a framework
within which free trade can be developed in the most dynamic economic area
in the world. The benefits to Australia, not least to Australia's grain growers,
will be enormous.
Let me conclude by addressing a couple of the issues which specifically
concern the grains industry. Our objectives might be summarised as growth,
competitiveness and self-reliance.
We want to see increased production and access to markets; institutional and
market arrangements which maximise the competitiveness of the Australian
industry; and an industry willing and able to take responsibility for its own
affairs. To these ends we have deregulated the domestic wheat market and reoriented
the Australian Wheat Board away from being solely a bulk supplier and
towards differentiated product. The Board now has the ability to engage in
value-adding of wheat and wheat products.
Without going into details, grain growers can also expect major benefits to flow
from the recent competition policy agreement between the Commonwealth and
the States. 
I know Bob Collins wants to hear the industry's views about new marketing
arrangements before he puts considered options before the Government; and
we are expecting to hear these views soon after a series of grower meetings in
September.
The ultimate objective is to allow growers every chance to seek out production
and market opportunities, and the point of competitiveness is to help farmers
reach this objective without hindrance or unwarranted costs.
A self-reliant industry means one in which government participation is limited
to ensuring that any clear public interest requirements are met.
It also means an industry which is sustainable in an agronomic, economic and
environmental sense.
The drought has dramatically reduced grain production and this has led us to
undertake the biggest peacetime importation of grain in Australia's history.
Some 390,000 tonnes of whole grain has arrived in Australian ports since last
December and there is potential for another 100,000 tonnes under existing
import permits.
I know that is not a fact calculated to please people in this room.
I know that some of you have argued that the Government should divert some
of our export grains to domestic use.
But we took the view that the costs of this would be too high. It would damage
our relations with established customers. It would also be a bad business
decision because we can import the necessary grain for a lower price than we
are receiving on the export market.
We do not believe imports constitute a long-term threat to traditional suppliers
to the domestic market, if for no other reason than the much higher cost of
shipping and handling imported grain.
We understand that the issue of imported grain creates imperatives for our
quarantine and inspection services, we have therefore developed protocols to
prevent the introduction of exotic pests, diseases and weeds.
We have also developed appropriate cartage arrangements such as secure
transport systems and dust suppression measures and these will be trialed in
November. 
While we are vigorously protecting our national interest in quarantine matters,
we must also be mindful of our broader interests where Australia is currently
challenging the legitimacy of import standards in a number of countries and
our success will rely heavily on demonstrating that similar decisions affecting
our own industry have an objective scientific basis.
I will finish with these few remarks. Like other sectors of Australian industry,
Australian agriculture has made extraordinary adjustments in recent years.
Australian farmers have responded to the challenges of a rapidly changing
Australian and international economy.
They have proved their adaptability and at the same time confirmed what we
have always known about them that they are not only highly efficient, but
highly resilient and durable.
It has been one of the very beneficial by-products of the great economic
changes of recent years, that the relationships between the national
Government and Australian industry and the Australian workforce have been
substantially redefined.
This is true of our relationship with rural industry and nothing is more
important than that we continue to develop this relationship.
The fact is that we can't succeed without each other. We do have a common
interest and it is in the national interest that we recognise this.
In recent times the drought has dominated at least the public side of our
partnership; but it won't end with drought; and I look forward to developing with
you new strategies for the prosperity of rural Australia in the better times that
surely lie ahead.
Even allowing for future droughts and all the other problems which regularly
beset Australia's farmers, the potential is virtually unlimited.
The farmers in this room and their families are overdue for some rewards and I
can assure you we will do every practicable thing to see that they come your
way. Thank you. 



TEL: 2 RAug .954: 06 No .012 P. 01
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, ROMA BUNGIL CULTURAL CENTRE, ROMA,
2 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, Fred Daly died today.
PM: Yes. I was very sad about that Fred was a great Labor person, a
great soldier, a great supporter of the Labor faith. He carre to the
Parliament in 1943, he saw the last years of the War, he was in the
Chifley Government, and, of course, he was a Minister in the Whitlam
Government. And he was one of those people who kept the
continuity between Labor Governments you know, the link between
Curtin and Chifley, to Whitlam, and then on to the rest of us. And
throughout his retirement, of course, he encouraged other Australians
to understand the Parliament, and the Government, but most
especially the Labor Party. I know his family will be very distressed
at his loss, as will many-Labor people.
J: Prime Minister, what are you saying about your other Labor colleague
in Western Australia?
PM: Just that he's the clown we have in Western Australia. John H-oward
has a circus over there...
J: What would you like to see done?
PM: I object to people speaking to racist, anti-Semitic organisations like
the League of Rights. And he has persisted in doing this, and it
reflects poorly on'the Labor Party, and I have made that position
clear in the past.
J: ( inaudible) spoken to ' Campbell lately?
PM: No. 
TEL: 2. Ru9.95 4: 06 No. 012 P. 02
2
J: Have you taken his comments about you personally?
PM: Its been on before you know this is not the first time.
J: Can you intervene?
PM: I have got a Party that has got mature structures. I don't have to
scurry away like John Howard did from Perth. You know, I saw
John Howard in Sydney at the Miss Saigon show the premiere on
Saturday night, and I said ' Clark Kent must have grabbed you from
behind a curtain how did you get here on time?". He must have left
that Western Australian conference at such a speed, leaving what
Reg Withers calls a civil war behind him. You see, what's on in the
Western Australian Liberal Party is something akin to what was on in
the Labor Party in the 1950s it's a major party split. This is not an
altercation this is a major party row a major split. And that, I think.
Is a real burden for the Liberal Party that in one of its States they
are completely at war.
J: Are you concerned Graeme Campbell has taken attention away from
the Liberal split?
PMV: I think that the Liberal split is so great that it will take more than even
Graeme Campbell's eccentricities to divert attention away from it.
J: But it must be a burden to you?
PM: I am terribly burdened here this morning. I'm just broken-hearted
just grief-stricken.
J: Are you concerned over the escalating diplomatic row with France?
PM; I'm concerned to see that the French understand the Australian
protest, and they are starting to register that now. And the recall of
the Abassador is, I think, recognition of the fact that the
Government's protest and indeed, the protest of all Australians has
been registered in France. Now, it's effecting now French business
with the region, it is affecting French standing in the region, and the
French don't like it. But we don't like their capricious decision to
continue to detonate nuclear weapons.
J: Is there any problem in this protest excluding a company? is it
breaking the law for political reasons?
PM: No. You can't... mean, what offends us about France is that it is a
u" 11iUU1rdcy. * TOU expect. aemocracies to Denave Dexter inan artronting
smaller nations, and doing it particularly in this way outside it's own
metropolitan area. So, I think, this sort of admonition is the price the
French are going to have to wear. 
TEL: 2. Ru9.95 4: 06 No. 012 P. 01'
3
J: Prime Minister, do you have any expectations the French will
retalliate?
PM. I'm not sure I'm not sure what they will do. But there is a lot of
reaction as well in Europe, and now North America as well, about the
French decision, and we saw President Chirac in the European
Parliament being affronted by a protgM rdI-ink we are going to
see more of that.
J: Are you concerned that Australia won't have a French Ambassador
now?
PMV: he's been recalled I don't know how long he has been recalled for.
J: Are there going to be further protests by Australia?
PM; We will be registering as we have now as the Labor Party has all
through the 1 980s, we registered our opposition to nuclear testing in
the Pacific, and we will keep it up.
J ( inaudible). . price we are going to have to pay?
PM: I'm not sure what the French will do.
J: They have indicated now they are considering their options?
PM: Okay. But I mean, let them be judged by what they do.
J: ( inaudible).. . will there be consideration now of sending a ( frigate)?
IPM: You send a frigate if you want, . you send a Naval ship for Naval
business, And I don't want to see an Australian Naval ship be turned
away by a French frigate with our tail between our legs. I mean, if
you send a Naval frigate out there, you would send it out there to do
Naval things. Now, I don't think the Australian community want an
Australian ship firing on a French ship, so therefore we won't be
sending a frigate.
J: Senator Ray has hinted that further action against
companies... .( inaudible)...?
PM:. We will be doing more. But I think we are continuing to see what we
might best do to continue to register our protest, and that's obviously
because this Is going to be a rolling matter, we will be considering
these things in that context.
J: Are you worried about the slide in the latest polls? 
TEL: 2. Ruy. 95 4: 06 No. 012 P. 04~
PMV: Oh well I mean there is only ohe poll that matters, that is on election
day.
J: Prime Minister, what are the things Australia could do about it?
PM; Well there is a heap of things and we have mentioned some of them
before. But there is no point here, I don't think, running through them
all.
J. Mr Keating what is it like to be back in Queensland?
PM: I Oh I don't know whether you should say that. I mean the Labor Party
has won. There's that story about Eddie Ward. He walked out of the
ballot room and they said " How did you go? He said, " I walked in".
" What was your majority?" " One." So I mean the fact is who is the
Premier Vpyjn Goss. And I think that the strength that the Goss
Government has brought to the Queensland economy is going to be
well recognised over time and to Its society and certainly with the
Federal Government. Queensland has been one of the great growth
States of Australia and that is coming off the policies of two
Labor Governments. And I mean I think this is what is going to matter
In the end. That is, where the recognition will be.
J: Don't you have to turn Queensland around before you..
PM; I I have never accepted Federal implications.
J: Not necessarily out of Queensland, but as it stands?
PM: The greatest Federal implication in Queensland is there is a Federal
Press Gallery which must find a Federal implication in every matter
that is, the Federal implication.
J: So you are rejecting the notion that you are on the nose here. in
Queensland?
PM: Well the thing is I could have answered all these questions in the
same way, put In the same cycle, at the last Parliament and, I think,
you know, the questioners got their answer on polling day.
J: When are you going to call an election?
PM: Well I have answered that question on umpteen occasions.
J: farmers...
PM:. Whether it is translated Jntd votes, or not, I don't think is singularly
Important. What is important is whether the rural community, whether
the farm community, farming families in Australia, can maintain their
viability through a period of prolonged drought. I mean I think that is 
T4E: 0L6.: 925N. o R. u0 12
the thing which the Graingrowers, Ian ._ Mc~ arlane, under his
leadership, and others have s hUo the ederalGovernment and as
I have said, we have now got around $ 600 million coming into this
program. We have got 5,500 farm families getting income support and
it Is. I think, I hope in areas of particularly exceptional drought
circumstances holding the rural community together. I hope that Is
the case. If we get follow up rains, I mean nothing will break the
drought better than rain, not income from the Federal Government.
But the Government Is there to do its part. To help the farm
community in general and graingrowers keep their families together
and keep their farms together through this period of prolonged
drought, which is now quite exceptional five years in some cases. So
I am hoping It helps and that we get the follow-up rains. I think this is
the sort of partnership that matters. It Is not a case of simply listening.
I made the point, good governments listened and bad governments
listened. But itIs what is actually done. I think what we saw here was
a large change In policy which is working, which was put together
cooperatively by rural organisations and the Federal Government, the
Labor Government. And I am very pleased about it and very proud of
it.
ends TEL 2 Rug .95 



72/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
WORKING NATION JOBS IN SOUTH-WEST QUEENSLAND
I am pleased to announce today a $ 12 million Working Nation Project to put
1000 long-term unemployed people from South-VWest Queensland into jobs.
The positions cover a diverse range of industries in the drought-stricken
southern inland region from the Lockyer Valley west to the South Australian
border. They include skilled and unskilled work, will last for six months, and could lead
to permanent work.
The project, known as " Partnerships Inc.", was funded under the New Work
Opportunities scheme, an iifftive-6f -the Federal Government's Working
Nation employment strategy.
The proposal was submitted by the Southern Inland Queensland Area
Consultative Committee ( ACC), a group of local business, community, union
and government representatives chaired by Toowoomba solicitor Mr Pat
Nunan.
With the effects of the drought on this area, the prospects of business picking
up quickly, without assistance, and giving work to the local unemployed are
still some way down the track.
The pattern of previous recoveries shows that the vast bulk of new jobs go to
new entrants to the labour market, not the long-term unemployed.
This project is a partnership of government, employers and the community
working toward the goal of securing much needed jobs and recovery for this
region and ensuring the long-term unemployed are equipped to compete for
the new jobs.
The placements include work with primary producers, drought landcare
projects, tourist operators, government, the health-care industry and hospitality
and retail employers. 
2
The project area includes Toowoomba, Warwick, Gatton, Crows Nest,
Pittsworth, Clifton, Allora, Stanthorpe, Texas, Goondiwindi, St George,
Dirranbandi, Dalby, Chinchilla, Miles, Roma, Taroom, Wandoan, Charleville,
Cunnamulla, Quilpie and Tambo.
The ACC is one of 62 similar independent groups set up across the country
under Working Nation to generate local employment.
Employers interested in participating in the scheme can contact ACC member
Peter Nicol of Toowoomba Regional Development Corporation on ( 076)
385977. Job seekers will be placed through the local CES.
ROMA 2 August 1995 



73/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
THE HON FRED DALY AO
With the death of Fred Daly, Australia has lost an outstanding Parliamentarian, the
last survivor of the Curtin Labor Government, a man who humanised the
parliamentary and political process and brought it closer to people, and one of our
leading raconteurs and wits.
Fred Daly loved the Parliament. He was a brilliant and frequently very funny
parliamentary speaker. He entered Federal Parliament in 1943 and he served as a
backbencher under John Curtin and Ben Chifley.
Much of his political career was spent during the long years of the Labor Party's
opposition from 1949 to 1972, first as Whip and then as a member of the front bench.
Fred's fighting spirit, his enjoyment of the rough and tumble of parliamentary
exchanges and his humour were very important in maintaining the parliamentary
party's morale during this period.
Fred spent his last three years in active politics as a member of the Whitlam
Government. His work as a Minister and particularly as Leader of the House of
Representatives was marked by his alert mind, quick wit and good humour.
In the twenty years of his retirement, Fred Daly became a much loved writer and
public speaker about Australian politics. His fund of memories and anecdotes
served to keep younger generations informed and interested in the political history of
the 1940' s, 50' s and 60' s where so much of Fred's political life had been lived.
Fred spent those years in Canberra and became something of an institution in the
National Capital's political, social and sporting life.
My sincere sympathy goes out to Fred Daly's family. He will be deeply missed.
GLADSTONE 2 August 1995 



74/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
THE ALAN GRIFFITHS INQUIRY
The Alan Griffiths inquiry, conducted by Mr Michael Codd AC, has concluded
and its report has now been presented to the Government.
The full and independent investigation found that it would be properly open to
me to accept the return of Mr Griffiths to the Ministry.
Mr Griffiths has made a valuable contribution to the Labor Government, to
Cabinet and to Parliament and I would have welcomed his return to Cabinet.
However, he has already indicated that he will be retiring from Parliament at
the next general election.
The Inquiry also found that there would be merit in the Government
considering the clarification and reinforcement of guidelines to Members of
Parliament and Ministers in a number of respects related to the use of staff
and facilities.
I understand that action already taken by the Minister for Administrative
Services, the Hon Frank Walker, to strengthen the guidelines is now well
advanced. I ha~ ie--] 6d-him to provide a report to Cabinet on implementation
as soon as possible.
The Inquiry's report has been tabled and its conclusions are attached,
Mr Codd has produced a thorough report and I thank him for the work he has
done. CANBERRA 3 August 1995 
CONCLUSIONS 200. The inquiry was asked to examine and report on " whether the conduct of the Hon
Alan Griffiths in relation to the matters leading to his resignation from the Ministry was
in accordance with appropriate standards of behaviour for a person holding office as a
Minister and a Member of Parliament, and in particular:
whether there was any conflict between his private interests and the performance of
his public duties;
whether he authorised or condoned any inappropriate, improper or illegal activities
by any of his staff in relation to the conduct of his private interests."
201. In relation to the first particular question there is no evidence of any direct conflict
or personal breach of guidelines or declaration requirements.
202. In relation to the second particular question there is no evidence that he authorised
or condoned behaviour by his staff of the kind specified, but the inquiry concludes there
has been conduct on the part of Mr Griffiths which does not meet standards which might
reasonably be expected of a Minister and Member in relation to three matters in
particular:-the way in which he directed Mr Lennox to involve himself in support of Mr
Griffiths' private financial interests ( paras 152 to 160 above);
( ii) the way in which he acted when the illegal and improper conduct of Mr Lennox
was brought to his notice ( paras 161 to 183 above); and 
( iii) the responsibility he bears for the conduct of Mr Lennox ( paras 184 to 190 above).
In the case of all three the inquiry finds errors of judgment and/ or a want of diligence.
With one exception the inquiry considers it would be unreasonable to find that Mr
Griffiths' conduct in the circumstances was improper. The exception is in relation to his
requirement that Mr Lennox repay $ 5,000.00 to the BB Account given the indirect
linkage to Mr Griffiths' financial interests.
203. On the basis of the findings in this report, however, and against the broad
background of precedents referred to in paragraphs 191 to 199 ( and particularly because
Mr Griffiths has paid $ 5,000.00 to Mr Lennox in recompense and has already lost the
benefits of Ministerial office for a longer period than any of those cases of precedent) the
inquiry believes that it would properly be open to the Prime Minister to accept the return
of Mr Griffiths to the Ministry.
204. The Inquiry further concludes that there would be merit in early consideration of
the clarification of guidelines to Members and Ministers in a number of respects:-
To make much clearer that the " over-riding conditions of use" of the facilities
provided to Members and Ministers, and the over-riding role of staff provided, is
to support parliamentary, electorate, portfolio or official business.
( ii) To clarify the guidelines concerning limidtations on Ministers and Members earning
income through personal exertion ( see paragraph 48).
( iii) To clarify the extent to which it is acceptable for staff provided to
Senators/ Members and Ministers to carry out duties related to the private interests 
of the Senator Member or Minister, and especially their private financial interests.
As indicated in the report, a degree of such involvement is inevitable, but as a
minimum it needs to be made clearer that the extent of any such involvement
should not be such as to cause any detriment to the official duties of staff. Beyond
that there may be value in guidelines which limit the areas to those which are
inevitable ( such as answering phones, passing messages, opening mail).
( iv) To refine the reference to electorate staff not being used for " party political
purposes", since the present apparently widespread practice is that electorate staff
are involved in campaign activity in election periods and throughout their
employment often in fund raising and other activities which on any reasonable
interpretation might be regarded as " party political". ( see paragraphs 114 to 116
above) To bring more directly and regularly to the attention of Senators Members and
Ministers the responsibility assigned to them for the conduct of their staff and for
ensuring their staff understand the standards of conduct expected of them.
( vi) To clarify the guidelines on use of official motor vehicles for private purposes so
that it is clearer what activities are properly embraced within the term " private". It
is not sufficient to proscribe, as the latest public service guideline does, use for
" 1commercial" purposes since that term also lends itself to a variety of
interpretations. The ambit needs to be made less ambiguous, therefore, for public
servants as well as for Members/ Senators and Ministers.
( vii) To' clarifyr the power to withhold severance benefits in appropriate circumstances
( see paragraph 181 regarding Ministerial Determination 1993/ 1). 
205. It should be noted also that, since 1987, the Code of Conduct deriving from the
Bowen Report and set out in paragraph 40 of this report has been accepted as applying
not just to Ministers but also to ministerial staff, public servants and other officials ( see
paragraph 38). The material presented to this inquiry suggests that there has been no
attempt by the Department of Administrative Services to bring this Code of Conduct to
the direct attention of all ministerial and electorate staff. This should be done, and done
regularly. 206. The Department of Administrative Services has acknowledged the findings in
paragraphs 204 and 205 and indicated they will be taken into account in a broader review
of DAS responsibilities and administration in this area, already well advanced.
207. Finally, the inquiry believes that the Australian Electoral Commission is open to
criticism for its actions in following up on the improperly constituted 1990 and 1993
electoral returns of Mr Griffiths ( paras 109 to 111) and should ensure it has procedures
in place to follow through its duty more effectively in circumstances where it becomes
aware of an improperly constituted return. The AEC has acknowledged there is room
for improvement and is taking action accordingly. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
JOINT DOORSTOP WITH THE GENERAL SECRETARY OF THE
VIETNAMESE COMMUNIST PARTY DO MUOI AT THE KILORI
CONFERENCE CENTRE, TANNUM SANDS, QUEENSLAND,
3 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I would like to say that we are delighted to have the General Secretary
of the Communist Party of Vietnam, Do Muoi, and to say that what we
seek with Vietnam is not a relationship, but a partnership. And that
partnership with the General Secretary has come in a very vigorous
visit. He has visited the ACT, Victoria, NSW and now Queensland. We
are looking at areas of co-operation between us, and ways we might be
able to help Vietnam develop. Vietnam is a country of 70 million
people, has just joined ASEAN, it has just exchanged Ambassadors
with the United States, joined the Community of Nations in the Asia
Pacific it now needs the help of countries like Australia to integrate
fully in the community of nations around here. So today, of course
you know Vietnam is rich in bauxite we have been looking at bauxite
and alumina. The General Secretary has also looked at
telecommunications, of which, of course, we have a very large
presence in Vietnam with Telstra. And we are looking at other aspects
including tourism aspects today. Tourism is another great
opportunity for the Vietnamese economy. So, I am delighted that the
General Secretary made the visit to Australia for such a high-ranking
person to have come, we are very greatly honoured, and I hope that
this will lead to other cooperation between us.
DM: First of all, I would like to thank the Honourable Prime Minister for
inviting me to visit Australia. Also, I would like to say... .( inaudible). . for
the attention given to my people, and most of all to you, I would like to
convey our friendship from the Vietnamese people to the Australian
people. ( The Secretary General says that for himself) and other
members of the delegation.. .( inaudible). . this visit is one of the longest
visits we have made we find Australia a peaceful country and you
have not any wars for hundreds of years which is contrary to our
situation. We are desirous ( inaudible)... . for peace. Australia is also a 
very rich country the people are leading a happy life. And I have
found all sorts of" friendships from Australia, especially towards
Vietnam. There have been ups and downs in our history, but history is
history. I believe from now on, between us, that we will always have
eternal friendship.
I came to visit the Honourable Governor General, I had working session
with the Honourable Prime Minister, and with the different Ministers.
And everywhere where we have been pleased to find friendship and
cooperation. .( inaudible) most thankful to the Honourable Prime
Minister and the people of Australia. We know that Australia has
helped Vietnam people all the way. Yesterday I had a meeting with the
Trade Union organisation. ( inaudible).... They supported our anti-
American War and they are continuing to support us in our professional
reconstruction. We are grateful ( inaudible) of projects which are very
efficient. This time the Australian Government has signed an
agreement with us to assist us in building a huge bridge. This is one of
the biggest projects so far in Vietnam worth $ 70 80 ' million. And the
Australian Government has also assisted us in making economic zones
in the South, and also assistance is coming in the form of personnel
training in health care and we highly appreciate the activities carried
out by the Fred Hollows Foundation, which is assisting Vietnam in
treating cataracts. It is an activity of high significance to the lives of the
Vietnamese people, because many Vietnamese people have eye
problems. .( inaudible).... We are grateful to Australia for this project,
and we will speed up the necessary procedures so that projects can
soon be put into operation to bring about bright eyes to the people.
Apart from the non-refundable assistance, the Australian Government
personified by his Honourable the Prime Minister has decided to lend
us ( inaudible)... During my visit I have met with business people here,
and we had discussions on multi-.. corporations possibilities. We want
to do the metalurgy, we want to produce electricity and new fertiliser in
cooperation with Australia. We want to do the telecommunications with
Australia as well. In short, we are very poor and we want to do
everything. In particular, we would like to do the dairy and the meat
production and sugar cane production with Australia because Vietnam
is extremely poor after the War and the livelihood of the people is very
low. 50 per cent of the children are undernourished. The main task of
the Vietnamese leadership is to improve the livelihood of the people
and to fight malnutrition among the children. One of the main purposes
of the visit to Australia is to visit the meat, dairy and sugar cane
production. In principle, the Prime Minister and the other leaders of the
Australian Government ( inaudible) support it by the business groups
here. They have shown their readiness and willingness to do that and
while we are considering the.. action. Your heart is already there.
What you need from us is to streamline the cumbersome procedures.
Now I can say my visit to. AUstralia is highly successful and what is best
of all is the friendship between our two countries Vietnam and
Australia. That can serve as the groundwork to develop our multilateral
cooperation and to materialise our cooperation and friendship we need
long lasting peace and stability. We need to be rid of war in our region. 
We need to eliminate ail kinds bf nuclear weapons from the region. We
need to eliminate the weapons of mass destruction from this region.
We need to join the struggle so that forever as we build stability,
friendship, cooperation and development in our region. Thank you.
J: General Secretary do you feel snubbed by the boycott of your visit by
the Leader of the Opposition, John Howard?
DM: It is quite normal. Now, well, he may have some other business.
He has sent his representative. Well in a welcome to you, I would like
to send my greetings. I hope that there will be only friendship between
us. I haven't had anything to say with the Vietnamese community here
because of many reasons. There are tens of thousands of Vietnamese
who have come here for a living. We thank the Prime Minister, the
Government of Australia and the people of Australia for helping the
Vietnamese people both in living and working conditions. We have
asked our compatriots who are living here to fulfil all the obligations of
the citizens of the country and at the same time in my country they can
enjoy their rights. We also advise that we offer to contribute what
needs to achieving greater prosperity and happiness to Australia and
they must work harder to have better lives and send their children to
school so they that can have an excellent education. This is one of the
best conditions under which you can give your children a good
education. ( inaudible) They can make some contribution to the
reconstruction of the country of Vietnam after decades of war and we
also advise them to unite with each other and respect the local laws.
J: [ inaudible]
PM: Vietnamese people in Australia and in Vietnam say that, I think,
Australia wants a partnership with Vietnam that we want to be able to
help the Vietnamese people. We want good people to people
relationships. We know the War has cost them, not only their liberty for
so long, but also their standard of living. Unfortunately, they have lost
much of the opportunities the rest of us have had. We would like to
help them catch up as quickly as they can. Thank you.
J: Prime Minister, just before you go, ( inaudible) the State election
outcome in Gladstone?
PM: I don't think so. I mean I had a most friendly welcome yesterday at the
Graingrowers Council not a traditional Labor spot. I had a very
friendly reception provided for me here in Gladstone yesterday. So I
think that, no, I don't think the press should take up the urban myth, the
panaceas, which have been put about by the spin doctors. I am finding
relations in Queensland are as good as they have ever been.
ends 



i.
PRIME MINISTER 75/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
STATE FUNERAL FOR THE HON FRED DALY AO
As a mark of respect for the Hon Fred Daly AO the Government will accord
him a State Funeral.
The Service will be held at 10.00am Wednesday 9 August 1995 at St Brigid's
Catholic Church, Cnr Marrickville and Livingstone Roads, Marrickville, and
will be followed by a private burial.
CANBERRA 4 AUGUST 1995
sses 653 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PJ KEATING MP
HIROSHIMA DAY 50 YEARS ON
When an atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima fifty years ago the world
was changed forever. We had been through the most destructive war in
human history. At the very moment we emerged into the peace we learned
that there were weapons in the world of unimaginable destructive force. We
entered a Cold War and with it came the threat of nuclear war which, it
became incri6asing~ y apparent, meant the annihilation of dvilisation.
We were not the first generation in history to live in fear of the end of the
world. But we were the first to have proof that it could happen. From what
we knew of Hiroshima and Nagasaki we knew what it would be like. And as
first the Soviet Union and th th9er-countries developed weapons, and
tested them, and the weapons became infinitely more powerful than the
Hiroshima bomb, the threat grew.
For half a century we have lived with this threat: that a miscalculation or a
moment of madness among a handful of men in Washington and Moscow
might bring an end to human life.-
To say that this knowledge profoundly changed our thinking is to understate
the case. The mushroom cloud has lived in all our minds. It has pervaded
our thoughts about the future; about our children, about human nature.
So long as the Cold War continued, the shadow of nuclear war grew larger.
New technologies emerged to make weapons and their delivery systems ever
more efficient and deadly. We became familiar with terms like Mutual
Assured Destruction, but we never got used to the idea.
The Cold War limited our options, but many countries did what they could to
make the world safer. Australia was among those countries. In fact, at the
forefront of them.
We worked through international organisations to persuade the international
community to heed the dangers of nuclear competition and prevent nuclear
proliferation and reduce nuclear stockpiles. We created a new post an 
Ambassador for Disarmament. In 1985 we took a leading role in developing
the Treaty of Rarotonga which established the South Pacific Nuclear Free
Zone. Protocol 3 of that Treaty prohibits nuclear testing in the South Pacific.
The end of the Cold War came as an unexpected and promising coda to the
century. It promised a way out of the nuclear prison. For a moment it
seemed possible that what we had assumed to be a permanent feature of our
lives might have been a temporary nightmare.
It created a great opportunity: but to seize this opportunity the two great
questions of nuclear proliferation and nuclear testing had to be addressed.
At an international conference in May this year, it was agreed to indefinitely
extend and strengthen the operation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons ( NP T). The purpose of thei NPT is -to-p revent the
emergence of new nuclear weapons states. Without the NPT it is likely that
many countries would have found it impossible to resist the temptation to
develop nuclear weapons.
It was a key to the agreement that non-nuclear weapons states were assured
the nuclear powers would play their part in diminishing the nuclear threat and
exercise ' utmost restraint' in testing weapons before a Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty ( CTBT) was agreed.
A commitment to conclude an internationally binding and -genuine CTBT no
later than the end of 1996 was one of the most important outcomes of the
NPT conference in May. This would achieve a goal for which Australia,
among other countries, has long fought in the United Nations.
Australia played an influential role at the May conference. We have been
active in the work underway to complete the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
as soon as possible and have tabled a draft text. The conclusion of the
CTBT should bring a permanent end to nuclear testing and will be a major
boost to the cause of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. It is a key
policy aim of the Australian Government.
The 50th anniversary of Hiroshima and Nagasaki the only times nuclear
weapons have been used in war is an appropriate moment to urge all
governments to redouble their efforts for the completion of a Test Ban Treaty.
Continued testing gives comfort to would-be proliferators and sours the
atmosphere in which the Treaty negotiations will take place. Australia calls
on all nuclear weapons states to put an immediate end to nuclear testing.
We have made our position on this clear to the Government of the People's
Republic of China and the Government of France.
The Australian Government recently sent a high-level delegation to the
nuclear weapon states to underline our concerns. I am pleased that all five 
nuclear weapon states have confirmed their commitment to a successful
conclusion to the CTBT in the agreed time. We intend to hold them to this.
In addition to the effort for a CTBT, Australia is supporting another measure
flowing from the Non-Proliferation Treaty conference: the immediate
negotiation of a convention to cease the production of fissionable material for
nuclear weapons or other nuclear devices.
The French Government's decision to resume testing at Mururoa caused
anger in Australia and throughout the world not only because of concern for
the Pacific environment, but because it puts all this work at risk. It puts at risk
our hopes for a post Cold War world which does not have the nuclear
shadow hanging over it.
The French nuclear testing program is a symptom of the wider problem the
problem of what we do to reduce and eliminate nuclear weapons in the 21 st
century. Since 23 June when I announced the measures we have taken to bring home
to the French Government the extent of Australian concerns about their
policy, we have continued to build coalitions with other countries which share
our view of the testing program.
We have been particularly pleased at the way many people in Europe, both
within governments and outside, have spoken out against the French
decision. Similarly welcome expressions of concern have been made by
Japan, by our ASEAN neighbours and by the countries of Latin America.
A central aim of our policy is to work with this international coalition, not only
in our opposition to French tests but also on wider nuclear issues.
The South Pacific Forum Regional Action Committee has begun its work. An
import it fieeting of EiiVironment Ministers from the~ fiWf6en South Pacific
Forum countries will be held in Brisbane on 16 and 17 August to discuss the
environmental impact of testing.
At the international level, the Government has decided that Australia will join
with other countries, including Japan, in bringing before the 50th anniversary
session of the United Nations General Assembly a resolution calling for a
complete and imi~ di~ td end to nuclear testing.
We also believe that progress towards a nuclear weapons-free world may be
aided by the creation of linkages between the existing or potential nuclearweapon
free zones which already cover most of the Southern Hemisphere.
We will be exploring this with the members of the S. outh Pacific Nuclear Free
Zone and the other zones involved.--
In order to strengthen our communication with the governments and people of
the European countries, many of whom share our views, and to ensure that
our position is fully understood, I have asked the Minister for Pacific Island 
Affairs, the Hon Gordon Bilney MP, to lead a Parliamentary delegation to
Europe in-early September. -This will be additional to a delegation, led by the
President of the Senate,. Senator Beahan, which will also be in Europe
meeting members of the European Parliament.
The Government has been considering the issue of whether Australia can
take action in the International Court. of Just_ e against the French tests. At
present, the legal advice suggests that such avenues are not open to us. We
will, however, be making oral submissions to the Court on the advisory
opinions sought by the World Health Organisation and the UN General
Assembly on the legality-df--ing nuclear weapons. As the French tests
raise important issues relevant to these proceedings, our position will be
firmly on the record before the court.
There have been a number of calls for the Government to send a ship to
Mururoa Atoll as part of an international protest against the testing program.
I have previously ruled out sending a naval vessel. The Government takes
the view that naval vessels should be used for naval purposes.
We have also considered the possibility of sending a non-naval vessel. The
Government has decided against such an action in the current
circumstances. Our reasons are principally strategic and financial. It would
be a costly exercise and it is by no means certain that it would have any
practical effect. We believe, on balance, that our resources can be put to
better use developing other elements of our campaign.
The Government is, however, concerned about the safety of Australian
participants in the flotilla. Present indications are that around ten Australian
yachts could be involved. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority, in
consultation with the Australian Defence Force, will be in touch with relevant
South Pacific search and rescue agencies to offer any additional support if
this is required.
The Government will also strengthen consular support for Australians in
French Polynesia.
With the tragedies of World War II and Cold War tension now behind us, we
have for the first time in many generations an opportunity to remake our
concepts of world security and take positive steps towards a world without
nuclear weapons.
Hiroshima is a most powerful reminder that we must not waste that
opportunity. CANBERRA Issued 5 August 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, BERLEI FACTORY, RYDALMERE, SYDNEY, 8 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I wanted to make the contrast for you today, here is the Labor Party
launching the largest private savings initiative the country has bver
had national superannuation something John. Howard should have
done in the 1970s when he received the Hancock Report and didn't, as
always, indecisive as always. Here we are today launching this report
and here he is with his party rent by divisions, where in Western
Australia we are seeing a 1950 style Labor split. This is not simply an
argument in the Western Australian Liberal Party, it is a 1950 style
split. It is a major division infside the one state of-the National/ Liberal
parties. John Howard would have you believe that he has acted to
deal with the problem. In fact he was over at the State Conference
and you might know that Dr Honey and the Crichton-Browne Court
forces won by four or five votes out of 500. So, if John Howard had
had any courage in standing to support the people who have
supported him, the Rochers and the Filings of this world, he could
have been completely decisive in -the result over a week ago. He
didn't. Not only did he not do that, he actually spoke about the
successes of the Western Australia Liberal Party. In other words, he
actually supported the incumbents. As a consequence of all this, of
course, he then scurried back to Sydney, he turned up next to me at
Miss Saigon in a dinner suit at 7: 30pm and he said he was three
minutes late. I thought more like 30 years late, but nevertheless we'll
let it pass. And I said, you must have had Clark Kent standing behind
a curtain to get you out of there that quickly. I mean, he scurried away
from the argument so quickly and he has, as always, showed no
leadership, no strength, always the vacillator and that is what has
happened on this occasion. Here is Mr Rocher now resigned, coming
after Mr Filing. You have got Mr Cameron's position still in doubt and
yet Noel Crichton-Browne will-be as powerful in the WA Liberal Party
today as he--Was a week ago because whether he attends caucus
meetings of the Liberal Party in Canberra matters nought if he is still
the power broker in the Western Australian Liberal Party. 
In other words, as one journalist in Canberra said this week, Mr
Howard's story that he has dealt with Mr Crichton-Browne was the
great whopper of the week and, of course, whopper of the week it was.
So, what we have got here is John Howard showing us two things.
The first is that he is weak and always indecisive. Secondly, that his
party is not a national party. It is a collection of state parties and while
he and Mr Staley and others talk about a national executive power, the
fact is they don't have a national party and it never functions like a
national party. The West Australian Liberal Party is introspective,
reactionary and vicious and there is no way without leadership is it
going to change. John Howard has not provided that leadership and
what a pathetic situation he is in with Mr Rocher saying I think I can
support John Howard and he is a supporter of his, I think I can support
John Howard better as an independent than as a Liberal party
member. So, again, I give you the point, here is the Labor Party today launching
proudly one of the great national schemes of our time in
superannuation. Where is he? Scurrying around in a party rent by
divisions, a complexion of state parties where he won't even support
the people who have supported him for the leadership and have
supported him in the federal parliamentary Labor Party. I am quite
happy to take questions about it.
J: Doesn't the Labor Party have its own problems in the West. Carmen
Lawrence is a political liability and Graeme Campbell is an
embarrassment?
PM: All parties have problems from time to time. In Western Australian the
Liberal Party has a civil war to use Mr Withers words a civil war. In
the Liberal Party in Western Australia is a major split, it is of the variety
the Labor Party used to have in the 1950s. This is a major fractious
division that has occurred over there and that is why again, what it
shows I say of Mr Howard, he'll never make a decision, he always
vacillates, he is always weak. What this shows again, remember how
he was slipping and sliding on the republic, he didn't know what to say
for three or four days. I mean, you name it, he is always slipping and
sliding. When it comes to even supporting his own supporters, his
own party, he can't say a word in their favour, yet they lose by four
votes in 500.
J: Has Carmen Lawrence become a political liability?
PM: There is a Royal Commission in Western Australia which will run its
course and-she will have her chance to put her views in the right form.
J: Are you talking tactics with Carmen Lawrence at the moment?
PM: No, I haven't any need to. 
J: Does she have your support Prime Minister?
PM: She has always had my support.
J: At what point will Dr Lawrence have a need to put the Party ahead of
her own vindication?
PM: Well, she has got rights, obviously. They are not to be put asunder by
people wishing to truncate her rights to put her views at this
Commission.
J: Did she offer to resign last week?
PM: She didn't and I don't reveal the course of private conversations I have
with Carmen Lawrence. She has always put the Party ahead of her of
her own position, always.
J: Would you support a ban on the French group bidding for the NSW
helicopter tender?
PM: Well, when the Prime Minister of Australia has got to worry about the
NSW helicopter tender we are really at a low ebb.
J: Would you accept a resignation if she offers?
PM: I'm not discussing it any further, I gave you an answer.
J: Prime Minister, is it time for Theo Theophanous to pull out of the race
for Batman?
PM: Martin Ferguson is the President '-of the ACTU and you know the
history of this in Australia. We have always encouraged the ACTU
President if they wish to move to the federal parliamentary Labor Party
for that to happen. It happened, of course, with Bob Hawke my
predecessor. It happened with Simon Crean. Simon Crean wants to
make it happen again. There will be a lot of support in the Labor Party
for him and over time this matter will be resolved.
J: New Zealand decided to take France to the International Court a
move Australia supports?
PM: We have looked at that, but we doubt very much whether there is a
possibility of reopening the old case, because by the time any new
case was started the tests would be over. So again, these things have
got to be real rather than cosmetic. We have examined the options
and we don't think that the Court, as much as we would like to use the
Court, really presents an option for us.
J: Has the Australian Government done enough to pressure France? 
4
PM: I think you can see the reaction from the French Government. The
withdrawal of their Ambassador the other day, the general mutterings
from Paris indicates, I think, that we have had an impact and, I think,
we are having an impact in Western Europe as well and I think a lot of
opinion in Germany for instance is in part coming from the campaign
which Australia has been leading.
ends 



vA.
I I A'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR THE NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION EDUCATION
CAMPAIGN LAUNCH, BERLEI FACTORY, RYDALMERE, SYDNEY
8 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed Paul ( Elliott), Lord Mayor, Jennie George, Richard Glass,
the Managing Director of Berlei, and Berlei executives, and members of the
work force, workers here at the Berlei factory, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a great pleasure to be here today, to be party to the launching of this
campaign to provide information to Australians about superannuation. Award
superannuation is one of the great undertakings of th6 isfdecade, and it is
now starting to blossom as a result of the Budget measures we announced
just a few months ago. It will be such that by 2002 which is not far away
every Australian working person will have 15% of their income going on their
account into a superannuation fund into a superannuation account for them.
What this will mean is when they retire, someone joining the work force will
retire on what is now twice the age pension, someone who is in the work
force already in their 30s perhaps will retire on about three-quarters of the
age pension, plus the age pension. So, it's going to mean a dramatic lift in
the standard of living of Australians in retirement, and, of course, put together
a huge pool of national savings, which can make a country stronger, which
means we will rely less ' dhV6Yverseas savings and overseas debt, and which
means we can power along investment and employmnent and exports. So,
this is a scheme that came from firstly, a lot of iriiagination, and belief in the
fact that Australian working people would put some of their income away as
savings for their long run retirement. And because they would be prepared to
do that, the Government would also be prepared to put income away, by way
of the tax concessions and direct payment, paying the tax cuts into
superannuation accounts. So as a consequence, we are going to see as
they say a very large pool of savings develop on behalf of each and every
person. To give an example, someone on average weekly earnings now that's
someone on about $ 32-33,000 when they retire, they will retire on a lump 
sum just under half a million dollars. And someone on one and a half times
weekly earnings, will retire on a lump sum of over $ 600,000. And this will
produce an income stream in retirement which will guarantee them a much
higher standard of living than they have today.
You don't need to be a demographer to know that the Australian community is
aging. When my generation moves through to retirement, there will twice as
many retired aged people as there are today. And we will be relying upon the
people-the-n in ihelvork force to provide the standard of living in retirement
most of us have come to expect but there will be twice as many of us. So,
this Government, back in the 1980s with the ACTU saw the opportunity to
start to move towards some sort of national contributory scheme for all
workers, not just people in the public se~ f&amp; o0-r somfe p-rivate cdTpanies, but
for all workers where something was put away by employers on their behalf in
lieu of wages. Some of the Accords we did in the 1 980s with the ACTU were
built on claiming less in cash at the time to allow something to go away in
savings for the future. And that's now up to around it will be 9% in 3 or 4
years from now, and then to that we add the Budqet contributions of this year,
3% tax cuts paid as super, and 3% from employees themselves, so the 9%
becomes 15% 9 plus 3 plus 3. And what it will mean is that we will see a
huge lift in national savings. A decade ago we had about $ 40 billion in super
funds. This year we have got $ 180 billion, and in the year 2020 when this
scheme is fully mature and up and running, we think we will have $ 2 trillion
that is 2 thousand billion dollars in superannuation fund assets. And people
talk about our national debt, and ttiat is an issue. But our national debt is
$ 160 billion we have already got $ 180 billion in super fund ass-ets thit year.
And we are going to have something like 2 thousand billion dollars, as I say,
in about 2020, or one thousand billion by the year 2000 not so many years
away. So, this is a mighty change. This is something most countries would like to
see their Governments do with their work forces. And this has been done by
a Labor Government with the work force, through the Accord. And it's not
been done bytax concessions to high income tax payers it's been done by
the fair and equitable way of this being allowed to go, these tax concessions
being widely available to all working Australians.
One of the things that I am most particularly pleased about, and that is the
support which super has given to women. Jennie already made reference to
that, and she has been herself a great stickler and supporter of this
advantage coming through to Australian women. You know that the pattern
of Australian female employment has been in respect of super that wherever
a person was actually lucky enough to have a superannuation fund, a woman
would have that tallying up for her. But if she left work to have a family, it
would then be either paid out as a lump sum and finished and terminated,
and mostly what she would get would be her contributions back and that
was the end of it. And if she happened to come into the work force later, she
could try and pick something up afresh from a cold start, but there was no
continuity. Now, there's preservation to age 55. Now, every one every
working woman will have a benefit in superannuation. And in the case, say, 
of somebody going off to have a family, those earnings will continue to accrue
and will be there if and when that woman comes back into the work force.
And that will then grow and compound to age 55 under the tax concessions.
So, what we call preservation investing will be there for Australian women to
give them that support in their own name in their own right at a later stage
in their life. And this is, I think, an important social milestone, and a good
thing we have been able to do together.
So, there is a lot in this for the country, there's a lot in this for our future. We
need investment to get employment. But this is a big continent. The projects
that are growing all the time in this country as such that it is more than our
current national savings can afford, so therefore we put the call on overseas
savings or overseas debt. And this is where the current account and the debt
comes from. To deal with it, we need to do some things, like adding to our
national savings, like superannuation. We also need to do some things like
putting the Budget into surplus, which the Government has done. So you
have got public saving on the one hand, and you have got private saving with
superannuation on the other. These are the ways in the long term how we
will deal with our debt. Not some imagined productivity commission, or some
bit of economic fairy floss that wouldn't travel a yard under real scrutiny, but a
real national scheme, where the huge force the economic force of that
wealth going in 15% for everybody, every week, into the future. It will mean
a much greater pool of savings, higher levels on investment, therefore higher
levels of growth and employment, higher* levels of exports giving Australia
that sort of savings advantage it's never really had in the past. And, as we
say, that standard of living in retirement.
One of the issues in the United States at the moment as they say, one of the
concerns of Middle America is that many Americans believe that they won't
be provided for in old age. They won't be provided for because they know
there will be many more retired aged people when the baby boom generation
retires than is the case today, and they don't think the tax system, or the
public system, will keep income support up to them. Well, in this country, a
Labor Government thought about all that a decade ago, so that when we get
to that position, you will have people basically on twice the aged pension. So
someone on average weekly earn2injgs just before they retire will actually
retire on an income the same as'average weekly earnings. They will go out
on average weekly earnings, and their pension plus super will add up to
about the same amount. And then that will improve to a point, and then it
drops away, because it is there to support the great bulk of the work force.
So, it's a great change this is a great national scheme. It certainty is, in
financial terms, the greatest private savings arrangement that Australia has
ever had, and by launching this pr6gram today, we are trying to tell people
about it to involve them with it, to give them some confidence that the system
is going to be managed well for them, and that it is going to do good things.
I was particularly pleased to be at Berlei here today, and glad of the
information which Richard and his colleagues were able to give me about the
clothing and textile industry. Because when we started on the big reforms in
clothing and textile 10 years ago, people were talking doom and gloom " that 
will be the end of TCF, it will be finished, there is no way we will be able to
compete with people abroad, we won't be able to make high quality
sophisticated things, we will simply be deluged with imports". Now, by again
taking the initiative and having that imagination and belief in Australians and
this industry that it could do better, we are seeing today a modern clothing
industry in Australia, which is not only providing products for this market, but
it is also providing for exports as well.
But the other thing that I thought was interesting about Berlei, was that the
building and the land was owned by the State Superan -nuation Board, and it
makes the point that here is this wonderful fe-iiniic1 -capacity her-t6 produce
a high quality garment, coming out of one of Australia's most committed firms
in this industry, in facilities which are owned by a superannuation fund. And
we are going to see more and more of this all around the country as your
savings will be placed in Australian industry and we will continue to see a
growth in the nature of the stock market, and a maturation where we start
seeing the stock and the investment industry actually supporting the
innovative companies, and we will be seeing a pool of savings needed to be
placed, to actually help all that along. I think this is a very encouraging and
exciting prospect.
So, I would like to, today, thank many people for their commitment to this
great national initiative to our colleague partners in the ACTU, represented
by Jennie George, to all those people in the work force who believed in
something better, in putting something away for tomorrow, to the industry we
have now got to build, to the investment industry who have to now meet the
challenge of what the Government has created, and to all those Australians
who know there can be something better out there in the future. We hope
that this campaign will answer some of those questions what is super? what
are my entitlements? how can I take my money? what is the Government
going to contribute? is the money going to be safe etc? what am I likely to
retire on? These are the questions that we know Australians want answers
to, this campaign is about opening up some of those opportunities to provide
them with those answers. I thank Paul Elliott for being involved with
the having the stewardship of this campaign, iifor those involved with it, I
am very happy today to be here today to officially launch it. Thank you.
ends. 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PJ KEATING MP
DOORSTOP ST BRIGID'S CATHOUC CHURCH MARRICKVILLE
WEDNESDAY, 9 AUGUST 1995
PJK: You want me to say something about Fred well he was a great Labor
figure. His special place for all of us was that he was the link to the forties
governments. He was the link to the Curtin and Chifley years. He was only
thirty when he joined the Curtin Govemment and he had that relationship
with Curtin as the youngest member of the Caucus. And he developed, I
think, a very special relationship with Chifley. As a young man he was a great
devoted follower of Chifley's. So he saw that period of Labor Government
ard he knew what a Labor Government was over an extended time and he
had that continuity, Of course then through most of his life he was in
Opposition and he came to government in 1972 with Gough Whitlam and
had three years of It. He retired In 1975 after thirty years. So his Ministerial
lifa was for three years only but his political life was over thirty. For us he
was the link to the Curtin and Chifley years. He was very much a Labor
traditionalist. He made light of the fact that he was in Opposition for most of
his life and picked up the anecdotes that he told others, but he was a
sedous Labor person with serious commitments to the community and he
was no humbug. And I think it is those values that we all cherished in him
and that we'll all miss.
J: You sat at the Cabinet table with him. What did you personally learn from
Fred Daly?
PJK: There was a fair amount of forgiveness in Fred I think. The split In the
ffltles of course was the dreadful agony they all lived through. But the joy of
coming to office in ' 72 saw all of that peel away from him and he took the
best of his life the best things of his life and celebrated them. I think
that's the lesson that we can take.
J: Can I just ask you one other question, there was a French newspaper
t dking about ethnic cleansing in Australia. Do you have a response to that?
PJK Well only that it holds the values of Australians in contempt. We gave up
our colonialism in the 1970' s, the French are still hanging on to their
olonialism in the Pacific. Maybe the French should have a good look at
themselves.
ENDS 7 



PRIME MINISTER 78/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SENATOR ALSTON'S ATTACK ON MY WIFE
Senator Alston's attack on my wife, Annita, over her role as the patron of the
Sydney Symphony Orchestra's European tour exposes the low, vindictive quality
of Liberal Party politics. It is a churlish smear the hallmark of the modern
Liberal Party.
My wife was invited to accompany the orchestra on its first European tour in
years; to act as its patron on the tour, and thereby to promote the tour, the
orchestra and Australia. She is proud to be able to assist the orchestra in this
way just as the management of the orchestra is delighted that she is able to
accompany them in her official capacity as the Prime Minister's wife.
During the tour, Annita will do all she can to promote the orchestra, through
publicity, by attending formal receptions for the orchestra, and by attending, and
sometimes introducing, concerts.
Her role on this tour will be similar to her role as a Government representative at
the Barcelona Olympics, and her role as an advocate for the Sydney Olympic bid
at Monte Carlo.
That Senator Alston should have used my wife's involvement in this important
cultural project to attack her and through her, me is typically sleazy. As the
Shadow Minister for Communications and the Arts, he should hang his head in
shame. His leader, John Howard, should dissociate himself from Alston's tactics
and rebuke him, or stand accused of condoning him.
Contrary to today's breathless account in The Sydney Morning Herald, no
$ 1 ,000-a-night hotel rooms and no $ 4,000 limousines have been booked. Any
costs associated with Mrs Keating's official travel will be duly collated and tabled
in Parliament in the usual manner for all such travel by Federal Government
representatives. In answer to one of Senator Alston's insulting questions: Mrs
Keating will not receive a cent of remuneration for her work as a cultural
ambassador on the tour.
I would have hoped The Sydney Morning Herald would have displayed more
support for such an exciting and challenging tour by this great Sydney and
Australian cultural institution.
CANBERRA 9 AUGUST, 1995 



PRIME MINISTER7/ 9
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERNATIONAL DAY OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
The first International Day of Indigenous People is a time for all Australians to
reflect on the position of indigenous people in our society on past
injustices, on recent achievements, and on our hopes for a better future
together. Our goal is to encourage Australia's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples to participate fully in the life of the nation while maintaining their own
unique cultures and identities.
In my speech at Redfern in December 1992, I acknowledged the many
injustices of the past 200 years. As we have begun to recognise and
acknowledge these injustices, so have we begun to redress them.
The Native Title Act of 1993 was a watershed for the nation. It enshrined in
law the rights of native title newly recognised by the High Court in its Mabo
judgment, and provided mechanisms to allow those rights to be determined.
The Government also established a Land Fund to make it possible for the
many indigenous people unable to prove native title to buy land. This Fund
will provide nearly $ 1.5 billion over 10 years and will give many dispossessed
indigenous people a real base and a stake in the nation's future.
The Government is examining further social justice measures for indigenous
peoples, as the third stage of our response to the High Court's Mabo
judgment. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities across the
country have been consulted on how best the Government can ensure equity
for indigenous people within the structures and institutions of our society.
The Commonwealth Government is acutely aware of the disadvantage
indigenous peoples suffer. 
The poor health of many indigenous Australians compared with the total
population causes particular concern. Over the last 12 years, in a bid to
improve the general social conditions of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, we have taken steady and consistent budgetary and administrative
action which has lead to lasting improvements in employment, housing and
education. Nevertheless, we recognise the need for further improvements in these
areas, and especially in the health of indigenous people, to redress the
disadvantages still suffered by indigenous Australians.
Earlier policies of child removal have been tragic for countless indigenous
families. The Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs and the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission are launching a National
Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children
so that we may know the full implications of these distressing past policies
and be able to consider ways to deal with the often very sad outcomes.
Alongside these specific policy initiatives, the nation has embarked on a
process of reconciliation between indigenous Australians and the wider
community. We must not fail in the aim of achieving a lasting reconciliation
by the centenary of Federation in 2001. Australia is a successful multicultural
society, and integral to our identity is the position of the first peoples of our
country.
The Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation has adopted as its vision:
A united Australia which respects this land of ours; values the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander heritage; and provides justice and equity for all.
This vision is in tune with Australia's national ethos of a fair go for all.
Together we can make this vision a reality.
CANBERRA 9 AUGUST, 1995 



80/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FRENCH NUCLEAR POLICY
The Government welcomes the indication that France may be willing to sign a
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty which imposes a zero threshold on testing, and to
close the Mururoa testing site.
The suggestions were made by a French Foreign Affairs official in a debate with the
Australian Ambassador to Washington, Dr Russell, over night. If this position is
confirmed at a meeting of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva later today, it
would represent an important step forward by France.
As I said in my statement in the House of Representatives on 19 June and more
recently on Hiroshima Day, 6 August, an international agreement to a binding and
genuinely comprehensive CTBT no later than 1996 is a central policy aim of the
Australian Government. Such an agreement would be a major boost to international
security and to our goal of the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
In the meantime, the Government will continue to work in international forums, and
with other members of the growing international coalition against nuclear testing, to
persuade the Government and people of France of the serious consequences of the
decision to resume testing at Mururoa.
We will shortly be in a position to announce the arrangements for the parliamentary
delegation, led by the Minister for Pacific Island Affairs, Mr Bilney, which is to visit
Europe. We are also continuing to work with our partners in the South Pacific Forum.
A special meeting of South Pacific Environment Ministers will be held in Brisbane next
week to discuss this issue.
The Government has received representations for assistance from the organisers; of a
protest vessel to carry Australian and international parliamentarians to Mururoa. In the
light of their advice that without additional funds for a deposit a suitable vessel could
not be chartered, the Government is prepared to make a contribution of $ 200,000
towards this public protest. 
2
The Government's contribution will be subject to a number of conditions, including
that the vessel does not breach the French exclusion zone around Mururoa or other
international law, and that a majority of the total costs involved come from private
participants and supporters. The charter will remain a purely private operation.
For reasons I have outlined in the past, the Government will not itself be sending a
naval or other government-operated vessel to participate in the protest.
CANBERRA August 1995 



79/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FIRST MEETING OF THE NATIONAL INFORMATION SERVICES COUNCIL
( NISC)
Today I chaired the first meeting of the National Information Services Council.
The Council was established in response to a recommendation in the final
report of the Broadband Services Expert Group. It is a high-level discussion
forum for broad policy issues associated with Australia's development as an
' information society'.
The Council's role is to inform the policy debate in government, by
encouraging input from members of the community, industry, and other
relevant experts in the field. It is an important source of non-government
views on information and communications services and technologies.
Today the Council focused on four important matters:
access to the emerging information services and technologies;
industry policy issues;
the legal questions and challenges arising from the new technologies
and services; and
Australia's role in the international telecommunications environment.
Independent working parties prepared papers on each of these topics for the
Council's consideration.
The paper on access issues argued that the right to communicate, and the
right to access information, are fundamental to a democratic and equitable
society. It identified a range of groups with particular access needs,
including: rural and remote, indigenous and ethnic communities, older
people, people on low incomes and the unemployed, women, and people with
disabilities. 
The report identifies a number of principles which the working group believe
should be acted upon. A fundamental principle is that access should be
non-discriminatory, so that all Australians can share in the benefits of the new
services. A cooperative and coordinated approach between governments,
industry and the community is also important.
The report argues that access is not only an issue for the future, but is
already a problem, and action is needed to provide access to narrowband
data services, particularly to rural and remote communities.
The paper on industry issues argues that Australia needs to establish a
clear national vision for the information technology and communications
industries, to provide a framework for cooperative activity within and between
industry and governments.
It considers that information industries have the potential to become one of
Australia's major net earners in the coming century, and Australia must plan
to become a leading provider of broadband interactive services.
Market analysis and social research are also important, to assist in identifying
and exploiting market opportunities. An adequate skills base is vital in
achieving industry development goals. In addition, trials and demonstrations
are a key means of developing technology, and accelerating its takeup by
industry and the general community.
The report on legal issues addresses a range of matters such as
competition, consumer protection, privacy, security and intellectual property.
One of its key messages is that existing laws affecting the development of
information and communications services are in many respects adequate and
do not need revolutionary changes. Nevertheless, some review and
adjustment is required in laws concerning industry structure, electronic
commerce and privacy. Moreover, laws relating to classification of material
need to be extended to the new information environment, and priority should
be given to implementing recommendations of the Copyright Law Review
Committee.
The international issues paper notes that the information services sector
has become a critical part of the infrastructure of the global economy, to
which Australian industry must have access.
It argues that Australia must participate in the development of international
trade rules that foster open national markets, and international competition in
basic telecommunications services. Structural impediments within Australia
must be addressed, and the government must take a proactive role in the
development of standards and codes of practice. Australia's performance in
telecommunications must be benchmarked against world best practice
standards. 
The issues and recommendations in the papers will be given close attention
by the government, and where appropriate taken up by the Committee of
Officials on Information Services.
Printed papers are available from the Office of the Chief Scientist,
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, 3-5 National Circuit, Barton
ACT 2600, or from Australian Government Publishing Service outlets. They
have also been published on the World Wide Web at
http:// www. nla. gov. au/ pmc/ nisc/ aug95/ nisc1 . html and available for
downloading as a single document via
CANBERRA August 1995
Contact: Dr David Swanton
Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet
Phone: ( 06) 271 5684
I_ 



82/ 95Zx.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES,
HIS EXCELLENCY FIDEL V RAMOS, 18-23 AUGUST
I am very pleased that the President of the Philippines, His Excellency Fidel
Ramos, will visit Australia from 18 to 23 August. This will be the first State
visit to Australia by a President of the Philippines. The President will visit
Canberra, Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Darwin.
The visit underlines the increasingly warm and diverse relationship between
our two countries and is an important opportunity to build it further.
The commercial relationship between Australia and the Philippines holds
great potential. While bilateral trade grew by 15 per cent between 1993 and
1994, our economic links remain relatively underdeveloped. The significant
program of economic reform which President Ramos has undertaken has
stimulated economic growth in the Philippines and opened up significant new
opportunities for Australian companies. I am pleased that President Ramos
will be accompanied by a high-level business delegation and will participate
in a number of major business seminars while in Australia.
The Philippines is the fourth largest recipient of Australian aid. We have a
developing defence co-operation program.
Australia has a strong and active Filipino community, which I know is looking
forward to welcoming President Ramos to Australia.
I look forward to discussing a wide range of bilateral and regional issues with
President Ramos. In particular, we will discuss our common interest in
APEC, of which the Philippines will be the chair in 1996.
CANBERRA 11 August 1995 



81/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TWO MINUTES SILENCE
I urge all Australians to observe two minutes silence at midday ( Eastern
Standard Time) next Tuesday August 15 to mark the 50th Anniversary of
Victory in the Pacific Day.
By observing the two minute silence in capital cities, regional centres, country
towns and in the suburbs, we will all express our gratitude to those men and
women who defended freedom and democracy, and delivered peace to
Australia. Together, during those two minutes, we can reflect on the achievements of
the men and women between 1939 and 1945 who united in this great cause.
Approximately 40,000 names of Australians who died during the war are
recorded on the Roll of Honour at the Australian War Memorial. About one
million people were under arms and many more people worked tirelessly to
sustain the war effort at home and bring up-families.
Many communities around Australia have already incorporated two minutes
of silence at midday in their VP-Day calendar. I understand some
communities have decided to sound air raid sirens before the two minute
silence as a gesture to mark those war years.
I hope State and Territory Governments, Local Governments, the business
community, church leaders and the union movement will support the two
minute silence and encourage the people of Australia to unite again for this
important 50th anniversary of the end of World War II.
CANBERRA 11 AUGUST 1995 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING, ' 1945: WAR PEACE', AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL,
11 AUGUST 1995
I am delighted to be here today to open the ' 1945: War and Peace' exhibition,
and to launch the Australian War Memorial's Public Appeal.
I regularly make the pilgrimage down Anzac Parade and I happily do so
because the War Memorial is one of our great public institutions.
It documents the experiences of Australians at war. It preserves and protects
our national memory.
And it educates our young people in what J S Manifold called " the old heroic
virtues" of Australia.
It inducts them into the Australian faith.
Last year I launched the Memorial's first ever Capital Appeal. The Appeal
aims to raise $ 20 million to renew the Memorial to redevelop the major
galleries and to enliven the stories which they tell.
The Federal Government gave the lead gift of $ 2.5 million to the Capital
Appeal and since then the State and Territory governments have together
pledged $ 2 million.
And corporate Australia has also been part of the effort.
Today we are launching the next stage of the Capital Appeal, the public
phase. Over the coming months, millions of Australians will be asked to
donate to the Memorial and I'm sure they will rally to the cause.
Money alone, of course, can not rebuild a great museum.
I'm convinced that the public appeal will also engage the community in the
affairs of the Memorial and encourage a sense of its community ownership. 
Let me say that I think it is entirely appropriate that the first exhibition arising
out of the Capital Appeal looks at the Australia of 1945.
1945 was the last year of the most destructive war in history.
It was the year in which an alliance of free nations finally answered the
challenge to the values which sustain our civilisation.
1945 was the year of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
But it was also the year in which Australia welcomed home hundreds of
thousands of our uniformed men and women.
' 1945: War and Peace' illustrates to new generations how the lives of
Australians were affected by the war and the dreams that were held for the
peace. It is a profoundly human exhibition and it displays some wonderful relics.
A sweetheart brooch sent by a soldier to his mother.
A handkerchief signed by her dad's comrades which was a seven year old
girl's seventh birthday present.
A baton belonging to Blamey, and the fuselage of a Beaufort bomber.
This exhibition tells us some wonderful stories. It tells us, for example, about
Moira Atkins, who served as a nurse on the island of Labuan. In 1945, she
won a beauty contest and with it a kiss from Mountbatten. I'm delighted to
learn that Moira is here today, and I look forward to meeting her.
It's also a very democratic exhibition. I'm told that those visitors who recall
VP Day can contribute their memories to the display and in doing so
strengthen and deepen the story.
In this way, ' 1945: War and Peace' is a conversation part of the great
national conversation of the Australia Remembers year.
The curator of this exhibition, Peter Stanley, and the rest of the War Memorial
staff, have done a marvellous job of presenting this story. But of course they
cannot claim authorship because that honour belongs to the whole World
War II generation.
It belongs to Australia's fighting men. And it belongs to those Australians who
stayed at home and performed miracles of production so that the war could
be fought and won. 
If a single message can be derived from ' 1945: War and Peace' and a single
lesson learnt it is that we are strongest when we work together.
The people that we see and read about in these galleries were united in
pursuit of a common cause and a just cause.
The Australians of 1945 believed in themselves, trusted each other, and
loved Australia.
Today, as much as ever, we need their belief.
We also need their energy, and their sense of purpose. Because while the
achievements of the World War II generation were great, their task remains
unfinished.
That task is to build and protect a strong, fair, prosperous and self-reliant
nation. We owe the same duty as the Australians of World War II: a duty to
the next generation, to the future Australia.
And the best way to honour the lives of the Australians of 1945 is to continue
their work.
It is important that as the war recedes in our history, it does not also recede in
our memory.
This generation of Australians and the generations to come must never forget
that 40,000 names appear on the Memorial's Roll of Honour.
Let me congratulate all those people who are working so hard to reinvigorate
the Australian War Memorial the people's museum. In particular, the Chair
of the National Appeal, Dame Beryl Beaurepaire, former Director Brendan
Kelson and Deputy Director Michael McKernan, and the Head of
Development Ros Casey.
Together, these people are leaving a marvellous legacy to the Memorial and
no less to the nation.
I am very happy to officially open the ' 1945: War Peace' exhibition and
launch the Public Appeal and may I commend both the exhibition and the
Appeal to all Australians.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PALAIS THEATRE, MELBOURNE, 13 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Are you happy with the way the pLselection process was resolved?
PM: I think that Theo Theophanous and Jenny Mikakos made a very
important gesture to the-abor.. Pary and to Martin Ferguson. I think
they, in the best traditions of the Paity, made a decision which they
think will be good for Labor and good for the government and I
certainly salute their decision and to endorse Martin Ferguson.
J: Mr Keating, how much pressure did the Federal Executive put on Mr
Thoephanous?
PM: The Executive hasn't met as you know and he had to make a decision
about whether he ran the gauntlet of that process or not. But, for my
part, I made clear my support for Martin Ferguson. He is the leader of
the industrial movement in Australia and it has been somewhat of a
traditional thing that the leader of the labour movement came to the
Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, in his case, when he thought it
would be worthwhile. Bob Hawke did this. Simon Crean did it. Now,
he has that opportunity. We will be stronger for having him.
J: Do you see him as a leader of the Left or as a potential leader of the
Party?
PM: That is for people in the Parliamentary party to decide, but I certainly
see him as a clear addition to the Caucus and, of course, representing
working Australia, the millions of working men and women in this
country. It could only make the Labor Party stronger and more
relevant.
J: And for the people of Batman, what can they expect? 
PM: I think a first class, experienced representative who already
understands the process of government and will be taken into the
government and into its processes.
J: Were you surprised by today's decision?
PM: Pleasantly surprised.
ends 



78Y~
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS GALA TRIBUTE, PALAIS THEATRE, ST KILDA,
13 AUGUST 1995
Tonight, and throughout this year of Australia Remembers, we have celebrated
the spirit of a generation of Australians.
It has been a bit like a giant birthday party for our parents and grandparents a
kind of national golden wedding in which we celebrate the bonds between us
all. And it has been at least as good for those giving the party as for the guests of
honour. It has been a chance for all of us to reflect on the gifts this generation gave us.
And to remember the price they paid in doing it.
What great parents and grandparents they have been.
They gave us the greatest gifts anyone can have. They gave us peace and
freedom. They gave us this country and a way of life we can call our own.
To do it, they gave up their own freedom. They gave up their lives. They gave
all their labour. And all their love.
They gave us an example to live by.
If we want to know what courage or duty or mateship mean, we can turn to
them. If we want to know what it means to be Australian, we can turn to them.
If we want to know what we can achieve as Australians, we can turn to them.
Many things have changed including the music but the essential things
remain. The fundamental things apply. 
2
Even half of their courage, half of their love of Australia, half of their spirit will
take us a very long way in life.
This concert has been a celebration of their spirit.
Tonight we will all take some of it away with us.
I thank everyone who made this event possible: and I know I speak for all
Australians when I say, above all, thank you to those who, at home and
abroad, fought the war and saved Australia. 



83/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
embargo: 8pm Saturday 12 August
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
MP AND THE MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS, THE HON CON
SCIACCA MP
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS PRISONERS OF WAR
Federal Cabinet has agreed to exempt Australian ex-prisoners of war who are
receiving nursing home care from the cost of nursing home resident
contributions. This decision is a special initiative to mark the Australia Remembers
commemorative year, and to recognise the unique sacrifice made by the
6,600 living Australian veterans who were prisoners of war while on
operational service.
The exemption will apply from 1 November this year, and will mean initially
that about 250 former prisoners of war who are currently residents of nursing
homes will be relieved of the financial burden associated with their nursing
home care.
The recent commemorative trip to Borneo highlighted the appalling
experiences which were endured by some war prisoners. Their suffering was
both physical and psychological. Their privations were profound.
Former prisoners of war, including their passionate advocate Mr Tom Uren,
have campaigned for a long time for this particular form of recognition, and
the Government is pleased to agree to it during the fiftieth anniversary of the
end of World War Two.
CANBERRA
.13 AUGUST, 1995 



84/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE WITHDRAWAL OF THEO THEOPHANOUS MP FROM BATMAN
I warmly welcome the selfless decision of Theo
Theophanous to withdraw from the pre-selection contest
for the seat of Batman, thereby giving the nomination to
Mr Martin Ferguson unopposed.
I know that this was 4. a very difficult decision for Mr
Theophanous to make, and a sacrifice for someone who
obviously has very substantial support in the ALP
branches in Batman. There is no doubt this action is
motivated by what he believes is in best interests of the
Labor Party.
I should also like to echo these sentiments for the
decision taken on Friday by Ms Jenny Mikakos.
Theo Theophanous has already made an important
contribution to the. Labor Party. His standing in the
Victorian Parliament and community is strong and he has a
big role to play facing a conservative government as the
Leader of the Opposition in the Upper House in Victoria.
In the event that an-opportunity arises for Mr
Theophanous to join the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party
in the future, I should welcome that and the contribution
he would make.
CANB ERRA
13 AUGUST, 1995 



0&amp;
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP, AND
THE MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS, THE HON CON SCIACCA MP
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS SPECIAL, SEVEN NETWORK, TOWNSVILLE,
14 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
ROD HENSHAW: Let's go back to Con in Townsville. Con Sciacca you also have a very
interesting and very special guest for us this afternoon?
CON SCIACCA: I do Rod. probably my chiefest backer in this whole program has been the
prime Minister Paul Keating, welcome Prime Minister, I guess you'd have a certain amount of
interest in this, there's no doubt about that. Don't you agree that we really did need to do
something on this very special year?
PAUL KEATING: I think so con. This was too significant a commitment, the losses were too
great, for it not to mean something 50 years later, the community action of this kind, which
Australians had never seen the likes of before, and as I said the commitment was too great. was
not something to simply be left to contemporary memory, but now the opportunity was ours, half a
century later, to tell Australians about the Pacific War, to lift it in our history, to understand that
this was the fight to save Australia, and Australia was saved, liberties were kept, our way of life
we created here was maintained, and that we owe it all to those people who did that, to keep
going. ROD HENSHAW: Prime Minister, Thanks very much for joining us on the program this
afternoon. Like me you were born after the war, but had you taken a personal interest in
Australias involvement to such an extent, before the Australia Remembers juggernaut got going.-
PAUL KEATING, Yes, I've made it one of the quite interestingly in my Prime Ministership
which started at the end of December 1991, it started just before the 50th Anniversary and the fall
of Singapore, in 1942, so through this period, 1992 to 1995, 1 really had the opportunity to span
the war years, shadowed by 50 years. So when I went to Kokoda in Papua New Guinea in 1992,
and then to Hell Fire Pass in Thailand, and Kanchanaburi, to various other sites around Asia, I
wanted to use the opportunity to bring home the lesson of the Pacific War which was not really as
well understood in Australian History, as the First World War, yet this was the war that saved
Australia. And you may also know that one of my own family died in one of the death marches
from Sandakan to Ranau In North Borneo, and I was aware of that, I was aware of all of that
prisoner of war, the prisoner of war saga of Australia even when I was a child and so these things
have been in my mind but overwhelmingly what's in my mind is to teach younger Australians, this
generation of Australians that we owe a debt to the generation, that heroic generation, that fought
and saved Australia, and to understand that this was the battle for Australia. While we had allied
obligations in the First World War, it did not involve the defence of Australia, this happened in the
Second World War and it's why I have as Con said, been a strong supporter of his, and of
Australia Remembers because this was the opportunity to bring it together with Victory in the
Pacific. the commemoration 50 years on.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL BARBER, RADIO 3AW, MELBOURNE,
14 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PB: Prime Minister, welcome first of all.
PM: Thank you, Paul. It is good to be here.
PB: Now you have seen a couple of the moving ceremonies this morning.
You have seen a lot of the VE ceremonies. You are going to see a lot
more this week of the VP ceremonies. To Paul Keating, citizen, what
sort of impact does it have on you?
PM: Oh a very big impact. I have been very interested as Prime Minister to
underwrite more fully the history of the Second World War in the
Pacific, where the sovereignty of Australia was threatened and where it
was saved. Before 1992, the 50th commemoration of the fall of
Singapore and then Kokoda and the Owen Stanley campaign, much of
the history of Australia at war has been centred around the First World
War the national identity being forged at Gallipoli etc. But it was in
the Second World War where Australia was saved and we are now
getting around in 1995 to the 50th anniversary of VP Day to tell that
story.
PB: To right the wrong?
PM: Yes. Well just to let young Australians know that the place was under
assault, that we could have lost it and yet with our Allies we fought back
and won the day. So I think that is important. The other thing is, of
course, I became Prime Minister in December 1991. Just a month or so
later, was the 50th anniversary of the fall of Singapore. So the period I
have been Prime Minister has been, if you like, 50 years on, the
shadow of the whole of the Pacific campaign in the War. So you have
a mind's eye picture of the time and the events and where they
happened and the sequence and the time between them. You know, so
in these four years I have been able to, in a sense, put myself back into
1942-45. F-C-) 
PB: Tell me, do you have difficulty getting a handle on just how difficult
things must have been for people up here in the north? I mean coming
from Melbourne and Sydney, you come up here and you suddenly
realise hang on, you know, Townsville they had three air raids but
they didn't come to anything. But they thought that the Japanese would
invade through this town. I mean to be living here at that time and then
to go meeting all the diggers on Saturday night, it is extraordinary.
PM: Well, I think, that the great sea battles, of course, were decisive. That
was the Coral Sea where the Japanese fleet was turned around. They
were heading, of course, to Port Moresby and had they taken
Port Moresby would have made then unrelenting assaults on the north
east coast of Australia and then, of course, we had the opportunity,
they were then forced back to the north coast of Papua New Guinea
and came over the Owen Stanley's and that is where we fought them at
Kokoda. The other great battle, of course, was the battle of Midway,
where really in a somewhat fluky environment, the United States found
the Japanese squadron and broke it up and these were the two
decisive events of the sea war.
PB: A lot of that here in Townsville.
PM: Yes, I mean it is like the war in Europe. I mean we nearly didn't win it. I
mean that is the point that was nearly if you look at, you know, why
Hitler didn't attack Britain with a maritime campaign after the fall of
France, why he opened up a flank with the Soviet Union. I mean we
won the war, but I think it is worth recalling that we might not have.
PB: Are you surprised that the Japanese, in fact, well they didn't invade
Australia? I mean, are you surprised that they didn't make a greater
effort or attempt?
PM: Well they made all the effort. I mean they got themselves established
in the Solomons. They got themselves established in Indonesia and
they had made assaults on Australia there and had they, of course,
succeeded in the sea campaign to take Port Moresby, they would have
certainly then moved solidly on to Australia.
PB: Can I ask you this one because you and I would be roughly the same
generation, I would think. I know that my relatives, when they came
back from the war so we were growing up in the 50s and early 60s
were very loathe to talk to me about it. You know, say " Uncle, what
happened in the war?" and they didn't want to talk about it. What was
the situation in the Keating family and do you know why they didn't want
to talk about it?
PM: Well my father lost his brother in the death march from Sandakan in
Borneo two months before the war ended and they expected him home.
In fact, they were organising the sort of party for him to come home. I
mean they got the telegram to say he had been killed by the Japanese
on the death march from Sandakan to Ranau. He was the only one 
who was enlisted and so it was always, in a sense, a pall hanging over
my family because he was the one who went away and he was the one
who didn't come back.
PB: Well, you see, there are many families like that who seem to suffer in
silence, whom are aged over 50. [ inaudible] they were New Zealand
and Australian.
PM: Well I think it was only until people started talking about it and writing
about it in the 1980s that, for instance, the Sandakan camp and the
death marches and what happened at Hell Fire Pass in Thailand was
not really spoken of very much, it is only recently. And the Sandakan
commemorative committee have now put these memorials around
Australia but they were placed there two years ago, nearly half a
century later. So you are right, it wasn't spoken of very much.
PB: But it seems now and this is what surprised me coming up here this
time, is that talking to the men and women all the women that drove
the trucks around here in Townsville this time around they seem to be
far more open about what happened and some are positive about their
lives and the contributions they made. Well as I say when I was
growing up in it, it really was that term we laugh at now " whatever you
do, don't mention the war".
PM: Don't mention the war, no. Well it was always overshadowed by
Gallipoli and Flanders, the First World War history and the Anzac
identity and because there were not, if you like, battles of that enormity
in the Second World War involving Australians. I don't know whether it
is for that reason that it was not celebrated as much as certainly in the
First World War the sovereignty of Australia wasn't called in to
question, but it was in the Second World War. I mean it was young
militia, young men who were not part of the regular army who fought at
Kokoda, who fought the initial resistance there and I think that we are
now learning to understand what that meant and to celebrate what they
did.
PB: Yes, the other thing too that occurred to me that there was this pall
during the 50s and whatever. That was the period, however, of well
the war changed forever because immigration suddenly became a
momentous thing and that has changed Australia irrevocably.
PM: Yes, Australia is now a multicultural country. A mono-culture is finished
and we are a more interesting and stronger place for it.
PB: And because of the vibrancy after the go out of themselves so
spontaneously, I just wonder whether that has rubbed off on to us and
that is why we now talk about the war, our parents do, more openly
than we mightn't have.
PM: I think the other thing is that it is half a century ago and people feel that
this is their last chance to talk about it in any organised way. 
PB: Well, again, is this the sort of grand finale, if you like, of looking back
as a celebration, do we now have to head to a republic, you know, in
the next century, all that sort of stuff?
PM: Well there is a bitter chapter closing in this I think going on. There is a
bitter closing in this going on because I have heard a number of
veterans say to me, this will be the last chance we will get together like
this. It is probably the last chance for us to talk about it like this. But
for those who went back to some of the theatres of the war, they feel as
if we sort of, you know, made the circle. We have returned and now it
is done and it was always in the mind...
PB: There was a chapter, Vietnam.
PM: Now it is full, it is shut. Well history it is never shut, but at least in the
minds of many people it will be more satisfied.
PB: Can I just raise one question with you, it popped up today, and that is
the fuzzy wuzzy angel the very famous guy Raphel he says that if
the Government wants to help him they should give him a home in his
village.
PM: Well, he left me a note when I met him. I haven't read the note yet, but
when I get a moment I will. I think we appreciate very much what these
people did for us, the many hundreds of thousands of them and we
constantly take every opportunity, you know later this year I first met
him in Kokoda in 1992 and later this year when I open the Kokoda
Memorial Village.
PB: Ok if I could just put it, it is him that features in that photograph carrying
PM: Yes, and along the Kokoda trail and we are building a hospital there
and dedicating it to the people of Kokoda because when I went there in
1992 it was about to be overtaken by, I think, a sugar company or some
other group which was harvesting some large group up to the edge of
what was formerly the little village of Kokoda. At any rate now we have
got two successive Papua New Guinea governments to agree to turn it
into an Australian shrine. It will be an Austral ian-Papua New Guinea
Shrine.
PB: So, you will read Raphel's letter?
PM: I will read Raphel's letter and see what we can do for him bearing in
mind that upon independence, with Papua New Guinea in the early
1970s all about, if you like, the responsibilities we have in terms of the
treatment of veterans passed over to Papua New Guinea and I'll see
what we can do sensibly without opening up the whole precedent area. 
PB: Can we clarify another one, Bruce Ruxton always seems to get upset at
most of Australia calling it VP Day, wants to call it VJ Day. Do you
have a firm view on that.
PM: No, some references have been VJ Day, some VP Day. I don't think
so, but it was Victory in the Pacific, it was a Pacific war and I think it
was called VP Day at the time from memory. I don't think it matters
much. There was only one substantial enemy and that was Japan. We
all understand that.
PB: Are you satisfied with their apologies thus far, I mean, is that the end of
it as far as you are concerned or do you want more?
PM: Well, there have been apologies in the past. I don't think the apologies
themselves matter as much as the inculcation of the truth in their
population. I think that matters more. That is, that the Japanese
community and its children are taught the history of the Second World
War and the period of Japanese militarism. I think we would rather that
openness and that understanding, that coming to terms with
themselves than simply an apology because, I think, it was Prime
Minister Kishi from memory back in the 1950s 1957 or 1958 came to
Australia with a very genuine and comprehensive apology, but that has
been forgotten and now people say they should apologise. So, we get
another Prime Minister to make another apology. I think what we really
want is for the Japanese people to understand what happened and to
take the lesson from it and to declare not to be doing these things
again.
PB: A hypothetical, say you were President Keating there in August 1945,
you knew you had these bombs, you had to think about whether you
were going to drop them or not and you knew that the possibilities was
one on Hiroshima and the other one on Nagaski, what would you have
done?
PM: I think the history shows that the Japanese were prepared to surrender
provided that the Emperor Hirohito was maintained in his majestic role
as the head of the Japanese community. Subsequently, President
Truman did agree to that. Had he agreed to it earlier, it is very likely
that the Japanese would have capitulated before Hiroshima and before
Nagaski. Whatever the rationale for Hiroshima, I don't think there was
any real rationale for Nagaski.
PB: So, you would have probably held off for a while longer and then if you
had to go with Hiroshima, you said you wouldn't go with Nagaski?
PM: Well, I wasn't there and it wasn't my call. But, the history book shows, I
think, that allied interception of Japanese telecommunications traffic
showed that they were prepared to capitulate providing that they could
get an assurance about the maintenance of the Emperor. Given the
fact that President Truman finally did agree to that, had he agreed
earlier the likelihood is Japan would have capitulated. One can never 
be completely certain, you could say of Hiroshima probably there is an
area of doubt, of Nagaski I couldn't see any point to that.
PB: Of all the ceremonies that you have been a part of and seen both over
VE Day and now our own celebrations here is there one that stands out
that has moved you more than any other?
PM: The one that moved me most was the visit to Kokoda in 1992. The
reason was that it was defended by young men, by boys in shorts in
singlets and shorts with machine guns. Australians 18 years of age
militia, as I said not part of the regular army, fighting the crack
Japanese marine troops, combat marines who came across the plain
and from the coast through Popondetta up to Kokoda. I think, that sort
of valour, I talked today about the innocence of Australia then a small
country, innocent of these sorts of forces in the world fending off the
Japanese. The crack manifestation of Japanese militarism with 18 year
old boys in shorts. The thing that has always made me feel so sad
about it all was obviously Changi, Sandakan, Kanchanaburi, Hell Fire
Pass, the incarceration in brutal terms of Australians and British
soldiers by the Japanese.
PB: I met a guy today who was nine stone, when he came back he was five
stone. He went from Singapore to Changi to the Burma Railway to then
making armaments in Japan, actually saw the bombing of Hiroshima
and I can't believe that he is so relaxed about it today.
PM: Tom Uren was in that position. Tommy was taken to Japan and he
worked in a coal mine and he saw the flash of either Hiroshima or
Nagaski I can't remember which one but he saw the flash.
PB: This guy said he didn't know what it was.
PM: No, and we were in Japan at an Australian cemetery earlier this year
and I thought that was a very sad place because imagine being an
Australian in Japan in 1945 in the snow and the cold and then coming
into summer and the bomb and the Japanese holding you in contempt
a pretty sad place to be and a pretty sad way to go.
PB: You are absolutely right. I know you haven't got much time, you have
got to go off, if you don't want to answer a couple of domestic issue
questions that is fair enough, but I wonder if I can just throw a couple at
you. Carmen Lawrence, is she finished?
PM: No. The High Court has said that until the jurisdiction of West
Australia, until the processes have run their race there, it can't
intercede in this. What's happening here is that the executive
government of Western Australia has employed as an arm of the
executive a Royal Commission to do things that none of the rest of us
have ever used the executive government to do. That is what she is
resisting. If the point comes where she gives testimony in this, I have
no doubt she will do it very forthrightly. 
PB: So, you still confident in her..
PM: Absolutely.
PB: Martin Ferguson, that issue and the resolution of it with him looking at
now getting a seat, is that a sign that the days of factional party hacks,
if you like, taking safe seats, is that a sign that that is over?
PM: I would hope we wouldn't have party hacks taking safe seats and
certainly with Martin Ferguson, the Labour Party will be stronger and
the government will be stronger because he is a person that has
represented working Australians all through his adult life, joining the
government. I mean, one of our claims is that we sincerely represent
the interests of working people and to have the leader of a movement
that has most adequately represented them join us would be a good
thing for us. I think the public will regard that change well.
PB: One more, I was quite angry at this criticism myself of your wife Annita
Keating and the Sydney Symphony Orchestra going overseas and..
we ought to be encouraging it not knocking it, John Howard refused to
actually intervene..
PM: You see, I would not have a front bencher of mine attacking the wife of
the opposition leader or a front bench member. Nobody attacked my
wife when she played a role in the Olympic selection in Monte Carlo
and represented Australia in Barcelona. And the Barcelona
representation, I think, materially helped the Monte Carlo selection.
There is enough to argue about in public life if that is what it is about
over policy without bringing in these things. So, running Senator Alston
out and then seeing which way the wind blows is not a very manly thing
for Mr Howard to be doing.
PB: Does it make you angry?
PM: Not much, there's nothing that could happen in the Liberal Party that
surprises me. Here they have got the whole force of the state in
Western Australia arraigned against the one woman member of our
Cabinet and they are out there chasing my wife over something she is
doing to support I mean, my wife is a European, she has been
through Germany and France and Britain on so many occasions she
doesn't' need a visit with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra to see
Europe. She is doing it only to advance what she thinks is Australian
culture.
PB: Has it in any way acted as a catalyst for you because you have got your
back to the wall according the polls John Howard is going to get in
easily this time.
PM: I've got more substantial things to argue about than that. 
PB: Alright, one final question, you were talking about young people and of
course you have got a young family yourself and what are their
thoughts about VP celebrations. What do you kids, what do you want
them to remember from this weeks and last week activities?
PM: I think the best that we can hope for with children as young as mine is
for it to register with them, to know that it was a great event in the
history of Australia, that Australia was saved by the courage of many
young people at the time and that those values of liberty and
egalitarianism and democracy which resided in the hearts of those
young Australians that fought in shorts at Kokoda, are still out there
today in the young Australians of this generation.
PB: Thank you very much, we'll talk again I hope.
PM: Thank you very much indeed.
ends 



AIi;
PRIME MINISTER 1
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MPR
AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS PACIFIC TRIBUTE LUNCHEON TOWNS VILLE
14 AUGUST 1995 ** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY m
Ambassador, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a pleasure and a privilege to be in Townsville to pay tribute to this brave city
on the 50th anniversary of the end of the war in the Pacific.
I have always had a feeling Townsvilles story is probably not as well known as it
should be.
Not all Australians are aware that the city was bombed on four occasions in July
1942; and not everyone appreciates the stress and hardship it endured during the
War.
The Japanese airmen were not as accurate as they might have been with their
bombs, but the incidents do give us some idea of the pressure the people of
Townsville were under and the strategic importance of Townsville to the conduct
of the war.
In the darkest days when a Japanese invasion of the Australian mainland seemed
imminent a report by Sir John Lavarak recommended that 10,000 civilians be
evacuated south. The evacuation never happened, but between 1939 and 1942
about twenty five percent of Townsville's population left
This place was an entry point for refugees from South -east Asia after the fall of
Singapore, and a refuge for soldiers, sailors and airmen returning from battle in
New Guinea and the Pacific.
Townsville was also, of course, a major embarkation point for troops and
supplies, and it was the most important Allied airbase in Australia 
This was the home of the " Kennedy' Regiment, 31 st Battalion which served in the
Middle East and at Kokoda, Buna and Gona; and, when linked with the 51 st
Battalion. at Lae and Ramu Valley, and at Balikpapan in Borneo.
Then, as now, Townsville was recognised as a vital link in the chain of Australia's
northern defence.
As Allied forces led by the United States first resisted and then began to drive
back the Japanese, Townsville's role became pivotal.
It was the home to the 5th American Air Force and I believe it still is, in the
sense that they have Freedom of Entry to the city.
Its presence involved thousands of civilians and military men and women, both
American and Australian, in the service of the US Army Air Force.
During the War Townsville was host, all told, to 90,000 troops the highest
soldierlcivilian ratio of any Australian city.
There were two RAAF squadrons No 7 Beaufort Bomber and No 80 Kittyhawk.
The No 1 Wireless Unit of the RAAF was located here at a top secret Central
Bureau of Intelligence base intercepting and decoding Japanese signals.
Among those engaged in Intelligence were members of the Women's Auxiliary
Australian Airforce and the Australian Women's Army Service.
The RAN worked out of Townsville of course, shipping Australian and American
troops to New Guinea and the Pacific Islands and providing escorts and patrols.
As the most important Allied Military and Air base in the north of Australia and the
Headquarters, for Naval Intelligence, no city in Australia no community in
Australia made a greater contribution to victory in the Pacific.
You can't turn a civilian town into a military base without putting strain on the
community. But Townsville clearly wthstood the strain. The civilian population
returned, the city grew and developed.
Today the city combines thetwin sads of tshstory as afrofer ownanda
grrison town. It has an important place In Australia's economic future and a
continuing strategic role In our defence.
Two thousand nine hundred soldiers of the Australian Army's Third Brigade are
here as part of the Ready Deployment Force. Among their many essential tasks
are conventional mil" tr operaitions; protected evacuations of Australian nationals,
and the provision of personnel and equipment for UN or multinational operations. 
3
The Brigade has recently distinguished itself in operations in Somalia, Cambodia
and Bougainville and provided support to Australia's medical contingent In
Rwanda which arrives back in Townsville in about ten days.
The R. AAF took over Townsville Aerodromne in 1939 and it maintains a significant
presence, with 1,250 personnel providing support for air operations.
The Army's 5th Aviation Regiment, which is also based at RMAF Townsville, was
deployed to Cambodia to support UN sponsored elections, and more rcntly to
Buka in Bougainville as part of Operation Lagoon.
So the Townsville tradition continues. As I've said on other occasions, this is one.
of the outstanding cities of Australia.
It has the strength which comes from its place on the northern frontier. It has
withstood the ups and downs of droughts and depressions which afflict rural life.
And carried more than its share of the weight of the war and emerged stronger
than it began.
In 1995 there are signs in Townsville to remind us of the past in particular those
memorials to the great alliance with the United States the Coral Sea Memorial
and the memorial to the 5th American Air Force.
With Ed Perkins here today I want to py tribute to the American men and women
who fought and died so bravely in the war against Japan they fought for our
freedom as weli as America's, and you may be sure that this country will never
forget that
But, above all, today I want to pay tribute on behalf of the nation to the people of
Townsville, for all they did for Australia during the war and all they continue to do.
I mentioned the visible signs of Townsville's contribution to the war but I think
the real indication lies in all that has been done since, all that is being done now.
It lies in the spirit of the place and the people. I think that is what counted and
today It has been my privilege to join you here in tribute. 



-J
A
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ELLEN FANNING, " AM PROGRAM", ABC RADIO,
14 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
EF: Prime Minister, thanks for joining the AM Program this morning.
PM: It is a pleasure, Ellen.
EF: What is the significance, in your view, of the celebrations for the
nation and especially for those Australians who, like you, grew up
after the Second World War?
PM: Oh, well I think what we are doing is celebrating the spirit of the
generation as we are celebrating the fact that this generation of
Australians gave us our peace and our freedom. They fought the war
and they saved Australia. That is why we are remembering it. That
is why we commemorate these events.
EF: And, indeed, over the next few days the focus will be on that
remembrance and on that idea of commemoration, but what do those
events of 50 years ago really tell us about the present and perhaps
about the future?
PM: Oh, I think they tell us that the people who fought that war were proud
of what was built here. That they loved Australia and they were
prepared to fight for its values and to maintain it and I think that is the
lesson for this generation of Australians that we can, in fact, very
much take the cue from them. They gave us an example to live by
and I think understanding that is to understand some of the lessons
and the other thing is the great loss and suffering has to mean
something it has to mean something. It can't just happen and with
the effluxion of time be forgotten and while it isn't in Australia, we
tend not to forget each Anzac Day. To remember indeed this 50 year
commemoration has brought poignantly back the events that
happened then to perhaps a much more innocent generation of 
Australians than we are ourselves today. That they had to cope with
it and that they did.
EF Well 50 years on, the anniversary does provide another opportunity
for Japan, looking at the other side, to put the war behind it. In your
view, has Japan been able to seize on that opportunity this year?
PM: I think Japan will only seize on the opportunity when the Japanese
people face up to it.
EF And have they done that this year?
PM: It is not a matter of doing it this year. It has to be done over time.
Their children have to learn about it. The history has to be taught.
I think that is the point. I think many people would believe that, for
instance, the German nation have been more prepared to talk about
the history, than has the Japanese nation. As that happens, and I
have got no doubt that it will, as those lessons are understood, well
then I think many people, including many Australians, will feel that
that is as it should be.
EF Well that isn't taught in schools in Japan at the moment and many did
point to this year as a milestone for Japan to begin to come to terms
with it, to put the war behind it. Do you think Japan has in that
context really seized on that opportunity?
PM: Well I am quite sure that the 50 years are bringing up Nagasaki and
Hiroshima for a lot of Japanese, brings home the message that they
were the victims. Where, in fact, they were the perpetrators of the
offence and that will only come with the history and over time. So I
don't necessarily think this was the year when the Japanese nation
said to themselves, or itself, that they had committed offences against
the community of nations and, in a sense, were seeking to
acknowledge that. I think with the bombing of Japan at the end of the
war a carpet bombing and the fire bombing and then, of course, the
two atomic blasts. Much of the focus will be, no doubt it has been, on
those. But I think like all great truths, these things will dawn on their
younger generation as certainly as you and I are speaking here.
EF: Well the Japanese Prime Minister talks on Tuesday. That is exactly
years since the end the war. What do you want to hear from
Mr Murayama during that speech?
PM: I think an acknowledgment of the fact that these militarist policies
were pursued to great cost and detriment to the community of nations
around Japan and an expression of regret on his behalf on behalf of
his nation. But I think I would also like to hear a commitment from
him to tell this generation of Japanese people the full truth, the full
history, of what happened. 
EF: You use the word regret there. There is often great debate about the
use of words in this particular debate. Is regret enough, is an
apology necessary?
PM: Welt I don't think the apology means anything without the truthfulness
being shown. That is I don't think the apology necessarily matters
without the nation of Japan knowing what happened and knowing that
a bad thing was done and that this history shouldn't repeat itself. I
mean that is, I think, what we want. I think the easiest thing to give is
the apology.
EF That is the easy way out.
PM: Well certainly the easiest thing, yes.
F: There had been an anticipation here in Australia that in some
quarters, at least, some people would indulge in anti-Japanese
sentiment at that time. What do you think it says about Australians
that, by and large, they haven't done that?
PM: Well I think Australia has a very great and deep sense of democracy.
That is where our tolerance and sense of freedom comes from. That
is why multicultural ism, I think, has worked in Australia. Why we are
tolerant to people who are not of anglo-saxon origins and descent.
How we have made this change in Australia work and those same
sentiments, I think, tend to also accommodate attitudes towards the
Japanese for that history.
F: How aware do you think Australians are 50 years on that Japan today
really underpins Australia's standard of living and Australia's
economy? Is there a general acceptance of that, an understanding of
that?
PM: I think there probably is to some extent. But it goes beyond the
economic point. It is true that Japan is our largest trading partner.
But the greater imperative is for Australians to come to terms with the
region, not simply to come to terms with Japan.
F: Well still on the economy if we could, voters are insecure here in
Australia about their economic future. Is it now becoming clear, do
you think, that your Government is delivering them a style of
economic recovery that they just don't like and they are not going to
vote for?
PM: Oh, no, on the contrary. I think this Government is giving them
something that nearly a generation hasn't had.
F: But the private opinion polling does say.. 
PM: Well you asked the question, let me give you the answer. That is,
this is not a boom, this is a low inflation recovery. There is a very
great difference. Australia has always had booms and it has had
busts. People are looking for the boom to see their asset prices rise
and then they are hoping to be able to position themselves for the
bust. This time it is not going to happen. We are not going to have
the boom. We are going to have solid, low inflationary growth,
accompanied so far by huge employment growth 670,000 jobs since
the last election. And I think it takes a bit of getting used to. I think it
takes a while for Australians to understand that, you know, house
prices won't be rising 10 per cent a year. Wages won't be rising
per cent or 8 per cent a year. But they will still have a more
secure future and a better standard of living. I think that is what we
are living with now. We are living with something that should have
always been in these years, that is where we did have, if you like,
much stronger growth on a sustainable basis.
EF: You are saying that that will take a while for Australians to
understand. Is it possible then that the political cost to this low
inflation recovery, that you have put in place, could be a defeat for
Labor at the next Federal election, if that understanding is not gained
in time?
PM: Well I mean governments can be defeated at all elections. But I
mean at the last election, what was the principal undertaking I made?
It was to restore growth and employment and we hoped we would get
to 500,000 jobs in three years. Our opponents said we were pulling
everybody's leg. In fact, we have got to 670,000 in two-thirds of the
time. That is well let me put it to you this way. It took us 200 years
to get to 6 million in the labour force by the early 1980s. We are now
at 8 million and we have added 10 per cent of that figure, that is the
6 million, in 2 1/ 2 years. So in terms of the principal commitment that
I gave not to leave the unemployed behind, to restore the economy
to growth and we have had 4, 5 and 6 per cent growth through this
period and now back to a more sustainable level the Government
has honoured those commitments, the hardest commitments of all.
Strong growth, strong employment growth and low inflation. So on
what basis, therefore, would you believe that the Government might
be defeated.
EF: Just finally, very briefly if we could Prime Minister, today the
High Court is expected to hand down its ruling on
Carmen Lawrence's application for an injunction in relation to the
Easton Royal Commission. Now against that background, there is a
perception that support from within the Government, and indeed from
yourself, for Carmen Lawrence could be dwindling, Is that the case?
PM: That is completely untrue. I noticed I got asked some questions the
other day, after I was asked about Martin Ferguson and I am quite
happy to say that in that context, we have seen Martin's selection for 
Batman now on an unopposed basis, which shows that at least the
Federal Labor Party, the national organisation of the Labor Party,
works unlike our opponents. But at the same doorstop, I was asked
about Carmen Lawrence, a series of questions, and I said look
Carmen will have her day to put her view. That shouldn't have been
taken by anybody as any diminution of my support for her. I mean
what is happening here is a very nasty thing. You have got the
Government of Western Australia, through the machinery of a
Royal Commission, extending its arm back into the business of the
former Government. Let me give you the example. What would
people think if in 1983, Bob Hawke and I had a Royal Commission
which went into why John Howard allowed the criminal tax avoidance
industry to flourish for seven years? Why he ignored the telephone
book of letters from the then Commissioner of Taxation, Bill O'Reilly?
How would the Liberals have felt if we had of asked Mr O'Reilly to
appear in a Royal Commission to say what did he say to the
Treasurer, Mr Howard, on that particular day, what Mr Howard said in
Cabinet meetings, what Mr Howard said to the former Prime Minister
and what did he say in return? You would hear the cries and the
wails going up, you know the hand wringing in the Conservative
journals and the editorials. But this is a very nasty extension of the
executive against a Member of Parliament and that is why the
Commonwealth Government is supporting Carmen Lawrence in her
High Court action.
EF: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you indeed.
ends 



q N
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, SHERATON BREAKWATER CASINO-HOTEL,
TOWNSVILLE, MONDAY, 14 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, where is Carmen Lawrence now that she seems to
have lost her avenue for..
PM: Well, she hasn't lost the avenue, she hasn't lost the matter, it is a
jurisdictional matter where the High Court has said that the Western
Australian action she has, that process has to be complete before it
would be competent for the High Court to hear it. So, the matter of
substance is not yet determined. But, the legal options which she
might have will now have to be considered and no doubt she will do
that.
J: Are you happy to continue supporting her while she exhausts every
legal option that she has available to her?
PM: Of course I am because this process of the Royal Commission in
Western Australia is directed to extending the arm of the Western
Australian Executive and in this matter, she has taken the view and so
has the Federal Cabinet that the rights of MPs versus the Executive
are important ones. But again, I think, she has taken the view right
through that she is prepared to tell her story at the appropriate
moment.
J: Her affairs must be doing some damage to the Party?
PM: I don't think it is doing as much as the Liberal Party is doing to itself in
Western Australia. In Western Australia we have now a third person
hopping out of the Liberal Party on the weekend after Mr Rocher and
Mr Filing. Now, Mr Howard told everybody last week that he was
resolving the matter and he had this, as he said, this sort of mock
expulsion of Senator Crichton-Browne. Well, if that has assuaged the
fears of Western Australian MPs, Mr Rocher wouldn't have run as an
Independent, Mr Filing may have come back into the Party and 
certainly the candidate for Swan wouldn't have shifted from the Liberal
Party to Independent status. I notice in the Sydney Sunday Telegraph
a story which says " Howard's strategy may backfire on him". Mr
Howard told all those gullible enough to believe him last week that he
had exercised authority and secured the agreement to push Senator
Crichton-Browne away from the processes of the Liberal Party. What
we now know is that this is untrue. It turns out that Mr Court and David
Honey prevailed upon Senator Crichton-Browne to remove himself
from the activities of the Liberal Party. After having found that out, Mr
Howard then put out a statement. In other words, it wasn't Mr Howard
who did that at all. Let me just say, and I am winking here, there is at
least one Canberra journalist who said to me if it is to be revealed that
Mr Howard was not central to Mr Crichton-Browne' s " removal" from the
Liberal Party, he would say so volubly in his medium Now is his
opportunity because Mr Howard has told an enormous porky here.
What he has done, basically, it is a very revealing article. It says that,
for instance, last week Mr Howard said ' I got rid of Noel Crichton-
Browne from the Liberal Senate ticket'. Senior Liberals dispute this.
They say Senator Crichton-Browne made his decision to stand down
from the Senate solely after discussions with the Western Australian
Premier and are adamant that Mr Howard had no influence on his
decision. Howard will say anything and he does. It goes on to say ' Mr
Howard's announcement banning Senator Crichton-Browne from party
meetings also came after he ( Crichton-Browne) had announced his
withdrawal from party affairs.
So, certainly this is hurting the Liberal Party in Western Australia and
what it shows is John Howard's weakness, indecisiveness, lack of
support for those who have supported him. By contrast, last week, I
said I was supporting Martin Ferguson. I made it clear that I would be
supporting him at the National Executive were it to have met today and
as you know that matter was resolved within the Labor Party with other
candidates withdrawing. So, again, let me just underline here John
Howard's duplicity and weakness in dealing with these people in his
Party in Western Australian over Senator Crichton-Browne. They are
leaving the Liberal Party in droves in Western Australia. There is a
real crisis there, a complete party split is on over there and let me
complete on those words by the former Senator Reg Withers when he
said there is a civil war on over there and that is exactly what is on in
the Western Australian Liberal Party.
J: Prime Minister, have you given any consideration or had any
discussions, even in private, about who might take over the health
portfolio..
PM: None, what so ever and I'm not considering it.
J: Would you be comfortable with Carmen Lawrence giving evidence at
the Royal Commission? 
PM: Of course I would be comfortable with her giving her evidence in any
body. But, again, there is a matter of principle here about the rights of
the Executive and the rights of Members of Parliament and that will
probably run its full course.
J: Does Martin Ferguson go to the preselection for the seat of Batman as
damaged goods now?
PM: No, I think, the public are very shrewd assessors of these processes
and they see that Martin Ferguson represented working Australians
over a long period of time in the Miscellaneous Workers Union and
then as President of the ACTU and they would see it as a natural shift
for him to make a change to the Federal Parliament in the Labor Party.
This will be good for the Labor Party. It will make us stronger, it will
make the Government stronger and, again, it just renews that contact
we have had with working Australians, to have the leader of the
industrial movement in the federal caucus. So, I would think most
Australians will regard this as a sensible outcome and like me would
probably appreciate the commitment which was made by the other
candidates and the decision which they took to withdraw from the
contest.
J: of Independents, Phil Cleary, says he may run somebody..
PM: Well, good on you Phil, do your hardest. In a democracy you can put
your money, put your deposit down and it is everyone for themselves.
J: Have you written off the next election as a loss?
PM: Where do you get those questions for God's sake. I mean, has the
sun got to you?
J: Are you prepared to consider the plea by veterans from the pacific that
they get some personal reward?
PM: We have a mature system of supporting veterans and we have had it
in place now for a very long period of time and you might also know
that those who were particularly disadvantaged, prisoners of war, you
might have seen Tom Uren's remarks of a day or so ago, supporting
the Government in support of those people who did suffer at the hands
of the Japanese and Germans. But in the broad, of course, we have a
very mature system of assessment and support for veterans.
J: What about ones in the Pacific, in Papua New Guinea and Solomon
Islands?
PM: That is for the whole of the service in the Second World War. Thank
you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF HEROES WALK, TOWNSVILLE, 14 AUGUST 1995
*' CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Con Sciacca, Councillor Tony M~ iooney and Mrs Mooney, Keith Payne VC and Don
Starcevich, son of Private Leslie Starcevich VC, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen. I'm delighted to be in Anzac Park this morning to open this Heroes Walk.
During the Australia Remembers year, we have remembered the efforts of the
World War Two generation of Australians. We have remembered those who
worked on the homefront as well as those who served on the battlefield.
But this memorial honours the bravest of the brave.
It honours the twenty Australians who received the nation's highest honour for
valour during the WWII the Victoria Cross and especially the twelve recipients
who fought in the Pacific War.
They gave their all in defence of this country and many of them gave their lives.
Today we pay tribute to people of rare quality men of great courage and
resourcefulness and sustained by their belief in Australia.
Men like Corporal Jack French from Crows Nest, near Toowoomba, who overcame
three Japanese machine gun nests at Milne Bay before succumbing.
Or Private Richard Kelliher, who enlisted in the 2nd AIF in Brisbane, who silenced
a machine gun post at Lae and saved his wounded section commander.
It is to these men and all their comrades that we pay tribute today.
I know that Keith Payne VC from the Vietnam War is here and we acknowledge
his great service to Australia.
The winners of the Victoria Cross are surely all heroes. But all of Australia's
fighting men and women of World War Two and the millions of Australians who
stood behind them deserve the title too.
We remember them all as heroes.
Thank you. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME INISTER THE HON P J KEATING. N2
NATIONAL COMMEMORA17ON SERVICE V P DAY, BRISBANE. 15 AUGUST 1995
'' CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY'
I have been privileged in the past three years to visit some of the cemeteries in Asia and
the Pacific and in Europe where Australian servicemen and women lie buried. It has
been my duty to utter some words of tribute on behalf of the Australian people and
participate in services to commemorate their deeds and sacrifice.
It has been one of the great privileges of my life. But it is a humbling experience. No
Australian can fail to be affected by these places.
This year, as part of the Australia Remembers program, many veterans of our World War
HI campaigns have made pilgrimages to the battlefields and these cemeteries. I think it is
beyond the capacities of my generation to appreciate just how deep their feelings must
have run.
It is not, however, beyond us to understand and it is our duty to try. It is our duty to
convey to our children what the deaths of those Australians mean to all of us and will
always mean.
Most Australians will never stand among the graves in Bomana and Lae, or Singapore or
Kanchanabuni or Yokohama or in any of the cemeteries in Europe, Sritain or the Middle
East. But all of us should know that Australians are buried there.
We should know why, and the meaning it contains for us.
We cannot know what their last days were like; what suffering they went through, what
pain and longing and despair they endured so far from home. We can only imagine.
And fifty years later we can feel the loss of their lives as our loss.
To stand among those graves is to recognise the profound truth of the ties that bind us as
Australians. These are Australians like ourselves. But these Australians gave their
young lives: gave them so we might live in peace and freedom, gave them so we might
enjoy the blessings of life and enjoy them in the country they loved-
Contemplate those graves, or the 40,000 names on the World War II Honour Roll at the
Australian War MemoriaL and the story of this country, and the story of every one who
calls it home, takes on an irresistible meaning.
It instils in our national life a sense of duty.
The story tells us that there was a generation of men and women who so loved this
country, and the freedoms and way of life we now enjoy, they were prepared to lay down
their lives. There were Australians who so loved what is just, they defended it to the
death. We cannot think about this without understanding the debt we owe them, and the duty we
have to honour their memory.
To truly honour them is much more than a ritual task. It is to take the knowledge of their
sacrifice into our daily lives and the life of Australia-It it is to love this country and give
to it as they did which is to say with that same faith from which their inspiration, effort
and endurance flowed.
It is to believe in freedom as they did, defend freedom as they did. To work together as
they did.
It is to make this country as strong and secure as they made it.
Time has changed our perspective on the world and on ourselves. We have had to adjust
our thinking to accommodate necessities. In many ways I think we are better for it. It
may be that we are less naive and more worldly than the Australians of fifty years ago. I
believe we are more tolerant and more open.
But if we are to succeed as we should we will always need their strength, their collective
spirit, their sense of duty, their faith. We will need their inspiration
I hope that this Australia Remembers year has reminded us all of these things.
Never did a generation of Australians have more reason to celebrate than those of
years ago. In pure and simple terms they were celebrating a victory. They had fought for
what they believed in and won. They had truted in their values and in each other and
they had been vindicated. Now they had every reason to expect the rewards of peace and.
prosperity. What we have done this year is to join them in this celebration, in this same confident
belief in the futue. 
3
Today we should recognise that we have the same unbreakable link to those people who
danced in the streets 50 years ago as we do with those who lie in those gaves in New
Guinea and Borneo and Thailand and Japan.
We are part of the one story.
I think this Australia Remembers year will have been a triumph if it has reminded us of
that I hope our commemorations this year have remided the Australians of today that
they have as much reason to celebrate as those of 50 years ago.
And the reason is the same-We are a free and independent people, we live in peace and
we have a great future.
And we have these things in common and we have a duty to Australia. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MIMiSTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP'
FREEDOM FLAME CEREMONY, BRISBANE, 15 AUGUST 1995
*" CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*"
This has been a very good year in the lifes of Australia. It was a great year when
the war was won. and I think this fftieth anniversary year will go down as a very
good one.
We could not live upto the deeds, but Ithink wecan say that in the year of
" Australia Remembers" the people of Australia lived up to the memory.
And we have remembered. We do remember. We have felt the bonds between
us and those Australians who, with our alies, fought and won the greatest of all
victorles fifty year ego
VP means Victory in the Pacific. It has also been called VJ Day Victory over
Japan and some people thought that is what we should call it In Australia.
I think most of us f OWtfirstt uterIst reafly important one -the " V for
victory.. The victory over tyrny and aggression. The victory for freedom
decency and justice. The victory for peace.
That is what we are celebrating.
And I think there Is reason to bellev that we have a little more cause to celebrate
aftr today's statement by the Prime Minister of Japan.
Today Mr Murayama acknowledged the " Irretf~ tl % Wta of Japanese
aggression in World War 11 and the " tremendous damrage and suffeing" it
caused. Mr Murayarna said: " I regard, in aspiit of humility, these irrefuitable facts of
history, and express here once again my feelings of deep remorse, and state my
heartfelt apoloy. 
I am sure all Australians welcome Mr Murayarna's statement. We all feel that it is
essential for the Japanese people to know and acknowledge the truth about the
past.
Australians have learned a lot about the past this year. We have learned a lot
about the war and what victory meant.
And we have learned how fortunate we are that we still have the things for which
Australians fought
We are free few people were ever so free, few countries were ever. so
democratic. Few have ever enjoyed for so long the peace we have enjoyed in the past fifty
years. We have our liberty, we have our rights, and we are at peace few nations were
ever so fortunate.
" Australia Remembers" has been a way of saying that we do not take this for
granted a way of reminding ourselves that we never can.
To remember has been to recognise that these great gifts were delivered to us at
immeasurable human cost.
It has been to remind us all that peace and freedom are hard won and we must
be prepared to defend them.
To remember has been to be reminded that when democracy needed defending
in Europe, Australia sent help.
And when we neee help, it was sent to us.
When Australia remembered this year we remembered the help we received from
the United States.
We remembered all those from Britain and the countries of the Commonwealth
who fought alongside Australians, suiffiered in prison camps with Australians, died
and lie buried with Australians.
To remember the Second World War Is to be reminded that free people have a
duty to freedom everywhere.
That might be the greatest lesson of all.
This year has been a great one for another reason. 
It has reminded us that while our world has changed dramatically, and while the
young Australians of today are very different to those who fought the war fifty
years ago, the bonds between our generations are unbreakable.
It has reminded us that the passage of time and. changes in perspective and
fashion cannot after the fact that we are the same people that we are part of the
same Australian story.
We have all drawn inspiration from remembering the deeds of the war generation.
I sincerely hope that that great generation has drawn some comfort from seeing
us inspired.
We are all a little stronger for this year. And Australia is a little stronger.
We not only know more about the war and what we won from it; I venture to say
we know more about how to win.
We know more about each other, more about the value of men and women from
all parts of the continent, all backgrounds and all parts of the world, working
together and sticking together.
We certainly know more about what it is to be Australian and we know more
about the duty that implies.
Celebrating the generation of 1945 has taught us that it is our duty to live up to
their love for this country and the sacrifice they made for it.
It has taught us to believe in ourselves, defend freedom and cherish peace.
Above all, it has taught us to be like those at Kokoda, or in the camps of Thailand
and Burma to keep up the faith and keep going.
I thank everyone who has made Australia Remembers such a wonderful event
every organiser, every worker and every participant
And most of all, I thank every member of that magnificent generation of
Australians who won that victory for all of us fifty years ago.
I v-
A d. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
-SPEECH TO THE AUSTRALIA REMEMBERS NATIONAL YOUTH FORUM,
BRISBANE GIRLS' GRAMMAR SCHOOL, BRISBANE, 15 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Can I say I am delighted to be at Brisbane Girls' Grammar School and to say
how pleased I am that so many young Australians have taken up the theme of
Australia Remembers and have engaged themselves with it.
I think it is apparent to you, if it wasn't earlier, that most of the things we
celebrate and the people we remember were young Australians in the main,
young Australians as you are today young Australians and that they had all
the hopes and aspirations that you have. They were very much at the point
in their own lives, as many of you are at today, and yet at this level of the
emotional development they carried the brute force of an assault upon
themselves, upon their life, upon Australia and it was belief in this country, a
belief in what we have created here, of what have we represented and faith in
themselves and those around them that let them fight the fight against
tyranny and oppression to a hard won victory which has given us all liberty
and peace. I mean that is what we remember. Remember that faith and
remember that belief.
Perhaps it came home to me most when I was in Kokoda in 1992 on that
same little green square that exists today, that existed then, where the first
shots by Australian combatants against the Japanese marines in defence of
Australia were fired. And that morning at 6.00 am, with the mist low over the
village as it started to clear, young Australian men in shorts and singlets
some 18 years of age, fought the best the Japanese Imperial Army could
throw at them.
Now that is people at Year 12 age, or approaching Year 12, to be sitting there
in that tropical environment facing the strongest and the best combat troops
the Japanese could throw at our country. So you had to believe in something
and you had to have faith in something to carry on and they did and they
fought a valiant fight for Australia and the rest is the history we know. 
2
That is who we are remembering and we see the diggers, now in their
late 60s or their 70s or even the First World War diggers older than that, and
you are prone to think about them, but you must think about them as young
people because it was their young lives which were disrupted and it was the
younger lives, the lives of even younger people, who were lost.
I remember walking through the cemetery at Kanchanaburi in Thailand, not
far from the Burma railway, looking at the number of young men, young
Australians who died, the day that I was born 18 January 1944. And you
know that it makes the point poignantly to you, they died so that your life
could be complete and I said in the speech for the Unknown Soldier, when we
buried the Unknown Soldier, that he was all of them, one of them, but one of
us. And they all of them were one of us.
I know we think today that we being the people of democracy and liberty, that
of course we would have won the war. We will back it up that the right side
won, the good people won, the good guys won. But it didn't necessarily have
to go that way and in the war in Europe which is so inextricably linked to the
war in the Pacific, that had Hitler made an assault on Britain in 1940, had he
not attacked the Soviet Union in 1941, had the Russian people not held out
Leningrad from 1941-1944, then we might have faced a completely different
world. With a successful Nazi Germany, with the Russians not in the war, where we
faced the Japanese with the United States, and the toe-hold in Normandy
might just simply have been that a toe-hold and been simply as we
remember Gallipoli from the First World War.
The fact that we succeeded and had we not it would have been a race
between Hitler and the United States to develop the nuclear weapon and it
might not have been Hiroshima and Nagasaki, but it could have also been
British cities and American cities. So it was close and I have no doubt that
the United States once that great machine finally wound itself up, under the
leadership of Franklin Roosevelt, that we would have defeated the Japanese
in the Pacific. But it might have been a different war. The whole environment
may have been different. But notwithstanding our sense of democracy and
liberty in our righteousness we may not have been at least the early victors.
So Australia was a more innocent country then and a small country.
A smaller much more innocent place than today, where we are perhaps less
naive and more worldly and so the assault and the affront was greater and
one had to have that deep sense of democracy and that clear installation of
the values to actually run a fight like this and to win. And so when we see our
relatives, our dead relatives, laying around the battlefields of East Asia and
Europe, we know that they were there confronting with some substantial
uncertainty that period in their lives which may have seen a different world for
them and for us.
So it had to mean something. 50 years on, we can't say oh well that was just
something in the past. This sort of stoicism, this sort of bravery, heroism, 
belief in Australia, belief in what we created here, belief in our values, had to
mean something. And so I am exceptionally pleased that so many
Australians remember and so many young Australians remember and have
learned about the period.
Now today the Prime Minister of Japan made a statement and one that I think
will bring substantial pleasure to many of us in this country and many of you
I think all of you. And I will read some of it because I think it is a testimony to
the battle that we fought. And he said, and I am reading part of it, " our task is
to convey to younger generations the horrors of war so that we never repeat
the errors in our history." This is what we have always asked of the
Japanese. That they teach their children what happened. And he is saying
that " our task is to convey to younger generations the horrors of war so that
we never repeat the errors in our history. Furthermore I will continue in all
sincerity to do my utmost in efforts being made on the issues arisen from the
war, in order to further strengthen the relations of trust between Japan and
those other countries. Now upon this historic occasion, the 50th anniversary
of the war's end, we should bear in mind that we must look into the past to
learn from the lessons of history and ensure that we do not stray from the
path to peace and prosperity of human society in the future. We do not
stray," he says. " During a certain period, in the not too distant past, Japan
followed a mistaken national policy. Advanced on the road to war only to
ensnare the Japanese people in a fateful crisis and through it colonial rule
and aggression caused tremendous damage and suffering to the people of
many countries, particularly those of Asian nations. In the hope that no such
mistake be made in the future, I regard in the spirit of humility, these
irrefutable facts of history and express here, once again, my feelings of deep
remorse and state my heartfelt apology. Allow me also to express my
feelings of profound mourning to all victims, both at home and abroad, of that
history. Building from our deep remorse on this occasion of the
anniversary of the end of the war, Japan must eliminate self-righteous
nationalism, promote international coordination as a responsible member of
the international community, and thereby advance these principles of peace
and democracy." He finishes, amongst other things, by saying " it is my
conviction that in this way alone can Japan atone for its past and lay to rest
the spirits of those who perished. It is said that one can rely on good faith
and so, in this time of remembrance, I declare to the people of Japan and
abroad my intention to make good faith the foundations of our Government
policy and this is my vow.'
Now that is a powerful statement and one that acknowledges for many
Australians the hurt that happened, the wrong that was done, the nationalism
which was invested wrongly, mistakenly and the sorrow that it expressed.
( tape break)
We should never be at any stage sanguine about liberty and democracy.
Those of you who are studying modem history will know that probably one of
the shots that started the First World War was in Sarajevo in 1914 where a
member of the then ruling royal family was assassinated and yet now, in 
Sarajevo 80 years later we saw the force last week of 2700 people machine
gunned and buried in mass graves, the sort of numbers that we as a country
lost on the death march in Sandakan, which we now remember the detail. I
think all that means to us is that we must be eternally vigilant about
democracy and liberty and about the value of each human person and about
human rights and it underlies again why we should remember, if not simply to
remember the fight for liberty and democracy by those young Australians
years ago. But, to remember how we need to be vigilant to preserve those
liberties today. Thank you for being interested in this remembrance program.
ends k 



1 -tv"
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RAY MARTIN, A CURRENT AFFAIR, AUSTRALIA
REMEMBERS, 15 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RM: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Good Ray.
RM: Were children, Australian children a deliberate target of this Australia
Remembers campaign?
PM: I think the whole nation was, but we had hoped that young Australians
most appreciated it too because while we now look at the diggers on
Anzac Day or today and we see people 60 or 70 years of age, there is
always the impression of thinking about them. But, it was them as
young people. It was them in their teens and their twenties. And so,
the young Australians of today are, in some respects, entitled to
picture themselves in that picture. So, if we can't make the linkage to
them, in a sense we are failing in the remembrance.
RM: Yes. Some of them said to us today when they saw the veterans
marching today that they felt like crying and some cried. Have you felt
like crying?
PM: Yes, absolutely. But, I was most touched at Kokoda, as I was saying
earlier today, that there is a little green square at Kokoda where the
mists were, the morning tropical mists and as it rose young Australians
of 18 years of age in shorts and singlets fought the best crack troops
that the Japanese Imperial Army could throw at them and there the
defence of Australia began in the hands of 18 year olds. These are
the images, I think, which do bring you to tears.
RM: The vets have said to me over the last couple of days when we have
talked to them that the image that they recall most, that they have
loved the most, has been children waving to them on the train with
balloons. 
PM: Yes because it was about, you had to have this view of Australia, your
belief in Australia to fight the fight. It had to be about your family and
the children and so the sentiments for which they fought and died are
the very same things which are ringing a bell with them now. I mean,
seeing young people interested in it and thanking them for it is very
sentimental for them.
RM: Yes, but I would have thought there was a generation gap especially
with the younger people who are 10 or 12 or 14, but clearly there
hasn't. This has brought them together.
PM: Yes, I hope that the whole series of remembrances and ceremonies
has brought into sharp focus what it means and we need to make the
point because our troubles all started in this century in 1914 in
Sarajevo and here we are in 1995 in Sarajevo.
RM: It is a terrible irony isn't it?
PM: And it means that we can never be sanguine about liberty or
democracy and that we always need to guard it and value it and
understand how it has been protected.
RM: A very quick question, have the Japanese now apologised, do you
accept the Prime Minister's statement as an apology?
PM: I think it is a very comprehensive apology and the most pleasing
element to it is his sentiment that he wishes to tell the younger
generation of Japanese people about the mistake in policies of the
past and to go the international way of peace and freedom and not
misplaced nationalism. These are sentiments I have not heard from a
Japanese head of government before.
RM: Strong enough for you?
PM: Yes, some will say in Australia, well it should have come from the Diet
or somewhere else, but Mr Murayama is the Prime Minister of Japan
and he speaks for the nation of Japan. It is a very comprehensive
statement.
RM: Thanks for your time, have a good night.
PM: Thank you Ray.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, BRISBANE GIRLS' GRAMMAR SCHOOL, BRISBANE,
AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister what is your reaction to the Japanese Prime Minister's
statement?
PM: It is quite a comprehensive one where he says that Japan eschews
nationalism, where he says that their policy was a mistaken one and
where he wants to embrace the principles of peace and prosperity.
It is a fairly comprehensive apology. It admits the mistaken policy of
the past. He sympathises with the damage that this has caused to
other peoples and I think most of the opponents of Japan during the
Second World War would be satisfied that a genuine sentiment has
been expressed by Prime Minister Murayama.
J: Has he got backing from the whole Japanese Government, do you
believe?
PM: Well he is the Prime Minister and he said it on behalf of the Japanese
nation.
ends
u. x.-l l. i -1 r 



TEL: 15. Aug. 95 6: 37 No. 026 P. 07i
PRIME MINISTER 85/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR GREINER AND " GUTLESS" POLITICS
According to an AAP report, the former Liberal Premier of NSW, Nick
Greiner, has accused the Leader of the Opposition, John Howard, of
adopting a " gutless approach" to political leadership.
Mr Greiner is reported to have said that John Howard had adopted " totally
risk-averse" politics, and that this style of political expediency " is having and
will continue to have a deleterious effect on the way this country develops."
Here we have, -from within the Liberal Party Itself, an astute and damning
assessment of John Howard's political leadership.
As Mr Greiner has confirmed, John Howard will try dishonestly to skate under
the electoral wire, revealing as few of his policies as possible.
Mr Greiner said It was good politics, but bad for the nation.
I say it is bad for the nation, an bad politics.
BRISBANE 16 AUGUST, 1995 



86/)-
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MVP
THE FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF INDONESIA'S INDEPENDENCE
Fifty years ago, in the same week in which victory was finally achieved in the Pacific
war, the leaders of Indonesia's nationalist movement proclaimed their country's
independence from the Dutch.
That declaration on 17 August 1945 by Sukarno and Mohammned Hatta set in train the
momentous events which created the modern Indonesian state and transformed our
region. On behalf of the Australian Government and people I am very happy to offer the
Government and people of Indonesia our warmest congratulations on the
anniversary of this historic event.
Few developments since the end of the Second World War have had such beneficial
strategic and political consequences for Australia as Indonesia's development as a
united and increasingly prosperous country.
In its half-century of independence, Indonesia has faced huge nation building
challenges. [ t has had to mould a unified nation and create a modern and outwardlooking
economy in a diverse archipelago comprising a vast number of different
cultures, languages, religions and ethnic groups.
Its population of 190 million is now the fourth largest of any country in the world.
In the face of these challenges, the accomplishments of the Indonesian people have
been remarkable.
Under the New Order Government of President Soeharto, the number of Indonesians
living below the poverty line has fallen from 60 per cent of the population to 13 per
cent in 1994. By the end of the century it is expected to fall to 6 per cent. Infant
mortality has more than halved over the past 25 years and life expectancy has risen by
17 years. In 1960 39 per cent of Indonesians were literate; now more than 80 per cent
are. Each year the Indonesian economy has been growing at around 6 per cent. It is
expected to continue to grow at this rate for the rest of the century. 
Indonesia has also had an important influence in the wider international community.
The Bandung Conference of Asian and African countries in 1955 led to the
establishment of the Non-Aligned Movement. Indonesia has been a core member of
ASEAN. And at the Bogor conference of APEC leaders last year under President
Soeharto's chairmanship, the framework was set in place for economic growth in the
Asia Pacific region into the 2 1st century.
These developments have formed the foundation for the growing economic partnership
between Australia and Indonesia, which has hugze, untapped potential for both our
countries. Australia's merchandise exports to Indonesia were worth more than $ 2 billion in 1994
and more than 300 AustraX'..-companies now have a presence there.
But Indonesia's independence struggle was also important to Australia in another way.
Our policy response to the developments to our north our decision to support the
new national leadership and to help marshal international support for Indonesian
independence rather than simply to acquiesce in the post-war return of the colonial
system marked a turning point in the development of an independent Australian
foreign policy.
Australia's choice reflected the realities of our geography and the realisation that the
aspirations of the people in this region mattered to Australia.
Australians can take pride in the contributions this country made at that time through
public support for the struggle, including Trade Union blackbans on shipping, and the
Government's decision to bring the struggle to the attention of the United Nations and
our key role as advocate of Indonesia on the Committee of Good Offices.
Far-sighted individuals such as the Prime Minister, Ben Chifley, the Foreign Minister,
Dr Evatt, Sir Richard Kirby, Mr John Burton, Professor W McMahon Ball and Mr
Tom Critchley, as well as many private individuals and trade unions like the Waterside
Workers' Federation helped to secure the cause of Indonesian independence and, in
doing so, shaped a new direction for Australian foreign policy.
I have often said before that no country is more important to Australia than Indonesia.
The future of our two countries is inextricably linked.
Year by year the network of government to government and people to people
contacts between us has been growing in strength and depth. I am delighted with the
rapid increase in Indonesian students and tourists coming to Australia. One of the
Australian Government's major policy aims is to ensure that this strong partnership
between us continues to develop and that it becomes a source of stability and
prosperity for our whole region over the next fifty years.
For that reason, I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government has decided
to mark the 50th anniversary of Indonesian's independence by establishing a prestigious
new scholarship scheme to be called the Australia-Indonesia Merdeka Fellowships. 
These will be mid-career awards directed at future leaders in each country from across
a wide range of professions and disciplines.
It is our hope that over time these fellowships will help consolidate in each country a
community of people who share common experiences and a common vision of our
bilateral relationship.
It is my very great pleasure on Australia's behalf to congratulate Indonesia and its
people on the achievements of fifty years of independence.
CANBERRA 16 August 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY T13E PRIME NMqNSTER THE HON P J KEATING, MY
FOR THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THlE SOUTH PACIFIC ENVIRONMENT
uMIN S S mMEEIG, HERITAGE HOTEL BRISBANE,
16 AUGUST
I am very pleased to be able to speak to you today both as Prime Minister of Australia
and as Chair of the South Pacific Forum.
This is an important meeting the first time Environment Ministers from the South
Pacific Forumn have ever met together.
So it is very disappointing that the event which has brought it about is such an unhappy
one France's decision on I' 3; Juxne to resume the testing of nuclear weapons in the
Pacific. The response to that decision both within this regon and outside it was swift and strong.
Much swifter and stronger, I am sure, than the Government of France expected.
The reactions reflected, I think, a sense of betrayal. Betrayal by one of the current
nuclear powers, which had only recently pledged to exercise the ' utmost restraint! in
testing. Betrayal by a democracy. A betrayal of the hopes all of us felt with the end of
the Cold War that the world might finally free itself from the awful threat of nuclear
destruction. The French decision was a bad decision, because it put at risk our efforts to secure two of
the basic pillars of a non-nuclear world the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and
universal membership of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
And within this region the region, far-from France, where the test are to be conducted
it raised particular concerns, of course, about the environmental damage the testing
program rmght cause.
In response to Frances decision many countries around the world have raised their voices
in protest Action has been taken by countries individually, in regional forums and
globally in the United Nations and other international organisations. 
For its part, the South Pacific region contains some of the worlds smallest and most
ecologically vulnerable states. But all of them are in a profound material and spiritual
relationship with the Pacific Ocean. And through the South Pacific Forum especially,
their voice has been heard in this international outcry.
Immediately after the French Government's announcement, a Ministerial Mission from
the Forum visited Paris to express our concerns directly to the French-The delegation
was led by the Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Evans. President Dowiyogo of
Nauru, who is with us at this meeting, was present, too, together with representatives of
Papua New Guinea, New Zealand and Western Samoa.
Since then, a Regional Action Committee has been set up with the assistance of the
Forum Secretariat to coordinate our responses to the testing program. It will meet again
tomorrow here in Brisbane.
We are taking actions in other parts of the world, too. For example, Forum diplomatic
representatives i Washington from the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Western Samoa, New Zealand and Australia have made joint
representations on nuclear issues to members of Congress and the Administration.
I want to take this opportunity to thank Secretary General Tabai, in particular, for the
enormous effort he has put into developing and coordinating the Forum response.
The campaign against French nuclear testing by Forum members has been strong and
consistent And I believe it has already been useful for example, in encouraging the
welcome French decision on 9 August to pursue a zero threshold in the negotiations for a
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. But there is much further to go.
We wI have a further opportunity to review where matters stand at the Forum meeting
in Madang next month.
An important point to underline is that none of the responses to the testing decision by
forum members has been motivated by hostility to France or to its role in the Pacific.
Still less have our actions been the result of any antipathy towards the French people or
French culture. It has concerned me whenever that line has been breached in public
protests. We are opposed, simply, to this single bad decision. And we want to see it changed.
Over recent years, with the Maftignon Accords in New Caledonia and the 1992 French
moratorium on nuclear testing, our region's relations with France had probably never
been better.
That is the situation we want to sec again a productive and creative French engagement
with this region. 
But the testing decision has apin raised questions about how well the French
Government understands the attitudes and concerns of the people of this region.
Because the region's response should not have come as a surprise to President Chirac or
his advisers.
Our history of opposition to the testing of nuclear weapons and the dumping of nuclear
waste in this region has been long and consistent
It has been expressed in a number of ways over many years: in communiques and
declarations of successive South Pacific Forum meetings; in the 1985 Treaty of
Raratonga and in the 1993 South Pacific Regional Environment Protection Convention.
This meeting is a further practical expression of our concern about the nuclear issue. I
want to thank my colleague, John Faulkner, for the arrangements he has made to bring it
about. You will be focusing on the environmental consequences of the French Governments
decision. Australia's Chief Scientist Professor Michael Pitman has brought together a
scientific advisory group of scientists with nuclear, geological, seismic, meteorological
and marine expertise to provide you with scientific advice.
You will have an opportunity to review this evidence and to consider a possible
monitoring regime for the region. Your recommendations will provide a very important
input into the discussions when Forum leaders meet next month in Maclang.
Soon after President Chirac announced his decision about testing I wrote an article for
the French newspaper LeMonde as Chairman of the South Pacific Forums in which I
tried to convey to ordinary French people why it is that we in the Pacific oppose the
testing program SO stron gly.
I wrote that " There is a world of difference between studying a map of the Pacific in
Europe and living on the shores of the ocean in Sydney or Brisbane or Auckland or Suva.
" The map puts these places a long way from Mururoa. But when you live in these places
you know that, vast thought it is, the South Pacific is one environment and it binds all
those who share it."
That knowledge which we all share is why this meeting is being held. It is why the issues
you are considering are so important.
It is why people in all the Forum countries will join me in wishing you well in your
discussions. 



PRIME MINISTER
DOORSTOP, HERITAGLHOTEL, BRISBANE, 16 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Could I say that I was pleased that we were able to host a meeting of*
the Pacific Forum Environment Ministers here in Australia, in Brisbane.
This is the place where we held the last meeting of the Forum. What
the Forum is considering is some material that Australia has put
together, scientific material, which will allow Forum countries to better
assess the environmental impacts of the testing program of the French
at Mururoa.
I'd like to just repeat a couple of the things that I said formally earlier
and that is this is a very bad decision by France. I should have
thought that international interest and the non proliferation interests
would have been paramount rather than the further development of
their own weapon inventory and just underline, again, that the
sentiment towards this does not bear any antipathy towards the French
or French culture. It is simply opposition to a bad individual decision
which we would like to see changed. No doubt the Forum Leaders will
consider this further at the Madang meeting and they will have
something to react to in the report by the environment ministers here
today. I am happy to take questions.
J: Prime Minister, how strong is the scientific evidence that will be
presented today?
PM: I think you may get a look at that later and you can make your own
judgement about it. But, at least we have pulled together the various
disciplines meteorology, geology-, seismic, marine et cetera too try
to make some assessment of the impact on the region and, of course,
on the reef structures themselves.
J: But no matter how strong that evidence is, do you think it will have any
impact on the French Government?
PM: I think the Government of France has misjudged international reaction
to this. I'm quite sure President Chirac was probably advised that this
46 ; i m i 
would blow over quickly. The thing that probably disserves him most
is public opinion in Germany and securing a high level of intensity in
European opinion is the way to prosecute this argument.
J: about the public, Prime Minister ( inaudible)
PM: You can see it in the quite strong registration of opinion in European
polls and also, I think, in the European Parliament and in France itself.
J: Will the Forum pursue that?
PM: We are still takingthe opportunities to proselytise on the issue. I am
and I think other pBpte are too.
J: Mr Keating, in relation to the matter of the Japanese apology, a lot of
the other allied countries are saying that its not good enough and
saying that we have been too quick to accept his apology and that in
fact we are out of step, do you agree with that?
PM: No, this is obviously a start of a period of reflection in Japan and
securing such a comprehensive statement from the Prime Minister of
Japan is a very good place to begin what is probably for the Japanese
now a longer run assessment. You might notice that Prime Minister
Murayama talked about telling the children of the undeniable truth and
that is what it is about. I have said this before, I don't think the
apology matters as much as the inculcation of the ideas, the history
and the values in their community.
J: So, if it is good enough for us is it good enough for England and
PM: They can make their own minds up about this, but we are not in
dispute, an international dispute, _ with the nation of Japan. We are
debating events half a century ago.
J: You say it is the beginning of a process, what more could you be
satisfied with, the Australian people be satisfied with the process
PM: Well, it is not the apology that matters so much. I have just said that.
It is the inculcation of these values. It is like saying when will all
Australian children be educated on a certain point? Well, no one can
ever know, but at least it is important to start teaching the truth about
this and to let this young generation of Japanese people know what
really happened. That is what matters.
J: Should there be an apology from the Japanese Government, but as a
whole?
PM: There has been over time, apologies. I don't think they matter as
much again as the dissemination of the history and the inculcation ofthe
values; I think that is what matters most. W. 
J: Are the expectations and demands of the allies then too great?
PM: The allies, I mean, you think that they are back there and still got the
hats on, still got the helmets on?
J: Prime Minister, will Nick Greiner be campaigning on behalf of Labor at
the next election?
PM: I think Mr Greiner has hit on a very important thing in Australian public
life and that is the Australian people have got a right to know what the
big picture policy options are. The Australian people have got a right
to know how poians will govern Australia. They have a right to
know about the directions and where Australia can be taken and how.
Honour and integrity in the public debate can only come with policy
and hiding from policy is not the way that Australia should be going,
not the way our politics should be going at this point in our history.
We need clear directions and we need them in all the things, our
relationship with Asia, the development of our economy, our society,
our social values. You might notice Mr Greiner talked about tax reform
and the labour market. When you hear any member of the Liberal
Party talk about tax reform, he is talking about the unutterable phrase
a consumption tax, a GST. You see, the Liberal Party still wants a
GST. Mr Greiner is hinting at it again. Mr Howard has spent all his life
committed to a GST, but now he won't say it. But, of course, do the
public know, that in office, they wouldn't get a GST? Well, of course,
John Howard is going to run to ground on policy and Mr Greiner
saying yesterday that he is risk averse, that he won't say where he
stands is only a statement of the obvious, but he is condemning it as
the way forward for Australia as I do because the Government has
always stood and said where the policy direction should be.
Remember all those Budgets and May Statements that I personally
delivered 17 of them four Prime Ministerial Statements, 21 major
national statements every dot point, every dotted and crossed.
That is what the public should expect and that is a right they should be
given. I notice that Malcolm Fraser and Tim Fischer jumped on it immediately.
Tim Fischer knows exactly who Mr Greiner was talking about. He was
talking about Mr Howard and Tim Fischer and Malcolm Fraser know
how damaging it is for someone of Mr Greiner's standing to say that it
is wrong for Mr Howard not to show the public his policy card.
J: Mr Greiner now says that labour markets ( inaudible)
PM: Mr Greiner knew exactly who he as speaking of Mr Howard he said
he was risk averse. He wasn't referring to me. They can say many
things about me, but risk averse isn't one of them and therefore this
mutter this morning on radio from Mr Fraser and Mr Fischer, they knew
exactly who Mr Greiner was talking . about too. What Mr Greiner is
1. 4 o P" tj
z, r i l . laL-li. 
doing now is being a loyal member of the Liberal Party this morning,
running the brush over the tracks, but yesterday he was making some
points which we all know are correct.
J: Given that the election campaign in Queensland, the Coalition ran
exactly the same tactics as hiding away their policy until the campaign
itself got underway, that was a virtual success, they went within a
whisker of winning government. It must be of large concern to you
facing a federal election with them running the same tactic?
PM: It would be of greater concern to the public. Let's say they had won,
what would their policy mandate be? What could they do? Anything
they like. That i sy-point, honesty and integrity in politics starts with
policies and I don't accept the view that it is good politics, if not good
policy, I think dishonesty in this respect is both bad politics and bad
policy.
J: Does that mean the Queensland government may have made a
mistake in its campaign?
PM: Are you a local? Well, I'll leave you to make your judgements about it.
J: Prime Minister, is confusing the electorate by your response to John
Howard in that at some stage you should say that he is a policy free
zone, at another stage you should say he is to change his policy
and now we are back to policy free zone...
PM: Who said that?
J: I am paraphrasing.
PM: I think I understand the sense of your. question. Let me approach it
this way. John Howard has had consistent policy prejudices. One of
them is to cut the wages of working Australians. Another is to stick in
a GST. Another is to get rid of Medicare. They are his policy
prejudices. Another is massive cuts in government spending. So,
when he says we have got to take the burden of government off the
back of people, that is simply code for cutting government spending.
When he talks about family friendly industrial relations policies he
really means cutting the wages of working Australians. So, he is trying
to keep the policy detail low, but he has got all the policy prejudices
right out there in the market place. That is the position. Greiner,
sharing a view, I think with me, says you can be completely honest and
credible in public life by putting your policies in the market place and
the Australian people have a right to know. Perhaps I'm old fashioned
in the view of saying that the public have a right to know where the
political parties stand, root and branch, crossed and dotted and
slippery politics will take the nation nowhere. Thank you.
ends 



TEL: 17. Aug. 95 1: 21 No. OOS
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, TIlE RON P J KEATING MP
TESTING OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS BY CHINA
Australia condemns the latest test of a nuclear weapon by China.
This test is the second in only three months since the extension of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ( NPI) in May this year. At the NPT Review and
Extension Conference all nuclear weapons states agreed to exercise ' utmost restraint'
with respect to nuclear testing pending the entry into force of a Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty in 1996, and to work sincerely towards the elimination of all nuclear weapons.
China's action flies in the face or these undertakings, which it supported at the NP'T
conference. One of the unfortunate consequences of China's decision to continue testing is that
nations which aspire to possess nuclear weapons will question the sincerity of nuclear
weapons states to eventual nuclear disarmament and their interest in developing nuclear
weapons may be reinforced. Such a development would be a serious threat to world
peace. Australia welcortis the recent statement of the ASE AN Regional Forum, which called
on nuclear weapons states to bring an immediate end to nuclear testing, as a clear
expression of regional and international concerns about the continued and unwarranted
testing of nuclear weapons.
Australians are angry that despite the end of the Cold War and the successful extension
of the NPT both China and France have decided to continue testing nuclear weapons.
Our disappointment is the greater because of the restraint exhibited by the other nuclear
weapons states and the fact that these weapons testing programs are occurring at a
critical time in international negotiations on a number of nuclear non-prolireration and
disarmament initiatives.
Australia urges China to cease its nuclear weapons testing program now as both an
important boost to global non-proliferation and disanmament efforts and global security.
CANBERRA 17 August 1995 



T1EL7: . Fiug. 95 21: 16 No. 022 PSTATEMENT
BY THE P&amp; jfE MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
TED WHITTEN
If you grew up In Sydney In the fifties and sixties you didn't hear much about
Australian Rules but you heard about Ted Whitten.
His fame went much further than Victoria. He was a great footballer but he
was more than that he was a true working class hero.
His character and courage made him an inspiration in Footscray and the west
of Melbourne and a legend among football lovers everywhere.
The world of Australian football has suffered a great loss with his death and
3o has Footscray and Victoria.
On behalf of the Government I extend my sincere sympathies to Ted's family
and friends.
CANBERRA 18 August 1995 TEL: 



PRIME MINISTER 89/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RESIGNATION OF GOVERNOR-GENERAL
The Queen's announcement of the resignation of the Honourable Bill Hayden
as Governor-General marks the end of a distinguished term of service by a
most highly respected Australian in this high office.
On behalf of the Government, I place on record our appreciation of
Mr Hayden's service to his country and our deep respect for the way in which
he has carried out his duties. He will be relinquishing his appointment after
seven years in office, the second longest term served by a
Governor-General. It was a measure of our admiration for the contribution
that he was making that the Government asked if he would extend his term
for a period of two years.
Bill Hayden's compassionate and inclusive style and his interest and concern
for Australians of all walks of life have been complemented by the warmth
and commitment which his wife, Dallas, has brought to Yarralumla. They
have earned the affection of millions of Australians.
As Bill steps down from office I extend, on behalf of the Australian people, our
good wishes and our hope that he and Dallas will continue to enjoy health
and happiness in the years ahead.
CANBERRA 21 August 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 89/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MOMITER, THE HON P J KEATING MIP
APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR-GENERAL
The following announcement has been made from Buckingham Palace:
" Her Majesty The Queen has graciously approved the appointment of
the Honourable Sir William Deane -AC KBE to be her Governor-General of the
Commonwealth of Australia. Sir William will be sworn in as Governor-General on
16 February 1996 after the Honourable Bill Hayden vacates the office."
I warmly welcome Her Majestys appointment of Sir William Deane as Governor-General to
succeed Mr Hayden. Sir William has had a career of great distinction in the law and is at
present a Justice of the High Court of Australia.
Sir Williamn will be sworn as Governor-General on 16 February 1996. Although the
appointment is at the Queen's pleasure Sir Wiliam has agreed that it would be appropriate for
it to terminate on 31 December in the year 2000.
Sir William was born in Melbourne in 193 1. He has pursued a career in the law, being called
to the Bar in 1957 and becoming Queen's Counsel in 1963. In 1977, shortly after being
appointed to the Supreme Court of New South Wales, he was appointed to the newly
established Federal Court of Australia. He became a Justice of the High Court in 1982.
Lady ( Helen) Deane received her schooling at Kincoppal Convent in Sydney. After leaving
school she became an articled clerk with a Sydney firm of solicitors and studied law part-time
at Sydney University. She graduated in law in 1958 and practised as a solicitor with one of
Sydney's leading law firms.
Sir Wiliam and Lady Deane were married in 1965. They have two adult children, a son and a
daughter. On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I extend very sincere congratulations to
Sir William and Lady Deane.
CANBERRA 21 AUGUST, 1995 
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TEL. ( 06) 270 6969CHAMBERS OF JUSTICE DEANE
FAX. ( 06) 270 6970
P. O. BOX E435
QUEEN VICTORIA TERRACE A. C. T. 2600
Naturally, my wife and I are moved by the confidence
shown in us by our country. The appointment is a very
great honour and we approach it with humility and an
awareness of the responsibility it entails. We hope to serve
Australia weoll . In that regard, we are conscious of the
dignity and distinction with which the present Governor-
General and Mrs Hayden have discharged and are
discharging the duties of office.
On my swearing in as a Justice of the High Court more
than thirteen years ago, I pointed out that the source of all
government authority and legitimacy in a true democracy
such as Australia is the people. I then made a commitment
to serve all the people of this country to the best of my
ability as a judge of their highest court. I now extend that
public and unqualified commitment of service to cover the
office of Governor-General under our Constitution during
the period of my appointment. 
DEGREE OP. DOCTOR OF LAWS, ( HONORIS CAUSA)
Presented by the Vice-Chancellor and Principal Professor D McNicol I 9 0
William Patrick Deane
Chancellor, I have the honour to present Sir William Patrick Deane for admission to the degree of Doctor of
Laws ( honoris causa).
William Patrick Deane was born in Sydney in 1931. His family moved to Canberra a couple of
years after his birth and he was educated at St Joseph's College, Hunter's Hill and at the University of
Sydney. While at the Law School of this University he was one of the student founders of the Sydney
Law Review, a development that came about very much under the influence of Professor Julius Stone.
He had a very busy time as a student, on the Law Review, with the University Squadron, as a member
of the SRC, the Union Board of Directors and so on. With all these activities, and working part-time in
the Tax Department in third year and as an articled clerk in fourth year, he confesses to having been a
" terrible crammer". But the cramming obviously worked. He shared the University Medal in his year,
but rather than the usual corollary, a scholarship to attend an English university, he accepted a
Rotary Foundation scholarship to study at Trinity College Dublin. He then went on to the Hague
Academy of International Law, gaining the Diploma cum laude. In fact he was the first attender at the
Academy from outside continental Europe to receive that honour. Since the diploma itself is rarely
awarded by the rigorously dviliancontinental jury to someone from a common law country, the
" cum laude" clearly meant what it said. He then spent some time at Louvain and Paris working
respectively with Charles De Visscher and with Georges Scelle, probably the two greatest European
international lawyers of the time.
On his return to Sydney he was employed by one of Sydney's large firms of solicitors and was also
plunged into lecturing part-time in international law, during Julius Stone's absence overseas. He recalls
that Stone left him free to teach the subject as he saw it. He was later the Teaching Fellow in Equity
and Succession. He went to the Bar in 1957, as long intended. At a time before Wentworth and Selborne
Chambers had been built, chambers were simply impossible to get. With Dean Shatwell's and
Professor Stone's unofficial encouragement, he spent his first months at the Bar closetted in a rent-free
room in the Law School building an unusual additional return for his part-time lecturing.
After nine years at the Bar, he took silk. As Queen's Counsel, he appeared in many of the leading
legal cases of the time. He was appointed to the Equity Division of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales and then, in 1977, to the Federal Court of Australia. While on the Federal Court he was also
President of the Trade Practices Tribunal. In 1982 he was appointed to the High Court and made KBE.
In 1988, he was made a Companion of the Order of Australia. 
In the period since his appointment to the High Court he has become an acknowledged
intellectual leader of the Court, and a major force behind many of its decisions In fields such as
constitutional, law, equity and tort. In constitutional Interpretation in particular he has becn
influcntial, whether as a member of the majority or, on some occasions, in dissent. He approaches the
Constitution as a social compact between the Australian people through the Federation referenda, not
as an Act of Parliament, and certainly not as an Act of the Imperial Parliament. As a social compact,
the Constitution is, In his view, a flexible document, which can usually be adjusted to changing
situations by acceptable legal method. Thus most of the criticisms of the Constitution are in his view
misplaced, although It is true that party politics has made section 128, the principal Intended avenue
for change, nearly unworkable. As a social compact, the Constitution both expresses and Implies rights
inherent In the members of the Australian community, rights which decisions such as that in the
case, on the inter-State adm'ission of banisters, reveal, are much more extensive than the narrow or
legalistic Interpretation had allowed..
He has also taken a leading role in developing the Court's jurisprudence In old areas such as
negligence and emerging areas such as unjust enrichment, constructive trust and equitable estoppel. But
he worries that ordinary people can no longer afford to go to law, that the development of the law in
the High Court may simply be forging weapons for the intim-idation of those, who cannot afford to
litigate, against those who can. To remedy this requires changes in the legal profession, both In
structure and in attitudes. Here, he believes, legal education has a major role. The old professional
system of education had many advantages, but full-time legal education, combined with study of
another degree, enables the modern law school to harness the idealism as well as the intellect of its
students. Chancellor, as his own work reveals, idealism is not the prerogative of the young or of the
recently learned. It is transparent both In Mr justice Deane's judgments and in his attitude to the role of
law In Australian society. Chancellor, I present to you an acknowledged intellectual leader of the
High Court, and one of the Law School's most distinguished graduates, for admidssion to the degree of
Doctor of Laws ( honoris Causa), Sir William Patrick Deane. 
Blackacre 1990
An Interview With
SIR WILLIAM DEANE, AC, KBE
it is Sir William Deane's practice not to give
interviews. He dislikes personal publicity and is of
the opinion that what he has to say about law he can
say in his judgments; that they are the appropriate
vehicles for his views. It is also his general practice
to decline invitations to speak in public. That is a
pity, for his Honour is eloquent and interesting.
However, his Honour agreed to depart from his
usual practice to refuse to give interviews for
Blackacre. He tells us it is the first time he has done
so and will probably be the last, but not, we trust,
because he found the experience too awful.
Sir William Deane is a delightful man. He
possesses, amongst other qualities, a disarming
humility. In response to being asked his impressions
of his job, he replied " I don't think that being a judge
of the High Court for a brief period of time in this
corner of the world in this part of the universe is
such a big deal and I don't think that five hundred
years from now that it is very likely that there will be
anyone at all in possession [ of] or reading any
judgment that I wrote. So the answer is, I don't go
home at night and think what a great job I'm doing".
William Patrick Deane was born in Melbourne in
1931. His family moved to Canberra a couple of
years after his birth. After primary school in
Canberra, he obtained his Secondary schooling at
St. Joseph's College in Sydney. In his final year there
he decided to study law. In fact, Justice Deane
confessed, " It was more a process of elimination,
which I think was very common in those days for
people doing law. I wanted to go into a profession,
possibly that seemed the thing for people from
middle class backgrounds to want to do". He recalls
that his father, who was an engineer, " was pleased,
but didn't push me that waymHis Honour has
-acknowledged publicly the role of his parents, who
went without many things to meet the costs and
demands of my education but who did not live to the
stage where I could offer them material evidence of
my gratitude" m ( Swearing in Speech, High Court)..
His Honour's memories of university are mixed
ones. In those days the combined Arts/ Law Course
at Sydney involved two years studying Arts on the
University campus and four years studying law at
the Law School. He found the two years in Arts
quite exhilarating. Attending Law School between 1950 and 1953, he remembers that ' The Law School
in Phillip Street was a very depressing place in those
days. I used to spend as much time as I could at the
university.. The great majority of the students were
part time students; they were articled. A lot of the
students were ex-servicemen who were really only
concerned with getting through as quickly as
possible. As a result, there was almost no corporate
life at the Law School."
" I don't think that being a judge of
the High Court for a brief period of
time in this corner of the world in
this part of the universe is such a big
deal"
Nevertheless, university life was a hectic one. He
held various offices in the Sydney University Law
Society, including Secretary and Vice president. He
was on the SRC and the Union Board of Directors
( which the law students managed to " stack" in order
to obtain better facilities at Law School). In addition
he worked part time in the Tax Department during
third year and was articled in the fourth year. Add
to this flying with the university squadron and
playing sport and the result was, his Honour
confesses, that * 1 tended to indulge in the practice of
cramming for exams as much as anybody else did in
those days". However, as it has been pointed out, the
cramming must have worked, for he topped both
History and Political Philosophy in his second year
in Arts and shared the University Medal for Law in
his year.
Of lecturers, Justice Deane remembers that the
ones who influenced him most were ( in the order in
which they taught) Professor Currey in
Constitutional History, Professor Shatwell in Legal
History, Professor Stone " of course" and Professor
Morison. The association with Professor Stone was
a long and fruitful one and the influence lingers,
undoubtedly. Profeuc, 3. swm page 
Blackacre 1990
. After graduating the young Deane spent nine
months in the advising section of the Attorney-
General's department, where he came under the
direct influence of the then Solicitor-General
Professor Bailey, who was " very kind" to Deane.
Following that he proceeded, on a rotary
scholarship, to Trinity College, Dublin, where " In
theory I was studying International Law. But the
truth is that I had a wonderful year".
His departure for Trinity had been delayed by the
almost complete loss of the sight of his right eye in
the last rugby match he ever intended to play. After
Trinity, Justice Deane went, " partly at Professor
Stone's prompting" to take the courses and exams at
the Hague Academy. At this distinguished
institution he was awarded the Diploma cum laudc,
becoming only the sixth person in the history of the
Academy, and the first outside Continental Europe,
to have gained it. The exam was " a bit frightening",
partly written and partly oral, the latter part being
conducted in public by a " jury" of five. His honour
then spent some time at Louvain and Paris working
respectively with Charles De Visscher and George
Scelle, probably the two greatest European
international lawyers of the time. Naturally, all of
this " pleased Julius Stone" and led him to ask Deane
to conduct his lectures in International Law during
the Professor's absence overseas for the whole of 1956 and part of 195
This began Justice Deane's teaching association wi;
Sydney University Law School. The associatic
continued for eight years as teaching fellow
Equity and Succession.
His Honour's decision to go to the Bar w;
" something that just seemed to happen". It appea
to have been characterised by the same absence
deep examination of alternatives that was the non
of the day. He recalled that "[ T] here was much le
an inclination on the part of most part time lecture
who were practising barristers to encourage la
students to question the correctness of the reasoni.
in cases. Also there was almost no emphasis on tt
many avenues in which legal education can I
applied outside the practice of the law. J woul
think that notwithstanding the efforts of people lik
Shatwell and Stone and Morrison and Currey mo
of us left the Law School thinking that the obvior
path to pursue was professional success and in thow
days real professional success was seen as lying
the Bar and that's just the way it worked. Lookir
back I think that has been unfortunate'.
Blackacre 1990
From all accounts his Honour's career at the Bar contrary view is irretri
was a phenomenally successful one. As Mr McHugh never going to convino
Q. C. ( as he was then) said on the occasion of Justice
Deane's swearing in to the High Court, his Honour When at the Bar his H
was " one of the most able counsel the Australian areas of taxation, trac
legal system has ever produced'. He went to the Bar and constitutional law.
in 1957 and, just nine years later, at the age of 35, of these areas of the l
was appointed Queens Counsel His honour, in name. It has been poir
response to our question, opined that the qualities suppose that his Hone
needed to be successful at the Bar varied depending this class of case, for
on the type of law, but that " If youre going to go front of a jury in a cri
into the practice of ' Lawyers' law" in the sense of on the occasion of Just
for example, appearing in the High Court on a High Court). Yet it is
regular basis, I think, apart from the obvious need that one hears, as the
for intelligence and basic legal knowledge, the main William earlier this y
ingredients are hard work; honesty with the court that ordinary people c
you are appearing before so that you get their law, that the developm
confidence; and oddly enough, a degree of humility Court may simply b
so that you can appreciate the. impotnaee of inmidatiMat those,
listeninw not only to wh at'oropo iays I3 to P~ ssiwhbbCrbwosda
the qucstions you are-adkh Be that. yo; cam FateliMopuoaBtf th
apreciate-rptrtear ii i
viw other than your ow to a cm
I ~ l
L sh_ hA~ oi~ iit . tLk..' 4 evably misconceived, you are
eanybody of anything'.
[ onour practised largely in the
ie practices, commercial law
It was largely on the strength
aw that his Honour made his
ited out that it is a mistake to
ur's practice was confined to
he " was equally at home in
minal trial' ( Mr McHugh Q. C.
ice Deane's swearing in to the
not without a touch of irony
SVice Chancellor said of Sir
ear that his Honour " worries
an no longer afford to go to
nents of the law in the High
e forging weapons for the
who cannot afford to litigate,
r. Howier Justice Deane-ise
irmony. 
Blackacre 1990
In response to being asked what he would say to
someone considering entering the profession today,
his Honour said, * 1 would say the sort of thing that
young people have always, with a degree of justice,
seen as involving a touch of hypocrisy in that I'd say
' that what the law needs now more than anything
else is a degree of commitment to community
service that I didn't show when I was setting out. It
seems to me that the important areas of the practice
of law these days, if you put aside constitutional
cases which are in a particular category, are not the
absurdly expensive commercial disputes between big
companies fighting with their shareholders' money.
It is the area where the law touches the life of
ordinary people and I think that the area of legal aid
has to be expanded so that the Law is available to
ordinary people. I think that the Aboriginal legal aid
area is one that holds tremendous attraction in
terms of fulfilment of something worthwhile. But as
I say, these are comments which the younger
generation going into law are perfectly entitled to
close their ears to when it comes from the
generation that has allowed law to move down its
current path".
" barristers and even more so exbarristers
that talk about their excases
are amongst the most boring
people that there are".
Sir William admits to having loved the Bar". He
consciously avoided speaking of any particular cases
in which he was involved, being of the belief that
" barristers and even more so ex-barristers that talk
about their ex-cases are amongst the most boring
people that there are". However, he did comment on
the sort of work he found personally unfulfilling:
[ In my later years at the Bar I hardly ever
appeared for individuals. That had the advantage
that you didn't become particularly involved
personally in a case. It had the disadvantage that you
didn't really have the feeling that you were doing
anything great for society or anything else..."
And also that which he found satisfying: " In the
early years of the Trade Practices Commission I was
the silk under the general retainer to the
Commonwealth and I stayed under general retainer
for the first six years of the Commission. That
meant that I was precluded from doing a lot of
company work in that period, for private
companies but I thought that was worthwhile.' " Also, for about five or six years as a senior
I was retained by the Commissioner of Tmx
the time in which the tax avoidance indus
really flourishing and I thought that was won
The retainer was with regard to tax av.
matters and we seemed to be making consi;
progress and we won quite a few cases but 0i
whole enterprise came tumbling down when
Casuarina v. Commissioner of Taxation in th
Court and it didn't particularly seem woni
anymore.-" I think the worst sort of judge in
non-jury case is the judge that s:
there silently nodding at you ai
finds against you"
In 1977, Sir William was appointed to the E
division of the Supreme Court of New South V
He sat for a mere six weeks before he
appointed to the newly established Federal COL
Australia. While serving in that office he was
the President of the Trade Practices Tribuna
1982 he was appointed to the High Court
appointment described by the then sha
Attorney-General Evans as " safe". Sir William
of his appointr
page.: 8
. r. 
r .' jfr~. 7
4
IT that " in one sense I think I just saw it as a change
of a significant change of, jobs. But I was
extremely happy on the Federal Court and would
have been quite hiappy to stay there".
Whben asked ' iether the responsibility of being on
the Bench weighed heavily upon him, his Honour
said that it did not " weigh all that heavily. Indeed the
fact that we niever ( or it is unusual to) sit in single
judge cases means that the responsibility is always a.
shared one. I personally found that the responsibility
was much heavier if I was sitting as a single judge in
the Supreme Court in Equity and the Federal Court
deciding questions of fact between people who were
there giving evidence before you as human beings,
than it is in deciding an important constitutional
case in the High Court. In the sort of work that we
do you may be wrong in many people's eyes but you
ordinarily have the time to think the issues through.
They are almost invariably issues of law and even
though a lot of people might think your conclusion
is wrong, and the decision of the court might
establish that it is wrong, if you are dissenting, it is a
process of reasoning that brings you there, whereas
deciding a question of fact at first instance is
exercising a different sort of jurisdiction which is
much more final and which in many senses is a
much heavier burden".
Sir William Deane was awarded an honorary
doctorate this year by the University of Sydney. It
was said at that ceremony that * since his
appointment to the High Court he has become an
acknowledged intellectual leader of the Court, and a
major force behind many of its decisions in fields
such as constitutional law, equity and tort He has
also taken a role in developing the Court's
jurisprudence in old areas such as negligence and
emerging areas such as unjust enrichment,
constructive trust and equitable estoppel*. Sir
William says of his job on the High Court that " It's a
hard job and after thirteen years on the Bench I
must confess I'm sick of writing judgments but I.
don't think there is anything more useful that I
personally could do now, though no doubt a lot of
people would disagree with that'. He admitted that
the office is one which makes him feel ' a little bit"
isolated " but not to worry about. I'd feel very
isolated if it weren't for my family. I don't see nearly
as much of my friends as I'd like to it's not easy,
Partly because of living mainly in Canberra, partly
because of the writing of judgments that never
seems to end, to keep in touch". His Honour went
On to say that " One danger in being on the Bench
for a long time ( and I suppose I'm coming up a long time) is that
you tend to forget that any form of questioning of
counsel, even though you may intend to be helpful,
can be off-putting and with a young counsel, a bit
intimidating. But the approach that to avoid that
risk you sit there and stay silent seems to me to be
an even worse approach. I think the worst sort of
judge in a non-jury case is the judge that sits there
silently nodding at you and finds against you. It's a
very hard road".
" I think the Court is more conscious
now than it has been at any time
since I've been involved in the legal
profession about the desirability of a
joint judgment ( of a majority) if that
can be done without unduly
sacrificing the standard of the
Court's judgments
Looking back over the law during the period of his
professional life, his Honour has discerned some
interesting ( and worrying) changes. He said " in my
time at the Bar it was unusual for discovery in
commercial litigation to be other than a quick
process directed at the ascertainment of what were
the really relevant documents. It was unusual for
more than one solicitor, and extaordinarily unusual
for more than two solicitors, to be engaged on a
case. It was unusual for a commercial case to take
more than two or three days. It was unusual for the
documents going to court in a case to be more than
what could be contained in the barrister's brief and
that meant it was usual for the case to be quickly
decided. There were exceptions, but crossexamination
of people for days would have occurred
in commercial litigation comparatively rarely. That
was beginning to change when I left the Bar and in
my time on the Federal Court I observed people
arriving to court with trolleys and it never seemed to
me that it helped to identify the issues or that it
added greatly to the efficiency of the litigation, as
distinct from the cost of it*. page 19
Blackacre 1990 
Blackacre 1990
In his own court, the changes have been more
positive. He said, " I think the Court is more
conscious now than it has been at any time since I've
been involved in the legal profession about the
desirability of a joint judgment ( of a majority) if that
can be done without unduly sacrificing the standard
or quality of the Court's judgments and also without
any member of the court being under pressure to
compromise his own real views. The court has, in
the last few years, introduced regular meetings of
the judges about cases which are reserved and
awaiting judgment. That has led to a formal
exchange of tentative views ( but on a limited scale in
some cases), which is conducive to the production of
joint judgments. In some cases those members of
the court who are seeing a case in a similar way will
agree that a particular person will write the first
judgment. In other cases no consensus for a joint
judgment will emerge until after a judgment has
been distributed. In some cases a joint judgment wil
be exclusively the work of one person, in others it
will be far more a co-operative effort. In the rare
case it sets out from the commencement to be a cooperative
effort. I don't want to be specific about
cases but I would think that there would be some
cases throughout the period that I've been on the
court where it would be apparent that the judgment
bears the traces of more than one hand sometimes
unfortunately apparent".
It seems superfluous to say that his Honour is an
eloquent man. He speaks ( and writes) in long,
logical sentences that are sprinkded with strong
adjectives. His words convey the deep conviction
that obviously lies behind them. He manages to say
much with a few simple words. At his swearing-in
ceremony in the High Court he said * 1 refrain from
making other than passing reference to my wife.
Some things are beyond words. Our lives have long
been one". In his judgments a similar eloquence is
found. We suggested to his Honour that his languap
at times, almost poetic. He said " I wouldn't p*
such kind terms. I think there are some areas
law where I feel rather strongly about things
those areas I may use language which I think
people would think is occasionally unduly stroi
And yet the language must be only an outward
manifestation of what is within, clothes for ide.
to speak. It has been said elsewhere that his
Honour's work reveals that " idealism is not the
prerogative of the young or of the recently lear
it is transparent both in Mr Justice Deane's
judgments and in his attitude to the role of law
Australian society". It is also transparent in the
impromptu words he spoke to Blackacre. He s.
" I.. think however that there has to be a cold, h
look at the way both sides of the legal professic
functioning. On the High Court we are a bit
removed from the run of the mill practice of bc
law and litigation but it's impossible not to be.
disturbed by the fact that law is obviously out o
reach of ordinary people unless they qualify for
aid of one sort or another. That is something w
quite apart from natural concern as an individu
does affect one's perception of the law, even in
terms of writing j udgments in the High Court
because you can't help but be conscious of the f
that legal developments which are aimed at ena
ordinary people to obtain justice can themselve:
become instruments of injustice when ordinary
people can't afford the luxury of litigation. In ot.
words, if you have a right of action in circumstai
where only the wealthy can afford to take advan
of it and only the wealthy can resist it it become
potential instrument of injustice and that is
something which of course is extraordinarily
worrying in the present situation and its no ansA&amp;
to that to say that law has never been availablet
ordinary people. If it hasn't been available to
ordinary people in the past it is time that the
community generally and the legal profession in
particular took steps to ensure that it is available
M. C.
page 



TEL: 21.. Hu 9.5 2: 24 U41
OrFICE OF THE PRIwt½ MINISTER
CANBFRRA
FOR MEDIA RESIGNATION OF THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL
AND APPOINTMENT OF HIS SUCCESSOR
The Prime Minister has announced this afternoon the Queen's acceptance of Mr Bill Hayden's
resignation as Governor-General with effect from 15 February 1996 and the appointment of Sir
William Deane as his successor.
The Governor-General Designate has released a statement.
Sir William and Lady ( lHelen) Deane are available for photographs this evening at 7.30 pm in
Sir William's office at the High Court, Canberra. This will be a picture opportunity ONLY
( two camera television pool, plus 4 still photographers, please). Entry will be via staff and
legal practitioners entrance which is located off Parkes Place ( on the south-eastern side of the
High Court).
Sir William will be available for a media conference at the High Court ( Judges' Common
Room, same entrance as above) on Tuesday 22 August at 11.30am.
Media inquiries concerning Sir William's press conference should be directed to the Prime
Minister's Press Office, ( 06) 277 7744.
CANBERRA 21 AUGUST, 1995 



I
( J)
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES, HIS EXCELLENCY MR
FIDEL RAMOS, JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, 22 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Well can I just say a few words by way of introduction. Firstly, how
delighted I am to see the President in Australia. I thank him, sincerely,
for coming, for showing this interest in the bilateral relationship, for
spending so much time in Australia and seeking to learn more about
this country and define the relevance in the relationship between the
two of us. We very greatly appreciate the visit and his conscientious
effort in it. During the course of our discussions this morning, we have
had a talk around the issues which are of interest to us and which we
have in common. Of course, the, if you like, stewardship of the region
in which we live. We are all bound by the Pacific Ocean, we're Pacific
countries and we have that community of interest. Of course the
President and I have been part of the founding group of APEC and we
both were at the Bogor summit meeting in Indonesia last year. We will
be attending the Osaka meeting of APEC this year where the action
plan we hope will be advanced coming from the Bogor Declaration
and, of course, many of you will know that the meeting the following
year will be in the Philippines, under the stewardship of the President.
So we have both a direct and active interest in this issue and I think we
are, let's say, quietly excited about the prospect of putting a Pacific
Rim organisation together with free trade objectives that advance
intercommunal trade and the movement of people that will go with it.
In other words, building a comprehensive and effective regional
economy which also has its own natural strategic value and
people-to-people values as well. So we have that between us. On the
bilateral relationship, I think we see us having a growing bilateral
relationship. The Philippines is a country of just on 70 million people,
it is a member of ASEAN, it provides a lot of the weight in ASEAN, and
I think it is true to say Australia has not done enough with the
Philippines. We are finding together that we have things in common
and the President and I, 1 think, are committed to advancing those
things both by way of investment, by trade, tourism, etc. We are, of
course, democracies. We have very similar cultural and democratic 
values and the President and I think that this is something we bring to
the Asia Pacific area and something we can be proud to proselytise
about. So we have had. I will round up my remarks on this, a
discussion about the bilateral relationship, about the multilateral
relationship in the region. our relations with other countries in the
region and a commitment by both of us to see us do more together,
country to country. Could I conclude, again, by saying how pleased I
am to see the President in Australia on such an extended visit and
invite him to make some remarks to you.
FR: Thank you, Mr Prime Minister. Ladies and gentlemen, firstly let me
express the deep appreciation of the Philippines Government and our
people for this opportunity to visit Australia on the invitation of
His Excellency Governor General Bill Hayden and Prime Minister
Paul Keating. The relationship between the Philippines and Australia
goes a long, long way back, even before World War 11. But that
relationship, of course, has been strengthened and reinforced by our
common defence of freedom and democracy in our part of the world.
Maybe not too many Australians now remember the very valuable
contribution of Australia to the liberation of the Philippines under
General Macarthur in late 1944 up to Victory in the Pacific in
August 1945, but the record is there. And I am here to express the
appreciation of our people for that very valuable contribution on the
part of the Australian people. Of course our relationship is reinforced
by our bilateral relations in this contemporary age, cooperation in trade
investment, but beyond the economic and material aspects, we also
have continuing and deep cooperation in education, in health, in
environmental protection and in human resource development. All this
within our bilateral framework as well as within the larger framework of
APEC and between us and itself, which the Philippines is a founding
member and Australia and New Zealand. We have discovered during
this visit that aside from the longitudinal, or north-south, kind of flow
that we can create an even more beneficial relationship between
Australia, the Philippines and the rest of ASEAN through a lateral or a
latitudinal flow which we hope to develop some more. For instance,
the Philippines pioneered together with Brunei, Indonesia and
Malaysia the establishment of the East ASEAN growth area and we
see now that the Northern Territory of Australia has become a very
active player in that almost borderless kind of an economy and this
has to do not only with trade investment, environmental protection,
forestry, but also tourism, education and sports. Mrs Ramos, in fact, is
President of the Philippines Badminton Association and part of
the Philippines Olympic Committee is now meeting with your sports
leaders to create a new momentum between the Philippines and
Australian sports. Australia being recognised as part of the world
leaders in physical fitness and sports development. We are also
looking at the APEC meetings together as neighbours. The one in
Osaka in 1995 and, of course, the one that we will host in the
Philippines some time in November or December 1996. And already
there are projects and programs being put on the ground in the
Philippines which are the result of Phi lippine/ Australian initiatives
during our first leaders summit at Blake Island in Seattle in November 
1993. Australia supported the proposal of the Philippines for
something tangible on the ground to be put in by APEC and this will be
a Centre for the transfer of technology for small and medium
enterprises. We have broken ground in the community of Los Banos,
which is a college town in the Philippines south of Manila, for this
Centre and by mid-1996 this should be an ongoing concern for the
benefit of the 18 member economies of APEC with the more advanced
countries like Australia contributing to the fund of knowledge for the
developing countries like the Philippines in small and medium
enterprises, upon which the economy of Australia has been founded
from the very beginning. All in all I would like to assess that so far, up
to this point, this visit has been most productive. We are just about
two-thirds finished with it, but we are seeing even more opportunities
as we move on to Brisbane, Queensland, tomorrow and eventually to
Darwin, which is so close to the Philippines that you might say Darwin
is mid-way between Manila and Sydney and so we thank you
Mr Prime Minister for all the hospitality, all the support, all the
cooperation and I am sure that all of this will lead down to great mutual
benefit between our two peoples.
PM: Thank you, President. Thank you very much for those sentiments.
I am happy to take questions.
J: inaudible
PM: Well the President and I had a quite extensive discussion on this topic
this morning. I think that this is a theme we have been over at other
times when we have met, perhaps not as well defined as the President
has defined it in the last day or two. I think Australia sees itself having
a strong partnership with the countries of ASEAN. Particularly the
countries which like Australia are not a part of continental Asia
Indonesia, the Philippines, etc and we think that there is some value
in some more formal commercial links between Australia, and New
Zealand can I say, and the ASEAN group of countries and this can
perhaps most obviously come through AFTA, some linkage between
Australia and New Zealand and AFTA, and I think if we get that
commercial linkage going then the natural strategic linkages come, in
a sense, with it. In North Asia though there are very big economies
and societies Japan, the second largest economy in the world, China,
the largest emerging economy, the largest nation in the world in a
sense, they stand in their own right. The rest of us, being smaller, can
have quite a large economy of influence by doing things together and I
think these sentiments, which the President has expressed, fall on very
fertile ground here in Australia. That is, there is, I think, the possibility
of creating a South East Asian regional economy and group of
countries and community with a very clear community of interest which
is not part of the orbit of Japan, or China, or the United States, or any
of the great powers. But a regional economy in which we all share and
benefit.
J: Mr President, you have spoken of Australia and the Philippines as both
being democracies in Asia. Do you think [ inaudible]?
I 
FIR: I do not think it would be necessary for any nation to curtail its
democracy or democratic system or culture in order to accommodate
with the rest of the countries in the Asia Pacific. I think the trend now,
under this freer world trading regime. is for countries to become more
transparent, for the economic environment to be more level and fair
and predictable, and this is where we are in the Philippines and.
I would say, also Australia. I think that in the end, and we are seeing
this already in Taiwan and also the Republic of Korea, that it will be
the freer, the more transparent and the more predictable kind of
regimes that will predominate. If I may amplify on my proposals about
Australia, the Philippines, ASEAN itself, being effective,
counter-veiling, or counter-balancing, forces in our part of the world.
This is not to say that I favour a military or a defence alliance.
No, there is no way that it could be that way. But the combined
economic clout and influence of countries like Australia, New Zealand,
all of ASEAN, must eventually C-10 as we call it in the Philippines
and in the rest of Asia, meaning the ten countries of South East Asia,
to include Cambodia, Laos and Myamar could exert great effective
moral-suasion over the big powers in the Asia Pacific to the extent that
there would be no unpredictable happenings, no sudden shocks, that
would threaten the stability of the Asia Pacific. Afterall, it is the
stability and the peace that continue to reign in this region that ensures
our dynamic economic growth and our social cohesion. So this is the
road that I see for countries like Australia and the Philippines and Asia
being the middle forces the moderating forces in our part of the
world.
J: Mr President, you clearly see Australia as playing a role in the region.
But other countries in Asia, most notably Malaysia, has some problem
with Australia playing a greater role. Why do you think they have that
problem with Australia and what is your view of Australia's overall
position in Asia? Are we Asian, are we on the fringes, where do you
see us?
FIR: Well the Philippines itself has no problems with any of its neighbours
in the Asia Pacific and around the world in fact. I do believe that in the
end, really not too far from now in terms of years, that everyone will
come around to seeing that the most important condition that we must
all try to attain is inter-dependence, mutual support and
accommodation. There is no question that our cultures, our histories,
our societies are uniquely different from each other. But there is
enough room, there is enough benefit in the world, for each one to
enjoy. I have said it in the past, I have said it here in Australia, I said it
over in New Zealand, that what is more important about becoming, or
being a part of Asia, or Asia Pacific to be more specific about it, is just
to be there, just to do what you have to do. And this must be a
two-way kind of thing Australia to Asia-Pacific and the rest of us in
Asia-Pacific to Australia. Let's just do it. Let's not be tied in with
labels, intentions and proposals. Let's just be there, let's just do it. 
J: Do you see that role being emphasised through APEC and, if that's so,
how happy are you with the preparations for Osaka?
FR: Yes, well, APEC is a very important forum and it has proven to be
effective since it was organised on the proposal of Australia back in
1989. The ASEAN regional forum is another important venue for really
ensuring the stability of our region and the AFTA is another framework
that provides beneficial opportunities for everyone. Certainly, if
Australia and New Zealand. through the CER, come into that
framework for freer trade, we, in the Philippines, would welcome that.
PM: I think we might have one more question, because I know that the
President will be addressing the Press Club, which will give you an
opportunity to invite other questions, so perhaps one from the other
Philippines side if there is one.
J: Can you just summarise your points of discussion?
FR: Yes, first we talked about our bilateral relations which have always
been very good and new opportunities for reinforcing the bilateral
relationship, especially in regard to the people-to-people kind of thing
education, tourism, small and medium enterprises, social development
and values, forms for personal interaction among ordinary people.
We also, of course, reviewed our regional situation under the
framework of APEC, the ASEAN regional forum, as well as new
opportunities for increasing trade investment, tourism, other forms of
economic and educational cooperation.
J: Prime Minister, did you talk about nuclear testing by France and
China?
PM: We did. We discussed that and I think the President and I agreed on
this point. That is, one, that the countries of the South Pacific should
be respected, the small island states particularly and, secondly, runs
counter to the non-proliferation objectives of the rest of the world for a
major power and a major democracy to be, in a sense, flouting those
objectives with a testing program and the same is true, of course, of
China. I think we were, I can say, happily at one on this point.
J: Prime Minister, on another matter closer to home if I may, [ inaudible]?
PM: Well I think he is doing a press conference today and I think courtesy
would demand that I let him speak for himself. Thank you very much
indeed.
FR: Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen. See you in the next one,
at the Press Club.
ends 



90/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM,
THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LATEST TEST OF A NUCLEAR WEAPON BY CHINA
As current Chair of the South Pacific Forum, on behalf of my Forum colleagues I
condemn the latest test of a nuclear weapon by China.
China has once again shown disregard for international opposition to nuclear
testing by carrying out its second test since the indefinite extension of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in May 1995.
China and other nuclear weapons states must come to terms with the imminent
ban on nuclear testing for all time. They must consider carefully the impact of
the changed global security situation on the role of nuclear weapons.
Forum leaders welcome the continuation by the United States of America,
Russia and the United Kingdom of their moratoriums on nuclear testing, as well
as the recent announcements by the USA and France of their commitment to a
truly comprehensive test ban treaty ( CTBT). These are a significant boost to
current negotiations for a CTBT. Forum leaders reiterate their strong support for
finalisation and signature of the Treaty in 1996.
We look to China and France to desist from further testing as the CTBT
negotiations enter this final, critical stage. The heads of government have noted
China's commitment to sign such a treaty. France has given a similar
commitment. The current nuclear testing programs of these two countries are
inconsistent with their commitment to exercise ' utmost restraint' on nuclear
testing pending the conclusion of a CTBT, and will sour the atmosphere of the
negotiations. Forum countries, along. with others, are considering a suitable resolution to be
put before the United Nations General Assembly to pressure China and France
to reconsider their testing programs. Additionally, Forum members will be
considering action in other international forums to make our opposition known
and to press the Chinese Government to stop testing.
Nuclear weapons have cast a great shadow over humanity in this past half
century. South Pacific Forum heads of government call on China to contribute to
world peace by eliminating the testing of nuclear weapons, thereby taking
another significant step on the journey to the eventual elimination of nuclear
weapons. CANBERRA 22 AUGUST 1995 



TEL: 22. Rug. 95 18: 2U No . U22 t'. LJ.
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MIMiSTER, TilE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER FOR PRESIDENT RAMOS OF THE P11ILIPPINES
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, TUESDAY 22 AUGUST 1995
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
On behalf of the Government of Australia and all Australians, I warmly welcome
President Ramnos, his wife and his party to Australia.
Before you left Manila, Mr President, you said that you were embarking on a journey
of friendship and opportunity.
That is exactly how we see your visit, too.
And although you are making your first visit here as President of the Philippines, you
and your service to your country are widely known in Australia.
People here along with much of the rest of the world were deeply moved in early
1986 by the images we saw of the tense struggle taking place in Manila where the
People's Power movement and Mrs AquinQ. stood their ground in support of
democracy. You played a courageous and vital role in that struggle.
In the following years, when the restoration of democracy was threatened time after
time, we observed and deeply admired your loyalty in defending the rebirth of your
country's democratic political institutions.
And in your first three years as President, you have displayed the same tenacity and
courage in implementing reform, in opening up the Philippines economy and allowing
it to regenerate.
The Philippines return to growth well over 5 per cent expected this year and the
large amounts of foreign investment now flowing into your country, are reflections of
your personal conumitment to responsible economic management and deregulation.
In your efforts, you have been able to draw on a private sector with business and
managerial skills that are highly regarded throughout the region. We particul1arly
welcome the members of the business delegation you have brought with you.
22. Rug. 95 18: 20 No. U22 
TEL: 22. Rug. 95 18: 20 No. 022 P. 02
2
Mr President, you made an important point in a speech last year, and you have since
demonstrated its truth: the truth that political democracy, social discipline and
sustained economic development are not incompatible.
By your succcss at home in consolidating democracy and reforming the economy you
have also given the Philippines a new standing in the regional and international
community. It is very fitting that you and the Philippines will have the honour of
hosting the summit meeting of APEC leaders in 1996.
Mr President, you will find Australia much changed since your last visit in the late
1970s.
We, too, have opened up our economy. With the assistance of eight successive
accords with the union movement we have ensured that the Australian business
environment has become more competitive. Last year Australia had one of the fastest
growing economies in the OECD and corporate profits were at historic highs.
Moreover, that growth has come with low inflation and high job growth.
Our utilities, telecommu ni cations industry, waterfront, civil aviation, and rail transport
have undcrgone dramatic reform. We have introduced a national superannuation
scheme to help lift our savings. Our education and training systems have received
massive investments.
But beyond these changes, Australia has been coming to terms with its history, with its
region and with its own society.
With native title legislation, a new epoch has begun for our indigenous peoples an
historic wrong-has been righted, at least in legal terms, and we are determined to see
that social justice follows.
Our place in the Asia-Pacific region is no longer disputed. Geography and economic
integration have driven this trend. But there is more to it than geography and
commerce. Important changes are taking place in the way Australians think about themselves not
leug because more than half the immidgrants joining Australia's multicultural society
each year come from Asia.
And Australians are now debating our future constitutional arrangements.
The changes have been fundamental. But they have been achieved without rejecting
our history.
In all this, it seems to me, there are important parallels with the recent experience of
the Philippines. Both of us have had to come to terms with our history and the
necessities which global change is imposing on us. We understand that we have to
make our own way in the world. We have thought hard about the sort of societies we
wish to be, and what our role will be in the world of the 2 1st century. 
TEL: 22. Rug.-95 18: 20 NO. 022 P. O'
3
And, not least, we have had to work hard to rework the images others hold of us.
I amn sure that your visit will contribute to this process for both our countries, Mr
President:* Australia and the Philippines have a good foundation on which to build.
Mr President, you said you come here as a friend and the commemorations this year
for the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the war remind us what close and longstanding
friends we arc. The Philippine government'-in-exile of President Quezon was
headquartered in Australia during the war. Earlier today we launched at the War
Memorial a book on the Battle of Leyte Gulf. This was the largest engagement by
Australian vessels during the war, and that victory began the liberation of the
Philippines. Australia hits provided economic assistance to the Philippines for many years. We are
a significant source of training for your defence force.
Our trade is growing well. But there is no doubt that our economic ties ought to be
more substantial than they are at present.
I am confident that this will happen. The opportunities have never been greater as our
two economies have opened up. A sign of what lies ahead can be seen in the MOUs
and agreements we witnessed being signed this morning and in the number of very
senior Australian businesspeople who are present at this dinner tonight.
I amn very pleased to join you, Mr President, in urging our business leaders and
investors to look at the new opportunities which are opening up for Australia and the
Philippines to do business together.
In all we do together bilaterally, we have the invaluable resource of the Filipino
community in Australia, now numbering around 120,000. It has doubled in size at
every census since 196 1.
Let me assure you, Mr President, that Australia and its government value our citizens
of Philippine origin, and we will care for them.
Our bilateral links wil also be strengthened by regional developments, like APEC and
the discussions we are having about closer links between the ASEAN Free Trade Area
and the Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Agreement.
Australia and the Philippines and you and 1, Mr President have been working very
hard to set up in APEC a structure which will strengthen the region economically and
increase its stability as it enters a period of historic economic and strategic change.
This visit has a particular significace. Not only are you the first President of the
Philippines to visit Australia, but you ame the first foreign Head of State I have ever
welcomed here who has an Australian grandchid. 
TEL: 22. Rug. 95 18: 20 No. 022 P. 04.,
4
That makes you doubly welcome as the leader of a great regional country with which
we want to develop close relations.
And evin more deeply as family. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, NATIONAL ART GALLERY OF AUSTRALIA, CANBERRA
22 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Any comment on the appointment of Sir William Deane?
PM: Well, I think he brings, amongst a few people, almost unparalleled
vista of the Constitution, he's made clear the symbiotic relationship
between the public in our democracy, and the Constitution. He has
been a very progressive Judge on matters which have been of quite
substantial moment to Australia. He is amongst a few one can't say
uniquely, but near uniquely fitted to the task of Governor-General,
which I think he will execute with great dignity and commitment.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: He has already played a substantial part, of course, in the Native
Title judgement, and I think he is exercised by the notion that the law
is a living thing, and that these were social questions that needed to
be addressed by the law he did then, and I am sure when he says
that, he will take that opportunity, because I think coming to terms on
a sort of deep basis of reconciliation with our indigenes has been
something obviously on his mind for most of his legal and judicial life.
J: How long can Carmen Lawrence continue to enjoy your support.
PM: Well, she has enjoyed it to this point.
ends. cm, 



PMRIIMISEE~-/
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE BOOK THE BATTLE OF LEYTE GULF
THE AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
CANBERRA, TUESDAY 22 AUGUST 1995
It is a great privilege to be able to co-launch this book with President Ramos here in
Canberra.
Last week, hundreds of thousands of Australians participated in very moving
ceremonies throughout the country to commemorate the end of the war in the Pacific
fifty years ago. For many young people who took part or watched, these events gave
them a chance to thank the generation of Australians who achieved the victory and to
reflect on its meaning for our country now.
The battle of Leyte Gulf was one of the critical events leading to the victory we
celebrated last week, and Australia was proud to have played its part in it.
The battle saw the largest Royal Australian Navy involvement in a single campaign
during the war. RAAF Wireless Units also played an important part.
Before the battle, thirteen Australian ships operating as part of the US seventh fleet,
had been involved in a number of fierce battles for control of the sea lanes around the
Philippines. Then, on 20 October 1944, seven of them participated in the allied operations to
recapture Leyte Gulf and Panoan. The greatest amphibious force ever assembled in
the Pacific and second only to the D Day landings in Europe landed four divisions
of the US 6th army and began the liberation of the Philippines.
On the day after the landings, which were accomplished without loss of life, Japanese
kamikaze bombers attacked the allied fleet, including HM4AS Australia on which
thirty crew members, including the ship's captain, were killed.
Australia has remembered the Australian Task Force Commnander at Leyte,
Cormnodore Collins, in the name given to our country's new class of submarines. 
The Battle of Leyte Gulf reunited the allies with the courageous Philippines resistance
forces, who had fought so bravely for three years against the occupying Japanese.
Those many thousands of Filipinos who fought and died for our common cause
deserve the thanks of all Australians.
I hope this book will be more than a fine commemoration for those who were involved
in the campaign, or who have family who were.
I hope it will remind a new generation of Australians and Filipinos that our countries
have common security interests, that these interests have been tested in the past and
that we can best preserve them today by working together to build a strong defence
partnership ourselves, and a regional environment which preserves the security of all
the countries in it.
For this reason, I was very pleased that we were able to witness today the signing of a
Memorandum of Understanding on defence co-operation which will provide a
forward-looking framework for developing the defence ties between us.
I congratulate the Department of Defence and the staff of the Australian Defence
Force Journal on this excellent publication. 



TEL: 23. Rug. 95 2: 47 No. 005 ~. U1
I I
I
" 11
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH FOR THE LAUNCH OF " COMING CLEAN, A BIOGRAPHY OF IAN
KIERNAN" 9, THE BATHERS PAVILION, BALMORAL, SYDNEY
23 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I was at a function about a year ago it was the presentation of the Australian
Artists Creative Fellowships, and John Olsen the great Australian artist I was
giving him a gift, or a prize, or a fellowship, I can't remember, and he said " well,
there are only two kinds", he said, " of Australians". He said " there are lovers,
and others". I mean, we often think of the others, don't we? And Manning Clark
he put It another way talked about the enlargers and the straiteners the
people who could always see something bigger, and those who said get your
head down, be serious, grind away, conform stay in the groove. And this has
always been the great divider in Australian life and also, may I say, in
Australian politics. And the reason that I am here today is to say something nice
about an enlarger, a lover, a person who has belief and imagination who
believes in things, and imagines better things, and goes out and does them.
And I am very pleased to have the opportunity, and as I read through the book
it is a very blokey book, there Is no doubt about that, but what an interesting
bloke. A quintessential Sydney larrikin crazy-brave, self-contained anyone
who does an around the world solo voyage has enormous inner confidence and
self-esteem. And this is a very complete person he may represent himself as a
fellow who rode around on motorbikes, and lost a $ 20 million property empire,
who sailed around the world and did all these sort of things, but he is a very
complete individual, and I think that's why we are all here.
And the thing we celebrate is the fact not simply his personality and his verve,
and his courage but the fact that a lot of Australians have seen in him some of
themselves. And Clean Up Australia Is the classic piece of community action -I
mean, just last week we were talking about the celebration of a victory a great
community victory in the Second World War. A commemoration of those who
have lost. And you can think through all the events, and the ones that strike 
TEL: 2
your heart are the ones that mean something are the community ones the ones
that have got real weight in them, where we have come together to do things.
And I think Ian pricking the consciousness of Australians about the environment,
and alsoL showing some of his own personality in the doing of it, many
Australians have recognised in him some of the good things they see about
themselves. And the aspirations they have to do things together. I think that is
why he has become important to us, and why what he has done with the
environment has been Important. It is the same with Fred Hollows It wasn't that
long ago that nobody knew of Fred Hollows but when people got a view of him,
to see how selflessly he had given of his time, of the larrikin spirit, but the
commitment to people there was again that point of identification. And I think
that's what we are really celebrating today. It's not the writing, or the outrageous
story and it is a sort of outrageous story.
I mean, of course, it is a quintessential Sydney-siders book. This couldn't have
been written by somebody from Victoria. Because it's partly, you know, you ran
read the bits through it I mean for instance, he loves the sea. I mean, if you
stand here and look out, how could you not love the sea? How could you not
love those headlands, which are I mean, they are bit pock-marked by
development but by and large they are really as it would have been before we
all turned up in 1788. And, you know, I remember as a boy myself a mate of
mine used to ring me whenever there was a really big storm on the Harbour, we
would catch the Manly ferry we would be the only two on it. And you would get
in the dip over here, and the waves would slosh right through out to the other
side, you know you would be going for the ride, just to enjoy it. And out there
on the city harbour, sailing on weekends, one of my stunts was that I used to get
the train from Bankstown to Circular Quay, get in my gear, and then I would jump
off the back of the ferry, and the boat would pick me up. And of course they
would yell out " man overboard", and they would say " oh, it's all right he has
been rescued". Sailing up to Pittwater what a beautiful place that is, the
Hawkesbury River. And there is all this sense of Sydney, and the water, and we
are sort of drawn to it. You know, you get this impression I know Ian has all his
life, you can tell by the book everything about him is completely salty, you
know.
Arnd also his interest in the built environment very interesting when the worst of
the packing-case architecture was being built, every good was being smashed,
he was out there trying to preserve the terraces In Woolloomoolco. I used to do
the Max Dupain pilgrimage when I was a boy, around all of Max's sites you
know, Lyndhurst at Glebe, or Tusculum up at Kings Cross, or the great Elizabeth
Bay house, or all of the not so remarkable terraces, all the bits and pieces. You
know, you saw the greater view of people you had a sense that we might not
have the architectural heritage of the United States, but what we have, we ought
to try and lift it. And if not lift it, keep it keep those parts that we did have. And
so, you know, we see him in here being interested in this, and this is a very
23. Aug 95TEL: N3o. Ru. 0.9055 2P: 4.072 
NO. uu:) r. J.;
3
interesting minds-eye picture of someone who was interested in Sydney at that
time, when really, nobody cared about these things a lot of the stuff was
smashed up during this period. So he is building those, and in the sense of this
very successful restaurant which is here, I mean it could have failed of course,
and no doubt the restaurateur has made a success of it, but it is hard not to with
the view, and the place, and everything else. But he saw the opportunity.
And I think all of this has been about.. the concern about the environment has
been in him, somewhat perhaps latently before his experience in the Sargasso
Sea, or in Hawaii in the Clean Ups, but he has seen the great marvellous
opportunity that we have been given as Australians to have bequeathed to us
this ancient continent. I mean, how could we have been so lucky? That just 200
years ago I mean, we are now in our 5S, 4 times our lifetime there were no
Europeans here. The Aboriginal community in this country has preserved for
the rest of us a continent. And we have a great duty to it, to understand what
we have been given, and to understand that we have to protect it, and that we
may hold here something unique in the world. Because I think our
consciousness about it Is now such that we will take the steps to hang onto it,
and to make sure that the style of life we have, and our respect for the land, is
that which may have the equal in the world, but none better. Now, Ian has
brought that consciousness up in the Clean Up campaigns of Sydney Harbour,
and then of course, Clean Up Australia the hundreds of cities and provincial
towns, the thousands of people that have been involved, lifting their
environmental consciousness. And that is really lifting the sub-conscious on the
greater environmental issues he is right when he said earlier that the
environment will win out. It is the political issue that won't be put asunder. No
amount of smarmy political talk is going to put it down, because if for no other
reason, our children know better than perhaps we have ever known about it.
They know what a great and valuable thing it is.
So, this I think this coalescence of the community view which [ an has brought
there, through his own essential goodness and view about the country is why
we celebrate his book today. I mean, some of the other things in the book are
terrific reading when he went around Cape Horn and he said that he could
barely see the light, but he got up and had a drink. And he mentioned that he
thought about a few people, but he said something about being a bit shaky it
was all a bit Shaky. Well, I would be a bit shaky going around Cape Horn. I
mean, to even make a commentary on the light. I mean, the book Is really a bit
of a thriller in its own way, but there are some funny lines he said " oh, I thought
I should have cleaned up the boat because people would think that I was such a
grubby bastard". You know, that sort of self-deprecation gives us again another
Indication of his personalty, and his essentially humility. People who do
things are it doesn't necessarily mean that they are not humble, but I have
always thought about Ian that there is a humility about him. But there is a
crucible in there too there is a reactor in there, throwing up ideas you can see 
TEL: 23. Rug. 95 2: 47 No. 005 P. 04
4
in his own commitment to move into another phase of his life after, lIf you like,
this book, to go on to the next phase. -I mean, I like to think maybe it is just a
case of boating your own drum about the baby-boom generation, but by God, we
had a lot of go in us, I have got to say. We had a lot of I'm not too sure how to
say it "' chutzpah". I'm not too sure how It comes out, but there was a lot of go.
And I think he is a classic baby-boomer I mean, he is out there maybe a bit
earlier than that, maybe you just crept into that category tan, I don't know. But
one thing is for sure as a generation, they have made a huge impact on
Australia. And the other thing is, they have a great belief in Australia, and the
Australian nation as an Independent country, as an independent culture, as a
force of our own that deserves the support.
So I am here with the very pleasant duty of launching the book, to pay a
compliment to Phil ( Jarratt) for joining Ian In writing it he has this pattern of
( Phil, I am saying) of finding people worth bothering with, and writing about them
or helping them to write their story, and these are important parts of the
Australian story, and we will always be in his debt for that. To the publishers
James ( Fraser) for taking a chance on a blokey book, but most particularly, we
are here to celebrate in a sense the recording of an interesting Australian life.
To say how much it has meant to the rest of us, that this life has brought
together a sense of community around this question of the continent, and the
landscape, but somebody who is a quintessential Australian who believes In
this country, and who loves It, and who wants to dream the big dreams, and do
the big things. As I say, it's the belief and the imagination which has brought us
to his restaurant of 20 years ago. Congratulations Ian it is a pleasure to launch
the book, and I am very happy to be associated with it, and with you. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION, NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, THURSDAY, 24
AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Q: Tony Wright, Sydney Morning Herald. Prime Minister, is it still your view as you stated a
few weeks ago that the Western Australian Royal Commission doesn't matter a tinkers
cuss? Will the Government continue to try to ignore the fallout from that Royal
Commission and would it ignore a finding that Dr Carmen Lawrence lied about her role in
the Penny Easton affair?
PM: Well, the Liberal Party have got Carmen Lawrence on trial for the suicide of Penny
Easton, that is what is on here. You know it is on. It is unjust and it is immoral and we are
not going to be any part of it.
Q: Jenny Hewett, the Australian Financial Review. Do you think it is politically acceptable for
a Minister to lie? Is there a question of morality or ethics involved or is it what you can get
away with politically?
PM: I think, I hope, probity in public life and integrity in public life are the stock and the core
things about public life and as I have just said to you, all honesty and integrity in politics
starts with policy not tricky, slick statements by politicians at doorstops. But, if the
imputation of your question is that Carmen Lawrence is untruthful or has lied, you have
prejudged her and not even given her the opportunity unfairly of you to put her view.
Q: Lenore Taylor, The Australian. You spoke in your speech a lot about marketing and
products. John Howard has been outpolling you by and large in recent months, even
without a product. How do you explain that? Why don't you think the voters are focussing
on the product, they seem to be agreeing with his marketing even without policies
released yet?
PM: I don't think you should jump to conclusions about the polls. I honestly think they vote on
policy. The Government has won five successive elections. We have won them all
basically on policy. We won 1984, after our first election, on the huge changes to
economic policy between 1983 and the end of 1984. We won in 1987 because we were
responding to the worst terms of trade Australia had enjoyed since the great depression.
A huge change to fiscal policy, a huge reorientation of national savings. That is why we
won. We won with the May Statement of 1987 and two months later we won an election
with it. We won in 1990 because we had given Australians the growth phase and the
employment that we promised them. We trebled the rate of employment growth that the
Coalition was able to provide over its seven years of office. We won in 1993 because of
the changes I have mentioned One Nation, the commitment I gave as Prime Minister to
restart growth and employment. We won because of the commitment to those age old
Australian values of egalitarianism and fairness. We won because we had a view of
Australia which was the view of the enlargers of Australia and not the straighteners and 
punishes. And we will win next time because the Labor Party alone has the capacity to
change Australian inexorably, to give it a long run low inflation period of growth, to see it
adopt a productivity culture, a savings culture and to give it a place in the Asia-Pacific the
Liberal's could not even have conceived of.
They are the things that win elections and while, no doubt, the public always like to think
they have got a choice in their opposing party's leadership, particularly after the
disappointment of Mr Downer and the then rush, the lift and the buoyancy of the poll
support which Mr Howard has got, it is gradually coming off and it will come off most
obviously on election day.
Q: Ian Davis, The Canberra Times. The Reserve Bank said in its annual report yesterday,
despite improvements in public and household savings Australia still needs to improve its
savings performance, lift living standards to improve. Does the-Government accept that it
needs to go further in improving national savings? Is renewed tax reform part of this
necessary equation?
PM: No, I don't think so. I think what the Bank was referring to was a need to cut back on such
things as double dipping and superannuation, through the need for tighter preservation
rules and access to lump sums, these sorts of things. Over time, of course, with the
remedial changes we have in place the grandfathening provisions from the pre-1983
changes, those were in place, a need to continue to deliver on the budget balance. That
means we will have a budget balance in place as the Reserve Bank report notes, but need
to keep it there and that is a message not only to the Government, but to the Opposition
and the Senate. I think, the need for the Senate to support the Government's fiscal
tightening strategy, I think, that is another very clear imputation or implication of the report.
I have already mentioned in the speech that superannuation is going to be worth about
four per cent of GDP in savings. The budget balance will have shifted from last year over
the next two years by about four per cent of GDP. That is eight per cent. Alright, it is in
an up-cycle. Knock one or two out of it if you like for an underlying number and we are
looking at a six percentage point savings change to deal with what, a 1.5 percentage point
problem? We have had the current account deficit running at about 4.5 per cent of GDP.
It is stable at about 3 or just under. So we have got a 6 percentage point fix in for a
percentage point problem. I think the Governor and the Bank are right to say to the
nation, to say to the political system, keep your eye on the public sector. And also, keep
your eye on the big change in occupational superannuation.
Q: Alan Sunderland, SBS TV. Mr Keating, you have said that the next election will be won on
policy. Do you think that your Government needs to come out with a major new policy
statement, an economic statement or some sort of other big picture, non risk averse
package before the next campaign, or do you think you will fight and win the next election,
essentially, on the sort of policy mix you have outlined?
PM: It is hard to get the signals from you. You are telling me big statements don't work and
then you are saying maybe we need one. This has been the government of change in the
post-war years. From 1983 until now we have changed Australia to make it an
internationally competitive country. Look at those numbers we mentioned. We are 40 per
cent more competitive today than we were in 1983. Not four. Forty. We have had a
per cent increase in household disposable income in the period. We have had a 20 per
cent increase in household income per capita. -We have seen exports grow from 13 per
cent of GDP to 22 per cent of GDP. We have seen over two million jobs created. We
have seen 680,000 jobs in two and a half years. It took us from 1788 until 1983 to get to
six million and we have added over ten per cent of that in two and a half years. We have
created a complete culture of change in productivity in the country, a change of attitude in
the industrial workplace on the part of unions, on the part of managers, of businesses.
We found ourselves a place in Asia that Australia of the past had never had before. It has
come from a Labor Government and we will keep on doing it. 
Now, having pulled the sock inside out, I don't know whether you want me to pull it back
the other way. That could happen of course, we could go to sleep again, we could put the
tariff wall up, we could run the flag up and ask people what they think about higher tariffs.
If they don't like it run it down slightly again. We can hang on the monarchy. We can do
the Native Title Act in. We can refuse to talk to the General-Secretary of the Vietnamese
Communist Party even though the US Secretary of State is quite happy to speak with him.
We can turn our back on the region and we can go back to sleep. We can do all that by
electing John Howard.
Q: Glenn Milne, Seven Network. You accused, I'm not sure wether it was us before or the
Opposition, of prejudging Carmen Lawrence by suggesting that she should have her day
before the Royal Commission. Does this mean that you are effectively suspending
judgement on her version of events until she testifies or do you believe that Carmen
Lawrence is telling the truth?
PM: I can always rely on you to keep on the main game, Glenn. There is only one clear
message here. The Liberal Party have Carmen Lawrence on trail for the suicide of Penny
Easton. That is what it is about. And that can't be made to stick. I notice just a day or so
ago we had a reference from the person who has been her chief accuser in a sense,
within the former government or if not chief accuser one of them, her former deputy, he
said I couldn't pin down any direct relationship between the death of Penny Easton and
the petition, no one will ever be able to do that.' Her mother, Barbara Campbell, went on
to say these things what about the suicide note, Mrs Campbell?', The questioner says
the section that has been published in the media refers to the petition, but there was
more to it I gather? Does that offer any clues to a suicide? " Oh yes, it offers an awful lot"
says Mrs Campbell. Other clues beyond the petition?' " Oh yes, definitely. I mean the
background, the family court. She mentioned the family court needed to be looked at. I
mean, you know there is also the case that we are all accused falsely of committing
perjury in the family court, that these are issues to be looked at'. ' Beyond the petition
itself?' ' Yes, definitely. I mean, there was bankruptcy proceedings and all sorts of things.
She was still there when she died. There was a High Court hearing still to be had on who
had precedence the bankruptcy court or the family court. ' So, her life had become very
confused' says the questioner ' lots of things apparently going wrong, things drawn out,
she felt brought this all about. So the petition was just one factor? Mrs Campbell ' Yes,
definitely". Now, we have had the Liberal Party, under Mr Howard's leadership yesterday accusing
her of Penny Easton's suicide. No such link, I think, can be made. If the petition has no
established link to her suicide what is the point of the Royal Commission? What is the
relevance of it at all? At all? Other than who said what to whom in a former Cabinet three
years ago. And that is why, in the end, if people want to go chasing down motives for the
death of people we have processes, we have coroners inquiries and then we have the
courts. But these things can't be resolved in a Royal Commission which is not even
looking at, on the expression of the Royal Commissioner, the actual suicide or the motive
for it itself. So what therefore is the relevance of the inquiry.
Q: Niki Savva, Herald-Sun. Would you as leader tolerate the tabling of a petition containing
details of a Family Court matter, in order to embarrass a political opponent?
PM: Well the answer is I wouldn't. No, I wouldn't. I wouldn't anymore than I would let MPs in
my Party stand under the privilege of Parliament and accuse somebody of being
principally at blame for the suicide of somebody as John Howard did yesterday. But can I
just say to you that on that theme, I think that I don't think I would agree either that
Mr Lightfoot, who was among the first who raised this in the Western Australian
Parliament, who said this " Is the Premier aware the two passports of Mr Brian Easton, the
Commissioner of the Western Australian Public Service, had been confiscated by the
Federal Court? Has Mr Easton sustained his resignation? If so, on what date did he
resign? Is he to receive an ex gratia or severance payment exceeding normal public 
service regulated payments?" He goes on. And the answer says this " I am asking you for
confirmation." The then Premier says " I know Mr Easton is passing through some marital
problems at the present time and I suppose that is another story, but it may have
something to do with that. I hesitate to say that because I do not know. I have no doubt
that if he will not provide the identity of the MP that the MP will not provide the identity
of the avenue through which the information is coming, it will be disclosed in the next
week or so." I wouldn't approve of that either. Could I also say that I endorse the
sentiments of the then Speaker, who said this " I refer Members to certain Questions
Without Notice which were asked by the Member for Murchison Eyre on Tuesday of this
week. It has been suggested that those questions were based on information concerning
proceedings before the Family Court. The lease of this information may well have been
unlawful. The point that does concern me, however, is whether the privilege of the
freedom of the House might be being used to circumvent an explicit order of a court or a
written law of this country. Obviously it makes a mockery of observing a subjudice
convention if the House tolerates or encourages speeches or questions aimed at
subverting an order or rule given in an appropriate court. Likewise, this Parliament should
not permit its privileges to be used to circumvent the written law of the Commonwealth
aimed at protecting the personal privacy of citizens." That is in response to a number of
issues related to this marital separation and difficulty made by members of the Liberal
Party beginning with Richard Court. I wouldn't approve of those either. But, hence, Mr
Easton's petition and the tabling of it, which refers to some of these matters about what
money he was to receive, how can you take the view with any justice that in some way all
of the burden of the pressure of this issue has come via that petition and then take the
further view that it came at the behest of Carmen Lawrence? I mean the Liberal Party
started using Family Court material in the Western Australian Parliament. The beginner
was Richard Court, followed consistently by a number of MPs and they were rebuked by
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. And even after the petition I think was lodged,
or about the same time, in 1989 there was a further reference by one of the MPs in the
Legislative Council. Mr Masters on the 9th May 1989 " which former employees of the
Western Australian Development Corporation, EXIM, received a payment from the
Government or EXIM following their employment with WADC or EXIM for services
rendered to either a subsidiary or some other Government Department." If you read the
petition from Mr Easton it refers to these matters and the Liberal Party were in this right up
to their neck. I mean where have you been living? Under a rock? Don't you read?
Q: Randal Markey, The West Australian.
PM: Oh it is such a high toned publication.
Q: Earlier in an answer to a question you were saying it would be unfair to prejudge Carmen
Lawrence and deny her the-opportunity to put her side of her story to the Royal
Commission. Doesn't it say that it must flow from that that you will accept and abide by
the findings of that Royal Commission. Otherwise, if not, the Government is contradicting
itself because on the one hand you are saying that Dr Lawrence deserves her day in court
to put her side of the case. And on the other you are saying that you will not commit
yourself to abide by its findings.
PM: Let me correct the question. It is not her day in court. It is not a court.
Q: Her day in the Commission then?
PM: The relevance of the reference to the Commissioner if Penny Easton had not
committed suicide there would, of course, be no inquiry and yet the Commissioner made
very clear, very clear indeed, that he was not about, and his terms of reference were not
about, any inquiry into the motives or circumstances of Penny Easton's suicide.
So, therefore, in both real and political terms the terms of reference lack all relativity to the
event and, therefore, lack political relativity. 
Q: Tony Vermeer, AAP. The Reserve Bank yesterday warned about the dangers that
inflation may be on the march again and you said after the Budget that the Budget had
taken the pressure off interest rates. Do you now acknowledge that the pressure is back
on and can your Government win an election with interest rates higher than they are now?
PM: I don't think you can conclude from the report at all that the pressure is back on. In fact, I
think the last line of the report, if I can go to it, says " The balancing of these and other
risks for activity and prices will be the key focus for monetary policy over the coming year.
In the Bank's judgement policy is presently well positioned to respond as necessary to the
evolving economic situation." It " is presently well positioned". So you can't adduce from
that the imputation I think you were making there. And the Bank make a couple of other
points: it says " The incorporation of the 2-3 per cent inflation objective into the Accord
Mark VIII agreement", which is a very welcome endorsement of that objective, " should be
helpful in this regard". That is, holding inflation. So there are any number of references of
that kind and, of course, you know on some other general points, some very strong
references to the public sector saving, a reference to a change in the trend of dis-saving
by private individuals. I mean there is not much in the report the Government wouldn't
endorse.
Q: Bruce Juddery, Freelance. Prime Minister I would like to get back to your speech if we
may and more particularly to a couple of omissions from it. You went through many of the
achievements of the Government. You didn't mention the efforts the Government has
made to transform higher education from an elite to a mass system and your own
initiatives which came out over the last couple of years to add to that dimension through
technical and further education. As you will appreciate, although a lot more money has
gone into higher education in particular over the years, there are people who would argue
like the Vice Chancellors Committee and others have argued that okay you have said
you can take so many more students, but then you haven't given them enough money to
[ inaudible] but the challenge the clever country is being fallen short of because you are
not providing for research infrastructure and lots and lots of other things that they
complain about, which we won't go through now because we haven't got all afternoon. Is
there any chance of an improvement or a rejigging of the lot of technical and further
education and higher education between now and the next election?
PM: An improvement in
Q: In the lot of higher education. What is going to happen in the Innovation Statement which
will impact on higher education and technical and further?
PM: Okay. Well let me approach the issue this way. You know that about 40 per cent of the
completions in secondary education, 40 per cent of those students who have gone
through to higher education. That has been the pattern in Australia, roughly. But, of
course, when the completions were a small number, it meant that higher education was a
relatively elitist thing. What the Government has done is to improve the access and,
therefore, the equity of education to get those completions up and we now have them to
around 8 in 10 students. They were 3 1/ 2, from memory, in 10 in 1983. So it is a
revolution in participation in education. But we have kept up the 40 per cent largely
throughput by adding places to higher education. We have added, I think, just on
275,000 places. We had 350,000 people in higher education in the early 1980s, we
have now got just on 600,000. We have created the equivalent of about 20 universities
of a campus size the same as Sydney or Melbourne University. So it is a huge change.
One of the things that pleases me greatly is there is an increased participation by young
women, in both secondary education and higher education.
But the other thing, of course, we had in One Nation was the Australian National Training
Authority, the renaissance of technical and further education building a national TAFE
system to sit beside the Universities. Because this has always been the Cinderella of
Australian education. That is, for the 60% who did not gain access to higher education, 
they cascaded into a system without training. And basically, what we are doing now is
rapidly growing the TAFE system to pick those people up. And in fact we had more
people apply for entry into TAFE last year than we had apply for higher education,
because there is often closer job prospects and job relevance, and a closer profile with
the labour market, with vocational education, than is the case with higher education. So,
we are.-hoping to have 2 mature competent systems. And, of course, in that we have
had generous payments for students, HECS has revolutionised participation in university
every HECS dollar goes back into places. Every HECS dollar goes back into places.
And, as a consequence, I think our education policies remain, now, the foundation of the
modem Australian society and industry, of our thrust into Asia, of our future.
Q: Sid Maher from the Courier Mail newspaper. Just with the election approaching, I was
just wondering if you are guaranteeing, sort of Acts of God notwithstanding whether
you will stay around for the full term of the next Parliament if you are re-elected?
PM: I'll see you off the course, old son. If we could have a slow time-frame camera at these
tables and this lectern, you would see me aging gracefully and most of you disappearing.
Q: Prime Minister, Malcolm Farr from the Telegraph Mirror. Back to interest rates, and your
appeal for endurance from voters. The low inflation recovery is restricting the capital
gain that many home-owners can expect on their property and many of those homeowners
are mortgage holders but there is no equal and opposite reaction from low
inflation in terms of interest rates. In fact, people are paying something like more than 3
times underlying interest rates for their mortgages how long do you expect them to
endure that? And as you were asked before, do you think you can go to an election with
that situation still in place?
PM: Well, Malcolm, I think if you draw a line through, let's say, the most.. . the property market
which has probably put on more value over time than any of that is the Sydney property
market, and if you take that over 20 years, I would be surprised if it does much more than
keep pace with inflation. I am sure you will see a great shift in values, 2 or 3 years, or
every 6 or 7 years, and then it stops. It drops, it drops, and then it levels back out. So I
don't know if people will whether people beat inflation anyway. That's the first thing, and
the second thing is during the periods of high inflation, the housing interest rates have
been much higher than what they are now. And we have got housing interest rates
roughly around 10% some are lower, of course. But they were 15-16% some higher.
And, of course, in the days when you had cocktail loans, you had some of them even
greater again you would have x% at 14-15%, and then you would have a lump at
So, there has been a big increase in disposable income, coming off those falls in interest
rates over the last few years, and, you know, as the sustenance of low inflation becomes
obvious and endemic to Australia, the whole view of the capital markets both here and
abroad start to change about the premium the nation pays for its savings. So you are
getting up with a better result in other words, a lower risk premium, if you like.
And so I think.... . and the other thing I think most Australians also care about their
children about what happens to their housing. I think it is a big issue with people. And
the system we had, of high inflation, was building mortgages and values for them that
essentially enslaved them for all their working life. You know, trying to buy their first
home in the prospects of ever-increasing housing prices. Affordability we have seen
very stark increases in affordability in the last couple of years, and I think this is a very
good social trend it's not a bad social trend, it's a unambiguously good social trend. But
I just also see I think it was in the Herald today that someone in the real estate sector
saying medium property prices in Sydney are lifting. I mean, these things will go on, but
whether over time if you wash the inflation out... . if you wash the inflation through, they do
better than inflation I don't know. But the point is having a roof over your head not
having a lump of inflation over your head, because that ends up meaning having an
inflationary mortgage over your head. So I think there is no low inflation is an
unambiguously good thing for Australia it will give us higher real incomes, higher 
employment and a higher standard of living than we have ever been able to obtain
during the periods of high inflation.
Q: John Ferguson from the Adelaide Advertiser, Prime Minister. Did Sir William Deane's
views on the republic influence your decision to back his appointment, and was the issue
discussed at that meeting prior to his appointment?
PM: I have never discussed the republic with him. Not ever. We have never discussed it.
Q: Prime Minister, Alison Carabine from Radio 2UE. There is probably little doubt that the
Penny Easton affair has caused problems for the Government what's your assessment
of the damage? And secondly, did you encourage Carmen Lawrence to bring forward
her appearance before the Royal Commission, to try and limit that damage?
PM: I think she takes the view that I mean, I think her appearance before the Commission
can be answered this way she takes the view that there is a sequence about her
appearance, and that it is fairly difficult to ask of her, to appear, to rely on information
that basically should be provided in the first instance by the petitioner, by the person who
presented the petition, and the Clerk of the Upper House who drafted it. Now, one would
think that was a logical starting point for such an inquiry. And not unreasonably, I think
she wants to follow those people through the inquiry, relying upon not what she knows
and hearsay, but the actual evidence they provide.
Q: Paul Bongiomno, Network 10, Prime Minister. While I accept that the Easton Royal
Commission has all the appearances of a political witchhunt, which is given potency by
the death of Penny Easton, isn't the problem for you and your Government and I would
suggest dynamite for Carmen Lawrence is that at this point of time, 8 of her former
colleagues contradict her recollection? So that on the balance of public probabilities, for
fair-minded people looking at it, Carmen Lawrence's credibility is in tatters?
PM: But what was the word I can't remember you used about the 8?
PB: Recollection?
PM: Yes recollection. But a recollection about what?
PB: About when a Cabinet meeting was held, and what was discussed at it?
PM: But the outcome of which was what?
PB: Well, the outcome was that I think it was about 5 days later....
PM: No the outcome wasn't an established link to the suicide of Penny Easton.
PB: I accept that. But...
PM: Right. If you accept that, well let me answer it from there if you accept that, then...
PB: . but Carmen Lawrence told the Parliament 3 days later something different?
PM: Hang on you asked the question. Once you accept that, you must accept the next
point the logical point of that that the discussion doesn't have a causal connection or
relevance to the suicide. And once you accept that, it is basically a set of recollections
by people about a Cabinet meeting that has in the broad politic no particular
relevance, and where honest people have different recollections, and where the person
herself has not yet had the opportunity to put a view.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
*** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB CANBERRA
THURSDAY 24 AUGUST 1995
It's nice to be back.
You may have picked up a comment the other day to the effect that Australian
politics was becoming risk-averse even gutless.
You will understand my outrage at this slur upon my profession.
Keen to defend its reputation, a couple of lively issues notwithstanding, I
decided to come down to the National Press Club and deliver a speech.
Not one of these headland speeches you've been hearing being decidedly
non risk-averse, I am more inclined to the headlong speech.
Or to put it another way, I would like to share with you some thoughts on
where our country is going. What is good and what needs to be improved.
How we might retain the good and make the improvements.
There are several places I could start: with those economic data in the back
pages of The Economist, for instance, where Australia continues to outshine
many of our OECD counterparts in economic fundamentals and is placed
among the top brigade in forecasts for growth.
It is easy to take comfort from the data, notwithstanding the current account
deficit which we must and will correct. The data shows that Australia is doing
very well.
And we should draw satisfaction from that.
Our initiatives have generally been effective. We have got the economic
settings pretty well right. And our approach to the economic and social
equation has been, I think, largely vindicated. 
But to draw a sense of satisfaction is not the same as drawing a sense of
complacency. If I have learned one big thing in the past decade, it is that reform never stops
you never entirely get out of the woods, there is always one thing more or
two, or three or even four things.
You never really get to the last chapter. You might sometimes imagine that
you are approaching it and that when you get over the next hill you'll see the
words, " The End", emblazoned in a clear blue sky.
But it doesn't happen. I said up in Roma the other day It's a bit like farming.
You fix the tractor and the generator goes on the blink. You get through a
drought and you have to deal with a flood.
Sometimes it does boil down to simple endurance.
The modern economic contest is a long distance race a very long distance
race. It is like the modern marathon, it gets faster and faster. But unlike the
marathon, it has no finish line.
I agree with what John Prescott had to say on Tuesday. I wish I didn't. I wish
I could say all the reform was over and that we don't need to change any
more. But we do. We need the culture of " continuous initiative" which
John Prescott talks about.
We need it in government, our education system, our public service and in
our businesses.
It is a condition of success in the modern world.
But we should remember that it is also a measure of our success.
The reason we have to go on is that we have come so far already. Far
enough to be a player. Far enough to enjoy some of the rewards and get
within view of greater ones. Far enough to know our potential and our
strengths and weaknesses.
I mentioned marathons: I think there's a lesson to be learned from watching
marathons, and listening to former marathon runners.
They all talk about not losing rhythm up hills and down, over cobblestones,
round corners, through the pain, through the drinks station you have to keep
the same steady stride and your eyes fixed.
You have to keep mind and body and soul together. 
When they are together, keeping up is almost mechanical. When they begin
to fall apart, the consequences are rapid and dramatic.
In no tir~ ne you drop out of the leading pack. And very few ever make up the
ground again.
I think this is something like the position we are in. On our own initiative,
talents and hard work, we have joined the leaders.
And we have to stay there. If they go faster we have to go faster.
We have to keep our stride.
If we are to keep up, we need to continuously improve.
If we are to continuously improve, we have to keep everything together.
The basics which have got us this far have to stay in tune.
And by this rather circuitous route I come back to the last time I spoke at the
Press Club. You will remember it was in connection with Working Nation
the Government's White Paper on Employment, Industry and Regional
Development. I remember copping a bit of criticism for comparing it with the White Paper of
the 1940s it was a shameful boast in the eyes of some people.
But it was a more than fair comparison. In fact, if only because contemporary
Australia is a more complex place, Working Nation had to be a statement of
broader dimensions and far greater detail than its counterpart of fifty years
ago.
And it was as much a defining document. It was as much a statement of this
Government's philosophy as the White Paper of 1944 was to the
Governments of reconstruction which Curtin and Chifley led. I hope it will be
as much a stamp of our ambition and achievement.
Working Nation was about keeping mind, body and soul together. I think I
said at the time that it addressed the great issue of unemployment with a cool
head and a warm heart.
It addressed problems which were both specific to Australia and endemic in
contemporary western economies and societies. It addressed them with a
view to maintaining the balance in this country between economic efficiency
and social justice indeed we sought the means to make those two goals
complementary. 
As Australian policy had been right through the eighties, Working Nation was
different to the orthodox model of economic liberalisation the model adopted
in a number of other countries and by our opponents.
It took the view that we could be competitive and still look after those on the
margins. We could compete with the best in the region and the world, and
yet maintain our egalitarian values and preserve our social cohesion.
Working Nation was a document for its time, and it was a very good one, I
believe. It has made life easier and opportunity greater for countless
Australians. It will make Australia both more productive and fairer. It will help
preserve the fabric of our communities and families. It is serving hundreds of
thousands of Australians now, and it will still be serving them for a long time.
Working Nation did not suddenly drop from the clouds. Its provenance was
the whole period of reform from 1983. It addressed the imperatives facing us
in the 1 990s, yet it was part of a policy story which includes financial
deregulation and tariff reform, reforms in training and education, the
progressive introduction of a sophisticated social wage, the Accords in
summary, a policy record which reflects Australia's dual commitment to
economic liberalisation and social fairness.
Working Nation built on this story and the philosophy underlying it.
It took a position on long term unemployment which not everyone shared, but
which was logical, moral and consistent with Australia's traditional values.
For all these reasons it will make Australia stronger.
With Working Nation we were not ahead of our time, but we were ahead of
most other countries; among them the United States, where Robert Reich and
many commentators these days complain of a destructive imbalance between
economic and social goals.
Working Nation now seems like a long time ago. You might ask why I'm
reviving it today.
Particularly as one of the weekend columnists wrote that there is no value in
these big policy statements any more? No political value at least.
But of course Working Nation is still operating. It's out there in Australian
communities now.
And there is profound value in major policy statements, including political
value. Policy is the means by which the lives of individuals, families and
communities are shaped. It is the means by which we shape the character
and the future of the nation. 
It is the purpose of political life, the only worthwhile measure of political
success, and by far the most significant measure of the worth of politicians
and parties.
It is also the best way to get elected.
I remain in no doubt that, however long they might suspend their judgement,
Australians always make policy their principal measure.
When they judge the Government sometime next year, they will judge it on
the basis of policy. Whatever you the media or we the politicians might think
about our ability to read or influence their views, one way or another the
ultimate test Australians apply will be a policy test.
It is essential to good democratic government that we explain our actions,
that we listen to what people are thinking, that we understand what they are
going through.
And that we are prepared to adjust our strategies when the interests of the
people demand it.
But it's equally essential that we don't confuse the product with the marketing
of it.
Of course we can be criticised for failing to " sell" policies as well as we might
I've no doubt that the criticism is often justified. But don't tell me that what
Australians want most in their lives is another salesman. Don't tell me that's
what they want in their Prime Ministers.
We can also be criticised for not hearing the complaints of large numbers of
Australians and I think very often that criticism is justified too. But don't tell
me that all Australians want from their Government is a good listener.
I've said it a few times good governments listen, but so do bad
governments. In our modern political culture I think we should resist what might well be a
real temptation to confuse good government with good radio and television.
They are not the same.
The essence of good government is not in the listening or in the talking but
in the thinking and the doing.
It was not public relations or spin doctoring which caused total employment to
rise by 380,000 in the year to June, by 680,000 since April 1993. Primarily it
was policy. It was thinking and doing. 
It was not PR which provided nearly 400,000 Australians with case managed
assistance to get employment or training, or a 20 per cent fall in the number
of long term unemployed: or a fall of more than 25 per cent among young
long tern unemployed. It was policy. It was thinking and doing.
When Working Nation was delivered, all of us here were in no doubt about
what was the most important issue facing the country it was unemployment.
No one needed reminding about the devastating effects of unemployment on
individuals, families and communities.
None of our imaginations needed prompting when we thought about the
difference between having a job and not having a job.
We all knew that jobs are far and away the best means of distributing wealth
and opportunity; that they are the best defence against alienation and
delinquency; the best measure and the best source of family and community
prosperity and cohesion; the best form of crime prevention; the best
investment a government can make.
I don't think we've forgotten. Even though we've had unprecedented job
growth and a fall in the unemployment rate among the highest in the OECD, I
don't think we have decided that the problem has gone away. I think we still
know that nothing counts as much as jobs.
Yet there has been a shift. Not in those communities where unemployment is
still very high, or in the families where breadwinners or children are still
unemployed. Not among those administering programs or dealing with the
consequences of unemployment.
But in the places where opinion is made, jobs have dropped down a rung or
two on the ladder of what matters. They should stay on top.
As long as jobs stay at the peak of our national ambitions we will know that
we are keeping body and soul together.
We will know that as a community we have kept faith with the spirit of change
in the past decade, and indeed with what we think of as our national
character and traditions.
And that is the best way to succeed.
The effort to marry economic efficiency to social justice and cohesion has
been the means by which we have reached the leading group of nations.
You have to ask -why change it? 
If a consensual incomes policy, a partnership between the union movement
and the Government is delivering progressive economic, social and industrial
relations reform if it is a vehicle of our progress why would you ditch it in
favour of a conflict model?
Why change stride?
If the Accords have helped substantially deliver sustained productivity
increases since 1983; a 60 per cent decrease in working days lost in strikes
compared to the previous period and, in the last 12 months, the lowest
number of strikes since records were first collected in 1942; employment
growth of 4.8 per cent in the past year and 2.3 per cent on average since
1983; economic growth which, at 3.7 per cent, one of the highest in the
OECD; and an inflation rate currently less than 3 per cent why would you be
ditching the Accord?
Why, when the Accord has helped create the culture in which change can
take place, in which the imperatives of competitiveness have been
recognised, in which enterprise-based agreements are becoming the norm
and worker superannuation is laying the foundations of a national savings
program why would you ditch it?
The essential contribution of the Accord has been as an inflation mechanism
in which the union movement has delivered wage restraint to help ensure
buoyant employment outcomes and, through this, sustained increased in
household incomes. The effect has been an increase in per capita real
disposable household income of 19.7 per cent since 1983.
Each employment target has been met, underlying inflation has been
reduced, and at the same time Australia has been opened up to international
trade and regional growth.
All of this without industrial disputes and with protection for the most
economically and socially vulnerable.
Why, when you have an effective inflation mechanism in the form of the
Accord, would you ditch it and leave yourself with only monetary policy to
control prices?
You keep the monarchy and you ditch the Accord! It is an amazing
perspective on contemporary Australia.
If we accept that social cohesion and social justice are desirable ends in
themselves, traditional national ambitions and essential aids in the economic
progress we have been making why would you be threatening cuts of
between 5 and 10 billion dollars in government outlays? 
It is also reasonable to ask why you would expect anyone to believe that cuts
of this magnitude will not include cuts in government programs in income
support, health, education, and transport for instance.
And why, when the evidence is plain that globalisation and new technology is
tending to increase earnings inequality everywhere, would you compound the
problem in Australia by cutting into the social wage we have built over the
past decade?
In the United States over the 1980s, 70 per cent of the rise in average family
incomes has gone to the top 1 per cent of families; and in the same period
the average real income of the bottom 20 per cent of income distribution has
fallen by 10 per cent.
In Australia very substantial increases in income support broadening the tax
base, introducing fringe benefits and capital gains taxes, reducing the lowest
marginal tax rate to 20 per cent and increasing the tax-free threshold have all
mitigated the tendency towards unequal income distribution. As a result, the
gap is nowhere near as wide in Australia as it is in the United States.
At the same time, the introduction of Medicare, large increases in funded
educational participation, the expansion of child care, targeted public sector
housing and, now, improved income in retirement through superannuation
none of which are taken into account by the usual studies or international
comparisons all narrow the gap in income distribution.
If a sophisticated social safety net is keeping Australian society together
through a period of profound and pervasive change why would you tear
holes in it?
Why would you make the US labour market model Australia's model, even as
the US Labour Secretary is lamenting its inadequacy?
To fix the Current Account? To make an impact on our external debt?
Because they are doing it in New Zealand?
But in New Zealand since they introduced individual contracts in 1991,
productivity has increased by only 1 per cent per annum. In Australia, it has
increased by over two and a half per cent per annum in the same period.
No one in the Government believes that every step we have taken has been
the right step, any more than we believe that all our problems as a nation are
behind us.
We know that the figures indicating that Australia has moved beyond the
realms of recovery into a sustained period of growth do not translate into
ease and comfort for every household and community. 
We know that the confidence in Australian sharemarkets, and among
commentators like Chris Caton and Don Stammer, is not felt generally around
the country at the moment.
Don Stammer has been reported as saying that he expected " a long lasting
upswing" that " will take us through to at least... .2000".
The Australian said recently that we may be experiencing " the healthiest
recovery the nation has had". But we know that it does not feel that healthy
in a lot of Australian homes.
We know that there is a lot of uncertainty around. And that there are a lot of
people preying on this uncertainty.
Perhaps this is where we need that capacity for endurance I mentioned.
The Government could do with it to deal with the modicum of frustration
anyone feels when hard won and long sought after success is interpreted as
something much less.
Much more importantly, Australians need it as we all come to terms with an
essentially new kind of Australian economy: an economy in which we have
sustained growth without inflation not a boom, not an environment in which
we substitute inflation for savings, but low inflation sustainable growth.
The uncertainties which people feel are not unique to Australia. In the US
and elsewhere, there appears to be wide concern about the income
distribution gap; about frustrated personal aspirations and inadequate
personal security.
I have talked about the income gap in Australia and I might add the
observation that in Australia the rich are not yet building private roads for
themselves, or employing private police forces and establishing, for all intents
and purposes, a new species of feudalism.
They have not had a government in the past 10 years willing to encourage
the growth of an exclusive and exclusivist oligarchy and an underclass
condemned to permanent and increasing impoverishment.
We have liberalised the economy to encourage opportunity and create
wealth. But we have also pursued a fair social equation and kept alive the
sense of commonwealth.
International comparisions create a context in which our problems can be
better understood, but I know they are small comfort for real insecurities.
Nevertheless, I think that with each successive quarter of growth confidence
will slowly return. We can also reasonably expect a steady improvement in
confidence as the current account begins to improve. 
It will take a while for the real and lasting benefits of the reforms to
superannuation to be appreciated, but they will be. And there is genuine
reassurance for all Australians in them they mean greater comfort and
security in retirement and they mean a savings base, and in due course a
savings culture, for the nation.
That sense that the recovery will be short lived can only be laid to rest by
time. The fears about the current account and our external debt will start to
fade as the deficit declines and Australians become aware that solving the
problem is within our reach.
And of course it is.
It is within our reach because of the action we have taken on both the public
and private savings.
We have taken the decisions to restore the Budget to surplus.
As Treasury has shown, the changes to superannuation will lift private
savings by around 4 per cent of GDP over time.
Together, these initiatives mean less reliance on foreign borrowing in fact,
considerably less.
I would very much like to see develop a new phase in the economic
consciousness of Australians. I know it has undergone a remarkable
transformation in the past decade, but I would like to see another one. And I
think it will happen.
Over the next two or three years I believe Australians will not only recognise
that we have entered a period of prolonged growth, but rapidly come to insist
that we stay on this sustainable low inflation path.
I believe we will see a savings culture quickly emerge. And among the
elements of that culture will be a recognition that we will only succeed by
saving and investing wisely, making maximum sustainable use of our
resources, continuing to work hard and committing ourselves to the path of
continuous improvement.
I think John Prescott can feel confident about Australia's capacity to reach
what he calls " champion" status.
The fact is, Australia has already embarked on a process of continuous
improvement at a national level. 
There are a multitude of new, well-managed quality firms in Australia which
were born and have thrived because of the internationalisation of the
Australian economy. They were raised in the knowledge that no matter how
good tley are today in their product and their process, they must be better
tomorrow. And the Government is keeping pace. We know we have to both encourage
innovation in the private sector and practice it ourselves. We also know that
the public is understandably cynical when governments talk about their
achievements and their work practices.
But we have kept up the pace of reform and we will maintain it.
This year we negotiated the eighth Accord. Each Accord has built on the
preceeding one. Each one has been designed to meet contemporary needs.
We have maintained the progress in opening Australia to international and
regional economies and improving those environments for trade. From
those first financial reforms of long ago, through the tariff reductions, APEC
and the vision of free trade in the Asia-Pacific we have kept up the pace.
We have progressed from protectionism and industry assistance, through the
adjustment plans for particular industry sectors we have today; to the notions
of innovation, investment facilitation and seeding growth through assistance
to small and medium-sized enterprises which govern our modern industry
policy.
Above all, we are developing the skills of our people which is the foundation
of all successful industry.
One Nation was a great leap forward. Working Nation, and to no small
extent, the cultural policy, Creative Nation, consolidated the gains. The
statement on innovation in industry that we will deliver later this year will
maintain the pace.
We will continue to back our judgment. We will continue to follow an
Australian path to international success.
We take the view that government needs to put a marker out beyond current
best practice, so we are not playing catch-up.
It is a rare government that meets with total private sector approval and we
don't go seeking it.
But we do seek partnerships, common goals, a cooperative spirit. We talk to
business a great deal. We exchange ideas. 
But governments have independent roles and capacities. If they do their job
diligently and with a passion, and have no hang-ups about their role, they can
help industry build its competitiveness, they can help it enter international
market places, they can help it win.
Our worst critics will concede that this Government has done a great deal to
translate regional free trade from economic fantasy into a real political
prospect. I think industries therefore, have reason to feel confident that we
count their interests as our own which is to say as part of the national
interest. I began by talking about policy and I will end by it.
I don't mean I will give you the full checklist since 1983. I won't even give you
a resume since 1992.
But I want to say this much.
The big policy statements those big, non risk-averse statements from
One Nation through to this year's Budget, have at their heart something more
than meeting the interests of the sectors of the economy and population
which they specifically address.
I think there is more to them than the effect they have in, say, kick-starting the
economy and creating new national infrastructure as One Nation did; or
creating a stimulus for regional development, as Working Nation did; or a
new deal for Australia's creative artists and industries as the cultural
statement did.
I think, beyond the practical effects we seek from them, good policy
developments pick up on forces at work within the country: I mean things as
intangible as collective needs and ambitions, emerging ideas and
perspectives and they give them concrete force. They give them expression
in the life of the nation.
And the life of the nation should be healthier for it.
I see policy as a process of national reinvigoration and reinvention. I see it
as a process of national character building.
Among the many things One Nation did, I hope, was give expression to the
sentiment that is always there in hard times the fellow feeling, the sense that
we are stronger when we stick together. And in so far as it succeeded in
doing this, I hope the feeling will last us right through the decade.
Working Nation, I believe, gave expression to an Australian sensibility as old
as the nation itself that employment is a birthright and the unemployed
should not be left behind. That this is a fair country and properly a pioneer of
social democracy. 
13
I hope Creative Nation will prove to have tapped a vein of creativity and
national pride; that the Native Title Act will be seen in time as an expression,
not of dur collective guilt, but our collective sense of justice and
responsibility; and that before the end of the century the initiative that we
have taken with the Republic will give voice to an Australian spirit and
identity. John Prescott said on Tuesday night " A country must be able to constantly
renew itself if it is to offer its people rising standards of living and larger
opportunities." He said he wanted " A culture of continuous initiative".
I have never welcomed a speech by an Australian business leader more than
this one.
Especially after all the talk about risk-averseness. 



TEL L N U 031
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
MR HOWARD AND THE MARKS ROYAL COMMISSION
Mr Howard today made the extraordinary admission that he and Mr Court
discussed the establishment of the Marks Royal Commission prior to Mr
Court's public announcement that the Royal Commission would proceed.
In his ABC radio interview this morning, Mr Howard refused three times to
answer direct questions as to whether he in fact urged Mr Court to set up
the Royal Commission.
Mr Howard now has the chance to live up to his rhetoric about the need for
absolute truth in politics. He can answer, truthfully and without prevarication
or deceit, the following simple questions:
Did Mr Howard discuss the establishment of the Marks Royal
Commission with Premier Court before its public announcement?
Did anyone acting on Mr Howard's behalf, especially the shadow
attorney-general, discuss the setting up of the Marks Royal
Commission with Premier Court or anyone acting on his behalf?
How many discussions took place, and when and where were they held?
Given the repeated claims by the Liberal Party that there is no political
motive in the establishment of the Royal Commission; and the fact that the
terms of reference relate to matters in the Western Australian Parliament,
why did Mr Howard and/ or his representatives discuss the establishment of
the Royal Commission with Mr Court and/ or his representatives?
Will Mr Howard adopt in his answers to these questions about his
recollections of his discussion with Premier Court, the same standards of
truth and directness that he claims to seek from Dr Lawrence and her
recollections of Parliamentary events leading up to the tabling of the Easton
petition? CANBERRA August 1995 91/ 95 



PRIME MINISTER 92/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO INDONESIA
I will make a short working visit to Indonesia on 17 September 1995 following my
visit to Papua New Guinea for the South Pacific Forum and 20th anniversary
celebrations of PNG's independence.
I will meet President Soeharto to discuss the APEC meeting in Osaka in November as
well as bilateral and regional issues.
CANBERRA 29 August 1995 



PRIME MINISTER *** Check Against Delivery***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENrs COMMITMENTS FOR THE UNITED
NATIONS FOURTH WORLD CONFERENCE ON WOMEN
TUESDAY 29 AUGUST 1995
I am pleased to be here today to mark Australia's involvement in the United
Nations' Fourth World Conference on Women.
Many people are cynical about international conferences. Some media
reports over the last week have referred to the United Nation's Conference as
a " talkfest", meaning all talk and no action.
We all know the syndrome. You don't have to be a cynic to recognise it
very often, just a casual observer.
It is true that, in many countries, implementation of the Strategies document
for the Advancement of Women from the Third World Conference has been
slow or non-existent.
The desire for faster progress towards true equality for women and men is
behind the idea that all nations should commit themselves to tackling the
most pressing needs of women in their own countries, before the UN
Conference.
And not just commit themselves. " Talkfests" commit themselves. We should
be suspicious of the word " commit" unless there is evidence of the will to
actually do.
The Australian Government welcomes this Conference of Commitments. We
are very proud to have initiated it. But we stress the meaning from the start
by commitment we mean doing.
Having had some experience of international conferences and the way the
UN works, I know this could not have been an easy task and I congratulate
the head of 05W, Kathy Townsend, and her team. 
For many years, Australia has been an international pacesetter on status of
women issues. The recently released United Nations Development Program
report on women points to Australia as having one of the best records,
ranking number six out of 130 countries on a range of criteria including
women's share of income and participation in education.
As I said in a speech to the Press Club last week, this sort of achievement
does not come about haphazardly or accidentally or through good public
relations. It is the result of thinking and doing the long hard slog of policy
development and implementation.
We could not commit ourselves to the things I will announce today without the
policy foundation we have laid for women since 1983.
Policies which have supported the dramatic increase in women's participation
in education and the labour force; a network of affordable, quality child care;
significant real increases in family assistance paid to women; the
establishment of a National Women's Health Program; the introduction of the
Sex Discrimination Act; and the extension of superannuation to 85 per cent of
women workers.
These policies are just part of the Government's program of reform to improve
the status of women. And we are proud of our achievements.
But satisfaction is not complacency. Reform never stops.
For the Government's commitments to be effective, they must give expression
to the needs, concerns, ambitions and interests of Australian women.
The Australian Council for Women, headed by Sandra Yates, was set up to
advise the Government in the lead-up to the Conference on how we could
address the barriers to the advancement of women.
The Council consulted with women's organisations, held community
consultations and conducted the " Purple Postcard Campaign", which asked
women to tell the Government the one thing that concerned them. Not
surprisingly, most women told us more than one thing.
The Government also commissioned research which sought the opinions of
women who were likely to miss out on putting their views through the more
formal channels of consultation.
We learned a great deal about the concerns of Australian women. But four
general areas emerged as the primary focus -for change and it is in these four
areas that the Government is determined to advance the status of women.
The four areas are: balancing work and family responsibilities; violence;
health; and public life and decision-making. 
The most important area raised by women was the challenge of balancing
work and family responsibilities.
In the consultations, women made it clear that they thought their position had
improved markedly. In particular, they said that today they had more
freedom, choice and opportunity.
But they also recognised the downside of these changes. Unfortunately,
because now women can do anything, they often end up doing everything.
As one women put it, her life consists of " Juggling everything, especially work
with the children." She was " the first to get up and the last to go to bed."
And this is not just hearsay and anecdote. There is concrete evidence of it.
Just last week the Australian Institute of Family Studies released a report
showing that the majority of women still had the main responsibility for
household tasks such as cooking, cleaning, shopping and laundry, even
when the women were in full-time paid employment.
Essentially, there is little Government can do to help with this modern
malaise. The " double shift" which women talk about is not one that
governments can arbitrate.
But there are things the Government can do to help women cope with their
different roles.
Many women pointed out that real equality had yet to be achieved in the
workplace. The Working Women Centres set up by the Government can play
an important role here in ensuring equity for women at work.
Over the past six months, the existing five Working Women Centres have
received more than 3,500 enquires from women about work-related matters.
The centres provide information and assistance to women on issues such as
pay, working condit * ions, enterprise bargaining and training. They are
particularly important for blue collar women and are probably the most
important source of information on employment issues for women from non-
English speaking or indigenous backgrounds.
I am pleased to say that the centres have been welcomed by women and
women's organisations. The only thing that has not been welcomed is that
two States do not have a centre.
Today, I am announcing that the Government will set up Working Women
Centres in Victoria and Western Australia, providing national coverage for
this important resource. Given the direction which Jeff Kennett and Richard
Court are taking industrial relations and employment conditions in their
States, I predict that the centres will see brisk business in Victoria and
Western Australia. 
Another issue raised by women juggling work and family responsibilities is
the difficulty of taking leave to care for sick children. There was strong
support for making existing leave more flexible. The Government agrees with
this position and will argue it before the Industrial Relations Commission.
Women were also very strong in their support for the choice to stay at home
to care for their children full-time. And there was a view that the needs of
women at home were often overlooked.
One area where this issue can be addressed at the outset is the new
communications and information technology. The new technology is set to
transform all our lives and we must ensure that the technology does serve the
interests of all Australians, not just those in the workforce or in education. I
have asked the National Information Services Council to advise how the new
technologies can respond to the needs and interests of women working fulltime
at home.
In the consultations, women at home raised the need for training to up-date
their skills: some were concerned that they would be left behind in the
information revolution. To address this, I have also asked the Council to
develop proposals for the training of women at home in the new technologies.
The Council will also report on how all women, including women in rural and
remote communities, can get equitable access to the new communications
services. The Taskforce on Women and Communications Technologies in
the Office of the Status of Women will be extended to ensure that women's
participation in the development of new technologies is maximised.
During the last election I announced the New National Agenda for Women. I
remember at the time saying that perhaps the most sobering message to
have come from our consultations for the New Agenda was the fear of
voilence felt by women in Australia violence on the streets and in the home.
Regretfully, I must say that violence is still one of women's main concerns.
We must and can do more to stop it.
There have been very successful projects in the United States and New
Zealand which show that coordinating the assistance and response of
governments, police, legal services and community agencies leads to a lower
level of violence against women, and fewer repeat offences.
The Commonwealth will work with State and Territory governments to
develop an integrated approach to stopping violence against women.
In the consultations, women frequently raised the need for early education to
reduce violence. The Government will contribute towards running forums in
each State and Territory to develop effective ways of dealing with violence in
Australian schools. 
In the area of women's health, many women spoke of the need to give priority
to better health services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women who
face additional problems because of discrimination, isolation and ignorance
of their needs.
The Government will introduce a new program targeted at Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander women. The Healthy Women, Strong Families Program
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Women will focus on health checks;
maternal and infant health monitoring; and health promotion and prevention.
Special attention will be given to rural and remote communities where such
services are currently inadequate.
Last week, Frank Blount, the head of Telstra observed that at the same time
as the status and influence of women have expanded, and at the same time
as women are generally outperforming men educationally, the proportion of
women senior managers in Australia's largest companies actually fell. As he
said, " There is something quite evidently wrong here".
To promote women's participation in public life and decision-making, the
Government will assist in the establishment of a national peak body of women
in business. The Australian Council of Businesswomen will provide a
stronger voice for women in business to Government, business networks, the
media and the community generally.
The Government will also encourage women's participation on private sector
boards. We will work in partnership with the Australian Institute of Company
Directors, the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry on a three-year initiative to increase the appointment
of women of merit to private sector company boards.
I have concentrated today on the Government's commitments to women in
Australia. But we also have a responsibility to assist less wealthy countries in our
region in their efforts to improve the status of women. Australia has been the
lead regional donor for the Pacific region in the lead up to the Conference
and we will continue in this partnership. Australia will provide funds to nongovernment
organisations in the Pacific Island nations to assist in the
implementation of commitments arising from the Conference.
It gives me great pleasure to hand the Government's national commitments
for women over to my colleague, Dr Carmen Lawrence, who will announce
them on behalf of Australia at the United Nations' Fourth Conference for
Women. I wish Australia's delegation to the Conference and the women attending the
forum for Non-Government Organisations well, and I thank all the Australian
women who voiced their concerns and contributed to the development of the
Government's commitments to improve the status of women. 



IPRIME
MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT A RECEPTION FOR THE AUSTRALIAN NETBALL TEAM,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 29 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much, Kirsten [ Wheeler], Michelle ( Fielke],
Jill [ McIntosh], members of the successful team and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here with John [ Faulkner] on this occasion to be
able to say congratulations and thank you to Michelle and the team for a
great Australian victory. A great victory, out there, against the rest of the
world, to demonstrate on two consecutive occasions that it wasn't something
that just was a flash in the pan, that you could keep it up. And that in what
was a most unusual as you say, won by one on two occasions a most
unlikely outcome. And then, of course, that final win which was, of course, a
very strong and convincing one.
I am very pleased for you all as a team, but particularly as individuals, to be
given this opportunity to be out there to actually have that win and for
Australians to share with you the joy of that victory. I was delighted for you
and for all the people interested in netball, yesterday, to see the reception
that you received.
I think it has meant a lot to everybody in this country. We have always had
such tremendously strong women in sport. It has been a part of our great
sporting tradition and keeping it up, out there, where now of course the
competition is always so fierce and the training is so much better than years
ago, it is so much harder to do it.
I am delighted that the Institute of Sport has been able to play a role because
in the 1980s when we were cutting Government expenditure and I used to
sit in the Expenditure Review Committee night in, night out. We cut many
things, but always put money into sport because this is an area where I think
young Australians can show their commitment, what they are made of and it
is a place where we can show our belief in them and our support for them in
one of the rare ways in which a Government can actually have a role and
make a difference and I hope in this respect we have. 
Running a political party is a bit like running a netball team. Except in public
life there are no grand finals. In your game, at least, there is a grand final.
In our's, even after you win the election, they say " they'll never win another
on" There is a problem a week later and it all sort of turns to ashes.
So there are no grand finals and you know how hard it is to keep the
psychology of the team together and to keep that belief in yourself and that
sort of instinct to go on, that determination, that willingness to will yourself on.
All of these things are true in public life as they are, I think, in sport. It is one
of the rare parallels I think you can make with world championship sport.
Now I am not saying we are as fit a team as you are we are not or that I am
the fittest one of the team because I am not. But the fact of the matter is, we
do have a slight idea of what it is like to be out there all the time in that
competitive environment, all the time knowing that it is a mind-play most of
the time. You have got to have the general state of fitness and the dexterity
to be in it, but in the end you have got to have the belief in yourself and the
belief in the group of you as a corporate entity, as a group of people and
of course, in this case, in your values and what you want to achieve.
In this building we all know you have these things because you can't do what
you have done without them and I think that is the thing that brings so much
pleasure to us. The fact that young Australians, as you are, have this belief
and these values and this is what has willed you on to win and you are, as
John said, a role model for many thousands of Australian young people and
especially young women who in this day and age where we are all buffeted
by opinions and views and news and everything else and cultural change and
economic change and all of the other things that move our lives around
today, much more than they have been moved by other generations I mean
out there to have some shining lights is a really, I think, important thing for us.
So on behalf of all Australians we thank you most sincerely and salute what
you have been able to do.
Could I just say a few words about Margaret Pewtress. I didn't know her well,
but I got to know her reasonably well. She was a great woman, a great
believer in young Australians, a great contributor to sport and we are very
sad at her passing. She always provided such gusto to the general question
of the organisation of sport in Australia, particularly for women, and I know
she is sorely missed by you and will be by the rest of us. She is one of those
real foot soldiers of Australian sport. She was always in there, every year,
through the good years and the bad years, in there basically trying to make it
better. So I am delighted we will remember her by a special award which will
be associated with the Prime Minister's Award and it couldn't be a more fitting
person to have that, if you like, longtermn acknowledgment by all of you and
those associated with you and those hundreds and thousands of young
Australian women in the sport, for Margaret.
So perhaps I will conclude by again congratulating Michelle, on behalf of the
team, and Jill, who has coached them, and the other key members of the side
to say what a great job you have done, how you have kept it together and 
3
doing it on two consecutive occasions is proof positive, if we needed it, that
you really have what it takes. And Michelle the fact that you have been able
now to finish your career on such a high point, is no doubt a personal
pleasure for you and as it is for you, it is for the rest of us.
I think this is another thing, of course, which we have often seen in sport.
That some people never quite retire at the time that they think they should
have and that shows again judgement and good sense and it comes to the
course at the crowning moment in your career. Congratulations. Thank you,
all of you, for your magnificent efforts on behalf of Australia. We are all very
proud of you indeed.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT CORRIDOR OF OAKS TREE PLANTING, JACKSON PARK
AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
It is a great occasion for me it may be that one's Prime Ministership is
confirmed when one plants a tree here. At any rate, we will have a tree. And
I am glad that I have had the opportunity to plant it. It's always been
that... . there are places in Australia which are quite important to the
Federation, to the nation, and also the Labor Party. And Maggie ( Deahm)
has mentioned the fact that Macquarie was an electorate which, of course,
was the home of a former Labor Prime Minister in Ben Chifley, and as well as
that, Tony Luchetti when I first went to Federal parliament, had been the
Member for Macquarie for the better part of a quarter of a century. So there
are very great Labor traditions here in the Blue Mountains, and interestingly,
we have this connection with Henry Parkes. And it was the case, of course,
in the 19th century, most people of his standing in public life had a house in
the country. And his house in the country, of course, was at Faulconbridge.
And happily, it has been preserved. And he was one of the principal people
involved in the Federation of our nation. And the notion occurred to him as it
did to many others, that there was no point in us being simply colonies, but
rather that we should federate and become a nation. And this happened, of
course, on the first of January, 1901. And he played a very proud role in it.
And Faulconbridge has kept that connection with the birth of the Federation.
And here we are now, just a hundred years later, trying to close the circle and
see us establish an Australian republic with an Australian person as our
Head of State. It shouldn't have taken one hundred years, but better late
than never.
Now, I think that in these years, when we think back upon it, that great period
of Australian nationalism was in the 1890s it was one hundred years ago.
Where we saw the big maritime strikes, one of the worst droughts, one of the
worst depressions recessions but we saw the birth of Australian
nationalism, we saw the birth of the Labor Party and that sense of the nation,
of course, we saw the Federation in 1901, and that nationalism went through
until it was snuffed out in 1914 by the First World War. And we are seeing in Q 
a sense that regenerate in the 1 990s, where we have seen some of the same
characteristics: the early 1990s, the recession, the drought, but again, I think
a new sense by Australians in who we are and what we have become what
we have made for ourselves as a nation, and now, how we have come to
celebrate what we have created here in Australia. And we know that our
aspirations as Australians that the sentiments we feel and the instincts we
have will be completely represented when we represent ourself to the world,
as ourselves. And that we can't go on one hundred years later borrowing the
monarchy of another country and say here we are, making our way in Asia,
with this great opportunity, this ancient continent bequeathed to us, where
just two hundred years ago there were no people of European descent,
where this continent in a sense was saved by the Aboriginal community and
kept in trust for the rest of us. And having been kept in trust, and again
having that opportunity to go now as part of the community in Asia and say
" oh, just by the way, the Head of State of Australia is the Queen of Great
Britain". Now, it has served us, and in some parts of our history it has served
us well. But now, of course, we must make the break to do proud, to do
justice to all of the instincts which Henry Parkes had, and all of those people
interested in the Federation of the nation we now have to make that change,
and make it to an Australian republic.
And let me tell you this the moment it happens ( interrupted by train
passing) lI was going to say this that as we make this change, we will feel
good about ourselves. You know, once people understand that there is an
Australian person who represents the nation, and who is the embodiment of
the nation, it will make us feel stronger, and it will make us feel better about
ourselves it will make it more clear to us who we are and what we are, and
who we have become. So, today, I plant this tree not simply to do as other
Prime Ministers have done, but to celebrate the spirit of nationalism of a
century ago. To celebrate the fact that Henry Parkes his way up here from
Sydney, weekends and from time to time, while having in his heart and mind
the notion that we were better and deserved to be better than a collection
of disparate colonies. That we were a people and that we were a nation then,
as we certainly are today. That's why I am very pleased to be here.
I do have this collection of Henry's letters, and they are quite an interesting
lot of letters they are letters between Henry and his financier. He used to
lend him money from time to time, and a few other personal things as well.
So, all it proves is nothing changes nothing ever changes. So, can I say
also how pleased I am to be in the Blue Mountains, and particularly with
Maggie Deahm. I see her sitting next to Bob Debus part of a Labor
Government. The thing I say about the Labor Party is that it has always had
belief in Australia, and belief in Australians.
We have always seen the better instinct in. people there has always been
two categories of Australians, as Manning Clarke has always said: the
enlargers, and the punishers and straiteners. The people who have believed
in something bigger and better, who have faith in Australians, and belief in
them, that knew they could always do something more, and the people that
said " know your place, keep your eyes down, stay at your last that is our 
3
place in life", the straiteners. And it has always been about this. And the
enlargers have always had to pull Australia along, whether it has been into
Federation, or whether it has been into engagement with the rest of the world,
or whether it is to the republic, the enlargers whoever they might be have
always been about pulling the country progressively to the next stage. And I
was saying the other day John Olsen, the great Australian artist, at a
presentation about a year ago in Canberra, said " there are only two kinds of
Australians lovers and others, and we know what to think of the others, don't
Well, anyway, I am here on behalf of the lovers, of the enlargers, of
the people who believe in a bigger Australia. Who have faith in themselves,
have faith in these young people, in the children, who always see something
better. So, that's why I am planting the tree not simply to be part of a series,
but to be part of something new, and be part of something better. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME INISTE 94/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
RELEASE OF THE APEC EMINENT PERSONS GROUP REPORT:
" IMPLEMENTING THE APEC VISION"
I warmly welcome the third report of the APEC Eminent Persons Group,
" Implementing the APEC Vision", which was presented to Prime Minister
Murayaxna, the 1995 chair of APEC, in Tokyo today.
The APEC Eminent Persons Group was first established in 1992 to develop an
independent vision for APEC to the year 2000. It contains distinguished
representatives from all APEC member econormies, participating in their own
capacities, under the chairmanship of Dr Fred Bergsten of the United States.
Australia's representative on the Group is the Hon Neville Wran. I would
particularly like to thank him for the significant contribution he has made to this
latest report and over the past three years to the work of the Eminent Persons
Group. Last year at their Bogor meeting APEC leaders took the historic decision to
achieve the goal of free and open trade and investmnent in the region by 2010 for
industrialised countries and 2020 for developing countries. The Eminent Persons
Group's 1994 report, " Achieving the APEG Vision: Free and Open Trade in the
Asia-Pacific", was instrumental in putting before leaders the importance of such a
goal. In this latest report the EPG has focussed on fleshing out its ideas on issues
it regards as central to the achievement of the Bogor commitments.
I particularly agree with the report's central proposal that it is essential for
APEC to move promptly, decisively and credibly to implement the visions of
Blake Island and Bogor.
The EPG report contains a number of valuable ideas we would strongly support.
It urges that liberalisation within APEC be undertaken on a comprehensive basis
with agreed timetables and principles. It recommends that APEC take as
forthcoming an approach as possible to implementing our Bogor decision to
accelerate, deepen and broaden our Uruguay Round commitments and it proposes
a way forward for APEC in areas such as dispute mediation, investment and 
standards. It has proposed that APEC should deepen its cooperation on monetary
and macroeconomic issues and it has made suggestions for deepening
developiient and technical cooperation in APEC, as an integral part of
community building in the Asia Pacific region.
The report will be a significant source of ideas on which leaders can draw in
Osaka to take forward the APEC vision for trade and investment liberalisation
within the region.
CANBERRA August 1995
[ Copies of the Report may be obtained from Michelle Innes, Macquarie Bank,
telephone number 02 237 4102] 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, THE VALLEY RESTAURANT, FAULCONIBRIDGE,
AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: ( growth figures?)
PM: Well, they are exceptionally encouraging. It has now given Australia
16 consecutive quarters of growth. Four straight years of growth with
low inflation and as a consequence of that growth we have seen
680,000 jobs in the last two and a half years. I think what is
particularly pleasing about the accounts is it shows the economy
growing at 3.7 per cent a strong but sustainable rate with low
inflation. So, if you had to sit down and fill the numbers in the boxes, if
we'd have had that privilege, they couldn't have been any better.
J: Foreign debt hit $ 180 billion, that is a record high.
PM: But, what came down is the debt service capacity. That is, the debt
service ratio, the capacity to service the debt is improving all the time.
It is half of what it was 10 years ago. Only 11 per cent of our exports
now service the debts. Ten years ago it was 22 per cent.
J: Are you happy with just 1 per cent for the June quarter, would you like
to see it a little higher?
PM: It is the year to number that matters and the year at 3.7 per cent is just
about where the Government would like it.
J: So, you don't think it is slowing down too much?
PM: I don't think it is slowing down too much. I think it is just at a nice clip.
J: On another matter, Indonesia, you are going there next month, will you
be raising the report that has come out on the death of these 11
people. N, N 
PM: I have heard the Indonesian Human Rights Commission will be
investigating those and we will look to that investigation. They are in a
position, I think, to follow these sorts of issues up and no doubt they
will.
J: What about Richard Court's memory, surely John Howard is
forgettable anyway?
PM: The whole basis of the Court royal commission is now unravelling
before his eyes. Richard Court says he might have said something,
may have, but can't remember and yet he has Carmen Lawrence
before this commission, he has set up an elaborate $ 5 million
commission against one woman who has said pretty much as he has
said. That is, remembering things from years ago, but even the
statements she has made are fairly clear to the Parliament of Western
Australia. And, of course, we have got Mr Wooldridge, the Liberal
Party spokesperson who was conniving with the West Australian
Government and with Mr Court in establishing terms of reference and
a commission against an opponent. Now, of course, he won't come
clean. Mr Howard is all about political honesty and we had all that
cant and incantations from him about the importance of political
honesty, but he won't say whether he and Mr Wooldridge were
conniving with Richard Court to disadvantage Carmen Lawrence.
J: Do you support Gareth Evans' mentioning of Anne Vanstone in the
Parliament yesterday?
PM: I think what Gareth was saying was that justice should appear to be
done. That you have seen, do you remember in NSW here, Mr Temby
was on some matter representing the police as a QC, he declined the
position because at the time he accepted the need that justice should
appear to be done. Here you have got a Council associated with the
Liberal Party in a commission set up against a Labor Party Minister.
J: But, is it appropriate that he is attacking the validity of the Council?
PM: Well, was it appropriate for John Howard to have his communications
spokesman attack my wife for going on a tour with the Sydney
Symphony Orchestra. I mean, in the annals of political cowardice, that
wasn't a bad one.
J: Mr Keating, when you visit President Soeharto this month, isn't it, what
are you going to say to him about the breach of human rights that were
documented today?
PM: Well, I don't know whether it was documented today, that is the thing.
J: Well, it is in the papers. 
PM: But, I don't go there with a travelling slate of what I think are human
rights breaches in his country. I mean, he could point to problems we
have prejudicial views about the Aboriginal community, denying them
equal opportunity and access what would you say about that?
J: Yes, but we haven't got reports saying that 19 people were killed while
they were praying in a church.
PM: No, well, that will be investigated, I'm sure, by the Indonesian Human
Rights Commission.
J: Given the worsening drought in NSW, should there be an increase in
federal assistance?
PM: At the moment, there are 10,000 farm families 10,000, I think now it is
over 10,000 on income support in those quite radical changes I made
with Bob Collins last November. And, I think, the response you can
see that from the Graingrowers in Queensland recently acknowledging
that point. I notice Mr Howard this week saying me ' too, me too',
again, ' we'll do the same as the Government'. It is the Government
that has broken all the policy moulds here to try to help the farm
community and the family farm in particular hold through this drought
and all of those arrangements are in place. All those drought
exceptional circumstance arrangements are in place now.
J: So, there will be no increased funding?
PM: The formulas are there. If there is more drought, there will be more
support and there will be more funding.
J: Dame Pattie Menzies died this morning
PM: I hadn't heard that and if that is the case I am very sorry to hear it.
She was a very great Australian.
ends 



ELL: 3 -UHug. 95 ( 3: 36 No 001 F ID 1,, C14
93/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, Tit E HON P J KEATING, MVl
EPAC TASK FORCE ON FUTURE CHILD CARE PROVISION IN
AUSTRALIA Today I have asked EPAC, the Economic Planning Advisory Commission, to establish
a task force to investigate and report on child care provision in Aus~ tralia.
Child care is cnicially important in Australia's economic and social development. It
influences decisions about participation in the workforce, it provides parents with the
opportunity to undertake education, training and other activities; and it gives children
broader experiences which help their social, physical and intellectual development,
Changing work patterns and family arrangements mean that a constructive and
forward-looking review for child-care provision is timely.
We need a child care program that delivers the services that Australian families need
while, at the same time, involving predictable Commonwealth outlays and appropriate
linkages of Commionwealth, State, community and private sector services. Child care
services are also an integral part of the Government's approach to building a highly
skilled and adaptable workforce, as demonstrated by our commitment to mect the
demand for work-related child care by the year 2001.
The Government has already made significant progress towards meeting these goals.
By the end of March 1995, there were 262,500 Commonwealth funded child care
places against a target of 300,000 places by 1996-97. The Minister for Family
Services, Senator Rosemary Crowley, is also overseeing the development of innovative
services, especially in rural areas, and the introduction of the Quality Improvement and
Accreditation System. Better coordinated and more flex~ ible child care services are
also on the agenda of the Council of Australian Governents.
The work of the EPAC task force will complement other work being undertaken. It
will have a mediumn to long-term foctis. While not ignoring current problems and
challenges, the aim will be to set directions for the futuire which will best suit
Australia's economic and social needs,
Given this focus, the EPAC task force will investigate and report on the prospective
demand for child care, best practice in the provision of child care, and the links
between the provision of child care and other children's and family services. 
TEL: 31 9J. HU95 u: 36 No. 001 P 14
TJERNS OF REFERENCE
EPAC TASK FORCE ON FUTURE CHILD CARE PROVISION
Having regard to the Government's child care policy, including its commitment to incct
the demnand for work-rclated child care by 200 1, EPAC will establish a Task Force to
investigate and report on the prospective demand for child care, best practice in the
provision of child carec, and the links between the provision of child care and other
children's and family services.
For the purposes of the inquiry and report, the focus will be on the provision of paid
child care for children aged 12 years and under by persons other than the immediate
family of the child.
In reporting on these matters, the Trask Force will focus on:-
prospective devclopmnents in family formation, labour force participation and
job patcerns, and the implications of these and related developments for the
demand for child care;
best practice in the provision of child care in each of the sectors of famnily day
care, long day care, outside school hours care and occasional care as evidenced
by examples in both the community aild private sectors in Australia and
overseas; possible futurc structures and trends inl provision of child care and the impact
of government policies on availability, pricing and quality of various forms of
child care;,
medium to long-term goals and mechanisms for child care provision and for the
appropriate linkages of child care and children's services; and
the relationships between suppliers of child care services, families who use child
care services, budget holders in the sector and regulators, and desirable
changes to these inl the medium to long-term.
The Task Force is to have regard to findings of the Law Reform Commission Report
Child C'are for Kids, the Auditor-General's efficiency audit report Mind the Children,
and the Report of' the National Council for the International Year of the Family.
The Task Force is also to have regard to measures already taken by the
Commonwcalth in recent Budgets and by governments as part of the COAG reviewv of
WcomMUnity services provision.
The Task Force is to report to thc Government by the end of July 1996.
The Task Force's findings will be released by the Government and used inl the
Governent's subsequent discussions with the States and the community on this
subject. 
TEL:
The report of the task force will therefore assist governments in planning to meet
demand for child care in the future. It will aid both governments and child care
pruvidcisL ill Udciasiiin mid iiii0vl'aitii tlv best and most efictient forms of child
care. It will address problems of coordination in delivery that too often confront users
of family and children's services.
The task force will comprise Patricia Faulkner ( Chair), Bruce Hartnett, Wendy
McCarthy AO, and Glenn Withers AU ( ex-oflicio). A small secretariat for the task
force will operate within EPAC. The terms of reference for the task force and
information on its members are attached.
The task force will release an issues paper and receive submissions up until the end of
February 1996. It will report its findings to the Government by July 1996.
CANBERRA August 1995 0 u. Hug. 95 0: 36 No. 001 P. 02/, 04 
0 Glenn Withers AO, Director, EPAC ( ex officio)
TEL: 30. Ruy. 95 0: 36 No. 001 P. 04,' u4
EPAC TASK FORCE ON FUTURE CHILD CARE PROVISION
SUMMARY VITAE
Patricia Faulkner
Currently Director, KPMG Management Consulting Pty Ltd. Formerly Head,
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Victoria and senior executive in Victorian
Department of Labour ( Occupational Safety and Health) and Victorian Public
Service Board.
Brucc Hatlnett Currently Group Employee Relations Manager, NAB. Formerly ICI Corporate
Employee Relations Manager, in senior positions in Victorian Departments of
Industry Development, Tourism and Transport, and ACTU research officer and
advocate.
Wendy McCarthy AO
Currently Chair of the Australian Heritage Commission and President of Chief
Executive Women. Formerly Chief Executive of Price Brent and the Family
Planning Association, Deputy Chair of the ABC and General Manager
( Communications) for the Australian Bicentennial. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
DAME PATTIE MENZIES
I was saddened to learn of the death today of Dame Pattie Menzies.
Dame Pattie was a fine Australian, a model and an inspiration to her
countrymen and women.
During her marriage of over half a century to Sir Robert Menzies and in the
years since his death, her concern for her fellow citizens, particularly women,
and her charm and warm personality earned the deep affection of the
Australian people.
Her family has accepted the Government's offer of a State Memorial Service
to be held in Canberra shortly.
On behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian Labor Party I
extend my sympathy to her daughter, Heather Henderson, and all her family.
CANBERRA AUGUST 1995 95/ 95
4 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT FUNDRAISING LUNCH, THE VALLEY RESTAURANT,
FAULCONBRIDGE, 30 AUGUST 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you so much, and thank you for so many of you coming. It has been a
very, very pleasant day indeed to be here, and to be in the Mountains, and to
have the opportunity of planting a tree at Faulconbridge with the line of oaks
the Corridor of Oaks which are a symbol, I think, of our continuity of the
Prime Ministership over the period since the Federation in 1901. And I am
particularly pleased to be there today with the Mayor, with my parliamentary
colleague Maggie Deahm, with Minister Bob Debus. I am particularly
delighted that Margaret Free could join us today, and other distinguished
guests, including the Chancellor and members of Local Government. It has
been a very nice occasion, and I am pleased to have been able to make that
link, again, between the Federation and Henry Parkes, and the things for
which my Party has been interested in, and the things for which we have
stood for a very long period of time. And particularly this link with Macquarie
with Chifley, of course, being Member for Macquarie and Prime Minister, I
have even got a link myself because I have been the Member for Blaxland
since 1969, a bit tenuous, but there we are better than being the Member for
something else.
And in this, I think I was saying earlier, for those of you who weren't there
that here we are now, a century on, thinking about our nationalism again.
And I just reminded people of the great decade of nationalism and social
experimentation in Australia it was more than a decade: from the early
1890s until 1914 was the period when the sense of Australia came together.
A period of great difficulty, of economic difficulties, of a very great drought in
the 1 890s, the birth of the Labor Party, and then of course, the Federation.
And then, basically, the First World War snuffed it out, and it only returned
fleetingly again during the period of Curtin's Prime Ministership, and of
course, with Gough Whitlam. And we hope that now, in the 1990s again, we
can where we have had, in some of these economic difficulties, a drought
these things must bring on a renewed sense of Australian nationalism.
Because here we are now, this decade, thinking about that we have to round
the circle off with an Australian Head of State. And it will be when it 
happens Australians will feel very good about the fact that an Australian
person is the head of the Australian nation that represents and personifies
the Australian people. So, it was an opportunity to make these points again
to say that, for my part, I was not about simply planting a tree as one of a
series of Prime Ministers, but to plant it for the reason that we round the circle
on Federation, and we cap it off by making clear that we are a unique nation,
the Australian nation, and everything about us is Australian and our Head of
State is Australian.
I was talking earlier, too, about the categories of Australians who believe in
Australia who have faith in Australia, and faith in the Australian people.
And, many of you I know who are students of Australian history, remember
Manning Clarke's division between the enlargers, and the straiteners and
punishers he said that Australians tend to fall into two categories, the
people who believe in something bigger, and greater and grander, and larger
essentially have faith in their fellow Australians to make it, and those who
say this is your place in life, get your nose to the grindstone, conform, and he
said they are the straiteners. And I think, as time goes on, you can see in this
debate again about an Australian republic, people coming out saying yes it
very clear, we are a unique nation, that our Head of State shouldn't be the
Monarchy of another country but there are still those people who say oh no,
you can't let Australians manage themselves. Not quite yet not quite yet.
They are not sure when it is, but not quite yet.
At any rate, we have come a long way together, and I think we have got an
opportunity now we have never had. And that is, one hundred years ago, all
the markets we dealt with, all the people we traded with, were essentially in
Europe, and sometimes in North America. This is the first time in Australian
history the European history of Australia, the non-Aboriginal history of
Australia where we are closest to the fastest growing markets in the world.
So, now on our doorstep are markets growing faster than the traditional
markets we used to have. And the thing I am most pleased about, is that
Australia has set itself up in the last 10 years to be part of that
psychologically, culturally, economically. Because you can't go and say to
old societies like Indonesia 200 million people here we are, we are the
Australians, not the Australians of a White Australia Policy, but a proud
nation, Australians, we relate to you and we have respect for your culture,
and they say show us how you treat your indigenes, and we will show you
how you will treat us. You can't go there without integrity you can't
approach these nations, and be part of this community here without integrity.
That means that we have to come to terms with our own history and bring
our culture, be clear about what our culture is, and who we are as a people
before we can go out and do that. Now, I believe we are doing these things,
and our relationship is such now with Asia I can't believe that at any stage in
our history that we have had a better relatio nship than we have now, whether
it be with Indonesia, or with Vietnam, and two weeks ago I had here the most
distinguished Vietnamese, the General-Secretary of the Vietnamese
Communist Party, who is now turning Vietnam into essentially a market
economy after those years of deprivation. Or last week, where we had the 
annual Ministerial Meeting with our Japanese colleagues in this case, the
Minister for International Trade and Industry, Mr Hashimoto, and Mr Kono,
the Foreign Minister. The two most important people in the LODP which is
the Party which has essentially managed Japan all through the post-War
years. I mean, we have got these relationships now, and we are building
them up.
And we can see an interesting life for ourselves an interesting engagement
with this region, a better standard of living, more jobs in Australia, and a
higher level of income for Australians. You compare that to the cloistered
little country we were back in 1983 ring-fenced by tariffs, ring-fenced by a
managed exchange rate. Sitting there, wondering which way to go: our
national income falling, because the things we had relied upon traditionally
wheat, wool, minerals being of much less value, and bringing much lower
prices and sitting there watching the income go down, the debt go up, our
competitiveness shot to pieces, no inner faith and confidence about
ourselves, coming out of a deep recession with very high unemployment and
inflation. I mean, that was the sort of yoke we were in, in 1983.
But, when you look at the progress now here we are, we are clear about our
identity, we pulled the tariff wall down, we have now got import competition
and exports. Yesterday, we had the highest level of exports per month in our
history we are seeing, in today's National Accounts, the inflation rate at
2.1 on the broadest measure of inflation for the year. We have just had
680,000 jobs since the last election can you believe that? 680,000 jobs
since the last election. It took us 200 years to get 6 million people in the
labour market, and we have added 10% of that in 2 1/ 2 years. I mean, it's a
profound change. And today, with today's National Accounts, where we have
another quarter of growth, we have 16 consecutive quarters of growth. The
last time we had 16 consecutive quarters of growth was 25 years ago a
quarter of a century ago. Four straight years of growth, four straight years of
employment, four straight years of getting on top of inflation and giving us
back our economic future. And yet my opponents talk about 5 minutes of
economic sunshine in their cynicism, they talk about 5 minutes of economic
sunshine. It is the longest growth phase in a quarter of a century. And it is
now our opportunity to build on these things, but we have done all of this
together the Government has done it with the Australian people. It has
done it with the Trade Unions we have put it into a consensual model,
where consensus matters. We have said at that Economic Summit way
back there in 1983 that the policies of conflict can't give us the economic
future we wish. That we can't have wage explosions that give workers a short
term wage increase to see it dashed by high inflation a year later. That we
need high investment to get high employment and that we need high
investment to rebuild our capital stock to give us the exports and import
replacement that will generate our wealth.
But, we need to do all of this in the context of inclusion. That is, we are one
nation and we are a nation together and it is not a nation for the high fliers
and the top end of town. It is a nation for everybody and so we said you are 
entitled to access and equity in health. You are entitled to access and equity
in education and you can have these things in a country this wealthy and at
the same time the goers who build the businesses can still have their go
becausq the profit share is very high, the tax system, the corporate tax rate is
by western world standards right on the line at about 35 or 36 per cent.
You can do all these things, but we don't have to go for the punishing and
straitening model of tearing people down and building an underclass.
At the last election you might remember me saying we won't leave the
unemployed behind, we won't have an underclass. Not that we might try not
to have an underclass, we won't have an underclass. When I introduced
Working Nation that great social change from the Government last year, that
was directed to the long term unemployed and now we've had since that time,
in these last two and a half years since the election, a quarter of all the jobs
have gone to long term unemployed people. In other words, it is typically the
case in most countries like Australia that the new entrants to the workforce
are the school leavers or the migrants. Those who are long term unemployed
stay out forever and they get marginalised, never to come back. We brought
them back. So, the place is not only more fully employed, but it is happier
and it is more fair.
So, doing it together in a consensual way without a conflict model. It means
that in this country, if you are single or if you are married or you have children
and you wake up and you are sick you have got Medicare there to support
you. Ten years ago three kids in ten completed secondary school. This year
it is eight in ten and we have added about 60 per cent of places to higher
education since the middle 1980s and you can see this by the growth in
higher education and we have the Chancellor here today just to make the
point for us. The reach of higher education and the access for higher
education which we now have.
But, how could we be the smart society that wanted to make the engagement
with Asia, that wanted to sell the clever products and the services and not just
another paddock full of wheat or wool as important as they are but to do
the other things too, the high value added products, the intellectual property,
the services, how could you do it when only three kids in ten completed
secondary school? I mean, what hope did we have?
This is the faith our opponents had in Australia. An elitist higher education
system, an elitist secondary school system. Seven out of ten didn't make it
bad luck. That was their philosophy bad luck, no faith in you. Of course,
never distinguishing the point that so many bright people are the children of
low income parents who make their way and make their change in this
society, but they were marginalised because they were not allowed to take
their place because the great liberator in a society like this is education. And,
it was through this change that we have been able to see the proliferation of
higher education, the regionalisation of higher education, the access to
higher education and now, of course, for that six in ten kids who leave
secondary school who were formerly untrained, we are bringing up the TAFE 
system into a national structure to have vocational education sitting out there
beside the universities as a place to educate our children. The children in
the main of working class parents.
Now, that is what inclusion is all about. That is what the consensual model is
all about. So, when you go to the trade unions and say ' give us sensible
wage outcomes and low inflation', we'll give you back high employment,
access to education for your kids, a decent health system and a decent
system of income support and a decent system of income support in old age
with a pension and superannuation. We have got that agreement. That is
what the Accords are all about. If it has worked so well for Australia, why
would you tip it out? Why would you not have it? To go back to industrial
fights so that one strong group can go and pick up a 15 per cent wage
increase at the expense of other lower income groups to find it blows the
inflation rate out of the water twelve months later and they end up with
another three or four percentage points on interest rates. That is what will
happen under our opponents. Were they to win an election, they eschew and
reject any Accord, you would immediately see the unions protect themselves
and go for wage increases. Immediately the Reserve Bank would start
sticking interest rates back up and it wouldn't be by half a percentage point or
one, it would be by three or four or five percentage points. In other words, we
would hold wages down by flattening growth, by flattening the whole
economy. In other words, rather than try to deal with the problem through an Accord or
some consensual arrangement directly, the Coalition would deal with it by
flattening the whole place and you end up like a west European economy. A
low growth economy running at one to two per cent. But, one to two per cent
doesn't provide the jobs. What we have in today's National Accounts is 3.7
per cent growth for the year. You may remember about a year ago it was
running at about six per cent and it was too. strong because we just couldn't
keep the goods and services up to it and the demand for imports was too high
and it went over into the current account and we said we have to slow this
down and we have. And, it has come back from six per cent to a strong,
sustainable 3.7 per cent. In other words, if you look at today's Accounts
figures 3.7 per cent for growth for the year, 2 per cent for inflation and
strong employment growth which we have seen over the course of the year
we have got the economy, at the moment, where we want it. We have got the
economy growing sustainably as I say for four straight years or 16
consecutive quarters.
This didn't happen by accident. It has been put there, not by spin doctors or
smart advertising agents, or smart party secretaries or people passing notes
to ministerial offices or words into the ears of journalists, it happened there by
policy. This all happened by policy. It happened by substance and that is
why we can sit here with our lunch and know that the Australian economy is
growing at a strong sustainable rate. That our core competitiveness has
been protected by low inflation. That those huge export growth figures that
we saw yesterday are going to continue because the model is in place. 
Look at the Government's last two major policy statements the Budget and
Accord Mark VIII. The budget took the budget back into surplus. We will be
in surplws now for the rest of the 1 990s. Which means as we need money for
investment and in these National Accounts today, these are strong
investment figures, as we need funds for the investment we will see it come
from the budget surpluses. We will also see it come from that other element
of the budget, national superannuation, where every Australian person by the
year 2002 we are talking about seven years from now will have 15 per cent
being put away for their income supplementation for the rest of their lives.
Which will mean for somebody who is now about to join or just joined the
workforce, they will have an income in retirement equal in today's dollars to
average weekly earnings. In other words, it will be about twice the pension.
But, it will do more than that. It will save trillions of dollars, thousands of
billions of dollars for our long run investment and our long run savings. So,
we don't need to put weight on overseas savings or on overseas debt. That
was the Budget.
A couple of weeks later we introduced Accord Mark VIII. Eight variations of
this since 1983. What did it say? Essentially, that we will have a wages
policy which is enterprise bargaining underpinned by a safety net. If you
don't get anything in the bargain, you get the safety net adjustment to make
sure that you can maintain your standard of living. They are modest safety
net adjustments of around $ 10 per week. Completely affordable in national
economic terms. But, the underpinning commitment which was in there. The
core commitment was that the ACTU and the unions will run the wages
system to produce two to three per cent inflation which is the target of the
Reserve Bank. So, you have got the trade union movement of the country
coming out, endorsing as a policy, the Reserve Bank's inflation target. It is
unheard of in the OECD area, in the western world area. I mean, you don't
find that kind of co-operation in countries they just generally don't have that
willingness, groups in society don't have that willingness to make those sorts
of commitments. Under the consensual model, we have got those sorts of
commitments and those two things, the Budget in surplus, the huge stock of
savings as superannuation and the commitment to low inflation, are the sorts
of things that really matter.
Now I noticed today in the Sydney Morning Herald, one of the barnacles of
the Press Gallery, Alan Ramsey is saying the Government has wasted the
year. The Government has wasted the year. Well have we wasted the year
with 16 quarters of growth, four straight years of growth? Have we wasted
the year with over 400,000 jobs in the last year, or 680,000 since the
election? Have we wasted the year bolting inflation down so that we maintain
our core competitiveness? You know, have we wasted the year giving
Australians, particularly the younger Australians, the notion that in retirement
they will have a standard of living akin to what they will have at work?
You know, have we wasted the year building a stock of savings our
opponents could have only dreamt of? Thousands of billions of dollars. 
Can you imagine the whole of the workforce having 15 per cent of their
income put away. That huge cash flow of that coming into national savings.
Instead -of that, what they want us to do is chase down Parliamentary
scandals and so-called, or worry about the sort of froth and bubble of public
life and not the policy. All that matters are the policy changes and I face an
opponent I mean I became Treasurer in 1983 after John Howard had left it
after five years as Treasurer. It was like a dentist going over bad work. You
know where he has done all the cheap jobs. You know, didn't touch the
exchange rate, believed in deregulation but didn't have the bottle, didn't
actually have the horsepower to actually float the dollar, believed in low tariffs
but couldn't knock over the tariff wall, believed in changing the waterfront but
couldn't do it. You know, believed in having a competitor to Telecom and
decent telecommunications services and lower phone prices, but never got
around to it. Left us with 11 per cent unemployment and 11 per cent inflation
and just by the sheer effluxion of time, and as their third choice in this
Parliament, he now says " well after you've spent 12 years of life putting it
back onto an even keel with your colleagues, I think I'll now take over. I will
come back and have a second go at wrecking
Well you see, you have got to say well look have you really got faith in this
country? Do you believe an Australian person should be our head of state?
No, he says " no, I still believe that the monarchy is best for us. Mind you, if I
were the Government, I might give you a referendum on the republic." But at
the referendum, the Government itself, would be in favour of the monarchy.
Oh say, oh that's terrific, thank you very much.
In other words, do you believe " No, I believe that the monarch of
Great Britain should be our head of state." Right. Do you believe that there
are good instincts in the Australian community, that they will come together,
that you can have things like Accords and that you can have, therefore,
higher growth, higher employment growth and a good social wage?
" No, don't believe in Accords, don't believe -there are these good notions
there at all. Believe it is going to be survival of the fittest. If you are
industrially strong, you take your pound of flesh. If you're not, bad luck."
Well, therefore, do you believe in a safety net? " Don't believe in a safety net.
You know, believe in the US system?
And here is the US Labor Secretary, Robert Reich, saying " In America, we
have had some of the highest employment growth in the world. But the army
of working poor in America, the lowest half of the American workforce haven't
had a real wage increase in 16 years." They haven't got beyond inflation in
16 years. In fact, they have wage declines. And I read a statistic last week,
that 70 per cent in the growth of American household income has gone to the
top 10 per cent of households and the bottom 20 per cent of American
households have lost 10 per cent of their income: an unconscionable division
of wealth. That is the sort of thing my opponents believe in. And then they
want to walk around and say " we believe in Australia, we believe in the good
things." I mean they want to take us back to an obscurantist, conflict model 
that we left in the late 1970s, early 1980s. And to pass up 16 quarters of
growth and low inflation and linkages into Asia
I said yesterday in the Parliament, I mentioned the General-Secretary of the
Vietnamese Communist Party. He came to Australia the week after Vietnam
was admitted as a full member of ASEAN the Association of South East
Asian Nations, with Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand etc full
member. That was two weeks ago. A week before that, the United States
had diplomatically recognised Vietnam again and they had exchanged
Ambassadors. The day he went home from here, the next day, he saw
Warren Christopher, the US Secretary of State in Hanoi. But John Howard
wouldn't see him in Australia because he is still fighting the Vietnam War and
he thinks a few Vietnamese in Western Sydney may not vote for him if he
were seen to be meeting Mr Do Muoi because of their memories of the
settlement of the Vietnamese conflict.
Now how can Australia hand stewardship of its Asia relationship to somebody
who plays these games and who doesn't understand that when you say to
these people a full member of ASEAN, to the leader of the country I will not
meet you or see you, I will snub you. Does he expect to be treated well by
the Thais, or the Malaysians, or the Indonesians, or even the Japanese who
run a western style economy? When Kono and Hashimoto were here last
week, they knew about it, they knew Howard had snubbed him. So these
things go around the region and then expect to say, after winning an election,
for Mr Howard to wander out there, into the Asia Pacific, and say " Here I am.
I believe in the monarchy. I still believe in all the trappings. I would have
knighthoods back, if I had the chance. And just, by the way, I will only talk to
the ones of you who I like."
Now, the thing is we are either in this, or we are not. We are either part of
this community of nations here, or we are not. We either go as a strong
vibrant society and culture, or we don't. We either go there proud of what we
are and what we have become, or we go there as some sort of derivative
society on the back foot. Now these are the issues. But you can't be like that
away from home, if at home you are divisive, you have a conflict model, you
don't bring everybody in and we are all not part of the one nation. You can't
cheat at home and kid people outside. It has got to be genuine right through.
You can't say the Native Title Act is a day of shame. That Mabo is an act of
shame and, at the same time, say to the Asian nations around us, we want to
be part of the community of nations in this part of the world.
So in coming here today to support Maggie, who is a new Member of
Parliament, but a good Member of Parliament. Who is a person of the
community who has faith in Australians and likes them, wants to be with them
and know them and represent them. This is the sort of governing Party
Australia needs, of people like this. Who have a genuine understanding of
community sentiment and see the good things in Australians. Who feel the
good sentiments and the good vibrations and not wanting to put their heads
down and make them keep their place and straighten and punish them and 
say " Well, if you are strong you get a big wage increase and if you are weak
bad luck and there is no safety net for you and there is no Medicare for you.
You go out there and put your hand in your pocket and if your kids get sick
you go and pay for it and by the way we only like certain Asians and not
others." I mean this is not the sort of Government Australia needs. But the
Government Australia has got has been the great Government of post-War
change in this country and the runs on the board are sitting in those national
accounts data today. And it should be a matter of great pride to Australians
that together we have all produced this result 16 quarters of growth.
I guarantee there is not another OECD economy, since the world recession,
which has had 16 consecutive quarters of growth.
So these are the things to have pride in. That we care about our children,
that we won't leave them uneducated, that we give them that access and we
lift them up and we believe in them and we let them do their best to put their
mark on Australia and that we have equality of opportunity and fairness.
But, at the same time, we have a good profit share, strong investment growth,
a sustainable growth rate in the economy and good employment growth. In
other words, everyone gets a cut of the action. It is not for one section or
another. Now, I think, that is the model we believe in. We believe in the model that
brings the best out in Australia and Australians, that doesn't play favourites,
that doesn't try and chop the thing up factionally, or in a partisan way. And
what these last 12 years have proved is that that model works and I think the
point we would like to make to you today is that it is the model for Australia to
have one where we are together and we believe in one another and that we
are kind to one another. A society which is a kindly society and not a hard
bitten, devil take the hindmost, society, . a Ia the American Republicans,
a la some of the other right-wing governments around the world. It is not for
Australia, it is certainly not for Paul Keating and it is not for Maggie Deahm.
ends 



TEL: iSep .95 3: 59 No. 015 P. 01/ 05
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
FRENCH NUCLEAR JESTS
It is almost certain that the French government will very soon possibly within
the next few days detonate an underground nuclear device at Mururoa.
They have no moral right to conduct these tests. It is an expression of
contempt for the people they wish to call their neighbours.
Mururoa Is a French territory, six thousand kilometres from the east coast of
Australia. Scientific opinion generally inclines to the view that the tests are
unlikely to cause immediate harm to our environment, or, indeed, the
environments of countries much closer to the test site.
The Government of France may think we have no cause for concern. If this is
their calculation, they are wrong. Not only are Australia and the countries of
the Pacific outraged at the French action, so are countries everywhere,
including France's European neighbours.
The Pacific environment may not suffer damage from these tests this year or
next but no-one can guarantee this. And no-one can guarantee that there
will not be damage In 20 or 50 or 100 years time. If there was no risk, the
French government would conduct the tests in France itself.
The world is at a crucial stage on the path to a Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty. France is committed to signing such a treaty, and we welcome that.
But France along with the other nuclear weapon states including China,
whose testing program we also vigorously oppose is also committed to
exercise ' utmost restraint" on testing.
A series of eight nuclear tests by France is clearly not an exercise in
restraint. It is not an action which will encourage the hopes we all hold for a nuclearfree
world. It is not an action which will help to solve the nuclear problems
which lie at Europe's door namely the Chernobyl-style nuclear reactors still
functioning in the former Soviet Union and the nuclear materials and
expertise seeping into illicit markets. 
TEL: I. SOep. 95 3: 59 No. 015 P. 02/ Ut
2
Rather it is an action which will give comfort to other countries with nuclear
ambitions, and one which will diminish France's reputation as a great
democracy and a good citizen of the world.
To try to persuade President Chirac to reverse this decision, the Australian
Government has been forced to take the most wide ranging diplomatic
measures we have ever taken against another democracy.
We have frozen defence contacts. We have taken the argument to the
French people directly through the pages of their newspapers and television.
We have acted in concert with our South Pacific Forum partners, and with
them sent a protest delegation to Paris.
We have argued our case in every available international forum. We are
working to bring a resolution on testing before the UIN General Assembly.
We have applied to intervene before the International Court of Justice in
support of New Zealand's attempt to reopen its 1973 nuclear tests case
against France; and the Minister for Pacific Island Affairs, Mr Bilney, is
leading a Parliamentary Delegation to Europe to build a coalition of interests
with those many Europeans who oppose the tests.
But for all the Government's efforts, we know that nothing has more
dramatically brought home the message to the French government than the
protests of the Australian people and the people of the region.
I hope that these protests continue: that they continue to be peaceful and
constructive, and directed where they should be, at the French government
and not the French people. The French people are not to blame for this, and
it is both wrong and counter productive to act in any way which suggests that
they are.
It is not for us to tell the French Government what their national security
interests are. But we must tell them in every possible way that their tests are
an affront. And that it is time for France to recognise that, whatever our
concepts of national sovereignty, we share the world's environment we
share the earth.
Our protests will not end with the first test. Until the tests stop, we will
continue to remind the French government that with every test they conduct,
the good name of France is diminished in this part of the world.
CANBERRA 1 SEPTEMBER 1995 



I EL I eP.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, BASS HILL, SYDNEY, I SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, is the federal party moving away from NSW Labor over
its broken promises in the run up to the federal election?
PM: I think the public of NSW, like the public of most States, know what is a
federal issue and what is a state issue. These issues here of notoriety
toliways are a state issue and, I think, that they understand that.
J: As a member of Western Sydney, are you disappointed at this
particular action taken by the Carr government?
PM: I think that promises of this variety governments and oppositions
need to know if they can be Implemented. Now, all new governments,
I suppose, as scales fall from their eyes when they arrive, but it does
get people's hopes up and then it dashes them and, I think, this is a
great pity because one needs the moral strength of public life, of
commitments from the public to keep the whole thing going. That is, in
a democracy we draw our strength from the public and from the public
only. So, keeping the public's belief in the integrity of the system is
important.
J: Is the government bowing to union pressure by putting off the sale of
ANL for two months?
_ PM: No, It Is just that It is a very large change. We are seeking to sell ANL
to P&amp; O. P&amp; O has extensive interests on the waterfront as well as at
sea and It gives the unions and the government a chance and P&amp; O
together the three of us to map out a course for the future including
for ANL which we can't do with a quick document over lunch. So, I
think, it Is like a policy due diligence and it Is a good thing that it is
happening this way. It is a very good thing for the waterfront, a very
good thing for ANL, for the seaman, a good result for employment of
Australian people at sea. I had a conversation with Lord Stirling
yesterday from P&amp; O where he was talking about training more officers
and engineers in Australia to serve, not just on ANIL vessels, but on
1 1 I1 N o . C C 4 F 0 
TEL 2
the 240 odd other P&amp; O vessels around the world, or some of them.
And also, training ratings who serve at sea, perhaps up to petty officer
standard so that they can get higher incomes and do more interesting
work. So, I think, it is going to be a pretty good outcome.
J: Prime Minister, Richard Court says it is disgusting that you have
attacked the judge in such an open and blatant personal way. Is he
right?
PM: He is not a judge, he is a commissioner set up under Richard Court's
government.
J: It is a legally constituted royal Commission, Prime Minister.
PM; What it is is Richard Court believing that governments have authority
even if they abuse the authority. Governments do have authority, but
again, authority comes with the respect only of the community and
when governments poison the authority as Richard Court has now
poisoned the royal commission's power, for everybody, then he can
expect nothing more than this sort of general criticism of the
motivations by him of establishing or seeking to use the royal
commission's power in this way.
J: What about the legitimacy of the royal commission, do you think that
your comments may have reduced that?
PM: Well, it is very obvious here, the Royal Commissioner has himself said
that there is no crIme here, there are no misdemeanours here. The
royal commission was set up with political motives in mind. It is now
turning sour on Richard Court because mostly, nearly always, every
political stunt reacts against the people who establish them or do them
and that Is what he is now living with.
J On the Mabo legislation, why are you moving towards this
amendment?
PM. Simply because the High Court has made some decisions about
procedural process. That is, that the Native Title Tribunal has to be
the agent of the federal court and not to be seen to be usurping
functions of the court. So, I think, the Brandy Case meant that the
High Court has said that certain procedural processes should be
followed and we will be making procedural technical amendments
accordingly.
J: In this session?
PMV: We may not draft it early enough for this session. We may even be
able to draft it for presentation this session, but they don't go to the
heart of the principles of Mabo. Again, they are procedural fulfilment
of the Brandy High Court Case. TEL: ep. 95 1: 11 No. 004 F. 02/ 03 
TEL: i ~ e j j No U4 ruF* r
3
J, What about the advertisements in the newspapers?
PM: It is for the Government a very proud statistic and for the community a
-very encouraging one that we have now had 16 quarters of
consecutive growth four straight years of growth and we are
growing now at just 3 3/ 4 per cent just under four per cent. In other
words we are really moving along at a good pace, a good sustainable
pace with low inflation. What the budget papers show is that the
Treasury expects these numbers to continue for the next four years.
So, if this Is the first time in 24 years that we have had 16 consecutive
quarters of growth and we have another four years or three years out
in the budget forecast as the Treasury is forecasting, that sort of
period six or seven years of consecutive growth it will be way
beyond any Australian experience and as we are already seeing with
16 quarters. So, for the public who have been mislead to thinking it is
all going to be five minutes of sunshine or something else, I don't know
how many five minutes there are in four years, someone can do the
sums, but there are many of them.
J: On the Australia Remembers celebrations you said that it helped the
soul of the nation, can you expand on that?
PM: The things Australians celebrate are the things they do together
community things and the greatest community action in Australia in
the last half century, of course, was the Second World War. And it is
that we commemorate. We commemorate those who served and
those who died, but we commemorate the fact that we fought together
and the country worked together during this crisis. If you look back on
all of the various things we both celebrate and commemorate, it is the
things we do together, are the things we feel most strongly about.
J: Do you think it enhances our move towards a republic..
PM: I think Australians now feel that we have such confidence about
ourselves now, a pride in the country we have become, of the place we
have made for ourselves here, that Australians are coming to
recognise that we can only be the complete Australian nation if our
head of state is an Australian person. I think that is the point.
ends 



96/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
NATIVE TITLE ACT AMENDMENT
The Government has considered the possible impact on the Native Title Act
1993 of the High Court's decision in the Brandy case.
The process in the Native Title Act for the registration and enforcement of
agreed or unopposed determinations made by the National Native Title
Tribunal is similar to the registration and enforcement scheme under the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975. The RDA scheme was held by the High Court
in Brandy to be invalid, as it vested Commonwealth judicial power in a body
other than a court.
The Government has decided to ensure the validity of the Native Title Act
scheme by amending the Act so that native title claims are commenced and
formally determined in the Federal Court. Details of the proposals are being
sent to indigenous groups, industry groups, State and Territory Governments
and other stakeholders and there will be an opportunity for meetings on the
proposals. We will not be making wholesale changes to the Native Title Act.
The proposed amendments are of a technical nature, dealing with the way in
which claims are made and determined. There will be no shift away from the
principles of recognition and protection of native title enshrined in the Act and
the amendments will reflect the current balance of interests.
The Government intends to introduce a Bill for the proposed amendments
into Parliament later in the current Parliamentary Sittings.
CANBERRA 1 SEPTEMBER 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE REMEMBRANCE DRIVEWAY CEREMONY, BASS HILL,
1 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you for those very kind words, Major General Latchford. Could I
recognise the Mayor, Councillor Max Parker, other distinguished members of
the Council, my Parliamentary colleague, Doug Shedden, members of the
Remembrance Driveway Committee and ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure to be here on this occasion. Indeed I have been
delighted with the Australia Remembers ceremonies over the course of this
year and I think it has been a good thing for our country, a good thing for the
soul of the country, to remember those who fought for us and those who died
for us. And, in doing this, we are saying that every Australian is special.
Every Australian particularly who fought for the liberties that we enjoy and
especially those who died for us. And that is why we are here to see this
Remembrance Driveway extended and to make that memory clear.
It is, I think, very poignant that this week we see this trouble in Sarajevo
where the First World War really began 80 years ago, the same city. And it
is a bit depressing to think that 80 years later, we are not free of these sorts
of conflicts and it makes it very obvious that we are not because the conflict
is in exactly the same place as it began. And we have spent most of this
century scrambling out of it. The First World War, of course, saw carnage on
a scale unequalled in human history and then it set up the conditions, of
course, for the rise of Nazism in Europe and Fascism in Italy and, as a
consequence, then with militarism in Japan we saw the Second World War.
And I know that the presumption is, of course, for the victors that the
righteous people won, the good guys won. But, of course, we nearly didn't
win in Europe. Had Hitler invaded Britain in 1940, and had he emasculated
the British Army in Dunkirk, we would have had great difficulty in getting a
beach-head in Normandy or anywhere else in Europe. And had he not made
the mistake of attacking the Russians who carried the war effort and the
burden of the war, really, from 1941 to 1 944 then we would have seen a 
different world in which Japan's expansionism may have been more profitable
for them, though it would have taken time to build the United States military
machine up. Countries, like Australia, would have been under even greater
threats than in fact we finally were.
So it would have been a different world and one can't say whether the
democracies would have triumphed in the final analysis. In the Pacific,
I think, we would. But, again, with a neutral Russia, one even wonders about
that. One thing is for certain, there was great sacrifice made all the way through
and we have enjoyed, now, 50 years of peace which is one of the longest
periods certainly the longest period in this century. But one we rejoice in
and one that we thank those who had to fight and, of course, who paid the
greatest sacrifice of all.
These are the things we remember and we want to teach our children about
these things, that liberty always come with a price and the freedoms we have
taken to be our own and are endemic to our way of life are not necessarily
part of the way of life of many people around the world and that the price of
liberty and freedom can often be an expensive one and many Australians
have paid the price.
The Second World War, of course, is the time when Australia's sovereignty
was threatened. It wasn't threatened in the First World War, directly.
It certainly was threatened, directly, in the Second World War and this was
the fight to save Australia and Australia was saved, in part, by the gallantry of
Australian servicemen and women, particularly in the campaigns in the
Pacific, in Papua New Guinea where I am going in another week or so in
places like Kokoda and, of course, before that in the Middle East and in
Europe. So this was great conflict and I think that we make clear that for those who
fought and died that it just had to mean something, that 50 years later it just
shouldn't be something that has happened in the past which has scant
attention paid to it. But that it had to mean something and that we remember,
that we do remember these people and that our children will know about it
and they will remember it too.
So I remember the Remembrance Driveway as being begun in my youth
because I used to motor around here not in a car, but on a bicycle past
those trees and we were conscious then what they meant. We have been
conscious since, probably not as conscious as we should be, but now of
course our consciousness about it will be renewed by this new endeavour
and stands of trees which are there to grace this area and to refresh our
memory and to pay tribute to these people.
I am particularly delighted that so many young Australians can be associated
with this. The LEAP Program is a program which has seen part of the
Greening of Australia right across the country. It has been done by young 
people with enthusiasm, under the Commonwealth Department of
Employment, Education and Training programs, and we thank them most
sincerely for their efforts and for their dedication and underline the fact that
this young generation of Australians have felt more poignantly the value of
Australia's environment and its nature, than other generations before them
have. And it is really to them we look for the preservation of this great
continent we have been bequeathed, to keep it in the kind of environmental
shape, to have respect and regard for it and to, perhaps, try and repair some
of the thoughtless damage which has been done.
Well here we are doing that to a dual purpose, to repair it, to replant it, but to
do so in memory of the people who served and were lost. So this is a nice
thing to do. I am delighted that the Committee has committed itself to this
project. Also, I am very pleased that the Roads and Traffic Authority can be*
involved. As is, of course, Bankstown City Council, which has always had I think a
good social heart and a good understanding of these things. But always
more importantly than all that, the community of this area which has always
been quite a clannish community, one that has always felt a sense ofcommunity.
And I think if the Second World War commemoration meant
anything, they really celebrate community action because the things we
always feel good about are the things we do together.
And I suppose the biggest thing we have done together, as a nation, is:
defend this country in the Second World War and it is that community action
we remember and that we commemorate. Again, it is the community actionhere
the community action by the Committee, and the young people, and.
the Government, and the Council but it is the community action of thepeople
of the area of Bankstown, which has in this case Bass Hill, which has
of course always given support to community values and to community
aspirations. So I am pleased to be back here. I used to drive down that road to thedrive-
in theatre, years ago, when it used to be there and around these
grounds on a bicycle. But they will always be special places to me. Morespecial
because of the things we have done today. Congratulations and
thanks. ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT A RECEPTION HOSTED BY THE HON WARREN
SNOWDON MP, HOTEL DARWIN, DARWIN, 5 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thanks very much indeed for that very warm round of applause.
I am delighted to be here with Brian [ Ede] and Bob [ Collins] and
Warren ( Snowdon] and Laurie [ Brereton] and our very distinguished
Parliamentary representatives and candidates here in the Northern Territory.
It is true, I think, that Bob and Warren have been a great team and yes they
have wrenched the money off me every time they have come through the
door. I used to say every time when you see that fat guy and the skinny
walking in, it is going to cost me money and they would saunter in all very
casual, but all very effective.
But the thing is it is a great thing for the Labor Party and Bob says we are
years old here. This is the oldest Labor Party in the world and we keep on
renewing ourselves and the thing that always keeps us going is faith in
Australia, faith in our fellow Australians and faith in the country.
Above all else, we have the policy disputes, but they are the things that keep
it rolling along and we keep producing these people that always push the
envelope out, that always enlarge it and make it bigger. And we have got a
double here in the Northern Territory with Bob and Warren and I sometimes,
you know, because you tend to, in Cabinet meetings, study people in sitting
there opposite you because everyone is a psychiatrist in politics, you look
into your little foibles and manners and characteristics, strengths,
weaknesses and you know you get very proud of a group of people like this.
And I was looking at Bob only a week or so ago, I am not saying that..
I mean it is hard not to miss him by the way. I am not saying this because
I am here, but I thought well there he is, he has sauntered in and you know
he is in an open neck shirt and I thought well look at the change he has
brought to Australian agriculture.
The previous week I was in Queensland at the. Graingrowers Conference and
there was great warmnth toward&amp; s the Labor Party from an area which has 
2
been traditionally a non-Labor voting and supporting group and it is because
with the drought, and the severity of it, this Government has kept income
support under that whole community. Now 10,000 farm families get income
support from the Commonwealth to tide them through this drought. There is
also funding under the Rural Adjustment Scheme and these are the sort of
props we put in to keep agriculture in place while the drought was on and
Bob has done an absolutely original and first rate job in putting all of those
things into place.
And you think well remember him in the Assembly, he goes to the Federal
Parliament as a Senator you take your chance in the lucky dip of the Federal
Caucus. He bobs up in a ministry, in a number of ministries where he has
done important jobs in transport, in communications and in agriculture and
we keep on producing people that do these things, that do good things for
Australia, understand the ethos, really love the country and want to advance
it. You know the others just don't breed them like we do. They just don't.
So he is almost tailor-made for the job of Minister for Agriculture. Bob is out
there, sort of you know, chews the fat with all these farmers and he
understands, of course, well. And the same I can say about Warren. I mean
Warren is a terrific Member of Parliament, a great constituency member.
He genuinely represents the place, understands all the balances, pushes the
envelope when he can, knows when not to, tries to get the best right and
I think this is most obviously true during the Mabo discussion, the Native Title
Legislation, which was a year long, tooing and froing over little details of a
complex piece of property and cultural law, which we had to build from the
ground up.
And this sort of value for the Labor Party.. you know it is not a huge
financially strong organisation, it's a collection of ordinary Australians who
have come together for the public good of it because of their commitment to
the country and we have produced Members of Parliament and Senators and
they go on to the Government and they make a tremendous contribution.
Whatever people might think organisationally about the Labor Party in the
Northern Territory, or in any of the other States, here you have produced two
cracker representatives who really are doing you proud let me assure you.
I am delighted to know them and to be in a Party with them and to be
colleagues of them and Laurie, of course, followed Bob in the transport
portfolio. And they have extended you know we were down today opening
the international terminal at Brisbane airport which we did in 1992, I think.
You turned the sod? He is a good sod turner. Turning over sod is an
accomplished art, I can tell you, and of course Laurie is here today as the
Minister presiding over the opening. So you know, again, it is just another
milestone in the great aviation story of Australia of course which the north
has played such a role in of course as we know Queensland with Qantas in
particular. So these are the things that make you proud to be in the game and, you
know, standing. here with a fellow like Brian who is a good leader, with good
values, you are~ proud to belong to the same Party as these people. I am
very proud indeed. 
When I came across today we took off from a very nice ceremony in
Brisbane, where again you see one of the principal gateways of the east
coast of Australia to Asia, you think of the way in which the country has
changed. And we flew over across the north, across Cape York, up through
the Gulf, some of the most beautiful landscape you could imagine on the way
down into Darwin. You think how big it is and how beautiful it is and to think
that it was held in trust for the rest of us by the Aboriginal community all those
thousands of years and that is why we owe it to them and to ourselves to
make a decent fist of it.
To know what a great thing we have been, a great bequest it is that this
ancient continent has been left to us to enjoy, to live from and to protect,
to protect this place and to understand that you almost have to live half your
life, if your a non-Aboriginal Australian, to understand a little bit about it and
to appreciate it more and there is something about the ancient quality of it.
It gets to you as you get into your middle years, I think.
I don't think I understood it as well when I was young. But I understand it
better now and you feel the ancientness, if I could use the expression, of it
and you know what an absolutely enormously rich bequest it has been
because there is no continent reserved for any other group our size and here
we are with these old societies like Indonesia, near us, and the great
emerging country of China, an emerging economy of a billion people and
these old proud societies like Japan and Korea in the region.
We are now part of that region. We are part of that family of nations.
We turned over the leaf from 20 years ago, when we were selecting people to
come here on the basis of race. It is not that long ago and we have done a
good thing in supporting the High Court, when the High Court -said in an
English speaking country like this, your common law comes from European
custom and tradition and we have now said your common law also comes
from Aboriginal custom and tradition. This is a great change. Because it is
the most honest recognition of the value to the rest of us of Aboriginal life and
custom and tradition and, as Brian has remarked, we have had the pleasure
of giving expression to how that title will be used and awarded in law with the
Native Title Act.
But these things and this opportunity we have in this part of the world, I am
sure they [ in Asia] say of us " show us how you relate to your indigenies and
we will show you how you relate to us" and I think we have made a
psychological leap as a country. We have righted a wrong with terra nullius.
We have engaged the community of countries around us. We don't select
people on the basis of race. We know we have been given a great
opportunity, that we can't squander. But Australia is a different place, it is no
longer a monoculture, it is a multicultural place. It is a lively interesting place
and we are now clear that we have been given this great opportunity.
I think as we have intemnationalised the country, as we have made the leap
with our exports into Asia, as our business culture has changed, as we have
approached these countries, we have changed ourselves. We have changed
our outlook in our culture and we do want to be a part of this community of 
countries around us and we do see this as a tremendous opportunity here.
And it has always been true, I think it is completely true because the
Labor Party has always had this belief in Australia and through the
wholesome view it has, it wants to see a happy society here and wants to see
us be a-part of this greater society around us.
I think there is a point of excitement about Australia, we haven't seen, not in
my lifetime, that we are seeing now. You see the bounty and the opportunity
when last week we had the economy growing at 3.7 per cent against the
year, sixteen straight quarters of growth it is the longest phase of growth in
years we have doubled our exports in ten years, we are educating about
three times as many kids as we were ten years ago. Eight out of ten young
people now finish secondary school, that is feeding through our higher
education institutions, that is feeding the product innovation, that is feeding
the exports.
All of these things are making this a much more bountiful and exciting country
and that sense of excitement is out there. I mean the polls might'nt measure
all this. But if you go to Australians today and say " do you think Australia has
a greater future, it is more secure, more certain of itself, more clear of what it
is, more exciting?" I think they would answer in the affirmative. And I think
that is very much what the next election will be about.
John Howard thinks he is being tricky and clever hiding his policies. But he
is not hiding them from me, he is hiding them from the Australian public.
He says " I am not going to show that Prime Minister our policies until it suits
me." That really is just simply cynical code for saying " I am not going to show
the Australian public my policies, until the last moment or if ever'.
Now I think that honesty in politics can only be about policies. It can only be
about policies and where you stand and I take the view, maybe an old
fashioned view, that the public have a right to know from the major parties
what we think the big issues are and what the direction for Australia ought to
be. I mean if they don't have that right, what right do they have? At least for
the party leaders and the party to articulate the visions, the steps and the
future for Australia. That is what we are doing.
But John Howard is not doing that. He is playing a tricky, cynical, little
political game trying to hide his policies because he thinks the public won't
like them and you see this is not, if you like, honesty in politics. They try and
compare themselves with the American Republicans. But at least you have
got to see of Newt Gingrich, even if you don't agree with him, he puts his
policies into the marketplace " that is what I stand for, If we get a Republican
majority in the Congress that is what we will do. These will be our yardsticks.
This is what our sheet anchor will be. You will know where we are coming
from. We will go in there and we will actually do it because we will have your
authority as a community and the constituency of the United States to do it."
What do our conservatives do? No contract with Australia. No honesty.
No policies in the marketplace. No mandate that they can claim. They want
to try and slip under the wire without owning up to what they stand for and
when they get there, without of course a mandate, they will just slip back to 
their prejudicial policies of old. And for Howard it will be the old ones
cutting the guts out of wages, straightening up working people, gutting
Medicare.. ( Interjection: And Anti Discrimination legislation.)
Well that too. All the things. You see that is what he will be about. He will
be about back to those sorts of things. You saw them at the last election.
You know there are only two members of the Shadow Cabinet that were not
there when Fightback was put together. Now have they all had a Pauline
conversion on the road to Damascus? Have they seen the light, or do they
really believe in full fees for university students? Do they believe in the
lowest common denominator for wages? They believe in no award
protections. They believe in no support of award underpinnings of a wage
system, that gives all the flexibility in the world. Well, of course, they don't.
They believe in all the things they have always believed in and, of course, the
unspeakable thing that Howard believes in, the three letters they can't utter,
is GST. He really believes in the GST.
You look at his whole career. It has been about three things. It has been
about kicking income up to the highest level income families to income
splitting. It has been about introducing a consumption tax and it is about
what he calls labour market reforms, which is code for cutting the bottom
quarter of the labour market back. That is what he believes in. That is all he
has ever had to say and I mean Australia is a small country. We all know he
goes on. He goes around the board rooms. I don't know whether he thinks
I don't know about these things. I mean in some of these board rooms, I can
hear the ants change step. You can hear the little zings. See the thing is I
know they say: " Look he has no ideas. He has no ideas." He sits there, he
goes there and recites all the old stuff and about mostly how they are going
to nail us.
But, of course, these people are running businesses. They want to know how
they are going to keep their business growing. So he thinks because they
are business executives, they are part of the sort of Liberal Party club, or the
Liberal supporters and when he leaves they are all happy with him. Well
they are not happy with him. They are not and we have some people saying
to us in the media " oh well, Labor has lost the touch with business".
You know some journos sitting constipated on a stool looking at a PC,
tapping away in the Press Gallery. You know never been near a board room
in ten years, telling us we have lost contact with business. I mean the fact of
the matter is, that the Coalition has the same obscurantist view they had back
in the 1970s. Australia has moved on, we are a completely different country,
we have changed, we have made the leap into Asia, we are more confident
about ourselves. Our culture has changed, it is ours now, it doesn't belong to
anyone else. We want it to be like this.
We have made great changes as a country and the public have been right in
there with them and that is the sort of country it is -now. There is a floating
exchange rate. Interest rates are set in the market. Wages are set by 
enterprise or collective bargaining. It is not the old tricked up, bolted down,
scene it was when Malcolm Fraser and John Howard were playing
Prime Minister and Treasurer all those years ago and they think they are
going to walk back in and because they think they're the pinstripe suit
brigade-and they are back in business, the people are going to say " oh well
that is it, let's put another five cents on the dollar, you know let's knock a
couple of percentage points off interest rates". I mean they have got no idea
of what it is like keeping all of those balls in the air the exchange rate,
interest rate, wages, inflation, keeping it all up there.
Only a Labor Government has ever done it under a market system like this.
They have got no idea and have a look at them. Howard will be the
Prime Minister and Fischer would be the Deputy Prime Minister. You have
got to say where are we going? And then you have got Costello who does
his you know.. I didn't think anyone could out-snarl Peter Reith but he has.
Look he is one of our great assets. He always earns a round of applause.
Him and Andrew Robb, they are out there.. you know that song " I've got my
mojo working." Well we have got them out there working. Costello and
Robb, every day, every time they are out there, we move up. So there is him.
And then after that you'll say " well who else is there? Who is the education
person?" Well that is.. we always call him Count Yorga Vampire Kemp.
And then for business, there is Prosser. I mean what a side, what a side,
and, of course, this is not lost on the business community. I mean those
captains of industry who are picking up the million dollar salaries, they are
not going to be managed by this crowd. There is a bit of professional pride
there. I mean they may be in the Liberal Party, but they are not going to be
run by them.
So look, the thing is, I think that from our point of view we have got Australia
now growing strongly. We have had 680,000 jobs growth in 2 1/ 2 years.
That is an absolutely phenomenal number 680,000. I mean I made the
point this way recently. It took us from 1788 to 1983 to get to six million and
we have added over 10 per cent more in 2 1/ 2 years. It is unbelievably
strong. I mean we went to the election. What was our principal commitment?
That we would restore the economy to growth and employment. We have
had 16 quarters of growth, we have had enormous employment growth and
there has been complete fidelity in those core commitments we have made to
the Australian public throughout the period.
So we can go and we have taken the big issues on like Native Title, like the
Land Fund, like the republic. All the things that will paint the way Australia
will be in the 21st century. So we can look the public in the eye and say
these are the sorts of things we stand for great initiatives like Working
Nation, that pick up the long term unemployed. Or the labour market
programs, or in education, or in health and we will develop, as always, our
policy stance for the next election. We won't be hiding.
There will be no obfuscation on the part of Labor. We will have our policies
out there in the marketplace. We won't be slipping around and there will be
no business saying am not going to show my policies to John Howard",
because all that would mean is we are not going to show our policies to the
Australian public and we have an honest relationship with the Australian 
public. We don't need to be tricky. We have faith in them. We have faith in
them to see through charlatans, people who have no ideas and people who
are not going to be honest with them.
So this is going to be, again, another important election, when it comes, for
Australia. It is going to be to keep the strength of the changes coming
through, to keep the linkages with Asia. Here was Howard last week.
We had down, on his first ever trip to the west, the General Secretary of the
Vietnamese Communist Party, someone running a country of 70 million
fought the French, fought the Americans, fought the Chinese turning it now
into a market economy. He wouldn't see him. He wouldn't see him, he
snubbed him. He wouldn't meet him and Do Muoi went home to meet the
American Secretary of State two days later.
I mean it gives you some idea and yet Howard says he wants the stewardship
of the Asia relationship for Australia and yet the week he snubbed Do Muoi,
was the week they became full members of ASEAN. So what do the
Malaysians, the Singaporeans, the Indonesians, the Thais, the Philippines,
what do they think about when one of their partners was snubbed? Because
why? Because he thinks there are a few votes out there with the Vietnamese
community in Western Sydney and in parts of Melbourne. That is it. Just for
the same reason he told those kids at Saint Ignatius High School that he
would put a prohibition on uranium exports to France. He will say whatever
he thinks will get the attention and the approbation at the moment. But in
terms of the serious stewardship of the country's interests, he can't be relied
upon and he can't be trusted.
So I want to thank you for believing in us, for supporting us, for having faith in
the better values which the Labor Party has always had on offer and knowing
that we are at the cusp an exciting part of our history as we come into the
21st century, as we throw off all the linkages to the vestiges of our past in
terms of the things, our Constitutional linkages with Britain. These things
which have been useful to Australia but are useful no longer. And that as we
take that turn on the centenary of our federation and into that 21st century,
that we will be the people marking out the way for Australia.
Now that is what I think this election coming is going to be about and that is
why I thank you for supporting us, supporting my colleagues with me tonight
and coming along to hear what we have got to say. But more than that,
simply to lend a hand. Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW INTERNATIONAL TERMINAL
AT THE BRISBANE AIRPORT, BRISBANE, 5 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you very much, Laurie [ Brereton], Frank Conroy, Premier,
Parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen.
Well it is a pleasure to open such a lovely building. This is an obviously
elegant and functional thing and what I like about it is that this is not an
international building. It wasn't borrowed from the plan cupboard of some
firm of American architects, or European architects. It was designed by
Queensland architects I think the name is Bligh Voller. They were involved,
also, in the other terminal and I congratulate them and I congratulate the
builders, Civil Civic, for doing something that reflects the confidence all of
us have in Australia.
This building is a confident building. It says something about Australia and it
says something about Queensland and I think the confidence that Australia
has, Queensland has by the bucket. This-is a very confident place. I think it
has and I have said recently a wind behind it now in Queensland it didn't
have so many years ago. And it may be that the state of political opinion is
divided in Queensland, but the state of confidence certainly isn't.
It is growing. It is growing at the moment about 1 percentage point faster
than the rest of Australia and it is a great tribute to Wayne Goss and his
Government that when the rest of the country is moving along at 3.7 per cent,
Queensland is moving along at 4.6 per cent or 4.7 per cent.
So it is, I think, not just simply an addition to the stock of the aviation assets
in this country, but it is a building which says something about a few
important statements. One, about Australian architecture; two, about our
confidence; three, about the pride we have in the place; and, I think it
beckons to the neighbourhood we live in saying that here is an entrance to
Australia from the rest of the world, or an exit from Australia to the world we
live in around us, because we know we are now part of that community as we
have never been before and that we know we are a welcome part of that
community as well. 
2
We were just speaking at the table here talking about the impact of the
Kansei regional developments and Osaka airport, the impact that had here on
Brisbane, that one development. And we know that one of the great
challenges of foreign economic policy in these years will be preparing the
world for the entrance of the Chinese economy to it. That huge country with
its vast, rapidly growing economy and with it, of course, will be wealth,
consumerism, travel. All of this is going to have a major impact upon the rest
of us, upon our lives, upon our outlook and upon our business and travel
opportunities and these are all things, I think, that we are preparing for here.
If you look at Brisbane Airport, the domestic terminal and the international
terminal, you would have to say this a place going somewhere. This is a
place that wants people to come here. So I think that we are in that part of
the world where most of the major decisions in aviation are going to be made
and we made a few big ones ourselves in One Nation.
We took away any of the interface between the domestic and international
carriage of passengers. We folded Australian Airlines into Qantas. We gave
Ansett an international license. We have sought to build and we haven't yet
a trans-Tasman air service, a single Australasian destination, a single
Australasian airline market. But we have succeeded, I think, in strengthening
Qantas, which will now be a capital adequate company. In times of scarce
resources, Governments can't put the capital into businesses such as
Qantas.
We did a trade sale with British Airways which will bring, not only synergies,
but some airline intelligence to the board beyond that which, of course,
resides their naturally. But from, of course, another company with a different
perspective. Qantas will be a strong airline. The challenge now will be to
make Ansett strong and that will mean keeping the capital up to it and seeing
the growth opportunities come and seeing the development of a good solid
aviation market in Australia and in Australasia. These, I think, have all been
milestones. We have sought in that One Nation package not only to kick start the
economy back to growth, which in fact it has succeeded in doing but, at the
same time, drawing all the transport linkages together. Only just a month or
two ago, Laurie Brereton and I and the Premier have had the pleasure of
getting on the One Nation train, which is the first standard gauge linkage
between Brisbane and Perth, via Melbourne.
Now we are talking about bringing Track Australia into being, which will have
one track, a track business, whose job it will be to run a competitive
permanent way on which all manner of railway companies and locomotive
operators can operate, so we can start to see some balance back in our
transport away from road, to rail see these efficiencies rise while, at the
same time, we are seeing hubbing and also these linkages with the aviation
industry. So, there were, I think, some important touch stones there, certainly for
aviation. One of them was to bring the development of this airport forward.
Another through this period, of course, has been to fund the capital 
subscriptions we have needed for the FAG and to guarantee its borrowing
program and I'd like to take this opportunity to add to Laurie Brereton's
remarks in congratulating Frank Conroy and his fellow Directors on a job well
done in building quite rapidly the aviation assets, the terminal assets we've
needed in Sydney, Melbourne, Alice Springs, Darwin, Brisbane et cetera. To
get that critical mass for us for the growth in the tourism industry which we
have had. We can now start to sell those assets off, but we have now a
critical mass of assets that actually work for the country.
By bringing those market disciplines to aviation we are going to see a better
industry. We will see, probably, better services over time, tighter services,
better price services. We can see it in aviation when we deregulated the
airline industry, we saw prices fall by around 20 to 25 per cent and a 60 per
cent plus increase in passenger movements and already Sydney airport when
we sat down looking at that second runway, I think, Sydney is now just in a
few years since we began that construction is already well into the turn of
the century traffic levels that have arrived in an unanticipated way from the
deregulation of the airline system.
So, these things have happened and it does mean that we have a very large
tourism market on our hands and one which we can grow and, of course, with
the Olympics coming up at the end of the century it is going to make a terrific
difference to that.
But, I think, the thing that is making the greatest difference is the confidence
we have in ourselves. The confidence we have in Australia. The faith we
have in what we are able to do. Our sense of ourselves and our identity. All
these things are underpinning the growth of our tourism market, it is
underpinning the growth of the economy and here we are bolting along at
around 4 per cent growth with a couple per cent of inflation, just about the
highest employment growth in the western world and at the same time
anticipating now the building of a pacific rim community through bodies like
APEC, making these bilateral linkages around the region with important
countries we trade with and now grow with and live with. These are, I think,
the hallmarks of the sort of view we will always have of the place.
I was very pleased to see our Aboriginal dancers with us because Aboriginal
culture and tradition is now an important part of Australia's culture and
tradition. There was a milestone met when the High Court said that
Aboriginal custom and tradition will be a source of Australian common law
and there is a native title there. The ' Government had the pleasure of
legislating that. But not just that, in the celebration of those traditions and
customs, we are seeing that also reflecting in our tourism industry. We are
pleased about it and we know that when we come to terms with the Aboriginal
community we will come to terms with ourselves and understand better and
appreciate more the fact that this ancient continent has been bequeathed to
us and that they have held it in trust down through the centuries for us to
enjoy with them.
This view of Australia and Asia is important. Those societies around us like
Indonesia 200 million people old societies, say, show us how they treat
their indiginies and we'll see how they treat us. It is an indication of whether 
Australia has turned over a leaf or whether it hasn't. Whether it is still the
country that only 20 years ago selected people on the basis of race for
immigration. It is not a long time ago. They are big sins to live down, but we
have made a great start.
These are all the things, I think, that are caught up in the confidence we now
have and we are now well and truly locked into the fastest growing part of the
world. For instance, the thing that changed most our lives has been the 747,
given us mobility that other generations have never had and yet the decision
about whether Boeing puts another lid on the 747 or builds a new aircraft are
going to be made in Asia. They are not going to be made in Europe or North
America, they are going to be made in Asia. They are going to be made
probably in APEC. They are going to be made in airports such as these and
they will have huge implications for us when they are made.
Today we do celebrate the opening of this terminal, in a way we are
celebrating the buoyancy that Brisbane has as well. We are celebrating the
fact that very shortly we are going to see further growth in air traffic
movements here. This will be the second busiest airport in Australia before
very much longer and I think the things the Premier mentioned the Casino,
the Exhibition Centre even more perhaps poignantly and recently the
Australia Remembers 50th commemoration, I think, lends further support to
the notion that Brisbane has caught its wind and it is really off and running
and it has got a critical mass and a depth and a cultural interest that it didn't
have in the past. This should be a matter of great national joy. It is to me. It
is why I am very happy to be here today to see this built in a Queensland
way, a Queensland sort of building with new things, like, there is no interface
( airside) of the building is now the one side with this innovation we see
upstairs and there won't be a wailing wall anymore at the airport. We will be
able to look through. So here we have got space, light, colour, elegance, we
have got all of those things and it is unmistakably Australian. That is why I
am so pleased to declare it officially open. Thank you.
ends 



C)
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, BEAUFORT HOTEL, DARWIN, 6 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: How do you feel about the bomb going off, are you going to take any
action?
PM: I condemn what the French have done in the strongest possible terms.
It is an act of stupidity. It is not something they need to do. Australia
has now arraigned the strongest set of sanctions we have ever
arraigned against any other democracy in our history. We have
suspended defence contracts. We have withdrawn the Ambassador.
We have taken this issue up at the United Nations. We have made an
impact in France and in Europe and, I think, this is reacting now
against the Government of France in France. So, these things, I think,
show the strength of our feeling here and the fact that the risk is the
proliferation risk. It isn't that the French don't have weapons that are
of high military grade. The risk for all of us is the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and that is what the French are devaluing.
J: Are you aware the New Zealanders have withdrawn their Ambassador
this morning?
PM: We withdrew our Ambassador a month ago to register our protest.
But, we now want an Ambassador to make that contact to express our
disaffection and also to be there when Minister Bilney leads the
delegation there. Now is the time we want contact, basically, to hop
into the French.
J: How do you feel all this time, all this effort, to no avail?
PM: France is an independent country and they can make the decisions,
but they are now wearing the admonition of people around the world
including Australia.
J: What sort of a response can you outline now, what can you do now,
what is the next step? 
2
PM: We are continuing to proselytise on the issue. As you know I have
had a substantial amount of press in France. The Foreign Minister
has had. Mr Bilney is going with a delegation. We have already had
oie led by Gareth Evans and this is putting pressure on the French
and President Chirac has given some indication now to reduce the
number of tests. Well, we want it reduced to zero.
J: So, his offer last night isn't good enough as far as you are concerned?
PM: They should abandon the tests. They should abandon the tests and
get on with the real problem, that is, how they contain the nuclear
threat in the non-nuclear nations.
ends 



771
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
OPENING OF THE MCARTHUR RIVER MINING PROJECT,
NORTHERN TERRITORY, 6 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed, Administrator, Chief Minister, Ambassador Hasegawa,
your colleagues Mr Kohno and Mr Sakamoto, the Chairman of Mt isa Mines
Mr Bruce Vaughan, distinguished members of the company, my ministerial
colleagues who are with me Laurie Brereton and Bob Collins Barry Coulter
Minister from the Northern Territory involved with the project, Warren
Snowdbn the Member for the Northern Territory, members of the Government
of the Northern Territory, other distinguished representatives and ladies and
gentlemen. It has been a great pleasure for me to be able to come here today, to
participate in this project which, I think, many will see as part of the
renaissance of one of Australia's great mining companies Mt Isa Mines.
This is a company with a great tradition in mining in this country. One that
goes back many years to that great deposit at Mt Isa and the mining of it and
in other important projects and that great pioneering and adventurous spirit
which we have seen from this company and from Australian mining.
I think we are seeing something new today. We are seeing the adventurous
spirit of Australian mining coupled with a new understanding about the
environment, new technology and social responsibility. That is what, I think,
makes this project so significant. It is not just another project. It is a project
which might not have happened though it always had the potential to happen.
It has happened because people wanted it to happen. Governments wanted
it to happen. The company with this technology wanted it to happen and they
found a partnership again with our great partners in Japan to make it happen.
All of these things, I think, are milestones in its future.
Mr Fruend ( Executive General Manager, Project Development, MIM Holdings
Limited) was kind enough to mention One Nation and yesterday I had the
pleasure of opening the new international terminal in Brisbane which was part
of the One Nation program as well. A month earlier, I had the pleasure of
joining Laurie Brereton on the One Nation train which for the first time carried
freight from Brisbane to Perth via Melbourne on a single gauge and which 
tied the country together as never before and yesterday I reminded people in
Brisbane that in One Nation we removed the interface between the domestic
and international carriage of passengers, where we folded Australian Airlines
into Qantas and then made it a strong private company, where we are now
trying tobuild Ansett as an international as well as a domestic company. We
saw One Nation as pulling Australia together the very name underwrote the
concept and at the same time kick start the economy which it did and since
then, of course, we have had 16 consecutive quarters of growth. Four
straight years of growth. It is the longest phase in Australian growth in
years with low inflation at around 2.5 per cent.
We are now outgrowing most other western economies and as a
consequence we have had huge employment growth at around 4 to 5 per
cent employment growth, around three times as much as most other
comparable industrial societies.
As a consequence of One Nation we introduced something to kick start
projects such as this. And we kick started them with the investment
allowance, but they needed more than that, they needed co-operation. They
needed to be brought together and because One Nation also implied bringing
it together as one, we had a co-operative venture between the Government of
the Northern Territory, the Government of the Commonwealth, Ministers of
the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory and, of course, co-operation
with the Aboriginal community of this area. With that co-operation we gave
the lie to the notion that the Aboriginal people are opposed to development,
that things can't be done and we have given not only birth to a new mine and
to a new enterprise, but a new spirit of co-operation which will underpin the
Mabo legislation and all of the other things which will follow once we
recognise some of the essential truths that had to be recognised. That there
was a civilisation here before European people arrived. That now, because
of our High Court decision, the common law of Australia no longer comes
from European custom and tradition but also Aboriginal custom and tradition
and that the Commonwealth has enacted a piece of law which pulls together,
understands who has this title and how it can be awarded, but in the granting
of it tries to make a reparation or reconciliation with Aboriginal Australians
which is honest and real.
That is why this project is going because that good will is there. And it came
from the companies, it came from the governments and, I hope, one of the
consequences of it is that MIM which has been at various times in recent
years, in the doldrums particularly with low zinc prices, could find itself reborn
as a company, as a new age Australian company, as a can do business that
gets things done. Against the odds, it has been able to develop this project
and I certainly pay a tribute to the company. To Bruce Vaughan Chairman,
Nick Stump Chief Executive Office and to Peter Freund who was the ramrod
on the project to get it going, that these people saw something better beyond
silly factionalism and mindless politics and mean spiritedness towards the
Aboriginal communities displayed by other mining companies and they
actually got it up and got it running. At $ 300 million a year or thereabouts, if
the mine runs for 20 years we will see around $ 6 billion a very large addition 
to the country's wealth and accords a large addition to its capacity to pay its
way. Let me also take this opportunity to salute the technologists because there is
a new terchnological barrier being breached here in milling this product down
to a very fine powder and then finding the extractive processes to take the
silicates et cetera from it to produce the zinc. I would say to our colleagues in
Japan I hope that they understand that when they deal with an Australian
business, and I'm sure they do, that it is real and it will be here in five years
or ten years or 15 years and that when you do business with Australia you
don't wake up in the morning, some morning, to find a general in charge of
the country, that it is the solid democracy, that our word matters that you can
litigate your interests here in our courts and like you we are a democracy and
also like you we don't have a two tiered society. We used to have the
remnants of our failed upper class, they have disappeared, thankfully, into
obscurity. And as a consequence, we have essentially, one group of
Australians as you have one group of Japanese. I think this is an important
thing, that the egalitarianism which exists in Australia also exists in Japan.
This is not well understood in Australia. It is one of the reasons we do things
together and we do them well. As the Ambassador and I know, all to happily,
of the great partnership we now have with the Government of Japan and the
people of Japan, better than a commercial partnership, a great political and
human partnership which has put the war years and the rest behind us and
where we are now, through APEC, building a great pacific rim community and
where, I think, we enjoy a relationship of trust which our two countries have
never enjoyed before and one, I think, Japan rarely enjoys with any other
country in the world. This is a matter of great pleasure to us.
I'd like to say that I hope that our Japanese colleagues Mr Kohno and
Sakamoto will find pleasure in this relationship as well as business and that
we will go on to do other great things together. Because we can, I think, be
relied upon. I'd like to take the opportunity to pay tribute to my colleagues,
one in particular, Laurie Brereton, who I have grown up with, of course, in
public life. Who pushed through all the big projects in NSW when weaker
spirits wouldn't have and who took over this transport and mining
responsibility from Bob Collins, who himself picked up the initial One Nation
projects but where Laurie had this particular task as a facilitator to try to push
this through as my Parliamentary Secretary. He did that, of course, with his
colleague beside him from the Northern Territory, Barry Coulter, and I think
Shane Stone and I here today to give evidence of that co-operation and to
say how pleased we are about it.
I hope the people of the Northern Territory can understand this. That their
media can communicate the fact that something good is going on here and
that something valuable has happened and that it is not about petty politics
and mean spiritedness or even the narrow and limited gaze of news editors.
That it is something grander than all of that and that people start to
understand these things. 
I want to say a special word about the Borroloola Aboriginal community and
their good will. To the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commercial
Development Corporation ( CDC) and Mawurli Corporation partners with
Bums Philp in the Bing Bong Project which we have just seen and to say
again this is the sort of involvement that we want to see with the Aboriginal
community. Not simply royalty takers, price takers in a market, but people
who are actually engaged in the business as well. Useful, responsible
partners in the development of Australia. And if we have trust in them and
respect for them we will see more of this. But those without faith and those
without trust and those without respect will get obfuscation as they have in
the past.
I'd like to say that the freehold title, I think it is Bauhinia Downs, which the
Commonwealth has purchased and given to the Gurdanji people and the
freehold title which will come from it pleases me enormously. I was glad that
the Commonwealth could spend $ 6 million diverting the road around the
Borroloola Aboriginal community to make this a much more pleasant project
for them. That all of these things could come together and that we could
underwrite a new future of co-operation for mining and for governments and
communities in this country.
This is a great continent. It is a rich continent. It is inhabited by people who
believe in the human spirit and in democracy. There is no end to its wealth,
to its bounty, to its abundance. We only need the sense and the good will to
be able to exploit it, but to do so in a way that pays tribute to the environment.
That lets people understand that the Aboriginal community were trustees of
this place for 40,000 years and have now given it to another society in
partnership which must have respect for the land and must understand what
a great inheritance we have been given. That is why it is incumbent upon
mining companies and the exploiters of the land, the pastoralists, to
understand this point. I am very glad that MIM does and in the new age of
mining that taking the best and leaving the rest is something that does belong
to some other epoch, that doesn't belong to now.
So, respect for the environment, for the Aboriginal community, for the
economic imperatives of Australia, for co-operation for the partnership with
Japan, these are all the things that we celebrate today and why we are so
pleased to be here for the opening of this historic project.
ends 



OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING
Since the Opposition today in statements by Mr Howard, Mr Downer,
Mr Fischer and Mr Taylor has chosen to respond to the French nuclear test
in a blatantly party political and cynical way it may be worth remembering
Mr Howard's initial response to the French decision to resume testing
( attached).
CANBERRA 6 SEPTEMBER 1995 
TRANSCRIPT OF THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION DOORSTOP,
CAIRNS COUNCIL CHAMBERS, 14 JUNE 1995 EXTRACT
JH: any reasonable, diplomatic moves and protests which the
Federal Government wants to take will have our full support.
J: Would that go as far as say, withdrawing the Ambassador from Paris?
JH: Well, I think, that's a little premature at this stage.
J: Tim Fischer was suggesting this morning the possibility of a consumer
boycott of French goods. Do you endorse that?
JH: Well, we'll talk about the matter this morning.
LATER THE SAME
JH: I support the recall of our Ambassador for consultations. I am
keeping the situation under review. I have discussed it with Alexander
Downer and I will be discussing the matter with my other colleagues
again next week. But certainly what the Government has done so
far is an appropriate response.
J: What about trade sanctions?
JH: I wouldn't, at this stage, be arguing for trade sanctions. I understand
also that some people have called, and I certainly agree with them as
individuals, to boycott things. It is one of those situations that you
have got to keep under review and just the response today is not
necessarily the final response. Sometimes in these matters what
you should do is give an initial response and if that doesn't
produce any result, then you might consider a further response
and it is never smart in those situations to fire all your shots at
once.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER 99/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
APPOINTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONER
The Government will recommend to the Governor-General the appointment of
Dr Peter Shergold as the new Public Service Commissioner when Mr Denis
Ives' five year term ends on 24 September 1995.
Dr Shergold is currently the Chief Executive Officer of Comcare Australia. In
1987, following a career as an academic in Australia and overseas, he
became head of the Office of Multicultural Affairs in the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet. He became Deputy Secretary of the Department
in 1990 and from 1991 to 1994 he was the Chief Executive Officer of the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission.
Mr Ives has provided leadership as Public Service Commissioner over the
last five years during a demanding period of change for the Australian Public
Service ( APS). It has been a time when the APS has given unprecedented
attention to its accountability for its actions and to the provision of dedicated
and flexible service to the community. Mr Ives has played a major role in
promoting management reforms throughout the APS. His work has been
directed in particular towards ensuring a skilled public service, free of
discrimination and with high standards of professional and ethical behaviour.
Pending the availability of a further senior appointment, Mr Ives will
undertake special duties for the Government in public administration and the
delivery of government services.
The Government is grateful for Mr Ives' contribution to the strengthening of
public service in Australia.
CANBERRA 6 September 1995 



PRIME-MINISTER 98/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE FIRST FRENCH NUCLEAR TEST
The Australian Government utterly condemns France's nuclear explosion at
Mururoa. By its actions the French Government expresses its contempt for the countries
and people of the region, and for all those who hope and work for a nuclear free
world. Whatever the French Government had in mind by conducting this test, it has
done nothing to enhance the honour of France, and has severely damaged its
international reputation.
Australia will be protesting in the strongest possible terms to France, and
pressing ahead vigorously with our comprehensive program of action aimed at
convincing the French Government to desist from further tests.
I have asked the Minister for Pacific Island Affairs, Mr Bilney, to convey our
protest directly to the French Government during his visit to Padis later this week
as leader of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation on nuclear tests.
As I have said, our protests will not end with the first test. Until the tests stop, we
will continue to remind the French Government that with every test they conduct,
the good name of France is diminished in this part of the world.
I note reports that President Chirac has suggested the number of tests at
Mururoa may be fewer than originally announced. This apparent response to
international protests will not diminish our opposition to each and every nuclear
test in the Pacific. We do not want fewer tests; we want no tests.
DARWIN 6 SEPTEMBER 1995 



r ( 9
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT THE McARTHUR RIVER MINE, NORTHERN TERRITORY, 6
SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, what will the Australian Government be saying to the
French Ambassador regarding the test?
PM: We will be saying that we are outraged by the fact the French have
decided to detonate this bomb, that this is a mindless decision, that it is
unnecessary, that the risks for everybody is the proliferation risk, the
risk for France is not that it doesn't have a comptent weapon, but rather
that other non-nuclear states develop weapons. We have already
undertaken a series of sanctions, the strongest by Australia against any
other democracy. We have cancelled defence contracts, we have
withdrawn our Ambassador, we have protested directly to the French
Government, we are taking the matter to the United Nations. Australia
has led the opposition to France in the world. This has made a
difference I think to the French opinion at home. It has certainly made a
difference to European opinion and it is this pressure which, I think,
President Chirac is now feeling.
J: Do you think the French Government really cares that Australia is
outraged?
PM: It cares and it is understood that, I think, we have hurt them in doing
this. But understand, this is against the Government of France, not the
people of France. It is not their decision, it is President Chiracs
decision and we have made it clear to President Chirac and his
Government as I think we are changing opinion in Europe too that
other European states, whose opinions they care about mightily, are
now making their views felt, such as in the European Parliament and
other places.
J: Will you expel the French Ambassador, Mr Keating? 
PM: No, we want the contact to be able to register, to keep the linkages.
That is what you do in these things. You express your anger, your
outrage, but you try and get a better outcome.
J: Mr Keating, what is the possibility of extra uranium sales confirmed?
PM: Well uranium sales to France are not an issue in this, they are not an
issue in this anymore than sales of other things to France are by
Australia.
J: Mr Keating, do you think the French now may reduce the number of
tests, or do you think this is going to..
PM: They may do under the weight of international pressure, but I am very
pleased about the fact that Australia has led that. That we have made
the difference in what, I think, the French Government thought was an
easy decision to take.
J: You have taken a lot of action until now, is there anymore you can
take?
PM: Well they are fairly strong actions we have cancelled defence
contracts, at the time we withdraw our Ambassador, we have led
delegations there and Minister Bilney will be leading another one
shortly to continue the campaign that we have waged to date.
J: Tim Fischer says that the Federal Government reaction hasn't been
strong enough, that you should expel the French Ambassador.
PM: Well it has been so strong as to affect French public opinion and I think
affect the view of the French Presidency. That is pretty strong.
J: But it hasn't been strong enough to stop them testing. They didn't even
delay their start?
PM: Well they are a democracy and they can make their own decisions.
Mururoa is not part of Australia, it is a French territory. But I think
because it is a democracy, we are more outraged. If this was a
totalitarian regime, you could perhaps understand how public opinion
and international opinion has been bypassed, but what really gets up
our nose is that this is a democracy and it is a democracy we have
fought for.
J: Mr Keating, can you tell me your thoughts this morning when you heard
the bomb had been detonated?
PM: Well one of anger and one of extreme disappointment about the fact
that France does not understand that the real risk for the world is for
smaller states to acquire nuclear weapons and that they have a vested
interest, as we all have, in stopping that happen.
ends 



EL: 6. Sep. 95 21: 49 No. 0260 100/
STATEMENT BY THE CRHIMAN OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING XP
TESTING OF A NUCLEAR W~ EAPON BY FRANCE
As current Chair of the South Pacific Forumn, on behalf of my Forum colleagues I
condemn the test of a nuclear weapon by France in the South Pacific.
France has defied the wishes of the people of the South Pacific, the appeal by the Asian
nations as exprcssed in the recent ASEAN Reginal Forum statement that called on
the nuclear weapon states to bring an immediate end to testing, and the voice of an
increasing part of the European and international commnunity. The majority of the
French people also oppose France's testing program in the South Pacific.
Of particular concern to the countries of the South Pacific is the French Government's
reluctance to fully address the environmental and health risks posed by the testing.
Forum leaders reiterate thc calls made by South Pacific Environment Ministers in
Brisbane on 17 August for:
0 an immediate end to testing of nuclear weapons in the South Pacific and the closing
of associated facilities, except those required for future environmental monitoring;
France to accept full and exclusive responsibility for any adverse impacts from
French testing on the South Pacific environment and people; and
0 France to pruvide access to the international community to all French scientific
data and to the testing sites themselves to enable an independent and
comprehensive assessment of the effects of testing.
Forumi countries call on the French Government to acknowledge the weight of opinion
against nuclear testing and abandon immediately its testing program in the
South Pacific.
Forui Itders will consider nuclear testing issues as part of the South Pacific Forum
Meeting in Madang, Papua New Guinea, from 13 -15 September.
CANBERRA 7 September 1995 TEL 



101/
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE MARKS ROYAL COMMISSION
The assessment by Commissioner Marks today of the " irrecoverable" position
he has been placed in because of the " fairly restrictive" terms of reference
imposed on him is a sad testimony to the jaundiced, political task he has
been given.
The Commissioner's remarks confirm what I said in Parliament last week
about the proceedings before the Commission.
They highlight the issue of the propriety with which the terms of reference
have been drafted and call into question the Leader of the Opposition and his
shadow ministers' involvement in the foundations of the Commission, as now
criticised by the Commissioner.
Commissioner Marks is entirely right when he says: ' The sooner this
Commission comes to an end the better.
CANBERRA 8 SEPTEMBER, 1995 


11 September 1995
E &amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I just thought I would give you a couple of comments about President Chirac's remarks and a couple more on Premier Court and his accomplice, Mr Howard.
The first thing I think I would like to say is obviously the French President's been stung by this, by the world reaction to the test and the Government of France is rattled. He has made a number of statements today which, I think, from Australia's point of view are ridiculous that Australia does not provide aid to the South Pacific where, in fact, our annual aid to Forum countries is around $ 460 million. And he went on to say that French Polynesia has a higher standard of living than Australia. That is untrue. He said that the French presence in the Pacific is what rankles us. This is not so. We have always said a constructive French presence in the Pacific is a welcome one. The politics of the Pacific is a matter for the people of these French territories and the Government of France to work out over time. The simple fact is they must face the unpalatable truth that Australia opposes French nuclear testing and is not opposed to the French or the French people, but this one bad decision. And it is this one bad decision which has brought so much angst against France, not only here In Australia, but of course around the world. President Chirac said that what the Australians and New Zealanders can't stand he talks about us together, but most of the assault of course Is made upon Australia. Well, I think, we would say we are flattered to think that Australia alone, or Australia with New Zealand and some other countries, have brought this reaction, But that Is not so of course. It has come from around the world and I think that is what is difficult for President Chirac to comprehend and to accept. This can all cease and France can start rebuilding its position on nuclear issues simply by abandoning the program and that is what they should do.
Could I just say a couple of other things, domestic things, about Richard Court and that Royal Commission. As you know, there have been reports today In the press and remarks by the Leader of the National Party In Western Australia that the $ 4 million plus, being spent on the Royal Commission is a very large sum of money and that it would be better spent on other public services, to which the Premier said this was merely speculation. Well speculation by the Leader of his Coalition partner seems to me to be fairly pointed. And he went on to say, after attacking me, " we have the strength of our convictions to -see this matter through, regardless of his bully-boy tactics, so we can finally determine the truth in what was a very tragic incident." But it is not the tragic incident which is being investigated. Commissioner Marks has made that abundantly clear. He is not Investigating the death of Penny Easton and yet that is how Mr Court, today, rationalises his continuation of this vendetta. Now Richard Court defeated Carmen Lawrence in an election. Not content with defeating her, he wants to personally destroy her. It's the nastiest, meanest, most vindictive action I think a leader of a Government has taken in my recent memory and nothing is going to detract from that until this Commission is wound up. So there is no point in Premier Court going on about the Commission or John Howard who is today waxing lyrical about the Commission, the Commissioner and how he has been treated but when Mr Howard was asked about the terms of reference he said " oh, I am not answering anything about that", In other words, those terms of reference, Mr Howard said he is interested in the truth, but not obviously, of course, not the whole truth. Otherwise the terms of reference would have gone to the Liberals and their shenanigans in the Western Australian Parliament on Penny Easton's behalf. So I mean the ruse and the farce goes on and It can be only settled one way and that is for it to be closed down.
Journalist: Prime Minister, what do you say about the state of relations between Australia and France when the leader of that country tells what you described as untruths on television, and also, do you believe that France is now going to only explode another 3 bombs?
PM: I have got no idea about the second question. On the first, I think French pride has been hurt, and an executive decision has been poorly taken. And, as this was one of the earlier executive decisions of President Chirac's term of office,. It has obviously reflected poorly on him, and he Is feeling the pinch.
Journalist: Mr Keating, uranium exports do you take seriously President Chirac's statement today that they may stop buying Australian uranium? And if they did) what would that impact have in terms of compensation?
PM: Well, I think that President Chirac would know that there is no point in a commercial spat, an ongoing commercial spat over these things. Australia supplies uranium to France under strict safeguards for use In their extensive power generation program. And I think that sort of rattling of the can is just another symptom of the reaction which, I think, the President has got to this decision.
Journalist: Prime Minister, have you communicated with President Chirac?
PM: Not today.
Journalist: Will you over this attack?
PM: Well, I think I am communicating with him now, through your good offices?
Journalist: Prime Minister, in the light of your comments about the Marks Royal Commission is there any point in Dr Lawrence giving evidence this week, as scheduled?
PM: Yes. I think she obviously the Commission, in its current series of sittings, has a place there for Dr Lawrence to be heard and she will be, and she deserves to be.
Journalist: Prime Minister, John Howard criticised you today saying something like it's one of the nastiest things he has seen, seeing someone from your office denigrating and destroying the reputation and integrity of someone like the Royal Commissioner I mean, do you accept that perhaps you went over the top there with that attack?
PM: &nbsp;No. Not at all. I 3aid yesterday the bad thing here was the politically motivated terms of reference. I mean, what has happened here Is that Richard Court and John Howard together have decided to trash Royal Commissions as an instrument for the elucidation of information in this country. Complex data arriving from complex circumstances where a Royal Commission is a desirable power. What they are doing is trashing that as an institution, by abusing the power that the executive Government of Western Australia has. John Howard has been in this right up to his neck. And, as I said yesterday, they lit the fuse on this together, and it has blown up on them. But, here he is, in his you know, what do you call it, his sort of mock-Sunday School piety going on now about how the Royal Commission has been treated what about the rotten terms of reference? What about the corruption of the processes by the Government of Western Australia, in establishing this? That's what is wrong here.
Journalist: Do you dispute then that you have tried to trash this Royal Commission so that it is easier for you to take no notice of any adverse findings?
P M. My view Is that the Royal Commission its terms of reference, the whole inquiry is illegitimate. And so everything that the Government has said since it came to that conclusion has been consistent.
Journalist: Well, why then should Carmen Lawrence appear before an illegitimate inquiry, as you term it?
PM: Well, she is obliged to. She has been called, and the sequence of people appearing before the Commission have painted her in a light which, she believes, is wrong.
Journalist: But how can she clear her name before a rotten Royal Commission?
PM. She may not clear her name, but she will give her views.
Journalist: Do you think she will emerge from this bullet-proof, Mr Keating
PM: Well, I haven't thought about that one, Niki.
Journalist: Well, that is what Peter Cook said yesterday.
PM &nbsp;Did he. Yes, well, let's say she, by bringing on the Western Australian the WA Inc Royal Commission, and living through the difficulties of that, and now having, you know, somewhere around 5 to 6 million dollars arraigned against her, wearing the thrust of the executive power of the incumbent Government of Western Australia, has obviously made her very sharp about her personal circumstances. And, I think, that much tougher.
Journalist: So, you're still totally convinced of the correctness of the case, or her account, of the events leading up to the tabling of that petition, are you?
PM:-Yes. But the Key point is, there is no linkage or established linkage between the Commission and the death of Penny Easton. And were Penny Easton not to have suicided, there would not be a Royal Commission. But to have one, when the Liberal Party first raised these matters over 2 1/ 2 years before Mr Easton ever replied, is, of course, absolutely rotten. That's the only word for it.
Journalist: Didn't in fact Keith Wilson and Pam Beggs start this thing going... ( inaudible)
PM: It doesn't matter where it started, we all hear rumours in public life do you see me dashing into the Parliament calling Royal Commissions? Is that the track record of us? Of course it isn't. But, there Is something vindictive and vicious about Richard Court he is not simply content to have a win over Carmen Lawrence politically, he wants to destroy her personally. It's a very vicious and vindictive thing to do. Thanks.
ends.
&nbsp;



( 9
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS IN ANZAC PARK, THURSDAY ISLAND, 12 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Mr Getano Lui ( Chairperson, Torres Strait Regional Authority), Mayor ( Mr
Pedro Stephen), Elders, my friend Mr Ettle Pau ( Torres Strait Ex Servicemen's
Association) who presented a wreath with me, my colleague Peter Dodd,
distinguished members of the community, ladies and gentlemen and boys and
girls. Thank you very much for that wonderful warm welcome this afternoon. I have
always wanted to come to the Torres Strait. I am most happy to be able to
have come as Prime Minister and to come to this beautiful part of Australia.
I have been very moved by the speeches, the things that have been said by
your Mayor, by Miss Bakoi Bon ( high school captain), by Mr Waraka Adidi ( ex
serviceman), by Mr George Mye ( Chairman of Damley Island) and they all say
one thing, I think, and one thing that I certainly agree with and that is to say
that we are all pert of this great country Australia. We are all Australians, we
are Australians together. We will be Australians forever. And, that this great
multicultural country of ours is different in parts. We do have our separate, if
you like, ancestral backgrounds, but we have this commitment to this great
country and this great continent, held in trust for most of us by the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people of this country. It is now our bounty to enjoy
thanks to this wonderful bequest which you as indigenes of this country have
given us.
I am pleased to be here today. I am pleased to be here with my daughters, so
they can see this part of Australia too and know that the land they grow up in
is one of tolerance, one of equity and one of decency and one of pleasure and
one of frendship and one were the environment matters to us all. The place
we can all enjoy together.
I was particularly drawn by the references to Eddie Mabo. This is, I think, the
right place to say that a good thing was done a couple of years ago. A truth
recognised, a lie overturned when the High Court said that the common law of
this country doesnt simply come from the tradition and customs of people of
European decen It doesnt simply come from the British common law. Now it 
2
is said by our highest court that Australia's common law comes from the
traditions and customs of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islander people.
So, it means that your customs and your traditions are as much a part of my
common law as they are of your common law. That is, in no stronger way
could it be said we are together and we are one than to say that our customs
and traditions and our cultures and beliefs form part of our common heritage in
our common law. From that law, of course, has sprung an indigenous title
which means you, as a people, are entitled to certain lands that have
traditionally been yours. This is a far greater right to come from the
recognition of your culture than to be given by some statute or act of
Parliament or act of grace or act of giving by a legislator because now it is
yours as an inherent right and perhaps it is late, but better late than never that
we have drawn a line in the sand and said that the lands which you make your
traditional connection with, that are not alienated are yours and we have set
up the processes for it.
The contemporary word was by the High Court, but the contemporary act was
by the Commonwealth Parliament in the Native Title Act and it all started here
in the Torres Strait Island. That is, in recognition of the justice which Eddie
Mabo sought, in seeking it and finding it, he has changed all of our lives and
all of your lives especially.
So, this is, I think, a good thing to ponder. We have got great ground to make
up and there are great social issues that we have to address, but we could
never address those, no act of giving from the Parliament or the Government,
no matter how generous can be as complete or as valuable as the recognition
of our essence as Australians our custom and tradition and law comes as
much from your traditions as it comes from non-indigenous, non-Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Island culture.
This is, in a sense, starting the slate again and the things we want to draw on
it are the things we must do together. I think it does underwrite the fact that
we are all members of the one country and that we are Australians and you
are as important to this Parliament of ours as the people from the regions of
Sydney as I am from or those other great parts of Australia, that we are all
Australians one and we are together. The proof of that is, in fact, the very
sacrifices which we have seen commemorated here today. In the Second
World War where Torres Strait Islanders fought in defence of Australia, fought
in defence of themselves and the rest of us, for the democratic values and the
culture and the tolerance we know our country has, but we knew that the
aggressor would deny us. Today, I give thanks on the part of all Australians
for that sacrifice, for those who suffered and for those who died and I want
that known and understood by all Australians.
Could I say that in speaking about your culture and your rights, George Mye
made reference to the fact that with ATSIC your fear is that the Islander
culture may be subsumed in the greater culture of Aboriginal Australia. This
has always been a risk, but one always believes that again in tolerance and
fairness, this will not be so. But, you are suggesting to us that there be a
Torres Strait Islander Commission. That you receive the funding from the
Commonwe ttl Pariament and not ATSIC and that you decide how this might
oa 
3
be spent in the best interests of Torres Strait Islander people. Let me tell you
this is something the Commonwealth Government is prepared to consider.
This is something we are prepared to think about. This, of course, will need
discussions, it will need negotiation with our Aboriginal brothers and sisters to
know that we see that commitment to ATSIC as being a solid and firm one and
yet at the same time, it is possible that we can more adequately perhaps look
after the interests and the culture of Islander people. To see that it is not
subsumed in any Ohe culture Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal.
At any rate, I am pleased to be here today to see the Torres Strait or the part
of it I can see. To come to Thursday Island, to see you as a community, to be
among you, to speak with you and to receive your hospitality. I thank you for
the warmth of it. I most especially thank the children for comning in such
numbers. For all you people who have been so generous in coming to meet
me, my family and my party today, I give you my heartfelt thanks and best
wishes. ends 



TEL i395~ J 18 : 6 NO.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, HIGH C~ OMMISSIONERS RESIDENCE, PORT MORESIBY,
113 SEPTEMBER 19S
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, do you think the prosence of the French in the Soudli
Pacnc, is in any way delogitimised by thoir decision to resume nuclear
testing?
PM. I think that there has been a constructive rlationship between the
French) and the countries of the Soith Pacific Snd, I think, the rest of
us. I don't think. there is any doubt that the legitimacy of their presence
or the sincerity of thelii pitmence Is called inlto que~ 4ion by a scant
disregard for the opinions and the interests of peo* l who live inl the
Poiftl Pacific Islanders. But, that is not to make a coMment abotf
the French tonritodes, This h* 3 alway6 been a matter between the
poople who live there and France itself.
4: Prime Minister, what sort of statement would you be looking for out of
the Forum?
PM: I think one that contflues the themes of lost year. That is, where wo
are looking fur managing resources better I think, Sir Julius. has a
themne which is consistent with that and that i. P how to further develop
thm ea. sources, how to keep them sustainable and we are able to, I
think, record from Wat year some substantial and positive, changes in
transport, turning around some of the heavy airline deficits I made the
point year ago that thcre was more money lost in the airline deficits of
" h Pacific countries than there was in this aid whiich Australia and New
Ze$ iand had given to Pacific Island nations and Pacific nations. And.
we are seeing quite substantial and very pleasing changes in the
budgets of those airlines and the rationalisation of those services,
Fisheries we are sftking to Improve the lot of Pecific Island countries
In terrms of flsheries, the benefits available to them, the pnceA they
receive, Those are issues I have taken up with Japan, with Korea.
Logging we are working towards a togging or forest acmod ut this
meetting which began in Brisbane and I hope that we can come to a U 1' U 
TEL 13ep. 9 1b No . UU l'U V-
2
point of isyreemeflt a~ QUt forest manggement on this occasion with the
sing~ ing of that 8cmord.
So, these are the things.
J* Haven't the Papua New Guinearis and the Solomon's kiiocked that
forestry code of conduct on the head?
PM, They are agreeing with it, I think, but they are saying well, I'm not
sure exactly what they are saying, but I think, in Papua New Guinea's
Case It Is saying that it hasn't got its own domestic process in place.
But, I would be very disappointed if we couldn't sign the accord up at
this meeting,
Ji: rrime Minister, you have ofered incentiveS to the Solomon Islands to
try and convince them to stop lowging arid they havenl taken those tip,
are you prepared yet to think about the big stick approach. withdrawing
aid?
PM-We are In a constructive, friendly relationship with the Woomon. Islands
and1, ot course, with Papua Now Guinea. Ono sooks to encourage
people to have, in this case, sustainable logging practicos, to help
where we can with sustainable logging processes and planning. I don't
necessarily belief that people always see your side of the arourrent
immediately. but we will keep wearing away at that as In t caso of the
somorons.
J: Whet * bou Gordon Bilney's line, that the Goverment will be leak than
wilting in tho future to eoaist those counties that are squanden their
resources, just how tough is the Governiment prepared to be?
PM-I think It is a case of both a bit of push anid pull. We try to pull people
along hy encouraging them to do things and we try and push them
alon. But again, one does tt within the wrt of protocols of the
rolationshIps. ft Is called trying to be construcive I think.
J; Out is there point in continuing to give aid for sustainable forestry
projects to a country Mhat has anything but a sustainabhi; industry and
which is seeking to defer this code of conduct at the Forum?
PM; Are you speaking of the Solomons, in particular? Well. I mean, the
Solomnon Wsands does not have a sustainable rate of forestry exlractiori
ojr forestry management. That it, an issuo of concern to Us. Wip have
assisted them to understand or at least rneasuro teir forestry
resources and then to be able to plot som sort of chart of extraction
and oustainabilfty, What the indications give us is that It is
unsustainable. We lidve made those points. wh~ ether we continue to
give financial assistance lfo forestry Is something for us to dlatervnfe,
but obviously there gets to a point of where 11e returns are not worth it. 
TEL: 13 ep j1: 86 y NO ' JU(
J: Just coming back to th point about the French test again, Prime
Minister, do yntu think fthre is anything more the Forum con
constructively do to argue the case against Padis?
PM: I think the value of the Forum IS for It to spak with one voice a$ the
voice of the Pacific. There is no otr meeting oa a group nf nations
this large or this representative that could say to President Chirac and
his govornment that this is a bad decision which we want reversed.
Thd value of it boing said in this Forum i3 that it is not simnply Australia
or Now Zealand, it is the Forum countries as a whole. So, rather than
now arguments, I think, the value is in the saying of it as a whole, as a
r~ rniuhity.
J. As Chairman of the Forum though. Australia h2S pW out a commnunique
with the Forum against the French testing, what is thi2 communique
that is Qoing to come out tomorrow, how is that going to be different?
PM: I think it will have a strono conderrination of the declsion of Mhe French
to lost, A condemnation of the decision to detonate the first b43st and
calling on the Government of Fran= e to desist. Now. again, Fran, ce Is a
sovereign country, but we will be at least saying that powerfully, I hope.
Xis there a danger that the fact that Australia is a member of this; rorum
could mean new accusations from France that we are gingering up the
Pacm against them?
PM: I think fth French are Worldly WleA. They know what peop think.
They know what thie geneful mood of the Pardfk is They don't like our
attue, but then we don't like theirs. And . I think, they kno&amp; W most
people around here don't like theirl for this either. We wil be sAying
tt in spade: 3, I hope, in the next couple of duys.
en'ds 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT CONCLUSION OF LEADERS RETREAT, MADANG
RESORT, 14 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'll just give you a few remarks. We had a good but long meeting where
we have adopted, I think, a good communique which is about
advancing the theme of last year which was managing resources.
Now, we are talking about securing development beyond 2000. We
had a good discussion around those issues and the communique will
be published for you very shortly. We also adopted the code of
conduct the logging code of conduct which we have been working on
since last year and we agreed unanimously to implement it with our
national codes. So, in other words, as each country implements its
national code of logging practices and conduct, it will give effect to the
code of conduct principles which are there and which have been
published to date.
Could I just say there was a lengthy discussion about nuclear testing in
the Pacific and you will find a very strong communique where the
leaders say they express their extreme outrage at the resumption of
French nuclear testing. Forum leaders again demand that France
desist from any further tests in the region and call on other countries
also to seek to persuade France to cease testing It goes on to say that
should France continue its testing in the Pacific, the Forum will review
France's status as a post-Forum dialogue partner and it goes on in that
vein. So, there was a very strong, and again unanimous view about that. So.
by and large, I think, one could report solid progress.
J: Did any particular country object to the communique on France?
PM: No, no. There was a discussion coming from Vanuatu, I thirnk, and
some of the people in the Melanesian spearhead group that they want
some sort of monitoring program there for the future. Because when
this program ceases, they want to be able to evaluate the atoll
environment and any attendant risk. So, there was a discussion about
that, but by and large it was agreed unanimously. 
J: Did any nations... break off the post-Forum relations with France?
PM: There was some discussion about that but not much because. I think,
that to most countries the Forum dialogue does provide an opportunity
to have a discussion with France, but in the event, as the communique
says, if it continues testing, the Forum will review its status as a post-
Forum dialogue partner.
J: So, does that mean that the French Minister due to attend the meeting
from Saturday next week, that he may be told that he is not welcome?
PM: No, no. the French Minister will definitely be Involved in the dialogue, at
this time.
J: until next year, by which time the testing will be over anyway.
PM: The testing will be over, but will France have its dialogue status?
J: Prime Minister, in relation to the logging code of practice, how do you
understand that will apply to the Solomon Islands, as the Solomon
Islands say it wont apply until they develop their own national code of
practires.
PM: For a start, it was unanimously endorsed and the Solomon Islands
Minister endorsed the code of conduct along with the rest of us. The
code of conduct though, is not a binding document which will apply to
each country. It is a set of principles and guidelines which will then be
subject to adoption as part of their national code of practice and code of
conduct. So, in other words and I might just give an example, Vanuatu
is just in the process now of adopting it, of ratifying and adopting it as
part of its code of conduct before its ministerial council. As you know
Australia at the moment is going through its own forestry practice
regime PNG has indicated that they are within a few months of their
being In a position to adopt their own xnde.
J. Solomon Islands doesn't introduce its own national code. It will have
not affect and practices will continue iin the Solomon Islands the same
as they are now?
PM: That is right, but again these codes are adopted here but the effect of
them can only be given under national rules or national legislation.
That has always been the case. In other words, what you are asking
me is if a country wants to wilfully go along and damage through clear
felling for instance its forest environment, does this stop it? No, but the
Solomon's did endorse the code.
J: What brought the code of conduct back into discussions today, we'd
heard it was to be taken off... 
PMV: No. it was never off the agenda, it waq cming back from last year. It
was absolutely set on the agenda for this time beAuise it was. coming
from last year.
J: . Just going back to the nuclear testing issue again briefly, do you think
cxtrorne outrage is good enough, hasn't France already got INe
message that there is oxtreme outrage?
PM: Well, would you like us to stand on our head and borrow a few garlands
trom around here to make the show better for you. What else have wo
got to say?
J. Do you think France wiAll take any notice..
PM: I think the French are veiy huit about all this. Now, they say in a
melancholy and wounded way, this is about the rest of us trying to
remove France from the Pacific. Well, of course we are noL. What it is
about is a bad decision to test nuclear weapons. That is what it is
about.
J, United Nations Prime Minister, to condemn France over this?
PM: That is still part of our processes and, of course, we also noted and
endorsed New Zealand's taking of the case to the ICJ. So, we are
going to continue our campaign.
J: ( inaudible) [ French teriftories? J
PM: No, only that it was said at the meeting that these are matters between
France itself and the various national groupings and populations.
J: Was there any discussin about how the Forum how France would
react to this latest communique?
PM: It is about getting a reaction It is designed to get a reaction and, I
think, the language makes that clear.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: Wall, it is about France's general attitude towards the Pacific area arid
its obvious contempt in this decision. I think they are the things that will
be assessed this time next year or between now and then,
J: Sn, it can be between now and then?
PM: Yes, sure.
J: Was the general attitude of the region discussed?
PM: No, not per se. 
J-So, the next test going off..
PM: Well, it will mean for a start we are continuing to express our outrage at
what has happened. We repeat that. We again demand that France
desist from those tests. Were it to explode another devise then it would
be up to Forum leaders to decide whether that dialogue status with the
Forum continues.
J: A couple of weeks ago you referred to France as still being a colonial
power in the South Pacific. In recent days you have made the point
that the status of those temitones is a matter for people of those
territories and France, yet in the past Australia has taken an active
interest in the making of accords for example in New Caledonia. Do
you believe that the testing issue will act as a catalyst for change and
reconsideration of that territorial status by France, New Caledonia and
French Polynesia.
PMV: I don't now the answer to that, but when PNG was seen as a colonial
territory of Australia that became a matter of debate and led, of: course,
to the independence movement, the independence of Papua New
Guinea which we celebrate with its twentieth anniversary this weekend.
Certain things bring these things into the public debate and I have got
no doubt that this weapons' testing program has brought into the public
debate France's status in the Pacific. But as with Australia, the
independence of PNG was a matter for Australia and the people of
PNG. So similarly is independence in the Pacific a matter for France in
the French territories for France and the members of those
communities. It is not a matter for the Forum.
J: Well Australia was influenced heavily by other countries in its say in its
independence of PNG Prime Minister.
PM: I think to be fair to ourselves I think we lead our own way out of our
colonial arrangements in PNG, perhaps later than might of otherwise
been, but still within 25 or 30 years of the war. It is for France to make
its own mind up about what its status and standing is here and what its
national objectives here and how people here relate to it.
J: Sir Julius implied earlier this week that the code of conduct would be
rejected, what has changed the situation?
PM: I think essentially the difference is one of meaning rather than
substance one of words rather than substance that is, it is always a
matter for PNG, say, as with other countries to ratify their code of
conduct. What they are saying is they couldn't do that before this
meeting. They could do it later, but they were quite happy to endorse
the code of conduct and accept that they are endorsing it for ratification
which they will do, I think, in the second half of this year.
J: Prime Minister, there was some recent tension between Australia and
PNG over aid and other issues, you had bilateral talks with Sir Julius 
1 Chan yesterday did you make any progress there in terms of the shift
from budget aid to program aid?
PM* It was never raised. We have now made a fairly heavy change over
timne in the shift between budget aid and program aid. We hope that is
going well, that is we are able to deliver decent services on the ground
for the dollars we provide. It may be a matter in PNG politics, but it was
not raised with me by the Prime Minister. So, as far as I am concerned
and I would have told him this if it had been raised that the shift is going
to continue under the agreement.
J: Was Ok Tedi discussed?
PM: No, not at all.
J: ( inaudible)
PM: You'll find something about that in the communique and I think that VAIl
say succinctly what we are essentially saying is we are going to
examine that over the course of the next year and report back.
ends 
FORUM LEADERS' STATEMENT ON NUCLEAR TESTING
LEADERS EXPRESS THEIR EXTREME OUTRAGE AT THE RESUMPTION OF FRENCH
NUCLEAR TESTING IN THE PACIFIC. FORUM LEADERS AGAIN DEMAND THAT FRANCE
DESIST FROM ANY FURTHER TESTS IN THE REGION AND CALL ON OTHER COUNTRIES
ALSO TO SEEK TO PERSUADE FRANCE TO CEASE TESTING.
THE FORUM ALSO NOTE THAT THE PAINFUL MEMORIES RESULTING FROM NUCLEAR
TESTING CONDUCTED IN THE REGION A HALF-CENTURY AGO STILL HAUNT MANY
IA PEOPLE IN THE REGION.
SHOULD FRANCE CONTINUE ITS TESTING IN THE PACIFIC, THE FORUM WILL REVIEW
FRANCE'S STATUS AS A POST-FORUM DIALOGUE PARTNER.
r A THE OUTRAGE OF THE FORUM MEMBER COUNTRIES IS SO MUCH THE GREATER
BECAUSE OF THE INTRANSIGENCE OF FRANCE, TOGETHER WITH THE PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF CHINA, IN PERSISTING WITH THEIR NUCLEAR TESTS IN THE FACE OF
NOT ONLY THE STRONG VIEWS OF THE PACIFIC REGION, BUT ALSO THE APPEAL OF
THE ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM, AND THE WORLD-WIDE SENTIMENT AGAINST
TESTING. THE DECISIONS BY THE GOVERNMENTS OF FRANCE AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
CHINA TO CONTINUE TESTING ARE COMPLETELY CONTRARY TO THE UNDERTAKING
AT THE NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY ( NPT) REVIEW AND EXTENSION
CONFERENCE ON 11 MAY 1995 TO EXERCISE " UTMOST RESTRAINT" IN NUCLEAR
TESTING PENDING THE COMPLETION OF NEGOTIATIONS ON A COMPREHENSIVE TEST
BAN TREATY ( CTBT) THAT WOULD BAN NUCLEAR TESTS FOR ALL TIME.
THE CONCLUSION OF A CTBT IS AN OBJECTIVE OF THE HIGHEST IMPORTANCE FOR
r THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY. LEADERS THEREFORE WELCOME THE RECENT
ANNOUNCEMENTS OF THE UNITED STATES AND FRANCE TO SUPPORT A TRULY
coMPREHENSIVE CTBT. THEY CALL ON ALL MEMBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNrY, AND ESPECIALLY THE NUCLEAR WEAPON STATES, TO SPARE NO
E TTiHNSURTiE CONCLUSION OF A CTBT NO LATERTHAN 1996.
r 
IN THE SPIRIT OF THIS RENEWED EMPHASIS ON GLOBAL DISARMAMENT, LEADERS
CALL ON FRANCE TO SIGN AND RATIFY THE PROTOCOLS OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC
NUCLEAR FREE ZONE ( SPNFZ) TREATY. THEY URGE THE UNITED STATES AND
THE UNITED KINGDOM TO DO LIKEWISE, NOTING THAT THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
CHINA AND RUSSIA HAVE ALREADY SIGNED THE PROTOCOLS.
THE DECISION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF VANUATU TO SIGN THE SPNFZ TREATY AT
THE FORUM IS WARMLY WELCOMED.
THE FORUM WILL CONTINUE TO OPPOSE NUCLEAR TESTING AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY
INCLUDING AT THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
LEADERS COMMEND THE EFFORTS COMMENCED BY THE FORUM DELEGATION TO
PARIS IN JUNE. THEY THANK THE FORUM REGIONAL ACTION COMMITTEE FOR ITS
WORK IN SUPPORTING THE ACTrIVITIES OF FORUM GOVERNMENTS AND ENDORSE THE
REPORT OF ITS ACTIVITIES PRESENTED TO THE FORUM.
LEADERS WELCOME NEW ZEALAND'S ACTION TO RESUME ITS 1973 INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTICE CASE AGAINST FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING AND ITS
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS IN THE PACIFIC AND COMMEND THE ACTION OF FORUM
MEMBERS SEEKING TO INTERVENE IN THE PROCEEDINGS TO SUPPORT NEW
ZEALAND'S REQUEST TO THE COURT.
LEADERS REITERATE THE CALL BY THE MELANESIAN SPEARHEAD GROUP LEADERS
THROUGH THE LAKATORO DECLARATION AND BY THE SOUTH PACIFIC ENVIRONMErNT
MINISTERS MEETING IN AUGUST 1995 FOR FRANCE TO CLOSE ITS NUCLEAR TESTING
FACILITIES IN THE PACIFIC, EXCEPT AS REQUIRED FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
MONITORING; TO ACCEPT FULL AND EXCLUSIVE RESPONSIBILrrITY FOR ANY ADVERSE
IMPACTS FROM FRENCH TESTING ON THE PACIFIC ENVIRONMENT AND PEOPLE; AND
TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO ALL THE SCIENTIFIC
DATA IT HOLDS AND TO THE TESTING SITES THEMSELVES TO ENABLE AN
INDEPENDENT AND COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE RISKS INVOLVED.
FINALLY, FORUM LEADERS EXPRESS THEIR SINCERE APPRECIATION TO THE PEOPLE
FROM THE REGION AND AROUND THE WORLD WHO HAVE OFFERED THEIR SUPPORT
AND THEIR VOICE TO THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST NUCLEAR TESTING. THEY RENEW
THEIR UNDERTAKING TO TAKE ALL POSSIBLE STEPS TO STOP NUCLEAR TESTING AND
THE PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
MADANO, PAPUA NEw GuvIA
14 SEPTEMBR 1995 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP ON DEPARTURE TO LEADERS RETREAT, MADANG RESORT,
14 SEPTEMBER 19" 5
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Nauru's Leader says that the French should be excluded from the post-
Forum dialogue, would Austraia support that position?
PM: I think for some countries here, it is only the post-Forum dialogue whe re there
is any contact with the French. So, I think, some countries will want ' to keep
that dialogue going.
J: Is Australia one of those countries?
PM: Well we don't we have ambassadorial sources and we have direct ones as
you know, but other countries don't so we respect their view.
J: How strong will the condemnation of France be?
PM: I think fairly strong. But again, here, questions about the French in this Pacific
and the French territories are for the French and the people who li~ e there.
What we are objecting to is a single decision to detonate these nuclear blasts
and If that were over then, if you lIke, our point of objection with France would
cease.
J: After talking with other leaders overnight, how hopeful are you now of getting
agreement on a code of conduct to restrict logging?
PM: I am reasonably hopeful. At the las meeting in Brisbane we. tied to
reconstruct the airline deficits which is a big thing to try to do. To try and get
the fisheries, to get a better deal on fseries and more cohesion in managing
fishery clients and getting better prices and the other thing w~ is to do
something about forestry, about unsustainable logging. Now, they are three
very big chunks to bite off we are going pretty well on two and I hopoe we do
well on the third.
J: Do you think using aid as a lever is an appropriate way to get people to fall in
line?
PM: I don't think so because we can al seek to pressure governments but aid is
about helping people and when aid is diminished Nstt arts to diminish some of
the programs that ordinary people get benefit from.
ends 



i EL 14 . QZep. 95 .1 : 57 No .022 F . C1/ 01
102/ 9
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, NIP
One of the themes of this years' South Pacific Forum is tourism and its role in the
region's economic development. To support this theme Australia has proposed
a package of additional measures to develop ecotourism in the region.
The package, worth $ 625,000 initially, will involve extensive short-temi training
programs both for tourism planners and private sector operators, involving an
Intensive six weeks training program, attachment to relevant Australian
institutions and long-term follow up.
In addition, five post graduate fellowships will be offered to train public and
private sector tourism managers.
A third element will provide support for the conservation of sensitive island
environmental or cultural sites of national tourism significance. I
Tourism already makes a major contribution to the regional economy. In most
island countries it is already the largest source of foreign exchange earnings,
with strong growth predicted through to the end of the century,
But the region still accounts for only one per cent of the global tourism market
and has enormous untapped potential.
For examrple, tourist numbers to Australia are expected to rise to six million by
2000. Each extra one per cent of the foreign arrivals to Australia Forum island
cou ntr ies are able to attract would add 3, 000 jobs and contribute an extra
million in foreign exchange earnings to the region.
one of the South Pacific's greatest attractions is Its unique environment, How to
use the environment effectively for tourism while protecting it is one of the
region's biggest challenges. This scheme Is a start in that direction.
MADANG September 1995 



TEL: 14. Dep. 95 23: 38 No. 029 P. 01/ 06
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MADANG RESORT, PAPUA NEW GUINEA, 15 SEPTEMBER
1995 E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What has been happening in the Forum this morning?
PMV: Well this is the round up, basically, the presentation of the Chairman's
report from yesterday and just general items on the agenda. But
before 1 do that, why don't I just give you perhaps an overview. I think
the important thing to say about the Pacific Forum, and this one, is
I think it has proved its value.
* changed the format for the Forums last year in Brisbane and that
change has been maintained by Prime Minister Chan and, as a
consequence, we have been abre to tackle matters which do materially
affect, importantly affect, Pacific island nations. For many of the
smaller Pacific island states, the Forum is the principal body they
attend and their principal contact in terms of, you know, governance
and issues of government. It's their principal place for advice and for
taking another view.
Now, I think, in the last year we have been able to move forward
substantially on a number of important things turning around the
airline deficits of the regional airlines of the Pacific, which is a cause of
great concern to the national budgets of some Pacific island countries.
Secondly, proposing a logging code of conduct so that Forum states
may say to logging companies, we subscribe to the Pacific logging
code, to the Forum code, and there is then a Forum code. That having
been unanimously adopted yesterday, I think, Is a strong point for I
hope better forestry practices and better prices, better returns from
forestry products and this is part of the problem that countries are not
getting adequate returns on a lot of the products they are selling. This
is both for forestry and for fisheries. 
TEL: 14 23: 38 No 029P02, O
2
Thirdly, of course, fisheries themselves. Fisheries are an important
part of the economy of the Pacific and the decisions we took over the
course of the year, I think, are going to improve the prices that people
receive for fish stocks and also their organisation of fisheries.
Tourism remains an important area of income and is a growing source
of income for many Pacific island countries and the initiatives we have
taken in tourism, I think, will help there. Of course the airline
rationalisation just helped by themselves. Getting a better scheduling
of airlines is going to help and we just again announced a support
package that is Australia, today for tourism for training and support
of about $ 600,000, which is aimed at trying to lift the core
competencies of tourism agencies and tourist operators so as to be
able to draw a little more of the Asia Pacific and North American
tourism market.
As well as those things, there has been a clear message to the French
Government about nuclear testing, The expression of extreme outrage
on the part of Forum member states and the Forum in general, I think
attests to the strength of feeling which countries have towards this
issue. And I hope that the strength of these views will be noted by
President Chirac and his Government.
We have had other useful discussions on a range of issues, most of
them I have mentioned, aviation, trade and investment was another
one, tourism of course. And, of course, I go on from here for the
anniversary celebrations of PNG's independence in Port Moresby.
I think this is another important moment in the history of both of our
countries, that Australia's relationship with Papua New Guinea and
Papua New Guinea's own progress 20 years after independence. This
is an auspicious occasion to be here and I have been very pleased
with the visit.
J: Prime Minister, has there been any discussion about what the nations
will say to the French Minister in the post-Forum talks besides the
actual wording of the declaration?
PM: No, there hasn't because by and large, I mean, once a Forum is over,
then as you know some of the states then stay and meet be they either
heads of government, otherwise a head of mission, level the dialogue
partners. Well that will happen on this occasion and it may be that
I think Gordon Bilney will be representing Australia on this occasion.
J: Carmen Lawrence, Prime Minister, and what did you think of her
performance before the Royal Commission?
PM: Well I haven't got all the details. I have only seen a few press
clippings. But I mean as she has consistently said throughout this, the
point is you have Royal Commissions when there are complex issues,
problems of illegality, government mismanagement, waste, fraud, all 
LL: 1 . ep Pz Hi0 o . z, . Ut
3
these sorts of things. You don't have it for a political exercise, a sort of
tawdry political exercise, of the kind that Richard Court had in mind.
So It Is just, you know, a $ 5 or $ 6 million waste of Western Australian
taxpayers' money and a waste of our valuable time.
J: Do you believe the political problems are now behind her?
PMV: Well, you know, I don't know whether she had deep political problems.
I mean there was a bit of a feeding frenzy about this to begin with
owing to the sequence of the appearances before the Commission.
But I think as it has gone on the public are quite wise about these
things, they know when there is a stew on and they know there is one
on here.
inaudible) memory recall do you think Cabinet Ministers should have,
Prime Minister?
PM: Well probably better than Richard Court's and John Howard's when
they were asked about the questions about what they said to each
other about setting it up. Probably better than that, but who knows.
J: [ inaudible] this week, she has appeared before the Royal Commission
and she also did a bit of a media blitz last night. Do you think she has
won the Australian public over?
PM: Well, I think, the public again are quite wise about the things that
matter to them employment, economic prosperity, the future of the
nation, health, social security. They are the things that matter. These
sort of political sideshows go on, which are interesting to all the
players, the people in the political system, to the journalists. But
I don't think they are that engaging for the public. I think they sort of
say " oh well this is another, it'll go to the keeper and let's get on with
life".
J: Prime Minister, have you and the other leaders been surprised at the
less than happy response to the logging arrangements that were
agreed to yesterday?
PM: What do you mean?
J: Demonstrations have been planned here in New Guinea, also
demonstrations I understand have been planned in the Solomon
Islands. It doesn't seem that the public has embraced the decision
with a great deal of enthusiasm.
PMV: Well you would hardly expect them to, would you? I mean a year ago,
we proposed this idea so that Forum countries could say look, rather
than simply relying upon what we believe Is a competent logging
regime, we will have a Forum logging regime. In other words, there is
a reference point. So when governments are pressured by logging 
14 p. 95 N 0. Ci 2j P 04i/ 0 E
4
companies, or operators, they can go back to the frame of reference
that comes from the code of conduct. Now they will adopt the code of
conduct and this will, I think, provide a much better regime for
sustainability of forest management. We have invested, ourselves, a
very big effort in this over the last twelve months. And, also, into
places like Papua New Guinea where we have Australian forestry
expertise and have had over the course of the year. And, more
broadly, in those countries where forestry is an issue Vanuatu, the
Solomon Islands. I think as a result of all this we will have something
which is coherent and countries can adopt it. For instance take
Papua New Guinea, It endorsed the code and will adopt It. This Is a
large country, with large forestry areas.
J: When will they adopt it?
PM: Well I think they will adopt it over the course of the next six months.
J: Will you be pulling Australian forestry officials, that have been funded
through Australian aid, out of the Solomon Islands?
PM: No, I don't think so. No. Not unless the Solomons they feel they want
to go their own way.
J: I understand that they have made that clear to the government already
in the previous..
PM: Not that I know of. But I mean, again, we help where we can and we
don't press our bureaucratic people on governments, unless they wish
to have them.
J: Prime Minister, you are heading to Indonesia tomorrow afternoon,
there is a poll out today in the newspapers in Australia, an AGB
McNair poll, showing that most Australians would like the government
to protest more strongly over East Timor. Will you be raising human
rights?
PM: When I am asked these questions I always give the same answer, that
I don't give notice of what I will raise with President Soeharto or any
other head of government because I think it is inappropriate and
rude and I think it is counter-productive. But I have very strongly
raised in the past human rights issues and I have had never a problem
in raising them. The last time I raised them, of course, was with Mr Do
Muoi from Vietnam, where we had a discussion on the human rights
aspect for probably a couple of hours.
J: Are you concerned with reports that are coming out of East Timor of
riots this week and people are under detention?
PM: I haven't seen any reports about East Timor this week. 
TEL
J: What about the recent reports on Irian Jaya, then?
PM: Well, I mean, these are issues that I think concern all of us. But,
again, the charge of these matters is in the hands of Indonesia.
We can talk about them and we do and have and we have talked
about them very clearly. I think Indonesia is under no
misapprehensions about the difficulty these sort of instances cause its
reputation around the world. I think it feels the natural pressure there.
J: Mr Keating, how do you feel about your investiture tomorrow as the
Chief of the Kokoda people?
PM. Well I take that as a great compliment to Australia that there is such
good feeling in the new region of Kokoda to Australians and fond
memories of our associations during the war and since. And, you
might recall, I went there in 1992 and proposed to the Papua New
Guinea Prime Minister, Rabbie Namilau, at the time that we would
perhaps make it a memorial village. In some way recognise the fact
that It is a place of significance and meaning to Australians and to
Papua New Guineans. As I think you will see tomorrow, we are going
to be opening a regional hospital there and some other civic facilities
which, of course, the village itself wouldn't be likely to receive in any
other way but this. So perhaps it is just a way of saying thank you and
to preserving the memory of those young Australians, boys most of
them, who fought the strongest combat force the Japanese army could
put together. And, of course, did it with great strength and heroism.
J: How do you characterise after 20 years of independence our
relationship with our former colony, now?
PM: Pretty good I say. We are doing things with them that I am sure..
I think we are a very good neighbour for Papua New Guinea, we invest
a lot of money here every year, we take a lot of pride in the
relationship. But underpinning it is a great interest in the people of
Papua New Guinea and what I found whenever I have come to Papua
New Guinea, and this is borne out during the 1992 visit when we
went out to Ela, to the cemetery there, there were 20,000 or 30,000
people there and the warmth towards Australia is always so
profound. And it is that relationship, it Is the people to people
relationship I think that really matters. Governments come and go, you
know the bureaucracy changes, programs come and go. It is that
people to people relationship that I think is the foundation stone of the
Papua New Guinea/ Australia relationship. But I think, as well as that,
the government relationships have been good, they have been
constructive and I am sure they are going to be endearing.
inaudible] shift towards tied aid, or are you willing to slow that down a
bit? T: 14 .' Oep. 23 : 38 No . C29 P 05/ 06 
TEL: 14. Sep. 95 23: 38 No. 029 P. 06/ 06
6
PM: No, we have taken the view that Papua New Guinea's strength as an
economy, as such, so that it will be able to maintain the growth of its
budgets and carry a shift from Australian budget aid to program aid
and it means that we get, in a sense, out of their way with the budgets.
But we can go and do some of these other things which are useful to
the community.
ends 



(/ 3
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH GRAHAM WORLD, " AM PROGRAM", ABC RADIO,
SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
At the South Pacific Forum in Papua New Guinea, Mr Keating has said now
that his Health Minister has appeared at the Easton Royal Commission in
Perth, there is not much value in it continuing. He was echoing the sentiments
of Dr Lawrence, who last night resumed her media campaign, calling for the
inquiry to be closed down and adding that it is unlikely to produce a balanced
report. Mr Keating, meanwhile, says he will ignore the Commission's findings.
The Prime Minister spoke to Graham World in Madang last night.
GW: Prime Minister, today's communique will include an endorsed code of
conduct to restrict logging in the region. But it doesn't guarantee that
unsustainable logging practices can be reigned in in countries where it is
going on.
PM: Well nothing can guarantee that. The Pacific Forum is just the sort of
is basically a community advisory organisation. It has no legally binding
strength. But the communique today, was endorsed unanimously by all
the countries the code of conduct for logging and, of course, a year
ago we had a snowball's chance in hell of getting any of this endorsed.
And now it has come back, it has been endorsed by everybody.
Vanuatu is currently taking regulations before their Ministerial Council.
Papua New Guinea is in the position of, I think in the next few months,
being able to adopt the code for their own forestry operations.
GW: What about the Solomons?
PM: Well for the Solomons it has been up to them whether they adopt it, but
they have endorsed it.
GW: On French nuclear testing, would you have expected anything beyond
the extreme outrage that the Forum statement has agreed upon? 
PM: Well I don't think there is much else that the Forum can do as it has
already been party to delegations to Paris, it has already expressed
itself in the strongest way in the past. We have now seen one weapon
detonated and it's a case of continuing to keep the pressure on France.
GW: Nauru's President wanted the French Minister for Cooperation excluded
from the post-Forum dialogue to take place in Port Moresby on Monday.
Why not go down that route?
PM: Well there was no support for that because I think for some countries
here, smaller Pacific island states, their only contact with France is
actually through this dialogue point every year. For those, of course,
who have embassies and structured relations with France, it doesn't
matter. But you have got to remember there are many countries that are
very small you know, with just populations of 70,000 and less and
their only contact with France is at post-Forum dialogues. So I think
they took the view they are better to have a link than no link.
GW: Tomorrow you will be attending the 20th Anniversary celebrations for
Papua New Guinea's independence. Would you agree that the
economic difficulties in PNG, in recent years, have placed the bilateral
relationship under more strain than previously?
PM: Oh not as much strain as it would be under had there not been
independence. I mean if it was still basically a trust territory, a colony of
Australia, then we would have a lot more problems than we have ever
had in the period of independence. It was a right step for Australia and
a right step for Papua New Guinea.
GW: We are giving about $ 300 million annually in aid. It is being shifted to
program aid. Isn't one of the difficulties that Australia is dictating to PNG
really how that money should be spent?
PM: No I don't think so. It is just that Papua New Guinea has got now a
revenue base of its own, it is a country that has got a lot of resources,
mining in particular, and it doesn't need the Australian appropriation to
come as budget aid. Rather, we get a better bang for the buck coming
as program aid and the communities can see the immediate impact of
Australian spending in such areas as schools and education and roads.
Whereas, if it goes as a budget, it disappears into the accounts of the
Papua New Guinea Government. So we decided long ago, Australia
I mean, that we would make this transfer from budget aid to program aid
and we are just about half way.
GW: Just finally, while you have been overseas this week, Carmen Lawrence
has appeared before the Royal Commission. You supported her going
there in public statements. But what has she achieved? 
PM: Well she has had a chance to put her view in a structured and orderly
way after other people, who have had a counter-view, have had the
opportunity to have their view put and publicised. So I think that is what
she has achieved. What is the value of the Commission after this?
I think not much.
GW: Will her appearance influence the outcome?
PM: I don't know. But given the narrow terms of reference and the political
nature of it, I don't think it matters very much.
GW: So what you are saying, still, is wind up the Commission immediately?
PM: Exactly. I think it was an outrage at the beginning with the terms of
reference the way it was framed and no matter how conscientious the
Commissioner might try to be, one can only work within the terms of
reference a Commissioner is given.
GW: Is Dr Lawrence still a positive selling point for the Government in the
next election?
PM: Well I think she remained that right through the period and I think the
Australian community are quite smart about these things. They know
when there is a lurk on and they know there is an abuse of executive
power here. Royal Commissions are things which have been very
valuable to Australia, very valuable. What Richard Court and
John Howard have sought to do is to trash them as an institution to try
and abuse their powers, the powers of the Royal Commission, to try and
abuse it to seek out an opponent. And, of course, in Richard Court's
case, he was not simply content to defeat Carmen Lawrence at the
election, but he has now tried to destroy her personally. He is very
spiteful and very vindictive and will be, of course, ignored in this
exercise by us.
GW: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Thank you, Graham.
ends 



I D
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AGRIBUSINESS ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND,
ORANGE, 20 SEPTEMBER 1995
Let me begin with a story about a fish tuna to be more specific, Australian
Southern Bluefin Tuna. Beautiful food especially raw.
At the bottom end of the market the canned fish end tuna fetches about $ 2
a kilogram. At the top end at the sashimi end in Japan the price is around
a kilogram.
In the last three or four years the quota for Southern Bluefin Tuna available to
the Australian industry reduced by around 70 per cent. But in the same
period the value of our exports has risen dramatically.
The difference is tuna farming. In 1991-92 the industry was worth $ 1.8
million. Today it is worth around $ 50 million.
By 2000, it may be worth around $ 200 million.
Tuna farmers in South Australia have become business people. They are no
longer hunting and selling a declining resource for low value uses.
They now harvest the tuna for sale in Japanese sashimi markets 4 days later.
They have invested in a culture of scienoe and husbandry, markets and
distribution. And they are succeeding in a highly competitive market.
The lesson of South Australian tuna farming is being learnt around the
country. In Western Australia they are about to begin a trial tuna farm. In
South Australia they are investigating the possibility of applying the same
principles to rock lobsters.
I am sure the lessons will not be lost on this audience.
We don't need to restrict ourselves to fish. 
The Australian dairy industry tells a similar tale. The number of dairy cows in
Australia has declined by 10 per cent in the past decade and the number of
dairy farms by 30 per cent.
But the gross value of dairy production has doubled in money terms and the
value of exports has more than trebled. We now export over 40 per cent of
our annual milk production and over half of our manufactured products.
In both these industries the potential to grow is almost unlimited. But doing
so will require not just maintenance of their present levels of energy,
efficiency and enterprise it will need constant improvement.
And responsibility of course will not lie with the industry alone. It will require
improvements in the way we do things right across the nation.
I think this is the point that Reg C lairs; is making when he says we have to
shift the emphasis from the principle of screwing the cheapest price out of the
supplier into one of working together from the bottom up to satisfy the end
customer. I know Reg Clairs has a passionate belief in the potential of our food industry.
I know he believes that what has been done in tuna farming and dairy farming
can be done right across Australian agriculture and horticulture. And I know
he believes in it at least in part because he has pulled off something of a
revolution in food with Woolworths. He knows from personal experience that
radical change is not only necessary but possible.
I have had some experience of change making in the past decade or so.
Anyone who has experienced change has also experienced resistance. Half
the problem is fear or a lack of confidence the innate side of conservatism.
You can't change that in people and it is pointless to try.
But what we can do is make people understand. In the end what drives
change is recognition of necessity and opportunity. Necessity pushes it
along and opportunity pulls it, if you like-
And once it gets going the confidence comes. Change breeds change and
success breeds success.
This is where government and management have their principal roles. First,
to recognise what has to be done, second to create the environment in which
others will begin to recognise it. In a sense, it's our job to start the chain
reaction. I could give you two obvious examples from the past decade. 
Take the Accord. The Accord has changed the culture of work and
productivity in Australia and in turn it helped to change the culture of inflation.
It has quite dramatically changed the country.
A second example would be the Landcare movement. Landcare has
changed the farming culture as the Accord has changed the industrial
relations culture.
And with the change in the culture new horizons constantly emerge.
I have to say that I share the view of Reg Clairs.
The fact is that food should be Australia's long suit.
We have the land, the skills, the scientific base and 120,000 farmers
determined to succeed.
And we have the markets as never before we have the markets.
I was in Indonesia earlier this week talking to President Soeharto about our
relationship with that country of 180 million people, and about the next steps
to be taken in the development of APEC.
The trade prospects for both the bilateral relationship and our relationship
with the region are simply immense. And the prospects for food exports are
second to none. The total food market in the Asian region is estimated at
almost $ 900 billion, and food imports are growing at a consistent average of
12 per cent per annum.
For all that, it is not easy to get a foothold in these highly competitive
markets. It requires work, dedication, skill and adaptability. It requires the willingness
to embrace change as well as the capacity to do it. And I think we are seeing
that capacity and willingness in modem Australian farmers.
And as the dairy and seafood and man~-ther industries demonstrate, when
these markets are cracked there are huge rewards.
The Government has been working with industry to see how we can best
position ourselves. We have been looking at new products and new
production methods.
We have found, for instance, that the potential is not only in those goods we
currently produce. There are all sorts of Asian food items, such as soya
products and specialist vegetables, which we can produce and sell both into
Asian and our own domestic markets. 
Sakata Rice Snacks for example is establishing a rice cracker business
manufacturing plant in Victoria with the support of the Government's
Innovative Agricultural Marketing Program. We currently import all our rice
cracker requirements. This operation will not only play a significant import
replacement role but also see export markets developed in Asia.
At present, our imports of Asian food items are adding about $ 800 million a
year to our trade deficit.
We have also found that the companies which do best are those who
establish networks with Asian partners and maintain a strong physical
presence in their target countries.
We have found that success depends on a strategic view a long view.
And, of course, it depends on quality and reliability of supply.
It means delivering the right product to the right place at the right time.
That creates a major challenge for our freight system particularly air freight.
At present air freight is the poor cousin a very poor cousin to the
passenger trade. Ninety per cent of our air freight leaves on passenger
planes which means that flight times and capacities are designed to meet
the passenger needs, not the needs of our food customers.
Our distribution systems on the ground are also underdeveloped and will
have to be improved.
Those tuna would arrive sooner and in better condition if they could go
direct. And I'm pleased to say that the industry and the Government are
working on the problems.
As you probably know, a number of groups in the community as well as
government bodies including the Agrifood Council, have been working on
how we might improve our transport links and air freight system particularly
how we might improve our capacity to mneet our aspirations for exports of
perishable and time sensitive goods.
To build on these initiatives, I have asked my colleagues, Laurie Brereton
and Bob Collins, to look at the state of our infrastructure, and our distribution
system and the world air freight business and deliver an action plan by the
end of November.
Freight is one of many problems we have to overcome. And we will. 
To give you a non-farm example. IBM's operation at Wangaratta is getting an
increasing share of the Japanese market because it is able to supply
Japanese customers more rapidly and reliably than any of its competitors
around the world including the USA, Germany and Sweden.
The average import cycle time for all its products from Australia is just 2 1/ 2
days. The Wangaratta plant has become super efficient by improving the
coordination between each link in the chain and with no increase in freight or
handling costs.
There is surely no reason why we cannot have similarly well coordinated
systems for all our time sensitive exports.
I don't think there is much I can tell this audience about either the problems or
the possibilities for food production and export.
But I would like to repeat what I said up in Roma a month or so ago. That is,
we do need as an industry and as a nation to commit ourselves to sustainable
practices. On that same trip that ended in Indonesia, I visited Papua New Guinea and
talked to our partners in the South Pacific Forum. Some of these countries
are losing their forests to logging at a rate which is tragic and scandalous.
The Solomon Islands, for instance, will have no forests left to log by 2003.
Yet in condemning the activities of unscrupulous timber companies in other
countries, we cannot ignore what has happened and is still happening here in
Australia. On the way to Papua New Guinea we flew up the Darling River, and the
evidence of devastation through bad land management practices is
frightening. We simply have to turn this around. Whatever we do in our food industry, in
future it will have to be done in a way that is sustainable.
We need to grow a food industry which is sensitive to the environment more
than that, which restores and rebuilds it.
That is the only kind of food industry worth passing on to our children.
It is also the only one which can guarantee that the ranks of our 120,000
farming families and the communities which depend upon them are not
decimated over the next 10 or 20 years. 
Sustainable agriculture is also the best way to get maximum returns on what
we grow. It is in the end the only path to premium products and premium
prices. Let me dwell for a second on those farming families. They are a great
national resource they contribute not only to the national product but to the
national character and spirit. We have to keep them on the land and it
follows that the land they farm must be able to sustain the use they make of
it. I know that the Landcare movement has produced something like a revolution
among Australian farmers. It has tapped their passion for the land itself and
created a much more favourable environment for further necessary change.
I include in that a greater willingness to look on farming as a business and as
a science. From there it is a much shorter leap to becoming more adaptable,
more efficient and more capable of adopting a long-term strategic view.
And perhaps the lesson to learn from this is that when you start thinking
about sustainable agriculture, you start thinking more clearly about the
industry itself. In other words, when we start recognising the environmental
necessities we begin to more generally recognise the commercial
necessities.
A more scientific or sustainable approach has implications for quality and
efficiency. It therefore has implications for exports, as well as implications for
the long-term future of farming communities and families.
The point I want to make is that we have a lot more in our favour than just the
land and the markets, and we have done a lot more in recent times than
perhaps we give ourselves credit for.
I mentioned Landcare, but there is more than that. Earlier this year I set up
the Land Management Taskforce and they will be reporting to me in the next
few weeks. The taskforce recognises that sustainable agriculture dependent
on the ability of those 120,000 farmers to manage in a complex natural and
commercial environment.
I also mentioned the work I have asked Laurie Brereton and Bob Collins to do
on freight, but I could give you a very long list of things already done of
hundreds of millions of dollars spent on aviation infrastructure since One
Nation was introduced in 1992.
Equally, we could talk about the money the Government is spending on
research and development or on efforts to combat salinity, or on road and
rail, or on the environment of the Murray Darling, or in the past 12 months on
drought relief. 
For all the hardship it has dealt to farmers and all the cost to the nation, the
drought itself has constituted a considerable extension of the learning curve.
It has forced upon us with new intensity the recognition that we must do more
to drought proof our farming land.
There have been huge changes, not least among them, I think, changes in
the relationship between the Government and farmers and the industry itself.
The greatest changes of all, of course, have been the structural reforms that
have affected all areas of the economy.
Those deregulatory reforms of the 80s did more to overcome the perennial
structural problems of Australian agriculture than anything else we will ever
do. Floating the dollar delivered the biggest increase in competitiveness we have
ever achieved in Australia. Dismantling the tariff wall greatly reduced the
burden on our internationally competitive industries. The Accord meant that
the depreciation in the exchange rate did not simply translate into higher
wages but rather into a permanent increase in our competitiveness; and it
has meant greater productivity, flexibility and industrial harmony than
Australia has had since the end of World War 11.
And to these reforms must be added APEC and the GATT the benefits to
flow to Australia's agricultural industry from the Bogor Declaration and the
Uruguay Round will be beyond measure.
Reciting these initiatives is not a way of saying that all that can or should be
done has been done.
As I have said more times than I can count, the process of reform never
stops. But reminding ourselves of how far we have come does have a worthwhile
purpose. It does or at least it should give us the confidence to meet the
new challenges and embrace new aspirations.
And when I say that is precisely what I mean. Governments can always
give a lead, they can always do more to get the environment right, they can
lend a helping hand in the market places of the world or on the farms
themselves when disaster like the recent drought strikes.
Governments can joint venture in reality and metaphorically at all sorts of
levels. But I think what we have to do from now on in the food industry is
recognise that the chain which ends on the dining tables of Taipei and Tokyo
begins with the land itself. It begins with Australian soil and water. And
everyone engaged in our agricultural industry needs to understand that. 
We need to recognise that everyone engaged in the industry from the
farmers to the distribution networks, the packagers, the transport companies,
the banks, the funds, the trade officials, the manufacturing companies, the
regional authorities, the CSIRO, all tiers of government and all tiers of the
industry needs to work in accord with each other and with a sense of
common purpose.
That means a shared ethic of efficiency and excellence, a shared
commitment to sustainability and though I am sometimes suspicious of
people who habitually use the word a shared " vision".
Earlier this week we all read about the World Bank's calculation that
Australians were the richest people in the world. I happen to think that in
many ways we are but of course there are more important things to be read
into their calculation than that assessment.
The ratio of resources to population in Australia has always made us
relatively rich and quite properly encouraged us to believe that our potential
for development is virtually unlimited.
But there have been, as they say, certain downsides. We could start with the
current account deficit.
Our resource richness was bound to make us a large importer of capital.
It was also inclined to make us at times complacent. Remember the
" resources boom" that was going to carry us on a wave into eternal prosperity
-without an efficient manufacturing industry, without downstream processing,
without working as hard as we have in recent years to get into new markets
and shape the world trading environment.
And the same resource richness made us wasteful and destructive with the
environment. We all know that this cannot go on any more. And not only the agricultural
industry knows it.
A fortnight ago I opened the McArthur River zinc and lead mine in the
Northern Territory. It is a model of a new age of mining in Australia. It takes
considerate and intelligent account of Aboriginal interests and Aboriginal
rights under the new Native Title regime.
It also takes account of the fragile and precious environment. Mount Isa
Mines has gone to great lengths to protect this environment.
And the McArthur River mine will earn in the region of $ 300 million a year for
the next 20 to 30 years. 
What is happening in mining, we can do in our forestry and fibre industries.
We must do it. In these industries and in agriculture necessity is now driving
us.
This is a conference of experts and interested parties. It is a conference of
the players in the agribusiness game. And I don't want to tell any of you
things you already know.
But I do want to reaffirm that as a government we are very conscious of our
role and responsibilities in this industry particularly our responsibilities
towards the natural environment of this continent and the prosperity and well
being of future generations who will inherit it from us.
For that reason, as we see it, there is no more important business in Australia
than agribusiness.
And we also take the view that there is no business with more potential
potential for doing good for Australia and good for the environment. For that
matter good for the world.
Let me conclude by reiterating that we should be proud of what we are doing
with tuna or dairy or, in fact, parts of most agricultural industries. But the
changes as a whole are coming too slowly. We must find a faster path to
sustainable agriculture, and become a global supplier of food.
In the very near future I will be inviting some key players to a meeting to
discuss how we can best set the ball rolling.
The essential thing is that the private sector the farmers, the processors, the
retailers, the distributors, the banks and funds drives this process.
And it must be driven with a long-term view, with an environmental as well as
a commercial strategy and with a determination that the industry delivers
benefits right across the Australian community.
I have absolutely no doubt that it can be done.
The trouble with visions is that they are readily translated into mirages the
horizon keeps receding and the exploring party develops the habit of
stopping too often for a drink.
So let's make it perhaps earlier than 2020, and get started on it straight away.
Thank you for inviting me to speak at this conference. 
It has been a very important meeting. If in 10 or 15 years' time we are
applying to all the things we grow in Australia the same principles as they are
applying to tuna in South Australia the principles of conservation and
sustainability, premium product and rapid and reliable delivery it may yet
prove to be an historic one.
I sincerely hope so. 



PRIME MINISTER 104/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
DEBT TRICK
Mr Howard's launch today of his so called Debt Truck makes it clear that
there will be no room for truth in the Coalition's election strategy.
It is outright dishonesty for Mr Howard to praise the Australian investment
environment in the morning and then undermine it in the afternoon with a
cheap and misleading stunt.
This morning Mr Howard said that " any potential overseas investor couldn't
do other than look upon Australia as a place where continuing long-term
foreign investment remains extremely attractive."
To then continue with his cynical Chicken Little scare campaign shows that
Mr Howard stands for nothing and will try any trick to slip into office.
Today's stunt is part of Mr Howard's broader scheme to deceive the
Australian people into believing that foreign debt is owed personally by them.
Mr Howard may deny this, but his endorsement of Senator Winston Crane's
campaign of lies in sending fake foreign debt invoices to his constituents is
proof of his complicity.
Despite knowing full well that the bulk of foreign debt is owed by private
companies he is prepared to back Senator Crane's deceit.
Mr Howard last month made a distinction between " telling the truth" and
" campaign hyperbole" today's dishonesty from the Opposition Leader
illustrates his point.
CANBERRA September 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DOORSTOP, ORANGE CIVIC THEATRE, ORANGE, 20 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, there was some expectation that there may be an
announcement pending or today on the freight terminal proposal..
freight terminal in Parkes. You alluded that sort of need, is it likely it
would be there?
PM: What I did say today is that I have now asked my two colleagues
Laurie Brereton and Bob Collins, that is the Minister for Transport and
the Minister for Primary Industries to come back to me with a report
about the needs of air freight capacity and specialised air freight
facilities for this country. I think it is true that much of the air freight
has been prioritised around the passenger needs and obviously the
big terminals at Sydney and Melbourne are in the main, configured as
passenger facilities. We need to do better with freight. Whether it is
done in Sydney or Melbourne or Parkes or wherever, at least we will
get an idea, I should hope, of what we need and then think about what
sort of strategies we need to employ to bring them..
J: It seems that there is very strong support for an airport here in this
region, something they wouldn't enjoy in western Sydney..
PM: No, but by the same token, I think, these things can't be sub economic,
they have to be economic. So, we need to see by some analysis
whether such an investment would actually be a productive thing for
the country. If the country spends its scarce capital into sub economic
resources then we move backwards. We have always got to keep
moving forward, so we can only do that with investments which are, of
their essence, productive and that requires us to do at least the
feasibilities and look at the requirements of the air freight industry as a
whole. I think we can do that. 
J: Mr Keating, you spoke very strongly about environment issues today,
the relationship with the land, what is your response to the green
movement threats to withdraw..
PM: I thought you would notice that the Conservation Foundation came out
contradicting that story in the Sydney Morning Herald on Monday, by a
part of the NSW conservation movement. We are going to do, I think,
as good a job as can be done on putting into place a sustainable basis
of forestry in this country. It is a difficult thing in a federation like this
to sign the States up and to get them all committed at once to a
strategy which defines adequate reserve systems, looks at sustainable
practices et cetera. But, we are now in that process and I have got
now doubt while we are in the process we will get a bit of jockeying
along by various interest groups and prodding along, but we will be
doing our very best for the environment and for having a decent forest
products industry.
J: Which States take the most persuading ( inaudible)..
PM: That is a question for other than a news conference. I'd need to go
back and look and see where we think people are, but again, I am
hopeful that we can conclude some good thing nationally.
J: Mr Keating, the polls today show the environment is one out of 8 out of
13 policy areas people think that the Opposition could do a better job
in and they don't have policies. How hard is that going to make it for
you to as you told your backbench to get out there and sell yourself?
PM: I think the Opposition are into basically environment chainsaw policies
by and large. I think, they are the chainsaw specialists in the
Australian environmental debate and I don't really think that most
people that have the environment at heart think the Coalition would
serve their interests. If you look at the things we have done in
Australia, they have been over a decade quite profound for the
environment, under this Labor Government and we are still doing it in
all those areas which are most difficult to do, like forestry, very difficult.
Landcare, the thing I have just-been speaking about, salinity, soil
degradation. No government but this Labor Government has tackled
those things the Murray-Darling, in a serious way, water these are
the big environmental issues and we are the only ones, I think, either
competently taking them on or successfully taking them on.
J: What does it say to you though that a lot of people obviously believe
the Opposition will do a better job?
PM: The public are quite smart about needling governments along, they are
always making you sit you know, putting the burr under your saddle. A. 
J: But how can you do that the polls such as that would rate the
Opposition ahead on virtually all of the major issues?
PM: These are the sorts of questions I used to get asked in 1992. I used to
give the same sorts of answers.
J: Is Carmen Lawrence a factor ( inaudible)..
PM: I'm not here to play press gallery games.
J: Mr Keating, I've got a few staff and I've got to organise Christmas
holidays, can I do it safely knowing the election will be after
Christmas?
PM: I've always said the public expect us to squeeze as much value out of
these parliaments as we can and I'm certainly lining my holiday up.
So, why should I muck yours about.
J: 94 per cent of our food companies are off shore, are you concerned
about that, should we be concerned about that and what can we do?
PM: Well I don't know whether it is as high as that figure. But there is a
substantial number that are owned offshore. But the main thing is that
they develop in a way which works for Australia. That is, that their
product and the growth of their product works in our domestic economy
and in our external accounts and to our greater wealth. I think they
are. But that is not to say that we shouldn't have a good sustainable
agri-business in this country which is Austral ian-owned. Some
substantial chunks of it are Australian-owned and I would like to see
those grow.
J: Where?
PM: Where are they going to come from? I think they are going to come
from the sort of businesses which we have seen in this region,
Manildra, the Dubbo Abattoir these sorts of businesses. I mean
entrepreneurship always proves, I think, where you see good
entrepreneurs that they can grow a sensible business. But also having
those linkages into the multi-national corporations is a good thing for
Australia. It does give us market access around the region that we
mightn't otherwise have.
J: Mr Keating, the Opposition Leader is unveiling a foreign debt billboard
at the front entrance of Parliament House this afternoon. He obviously
believes that is a big vote winner, yet you are playing that down..
PM: He is also telling the MTIA what the Coalition will do for business and
I can tell the business community what the Coalition will do for
business. The first thing they will do is scrap the Accord. The next 
thing that will happen is you will get sporadic wage breakouts, any
central bank will then stick up interest rates to try and hold inflation,
growth will then dip, the profit share will get knocked about and the
whole cooperation at the workplace will go and, of course, the thing
that will go with it is job growth. So I mean that is what the Coalition is
going to do for business and that is the other thing they are doing
today.
J: Prime Minister, you have spoken in your speech about the current
account deficit. How more confident are you about reducing that
deficit, given ABARE's forecast yesterday...
PM: Well they were both good numbers as you intimate. ABARE's export
projections were encouraging and I think that 8 per cent drop in
imports yesterday tends to confirm the view that the Statistician put at
the last balance of payments release. That is, that it has peaked and it
is probably on the way down. If that is the case, of course, we get
back to some more sustainable rates on the current account deficit.
But it is a point I was making earlier to the conference. In a continent
this large, we are always going to need capital requirements greater
than our savings railways, ports, wharves, mines, farms, factories.
We will never in a country this big, ever, afford them just from our
domestic savings and that is no bad thing. It is like a person buying
their home. They can't afford it from their own domestic savings. They
use someone else's, but they grow an asset. We are using someone
else's and we are growing an asset too.
J: Mr Keating, you were speaking in regard to the drought and what the
Government has done for it still worried about anomalies for
exceptional circumstances. Is there going to be a review?
PM: Well I don't know that there are anomalies with it. There are, maybe,
Ferceived or argued anomalies. We have this body called RASAC,
which advises us on which particular districts ought to be appropriately
declared as exceptional circumstance areas. And where we think
there have been, let's say, difficult circumstances but not exceptional
under the criteria we have sough~ t to do some special things for those
districts. Some of them, of course, in New South Wales. But we are
about to receive a RASAC report and you know if the tom-toms mean
anything, some of the shires around this district may qualify.
J: Mr Keating, this district covers a broad cross section of the society I
believe you have polling showing that if the Government stops
hereafter is that a reflection on your
PM: I don't know. I mean David Simmons has kept on coming back and
Rob's going to take his place, we think. So I think we are confident
about it. But, again, competence is one thing, work and effort is
another and I think care, commitment, work effort, diligence to a locaL 
community is what makes the result in the end and we have been
doing that.
J: Mr Keating, as a folliclely-challenged member of the Press Gallery, is
there any truth to the claim that you are banning photographs from
behind?
PM: Well I saw that story in the Sydney Morning Herald today and let me
assure you the story is completely inaccurate and completely wrong.
I have had no conversation with the Speaker about this, none
whatsoever, nor has a member of my staff. The Speaker did this on
his own initiative with the Sergeant-At-Arms. Mr Seccombe from the
Herald was told that. But Mr Seccombe has no respect for accuracy or
truth and he gets that, of course, from the leadership of the Sydney
Morning Herald, which has a very low premium on accuracy or truth in
reporting.
ends 


22 September&nbsp;1995
E&amp;OE.....
&nbsp;PM: This chap beside me is Tony Robinson he is the Labor candidate in&nbsp;Chisholm. This is one of the seats we will win at the next election. Mr&nbsp;Wooldridge is, of course, the Member, is basically a sort of private&nbsp;person who happened to find himself in the Federal Parliament, but&nbsp;someone who basically, doesn't like the public business the business&nbsp;of serving the public and the nation, and wants to do it from his office&nbsp;desk with a press release. Well, our candidate here is out here&nbsp;hotfooting it around the community and we think this is a seat which is&nbsp;likely to fall our way when the election is held. And one of the reasons&nbsp;it is going to is industrial relations. What we saw today in The&nbsp;Australian is " Court's IR Bill Threat to Howard", and the reason it is a&nbsp;threat to Howard is because it has all of the ugly features of the Liberal&nbsp;Party's unrestrained industrial relations policies and attitudes. In here&nbsp;it says they were actually threatening unions with de-registration if they&nbsp;try and opt out of the State industrial system by transferring to a&nbsp;Federal award. So, all those employees who are protected in Victoria&nbsp;against Jeff Kennett's legislation by moving to Federal awards, and&nbsp;those who in Western Australia will try and do the same, the Liberals&nbsp;will try and be up on them in their own state, but were John Howard to&nbsp;become Prime Minister, of course, he would catch'the lIdt of them under&nbsp;the Federal legislation, and they would all end up losing the things the&nbsp;award protections now give. Such as penalty rates, holiday leave&nbsp;loading, the overtime options and the rest. As I indicated in the&nbsp;Parliament yesterday, this could mean somewhere between $ 4000-$ 5000 to an average working person, and there I quoted truck-drivers,-nurses and labourers.
So, it is a very real issue John Howard has, for all of his political life,&nbsp;wanted to hop into working people and cut the incomes of the bottom&nbsp;half of the community. And what you are seeing here is Court * r &nbsp;essentially blowing his game, just as Jeff Kennett did in 1992 ahead of&nbsp;the 1993 Federal Election with Fightback and Jobsback. So, industrial&nbsp;relations is going to be a real issue because the Liberals say they won't&nbsp;keep Labor's no disadvantage test we say sure, lets have enterprise&nbsp;bargaining which we have introduced lets have flexibility, but not&nbsp;flexibility down. Not cuts overall. So, we have a thing called the nodisadvantage&nbsp;test they won't have it. And as a consequence, what&nbsp;the Liberals want, and what they have always wanted, is not just&nbsp;flexibility which they call IR reform but flexibility down, which is really&nbsp;pay cuts. So, today, you are seeing it again. I mean, I don't think the&nbsp;people need the tom-toms beating any louder than this to know that&nbsp;Howard and Reith have in store a draconian industrial relations policy&nbsp;which will cut the wages of working Australians to pieces.
J: But they haven't finalised their policy yet how can you be so sure that&nbsp;that's what they plan?
PM: They have been at it for years. I mean, they have been saying even&nbsp;this year John Howard has been saying that Jobsback was basically&nbsp;the right framework. Reith is saying that he would take great pride in&nbsp;being able to put such a policy into place this is in the last couple of&nbsp;weeks. And if they don't, what is their objection to Labor's policy? We&nbsp;have got enterprise bargaining far more in the Federal sphere than in&nbsp;any state. We have had high productivity growth somewhere between&nbsp;2 we have got low inflation, we have got a high profit share in&nbsp;the economy. What is wrong with it? What is wrong with it, of course,&nbsp;is they want to cut the wages of working Australians, that's what is&nbsp;wrong with it.
J: You're saying that you want to look after blue-collar workers which are&nbsp;traditional Labor voters, but one of your former Labor Ministers, Mick&nbsp;Young has said that, basically, his research has shown that it will be a&nbsp;struggle for Labor to retain those traditional blue-collar loyalists.
PM: That was a view he has taken off his work in Queensland he was&nbsp;given the job of looking at the Queensland outcome. Well, I don't&nbsp;doubt that the Queensland Labor Government lost blue-collar working&nbsp;people, but I don't think that's true of Federal Labor. Because we have&nbsp;put into place 600,000 jobs not 60,000, but 600,000 3 safety net&nbsp;adjustments, plus a strong real increase in real wages with low inflation&nbsp;these are all the ingredients of support. And, of course, all these&nbsp;other things like the home childcare allowance, the generalised&nbsp;childcare rebate all done since the last election, are all completely&nbsp;faithful to what one may call the blue collar constituency.&nbsp;
J: Mr Beazley has conceded that there is some softness in the level of&nbsp;support amongst the blue-collar workers for the ALP?
PM: Well, there is softness in all categories of support for all Governments&nbsp;in any Parliament. It's a matter of making sure they are solid when you&nbsp;need them.
J: Kim Beazley has also said that there are disadvantages in strong&nbsp;leadership mainly in your strong leadership .( inaudible).. what sort&nbsp;of response do you make to that?
PM: Who said this?
J: Kim Beazley.
PM: You must have mis-interpreted him there is no substitute for&nbsp;leadership anywhere. Anywhere, and in any environment. And the&nbsp;problem that they have with John Howard is that he is weak and&nbsp;sneaky. He is weak he doesn't stand for things, you can see it with&nbsp;his Party, you can see it in the Parliament, you can see it with his&nbsp;policies. And he is sneaky because he is trying to pretend all the time&nbsp;that he has policies for people. When he says " I don't want to showthat Paul Keating my policies", what he is really saying is that " I don't&nbsp;want to show the public my policies". It's not me he is hiding his&nbsp;policies from it's the public. And there can be no honesty and&nbsp;integrity in public life without policies. So if you want to be sneaky, the &nbsp;sneakiest thing to do in public life is to keep your policies in the bottom&nbsp;drawer to let the public find out about them after the election.
J: Vince Fitzgerald says that it's not even controversial that foreign debt is&nbsp;keeping the whole interest rate structure higher isn't that true?
PM: No. Australia's current account imbalance always puts some question&nbsp;into the exchange markets, and into the longer rates the ten year&nbsp;bond rate etc. But all the short-term interest rates as Ralph Willis was&nbsp;making the point yesterday are set off the inflation rate. They set off&nbsp;demand for money, they set off the growth. We have got an economy&nbsp;growing at 4% a year. The Japanese have an economy growing at half&nbsp;a percent a year, the Europeans have an economy growing at around&nbsp;1 a year. So, when you have got a stronger growth economy,&nbsp;providing more jobs and more prosperity, the price of money rises&nbsp;because more people are bidding for it.
J: But Mr Keating, it was you who drew the connection between highlevels&nbsp;foreign debt and Australia being in an economic difficulty?
PM: I have just given you the answer to that you have got to understand&nbsp;the nuances.
J: What about Dr Vince Fitzgerald's comments this morning?
PM: Well, Vince is a sour ex-bureaucrat. I mean, Vince gets the old lemon&nbsp;in the mouth every morning and gives a good hard suck on it. I mean,&nbsp;you will never get any cheerful comments out of Vince about the&nbsp;economy, because Vince thought he should have been Secretary of the&nbsp;Treasury and a few other things, and never made it. I mean, look, the&nbsp;fact of the matter is Australia, and I think Australians should&nbsp;understand this thing about the debt. We have got $ 180 billion of debt,&nbsp;but juxtaposed against that, we have got $ 135 billion of assets offshore.&nbsp;The Government debt is only 4% of the debt. And the debt is&nbsp;borrowed by the BHPs and the CRAs and companies like that, who can&nbsp;service the debt. It's very much akin to a domestic household you&nbsp;don't have enough savings yourself to buy your first house, so you&nbsp;borrow from the community to build yourself an asset. Australia doesn't&nbsp;have enough savings to keep funding this massive nvestment, so we&nbsp;borrow from the rest of the world to build a stronger Australian&nbsp;economy. That's why it's there. But to run around trying to beat up a&nbsp;scare about it is crazy. I mean, what does Mr Howard say about the&nbsp;employment growth? About the 600,000 jobs? The 2-3% inflation?&nbsp;The strong investment growth? These are conditions I have not seen&nbsp;in 26 years of political life.
J: But Dr Fitzgerald is your principal savings advisor?
PM: He is not our principal savings advisor at all.
J: Mr Keating, should the ABC continue with pay TV?
PM: Oh, the ABC we would need a seer to decipher what goes on in the&nbsp;dark recesses of the ABC.
J: How do you feel about the...
PM: . we pay them more than we pay the state of Tasmania do we get&nbsp;value for it? It's a moot point.
J: How do you feel about the Packer-Murdoch arrangements?
PM: That's up to them. They're a couple of big, burly characters who can&nbsp;look after themselves.
J: Richard Alston says that there should be an inquiry into it, that&nbsp;basically Mr Lee has been caught asleep at the wheel
PM: The last time I saw Richard Alston, I was doing a campaign launch in&nbsp;Western Sydney to a news conference, which was arranged by me. He&nbsp;wanted to get into it, and while he was waiting for me, he was hiding in&nbsp;a bush. When I finished, he crawled out of the bush I had not walked&nbsp;three yards and he appeared like some sort of apparition. You know,&nbsp;he was down there with the mulch and the bugs and the bush. Which&nbsp;is, by the way, where he belongs.
J: Mr Keating, are you concerned about relations between France and&nbsp;Australia after the French Ambassador said that your attacks on France&nbsp;as a colonial power have taken their toll?
PM: Well, I think that I am pleased that the French have noticed this Labor&nbsp;Government's protests about their mindless policy of exploding nuclear&nbsp;devices in the Pacific, when the premium has to be on non-nuclear&nbsp;proliferation. I mean, even in France's own best interests, they should&nbsp;be always putting a premium under the non-proliferation regime,&nbsp;because if you are a country with nuclear weapons, the thing not to do&nbsp;is let the country next door get them, to keep you hegemony. They&nbsp;don't even seem to understand that self-interest point. So, at a time&nbsp;when other nations are experimenting with nuclear programs, the&nbsp;problem about a democracy like France exploding a weapon such as&nbsp;this, is to say the proliferation is okay. So, if the Australian protest is&nbsp;being registered strongly in the Elysee Palace, if it is being registered&nbsp;strongly in Paris and the French nation, then that's exactly what we&nbsp;hope it will be.
J: Does it concern you that relations may be under threat?
PM: Well, as I have said before we are not here having a dispute with the&nbsp;French people we are having a dispute with the French Government&nbsp;about a bad decision that it has taken.
ends.


The announcement yesterday by the Marks Royal Commission of a widening&nbsp;of the range of issues on which it may make adverse findings against the&nbsp;Minister for Human Services and Health, and the Western Australian Labor&nbsp;MP, John Halden, has put an end to any credibility which this flawed and&nbsp;unjust political inquisition might have had.
If the Commission wanted to widen its scope into fruitful areas, it might, for&nbsp;example, have given itself the task of examining the inconsistencies in&nbsp;Premier Courts account of how he obtained the Goldrock documents, which&nbsp;he handed to Penny Easton.
Was Richard Court not telling the truth when, according to the police&nbsp;transcript presented to the Royal Commission, he told the West Australian&nbsp;police in early 1990, far as the minutes go, the minutes didn't come&nbsp;from Withers. To my knowledge they just arrived and basically what did&nbsp;with Withers is I just wanted to confirm whether this was correct.'?
Or was he not telling the truth on Tuesday when he told the Royal&nbsp;Commission itself, ' Mr Withers quite openly provided me with all of the&nbsp;minutes of Goidrock's operations.'?
There are many other issues concerning the behaviour of Premier Court&nbsp;which, on the basis of Tuesday's evidence, the Royal Commission could have&nbsp;chosen to investigate.
That it has not done so, but rather has preferred to continue to operate within&nbsp;narrow terms of reference while widening the net of political allegation&nbsp;against Carmen Lawrence, has ensured that any findings the Commission &nbsp;makes will be ignored by fair-minded people.
CANBERRA22 September&nbsp;1995



PRIME MINISTER 106/ 95
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
MP, THE MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, SPORT AND TERRITORIES,
SENATOR JOHN FAULKNER, AND THE MINISTER FOR RESOURCES,
DAVID BEDDALL MP
DRAFT DEFERRED FOREST AREAS
The Government agreed this evening to-release detailed draft proposals from
officials setting out Deferred Forest Areas in New South Wales, Victoria,
Western Australia and Tasmania. The draft proposals for each State will be
made available to stakeholders later this week. There will be a three week
period for public consultation.
The draft reports identify Deferred Forest Areas through which it is proposed
to protect values needed to meet the Commonwealth's criteria for
comprehensive, adequate and representative reserves pending the
negotiation of Regional Forest Agreements with relevant States. The
documents represent the positions which have been reached by
Commonwealth officials in negotiations with their State counterparts.
Following the public consultation period, the Government will then decide on
the areas to be set aside as Deferred Forest Areas.
This is a vital step in the development of Regional Forest Agreements with
State Governments. It shows the progress that has been made in identifying
forest areas to be deferred for further study to determine those forests which
will be required for inclusion in a National Forest Reserve System. In
contrast with previous decisions on forest use, assessments of possible
Deferred Forest Areas have been conducted on a regional level.
The Commonwealth's proposed criteria for a comprehensive, adequate and
representative forest reserve system were announced in July 1995 and
formed the basis of the identification of draft Deferred Forest Areas.
The scheduled consultations will allow public scrutiny of the Government's
process on this important issue. Any significant issues that arise during the
consultation process will be referred to the Government's independent
scientific panel to ensure the objectivity of the process.
CANBERRA SEPTEMBER 1995 



-N
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED: 7.3OPM
*** PLASE CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
CEDA CONFERENCE APEC AND AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS,
APEC THE OUTLOOK FOR OSAKA
SYDNEY, TUESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 1995
I am grateful to CEDA, to the Macquarie Bank and to the other sponsors of
this conference for the effort that has been put into arranging it and for this
invitation to speak to you.
It is proof of APEC's progress that four or five years ago conferences on the
subject were held at universities and attracted largely an audience of
academics and officials.
Now APEC requires practical attention from business people the sort of
attention you have been giving today.
I can't stress too strongly my conviction that a fundamental measure of
APEC's success from Australia's viewpoint will be whether it serves the
needs of Australian business.
Whether it helps you to export your products or services more quickly and
efficiently into currently restricted markets around us.
Whether it maximizes your opportunities to develop cooperative
arrangements with your counterparts in other APEC countries.
Whether it helps create new Australian jobs and develop Australian skills.
I am sometimes accused of being preoccupied with APEC. I am happy to.
wear the charge. But it is not, in fact, true.
I have certainly put a great deal of effort into APEC. And I am convinced it
offers Australia enormous opportunities. 
But I am concerned and I think we should all be concerned with something
broader than APEC: by our need to establish in the Asia Pacific structures for
the long term which will cement our integration into the region.
It is no good expecting that our geography alone will deliver the economic
benefits of being part of the fastest growing region in the world.
And it is no good just declaring that Australia's future lies in Asia and
expecting that to be the end of the matter.
It is not the end of the matter for governments and it is not the end of the
matter for business.
Beyond recognition of the fact of our proximity and the fact of the opportunity,
there is a great deal of thinking and a great deal of work that needs to be
done. That is what the act of our engagement demands.
We need sustaining ideas about how to support our involvement and how to
secure the future.
And, above all, we have to be comfortable with Australia's place in Asia.
As I have said before, Australia's engagement with Asia is not a take -it-orleave-
it-affair. Asia is not a target of convenience for us us. It is not a
fashion, or a flavour-of-the-month or a political gimmick.
The structures this Government has been helping to put in place go beyond
APEC. They include the ASEAN Regional Forum, which deals with security
issues, and the new linkages we are establishing between the ASEAN Free
Trade Area and the Australia/ New Zealand CER arrangement.
We have just held the first, successful, AFTA-CER Trade Ministers meeting.
The structures also include the range of bilateral arrangements we have
made with our regional neighbours, such as the Austral ia-Indonesia
Ministerial Forum, which help to open up new areas of cooperation quite
outside traditional diplomatic contacts.
We have been helped greatly in our efforts to build these structures by a
little-remarked but quite historic shift which has taken place in the past year
or so in regional attitudes towards Australia.
I am convinced that, in a way which has never been true in the past, our
friends and neighbours; have recognised that Australia the continent and its
resources, the people and their skills and knowledge, the securedd emocracy
and the strong diverse society represents a substantial asset for the region
as a whole. A substantial asset and a valuable partner. 
Evidence of this change was seen, in the unprecedented joint statement
about the Australia-Japan relationship which Prime Minister Murayama and I
issued in May. In that document the government of Japan said it " Welcomes
Australia's decision to create its future in the region and reaffirms that
Australia is an indispensable partner in regional affairs".
It was seen in the comment by President Ramos of the Philippines during his
visit last month that " For clear and practical reasons, the countries of our
region see Australia as an integral and vigorous part of the region"
It was seen the comments of the Indonesian Minister for Research and
Technology, Dr Habibie, when during his visit in May, he described Australia
as an asset in the region.
It was seen in Singapore's decision to establish its airforce flying school in
Western Australia, and in the original proposal by the former deputy Prime
Minister of Thailand, Dr Supachai, for the establishment of links between
AFTA and CER.
One of the reasons behind this change is, I am sure, the conviction in the
region that this Government has committed itself to the cause of engagement
with Asia in a way which Australian Governments have never done before.
This has not always been easy.
To succeed, you cannot regard this country's international relations as
peripheral to our main interests or as a remote sub-branch of domestic
politics.
You can't, for example, refuse, as the opposition did, to meet the Vietnamese
Communist Party leader, Mr Do Muci, in the very week Vietnam became a
member of ASEAN, because you think there might be a handful of votes to be
picked up in western Sydney, and expect that there will be no consequences.
Our effort has to be consistent and unrelenting.
In my three years as Prime Minister, for example, I have visited Indonesia five
times and Japan three times, with a further visit planned for November.
Important national Australian interests are engaged here.
One of those important interests is APEC, and that is what has brought all of
us here.
There is no doubt that APEC offers Australia enormous opportunities. Its 18
members represent the world's fastest growing economies and account for
half the world's output, and nearly half its exports. 
In area after area the opportunities are vast. For example, expenditure in
regional markets on telecommunications services and equipment has been
estimated at nearly $ 300 billion by 2010. And the World Bank predicts
investment in energy systems of around $ 500 billion before 2000.
I was in Orange last week talking about the opportunities for Australia to
develop a vastly expanded food industry, capable of becoming a pre-eminent
supplier of fresh and processed food to Asia. Conservative estimates put the
Asian food market at nearly $ 1000 billion by 2000.
Already nearly three quarters of all Australia exports goes to other APEC
members.
And by as soon as next year when our exports to Indonesia and Malaysia
will each exceed our exports to the United Kingdom all our top 10 export
markets will be APEC members.
So it is no wonder that getting APEC right lowering the barriers and keeping
the trade and investment flowing is one of the Government's highest
priorities. Just on a year ago all APEC leaders met at Bogor under President
Soeharto's chairmanship and agreed to the audacious goal of free and open
trade in the region by 2010 for developed countries and 2020 for developing
countries. It is important to remember just how ambitious the Bogor Declaration was.
APEC, after all, covers more trade than either the European Union or the
North American Free Trade Area.
And the Bogor commitment to eliminate allI barriers to free trade and
investment was never attempted in the 40-odd year history of the GATT.
But what brought about the agreement to the Bogor declaration was the
recognition by all the APEC leaders that if we are to maintain the great,
transforming, growth in the Asia Pacific which history will judge to be one of
the defining developments of the late twentieth century it is essential to
maintain the dynamism of regional trade and keep dismantling the barriers.
We estimate that APEC-wide free trade will bring gains to Asia-Pacific
economies of around three times the benefits of the Uruguay Round outcome
alone an amount of more than $ 300 billion a year.
But a view of APEC which only pays attention to its economic dimension is
incomplete. Because although it is an economic and trade body and in my
view should remain one it also has very significant political and strategic
consequences for Australia and our region. 
It encourages a continued constructive American engagement in Asia by
keeping open the links across the Pacific. This is important to all of us
because in the absence of a United States balancing security role in the
region, strategic uncertainties would multiply, especially in North Asia, and
the result could be a very dangerous arms race with quite unforeseeable
consequences.
APEC also provides a multilateral framework for regional engagement with
China, whose 1.2 billion people and rapidly growing economy guarantee that
it will be a central factor in regional, indeed in world, affairs into the next
century.
A regional organisation like APEC which engages the three Chinese
economies of China, Chinese Taipei and Hong Kong could probably not be
replicated again. It is certain to be a valuable asset for the region in the
years ahead.
APEC also gives Japan the opportunity to assume some of the higher
international and regional profile to which Australia believes its economic
weight entitles it.
Every step we have taken with APEC has been a step into unmarked territory.
The sort of thing we are trying to do has never been done before.
Quite simply, in APEC we are creating a new style of trade negotiation, but
one which fits the features of our region.
APEC's approach to trade and investment liberalisation will not follow the
model of traditional GATT rounds of trade bargaining. APEC is not about
creating an old fashioned trade arrangement confined to eliminating barriers
to trade at borders. Nor is it about establishing a Europe-style highly
institutionalised political and monetary union.
APEC's approach has already been unique in several ways.
Firstly, APEC has already set the end goal it wishes to reach free trade and
investment in the region by 2010 for developed economies and 2020 for
developing economies.
Secondly, in APEC, developing countries are for the first time, not just
participating in but leading a major trade liberalisation process.
Without President Soeharto's strong leadership, for example, the Bogor
declaration would never have been agreed.
In my discussions with him in Bali a week ago, I was again reassured by the
strength of President Soeharto's commitment to the decisions made at Bogor.
He remains firmly convinced of the benefits which APEC can offer to the
developing country members of APEC. 
Thirdly, APEC has had Asian countries at the helm during its critical early
stages. Indonesia was in the chair last year, Japan is now and the
Philippines will be in 1996.
Asian countries have not yet taken a place in international affairs
commensurate with their economic power. In APEC, for the first time, we
have an international forum and an international agenda that is very much
shaped by Asia.
Fourthly, because APEC will build closely on the liberalisation programs on
which most countries in the region are already well embarked, it will be more
comfortable and familiar and more easily accepted as a ' win-win' outcome
than the traditional adversarial approach of the GATT.
Next, progress in APEC is being driven very much by leaders.
The establishment of informal leaders meetings, which I first suggested in
1992, has been critical in setting the agenda and keeping it moving. It was
national leaders who outlined the vision for APEC at Seattle, who set clear
goals at Bogor and who at Osaka in November will set out the blueprint for
getting us there.
There is nothing like an imminent summit of political leaders to galvanise
officials into action, and no-one other than leaders has the authority to take
the hard decisions when these are needed.
The Eminent Persons Group, and the way in which it has reported directly to
leaders on long term directions for APEC, has been important in preserving
the breadth of the APEC vision. Neville Wran has been Australia's
representative on the EPG for the past three years. I can see a continuing
role for an advisory body for leaders of this sort outside the official APEC
structure to keep us focussed on APEC's goals.
Finally, APEC has taken a new approach in the way it has actively and
directly involved business. Business views are sought, taken into account
and affect the outcome of policy decisions in APEC.
The Pacific Business Forum ( PBF), of course, has been advising leaders
directly. At my request, Imelda Roche and Philip Brass have ably and
effectively represented Australia on the Business Forum. Its most recent
report, released last week, will be considered by leaders at Osaka.
Business symposiums are now also regular events around APEC ministerial
meetings. The APEC meeting on small and medium enterprises in Adelaide this month
had an associated business forum attended by around 800 APEC business
people and business exhibitions drawn from all 18 APEC economies. 
7
The feedback we have received from Australian business participants has
been overwhelmingly favourable. One of them wrote to the Secretary of our
Department of Industry, Science and Technology that we covered more
ground in two pleasant days in Adelaide than we would probably have
covered in a month had we simply gone directly [ to the region]".
Similar experiences were reported from APEC telecommunications and
transport ministers' meetings earlier this year.
And Indonesia also hosted last week a major APEC government-business
dialogue on regional infrastructure issues.
But whatever APEC's potential, and however interesting and unusual it may
be as a model, what really matters is whether it can continue to deliver the
goods.
We are now just two months away from the Osaka leaders' meeting, which
will be another critical moment in APEC's development.
APEC seems to be full of critical moments. But the reality is that unless it
demonstrates continual progress it runs the risk of marking time while the
march of history leaves it behind.
That would diminish an opportunity of unprecedented dimensions to the 21st
century.
While the task of leaders at Bogor last year was to identify the final
destination for APEC trade cooperation, our job at Osaka will be to agree on
a road map to reach it.
Australia will be looking for commitments from members to table before the
next leaders' meeting at Subic Bay individual country plans showing how and
when they will meet the Bogor free trade commitments, and to a parallel
program of collective liberalisation in those areas ( like mutual recognition of
standards and the harmonisation of regulations) where APEC-wide
agreement is the best way forward.
These action plans will be developed individually, but they will have to meet
agreed guidelines.
And the guiding principles must be sound:
liberalisation must be comprehensive, with sensitive
sectors being handled by phasing in over a longer
period not by excluding them altogether
all countries must begin liberalising at the same time,
even if some move more slowly ( as will happen with 
the different end dates for developed and developing
countries) and plans must balance members' interests to ensure
that they all benefit from the liberalisation program.
Plans do not need to be the same for each member. They only need to have
each member proceeding at an adequate and balanced pace down the road
to 2010 or 2020.
The plans will be evolving documents over the 15-25 year period provided for
in Bogor and will be subject to a regular process of peer review. For this
reason, we will probably see in Subic Bay more detailed plans for
liberalisation in the early years, with greater definition of the later years as
plans evolve. What will not change, however, is the end goal already set by
leaders. For trade facilitation issues, where the most sensible way to make progress is
through collective action, I hope at Osaka we will set some clear targets and
dates. For example, adoption by 1996 of a common basis for tariff
classification, agreement to common APEC-wide standards for electronic
import clearance by 2000, or simplification and streamlining of business visas
by 1996.
Final agreement to a full program of collective action may not be possible at
Osaka and further work may be needed. But Osaka should make a good
start. The benefits of collective action in these areas should not be underestimated.
The regional coordination of electricity generating equipment specifications
alone could achieve savings in excess of $ 10 billion.
As agreed at Bogor, leaders at Osaka should also announce a package of
measures to accelerate our Uruguay Round commitments. This
' downpayment' on APEC liberalisation will demonstrate our commitment to
APEC and also represent tangible support for the multilateral trading system.
So by this mixture of individual action plans, collective action and concrete
downpayments we want Osaka to chart APEC's progress over coming years.
In this process Australia will need to be able to check that others are
matching our liberalisation and that there is balance across the board.
The Government will have to work out precisely what progress is required by
our key trading partners before we can determine how and when we will open
our market further.
We also need to know what a commercially relevant program of collective
action might look like. 
The survey work CEDA has done for this conference, identifying and
prioritising business views on impediments to trade and investment in the
region, provides essential information for this.
That work is also a powerful reminder of why APEC is important to Australian
business. We have already opened up our economy, and we have reaped the economic
benefits. This is a much more competitive and world-oriented economy than
it was a decade ago.
But, as your survey has shown, we still face serious barriers to some of the
markets around us.
We don't have the size and clout to force those barriers down unilaterally.
And there are few signs that the international community is ready for another
global round of negotiations through the WTO.
So APEC is the best means we have of addressing the problems of access
which Australian businesses face.
It is vital that as APEC develops, and as our national contribution to APEC
evolves, the voice of Australian business is heard clearly. For this reason the
SGovernment needs to establish a clear consultative channel of
communication with business.
The latest Pacific Business Forum report proposes the establishment of a
permanent APEC Business Council, comprising representatives from each
APEC economy, to directly advise leaders and deal with APEC working
groups on business issues. I strongly support this.
But I also think we need to establish a national mechanism to coordinate
Australian business views on APEC and provide input to me and the
Government on the business community's interests in APEC.
I have asked Imelda Roche and Philip Brass, as my PBF representatives, to
liaise with business people and business groups over the next few weeks and
to advise me before Osaka how such a representative national APEC
business body can be best set up.
You will no doubt be reading a good deal about APEC in the weeks ahead,
much of it confusing and some of it contradictory.
I am now very familiar with the pattern of public commentary on APEC. It
goes this way. 
First, we are told that our goals are too ambitious and that we are overreaching
ourselves. That was said about the original proposal for APEC,
about the likelihood of getting the ' three Chinas' in, about the prospects for
ever getting all the APEC leaders to meet, and about our chance of having
the Bogor declaration agreed.
The next stage goes " Well, of course you have done that, but the process
has obviously failed because all barriers to trade have not yet been
removed." In fact, of course, none of what we are doing is easy. And the closer we
come to implementing our action plans, the more energetically special
interests will fight. I said we will need to do a lot of thinking and a lot of work
we will also need a lot of determination and a lot of patience.
But bear in mind that APEC has come a long way in six years from a
tentative first meeting of ministers in Canberra in 1989 to the agreement by
the leaders of half the globe at Bogor last year to adopt the goal of regional
free trade and investment.
To put APEC's progress in context, although talk of a common European
market started soon after World War 11t, h e Treaty of Rome was not signed
until the mid fifties and it took until the single market exercise of the eighties
before European countries started addressing fully all the trade impediments
among them.
And more recently, with the Uruguay Round, the total period from the first
negotiations to the final implementation of all agreements will be about 23
years. Will we succeed at Osaka in sustaining APEC's forward momentum?
It is always hard to say, because leaders meet without officials present and
the dynamics are fluid and unpredictable.
The main outstanding issue at the moment looks like being the matter of
" comprehensiveness" that is whether APEC liberalisation will cover all
sectors of our economies and all trade barriers or not.
As you will have seen from newspaper reports, we are encountering
nervousness on the part of a few of the APEC economies surprisingly few I
might say about the coverage of agriculture.
Australia's position is clear. The Bogor declaration is unambiguous on the
question of comprehensive coverage. It refers to the goal of " free and open
trade and investment"; to promoting the " free movement of goods services
and capital"; and to ministers and officials addressing " all impediments to
achieving our goal". 
It does not say " free trade except for agriculture".
We all have sensitive sectors for Australia, these might include automobiles
and TCF. The effect of any APEC member excluding one sector from
coverage of the free trade commitment would be that others would also look
for exceptions. This would paralyse APEC.
And agriculture is a vital issue for Australia. We worked for forty three years
to have it addressed in any serious way in the GATT and some of the
language now being used to justify " differential treatment" is all too familiar to
us. The fact of the matter is that the 15 25 year time period leaders set in Bogor
for the achievement of the free and open trade and investment goal provides
ample scope for member economies to undertake any necessary
adjustments. I think, in the end, we will resolve this question successfully because the
overwhelming majority of APEC members strongly support Bogor's
unequivocal intentions on this point.
In this regard, the Osaka meeting in November will be a real test of Japan's
capacity to look beyond sectoral preoccupations and to give a lead to the
countries of this region.
* It has never had a better opportunity than it will have in Osaka, in this
year since the end of the Second World War, to show that it has the capacity
to provide genuine leadership and to help shape the region's future in ways
which will benefit its own people as well as the other economies of the region.
I am sure it will take the right decisions, and I have told Prime Minister
Murayama, MITI Minister Hashimoto and Foreign Minister Kono recently that
Australia is willing to help Japan work for a successful outcome.
A long road lies ahead of us with APEC.
But the benefits for the Australian economy, for Australian businesses and for
Australians now and in the future make it a road we must travel. 



7
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE ACTU CONGRESS, MELBOURNE,
27 SEPTEMBER 1995
AS DELIVERED
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, Martin, Jennie, Bill, Members of the Executive, friends one and all it
is great to be back and I mean that. I always look forward to coming to the
ACTU Congress.
One of the happiest memories I have of the 1993 election was the meeting
I had with the ACTU Executive a week or so later. That wilt always sit in my
-mind as a manifestation of what it was all about coming home to our real
friends. Now I have always stuck with the unions. I believe in union people because
I believe in the things that most of you people do. You spend your working
days and your working week looking after the interests of ordinary
Australians. And it is hard going and it has always been hard going, but we
have done many things together and the model we have put together is so
sophisticated, in certainly western world terms, but what pleases me greatly is
not only has it worked but you all know how it works and why it works and
why the consensus and the cooperation that we have had between us does
really mean something and that the trust that we have built up between us
does really matter.
And I couldn't think of a healthier thing than the trust between the
Government of the nation and the workforce of the nation, or the leadership of
that workforce. And if you are about building trust, about a cooperative
partnership, is there any greater basis than this? Well I wouldn't think so and
that is why I am here, pleased again, to be able to talk about it.
The other thing I am pleased about is Jennie George gave me a kiss when
I arrived. But she won't be giving John Howard one. 
And I have got to tell you how much pride it does fill me to find people like
Martin Ferguson, who has just given me a kind introduction, to know that after
having led the industrial movement, he will be going to the national
Parliament to carry on his life's work and to see that torch passed to another
great person in the labour movement Jennie George.
I congratulate Jennie on what is not simply a wonderful endorsement to be
the President-elect of the ACTU, a wonderful endorsement of a Labor person,
but a wonderful endorsement of a Labor woman. And I mean she has been
so good at it and I watched her in a few interviews recently. She has got
them coming and going, she knows all the angles and she is only limbering
up. When she really gets going and all the lines really start rolling through
her mind and, of course, I always find this in the election campaign for the
first week you are stumbling around, pulling the lines together, then you start
really refining them down and by the third week they're deadly. A punch in
every sentence and I am sure that is the way it will go here too.
But it does fill me full of pride to think that the trade unions in this country
have been able to elect a leadership group in this last decade that has meant
so much to Australia and so much to the labour movement. We will never
see it better than this. It doesn't matter how long we live, I don't think it has
ever been any better than this. There is no time when the Labor Party and
the industrial labour movement have had such shared objectives and have
done so much together and, again, in that relationship of trust. I
We have completely remodelled a middle-sized OECD economy from the
ground up its economy and its society and we have done it in the image of
labour, of industrial and political labour and we sit here today with 4 per cent
economic growth, 4 per cent employment growth, 2 1/ 2 per cent inflation and
one of the most fairest and decent wage and social policy systems in the
world and that is a tremendous achievement a great achievement.
And they are the things, I think, the values we have to inculcate in the
Australian community. That by cooperation you can do good things. If you
have, as I think we all have, faith in ourselves to do something good and
belief in our fellow Australians that with them something great can be
achieved, there are no boundaries to what can be done in this country.
I mean I wasn't surprised the other day when the World Bank came out and
said that on an asset basis we were the richest country per capita in the
world. And I said on an asset basis because that is not so on an income
basis. But you don't have to be an economist to know that the great wealth of
this continent, as large as it is spread over just 18 million people would
have to turn up a result something like that.
But this is the great opportunity we have been given just in four times our
lifetime there were no Europeans here and that the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders of this country had held this great continent in trust for us and
we have a remarkable opportunity to do something with it. 
You know from the history of the labour movement in the 19th and early
century of people going off looking for nirvana in South America to make the
sort of social paradise, to build the model they didn't think they could build
here with the forces of reaction. Well I am glad some of them stayed at home
because we are able to build now a model that very few countries can
emulate. And when we are looking at ourselves you look at Japan, it is growing at
1/ 2 per cent a year at the moment. Western Europe is growing at around
1 1/ 2 per cent to 2 per cent. The United States is growing at around
2 1/ 2 per cent. We are averaging around 4 per cent. We have been growing
as high as 6 per cent. That means we are creating twice as much wealth and
twice as much opportunity as we would otherwise were we in some
straight-jacketed model, some model which says " let's not cooperate
together', but rather " let's let the people take the best and the devil take the
hindmost, the strong take the best and the devil take the hindmost, and we
will see what happens after that."
Rather than that, we have gone a long a path which says that employment
matters and I think the thing that is lost on many people, it is certainly lost on
our friends in the Coalition, that the Accord has always been a very clear
trade-off of wage restraint for growth. And the growth is the thing that
delivers the employment and the employment goes to the people who are
either at the bottom end of the queue or starting in the workforce. So it has
always been, in a sense, an internal trade-off for the trade unions of this
country. In a sense, restraining the top-end power of the ACTU constituency
to deliver equity and fairness in the bottom and the middle ranges of the
income scales and to guarantee to those people employment, so that we can
run a quite fast, high growth, economy and we can run it with low inflation.
Now, of course, under the changes we have introduced, we have now come
to a productivity model. We have come away from the strictures of a
centralised system which wasn't able, while we could get aggregate wage
adjustments from it, national wage aggregate adjustments, we weren't able to
get the within sector flexibility we have always known we have needed. So
we needed the award restructuring to proceed that. We put that into place.
Amalgamation of unions. That has got into place and we are now into an
enterprise bargaining system, which gives us the capacity to lift the earnings
and productivity of businesses and share it between profits and wages.
As well as that, for those not able to access the system, we have got a safety
net. We probably have the nearest thing to a permanent wages system, we
have had certainly in the twelve years of the Accord because we had so many
various wage models to take us through those difficult years of transition from
the uncompetitive economy, industrial archaeology of the early 1980s,
through the big collapse in our terms of trade in 1985-86, to the big
deprecation of the exchange rate, at the same time then trying to pick it up, 
restrain the growth of the late 80s, to hold inflation down so that we knew we
wouldn't be back where we started in 1982-83.
Now we have come through all those wage systems. We have now got low
inflation and we all know it is much easier to run a wages system on low
inflation and, I think, we know that the system we now have together is a very
fair one. If you don't have enough bargaining power to get yourself an
enterprise bargain that increases your income, or at least where you would
get protection, real wage protection, you can fall back to the safety nets.
So it is, I think, a model, perhaps, in transition, but one getting very near to
the one that we are going to finish up with and that is one where enterprise
bargaining will be the order of the day. And, of course, one of the things
I said to you in 1993 and since and that is were we still hostage to the
centralised wage fixing system, how much easier it would be for a Coalition
Government to hop into Australian working people, to tear the hell out of it.
Whereas now we have developed a model that lives by itself and breaths by
itself, out there, in the industrial landscape in the workplaces of this country.
Because we can what the Liberals are about. They are always about the
same thing. It doesn't matter whether it is Stanley Melbourne Bruce in the
1920s, or the Earl Page's of this world, or any of the Labor renegades like
Joe Lyons, or Menzies, or Fraser, or any of them they are always about the
same thing: basically, cutting peoples' wages. And I don't quite know why
because the profit share is almost at an historic high. And you have got to
say well what do you want. Do you want the profit share beyond any historic
precedence and what is the point in that? Aren't the executives already
getting enough out of it? Are they milking the system as much as they can?
What do you want to cut the wages of working people for, other than spite
spitefulness, a sort of an ideological envy? But you see it with Jeff Kennett in
Victoria. You see it now in Western Australia. We have seen John Howard
endorse the Western Australian model.
Fortunately, with Labor in office, with the Federal legislation so many people
came back under the Federal award umbrellas. But, of course, with a
Coalition Government that option would still be there. But, in a sense, the
option would be to fall into their schemes so that they took a lot of these
protections away.
So, I think, that we have been able, through all of the vicissitudes and
difficulties of a re-modelled economy, to put an essentially fair wage system
into place. And, I think, that is the message that we have got to get to
Australians. That we have given Australians huge employment growth
2 million jobs since 1983. That our wage that we have adjusted the country
economically to low inflation, but we have done it fairly and decently. That we
have tried to protect the weak and the disadvantaged and, as a consequence
of all of this, we have a much more cohesive and united country and a much
more efficient economy. 
This is an -extremely great achievement and I am quite sure, -rot even in the
halcyon days of the labour movement in the earlier part of this century and
last, such cooperation never really existed to this level and so precise have
been our objectives to go and do it together. And we have kicked other
milestones that, I think, we mightn't have even have thought were possible
back there in 1983 and a couple of obvious ones come to mind
superannuation is perhaps the most obvious. Because for those of us who
have got a lot of our working lives behind us, it won't mean as much as for
those with their working lives ahead of them.
But, even today, with a couple in their mid-30s in the workforce there is going
to be a substantial increase in retirement incomes for those people above the
age pension. And for those, of course, starting work now, it will mean
essentially someone on average weekly earnings will, at the end of their
working life, retire on a retirement income of about the same around
average weekly earnings in today's dollars. And that is real progress
because it is not very many times that any Government, or a trade union
movement, get the opportunity to put such a thing into place. And to do it in
the way in which we have, adjusting the wage systems over the years, now
putting some tax cuts aside to go into superannuation accounts, a relatively
modest contribution on the part of employees, will get us to 15 per cent by the
year 2002. We will see a huge pool of savings built and a set of protections,
for Australian working men and women in retirement, we would never have
got by simply the public budgets, by legislation and, certainly, not from a
conservative Government.
We have been able to do things like that and maternity leave is the thing we
have just done most recently. There are others that spring to mind,
child care, support for women in the workplace, the changed status of women
both in the country at large and in the workplace. All of these things have
come from the Accord and come from the relationship of trust that we have
developed together.
Now the Liberals, they don't understand any of this because, basically, they
don't have any faith in people, they don't see you as fellow Australians, but
rather some sort of class enemy, some sort of political enemy. But their story
is starting to fall on deaf ears because the business community know that
industrial disputation now is at the lowest it has ever been since they have
been keeping the records. They know it is 1/ 6 of what it was when
John Howard was last Treasurer. They know that the profit share is up and
the stock market is running at about 2,150. The day I was sworn in as
Treasurer, the All Ordinaries Index was 451, from memory. There has been a
five-fold increase, a four to five-fold increase, in wealth in the stock market.
They know these things.
They know that there is flexibility in the workplace. They know that they are
able to drag productivity out of businesses and sensibly share it between
profits and wages. And you have got to wonder now, how many of them want
to turn it up because I am finding, as I go about, that the endorsements that 
one would formerly expect to see for the Liberal Party are just not there
anymore. That it has been on for too long now and it has worked and that
people have faith in it not just us, but the employers as well.
Now, Howard is out there doing what he normally does and, today, he is in a
difficult spot because he made a great mistake yesterday in saying that he
will open the cross runway at Sydney Airport, so as not to concentrate the
traffic on the two parallel runways. And you might say " well what has that got
to do with industrial relations". Well I will tell you it has got this to do with it.
This is a fellow who has been telling us for years that we are slack about the
micro-economy. He is going to be guy that cleans up the ports and wharves
and the rail system and all of the other things that we, he says, haven't been
able to do. You can say to them the turn-around time in the ports is the same
as European ports. You can tell them now that there are 18 people per ship
on the Austfalian coast when there used to be around 28. You can say these
things it cuts no ice with them because they say they are going to do the
tough things.
But the one major micro-economic reform to the airline system in the last
years, has been the opening of the third runway at Mascot. It is the
gateway to Australia. It is the key to Australian tourism. It is the linkages to
Melbourne and Brisbane and the other major ports in Australia. It is the
change which John Howard was out there arguing for, pressing us for, for
years and years and years, on the record.
Yesterday he said he now opposes it now that it is built, he wants to put a
cross wind runway across it which will mean that the safety margin falls to
pieces, that we would actually halve the traffic of the airport, and so the one
micro economic test, not even a test for him because we built it not him, for a
few votes in the seat of Bennelong, in his own seat, he is prepared to tip on
its head the one major micro economic change in civil aviation, yet have the
rest of Australia believe that he is going to be the guy that does it to wages,
the labour market, the waterfront, to shipping, to transport, to all the other key
areas of the micro economy in this country.
Not only has he said that, he has gone and said that he will down the asset
sales task force budget measure of selling the airports off by withdrawing
support for the sale of Kingsford-Smith airport while ever the government
doesn't exceed to his demand to have cross wind traffic. Now you know that
if you put a plane across two parallel lanes of traffic what you have got is a
recipe for disaster.
So, here he is telling the employers at the business lunches in Melbourne and
Sydney that he is the one to do the tough things. He is the one to make the
fundamental changes, but on a change where they are needling him in
Hunters Hill, where in that important headland for him between Lane Cove
and Woolwich in Sydney he thinks the pressure is getting too hot, what does
he say, he will tip the major civil aviation micro change on its head, he'll got 
back to an unsafe airport, he'll actually punch a $ 2 billion hole in the surplus
by vandalising the government's asset sales program.
I can tell you this, there is blood in the water, and in politics you have got to
have a nose for it. I watched him in the Parliament today, it came in, we had
the vote on it, but normally sitting opposite me in the chair all cocky with
inane little comments, but where was he? He was down in the back end of
the triangle of the Parliament, back into the back of the horseshoe talking to a
couple of backbench MPs while the votes were taking on. The psychology
was all wrong, all wrong. I said to them ' where's you little mate? He's down
the back here.' And, of course, they were on the back foot on the wages front
because they knew I was coming here today and I know you have seen some
of our advertisements this morning and so have they, which underlines the
fact, of course, that the award protections which are there now in overtime,
penalty rates, holiday leave loadings et cetera, would go without
compensation under their model and it would mean that for people in certain
circumstances, in certain occupations, I gave the figures during the week
transport workers losing nearly $ 5000 a year, nurses losing more than $ 5000
a year by losing penalty rates and these things, or losing overtime payments,
that this would be a material disadvantage, a large disadvantage for a very
large section of the work force. To which they say ' we'll be keeping the award
protections', but only for people who don't change jobs. But 1.7 million
Australians change jobs every year. In the last three years 43 per cent of the
work force have changed jobs. That is 43 per cent of people that don't have
the option of award protection. Like for instance, all the higher education
people. Students, who leave and graduate, who come into jobs and there are
600,000 of those a year, no award protection. For half the year 11 and 12
leavers, about 200,000, no award protection. For the women joining the work
force, no award protection.
We are gradually getting these points out and they don't like it because,
essentially, it is the same miserable policy they have always had. It is
Jobsback, just dressed up in another way and it is about those things
tearing down wages for ordinary men and women through the loss of such
conditions without compensation.
We say we have a no disadvantage test. That enterprise bargains have got
to be run past the test and that you can vary some of these conditions, but
there has to be no disadvantage overall. No remunerative disadvantage
overall. They would never agree to such a test. We are also saying some
community standards just shouldn't change, like sick leave for instance. You
just shouldn't trade it away even though there are many things that can be
traded away providing there is a remunerative benefit in return.
So, this is there difference and we are starting to get them out. They were
feeling the pinch today on industrial relations and they are feeling the pinch
on this very important, I think, icon issue. That is whether Howard has the
bottle, or, put in the vernacular, the guts, to do the big changes in this
country. Whether he can take on the big issues and do them co-operatively 
as we have done in places like the waterfront or in shipping and in transport
or in telecommunications or in civil aviation or in any of these areas.
Because when the first test has come, he has caved in for a few votes in
Bennelong because he has only got a three and a half per cent margin in
Bennelong. So, instead of walking along with confidence believing he might
win a national election, he is really worrying about whether he can hold the
seat of Bennelong and whether he can please the Gurghers of Hunters Hill.
He has not had a good day and, I think, this is a turning point in the dream
ride he has had to date. Many people have said well, the government has
been in office a long time, we want an alternative to be able to vote for and
the moment that Downer resigned Howard jumped straight in the polls, but of
course, with time the journalists have been saying to us ' is there an early
election on?' I've been saying no, no early election. I want plenty of time to
have a look at Howard. It is the same old Howard that we saw in the 1 980s
and the 1970s. He might be trying to airbrush himself and Andrew Robb
might be trying to airbrush him and wash away a few of his problems, but in
the end, when you peel it all off he is the same person. He wants to hop into
working people and when it comes to the big changes we called him in the
Parliament today " gunna Howard" he was gunna to float the dollar, but he
didn't. He was gunna deregulate the financial markets, but he didn't. He was
gunna knock over the tariff wall, but he didn't. He was gunna change the
micro economy, but he didn't. He was always gunna do these things and yet,
here he is, naked now coming up to a poll saying, for the shabbiest ot
reasons, let's cut back the capacity of our largest airport and let me vandalise
the budget surplus. All for a few votes in Bennelong.
I hope the public understand this, while at the same time he is saying he
endorses the Western Australian industrial legislation and he wants to see
these changes of the Western Australian variety in the Federal jurisdiction.
So, it is very clear what we are going to fight. It is very clear, I think, that we
can beat him because we'll beat him not just on these issues, but on the basic
issue that he has no faith in Australians and no real belief in Australia.
Howard is a person from that part of Australian history that has always seen
Australia as a derivative society. He doesn't even understand the
opportunities we now have. He doesn't see the imperative of our integration
in Asia. Four weeks ago he refused to see the General Secretary of the
Vietnamese Communist Party Mr Do Muoi, who the previous week had joined
ASEAN the Association of South East Asian Nations as a full member.
Who, two days after leaving Australia sat down in a meeting with the United
States Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but he wasn't good enough to
meet John Howard. And, all around the region now, we have got people
saying, ' What about the Federal Opposition in Australia if they are not
prepared to talk to the Vietnamese, will they talk to us?" I mean, what sort of
a relationship would the rest of ASEAN have with them? These are the sort
of obscurantist views, he is still fighting the Vietnam war or here he thinks
there may be a few votes in the Vietnamese community in western Sydney or
in Melbourne, just the same way as he thinks there might be a few votes over
at Bennelong with the airport. In just the same way at St Joseph's College in 
Hunters-Hill, eight weeks ago he told a group of high school students, yes, he
thought he should put a ban on uranium sales to France when he knew his
policy was the very opposite.
You see, there is no strength there and there is no purpose and there is no
understanding. To think that now here we are with a growth economy, a
productive economy, a stripped down one, one that can now engage itself in
Asia in the fastest growing part of the world, where we are making bilateral
relationships the likes of which we have never had with these old societies
like Indonesia and Vietnam and China and, of course, the great relationships
we have built up over the years with our biggest trading partners Japan and
Korea it is lost on him.
So, these are the reasons why I think the Australian community are not going
to take him. He is out of his age and he is out of his depth. Worst of all he is
weak and sneaky and they don't like sneaks.
I know you see most of these things in him that I see, but what I see in you is
the good things about Australia-the things that we have done together and
the things we do believe in together. The building blocks we have put into
place, where we have taken this country from an industrial backwater with old
derivative technology to a modem industrial country, which is still changing,
still evolving, where we have set up partnerships not simply between the
government and the industrial wing of the Labor movement, but also with the
farm organisations, also with industry, where product innovation is the order
of the day, where the education system is the thing that pumps our product
innovation along, that great liberator of education. These are the things that
have remade Australia and they are things we have done together and they
are not academic things, they are not esoteric things, they are real things that
have been put together because of trust between us and the faith we have in
our fellow Australians to make adjustments and to see a better way.
We in the Labor movement always think we do represent the best instincts of
Australians out there because the Labor Party is a collection of little branches
spread across the country, joined by people who have no other reason for
joining it, no ulterior motive but the advancement of the nation. You people
represent working Australians in trade unions, you do so simply for their
advancement. They are very decent and pure motives and it is why, I think,
at our grass roots we have been able to always produce good policies. And
you have had the leadership. You have had great leaders in these years and
leadership is everything in an organisation and in the ACTU you have had a
great clutch of leaders who have seen the opportunity and steered the boat
the right way, in their own right and in partnership with the government.
That is why I am pleased to be back today to say to you that you did keep the
faith for us last time. You did fight the unwinnable election. We did win it and
we have kicked into place since the industrial legislation, we have seen home
enterprise bargaining, we have stitched up superannuation now to 15 per
cent, we have put in the maternity allowance, the home child care allowance, 
the generalised child care rebate and we have seen since the election,
680,000 jobs created and fulfilment of the most solemn commitment we made
at the poll and we have seen the target we set in Accord Mark VII exceeded
in two and a quarter years. So, it was worth it. It was worth it to win that last
election just as it will be worth it to win the next one. Because the thing we
must remember, people talk about the golden age of Australia in the 1950s
and the 1960s and when you looked around it was a fairly ordinary world. It
was a bit golden for us because we were selling food to countries that
couldn't feed themselves. We were selling wool to people who couldn't clothe
themselves and we had a ray of sunshine shining on us, but there was a lot of
darkness around. This is not the world today. The world today, there is sun
all over the place east Asia is growing as never before, the Indian sub
continent is growing as never before, South America is growing as never
before there is a real light shining out there and Australia is now part of that
broader sunshine and we are not just sitting there with some sort of natural
endowment or benefit that gave us a 10 or 15 year benefit which then washed
away as these other great countries caught up and passed us like Japan and
Germany in the post war period or the United States or some of the countries
of east Asia. Now we are out there in our own terms in the broad sunlight of
world growth, of broadly spread world growth and opportunity and we are
earning our freight amongst the community of nations in the area in which we
live, not as some sort of European enclave, but as a part of the Asia-Pacific
region ourselves.
It has never been a better scenario for us and that is why it would be a
tragedy to see this scenario darkened by an obscurantist reactionary
government that doesn't understand where we are at all and has no capacity
to keep the co-operation of the kind we have going.
So, I ask you to keep the faith in the Labor Party. Keep the faith in this Labor
Government and know that the things we promised you, we have done, but
also know we have done it together and we can keep on doing it.
Thank you 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
HANDOVER OF THE EVALUATION OF THE NATIONAL HIV/ AIDS
STRATEGY, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
CANBERRA, 27 SEPTEMBER 1995
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
On your behalf, and on behalf of the Commonwealth, I would like to thank
Professor Feachem for the outstanding work he has done in preparing this
Evaluation of the National HIV/ AIDS Strategy.
Professor Feachem has been assisted in his work by dedicated officers of the
Commonwealth Department of Human Services and Health, who also
deserve our thanks.
After more than a decade of intensive policy-making, and the completion of
two national HIV/ AIDS strategies, it is very useful to have an expert and
knowledgeable outsider critically assess our achievements and our
shortcomings. An independent evaluation is vital if public confidence is to be maintained in
the essential principles of the national HIV/ AIDS policy. And as Chief Health
Adviser to the World Bank, Professor Feachem is well qualified to provide an
assessment. In preparing his Evaluation, Professor Feachem has travelled extensively and
consulted widely.
Many of the groups and organisations with whom Professor Feachem has
reviewed Australia's HIV/ AIDS policies are represented here today.
There are representatives of the State and Federal political parties, senior
State and Federal bureaucrats, health professionals, academics, indigenous
Australians, the State and Territory AIDS Councils and the Commonwealth's
formal HIV/ AIDS advisory bodies. 
Professor Feachem's report brings to the Government all your views. It
brings the views of the Haemophilia Foundation Australia, and the bodies
grouped around the Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations the
National Association of People Living With HIV/ AIDS, the Scarlet Alliance,
the Australian IV League.
The views of Australians living with HIV/ AIDS are perhaps the most important
of all because they are, in all senses, closest to the daily challenges of the
epidemic. Since 1982, their strong and distinctive voices of people have helped shape
our national HIV/ AIDS policies.
People living with HIV/ AIDS could be excused for concentrating solely on
personal and family concerns.
But they haven't. Over the past decade, people with HIV/ AIDS have
transcended their circumstances, and the daily burden of coping with the
virus, to make often outstanding contributions to our HIV/ AIDS policies not
to mention the general life of the nation.
We can learn something from their bravery. And even as we show our
support for them, we can derive strength from them.
As Professor Feachem has outlined this morning, Australia's response to
HIV/ AIDS is recognised as being amongst the best in the world.
A decade of hard and unremitting effort in this country has resulted in a
welcome reduction in the rates of incidence of both HIV and AIDS.
In per capita terms, we are in a much better position regarding HIV infection
than, for example, Canada, France, the United States, Spain and Switzerland.
And as we look to the future Australia also seems to have passed the peak
incidence of AIDS infection, while the United Kingdom and the United States
appear to be experiencing continuing increases.
So we can be quietly pleased to have done relatively well in the fight against
HIV/ AIDS.
However, while ever the virus is amongst us, there can be no room for selfsatisfaction
or complacency.
There are presently some 14,700 people living with HIV/ AIDS. And a much
larger number know people and love people afflicted with the virus.
People living with HIV/ AIDS are members of the Australian family. 
They are workers in factories and players in orchestras. They are teachers in
schools and students in universities; they are clerks and journalists and
artists and labourers and lawyers. They are fathers and sons and brothers.
We enjoy and profit from the things they create.
HIV/ AIDS affects us all in our families, our workplaces and our communities.
In a sense, we are all living with the virus.
HIV infection has cost Australia dearly and not only in human terms.
In one year alone, 1992-93, the cost of providing treatment and care was
$ 130 million.
In the same year, the total indirect cost from earnings lost because of
HIV/ AIDS illness and death was estimated at $ 313 million.
I am convinced the human and financial cost would have been even greater if
not for the partnership which has been forged between governments, the
medical, scientific and caring professions, and the affected communities.
Community involvement and consultation in decision-making has ensured
that our actions have generally been well-founded, well-directed and wellexecuted.
Where delicate balances have had to be struck, we have always engaged the
public in dialogue.
Some who were opposed to the shape of our policies claimed that, if the
treatment of HIV/ AIDS was to be met effectively, we had to choose to protect
either general, or individual, rights. They believed that the protection of the
community could only be ensured by imposing sanctions, controls and
ultimately isolation upon those most at risk of HIV infection.
Our experience so far has demonstrated the opposite the greater the
protection we afford to individual rights and responsibilities, the greater the
benefit to the entire Australian community.
At all times, the Commonwealth Government has acted in the firm belief that
our paramount consideration must be the health and well being of the
Australian people.
No sectional or political consideration has ever, or will ever, stand in the way
of the Government taking whatever steps are necessary to contain the spread
of H IV/ AIDS. 
However, our achievements to date as recorded in the Evaluation Report
demonstrate that the best results are achieved by consultation, not coercion.
Within the Federal Parliament, the spirit of bipartisanship will, I trust, continue
to guide the deliberations of the Parliamentary Liaison Group on AIDS.
This Group provides the best forum in which to resolve the differences that
inevitably arise during the preparation of public education campaigns which
involve the frank discussion of human behaviour.
Nevertheless, this Government will never shrink from the need to work with
and through the communities most affected by this virus.
We owe this duty of care to our fellow citizens, and to our children.
As we look ahead, there is little prospect of the early development and
distribution of effective vaccines or cures for HIV/ AIDS, despite the welcome
developments in combination treatments of HIV infection.
And there are some disturbing signs, including some in the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities.
And, of course, every year sees the emergence of a new group of young
Australians who may be exposed to risk of infection.
So we cannot lose our resolve, or drop our pace. It is clear to the
Government that there remains an overwhelming need for a national
HIV/ AIDS strategy.
I am pleased to announce that, as recommended by Professor Feachem, the
Commonwealth Government will support the establishment of a Third
National HIV/ AIDS Strategy, with dedicated, secure and adequate funding for
five years.
As Professor Feachem has reported, the four key elements of the Strategy
are: education and prevention;
treatment and care;
research; and
international assistance and cooperation. 
The detailed components of the Third National Strategy will be decided upon
after consideration of the recommendations contained within the Evaluation,
discussions between all governments, and consultation with non-government
organisations and the general public.
These processes must be conducted responsibly but also quickly.
The over-riding objectives of the Third National Strategy must be:
to care for those affected by HIV/ AIDS;
to conduct further research into the nature of the virus and its
transmission; to redouble efforts to prevent new infections within the national territory
of Australia; and
to assist in the international effort to contain the spread of the virus,
particularly within the Asia-Pacific region.
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is tragic to think of the people Australia has lost to HIV/ AIDS and with
those people, all of their energy and creativity and strength.
It is important to remember the lives we have lost.
But it is also important to remember the lives we have saved through
intelligent government policies and generous community cooperation.
I think Australians can derive some measure of pride from the way we have
fought this virus. In the best Australian tradition, we have shown our belief in
practical, constructive measures.
We have stuck together as Australians.
And in that spirit we should go forward.
Thank you. 



17
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 27 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, we have seen Mr Howard, the old Mr Howard. It took a while for
us to take the layers of new political clothes from him, but there he is
just as he always was: without ideas and without principle. He is now
going to strike down, if he can, the largest change to the micro
economy in the State of NSW and, for tourism and air transport, the
largest change in Australia in the last 20 years, the third runway in
Sydney. This is the runway that he enjoined this Government to build
for years and for years. This is the runway he said was not being built
because of political cynicism on the part of members of the Labor
Party in seats around Sydney airport. It has now been built, he now
wants to cut its capacity dramatically by again opening the cross wind
east-west runway which would mean a dramatic increase in the risk
factor of aircraft intersecting a downwind runway and at the same time
dramatically cutting the capacity of the airport. This would have flow
on effects to Melbourne and Brisbane and the whole east coast grid of
airline connections.
It means that all of his rhetoric about micro economic reform which we
have had ad nauseam, how he will be the tough guy, that will hop into
the waterfront, he is the tough guy that is going to hop into the unions,
he is the tough guy that is going to hop into the seafarers. When it
comes to one micro economic change, and a big one, he starts to
backslide on years of statements by himself for a handful of votes in
his own seat of Bennelong. We hear these headland speeches, as the
Minister for Transport said in the House this morning, the only.
headland he is interested in is the one between Lane Cove and
Woolwich the one that worries him about his three per cent margin in
the seat of Bennelong.
So, here he is saying I am the new John Howard, I have been
airbrushed, my old past has been airbrushed away, I am a new person
but when it comes to the first test, even as Opposition Leader, I don't
think I can pass it, I don't think I can support the Government in a
policy I have supported for years.
To add insult to injury, bad enough that he puts asunder this micro
economic reform, he wants to stamp his foot and abuse his powers in 
the Senate by tugging away at $ 2 billion of the budget by pulling the
Kingsford-Smith airport sale out of the sale of the FAC airports. As the
Minister for Transport made clear yesterday, there is no way that
people are bid for the other smaller investments until the big one
Kingsford-Smith and Badgery's Creek are settled first.
So, if Mr Howard refuses passage of the Bill before Christmas, it
means that the budget will miss out on a $ 2 billion change, $ 2 billion
which has produced the surplus and it will be all at the hands of John
Howard. I hope the business community are looking at all this because it is no
accident that he left the likes of me and other ministers to do all the
dirty work of the 1980s that he left behind. He wanted to float the
Australian dollar, but he never got around to it. He wanted to
deregulate the banking system, but he never got around to it. He
wanted to free up the labour market, but he never got around to it. He
wanted to remove the tariff wall, but he never got around to it. He
wanted to improve the micro economy, but he never got around to it.
And now, when we have got around to it and got around to it on this
important feature of aviation he says " No, I'm not having it, I want the
cross wind runway open", and even though he knows it will cut the
traffic volumes by nearly half, he says, " that is all right providing I am
safer in the seat of Bennelong."
This guy is not fit to be Prime Minister. He is not fit to lead a major
party and you don't need my claims about that, you have got it right in
front of your eyes over night.
J: You mentioned the business community, what about the local
community which feels that your government has created an
intolerable situation for them in their daily lives?
PM: We have got now the largest noise abatement program anywhere in
the world. What we are seeking to do is to immunise those areas from
the airport noise. But, as Mr Howard's own the Mayor of Hunters
Hill said rather eloquently yesterday, if they were to put light aircraft
even on the tail end of the east west runway they will take them out of
the main parallel runways which will only then fill up with larger wide
bodied aircraft which will only compound their noise.
PM: The other thing is the Government has made, I think, very important
changes now, all the aircraft do take off from the end of the seaward
runway, if they are taking off to the north. And by the time they get
over Hunters Hill and these other places, they have got 3000 or 4000
feet under them, and this has made a very great difference.
J: People are still very angry, though, do you accept that this is a
dangerous political issue for you, and that John Howard could be just
playing smart politics here? 
PM: Well, if you think that tugging away at the largest micro-economic
change, destroying the largest micro-economic in Civil Aviation in the
last quarter century, and knocking $ 2 billion out of the Budget is smart
politics, I don't.
J: Is it a dangerous....
PM: lI think it is a dangerous issue for him so dangerous, I think, it has
really painted him as he really is. I mean, Howard in policy terms has
never amounted to a row of beans. I know that, because I have had to
do amongst others most of the work in areas he had former
responsibility. And what he is showing you again is that no matter how
much he has been air-brushed by Andrew Robb and the Liberal Party,
and how much the Liberal Party want to make him over as a New Age
person, he is the same tired, old character cynical character that he
always was.
J: Do you accept that this issue is hurting you, electorally?
PM: No. I think the Government Governments that do things the nation
needs are generally rewarded. The nation needed this change, and
the Government put it into place.
J: Prime Minister, you say he has been air-brushed, too, on IR what is
your IR message to workers for the election?
PM: My IR message is that we're now in the lowest level of industrial
disputes since we have been keeping the records they are one-sixth
of what they were in the late 80s, we have had a fair wages system
which has made Australia competitive, but given Australia high
employment and fair wage outcomes, and all the protection's that
working people can only get under the award system. We have given
them flexibility with protection, and this will go under a Coalition
Government.
J: What about wages? Will they cut wages?
PM: The Coalition the result of their policies will be substantial cuts in
wages for Australians as they lose, without compensation, penalty
rates, overtime and other elements of the wage package. Because
there will be no guarantee and when pressed, Mr Reith, their
spokesman, always falls back on the same expression: " We will be
keeping Federal awards". But, that's not a choice that is going to be
made available to the 1.7 million people a year who either join the
workforce for the first time, or change their jobs. 43% of Australians
changed their jobs in the last 3 years. That means that 43% of
Australians will have no award protection under a Coalition
Government.
J: But workers still see executive salary increases going through the roof
all the Government does is criticise them, what do you intend to do
about that? 
4
PM: The Government does criticise them, and executives who take these
decisions know they they induce a problem in their own companies
under an enterprise bargaining system. All of this is noticed by the
workforce. But executive salaries are not set in any Industrial tribunal,
and therefore, the Government has no option to appeal them when
these remunerative packages are set.
J: Prime Minister, the temperature seems to be picking up around the
place are we still looking at a poll next year?
PM: That has always been my intention to stretch the Parliament out, to
give the public the value they like from them.
J: It still is, Prime Minister?
PM: It is, indeed. And, you know, we have had... when a very high hurdle
was set for the Government with the Budget, and the Government
jumped it a surplus Budget without all these mooted increases in
income tax and the rest instead of saying good jump, generally it was
said [ that we were] " clearing the decks for an election". When the
Government introduced Accord Mark VIII, pinning the inflation rate to
it was said " clearing the decks for the election". When the
republic framework came down, it was said " clearing the decks for the
election". That was months ago, and there has been no election.
What the Government is going to do here, is keep on governing, and
one thing is very clear the more time we give John Howard, the more
obvious we make our view known, and that is that he stands for
nothing, and he represents nothing but cynicism and low principle.
J: Mr Keating, there is a poll out today on Carmen Lawrence a 2-1
majority now of people who think that the Carmen Lawrence affair is a
witchhunt do you think that issue is now over as a political problem
for the Government?
PM: I think it's over in respect of any damage that it is likely to be doing to
Carmen Lawrence, and because what matters to her matters to us, it
means that, I think, most Australians think the process has been unfair.
J: Is it true, Prime Minister, that you will be doing big hit policy
statements?
PM: No. But I'm always considering policy statements.
ends. 1-:-1
il'o iilaL. : ui-b 



PRIME MINISTER
*** PLASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY'*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE ACTU CONGRESS
MELBOURNE, 27 SEPTEMBER 1995
It's a great pleasure to be here.
There is no more important partnership for the Government than our
partnership with the ACTU.
There is no more important partnership for us, and no more important
partnership for Australia.
The last dozen years have proved this.
It has been proved in an Accord which has provided us with the motor and
the means of essential change; and with low inflation, and industrial harmony
and cooperation, and much else that now characterises modem Australia and
distinguishes us from countries which have-gone down neo-conservative
paths meaning no consensus, no safety net, no accommodation of the
social imperatives as we confront the economic ones.
The Accord proves the value of the partnership, but it is proved in other ways
as well.
It is proved in the social programs. In programs for Australian families and
Australian women. In the Working Nation programs for employment and
training for young Australians and Australians coping with structural change.
It is proved in the social policies which together make Australia's social safety
net among the most comprehensive and sophisticated in the world.
The value of our partnership is proved in the egalitarian reforming character
of the Australian Government in both social and economic policy and,
beyond these realms, in policies for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, in
environment policies, in policies for the advancement of our nation and our
nationhood, including our progress towards a republic. 
The value of our partnership is proved in the continuation of a Labor
Government a Labor Government still charged with zeal for reform and still
aware that its responsibilities are forever to Australia's working men and
women and their families.
It is not the easiest partnership to maintain, especially in times of change.
But who can say now, after twelve years of the most thoroughgoing reform in
our country's history, that our interests cannot be reconciled not only
reconciled, but made a force for the nation's interests?
No one can say that.
And when we have doubts about each other, it is worth bearing this in mind.
It is worth reminding ourselves of what might have been if the Fraser
government had continued, or we had adopted Thatcherism through Howard
or Hewson.
Think what sort of country we would now live in. How would the opportunity
and wealth be spread in the New Right Australia of the old John Howard? Or
the Old Right Australia of the even older John Howard?
Never forget what our opponents have stood for in the past decade and a
half. Don't think for a moment that Hewson was an aberration. Hewson was
not an aberration. He was a Liberal.
Like John Howard. John Howard has been every kind of Liberal it is
possible to be old right and new right, Fraserite and Hewsonite, wet and dry,
hard and soft, honest by name and rank opportunist by nature. What kind of
Liberal John Howard is depends on which-way the Liberal Party thinks the
wind is blowing. And if they can't get a reading here, they take one in
America. But in the end there is only one John Howard and he is a deeply
conservative and reactionary chap. The most conservative Liberal leader, he
once said, in the party's history.
The man who believed in all the things that John Hewson believed in but now
wants Australians to believe he doesn't; the man with the airbrushed past; the
man without policies. The man who wants to keep the monarchy and abolish
the Accord.
The man who wants to be Prime Minister and lead Australia into the 21st
century. John Howard may want to keep his policies and his ideas hidden. He may in
fact not have any policies or ideas beyond this industrial relations policy of
his. But the next election whether he likes it or not will be about policies. 
The next election will be a referendum on ideas for Australia.
And one of those ideas is the Accord. The Accord has been a defining idea
in the past decade and only a fool would abandon it for the next.
That's the rub. That's what matters.
The partnership between us has achieved great things. But the most
important thing is yet to come. It always is.
The most important thing is what we do to see that Australia goes into the
21st century strong and secure, that the wealth and opportunity is shared,
that our kids have hope and faith in their future, and belief in Australia.
That we keep the great Australian democratic goals out in front, that we do
the things necessary for our economy to compete in the world, and the things
necessary to build a good and fair society and that we don't surrender the
power to do them.
I know it depends on trust and I know that trust is tested by events. I know
that there are people who ask if the reforms of the past decade have been
worth the pain: people who say the change is too rapid and too stressful and
that it is not giving us the economic and social results which we have a right
to expect.
But the fact is that the economic changes were essential, and they have
given us extraordinarily good results, kept us up with the international game
and set us up for the 21st century.
And if this intemrnationalisation of the economy has put pressures on our
communities and on our traditional social goals in Australia, we have resisted
the pressure with far more determination and far more success than most
other countries.
Worldwide technological change has increased wage inequality everywhere,
but our response has been to offset this trend through a sophisticated social
security system and a social wage.
Nowhere has there been more change in Australia than in our workplaces, in
the labour market and in industrial relations: change towards fewer and
larger unions, change to enterprise-based bargaining and a reduced role for
centralised wage setting practices, updates to and restructuring of awards.
The case is unarguable the changes had to be made and they have been
made well. We need to draw confidence from that experience and faith in
this partnership between us. 
We need this partnership because Australian industrial relations are once
more under threat and with that the well-being and security of Australia's
workers are under threat.
John Howard and the Liberals have so few ideas we probably should be
thankful for this one. Their industrial relations policy at least lets us all know
where they stand. And whatever they might do to cast a softer light on it, they
stand where they have always stood. Which is in direct opposition to Labor.
Nowhere is the difference between Labor and the Opposition more obvious.
The industrial relations policy debate we have recently entered highlights
three fundamental differences between us.
One, in the weight given to consensus and co-operation.
Two, in the value accorded to the basic needs and protections for working
men and women.
And three, in our implicit judgements concerning what it is that Australians
want in a Government.
I want to address each of these matters.
We shouldn't forget the antecedents of our reforms. Our predecessors in
office bequeathed to us a quite amazing set of doubles double-digit inflation
and double-digit unemployment. This was an achievement of no other
Government in our history, but which a John Howard government may well
match. These facts established a very obvious case for a different approach to wage
and employment matters.
And this was what the Accord was all about a simultaneous attack on
inflation and unemployment.
Over the rest of the 1980s the union movement and Australian working men
and women bargained for wages and conditions in a new spirit one which
was sensitive to the need to control inflation and reduce unemployment.
This was the restraint of mature and responsible Australians.
It delivered huge benefits to our economic reconstruction.
The Accords have delivered sustained productivity increases and decreases
in real unit labour costs. Since 1983, we have seen a 65 per cent fall in
working days lost in strikes. And at the same time we've seen the creation of
2 million jobs in Australia. 
The Accord has helped create the culture in which change can take place; in
which the imperatives of competitiveness have been recognised, in which
workers' superannuation is laying the foundations of a national savings
program and all of this in the context of real protections for those at risk of
disadvantage from reform.
Each employment target has been met, underlying inflation has been reduced
dramatically, and at the same time Australia has been opened up to
international trade and regional growth.
As I said at the National Press Club a month ago why would anyone ditch it?
And why, when in the last decade the union movement has been in the
vanguard of necessary economic change and social progress, are we
confronted with an Opposition that speaks the anti-union language of the
1970s? Could it be because they alone among Australians have not changed?
To say that Australia owes a lot to the behaviour of workers and unions in the
early years of the Accord, is to grossly understate the case.
It is not a small thing to forego wage increases for benefits that tend to accrue
to the economy at large and not necessarily to those making the sacrifice.
It is no small thing to change behaviour in fundamental ways for unseen
benefits. It was no small thing to put trust in an untried institution, especially one that
was treated with a good deal of scepticism, and even derision by some.
The 1980s Accord accomplishments have left us with an economic base that
ensures strength for the rest of the 1990s. Australian workers have delivered
underlying inflation of less than two and a half per cent for all of this recovery
even though jobs growth has been outstanding. Costs are under control and
now real wages and productivity are growing.
It is now understood that confrontation between employers and employees is
not inevitable, and that conflict in the workplace is not a quintessentially
Australian way of operating.
It is now known world-wide that we are about achieving efficient economic
reforms in an environment of co-operation, consultation and consensus.
The cost restraint of the 1980s and the overall jobs growth since 1983 have
meant that real disposable per capita household incomes easily the best
single measure of individual economic welfare has increased by a very
healthy 20 per cent. 
It is sobering to ask where we would be today if Australian workers and
unions had not acted with selflessness and maturity when it was most
needed. It is particularly sobering to ask what might happen in the future if the Accord
partnership is undone by our political opponents.
That is the first major difference between the Government and the Coalition.
For the Government the Accord is fundamental, for the Opposition it will be
the first thing to go.
Australian labour productivity growth has been more than twice that of New
Zealand since that country introduced its Employment Contracts Act the
Coalition's preferred model in 1991; the underlying rate of inflation is low;
industrial disputes are at an historic low; the profit share is something close
to an historic high and investment is booming but they want to abolish the
Accord. The motive can't be rational. It must be ideological. It must derive from some
loathing of unions and working people. Either that, or a loathing of common
sense. The same lack of reason appears to have infected their thinking on interest
rates. Just now they have been attempting to connect it to the level of foreign
debt, by means of an unreliable imported truck.
It is a very peculiar place to go looking for the problem or the solution. And
a very peculiar way to go. If they were being rational or honest they would
send out a truck which explained the link between the Accord and interest
rates. Because if you don't have the Accord to control inflation, you only have
interest rates to do it. If you haven't got an Accord and you want to take the
heat out of wage pressures the only medicine is interest rates.
The unarguable fact is that high interest rates always mean lower growth.
And increases in interest rates to combat inflation must mean higher
unemployment. I do not mean to imply that the Coalition wants higher interest rates and less
employment growth. I do not necessarily think that they are nasty although
there is some evidence of this. But I'm more inclined to think that they are
prey to primal prejudices particularly against unions and workers.
They see a productive partnership between governments and unions and
workers as some profane cabal. Some horrid thing. Some anathema. 
In fact, the Accord is a living, breathing and dynamic institution, responsive to
outside pressures, accommodating of world economic forces and flexible to
the contemporary circumstances of the Australian labour market. It has been
also a significant contributor to social equality through support for Medicare
and, most recently from Accord VIII, expansions to superannuation, and paid
maternity leave all on a means tested basis.
No one should forget that when wage restraint was most needed the Accord
delivered it.
When the adverse terms of trade change of 1985 caused a significant
devaluation of the currency it was through the Accord that the devaluation
was made effective and real. The partners supported a small real income cut
in order to ensure that employment growth would not be at risk.
When the extreme labour market pressures of the late 1980s emerged it was
the Accord processes which kept a lid on inflation when almost no outside
economic commentator thinking of similar pressures from the past believed
it was possible.
And when it became clear that some movement towards productivity-based
wage adjustments was necessary to ensure competitiveness, again it was
through the Accord that this was institutionalised and became a reality.
Today the Accord continues to support enterprise-based identification of
workplace-specific needs and this is highlighted and emphasised in the 1993
Industrial Relations Act.
The Accord is thus clearly an institution motivated by and sensitive to
contemporary economic imperatives.
But through all this one thing has never changed, and never will.
It is that the Accord and the Government's industrial relations policy will
always reflect the value we give to protecting the disadvantaged in the
workplace. Nowhere is this more clearly evident than in the concept of the Government's
" no disadvantage" test to workplace reform.
The Government does not pussyfoot around with this issue: " no
disadvantage" in agreements means exactly that.
Some awards can be taken away in a workplace bargain, and over the course
of time and because of the particular imperatives of workplaces, some
employment conditions should and will be changed.
But award conditions can only be varied if the total package of remuneration
is not diminished through this process. 
Put simply, no worker can be made worse off, by law, from the signing of a
workplace agreement.
This is the difference between the Government's approach and that of the
Opposition. The Opposition in government will have legislation that guarantees that some
conditions can be lost, and lost without compensation.
That is, workers' overall incomes are clearly in jeopardy.
This is a crucial development in the policy debate.
It is clear this is true from listening to what Peter Reith and John Howard
have said about their planned reforms.
They have said that they support the current Western Australian State Award
legislation. They have never backed away from the essential lack of a true
no disadvantage test in Jobs back!
Both the Western Australian and Jobsback! approaches allow agreements
which do not include some basic conditions; for example, overtime pay,
penalty rates and holiday leave loadings.
And most significantly, these reflections of what their industrial relations
system would look like do not offer compensation for the loss of conditions.
Does it really matter for the incomes of working Australians? Yes.
Some examples are instructive.
Nurses. There are over 150,000 registered nurses in Australia. A typical
nurse works enough nightshifts and weekends to increase his gr her pay
above the base rate by an average of 22 per cent a year. This is worth about
$ 5000 a year.
Unskilled labourers. For unskilled labourers who work overtime the number
of hours accorded the higher pay rate is about 10 per week. If these hours
were paid at the base rate approximately one million Australian labourers
would experience an income cut of about $ 5000 a year.
Of Australia's 360,000 drivers who work just 8 hours of overtime, reducing the
rate to that of base pay would cost them about $ 6000 a year.
Bar attendants at this week's AFL Grand Final would see their wages
reduced by at least $ 40 for their day's work if the penalty is removed. And if
this is regular weekend work for Australia's 50,000 bar attendants, it amounts
to an annual income loss of over $ 2000. 
The Opposition call it a scare campaign. Let me tell them for the one and a
half million Australians I have mentioned and that's just a start the scare
campaign is coming from the Opposition. Quite simply the Opposition who
like to talk about families, have a policy to take money from breadwinners.
The facts speak for themselves: in a world in which there is no compensation
for traded-in conditions, a great many working Australians must be at risk of
losing considerable income.
The Coalition's recent responses to these criticisms have themselves been
instructive. Again, they do not seem to comprehend the basic realities of the Australian
labour market.
John Howard insists that " no worker will be forced off awards if they don't
want to be".
In other words, there isn't a problem. The Coalition just wants to introduce
more choice for workers. There is either profound ignorance at the root of
this, or profound disingenuousness. Whatever the cause, it is false.
What will happen when employers say as many are sure to " take the
contract or take the sack". Who has the power here? What real choices will
such workers have?
What happens to workers who sign a good agreement but later want to return
to the award because their employer demands that they accept a new
agreement with lower wages. How can workers possibly get back what they
have lost?
And what happens to the extraordinarily high number of workers each year
who face a new employer?
No political party which says that workers can choose an award if they want
to really understands the extraordinary flows in the Australian labour market.
Or, if they do understand, they just don't care about it.
The huge number of Australians who face a new employer every year would
not have an effective choice about keeping overtime or penalty rates. They
would not be in a position to sustain award incomes if such conditions are
traded away under the Coalition's approach.
In 1994 1,731,500 Australians more than 20 per cent of the workforce
faced a new employer for a wage and salary job. Currently over 42 per cent
of the workforce has been in their current job for less than 3 years. 
They are surely a significant part of this debate; because they are the people
who will be confronted with the injunction take the contract or forget the job.
In other words, under a Coalition government federal award system, and
adding those under conservative state awards, millions of working Australians
could lose valuable conditions and pay.
The numbers are not difficult to believe. After all, there are around 600,000
higher education students today and most of them will face a new employer in
the next 3 years.
Of the 400,000 or so year 11 and 12 students currently enrolled in school, at
least half will be in this position.
Every year several hundred thousand married women re-enter the labour
force in search of new jobs.
And in 1994, 600,000 employed people chose to change jobs.
The argument is clear. The Coalition can radically and quickly put at risk the
hard won wages of a very large number of Australians.
This is already happening under the Western Australian legislation. Howard
and Reith say their approach is " softly softly", but Howard and Reith know
that the forces in the labour market make a mockery of this.
Australians know the value of change, and recognise the need for efficiency
and competitiveness in our economy. But they also know the equation is
more complex than the Coalition would have us believe. They know, I am
sure, that the Accord is the expression the civilised expression of that
equation. And I don't believe they'll let it go.
If I am right in saying that Australians prefer cooperation to conflict and
continue to value our traditions of equity and fairness, they will reject the
Opposition's industrial relations policy. They may well be glad to see that
they have a policy but they will not be impressed by the nature of it.
They believe, I think, that equality and fairness are fundamental to Australia's
way of life, and they know that workplace arrangements and award
protections are an important means of delivering them.
If labour productivity growth were low, and the Coalition model was a proven
way of raising it, it would be understandable. But Australian labor
productivity growth is twice that of the place where their model is employed
New Zealand. 
If there is no efficiency case for change, Australians have cause to wonder
why it is that they should risk hard won workplace incomes. Why it is that our
fundamental identification with a fair go and social and economic equality
should be put at risk?
The Australia we have created through the Accord mechanisms is a place to
be proud of. Robert Reich, the United States Secretary of Labor has recently
lamented that in his country, while employment growth is healthy, they have
created vast numbers of working poor.
On the other side of the Atlantic, while there are sophisticated safety nets, the
countries of Western Europe have poor jobs growth records. They envy the
US for this, while Reich envies these countries their relatively low levels of
poverty. In Australia we have the best of both worlds. It is clearly to a significant
extent because of the Accord processes.
I take you back to my theme. Our success in this partnership springs from
the belief we share that the incomes of all working Australians must be
protected. I wish you well in this Congress, and trust that I will be able to address you at
your next one by which time I hope that collectively we have put to rest for
all time the aspirations of those who seek to put Australia on the path to
conflict, inequality and social injustice.
Watch this space, we won't let you down. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL LYNEHAM, " 7.30 REPORT', ABC TV,
28 SEPTEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
UNDER EMBARGO UNTIL 7.30 PM
J: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Good, Paul.
J: Surely many Sydneysiders would agree with John Howard's
suggestion that the aircraft noise should be shared more fairly by
greater use of the east-west runway.
PM: Opening the east-west runway will just make Mascot inherently unsafe
and it will basically add another 100,000 people to the noise level.
J: Unsafe because of the intersecting runways?
PM: Because of the intersection of the flight paths.
J: But there were intersecting runways there for a long time.
PM: But not two runways. They are now intersecting two runways. At one
stage, until this runway was built, they intersected only one runway.
In fact John Howard has this to say about building the runway. This is
a press release of his from 1989. ' The Government is playing
carelessly with a situation that could too easily result in a major
tragedy. The risk must be averted. In the interests of safety, airport
facilities should be upgraded immediately including construction of the
third runway." I mean he hasn't got a leg to stand on. What has
happened, Paul, here is he has had a little bit of pressure from his own
electorate. He holds this seat of Bennelong, he has held it for
years. He is out there telling us he is the champion of 
micro-economic reform. The largest micro change of the air traffic
system of Australia, was the third runway in Sydney. He is now saying
" cut its capacity dramatically by putting a cross-wind runway across it."
J: But all politicians respond to electorate pressure. I mean Bob Hawke
did it to you in the Tax Summit, didn't he? A bit of pressure from
Bill Kelty and your cart ran off the road.
PM: But the Government didn't respond to the pressure when it made the
decision to build the runway and it did build the runway. You see
John Howard is saying, " Elect me, Prime Minister of Australia. I will do
the hard things in the micro-economy." He said recently, " The greatest
priority that faces the Government at the present time is the national
economic interest to reignite the process of micro-economic reform."
The biggest micro-economic reform in aviation, is the third runway at
Mascot. It is the thing that let's the whole national system flow. It is
the gateway to Australia. He is saying, " You elect me Prime Minister
because Labor can't take the fight any further on waterfront, on the
shipping, in the airports, in the labour market. I will clean up and do
the hard bits." The first whiff of grapeshot, the first bit of pressure from
a seat he has held for 20 years, and he goes to water. He runs away
from statements he has made, absolutely categorical statements in
favour of building this thing.
J: But you say he is sort of shutting it down, or you imply he is almost
destroying the third runway. He is just saying, " Hang on for a few
months. Deal with the noise problem."
PM: No, he is not saying that at all. If we run an east-west runway now
across the two intersecting flight paths, it would be inherently unsafe.
Therefore, to try to make it safe you would have to drop the capacity
back enormously and you would never make it safe. That is what he is
saying. Secondly, he is saying, " If you don't do it, I will knock $ 2 billion
out of the Budget from the asset sales. I will refuse the passage of the
asset sales legislation in the Senate." This is the same person who is
telling us we should have bigger surpluses. You see the thing about
him is he can't take any pressure. He was like it when he was
Treasurer, he was like it when he was Opposition Leader in the
The first bit of weight goes on and he snaps.
J: But he is over 9 points ahead in the polls, he can't be doing everything
wrong?
PM: And he is weak and sneaky to go with it, Paul.
J: But the people
PM: He is weak because he always caves in on the big ones. You know
what we call him in the Parliament gunna Howard. He was gunna 
float the exchange rate, but he didn't do it. He was gunna deregulate
the financial markets, but he didn't do it. He was gunna knock the tariff
wall over, but he didn't do it. He was going to fix the ports and
wharves, but he didn't do it.
J: He'd say he is going to beat you at the next election, and he will do it.
PM: Well he won't. Look, do you think the public are going to say, here is a
man who knows this airport should be built, who supported its building,
who cajoled the Government of the day to build it and now for the
weakest of political reasons he is now saying he wants to cut its
capacity dramatically and not only that he will actually knock $ 2 billion
out of the Budget while he is doing it.
J: You said yesterday it was still your intention to stretch the Parliament
out. Does that amount to " I have definitely ruled out an election before
Christmas"?
PM: No, because Prime Ministers with any sense don't rule anything out.
J: Do you concede you would get clobbered if you went now?
PM: No, I don't concede that at all. I mean the Government is about 7 to
8 percentage points, two party preferred, at difference with the
Coalition in the published polls.
PL: And your private polling says you lose by 20 seats.
PM: No it doesn't. And the moment a poll happens, people start shifting
their position immediately. But I do believe the public expect that
when they give a government a mandate, they expect it to go and do
it. The mandate we were given, was to restore growth to the
economy, and employment. We have now had 16 consecutive
quarters of growth 4 straight years of growth.. We have had nearly
680,000 job growth....
PL: And you have got what people are calling a voteless recovery?
PM: Well, I don't... let's wait and see. I mean, what will they do? Take an
outfit that has got no policies, that has no strategy for dealing with
wages?
PL: Well, the election is a way off yet he can out his policies, can't he?
PM: that's got other than cutting wages, which is his only policy that
on the micro-changes which will keep the efficiency of Australia
going, at the first test he fails it. 
PL: Can you show me a piece of paper where John Howard says his plan
is to cut wages?
PM: Yes. I can show you a piece of paper which says that they will go to
individual employment contracts, and they will not have the Labor
Party's this Government's no-disadvantage test. That means that
penalty rates, holiday leave loading, overtime....
PL: But Peter Reith recently said that they would keep the nodisadvantage
tests.
PM: No. He said a no-disadvantage test not the no-disadvantage test.
PL: Well, until you discover what their components are, you can't...
PM: No, no, no. What he says is this if you want to take away... we say
this, if you want to have an enterprise bargain, and remove overtime,
holiday leave loadings and penalty rates, you can do it provided that
the overall package leaves the working person no worse off. In other
words, you can get the flexibility, but they have to be either no worse
off, or advantaged. What they would do is just simply let them lose it,
as the Western Australian legislation makes clear which Mr Howard
has endorsed.
PL: But until you see their policies, many voters are going to say here's
Paul Keating with the old scare campaign again.
PM: No, no, forget about the policies have a look at this week. Here he
is this week, he is going to try and knock.... has he been saying we
should have a bigger budget surplus? Why then, is he going to try
and punch a $ 2 billion hole in it by refusing the sale of the airports in
the Senate? Hasn't he said for years that we should have built a third
runway in Sydney to improve the micro-economic efficiency of the
East Coast air traffic system? He has why now is he trying to stifle
it? I mean, the fact is he represents nothing.
PL: Talking of representation, was Jennie George right when she said
yesterday that in the lead-up to the election, the ALP could not forget
that it was in power purely to represent the interests of workers?
PM: It's in power to advance the national interest, which is best advanced
through growth and employment. And whenever that happens,
working Australians always get a piece of the action the biggest
piece of the action and the place is more cohesive, and better. I
think that's what she means, and that's what we mean.
PL: And given that you have so many marginals that you are holding by
such a slim margin, and the Opposition only needs to win 9 to take 
Government, how can you possibly be seen now as having any real
prospects of victory?
PM: Oh, well, I mean, that's a pretty dull question, Paul, from a smart
character like you.
PL: Well, how can you?
PM: You know that all these elections are won by the last half a
percentage point they have been won by the last half a percentage
point since Federation. I mean, they are all to get 50% plus 1 the
hard bit is getting the 49.5% first to put the last half a percent on.
PL: Yeah, but you are so far behind from that?
PM; No, we are not. Look, the thing is that the Government has done the
things that it was asked to do at the last poll. I stood up there at that
policy speech in Bankstown, and I said we will restore growth and
employment to the economy, we won't leave the unemployed behind.
And we have done exactly that. And look what has happened since
Mabo, APEC, the structure for the republic, Working Nation for the
long-term unemployed...
PL: But you have been very frustrated that there has not been any real
appreciation of these efforts?
PM: Well, I don't think that pollsters I have always said to you it takes a
politician to read the hieroglyphics of the polls. I mean, you have got
to understand what people are saying behind them, what they think.
And also, I think, the public are smart enough now, they know they
can always give the Government-a needle through the polls, just the
same as a by-election. But it is a wholly different matter in the old
ballot box on election day.
PL: Thanks for your time.
ends. 


TEL ELO: c2t 95PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPADDRESS TO THE NSW ALP CONFERENCE, SYDNEY TOWN HALLSEPTEMBER 1995E&amp; OE PROOF COPYWell, thanks very much for a very enthusiastic welcome I appreciate It. Ithink it's our about 106th Conference, and we do keep keeping on here wedo keep keeping on. But Terry, Chris, Della, Anthony, my Parliamentarycolleagues and friends one and all. I am very pleased to be back here Istarted my political life here all those years ago at a Conference in the early1960s. And 30 years later we are still running Australia we have a nationalGovernment, and a Labor Government in NSW. And this Parliament, these 3years, arguably, have been our most valuable. When we won In 1993, andwe stuck itto the Tories in the sweetest victory of all, we opened up anopportunity for ourselves and for Australia that consolidated the work and thegains and the imagination of the 1980s. We have consolidated the recoveryto now the longest growth phase in Australia's post-War history. The nextnational accounts will be the 17th consecutive quarter of growth a nationalrecord. We have returned the economy to strong job growth we have had,since the election, 680,000 jobs. And I said recently it took us from 1788 to1983 to get to 6 million, and we have added 10% to that in 2 1/ 2 years. It'sway beyond our commitment of half a million we reached that, in fact, after 21/ 4 years. And in this process of consolidated growth, and strong job growth,we have consolidated low inflation we have an inflation rate around 2 3%,after the Tories, of course, couldn't' get it under double digits. So we havefulfilled, I think, the most solemn pledge we made at that election, which wasall about growth and employment. And that pledge was to get the economyback to growth, to pull dlown unemployment to not leave the unemployedbehind. They were the solemn commitments the hardest to meet, and theyare the ones we have met the most. As I say, we have done it all by breakingthe back of that pernicious disease Australian inflation and done it in away, also, which now has the current account deficit trending down.Three months ago, of course, it was turning at $ 3 billion, and we had all thehand-wringing, and the Liberals with their debt truck and the rest yesterdayit came in at $ 1.5 billion, half of what it was 2 months ago, and below the: 20 No. 001 P. 01/ 16
TEL 2figure of just over $ 2 billion the previous month. So, we have got it trendingdown. Not in 12 years have we faced a better scenario 4% GDP growth, 4%employment growth, 2-3% inflation, the Current Account trending down, andexports booming. And we have been given the time for the transition to anew labour market. In these 3 years, Laurie Brereton Introduced the new IRlegislation, and we have made that change from the most centralised of wagefixing systems, to, now, an organic one where the only place out there in themarket place the only place where our unions will survive, the only placewhere they will have the opportunity to go and do the things they need to doto represent their members, and not be held hostage to some ConservativeGovernment of the future at whatever time it wants to put a knife through theheart of the centralised wage fixing system. We have built a labour marketthat keeps our competitiveness, keeps the jobs coming, keeps inflation low.And while we have been doing all of that, we have moved the Budget back tosurplus, we dramatically expanded superannuation so that all of us will havea better standard of living in retirement. By the year 2002 which is just 7years away every Australian person will have 15% minimum savings insuperannuation, which will dramatically increase their benefits In retirement,and while doing it, produce a huge pool of national savings which willunderpin a much higher level of investment in Australia, and lower ourreliance upon overseas savings and overseas debt.And to underline these achievements to cap them off, to finish them off, topolish them off we have strengthened our identity in our culture. We haverighted the wrong of terra nulus with our indigenes, we have given themback that part of the remaining land that was always theirs, we built arelationship of quality and trust with the countries of the region, and arelationship which is without precedent In Australia, between Australia andthese places. We have threaded together the most ambitious free-tradeundertaking in the world, which is APEC, and we have laid down the blueprintfor an Australian republic. And we have done all of these things in 3 yearsin less than 3 years. We have made Australia a country we can be proud ofwe have made Australia the fairest Anglo-Saxon country in the world. Andthis is what Labor Governments are all about: fairness, equity, imagination,belief, faith. Faith in our fellow Australians, compassion for their lot in life,belief in Australia. But now, at the brink of the century, there is one messageto come from that great achievement, and it is this: we can't go back.Now we have got such momentum, we can't go back. Now we have madeAustralia competitive and stronger, we can't go back. Now we have built asocial democracy and a social wage with equity, we can't go back. Now wehave got a Native Title Act, we can't go back. Now we have built a future inAsia, we can't go back. Now we have mapped the path to the republic, wecan't go back. We can't go back to the Iniquity, or our pastuncompetitiveness, we can't go back the conflict, we can't go back to thecontinental insularity, to the mono-culture, to the denial of truth about ourindigenes, to the monarchy. In short, we can't go back to the old Australia.We can't go back to John Howard's Australia conservative Australia, theLiberal's Australia. 2 Oct 95TEL: g. 2o No. U .~ t0 01 R .02/ 16
TEL: 2 ct 3: 201 N JO. CC1 F . u33Now, this week was an interesting week in Australian public life. This week,the real John Howard stood up. He didn't stand up voluntarily, and he didn'tstand up very straight. But he stood up just enough for Australians to seehim for the first time since he became leader again. And what did they see?They saw the old John Howard the one we all know. The man who hasopposed every wage rise, bar one since 1978. The man who opposesprogressive legislation instinctively. Who opposed the Racial DiscriminationAct, who opposed sanctions on South Africa, who opposed the South PacificNuclear Free Zone, who said in 1987 " Medicare is one of the great disastersof this Government we will be proposing changes to Medicare that amountsto its de facto dismantling". The man, who in the same year, wanted to reintroduceracial discrimination into Australia's immigration policy. Privately,Honest John says he wants a labour market with downward flexibility.Publicly, Honest John says he just wants a flexible labour market. Yet, at thesame time he champions his other article of faith the family. " I'm pro-family",he says as if the rest of us, of course, were anti-family. But he's pro-family,and anti-overtime rates. Pro-family, and anti-penalty rates. Pro-family, andanti-award. Pro-family, and anti-breadwinner. Pro-family, and pro-take-the--contract-or-take-the-sack. Pro-family, and pro-knocking tens of billions out ofGovernment programs which go to support Australian families. John Howardis pro-family, and anti-family support. He is pro-family, and anti-fairness.John Howard has a curious concept of choice we noticed it this week withindustrial relations. The downward flexibility he favours, he wants us toconstrue as choice. And in fact, the choice he talks about will prove to be adenial of choice, as it is already happening under legislation in Victoria, andin legislation in Western Australia. There was the case this week of alibrarian in Melbourne, under the old Victorian state award. After years ofcommuting, she saw a job advertised closer to home. She phoned theemployer, and found that the work is identical to her current position. Thenshe discovered the difference in the salary her current salary was $ 35,000.The salary for the new position because the old state award had beenabolished by Jeff Kennett was $ 19,000. So, she was forced to stay whereshe was. That's the choice that John Howard talks about. And in that choice,of course, it makes very clear that person is going to be stuck there is notgoing to be mobility or flexibility, but stuck and not able to make the moveaway. Now, he has never done the right thing, and he has never done the hardthings. In the 80s he let himself be buffered around by the heavies of theNew Right. He picked up their rhetoric, after formerly trying to make himselfup as some sort of cuddly person in the moderate parts of the Liberal Party.But he ended up with the heavies of the New Right, and trying to buy voteswith a discriminatory immigration policy. He has always been weak he cansound forcible, but he is never strong, and he is never principled. Now, letme just give you a couple of quotes this week about Mascot airport, becauseit is not so much the issue of the airport it's what it means In terms of wherehe would lead Australia. He says all the time the greatest priority that facesthe Government at the present time in the national economy in the nationalinterests is to " re-ignite the process of micro-economic reform". He says,
EL: . Oct , Z 1' 1 U'Ouii P .0j4/ i4" the Coalition Government will revitalise the micro-economic process. Itmight be boring to many, but any Government Interested in this country'seconomic future and jobs for its people must get on with the task of improvingits efficiency. The better we are, the better off we will be", he says. As one ofits first tasks, he says he will have a Productivity Commission, which will carryout a stock-take on the progress of micro-economic reform. There will beparticular areas of emphasis which will impact on Australia's internationalcompetitiveness, as well as a timetable for decision-making andimplementation. In other words, he is the one he says will crack all the toughnuts that Labor, he says, won't touch. Such as the waterfront, such as thelabour market, such as shipping and transport, such as these things.But when it comes to the biggest micro-economic change in air transport inAustralia that is the third runway at Mascot airport, he is now slipping backsaying he wants to cut its capacity by 35%, and he wants to make ininherently unsafe. But this is after he said these things about it he said thisin a press release, which I have from 1989: " in the interests of safety, airportfacilities should be upgraded immediately, including the construction of athird runway. The Government is playing carelessly with a situation thatcould too easily result in a major tragedy this risk must be averted." This ison his press release. And it goes on in that vein. He said this In a number ofother places he has made it clear across the way. And when asked on radioin the same year, he said this talking about noise: " Many people get lessbecause you will have the north-south pattern. I think the case for it, ongeneral interest grounds, is absolutely overwhelming. Our policy is to build it,that's been our policy for the past 6 1/ 2 years". In other words, he says it willbe better, it will be safer for the airport to be configured this way it will lift itscapacity, and it is a major micro-economic change. But now, the same microreformerthat has urged Labor to do another hard thing as we have done onthe waterfront, in shipping, in telecommunications, in deregulating the airlinesystem, in infrastructure such as the third runway he now says for a fewmiserable votes in Bennelong, he will move backwards. He will movebackwards. He will move backwards away from the task that he knows has tocontinue. Whether it's in ports and wharves, or electricity, or gas, or water, orany of the things that will determine our competitiveness, he is moving back.But listen to this for humbug, and he said this in the Parliament in 1981, " whatmakes what this Government has done so criminally irresponsible", and he Istalking here about the runway, about Mascot, " as criminally irresponsible in apolitical sense, is that all along it has known the right thing to do. It's onething to be invincibly ignorant about the correct economic prescription, It's aninfinitely more culpable thing to know what the right thing is, and toconscientiously pursue that course of action in the name of politicalexpediency and political opportunism". In other words, he is doing the verything now that he was upbraiding other people alleging that other peopledid then. Yet this is the person who is going to run the new Australianagenda. The person who is going to be the hard man, who breaks the microeconomiclog-jam. First bit of pressure, and he goes to water. And where'sthe pressure? In a seat he has held for 20 years. He has got a margin of3.5% 1 he is running for Prime Minister, but he thinks he mightn't hold his seat.Oh; he's got a big ticker a big ticker. And he said oh no, look, it's all about
[ ELL O. Ct 5 3: 2U No . Cj01 F. 05,-16Lowe. But, of course, the noise in Lowe comes across the back end of theelectorate he knows it's all about Bennelong. And here he is, he's out theresaying I can lead you to a better Australia, I can break the log-jams, I canbring the new age in, but I had better shore up my own seat. I had better getaround. But, of course, the other thing, can I say he is completely at odds with theinterests of the people from rural NSW. And just let me give you a couple ofinstincts about this. If we force Mascot back by 35%, there's no way all of thecommuter aircraft can come to Sydney. They will have to hub somewhere,and then come they will have to hub into bigger planes. We won't have 8-seaters, and 12-seaters and 20-seaters they will have to hub into bigplanes. So, if I give you an example: from Dubbo, it now takes 55 minuteson Hazelton Airlines. If they have to hub through Orange, it will take 1 hourminutes. It costs $ 3.36 now, it will cost $ 436. From Parkes, it takesminutes. If they have to hub through Orange, it will take 1 hour andminutes. And let me give the example of Port Macquarie Port Macquariedirect now is 55 minutes, hubbing through Newcastle on Eastern Airlines, Itwill take 1 hour and 50 minutes. It now costs $ 348, it will cost $ 470. Alburyon Kendall Airlines takes 1 hour 10 minutes now. Hubbing through Canberrait will take 2 hours and 15 minutes it's now $ 432, it will be $ 528. AndNarrandera which comes via Hazelton is 1 hour 20 minutes. Hubbingthrough Wagga will take 2 hours and 5 minutes. It's now $ 396, it will be$ 490. 1 mean, that's what he is doing to country NSW he is going to punishit, he is going to remove their access to our capital city, he is going to do It allin the name of a bit of sly politics for a change which he has always himselfsupported all those years ago, for all those many years.Now, this is the John Howard who believes that he can dupe the public, thathe can explain to people see, he is from the John Carrick school of politics.That is, say a thing often enough, say it with meaning, look serious, keeprepeating the lie, and you have got a good chance of getting away with it.Let me say a few things more about his industrial relations policies. He saysthat people will be able to stay on their awards. But this belies anunderstanding about the labour market, that 1.7 million take new jobs orchange jobs every year. That in a 3 year life of an Australian Parliament 3years 43% of jobs change. Every time they change, those people lose theaward protections. All the young people coming out of universities into thelabour market for the first time, lose the award protections. The womenjoining the workforce won't have the award protection. Migrants joining theworkforce won't have the award protections. So much so, all of those thingswill change. And then he says that he will have some sort of disadvantagetest, but not the no-disadvantage test. Not the one that says you can trade inor cash-out overtime, penalty rates or holiday leave loading, but you must getsomething for it. You can trade them away to make the enterprise moreflexible, to make the work hours more flexible, but the total package must notbe a disadvantage for the employee, and there is a test which is appliedthrough our federalised institutions. He won't do that. Nor will he say thatthere is some community standards like sick leave and maternity leave etc
TEL: 2 UCt u Iio 001 F'. U6 It!6which won't be traded away, and shouldn't be traded away. He wants, ofcourse, flexibility downwards, and there will be no disadvantage tests. Nowwhat this means to the people in the workforce like, for instance nurses whowould lose about 22% a year by losing overtime and penalty rates, about$ 5000 a year, truck-drivers who would probably lose the better part of about$ 6000 a year on the same basis you can find all categories of people In thislabour market of ours who, basically, will be much worse off, without thesystems we have in place. And this Is the nearest we have ever got to apermanent wages system. And the enterprise bargaining system wherepeople can go out, with the productivity of the business, split it betweenprofits and wages, and make themself better off, and make the companystronger, and make the business stronger and for those who haven't got thatstrength, or that negotiation power, or that negotiating position, we have gotto say to you we have got a safety net, with safety net adjustments whichmaintain their purchasing power, and give them increases in income. That'sthe system we have in place it's the system he wants to junk.But this is the man who will basically do anything to see this view of his thisreligious view he has had about pushing wages down. The same fellow, ofcourse, who doesn't want an Australian as the Head of State. The same guyas I said earlier who is opposed to the Native Title Bill. The same personwho, months ago, wouldn't see the political leader of Vietnam. Who hatesthe Accord, but wants to keep the monarchy. Who wants to strip away thoseaward protections from the lowest paid, and create an army of working poorto give us the American model for Australia. The failed Treasurer, the failedLeader of the Opposition, the Liberal Party's third choice In this parliament.The man who wants to be Prime Minister of Australia. The thing is we can'tgo back.This week, we saw the real John Howard the vaccillator, the opportunist,that man without principles, the man without policies. The man who hasHonest John etched on the shingle out the front, and under it, " we tradeanything". Anything for a few votes. The national interest on aviation, andmicro-economic reform sold for a few votes in Bennelong. The nationalinterests in a relationship with Vietnam sold for a few votes in Marrickville.And by the way, this week when he was sustaining his losses on Kingsford-Smith airport, he went up around the press gallery he is now beaveringaway in the press gallery and he told them that his Private Member's Bill ofKingsford-Smith Airport was just a clever stunt a means of getting industrialrelations off the front page. Well, I thought an interesting example of tacticsdevised after the battle yes, I have lost a leg, but you know, I meant to. Itwas part of the strategy. But the more interesting point is why would hewant to move industrial relations off the front page? If he Is running aroundtelling journalists that he has moved his stunt Private Members Bill onKingsford-Smith, why would he want to remove industrial relations off thefront page? And the answer is easy and that is, because everyone knowsthat on industrial relations, John Howard has never changed that it will stilldefine him, that he is determined to got his way and to cut wages back.
TEL: 2. Oct. 95 3: 20j No. 001 PF. 07.167So, we have seen him trading votes, and trading policies all week. Theprinciple and integrity of the institution of the Royal Commission which hasmeant so much to Australia in years past, which we can see working herenow with the Police Royal Commission in NSW was sold for the votes thatCarmen Lawrence might win, and the Liberals might lose as they fail apart inWestern Australia. All of these things have always been his way. He hasnever done the hard things, or the good things, he has only done things tobuy votes.On the other hand, Labor sees our ( tape break)... replete with opportunities.We have come a long way in the past decade, and a very long way in 3years. But none of us believe that we have gone as far as we might, that thejob is over, or that the dream is fulfilled, but we are still doing things. And letme just give you a few examples. On the environment this week on theenvironment, we have got the largest process we have ever had under theNational Forest Policy Statement, the agreement between the Commonwealthand the States we are now looking at deferred forest areas which will be putaway for 2 3 years for development of Regional Forest Agreements. ThoseRegional Forest Agreements will have representative stands of treesrepresentative reserve systems, so we won't be arguing coupe by coupe,compartment by compartment, logging company by logging company for eachgroup of trees that are taken from the forests. So, in other words, we willhave a mature system. And what is our standard? 15% of the native forestswhich existed before European settlement that is about twice as much asany comparable developed country has. Twice as much as the UnitedStates, much more than Europe higher than any comparable country. Andwe are now getting the cooperation of the State Departments of Forestry weare bringing the States in partly because we told them last Christmas that ifthey didn't, we would cut woodchips back by 20% a year to nothing. And sothey have come to the party Tasmania has signed up. You know ourGovernment in NSW didn't need signing up they are going to put a goodpolicy into place with the Commonwealth. And we are about to now, embarkupon a process where for 3 weeks we have left a draft in the market place forthe green groups, the environment movement and for the forest and paperindustries to look over, and to come back to the Cabinet, and where theCabinet will then settle on deferred forest areas. We will put them away, andin the next 2 or 3 years we will have Regional Forest Agreements, and thenwe can go on with a decent plantation and pulpwood industry taking regrowthand some things from the native forests, but knowing that those greatforests of Australia will be protected, and the representative stands andspecies will be there forever. Now, that's what we're doing. No Governmenthas ever attempted it that's what we are doing now.But I noticed in today's Australian, someone had some wise words to sayabout this process I'll just read you a couple if these things. It says indemanding Federal and State Governments protect ever-Increasing areas ofold-growth forests, the environment movement may sacrifice its credibility,and reinforce the image that it is insatiable. Without even glimpslng at thedraft proposals for the deferred forest areas yesterday, the environmentalalliance prepared a statement that condemned the outcome as diabolical. It
TEL: 2 Oct .95 3 : 20 NO 01 F 08/ 16claimed forests such as East Gippsland in Victoria were going to bedestroyed that the situation in Victoria was catastrophic, only 2 catchmentareas would be protected. None of this is true. Years of campaigning haswon the movement far more than it is prepared to admit. In Victoria, wheresome of the most detailed assessments have been carried out, the size ofnational parks and reserves means additions of protected forests are likely tobe small". It goes on to say, " reserves in the Wombat State Forest will beenlarged by 50%. Of box ironbark forests, spread throughout Victoria, anextra 90,000 hectares is required to meet the Federal Government'sbenchmarks. There will be 150,000 hectares available. in East Gippsland.the State's 3 year plan allows 18,000 hectares to be logged, leaving 640,000still untouched and available for inclusion in a reserve system that will havebeen long-finalised by then. Interim protection has also been given to 2 iconareas the Betka River, and Ellery Creek catchment area. This is notcatastrophic, nor the destruction of East Gippsland". And it finished with thispunch line " if the environment movement wants to be taken seriously, it willneed to drop the exaggeration, and use the next 3 weeks to make the most ofCanberra's offer of genuine consultation of what is still, after all, a draft".Now, let me endorse those comments.Only Labor has ever protected the environment. We are the only ones whocare about it. And if you take the last 15 months, we have put away InQueensland, Shoalwater Bay that beautiful area that has been within theDefence Department for all these years. we have put it away forever. Wehave saved Jervis Bay. We have dlone things in various locations alongEastern Australia particularly. And not only that, we have just reinstatedanother plan on the Barrier Reef Laurie Brereton has, again, beenprotecting the Reef through the carriage of vessels through it, andparticularly, dle-ballasting. We have done all of these things and, at the sametime, we have told the forest industries you are going to be cut by 20% a yearto nothing, unless you get into Regional Forest Agreements. You either addvalue, and get into Regional Forest Agreements, or you're in for the chop.Except the chop is not the tree the chop is you. In all of this, we have nowestablished a process where not like last year, where we were arguingabout 100 or so coupes but we are now looking at the forests of the countryas I say, for the largest representative system in the developed world,minimum of that which existed before European settlement. And, of course,we are doing more than that. On the land, we have got the Landcaremovement working. Only Labor cares about the land, and the way it hasbeen abused and lost. And we have got the Land Management Task Forceabout to report, and it is going to report about how we have got whole of farmplanning how we rationalise farms in regions. How we give structuralassistance to move farms into rational and economic units. How we got offmarginal land. How we deal with salinity. How we see water resourcesbrought to the right places, at the right prices, in ways that will not encouragesalinity. How we improve our principal river system, the Murray Darling. Allof these things are things which are only on the agenda of one political partythe Australian Labor Party.
TEL: 2.0ct. 95 3 : 20 No .001 F. 09/ 1E9And can I say, while I am at that, in these things that we are doing theseideas we have we are also underwriting now the future of Australianagriculture. We are trying to drought-proof Australia. We are putting apremium on the family farm. And isn't it a great irony, as always I suppose,that it has got to be a Labor Government that goes out and defends thebackbone of rural Australia the family farm, It's a Labor Government whichhas now removed, in the drought, of course the asset test for income socialsecurity income. Over 11,000 farm families are now getting income supportwe have paid $ 88 million in exceptional drought relief in NSW, and we havepaid $ 600 million overall $ 600 million. And that has kept rural Australiatogether given them hope, given them heart until the rains make clear, orenough rain comes, to see that the drought is broken.For regional Australia that the Liberals have never cared about, that theNational Party has never cared about we are saying regions are importantto Australia. Regions is where the fastest growth is it's not in the capitalcities any more, its in some of the regions. We want to make the regionswork better. We want to see them become part of the national economy. Wewant to see them have a role and a future for themselves, and make theircontribution. And we are developing Regional Economic DevelopmentOrganisations, we're funding the capacity of people to think about thelrregions. We are saying that the regions which are led at a community levelby business, by unions, by local government, by community groups they arethe regions that kick along. They are the regions that are part of the Laborview of Australia the ones that will be part and central to where we go as afuture. They are some of the things that we are thinking about. And I tell you thosethings to make this point that the coming election is going to be areferendum of ideas, a referendum on policy. A choice between those withideas, with imagination and with policy, and those without them. The bigideas growth, jobs, cooperation, fairness, the environment, the region,APEC, the republic. I mean, these are the big ideas of Australia. The bigideas of Labor. The big things we stand for. And there is going to be norunning and hiding in the referendum of ideas. John Howard might run, buthe can't hide. And I can assure you I will trace him down every policy blackhole, through every shonky press statement, through every glib phrase,through every broken promise, through every paltry manoeuvre he will beaccountable. Because they have no policy ideas the dogs are barking it intheir staff and around Parliament House. There is no inventory of ideas andpolicies about to come out for the election, for the Liberal Party. They don'thave any. They want to make the election campaign about us. I say goodwe are the leaders of Australia. We are the enlargers we are not thepunishers and the straiteners. We are the people who dream the big dreamsand do the big things.Imagine if they had our agenda imagine if now John Hewsori had won theelection, and he was sitting with our work 4% growth, 4% employmentgrowth, 2-3% inflation, the Current Account trending down, exports booming,a cooperative labour market, and Accord where the unions endorsed the
TEL: 2 .0c t -6 : 2u No Uul F. 1uw' it,Reserve Banks inflation target, a fair social wage, Medicare, theenvironment, the forests, the sea, the water, the land, the region, the country,APEC, the Pacific Rim, the republic. Imagine if they had that agenda. Butwhat have they got? Miserable, out-dated rubbish from the 1950s and the1960s. The politics of envy. The mono-culture. They reject it all. About ayear or so ago in Canberra I saw John Olsen getting a prize. He said, " lookthere's only 2 sorts of Australians the lovers and others, and we know whatto think of the others, don't Now, we are part of the lovers. We arepart of the believers. We are the enlargers. And Australia has always gonefor enlargement it has always gone for the big ideas for equity, fairness,justice and a future. Now, that's what we have got. We are going to fight thiselection as hard as we fought any election ever. The thing we have gotagainst us, is that we have been in office for 12 years. But the public knowsthat against that longevity of office, there is this huge pile of achievements.That we have genuinely given Australia a future, that we have ideas about it.We feel for the place we know about its role in the region, we have regardfor one another they know these things. In my view, they are not going toturn that out, and take the third choice of the Liberal Party. A person who hasnever put any of the big policy changes into place, and someone who justthis week has proven again how hollow he is. It's going to be a great fight.And you have often heard from this lectern in other circumstances the phrasethings worth fighting for. But these things are worth fighting for. We have gota Labor Government in NSW we have got a great Labor leader In Bob Carr.We have got a Labor Government in Queensland, and we control the greatbulk of the resources in Eastern Australia the landscape, the territory wecan do things together. And I can even drag a few of the recalcitrantPremiers to the party on occasions. So the future is ours. What we have gotto do now is go out there and hang on to it grab it, seize it, and run with it.And when we do, we will have the reward we have had on 5 occasions. Whatwe now want it now is for our 6th, and I am telling you this we will get it.Thank you.ends.


PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTERS THE HON P. J. KEATING MPRESOLUTION AGAINST FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING, NSW ALPCONFERENCE, SYDNEY, 30 SEPTEMBER 1995E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Mr President, I thought I would take this opportunity of the Conference to say&nbsp;something declaratory, to move a proposal which I urge the Conference to&nbsp;adopt. It is about the role of the French in the Pacific and the shameful&nbsp;decision by France to test nuclear weapons there. It says this:
Conference condemns the continuing program of dangerous and&nbsp;environmentally irresponsible nuclear testing being conducted by France in&nbsp;the South Pacific.
Conference notes the destabilising adverse effects of the program on&nbsp;the region and the infringement of the rights of the indigenous people of the&nbsp;South Pacific. Conference expresses its outrage that France's nuclear testing&nbsp;program seriously impedes progress on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty&nbsp;and Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and the efforts to create a nuclear free&nbsp;world. Conference expresses its total opposition to all nuclear testing by all&nbsp;states in all environments.
Conference calls on the Federal Government to continue its campaignto employ all practical measures at Australias disposal to halt the Frenchnuclear testing program, including through diplomatic efforts includingresolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and other multilateralorganisations and regional bodies such as the South Pacific Forum;, taking&nbsp;every appropriate step in international law to secure the end of the testingprogram; encourage individual campaigns of protest by Australians.Conference states that no new contracts for Australian uranium salesto France be signed or approved until France signs the CTBT.Conference calls on the Australian Government to take all actions inrespect of existing contracts for uranium sales to ensure that such sales&nbsp;make no direct or indirect contribution to the French nuclear weaponsprogram. Mr President, the Australian Labor Party and this Government has had a longand honourable history on arms control and disarmament issues. Rightthrough the 1 980s and the 1970s we urged the world to adopt a South Pacific&nbsp;nuclear free zone to support the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and we&nbsp;have also supported and developed the groundbreaking Chemical Weapons&nbsp;Convention. Our objection to what is being done now is at a time when there should be a&nbsp;premium on non-prolIife ration, at a time when the world believed the cold war&nbsp;had ended. A democracy. Not a totalitarian regime, but a democracy hascome out and said that in its view, the nuclear weapons game is not over.That the premium on non-proliferation will be lowered and it has basicallysaid it is competent for it and others to go out and test nuclear weapons, torefine them further or to develop them in a primary sense.Now by President Chirac overturning President Mitterand's decision for a&nbsp;cessation of testing of nuclear weapons at Mururoa Atoll, what we have seen&nbsp;there is a nuclear weapon state telling all the would be proliferators that It is&nbsp;basically okay to test weapons. The Irans, the lraqs, the Pakistans and all of&nbsp;the others who are out there mucking around with nuclear weapons, France&nbsp;is out there saying it is okay. That is our objection.
Our second objection is that because it is a democracy it ought to haverespect for the people in the area in which it is testing. That is, it is nottesting these weapons in its own territory, its own metropolitan territory, it istesting them in an area of the Pacific it calls its own. And in debating this withone French newspaper, the editor upbraided me, he said this is Frenchterritory, this is France. I said yes I know, there are Polynesians all the waydown the Loire Valley and Carcassonne and Aix-en-Province, popping outbehind the trees, down in the Dordogne, they are all over the place. The factis, what France has done is call into question the legitimacy of its connectionsin the Pacific for its contempt and betrayal of the values that democracieshave. The belief that other democrats around the world have had in Franceand its values and the betrayal of the people of the Pacific area. These aretheir points of objection.
The biggest problem that we face in the post cold war world is a cessation oftesting of nuclear weapons and Australia will be at the forefront of thedevelopment of a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. If some good comes fromthis we hope to pin France into it and it said it would support a zero thresholdwhich would mean that we may have a treaty of substance. But beyond thetreaty and the Non-proliferation Treaty, of course, we still have the greatstock pile of weapons out there, decaying weapon inventories. I think whatFrance has done is remind the world, remind everybody, that there are50,000 nuclear warheads laying around the place, that we do have rottingsubmarines sitting in Vladivostok, that their reactors are overheating and theyare being kept cool by pumps on the wharves and all of the other bits andpieces of industrial junk which has been appendages of that old desire to see&nbsp;a big Soviet maritime force. It is true still, unfortunately, that there are 14&nbsp;reactors the same as Chernobyl, that they have the same inherent design&nbsp;faults, that they are sitting in the Ukraine and Belarus? and these otherplaces around northern Europe, that they threaten continental Europe, thatthey have to be replaced and that the premium has to be upon nonproliferationon the disposal of these weapon stocks and on making theseelectricity programs safe.This is what France should be interested in and it is engagement with theseissues which will bring security to France. Not some notion that it should bedeveloping a weapons program itself and one which in someway willguarantee its security in the past. This is all a throwback to 1940 and 1941.This is all about Hitler going down the Champs Elysees. It is all about Chiracsaying never again. Well, of course, we all know never again and anyonethat owns nuclear weapons can say never again, but why must they refinetheir weapons and why must they add to the inventory and why can't they jointhe rest of us in cleaning the world up. This is what we want them to do.Mr President, the good thing about this is we are having an impact on theFrench people themselves. I have placed articles in LeMonde, in Liberationand with other newspapers, we are winning the battle in France itself andPresident Chirac has just taken an enormous tumble in the opinion polls froman approval rating in the 50s I think 58 down to 32 per cent and adisapproval rating which has gone from 20 odd per cent to something likeper cent. It has been a complete reversal of his fortunes and that of hisgovernment. Now, we have got 71 per cent of the opposition in the Europeanparliament, France's European allies 71 per cent opposition to testingamongst the French people and, of course, general support for the policiesand processes that we have articulated and enunciated.So, he is losing the battle in Europe, he is losing it at home, he is losing it inGermany which is a country that matters most to France in terms of publicopinion, he is losing it, I think, all around the world.We want to make clear that our opposition is not an opposition to Franceitself. France has given the world so much in its history with the FrenchRevolution, with democracy, with Its culture, so our opposition is not anopposition to France or the French people, it is an opposition to the FrenchPresident's decision and the French government. We object to thisunprincipled decision, to this betrayal of the interests of the rest of us andthose in the Pacific by a democracy.We have worked with France in the past to do things. I had the pleasure in1988 of meeting Prime Minister Michel Rocard and proposing to him that wenot sign the minerals convention and that we make Antarctica a wildernesspark and that is where the movement towards the 50 year wildernessdeclaration for Antarctica came from. Bob Brown was chewing on a mueslibar at the time, I think. But, Mr President, the fact is the Matignon Accords inNew Caledonia, those Accords which are about basically the peacefulresolution and transition of that place were things Australia joined France on.
So, we are not against France or the French people, but we are against this&nbsp;decision. We want it reversed. We want to see no more tests. We want the&nbsp;French to clean up their act. We want them to apologise and we want them&nbsp;to join the rest of us in cleaning the world of these dreadful weapons. That is&nbsp;what we want.
President Chirac says I am anti-French, this you know Mr President, Isn't&nbsp;true. All those antique dealers down the Rue de Bac and the Rue Madeleine&nbsp;and the Rue de St Honore know it is not true too. But what is true is that we&nbsp;are going to keep on his wheel until he lets off. What is true is I'll keep after&nbsp;him until he gives it up and I know the Australian people are going to keep&nbsp;after him as well. That we are not going to relent. That we do have good&nbsp;values and we do get indignant about these things and we did think the cold&nbsp;war was over and there was no more need for it.
The other thing is, of course, just from a point of view of sheer self interest. If&nbsp;you are a weapon state, I should imagine the thing to do is not let the bloke&nbsp;next door be a weapon state. So, France had a vested interest in the Nonproliferation&nbsp;treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as has the United&nbsp;States and Great Britain. If they have got them, their policy should be to let&nbsp;no one else have them. But they are not even that smart. They are out thereletting the Iran's and the Iraq's and all the others muck around with them and&nbsp;saying good on you, go for your life. That is what we object to and we are not&nbsp;having it and we are going to protect the people of the South Pacific and we&nbsp;are going to argue their case for them.
At the South Pacific Forum there was unanimity of opinion against this. I&nbsp;heard a speech there from President Kabua from the Marshall Islands talking&nbsp;about the nuclear program in his country over the years and the wasting&nbsp;stock piles, leaking nuclear stock piles in that country and the proposals he&nbsp;has had put to them by nuclear weapon states to put more there. They have&nbsp;always been at it with these lovely little places scattered throughout the&nbsp;Pacific, taken communities that have been essentially taken down, used and&nbsp;abused, absolutely used and abused for development of these huge testing&nbsp;programs. It has been a shameful record by most of the democracies in the&nbsp;Pacific, but It shouldn't continue.
&nbsp;So, Mr President, I urge conference support for the resolution. I know there&nbsp;is a fair bit of bipartisan support for this. I welcome this, but I assure you the&nbsp;Government will fight this right to the end. Gareth Evans Is In New York at&nbsp;the moment, where we are now putting together the support at the United&nbsp;Nations for a resolution which is condemning this testing and process and&nbsp;calling it into question and seeking a cessation of it. We will be using all of &nbsp;the forums we can to keep this pressure on and I know with the support of the&nbsp;Labor Party and the community of this country we can have a very big impact.
Thank you very much.ends



TEL: 2. Oct. 95 18: 25 No. 00? P. O.'
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J KEATING MP
THE SECOND FRENCH NUCLEAR TEST
I deplore the latest French nuclear test at Fangataura. The test Ignores the
understandable outrage of the international community at the French Government's
first test and compounds the sense of anger felt by regional countries as a result of
continued testing.
This decision runs against common sense, France's good name In this region and
around the world has been further damaged, and the test Is contrary to the wishes of
the 71 per cent of the French people who want the French Government to cease
nuclear testing in this region.
. Australia's efforts to press the French Government to abandon Its testing program
will be unceasing and unrelenting until the French Government hears the clear
message from nations around the world to abandon its nuclear testing program. Our
campaign will continue with the same vigour until all the testing stops.
The Australian Government does not accept that nuclear tests are necessary for the
purposes stated by the French Government * to protect France's national security, to
ensure the safety of the French nuclear cOeterrent and to develop simulation
technology. The French Government must explore more fully the technical
alternatives to further tests.-
The French Government has failed to ask the question: would nuclear tests of this
kind be tolerated in metropolitan France? Clearly they would not. The French
Government must accord the South Pacific the same respect that it reserves for
metropolitan France.
Australia fully supports the statement from the recent South Pacific Forum meeting
that called on France to
desist from further tests in the region and to close associated facilities, except
those required for future environmental monitoring;
accept full and exclusive responsibility for any adverse impacts from its
testing on the Pacific environment and people;
provide access to the international community to all scientific data it holds and
to the testing sites themselves to enable an independent and comprehensive
assessment of the risks Involved; 
2
* Sign and ratify the Protocols of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty.
Only these actions would show that France takes seriously its obligations towards
those countries In our region with which it seeks good relations. If France cannot
even agree to the region's reasonable requests for scientific access, it demonstrates
its disregard for the Interests or the South Pacific community.
Australia Is well advanced In Its negotiations with like-minded countries In bringing a
resolution before the 50th session of the United Nations General Assembly in the
coming weeks, which would constitute a strong statement of international opposition
to nuclear testing and call for an immediate end to such tests. This will build on
similar resolutions and statements made in the parliaments of many nations around
the world, In International organisations such as the IAEA, and In regional groupings,
Including the South Pacific Forum and the ASEAN Regional Forum, and will leave
the French Government In no doubt about the breadth of opposition to nuclear
testing.
We will continue to facilitate campaigns of Information and contact between the
Australian and French people so that the basis of the opposition of Australians to the
testing program and the intensity of their feelings are understood In France.
The recall of the French Ambassador to Australia. France's announcement Nhat It will
sign a truly comprehensive test ban treaty in 1996, and suggestions that the number
of tests may be reduced are all signs that our campaign is having en effect. With
every new test It holds, the immediate and the long-term costs to France increase.
CANBERRA 2 OCTOBER1995 TEL: 



TEL: 3. Oct. 95 5: 21 No. 015 P. 01/ 06
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH MURRAY NICOLL, -DRIVE TIME", ABC RADIO SAN
ADELAIDE E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MN: Prime Minister, Paul Keating.
PM. How are you Murray?
MN: I'm well, thank you. You're back in the ciV now after being on the
Peninsula?
PM: Yes.
MN: What did you say to the people of the Eyre Peninsula, and perhaps
more Importantly, what did they say to you?
PM: Well, the point of going was to talk about the sus~ tinability of
agriculture, and we have been now looking at regions of Australia
there is ai strategy we have in South West Queensland, one in NSW
and now the Eyre Peninsula in* South Australia, to look at support
from the FederarGovernment, to look at ways of in which farms can
be improved, to underline the importance of whole of farm
management. What that means is drawing the farm so that on the
good soils you grow certain crops, not all the soils will be uniform, the
place won't be able to stand uniform stocking rates, in other words,
getting a plan for the farm, and getting a plan for the region. And you
might remember a year ago, in November last year, Bob Collins and I
announced the Drought Package for the drought affected farms, and
we also introduced Bonds Firm Bonds to smooth income out, and
concessions for water and fodder. Well, during that time we started
then putting a line under this question of sustainability in agriculture,
and from that day to this, we have been on that subject, and today I
received a report from the Land Management Task Force on this very
subject. And, of course, we are seeing this-put Into place here in a
regional way on the Eyre Peninsula. 
TEL: 3. Ot. 2
MN: Traditionally, of course, Liberal strongholds out in the bush we have
not seen much Labor action out in the country before now...
PMV: We have held Grey for 10 years, until we lost it last.
MN: Yeah you reckon you can get it back this time, right?
PM; Well, it's a margin of a couple of percent... . but look, I mean, I heard
your introduction about the election and the rest, but I have been
going around rural Australia now for a couple of years about this
same subject. I was in Orange 2 weeks ago, I was in Roma about a
month before that, in Wlnton in Queensland a month eore that.
And I think with the droug~-t ' having come through, with all of the
devastation it left in its wake, we have got to draw some lessons from
it, and keep the momentum going towards sustainable agriculture, so
that we are not seeing people walk off arms because they become
marginal because they are not properly managed. I think this is the
time to actually drive that lesson home.
MN. Meantime, you are getting a bit of a jump on the Opposition Leader,
John Howard?
PM: Well, we are interested in Australian farms, and the family farm we
did as no Federal Government has ever done we suspended the
Farm Assets Test for those areas which were affected by drought,
Whfich means that now 11,000 farm families are getting income
support, so we are doing these very solid and tangible things. The
Farm Bonds are, I think, a great breakthrough, and I have always
held the view that the family farm is the backbone of Australian
agriculture that we will get the... . no one will care for agricultural land
if the family walk off the farms. So, we need to keep our productivity
up, and the quality of the land the whole Landcare movement is
coming from the family farming community, and I think we the
Federal Government, certainly this Labor Government wants to
keep that going.
MN: Did you get any reaction from out on the land at the French nqpcleqr
,--tests? I mean, you have been dealing with people who's livelihood is
the land, and vice versa the land is their life and this is what it is all
about the environment and the nuclear tests in the Pacific, and the
ap'iazing second test a huge explosion on another Atoll did you get
any reaction from the people put on the land about that?
PM: No, I didn't today, but I have it, of course, in many other places, and I
can only agree with the sentIments I think you are expressing there
implicitly, Murray. That is, this is a very foolish thing for the French
Government to do. The interests of France, and every developed
country, and all those people who cherish liberty, should be to
dimlnlsh the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The sin that France is 015 P0,~' 
1 r-L: 3 . Oct 9_ 5: 21 N0.015 P. 0-3/ 0t
3
committing is to say to the would-be proliferators this is the lraqs,
Irans, the Pakistans and countries like that, who, we're told, are
developing a nuclear capability to say to them as a sort of
developed democracy, well, that's okay you can go and let your
bombs off, and do as we're doing. I mean, that I think, is the principal
point of objection, let alone the lack of regard for the people of the
Pacific whose wishes they have simply just ignored.
MN: What about the suggestion and it's come from many quarters of this
country that we should say to the French Ambassador in Canberra
it's time you got on your bike, and that, in fact, all other countries
around the world should do the same thing. How would you feel
about that?
PMV: Well, it's a matter of whether you do better engaging these societies
and governments, than not engaging them.
MVN: And that is the reason our Ambassador is still in Paris?
PMV: Yes. I think we have been more effective in engaging them, As you
may know, I wrote an article for LeMonde, I did one also for
Liberation, and these had some Influence in-the French debate, and
in'the German debate. And I think this debate in Germany is starting
now to run against the French President and he may deign to, you
know, take a view askance at Australia's view, but certainly not
German public opinion. But he doesn't need to go further than his
own country now, the overwhelming number of people in France
now dis-favour this policy, and wish he would desist. It's all about, of
course, the Second World War it's all about saying it will never
happen again. Well, they already have a stock of nuclear weapons in
their inventory. The issue for France, I think, is to engage the rest of
the world not to sit back with a sort of a you know, a nuclear weapon
under its arm, but rather to deal with the real problems and that's t
way I think France will find that it doesn't face any sort of problems
that it faced in 1940.
MVN:-So the French Ambassador will stay In Canberra?
PM: Well, I think if we say to him go, what we are saying is that we don't
want a dialogue with France, we don't want to talk to them, we don't
want to have a communication with them, That seems to me to be a
pretty strange policy when you object to what they are doing.
MN. Can we go any further than we have already gone is there anything
else we can do?
PM: Well, we have got the Foreign Minister at the moment at the United
Nations getting a resolution together against France. We have,
today at the Pacific Forum, broken off their dialogue partner status
this is the dialogue partner status that France enjoys with the 
TEL: 3 ct. 1: 4 NO.
4
countries of the Pacific Forum, which is the Pacific Island countries,
including Australia and, as you know, our protests against France
has been our strongest protest ever against a democratic state.
MN:-John Howard today has said that the Coalition is seriously
considering releasing more of their policies in the lead-up to the
election, and we're moving onto the fact that you are doing a lot of
moving around the country at the moment, and so are a lot of others
in this pre-election campaign they're calling it a scare campaign, of
course, that you are Involved in. Have you seen Mr Howard's 12
point minimum standard through industrial relations?
PM: No, I haven't. You might remember Murray you need a bit of a
memory with John Howard but you remember before the last*
election, he had an Industrial Relations Bill he was going to table?
And he was going to table it up until the last week of the campaign...
MN: Well, they did run into some other problems during the campaign.
PM; I know but he never tabled it. He had a Bill ready, he said the IR
Bill, the Industrial Relations Bill but we never saw it. Now, if he had
it ready for March 1993, he certainly had it ready in these last couple
of.. because he was then the Industrial Relations spokesman. He is
now the Leader of the Opposition with essentially the same view, and
what we are saying to him is I mean, he wants to cut the wages of
people in the bottom deciles of income. He calls it labour market
flexibility it's basically wage cuts. People would lose penalty rates,
overtime rates, holiday leave loadings without compensation in their
wages. And what I have said today and yesterday was if Andrew
Robb their Federal Director who was on the Sunday program on
Sunday saying we have got 98% of our policies prepared why are
they keeping them from the Australian public? I mean, they are not
keeping them from me I only get 1 vote in the election, It's the
community of Australia who are entitled to know where the major
Parties would lead them.
MN: But it is a valid answer, when we are not officially in an election mode
it is a valid answer to say well, last time we laid it all out on the
table, it got up and hit us between the eyes?
P M: It got up and hit them between the eyes because it was no good,
Murray. It's not valid for any Party to hide its policies. The Federal
Government is out there with a balanced Budget with a Budget in
surplus we say how we are doing it, we have got all the measures
down there in the Budget. I mean, when I announced -with the
ACTU the Accord, we had to say how it would work, how it endorsed
the 2-3% inflation rate. When I lay down the structure for the
Republic, I said we are going to move to an Australian republic, and
here is the model. There's no trickiness on our part. This tricky view
this sort of sneaky view that you have policies, but you think they 015P. U' 
TEL: 3 . Oct .95 5 N o. 015 P. 0 51 0
are too crook to show the public because they won't like them, and
you can slip them past them in the last 10 days of the poll, is, I think,
high dishonesty in politics.
MN: But realistically, nobody comes up with policies they are fully
convinced that the public won't like?
PM: Well, if you have got policies that you are convinced that the public
won't like, why would you want to be Prime Minister of Australia? I
mean, Kf you think your policies are going to be anathema to the
community, then you ought to be out of the business. I mean, these
people are saying here's Andrew Robb brazen as they come, out
there on the Sunday program saying we have got our policies 98%
prepared. Well, why won't you show the Australian public, Mr Robb
and Mr Howard? [ And they will reply] " because I don't think they will
like them".
MN: The standard question that you are getting at the moment as you
move around the election. Ralph Willis, the Treasurer, was on this
radio station not so many weeks ago saying that the election will be
held in the first quarter of next year does that still hold?
PM: Well, the Treasurer doesn't speak on these matters. These matters
have always been left to the Prime Minister, and every Australian
Prime Minister has the discretion in this. But, I have made clear right
through when I have been asked this and remember this, first of all
John Hewson started talking about an early election 15 months ago,
then Alexander Downer said we were going to have an early election,
then John Howard said we would have an early election, and all the
pundits when the Budget came out they said " oh, surplus Budget
clearing the decks for an election". Well of course, it was all untrue.
I have said right from the start that I think the public believe that
Parliament when they elect a Government they should be able to
draw the maximum advantage from the Government's work over the
course of the Parliament, and that having early elections is too tricky,
and not to be considered. That's always been my view,
MVN: And that still holds -we won't be going to the polls before Christmas?
P M: I'm not. . the chance of us going to the polls before Christmas is very,
very slender Indeed. But I am not saying definitely to you or to any
other commentator to give away a Prime Minster's right which every
Australian Prime Minister has enjoyed.
MN: So that's an almost definite?
PM: No you'll get no more from me than that. I'm not here to make
headlines for you.
MN: It's an almost definite it's a definite should be that way? 
TEL: 3 . Oct .95 5: 21 N0.015 P. 06' 0E
6
PM: Wts a definite that the public want value from the Parliament, and they
don't like politicians being tricky, purling erections at times to suit
themselves.
M N. And the Prime Minister would never go to an election until he thought
he could win it?
PM: Well, the Prime Minister will have to go to an election within 3 years
of the last Parliament sitting. It's just a matter of the Constitution.
MN: Okay. Now, you're about to head off in fact, I think I have held you
up, I think. What are you doing in town tonight?
PM: Well, I'm opening the restoration of the Palm House in the Gardens.
MN: Oh, yes.
PM: We gave $ 1 million to it, under the, 0, Oe-J~ on program, which I
introduced, as you know, for these public works back in 1992. Now,
my last visit to Adelaide was on the One Nation train which brought
the standard gauge railways for the first time from Melbourne to
Adelaide. Arnd we also had one there for heritage buildings the
restoration of heritage buildings and this is a classic heritage
building. Now, the Premier is down here tonight, and the Premier
knows this you don't get to get your name on a plaque unless you
put some money in. Now so far, we haven't got any money out of
him. So, all the garden types down there who support this garden,
should say to him now listen Dean, if you want your name on the
maker's label here, you had better get your cheque book out.
MN: Well, if you find out a way to get a buck out of Premier Dean Brown,
let me know will you there's a lot of people wTho would join the
queue?
PM: Well, he always comes around asking me.
MN: Maybe he thinks you have got a Santa wallet?
PM; He puts on a sad face, and he thinks I'm a sucker for a sort of sad
look.
MN: Okay. Thank you I would like to talk to you next time you're in town.
PM: Thanks Murray.
ends. 



TEL: 6. Cjt. 1: NO U06 F 0 1 U.
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT " KINGAROQ", LOCK, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
3 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: What is the meaning of the Task Force Report?
PM: Well, I think the Task Force Report is part of the new thinking of
Australian agriculture. That is, how we build sustainability into
Australian agriculture, where we are not simply using up the sort of
natural endowments, and then running them down, but rather adding
to them, and keeping them there. And we can do this, I think, on two
main bases: one, that whole of farm planning, that's on the form
planning itself, and planning within the farm districts. And this is
where, I think, Landcare and the whole Landcare movement is
coming through. As well as looking at sustainability of agricultural
production on a regional district basis. So, some of this of course has
come from the aftermath of the drought, and I think this is a good
thing that perhaps the drought has reminded us that we have to move
to sustainability.
The other thing is that, of course, it keeps the farm family together,
and I think this is extremely important for Australian agriculture, that
the backbone of Australian agriculture remains intact, and that is the
nurturing that the land is given by Australian farm families, and the
maintenance of the family the economic viability of the family
becomes important. Now, what's happened in the last 20 or 30 years
Is that the terms of trade have shifted on farmers the things they
used to sell 30 years ago were more valuable than the things they
used to buy. This Is not the case any more, which means we have
got to be more efficient the margins are slimmer, theref ore we have
to use all of our assets in an optimal way-And I think the sort of
discussion you have heard this morning in there indicates, I think, to
you that farmers in districts are now thinking in these ways they
know their own farms' vulnerabilities, they are going to try to repair
them and make them better,. more sustainable and more productive, 
TEL 2
and therefore a better bottom line, and therefore a stronger farm
family, therefore the likelihood is that the children will keep the
farming going, and that is good for rural Australia, and it's good for
the economy.
J. Now, is the Federal Government actually supporting the campaign
financially further supporting it?
PM. Well, I'm just about to announce again today here at Wudinna that we
are going to be funding a further regional enterprise in farming. We
are now doing this across the country in a number of places where
we are seeking to, well, if you like, reconstruct the holdings, and to
make them more efficient, and to see how people can adjust
themselves either on properties or off properties. All with
sustainability in mind, all with more farm efficiency in mind.
J: Will you consider extending funding for the PMP campaign to the
year 2000, as per one of the recommendations?
PM. Well, we are very keen about keeping the momentum going of
Property Management Planning, and now, I think, we have got it on
the roll, we want to keep it there. So, I think that you will see from the
Federal Government from this Labor Government a lot of interest
in sustainability, a lot of interest in drought-proofing, a lot of interest
in sensible planning of farms, and management of farms, and we are
not going to let the opportunity go.
J: So you can say at this stage that you will look at further funding?
PM; I Well, I think we will be looking at further funding, yes.
J: Do you think the Lock group here is a good example of what's been
done so far, as far as land management is concerned?
PM: Well, I thought it was a very encouraging conversation with the Lock
group here today. You had one of the older farmers saying that he
was thinking for the first time about new ways in which to farm the
property new ways in which to configure the property, to not just see
it out in simple blocks and attack it, regardless of the soil types and
the vulnerability to erosion. Then you had another farmer say that a
younger farmer saying that he was very excited by the prospects,
and that, you know, a new vista had been opened up. And we need a
bit of both, I think we need experience from a change in attitudes
from experienced farmers, and that sense of excitement that I think is
going to keep agriculture going. And I think there is nothing better -I
mean, education does this to all of us in all fields, and I think thinking
about going into one of these programs, and having the value of the
conversation of other people in the same district to have tried other
things in similar soils, and in similar circumstances, really means that
you are starting to concentrate the knowledge, and getting up the
TEL . Oct 5 1 : 36 No .006 P .02/ 0. 
TEL 3. c 9 : 3 o06P0'
3
learning curve awfully quickly, rather than doing it the hard way by
yourself.
J Your visit here to one of the most marginal Liberal seats has
Inevitably sparked more claims of electioneering is that what you
are doing today?
PM: No. I have been in many parts of rural Australia all this year I have
been recently in Roma in Queensland, in Winton, in Orange in NSW
just over a week ago, in Rockhampton, well, all parts of Australia.
Mainly to try and help with the drought by giving income support to
farm families, but now it has broken in many places, learning the
lessons and getting that sustainability going. So, that's what this is
about, and what's happening here on the Eyre Peninsula I think is
encouraging. And can I just say that we have held this electorate of
Grey for over a decade we only narrowly lost it, and it is something
that can come our way again, but this is not the first day of an
election campaign, I can assure you of that.
J On another matter, Prime Minister, the French nuclear testing do
you support the South Pacific Forum's decision to suspend dialogue
with the French?
P M. Well, I was part of that at the South Pacific Forum. We made a
decision that we would think about terminating the dialogue status
with France were it to explode another device. Well, it's done that,
and I certainly concur in the Pacific Forum making that decision
today, and breaking that dialogue status off. This is, again, another
selfish and I think thoughtless decision by France it wouldn't test
this weapon in its metropolitan territory, it wants to test it in someone
else's when the premium should be on nuclear non-proliferation. The
big challenge is to stop the non-weapons states from getting into
weapons, and for a democracy like France to be out there
encouraging it is an affront to everybody who believes in the values
and the thought process of democratic states. This is our principal
objection to what the French are doing.
J Why won't the government consider severing bi-lateral relations with
France?
PM: Well, one, to keep an influence on France, and I think we are starting
to because we have maintained relations have an influence on
French public opinion. So now that the great majority of French
people want to see this program terminated, President Chirac's
standing in his community on this decision has plummeted, and I
think Australia's proselytising the things I have been able to do in Le
Monde and some of the other, Liberation, and some of the other
newspapers have made a difference, and I think this is the sort of
influence that Australia can have. We can see the impact we have
had on the chemical weapons treaty, the chemical weapons
3 Oct 951: 36 N0.006 P-03/ 0-
TEL 3u : t o u6F u
4
convention in the past where we are seeking now to get a resolution
up to the United Nations the Foreign Minister is now there -* we are
going to play an active role in the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
So engagement is the answer, I think pressing on, indefatigably,
and engaging on the issues.
J: Just lastly, following your criticism and the fact that he hasn't
released any policies he has given an indication that he will be
coming out with policies before the election what is your response to
that?
P M. Well, Andrew Robb was telling us on the weekend television that they
have their policies 98% prepared. Well, it that's the case, why are
they hiding them from the Australian public? It's not me they're hiding
them from I'm not the person who is going . who is casting the
votes, I'm only casting 1 vote at the next election. But millions of
votes are going to be cast by the Australian community why is John
Howard hiding his policies, when his Federal Secretary his Federal
Director says they are 98% prepared? What cynicism is prevailing
that he will only pop them out at the fast minute, or if he gets a
chance not pop them out, to sneak past the public without them
being able to understand what he is really proposing? It's as I have
always said, honesty and credibility in politics starts with policies, and
if the Liberals have their policies prepared as Mr Robb now tells us
they have why is John Howard being so slick and so sneaky in
keeping them in the bottom drawer?
ends. 3 UC t ., J5I IS 6 N 0 006 F,. u4/ u 



108/
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
Today's front-page report in The Sydney Morning Herald deliberately distorts the
process of consultation undertaken by the Federal Government to develop a National*
Forest Reserve System.
Yet again, the Herald's environment writer has either faied to understand the process,
or deliberately misrepresented it in an effort to derail the constructive process now
underway. Statements claiming that some areas proposed for interim protection were either not
forest or had previously been logged, are mischievous and misleading.
The criteria for identifying which areas should be set aside were developed by a panel
of eminent scientists and endorsed by the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature. It is important that the criteria be properly understood by the relevant interest groups,
and by those reporting on this issue.
The main criteria relate to protecting old growth, wilderness and biodiversity values of
forests.. Under the old growth criteria, 60 100 per cent of all remaining old growth forests
would be protected, with the appropriate level of protection for each fqrest type
dependent on its comparative rarity. This means that for some forest types, 100 per
cent of old growth would be protected, with a minimum protection level of 60 per cent
for forest types with extensive old growth stands remaining.
The wilderness criterion, however, does not relate just to forests. Wilderness is not
related to vegetation type. " Wil1derness" embraces measures of remoteness,
naturalness and lack of disturbance, regardless of the composition of the vegetation.
Accordingly, the approach taken by the Commonwealth is to identify high quality
wilderness, regardless of vegetation type, consistent with well-established
methodology and then to give it interim protection. Any forest areas within those
wilderness areas are therefore also given interim protection. This approach has
resulted in an estimated 99 per cent of all remaining wilderness in Tasmania being
given interim protection. The Commonwealth criterion aims to protect 90 per cent or
more wherever practicable. 
2
Under the biodiversity criterion, the Commonwealth is committed to protecting 15 per
cent of the pre-1750 distribution of each forest community. Meeting this benchmark
will inevitably lead to the protection of significant areas of previously logged forest,
simply because it would be impossible to meet this criterion for many forest types if
only unlogged areas were considered. This would result in a significant reduction in
the total area of forest set aside for the reserve system.
While it may have been possible to establish a comprehensive, adequate and
representative reserve system without including previously logged areas one hundred
years ago, this is unfortunately no longer possible.
The Government is making the most serious attempt ever to balance the many
competing interests involved in the forests issue, and it will not be deflected from an
objective application of its policy
We have always said, however, that the reason for having a public review period was
to allow issues to be raised so that we can be sure that the final decisions are correct.
We are as keen as the various interest groups for the material presented as drafts by
Commonwealth and State officials to be fully tested and we will ensure that any doubts
about the veracity of the methodology used by the States to apply the Commonwealth
criteria are resolved before final decisions are made.
This is a matter of immense importance to all Australians. The Government wants to
strike a balance which will best serve the interests of the whole community. This
includes establishing a world class forest reserve system. It is important that the
process leading to the establishment of this system be reported conscientiously.
CANBERRA 3 OCTOBER, 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
*** PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY***
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE NAB ETHNIC BUSINESS AWARDS, MELBOURNE
4 OCTOBER 1995
Recently the World Bank measured our vast natural resources against our
small population and declared that Australians are the richest people on
Earth. I think we were all a bit startled by this, even though I also think that in some
ways we are even wealthier than the World Bank knows.
But we shouldn't read their report too literally. Wealth can be measured in a
number of ways, and this way points as much to the potential as the reality.
I think we should read it as a reminder that the potential is there to make
Australia one of the truly prosperous and fair societies of the 21st century.
It reminds us that reaching our potential depends on us on the Australian
people. On what we do with this continent and its wealth, its environment, its
culture and heritage, its place in what has become the most dynamic region
on earth.
And tonight is also a reminder of that.
No policy adopted by Australian government since Federation has done more
to fulfil our potential than the post-war migration programs.
We very often talk about our cultural diversity as if it were purely cultural as
if it were primarily a matter of food and festivals.
Yet, whether they were British and Irish migrants in the 19th century, or
central and southern European migrants in the last half of the 20th, the real
measure of their contribution is in their energy and vision in their industry
and entrepreneurship. 
And in the affection and loyalty they developed for this country.
Australia's cultural diversity is indeed one of the great advantages of being a
contemporary Australian. Our social cohesion is one of our great assets.
And no less are we served by the ambition, dedication and skills of migrant
businessmen and women. Think of some of the great businesses of post-war
Australia and a lot of non-Anglo Saxon names come to mind people who
came here from their devastated homelands, who cut the painter with their
past, and made this the home of their hopes and ambitions.
And we have all profited from their efforts.
Tonight we pay tribute to the people who are continuing this tradition. People
who are making their lives here, investing their energy in Australia.
These awards recognise the role that our cultural diversity can play in our
economic future.
We have with us tonight people from all over the world who live and run
businesses in Australia.
Who all pursue their personal ambitions and serve the Australian national
enterprise. That's the key the key to multiculturalism, and the key to Australia's future.
Individual enterprise, collective spirit. Different cultures, one nation.
Let me thank all those responsible for organising this evening especially the
National Australia Bank.
Let me congratulate the business people who are receiving tonight's awards
and those countless others who every day pursue their hopes and ambitions
in Australia and serve their country well. 



(~ kzN
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH DEAN BANKS/ ROSS STEVENSON, RADIO 3AW
MELBOURNE, 5 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: We are joined this morning by the Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Dean.
J: You are largely known to be nocturnal, as opposed to this early...
PM: And I am largely that. But some invitations I can't resist.
J: I was going to say, you're a week late, you know, the Grand Final was
last week. The real one.
PM: I know. Well, for us there's a Grand Final every 3 years.
J: Oh so we're in election mode now, are we.
PM: No, no you said the real one, and that's next year, the way we're
going.
J: Sort of seems like we're in election mode.
PM: Well, I suppose it does. I mean, but people have been saying this
now for 18 months. You might remember John Hewson was still
Opposition leader during this Parliament, and he said we were going
to an election, and then Aldxander Downer said the same, and Mr
Howard. But I, well, we're now into October, so it's not going to be
early.
J: Is it true you don't like travelling?
PM: I don't like travelling? 
J: Yeah I read something in one of the papers the other day.
PM; No, no. I like travelling I like getting about. I was in South Australia
the day before yesterday, and Melbourne yesterday and today.
J; We don't seem to see you down here much, though.
PM: I come here lots often. But I'm in and out, you know. I do things,
and I generally shoot back home.
J: But it's not really a public performance when you come to Melbourne?
PM: Well, it depends how much coverage I get, I suppose. But I come
here very often I'm here every couple of weeks.
J: Tell us, we do get reported comments of yours from time to time that
sort of seep out of they seem to seep out of dinner parties to the
effect that you say things like in Australia if you are not living in
Sydney, you're camping out?
PM: No somebody falsely attributed those words to me. I, love
Melbourne the garden city of Australia.
J: Tell us in your heart of hearts when you get with your mates your
real mates, the ones where confidentiality is at a premium....
PM: There's no such thing as confidentiality.
J: But even when you get with them at a dinner party behind closed
doors, do you ever give Melbourne a nice old bucketing?
PM: No. I'm a great fan of Melbourne's. And I have tried to do some
things here particularly when things were low a couple of years ago
and they have basically happened, I think, a few of the things we
have been involved with. And I have been very keen to see Victoria,
you know, get its act together and to move on. Because this is a
lovely city the Treasury building for instance,, is one thing that I was
involved with. We did that in One Nation cleaned it up, and
provided the funding to turn that into, again, another building of
important status that could be used for public purposes. And we
have also been great supporters of Southbank...
J: Home of the new casino?
PM: Well, home of the new Casino, but a good development. The value
in the city jumped the River. I have been vocal about Melbourne's
skyline, about its architecture, about its town planning, I'm opposed to
100 storey buildings... 2 j. 
J: You've convinced me know that you are the greatest fan that
Melbourne has in the world!
J: In fact, that's where that quote came from, wasn't it those years ago,
that you said the disappointing thing about Melbourne now is that
there aren't a lot of buildings that you can have a good perve at?
PM: Oh, I could have said something like that, but it's a bit crass for me,
that, isn't it? But Melbourne has got a great architectural heritage
about it. It's taken the sort . the people have taken the natural
topography and made something of it. If I look at Sydney where I'm
from where there has always been that great advantage of the
Harbour, which is the natural asset the city had, Sydney has never
done as much with the rest of the place as the people of Melbourne
have done with Melbourne. I mean, I think this . you can see vista
upon vista here of city-scapes, and really particularly suburb
development, and suburb and views, they are by and large
superior to most of Australia's cities.
J: You mention that word " election" a little bit earlier on do you get a
sense that, these days, with the parties being so close, that this next
election may be an election without issues?
PM; Oh, it will be an election with issues. I said the other day, it will be a
referendum on ideas.
J: But that's big picture stuff, isn't it?
PM: Well, I don't think so. I mean, ideas matter for the future, they matter
for the sort of world and the country our children will live in. I mean,
my children are now just becoming teenagers it wasn't so long ago
they were just little kids, and in 10. years' time, they will be well and
truly into their adult lives, so we have got to think now about what sort
of country we are going to be...
J: Is that sort of creating the issues for when the election runs?
PM: No, I think, but, say, some of the things we have been speaking about
or I have been involved with such as APEC [ where] I'll be going up
to Osaka in November threading together a free-trade area in the
Pacific to give Australia a place in the big markets for the first time
ever, and a seat at a very big table. Now, some people might think
it a bit abstract, but it isn't. It matters to us now, but it will matter
more to our children in a decade. I mean, these sorts of issues are
the sort of country that we live in, the view we have of ourselves, the
values we have all these things I think are important.
J: They might be just a bit too big to be able to convey in 30 second
sound grabs, though? 
PM: I don't know if you look at the OJ Simpson trial yesterday what you
saw yesterday was...
J: Do you think he's guilty?
PM: Well, what you saw there was a division of opinion around a division
of values. Now, I think in this country . this is a multi-cultural
country and I made this point last night we're certainly not... . we are
doing the opposite to homogenising the culture, but we are certainly
homogenising the values. And I think it is very important that we
have a set of core values as a community where we mean something
to each other, and we mean something to one another, and we don't
take that sort of view which is very typified now of America that the
strong take the best, and the devil takes the hindmost. And I think
that is sort of a callous view of the world that the strong prosper and
the weak fall off the back of the truck is something that the Labor
Party, and I in particular, have always resisted. And a lot of this
coming election will be about those sorts of thongs about whether
you do have a safety net for wages, whether you do have a social
wage, whether you do keep Medicare.
J: Talking of Medicare, are you going to revamp it, according to a report
in The Australian this morning it seems you are?
PM: Well, we're constantly looking at it, because it is constantly changing,
because the quality of health services have changed, I think, for the
better in a decade. The main thing is that we are getting any
outcomes, I mean....
J: Is that a yes? You are going to give us a revamp
PM: We'll be doing some things with it but again, I have said the other
day, and I have just said to you-here this will be a referendum of
ideas, and the Government has got plenty of ideas in the market
place, and that Cabinet of mine is always brimming over with ideas
we have always got more things there than we can use. And I think
this is the same in health. But, it is important that we keep the tone
on Medicare so that it does serve the community well.
J: Do you think, Prime Minister, that you made a mistake some years
ago when you were Treasurer to accept the advice of John Howard,
and when Mr Howard told you that you should live in Canberra,
instead of commuting all over the place? In other words, you have
been stuck there for such a long, long time do you feel that you're
away from the Australian people? There's so many retired politicians
say to us that, you know, that's cloud cuckoo-land up there?
PM; Well, I'm in Sydney or Melbourne virtually every week if I'm in
Sydney one week, I'll be in Melbourne the next, or Adelaide the next.
I mean, 1get around this country alt fm -all dthe bme And the other 
thing is, we're not just sitting in a cell in Canberra people come
through the door, I mean, business people, community groups you
are constantly seeing a range of people. As well as, of course,
dealing with the media. So, I love getting around Australia I mean, I
love the country, and I love looking at it, seeing it, talking to people,
and I think I'm as in touch with it as any Prime Minister could have
ever have been.
J: Have you cast your eyes to what you might do after politics it
occurred to me, I wonder whether having to make these repeated
protests to the French is cruelling your post-Prime Ministerial job
prospects in Paris?
PM: You mean for the Paris Option?
J: Yes.
PM; No, well, I think I have got a bit of time to do here, before I do any of
that.
J: Well, having won the last one which was described as the
impossible win is the next win optional for you?
PM: Oh no they are never optional. No, you have got to go in hard after
them no-one gives you these things on a plate, you have got to earn
them. The public are quite smart about all this they say look, we
make these characters earn our support we get value from them that
way. And when they see a tug-of-war going on, they say this is good
we are going to get some value here. So they like the contest they
like, you know they like to hear the ideas. I mean, one of the strikes
I am making against John Howard is Andrew Robb says he has got
98% of their policies finished. To which I say, well, why are you
hiding them from the Australian people?
J: Because it's good politics?
PM: No it's not. I don't think it is good politics. I think the public are
entitled for their leaders to give them the directions which the country
ought go. To give them the shape of the sort of Government they
would lead.
J: But you get a situation like Martin Ferguson bashing up the Coalition
about the privatisation, and yet you have flogged off Qantas and the
Commonwealth Bank and ANL and so on or attempted to?
PM: Yes, but we have still put our policies in the market place. And I think
that if you do that, you say to people well, this is what we stand for,
but saying ha ha, look, we are going to be tricky here [ andjwe are
now just going to give you a glimpse of them, like a sort of a dirty
postcad,. and pull it out of the sleeve, and give you a quick look at it
S 
before you go and vote, this is the Howard view of the world, It's a
view without integrity, in my opinion. I think honesty and credibility in
public life is only about policies it certainly starts with policies. And
you know, they should be in the market place, and in getting them
there, people can make a judgement. And they see where the value
is, and they can make a decision.
J: Just the very thought of John Howard pulling a dirty postcard out of
his jacket.
PM: Well, a policy postcard. ( inaudible)...
J: Do you ever look at some of your former colleagues who have now
retired and envy them their position you know, you pick up The
Bulletin every week, presumably you read Richo's article you know,
where he is getting paid $ 400,000 by Kerry Packer to churn out that
stuff?
PM: I know, but they're all trying to get back in the game, aren't they? I
mean, they're all victims for a microphone or a television camera.
J: Do you read Richo's column every week in The Bulletin?
PM: No. I don't read The Bulletin, much. The Bulletin has died as a
magazine years ago, I think. I mean, The Bulletin was a must-read
thing 10-15 years ago, but it's a must-forget magazine these days.
J: What do you read?
PM: I read the newspapers, in the main.
J: Yep. Preferred paper?
PM: No, I read the Sydney Morning Herald, The Age, The Australian and
The Financial review most mornings, and then when I get to work, I
pick up the Courier Mail, and the Adelaide Advertider and West
Australian.
J: What do you expect from the Packer outlets whenever this next
election is called? What do you anticipate from the Packer organs?
PM: Oh, well, I don't think it ends up being much different, whatever they
think about you what ever the proprietor's view is.
J: But do you think that the proprietor's view is going to, at some stage,
filter through one of his outlets?
PM: In some respects. I mean, they will do the... .60 Minutes will sort of get
the message to do a softie on Howard, or something like that. But
again, they're one segment Proprietors are very it's very hard for a 
7
proprietor to program the news. It's like the proprietors of this station
saying to you guys look, this is what you should be asking the Prime
Minister. You would say oh come off it, wouldn't you?
J: Absolutely.
PM: Absolutely.
J: Peter Nixon asked me if I could ask you...
PM: He's an old mate of mine.
J: Nicko said it's interesting you raised that 60 Minutes thing that was
about the closest we got to learn a little bit about this fella called Paul
Keating. You have been in public life for what 26 years, yet we have
had your sister sitting in that chair where you're sitting we probably
learned more about you from Annie than we have ever found out from
you yourself?
PM: Well, I have had so many of these so-called colour pieces written
about
J: You don't like any of those, do you?
PM: No. Basically, if I could do the job completely privately, I would. I
don't really like the razzamatazz. That is, the so-called celebrity
status of it. But, there's nothing about me that isn't written there
somewhere, or said in some television program, or in some profile. I
mean, there's been so many written over the years, that when
someone comes and says look, we would like to do a profile on you,
we say oh cut it out cut it out, we have done so many.
J: Do you feel the Australian community knows you, though?
PM: I think they know me, back to front.
J: You puzzle me in that sense, because I remember Ros Kelly saying
for example there are two of you the one the public knows, and the
one that she knows.
PM; Well, they certainly know the public me I think they have seen me
for a long time, now. Privately, we are all different privately I think
probably I mean, you're different privately than you are on radio, I'm
sure of that.
J: Like you wouldn't believe.
PM: That's right. Well, I think we all are. We all are. We're a bit... . we are
different And, of course, you're not in that sort of competitive
environment, and so you behave differently. And I suppose it would 
be good of the community saw more of that, but how do you do that?
You can hardly invite the TV camera's in for brekkie, can you?
J: No. Here's a question for you I have been dieing to ask, Prime
Minister. Is there any danger of getting Laurie Brereton to get the
time of an air flight from Melbourne to Sydney down under about a
day and a half?
PM: Well, I don't know. I mean, certainly if John Howard shuts that Third
Runway down, it will be two and a half days.
J: But it is, I mean...
PM: You would grow old on the trip.
J: But I know just talking to people who travel from Melbourne from
Sydney on an aeroplane, but it's just getting longer and longer.
PM: Well, just imagine if you cut 35% of Sydney's capacity out. I mean,
this is what this thing with Howard was about last week. It wasn't so
much about the runway, or about the travel time, it was to say this
he's been at me and others saying " we have got to take Australia to
the next phase of micro-economic reform. The Labor Party can't do
this we're the blokes that will crack the tough nuts of the waterfront,
and the airlines and the labour market. Okay, the government's done
not a bad job, but they have come about as far as they can go, you
had better give it to us". The greatest micro-economic change in Civil
Aviation infrastructure in the last 20 years is the 3rd runway at
Mascot in Sydney. And first whiff of grapeshot, first bit of pressure,
and Mr Howard is about buckling under and cutting its capacity back.
So what would he do on all the really hard things, like ports, wharves
and the labour market? And the-answer is buckle. That's the point
it wasn't a discussion about the airport so much, but the airport is still
central. It's been the gateway to Australia, Mascot. It has the most
international flights, and just to get the East Coast group working
properly at Brisbane-Sydney-Melbourne.
J; It was working properly, though wasn't it?
PM; To get it working properly, you have got at least to have the capacity.
See, a few years ago the Government de-regulated the airline system
we took away the 2-airline agreement. As a result, air fares
dropped 25% roughly
J: Yeah am I right in saying we wound up with 2 airlines?
PM: But you have got a competitive system. A 25% fall in airfares, and
plus increase in traffic 60%. In the last 3 years, 60% more
people are travelling. Now, what that has done is put huge pressure
on Sydney and Melbourne, but particularly on Sydney. And without 
that 3rd runway, without those parallel operations, we would I
mean, God knows how long it would take you to get everywhere else.
J: Let me ask you a question are you going to come to the Melbourne
Grand Prix at Albert Park, which I remind you is on March 10, or have
you got something else planned for that weekend?
PM: Well, Jeff has not invited me. He's keeping this one to himself.
J: We got a couple of tickets, if you want to come?
PM: Maybe you will let me have one?
J: Yeah, you're more than welcome. Score our Premier out of 10 for
us?
J: Is he the biggest ally you have got in your hopes for re-election?
PM: Well, he . yes, he is a complex character, is our Jeffery. He will do
some things that's what the public like about him, he'll get in and do
some things. That's what I like about him. What I don't like about
him is the sort of ideological cast of the Government -it's still basically
the hard-hearted view, and if you see it writ large in the Federal
arena, that means, you know, cuts in Government spending, it means
cuts in payments to families, it means all those sorts of things.
J: A 6 maybe?
PM: Hmmm?
J: A6?
PM: Oh yes, I'll give him a 6.
J: You pass him. And one word -we're out of time we're out of time,
one word answer OJ Simpson, do you think he is guilfy or not?
PM: Well, I think what is guilty is the circus which-it was has meant that
justice could never have really been done, one way or the other.
J: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us maybe every 2 weeks, now,
given your frequency in Melbourne.
PM: ( inaudible)
ends. 



\ I
I TA] l
INEI KING POINTS THE HON P J KEATING MP AUSTRALIANRMAN
ASSOCIATION, ' PARTNERSHIP 2000' TRADE AND
rESTMENT CONFERENCE, THURSDAY 5 OCTOBER 1995
It is a great pleasure to join you for this conference and to welcome this
senior German business group to Australia and particularly. to welcome the
German Posts and Telecommunications Minister Dr Boetsch as its leader.
S I promised'Chancellor Kohl when we met in March that I would come
personally to this conference as a means of underlining the importance I
attach to building stronger tics between Germany and Australia business
and investment ties, of course, but not only those. Earlier this week I was in
Sbuth Australia, which has a long historical link with Germany and German
culture. I was there in part for the re-opening of the magnificent Palm
House at the Botanic Garden, designed by Gustav Runge and manufactured
S in Bremen listening to the Stuttgart Chamber Philharmonic and reflecting
on all the things Australia has drawn from Germany. I am glad the cultural
flow is not all one way. The Sydney Symphony Orchestra has just completed
a very successful tour of Germany. My wife Annita had the opportunity to
be with them, including at a concert given to a very large and enthusiastic
audience at Christian Georgi's Bremer WoUlkammerei.
1 I 1
i
i~ In Germany earlier this year I hadtwo particular messages I wanted to get
across and I want to repeat them today,
S First, is my conviction that Australian business people need to do more in
Europe, and that if we are to. maximise the opportunities available to us there,
we have to look beyond the English Channel this is not to downplay our
economic links with Britain, but to recognise that there is much more to
Europe than is covered by the route map of the London Underground: and,
above all, that means Germany, which accounts for almost one quarter of
European GDP, is the world's third largest economy and its second largest
xporter and importer.
, There is no doubt that our trade and investment relationship with Germany
falls short of its potential. Germany is our seventh largest trading partner,
with two-way trade around $ 6 billion, but only our 15th largest export
madka. andoor exports have been falling so there is clearly much more for
Aintahin innss to do on that front and I hope thi conlr e helps
PRIME MINISTER 
2
The investment relationship is in better shape. Germany is our 9th larpst
source of foreign investment, and more than 200 subsidiaries of German
companies operate in Australia. They represent some of our most respected
companies. In the other direction, Australian companies like Boral, Pioneer,
Brambles, TNT, ANIand AMCOR are active in Germany but here again
you can't help feeling that there is more of mutual benefit to squeeze from the
relationship than we have yet managed.
I hope our German visitors will have the opportunity to see some of the gicat
economic, and social strengths of this country a highly skilled Workforce,
with a strong emphasis on training, lessons we have drawn directly from
Germany's experience a deep pure research base an economy which puts
a. premium on growth, and which has now delivered growth for 16
consecutive quarters, and which is becoming more international ( exports
havec nearly doubled as a share of GDP since the early 1980s) and more
competitive ( international competitiveness increased by 36 between 1983
4nd 1995)
9. 9 The other major point I want to get'across is that there is no contradiction or
tension between the Australian Government's determination to integrate
Australia more deeply into the Asia Pacific and our desire to strengthen our
tics with countries like Germany -: in fact, the reverse is true: Australia's
engagement with Asia makes us much-more, not less, relevant to Europe a
prosperous Australian economy which is integrated into the region around us,
using all the resources of our multicultural society, has much more to offer to
Germany and other European countries, as a direct trade and investment
partner, as an investment base into Asia, and in cooperative activities in third
markets we have already seen successful German Australian investment
" partnershipsi n Asia like the Leighton-AEG venture to construct the Hong
on~ n~~ ai.-
" t is very good, to have Dr Boetsc, hleading this mission because
telecommunications and information technology offer huge potential for this
sort of co-operation telecommunications equipment is already one of the
fastest growing components of our bilateral trade and in the wider Asia
. Ptcific region, expenditure on-telecommunications services and equipment is
expected to reach nearly $ 300 billion by' 2010.
. m The reason for the timing of my visit to Germany earlier this year was to
attend CeBIT, in which Australia had been invited to participate as a partner
country. This. was an honour for us, but it was a reflection of what has been
happening in Australia in this area our long history of technological
S. excellence in telecommunications broad band networks expanding across
the country world's heaviest per capita users of the Internet and second
highest per capita users of personal computers.
K
I. I a S'S 
3
So this area, again, offers great opportunities for both Of us hope Australian
if and telecommunications companies will -use the success of CeBIT this
year as a base to build on at, next year% exhibition.
Congratulations to the Australian-Germani Association especially -Mr
Tretbowan and Dr Rohkamm, President of the German counterpart
organisation, on their work to set up this conferece I wish you every
success with it. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, GRAND HYATT HOTEL, MELBOURNE, 5 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Howard says Australia doesn't have enough combat capability.
What's your reaction to that?
PM: I would reject any such conclusion by him. We have had probably the
most far-reaching examination of our Defence, with a White Paper in
the 1980s and then the Strategic Review recently. But I notice also
he's saying he won't put any more money into Defence, so what's he
doing, wringing his hands? Well, that's what he's normally doing, of
course.
J: But he said the White paper is a failure?
PM: On what basis would he say that when the serious people in Australian
Defence, and Australian Defence analysis have never concurred in
that view. And if he thinks that, where's his money? I think he will tell
you he's not committing any more funds to Defence.
ends 4: 



a
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH DEREK GUILLE, ABC REGIONAL RADIO,
OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
DG: Mr Keating, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you Derek.
DG: How important are the regional electorates going to be in the next
federal election?
PM: Well, as important certainly as any other electorate in the country and
what is important, I think though, is that now with the emphasis that the
Government has put on regional development and regional -policy in
the Working Nation statement is thiatf regions think that fihey are gifing
a look in,, perhaps for the first time in a long time and they will be
seeing what the major parties have to say both about and for regions.
DG: Certainly, indeed earlier on this progiram earlier this week, Barry Jones
was suggesting that Queensland regional seats were a potential
problem for the ALP.
PM: Just normal public polling in the newspapers suggest that some of our
support in regional Queensland has diminished, but the Government is
the only party which is out there arguing for a larger role for regions. It
is true now that many of the regions in Australia are enjoying more
growth and more prosperity than the capital cities and the regions
which are well lead, where the community groups, the businesses
community, the trade unions, local government, community groups are
coming together and setting goals, they are finding more local
investment, more employment and they are doing better. We have
encouraged this process.
We did a study with McKinsey and Company about two years ago and
what the study found was tat te regions which were well lead were
the regions which kicked along. So, we-are supporting that and we are 
supporting them in many other ways. I went to regional Queensland in
the drought and you might remember last November we made a very
big policy change, we suspended the farm assets test for drought
affected farmers. You see, farmers of course, have assets but they
didn't have income, but undeF-the assets test they couldn't receive
income support. We have now got 11,000 farm families picking up
that income support which is putting a floor under many of these
regions. Can I just say about states like Queensland and Western
Australia much of what the Government has done over the last decade
in taking the tariff monkey off the back of Australia really meant taking
the tariff monkey off Queensland and Western Australia. So, the
reason Queensland is growing faster than the national average and
the reason Western Australia is growing faster than the national
average is because national economic policy under this Labor
Government supported those two states and put far more adjustment
pressure on Victoria and New South Wales.
That adjustment pressure is making the Victorian and New South
Wales economies now modern. We are getting out of the old rust
bucket industries and into new ones, but in doing it we have taken that
cost off the big primary exporting states of Western Australian and
Queensland. So, we deserve to do well in the regional areas for that reason.
DG: You were in South Australia earlier this week visiting properties there
and looking at Landcare issues, can you tell us about that visit and the
projects that you saw.
PM: As part of the general debate about the environment, I take the view
that we have been very fortunate to have this great bequest of this
vast continent to a relatively small population and that we have to care
-for and nurture the environment. We are doing this now with the
forests, but we have to also do it with soil and land degradation, to
deal with the quality of the land. What we are seeking to do is to look
at regional precinct approaches to Landcare and whole of farm
management. We have got a very large Landcare movement now,
about a third of farmers are actually in Landcare, but what we have to
do is to look at each farm and manage each property. So, instead of
just looking at a property and saying right, we will cut it into four and
we will put wheat in four paddocks and we'll do this over two or three
years, some soils will simply not grow wheat, some won't grow other
crops. Other places are unsuitable for grazing. Land which is
overgrazed ends up being a dust bowl and blows away, we are losing
top soil. So what we are saying, is let's blend Landcare and whole of
farm management, farm management planning, so that we can see in
which way, right to each farm, how we can preserve the landscape and
make it better and through the Rural Adjustment Scheme, actually help
some farmers get off the land and ' peihfaps'the farmer next door pick
up their property to have a more viable unit. 
In some places this will need to happen, in other places not, but there
is no doubt that water quality, salinity, land quality are a part of the big
picture of the environment and we have got to tackle those hard
problems.
DG: Similarly the logging debate is a part of the big picture too and that
seems to me a sort of a flash point at the moment which I don't think
anybody really wanted, but is there still potential for compromise?
PM: Yes, what the Government is attempting to do is what no other western
government, I think, in the world is trying to do. We have set a
benchmark for establishing representative reserve systems for
Australian forests. Instead of just wood chippers and forest people
tearing trees out willy-nilly across the country, what we are saying is
let's establish a system of representative reserves so all of the
important species of trees are represented in an adequate way. That
way we know we are protected in the long run against indiscriminate
logging or other practices. The benchmark we have set is 15 per cent
of the cover which existed prior to European settlement in 1788. No
other OECD or western government has set such a high benchmark.
Most countries, say the United States, are looking at seven to eight per
cent of the cover which existed before settlement. We are looking at
per cent. But to get that cover and to develop these regional forest
agreements, to have representative reserve systems, it takes two or
three years to define, measure and sort these areas so that a Regional
Forest Agreement can be made between the Commonwealth, the
States, the forest industries and the environment movement if you like.
So, what we are doing now, we have laid on the table plans for a three
week discussion, draft plans, draft proposals for what we can Deferred
Forest Areas. These are areas we will put away until we can do the
Regional Forest Agreements, until we can assess how we get a
representatie reserve ytm
In this three week process where we put the plans on the table, you
are going to get all the pushing and shoving from the various interest
groups, but what the Government is seeking to do is what no
Australian government has ever done before.
DG: But how worried are you that the environmentalists are using their
support as a sort of blackmail to try to get a better deal?
PM: They have got to be careful they don't over do it because this is an end
game being played now. This is not just an annual scuffle over
woodchip licences and certain coups small coups, you know, one
hundred metres square. What you are talking about here is the
cataloguing and the inventories of Australia's forests for the long term.
So, if some people in the environment movement exaggerate it, over
play-thir hand, wipe themselves out of the process, they are selling 
down the drain the interests of every consciencious Australian who
believes in our environment. They are selling down the tube the
interests of all those young people out there, all those Australians who
believe that we should keep a pristine reserve system of forests and a
government can do no more than try to take this on. Understand this
Derek, the Commonwealth is not a logging authority, the
Commonwealth doesn't have forests the States have the forests. So,
we are now working with the States who have signed up under this
policy. It will never be perfection, but we are trying to get as near to it
as we can in a really good system the likes of which we could have
only dreamt of ten years ago.
There was a bit of macho behaviour, apparently, in an officials meeting
a couple of days ago where a couple of people said look, we are the
enemy and if you don't line up we are going to wipe you characters
out. Well, there is a lot of, I think, interested Australians saying we'll,
this is not mature behaviour, what we want here this is now serious.
There is no way a coalition government would ever do this, there is no
way John Howard would ever be in this. There is no way the Liberal
Party would ever lock up great lumps of the forests in representative
reserve systems. So, they are playing for keeps, a lot of these people
in the environment movement now and they have got to know that. So,
if they take the view that they can, as they put it, knock us over even
though they say this fellow apparently said John Howard wouldn't
give us a quarter of this. What are they saying, we would like to see
the forests decimated to poke a Labor minister in the eye or are they
really putting the interest in the environment first because the
Government is. We can't do more than we are doing now, we are
trying to corral the States into a decent debate and lock up these
areas so they can't go to woodchips or can't go to indiscriminate
logging.
DG: Prime Minister, another issue that i-s a bit of national importance even
though some might think it is a Sydney issue, but Sydney is the
gateway to Australia for many of our international tourists and for those
of us travelling overseas. The Sydney airport is almost a running sore
isn't it?
PM: You are quite right in describing it like that, it is the gateway to
Australia. Since the Government deregulated the airline system,
airfares have fallen by 25 per cent and what that has donie is increase
traffic by 63 per cent. There is 63 per cent more people flying today
than two years ago because a whole new market has been opened up
for low income and middle income people because of the cheaper
fares. We have just got the third runway into Sydney in the nick of
time to pick up that capacity. What John Howard is saying is he wants
to run the cross wind runway again. In other words, you would have
planes coming down intersecting across two other down wind runways
and, of course, it would be inherently unsafe and to make it even
vaguely safe one would have to cW the capacity of Sydney back by 
per cent. This would choke up the whole of the east coast traffic grid
and choke up international passage into Australia.
But the point is more than simply about that. John Howard is saying to
the community look, this government had done not a bad job, but they
can't take it any further. They can't crack the hard nuts of the ports
and the wharves and the labour market, leave it to me, I'll wear the hair
shirt and I'll hop into all these unions and I'll hop into the waterfront et
cetera. Because he said micro economic reform is what we really
need. You say well, hang on John, the third runway at Sydney is the
biggest micro economic reform in infrastructure of Australian aviation,
the first bit of pressure in your own seat of Bennelong and what do you
do? You want to cut it back. So, are you to be believed? That you
would be the tough guy that actually hops into the wharves and the
parts, but you never did when you were in government. That you
would fix the labour market and fix it for go and when I say fix it I mean
really fix it by cutting wages, but, you weren't able to reform the labour
market when you were in office.
These are the issues which, I think, are revealed in this airport debate.
It is not just about the capacity of Sydney airport. It is about the
incapacity of Howard to do hard things.
DG: Is it also about the way Sydney is a bottleneck as well, that regional
people getting access to the airport and regions of Australia getting
access to international visitors because of what happens as soon as
people leave the airport.
PM: I made this point at the Labor Party Conference last weekend. A lot of
people will have to hub in NSW and the regions if Mr Howard were to
have his way. For instance, you would find people in northern NSW
couldn't fly in an eight or ten or fifteen seater aircraft to Sydney. They
would have to hub in Newcastle. That will add another hour to their
trip and cost them another hundred dollars. People in western NSW
would have to hub at Dubbo. In southern NSW at Canberra. So, they
couldn't get that direct access. So, they'll get into a wider bodied
aircraft and it will then take them into Mascot. It will add an hour to
their travel, it takes them now roughly an hour, it will be roughly a two
hour trip and it will cost another hundred dollars.
That is unfair, I think, when we now have this capacity and you don't
have to be an aviation expert to know that if you have got two aircraft
running in parallel, they are inherently safer than something crossing
another and crossing two. In the old days we crossed one and even
that we were hostage to a major accident, but crossing two is
impossible.
DG: You have a great reputation as a fighter in political campaigns, the
polls are indicating that the level of support for the ALP from the blue
collar workers isn't there any more, does that worry you or is this.. 
PM: It is basically a nonsense. The Bulletin had a poll this week saying
blue collar support is down on 1983 1983 is twelve years ago. The
whole country has changed since 1983. A lot of industries we had
then old rust bucket industries thankfully have gone and we have
got tertiary and service industries now. You can't make the
comparisons for 12 years ago and then they said that we have lost a
quarter of the difference between what we have now and what we had
then, not a quarter of them, but a quarter of the difference. And you
say well, let me get this right, we have lost a quarter of the difference
of a blue collar category of people in industries that today are totally
different to then and yet the Labor Party at the last national elections
picked up its primary vote from 39 per cent to 45 per cent. In other
words the primary vote where they put a number one beside you
went from 39 per cent in 1990 to 45 per cent in 1993. So, let the votes
speak for themselves rather than some shonky poll by some magazine
editor that wants to create a splash. The other thing is, the public are
quite smart about the polls. They see this as a way of needling the
government, you know, how are you going to vote in the next election?
Oh they say, well look, I think I might vote for the Coalition. And then if
you ask them who do you expect to win the election? Oh, I think, the
Labor Party will win the election. It is a bit like a by-election, it is a
chance of having a shot at the government. What the last election
revealed and the one before that is that it is really only close to the
election that people make their mind up and that's why there is a very
large undecided vote sitting there. There is only one poll that matters
and it's a truism.
DG: It is a truism, we'll be watching for that one. You've been involved in
the O'r ange Agribusiness Conference, I think relatively recently, that
was last month, can the govdfrrment do more to ensure that we get
more of our produce and our products into Asia despite things like
EEP and those sorts of impediments that might be there.
PM: I was very heartened by that conference, there were 300 people from
agribusinesses in Australia. The ethnic business ' awards which were
broadcast on SBS last night, I was giving this presentation and you
could see there people for instance growing lettuce. They know that
there is a quality issue here, that they have to get the lettuce to the
markets quickly and this chap who won the award, I think, was flying
tonnes of lettuce out on aircraft a week. What this conference in
Orange was about was how we make that linkage. Instead of farmers
just being price takers for wheat or wool or any other commodity we
actually develop the downstream processing of these materials, of
these foodstuffs and not just that, we take them into the market place.
So, seeing someone like Reg Claires from Woolworths which is
Australia's largest food retailer, his fresh food strategies work very well
for them, taking them into Asia, saying let us see if we can organise
the banks, Woolworths, the big retailers, organise the farm groups to
produce food that we can manage in volume of high quality and sell it 
in shelves we control, is a very encouraging development in Australian
agriculture and it is why I attended that conference and why we are
supporting these sorts of policies. In the next week I'm going to be
having another meeting of major interest groups around this very same
subject.
DG: So, that business of there being a partnership between government
and business to be aggressive marketers of what we have got and we
have to constantly prove to the market place that we can continue to
provide though don't we?
PM: Yes, but understand this point about price taking, if you are just
producing wheat if you sell into a world market you take the price the
market gives you, that is all you can take. But, if you are selling to an
Australian flour miller or an Australian producer of noodles or
something and then they are selling them through Woolworths into
Asia you have got a completely different situation on your hands. That
is what we are really looking for.
DG: And negotiations on APEC free trade going on, will this have an impact
on our ability to get more tae it sato
PM: APEC is the biggest diplomatic initiative Australia has ever had and we
have been principally responsible for threading together the largest
free trade area in the world. We are still developing it by threading the
pacific rim countries together. The next meeting is in November which
I will be attending in Osaka. You might remember the historic
declaration which we had at Bogor in Indonesia. Australia has never
been part of a big table like this, never had a seat at a big table like
this. We have always been an island continent, we are not part of the
United States of America, we are not part of the states of Europe, we
have got no natural market so this government has thought how can
we do this? We have done it through the GAiTr, by seven years of
negotiation there to get a better deal in tr~ de -in the World Trade
Organisation, but it is not a regional area of open free trade and that is
what APEC is. This is another point and can I just say John Howard,
my opponent, he doesn't understand any of this. When the Leader of
Vietnam cam here about six weeks ago he wouldn't even meet him.
Do Muoi went back to meet the US Secretary of State in Vietnam two
days later. The week he came to Australia was the week that Vietnam
became a full member of the A$ EA N the Association of S'o uth East
Asian Nations. The Liberal Party has no concept of the need to
deveW6i'Xustralia's bilateral and multilateral trading links and this is all
about what our children do. What sort of lives our children will lead.
What sort of opportunities they will have in 10 years from now and
years is not long. In five or ten years from now the face of Australia's
trading opportunities in Asia will have completely changed. And I am
happy to say because of this government. 
8
DG: Just finally Prime Minister, at the moment the ALP holds more regional
seats than the National Party, would you be doing a great deal to
retain that and in conjunction with that many of those seats are very
marginal, 5000 either way would have seen 10 seats change hands,
will the next election be just as close?
PM: I think it will be, but the government has done a great deal about
regional Australia. Firstly, we are the only government that has ever
changed income support measures for the farm sector in this way in a
drought. We are now using the opportunity of the drought, the
problems of the drought to say let's not have this happen again, let's
try to drought proof farms both with the farm savings bond so that
people can save for the rainy day or the non-rainy day as the case
may be or put fodder and water storage on their properties. Let's do
those things, but let's get down to whole of farm management as we
have never done before. Let's try to manage farms properly so that we
have got sustainable agriculture and we are not just burning the
ground up, burning away our heritage. Then let's think about farms in
a regional precinct basis and on top of that then let's think smartly
about how we market it. I don't think any other Australian government
has ever done these things and that's why I think we will get a good
response from the agricultural region and the provincial cities. We
have got infrastructure bonds there to support capital developments in
provincial cities which we have not had before. We've given support
to regional economic development organisations, our consciousness
about the regions is higher than it has ever been.
DG: Still a close election?
PM: They are always close.
DG: They are always close. When will it be?
PM: It will be when the government believes that the Parliament has run its
full course. We are basically at the end of the Parliament now, but
technically it is March next year.
DO: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you Derek.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PETER COUCHMAN, RADIO 3L0 MELBOURNE
OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PC: Good morning, Prime Minister. Good to have you joining us.
PM: Thank you.
PC: We have been discussing the erosion of support for the Labor
Government from the so-called ' true believer's' and people have been
advancing reasons for it. Why do you think the true believers are
deserting you?
SPM: I don't think they are. Just take the not the opinion polls, but the
real polls in 1990 Labor's primary vote was 39 per cent of the
national vote. In 1993 it was 45 per cent. So we picked up 6 per cent
of the national vote in primary votes between 1990 and 1993 and, I
think, if you take an electorate like my own, I think I got 72 per cent of
the primary vote and previously I have never had over about 65 or 66
per cent. So, in 1993 we had probably the biggest Labor vote in a
decade. I just don't think that this thing is really happening and to the
extent that it is, the mosaic is changing. We have picked up a lot of
people in the middle ground that we never had 10 years ago.
PC: All right, so you are losing some but you are gaining some you think?
PM: We have to be because we have won five elections.
PC: Let me just put to you some of the things that people have told me
this morning while we have been discussing it. They feel betrayed
because as Jennie George pointed out in an interview she did the
other day, the people in the lower pay scales have borne the full
brunt of economic restructuring that has gone on. They just haven't
seen any return for it yet, or they feel that they haven't seen any
return for it. 
PM: What has happened, we've now had fairly strong real wage growth
for many years and in the 1980s where we had wage restraint in the
middle 1 980s to recover our competitiveness, we gave compensation
by way of tax cuts. This was a huge tax cut program that went on
from 1984/ 85 right through until 1993 and by cutting government
spending as we did, when I became Treasurer back in 1983 we had
government spending at 30.5 per cent of GDP and by 1990 it was
down to 23.5 per cent. So, it was down about six to seven
percentage points. That is about today, $ 30,000 million a year,
billion a year and because of that we are able to give those huge tax
cuts. Those tax cuts and the transfer payments, such as the Family
Allowance Supplement which we pay to low income families, all of
that has pulled them right up from where they were. For instance, a
decade ago the bottom tax rate was 30 per cent, it is now 20 per cent.
The tax free threshold was $ 4500 it is now $ 5460 from memory.
PC: The trouble is, they don't feel any better off and there are two factors
here, I think, they feel as if they have been thrown a few morsels and
then the better-offs the haves as opposed to the have notes have
been getting huge salary increases.
PM: Yes, but there was a lot of that in the 1980s, Peter, for a few people
up the top end, but I think a lot of that has disappeared, too. Look,
these are the real numbers household disposable income, and
household disposable income per capita. Now, per capita measures
wages, salaries, supplements and pension payments, and household
disposable income per capita per person has risen by 21 per cent in
real terms since 1983. Household disposal income per household
has risen by 40 per cent. They are the best measures.
You won't find anything like that in the United State. You won't find it
in most parts of western Europe. It is very strong real growth. Partly
the reason for that is, of course, th6 huge employment. We have had
two million job growth since the early 1980s. We have had about 26
or 27 per cent employment growth, which is about 2 to 3 times the
OECD average. And because more people in households are in
work, household income has risen.
PC: Yes, but you see people are earning less than $ 30,000 a year. Look
at a story like the one that was published in the Australian yesterday,
some of the senior executives in one of the Government's own
corporation, the Australian Industry Development Corporation, have
got the most huge salary increases, I mean millions of dollars a year
going to seven or eight executives in that corporation. They just see
the Government speaking with fork tongues on something like this.
PM: This is a body which we have thought of privatising and selling.
Essentially an investment bank like the AIDC is really only a
collection or a collation of its top staff. I mean, it is basically as I said,
you know, computers and office dividers and bits and pieces, but the 
business is really the people in it. Now, to keep those people, you
keep them against the competition in the market place. But, again,
that is decided by the AIDC board. But the things I have been
interested in, Peter, and the things Jenny George is interested in, is
for instance the Family Allowance Supplement. You take someone
on $ 18,000 who has got two or three kids 18 base rate. That would
have taken them to roughly about $ 25,000 a year. Now there is no
way that someone on that income could negotiate in a workplace a
sort of 6-7 thousand a year wage increase. Now I have got John
Howard running around in fact he is following me around Melbourne
at the moment, I was just over at 3AW, me and my shadow I said to
him, if I give you my itinerary will it help. But anyway, I don't know
whether he will burst in on us in a minute.
PC: He hasn't rung us up though..
PM: He might come in with his smiling countenance in a moment.
Anyway, the point is what he is about, is basically cutting this out.
You see, he is out there talking about battlers. I mean, the cynicism
of it is he's opposed every wage increase bar one since 1978, and
when we introduced FAS, the Family Allowance Supplement, now
called Additional Family Payment, they were opposed to it. They
have been opposed to all of these benefits which we have paid to low
income families. Now when he talks but doesn't show us the list of
his policies which include cuts in government spending to get rid of
they say " waste and duplication". But it really isn't waste and
duplication, it's cuts in payments to families. It's cuts in payments to
schools. The same sort of things that Jeff Kennett has done here in
Victoria, but on a grander scale nationally. What we have done in
Australia there is a disparity in incomes, Peter, it has happened
world wide.
PC: So you acknowledge this.
PM: Absolutely.
PC: The gaps between the haves and the have-nots has widened.
PM: This is now an international country and the wage spectrum reflects
that which exists in a lot of other countries. The chief executive
officers, etc. But what we have done, unlike the United States, unlike
Britain, unlike the Thatcher's Britain which John Howard would seek
to emulate, or Ronald Reagan's America, we have brought the bottom
two deciles at least of income deciles, two groups, up immeasurably
so that yes the gap has widened but nothing like the way it would
have widened. So if you inject into that heaps of employment growth
so that a couple more people in the household are at work or the wife
has a job and formerly wouldn't have, because there is massive
participation now by women in the workforce, all of that I think means
that we wiill keep the Australian family. together by keeping the place 
more financially, economically cohesive. That is with employment
and a goad social wage. That means, the likes of the Family
Allowance Supplements. That means the safety net for wage
increases which Mr Howard wants to do in. It means Medicare. It
means all of those things that really buttress a family. Now, you will
still have people say as they have said to you, Peter, well okay we
still feel as though some of it has passed us by, and I can emphathise
with that, but nothing like it would have. I mean, I don't know whether
you noticed the US labour secretary, Robert Reich, the US Minister
for Labour, about 3 months ago said well in America we have had
heaps of employment growth but we have had real wages falling for
16 consecutive years. In the United States, 70 per cent of the
incremental wealth of the last decade has gone to 3 per cent of the
population and the people at the bottom, they are really at the bottom'.
This is not true in Australia. The values of this government and the
values of holding this society together, I mean, Working Nation
looking after the long term unemployment, One Nation getting the
place started again, and those big social questions, occupational
superannuation for the workforce these are all about making
Australia different and better.
PC: Oh yeah, I think you are right. I think anyone who goes to the United
States comes back saying you are infinitely better off here if you are
disadvantaged than you are there. But your problem, politically, is
that John Howard is reminding people of just why they are finding it
tough in Australia. He pointed out last night, for instance, that the
cost of servicing an average mortgage in Australia has jumped from
$ 651 in 1983 to $ 974 in 1995 and that is in real terms. Now that is a
hell of a lot of money out of people's pockets if they are earning less
than $ 30,000 a year.
PM: Again, I would have to look at those numbers to know whether they
are right. But partly that will be explained, some of it will be explained
that house prices have risen. I mean, many people will say to you
oh I feel better about things because I bought a house for $ 120,000
and it is now worth $ 300,000. Well the new buyer who ii coming in to
buy the $ 300,000 house is going to have a higher level of
repayments than that person who bought it 10 years earlier. So that
is the sort of meaningless comparison, but if you look at the interest
rates we have got now, Peter. And here is John Howard crying
crocodile tears about the repayments but he has opposed every wage
increase. You see he says this " oh isn't it shocking that you are
paying this on your mortgage", in other words, your household
income has been diminished but " by the way I do oppose your wage
increases" you know, you have got to say are you-. for real, really. I
mean, are you out there crying crocodile tears about peoples'
disposable income but you have opposed formally every wage
increase bar one in 20 years. Now, before I opened up the banking
system in the 80s, when you went to get a mortgage you would get
maybe $ 30,000 at 13 1/ 2 per cent then the next $ 20,000 would be at 
the overdraft rate which would then be 15 or 15 1/ 2, and then the next
$ 20,000 would be at 18 per cent. They used to call them cocktails
because the banks couldn't lend on a consolidated mortgage. So
your average interest rate, God knows what it was then, it was around
or 16 per cent. What is it now 10 and it is all in one lump. So
you can actually go in and say well look, I want a mortgage for the
house and it is in one consolidated mortgage and it is around 10 per
cent and at the same time you can actually say and we want to
actually start by putting, you know, a new fridge in and a garage on
the side and the bank will let you have actually a bit more on the
mortgage at the mortgage rate to do those things. Back in the 80s, in
Howard's Australia, you could get $ 30,000 from a bank, so you had
all these fringe institutions growing up, permanent building societies
remember the growth of the permanent building societies they were
all there because the banks couldn't lend and people had these very
high interest rates. So, if it does comfort people to think that their
house is worth more, they must know that when someone buys it they
are going to have a bigger repayment than they had 10 years earlier
or 20 years earlier. But the question is how much of their income
goes on it. And this is the housing affordability index and housing
affordability is very good now because wages have risen and interest
rates have come down.
PC: Just while we are talking about housing and so on. One of the things
that would have helped you and, I'm sure, heartened you enormously
would have been a cut in interest rates between now and the next
election whenever that happens to be. Now, the latest retail figures
we've got this week seem to indicate that that is not very likely at all.
Were they good news but a disappointment to you politically.
PM: Well, by the same token, the balance of payments for the month was
very good. Two months ago we had everyone going potty about the
thing running at 3 billion for the month and last month it fell to 1 1/ 2
billion, the previous month, 2.2. So, there is a sharp fall. You might
remember, Peter, at the beginning of the year Ralph Willis came out
and said the current account deficit would be 27 billion for the year.
Well there is now going to be, I think, a sharp revision downwards of
that number, which means the economy is behaving in a controlled
way. So we might have seen a strong retail figure for the month but
that doesn't mean to say that the economy is tearing away. I don't
think it is. When the next quarter comes around it will be 17
consecutive quarters of growth, we are in our fifth year of growth now.
We have had 16 consecutive quarters, four years, as of last quarter.
In the next quarter, the one we are in now, when the numbers are
published, it will be the longest growth phase in Australia since the
second world war. The longest continuous growth phase since the
second world war, but not just the longest continuous growth phase,
the longest continuous growth phase with low inflation. We had
some higher growth in the 70s but it was with 10 per cent inflation.
Now we have got strong growth with two to three per cent inflation. 
PC: Which must make it puzzling to you that you are not getting support
from not just the true believers, it's the middle class greens, you know
the tree huggers, they are saying to you now we are the enemy and
we are going to bring this government down. A survey of business
leaders the other day I noticed overwhelmingly wanted John Howard
as Prime Minister.
PM: That is not true, though. Look, the public know the polls are a sort of
partial snap shot of opinion and they also know it is a way of sort of
spurring the government on, you know, needling the government. It
is a bit like a by-election, you can sort of have a needle at the
government through the polls. But it is only when we get down to
near the vote that people really start to focus sharply on where their
interest lie. This is just as true in the 1993 election. I was having the
same conversations, to some extent, that I am having with you today,
different issues perhaps, but the same theme, but then of course the
growth was only starting to it would have been around about a year,
it was not as obvious as now. I think that Australians know that this is
a good place to live. We have a chance of creating here, if not the
fairest, one of the fairest societies in the world. This makes your life
much more pleasant and that means a good social wage, decent
wage increases, a safety net, a good medical system, access and
equity in education, long term savings in superannuation and
retirement incomes. All of these things are what it is about low
inflation which really means low interest rates. Before they walk
away from that model and go back to a Liberal Party unprepared for
office. I mean, here is Andrew Robb, the Federal Director of the
Liberal Party, last week going on television saying we have 98 per
cent of our policies finished well why are they keeping them a
secret. Why are they so slick in not showing the public what their
policies are. The answer is they don't think the public will like them.
PC: Well the answer is they want to keep the pressure on you and they
want to make you the focus of public discussion and the public
campaign.
PM: No, they think the public won't like them, they think they will slip them
out to the public in the last week of the election campaign and they
will slip under the wire without really being pinned down. Remember
when Jeff Kennett said about three or four years ago no one will
lose a dollar of income when we come to office and of course that
was completely untrue. Howard will say the same things. He will
start talking about softening his wages policies, don't believe him. He
is going to be cutting into wages as he has always wanted to. Now, I
think, when the public take all of that into account they say what has
this government given us, four continuous years of growth and now
the longest growth phase since the war, low inflation, equity in the
wage system, enterprise bargaining but a safety net, a decent social
security system, income support for families, retirement incomes and 
not just that, a view about Australia's identity, about its culture,
threading together the biggest free trade agreement in the world with
APEC which we are part of they say will we walk away from this and
take pot luck with the Liberal Party. I don't think they will do it.
PC: How seriously do you take these threats from the greens. I mean,
they do represent a large slab of the middle class vote don't they.
And if what we are hearing is true, they're pretty disillusioned with
you at the moment especially over forest policy.
PM: I don't think so. I mean, what happened, we have had a few
intemperate remarks by some people in the Wilderness Society
because what we are seeking to do now is the grand-daddy of forest
policy around the world. What this Government, this Labor
Government is seeking to do is to do as no other western government
anywhere has done. We are seeking to put away in representative
reserve systems for forests 15 per cent of the cover which existed
before European settlement in 1788. No other country is trying to
benchmark 15 per cent, they are mostly working on 7 or 8 per cent.
So we have got a most ambitious policy and we now have a draft in
the marketplace for three weeks which is a Commonwealth/ State set
of documents looking at Deferred Forest Areas. So what we are
hoping to get to is what we called Regional Forest Agreements. Let
me not confuse people with the terms, Peter. What a Regional
Forest Agreement is is this, we say look if you want to take logs, that
is native forest logs or regrowth from particular areas, you can only
do so if there is a Regional Forest Agreement. And what a regional
forest agreement will be about is having representative, solid strong
representative species of trees in representative reserve systems.
Once that is in place, they can go taking these things and they can
export their woodchips but only where these deferred forest areas
have been agreed. But before we -get to a regional forest agreement
which takes two to three years to pu6t into place because you have got
to firstly measure and survey the areas, you have got to know what
the species are, you have got to be clear that it truly is a
representative system. We are putting away now what we call
Deferred Forest Areas or OFAs. In these three weeks what we are
agreeing to is what goes away for the next two to three years so we
can have the Regional Forest Agreements later. And what will
happen in this process, you will have the greens pushing for more
and the foresters pushing for less, but what the Commonwealth..
PC: And the Government sandwiched in the middle.
PM: No, the Government will come through the middle with a system
which does justice to our native forests but at the same time tries to
preserve a forest products industry, perhaps not in the form it is in
now, but preserve a forest products industry that can actually work off
either regrowth, planations or parts of the native forest. But it won't
be parts of the native forest which tear away at the integrity of that 
reserve system. So if we were not doing something like this, if we just
went on for years just approving woodchip exports like we had last
years debate, and not tried to put this together. You see, what I said
at Christmas last year is if these States don't come to the party, if
Tasmania doesn't sign up and the other States don't sign up here, we
will be cutting woodchip exports by 20 per cent a year to nothing, so
in five years there will be none. So they all said, God we better get
into the game. So they have signed up, Tasmania has signed up
which is the State we needed to be in it, along with Victoria and NSW
and we are now in this sophisticated process that no government like
this is doing anywhere in the world. And I just hope there was a
very good piece in the Australian on the weekend where one
journalist said look I hope the greens understand how important this
process is and what quality it is and how good this is going to be for
Australia and that they are part of it and not removed from it.
PC: Prime Minister, we have got to break for our news now, but thank you
for stopping by this morning and I'm sure we will see you again
between now and the next election, whenever it happens to be.
PM: If you give me a good invitation, Peter, I'm sure I'll turn up.
ends 


CPRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPDOORSTOP, SYDNEY, RANDWICK RACECOURSE, 6 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I wanted to say some things about John -Howard's Defence-Policy,&nbsp;Statement he released yesterday. And if you need to be proof&nbsp;positive that as we squeeze Mr Howard to release policy details, each&nbsp;one he releases though he has most, of course, secretly cached in&nbsp;his bottom draw but as he releases them, you find that there are no&nbsp;ideas in them, and that they are out of their time. Last week we saw&nbsp;his blunder on Mascot Airport, on the third runway. This week, it's on&nbsp;an even larger topic the question of the nation's defence. And what&nbsp;his statement reveals, is, I think, what we have been saying of him,&nbsp;and that is that he hasn't had a fresh idea since the 1 950s. He says&nbsp;in this speech that what he calls " unresolved tensions between the&nbsp;Government's focus on the defence partnership with the region&nbsp;versus the region as a potential source of threats". In other words,&nbsp;there's a codeword here which is basically fear of South East Asia,which underlined all of his call for rebalancing our policy.
So, here we are in the 1990s engaging Asia like as never before, and&nbsp;what's he talking about? He's talking about rebalancing, whichmeans more fear of our environment, and a bigger gun. He talksabout rebalancing, yet you know, when the leader of Vietnam camehere a few weeks ago 6 weeks or so ago he wouldn't see him. Hewouldn't engage Vietnam, that wants to be a friendly country withAustralia, but he wants us to have a bigger stick and more weaponsagainst them. At the same time, he won't put any more dollars on theline to do it. In other words, a complete confusion of objectives andmeans. Here he is, basically espousing a 1950s defence policy forAustralia. Closer ties, he calls it, with the United States, fear of theregion he upbraids Gareth Evans for not including the United Statesin a map of East Asia, and the main reason for that is, of course, itisn't in East Asia. And the only map that John Howard wants to see isthe one with the big red arrows coming down again towards Australia,&nbsp;so he can run around beating up fear about the strategy environmentthe threatening strategic environment we live in.
Australia has completely passed John Howard by. Australia haspassed John Howard by. The changes that have been made here,the changed environment we now live in an environment of trust andco-operation with ' ASEAN, in the ASEAN Regional Forum, in the bigbilateral relationships we have with China -and Japan and the UnitedStates, in multi-lateral bodies such as A PEC, in the defence cooperationwe know have around the region, -in'the defence exerciseswe have with countries such as Malaysia and Singapore and others,in these sorts of things, we see from him a complete failure tounderstand this. The Indonesians, for instance, in the Kangarooexercises this year.
So, what we are seeing is the very thing we always say about JohnHoward he's learned nothing since-the-1 950s-If you -want to really.see a slab of 1950s policy, that was his Defence Statement last night:-And this is the person who says he should have stewardship ofAustralia's Asian relationship someone who fears it, and someonewho wants to put together a bigger defence effort. And, as I made thepoint,nowhere in his policy were there any extra dollars committed.He says that our defence relationship with the United States is driftingKim Beazley is in Washington at the moment. We have 2 USwarships a guided missile cruiser and a destroyer in Sydneyharbour 1 in Darwin a frigate the 2nd US marine group airexercise to be held this year Southern Frontier is underway today,in the Northern territory involving 300 US troops and 18-30 aircraft,we have also just completed a few weeks ago K~ angaroo 95 ourmajor exercise with a large US participation of about 2000 US tiRoops,and black-hawk helicopters, plus 3 US ships. I mean, if we do anymore with them, they will be sitting in our laps it will look like 1945.But this is the sort of dross and drivel that John Howard's about. Youcan understand now why he wants to keep the policies a secret.Because as he drops them out, you realise he and his party havecome nowhere in 40 years. And whether it was turning our backs onthe gateway to Sydney at Mascot last week, or as it is today dredgingup a 50s defence policy for Australia completely missing the pointabout Australia's connections with South East Asia and North Asia,and our relationship with the United States. Wherever you look, JohnHoward's out of his depth, and out of his epoch, and the country haspassed him by. Now, we will see more of this this is why there isthis dichotomy of opinion in the Liberal Party the Andrew Robb's ofthis world who want more policies released, and his parliamentarycolleagues who want less because they know they are going to revealthis sort of tripe. So, I would be glad to take questions from you.
J: John Howard said yesterday when he spoke of the possibility of theprepositioning of US equipment in Australia. A body that he spoke to,the Australian Defence Association, suggested that this could involvefor example, 15 merchant vessels in Darwin. Was that the sort of thingthe Government would support?
PM: We have just finished a major exercise, a major mock combat exercise&nbsp;in Kangaroo 95. As I say you have got this southern frontier 11 here&nbsp;exercise underway at the moment, this very day. They are the sort of&nbsp;things you do with the United States and you keep, as well as that,&nbsp;apart from strategic engagement in bodies where we have had a huge&nbsp;influence such as the ASEAN Regional Forum, but you also keep it in&nbsp;the big commercial bodies of engagement between the United States,Australia and East Asia, in bodies such as APEC. This is what it is all&nbsp;about, we are in a co-operative war, the cold war has finished. John&nbsp;Howard is the same person who by the way was telling us that, I mean,&nbsp;it was a bit rich I thought, Howard criticising the: Government for not.&nbsp;coming to terms with the end of the cold war. I just remind you, he was&nbsp;still warning Australians of the need to avoid being fooled by&nbsp;Gorbachev and Perestroika in December 1987. He is unbelievable.
J: Do you believe that an increased dialogue with our Asian neighbours&nbsp;is lessening the need for a sharpening of Australia's defence?
PM: No, Australia has developed through our White Paper process of the&nbsp;1980s a strong defence capability and a forwarfd core defence&nbsp;capacity, but the complementary policy, the better approach than&nbsp;simply relying on weapons is to engage the neighbours and to develop&nbsp;a friendly co-operation with them. Which, of course, we have. We&nbsp;have got the best relationships we've ever had in east Asia, south-east&nbsp;Asia and north Asia. Also, we have got Mr Downer saying ' oh well, we&nbsp;should be concentrating more on north Asia'. Why? We are already&nbsp;doing so much with north Asia, but south east Asia is where we live.
J: What do you say to those critics who say that we are, in fact, too close&nbsp;to those countries in terms of military relations, that the military are&nbsp;responsible for the ( inaudible on human rights?
PM: What do I say? It is rubbish. I mean, how can you be too close to a&nbsp;nation of 180 million people who are on your doorstop. How can you&nbsp;be too close?
J: Prime Minister, is there a need to have another look at the ready&nbsp;reserve and its relationship with the general reserve, in terms of their&nbsp;training, morale and those sorts of operations and things?
PM: That question jogs my memory about this Liberal Party magic wand&nbsp;called ' administrative savings'. They are always going to be cutting&nbsp;money out of the budget. Of course, administrative savings will not&nbsp;fund the sort of spending that they have in mind, but we have from the&nbsp;defence budget, yielded great changes in savings already. In terms of&nbsp;outsourcing and changing the character of the ADF where a lot of the&nbsp;tasks which are done in-house, within the force, within the ADF&nbsp;structure, will now be done privately and off bases so that more of the&nbsp;ADF will actually be a core combat force and sitting behind that a&nbsp;reserve. That is the direction Australian defence planning and policy is&nbsp;going, but I think, this has just escaped Mr Howard.
J: This morning Mr Howard spoke about another topic, he quoted the&nbsp;ALP President Barry Jones suggesting that the Government is going to&nbsp;increase tax.
PM: Barry Jones has written another book and in that book he talks about&nbsp;some of the subjects that he has been quite learned about. About the&nbsp;information age, about how he thinks the nature of work is changing,&nbsp;about how national governments will respond to this... This has got no--&nbsp;implications for the national policy at all.
J: Do you reject claims from Mr Howard that you are thinking of&nbsp;increasing taxes?
PM: Mr Howard was the highest taxing Treasurer in Australia's history. Mr&nbsp;Howard had taxes to GDP higher than any one in Australian federalhistory. He left me the dirty work of bringing taxes down. When he left&nbsp;office the bottom rate of tax was 30 per cent. It is now 20 per cent.When he left office the tax free threshold was $ 4,500. It is now $ 5,450&nbsp;from memory. When he left office the top marginal rate was 60 per&nbsp;cent. It is now 47 per cent. When he left office the company rate was46 per cent. It is now 36 per cent.&nbsp;
J: So you reject his claims?
PM: It is just tripe, as most of the things he says about economic policy are&nbsp;and certainly about taxation.
J: Any comment concerning the story this morning out of Washington, in&nbsp;the Financial Review, about IMF warning Australia on interest rates?
PM: I think there is a bit of reading into behind what the I MF said. The IMF&nbsp;does a study on Australia as it does on most other countries, all the&nbsp;OECD countries every year and they give us a running commentary on&nbsp;economic policy, but they don't give a month by month, quarter by&nbsp;quarter account on monetary policy or interest rates and I just think&nbsp;whoever wrote the story read too much into it. Thank you.
ends


PRIME MINISTER1ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER," THE HON P J KEATING MPAUSTRALIANSKILL OLYMPICS TEAM FAREWELLSYDNEY, 6 OCTOBER 1995
I'm very happy to be in Sydney today to farewell the Australian team for the&nbsp;33rd International Skill Olympics. More than 6000 young people from across the&nbsp;continent competed for positions on the team, so you should feel extremely proud of&nbsp;your selection.
Of course, you won't get as much media coverage as those more glamorous&nbsp;Olympians who are going to Atlanta next year. But your efforts in Lyon will be no&nbsp;less significant, the message you bear at least as profound.In fact, from a national perspective, Lyon is the main game. In Lyon the mettle ofAustralian industry will in no small way be tested.Lyon is the main game because, increasingly, education and training matters likenothing else.The world is changing visibly, quickly, inexorably.Trade walls are falling over, capital markets arc shaking themselves free ofregulation, transport and telecommunications developments are outstripping eachother, countries are at once more interlinked and interdependent and morecompetitive. And the story of work is being rewritten.The US commentator, Peter Drucker, has written that at the end of the twentiethcentury, a new society is emerig the knowledge society. It is a society where thekey resource is not capital or labour, but knowledge.The forces driving this transformation are bigger than all of us. If we adapt to thechanges we will prosper if we don't, we'll founder.We can catch the wave in to the shore, or we can let it wash over us and leave usbehind.
In a knowledge society, Australia has to own the knowledge Australians have toearn it. And to do that, we have to invest in education and training.We have to invest in formal education, and not just because formal educationdelivers formal knowledge. Formal education teaches people how to learn. It begetsthe capacity to acquire skills on the job.And having formal education and informal skills demonstrably helps individuals and,in turn, companies and countries, to adopt and adapt to new technologies. Which isthe essential prerequisite, of economic growth and wealth acquisition in the modernworld. Education and skills are essential in the challenge of the new technologies and newinformation. They are the essential means of coping with the uncertainty of changcand turning it to our advantage.We shouldnt forget that education is not just about economic efficiency: educationlinked to informal on the job training is the kcy to individual prosperity and wellbeing. Government involvement in education is like it always has been the best kind ofintervention to create individual opportunity where inherited economiccircumstances would otherwise deny it.iEducation and skills development have a profound social dimension as well as aneconomic one they are essential to our success in the world economy and essentialto our becoming a fairer and genuinely more democratic society.Pursuing an education is the most important thing a young person can do. A goodeducation is the best guarantee of an interesting job. It holds the most promise for aprosperous life.Nothing is more important to Australia and Australians than education, and cansafely say that nothing is more important to the Australian Government. We have niogreater responsibility.Over the last decade we have done a lot towards renovating Australia's educationand tmining sectors.Since 1990, we have doubled spending on vocational education: from $ 344 millionin 1990 to S779 million in 1995.We have established the National Employment and Training Taskforce( NETTFORCE) to increase industry's commitment to traineeships and last year,apprentice and traineeship commencements as a proportion of the 15-19 year oldpopulation were higher than that achieved in any of the previous three decades.
We have increased participation in universities from 340,000 students in 1982 to600,000 today and greatly improved school retention rates from 36% in 1982 toin 1994.We are on our way to ensuring that by the year 2001, 95% of 19 year olds will havecompleted Year 12 or an initial post-school qualification or are participating informal education and training.The last decade has witnessed a sea change in the Australian education and trainingsector. You can sense the change when you talk to people, when you visit theirworkplaces, when you see the things they make and the services they provide.Australia is a livelier place now, more alert and energetic with a much largerfuture. So we have come a long way.
But we have not come far enough.
We must provide better education to more Australians. And we must provide&nbsp;them with coninusous education because the knowledge they will need to survive&nbsp;is always changing.
The sector which has seen the greatest amount of change and the greatest rate of&nbsp;change is the communications sector.The development of the new information technologies offers new opportunities forAustralians but only for Australians with the right training.There will be new industries to develop, and new economies in which to work. Butif we are to maximise the benefits we derive from the new information age if weare to suck out all the value and all the jobs then we have to ensure that our youngpeople understand the new technologies.
That's why the Government is investing in a comprehensive education network&nbsp;service, called EdNA, to ensure all students and teachers arc equipped for the&nbsp;information society.
That's also why I'm glad to see that WorkSkill Australia has played an important role&nbsp;in the inclusion of a Global Multimedia Challenge as part of this years Skill&nbsp;Olympics. In this and other ways, WorkSkill Australia has done a superb job in co-ordinating&nbsp;Australia's effort for the Skill Olympics. Over the years, the organisation, led so&nbsp;energetically by lack Dusseldorp, has enabled nearly 30,000 young Australians to&nbsp;test their skills in qualifying events for the Olympic team.
Last year's inaugural Australian Training Awards recognised the great contribution&nbsp;made by WorkSkill Australia to vocational education and training.
Congratulations to the people at WorkSkill Australia. And I must not let pass the&nbsp;opportunity to congratulate Jack Dusscldorp on his nomination for the Presidency of&nbsp;the International Organisation for the Promotion of Vocational Training and&nbsp;International Youth Skill Olympics.
Most importantly, I want to congratulate the competitors we are farcwelling today.&nbsp;
Good luck to you all. We will be watching your progress keenly, and willing you on&nbsp;to victory for yourselves and your families, but also for Australia.


"* PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"*
9 OCTOBER 1995
Thank you for the invitation. It's a great pleasure to be with the CFMEU for its&nbsp;Biennial National Conference. As Prime Minister I trust you'll ask me to the next.&nbsp;
I am keenly aware of the importance of the CFMEU's political support for the&nbsp;Government in the past, as you should be aware of the many values and&nbsp;perspectives that we share.
Not least, we abhor the implications for Australian workers of the Coalition's&nbsp;industrial relations policy.
We also share an understanding of the importance of the Accord for the wider&nbsp;economic and social good of Australia.
The Accord has meant that we have achieved great reforms without industrial&nbsp;mayhem.
And these goals have all been reached with continued protection of both the jobs&nbsp;and social well-being of the least advantaged.
If the Government could ask one thing only from the CFMEU it would be this:that the union and its members re-affirm their support for the Accord processes.We all know that at various times over the period of the Accord that some of themore powerful in the union movement could have got more for themselves if theychose. It is a testimony to the maturity of strong unions that they recognised theinterest of the broader community and chose not to exploit their strength.
The social benefits have included considerable real expansions to socialsecurity and the social wage, and to the development of a comprehensivesuperannuation scheme that our opponents would never have had theimagination or capacity to implement.
The benefits also have included industrial peace, which has seen strike activityfall to well under half the average of the Howard/ Fraser years. Last yearAustralia had the lowest number of disputes since 1940, and the number ofworking days lost was around 70 per 1000 workers, compared to 590 per yearunder Howard.
The figure is worth repeating. 70 compared to 590. One eighth of what it was.And we are living through not five minutes of economic sunshine but a recordperiod of economic growth, the longest sustained period since records werekept. Some people may have forgotten, but economic growth once used to gohand in hand with strikes.
Could we just pause and reflect on what Australia might look like with theCoalition's anti-worker industrial relations policy, without an Accord?Imagine the types of consensual policies that would be delivered by PeterCostello as Treasurer.
Imagine the sort of intelligent industrial relations solutions that would emergewith Peter Reith as Minister.
Imagine John Howard leading workers and firms through some of theinnovations of the past 12 years, such as BHP's Steel Plan, or the Toyota Plantdevelopments indeed, imagine John Howard simply understanding why theAccord has been so important.
Few things are certain in political life but these things are:There would be no consensus under a Coalition government.Co-operation and understanding would be diminishing commodities.Conflict would increase.
Perhaps the most important benefit from the Accord is that there has been aneffective extra mechanism to control inflation: having wage outcomes consistentwith low increases in unit labour costs.
Increasingly these have taken the form of bargains showing sensitivity to thecircumstances of particular enterprises, and increasingly there has been anappreciation of the need for trade-offs and productivity offsets.We hope and trust that the maturity in pay arrangements that has been such akey characteristic of the Accord will be with us for a long time to come.In all good partnerships reaffirmation of the essentials matters.
Without our joint understanding of the links between costs and employment, andwhat this has meant for social justice and progress towards economic efficiency,we would only have interest rates to control inflation and manage the economy.We would have Peter Costello using the threat and the actuality of higherinterest rates to keep price pressures down. And even he knows that this worksonly through the creation of higher unemployment.
This is the Coalition's recipe for economic management Peter Costello, PeterReith, John Howard and no Accord.On the topic of economic management it is opportune to put to rest a large fibthat Honest John has been putting about.The oft-repeated fib indeed, Andrew Robb used it on the Sunday program threetimes last week is that real wages have declined under the Accord. As if theAccord has been bad for workers.It is demonstrably false.It is true that real wages fell slightly in the 1980s when the Government and theunion movement together had to address-the appalling mess left to us in 1983 ofdouble-digit inflation and unemployment. It wasn't an accident that there waswage restraint over the 1980s. This was a necessity.It was through this wage restraint that employment grew so quickly and inflationfell. And this meant a 20 per cent increase in real household disposableincomes per head by June 1995.But since the beginning of the 1990s there has also been an important increasein real wages, as measured by the best indicator, real full-time total earnings.The recovery has meant that in the whole period since 1983 the increase in realwages has been 7.2 per cent.
7.2 per cent. Real. Not a fall. The Liberals say there has been a fall. It is a lie.And that's not to mention the myriad of tax cuts under the Accord or the likes ofsupplementary payments or FAS.But I'll get back to the Coalition in a few minutes.Before doing so I want to raise a few issues of particular concern to the CFMEU.We will all recall that after the Builder's Labourers' Federation was deregistered,its assets and property were placed in the hands of a custodian.But after the amalgamations that resulted in the formation of the CFMIEU it wasappropriate that this control be transferred to the CFMIEU, and indeed, this was ajudgement made by the Industrial Relations court in August. It is a decision thatthe Government supports.Well, Jeff Kennett has appealed against this finding.The Federal Government finds it unacceptable that the CFMEU does not havecontrol over these assets, and today I can tell you that we will intervene in theappeal and offer you support.We are on your side here. Kennett never knows when not to push his luck. He'smanic about belting unions.irAnd I cannot let the opportunity pass without acknowledging the untiring effortsof Stan Sharkey.The CFMEU has also been encouraging the Government to support the&nbsp;ratification of the new ILO Convention concerning Occupational Health and&nbsp;Safety. Australia takes its ILO obligations and the ILO standards very seriously,&nbsp;and has now ratified 57 ILO conventions.
As a major mining country, Australia made a strong commitment to the&nbsp;development of the new ILO standards on safety and health in mines which were&nbsp;adopted at the 1995 international labour conference.
Mining is obviously an area where these matters are of particular significance.We do not want a repeat of last years Moura Mines Disaster in Queensland.I should mention here the very important international role played by the JointNational President of the CFMEU, Mr John Maitland, who was the Chairman ofthe workers' group in the committee which developed these important standards.
Australia will be considering the new convention as a priority with a view to itsearly ratification. Again, we won't be letting the CFMEU down.Australia also actively supports the current efforts of the ILO to improve itseffectiveness and promote observance of its standards, especially the humanrights labour standards. As part of its current activities the ILO is identifyingobstacles to ratification in countries which have not endorsed core human rightslabour standards.We will be examining ways in which the promotion and observance of ILOstandards can be encouraged in the Asia-Pacific region. This will be the subjectof recommendations by a tripartite working party which, under the Chairmanshipof Michael Duffy is considering the matter and will report to the Government laterthis year.The CFMIEU has expressed a concern which has been shared by theGovernment for some time. It relates to the contracting-out arrangements thatplace people outside of the PAYE system.It was perhaps a mild curiosity in the past, but it is now clear that it has becomeendemic in the building trades.It is an activity that robs the Government of tax revenue.It is an activity that undermines the award system.Tr~ It is an activity that puts in jeopardy the rights of those who were previouslyprotected as employees.It is also an unethical activity. The two words that come to mind are rorts andscams. The CFMEU understands this well..In saying that we need also to acknowledge that this is a difficult area. But it isan area in which reform has to take place.In the Budget the Government announced that it would be amending the PAYEprovisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act to ensure that they coverpayments for labour which were always intended to be covered. In the past ourattempts to fix this problem have not been sufficient.We know it is hard, but I want to reaffirm today that the Government has madeprogress and legislative change will be announced shortly.
It is also relevant for me to acknowledge to this group that we are currently goingthrough a necessary but possibly apprehensive period for workers involved inthe forestry industry. Obviously we all need to wait to see how the currentconsultations develop, but several things can be said with some confidence.They are that the government does not resile from wanting to have a world classforest reserve system in place for the longer term. But we similarly recognise theimportance of having a wood products industry with sustained and significantemployment, and with an increasing emphasis on domestic value adding.We must make sure that in this industry, as in others, we use the rich resourcebase that we have to create jobs for Australian workers, in a way that alsoprovides for the highest standards of environmental protection.Over the ensuing weeks these issues will be vigorously debated and I lookforward to a full contribution from those of you with a direct stake in the issue offorest policy.I want to spend what time remains to answering a few broader questions ofinterest for the CFMIEU. Naturally this must bring me back to the Coalition,because the industrial relations debate is the real policy question for Australianworkers. It is here that the essential issue of take-home pay will be decided.Its already clear that the Coalition does not understand the value of the Accord.And given the clear benefits of the Accord, this says something about theCoalition's capacity to understand and judge policy.Oh, they say, so the Accord reduced strikes and conflict, helped expand socialprotection for the disadvantaged, allowed a threshold cut in inflation, facilitatedthe introduction of a comprehensive superannuation scheme, and allowed us tomake the significant industrial reforms essential to our internationalcompetitiveness? " Is that all?", they say. Well, we better throw the Accord out.Somehow it says it all about them: ditch the Accord and keep the Britishmonarchy.You have to ask, why?They say that the most important possible reform to Australia will be in the areaof industrial relations.
John Howard said last Friday that: essential elements of our industrialrelations policy will remain".He has many times recently said that Jobsback! in which there were only fourminimum conditions for workers is the correct approach.He has consistently supported the Western Australian state legislation in whichthere are also four minimum conditions only.He looks enviously at New Zealand which abolished awards in 1991. He wantsus to be like them.And we should never forget what goes on in the minds of that Shadow Cabinet oftheirs. It is the same Shadow Cabinet that wanted to scarify workers at the lastelection. And they have not changed.The big issue which will come back to haunt John Howard, Peter Reith and PeterCostello and the rest is very simple: they don't guarantee workers' pay.It's as simple as that. If workers sign workplace agreements that remove someof their award conditions there will be no compensation to ensure that the valueof the package is maintained.The Government guarantees that pay can't be cut. If workers trade-in someaward conditions, they will see increases in pay to cover it.In other words, we have a true no disadvantage test. The Coalition does not.Workers will lose under the Coalition.And workers will lose big under the Coalition.And when workers lose, families lose the families of so-called battlers withwhom our opponents claim to have so much in common.And when the low paid become lower paid, and less secure, the fabric of societybegins to change. You can't knock the low paid about without knocking Australiaabout you can't do it.Remember that Peter Reith's July speech set out the minimum conditions thatwould provide the basis for the Coalition's approach. It did not include penaltyrates, overtime wage rates, or holiday leave loadings, to name a few.And don't hold your breath for travel allowances or tool allowances they justwon't be on if the big goal is " flexibility".
Watch this word " flexibility" from the Coalition.It means pay cuts. For " flexibility" read " pay cut".It's not as long as " incentivation", but it is much more pernicious.Flexibility. Whenever Howard or Reith say this, ask: why doesn't he admit hewants the pay of the least powerful to fall?Well, what will the Coalition's policy of flexibility mean for some typical CFMEUworkers? Let me show you.Take an ' Operator Level 3' miner, who receives an area allowance of $ 8.11 perday, a service increment of $ 1.77 per day, and who works a fairly typical 6 hoursof overtime a week.If the overtime is paid at the base rate instead of at time-and-a-half for the firsttwo hours and double-time after that, the loss will be $ 69.30 a week.Assuming the holiday leave loading of 17 per cent goes too, this worker will losea total annual amount of $ 7,100.60. This is a cut of 18.8 per cent for one of theCoalition's " battlers".What about a " Log Band Sawyer'? A typical person in this job might work 8Shours a week overtime, and at the moment they receive the annual leave loadingof 17.5 per cent. Working the same number of hours under the Coalition policy,the log band sawyer stands to lose at least $ 2684.85 a year, or a real cut ofabout 10 per cent.How about a typical ' Leading Hand Linesman'?Today they receive industry, tool, leading hand and special allowances worth$ 55.60 per week. If they work 8 hours of overtime a week which is fairly typicalthey stand to lose just from this being paid at the normal rate a total of $ 65.70 aweek. Taking away the holiday leave loading which is worth $ 317.50, the total loss forthe year for the linesman would be $ 6139.90, a 20 per cent cut.This is flexibility, Howard-style. Flexibility downwards.And somehow we don't think that Mr Costello will find it in his heart tocompensate these CFMEU workers through the social security system.
He and Mr Howard say they are pro family, but they're anti family incomesupport. Pro family and anti overtime rates. Pro family and anti penalty rates.Pro family and pro " take the contract or take the sack".But, what does the Coalition say about the examples I have given?It can't happen, they say, because no one will be forced off an award if they don'twant to be. That is, if you like your current arrangements that's fine, you canhave them. There will just be a lot more choice. What a great system no-onecan lose!Now I can only say to this one simple thing: Mr Howard and Mr Reith are eithervery ignorant about how labour markets work, or they are trying to fool everyone.What sort of choice is there for workers asked to sign an agreement or risklosing their jobs?And we know that this is already happening under the Western Australianlegislation. Ask Jeff Allen who was sacked in WA for refusing to sign a " flexible"workplace agreement.It should be no surprise that the Coalition seems to have the lowest support inVictoria and Western Australia where workers are having first hand experienceswith these realities.We also don't know what will happen to workers on workplace agreements thatbecome whittled away from inflation. Why won't the Coalition explain more tovoters about how they can expect to maintain their conditions? They are thesame voters they are crying crocodile tears over.The other large bit of ignorance or dishonesty on the part of the Coalition hereconcerns job mobility.How can those applying for a job hope to get the award conditions if they wantthe position? How does " choice" work here?John Howard should take a long hard look at the data. In 1994, for example,1,731,500 people took a new wage and salary position. That's about 20 per centof the paid workforce.Over 1.1 million of these came from outside the paid labour force from school,from tertiary education, from being at home looking after children, as newimmigrants.
Let's put it differently: 42 per cent of workers have been in their jobs for lessthan three years. Thus under a Coalition's first term, at least 3.6 million workerswill be facing a new employer and thus will not have the effective choice ofstaying on the award.This is a key point for the debate.It's a key point for Australian workers.And it's a big point for the CFMEU.A very large proportion of CFMEU workers are quite mobile, and thus withouteffective choice about keeping the award.For example, in 1994, 43,733 building tradespersons, including 18,492carpenters and 7,445 plumbers, took a new job. That is, over 30 per cent of thetotal in those occupations in just one year.And so did 36,603 construction and mining labourers over 40 per cent of thetotal. This a lot of people to be given " flexibility".Forty per cent cut off awards and made to " fend for yourself'. Let me get it right:" choice" to fend for yourself.When Mr Howard and Mr Reith say that anyone who wants to stay on the awardcan do so, we hope they will be explaining to the 1.73 million taking new jobshow they will do this.We hope they will be writing to the 120,000 CFMEU members and describinghow the awards will be protected for the quarter or so of those who will face anew employer in the next year.And we hope they will be explaining to all those people who are currentlythinking of leaving their current jobs how to make sure that they keep the level ofpay. As we all know, there can be any number of reasons for leaving a job it is oneof our most basic freedoms. But if leaving the job means losing the Award, thatfreedom will be seriously eroded.And the labour market will start to lose mobility. It will become more rigid.
This point came up with a friend of one of my office staff just the other day. Sheis currently on a reasonable wage working as a librarian, but wanted to transferto essentially the same job under the Victorian Award. She was told that the paywould be about 30 per cent lower, and is now not going to move.There are a great many possible losers from this approach, and it's hard to seethe overall benefits.It is possible that I'm being a bit hard on the Coalition, and that there might be agood reason for undermining workers' pay and conditions. There might be someterrific purpose to all this.So I thought I'd end by going through every possible reason for the Coalitionwanting to do this to see if it's good policy.Perhaps they want to put the system at risk because profits are too low. Havethey checked the profit figures lately?. They are very healthy, so that can't be it.It's not about profits.Could it be because employment growth is too weak! But in the last two and ahalf years we've created 680,000 jobs, and we have seen record falls in theunemployment rate, so that can't be it.It's not about jobs.It must be to influence industrial disputes, you might say. But remember, wehave the lowest level of strikes since the figures were first collected, so unlessthey want to increase strikes, why would this be the reason?It's not about industrial action.Maybe it's about labour costs. But they have fallen by 10 per cent over the life ofthe Government, at the same time that real wages have risen. And theextraordinary increase in real household disposable incomes of 20 per cent can'tbe it either.It's not about costs.There is only one thing left: it's to increase the growth in labour productivity wewant to be like New Zealand, don't we?
But this doesn't work either because since the Employment Contracts Act MrHoward's preferred model was introduced in New Zealand the rate of growth oflabour productivity has been only 1 per cent per year, while ours has beenaccording to the OECD.So it's not about productivity.In short, it's not about policy.I'll tell you what it is.It's ideology and spite.Ideology and a complete lack of understanding of the needs and concerns ofAustralian working people.Ideology and an appalling lack of sympathy for those with weak bargainingpositions. Ideology and disregard for the living standards of the great many who needcurrent award protections to survive the people they have the gall tocondescend to and pretend to understand and care for. The people they callbatters. The only possible reason for jeopardising the current arrangements, for doingaway with the real no disadvantage test, for undermining a fair system isideological a mind-set against awards, against the safety net and against tradeunions. They don't like working people and they never have.The Coalition's approach must damage the social fabric and inevitably broadensignificantly the divide between the advantaged and the disadvantaged.It must take us towards the kinds of labour markets they have always admiredthe dog eat dog labour markets and the lands of the working poor.If the election is going to be fought on policy, if it is to be a referendum on ideas,if it is to be a test of imagination and understanding of what this country needsand wants, stay well clear of the Coalition.John Howard will not rip away at working people without a fight. I'm going togive him the fight of his yet undistinguished life. And I know the CFMVEU willenjoy every minute of it.



7
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
OPENING OF THE EAST PERTH REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT
CLAISEBROOK COVE, PERTH 10 OCTOBER 1995
( CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY)
We all tend to take our urban environments for granted, and as they change,
we bend our minds to accommodate them.
It is not usual for Governments to encourage protest and opposition to the
status quo.
But when it comes to the environments in which we live, we have a duty to
stand up and be counted a duty and a perfect right.
Just as Australians have grown fiercely protective of the natural environment,
they must protect the best of the urban environment and insist on having a
say in the direction of development.
" Protect and direct" might not be a bad slogan. We have done some awful
things to our cities and we are still doing them. We are doing them to our
suburbs and to country towns.
We live in an era in which protection of the natural environment is paramount
in almost every Australian mind. I think we need to marry that with a concern
for what we build on it, for what will reflect the sense of place which by now
we have developed.
I think the time has come to recognise that what we build on this landscape,
what we build-forother-Australians-to live in and look upon is an essential
measure of our care and responsibility, a measure of how we feel about
Australia and the sort of country we want it to be.
I think it is vital that we preserve our built heritage. Vital that we build living
and working environments which are functional, aesthetically pleasing and
compatible with the Australian natural habitat. 
Environments which will last and age gracefully. Environments not only for
now, but for future generations of Australians.
And I think this is the responsibility of every government, every city and
municipal council, every authority with a say in urban development and town
planning, and of course every developer and every architect.
And as I said, it is up to every one of us to demand it.
That is why we began the Better Cities program and why I am so happy to be
here today and to open the Claisebrook Cove Development.
It's a pleasure to be here today to open the Claisebrook Cove development
perhaps the most scenic element of the East Perth Better Cities Area
Strategy. Not so long ago, the Claisebrook inlet was unsightly, unused and unloved.
I'm told this was pretty much Perth's main drain contaminated and fairly
unpleasant.
Today, of course, it's an urban waterway on a Venetian scale one of Perth's
most important public spaces. The inlet and cove has been reconstructed,
power lines and fibre optic cables placed underground, a new pedestrian and
cycle bridge built and the whole area landscaped.
It hasn't looked this nice for a century or more. Some very attractive housing
has already begun on Constitution Hill which will eventually flow down to the
rim of the Cove. This is now an area of Perth crying out to be displayed
rather than one demanding to be hidden.
Through the East Perth Better Cities Area Strategy, this part of inner Perth
next to the Swan is being rejuvenated. The Federal Government has
invested $ 32 million of Better Cities funds to transform East Perth from
disused industrial land into a lively urban village.
The Strategy includes the rehabilitation of the old gas works, the
establishment of several parks and the Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Centre, the building of a new railway station and river jetties, and the
construction of medium density housing and a commercial district.
.1 am. especial ly-plIeased . to . confirm. that-this. redevelopment project will be
accessible to Australians of varying incomes. The Commonwealth Minister
for Housing and Urban Development Brian Howe, and the State Minister for
Planning Richard Lewis, are finalising the Heads of Agreement on ' Affordable
Housing'. Significant public funds have gone into East Perth and it would be
unfair if lower income Australians were excluded from living here.
Claisebrook Cove and East Perth are good examples of what is being
achieved around Australia under the rubric of the Better Cities program. 
Better Cities was initially an $ 816 million scheme and with the extra funds
from the last Budget, the Federal Government investment is more than $ 1
billion. The Government has allocated $ 78 million for Better Cities in Western
Australia to projects in Bunbury, Stirling, Fremantle and throughout Perth.
Better Cities is about regenerating urban areas unlocking them and making
them more pleasant, livable and efficient. The quality of Australia's cities is
one of our great comparative advantages. It feeds into our international
competitiveness as well as the happiness of our people.
The Federal Government believes that investing in our people and the cities
in which they live is a good idea. I am very pleased that all governments
have had the wit to work together to renovate East Perth and I congratulate
everyone involved.
I'm very happy to open Claisebrook Cove. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ADDRESS TO THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN NURSES FEDERATION
PERTH, 10 OCTOBER 1995
** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
It is a great pleasure to be here today: it is one of the privileges of this job of
mine to meet people who do the essential things in our society. In your case,
people who help to make this a compassionate society, and therefore a good
society. If societies are truly compassionate they are also more efficient the goals are
not opposed.
0
It is important to make care more efficient it is a poor kind of care which is not
efficient. But the fundamentals of care are not negotiable in the market place the core of
education and health and human services resides in the public sphere. They
are the responsibility of communities and governments.
And it follows that governments have a responsibility to look after those who
provide the care.
I said it is a privilege to speak to people like yourselves on whom we all depend.
It is also one of my privileges as the leader of a Labor government to be in a
position to support you.
That is what I want to assure you of today. I want to assure you that the Federal
Government supports your claims for wage justice and will provide you with
whatever protection we can. 
Some people are saying that we are engaged in a scare campaign about what
Federal Coalition government would do with Australians' wages and conditions
of employment.
But we are not talking about phantoms. We are not talking about maybes. We
are talking about an approach to industrial relations, an approach to lower paid
workers, which you are actually experiencing.
In fact, in Western Australia we are seeing the prototype of what would be a
national regime if the Coalition were elected. You don't have to take my word for
it read the transcript of Mr Howard's remarks last night. No one could mistake
the meaning of them he cannot conceive of capitalism without low wages and
less security at the bottom end.
He remains what he has always been a believer in primitive capitalism,
capitalism moderated not by consensus about common social goals, not by an
Accord between workers and governments, not by a social safety net to protect
the weak and a social wage to support the families of the lower paid, but by what
he calls an " ethic", by a sense of responsibility to the business community.
Well I'm all in favour of a sense of responsibility: but I do not believe the welfare
of Australian wage earners should depend on it. I think we are a bit more
sophisticated than that.
Now, the nurses and teachers of Western Australia are in centre of this d
debate. What has happened to you, under the direction of Mr Keirath, is being
watched by Australian workers and their families everywhere:
I can tell you today that what they will see is Federal government support for
you. While WA nurses are on a Federal award their access to the safety net is
at the discretion of the WA government.
But the WA government has resisted the two $ 8 a week safety net
adjustments This has meant that the real purchasing power of the wages of WA nurses
is falling.
The case is now going to the Industrial Relations Commission. We have
supported it going to the Commission and we will support you in the
Commission. We supported it going there through the Accord. 
I might say this about the Accord.
The Accord has delivered to Australia low inflation, high economic growth, high
employment growth, a record low in industrial disputes, an industrial
environment of consensus and cooperation, vastly increased flexibility in
workplace arrangements and a broad sophisticated social safety net for the low
paid and disadvantaged
There is a lie being put around about the Accord just now.
The lie is that the Accord has not helped Australian workers and Australian
families, Part of the lie is the claim that Australian workers have suffered real wage cuts in
the past decade. This is an attempt to give birth to a myth.
The fact as opposed to the lie is that wages have increased, not fallen: over
the twelve years since 1983 there has been a 7.2% increase in real wages.
And a twenty per cent increase in per capita incomes after the tax and social
security changes.
The lie about wages and incomes is compounded by hypocrisy not just by the
curious fact that John Howard has opposed every wage increase bar one since
1978. Its compounded by what has been done in Western Australia by a Liberal
Government particularly by what has been done to the nurses of WA and
what will be done nationally by a Federal Liberal government.
When we talk about nurses, of course we talk about more than nurses.
We talk about parents. We talk about the children they have to support. We
talk about families.
The same can be said about teachers teachers who in this state have been
similarly abused.
The fact is that every time we talk about workers blue collar or white we talk
about Australians who fulfil a range of essential roles and responsibilities.
The next time the Coalition talks about families ask them about wages
including youth wages. In WA they are offering $ 4.00 per hour for youth wages. 
Nothing supports a family more effectively than a decent wage.
And after the decent wage comes employment security.
Under the current arrangements nurses are all covered by the Federal Awards.
This protects some of the basic conditions of nurses' pay penalty rates,
overtime pay, holiday leave.
You know what penalty rates and overtime are worth to you. You know the effect
if you lose them.
During a normal year, most nurses work on weekends. Most work night shift.
You all get holiday leave loadings. And out of this work you support yourselves
and very often your families.
Under a Coalition government, as we have seen under Mr Keirath, these
protections and supplements are not guaranteed even though they may
account for more than 25 per cent of an individual's income.
Let me give you an example:
Take away the penalty rates, and nurses who work just weekends lose 38% of
their annual pay.
Or take the example of full time registered nurses who work some weekends and
some nightshifts throughout the year if they work the same hours without the
penalty and overtime rates they will lose 22% of their income.
About $ 100 a week.
Now the Opposition says that this won't happen because only those who want to
go off the Award system will go off.
But this is not how labour market operates!
In 1994 1.73 million Australians faced a new employer.
39,400 nurses were among them.
Many have just graduated. A large proportion are returning to work after having
children. Some are people who have recently moved from the country to the
city, from one state another.
The Opposition says they will have a choice. But they won't. 
What choice will these people have if the employer says the job doesn't come
with penalties and overtime?
Say a nurse's husband's job obliges him to move to Albany, or your wife wants to
move east to be with her parents, say you want a change of climate, or you want
to have a child you need to leave, and in leaving you leave the present Award.
Under a Federal Coalition government thousands of nurses will not be able to
change jobs without losing pay a lot of pay.
Someone told me the other day of a friend of theirs a librarian in Victoria who is
earning $ 35,000 a year. She wanted to work closer to home and she saw an
advertisement for a position which was identical to the one she presently holds
identical in all respects bar one, the salary. Leaving the job meant leaving the
benefits she had inherited from the award, and negotiating a whole new deal.
The whole new deal in her case meant a salary of $ 19,000 a little more than
half of what she was earning.
So she had to stay where she was.
The Coalition calls this choice.
But she had no choice no choice, but to stay.
You can think of this as a scare campaign if you like, but what I am really about
is warning Australians that the Opposition's attitude to the labour market is one
of the big differences between us.
The Coalition's position on industrial relations reflects a view of the world in
which employers have a pool of working poor to call on in an ultra competitive
market place.
It reflects deep seated beliefs and prejudices prejudices against trade unions,
prejudices in favour of that 19th century philosophy which boils down to every
man for himself and every woman for herself prejudice against the idea of an
egalitarian and inclusive Australian ethic and ideal.
The next time you hear the Coalition talking about " battlers" I think you should
recognise it for the rampant hypocrisy it is these are the battlers whose wages
will be cut and whose security will be undermined in the interests of cutting costs
for business.
The media are saying that industrial relations will be a major election issue. In
this case, the media are right. 
But I suspect what is generally understood by industrial relations is too narrow.
Industrial relations go to the heart of the basic social relationship the
relationship between workers and their employers.
It goes to the heart of economic competitiveness and efficiency objectives, I
might say, Labor has pursued like no other government.
But what goes under the name " industrial relations", goes much further than this.
It goes to the fundamental tenets of what Australians have always meant by a
good society that is a fair society, a society in which the effort is always made
to extend the realm of opportunity and bring into it those who have drifted onto
the margins.
Our industrial relations, determined not just our efficiency but our ability to meet
these traditional social goals. They determine our whole social fabric including
the strength of our families and the opportunities we can extend to our children.
Our industrial relations are a measure of how much we actually believe in the
ties that bind us all as Australians, or how much we merely pay lip service to
them. So when people say that industrial relations will be a major issue in the next
election campaign, in fact they understate the case because what we think
about industrial relations defines our ideas about Australia, about what sort of
people we are, what sort of society we should become.
The way you are treated here in Western Australia impinges directly on these
questions. The Commonwealth Government will support you because you
deserve support, and because it is in the interests of Australia that you receive
justice. ends. 



p
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RON EDWARDS, 6PR, PERTH, 10 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RE: Welcome, Prime Minister
PM: Ron, thanks. Very good I'm very glad to be back here.
RE: We've got some good weather. You have been out to Claisebrook for
the opening of part of that Better Cities program down there.
PM: It's a very nice development, I think. And the thing I think is
particularly good about it is that it brings the, if you like, the Eastern
end of the the city, into contact again with the river.
RE: That was something that was lacking.
PM: Yes. Because the river sort of went around and sort of vanished
anonymously.
RE: Yep.
PM: There's a Casino on the other side, so it sort of makes that link,
doesn't it? You know, the new development makes the link down to
the edge of the river, across the river onto the Casino it gives the
city a continuity.
RE: And importantly, I think, it expresses the role of Government in with
the private sector in redeveloping our cities Government's can
actually provide the vision, and the structural things. It's very difficult
to ask the private sector to carry that cost always, but Government's
can do that.
PM: Well, I don't think an individual developer can do a thing like this.
You know, cleaning up the old drains, and cleaning up a century of 
rubbish and refuse, and pollution. But now it's done, obviously there
will be more development, more housing built there, and the old
factories around it will get offers they probably can't refuse and we'll
see more housing. It will be a bit like, I suppose the best example is
Darling Harbour in Sydney, where once the Government of NSW did
a key part, they were able to do more. And that's what we thought
we'd do with the Commonwealth Better Cities Program, which we
have used here with Western Australia. And, of course, in Perth the
other one that springs to mind is Fremantle. When I was Treasurer,
we the Commonwealth Government invested about $ 30 million in
Fremantle in the middle 80s, and it was then the old port city, but a lot
of industrial archaeology there. And now, Fremantle is a great place.
RE: All my friends who come to Perth, they always say you must go to
Fremantle, because it's just got something to offer.
PM: It has. And it's a lovely outlook to the city here, and a sort of social
place and it really didn't exist like that before this Government put
the money into it.
RE: I have to raise a question Clarry Isaacs phoned me after
Claisebrook and said that he'd hoped that Aboriginal people would
have been invited to be part of that process. It's important, isn't it,
that we involve Aboriginals in...
; r P M: But they were involved. I mean, Clarry's only a grandstander, I'm
afraid, and you know, they were involved in it, but they're, sort of, he
was going I've got to get his permission to cross the Bridge, and all
this sort of stuff, I mean, it's just basically a bit of grandstanding.
RE: Yeah. So you don't take it any further than that you think that they
were effectively involved in the whole process?
PM; They were. Absolutely. And I mean, he had an identity problem it
wasn't me he should have been railing against, it was the Premier.
I'm the one supporting the Native Title Legislation.
RE: Right. How are you getting on this time with your visit, in talking with
the Premier?
PM: Okay. I mean, I don't like his policies, and I don't like his politics. I
made that clear today about Carmen Lawrence he defeated Carmen
in an election, he didn't need to go after her and try to destroy her
personally.
RE; Might he not say that he was entitled to find out whether or not she
told the truth to the Parliament and the public? 
PM: Not at all entitled. I mean, what how would he go if I said well,
listen, I'm entitled to know what went on in the Howard Cabinets the
Fraser/ Howard Cabinets you know, why John Howard let all those
bottom of the harbour schemes go on for a few years, and we'll see
what each Cabinet Minister said to one another. They would be
screaming blue murder. And if he wanted to do that, why didn't he
put . the Liberals who represented Penny Easton's interests in the
Parliament for 2 years, Masters and the other chap?
RE: Lightfoot.
PM: That's right Lightfoot. I think it was Masters or Lightfoot who said on
radio here a couple of weeks ago a month ago quite brazenly, oh
no, we were representing Penny's interests, and we spoke to her and
she said no, I want you to go on. But the Premier puts the Terms of
Reference together, but only about when Brian Easton wanted to put
his views. But I thought the Clerk of the Upper House said it all, Mr
Marquet, he said it is his view I don't think I'm mis-quoting there
was a question of propriety about whether the then Premier Carmen
Lawrence should have intervened to stop Mr Haviland presenting
the petition. In other words, Mr Easton had a right to put his views to
the Parliament in a petition, and it would have been improper to have
interrupted or intervened in that process. And that is essentially what
I think the Clerk said, and that was a key point. I think it was the key
point I mean, these were the things also that were said by Mr Gyles
yesterday in the summing up. So, it was a spiteful little exercise, I
mean....
RE: But it damaged Carmen Lawrence, though?
PM: Richard Court said today oh, we don't attack people personally over
here, he said, responding to my comments today. No he's only
attacked her with a $ 5 million Royal Commission.
RE: But he has damaged her politically?
PM: Well, he's attacked her personally by arraigning the State against her
with a $ 5 million Royal Commission it's the worst personal attack in
history, in this country, I think.
RE: So you will repudiate any of the findings from Commissioner Marks?
PM: Look, I think that if the Commissioner picks up the points Mr Gyles
made yesterday, that it's immaterial whether Carmen Lawrence knew
these things or not, the key question is did Mr Easton have a right to
present a petition to Parliament? The answer is he did. Was the
petition presented correctly was it a breach of the privileges of
Parliament? A Committee of the Parliament said no, it wasn't. And
the Clerk has called in to question the rights of anybody to actually 
interfere with the presentation of a petition. Now, I think that if the
Royal Commissioner keeps on those points, he can't go wrong.
RE: Right. If you had to sum up your tactics in the Parliament in relation
to the Royal Commission, do you think they were successful, because
certainly you took a strong line, didn't you?
PM: I did. There was no I mean, chit-chats in Cabinets or Cabinet anterooms
about what Ministers say, and then opening up like with some
sort of can-opener the whole question of Ministerial responsibility and
Cabinet secrecy once you throw those things out, you throw out the
whole workings of a Westminster style Government. See, if now no
Cabinet Minister in Western Australia can say well if I say this in the
Cabinet Room, how do I know that I won't be called to account for
these words in some Royal Commission in 3 years time? I mean, I
had better shut up I had better be quiet. And once that enters into
our into the free-flow of debate in the Cabinet, who is running the
place, and how can it be run? And that's what Richard Court see,
the Liberals always do this they break all the standards of Australian
politics. They did it in 1975 by refusing supply in the Senate, he has
done it now by breaching the confidentiality of the Cabinet with a
Royal Commission, and he has done it by chasing out an opponent
who has done nothing illegal, created no misdemeanour, but by
arraigning a Royal Commission against them. In other words, they
always if they have a choice of doing what is right and wrong, they
will take the wrong course.
RE: You have mentioned the question of conventions do you think that
when you began to debate the Royal Commission in the Parliament,
you may have broken a convention, because at that stage that really
was the case?
PM: No. No Mr Howard before I debated it, John Howard was asking
me questions about things that Mr Kovaks had said. They were using
all of the testimony in their questions. And how dare I refer to this.
So what I did was read the transcript. I said well, listen, I want to get
your point of objection clear about this you don't want me to read the
transcript of the Royal Commission, but the Royal Commissioner
publishes the transcript on a disc every afternoon. And the media
can read it, and the journalists can read but what? The Parliament
can't? Is that what you're saying? You know, their objections fell to
nothing.
RE: Right. You mentioned John Howard if I can paint this picture to you:
you were at the Rugby League Grand Final there following the
Canterbury Bankstown Bulldogs, I still call them that, like to call them
that.
PM: The Bulldogs. 
RE: Yeah. And they weren't really the favourites at the time, they had a
difficult year, and in fact, if anything you would say they were a bit
behind Manly when it came to the game, but in the end they won.
PM: They did.
RE: Do you see yourself in that role, a bit like up against John Howard
that you have had a difficult year, you're not in front....
PM: Except but I haven't got a champion to beat, have I? I mean, he's
not a world-beater.
RE: Dogged?
PM: I mean, no he's just stuck around. He's been around for
years, and that's about it. I mean, today on radio in Adelaide he
said he got asked by an interviewer, what do you think will
Industrial Relations be the big election issue, the big issue in this
election? And Mr Howard said no, I think the big issue will be that the
nation should be led by a new group of people. Not a group of
people that have got ideas, or a group of people that have got
policies that they will publish, not a group of people who understand
that we live in Asia, but by a group of people presumably who don't
want to know about Asia. And a new group new people like John
Howard, who was a Minister 20 years ago, and John Moore, who was
a Minister 20 years ago. I mean, it is going to take more for John
Howard to say I want my turn. You remember Ron, in the Parliament,
I used to mock him and say in this perennial debate and contest he
had with Andrew Peacock, I used to say John's view is Andrew got 2
turns, so he wanted 2 turns. Andrew got 2 turns at the leadership, he
wanted 2 turns. Now he's saying, look, basically our policy is that it's
our turn. Our policy is at the coming election, you should vote for us
because it's our turn. This other lot have had 5 elections on the trot,
and it's our turn. And we say hang on Mr Howard, what about your
policies? ( and he would say] oh well, I'm keeping those quiet until the
last gasp of the election campaign". And can I say, what was said
today by Cheryl Kernot, I endorse and that is, she said the
Democrats won't respect any mandate a Coalition Government will
have unless the people could actually see the policies they are
elected upon.
RE: Do you think that John Howard is being very smart, and not making
the mistake of John Hewson laying it all out, and in fact, keeping it
very quiet? And to that extent, it's making it more difficult for you? I
mean, they think it's probably working.
PM: But I don't think it does, Ron. I don't think the public want sneaky
behaviour. I mean, there's Andrew Robb two Sunday's ago on the 
Sunday program saying we have our policies 98% prepared. Well, if
that's the case, why not show the public? I mean, aren't the public
entitled to see what the leader of a major party, the direction in which
he will take the country? Now, he's saying no. On the other hand,
the Government publishes budgets full of details. When I published
the blueprint for the republic full of structure and details, you know.
Accord Mark VIII with the Unions, low inflation, full of structure and
detail. And he thinks he can slide through slip under the wire on
polling day saying " look, I'll give you 5 minutes glance at these
policies, and away I'll go". But, as I squeeze him to actually put some
out, you can see he doesn't represent much. He had one last week
on defence policy. And what was he basically saying? That we
should be very wary of South East Asia because they could still be
enemies. We have got to cuddle up to the United States. Now, you
have a look at Western Australia Ron, what we have done we have
made HMAS Stirling the major west coast base of Australia. Before
that, it was all in Sydney. The Liberals used to have the tanks at
Puckapunyal as if we were going to be attacked from Antarctica, or
somewhere like that. We have now got them arraigned in Northern
Australia we have got these bases across the North places like
Tindal. And we have got Singapore doing its flying training here in
Western Australia, its tank training in Queensland, we have had
Kangaroo 95 exercises with the Indonesian Army, and the United
States but John Howard doesn't like any of that. So when he
actually puts a policy out, the speech he made on foreign affairs and
defence, could have been written by Harold Holt. It could have been
spoken by Harold Holt in 1967 or 1966.
So, I think that I can see why he doesn't want the policies out there,
because when he puts them out a week ago, before that, he took a
view about Mascot airport. And you might say well, in Perth what
matters to us here about Mascot airport? Well, simply this he says,
Mr Howard says, I'm the leader to crack the last of the tough nuts:
our waterfront, courts, industrial relations, but what happens? On
Mascot he gets a bit of pressure in his own seat of Bennelong which
he holds by 3.5% and he wants to cut Mascot's capacity back by
This is the gateway to Australia this is the port on which all
the others work. You know, and what it reveals is the first bit of
pressure, and down he goes. So, he doesn't want to publish policies,
but it's very interesting I thought today that it was very revealing
when asked well, what do you think will be the big issue in the
election campaign Mr Howard, he's saying I think it's time we were led
by a new group of people. Essentially, he's saying he's trying to run
the " It's Time" theme of 1972. The difference was that Gough
Whitlam was a real leader, and Bill McMahon wasn't. Here, I hope,
the reverse is the case. 
RE: We, incidentally, did ask John Howard to come on today he's in
Adelaide, and he said he's too busy. We've got the Prime Minister
Paul Keating with us.
( ad break)
RE: Paul, industrial relations, do you support the trade union blockade of
Western Australia that is foreshadowed?
PM: I got asked this question earlier Ron, and I made this point that this
year we have got the lowest number of industrial disputes in Australia
since 1940. That is seven working days lost per thousand workers.
When John Howard was last the Treasurer it was 690 days lost per
thousand worker. That is 70 compared to 690. It is an era of almost
unprecedented industrial peace and the reason that is there is
because we have a co-operative policy in place under the Accord with
the trade unions, that we run Australia at about 4 per cent growth,
strong employment growth and they do sensible things on wages. But,
there is no reason for industrial disputation in Australia. The fact that it
is on here is because of very unfair industrial relations policies by Mr
Court and Mr Kierath and the Western Australian Government. They
are going for peoples' throats and they are protesting.
RE: It does lead you to the ultimate difficulty though doesn't it, that they
have got a tactic on which is to put on an economic blockade in
Western Australia. The Opposition Leader Jim McGinty says he is
pretty uncomfortable with that. Would you similarly be uncomfortable?
PM: I have spent 12 years being uncomfortable with those tactics, but you
have got to be fair dinkum, you have got to be decent about these
things. If there was decent policies here this tactic wouldn't be there.
If there was decency being shown here by Mr Kierath and others these
people would not be proposing these policies.
RE: Did it worry you what Mick Young had to say to the backbench, that is
that the blue collar vote, the workers of Australia were deserting the
Government. That in fact after some time of enterprise bargaining
there was a feeling that no matter what happened their conditions were
going to be worse and that they responded to that.
PM: I think they did in Queensland, but I certainly don't think that is a view
shared nationally. Yesterday I spoke to the CFMEU the
Construction, Forestry, Mining, Energy workers union in NSW the
bluest of blue collar type unions, I don't find anything but generally
warm support. Basically because the Government has delivered on
the key commitments it made. At the last election, the most solemn
commitment I made was to restore the economy back to growth and to
employment. We have had since then 16 consecutive quarters of
growth when in the quarter we are now living in, Ron, when those 
numbers are published in November we will have the longest growth
phase since the Second World War. The longest continuous growth
phase since the Second World War. That was the key commitment I
gave. The other commitment was employment, to not leave the
unemployed behind. We have 680,000 job growth and the other thing
we committed ourselves to was a fair industrial relations act which we
introduced and we have now got enterprise bargaining and under that
the safety net. If you can't get an enterprise bargain you get an $ 8
increase or a $ 10 increase under the safety net.
Now, in the enterprise bargains we had a thing called the no
disadvantage test. A group of employees in a union can sit down with
the business and say ' look, we will dispense with certain conditions
providing it is compensated in the pay.' So, the test is applied so that
there is no disadvantage. In other words, the working person doesn't
come away from an enterprise bargain less well off. They can come
away better off, but not less well off. Now, of course, Mr Howard wants
none of this. Mr Court wants none of it. Mr Kierath none of it. As a
consequence I think that we have got a lively debate, but I certainly
don't accept the view that blue collar workers are leaving the Labor
Party. Can I just make this point, I don't think blue collar workers are any
different from white collar workers or any other worker. They want the
policies be implemented that they believe are actually best for
Australia. The idea that you can segment them out is so manipulative,
that we can segment you out and say ' well, you are a blue collarie, so
you have only got these interests' and if they get fixed up you will be
right. Blue collar people have the interest of the country at heart in the
broadest sense its identity, its ethos, its values, its place in the world
and they look at all of those things,, not just industrial relations.
RE: Is industrial relations going to be for you this time what the GST was
last time. That is the clear dividing line between yourself and the
Opposition?
PM: Again, there is a lot of rewriting of policy here, Ron. Not by you but by
commentators. The last election was won by the Government because
we believed in a broad, inclusive Australian society. The GST was just
an example of the unfairness. It wasn't won on the GST. It was won
across the board and across the board it will be won again. You see, I
think that when people say that industrial relations will be the major
issue in an election campaign, in fact they understate the case
because what we think about industrial relations defines our ideas of
Australia. That is, what sort of people we are, what sort of society we
should become. It is not just about pay rates. It is the values we have.
I think they measure how much we actually believe in the ties that bind
us as Australians. In other words, the right to a job, the right to decent
rates of pay, the relationship between employers and employees is 
part of the bindings of Australia. It is not just a narrow thing about
money and wages. This the Coalition do not understand.
Can I say, at the moment the profit share in the economy that is, the
proportion of national income going to profits is right up against the
historic precedent having no historic precedent. So, what is Mr
Kierath and Mr Court saying? That they want to cut the wages of
working people? I just visited the nurses today. They can't get a
safety net increase of There is nothing rational about that, it is just
spiteful.
RE: Graeme Kierath says he wants to debate you about industrial relations.
PM: Yes, but when I get down to debating State Ministers, Ron, I'd have
them hanging around my legs wouldn't 1, from one end of the country
to the other.
RE: He says his dispute is not with workers, it is with only union officials.
PM: He says that, but he is quite happy to take a group of nurses, nurses of
all people, and firstly oppose them getting a safety net increase of $ 8
which is now a year late and secondly remove from them penalty rates,
overtime rates. I gave the figures today, most nurses work weekends,
part of a weekend or work at times out of normal working times. If you
take them back to ordinary rates, they lose about 20-25 per cent of
their income. It is just vindictive and mean spirited.
RE: If I can take us for a moment on the question of refugees. It has been
said that the Government has been mean spirited towards East
Timorese refugees, that we should be taking them because we have a
responsibility the Indonesian Goverrnent has not behaved well in
that occupied territory and that we should have a special role in
dealing with them. What is your response to that?
PM: We have very clear laws in this country about refugees. Refugees are
treated well here. There is a whole legal. process that has been
negotiated, in a sense, between the government and the courts. As
various pieces of legislation have been tested in the federal court we
now have a regime were people are assessed for refugee status.
Timorese people have Portuguese citizenship. So, they have no
refugee status though the Government has taken the view that Timor is
part of Indonesia, is a province of Indonesia, those people still have
Portuguese citizenship status.
RE: Isn't that effectively saying what the Indonesians could therefore do is
deport them all to Portugal then if we were to follow that line?
PM: Some people in Australia will still have, for instance, citizenship in
other countries in Great Britain many people in Perth would have an 
Australian passport and a British passport. They would have
Australian citizenship and they would have British citizenship they
would have dual citizenship. These people have dual citizenship
therefore they cannot argue that they are refugees.
RE: I have never felt comfortable about East Timor though since the
invasion period, I think Australia probably owed Timor a bit more and
we should have given them a bit more and this maybe is one of those
tests.
PM: But what happened, 20 years ago there was a civil war going on in
Timor. The Portuguese did nothing with the place, they left it
undeveloped and had it gone to a free vote, it is often argued, that the
people there would have voted for incorporation of Timor into
Indonesia. As it was Indonesia annexed Timor. Here is an island in
the archipelago in a state of civil war with the Portuguese, just about
the worst colonial power, and people were surprised in the final
analysis that it was annexed and incorporated into Indonesia. It may
have gone that way in a free vote, but Australia has a relationship with
Indonesia which is built on many foundations. It is a nation of 190
million people. It is a nation of great diversity, of great diversity in the
cultures and there is, I think, a substantial tolerance that exists
between the interaction of those cultures in that very complex country.
RE: Would you hope to get relations with Malaysia onto as good a level as
we have with Indonesia?
PM: Can I just say this about Indonesia, we can't throw it up the flue and
say well look, because we don't like all the things that are going on in
Timor we will rupture the relationship with you across the board. I
have never believed that was in. Australia's interests. But what we
have because we have a stronger relationship with Indonesia we do
push the case very solidly about Timor. When ever I get the
opportunity to speak to President Soeharto I raise these issues and I
am quite happy too. But we can't have a phoney campaign about
refugee status for people who enjoy the citizenship of Portugal.
RE: So, would you like to have the relationship with Dr Mahithir in Malaysia
that you have got with President Soeharto?
PM: I haven't got a bad relationship with Dr Mahithir. It is a-co-operative
one, Australia is doing a lot with Malaysia and I think doing it cooperatively
and reasonably well. They are all important to us. A few
moments ago: I made-reference. to what Mr Howard-said, but I would
just like to get this point across to people. He said that there were
unresolved, tensions between the Government's focus on defence
partnerships for instance, flying training by the Singaporeans,
Indonesians coming to Kangaroo 95 tensions between the
Government's focus on defence partnerships with the region versus
~~ rj~ 
the region as a potential source of threats. This is simply code
language for fear of south-east Asia.
Why should Australians not have a good relationship with our largest
nearest neighbour Indonesia? It is imperative we have it, with
Malaysia, with Singapore, with Vietnam. John Howard wouldn't see
the leader of Vietnam when he came here two months ago, but that
person Do Muoi went home to meet the US Secretary of State.
This idea that we reject the community around us, we live in an
isolation and then we run off to Washington and say ' please look after
our interests', I mean, is a dreadful way to protect the security of
Australians and to lose that engagement.
RE: Final quickly, employment for over 50s, there is a problem of
unemployment for over 50s. Can we make a special effort to do
something about that, we were talking about that earlier today?
PM: This is what we introduced Working Nation for and that we are now
starting to get very large effects from it. This year we have had about
400,000 job growth, of that 400,000, 100,000 has gone to the longer
term unemployed because we are now case managing these people.
We can now get to find out about their aptitudes, their work
experience, what they are doing, give them a job subsidy and get them
moving. In that huge employment growth we have had in the last two
or three years, we are starting to make inroads into both the younger
and the older unemployed groups as we have never done before.
RE: Paul, it is good to see you, earlier I mentioned the grand final involving
Canterbury-Bankstown and Manly, are we getting to the finals time in
terms of elections. Are we building towards that and how far off in the
future is it?
PM: Ron, I have had three Opposition Leaders now in this Parliament Dr
Hewson, Mr Downer and Mr Howard all saying we are going to an
early election. Well, here we are in October 1995 and the Parliament
expires about March or April of 1996 and we still haven't had an
election because I don't think the public appreciate governments being
tricky with them. They don't want Prime Minister's who are tricky with
them trying to call polls, to slip past the Opposition in a bad phase or
something like that. I have always thought the Parliament should run
its full term.
RE: OK, Paul Keating, thanks for joining us. Good to see you in Perth.
PM: Good, Ron.
ends 



-1.-I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH RICHARD UTTING, RADIO 6WF, PERTH,
OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
RU: Prime Minister, how are you?
PM: I'm good Richard, thanks.
RU: Now, this poll in today's Age and I think all the polls are showing that
the Coalition is enjoying a substantial lead over the Government.
PM: Some do, I mean the Morgan poll had us two party preferred
yesterday, 52 for the Coalition and 48 for Labor. That is only four
votes the difference, that is two to change changes all that. The
Newspoll today had us up two to 39, the thing about them is in
quantitative terms they are pretty unreliable and they give you some
hint of the directions really, only. I think governments are never in
front during the life of a parliament or rarely.
RU: Now, the last election campaign was you went in trailing and everyone
was writing you off then, were you trailing then as much as you are
now and the same time?
PM: By a bigger margin, but I said the other day in an television interview, I
mean the place I want to be and this is one out and one back. I
couldn't think of anything worse than going into an election campaign
in front because what happens is everybody wants to drag you back. I
am happy to have Mr Howard in front, that's where I had Dr Hewson.
RU: Yes, well Dr Hewson had what they have termed the longest suicide
note in history.
PM: He is now in a Merchant Bank somewhere.
e 
RU: But, do you have the same advantage, I mean John Howard is as they
say occupying the porcupine position rolling himself up into a ball,
making a very small target of himself.
PM: Gradually the policies are coming out. Andrew Robb their Federal
Director said on the Sunday program on Channel Nine two Sundays
ago, they had 98 per cent of their policies prepared. If they have got
98 per cent of their policies prepared, why aren't they showing them to
the Australian people. They are saying ' oh look, we are hiding them
from Mr Keating'. But, they are not hiding them from me, they are
hiding them from you, they are hiding them from your listeners, they
are hiding them from the public in general and what other basis of
credibility or morality in their politics can there be without showing
what your policies are. The public are entitled to expect from major
political leaders the policy directions, where they would take the
country. Mr Howard has got all these nasty views but he thinks that
the public won't like them so he will slip them in three days before the
election or a week before the election or if he can get away with it not
at all. By contrast, everything the government does is explained and is
in the public domain the budgets, the accords, the republic structure,
the native title act, you name it and it is all out there but they are not.
Under pressure he is now letting a bit out to keep himself credible. A
week ago on Mascot Airport in Sydney, which in a sense if you live in
Perth you'd say ' well why does it matter. What mattered about it was
this, he has been saying ' the government has taken Australia so far,
but we are the sort of tough cookies who will crack the tough nuts'
you know, waterfront, ports, airports the biggest micro economic
reform in the infrastructure of Australian airports is the third runway at
Mascot. It is the gateway to Australia. He wants to cut its capacity by
per cent because it is affecting-a few people in his own seat. He
has got a margin of three per cent, he says he thinks he can beat me
at an election and become Prime Minister, but he is actually worried
about losing his own seat.
The other thing we squeezed him out on was industrial relations. On
industrial relations he makes clear where he stands and last night he
said ' changes to Australia's industrial relations system are the key to
solving Australia's twin problems of high debt and high unemployment'.
He said he was ' a believer in capitalism and the profit motive, we
should be talking about reducing the costs of doing business.' Now, all
that can only mean cuts in wages. He runs around saying he supports
Australian families, but everytime he says it I think Australians should
ask themselves how do you support Australian families on low wages
without job security. So, he is getting a few things out and we are
starting to see the same sort of line, he is running the same line that
Mr Kierath is running here in Western Australia. Basically, hop into
working people and rip their wages down while crying crocodile tears
on television about them. 
RU: Have you identified industrial relations as being one of the key areas
leading up to this next election whenever it may be?
PM: I think it is because this sort of view about making capitalism affluent,
to have people engage in a dog eat dog struggle in society which is, I
think, the gist of it, in other words you rip and tear at the bottom end of
the labour market for every dollar you can get. I don't think we want a
dog eat dog society, I don't think we want Australians scrubbing
around for low paid jobs without security, we don't want as the
Americans have an army of working poor. And do you notice by the
way, Richard, the Pope refused to see the republican leadership,
Gingrich and Bob Dole and he refused to see them, I think, if we can
believe the reports because he thinks that the gap between rich and
poor in the United States is too great. You saw that member of the
British Conservative Party resign to say he was going to support the
Labour Party this week in Britain robbing Mr Major of a further vote in
his slim margin in the House of Commons and he said there was no
regard in the Party for the interests of working people.
Now, these are all the policies John Howard and Keirath and their ilk
support. The Pope has made a strong statement, I think, saying I've
not come to America to cuddle up to people who are trying to,
essentially, push working people asunder, divide the country and have
no compassion about them.
When John Howard said last night that changes in the Australian
industrial relations system were key to solving the problems of
unemployment and debt, that he was believer in capitalism and the
profit motive, let me quote him we should be talking about reducing
the costs of doing business Now, every business person you speak
to Richard, you can talk to the major companies or the smaller ones,
they'll say labour costs in Australia are not a problem. We are hugely
competitive abroad, our labour costs are not really an issue. I was in a
plant in Melbourne a week or so ago, in a business which is competing
abroad and the Manager said to me " where we have got such a margin
Mr Keating, he said, is that the labour costs here are so competitive
with our competitors. The technology is about the same, but the
labour costs are good" and he said " it really puts us in with a chance."
What Howard is talking about, in reducing the costs of doing business
is just code for ripping wages down, yet at the same time he wants to
disingenuously talk about Australian families. He says he believes in
families as if, of course, the rest of don't, he believes in families but he
doesn't believe in family support. This sort of hard hearted view that
the strong take the wealth and the devil take the hind most, which is
the Gingrich/ Dole view of the world, the Pope said not for me, I'm not
going to glorify this view by meeting you. But this is the view that
Howard has. 
RU: Perhaps you might need to get the Pope to Australia because I
suppose one of the problems that you are facing is that you have been
in power for 13 years now, don't you think that is your biggest
handicap?
PM: Yes, but one problem we are not facing and that is an immoral position
on society. A position about dividing society, I mean, this Party
believes in a good social wage. Australia is a cohesive, good society,
we have got high employment growth because the Government has
focussed on employment. We have had strong growth in household
disposable income disposable income of Australian households,
Richard, has risen by 40 per cent since 1983. Forty per cent in real
terms since 1983. We have got Medicare sitting there, basically giving
access and equity in health, you've got now massive participation rates
in secondary school which we didn't have 10 years ago. These are the
things that bind a society together, but this sort of snaky, rich view that
the millionaires are not doing well enough and we have got to send the
All Ordinaries Index not from 2150 but to 2500. You know in America I
think I have got this number right, but if I haven't got it exactly right it is
like this, in the last decade 70 per cent of the incremental wealth in the
American economy has gone to three per cent of the population. How
can they defend that? America is a tinderbox, you can see it in the O. J
Simpson trial, you can see it in the riots in Los Angeles, it is a
tinderbox because the poor are getting poorer and when the US
Secretary of Labour Robert Reich, the Minister for Labour comes out
and said ' look, yes we have had plenty of employment growth in
America, but we have falling real wages, we've got an army of working
poor'. This is the model that John Howard wants for Australia. What
we say is that is why there has to be a no disadvantage test, you can
have enterprise bargaining and flexibility but you can't reduce the
package of the working person.
RU: Allright, now wouldn't the proper thing to do then rather than to
speculate what John Howard may or may not be about.
PM: I'm not speculating, he said it last night. I just quoted you.
RU: You are drawing conclusions from it perhaps some uncharitable
people, some cynics might say. If you called an election now to get rid
of the uncertainty, to flush out his policies then we could all see what
they are.
PM: Why doesn't he just do the moral thing that leaders, he says he
believes he has a position such that he can lead Australia, let's have
a look at them. Let's get the policies out there. This sort of sneaky
stuff, wait until the last three weeks of the campaign and then try to
put them out so that they don't get adequate scrutiny and we can sort
of slip under the wire unnoticed. Haven't we got past that. Can I just 
say also, did you see him the other day on foreign affairs and
defence because you see, as we squeeze the tube a little bit of paste
comes out the end. Sometimes he has to give a bit out to remain
barely credible and what was he saying, he made a speech that
Harold Holt could have made. Now, in the last decade, take HMAS
Stirling here, we've given Australia an east and west coast defence
base, we have now built Stirling into the major naval defence base,
we have taken the tanks from Puckapunyal in Victoria where the
Liberals had them. I don't know what they thought, we were going to
be attacked from Antarctica? And we put them into northern Australia
with the big airbases at Tindal and other places. He made a speech
the other day that Harold Holt could have made, it basically said, and
let me quote him, he said ' unresolved tensions between the
Government's focus on the defence partnership that is with
Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia et cetera and they are exercising in
Australia unresolved tensions between the Governments focus on
the defence partnership with the region versus the region as a
potential source of threats'. In other words, what he is saying is
you've got these people down like Kingaroo 95 doing the exercises
with them, but they might be the enemy. What we should do, he said,
is rebalance our policy and move closer to the United States. In
other words to say to the US well here we are, we can't defend
ourselves, the neighbourhood we are suspicious of it. Basically, they
are sort of enemies there. So, instead of going out in the 90s as I
am doing, engaging Indonesia, engaging Vietnam. When the leader
of Vietnam came here 6 weeks ago, Do Moi, John Howard wouldn't
meet him, refused to meet him. He went back 2 days later and sat
down in a meeting in Hanoi with the US Secretary of State, Warren
Christopher. He was good enough for Warren Christopher to meet,
but not good enough for John Howard to meet. He won't engage
them he says let me have the stewardship of the Asian relationship,
but you have got to say to yourself, well, how could we let you have it,
John, you have still got a sort of 60s view of the world. I mean, he's
still re-fighting the Vietnam War. I mean, he is suspicious of
Indonesia, he's suspicious of Malaysia, he's suspicious of Vietnam,
and you want to be cuddling up to the Yanks.
RU: For all of that, I mean, that's a marvellous election speech, isn't it?
PM: No. No.
RU: A marvellous election speech.
PM: No, it isn't let me just correct you. It's about the first responsibility of
any Australian Government, to the security of its people. And if
Howard believes that he can't engage the region we live in, what
hope would he have of leading Australia. That's what it's about. I
mean, gradually Richard, you're right in your comments he hasn't
got the policies into place, but the little bits he has got out there his 
6
gutlessness on Mascot airport, you know, that weakness, the sabrerattling
Harold Holt type speech of last week, last night again about
trying to hop into working people, but not saying you know, in a
sneaky not saying exactly that he will cut their wages. This sort of
weak and sneaky stuff, I think, has got nothing going for it.
RU: You use words like weak, sneaky, gutless and so on don't you really
think you are bringing political debate down to the gutter?
PM: No. They call me a liar, he calls me a liar every day of the week
every day of the week. I have got his party president running around
saying I am one of the richest people in Australia that I have entered
public life for my own personal benefit. I mean, the stuff I have got
Senator Baume in the Senate attacking me every day. I mean, I get
questioned about what's being spent at The Lodge every day of the
week I mean, it's just outrageous what they do. I mean, I'm talking
about his policies, I'm not talking about his personal life, as he does
about me. I'm talking about his policies defence and foreign affairs,
wages these are all legitimate issues. I mean, it is gutless to say
that we will cut the capacity of Mascot airport by 35% in the gateway
to the country, which affects then the ongoing flights to Perth,
Melbourne, Brisbane etc, because he thinks he might lose his margin
of 3.5% in the seat of Bennelong. Because in 1989 he supported
building the runway. So, the first bit of pressure he gets he gets a
little bit of pressure and what does he do? He caves in. They're
about legitimate public issues.
RU: Well, let's talk about a public issue that has been winding down in
Perth, I suppose, and that's the Easton Royal Commission. If you're
a betting person, you might think that could well come down with an
adverse finding against Dr Carmen Lawrence, your Health Minister.
Would that make any difference to your support for Dr Lawrence?
PM: No. The Commission is completely discredited. I mean, I think Mr
Marquet hit the nail on the head the Clerk of the Upper house
when he said in his evidence I don't know if it was well publicised
here that what he said was it would have been improper for Carmen
Lawrence to have required on a Party basis Mr Haviland not to
present Mr Easton's petition. That any person has the right to
petition the Houses of Parliament. I mean, any one of your listeners
that has a grievance can put a petition to that House of Parliament,
and it's the duty of MP's to put those petitions. Whether they agree
with its content, or act upon, it's their duty to put them. But, what was
argued implicitly in the Terms of Reference drafted by Mr Court, was
that, you know, she should have stopped this, Of course, after Mr
Masters and Mr Lightfoot raised on her behalf for 2 years earlier,
all these issues in the West Australian Parliament. In fact, Mr
Masters quite I think it was Mr Masters said on Perth radio about 4
weeks ago, quite brazenly, oh yes he said, I said to penny, look I 
raised these issues, and do you really think I should do more? And
she said oh yes, I'm sure I'm right on this, so you get back in there.
They did this for 2 years, and then drafted the Terms of Reference
only around Haviland's presentation of the other side of the family's
interests. So, you know, what can you make of it?
And here we have the West Australian today talking about Wanneroo,
and here's Richard Court who wants a full, public $ 5 million
extravaganza on Carmen Lawrence, trying to cover up this Wanneroo
Inc issue and the West Australian, let me quote from this, this is
from the editorial, and I don't normally quote from West Australian
editorials, it's not my favourite paper, but it says this: " People will not
be satisfied that the inquiry has got to the bottom of the allegations of
corruption in the city of Wanneroo in the 1980s, unless it is covered
by privilege and open to the public. The longer Mr Court
procrastinates over giving the Kyle Inquiry the powers of a Royal
Commission, the more he will fuel the perception he has something to
hide". And I also notice the is it the Chancellor of the University
saying..
RU: I think it's Murdoch.
PM: Murdoch University saying that's Peter Boyce saying there were
already too many Royal Commissions in Australia, but the serious
allegations surrounding Wanneroo Inc warranted some form of full an
public inquiry. So, Mr Court's rancid duplicity on this I mean, he is
always up there speaking in pious tones, but, you know, this was put
on basically to cover the stink that was going on in the Western
Australian Liberal Party. Here's Noel Crichton-Browne trying to get
in, here's Withers saying that he was expelled in terms which were
dubious, you have got Fred Chaney talking about funding the thugs,
the political thuggery in the Party, " rather greasy and sleazy", he
says, " I would say the circumstance where the Liberal Party can't
conduct its affairs honestly and in a principled way, why should
people want to contribute to The Lawrence inquiry was put on to
smother that fight. Now, I mean, I think he is going to be hoisted on
his own petard, Premier Court. That is, he can't continue with the
Wanneroo Inquiry without it giving appropriate protection to the
witnesses. So, you know, I mean one bad act begets another. And
it was a bad thing to do the Easton Inquiry was a bad act,
essentially, by a Premier who wanted to inflict personal damage on
an opponent he had already beaten. I mean, not content to have won
the election against Carmen Lawrence, he wanted to destroy her
personally. He's a very nasty person, Court.
RU: All right. Now, can I move on I have been saying these questions
from some of our listeners, but one other question if we've got time
for just a couple of other quick ones when we, can we expect the 
emu and kangaroo to grace our Coat of Arms instead of the lion and
the unicorn? That's not a bad question.
PM; In Western Australia?
RU: Anywhere.
PM: Well, there's an emu and a kangaroo on the national crest, which is
rather appropriate. I'm not sure about Western Australia it's got a
swan somewhere there, I think. There are swans around here.
RU: I suppose implicit in that is the whole idea of the republican debate,
which seems to have gone to the backburner. Now, you raise this...
PM: Can I just say from my point, not at all, but go on sorry.
PM: But this is something you ran on very strongly some time ago do you
see, at the next election, whenever it may be, that the republican
issue will be one that needs to be thoroughly addressed by both
parties?
PM: Oh, absolutely. And what I have done is laid down a blueprint for an
Australian republic. You see, again let me just take the chance on
this to reinforce a point I made earlier I didn't say wink, wink, nudge,
nudge I think we need a republic, But I won't give you the details. I
put down a speech in the House of Representatives, you know, the
people's House, on television, the whole framework for an Australian
republic. What did Mr Howard do? He slipped and slided for 3 days,
and then said oh look, I don't believe in a republic myself but if I
were elected, I would put a republic referendum if people wanted me
to, but at that referendum, I would vote for the monarchy. Well
Richard, you know this to get any Constitutional change through in
Australia, the Government has got to be going flat out for it. So,
effectively, there is only one Party that will give Australia a republic,
and that's the Labor Party. because for a Coalition Government to
say look, we promised you that we would put a referendum on the
republic, but you know this would be Mr Howard I'm in favour of
keeping the monarchy, so, have a vote on it. You have got a majority
of electors in a majority of States to pass it, so effectively, what he
said is there will be no republic under the Coalition. And what I'm
saying is there will be a republic under the Labor Party we will put
the referendums, and we have already put the structure down.
But how can we make our way I mean, this goes back to his whole
view of the world how can we make our way with these old societies
like Indonesia, 190 million people, South East Asia, Malaysia,
Thailand, Vietnam, the Philippines, these sort of countries, and at the
same time saying here is Australia, a unique and important nation, a
country with a unique culture, that is a partner in the region, but by 
the way, our Head of State is the Queen of Great Britain. I mean, the
Queen I have a great regard for the Queen, and the monarchy
works fine in Britain, this is not about the Queen it's about the ability
of Australia to express its sovereignty in full. That's what it's about.
And, you see, but John Howard isn't interested in the region he
thinks, essentially, Indonesia is still a threat. He thinks the
Vietnamese are still a threat. And he would head straight for the
White House. If I was an American President, if another Leader
turned up as a mendicant, you would have to say oh God, not another
one. Not another one coming asking us to defend them. Not another
one. You see, what the Americans know with a Labor Government
you can see it with Stirling, you can see it with Tindal, you can see it
with bases in the North, you can see it in engagement with Asia, you
can see it with APEC they know we are out there doing a job, and its
one that they can identify with, and support. That's the sort of ally
they want.
RU: Right. Well, Paul Keating, we have to leave it there. You're not
going to tell us give us any hint about this election, and....
PM: Richard, can I say about a year after the last election, John Hewson
was saying the Prime Minister is going to take us to an early election,
and that went on for months. And then Mr Downer got the job, and in
the first flush of his victory over others, when he came up in the polls,
he said the Prime Minister is going to take us to an early election he
was hoping he would get an early election. Then Mr Howard got it
and said the same. When the Government produced a surplus
Budget in the middle of the year, many of the newspapers said [ I was]
clearing the decks for an election that was May. This is October
there still hasn't been an election, because I think the public do want
value for from these Parliaments. That is, they don't want tricky
Governments, trying to trick them at a poll, called at a time when they
think the Government should be doing the nation's work. So, I know
it would help your ratings if I announced the election on your
program, and I would like to do you the favour, but I can't.
RU: Nah, I don't need help in ratings, Paul.
PM: How are you going you're going well? Well, good on you. That sort
of right-wing adventure down the road your friend and mine, Mr
Sattler I mean, all power to you.
RU: Paul, we'll leave it there.
ends. 



) aj9I
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 11 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I will give you a comment about Mr Murdoch's remarks. Well the first
thing I would say is at an important time in the political cycle, with an
election up to half a year away, it is a good opportunity for me and the
Government to confirm again simply how strong the Australian
economy is. Now statistics don't tell us everything. But they are about
the best measure we have and what the statistics show from the
Australian Statistician not me, or my office, or the departments is
that the Australian economy has now completed 16 consecutive
quarters of growth. We are into our fifth consecutive year of growth
and this as I have said last week in this quarter when the Statistician
publishes the accounts will be our longest period of growth since the
Second World War. The other thing that I think is worth saying is that
this happily has been accompanied by just about the highest job
growth we have had in the last 20 years: 670,000 jobs since the
election, the largest fall in unemployment in a year last year, and all of
this, of course, with inflation at an underlying sense running at around
2 1/ 2 per cent. And that is why Australia has been at the top of the list
of all of the indexes on Western countries for the last 2 1/ 2 to 3 years.
The other thing that I think is worth mentioning is a word we hear a bit
about productivity. Productivity has increased by 12 per cent since
June 1991. This is June 1995 four years we have had productivity
running you can average it out at around 3 per cent a year, which is
about twice what we used to be doing, more than twice. And real
wages have increased in the same period by 6 per cent. We are
per cent more competitive than we were a decade ago, we have got
solid profits and I notice from News Limited's newspaper account today
in The Australian of the annual meeting, Mr Murdoch said that
News' newspapers in Britain and Australia were thriving and for the
most part dominating their markets. In Australia, where News control
two thirds of the newspaper market, the papers were " doing extremely
well with strong advertising results and with results a little ahead of the
budget although circulation was difficult in one or two places".
The other thing that I think is worth recording, not that I am here to
parrot News Limited's news or good news, is that it declared a profit of 
$ 240 million this year for news Limited in the $ 1.4 billion result of
News Corporation internationally. Now all this, of course, underlines
simply how strong the Australian economy has been. Now I notice that
John Howard, that great supporter of our economic progress jumped
right on Mr Murdoch's remarks instead of saying " well let's interpret
them properly". He said " I don't want to get into the personality side of
it. I deal in policy." Well you could have fooled me, John. And " it is
undeniable", he said " that the Australian economy is highly
vulnerable." Well it is the sort of vulnerability that most other societies
would like to have, I think, that sort of growth. Here is Japan growing
at 1/ 2 per cent. Here is the United States with a speed limit of
2 1/ 2 per cent. And here is the Australian economy growing at
between 4 and 6 per cent a year. So one doesn't get too many
opportunities to say these things and have them reported.
J: Are you saying he doesn't know what he's talking about?
PM: No, I am saying that you need to know what the historical record is
here.
J: But he said it's an absolute disgrace.
PM: Well by whatever measure. Four straight years of growth and now in
our fifth year of growth can never be, by any measure, terrible. It has
to be good and, of course, it is unambiguously good.
J: But why did he say it?
PM: Well I think he just drifted into Adelaide and he was basically, I think
you know he is flying around the world with a big organisation and a
few, I think, reactionaries were whispering in his ears some things and
he has gone and blurted this out in a news conference.
J: But he seems to know the youth unemployment rate in Adelaide.
I mean, he might have just drifted in, but he seems to know
( inaudible)
PM: Well someone has told him that and told him wrongly because youth
unemployment in Australia is 9 per cent and it is 9 per cent because
this Government has lifted the completion rate in secondary schools to
just about eight in ten young people.
J: I thought it was 37 per cent?
PM: No, of the cohort of children 15-19, 9 per cent only are looking for work
and 9 per cent is too high. But it is not 37 per cent. The 27 per cent,
not 34 per cent, is for those who are out there in the labour market.
But it is our policy to keep young people, the years 16-19, as a period
of vocational preparation. How many times have you heard me say
that we regard age 16-19 as a period of vocational preparation?
We won't let our young people fall out of the system, cascading into no
training and no work and that is why we have kept them in school and, 
of course, under Working Nation we have the Government's Youth
Training Initiative. So for all young people 15-17, the Government
offers a guarantee of training or employment. For the unemployed
aged over 17, the Government's Job Compact means that all people
who have been unemployed for 18 months or more are given a
guarantee of a job. In other words, we won't let kids cascade into
nothing and the only thing I can urge upon News Limited is that they
join the Youth Training Initiative, team up with Bill Kelty and
Lindsay Fox I am sure Bill would get the documentation to them
quickly because I don't think at the moment, one young person in
News Limited is in the Youth Training Initiative, or picking up any of
the wage subsidies.
J: Have you said that to Murdoch today, or during his present visit?
PM: No, no I haven't.
J: But isn't Mr Murdoch right that 8.2 per cent unemployment is nothing to
be proud of?
PM: But economic policy and the success of it is all about the rate of
change. We had unemployment here at over 11 per cent, less than
three years ago. You know that last year the fall in unemployment in
Australia was the largest fall we have ever had and this is not in a
country with static population growth. This is not a European economy
with static population growth. We have got strong workforce growth
coming from migration, coming from the school leavers, coming from a
very high participation by women in the workforce. So we are always
running against the tide and, even running against the tide, we have
got unemployment down 3 percentage points roughly in 2 1/ 2 years
and, of course, our target is to 5 per cent. And we will get to 5 per cent
because of Working Nation. The sort of programs that John Howard
and the Coalition don't want to have.
J: Do you think Mr Murdoch has turned against you, Prime Minister?
PM: No. Look, well I don't think he has turned for me. I mean I try and
keep my dealings with the newspaper proprietors at arm's length and
proper.
J: But it is said that he backs winners.
PM: Well, Laurie you know all about backing winners. You have been on a
few in your day. But I will tell you one thing I would say about him.
I do empathise with his view about casinos. I do empathise with his
view about families because Rupert is a good family person. But there
is one thing he can do I can't do. He is a major producer of feature
films and he can eschew and reject violence in films. Now this is a
wealthy, well-padded corporation. It can afford to be picky and choosy
about scripts and about product and I would like to see him take the
lead in Hollywood like others took the lead years ago, perhaps in an
over reaction but years ago to knock out the violence which has been 
deluged onto our kids and our families around the world. Now that is
something he can do. I can't do it.
J: Have you talked to him about that?
PM: I have over time.
J: What was his reaction?
PM: Well I can't remember exactly. No, I mean I think he generally
sympathises with that view and as you know I did speak to him about
getting Australia into the feature film business because we only ever
had one film that made the big time and that was Crocodile Dundee
and a lot of our product has been for art house cinemas. And that was
the point of getting him to commit to do three or four feature films a
year in Australia, to develop the Australian Film Industry or give it
access to a much broader market. Now I would like to see that not
just the freshness of Australia, the uniqueness of our culture, the
vitality and enthusiasm of our actors and actresses but as well, use
this as an opportunity to actually make a statement about the quality of
this sort of product for the world.
J: Did you get a surprise with his views on Kerry Packer and
Rugby League?
PM: Well he had a crack at everybody I think you would have to say.
The ABC got a spray, Kerry did, everybody did and I think after
Mr Howard's appearance at Hayman Island, there were a lot of
misgivings about J W Howard after that.
J: What makes you say that?
PM: Because the whole of News Corporation was buzzing that the thing
was a complete flop and some Australians in that organisation said
they were ashamed to be Australians when he stood up in front of an
international audience and basically bombed out.
J: So why did Mr Murdoch give him a leg-up yesterday?
PM: Oh, I don't think he did.
J: It looks that way.
PM: But look here you are I mean it took us 20 years to get you out of
the cultural cringe about Britain, about Europe and here you are
Austral ian/ American entrepreneurs and you are back at a cultural
cringe again. I mean what am I going to do with you?
J: But are you saying that you don't see anything politically pointed or
dangerous in these comments? 
PM: No. No. In fact could I ever get you lot down here to tell you seriously,
with feeling and meaning, and have you receive it and take It that we
are having 16 consecutive quarters of growth, that we have completed
our full four straight years of growth, we are now in our fifth year, we
are in the longest growth cycle since the Second World War, with low
inflation and huge job growth.
J: What do say to Mr Howard's comments that you shouldn't have
dragged the Pope into this political debate?
PM: Well you see how quickly you bit on that. No, I was only talking
he and Tim Fischer they are like a pair of mako sharks because I didn't
bring the Pope into it. What I said was that we don't want a
dog-eat-dog society. We don't want, as Robert Reich the US Labour
Secretary has said, a society which has got an army of working poor,
where the extremes of wealth and poverty are greater and that these
sort of policies we reject and I said look there is the Pope refusing to
meet the authors of these policies.
J: ( inaudible) do you expect Mr Murdoch's views to be reflected in
his newspapers?
PM: Well why would you? I mean were they reflected when he was largely
complimentary about the Government in public? I wouldn't think so.
J: He says that ( inaudible) views on the economy ( inaudible).
PM: I am sorry.
J: He says the newspapers have been chokka with glowing reports on
the economy.
PM: Well the United States, where most of his business is, grows of the
order of 2 to 3 per cent in the main. It is running at around 3 per cent
at the moment I think and this economy is growing just about twice that
fast. And that is why, I think, the profitability of News Limited has been
so great.
J: Mr Keating, you have got various things that you think Mr Murdoch
should do. Are you going to give him a ring, or tell him personally that
he should do these things?
PM: No, no. It is a case of mental telepathy. I know you will do the job for
me, Michelle, with great fervour.
J: Is it hypocritical of him to criticise the Australian economy having not
done anything in the area of traineeships?
PM: No, he has views about the economy. Everyone can put their views.
It is just that his get more attention. But on the traineeships, he should
do more himself and he can. I mean it is a great pity that people like
Lindsay Fox and Kelty have got to stump the country. And the 
Government, Simon Crean and DEET have got to do their best to get
kids into traineeships, but there are none in News Limited.
J: Two areas where you have accused him of not putting his money
where his mouth is youth employment, and ( inaudible)
PM: No, they are your words, not mine.
J: Well, what else is it if not hypocrisy if you say that ( inaudible)
PM: No, I am just saying there is an opportunity there and I am just saying
I empathise with him with some of these things. He says he has a
hobby horse about casinos and that is fine because soaking working
people and tipping their change and more than their loose change into
the coffers of large industrial companies isn't, I think, a productive
enterprise. I mean I have an old fashioned view about that and so
does he and, of course, you know my views about film products and
children. I really do believe that families are being deluged with
violence.
J: Well, what would it say about him if he doesn't take up the
opportunities offered by the ( inaudible)
PM: I have never seen him not take up an opportunity yet.
J: Mr Keating do you accept though that it is not a good place for you to
be in, in coming to an election, with Kerry Packer and Rupert Murdoch
not thinking perhaps that you are the best person to run the country?
PM: The balls are still coming in in slow motion there, pal. We are going to
hit one into the Queen Elizabeth stand, one into another stand and we
are just in the right place and, of course, I always like playing on a
sticky wicket, you know that. Now I don't want this to be like
grande bouffe, so I am leaving in a moment. I don't want to have a
blow out.
J: Do you find it frustrating that the polls are still not moving much, if you
look at that Reuter average?
PM: They have got a very good feel about them. To someone who has the
touch, they have a very good feel about them.
J: What feels good about them?
PM: Well that is what I say. They are like hieroglyphics for journalists, but
they always were.
ends 


PRIME MINISTERSPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPTENTH ANNIVERSARY DINNER OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHINESE FORUM OFNSW, SYDNEY, 12 OCTOBER 1995I'm delighted to be here for the tenth annual dinner of the Australian Chinese Forumof NSW.I know that many Labor leaders have participated in the activities of the Forum, andit's a tradition that I'm pleased to continue.The Forum's activities in raising the profile of Australian Chinese and encouragingthem to participate fully in our national life are very worthwhile.Can I also commend the Forum's efforts in raising the political awareness of theChinese community. I think it's vital that all elements of society engage in thedemocratic life of Australia.Your Forum is playing a valuable role within the Chinese community.That the Forum is one of several similar organisations in Sydney is a mark of thecommunity's health and maturity.Australian Chinese are one of our oldest and most respected communities.By some accounts the first Chinese mariners made landfall on our northern coastscenturies before European settlement. Since the gold rushes of the mid nineteenthcentury you have lived the Australian story with us.You have brought your ambition and energy. The lives you have built for yourselveshave also built Australia.You have built some of Australia's most successful businesses and provided thelabour and acumen on which many others were built. You have played key roles inAustralia's public life, and continued the admirable Chinese philanthropic tradition.You have enriched the culture in myriad ways.
I think it should also be said that you were trail blazers of modern Australianmulticultural ism. You saw through that long era of xenophobia and prejudice yousurvived discrimination and violence. You have undergone traumas in our historywhich other groups have never known.I think it is safe to say that Australia is now a much more tolerant and worldly place.If this is so then in no small way we have the Chinese to thank for it and no groupof Australians is more entitled to enjoy its benefits.At the same time we all continue to benefit from Chinese culture and Chineseenterprise. We are now very much aware that cultural diversity is a major nationalasset, especially coupled with the social cohesion we enjoy.We are a more enterprising people, equipped with more languages and talents andinternational, and especially regional, contacts.Australian Chinese are succeeding brilliantly in an extraordinary range of activity inbusiness and industry, in medicine and science, in academia, in music and the arts,in sport. When a Chee Quee is scoring runs for New South Wales, you know you'remaking progress.Societies are generally less than perfect but Australia's way of living and workingtogether works better than most.No government decree makes it work. I think the success of multicultural ism derivesprincipally from the country's democratic ethos coupled to a fundamentalpragmatism. The last two generations of Australians have seen the necessity ofimmigration and learning to live with cultural difference and in due course theexperience has taught us to see the great advantages.Governments can't legislate for a cohesive society. But there are some thingsgovernments can do.Rather than requiring newcomers to Australia to shed their cultural identity, we haveencouraged them to retain their links with their parent cultures. We have asked onlythat immigrants respect our basic democratic values and traditions, and that allAustralians reserve their primary loyalty for Australia.We have set ourselves the task of creating an inclusive society: we try to draw in allthose who drift to the margins: we maintain a sophisticated social safety net toprotect the low paid and those who fall on hard times; we provide health care, socialsecurity, education and community services. We take the view that the mostsuccessful countries in the world in the last half of this century are those which haveadopted this kind of social democratic model.We think that a country like Australia can run a dynamic globally integrated economymaintaining high rates of growth, without the creation of an economic underclass.
We take the view that such an underclass whether it is based on economic, ethnicor any other factor is ultimately damaging to the social fabric, to the way of life weaspire to and to our national ambitions.This attitude has much in common, I think, with the decision taken a quarter of acentury ago to finally reject the notion that ethnic origin should ever be a criterion forthe selection of immigrants to Australia.It is of a kind with the bill brought before the Commonwealth Parliament tounreservedly declare that racism is wrong and that racial vilification and incitementto racial violence is illegal.I have said in the past that I look forward to the day when Australians willinstinctively count among the great advantages of being an Australian thedemocracy and tolerance we enjoy here: who also recognise these things as beingessential to our social cohesion and our national identity and who see them asinviolable tenets of Australian life.I believe we are coming rapidly to this conclusion. And I also believe that as apeople we have come a long way very quickly towards recognising both the realityand the great potential of our engagement with Asia.These days, most people are believers. But the story still needs telling.Around two-thirds of all Australia's exports already go to East Asia.Our merchandise exports to East Asia grew by more than seven per cent last yearand are now worth $ 41 billion.And more than one million Australian jobs have been created by those exports.By as soon as next year when our exports to Indonesia and Malaysia will eachexceed our exports to the United Kingdom Australia's top ten export markets will allbe APEC members.At current rates, our exports to the region will almost double in value by 2000. All thesigns are that our economic links with Asia will continue to strengthen.But I want to emphasise as strongly as I can that this Government's commitment tocloser relations with Asia is not the result of some crude economic determinism. It isnot simply a matter of following the markets.Asia is not a target of convenience for us. It is no fad, fashion or political gimmick.The Leader of the Opposition may " blow hot and cold on Asia" as a commentator inthe Singapore Business Times described it this week.I
I do not think it was Mr Howard's intention, as the same article observed, to " stokeup a little paranoia about Australia's immediate northern neighbours", because MrHoward would know better than anyone how dangerous and unpopular this ploy is.What worries me is that the defence speech which inspired these comments inSingapore seemed to reflect a continuing ambivalence about Australia in the region.Often with Mr Howard one gets the feeling that while the words are there, thecommitment is not.Yet Asia is emphatically where this country's security and prosperity lie.It is where an increasing number of our people come from.And unambiguously and wholeheartedly it is where we want to be.In an increasing globalised world it is true, of course, that Australia has importantinterests outside Asia.It is also true that Australia has been involved in Asia over many years.For the most part, our record of engagement is long and honourable, from oursupport for Indonesian independence, through the establishment of the ColomboPlan, to the development of our great trading links with Japan and Korea.But it is also true, in a quite different way from the past a deeper, more urgent andmore intense way that Australia's economic, strategic and political interests nowcoalesce in the region around us.As I have said before, the simple fact is, if we do not succeed in the Asia-Pacific, wesucceed nowhere.In recent years, Australia has taken great strides into our own region. Our regionalrelationships have developed new depth and weight.These advances haven't occurred by themselves. Our progress has required theefforts of this government and many other Australians.It's a result of the choices we have made.During the 1960s, Australia came perilously close to marginalising ourselves in theworld. The White Australia policy and the protective and regulatory barriers behind whichour industry and financial institutions slumbered were all of a piece. They were allthe product of a defensive and inward-looking cast of mind.Just in time, we saw the need to open ourselves out to the world and to breakthrough the protective walls which held our economy and our minds in check.
Just in time, we reformed our economy and faced it towards our own region.We have transformed both the way we live and the way we relate to the outsideworld. Foreign and domestic policy have come together driven by the same imperatives,and towards the same ends.Success at home and abroad are inextricably linked each dependent on the other.Australia's domestic prosperity in part relies on our management of our externalrelations. And international success requires we implement domestic policies whichincrease Australia's competitiveness and ensure that we make the best use of all ourpeople. Our efforts on regional free trade, multicultural ism and education and training are allpart of the same strategy.It's a strategy to cope with and capitalise on change profound and unrelentingchange. The international system which has been our lot since the Europeansettlement of Australia is being remade by technological revolutions and the globaleconomy.This transition provides Australia and its political and business leaders withunprecedented opportunities and heavy responsibilities.And more choices.We now have a chance to take part in crafting the new institutions and frameworkswhich will take the world into the next century. But opportunities like this are neveraround for long. Very quickly, new organisations will emerge and new patterns ofinternational contact will fall into place and, once that happens, further changebecomes very difficult to achieve.I want to ensure that Australia helps to shape the new regional framework and thatthe changes which are introduced serve our interests as well as those of the widerregion. That is why I have been working hard at building institutions like APEC which willhelp cement Australia's integration into the region over the long term. My opponentshave recently taken to saying that I have laid claim to founding APEC. Of course Ihave done no such thing. What we have done over the past four years is lift APECto a new plane through the institution of Leaders' Meetings. This is what has givenAPEC its recent impetus.In recent years Australia has been one of the moving forces behind the ASEANRegional Forum which deals with security issues. We are building linkages betweenthe ASEAN Free Trade Area and the Australia/ New Zealand CER arrangement.
We have also matched our efforts to build regional institutions with new bilateralstructures established over the past four years. Bodies like the Austral ia-I ndonesiaMinisterial Forum, the Australia-Korea Joint Economic Committee, the Thailand-Australia Ministerial Commission and the Singapore-Australia Business AllianceForum are playing their part in multiplying and diversifying the strands of contactbetween Australia and the region.And we are developing new areas of co-operation with countries like Vietnam, whichhas joined ASEAN and is beginning to participate fully in regional affairs.China, of course, remains a very significant country for us. It is our sixth largesttrading partner, and China has more foreign investment in Australia than in any othercountry a mark of the deep complementarity in our relationship.The growing weight of China in the region and the world is obvious and inevitable.Australia has nothing to fear from this. We have been a firm supporter of China's fullintegration into world and regional institutions. We regard it as essential to engageChina productively in the global economy.That is one reason why we think APEC offers such promise.It has taken time for people in the region to accept how greatly Australia haschanged. But over the past twelve months or so, I believe we have begun to see asignificant change in regional perceptions of Australia which matches the changes inAustralian views of Asia.In a way which has never been true in the past, our friends and neighbours haverecognised that Australia with our talented people, our rich continent, our securedemocracy and strong diverse society represents a substantial asset to the regionas a whole. A substantial asset and a valuable partner.This fresh view of Australia is well summarised in the joint statement about theAustralia-Japan relationship which Prime Minister Murayama and I issued in May.Japan, it said, " welcomes Australia's decision to create its future in the region andreaffirms that Australia is an indispensable partner in regional affairs."That same acceptance of Australia's position as a regional partner is widely reflectedthroughout the region.One of the reasons behind this, I am sure, is the recognition by our neighbours thatthis Government has committed itself to the cause of engagement with Asia like noother government before.Asia is not a rather exotic optional extra on top of our foreign policies. Asia standsat the very core.This Government has chosen to engage the region and not to shrink from it.
We look for the promise and not only the dangers.We work at our relationships with our neighbours and not just our old and powerfulfriends as important as those old friends remain to us.And, might I say, I choose to meet my responsibility and meet those regional leaderswho visit Australia.I'm confident this is the right mindset to bring to the formulation of foreign policiesthe right mindset for Australia.It's a departure from the approach which characterised Australia's externalrelationships for most of our history and which still dominates the view of a fewAustralians. According to that school, Australia is a European enclave in an alien part of theworld. It assumes that we are only uneasy occupants of this continent that we havenever really been at home here and that our survival depends on great andpowerful friends from outside the region.It is an approach which regards our region, at base, as a threat to be resisted.I can understand this attitude. In the past it made sense. The European populationof this continent was isolated. Threats, like that we faced from Japan during theSecond World War, wer genuine and it did require assistance from a great ally,whose security links with the region are unambiguously good.But the world has changed a great deal in the past fifty years. What is needed nowas our region develops and changes and as Australia becomes more integrated intothe region economically and politically is a second approach strategicrelationships which will give us security in Asia rather than security from Asia.That was why the defence policy which the Opposition Leader announced last weekwas so deeply disappointing. It levelled one clear criticism of Government policy: inMr Howard's words, Australia's " security policy needs rebalancing to see if we havegot the mix right between defence of Australia's concerns and the need to enhanceregional engagement."Mr Howard said there were " unresolved tensions between the Government's focuson defence partnership with the region versus the region as the potential source ofthreats." This is code for Mr Howard's defining belief: that the threat to Australia is from ourneighbours, that the big red arrows on the maps from the 1960s are still pointingsouth.That what we need are better, closer, cosier relations with a distant paternalprotector so that we can put off forever the task of coming to a full engagement withour region.
This is not what Australia needs. And I am convinced it is not what Australia wants.By the turn of the century, by the centenary of our nationhood, I hope that Australiawill be a country:in which our business people are a familiar and a valued part of thecommercial landscape of the Asia-Pacificin which our defence and strategic links with the countries around us aredeeper than everin which more and more Australians speak the languages of our neighboursin which we are making full use of the great resource of the growing numberof Australians of Asian background especially Australian Chinesein which our national identity is clearer to us and our neighbours through theappointment of an Australian as our head of statein which our national culture is shaped by, and helps to shape, the culturesaround usWe cannot go back to the old ways of dealing with our region. We cannot let thepressure die. We cannot let the momentum wane.It is vital that Australians and especially Australian political leaders be at easewith our geography.But that's an injunction I needn't deliver to this audience.I don't have to lecture Australian Chinese about having a proper sense of place.You have been in this country for a very long time. While you continue to drawstrength from two cultures from two wells your efforts continue to be part ofAustralia's national story and an increasingly major element of the nationalenterprise. Australia welcomes all your efforts in business, politics, the arts and sport. Theyadd up to a great part of the national enterprise.Thank you.


** PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY"
OPENING OF THE ACOSS CONGRESS, SYDNEY12 OCTOBER 1995
1 am pleased to be back at an ACOSS Conference. So regular are my&nbsp;appearances here I imagine you could be persuaded that we share your&nbsp;concerns and respect the good you do.
I was, of course, interested by the theme this year " Fact, Fiction and the&nbsp;Future". It is not easy to sort out fact from the fiction at the best of times; when it&nbsp;comes to social policy, or the shape our society is taking, it is very difficult&nbsp;indeed. But it is also essential. We can't formulate policy on the basis of phantoms,&nbsp;we cannot Improve the kind of sophisticated social security services we now&nbsp;have unless we have an accurate understanding of realities.
It Is not easy but I thought today I would try.
And while I'm at It, I also thought I would talk to you a little about the future&nbsp;about how we can. continue to shape up Australian society, make it more&nbsp;equitable, more prosperous and richer in opportunity.
The future, of course, Is a word laden with meaning. It bears somerelationship to what has become known as " the vision thing".I happen to prefer the " future thing", if only because it is generally the peoplewho wax most lyrical about their visions who wane most visibly when It comesto doing something about it.The future has more reality.
The great purpose of governments is not so much to have a vision as tocreate a future. We need to anticipate it, plan for it and, above all, carve itout shape It the way we want it shaped.We always know this much about the future it is where our efforts will bejudged. It Is where It will be decided whether or not we failed or provided forour country and our children.And so long as Labor Is in office, we know this as well we will keep movingtowards an Australian social democracy in which fairness and equity are theguiding principles, in which the effort is constantly to share the wealth as wellas to create it, In which opportunities are open to all and the safety net iswide enough and strong enough to catch those who fall.My measure of the past is how much progress we have made towards thisgoal. My measure of the future is how much more progress we can make.As you know, our ambition over the past 12 years has been to make thefastest possible progress down two parallel paths.Down the economic path, we sought to secure Australia's prosperity byimproving our competitiveness, increasing our exports and the range of them,increasing productivity, and restructuring our economy in ways which woulddeliver us a place in the markets of the world, set us up In the region anddeliver long term low Inflation growth.We did these things and we are still doing them. And fof one reason tocreate and distribute wealth and opportunity for Australians now and in thefuture. And because nothing creates and distributes wealth like jobs, and nothingcreates opportunity like jobs and nothing denies it like the lack of themabove all, we have been determined to create jobs.We created 1.6 million of them in the 1 980s. We have created 670,000 ofthem since March 1993.Down the social path, we pursued that model I have described; we expandededucation, health care, child care, social security. We developed a socialwage and a social security system with few equals in the world.And in the last 18 months, we have taken it further with, among other things,Working Nation and its extensive programs for young Australians and thelong term unemployed.I would like to pause for a moment on this subject.Last night your National President took issue with remarks I made yesterdayabout youth unemployment.
3Let me repeat those remarks which, you may recall, were made In reply toRupert Murdoch who had said the day before that 34 per cent of youngpeople in Adelaide were unemployed.The issue Is an interesting example of your ' lact and fiction" theme.This is what I said yesterday in reply to a question from a journalist:Well someone has told him that, and told him wrongly, because youthunemployment In Australia Is 9 per cent and it Is nine per cent becausethis Government has lifted the completion rate in secondary schools tojust about 8 in 10 young people.Now, it can be said that the rate of youth unemployment in Australia is 27 percent because 27 per cent of the 30 per cent of 15-19 year olds who areactually not in education are also not in work. That is what I said yesterday" The 27 per cent is for those who are out there in the labour market". Thatis a fact.It Is true that measured as a percentage of those in the labour market, 27 percent of Australia's youth is unemployed and that is the way the ABSmeasures them.But It Is not true as many people believe because they are led to believe itthat 27 per cent of all our young people are unemployed. 70 per cent of themare in the best possible place they could be in education and training.18 per cent of them are In jobs. And 9 per cent of them are unemployed.That is a fact. They are all facts.And it Is also a fact that 70 per cent of young Australians are in educationbecause it is deliberate government policy; that every government with a careabout its future Is doing its utmost to keep young people In education andtraining; that to let them drift into the labour market without education andtraining will greatly inhibit their opportunities and greatly increase the risk oftheir falling Into long term unemployment.These are facts. Just as much as the 9 per cent I quoted is a fact. Just asmuch as the 27 per cent of 30 per cent is a fact.And what matters as much as these facts is what we do about them. As I saidyesterday, 9 per cent of 100 per cent Is too high. 27 per cent of 30 per centis too high. The exceptional rates in some suburbs and regions aroundAustralia is too high.Just as the rate of 8.2 per cent unemployment overall is too high.
But the whole thrust of government policy since the election of 1993 has beento get these numbers down, to get young Australians educated and trainedand thus largely insulated against long term unemployment.That is what the Youth Training Initiative Is about. It is what the Job Compactis about. It is what the expansion of the TAFE system is about.And it is why we have had in the past couple of years the largest fall inunemployment In our history, and why youth unemployment now stands at91,000 and not a figure in the region of 158,000 which is what it was in 1983.It Is why long term unemployment has fallen by more than 30 per cent in thelast two and a half years.We don't think the job is done. We don't think it will be a simple thing toconsistently maintain the momentum towards the 5 per cent target we haveset ourselves.But no one should ignore the progress that we are making, or put about thestory that progress is not being made or pretend that 670,000 jobs meannothing, that a 31 per cent fall in long term unemployment means nothing.No one should pretend that. And no one should pretend that more cannot bedone. The Government Will do more. It will do more through Working Nation andthrough regional development and other programs. In the policyannouncements we will make over the next few months you will see theemphasis on jobs and training maintained.No doubt your own organisations will also do more. We have always saidthat while government has the principal responsibility, getting theunemployment numbers down is a task for the whole country. It is everyone'sresponsibility. I am sure the private sector will do more and who knows, with yesterday'sfree advertisement for traineeships, new companies will join the nationaleffort. If Rupert Murdoch has given our progress an inadvertent fillip, I will bedelighted. But I do not believe that emphasising only the negative, orchoosing only those figures which paint the gloomiest picture, will help us atall, Deliberately misleading people will certainly not help.
My political opponents say that real wages have fallen in the past decade,when In fact they have risen by They say that household incomeshave fallen when In fact they have risen by more than 20 per cent. They say,as Peter Reith has often said, that a two parent, two child family on averageearnings of about $ 38,000 is $ 26 a week worse off in real terms than theywere in 1983. That Is a fiction. The fact is such families are better off In realterms than they were in 1983.They say, as Peter Reith has also said, that low income families are worseoff. In fact a two parent, two child family on two thirds of male averageearnings Is $ 71 a week better off than they were in 1983.They say that the economy Is in awful shape and the sky is about to fall in,until the statistics prove the opposite and the sky stays where it has alwaysbeen and the sun stays out and then they say, as Mr Howard said'yesterday, " but that is not how it feels to people".In other words when you're caught out telling fibs which have been designedto distort people's perspective, quote the perspective.I don't think painting the gloomy picture necessarily helps us help those whogenuinely have reason for gloom. The Chicken Little routine engaged in byour opponents for most of this year, certainly didn't help the economy and itcertainly didn't help the unemployed. Nor did it do a single thing for theAustralians they suddenly discovered and with them a new word In theirlexicon the battlers.Nothing they have said this year has helped the battlers. Nothing they areever likely to do will help them but that's another story. What has helpedthese Australians Is the 78 per cent increase in family payments for lowIncome families. The social wage whose average value to a family with twochildren is $ 195 a week has helped them. The 70 per cent increase in thereal value of the social wage has helped them. They fared rather worseunder Mr Fraser and Mr Howard of course the social wage fell by 17 percent and the value of payments for the most needy families fell by 4 per cent.That did not help them.The Opposition fictions are really just try-ans thrown there In the hope thatsome of the lie would stick.Of a more substantial nature was the appearance of claims that Incomeinequality has greatly widened since the early eighties. This has come notmerely from the Opposition, but from respectable commentators.it is a matter of great concern to the Government. And I must say a matter ofsurprise, because we have been conscientious in our efforts to avoid thesame social traps which other reforming economies created for their people.
To find out what has happened to income distribution over the eighties andnineties the Government commissioned research from the University ofMelbourne. The study, called Trends in the Distribution of cash income and non cashbenefits, covers the period between 1981-82 and 1993-94, and examines theeffect of wages and salaries, the tax system, the social wage and cashtransfers on income distribution.It will provide the most up-to-date and comprehensive analysis of trends inincome distribution in Australia yet undertaken. That's important, becausemost of the stories around at the moment are only about bits of the picture.They might tell us about what has happened in parts of our cities, or aboutthe overall shape of things in a particular year, or the distribution of earnedincome alone. But you need a comprehensive map of what's happened overtime if you genuinely want to evaluate the effectiveness of policy andeffectively shape the agenda for the future.Today I'd just like to tell you about a few of the key findings of the Melbournestudy. They are preliminary results at this stage, but they are consistent withthe pieces of the puzzle that you can find in other studies.And when you put together the picture, the authors find that the distribution ofdisposable income that Is, private income plus government cash transfersless income tax became more egual over the period of the LaborGovernment. Moreover, the share of disposable income received by thebottom 40 per cent of income units increased that is, the poor became betterOff. The study did find that, in common with other countries, there appears to be awidening of wages dispersion.In Australia, though, this trend has impacted much less on those at thebottom than in many other countries. For example, the increase in earningsInequality In Australia during the 1 980s was less than a quarter of that of theUS and less than a third of the UK.In this country we have chosen to protect the wages and conditions ofworkers through the industrial relations system.The question of income distribution cannot been seen in isolation from thecurrent industrial relations debate. After all, the largest component of incomefor the majority of adult Australians comes from wages and salaries from ajob. Thus the quickest and most effective way to widen income distribution wouldbe to initiate, labour market reforms that led to lower pay for those in theweakest bargaining positions, and higher pay for those in the most powerful.
This Is precisely what the reforms envisaged by the Coalition would achieve.How can this be? Isn't the Coalition's industrial relations reform agendadesigned only for flexibility? Won't it lead to higher wages through higherproductivity? Won't there just be more choice?As Is usual in the area of Industrial relations, the real information lies in thedetail. It is here that the facts are hidden, and the fiction becomes plain.The Coalition will Introduce industrial relations reforms that allow agreementsbetween firms and workers with only a few minimum entitlements writtendown. We don't know what they will be, but from other lists they haveproduced for example, in Jobsback!, or from some of Peter Reith'sspeeches we certainly know what will not be in them.What will not be in them will be overtime and penalty pay rates, tool and otherallowances, and holiday leave loadings. Because with these there wouldn'tbe enough flexibility.It's important to understand how their approach differs from current policy,because differ it does and the chasm is broad and deep.Current workplace arrangements allow agreements without overtime andpenalty rates, tool allowances, and holiday leave loadings. But only if basepay is Increased so that workers are not made worse off. Let me repeat thisfact agreements are only now possible if workers -current overall pay isprotected. And here is the essential difference between the Government and theCoalition in industrial relations; the Government guarantees that workers arenot made worse off through signing an agreement, the Coalition does not.Under the Coalition, workers in poor bargaining positions will have their paycut they will lose overtime and penalty rates, and holiday leave loadings,and they won't be compensated for this.How much can workers lose from this? The answer is, a lot. Some examplesmight be useful.How about a typical ' Leading Hand Linesman', who earns about $ 30,700 ayear? Today they receive Industry, tool, leading hand and special allowances worth$ 55.60 per week, If they work 8 hours of overtime a week which is fairlytypical they stand to lose just from this being paid at the normal rate a totalof $ 65.70 a week.
Taking away the holiday leave loading which Is worth $ 317.50, the total lossfor the year for the linesman would be $ 6139.90, a 20 per cent cut.Or take a labourer in the building industry, with an annual income today of$ 32,900.Say 10 hours of overtime are worked 1 hour each day and 5 hours onSaturdays. The additional income from the overtime rate is $ 84 a week.Without this overtime rate the worker would lose $ 4,032 each year, and stillbe working the extra 10 hours. If the Industry, special, tool, and transportallowances and holiday leave loadings are also lost, a further $ 2,788 goes.In total, then, the pay reduction would be $ 6820, or about 21 per cent. Thereare over 1 million labourers in situations just like this.Consider full-time nurses who work the typical amount of night shifts andweekends each year, and currently earn $ 24,600.If penalty and overtime rates were reduced to the normal day rate, and they-still worked the same hours, their income would be reduced by $ 5,412 22per cent to $ 19,188. There are over 150,000 registered nurses in Australia.But, what does the Coalition say about the examples I have given?It can't happen, they say, because no one will be forced off an award if theydon't want to be. That is, if you like your current arrangements that's fine, youcan have them. There will just be a lot more choice.This is fiction.Mr Howard and Mr Reith are either very Ignorant about how labour marketswork, or they are trying to fool people.What sort of choice is there for workers asked to sign an agreement or risklosing their jobs?How can those applying for a job hope to get the award conditions if theywant the position? How does " choice" work here?Here is a fact for the debate: in 1994 1,731,500 people took a new wage andsalary position. That's about 20 per cent of the paid workforce.Over 1.1 million of these came from outside the paid labour force fromschool, from tertiary education, from being at home looking after children, asnew immigrants.
Let's put it differently with the addition of another fact: the fact that 42 percent of workers have been In their jobs for less than three years. Thus undera Coalition's first term, at least 3.6 million workers will be facing a newemployer and will not have the choice of staying on the award.So considerable change is not just inevitable, but it could also be very quick.And with dramatic consequences for the workers and families affected. Withdramatic consequences for our social fabric.It also will have two clear economic outcomes. The obvious one, and the onethat groups such as ACOSS will care about profoundly, is that the Coalition'sindustrial relations policy must widen the distribution of income.No academic labour economist would doubt this.No community worker will be surprised to see large increases in the numbersof poorer workers seeking assistance.There is a very different group who will find themselves worried about thispossibility, It is the Liberal Party's natural constituency, who will hope andtrust that a Coalition government will be reducing outlays.But how can social security payments not increase automatically if theincomes of the poorest workers are being cut?For example, take the case of the labourer in the building industry outlinedabove, and let's assume he has three children.If the labourers pay is reduced from $ 32,900 to $ 26,080, the family willreceive an increase of $ 3,675 a year in family payments from the Departmentof Social Security.Here then Is the issue for the Coalition. The Coalition will need to find manymillions of dollars to support the new wage systemThis is a predictable result of moving some aspects of income distributionaway from the wage system and into the social security system: not only willIncome distribution, become less equal, but government spending has to goup. If government spending Is not to go up, the current social security rules willhave to be made less generous. That is, rates of payment will fall, or thetaper will be increased, or indexation will be discontinued.Either way, two quite different groups must view these possibilities with greatconcern as must every Australian who values our best traditions and our wayof life.You really have to ask why?
And you really have to conclude that governments make a difference.Ideology makes a difference. Policy makes a difference. And if parties don'treveal their policies, you have to ask why.Government policies really do matter. And they have certainly mattered overthe past dozen years not feast in the realm of income distribution.Although the University of Melbourne study found that private or marketincome has become more unequal between 1981-82 and 1993-94, theGovernment's policies have more than offset this trend.Ann Harding's work shows that the gap between the top 20% of incomes andthe bottom, based on private income alone, is around 13 to 1. But when youadd in the effect of cash transfers, the gap between the rich and poor isreduced to 5 to 1. The effect of Australia's progressive income tax systemfurther reduces the gap to 4 to 1, and when expenditure on social wage istaken into account the gap between rich and poor falls to 3 in 1.Furthermore, the University of Melbourne research found that both the cashtransfer system and social wage expenditures had a greater equalising effectin 1993-94 than in 1981-82. That is, the Government's significant increase inspending on social security and the social wage has reduced inequality morestrongly In the 1990s than comparable expenditure did in the early 1980s.Wages do not and cannot take into account the costs associated with familyresponsibilities. This is where there is a legitimate role for Governmentpolicy. Over the period of the Labor Government, our priority has been tosupport low income families. To take just one example, a single incomefamily with two children on two-thirds of average weekly earnings receivesabout $ 120 a week in cash transfers.We have also dramatically increased the value of payments to people whodon't get any wages or salary.During Labor's period in office the real value of unemployment benefits hasincreased for single adults by 25 percent, or nearly $ 30 a week. Sole parentfamilies with two children are around $ 62 dollars a week better off in realterms now than they were in 1983 and those renting in the private market aremore than $ 80 a week better off. You might find it illuminating to comparethis with real income loss of nearly $ 15 a week borne by the unemployedwhen John Howard was Treasurer, or the $ 5 a week cut borne by soleparents during the same period.We also need to take into account the impact of the tax system on incomedistribution. Another of the current fictions is that our tax system doesn'thelp. The facts are different.
Under Labor, the tax base has been broadened to include capital gains andfringe benefits. We do have a progressive income tax system. A tax systemthat contributes to reducing the spread of incomes in our society. Income taxreduces the gap between the rich and the poor.Although it Is often overlooked in an examination of income distribution, thesocial wage which Includes spending on health, education, child care andhousing is one of the key features of the Australian social landscape.Government spending on services such as Medicare and pharmaceuticalsmeans that families can spend their hard earned cash on other things. Andit's not a small amount of money. NATSEM have estimated that healthbenefits alone are worth $ 70 a week for a couple with children.When you add in education and housing it goes up to about $ 200 a week fora family. And that's before you think about some of the other directassistance government provides like child care.Take away the expenditure by Government, and we would all be worse off.Under Labor, the value of the social wage per person has increased in realterms by 73 per cent.And the social wage is about more than just paying for services you wouldotherwise have to pay for yourself. It's also about providing a quality service.Our health system is the best example of this. All Australians are entitled to ahigh quality health system that enables everyone to get the medical attentionthey need.We will not have a society where the poor can't have the operation they needbecause they can't afford medical insurance.Just as importantly, we will not have a society where the poor get a secondbes3t health service.The social wage expands people's opportunities, it changes people's lives.Government spending on education is an investment in the future for ourchildren. We all know that the more education you have, the less likely youare to be unemployed. We all know that a better education is the key to abetter job. The fact Is that educational attainment is one of the most accuratepredictors of socio-economic status.And we know that early school leavers have significant labour marketdisadvantages, and that those disadvantages stem almost entirely from thegroup's lack of qualifications rather than from the economic -status of theirfamilies, disabilities or other external factors.
That is why the Government is committed to ensuring that by the year 2001,of 19 year aids will have completed Year 12 or an initial post-schoolqualification or are participating in formal education and training.That is why the Commonwealth has committed $ 1.5 bilflion in growth fundingto the vocational education and training system from 1993 to 1997, andcontributed to the creation of about 35., 000 extra places each year.That is why Commonwealth funding available to higher education has risenfrom $ 3 billion in 1983 to $ 4.8 billion in 1995 an increase of almost 61Why we have massively expanded the Australian higher education system sothat it now enrols more than 30% of all 17 to 22 year olds.Education is one of the key factors behind Australia's high degree of socialmobility. A recent study of second generation non English speakingmigrants, for example, shows extraordinary upward mobility in onegeneration. For example, 4% of Greek male migrants were professionallyemployed in 1991, but 19% of their sons were.These kinds of effects of the social wage cannot easily be captured by simplemeasures of income distribution. But they are important to our sense of a fairsociety as well as to the reality of it,A story about an increase in income equality is not a story the media oftentell. Sometimes you would think Australia was one of the most unequalcountries In the world.I am not sure whether we are the richest, as the World Bank says, but I don'tthink it matters as much as being the best country the best place forordinary people to live and work and raise families and lead tolerably happy,fulfilling and secure lives.Wherever we may rank on the scale of riches, I think there is no question thatno more than half a dozen countries can compete with us on that score.And therein lies our ambition for the future. Richer certainly, bigger andstronger for sure but as a means to an end, which is to be a better country,no better in the world.We should have no doubt about our capacity to do this. Look back for amoment and you can see how far we've come.As a nation, it is true, we have been blessed with a great many naturaladvantages; but the basis of this good society has been constructed by anact of will, by a conscious effort.
Understandably given that they are such a part of the national psyche, wetend to number the natural elements among the greatest of the blessings ofbeing Australian. And no one would dispute that they constitute a marvellousinheritance. But surely we should count Australian democracy even more highly.And we might easily add the legacy of social idealism and reform which goesback at least a century. I include in that the traditions of egalitarianism whichthe last twelve years have shown to be as strong as ever.Some people here will dispute this, I'm sure. But, whatever the imperfectionsof our society and our social services, I think the last 12 years have shownthat in Australia the " fair go" lives and they have shown that the Australianpeople will not vote for anyone who strays from the principle.We have not yet created the perfect Australian social democracy. I am notsure that social democracy admits of perfection. But it is without doubt thephilosophy which has worked best in the world and it sits easily with thatblend of egalitarianism and pragmatism which has for so long beencharacteristic of Australia and Australians.In the last decade we have rejected the regressive " primitive capitalism" ofthe New Right, the anti-social onslaughts of Thatcherism and Reaganism andall the reactionary variants in between.Sometimes we only just managed to do it.Had we failed in 1993, or 1987, or at any of the other elections, we wouldnow be living in a very different country. I think everyone here knows howdifferent. Remember if you put your arm out for the unemployed they woulddrag you down. Remember Gordon Gecko.If anyone has forgotten, I can only suggest they read Fightback or refer toJohn Howard's election platform in 1987.And then,* I suggest, you remind yourself that this is the same John Howard.And this is pretty much the same shadow cabinet as John Hewson's 16 outof 19 remain.These are the same people who put their hands up for knockingunemployment benefits off the unemployed after 9 months, for abolishingMedicare and for slashing the social wage.We have had a lot of trouble extracting policies from Mr Howard, but everyskerrick we have got suggests the same old story. Particularly the industrialrelations policy look at this policy and you will see the image of the same oldideololy. Industrial relations is the wash in which their true colours run.
And that policy alone would profoundly change the structure and fabric ofAustralian society.When John Hewson addressed ACOSS three years ago at least he said whathe would do where he would go.When John Howard addresses you tomorrow, you will get platitudes at best,or untruths at worst. What you won't get are the details of his $ 10 billion ofcuts to government spending.You won't hear his rancour for the low paid or the disadvantaged whom heholds in complete contempt.But there Is something else the last 12 years have demonstrated; and that isthe need for people of good will who know what thie realities are, who candistinguish between fact and fiction, who know that our success depends onour social cohesion and our social cohesion depends on fair and equitablesocial policies we need all these people on the one side.If I may be forgiven another brief foray into the future, I like to think that whenthe next generation counts their blessings as Australians they'll count thesefirst. I like to think that when they are asked what is so good about being anAustralian in 2010, they'll say well you get a fair go here. It's a birthright likethe beaches and the bush and the wide open spaces.


109/ 95PRIME MINISTERSTATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
Mr Howard has answered the call from ACOSS for him to announce his&nbsp;policies with a list of things that the Opposition will not do.
John Howard claims he will not slash Medicare. He will not kick people off&nbsp;unemployment benefits. He will not take away the sole parent pension. He&nbsp;will not force people with disabilities onto unemployment benefits.
Mr Howard has been forced into the embarrassing position of promising not&nbsp;to deliberately disadvantage the most vulnerable people in the nation.
Why? Because he has a past dominated by a determination to strip away benefitsfrom society's most disadvantaged.The remarkable fact is that John Howard went to the last election promisingto do just that promising to abolish Medicare; promising to kick people offthe unemployment benefit; promising to take away the sole parent pension;promising to force people with disabilities onto unemployment benefits.These were the proud boasts of the Liberals at the last election. And 16 outof the 19 members of the current shadow cabinet put their hands up for theseregressive policies and stomped around Australia selling them.Because he can't hide from his past, he is now in denial.However, on the issue dearest to John Howard's heart industrial relationshe is less categorical.In his speech, John Howard admits to the inevitability of pay losses where herefers to countries with greater flexibility having lower unemployment.Flexibility is code for pay cuts.
2He says he will not force workers off awards. But he says nothing about whatwill happen to the 1.73 million workers who face a new employer each year.How can someone choose to stay on an award that is not offered to them?The amount of turnover in the labour market will ensure that workers areforced off awards very quickly. Workers will lose pay and conditions.Overtime, penalty rates and holiday leave loadings will be optional, and notcompensated if lost.As ever, John Howard says he's pro-family; but he's not pro the wagesfamilies need and he's not pro-family support.John Howard also denies that he has any plans to slash $ 10 billion fromsocial welfare. Yet, the shadow treasurer, Peter Costello, is on record assaying that the Government should cut at least $ 11.7 billion from the Budget.You don't cut $ 11.7 billion without slashing social welfare.I said yesterday that, when John Howard addressed the ACOSS Congress,he would talk in platitudes at best or untruths at worse. Today he did both.CANBERRA 13 OCTOBER 1995


PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPSPEECH FOR THE OPENING OF THE BLACKTOWN BUS/ RAILINTERCHANGE, BLACKTOWN, 14 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPYIt's a great pleasure to be here it's great being in the West again. I used to&nbsp;come out to Blacktown on my pushbike. Today, I came out on the train, and it&nbsp;was a good ride too nice and quick, and smooth. And I think the thing that&nbsp;we celebrate here today is we always as Australians tend to value&nbsp;community things. We like to do things together. We appreciate doing&nbsp;things as a community. And this is a big community effort this is something&nbsp;done between the Government of the Commonwealth, and the State of NSW&nbsp;$ 25 million for, as the Mayor and Brian Langton said, the largestInterchange in the CityRail system. Now, you know, I'm sure sometimesBlacktown feels the squeeze between Penrith on one side and Parramatta onthe other well, one thing is for sure you have got the biggest railwaystation. And you have got that and not only that, a modern one, and youhave it because it does serve the community and you need it. And we knowthat given the fact that these days in a big metropolis like Sydney, you havegot to be able to move around it to find work, and to find enjoyment, and it'snot easy in any city these days moving on the roads you get a better rideand a faster one, and a cheaper one by going on the rail system withCityRail. And so, this is why we have built it. We have tried to make your lifebetter and easier and more comnfortable by developing this Interchange sothat you can make the link easier from the railway station to the bus, so youcan get home, and you don't have to be sitting up in the car sweltering on theway out with the western sun belting you in the chest all the way home, andthe sun belting you in the eyes all the way in. I used to a bit of that a fewyears ago, and that's why I decided to take the train for a long time too. Butin those days, it was the red rattlers, of course one had to fight for a placeon them.
I'm very pleased that the Better Cities program of the Commonwealth couldbe arraigned here, and used here we're spending $ 1 billion in trying todevelop facilities such as this and re-develop some others. And, of course,we have got the Y-section rail link just back down the line, we have got he re-construction of Parramatta station, and of those of you who go to the city and&nbsp;go past the old railway workshops, we're re-building that as a place for living,&nbsp;as a place for medium-density development. And of course, Ultimo-Pyrmontwe have got money there seeking to do that, as we also have in Newcastle.So, this program is, I think, an important one, and one where we can use theCommonwealth with the States to create really good things. And we havebeen able to do this with NSW in a place like this in Western Sydney.Now, I know a lot of people in Western Sydney think that the Governmentresources won't be committed to them. But, let me tell you this LaborGovernments always stick with the people in working areas because theyknow that the social wage and community values are the things which make adifference to their life. We're just now in our fifth year of economic growthwe have just completed 16 quarters of economic growth. The economy hasbeen growing at about 4-5% a year, we have had 610,000 jobs since the lastelection, and if you live in the Western Suburbs of Sydney, the thing thatmatters most to you is the strength of that economy. Because most of us liveoff the ebb and flow of the economy if it's doing well, you do well. If it'sdoing poorly, most people feel the effects, or they feel the unemployment.And we have been getting people back to work at a record rate, as we have arecord number of people joining the labour market from school and frommigration, and women who are coming into the labour market as they haven'tcome before. And as a consequence, getting that economy growing mattersa great deal.
Then, of course, there's all of the other things that hel p the social programs&nbsp;like the Family Allowance, or the Family Allowance Supplement, or Additional&nbsp;Family Payment as we call it today. Or Rent Assistance, or of course, that&nbsp;big foundation stone Medicare, which its under our health system. These&nbsp;are all the things that buttress the sort of life that you have. And then of&nbsp;course, education. Just a decade ago, only 3 kids in 10 completed&nbsp;secondary school this year, it's 8 in 10. And you know where the big gainsare? They are in the Western Suburbs of Sydney, and places like it -in thebig areas where working people live, so that we can see the children ofworking parents do well in secondary school and in universities. This is thegreat liberating force in Australian life -you jump the boundaries byeducation. And that's where our mobility comes from so the kids of workingclass parents get their break in the education system. And if they get sick,they get looked after by Medicare. And if mum and dad have got a modestincome, they get support in the Family Allowance Supplement. They getsupport with Rent Assistance. They get support with childcare. They getsupport with these sorts of things, and they get support with facilities like this.Now these are the things that Labor Governments do, and LaborGovernments believe in. By the way, my little mate Johhny Howard was outthere talking to ACOSS yesterday that's the Australian Council of SocialServices. And he was saying he has had a big Paulian conversion on theroad to Damascus, or so he would have you believe. Three years ago, theywere going to kick working people to death with their policies, in terms ofthrowing people off unemployment benefits after 9 months, scrapping Medicare, making you pay the full freight for health insurance, knocking down&nbsp;all the Social Security payments, they want to cut $ 10,000 million out of&nbsp;Government spending, but of course now he says he won't touch any of theseprograms. Well, the thing is I'll give you a bit of good advice: don't believehim. Don't believe him. He will go for you again just as he was going to go&nbsp;for you through John Hewson 3 years ago 16 members of the 19 membersof the front bench [ of the Opposition] are still the same people that put&nbsp;Fightback together. So, they have all had this it's been like group therapy&nbsp;they have all had the Paulian conversion on the road to Damascus theyhave all seen the light in 3 years. Now, you would have to give John Howard&nbsp;the Gregory's to get out to Blacktown. He would need an army map to get out&nbsp;there I reckon I could get my old pushbike and it would get out here by itself.
But, be that as it may, the fact of the matter is again, let me return to this&nbsp;theme: what matters are the things we do as a community. Now, whenAustralia Remembers was on just 2 months ago, the reason a nation felt&nbsp;proud of it, that we felt part of it, is because we fought that war together as a&nbsp;community. And Australians rejoice in community things because it is notjust private wealth and private reward that's all right for the individuals. But&nbsp;it's not right for everybody. We want to keep the egalitarian values ofcommunity spirit and a fair go, and inclusion, that we are all in this together,&nbsp;These are the values that we want to keep going. And this is very much what&nbsp;inspires projects such as this to say if you live in Western Sydney, you're as&nbsp;entitled to good transport as if you live in the ritzy parts of Sydney. And that&nbsp;t Government is not going to forget about you it's going to put thesefacilities in place, it's going to see that they're safe. And this thing has got, Ibelieve, 37 Closed Circuit Television cameras, it's all open so people can see&nbsp;through it, there's going to be safe areas of a night which are going to bepoliced so your kids can come home on the train, and they can go to a placewhere you know they are not going to be accosted, or worse. These are the&nbsp;things that matter to the security, to our peace of mind, and to the way weJive. At any rate, I'm glad to be here today, back in Blacktown with mycolleagues Russ Gorman and Roger Price, who have, of course, represented&nbsp;this area fervently and well over a long period of time, and to be here with theLabor Minister for Transport, Brian Langton, in opening this great facility. It'sa great thing for Sydney, for the rail system, but a good thing for Blacktownand the environs, and I am very pleased and proud to be here to officiallyopen it.
Thank you very much, indeed.


TEL: 15. Oct 95 0: 30 No. 005 PL PRIME MINISTERTRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPSPEECH AT THE SYDNEY THEATRE COMPANY FUN DRAISER, SYDNEY14 OCTOBER 1995E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed. What you can do with a tram shed. It just&nbsp;shows you what a little imagination and flair can do, and to Rachel [ Ward]&nbsp;and Anne [ Schofield], and alt the people in the arts and costume and the&nbsp;decorative departments of the company, and all those other people who put&nbsp;their backs into this it's got a wonderful ambience, and a wonderful feel.And if the Foundation goes anything like as well as this night has gone, it's&nbsp;going to be a great success.&nbsp;
A few electric candelabra, a bit of smoke, an elephant, Andrew Denton, and&nbsp;there you are one explosive mixture. It's very nice to be associated with the&nbsp;-Sydney Theatre Company, and to be asked to speak at this the launch of&nbsp;the Foundation. Because it is not an old Company 18 years is not so old,&nbsp;but it's had such an impact upon the life of this country, and theatre, and Ithink that we should count our blessings that we have developed a Companysuch as this, and needs things to support it. Now, there is a rumour goingaround at the moment that it's pretty scratchy, the arts at the moment prettyscratchy. And there's a bit of a debate going around that there's too muchpublic money in It. But, there should be State sponsorship of the arts, and I'mdetermined for one to maintain it. It takes a long time to develop an artisticinheritance it takes a long time to develop an arts culture. But, we all knowall of us in this room that the arts define any nation, and the arts more thananything else have defined Australia. All the politicians think they definedAustralia, but I think most of them defined it after the artists defined it first.And that's why our playwrights, and the ones that have been associated withthis Company, like David Williamson, and Louis Nowra and Nick Enright, andKaren Mainwaring people such as that, are the people who chronicle the lifeof this country put it down in the most interesting ways, tell it to us and showit to us in a way we might not otherwise understand, and burn it into ourconsciousness. These are the things that theatre can do.
And we need to continue what has happened, and what has occurred to us at&nbsp;this time, and this is the point of the Foundation to try and bring someprivate money to the arts. Other than that, it comes from the Government.rhis year, I think the Commonwealth provided about $ 1 million to theCompany, and I think the State of NSW about the same, and the rest of itcomes, of course, commercially. But, this is about opening up the pockets ofthose that have got more than they need, and who can drop and sprinklesome of their funds and money around in the places where it will do a lot ofgood. And if a show like this doesn't get some money out of them, wellnothing else will.
Of course, the people who have most of the money never come to things like&nbsp;this. You know, if we could get Kerry or Rupert here, and spend a bit ofmoney on the theatre instead of just the football we got those heart-starters&nbsp;out of Kerry of course, when he took a bit of a jolt years ago. And he's akinder fella than that he's done a lot of other things the rest of us don't knowabout, but there's more he could do, and the same goes for Rupert. Now, the&nbsp;thing about the big-hitters is that they are always giving money to charitiesand you say to them what charities? " Well, you know, charities" [ they reply].Which charities? " Charities". It's always done with such feeling suchcommitment. But if they just decided what they could do by taking an interestin organisations, like some of you are taking in this Company a personalinterest in the way it runs, who manages it, its commerciality, its problems, itsartistic development all of the things that we know make a business like thiswork a Company like this work, then they could be so powerful. Now,maybe there's a cheque in the mail I don't know. But, most of them havestill got their play lunch money most of them, not all of them, but most ofthem. But, there's a lot of money around these days I mean, LaborGovernments are good for employment, they're good for battlers, but they arealso good for the wealthy. When I became Treasurer all of those years ago,the All Ordinaries Index was 453, and today it is 2150 there's a lot of moneyin between, and we only want a little bit of it here just a little bit, just atrickle. But I don't know why it is that we have so many scrooges in Australia, and wecan never get any philanthropic interest from them in supporting the arts.Now, it's always left to Governments, and Governments do their best, and wehave bodies that help us we have now got a thing called a MajorOrganisations Board, and I know you are pleased that the Sydney TheatreCompany is one of the star turns with the Major Organisations Board. And,we have got the Australia Council, and Michael Lynch is here tonightbecause he has had great association with this company, and Hillary McPheebattling away to get the right money in the right places for the arts. And it'shard going. But this is where the bulk of it comes from we still need thatState sponsorship of the arts, but we need not just the money privately, butthe interest that comes with it, and getting people interested. I always thinkthat once you have had an emotional connection with the arts, you can neverleave it off, because it makes very clear what your future with it will be, A lotof people have never had an emotional connection with the arts, they havenever had the thump to the chest, and they think it is something just up in the&nbsp;ether. They don't realise that it is something that actually feeds the soul, liftsIyour consciousness, defines the country and does all those things they thinkit is something, some superficial thing.
At any rate, this is a valiant attempt to get a private Foundation together, to&nbsp;put money back into development of young people, artists, actors, people&nbsp;who design the sets all of the things that a company like this needs to bring&nbsp;young people along, and to encourage them, and to see the Company growwith even stronger roots and foundations than it has today. That's the eointof the Foundation to try and get that sort of commitment from private'Osponsorship. Now, the Americans have done it so well for so long, and I don'tquite know why it works in America but not here maybe simply becausethere is more money around. But there's a lot of money around here now,and what we have got to do is get people to make the commitment. At anySrate, I would like to congratulate Rachel [ Ward] and Anne [ Schofield] forobviously the huge effort that has gone into this to make a statement. Tomake a statement about the arts, and to make the effort to make it count.Can I say for the Governments part, we have tried to keep that strongsponsorship of the arts in Creative Nation we have now got nearly $ 100million of those funds expended this year, we have developed this multimediacorporation, because we think multi-media will be a strong outlet forthe arts, just as film was all those years ago. And, of course, we are stillsupporting through the Major Organisations Board, the major Companies,and of course the film industry. Now, there has been some controversy aboutRupert and the Showground, but we have only ever had one film that's madethe big box-office earnings, and that is Crocodile Dundee, although, ofcourse, we have had many great films produced in this countrA And I think itis a good thing that we can get Fox, and get that belief internationally inAustralian films, films made here, and Bob Carr and I have committedourselves to getting that business up and running, and I don't think we willhave any problems, either, with Rupert Murdoch I think he is very committedto it. He sees a good thing to be done here, and I hope you feel that too.Because when we develop the film industry further, we are developing thewhole profession further because so many people move between the stage&nbsp;and film.&nbsp;
So, could I conclude my remarks again by thanking you very much for the&nbsp;invitation you have done me proud in asking me. It's a great.. . the ambience&nbsp;tonight was fantastic when I walked in, there was a lot of smoke and dust&nbsp;about, and it had all of the feel of a medieval place I thought I could havebrought John Howard along and he would have got a few progressive Ideas.I think he's just moving out of the 14th Century Into the 15th now. But, I thinkhe's not quite on this wavelength. Anyway, it's been a lovely night and agreat show I loved the Celtic dancers: a bit like the Tap Dogs. The lastshow I saw at the Sydney Theatre Company was the Tap Dogs, and theyhave done so well internationally, too so there you are, they started here.All the way from Newcastle to Sydney, and after Sydney, the world. So,thanks very much for having me along I wish the Foundation well, I will dowhat I can to support it, Burrows and Ted will keep me up to the mark if we&nbsp;slip back. But it is about private sponsorship, and I think it is a chance to lift&nbsp;that awareness of people the consciousness of people that more can be&nbsp;done for the arts, and if they have got some loose change to play with, they&nbsp;could put it into something good because as we all know, giving money&nbsp;away is a lot harder than making it. It takes a bit of style to give money away,&nbsp;and what we will do tonight is try and develop a bit of style for those people&nbsp;who haven't had to this point a lot of it. Thank you.
ends.&nbsp;



111%-5 I
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DR DON RUSSELL
I am pleased to announce that the Australian Ambassador to the United
States, Dr Don Russell, is to return to Australia to take up the position of
Principal Adviser on my personal office staff.
Dr Russell has filled the important role of Ambassador to Washington with
great distinction for more than two years. His knowledge and experience of
domestic and international policy issues and his dedication to his country's
interests have lifted Australia's profile in the United States and strengthened
the ties between us.
Of the many issues on which Dr Russell has worked successfully, I want to
thank him in particular for so effectively conveying Australia's views on APEC
and other trade matters to the Clinton Administration.
Naturally, I am pleased that Dr Russell has now agreed to re-join my office
from next month. His experience, knowledge and creativity will be a valuable
addition to the team and indeed to Government policy and Australian public
life. I am also pleased that John Bowan will continue to work with me as Chief of
Staff. Arrangements are in train to appoint a new Ambassador to the United States,
whose name will be announced shortly.
CANBERRA 16 OCTOBER 1995 



TELj6 Oct. 95 21: I11 No.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH CATHERINE JOB, ABC RADIO " AM" PROGRAM,
17 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
CJ: Well Mr Keating, you have been calling for some policy detail from Mr
Howard, he has just given us some, is it a step in the right direction?
PM. An endorsement of the Western Australian endorsement of the
Western Australian legislation. Hear him slipping and sliding when
you put the questions to him about the strikes, ' yes' he says in his
measured tones ' yes, we do, you know our position, we have been
supporting ballots on strikes for some time now'. Basically, look let me
just make this clear to you, his claim that the Federal Government is
supporting this strike or having anything to do with it is completely
untrue. This was on before I went to Western Australia. The blockade
had been announced before I ever went there and it is there because
of the viciousness of the Western Australian legislation. This year
Catherine, industrial disputes are at their lowest level since 1940.
They are at 70 working days lost per thousand people. When Mr
Howard was last in government it was 790 working days lost per
thousand people. We have, as I say, the lowest level of disputes in
the nation since 1940. What is happening in Western Australia now is
what you would see all over Australia if John Howard were to become
Prime Minister because John Howard endorsed Mr Kierath and Mr
Court's industrial legislation at the Western Australian Liberal Party
conference he spoke at about six weeks ago.
CJ: That was the first wave, of course, that he spoke about six weeks ago,
but this current dispute certainly suits your purposes doesn't it, to paint
a picture of the industrial mayhem you say would ensue under a
Coalition government?
PM: No industrial dispute in this sense suits my purposes. My purposes
are for industrial peace, they are for low inflation, high productivity and
high employment growth which is what we have at the moment. We
have the lowest level of industrial disputes since 1940, we have an 
TEL 2
inflation rate of 2.5 to 3 per cent. We have 2.5 per cent productivity
growth and 3 to 4 per cent employment growth. You don't get that
other than with a co-operative work force. How could you possibly
have row inflation like this and high productivity without a co-operative
work force? And, the whole consensus model, which the Government
has put together under the Accords since 1983, the reason we have
had declining inflation and higher productivity and a whole productivity
culture in the workplace is because of the consensus model. That is,
we have sensible wage outcomes in return for higher rates of
economic growth and employment.
Now, Mr Howard ran a conflict model all through the 1970s. What we
saw then was a massive level of industrial disputes. I'd like to give you
the numbers:, 790 to 70 from my recollection, I think that is exactly the
numbers and it is 10 times as much. There was over 10 or 12 times
more industrial disputes.
CJ: Mr Keating, you say that you don't want to encourage industrial
disputes and you are lauding your record on getting those numbers
down, did you do anything to dissuade the blockade of Western
Australia today?
PM;* Understand this, I spoke at the Nurses Federation over there last
week. Did you know that Richard Court has denied those nurses an
$ 8 wage safety net increase now for over 12 months. We have now
had to join issue with them in the federal court, in the arbitration
commission to support them in having it paid. They probably won't get
it paid until about next March in which case they will be 15 months
waiting for an $ 8 safety net wage increase. Mr Court is absolutely
vicious on these people and he has now brought in this draconian
legislation and were it to be there, of course, without the protection of
the federal award system people would have savage wage cuts and
loss of conditions.
CJ: But Mr Keating, as Mr Howard has pointed out this stunt isn't he says
about work place conditions or about pay, it's about politics. It's about
political donations from union dues and secret ballots for strikes.
PM: Understand this, it is about the whole nature of the Court government's
industrial relations. There is a whole community reaction to Mr Court
over there and that Is what's on. Mr Howard would like to think
otherwise, but you see, It has basically blown up on him. The same
way as Mr Kennett's legislation blew up on him three years ago. Mr
Kennett was telling the Business Council a week ago ' don't worry,
when the Federal Liberals get in we'll have the overarching federal
legislation so my west Victorian legislation will be able to work.' He
said ' the employees will have nowhere to go, they will be trapped'. In
other words, there will be Western Australian legislation right across
the country. I gave the example in the Parliament yesterday of a
librarian who was in touch with us in Victoria, who is not under the
No 020 UZ/ U
16 -OCT c 
TEL t t2J5 21 : 11 No . U2U
3
federal system, she has a wage now of $ 35,000, applied for another
job as a librarian in a part of Melbourne that suited her convenience to
her living and the wage on offer was $ 19,000. From $ 35,000 down to
$ 19,000 because she couldn't get the protection of the federal awards,
so she is staying where she is.
Now, you get that legislation across the country and you will find a
massive reaction, no one is going to have 20 and 30 per cent pay cuts
or in her case nearly a 50 per cent pay cut. Nobody is going to be
accepting that and that is what this is about. All of John Howard's
words are codes for wage cuts for the bottom end of the work force.
He-was out telling ACOSS last week, ' look, in some countries where
we have flexibility there are higher levels of employment growth ie
America'. You have heard the US Labour Secretary Robert Reich
recently talking about an army of working poor in America where
wages have been falling for 16 years. Sure they have had strong
employment growth, but there is literally an army of working poor and it
has done nothing for their economic growth, they are not growing
faster ever than at about 2.5 per cent.
CJ: Mr Keating, you have announced yesterday, if we can just move on to
another subject very briefly, the return of Don Russell our Washington
Ambassador..
PM: Can I just finish on this point, I was asked directly in the Parliament
yesterday did I support this strike? I said I neither endorse nor
t disendorse It and I didn't endorse it in Western Australia. These are
alt words put into my mouth. Mr Howard is conveniently in the
Canberra studio this morning to put words into my mouth, to say that I
support the strike and that I am basically in -some way behind it. I
didn't even know about it before I went to Western Australia, to be
frank with you. I haven't endorsed i t, but you see, he knows that it is a
foretaste of things to come for the community. He knows that the low
levels of industrial disputes now and the whole consensus model is up
for grabs were he to become Prime Minister and he knows I'll make
this point over and over again. That is why he got himself out of bed
and got shaved and sat in the studio at eight o'clock, showered and
dressed with nowhere to go at eight o'clock, to put the spurs into me
over policies that he supports.
CJ: He is very keen to reply to what you have just said Mr Keating if that is
ok with you.
PM: The thing is, of course he would. He would hang there if it was 1: 00am
in the morning, he would be hanging around trying to put his view. But
understand what his view is about, it is the rancid view of people that
despise working people, who want to push their wages and conditions
down. Look at Richard Court, not happy simply to defeat Carmen
Lawrence he had to try to destroy her personally with this vicious royal
commission. He is vicious. He is vicious on the work force and don't
TEL 
TEL 4
under estimate the degree of community reaction. I'm not talking
about union reaction, but community reaction in Western Australia.
And what the Australian community have got to know, were John
Howard to become Prime Minster, he would see this every week of the
year every week of every year that he was In office and why would
people turn their back on the lowest level of disputes that we are
seeing now 2.5 to 3 per cent inflation and high productivity growth
to take back the model that Mr Howard left as a smouldering ruin in
1980, 1981, 1982 and 1983.
CJ: Mr Howard is still here in the studio.
JH: Well, the Prime Minister has had an opportunity over the last few
minutes to behave like a national leader, to behave like a Prime
Minister, not to behave like a partisan politician. He could over the last
few minutes have condemned the strike, he could have called upon
the unions not to precede with it, he could have repudiated it, but what
does he do? Cowardly like and betraying his responsibilities as Prime
Minister Pontius Pilate like, he sits on the fence and he says ' I neither
endorse it nor disendorse it'. In other words, he is not prepared to
express a view on the inflicting of pain and suffering and discomfort on
1.3 mil lion of his fellow Australians. If ever there was a demonstration
that this whiole thing is a political cook-up between the Labor Party and
the ACTU, designed to create the impression that if there is a change
of government there will be industrial chaos. He knows damn well that
there is nothing in our policy that is going to out the wages of workers.
He is the world expert at cutting the wages of Australian workers, he
has cut their wages over the last 13 years, he has increased their
mortgage payments on average by 50 per cent, he has produced a
higher sustained level of unemployment of Australian workers than any
other Prime Minister since the end of World War 11 and what he is
about now is trying to generate a phoney political strike which is doing
real damage to the people of Western Australia. Instead of
condemning it, Instead of being the leader of the country, he is being
the provoker of severe industrial pain and disputation on the Western
Australian people. If people suffer today in Western Australia Paul
Keating is to blame and the last 10 minutes, particularly the last two
minutes of his interview have proved conclusively his political
motivation and attitude regarding this strike.
CJ: A brief response from you Prime Minister, are you going to condemn
the strike?
PM; That is a sort of condescending and supercilious line: " I have behaved
like a partisan politician." What were Mr Howard's first remarks to
come on the program to lay the responsibility at my door In precisely
the partisan way he always behaves. Secondly, it is not my matter.
This dispute is a dispute brought on by the Western Australian Liberal
Party( s legislation. It is a dispute that exists in the state of Western
Australia as a consequence of their behaviour. It is not my matter. I
16 uct .95 21 11 HO .020 P -U4/ Q 
TEL
am neither endorsing it nor disendorsing it. It is not my matter, but it is
very much the matter of the Liberal Party. It is very much the matter of
the legislation of the Liberal Party. Let me just correct another thing
Mr Howard said, there haven't been wage cuts through the period of
the government's office. There has been a 7.2 per cent real wage
increase, real wage increase, during the 12 years of the government's
office. A 20 per cent increase per capita in household disposable
income and a 40 per cent increase in household disposable income
over 12 years. That is real, 40 per cent real, 20 per cent per capita
real and 7 per cent to real wages. So, Mr Howard is wrong on three
counts. He comes onto your program simply to make political points in a very
partisan way as an apologia for the viciousness of legislation, the
thrust of which, of course, he entirely supports.
CJ: Mr Keating, Mr Howard, thank you both for your time.
ends 0 Oc t I No 020 Ut,/ Ut-



PRIME MINISTER112/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
FORESTS PROCESS
In response to stakeholders' requests for more time to fully consult with the
Government on its forest plan the public consultation period on the forests
process will be extended for two weeks until 3 November.
The Government is committed to a genuine consultation process and to
thoroughly addressing any concerns raised prior to final decisions being
made. The Government is also confident that the final decisions on this important
issue, now to be made in November, will be broadly supported by the
community. CANBERRA 18 October 1995 



-TL: 18. Oct. 95 4: 05 No. 016 P. 0
PRIME MINISTER 113/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP
EPAC PRIVATE INFRASTRUCTURE TASK FORCE: FINAL REPORT
( embargo 12. Olam 19 October, 1995)
I welcome the release of the Final Report of the Economic Planning and
Advisory Commission ( EPAC) Private Infrastructure Task Force, established in
November last year. The Task Force has been inquiring into private sector
Involvement In the funding, management and control of public infrastructure.
The Report provides a substantial fund of ideas on issues relating to private
sector Involvement in infrastructure.
Among other things, the Task Force noted the rapid development of
, infrastructure finance and the growing emergence of superannuation and life
Insurance investments in infrastructure. The package of superannuation
measures announced in the Budget will greatly Increase the pool of
superannuation funds, and the level of funding that is available for
Infrastructure from this source, over the next decade.
The report also highlighted the growing sophistication of the infrastructure
finance industry and the role played by infrastructure borrowings as a catalyst
for private sector involvement. This greater sophistication will, over time,
reduce the need for Infrastructure borrowings.
The Task Force recommends that the tax incentives for infrastructure
borrowings will not be needed after their current life. However, the Government
believes such a judgement is premature, and continues to see a significant role
for them in facilitating greater private sector involvement In funding the
development of infrastructure.
There are many substantive issues raised in the report and I have asked my
Ministers to review them. The Government will respond to the detailed
recommendations shortly.
CANBERRA 18 OCTOBER 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
DELIVERED BY THE MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES AND HEALTH,
THE HON CARMEN LAWRENCE, MP
PRIME MINISTER'S EMPLOYER OF THE YEAR AWARDS, CANBERRA,
18 OCTOBER 1995
I am very pleased to be here today to present the Prime Minister's Employer
of the Year Awards and to recognise employers who have given job
opportunities to Australians with a disability.
The Awards are in their sixth year and in 1995 attracted almost 400
nominations. I must say that past presentation ceremonies number amongst the most
uplifting functions I have attended.
The Awards always tell a good story and, I think, a very Australian story.
In Australia we move forward as a group. In Australia, we care about each
other we help each other out and we stick together. Australians have, I
believe, a fundamental and very deeply-held belief in fairness.
There is a consensus in this country and it's not found in all countries, or
even most countries a consensus that everyone should contribute to and
share in the common wealth.
That's one of the best things about living in Australia. And it's one of the best
reasons for loving Australia.
These awards are a practical expression of the Australian consensus. They
are a good example of government, business and unions all pitching in and
working together in the common interest.
There are many things that a government can do to create an inclusive
society and to maintain a strong social net. 
Governments can provide health care and social security and education and
community services to all. Not all governments do this but the best do.
And there is much that governments can do for people with a disability.
For the past decade, this Government has assisted people with disabilities
through the Disability Services Program and in light of the Baume Report,
we will redouble our efforts to increase opportunities, especially in
employment, education and training.
In 1991 the Government introduced the Disability Reform Package to coordinate
Commonwealth services and enable people with disabilities to
participate more fully in the life of the community. The Disabilities
Discrimination Act of 1993 declared that discrimination on the grounds of
disability is unlawful.
These are valuable things and the Government will keep doing them, and
building on them.
But what governments cannot easily provide to people with disabilities
unlike businesses are jobs.
A job is the most important element of the Australian inheritance.
Ilt is the best guarantee of an interesting and prosperous life.
It's the best builder of confidence and self-esteem, and the best antidote for
depression and self-doubt.
As a way of bringing people in from the margins of society, nothing else
comes close.
Businesses should employ people with disabilities because they share
along with the rest of us a responsibility to society.
They should do it because it will provide their employees with new skills and
a better future.
But they should also do it because hiring people with disabilities is good
business practice. With proper training and support and in the right job, a
person with a disability can do as well as any worker. And the experience of
these Awards tells us they bring an extra measure of enthusiasm and
commitment to the workplace.
Of course, many businesses have already seen the light. People with
disabilities are working with great flair and success in shops and offices and
schools; in councils, timber companies and computer companies; in
universities and banks and hotels and airlines. 
And all of them are very much a part of the national enterprise.
Let me offer my congratulations to everyone involved with the Employer of
the Year Awards the organisers, the sponsors and the very hard-working
selection panels.
Thank you especially to the ACTU, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry and Business Review Weekly.
Congratulations to those employers in both the private and public sectors
who have given people with disabilities a chance, and who have been
nominated this year.
Most importantly, congratulations to those people with a disability who take
their place in Australia's work force, whose courage is equal to their
employers' vision.
Australia is a stronger nation for these Awards. And because of the
generosity and intelligence of the employers we recognise today, Australia is
a better country in which to live.
Thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PETER COSTELLO'S " RADICAL NEW TAX PLAN"
The Federai Opposition's secret tax plan, uncovered by the Business Review
Weekly, would lead Australia down the path of social decay and urban blight
already travelled by the United States.
Despite his denial it is now clear that the Shadow Treasurer, Peter Costello,
held secret talks between Victorian, West Australian and South Australian
Governments on introducing new State-based income taxes and consumption
taxes. The hitherto confidential talks demonstrate that in only one important respect
has the Liberal Party changed its approach to Commonwealth-State relations
from that proposed in Fightback! three years ago the Commonwealth GST.
Reluctant to advocate publicly a Commonwealth GST, John Howard's
Coalition now intends to achieve the same result by '' cooperative"~
agreements with State Governments.
This " radical new tax plan" would have profound implications for taxation and
undermine the Federal Government's capacity to meet its national
responsibilities for social programs.
Far from " breathing new life into federalism", the " swingeing cuts to Federal
government spending and responsibilities" proposed by the Opposition would
hollow out the Commonwealth, while deserting those now assisted by the
Commonwealth role in housing, health, education and welfare.
Peter Costello's mantra of " cutting duplication" is code for shifting
Commonwealth education, health and welfare functions to the states.
The Coalition may seek to deny this but Mr Costello's plan outlined in BRW is
simply fleshing out Mr Howard's commitment in his first ' headland' speech to
wind back specific grants to the states. 
Mr Howard said the Coalition would " revert to the practice of former coalition
governments of winding back Section 96 for specific grants to the States.
That will mean States themselves will have greater freedom of choice when
deciding their programs and priorities.)'
We already know what the Victorian, South Australian and West Australian
Governments' priorities are. Already today in terms of their own funding the
Liberal state Governments have made major cuts to spending on social
programs. In Victoria Jeff Kennett has cut spending on public health by $ 260 million, he
has closed almost 300 schools and reduced teacher numbers by 8,000.
In South Australia, Dean Brown is looking to cut spending on health by
million and privatise public hospitals. He has already cut spending on
education by $ 40 million.
And of course, as you would expect, Richard Court has an agenda for the
widespread privatisation of the public health system in Western Australia.
If the states had the " freedom" John Howard wants to cede to them they
would be under no obligation to maintain public health, education and social
welfare programs.
That's what cutting back Section 96 Grants to the States means.
Freed from many of its social responsibilities a Federal Coalition Government
would then blame the subsequent tearing of Australia's social cohesion on
the States.
Their model is the US Republicans' Contract with America, which passed the
buck but not the bucks to the States.
I reiterate our firm opposition to the Federal Government cooperating with the
introduction of State income taxes or of a new consumption tax.
I also reiterate our continuing opposition to closing down the
Commonwealth's role in health, education, housing and welfare.
BRISBANE October 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO ALP DINNER, GREEK CLUB, BRISBANE,
OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much indeed. Thanks very much Bob Gibbs ( QLD Party
President), Wayne and Roisin, members from the State Cabinet, my Deputy
Kim Beazley, members of our Federal Cabinet, Lord Mayor Jim and Mary,
Mike Kaiser and Maree and friends one and all.
Well, it is always good to be back at the Greek Club, always a marvellous
audience, always a marvellous Labor audience and it should be because
Queensland is a Labor State. I am particularly proud to be here with Wayne.
I was here with him three years ago when we did and said all those things
then at the start of that election and I am delighted to see his Government
back in office because you can see what a difference it makes in Western
Australia this week what a difference a Labor government makes. I thank
him for his uplifting speech and for the uplifting sentiments.
This is a Labor State. We lost it for a very-long period of time until he won it
back and we always remember, of course, that the Labor Party was born in
Queensland and every time I come here I am reminded what a remarkable
Party it is, more than 100 years old and it has seen the transformation of the
country, seen all the history, made a large part of it and has gone on adapting
itself and adapting Australia. One hundred years later our Party is still useful
to Australia, still cutting the mustard, still making the way, still puffing our
stamp upon this country and we are stronger now than we have ever been
and we will win the next election.
We will win the next election because Australians will not want to squander
all the hard work of this last decade. They won't want to make the
commitments they have made to build a new modem, efficient, outward
looking country and squander it. They will always choose to go forward.
Australians always choose to go forward, they will never go back. I don't
think Queenslanders are any different than their fellow Australians. They
have always cherished in this State our best traditions, the best traditions of
Australia and, of course, many of our best traditions began here. They will 
stay true to the course and if we have faith in Queenslanders, they will have
faith in us and I think that we can show them that we have delivered.
At the last election our most solemn pledge and our most solemn promise
was to restore the economy back to growth and to get unemployment down.
Remember at the time I said we wouldn't leave the unemployed behind and
we have done these things. When the quarter we are living in, this current
quarter of the year, when the figures for the quarter come out it will show that
we have had 17 consecutive quarters of growth. Four full years and the first
quarter of our fifth year and those 17 consecutive quarters will make it the
longest growth phase since World War 11 670,000 jobs since the election,
we made a target of half a million, they said it will never be achieved, it's just
a bit of banter, never be achieved! We got to 500,000 jobs in two thirds of
the time in two years and we are now at 670,000 since the election. While
we have done that of course, we have consolidated low inflation. Not only
have we broken the back of inflation as no other government was able to do
after it struck Australia, but we have got it around now running at 2.5 to 3 per
cent. Remember about two months ago all the foreboding from the Liberal party
when the current account deficit came out at $ 3 billion for the month. They
went on about our debt, how we were ruined and then the following month it
was $ 2.2 billion and last month it was $ 1.5 billion, last month we were at half
of what it was two months earlier and now we are starting to see the current
account trending down. So, if you look at where we are I don't think we have
been anything like this in 12 years. In fact, the Governor of the Reserve
Bank made that point in today's press 4 per cent growth, 4 per cent
employment growth, 2-3 per cent inflation, the current account deficit trending
down and exports booming. While we have done all that we have got the
budget back into surplus, we have dramatically expanded superannuation so
that all of us will have a better standard of living in retirement. Everyone by
the year 2002 which is not far away, just seven years away will have
per cent minimum being put away for everybody to improve their income in
retirement while producing at the same time a massive pool of retirement
savings to help the country ease its savings path, to call upon for investment,
to give us a stronger economy and a stronger income for all of us into the
future. And to anneal these achievements while we have been doing that, we
have strengthened our identity and our culture. We have righted the wrong
of terra nullius with our indigenes. We have given them back that part of the
remaining land that was always theirs. We have built a relationship of quality
and trust with the countries of the region which, I think, is without precedent
and we threaded together while we have been doing all that the most
ambitious free trade undertaking in the world APEC and at the same time
layed down the blue print for an Australian republic.
We have done all these things in three years, in less than three years.
Within one Parliament. We have made Australia a country that we can be
proud of and, I think, we have made it one of the fairest countries in the world
and that is what the Labor government, after all, is all about. It is about
fairness. It is about equity. It is about imagination. It is about belief. It is ' A
A~ I~ 
about faith. Faith in our fellow Australians, compassion for their lot in life and
belief in Australia. But now at the brink of a new century we can't go back.
We can't go back to the inequality. We can't go back to our past
uncompetitiveness. We can't go back to the conflict, to our continental
insularity, to the monoculture, to the denial of truth about our indigenes, to
the monarchy. We can't go back to the old Australia. We can't go back to
John Howard's Australia.
We can't go back to the man who describes himself as the most conservative
leader the conservative parties have ever had. To the man who a week ago
told us Asia was a threat. To a man that told us when he was leader that
Australians need to avoid being fooled by Gorbechov and Perestroika. Who
railed vociferously against the economic sanctions against South Africa and
condemned our government's anti apartheid policy as mistaken and who
opposed the government's south pacific nuclear free zone initiative. We can't
go back to that person and to those things.
Imagine if John Howard had been managing Australia over the last twelve
years. There would have been no accord, no awards, no Medicare, no safety
net, no superannuation, no Daintree, no Gordon Below Franklin, no leap into
Asia and no progress towards a republic. In other words, we would be a
completely different kind of Australia, a right wing regressive backwater of a
country that would be unrecognisable from the country that we have today.
We have seen him in the last week with industrial relations. John Howard is
always talking about support for families. He says he is in favour of families.
He is in favour of families but not in favour of family support. He is in favour
of families but not in favour of awards. He is in favour of families but he is not
in favour of overtime rates. He is in favour of families but he is not in favour
of penalty rates. He is in favour of families but he is not in favour of annual
leave loadings. He basically believes as the Western Australian government
does, that he can cut across the rights of society, he can break the social
contract, he can do things which rob Australians of their sense of democracy
and their rights. He can do things to say that Australians can't withdraw their
labour, that they must keep their heads down, they have to work for the offer
that they have been given, that we take them back to where they were more
than a century ago in the 1890s. These are the things that he believes in.
But this week was, I think, quite revealing about the Liberal party. It is
haunted you know by its past. It is a bit like a haunted house. The echoes
come out of the walls, the old policies the old individual wage contracts or
the old disasters like Vietnam you see, he wouldn't see Do Muoi here five or
six weeks ago. He wouldn't meet the paramount leader of Vietnam, but the
US Secretary of State met him two days later. He was good enough for
Warren Christopher but not good enough for John Howard.
They are haunted and it keeps bubbling out. In just one week we have had
Mr Andrews the Parliamentary Secretary to Mr Costello the Shadow
Treasurer talking about the need for a GST. We have had Bronwyn Bishop
giving us her treatise on families and children. She said ' I think it is an 
important principle that when you bring children into the world you have to
remain responsible for them and that it is not the tax payers responsibility to
pick up the remnants of a family when it breaks up.' She is a real charmer
isn't she? She is a real sweetie, Bronwyn.
Then we had Costello, of course, today with his state income taxes. They, of
course, won't show us their policies. Andrew Robb says they are 98 per cent
prepared, but he won't let the public see them. Supposedly to keep them
from me, but somebody on the inside on one of the consultancies who are
working with them, gave the story to the BRW Business Review Weekly
published today, saying that basically they want income taxes for the States
so the States can put their rates up as they see fit. So you would have a
different rate in Queensland to NSW to Victoria et cetera. In other words,
they would fracture the country and break it up.
Then you have got, of course, Mr Fischer. Did you see him on Lateline the
other night? That was a -stunning performance wasn't it? Kerry O'Brien said
to him ' well, you would have to concede that it does on the face of it give
ammunition to the Government's claims that the Coalition is a policy free
zone?' He said ' but we do have policies, policies of substance, policies in the
pipeline, policies some aspects of which have already been announced. On
the small front but important, the reintroduction of the black spots road
program.' This is one of our programs. It happens to be an important one,
but you would hardly say it was the rationale, as the principle policy focus of
a deputy prime minister talking about the policy framework for a new
government. Of course, John Howard said it would dribble out. I made some illusion to Mr
Newman from that Mad magazine years ago, but it wasn't appreciated. But, it
is dribbling out and as it is, it is not doing him any good. I mean, we have
seen just in the last week his GST out from Andrews, Bronwyn Bishop giving
us her view on children and the support of children I don't think the Pope is
on her side. Mr Costello with state income taxes and then, of course, I had
little Johnny at 8: 00am Monday morning. Now, I don't listen to I used to
be an ' AM' junkie until 1983 and I gave it up. I broke the habit. But my
colleague Don Russell is coming back from the US to support us and I
thought he would be on ' AM' so I turned it on.. And heard them say we
have got a blockade in Western Australia and we will cross live in the
Canberra studio to the Leader of the Opposition. So, I thought oh here he is
like the cat who swallowed the cream. Sitting up there about to lay into this
strike which Premier Court and he have basically conjured up, lay it on us as
if it is our responsibility. Sure enough, first sentence, and he has now got this
Menzian tone of voice, he says ' I think it is a disgraceful thing in a country like
this when a Prime Minister will allow the blockade of a State'. Now, I don't
know whether he has been schooled in this, but this is now the way he is.
It is a long time since I phoned in, I wouldn't even know what the number was.
So I got onto Greg Turnbull and said ' you had better get me that ' AM'
producer because I want to get into this and I had the flu, I was as crook as
Rookwood I can tell you. Anyway I staggered to the telephone, in the dark, 
and I got on there but I got the drift after a while because they put me through
to the sound box so I had the debate coming over. Of course, it didn't take
me long to hit the themes. The main theme was if John Howard was Prime
Minister this is how it would be every week that he was Prime Minister.
Well, it was only in the evening that we saw the film footage of his reaction. I
don't know whether you saw it, but it was one of the classics of Australian
politics. He took the earphones off and then banged them back on and
banged his glasses off and then put them back on straight again and banged
himself again, then said ' turn him off, turn him off and I thought God! he has
got St Vitus dance. He is doing an Inspector Clouseau impersonation here.
Now, it is little wonder he is hearing voices. There is little wonder there is
echoes from the haunted house because as we squeeze him, as we squeeze
the tube and a bit comes out, every bit that comes out always leaves us
plenty of room to get into it because they have no policy structure and they
have no discipline.
And it is the same team, the same old team that was there at the last election.
Sixteen of the nineteen are the same ones who put Fightback together. The
new ones are simply replicates. Bronwyn Bishop being one of them.
He said this recently, he said this on radio. He was on with Jeremy Cordeux
in South Australia:-' the major issue will be what Mr Howard, industrial
relations do you think or what?' And Howard says with all of the
seriousness he could summon ' no, I think the major issue will be essentially
whether or not it really isn't time that a new group of people were given the
leadership of this country.' Not that you deserve it. Not that you have got an
agenda for change. Not that you can lead the nation. Just that a new group
can come in and give us the leadership of this country. You know, like the
new Minister for Trade Mr Fischer, the new Deputy Prime Minister, our black
spots specialist. Or the new Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Downer. Now,
there's a fresh face. Or the new Minister for Industrial Relations Mr Reith, he
is real new. Or that happiest one of them all that new Minister for
Employment, Mr Kemp. He is always such a happy fellow. Or the New
Minister for Privatisation, Senator Bishop. Or Mr New himself, the member
for Bennelong. Or the new Treasurer, of course, Mr Costello.
There never was a new group quite as old as this one. Never was thinking so
stale. Now, you can take recycling so far, but this is taking it to absurd
lengths. You have got to say when you look at some of the other people like,
and I always forget his name, that young monarchist, Abbott. Yes, the mad
Abbott. You have got to say of the Liberal Party where do they find these
junior monarchists to lead Australia into the 21st century? Do they look
around for them or do they just spring up naturally? Where do they find these
relatively young men and women with the social and political ideas of a
century ago. I mean you have got to look pretty hard.
The fact is, this is what we face. This is the same group that put Fightback
together. I said the other day they have had the sort of Paulian conversion
on the road to Damascus. I mean, 16 of the 19 of them wanted to throw the 
unemployed off unemployment benefits after nine months. They wanted to
set up a GST. They wanted to make young Australians pay full fees at
university. They wanted to abolish Medicare. But now, they are into ' me
tooism'. They are in all the things the Government believes. You say
Medicare, ' no we're for that'. You know, expansion of opportunity in schools,
no. we're for that.' Awards, ' no we're for that.' So, well God! if that is the
case why don't you let the authors of the policy. If we are the authors of the
policy why don't let us do the governing? ' No' they say ' it's time for a new
group to run Australia'. Time for a new group to run Australia. In other
words, it is on a rotational basis. You know, they have had five turns and
now it is our turn. I mean, you know how it works inside the Liberal Party.
Howard used to go around saying Andrew has had two turns and I want two
turns and he got two turns. He got two turns and now he thinks, he says ' now
they have had five turns it is our turn. It is a new group and it is our time to
run Australia.' Well, righto, ok, good luck to you Johnny but we are not going
to make it easy mate.
I'll tell you what is wrong with the Liberal Party, they don't believe in the
country. [ Sound system breaks] Hello someone has knocked us off. There
must be a Tory on the staff. Get their names! It has got to be a Lib.
We may laugh at these characters, but the thing about the Liberal Party is
they have got one fundamentally bad trait and that is they don't believe in
Australia, in what we have become, and the have no faith in Australians.
That is their problem. I have often said and I have used this term that
Manning Clark used to use. He said there are only two kinds of Australians
the enlargers and the punishers and the straighteners the enlargers are the
ones who always believed in something better, having faith in people,
believing they could do something better themselves and having faith we
could do greater things together enlarging Australia, making it bigger and
making it better. That class of Australians and the others were the punishers
and the straighteners. Those who said be happy with your place in life, get
your head down, know your place, get your nose to the grindstone. I mean,
you could see it in Western Australia last week. You know, you want to have
a strike? Give us seven days notice. Want to have a strike? Go and tell
your employer first. If you try to get under the federal awards we will actually
deregister your union. You know, take the offer, get your nose down, don't
complain. This is their view, they would never have faith in the people, in the
institutions we have built, in the country we have become.
It is as if Australia has passed John Howard by. His defence speech of a
week ago could have been given by Harold Holt. No nonsense, no joking, it
could have been given by Harold Holt. It wasn't security in Asia, as we are
saying but security from Asia. Nothing has changed. The same industrial
relations policies, the same general approach. No real pride in the
institutions we have built. The Accord which is a model of co-operation in the
country and the economy, the lowest level of industrial disputes since 1940
working days lost per 1000 compared to 690 working days lost per 1000
when Howard was in office. A model of co-operation, low inflation, high
productivity. 
I was out at a workplace today with Michael Lavarch and the people there
were saying ' look, the first enterprise bargain, it took us a while to work out
what to do with it. The second one we actually got something out of it, we
have got higher pay, better hours.' One fellow said ' I'm home more often than
I've ever been these days getting to know my wife again' and ' a real spirit of
co-operation' he said. ' When we get to the third enterprise agreement we will
really know how to do it better', so the Manager said ' yes.' That whole cooperative
spirit is there. No, they want none of that. No faith in people to do
the right thing. No faith in the bigger view. No co-operative model. No view
that we should basically keep these egalitarian concepts of Australia that it is
a good thing that we don't have an underclass here. You saw the American
Labour Secretary Robert Reich, no less a person than the US Secretary of
Labour saying that in the US ' we have had enormous employment growth, but
unfortunately we have had falling real wages for 16 years. We have got an
army of working poor.' And you can see the divisions in that society with the
O. J Simpson trial. You can see the tensions there. You can see it in
Washington during this week. You can see what happens when you don't
have the commitment to one another. You don't have that sense of
compassion. You don't have that sense of consensus. You don't have that
co-operative spirit.
We have got it because we believe in people. We trust them, we've asked
them to be in it with us, to make it a new economy. An efficient place, but a
caring place and we have done it. But they have none of these
understandings and they don't believe in people. John Alston said it another
way recently in Canberra. He said ' there is only two kinds of Australians' he
said ' lovers and the others' and we know what to think of the others don't we?
I said at the Labor Conference in Sydney a week or so ago, we are going to
make this election a referendum on ideas. A referendum on who has the
ideas for Australia. Who are the people that can lead it into the 21 st century,
who can lead Australia into Asia, who can find us an organic place for
ourselves in the region. Who can find us peace at home with our indigenes.
A society which feels together and at one truly one nation one that has a
focus on growth and on jobs and on co-operation and on fairness and on the
environment and on the big things that we believe in our identity, the
republic and the things that have made this a great country. The things that
have made us unique as a culture and unique as a society and as a people.
This is the agenda of Labor. The big agenda. The big ideas. The big ideas
of the nation. The big ideas of our sovereignty being fully expressed by an
Australian head of state. Of taking us into Asia and being part of it. Of
threading together a great free trade agreement around the Pacific rim, with
APEC. Of coming to terms with our indigenes. To say we can't ever make
the leap to these old societies in Asia without settling these things at home
first. I mean, these are the things that follow. It is not just mean spirited
budget making or penny pinching or trying to cut the lowest paid people
down, to cut people under $ 22,000 or $ 25,000 down. What an objective in
l ife to try to do that. 
I believe this, that the election will be a referendum on ideas. That it will be
about who has had the faith in the country. Who has adapted and been able
to change it. Who has been able to make it better. Who has been able to
make it fairer and more decent and to be able to say as the Reserve Bank
Governor said today, in all the years he had been in economic policy making,
he had never seen the Australian economy quite as strong as it is now.
John Howard can slip around, he can try to hide his policies, he can try to
keep it under wraps until those last couple of weeks before a poll, but in the
end I don't think the Australian people will reward him. I think the sands are
running against him already and one thing about the Liberal Party, there is no
sentimentality in it. Once your use by date is past you are for it. He is the
third choice after all in this Parliament and he knows that.
So, I can say this, I look forward to this election and so do my colleagues.
We go into it with tremendous fervour, great faith in what we have been able
to do and faith that we can do more with the Australian people. But we know
this, we are democrats and we know that all power comes from the people
and that we need their support to keep on going. It is not just elected
governments, you need that constant support to put the mandates into place.
We need their confidence and we need their encouragement. And we will go
back to them and say three years ago you wanted us to restart the economy,
we have done it. Three years ago we made a commitment to do the hardest
thing, to get unemployment down and employment up, we have got
employment up and we have still got it growing. We have done these things
that we made our commitments to you to do and we want you to assess us
but assess us fairly against the other party that has not done the hard yards,
that has not done the policy thinking, that has not done the work, that hasn't
come together, but after all this that they can't at this point just simply reel off
some dreary policies without basically having faith in the place and believing
in the place because our Party has the change. It was formed in Queensland
100 years ago, as I said in the beginning, 100 years later it is still useful. We
have adapted Australia. We have adapted ourselves and we have adapted
Australia and we have made a model of social democracy, which I think now,
is unique in the western world. We have got an efficient economy grafted
onto a compassionate social wage and, I think, Australians are going to think
very hard before they put that asunder, before they put their mark against it.
I can assure you that we will be going into this election with great confidence.
And we will be putting those big views, the big views about where we see
Australia and where we see it going. And I know that visiting a school today,
all those young people joining the rolls, they have got no doubt about which
way the direction in this country, which way that direction should be. It
should be for the things we value the republic, the environment, faith in
ourselves, opportunity, the right to a job these are the things which I think
they hold dear. They are not about to take a trip down the time tunnel to the
Liberal Party. 
Perhaps I can conclude on this point by saying how much I have appreciated
the Party in Queensland, bringing us together the Cabinet today here in
Brisbane. For the Lord Mayor for having us at the Town Hall which is a
singular pleasure. But to be here in the presence of Wayne Goss and his
Cabinet as the Labor family together. Because the thing about the Labor
Party is it is united. We are together. There is no fracture in our views, there
is no great divide in the Labor Party on social policy or foreign policy or
economic policy. There are changes at the edges, there are shades of
opinion, but there is no great divide. We have never been as united as this
and as well as that we have got the industrial movement with us. We are a
united force. I don't think, as I said earlier, the Labor Party has ever been
stronger. But this is the State in which it was formed, in Queensland, and to
be here with 1200 of you with such bonhomie and buoyancy, with our State
Cabinet colleagues and with Wayne, it gives me a lot of pride and a lot of
pleasure. We will need your strength to carry it through. But don't believe for
a moment that we can't win well and win here in Queensland. We can. And
if we have faith in Queenslanders they will return the faith to us. The one
thing I pledge is to work for their support. To work with our State colleagues
for their support. To work as a united party and when we have that mandate
to work hard to put it into place and the great catalogue of things we have
been able to achieve in these three years, we will be able to do again in the
next three as we come down to the end of the century, as we make that leap
into the 21st century and put the indelible stamp of Labor proudly across the
face of Australia.
Thank you very much indeed.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, CITY HALL, BRISBANE. 20 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I have a number of things to say to you and some information to release
to you. You may now have a statement where I have said I am going to
appoint Con Sciacca as Minister Assisting the Treasurer for
superannuation matters. As you know Mr Sciacca was involved,
through most of the year, as Minister for Veterans' Affairs, in the
Australia Remembers commemorative arrangements and
commemorative program, which by the way, reached its climax here in
Brisbane and I think that we in the Government have been very proud
of the commitment he has made to that. The fact that it has worked
particularly well and that, I think, also the RSL and other groups
Involved in the commemoration were very appreciative of his efforts.
He has very clear personal skills to do an outstanding job consulting
Australians and explaining to them policies, things which are of value to
them and we think that superannuation is such a significant matter
given the fact that this Government now over a period of a decade has
got superannuation up to the point where soon, by 2002, every
Australian will be putting away 15 per cent of his or her income for their
retirement benefits. Many issues are involved here and I know the
public want information about this Important and sea change to
retirement income and national savings and while this area of
responsibility, of course, is principally that of the Treasurer, he has
indicated to me that he could do with more both administrative support
and field support on this. So, Mr Selacca will be Minister Assisting the
Treasurer on superannuation and will be working with Paul Elliott who
has been Parliamentary Secretary involved with this and who, with the
Treasurer, has done a very good job to date.
That is one thing of, I think, importance to the country and also to
Queensland because a Queensland Minister will be doing it and we
now have a strong complement of Queensland Ministers in the Cabinet
and this is, in a sense, a bit of a feather in Con's cap for a job well done
this year and the appreciation of his colleagues. 
A number of other things I would like to announce. I have got three
statements. One which is to announce a major upgrade of the Bruce
Highway which is a $ 150 million commitment to the highway and today
we have committed $ 64 million towards that $ 150 million planned
upgrade from Brisbane to Cooroy. Under plans approved by Cabinet
today a 24 kilometre stretch of lhe highway between Brisbane and
Cabooltuie will be widened to six lanes. Over the next three years $ 14
million will be spent on this section, $ 9 million on the construction of an
interchange at Buchannan Road serving Caboolture and Morayfield
which will be opened to traffic by Christmas next year and $ 5 million on
planning, project design, land acquisition, traffic management plans and
an EIS and public consultation on the Brisbane to Caboolture
upgrading. The project which will get under way before Christmas Is
te first stage of a $ 100 million ten year upgrade of the highway.
My colleague, Laurie Brereton, also announced that $ 15 million will be
spent widening the dangerous stretch of the Bruce Highway between
Yandina and Cooroy to four lanes. The full 18 kilometres will be
completed by 1990 end will link up with the Yandina bypass now under
construction. So, I think there are about 2000 construction jobs over
four years involved here. This is a further important upgrading of the
national highway system and particularly this section of the Bruce
Highway Another announcement that I am able to make is that we will be
spending an additional $ 20 million for capital developments for
Queensland universities in 1998. Simon Crean has, I think, announced
today that $ 15.5 million will be for three major capital developments at
Loganlea, Gold Coast. Ipswich and Rockhampton in 1998. This on top
of the $ 27.3 million allocated to Queensland institutions from the capital
development pool in 1998/ 7. Queensland institutions will receive a
further $ 4.5 million in 1998. Around $ 13.5 million will be directed
towards a new campus development In Brisbane's western and
souther growth corridors and the remaininlg $ 2 milliol will be allocated
to Central Queeilland University for its Rockhampton campus. The
1990 allocation represents the federal government's ongoing
commitment to providing adequate facilities for Queensland's rapidly
growing higher education student population. You might remember in
an earlier announcement this year we added 4200 places to university
places In this state; $ 6.5 million of these funds will go to the University
of Queensland to enable construction of a new campus on the site of
the old railway workshops in North Ipswich. This is estimated to serve
a population of around 400.000 In Ipswich and the surrounding
communities. The develuplent of the new campus will enable the
University of Queensland to maintain its tradition of providing a diverse
and high quality range of courses to Queensland and Brisbane
students.
An allocation of $ 7 million will go to Griffith University to enable
expansion of Its existing Gold Coast campus as well as the
development of a new campus at LoganLea In Brisbane's southern 
growth corridor, This southern growth corridor has, of course, been an
Important component of the growth along the east coast of Australia. It
is one of the fastest growing areas in the country, if not the fastest and
you know the natilal government has had an interest thoro in rail
facilities, in transport and now in education. So, that funding will be
made available there as well.
I might also mention that my colleague the Minister for the Environment,
John Faulkner, announced with the Government of Queensland today a
$ 16 million package to protect the endangered Mahogany Glider and
other unique flors and fauna along the Queensland coastline. It will
involve a package of around 38.000 tiectares along the coast being
voluntarily acquired. Il these areas most of the crucial glider habitat
will be purchased and added to existing national parks between Tully
and Ingham and voluntary conservation agreements will be introduced
on the remaining crucial habitat areas. This package is, I think, an
important landmark package that will ensure the continuing protection
of four remaining significant Mahogany Glider colonies including the
one associated with the Cooper wetlands adjoining Halifax Bay. The
package will also ensure the continuing protection of other important
tiora and fauna species unique to the regiuon such as the Southem
Cassowary and the Proserpine Rock Wallaby.
The Minister said they were looking at acquiring 16 free hold and free
lease hold properties in the Tully/ lngham area and, I think, land holders
in the area have been informed of the Governments intentions. I
understand this has been very widely welcomed by industry and by the
environment movement around the country.
So, I'll leave my remarks at that and that Is. of cui se, additional to the
remarks I made at lunch time.
J: Prime Minister, Peter Costello denied that a Coalition government
( inaudible)...
PM: No, obviously this is the problem about secrecy in politics, of political
parties not coming out and saying where they will stand. Obviously the
source of that article in the BRW was someone who has been engaged
with this process over a considerable period of time und this, of course,
was for an announcement in September next year. Long after a
national election had been held. As a consequence of such a change
and remember it is not as If this has not been heard of before. This is
very much in the conservative agenda and they have been at the
Commonwealth, of course, they wasted their time with me proposing In
my day as Treasurer that we should give them a commonwealth
income tax and then let them set the rates. I mean, the glue that holds
this federation together is the uniform taxing power of the
Commonwealth. The day it is split up and given back to the states you
will have six state economies and you will have the Australian nation
substantially fractured. When one looks at any of the federations 
around the world be it Germany or Canada it is very clear that the
taxing power is central to their maintenance ea cohesive countries
The Coalition's view has been always that If you have all the power
vested in the national government the economic power particularly
and the Labor Party gets hold of the government therefore the whole
progressive agenda is advanced. Their question is, how do we hold
the progressive agenda back? You hold it back by fracturing the power
and giving it back to the States. All in the name of federalism as if
when we federated a century ago it wasn't simply to create the nation
which, of course, now it is. being used as a way of regressively going
back to the needs of the States, what ever they might be.
But, in this proposal where they would vary the marginal tax rate from
the initial 16 per cent, as a consequence of that it would affect some
States differently than other States and South Australia would need to
increase the total marginal tax rate by 6 per cent. Tasmania by 9.5 per
cent et cetera. So, again, this would have very different affects and, of
course, those States which have stronger domestic, stronger if you like
indigenous tax bases would be able to give more income tax relief by
way of a different rate structure than others. So, the States that had a
stronger domestic base would be able to provide a lower rate of income
tax than other States. So, you would have wealthy people shifting their
domiciles so they could pick up the lower tax rates et cetera. It would
be the sort of mayhem you would see from it.
I have said before and I said today earlier and I'll say it again and that is
there can be no honesty and credibility in public life and in politics
without policies. Mr Howard says they will dribble out, this is what he
means by dribbling them out. But here you have got an important
component of national economic policy, the prerogative of the
Commonwealth to be able run fiscal policy in this country, which you
know has been very important in these times when we have had
problems with the current account imbalance and savings problems and
terms of trade problems in the middle 1980s. It has been entirely
central that the Commonwealth has this power. This is a power, of
course, they would put asunder.
J: As part of his denial today Mr Costello says a Coalition government
wouldn't raise taxes and has called on you to give a signal.
PM: He wouldn't be giving the denial unless someone wrote this In the
BRW. You wouldn't be asking me any questions about this. In other
words, he has kept you in the dark, happily, and then when we flushed
him out he gives you a pap answer and you want me to respond to it
seriously and I'm not going to. The only response I make is this, at
least we can see what John Howard is up to. It is all the old agenda
tax powers back to the States, hopping into working people, knocking
Medicare off and getting a consumption tax up, the GST up but in the
name of the States and the hands of the States. It is the same agenda
and when the Liberal backbencher Kevin Andrews said this week and 
was rebuked by Mr Howard for supporting a GST, lie probably didn't
know that Mr Costello had a more surreptitious way of getting to it, that
is to say to the States you have yuur own consumption taxes.
J: Do you put any store to the criticism today of calling the major
institutions...
PM: I got asked that at lunch time, I can't make a senal of it
J: Has Cabinet decided what to do with the computer bounty
PM: No, it hasn't but It will probably do so later in the year.
J: Later in the year, so ( inaudible)
PM: We had a preliminary discussion about it, but no final decisions were
made about it.
J: So you need more Information from Peter Cook?
PM; More information and more time.
J: Prime Minister. France has apparently called on Britain and the US to
sign the treaty banning nuclear testing in the South Pacific.
PM: I often say to people that those who try to pretend that Britain Interests
and ours are the same, particularly in respect to the republic, that
Britain has her interests in Europe and we have ours in the Asia Pacific.
It is very clear in respect of nuclear testing that Britain has been one of
the very few countries which has said anything. In fact it said nothing
which has been critical of France's decision to test weapons in the
Pacific. I make no criticism of them in that respect, it is entirely Britain's
right, but people in this country should notice that Britain's interest and
our interest are completely different and that the Queen of Australia. as
head of Australia and Queen of Great Britain is looking at the world
through different prisms and that is why, of course, we need an
Australian head of state in this country. We need our full sovereignty to
be expressed so our views on Important issues such as these are not
compromised whatsoever.
J: Just back to computers again, do you think that despite your general
predisposition to oppose tariff barriers, subsidies that there is a case
for the computer industry...
PM: There has never been a, if you like, any religion in all this for us. We
have generally taken the view that Australia is advantaged by getting
protection levels down and I thinK the proof of the pudding has been in
the eating. Those who believed In high tariff poltections have been
wrong and shown to be wrong, but we have got other programs and
other supporting measures in ship building which has improved, I'm
sure. ship building, computers in the partnership programs. We have 
sought to encourage particular parts of industry to do innovative things,
but in the context of generally declining overall protection.
J: Well, this is an industry that does require considerable investment..
PM: Yes, but again the bounty does apply generally and the things we tend
to do best at are software writing, that sort of sharper end of the
business and not particularly the hardware area, the screwdriver area,
where this bounty has in the past generally been spread. Now, it may
be this is the right way to support the industry.
J: But something more focussed?
PM: But something more focussed might be bettor too.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
SUPERANNUATION APPOINTMENT THE HON CON SCIACCA, MP
I am delighted to announce, particularly while here in Queensland, that the
Hon Con Sciacca MP, Minister for Veterans Affairs, is to take on the
additional job of Minister Assisting the Treasurer for Superannuation.
The comprehensive system of superannuation introduced in the last Budget
will substantially lift national savings and improve financial security for
individuals in retirement.
These changes are far-reaching. It is, therefore, important that they are
widely understood so that individual Australians appreciate more clearly how
they will benefit.
Con Sciacca's achievement in developing and promoting the Australia
Remembers program, which reached its climax here in Brisbane in August
this year, was outstanding.
He has earned the thanks and respect of the Government, the Opposition,
and all Australians, whatever their political persuasion, for his efforts in
bringing our people together to commemorate the historic events of
Australia's involvement in the Second World War.
Con has the personal skills to do an outstanding job consulting with
Australians and explaining the importance and value to them of the
Government's superannuation policies. These skills will complement the
established expertise of the Treasurer, Ralph Willis, and his Parliamentary
Secretary, Paul Elliott.
OCTOBER 1995
Brisbane 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SOUTH PACIFIC NUCLEAR FREE ZONE TREATY
I warmly welcome the announcements by the governments of the United States,
the United Kingdom and France of their intention to sign the Protocols in the
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone ( SPNFZ) Treaty in the first half of 1996.
The People's Republic of China and the Russian Federation have signed and
ratified the Protocols open to them. All five nuclear weapon states have now
formally recognised the desire of South Pacific countries to live in a region free
of nuclear weapons and nuclear testing.
There are three Protocols to the Treaty under which the nuclear weapon states
agree not to use or threaten to use nuclear explosive devices against any other
SPNFZ member and undertake not to test nuclear explosive devices within the
territorial boundaries defined by the Treaty.
Australia has worked tirelessly towards this objective, one which we have shared
with the nations of the South Pacific. We took a leading role in the
establishment of the SPNFZ as a means of preserving the peace and security of
the region and its environment.
The decisions of the governments of the United States, France and the United
Kingdom will send a strong message to the international community on nonproliferation
and disarmament. This will help drive negotiations for the
completion of a truly Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996.
In taking this welcome decision the French Government has also underlined the
anomaly of its nuclear testing program in the South Pacific.
Each test is an affront to the aspirations of the region embodied in the SPNFZ
Treaty. France's decision will not lessen our resolve to go on campaigning actively for
an immediate end to French testing.
CANBERRA 21 OCTOBER 1995 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS
AUSTRALIA AND A WORLD WITHOUT NUCLEAR WEAPONS
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 24 OCTOBER 1995
Thank you for coming today to this commemoration of the 50th anniversary of
the signing of the Charter of the United Nations.
I want to give particular thanks to the members of Australia's National
Committee for the 50th Anniversary and to its co-chairs, Gareth Evans and
Roger Shipton.
The Committee encouraged debate about how the United Nations should
respond to the challenges of the next century. It has played a great role as a
catalyst, encouraging a very wide range of organisations to create their own
anniversary activities. And in a particularly appropriate focus, it has
encouraged the involvement of youth in these discussions. We have a vivid
illustration of that in the postcards from primary schools all over the country
which are displayed around the room.
As we have seen again over the past few days, this 50th anniversary has
already generated another round of critical debate about the role and
functions of the United Nations. Practically everyone, it seems, has a view of
how the UN could operate more effectively, or cost less, or do more, or do
less.
This is no bad thing when an organisation matters as much as the United
Nations does. I've done it myself. And no doubt I will do it again. But not
today. Or not much, anyway.
Because on its 50th birthday the UIN is entitled to a bit of a celebration, a
reminder to us all of what it has done in that half century to build a more
humane, enlightened, tolerant and secure world.
And Australians, especially, should join in the celebrations. Because through
all the ups and downs of those fifty years, the UN has had few better friends
than this country.
When the Secretary General, Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali, visited Australia in
April to take part in our conference on global cultural diversity he said to me 
that he judged countries not so much by their size and GDP as by their ideas
and commitment.
In financial terms, Australia is the thirteenth largest contributor to the United
Nations. We pay our dues on time and in full. But I think that by the
Secretary General's measure we have been even more important to the
organisati on.
We were there at the beginning of course.
Dr Herbert Vere Evatt, was instrumental in drawing up the Charter. He
battled long and hard to ensure that the voice of the smaller nations would be
heard in its deliberations.
And the great feminist pioneer Jessie Street, the only woman in the
Australian delegation to the 1945 San Francisco Conference, helped to
secure in the preamble to the Charter a reference to equality between men
and women the only human right explicitly so mentioned.
Fifty years on, most of you in this room are here because in one way or
another you have been carrying on the work of those Australian pioneers.
And many other Australians have been there before you.
Australians were the first peacekeepers to serve under United Nations
auspices when we sent military observers to Indonesia in 1947 during the
independence struggle. Since then, Australian military and police personnel
have served with great courage and distinction in Europe, Asia, Africa, the
Middle East and the Caribbean.
Australians have a distinguished record as aid workers, as diplomats working
on disarmament, as health experts dealing with smallpox or AIDS.
The Australian government and ordinary Australians have been able to
contribute, including through one of the world's largest humanitarian
resettlement programs, to the wonderful work of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in providing help and sanctuary to the millions of people who have
been forced from their homes by conflict and disaster over the past fifty
years. Australians have played a prominent role in the system of human rights
protection created under the UN's auspices. Eminent Australians, including
people such as Phillip Alston and Elizabeth Evatt, have served in their
personal capacity on the expert committees which monitor implementation of
the core human rights treaties.
Part of the reason for holding this reception today is publicly to thank all of
you and your predecessors for your service to the interests of this country
and the international community through the United Nations. 
But another reason for this gathering today is to thank the United Nations for
what it has done for Australia.
Because the United Nations has given us a forum where nations can resolve
differences in an environment bounded by agreed rules and norms. It has
provided a space in which the challenges facing humanity can be discussed
and our experiences shared.
For all its faults and imperfections, it is impossible to imagine a world without
it without international forums for the discussion of human rights, setting
universal standards, and developing measures to prevent human rights
abuse. A world without bodies to address issues like the status of women
and racial discrimination or to give voice to the aspirations of indigenous
peoples.
A world without the capacity to negotiate the pressing trans-national
challenges of the environment or to tackle the most difficult problems of
economic development.
But in addition to these large issues the United Nations also affects for the
better the lives of ordinary Australians through the web of international
agreements which have been negotiated under its auspices. These cover
issues as diverse as weather monitoring and prediction through the World
Meteorological Organisation; improved labour standards and protection of
workers' rights through the International Labor Organisation; safety standards
in civil aviation and maritime transport; the placement of satellites and even
the transfer of mail between countries.
But for all the good work which the UN does in such areas, its ultimate
success or failure will have to be judged by the impact it has on international
security. Because above all else, the people who drafted the Charter 50 years ago,
who had just experienced a global conflict the most destructive in all of
human history were motivated by the desire to rid the world of the scourge
of war. But their hopes were almost immediately crushed with the coming of
the cold war. For the first time, the international community had to
contemplate the possibility that another world war would destroy our
civilisation.
The UN system has a great responsibility to help the world avoid such a
catastrophe. The disarmament goals of the international community are set
in resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
The vital international treaties to turn these goals into reality are negotiated in
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. And the ultimate recourse for
enforcing compliance with international disarmament obligations lies with the
UN Security Council, as we have seen in the Council's actions on Iraq and
North Korea. 
This central role of the United Nations makes today's occasion an appropriate
one to make a major announcement about Australia's arms control and
disarmament policy.
In all the debate and anger over the past months about the French
Government's decision to resume nuclear testing in the South Pacific, there is
one point which consistently recurs in our thinking about the issue.
I have made that point publicly. It is that, however strong our opposition to
them, those tests at Mururoa, and China's continued testing, are not
themselves the core of the problem. They are instead a symptom of the
problem the deeper and more troubling problem of nuclear weapons in the
world. The reason we have seen such a huge outpouring of public concern about
the French tests, not only in this region where they are being held, but also in
Europe and Japan and elsewhere, has been a feeling that we have been
cheated robbed of the chance of a world free of nuclear weapons.
With the end of the cold war, we all breathed more easily. We allowed
ourselves to think that the nuclear threat, the nightmare of two generations,
had finally passed. The thought of nuclear weapons and nuclear war faded
from our minds.
But the reality has not faded. Fifty thousand nuclear war heads remain in the
arsenals of the five declared nuclear powers. And it is no less real and
frightening that others not just the so-called threshold states of India,
Pakistan and Israel, but others like Iraq wait and work to acquire nuclear
weapons. The French decision to resume testing announced within weeks of the
indefinite renewal of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was an outrage
and a folly. It has produced an entirely understandable wave of anger around
the world. But we may yet be able to derive something positive from it
because it has jolted us back to the reality of nuclear weapons in the world.
I now feel a growing certainty that some great good might yet be got out of
the present bitterness if we make this the moment to take on the challenge of
nuclear weapons.
I believe we can turn the global outrage at French and Chinese testing into
something broader and more ambitious I mean the creation of a world totally
free of nuclear weapons.
This has often been talked about in the past, of course. It is a goal which has
been forcefully articulated by Professor Joseph Rotblat, who won this year's
Nobel Peace Prize. It has long been an aim of Australian policy.
However, to most people, including me, it has always seemed an
unachievable ambition, at least in our own lifetimes. 
The strategic uncertainties and deep political suspicions of the cold war
would surely have made this goal impossible.
But that world has now changed.
We still have conflict, of course. We still have competing national interests.
But the strategic framework in which nations operate has changed profoundly
and I believe it is now possible to contemplate getting a concrete program to
achieve a nuclear weapons free world.
Because the truth is that the sort of world we now have, with nuclear powers
committed to reducing their arsenals and unlikely to use their weapons
offensively, will not continue forever. We can be certain of this.
Unless we take action now, the nuclear competition that characterised most
of the second half of this century will very likely return and probably in a
much more unstable and multipolar form.
The world must extricate itself from the circular argument that we need
nuclear weapons because we have nuclear weapons.
The nuclear powers cannot be excluded from this: they must understand that
the most likely threats to their security lie in the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. This is a point we have made often about the French tests and the way they
cut across the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the most important arms
control treaty ever negotiated within the UN system.
I notice that former French President Giscard D'Estaing made a similar point
in an article in the French press on 12 October. He said that " the increase in
the number of states, be they big or small, who manage to develop nuclear
weapons, now constitutes for France a threat just as serious, if not more
serious, than that of a strategic strike decided by one of the rare countries
with nuclear weaponry."
I believe that a world free of nuclear weapons is now attainable. It can be
done and it will be in the best security interests of Australia and our allies and
friends if we do it.
As we saw in the Gulf War, new technology has given weaponry an accuracy
that substitutes precision for brute explosive force, and with far less risk to
civilians than those from nuclear weapons.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, we have also seen how real is the
potential for catastrophic nuclear accidents.
The Government believes the time has come for more determined movement
towards the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. 
There is no magic wand we can wave to make this happen. As with the long
negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament to get rid of chemical
weapons, ultimate success may be decades away. And getting there
involves security issues of the greatest complexity and profundity. We do not
minimise the difficulties or the dangers.
Success depends ultimately on having the will as well as the ambition. The
Chemical Weapons Convention, endorsed by the UN General Assembly in
1992, has shown that where there is a will there is a way to put the genie
back in the bottle. We proved it was possible to rid the world of a whole class
of weapons of mass destruction. And the verification problems for a total ban
on nuclear weapons should be easier to solve than those for a ban on
chemical weapons.
A key building block for a nuclear weapons-free world is already in place with
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, article VI of which commits the nuclear
weapon states to " pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures
relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear
disarmament". But this generalised statement of principle is not nearly enough.
What we need now is action to achieve the abolition of all nuclear weapons.
These are the next steps the Government has in mind.
In our own region we want an end to nuclear testing by France and the
closure of the Mururoa test site.
For nearly 50 years since the beginning of the nuclear weapons era the
Pacific has been used as a testing ground. The Americans began testing in
the Pacific in 1946 and continued until 1962; the British tested in Australia
from 1952 until 1963; and the French are still testing in French Polynesia.
In 1983 the Australian Government set the objective of ridding the region of
testing and began its campaign to declare a South Pacific Nuclear Free
Zone. With the announcement on 20 October by France, the United
Kingdom and the United States that they would sign the protocols of the
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty in the first half of 1996, we can say
that we are on the point of achieving our objective and ending a dark period
of the region's history.
The Government's deep regret, of course, is that France is not drawing the
logical conclusion from its intention to sign the SPNFZ protocols and ending
its tests now as we urge it to do.
We also want the nuclear weapons states to support the African Nuclear
Weapon Free Zone Treaty, which is being presented to the current session of
the General Assembly, as well as the South East Asian Nuclear Weapon
Free Zone which is nearing completion. 
We believe that progress towards a nuclear weapons free world would be
given a major boost through the creation of linkages between existing or
potential nuclear weapons free zones in the South Pacific. Latin American.
Africa and the Indian Ocean which already cover most of the southern
hemisphere. Globally, the most immediate priority has to be the conclusion of a genuinely
comprehensive test ban treaty by mid-1996, followed by its early entry into
force. Australia, together with Mexico and New Zealand, is presenting a
resolution to the current session of the General Assembly to entrench this
deadline. In Geneva, Australia has been consulting closely with key countries on ways
to expedite the CTBT negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament to take
advantage of this opportunity. Over the next few months the Government will
be devoting substantial resources as we did for the Chemical Weapons
Convention to doing what we can to help bring this about.
Next, we want to see the immediate start and early conclusion of negotiations
on a convention to ban the production of fissile material for weapons
purposes the so-called " cut-off" convention. And we want to see the
development of a regime requiring all states to declare and account for their
present stocks of fissile material, as another necessary prelude to the
elimination of nuclear weapons.
We want to encourage the further strengthening of international safeguards,
in particular by building up the International Atomic Energy Agency's ability to
detect illegal undeclared nuclear facilities.
We want universal membership of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
particularly by the nuclear threshold states of India, Israel and Pakistan.
But as I said earlier, Australia is determined to pursue the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons.
We want the nuclear weapons states to carry out their commitment to the
elimination of their nuclear stockpiles by adopting a systematic process to
achieve that result.
The next steps towards this are the adherence by the United States and
Russia to the destruction timetable under START, and further nuclear
reduction agreements between the United States and Russia, with the
earliest possible involvement of the United Kingdom, France and China.
We acknowledge the need as we always have, for a system of stable
deterrence to be maintained while the reduction and eventual elimination of
nuclear weapons is being achieved. 
All these elements constitute a program which will set norms for international
behaviour, establish new international legal obligations and further develop
international control mechanisms which will serve as an essential framework
for the safe and secure elimination of nuclear weapons.
I am writing to other heads of government who share Australia's concerns,
suggesting that we look at the means by which we can advance the cause of
a nuclear-weapons free world. I hope a new coalition of international
interests will emerge from these consultations.
As its contribution to this, the Government will establish a group of
knowledgeable and imaginative individuals from around the world. In a major
series of meetings in Australia, this group will be tasked to produce a report
to be submitted to the next United Nations General Assembly and to the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
The group will examine the problems of security in a nuclear weapons-free
world and suggest practical steps towards the goal, including the ways of
dealing with stability and security in the transitional period.
Next week, the International Court of Justice will be hearing a case referred
to it by the UN General Assembly, asking it to give an advisory judgement on
the legality of the use and threat of use of nuclear weapons. We believe, and
will argue before the Court, that it would be best for the Court not to make a
judgement the legqality of nuclear weapons is a different matter, of course,
from their utility or strategic value or even their morality.
A judgement by the Court that the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is
gal, even if only in some limited circumstances, runs the profound risk of
achieving precisely the opposite of what those seeking the Court's opinions
want namely the encouragement of others who want to join the nuclear club.
Even a judgment that nuclear weapons use or threat is illegal unless very
carefully framed to deal with how that conclusion might be put into practical
effect would likely be ignored by the nuclear powers and, as a result, serve
no purpose other than to weaken the standing of the Court itself.
The Government has now decided, however, that Australia will also argue to
the court that if, despite the good reasons for not making a decision, the court
is minded to make a decision in the case, it should decide in favour of the
illegality of those weapons. The Foreign Minister, Senator Evans, will travel
to The Hague to present this case on the Government's behalf on
October. We are not naive about our role in this enterprise to make the world free of
nuclear weapons. We are a nation of only medium size and weight in the
world, and we are not a nuclear power. 
On the other hand, we are skilled at multilateral diplomacy and have
demonstrated on issues like the peace process in Cambodia and APEC and
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the protection of Antarctica as a
wilderness reserve and the campaign against apartheid, that we have the
energy and ideas and the capacity to create coalitions with others, to make a
real difference in the world.
With the same energy we gave to those projects we will now commit
ourselves to the goal of a nuclear free world.
Reflecting on the history of nuclear strategy, the American writer Fred Kaplan
says that nuclear strategies were contrived to disguise the real nature of the
nuclear bomb. It is in fact, he writes, " a device of sheer mayhem, a weapon
whose cataclysmic powers no-one really had the faintest idea of how to
control. The nuclear strategists had come to impose order but in the end
chaos still prevailed."
The world has a chance just now to find a way out of the chaos. The chance
will not last long. We can help the world to grasp it, even show the way.
At the beginning of the United Nations' second fifty years, there could be no
better way for us to show our commitment to the ideals which motivated the
men and women who drew up the Charter than by working, like them, to turn
a coalition of noble ideas into a concrete and enduring reality. 



/ 7.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH SARAH MACDONALD, TRIPLE J, 25 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
MAC. Prime Minister, could France have done the world a favour by
resuming nuclear testing?
PM: No, but I think we have got to draw something good from the debris
and what Australia has now decided to do, what this Government has
decided, is that we will establish at the core of our policy a commitment
to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. That is, we will go
beyond the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, that we will commit
substantial resources to that, but we will go beyond that and seek to
eliminate the 50,000 strong stock pile of nuclear weapons.
Now as well as that, we will commit substantial resources to expediting
negotiations on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as a first step
towards eliminating nuclear weapons and we will kick start
negotiations on fissile material production and stock piles also as a
step towards the elimination of nuclear weapons.
So, at the end of the Cold War and the changed strategic environment,
we think it is now time, particularly with the heightened focus on what
France has done and the objection to it, to actually now strike out and
make a new direction, to actually not simply stop testing but to actually
be rid of the weapons themselves.
MAC: But if countries like France and China won't listen to us when we say
stop testing, do you think they are going to listen when we ask them to
get rid of their weapons as well?
PM: Well, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty which France has said it will
sign and others may sign, we have had a very strong reaffirmation of
the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty this year. That was one of the
things which, of course, soured us with the French. When there was
so much optimism around about the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty,
the French then decided to test their weapons. But now they have 
said they will sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. The thing you
have got to know about nuclear weapon states Is the thing they now
fear, as the rest of us do. is that someone else will get weapons too.
So, from their point of view there would be some clear interest on their
part to make sure that the country next door doesn't get weapons. So
they may sign and. I think. '. vill sign the Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty, it will then be a case of urging Russia and the United States to
move forward on their START obligations and start to de-construct
their nuclear warheads and then reprocess the material and that wouid
be part of a generally broad policy of doing that.
MAC: We'll talk about what Australia will do to achieve this goal. you are
going to set up an eminent persons groups to report to the UN. what
would you like them to report to the UN about?
PM: I think practical and innovative thinking on ways to reduce existing
arsenals and halt proliferation. Australia is not a weapon state, we
don't have nuclear weapons but we have had some success, indeed
quite a lot of success, with the chemical weapons convention. There
we succeeded in abolishing a whole class and category of weapons.
This is what we are seeking to do with another class and category of
nuclear weapons. So. we will bring into a group those people who
have a deep knowledge of the whole development of these weapons
programs and of course disarmament and the treaties and processes
to actually de-construct them.
MAC: Why when Gareth Evans goes to the International Court of Justice,
why would he argue that the Court shouldn't actually make a ruling
about the legality of nuclear weapons, why shouldn't he just have our
first scenario and that is that weapons should be illegal.
PM' We are saying that the best option is for the Court to make no
judgment because its finding either way legal or illegal will make
nuclear disarmament more difficult. If the Court is to come to a
judgement we would prefer it to find nuclear weapons illegal and to
acknowledge the practical difficulties which follow. Because it has
never been a legal matter as to whether they are legal or not, they are
weapons of mass destruction. Their very design, building and
potential use has got naught to do with legalities, it has got all to do
with power and to do with defence or a deterrent defence. But, those
who want to be rid of the things think that a judgement inside the
courts may help, well if it is a judgement for their legality, of course, all
the people who believe that nuclear weapons are abhorrent would
have taken the step backwards. If to say they are illegal, I think, we'll
find that you then have the major powers walking away from the
International Court of Justice. Is that going to do us any good?
MAC: You talked about it, it might be achievable I think some people think to
get rid of the stockpiles, but do you really think that one day in your life
time we will a world free of nuclear weapons? 
PM WNell, I think. it is a possibility now. I never thought that too many
years ago. But now the strategic environment of the bipolarity of the
Cold War has changed and we are looking at regional problems and
wve are also. I think? from the point of view of military hardware,
witnessing the success of these pin point accuracy weapons where
you don't need the mass explosion and the mass explosive force of
nuclear weapons as a deterrent. You can see in Iraq how these pin
point accuracy weapons were deployed. We may be getting to the
point that people in defence administrations with defence
responsibilities around the world, will think in terms of the precision of
these sorts of weapons versus nuclear weapons.
Such a process, that is removing the warheads, would have to take
place within the context of a continuing deterrent policy whereby the
deterrents which are held by the nuclear powers are gradually wound
down. But, the main thing to begin with is to ban further testing, to kick
start negotiations on fissile material production, to stop more of it being
produced, to stop the diversion of materials and proliferation and then
start grinding away at the stock piles. That is how I would see it and, I
think those things are achievable.
MAC: Why do you think the world is going to listen to Australia. as you said
we are a relatively small country and we are not a nuclear weapons
state. Why are they going to take notice of our move?
PM: We have had a number of successes with the chemical weapons
convention where we put our back to it with a number of other
countries that succeeded in banning the use of a whole class or
category of weapons. We have had success in other things such as
the peace accords in Cambodia, APEC putting together a huge
transpacific free trade agreement, free trade proposal and, of course,
in Antarctica.
Let me tell you about Antarctica. I first raised this actually with the
former Prime Minister of France at a time when we were about to sign
the Minerals Convention and that would have seen the green light to
mining and exploitation of Antarctica and I put to Prime Minister
Michele Rocard in 1988 that we shouldn't advance and sign the
Minerals Convention, that there was a better way. We didn't
understand Antarctica, that we shouldn't tear it to pieces, not in some
sort of premature scramble for resources, particularly for oil, and that
we should set aside the Minerals Convention which was ten years of
work and seek to declare Antarctica a wilderness park. Now, that
happened, it took some time and there were a lot of negotiations and a
lot of consultations along the way but it happened. As the Chemical
Convention happened. As APEC is happening.
So, I think, because Australia has no axe to grind in these things, that
it is not a weapons state but it does have mature foreign policy 
processes and disarmament is one of the things we have specialised
in. but not over played our hand in. that we can be effective and. I
think, practical in getting results.
MAC: Australia is still contributing to the nuclear industry by providing
uranium and lots of environment groups say that this actually
compromises our arguments in the world stage on nuclear weapons.
PM: I don't believe it does. We don't provide uranium to weapons
programs. They go to civil power programs and we have, of course,
through the IAEA a set of international safeguards to protect against
diversion to weapons programs. But if we stop the production of fissile
material, then that doesn't become a question. And then, of course,
you have got whatever will be the outcome of the intellectual tussle
over greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuels and the civil nuclear
power. None of these things are simple, but Australia's position has
always been that we have supported a Nuclear Non-proliferation
Treaty and we have been opposed to the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and the diversion of these materials. I think the fact that
Australia is actually in the business and has a say in the IAEA and is
regarded as a player with integrity in these issues makes us more
effective.
MAC-Would you like to use our strong position in Asia to convince countries
like India and Pakistan which is where a lot of the world is worried that
nuclear development may happen to actually go away from that goal?
PM: Were we to succeed in moving towards this goal, the pressure will
come on those countries to declare their hand and make clear where
they are. But, there can be no such pressure while a major democracy
like France is out there encouraging people to test weapons. That is
our objection to the French. That is, that they are out there saying at a
time when the rest of us trying to keep the horse in the stable, to not
see the nuclear option bolt amongst a group of other countries, France
is out there saying it is okay you can have as many bangs out there
under ground or above ground as you like and, I think, that is the real
sin that the French have committed.
MAC: Were you disappointed today that Bill Hayden didn't bring up French
nuclear testing in his speech to the UN?
PM: Well, it is in the text and it is published for and on his behalf and on
behalf of Australia. Whether he actually said it is a matter for him and
his time constraints. This is the problem of these major international
events, I think people only get about five minutes and that's it.
MAC: Shouldn't he have put it up the top of his speech?
PM: Well, it is about the UN, it is about a body which he had an
involvement with as Foreign Minister. Obviously, it was in the speech 
to be given, but what we have done here today is indeed far more
significant than a comment about France. As I said to you earlier.
what we have done here today, is establish at the core of our own
policy a commitment to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons of
all classes. No Australian Government has ever taken that position
before.
MAC: Finally, there has been a lot of hoo-ha today in the press about
Cabinet meetings and sponsorship, do you reckon you are worth
$ 20.000?
PM: I'm not part of any sponsorship things and I didn't attend that
gathering. The press are better off the trivia and onto the main things
like you and I were just speaking about. You were going better before
you got around to that question.
MAC: [ laughs]
ends 



PRIME MINISTER 118/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
STATE TAX CAT OUT OF THE BAG
Mr Costello's tax cat is out of the bag and Mr Kennett has belied it.
Mr Costello's answer to repairing the Vertical Fiscal Imbalance which he says
exists between the Commonwealth and the States a State income tax has
been endorsed by his Victorian colleague, Premier Jeff Kennett.
This comes as little surprise because Mr Costello told Business Review
Weekly that he had consulted conservative State Governments, which of
course includes Victoria.
Mr Kennett's comments articulate the plan.
He says that basically the Commonwealth should have Defence,
Telecommunications and a few other responsibilities and it should only be
able to collect 20 per cent of the income tax. The balance the other 80 per
cent would be collected by the states to fund social policies and services.
Apart from the inherent problems in this proposal, the conservative States are
already walking away from all the responsibilities he says they should have.
Health and education come readily to mind, and no one brings them to mind
quicker than Mr Kennett himself.
The Victorian Premier has been closing hospitals down at an alarming rate,
shutting down hundreds of schools and has now embarked on a privatisation
binge which includes Victoria's ambulance services.
There is no better example of the Liberal mindset than Mr Kennett. Unless it
is Mr Howard, of course.
We are now seeing the real conservative agenda revealed: get the
Commonwealth out of social policy, get the Commonwealth back to some
core functions, give the States the responsibilities and walk away from them;
reduce the Commonwealth of Australia to a mirror image of the Liberal Party
a mere collection of States.
It is all consistent with Mr Howard's long-held view of the world. 
2
Let there be no doubt that John Howard and Peter Costello mean to have
State income taxes and State consumption taxes. They want the bulk of the
revenue raised by the States and they want the Commonwealth pinned back
to minimal responsibilities.
What we would then have is two tax bases in the system a Commonwealth
income tax and State income and broad based consumption taxes.
CANBERRA October 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
VICTORIAN AGRICULTURE RECOVERY AND LONGER TERM GROWTH
I am pleased to announce today a Drought Recovery and Management
Facility which will better position Victorian agriculture to take full advantage of
the recovery from drought.
It is also intended to secure the longer term competitive position of Victorian
agriculture in the international market place.
I understand recent rains hold out the prospect for good crops and pasture
recovery. But our capacity to maximise the opportunities arising from these
favourable conditions will depend on how rapidly farm businesses are able to
recover from the impact of drought, and how well we deal with the rural
adjustment pressures that have built up over recent years.
Adjustment pressures are particularly pronounced at this time in Victoria,
which has experienced successive years of relatively poor incomes resulting
from a period of generally poor commodity-prices and other adverse
conditions followed by the drought. This has seriously weakened the
financial position of many farm businesses and their capacity to respond to
the current recovery.
The recovery period now in prospect provides an opportunity to facilitate
necessary adjustment in Victoria, especially in the wheat and sheep sectors.
The enhanced productivity and re-establishment support to be offered under
the $ 15 million Drought Recovery and Management Facility through the Rural
Adjustment Scheme will assist farmers and graziers to improve the
productivity of their farm businesses and to secure their longer term
competitiveness. Longer term adjustment will be supported by helping those
in the deepest trouble to leave sooner rather than later, and with dignity.
Up to $ 7.5 million will be made available by the Commonwealth to Victorian
farmers under the Facility, and the Victorian Government will be approached
to match this on a dollar for dollar basis. I
117/ 95 
This support is being complemented by $ 3.17 million Commonwealth funding
to match the Victorian Government's contribution to the extension of the
Wimmera-Mallee pipeline to facilitate improved drought preparedness and
management. The Commonwealth has agreed, subject to environmental clearances, to
provide $ 2.55 million for construction of stage 3 of the pipeline.
An additional $ 620,000 for associated property management improvements
and community participation to secure the benefits of the project will also be
provided. Together, these initiatives will greatly strengthen the capacity of the
Wimmera and Mallee regions to deal effectively with ongoing adjustment
challenges. BALLARAT October 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT THE BALLARAT COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE,
BALLARAT, 25 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, inflation at 5.1 per cent, what sort of impact will that have
on employment rates?
PM: Well, I think, that the headline rate is not the thing that matters here it
is the underlying rate, which is just over 3 per cent 3.1 per cent.
It has jumped quite a bit in the quarter and part of it is a couple of
one-off factors. For instance, the NRMA in New South Wales is no
longer discounting its premiums on third party insurance. It is also
coming from changes to cigarettes and tobacco, in terms of
Government changes there. Motor vehicles Commonwealth sales
tax, which is a one-off thing, it is not going to continue happening.
I think those things alone have added about 0.4 per cent to the rate for
the quarter. So the rate for the quarter was 1.2 per cent.
About 0.4 per cent of the 1.2 per cent came from these one-off factors,
which means that if we look through it and have a look at the true
underlying rate, it is probably around 0.8 per cent for the quarter which
should see us over the year well within the 3 per cent.
J: So you are confident the Government can keep the lid on wages?
PM: Oh yes I think so. And the other thing is, of course, some of this bloom
comes off the very high rates of growth of last year where the economy
was running at 6 per cent and then, of course, at 5 per cent and then 4
per cent. It is now slowing to around 3 1/ 2 per cent to 4 per cent. But
while, of course, all of these CPI's record a bit of past history and they
are picking up the bloom on that demand in the economy and that has
now passed through as policy slowed things down a bit to a
sustainable level. And that is why the Government did the things it did
this year to slow the economy up to make it sustainable, to make sure
the inflation rate over time is low and sustainable. 
J: Will it damage the economy?
PM: Oh no, No, I think Australia has broken the back, in a serious way, of
inflation. What we have got to do now is be vigilant about it, but that is
what the Government is. That is why we have taken the Budget into
surplus. That is why we had those monetary adjustments in November
and December last year and that is the reason why the economy has
now successfully slowed.
J: Will there be any interest rate cuts before the end of the year?
PM: It has got very little implications for interest rates none I think.
J: Ballarat has a history of high unemployment. What can the people of
Ballarat expect between now and the end of the year?
PM: Well it can e xpect growth, it can expect the sort of Government
commitments that I have made today. You know, $ 6 million we are
spending on the School of Mines Technical College. General support
through Commonwealth programs through Working Nation. Support
for the long term unemployed and the young unemployed. But, more
generally, of course higher levels of growth. And one of the things
I keep saying is, you know you don't have to be an economic genius to
know that with productivity these days, we are getting more output
from fewer people. So to keep providing the jobs for the many, you
have got to have even more output, which means even more growth
and what party is set up in Australia to give Australia growth?
The Labor Party. Because we are the only people who can basically
keep the wage genie from pushing wage inflation and therefore that is
why we have always run a more high growth economy than the
Coalition. And these days, let me make the point again, if you are
getting more output from fewer people, more output from a given level
of growth, less employment from a given level of growth, what do you
need to take up the people? You need even more growth. So you
have got to be able to run a pro-growth economy, which we can do.
J: Mr Chirac has called your Government excessive and you a follower
and not a leader.
PM: Yes, well he is a bit stunned, Mr Chirac. But the most important thing
is we are going to pull him into the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
and as I announced yesterday, we are now making it the target and
the central element of the Government's policy on disarmament, the
eradication of nuclear of weapons world-wide and this means a
number of approaches. First of all, getting a comprehensive ban on
the testing of weapons, stopping the production of fissile material and
then starting to chew away at the weapons inventory those
50,000 warheads which are sitting out there. Now Australia has had a
lot of success in this in the past. We were one of the principal
countries, the principal country in fact, behind the eradication of a 
whole class of weapons with chemical weapons by the establishment
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. And we have done it once, and
I would like to see us provide the lead again. So we are the ones
leading. All he is doing, I think, is sort of living in the sort of after-glow
the twilight of the Cold War still testing weapons when what he
ought to be is removing them.
J: Australian Governments since the 1970s have been committed to the
elimination of nuclear weapons. How are you different.
PM: Yes, they are committed, but they haven't been actively running a
policy on it and pulling together world bodies and articulating these
things in bodies such as the United Nations. And they might have
articulated in the 1970s, but in the 1990s it was a Labor Government
that got, in Australia, the world to sign up to the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Just as it was a Labor Government that got the world to
change its view about Antarctica, or about Cambodia. We're quite
effective. We're a relatively small country but we are effective. And
I think our foreign policy processes are trusted by many countries
around the world and I think you will see Australia, in the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, carrying a very large part of the
international load.
J: Are you grateful for Mr Chirac for getting Australia's line on nuclear
testing stand up in the context of the UN celebrations instead of
Bill Hayden?
PM: Oh it doesn't matter.
J: Was Gary Gray right when he said the only problem with the
[ inaudible] Cabinet
PM: Oh, God knows. I didn't go. I mean what rock did you crawl out from
under with all these questions?
J: [ inaudible] ASIA Report influence of right-wing groups harming ties
with Asia?
PM: Well we have security organisations to keep an eye on these sort of
developments and the place to put those sort of observations is in their
reports and that is what they are doing and they will do a professional
task in keeping surveillance on these sort of groups and individuals.
J: Do you share the concerns?
PM: Well that is a matter for them, they are making the observation.
J: How serious are you about changing the taxation powers in the
Constitution? 
PM: Well the Liberal Party I mean here we are nearly a century after
Federation, here we are with the development now of a national
economy. Here we are, 18 million of us, in this large continent making
our way in Asia and they want to fracture it, fracture the nation by
going back to six individual States with six State income taxes. What
Peter Costello is about and made clear in the Business Review
Weekly this week, is having six State income taxes. Now, I ask you,
where would the nation be if we had six little economies in this country
not one national economy, not one national Government truly able to
operate the Australian economy and where would we be in Asia and
the world with that sort of approach. I mean the Liberals are not a
national party, they are a complexion of six States, they are a
State-based organisation and what they want to do is take Australia
back basically to pre-Federation. Well the country has moved on, it
has moved past them.
ends 


The Opposition Leader today made the dishonest claim that I had somehow&nbsp;destroyed bi-partisanship in the nuclear debate.
That honour rests with the Opposition and Mr Downer who yesterday&nbsp;launched a desperately empty, misguided and completely partisan Matter of&nbsp;Public Importance criticising the Government's policies to secure a nuclearweapons free world.
Yesterday Mr Downer was partisan. Today Mr Howard affected a passion for&nbsp;bi-partisanship.
A display of humbug on the subject today cannot unwind the partisan&nbsp;response of yesterday which has received broad publicity.
Whatever the body-language, you either support an initiative of this kind or&nbsp;you don't.&nbsp;
Mr Howard made it clear yesterday with the Opposition's MPI that he didn'tsupport the Government's position.
In his concocted indignation today Mr Howard failed to take up any issue ofsubstance on nuclear or strategic policy.
CANBERRA26 October 1995



PRIME MINISTER
** CHECK AGAINST DELI VERY"*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN NURSING FEDERATION FEDERAL DELEGATES
CONFERENCE, CANBERRA, 26 OCTOBER 1995
It is an honour to be asked to address the 11 th Biennial Australian Nurses
Federation Conference.
I have been talking to nurses quite a lot lately at Ballarat yesterday, and in
Perth a couple of weeks ago.
And this is not just because I believe that nurses do some of the most
important work in our communities, although I do think that. Nurses provide
-the most important ingredient of any civilised society, any decent community
and, I think it is fair to say, any successful health system. They provide care.
How as a society we treat nurses is therefore a measure of how much we
value care. It is a measure of what we mean by " civilised", by " decent", and
" 1successful".
To take nurses for granted is to compromise those values. To actually cut
into their pay and conditions speaks of abandoning them altogether.
Something similar can be said, I think, about the present fashion for
privatising health services, including ambulance services.
A great many things can be done equally as well by private interests, but
where the people's health is involved there are very clear lines to be drawn.
The people's health should never be subject to ideological fashion or
obsession. It should never be placed at the mercy of no other consideration
than the bottom line.
On these things on the pay and conditions of nursing, on cost cutting and
privatisation in health there is a very significant national debate now raging.
Ar. 
At present, the antagonists are the Commonwealth Government and the
conservative state governments. I can tell you now that the Commonwealth
Government will do all it can to protect nurses against state governments like
the one in Western Australia.
The industrial relations policies of the conservative States and the health
policies of the conservative States are of the same ilk. They are related.
They come from the same family of thought.
And, needless to say, the conservative States and the Coalition come from
the same family too. So what we see happening in the conservative States
we can expect from a conservative Coalition. In fact, there are indications
that a Federal Coalition government would hand over much more
responsibility for health to the States.
That is why this debate is so important. It is a debate about not just the
fundamentals of health care or even just the fundamentals of industrial
relations and fair wages it is a debate about the kind of society we want
Australia to be.
If this strikes you as a political speech, you are probably right. There is a
great deal at stake, and the fact is we can only defend the things we have
won and the things we believe in by winning the political debate.
As I said the battles at present are being fought out in the conservative
States. In the conservative States there have been particularly poor dealings
between nurses and those State governments. For example, in Western
Australia and South Australia, the second safety net adjustment of just $ 8 a
week has still not been paid.
Nurses in conservative States have received almost no pay increases for
several years.
This has meant that many thousands of nurses have experienced cuts in the
purchasing power of their pay. Nursing is one of the very few occupations to
have had this experience over recent years.
The lack of empathy for and understanding of nurses' needs led the
Government to make an important decision.
We decided to support a Special Case before the Industrial Relations
Commission on nurses' pay.
This is an Accord commitment to guarantee wage justice for nurses in
conservative States and it should be noted that it is very rare for a specific
occupation to be identified as in need of help in the eight Accords negotiated
with the ACTU. 
It speaks volumes for the Accord and, I think, for the difference between
Labor and the Coalition.
Some might say, that's well and good for nurses working in conservative
States, but it's a relatively minor issue, isn't it?
In fact, it is a major issue for all Australian nurses.
It is a major issue because the vast majority of nurses are covered by the
Federal system, and this is where the current industrial relations debate
really matters.
It is a major issue for all workers simply because the Coalition will radically
alter the Federal awards, and that will mean reductions in pay and conditions
for nurses.
The big point and it is a very big point for nurses is that the Coalition's
policy does not guarantee workers' pay. The value of penalty rates, and
overtime, and holiday loadings, among other allowances, will disappear.
When I was in Western Australia I illustrated what this might mean for the
earnings of nurses and, I must say, there were some signs of shock at the
extent of what could happen.
How much pay is involved? Let's have a look at some facts.
Currently working nightshifts typically pays about 15 per cent more than the
day rate, or about $ 15 a night extra. The Coalition's policy means that the
nightshift can be paid at the day rate.
Most nurses who work full-time work some nights and some weekends every
year. For weekends there is at least a time and half penalty rate.
Taking away the penalties and the holiday loading costs the average nurse
around $ 5000 a year. This is a typical nurse, not a special case. $ 5000 a
year. Typical nurses have typical needs. Typical family needs, typical recreation
needs, typical financial commitments. Cut nurses' pay cut anyone's pay
and you cut into their standard of living, into their hopes and expectations,
into their opportunities and opportunities for their children.
Cut nurses' pay and you cut into the quality of health care and the fabric of
communities. Cut nurses' pay and you cut into the basic values of Australian
society. 
That is why I have said so often about John Howard and to John Howard
you cannot pretend to stand for families and communities and the decent
values which bind them together and also stand for low wages and wage
cuts. Even if you put aside all the obvious moral judgements to be made, it makes
no logical sense.
Now I don't know whether Australian nurses think of themselves as " battlers".
I prefer nurses myself. But if nurses are battling now, they would be battling
a lot more if a Coalition government were elected and applied the same
policies as Western Australia is applying.
A Federal Coalition government will mean pay cuts of over 20 per cent of
incomes. About $ 100 a week.
The Coalition says that this is a fantasy, that it just won't happen, that it's just
a scare campaign.
Of course, the Coalition would have the Australian public believe that any
questioning or criticism of their intentions to draw the merest negative
inference from their past policies or their present lack of them is a scare
campaign.
They say that anyone who wants to stay on the awards can choose to do so.
But this is not how things work.
And it is not what most nurses will experience.
A huge number of people and a very large number of nurses move into
new jobs every year.
How will these nurses be able to " choose" to stay on an award with penalties
and holiday loadings if such conditions aren't offered as part of the job? After
all, there can't be a choice if the employer doesn't want to offer it. And there
is no effective way a government could insist on this.
In 1994, 1.73 million workers took a job with a new employer, and there were
many nurses among them.
Several hundred thousand of the 1.73 million had just finished higher
education, and there were many nurses in this group.
Around 400,000 were married women returning to the labour force, and many
of them were nurses. 4' 
A large number would be workers including nurses who have moved for
any number of essential reasons. Australians often have to move. It is a
pretty basic necessity, and a pretty basic freedom: attach to it the penalty of
significantly lower wages and less security and that freedom is pretty
seriously compromised.
So how many nurses face a new employer each year and would thus, under a
Coalition government, have no effective choice about keeping penalties,
overtime, holiday loadings and other allowances?
In 1994 the number was 32,387 about 22 per cent of all registered nurses.
In just one year.
10,897 of these nurses were women aged between 25 and 34. That's 31 per
cent of all female registered nurses in this age group.
About 1 in every 3 of this group, and just in the course of one year. This
means that the maeority of nurses would have faced a new employer within
just a few years.
And it's not just the nurses facing a new employer who have things to worry
about with the Coalition.
What's to stop an employer even a Federal government employer from
reducing pay and conditions when nurses' contracts without penalties expire?
What's to stop an employer giving preferred working hours to nurses who are
prepared to take the contract instead of the award?
What's to stop an employer offering promotions to those who are willing
initially to move off the award?
And what's to stop an employer from eventually decreasing pay for workers
on contracts without penalties who will find themselves unable to get back
onto the award?
The answer is, nothing.
In bringing these issues to public attention it must be recognised that what
happens to nurses' pay is not just an issue for nurses.
It is a reflection of what can happen to the majority of Australian workers.
And it is a symbol of the essential differences in the sorts of societies valued
by the Government and the Coalition.
This Government will continue to protect the bargaining position of all
workers. 
The Government, through its Accord commitments, has worked to ensure that
not only is Australia a place of reform, but also a country in which the welfare
of families is assured.
We say that the best way to ensure the income of families, particularly
working families with children, is through the maintenance of the value of
award conditions.
Our opponents have long made it abundantly clear that they do not value the
Accord and the consensual philosophy on which it is built, or the award
wages system which is in many ways its expression.
They are committed to doing away with both.
That puts at risk our social cohesion, the very nature of our society.
This is evident in more fields than industrial relations, of course. But
industrial relations are the most basic of relations the relations of work and
how we conduct them determines the most basic of our needs and the most
basic characteristics of our society.
That is why I say that this industrial relations debate is so important.
It is why I say the Government must win it.
We also have to win on health.
Labors health policy is built on Medicare universal access to quality health
care. Medicare is affordable, simple and accessible. And, unlike many other
countries, we do this while maintaining spending on health at a sustainable
per cent of GDP.
As front line health workers, nurses are the guardians of Medicare. Nurses
ensure that Medicare means quality care that is efficiently and
compassionately delivered.
A recent survey shows that 88 per cent of Australians are satisfied with
Medicare very few government programs ever reach this level of public
support. And a decade ago the figure was only 44 per cent.
The Government is very proud of this, and you should be too. Because the
best policy in the world will flounder without dedicated and skilled people to
put it into place.
So popular is Medicare that John Howard now says that he also is a
supporter of Medicare. 
Just a few years ago he described it as " a great failure"; " an absolute
nightmare"; " a total disaster".
And back in the 1970s he was part of the government team which dismantled
Medibank when that was the name of the national health scheme even
though they had promised the Australian people they would keep it.
This is the same man who was happy to leave 2 million people without any
health insurance.
The same man who voted twice against universal bulkbilling in the Australian
Parliament.
The same man who went to the last election with yet another policy to abolish
Medicare. Some people say I am unfair to disbelieve Howard's change of mind.
I say that for John Howard to support Medicare he would need more than a
change of mind. He would need a change of mind and heart and
fundamental values. He would need a transplant of proportions which are
beyond the reach of both science and credibility.
But more than that, he would need a change of Party.
Because the Liberal Party has never supported public health. They have
never lined up with those who down the years have argued for the right of all
Australians for access to free, public health care.
They went to the last election with a health policy which the AMA described
as " music to the ears".
The ears of the AMA three years ago were pretty well all on the right of
course. They included those attached to the now endorsed Liberal candidate
for the safe seat of Bradfield.
It was reported at the weekend that Mr Nelson is keen to have a say in the
development of the Liberals' health policy. He is also on the record as saying
that bulkbilling should go.
Mind you, he said as recently as May this year, " I don't know what the Liberal
Party's health policy is, and if you do, could you please let me know'. In
doing so, of course, he gave voice to what has become pretty well a national
refrain. But we know that, at its core, the Liberal's health policy will always support
private health over public health.
rC -7N 
And if you doubt this, you only have to look at what the State Liberal
Governments are doing to public health.
Jeff Kennett has cut $ 260 million a year out of public health, and plans to
close two public hospitals in the La Trobe Valley and replace them with a
private hospital.
Dean Brown in South Australia reduced health expenditure by $ 35 million last
year and has plans to cut a further $ 35 million over the next two years and
privatise public hospitals.
Ray Groom in Tasmania has privatised the Mercy Hospital.
And, of course, Richard Court has an agenda for widespread privatisation of
the public health system in Western Australia.
All around the country, Liberal Governments are cutting funding and
privatising hospitals. And, in Victoria, even ambulance services.
If John Howard wants to persuade us that he has changed his mind, that he
does really believe in Medicare, that he does really believe in the public
health system, there is one simple thing he can do for a start.
He can condemn the actions of his colleagues in those conservative State
governments who are slashing public health.
If John Howard wants us to believe that he is going to break with the Liberal
tradition of Medicare bashing a tradition he supported in the Fraser
Government, a position he supported at the last election never was there a
better opportunity to demonstrate it.
He can disown the policies of Jeff Kennett, Dean Brown, Ray Groom and
Richard Court. He can tell them they are wrong.
Over the past two years, the Commonwealth has increased health funding to
the States by about $ 800 million. At the same time, the States have cut more
than $ 700 million from public health. He can tell them to put it back.
But maybe taking a stand for public health sounds too much like taking a
policy position.
It strikes me as strange that the only health policy we have heard from John
Howard is that he intends to give tax incentives to encourage people to take
out private health insurance.
Tax deductions for private health insurance would cost over $ 1 billion.
So he is going to show his support for Medicare, for public health, by giving a
billion dollars to the private health system. 
This is a novel way to show support.
If you want to improve the public health system, why would you give a billion
dollars to the private health system?
Why is he doing this?
Is he doing this because he thinks the private health system needs support?
But over the past five years, there has been an increase in patients using
private hospitals. Admissions to private hospitals as a proportion of total
admissions has also increased, as have the reserves of the private health
insurance industry from $ 991 million in 1991-92 to over $ 1.35 billion now an
increase of 36 per cent.
At the same time, average premiums for private health insurance have
increased by 40 per cent in real terms.
It doesn't sound like the private funds need an injection of $ 1 billion to stay
solvent. He can't be doing this because he thinks that private insurance is more
efficient than Medicare. The administrative costs of private health funds are
11.6 per cent of the benefits paid, compared with only 3.5 per cent for the
Government's Health Insurance Commission.
In fact, a shift to private health insurance would lead to a less efficient and
more costly health system. Overall, health costs are likely to increase
because of higher administrative costs, fewer controls on over-servicing and
the reluctance of private health funds to encourage cost-containment in
private hospitals.
We would end up with more, not fewer, resources being spent on health care.
And you don't have to take my word for it this is the view of respected health
economists such as Jeff Richardson, Richard Scotton, John Deeble, Stephen
Leeder and Kevin Forde.
The evidence could scarcely be clearer. In the United States the introduction
of tax subsidies for private health insurance caused an increased demand for
medical services. It was a major cause of the rapid escalation of medical
costs in the US.
Tax subsidies for health insurance would also assist specialists to raise their
fees. Specialists have made it clear that the existing system holds their fees
down. 
John Howard wants more people to take out private health insurance. But
let's be very clear that this would mean that those families and individuals
who took up private insurance would pay more for health care than they do
today. They would have to pay the difference between the tax subsidy and the cost
of private insurance. And they would have to pay the high cost of gap fees
charged for private hospital care.
His policy is simply cost-shifting. Under the Coalition, the cost of health care
would be shifted from government to the people. Patients would pay more.
And who would get the extra money?
Private hospitals, specialists working in private hospitals and the private
health insurance funds.
The private health system, not the public health system.
In short, the Coalition would deliver neither an efficient nor an equitable
means of solving health care problems. The major beneficiaries of the tax
subsidies would be tax-payers who already have private health insurance
people who we know are more likely to be higher income earners.
The real danger is that a two-tiered health system will develop a rich,
privately funded health system alongside a poor, publicly funded system.
Coalition thinking on health, like their thinking on so much else, betrays a
strange magnetic attraction to the example of the United States. Yet,
America's health system costs nearly twice as much as Australia's and it is
based on sharp distinctions. It treats the well-off privately insured person
very differently from the publicly-insured and uninsured poor people.
As I said in my speech to the nurses in Western Australian, the fundamentals
of health care are not negotiable in the market place the core of the health
system, along with education and other essential human services, resides in
the public sphere. It is the responsibility of communities and governments.
One of the challenges of the public health system is patient waiting lists for
hospital admission.
Our best estimate of the number of patients on waiting lists is between
100,000 and 120,000 at any point in time.
It is not to in any way play down the need to solve this problem to put it in
perspective in fact, only by getting it in perspective will we get the solution
right. -= 7 
There are four million admissions to public hospitals each year in Australia,
about 11,000 a day. So patients on waiting lists make up about 3 per cent of
the total load on the public hospital system. And of the 120,000, 15,000
require surgery within 30 days and 20,000 within a year. These are the
people we have to target.
Many of the other patients are counted on waiting lists because they may at
some later stage need hospitalisation for a condition which does not respond
to other treatments.
I make these points to demonstrate that the solution to waiting lists is not
beyond us. It is within our means. And it lies primarily in the public health
system. It does not lie in giving tax concessions for people to take out private health
insurance. It is folly to think that people who take out private health insurance will only
seek treatment in private hospitals, and thus free up public hospitals. In fact,
many sophisticated procedures are only carried out in public hospitals. And
most people, even Kerry Packer, when involved in an accident or an
emergency, are treated in public hospitals.
Since 1992-93, the Government has provided some $ 88 million additional
funds to the States to reduce waiting times for elective surgery.
The Commonwealth is also funding demonstration models of public hospitals
which have best practice approaches to waiting time management to improve
the delivery of service to patients.
And in this years Budget, the Government provided extra funding to the
States to reduce waiting lists for public patients. Under the new
arrangements, specific targets will be set for waiting times for elective surgery
and for access to accident and emergency care.
We are serious about improving waiting lists. But are the States? Is John
Howard? How serious can the State Governments be about reducing waiting lists if
they cut funding for public hospitals? Jeff Kennett's cut of $ 260 million a year
alone would fund an extra six public hospitals.
How serious can John Howard be about supporting public health if he not
only does not condemn these cuts, but advocates giving $ 1 billion to the
private health system $ 1 billion which would more than pay for the treatment
of all the people on the waiting lists for public hospitals?
I am justified, we are all justified, in disbelieving John Howard's claim to
support public health. 
His record shows he is not to be trusted. He has voted against Medicare, he
has campaigned against Medicare. His Party in government at the State and
Federal level has consistently cut funding for public health.
And his proposal for tax concessions for private health insurance shows he
remains a supporter of private health at the expense of public health.
As I said at the beginning, the two issues of support for public health and
support for the wages and working conditions of nurses are inherently linked.
If you support Medicare, you must support the front line workers who deliver
the care and who make the system work. You cannot expect to maintain a
quality health care system if you do not give fair and just reward to nurses for
their expertise and dedication.
And you cannot expect to be believed when you say you support public
health if in the course of your public life you have done little but oppose it,
and your colleagues in the States are just now busily tearing into it.
Labor built Medicare. We have always believed in the right of all Australians
to free hospital care. We have always supported public health. We have
made the building and maintenance of a great public health system one of
the foundations of a fair society an essential and defining element of
Australia's modern democracy.
And because Australia's nurses are an essential and defining element in this
great equation, we will support you. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MPD
SPEECH AT BOX HILL TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, 27 OCTOBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much for that very generous and enthusiastic welcome. Helen
( Mayor), Tony and Sandy ( Robinson), my parliamentary colleague John
( Thwaites), Kelvin ( Thomson) and any others who may be with us today from the
Victorian Labor Party, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen and boys and
girls. It is great of you to come along and to support Tony and the Party in the battle
for Chisholm and to focus some of the public Issues that are now in the current
debate as the Coalition tries to remake itself.
So much of the last decade of our politics has actually swum around Box Hill.
This was the site of John Howard's ' Little Big Horn' in 1987. This is the place
where he had his last stand and, of course, he went down with that taxation and
health policy of his and as a consequence we have seen Labor win two
subsequent elections. We won 1987 and we won It, really, here in Box Hill in
1987 and, of course, that gave us a chance to win 1990 and 1993 and it has
given the country the chance to grow and change itself and adapt Itself into one
of the fairest societies In the world. That would not have been the case if Mr
Howard's miserable conservative message, which he launched here in Box Hill
In 1987 had of had the support of the Australian public.
But, the thing about the Torries is that they never change. It wouldn't matter
whether it was John Howard in 1987 or John Howard in 1995 or Stanley
Melbourne Bruce In 1921. It wouldn't matter, it Is always the same message.
I have often said and I quote Manning Clarke's words about Australians dividing
themselves into two categories. The enlargers of Australian life and the
punlshers and the straighteners. The people have belief and faith in Australians,
who believe In themselves and know they can do good things together and
enlarge and make the place bigger and greater and better and those who say 
' keep your place, keep your eyes to the ground, be happy with what you have
got, know your place', the punishers and the straighteners. And, of course, Mr
Howard belongs to the punishing and straightening camp and so, of course,
does Mr Kennett.
Nothing has ever changed with them even though nearly one hundred years on
from our Federation, with all the bounty and wealth that the country has, they still
have the same miserable view that they have had right throughout the century
and when, of course, speaking now as we do about industrial relations and
health being two of the principle issues, these are the issues that they have been
on. John Howard is now trying to remake himself. All of the things which he has said
and done throughout his record of public life he is now trying to disown roll
himself up into a very small ball and say ' just look at the Government, don't look
at me and don't dare repeat what I have ever stood for in the past, because if
you do I will call you a liar' and that is what he does. We say of Mr Howard,
' you have always been in favour of cuts to real wages, you have opposed every
wage increase bar one since 1978'. ' Lie' he says ' lie'. So, you have always
been opposed to Medicare? Uie. This is his technique now, to try to paint
himself to be something that he isn't. But we have got to remember that 16 of
the 19 members of his front bench are the same people who put Fightback
together just three years ago. The same people who want to throw the
unemployed off benefits after nine months. The same people who wanted a
GST. The same people who wanted to cut Si10,000 million $ 10 billion out of
government spending and mostly in the social wage. The same people who
wanted young people working for $ 3.00 per hour. Sixteen of the nineteen of
them are still there. The so called new ' group' as he puts it.
He got asked the other day on an Adelaide radio station Mr Howard what do
you think will be the big issue In the next election?' He said and he now has this
Menzian tone about him, he says sagely Well, think the real issue of the next
election is that a new group will come to run Australia. A new group will come to
lead Australia and that Is what, think, the issue is going to be'. Apparently, it is
now on a rotational basis. They have had five turns, it Is now our turn. It is like
when Andrew Peacock was around. Andrew got two turns so he wanted two
turns. I said ' oh, the new group', the new Prime Minister perhaps, John Howard,
he is very new. Or the new Deputy Prime Minister Mr Fischer. Who when asked
on Lateline two weeks ago when quizzed about their lack of policies and asked
by Kerry O'Brien for some definition of what their policy prescription said, he said
I.. we have got a number of policies out there, we have got a policy out there on
the black spots program' he said. That was the first thing he mentioned, the
black spots program on the roads. This was his reason for a change of national
government. And the, of course, we have got the very new Shadow Treasurer 
or the very new Foreign Affairs Minister Mr Downer. So, these are the things
that they are saying.
We are now focussing on their industrial relations policies and we are focussing
on their health policies. Given the battle at the Little Big Horn here in 1987 1 just
thought I would go back and just repeat from a transcript which was done a few
days before the election on 1 June 1987 by Mr Howard on the John Laws
program in Sydney. Mr Laws asked him about whether there would be
reductions coming from for lower personal tax, he said well, they will be very
major reductions. In health, the Medicare system is a total disaster. We will be
proposing changes to Medicare that will amount to its de facto dismantling. We
will put it right apart. The second thing we will do is get rid of the bulk billing
system, it is an absolute rort.' So the questioner Mr Laws says so really what
you are saying is what you will do is take us back to how things were pre-
Medicare?' John Howard says ' As best we can, yes, recognising that in a
society you never go completely back, but I would love to go back.'
You see now, there it Is. But now we are supposed to say ' oh you are a believer
in Medicare are you John?. You are going out there kidding everybody that you
are going to keep it while you want to put $ 1 billion into private health?' And he
says ' yes'. We say ' but look, your record is that you have opposed bulk billing
twice in the Parliament. That in 1993 you actually wanted to dismantle Medicare
as part of the Fightback policy. In 1987 you had these things to say about it.
Really, you are intending, if you get into office, to dismantle Medicare and
twisting the system back to private health.' He says ' lie'.
The thing about politicians, there is a lot of poor commentary in this country
about politicians because some people in the media think that they don't have
convictions. Politicians do have convictions. They have beliefs and mostly you
show me anyone 55 years of age, who has been in public life for 30 years, who
has a long track record of views and I'll show you somebody who is basically
going to stick to their views. Just as I have a conviction about opening this
country up, making it internationally competitive, making it fair and equitable,
making the leap into Asia, giving us an identity, having an Australian republic,
these are things I believe in. I am not going to change. John Howard is not
going to change either, but he expects us to believe that he has had a Paullan
conversion someway between the Fightback election and now. He is now in
favour of Medicare. He is in favour of award wages, he is in favour of all these
when we know, in fact, he is not. It Is like seeing a man in a balaclava crouched
in your rhododendrons with a crowbar and a bag. And you would say ' excuse
me, would I be right in inferring that you have sinister Intentions?' And he says
' liar'. You say ' but look, we have seen your record' and he says ' it is a scare
campaign' to which we are supposed to say ' oh look, I'm terribly sorry I wont
disturb you any further. I'll go off to Bridge for the afternoon'. 
What do they think It is? Do they really think we are that stupid? Do they think
the whole community while he hides his policy is so silly as to accept his bland,
now, support for Medicare? He will tear Medicare to pieces. He will rip it apart.
He will rip public health apart because he has no respect and they never have
had any respect for public health. Much of this election is going to be about the
sort of society we are. The sort of society we have become. The things that we
regard as community norms and we in the Labor Party have always believed
that one of the things which is a community right is public health. The health of
our citizens, the right to treatment, the right to have a healthy existence, that it is
not a right defined by your Income. That is what we believe and we have always
believed In that. They have always believed in private health. They have always
believed In support for doctors. They believe in now kicking another $ 1 billion
into private health through tax rebates which will go to the incomes of specialists
and private hospitals and to private funds.
Yesterday I told the Parliament that private funds have now got $ 1.35 billion in
reserves. Yet, they have stuck up premiums for private health by 40 per cent in
the last year. They have got $ 1.3 billion in reserves, yet John Howard wants to
give them another $ 1 billion by way of tax rebates for private health insurance
where in fact what he should be doing is putting the money into the public health
system. In the last year the Commonwealth has put $ 800 million into the public health
system and the States have taken $ 700 million from it. In Victoria here Jeff
Kennett has taken $ 260 million out of public hospitals. That Is where they stand.
All around the country coalition governments are taking money out of public
health. Does Mr Howard admonish them? Did he say to Jeff Kennett you are
wrong? Did he say to Dean Brown you are wrong? Did he say to Ray Groom
you are wrong? Or to Richard Court? No. He supports all that. Let me just
repeat something he said in that same interview about health. John Laws said to
him you must be fairly happy that Bruce Shephard is the newly elected
President of the AMA in NSW pledge to destroy Medicare?' Howard says Well,
it does, I have a lot of time for Bruce. I think he is a very courageous man, both
in the personal sense and professional sense.' Laws says will the AMA be
better off? Howard yes, I think, the AMA will more aggressively represent the
interests of free enterprise medicine.' What is free enterprise medicine? What is
free enterprise about the health of the community, but this is their view and they
are ripping money out of the system all around the country.
Jeff Kennett is now thinking of privatising the ambulance service. Now, I know
some ambulance officers are here with us today and I heard that story in Ballarat
the day before yesterday. Where somebody died because when they called,
instead of getting a response in eight minutes it took 55 minutes because no one
was there. Is the state of Victoria so lacking in moral fibre and so poor that it 
can't run an ambulance service? Are things so crook that Jeff Kennett has got to
put locks and chains on public toilets on railway stations?
I mean, is that what it has come to under the Liberal Party? I mean, is that what
we are all about in 1995, when the All Ordinaries Index is at 2150? It was under
500 ten years ago a four-fold increase in the wealth of the stock market, a
huge multiples of our national GDP In ten years. And what is it about? Some
sort of miserable, public accountancy view that, you know, we get the books
back into surplus by putting chains on railway station toilets, or privatising the
ambulance service, or in John Howard's case knocking over Medicare and
bulk billing and driving everybody back to private practice to give the specialists
the incomes they think they deserve. I mean, that's what they're about. So,
when John Howard says he supports Medicare, don't believe him. When John
Howard says he is going to keep Medicare, say what you will do John is you will
bust open bulk billing. It will go. The whole notion of public health and universal
access will go if there is a Liberal Government, as sure as I'm standing here it
will go if there is a Liberal government. So, when he does his chameleon act,
and tries to repaint himself, we just need to go back to those quotations on the
John Laws program: " We will be proposing changes to Medicare that amount to
its de-fact dismantling we will pull it right apart. The second thing we will do is
get rid of the bulk billing system it's an absolute rort." So you're really saying
you will take us back? ' Yes. Recognise in society that you never go completely
back, but I would love to go back". And that's where he stands that is what he
has always though. That's how he has always voted, and that's what he will
always do.
Now, the same goes for industrial relations. Industrial relations they are now
saying that we are mis-representing them, that we are liars, and everything else.
And this is the response they have given, and they expect journalists to run it,
and repeat naively ' oh well, the Opposition says they wontt have that that's not
true". We say well hang on, if you have got any guile about you at all? I mean,
is there any scepticism left in journalism in this country? I mean, this is what
they have always done and said why would you think they would change now?
Just simply for the convenience of an election. But what they say on industrial
relations, what we say, is we want a more flexible labour market. We want
enterprise bargaining where people can trade away certain things for greater
beneft, and make the working of the business more flexible, in hours In the sort
of rosters, in some of the penalty rates and overtime rates, but we have an
important element In our policy. We have a thing called the ' no-disadvantage
test". And those agreements have got to go past the arbitration commission,
and they look at them and tick them to see that there is no disadvantage from
the totality of the new package to the employee. So, under our policy you can
have flexibility up, you can flexibility sideways, but you can't have flexibility down.
There is a no-disadvantage test. But the Liberals won't endorse the nodisadvantage
test, because they want cuts in the wages of Australians down. 
They want the last two or three deciles of the income of the labour market to be
subject to reductions. And you can see it here in Victoria, and we have allowed
many State registered unions to register themselves under the Federal
jurisdiction, so as to escape these sorts of individual contracts offered by the
Kennett Government. Now, Jeff Kennett told a business audience at the
Business Council last week when the Federal Ubs get into office, the employees
will have nowhere to go. The employees will have nowhere to go they will be
trapped. Trapped. In other words, his model, has employees running around
trying to get wage justice as the sort of Federal legislation, and the State
legislation, closes in on them. And it really matters, because yesterday on the
ABC, Mr Reith was asked pointedly and repeatedly ubut can you guarantee
that there will be no reductions in the pay of people if they actually agree to an
individual contract in the terms you say?". Arnd he said. " we have always
believed In good wages" etc etc, but the journalist came back and said can you
guarantee that no-one will be worse off? And he said " we will be trying to do
our best in all the circumstances". In other words, no guarantee. Because what
they're about is basically flexibility down. What John Howard has always been
about is cuts to lower and middle income earners.
As if the economy isn't strong enough. I mean, we have had 670,000 job growth
in the last 2.5 years. We have got the profit share and that Is the share of
national income going to profits almost without any historic precedence, in
terms of Its height. Its why the stock market is so buoyant. We have had quite
strong productivity. We have had the lowest level now this year of industrial
disputes since 1940. This year, we had 70 working days lost per. thousand
employees. In John Howard's period of office, it was 590 working days lost per
thousand employees. So. if It's not industrial disputes, and it's not productivity.
and it's not the Inflation rate, its not profits, what Is it? Why do they want to hop
into working class incomes? And it's because they are spiteful and nasty that's
all, But that's all it is. Basically, they are ideologically arraigned against the
great majority of the working community. They want to, basically, push them
down the old punishing and straitening point. And you see, don't take my word
for it read what Reith said yesterday: " Can you guarantee Mr Reith, that
people won't be worse off, " We'll do our best in all the circumstances", he said.
In other words, no guarantee. Now, you can see all of this coming out of this
Issue, and it's what I said earlier what sort of society we are, Because
industrial relations is about more than just pay-rates, and classifications and
awards, it's about the sort of country we are. That sort of basic community right
how you relate to your employer, how your employer relates to you, what sort
of labour market there is, what sort of environment you have at work.
See, John Howard runs around and says 1I have always believed in families'. I
don't know what he thinks the rest of us believe in. I mean, does he think we're
Martians we don't come from families? I mean, the arrogance of him, saying
he always believed in families as if the rest of us don't. To which I say yes, you 
believe in families, but you don't believe in family support. You believe In
families, but you don't believe in decent wages to support families. You believe
in families, but you don't believe in overtime rates. You believe in families, but
you don't believe in penalty rates. You believe in families, but you don't believe
in the holiday leave-loading. You believe In families, but you don't believe in
universal health insurance, and health access. You believe in families, but only
those on the highest incomes you can give a tax-break to they are the families
you believe in.
Now, this is not an academic discussion, or an academic debate let me just
give you some idea about the impact on working people of these sort of policies.
And It is this let's take a typical ambulance officer, who lost the penalties for
night shift and weekend work ambulance officers, of course, work most
weekends, and plenty of nights, so it's bound to matter quite a lot. And it does.
A typical ambulance officer's pay would be reduced by $ 172 a week, even with
the same hours but without the overtime and penalty rates. That's over $ 8000 a
year lost, and that's a lot of income for officers who typically earn around
$ 36,000 a year. And the same Is true of nurses if you take away from nurses
who, of course, have as components of their income overtime, penalties and
holiday leave loadings to mention a few, there will be no compensation for them
if they are lost, and for the average nurse, it will cost around $ 5000 a year. And
this is a typical nurse not a special case. That is, someone who is working in a
typical circumstance, doing typically certain hours of overtime during penalty
periods. So, there's just 2 classifications of people.
But what sort of Government and you can see it In Western Australia under
that vicious legislation there. Now, the Western Australian Government won't
pay the second $ 8 safety net for nurses they won't have an enterprise bargain
with them, and they won't pay them. What sort of shabby Government beats up
on a group of nurses? That won't give them an $ 8 increase to maintain their
wages? So we, in the Commonwealth Government, have joined with the
Australian Nurses Federation in a case before the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission to bring on and make mandatory the payment of the I mean,
that's what they are about. Now, what Reith will tell you and Mr Howard will
say mhlook, you can stay on the award, we're not changing that, we are
giving you that chic" but what they don't tell you is this that each year,
1.7 million Australian workers either enter the labour market from school, or from
university, or women joining the labour market, or come as migrants, or change
jobs 1.73 million people. In 1994, the number of Melbourne people who faced
a new employer was 270,000. The nation, ft was 1.73 million. If you take a
three year period, 42 per cent of Australian workers will have changed jobs
with~ in three years. That's 42 per cent who will never get a choice about staying
on the award, because once they lose the award, they can't get it back.
They then take the contract, or they take nothing. And so there's no choice.
The Liberals say we're givng people choice but there's no choice in that. 
And I gave an example of a woman here in Melbourne who is a librarian, two
weeks ago in Parliament. She was an $ 36,000 a year in her present job, but
wanted to apply for a job as a librarian in a part of Melbourne closer to where
she lived. She put the application in, to find the job now paid $ 19,000. so she
had to stay where she is there's no choice for her. But you see, what happens
is once 2 or 3 years go by, and you have got one business out contracting and
doing work, who have got employees on much diminished wages, and you have
got another business with people on awards, it won't be very long before the 2nd
business Is uncompetitive. So, what will be happening Is they will only take
people on who don't want to go on the awards, and so the whole decay goes into
the system, and the whole underpinning of the award system goes. So, when
Peter Reith says we will give you the choice of staying on the award, say " sure
you will Peter sure you will". And in three years time, half of us will be out
there on individual wage contracts without any protection whatsoever. We will
go back to that master and servant provisions of the British Common Law of the
19th Century.
So, this is the labour market they have in store for the rest of us this is the sort
of way after now a decade of industrial cooperation, with a 3 per cent inflation
rate, with 670,000 job growth, with over 2 million new jobs since 1983, with an
economy performing at nearly twice the rate of economic growth under Labor as
under the Liberals, with a stock market going up by four-fold in value they're
saying well thank you for that cooperation, now we'll tell you what we have
instore for you. You keep your place you get out there in indmdual wage
contract, and you take what the employer offers you. And you say well hang on,
what's wrong with some protections of the awards arnd the safety nets haven't
we struggled for this for a century, and haven't we reasonably operated this
system? And they are just going to go back to the same policies that you would
have seen as I said earlier under the likes of Earl Page of Stanley Melbourne
Bruce or Joe Lyons or any of them they will try to push working people down
And while they are doing it, rip away at one of those fundamentals which is, of
course, protection under the health system and under Medicare.
So this is going to be an important election, just like 1993 was. Now there is a
lot of new wisdom invented particularly by commentators about election results.
They said Labor won the 1993 election because of the GST. That is simply not
true. We won the 1993 election because people had an idea of the sort of
Australia it would become under John Hewson.
You might remember coming up to that campaign I was making a speech in
Brisbane to a Labor audience about the unemployed and we had at the time
unemployment rising not failing. And I said we will never leave the unemployed
behind. We will always put our arm out and bring them up with us. We will bring
them back Into the society. We will deal with the long term unemployed and we
will put a premium on employment and we will bring them along. 
John Howson said in Parliament a week later, " the Prime Minister says he will
put his arm out and pull the unemployed up. When you put your arm out to pull
up the unemployed and the disadvantaged, they will pull you down.'
Now it is that sort of remark and that sort of view that lost the Liberals the 1993
election. The OST was but an example of the panoply of nastles they had ready
for the Australian people, including, of course, destroying the health insurance
system amongst others in the biggest tax switch which would have
disadvantaged low and middle income people. And now, they think, they can
hide that. At least Hewsan had his policies there.
The point I make about John Howard, he is always saying " oh, I am honest
John". I say, well listen, what about this for an idea? I believe that honesty and
credibility in politics can only be about policies. That the nation's entitled to know
from its political leaders where they see the national direction going, where they
see the policy framework being developed.
I mean aren't they at least entitled to know where each of the parties would take
them? What sort of honesty can there be without some integrity in the party
policy processes about telling them? But what he thinks he will do is repaint
himself and camouflage himself and try to slide under the wire at an election and
then bring all the nastles out afterwards.
Now we saw a typical example of this, this week, in the Business Review Weekly
a business magazine. In it Peter Costello, the Shadow Treasurer says he will
introduce something to deal with, what is called, the Vertical Fiscal Imbalance In
the payments between the Commonwealth and the States. What he was saying
was a Coalition Government will introduce a State income tax so that the States
can raise more money, more like the money they spend, rather than relying on
the Commonwealth to give it to them.
This expression Vertical Fiscal Imbalance means it Is a comparison between
what the States spend and what they raise and because there is, they say, a
perceived imbalance because the Commonwealth gives them a lot of the money,
they don't actually raise it, States would behave better if they raised the money.
Therefore, they are better with taxing powers.
Now the Liberals have always believed In fracturing Australia back to the States.
They are always talking about new federalism as if the act of Federation was in
some way an act to buttress the States. The act of Federation In 1901 was the
act of the creation of the nation and, since the war, we have seen the
development of a national economy from the uniform taxing powers that came
under John Curtin and Ben Chifley In the war years, we have developed a
national economy. 
We're 18 million people, we're in a continent, we share a border with nobody,
there is no line of distinction amongst them other than some phoney colonial
lines drawn on a map one hundred odd years ago we are a nation at one.
We are one nation.
There should be basically one national economy. One national Government
running the national economy. One national income tax system. But they say
the problem about that is that the progressive agenda is advanced by Federal
Labor Governments who win office because if they have a national economy and
a bag full of national powers, they will advance the progressive agenda which
is, of course, contrary to the conservative agenda.
So they say the way to stop a Labor Government, federally, doing this is we split
the power back to the States so we give them income taxes and we give them
consumption taxes. We can't do a consumption tax. Every time we put our
head up, we get beaten on that. So we will give the States the right to put a
consumption tax and we will then have six State little economies. So when a
Federal Labor Government comes along in the future, they won't have the
powers they have had in the past to do things like universal health insurance or
the external affairs power for the environment, or any of the other great
redistributive things Labor Governments do. We won't be able to have an
Accord with the trade unions. We won't have wage/ tax trade-offs. We won't
have award superannuation. We will split the power back.
Here we are this week and Costello brazenly is up their saying " we will do
something about Vertical Fiscal Imbalance In our first year of office. 0 The
moment I put a statement out saying notice this, he says ' lars'. And we say well
hang on, here is your quotations. He said " oh, what I meant was only giving
them a fixed share of Commonwealth income.'
But a fixed share of Commonwealth income is still Commonwealth income.
It doesn't touch the Vertical Fiscal Imbalance and it Is that, he sa~ d, he will repair.
He then says he has talked to the States and surprise, surprise or really no
surprise Jeff Kennett comes out this week and says ' the Commonwealth
should have 20 per cent of the tax and the States should have 80 per cent'.
And then he says ' the Commonwealth should have just some core functions
defence, and the currency, and a couple of other things, and that is it". In other
words, the powers should be back with the States and so should the money,
But we say, well hang on Jeffrey you have got the powers now and what are you
doing, you are closing schools, you are closing hospitals. You want the powers
but then you don't want them. You want the power to take the power away and
then you want the income tax. 
Now Peter Costello has said he consulted the conservative States and he did
and he consulted Jeff Kennett, and he consulted Ray Groom, and he has
consulted Dean Brown etc and they agree with him. They want a State income
tax. But the moment we say, by your own words, here it is, they say " lie".
Now I don't know whether they expect the media to just repeat their rebuttals.
But gradually, you know, these things are coming into the public debate and you
see what their real agenda is and it is the same old agenda, isn't it? Income tax
powers for the States, a State consumption tax. And, yesterday, we found that
Access Economics is putting together a study on a State consumption tax for the
conservative States.
A State income tax, State consumption taxes, an industrial relations system that
goes back to individual contracts and no award protections and declines in
wages, private health insurance and support for specialists in private hospitals.
And yet John Howard thinks he is going to get away with repainting himself as
some sort of new-age person who is going to trick the rest of you into believing
that at 55 he has eschewed all the views he has ever had and he is a changed
person. He has had the Paulian conversion on the way to the ballot box.
Well I will just tell you this, There is another -Box Hill coming up for
John Howard. Now he won't have his policy launch here because this is the site
of a Little Big H-orn for him. He won't have another one here, But there is
another Box Hill coming for him and it is coming for him because, for this simple
reason, that he wants to change the community values of Australia. He wants to
change the sort of society we are.
And you saw his defence speech two weeks ago, where he was saying nwe want
security from Asia, not in Asia". I mean indirectly he said, " the region has an
opportunity but at the same time it Is a threat and we really should be cuddling
up to the United Statesu.
You know, it is the same old view. They want to change the society. They want
to change the culture. They want to take one of the fairest and most decent
societies we have developed here and break it and smash it up. They have no
faith in Australians and no belief In the nation as a whole. And that is the thing
I have always held such objection to the Liberals about.
At their core, they don't have the faith in the Australian people. They don't think
we are capable of better things together. They don't believe that there is
goodness in people, that they will do things for their own good spiritedness and
for the national good. They don't believe. Yet they want to govern Australia with
some sort of miserable alien philosophy to the place, that you might have found
in Victorian England In the last gasp of the 19th century, or in the middle of this
century in Australia like Cold War warriors like Sir Robert Menzies you know, 
who regard Asia as a problem, who could only see ourselves cuddling up at
Whitehall or in Washington, who basically want to keep working people in their
place.
Well they are not going to be kept in their place. They are going to find out
about him just like they found out about John Hewson.
The difference between John Hewson to give him his credit he had the
courage to say what he meant he would do. But this character, thinks he can
slip and slide around it and not say it at all.
So this is going to be a fight for Australia's values. This is going to be a
referendum on ideas and ideals and in the big marketplace of those
referendums, John Howard can't escape by having no policies and trying to
camouflage himself.
So I say to the people who have come here today, many of you believing in
these things but particularly some of the industrial representation that is here
today, from the nurses and the ambulance officers and others and just say that
your plight is not falling on deaf ears, that we know what a battle it is, that we
know about the miserable public accountancy of the Kennett's, and the
Stockdale's, and the Howard's, and the Reith's, and the Costello's.
But we won't have a bar of It and when we win the next Federal election and
when we have got them on the grass for 16 years, we will then be in a position
where most of these mares are so imbedded that even doing their worst, they
will never unseat them. Now that Is what the battle is about.
Now in this electorate of Chisholm, we have had a former Deputy Leader of the
Coalition, Michael Wooldridge. Basically he was unknown until he made a few
outrageous remarks about Carmen Lawrence a couple of weeks ago. He does
nothing here. Nobody I have ever spoken to from this electorate knows him or
can remember anything that he has actually done for the community.
Now this is not true of Labor people. We are always of the community. We
believe in the community. We come from the community. That Is what
Tony Robinson will do. He is from the community. He will represent the
community, as Helen Mayer before him, for Labor. And you can't run an
up-beat, up-lifting society with people in the parliamentary parties who don't
believe in things, who don't really represent people, who don't feel the
community views coming through and who try and advance the commonweal
with that belief and faith In Australia and Australians.
Now all of that, I believe, is certainly part and parcel of Tony Robinson's
character and make-up. He will make a first class Member for Chisholm and he 
will help put a Labor Government back there in Canberra because this is one of
the seats we have to win.
So we are not here just beating our gums. We are here about real and genuine
things, about values and ideals that matter and about the shape of Australia as
we approach this exciting period. Never have we been set up like this before.
18 million of us in a continent without a border with anybody, with a chance of
having an environment second to none, in the fastest growing part of the world
the Asia Pacific while we are making our settlement of our participation in the
region. I mean what an exciting prospect and a fair country that has got good values.
I mean to turn all that back now and go back as John Howard said he wants to
do, to go back to the values of the mono-culture, to regard Asia as some alien
place and to start fracturing up Australia Into States, and dividing our community
this is not the way forward for Australia. And the Labor Party, as always, will
fight the good fight for good values, for good ideals and for good things and
I know you will help us do it.
Thank you very much for having me.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
The Sydney Morning Herald will tomorrow publish a story which is a complete
fabrication around a matter which arose nearly ten years ago.
Herald staff have leaked details of the story to financial markets, obviously
providing a picture which is damaging to me, through allegations which I can
assert have no basis whatsoever in fact.
That The Sydney Morning Herald should behave in this way is outrageous.
I am reliably informed that the journalists concerned were fed this fallacious
material by the Liberal Party.
The attached correspondence this week between my office and The SMH
makes it clear that any suggestion of improper dealing is utterly without
foundation. CANBERRA 27 October 1995 I~ 
OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
October, 1995
Ms Colleen Ryan and Mr David Humphries
The Sydney Morning Herald
By fax: 02 282 3005
Dear Ms Ryan and Mr Humphries
You have written to the Prime Minister about the global borrowing limits of the
Northern Territory in respect of a matter nearly ten years ago.
You insinuate in your questions that the Prime Minister had a conflict of
interest in proposing to the then Cabinet that the Northern Territory
Government be granted a right to borrow a global limit of monies to be
employed at its discretion for public works.
The Prime Minister had no conflict of interest whatsoever. He responded to
an express proposal from a Coalition Government in the Northern Territory
a proposal which was itself only agreed over time, and with offsets. The fact
that he was acquainted with Mr Anderson of Tipperary Developments, the
ultimate successful tenderer on the projects in question, was immaterial.
No Commonwealth tender was involved. It was not the Commonwealth doing
the borrowing or awarding the work it was a Territory setting its own
priorities and awarding work under its own processes. The Commonwealth
merely agreed an upper limit on what it might borrow in any particular year.
And even this figure was not binding on a State or Territory.
All State and Territory global borrowing limits include proposals for civic
works undertaken by many Australian construction firms and developers,
many of whom are and would be known personally to the Prime Minister or to
the Treasurer of the day.
You asked why the Prime Minister, when Treasurer, did not declare on his
Parliamentary Pecuniary Interest register travel to Tipperary Station in 1986
and 1987 on Mr Anderson's plane.
Mr Anderson invited the then Treasurer, a personal friend, to his property
only for the purpose of seeing and visiting that property. It had no connection
whatsoever with his duties as Treasurer. It was purely a private visit. Private 
domestic travel and accommodation by personal friends is outside the scope
of the pecuniary interests register of Members or Ministers, as a cursory
perusal will reveal.
The Prime Minister visited the station Tipperary in 1986 and 1987 during its
development phase, and has not visited it since.
I have attached a copy of the relevant sections of the guidelines on
Ministerial interests. Were your interpretation of the rules for declarations to
be accepted, Members would have to declare all accommodation and travel
provided by any friend or relative.
At any rate Mr Keating's visits to Tipperary were well reported at the time,
especially when Mr Keating told a Canberra press conference that he had
recently been in the Territory " shooting pigs".
Let me conclude on the following points:
The Prime Minister regards these questions as not investigative journalism,
but simply harassment. Your editor-in-chief has confirmed that you were
sooled onto this non-story by the Liberal Party.
This issue has been raked over by Mr Keating's opponents years ago and
everything that needs to be known of it is known. He regards you both as
doing the Liberal and National parties' bidding. This issue is being hawked
about by them it does neither of you credit to take it up.
I know you must think yourselves hard-hitting investigative journalists but
this little effort locates you at the bottom of the journalistic food chain.
The Prime Minister has an unblemished record for probity over 26 years of
public life. Your sordid insinuations of a conflict of interest or corruption are
as fanciful as they are offensive. They are also defamatory. You would do
well to weigh your conspiracy theories carefully against the facts.
Yours sincerely
Greg Turnbull
Senior Media Adviser 
-V J 1. U14 6
Gifts received by Minisitrs and thecir families from1 family memibers or personal friends in
a purely personal capacity need not bc disclosed unless the Minister judges that an
appcarancc of a conflict of interest might otherwisc arise.
212. FTravcl anod Hospirtality
Ministers, sponsored travel generally relaes to overseas travel becca use of thle
automatic travel entitlements they have within Australia. The rules regarding sponsored
overseas travel are as follows.
Overseas travel is to be regarded as sponsored where arty part of the costs, including
fares, accommodation and living expenses, is not borne by the Minister or the Australian
Government. Ministers should be aware of the possibility that conflicts of interests may arise or be
seen to arise through acceptance of sponsored ovcrseas travel by members of their
famnilie.. Ministers should not accept for themselves or for their families offcrs of sponsored
overseas travel from: any source, whether connect ed directly with their responsibilities or
riot, subject ( 0 the following.-
The Prime Minister tnay authorise acceptance of such travel in a particular case.
His athorisation should be sought in advance.
A Minister need not seek authorisation to accept guest of government
arrangements granted to the Minister during an official visit to a particular
country. ( In cases where there may be foreign policy implications in accepting
guest of government status, Ministers should consult the Minister for Foreign
Affairs.) Acceptance of incidental meals, entertainment and other hospitality in the course
of an overseas visit, including, for example, home accommodation offered on a
personal basis, is a matter for the judgment of the Minister having regard to any
conflict or appearance of tonflict between intere. it and duty that may arise.
If sponsored travel bt accepted under points or above, it must be disclosed. The
purposc of the spon~ sored travel should be shown. It is not necessary to disclose
acceptance of Ruest of government arrangemecnts see above granted during
official overseas visits.
Mhe rules regarding sponsored travel by Ministers within Australia are necessarily less
fixed. Hospitality ( which may or may not be associated with travel) is a related issue.
In deciding whether to ACCEPT sponsored travel or hospitality in Australia, a Minister
should exercise hist or her judgment having regard to any conflict or appearance of
conflict of interests that may arise. 
GOVERNMENT DIVISION 7
In deciding whether any sponsored travel or hospitality which has been accepted in
Australia should be JtrJ. G ER1FD, the Minister should again exercise judgment. If travel
or hospitality has been accepted which may give rise to an appearance of a conflict of
interests, it should be disclosed.
In relation to hospitality, the Minister may find it helpful to consider the following
guidance provided to Members of the House of Representatives by the Registrar, to assist
Members in deciding what they n~ eed to disclose:
' Hospitality" refers to free or concessional accommodation providcd to the Mcnibcr, the
Memnbcr's spouse or dcpcndcnt children wholly or partly by any pcrson, organisation,
business or interest group or foreign Government or its reprcscntative. It includes the
provision of free or concessional meals provided as part of an accommodation
arrangement but does not include hospitality provided in a purely social way by friends or
colleagues. Entertainment rcceived from concerned constituents and intcrcst groups
legitimately exercising their powers of political persuasion, explanation, or argunicnt on
the mcrits of an issuc to further a particular cause or concern need not be included. Thcrc
is also no necd to include crcrtainmcnt receivcd in common with significant numbers of
othcr Members or persons such as a reception or dinner hostcd by a High Commiissioner
or Amnbassador.'
13. Membership of Organisations
P
Membership of all associations, professional and recreational, which have aimsr and
objectives which could be affected by Government action ( particularly in matters for
which they have portfolio responsibility), should be inclu~ ded unions or professional
associations). 14. Other Intcrests
List any other interest which, in the opinion of the Minister, holdLs the potential for a real
or apparent conflict of interest with thc Minister's duties to arise. GV. N9M4T DI1I5I0N41 . Naon. 026 P. 09 
19/ 10/ 95 18: 55
T1e~ lbucV P"" mii. ArA
The Rt Hon P. 3. Keating,
rime Ministcr,
Parliailt House,
(. anbem 2601
Ucig Mr Keating,
We are preparing ani aniclc which cHnvamcs thc 1988 Loan Council decision W approvz an iflctcase in
the Northern Territory's global borrowing links which facilitated the funding of the Stale SqtIare
complex. We would appreciate it if you could isiiwcr the attached ques1iona oil your role In t e
approval. your declariiunos to the then Pime Minister, Mr Hawke, Cabilet and the E'xpenditurc
Review Cowmince, and your dcu1arminnt on the Pnrliaitientary pecuniary intircst register.
We look forward in your reply. We cai b. conrtacted by fsckituile on 02-2823405 or by phone on
02-21822325 or 02 2921794.
Youyncercly. Col7Ryan and David Hun hric
October 19, 1995 O.' liq Fill 201S aSWS. Syr uW W Pnisd sodmw-CPO9 5C % fl/ W 2W.
TdWA~ hf ( 02) 20 28 r tI I 2U 313. Dvsums ( 0 W3 MWbSm. ( 022) 8 2 1. 1, raw% ( oz) M 2451
hwsOd utl. MIA s 4 0hi, he~ ul el U M 111O1R 7 
003
* Why did you not declare a conflict of interest to the prime Minister, HrIawke, the Cabin~ o the
)' ipenditurt Review Committee i; n your 1988 decision to approve an increase in the Northern
Territury's borrowing limit, enabling it to build the State Square project, given that you knew hix
Warren Andem~ on stoud to benefit from the pri edti riotigh his comapany Tipperary Developments?
0 Do you think that you were rc~ aired to declare a cordlict of internal under the rules for Minixtefial
conduct e~ tabtished by Prime Minister Hawke in 1983 mid the Code of Conduct for Ministers adopted
by the Hawke government in 1987, given that a friend of yours, Mr Warren Anderson. stood to baritfit
from a decision tto approve an increas~ e in NT borrowing Urnitt which allowed the State Square proj&amp;-t
to proceed?
Why didn't you declare on the. Parliamnentary pecuniiary interest register truvel to TipperaryStation
in 19X6 and 1987 ont Mr Anderson's plane?
Why didn't ynu declare on the pecuniary interest regiter aixommodation provided at Tipperary
Staior in July 1987? 


PRIME MINISTER 121/ 95STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPTHE THIRD FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTI strongly condemn the latest French nuclear test at Mururoa.This test flies in the face of the French Governments recent announcement that itwill sign the Protocols of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone ( SPNFZ) Treaty. Itfurther brings into question the sincerity of France's commitment to the security ofthe region and its environment. The French Government should draw the logicalconclusion from its intention to sign the SPNFZ Protocols and end its tests now.Continued testing has triggered powerful reactions around the world that reinforcethe view that security based on nuclear weapons is unsustainable in the longer term.The strength of this opposition adds weight to the Government's decision to pursuepractical measures that will lead to a world free of nuclear weapons.This view will be reinforced in the coming weeks with the United Nations GeneralAssembly scheduled to consider a resolution, in which Australia is playing a leadingrole, calling for an immediate end to all nuclear testing. France must acknowledgethe force of this resolution and the fact that it represents world opinion. To continuetesting would be an affront to the wishes of the international community as well asthe South Pacific.France continues to seriously damage its international reputation by its actions in theface of world opinion.France stands almost alone in not recognising that changed strategic circumstancesand changing world opinion mean that a system of security based on nuclearweapons is unsustainable in the longer term.Until French Government acts responsibly towards the nations of the South Pacificby ending its nuclear testing program we will pursue our comprehensive campaign ofaction opposing the French decision.CANBERRA 28 October 1995



PRIME MINISTER 122/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PREMIER COURTS THREAT: A STATE INCOME TAX AND
CONSUMPTION TAX OR SECESSION
West Australian Premier Richard Court has made it clear where he stands on
State Income Tax and State Consumption Tax he wants both.
And while he was telling us he wants both, John Howard was slipping and
sliding on radio in Perth pretending it wasn't his policy.
I bet he wished Mr Court had a case of lockjaw. The Premier has confirmed
the Coalition's taxation policy.
The Shadow Treasurer, Peter Costello, let the cat out of the bag with his
interview with Business Review Weekly saying he would fix the so-called
" vertical fiscal imbalance" which is econo-speak for state taxes. Mr Howard
and Mr Costello have been denying it since.
But Mr Howard's difficulty is that Mr Costello was quoted directly in Business
Review Weekly.
Mr Costello said he had consulted with the conservative states and he had.
The product of this consultation was published by the Treasurer Mr Willis on
Sunday a 45-page plan by Access Economics commissioned by Richard
Court and the other conservative States and Territories for a State income tax
and a State GST.
Mr Howard is entirely conscientious at muckraking and smearing he is not at
all conscientious at producing policies.
Richard Court is so desperate to levy a State Income Tax and a State GST
that he will even use the outrageous threat of secession to get his way. And
Mr Howard is happy to oblige him. But not yet. He wants to win the election
and then introduce State taxes on the sly. Mr Costello has said as much. 
This Government will do all in its power to stop the fracturing of the uniform
income taxing power of the Commonwealth.
Mr Howard wants to introduce what he couldn't at the last election a GST.
Access Economics did the work for the Liberal Party in 1993 with
" Fightback!", and they are back again.
This time it's the same proposal, but levied by the States.
When Mr Howard says that as Prime Minister, he wouldn't permit State taxes
to be levied don't believe him.
His statements on this have about as much integrity as his muckraking efforts
of the last few weeks.
CANBERRA 31 OCTOBER 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ANDREW DENTON " PAUL KEATING UNPLUGGED',
SEVEN NETWORK, 1 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
AD: That's a good start. Now I have seen you work a room before. You
are very, very good at it. Does working a room come naturally to you?
When you were a kid did you go to other kids birthday parties and walk
out an hour later knowing you had the numbers?
PM: No, but I always had a sixth sense of who liked me and who didn't.
AD: Yes.
PM: I could always tell.
AD: How can you tell?
PM: Well it is just a, you know, maybe an aura, an idea you have. But you
need it in public life. You need to be able to assess people quickly
and also to enjoy them.
AD: When someone doesn't like you, how do you deal with that?
PM: Oh, well I try and do the best I can with them. Put them out of their
misery.
AD: What, you kneecap them?
PM: No, make them feel more comfortable.
AD: Is power sexy? Is it a sexy thing?
PM: Well, I don't think so. It wouldn't interest a sexy fellow like you.
AD: Sure. 
PM: But it is uplifting and exciting. It is uplifting and it is exciting, partly
because it is a high wire act, It is always big issues with a lot of
moment, always done mostly under difficult circumstances. So it is the
ultimate high wire business and you can't be on the high wire and not
be excited, or elated.
AD: I have a quote here from Neville Wran former New South Wales
Premier, Federal President of the ALP, as you know...
PM: A great fellow.
AD: about what it takes to get to the top in politics. " To get there in the
first place takes an enormous amount of tenacity and courage, the
capacity to snap out of depression because it is a lonely life stepping
over the bodies to get to the top. To get there you finish up covered in
blood and shit up to your elbows. It doesn't vary anywhere. It is never
easy. It is all hard." Does that ring a bell with you?
PM: Yes, it does. It is like an endurance test. It is like a marathon. I think
the better analogy. It is like a marathon. But you can't keep running
unless you have got something to run for. You know, you can't keep
going unless you have something to run for. And, therefore, I don't
really think you have to crawl over people, or in some way respond to
that sort of frame of reference providing you keep running. But you
can't keep running if you don't believe. If you are not a believer, you
run out of puff.
AD: Is it as brutal as Neville Wran makes it sound though?
PM: It is perhaps during the mezzanine phase. You know what I mean?
AD: The mezzanine phase?
PM: That is before you have got to the first floor. That is where all the
sorting gets, I think, brought on in earnest. Once you are at the first
floor, it is a bit like coming to the top of the mountain. As you get
towards the apex there are fewer places to go, fewer places to hide
and it is all more obvious. So the selection becomes more automatic.
But down at the base it is harder.
AD: So basically the higher up you go, the easier it is to clean the blood
away because it just..
PM: Yes, but it is not blood. It is, what should I say, easier to fill the
intellectual vacuums.
AD: What does that mean?
PM: Well if there is a void there somewhere, you can fill it with somebody
and move on. 
AD: Are you often in touch with intellectual voids?
PM: I have got a whole range of them sitting opposite me every day.
AD: First one. This will be an interesting exercise in statesmanship tonight.
PM: You are a bad influence.
AD: I said nothing. I was actually wondering more about your own Caucus.
Actually speaking of your fellow Ministers, when Barry Jones is on the
line how do you get him off the phone?
PM: Don't get him on.
AD: Is that Labor Party policy now, don't get him on?
PM: Oh, no, Barry is okay.
AD: When he rings do you sort of scribble a note going " not here, not
here"?
PM: I have done that, but not very often.
AD: What about Kim? Do you worry about his weight?
PM: Oh you were unkind to him a week or two ago.
AD: I think everyone is unkind to Kim at least once in their life. It is just
part of the political cycle. Neville Wran describes it as you have to
deal with depression because it is lonely getting to the top.
Is depression ever anything that you have had to deal with?
PM: I have had bad times, but you have always, I think, got to believe you
can slog it out.
AD: What is your idea of a harrowing experience that you have been
through, moments where you realise oh don't touch that fence it is
electrified?
PM: Well you have got to make judgements. For instance, one I made
if you like, the turning point in the last Parliament was I said in the
Parliament if Labor loses the election, we will pass the GST in the
Senate and our mob went " ahh". And I thought oh they'll be right in a
couple of minutes. But they weren't. They weren't right. They all had
a Bex and a good lie down after it. The whole lot of them. I mean
seeing a full Caucus having a Bex and a good lie down it is a moving
sight.
AD: Yes. I just thought of Kim Beazley and Robert Ray lying down. 
PM: Well you can always pick them out. And I thought did I call this
wrong? But I was sure I didn't, you see? So the public thought this is
getting serious, we are going to get a GST because if this other joker
wins, this one will pass it and from that moment it became real that
discussion.
AD: Yes.
PM: And the moment that became real, the pressure came on Hewson and
then the cracks started running through the stratas, you see what
I mean? Whereas before I couldn't get the weight on him. But then
the cracks started appearing in the stratas. So, you said what was
harrowing, living through the little period until everyone decided it was
a masterstroke and not a mistake that is the definition of harrowing.
AD: You didn't consult with them at all before you said this? The first time
they heard it was when you stood up?
PM: Oh, yes. But if it is not spontaneous, it has no effect.
AD: Eisenhower used to say that a sense of humour is a part of the art of
leadership. Do you ever tell jokes against yourself?
PM: Oh, yes, all the time.
AD: Oh do share.
PM: Well they don't come to mind.
AD: Well, no, I'll tell you what
PM: They are situation jokes.
AD: no, I will give you some thinking music.
PM: We will give you some tonight.
AD: [ Denton humming " God Save the Queen"]. No, in what situation then?
I mean, yes, it is hard to come up with jokes off the top of your head.
In what situation?
PM: Oh, often with my staff I will say things which are self deprecatory.
AD: Well what would you self deprecate about?
PM: Well that is a hard question. I mean, again, they come up on the spur
of the moment.
AD: You used to be a larrikin. You say this. You used to leap off the back
of ferries and arrange for a mate to pick you up just when everyone 
thought you were drowning. Which, in fact, could also be a political
metaphor when you think about it.
PM: There is always someone there to pick you up.
AD: Always someone there to pick you up. Especially a mate in the
New South Wales Right too.
PM: It is laden with mates.
AD: Absolutely.
PM: Wall to wall mates.
AD: I would presume in your job you don't get the opportunity to be a
larrikin. I mean Malcolm Fraser apparently used to slip ice cubes into
the pockets of people as a joke and well we loved him for that.
PM: Oh, yes, I wondered what it was actually.
AD: Because he didn't have pockets sometimes. I am just trying to get at
what is the Prime Ministerial sense of humour.
PM: Oh, I have a great sense of humour. I am always a sucker for a laugh.
AD: Yes.
PM: Any friend of mine that makes me laugh is a friend of mine for life,
basically.
AD: Really? Even if they are on the other side of the House?
PM: Oh, yes. You're in there with a chance, pal.
AD: Hey, hey, hey. We have said no body contact. Absolutely no body
contact. I think he is trying to crack on to me. You have got to be
careful.
PM: You're getting value out of those boots, aren't you?
AD: Yes.
PM: They will be with you in five years time.
AD: You're getting value out of those too.
PM: Yes, but these will wear out in 18 months.
AD: Well it depends whose head you have been kicking with them, really.
If you pick soft heads or hard heads. 
PM: Where did you get those, at the sort of army surplus, is it?
AD: We haven't found out much about your sense of humour, but we have
discovered you are a foot fetishist. You like passionate people don't
you?
PM: I do. I love stars. I like people who are good at what they do.
AD: What about passionate Liberals?
PM: Well how can you be a Liberal and be passionate? It is a contradiction
in terms to say I am a Conservative but I am passionate about it.
AD: How has this happened though? How have we ended up with such an
apparently tragic situation where all the people with ideas are on one
side of politics and a bunch of people totally bereft of ideas are on the
other?
PM: Well it happens. I mean look at the Labor Party in the 50s and
it was nowhere. Philosophically, it was nowhere. Now it is not that the
individuals didn't have ideas then, or that individuals of the Liberal
Party don't have ideas now. But, philosophically, in the 50s and
we were all over the place. They are now in that position.
AD: Could I put to you your worst nightmare? John Howard dies tomorrow,
you have to go to his funeral and say something nice about him.
What would you say?
PM: Well, no, I would say that he stuck by the ideology and the philosophy
that he believed in. But, of course, I think that is all wrong for
Australia...
AD: Yes, we know that.
PM: at the end of the 20th century.
AD: He has stuck by it passionately, would you say?
PM: Dogmatically. There is a difference.
AD: There is a difference. You can't mention John Howard without talking
about the Parliamentary bear-pit and we have some examples of your
work here. First of all, a couple of examples of you in full flight.
( video rolls)
AD: It seems to me that you really enjoy the theatre of Parliament.
PM: I do because I like to think that all the incoming balls are coming in
slow motion. So you say, is this one going into the Queen Elizabeth
Stand? Is this one going into, you know, the such and such stand? 
In other words, if you have got the mosaic right, every question is
going to have a slot. Whereas if you don't have a mosaic it is just all
happening rapidly around you. So, even though you don't have much
time to prepare, you know what the argument is and where it fits and if
they come particularly slow, you can get the rhetoric ready as well.
A theatre, you know, a nice little touch.
AD: Where abouts in the mosaic then does this particular performance fit.
( video rolls)
AD: Was that adlib or was that written. Was it like blgh, blgh, blgh?
PM: No I learnt that one in primary school. Everybody was out of step bar
him. That was the point I was trying to make.
AD: In public perception, the word most thrown around about you is
arrogance.
PM: I know that, yes.
AD: Does that surprise you?
PM: Well, I think they confuse pride in ones craft and getting the job done
with arrogance. I mean, letting a good thing be knocked over is not
humility. What has happened in our political system in most of the
post war years is that politicians threw the pass. They threw the pass
on all the big changes. Australia had become by the very early 1980s
quite a relatively poor country in terms of its national income.
AD: I'm going to stop you there for one second. I don't want to go into that
speech.
PM: No, no, but I just want to say this, that it became a poor country and
people had thrown the pass on big policy changes. Therefore to get
them through you have really got to have a big run at it and you have
got to push hard. I think they confuse the pushing with arrogance
rather than with pride in one's craft and getting it done.
AD: There may be some truth in that, but I think they also see a man who is
verbally very brutal.
PM: Orally very brutal.
AD: Yes, orally and, of course, extremely linguistically pedantic. Let's not
forget that, but also a winner, a man who desperately loves to be a
winner which isn't a bad trait for most Australians, but you have
pushed that through so forcefully, I think that is what they see as
arrogance. Somebody that will never, ever, ever, ever back down no
matter what the situation. 
PM: Well, there is no prize for coming second is there?
AD: There is a second prize.
PM: That is the one we gave John Hewson at the last election. I think what
the public need to know is when I do those things I am doing it for
them.
AD: This will hurt you more than it will hurt them.
PM: No, when I push one past the system I am doing it for them because so
many have not done it for years, who don't I think, have not had the
conscientious regard for them that I hope I have. That I won't sponge
on them or kid them. And if the price of all that is that some of the
imagery gets scratched up along the way well, I don't mind that.
AD: How is it possible as Prime Minister to keep in touch with the battler?
Is it a sort of remote sensing thing where members of your Caucus tell
you about people they know who know real people or do you go
straight to the source and have lunch with John Laws, how do you do
it?
PM: He knows them!
AD: He does.
PM: He is one himself. Well, for a start, I lived for 40 years in Bankstown in
Western Sydney. I grew up there and worked there, lived there and
you end up with all of the frame of reference, mores, values of that
community. I am a westie.
AD: You are a westie?
PM: I am a westie.
AD: Well, where are your ugh boots? Come on.
PM: I have got them on can't you see.
( video rolls)
AD: Do you sometimes feel awkward about the positions you are put in as
Prime Minister?
PM: What happened was, we were standing there with this very interesting
group of young people who were going off to the Skill Olympics and
then there was this very strong beat of this song coming through and
we were all standing there. Well, of course, I can't resist a beat so I
had the feet going and I thought well, I might as well throw the lot in
and then I brought them in. 
AD: So, old good time Paul was leading..
PM: A sing-a-long.
AD: Yes, all right. Maybe it is just me, but you didn't look totally
comfortable in that situation.
PM: Have a look at the people next to me. I look more comfortable than
them.
AD: You have always championed Australian culture. Not since Gough
Whitlam have we had a Prime Minister so allied to that sense of
culture. And, you have championed the information super highway
and we have seen the first three gleaming lanes of that open recently
courtesy of pay television Foxtel, Optus and Galaxy which is
essentially wall to wall American broadcasting with a token Australian
representation. What benefit is that to Australian culture?
PM: It may be at this point of its development, it may not be a development
of Australian culture, but it will be a development to Australian services
and information. The pay television is paying for the fibre optic cable.
When Telecom slips the fibre optic cable under the door, which is
going to bring with it all the interactive services, all the on-line services
so when people have got their personal computers and they are really
into creativity and interactivity, the thing that is going to facilitate that
happening as a pay television service which pays the freight for putting
the cable there in the first place.
AD: I guess the reason I am puzzled and frankly depressed about the
future prospects of Australia as an individual entity is that yours is the
party and you are the man that is rapt in the flag. You actually have
the flag as your logo and you have always been on the public record
as being deeply committed to Australia and I don't think anybody could
doubt your emotional commitment, yet on the other hand I see in a big
picture sense national assets being sold off, American television
swamping our own culture thanks to this new pay television and 1,
frankly, find it hypocritical.
PM: No, we fought them. No, don't be too pessimistic. We fought the
Americans in the Uruguay Round the GATT and the reason we did
is so we would have the right to have our film industry. We would
have the right to put content provisions. into our free to air
broadcasting. That we would have the right to have a somewhat
protected film industry. Now, we have done those things, but
Australian culture is not going to be decided by what comes down the
pay tv channel. It is going to be decided by the sort of society we are,
the faith we have in ourselves one to the other in our capacities and
what we can do together and the belief that we have in the country.
AD: I hope you are right Prime Minister. I hope that Australian children
don't eventually see Australian history through American eyes. I don't 
know if you saw how your office was portrayed on The Simpsons
recently. Here is a sample.
( video rolls)
PM: Well, they have got some of it there haven't they?
AD: Would you like to move on from here maybe and lead a larger
country?
PM: No, Menzies had that in mind you know. He thought the British
Conservative Party might choose him over Churchill.
AD: Your wife has described you as a daydreamer. Do you get a chance to
do that at all in your position.
PM: Yes, and that is a fair description because show me a good
government and I'll show you a group of good ministers with good
ideas. That sort of creativity can only come from putting the stuff
together yourself so you have got to think.
AD: But, daydreaming?
PM: So, often I'll find myself at something and I'm thinking about something
completely different. Annita will say to me, are you with us? Like, click,
click, click, are you with us? I'll say yep, yep, but I wasn't. I wasn't. I
was fibbing.
AD: Prime Minister, we are out of time. When you go home tonight, tuck
yourself into bed in the jammies, are you going to sleep well?
PM: Not as well as I used to.
AD: What's the problem?
PM: Late night television programs perhaps. No I'll go home and do a bit of
reading, have a look in on the kids, turn out the lights and hope we
wake up to a good set of newspapers in the morning.
AD: Prime Minister, thanks very much.
PM: Thanks very much.
ends 



12Q3
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
NO ISSUES PLEASE WE'RE PROFESSIONALS
The Coalition's " strategy" of keeping the Australian people in the dark about
policy matters for the election has today reached new heights of absurdity.
The Liberals have refused to answer a straightforward question put to them
by the ABC on what they see as the main issues at the next election because
this " is of a strategic political nature and cannot be disclosed before the
election campaign".
Andrew Robb, the Liberal Party's Federal Director, has justified this insult to
the Australian electorate on the grounds that the parties are playing for big
stakes and it is professional and disciplined not to comment on these matters.
This is despite an Adelaide newspaper report today which suggests the
Liberal Party's policies for the election were " finalised and packaged at the
weekend." If they're ready, why not let the public see them and make an
informed assessment.
John Howard and his colleagues are quite happy to engage in daily exercises
in muckraking and personal abuse but do not have the honesty and
intellectual depth to engage the Australian people in a debate on the kind of
Australia they envisage for the future and on the policies which could achieve
this. And yet, when the Government points to the ideological attitudes and the
previous policies they have taken to the people as a guide to their real
intentions, the Liberals simply accuse us of lying and of manufacturing a
scare campaign.
Mr Robb's latest excursion into the absurd only serves to increase the
suspicion and scepticism with which Australians will view the Coalition's
political tactics.
CANBERRA 1 NOVEMBER 1995 
N. oa mJ QJ .1 ' VJrck t% AovC Aov,, W( 2
ROB Well as we've predicted for months now, we've observed that their
members, especially in tie regional seats, whoiu t1my'ie vulnetable, have been running away from
Paul Koating, running a hundred miles from Paul Keating, trying to distance themselves from the
Labor Party, but the irony is that everyone of those people have voted for every pioco of legislation
that's gone thmgigh with the Keating Government over the last three years. They haven't opposed
anything In the House. all the tax Increases. the petrol tax increase, the Medicare levy Increases.
all of the biukvi piumiea, they'vu bUeri a party to It, and they're now trying to quite cynically
present themselves as Independents In the electorate. Now I think that is taking the electorate for
granted. EWART; That's the way politics works though, doe. n't It Are you ready to combat
that? ROBB: Well, all we can do is shine a light on it. We can try and expose that. We
have been saying that this is what they'll do. this Is what they're doing, we've ben saying that for
months. EWART: An ABC survey of both Liberal and Labor candidates that's just Wen dull,
the results of that are coming in now and the consistent answer from Liberal candidates, when
they're questioned on what they see as being the issues at the next election, their answer is that
question is of a strategic political nature and cannot be dis. lorsed hAfore the election campaign.
Now isn't that getting a bit paranoid?
ROBB: No. no, no. This is a campaign, we're playing for big stakes in this election,
this is all about the future of Australia. We have to play a very professional part In the campaign
that we run and the period betore the campaign, so I think R's quJite critical that we have a
disciplined effort by all of our candidates across the country.
EWART: But, if, as you scem to suggest, the electon campaign could be off and
running any day now. Don't you need to have a bit more detail than that?
ROBB: The work Is lone, and we will, as we've promised, we will release further
detail and all the detail that the electuiulu iftwd tu make a Judgement between now and election
day. ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW VICTORIAN COLLEGE OF THE
ARTS BUILDINGS, MELBOURNE, 2 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
We hear a lot about economic development and about growth. But when
I come to places like this we just had a little tour through the Art School and
through the Television and Film School and I often think that when a country
gets a chance to reflect upon itself, when one's development is to such a
point that there is actually a premium and a value on reflecting upon yourself
and thinking about the essence of who you are and what you have become
and what you might be, well then I think you are starting to really make it.
That is, it is not all about widgets and making things, or boring holes in the
ground, or growing paddocks full of wheat we can do all those things.
The world is out there making widgets these days, some make them better
than others, some more innovative than others, some more competitive than
others. But in a lot of the countries we compete with, the one thing they are not doing
is they are not doing this and that is, I think, one of the things that marks us
out as a society and why we should always have a premium on the arts which
are about, of course, the mind and the soul and the heart and the things that
are dear to us all. And I have often thought that anyone that has ever had an
emotional connection with the arts could never forsake it, could never leave it
off, never not support it. And we were just reminded, if ever so briefly by
Natalie Christie's rendition of those two Strauss songs, what distilled genius
always means you know the things that are up there with the sublime, that
are just under the subliminal barrier, that haven't quite got through it, but are
so close to doing it that it doesn't matter.
So I thank you very much for the introduction and the songs. I have often
thought that it has always been a great pleasure for people to write songs in
German because it is such a great speaking language and I often think what
I could have done in the House of Representatives with it. It is one of those
things that lends itself to some poetry. Well with English you have got to
really work hard at it. 
But I am very pleased to be here today because we have got Jeffrey making
a nuisance out of himself this morning in the press and in Federal politics you
are always swatting blowflies. I mean you are always trying to blow them,
shake them, off. But I am glad that Dick is here to remind us what an old
fashioned Liberal he is. He has always had his heart in the right place and
his head in the right place and I think we have, all of us, always appreciated
him and the things which Louise said about his role here.
I think that national governments should think about such things as the arts
and culture. Not because it is the thing to do, it is the thing we can't be
without and that in undertakings such as this it takes a long time to build
an institution like the Victorian College of the Arts. It doesn't happen
overnight, it happens with a long gestation, it happens with performance,
it happens with commitment. It takes a long time for something like this to
grow and, therefore, when a national government gets involved with it you
know that if you can basically provide some of that financial and moral
support to an institution which is already up and running, you can actually do
a lot more with it.
So it is more than a pleasure to be involved here, with the Victorian College
of the Arts, and to be engaged with others today in opening these new and
refurbished buildings housing the school of Film and Television, the School of
Art and, of course, the Library and the Student Union.
I mean these things are always about, in the end, assets of the Australian
people and I am very pleased that they are in the State of Victoria, which has
given so much to this country in terms of its art and its artists. And, of course,
so many people famous Australians and famous artists have had their
association and their connections with the VCA and its predecessor schools,
such as Tom Roberts and Fred Williams and Clifton Pugh and
Suzanne Johnston and Gillian Armstrong and Geoff Wright and
Richard Lowenstein just to name a few. So there is a very deep heritage
here and one that I think we should be very solid in supporting.
Now we introduced this Creative Nation statement last year, it was
$ 250 million expenditure on the arts and $ 100 million, I think, of it now has
been spent and that is starting to percolate its way through the Australian arts
community. And we are in the course of establishing the National Academy of Music here
in Melbourne to provide a training centre of excellence in Australia for young
musicians of outstanding talent and I think that is going to be a significant
thing. We have established the Australian Foundation for Culture and Humanities
here in Melbourne with a budget of over $ 6 million for three years with,
as I said, that distinguished Victorian Dick Pratt as its Chair and I know you
know that he has already given $ 3 million himself to it, which must be the
biggest single private donation to the arts in our history, I think. 
But it is not the money so much we appreciate. We appreciate that because
it is about raising private finance. But what we appreciate most about that
gesture is it is not simply a snip from a very large cheque book, but it is rather
the importance and the meaning which it has from somebody who knows how
important the arts are. I think that is appreciated as much as the money
in fact more.
We are funding the Australian Ballet School and through the
Australia Council we are supporting the Australian Ballet which, of course, is
headquartered here in Melbourne as well as the Melbourne Theatre
Company, Circus Oz and the Victorian State Opera. And I am very proud that
the Government has been able to contribute to this development here.
Now, I might just say a couple of things about Jeffrey because I don't want to
leave him out. He has got this ad this morning which, even for Jeffrey, is
quite a nasty little ad. It says ' why is Mr Keating punishing the Victorian arts
community?' And he has got the Victorian College of the Arts, School of Film
and Television, recurrent spending $ 1.3 million; capital spending $ 35 million
and equipment maintenance $ 35 million. That is the spending for 1994/ 95,
but if you take it over the period of the development which is 1991/ 92 to
1993/ 94 we have spent $ 16 million here and this more than favourably
compares with the $ 10 million and not the $ 14 million in Sydney's Australian
Film, Television and Radio School which, of course, was established during
John Gorton's period, way back there.
Jeffrey is playing a very seedy little game here and we don't expect this sort
of thing from Victoria and I think he has been comparing notes with Richard
Court or reading from the Bjelke Petersen style manual. I notice the other
day when I went into Treasury Place that Jeffrey has got his new offices done
up like the Reichstag down the back of the building. He has got flags decked
off it all over the place. His Casino awash with money, I mean his and Ron
and Lloyd's casino, but of course there is no money for the arts. Victoria
spends less money on the arts per capita than any other State. He has got
no money for the arts, no money for public transport, no money to run an
ambulance service, no money for lavatories on railway stations but he keeps
increasing the capacity of the Casino to gather up the earnings of Victorians
and he keeps selling off everything that moves. Every public asset in place,
but he has got no money for the basic amenities of the civilised society. I
often think that these casinos are a tax on the poor and a massive blight on
Australia and this one is a massive blight on Victoria. To cover his
embarrassment about having no money for the arts and no money for this
college because he gave it, basically I think some land and that was not
much, he decides to spend a very large sum of government money to tell
some untruths about the Commonwealth.
The truth about Jeffrey is he is becoming a worried man and he should be.
He runs one of the nastiest ouffits in the country which is nearly as nasty as
Richard Court's. There are a lot of questions being asked about Melbourne
and around Australia about this government and I don't think trying to sell the
Commonwealth short on the arts is a way around the problem. 
I rather like Jeffrey on occasions, but I don't like him today at all. We have
spent $ 18 or $ 19 million here and $ 16 million of it has come from the
Commonwealth. As I said $ 11 million for the new School of Film and
Television and $ 5 million for the refurbishment of the Art School and as well
as those other important cultural identities which have come here, but more
importantly than all of this is that we are developing arts institutions of
substance and of depth and this will stick to Australia like nothing else.
Whenever we get a chance to put some public money into the arts, you've got
now a lot of critics of public commitment to the arts and that is fair enough
and we need some more private funding of the arts, but it still is important, I
think, for a country to put a premium on what it is doing a premium on itself,
on its identity, on its culture and to make that commitment and I think that
every Premier and Prime Minister who have made commitments to the arts in
the past have always understood this and have understood how important it
is. It is why Australia can stamp itself out as a unique country which has got
good values and good belief and why we are, as a civilised country, it is
important for us to focus on these things.
These days all the artistic disciplines of this institution are represented on this
four hectare site in the heart of Melbourne's art precinct, even that is
important. We are in the new building of the School of Film and Television
which in another life was the famous Swinburne Film and Television School.
I was interested to see some of the work just in a very brief visit I had before
coming down here and to know as we know that in a country like ours the
premium is going to be on the ideas we generate on the products we
generate which have got ideas and intellectual content that we are not going
to be in there competing with low labour cost countries on low value added
products or products without value adding, but rather on things which have
got these important artistic and intellectual components to them. I think what
we are seeing is a measure of, you know just walking through the Art School,
just seeing what people have done in-particular sectors whether it be in
landscape, painting or just painting objects or people or situations. It is all a
focus on trying to distil the essence of the country, of ourselves as a people.
These are the things, I think, which will travel. We are an English speaking
country and a large part of the worlds market in entertainment and art is
generated from countries such as Australia and it is one of the things that we
can do well and that is why the Government invested quite a lot of money in
multi media. Moving again as we move from theatre to film, from film now to
multi media and seeing that will generate a lot of creativity because I think the
more we increase the milieu of creativity, however it spins off in whatever
discipline, the greater the critical mass, of course, the better it is for the sort
of things we produce and that we are famous for.
I always think of those people who look at our productivity or GOP per capita
or whatever measure it might be and we do alright in all these things, but
there is never a premium in any of this sort of thing as I said earlier which a
lot of countries do not do and really don't understand and haven't put the
premium on it. 
So, I regard this as being another very solid addition to the capital stock, but
rather the creative stock of our institutions and our country and you have just
got to get such a good feeling about Australia now. Here we are towards the
end of the century, the place is growing strongly, we have licked the scourge
of inflation, we are now on the edge of the fastest growing part of the world,
we are much more confident about who we are now, about our identity, we
are more proud about the country than we have ever been and our children
have an education, by and large, across the board which was not true when
most of us were at school and the sheer capacity to do new things, the
excitement of it is profound. I have never in nearly 30 years of public life
struck a more exciting period than this. These are the things that excitement
is made of.
I have just come away from quaffing down a red wine over on the Southbank,
which is definitely not a Jeffrey creation, it is one of yours and it is just
another measure of the way in which this great city is growing intellectually,
culturally and every other way in the middle of one of the important
international festivals of the world. That is so successful this year too.
Wherever you go in Australia you find this all around the country now. This
burgeoning of intellectual thought, of enjoyment, of pride in our culture and
pushing out the envelope of the things that we might be able to do. This is
what this institution is about and it is a very proud day, I think, for all of those
who have been involved with it. Those who have supported it over the years,
those who have helped it grow, those who have directed it, to know that the
product of it the statistician may not be able to measure, but we all know in
the end it will be a more important measure than almost any other thing the
statistician is able to measure.
Thank you for having me along, to be involved in the declaration, of the
opening of these important buildings.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, VICTORIAN COLLEGE OF THE ARTS, MELBOURNE
2 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, superannuation. The Coalition appears to have adopted a
key part of your policies as their own, and called It their own now what's
your response to them?
PM: Well, the obvious response is If people want good, progressive policy,
keep the authors of the policy not some faker who is trying to pick it up
on the cheap.
J: Prime Minister, retail'trade is down a fraction is that a good sign of the
economy?
PM: Oh, God knows, pal. That needs to be deciphered by geniuses like you.
J: Prime Minister, on what do you base your claim that you say Victoria has
the lowest arts spending of all the States where do you get that from?
PM: Oh, Just on a few simple statstics. I don't know whether I have still got the
piece of paper, but It's materially below all of the other States Victoria
spends less money on the arts than any of the other States, and, of
course, can I also just quote Mr Haddon Storey in terms of
Commonwealth speniding. In writing to Michael Lee earlier this year, [ he]
said * 1 was particulal pleased to learn of the Initiatives that are to be
developed In the State of Victoria. Once again, may I commend you for
the development of the cultural policy, and for the initiatives that begin to
address the Imbalance in allocation of Federal resources that has
unfortunately become the characteristic of arts funding over the past 
decade". Now, a lot, of course, of the national companies are here. Now,
they can't simply be counted as simply Commonwealth/ Canberra
Institutions. They are actually institutions which are shared by all of us,
including the city of Melbourne.
J: Do you accept that ( inaudible)
PM: No. I don't. And it's like these-shonky ads by Jeff Kennett this morning. I
mean, what he has done. is publish the 94-95 spending on a project
that.. he's published spending of $ 1,370,000, but the project cost $ 16
million. Now, that's just shabby and dishonest
J: What do you think is behind his attack then, Mr Keating?
PM: Well, he's just trying to help Howard out. He's beyond help he shouldn't
bother. I say this to Jeffrey look after yourself.
J: What do you think of the report this morning that the Liberal campaign
slogan is going to be lime's Up, Paul'?
PM: Well, I always say to our people that Andrew Robb is the Kim Philby of the
Labor Party he Is our man helping us out, because almost everything he
touches turns to clay. You know, always remember that he is in there
helping us.
J: Will you rule out a December 9 election?
PM: Oh God, you know I get asked that sort of silly question daily let me give
you the standard answer. Say this to your news director with feeling, that
what I believe Is the public expect to have real value from the parliaments,
that they don't expect the Government to be going early, or to be shortcircuiting
the opportunities the Legislative and Governmental
opportunities.
J: Mr Keating, back on superannuation you say don't believe John Howard
when he gives these various commitments do you believe Mr Costello,
and secondly, do we need another inquiry into the financial system?
PM: Is that what they have said?
J: Yeah.
PM: They will say anything, I tell you. I mean, here they are the last Inquiry
inyto the financial system you know, I will tell you a little story. When I
first became Treasurer which 1s now quite a long time ago I came Into 
this dingy litte office which Mr Howard used to occupy, arnd they had
cleared out all of their things. You know, the cupboards were bare. Arnd
there was a copy of the Campbell Report on the shelves, and it must have
been sitting in the sun, and it had gone yellow. HeI commissioned it, and
did nothing with it. The thing about Mr Howard he's not a conservative,
he Is a reactionary. I mean, Menzies was a Conservative. Conservatism
is about maintaining the status quo, and perhaps incremental movements
forward. Mr Howard always wants to go back. So, they commissioned
that study which came, really, from an idea of one of the staff members
of Malcolm Frasers office he did nothing with ft. The float of the dollar,
the opening up of the financial markets all of these things were left on
the shelf, and they were done by this Govemment. We have now got a
burgeoning, growing financial market, the exchange rate the price of It
set in the markets, interest rates are set in the markets, we have got a
very.. there's a lot of tone on our financial markets. I think about the last
thing we need now is another inquiry Into the financial markets. I mean,
they say these things every day you're just wasting your time and mine.
J: What about the regulation of the financial markets?
PM: There's no regulation left. What regulation? The exchange rate is set in
the market, the Interest rates are set In the market.
J: Well, the various; regulatory authorities like the Competition Commission
and....
PM: You don't like those?
J: Well, he doesnt He says that there's too many, and they're too much
overweight.
PM: Oh, yeah. I know he says all sorts of things.
J: Our State Government has released details of a city
link ( inaudible) they're trying to push people onto a basically privately
run freeway have you got any views on that?
PM: I mean, here we are, where In the last decade, our GDP has more than
doubled, and we're seeing the Stock Market climb by a factor of five,
where the country Is much wealthier than It used to be, but we can't afford
to run an ambulance service. We can't even afford to leave open the
toilets on the railway stations. I mean, Jeff Kennett has got the lock and
chain on the toilets on the railway stations. What's the world coming to? I
mean, what does he think he's doing? He's looking after his pals down
there at the Casino, and, as I said a moment ago, the Casino here in 
Victoria is a tax on the poor, and a blight on the State of Victoria. And, no
doubt, If he gets up to any other tricks be it the Albert Park Grand Prix,
or the City Unk he'll try and shut all the roads off so people must pay the
money. Now, as I said a moment ago, Jeffrey is a very worried man. He
has finally worked out that people don't like him very much, and they don't
like him for these sorts of shenanigans. That Is, trying to jam the roads of
to make you pay the toil. I mean, what's he doing? The thing is, you see,
he believes in public squalor this is the sort of snaky Uberal Party view
these days this Is how the Uberal Party has changed so much. It
believes now in public squalor can't afford a toilet In a railway station.
can't afford an ambulance If you have had a heart attack, can't afford a
road through a capital city, you can't drive through It If you don't want to
take the freeway. As I said, he has got the building down in Treasury
Place done out like the Reichstag, he's sitting up there and, you know, in
the end this community will hate him. They will hate him for all of the
things he is doing which are so un-Australian. They will hate him for ft.
J: Prime Minister, John Howard was in Melbourne last night wooing the
Chinese community
PM: Look, John Howard couldn't woo anybody. He couldn't woo anyone. He
can't even woo them in a Uberal Party conference. The last time I saw a
Uberal leader at the Chinese community, was Alexander Downer chasing
a meatball around a plate with a pair of chop-sticks. It's on film you'll
find him. He chases it all around the plate, you know. John Howard
wooing the Chinese community well, well, well. I'll tell you one thing
about the Chinese they are very smart. They won't be taken in by him.
Because let me tell you every time he's had the chance to kick the racial
can In Australia, he has. You know what those Chinese think about him,
deep In their hearts? They think if this bloke had a fair go at us, he would
send us back. That's what they think about him.
J: Your comments on the Casino being a tax on the poor and a blight can
you expand on that?
PM: Well, of course it's a tax on the poor. They open up, everyone turns up in
their zoot suits, their dinner suit and the champagne, four days later,
they're emptying people out from the working suburbs of Australia. You
know, when they have run out of money, they pour them out the door. I
mean, its a bad cultural and social development.
J: Does that apply everywhere, Mr Keating? 
PM: I hate the things I don't like Casino's. I mean, I don't have that much in
common with Rupert Murdoch, but one thing I do is I think Casino's are
bad news.
J: What about some regulation in that area?
PM: Well, thats for a smart journo like you to get right onto, mate.
J: Could you still run an election campaign and attend the CHOGM and
APEC meetings?
PM: Well, there's a political science unit near here you want to go and throw
that question in, and see what answer they give you.
ends. 



rK~)
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
ANNUAL DINNER, REGENT HOTEL, MELBOURNE, 2 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I am very touched that Peter Reith and John Moore are with us tonight.
I mean yes, Peter said he is close to me, well he is not close on policy.
I mean they get to hear me these days, Mondays and Thursdays.
But Thursday nights I am touched and indeed a third one, Mr Kemp, I am very
touched. They come out to take a few after hours pointers. A bit of
off-the-job training and I don't mind doing a bit of that either.
Well we are in a very interesting period of our economic history. I think
everyone in this room understands that, because it wasn't all that long ago
that Australia faced the long-end point of a very big decline in the terms of
trade. Now that expression always ends up being an economist's expression,
but it basically boils down to something like a ratio of the value of the things
you sell versus the things you buy.
And, of course, in the early post-war years, Australia's terms of trade were
very good. The things we sold were very valuable and the things we
produced were valuable. But the things we bought were fairly cheap and
manufactures, generally, were inexpensive in those days. But raw materials,
food, agricultural products and minerals were expensive. We have seen a
long trend decline in that and it got to its bottom point in 1985-86, the year of
the Banana Republic so-called, and that meant that we were still pursuing a
lifestyle to which we had become accustomed, but without the income which
we had for most of our post-war period.
As a consequence, we were in deep trouble and not only that we had double
digit inflation and we had profits in very bad shape, poor levels of investment,
a regulated and over-valued exchange rate, a sclerotic financial market and,
of course, high tariffs. In short, we were in a very parlous state. 
Now what has happened since is a determined and conscious opening up of
the economy and all of the things which affect our competitiveness are
essentially being put right. The most important price in the economy, the
exchange rate, was set in the market and, as you know, we had a very large
fall in the exchange rate in 1985-86 by 25 per cent.
Now this restored our competitiveness but the trick is to turn a big
depreciation of the dollar into a real depreciation that is, to wash the price
surge and inflation from it and we have done that. And today the Australian
economy is 40 per cent more competitive than it was in 1983.
Now, as a consequence, manufacturing exports have doubled, elaborately
transformed exports have tripled and, as you know, manufacturing production
has risen by over a third 35 or 36 per cent. All this, of course, has changed
the nature of Australia and a part of that competitiveness has, of course,
come through the Accord with wages.
Now I want to say some things about this tonight because in the election,
which is going to be held some time in the next six months a little note there
for Andrew Robb, some time in the next six months, Andrew industrial
relations will be an issue and the way in which we run Australia will be an
issue. Now, essentially, what the Government has done with the ACTU has
introduced a consensual model in the way in which the economy is operated.
So we rely not just on budgetary policy, fiscal policy and monetary policy, but
we also rely on the third instrument the Accord and in that instrument,
essentially, we have made a bargain with the unions which is wage restraint
for growth. Wage restraint for employment and throughout the history of the
Accord we have now seen that restraint and we have seen a very large
measure of that growth.
So much so that we have quite phenomenal levels of employment growth in
the period and, of course, we have seen GOP growth average 1.9 per cent
during the period of the last Coalition Government that is a seven year
period, it is a decent chunk of our history 1.9 per cent. The average GOP
growth under this Government is 3.5 per cent.
Now it is nearly double and you show me any economy in the world where the
economy is growing twice what it used to grow and I will show you a much
wealthier one and a better one. Now, of course, that growth has produced
very high rates of employment growth and the employment growth is the thing
which underpins, of course, the industrial cohesion and the egalitarianism.
As a consequence, you get more compliance with the underlying objectives of
the wage restraint and the commonsense.
So, as a consequence of that, in the period 1 976-82 there was less than 1 per
cent employment growth a year. In the period since, we have had between
2 1/ 3 per cent and 3 per cent employment growth over the period. So we 
have got nearly 2 1/ 2 times as much employment, probably just on three
times as much employment. Now you take an economy which has got three
times as much employment and twice as much economic growth and you
have got a very large change. This has produced a quite profound change in
incomes. Household disposable income has risen by 40 per cent since 1983 because
more people in households are in work. And if we look at household income
per capita that is wages, salaries and supplements looking at, also, the
family allowance payments, pensions the works put that through it, we have
had a 21 per cent increase in household disposable income per capita.
That means that all of you out there operating a business, that want people to
buy your products, there is more demand for your products because there
has been real growth in household income and there has been more people
in work.
In 1983, we had a workforce of six million. Today we have got a workforce of
just over eight million, which is a phenomenal increase in growth.
Our workforce is growing about 2 to 2 1/ 2 times the western world average
certainly the average of western Europe and this is what is putting the
buoyancy under the economy and under the sort of markets that you are
living with.
Now, of course, the measure of the wage restraint is the profit growth and the
very lowest profit share in GDP this is the proportion of national income
going to profits the very lowest share was higher than the highest in the
seven years of the last Coalition Government. The highest profit share in that
period was in 1981, which is 15.89 per cent of GDP and the lowest we ever
had was in June 1983 at 15.92 per cent of GDP. In the last few years, of
course, profits are now bumping up against the 1988-89 high which, of
course, has no historic precedence in Australian corporate history.
So, the Accord which is the consensual model, which says you give us growth
and we will give you wage restraint, you give us growth we will give you better
profits, you give us growth and we will therefore give you better investment
and employment, and all of that means that the Australian economy is more
fully employed, people are more prepared to be part of a very large change
and to make the adjustments.
So when the dollar fell out of bed in 1985-86 as it has in many countries
it dropped by 25 per cent, prices come up, the landed cost of imports rise,
that price surge then goes into the economy, then it goes into wages. All of
that was taken out and we turned a massive nominal depreciation of the
exchange rate into a real depreciation. We did what most comparable
countries don't do. They have the big depreciation, then they get the price
surge, then they get the wage surge and the competitive benefit is gone. 
We have captured the competitive benefit and that is why we are now seeing
manufacturing exports growing so strongly and, of course, by lowering the
tariff walls, we are starting to see very strong import competition, productivity
between businesses and a better outcome altogether.
Now this sort of model is something which is now fairly unique in the western
world and people talk about the need for wage flexibility. Now the
United States is often used as a model. People say, well look at the
United States, it is a very flexible labour market, you can go out there and
basically make an individual wage contract, people will take the job,
they'll take whatever basically is on offer and, therefore, you will get a more
flexible economy.
But what the United States has shown is that it has had about one of the
lowest rates of growth in labour productivity in the OECD for decades. In the
United States currently, labour productivity growth is half that being
experienced in Australia. Now that is one number I would like to sink in. That
is, in the so-called most flexible labour market, the ultimate dog-eat-dog
labour market, labour productivity is half that being experienced in Australia
and, of course, you know the United States economy has a speed limit of
2 1/ 2 per cent.
Now everywhere in those big US markets, once that US GDP growth rate
starts going over 2 1/ 2 per cent, the US Federal Reserve starts hitting the
panic button, policy makers start hanging their heads. It generally hovers
around 2 per cent, or under 2 per cent somewhere between 1 1/ 2 per cent
and 2 1/ 2 per cent.
Now we are doing either half that much again, or twice that much.
So it doesn't say very much about their supposed labour flexibility that they
have got a speed limit of 2 1/ 2 per cent. That is outside of the recessions of
1981-82 and 1991, we have been growing now around 4 per cent for most
years. It doesn't say much for the United States economy that where you
have the supposed flexibility of a labour market without safety nets, or without
award structures, that their labour productivity is so low and that their growth
is so constrained.
Now take New Zealand. We hear a lot about New Zealand. My colleagues
here from the Opposition think New Zealand is somewhat of a model for
them. But let me say this about their policy, the Employment Contracts Act of
1991. Since that was introduced, the rate of growth of labour productivity has
been 1 per cent per annum, while Australia's has been 2.5 per cent.
Now there is a strong message, I think, in that and that is get people
interested in running a business more productively and they do a much better
job than putting the whip across their back.
This notion that they are out there and they have got to keep their place and
keep their head down and line up and take what you give them and then they
will just be their most productive selves is, of course, a nonsense. And look 
at some of the countries which have adapted to massive productivity change.
Look at Japan, which had a couple of hundred yen to the dollar, 250 yen to
the dollar, coming down to 88 yen to the dollar, it is now in the
somewhere yen to the dollar. A huge call on that country for productivity
change just to keep its exports going, massive productivity demands.
How did they get it? They got it by bringing the employees into the
productive system. They didn't get it by putting the whip across their back.
Now in this country, we have been able to do that. We are now into a very
big phase of enterprise bargaining, a very big phase. And I met a couple of
people the other day at Tubemakers in South Australia they are producing
extruded plastic pipes and I said how are you going here? And one fellow
said to me, well look to be honest this is the best time of my working life.
He was about 54 or 55. 1 said, is that right? He said, yes, I am earning more
and I have got more time to myself than I have ever had. And he said we got
that out of the last enterprise bargain and then they had a little discussion
around the table.
They said the first one wasn't that good, we didn't know really what to do with
the first one, it was pretty much a reflection of what we had. The second one,
we realised we could actually do a few things that would help the business
and that gave us, you know, a better pay packet. But they said the third one,
the one coming up, that is going to be a beauty because we have got this
idea, that idea, this idea, that idea. They have just put in a new production
line. They were saying how they actually improved the production line, how
some of their ideas had actually made it more productive and how the
management had taken some of their productive ideas on board and in the
third model they think they are really going to hit the jackpot that the
business is going to grow in productivity and the management was just as
optimistic as the people I was speaking to at lunch.
So I think we are starting to get the hang of doing things productively and
cooperatively within a consensual framework and enterprise bargaining, the
movement away from centralised wage fixing, is the key to this.
But, of course, you know that under the Government's policy we say if you
can't get an enterprise bargain, we give you an increase under the safety net
and that you need the safety net to maintain real wages and the purchasing
power that you have.
Now we have a thing called the no disadvantage test. That means you can
trade in things like overtime rates and penalty rates and holiday leave
loadings, but you must come out the other side with something at least as
good as you have now. You can't go backwards.
So under enterprise bargaining we can see that flexibility. Under the safety
net you get the protection and the two together mean that we can have higher
levels of labour productivity, higher levels of profit, higher levels of
investment, higher levels of production and, of course, a better Australian
society. 
Now the coming election will be about, amongst other things, whether that
consensual model stays, whether the Accord model is thrown away and many
people in business today, I think, don't remember what it was like back there
in the 1 970s and the 1 980s. Let me just give you one statistic. In our period
of Government, through strikes, we have lost an average of 70 working days
per thousand. In the period of Government of the Coalition, the seven years
from 1976 to 1983, the average days lost through strikes was 590 per
thousand. Now I haven't got the numbers mixed up there 70 versus 590. Not for one
year or six months, but for an average period of seven years in the case of
the Coalition and 12 years in our case. Now that is what it was like. It was
strikes the norm. There was, essentially, high interest rates to try and hold
down inflation, which held down growth and with it held down profits and held
down production.
So there is no easy choice, there come the next election. If you vote for the
Coalition at the next election you have got to really mean it because it's going
to punch a very big hole in your company accounts. And the reason it is is
because the consensual model is going to go out the door and what will come
in is, essentially, a view about industrial relations which I now think is alien in
Australia and where the central bank is asked, basically, to keep inflation
under control through higher interest rates.
But when it gets the flame-thrower out on inflation, it burns everyone else in
the street as well. I mean we have had now, some of you might have heard
this morning on radio the British Deputy Leader of the Labour Party. We see
a lot of people like Mr Prescott these days coming and saying what are you
doing in Australia that lets you grow at least half as fast, or twice as fast, as
the rest of us with high rates of employment growth and low inflation?
You are doing something here that we are not doing and people come here
now inquiring about it. It is called throughout Europe, now, the Australian
model. A lot of people in North America are interested in it and I think it is
something that I am very proud of. That is we can, together, do something
and when we do things together we are stronger. This is the point. When we
do things together we are better.
Now we want to make that big leap into Asia and consolidate it, we want to
grow those market opportunities out, which we can do, we have got the
products, we have got the intellectual capacity, we have got the R&amp; D, we
have got the innovation and we have got the competitiveness. We have to
keep the whole country signed up to it. Not just part of the country, but the
whole country and that means keeping the executives, and business, and the
boards of management of companies, and the employees, all signed up to the
same view. That is, that we want to be able to while these windows are
open in East Asia particularly, where we are now set so closely to the fastest
growing economies in the world make every post a winner and we want to
drive it. 
Now, of course, that means more than just an Accord. It means product
innovation, it means education and in education the Government has spent,
now, a very large amount of budgetary dollars on the education system.
Ten years ago, only three young people in ten completed secondary school.
This year, it is just under eight in ten.
We have lifted the number of university places from 340,000 to 600,000 this
year and, of course, now we are rapidly building the Cinderella of Australian
education TAFE, vocational education into a system that can sit beside the
universities and that is the thing that will power the businesses along and
make the difference in the sort of products we produce and the sort of access
that we will have to markets around here.
But the other thing we have got to do, we have got to want to be in it.
We can't approach Asia as some sort of a fad, or a fashion. It has got to be
something where we take a view that we are going to be in Asia, involved,
forever and that we want to make our way with these Asian societies and
Asian economies. Now we are making great strides. But we have still got to
consolidate it. We still have to make them believe that we mean it.
Now I was addressing a group of school children in Queensland a week ago
and I said to them look when we came here in 1788 as Europeans, we were
like miners in the field, we pegged the claim, we banged the white peg into
the ground and said we will consolidate the place, we will get it to a critical
mass, we will try and hang on to it. We have been doing that, and we have
been doing that well, since that time.
But the negotiation of our settlement in the neighbourhood is not complete.
Our negotiation with Asia and the terms of our settlement into the
neighbourhood is not done. We are part way through it. It is only 20 years
ago that we had a White Australia Policy. We were very lucky not to be
marginalised then as South Africa was marginalised to its great economic
cost. And it is not a long time ago and memories are not that short.
So people are watching Australia to see with what conviction we want to do
this and how earnestly we want to make the settlement a final one, and it is
why when you talk about the Australian Chamber of Manufactures, or its
constituency, or its product, you are talking about really, amongst other
things, not its role as an import replacer, or as an import competitor, but as an
exporter into these markets. We won't keep the market opportunities unless
we make certain that the political relationships are the right ones. So, this is
another thing where the Government believes that foreign policy and
domestic policy are all the one. That no longer in Australia do we have a
domestic political discussion and then out there as an outrider is foreign
policy, but rather it is all part of the one debate.
When we succeed in this, of course, we will succeed as a country, but the
opportunity we have is manifest and profound. Very few people, 18 million of 
us, very few nations have been given this opportunity. Eighteen million of us
in a continent this large with such bounty, now located amidst the fastest
growing markets in the world, with a good environment and a good social
attitude, a good social view, the view of egalitarianism and a fair go, very
much built into Government policy.
So, whether it is access and equity in health through Medicare or access and
equity in education, or whether it is fair wages and the prospects of doing
innovative things in the work place. Whether it is running the Australian
economy on a consensual model or not. These are all the things which mark
out our maturity and the way in which we can be in quite a special way a
unique country that can do very unique things. Because we have been,
through our history, our origins are European, yet we find ourselves perched
with some of the oldest societies in the world, some of the largest countries in
the world, large old Asian societies. So, they will always look askance at us
until they are absolutely clear that we want to be with them forever, in an
amalgam of co-operation and progress.
The Accord is more than just a deal between the Government and the ACTU.
It is about saying how can we operate as a country, as a community, how
can we do the things we need to do that we must do be competitive, lift our
profits, lift our investment, provide a decent income for people and carry this
model right through the society, through the social wage, through our social
policies, through issues about our identity and into our foreign policy. All the
bits make up the whole, but the whole is a bigger whole than we have ever
had as a society and as a country before.
This, I think, is going to be a fork in the road. You know that saying, I came to
the fork in the road and I took it. Well, there won't be any coming to this fork
in the road and taking it. There will be a very clear choice. It will be one way
or the other. But if the way is to take the view that we don't have faith in our
fellow Australians, that we don't have faith in working people to see
something good in all of this and to do co-operative and clever things, and we
don't have the faith in Australian management to think more cleverly and
more productively, if we don't believe we can do these things together, we
won't. We will go back to a bickering society, that is clawing away at income shares,
that are not at all agreed and where the strife which comes from it will be
manifest again and we will look around for models and while we are looking
we will watch all of the countries around us leave us for dead. That is not
something I think Australians can really endure anymore.
The model we put together is interesting, not just in Australian terms, but in
world terms. It has been going now for nearly 13 years. Not 13 months.
This is not a flash in the pan or an experiment and as I say, we have been
just on doubling the GDP growth on average we had previously, lifting the
profits to levels that have been unprecedented and giving us a rate of
employment growth two or three times what it used to be. 
This is a very strong thing and you know the old saying, when you are good
thing stick to it. The thing, I think, for Australian manufacturing is that it may
be a great irony that it took a Labor Government to give Australia a true
market economy, but that is what has happened, and by knocking the tariff
wall down and by letting you show us how you can compete and adapt and
not just do that, but actually grow your business and your production while
you are doing it and making yourself stronger, really means that that thing
that most of us have always believed, that under stress and competition,
Australians will always answer the call and always do well.
Whether it is in business or commerce or sport or culture or what ever it might
be, but the big call of the last decade has, I hope, changed the Australian
economy forever. And the changes you have made as constituent companies
of the ACM are as much part and parcel of that change as any change made
by the unions and the Accord or any change made by the Government or any
change made by the institutions. We have all been in it. As a consequence
we have got a very remodelled Australian economy and a far more cohesive
and much nicer Australian society as a result.
My message, of course, is a simple one. Don't change horses. I don't know
how many of you are going to rush out of here and think about this and make
your way down to your local polling booth to vote Labor maybe not as many
of you as I would hope. But, the thing is, even if you do support the Coalition,
I know many of you in your hearts, you'll be hoping out there with those
stubby pencils and all the other polling booths that other people don't.
As a consequence, we will keep a co-operative model in this country and we
will know when we have made a change of substance and we will know that
thing, I suppose we have always known, that when we do things together we
are stronger and we are better. That is the thing I want to keep doing.
That is, I'd like to keep things going as they are, and that is to see Australians
understand that something good is being done here and we should think long
and hard about it before we put it asunder.
Thank you very much.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
** Embargoed until 9: 00pm check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN REPUBUICAN MOVEMENT 5TH ANNUAL DINNER,
SYDNEY, 3 NOVEMBER 1995
It is a pleasure to be here, even if it is something of a daunting task to follow
Robert Hughes, and I thank Malcolm Turnbull and the Australian Republican
Movement for inviting me along.
Robert Hughes is an expatriate Australian but a genuine patriot. He maintains
a keen, intelligent and very sympathetic interest in his homeland; he has
written a couple of the great books about Australian art and Australian
history; and by his work and his character a sort of pragmatic Australian
humanist he is a great ambassador for this country.
He is to Australian arts and letters what Lew Hoad was to tennis.
An unselfconscious ambassador for Australia to the world.
And of course he is a republican.
There used to be another kind of Australian expatriate of course the one
who left and from a great distance heaped scorn upon the place. But these
are much less common than they used to be and we are all grateful for that.
We are not alarmed if Peter Carey decides to write his novels in New York
instead of Sydney or Bacchus Marsh. We do not get a fit of the cringes if
our film directors
and actors base themselves in Hollywood, or our painters get themselves a
villa in Tuscany, or our musicians set up camp with the Berlin Philharmonic or
sing with the Scottish National Opera. 
For those of us whose memories extend to the fifties and sixties, this
represents a considerable change of heart. We are much more relaxed about
it.
And rightly. No one really leaves anywhere for good these days. Not in the
way people used to.
In part the change stems from the revolution in global economics and
telecommunications. It is going to be increasingly difficult to be xenophobic
and prosper in the modern world. If you are not open and interacting with
the globe you will not be in the game.
This demands a large measure of tolerance, openness and adaptability; and,
remarkably for those of us who remember the days of insularity and the
mighty cringe, suddenly these things can be said about Australia.
This is a tolerant, open and adaptable society. It is hybrid, eclectic and
infinitely diverse. I hesitate to use such terms in the presence of Robert
Hughes, but Australia does seem to me to have a touch of the post moderns
about it.
That is not to say that it has happened overnight, only that it feels like it.
Nor is it to say that this generation is singularly responsible for the change, in
fact the foundations were laid a long while ago. The roots go down to the
colonial democracies, to the democratic institutions we inherited from Britain,
to the experience of war, to post-war immigration.
It is impossible to overstate the significance of post-war immigration or the
power of good it has done us. Nothing has wrought such a change on the
national consciousness and the national fabric.
And nothing was better calculated to drive away the fear and the prejudice.
It is one of our great national successes, this transformation of Australia into
a tolerant and diverse and outward looking modern society.
Every day a thousand cliches are uttered about it but we really should take
great pride in the achievement, because it proves something about both the
old values of Australia and the new.
And we should passionately defend the principles of tolerance and democracy
on which it is built. 
That is not to say that what has come to be called multiculturalism is beyond
either criticism or the need for reform and adjustment.
And in the past couple of years I have been making this point: what we have
come to call multiculturalism must never become an ideology, or a
bureaucratic citadel of political correctness.
It must never become exclusive or exclusionist. It will self-destruct if it
begins to mistake diversity for the mainstream. Nothing in the agenda of
multiculturalism has ever said, and nor must it ever say, that the culture of
pro-multicultural Australians is to be washed away.
That includes those great institutions and traditions we inherited from Britain,
and those Australians of earlier times adapted and invented.
We are not discarding the old tiles in the social and cultural mosaic, we are
adding to them.
I suspect that the mark of a truly successful multicultural society is less the
degree of diversity than the sense of unity, the sense of oneness.
Diversity is easy to achieve, and we have proved that it can be managed in
ways which are equitable and fair and which preserve social harmony.
The real trick is creating the glue that holds it together. That is probably the
hardest part. It is certainly the crucial part and the part we must be forever
vigilant about.
And it is the part where the republic comes in not as a sufficient condition
for national cohesion and purpose, but a necessary one.
And these are things we need.
We have a huge continent and a small population. There is a a great deal of
cultural diversity within the geographical and occupational spread before you
even get to the ethnic differences. The federation is a loose one.
I don't see these facts of Australian life as a threat to the nation though it is
always worth bearing in mind that we cannot take our nationhood for
granted. Rather I think that in them lies the clue to the sort of country, the sort of
republic, we ought to and can become. 
One that values the diversity of the place and the population; one that is
deeply democratic, egalitarian and tolerant; one that expresses a love for the
land and the best traditions of the people and yet can accommodate the new.
In a sense, this is the other meaning of minimalist. As much as a republic
will set a new direction for Australia and express our hopes for a new sense
of common purpose, it will confirm what is already there.
It will confirm our independence. It will confirm that tolerance and diversity
and our democratic institutions and traditions, It will confirm our belief in
Australia and our love of the land and the environment.
I think that this is the essential beauty of it, the huge opportunity it presents
to us. In a single essentially symbolic act we can confirm both the history
and the contemporary reality of Australia, including our contemporary
ambitions. I include among these our ambition to make women truly equal partners at
every level of our national life; our ambition to give Aboriginal Australians
both justice and opportunity and to make our Aboriginal cultural heritage
secure. And I also include our ambitions in the region and the world. Our ambition to
succeed in becoming a partner and player in the region. Our ambition to
make this a clever and creative country.
And we can do it at a hugely symbolic time at the close of our first century
of nationhood, at the dawn of a new century.
Few other countries have such a chance.
I don't think I need to tell you that I believe it is altogether too good an
opportunity for Australia to let pass.
Now, this seems to me to have certain inescapable consequences for the
Australian Republican Movement and for all those Australians who believe
that our head of state should be an Australian.
It means, perhaps above all, that we talk a good deal less to each other and
a good deal less to Lloyd Waddy and his little band of soldiers and a good
deal more to Australians who remain sceptical, uninterested or, for whatever
reason, vaguely hostile.
It means that the great debate the really great debate should now begin. 
The republic is no longer an abstract idea, it is not something out there in the
never never.
I think Australians should now assume that there will be a referendum on this
question before the year 2000. And I think the debate should be conducted
with this in mind. Australians will soon be asked to decide whether they
want as their head of state the monarch of Great Britain or an Australian.
Now for most of us here all of us is a reasonable guess the issue is
beyond doubt.
I confess I sometimes cannot understand how anyone could fail to see why
Australia should have an Australian head of state.
And I also confess that sometimes, even though I know there are
complexities to resolve and obstacles to overcome, I cannot understand why
anyone should not have faith enough to think that we can overcome them.
Nevertheless, I know and I'm sure all of you know, that there are good
reasons why Australians are cautious and sceptical about this change.
" If it ain't broke, don't fix it" sums it up pretty well. Of course, it's less a
question of being broke than one of obsolescence. If being broke was the
criterion for discarding something most of us would still be getting around by
horse and cart.
What we're talking about here is a trade-in. A trade-up. A new model
called the Republic.
Now, it is possible that events since France began exploding bombs in the
Pacific again have possibly persuaded a lot more Australians that indeed it is
broke. Many Australians, I know, fear the change to a republic. I think their greater
fear should be that we will be left to share a head of state with a country
which may very often in future feel itself obliged to oppose our interests in
this region and the world.
The British Government has made very clear what has been obvious for a
long while that Australia's interests and Britain's interests are often very
different and even fundamentally opposed. 
This was made plain even before John Major declared his outright support for
President Chirac's actions, when Britain stood alone among European nations
in refusing to condemn the French nuclear testing program. Now it is plainer
still. It should come as no surprise to anyone, of course.
I seem to remember making a speech in the presence of Her Majesty The
Queen shortly after I became Prime Minister; and in it saying that just as
Britain had for many years been pursuing her interests in Europe, Australia
was now pursuing Australia's interests in Asia and the Pacific. And drawing
the conclusion that while we saw our heritage as shared, and there was
much else to share in the future, we saw our destiny as distinctly different.
It was entirely unexceptional. I was a little worried I might be accused of
being platitudinous.
But then that closet republican, John Hewson, rushed outside Parliament
House and condemned me for showing too little respect.
We can't be sure at all that Australians everywhere will see in the British
Government's support for the French Government more evidence that it is
silly for us to share a head of state with another country and I stress this,
any other country.
As confirmation that Britain would pursue its best interests regardless of
ours, John Major's action this week approached the brutal. However, the
lesson to be learned from it is not an anti-British one but one about the
inappropriateness of Australia having a head of state who is not one of us.
So how do we proceed?
I think the answer is by persuading our countrymen and women that we can
make the change to an Australian head of state without danger to our
democracy and our federation and without offence to a Queen we hold in
very high regard.
And by resisting the course on which the conservative parties have
embarked, which is to stall the debate and progress towards a republic by
means of a charade called a peoples' convention.
The peoples' convention they talk of has very little to do with genuine debate
and democratic participation, and a great deal to do with political diversions
and procrastination. 
It is about to use an expression attributed to Mr Howard kicking the
republican ball into touch. Mr Howard cannot be relied upon to change his
views on the monarchy: I doubt if there is a more ardent monarchist in the
country. Let me quote to you from an article Alex Mitchell wrote in the Sun Herald on
June this year in which he referred to a discussion he'd had with a person
he described as " a very senior Liberal". He meant John Howard. How would
the Liberal Party respond to the republic he asked him
No worries he replied. We can kick the whole thing into touch by
calling for a peoples' convention, the peoples' convention is a perfect
talking shop. It will keep the issue off the party political agenda and
the election agenda. With the people's convention up and running, the
Liberal Party wouldn't have to say or do anything about the republic.
It would effectively bury the issue for as long as we want it.
Later in the conversation he announced: I am a monarchist. I was
born a monarchist and I will die a monarchist.
Dare I say the rest of Australia need not die with him.
Mr Howard can be relied upon to create smokescreens and confusion. He
has lagged behind the progress of this nation throughout his political career,
and that is what has made him a difficult opponent. The experience of being
forever at odds with the direction of the country, forever trying to catch up,
has made him Australia's foremost spoiler.
We can be sure he will want to slow progress and he will do that by trying to
create as much uncertainty in the public mind as he can. He will try to make
the resolution of this issue appear more difficult than it really is.
But we have got over him before and we can get over him again.
If you ask Mr Howard what his policy is on the republic, what policy he will
give you he will say: " you can be for it and against it". That is, he'd give
you the direction either way.
But what he is really saying is that he himself is against the republic and
effectively, he would make certain there is no chance of a republic.
John Howard says that if there was a referendum for a republic put by a
Government led by him, he personally would be for the monarchy. 
Does anybody in this country seriously believe that where such a referendum
proposal must secure a majority of electors in a majority of States that such a
proposition would have a snowball's chance in hell if the Government of the
day wasn't going flat out for it.
Particularly if the Prime Minister was running on the " no case"
Any Government putting a referendum proposal for a republic would need an
all out national effort an all out political effort.
But to go into such a campaign with the Prime Minister saying that he is
actually against the proposal would be to make a sham of the whole process.
John Howard's shonky republic proposals mean one thing and one thing only
no republicl
A Coalition Government would mean no republic.
There's only one way to an Australian republic and that's with the only Party
which gives real meaning and expression to the great breadth of national
sentiment and identity that is, of course, the Australian Labor Party.
Like all great reforms, the Labor Party will have to carry the weight of this
one too. But to carry it with an Opposition saying that they could be with
you on the same proposal when their purpose is to destroy it is taking
political chicanery too far.
And we will do it by the same means. We will be appealing to the Australian
people who are sceptical and pragmatic but not bad judges and who are not
averse to necessary change.
Mr Howard said the other day that the republic was now " election neutral".
Let me tell you and him it is not. It is alive and well and all his efforts to
neutralise and destroy it, will almost certainly fail.
If we take our argument to the people of Australia and put our case well
and the media of this country allow us to put it well ( and at least on their
editorial pages they do support the republican cause) I am sure the people
will vote for an Australian republic.
We will have to take it well beyond the perception that the republic is for the
well-heeled of Sydney and Melbourne. We will have to dispel any perception
that it is a male and middle class movement without much consequence for
the great majority of Australians. 
And we will have to dispel some of the myths about the Government's
proposals. For instance, it has been alleged that an Australian president
elected by a two-thirds majority of parliament and only removable by the
same means would be able to abuse the powers he or she would possess.
In fact this method of election is much less likely to give us wilful or
whimsical Presidents than a popular election, and Presidents much less likely
to claim a popular mandate for their political or other beliefs.
No President could be elected without bi-partisan support and no President
could be removed without it. As we have said many times, popular election
would mean that a Ninian Stephen or a Zelman Cowen would never become
President of the Republic of Australia.
And as we have also said, the requirement of bi-partisan support would
insure against arbitrary or politically motivated removal of a President.
The Government's proposals have been carefully constructed to avoid the
appointment of Presidents who bring their own political agendas to the office
of the head of state. Serving politicians would be disqualified for
appointment for five years after leaving parliament and for those who
remain in any doubt, I can ensure you that would disqualify me for life.
An Australian head of state would be expressly required to exercise his or her
powers, other than the reserve powers, in accordance with ministerial advice.
And the reserve powers would have to be exercised in accordance with the
Constitutional Conventions.
The Government's proposal provides for a President who performs essentially
the same functions as the Governor-General does now.
Because we will have to answer these and many other questions about the
implications of the move to an Australian head of state, the Government
today released an information kit for distribution throughout the Australian
community. Of course I will leave a few of the kits with you tonight and I hope that they
will be of use in the great campaign that lies ahead of us. 
We will need all the resources of reason and faith that we can muster. Even
with the tide of history and logic running for us we can't expect to be easily
carried ashore. We are going to have to swim. And we are going to have to
expect the occasional attack from jellyfish and stingrays and the odd hold-up
in the seaweed otherwise known as proposals for a peoples' convention.
But the tide is with us and the incentive is certainly there. Drifting is no
longer an option and drowning is simply not on.
It really can and must be done and I urge you all to make the mighty effort it
requires. 



PRIME MINISTER 124/
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN REPUBLIC INFORMATION ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S
PROPOSAL The Government's proposal for the move to a Republic was outlined in a
speech delivered on June 7 this year -' An Australian Republic-the Way
Forward". In the speech, I put forward the arguments in support of the
Government's view that the Head of State of Australia should be an
Australian. To encourage a wider understanding of the issues surrounding the
Government's proposal, an information kit has been prepared for public
release. The information kit contains a copy of:
the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia;
the Prime Ministers speech of 7 June 1995 announcing the Government's
proposal;
* a pamphlet outlining the Government's proposal; and
* a Question and Answer booklet containing answers to commonly asked
questions about the move to a Republic.
Members of the public can obtain the information kit free of charge by
telephoning the Australian Government Publishing Service hotline:
008 020049.
In addition to the kit, the outline of the Government's proposal has been
translated into sixteen languages ( attached). These are available through
the Office of Multicultural Affairs publications hotline telephone number ( 06)
241 4841.
Documents in the kit are also avilable through the Internet world wide web at:
U RL http:// wwfw. nla-gov. au/ pmcirepublic. html
CANBERRA 3 November 1996 
TRANSLATIONS OF THE OUTLINE OF THE GOVERNMENTS
PROPOSAL
ARABIC CHINESE CROATIAN GREEK ITALIAN KHMER LAO MACEDONIAN PERSIAN POLISH PORTUGUESE RUSSIAN SERBIAN SPANISH
TURKISH VIETNAMESE 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF TARGET/ TCFUA DEED OF AGREEMENT,
TARGET RETAIL STORE, MARIBYRNONG, MELBOURNE
3 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
This is a milestone indeed, a landmark deed of co-operation, signed
between a major union and a major retailing organisation. But it is more than
that it is something which is underlining what the whole spirit of co-operation
at the workplace is about, about the consensual model that we have in this
country in operating industrial relations. That is, a model where we believe
that when business and labour come together and decide to run the economy
co-operatively on a consensual basis, better things happen. We end up with
low inflation, more growth, more employment, and a better environment at the
workplace. As you know, we have had I gave some figures yesterday that
this year, we have lost 70 working days per thousand people at
work... . whereas, under John Howard, in 7 years during the period of
Government in which he was Treasurer, they lost 590 working days per
thousand. 590 compared to 70. Of course, in those days, the economy was
strike-prone, there was no co-operation, there was a conflict model. As a
consequence, we're seeing a much more cohesive, industrial scene a more
co-operative workplace, where we have got values of co-operation in the
workplace, of consultation with employers, and, of course, under enterprise
bargaining, a whole different notion of how the economy should run, how
businesses should operate, how the employees can help the businesses be
more productive, and how that extra earnings can be split between profits
and wages.
Now, that's the model that's the Accord model. What our opponents are
about, basically is back to the conflict model. They are basically back to what
they call labour market reform and flexibility, which they really mean flexibility
downwards it means losses in pay and conditions, and that's essentially
what they're about. Now, what this is about is something completely different.
It's about recognising the fact that there are 300,000 home-based workers in
the textile industry, that for every worker that works in the textile industry at
work, there are 14 that work at home. And that's an enormous workforce of 
outworkers away from work and at home. And these are mostly women
mostly women from non-English speaking backgrounds, and most of them are
Asian. And they are set up classically to be exploited by unscrupulous
employers who will use them in the most unscrupulous ways to get work from
them for essentially small change. Now, what this landmark deed of cooperation
is about, is about one very large and important company Target
showing what a good corporate citizen means by writing down what the ethics
of a good employer should be. And I think Target has proved itself to be one
of Australia's best corporate citizens in both the way it's behaved, and in
doing this, it has declared that any exploitation of workers is unacceptable.
And it has told this to its suppliers, so it's saying to suppliers don't supply us
with garments which have been put together with blood money. Don't supply
us with garments which have been put together by usury and exploitation of
women at home.
Now, this is a big statement, and it says much about the ethical issues in the
labour market, and much about the ethics in the way in which the Australian
industrial relations are being transformed. Now, Target worked with the
TCFUA to develop this agreement, and Target has been recognised by the
union as an outwork best practice organisation. And that's going to matter, I
think, in terms of the industrial relations that Target has, because I think the
whole union movement appreciates this sort of sentiment, as does the
Government, and that's why I'm here to mark the event. The execution of the
deed of co-operation between Target and the TCFUA will, I think, be a
watershed. It will help bring outworkers into the mainstream labour market,
into the world of fair wages and decent conditions into the world of social
and economic justice. Now, this is what it means, and it is walking away from
the dog-eat-dog kind of labour market that John Howard and Peter Reith
want. It's walking away from the dog-eat-dog society that Jeff Kennett wants.
It's walking to decency and fairness and equity in the way we live, the way we
relate to one another, and we don't pretend we don't know there's 300,000
people working out there in sub-economic conditions. And we don't pretend
that they're out of sight and out of mind. Rather, we put them up in lights and
say that they are as much a part of the workforce as anybody else, and that
they need to be treated properly.
The Agreement, I think, is in line with the spirit and letter of the Accord, and
it's in line with the motivating ideal which runs like a seam through our
national life, and that is as I often say, reflecting what I in fact find here in
Australia that we are strongest, all of us, when we work together. When we
work together and have regard for one another, we're stronger and we're
better. So, I am very glad that the Government has been able to assist in the
promotion of this agreement and the protection of outworkers. And in
response to a request from the TCFUA, we fronted the National Outworker
Campaign through our workplace reform program, which reached into the
community. Now, John Howard attacks us giving money to unions. You will
often find the Coalition attacking the Government for so-called " giving money
to unions". But part of it is something like this the Workplace Reform
Program, and the National Outworker Information Campaign, which finds out
about the conditions people are working in at home in these circumstances, 
and then tries to find out the truth about their conditions, to educate workers
about their entitlements, and employers about their responsibilities. In other
words, it's money well-spent, and money properly spent.
The result of the campaign was the TCFUA's report " The Hidden Cost of
fashion", which shed considerable light on the vulnerability of workers. Now,
in our Budget of 95-96, the Government announced a new $ 33 million
development package for the TCF industries, which includes funding for a
new Outworker Information Campaign, and research into contracting out in
the clothing sector. And Accord Mark VIII recognises special needs of homebase
workers, and committed the Accord partners including the
Government, of course to work towards ensuring that minimum standards
apply to outworkers as much as to other workers.
Now, can I also say we have acted on the social security front as well.
Employers have been known to force out workers to take the dole illegally,
saying get out there and take the dole, stay at home and make work, and we
will give you something for the piece work at home, in order to drive down
their wage bill. This is the sleaziest kind of exploitation. And they threaten to
expose their employees if they speak out, so that there are a lot of people
particularly women frightened about the fact that they might have been on
the dole, but at the same time earning some piece work income from an
employer. Now, because the situation for outworkers has been so difficult,
and because without special assistance many of them would remain outside
the mainstream, the Government has now amended the social security
legislation to provide an amnesty for affected workers. This means that the
social security debts of outworkers in the clothing and textile industries will be
waived if DSS is advised of undisclosed income between the 1st of
December 1995, and the 31st of May 1996. So, we should say to all those
people out there especially, and in the main, women who might have
picked up the dole, who may have picked up the dole, but who have been
doing piece work for an unscrupulous employer, and even perhaps been
threatened by an unscrupulous employer with being exposed, don't be afraid
any longer. You can tell DSS about it, and you will qualify under the
amnesty. So, we are very proud as a Government to have played a role in
buttressing the protection extended to home-based workers, and I think the
deed of co-operation will be good for Australian workers, and it will be good
for Australia.
It's the sort of thing let me say unambiguously that the Labor Party stands
for. I'm very pleased to see Bob Sercombe and Kelvin Thomson with us
today, our Candidates in the next Federal election. And these are the sort of
values that we stand for. I mean, the Labor Party is a community-based
party. It represents no vested interests it represents just the broad mass of
the people, and these are the things the thing we're doing today is the sort
of the thing that only Labor Governments stand for, that you will never see
from the Tories. I made this point yesterday about Jeff Kennett I mean here,
he is making the run for the bottom line of the Budget, but he never knows
when to stop. He never knows what is important to a civilised society. And
when someone has had a heart attack, or a child is threatened, there should 
be an ambulance there to pick them up. There should be a hospital to
receive them. And getting to the point where we are putting chains on railway
station toilet blocks is about the bottom of the pack. And now, of course,
herding vehicles herding vehicles, funnelling vehicles, siphoning vehicles
into roads which are just a common right.
I mean, there is a thing called the social contract. And the social contract
means that you have the right of free movement, the right to do things. Sure,
we obey the laws of the nation and the state, we're all part of the contract
providing one partner doesn't squeeze it too much. But in Victoria it is being
squeezed too much the social contract is being put under threat. And when
they brazenly stare down the parliament and say things that are not true, Mr
Kennett chides journalists " well, what are you going to do about it?".
Meanwhile, the flags are hanging at 45 degrees outside the Reichstag over
there in Treasury Place. And he's for labour market flexibility, like John
Howard and Peter Reith they're for labour market flexibility. Which means
they will all see the executives taking very strong increases in pay, they all
think they should enjoy a lifestyle to which they have become accustomed.
But they would be very happy to have migrant women, from non-English
speaking backgrounds, working away at home on sub-economic rates of pay
and saying to them if you happen to be on the dole at any stage, we will
threaten you with exposure. I mean, this is the sort of ethic that comes from
the sort of " greed is good" mentality. So, there is something important being
done here today, about the values of this country the ideals of Australia,
about the egalitarianism, about the fairness. And when a big company like
Target stands up, and a big union stands up, and join hands together, in
national terms, it is entirely noteworthy. It's entirely noteworthy, and it is an
important change to the fabric of our society, and the sort of country we have
become, and I hope we will always be. So I'm very happy indeed to formally
present copies of this Deed of Co-operation to Target and the TCFUA for
execution, and with all the hopes and expectations for a better deal for
workers. And can I again extend my very sincere congratulations to John
Irish, to Tony Woolgar, to Brendan Soraghan who have been involved in the
negotiation, to the TCFUA in the broad, to Kevin Boyd as President, and just
say how different, and how nice it is, to be at a function like this, instead of
some grasping, greedy little outfit that wants to rip off ordinary Australian
people to line their pockets and make their corporate earnings just a little bit
bigger. Thank you very much indeed.
ends. 



7'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 5 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: lull just give you a comment on Mr Rabin's assassination. The first
thing I would like to do is to offer my condolences to his family, to his
wife and his family, to the Government and people of Israel on behalf
of the people of Austral! a.
I was left incredulous I must say at Mr Rabin's assassination. He was
a real leader who made great strides for peace. He took the risks, he
was a tough person, he had the support of the sceptics in Israel. The
people in the military have had to fight conflicts over these issues. He
had the power and he summoned it and he used it and it is a tragedy,
a personal tragedy, that the world has lost him and a tragedy for Israel
that he has been taken away.
The bad feature of this is that Jewish people around the world always
regard Israel as a sanctuary from violence and to have violence done
to their leader by one of their own, I'm sure damages that dream for
them. But, the sad fact is that the people who have sought the peace
and made the steps in the Middle East Anwar Sadat, in the first
instance, now Yitzhak Rabin and others have had to wear the supreme
sacrifice of their own lives.
I offer to Shimon Peres, the Acting Prime Minister, our very deepest
condolences and to say that the thing that can be best done in the
memory of Yitzhak Rabin is to continue the peace process and to see
it consolidated and you know here that we have played a role in that
process ourselves during these negotiations. We have had peace
keepers in the Sinai, we will commit ourselves fully to that peace
process which will do more, I think, than anything else to honour the
memory of Yitzhak Rabin.
J: Mr Keating, has any thought been given to who will attend the funeral
on Australia's behalf? 
PM: We are thinking about that now. I would like to go myself. It is on
tomorrow night at 10: 00pm Australian time. So, it is just over 24 hours
and there are no regular air routes there, so we are just trying to look
at what arrangements might or could be put in place.
J: Mr Keating, does this have implications for the peace process given
that you just described the Prime Minister toughness, experience
with the military a peace maker, is there someone to take on that
role now?
PM: Well, that is a matter for the Israelis, but no doubt all the people in
Israel that value peace, they would feel I'm sure as I feel that the way
to honour Yitzhak Rabin and his work would be to consolidate and
accelerate that process. That political fillip and commitment inside
Israel is probably as important as whoever it might be leading the
country.
J: Prime Minister, are you concerned that this event may make Israel
somewhere that Australian citizens should think twice about visiting
the country?
PM: I don't think. I think that it is just another tragic event in the long road
to peace in the Middle East. But, it doesn't hold any implications for
the safety of any Australian person there. Thank you.
ends 



@ 1&gt;
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
ASSASSINATION OF YITZHAK RABIN
I was left incredulous upon learning of the death of Yitzhak Rabin. He was a
real leader looking for lasting peace. But apart from the great loss, his death
by violence punctures the dream of Jewish people everywhere that Israel is a
place of sanctuary, a place where people pay each other due regard and
respect, a place where, above all else, human rights and human happiness is
the foundation of the society.
This assassin has done more than rob us all of Yitzhak Rabin. He has
cheated the Jewish people of the security of these beliefs to which so many
people have dedicated themselves.
On behalf of all Australians, I express profound condolences to the family of
Mr Rabin and to the Government and people of Israel. I have sent a
message of condolence to the acting Prime Minister of Israel, Mr Peres.
Yitzhak Rabin's vision, strength and commitment were instrumental to
achieving the breakthrough in the peace process. His death is a tragedy for
Israel, the Middle East and the world.
The best way the world can honour Mr Rabin is to push ahead with the work
he began. For Australia's part, we will continue to give our full support to the
peace process. Our support for Israel's right to exist in security and safety will
remain a guiding principle of our policy.
CANBERRA November 1995 



( 1 N
K
S
I .4 47/ 95 Mc Bob Mc.
MT191 EXPORT A
PRIME MINISTER
AUSTRALIA-MALTA AIR SERVICES ARRANGEMENTS
The Acting Prime Minister Mr Kim Beazley, and the Deputy Prime Minister of Malta,
Dr Guido de Marco announced today that Australia and Malta had agreed to open
negotiations immediately on an Air Services Agreement between the two countries.
The Ministers expressed their hope that an Air Services Agreement could be concluded
expeditiously, so that scheduled direct air links between the two countries could be
established for the first time.
Professor Guido de Marco said that this was a very pleasing outcome from his visit to
Australia. It was further evidence of the close working relationship between the
Australian and Maltese Governments.
Mr Beazley said that the prospect of direct air links would be of particular interest to
the many Australians of Maltese origin, who play an important role in maintaining
close relations between both nations. The business community, especially exporters,
also stood to gain from the new market access which direct air links might provide.
Canberra 6 November 1995 Announcing tht
Senator Bob M,
had earned a tot
Senator McMull
" Making the fin.
deserve for their
" In many fields.
finalists have sh,
increasingly cor.
" It is particularl.
agricultural pro(
vying for this yt
The finalists wil
Australian Expc
The winners wil
State and Territc
The 1995 finalis
Australian F
zirconia. Bayswater C
coals. Queensland Tioxide Aus;
Parliament
2772 



TEL 6. Nov. 95 18: 58 No. 00? P. 01/ 1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH LINDA MOTTRAM AND DEBBIE WHITMONT, ABC
RADIO NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Yitzhak Rabins life was a life that mattered. So it was a very, I think,
moving ceremony to recount his life and some very moving things said
including by K( ing Hussein of Jordan, by President Mubarak, by
members of his staff and family and I hope that his untimely death will,
if anything, spur the peace process along.
J: It Is a high price to pay for pursuing a political policy that you believe
in. I wonder what you think as a leader yourself and also what you
think in terms of world politics, that it has to come to that. Is that
something that goes through your mind?
PMV: I think anyone who Is a democrat knows that there is an attendant risk.
But, you do meet people and you must meet people because, for all
democrats, the life source Is from the public, its from the people, and if
one gets to the point where you don't have that free association, you
can't pick up the bloom from the community, you can't pick up the
buoyancy and the authority whiich a democrat must have. So, I
understand very well what his life and, I think, what his attitude about
that was. How he would have lived his life in this respect. But, of
course, on the evening that he died he had, I'm told, a very successful
rally for peace in what has been a very controversial debate here in
Israel. So, he had a very clear manifestation and some jubilation and
joy at the reception he had been given and it was at the end of that, of
course, he was murdered, he was assassinated. So, he would have
had a charge from knowing that on his most important mission that
there was great support, a crowd of 100,000 or more had turned out to
support him.
I think it may be too that Israeli's will reflect on their own political
process and that the rabid and unprincipled attacks upon him, the
extreme views put against him have created a climate which has
produced his death and it may make people here reflect about that-
TE6L.: Nov. 95 18: 58 No. 007 P. 0
2
That they have to conduct their debate in more moderate terms, more
sensibly.
J: How does it affect your view of Australia and Australia's role in the
world?
PM Australia is blessed because it shares a continent with nobody and it is
a very large nation which has, essentially, been held in trust for us by
the Aboriginal people and which we have now developed as a united
country. When you see old places sharing civilisations and borders
and where old hatreds have been around for a long time Otfortunately,
has been not our lot
J: Can I just ask you also about the issue that is running in Australia
regarding John Howard. He has suggested that you have dealt with
this situation, in terms of his inability to be here, in an improper
fashion, what is your response to that?
PM: I wouldn't for a second diminish Yitzhak Rabin's life or in any way seek
to trivial ise his tragic death by a debat6 about some of the
meanderings of Australian politics. The important thing was, I think,
that Australia should be represented to honour the life of a significant
person who really made a difference in a country that has always
struggled. Arnd that representation can only be by the Australian
Government. Thank you.
ends ~ 1i
TEL: 



TEL: MINI.. ER
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY TIE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY CANADIAN PRIME MINISTER CHRETIEN
I am very pleased to announce that the Prime Minister of Canada, the
Rt Hon Jean Chretien will visit Australia as a guest of the Australian Government
from 14 to 16 November.
I warmly welcome this first visit to Australia by a Canadian Prime Minister in
years. Australia and Canada enjoy strong and close relations, which
Prime Minister Chretien's visit will reinforce.
I look forward to greeting Prime Minister Chretien and to discussing with him the
wide range of important issues and interests which our two governments have in
common. CANBERRA 9 November 1995 9. Nov. 95 2: 29 No. 00? 



TEL: PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VISIT BY THE PRESIDENT OF REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS
The President of the Republic of Cyprus, H E Mr Glafcos Clerides, will
visit Australia from 14 to 17 November.
I am delighted that President Clerides has accepted my invitation to visit
our country. The relations between Australia and Cyprus are very
friendly. Australia takes a close and sympathetic interest in the problems
of Cyprus. The Cypriot community plays a very important and valued role
in Australia's multicultural society.
I look forward to meeting President Clerides in Canberra. As well, he will
meet other Australian Ministers, will visit-Sydney and Melbourne and will
have the opportnunity to meet members of the Cypriot community in
Australia. Canberra 9 November 1995 9. Nov. 95 2: 29 No. 007 P. 09/ 



OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
CANBERRA
ber STATEMENT FROM THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER
I nisterRE: THIE GUARDIAN
An article in The Guardian newspaper in London has falsely attributed to Mr Keating a
flippant and offensive remark concerning Her Majesty The Queen.
The quote ascribed to Mr Keating has been cynically invented by the newspaper to,
enhance the story. Mr Keating denies emphatically making the remark attributed to
fly him. He has given no interview to The Guardian newspaper. He recently met and
kas shook hands with a journalist from The Guardian, but at this brief corridor encounter
in front of two witnesses no such remark was made.
ig a This is not the first time a member of the British press has let his imagination run ahead
om of his story. One expects this sort of behaviour from some British tabloids, but not
New from a newspaper with the reputation of The Guardian.
that CANBERRA
New .9 November, 1995
S to
that last
Tred ast, atar 2849 



TEL: *. ov9. Nov 95
PRIME MINISTER1
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING3 MP
DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 9 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: There are a couple of sleights of hand going on by the Coalition in my
short absence from Australia, and I just thought I would point them
out, and underline the significance of them. And they are that a week
or so ago, Richard Court presented an Access Economics report on
the distribution of FederallState financial powers, commissioned, it
says, by the Western Australian Ministry of the Premier and Cabinet,
on behalf of the Governments of the States and the Territories. He
did a press conference holding this document, and of the document
he said we don't want another Quebec situation, where people are
being forced out of the Federation. In other words, he was waving
around the threat of secession, or the prospect of secession, were
the States not to get a go on that thing they called the vertical fiscal
imbalance. Now, I had made this point in the Federal Parliament,
that when Mr Costello said that onhe of the first things he would be
dealing with in Government was the vertical fiscal imbalance, that
could only mean as it meant to the journalists who wrote the story,
and that was a transfer of taxing powers to the States.
John Howard has been on Richard Court's back, and he is now onto
the big smother in the run-up to the election. lie said that's a no-no
until we're into office. So, what was a secession issue for Mr Court
early in the week, by the meeting of the State Premiers on Friday, it
was really only a division of Commonwealth income tax. Now, first of
all the first thing to say about that is that's only the policy until a
Coalition Government, or were a Coalition Government were to be
elected to office. If a Coalition Government to be elected to office,
the bible of Commonwealth/ State tax powers will be this Access
Economics report. And it says let me just remind you of a couple of
things it says " our assessment is that a combination options
options 3 with other options 4 and 5 dominates the others as
potential avenues for future reform. That is, combining State income
2: 29 No., 00? P_. 01/ 
9. Nov. 95
2
taxes with possible increases in the wholesale safes tax, a broadbased
consumption tax, or payroll tax, so as to eliminate both vertical,
fiscal imbalance and the worst of the State taxes". That's their
principal observation recommendation. It says " eliminating VFI by
allowing the States to raise personal income taxes in aggregate, in
order to do away with net Commonwealth payments to States, the
States would need to levy marginal personal income tax rates above
the tax-free threshold, at the rate of 15.6%, the Commonwealth
making room by dropping its own marginal rates equivalently", it goes
on in the conclusion, ' lor Australians to enjoy the benefits that
competitive Federalism has to offer' whatever competitive
Federalism means one century after Federation -1" hen VFI should be
eliminated or much reduced. The elimination of VFI could be done in
several ways: allowing the States to levy personal income taxes or
sales taxes, or sales taxes, or somewhat less plausibly by a marked
increase in the more efficient State taxes. However, probably the
vest and most obvious way to eliminate it, would be allowing the
States to levy personal income taxes".
Now, It's as solid and as direct as that, and it has been commissioned
by the Western Australian Premier, his Government, on behalf of the
States. Now, at the meeting of State Premiers, Wayne Goss who
chaired the meeting presented the States position at a press
conference. And, not surprisingly, because he doesn't subscribe to
these views, he said that he and Bob Carr and the other Coalition
Premiers, would be content with a share of Commonwealth income
tax not new State taxes. But this is not at all the Coalition agenda.
John Howard and Costello their agenda is for State taxes and a
State consumption tax. And Richard Court made it abundantly plain
in the commissioning and presentation of this report, and he made it
abundantly plain by his backilip. So serious was it, we might secede
on Monday or Tuesday, but by Friday after having been nobbled by
Mr Howard he was going to go, lamely, simply for a share of income
tax So I'm just here to point out what that backflip meant. And we
are also seeing it now on industrial relations.
In Industrial relations, he haO his phase 2 proposal he was going to
stare down the unions, he was going to fight to the last drop of the
blood of the Federal Labor Government, and the rest. And what we
find now is that he has got another signal from Mr Howard run dead
on phase 2 of your IR proposals. But, the point we make it's phase
I which is the real problem. Phase 1 of the problem which is stil in
place, doesn't guarantee that workers will be as well off as they are
now. And remember the interview which Fran Kelly put with Mr
Howard I think I have got the notes of it here where she made
these points, and the reply was completely unambiguous in terms of
the direction in which they would be heading. Mr Reith said he
couldn't guarantee when asked persistently can you guarantee
that workers will be no worse off? He said paraphrasing him, but I
think you will find the paraphrase Is accurate look, we'll be doing our
TEL TEL: 9. NNoo. 9.0502?: 2 9P .02, 
TEL: 9. Nov. 95 2: 29 No .007 P. 03/
3
best in the circumstances best to have fair and reasonable wages
and conditions. Not a guarantee. Twice he got asked about the
guarantee, and there of course, no commitment on the guarantee.
So, what we're finding is now that we've got this quotation from
Richard Court he ruled out his own State income tax with a
consumption tax, thats on November 4th in the West Australian, but
earlier in the week, he was so het up about it all he was talking
secession. Last week, he was going to tear the unions apart, he was
going to do all these things and remember the things that he has
dropped. He is now.. . Mr Reith is now running around saying that he
has made concessions to the unions, you know, that they thought
better of it, and they can now work with unions, he said. And what
they have proposed is that the most draconian of things they won't
now prosecute a union if it tries to become Federally registered.
Well, thank you Mr Court. He won't stop unions having * access to
industrial sites I mean, these are all the things which cut across our
very democracy, not some industrial law.
But, I think the most important thing that bears upon these 2 things
are the things that Mr Howard has said himself in the last couple of
days. And he got asked this question by a caller on a phone-in
program: " Mr Howard, the people who developed Fightback, who are
still in the parliamentary party, how are you going to balance the new
initiatives if you win Government?". ' Well, it won't be any problem',
said Mr Howard, " wie just don't have Fightback anymore". " I know
you don't have Fightback, but you have got the people who
developed it7, and he says " oh, yes". Then he has told us on
another radio program in the last day, that people know who their
people are. " People know who the players are", he said. He made
an analogy about football they know who are the players for the
various positions. In other words, it's not a matter of our policies
when David Margan asked him these questions. Let me give you
these answers he said this:' Margan said " not to reveal the
policies?", Howard: " No, no, no, no, no you know who the players
are you're not going to tell me that you don't know who the players
are". In other words, the players are the people who have held all the
positions which are synonymous with Fightback on industrial
relations, on state taxes, on consumption taxes, on all the things.
And then he said in the Courier Mail, just a few weeks earlier " One
of the groat advantages of my having laid out an industrial relations
program over such a long period of time, Is that if I win the election,
nobody can deny I have a mandate to change Industrial relations"
That's a mandate for the old Howard policies the policies of the
players that everybody knows. So, by making the point that you know
who the players are, you don't need the policies, what he is really
saying is you know what the old policies are. You know what the old
prejudices of the players of the Coalition are the people who put
Fightback together. And how perceptive is the caller saying well Mr
Howard, If they're the old players, and they're the old players who put 
TEL: 9. Nov. 95 2: 29 No. 007 P. 04/
4.
Fightback together, what are you going to do other than give us
Fightback policies? And he says well, you know who the players are.
Now, this is a very I think damaging admission by Mr Howard,
because what he Is really saying is look, people now what I stand for
I stand for consumption taxes, I stand for hopping into unions, I
stand for individual wage contracts. It won't be a matter of the
policies it will be a matter of who we are, and what we have always
stood for. So, when you see that in the context of the gymnastics in
the Coalition this week, of Richard Court going from secession on the
Monday, to mute compliance on the Friday on State taxes, and then
going for rabid, anti-democratic draconian industrial policies one
week, and then moving lamb-like to an agreement with unions about
those clauses in another week, all I can say to people is you can
smell the rat in the Coalition camp. Mr Howard's nobbling Mr Court,
and what you will get were there to be a Howard Government, is all
the things that are in this Fightback, in this authors' of Fightback,
Access Economics In their new paper State consumption taxes,
State income taxes, particularly State income taxes, and of course,
the same Industrial relations pollices that Mr Howard has always
subscribed to.
J: made your run on this a bit early? Aren't you just a bit miffed that
they have acted to de-fang these issues before the next election?
PM: Oh, no. But Mr Howard is not de-fanging anything he is putting the
dentures back Into the Coalition dogrs mouth. He is saying we're the
same old people don't you know the players? We have always
been there. It's us the old team, the old Fightback group, we're
going to do it all again. I mean, what do you need? Flashing lights?
You know, do you need it put up on your pces? I mean, he is making
It obvious to you.
J: Are you saying that all the States are complicit in this arrangement ? 7
PM: No. I think the Labor States have traditionally rejected State income
taxes, but there is no doubt the Coalition States want one. Jeff
Kennett made clear when he said that 80% of the taxes should come
to the States. There's Jeff Kennett's remarks I'm not imputing
remarks to him, he made that remark. You have got Richard Court
making clear where he stands that's what they're after.
J: But didn't, at the very least, Mr Goss and Mr Canr show a little lack of
foresight from your point of view, in signing onto allowing Access to
do this report?
PM; I I doubt very much whether they did sign on. I mean...
J: Well, Mr Goss certainly did. He was there when the initial decision
wwstabled? 
TEL: 9 . NvN. 9o5.02: 0279
PM; Well, even If that is true, that doesn't mean that he must comply with,
or sign up, to its recommendations,. But it very much clearly
means that Richard Courts militant presentation of the Access report,
and his banging the secession drum, makes very clear what his
preference is.
J: Are you saying the States aren't all that serious about seeking their
own State income tax?
PM: They want their own income taxes. Look, it's the 1991 proposal it's
the Greiner proposal. it's the Coalition proposal. They were going to
do it in Perth they wanted their State income tax, but not only that,
[ they wanted] the right to set their own State tax rates themselves,
and what's more, cheekily at the time, they said if the Commonwealth
were to give tax cuts or any tax benefits by way of arrangements
under the Accord, we actually had to compensate them. I mean, you
know.
J: ( Inaudible)... economic growth may have slowed too much affecting
the labour market * how quickly do you see the labour
market.. .( inaudibre)...?
PM: Well, the economic growth has slowed from an unsustainable to
a sustainable And we're seeing, consistent with that, very
strong growth still in the job vacancy series. Were seeing strong
investment expectations the economy is in a very nice position. Its
on a sustainable growth path, with good investment and low inflation.
J: ( inaudible) not worried by an increase in the unemployment
levels?
PM: Well, we have had the biggest fail in unemployment in a year, and
what we have seen in the past Is whenever you see these very large
takeup in employment, we have seen these pauses, or these
plateaux, until the economy sort of catches its breath again, and
moves along. Now, at a 3-4% clip, the economy Is till going quite
strongly.
J: Is the economy in nice enough shape... has there been enough of a
pause or a breath to consider that the next move In interest rates
might be down?
PM: Well, again, that's for longer portents for markets to make a
judgment about, I think. But a lot of the judgments are already in on
that we have seen the long-ternm bond rate drop from over 10.25%
to around
J: On taxes are you saying that a party leader who supports a
consumption tWx and changes their mind, shouldn't be believed?
TEL: 9. Nov. 95 
TEL: 9. Nov. 95 2: 29 No. 007 P. 06/
PM: No. If you are making a reference to me, and you are, what I did was
cut then Government spending by let me refresh your memory by
6% of GDP. From 30.5% of GDP, to 23.5% just under 24% of GDP.
In other words, the Commonwealth doesn't now need a tax base in
consumption, because it's a smaller public sector.. That's the
difference between 1985 and now. But to give the States there
would be 3 tax bases. There would be a Commonwealth income ta~,
there would be a State income tax, and a State consumption tax. You
give the political system 3 bases, it will go and spend it. It might not
spend it at the Commonwealth level this year, but over time, the
States and the Commonwealth systems of government will spend the
money, and we won't get a second chance to get out of the hole that
Mr Howard left us in, in the early 80s we won't get a second chance
to buy down public spending in the way we did in the 1980s. So,
when we looked at a consumption tax in 1985, we had
Commonwealth outlays around 29-30% of GDP. By the time it got to
24% of GDP under the Labor Government, we didn't need a
consumption tax, and that's the point I have made consistently.
J: Last Friday, all the Premiers signed up for a fixed share of
Commonwealth revenue including the Labor Premiers doesn't that
leave you isolated from the States?
PM: Oh, no. I It leaves me in the box seat
J: Why?
PM: Because we have the powers, and...
J: But you're at odds with all the States, even the Labor States?
PM: Well, that's been part of my-condition for nearly a decade. And I'll tell
you why in the last 3 years, in the period 90-91, the States would
have lost about $ 3 billion, had they had a fixed share of
Commonwealth income tax Now, how can the States cop a $ 3 billion
loss? How could their school system not withstanding the massive
cutting you have seen by Jeff Kennett in schools and in health it just
pales into insignificance compared to the cuts that would need to be
there in public services by a loss of $ 3 billion over that period. So,
effectively, the Commonwealth would have had to have kept up the
payments, either in nominal or real terms. So, in other words, the
Commonwealth carries the burden on the down-side, but then loses it
on fth up-side when it needs the money to bring the deficit down, or
to produce a surplus. Because the Commonwealth is the shockabsorber
in the national economy, the Commonwealth Budget is a
shock-absorber, the State Budgets are not. What the States need is
revenue adequacy from the Commonwealth which we're giving thern
by a real-terms per capita guarantee, that is real-terms maintenance
with a population factor. But to give them a share of Income tax?-If, 
9. Nov. 95
7
we ever reached a point again where the Commonwealth Income tax
fell, they would be screaming blue murder that they want more money
from us. I mean, it's just an insincere ploy that they know has not a
snowballs chance in hell of happening, from us.
J: Mr Keating, are you inclined to pick up Gough Whitlam's suggestion
about a referendum of the Senate's power to block?
PM: Look, I have been away, and I haven't followed this debate around
November 1 ith, and I really haven't seen what Gough has said.
J: Mr Keating, on CHOGMV Jim Bolger says he doesn't think John
Majors in a mood to change his mind. Is that the right sort of
attitude ( inaudible)...?
PM: Well, I mean, I think, our position is that we're not in a mood to
change ours, either. That is, this is an indefensible position by the
French, and no amount of sort of post-decision rationalisation can
make it defensible, and that's the position we will take.
J: So what as a minimum would you be expecting to come out of
CHOGM in response to the French testing?
PM: Well, our clear condemnation of their decision.
J: Are you concerned that Internal politics may lead to something a bit
softer. ( inaudible)...?
PM: Well, there's no doubt that the French will be calling up favours all
around the world, amongst Commonwealth countries. And It won't be
changing Australia's position. I mean, we will secure all we can from
the process, but our position will be crystal clear right through.
J: But doesn't it rather weaken things that Jim Bolger is already saying
that we'll agree to disagree, and leave it at that?
PM: Well, I know he has said that, but I don't know what that means in
terms of the documents, the communiques etc. But I will be making
very clear to him In fact, I'm going to speak to him in less than an
hour, to say to him that our position is that we should have a clear
condemnation of France for Its testing program. And of any other
country testing weapons, consistent with the communique of 2 years
ago.
J: Prime Minister, what's your view of suggestions that CHOGM should
also be censuring Nigeria over its human rights record would you be
supportive of a move like that?
PMV: Well. I think that I would be. It depends of what comes from the floor
on this Issue, but our position on human rights is clear, and of course,
TEL: T2E: L29: 9N. oN. o0.0975 P. 07, 
TEL: 9. Nov. 95 2: 29 No. 007 P. 08/
we don't support as a party, as a Government the death penalty,
under any circumstances, least of all these kind of circumstances.
Do you think Charles should be allowed to marry Camilla?
Oh, well, I think it's time for me to leave on that note, Niki.
J: PM: ends. 


E&amp;OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating. what do you think CHOGM can achieve for the end of nuclear&nbsp;testing in the Pacific?
PM: Well, I think, it is a broad enough forum, representative enough to be able&nbsp;to competently express its view about the fact that France has extended&nbsp;the proliferation risk and has arrogantly decided to continue testing Its&nbsp;weapons in&nbsp;someone else's domain.
J: So how do you react to Mr Major's statement yesterday that he really&nbsp;would have been hypocritical not to have supported the French who had&nbsp;no choice of following nuclear power?
PM: Mr Major made a contribution this morning and I was able to enter the&nbsp;debate myself. He makes a couple of valid points. I think. One is that the&nbsp;system of nuclear weapons has been an effective deterrent for most of the&nbsp;post war years. through the cold war years. My point Is though that the&nbsp;cold war bipolarity has finished. That complexIon has gone. There is now&nbsp;no more dedicated nuclear enemy. The real enemy now Is the&nbsp;proliferators, the people who can divert mechanisms, material, technical&nbsp;advice and build weapons. So, most likely, if France believes it needs a&nbsp;nuclear weapon to defend Itself, it is not going to need It to defend Itself&nbsp;against the traditional enemies of the past like Germany or Russia, it i3&nbsp;more likely. If it Is to be attacked, it will be attacked by a terrorist or a&nbsp;terrorist group with a nuclear device.
J: Did you make this point today?
PM: I did and I made clear that therefore what France has done, the strikeagainst France, Is that it has made clear to the proliferators that bombbuilding is ok and It becomes a bit difficult to say ' oh, we will cease whenthe Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty comes' because what you are reallysaying, in principle, is bomb building Is ok and we will cease when we aregood and ready and we have got our bomb built. So, that I think. Is thepoint, The second thing I said today, the second strike against France, Isthat It is a democracy and It Is also a democracy which I said many peoplearound the table had fought for, fought to preserve French liberty and that&nbsp;the masthead of French society liberty, equality, fraternity was&nbsp;something that was not providing any equality or fraternity to the people&nbsp;of the Pacific. It is one thing a dictatorship or a military government going&nbsp;Its way wilfully In disregard of communities, but it Is another thing&nbsp;altogether for a democracy. Therefore the objection to France's testing&nbsp;program Is, one, that It encourages proliferation and, two, that as ademocracy it has turned its back on the ideals of Its own democracy andalso its back upon those who actually fought in defence of French liberty.
J; Mr Keating, was China also encouraging proliferation and Is it being&nbsp;criticised?
PM: It is and it was. I mentioned China too to say that It Is doing just the sameMthing as France. It Is encouraging proliferators to develop weapons. Thedifference with China, of course, Is that it is doing them In its ownmetropolitan area.
i: What do you think of the role being played by John Major?
PMV: Well, it has only just started.
J: he asorns to be saying, certainly in talks with the New Zealand PrimeMinister last night. the position of those two Prime Minister's seems to bethat the agreement was to agree to disagree and put It to one side andget on with the rest.
PM: The agreement, I think, will probably be to disagree, but It will not be putto one side. One hopes the communique will reflect the broad basis ofthat disagreement.
J: a proposal I understand for the New Zealand Prime Minister and British&nbsp;Prime Minister to issue a mini communique this evening, do you support&nbsp;that move?
PM: We haven't even finished the global discussion at this point.
J: Do you support their move though?
PM: I just told you, we haven't finished the global discussion at this point. I am&nbsp;not sure how the discussion will go for the balance of the afternoon.
J: In your discussions with Mr Bolger'last night,. did he raise that prospect of&nbsp;a mini communique?
PM: No.
J: Did Mr Major raise any other points?
PM: Yes, he made quite a number of po ints, I'm not sure that I've got my notes&nbsp;with me. He made a comprehensive set of points, one about development&nbsp;finance for developingconre
J: On the French question, did he havie any other points?
PM: No, it was only that as a ' possessor of nuclear weapons there was a&nbsp;responsibility that he understood. He thought he understood President&nbsp;Chirac's position as a result of that which IS something he has said before&nbsp;I think.
J: Prime Minister, do you think you are getting enough support form New&nbsp;Zealand in your opposition to the stance being taken by the French?
PM: New Zealand's position has been clear about this issue right the way&nbsp;through and, of course, Prime Minister Bolger Is In their C hair, he Is not in&nbsp;the debate.
J: Prime Minister, have you had any discussions with Dr Mahathir&nbsp;especially after his statement In support of you last night?
PM: I didn't realise that he had said something in support of me last night.
J: Well he did.
PM: No, I have since been told and I also said some things in support of him.&nbsp;in support of some of the points he made in his own contribution on this&nbsp;Issue.
J: Could you elaborate on that?
PM: Just that he was referring to, as I had in Australia earlier referred to, therisk of the Chernobyl type accidents and that being the real problem forEurope. He was talking about, I think, $ 400 million needing to be spentto encarcerate and to seal Chernobyl. The problem is that there are14 Chernobyl reactors there Is 14 of them.
J: Are you going to have any private meetings with Mr Major?
PM: Yes I am down, I think I am seeing him tomorrow afternoon. Maybe the&nbsp;next day.
J: Do you think the fact that Mr Major has given precedence to his regional&nbsp;considerations over the desires of Commonvmalth countries says&nbsp;anything about what [ inaudible] other countries should put in the&nbsp;Commonwealth?
PM: Well I think that it makes cleat that we ail have distinct interests. I thinkwhat the Commonwealth can do is cut across regional Interests. I meansome of the subjects under discussion make clear that it can cut acrossitis an organisation which has had, of course its beginning Isbecause of its contact and arrangements with Britain In the past and itgoes across the world. And, youlkmow, It cuts across a lot of regionalboundaries and it can therefore address a lot of subjects that many otherregional groupings could not. So in that sense It Is useful. * But I thinkPrime Minister Major's support for the French comes from the focus thatFrance, and Germany, and Britain have had on each other since theopening days of this century.
J: Mr Keating, did you In your contribution raise the Nigerian matter?
PM: No.
J: Was there much discussion on that today?
PM: No, not at this point. It probably will be.
J: Could you tell us where you think that is up to?
PM: Oh I can only say where we stand on it. I think at this point, that Is thatwe have called in the Ambassador in Canberra to express our disfavourat this decision and to say that we think It is wrong and no doubt therewill be similar expressions here. Now whether one moves to then somesort of sanctions is a matter for debate. President Mandela, Iunderstand, doesn't favour sanctions for instance.
J: Robert Mugabe does and some others do. Where does Australia stand&nbsp;on sanctions at this point?
PM: Well we will listen to the debate and see what we think about it.
J: Do you think it is important for the Commonwealth to actually take action&nbsp;against Nigeria, rather than just mouth words?
PM: Well that is the same thing. We will see when we go in there.
J: Prime Minister, Fleet Street seems to be in something of a lather. Have&nbsp;you been verbaled?
PM: I think I have to say I have been, yes.
J: Well, what were the circumstances of It exactly?
PM: Well as you know I like journalists. Most of the time I like journalists andI am used to the tricks of the trade. But I do reject and objectstrenuously to people who are Imputing to me something I haven't saidat all. The Queen was never mentioned In any discussion not at alland I do not refer to The Queen flippantly ever. And some Australianjournalist said he thinks that they are words that have been used by LesPatterson, by Barry Humphries. Now it may be, which makes thejournalist even more culpable.
J: Isn't it very surprising that the newspaper concerned is [ inaudible]&nbsp;newspaper?
PM; It is. I think the only thing about this Is that the sort of cancer which thetabloids In Britain have had, has obviously had such an Impact on theBritish press that It has moved into the broadsheets who feel they mustuse some of this too to be able to convey their Message.
J: So what is your estImation of a British journalist at the moment,&nbsp;Prime Minister?
PM: Oh well I don't know.
J: Are you going to take this up with the Editor of The Guardian?
PM: Well I think Greg Turnibull put a statemnent out. Greg Turnbull wasstanding with me with Ric Simes and I just saw this person In thecorridor. I I 1-
J: The British press are also Interpreting Mr Major's visit here as a victory.The British papers this morning are saying that his logic on the Frenchnuclear issue has won over, particularly won over, New Zealand. Is thatyour interpretation?PM: Well you should know, you're a New Zealand Journalist.J: Well I am asking you what your interpretationPM: You should know whether New Zealand has been won over or not.But they were not won over last night when I last spoke to them aboutthis subjectJ-Mr Keating would you say that Mr Major was on the back foot duringdiscussions this morning? You said that you and Mr MajorPM: Well he put his position forthrightly and I put mine, the Sultan of Bruneiput his, Prime Minister Chan of Papua New Guinea put his,Prime Minister Mahathir, amongst others.J: [ inaudible) In a mood to Issue the sort of condemnation. Gareth Evanssays Australia wants a straightforward conference.P M-Well I said that France and China should be condemned for theirdecision and for the reasons I stated earlier.J: There was no support for Britain at all In those discussions?PMV: Not so far, but this global session hasn't finished.J: Do you believe there will be any support for them from any countries? 7PM: I don't know.ends



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, MILLBROOK RESORT, QUEENSTOWN,
12 NOVEMBER 1995
ElOE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, what concrete acton Is Australia going to take over tihe
Nigerian Issue?
PM: In the first Instance, we will be withdrawing our Ambassador to show
our anger and our objection to this sort of behaviour, the denial of
human rights and human values In Nigeria and, of course, I have been
part of the majority here the overwhelming majority of
Commonwealth Leaders which has made clear that Nigeria will be
suspended from the Commontwealth until it demonstrates that It has
had a change of heart and a change In the way in which the country
Operates and is moving back towards civilian government.
J, What impact does suspension have, I mean, how does this hurt
Nigeria?
PM: There are two things, I think. This was a test of the Commonweafth's
moral authority. The Commonwealth's moral authority has been
Important in Zimbabwe. It has been important in removing the racially
based government of South Africa, the policy of apartheid. On that
occasion It introduced economic sanctions which were completely
effective. I might just say John Howard today on television, said that he
doesn't regret not Supporting economic sanctions against South Africa.
Let me record that, had those sanctions not been used,
Nelson Mandela would not be at this meeting today. He would not be
at this meeting as the President of South Africa, but for the fact that the
Labor Government in Australia and other like-minded governments
around the world employed economic sanctions against South Africa.
Now, these opions always exist for other countries. The
Commonwealth has no constitutional authority over sovereign
countries, but it is a very large representative group of countries and It
does have moral authority. Its moral authority would not have been 
maintained were it to be, In a sense, scrubbed, defied by the
Government of Nigeria in executing these nine people. The fact that
they were executed means, I think, that the Commonwealth had to act
and the Commonwealth has acted.
J: What sort of a push was there for expulsion?
PM; Not very much, in fact none. Because with expulsion there Is no
Incentive to return and there Is no continuing link withl the country.
Whereas with suspension, we can keep that pressure on. That
pressure has been kept on a number of Countries in the past and most
obviously, of course, South Africa.
J. Any indication from the Nigerian Foreign Minister as to whether they will
take up any of that Incentive as you say?
PM: Well, I think, thy wil1 have to think about their position and no doubt,
I think, probably today, we will think further about what might be done.
But we did adopt yesterday a set of principles around the H~ arare
Declaration which will be applied now, I think, consistently over time to
any Countries that break the conventions of decent behaviour In
government or human rights.
J: Will we be expelling Nigeria's legation from Australia?
PMV: We are withdrawing our Ambassador tor consultations and we will
consider where we go from there, but this Is very strong action by the
Commonwealth in suspending Nigeria and it wes unanimous bar two
countries.
J: What countries were they Prime Minister?
PM: The Solomon Islands and Gambia.
J: What further actions would you like to see taken against Nigeria to give
some efec to what you ame hoping to achieve?
PM: The problem here is the question again of the nation state. Countries
which are calWe nations are often a Collection of regional areas or tribal
regions and politics in many countries of Africa have been organised
tribally. It remains to be aeon whether a poltical party structure of the
kind we have In Australia can actually apply effectively wtiere there Is
good government and justice for all. I think these are some of the
Issues, but one thing Is certain, a return to ciiian government is the
key ingredient for Nigeria.
J: Just one lest question on Nigeria If I may, there was talk last night of
setting up a time frame for possible expulsion, what Is your view of
that? 
ILL-3
PM: I think probably the time frame should be between now and the next
meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government, which Is two
years. Some may argue for it earlier than that, but I think to have the
sort of plenary force of the Commonwealth, there really needs to be a
Head of Government Meeting. And I don't think that, if you like, further
solid action can be taken without a meeting of the Heads of
Government. So I think that is probably the way it might go.
J: By having to confront issues such as Nigeria and nuclear testing, do
you believe this has strengthened the Commonwealth. or CHOGM, as
a forum?
PM. Well one of the things I said yesterday was that if the United Nations
didn't exist, we would have to invent it. If the Commonwealth didn't
exist, we wouldn't have to invent it. But it does exist and it exists
because of the linkage we have all had with Britain at one point or
another. So it Is a trans-regional body that runs across the world's
regions and it has been effective in speaking about democracy, the rule
of law, justice, human rights and development issues end I think it can
continue to do that. Yesterday was a test of that and I think It passed
that test.
J: You would be aware of Mr Howard on the Sunday Program today,
Prime Minister. What would you like to say about his comments?
PM: Well he said today, he gave us this pat line again that he Is in favour of
families, arrogantly, as if the rest of us don't come from families, or we
are not in favour of them. But what he said is he was in favour of
orthodox family arrangements. What he means Is he is not in favour of
the unorthodox. In other words, he is only in favour of the nuclear
family and the picket fence, he is not in favour of single parent families
and he said, I thought rather ominously, that " a Government under him
will not be a society where the Government picks up the pieces of
families". In other words, they won't be supporting giving income
support to families, income support per child for children, as the
Government does. You see Mr Howard says he believes in families,
but he doesn't believe In family support. He believes in families, but he
doesn't believe in decent wages for them. He believes in families, but
he doesn't believe In overtime rates. He believes in families, but he
doesn't believe in Medicare. I mean, and what he made clear today,
when pressed about the orthodox families that he is supporting and
as, I think, every Australian knows the so-called nuclear. orthodox family
is but a minority of families in Australia he said he was not going to
debate in 1995 the definition of the family. In other words, what he Is
telling us it's the same old John Howard with the picket fence. If you
are, you know, mum and dad and three kids with a comfortable
bungalow and a car in the driveway, well you will be supported. If you
are a single parent with children, you won't be. If you are any other
category of family, you will be called into question. That was one of the
things he said. SL . I 14W V J L. .0 IU I 
The other thing he said was about integrity in Government. He said we
need Integrity in Government and Mr Oakes asked him the question,
" Well why, Mr Howard, did you say coming up to the 1983 election that
the Budget deficit was $ 6 billion, when you know it was $ 9.6 billion?"
Hie then told a lie. He said, " I found out about it the night before the
election." That is untrue. He found out about it about the Tuesday
before the election and he sat on it for tour days. In a key matter, in a
key election, and then he has got the gall to talk about Integrity In office
and honesty in policies. He was asked, also, this question: did he
regret his non-support of economic sanctions in South Africa? And he
said, no he didn't. The point was made, well Nelson Mandela wouldn't
be at this meeting of the Commonwoetth had your view obtained. Now
Nelson Mandela wouldn't be here had John Howard's view obtained.
This is the same John Howard who said be very careful of
Mikhail Gorbachev and perestroika, he Is essentially leading you on, it
is just the old sort of communist bogey, giving us another misleading
line. in the meantime, of course, the Soviet Union has fallen apart, the
Berlin wall has come down. On every foreign policy issue he has ever
touched, he has been wrong and he was wrong a month ago when he
said we have got to be suspicious of Asia, It Is a threat, we want
security from Asia and not In Asia. But the thing about him Is, he never
learns. He is out there today beating his breast about his policies on
South Africa. In fact, they were dead wrong and he was in a minority
against the rest of the world.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, BENDIGO ART GALLERY, BENDIGO, 12 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, the Queensland by-election has been announced for
February 3, how does that affect the timing of the federal election?
PM: It doesn't. They are just separate issues, completely separate issues.
I think people know that.
J: Will you be going to Queensland to see if Wayne Goss is going to
want some help with the election?
PM: It is a by-election. I can't remember one Prime Minister ever involved
in a State by-election not ever.
J: How do you think the Government will go?
PM: In the by-election, you mean?
J: Yes.
PM: Oh, I think the Government will win it because I think Wayne Goss has
got in there, got on with the job. It has got a very good feel about it
Queensland. I think it has got tremendous potential, particularly with
the Asia-Pacific growing the way it is and its links with it and the shift
of population. It has got the wind behind its sails and he is driving it.
J: Mr Keating, did you have any talks with Mr Goss about the timing of it?
PM: No. I haven't spoken with him in the last two days either.
J: Will Joe Helper win the next election in Bendigo?
PM: Well I think he will and this city and this electorate needs someone like
him to represent them in the national government and to do some
more things like we have done today. 
J: Do you think Bruce Reid is strong enough to win though?
PM: Well, to be honest with you, I hardly know their names of some of
these Coalition fellows because you don't ever hear from them. And,
today, we have said we will take the historic gallery of this city, you
walk through that facade into the old galleries of it. It is one of the
historic cities of Australia and the art gallery ought to be the place of
recording some of its history. So we are going to join the city and
bring it back to life. Now you know Joe was on my back about it. I saw
the sense of it. We have gone and done it. Today we also announced
the transfer of the tourist information centre down to the former
post office, which is $ 213,000. We are spending just on $ 400,000
here in these things, on top of the $ 2 million we will spend on the
gallery. So these are, I think, for the core precinct of the city, all strong
for its tourism, understanding the great heritage which is here and
using it as well as the community facilities. I mean we have got a full
office here of the Department of Employment, Education and Training.
We have got very large labour market programs for the unemployed
and the long term unemployed and that is growing. I think this year,
I am relying on my memory, but in terms of support for
Local Government, other Commonwealth payments to Bendigo, I think
it is somewhere of the order of around $ 55 million. And that is,
of course, outside the Social Security system, outside of Medicare and
outside all the mainframe programs.
So that is at the time when Victoria is pulling out money for education,
pulling out money for health. The Kennett government is withdrawing
funding from here. We are the ones interested in the place and so that
is why we want him here.
J: Mr Keating, there was a handful of.-East Timorese demonstrators at the
lunch in the park today. In an interview, the newly appointed
Indonesian Ambassador has described the Dili massacre as merely an
incident and wants Australia to get tough on flag burning.
PM: I have not seen the interview. I don't know what he said, Peter
( Harvey). I have no idea. I have never seen anything he has said
about issues affecting Australia and Indonesia, or Australia and Timor.
J: I realise that, but he said this in Paris.
PM: Well let's see what he said, Peter, and we will give a remark later.
J: Mr Keating, fuel prices, the difference between what city people are
paying as compared to people here in Bendigo and other regional
centres. What is being done at this stage?
PM: Well, petrol discounting comes and goes, I know. But you do get
regional disparities in petrol prices. I mean, essentially, these things 
are set in the market. We have a freight equalisation scheme which
does Affect beneficially many parts of Australia. But, I am just not sure
to what extent it affects Bendigo.
J: Mr Keating, any response to Jeff Kennett calling you a jelly back?
PM: Poor old Jeffrey. I mean, I don't know what he puts on his rice crispies
of a morning, the old Jeffrey. Some days he sprinkles them with
Valium other days he sprinkles them with chilli.
J: Is Community and Nation federal Labor's backflip on City Link as Mr
Kennett has claimed?
PM: Community and Nation is a very great reform of Australia's public
housing system, that's what it is principally. Getting support for
tenants in both public and private housing, to kick on the private
housing sector in the rental market and to kick on the development of
the community housing sector as well, that is, the public housing
sector. It is a very great reform and I am very glad it was greeted as
such by most newspaper editorials and by the industry. But, how it
affects Victoria and these various projects is just a matter of how we do
see a value in international linkages to cities like Melbourne and
Sydney. In Sydney we are reserving land and a transport system to
Sydney west airport from Kingsford Smith Airport. We have just spent
$ 250 million on Brisbane International Terminal and in the same way
we are looking at what linkages there can be from Tullamarine to the
city of Melbourne. I don't see this being in any way at odds with
anything the Premier wants to do in his traffic policies.
J: Mr Keating, do you intend going to Singapore and Malaysia next
month?
PM: I have been invited to give the Singapore Lecture in Singapore which I
am prone to do and currently we are seeking to put into place, we are
talking to Malaysia about arrangements. I might be able to go firm
about that in the next day or two.
J: Mr Keating, I wonder if you would care to comment on Andrew Olle
who remains in a critical condition in Sydney this afternoon?
PM: Only to say as a relatively young man I am desperately sorry to see
the condition he is in and I am desperately sad for his family and as
someone who is well known to the community I am sure there are
many Australians who think the same.
J: Prime Minister, I have been talking to Aboriginal leaders in this region
and they were saying that the Mabo legislation has been watered
down to the extent that it will lose many of the benefits for them. 
PM: No, it is not going to be watered down. It is going to take a while to get
the claims moving and to get them up, but in the end if one can
establish a custom or traditional association with the land, that is the
criteria for the legislation. I don't doubt that in any of these processes,
various groups will get frustrated with them, but the strength of the
legislation is there and the Government is not going to be changing it.
J: Prime Minister, the State Housing Ministers met in Melbourne today..
( inaudible) does that place it in jeopardy?
PM: I haven't heard what they have said, but I know Brian Howe came to
the Cabinet with some very strong support from State Housing
Ministers about it. They have been looking for a reform of this kind for
many years and the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement hasn't
changed really that much since 1945. It really needs this sort of
change now.
J: The State Housing Minister for Victoria says that the Victorian
government is not prepared to pay any money because the Federal
government isn't going to put in any money.
PM: Well, the whole thing is that it is revenue neutral. You see, the money
that Victoria would now spend on rental subsidies in public housing,
they wouldn't need to spend, we would spend it. That is where the
adjustment comes in. In other words, it wouldn't affect Victoria's
budget and, I think, these things need to be understood. But, there
would be a little bit of politics being played here by Jeffrey and the
boys as well. So, you can put a big discount through most of what
they say for a while.
J: Mr Keating, John Howard has nominated small business incentives as
the main electoral issue in Bendigo.
PM: That is why he was out supporting our incentives package, our
innovation package last week saying it was his own. He called it the
imitation package. Of course, it was about supporting innovation in
Australian business and one of the great reforms we have in there is
bringing the banks into the equity position, rather than debt. That
banks can actually invest in companies. You saw the company I
visited here in Bendigo this morning with Joe, we went to see AUSVAC
producing vaccines. Now it may be that that company through its own
retained earnings has got enough capital, but if it hasn't, it would be
the sort of company that the banks would actually take equity in rather
than debt. That is a very novel change as is all the extension services
like TradeBlazer, the reaffirmation of the 150 per cent R&amp; D
concession, all these things are very much supportive of the small to
medium business.
J: Will the superannuation funds be invested into the housing industry? 
PM: Well, they are now.
J: More so through your program announced last week?
PM: Well, we are seeking in our program the other day, to teach super fund
trustees to educate them about opportunities for investment in the
market and how better to get a result from their investment fund
managers and there is no doubt that as we see more competition in
the housing market we will see more mortgages bound up and sold
into the bond market and Australian super funds will be buying them.
J: Mr Keating, your forest agreement prompted quite a bit of interest in
and around Bendigo, but the Box Ironbark forests which surround
Bendigo weren't included in the reserve system.
PM: Our view was that there is in the Box Ironbark forests which are part of
the national forest estate and those on private land, that they are of
sufficient size to represent a representative reserve system and that is
the key point. What the government is seeking to do here in forestry is
develop representative reserve systems and we are seeking these
Deferred Forest Agreements, deferred forest areas and as well as that
putting areas away for regional forest agreements which we'll then
enter into at some couple of years down the track. Our forest
statement is the biggest reservation, I'm sure, the biggest reservation
of trees in Australian history. Over six million hectares of important
forest and that is why, I think, it was greeted so well by serious people
interested in conservation.
ends 



7&gt; . CI
PRIME MINISTER
NEW AUSTRALIAN AID FOR HIVIAIOS PROJECTS IN AFRICA
In the Commonwealth Action Program issued after today's CHOWM retreat at
Queenstown, Commonwealth Leaders noted the threat which HIVIAIDS poses to
large parts of the younger population of many Commonwealth countries and urged
that further resources be committed to combating its spread.
During this discussion, which I introduced, I announced an additional Australian Aid
Program of $ 10 million over four years for HIV/ AIDS care and prevention in Africa.
This funding is additional to the $ 7.8 million currently being spent on ten HlV/ AIDS
prevention and care projects in southern and eastern Africa.
The HIV/ AIDS pandemic is having a devastating human, social and economic
Impact on Africa, which now has 70 per cent of the world's AIDS cases. In
Zimbabwe alone, the Health Minister estimates that 100,000 people will die of
AIDS over the next 18 months.
International assistance and cooperation is an Integral part of Australia's national
HIV/ AIDS strategy. We believe that Australia's experience and expertise,
especially In AIDS education strategies can usefully be shared with other countries.
Like existing Australian aid projects for HIV/ AIDS care and prevention. the new
funding I have announced will be channelled through international organisations,
Australian NGOs and indigenous groups.
The additional resources will enable Australia to fund UNICEF initiatives in this
area in South Africa and Kenya in addition to our support for current projects In
Zimbabwe, Malawi and Namibia.
They will also enable the continuation of core funding to the Southern African
Network of AIDS Organisations ( SANASO), which links 100 NGO and community
organisations involved in HI V/ AIDS prevention and care.
Australian aid expenditure on HIVIAIDS projects to the end of 1995/ 96 is estimated
at $ 53 million.
AUCKLAND 12 November 195 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
ASSISTANCE TO COMMON WEALTH TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
Australia will make two further contributions to Commonwealth programs.
A contribution of $ 100,000 will be made to the Commonwealth Partnership for
Technology Management which Is being officially launched today.
The Commonwealth Partnership for Technology Management Is a non-profit
company which provides a network of contacts for technology management
and problem solving in Commonwealth countries. It Is a partnership of
government, private sector and academic institutions established as a
company In order to give It Increased access to prtvatesector expertise and
funding. The funding will assist Commonwealth members to develop improved
technology management capabilities.
Australia will also contribute a further $ 150,000 to the Commonwealth Fund
for Technological Cooperation for a study to review how the Commonwealth
might better help small states overcome obstacles to increasing their exports.
The Commonwealth already provides advice at a government policy level to
help members take advantage of the greater trade opportunities and deal with
the challenges presented by global trade lberalisation since the post Uruguay
round. This study will Identify measures to help small states, especially Pacific island
states, overcome practical constraints St various stages to production,
marketing and exports for example by use of short term advisers.
AUCKLAND 13 November 1995 I 



L . PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, RAAF FAIRBAIRN, CANBERRA, 14 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: A remark on the Lawrence Royal Commission we only have at this
stage Premier Court's summary of the report, and I would like to read
the full report. But I think we have only got to regard the result as very
dubious open to doubt as indeed Commissioner Marks said it would
be in one of his public statements. He also said at that time of that
statement, that the terms of reference had turned out to be fairly
restrictive, he said it was " part of my training not to make assumptions
on half the evidence". In other words, he was saying that it was
restrictive, the evidence and the findings would be open to doubt.
Well, they are open to doubt if what we believe to be the findings are
an accurate reflection of what Mir Court has said, and I just simply
make the point that it was a political Royal Commission set up by the
Opposition, by John Howard and Richard Court for the most base
political motives, it has not a shred of integrity to it in the drawing up of
the Royal Commission's terms of reference, it's been a charade from
front to back, and it was condemned by the Royal Commissioner in
terms of process. And we can only agree with the Royal
Commissioners own observation that it would be open to doubt, and
therefore I regard the whole process as dubious and worthless.
J Do you retain confidence in Dr Lawrence?
PM: I have complete confidence in her, all these claims and counter-claims
it's always seemed to me that her version of these things are fairly
clear anyway, but the key evidence was given by Mr Marquet, the
Clerk of the Upper House, who said it would have been improper for
any Premier or Member of the Executive Government to stop a
Member of Parliament presenting a petition. Like me as Prime Minister
stopping a Member of Parliament presenting a petition in the House of
Representatives or the Senate. That was the knockout evidence, but
of course, it came late and the sequencing of the witnesses was such 
that all of the very notable evidence was given by people who are
giving evidence against Carmen Lawrence. So, she has my complete
support and I'm sure the support of everyone in the Government, and
our sympathy for having to go through such a process where we have I
seen the grossest form of personal abuse at the hands of the Liberal
Party. A $ 6 million Royal Commission arrayed against one woman.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: I haven't seen them the findings in detail.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
~ PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTE R, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
SIGNING OF COMMONWEALTH LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCORD,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 14 NOVEMBER 1995
I am very pleased to be here to sign the first partnership agreement entered
into by Commonwealth and local governments.
The textbooks commonly refer to local government as the " third" tier of
government. I suppose it might seem a little remote when you're sitting on
Capitol Hill but that description seems much less accurate when you're
driving along a suburban road, or sitting in a local park or using the local
library. Of all the tiers of government local government actually operates closest to
the people. Good local governments keep their communities together and
keep them strong. Local representatives are drawn in a very immediate way
from their communities and because most elective positions are part-time,
the incumbents remain fully engaged in those communities.
Local government is situated directly in the communitys line of sight and
your work is of interest to all the members of the community.
Australia's councils have always served as the forum for local decisionmaking
on local matters. But they are also increasingly significant to our
national life.
In all bu a few areas of Australia's public life, the decisions of local
government and the quality of those decisions help determine our
progress. This is the case with the regeneration of our cities and the redevelopment of
our regions. It is most certainly the case with the protection of our natural
environment. The health of our people and the houses they live in, the
culture in which they participate, their jobs and their standard of livng all
this is touched by the processes of local government-Many of the problems
we face as a natio lie at the 1oca level and so do ft solutions.
29461 
All Australian governments owe a duty to the Australian people and all are
charged with serving the Australian nation. No less than their
Commonwealth, State and Territory counterparts, local governments have a
role in addressing national issues and pursuing national goals.
As local governments become more aware of their national responsibilities,
the federal government is moving to anchor itself more securely in local
communities.
The lesson we can draw from such widely different initiatives as Working
Nation Landcare and Australia Remembers is that national programs work
best at the local level when they are delivered by local people, fuelled by
local energy and informed by local needs.
We realise that in pursuing national priorities, we must make use of the
people and resources on the ground and very often that means local
, tered governments. So a partnership between the Commonwealth and local government is very
worthwhile and long overdue. But like all matches, it required some making.
j on
re In February David Plumridge first mentioned to me the idea of an Accord
; al spurred on, I believe, by the success achieved at your First National
Assembly last November.
081, to I thought it was a very good idea and an excellent means of broadening and
and deepening the relationship between our two levels of government
e way
-time, In the intervening months, the two parties, led by David Plumridge and Brian
Howe, have worked hard to put some flesh-onto the bones of this Accord
and they have succeeded. We will sign a very valuable document today, one
ind which contains some significant undertakings and which will shape our future
working relationship.
At the heart of this Accord is a set of principles shared beliefs sincerely held
ur and shared goals to be sincerely pursued. These include commitments to
social justice and community cohesion, the pursuit of reconciliation with our
indigenous people, recognition of the benefits of cultural diversity and the
need for all governments to pursue micro-economic reform and to protect the
environment. This is an important statement a statement of the principles which guide
ent of Australian government. These principles have not always been the subject of
iral consensus within the Australian polity, so it is worthwhile setting them down
in ink if not in concrete.
-all
blems B# ftiPc= icmposed of morn than finwoLs. Both th-
I murom. i adocal govermwrtitmwedi~ i~ iimudrakg 21) i 47? 
W(
The Commonwealth believes local government should be involved in COAG de
processes and Ministerial Council activities where local government has a a r
legitimate interest, such as a significant statutory responsibility or financial up
commitment. Or
The Commonwealth will consult with local government when its initiatives are thit
likely to impact upon local government, having regard to normal budgetary an,
processes and existing arrangements with State and Territory Governments. If/
And the Commonwealth undertakes to provide funding, within existing anf
resources, for a range of local government initiatives from the Local PC
Government Development Program and to review the financial position of
local government, taking account of such issues as future changes in local W
government functions and responsibilities. de be
So the Accord is good for local government. But it's also good for Australia. we
It folds local affairs into the national mix and draws local government more rer
fully into the mainstream of national life. art
Under the Accord, local government commits to pull its weight in the arena of It v
micro-economic reform, particularly through the implementation of national thE
competition policy, enterprise bargaining, productive diversity and regulatory
reform. Fir
go'
Following on the Report of the Urban Design Task Force, the Commonwealth pei
welcomes local governments willingness to pursue reforms that will improve
the quality of our cities and thus the quality of life of our people. Th
I welcome your commitment to the protection of the environment. The Accord tw(
provides for an integrated approach to planning and development and to Fe
appropriate involvement in areas like waste management, sewerage and
stormwater treatment issues that are crucial if we are to look after our rivers Tland
our coasts. ac, th(
In this Accord, local government signs up to the cause of invigorating
Australian democracy through the creation of an effective citizenship W!,
education program. 191
Th
I know you had Philip Adams speaking to you yesterday and I gather you na
warmly welcomed everything he said about the program called Australia
Consult. Lei ffui-
The government endorsed the program back in June, shortly after I Cc
announiced the Government's preferred model of an Australian Republic. an(
There has been a good deal of debate about the model. I believe it is the
best means of reaching the objective of having an Australian as Australia's W(
Heed of State; Au
I t 
We decided it was the best model after extensive consultations and a great
n COAG deal of hard thinking. We still firmly believe it is the best model. But it is not
has a a model we want to force upon Australians indeed no model can be forced
iancial upon Australians. A republic can't be forced upon Australians.
On the contrary, we want the whole nation to consider the issues. In fact, we
atives are think that the consideration of them will be immensely beneficial to the nation
igetary and to the life of our democracy.
rnments. If Australia Consults serves the purpose of encouraging interest and debate
ng and knowledge of our democratic system and an enlivened sense of national
possibilities and national purpose, it will be an invaluable program.
; ition of
n local We have a chance with the approach of the Centenary of Federation and the
debate about our Head of State and other constitutional arrangements to
become much more familiar with our democracy and ourselves. And I hope
, ustralia. we learn a great deal more than what our shortcomings are. I hope we will be
int more reminded that there is no more robust democracy in the world: indeed, there
are few older democracies and few, if any, more truly democratic.
arena of It will do no harm if through the national debate ahead of us we are reminded
ational that Australia is a very good, and very democratic place to live.
egulatory Finally, by participating in a national system of performance indicators, local
government joins the other two tiers of government in the measurement of
ionwealth performance and progress in the delivery of services.
improve The Commonwealth Local Government Accord is a balanced document,
which will make for a more secure and productive relationship between our
he Accord two levels of government. More than that though, it will make for a better
nd to Federation and a stronger nation.
iand
our rivers The Accord demonstrates how well Australian federalism can work when the
activities of all governments coalesce around national priorities and when
the decisions of all governments are measured against the national interest.
g
a When this Labor Government signed our first Accord with the trade unions in
1983, no one could have predicted the benefits that would flow to Australia.
There is no reason why today's agreement should not similaily advance the
ir you nation over the next decade.
' ralia Let me say in dosing that it has been one of the real pleasures of my time in
this office of Prime Minister to watch the relationship between the
Commonrwealth and Local Government grow into something truly substantial
iblic. and creative.
is the
; tralia's We will all have to drew our own conclusions about the other side of the
Australian political equation who, at this premier event on fth local 2 I 9, 
mi
government calendar, decided that the interests of local government are best
advanced by a deafening policy silence. DPI
If we all rack our brains, perhaps we can think of some reason why we should
be kept in the dark. I must say I can't think of one. If it is a decent policy I
cannot think of any advantage the Government could take from it. If it is not a
decent policy I cannot think why it would be more credible just before an
election than it would be now. The
Let me offer my thanks to those responsible for negotiating this Accord Lim.
ehsep leecaivaellsy bBerhiainnd H aonw eim. pBrerisasniv ree trierecso rfdro omf speurbvliicce l ifaen da t atchhei enveexmt eelenct tion and aM rre I
And to all the local government representatives here today: good luck for the Eproc
future because the work of local councils represents much of the hard work " No
of government. I trust you will return to your communities excited by our D
achievement today and confident in the ability of Australians to work BedF
together for a common cause. Bd
Thank you. Po
A scopc " Bas,
US$]
R Tin mar:
E ~ trad.; Mar'
L and
E Norr
A indu
A dem. Norr
S Furti Mini DPIE
2950 



PRIME MINISTER 131/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
MARKS ROYAL COMMISSION
The Marks Royal Commission was unable to rise above its poisoned origins.
It was conceived In political malice. It was constituted with extravagance and
partiality. Consequently, it will be remembered, If at all, for the disrepute Into
which it has brought Royal Commissions as a proper and relevant institution
In Australian public life. And its findings will be rejected by all fair minded
people. Because the Royal Commission was conceived as an act of political
malevolence by the Court Government, aided and abetted by John Howard
and the Federal Coalition, basic principles of natural justice were ignored at
the very outset.
The terms of reference were deliberately narrow. They were drawn up to put
Dr Lawrence and the Labor Party on trial, while excluding from scrutiny the
actions of Premier Court and his colleagues, who were the first to make a
public issue of the private affairs of Penny Easton and her husband. This set
the tone for what followed.
In Perth, the Court Government was prepared to spend millions of dollars of
Western Australian taxpayers' money and to array the full force of the
executive power of the state against one decent woman.
In Canberra, John Howard and the Federal Opposition, having connived in
the establishment of the Royal Commission, launched a vicious political
onslaught against Carmen Lawrence. Long before it was over, they
clamoured for her resignation and dismissal.
They defamed her in Parliament in the most disgraceful manner. With the sly
encouragement of John Howard, Messrs Wooldridge and Tuckey and Mrs
Bishop accused her of causing Penny Easton's death.
In one ten day period in August, 31 of 37 Opposition questions without notice
to the Government In the House of Representatives concerned the Easton
affair. 
In this period, John Howard asked 13 questions about it and did not ask a
single question about anything else, When I and the government defended
Dr Lawrence, the Opposition tried to silence us with bogus appeals to the sub
judice principle.
When the government was obliged to safeguard the fundamental principles
Involved and to enable Dr Lawrence to defend herself before the Royal
Commission, the Opposition sought, and is still seeking, to prevent this
elementary expression of natural justice.
Their behaviour throughout has been contemptible.
Premier Court continues to claim that the Commission was set up " to
establish the truth in relation to these serious matters". But the narrow terms
of reference meant this was not possible.
The fatal flaws and irrelevance of this Royal Commission are confirmed out of
the Royal Commissioner's own mouth. He pointed to the restrictive nature of
its terms of reference. He said that the sooner it came to an end the better.
He said that its results would probably be open to doubt.
In this he is absolutely right.
Mr Marks even said that the experience had demonstrated that the
usefulness of Royal Commissions was fast receding.
While the Government agrees with the Royal Commissioners implicit
judgment of the value of his own Royal Commission, we continue to believe
that there is a proper role for Royal Commissions, where they deal with
appropriate matters of public importance, are constituted properly and have
relevant terms of reference.
In this regard, the establishment of this Royal Commission was unique and
uniquely disreputable. It will stand as an example of the lack of principle,
propriety and decency of the Court Government and John Howard's Liberal
Party. I continue to have complete confidence in Carmen Lawrence and look
forward to her continued role as a senior and valued member of the
Government. CANBERRA 14 November 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 132/ 95
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
AND THE MINISTER FOR DEVELOPMENT CO-OPERATION, THE
HON GORDON BILNEY MP
VIETNAMESE BRIDGE PROJECT
The Governments of Australia and Vietnam today announced their decision to
proceed with the construction of a bridge across the Mekong River at My Thuan
in southern Vietnam.
The bridge, to be jointly funded by the two governments, is expected to cost
approximately $ 83 million, with Australian contributions over four years
expected to be over $ 55 million. It will be the Australian aid program's biggest
ever infrastructure project.
The decision is another important milestone in the growing partnership
between Australia and Vietnam.
The bridge will be the first across the Mekong in Vietnam and about
2,000 kilometres downstream from the Austral ian-builIt Friendship Bridge linking
Thailand and Laos. It will replace an existing ferry service which each day
transports up to 22,500 people, 4,000 tonnes of freight and 5,000 passenger
vehicles. The decision to proceed with the project follows the acceptance of a detailed
feasibility study which covered a range of technical, economic, environmental,
social and legal issues.
The study found the bridge to be technically feasible, economically viable and
likely to make a significant contribution to improving the living standards of
people throughout the delta region of southern Vietnam.
Construction of the bridge will boost the economic development of the whole
Mekong delta region, which is constrained by the massive natural barrier to
transport services of the various arms of the Mekong River. 
For the 15 million people of the delta the bridge is intended to * bring quicker,
easier and cheaper transport and higher returns for produce. It will also
enhance access to hospitals, schools and other social services.
The bridge will be built on Highway One, the main North-South road route in
Vietnam and will facilitate transport of over half the rice grown in Vietnam to the
major population centres around Ho Chi Minh City.
The overall length of the bridge will be 1,360 metres, comprising a main bridge
length of 640 metres and total approaches of 720 metres.
The commitment to proceed with the bridge follows a statement of " in principle
co-operation" signed during the visit of the General Secretary of the Communist
Party of Vietnam, Mr Do Muoi, to Australia in July.
The Minister for Development Co-operation, Gordon Bilney, and the visiting
Vietnamese Minister for Transport and Communications, Dr Bui Danh Luu,
today signed a Memorandum of Understanding for the detailed design phase of
the bridge.
The My Thuan bridge is part of a balanced development co-operation program
with Vietnam, which targets four main sectors, as well as a range of NGO
projects which focus directly on poverty. Apart from infrastructure the
Australian aid program has substantial projects in health, natural resource
development, and education.
Construction of the bridge is expected to begin in June 1997 and finish towards
the end of 2000.
CANBERRA NOVEMBER 1995 



Da Min,
PRIME MINISTER DPIE9
133/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP A new
export. Beddal
TRADE AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION ARRANGEMENT " The p
overse
I am pleased to announce that Australia and Canada have today signed a Mr Bec
Trade and Economic Cooperation Arrangement. logo, d
The Canadian Prime Minister, the Rt Hon Jean Chretien, and I witnessed the Ari e
signature of the Arrangement, which marks the centenary of trade relations market
between Australia and Canada. " The in
Under the Arrangement a Ministerial-level consultative group will be prawns
established to expand trade and investment and encourage business
cooperation between Australia and Canada, and jointly in our respective " The lc
regions. The group will meet annually. clean a
The Trade and Economic Cooperation Arrangement demonstrates our joint " This
commitment to reducing trade restrictions between our two countries. " The pr
Importantly, it seeks to advance our shared APEC goals in a manner we hope to be a
will be emulated by our APEC colleagues. Mr Bed
the in d
scheme
CANBERRA November 1995 A Furthet Ministe Departi
29 78 Pa, 



L PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA, THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
JEAN CHRETIEN MP, DOORSTOP, PARLIAMENT HOUSEl
NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PJK Can I begin by saying how delighted I am to see Jean Chretien in
Australia. We have become firm friends over time now. But more than
that, more than our personal relationship, what is indeed a great
pleasure is to see a Canadian Prime Minister here in Australia. Pierre
Trudeau came here, I think, in 1970 or there about and our
relationship in the world has been so significant over time, right
through this century, that our common links and much of our common
culture is such that our relationship between us becomes somewhat
unremarkable though, of course, the strength of it is quite remarkable.
It is time, I think, on these occasions to take the opportunity to
underline how much we do have in common and how much we have
mattered in the world in various ways when we have acted in concert,
in unity in various things, not just the conflicts but in other times.
I think, we have been two countries that have always stood up for good
values, for good Ideals, for good things and this is still true and I think
even this CHOGM meeting where we have had a number of difficult
issues, again, Canada and Australia are part of a solid majority for
taking decisions that matter and doing things that mean something.
Of course, one of the things we now have in common is APEC and as
Australia and Canada looks more to Asia and the Pacific, not only is it
good for our trade and our growth, but it is good for the sense of unity
it brings to the Asia-Pacific which has strategic implications as well as
trade implications. So, we are partners in that and we were partners at
Bogor and we will be partners, again, at Osaka this weekend. Again, I
think, it underlines the importance of a common view about the way the
world Is moving and some of the big issues, That is, how East Asia
develops, how we keep the resources up to it, how we participate in it.
These are all important things.
So, we have had an interesting discussion around those subjects and
around some of the bilateral Issues. I congratulated the Prime Minister 
2
on his role in the debate in Canada over Quebec and the maintenance
of Canada as a cohesive society with an identity of its own because I
can't think of another country in the world that has something liIke the
opportunity that Australia has.
Canada is, in fact, a larger country than Australia in terms of its
geography. Mostly where we go Australia is a very large or the largest
country in discussions and we have a relatively small population here
18 million Canada, in that vast land has a relatively small population
too and it is a great opportunity given to us and the importance of
maximising that opportunity both at home and in the world is, I think,
something we both appreciate.
At any rate, It has been a good discussion, but more importantly, some
of that discussion we have already had in New Zealand and we have
already done things there and we have got more things to do on the
weekend. The important thing to say, for my part, how delighted I am
that Jean Chretien can be with us on this occasion as a Prime Minister
of such a great and friendly country and to be in Australia with Aline
who we have come to know well and to like too and to introduce him to
the Australian media always a dubious introduction, but I'm sure they
will be on their best behaviour.
JC: Merci beaucoup, Paul. I don't have to add, I think, it was a very good
discussion. We have a lot in common, not only history and culture and
vast land and so on, but we are both part of the Pacific and it is
extremely Important for Canada to become more and more a part of
the Pacific.
In our discussion we realise that it is extremely important that APEC be
a success. We have virtually the same interest and, of course, we can
be for Australia a good link with North America. And Australia can be
with us a good link with the people living in this part of the world. So,
for Canada for example, our trade with the Pacific is bigger than our
trade with the European continent by 50 per cent and we have done it
In the last five years. So, the Pacific is getting more and more
important for all of Canada and it is why I am happy to be able to work
with the Prime Minister of Australia to make sure that the goal of 2010
and 2020 be met so there will be freer trade and free trade in this part
of the world. And it is where the growth and the people are at this
moment and I am sure that working together we will achieve this. On
the bilateral basis since we met two years ago, the number of
exchanges has increased quite substantially, we have had eight
Canadian Ministers visiting Australia and about the same number of
Minsters came to Canada from Australia. And, you know, investment
is growing and the exchanges are growing and I think that we can be
very good partners.
So, I am delighted to be here. It is my second visit, I was here 24
years ago. There are some politicians here too that I met then. I have
met with the Governor-General and I had met him many years ago and
/ I r 4 1 N 1J14 U U0 rF . U 
its one politician that has been around longer than 1, but he said to me
$ we will be both beaten in terms of record by Paul Keating, he is still a
young man.'
Any questions?
J: ( interpreter]-Mr Prime Minister, Mr Keating has a keen interest In
Australia becoming a republic. Could you tell us whether Canada has
a similar kind of agenda and could you also comment on Mr Trudeau's
comments that he made several years ago?
JC: I can reply In English, okay. The Monarchy is not a problem in Canada
at this moment. We have other problems to debate, so nobody is
debating this problem. Of course, I have followed with some interest
what Mr Keating has been debating here in terms of republics, or the
possibility of having a republic. It is an interesting debate that we are
following. There are some local reasons to speak about it, but for me
I have other problems at this moment. That is, as I said at one time,
you know I have to deal with some problems in Quebec with those who
want to separate. I don't want to have the Monarchists on my back
too. So, you know, one problem at a time and it is not an issue at all in
Canada at this moment. As far as Mr Trudeau's comments he made,
I said I will comment about it when I have read what he said. Well
I can make a comment, yes. That Is true that Canada is the most
decentralised federation in the world, but perhaps we'd [ inaudible].
That is all.
J: Have you been studying in Australia how Australia deals with its
secessionist movements, or how Australia has dealt with its
secessionist movements we have got them but they have just about
disappeared.
JC: You had apparently something in the 30s, that occurred in 1935.
J: [ inaudible), at a low level.
JC, Yes.
PJI( Very low.
JC: But it was a low level. It was pretty substantial in 1935 and you are
still together. So I studied that you are still together and Canada is still
together. So we are all right.
J: Both Japan and Mexico have sent diplomatic letters expressing
concern over Canada's spying activities. What assurances would you
give to them?
JC: You know I make no comment about it because it is an employee who
said that something you believe, you might believe. I don't know. I am
not commenting on that. So I don't know, on a daily basis, the 
operation and you have to act within the law. If somebody accused
them of acting outside of the law, fine.
J: What will you say to Mexico and Japan who are concerned?
JC: I don't think they will complain because, for me, I don't know if it is true
or it is not true. So that is what I will tell them.
J: [ inaudible] wants an inquiry. What kind of an inquiry should it be?
JO: This is the second time that somebody working for that organisation is
talking and I don't know exactly there is mechanism for surveillance
and they have to respect the law. So that is the only thing I can say.
J: Mr Keating, could you just explain for Canadian readers the benefits of
becoming a republic and then, Mr Chretien, could you ever envisage
Canada becoming a republic? Maybe I could put it that way.
PJK: Well, I think, Australia as an island continent with a multicultural
society which has got of course a very large derivative component
from Britain and Ireland and from Europe we have developed a
culture here which is changing as post-war migration has changed it.
And now, I think, in the culture of the new Australia, an identity and a
sense of identity, an independence of identity has emerged here quite
strongly. We live near very large and old societies which are different
from us such as Indonesia, 190 million people, the largest Muslim
country in the world and to approach them and to be a member of the
community of nations in this direct part of the world, I don't think we
can be there as some sort of constitutional derivative of Britain.
To say that, you Know, here we are the Australians of new, those with
a culture they have developed here, representing the things we have
done here, but by the way our Head of State is The Queen of
Great Britain. it Is not going to work here anymore. It has been useful
In the past and we have developed a strong country here and a good
culture here. But I think it is past. That we live in a group of countries
which are demonstrably, by their geography and culture, Asian
countries and now that we have such an opportunity in this very large
and vast continent to create something of our own here. It has to be
the full expression of the Australian sovereignty and Australian identity
which could only really come from our Head of State being one of us.
J: Mr Chretien, do you ever see those reasons pushing Canada towards
a republic?
JC: There was a special problem here a few years ago when the
Governor-General decided to sack the Prime Minister, if I can use
that word, and it is still a controversy because I was reading this week
Mr Whitlam was commenting on that and is still not very appreciative
of what happened that day. But we have the problem here of an
elected Senate that we don't have in Canada. So, the institution is
not creating any problem in Canada, the other state is the Queen of 
England, but she is represented by a Governor-General, and we have
managed to alternate between a French one, and an English one,
and we have managed to be above controversy. There was a
problem in the 20s you were not there, I was not there
but... ( inaudib le). was sacked more or less by the Governor of the
time, and eventually there was an election and since that time the
Governor-General in Canada has always acted on the advice of the
Prime Minister. So, we don't have the type of problems that was
caused here 20 years ago, so, as I said, there is no controversy, and
no great gain, or no great losses to be seen at this moment with that
problem.
J: Sir, a question about Canadian politics.
JC: Yes.
J: Would you in Canada retain in your Cabinet a Minister who was
found by a Royal Commission to have lied?
PJK: That's a trick question.
JC: Very tricky.
PJK Its not very tricky, really.
JC: It depends, you know you're asking me a question that it Is
absolutely political, and after 32 years in Parliament, I don't answer to
all political questions that are addressed to me.
PJK: I'll put it in the vernacular it was a duffed up, tricked up Royal
Commission, who brought down, a dodgy finding, and it's being
treated with the contempt it deserves by the Prime Minister of the
day.
JC: Some nice words.
J: ( interpreter) Mr Prime Minister, have you in your discussions with Mr
Keating have you reached an agreement on how to maintain
Canada and Australia's position .( Inaudible).., position -In the
APEC discussions?
JC: ( interpreter) During our discussions we have made a lot of progress
on discussions with relation to Indonesia. We hope to maintain that
progress through discussion, and that Australia and Canada will
maintain a strong position In APEC through our mutual discussion
together..
PJK Can I just add to that, and just say that Bogor set with clarity
declared with clarity what the objectives were. And there was a full
commitmnent to those objectives. What Osaka is about, is laying
down a plan of action for those objectives. So, this is an important 
meeting to back in the Bogor Declaration. I think the fact that Jean
Chretien and I were very much in support of President Soeharto's
initiative and declaration the content of the declaration at Bogor it's
Important that we now round that out in Osaka, and that's why I think
we see this meeting as being a significant one.
J: ( interpreter) Mr Prime Minister, you have spoken about reform and
reconciliation in Canada following the recent referendum?
JC: ( interpreter) We have formed a Committee to examine these two
aspects, and we have to work towards solutions before Christmas.
This Committee will certainly look at working towards reconciliation,
and correct certain assertions that were made which were false
during the referendum campaign.
PJK: Maybe one last question, and then we will leave it, thanks.
J: Mr Keating, you have described 2010 and 2020 the other day as
important yardsticks is that an indication that there is some flexibility
in those end dates?
PJK: No. They are end dates, and I think our position I think I would
probably speak here for Prime Minister Chretien, too is that we don't
mind flexibility within the dates, but we don't want flexibility outside
the dates. And I think that has been generally most people's
position.
JC: And It is kind of complicated because it is a long period of time
years and some countries might become quite advanced in their
development, who are not at this moment, because the progress in
some Pacific nations is fantastic. . And from a period of 3-4 years, we
have a country that could claim that it's a have-not, and suddenly
become a pretty prosperous nation. So, its wide flexibility is
absolutely needed.
PJI( Thank you very much.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, RAAF FAIRBAIRN, CANBERRA, 16 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, are you concerned with the maritime strike and the
coalminers strike following that?
PM: Well I spoke to the principals overnight Mr Davis, Mr Kelty and
Mr Pallas from the ACTU and I think we may have a resolution of it.
I am optimistic that we might be able to tidy it up by midday or
thereabouts.
J: Are you aware the strike kicked off early in Melbourne at 7.00 am this
morning?
PM: Well I think the main issues in the dispute are likely to be settled and
they are that all the civil actions that CRA was going to mount against
the individuals and the organisations be taken off and that the principle
of equal work for equal pay and-the right of people to bargain
collectively without discrimination against that being offered by a
contract I think these are the issues which are likely to be agreed.
What has been at issue here is contracts being offered at prices and
at wages above what the award is being offered at or any collective
bargain and then, of course, when there is no union well the fear is the
wages then go down. So these are weighty issues being debated.
But, I think, the parties are close to an agreement and I am optimistic
we can get it settled.
J: The ACTU says that there needs to be changes to the IR legislation.
Will you be looking at that?
PM: Well I don't think there needs to be changes in this matter and CRA
has been one of the few companies doing this and I think if it can be
settled, it would be good for everybody. Good for the IR system, good
for the economy. 
J: Who is going to pay Carmen Lawrence's legal bills if it's not passed by
the Senate?
PM: Well, look, the Royal Commission is the most vicious political stunt
that has been mounted in Australia probably since the War. And,
I think, before the Liberals take it any further, they ought to recollect
that both Mr Howard and Mr Court have very faulty memories about
this both of them when asked about their own recollections, they
were decidedly faulty and dodgy and I just say this, that the Australian
people recognise a hypocrite in a fog ten kilometres off. And they can
see the hypocrisy here and for the Commissioner to have said that
professionally he could only judge things on half the evidence and
then bring down such rock solid recommendations calls into question
his own credibility.
J: [ inaudible] perjury contempt charges?
PM: Well I am just saying I think they should consider carefully before they
go any further with these vicious stunts because Mr Court made it very
clear that he couldn't recollect his matters when asked and Mr Howard
made it clear he couldn't recollect what he said to Mr Court. So before
they start now going back to the courts, they all should remember that
all governments have these powers all governments, including the
Federal Government.
J: Is Carmen Lawrence something of a liability?
PM: No, none whatsoever. I mean I think the public support for her has
been manifest and, of course, the intellectual drivel which the
Commissioner engaged in, when the press wrote the Commissioner
and his Commission off, saying " the quicker the inquiry should be
round up the better"' " you have got to wonder what the point of
Royal Commissions are" " I can'f ' make a judgement on half the
evidence". What does he do? He brings down these findings as
though they were all a matter of, you know, tablets from a mount.
I mean it is just disgraceful.
J: There are suggestions that President Clinton is unable to attend
APEC? Will that devalue the summit and do you remain confident that
PM: Oh, it wouldn't devalue the summit, but I would very much like to have
him there. But, of course, he has essentially a budget crisis on in the
United States and no doubt that is attracting his attention.
ends 


6 2OFFICE OF THe PRIME MINISTERCANSEARAFOR MEDIAThe attached correspondence passed between the Prime Minister, and negotiators forthe ACTU and CRA on Wednesday evening. 15 November.The handwritten note from Mr Palmer, for CRA, reads:" Tim, there is a lot here I can agree with but a couple of points give meconcern and I need to talk to a few people about them tomorrow morning. Inote that it's all one way. Why don't we let the PM go to bed and assure himthat we will sort out the details tomorrow."17 November 1995
FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION SHEETTO: QPlioj M( Ad-/ vVATTEN'flON: FAXNO: 13L4~% L)FROM: TrvA 9Cd4MESSAGE: v
: 15/ 11 ' 95 23; 04 ' 132015WTPAMRo1BASI OF5S0X L M T FOR XURTMMEAGOTIAn0ONS ISEWEINCRA ( INCLUDING COMALCO) ACTCI The. Compaay agrees dthat all ciMi litiptiou or any foreshadowed litirioagait indviduals or argaisadorn diretly or inirectly relating to the CRA WeipaDisput " O~ l c aut~ ioc.2 The Company agreesto e able employe&amp; who so cho os. to have a co~ ei1vybargaied agmeCU1t which includes thew Union and thai doe 110t dicriminsta aainstthei choice,3 The Company agrow to the priipla of cual pay for work of equal valtir-Itis recognised by the pris that the appllc= iou of ts termn ay requim &amp; irthurnegotiation Mo' rdawto ractcally iiplmt. However in the co~ ze= Oflbaediscussionsthe twm applies to allWpa nd vnditiona and furthe acem to csablishcomparable worth bemwee the callective agremnt~ and the individual sud' coaa.i hepasties cant = o reach agreetnet by Thurday 3 0 November 1995 thca this matwrcz be mwolved on th~ e baWs of a privae ubtraton by the AIRC4 The partis ag to m~ t as won as pracald tomorrow ( 16 Novemer 1995)to fthaLsi this in pzincPle mg~ eZ ag F~ pa to report to the AMRC by2.00pm somomfw an( ma e fo Behi o fA rUTPallas Siped far Behalf of dLA( Caznalco)( as 0 stunmm of int=)Aiwv ot' AO~iwUI~ Ihv4 v~ o ~* 0w4v 4* 4YA# A444 Av -inog;*. no-uM ay#% tV61 3 820 1393W T PALXERQ001
VM.BASIS OF SETTLEMENT FOR FURTHER NEGOTIATIONS BETWEENC1RA ( INCLUDING COMALCO) ACTUI Ile Company agrees that all civil litigation or any foreshadowed litigationaainst individuals or organisations directly or indirectly relating to the CRA WeipaDispute shall never be actioned.2 The Company agrees to enable employees who so choose to have a collectivelybargained agreement which includes their Union and that does not discriminate againsttheir choice.3 The Company agrees to the principle of equal pay for work of equal value. Itis recognised by the parties that the application of this term may require furthernegotiation in order to practically implement. However in the context of thesediscussions the term applies to all pay and conditions and fiuther seeks to establishcomparable worth between the collective agreement and the individual staff contracts.If the parties can not reach agreement by Thursday 30 November 1995 then this mattercan be resolved on the basis of a private arbitration by the AIRLC4 The parties agree to meet as soon as practical tomorrow ( 16 November 1995)to fuialise this in principle agreement and agree further to report to the AIRLC bytomorrow on the outcome.Signed for Behalf of ACTU Signed for Behalf of C( RA( Camalco)( as a statement of intent) ( as a statement of intent)T Pallas T Palmer
Transcr



I,
PRIME MINISTERI
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, HANKYU HOTEL, OSAKA, JAPAN
17 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, In the Japanese press today there are suggestions not
only in the Asian press that without the presence of Bill Clinton, it
seemed a very bad signal to just how Important APEC is, and If 1 could
add to that question, in Bogor, yourself, President Clinton and President
Soeharto played a key role In the Leaders Meeting, without, you know, Mr
Clinton on the weekend, Is there a chance that you won't be able to stIffen
the resolve ( InaudIble).. free trade?
PM: Well, obviously, it would be better had President Clinton been able to
come, and I am very disappointed that he can't come. But he has a huge
fiscal crisis a Budget Crisis on In the United States, and the Federal
Government In the United States, In some parts of it, have now ceased to
work for a number of days, so it is obviously a matter of great gravity for
him. It Is true that the President has worked with others myself Included
at now the 2 previous meetings-of APEC. The bIg meeting was the
declaration meeting of Bogor the declaration for free trade by 2010 for
the developed countries, and 2020 for developing countries, and now the
Action Agenda Is under discussion here.-in Osaka. There has been a lot
of commitment by all countries to this Including the United States and
we are moving positively towards what I think will be a very substantial
outcome here In Osaka. So, yes it would help If he was here, but again,
the only thing that I am sure that would keep him away from here is this
kind of crisis.
J: How damaging is it to Australia that while you are here trying to promote
Australian trade, you have got the waterfront effectively being shut down
back home? 
PM: Well, what I'm here is trying to promote a future for Australia for the next
half century not the next 5 days. And this is what this is about it's
about Australia's integration with the economic community of the Asia-
Pacific, and It Is very much both a medium and a long-run thing, The
dispute on the waterfront is one that's now had 2-3 years in the making.
And that is, around -this principle that one particular company has had a
religious view that Individual wage contracts are a good thing, and
working under an award Is not, and that they will pay more for a contract
than they will pay under an award. The ACTU and the union movement
want this question of no discrimination you can at least offer working
people a choice. But there is no choice there is no choice at all when
there is much greater emoluments and salaries available under contracts
for the same work. Now, that's the Issue on principle the CRA has been
promoting it now for 2-3 years, and we are seeing the culmination of this
dispute when they put civil actions on the employees. Now, I'm confident
that we can get a resolution on It. The parties are now meeting around
the four principles I alluded to yesterday, and I had an Indication from
both parties yesterday morning the previous evening, in fact that during
yesterday, we would have the matter resolved. Nevertheless, they are
still speaking around the same subjects, and I think that's a very good
sign.
J: So you are saying that the company Is completely to blame for the
present situation?
PM: It wants to bust unionisation of Its sites. That Is, they will pay more in the
first Instance to be rid of the union, and when the unions are gone, each
Individual then has no-one to deal with but the company. Now, this has
always been if you look at the United States a recipe for lower wages.
Unions understand this this is what the antecedents of the dispute are.
What brought it on, was putting the civil actions on. In other words, not
content to have some wins at the sites industrially, they have gone after
the Individuals. That's when the ACTU, of course, were forced to
intervene. But that said, I am pretty sure particularly after my
conversations with Mr Davis from CRA that he wants the dispute settled,
and that the points that were broadly agreed on the evening before I left
for Japan are the ones which will give a resolution of the dispute. Now,
some of those points have been widened, I think, over the course of
yesterday. They are now seeking to get them back to those essential
points.
J: Are you adamant that you won't change the Government's legislation?
PM: It doesn't need to be changed the Government's legislation Is not an
Issue here. It's all about the question whether or not there Is 
3
discrimination in offering a proposition to a worker under an Award,
versus [ a worker] under a contract. That's the issue. You see, the people
on the conservative side of the IR agenda in Australia the Liberal Party
in particular say we will give you a choice. Well, there is no choice, if in
fact you get more under the contract and you get less under an award.
People say well, at least they are getting more. Well, in the short term
they will, but in the long term will they? They probably won't.
J: The ACTU says that the legislation allows this to happen, and that it
should be changed.
PM: Yes, but the ACTU is not pressing that point with me. They were not
pressing that point they haven't pressed that point with me.
J: Prime Minister, John Maitland announced a short while ago that the CRA
mines in Queensland would be closing today, and that they are bringing
forward a national stoppage to Sunday. They don't seem to share your
optimism about the resolution of the dispute.
PM: Well, there are two matters here. There is the waterfront stoppage, which
was an action by the whole union movement, which then, of course, then
effects a whole myriad of companies and Individuals across the board In
the country, and then there is the question of CRA Itself. CRA has made
this a site-by-site matter, and they do have mining Interests. And so, what
you are probably seeing Is the CFMEU starting to narrow the dispute to
CRA. But hopefully we'll get beyond all that.
J: Mr Keating, have you spoken to any of the main parties today?
PM: Yes, I have.
J: And that's what gives you hope?
PM: Well, I think that people do want us to get this settled, but it's a matter of
whether... l1 think Ideology Is going to try and fear over common sense, and
I think common sense will always win.
J: What sort of signal do you t hink this sends to the public In the debate
between the Coalition and the Government way
PM: The signal to the public is this would be on In every business across the
country for the rest of time certainly the next half dozen ' years if the
Coalition were to win an election. What you are seeing with CRA Is a
taste of what you will get under a Coalition government.
I 
J: Mr Keating, on APEC The agreement that you will be signing on Sunday
allows for flexibility. What is your definition of flexibility, and do you think
it differs from that of some of the Asian countries?
PM: Well, we haven't published a declaration at this point, and we are not In a
position to publish now the large bulk of the communique. But one thing
is clear, I think, and that is that the essence of Bogor is going to be
reflected here. There has been a mighty amount of work put Into this by
at least the Australian Government, by the Government of Japan of
course they have got pr incipal carriage of It by the United States, by all
of the other players in the region. And I think they realise what the
importance of the stakes are here. And that Is, to see that East Asia is
going to be adequately resourced Into the future. That is, to keep growth
going In East Asia, where we will need to have a free flow of goods and
services, and to not have the Income disparities say, between coastal
provinces of China, and the Inland provinces of Chinas* disparity of
opportunities of the kind you see in Africa and these other continents. All
of this leads to a more harmonious political and strategic environment.
These are the issues at stake, and I think that's why people will see the
broader picture.
J: Would you be hoping that the language In the final communique will
sound somewhat less ambiguous than what we have been led to believe It
Is at the moment?
PM: There's only one line that you need to really watch and that Is whether It
says 2010 for the developed countries, and 2020 for developing
countries. That's the key bit.
J: Not the farm sector considerations?
PM: There's not going to be I would be -surprised now after the work we have
done and others that there are going to be exclusions for particular
sectors.
J: And you are confident those dates will specifically be In that
communique? Not just a reiteration
PM: That's what I'm here for to bang those nails Into the wall. Or to do my
best to do it.
J: Hasn't it already been agreed that those dates will be In it?
PM: What Is agreed is what walks out of the final meeting that's what's
agreed. I 
J: Yesterday before you left you were predicting that the strike would be
wrapped up and all over by midday of course, it wasn't. I was just
wondering if during the nature of your discussions earlier this morning
there were principles involved In this dispute are you prepared today to
put any timetable on when you think it will be resolved?
PM: No. But I had an indication then from the ACTU and the company that It
would be near to resolution by the middle of yesterday a written
indication. So, the fact that we-are still making progress, and around the
same points, augers pretty well for it.
J: You have had a written indication from both sides?
PM: Indeed.
J: How hard will it be to bang those nails into the wall just how hard?
PM: Again, the situation politics of meetings is what we have all spent our lives
being involved In, and so has everybody else there. And so it Is a matter
of keeping. the key elements of the Bogor -Declaration, and the prospects
it holds for everybody under close and serious attention. And I think if
that happens if that happens we will get the result we want.
J: Mr Keating, there seems to be an encouraging sign out of the US today in
terms of potential cutbacks In their farm subsidy programs. What
Implication will that have for us?
PM: That will have very positive Implications for us, I think. I think we are
starting to see an understanding that in the end, If the US wants to
subsidise sectors from its central budget, In the end the whole of the USeconomy
will be weaker, and it won't have the increments to growth and
to product and to employment that it would otherwise have. It is,
essentially, taking the trade liberalisation story further by taking some of
these subsidies down.
J: Given that you said earlier that you had some written Indication yesterday
an undertaking from the parties that you believed it would be settled
yesterday, I was just wondering if in the light that it wasn't, could you tell
us whom you believed reneged on that deal that you ? 7
PM: It's not a matter of reneging, It's a matter of clearing of details, but details
have become more amplified. I think that is what's happened. 
J: So, basically, did you have to spend the morning trying to get them back
to those four principles is that what you are saying?
PM: Well, the four principles are the key issues.
J: Is that what you had the agreement on?
PM: yes.
J: An agreement from the ACTU, the CRA, that that would be what they are
negotiating around?
PM: We had an agreement between the parties, which was then put In writing,
and which was then communicated between the two of them with an
Indication from both of them that certainly from the company that It had
to go and sort some of the details out. But hopefully then they could clear
their way midday yesterday, or thereabouts.
J: So what went wrong?
PM: I think what happened was when you throw a matter like this inside a big
industrial company which has been fighting an Issue like this for 2 or 3
years, you know, all their fine-print people come out of the woodwork.
J: So it was on the company's side that the problem was struck?
PMV: In terms of progressing it to that point yesterday, I think yes, yet it may
have been In the afternoon the ACTU then In other matters as well -I
don't know.
J: So the best way to describe it is that we have an agreement In principle
for an end to this dispute?
PM: There is an agreement In principle around these four points they need to
be confirmed as to what some of the text to the points mean.
J: Does the legislative remedy. ( inaudible)...?
PM: No. Itfs not relevant to that.
J: Have you found it at all frustrating being preoccupied with International
events in the last 3 weeks, and you haven't been involved in the domestic
scene? 
PM: No. I mean, I haven't been away for that long I have been in and out of
the country. Let me tell you this bringing back to Australia a set of trade
arrangements for the next half century are the antithesis of frustration
the absolute antithesis of frustration.
J: Do you think there just needs to be some goodwill on both sides of this
dispute to solve this?
PM; Look, it's been fought out site by site for over 3 years. This has been a
particularly drawn out and intractable matter, and you know, like all
matters of weight and substance like this, where issues are hotly debated
and disputed, it will take some goodwill to get to the point of settlement.
J: Prime Minister, I heard what you said before, but there seems to be a
sense that If this was a G7 Summit, that Bill Clinton would be here come
hell or high water.
PM: No. I think that the Presidenits commitment to East Asia is quite a
profound one, and the concept of an Asian Pacific grouping is a profound
one, and I think he would have major reservations and misgivings about
not being here. And I say " major", underlined, because he was Involved
with this from Seattle from the first meeting in Seattle through Bogor,
and remember, he came to Indonesia two days after the Congressional
drubbing the Democratic Party took in the United States. And I think he
would have come here had it not been for a paramount fiscal crisis.
J: With things obviously so difficult ( inaudible) could his absence make
the difference between getting ( inaudible) ? 7
PM: Well, I hope not. I think Vice-President Gore Is coming in his place, so
the US will be represented.
J: Are you running a bit of a lone race in trying to hammer home the things
that you want?
PM: We have made our presence felt I hope in these negotiations. I certainly
had many opportunities of discussing now with Prime Minister Murayama
with my visit here where I spent a lot of time on this subject, on the details
of this subject with Ministers Hashimoto and Kono, and twice when they
had the return visit to Australia about two months ago. And subsequently,
of course;, we have had discussions with the Diet Members' League
Agriculture Committee, and we have had, of course, visits here by Bob
McMullan, Minister for Trade, and the Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans,
and they have been involved In negotiations. And last week I also sent
back with my own annotations, changes in the Declaration which the 
Japanese Foreign Ministry communicated to us yesterday that the bulk of
which were included in the Draft. So, you know, we have been in there
trying.
J: Prime Minister, do you have any comment on the Senate's consideration
of holding up appropriations at all?
PM: No I'm just not up with that, I'm not sure where that matter Is.
PM: Prime Minister, Senator Evans Indicated yesterday that a deal had
virtually been stitched up how much more is left for the Leaders to do on
Sunday?
PM: Well, again, this we believed was the case exactly at the beginning of the
Bogor meeting, and then we found that a couple of countries were not
completely happy with some of the text. I mean, I think we are going to go
In here in a fairly good position, but It will be a matter of keeping It there.
J: How would you characterise the mood last time there was a sense of
euphoria that reached this landmark decision, the mood this time, Is It a
case of. ( inaudible)...?
PM: Well, last time it was.. let's just retrace where we have been. APEC; was
a mini-OECD body, which met at Ministerial level from Its Inception you
show me your economic statistics, and I'll show you mine. We have
turned APEC now into a Head of Government body a complete change
to get the authority of Leaders to be brought to bear to decisions and
then met as a group, decided to meet a second time, and at the second
time take on the ambitious project of open trade In the Pacific in goods
and services by these certain time-frames. That was the big leap. Here
Is [ about] putting flesh on the boneas of that structure that is, putting an
Action Agenda down. And then, at the following meeting In The
Philippines, will be about national country offers, and * the longer this
process goes, the more likely it will be bureaucratised, and the less likely
it will be the major input of the Leaders. But it will still need their authority
to guide it. We're in that second stage with this one.
J: Mr Keating, President Kim said that he would like to see APEC remain a
consultative body rather than a negotiating body is that a sort of sign
that they are backtracking on this?
PM: People have all sorts of different expressions for these things and again,
part of the translation Is part of the problem in all this. I think President
Kim has been a very strong supporter of APEC, and he knows that to
keep. I mean, on of the great challenges for Australia, for the United 
States, Korea, Japan, is how we accommodate the burgeoning Chinese
economy in the Asia Pacific. How we will let it come into the Asia Pacific
economies, and how we resource it properly. And I think President Kim
knows as well that it can only happen with this sort of forethought, this
sort of structure. I think we might make this the last, okay?
J; You said a couple of countries weren't particularly happy can you tell us
which countries?
PM: Oh well, in a communique of this depth, there would be at some point
none of them would be happy. It's a matter of what is distilled from their
real motivations in this, what they're prepared to trade away. I mean, the
essence of a negotiation is trading that which is not paramount to you to
keep that which is. I mean, I think this is what is of its essence a
negotiation around those principles. Thank you.
ends. 



9
135/
STATEMENT BY THE PREWE MINSTER, THE HON IP J KEATING9 NT
AFEC BIJSINSS TRAVEL CARD
Australia will introduce an APEC business travel card to facilitate entry into Australia by
accredited business people from APEC economies.
This follows the recommendations of the Pacific Business Forum for easier access for
business travellers.
Australia is developing the following arrangements to make short-term business travel
easier a system of accreditation for business travellers run in partnership between the
business conmmities and participating member economies
a business travel card rather than a visa as a means of identifying business travellers
and facilitating entry.
Over 200,000 business people visited Australia last year and this number is rising rapidly
each year. Australia is commnitted to streamlining and accelerating its visa and entry
arrangements and the application of advanced technology to this task.
Australia is proposing the establishment of a working group with all those APEC
economies interested in jointly developing such a system. Not every APEC memnber might
be able to join such an arrangement immediately, but all would be welcome when ready.
Australia also endorses the recommendations of the PBF on business temporary residence.
We are already simplifying our entry rules and streamlining processing for longer term
temporary residence, as recently recommended by the Roach Committee and accepted by
the Governent.
Greater ease of travel will help APEC meet its aims of stimulating trade and investment in
the region. Beyond the greater ease of travel for our business people an APEC business
travel card would be a symbol of APEC's potential to build bridges in our region.
OSAKA 19 NOVEMBER, 1995 44= 4MW 



TEL: 18fov. 16 U4 NO. U1 F 0/ U.
PRIME MINISTER 134/ 95
*" EMBARGOED UNTIL 9: 00AM, SUNDAY 19 NOVEMBER 1995'
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRIME MINISTER'S XI
The following team will represent the Prime Minister's XI against the
West Indi~ s at Manuka Oval on 5 December:
Michael Bevan ( NSW) Captain
Mark Harrity ( SA)
Dene Hills ( TAS)
Brad Hogg ( WA)
Dean Jones ( VIC)
Mark Lavender ( WA)
Shane Lee ( NSW)
Carl Rackemann ( QLD)
Wade Seccombe ( QLD) Wicketkeeper
Andrew Symonds ( QLD)
Brad Williams ( VIC)
Brad Haddin ( ACT) Twelfth Man
Current test players were not available for selection because of the timing of
the Third Test versus Pakistan in Sydney. But I believe that the team is a
competitive and attractive one, which includes some of our finest players of the
past decade and a number of big stars of the present and future.
I am delighted that Carl Rackemann will be playing. His selection is a
thoroughly deserved recognition of his outstanding services to Australian and
Queensland cricket.
Dean Jones is an exciting and popular player, who is playing as well as he was
when he appeared in this fixture for the first time more than 10 years ago.
Canberra's cricket fans will again have the chance to admire the great talents
of their favourite son, Michael Bevan. The award of the captaincy to this
exciting young player is an honour to ACT cricket and an indication of
Michael's potential on the national and international scene. 
TEL: 18. Nov.' 5 16: 04 No. 001 P. 02/ u-
2
And among those members of the team yet to play test cricket, there are
outstanding players who have every chance to wear the green and gold before
long. It will be a great pleasure to welcome the West Indies team to Canberra once
again. I am sure the match will live up to the fine traditions of this important
event in the local sporting calendar.
CANBERRA 19 November 1995 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, INTERNATIONAL PRESS CENTRE, APEC, OSAKA,
JAPAN, 19 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Today's meeting of the APEC Leaders, the adoption of the Declaration
and the Action Agenda showed that APEC could deliver, and that the very
firm and visionary commitment taken at Bogor in Indonesia a year ago,
under the Chairmanship of President Soeharto those firm objectives of
free trade in the Asia-Pacific by 2010 for industrialised countries, and
2020 for developing countries those commitments were reinforced here
today in those two statements. It's an outstanding result, it's one that
keeps the strength of the Bogor commitment reflected now in the action
plans, and in the Action Agenda, and will give President Ramos at the
meetings in The Philippines the opportunity to then put flesh on the
bones of those commitments towards the individual action plans. So, It's
taking the prospect of shaping the growth of the Asia-Pacific by closer
integration of economies, giving it so much more definition more rapidly, I
think, than almost anyone could have expected just a couple of years ago.
In Australia's terms, of course, we will have from this the benefit off an
outstanding result in terms of additional growth and jobs, and closer
integration with the neighbours in the region.
The other thing I think which * is significant about it, is that not only has the
Declaration and the Action Agenda here at Osaka provided the means to
get to the Bogor objectives, but more than that, it's delivered a down
payment on that aim of very significant proportions. And we have seen
today a couple of very significant trade packages liberalisation packages
announced, one by Japan, and one by Indonesia for instance -and putting
a big advance down on the Uruguay Round, is something I think the
APEC leaders feel very proud of. This, after all, was attempted at the 
Halifax G7, and didn't go anywhere, but it has gone more than
somewhere here.
The other thing I would say is there is a tremendous attitude on the part of
APEC leaders. And that is that they meet as leaders, and there is now a
great amount of trust and a good relationship between them. And the
thing that marks APEC out from other trade liberalising bodies, is that it
has decided the end points. In the Uruguay Round, and the WTO0, there
were never any end points decided. It has decided the end points, and
therefore APEC has agreed that there will be a process beginning now
which will then move towards those end points which are agreed. So it
has the Leaders Meeting to drive the process, the authority of the leaders.
and the ambition of the leaders to drive the process where, of course, in
the GATT and the Uruguay Round It was invariably Trade Ministers or
sometimes Foreign Ministers, and you could never get the authority there
that you get from Heads of Government or Heads of State.: So, it's getting
that impetus, and it's got by these regular annual meetings everyone
gets to know one another, there is a great deal of trust and goodwill
towards each other, and that political authority is then being brought to a
process which has already fixed end dates. So, this makes the APEC,
process completely different to any other.
There was some additional things said today, and that is that.. . a couple of
other proposals. For instance, on behalf of Australia, I put down a
proposal to develop a working group on food security. This will be one of
the problems as we see the Asia-Pacific area grow potential shortages
of foodstuffs, and what that dimension might be, and what strategies that
might be put in place. There was a discussion about macro-economic
issues as well. But by and large, I think the model we have chosen that
is, from the start, the end point understood, and then a voluntary
approach concerted liberalisation to get down to the end points is a
mature process, it's one which relies upon the goodwill of the leaders
themselves and their own voluntary commitment to the end points, and
one that I think judging by the size of the packages announced today is
going to get us there, and get us there very adequately.
I would like to take the opportunity on this occasion also to thank a
number of people. I would like to thank Prime Minister Muraysma, who
has done a first class job of bringing the stewardship of the APEC agenda
here at Osaka to this point, supported as he has been by MITI Minister
Hashimoto, and Foreign Minister Kono they were both significant in this.
I would like to also thank my own Australian Ministerial colleagues, Bob
McMullan and Gareth Evans, and I would like to particularly thank the
officials we have had working on this throughout Peter Grey, our senior
Official, Mike Costello and all the other Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade Officials, Allan Gyngeli in my own office. Michael Thawley in PM&amp; C
and David Ritchie also in that Department, as well as other Departments.
I would also like to thank the members of the Pacific Business Forum,
particularly Imelda Roche and Phillip Brass, and Neville Wran who, of
course, was the Australian person on the Eminent Persons Group. Its
been a very big effort now, really from 1992, to get this to this point, and
getting that clarity at Bogor, and then moving it along to here, has
required a lot of political, ministerial and bureaucratic effort over the
course of the year, but the product is there, I think, for all to see, and the
Osaka Action Agenda is a very high quality piece of policy making.
J: Prime Minister, was there any. ( inaudible)... . in the meeting from the end
points?
PM; None whatsoever.
J: Do you have reason to believe that Malaysia will work very hard to fulfil Its
commitment to a free and open economy by the year 2020?
PM: I have no reason, from anything Prime Minister Mahathir said today to
believe other than his commitment to the Declaration, and to the Action
Agenda.
J: Prime Minister, how much pressure do your declarations today put on the
rest of the world to free up trade, particularly at the WTO talks?
PM: Well, APEC already represents over half the world's GDP. From memory,
I think in a decade's time we are forecasting that to be around
percent of world GDP. It's obviously, this very strong political commitment
today, and the definition of the commitment, means I think APEC is the
only body in the world now holding up the prospect of general trade
liberalisation. And this must put pressure, over time, on Europeans in
particular, to match some of this.
J: Prime Minister, could you just tell us what importance you attach, and how
you rank, the Chinese initiative today on tariffs?
PM: I think that there is a general... .1 made this point in the meeting today
about the GATT processes and APEC. At the GATT, the negotiators turn
up and they say " we have got four cards", and someone says " wVell, have
you only got four, or perhaps five? And if you really squeeze us, six?"
But of course, there is still four cards in their pocket. What has happened
at APEC, is we are saying we are putting ten cards down by 2010 and
2020, and we are going to lay the cards out on a timeframe, on a process
of concerted liberalisation. And the Chinese package, the Indonesian 
package, the Japanese package are steps along the way of the individual
action plans that will get the ten cards laid. So again, it gets back to the
point I made earlier about the end points being defined. If the end points
are defined, the road to the end points becomes more obvious, and
therefore, national Governments can work on individual plans to get
there, you know, looking at the needs of their economy, their
commitments under APEC and generally, the need to resource the area.
The great challenge, I think, for those of us who live in this part of the
world, is resourcing the growth needs of East Asia. And as these
economies get to a bigger base, when they were smaller growing by 8-
phenomenal as that growth is of a small base, the resourcing
requirements are manageable. But when the bases start to get big, and
you are still getting large increments to growth, the resourcing
requirements then become mammoth massive so it means the
impediments need to be cleared away to get an appropriate free
movement of resources. And of course, more efficient supply side
economies to be able to deliver them. The prospect of continuing growth
in I think, particularly in East Asia means that the supply response in
the United States will be strong. Already, exports to East Asia and the
United States are growing at twice the rate of East Asian exports from
East Asia to the United States, and we will see the same sort of supply
response from a lot of the economies in the region as they complement
one another towards a better level of general resourcing to keep growth
going. And with that growth will come income growth, and the more even the
income growth, the better will be the cohesion of communities, the better
will be the degree of harmony between economies, and of course, that is
essentially the core thing that we are trying to do here integrate our
economies, have higher standards of living, better jobs, higher quality
employment, and more of it.
J: Prime Minister, what does this mean to Australian exporters on the one
hand, and consumers on the other?
PM: I think it means for Australian exporters more opportunities, and I think
that means, for consumers, in the ends more jobs, more growth, and by
integration obviously more variety, and hence more interesting jobs. This
has a direct impact on the prosperity of all of our economies, and it's why
it has always needed that sort of political horse-power to break it through.
And that's what I think you are seeing confirmed again today.
J: Two questions if I may Prime Minister first, you said the end points are
known, but can I ask you what you understand by free trade and
investment does it mean zero tariffs, and zero non-tariff barriers by the 
target years? That's the first question, and the second one is it's
obviously difficult to compare these initial offers, but do you think there is
a sort of rough or broad comparability in what's been put on the table so
far?
PM: Well, it's got if you read the Action Agenda, you will find in it very clear
statements about the process, and about comparability. It says on page
four each APEC economy will begin to develop its action plans
immediately, after the Osaka Leaders' Meeting. Action plans will contain
specific and concrete details with time frames for the near to medium
term, while outlining the basic directions of 2010 and 2020. Each APEC
economy will submit its action plan to the 1996 meeting, overall
implementation will begin as of January 19971 and then it talks about
transparency, and the mutuality of effort, and the process of review. And
it deals with the review question very directly. Under transparency, it
says each APEC economy will ensure transparency of its respective laws,
regulation and ministry procedures which reflect the flow of goods, etc.
APEC economies under non-discrimination will endeavour to apply the
principle of non-discrimination between and among them in the processes
of liberalisation. Some of that sentence is code for the status of China
and MFN with the United States, but the commitment amongst the others
is very clearly will apply the principles of non-discrimination between
them. On comparability, APEC economies will endleavour to ensure the
overall comparability of their trade and investment liberalisatlon
facilitation, take into account the general level of liberalisation that's
amongst the others and facilitation already achieved by each APEC
economy. It should be WVTO consistent, and comprehensive.
So, you know, in the language of international declarations and
communiques, you don't get it much more solid than that. And I think
that's why... I mean, as a veteran of umpteen OECD, IMF meetings, World
Bank meetings particularly in and out of the GATT Round over the years
this is almost strange language, it's so direct.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: Well, I think what we are seeking to do is to open the barriers, and to
facilitate trade and to facilitate investment. A lot of investment facilitation,
of course, will get back to things like national investment policies,
opportunities for people to invest in particular projects, in particular
industries these sorts of issues. So there is no actual definition of what
free means, in that sense, but we know what it means in terms of the
commitment. That is, so that we can freely invest In one another's
economies, and make it work. 
On tariffs, there has been no discussion amongst members about whether
free means zero tariffs, or 5% or 10%. If you look at Indonesia's package
today, it's talking about every tariff above 20% gets to 20% by a certain
time, everything between 20 and 0% goes to 10%, and then by another
date, everything above 20% now ends up at 10%. So, you know, once
you are down to those sorts of levels of tariff protection, you're not -I
mean, the daily exchange rate fluctuation is worth more than the 5% tariff.
So I don't think there is any point about zeroes or fives, but there is a lot
of point about forties, and sixties, and hundred and twenties, and two
hundred and forties.
J-Prime Minister, according to Japanese officials, the issue of security was
raised at regional security -was raised at this mornings discussions.
Could you give us some idea of the points that were discussed, and how
that related to APEC's particular mission?
PM: I can't recall it being raised, other than that, obviously, if you take the
leadership of the countries that are represented here, who now meet
regularly, they obviously get to know one another on a personal basis,
and I think that's meaning that we are starting to see things.. . we are
starting to see a lot of movement. For instance, President Jiang Zemin
visited Korea recently, we are seeing so much more movement between
APEC leaders or leaders of the countries In the APEC are and 0 would
like to think that part of that is the fact that they have got to know each
other quite well at APEC meetings. And there is a real enjoyment
amongst the leaders about seeing one another again, and sharing each
others company.
J: Prime Minister, at a number of bi-lateral meetings that you had with
leaders yesterday, you expressed concern about President Clinton not
coming here. Do you believe that he should have come, despite his
problems back home?
PM: Well, it is a very idealogical matter for the United States, and a political
matter to decide what the shape of American public policy is, and how the
Budget is, and I can understand the weight and gravity of that. But I was
disappointed, of course, that the President wasn't here, and there has
been some discussion about the fact that on the Republican side there
was a view that this was the weekend to bring this matter to a head. Well,
the point I would make is whether that is true or not, the United States as
a country has had to deal with its domestic problems at the expense of
the President's attendance here, and that I think is a disappointing
development. That said, the President made certain that he was in touch
with the APEC leaders of course, Prime Minister Murayama, and he had
the Vice President attend in his place. And Vice President Gore made 
very firm commitments on the part of the United States in the meeting
today, saying that is, expressing the commitment of the United States
to its continued engagement with East Asia, of its continuing commitments
to APEC, and I am quite sure given those assurances that we will see
the President's attendance at the meeting in the Philippines next year,
when we get onto the individual action plans. But one thing is clear, I
think. from today's meeting from here on out, APEC has reached its sort
of critical mass, and gone solid, and it will only solidify further after Subic
Bay next year, and the commitment of the United States President
through his Vice President is, I think, was an assuring contribution to the
meeting.
J: Prime Minister, have you had a chance to discuss with the other leaders
here your proposal for a panel to talk about security in a post-nuclear
world?
PM: I raised it with Prime Minister Murayama. That is, Australia was involved
in the Chemical Weapons Convention, wherein we removed one whole
category of weapons. And if we can remove a category of weapons and
given that the I think it would be generally agreed that the verification on
chemical weapons would be more difficult than nuclear weapons, it is
possible obviously to get the stockpiles down, and remove nuclear
weapons. Now, of course, this would involve a complex discussion about
deterrents and deterrents policy during the wind-down, but there are now
50,000 nuclear warheads out there. And I think there is a view amongst
the nuclear states that there is the group of them who have these
weapons, and there are the rest of the nations who do not. That's of
course, not as it will be. There will be a much larger group that will have
the weapons. It won't be just the handful of nuclear states now it will be
a much larger group. So, the choice is between the handful, and the
great mass of countries that don't have them, but between them are a
much greater number of countries who have nuclear weapons. So
Australia has though this is the opportunity to actually given the concern
about French testing in the Pacific, and Chinese testing to actually go
beyond the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and the cut-off convention,
to actually start taking the inventories down. And I raised this with Prime
Minister Murayama yesterday, and received a fairly positive response
from him.
J: Prime Minister, who would you see being involved in that task force, and
how do you see it operating?
PM: Australia is putting together a group of prominent International people
who have had an experience in arms control issues in defence policy, in
international geo-politics, and at some point, will be announcing that 
group, and charging them tasking them with the job of starting to put a
bit of a map down for us about which way we might tackle the problems.
J: ( inaudible)...
PM: No.
J: Prime Minister, if 1 could just follow up something which my colleague
there asked about comparability, and also really about free trade. I can,
you have talked a lot about these end points, but obviously we are all
intrigued as to how eighteen economies in APEC actually share the same
goal? I mean, the great free trader, which is China, can hardly share the
same destination as the United States at this point. But anyway, my
question is a question of comparability you have singled out Indonesia
for praise for this detailed and ambitious plan it has Identified today how
does this compare with, for instance, what the United States has put out?
And, as far as I am aware and correct me if I am wrong there has been
no indication that the United States is going beyond any commitment, or
concession, it has already made under GATT. Now, how do these two
things compare?
PM: Well, these are commitments freely entered. And Bogor was. a
commitment was made by the President of the United States, and in these
documents, the commitment is there from the United States, too. I don't
find it remarkable at all that the lesson of getting the right
complementarity and resource allocation in a region that is growing as
fast as this is all that remarkable. There is an obviousness about it that is
though as we all know perhaps through some of the dismal periods of
history that obvious or not, these things haven't happened. The thing
about this is it is happening people do see the opportunity, they do think
it is something they should do, and they are making commitments as
Head of Government and Head of State level. And I think it Is that
political impetus the fact that it is not left to Ministerial haggling, or
bureaucratic incrementalism, but rather being driven by the leaders
themselves is the difference here.
J: Prime Minister Keating, the on a matter that is related to trade, and it is
the waterfront dispute in Australia I was wondering what you think of the
involvement of your predecessor former Prime Minister Bob Hawke in
the attempts to resolve the dispute? And do you think that he wiAll be able
to bring his background and experience in industrial disputes to resolve
this matter?
PM: Well, the Government has taken charge of the issue itself, and though
commitments were made by the company and by the trade unions last we 
which led the Government to believe would be capable of resolution
before weeks end, when that was obviously not to be so, I ' spoke to the
Minister for Industrial Relations, who of course then opened up a
discussion with the President of the Arbitration Commission, President
O'Connor. And as you know she has called a compulsory conference,
and as a result of that call, already the waterfront stoppage as shortlived
as it was has ceased. So, the Government has taken the issue
over through those processes, and I expect the parties of course to come
along and to appear. I mean, the company has been quite wilfully going
its way now seeking to secure the non-unionisation of sites through
discriminatory wage packages, and the ACTU for its part, while in
dispute with the company sought to engage, of course, many other
parties by a broad national stoppage, which of course didn't find favour
with the Government. Now it will go to the Commission. It will go to the
Commission, and the Commission will amongst other things adjudicate
on the central point, about whether there should be, and can be, any
discrimination for equal work and equal pay equal pay for equal work.
And given the Commission'* s record on this point of discrimination, or nondiscrimination,
I don't think it particularly if you were a betting person,
you wouldn't particularly need to concern yourself too much about who
the advocate was. I think Marcel Marceau could almost get this one
through. Can I just say, though you asked me about Bob Hawke. If he
can help in this, and the unions feel comforted by that experience, then I
think that's a good thing.
J: Mr Keating, has the waterfront dispute embarrassed you at this APEC
conference, and secondly, is it possible to quantify the benefits which will
flow to Australian farmers from today's decision?
PMV: Well, no the answer in the first instance is no. It's just part of our
industrial relations scene we have got the lowest level of Industrial
disputes in Australia this year [ it was] last this low in 1940. And I would
think just about one of the lowest in the OECD, if not the lowest. But, in
any economy our size, there will always be some industrial problems. As
far as the Australian agricultural sector is concerned, in raising this issue
of food supply, food security, today, and looking at some of the problems
through a working group, obviously we mean to get a better definition on
this. But I can't see it being other than providing opportunities for
Australian agriculture to lift their supply capacity to the region, and to
participate in it.
J: Mr Prime Minister, reportedly the Government of France is going to hold a
nuclear bomb testing tomorrow are you going to take a specific action on
this matter? 
PM: Well, we have. AustraIi a's made the strength of our feelings and our
actions known. We have supported, of course, expressions of
condemnation, and multi-lateral bodies such as the Commonwealth
Heads of government meeting last week, and in the UN. And apparently
the President of France was very peeved about the fact that some of his
European colleagues made similar expressions over the course of the
week. I think there has been pretty general, broad, world-wide
condemnation of this action, and there will be for a subsequent test. One
more question, I think, and we'll go.
J: Just on the industrial dispute in Australia I'm wondering if you are
disappointed that the ACTU hasn't been able to call off the coal strike
ahead of tomorrow's Arbitration Commission hearing?
PM: Well, CRA had the opportunity of settling this matter last week and
decided not to. They understand what the industrial imperatives in this
are, but, of course, they will be parties before the Commission on
Monday, and hopefully if that process works well.. . but as I say, if it is
around the question of discrimination, around the question of equal pay
for equal work, I don't see the Commission being able without I'm not in
a position to judge this, because this is the Commission's matter but I
don't see the Commission being able to say " yes, we will have non-equal
pay for equal work", for instance. And, presumably, the parties would
accept the Commission's findings in which case, of course, the disputes
would be over. Thank you.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
"~ Japan Embargo 9.3Opm Osaka time***
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MID
INTERVIEW WITH NHK TELEVISION JAPAN, OSAKA
NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: French papers have reported that France is planning another nuclear test
in a few days are you planning any specific measures to protest against
France this time?
PM: We have just last week secured the most condemnatory resolution in a
large multilateral body that's the Commonwealth Heads of Government
meeting where Australia proposed that France be condemned for its
position, for its decision to resume testing. And of course the word in
international diplomacy the word condemned is a very judgmental and
harsh word. So, that was at the Commonwealth Heads of Government.
At the United Nations, we have also secured a very strong resolution
against the French, and we will continue to proselytise the cause of liberty
of people in the Pacific for the way of life that they wish, and the views
that they are entitled to call their own, without this sort of heavy-handed
approach from the French.
J: Last time you recalled your ambassador from France. This time, what do
you do?
PM: Well, we have made the protest clear, and I think that President Chirac
has said himself on American television that Australia had been the
source of greatest pressure on France. You might have noticed in the
weekend press that President Chirac took umbrage at a number of
European countries, similarly expressing the same view as Australia, and
decided he would cancel one or two meetings with them. So, the 
pressure is continuing to come on them, and I think that's more effective
now than any bilateral action, or unilateral action.
J: It's a related question you have proposed to Prime Minister Murayama to
set up a joint taskforce to deal with nuclear testing. Would you elaborate
on what Australia and Japan can do in this taskforce?
PM: Not on nuclear testing but to rid the world of nuclear weapons. It's going
way beyond the testing point. There are 50,000 nuclear weapons around
the arsenals of the major powers. What Australia wants to do is get them
down to be rid of them. To be rid of nuclear weapons. You might know
that Australia played a leading role in the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Now, in that Convention we removed one whole category of weapons, so
if we can do it for one whole category with chemical, we should be able to
do it conceivably with one whole category with nuclear. And of course,
the verification procedures on chemical weapons is, I think, far more
difficult than verification on nuclear. So, we are now putting together a
taskforce to look at ways where we may promote international agreement
to actually cut the stockpiles. Now, this comes as well as Australia's
involvement in the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty we will be playing, I
hope, there a leading role, too which is a comprehensive ban on further
testing, by everybody. We are also supporting the cut-off convention,
which is the cutting off of further production of fissile material. So, there
are three matters there is a cutoff convention on stopping the production
of fissile material, there is a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, which is
aimed at stopping comprehensively further testing, and then there is
Australia's own initiative to actually be rid of nuclear weapons to actually
take the stockpiles down. And it was that last subject that I spoke to
Prime Minister Murayama about asking for Japan's support in this.
J: With regard to APEC what is your evaluation of the outcome of this
APEC Summit in. Osaka, particularly with respect to the issue of
comprehensiveness?
PM: I think the overall result was outstanding. The great clarity of the Bogor
Declaration, which President Soeharto provided his stewardship
provided has been, I think, built upon under the stewardship of Prime
Minister Murayama. And I think that the outcome in Osaka yesterday is
something that does adequate justice to the Bogor Declaration, and the
leadership of President Soeharto in it. One of the stumbling issues over
these recent weeks was the question of comprehensiveness, but what the
draft declaration and the agenda showed the liberalisation agenda
made clear is that everything is in all categories of goods and -services
-are in the mix to free trade by 2010 for developed countries, that
includes of course Japan and Australia, and the developing countries by 
2020. So, what we said all of us, I think we don't mind...] mean, what is
unique about APEC is that it has specified the end points 2010 and
2020. In the Uruguay Round there were no end points it was a as if
[ they said) " yes. liberalisation is a good thing, but maybe not too good,
and we will just give away as much as we have to, and no more". Here,
there is a much more generous, and a much more wise approach. At
Bogor, we decided the end points. Once you have got the end point
decided, and you have got commitments around the end point which is
free trade by 2010 and 2020 the pace which individual countries then
adopt for the lberalisation of particular sectors is a matter for them. And
so this is why we have used this device called concerted liberalisation
each country does its liberalising, but we bring it together as a concerted
policy. Or we have liberalisation in concert. Now, this is both, I think,
effective and mature, and the test you could see some of it yesterday
was a very big liberalisation package announced by Japan, by Indonesia
and by China.
In other words, if people would make the big commitment to free and open
trade by a certain date, you know, give them the credit of knowing that
they will find their own way of getting there, and yesterday proved that
they will. Which is a far better approach than the sort of mechanistic
legalism of the Uruguay Round, or the
J, Do you think that Japan has been able to achieve its role as a host nation
to the conference?
PM: Yes. I think that all of the imperatives of leadership which I believe
Japan had to show on this occasion it did show. I think Prime Minister
Murayama's work, Minister Hashimoto's work, Minister Kono, and their
officials Mr Kono, and Mr Seki that group. And the fact that we had the
Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Gaimusho working together which
I must say is a rarity for Japan showed how effective they can be
working together. So, I think and yet, let me say another thing, not only
was leadership shown, but the fact that in an unfortunate way President
Clinton couldn't come, it made very clear that Japan was able to do this
without the validation of the United States. In other words, Japan stood
on its own feet, and did this without the United States holding its hand.
And that, I think, is a good thing too, because as you know, Australia is a
great supporter of Japan's, and we're a great supporter of Japan taking a
full place in the Security Council. But none of us would have wanted to
vote for a country that, having the test of international leadership around
something so mammoth as this APEC agenda, if Japan had either shirked
the test or failed the test, it would have given not just Australia, but many
other countries second doubts about its leadership capacity. I think those
doubts have been dispelled. For my part, I have always believed 
because Prime Minister Murayama sat next to me at Bogor I had an idea
about his own thoughts about all of this, and I always believed he would
rise to the challenge. And I think Ministers Hashimoto and Kono
understand how absolutely pivotal and key this was to Japan setting up a
proper East Asian trading structure, one that allows China to come out
with the world economy and be received in a structure which has got
rules, and which has got policy, that allows a proper resourcing of East
Asia, at the same time, keeps the United States commercially engaged in
the region. I think those two Ministers particularly understood those
imperatives, and I think this must have been of material assistance to
Prime Minister Murayama.
J: With regarding of EAEC. there is a debate about Dr Mahathirts plan to
create the EAEC....
PM: Can I interrupt you? Look, it's an old debate. There's one premier
organisation in the Asia Pacific now it's APEC. I mean, the bonhomie,
the commitment, the goodwill that has come around APEC. I mean, look,
since our first meeting in Seattle, you have got much greater movement of
people between Korea and Japan with President Kim and Prime Minister
Murayama, you have just had recently President Jiang Zemin visiting
Seoul, the movement of people and the understanding and goodwill has
come from one body, and that's APEC. Because at the same time, the
strategic guarantor of all this the United States is involved, too. In any
East Asian body, the United States isn't there. Now, this debate. . you
could have a debate about this at the time of Seattle. You could even
keep the remnants of it going at the time of Bogor. But now, there is one
and one body only, and that's APEC. Now of course, in the region in our
region, that is East Asia, South East Asia you still have people meeting
and talking, and our trade ministers meet and talk without some of our
Pacific Rim partners being present on all occasions, but that is not the
institutional structure that we are speaking of. The institutional structure
is around APEC.
J: Mr Keating, you are well known as Mr Deregulation how do you plan to
pull the Australian economy back Into shape?
PM: Well, It's already in pretty good shape, now. After ten years of hard work
we are now in our longest phase of growth since the Second World War.
This quarter will be seventeen quarters of consecutive growth, so this is a
record for us. This year, the economy has been growing around we
have been averaging in the last half dozen certainly, the last four years
about 4% employment growth a year. We have got inflation sitting at
about our exports in the last decade have doubled, the proportion of
our exports we devote to servicing our debt has fallen from 22% of our 
exports to 11 and, I think, we have got a horsepower about the country
now, and a confidence I think we have probably never had before. So, I
think these policies have worked, and I think that the Australian people
have made themselves the effort, and have had the Confidence to take
the opportunity to make their own country internationally competitive. But
having made it competitive, take the leap in market growth in the East
Asian region.
J: Foreign policies you have already expressed that Australia will pull away
from the Commonwealth why the reason?
PM: No. I am saying that Australia should have its own Head of State that
the Head of State of Australia shouldn't be the Monarch of Great Britain,
that it's now inappropriate that it should be the Monarch of Great Britain.
Australia is now a multi-cultural country it Is a mono-culture no longer.
Over half of our migration intake comes from Asia. You know of our post-
War migration from Europe and the Middle East, and as a consequence,
Australia has a diversity and a vivaciousness about it now, and a
willingness a very strong desire to engage with the region, and that
sense of the culture of the new Australia and its identity can't be served
by us saying oh, by the way, our Head of State is the Monarch of Great
Britain. Our Head of State should be an Australian. So the Government
is supporting Australia moving from the Monarchy to an Australian
republic. But we do not wish to remove ourselves from the
Commonwealth. I attended a Commonwealth Heads of Government
meeting list week one of the two newest members returning was
President Nelson Mandela of South Africa. A republic, but he is still in the
Commonwealth. Well, Australia would be a republic too, but still in the
Commonwealth. But the Queen of Great Britain would not be the Queen
of Australia.
J: In the few days that you have been here, what has been your impression
staying in Osaka and Kansai, and also, could you please tell us what Is
you vision for future economic links between Japan and your country,
Australia?
PM: I think coming to. most of my visits to Japan are to Tokyo. I have been to
Osaka before, and coming to Kansai, one is reminded again of the actual
size and strength of Japan. You know, the industrial might one sees in
that trip from the airport into the city, past kilometres and kilometres of
petro-chemical plants and the rest, and this very big City and very large
population, and a very large part of Japan's GDP in the Kansai region.
We now fly direct flights into the new airport, we have a new relationship
with the Kansai region, and I think it's one that we can.. I1m ean, I think it's
cheaper to do business in Kansai, probably, than Tokyo. And I think we 
see that opportunity. And it underlines again the absolute size and
significance of Japan when one thinks of the size of metropolitan Tokyo,
and then sees the strength of the Kansai region, it reminds you simply just
how large Japan is.
The other thought I had about it is that one of the reasons Japan has
been accumulating trade surpluses, and because it hasn't lifted domestic
demand to the point that perhaps it should, and in housing and
infrastructure, it has become very apparent to me that this is one place
where Japanese national savings should be sent. Cleaning up the
Capital Gains Tax rules on property would allow a sensible aggregation of
properties, more rational development of cities better urban planning.
Because one of the problems Australia has, is not a well developed sense
of urban planning, and I am unhappy to say that we share this with you.
There is no really developed sense of urban development in Japan. You
don't need to be an urban planner to understand this your eye can tell
you this, at every street corner. So, I think that if Japan continues to
worry about a surplus, and the strength of the Yen, one of the ways of
solving it is to put more of its savings into housing renewal, better cities
and a higher standard of living for people. But the one thing that is
certain Japan has got the strength to do all these things, and as such, it
is an important partner for Australia, an important interlocutor for
Australia, it is our largest trading relationship. And I think you can see,
throughout this APEC discussion where our officials and yours have
worked very closely together, where our Ministers and yours have worked
closely together, where Prime Minister Murayama and I have worked
closely together, how effective a partnership we can be if we put our
minds to getting something done.
J: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
ends. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN SHOVELAN, " AM PROGRAM", ABC RADIO,
NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JS: Japan wants it to be flexible, Malaysia wants it to be voluntary, we
want a firm commitment. There seems to be conflicting approaches to
exactly where we are going.
PM: Not after today there is not. There is a very comprehensive action
agenda and the declaration which, of course, run to 30-odd pages
were all agreed. So while it may be true, the question you put
reflected the position as they came into this, coming out of it they have
agreed on these very firm dates of free trade by 2010 for developed
countries and 2020 for developing countries, and the means of getting
there. It is an absolutely outstanding result.
JS: Well there was some question whether there was going to be much in
it for the Australian farmer. What is the result for them?
PM: Well the answer is there is much in it for everybody. It will mean we
will be able to see the Asia-Pacific continue growing at this rate
because you see as these very large economies like China start to get
a critical mass, the resourcing requirements in minerals, in energy, in
food, are going to be larger than we have ever seen before. So unless
we get the trade barriers down now, the impediments straightened out,
we won't see the Asia-Pacific growth continuing the way it has been.
But for it to continue at that pace and at the same time have Australia
integrated into it, is the biggest change in Australia's trade position in
our history.
JS: Can't the sceptics, though, still justifiably argue that it is long on
rhetoric and short on action because essentially nobody is really giving
certainly in Australia's case, we are not actually doing that we
haven't already announced?
PM: That is not true at all. In fact what we have said in this statement is
that the action will begin now. That what the declaration and the
action agenda require is that Ministers will start to put together their 
2
well let me read from it, " Each APEC economy will begin to develop its
action plan immediately after the Osaka Leaders Meeting." This is for
each individual country's plan for next year in The Philippines.
" Overall implementation of action plans will begin as of January 1997."
You can't get it more specific than that and, of course, the
down-payments: what we have done here today is put a very big
down-payment on the Uruguay Round outcomes. So, as a group of
countries, we are advancing as distinct from the Europeans and
others we are advancing the whole of the Uruguay WTO Round. And
countries here today like Indonesia, China, others, Japan put very
large deregulatory trade liberalising packages down and so to has
Australia.
JS: Can I ask about a couple of the personalities of the meeting.? One
that wasn't there, Bill Clinton, and Dr Mahathir. Is Dr Mahathir still
recalcitrant about APEC?
PM: Now look focus on the big issues. I mean you can't get an Australian
journo off an old slogan. Here you are faced with one of the great
post-war trade changes and you are asking me about something
Dr Mahathir said two years ago. Dr Mahathir signed up today to this
process and the atmosphere of trust and goodwill and general
good-naturedness amongst the leaders is what is driving this process.
The problem about trade and economic integration in the past is that
the people involved have been Trade Ministers or officials and, try as
they will, they can't get the authority that heads of government or
leaders have. So to get the leadership at heads of government and
heads of state level of the whole Pacific-Rim and get them together in
a very friendly environment, driving a process of this quality, is what
has made all the difference and it gives the authority to the Trade
Ministers, it gives the authority to the bureaucracy, to the Trade and
Foreign Affairs Departments and, as a consequence, the Asia-Pacific
will lead the world in open markets and that is why already over half
the world's production is in the Asia-Pacific. In ten years time it will be
odd per cent of the world's production and when this is
implemented by 2010 and 2020, 75 per cent of the world's production
will be in our backyard.
JS: Can I ask you about the industrial dispute at home just briefly. What is
your reaction to Bob Hawke going back into the Industrial Court as
ACTU advocate?
PM: The important thing is the dispute itself, not who the ACTU advocate
is. The important thing is that the Government has taken the dispute
over. Last week the company went its own way as it has done now for
a number of years to try, in a discriminatory way, to take unions out of
their sites so that they can control the sites without any group
representation by trade unions. The ACTU for its part, didn't confine
the dispute to the CRA, it broadened it to a waterfront dispute which it
should not have done. I thought we could have this resolved last week
and the indications from the ACTU and the company was that it could 
be resolved. When that didn't happen I had a number of conversations
from Osaka with the Minister for Industrial Relations and he and I
agreed that he should speak to the President of the Arbitration
Commission, President O'Connor, to suggest or to have the President
consider whether a compulsory conference was a reasonable thing to
do given the national interest considerations here. On balance,
Justice O'Connor decided that and she has called a compulsory
conference, as you know, over the weekend and for Monday.
As a result of the weekend's meeting, the waterfront dispute is off.
There is now a dispute limited to CRA and in the Commission
tomorrow the matter to be considered is the question of discrimination
or non-discrimination around equal pay for equal work. Given the
Commission's history and its remit I can hardly see what avenue there
would be for the Commission to say that there would be -unequal pay
for equal work.
So, I don't think it matters very much who the representative of the
ACTU is. Whether it is Bob Hawke or Bill Kelty or whoever. I think
almost anyone can get this proposition over the line in the ambience of
the Commission's Act.
JS: John Howard says that it is very embarrassing for you that Bob Hawke
had to be called in to settle a dispute or to try to settle a dispute that
the Government has failed to settle.
PM: He is not settling a dispute. The dispute was taken over by the
Government. It is the Government's Act and the Government's
processes which have got the dispute settled to this point. I mean, the
waterfront dispute off and nobody has gone to the Commission, not
Bob Hawke, not anybody. So, it is. quite wrong for Mr Howard to say
that. I mean, it suits him to make this tawdry political point, but let the
public judge his remarks. The thing is the Government is going to take
no nonsense from CRA or the ACTU and it has evoked the proper
processes and if-the ACTU feel more comfortable about having Bob
Hawke represent them, that is fine. But the case in question now, the
residual matter, about equal work for equal pay, I think, almost anyone
can win that case because I doubt very much the Commission, having
decided to call a compulsory conference can say other than that work
of equal value should have equal pay.
JS: Just a last question, do you have any sort of advice or wishes for Mr
Hawke?
PM: Not at all, but I mean Bob has been in the self laceration business in
recent years and any balm the Government can spread on it, I'm sure
will be appreciated by him and be well meant by us.
ends 



( 6
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J ] KEATING MP
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES-WEDNESDAY 22 NOVEMBER 1995
APEC This was the third meeting of leaders of the APEC economies.
The process began with the meeting hosted by President Clinton in Seattle in
1993 following a proposal I had made orally and in correspondence with the
other APEC leaders. It continued with the historic meeting chaired by
President Soeharto in Indonesia a year ago, which produced the Bogor
Declaration. In that declaration the APEC economies committed themselves to
the goal of free and open trade in the Asia-Pacific at the latest by 20 10 for
industrialised countries, and 2020 for developing countries.
The Bogor goals were unprecedented and audacious. The challenge for APEC
this year was to put in place at Osaka a plan of action which would show how
the goals could be implemented.
I believe the result was an outstanding success. The plan of action and Leaders'
declaration met all Australia's aims and have firmly cemented APEC as the key
regional body for co-ordinating the development and growth of the Asia Pacific
into the next century.
It has provided a framework which will ensure Australia's continuing and deeper
integration into the dynamic region around us with all the economic, political and
strategic benefits which follow from that.
It is of deep and long-run significance to Australia.
At Osaka, the 18 APEC economies, which already account for 60 per cent of the
world's GDP and half its trade, renewed their commitment what the Leaders'
declaration describes as their ' unwavering resolve' to free and open trade and
investment in the APEC region by 20 10/ 2020. 
The Osaka action agenda sets out the principles which will underpin the process
of trade liberalisation and trade facilitation in the Asia-Pacific. The eight
principles we have set down include WTO consistency, comparability,
non-discrimination, transparency, standstill, and a comumitmient to move together
in the liberalisation process.
But a central principle for Australia is comprehensive coverage of all sectors and
issues. This means that agriculture is firmly on the APEC agenda. This was one
of the most difficult issues we faced during the year. But as I told Prime Minister
Murayama, MITI Minister Hashimoto and Foreign Minister Kono in several
meetings over the past twelve months, it was an acid test of APEC's relevance
not only to Australia but to developing agricultural producers like Thailand and
Indonesia. This is a real win for Australian farmers because it enables them to plan
confidently for the opening up of the vast market around us and brings closer our
vision of Australia as a global supplier of food.
In addition to the principles a process was agreed for liberalisation. Leaders
directed ministers and officials to immediately begin the preparation of ' concrete
and substantive' Action Plans to be submitted to the 1996 Ministerial Meeting in
the Philippines for assessment. Overall implementation of the plans will begin in
January 1997, with annual reviews and improvements thereafter. The plans will
be most detailed for the early years, but will stretch through to the 20 10/ 2020 end
dates. We have got the two key things right about APEC.
First, we know where we are going. We have decided on the end point we want
reach free and open trade and investment in the APEC region and we have a
process for getting there concerted liberalisation.
This is an entirely new model for global trade liberalisation. It does not depend
on the legalistic and adversarial approach of traditional trade rounds in which the
incentive for negotiators was to keep their best cards in their pockets, ensuring
that offers were therefore grudging and incomplete. It substitutes instead a new
form of concerted individual movement in which peer pressure and self interest
will work hand in hand to maintain progress towards goals which have already
been set.
The second thing we have right in APEC is the regular involvement of leaders.
Their meetings give the process an authority and drive which could never be
matched by meetings of Ministers alone. Their engagement invests the outcome
of the annual discussions with a weight and authenticity which keeps it moving
forward. 
The APEC process marks a very significant new development in trade
negotiations. I suspect it is likely to prove much more relevant to the sort of
global economy which is now developing: one in which Asian countries have an
increasingly significant economic role; in which many more states need to be
engaged in the process and have an stake in the outcome; and in which the role of
developing countries like China and Indonesia Will become more central.
One of APEC's greatest values as an institution is that it is a practical example of
North-South cooperation. It provides a framework for developed and developing
economies to work together to liberalise and facilitate trade and investment and
to promote economic and technical cooperation. It has been fundamental to the
whole APEC outcome that President Soeharto the leader of one of the world's
largest developing countries has been one of the driving forces behind
liberalisation. Leaders did not only talk about principles and process at Osaka. They delivered
a package of initial actions a ' downpayment' on their Uruguay Round
commitmnents which demonstrates beyond question APEC's seriousness of
purpose. For example, Japan announced the acceleration by approximately two years of its
Uruguay Round tariff reduction commitments on items affecting trade worth
billion as well as a substantial package of deregulation measures.
China announced that it would substantially reduce tariffs on over 4,000 tariff
lines and will eliminate import control measures on about 170 tariff lines. The
other APEC members, including Indonesia, all put good contributions on the
table. Through these downpayments APEC has managed to do something the G7
members could not bring themselves to do earlier this year. APEC has become
the principal catalyst for global trade liberalisation.
At the Osaka meeting we urged other WTO members to match APEC's efforts.
We also agreed to hold a meeting of APEC trade ministers next year to consider
joint initiatives in advance of the first ministerial meeting of the WTO which will
be held in December 1996 in Singapore.
In addition to these trade liberalisation measures, a number of important trade
facilitation measures are to be taken. For example, APEC will introduce a
common harmonised system of tariff classifications by 1996, an internationally
agreed standard electronic customs message system by 1999 and pilot mutual
recognition agreements in the area of standards by 1997. 
These are important benefits for the business community. Customs procedures
alone can add 10 per cent to the cost of doing business and although tariffs in
some parts of the APEC region remain high, the main impediments for many of
our businesses are in the non-tariff area.
The APEC leaders also acknowledged the vital work the business sector must
play in APEC's work by agreeing to the recommendation from the
Pacific Business Forum that we establish a permanent APEC Business Advisory
Council, with its members to be appointed directly by leaders.
I want to acknowledge here the outstanding work which Australia's
representatives on the Pacific Business Forum, Ms [ melda Roche of Nutrimetics
and Mr Philip Brass of Pacific Dunlop, have done for Australia and for the APEC
region, and to thank them on the Government's behalf.
The Emin~ ent Persons' Group has also made a very valuable contribution to
APEC's development work, and I again thank Mr Neville Wran for all his work
over the past three years
I announced during the Osaka meeting that in response to one of the
recommendations of the Pacific Business Forumi Australia will introduce a
business travel card to facilitate regional travel by accredited business people.
We have also proposed that other APEC economies join us in this scheme. This
will help greatly to facilitate the freer movement of business people around the
region. The long-term benefits of APEC's trade liberalisation and facilitation are
enormous. Recent modelling work by the Office of National Assessments and
the Industry Commission backs up earlier conclusions and suggests that, when
the full effects of the Bogor commitments have flowed through, the income of
APEC members will increase by 3.8 per cent or USD 745 billion more than the
current size of the Australian and Korean economies combined.
Australians will benefit directly and substantially from this process. The initial
results of the most recent modelling shows that Australia's real income will rise
by 6.8 per cent or $ 40 billion when all the effects have flowed through, and that
growth of this order can be expected to generate around 500,000 new jobs over
the course of the liberalisation period.
These revised figures on the benefits to Australia which are the result of more
comprehensive modelling, are substantially higher than those I gave the House in
the statement I made after the Bogor Declaration.
Most of the focus on APEC has concentrated on its trade liberalisation
dimensions. These are central to APEC's work and are vital to the region's
contnung prosperity. 
But APEC also has a number of other dimensions, including its important work
in areas like education and training, science and technology, small and medium
enterprises, transportation, telecommunications, tourism, economic policy and
sustainable development.
Cooperation in these areas is expanding quickly and we are seeing the
development of much more intensive sets of linkages between APEC
governments and businesses in all these new areas.
One of APEC's major tasks and one which was recognised by all the leaders at
Osaka will be to keep resources flowing to the rapidly growing East Asian
economies, especially China, as the region's unprecedented growth continues.
For example, East Asia's demand for energy is doubling every 12 years compared
with the world average of 28 years.
China's demand for grains is growing so fast that its estimated shortage within
years could be three to six times Australia's total annual wheat production.
APEC's infrastructure requirements over the next decade are likely to require
US $ 2 trillion, of which well over US $ 500 billion will have to come from the
private sector.
The way we handle these requirements will affect not only the region's prosperity
but its security in the first part of the next century.
I said at the leaders meeting that Australia was ready to address the concerns
which Japan, Korea and China have expressed about meeting their food needs. I
suggested the creation of an APEC task force on food and agribusiness to
examine regional food challenges into the next century. I will be writing shortly
to my colleagues about this proposal.
If the Bogor commitments are fully implemented, by the year 2020 APEC will
account for more than three quarters of global production and three quarters of
the world's trade. ASEAN's per capita incomes will be five times their current
level. One enormously beneficial consequence of the establishment of these APEC
meetings is the opportunity it provides for closer contact between regional
leaders. In addition to the discussions in the leaders meeting itself, I was able to
hold very useful bilateral discussions with President Kim Young Sam of Korea,
President Soeharto of Indonesia, President Zedillo of Mexico,
President Jiang Zemin of China, Prime Minister Murayama of Japan,
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore, Prime Minister Banharn of 
Thailand, Prime Minister Bolger of New Zealand and Vice President Gore of the
United States.
This meeting was a very great success for Prime Minister Murayania and the
Japanese government especially MITI Minister Hashimoto and
Foreign Minister Kono who were most directly involved. Japan's leadership was
very important in helping to shape this outstanding result and I congratulate them
on it.
I feel very confident that President Ramos of the Philippines, who will chair
APEC in 1996, will continue this work. I have offered him any assistance
Australia can provide.
I also take this opportunity to mention the collaborative work of officials from
the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade who have worked very hard and very effectively, including
with their colleagues in other APEC countries, to help bring about this excellent
result. I suggested last year after the Bogor meeting that the establishment and
development of APEC would rank with the establishment of the structures which
grew from the Bretton Woods agreement after the Second World War as a model
to serve the interests of a new world. After the meeting in Osaka I am more
than ever convinced of the truth of this.
Australia can feel well pleased with APEC's progress and our own central role in
developing it. 



PRIME MINJISTER 136/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE FOURTH FRENCH NUCLEAR TEST
I strongly condemn the latest French nuclear test at Mururoa Atoll.
I am appalled that the French Government continues to show disregard for the
feelings of the people of the South Pacific. It has further isolated itself from
international thinking on nuclear i ssues and significantly devalued its international
credentials.
Australia warmly welcomed the recent United Nations General Assembly resolution
calling for an immediate end to nuclear testing. It is clear the international
community shares Australia's conviction that continued nuclear testing is not
consistent with changed global strategic circumstances and changing world opinion.
The Government fully supports the recent Commonwealth statement on disarmament
in which the overwhelming majority of leaders condemned continued nuclear testing
and all leaders emphasised the importance of the determined pursuit of the
elimination of nuclear weapons. This confirmed to me the breadth and depth of
opposition to continued nuclear testing.
Continued testing raises the level of scepticism amongst non-nuclear weapon states
about the sincerity of some nuclear powers to pursue nuclear disarmament and
therefore advances the prospect that some non-nuclear weapon nations will pursue
their own nuclear weapons programs. The French Government must realise that by
sending the wrong signals about its nuclear intentions it is in fact undermining its
long term security, not strengthening it. Security in the next century will not be found
in the possession of nuclear weapons.
The Government calls on France to abandon immediately its testing program and to
desist from actions which undermine progress towards a Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty and measures to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
I will shortly be making a statement on the next steps Australia will be taking to
pursue the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons which I set out in my
United Nations Day speech on 24 October 1995.
CANBERRA 22 November 1995 



I LL
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES THURSDAY 23 NOVEMBER 1995
MOTION OF CONDOLENCE PRIME MINISTER YITZHAK RABIN
I move: That fhis House records Its deep sadness at the assassination on
4 November 1995 of Yitzhak Rabin, Prime Minister of Israel;
expresses its profound sympathy to Mrs Leah Rabin and her
family and to the people of Israel in their bereavement; further
expresses its hope that all the parties to the Middle East peace
process will continue to follow the path of peace and reconciliation
along which Mr Rabin had set out, and requests that this motion
be conveyed by the Speaker on behalf of the House to the
Government of Israel.
Like all Australians, I was horrified to learn of the assassination of
Yitzhak Rabin. Few people in international public life are called on to
make decisions of such weight and consequence as those he had to
make. And few have done so with such courage and clear-eyed vision.
Yitzhak Rabin was a remarkable individual. His life was dominated by
his absolute commitment to the state of Israel and its people. From his
birth In Jerusalem in 1922, he was at or near the centre of most of the
events which created and shaped his country. His life was devoted first
to the foundation of Israel, then to ensuring Its survival.
For many years, Mr Rabin expressed this commitment through his
distinguished career as a soldier. He fought in the 1948 war of
independence, then served for more than twenty years as a member of
the Israeli Defence Force, His military career culminated in his
appointment as Chief of Staff of the I DF and its commander during the
Six Day War. ftAL v z157 2 &gt; 4 No. 0 
TEL
After five years as Israel's Ambassador to the United States, Mr Rabin
returned to Israel in 1973 to enter politics.
Just as his military career was driven by his unswerving commitment to
Israel's security, so was his life as a political leader.
But although that deep commitment never changed, its form did and
quite profoundly.
During his second term as Prime Minister after 1992, Mr Rabin came to
the view cautiously, almost reluctantly, but irresistibly that the cause
to which he had committed his life Israel's survival and security was
now served best by a sustained effort to negotiate a settlement with the
Palestinians.
This did not represent any change in his fundamental beliefs. But he
had the imagination and courage to recognise that military superiority
alone coulo1 not deliver lasting security for Israel. And he understood that
a change of approach of parallel importance was taking place among
the Palestinian leadership as well.
This represented a fundamental shift in policy for Israel, and many
Israelis were unsettled by it. It was possibly only Rabin, with his
unassailable reputation as a defender of Israel's security, who could
have carried most of the country with him in following this new path.
The breakthrough came with the signature on 13. September 1993 of the
Israel i-Palestinian Declaration of Principles. in that document, for the
first time ever, Israel and the Palestinians recognised each other as part
of the same neighbourhood and accepted the need to deal with each
other as neighbours. That historic recognition was symbolised when Mr
Rabin shook the hand of PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat at the White
House in September 1993.
That handshake was the beginning, not the end, of a process. And
despite the intense political pressure he came under pressure which
went well beyond the normal and acceptable bounds of political debate
Mr Rabin remained determined to keep the peace process going.
Under his leadership, the peace treaty with Jordan was signed in
October 1994 and then the Interim Agreement With the Palestinians, just
two months before his death.
The worth and substance of Mr Rabin's achievements not just for Israel
but for the Middle East and the world were recognised when he was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last year, together with Mr Shimon
Peres and PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat. T. E2L: 2 . Nov. 95 23 : 4 No Cui8 F,' CL 
The great shock of Yitzhak Rabin's assassination was not so much that
it happened, because violence in the politics of the Middle East is
tragically common. It was that he was killed by another Israeli.
Because at the core of Israel's existence has always been Its role as a
sanctuary for the Jewish people.
His assassin has done more than rob us all of the life and potential of
Yitzhak Rabin. He has cheated the Jewish people of the security of the
beliefs to which so many Israelis had dedicated themselves. That Israel
was a place where, above all else, human rights and human happiness
were the foundation of the society.
Some good may come of his death if, as many of the country's political
leaders and public figures have urged, it causes Israelis to reflect on the
ways the political debate was abused and misused.
And much good will come of it if it reinforces the commitment of Israelis
and their neighbours to press ahead on the difficult but unavoidable path
he had set.
From my discussion with Prime Minister Peres, I know that he and the
Israeli government are deeply committed to this task. As he told the
Knesset yesterday:
' Our main objective will be to arrive, if possible by the end of this
century, at a comprehensive peace In the Middle East. To create
a Middle Fast without violence, without bloodshed, without
terrorism, without wars, and without the factors which led to all of
these poverty, ignorance, backwardness and prejudice.'
The best way Australia can honour Mr Rabin Is to continue to give our
full support to the peace process. We shall continue to support the right
of Israel to exist in security and safety, at peace with its Arab neighbours
in the context of a comprehensive regional settlement. We shall also
continue to help in whatever practical ways are possible, including
through our participation in the Sinai peacekeeping force and United
Nations peacekeeping operations and through our practical work on
regional security and on water resources as part of the peace process.
When I met Prime Minister Peres after the funeral, he told me that in the
fifty years he had known Mr Rabin, he had never seen him as happy as
he was on the night he was killed. He was buoyed by the support of the
vast crowd of 100,000 which had turned out to rally for the cause of
peace. For the first time in his life, he had sung in public. 
IL~ L: 22. Nov. 95 23: 48 No. 018 P. 04/ 04
Yitzhak Rabin's life was a life that mattered. He changed, fundamentally
and for the better, the society which he led and the region of which Israel
is part.
But it is important to remember, too, that his murder was not just a
political event. It was also human tragedy for the family of Mr Rabin and
those who loved him. No one who saw his grand-daughter deliver that
eloquent eulogy at his funeral could fail to be moved by this human
dimension. That is why, Mr Speaker, I am sure that I speak for all the Members of
this House when I offer our deepest condolences to Mrs Leah Rabin and
the other members of Mr Rabin's family.
I commend this motion to the House. 



PRIME MINISTER 137/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
JOHN HOWARD AND THE MARKS ROYAL COMMISSION
John Howard's claims today concerning Justice Marks are transparently
dishonest. His only truthful statement was his grudging admission that the Telstra matter
and the Marks Royal Commission were totally " unrelated".
Mr Howard claimed on " AM" that the Government had appointed Justice Marks
to carry out a Telstra review this is untrue. Justice Marks was appointed by
Telstra, not the Government.
For Mr Howard to imply that the appointment of Justice Marks by Telstra long
before the establishment of the Marks Royal Commission somehow invalidates
the Government's criticism of the Commission is either ignorant or deliberately
deceptive. Criticism of Justice Marks followed his acceptance of a politically motivated
Royal Commission. His previous professional life has never been at issue.
The Marks Royal Commission was the product of deliberately narrow terms of
reference designed to deny Dr Lawrence natural justice while the terms of
reference in the Teistra inquiry were wide ranging and properly constructed.
There was also no question of improper contact between the Government and
Justice Marks in the Telstra case. In the Western Australian case the contact
between Richard Court's staff and the Royal Commissioner is open to question.
It is drawing a long bow indeed to compare Mr Marks' involvement a year ago
with an external Telstra review with his later involvement in Richard Court's and
John Howard's politically malevolent Royal Commission. It is also completely
dishonest for Mr Howard to say the two cases were run " simultaneously".
With the connivance of John Howard, Richard Court established a Royal
Commission with the express purpose of having terms of reference guide the
Royal Commissioner towards a ' guilty' finding. 
2
It was a vicious $ 5 million political onslaught against one woman. It was the
most savage and systemic personal attack against someone in political life in
the post war period.
Its findings were left open to doubt by even the Royal Commissioner himself.
Mr Howard's dishonesty in exploiting this matter deserves to be condemned.
CANBERRA 24 November 1995 



139/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
HOWARD DODGING AND WEAVING
The Opposition Leader was at his most slippery on Meet the Press today
sending a clear signal that he intends to conceal his true policies from the
public until after the election.
Mr Howard has very little to say on a range of important national issues, and
what he does say simply cannot be believed. Whether it be pensions,
Medicare, industrial relations, media ownership, or economic management,
Mr Howard cannot be trusted.
He refused this morning to match the Government's undertaking to maintain
pensions at 25 per cent of average weekly earnings. If the Labor
Government had adopted the Howard approach to pensions, single
pensioners would be $ 20 a week worse off, and couples $ 34 a week worse
off. Mr Howard wants to dump an important social commitment of this
Government, but he won't admit it.
On Medicare, Mr Howard made the extraordinary claim that the changes
made by the Fraser Government to the then universal Medibank scheme did
not amount to " dismantling."
The Fraser Government, of which Mr Howard was a senior member,
produced five separate health systems in seven years each one more
complicated, discriminatory, expensive and confusing than the last.
Now Mr Howard says he won't " dismantle" Medicare or bulk-billing. Don't
believe him. This is the man who once described bulk-billing as " an absolute
rort." On industrial relations, Mr Howard dishonestly tried to deny he intended to
abolish the role of the Industrial Relations Commission. 
He doesn't deny saying of the Commission: " We'll stab them in the stomach."
And he cannot deny saying in May 1991: " There will be nobody in this room
happier than I will be when the role of the Industrial Relations Commission in
the wage fixing processes of this country is reduced to nothing more than an
optional extra."
For Mr Howard now to play with words, as he did on television this morning,
is simply not credible.
On media ownership, Mr Howard will throw diversity to the wolves. Put
simply, he is prepared to allow a single proprietor to own a major television
network and a metropolitan newspaper in the same city. He is prepared to
sacrifice diversity of media ownership to buy the support of influential media
proprietors. He confirmed this last week when he and the Coalition voted
against the Government's legislation tightening the cross media ownership
provisions. CANBERRA 26 November, 1995 



if
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
26 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well you might recall that in my speech on United Nations Day on
24 October on the 50th anniversary of the birth of the United Nations
and the adoption of its charter I said that I didn't believe that the
strategic framework which now exists in the world that first of all it
would persist forever and that the strategic framework had changed
substantially from that which obtained in the Cold War period. And
I believed it was now possible to think about and develop a concrete
program of making the world free of nuclear weapons because I think
that the sort of world which now exists where you have nuclear powers
committed to reducing their arsenals as we have the Russians and
the United States and the unlikelihood of using their weapons
defensively won't continue forever. I think the one thing we can be
sure of is that this position will not obtain forever. There is a view
amongst some of the nuclear powers that they have nuclear weapons
and they will commit themselves to the non-proliferation treaty and not
use them offensively. But this is not a static model. It is not going to
be the half a dozen weapons states and the rest of the countries
without weapons. Unless something is done about this, there will be
many states with nuclear weapons. And now, I think, is the time to
move. Unless we take action now, we won't make the appropriate
steps to begin reducing that 50,000 warhead inventory which is now
laying around the world and unless we address the issues of
proliferation and the threshold states that is those on the edge of
getting nuclear weapons as well as nuclear terrorism the nuclear
competition which characterised much of the last half century will
continue again after this pause. But one thing will be certain, it won't
even have the stability of the bipolarity of the Cold War. It will be a
multi-polar, unstable world where no one is certain what the policy of
deterrence really means and no one would be able to guarantee what
that action will really imply. And I think we are reminded powerfully of
this by the French fourth test in the Pacific and also the claims of 
nuclear terrorism in Russia with the Chechen rebels claiming to have
placed nuclear materials and explosives in Moscow. We are just going
to see more and more of this as these materials, the mechanisms, all
of these devices and, of course, intellectual property start moving
around the world. So this Government believes that this is a time to
make a start and that is actually beyond the Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty to which we will be deeply involved, that is beyond the cut-off
convention, beyond the conventional framework. But, rather, to
actually start hoeing into the problem of the 50,000 warheads because
we won't actually get the whole notion of non-proliferation moving
unless we actually see the warhead numbers coming down and, of
course, part of this will be enjoining the United States and Russia to
move swiftly under their START obligations. Now I announced in my
speech in October that we had decided to set up a Commission
because there has got to be a starting point for all this where do you
begin on this very large task? And you might recall that Australia was
very deeply involved in the Chemical Weapons Convention and
therein we removed one whole category of weapons and, of course,
the verification procedures with chemical weapons are even more
difficult than nuclear weapons. So this is why we have decided to
think about a beginning and the beginning is getting together a group
of recognised specialists on this subject, getting a group of people who
have had experience on this issue and try to come to terms with how
we might begin to actually take the arsenals down. So we have
decided to set up a Commission of eminent individuals who prepare a
group which would try to work through the difficult and complex issues
of how we get to a nuclear weapons free world and how to make
practical recommendations towards it. And I am happy today to
announce the names of the individuals who have agreed to participate
in the Commission. I think they are an outstanding and authoritative
group of thinkers, statesmen, scientists, disarmament experts, military
strategists, people who have lived with and in the Cold War and who
have a wide experience of international security and disarmament
issues. They include: Mr Michel Rocard, the former Prime Minister of
France; Mr Robert McNamara, the former United States Secretary of
Defense; Professor Joseph Rotblat, the winner of the 1995 Nobel
Prize for Peace and founder of the Pugwash Conference; Field
Marshal the Lord Carver, the former Chief of the British Defence Staff;
the distinguished Australian analyst, Professor Robert ONeill, from
Oxford University; Dr Maj-Britt Theorin, who is a Member of the
European Parliament and former President of the International Peace
Bureau; Ambassador Rolf Ekeus, who is Executive Chairman of
UNSCOM which has worked to eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction; Professor Roald Sagdeev, the Science Adviser to former
President Gorbachev; and, General Lee Butler, who was formerly the
head of the United States Strategic Air Command. Other members
Ambassador Celso Amorim, from Brazil; Ambassador Jayantha
Dhanapala, from Sri Lanka; Ambassador Dr Nabil Elaraby, from Egypt;
Professor Ryukichi Imai, from Japan; and, Datuk Dr Ronald McCoy,
from Malaysia have a distinguished record of achievement in arms 
control and international diplomacy. The convenor of the group will be
Mr Richard Butler, who is Australia's Permanent Representative to the
United Nations and many, of course, know him and remember him as
our Ambassador for Disarmament from 1983 to 1988. 1 don't think we
could have hoped for a more impressive and distinguished group and
I am very grateful to all of them for agreeing to participate. That they
have done so despite their busy schedules, I think is a reflection of the
seriousness with which they regard the issues in the Commission
which we will address. I think they bring a wide range of expertise, the
experience and views to the task and while they won't be representing
Governments, they include people from nuclear and non-nuclear
powers and from a range of regions. So I am very confident that the
Commission's report will make a substantive and serious contribution
to the question of how we can rid the world of the threat of nuclear
weapons. I might add that the first meeting of the Commission will be
in Australia in January and we envisage two or three other meetings,
some of which will be overseas. Its final report will be submitted to the
1996 session of the United Nations General Assembly and to the
Committee on Disarmament. Could I record here my gratitude to the
Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, for his assistance in putting this group
together. The Commission will be supported by a Secretariat drawn
from the Arms Control and Disarmament area of the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade, which you might know has got a very high
international reputation and, of course, we will be liaising with
Government and non-Government organisations as the work of the
group progresses. So, in all, this is I hope the kind of beginning that,
certainly in my generation, we could have only dreamt about through
the Cold War years. And going beyond the actual commitments by the
United States and by Russia, under their START obligations, to take
this opportunity while we do have this strategic pause and to see if we
can't stop the spread and proliferation of nuclear weapons and to
make that believable and to make it stick we really have to start pulling
the stockpiles down and Australia is a non-nuclear power but with
reasonable credentials in disarmament. I mean as a medium-sized
country we have, I think, fought beyond our weight in disarmament
issues over the years and, I think, we can bring to the line again the
sort of vitality and integrity which we have brought to the
Chemical Weapons Convention and do something positive here.
J: Given the recent behaviour of the French though, Prime Minister, at
the end of the day can you see a country like France agreeing with any
recommendations to start pulling the stockpiles apart?
PM: Well I think the answer to that is yes for the obvious reasons. I mean
you had former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing saying the greatest
threat against France is really from the proliferators of nuclear
weapons, from the states which now no longer have them or from
terrorism. And having a nuclear stockpile is not going to deal with that.
Now, you know, there is a clear understanding on this. Where there
isn't a clear understanding amongst the nuclear powers, I believe, is 
that they see some sort of static model that there are so many of them
and that is all there will be. Of course this is just, in the end, not true.
What will happen is that other states will gather nuclear weapons and
there is no moral reason why one state should claim the right to have
them say Britain or France on the basis they say that they are
democracies, or the United States, but other countries who say they
shouldn't have them because they are not a democratic state,
for instance. I mean there is no criteria for the possession of nuclear
weapons and so they will continue to proliferate.
J: You put the argument about the possibility of proliferation of weapons
amongst smaller states at CHOGM and it didn't really seem to me to
get a lot of agreement from British Prime Minister Major. Do you think
that he will come to see your point of view and why?
PM: Well I think it is just not our point of view, it will be in the end an
international point of view. What we are seeking to do is to draw the
threads together on the argument from people who have been involved
with it and around it over a long period of time. And then produce this
report to the United Nations and it will then be, in a sense, a wider
body and certainly not just Australia sort of putting that view and I think
anybody who then takes the view, well it is a static situation and there
won't be anymore nuclear weapons than there currently are has a very
naive view of the world.
J: What has been the international response so far to this initiative?
PM: Well I think the international response is the acceptances. I mean that
is the best guide to the international response.
J: Wouldn't there still be a danger of nuclear warfare even if you got rid
of all of the weapons given that many of these western countries
actually have the technology to rebuild them quickly in a time of
conflict?
PM: Yes, that is going to be there. But I just don't think that the impetus to
non-proliferation is going to be as successful if the world takes the
view that we will keep the absurd 50,000 stockpile. In other words, are
you to be believed by these states when you say there shouldn't be
any further proliferation, but we will hang on to this absurd stockpile
with all of the attendant risks that that brings. Now no doubt, one of
the major issues in this discussion will be where the deterrent policy
goes as the stockpile comes down. But, as you know, you still have an
effective set of deterrents with 200 weapons, let alone 50,000.
J: Have you spoken directly to any of the participants in the group to
encourage their involvement?
PM: I have. I spoke to a number. But, by and large, what has happened
here is the Foreign Minister and I have talked about the nature of the 
group, some of the potential candidates and tried to, you know, get
down to a choice of people who we think can reflect all of the various
views strategic; political; that come to it with a scientific background;
a moral, philosophical background; a technical background;
experience in disarmament and we have narrowed it down to a
choice of people and between us we have spoken to them.
The Foreign Minister has spoken to most of them.
J: Will there be a Canberra-based secretariat to support this and will we
be financing that?
PM: Yes, it will be supported by the group who have traditionally, in the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, focussed on this issue and
we will be carrying the cost of it.
J: At the end of the day, what do you expect this group to produce? Is it
a report that will simply be a focus for discussion, or will it contain
within it concrete recommendations for further pragmatic steps?
PM: Well if the United Nations itself were to commission such a study, it
would probably go to if not the same people similar people.
But then, of course, to get such a study going would require, you know,
the general political difficulties that are required to be encountered by
the United Nations in any such initiative. In a sense, we have by
taking our initiative we can take this initiative in a unilateral sense
and then present this report to the United Nations and to the
Conference on Disarmament.
J: Mr Keating, just on another matter. This final week of Parliament, how
crucial is that in terms of setting the scene for next year's election?
PM: Not very crucial I don't think. I think, you know, people in this country
will decide what they want to do, who they want to govern them on
what the parties have done, how credible they are, how effective they
are and how effectively they are led.
J: On the forest debate in Cabinet tomorrow, it seems that the
environment movement isn't happy with the process that has been set
up and that the outcomes under that process are not going to satisfy
them. Does that concern you in the lead up to an election?
PM: Well let's wait and see how we go at it first.
J: Mr Keating, on Meet the Press Peter Reith has said today that the
Coalition will not guarantee necessarily equal pay for equal work?
PM: Well that is the issue. You see, in that sense, nothing in the CRA
dispute changed the Coalition's position. They don't believe in equal
pay for equal work. They won't ever have the no disadvantage test for
enterprise bargaining that the Government has. In short, they are 
committed to cutting the wages of working Australians. That is their
business, it has always been their business, it will remain their
business and what you will see is, as Mr Reith refused to give the
commitment on the no disadvantage test on ABC Radio about three or
four weeks ago you have seen him today refuse to give the same
commitment on equal pay for equal work. You have got Mr Howard
slipping and sliding on the Commission saying he will keep it. Yet he
said he will " stab it in the stomach", to use his own words and then he
tried to get out of that by saying the Government was in fact talking
about coming at it from the rear or something. In fact, he was just
asked directly, if I remember it, " so you are going to abolish it?".
" As I have said before, we will stab it in the stomach." I mean,
basically, they have been opposed to the Commission being in the
system and it is the Commission which guaranteed the equal work for
equal pay. The Commission would go. But whether the Commission
went or not, they don't believe in the principle of equal work for equal
pay.
J: Mr Howard says that prospective buyers of the Sydney Airport aren't
worried by [ inaudible]?
PM: I mean on what basis did he make that claim. I mean it is just
nonsense. But I noticed he did say, it was not just about my seat.
So he has admitted that the view from the Headland of Bennelong has
been completely central to this process for him and I noticed that some
reporting of the Senate Committee, of course which was chaired by the
Coalition, and the report didn't make reference to the fact that,
of course, Sydney Airport's capacity would be cut by about
per cent. I mean what Mr Howard has done here is just for the most
base political motives, saving his own skin and his own seat, he has
decided not only to press his view about opening up the cross-wind
runway at Sydney and dramatically reduce Sydney's capacity.
But, in doing it, actually do something which knocks around the
budget, delays the process and, more than that, I think calls into the
question the efficiency of Sydney as the hub for airline operations in
Australia and particularly as we approach the Olympics.
J: Mr Keating have you spoken to Bill Kelty since you returned home?
PM: Well, Russell, I have got no intention at these press conferences of
telling you who I have spoken to in the last day or two, or week or two.
I speak to Bill Kelty quite often. But, you know, you can put your
glasses down on asking me questions about that. I will tell you one
thing I would like to say, though. I noticed that John Howard, today,
made very clear that he would basically walk away from the
Government's 25 per cent commitment to the aged pension,
per cent of average weekly earnings relativity to the aged pension.
He was asked repeatedly and all he would say is that he would go for
the indexation and you might have seen a press release by my
colleague, Peter Baldwin, today and he said the fact is that Labor has 
increased pensions by 14 per cent in real terms when measured
against the Consumer Price Index. Mr Howard says he will only
maintain pensions in line with the Consumer Price Index. If this is all
we had done, then single pensions would now be $ 20 a week worse
off and couples would be about $ 30 a week worse off. And even this
promise is suspect given that pensions fell by 2 per cent in real terms
during Mr Howard's tenure as Treasurer. So he was pressed a
number of times and he wouldn't give the commitment. He finally said,
weakly, " well that is the Government's policy". Yes, that is this
Government's policy, but that made no reference to what any
Government he might lead, to its policies. In other words, he has
effectively refused not effectively, blatantly refused to say that he
would maintain the aged pension at 25 per cent of average weekly
earnings.
J Mr Keating, on another contentious privatisation the Government
has got a week to resolve the sale of ANL. Do you hold out much
hope of the MUA [ inaudible]?
PM: Well I have got to go through those issues. I have been out of them
for a couple of weeks being abroad unfortunately. But I will get back to
it this week. Can I just say on a couple of other points, Mr Howard
said he wouldn't be dismantling Medicare. He said precisely that.
He said " we will effectively dismantle Medicare". He said this when he
was Leader of the Opposition heading for an election. He has made
similar references in the run up to the 1993 election. They have
opposed Medicare always and when John Howard says he will keep
Medicare, he is just simply not to be believed. It is just, basically, a
political lie. He will tear Medicare apart and junk it at the first
opportunity. On the cross-media rules he was asked a question about
Mr Black and he said that " any increase in equity for Mr Black would
need to be considered in the future". But when asked what the criteria
would be to give Mr Black extra equity in the Sydney Morning Herald,
The Age and the Financial Review, he said " he wasn't there to put
Mr Black's case." But it was not there putting Mr Black's case, if he
was the Government it would be the approving authority. He was quite
reasonably asked what would be the criteria for increased equity in the
Sydney Morning herald, The Age and the Financial Review and he
wouldn't say. He is trying to have the best of all worlds. To tell Black
he will give him more, but not tell the public on what basis he will give
him more. And he also, when asked about the cross-media rules,
talked about again, he wouldn't come clean there having voted
against the 15 per cent cross-media rule in the Senate, he wouldn't
come clean other than to say that he believed in Australian ownership
which is code for giving Mr Packer, I am sure, more equity in the
Sydney Morning Herald. So, essentially, what he is telling us is under
a Coalition Government, somebody could own a major television
network and capital city newspaper in the same city. Now I don't know
whether Mr Howard thinks that that sort of slipping and sliding is going
to get him around the real issues. But he was slipping and sliding all 
over the place today and making it very clear that he is going to be as
duplicitous and as tricky as he possibly can be.
J: Just to be clear on that, Mr Keating, are you saying that Mr Howard
would approve Mr Packer getting Fairfax?
PM: Well don't take any notice of what I say. Take notice of what he has
done. This week he has voted against the proposition that there be a
per cent upper limit on newspaper proprietors holding interests in
television and vice versa. He has voted against it. So he has made it
very clear where he stands.
J: But that is what you think?
PM: What?
J: You think he would approve of Mr Packer owning Fairfax and the
television station?
PM: Absolutely. I said that earlier in the year and all that happened this
week is that it was borne out.
ends. 



138/ 9-5~
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIAN INITIATIVE FOR A NUCLEAR WEAPONS-FREE WORLD
I am pleased to announce the formation of the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of
Nuclear Weapons. I foreshadowed the Commission's establishment in my 24 October 1995
address on Australia and a world without nuclear weapons.
The Commission comprises eminent and outstanding individuals from around the world
statesmen, scientists, disarmament experts and military strategists with extensive knowledge
and experience of the subject matter. They are uniquely placed to bring fresh and imaginative
thinking to this important task. A list of the Commission's members is attached.
The Commission will propose practical steps towards a nuclear weapons-free world including
the related problem of maintaining stability and security during the transitional period and after
this goal is accomplished.
During the current session of the United Nations General Assembly a number of resolutions
have been adopted on nuclear matters which reaffirm broad international support for progress
towards our shared goal of the cessation of nuclear testing and the continuation of the process
of nuclear disarmament leading to the ultimate objective of the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons. The adoption of these resolutions is consistent with the commitment made by 178 nations,
including the five nuclear weapons states, in May this year to the indefinite extension of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ( NPT), article VI of which commits these
nations to pursue measures towards complete disarmament.
The Canberra Commission and its work will be a major contribution to that shared goal.
Some years ago a Commission of this type would have been a theoretical exercise. But the end
of the Cold War means that we can seriously envisage a concrete program to achieve a world
free of nuclear weapons. Current and planned reductions in nuclear arsenals, the unanimous
decision to extend the NPT, the commitment of the international community to conclude a
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996 and the international outcry against continued nuclear
testing all show that the time is right to take a fresh look at concepts of security and the role of
nuclear weapons. 
The Commission's wide-ranging mandate will enable it to deal with the many complex issues
that need to be taken into account. These include the importance of political motivation and
incentive in strengthening non-proliferation norms and moving to a nuclear weapons-free
world, the role of the nuclear weapon states and threshold states, steps to strengthen
international instruments and control mechanisms, verification arrangements, global and
regional security in the transitional period to a nuclear weapons-free world, and dealing with
possible breaches of commitments often called ' break out' nuclear theft and terrorism.
The Commission will meet three or four times beginning early in the new year in Australia. Its
report will be presented to me by 31 August 1996. The Government intends to submit the
report of the Commission to the 1996 United Nations General Assembly and to the
Conference on Disarmament as a major contribution to nuclear disarmament initiatives
emanating from these bodies.
We should be under no illusions about the difficulty of the task but the opportunity to develop
a practical program leading to complete elimination of nuclear weapons must not be lost.
CANBERRA
26 November 1995 
CANBERRA COMMISSION ON THE ELIMINATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
Ambassador Celso, Amorim ( Brazil)
Celso Amorim was Brazilian Foreign Minister from 1993-1994, and a former Assistant Professor,
Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Brasilia. He is
currently Brazil's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, New York.
General ( retd Georze Lee Butler ( United States)
Lee Butler was Commander in Chief of the US Strategic Air Command ( 1991-92) and
subsequently the US Strategic Command ( 1992-94) with responsibility for all US Air Force and
Navy nuclear deterrent forces. He was closely involved in the development of US nuclear
doctrine. General Butler has served as a deputy to General Colin Powell.
Ambassador Richard Butler ( Australia) ( Convenor)
Richard Butler was Australia's Ambassador for Disarmament from 1983-88 and is now Australia's
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, New York.
Field Marshal the Lord Carver ( United Kine'dom)
Michael Carver was Commander in Chief Far East of the British Army ( 1967-1969), Chief of
General Staff ( 1971-1973), and Chief of Defence Staff ( 1973-1976). He is author of A Policy for
Peace ( 1982), on nuclear policy, and numerous other works on military history.
Ambassador Javantha Dhanap~ ala ( Sri Lanka)
Jayantha Dhanapala chaired the 1995 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review and Extension
Conference and is a former Director of the UN Institute for Disarmament Research ( UNIDIR). He
is a prominent figure in international nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament issues and is
currently Sri Lanka's Ambassador to the United States.
Ambassador RolfEkeus ( Sweden)
Rolf Ekeus is Executive Chairman, United Nations Special Commission ( UNSCOM), whose
mandate is to identify and eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. He is a former Swedish
Ambassador for Disarmament and Ambassador to the CSCE. 
Ambassador Dr Nabil Elrabv ( EU120t
Nabil Elaraby is a specialist international lawyer and a member of the International Law
Commission. He has been a key figure in nuclear non-proliferation matters for many years, and
was formerly Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations, Geneva ( 1987-91). He is
currently Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations, New York.
Professor Ryukichi Imai ( Jaloan)
Ryukichi Lmai is a Counsellor to the Japan Atomic Power Company and a Professor at Kyorin
University. He is a former Ambassador of Japan to the Conference on Disarmament ( 1982-87), to
Kuwait and to Mexico. He has been a Distinguished Scholar and a member of the Board of the
Institute for International Policy Studies founded by former Japanese Prime Minister Nakasone.
Professor Imai is an author of numerous books and articles mainly on nuclear energy, nonproliferation
and disarmament matters.
Datyk Dr Ronald S McCoy ( Malaysia)
Ronnie McCoy is Vice President of Asia Pacific Region and Chairman of Malaysian Chapter of
International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, which organisation won the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1985. He is currently President of the Malaysian Medical Association.
Robert Mcfamara ( United States)
Robert McNamara was Secretary of Defense under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. He is a
former President of the Ford Motor Company and the World Bank. Since leaving the World Bank
he has been active in economic and development efforts across the globe and in the areas of arms
control and nuclear non-proliferation.
Professor Robert OQl-eill ( Australia)
Robert O'Neill is Chichele Professor of the History of War, All Souls College, Oxford University
and was formerly Director, International Institute of Strategic Studies, London.
Michel Rocard ( France)
Michel Rocard was Prime Minister of France 1988-91. He is now a member of the European
Parliament and the French Senate, and a member of the Foreign Affairs and Defence Commission
in each. 
Professor Joserih Rotblat ( United Kindom)
Winner of the 1995 Nobel Peace Prize, Joseph Rotblat is President of the Pugwash Conferences on
Science and World Affairs and a long standing activist and writer on nuclear disarmament. He
worked on the atom bomb during World War II in Liverpool and Los Alamos and was a signatory
of the Russell-Einstein Manifesto. He is Emeritus Professor at St Bartholomew's Hospital,
University of London.
Professor Roald Sa deev ( Russia)
Roald Sagdeev is Distinguished Professor, Department of Physics, University of Maryland and
Director of the East-West Space Science Centre. He has held the post of Director of the Space
Research Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences and was former President Gorbachev's
science adviser. From 1987-1988 Professor Sagdeev was Chairman of the Committee of Soviet
Scientists for Global Security.
Dr Mai-Britt Theorin ( Sweden)
Maj-Britt Theorin is a Member of the European Parliament. She is a former Swedish Ambassador
for Disarmament and President of the International Peace Bureau. She was Chairman of the UN
Commission of Experts on Nuclear Weapons 1989-90. 
CANBERRA COMMISSION ON THE ELIMINATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS:
PROPOSED MANDATE
The Commission will develop ideas and proposals for a concrete and realistic program to
achieve a world totally free of nuclear weapons. The proliferation of nuclear weapons is
widely recognised as having become the most serious threat to global security , and member
states of the United Nations and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT) have committed
themselves to the objective of a world totally free of nuclear weapons. While various studies
relevant to the achievement of such a world have been and are being conducted, there has been
no attempt to develop a comprehensive and practical answer to the crucial question of how this
objective can be achieved.
The practical steps towards a nuclear weapon free world, to be suggested by the Commission,
will also address the related problem of maintaining stability and security during the
transitional period and after the ultimate goal is accomplished.
The Commission will present a report to the Prime Minister of Australia by 31 August 1996. It
is the Government of Australia's intention to submit the Commission's report to the 51st
Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and to the Conference on
Disarmament. The Commission will consider and develop recommendations on the following issues:
Identification of concrete and realistic steps for achieving a nuclear weapons free world,
including the development and establishment of necessary verification and control
mechanisms and new international legal obligations. Possible areas of focus include:
the contribution of a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty; Nuclear Weapon Free
Zones; a ' Cut-Off Convention on the cessation of production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons; a possible treaty requiring all states to declare and account for
their present stocks of fissile material; and the strengthening of the international
safeguards system;
carrying through of the commitment by the nuclear weapon states to eliminate
their nuclear stockpiles through a systematic process, including safe and secure
arrangements for weapons dismantlement and destruction; and
the problem of nuclear threshold states and the related issue of achieving universal
participation in the NPT.
Development of durable security arrangements, both globally and regionally, including
the maintenance of a system of stable deterrence while the reduction and eventual
elimination of nuclear weapons is being achieved;
the link with other weapons of mass destruction and their control or elimination;
and measures to prevent break-out, nuclear theft and nuclear terrorism/ criminality.
Other related issues the Commission may identify during its work. 



.9TEL: 2~ No0V. 0: 31 No. 004 P. O. 1/ iiU
L PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO THE MTIA ANNUAL DINNER, PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA, 27 NOVEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you very much Graham and Jo ( Kraehe), Bert and Pauline ( Evans),
Bill and Barbara ( Page-Hanify), Senator Robert Hill, Senator Kernot,
distinguished members of the diplomatic community, my ministerial and
parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen.
Well, I did want to follow you immediately, Graham, so I could get back and
get into the tucker and the wine. But you may be a bit weary and I think I'll
have to cheer you up a bit. It was a reasonably cheerful speech, but only
reasonably cheerful and I thought I would say a few things to you that have
occurred to me in recent times about our prospects and where we are.
We are about to go into, sometime next year, an election campaign where
one half of politics will say we are all ruined and the world is about to end and
the other half will say that things have never been rosier. But I think the truth
of the matter is that we are facing a period of substantial prosperity In the
region in which we live and we are in a good position to capture it and to
grow with it.
We have got a number of commentators in Australia now talking about, for
instance, Don Stammer calls it a ' long lasting upswing that will take us
through to at least the year 2000' and, I think, that if you look around the
world particularly in our region, you can see plenty of reasons why that
probably is so. That is apart from the domestic reasons that we have now got
on top of, a lot of the problems here of competitiveness that we have been
growing quite strongly, certainly in OECD terms and that there is no particular
reason why we shouldn't continue to do that. Our cost structure is fine, the
profit share in the economy is very high, the exchange rate provides a
mechanism for competitiveness, we have essentially now endemically low
inflation and, I think, we can keep that there and we are trying now to remedy
the savings imbalance through the public sector in superannuation as you,
Graham, remarked. 
TEL: 28. Nov .95 0: 31 No. 004 F. 02-' 10
2
So, all those elements are in place and I think there are other good signs too.
The Japanese economy is now starling to show some signs of growth again.
I think the so-called bubble of the late 1980s, they are starting to wear their
way through that problem, the Japanese government has just introduced a
very large stimulatory package which will lift domestic demand and lift activity
in that country. The Yen has started to depreciate against the US dollar
which will lift Japanese competitiveness. This gives the breathing space in
terms of their own productivity changes and if that economy starts to lift again
it will have a lot lugging power for Australia.
The US is still bowling along quite well at around 2.5 to 3 per cent or probably
at the moment just over 3 per cent. China is growing more slowly than it was
two years ago, but still at such a speed as to provide a lot of demand in this
part of the world. So, the environment we find ourself in is quite good, even
Europe is starting to pick up now with the German economy knocking up
around 3 per cent and the British economy doing quite well in terms of
growth. So, the scene is really quite an up-beat one in terms of growth and
activity. Given that we have now got a much higher proportion of our product
in exports, there is no reason why that can't make quite a substantial
difference to us.
I think that that presents some real opportunities for us and the Government
is trying to make the most of those opportunities by our trade penetration in
the region and also shifting the pattern of what we are doing here. It is worth
recalling, I think, that a decade ago we were exporting 13 per cent of GDP.
The middle range of the OECD countries is between about 23 and 25 per
cent of GDP. We were lagging way behind. In 1983 we were right at the
bottom of the pack. Since then, of course, we have had a very big change in
opening up our economy and competitiveness so now we have got exports
running at around 22 per cent of GDP. -We are not quite up there at that, if
you like, mid range of the OECD, but we are closing quickly and, of course, 9
per cent of GDP the difference GDP this year is $ 500 billion 9 per cent is
billion, you can just imagine what that current account would look like If
that transition had not occurred. I mean, you would be sitting here In a
comatose. economy, growing at probably 1 to 1.5 per cent a year with high
interest rates holding it down and those who had a quid would keep a quid
and those without it would never get one and there would be a lot losing it.
As a consequence that $ 45 billion in addition to exports a year has
completely transformed the face of the Australian economy and, of course,
elaborately transformed manufactures are now leading the way in terms of
our growth. That is a very, I think, important change and it is also just worth
recalling that you hear a bit of doom saying about our debt and we certainly
have to keep an eye on it. But, 10 years ago 21 per cent of our export
proceeds went to paying our interest. This year it is I11 per cent. So, there
has been a very big transformation in the debt service component of the
Australian current account. You might say ' well, we have got substantial
national debt', we have. Perhaps like the person in the street with a big 
T2EL8:. Nov. 95 0: 31 No. 004 P. 03/ 10
3
mortgage, they have just had a doubling of their income, it certainly makes
you sleep better at night and that is what has happened to us. Our debt
service component has come down immeasurably and we are in better
shape. The other thing that I think is worth saying is that and Graham made a couple
of comments about the primary exports sector, obviously his company is not a
foundation member of AMIC or any of those other bodies, but I am rather
bullish about the terms of trade. The terms of trade have been shifting on
Australia since 1950. In 1950 the things we sold to the world were valuable
and the things we bought were relatively inexpensive. Resources were
expensive and manufactures were cheap and we had, therefore, a very high
standard of living in the post war years. That all changed so we got to those
absolutely depression level terms of trade in 1985/ 86, the period that I talked
about the banana republic and those banana republic terms of trade. That
was probably our low point, but I think we are probably going to see, with a
rise in the Chinese economy, India, South America, Russia, all really joining
the world economy certainly for the first time in the case of China, India and
South America and for Russia the first time since World War 1, 1 think we are
probably going to see an upward pressure on prices and more value
attaching to real things as distinct from manufactured things.
I think the premium that has been on widget making technology, gadgets
which has carried a lot of industrial societies along for quite a long time is
probably going to shift given that most countries are now in the gadget
business, whether they be developing economies like China or new
industrialising economies like Thailand for instance, or ones that now have
the aura of a developed economy such as Singapore, these are all countries
that have enjoyed a premium from technology. But, I think, there is going to
be a swing back to real resources, those finite things which for some reason
or another have fallen in value and, I think, if Australia actually gets the
double with a high value added manufacturing industries and at the same
time a pick up In the terms of trade, we'll start shooting back up that Income
curve which we slipped down between 1950 and the mid 1980s.
So, ther is a lot going on out there, I think, and a lot of countries you
compare us with in the industrialised world don't have the resource base we
have, they don't have the capacity to produce food the way we do, yet at the
same time now with an educated population and a much greater commitment
on the part of industry to produce transformed things we can pick up that
premium and at the same time improve our position on the resources front.
Now, that is a reasonably good outlook I think and the other thing then is our
penetration of these markets. Graham mentioned APEC, let me just say a
couple of things about it. The APEC meeting in Osaka was, of course, a
watershed for the region and for Australia. What it meant was that the Bogor
declaration which proclaimed free trade in the Asia-Pacific by 2010 for
developed countries and 2020 for developing countries was transformed into
an Action Agenda at Osaka which ran to 35 pages which was absolutely firm
TEL 
I' .1L0 J u: 61 No. COU4 F il
4
and solid all the way through in terms of developing that agenda, making a
start in 1997 and putting down a huge down payment on that agenda as the
first round of Uruguay Round commitments, WVTO commitments on the part of
APEC member states. In other words it was not just simply a declaration or
further words, but a very clear commitment on all the member states at Head
of Government level, to actually go down the path of free and open trade and
to do so in a way that also shows the lead in the Uruguay Round.
You could not have believed that such an agreement could have been made
just a couple of years ago. So, this will be not only transforming and
redefining the Asia-Pacific, it will probably lead the world in terms of free
trade given the fact that already 63 per cent of world GDP is in APEC and in
years time 75 per cent of world GDP will be in APEC. Three quarters of
the world's production, half the worlds population and at Head of
Government level we have sat down and hammered that commitment out. In
a structure, I might say, that in a very substantial measure Australia has
invented and dealt itself into. I think those of you who know a bit about the
Government and the way it works know that now no longer is domestic
economic policy and domestic and foreign policy two arms, two separate
arms and two separate areas of Government. But foreign affairs and trade is
as much part of the domestic agenda as any other part of the domestic policy
focus and we tend to try and operate it in a way where one goal serves the
other. Now with' APEC, we have put a body together which I think is going to
change, certainly in the next half century, the political architecture of the
Asia-Pacific, not just the commercial architecture. Because when I was there
recently I came there with Jiang Zemin the Chinese President, having
recently visited South Korea which, of course, would have been unthinkable
at any time since 1949 until now with a Japanese Prime Minister having
visited China, with the Korean President having visited Japan and I think a lot
of this goodwill has come from APEC. The fact that they all meet each other,
know each other and have some confidence of trust in one another means
that these barriers are dropping.
So it has political ramifications as well as trade ramifications and, of course,
we are an integral part of it. It has been, I think, a very key change and one
which Australia should take a fair bit of pride in and I hope more than that a
fair bit of sustenance from because some calculations we have done between
the Industry Commission and a couple of other of the economic intelligence
agencies is that APEC is likely to add about A$ 1 trillion of GOP to the APEC
countries during the period up to about 2015. So this is quite a dramatic
change and, of course, will start to open all that area up.
The reason APEC is working is because it has got a design quality that no
other trade body in the world has. First of all, it is driven by a
Leaders Meeting. It is not a ministerial meeting. It is a H-ead of Government
meeting and that meeting has decided the end-points of the trade
liberalisation. Whereas in that drawn out process of the Uruguay Round,
ILL: 
TEL 26,. 10V 95 0 -1 N'o . CC4 F'. 05/
there were never any end-points. There was only what you could garner from
the person next door and it was all based around the proposition that trade
liberalisation is something we had to do, but we didn't like it very much.
So you had to give something away just to. sort of, get along and to get your
share. Whereas what has happened here is that the APEC leaders have actually
decided that trade liberalisation is a good thing and that they will free up their
markets in goods and services by a certain date and the process will then be
driven towards that by the Leaders Meeting. In other words, it is just
completely different to the Uruguay process altogether and thinking of the
design of APEC and how it might function has been thinking about how we
can really change the whole of the Asia-Pacific, keep East Asia properly
resourced and keep it growing because Graham made the point about these
high growth rates in East Asia. Well if you have got a relatively small
economy, you can grow at 6 or 8 per cent because off a small base you can
get large increments to growth. But you get the Australian economy which is
$ 500 billion and grow it at 4 per cent, there is a $ 20 billion increment to
wealth. That is a large proportion. For instance, it is a third of the size of the
Malaysian economy our growth in one year equals a third of the size of the
Malaysian economy. So just keeping that sort of resourcing up to it is an
enormous challenge.
Now all of this is going to happen, of course, in the Asia-Pacific with China
requiring I mean I have got just a couple of statistics here, Talking about
energy. For instance, East Asia's demand for energy is going to double
every 12 years compared with the world average of every 28 years.
China's growing food needs has an estimated grain shortfall of up to
136 million tonnes annually within 15 years. That is three to six times our
total production of wheat. East Asia's infrastructure requirements for roads
and airports, railways and power stations are likely to exceed $ 2 1/ 2 trillion
over the next decade.
So just keeping that great machine resourced is going to be a great
challenge. In other words, if we want to keep growth in East Asia, and be
part of it,.-we have got to set up the machinery for it to happen. And clearing
the impediments in the road blocks and the logjams out of the system is going
to be an important thing to do to keep it going and that is what APEC is
about. Essentially if we can fuel income growth in East Asia, then we can
participate in it.
Now, fortunately, we have seen a lot of success in this part of the world.
Economies are growing, living standards are rising, people are getting better
opportunities. But this is not so all around the world. Look at Africa, for
instance, Southern Africa, or West Africa. There you have got, you know,
faltering political structures, falling real incomes. It doesn't have to be the
way it is here in East Asia. But keeping East Asia growing, keeping
expectations rising, keeping people happy means keeping income growth
moving, which means keeping resources mobile, which means getting the 
I LL: 2 . Nov U NO . u04 F u6/ I'
6
political will to get all that into place. And that is, essentially, what APEC has
done and which Australia, of course, has shown a substantial role in leading
in its formation and in seeking to support those other people who have given
it impetus such as President Soeharto of Indonesia with his declaration, and
Prime Minister Murayama in Japan. So this is Important.
The other thing that I think you should remember too is that the Government
is also working on putting together, as much as we can, some sort of union
between AFTA the ASEAN Free Trade Area and Australia and
New Zealand, or the CER agreement.
Here we have the opportunity in South East Asia of creating a market of
around $ 1.2 trillion in GDP and about 300 million people as a sub-group of
APEC and we are travelling quite well. The Foreign Minister and I are very
pleased with the progress we have been making to date in the AFTA/ CER
discussion and I think, around the region amongst the ASEAN countres,
there is a willingness to involve Australia and New Zealand in this particular
undertaking and where we help them open their markets up and in so doing
create a better mar'Ket for Australian produce.
So it is not anything other than an optimistic scene, I think, and the fact that
we are well placed here in this fast growing part of the world, that we are
starting to get these structures into place, that our own economy is
competitive, we are 40 per cent more competitive this year than we were in
1983 and that competitiveness is now driving that export growth into
elaborately transformed things in services and, of course, in the big bulk
trade of commodities in minerals and, of course, in agriculture. So I would
like to try and ride that process further and to see where it takes us and that,
of course, in trade. The other things in trade facilitation which Is a way of
clearing away impediments to things like the tax system, foreign investment,
customs harmonisation, all of these other things are very much on the
agenda as well.
Now, I think, that we need to savour how far we have come. Certainly
understand how far we have got to go, but know what the opportunities are
and there-are very few OECD countries like Australia that have either the
growth we have, or the growth opportunities we have and they are very much
there. But, first of all, you have got to want to be in it. You have to want to be In it
the East Asian game. You can't be there as a sideline, or a fad. You have
actually got to want to be in it and you can't straggle out there with loyalties to
Whitehall and to Washington believing that you are going to have all the
doors opened up for you in Kuala Lumpur, or Beijing, or Jakarta if our focus
remains only in the places where we have been before. Those things we
have got to do well too and, I think, we can and we continue to keep
for instance, Britain is the largest foreign investor in Australia, we are the
second largest foreign investor in Britain. We have still got very large
investments from the United States. We still have a great strategic 
TEL: 2 . NOV.-95 0: 31 No. uu4 F'. 07/ iñ
7
partnership with the United States. But we have got to make our way here
too and I believe we can.
Now Graham said earlier, we have had a period of sub~ stantial industrial
peace and he correctly identified the problems of the CPA dispute and
I would just like to say a couple of things about industrial relations.
One is to say that we have had a dramatic decline in industrial disputation in
this country. The Accord has delivered tremendous certainty, I think, to the
labour market. It has been principal amongst the instruments in reducing
inflation and lifting employment. We have had a 26 per cent increase in
employment since 1963, household disposable income has risen by
per cent since 1 983, household disposable income per capita has risen by
21 per cent and real wages have risen by 7 per cent. So there is a very good
scene there in terms of the workforce and that is reflected in the wage
restraint and the commonsense is reflected in a much higher level of profits
and, of course, stronger levels of investment which has been powering our
rate of growth.
We are growing, on average in the period of this Government, just on twice
the rate of growth on average in the period of the last Coalition Government
and that is, in part, because you can run. the economy faster without
crunching it with interest rates because there is an Accord to rely upon in
terms of wages growth.
Now this dispute we have had is, of course, not in the normal course of
enterprise bargaining, or in wage settlement. The dispute was not about the
normal growth we have had in enterprise bargaining which has changed the
labour market, I think, markedly. It was about, amongst other things, this
whole question of choice and, by and large, CRA had run a policy which said
that if you take a contract you are worth more than If you are on an award.
Or put another way, that it will discriminate in favour of contracts against
award employees who get their conditions by collective bargaining.
Now if the Government were to say to the MTIA, or to the Business Council,
or to AMIC, or any other body that our policy will be and the union's with us,
under the Accord that we will pay workers up to $ 10,000 $ 20,000 a year
more if they are unionists, there would be a hew and cry around the country
you would have to put cotton wool in your ears. What has happened here is
exactly that, but the reverse. They're saying that If you're on a contract, you
can have more because you are worth more. Now, that's not about equal pay
for equal work it's about unequal pay for equal work, and it essentially not
about choice at all it's about discrimination. And CRA played that game,
and quite successfully, until they finally put those civil writs on people, and at
that point, they stubbed their toes and the unions reacted against them.
Now, this Government is not about to discriminate In favour of unionists, we
are not about to go around and say that if you are on an award, there should
be a beneficial offer made and indeed, the ACTU for its part, wants only a 
TEL: 28. Nov. 95 0: 31 No. 004 P. 08, i0
level paying field. They want to be able to secure the same wages and
salaries for the same work if somebody is on an award, versus somebody
who is on a contract, and that's what the dispute is about. Now, it's not about
the way forward, it's not about labour market reform, It's not about organising
the workplace, it's not about best practice, it's not about training and
retraining, because if we look through the successes we have had in
enterprise bargaining in Australia which now affects, of course, about twothirds
of all federal award employees.., well, look at the great industrial
companies in Japan, and other big companies around the world who have
made very great changes in productivity levels, these have generally come by
teamwork, team spirit.
( tape break)
And that's why I wasn't at all surprised when the Industrial Commission held
in favour of no discrimination being brooked or tolerated. In a sense, there is
no place for ideology in this. And what, I think, the company is doing
essentially, is taking an ideological view that if you are on a contract, you are
more useful, and therefore, you are worth more. Now, you know that there
has been the Employment Contracts Act in New Zealand since 1991, but I
don't know whether you know that labour productivity has grown by 1 a year
since. And labour productivity in Australia has grown at 2.4% over the same
period. So, I don't think it's the answer to a maidens prayer, though New
Zealand, of course, has set a model which it's comfortable with, and which
can operate its economy. Can I just remind you, too, of the US Labour
Secretary Robert Reich, who not long ago at a European OECD Conference
lamented the absence of flexibility in the US labour market, and the US
economy. This is a country where the model that CRA wants is the vogue
where people are basically on contracts, and Robert Reich said " in the United
States, we have had huge employment, but falling real wages for 16 years.".
The US has a speed limit of 2.5% growth, and whenever it gets over that,
they start pulling it back, and that 2.5% growth you would have thought by
now would have been 4-5% if those who believe in flexibility, coming from
these sorts of industrial arrangements, having seen them operate for so long,
that flexibility would have been there. Well, the flexibility isn't there, the US
is still a much more rigid economy than it ought to be, and taking securing
an army of working poor is doing not very much for flexibility, but it is also
ripping the soul out of US society.
And, you know, I noticed just a little chilling statistic in Time Magazine a week
or so ago, while I was flying up to Japan, saying that gunshots account for
more deaths of young people under 16 in California than road accidents, or
any other category of damage. Now, they're unemployed, they're on the
streets, and no-one cares about them. And that's not what we went here, and
we are not going to have it here.
Now, we're going to have a debate in the election campaign around these
issues. Our Coalition friends are here tonight, and I just want to make this
point to them, and to you to say, the Government doesn't mind an honest 
TEL: 28. Nov .95 0: 31 No .004 P .09/
9
debate on this, our model is enterprise bargaining, collective bargaining.
each business tailoring its productivity seeking to draw from its employees
more efficient work, and sharing the gains between profits and wages. That's
happening I think we are starting to do quite welt with enterprise bargaining,
we have a very large training agenda, we have got an international best
practice agenda sitting there, we have got a safety net which looks after
those people who can't get an increase under the enterprise bargaining
system, and in terms of the contracts, we are saying in that respect, equal
pay for equal work. That's the model we are in. We are saying if you can't
get an enterprise deal, you pick up something under the safety net, but if you
can, you and your employer can actually produce a better business which is
more profitable. There's sense about that there has been a great evolution
in that, and there is, I think, a great deal of sense and respectability about
that.
And if the Coalition believes that it doesn't believe in enterprise bargaining in
this way, that it doesn't have a commitment to collective bargaining, that it
doesn't have a no-disadvantage test, that it doesn't believe the Industrial
Commission has a place in all this, then it should say so. And say why it
believes this. To say why it believes such a system would be better for
Australia. Because if they believe it, presumably, they can argue for it, and
make a case for it. But what we won't be having in the election campaign is a
radical change to the labour market by stealth of one side pretending they
have got the policies of the other side, when in fact, they have a completely
different set of policies altogether. Stabbing the Commission in the stomach,
knocking it out of the system, not having a no-disadvantage test, not
effectively giving people a choice these, I think, are alt the recipes, I believe,
of going back to the conflict model that we all came from in the late 1 9709,
which saw a spurt of wages growth, and then a big fall in real wages
thereafter. The inflation rate knocked into 10-11 investment smashed to
pieces, and rising unemployment. That's the sort of model out there. Or,
there's the model we have had as we gradually get the flexibility in the labour.
market, sector by sector, company by company.
Now, I think we are making the grade. A couple of weeks ago I was at tube
makers in.-Queensland, and I was very impressed by a couple of people a
couple of working fellows I sat down with for lunch, and they were literally
blue-collar people in blue overalls, sitting up there talking about how they had
put the last new line production line into the business, and quite proud of
the little innovations they had brought to it. And 1 said to one how are you
going? And he was about 55 or 56, and he said " look, this is the best I have
ever had it in my working life. The best wages I have ever had, the best
working conditions I have ever had, and more time to myself'. And I said,
" well, you please me no end, telling me that", and he said " no, we're looking
forward to the third round of our enterprise bargaining. The first round, it was
pretty much as what we had. The second round we made some real gains,
and we now think all of us think we can do a great job", and they all said
hear-hear down the table. Now, I think that mood is around, and I think we
can really pull it together and make it work. But I think that if we are going to 
TEL
split people off, and cut their wages, we will not grow the Australian economy
out as a low-wage country. The Australian economy is going to make it by
innovation, by education, by elaborately transformed things. It is also going
to make it by accessing those big markets for the things the raw materials
we produce, and the secondary processing of them. It's not going to make it
by low wages this is not going to be a low wage, low rent society, and nobody
should try and take it there. But if the Coalition want to take it there,
then this will be the issue in the election. That is, one where we will have a
referendum on industrial relations, on wages and conditions. Where we are
not going to see a sea-change of the kind of country we are by stealth.
Because in this country, IR is not just a matter of factory floor wages or
conditions it's about the sort of society we are, how we relate to one
another. Because your income gives you that mobility, it lets you pass
through the barriers, it gives you your standard of living, it looks after your
family, it brings you the human happiness that the political system should
bring. It's part of the fabric of the way we are, of the sort of country we have
become, the sort of society we now are. And this is why we believe it's
central and it is a debate where we can participate with a bit of goodwill and
keep our society together, and God forbid the point where young adolescents
are finding we're losing more of them from gunshot wounds than we are
through road accidents, or drugs, or anything else. That we actually have a
society that actually does care about one another, and where we have some
common values and some cohesion and some real beliefs about the sort of
country we have become.
So, if CRA wants to go out, and run this debate fine. The unions will rise to
the occasion, no doubt, and as a consequence, I don't know whether any of
us are going to be advanced by it. But let's not call it reform call it ideology
by all means, but not reform. So, perhaps I could conclude on this point -I
really think we are in for a long period of growth, after the turn of the century
at least. I see nothing coming in our way any impediments to knock that
around. Our cost structure is in good shape, our fundamental inflation rate is
in good shape, our competitiveness is in good shape, and our strategies
positioning in the Asia Pacific has never been better. Our bilateral
relationships with the countries around us with Indonesia, with Malaysia,
with Singapore, with Thailand, the Philippines, China, Japan have never
been better, We have got huge opportunities there we have got he trade
barriers down, we have got best practice coming in, we now have
international businesses to compare ourselves with, we are in there for the
break we have never, ever had before. We have had these phases In the
past like, we call the golden years of the 60s. But they were golden for
Britain, the United States, Canada, Australia and a few other countries. They
were not like now, where they are golden for the whole of South East Asia, for
the rising income levels of North Asia, for substantial parts of Europe. This is
a period, I think, none of us have lived through one as exciting as this. And
let's not trade it away in gloom. Thank you very much.
ends. 28 Nov .95T0E: L3: 1 2~ N. oN. v00.49 5 P. io'i': 



28 NO v75 I2 NO. UY
TEL: 14
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR GRAEME CAMPBELL
In recent months, Mr Graeme Campbell has on several occasions placed
himself in direct public conflict with the platform, policies and rules of the
Australian Labor Party.
As a member of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, Mr Campbell has had
every opportunity to advocate the views he genuinely holds in relation to
immigration, the racial composition of the Australian population, French
nuclear testing and forest policy within the policy processes of the Caucus
and the Party.
However, his views on these matters have not found majority support within
the Caucus, the government or the Party.
His continued public advocacy of these views, and his attendance at
meetings of such groupings as Australians Against Further Immigration and
the League of Rights, are matters that must be considered by the National
Executive of the Australian Labor Party.
The National Executive should consider all the circumstances of
Mr Campbell's public statements and actions, and determine whether he is
best able to continue to represent the Labor Party's interests in the seat of
Kalgoorlie.
CANBERRA 28 November 1995 0195 



.2
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE FUTURE OF OUR FORESTS, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
NOVEMBER 1995
Mr Speaker, I seek leave of the House to make a Statement on forest policy.
Mr Speaker, today I announce the Government's broad policy direction on
Australia's forests and forest industries. I am also announcing several
related initiatives vital to the future of our native forests and the industries
which depend upon them. Full details of these measures will be released
tomorrow by the Minister for Industry, Science and Technology, the Minister
for the Environment, Sport and Territories, and the Minister for Resources.
Mr Speaker, Australia's forests are a defining feature of our landscape, a
priceless element of our environment and heritage, a national resource of
immeasurable proportions and a profound national responsibility.
All Australians have a stake in these forests. All of us have a responsibility to
insist that they are properly managed and carefully conserved.
They are a national treasure and their management must be ecologically
sustainable and economically clever.
Our native forests are of inestimable conservation value. They are vital
repositories of biological diversity indeed, new species of plants and
animals are still being discovered. They are a haven for endangered
species. They are vitally important as water catchments, they influence our
climate and act as carbon sinks to limit the greenhouse effect.
Just as importantly they are places of unique and unrivalled beauty. They
are aesthetically and spiritually important to us. They are important to our
sense of belonging to this land. Our respect for and enjoyment of them is
part of our communion with Australia.
Mr Speaker, the national interest quite simply demands that we protect our
forests. 
This same national interest also demands that we use the forests intelligently
for the things we need and for the communities that live with them.
Our forests have economic significance. They are an important renewable
resource, contributing to the wealth of the nation, and providing us with
essential commodities.
Many Australians, and many Australian communities, depend on our native
forests for their livelihoods. Whatever we decide are our priorities, their
interests must be attended to.
This perception of an irresolvable conflict between the environmental and
commercial values of forests has produced deep divisions in the Australian
community. The debate presents itself as a conflict between absolutes: the
absolute necessity to protect these priceless parts of our environment, and
the absolute necessity to protect Australia's economic interests and the
well-being of Australian working men and women.
The conflict is easily understood. No Australians want to see these forests
destroyed or damaged beyond repair. Nor do they wish to see the economic
interests of Australia damaged or the livelihoods of their fellow Australians
threatened. We on the Government side number ourselves among these Australians.
No policy is going to satisfy everyone. Neither side of this debate can expect
to get everything they want. The aim is to see that Australia is the winner,
that the Australians of the next century are the winners. In the end, the
essential goal is the protection of the long term national interest.
Mr Speaker, it is towards this goal that the-Government has steered a course.
Our cause will be greatly advanced if, on both sides, the debate is conducted
with the national interest in mind. We should all remember that no-one in this
conflict has a monopoly on truth or virtue, or a mortgage on concern for the
future of our forests. Those who presume they do and claim it exclusively will
only debilitate the efforts of people of good will to find the best solutions.
We recognise that this is a debate which will of its nature arouse great
passions. But, equally the solutions and the path to them cannot be other
than rational.
We will not find solutions without cool thinking and a genuine desire to find
common ground and a degree of shared good will. 
Mr Speaker, if the task of devising a national forest policy which meets
community expectations is made difficult by polarised opinion and emotion, it
is made even more complex by the fact that, under our Constitution, the
States have the primary responsibility for land management, including the
management of our forests.
Many in the Australian community expect the Commonwealth to take more
responsibility for Australia's forests than the Commonwealth has the ability to
take. It is expected of the Federal Government that we develop an effective
national policy, yet the Federal Government does not effectively have the
power to do so. What powers we do have can never deliver the long term
changes we are seeking to the reserves, to sustainable management and to
the industry without the States.
The recourse to the Commonwealth Government underlines the failure of
interest groups to secure the appropriate undertakings from those who do
manage forests in Australia and that, of course, is the State governments.
In lieu of actual powers, the Government has taken the lead in developing
with the States a cooperative approach to managing and protecting our
forests. This policy has depended upon the States recognising that there is a
national interest to be served, and success in the long run will in large part
depend upon the States continuing to recognise this.
Mr Speaker, we started on this difficult journey towards a common approach
to forest management with the development of the 1992 National Forest
Policy Statement, to which all State and Territory Governments are now
signatories. This was itself no easy matter and some parties have only more recently
joined. Embodied in that Statement are the shared economic, social and
environmental objectives which all governments have made a commitment to
achieving. Through the National Forest Policy Statement, the Commonwealth and the
States agreed to the ecologically sustainable management of Australia's
forests. Realising that we did not know enough about our forests, the
Statement provided the basis for thorough, cooperative assessments of their
values, leading ultimately to the concept of Regional Forest Agreements with
the States. These Agreements offer the real possibility of a long term
framework for the protection and management of these important national
assets. As an idea it is probably unique in the developed world. 
The Policy provides for the development of a National Forest Reserve
System, which would ensure the protection of high conservation value areas
required to maintain biodiversity, old growth and wilderness values.
Earlier this year, the Commonwealth through a panel of scientists, developed
a set of criteria for determining which areas should become a part of this
system. They include;
a broad benchmark of 15 per cent of the pre-European distribution of
each forest type to be protected within the reserve system.
retention in reserves of at least 60 per cent of existing old growth,
increasing up to 100 per cent wherever practicable for rare old growth
and * protection of 90 per cent or more wherever practicable, or areas of high
quality wilderness
These criteria are recognised as at the leading edge in world terms.
But, Mr Speaker, before we can arrive at a position from which we can
negotiate Regional Forest Agreements and, through them, a comprehensive,
adequate and representative National Forest Reserve System, we must put in
place interim protection measures for forests which might be required as
components of such a reserve system.
The device we are using for this is a Deferred Forest Area or OFA process.
The Deferred Forest Areas process has been designed to provide the
appropriate degree of interim protection needed for the longer term RFAs. It
is not meant to be the last word on which areas would be logged and which
would be turned over to forest reserves. Rather, it was meant to provide an
essential building block on the way to Regional Forest Agreements. The
decisions to be announced tomorrow therefore, are but the first step in a
longer, more rigorous process. But for the forests, a giant step.
For most of this year, the Commonwealth has been negotiating with New
South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and Western Australia to identify forest
areas to be protected pending further assessment in the development of
Regional Forest Agreements.
In cooperation with these Governments, the Commonwealth has recently
concluded a very extensive consultation process in which interested
individuals and groups have had their say in an open and transparent
process. Through their contribution they have been able to influence the
outcome and, I am pleased to say, our Deferred Forest Areas are the better
for it. At the same time, I believe, these consultations have underlined the
fact that the policy approach we have chosen is undoubtedly the right one. 
Through the Deferred Forest Areas process, we have delivered a positive
and I stress immediate outcome for all Australians who have a stake in our
forests which is to say, albeit to varying degrees, every Australian.
As a first step, the decisions we have taken this week offer sound
conservation outcomes as well as predictability for our forest industry.
We have taken a precautionary approach, so as to ensure that future
reservation options are kept open.
Cabinet has agreed on the areas of state forest to be deferred. Detailed
maps of these areas will be released tomorrow.
Our objective has been to ensure that options for establishing the reserve
system, based on criteria developed by the Commonwealth are not
foreclosed while longer term assessments are conducted.
Mr Speaker, I am confident that we have achieved this objective.
In the next few weeks, the Commonwealth expects to sign Deferred Forest
Agreements with the States I have mentioned. I will be writing to the
Premiers later today inviting them to enter these Agreements.
I have on a number of occasions talked about creating in Australia a forest
reserve system the equal of any in the world. With the signing of these
agreements, we will have taken a huge step towards this objective.
Mr Speaker, the management of those parts of the forest estate outside the
reserve system is just as important as the reserves themselves.
The Government is committed to ensuring that the management of these
areas, some of which will be available for harvesting, is truly sustainable.
As part of the longer term process, we will be joining with the States in a
thorough review of forest management and codes of practice.
Our aim is to ensure that the full range of values we attach to our forests are
maintained in perpetuity. We must adopt the view that these precious assets
are held in trust for the future, they are not ours to neglect or degrade.
The forests industry should be a model of ecologically sustainable
development. Our objective is to ensure that it is.
Mr Speaker, the annual turnover of Australia's wood and paper industry
based on native forests and plantations, is in the order of $ 10 billion, or about
one per cent of Gross Domestic Product. 
The Government believes it is imperative to have a viable wood and wood
products industry.
Investments of between $ 4 billion and $ 6 billion are at present under
consideration. Industry and unions predict between 15,000 and 25,000
potential new jobs over the next decade.
The associated Wood and Paper Industry Strategy also to be released
tomorrow sets out the Government's long term vision for this industry. It is
the Government's aim to transform it to make it both internationally
competitive and ecologically sustainable.
As part of this transformation, we will encouraging increased investment in
value-adding processes for wood and wood pulp, and give priority in issuing
woodchip export licences to applicants who invest in domestic processing.
We are determined to sharply improve domestic value-adding of residues
currently being exported as unprocessed woodchips. We will, through this
industry, expand job opportunities in regional Australia.
We will clear the way for value-adding to forest residues by the release of
strict environmental standards for Bleached Eucalypt Kraft pulpmills.
And through Regional Forest Agreements to be developed with State
Governments, we will provide industry with increased assurance about
resource supply and greater regulatory certainty.
We will continue to remove duplication in environmental impact assessment
processes at the Federal and State levels and reduce administrative and
compliance costs.
Through Auslndustry, we will provide add-itional funding for enterprise
development to firms in the wood and paper industries, and so promote best
practice and competitive efficiency.
We will provide additional assistance to small and medium firms in the wood
and paper industry who are seeking to move into new markets or upgrade
existing facilities.
And through the Wood and Paper Industry Council, we will develop industry
sector approaches to investment and improved import replacement and
export performance.
Underlying all of these initiatives is a fundamental commitment to sustainable
job growth and opportunities for Australian workers.
Mr Speaker, while the Government is committed to the long-term
sustainability and prosperity of the native forest based industry, special
recognition will also be given to the increasingly important role of plantations
and farm forestry. 
These sectors represent the best sources for future growth in the wood and
paper industry. Plantations already supply a significant proportion of our total
wood and paper products and major value-adding investment proposals are
currently under consideration.
In 1995, the industry set a target of trebling the current plantation resource by
2020. The Government supports and welcomes this initiative. It will act to
remove impediments to plantation establishment and establish a policy
environment which will help industry to realise this target.
Mr Speaker, every effort has been made to minimise necessary disruption to
the timber industry arising from the Deferred Forest Areas process. State
Governments have been asked to re-schedule logging operations away from
deferred areas. However, the Government recognises that in some cases rescheduling
may not be possible and that logging operations will be affected.
Accordingly, the Wood and Paper Industries Strategy contains details of a
generous Structural Adjustment Package which will provide financial and
other assistance, including retraining, to proprietors and workers in the timber
industry, those detrimentally affected by the Deferred Forest Areas process.
Mr Speaker, we are especially conscious of the disruptive effect on some
operators and communities of these changes. We will do all that we can
reasonably do to help.
Mr Speaker, let me turn to the vexed question of the woodchip export
licences. Applications for woodchip exports for this year were about nine
million tonnes. However, as indicated last year the Government wants to
reduce the amount of wood exported in this unprocessed form. The
Government has therefore decided on a much lower volume for this year
which will be 5.25 million tonnes. This amount is a fair and consistent down
payment on that objective.
Licences will be issued for 80 per cent of that volume. The remaining 20 per
cent will only be available in regions where there has been significant
progress towards Regional Forest Agreements with State Governments.
Details of this year's ceiling will be announced tomorrow by the Minister for
Resources. The Government has made a commitment to phasing out woodchips exports
by the year 2000 from areas not covered by Regional Forest Agreements.
We remain committed to diverting these exports into further domestic valueadding.
The industry is on notice that unless we get the progress and the
agreements, woodchip exports will be phased out. 
Those on the extremes of the debate in the timber industry and among their
more uncompromising opponents should understand that the Government
will not waver from this course or these decisions.
Mr Speaker, no Australian government has ever made such a conscientious
attempt to resolve this huge and vexed issue. Most governments would run a
million miles from it. We have been at pains to strike the right balance; to
find the means by which environmental and economic necessities can be
reconciled in the national interest; the means by which a profitable industry
and prosperous communities can be reconciled with our responsibility to
preserve a unique and magnificent part of our natural heritage for our
children and the Australians of the 21 century and beyond.
Mr Speaker, it can be done. This statement demonstrates that driving an
intelligent course can reap substantial and permanent benefits for both sides
of the debate and for the nation more substantial and more permanent than
any we might derive from pursuing one direction to the exclusion of the
interests of the others.
The moral comfort of extreme and certain positions may be warming to those
who hold them, but they do not confront the real moral challenge, to deliver
real, worthwhile, lasting and democratic solutions. Ones that everyone can
respect. Mr Speaker, no-one should be under the illusion that with these decisions the
difficulties and sensitivities surrounding the issue will disappear. Of course,
they won't.
But I hope the process will decidedly help to create a more cooperative and
analytical environment. An environment in which the common goal of the
protection and renewal of our forests can be achieved with a forest products
industry that has a future based on sustainability and ecological decency.
Mr Speaker, this statement will bring us much much closer to ecologically
sustainable management of our great forests. And, with it, much closer to
meeting our responsibilities to the Australians of the next century and
thereafter. 



i L L I
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LAUNCH OF ANDREW THEOPHANOUS' BOOK
" UNDERSTANDING MULTICULTURALISM AND AUSTRALIAN IDENTITY",
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 1 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, thank you, very much indeed, William [ Albonj. Could I also
acknowledge the High -Commissioner of Great Britain, other distinguished
members of the diplomatic corps, Mr Rebikoff, Lois O'Donoghue and, of
course, my Parliamentary colleagues, other distinguished guests, Andrew,
and ladies and gentlemen.
Well about this time every year, Andrew has a new book and it has become
at least once In my itinerary/ agenda for the course of the year. I always say
that within the year we had better put a day in, for Andrew will have another
book and I am very happy to be here this morning to launch this one.
It reminds me, I think, of two points. One is that there are people in the
Labor Party the Labor Party is full of people who have all sorts of views
about all sorts of things, are in the business of politics out ot conviction not
convenience and you can see this just in this work, alone, that Andrew has
done, how thoughtful he has been and how he thinks about Australia, thinks
about the way In which it is changing and tries to write down and record and
perhaps lead in the way in which Australian thought has changed and is
changing. So it is a very interesting polemic he has written and the prodigious energy
which he displays with these publications is, of course, quite profound. He is
talking about, of course, the perhaps singular most defining feature of
Australian society today and that is the impact of the post-war migration
program on the cultural identity of the country and it is, we believe, a great
success story. We don't presume it is a model for the rest of the world.
But I think we are an example of a culturally pluralist society that works pretty
well and in this text he is, I think, trying to tell the reader why he thinks it
works well and to say that our whole process is informed by democratic
com monsense. I LL . Nov., j5 23: 24 No. 013 P0'~ 
I EL 0L . N o v. 95 23: 24 NC .
2
is main theme, I think, is that multiculturalism is successful because of the
strength of the nation's oldest values. That is egalitarianism, principally, the
belief that everyone deserves a fair chance or a fair go and our deep-rooted
sense of democracy and our basic tolerance, which comes from it, is the thing
which has given people the psychological space to let multicultural ism work
in a way that we have been able to draw strength from it.
He says that rather than diluting Australia's culture, it has replenished it.
Replenished it around the theme that the place is, essentially, deeply
democratic and tolerant and egalitarian and that the influences of
multiculturalism have, in fact, highlighted, sharpened, and replenished those
Instincts. And that people have brought colour and ambition to Australia and
that has generally supported the tendency we have all had to these
democratic ideals and democratic traditions.
And I think people coming particularly in the early phases from Europe,
who have in the first instance, changed the nature of the culture of Australia
have found when they have come here, particularly rent by two World Wars,
that the opportunities for freedom in Australia where these values are bound
and, also, in the sun because it is always easier, I think, to feel happy and
free in a temperate climate, than one does rugged up under a grey sky.
But the whole notion of you Know, you share in the bounty of the country
whether you are wealthy or not, when you share in the pleasure of its
environment. And, I think, all of that has produced a great view that amongst
migrants and in the community that the multicultural ism that has arisen from it
has truly replenished that which we have had here.
Of course no policy of the Government, or no document, could make
multiculturalism work. That has to come from the community itself. But a
strong Government commitment to multiculturalism is necessary and it is that
commitment which, I think, Andrew rejoices in in the Labor Party and I think
that we enjoy as a Party with people in the community.
Could I also say that in saying that I don't believe that multicultural ism must
ever be allowed to become an Ideological position, a sort of repository of
political correctness, or something beyond criticism. But certain things are
beyond the pale, like a racial basis in discrimination of our immigration
system, or discrimination against migrants in the workplace etc.
But, I think, the theme that the Government has been perhaps touching in the
last couple of years is our general embrace of multiculturalism, but. making
clear that everybody's first loyalty has to be to Australia. That is, within the
bounds of Australian democracy and egalitarianism, the things which Andrew
argues is actually feeding and replenishing our culture, the inspiration of it
has to be always that which the democracy is about. And that is the first
loyalty to the society we have created here and our first loyalty to Australia
and, of course, that Is most obviously expressed in the allegiance which the
Government strongly encourages and that is, of course, taking Australian
citizenship, which we are seeing, I think, as a growing tendency amongst
people who have had permanent resident status. . u16 ' C 
I EL: 30 . Nov 95 23 : 24 N1,3 13 P -05/ 0
3
Andrew's book sets out a narrative on the Government's recent advances
the National Agenda for Multiculturalism, first released in 1989. The National
Multicultural Advisory Council has reviewed the National Agenda for us and
the Government will soon formally respond to their report. The Racial Hatred
Legislation, commitment to access and equity principles, the platform on
which multicultural ism has built itself which is social justice, he refers to this
and he says that the very essence of social justice are the things that hold the
egalitarian notions together. Hence, the underpinnings of multicultural ism
and he goes through some of the elements of it Medicare, education and
training, superannuation for everybody, and in the broader, of course, the
Native Title Legislation which brings into the social justice equation more
obviously, of course, the first Australians.
Now, these are all things which, I think, that we see as a matrix, as threads of
a fabric. That is, it is not just about the Migration Program. It is not just about
a separate cultural identification with the countries of origin of people. But it
is about a bigger thing that they can identity these historic interests with the
new-found, in the case of those who arrived as migrants, freedom and
democracy here which is itself fed by a long egalitarian tradition, which is
itself supported by social justice and social justice policies.
And so while these things might seem to be in the realm of social policy, they
are In fact part of community policy. These are points we often make of our
opponents, wearily, about things such as Medicare, education and training
because education is the great boundary jumper. It is the place where
people skip through the stratumns and when only three children in ten
completed secondary school ten years ago, you can bet that most of the
seven of the ten, of course, represented preponderantly those of lower
incomes and disadvantaged groups.
Now, of course, this year that is eight in ten completing secondary school and
we have had now a 60 per cent addition to tertiary places and an enormous
revolution In vocational education. So that where once only 40 per cent of
people were trained after secondary school 60 per cent cascading into,
essentially, a labour market within which they were not equipped with skills
will have now the great bulk of the community, 90 per cent odd, coming into a
training situation post-secondary training.
And that is not a statement about education, it is a statement about your
society, It is a statement about mobility, it is a statement about the brightest
people being chosen on their abilities from within the education system rather
than their parents income or their parents social position. All of this has, of
course, made it likely that the children of migrants take a greater role in the
society. So, giving people universal protection against sickness which is not a market
matter your well being should not be a matter for the market place
education, training, the right to a decent income in retirement so that the
Commonwealth's tax concessions are equitably drawn down, all of these
things we think In the Labor Party buttress a whole notion of society and
buttress the notion of multiculturalism. 
TEL: 30. Nov. S 23: 4 No. 013 P. v4/ Ut
4
Now, you know, it is rare for me these days in a public address to ever let the
Coalition off and I'm not going to do it today either. I just wanted to say a
couple of things about them because there is a lot to say about them even
though they don't say much, there is still a lot to say about them.
We found something that goes to this subject. It is a report which Senator
Short the Shadow Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs had
commissioned by Mr Zachary Wilks of the University of Michigan. The
document is entitled ' Building Australia's Future. An Evaluation of Settlement
Services Prepared for the Office of Senator Jim Short, Shadow Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs'. In his covering letter to select migrant and
ethnic groups Senator Short states that this paper " is Mr Wilks' personal view
and does not represent a Coalition position." However, it is a document that
makes clear it is a research document prepared for, by and with the active
co-operation of Senator Short and his office and it carries hence his
imprimatur, It has been distributed officially by him at public expense. It says
" The Coalition is currently reviewing several important matters in the areas of
multicultural affairs and settlement services I would appreciate hearing
from you on the topics identified",
Should the Coalition win the next election, I'm sure this officially sanctioned
circulated paper would no doubt be used by a Howard government as some
sort of mandate for adopting the radical changes it recommends. I'll give you
a little taste of just a couple of pieces of it.
It says all business and skilled entrants including concessional family
entrants who are in a skill assessed class should be required to have English
as a precondition of entry. Without English ability their skills or business
acumen are virtually worthless in and to Australia Well, of course, bad
luck for Peter Abeles and Frank Lowy and Frank Belgiorno-Nettis. They
wouldn't have made the grade on that basis.
Then it goes on if they do not attend the courses or obtain English
elsewhere then they should be denied access to welfare benefits. In the
future their sponsors should bear their living costs In other words, If they
don't attend courses and are trained proficiently in English they shouldn't get
welfare benefits and their sponsors should be reminded they will have to
carry the costs.
It is so friendly. And it goes on to say this migrants without English ability
including humanitarian and refugee entrants in particular should be required
to undertake English language courses as a priority for settlement. They
should continue to receive financial assistance while they are undertaking
these courses. However, if they fail to attend class or drop out prematurely,
they should not be eligible for future unemployment assistance unless they
have obtained English either through the courses or elsewhere It is a
hard world Mr Howard has in mind for the rest of us.
1 wish Margaret Thatcher had come to Canberra recently. She could have
endorsed Johnny as well as Jeff. She would have endorsed this for sure. 
7u Nov 1j:* 1-4 No 013 F U , U t
if all else fails the Government may have to look at more prescriptive
methods to ensure migrants obtain sufficient English skills so they can fully
participate in society and are not at risk or impost to either themselves or the
community. Such a proposal could involve proficiency certificates that would
be awarded by accredited English programs and presented when applying for
a job Here Is a little rub employers who fail to check for the certificates
could be made subject to fines You see, all those nasty employers out
there employing people who don't speak fluent English.
Anyway, it goes on, there is pages and pages of it. I won't bore you with it. It
is just typical of the Coalition's snaky approach to multicultural ism. One of
the things I have said to Alexander Downer was multicultural ism is more than
heading for the nearest Chinese restaurant. It Is more than chasing a
meatball around a plate with a pair of chop sticks which is what he did on his
foray to a Chinese restaurant in my electorate.
In the Labor Party, of course, proficiency with chop sticks comes at the age of
16. In the Liberal Party it comes at about 42 or 43 years of age, but by then
the capacity for dexterity is long past. So, they never quite make it, there is
certainly no accreditation in their youth. But, I don't know whether these
things have ever occurred to our friends in the Coalition. At any rate, they
don't have a view that we have, that the thing that multiculturalism has done
has been to enlarge Australia, to make it bigger and to make it better, to
make it more interesting, to make it more resilient and to do, as Andrew has
suggested, replenish those basic instincts of egalitarianism and democracy.
In that sense, as people live their lives here, as their children grow up here,
the culture of Australia has changed to a newer identity. But one which is
uniquely Australian is that which some of the rest of us might have identified
or 40 or 50 years ago and indeed given our place in the world, our
proximity to large, old societies like Indonesia, very old societies like Papua
New Guinea and our proximity also to the fastest growing markets in the
world. The change to Australia is one that in our cultural diversity is not just a
social strength, but a strength in approaching these markets and being part of
the community and region in a way we might not have conceived before.
I have made the point and Andrew makes it well here, that you can't ever
really be thinking about a society at peace with itself, comfortable with the
changing nature of its culture and its identity without, of course,
understanding that the people who must feel comfortable in this are our
Indigenes. It is going to take a long time before the Australian indigenes feel
comfortable with Australia, the way it is now, but I think we have made as
strong a renewal of our efforts to that as perhaps any government has,
certainly in recent years and we are going to keep that commitment up.
But, you can't say that the place is open and fair and democratic if one
Important and key section is excluded from opportunity or where the barriers
to participation are too great. 
TE L 110. Nov. 95 ~$ 24 No. C01J. 3 . CxO/':
6
So, that is why that happy mix of social policy runs with the whole current of
our society and it is why too, with a republic that in renouncing a European
monarch as our head of state, we would have made that affirmation of the
way in which we have changed and to say to all the people who have joined
us that they are more likely to be and more welcome in being an integral part
of society which they volunteered to belong to.
I think we in the Party owe Andrew a debt for getting this down because
debates come and go and the plasma of the debates exist at the time but
then they disappear and you try to remember what debates were like
years ago or 20 years ago and you can remember the highlights, but you
don't remember the flux and I think what this text does is put that down. It
puts all of the issues down, it gives us the threads of the debate and records
this quite distinctive, defining change in our history. For that we thank
Andrew and it is therefore with great pleasure that I officially launch his text.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR MR YITZHAK RABIN,
CENTRAL SYNAGOGUE, BONDI JUNCTION, 3 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well Dr Oystragh, Ambassador, Consul-General, Rabbi Franklin, Rabbi Wolff, Rabbi
Ingram, my Parliamentary colleague, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you very much indeed for paying me the honour of asking me to come on
this occasion to remember Yitzhak Rabin and to remember what a significant life he
had, and to recall the very great things he did for the Jewish people and for the
State of Israel.
I had never met him. He is one of the people when one goes through life and you
often think I would like to meet this person. He was one of the people I would have
liked to have met. But I never, ever, had the opportunity.
But I always admired, obviously, his physical courage, his courage as a soldier and
a politician and remember well some of the things which have already been said
about his work, about his role in 1948 and in 1967, and how much and how
important he was to the people of Israel and to the State of Israel.
I think people came to his funeral to pay tribute to his courage and to underline how
important his work had been. And his courage was not simply the courage of a
soldier, but the courage of a politician in the sense that he understood that, in a
democracy, people need to feel the community, they need the plasma of
democracy, they need the pulse of community and community opinion and one
ceases to be, in a sense, a democrat if one is removed from them. So one always
had the sense of the accessibility that he gave to the people of Israel and,
of course, the attendant risks which he took and the courage which, of course, he
showed. The security of Israel and the survival of Israel was, of course, the one thing running
through his whole life. But that he had the flexibility to see that that aim could be
achieved by other than the policy he had formerly adopted was the mark, perhaps,
of his greatest strength.
That he understood that while Israel could be defended in a military way, it couldn't
be defended permanently in a military way and that to make it secure, one had to
gamner the support of the surrounding nations and peoples, and to do it on the basis
of friendship and to do it with magnanimity. And, I think, having dedicated his life to
its security and its survival, he saw peace as the way in which that aim would be
secured and the magnanimity of the peace process was important to securing the
peace. 
And I was very moved by similar thoughts that Shimon Peres had to say when
I visited him, saying that he would dedicate himself to this process, that he would
put his Government on it and that it was more important than the Government itself.
And that, were they not to succeed in this, then the security of Israel which Yitzhak
Rabin and he, Shimon Peres, had dreamed of may allude them.
And one had the impression, just in a short visit to Jerusalem seeing the young
people particularly the young people with the peace signs all over the city was
very moving indeed. And I thought that that sense that the community had to
embrace peace not just at the political level, but right down through the society, was
very much in evidence during the period I was there.
I was also struck by the informality of the funeral. A funeral without pageantry. One
which was, again, accessible and wasn't distant from the people and in my view it
underlined, again, the democratic tenor of Israel and the sense of democracy of the
place that the funeral was as it was without pomp, without an overbearing
ceremony and accessible to all the people. And, I think, that the shock and the loss
was borne, in a sense, by the dignity which has come to Israel's democracy and
those who are participating in it.
SO, I think, we one month later think about this very great man and we know what
he has done for Israel and we know what he was doing with a very intricate and
precise process of peace. In, first of all, building the confidence within his former
opponents, building the confidence so they could be confident enough to move from
the political to the constitutional to the administrative to be able to actually operate
an authority, to be able to operate a system of civil government and to invest that
importance in them and, in so doing, lift them up so that the peace process could
actually be accomplished.
This takes a great understanding of human nature, a great understanding of one's
opponent. But a very great understanding of one's objectives and I think
Yitzhak Rabin, obviously, had these things.
I can only wish Shimon Peres well in this, as we all do. And in watching him pursue
the peace process, with I think a renewed vigour from the people of Israel, and in
the securing of it, we will do more than anything we can say tonight, or elsewhere,
to remember Yitzhak Rabin and to pay tribute to his life and to his work and to his
strength and, in that way, to see his dream come true.
I appreciated very much the invitation to the funeral. I appreciated the fact I could
even be there. But his life mattered too much not to be there. That is why I went
and that is why I am here tonight.
ends 



. i rL: PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
ADDRESS TO AN EMPLOYER BREAKFAST, CANTERBURYBANKSTOWN
RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB, BELMORE, SYDNEY,
4 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much Peter ( Moore), I am delighted to be here with my fellow
patron Kevin Stewart and my parliamentary colleagues Leo McLeay and
Daryl Melham and Janice Crosic and with so many other people who are
dedicated to this task, those associated with Canterbury-Bankstown Rugby
League Football Club, Brendan Priest ( Deputy Secretary of DEET) who is
with us today, Dave ( Rowland) and Shelly ( Taylor-Smith) who have just
spoken and ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here with Peter and
George ( Paciullo) as Chairs of the Southern Sydney and South West Sydney
Area Consultative Committees to be on this occasion asking some of you to
be part of this very substantial endeavour which we are all undertaking.
To see what we are doing in some sort of context let me just paint a little bit of
scenery for you and say that 10 years ago only three young people in
completed secondary school, Whatever hopes we have for this being a
clever country or a intelligent country or what have you, obviously if seven
out of 10 are not reaching secondary school standard, they can't obviously
reach tertiary standard and other vocational standards. In that 10 years we
have had a great revolution in Australian education. This year eight in 10 will
have completed secondary school. So, we have gone from three in 10 to
eight in 10. Ten years ago 40 per cent of young people then streamed
themselves into university and we still have 40 per cent streaming
themselves through, but you can imagine the increase in numbers required to
stream 40 per cent of three in to compared to 40 per cent of eight in
As a consequence, we have now added 60 per cent of places, more in fact in
1983-84 we were at 360,000 university places and we are now at 610,000
places. It has been a huge addition to the stock. So, we have got 40 per
cent being trained in a tertiary way, but then the problem is with the other
per cent and a lot of that 60 per cent was simply cascading into nothing.
Dave said earlier, when you find that people turn up with a saw and a
4 bU u e OU 
2
hammer and say they are carpenters, they were many people broadly
untrained. As a country we are not going to make the grade with low paid
jobs, with low paid labour. This is a relatively low labour cost country, but we
are going to make it doing innovative and clever things. We are going to
make it adding value, producing innovative products, getting into those export
markets. It is not our job to be competing with mass low labour cost countries
and yet that is the way we were set up in the post-war years, in the days of
tariffs, the days of protection, the days of neglect of the education system.
We in the Labor Party think one thing. That education is the great bridger,
the great bridging thing through the social stratas, the great bridge to
opportunity, the great liberator. It gives people a chance to break into all
sorts of fields and all sorts of incomes and all sorts of opportunities and, of
course, all sorts of excitement in their lives. So, education and training has
been the focus of much of what we have been trying to do. Not long after I
became Prime Minister we said in the One Nation statement, we put $ 1 billion
into TAFE and set up a National Training Authority for the first time ever the
Australian National Training Authority, ANTA to run a national TAFE
system. We have now put $ 1.25 billion into TAFE. What are trying to do is
to build vocational education beside the universities so when that 60 per cent
cascade out of school Year 12 but don't go to university, they cascade into
a competent vocational education system and they get certificates and they
get accreditation across the country and we get the standing of TAFE up.
That is what is basically on. But, you will still find quite a lot of young people,
particularly in the past, who have left school at 15 or 16 and are untrained
and have never had the opportunities to stay on to Year 12 or those who are
on the way to staying on, but find they can't make it and drop out. In Working
Nation which we did in 1994, what we have sought to do there is to pick up
those people who are untrained or who are part of the long term unemployed.
It is our aim in Working Nation not to let any young person under 18 drop out
of the system. If they drop out, we either get them back in school or back into
training with a job subsidy so that at least we get them back in the system
and we don't let them drift by the wayside.
So, the various programs we are building up are focussed on those things,
such as the Youth Training Initiative which comes to mind and where we are
now starting, as Dave suggested earlier, to take young people in Years 11
and 12 and give them some out of school, on the job work experience and to
give them some training in Years 11 and 12 for TAFE courses so that they
pick up credits while at school for the TAFE course that they will then
undertake. In other words, we start streaming them before they leave school.
And so we overcome that problem that Dave Rowland mentioned, that they
leave school and find they haven't got a job and they don't know what to do.
In other words, we start focussing them while they are in Years 11 and 12.
That Is the sort of broader educational and training picture. The labour
market is a different thing again. The labour market is very much like a pool.
You have people coming into It, staying in it for a while and then coming out
of it into a job. But, the time in the pool very much reflects the state of the
4 .1) eC ., is u : 01 10 U6 I i I" 
TEL: 4. Dec 5 u : ul1No . U
3
labour market and those who are untrained find that they are in the pool and
they gradually drop out of sight and people are no longer interested in them.
Yet the demands of the labour market are not so great as to be able to take
them from the depths of the pool, they will just take up the ones who have
come in at the beginning. So, the school leavers each year, women joining
the labour market, migrants, they come into the pool and very quickly go out
and get a job. But, the ones that have been in there longer in societies like
Australia are, in the main, forgotten because there is not enough sucking
power, if you like, in the labour market to take the new entrants plus the long
term unemployed.
What Working Nation is principally about, through the Job Compact, is to
make sure that the ones who go out, that there is a high proportion of the
long term unemployed in there. In other words, it is not just the ones who
have been unemployed two or three weeks who come in and then go out, but
the ones who have been long term unemployed, 18 months or two years or
so. This is where we came up with this novel idea called the Job Compact.
We actually case manage people, so we have one person who gets to know
or 30 people, get to know what they did at school, what their personality is
like, what their family situation is like, what accredited training they have had,
what work experience they have had and what they might to. And, we give
that case manager also a Jobstart subsidy in the main and then we say to
that person we will case manage you and find you a job and we will subsidise
that job with your employer, but you must take the job, you cannot knock the
job back. In other words, there is a compact here that operates.
Well, the success of the program to date is that we have reduced long term
unemployment by 25 per cent In the last 18 months and that is an almighty
change in a country like this because in the 1980s when we had massive
employment growth, I think, the long term unemployed went down by
something like eight or nine per cent over the whole period. Because once
you are out, you stay out. The system just takes the new people up and that
is the end of it. Now, part of the case management approach, developing a
private market in case management and employment services which we are
doing and finding jobs which we then subsidise, we are also trying to find
traineeships and Jobstart places for longer term unemployed people and
particularly for young people.
This is where the Area Consultative Committees come in and where business
comes in. We can't do this without the business community. This can only
be done if the society as the country itself decides that it is not acceptable to
have a stock of people young or not so young sitting around the labour
market not in jobs, mouldering away, all their aspirations being dashed, their
self esteem being dashed and this is a great problem. When people have
gone for jobs and been knocked back, gone again and been knocked back,
gone again and been knocked back, they think there is something wrong with
them. Their esteem goes down and after a while they don't apply, they are
psychologically out of it and that is why the work experience is so important.
Again, the points you can see with those three young men who came on the
stage earlier. Their experience is up and their confidence is up and they 01 P. 12/ 14 
T4E. L: D ec. 95 0: 01 No. 001 P. 13/ 14
4
have done some things. I thi'nk Dave * Rowland mentioned the high retention
rates. It is not when we stop the subsidy, the job stops. When we stop the
subsidy, most stay in work. We have a very high success rate with the
people who stay in work.
What I think this breakfast is about, the reason we have got the Bullfrog on
the job here and others is basically to bring people in and people have got
experience. People like George who have been in public life and now in local
wa--o% Ao go o t to i s%, J pay VVV I ICCQ Itv'U t0K. ~ i I
interest in this' and it is not just you doing something, but you will get
something in return. You will get a better trained person, you will get
tremendous loyalty from them and you will end up with a better community
around you, you will end up with a more fully employed community and a
happier one, I think the story that Dave Rowland mentioned also of training
on the job, the Government has also through our training policy, not simply
trying to build a vocational educational system in TAFE, but we also want a
private training market. So, when there is a big job or a big business and
employers are short of skills we will subsidise the building of a specialist
training facility in that plant or on that site and people with go through it. I
think Dave said 170 people have been through his.
We are doing this all around the country so we don't simply want a public
sector monolith in TAFE, but we also want a private training market out there
to train people on the job. So, let's say you are a small employer, it is the
TAFE training that will matter or maybe some training on the job. If you are a
larger employer, we could help you with a training facility and through DEET
the Department of Employment, Education and Training and the CES we
are able to pull people up under the case management system. If they have
been unemployed 12 months or more we know about them, we know what
they can do, we can give them a training place and the job start with you and
we can give you the subsidy to get them up there and you will find there is a
whole new source of employment open to you that wasn't opened to you in
the past.
In the end, we will be a better society, a happier one and a fairer one. Shelly
talked about being Aussies and it is great to be an Aussie, well one of the
great things about being an Aussie is the egalitarian sense of the country
the sense of fairness and equality and fair play and it is a very equal country
but will become less equal if a slice of the community are not in work. The
way you keep that social cohesion is to give people a job opportunity and to
give them a chance and to bring them up and to care about them.
We set up Working Nation to say we care. We won't let people fall out of the
system and stay at the bottom of that pool of unemployed people forgotten,
but rather we will make sure they get their chance to get up into the stream
again and back into the labour market. The difference will be a lot of harder
hearted societies where they say, as the Republicans now say in the United
States if you haven't got a job bad luck, bad luck, you are not going to get any
unemployment benefits perpetually either. Or in a lot of other countries in
Western Europe, well, they'll deal with young people on the streets, they'll
TEL 
ends EL z4 be C. U: HrOJu . uU, r i44/ 1-
deal with crime, they'll deal -with all th'e attendant p. r oblems which come from
that sort of approach, but in this country we have made a different choice. In
1993 when we were returned to office we were returned on a program of
getting the country back to work. We have 650,000 job growth since the
election 1993. Our target was 500.000, we reached that in two years. Last
year we had the biggest fall in unemployment in our history and even though
we have got unemployment around 8.5 per cent, it is still too high. With
Working Nation we have got a chance of getting it down. In the 1 980s when
we had that huge employment growth, we could never get below 6.5 per cent
and the reason was we never had a Working Nation program there and we
never had people like you there to actually tap into it and go through the
veneer into those long term unemployed people. So, when the labour market
was really running flat chat we were starting to complement it by skills
formation through migration. We were not getting into the long term
unemployed. That is what Working Nation now allows us to do and, of
course, the whole education system is producing a product which we didn't
have in the 1980s.
So, altogether whether it be the Government's employment programs or just
the raw employment growth from the growth in the economy and that is the
central thing, that raw demand for employment. But then who gets the jobs?
And we know that they are going to go to school leavers, to women, to
migrants, but they must also go to the longer term unemployed and that Is
what this breakfast is about. It is about going out there, helping those
people. It is about asking you people in business to think about it, not to do it
out of some sense of ultrulsm, but in the sense that it is more efficient, we will
have a more efficient labour market if those under utilised resources are not
under utilised and you will end up with a better workforce yourself and you
will live In a better society from the one you would otherwise live in.
That is what we are doing and that is why we are here. So, let me again, take
the chance of saying thank you to George and Peter, to the Area Chairs, and
to congratulate you again on that target f * getting over 3000 training jobs by
Christmas. We are already at 3400 as George told us. And that the training
pays program gives us the opportunity to do those things and to reach out In
a real way to those people who are feeling the despair and hopelessness of
unemployment. When, in fact, we can do the compassionate and the efficient
thing together, by picking them up, taking an interest in them, giving them a
job and getting a better employee and a better business. So, that is what it is
all about and I particularly thank our sports men and women for joining us
today, Shelly and our own Terry Lamb and all of the other people who have
come along, Mal ( Meninga) who is with us now, for coming today because
you people are important models for people in their hope because when they
are unemployed they look at you and they see, through your own dedication
arnd energy, what you can do for yourself and it is always a reminder. So, to
see you in this context is very nice indeed. Anyway, thank you all very much
for coming. 
TEL 6
There is no reason why these strong employment rates can't stay up and if
they stay up we have got to pull the longterm unemployed into it. We just
can't take the new entrants the school leavers, women joining the workforce,
or rejoining it, or migrants and just let the longterm unemployed people
languish in the longterm pool of unemployment.
So that is why your Area Consultative Committees matter. That is why the
link to business matters because if we can't get you interested and to know
that you do end up as this chap this morning was telling us about his
construction company that Is getting a good class of trained people coming
from longterm unemployed people. He is training them himself and then he
knows that he has got tremendous loyalty from them in the firm and they are
going on.
Now I know in these sorts of ventures people say oh well, you know, there is
a bit altruism required here. But it is not altruism. There is a bit of
good-spiritedness about it. There is a bit of compassion about it. But there is
also a lot of efficiency about it and good sense because, obviously, we will
never make the sort of growth rates we can and enjoy the sort of incomes we
expect if a large part of the country's resources are either under employed, or
unemployed. So we are doing something for all of us if we get the longterm unemployed
back to work and we are doing something particularly for them and we are
making our society more cohesive.
Now the other day, my Tory opponents jumped all over me for talking about
the rates of deaths in California amongst young people. And I read this
chilling statistic in, I think it was, lime magazine saying that in California
more young people die of gun shot wounds than die of car accidents and that
is pretty frightening. The main reason for that is because under these crazy
American laws, they let people carry guns around. But it is also part of the
social malaise of unemployment and disillusionment and rejection. It is all
out there and we don't want to see any of that cancer coming into the
Australian society. I mean some of that malaise has been there with the
longterm unemployed and as a society we have got to get in and do
something about it.
Now Working Nation is the most valiant attempt ever been made in this
country to deal with it and, as far as we know, while other countries similar
countries are into labour market programs, none of them have quite got the
Innovation of Working Nation, we don't think, and we think we are a real show
of building on that 25 per cent reduction in longterm unemployment since it
was introduced and getting that down and making a very big difference into
the way Australia functions and the fact that people can share in it.
Now the Government has taken a very big interest in regional Australia
because now in some of the regions they are growing much faster than the
capital cities. A lot of the employment opportunities are in some of the
TEL Dec .95 0 j1 NO. JJ0i F .08/ 1: 
i EL 7
regions. We are trying to get regio'hal leadership, we are trying to give
regions focus and, at the same time, we are trying, in that, to get a focus on
longterm unemployment which is prone to be more difficult in the regions than
in the cities. And we are very pleased that so many of you are from the
regions of Australia and you have seen yourself committed and interested
enough to be in it with us, to do something about it. Because the whole thing
about One Nation is that we think of ourselves as one nation when we are all
pulling together and it is not just programs for the capital cities, but for the
provincial cities and the towns and the regions around the country as well.
So I would like to take this opportunity of thanking you for your interest in
work and training and I think we all know that when we give these people
training and work experience, even with a job subsidy, when the job subsidy
finishes the retention rates we are getting are so encouraging that people are
staying in the jobs and going on.
So we may well be able to fill those jobs which the labour market is requiring
us to fill with employment growth. The main thing is we fill them by taking a
good share of the longterm unemployed up into them as well. So we have
some real fairness operating in the system and we have the sort of country
that we have always believed Australia should be.
Anyway thank you very much for coming along today. Simon and I are
delighted with the progress of it. Simon has done a great job with Working
Nation, as Minister. He has got a great Secretary in Derek Volker and a
great team in DEET. We are absolutely delighted with it and pleased as
punch you can be involved with us.
ends 4 Dec.~ u; Ui NO-oij U 



I9 A
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ANNIVERSARY DINNER OF THE ISRAEL CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE, SYDNEY
MONDAY 4 DECEMBER, 1995
It is a very great pleasure to be here this evening to mark the 25th anniversary
of the Australia Israel Chamber of Commerce.
The Chambers achievements over that quarter century are substantial and Its
potential is even greater. So there are many reasons to celebrate tonight and! I
will cc-me to them shortly.
But I hope you will forgive me if I begin on a more sombre and personal note.
Only it month ago I made my first visit to Israel, for the funeral of Yitzhak
Rabin. They were the saddest of circumstances in which to make such a
joury. The number of leaders who had travelled to Jerusalem from around the world
was testimony to Yitzhak Rabin's remarkable life. He had physical courage, of
coursia and not only as a soldier, but as a politician too. But It was in his
moral courage that his true greatness lay. He was a man whose whole life had
been devoted to the survival and security of Israel. But when it mattered, he
had thie imagination, flexibility and courage to see that that same cause was
now served best by a policy of negotiation with the Palestinians.
The Image of King Hussein of Jordan, President Mubarak of Egypt, Prime
Minister Chemomyrdfin of Russia and President Clinton standing together In
Jerus. Wemn, In the Mount Herzl national cemetery and speaking of their shared
loss was, surely one of the most moving public moments of the late twentieth
century. But, in a way, just as moving for me as that ceremony was what the funeral
revealed about Israel Itself and about Israelis. The quiet, determined faces of
the thousands of young people lining the streets holding up peace signs, the
Informality and simplicity of the funeral and the memorial service solemn but 
without high pageantry or panoply all struck a powerful chord with me as an
Australian, because they were a signal of a deep sense of democracy and
equality which Is at the essence of both our countries.
I often think that immigrant societies, wherever they are placed, are closer to
each otlher in tenor and tone than they are to the countries from which their
populations originally sprang. I felt that strongly in Israel.
Yltzhatk Rabins assassin robbed Israel and the world of a life that mattered,
and punctured the dream of Jewish people everywhere ftht Israel, above all
other things, was a place of sanctuary.
But ho did not kill that dream. I came away from my short visit convinced that
the people of Israel would draw strength from the tragedy of Rabin's death.
And that this was a society which would come through the ordeal it now faced
strongier and more able to meet the challenges and they are profound
challenges which lie ahead.
Because the work of peace which Rabin supported has much further to go.
The interim agreement between Israel and the PLO was signed on 28
September but it now has to be implemented.
The negotiations still to come on permanent arrangements for the peace
settlement will be even more difficult. Above all else they will require goodwill
and generosity. And it will be very important, though immensely difficult, to
narrow the differences between Israel and Syria over the next few months.
All of -us hope tat reaction to Yitzhak Rabin's murder will constrain extremism
as these negotiations proceed, but we cannot be confident of that. People on
all sides both the malevolent and the frightened will no doubt continue to try
to derail the process.
My dis3cussions in Jerusalem with Prime Minister Peres left me In no doubt that
he, like Mr Rabin, sees no alternative for Israel or its neighbours to following
the path of peace, however difficult it might appear and however careful the
steps along it must be.
His objective, as he told the Knesset on 22 November, is ato arrive if possible
by the end of th~ s century at a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. To
create a Middle East without violence, without bloodshed, without terrorism,
without war and without the factors which lead to all of these, poverty,
ignorance, backwardness and prejudice%
It Is hardly credible for an Australian Prime Minister, from this distance and from
the security of our continent, to offer detailed advice on these vital issues of
security and peace to those who struggle with them daily and I will not try. I will 
only say as I said to Mr Peres that Israel can continue to count on
Australia's goodwill and practical support for the work of peace.
The sort of practical support we can provide is seen in our membership of two
of the working groups set up under the multilateral track of the peace process.
The areas we are working on arms control and regional security, and water
resources are ones where we have some expertise to share. In April this
year, for example, experts from Israel, Jordan, Egypt, the Palestinian Authority,
Morocco and Oman met in Terrigal for a workshop on rainfall enhancement.
This sort of Issue does not generate headlines or high drama, but it offers
avenues for practical cooperation which will be vital if mutual confidence is to
develop within the region.
Australia is, of course, also providing direct support for Palestinian autonomy
through our three-year $ 15 million aid program announced in October 1993.
And Australian defence force personnel continue to play a core role in the Sinai
peacekeeping force and to participate in United Nations peacekeeping
operations elsewhere in the region.
In May 1994, I said in a speech to the Zionist Federation of Australia that
Australia had never wavered and would ne-ver-waver from our commitment to
Israel's right to exist within secure and recognised boundaries. But I added that
beyond those familiar phrases, we would never waver from a deeper conviction
that the international community is a better place, a more decent place, for
the contribution Israel has made and will yet make.
I hope in some small way that Australia can help it make that contribution.
Let me turn now to the reason we are celebrating tonight the 25th anniversary
of the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce.
Back In 1970, a sceptical joumalist from the Australian Jewish News asked the
founders of the Chamber whether it was anything more than an Impressive
set-up'.
Well, over the past quarter of a century you have certainly answered that
question decisively. We are here tonight to celebrate your vision and
achievements. As the attendance at this dinner tonight shows, the Chamber has become a
highly respected and influential organisation, with offices throughout Australia,
as well as In Tel Aviv. It has a national membership of over 800 companies,
and a list of Governors that reads like a who's who of corporate Australia. 
4
It has been a catalyst for the development of a very lively business partnership
between Australia and Israel. It has organised successful trade missions,
promoted joint ventures and commercial partnerships in third countries and
initiated academic and Industrial research and development agreements.
Earlier this year it was involved In the dedication of a plaque in Israel
recognising the heroism of the Australian Ught Horsemen who were involved in
the charge at Beersheba Wells in October 1917 as part of the advance that led
to Jerusalem's liberation from occupation. Some of the remaining veterans
were present. I thank the Chamber for Its part In arranging this ceremony.
But I suppose the main measur, of the success of a Chamber of Commerce
has to be what has happened to the commerce. AMd here the figures are
strikirg. In 1970, our bilateral trade was worth $ 8.5 million. In essence -as the
Chambers Executive Director, John Weiss, has pointed out Australia sent
Israel coal and wool and we got back oranges and bathing suits in return.
Now it is worth $ 30 million. Coal and wool are still Important, but Australian
exports of elaborately transformed manufactures have also started to make
inroadls into the Israeli market.
There Is no doubt that some strong synergies exist between the Australian and
Israeli economies.
Each of us has a strong research and technology base on which we want to
build. I will have some more to say about that from Australia's side when I
launch the Government's Innovation statement in Melbourne on Wednesday.
In Information technology and telecommunications, for example, both Australia
and lnral had more than 100 exhibitors at the CeBIT fair In Germany which I
attended in March this year.
Israel's privatisation of its cellular and International communications services
has provided an important Investment opportunty for Australian companies. I
am very pleased that Australian companies are now joining International giants
such as Intel, Motorola, IBM, Mitsui and Microsoft In working with Israeli
industry on building Information technology alliances.
Neither of us Is big enough to take on the giants of these Industries alone, but
we can probably Identify some highly rewarding areas of co-operation.
Cooperation Is expanding in other areas, too. The High Technology Trade
Mission to Israel which the Chamber organised In September was the largest
Australian business delegation ever to visit Israel. A number of joint venture 
agreements involving the exchange of technology have already come out Of
that mission.
One o~ f these was an agreement to grow in South Australia a new variety of
olive which, as a result of Israeli technology, produces more oil than any other
olive. This project is expected to generate a substantial olive oil industry in
South Australia which will export from Australia throughout the Asia Pacific.
Another source of potential economic partnership must come from our similar
climate and topography.
Solar energy, desalination and water management systems are critical Issues
for both of us and I am sure there are ways we can work more closely together.
Australia is a world leader in water management technology. The Snowy
Mountains Engineering Corporation, for example, has recently conducted
discussions with Israeli authorities over the Jordan Rift Valley project. And an
Israeli compary has successfully combined Australian waste-water technology
with Israeli engineering skill to provide municipal waste water treatment
througjhout Israel.
As wo each move to build our infrastructure to cope with growing populations
from Immigration, our tranisport, construction and service industries also have
great potential to work together.
The new terminal planned for Ben Gurion International Airport has attracted the
interest of Australian companies, as, I am sure, will the planned Cross-Israel
Highway project. Australian firms are being added to the lists of approved
vendors to the Israeli Electric Corporation.
Another real area of potential growth in trade and investment lies in the way we
can each use the other country as a base for regional operations.
Israel's free trade agreements with the United States and the European Union
are an Incentive for Australian companies. IPEX, for example, has chosen
Israel as its European headquarters for their software business and Is among
the fastest growing computer companies In Israel.
But, for the first time, it is also possible to imagine Israel as a potential base for
trade into the Middle East. We are not at that point yet but the signs are all
pointing in its direction. Over time, I am sure that will happen because It serves
the Interests of both Israel and Its neighbours.
The signature of the Israel-Jordan trade agreement in October this year and
the convening of the Amman Summit, in which Israel participated with Arab
courtries, are promising steps. 
.6-
In Australia, the first joint tourist promotion program involvng Israel, Egypt,
Jordan and Turkey, is scheduled for early 1996, and Is a very welcome sign of
things to come.
In the other directon, some Israeli companies have already sensed the
potenlial for operating out of Australia Into Asia and the Pacific. I know the
Chamber has been active in spreading that message in Israel.
For example, a leading telecommunications company, Teledata, has set up a
successful mnanufactuing facility In Brisbane which supplies the Australian
dome3tIc market but also exports to Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and
Indonesia
This brings me to a point I want to put firmly on the record.
I am sometimes accused of paying too much attenton to Australia's relations
with Asia at the expense of Australian economic interests elsewhere. This Is
a view you will sometimes hear from my political opponents and from the
stodgier sort of newspaper columnists.
It is not true, of course. But I want to make clear just what I do think becal se
R is vory important to all of us who live in this country and who care about its
fuure. I am convinced of this that unless this country gets our relationship-
Including our economic relationship with Asia right, we will not succeed
elsewhere. This does niot mean that we could not keep other bilateral trade links open. Nor
is it to deny that some of them might prosper.
But, over the long run, this fact seems undeniable to me: the degree of
AustraWlas Integration into the region around us and the experience our
business people gain In matching it with the most dynamic economies in the
world will determine, more than anything else, how relevant we are to other
global markets, and how successful and competitive we are in them.
So my view is simple: our business people should be looking to do business
wherever there Is a profit to be made and a mutual Interest to be served. But
we w~ ll only maximise those opportunities with Israel, for example, or Europe,
when we have shown that we are fully engaged In our own region.
That is why APEC Is important to all Australian business people, even those
whose primary interests lie In other parts of the world.
It is why the outcome of the Osaka leaders' meeting with its agreement on a
plan of action to Implement the commitments we made at Bogor for free trade 
in the region by 2010 for industrialised counties and 2020 for developing
countries was such an important development for Australia, but also for others
who want to do business here and In the region.
The O~ saka meeting firmly cemented APEC in place as the key regional body
for co-ordinating the development and growth of the Asia Pacific into the next
century. We e-stimate that the full results of the Bogor commitments will expand the
regional economy by about the size of the present Australian and Korean
economies combined, arnd that Austral~ a's real Income will rise by $ 40 billion
when all the effects have flowed through.
If the Bogor commitments are fully implemented, by 2020 APEC will account
for re than three quarters of global production and three quarters of the
worlds trade.
The effort we have put into setting up APEC and elevating its decision making
to the level of leaders has been directed to these very important alms to
getting Australia a seat at the -world's largest free trade table, and, by keeping
the region's development and growth going, better ensuring Its security as well.
That is good for all Australians and for those who do business here and In the
region.
That Is also why we have been working on the development of links between
the Australa New Zealand Closer Economic Relations agreement and the
ASEAN Free Trade Area.
We recently held the first successful meeting between CER and ASEAN trade
ministers. We agreed to complete a series of practical collaborative projects
which will address Issues of real concern to business people. And these
projects and these developing linkages with Southeast Asia will complement
and neinforce what the Government is working to achieve with APEC.
Anyone who suggests to you that we should be wary about over-emphasising
economic links with the Asia Pacific does not understand, in my view, just what
the causes of global success for Australian traders will be In the decades
ahead. Let me end this speech, not with congratulations-you already have them but
with a challenge.
Because although trade between Australia and Israel has been growing well, it
still falls short of its potential. If it is to reach that potential a sustained effort will
be needed. This will Involve Governments, of course. I know this Is a high
priority of Ambassador Moyal. And his enthusiasm will be matched on our side. 
But mainly it will involve the private sectors of our two countries. I can't think of
a more, effective organisation than this one to Identify new areas for trade and
Investment and to put together the people and companies who will be needed
to take the trade relationship between us onto a new level.
I wish the Australia Israel Chamber of Commerce every su cces over the next
twenty-five years.
Ends 



6
I/ i
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE AREA CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE CHAIRS
NATIONAL CONFERENCE, HOTEL INTERCONTINENTAL, SYDNEY,
4 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well thank you, Monique ( Aho], Simon ( Crean], my colleague, Derek Volker,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Well we appreciate very much you coming together. But, more particularly,
for giving us support over the course of the last year in doing what, I think, is
a new thing for Australia. That is, a partnership between the Government
and business in focussing on the labour market and particularly on the long
term unemployed.
One of the things, I think, we have always believed well we like to believe
certainly it is one of our characteristics, is that sense of fairness and
egalitarianism which I know you all share and I think most Australians share.
And there was no way that we can continue to lay claim to those qualities if a
large proportion of the workforce were denied opportunities to take their
place in society and to enjoy the things the-rest of us have been able to enjoy
and to share in the opportunities and the bounty of Australia.
And the difficulties of unemployment and longterm unemployment have been
pretty obvious for quite a long time and even in the 1 980s where we had
spectacular rates of employment growth, we could never get unemployment
below about 6 1/ 2 per cent because we could never get down into the people
who had already lost their place in the labour market. And I think we always
need to keep a sort of mind's eye picture of the labour market of people
coming into the pool, perhaps staying there a few weeks or a few months,
and then going out to employment. And the fact that some people in the pool
are there a very long time and they drift to the bottom of that labour market
and when we get strong employment, there is not enough pulling power from
the employment to tug the new entrants along and to pull them out of
longterm unemployment.
So you find we have this pattern of those who join the labour market are the
school leavers, women moving into the labour market often rejoining it, or 
for the first time migrants. * Aiid so even in an economy which is growing as
strongly as this one has where we have had employment growth of around 3
1/ 2 per cent to 4 per cent it is taking up the new entrants and it is taking
down unemployment. But it is not necessarily getting to the longterm
unemployed and for all the reasons that Monique mentioned a few moments
ago, people lose their self esteem, they lose their sense of importance and
their sense of self worth and, after a while, they are psychologically not really
prepared to apply for jobs or even were they lucky to snare one are they in
the right sort of shape to make a contribution to hang onto one.
So the challenge has been for us to deal with the longterm unemployed as
well as the raw demands of employment. Now I am very happy with the rate
of growth we have been getting in employment growth. We had the largest
fall in unemployment in the last 12 months we have ever had. But even so,
8 1/ 2 per cent unemployment is too high and you can see that even with the
economy growing somewhere between 6 per cent and 4 per cent in the last
few years, in fact we have had 17 quarters of consecutive growth. This is the
longest growth phase in Australia since the war. We have never had 17
consecutive quarters of growth since the Second World War and yet we have
still got unemployment with an eight in front of it.
Now our target is to get to unemployment of 5 per cent by the turn of the
century, which means as we continue with employment growth and we get
towards that 6 1/ 2 per cent we had in the late 80s this time with Working
Nation in place we ought to be able to go down further through the
arrangements we have in place with you and people like you, in the Area
Consultative Committees, and with employers across the country to focus on
the longterm unemployed so that we can actually get down to that group that
we weren't able to get to in the 1980s.
Now since Working Nation was introduced, we have had a 25 per cent fall in
longterm unemployed. And, I think, even after the end of the 80s with that
huge period of employment growth, we only reduced longterm unemployment
by something like 8 per cent or 9 per cent. So this is a huge improvement
and it couples in with what we are trying to do in education and training
generally. This morning I was out at the Canterbury-Bankstown Leagues Club, talking to
the Southern Sydney and South West Area Consultative Committees, and I
was making the point there about education and how education and training
are the bridges to better opportunities for everybody. It allows people to
crack through the barriers economic, social, however they perceive them
and find the opportunities for themselves.
Now a decade ago, only three young people in ten completed secondary
school. This year it is eight in ten and a decade ago we were putting 40 per
cent of young people through university and we are still putting 40 per cent
through, which has meant with a massive increase in participation and
completion rates in secondary school we have had a huge addition to the 
stock of tertiary places. We" -have 66ne from 325,000 university places in
1985 to over 600,000 this year.
So we have got that 40 per cent coming through. But, of course, in a much
fairer sample because so many more young people are completing Years 11
and 12 and going on. But we also had the problem of that other 60 per cent
cascading into very little training and in a country that wants to be
technological clever and innovative there is no way you can talk about a
clever country for a start, if only three in ten young people completed
secondary school, and even if we get to eight in ten as we are now, if we
can't get a higher proportion of them trained, we are not going to make the
grade in terms of their expectations and opportunities and our own for the
country. So we are doing two things. We are building a tertiary education system of
quality and we have had a big revolution in tertiary education and we are still
working our way through that. We have now expanded it. We have now got
to continue to lift the quality on that so we don't get lower common
denominator effects and now out into vocational education in the One Nation
statement of 1992, we put together the Australian National Training Authority,
which for the first time is putting together a national TAFE system, with
national accreditation. Now this was a big effort.
Joan Kimer is with us today. She was Premier then and I owe her a great
debt in supporting that initiative and we brought the other States to it. Wayne
Goss was ANTA is now based in Brisbane and he was, if you like, one of
the founding Premiers in it and the impact of it has been, I think, already
rather profound. And we are going to build a national vocational education
system and with it appropriate certification so that the standing of somebody
with a certificate from TAFE or ANTA across the country will be able to find
recognition as they find for a tertiary degree.
Now all of this, of course, fits the story of training and in Working Nation we
focussed on the longterm unemployed through this novel thing of a Job
Compact, where we say after you have been unemployed 12 months or more
we will give you a Case Manager, who then manages you and that person will
manage around 30 people and get to know you, your educational
attainments, your work experience, your aptitude, your family situation and
has the option of giving you a job subsidy and getting that person placed into
a job. But the essence of the Compact is they must take the job.
Now through that device we have had a lot of success in bringing longterm
unemployment down and that, in part, also means bringing the business
community into the picture. Because it can't be done only by the
Government, it can't be done by the CES. We are also trying to develop a
private training market and Joan is chairing ESRA, which Simon and I
developed to create a market for employment services so it is not just, again,
the monolith of the CES. But we have also got other private providers of
employment services out there, just as we are going to have private providers 
of training. It won't just be the AN1AITAFE monolith, but private training
providers. And just out at Canterbury-Bankstown this morning, a representative of a
construction firm was saying how they have set up their own training unit and
they are putting about 170 people a year through it. And we are supporting
that, financially, and we are supporting those sorts of activities financially
around the country to see a private training market emerge as well.
The other important thing, I think, we are doing is we are starting to try and
encourage young people in Years 11 and 12 to get some out of school work
experience and start to focus their career into TAFE and giving them TAFE
accreditation while in Years 11 and 12, through the Youth Training Initiative
of Working Nation.
So, in other words, instead of them finding at the end of Year 12 when they
have left school and all of a sudden they can't find a job and are not sure
what they do next and they are not quite prepared for the next step, we start
getting them thinking about what they might do and getting them prepared
and getting them focussed and streamed in Years 11 and 12.
In Working Nation we thought it was important to declare that we wouldn't let
any young people under 15 years of age slip through the system. We were
regarding 15 to 19 years as a period of vocational preparation. We don't
expect young people to be away from school, or away from structured training
and, if they are, we try and pick them up through the labour market
programs, or get them back into accredited training. At least they should
have the opportunity that, to 19 years of age, they can then come and say I
have had education to a certain level, or training to a certain level, or
post-secondary training of some quality and they can prepare themselves
better for entry into the labour market.
So this is a very great change and it all, I think, underlines this question
about what sort of society we want to be. Now as you know there would be
no place for Working Nation or One Nation in the Contract with America.
There is no way our friends in the Republican Party, there, would have a bar
of it because they say if you are out of work, bad luck. Bad luck, do your best
and get moving.
But what that attitude and state of mind does is, I think, damn a lot of people
to longterm unemployment. Their children grow up in the environment of
their parents being longterm unemployed and it produces a sub-culture which
is not only dispiriting and completely dismal for them, but starts then to erode
the whole egalitarian ethos of the country and the social cohesion we have
always had.
Employment in Australia has always been the way you got your hand on
some of the national cake. And if you are not employed or you can't get a
job, then those opportunities are denied to you. And we say that a target of
per cent unemployment is achievable. It means we have got to grow the 
economy a bit faster than Wewouldini the traditional structure. But with an
Accord we can grow the economy faster than we would say in Western
Europe or North America.
I mean you hear a few of my opponents talking about labour market reform,
which is just code for cutting wages on the bottom end of the labour market.
You look at America which has got an army of working poor on very low rates
of pay, exceptionally low rates of pay, and yet the American speed limit is 2
1/ 2 per cent GOP growth. It has not made the American labour market more
flexible. Or if it were to be more flexible, America could grow faster than 2 1/ 2
per cent. But it never does.
Yet we have been averaging around 4 per cent and we did this mostly
through the 1980s and any country that is growing at 4 per cent a year is
creating a lot of wealth and this economy of ours is $ 500 billion of GOP, 4 per
cent of that is $ 20 billion. So there is $ 20 billion of new value every year is
being created and it helps Humpty Dumpty to stay together if there is
billion out there of new real wealth being created.
Now there are bigger and smaller Humpty Dumpties all around the country
we all know that. There are a couple of big Humpty Dumpties in this city. But
the fact of the matter is we have got to have that sort of creation to get the
economy moving.
Now I think it is worth pondering, we had the National Accounts out last week,
and after 17 quarters of growth, we are now in our fifth year of consecutive
growth and growing. For instance, in the year to September last year at 6 per
cent, growing this year at 3.5 per cent. But, basically, around 4 per cent to
per cent you can say, on average, in these last three or four years. The
Non-Farm GOP Deflator, the broadest measure of inflation. The one that is
not messed up by weightings in the CPI basket, the broadest measure was
2.8 per cent in last week's National Accounts for the quarter. So after 17
quarters of growth and running at that speed and strength, we have still got
inflation at 2.8 per cent in the broad, which is a mighty achievement.
Now there was a time, of course, when if you said things like 2.8 per cent, or
2 1/ 2 per cent inflation we have been running between 1 1/ 2 per cent and
2 1/ 2 per cent really for the last three to four years. People are now getting a
bit blase about it. They shouldn't. Inflation is a scourge. It slows your
economic growth, it pulls peoples' assets down, it wrecks their savings, it
gives them big mortgages. But the reason we can run the economy faster is
the Accord we have with the unions and, essentially, it is that essential
undertaking: growth and employment growth for sensible wage outcomes.
The unions say give us growth and employment growth and we will give you
sensible wage outcomes. Now we are getting, now, quite strong growth in
real wages. But we are still protecting the inflation rate with good productivity
growth coming from the enterprise bargaining system. So we have got a
good strong economy on our hands. We have got good profits, good
investment numbers around. 
There is no reason why these strong employment rates can't stay up and if
they stay up we have got to pull the longterm unemployed into it. We just
can't take the new entrants the school leavers, women joining the workforce,
or rejoining it, or migrants and just let the longterm unemployed people
languish in the longterm pool of unemployment.
So that is why your Area Consultative Committees matter. That is why the
link to business matters because if we can't get you interested and to know
that you do end up as this chap this morning was telling us about his
construction company that is getting a good class of trained people coming
from longterm unemployed people. He is training them himself and then he
knows that he has got tremendous loyalty from them in the firm and they are
going on.
Now I know in these sorts of ventures people say oh well, you know, there is
a bit altruism required here. But it is not altruism. There is a bit of
good-spiritedness about it. There is a bit of compassion about it. But there is
also a lot of efficiency about it and good sense because, obviously, we will
never make the sort of growth rates we can and enjoy the sort of incomes we
expect if a large part of the country's resources are either under employed, or
unemployed. So we are doing something for all of us if we get the longterm unemployed
back to work and we are doing something particularly for them and we are
making our society more cohesive.
Now the other day, my Tory opponents jumped all over me for talking about
the rates of deaths in California amongst young people. And I read this
chilling statistic in, I think it was, Time magazine saying that in California
more young people die of gun shot wounds than die of car accidents and that
is pretty frightening. The main reason for t hat is because under these crazy
American laws, they let people carry guns around. But it is also part of the
social malaise of unemployment and disillusionment and rejection. It is all
out there and we don't want to see any of that cancer coming into the
Australian society. I mean some of that malaise has been there with the
longterm unemployed and as a society we have got to get in and do
something about it.
Now Working Nation is the most valiant attempt ever been made in this
country to deal with it and, as far as we know, while other countries similar
countries are into labour market programs, none of them have quite got the
innovation of Working Nation, we don't think, and we think we are a real show
of building on that 25 per cent reduction in longterm unemployment since it
was introduced and getting that down and making a very big difference into
the way Australia functions and the fact that people can share in it.
Now the Government has taken a very big interest in regional Australia
because now in some of the regions they are growing much faster than the
capital cities. A lot of the employment opportunities are in some of the
1 77 
regions. We are trying to get regional leadership, we are trying to give
regions focus and, at the same time, we are trying, in that, to get a focus on
Iongterm unemployment which is prone to be more difficult in the regions than
in the cities. And we are very pleased that so many of you are from the
regions of Australia and you have seen yourself committed and interested
enough to be in it with us, to do something about it. Because the whole thing
about One Nation is that we think of ourselves as one nation when we are all
pulling together and it is not just programs for the capital cities, but for the
provincial cities and the towns and the regions around the country as well.
So I would like to take this opportunity of thanking you for your interest in
work and training and I think we all know that when we give these people
training and work experience, even with a job subsidy, when the job subsidy
finishes the retention rates we are getting are so encouraging that people are
staying in the jobs and going on.
So we may well be able to fill those jobs which the labour market is requiring
us to fill with employment growth. The main thing is we fill them by taking a
good share of the longterm unemployed up into them as well. So we have
some real fairness operating in the system and we have the sort of country
that we have always believed Australia should be.
Anyway thank you very much for coming along today. Simon and I are
delighted with the progress of it. Simon has done a great job with Working
Nation, as Minister. He has got a great Secretary in Derek Volker and a
great team in DEET. We are absolutely delighted with it and pleased as
punch you can be involved with us.
ends 



ILL 5 . eD ec .9,22:: 366 NN. 0. 0055 PP0-0110/ 07
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
LUNCH FOR THE PM'S XI v THE WEST INDIES, MANUKA OVAL,
CANBERRA, 5 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thanks very much indeed John ( Gallop). Can I just recognise Richie
Richardson and Michael Bevan, Denis Rogers, Wesley Hall, Andy Roberts,
Steve Bernard and ladies and gentlemen.
What a pity we are at this point in the day. I thought we would be going well
because my experience with these matches has been that we have mostly
had good weather. It is a pretty safe time of the year in Australia, but with the
weather patterns the way they are, nothing is safe any more it seems. At any
rate, the clouds have lifted somewhat and I am hoping against hope that we
might get five hours or something like that in. In which case, we would not
have seen the day go to waste.
I know this is an important day for the ACT Cricket Association because it is
one of its fund raising days amongst other things, but I know it wants to keep
up this tradition of the Prime Minister's Xl and so do I. Particularly for our
colleagues from the West Indies and this being their first match of the tour,
they pay us a great honour indeed in being part of the Prime Minister's Xl and
coming last evening and today to play our side and in doing that, of course,
they have done it quite a few times over the years. I was just looking through
the book " The Prime Minister's Xl" by Don Selth there on the table, we have
seen a number of them here in the past. Wes Hall, I think, back in the 1960s
and Richie, of course, was here in 1992. So, they are no strangers to this
place and we have kept the tradition going. Being the first fixture of the tour
for them, I hope that they can limber up in a sense this afternoon.
I would like to underline how important the West Indies are in the world of
Australian cricket of world cricket and, of course, a measure of their
greatness is the fact that only after two decades did Australia manage to win
back the Frank Worrell Shield. There is a great sense of euphoria here and,
I think, that they have set the standard in cricket by which other countries
judge themselves. That is, the measure of someones euphoria is really 
TEL 2
whether they can climb over th-e top of-you. When they know how hard that is
to do, they rate themselves by comparing themselves with you.
Australian cricket, of course, has been riding high over recent times.
Perhaps not yesterday, but mostly and our team has been performing very
well under Mark Taylor and we have got many and very talented cricketers
knocking on the door of the Test team. But we have got a long way to go
before we achieve that special status which the West Indies have had in
dominating international cricket so totally and for so long.
It has always been a great wonder to me that from the Caribbean, those
relatively small states and populations like Barbados with a population
roughly the size of Canberra or Antigua with a population roughly akin to
some of our provincial centres, yet it produces this huge number of
international ranked people and it really is quite exceptional. We were just
talking about my home town of Bankstown, how many cricketers we have
produced from there and how many swimmers and the rest, well, there is
Bankstown and the rest of Australia and I suppose there is Barbados and
Antigua and what have you. I know what it is like to produce all these stars..
Though we are very proud of our cricketing stars from that part of the world,
we have never turned out the number of fast bowlers that you have and your
success in the 1970s, 1 980s and 1 990s was founded on that magnificent fast
bowling. We have got Curtley Ambrose and Courtney Walsh here today, of
course, to show us some of their form if we get an opportunity.
It Is a great pleasure for me to be here as Prime Minister with Wes Hall and
Andy Roberts in our company as Team Manager and Coach. Of course, they
were household names in Australia and great draw cards and they kept that
contact with cricket and, of course, the other thing I have in common with
Wes is he is a pollie, a politician. So, he knows about all of the other
undercurrents going on out there too. We were just talking a bit earlier about
how politicians immediately pick up the pulse of a crowd or a circumstance or
a place and no doubt, this has put him in good stead with instinct it has put
him in good stead in cricket and in public life. At any rate, it is great to have
them both here with us and again we appreciate very much their commitment.
Could I express my appreciation particularly to the Australian Cricket Board
and to the ACT Cricket Association in organising what has obviously been a
well organised event, other than the weather. If my predecessor was still
here, he would have been a better chance on that too and a couple before
that could But, I am only an ordinary politician and so I can only say thank
you for the organisation that you have obviously displayed here and just in
the year since the renovations and the extra facilities out the front, of course,
are going to make it a much better place to organise cricket into the future.
I would like to thank the players, Richie Richardson and his side and Michael
Bevan and our side with many substantial young people coming through
cricket and the great opportunity for them to be up against such a quality side
and I thank them both. Of course, this stand has been called after the great
Don Bradman and 1, as a former finance minister and Treasurer of this
TEL D. ec 236 ' 40. u05 P -U2C/ K-
3
country, you get a bit of a penchant for statistics, but whenever the statistics
are brought out about Bradman, he distinguishes himself so obviously in
Cricket world history. It was nice we had a $ 5 commemorative coin in his
name punched and we were able to use it today. The Mint is still hanging on
to it though and they won't let them have it. They are very thingy about the
currency here. They make their money under a thing called seigniorage this
is a little trick they have about what it costs to produce the money and the
difference in its face value. So, given the fact that it never costs that much to
produce these coins, they could give a few away. But, I don't think we are
going to get hold of the Don Bradman coin today. We did ask Don to come
over on this occasion, given that the coin was struck in his honour. We all
take opportunities to remember his great life as a cricketer and his great life
as a world sportsman and as an Australian sportsman, but he wasn't able to
come for reasons, family reasons and others. It would have been nice to
have had him, but we understand.
So, can I just conclude by thanking you all the Australian Cricket Board and
the ACT Cricket Association particularly. I thank you for keeping up the
tradition of the PM's XI. I am glad also my parliamentary colleagues could be
with us, from the Opposition and also mine in the Government and we can
all of us Rwf e get some opportunity here, keep increasing the record book
that we have on the table and keep alive this very important tradition. I'd like
to propose a toast to our West Indies guests, if someone could pass over my
drink. To just say thank you and wish you all the best on this tour.
ends i cL t, Liec z ' Do NO uu U. 



6 Dec .95 ' I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE NATIONAL TRADE AND INVESTMENT OUTLOOK CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE, 6 DECEMBER 1995
I am very pleased tu be here to address this National Trade and Investment Outlook
Conference for the third successive year.
The innovative Minister for Industry Science and Technology, Peter Cook, was
instrumental In establishing the conference and the Australian Government is pleased to
sponsor It. NTIOC has become one of the more important conferences on the business
calendar. I thank you all for coming, arid In particular let me welcomne to Australia our visitors from
overseas. This conference is at once a manifestation of the change taking place in Australia and
throughout the world, and an agent of that change.
And that is what, primarily, I want to talk about today the change we are seeing, the
changes we can arid should make.
It is often said these days that we live In an era of unprecedented change.
In fact, I suspect politicians have been saying we are living In an era of unprecedented
change since politics was born. I'm sure I remember a former Prime Minister of ours,
Bob Monzies, saying we were living in an era of unprecedented change and Bob was
reluctant to change a light globe.
I'm equally sure that if anyone had kept an ear to the ground In the 1950s they would
have heard what we sormetimes hear now which is people saying they are tired of
change. These days the sociologists arid psychologists are warning us that people are
fed up with It, exh~ austed by it.
Yet we also see evidence of their willingness to embtrace change. The last decade bears
witness to that. In their workplaces and communities, on their farms and in their
businesses, In schools and universities, in their minds In the way they think about the
world and their country's relationship to It the Australian people have made changes.
They have made Australia a much more competitive country 40 per cent more
competitive than a decade ago. They have seen exports rise by one third in the last five
years. They have seen ETM exports grow by 17.5 per cent per annumn over the past
decade, so that they now make Up airTost 2~ 3 per cent of our total merchandise exports.
Put anotlii way. 17 out of the top 50 Australian export commodities last year were
ETM's In 1983 only 3 of them were.
All this is reason for optimism. So is the growth in Australian services exports 10 per
cent per annimun since 1988/ 89 w~ th the likelihood on current trends of a net surplus this
year. We have recorded national economic growth in every one of the last seventeen quarters.
TEL TEL No 6.. e0c 2925 4: P4?. 0 1 / C 
TE: 4L7:. 65. N Do. c0 22 P. 02/ 0
2
And we are looking to positive growth in the eighteenth quarter.
And of course we are becoming more closely integrated with the fastest growing region in
the world. By as early as next year, when our exports to Irdonesia and Malaysia will
each exceed our exports to the United Kingdom, all our top ten markets will be In the
Asia Pacific.
If all these developments give us cause for confidence, so does APEC. In fact few
developments in our recent history are such~ a cause for confidence and optimism as
APEC. The meeting In Osaka recently was an outstanding success. it cemented APEC as the
key regional body for coordinating the development and growth of the Asia-Pacific over
the next century. All APEC members will benefit fromn the liberalisation and facilitation
agenda. Once all the effects have flowed through, the Income of APEC members will
Increase by awound $ 1 trillion.
Australia's real income Is expected to rise by $ 40 billion, and growth of this order can be
expected to generate around half a million new jobs.
For Individual businesses the benefits will be substantial. For instance, differing
standards can add between S and 10 per cent to a new exporters costs. In OsakaIt was
agreed to harnionise and simplify customs procedures on an APEC-wide basis by 2000.
And within the next 10 years the requirement for paper work for key trade and transport
documentation will be entirely eliminated.
In a remarkable step, at Osaka the leaders demonstrated their seriousness of purpose
with down payments on their Uruguay Round commitments.
F or example, Japan accelerated its tariff reductions to the tune of $ 135 million; and
China brought forward to 1998 its WTO accession bid of reducing tariffs on more than
4000 items by an average of 30 per cent,
These were just two of many steps at Osaka which were unthinkable four or five years
ago. When some of them were mooted even 18 months ago, the cynics came out In
force. Seattle, Bogor and Osaka have proved the cynics wrong.
The APEC process has proved a triumph. The Leaders meetings have established a
unique degree of trust and good will and authority. And the decision to establish end
polits, and then move towards them with the weight of that authority arid the force of that
cooperation, gives the process much more momentum than the Uruguay Round and the
WTO could ever achieve.
That is why APEC should give us confidence: it has established enormous momentum in
a very short period of time, shorter than even its most passionate advocates anticipated.
Great as the economic benefits will be, there will hardly be a greater one than the lesson
about the potential for cooperation between countries. As I said after the Bogor
declaration this was not something which necessity demanded we do. It did not have to
be done, Instead, between us we Imagined what we might be capable of doing, and we
are doing It.
And, as I said before, once you create an environment for change and a framework for It,
change begins to grow of itself. Suddenly needs are recognised. Suddenly the solutions
are at hand. The advance on GATT commitments is one example. Another Is the
proposal we put to develop a working group on food security, which Is bound to become a
major Issue as the Asia Pacific grows. Another is our announcement of the APEC
business travel cardl to facilitate regional travel by accredited business people. Another is
the decision of the Leaders meeting to establish a permanent APEC Business Advisory
Council. TEL 6 Dec 95 
TEL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 03/ OS
3
One important way of Interpreting the policies and initiatives I am announcing today is
that I want Australia to be APECready: ready to respond to the challenges and to realise
the commercial opportunities of the free trade and investment environment we have In
the making.
The Initiatives In many ways reflect the new phase in our industry policy.
Our reforms In the early and mid 80s concentrated on opening the Australian economy to
the world and to global competition. Subsequent reform concentrated on building a
competitive domestic environment through microeconomic change. Neither process has
ended. They are ongoing.
But now we address the question of what it takes for the individual firm to maximise its
competitiveness, meet the challenges of open markets and take advantage of the
opportunities they present. And a key Is a commitment to innovation.
I can, perhaps, best Illustrate this by two very different industry examples. The first is
BHP, Australia's largest company. A little over a decade ago, BHP Steel was a
predominantly domestic producer threatened to the point of extinction by import
competition. In 1983, BHP, the Government and the unions agreed to a Steel Industry
Plan which saw BHP revolutionise its work practices and undertake almost $ 2 billion
worth of Investments, Including investment in new technology.
In a second phase of reform, since the late 1980s BHP has focussed on securing
productivity gains by improving skills, restructuring awards, total quality management and
encouraging a more customer oriented culture.
The effects have been dramatic and are perhaps best expressed this way: production of
tonnes of steel per person in 1982-83 was 175; in 1987-88 it was 257; last year it was
618. It now has one of the highest export/ production shares of any major steel maker in
the world.
In a sense, BHP Steel's story mirrors the story of Australia's reforms since 1983. And it is
not merely among big companies that versions of the tale are told.
Bllcon Engineering is a Victorian based manufacturer of quality precision metal
componenthy. After operating for 50 years, In 1990 it faced closure, but It re-made itself
through innovation and quality. Bilcon has achieved a 220 per cent turnaround in
profitability and more than 100 per cent employment growth and Bilcon components can
now be found in Europe, Asia and South America.
Good policy like good company management Is a process of continuous improvement.
Australia already has the Ingredients of a dynamic and effective innovation system,
ranging from the tremendous national asset of our excellence In science, to our very
strong propensity to take up new technology, to the surge of our companies including
the crop of export-oriented small and medium enterprises towards best practice and
commitment to quality.
So the policies we announce today are not the first word; and, certainly, nor will they be
the last. They represent steps along the road of continuous improvement.
In fact, today's statement provides for measures that will raise $ 353 million more in
revenue over the next four years than will actually be spent.
In this way, the Government Is making room for a range of other initiatives which also
build on success In other areas.
What we are about today Is good public policy and good government.
The Government has already done much to foster innovation by creating a more open
economy and a better macroeconomic environment where competition is more vibrant
and the rewards of Innovation easier to capture. There have also been significant
Investments In education and training and in our basic research effort. 
TEL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 04/ 08
4
Today we take the next steps to strengthen Australia's capacity for innovation by which
we mean: generating ideas
a commercialisIng and using new ideas
linking Australia even more closely into ideas elsewhere In the world
0 encouraging new ideas in business and the work place
accelerating the application of ideas by using the Information super highway, and
promoting access to information technology for all Australians, Including people
with disabilities, those in remote areas, people on low incomes and women.
Put simply, Innovation Is about new products and services and new and better ways of
producing them.
For a company, innovation provides a key to Increased competitiveness.
In today's world, tastes and technology change rapidly information moves fast. And
good ideas are quickly copied or superseded. There is constant pressure to come up with
something new and better.
Success depends on being able to meet the needs of more discerning customers.
The firms that will prosper will be those committed to continuous renewal through
innovation the ones which are enterprising and skilled enough to differentiate their
product and create a distinctive competitive edge.
For the economy as a whole, Innovation lies at the heart of productivity growth. And at
the heart of Innovation lie Ideas. Innovation in putting Ideas to work.
It Is not just the skills of the workforce or management, or the capital they have to use,
but how these are used In ever more productive combinations, which Is the central driver
of economic growth and rising living standards. Fostering an environment which rewards
Innovation Is therefore a powerful lever In raising productivity and growth.
But Imperatives of innovation go beyond the economic. A sophisticated and just society
will be Information rich. It will be enterprising In Its response to new ideas and challenges
and It will utilise technology to its full capabilities. This will ensure the highest quality of
life for all Australians.
There Is no simple model of innovation. It can come from different sources, It can come
from basic scientific research which produces a result capable of commercial
exploitation. It can come from changing the way a workplace is organiised to improve
flexibility and responsiveness to customer needs. It can come from utilising existing
equipment In a novel way, not envisaged by the original manufacturer.
Innovation is a complex process of Interaction and Information transmission which is
strongly Influenced by a nation's culture, particularly Its willingness to rewarr enterprise
and risk taking.
Ideas can emerge from anywhere within such a system. Turning Ideas Into maximum
economic benefit depends primarily on a competitive and responsive private sector and
strong lines of communication between all parts of the system.
These outcomes will only materlalise where Information flows freely within the system.
The most successful firms are those that are highly attuned to the needs of the market,
have access to leading edge technology to convert market needs Into commercial
products or services, and the management and the financial resources to facilitate this
process. 
6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 05/ 0:
Australia already has the basis for building an Innovative and enterprising society. For
many reasons among them the quality of our education, our Investment in world class
science and research, our cultural diversity, our capabilities In technology and
engineering, our first class communications we can build an Information rich society
which complements the advantages which our natural resources and environment
provide. I do not say we have reached optimal levels In these. Indeed, I am very much aware that
we need to work on all of them. They are relative strengths, but collectively they provide
a very strong foundation.
So let me summarise the measures we are announcing today.
First, we need to keep generating new ideas.
The Government has chosen seven visionary science projects which will boost our
science infrastructure and link Industry with large scale collaborative research to keep
Australia abreast of the world's most advanced technologies.
The Government will continue its support for industry research and development
through the 160 per cent R&amp; D tax concession, which will be fine tuned to improve
accessibility, management and cost effectiveness. Change will reduce uncertainties
for companies, while closing all opportunities for abuse.
The Government will renew the $ 40 million a year competitive grants scheme for
Industry research and development. The grants target high quality projects by well
managed companies, recognising that high-technology start-ups are the nurseries for
new Industries.
The Government will fund five new Cooperative Research Centres ( CRCs),
bringing the total to 67, and has decided to establish the CRCs as a permanent
program with new CRCs approved on a rolling two year basis. New CRCs are to be
supported in the areas of advanced engineering, sports science and medicine,
intelligent transport systems, textile technology and building and construction
technology. Next year the Government will contribute around $ 140 million to the CRC
program.
The second category of Initiatives will Improve the flow of finance into business
Innovation and our capacity to commerciallse our scientific research.
A new package of measures designed to help finance the Innovation process will be
implemented. An important source of ' patient' or ' growth' capital will be opened up
with the new ability of the banks to provide equity capital to their clients needing to
fund business expansions. Initially the Investments are likely to be directed to firms
with strong growth potential and tumovers between $ 1 million and $ 50 million. New
programs will upgrade the financial management skills of SMEs to prepare them
better for raising debt or equity finance to make them ' investment ready'. Through
an education campaign, the Govemment will also help Increase the understanding of
the Investment community, particularly superannuation trustees, of the
opportunities for profitable Investment In Australian companies.
Three new Innovation Flagship Projects will bring science, Industry and user groups
together to speed the development of new products, processes and services. The
new projects, costing $ 23m, will comprise a mineral technologies pilot plant, a
hydrodynamic testing facility, and a facility for the development of magnetic
resonance in the advanced diagnosis of cancer.
An additional $ 20 million will be spent over four years to encourage greater access
to, and uptake of, new technology by Australian firms. More Technology Support
Centres, which were established to help SMEs with technical advice and access to
R&amp; D facilities and skills training, will be established. Experience with institutions like
Germany's Fraunhoffer, and the Queensland Manufacturing Institute clearly
demuiinotiate the advantage of these centres to Innovative firms.
TEL: 
TEL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 06/ 08
6
A new Research Commercialisation Program will help get the high quality work
which is done in our public sector science agencies into the market. Tile
Government will also encourage the establishment of new companies as business
spin-offs from the research sector.
0 The Government will strengthen Australia's Intellectual property system to better
protect ideas developed in Australia.
A broad-ranging Innovation Culture Program will raise comnmunity awareness of the
Importance of science, engineering, technology and enterprise to Australia's future
economic and social well-being.
Third, the Government will spend $ 17 million over four years to expand International
science and technology links and cooperation and establish an International panel for
CSIRO to help promote Australian science to the world.
* Subject to private sector participation, the Government will provide funding for an
Australian Trading Company In Osaka, Japan, to help firms, particularly In the food
sector, sell to Japanese retail outlets: and, In addition, support stronger collaboration
between Australian companies and R&amp; D agencies and partners overseas through
strategic alliances, joint ventures and consortia.
Fourth, we will stimulate Innovation In business and the work place.
9 Demand for new and better products Is a potent force for Innovation along the supply
chain. The Government will devote $ 6 million to a pilot Leading Edge Customers
program. Major commercial and Government customers, Including BHP, will
participate. The best Australian managers are equal to the best in the world, but there are nlot
enough of the best. Better management will help generate both employment and
productivity. The Government will support a range of management Initiatives In
response to the recent report of David Karpin's Committee on leadership and
management skills.
We will establish a National Centre for the Workplaces of the 21st Century, and a
Benchmarking Information Service to conduct and sponsor research projects and
spread best practice.
The fifth set of measures relates to information technology, probably the dominant force
Already in Australia the national digital broadband network Is being roiled out. By 1999
Teistra will be servicing 4 million homnes and Optus 3 million.
We are seeing Australians embrace the new on-line services In their schools, their work
places and their homes.
The number of Internet users is currently doubling every three months.
And only the United States has more Internet users per capita than Australia.
Of course, this Is not really surprising because Australians have always shown an
enthusiasm to adopt new technologies.
For example, we have the third highest number of personal computers per head in the
world, 
EL: 6. Dec. 95 4: 47 No. 022 P. 07/ 08
7
Australia, as a sparsely populated Island continent, has everything to gain from
Instantaneous flows or Information and the capacity to do business anywhere In the world
at our finger tips. The comnmunications revolution also suits our social ambitions our
egalitarian and Inclusive ambitions.
The Government has created a national strategy for Information and communications
services and technologies.
Today's statement takes the strategy a step further, ensuring wide access throughout the
community to information services, developing content for the Information networks and
providing the support ot information technology to Australian Industry.
The starting point for access must be to ensure that all our school children have the
opportunity to benefit from the new Information services and the confidence to use them,
This will be vital to their future. That is why we have been working with the States and
Territories to establish the Education Network Australia ( Ed NA) to deliver a wide range of
services to every school, technical college and university.
It Is also why Teistra and Optus are spending $ 185 mnillon to provide the Infrastructure to
link our schools to Information services. By 1999, 97 per cent of schools will have ISDN
digital links and half of them Broadband links.
The Government appreciates the Importance of assisting the wider community to be part
of this revolution as well. Homes and businesses are the key platform, but community
facilities must be Included, not least as a safety net. Accordingly, we will:
0 Ensure that every public library Is linked to on-line services.
Extend the comnmunity Information network, which provides a network of computers
In public locations, to all States and Territories by the end of 1998.
And provide a national Indigenous radio and news service and extend the Tanami
network.
The greatest benefits to flow from the new technologies will accrue to those countries
which create the content.
In the Government's cultural policy, Creative Nation, we Identified three waves of content
production, namely material for CD-ROMs, on-line services and broadband Interactive
services. The measures Introduced today will help see this momentum carry on to the second
phase, namely on-line services.
Ten million doiiars will be committed to a new program called " Australia's Story" to
digitise culturai material from our national collections and make them availabie on-line.
The ABC wiil be funded to digitIse Its radio and TV science archives to establish an online
science service for schools. Support wiil be provided for curriculum materials
showcasing Australian science, and for career education materials covering science,
engineering and technology-based employment.
As a result, all Australian schools and libraries will have access to a very rich array of
cultural and scientific material.
School chiildren wili be able to read the journals of Captain Cook, or explore Australian
flora or fauna, or view an Arthur Boyd painting by clicking on a few ( cons.
Information technology has Itseif become an Important Australian Industry. The
Government's decision to extend the computer bounty will secure Australian manufacture
of the computer and communications hardware to underpin development of new products
and services, Including software.
TEL 
TEL: 6 b. Lie 9 t 4 4 No. 22 F U U.
But more broadly, Information technology Is vital to our Industry performance as a
pervasive enabling technology. It is, Itself, a key to Innovation across the range of
Industry sectors. Accordingly, we have decided to;
establish a $ 3.8 million Superhighway Ready Scheme to show how businesses,
Including SMEs, can use network information services.
support the new information system, Tradeblazer, to help Australian firms Identify
opportunities and do business by accessing information through the Internet.
accelerate Australia's effective use of High Performance Computing and
Communications through $ 24 million for broadband communications between
existing supercomputers, including between Australia and Japan. Centres of
excellence In supercomputing applications for example, in environmental modeliing
will be established.
I appreciate that many of these announcements today are of domestic Australian
government policy. However, to those of you visiting us from overseas, I say this all
these measures which encourage the Innovative thrust evident in Australian industry will
make us an even more attractive business partner In the years to came.
Innovation whether at the national level, the Industry level or the level of the firm Is a
matter of continuous creativity, adaptation and change. So Is good policy.
Which Is why over the past three and half years we have kept up the momentum. Not
because we think we wiil ever complete the task: we know you never get to the last
chapter in the story of change.
Not that we should find this too odious a fact of modern life I can't think of anything
more pointless than governing without a mandate for reform.
Our objective has always been not only to institute change, but to create an environment
In which change will breed change, and Indeed a greater capacity for change.
The same goes for our efforts Australia's and those of other nations In the GATT
Round and with APEC. The aim Is to create a world and regional environment in which
the great economic forces we are seeing unleashed, and the great revoiution in
technology and global communications, become waves we can all ride in the 21st
century. The emphasis must be on " all". We will meet less resistance, we will grow less tired of
change If we make it with the collective interest at heart. We will generate more
momentum and we will get more far-reaching reform, If we take up the challenge as a
cooperative enterprise one in which all may engage and from which all can benefit.
What is remarkabie about these times is their potential for cooperation. And what is
remarkable about cooperation is its potential to create more general prosperity, more
opportunities and better lives for more people.
Sceptical as Australians by nature are, I think the last few years have deepened our belief
in the potential of the times in which we live.
We recognise a much greater capacity to trade and constructively engage with our region
and the world, a much greater capacity to grow and manufacture products and services,
to work In more productive, creative and satisfying ways, to use technology in ways which
bring to our lives more knowledge, more security, more satisfaction to innovate in ways
which will bring us closer to realising our personal and collective ambitions.
This statement we have released today will help increase the potential of our times and
deepen our faith in it.
So will this Conference and I thank you for inviting me today. 



TEL 5. Dec. 95 19: 57 No. 012 F'. 01/ 02
4' 41/ 95
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
HOWARD'S SOUR GRAPES
The Leader of the Opposition's petulant performance on ABC Radio's AM this
morning confirms his determination to run down the Australian economy at
every opportunity.
Despite his lame assertions to the contrary, John Howard is now publicly
imploring the Australian economy to perform poorly, and denigrating the
significant economic achievements of the Australian community.
We have just achieved a record seventeenth consecutive quarter of
economic growth. Mr Howard claims the September growth figures were
" something of a mirage." Next he will be claiming we have had seventeen
consecutive mirages.
Mr Howard has now pinned his hopes on negative growth in the December
quarter it is his version of Dr Hewson's pre-1 993 election cry that the
economy was heading into depression.
Seventeen quarters some depression!
And in a breathtaking display of hypocrisy, John Howard claimed incorrectly
that confidence was low in the economy because " what people are reacting
to at the moment is the lack of any medium or long term plan from the
Government.
This from the Leader of the Opposition who has tried to make a virtue of
concealing his policies from the Australian public his only political strategy.
From John Howard, the Australian people get neither a medium or a long
term plan they simply get whingeing.
His only short term plan as he confirmed again in Perth yesterday is to
ditch the cross-media ownership rules to put an end to diversity of media
ownership in Australia. 
TEL: 5. Dec. 95 No. U 1 r. uz,/ U
2
After Parliament has risen he dribbles out his sneaky media plan at a Perth
doorstop. Where are the critics now who accused me of making a baseless claim when
I said that Mr Packer had him in the bag? Yesterday's statement proves he
not only has him in the bag but that he has tied the knot with a silken tassel.
CANBERRA 6 DECEMBER, 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THE PRIME MINISTER, THE
HON P J KEATING MP AND THE MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, SENATOR THE HON PETER COOK
WORLD CONGRESS CENTRE, MELBOURNE, 6 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well, ladies and gentlemen, you know that I had the opportunity of
delivering on behalf of the Government this statement to the National Trade
and Investment Outlook Conference, which is now a very large forum for
advancing Australia's trade development and trade policies. And we are
getting a very high degree of attendance, larger constituencies from various
countries and business communities around the world and particularly
around the region. And we are very pleased with the progress of it.
So we thought given that much of what we are doing here today is building
on the successful industry policy structure we have put into place, it was
important to put that in the context of where Australia is growing in trade
and investment in the region and to say in which way it is changing and to
take the policy framework further and that we are doing.
Could I say that the principal driver of the process has been my colleague,
Peter Cook, as Minister with industry responsibilities and I think that you
will see by the nature of the package that, as I said in the Conference
today, we are long past the notion of whether we are free trade, or
protection, or those old debates. But rather how we can grow out, further,
product innovation, research and development, applying better ideas and
seeing which way we can help small and medium sized business
communities and this can I say also my colleague, Senator Schacht, has
had a substantial role to play and in doing this, looking into the package as
a way of further developing innovative policy in Australia.
This is part of a package. It is a responsible package. It is, in fact, raising
about $ 350 million more in revenue than we are actually spending over the
next four years. But, I think, it is important to show that money of this
dimension, sensibly spent, can have a big impact in filling out the picture, in
building on what we have now in terms of our trade development, in terms
of the development of Austrade, in terms of our outreach programs and, of
course, in the big context of APEC etc. 
It further underlines a central thing too which this Government has always
been committed, which is competition. It is through competition which we
have had by dropping the tariff wall, by micro-economic reform, by opening
up the airline system, in whichever field you wish to focus on that
competitive urge is what is making Australia more efficient, where we have
seen productivity higher, inflation lower and our trade competitiveness in
better shape.
So we need to provide the sort of fine textured detail on how to grow and
prosper in the world and, I think, that this sort of a statement wouldn't have
been possible, it wouldn't have meant anything, in Australia ten years ago.
But, of course, now it fits I think very well the niche we need for it.
It has got a number of elements to it. Perhaps I can just flick over them and
then Peter can round out my remarks. We have always had a very strong
public sector research and development effort. We have a very large
commitment. We spent about $ 3 1/ 2 billion on current public sector
support for R&amp; D. We have now succeeded, I think, in building private
business R&amp; D and you can see that with a lot of Australian specialised
businesses now. What we are seeking to do here is to improve that. Also,
focussing on some major facilities which will advance that effort and then
looking at such things as the extension of the 150%, the Major Facilities
Program, the Cooperative Research Centres, in commercial isation, using
ideas. For instance, in areas such as the specialised manufacturing
technologies of Fraunhofer type institutes, or the Queensland
Manufacturing Institute taking that further, linking Australia to world
leading edge technologies. All these ways of deepening our innovation
and our propensity to use it.
There is also, I think, an important -change here for the support in equity of
small and medium sized enterprises through encouraging banks into the
equity business. It is banks, after all, who have the closest focus on
medium sized firms, who know more about their prospects and their
management then say any funds management institution would. And we
think this will be an important component for the equity support of
businesses which are already up and running and which require that kind of
support.
And then reaching out to the world, we have got the TradeBlazer program
which is, again, looking at not only providing, if you like, on-line advertising
for one's product and the capacity to link to a market abroad. But, also, to
actually do your business on-line and do the customers procedures and all
the payments system being on-line too and this, I think, is a very innovative
program.
We have got the proposal where we are going to use funds with other
commercial enterprises in building up a trading house capacity in Osaka, in
Japan. We have had approaches over the years from the Kansai region.
Set up costs in that part of Japan are lower than in Tokyo and Kansai has a 
population almost twice the size of Australia and, therefore, we think this is
a good place to try and advance further the whole notion we have had with
Austrade and start to focus it in, in a practical way, on these things. But not
the Government doing it doing it with private business, but us helping.
In new ways to operate, we have got the leading edge customers,
encouraging suppliers. We have got the response to the Karpin Report. In
industry technology, further developing the whole notion of access with
schools and young people, children, communities and, in content, through
the Creative Nation on-line services developing that further. And in
industry, with the computer bounty, helping firms operate with the
TradeBlazer concept, the Highway Ready Scheme.
As you know, we are rolling out the cable in Australia now very quickly
through Telstra and through Optus. We have got an ambitious regulatory
environment post-I 997 into place. We have already seen prices falling.
There is about a $ 1/ 2 billion benefit, in recent times, to the whole
community from falling telecommunications prices. And so that IT
componentry, the access and content of the industry, the regulatory
environment, all this complements the general thrust of bringing innovation
to Australia.
So I complete on these notes to say that what governments have got to do
now is be alert to the directions in which innovation is heading, in which
ways government might help to spur that process and to know that in all
these international and competitive things like benchmarking and the
focus on leading edge technologies and the dissemination of these ideas
and the linking of small and medium sized businesses into it are the way
in which the trade debate, under this Government, is heading.
And my colleague, Peter Cook, has been the driver of this and I would now
like him to round out my remarks. Thank you, Peter.
PC: Well thanks, Paul, and thank you ladies and gentlemen. Can I just start by
saying this is a fully costed package as Paul has said. It falls easily into
five parts: generating ideas; once you have generated them,
commercialising them; how Australia then links to the world; and new ideas
of business in the workplace; plus accelerating ideas, bringing us all into
convergence with the superhighway.
I would describe this as really the post-debate for the tariff free trade
argument in Australia. We have passed that. We have crossed the
Rubicon. We are looking at Australia in the international open market as a
competitive nation and what this package does is build our scientific
prowess, which is considerable, with our commercial sector.
Commercialising the ideas that we create in Australia to give us a sharper
edge and a more competitive edge in a more open APEC trading
environment. And so it is about Australia winning in APEC and winning in
the world as an outcome for the free trade market that we are creating. 
Can I also say that one of the questions I am often most asked is where are
the jobs coming from in the future in the next century. This is a package
that addresses that full on. As Paul said in his speech, we have invested a
huge amount in education, skill and training in this country. This is a
natural out-growth of that significant investment in education because we
are talking here about intellectual industry intellectual industry in the next
century and positioning Australia to be a leading provider of that in this
market. The main elements that I think have been left to me, however, is to say that
this package also involves a major investment by Australia in new science
facilities $ 62.4 million which was funded under the Working Nation
program and which means investment for Australian science in new
infrastructure that will underpin its international leadership position. Now
that goes to the Australian Telescope, upgrading of that, building
interchange links between Australian astronomers and world astronomers.
It goes to renting some time on the Synchrotron Research Program and
expanding our cooperation with the Japanese on Synchrotron research.
That is all a very, very important element for our science community. It
involves, as well, the Genome Research Facility at the cost of $ 10 million,
which we will establish now based in the University of Queensland and the
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research in the Royal Melbourne
Hospital. million on Airborne Research, which is to do studies including the
ozone layer, water and soil evaluation studies, remote sensing studies,
studies on oceanography and environmental monitoring studies this is an
area where Australia does have a world leadership, this facility will
consolidate that leadership.
The Proteome Analysis Centre at million will study the structure of
protons formed from genes and fit closely into the Genome Facility that we
are funding. And the Plasma Fusion Research Facility at a cost of
$ 8.7 million, which will look at energy fusion options.
All of those will give Australian scientists major facilities enabling them to
continue their leadership role in these sectors of the economy and they will
be facilities in Australia. And, under the arrangements that we have worked
with out with APEC Science Ministers, we will have some of them come and
work with us some of their scientists from this region as well on our
facilities, so that we can build closer links within the region which we can
husband internationally.
So, for me, if I had to describe this in a brief summary call, I would say that
what the Snowy Mountains Scheme did for Australia in the 1950s, this
package is aimed at doing for Australia in intellectual industry in the next
century and putting Australian intellectual infrastructure in place to capture
what will be the new frontiers of industry in this region and the world in five
years to time, for the next millennium. 
PM: Well thank you, Peter. I think we are actually happy to take questions.
J: Mr Keating, some would say you are taking more out of research and
development than you are putting in [ inaudible]?
PM: No, not out of research and development. It is taking it out of, some times,
the hands of some of the tax professionals doing that. But it is not taking
out of R&amp; D and the closer focus of the measures means that and also
using money directly into some of the other related programs, other than by
the tax system the overall R&amp; D effort will be more effective.
J: How quickly, Prime Minister, will you expect the changes to withholding tax
on the arrangements of banks to translate into cuts in interest rates and are
you able to quantify that at all?
PM: Well I mean, I think, the changes that take effect on 1 January 1996 we
will still have to legislate the changes but their impact, I think I wouldn't
want to make a judgement about their impact on interest rates at this point.
J: Prime Minister, there is an extra $ 350 million to play with, where would you
like to direct that?
PM: Well the Government will be announcing a series of statements over
ensuing months and, of course, that will be employed on that task.
J: Will part of the money be put into the housing statement?
PM: Well we have got a housing statement coming, which is I think it is going to
be a very large change in policy and it may require some of these funds.
But I am not sure that it will.
J: Prime Minister, in your speech you expressed some scepticism about the
possibility of educating superannuation fund trustees about making money,
equity funds, available for small and medium enterprises. Do you have any
ideas, any carrots, or sticks in mind for helping to educate them in that
area?
PM: No, but I think it is important that I mean a lot of trustees are conscious
of their trustees' obligations and they feel, correctly, the impulse to be
prudent and to be cautious. It is a matter of letting them understand that
within the framework of that prudence that they can do things which are
better for their funds, for their earnings, for their members, and for the
economy. But they need to get their confidence levels up and I think that is
all about education. And then, of course, with it up, they will be more
demanding of the funds management industry and it will commensurately
have to improve its act as time goes on. So I think given the fact that we
are moving now down the road of a Government engendered in
Government sponsored, but privately operated, national savings schemes
through superannuation, we need to get the private participants role in it up
and, I think, this is one of the ways of doing it. 
J: Prime Minister, who has been rorting the R&amp; D allowance system and how
have they been getting away with it?
PM: Well the Tax Commissioner could probably give you that advice, I can't
Malcolm. But one thing is certain, that Peter Cook and I and before Peter,
John Button we have taken the view that we want to make a statement
about research and development and the importance of innovation in the
Australian corporate culture. We haven't had the spread of R&amp; D into the
private economy in this country as we have seen in comparable economies.
We have got a very big concentration in the public sector. We wanted to
underwrite, very obviously, investment in research and development and
we have done that by allowing 150% deduction for investment there. But,
like any concession in the system glaring concession as this is, as we
want it to be the tax professionals will be in there trying to work out how
they can use it to shelter income, or avoid income. Some of that, we think,
has been going on and these changes should yield savings to the Budget
which won't diminish the R&amp; D effort in the nation overall. But will certainly
improve the Budget balance and let us have a better bank for the buck in
industry policy terms.
J: Prime Minister, it won't be easy banks to buy equity John Howard
announced it two weeks ago
PM: No, no, let me just correct this. John Howard's idea of policy is to find out
what we might be doing through the bureaucracy and try to announce it
before we actually get the documents down.
J: So are you saying he pinched your idea?
PM: Look he doesn't have any ideas. So must of the stuff that comes from him
is from us. I mean this is a derivative business. He derives much of his
stuff from gossip around the corridors or from the bureaucracy. In this
respect, can I say to you, before John Howard ever made that statement, I
had had long meetings with a couple of the managing directors of the major
banks, going through the tax principles involved, whether they were
accruals taxed, whether there were tax choices between accruals and
realisations on one side, whether we would have in the tax system the tax
treatment of it being either on realisations or an accruals basis,
guaranteeing symmetry of tax treatment on the way through. And in that
long debate, when you are involving private companies as we are with
private banks even for those who have difficulty recognising a policy idea,
there was probably so much of the bits and pieces around the landscape
that Mr Howard has tripped over one. But let me assure you that was all on
weeks and weeks before John Howard ever said a word about it.
J: John Howard has these great contacts, these great sources 
PM: Well can I just say, he doesn't have them though, Laurie. You see what he
does is he picks up the threads and the thread he picked up on the growth
numbers, of course, today he exposed himself on AM.
J: He is right on one leg. Why shouldn't he be right about the other one?
PM: Well where did you get that notion from?
J: You claim he got a leak about your policy here. So how can you dismiss...
PM: In other words, a leak about something in industry policy we have been
speaking to a bank about, means that any leaks he gets on anything else
must be right.
J: [ inaudible]
PM: Now, Laurie, even for a champion leaker like you, with Budgets and other
things to your name, even you wouldn't subscribe to those principles. And I
thought John Howard put himself down eloquently today by saying, when
asked by the compere ' you don't really have an idea about this Mr Howard
do you?' And he virtually admitted he didn't.
Can I just say about the growth figures. We are in our seventeenth quarter
of growth, we have been through our seventeenth quarter of growth and we
are in our eighteenth. And certainly the strong contribution which we saw
in the September quarter from the rural sector which has come, of course,
from the breaking of the drought in some areas. It won't be repeated and
stocks may detract from growth, but there is going to be a very strong
contribution there from the public sector and from investment in plant and
equipment which fell last time, but we think we will be stronger through this
quarter. The bottom line is we belie ve we are in our eighteenth quarter of
growth and, I think, most of the private economists agree with us and if you
turn up our famous The Economist magazine forecast, they have got for
Australia in 1996 3.1 per cent, which is of course, very strong growth.
J: One more question Prime Minister, Mr Beazley on Sunday didn't seem
entirely confident about that?
PM: It is your judgement about the degree of confidence. I am entirely confident
that we are in a growth quarter and we have already created the post war
record last quarter. The country has never had 17 consecutive quarters of
growth since the war. It has now had it and we are now in our eighteenth
quarter. Remember this, John Hewson said before the last election that we
were going into a double dip recession and then as he got gloomier, we
were going into a depression. You might remember John Howard echoed
those comments in the lead up to the 1993 election. This is the Howard
version of the Hewson foray into econometrics and economy forecasting.
He is trying to get everyone ready to think that while we have had this huge
growth phase which he formerly described as a double dip recession and a
depression, making them seem complete jokes both of them, he is now 
trying to say ' oh, oh, the best days are over'. Remember his five minutes of
sunshine. I don't know how many five minutes there are in 17 quarters.
J: figures for the 18 quarters of economic growth..
PM: I'm not sure when they are published.
J: March
PM: March 20, if you ask me to assure you about the election campaign date, of
course I wouldn't.
J: Prime Minister, I am a reporter from Taiwan's Commercial Times, my
question is in regard to a story published in our newspaper that Australia..
there, Australians have a lot of business because Canberra can not stand
up to China over the issue of Taiwan, I would like to have your comment on
this.
PM: I don't think that has been a major factor in the development of our exports.
Our policy is well known on this issue and during the period when this has
most been debated around the world, Australian exports have gone from 13
per cent of gross domestic product to 22 per cent of gross domestic
product. So, if it is restraining our growth in exports it is not apparent.
J: Prime Minister, one of the innovations here in Victoria causing controversy
is the Citylink project. You have got your reservations about that, but can
you confirm that there will be no changes under Federal law to the tax
treatment of that project even though you disagree with it?
PM: The Federal law in respect of the Melbourne Citylink has never been an
issue. It is a matter for the Victorian Government and they want to avail
themselves of these capacities, the capacity under the tax system to do
things, it is a matter of how they construct packages with private companies
and what they have to do to make them work, If Jeff Kennett wants to make
a sheep run out of the Citylink it is his business. It is like saying to the
Commonwealth ' well, if some company is doing one thing or another
because they are all subject to the Australian taxation system in some way
then the Commonwealth is responsible'. Well, of course, it isn't unless, of
course it is out in the area of tax avoidance or something like that.
J: Mr Keating, how much damage could Mr Howard cause by talking up a
recession at the moment?
PM: Well, it didn't do Dr Hewson much good and, I think, this sort of what I call
studied gloominess Mr Howard now has won't do him any good and, of
course, it is not meant to do the economy any good and that his been their
stock in trade. They have tried to score off the backs of the Australian
people and their progress for their own miserable political ends. I think, Mr
Howard running around talking about negative growth in this quarter is just
like the unbelievability of his five minutes of sunshine line. 
J: any interest rate cut that might occur before the next election then has
the gloss taken off it and seen in the context of an economy stalling, just as
he as predicted?
PM: Not at all. The Government has made it very clear, as I have all the years I
have been the Treasurer or Prime Minister, that interest rates are adjusted
when they need to be not in response to the political circumstances. Let
me remind you of the former Governor of the Reserve Bank. He said
' relations with the government have been entirely proper, but only an
insider could know this was not always so.' That is alluding to John
Howard's period as Treasurer and his intervention in interest rate setting
and Dr Hewson's intervention when he worked for Mr Howard forays
which were famous in the corridors of the bank. Now, this never happened
under this Government and it is not happening now. Mr Fraser has made it
very clear that if he sees a need for interest rates to shift and he
approaches the government and the government agrees, the initiative for
that will come in response to the economic circumstances. In other words,
it will be entirely and I think Mr Fraser will take this view, that he may or
may not do things which are seen to advantage the government just the
same as he might do the contrary. In other words, he won't be taking any
notice of the comments of commentators about making shifts in policy in
response to the electoral cycle.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: I got asked all those silly questions for years and I gave silly answers, but I
have run out of them.
J: Prime Minister, can I ask you John Howard..
PM: Well, I'm just saying and let me just get this clear. This is a policy which we
have developed over, now, quite a long period of time. We have been
thinking about it for well over a year, probably 18 months or so.
J: That being the case Prime Minister, why then did Senator Cook bucket it?
PC: Let me indeed answer that, because if you compared what he said to what
we are doing, my criticism of the broad idea which we were at that stage
refining was that his structure of it, the idea in the broad that he had
pinched would have caused the advantage to drift to the big end of town.
This is a targeted measure which is aimed squarely in the heartland of
where it is needed among small to medium sized companies and what he
missed out on was the policy refinement we brought to this measure.
PM: The real debate about this measure was, apart from the prudential question
of the Reserve Bank, but in the terms of the tax treatment was whether a
bank investing in a company which was experiencing loses could actually
deduct those loses in the year in which the loses, were actually hitting the
balance sheet. In other words, were we going to tax them on an accruals
I Z 7 .7 
basis where as. they got the deduction for loses, they were given it, but
when the company went into profit they were then taxed on an accruals
basis as it went into profit. Now, it won't surprise you to know that some of
the banks wanted accruals deductions for loses, but realisation taxation for
gains. The point I made to them was that we had to have symmetry of tax
treatment, not asymmetry. You couldn't have accrual deductions for loses
on one hand, but not accruals taxations for gains on the other and whether
they weren't better opting for the tax treatment under capital gains where
they're taxed they get the benefit of deferment and they are taxed on a
realisations basis only. In the end, I think, this is what they have chosen as
the best way to go. It is certainly the way the government believes it is
best, but that has involved a number of meetings, no doubt a number of
papers being written in banks and a bit of this stuff has fallen in Mr
Howard's hands. We have seen no policy detail from him, but he is quite
happy to run out and blurt this out knowing full well that the government
had the matter well and truly in hand for a long time.
J how can you say that business finance is targeted guidelines..
PC: No, we have said it is for equity finance between $ 2 million and $ 50 million
and it is in that area that we are proposing to the Reserve Bank for the
guidelines to be reconsidered and that is the area where most Australian
small to medium sized companies operate at.
J: companies access to funds to actually start up emphasise why can't
supervised access..
PM: Well, we have had that in the past with MICs and other instruments, but
what we have found is that the costs of first of all researching out the
companies, seeing what the value of the innovation is, how it might be
applied, how it might be commercialised before one dollar is actually put
into the business. These have got very high background costs and the
dollars that need to be committed for the outcome or output have, whenever
we have seen them, not been there. With the MIC companies what we
found was that were it not for the value of the tax concession we would not
have had the investment. There was no genuine interest in investment by
the funds management business in what they might see as the blue sky of
high growth, innovative companies. We have, I think, discerned the greater
need for those to be who are already up and running, but who are
desperately short of equity or capital and can't get it. Often companies that
have capital, so called, or equity, the equity has been borrowed from
someone else maybe relatives or maybe a financial institution or some
other business yet if they have equity, I think, the attitude of the banks
would be and they can speak for themselves, but if they stay in these
companies for four or five years, build them up and then offer the equity
back to the original owners or anyone else that wants to take a part in the
business. That is, they get them on their feet, put the equity in them and
then move out of them 
For banks who are looking at a marginal return on debt at best and 100 per
cent loss at worst, or a large part there of and requiring something like 11
and 12 per cent return on funds, it's going to help them flesh out their return
on funds if they invest in companies that actually grow and produce high
levels of earnings. In other words, for banks that are facing competition
now in the banking system for housing and some of the staples where their
margins are being thinned out, this will be a useful area for them and, I
think, given the fact that banks are closer to most companies, they can get
the specialisation there that a funds management business can't.
So, that is why, I think, it is a real opportunity for the banking system
because we are seeing the whole basis of banking change. Banking is
changing, where once people had the mortgage, that was the foundation
building block of their relationship with the bank. Those mortgages are now
being packaged up and sold into the bond markets. The founding
relationship with the bank now is your credit card, the plastic card and it is
through the plastic card and transaction charges that banks are making
their earnings and, I think, this gives banks another area in which they can
actually lift their profitability and do some good things for companies.
We think those medium range companies, the ones that have got money,
are already going, is where the greater need is rather than us trying to
devote a substantial slab of our own equity to a venture capital business.
PC: Can I also say the premise is a bit wrong. Have a look at the research
commercial isation program which is $ 10 million over four years to help
public sector science products to be commercialised which is, really, at the
very early stages of start up and the Australian technology group which
helps private sector start up companies get their product commercialised
too. This is an area in which there are positive supports for very early first
stage commercial isation.
J: Prime Minister, given your interest in family television, how much input did
you have in this so called ' V chip proposal to cut offensive material off?
PM: This technology is around the world, it is about these days and we are
going to see how it might be applied and, I think, Michael Lee is going to
talk to the broadcasting authorities about how and in which way it might be
used. But obviously, the capacity is there if a family wants to block out
some of this violence in television or particular categories of programs that
seems to me to be a very democratic choice that the technology will offer
them.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: I don't know, free to air broadcasting is a science all of its own. There are
greater authorities on that in this country than me.
J: Prime Minister, your forecasts are quite specific, how confident are you that
you will actually meet those forecasts and will there be any pressure on the 
R&amp; D body like the industry board et cetera to actually ensure that those
targets are met by limiting access to the tax concessions?
PM: Well, there is always pressure in the tax system particularly when the
accountants are in there in a big way in some areas and no doubt we will
get pressure from this, but again, I think, good policy is best achieved by
being clear about what the objectives are and going after them. I cut my
teeth on the Fringe Benefits Tax and the Capital Gains Tax and a few of
those other icons, so this one is very much par for the course.
J: Mr Keating, a question not about the election, but after the election. If the
government is returned..
PM: When the government is returned.
J: It is good to see your confidence. If the government is returned to office
what are the two most important things that you would like to achieve in that
term of office?
PM: This is all election campaign material, you are wanting a peek-a-boo into
the campaign, telescoping into the campaign? Well, I think, the most
important thing we have done in this Parliament is the development of
APEC. From a cold start we have now set up the political infrastructure of
the Asia-Pacific and a trade structure there and the integration of Australia
with Asia, I think, has been one of the things in this Parliament we have
concentrated on all of us I mean, Peter as Trade Minister at the
conclusion of the GATT round and then into industry and his lock in to all
these export markets. That is one thing and the other thing, of course, is
you can't do these things without understanding some of the core elements
of our identity. Of course, the issue which will most focus that in the next
Parliament will be the republic._
J: Mr Howard [ cross media] ( inaudible) Kerry Packer?
PM: Did you notice he slipped this little one out on a Perth radio station late for
the evening news and he had to wait until the Parliament got up before he
said that he thought he would get rid of the cross media rules. To say that
he thinks that television owners can own print in the same city.
J: we are seeing now between Rupert Murdoch and Kerry Packer
increasing links over recent months, there is no such thing as this being the
Packer candidate, I mean a Packer-Murdoch conglomerate.
PM: I think that you should have read closely the fine print of Mr Kitney's story
last week and you would have found that Mr Howard's expressions which I
believe largely came from his end of year drinks party made it very clear
where his loyalties were going to be. He was telling us a couple of years
ago we should junk the foreign investment policy and now he is getting all
very het up about Australian owners of television and media assets. I think 
Rupert Murdoch knows it doesn't mean him, so he might be slipping past
one or two of you, but I doubt if he is slipping past Rupert.
J: ( inaudible) [ contribution to the Carmen Lawrence Fund]
PM: I think I probably will, yes.
J: ( inaudible) [ how much?]
PM: Why should I tell you?
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: No, everyone can make their own minds up about these things. This is
some moral issue here as the Coalition who have staged a $ 5 million royal
commission against one person and then when that person seeks
representation before the commission as other people have done, as Nick
Griener has done and Mr Grey in Tasmania has done, she has been
denied the appropriate finance by a very snaky and spiteful opposition. I
would like to see how they feel about that if Mr Court was drawing on the
resources of his boat building business to pay for some of his freight.
J: Mr Keating, if the superannuation education campaign fails to change the
behaviour of fund managers, could you consider other incentives given the
frustations you have expressed about their performance?
PM: We are going through a very interesting time in the building of a pool of
national assets that we know that have been privately funded and privately
managed and we hope can be privately employed in a way that really
benefits the nation and to individual superannuants. I think, that the
debates that we have been having, whatever the occasions of them may
be, are good for this process and, I think, these sorts of things are going to
be good for it to try to encourage trustees to know more about the business
they are in and be more discerning about who manages their funds. To be
picky and choosy about who does it, why, what their objectives are et
cetera. But when we get that diversity in funds management, the market
itself will start picking out the people with the bigger I mean, the
specialisation you see in the US fund markets is there where some fund
managers distinguish themselves by consistently higher levels of earnings.
This will just draw custom to them, so others will fall by the wayside and
that has already been happening. You can see it with the changes of the
AMP Society, the changes in management there.
J: Mr Keating, with the changes in the Reserve Bank guidelines to allow them
to invest in small and medium sized businesses for, the first time, what sort
of safe guards will there be to ensure that the banks don't, in fact, demand
equity in small businesses in return for extending credit.
PM: Some of these issues will need to be worked out between the bank and the
banking system, but I think, there is a big opportunity here being given to 
14
the banking system. I notice Mr Mercer in the print today talking about the
future of banking and I think this is one of the innovative things that banks
can do and do well. Given the opportunity, I think, they will make the most
of it with the Reserve Bank.
J: You don't believe ( inaudible)..
PM: Well, let's see how the regime comes out.
J: Can you spell out what limits will apply in the prudential guidelines as to
what sort of companies they can lend to and how much of their issued
capital..
PM: Obviously, we will be more precautionary about it than we would be if this
was obviously a scheme that is up and running. They are all subjects that
we will attend to, I think, in defining that.
J: how much money they might be prepared to put into this venture?
PM: would contribute to the order of $ 300-400 million in the first tranche
which is a sizeable slab of capital given that we are talking about
companies needing somewhere between probably $ 210 million and maybe
$ 215-220 million. It is going to be a healthy addition and certainly to the
stock of companies which any one particular bank has the relationship with.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: I could, but I don't know whether I should Michelle ( Grattan). I will just say
that I have had strong indications from the banks, in general, that they see
a future for themselves here and, I think, they will take the opportunity up. I
thank you all for coming.
ends 



142/ 9 1
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FRENCH DEFENCE MINISTER'S ANNOUNCEMENT OF FEBRUARY
END TO FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING PROGRAM
The French nuclear testing program should never have started and should end
immediately. We do not want fewer tests, we want none.
I welcome the French Government's affirmation of its support for a zero yield
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, but it should draw the logical conclusion from
this stance and end testing now. There would be no better way to signal
support for the next round of CTBT negotiations, which will begin soon.
CANBERRA 7 December 1995 



PRIME MINISTER 143/ S
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING COUNCIL MEETING
The Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council ( PMSEC) met today in
Canberra to consider the application of science and technology to managing our
oceans, and developing our plantation forests.
Today's meeting has been valuable to the Government in spelling out the major role
of science and technology in these crucial environmental and resource areas. The
reports, presentations and discussions at today's meeting have given us clear
messages about promoting and using science for sustainable development of some
of our most valuable and promising resource areas. I have asked the Ministers for
Primary Industries and Energy, Industry, Science and Technology, and the
Environment, Sport and Territories, to follow up the key issues emerging from today,
and report on how we can ensure that the best science applied to preserving and
developing the Exclusive Economic Zone and our plantation forests.'
The discussion at today's PMSEC meeting was based on papers and presentations
by independent working groups of scientists and industry leaders.
The paper " Australia's Ocean Age: Science and Technology for Managing our
Ocean Territory" focussed on how science and technology can assist in the effective
management of Australia's marine resources. Australia now has a responsibility
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to further advance
exploration and marine research, so as to sustainably develop, preserve and protect
the marine environment.
The paper and presentation on ' Research and Development Contributing to
Plantation Forestry' examined the substantial and growing contribution which
plantation forests make to our supply of wood products, and the major value-adding
roles of research and development in improving the sustainability and yields of
plantation forests, and in the use of plantation-grown timber. The Council heard of
the close collaboration which has developed between researchers and industry,
leading to the successful application of research to the management, sustainability
and productivity of our forest plantations. 
The PMSEC meeting also heard presehntations on the Government's innovation
statement released earlier this week, including the specific projects which will be
funded under the $ 62.4 million Major National Research Facilities program; Science
and Technology in APEC; and Australia's science and engineering base for
information and communications services and technologies.
I also informed the meeting today that the Chief Scientist would become a statutory
office holder within my portfolio. This will build on the current arrangements for
science and technology, and increase the already high profile given to science and
technology by the Government.
The Council ( PMSEC) was created as part of the advisory and coordination
arrangements announced in the May 1989 science and technology policy statement.
It meets twice a year, to provide a major forum for consideration of issues of national
significance in science and technology, with a particular emphasis on the application
of research to economic and social objectives. This provides an opportunity for the
Prime Minister and senior Ministers to discuss issues with leaders of science,
industry, and the major scientific institutions.
CANBERRA 8 DECEMBER, 1995
Further information:
Office of the Chief Scientist:
Dr Guy Verney
ph ( 06) 271 5209
The paper'Australia's Ocean Age: Science and Technology for Managing our Ocean
Territory' is available from:
Office of the Chief Scientist
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
National Circuit
BARTON ACT 2600
or from the world wide web at:
http:// www. nla. gov. au/ pmc/ ocs/ ocean. html
or from Australian Government Publishing Service outlets. 



PRIME MINISTER 144/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
OCEANS POLICY
The Government has agreed to a proposal for the development of a coordinated national
policy on the management of Australia's marine resource. Given the importance of this
issue and that it crosses many areas of Government activity, I have asked my Department
to coordinate development of the oceans policy. Extensive consultation will take place in
1996 to ensure that the views and interests of all parts of the community are considered.
An integrated oceans policy for Australia will assist in dealing with problems in the marine
environment, taking the opportunities offered by our marine areas, and meeting our
obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea for our Exclusive
Economic Zone ( EEZ).
The opportunities provided by Australia's marine environment are likely to increase
considerably as technology advances. We need to position ourselves to take these
opportunities in the EEZ as they arise, as well as ensuring that current uses of marine
resources are efficient and sustainable. The overall goal of the policy should be to provide
the vision that will promote the efficient, sustainable use of Australia's marine resources in
the EEZ while conserving the biological base of those resources. It will also need to
consider the needs of indigenous people in marine resource use and management.
This is an important issue that will benefit from the input from scientists at today's meeting
of my Science and Engineering Council ( PMSEC).
The discussion at the PMSEC meeting was a significant contribution to our approach to
marine science. At the meeting, an expert group of scientists presented a paper titled
Australia's Ocean Age: Science and Technology for Managing our Ocean Territory. They
argued that innovative and sustainable use of marine resources is increasingly likely to
make a significant contribution to Australia's economic prosperity.
CANBERRA 8 DECEMBER 1995
Further information:
Office of the Chief Scientist:
Dr Guy Vemney
( 06) 271 5209
The paper " Australia's Ocean Age: Science and Technology for Managing our Ocean Terrtory" is
available from the PM's Press Office, the Office of the Chief Scientist, or from Australian Government
Publishing Service outlets. It is also available on the world wide web at:
http:/ twww. nia. gov. au/ pmr./ ocs/ ocean. html 



( f
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AND THE MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT,
THE HON BRIAN HOWE MP, DOORSTOP, BEENLEIGH COMMUNITY
CENTRE, QUEENSLAND, 11 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: How confident are you that the States will respond positively?
PM: Well, my colleague Brian Howe has had substantial discussions with
the State Ministers for Housing and Regional Development and by and
large there is, I think, a general willingness to go down this path. That
is, it has been pretty much a part of the COAG process, that is, better
aligning the roles and responsibilities of the Commonwealth and the
States and this seems to us a sensible direction. That is, on the one
hand the Commonwealth will be taking over the responsibilities of
income support, both for the public and private rental market and on
the other hand the States will be taking full responsibility for the
housing stock. There will be efficiencies and, of course, a more
equitable support for people on lower incomes.
J: Prime Minister, how quickly do you expect people who are renting
privately to see the benefits of public housing ( inaudible)..
PM: As we say in the Statement, it is contingent upon a set of agreements
at the Council of Australian Governments as to the reflection of the fact
that the States would no longer be required to provide rentals to public
housing, but rather this would be done by the Commonwealth and this
will require a discussion and agreement about the general figures.
J: So, are you talking about, in terms of after this three year interim
agreement?
PM: We start in 1 July 1996 for the agreements, we should have it in place,
I think, by then shouldn't we Brian? 
BH: The interim agreement is up to three years so that really is contingent
on how long it takes for negotiations and how long it takes to actually
set up the new approach. There are some complicated planning
issues involved, so the interim agreement is there for three years as
the current coverage. But, it could be a long way sooner than three
years.
J: So, it is conceivable that there could be some announcement before
the election?
PM: I think, we have really got to sit down with the States and take it from
here in terms of financial assistance grants and I can't see us getting
that done before the election.
J: Prime Minister, if people capitalise how are they going to be able to
afford to pay off their mortgage?
PM: A lot of people will, for a start, if you put a decent down payment down
it means that you're not borrowing such a high proportion of the cost of
the mortgage and therefore the repayments can be structured to suit
you. A lot of people just can't get the deposit together.
J: Who would act as their guarantor I mean, they would have to act as
their own guarantor..
PM: Well, I think the financial institutions, we have got plenty of them in the
housing area, they are fairly sophisticated and the sort of bad debt
situation in housing is so low as to make it a very safe area of
commerce. But, of course, there are mortgage insurers as well and a
lot of financial institutions will insist on mortgage insurance.
J: The housing industry would prefer a more direct incentive any talk
about that?
PM: I notice John Murray from Master Builders Australia said today it was
the most definitive statement on housing since World War 1I. So, that
is a fair indication of what they think about it and, I think, that they are
thinking long. I mean, housing finance today is there by virtue of the
fact that the government opened and deregulated housing in the
middle of the 1980s when our predecessor, of course, left it subject to
regulation. So, you were very lucky if you got a housing loan, most
people couldn't and when you got a loan it was cocktailed up with
second mortgages and personal finance. So, it was enviably higher.
We have got real competition in housing lending now and housing
lending rates are coming down and this has been a stimulus to the
market. But, where there has been overbuilding, you will just have to
wait for that stock of places to be taken up, but there is no doubt this
would help in the longer run because it means that some of the private 
stock could go virtually into rentals for people who might not otherwise
qualify for a place in public housing for years and years.
J: Prime Minister, is this aimed at the battlers?
PM: Well, Brian Howe and I have been battling for battlers all of our
political lives. The Labor party has been battling for them for over 100
years and in our case we have been battling for a quarter of that time
and a lot of the changes to rent assistance which I mentioned in the
speech, affordability came, of course, from reforms in the 1980s and
the essence of this is for people on low incomes who are finding that
they just can't get the houses of their choice in the places of their
choice or for people who are now in public housing who are afraid to
move to where they really want to be because they think they will lose
their place. Now, it is only ever Labor governments that think about
these people and, of course, the Liberals condescendingly call them
battlers. It is a bit like saying someone is in trade, it is their social
equivalent of their " in trade" remark.
J: Prime Minister is it possible to put a dollar figure on the Rent
Assistance Program?
PM: I don't think we should try that at this point. We have got some fairly
close estimates of it all, but this is a big program, a systemic program
change has got to be worked through with the States. So, rather than
having numbers running around we have made some very clear
benchmarks though. We are saying that new tenants in public housing
will receive subsidies which will ensure that they pay no more than
per cent of their income in rent for appropriate housing. There is some
of those types of things there to give people a guide.
J: ( inaudible)..
PM: I think the answer to that is yes. It is just a matter of how much we can
negotiate in the mean time.
J: Mr Keating, are there any guarantees that the States won't just rip
money out of the housing sector the same as they have done in
health?
PM: What will be happening here is that the States would be providing
funding to the Commonwealth for the implicit rents they now provide.
We will still have a commitment under the new agreement, but again, if
they allow too many of their housing stock perhaps more ambitiously,
they can sell them, turn them over, renovate them, but there will
always be political pressure on States to provide public housing and it
is like every state, I mean you can try some of these policies if you
wish but in the end you get a community back lash. People do want
these sorts of public services. 
J: Prime Minister, the Coalition says the real issue is a cut in the interest
rates..
PM: We have seen quite substantial changes in housing interest rates now
with fixed housing rates and variable rates having come down in the
last few months. They will always make the glib empty remark. The
non-glib full remark is, as I say, where we want housing policy to go in
the long run. And as always, it is only the government out there with
the policies. Today, again, it is always the government out there with
the policy and what you get from them, you know, press release
confetti. You know, the confetti and we are obviously entering the
confetti stage with the Opposition. But it is not very easy to write very
much on a piece of confetti and that is what they will do. They will give
you one page press releases from now until polling day. So what they
won't give you is a coherent policy.
J: Senator Cook talked yesterday about a downfall in interest rates
coming from the Innovation Statement ? 7
PM: Well the more innovation there is in the financial markets the better
and you can see it in housing. I mean John Howard had the Campbell
Report. He could have deregulated housing interest rates so as
people could get the benefit of lower housing. He didn't do it. We did
it and, as a consequence, now you can walk into a financial institution
with one mortgage and get a loan. You couldn't do that. They were
rationed. Housing finance was rationed before deregulation and you
then only got $ 25,000 or $ 30,000 on a mortgage. You then got
another $ 10,000 on an overdraft. You get some more money on a
personal loan and it was all cocktailed up. The more the Government
has been able to bring innovation into the financial markets, the more
efficiently they are operating. And you can really see some probably
in this last 12 or 15 months, for the first time really strong competition
in the housing sector.
J: Prime Minister, do you expect all the costs to be covered by the
Innovation Statement?
PM: Well the costs to this are not affected by the revenue raised from the
Innovation Statement because this is a revenue neutral matter
between the Commonwealth and the States. It is a matter of us
realigning our roles and responsibilities. It is not a matter, here, of
trowelling new money in.
J: What about Better Cities funding?
PM: Oh the Better Cities money is there. But that is over a period of years
over three years. 
J: inaudible
PM: Well, I mean Brian said it himself, eloquently, about the rail lines and
the importance of the gateways. I mean we have just spent
$ 250 million here in Brisbane on a new international airport where we
have now got, you know, linkages down to the city of Brisbane and to
the Gold Coast. We have got, now, a rail line to help also make that
linkage and this is going to be as true and as valuable in Melbourne,
as it is in Sydney, and other places. And it is again, as Brian said it
is only in the last 30 years or so that we have been building rail links
and these sort of linkages. I don't think you want to add to that Brian,
do you?
J: Kennett's assertion essentially that you are undermining him?
PM: Well I can't see how it undermines his proposals. I mean I think he is
just having a bad week old Jeffrey.
J: Mr Keating, will the timing of Mundingburra by-election affect your
plans for the federal election?
PM: Well, no, because Mundingburra is exclusively a State by-election,
about exclusively State matters. People in this State know all about
that. They have had these issues in the public debate now for months
and months. But I am very confident Wayne Goss' Government will
win the by-election because the Government is doing very well.
I mean it is back in the saddle, it is governing, it is looking good and,
I think, the Premier said it all the other day when he said " you don't
want the instability that comes from hung Parliaments". Look at
New South Wales. The Fahey Government couldn't move for pressure
from independents. You had Premier Greiner making the same point
and there was very much a time when people regarded New South
Wales, under the Coalition Government, as a place to miss. You know
you went to Queensland, or to Victoria. Now I don't think Queensland
should lose that advantage. The advantage of Government and
getting on with it.
J: How do you think Wayne Goss would go in a State poll?
PM: Well there is no State poll. I mean it is a by-election.
J: No, if the by-election went the other way?
PM: Oh God knows. Well I think he would get up because the Government
looks good, I think, and we are getting things done. Like the things we
are doing jointly with them here.
J: So from a federal point of view Mundingburra doesn't concern the
federal government either way? 
PM: No, the federal arena has got a whole different smorgasbord of issues
altogether and given that it is not that long since a State election here,
which was a relatively close one, in which this seat mattered then and
mattered now. I mean I am sure the Queensland community, certainly
the people of Mundingburra, understand that well. Anyway, it is only
ever the Labor Party that has ever done anything for Townsville.
I mean we have just put funding into a new port, the Commonwealth, in
the last year or so. Look at that huge investment in the water supply.
There is one branch of the Australian Taxation Office. I mean
Better Cities funding.
J: So you wouldn't see anything Mundingburra by-election within five
weeks of the federal campaign?
PM: Well, Jim, you're in the central Canberra Press Gallery business of
picking election dates for the Prime Minister. It is like, you know, a
game of scrabble.
J: So you wouldn't see anything Mundingburra by-election within five
weeks of the federal campaign?
PM: No, it wouldn't worry me because I think they are separate issues.
J: Does it worry you that you won't be invited?
PM: When have you ever seen a Prime Minister in a State by-election?
When, ever? Like since 1901, ever? I don't think so.
J: inaudible
PM: Yes, but Ian Spicer is a fully paid up member of the Liberal Party,
mate. Ian Spicer is a card-carrying Lib and he was in the last election
and he will be in this one.
J: And that comes from all the Westpac people that were polled?
PM: No, and it is not coming from the private economists. It is not coming
from the other organisations who make it very clear that they expect
the economy to be growing of the order of 3 1/ 2 per cent.
J: inaudible
PM: Well that could be drawn from it and could be so. But I haven't seen
the results of the survey. I can't confirm those. But, again, we have
taken the economy off from 6 per cent GDP to something slower.
That doesn't mean to say it is going into negative growth.
Only Howard is pushing that miserable view around, just as he did in
the last election. They were going to have a double dip recession and 
7
a depression and any chump in the press who was prepared to listen
to them then wrote it, just put the same discount through it, that either
you put through then or you should have.
J: What are your expectations of Howard's national identity in the next
Headland speech scheduled on Wednesday?
PM: Well when Mr Howard starts talking about the national identity
I mean you know for him who always started in Whitehall and finished
in Pennsylvania Avenue and no doubt he will be preaching some of
the themes which I hope I have made familiar about the importance of
culture to Australia, of Australian culture to Australia, keeping violence
off television. Unlike him, I don't mind him pinching my policies.
That is quite a compliment.
ends 



I J
(. oP U\)
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF THE COMMONWEALTH HOUSING POLICY,
COMMUNITYAND NATION -BEENLEIGH, 11 DECEMBER 1995
It is a real pleasure to be here.
A nation's success depends on adapting to change and preparing for future
needs. That is why there could be no more appropriate place to launch this
Statement than here in Beenleigh.
Everywhere you look around here there is change. Yet there are also
unmistakable signs that traditions are continuing and that a sense of
community has been retained.
This is a community centre, after all, and it sits between two old landmarks, the
Power Brewery and the famous Yatala Pie Shop which has been an institution
in these parts since World War 11.
Cities need traditions and a sense of continuity because people need these
things. We need to be part of the story. And we need to be part of
communities. We need to belong.
But we need to balance these needs with the need for change. Because we
need investment and growth to create opportunities and jobs, we need the sort
of change which is happening here. And because Australia and the world
Australians live in is changing all the time, we need the sorts of change this
Statement brings.
Last Wednesday in Melbourne I launched the Government's Innovation and
Information Statement. Today, we launch this housing Statement. We have
called it Community and Nation. Both of these Statements are essential steps
on the way to a stronger, more secure and more dynamic Australian social
democracy. The Innovation Statement described major new investments in Australian
industry, technology and telecommunications. It recognised that to keep 
Australia in the first rank of nations we need to be at the forefront of technology
and ideas.
The Statement was an investment in ideas: it contained strategies for making
Australian ideas, and world ideas, work for Australia.
It was also an investment in best practice, in making Australian business and
industry as efficient and productive and creative as any in the world.
It was an investment in small business, because it is in small and medium
sized enterprises that ideas become products, Australian products.
We also invested in markets, particularly in the great markets of our region,
because it is on overseas markets that the success of these small businesses
largely depends.
And it was an investment in jobs the jobs of the future which will increasingly
come from these knowledge-based industries and the entrepreneurs who
provide their energy.
The Innovation Statement went much further than questions of technology,
industry and finance. It was a Statement about the kind of Australia we want,
the kind of society we want.
We were concerned with the application of telecommunications technology in
ways which will bring benefits to the greatest number of Australians; including
those for whom this technology creates an opportunity to escape from social,
economic and personal disadvantage. It was a Statement, as I said, to bring
us all closer together.
And so is this housing Statement, Community and Nation.
In so far as the Innovation Statement was an investment in the wealth of the
nation and jobs and opportunity for the Australian people, it was investment in
Australian social democracy. It was done to help provide the foundations of
our future prosperity and strengthen the bonds between us.
Community and Nation expresses the same ambition. It comes from a different
angle, but the ultimate goal is the same.
If it is not already obvious, the example of other countries should make it clear:
we cannot have a fair and just society, one in which opportunity and freedom
abound, if we do not have a strong, flexible, world class economy. But it is just
as true that the most dynamic economy does not guarantee fair and just social
results.
Those social results depend on the willingness of governments to
imaginatively and sensibly intervene. It depends, not just on good intentions
and good feelings, but on good policy. It depends on applying ourselves to 
social policy with the same rigour and intelligence we bring to industry or
telecommunications or the economy.
And that is what we have done, I believe, with Community and Nation.
Housing is fundamental. Cities are fundamental.
We are talking about the environment in which Australians live. In which we
work and raise families. There are no better measures real or symbolic of
how well we are succeeding as a nation and as a society than the quality of
our housing and the nature of our cities.
Cities symbolise our economic and social ambitions and measure how
earnestly we pursue them. They are essential repositories of our continuing
traditions and community values, yet they are also a measure of our dynamism
and modernity.
Look at some of the richest countries in the world even the richest and you
see the results of inadequate planning and infrastructure, all of it ultimately
reflecting inadequate responses to social and economic change and ordinary
human need.
Look and you will see stark evidence of the fact that poor quality housing and
poor urban environments mean greatly reduced opportunities, greatly
increased crime and other social problems.
Not only do such cities inflict environmental hardship and deprivation on large
numbers of their inhabitants, they entrench poverty and disadvantage, they
entrench crime and despair.
You see the manifestations of poverty and crime, but what you don't see is the
economic, social and human cost. You can count the cost of law enforcement
or drug programs, or social welfare; but you can't count the cost to the nation's
social cohesion and self-esteem. And you can't count the cost of wasted talent
and ambition.
When poverty is passed on from one generation to another we all lose. When
we condemn generations to poverty the loss of human energy and creativity is
immeasurable.
As this Statement says, in Australia we have largely avoided the worst of these
problems. However, there is no denying they exist. There is equally no doubt
that the potential for them to multiply is real and immediate.
That is the principal reason for this Statement. If we are to maintain our social
cohesion and keep faith with our traditional egalitarian ambitions, we need to
respond to economic, social and demographic realities. If we are to break the
poverty traps and broaden the fight against unemployment particularly youth
unemployment, we need to respond now. 
This is a Statement to meet modern realities and future needs. It proposes a
long term reform agenda which will go a long way towards ensuring that in the
21 st century Australia's characteristic way of life will be maintained.
This Statement provides for a fundamental reform to housing assistance for
Australians on lower incomes. We hope to enlarge their realm of opportunity
by providing accommodation which meets their family needs and puts
education, training, employment and services within their reach. We aim to
give them better housing and more choice, more options.
Housing is one of the largest components in most families' budgets. Yet the
benefits provided by public housing are the smallest component of the social
wage. While the benefits to a few people may be high, the average benefit is
low because few people can get into public housing.
Under these reforms the Commonwealth will take a much greater responsibility
for providing housing assistance. The reform package will underwrite:
substantial increases in rent assistance for about 500,000 people on
low incomes in private rental housing who might otherwise have to wait
years to get into public housing
the maintenance of a strong public housing sector without financial
disadvantage to existing tenants
subsidies for new tenants in public housing to guarantee that they pay
no more than 25 per cent of their income in rent
a wider choice in housing and location for people on low incomes
the renewal of old public housing estates
the development of benchmarks of affordability for low income renters,
and in consultation with the States, the creation of a new Consumer Code of
Practice.
The linchpin of Community and Nation is a radical reform to the
Commonwealth/ State Housing Agreement indeed we propose to negotiate
with the States a newagreement, one which addresses present and future
needs.
The first Commonwealth/ State Housing Agreement dates from 1945 when it
was introduced to provide public housing for people working in expanding
post-war industries. In the fifty years since that first Agreement, nearly
400,000 houses have been built. 
The people who designed that first agreement had ambitions not unlike our
own. To quote from a report of the Commonwealth Housing Commission at the
time: We consider that housing is essentially an expression of the way of
life of people and that, therefore, it is impossible to separate housing
from a consideration of the broader aspects of the life of the people
from such questions as how and where they earn their living and how
and where they spend their leisure.
These were enlightened sentiments, but the old approach to public housing no
longer delivers what we need.
Many of our housing estates are ageing. The houses are ill-suited to the
composition of families today. They are not located where the jobs are.
And waiting lists which now stand at well over 200,000 continue to grow.
Despite major increases in rent assistance, over 40 per cent of recipients still
pay more than 30 per cent of their income in rent.
The time has clearly come for a reform as basic as that first Agreement.
What the Commonwealth is proposing today is a package to help people live
where the job, training and other opportunities are.
These reforms are about providing greater flexibility in the provision of public
housing. And they are about making housing more affordable for those renting
private houses. The housing reform package we are putting forward today is
about providing opportunities for a better future for many Australians.
The Commonwealth today proposes a package to help Australians live where
the jobs, training and other opportunities are.
These reforms will provide greater flexibility in the provision of public housing
and they will make renting private houses more affordable.
Accordingly, we will seek from the States a fundamental realignment in roles
and responsibilities. We will offer to take over full responsibility for housing
support for people on low incomes, including responsibility for the subsidy
implicit in public housing rental rates. In turn, the States will be asked to
vacate the public housing rental subsidy arrangements and to take
responsibility for the supply and management of public housing.
This increase in Commonwealth responsibilities will require a transfer of funds
from States to the Commonwealth. That is, those funds now employed by the
States in the provision of these subsidies would be turned to the hand of the
Commonwealth. The reforms will be budget neutral across the
Commonwealth, State and Territories. 
The Statement contains a set of key principles for service providers including
the development of a Consumer Code of Practice.
It is important to stress that people currently living in public housing will not be
affected financially by the proposed reforms; and in future, public housing
tenants will pay no more than 25 per cent of their income in rent for
appropriate housing.
However, the principal target of this Statement is a group of Australians who
far outnumber those in public housing. There are 400,000 Australians in
public housing. But there are around 976,000 people receiving assistance for
private rental.
In recent years, we have significantly increased assistance for people on low
incomes in the private rental market. In 1986 we extended rent assistance to
the unemployed, and in 1987 to low income working families. And we have
increased the rates of assistance. For a couple with one or two children, rent
assistance has increased by almost $ 21 a week in real terms since 1983 an
increase of more than 100 per cent.
Nevertheless, there is a huge gap between those receiving rent assistance
and those in public housing, even for people on similar incomes. On average,
rent assistance is worth $ 1,500 per annum for a household. But the public
housing subsidy is worth an average of $ 3,800.
Under the reforms we propose the Commonwealth will use the funds flowing
from the realignment of roles and responsibilities not only to pay directly for the
subsidies of public housing tenants, but also to substantially improve
assistance for those renting privately.
But the primary aim of this Statement is to substantially improve the choices
open to those people on low incomes. There is no doubt that the current
arrangements make it difficult for people to get the housing that best suits
them. There are people in public housing who want to move closer to job
opportunities but are frightened of losing the security and financial support that
public housing provides.
There are others sitting it out on long waiting lists for public housing because
they cannot afford to pay the extra costs of private rental.
The fact is that many Australians take up these advantages, even though it is a
long way from their families and communities and from employment and
training opportunities.
The great change the Government seeks is that people on low incomes get
access to housing that is appropriate to their needs meaning principally
employment, education and services, which are the sources of opportunity. 
The implementation of these reforms is contingent on successful negotiations
with the States. If they are to proceed, we will need to agree a satisfactory
adjustment to financial assistance grants to reflect the Commonwealth's
increased responsibilities on the income support side.
My colleague, Brian Howe, has already advanced discussions with the States
through meetings with State Housing Ministers.
We will also need to agree on a new results-based approach to public housing,
with clear performance indicators.
And the States will need to undertake the responsibility for providing an
adequate supply of affordable housing in appropriate locations.
The Government has proposed to the States and Territories an Interim
Agreement for up to three years from 1 July 1996, based upon existing
arrangements and funding levels, during which many of the building blocks for
the new model can be put in place.
Under the reforms, the States and Territories will have much greater flexibility
in the provision, financing, pricing and efficient management of the public
housing stock. The States and Territories will have more autonomy in
managing their housing programs within an agreed needs framework, a
change which will provide more accountability in property and tenancy
management arrangements.
As I said, the States will be required to supply appropriate housing where it is
needed and that will mean increases in the supply to some areas. However,
the States will be able to consider alternative suppliers and commercial
financing options.
These key changes will allow them to provide more appropriate assistance to
the needs of public housing renters. They will be able to respond to client
needs through a wider range of mechanisms, including leasing in the private
market rather than constructing purpose-built dwellings. This will provide a
substantial and continuing boost to the housing industry. The States and their
authorities will be able to develop a much closer relationship with tenants and
that should mean better results for everyone.
We will seek a better standard of service for people in public housing. At
present, most public housing authorities fill a dual role: they manage the
public housing stock and help potential clients with their accommodation.
As part of the microeconomic reform process, we will seek the separation of
these roles in order to provide a more concerted focus on client needs and
more efficient property management practices. T 
In Sydney, Better Cities is creating the Parramatta link and Blacktown
station. In Melbourne, it is electrifying the rail in Melbourne's South East and
South West corridors.
That is to nominate just some of the projects.
And of course here in Beenleigh, just over three years ago I had the pleasure
of launching the Beenleigh to Robina rail project under the Better Cities banner
in the company of my colleague, Premier Wayne Goss. So I hardly need tell
you that it is a matter of great satisfaction to travel on this railway today.
I also hardly need to say that it is even more satisfying to announce another
million in capital funds for the Better Cities program over the next three
years. This funding will be used for projects in three priority areas.
We will continue to pursue programs of urban renewal, particularly in some of
our older public housing estates.
Our second priority is to improve the links to those international gateways
which connect us to the world. As part of this strategy, the Commonwealth will
contribute to the acquisition of land for a rail corridor to Sydney West Airport.
This contribution will be subject to the New South Wales Government meeting
certain conditions, including agreement on land use around the new airport,
and a timetable and strategy for the rail and road links.
The third priority is to make a better fist of managing development in our major
urban growth corridors. Brisbane to the Gold Coast is an obvious one and
hence our commitment to the railway.
Another example is Mandurah, south west of Perth, where rapid population
and industry growth has put great pressure on infrastructure and services,
particularly transport and water.
Under Better Cities, an integrated approach to management is developing a
rail transit system to service half a million people and clever ways of handling
water, sewerage and urban runout, to improve coast and river quality and
reduce demands for scarce water.
There have been a lot of mistakes made over the years, there has been a lot of
neglect and myopia. These projects prove not only that we have learnt from
our mistakes, but that we can rectify them.
Better Cities has proved just what its name says after generations of
indifference and thwarted good intentions we can build better cities. 
By the same means we hope to eliminate the poverty traps and the alienating
and dispiriting environments in which too many Australians live.
We agree with the remarks made by Father David Cappo of the Australian
Catholic Social Welfare Commission last week when he said that we need to
provide not just houses for people but homes.
And I sincerely hope that the States and Territories will come to the
negotiations with this in mind and in this spirit.
We have an opportunity to make a fundamental and profound improvement not
only to our housing and our cities, but to the quality of our society and the well
being of a great number of our fellow Australians.
At the same time as we pursue this reform we must continue to renew our
urban environment.
Of course, we were not the first to believe in the planning and renewal of our
cities. The Whitlam Government made a concerted effort to solve the
problems. And there were sporadic attempts in the years separating that
government from the original Commonwealth Housing Commission. The
Commission itself was insisting on planning back in 1945, even going so far as
to say that the States should receive no financial assistance unless they had
enacted legislation for regional and town planning.
There have been many successes, but it is safe to say that neither the States
nor the Commonwealth have consistently lived up to these good intentions.
The Better Cities program provides evidence that we can live up to them, and
repair some of the damage.
I have visited any number of major projects in the past couple of years and I
have to say it has been one of the more inspiring experiences. Better Cities is
quite literally revitalising city centres and urban environments around the
continent. In doing so it is conferring very considerable benefits on the
Australian people and on the Australian economy.
In Newcastle, Better Cities' funds have helped restore historic buildings,
construct sea walls and realign roads and build bridges to link the city centre to
major residential developments.
In Stirling, in Western Australia, an electric rail link to the Perth CBD,
constructed with Better Cities funding, has made local businesses more viable
and life more convenient for residents.
In Elizabeth and Munno Para in South Australia, Better Cities funding is
helping to create affordable housing close to centres of employment, education
and community services. 
The Taskforce, working in consultation with State, Territory and local
governments, will seek the means of increasing competition through a
coherent national approach to regulation.
The national approach to regulation will allow consumers a wider choice of
builders, more affordable choices in designs and materials, better quality
homes and a more efficient building industry.
There is some indication of the potential benefits of a national approach. The
Australian model code of residential development, which was released in 1990,
has been widely accepted and is helping people design and build attractive
affordable housing in well planned communities.
The name of this Statement, like the Statement itself, originated in Brian's
office. It suits the man as much as it suits the statement.
Brian Howe is leaving the parliament at the next election and it will be a
distinguished record of public service he leaves behind him. If this is not his
crowning glory it is at least a very big and bright last feather in his cap.
I know that it has been one of Brian's great ambitions to correct that inequality
in our national life which sees a very large number of Australians in private
rental accommodation living with an unwarranted and quite unjustifiable
disadvantage. In the end the justice and the wisdom of his proposal was
irresistible. Brian Howe has been an outstanding member of this Labor Government. He
is, of course, a man of the left but more than that, a man of passionate
conviction. He is also and just as importantly a good politician and a
conscientious and responsible Minister. History will show that he never put his
great desire for reform ahead of what was-on the day practical and necessary,
both for the Government and the nation.
That's why I say the title of this Statement is so appropriate. It is an
expression of Brian's belief in the community of men and women. He believes
in the values of ordinary people; in their capacity, if they are given a chance, to
lead good creative lives and collectively do great things. And he believes that
it is Labor's mission and a government's duty to give them that chance.
Brian also believes in the Australian nation. He believes that for all the vast
distances and cultural differences which separate us, we are, in the last
analysis, all Australians living in one nation; and we do best when we adopt a
national approach and put the national interest first.
He is a communitarian and a nationalist. In this he gives expression to a great
tradition. He has been a proud bearer of that tradition in the Commonwealth
Parliament and he leaves it knowing that in no small way this Statement will
continue to bear it for him. 
And there are many good reasons for building them. Good urban design has
profound benefits for the community, for the environment and for the economy.
Good urban design can remove stress and difficulty, maximise efficiency and
provide the essential " glue" for a community. It can link us both to the future
and our past. It can express our values and ambitions.
Good urban design is also an essential element of good environmental
practice. With good design we can protect natural habitats, prevent
contamination of land and water, improve micro climates and raise community
awareness of environmental issues.
And good urban design also is a powerful force in economic activity. Good
urban design can be a decisive factor in attracting investment. It can give
cities a significant comparative advantage. An OECD report recommends that
cities wishing to stimulate economic activity should invest in infrastructure and
the quality of their urban environments.
These are powerful arguments and cities which have heeded them in Europe,
like Lyon and Munich, are reaping great benefits. In Australia it may be we are
inclined to take our relatively comfortable and easy way of life too much for
granted. If we are to maintain these comforts into the 21 st century and
compete effectively in the front rank of nations we are going to have to take
urban design and planning much more seriously than we have so far in our
history. We hope that this Statement will in time be seen as a turning point in the way
we think about our cities.
Housing is one of our most important industries. It contributes over five per
cent of GDP. In 1994-95 about $ 22.9 billion was spent on new houses,
renovations and additions.
Over the next ten years we will need to add another 1.5 million dwellings to the
6.9 million presently in existence. The fact is we will not be helped in this by
the complex and contradictory web of housing regulations which afflicts the
national housing industry.
The Industry Commission has estimated that reform of building regulations and
building approvals has the potential to deliver an increase in real GDP of one
per cent. If that estimation is correct, reforms to the housing industry have the
potential to deliver more than reforms to water, rail and road combined.
In other words, the housing industry constitutes an area of the economy in
need of major microeconomic reform. To do this the Government will establish
a high-level Taskforce to develop a comprehensive national reform strategy. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MVP
SPEECH, CAMPAIGN LAUNCH FOR THE HON MARY CRAWFORD MVP,
WINDAROO COUNTRY CLUB, BEENLEIGH, QUEENSLAND
I1I DECEMBER 1995
EXTRA C T-REPUBLIC/ IDEN T/ TY
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Now, this election coming up is going to be about what sort of country we are,
what we have become and where we want to be, And you know what the
Government has been doing now for ten years opening Australia up, we
have been seeking to looking for these things, opportunities and equity at
home and enterprise abroad. And we're now going out to the world as we
have perhaps never done before, but not only are we going out there, we're
actually putting into place the structures that will receive us. When I came
back from Osaka a couple of weeks ago, Australia was a part of by the
adoption of that Action Plan the largest free-trade agreement in the world,
and will be an integrated part of the largest whole of any economic
organisation in the world. We are now an integrated member, and we will be
when we get our action plans adopted next year, of a body which is
responsible for the production of 63% of the world's GDP and half the world's
population. So, it's larger than any other body the European Union, or
NAFTA or any other economic grouping. And we're not just sitting on the
outside looking at it, we are an integral part of it. And that's been done by a
Labor Government that had the vision and the wit, and the belief that not only
were we good enough to be in it and to participate in to, but we were open,
stripped down, competitive and ready to be in it, and we have then put the
organisation together so Australia has that sort of place in the world.
Now, these sorts of changes and going out there as a community proud of
what its done, proud of itself, clear about who it is, strong about its culture
it's why I believe that in the end, we can't approach the community around us,
or be an integral part of it as we would like to be, by saying here we are a
unique country, proudly Australian, but by the way, our head of state is the
Monarch of Great Britain. It might have worked for us in the past, it won't
work for us any more. It's why the change to an Australian republic is not 
TEL 2
simply an important thing for our identity and our culture, an affirmation of
what it is to be an Australian, but rather as well that it's going to be part of
better economic integration of Australia in the Asia Pacific, as a consequence
of this. And I don't * have any time for John Howard's view he says " oh, I'm a
traditionalist, I believe in the Monarchy". What he is saying is no Australian
is good enough or smart enough to be our head of state. That's what it really
means down in a nutshell, what it really means is that he believes someone
with a hereditary title can be and should be head of Australia, our head of
state, can best perform the responsibilities of head of state, rather than any
one of us. Any one of us, And that's a terrible indictment I think on a country
such as this.
An indictment of a view that I believe he has on a country with such promise,
and such vitality, and such individuality as Australia has. So, it's going to be
about these things about who has faith in Australians, and who believes in
us as a society. Who will back Australians in. Who knows they can do all
the smart things that any other country can do, and has the confidence to let
them go and do it, and build the structures within which they can do it. These
are the things that I think Australia needs now, and not a trip down the time
tunnel of s ome derivative society that believes that as he said in his foreign
policy speech we have let the US Alliance go. As if the United States
Government wants another mendicant state turning up saying oh, will you
please protect us? What they want are allies that can stand on their feet and
make structures that actually help them, as well as ourselves, in the
management of world issues, world trade issues etc. And that's the sort of
ally I believe Bill Clinton wants not someone with their hand out looking for
some gifts strategic client status some gifting from the United States. And
that's why, again, it gets back to whether you have faith in yourselves,
ourselves, to relate to the old societies around us, to find our place in the
world, to feel comfortable here, and to become part of the community of
nations here. Or whether we say, look, we want security from Asia, rather
than security in Asia, because that's John Howard's message he wants
security from Asia, not security in Asia. The Government is after security in
Asia, he wants security from Asia. And when he said in his speech that
defence capabilities and defence collaboration and all of these things, good
though they may be, present at once an opportunity, but on the other hand,
an issue of conflict. That is, whether it will actually help us protect ourselves.
In other words, our friends in Asia might be our enemies in Asia, and we
should be wary of them, and that's why we need to keep our bet covered by
this sort of unreconstructed, if you like, alliance with the United States.
Now, that's not the way we will prosper. We will prosper in this country with
security in Asia, not from Asia, because 18 million of us occupying this huge
continent, but holding it in fear of the neighbourhood around us is, I think, for
us untenable. But that's essentially his view. Now, he's doing a statement on
Wednesday about what he calls identity and these things. But all of it will be
covering his tracks, about what he really thinks. He says " I'll give you a
republic, too but at that referendum, I will actually be voting for the
Monarchy". Now, to get a republic referendum through, you have got to get a
majority of electors in a majority of States, and if the Government isn't going
T1E2L:. Dec. 95 19: 03 No. 026 P. 02/ u. 
TEL 1z -bDc ., JI NO. C
3
flat out for it absolutely flat out for it there is no chance of it succeeding.
Imagine what chance you would win with the Prime Minister running around
saying " well, we have got a republic referendum on, but actually, I'm in favour
of the Monarchy". Now, this is his proposal. You see, because basically, his
whole world started at Whitehall, and finishes at Pennsylvania Avenue.
That's his view of the world, and the fact that we are here is just a sort of
inconvenience you know, likes the country, but doesn't like the location.
Likes the house, but doesn't like the neighbourhood. And I just can't see how
there is any profit in Australians supporting that sort of view. And the other
things, I think, are going to be important too. And that is, the things that
underpin our society, like a decent social safety net, or Medicare, or a fair
industrial relations system, or superannuation. He's saying now after saying
for years Medicare, we are going to rip it up, we're going to go back to before
Medibank, bulk billing is a rort, and we are going to make deep cuts in
Government expenditure, and talking about a structural surplus in their first
year, which implies cuts of $ 9-10 billion, he's now saying ' oh, no I don't
believe any of that any more". He now says he is in favour of Medicare, of a
decent social safety net, fair industrial relations. Well, as I have said to other
audiences don't believe him. He doesn't mean it. What he means, is what
he said for so long. And when he goes around the country saying " people
know what I stand for I have been around for a long time in public life, they
know what my values are, they know what I stand for Yes they know what
he stands for ripping Medicare up, pulling the social wage apart, running on
a contract basis with no protection no Award protection's in the industrial
arena. These are the things which he believes in, and also cutting back
Government spending in important services.
ends. 



14 5/
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
REGIONAL VICTORIA FEDERAL TOURISM FUNDING
Regional Victoria is to receive almost $ 500,000 in Federal funding to help it become
more involved in the State's growing tourism industry.
The funding will be provided under the four year, $ 23 million Regional Tourism
Development Program ( RTDP) which aims to help spread the economic and social
benefits of tourism beyond metropolitan Australia.
Grants will go to six key tourism projects covering areas from Bendigo to the
Dandenongs. The largest grant of $ 213,000 will go to the Bendigo Tourism Board, to relocate the
visitors centre from Kangaroo Flat to the city's recently restored historic post office.
This funding recognises Bendigo's importance to the State's tourism industry,
particularly as the regional gateway to the goldfields of central Victoria.
An additional $ 55,000 grant will enable a signage system to be developed throughout
the goldfields to educate people about the region's grand history, including its fine
buildings which are a legacy of the gold rush era.
A new tourist information centre at Heathcote, to receive $ 100,000 in funding, will not
only highlight that town's natural assets it will provide information on attractions
throughout the broader region, including the ' Pink Cliffs' which developed their unique
character as a result of past gold-mining activity.
Other funding includes $ 71,500 to build a world-class walking track along the Great
Ocean Road between Cape Otway and Princetown, $ 45,000 to develop a tourist drive
with linked walking tracks from the Puffing Billy Steam Train in the Dandenong Ranges
through the Casey Cardinia and Westernport regions, and $ 15,000 to develop a tourist
trail along the rail line between Mirboo North and Boolarra.
Regional Australia can offer both domestic and international tourists a wealth of
experiences that they could not find in our major cities.
Tourism is one of Victoria's growth industries, currently employing around 130,000
people and pumping more than $ 7 billion annually into the State economy.
BEN DIGO
12 DECEMBER 1995 



146/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ANDREW OLLE
It was with deep regret that I learned tonight of Andrew Olle's death.
For many years he has been among Australia's most distinguished, respected
and admired journalists. The news of his fatal illness came as a terrible
shock not only to those who knew him personally and professionally, but to
those millions of Australians who knew him through radio and television.
His tragically premature death is a great loss to his profession and to
Australian public life.
It is also, of course, a terrible loss to his wife and family and friends and to
them I extend my deepest sympathy.
CANBERRA 12 DECEMBER 1995
L _ i I
r 



PRIME MINISTER 147/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
TRENDS IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF CASH INCOME AND NON-CASH BENEFITS
I have today received a report on income distribution which demonstrates that
the Government's policies aimed at ensuring a fairer Australia have worked.
The Consultancy Report Trends in the Distribution of Cash Income and Non-
Cash Benefits was commissioned to identify trends in incomes and income
distribution in Australia since 1981-82.
It was prepared by Dr David Johnson from the University of Melbourne and
Drs lan Manning and Otto Hellwig from the National Institute of Economic and
Industry Research, who are among Australia's leading researchers in the
field. To quote from the report:
" improvements in government policies and programs in income support
payments, and services such as education, health, public housing and
child care, and the progressive nature of the income tax system, have all
contributed to the result that Australia appears to have become a more
equal society over the period from 1981-82 to 1993-94."
The debate on inequality in Australia has been difficult to follow. There have
been different definitions of economic inequality and a lack of consistent and
reliable data.
This study, however, is the latest and most comprehensive data available. It
is also the first to comprehensively assess the impact of non-cash
government benefits, such as education, health, housing and child care.
The three main findings of the report are:
1. Australian households are, on average, better off today than in the early
1980s Taking into account the number of people who live in a household, all
household types sole parents, single people, couples, couples with
dependent children, couples living with other adults and single people 
living together as a household benefited from the increase in average
total income of 9.1 per cent over the period studied. ( Total income
includes private income, government cash benefits and the value of
non-cash government benefits.)
2. Australia is a society with a more equal distribution of income today than
in the early 1980s
Households in the lower income ranges received a greater share of
total income over the study period, whereas those in the top
per cent of income earners received relatively less. As the report
notes, " this demonstrates the substantial and increasing impact that
government interventions have had on inequality".
3. The non-cash social wage has played an important role in this
redistributive process, and its importance has increased over the study
period The value of non-cash benefits such as health, education, housing,
child care, concessions and subsidies grew by 41 per cent in real
terms over this time. All households benefited from this increase, but
those on the lowest incomes generally gained the most.
Families with children were major beneficiaries of the increases in total income.
The total income for couples with dependent children rose by 12.7 per cent and
for sole parents rose by 22.3 per cent.
Older people also gained significantly from government policies of targeted
assistance and by increases in the value of services they receive. Couples
over 65 received the highest level of non-cash assistance of any group over
the study period. For older people, around two-thirds of their total income is
in the form of government cash benefits and social wage services.
The results of the study have been thoroughly validated. There has also
been a comprehensive assessment of the results against other major
research in the field.
The report concludes that, not only do government policies reduce inequality,
but the importance of government intervention in reducing inequality has
increased between 1981-82 and 1993-94.
Over the study period, left to itself, the market would have produced incomes
that led to declining living standards for many households.
Improvements in income support and non-cash benefits, however, have
ensured that Australian households are better off now than they were in
1981-82. This is particularly so for those on lower incomes.
CANBERRA 13 December 1995 



.1
/ 1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UJE, 13 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: How are you John?
JL: I am pretty good. What about you?
PM: I am as fit as a fiddle.
JL: Good on you. Before I turn you over to the listeners for a couple of questions, let's take a
couple from my end to begin with. The last time you were here at the end of July, it was just
after Wayne Goss had just crept over the line to win the Queensland election. The result of
that regarded as the fault of the unpopularity of you and the Government in mid July. Is that
why Wayne Goss refers to you as, I quote the Queensland Premier directly, " a Southern
politician"?
PM: Well that depends where you live, I think, in Queensland. I mean from Far North Queensland
down they think everyone is a Southern politician.
JL: Do you see it as being an insult?
PM: Oh, no, I don't think so. It is just one of those things. Look I think Wayne is going to do real
well there. He has taken the job on with great gusto. I mean I think the election campaign..
obviously it didn't turn out for him, the last election, as he expected. But he is the Premier, he
has got on with the job, he is doing a good job and I think Queensland has really got the wind
behind its sails. Whenever you go there, in any part of it, you always feel it has got the
growth, it has got the population growth, it has got a temperate climate, it has got the tourism,
it has got the linkages to Asia, it is really off and running. And the best thing, I think, that can
happen to Queensland is that the Government gets on with the job.
JL: Yes, it has got that terrfic new train that you drove the other day, too?
PM: Well that is right. You see that is the fastest growing growth corrdor in Australia from
Brisbane to the Gold Coast, which reflects again the movement of people into Queensland
and, of course, it was only cars, cars and roads. And under the Better Cities program of the
Commonwealth, we have made a very big contribution to building a new railway from Robina,
the Gold Coast, connecting up to Brisbane which is going to change the lives of hundreds of
thousands of people when it gets going. It is a few weeks from being opened I think.
JL: The latest national accounts confirmed a record of 17 quarters of economic growth in
Australia. In light of that, are you sorry you didn't take the December option for the election?
PM: Oh no, I have been saying all year, John you will have noticed that I think the public expect
us to get full I mean they are only three year Parliaments, they are not five years as in
Britain, or four years as in the United States. They are three years here and cutting them
short you are into a couple of years. And I think the public are cynical about that sort of stuff 
Governments sort of trying to grab a time of their choosing and we have kept on with the job.
Look, just in the last week, we have released the Innovation Statement and a big statement
on a change to public housing. In other words, we are using the time and keeping the policy.
And, as you quite correctly say, I was very happy about the fact it is 17 quarters of
consecutive growth 4 1/ 14 years of growth. That is the longest period of growth since 1945.
JL: Okay, let's take a caller. Hello.
C: Hello.
JL: Okay, go ahead talk to the Prime Minister.
C: Yes, good morning Prime Minister. Thank you for speaking to me.
PM: Pleasure.
C: Prime Minister, what commitment are you going to give to small business. Small business is
the largest employer of people in Australia and small business, at this point in time, is
struggling like mad. What can your Government do for us?
PM: Well the biggest thing we can do for you is to give you a growth economy. As you know, the
economy has been growing at between 6 per cent and 4 per cent over the last few years. We
are running, at the moment, at about 3 1/ 2 per cent to 3.7 per cent. And we are seeing a lot
of employment growth. We have had, now, 730,000 jobs since the election. Now all that
increases purchasing power. It increases the buoyancy in the economy and I think the other
point worth noting, is that despite the fact it is the longest period of growth since the war.
Even in our fifth year of growth 4 1/ 4 years behind us, in our fifth year now the broadest
measure of inflation we saw in last week's national accounts came out at just under 3 per
cent, 2.8 per cent. So this, for Australia, is a mighty record. A long period of growth, low
inflation, strong job growth. They are the biggest things that I think the small business
community need.
JL; Now, Prime Minister, can we just go back to the caller because you might have some
specifics in mind as to what you feel the Prime Minister should be doing for small business.
Have you got any specifics in mind?
C: Yes, well small business, at this point in time, is struggling like mad. We have had no flow on
from all the fancy statistics the Prime Minister is giving us. You know we hear statistics, but
small business is still struggling. What can the Government do to help small business?
I appreciate all the statistics, but they are not helping us directly.
PM: Well they are not just statistics. It is actually growth.
C: Well why aren't they helping us then?
PM: Well it is obviously helping some people more than others. But I mean imagine how you
would be unhelped if we had, you know, a recession, or low growth, or we hadn't had that
strong employment growth. I mean it is that strong employment growth that keeps retailing
strong. I mean you look at the retailing numbers over the last few years, that is a measure of
the sort of purchasing power in the economy, or purchasing trends. This affects the small
business community. The other thing in that statement the other day the Innovation
Statement that we did specifically for small business is for those who are in need of capital,
we have now given the banks the right to invest equity rather than debt in the companies. A
lot of smaller businesses don't have enough retained earnings to grow. So what we have
done, in a sea change to banking policy in Australia, we are now saying to the major banks,
you can invest In equity if you like. So let's say a business has got some real potential. But
the owner just can't find the next $ 300,000, or the next $ 1/ 2 million, or even the next
$ 1 million. The banks can invest in that company and then sell their equity later on down the
track when the business is up and running and going strongly.
JL: Can I ask the caller? What do you believe is the problem with your small business? If you
have got a problem with your small business, why have you got a problem? 
C: Well we believe people just aren't spending. People are holding back on spending in the
retail areas and we just can't understand why. In days that have gone by 3, 4 and 5 years
ago people would come in buy. Today they are not buying.
PM: What business are you in?
C: This Christmas is probably one of the weakest Christmas's we have ever had.
JL: What sort of business have you got?
C: We are in jewellery.
JL: I see.
PM: Yes. Well, can I just say, it depends also where you are because one of the trends in
Australia has been towards, you know, more shopping centres, large retail shopping centres.
And, if you are in one of those, you tend to pick up the passing trade and traffic. If you are in,
what you may call, a suburban retail situation, you could find if there is another large outlet
nearby that that starts to affect business. And, of course, one of the things which I think
Bishop Rainer said in Victoria about Victoria, in particular, where we have seen gambling now
starting to knock around retail incomes.
JL: Where are you calling from?
C: From Sydney.
JL: Okay. Prime Minister, are you suggesting the same thing may be happening in New South
Wales?
PM: Oh, I think, in New South Wales people up there have been used to it. They have been
pulling the pokies for that many years that they have adjusted to them I think. But the only
other thing I can see to our caller is that it is basically income growth. We have had real
growth in wages this year, you have still got low inflation, you have got the economy growing
quite strongly and you can see we had 112,000 job growth in the month a phenomenal
figure just a week ago.
JL: So are you really saying to the caller that there is not much more that can be done?
PM: Well I don't think from the Government's point of view, in that respect, no.
JL: Do you accept that caller?
C: No, I don't. I would like maybe if the Prime Minister could give a guarantee, or an assurance,
that small business can liaise with him directly?
PM: Well they do that. Well we meet the small business..
C: We could speak to you and directly give you our grievances and I am sure between the small
businesses and the Prime Minister's Department, or the Government, we could try and
improve things because they are really not good at this point in time.
JL: Okay, well..
C: We are in a major regional shopping centre and business is not good.
JL Okay, well the Prime Minister has made the point and I will have to say goodbye to you.
PM: Can I just say, we have a Minister for Small Business and he has regular meetings with the
peak small business councils and, you know, not every small business in Australia is going to
be feeling as though they are doing well. But, again, I can only repeat the point we have
never had a longer period of growth, since the war, than this one and we are having it with
low inflation and strong job growth. 
JL: Let me just look at a couple of faxes and notes that have come to us on the Intemnet. This
one is in reference to foreign investment and tariffs. " Prime Minister, we know it is to make
us more competitive with the teeming millions in Asia. But short of reducing our pay to $ 1
dollar an hour, how are we supposed to keep a small business going with all the utopian
requirements for workers your Govemnment demands if tariffs are phased out?"
PM: Well wages is not the problem in Australia. This is still a relatively low labour cost country
and that is why you find all these major businesses around the world, locating their
headquarters in Australia. They have a choice of picking which of the Asian economies they
wish to come to and many have chosen Australia and I don't think wages are a problem here.
I mean this is the point I keep making to Mr Howard. He sees us as a sort of low wage cost
country, that is in there competing on, basically, unskilled jobs and low grade jobs in
manufacturing. The model I see is one of a higher wage country with product innovation,
intellectual content, selling elaborately transformed goods and that is why we changed the
education system from three young people in ten completing secondary school ten years ago,
to nearly eight in ten now. A huge boost to universities etc.
JL: Okay, well we will come to that in a moment or two. Just let me go back to this note that I got
back. I am quoting from Mrs Joy Hutton: " Before the Labor Party decided that tariffs were
set up to protect rich squatters, cow cockies and beastly businessmen, we had full
employment, a basic wage, private health insurance and a good public health system, equal
employee/ employer superannuation contributions, full vaccinations and health screening and
a thriving small business sector, manufacturing everything we needed. It was admitted after
1972 that dropping the tariffs would throw thousands out of work, so expensive retraining
schemes and how to enjoy more leisure courses were introduced. What was the advantage
of rushing in and destroying all those great little businesses?"
PM: Well that is nearly all wrong. That is nearly all wrong. The whole analysis there is wrong. I
mean manufacturing production was falling. By 1983, manufacturing was in such a state that
there had been a one third reduction in manufacturing jobs in about five years. The economy
was growing at less than 2 per cent now it is growing on average around 3 1/ 2 per cent to 4
per cent.
JL: She is talking about early 1970s, when the tariffs were dropped, when Gough Whitlamn..
PM: No, well they weren't dropped. I mean what happened was tariffs rose again in the 70s under
Malcolm Fraser and John Howard. This Govemnment started taking tariffs down in 1987/ 88
and will be down to an average level of 5 per cent by 1996/ 97. In the period since the
Govemnment reduced tariffs, exports have gone from 13 per cent of all we produced to 22 per
cent. That is worth $ 45 billion extra a year in exports. Just imagine where we would be, now,
without it and manufacturing production has doubled and the fastest growing component of
our exports is elaborately transformed goods. Look at cars. Did you know a car now, had we
kept the tariffs that your writer suggests, the average car would now be $ 10,000 or $ 12,000
dearer. And the quality in the last ten years has improved profoundly. I mean you pick up,
now, a Commodore, or a Ford, or a Toyota. You look at the quality of the cars compared to a
decade ago and look at the price. Why should Australians, Australian families, pay an
enormnous price for cars of low quality when they can now get them at much cheaper prices
and higher quality and the same goes for shirts, for shoes, for clothing, for all those things.
That is why our standard of living has come up because we are not putting this huge penalty
on people with tariffs. And the rest of the world Is bringing their tariffs down too. That is what
APEC is about, John. You see Indonesia announced a big package a couple of weeks ago,
China the same.
JL: Can we just have a look at Joy Hutton, very quickly, and Mrs Hutton we will have to finish
with you after this. But just look at what she says here. " We had full employment." Did we
have full employment?
PM: No, not then we didn't. We haven't had full employment since the 1960s and we had that
because, basically, the world was paying us a fortune for primary exports, agriculture and
minerals. That all changed. The game went very sour by the late 70s, early 1980s. When
you and I did that Interview where I talked about the Banana Republic, John, our terms of
trade were at the lowest since the Depression in the 1930s. That is the prices we were paid
for those things. I mean the happy days finished about the time Bob Menzies retired and 
from 1965 to 1983, the place turned into sort of industrial archaeology. It was, basically, an
industrial rust bucket. It is not now, fortunately.
JL: Okay, well Joy Hutton, I know that you would have liked to have heard a lot more in answer.
It is very difficult for the Prime Minister to cover it all. It is very for us too and I am sure you
understand, Joy, and thank you for taking the time to send us the fax. Here is one that comes
from I can't tell you where some kitchen specialist fellow. This is to you, Prime Minister.
" Would not be dead for quids. The country may have its problems, but to you and the Prime
Minister I am the luckiest man in the world. I have a lovely wife and two healthy boys. I have
a successful business, a one man show and a couple of cars, a good roof over my head, that
is keeping the dream alive. Best regards and merry Christmas to you and the Prime Minister.
Ric in the Riverina.
PM: Good on you Ric. Yesterday I was in Bendigo and I met a number of people in business and,
in fact, I gave an export award to a business which has developed a vaccine business selling
into Australia, that is veterinary vaccines for animals for the farm sector, selling into Australia
and to Asia. You know, growing strongly, about to double the size of the business, about to
build a second factory. I get those sorts of stories all over the place.
JL: Ok, while we are on that subject, John Howard today is on the headland again. Not the
soapbox, but the headland..
PM: on the headland..
JL Yes, he is expected to talk about the virtues of Australians and the virtues of Australia. Do
you detect any anti foreign investment message coming out of this headland speech?
PM: Well, yesterday he said I am as representative of the Australian mainstream, my values,
my hopes, my aspirations are those of the mainstream Australian community I mean, who
is he trying to fool? He was telling us a couple of years ago, he is the most conservative
leader the Coalition party's have ever had.
JL: People do change.
PM: Oh yes, but he has decided to become a social democrat. I don't know what he'll become
next. A Fabian socialist, maybe a concert pianist. Anyway on foreign investment he has
been saying for years things like this the time has come for Australia to abandon totally all
investment restrictions and abolish the Foreign Investment Review Board Put simply, we
now need all the equity and the investment we can get. On another occasion he said we
really can't have it both ways. If we don't bring capital into Australia, not having enough
ourselves as a nation, we need to put up with a much lower otherwise standard of living
JL: And do you detect an about face coming on that?
PM: I think he is making this case that, particularly in the media, we should be letting Australian's
own it and not foreigners. This is all code, I think, basically for letting Kerry Packer own the
Sydney Momning Herald and The Age as well as the Nine Network in NSW and in Victoria.
JL: Your policy is to try to promote diversity in ownership.
PM: And it has. The cross media rule has kept there is a new set of owners in radio,
independent from the newspapers. A diverse set of owners in the newspapers and a separate
set of owners in television. In the old days, for instance, John Fairfax and Sons owned the
Sydney Morning Herald, The Age, the Australian Financial Review, it owned Channel Seven
in Sydney and in Brisbane, it owned the Macquarie radio network.
JL: True.
PM: Now, of course, the Macquarie network is owned by different radio groups. Channel Seven is
owned In part and controlled by Mr Kerry Stokes, a completely new and different owner.
JL: Yes, but did it matter when the Fairfax family owned all those things, I mean was Australia
damaged by that ownership? 
PM: Well, it meant that you got the view from Jones Street, Broadway transmitted right through
the whole media chain and what was happening was we were getting more concentration. As
they were to drop out, basically their assets would have then fallen to Mr Murdoch and Mr
Packer only. Can I just say this, John Howard said, this which was interesting John, on
foreign ownership of the media he said no I don't have any hang-ups about foreign
ownership. It seems that the people who oppose foreign ownership vigorously and zealously
and almost religiously in the media are, in fact, doing more than anyone else to increase the
level of concentration in ownership because it is the powerful overseas players that have got
the capacity to provide the alternative to News Limited.'
That is in 1991. In 1995 he has gone over again 180 degrees and now he says he is in favour
of Australian ownership in the media and that is only code for one thing, that is, how he can
wriggle out of the claim I put upon him that basically he wants to provide Mr Packer and his
organisation with control of a major television network and the principle newspapers in the
country.
JL: You can understand the point he is making and just back to what you said about the Fairfax
organisation. I worked for the Farifax organisation at the time that they had Channel Seven,
the Herald, the Age, the Financial Review, the lot and the Macquarie broadcasting network
and there was never any editorial interference there I have to say.
PM: Oh, they don't muck about with you mate. They think you might leave and when you leave
the station profits leave with you. So, they gave you a wide berth, but for others though there
was always a line. Look, it is just this thing about John Howard, he is out there saying ' I am in
the mainstream' where he was making a virtue a few years ago saying he is the most
conservative leader the Coalition has ever had. He has now done a back flip on ownership, I
mean, it is all this sort of view and can I just say he is trying to say to people that he will give
them a republic, I hope he doesn't say anything about it because the fact is he doesn't want
one and he has a plan to deny Australians a republic and he has got years of passionate
support for the monarchy behind him.
JL: We had better go to a caller, otherwise we will spend the entire time talking about John
Howard.
C: I'd like to speak to the Prime Minister.
PM: I'm all ears.
C: Good morning, sir.
PM: How are you going?
C: Good. I've been listening to you of late talking about what you are going to do about welfare
housing and giving them some sort of percentage break, what I want to know is what are you
going to do for somebody like my wife and myself who are paying the variable rate of 10.5
per cent and battling?
PM: Let me just tell you what we have done for a start. In the late 1980s, I was the Treasurer and
I deregulated housing lending. Something my predecessor didn't do. What used to happen
in his day is you could get a housing loan for 13.5 per cent, but only to about $ 27,000. They
then gave you a second mortgage which would be at 2 or 3 percentage points above that. So
you would have another $ 20,000 at say 15 per cent. And then you get a personal loan at 18
per cent for the last $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 because banks had to ration money for housing
because they couldn't borrow on the market to lend it. They couldn't bid for it in an open
system. Now they can bid for the deposits in an open system and they can actually lend them
as consolidated mortgages. So, you have a consolidated mortgage or you have the capacity
to get a consolidated mortgage and the rate is around 10.5 per cent. The repayments on that
mortgage would save you thousands a year compared to what would have been the case
before housing was deregulated and you could have one consolidated mortgage.
The other thing is by introducing competition in the banking sector we have got now real
competition in the supply of housing funds. Specialist housing lenders coming out and in that 
environment you can see both fixed rate and variable rate mortgages coming down in price
as banks have to respond to one another to now some of the super funds, to now some of the
specialist housing lenders such as the schemes, say, the Macquarie Bank and others are
running against the main four and as a result we are seeing people switching mortgage
lenders and having a much better menu of people to borrow from at much cheaper rates.
JL: Ok, could we ask the caller because I think it is important that we understand, what do you
expect. Can you tell me what your expectations are?
C: Well, John, this is what the people that I talk to in the circles that I move in and they have
basically got the same rate as what I have got. They are just sick of the Prime Minister telling
everybody about what is going on in the welfare system and not helping us because we are
battling too and we are paying the tax.
PM: What is your basic income?
C: I am earning about $ 40,000 a year and I have got the average $ 1 00.000 mortgage.
PM: Yes, ok, but understand the point that there would have been a time in the 1980s where you
wouldn't have got a $ 100,000 mortgage. I mean, you wouldn't have had the house. Can I get
you to understand this point, there would not have been a mortgage for you.
C: Houses were cheaper then.
PM: Cheaper or not..
JL: Wages were down too.
PM: Houses were cheaper, but the difficulty was that you couldn't get a mortgage. If you didn't get
some money from relatives or someone else to bridge some of the gaps you just couldn't get
the mortgages because the banking system couldn't give them to you. And they couldn't give
you a mortgage certainly to that sort of level at these sorts of prices. Can I just say about
housing the other day, what we did in housing is for people further down the income scale..
JL: But, he is worried about him and he is kind of in the middle. He is middle Australia and there
are a lot of people expressing concern for that area.
PM: Indeed, but again, what keeps that mortgage at around that 10 per cent level or for some
people as low as 8.5 per cent, between 8.5 and 10 per cent and the answer is low inflation.
And what keeps that low inflation rate in place? The government's policies and the accord
with the unions. If we didn't have sensible wage outcomes, if we had a tear-away industrial
relations system, you wouldn't be looking now at the broadest measure of inflation turning up
2.8 per cent. It would be back to 5, 6, 7, 8 again and for every percentage point you can just
add that on to your interest rate.
JL: Can I say this to you, I understand the point you are making and I think that people would
understand the point you were making too, but it is very difficult for somebody like the fellow
we are talking to now, earning his $ 40,000 with his $ 100,000 mortgage and he believes he
has a problem. It is very hard to make them feel good about the problem that they have now
by saying it could have been a whole lot worse. It is true, it could have been 10 years ago
more he might not have been even able to buy a house, but it doesn't help much now does
it?
PM: But, what am I to say to you John? That the person who has lent the money, the retired
person, the saver, the person who has put their money in the bank or in a fixed deposit or
some fixed instrument from which the banks have borrowed to lend to your caller, are they to
get such a derisory rate of interest that they don't receive earnings on their deposits?
Because, you see, anything in housing which is in the ranges we are in now is built on a
relatively low inflation rate, low inflation and what is called the real rate of interest.
C: Could I offer something else please?
PM: Sure. 
C: I am paying the 10.5 per cent. Would it be possible for you to give it a tax break after 8 per
cent?
PM: No, because what happens then is that the country starts then subsidising investment in
housing and where ever you see a tax subsidy, you will start to see a flow of investment away
from the things that are going to provide the jobs and the income and the security. And that
is basically the plant and the equipment and the capital stock of the country. So, once we
start saying that we are going to start subsiding house mortgages, you can forget the budget
surplus. You can forget growth and investment in manufacturing. Soon you'll start to see
employment levels coming down and it wouldn't be your mortgages you'd start worrying about
then. You would start worrying about your job.
C: But, you are subsidising other people in this country in relation to housing in your policy you
have just announced.
PM: Well, we are subsidising people who are on incomes of $ 18,000 or $ 21,000 or $ 22,000 with
two or three kids. Yes we are and the reason we are doing that is we believe that those
children in those families have a right to a roof over their head. It may not be a private house
as you have it, it may be a house in a housing commission area or it may be a rental. What
we are saying in our housing reforms the other day, is that the Commonwealth will take over
income support or rental support in the private sector and the public sector. At the moment in
the public sector, in public housing, this is done by the States.
JL: Prime Minister, we will have to move on and to my caller I hope you understand we have
given you as much time as we can.
C: Thanks very much, John.
PM: I was glad to speak to him, but can I just say John again, you have got essentially rates of
interest now in housing which are built on that low inflation rate and every percentage point In
that underlying inflation rate is another percentage For instance, let me cut a long story
short. If the inflation rate wasn't three but say six per cent his interest rate wouldn't be 10 per
cent it would 13 per cent.
JL: I think he understands that and I thank you very much for the call. I'm sure that they
understand, but it is very difficult and I understand the difficulty from your point of view to
make people feel better by saying ' Well, you might be doing it tough and he feels he is doing it
tough, but it could be a whole lot worse' And when you say that it is true 10 or 15 years ago,
but it is very hard to cast your mind back and say ' well, thank God I didn't live then.'
PM: I know, but again what do you say to the person who has got a nest egg in savings in
retirement or is just a reasonable saver, who put their money away, to make those housing
rates cheaper essentially the savers have got to subsidise the borrowers. Again, you won't
get that sort of I mean, borrowers these days will demand the real rate of interest. That Is,
a rate of interest above the inflation rate, so if you are talking about say a three per cent
inflation rate and they are talking about four to five per cent real you are talking about seven
to eight per cent and then the banks add their one per cent on and there you have it.
JL: I understand clearly what you are saying, but I also understand it is difficult, particularly
middle Australia feels that they are being a bit neglected, small business feels it is being a bit
neglected too. Let me just read this fax from Helensvale in Old. Mr Keating, I am sure many
people other than myself would be interested to hear why you refused to fly the Australian
flag on the car provided to you by the people of Australia.
PM: I just think getting around in a Commodore with a flag on the front is a bit comical, frankly.
Saying, " here I am, aren't I important. Please notice me." I am just not into that sort of thing.
I am quite happy to join the milling throng of traffic out there without going along like some
potentate with a flag on the front fluttering. If it was on a big limo in New York with the US
President in it you could understand it I suppose, but running around Sydney and Melbourne,
as I do, and Canberra, in a Commodore with a flag fluttering on the front. I mean, I just think
that it just gets a little bit comical to be saying " here I am". 
JL: Yeah. Now, Leonora Fenwick of Helensvale from Queensland who sent me the fax I have
to say to you Leonora, that some time ago I asked the Prime Minister the same question in
the street. I saw him in the street, and I said to him I didn't know it was you have you got a
flag on the car? And he gave me exactly the same answer he said, " give us a bekdriving
around here with a flag on the front. Bad enough having people look at you anyway"
So, he gave me the same answer, so he's not pulling your leg. But I'll go to the second
paragraph of your fax also, why without being asked have the Australian people funded a
Republican information kit, printed in 17 underlined languages. Will a similar kit be funded
for the case for the Constitutional Monarchy?
PM: Well, I mean, we have got a Civics Education Program running out there to tell young people
in particular about the shape of the Constitution, the way our public institutions work, to give
them a background in the history of it which is I think a very neutral thing. We proposed it
with the States, and the States are taking it up. And that, I hope, is going to improve the
understanding of the whole institutional structure of Australia by young people getting that at
school. What I did recently was to simply release the speech I made in Parliament, putting
the framework, and to flesh out some of the arguments and the details of that proposal.
JL: Yeah, I also think it should be said to Leonora Fenwick you say here " and why, without being
asked, have the Australian people funded a Republican Information Kit?" I don't think we
elect Government's to have them ask us what they should do at every turn I think that some
faith has to be placed in the Government, and I don't think that any Government would ask
the general public every time it wanted to put it's hand in it's pocket, even though it might
frustrate the general public. We better move on we'll take another call, Prime Minister.
Hello?
C: Hello?
JL: Okay the Prime Minister is here.
C: Yeah. It's Wayne McTeer, I have just got a question to do with... . well, particularly in regard to
the Prime Ministers emphasis on savings, which of course is a terrific thing.
JL: Can you keep your voice up a little bit for us?
C: About the last time that there was a change made to the compulsory superannuation system,
there was also a change made to the company tax rate, where he moved... . he originally had it
at 39%, moved it down to 33% then at that point, he moved it back up to 36% from 33%. And
at the same time, of course, he bought the payments forward. Now, the effect of moving it
from 33% to 36% was to increase the tax by 3% which reduces the amount of funds
available within a company by 3% out of what was 66% in other words, 1 in 11, or So
that little move, reduced the money, or the funds that were available, for investment in a
business there's nothing else you can spend it on, because as soon as you spend it on
something personal, you get taxed at the personal rate, or as soon as you spend it on a car or
something like that, you pay FBT. So, it can only be spent it on legitimate investment things,
so that shift reduced the amount of funds available in all the businesses in the country for
investment in capital equipment which he just said is very, very important, and of course we
all agree with that by Now, what was the logic of that? What is the logic of reducing
the amount of savings, reducing the amount of funds available for investment to businesses?
PM: Well, the answer was that we provided you might remember in the One Nation statement
some 2 or 3 huge concessions to business. One was accelerated depreciation of plant and
equipment, where you could write off an asset over 40 years, you can now write it off over
years. When you could write off an asset over 20 years, you can now write it off over 7. And
where you could write it if over 5 years, you can write it off over 3. This produced a cost to
the Budget of around $ 1500 million to $ 2000 million, and as well as that, we introduced 2
investment allowances so you can write off 120% of certain investments, instead of writing off
100% of their capital costs. That came at about another $ 1 billion. So, in other words, the
Government had given concessions of around $ 3 billion and we had to get the Budget back
into surplus for public savings, which we need for the Current Account and other things, and
you have got to say " well, where should the weight fall? Should it fall on personal tax-payers,
or should it fall to some extent modestly on companies that have been given so much?".
You see, could I also just remind you when the Government came to office, the corporate 
rate wasn't 36% it was 46%. And not only that, you paid personal tax on the dividends,
where now you have got the relief of personal taxation on the dividends with a dividend
imputation system. So that now you pay 36%, and you can keep 64 cents in every dollar in
the company. In the 1980s, before I became Minister, you could keep only 22%.
JL: Okay what were you going to say?
C: You partly got elected on dropping the rate from 39% to 33%. And then you said well, that's
going to be off-set by bringing the tax payments forward the company tax payments forward.
Now, almost to the day of when the company tax payments started to go forward, you then
put it back up to 36%.
PM: But who should carry the burden of the change? Should it be the public working people
with an increase in the personal tax rates? Or should it be companies who have been given
so much?
C: It just depends if you want to create jobs, if you want money to I1m ean, the bottom line of
it is, do you want companies and small companies who have got the capacity to create a lot
of jobs to invest in capital equipment? Because that's... . as you know from your own piggery,
there is nothing else you can do with company money like that, bar invest it?
PM: All right. But let me just take this point to you. Not that many years ago, you could keep only
22 cents out of every dollar of company income before this Government introduced it's
reforms. Now you can keep 64 cents you can keep three times as much. You pay your 36
cents, and you can keep 64 cents in the company. You are not forced to distribute. In the old
days, there was a thing called undistributed profit tax you were supposed to distribute. So, it
went to you, and then you paid 60% personal rates at the margin. It's a huge revolution.
Dividend imputation is now costing about $ 3.5 billion a year.
C: We're talking about the last two years.
PM: Yeah, but you can't just talk about the last two years. I have got to run an economy and a
system, and the Budget we had to move the Budget balance from deficit back into surplus,
and that's for the Current Account and investment. In other words, if we don't have a stronger
level of public savings, there won't be the pool of national savings to draw the investments
that you are correctly speaking about.
C: Well, why did you why did you drop it from 39% back to 33%? Before the election it was
back to...
PM: No. We dropped that in, I think, 1989, or 88 from 39% back to 33%. Or it might have been
1993. That is, to try and kick you might recall, in the last election in 1993 we were still
coming out of a recession. So what we did, is we reduced the company rate from 39% to
33%. We gave an investment allowance of 10%, and a second investment allowance of
the ones I mentioned earlier. So in other words, all of that was to promote a big pick up in
investment and it did. And that's why the investment is so strong, and why employment is
so strong. But again, in the end, the Budget had to go back into balance and back into
surplus. In other words, you help when things are slow, by reducing these rates, and putting
these concessions in, and when things pick up again, the sector the business sector was
able to afford a modest increase in the corporate rate.
C: So, the company tax rate is just another economic lever that you can pull and pull every year
or two.
PM: No. It's
C: I mean, it's been pulled twice since 1992 or 93, whenever the last election was.
JL: 93.
PM: Let me just make the point again 
C: How can you plan a thing under that basis, and how do you expect people I mean, even
now, you could have made investments and planned future investments in 93, just after that
election, based on a certain rate. And then around about a year or two years later, the
company tax rate is reduced again, and you have reduced the funds available by 9%.
PM: Look, are you trying to argue to me the difference between 33% and 36% in the company rate
is...
C: It was 39%
PM: Let me just get a word in here....
C: It's
PM: I know I can do my mathematics I'm not silly...
C: I realise that.
PM: Are you trying to argue that the difference between 33% and 36% 3% in the company rates
is going to make all the difference in whether you invest or not? Because if you think if you
are arguing that, let me assure you that's not what has happened with investment numbers.
The reason we have got strong investment numbers there since that change, is because the
whole of the economy is doing so well, and partly, that's because the Budget has moved back
into surplus, it's because the pressure is taken off interest rates by reducing the bond-selling
program. Do you know, this year as a result of the Budget last year, we sold $ 20-odd billion
worth of bonds to fund it, this year we are down I think, from memory to about $ 6 billion?
There's a $ 15 billion a $ 15,000 million reduction in the sale of the Commonwealth Bonds
selling program. Do you know the pressure that takes off interest rates? And taking that
pressure off interest rates has helped your business make investments, and given it a future,
and if you had to look at that environment versus three percentage points on the corporate
rate, I mean, there's just no comparison.
JL: Okay. We'll have to move on I appreciate your call, and thank you for it. I hope you have a
happy Christmas, and a tremendously successful next year. And Prime Minister, we're about
to run out of time. What are your plans over the Christmas period are you going to have a
break?
PM: I'll have a couple of weeks off, I think, John and you know, try and regain my sanity in full with
my family. And I know you're having a break yourself, and good on you.
JL: Yeah, well, when we get to the end of the year, we feel like we have done a year, and it
seems the older you get, you start to feel like you have done a couple of years.
PM: This has been a satisfying year for me we have had, as I said, three-quarters of a million job
growth since the election, we have got the Budget back into surplus, we have got the Accord
underpinning the low inflation rate, we have got a framework for a republic out there, we have
threaded together the biggest free-trade area in the world with APEC, I have just done the
Innovation Statement for the business sector, and we have now got this huge public change
in public housing. So, you know, I think that sort of activity I don't mind finishing the year, if
you like somewhat worn down, getting those big changes into place. Because I think that's
what the community reasonably expects Governments to do.
JL: If you could give Australia a Christmas present, what would it be?
PM: I think the continuation of strong growth in the next year which, at present, I think the
Govemnment is giving the country with low inflation and further integrating ourselves, in this
next 12 months, into Asia. I mean, I think they are the two things that are going to matter
most to the sort of economy... . when I'm out of politics, and you're off radio John, they're the
things that will stick to us.
JL: Okay. I hope you have a wonderful Christmas, and I hope you have a a successful New Year
I hope it is a wonderful year again for Australia, because it is a pretty important place to all
of us. I sometimes wonder whether people fully understand the complications of running a 
country I know that quite often I don't. But one would hope that you and your Government is
doing it's best, as one would hope if John Howard were running the place, he would be doing
his best as well. What are the chances of him running it?
PM: Well, he might be doing his best, but the question is will his best be good enough for
Australia in this point in it's history? And, you know, just one change there that I didn't
mention in that group was the change in our forest policy, which tries to meet the dual aims of
the environment and a sustainable logging industry. Two weeks ago, we put away under
those deferred forest agreements, six million hectares of forest. And I think getting all
that.... . you know, appreciating the great inheritance we have here on the Continent, and it's
beauty, and it's nature, and at the same time, growing our industries in a way which is
harmonious with the nature and, again, finding our place in that region. I mean, that sort of
totality of view is the thing I think is the Government's trademark, and frankly, I just don't think
the Coalition understands that debate at all. I just don't think that John Howard's view of the
world which is basically to regard Asia as a problem, to not put that sort of premium on the
environment, to not have faith in people to run a decent industrial relations system without
trying to sort of press people into sort of contracts and grind them down I think a
cooperative, inclusive model is the way for Australia to go, and I think the proof of the
pudding is in the eating. We do have this strong growth, we do have the employment, we do
have the low inflation, we do have the integration with Asia and we are getting the place we
are putting a great premium under our environment.
JL: Okay. Thank you very much for your time you have been very generous, as I said at the
onset there wouldn't be too many world leaders who would front up and do it again, but I
thank you very much for doing it, and I hope early in the New Year we can talk to each other
again, and Happy Christmas.
PM: Good John, and have a good holiday.
JL Good. Bye.
ends 



01
PRIME MINI1STER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF AUSTRALIA MALAYSIA SOCIETY
WEDNESDAY 13 DECEMBER 1995
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
It is very good to be here to launch the Australia Malaysia Society.
And it is good to have so many old friends of Australia from Malaysia present.
I particularly want to welcome again the Chief Minister of Sarawak, Tan Sri
Taib Mahmud, who is Chair of the Malaysia-Australia Foundation and his
colleagues from Malaysia.
The establishment of this society and the formation of the Malaysia
Australia Foundation which Dr Mahathir launched in KL last year are a
reflection of what it is that really underpins the relationship between Australia
and Malaysia that is, the level of contact and depth of friendship between
the people of the two countries.
This is not a relationship which exists only between Governments. It is one
which is nourished and sustained by all the links which individual Malaysians
and Australians have been built up over the years. That is what motivated
people in both countries to establish the Society and the Foundation.
Substantially, of course, those ties have grown out of the experience of
students. The figures may be familiar, but they are worth repeating. Over
120,000 Malaysians have been educated in Australia and many of them, like
our guests today, have gone on to hold influential positions in the Malaysian
government, public service and business community.
At any one time, more than 10,000 Malaysian students are studying in
Australia. Another great area of strength has been the relationship between our
defence forces. These ties go back even before Malaysia's independence.
They are formalised through the Malaysia Australia Joint Defence Program
and the Five Power Defence Arrangements. Australia is the major overseas
provider of training for the Malaysian defence force and we have regular
discussions about defence and security matters. No-one who has any 
contact with the military in either of our countries can doubt the close
personal bonds which have grown out of these professional links.
The trade and investment relationship has been another key source of
people-to-people contact, of course. As we have seen with the establishment
of this society, the Australian business community has been a keen supporter
of the bilateral relationship over the years.
By next year, Malaysia should overtake Britain to become one of Australia's
ten largest export markets. It is now our eleventh largest trading partner, with
two-way trade of $ 3.5 billion in 1994-95. Australia also ranks as Malaysia's
eleventh largest trading partner, showing how evenly the relationship benefits
us both.
Bilateral trade grew at a remarkable 22 per cent last year and has grown at
that rate for the last three years. And Malaysia's strong growth, predicted at
almost nine per cent this year, and its program of privatisation and
infrastructure development, provide excellent opportunities for Australian
exporters and investors.
Prospects for trade in services are equally good. Total services trade was
worth over one billion dollars in 1993-94 and it has been growing at 17 per
cent a year.
Tourism is a significant part of this trade and another way in which people-topeople
contacts are growing. Almost 60 000 Malaysian holiday-makers came
to Australia last year, and up to 100 000 Australian tourists visit Malaysia
each year. The recent expansion of air services between us is a further good
move which will help tourism.
Australia and Malaysia have also been working closely together on global
and regional economic developments. We have used the Cairns Group to
press for greater liberalisation of world trade in agriculture and we have a
very cooperative relationship in APEC and in the dialogue on trade facilitation
between AFTA and CER.
So this is a very healthy relationship and we have a very good story to tell.
But to maintain it at this level we need to work on it. Because, paradoxically,
there are dangers in our very closeness and familiarity with each other.
It can make the familiar views we have of each other harder to discard when
they are no longer relevant. We can get stuck with images of each other
which are out of date.
Precisely because this relationship is so old, it brings with it a lot of
preconceptions which can impede a clear view of each other.
I have no doubt that Australia needs to see Malaysia in a new way and that
the same is true in the other direction. 
Australians need to look at Malaysia, not through the prism of the Emergency
or Confrontation or the Colombo Plan connections, but in the context of the
dynamism and change which have made it Southeast Asia's fastest-growing
economy 9 per cent this year and an average of 8.5 per cent per year over
the past seven years.
And during that same period, Malaysian exports have grown each year at
double-digit rates.
This economic growth has been almost entirely driven by the expansion of
Malaysia's manufacturing sector which contributed 20 per cent of GDP in
1985 but 31 per cent in 1994.
This is a remarkable national achievement.
Looking the other way, I hope Malaysians will see a modern multicultural
Australia which is not an outpost of Europe or North America, which is not
trying to be Asian or American or African or anything other than what we are,
but which is economically strong, technologically sophisticated and endowed
with resources which complement the needs of Malaysia and the other rapidly
developing countries of Asia.
Future success for the Australia -Malaysian relationship depends on our
recognising that these changes are underway and building on them. We can
continue to do the sort of things we have been doing, but we need to do them
in new ways. And we need to take advantage of the economic and social
changes in both our countries to find new things to do together.
For example, Dr Mahathir and I agree that technology and research will be an
important new area for cooperation. We discussed in Jakarta last year the
opportunities for us in environmental technology. Australian Cooperative
Research Centres and Malaysian institutions like the Standards and
Industrial Research Institute of Malaysia, are already pursuing these those
opportunities, and discussing collaborative research into polymers and
aeronautics. In the field of education, where our relationship has been so close, we need
to think less in terms of Malaysian students coming to Australia for their
education, and more about new approaches such as opening Australian
campuses in Malaysia or twinning Australian and Malaysian educational
institutions allowing Malaysian students to share their tertiary degree
between the two countries.
But I have to say that I hope that, in these changes, we will not lose the
opportunity for students from each country to live and study in the other. And
I am pleased to note that some Australian students are now beginning to
pursue their studies in Malaysia. That has been a source of the remarkable
strength in this relationship, and we need to preserve it. 
In the area of trade we are already seeing the results of the changes in our
two economies.
Fully one quarter of our trade now comprises Elaborately Transformed
Manufactures. This reflects both Australia's increasing competitiveness in
manufacturing, and the sophistication of the Malaysian economy.
And our long standing investment relationship is one of the healthiest in the
region. We each have investments worth several billion dollars in the other
country. Malaysian investment in Australia has been growing quickly by 34
per cent in 1994 and diversifying into new areas. And while Australian
investment in Malaysia is growing well with over 200 businesses now
represented there I would like to see more growth.
These are some of the matters I hope to discuss when, as I can now
announce, I visit Malaysia officially on 15 and 16 January. I am very much
looking forward to the opportunity of talking to Dr Mahathir and his colleagues
and to seeing developments in Malaysia for myself.
Few relationships between countries have such a base of goodwill as this
one. It has a flying start.
I am sure the Australia-Malaysia Society's activities will complement the work
of the Malaysia-Australia Foundation and other organisations which have
been established to foster people-to-people links between Australia and
Malaysia including the Canberra based Australian/ Malaysian Society in
deepening this relationship. The Society's first project a photographic
exhibition on multiculturalism in Australia and Malaysia, to be shown
simultaneously in both countries is an excellent way to start. I understand
that Dr Mahathir's daughter, Marina Mahathir, proposed this project, following
her own very successful exhibition " Eyes on ASEAN" in Australia last year.
It only remains for me to congratulate all of you, and Ric Charlton in
particular, for the work which has been put into establishing the Society.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the Society formally and to wish it well for
the future. 



1/
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING, MP
VAGUE IS BEST JOHN HOWARD'S VIEW OF NATIONAL IDENTITY
Mr Howard's " reflection" on Australia's national identity will go down in history
as one of the most vapid statements about Australia ever delivered by an
Australian political leader..
It was ultra conservative ideology thinly and soporifically disguised as
thoughtfulness and moderation. Mr Howard sneaks around the great issues
facing Australia, offering everything but an indication of what direction he and
the Coalition intend to take. On some of these key issues, Mr Howard is
glaringly exposed again as a policy-free zone. For instance, Mr Howard
appears to be still sitting and " reflecting" on our relationship with Asia while
this real, dynamic and irreversible fact of our national life streams past him.
He hangs his " reflections" not on any positive thoughts or plans he has for his
country, but on a pathetic and malevolent misrepresentation of the
Government's record on matters concerning Australia's Constitution and
identity. The Coalition has long run a campaign of misinformation on this
issue. I am flattered by his frequent references to me but they are almost
without exception completely false.
For the record, no one has attempted a " heist" of Australian nationalism and
no fair reading of the record since I became Prime Minister could lead to that
conclusion. Never have I attacked earlier generations of Australians, rather I
have honoured them and made strenuous attempts to keep them in the
forefront of our national consciousness. Nor for that matter, have I ever
attacked the British people or the great heritage Britain left to us.
Let me give him a couple of examples of what I think in fact, rather than that
which is ascribed to me by the contemporary urban myth Mr Howard has
attempted to manufacture. In my first speech as Prime Minister, on Australia
Day 1992, I said:
" Perhaps we should not be surprised if these and other profound
cultural and economic changes have made many Australians wonder if
the traditions of their country, the values for which they have worked 149/ 
and fought, are not under attack. I suspect there are many Australians
who are wondering if their Australia will survive the changes if there
will be a place for the " old Australia" in the new.
I have no doubt that the best of Australia will survive in fact it must.
The hard-won traditions of democracy, of fairness and equity,
individual opportunity and personal security, our way of life and those
institutions which guarantee our freedom, will remain the guiding
principles of Australia."
In calling for an Australian Head of State, in my speech to Parliament on 7
June 1995, 1 said: ' This is not because our generation lacks respect for the
British monarchy, or the British people, or our British heritage, or the British
institutions we have made our own, or our long friendship with the British in
peace and war. On the contrary, Australians everywhere respect them, as
they respect The Queen."
On the arts and multiculturalism, Mr Howard offers the same clueless mixture
of vapid motherhood statements and cynical misrepresentation. On the
republic, if anything, he appears to be retreating. He sneaks around the
issue and it is not easy to tell precisely in which direction he is pointing. The
only definite thing asserted is his determination to hold a Constitutional
convention a device which he himself has described as the means by which
he would " kick the republic into touch".
John Howard has an identity crisis. In trying to be all things to all people, he
succeeds only in standing for nothing to anyone. His latest " Headland"
speech is not so much about Australia's future as about John Howard's past.
Howard-watchers will smile wryly at his re-visiting the Future Directions policy
document of 1988. The derision with which this document was greeted when
it appeared, as one of the most conservative and least original policy
statements seen up to that time, no doubt helps to explain why the Leader of
the Opposition is so petrified today of venturing anew into the dangerous
territory of policy substance and ideas.
Finally, if John Howard is unable to answer the big questions, perhaps we
can help him with the small ones.
First, who is the " Australian" historian, Charles Wilson, referred to in his
speech? Answer an English historian who made a brief visit to Australia in
the 1970s.
Second, where can we find the prejudice against other than orthodox families
Mr Howard challenges us to find in his utterances " over the past 20 years"?
Answer try the Sunday Program, 12 November 1995.
CANBERRA 13 December 1995 



148/ 95 K
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VISIT TO SINGAPORE
I will pay a short visit to Singapore on 17 January 1996 to meet
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong and to deliver the Singapore Lecture.
I am honoured to have been invited by the Institute of Southeast Asian
Studies to present this lecture, which will give me an opportunity to talk
about Australia's relations with the region around us and the challenges
now facing Asia and the Pacific.
I am looking forward to visiting Singapore again and to continuing my
discussions with Prime Minister Goh about regional and bilateral issues.
As I announced today at the Australia-Malaysia Society launch I will
also be visiting Kuala Lumpur on 15 and 16 January. It will be my
first visit to Malaysia as Prime Minister.
CANBERRA 13 December 1995 



I
K'
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
14 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well I would like to tell you that the Cabinet has today decided that
Australia will enter into a security agreement with Indonesia. The text
has been agreed over a number of meetings between President
Soeharto and myself over the past 18 months and after it goes through
Executive Council the agreement will be signed next Monday in
Jakarta. The agreement asserts, in formal terms, for the first time that Australia
and Indonesia have common interests in the peace and security of the
region and that we intend to cooperate in support of those interests.
The agreement is intended to make an enduring and powerful
assertion within the region and outside it that the long term strategic
interests of Australia and Indonesia coincide.
This is a major strategic development for Australia and for the region
and a development of fundamental importance in our bilateral
relationship with Indonesia, it is about providing for Australia's future
and creating greater certainty about that future.
The agreement, which is of treaty status, commits the two
Governments to the following things: consult at Ministerial level on
a regular basis about matters affecting their common security and to
develop such cooperation as would benefit their own security and that
of the region; ( ii) consult each other in the case of adverse challenges
to either party or to their common security interests and, if appropriate,
consider measures which might be taken by them individually and
jointly and in accordance with the processes of each Government; and,
( iii) promote, in accordance with the policies and priorities of each,
cooperative activities in the security field. 
As is the case and usual practice, the full text will be released after the
signing on Monday.
Now this is a significant and natural extension of the cooperation we
have built up with Indonesia in recent years. It demonstrates that each
of us has confidence in the security intentions of the other. In other
words, we are putting on the table and we are saying formally that the
things that we are saying and doing to and with one another, the
agreements that have been entered recently between our defence
forces, the discussions we have between Foreign Ministers and at
Heads of Government. It is there to demonstrate that each of us has
the confidence in the security intentions of the other.
I have said before that Australia is no threat to Indonesia and
Indonesia is no threat to Australia. This has been the basis of our
defence planning for many years. But it is important that it is
understood by the people of each country. You also remember me
saying that the emergence of President Soeharto's new order
Government in the 1960s was the event of most positive strategic
significance to Australia in the post-war years.
The consequences for Australia of having a hostile or even unfriendly
Government in Indonesia over that period would have been
incalculable including for the percentage of our national resources we
would have spent, or would be spending, on defence.
The agreement builds on all the work that both sides have put into
building up the depth and diversity of the relationship between the two
countries. The interests we now have between us are varied and,
of course, they are not new. You will know about the things we have
done together on the Cambodia peace settlement where Australia and
Indonesian diplomats and our armed forces worked closely together.
You know of our collaborative work on the ASEAN Regional Forum
and, of course, more recently on APEC.
The agreement is, essentially, about building a structure for the future
of Australia, to reduce uncertainties over the next 10 to 20 years and
with it Indonesia is offering us the opportunity to shape the region.
The agreement will reinforce the security of the region as a whole by
demonstrating to our friends and neighbours that Australia and
Indonesia will continue to build a close and cooperative relationship.
There are several things, though, that the agreement does not do. It is
not an assertion that we have common internal policies or
philosophies, or that we endorse everything that Indonesia does
internally or vice versa. It does not involve us in the internal affairs of
Indonesia, or compromise our approach on human rights. There is a
reference in the text to adverse challenges in the agreement and 
this has application only to external challenges, not those that might
arise from internal developments.
The agreement does not cut across Australia's commitments under
ANZUS, or the Five Power Defence Arrangements, or our Joint
Declaration of Principles with Papua New Guinea, or indeed
Indonesia's membership of ASEAN and the non-aligned movement. It
does not cut, or undermine, or contradict, our regional and multilateral
approaches to building up security dialogue and confidence, such as
our joint support for the ASEAN Regional Forum.
It is not a defence pact or alliance with an automatic agreement on
support in the event of attack. It is couched in simple terms, simple
and unambiguous terms, and means what it says.
Now I said earlier that the discussions on the agreement have been
running now for about 18 months. The proposal was first discussed by
the Security Committee of Cabinet in February 1994. In the
1993 Strategic Review, we stated that more than with any other
regional nation, a sound strategic relationship with Indonesia would do
most for Australian security.
I first raised the matter with President Soeharto in 1994. He took it up
with me again at our meeting in Bali and we, more or less, completed
negotiations during our bilateral discussions in Osaka. During those
meetings, I had a personal emissary representing me. That person
has been General Peter Gration and he, accompanied by
Allan Gyngell ( PM's Senior Adviser International), had made visits to
Indonesia to settle some of the discussion, terms and sense of the
agreement. The agreement will be signed in Jakarta by Gareth Evans and the
Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mr Ali Alatas, in the presence of
President Soeharto and myself. The two Defence Ministers Senator
Ray and Mr Sudradjat will be present as will the Australian Chief of
the Defence Force, General Baker and the Indonesian Defence Force
Commander, General Feisal Tanjung.
The agreement, of course, is not a promise that Indonesia and
Australia will never disagree on issues. We have the Five Power
Defence Agreement with Malaysia and Singapore and we found on
various matters, trade matters and the like, we have had
disagreements from time to-time. We have got, of course, an
agreement of a different variety with ANZUS and, of course, you know
we had disagreements with the United States from time to time.
No relationship, with as much substance as ours, will ever be free of
disagreement and I don't think either of us will be inhibited from
expressing such differences frankly and arguing out our case as we 
have done, obviously, with Indonesia. But those policy disagreements
come and go and, of course, over time as the political leadership of the
countries will change.
So I believe the agreement represents another stage in the
development of Australia's relationship with Indonesia. Indonesia is
our largest neighbour, the world's fourth most populous country, the
largest Muslim country in the world, the immediate past Chair of the
non-aligned movement, and on some measures, based on purchasing
power parity already the tenth largest economy in the world.
On the other hand, of course, we are a modern, technologically and
scientifically advanced society, with a huge resource base we enjoy
in a Continent in a country we share without borders and, of course,
we are as we all know a rich and dynamic multi-cultural society.
I think I am convinced that Australia and Indonesia have much to
contribute in partnership. I think we have a great opportunity here to
shape the security environment of the region.
This is, as I said earlier, a chance to say that in an enduring powerful
way, within the region and outside it, that the long-term strategic
interests of Australia and Indonesia coincide. And our first chance to
put down in formal terms that Australia and Indonesia have common
interests in the peace and security of the region, and that we intend to
cooperate in support of those interests. Thank you.
J: Prime Minister, have you discussed this with any other regional
nations, or with the United States, as we said we would do in that
strategic review?
PM: I have discussed this with the United States Ambassador, and we will
be moving around... in fact, General Gration will be visiting as will
other representatives of Australia a number of countries to make
clear what it means. In fact, General Gration will be travelling early
next week to a number of capitals Washington, Tokyo and Beijing,
Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, Wellington, Port Moresby to explain the
background of the agreement in person.
J: Prime Minister, does this make Indonesia the next closest nation to us
after the United States?
PM: Well, I have said before that no nation is more important to us than
Indonesia. It's our largest nearest neighbour, and the clarity and the
integrity of this agreement makes very clear their importance to us.
Of course, in defence and security terms, ANZUS and our relationship
with the United States has always been central to Australian defence
and foreign policy, and it remains so. 
J: Mr Keating, does this agreement mean a practical increase in defence
cooperation and possible exchanges of intelligence information?
PM: Well, I think it might be worth reminding you in August 1995, the
Vice CDF and his Indonesian counterpart co-signed a letter outlining
the principles along which bi-lateral defence relations will be
developed, and that letter was endorsed by the Defence Ministers of
our inaugural meeting in Perth in August of this year. Now in that, our
Defence Ministers agreed to meet annually, Indonesia presented it's
White Paper on Defence, Ministers agreed on the need to develop
inter-operability and commonality between our regional defence forces,
and they endorsed the following objectives in the following fields:
operations and exercises, training, communications and electronic
warfare, logistics, intelligence, strategic consultations, and contacts
and visits. They also agreed a new management a structure to
co-ordinate all cooperative activities, comprising a defence policy
committee headed at the three-star level, and a defence co-ordination
committee at it's executive arm. And you might remember of course,
that in terms of co-operative activities, Indonesia has participated in
the Kangaroo 95 exercises, port visits by ships of each Navy, annual
special force troop exchange exercises, and we are increasing, of
course, the number of trained people from ABRI here in Australia.
So, there is now a real formal structure there in place, and this just
provides, I think, a better setting for the development of that structure.
J: What will you say to those Australians of East Timorese background
and their supporters who will be undoubtably critical of this?
PM: Well, I think this is not an either-or issue. The Austral ia-I ndonesia
relationship is a relationship, I think, of many parts and great depth.
And I think what we have seen both over time in the development of
this issue by the Foreign Minister, by the Defence Minister and their
counterparts there, by the relationship I have had with President
Soeharto, by those collaborative things we have done that we have
mentioned Cambodia, the development of the ASEAN regional forum,
APEC that we now have a broad relationship with Indonesia.
It's a relationship of substance, and it is I think within that
relationship of substance that human rights are an integral part of our
dialogue, and that they are very much at the core of our sense of
ourselves. And I have told you a number of times now that
whenever we feel a desire or a wish to make clear where we stand on
human rights, or any human rights issue including Timor we make
that clear. I have put my views to President Soeharto forthrightly, as
I know the Foreign Minister does regularly with his counterpart etc.
None of that is changed by this agreement none of that is changed by
this agreement. You know, it is inevitable that we are going to agree
on some issues, and disagree on others. But when we do so, we will
do it directly. But we will do no service to Australian interests, or the
interests of the people of Indonesia were this to become a single-issue 
relationship, and I don't think any service to the people of East Timor,
either.
J: Prime Minister, to get a fix on this is this more than a non-aggression
pact, but less than a Treaty?
PM: It has Treaty status, but it is not a defence pact which implies a military
response. What it makes clear is that each country will consult the
other in the case of challenges to either one of us, or our common
security interests, and if appropriate, consider measures which might
be taken by them either individually or jointly in accordance with their
national processes.
J: So it could involve Australian troops, or Australian defence forces,
being involved in defence of Indonesia?
PM: Yes, but it doesn't have automaticity it doesn't have auotomaticity.
Can I say, the agreement is squarely in the same family of agreements
as the Five Power Defence Agreement, and our Joint Declaration of
Principles with Papua New Guinea. I mean, for instance, the
Five Power Defence Agreement has words like this: " that their
Governments would immediately consult together for the purpose of
deciding what measures should be taken jointly or separately in
relation to such attack or threat".
In the Joint Declaration of Principles with Papua New Guinea it says
' the two governments will consult at the request of either about matters
affecting their common security interests in the event of external armed
attack threatening the national sovereignty of either country. Such.
consultation would be conducted for the purpose of each government
deciding what measures should be taken, jointly or separately, in
relation to that attack.'
So, it is in the genre or the family of those agreements. Whereas
ANZUS says things like this ' for the purpose of article 4, an armed
attack on any of the parties is deemed to include an armed attack on
the metropolitan territory of any of the parties or on island territories
under its jurisdiction in the Pacific on its armed forces, public vessels or
aircraft in the Pacific. It declares ' it would act to meet a common
danger in accordance with the Constitutional processes under article 4.
Under article 3 it says ' the parties will consult together whenever in the
opinion of any of them territory integrity, political independence or
security of any of the parties is threatened. There is other language
in the ANZUS agreement which has much more clear and automatic
responses whereas this is very much an agreement in the family of the
agreements that we have under the FPDA and with Papua New
Guinea. 
Can I also say that Indonesia has no such agreement with any other
country. This is the first agreement of its kind. It has made clear its
non-aligned status, but that said, this is the first agreement of its kind
with any country and as I say, it is an agreement in the genre or in the
family of those we now have with Malaysia and Singapore and Papua
New Guinea.
J: .( inaudible) Coalition support for this? Is this a bipartisan issue?
PM: I would hope so. I think that there has been a strong degree of
bipartisanship about issues relating to the security of Australia. We
have seen that around ANZUS. We have seen it around other treaties
and I expect we will see it around this.
J: Are you interested in pursuing more bilateral agreements with other
regional countries?
PM: Not necessarily, no. I think, if you look at our immediate area we have
the Declaration of Principles with Papua New Guinea. We have this
agreement of treaty status with Indonesia and then with Malaysia and
Singapore we have the five power defence agreement which includes,
of course, New Zealand.
J: Prime Minister, you said in the Financial Review that East Timor does
remain a problem for Australia and for Indonesia and you think it
should be dealt with. What do you mean by that, are you simply
raising a point whenever these discussions come up or..
PM: Indonesia has come from, in a post colonial period, a country virtually
destitute in terms of resources and wealth to a country growing at eight
or nine per cent a year now, which has got a substantial economy,
where the distribution of wealth is widening, where prosperity is
becoming obvious for anybody who visits and now it is playing a larger
role, of course, with APEC, with the ASEAN Regional Forum and to
some substantial extent in international terms that is marred by the
difficulties it has had with Timor. I think this is a problem for Indonesia,
but I think the Indonesian government thinks this too and I'm sure it is
thinking about ways in which this matter can be accommodated within
the plurality of that sprawling archipelago of ethic groupings and
religious groupings.
J: What can you do?
PM: That is, principally, for Indonesia to think of. I mean, we have all got
ideas of what they can do, but it is not, I think, my place here to be
telling Indonesia what it might do about it. But, it certainly has been
my place in the past to say that we believe respect for human rights
and the liberties of individuals is upper most in any society. 
J: Prime Minister, could Indonesia improve its agreement standing with
us and others by being more frank in its acknowledgment of its
mistakes in East Timor such as the Diii massacre.
PM: Well, I think, there is a great, you know, if you look at the
contradictions of Indonesia, you have had debate about the closures of
newspapers last year and yet AlVI Australia television a lot of ABC
content, items of television content which go to our values, the rights of
individuals, Timor, all these issues, are beamed into Indonesia every
day of the week. The growth of satellite television received material,
there are satellite dishes popping up all over the country. This is a
place which doesn't have that tightness that you see in authoritarian
regimes. It is a country that is growing. President Soeharto is opening
the economy up by one successive deregulatory package after
another, he has signed up and is, of course, the founding person in the
APEC declaration at Bogor. So, any leader in any government which
is opening its economy up, growing its private sector, trading with the
rest of the world can't hope, as I'm sure the President doesn't for a
moment, that Indonesia's political society and polity is in some way
constrained or perpetually constrained.
So, I think, we need to understand that contradiction. Yes, you will see
examples of what we believe are incursions against free speech, but
what you are also seeing is a massive opening up of the economy and
a huge deluging of that society with news and views and information
from all around the world. We can all nominate some exceptionally,
tightly run societies, this is not one of them.
J: Do you believe this move will have the support of Australian public
opinion?
PM: I think so and when ever we have seen polling on this, when asked the
question whether a serious and important relationship with Indonesia
is in Australia's best interest, it is always answered in an overwhelming
way. I think, Australians have got a very mature view about this. This
is our largest nearest neighbour, we are bound to them by our
geography in perpetuity and we have to build the structures that
provide the trust and the integrity of developing our relations together
and having our impact upon the region.
J: Prime Minister, does this agreement puts in a position where Australia
might have to choose between Indonesia and one of its other friends in
a situation where, for example, of a contretemp between Indonesia and
say Papua New Guinea, in the past Indonesia and Malaysia..
( inaudible)..
PM: Indonesia and Papua New Guinea have a document themselves about
lessening tensions, about doing things each party undertaking
things to lessen tensions. None of our friends in the region are likely, 
in any way, to threaten Indonesia and I believe that Indonesia has no
territorial designs on Papua New Guinea and they have made clear in
their official text how important it is to keep those issues down. So, I
don't see this as a real possibility.
J: from the Australian side, was part of it a concern within the
government about Indonesia's part in the post-Soeharto period?
PM: No, it is just that we have gone on for too long saying to one another
privately that President Soeharto's government has held this sprawling
archipelago together, of diverse ethnic and religious groupings, but we
have never made in any formal way or put together in any formal way
the gestures which make this clear. In many respects the Australia-
Indonesia debate has been, in a sense, compromised by the sole
issue of Timor and it is the responsibility of every Australian
government, certainly this is my view, that it is the responsibility of the
government to have a proper broad relationship with our largest
nearest neighbour. You might remember, in 1991, just before I had the
first Caucus vote on the leadership, I said then, that Indonesia was the
country with which we are yet to put the full constellation of foreign
policy instruments in place and relationships in place. And while we
have got a good and, I think, enduring relationship now which has
come from the work of Gareth Evans and Robert Ray and others and, I
hope, my own, I think, this anneals those efforts, polishes those efforts,
provides a framework for those efforts which makes clear that the
government of Australia regards a relationship with Indonesia as
central to its view of the region.
J: Is part of your reason for going to Malaysia to speak with Dr Mahathir
about this matter..
PM: I would be very surprised if Malaysia, like Singapore, wouldn't regard
this as a completely healthy sign for stability in the region, in the area,
and I had thought in fact I had discussed going to Malaysia with Prime
Minister Mahathir during the Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting in New Zealand and my firming up of the dates of a visit is one
I am going to make now in conjunction with delivering the Singapore
Lecture in Singapore. You might recall that the Commonwealth Heads
of Government Meeting was a meeting held before the APEC meeting
in Osaka and it was at the APEC meeting in Osaka that final
substantial agreements were arranged between President Soeharto
and myself. So, my visit to Malaysia was really set before this was set
in place.
ends 



~ 2
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH KERRY O'BRIEN, ABC TV 7: 30 REPORT,
14 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
KOB: Prime Minister, in what circumstance would Australian troops go to the
assistance of Indonesia?
PM: Kerry, I think, you have got to see this agreement in context. For a
start its title, An Agreement on Maintaining Security, security is not
simply about external threats, it is about the whole environment of the
region. It is about the foreign policy and trade policies of the
countries. It is about the way we organise ourselves. What we are
saying here is that Australia and Indonesia have a coincidence of
views and interests in the strategic outlook of the region. And in that
context, it says it will consult in the event of a challenge to either
country. It will consult and decide what approach should be taken,
whether it should be taken jointly or singularly.
KOB: Ok, but you have acknowledged today that there are circumstances in
which Australian military assistance might be given. Can you give us a
hypothetical instance, I think it is important for Australians to
understand those circumstance because you are talking about a big
step.
PM: Just understand this, this is a reciprocal agreement where Indonesia,
in that circumstance you are speaking of, would also be likely to be
supporting Australia. We have in place now, under the Five Power
Defence Agreement, for the non-reciprocal defence of Malaysia and
Singapore an agreement which commits Australia to discuss, consult
and perhaps defend those two states without any commitment by them
to us. The key thing about this agreement, Kerry, is that Indonesia is
the first Asian country to put its hand up and say it would consider
joining Australia in this sort of an agreement.
KOB: Ok, now, to try to understand this further. In June this year, Defence
Minister Robert Ray endorsed a defence study by Professor Paul Dibb 
which warned that uneven economic growth in Asia could threaten
peace in the region and that report identified China as a potential
source of volatility. Do you agree with that scenario?
PM: I think you may recall a couple of weeks ago I went to the Osaka
APEC meeting where we adopted the Action Agenda on trade
liberalisation coming from President Soeharto's Indonesian meeting.
What that is very much about is resourcing East Asia, clearing away
the road blocks, the constraints, the trade and non-trade barriers, the
resource constraints to keeping the massive machinery of East Asia
moving. Not just south-east Asia, but China, Korea, Japan, all those
huge resources. I think, it is very important that given that East Asia
has shown that it can bring their economies up, can distribute wealth,
can have a rising living standard which we have seen in places like
Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and we are seeing it in Indonesia, in
Malaysia, the challenge with China is also to get an evenness of
income growth and that means resourcing it properly. So, APEC is
very much about that, it is about keeping the growth running through
East Asia and resourcing it.
KOB: I understand that kind of scenario you are putting, but the other side of
that coin is the one that Robert Ray virtually endorsed in June this
year. I am asking you if you acknowledge the other side of the coin
which is, that if the growth is uneven China could pose a threat in
terms of volatility in the region. Is it that kind of potential threat that
you are trying to anticipate in this agreement with Indonesia?
PM: Is it a threat from China? No. But are you saying could there be
tensions within the Chinese society and economy by uneven growth?
Well, of course there could. The fact of the matter is that the way you
maintain security is that you cover these bases like APEC, like free
trade in goods and services, like proper regional defence cooperation,
like a harmonious view between member governments and member
states of these organisations in the area. That is what much of this is
about. But, it is also about, in the event that there was an external
threat to either one of us, we would consult one another.
KOB: I want to move on with the time that is left. You say that the treaty is
premised on our respect for the sovereignty, political independence
and international integrity of all countries. Dare I ask it, what about
East Timor's sovereignty?
PM: East Timor is a province of Indonesia. There are problems in East
Timor in respect of human rights issues which this treaty doesn't affect
at all. This in no way affects the internal developments in Indonesia or
any attitude we may take to them. Let me take the view, I mean, I see
some reports already by members of the East Timor groups and
lobbies here and others speaking for them, they seem to think,
fallaciously, that some alienation of the relationship between Australia
and Indonesia our largest neighbour will in some way help their 
cause. The only thing that is going to help their cause from Australia
is, basically, interventions by the Australian government for and on
their behalf in a constructive climate of cooperation with the state of
Indonesia.
KOB: But, you have been doing that for years and there appears, in the end,
to be no progress in resolving that issue.
PM: Look at the relationship with Indonesia today and the culmination of
this agreement compared to, say, three years ago or four years ago.
KOB: But, we are talking about East Timor.
PM: Yes, but I am talking about the breadth of the relationship. Look at the
progress we have jointly had with our collaboration in APEC or in
Cambodia or in any of these other places. The whole relationship with
Indonesia is now thicker, it has got more struts to it, it is more
meaningful, it is not just simply a narrow foreign policy relationship any
more. Therefore, the government of Australia is always going to be in
a far stronger position to deal with Timor in the Indonesian context
than in any other environment. Kerry, this notion that the Timor lobby
in some way expect Australia to disrupt its relationship exclusively with
Indonesia on the Timor issue, is not going to help the Timorese
people.
KOB: By the same token, the Timor issue, it would seem, is not going to go
away, it does seem to be in an appalling situation and Patrick Walters,
an Australian correspondent in Jakarta who was senior adviser to Kim
Bealzey when he was Defence Minister, wrote last week that the
Indonesians appear to have run out of ideas on East Timor. The talk
of special political autonomy, for example, has lapsed. Where can we
expect them to go from here and what do you regard as an acceptable
resolution of that problem?
PM: It is for them to decide which way they wish to tackle the problems
which are now quite endemic there and they are serious.
KOB: But, what guidance do you seek to give them with this special
relationship that you have?
PM: Understand this point, this is a massive archipelago of huge cultural
diversity in ethnic and religious terms. It is the biggest Muslim country
in the world. It is, outside of this context of Timor, a country which has
shown quite substantial tolerance to religious and ethnic groupings. It
is used to managing diversity. This is now a rutted in problem for it
and it is something we have indicated we would like to help with. I do
this regularly in my discussions with President Soeharto as well as say
when ever we believe human rights are being affected, forthrightly put
our view and we will continue to do that. But Kerry, the important point
is this, we are not going to hock the whole Indonesian relationship on 
Timor. Now, that is what the lobby has got to understand. It is not
going to happen because let me just say this to you Kerry, a Prime
Minister's first duty is the security of his country and I have always
regarded our, if you like, settlement with Indonesia whom we have
embraced from its post colonial period as one of the primary building
blocks of Australian security and foreign policy.
KOB: And you have made that clear, but very quickly, last question. Does it
matter to you in the framework of that relationship, that you always
seem to be going to President Soeharto, he doesn't come to you and
now you are off to Jakarta again to sign this treaty on Monday.
Superficially at least, that doesn't suggest an even relationship?
PM: Look at the results. The largest free trade arrangement in the world in
APEC in the world 63 per cent of world GDP. The only genuine
north south arrangement in the world. Look at this agreement which
would have been inconceivable just a few years ago.
KOB: But, do you concede that superficially that does not suggest an even
relationship. How many times have you been there?
PM: No, my frequency there or his visits here are not measure of the
importance of the bilateral relationship or the way in which the
interests of Australia and Indonesia are accommodated. For a start,
this agreement is the only one of its kind Indonesia has with anyone
and let me repeat a point I made earlier, it is the only Asian country
that has actually put its hand up to say it would contemplate such an
arrangement with Australia about Australia's security.
KOB: And I'm going to have to cut you off there, I'm sorry, because we have
to cross to Sarajevo to Tusla in a moment, but thanks very much for
joining us.
PM: Good, Kerry.
KOB: Thank you.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA-INDONESIA AGREEMENT ON MAINTAINING SECURITY
Cabinet has agreed that Australia and Indonesia will sign on Monday 18
December a security agreement between our two countries.
The Agreement on Maintaining Security commits the two governments to:
consult at Ministerial level on a regular basis about matters affecting
their common security and to develop such cooperation as would
benefit their own security and that of the region;
consult each other in the case of adverse challenges to either party or
to their common security interests and, if appropriate, consider
measures which might be taken by them individually or jointly and in
accordance with the processes of each government; and
promote, in accordance with the policies and priorities of each,
cooperative activities in the security field.
This is a serious and important step for both countries. The agreement is a
significant and natural extension of the cooperation Australia and Indonesia
have built in recent years through mechanisms such as the Australia-
Indonesia Ministerial Forum and our collaboration on APEC. It demonstrates
the confidence each of us has in the intentions of the other. But it goes
beyond that to set out in formal terms for the first time our common interests
in the peace and security of the region around us, and our intention to
cooperate together in support of those interests.
The agreement will reinforce the security of the region as a whole by
demonstrating to our friends and neighbours that Australia and Indonesia will
continue to build a close and cooperative relationship.
It does not affect our existing international commitments. It is premised on
our respect for the sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity
of all countries. I 150/ S 
Discussions about the agreement have been in progress for eighteen months.
I first discussed the matter with President Soeharto in 1994. I am grateful to
General Peter Gration AC, the former Chief of the Defence Force, who acted
as my personal emissary in discussions with Indonesia on this agreement.
Formal processes need to be completed in Australia, with the submission of
the Agreement to the Executive Council for approval. I expect that to happen
today.
The agreement will be signed by the Foreign Ministers, Senator
Gareth Evans QC and Mr Ali Alatas SH, in the presence of President
Soeharto and myself. The two Defence Ministers, Senator Robert Ray and
Mr Edy Sudradjat, will be present, together with the Chief of the Australian
Defence Force, General John Baker AC, and the Commander-in-Chief of the
Armed Forces of the Republic of Indonesia, General Feisal Tanjung.
CANBERRA 14 DECEMBER 1995 



151/
A A
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
BOUGAINVILLE PEACE TALKS
Leaders from all the major Bougainvillean factions will meet in Cairns today to
discuss ways of resolving the six year old conflict on Bougainville. The PNG
Government has endorsed the meeting and asked Australia to facilitate it.
The Australian Government is providing a venue and the necessary security
arrangements for this meeting. This will allow leaders to discuss freely the
future of their island and propose ways of settling the conflict there which
could then be taken up in discussions with the PNG Government.
The Australian Government will not be a participant in the Cairns talks.
The Australian Government strongly supports a settlement and stands ready
to assist in restoring the economy on Bougainville, particularly the restoration
of education and health services as soon as circumstances permit. I am
pleased that the Commonwealth Secretariat has expressed its readiness to
assist in the Cairns talks.
But it is only Bougainvilleans themselves, in conjunction with the
PNG Government, who can create a lasting solution to the conflict.
The issues involved cannot be settled by force. The PNG Government has
said that peace can be brought to Bougainville only through a political
settlement. I have sent a message to the participants urging them to make the most of
the opportunity which these talks provide to demonstrate that they are truly
committed to peace on Bougainville and to examine new ways of resolving
the conflict and restoring security and prosperity to the island.
CANBERRA 14 December 1995 



K,.
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH ANGELA CATTERNS, TRIPLE J, 15 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
AC: Welcome back to Triple J, Mr Keating.
PM: Thank you, Angela. Good to be here, particularly on this day.
AC: Now, five more transmitters have begun broadcasting the Triple J word
today, with another set to begin on the weekend. What do you think it
is going to mean to the young Australians in these areas?
PM: Well it must be unique, I think, as a national concept. I can't think of
many other countries that have a network so extensive for young
people. You know it was, I think, in 1989 we decided to extend the
network before that it used to be broadcasting in Sydney
we decided to extend it to other States and Territories and to
Newcastle and then by the end of 1990, I think, it reached about
66 per cent of the population. And then you might remember, Angela,
in August of 1993 we announced we would extend Triple J to 44 new
metropolitan centres at a cost of $ 12 million. And today, we are
celebrating the extension to North East Tasmania, Geraldton, Albany,
Mackay in Queensland, the Southern Downs of Queensland, and the
La Trobe Valley of Victoria, and Bega and Cooma in New South
Wales, amongst other places. So, I think, it will now go to all centres
of more than 20,000 people. It will reach about 89 or 90 per cent of
the population. So I can't think of any other country which has such a
network. I think it is a fantastic concept.
AC: Mr Keating, why did you do it? What is the Government's aim in
expanding Triple J like this throughout Australia?
PM: I think to provide a network where young people can listen to music,
where we can expand the whole menu of Australian music, give them a
station or a channel where they can listen to debates which affect
them, that gives them a medium where they feel part of it and included 
in it. It is a very inclusive concept Triple J. You know everybody that
has a common interest, whether by age or by inclination, can find
somewhat of a spiritual home in the medium. So I think that is the
reason.
AC: Oh, I am glad you think that.
PM: Well I must think it we put the dollars down for it. You have got to
think it.
AC: And so how committed are you, really, to representing the interests of
young Australians? You know it seems all of a sudden politicians have
realised there is a youth vote.
PM: Oh, I don't think so. I mean I don't think all of a sudden. Let me say,
for my part, I have spent most of my political life making certain that
young people today have more opportunities and a more interesting
life than I had at their age. Not that my life, at their age, wasn't a good
life. But it didn't have the vitality, the interests, the opportunities that,
I think, young people have today. I mean just ten years ago, only three
young people in ten completed secondary school. This year, it is just
under eight in ten and as you know we massively expanded higher
education and vocational education. And look at the
intemnationalisation of the economy now. Look at the opportunities in
Asia. What I found, myself, was working in Sydney for a Government
employer and that is what I had mostly to look forward to. I mean
today somebody can find themselves working for any number of
people, can find themselves working in Asia, or in North America, or in
Europe and be back here, then go somewhere else, or do something
else. So, I think, that education is the great boundary jumper.
Education is the thing that lets people jump the barriers of opportunity
and so my political life has been about believing in the vitality of the
sort of effervescence, the verve, of young Australians. And much of
what I am about is including them and making them feel as though
they are part of the place. I mean everything, in fact, we are doing..
you know this thing we put together in Osaka in Japan, a couple of
weeks ago, with APEC opening all the trade barriers up in the Pacific,
taking all the tariff barriers off Australia, letting the thing breath, letting
people go out there and be part of it. I mean some of these places are
just so exciting.
AC: Mr Keating, you must be pleased with your diplomatic coup today.
The security pact with Indonesia has really surprised us all. Why was
it necessary?
PM: Well we live next to the Indonesians. They are an old society of
190 million people and we have to reach a point of clear
understanding about what our own strategic intentions are towards
each other and we don't want to see any conflict in the area any more.
We saw this in the Second World War and the Korean War and in 
Vietnam. So, we have developed a security agreement which is more
than a defence agreement. It is about security. It is about doing
clever things together in the region to secure ourselves so we never
have to see ourselves in conflicts again. And that can extend to the
peace accords in Cambodia which we worked on or the huge
undertaking of APEC, opening up the trade barriers in the Asia-Pacific
or just cooperating in any of the other fields where we believe we can
make it better for Australians and Indonesians. And, where we commit
ourselves to one another in a more formal way than we have ever
done before.
AC: As we know Mr Keating you are a great supporter of self determination
in Aboriginal Australia. Why not in East Timor?
PM: We are not arguing self determination in East Timor. East Timor is a
province of Indonesia and has been since 1975. What we are
concerned about in East Timor is the way in which people live, the
respect for their rights as individuals and we have, as a government,
always made our position clear on this with Indonesia. In fact, I am
sure we have been one of the few countries making our views known
as vociferously as we have and what ever possibilities the people of
Timor have for better lives, lives where they believe all their liberties
are being respected, it is in the context, I believe, of a broader deeper
relationship between Australia and Indonesia. It is not going to be
happening with Australia turning its back on Indonesia. This did
happen from 1975 until about the middle of the 1980s. By and large,
Australia turned its back on Indonesia. It took Timor nowhere and, I
think, this sort of model we produced yesterday is the right framework
to be working in for Timor.
AC: Has 1995 been a good year for you, Mr Keating?
PM: Well, we have got a lot of things done. I mean, good years for me are
about what you can accomplish, what things you are able to do. For a
start we have got this huge regional security agreement with Indonesia
yesterday. Three weeks ago in Osaka we saw the action plan for the
biggest free trade area in the world of which we were massively
involved. We have laid out the blue print for republic. We delivered a
superannuation system to all Australians which will most beneficially
effect young Australians, giving them a decent standard of living in
retirement and a pile of savings to go with it. We think, for this
generation of young Australians, around $ 2 trillion in savings $ 2000
billion in national savings.
I think, we have had an extraordinary year for that generation of
Australians who remember World War 11 with Australia Remembers.
We have convened the Canberra Commission to start the world
thinking seriously about getting rid of nuclear weapons and I am
bringing that group together from around the world in Sydney in
January. 
As you know, we have had the economy the most pleasing thing is
that the economy has been growing. We have had now the longest
period of growth since World War 11 17 consecutive quarters of
growth and we have had 730,000 jobs since the last election and we
have got the budget in surplus.
It is hard to have a better year than that. If you are sitting in this job, it
is pretty hard to top that.
AC: How many plane trips do you reckon you have taken 1995?
PM: Oh well, as many as I have to. I am very stingy with my movements. I
try not to move around unless I have to. If I have to go somewhere I
try to do three things at once, rather than make three trips, but even so
I do a lot of travelling.
AC: Are there any personal highs or lows you would care to share with us
Mr Keating?
PM: I think getting the security agreement with Indonesia is a very big high
for me.
AC: It sounds like you have been celebrating long into the night.
PM: I need a cup of tea or a coffee. I need a bit of a hit some where or a
bit later, something else. No, I think, when something is done about
the security of the country, I mean, every Prime Ministers first
occupation must be with security of the country and this goes right
centrally to it. The other high, I think, is APEC. APEC we started
from nothing really, It was a small economic organisation in 1992 and
we built it into the biggest free -trade organisation. Certainly the
biggest free-trade agenda in the world, with the United States, Japan,
China, Indonesia, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore,
Malaysia I mean, it's an enormous body. So, that was getting that
action agenda into place in Osaka was really pleasing for me. And
we have had a lot of other things like, I got this proposal together for
improving our civics education in our institutions. That is, talking
about the workings and the traditions of our democracy, but in
schools, which is going to affect the way people view the whole
institutional basis of the country into the future. And the other thing,
of course, I was very chuffed about was getting a solid framework
down for the republic, and in the months since I did that speech in the
House of Representatives, quite a number of people are now coming
around to saying " Well, on all things considered, the balances in that
speech are pretty right". You know how people reflect on things, you
know, people writing in newspapers and what have you. So, I'm very
happy about that.
AC: Will you be taking a holiday, Mr Keating? 
PM: I'm going to have a couple of weeks of I always have two or three
weeks off at Christmas because.
AC: Do you go away?
PM: Well, it's the only time in Australia that the country closes down,
generally shuts up.
AC: Do you go to the beach, or a farm, or stay home?
PM: No. I mostly go to Sydney, because Sydney in summer is fantastic.
You have the Festival of Sydney all the good shows on, half the
traffic, it's not too hot, and I mostly end up somewhere up at Pittwater.
I do a bit of sailing, and I'm doing that this year, too.
AC: Sounds fun.
PM: I mean, just light you know, no-one talking politics or policies,
AC: Turn the phones off. Tell us what a Keating family Christmas is like
does Annita cook?
PM: Well, she has always done, until we have come to the Lodge. But
there, our chef always makes a nice Christmas meal for us. But, the
main thing is the joy we have always had my youngest daughter is
ten Alexandra and of course when we went to the Lodge she was
six, and they were all relatively young. And always, I think, the joy for
us is watching them sort of enjoy the day, and open their presents
and have their friends around. It's that sort of a day a day together.
AC: What do people buy you?
PM: I'm a bit hard to buy for.
AC: I can imagine.
PM: I'm a bit hard to buy for.
AC: Not socks and ties, I presume?
PM: Well, you can get me in with a good Tom Jones CD I'm in the
market for a few more of those.
AC: Right. I can hear him dropping hints.
PM: Yeah. I also... you know I like classical music, and I always look for
some historic violin material.
AC: Really? 
PM: People like David Oistrach, or Jascha Heifetz or Nathan Milstein
any of these sort of people. I'm always a sucker for a weepy tune.
AC: Are you?
PM: And the weepiest tunes, of course, come from violins. Or a weepy
song.
AC: Mr Keating big year ahead for you. Do you ever entertain the
though that you might lose the election?
PM: In this game it's all thrills and spills. One hopes for more thrills than
spills, but there are spills around you have got to avoid them if you
can. You can't always.
AC: And so when will we all be voting then?
PM: Well, before next May.
AC: Before next May.
PM: The House of Representatives has to sit three years after it last, first
sat. And it last first sat in this Parliament in May of 1993, so it's three
years to May. Our tradition is to have it a little before the expiration
of that time, and that may be so again. So, it's not far away.
AC: Not far away?
PM: It's not far away. And we're going to have a Christmas without too
much politics, if I can pin Johnny Howard down to a decent Christmas
day, and stop him running around.
AC: What you and him are going to spend it together?
PM: No I don't think we'll be going that. But, I think the public want a
break. They want a break from the hubbub of public life, and all the
buzzes of debate. And this, I think, is the cycle for that break.
AC: So, we'll probably go to the polls around about February some time?
PM: Well, that's what they say here in Parliament House, in the Press
Gallery.
AC: Do they?
PM: Yes.
AC: Mr Keating, we appreciate very much you being here with us on this
very exciting day. I don't know if you know, but Triple J at this time 
7
every year conducts a poll of the best songs of the year. We call it
the Hottest 100 do you have a favourite song of 1995?
PM: I think that Christine Anu song Party is one of the things my kids
like, and....
AC: Don't forget to tell them to vote in our Hottest 100, your kids.
PM: And I don't mind it myself.
AC: Good on you. Well, I' II play it for you now. Thank you so much for
joining us today Mr Keating Happy Christmas.
PM: Thank you Angela. Thanks for the yarn. Good bye.
AC: Bye.
ends. 



TEL 15 . Dec . jS~ 15 4t No. uij r ui'vi
PRIME MINISTE
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
THE VALUES MR HOWARD'S POLLSTER TELLS HIM TO BELIEVE IN
Anyone reading Mr Howard's document cannot fail to be impressed by the
number of things he believes in at least for now, in these times, which he
hopes will suit him.
Yet the document leaves many questions unanswered. There is no mention
of Christmas, for example. Does Mr Howard not believe in Christmas? There
is nothing on gardening or intergalactic travel.
I have no doubt that Australians will find many other things Mr Howard does
not mention and they too will ask themselves if he does not believe in these
things, does he believe in anything at all.
CANBERRA December 1995 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, DEPARTURE FOR INDONESIA$ RAAF FAIRBAIRN,
CANBERRA, 17 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, are you satisfied this treaty is in Australia's best interests?
PM: Well, I think the signing is going to be a moment in history which is
going to very much shape Australia's future. And I think we feel the
poignancy of that all of us, involved with it. And it will make not only
Indonesia's and Australia's futures more secure, but in making it
secure, it will make the region more secure.
J: Mr Downer says it has been a very rushed secretive affair announced
on Thursday, and suddenly signed on Monday.
PM: It might have been rushed for the Opposition, it wasn't rushed for us. It
took a couple of years in the making, and it's had all of the due
process and consideration, and bilateral discussions that it should
obviously have.
J: But he says there's been no public debate surrounding this treaty.
PM: Well, these sort of treaties require the support of the Government, the
process of the Cabinet, and that is what it has had.
J: Are you concerned about Dr Mahatir's comments?
PM: I haven't seen them. In today's press? I haven't seen today's press.
J He said that Australia
PM: Look, I haven't seen today's press at all. Okay, I'll think I'll leave it at
that. Thanks.
ends. TEL 17. Dec. 95 14: 44 No. 001 P. 01,-01 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PRESIDENTIAL PALACE, JAKARTA, 18 DECEMBER
1 996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM. Well this agreement we have signed today, I think, will help set the
environment for the region well into the next century. I said to you earlier
today that Australia was around at the founding of the Indonesian State as we
know it today. We have supported Indonesia against the Dutch at the end of
the Second World War and we were justifiably proud in our role in the
independence movement here in Indonesia.
In the years since, of course, Indonesia has become a much more prosperous
country, there has been a very large increase in wealth, it has been quite
evenly distributed and it has now an economnic significance as well as a social
significance of its size that bears upon the region and on the Asia Pacific in
general. What we have achieved in these last few years is a measure of the
cooperation between us which has begun at foreign policy level, in the
relationship.-between the Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and Foreign Minister
Alatas. And in the quite important and more comprehensive relations we are
developing in defence cooperation between our Defence Ministers, in Robert
Ray and his counterpart Mr Sudradjat, and tetvveen our Chiefs of thle Defence
Forces, both of whomn are with us today, and those other operational officers
in both of our services. Also, my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister, of
course, was involved as Minister for Defence back in the 1980s.
So I think we see what we have signed today, which is a historic agreement,
as an extension of the cooperation that we have been able to develop
between us and the fact that we recognise that key point and that is we are
bound together by our geography, by our interest in a peaceful and secure
region, by our quest for income growth and better standards of living, and by
those very happy, shared memories of our history over time.
The relationship has had its problems, but the fundamentals remain sound
and important and that is that much of Australia's future is bound up in the
future of Indonesia and vice versa. And, I think, that President Soeharto has 
ftLL: 2
shown his capacity to lead and take strategic directions for the benefit of his
nation and for the region. And we have. joined him in this most obviously
before this with APEC, where we have built, I think, a new political
architecture in the Asia Pacific, which includes, of course, North America,
Japan, China, Korea, the countries of ASEAN, and Australia and New
Zealand and, of course, now some more.
This has set up a whole frame of reference we have never had before, neither
of us and, I think, now by recognising that each has a strategic interest in the
other, that is that Australia has a strategic interest in the region and in the
fortunes of this archipelago and that Indonesia has a strategic interest in us,
in Australia, in our continent means that we are acknowledging the force of
our geography and our shared history and the fact that we now live in one of
the most peaceful parts of the world and we have the machinery in place to
keep it that way.
So more than anything else, I think, this agreement is a declaration of trust. It
is a declaration of trust about the strategic intentions of each of us. So rather
than us being privately, if you like, assuaged or comforted by a declaration by
Indonesia about its territorial ambitions, of lack of them, and similar
statements by ourselves to the same point, this cuts through all of that and
gets to the fundamental point that there is a basis of trust between us and
together we can do substantial things together. 200 million people here, or
just on, in Indonesia. Our country, a large continent, rich in resources, strong
in technology, strong basis in education. We are, together, capable of doing
many good things. Not just in our two countries, but in third countries too.
So this is more, I think, simply than an agreement about maintaining security.
But, rather, it is about a declaration of trust between us which then goes
beyond the official family into our communities.
Now I would like to just say that I am very pleased that my colleagues could
join me because each of them were party to our first discussions about this in
the Security Committee of the Cabinet. And where we have seen the
development of the relationship with Indonesia, as a logical extension of the
growth of Australian foreign domestic policy abroad.
I am also delighted that General Oration could be involved in the process as a
former very distinguished Chief of the Defence Force. I think his relationship
with Indonesia, the trust he built up here, the regard in which he is held was
important to Australia and was important in this respect. And that general
direction that he struck years ago is being followed now and developed
further by General John Baker and, before him, Admiral Beaumont. And the
three of these officers General Gration as a former Chief have, I think,
reflected very substantially and well on Australia and on this relationship.
I would like to also thank our Ambassador, Allan Taylor, who carried a lot of
the work at this end with his usual skill and discretion and the fact that he is
held in such regard, in this country, matters mightily to us.
i j Dec Ho -Uut) F -Uz,' U 
iLEL: 1jI) . ec., j5 11i: 5( No. UUb h'U,' Uc
3
You have now got the full text of the agreement and you can see what it says.
It has appropriate preambles and agreements on those key points and, I think,
my last thanks but not least is to the Indonesian Government, especially
President Soeharto who has had the imagination and the goodwill to agree to
a proposal such as this and State Secretary Moerdiono who was involved in
the nitty gritty and in some of the detail and never wavered from the strategic
vision that he and the President had.
In all, I think, an agreement such as this is unusual for the fact that it has
been made outside of any other context as the Five Power Defence
Agreement was made In another context, particularly with Britain withdrawing
from Singapore and the region, in the context of the difficulties then
experienced between Malaysia and Singapore and Indonesia. Australia's
agreement with ANZUS, of course, comning from our long shared cultural links
and our experience together in a number of theatres of war over the century.
This is a contemporary agreement made for contemporary reasons, for the
right reasons, and I think it is something which is going to add strength and
value to both of our countries and that is going to bring a sense of security to
the region that, I think, other members states of the region will share with us.
So in all I feel very honoured to be involved, as I am sure my colleagues do,
and we are very pleased at the reception we have been given in Indonesia
and are very grateful for the hospitality.
J: Mr Keating, you said earlier today that this agreement was delivered on a
pledge you made in 1991. 1 am wondering how it rates, as four years as
Prime Minister tomorrow, obviously it is the biggest achievement of your
Prime Ministership?
PM: Well it is not a matter or rating things, I don't think, Michael. But, rather, that it
was one of the things I said at the time that I thought needed to be done.
That is, not this exactly. But a general rapprochement with Indonesia given
the fact that over the years, the relationship had gone off the boil, principally
because of Timor, forgetting how great a stake Australia had had in
Indonesia's independence. And, can I say, how proud the Labor Party had
been in the growth of the independence movement and its succeS3 and that
seemed to be forgotten. And, yet, the force of our circumstances, our
geography, our shared interest in the region, were the things that promoted
my colleagues continuing interest in it. But we needed to bring it into some
-sort of logical statement about where we stood and, I think, this is what this is.
J: I would like to ask on the Article 3, which says that it could be extended
[ inaudible]. Is this any good if Indonesia is no longer a threat to Australia?
Could you tell us whether there is any threat to this treaty in front of you now,
thank you?
PM:-It says that " the Parties agree to promote in accordance with the policies and
priorities of each mutually beneficial cooperative activities in the security
field in areas to be identified by the two Parties". Well, I mean, people have
asked is this a military pact? No, it isn't. It is a security, agreement. It is 
E L: 1. De c 11: 5 No . U06 PU4/ ' J
4
about security and bringing security to the region and that requires an
ongoing assessment by both of us about the way in which the region is
developing and what things are happening and, I think, all of the things we
can see just let's take us the last six weeks the APEC Action Agenda being
adopted in Osaka in fulfilment of the Bogor Declaration, which is one of the
most important, I think, institutional things to happen in this region probably
since the War. I noticed this week that ASEAN, for instance, has decided
now to meet informally annually, very much in the manner of the APEC
Leaders Meeting, to try and keep the process of change moving. All of these
things have got to have a good bearing on security in the region, security in
all of its facets. So this is not about identifying threats, or even preparing a
response to threats, but saying that we need to be alert to what it is that
makes the region more secure and act either singularly or jointly that is act
in concert where we are agreed to upon consultation, which is I think what
the essence of a security agreement should have.
J: Prime Minister, Alexander Downer has put out a statement in Canberra
reporting to reveal a private conversation with your Foreign Minister in which
he alleges the Foreign Minister was concerned about the wording, referring to
adverse challenges, rather than external challenges in the treaty. Could you
respond to that claim, please, and also would you then care to go on and
explain why that wording was used in contradistinction with the Five Power
Agreement?
PM: Well can I just say, I think, that the Foreign Minister is on the record making
mention of this clause and, I think, we would say he is being verballed here by
Mr Downer, who the day before I might remind you said that relations with
Indonesia were at the worst in 13 years. This is the same Mr Downer who is
reported today as saying he may give way to Senator Hill on the Foreign
Affairs portfolio were they to win an election. He gave way on the leadership
of the Liberal Party, he's now giving way on the Shadow Portfolio of Foreign
Policy. To do the nation a real service, he would give away on his
constituency, and let someone serious take it up. If not from our party, from
their's. So,. I don't really think that given his standing, weight, record or the
veracity of his claims that he is worthy of more time than I have given you,
Glenn, on the answer.
J: Could I just ask the same question again what does... ( inaudible) How do
you understand this?
PM: I'm sorry?
J: What do you understand by adverse challenges?
PM: Oh, yes. Well, I was more interested in dealing with Mr Downer than that
point, not to forget the point. And that is that when one, I think, negotiates this
sort of agreement, which is a big change for both countries, and especially,
for Indonesia which has a non-aligned position so obviously and for so long
that some of the phrases which might spring to mind in a country with our
frame of reference, where our language and use of it is known well and for
which we are comfortable in treaties and agreements of this variety, this is not 
TEL: 19. Dec. 95 11: 57 No. 006 P. 015-/ u j
necessarily true in Indonesia. And I think language like external threats is
language that conjures up more than Indonesia wishes to state. I don't think it
wants to say it's threatened, or even to seek to identify threats. So, the
expression " adverse challenges" fits nicely with the general conception of the
agreement, but doesn't jar with the agreement requiring of them some
nomination of a threat. So, again, I think because these words don't reflect,
say, words in the Five Power Defence Agreement written in another age and
another time, or in other harder military arrangements we have with, say, the
United States, is not to say they don't adequately reflect the sense of what we
are seeking to do here.
J: Mr Keating, is that a concession on the part of the Australian
negotiators.. ( inaudible)...?
PM: It's not really concessions. I mean, I don't think any of us have seen many of
these things that is, the paragraphs or phrases as concessions. Rather,
you start off from essentially a clean sheet of paper saying. ' look, we want to
say more than we have been saying to one another, we want to say
something that we can do in both of our names for the region, and which can
be made sense of in the region". And what we have is what you have in front
of you. And Indonesia has sensibilities in this, sensitivities in it, as we do.
And the best if you like graft of those, is in the agreement.
J: Mr Keating, you sent a very very top level delegation to Indonesia to sign this
treaty is there any chance of President Soeharto visiting Australia in the
near future?
PM: Well, we're about between now and May next year to have an election in
Australia, and I think he is going to be interested in the outcome of that
election, as we are. And he has a standing invitation to visit Australia, of
course, and he would be well advised by his advisers to think about that in the
context of the next Australian Parliament and Government, and no doubt he
will. But again, there's always been difficulties about him coming to Australia
with vociferous objections to the policies of his Government in Timor, and
that's not to say in some way that I notice there has been some comment
[ that] I have made many visits here, and during this phase, he hasn't made a
visit to Australia. But look at the results. There's APEC sitting there. There is
this agreement sitting there. There's this continuous strengthening of the
bilateral relationship. The Foreign Minister and the Defence Minister
numerous visits here over the periods are all part of the building of this
relationship. And I don't really I mean, I would like to see the President in
Australia, but I don't think he needs to come to prove we have a relationship.
J: Mr Keating, you. .( inaudible). are you looking at other bilateral agreements
similar to this with, say, Malaysia and Singapore?
PM. No. We are doing good and effective things with the Five Power Defence
Agreement collaborative things in the defence field that's becoming more
sophisticated as time goes by, and I think the structure of it suits Singapore,
and suits Malaysia and suits us, suits New Zealand, suits the British. 
6
J Even if it means closer defence ties With Singapore and Malaysia?
PM:-Well, they're quite close now. ) mean, we're doing joint exercises with them.
The Malaysians are doing... the Singaporeans are doing their flying training
they have got a base, of course, at Pearce in Western Australia. They are
doing their tank training at Shoalwater Bay. We're doing collaborative things
joint exercises with the Malaysians. So I don't think there's anything lacking
there.
J Prime Minister, this agreement seems to be being lauded less loudly in
Indonesia than It Is in Australia. Does that concern you at all? Why do you
think that is?
PM: No. Well, Indonesia is a member of ASEAN, it has it's whole background is
that it is in this perpetual partnership with the countries of the Association of
South East Asian Nations they have just had, again, another summit. And,
you know, there is a protocol about the way in which it acts inl the region,
about its trade relations, about AFTA we're not in that position. So, for
Australia, making a bilateral agreement such as this, with the import it has,
there is an exclusive nature about it that I think there isn't with such an
agreement with Indonesia which lives in these multi-lateral arrangements.
J: So it's not a sign that it's more significant to Australia than it is to Indonesia?
PM: No, I don't think so. And I think you can judge that by the attendance at the
agreement, and at lunch.
J: Mr Keating, whose idea was this notion of a security treaty, and will it
automatically lead to much closer defence ties with Indonesia ties that have
become much more close in recent years?
PM: Well, I think it will. I think it's a signal that the declaration of trust which I
spoke of earlier, is there in print. It's more than implied, it's more than
something which flows from, or is drawn from, or is drawn down from a
continuing -get of collaborative relations in defence and foreign policy. And I
think the fact that it is there unambiguously in this way will mean more will be
done, and it's In a sense a bit of a green light, I think, to our defence forces
that more can be done.
J: Can you indicate in the early stages how you see the agreement manifesting
itself in practical terms over the next 2 3 years, in both countries?
PMV: Well, I think it's a scene-setter, above all else. I mean, it's not only practical,
but symbolic and a scene-setter, and it governs, I think, a whole lot of
responses. You know we now meet as a Ministerial group. We have
Austral ia-Indonesia Ministerial meetings, which go beyond as we have
always had it in foreign policy and defence to the economy, to industry, to
science and technology etc. And I just think all of these things will be given
more impetus, too. What we're doing here is we're putting the mortar in the
bricks of the relationship that's what we're doing. 
TEL: 1' Dec ' 6 j: 5? No u6 P. 0O7/ U
7
J ( inaudible)...
P M. Well, we have had discussions for quite a long time, now, about how we ought
to speak about the relationship with Indonesia in an official way, and we have
had discussions about whether there should be a joint declaration of
principles, or perhaps some other form. And we had a discussion in the
security committee, some time I think in 1993, wherein we thought we might
try and do something which was more explicit in the security area. In other
words, something that was more a straight interface between our two
countries, rather than something that in a sense, transcended the societal
questions. And, as a consequence, I took that matter then forward, the
Foreign Minister, the Minister for Defence and I had discussions about what
the parameters of this might be, obviously, our close advisers had discussions
about it. And then I raised the matter with President Soharto in 1994, and we
had then further discussions in which General Gration and my colleague Allan
Gyngell were involved with, and then the President came back to me on the
question in Bali, and we decided to go further. Then there was another
discussion between General Oration and Secretary of State Moerdiono, and
then I had a further discussion with the President at the bilateral meeting I had
In Osaka. Then discussions with my colleagues when I returned and, you
know, the Cabinet since decided that the draft as presented was acceptable
to it, and today we are here.
J: Mr Prime Minister, you just mentioned that it was a declaration of trust?
PM: Yes.
J: Does that mean that there will no longer be suspicions between Australia and
Indonesia?
PM: Well, I think the answer to that is yes. I mean, in all nations you will always
have suspicions, particularly in big nations where there are things in our
history which have rankled us. But by and large, this is an endeavour better,
a statement which makes clear what our strategic intentions are towards one
another, by the Government of Australia, by the Government of Indonesia.
And the general position that Indonesia has taken for so long about it's
position, it's non-aligned position, it's view of other nations and their
sovereignty, and the views that we have taken in the past mean that there ' is
a sort of backdrop within which such settings can be made, as we have in this
agreement. So, I think it will do a lot it is very much a declaratory set of
statements about how we see one another, and the trust that binds them. And
I think it must do a lot to reduce suspicions, in both countries, of both
countries.
J: Can I go back to this question about adverse external challenge could you
clarify the concept of adverse challenge? Does it have any connotation of
Australia being involved in an internal challenge that might occur?
PM: Well, I said that I thought forcefully, and I hope well the moment I first said
something about this. And so too did Foreign Minister Alatas make exactly
the parallel point. So, let me use this opportunity to clear again this 
FEL: 1l . Dec. 5 1i: 5(, No. OU6 P. uS/ U;
8
expression " adverse challenges" does not mean challenges with respect to
the internal affairs of Indonesia, or the internal affairs of Australia. One of the
values of this agreement is that it is an external interface, one to the other,
between both countries. It is not about actually delving into our societies in
any way, which makes it cleaner and therefore, I think, better. Thank you very
much indeed.
ends. 
TEL AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA
AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
ON MAINTAINING SECURITY
THE. GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA ( hereafter referred to as the " Parties"),'
DESIRING to strengthen the existing friendship between them;
RECOGNISING their common interest in the peace and stability of the region;
DESIRING to contribute to regional security and stability'in order to ensure
circumstances in which their aspirations can be best realised for the economic
development and prosperity of their own countries and the region;
REAFFIP ING their respect for the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of all countries;
REAFFIRMING their commitment to the settlement of all international disputes by
peaceful means in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and International
law; RECOGNISING that each Party has primary responsibility for its own security;
MINDFUL of the contribution that would be made to their own security and that of the
region by cooperating in the development of effective national capabilities In the defence
field and hence their national resilience and self-reliance;
NOTING that nothing in this Agreement affects in any way the existing international
commitments. of either Party;
THEREFORE AGREE as follows: Article I
The Parties undertake to consult at ministerial level on a regular basis about matters
affecting their common security and to develop such cooperation as would benefit their
own security and that of the region. 18. Dec. 95 16: 36 No. 009 P. 01/ 02 
I Li lZ. bec.' 95 No. 009 2
Article 2
The Panics undertake to consult each other in the case of adverse challenges to either
party or to their common security interests ard, if appropriate, consider measures which
might be taken either individually orjointly and in accordance with the processes of each
Party. Article 3
The Panics agree to promote in accordance with the policies and priorities of each
mutually beneficial cooperative activities in the security field in areas to be identified by
the two Partnics. Article 4
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the later notification by either
Oovcrnment of the fulfilment ofIts requirements for entry into force of this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WIHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorised by their respective
Governments, have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Jakarta on the eighteenth day of December, one thousand nine hundred and
ninety-five in the English and Indonesian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
AUSTRALIA;
OARETH EVANS
Minister for Foreign Affairs FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA:
ALIALATAS
Minister for Foreign Affairs 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, PRESIDENTIAL PALACE, JAKARTA, 18 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Can I just begin by saying that the signing of this agreement with
Indonesia is a very satisfying moment for me. What it does is give full
expression to the kind of relationship I believe we should have always
had with Indonesia and it is a declaration of trust and cooperation on both
of our parts where we are saying that the security of the region is a
common interest between the two of us. They are saying the environment
and security of our continent is of interest to them as we are saying the
strategic environment of their archipelago are of interest to us.
We were here, of course, at the founding of this state. We were the first
country to support the Indonesian people against the Dutch in the post
war decolonising period and we have much of substance and durability in
this relationship. And, I think, the weight of it is given evidence by the fact
that this is the most powerful, if you like in government terms, delegation
to have visited a country the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister,
the Foreign Minister and the Minister for Defence.
So, you might remember that during the middle of 1991 1 gave an
interview during the then leadership challenge saying that one of the
things I wanted to do was to see a proper relationship with Indonesia and
this sets up that structure within the broader architecture of the Asia-
Pacific under the aegis of APEC.
In these two ways we have given more substance to this relationship and
declared more obviously our trust in it than we have ever done before.
J: Prime Minister, there has been another demonstration in Australia today
on the East Timor issue, what can you do or say to bring those people on
board? 
PM: It Is, I think, so obvious that the treaty for security is about maintaining a
peaceful environment In the region. You have got this government
seeking now to start the long process of the destocking of the nuclear
arsenals. We have been responsible in a large part for a convention
ridding the world of a whole treaty of weapons, of chemical weapons. The
government's support for peace in Cambodia, what we have done in the
region with APEC and what we are doing here is all about peace and
security. So, why people would demonstrate about peace and security is
beyond me and when they wish to focus on Timor, the only positive way, I
think, Timor can be approached as an issue is in a relationship with this
substance. So, I just think they have to understand where the
government is coming from in terms of peace and security generally and
Indonesia in particular.
J: Do you think you could have won their support if you had made this a
more public process
PM: Well, if there had been a more public process there probably wouldn't
have been a treaty.
J: Doesn't that prove a point of perhaps needing greater public support for
this treaty?
PM: No, this treaty was negotiated privately within the due processes of
government, of the Cabinet and in the authority given to the Parliament
and to Its majority, the government and to its executive the Cabinet. All
the appropriate protocols have been followed in the development of a
treaty around sensitive issues. This wide notion that you can go out
making a declaration that you want a treaty without even knowing whether
the other partner has any intention of reciprocity.
J: Could you see any further such bilateral treaties with Australia and other
countries in the region?
PM: Not really. This is the key one. The fact Is that we have put Into place in
the last couple of years two key things, we have built a new political
architecture in the Asia-Pacific with APEC which has North America,
Japan, China, Korea and South East Asia and Australia and New Zealand
and we have built a bilateral treaty of security with our nearest largest
neighbour, That sort of structure Australia has never had before.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE LUNCH HOSTED BY NEVILLE NEWELL MP,
TWIN TOWNS SERVICES CLUB, TWEED HEADS, 20 DECEMBER 1995
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well we are going to run a little quiz. Why do you think we are here? You
guessed it. We are here for the thing that Neville [ Newell] and Harry [ Woods]
and Bob [ Home] have been on our backs now for about three years and that
is the Pacific Highway. And it is, of course, the major civics works project of
the East Coast of Australia and it has been in its current state the major
inhibitor to development and, of course, the cause of so many deaths.
Now we have reached a point in our history where we are now as a
Commonwealth Government doing things with the States. We have
recognised, all of us, that the responsibilities to the nation, the communities,
the regions, go beyond anyone's sphere of Government. And in the Council
of Australian Governments, we have put together a tri-partite body which is
the Commonwealth, the States and Local Government. And, today, we are
working that same model across the sectors to do another great public work
and that is to modernise and renovate the Pacific Highway.
You understand the Commonwealth has now for many years, as a result of
the Council of Australian Governments processes, divided our responsibilities
between the national highway system and the urban and arterial roads which
were formerly, in part, managed financially by the Commonwealth. So that
they are the responsibility of the States and we carry the national highway
system. And the national highway running between Sydney and Brisbane is the
New England Highway and it is the highway for which the Commonwealth has
taken responsibility. But the development and the movement of people, of
course, in this State and in Southern Queensland, is along the coast. And
while this Pacific Highway has been the responsibility of the States of
Queensland and New South Wales, the financial responsibility and cost of
bringing it to the status of a major highway, are beyond the financial capacity
of any one State. 
So my colleague, Laurie Brereton, brought to the Cabinet a proposal to fund
a dollar for dollar funding arrangement with the States of New South Wales
and Queensland, an augmentation of the national highway responsibilities
and road programs of the Commonwealth, in a way where we could attempt
to undertake this major work.
Now you might recall that the NRMA published a report, I think it was in July
this year, about the Pacific Highway and I understand it is about to publish
another. And it talks about the highway being the spine of the continent's
East Coast and the need to upgrade and renew it. And I think, by and large,
given that the Bureau of Transport Economics has now published quite a lot
of data on this project, that we will find probably in a reflection in the NRMA
report our own understanding of the costings of the project.
Essentially, what the Commonwealth is proposing today is that we will offer
$ 750 million in ten annual instalments of $ 75 million each to the States of
New South Wales and Queensland for the fast tracking and duplication of the
highway over ten years.
The offer is conditional on New South Wales and Queensland maintaining
their existing levels of commitment to the Pacific Highway and agreeing to
match the Federal Government's contribution dollar for dollar and we have
indications from both Governments that they will so make those contributions.
And just to make sure they will, we have got their name on the maker's, label
here. We have tied them right in.
Now what this will mean is, of course, that we will see $ 750 million from the
Commonwealth and $ 750 million from the two States and that will mean an
additional $ 1.5 billion will be spent on the highway over and above existing
State commitments. So there is already a State program. This will be rolled
together with this new program, but rather than simply dealing with black
spots and some of the more difficult areas, with the current program and
maintenance we would be looking at, of course, a complete rebuild of the
highway. New South Wales and Queensland will retain responsibility for the Pacific
Highway and we will maintain our commitment, of course, for the National
Highway system including the New England. But we realise, I think, that the
reconstruction of the Pacific Highway is a national transport priority and we
are prepared to pull our weight in it. We are very pleased by the indication of
cooperation from the two States.
This represents one of the largest public investments in the Commonwealth,
an investment especially in the future of Queensland and the north coast of
NSW. The Pacific Highway reconstruction project will develop a world class
highway up the Pacific edge of Australia. Currently only about 16 per cent of
the highway features dual carriageways and even if we continued funding at
present levels for the next 10 years, coverage would be less than 20 per cent.
So, even if we carried on as we are, we would only have 20 per cent of it as a
dual carriageway in a decade. But, under this new proposal 81 per cent of 
the highway will feature dual carriageways by 2005 and 2006. All 192
kilometres of poor alignment and all 206 of narrow pavement will be removed
all of it removed. All 63 narrow bridges will be eliminated and all major
towns will be bypassed by the highway. This, of course, will make them more
safer and more pleasant places in which to live, which will increase tourist
potential. They are, of course, Nerang, Coolangatta, Tweed Heads,
Chinderah, Brunswick Heads, Ballina, Woodburn, Cowper, Ulmarra,
Woolgoolga, Coffs Harbour, Uranga, Kempsey, Kew, Taree, Bulahdelah,
Karuah and Raymond Terrace. None of them will have the highway running
through them.
In other words, we can get on with, essentially, recognising the needs of a
dual carriageway highway, a safe road for conveyance and one which will be
an artery which provides the building of greater communities along the coast
as the natural shift to the coast takes place. As we see the growth in
population and the growth in demand, we will be able to put this major
national asset into place.
There are, I think, many people have been supportive of this being done for
many years. My colleagues have made an enormous difference in this
debate and I want to acknowledge that. There are things said in public life,
people say things about members of Parliament in the due course of events,
but let me assure you that Neville, Harry and Bob have made this, I suppose,
amongst all of the things in which they have been involved perhaps the
principal thing which they knew the Commonwealth had to be involved with.
So, the point of electing local members of Parliament to take their place in the
national Parliament and in the government is to be able to decipher what is
needed, what can be delivered, what should be done by the Commonwealth,
what other things should be left by the States or how we do things
collaboratively. They have worked together and as a consequence of their
membership of the government, this project is going to happen. I would like
to acknowledge that. I would like to also acknowledge Laurie Brereton's role
in this. Laurie has put down more cubic metres of concrete, built more
bridges, more roads and had more local and regional arguments than anyone
in the country I think. Maybe I could rival him, but the fact is I need to say, in
NSW, " Mr Builder, thank you." I actually think that is going to be the case
here again. Of course, he has seen the need for this to be done and neither
he or I are into the semantics of what is a national highway and what isn't.
There is a major need here and that is what we are responding to. We are
not trying to find characterisations. I'd like also to acknowledge the work of
the NRMA. I am delighted that Don MacKay could be with us today, for the
conscientious effort as a Roads and Motorists Association, you represent the
interests of people in the most difficult stretch of road in the country. They
have done that consistently and conscientiously and their views about this
have been material to the way in which the government has responded. I
want to take this opportunity to thank Don and the Association.
But, I think, what it means, more than all of the technical things, is an
endorsement by the Commonwealth, again, of the importance of this region of
Australia. It is such a beautiful area. We were sifting in the plane coming up, 
we were just to the landward of the coast on the way up, looking at all of the
coastal towns as they came by and also the river mouths. And you see what
a wonderful stretch of coast it is. It has got to be one of the most naturally
beautiful places in the world and what a great bequest we have been left as a
nation, to manage this coast line well, to give people their enjoyment of it and
at the same time secure it as economic assets for the States and for the
country. This is, I think, where we have seen a very big change in the
government's policy with Better Cities. I was here just a week ago taking the
first ride on the train from Robina back towards Brisbane were it will link up
with the main electrified line out of Brisbane and I'm sure we are going to see
a time too when that railway will come down here to Tweed Heads.
This is another thing that both Neville and Harry have been talking about now
since under the Better Cities program we join with Queensland in the funding
of the railway from Robina and given that this area of coast, particularly from
Brisbane to Coolangatta, is the fastest growing area of Australia and, of
course, the area from Tweed Heads down through Grafton et cetera has also
got the same buoyancy of growth. What we do need to see in place are the
appropriate bits of public infrastructure and the good thing about the railway,
for instance, is that it is actually going to design the way in which the
development moves around it. In other words, it is not coming simply at the
end of the process, even though we have seen a lot of development in the
Gold Coast and the hinterland, it is going to define, in fact, the way in which a
lot of this development occurs.
So, there is a role for the Commonwealth. We see it under Better Cities. We
have seen it where we have introduced stimulatory statements like
One Nation, where we have put funding into various projects that are beyond
a municipal government's capacity or the states's capacity and we have got
now some very large rolling programs running as well. The main message is,
I think, that we are very interested in the north coast of NSW and this area
between Tweed Heads, Coolangatta and Brisbane. We have been happy to
join with the Government of Queensland and now the Government of NSW in
doing these things.
The one bit left undone was, of course, the highway and, with this
announcement today, that will be done as well. As a consequence we can
start thinking in a unitary way of the whole region. That has come by virtue of
the fact that the Commonwealth recognises and has a role in these regions
with the States and with local government.
So, I think, this is a very big change and it also recognises the urbanisation of
the coast and how important it is for us to get it right and how the devotion of
public assets can be important. There is a place for private growth and
private assets, a place for the public ones and invariably where the public
ones are set, it will set the pattern of development which then follows it and
this is what we have been seeking to do. As well as that, can I just mention
that you might recall our Working Nation program which is a statement
designed to deal with long term unemployment. Simon Crean announced
recently under our New Work Opportunities project that we are going to see 
1750 jobs created in the region here under that program and also we
supported under Working Nation, Regional Economic Development
Organisations. We have established one in northern NSW and the point of
that is to focus on what the region needs and how best it should develop. We
have found in the McKinsey study that the regions doing best and there are
many regions of Australia growing faster than the capital cities the ones
doing best are the ones that are locally led by the Federal members, by State
members, by local government, by the business organisations, by unions, by
non government organisations coming together and providing leadership.
In other words, if a community knows what it wants itself then it will draw its
own investment to it and what we find happens is that most of the investment,
in fact, doesn't come in from outside, it actually comes from the region, that
existing businesses grow faster and it is giving a signal to the State and to
the Commonwealth governments about what they might do with the area.
One of the great challenges, but I think one of the most exciting prospects for
us, is to do all these things but to do it with an eye to nature and a beauty.
The first thing you always think about flying in here is the nature and the
beauty of it because it is an absolutely exceptional part of the country. It
doesn't matter where you go in the world, when you come back here it always
strikes you.
Just three weeks ago we made key decisions about the forests of this
country. In what must be the biggest public decision in respect to the forests
ever, six million hectares of Australian native forests have been reserved
under Deferred Forest Areas for broader assessment into Regional Forest
Agreements. In doing this, we will see I hope, the dual commitments to the
environment, to representative stands of native species of trees and to the
forest products industry, so we can have a sustainable forest products
industry. And where those two objectives clash, we are going to have a very
large reconstruction package of financial measures to support those
industries and the people in those industries who have got difficulties dealing
with the reconstruction of the forest industries arising from that package. But,
I think we can do it and, in doing it, I know there are two things here: there is
substantial environmental conscientiousness, as naturally you would expect,
given the beauty of it and the forest resources in this region of Australia.
I think, people should be assured that no government has ever done more
and more conscientiously something to actually keep important
representative stands of forests in this country. But, we are also conscious of
the jobs and the employment and the costs of reconstruction of these
industries. And on this occasion we have been, I think, very cognisant of that
and the financial commitments and adjustment packages we have announced
recognise that too.
So, if you take the region as a whole, just looking at the difficulties of, say,
development from Newcastle up to Brisbane, all the demands for population
growth, all the demands for traffic, the settlement difficulties along the coast,
the importance of the preservation of the hinterland, the importance of 
agriculture and timber industries, what we are seeking to do is to do it
together as a whole policy, and to focus that on the whole region. I think,
what we are talking about today, the transport spine, the link that runs
through it, important as that is going to be to all of these communities, what is
I think, important beyond that is how we approach the whole region and we
underline the beauty and preserve it, we secure the prime natural assets and
we develop the place for the quiet enjoyment of those who have chosen to
live here.
Can I thank you very much for coming to lunch today, to be here at this
important announcement and let me again thank my colleagues Neville
Newell, Harry Woods and Bob Home for their interest in this and say that
when communities get serious about their own needs and prospects, and
they get serious members who know they have got to earn their freight and
are not sitting there with some sort of God-given right or to be hearing voices,
of being tapped on the shoulder by some supernatural force to represent the
rest of us, that people are actually out there working and doing, this is the
result of that sort of representation.
Thank you very much indeed.
ends 



22. Dec. 95 165: 21 No. C) 12 P. 01/ 0]
r9" unvuE 111VIII11= I 111114 154/ 95
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, IMP
CANBERRA COMMISSION ON THE ELIMINATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
It is my pleasure today to announce that two additional outstanding individuals have
agreed to participate in the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons. They will join the fifteen eminent statesmen, scientists, disarmament
experts and military strategists who, as noted in my statement on 26 November, will
bring experience and imaginative thinking to the task of proposing how to achieve a
world totally free of nuclear weapons.
The new members of the Canberra Commission are Commander Jacques-Yves
Cousteau and Ambassador Qian Jiadong. Both have exceptional qualifications and
will strengthen the Commission In key areas. Commander Cousteau has a unique
International reputation deriving from his work on environmental issues, notably in the
field of marine conservation, and has moreover a strong personal commitment to the
cause of nuclear disarmament. Ambassador Qian's distinguished diplomatic career
includes serving as China's Ambassador for Disarmament.
The Commission will meet for the first time in Canberra from 23-25 January and Is to
conclude Its report by 31 August 1996. It should be large enough to encompass the
range of specialisations needed for its task but not so large as to be unwieldy. With
these two most welcome additions I am confident that the Commission is appropriately
structured to carry out its mandate.
CANBERRA 22 December 1995 



I' 4o1Uu, 0u l1 . iJ/ I
ACTING PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE HON KIM BEAZLEY MP
RESIGNATION OF PRIME MINISTER MURAYAMA
Prime Minister Murayama, who announced his resignation earlier today,
made a major contribution to Japanese public life at an important time in
Japan's history.
He presided during a period of unprecedented change in the Japanese
political scene and of great 9conomic challenges for Japan.
He showed dignity and leadership in encouraging Japan to come to terms
with the country's wartime past, especially through his comments marking the
fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War. Those comments
were appreciated in Australia and in the region.
His commitment to building a prosperous and stable future for the Asia-
Pacific region was underlined by his leadership in APEC, including as chair of
the most recent leaders' meeting in Osaka.
Prime Minister Murayama has also made a notable contribution to further
building Australia's unique partnership with Japan. The Joint Declaration on
the Australia-Japan Partnership by Prime Ministers Keating and Murayama
last May provided an enduring statement of both countries' commitment to
strengthening our bilateral ties, and to working together to promote
prosperity, and to enhance political cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region.
The Australian Government appreciates Prime Minister Murayama's
contribution and looks forward to working closely with his successor.
MELBOURNE January 1996 



ACTING PRIME MINISTER
HOWARDS HOLLOW PROMISE
John H-oward's promise today that he would guarantee that workers receive the
same rate of pay under his Industrial relations system simply cannot be believed.
It runs counter to a raft of previous statements he has made on Industrial
relations, Including his wholehearted embracing of the Victorian and Western
Australian Industrial relations systems.
Australians should remember that Jeff Ken nett promised Victorian workers
before the 1990 State election: " You won't lose a dollar".
Since then workers have seen: all State awards abolished, leave loadings for all
Victorian workers abolished with workers losing an average of $ 430 before tax
each year; sick leave entitlements reduced and no entitlement to pro-rata sick
leave; no entitlement to redundancy pay; and the independent Victorian iRC
abolished. That is why 400,000 workers have fled Jeff Kennett's Industrial relatins system
and transferred to federal awards.
In Western Australia overtime, penalty rates, holiday loadings and hours of work
are not guaranteed. The minimum houriy rate for young peopie is $ 3.77 an
hour, This Is the system that John Howard said he would like to see throughout
Australia. If the Opposition Leader today genuinely wanted to ensure that workers should
keep their current award and conditions, why then has he campaigned so long
for industrial relations reform?
His belittling of the union movement today and his sidelining of the IRC are code
language for an outright attack on the job security of workers, and In the end,
wage cuts. It would also lead to massive Industrial confrontation, just like John
Howard's bad old days. 
-2-
The only guarantee of workers' wages Is the Government's, which Is enforceable
through the IRC.
The employment advocate which Mr Howard proposes to have replace the IRC
would do no more than in effect file workplace agreements. It would not have
the power to protect the rights and conditions of Australian workers.
Under Mr Howard, Australian workers would have to finally seek fair conditions
at employment through civii courts. This would be ridiculously expensive and
cause major delays.
Despite Mr Howard's professed concern for Austraian youth, he did littie today
to guarantee work and training opportunities for young people.
He owes young Australians the detail of his real plans, which undoubtediy will
inciude cutting their wages, removing their conditions and abolishing Working
Nation programs.
Melbourne 8 January 1996 



TEL: 9. Jan. 96 15: 33 No. 0 5 P. 01
( 3
PRIME MINISTER 1/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPDEATH
OF FRANCIOIS MITTERRAND
France, Europe and the world havc lost a distinguished statesman and
outstanding leader in Frangois Mitterrand.
Under his 14-year Presidency, France played an international role that was
engaged, energetic and constructive. His most enduring legacy will be the
vision of a unified, peaceful and outward-looking Europe. In particular,
Frangois Mitterrand was determined that France and Germany should work
together in building a uted Europe. He was an important force for
cooperation betwccn Europe and the United States. Under President Mitterrand,
France was active in seeking resolution to the problems of Cambodia and the
Middic East.
In the South Pacific, Franiois Mitterrand pursued policies of reconciliation and
understanding towards the indigenous peoplcs of France's overseas territories.
His decision to place a moratorium on French nuclear testing was a valuable
and far-sighted contribution towards the goal of nuclear non-proliferation and
won widespread appreciation in our region.
In domestic affairs, Frangois Mitterrand's commitment to human rights, social
justice and reform and his concern to apply innovation and creativity in
prcparing for the future will leave their mark on France and beyond.
Frangois Mitterrand was a truly impressive individual. He -bore his illness with
courage and dignity. Throughout, he maintained an acute intellectual capacity,
a profound sense of history and, as always, he had a crystal-clear sense of
France's interests and its place in the world. I am very glad I had the
opportunity to know Franjois Mitterrand pcrsonally.
On behalf of the peoplc of Australia, I extend my deepest sympathies to
President Mitterrand's family, and to the Government and people of France.
Senator Evans will attcnd the memorial mass in his honour in Paris on behalf of
the Australian Govermnent and people.
CANBERRA 9 January 1996 



7,; i
ACTING PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE HON KIM BEAZLEY MP
AMANDA VANSTONE AND DR GOEBBELS
It might have been hoped that Senator Vanstone would realise that her vilification
of the Prime Minister by an extended, pseudo-scientific comparison with Goebbels,
the infamous Nazi propaganda chief, anti-Semite and mass murderer was a
serious error of judgement. Instead, she has chosen today to repeat her
disgraceful attack.
Apart from its absurdity, Senator Vanstone's speech on Monday was deeply
offensive to Australia's Jewish community because it had the effect of trivialising
the unspeakable horrors of the Nazi era, She and apparently John Howard, who
has endorsed her behaviour are unable to distinguish between the vigorous
rough and tumble of Australian democratic life and the vicious, inhumane and
genocidal politics of Nazi Germany.
Nothing could more clearly underline how desperately out of touch with reality the
Liberals are, or how profoundly oblivious they are to the sensitivities of
Australians. Senator Vanstone's behaviour is the more reprehensible for being so
far from the balance, moderation and judgement which people have the right to
expect in a Shadow Attorney-General.
Senator Vanstone's speech has deservedly brought condemnation from t Jewish
community, which has asked her to acknowledge the offensiveness of her
statements. Her response has been to repeat them.
I call upon Senator Vanstone to apologise for the deep offence she has caused to
all Australians and in particular to those who were victims of Nazi atrocities.
I1 IJanuary 1996e 



Is
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DINNER GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF MALAYSIA,
KUALA LUMPUR, 15 JANUARY 1996
Prime Minister, thank you for the honour you do me and my country with this
dinner and this visit, the fIrst by an Australian Prime Minister since 1984.
The friendship between our two countries Is old and runs deep,
50,000 Australian servicemen and women have served in Malaysia, and many
lie burled In Malaysian soil. 120,000 Malaysians have studied In. Australia.
200,000 Malaysians and Australians come and go between our two countries
each year.
Prime Minister, I know Australians hold your country In warm regard. I know
they want Australia's relationship with Malaysia and the Malaysian people to
thrive. And it should thrive. Our shared past provides a strong foundation,
but increasingly the strength of our relationship derives from the future we
share. Whatever the benefits of our relationship In years gone by, there are
more many more to be gained in the years head.
The past can no longer be the primary source of understanding between us.
We must work hard to understand the modern face of our two countries.
Consistent with the changes being made In both countries, and with the fluid
International environment In which both countries live, Australia and Malaysia
need a fresh, contemporary appreciation of each other.
Change Is something we have In common. It Is fundamental to our
contemporary existence as undeniable as any fact In our history.
Under your leadership, Prime Minister, Malaysia has set Itself the goal of
becoming a developed country by 2020. And anyone who has watched your
progress In recent times will be In little doubt that you will succeed.
Malaysia Is now one of Asia's most rapidly growing economies, with a rate of
growth consistently better than 8 per per cent, and this year at 9.5 per cent.
Your country Is a dynamic force for prosperity in the region, and this modem
city of Kuala Lumpur Is emerging as a major regional business centre. 
It is a quite remarkable economic transformation, a remarkable national
achievement and, Prime Minister, It Is, Indelibly, a remarkable tribute to your
personal vision, leadership and energy..
Malaysia's economic revolution is watched with admiration in Australia, where
the necessity for economic change and the rewards and difficulties which
accompany It, are well understood. The process has been different In Australia,
but the ambition has been the same. We recognisedmore than a decade ago
that our future depended upon sweeping economic change.
The changes we made turned Australia Into one of the most open economies
in the world: open, Innovative and diverse, forty. per cent more competitive than
it was a decade ago and growing consistently.
Our mining and rural industries remain great strengths and continue to
complement the needs of rapidly developing countries in the region, including
Malaysia. But our fastest growing exports are manufactures and services, and
elaborately transformed manufactures are growing faster than anything else.
This is why we say, Prime Minister, that we understand the need for change
and the realilis of it.
And because this change In our economy has been made contemporaneously
with the new dynamic growth In countries like your own. we also say that this
Is the region where Australia's future lies.
The facts speak for themselves. Sixty per cent of all our exports go to the
countries of Asia. Forty per cent of our Imports now come from those
countries. By the end of this year all of our top ten export markets will very likely be In the
Asia-Pacific region.
The level of our engagement with Asia Is unprecedented and I believe
Irreversible. And not just In economic terms. We now seek our security In the
region not from the region.
We continue to participate in the Five Power Defence Arrangements, which
contribute directly to the defence of Malaysia and Singapore. We are an active
participant in the ASEAN Regional Forum. We have just signed an historic
security agreement with Indonesia, which signals the complete confidence
each of us has In the strategic intentions of the other. And our alliance with the
United States constitutes a dependable pillar of security In the region. 
Our cultural links with the countries of the region go back a surprisingly long
way. Australia has long been one of the " universities of Asia" and that tradition
continues with nearly 70,000 Asian students around 10 per cent of the
Australian student population now studying in Australia.
At the same time, Australians are increasingly learning from Asia. . In no other
country in the world, in fact, is such a high proportion of the population studying
the languages of Asia as second languages. And in ten years' time we aim to
have 60 per cent of Australian school students studying an Asian language.
At a less formal level, the last decade and a half has seen an extraordinary
growth in our awareness of Asian countries and their cultures. Travelling In
Asia is much more common. For many young Australians, the countries of
Asia have replaced Europe as the place to go and see and learn.
At the same time, of course, Asian migration to Australia has radically
increased our understanding of Asian cultures and values. And with Asians
comprising the largest proportion of new migrants each year, this Is a pattern
which Is bound to continue.
Prime Minister4 none of this is to say that we are In the process of becoming
" Asian". Weocinnot be Asian any more than we can be European, American or
African. What we can be, and what we are determined to become, Is a society
which is rare In Its cultural diversity, richness and tolerance, and a country
which Is strong and Integrated with the region around It.
Prime Minister, there are almost limitless opportunities to develop what Is
already a very healthy relationship between our two countries... Last-year trade
between Malaysia-and Australia increased by 22 per cent. Tomorrow, when I
talk to business people from both countries, it will be with a view to Increasing
that growth still further.
Technology and research, including environmental technology which you and
I have talked about in the past, Is one important new area for cooperation
between us. Education will be another: the finalsatlon of your new
Education Act will broaden the range of our cooperation enabling the
establishment of twinning arrangements between Australian and Malaysian
Institutions, and the opening of Australian campuses In Malaysia. Of course,
as I have said before, I sincerely hope that even with these changes students
from each country will still have the opportunity to live and study In the other.
As Malaysia prepares for the Commonwealth Games In 1998 we are preparing
for the Olympic Games two years later. The conjunction obviously creates the
potential for cooperation on matters relating to sport by which I mean
everything from youth development to building infrastructure. 
For these and many other reasons, I believe the last few years of this century
hold out the chance to deepen and expand the relationship between our two
countries. In addition, we can continue to work together in a multilateral environment: in
APEC and in the development of links between AFTA and the
Australian/ New Zealand Closer Economic Relations agreement.
We have common views about the world. We agree that the end of the
Cold War creates a unique opportunity to address the threat of nuclear
weapons. We welcomed the signature of the South East Asia Nuclear
Weapons Free Zone treaty at the ASEAN Summit last-December. And next
week we will welcome Datuk Ronald McCoy from Malaysia when he joins a
group of outstanding international statesmen, scientists and military strategists
In the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons.
Prime Minister, we have great Interests In common and we share great
opportunities commercial opportunities, opportunities In science and
technology, education, tourism and much else. Above all, * we have the
opportunity to create a new level of mutual understanding between--the peoples
of Australia a id Malaysia, and to forge a rich and rewarding friendship which
will endure ihitb the 21st century.
Prime Minister, I believe you will agree with me when I say that these are
opportunities we cannot afford to let pass.
I thank you once again for the honour of this visit and this dinner, the. warm
welcome and the gracious hospitality you have extended to me,. my wife and
my party. 



TEL 15. Jan. 96 10: 49 No. 001.-Py 01
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP, RAAF FAIRBAIRN, MONDAY, 15 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM. I will just give you a brief comment. On this, as all of my overseas
trips, I will be going to look after Australia's economic and security
interests. Of course, I have been to Singapore three times. This is my
first visit to Malaysia, but I have met the * Prime Ministers of both
countries on many occasions. These are old relationships for
Australia, but we need to keep them in a contemporary setting and
hence the value of the visit and talking to them and doing things with
them. I think it is worth reminding people that our two way trade with
both these countries is about $ 10 billion and it is growing at 20 per
cent a year. So, these are two very important countries to Australia
and I am looking forward to going.
J Flow important is it that Australia consolidates its relationship with
Malaysia?
PM: It is important that we consolidate our relationship with all the countries
of ASEAN and our near neighbourhood and we have been doing that.
we hav-egot very good bilateral relationships with Indonesia, most
obviously manifested in the treaty last year, with Singapore who we
have worked with on many other Issues as well and Malaysia and the
Philippines. I don't think our relationships in the area have been any
better.
J: Will you be pressing the Prime Minister on the Gillespie children?
PM: No, I think, as with all human questions this is, like many family things
a human tragedy, but it is essentially a legal matter. But, any
information Mrs Gillespie has I am happy to hand on to our High
Commissioner and he can propose it.
ends 



i) Y
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE AT THE ISTANA HOTEL, KUALA LUMPUR,
16 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF ONLY
PM: I just thought I might open with a few opening remarks and then invite
questions. The first thing I would like to say is It has been a very
enjoyable visit to Malaysia. I have enjoyed again meeting the
Prime Minister and members of the Government, members of the
bureaucracy and the diplomatic corps at a very nice dinner last
evening and I had the opportunity to have quite a long discussion
there'WNith the Prime Minister and again today a very useful discussion,
In the formal settings, where we were able to go through a reasonably
long agenda.
These talks underlined, I think, how deep and strong our bilateral
relationship with Malaysia Is and how we can do much more together,
howi there Is so much compiementarity between our two economies
and, of course, with that long shared history going back so far, It just
makes fairly obvious that we should be doing perhaps more In each
others country and doing more together In third countries.
We talked about a number of specific areas in this regard the
environment, science, health, finance, building and construction,
communication, civil aviation and, as you know, we were very
pleased to sign a Memorandum of Understanding on Education
Co-operation. You might recall that Malaysia has made a very key
decision to allow twinning of universities, which will mean you will see
Australian campuses here in Malaysia and we will be putting our
universities together.
I will be speaking shortly at a Business Forum which underlines how
much dynamiarrt and activity ejlsa * In our commercial relationships
and you might know that later on today I will be having separate
discussions with the Deputy Prime Minister, Anwar, and also
Tun Daim. And then I go to a reception by the Malaysia-Australia
Foundation, which Is designed to emphasise the strengths of the
people to people links I have been talking about and I am very
heartened by the development of these two bodies. 
I have very much enjoyed this visit and I said to the Prime Minister that
I would like to come back and have a more extensive visit one where
I can see more of the countryside and I have Invited Dr Mahathlr to
come to Australia.
So, all In all, it has been a very fruitful time and I have enjoyed it and it
just shows you, I think, how much you can cram Into a relatively short
period of time.
J: Prime Minister, how would you describe you said it was a very good
relationship, would you say now that the hiccups of the past as
Dr Mahathir described them are now behind us?
PM: Well I think what drives Governments and countries are the real
building blocks of relationships and the momentum they have as
societies, and that Is what has driven this relationship right through its
history. And now we are both doing more, we are both more open to
the world, we are prone to drive each other along faster and I hope,
together, do things to drive the region along faster. And the fact that
I am here, I think, is evidence that that Is what I believe and It Is
certahily what the Prime Minister believes.
J: Last night Dr Mahathir said that there was some negative elements In
both societies regarding the relationship. What did you take him to
mean by those negative elements? Do you think there are negative
elements In both societies?
PM: Well I have a penchant for positive elements. That might make me
unusual In some company here. But the fact Is we, I think, you see
Dr Mahathir and I have now had quite a substantial history In
multilateral bodies most recently, at the Commonwealth Heads of
Government Meeting -and I think he made the point last night
convincingly and I reiterated the point in my talks that we all need a
contemporary snapshot of societies. You know you come to Malaysia
In three years time, It will be a different country than the one you are In
today. Go to Australia In three years time, It will be different again to
the one three. years ago. And, I think, that old, deep relationships are
often not only taken for granted but the stereotype remains In one's
mind about them. And the value of visits like this not just for Prime
Ministers and Ministers, but for business people, and for Journalists,
and for everybody else Is to see a contemporary reality. That 18, I
think, which makes very clear that we are countries that live In great
proximity to one another and will have a shared history in the region
and In the world. 
J: Mr Keating, is it fair to say that in the contemporary reality, there are
still more differences between Australia and Malaysia in terms of the
outlook on the specifics of the region than there are with some other
countries like Indonesia?
PM: No, I don't think so. No, I think that we all see the sort of boundless
opportunity and the pace of the change doesn't leave much time for
scepticism, or cynicism.
J: Mr Keating, Dr Mahathir said this morning that the relationship was
" as harmonious as it could be". What do you think he meant by that?
PM: Probably what he said,
J: But he seemed to be indicating some reservations still.
PM: Well he thinks it is as harmonious as it could be, it means it is as good
as he thinks it can be and that is very good as far as I am concerned.
J: Mr Keating, what is your response to Mr Goh's proposition that
Australia and New Zealand could one day become members of
ASEAN?
PM: Well I don't think we have been Invited. But, I think, what we want to
do is to see ourselves more Integrated with the region including the
ASEAN economies and the ASEAN economy. And you know we have
been speaking of the proposition of whether we might be able to see
Australasia Australia and New Zealand and AFTA do something in
concert and, I think, were that to happen we would goa'very long way
to drawing the best of the complementarities that might be available
from, if you like, both economies.
J: So trade integration is the first step before any political Joining in
ASEAN?
PM: Well, I think Prime Minister Goh mentioned this the other day for
instance. I think all of us have an open mind about the structures of
the region. But the thing that we are all doing Is we are all in it.
We are Integrating ourselves further, all of us, in the trade and traffic of
the area and smoothing those things out, I think, probably matters
more than the political/ economic structures. So that is getting the
open access and the trade opportunities and the flux of business
moving Is the thing that matters. Now whether that happens
bilaterally, or multilaterally, I think, doesn't much matter. It may
happen somewhat quicker and better if it happens multilaterally and
that is why we are looking at AFTA and Australasia for instance.
The next step about some political involvement in ASEAN is really,
I think, for ASEAN to think about more than for us. 
J: So you agree with Dr Mahathir that now Is not the right time for
Australia to become part of ASEAN?
PM: Well we haven't been Invited to become part of ASEAN. Musing about
It is something that has been done from time to time and
Prime Minister Goh was doing that this week.
J: Prime Minister, you said In your speech last night that Australia was
not attempting to become " Asian", yet Dr Mahathir has specifically said
that we can't expect to be part of Asia until our population mix changes
in that direction. How do you reconcile those two views?
PM: Well, I think, quite easily. I think he Is saying is Australia an Asian
country? What I Baid last night was no, It Isn't. And he is really
saying It would only be an Asian country when it was actually Asian, or
predominantly Asian. I wouldn't have thought there Is any need to
reconcile those views. I think we are coming to the same question
from a different angle. Australia is not an Asian country, but it Is an
integral part of the Asia-Pacific economy where we supply half of
East Asia's raw requirements for steel, for energy, for coal, a large part
of its requirements for food, as well as the higher technology areas we
are . n6w seeing our markets grow in and, I think, that Is the point.
So whether you call it us being part of Asia, or the East Asia
hemisphere, or the Asia-Pacific, I think what matters Is that we are an
integral part of that economy and it happens to be the fastest growing
economic region of the world. 1 think that Is what we are speaking of.
I wouldn't want to see Australia described as an Asian country It Isn't.
It Is Australia. It is not European, it Is not North American It Is
Australia.
J: Mr Keating, despite what you have just said, there Is no doubt there is
still tension In the relationship between Australia and Malaysia
Dr Mahathir referred to it and it bubbles up from time to time.
Where do you think that tension comes from?
PM: Well I only had just a briefing as I walked In about the remarks he had
made to you as a group outside of his office and I don't think there is
anything he said that sustains your point.
J But he said that in his speech last night, talking about the hiccups and
how they do come up, we have got to deal with them.
PM: Well hiccups come in all relationships. I mean of course they do.
But they come and go. It Is the strength that underlies it that matters.
J: Mr Keating, was there any discussion on the Dr Mahathir's Idea for the
East Asia Economic Caucus and the possibility of a formal relationship
between Australia and the EAEC? 
PM: No, we didn't discuss the East Asia Economic Caucus proposal.
I think, though, what we do welcome is regionai cooperation. That Is
the point I just made to you a moment ago and I am going to have
more to say about that In Singapore tomorrow. I think for us APEC
provides perhaps a core piece of political architecture in the
Asia-Pacific because It Includes the largest country, China, the largest
economy In the region, Japan, and the largest economy In the world,
the United States, as well as the countries of South East Asia and
those other continental countries like Australia.
J: So you have changed your view that the EAEC is Irrelevant?
PM: Well I don't think there is any value In adding to what I thought was a
very succinct answer, Glenn.
J: Prime Minister, were there any discussions about closer defence ties
and was the issue of the Indonesian defence treaty raised by
Dr Mahathir?
PM: No, no, In fact I spoke to the Prime Minister about It last night and said
that I regarded It very much as a declaration of trust between Australia
and-l1idonesia. That Is, that Issues In the past -back in the 60s and
other things which have now passed through we are saying that In
the language of the treaty that we have common strategic Interests,
Australia doesn't have territorial designs on Indonesia, Indonesia
doesn't have territorial designs on Australia. There, Is nothing In the
area but good things to be done together and to. cooperate. And that
cooperation will also extend, of course, to defence cooperation, which
we are already doing. So, In a sense, the treaty, Is a further
development of that defence cooperation which, I think, the Prime
Minister well and truly understands and, of course, that makes the
area much more solid again, compiementing the Five Power Defence
Arrangements,
J: On defence, did you make a plug for Transfield and the patrol boat?
PM: I don't go around making plugs that is for other people to do. But we
talked about the value of developing, you know, core regional strategic
Infrastructure and, obviously, a naval ship building capacity In this part
of the world Is a strong asset. It Is a very strong asset for Australia.
We are, obviously, prepared to share that technology and that asset
with Malaysia. But that Is essentially a decision for their defence force
and their Government to make.
J Mr Keating, Is trying to Integrate with Asia the plan of your Government
alone or the future of Australia? 
PM: Oh, I think it is very much an imperative for Australia. That is, we live
in this part of the world, we trade in this part of the world, more and
more of our people to people contacts are in this part of the world, half
of our migration intake is from Asia, the cosmopolitan, multicultural
character of Australia means, I think, that we will look at this part of the
world. This has already become the central focus, I think, of
Australians.
J: Mr Keating, you have expressed your Interest to attend the
Asia-EU meeting in Bangkok. Did you discuss this with Dr Mahathir?
PM: No, I haven't no. There are many issues in the sort of International
constellation out there that is one. It is not one that the Australian
Government has put great store on.
J: Is Australia keen to attend the next ASEAN-EU Summit?
PM: Well it depends. We will see how the first one goes.
J: Did you receive an undertaking that Malaysia would not oppose your
presence at the next summit?
PM: We didn't discuss It at all. Not at all. I have never raised the EU-Asia
meetings with Prime Minister Mahathir, or any other leaders of
ASEAN.
J: Did Dr Mahathir accept your Invitation to come to Australia?.
PM: No, but he knows it is there and he knows it is a genuine one.
J: Mr Keating, on a personal level, how were relations? I mean how did
you get on with Dr Mahathir?
PM: Oh, good. But I always do. I had a good meeting with him in
New Zealand and we ended up together a couple of times in Osaka
and, of course, here we had a very, very nice evening last night with
Dr Mahathir and his wife.
J: Dr Mahathir mentioned last night, in his speech, trade agreements.
Is there anything new in the pipeline in the way of formal Government
to Government trade agreements?
PM: No, but we are thinking about what is going to be best for us. We are
not dealing with the same sort of economies and countries we were
when we were speaking about this on the last occasion and I hope
today's discussion will be good for both of us who are thinking about
what that should be. Anyway I found it very encouraging.
ends 



i I
PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AUSTRALIA-MALAYSIA BUSINESS FORUM
TUESDAY 16 JANUARY 1996, KUALA LUMPUR
Thank you for your kind Introduction and thank you for Inviting me to address this forum.
It Is a great pleasure to be here. That Is partly because It Is always a pleasure to be In a
position to tell a story of success, and speak with confidence about the future. It is also a
pleasure because I know I am among people who, by their actions, are writing the story
and shaping the future.
I want to begin by acknowledging your effort and your faith In the future of our two
countries. Your presence here Is a reminder of the strength of the commercial relationship between
Australia and Malaysia. It should also remind us of the wider picture.
Australia and Malaysia are both part of the fastest growing region In the world. That is our
great good fortune.
We are also living in probably the most competitive business environment In the world.
That Is our great challenge.
Yet It is precisely that openness to competition which is so much a key to the dynamic
growth we are seeing in the region.
Malaysia, of course, has risen to this competitive challenge with extraordinary verve and
success. The Malaysian Government has committed Itself to deregulation and exportorientation
as the keys to long-term growth, and has shifted the base of the economy from
resources to manufacturing. The results of these reforms have been remarkable.
The economy has grown at better than 8 per cent per annum over the past seven years.
Manufactured Items now represent over 60 per cent of exports. Exports of goods and
services are now equivalent to around 90 per cent of GDP. And Malaysia Is now one of
the world's top twenty trading nations. 
Australia has faced a similar challenge and has undertaken a process of economic
transformation along broadly similar lines.
The Inefficient, inward-looking, highly protected economy which lingered Into the last
decade Is now a closed chapter In our history. We used to rely on our commodities to
support an uninspired industrial structure sheltered behind a wall of protective barriers. We
tried to shut ourselves In and the world out.
But we changed. Radically and fundamentally. Over the last decade we have laid the
foundations of a diverse, dynamic and Internationally competitive economy.
We put in place a program of unilateral tariff reductions which will bring Australian tariffs on
manufacturing down to an average of about 3 per cent by the year 2000.
We let the market set the most important price In the economy the exchange rate.
And we deregulated our financial market.
We opened the economy to the world.
The results speak for themselves.
Our economy is mruch more sophisticated and diverse. Our reliance on exports from our
traditional mining and pastoral industries has been balanced by dramatic growth In
manufacturing exports and services: manufacturing and services share of total exports
has risen from less than a third of the total to almost a half.
Manufacturing exports have grown at a trend rate of 15 per cent per annumn at almost
two-thirds of these are Elaborately Transformed Manufactures. Exports of ETMs have
grown by over 17 per cent per annum over the past decade and noi ' account for almost
one quarter of our total merchandise exports. In 1983, only 3 out of the top 50 Australian
export commodities were ETIVe: in 1994 17 were.
If current growth continues services and manufactures will, by the year 2000, constitute
almost half our total exports to Asia.
We exposed Australia to the global competition and Australia has responded. We are
per cent more competitive than we were a decade ago and this is reflected In a dose in our
trade to GDP ratio from 14 to over 21 per cent. Our exports have risen by one third In the
last five years.
Labour market and microeconomic reform is building a more competitive domestic
environment and bringing Australian Industries up to world best practice. 
The Australian economy Is now on a path of robust and sustainable growth. The economy
grew by a strong 4.8 per cent In 1994-95, and is expected to grow at 3 and a quarter per
cent in 1995-98.
This process of Intern ational islng our economy Is very much Integrated with our foreign
policy focus on engaging the Asia-Pacific as the region where our future lies.
Forty per cent of our Imports now come from Asia and we direct 80 per cent of our exports
there. Our merchandise exports to East Asia grew by more than seven per cent last year
and are now worth $ 41 billion. More than one million Australian jobs have been created by
these exports.
By the end of this year all of our top ten export markets should be in the Asia-Pacific
region.
And, if Asia is Increasingly Important to Australia, Australia is increasingly Important to
Asia. We provide almost half of East Asia's coal, iron ore and beef, and well over half Its
wool and aluminum ore. And our exports of manufactured goods, Including ETMs, and
services are growing as a proportion of our exports to Asia. We are also a growing market
for Asia: our imports from Asia nearly tripled In the decade to 1994.
Our support for APEC flows naturally from this process of rapid Integration of the
Australian economy with the Asia-Pacific region.
But APEC Isn't just a perfect fit for Australia. All APEC members will benefit from APEC's
liberalisation and facilitation agenda. Australian modelling shows that the Income of APEC
members will, once all the effects have flowed through, Increase by 3.8 per cent or around
SUSi trillion more than the current size of the Australian and Korean economies
combined. As I am sure you are all aware, Australia has been avid In the pursuit of APEC and
delighted by its. extraordinarily rapid development.
And APEC Is delivering real benefits for business around the region.
Differing standards discourage trade and can add up to 10 per cent to exporters' costs
when they enter a market for the first time. APEC members have agreed on greater
harrmonisation of members' standards with international standards and mutual recognition
of testing and certification. Even a modest liberalisation of trade restricting standards In
the region is estimated to Increase regional trade by 20 per cent.
At Osaka we also agreed on an ambitious program, to be Implemented by 2000, to
harmonise and simplify customs procedures on an APEC-wide basis. And within the next
years the requirement for paper-work for key trade and transport documentation is to be
eliminated entirely. 
These are just some of the steps APEC Is taking to address the challenges Australia,
Malaysia and other members of the region need to meet to ensure growth continues In the
Asia Pacific.
In many ways the trade and Investment relationship between Australia and Malaysia Is a
model of the sort of spectacular economic integration we are witnessing across the reglon.
The commercial ties between Australia and Malaysia are both diverse and substantial.
Merchandise trade was $ 3.5 billion In 1994-95. Services trade Is over $ 1 billion. And we
each have several billion dollars invested In the other's country.
These links are growing.
Merchandise trade jumped by 22 per cent In the last year, and the rate of Increase has
been around that figure for the past three years.
Services trade is growing at 17 per cent.
Malaysian investment in Australia Is growing strongly and showing welcome signs of
diversification. The strength of our economic relationship Is, of course, underpinned by the performance of
the Australian sn4 Malaysian economies.
Apart from Its size and diversity, our commercial relationship is marked by the similar
weight It has for both countries.
Malaysia Is Australia's eleventh largest trading partner as Australia Is Malaysia's eleventh.
This year Maiaysia should overtake Britain to rank as one of our ten. la'rgest export
markets. And. Australia Is Malaysia's twelfth largest export market.
Our investment Is also very much a two-way flow.
The growth of our economic relationship reflects the profound changes which have taken
place in both countries over the past decade.
The fact that ETMs now make up over a quarter of our exports to Malaysia up from just
13 per cent ten years ago reflects Australia's increasing competitiveness In
manufacturing. These days we are exporting components for the Proton car, rail carriages
for new urban transport systems, electricity transformers, harbour cranes, computer
software for Bank Negara and medical equipment such as the bionic ear and these are
only a few examples. 
At the same time the pattern of Malaysia's exports to Australia reflects Malaysia's rapid
ascent of the technology ladder for example, these days Malaysia sells computers to
Australia, $ 80 million worth last year and this from a minimal base Just five years ago.
From this base of diversity, growth, mutuality and adaptability, the commercial relationship
will go from strength to strength.
But in this competitive international environment, we must work hard on our relationship to
Identify new opportunities for cooperation and capitalise on emerging complementarities
between our economies. I am sure you will know better than me which areas are the most
promising. Nevertheless let me make a few broad suggestions.
We expect tourism to become an increasingly important part of our services trade. About
100,000 short-term Malaysian visitors came to Australia last year. By the year 2000, we
expect the figure to reach 250,000. About 100,000 Australians visit Malaysia as tourists
each year and there is every reason to believe that the number might increase just as
dramatically. There are more than economic benefits in this exchange: tourism maintains our invaluable
tradition of close people-to-people contacts, it keeps our mutual understanding
contemporary and fresh, it spreads awareness and cultural understanding at the same
time as it fertilises the ground for other commerce.
The recent agreerent to expand air services between Australia and Malaysia will help
expand the tourism trade, and our commercial relationship overall. Capacity for each side
will increase by 90 per cent by April 1998. This will allow MAS more direct flights to
Brisbane, Adelaide, Cairns, Darwin and Perth, and a dedicated freight service. We are
pleased that MAS has immediately announced increased flights to Perth and Brisbane.
Malaysia's hosting of the 1998 Commonwealth Games and Australia's hosting of the 2000
Olympics will provide a particular focus for the bilateral tourist relatioship. And both
countries can expect to benefit from the increased flow of visitors to the region. For
example, the Commonwealth Games offers Malaysia an opportunity to promote itself as a
stop-over for visitors to the 2000 Olympics.
Each country needs to be alert to the media opportunities for promoting our countries that
both events present. And we should be thinking now about attracting future uses of the
world class sports facilities we are developing in Malaysia and Australia.
Education a mainstay of the services trade between our countries, and the principal
source of the people-to-people links between us also has great promise. Australia has
provided education to over 120,000 Malaysians: now in an era when the development of
our human resources is more critical than it has ever been before, we are developing with
Malaysia more flexible and sophisticated arrangements. 
In future Malaysian students will Increasingly be able to share their tertiary degrees
between the two countries. We are also enthusiastic about the opportunities presented by
Malaysia's decision to allow foreign campuses to open here. And we are confident that we
can provide the high-quality, tailored tertiary courses which Malaysia wants under this
scheme. Skills training is another area where we can see new synergies in education cooperation.
Australia has recognised the importance of skills-based training, and has made historic
improvements to its training system particularly through the establishment of a National
Training Authority. As Malaysia's demand for a highly skilled labour force grows In tandem
with the sophistication of the economy, Australia can share its experience in providing
quality and cost-effective assistance in human resource development.
As Malaysia expands its private hospital facilities and upgrades the quality of health care,
Australia can offer the benefits of experience in health service planning, design and
construction of hospitals, hospital management, clinical services and pharmaceuticals.
I know the process has begun, with Malaysia making use of Australian services to plan,
build and run medical facilities; and planners like Health Solutions, architects like Thomson
Adsett and Woods Bagot, and IT companies like Working Systems all finding opportunities
to deploy their expertise.
Australia has an IT and telecommunications industry worth $ 40 billion and It is growing
rapidly. On a percapita basis only the United States has more computers and processing
power. We are decidedly competitive in IT&amp; T and this has been recognised, I am pleased
to say, by Malaysian companies like MMC and Mesiniaga [ MESSING-NIAGA].
Commercial cooperation in these high-technology industries has the added advantage of
providing a skills and technology transfer for Malaysia. For example, an Australian
company, Techcom, has supplied 30 staff to one of Malaysia's new telecommunication
carriers to help them develop marketing and customer service functipns.
Proof of the complementarity between advanced Australian technology and the
development of Malaysia's infrastructural base can also be found In the STAR light rail
transit system. This high-profile project is designed to meet the challenge of commuter
management in the booming environment of modern Kuala Lumpur.
An Australian company, Evans Deakin Industries Limited, has won the contract for the
design and manufacture of the 90 carriages which will run on STAR System 1; and another
company with a substantial Australian connection, John Holland Asia, is building the tracks
for the project.
As Malaysia continues to privatise and build up its infrastructure Including the new
international airport and the facilities for the 1998 Commonwealth Games great
opportunities will present themselves to Australian firms. 
And I am sure Australian firms will grasp them. There is a very long list of recent success
stories. There is a very long list of recent success stories, including major investments by BHP,
CSR, and Boral in. the building materials sector, a major joint venture by Wilson
Transformers for the manufacture of transformers in the State of Negri Sembilan,
investment by Davids Holdings in substantial warehousing facilities in Shah Alam,
contracts won by Transfield in Sarawak for electricity transmission lines and for a harbour
project, commitments by Village Roadshow to the development of cinema complexes, a
major contract won by the Australian operation of the ABB Engineering and Construction
group, for the rail electrification project, a major water management project won by John
Holland in East Malaysia and a significant investment by Westfield in the retail shopping
complex in the Kuala Lumpur City Centre project, the twin towers of which loom over us
today. Just as satisfying is the evidence that the institutional base of the commercial relationship
is keeping pace with the development of the business links. The Malaysia-Australia
Business Council and the Australia-Malaysia Business Council are both playing important
creative and supporting roles and I want to formally acknowledge their contribution.
Today I am pleased to be able to announce that the Australian and Malaysian
governments have decided to take another step to ensure that these opportunities do not
pass us by. Our joint trade commission will be made a ministerial level trade commission,
which will mean that ministers are directly engaged with the private sectors of both
countries in identifying and pursuing opportunities for further cooperation. It is planned
that the first meeting of this group will take place when Minister Rafidah leads an
Investment mission to Australia in May this year.
When profound change is occurring when we talk about the achievement of APEC and
the potential of it, or the relationship between Australia and Malaysia and the future of it
unless you are actually Involved, consciousness tends to lag behind reality.
You are here in pursuit of the commercial oppoitunities. Yet there is a sense in which you
are doing more than that. You are pushing into a new age call It the Asian century, or the
Pacific century, or simply the 21st century whatever you call it, It is without precedent or
parallel.
And so unmistakeable are the signs of success, scepticism barely has a chance. There is
no time for cynicism or indifference to set In. The tide has turned quickly and irreversibly,
the world is understanding the magnitude and meaning of what is happening in countries
like Malaysia. Very rapidly it is leaving the realm of the remote and the abstract: it is not
mere words, but fact manifest fact,
And for making it fact you and people like you must take a lot of the credit. 
Australians and Malaysians alike, I thank you for coming today, and I wish you every
success. And let me also thank those in the Asian Strategy and Leadership Institute and the
Malaysia-Australia Business Council for organising this business forum. It Is yet again an
example of the initiative displayed by the business communities involved in the relationship
between Australia and Malaysia. 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
QUESTION A ND ANSWER SESSION FOLLOWING THE SINGAPORE
LECTURE " AUSTRALIA, ASIA AND THE NEW REGIONALISM",
SINGAPORE, 17 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Q: Mr Keating, my question is in two parts. First, Australia has spent a
great deal of time and effort on multilateral security initiatives.
What has prompted the sudden desire to engage in bilateral security
arrangements with Indonesia? On that note, considering Indonesia's
traditional reluctance to sign security treaties, what in your opinion has
motivated Indonesia to accede to the Austral ia-Indonesia Agreement
on Maintaining Security?
PM: I don't think it is accurate to describe Australia's interests in security
arrangements as simply multilateral.* In fact, its c~ rntral security
arrangement has been bilateral and that is, of course, the
ANZUS Treaty between Australia and the United States. We have had
other mulilateral treaties and have them. The Five Power Defence
Arrangements, of course, in this context springs immediately to mind.
But the Five Power Defence Arrangements themselves reflect, in part,
the history of the confrontation period and now the years have gone
by, ASEAN has come, regional cooperation in South East Asia is now
the norm, and yet Australia was a party to and remains a party to and
has affirmed this very day, its commitment to the Five Power Defence
Arrangements. Yet the period of confrontation brought many
suspicions to Australia about Indonesian intentions as they brought
those same suspicions, very obviously, to Singapore and Malaysia.
As a consequence, the relationship which Australia had with Indonesia
from its founding in 1946, where we were the first country to recognise
its independence, who took a leading role in the United Nations in ' its
independence, and who claimed proudly some very direct and
influential association in the birth of its independence, this confidence
and friendship was muted over the years as a result of events in the 
1 960s and because of Timor and other things in more modem times.
Yet the event of greatest positive strategic significance to Australia in
the post-war years was the election of President Soeharto's new order
government. So it seemed to me and to my government that we should make clear
that we regard the government of Indonesia and Indonesia as an
influence of positive strategic significance to Australia and that we do
not hold Indonesia in suspicion, that we accept its statements that it
has no territorial ambitions in conflict with Australia and I am sure
President Soeharto accepts my declaration that we have no territorial
ambitions towards Indonesia.
Therefore, we are neighbours locked together by geography and,
in some respects, by a very happy history surrounding the birth of their
country. And we thought the time was right to make that declaration to
declare our friendship, to banish forever any lingering suspicions and
I believe the best way of doing that was to say that we share a
common regional perspective and that we share a common
perspective on matters of security and that we should engage one
another on that subject. These are all the elements of the treaty.
The second part of your question was, why did Indonesia agree to the
treaty when it has a history of non-alignment? I think it is for this
reason that Indonesia does regard Australia in a friendly way, that
making such an arrangement, or declaring such an arrangement,
between countries in friendship, doesn't offend any non-aligned
principle, and there was also the whole issue of the * rength of our
position Australia is an island continent, as I remarked vin my address.
We are in the fortunate position of sharing a border with no one.
We are the only nation on earth with a continent to ourselves and our
nearest neighbour is a nation of 200 million and I believe the largest
archipelago in the world.
There are very large strategic issues to be considered always in that
kind of geographic environment. So I think on the basis of friendship
of a common view, of the things we are doing bilaterally and
multilaterally, and also in juxtaposition to the Five Power Defence
Arrangements it gave the region more solidity and more security and
more confidence for Australia to make this arrangement with Indonesia
and I believe Indonesia thought that too.
Q: I would like to ask Mr Keating two very simple questions. One, you
make constant reference to the region. As Australia's Prime Minister,
what is the geographical boundary of this region you are referring to.
Two, you are a very strong advocate and, of course, initiator of APEC.
Yet, in your lecture on regionalism, you are singularly silent on the
EAEC Dr Mahathir's proposal as well as on the Indian Ocean
Association. In the case of the EAEC, I understand many Australians 
are adversary. But in the case of the Indian Ocean Association,
I understand that many Australians are strong advocates. Could
I have your views please, thank you?
PM: Well, I think, there will be all sorts of definitions of the region.
I mentioned in my speech my Foreign Ministers definition, which is the
East Asia hemisphere. That is that slice of the orange which takes you
down through East Asia and through Australasia. But while that may
describe the' East Asia hemisphere, or perhaps you could call it, too,
the Pacific Rim depending on how large a slice you take. One thing
we are all clear about, I think, and that is that it is good for us to have
the largest economy and the largest liberal democracy in the world
economically and strategically engaged in East Asia and that is the
United States. And the United States strategic protection of Japan and
Korea, which is embodied in their treaties, remains more convincing to
everyone in the region if it is underpinned by a higher level of United
States economic engagement.
This is, perhaps, the distinguishing feature between the EAEC
proposal and APEC. And it is also the fact that the United States
represents the largest market for the greater number of the developing
countries of East Asia. So it is the largest market and it is the largest
strategic power and the largest strategic influence.
So APEC, as distinct from East Asia, includes of course the United
States which has a boundary on the Pacific Ocean. So it is a
trans-Pacific body and, I think, that is the distinguishing feature
between the two.
As for the Indian Ocean, I think some good may come from some
clarity about common interests in -Indian Ocean trade patterns and
trading trends, or even trading facilities. But I don't see the
Indian Ocean as being part of APEC or the APEC region, which is
distinguished by the coincidence of its trade sinews and its strategic
alliances. The Indian Ocean is altogether different.
Q: Mr Prime Minister, this security treaty that Australia has signed with
Indonesia is it a bilateral confidence building expression, or is it a
concrete defence arrangement whereby if Indonesia feels threatened
in the matter of the Spratley Islands Australia will have to respond to
this challenge?
PM: You should be writing for an Australian newspaper. No, it is not a
security pact. It is a treaty about maintaining security and adverse
challenges to what we perceive to be our mutual security. And those
challenges may be military, but more likely not and therefore we would
discuss with one another how we would respond to those challenges.
They could be environmental, they could be in all manner of fields.
But the fact of the matter is that it is above everything else a 
declaration of the trust between us, in a statement that we do see
ourselves having a common strategic outlook and common strategic
interests, and that we are prepared to consult and discuss them
whenever they are challenged. That is what it is.
Q: Mr Keating, could you please give a definitive definition of APEC's
commitment to open regionalism? Does this mean that APEC would
extend its free trade obligations to others on a reciprocal basis, on a
unilateral MFN basis, does it mean the simultaneous lowering of its
barriers to its non-members as it lowers its barriers to its members?
PM: Well you might recall I said in my address that one of the rules should
be that we don't close the Asia-Pacific area off, that we don't get
complacent about it, that we are not smug about it were we to keep it
growing, and that we should engage with the rest of the world and
I extol the virtues of the WTO and the multilateral trading
arrangements that came from the Uruguay Round. That is the position
I hold fairly firmly.
The other thing is that Australia did some substantial economic
modelling on APEC to examine who received the greater benefits and
the berfefits total, we believe, up to the region of US$ 1 trillion of
additional wealth from the APEC reforms. That is the Australian and
Korean economies together in additional value and, obviously, some
countries will secure more of that trillion of benefit than others.
But one thing that the study did reveal is that there is a very minimal
free rider effect from countries outside the Asia-Pacific.
In other words, the notion that the European Union, for instance, would
in some way be a free rider on the reforms in APEC were not really
borne out by the study, which only reinforces in my mind the view that
the issue of whether APEC is a preferential or MFN area is really not
much of an issue at all. And, even if we were to make it a preferential
area, and under the GATT rules it was a free trade area, each
individual country could independently decide whether it wanted to
extend the preference anyway.
I think more likely we will all decide that we do want it to be an open
system. But, of course, this is a matter of debate in the United States
and I think if the United States is convinced that there is no free rider
effect, but a much more harmonious world effect, they would probably
share the view that I would take and I suspect your Prime Minister
takes about where we see APEC and free arrangements in the
Pacific going.
Q: It is quite clear that economically and geopolitically Australia is part of
Asia. Yet, historically and culturally it has been affiliated with the
Anglo-Saxon world. To what extent do you see this as a hindrance or
a handicap on your efforts at integrating within Asia? 
PM: I don't see it as a hindrance or a handicap. The point I made in the
speech is Australia is unique. I mean Australia is unique in many
ways. For a start I mean as a nation, let me repeat the point, we share
a border with nobody. The continent is old it is geologically old.
Australia is a very old place. Evidenced, in part, by the fact that the
indigenous civilisation had been there for 40,000 years.
The important thing for Australians of European origin, or Asian origin,
is that they understand that it is imperative that to become part of the
region, let's call it that rather than Asia the region it has to come to
terms, first, with its own indigenes, so that we are at peace with
ourselves, that we move together, forward, as a nation, and that the
tolerance and diversity I mentioned in the text is the defining quality
that marks out the Australian nation as a unique nation.
If it is unique, therefore, why would it want to be Asian. I mean it would
have a crisis of confidence if it wanted to be anything other than what it
is. And whatever else Australia has, it has no crisis of confidence.
What we want to be is part of the region. We don't want to be Asian,
though'of course over half of our intake in migration now comes from
Asia and the culture of Asia is having a very large impact within
Australia and upon Australia. But the fact that 75 per cent of our
exports go to the Asia-Pacific area, already I think underlines that we
are integrated with the region and that is what we want to be.
As I said, it would be foolish for us to describe ourselves as Asians
because we are not./
Whether we are part of Asia, or the Asia-Pacific, is a debating point.
Whether we are part of the East Asian hemisphere, or that slice of the
orange, is another debating point. But we are not European, as I said,
we are not African we are Australians and I believe we can play not
just an active role in this region, but a very constructive and supportive
role which will enhance the quality of life for people in the region
Asian people in the region as well as people who have come from
Europe.
Q: Mr Prime Minister, sir, you have made it very clear that Australia is
not Asian, but you have also told us that you are in the " others"
category and it's a bit difficult to be one country in a single category.
I would like to invite your comments on a possible grouping, which is
not Asian, but Oceania, which could include New Zealand and the
other islands around Australia and New Zealand and the region. I
would like to invite your comments, on this as a possible grouping,
and with the Chairman's indulgence, a related question what are
your comments on an Asia Oceania community? 
PM: Well, I'm not sure I am the one to decipher or divine the ways of the
United Nations, in that mirror-maze and mish-mash of interests, who
am I to say what grouping we should belong to. But let me make this
point it doesn't overly exercise our mind. We are engaged with the
region, and we're playing that role, I think, conscientiously, because
we are here, we live here and we want to be with our neighbours.
Our principal focus is with our neighbours, and it seems incongruous
to us, that we are with Europeans and others, but I can assure you
that we are not wandering around saying where are we? Because, it
is no burden to inherit a continent, and when they were giving them
out, not too many people got one. And when you got one, you don't
wonder about it, you just be grateful for it.
Q: My question is about human rights how do you see, Mr Keating, the
role of regional organisations, and particularly APEC which is the one
regional organisation Australia is part of, in promoting dialogue about
human rights? What we mean by human rights, I guess, is another
question.
PM: Well, I think it is another question for many people. I made the point
in the* speech that Australia is one of the oldest democracies in the
world~ You know, we had universal suffrage, secret ballots, before
the United Kingdom for instance. Egalitarianism and equity have
mattered in our country, and the rights of individuals have mattered.
And I think the reason for Australian tolerance of a very multicultural
population, or the degree of tolerance within that population, comes
from the deep sense of democracy which Australia has. That sense
of democracy gives everybody a lot of intellectua) -space, and
therefore, human rights, and the liberties, and all the issues of the
social contract have always been in our mind, and they always will
be. But that's not to say that we can impose our values on others, but
we know and we invariably, whenever we think human rights have
been violated, we say so. And when they are perpetually or
consistently violated, we keep on saying so. But I think we know the
dialogue of the answer, and that economic growth and prosperity
generally will liberate many societies or individuals oppressed in
this way. And it is impossible to grow economies and societies
without growing their politics as well it's not possible to liberate
them, and yet constrain liberty, freedom and the mind. So, in the
quest for economic growth and prosperity, these things have been
great liberalising forces in breaking down ideology and lifting
opportunities, and with it one hopes a premium on human rights
and good values. These are the things we have been supporting, as
well as forthrightly putting a view whenever we think those human
rights are violated.
But I am often asked is the Australian sense of democracy and liberty
a handicap in dealing with Asia, and I never believe that it is,
because I think Australia can contribute a lot to the region. It is a 
very democratic state, and people's liberties are very obviously clear,
and taking that sort of inheritance, and tradition, to the region, I think
must be a good thing.
Q: Recently, the Prime Minister's of Thailand and Vietnam met in Hanoi
and they said that a way to keep peace in the region is to have the
region of South-East Asia is to have a defence alliance in the
region. May we have your views regarding what are Australia's views
towards such a proposal? And whether Australia will participate if
such a proposal is endorsed by the whole region?
PM: Well, I think I didn't know of this, but you have informed me this has
happened. But let me say that I think that a commitment to security
and respect for the affairs of others is a good thing a web of
declarations saying so is, I think, a good thing. And if you look at just
the discussion we have had in these last few minutes, about this
declaration between Australia and Indonesia. The affirmation today
between our two Governments here, about our arrangements. The
discussions I have just-had with Prime Minister Mahathir around
some of the same subjects, with his country a member of the Five
Power Defence Arrangements. I mean, that constitutes something of
a welS. And whether the web moves through Thailand and Indo-
China, I guess is a matter for those countries. The main thing is, I
think, that none of this should be discerned as in any way a policy
either seeking to contain China, or needing to. Because as I made
clear in my remarks, I don't believe China is an expansionist power
it is a country focussed on its internal development, and we should be
doing everything to fully engage it, and to co operativey, bring it into
the world. That's the way to respond to China.
But again, China, or Vietnam, or Thailand, or Indonesia, or Australia,
or Singapore are entitled to make prudent arrangements, or to have
prudent structures, that have an eye to their security. And I think the
security of one's people is the first duty of any government. So, I
don't have any problem with this at all, and this general commitment
to a stable situation and respect for others is the kind of healthiness I
think we have always wanted to see.
Q: Mr Prime Minister, in your talk this afternoon you touched briefly on
China, but one issue that you have missed out is the China Taiwan
relationship. Now, I have two questions, if you don't mind Mr
Chairman?
C: Well, keep them short.
Q: Okay. First question is Mr Prime Minister what is your position on
this issue, and second question is, in the likelihood of a flare-up
across the Taiwan Straits, and as Australia becomes an increasingly 
significant player in the Asia-Pacific region, what do you think the role
of Australia would be?
PM: Well, Taiwan is a competent economy a highly developed,
competent economy, as is Hong Kong. One of the points I made
earlier about APEC is, I mentioned this point about flexibility within
regional structures, in the context of inflexibility in the bi-polarity of
global arrangements. Remember I made the point about Afghanistan
and Angola? how they were dressed up as being regional issues, they
were really global ones. They were sub-sumed into the global
discussion the bi-polarity that existed in the Cold War. What we are
seeing in regional arrangements here, say, with ASEAN, with APEC
and particularly you can see it in APEC is that you have got China
sitting there with Hong Kong and Taiwan represented there. So there
is, indeed the point I was making is there is flexibility. You can get
flexibility into regional arrangements you mightn't be able to get into
global arrangements. Now, Taiwan operates as a competent,
effective economy, but we accept China's view about Taiwan's status.
We also accept the fact that China is going to have a number.. there
are going to be a number of Chinese economies Hong Kong will
remain one, Taiwan will remain one, and there will be parts of China
growing at different rates than other parts, and we may see
discernible parts of China be more prosperous than others I think
we are already seeing that. In other words, the development of subregional
economies in China. Now, I don't have any problem with
that, but I do have a problem with Taiwan having, say, government
status head of government, leadership level within APEC. So, our
position on this is pretty clear it has always been clear,
Q: Prime Minister Keating, despite any number of treaties that countries
may have, either unilateral, bilateral or multilateral, it's only when
push comes to shove effectively, when there is war that the
commitment to these treaties is tested out. But particularly at that
time, it seems to be the world security council that has a bigger say in
things than anyone else. What in your view Mr Keating, rather, what
is your view, of the present constitution of the present world security
council, and how if at all could it be changed to better serve the
interests of everyone concerned?
PM: Well, reform in the United Nations is a very big subject and there are
people more specialist and more have more specialist views about it
than I. Indeed, my Foreign Minister has written a book on it. So, I am
not game to say too much about it other than repeat what I said in my
remarks. When the second largest economy and the third largest
economy in the world are not part of the governing structure of security
we have an immature structure. It is 50 years now since the war in the
Pacific and the war in Europe and the time has come, I think, for Japan
and Germany to take their proper place in these forums. I think that
would do much to improve the security council. As to its broader 
charter I don't know. At this point, I think, you could say that for
whatever reason the United Nations has not garnered, not drawn to it,
not drawn down the national authorities one might have expected it to
have been able to draw down when the Berlin Wall came down in the
post Cold War period. This hasn't happened.
That is why I believe that a far superior way of dealing with problems is
to eliminate them at their source. One of the ways we are doing that
here is we are co-operating together. I talked about the sense of
fellow feeling and good will at APEC meetings when the Leaders sit
down. The chemistry of the meetings is quite interesting. There are
18 leaders without officials and they all now know one another well.
They have bilateral meetings, they have occasional casual meetings,
they have a good feeling together and they know they are co-operating
in a bigger undertaking in opening up their economies and lifting
prosperity. This is a much better way of dealing with problems than
relying on some structure within the United Nations, no matter how
modem or how adaptive it might be.
Q: Mr Prime Minister, I am curious as to what you consider to be a priority
in as far as the progressive equation of Australia goes risk
management or opportunity seizing and I am curious as to how you
feel your recent relations in the region may have helped one cause
or the other?
PM: I think that the primary one is opportunity seizing as you put it. The
way to keep east Asia growing is to keep it properly resourced. It
won't keep properly resourced unless the avenues, of resource
availability are open and the impediments are taken away. Be it tariffs
or non-tariff barriers or other traditional policies. These are the things,
I think, the efficient commitment of resources of the region to our
respective economies is the way to best guarantee that the east Asia
growth phase continues. That is what, essentially, APEC, is about. It
is essentially what a lot of Australian foreign policy is about, it is a lot
of what our bilateral relations are about. How we create better trade
and investment opportunities, how we create a climate of confidence
and in doing that how the region then prospers. In a prospering region
these questions about risk management become much less important.
Compare your own country or Malaysia with 30 years ago. Look at the
attendant risks then and now and what has been the intervening
influence. It has been economic growth. But, you.. won't get economic
growth, many countries don't have resources or adequate resources or
they don't have skills or they don't have other things. What I am trying
to do, what I think your Prime Minister is trying to do, I think what all of
us in the region are trying to do is open the flows, to let the flows
happen naturally and to keep the growth phase continuing. And in that
way, we all seize the opportunities and the emphasis on risks then
become very greatly diminished. 
Q: Mr Keating, you mentioned earlier your opinion as to who should be
the new members of the Security Council of the United Nations. Now,
this debate on the increased membership of the United Nations has
been going on for years and years. The problem is the cost, there are
far too many members in the United Nations and each continent is
advancing their own members. Now, don't you think it would be better
to have an agreed criteria, of course, the important word is agreed and
that would be a problem of course, an agreed criteria on which
members could be appointed.
PM: The United Nations exists on the principle of universality, I think. And
it was the great attempt in the post war years to develop a new order of
collective security and that had to be representative of the growth of
nations. As people threw off their colonial yoke and took their
independent status, obviously the numbers within the United Nations
have grown. I don't think that is what has made it ineffective. Any
argument about its effectiveness was probably overshadowed by the
influence of the cold war and the bi-polarity of those two powerful
nations the United States and the Soviet Union. That is not to say
there isn't a place for a healthy debate about the future shape of the
United Pations or how it can work effectively. All I am saying is that
the second and third largest economic power should certainly be in the
business of the Security Council. What I am not saying here is what
the design of some of these instruments should be. What I am saying
is that regional arrangements and regional solutions are going to be
more important and can be very effective. I made the point in this
region, the arrangements are between developing and developed
countries. There is no hierarchy. If you look at ouj -multi-lateral
bodies, be it ASEAN or APEC, there is no hierarchy. The developing
countries, indeed look at the Bogor Declaration that came from one of
the largest developing countries in the area.
So, regional bodies can do good and effective things and I think where
many regional problems in the past have been glossed over or
papered over by the bi-polarity which has existed, the tensions are
now coming to the fore and they are best, I think, dealt with regionally.
If they spill over, they may spill over to the UN, but I think there are
other solutions to the world's problems, other than the UN, despite the
fact that the UN remains a very useful body.
Q: Mr Keating, I would like to ask you about exchange rates, they have
not been mentioned at all this afternoon.
PM: You are a punter are you?
Q: A number of impediments have been offered that might stand in the
way of further APEC, Pacific Rim or whatever developments in the next
or even 30 years. European experience suggests that when a
number of other problems have been cleared out of the way, currency 
then starts to rise towards the top of the list as being something which
simply stays in the way. Do you feel we might see any kind of
developments on currency harmonisation in this region over the next
or 15 years and perhaps if we do see a regional unit I might dare to
suggest a name for it, the regional unit of course would be called
' ARU'.
PM: [ tape turn] what will happen in these things, but I doubt very much
that any of this would ever be in a position of being able to design
something which provides so-called stability to exchange rates. I
mean, since the days of fixed exchange rates broke down in the 1970s
and we have not got a very large flux of international markets and
flows of funds and where each countries characteristics are different
and where they are assessed differently and where their levels of
wealth and prosperity are different, of course, the value of their
currency will reflect that. And in the reflection of it, it will adjust the
parameters within the economy as well as with the outside of it. So, I
am not one for managed exchange rates. I don't believe in them. All
that happened in the Plaza-Accords which we often heard about in the
1980s was a lucky break at the end of a long period when a correction
was ovbrdue. If. the Plaza Accord partners today sought to do what
they d6~ then, I think, the markets would trample on them. So, if you
run a good country with good policies you can always stand in the
market place and get a fair price on your currency. It might be a bit
overdone some days and a bit underdone on another, but by and
large, the fundamentals will come out and, I think, tricky management
by central bankers trying to pick the rate has been the cause of much
of the world's problems in the post war years. It is a ha~ it-we have all
kicked and, I think, it should stay kicked.
Q: Prime Minister, earlier on you mentioned recently the significant
increase of Asian migrants into Australia. It has been well documented
that this has caused some problem and some Australians have been
rather upset about this trend. Does this worry your government and
will you please comment on what is your government going to do about
that.
PM: I don't want to correct your assumptions in any strident way, but let me
assure you there is very little tension or adverse comment in Australia
about the make up of the migration intake. Half of it now is from Asia
and the settlement of people in Australia is as harmonious now as it
was five years ago or ten years ago or earlier. In fact, I think it is more
harmonious now than perhaps it has ever been. Australia is singularly
devoid of racial problems, be it around Asians or Muslims or any other
categories of persons. By and large it is not an issue there. The issue
in Australia, if there is an issue, is just on a population basis, how large
the migration program should be, not what its composition is. So, I am
very happy to report to you that what may be perceived, perhaps in
some places, maybe here in Singapore, that there is some resentment 
if that is the implication of your question about a high proportion of
Asians in the intake, that is not so. I represent a constituency which
has a very cosmopolitan makeup and I have a very good feel of these
issues in Australia. I can assure you that there is almost complete
equanimity about the character of the cosmopolitan makeup of the
country. I think people are very happy with Asian migration to
Australia. It has brought wealth, business experience, diversity,
strength. I think, if there is perhaps one phrase that I could borrow
from that, it'is that many Australians feel that in diversity there is
strength and vitality and interest and that it is no longer really an issue
for us. To manage our country or our society in some exclusive way to
Asia, it is not on and it hasn't been on for 25 years.
ends
CI i L I. i~ i 



TEL 17. Jan. 96 18: 13 No. 021 P. 01/:!
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE,
HIS EXCELLENCY MR GOlI CHOK TONG
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE AT THE SHANORI LA MOTEL,
SINGAPORE, 17 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
GOI-: Yes, good morning ladies and gentlemen. Prime Minister
Paul Keating and I had a good meeting this morning. We ranged
over many subjects. We discussed developments in the region and
also bilateral matters. On bilateral matters the principle point which
I am making this morning is we will be issuing a Joint Declaration
on a New Partnership.
Our relations are very good. We have been doing many things
together. But we thought we can do more if we were to collect our
thoughts, put them on a piece of paper and decide on the focus
and where to focus In the years ahead.
The Joint Declaration will be issued to you and I will stop over here
so you can ask questions on what we will be doing and on such
matters that are of Interest to you. You can address questions to
Prime Minister Keating or myself.
J: Prime Minister Goh, can you elaborate on this New Partnership
scheme. How will it benefit for Singapore, Australia and the region
and what does It mean to them?
GOH: Well, basically, there are several pillars In this Joint Dec. laratIon
political, security, social, economic. On the economic side we
would. of course, be encouraging Singaporeans to invest In
Australia and Australia to trade more with Singapore. We would
also be working together to Invest in third countries like Indonesia,
so it would benefit the Indonesians. And when Indonesia grows the
economy will also affect Singapore and Australia Wn a positive way.
J: Mr Goh, this week you gave an interview with the suggestion that
Australia might one day be a part of ASEAN. Do you suggest a 
T1EL7: . Jan. 96 18: 13 No. 021 P. 02/
2
possible timetable for that whether 2010, 2020 and what sort of
hurdles, what sort of benchmarks, does Australia have to meet In
order to become a partner?
GOH: I would like to put my remarks in context. I was asked a question
by The Australian Financial Review whether I foresee Australia
joining ASEAN one day. My reaction was, it is an idea which is
thinkable and Indeed it is a thinkable idea of the horizon. But since
this is an over the hoilion idea, there Is no timeframe In my mind,
there is rno immediate proposal, we did not discuss this, Australia
has not Indicated that it would wish to join ASEAN at this point of
time, and neither have I discussed this with anybody else. So it is
just something which is over the horizon.
In that same interview, Mr Goh, you also praised Mr Keating's
leadership, In the coming election in Australia, would you be sorry
to see Mr Keating go?
PJK: Well, of course, he would. That is why I am here.
GOH: As I have said In the interview, I mean in a personal sense, I would
be sorry to see anybody go and I know Paul Keating very well and
as I told the interviewer, we have got the same vision for the region,
we have got the same stature, we have got the same height..
PJK: You are a bit taller.
GOH: and I like him as a person very much.
PJK: And I like you too.
GOH: Thank you.
J: Mr Goh, the visit to Malaysia by Mr Keating was a very important
one. You are used to the regional dialogue, the nuances with
Malaysia, how do you assess the success or otherwise of that trip'?
GOH: Well I read the reports in the newspapers that said it went very well
and I am very pleased that the meeting of Prime Minister Keating
went very well in Kuala Lumpur. It is Important that bilateral
relations between any country In the region are strong and certainly
we want to see strong relations between Malaysia and Australia,
Australia and Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, and so on. It is
good for the region.
J: ~ Prime* Minister, do you feel there was some movemnent in the
relationship over the last few days between Malaysia and
Australia? TEL 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 18: 13 No. 021 P. 03,
3
GOH: Oh from what I have read, 6ertalnly there is movement.
PJK: There is a fine calibration, yqu see, in our lot. They are into the
millimetres of movement, you see.
J: Mr Keating, can you tell us what the main message that you will be
trying to* get across In your Lecture this afternoon?
PJK: Well, I think, rather than me try and anticipate that, it Is a complex
number of Issues there the bilateral relationship that exists
between Australia and Singapore. The principle focus of it is the
way in which the world has changed after the Cold War,
regionalism and t role of regionalism In shaping world events
and, of course, events within regions. It is a very great opportunity
and I was very pleased to be asked and regard it as an honour to
be able to speak at some length about these subjects.
J: Mr Keating, can you comment on the Australian-Singapore New
Partnership? What Is your view?
PJK: Well, I think, in relationships between longstanding friends and we
are longstanding friends there is always, I think, some tendency to
know where the other party is and take them for granted and
believe you understand where they are. And, I think, It Is a good
thing that we stop, pause, occasionally and think about where we
are going and write down what we want to do together. And the
Prime Minister and I have had very great pleasure indeed in
working together both bilaterally and multilaterally and the role that
Singapore plays in this region, Australia's role here too, the things
we have done together in multilateral bodies such as APEC, our
role with ASEAN and the Regional Forum, these sorts of issues,
these are all things which I think that Singapore and Australia have
been able to do together, And just to recite what we have been
doing in APEC, what we are seeking to do with AFTA and
Australasia, our cooperation In the security Issues of the Regional
. Forum, our reaffirmation of our commitment to the Five Power
Defence Arrangements, these are Important statements, I think, of
Where we stand on key issues and, I think, they are very Important
to the peoples of both of our countries, In terms of security, the
Five Power Defence Arrangements the reaffirmaton of them is
important to Singaporeans, I think, as they are to Australians and
the recital of our commitments on economic policy are important to
our communities. And as the Prime Minister remarked in response
to the question about my visit to Malaysia, Malaysia Is also a party
to the Five Power Defence Arrangements and the fact that we all
have a shared commitment to the region, to its prosperity, to its
peace, is an important demonstration of regionalismi the subject I
am addressing some time this afternoon. So these are the Issues
which, I think, are of value to Singaporeans and to Australians. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 18: 13 No. 021 P. 04/
4
J: Mr Goh, during your visit to Australia In 1993 there was a fund that
was set up by both Australia and Singapore to help the private
sector Invest in third countries. How does this New Partnership go
further then that?
GOH: Well. I think, on this Saturday, two parties Australia and Singapore
will be signing another agreement which is on provision of training
to personnel from third countries so that Is In advance over what we
decided to do when we were In Australia.
J: Mr Goh. what is your view on Australia signing of the defence treaty
with Indonesia?
GOH: It Is a good thing, we believe that security has been enhanced in
the region with the signing of this agreement. We believe In a web
of relations between countries, so there can be several tiers in
relations and this'represents another tier of relationships which will
strengthen the overall regional security for the region. We welcome
it.
J; Mr Keating, is there a direct comparison, or any particular
comparison, between the agreements signed with Indonesia last
month and the agreement with Singapore?
PJK Well the agreement with Singapore Is a recital and statement of our
contemporary situation and outlook which encompasses some of
our recent economic history and asserts and reaffirms our
commitment to shared security arrangements In the area.
Of course Australia had no such fundamental agreements with
Indonesia and the fact that we now have one which goes to security
issues, means as the Prime Minister said when speaking about a
web it is a web of regional association and cooperation.
And, therefore, the agreement with Indonesia does, I think, as the
Prime Minister has said, it makes the whole area more secure. It
was very much a declaration about the trust between Australia and
Indonesia and that kind of declaration must give a very good signal
to the whole region. So what we are doing in the declaration today
Is pausing and thinking and stating, again, the things that we have
in common, the objectives we share, which are consistent with and
completely compatible the agreement, for instance, which
Australia has made with Indonesia.
J: Mr Keating. do you expect to sign similar agreements with other
Asian nations, you've signed one with Tokyo etc? It has been a
consistent theme of yours to develop ' anew vision. If so, what sort
of countries would you see next on your list? 
T1EL7:. Jan. 96 18: 13 No. 021
PJK: No, there Isn't a list. I mean, there i6 a naturalness about all of
these and they have come for natural and good reasons.
J: Mr Keating, you have always said that to go forward in Asia,
Australia needs to be a republic. in that context, ls the decision by
the New South Wales Government to downgrade the role of
Governor a good step?
PJK: Well, I think, we will deal with domestic, constitutional arrangements
In New South Wales, when we are back In New South Wales.
J: Prime Minister, has Australia had to sacrifice Its commitment to the
pursuit of improved human rights and greater democracy to gain
acceptance In this region?
P1K: No, I mean I am on the record on that on many occasions and the
references have mostly been about Timor and I don't think anybody
who is near the subject belee that Australia is likely to have any
influence beneficial, that is for the East Timorese in a stand-off
with Indonesia. And I made it clear In Australia and I make it clear
again, we are not about to make the Australia/ Indonesia
relationship hostage to one issue. It is an issue I have discussed
often with President Soeharto and it is one that needs to be dealt
with in a framework. But, I think, Australia's democracy, its
strength, its tolerance, are assets for its role in the region and they
don't have to be compromised.
J: Mr Keating, in regard to the hostages taken by Chechen rebels in
southern Russia [ Inaudible]?
PJK;-Oh, I don't think I can say anything new or profound about it. It is a
European problem. It is a problem remote from this region.
We feel the human tragedy very particularly and, I think, my own
wish abou this is that, you know, commonsense allows some of
these problems to be solved.
J: Mr Keating, the recent purchase of Dreamworld by Singaporean
Investors has met with some opposilin. Do-you think this will
discourage Singaporeans from investing In Australia and, in the
light of this, will you continue to pursue your pro-Asia policy with the
some vigour?
PJK: Oh yes. I don't think there is anything superstitious about
Singaporean investors not at all. And I think some hand wringing
in the Australian financial press will not put them off will not put
them off,
ends TEL 
( For Immediate Releas]
MINSTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS PRESS STATEMENT.
THTE SINGAPORE-AUSTRALIA NEW PARTNERSHI[ P
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong and Australian Prime Minister* paw
Keatinig today announced the -Sirgpre-Austria Now Partership-. The New
Pci tiership, an initiative which was ccodNcvd during I&amp; Keating's visit to Singapore
in March 1995, gives formal recolaition. to te cooperaton which has grown between
Australia and Singaporc in recent ycars. Slace March 1995, senior officials from
Australia 6d Singapore have worked on the details of this New Partaership through a
scrie. of Joint Comimittee Meetiags in Singapre -and Canberra-. Encoamsing
cooperation in political, security, economic and cultur-al matter, the New Partnmzship
Ls tetimony to the common view shared by both couatrics of the gfrategic
envrwint, both within the region sad globally. The Purtn= 4i will stengtkh= th
cxccecnt relations exist ing between, both counties.
2 Dot Singapore and Australia see dze New Pprtnership as going beyond
mutua beneflt and as one baving a positive imp=~ on the region. Through the
cooperation and eagageineat of both countries in regional and international fora, such
as fth ASEAN Regional Forwrn, the World Trade Organisation and the Asia-Pacic
Economic Cooperation, the Partnership would be a stcp towards the development of a
community of comprehensive cooperation between the countries of Southeast Asia
and Australia and New Zealand. On the economic front the Partnership recognises
that while enhanced economic cooperation wiU be of beacit to both countxies, such
cooperation could also benefit the region, in parficular, joint investment in thid
couwtries. Both 4omntries have also decided to collaborate on technical cooperation
through joint trainin g propammnes tot third coumtzies. 
3 As part of the Partnership, Australia and Singapore have decided to
establish a Joint Ministerial Committee led by both countries'. Foreign Ministers
which will meet once every two years to review the progress of cooperation between
both countries.
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
17 JANUARY 1996
ate: The text of the Joint Declaration on the Singapore-Australia New
Partnership is attached] 
~ RI~ ERSffl~
SA JOINT DECLARATION BY THE PRIME MINISTERS OF
AUSTRALIA AND SINGAPORE
1 After our discussions in Singapore in March 1995, we asked our senior
officials to conduct a comprehensive review of the relationship between Singapore
and Australia.
2 By this Declaration, we now wish to give formal recognition to the new
partnership that has grown up between Australia and Singapore in recent years, and
to signal its future direction and purpose.
3 Australia and Singapore share a common view of the strategic
environment, globally and in the Asia Pacific region. We are committed to
achieving free and open international trade and investment. We both see the United
States' presence and strategic engagement in the region as being of tfundamental
importance to the peace and prosperity of the region.
4 We also have substantial and growing bilateral links, especially in the
commercial sector and through people-to-people ties. Our long-standing dcfence
cooperation has reinforced regional stability.
These are the foundations of our new partnership.
6 The end of the Cold War, changes in strategic relations between great
powers in the Asia Pacific region, the shift in the centre of gravity of global
economic activity from the Atlantic to the Pacific, and the associated dynamism of
East Asian economies, present new opportunities as well as uncertainties and
challenges. 7 Our common objective is to ensure that we have in place international
and regional institutions which underpin our shared political, economic and security
interests. 
8 . For both Australia and Siapore, the significance of this partnership
goes beyond its importance in their bilateral relationship. For Australia, it is a very
important clement in its engagement with the Southeast Asian region. For
Singapore, it is a recognition of the value it places on Australia's role in regional
affairs. 9 Our partnership will give further impetus to the development of a
coniunity of comprehensive cooperation between the countries of Southeast Asia
and Australia and New Zealand.
To sustain this new partnership, and to build on its objectives Ausumlia
and Singapore accordingly declare.,
We are committed to strengthening APEC, recognising
its status as the premier institution in the Asia Pacific
region. We. ame determined to achieve the practical
ful~ filment and implementation of the Bogor Declaration
and its time-table.
We will work together to see that APflC liberalisation Is
matched by global tad liberalisation. We will
cooperate towards augmenting the WT( Ys role, starting
with the lced up to Singapore's hostg of the 1996
WTO Ministerial Meeting.
We will cooperate in forging linkages, between APTA
and CER
We will cooperate to ensure the success of the ASEAN
Regional Fo= 4m the Asia Pacific's regional security
organisaxion.
-We affrm our shared commitment to the Five Power
Defence Arrangements. The active commitment of all
members will ensure its continuing role as a credible
element in the security architecture of the region.
We welcome the extensive broadening of bilateral
defence cooperation in the last five years. Noting the
benefits to Australian industry which are expected to 
follow from the training of Singapore Armed Forces ini
Australia, we agree also to explore further the prospects
for long-term defence industry cooperation.
-We recognise -that cnhanced economic cooperation is in
our mutual interest, and could be of benefit to the region.
Complementarities in our resource endowments, capital
availability and technology usage offer real scope fbr
cooperative ventures. To this end, we agree that:
Our commitment to economic cooperation
embraces both bilateral opportunities and joint
projects that benefit third countries in the region.
Our aim is to eahance and diversify bilateral trade
and investment and joint investment in third
countries. The role of our Governments is primarily to*
facilitate partnerships between Australian and
Singapore companies which meet these criteria.
The process, already undarway, of drawing each
other's attention to specific investment
opportunities will continue.
Our collaboration may include technical
cooperation through joint training programmes
with third countries.
Economic cooperation also includes collaboration
in research and development in areas where both
countries have compatible technological
capabilities, where we can add value by working
together, and where there are prospects for shared
commercial outcomes.
We will encourage the Singapore Australia Business
Alliance Forum's work in identifying and implementing
opportunities that meet the above criteria.
We will work to improve dilalogue and contact between
our Govermnent agencies in the economic and financial
areas. Importanit issues of public policy which would 
benefit from an enhanced dialogue include: public
finance, including budget management issues;
superannuation and retirement income systems; and
competition policy.
We are committed to promoting mutual understanding
through expanded cultural exchanges and more peopleto-
people links. In this way we contribute to a broader
sense of community and cooperation in a region of
cultural diversity.
11 We agree to establish a Joint Ministerial Committne to be led by our
respective Foreign, Ministers. The Committee will meet once every two years and
each side would be represented by at least three Ninisters reflecting the range of
bilateral cooperation.
17 JANUARY 1996
SINGAPORE 



TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 01/ 1
PRIME MINISTER
EMBARGOED UNTIL 6PM AEST
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE SINGAPORE LECTURE " AUSTRALIA, ASIA AND THE NEW
REGIONALISM" SINGAPORE, 17 JANUARY 1996
It is a great honour to have been asked to give this lecture and I thank Professor
Chan Heng Chee and the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies for the invitation.
Australia has had a long and productive association with the Institute over many
years. I also want to thank the Government of Singapore for Its support for the lecture
and, especially, Deputy Prime Minister Tony Tan for his courtesy to me In
chairing it today.
This is my third visit to Singapore as Prime Minister and It is always a pleasure
to come here. There Is an energy about Singapore which flows from people
who are conscious of the Inevitability of change and who are trying to shape that
change for the better.
I admire that. Singapore, perhaps more than any other place in the world,
teaches the vital lesson that we cannot prepare for the future until we know
what we want it to be.
This has been the distinctive principle guiding Singapore's modern history: the
same principle that some time ago began to guide Australia through the present
era. When you face things and begin to do what must be done, you liberate
ideas about what can be done. This great era of change has meant that as we
approach the centenary of Australia's nationhood a new, stronger and clearer
vision of our future has begun to emerge. And It now goes without saying that
much of the future we see we see in the Asia-Pacific.
The vision of a future for the region, and of the potential for our relationship to
serve our separate and mutual interests, has been the Inspiration and the guide
for the joint efforts between Australia and Singapore over the past four years,
and it is the reason why I have so much enjoyed working with Prime Minister
Goh and his colleagues on Issues like APEC and regional security. 
TEL: 1( Janj 156 NoD. U12 P .02 / 1'
2
And although this lecture Is not about our bilateral relationship, I want to begin
by saying how pleased 1 am that the Prime Minister and I were able this morning
to issue a major declaration on the Austral! ia. Singapore partnership which will
help ensure that this old relationship between us remains relevant and creative
into the next century.
And it Is an old relationship. In Singapore, of all places, the provenance of
Australia's engagement with modem Southeast Asia Is clear. Indeed, for the
generation of Australians before mine, Singapore was interchangeable with
what we then referred to as the Far Fast, although It was really the Near
Northwest. Singapore's history and Australia's have been closely linked throughout this
century. You need only go to the cemetery at Kranjl where so many
Australians are buried.
After Singapore's Independence. the links between us grew through our
partnership in the Five Power Defence Arrangements and the bilateral defence
ties which merged from It Today, our bilateral defence cooperation is
extensive. The Singapore armed force train in Australia and the RSAF has
established a Flying School at Pearce Air Force Base in Western Australia.
Our close engagement was strengthened through the people to people links
establshed under the Colombo Plan and since. Last year nearly
10,000 Singaporeans studied In Austraria.
And, of course, our growing trade and Investment ties underpin an economic
relationship which is Important to both of us. Singapore and Australia are
consistently among each other's top ten trading partners.
We have also developed a strong habit of cooperation on regional Issues where
our views so often coincide APEC most recently, of course, but earlier with
ASEAN, with which Australia was the first country to estabrish a formal dialogue
relationship. Now in the declaration we have signed today we have affirmed the strength of
our partnership and established a framework to support our continuing
cooperation In all these areas.
For me this partnership is especially important because, as Prime Minister, one
of my central goals has been to see that Australia Is better Integrated with the
rapidly changing region around us, that we have an opportunity to play a role in
shaping it and are better prepared to meet whatever challenges the 21st
century may offer. -A N 
TEL: 1?. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 03/ 1,
3
1 have said more than once before* I Australia does not succeed In Asia It will
not succeed anywhere.
But success clearly requires more than the traditional tools of foreign policy.
For Australia, as I suspect for most countries, our external relations can no
longer exist in a separate box marked " foreign relations" or " foreign policy"
largely unconnected with the domestic policies which are needed to build a
society which Is both open and competitive and cohesive and strong.
That was why it was imperative for Australia to dismantle the ring fence of tarffs
and protection to open our economy to competitive breezes, and in so doing, lift
our gaze to the world.
We deregulated our capital and exchange rate markets and opened them to the
world for the same reasons.
As a result, In the decade to 1 994/ 95, Australia's export to GDP ratio Increased
from 14 percent to 21.5 per cent. The level of direct foreign investment In
Austrlia Ns increased eight fold and the level of direct Australian Investment
abroad has increased seven fold.
Rt was all there, waiting to be unlocked.
It is also why it has been necessary for us to address other challenges thrown
up both by our history and the imperatives of the future. One of those has been
the Injustice done to Australia's Indigenous people, not least through the
lingering pretence that before Europeans arrived on our oontinent it was a terra
nuthlus a land of nobody. We have undertaken a huge effort In social justice to
see that historic wrong put right.
I think It will be equally good for our long term national cohesion and sense of
ourselves If we make the leap to a republic. The time has come for an
Australian, rather than the monarch of Great Britain, to be our head of state. I
want Australia to be, a3 Singapore is, a Republic and a Republic within the
Commonwealth.
The change will not make us what we want to be, but It will help describe us to
ourselves and to others. it will help define our complex Identity, help articulate
our ambitions and values, help fuse the links between the old Australia and the
new. 
TEL: 17. Jan., 96 15: 58 No .012 P. 04/ 1'
4
Much the same desire to preserve Australia's egalitarian values and traditions
arnd maintain cohesion and harmony ted us, as we made the structural changes,
to intensify our efforts to strengthen Australia's social fabric. Our economic
effort has been matched by an effort to develop sophisticated social programs
which deliver equity and encourage tolerance. The path we have taken leads
towards a modem multicultural Australian social democracy, one that Is dynamic
economically and socially fair,
All this change, economic, social and political, has set Australia up for the
future. It Is also divining our path in the Asia-Pacific.
I have always said that the nature of Australia's relationship with Asia has been
long and for the most part honourable.
But Australian Governments and the Australian people have recently come to
recognise the impflcatlons of living In and with the region which Gareth Evans
describes a~ s the East Asian hemisphere.
Australia's closer relationship with Asia Is partly driven by economic realities, of
course. Already two-thirds of our trade is with the APEC region, more than half
of It with East Asia.
But our engagement with the region around us Is not just commercial. And It is
not just the result of some crude economic determinism.
It goes and must go much deeper than that
Rt goes to a genuine desire for partnershIp and real Involvement.
For example, it has changed our thinking about our defence on the basis that
Australis needs to seek its security In Asia rather than from Asia.
That is why we have so strongly supported the development of the ASEAN
Regional Forum. It Is why we have worked hard to develop strong defence links
with our neighbours like Singapore and Malaysia, as well as new partnerships
with countries like the Philippines and Vietnam.
And It Is why we recently signed with Indonesia a new Security Agreement
which builds on the development of our bilateral defence inks, 
TTEELL 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 05/ 1'
This agreement sets out formally for the first time the reality that neither
Australia nor Indonesia threatens the other and that we have common interests
In the stability and security of the region around us. And it goes further than
that, to make it clear that we are prepared to consult If those interests are
challenged. The agreement marks a major step not only In Australia's relations with our
largest neighbour but also In the outlook for regional stability. It expresses a
common understanding that we are stronger together and that we should affirm
a common interest.
Similarly, Australia's engagement with the region extends much more freely to
people-to-people contacts. Language and capacity in language Is central to
this. Accordingly, the Federal and state governments have committed
themselves to a language strategy which aims to have by 2006 sixty per cent of
all Australian school children from years three to ten studying one of four Asian
languages Indonesian, Japanese, Mandarin Chinese or Korean.
And this change is already well underway. Already more people are studying
Japanese1 Australia than in any other country apart from China, Korea and
Japan Itself. And more schoolchildren from Australia spend time studying In
Japanese schools than children from any other country.
At the same time there can be no doubt that the course of closer engagement
with Asia on which Australia Is now embarked is having its impact on our culture
and outlook as well.
The nearly forty per cent of Immigrants to Australia who now come from Asia
are playing their part in changing the way Australians think about the world and
their country; In just the same way that earlier waves of Immigrants, ever since
1788, successively shaped and re-shaped Australia's sense of itself.
And, It goes without saying, Australia Is shaping them and their descendants as
It shaped those who have come before.
I don't want to enter the debate about ' Asian values' here but I do want to say
something about Australian values.
Although it Is often described as a young country, Australia is one of the oldest
democracies In the world. We had universal suffrage and secret ballots well
before the United Kingdom and before almost any other country. The
democracy is old and runs deep. Our sense of ourselves Is imprinted with ideas
of equality and equity among them, the conviction that all members of our
society not only have a right but a duty to have their say. That is why voting in
Australia Is compulsory. 
TEL: TEL 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 06/ 1'
6
And despite deep imperfections in our record, including the racism inherent in
our immigration policies until a quarter of a century ago, Australia has also been
a very tolerant community, absorbing settlers from all parts of the world with
remarkably little tension.
In many perhaps most respects, the values I believe In and most Australians
believe in are precisely those that are often referred to in this debate as " Asian".
The importance of family, the benefit of education, the need for order and public
accountability, the inherent value of work most Australians I know would
describe these as Australian values. Indeed the word most Australians would
very likely choose to describe as the core Australian value is ' mateship' and
' mateship' expresses an ethic of communltarianism and mutual obligation which
in other contexts Is called " Asian".
In other areas respect for authority, the Importance of ' face' and the
preference for harmony and the avoidance of conflict the differences between
Australia and some other Asian countries is dearer, but the degree to which this
to a debate about values, as opposed to cultural practices, Is less clear.
More Impqant over time, I think, will be where we stand on the larger debate
not about" Asian' or western values, but about values themselves and what the
role of government should be In shaping them.
Fundamentally It will be a debate between those who believe the main role of
government is to get out of the way and let the market rip and those who
consider that government provided it is operating with the consent of the
governed has a role in shaping and expressing the values of our community.
Defined this way, the debate cuts across Asian and western societies alike.
I have never believed that Australians should describe themselves as Asians or
that Australia is or can become part of Asia.
We are the only nation In the world to Inhabit a continent of our own. I have
said more than once before, we can't be Asian any more than we can be
European or North American or African. We can only be Australian and can
only relate to our neighbours as Australians. Our history, Including the 40,000
year history of our indigenous people and the histories of the 150 different
cultures from which Australians derive, make us unique in the world.
Our somewhat unlikely history and geography should not change this
fundamental conviction and this irrevocable commitment that Australia Is and
must always be an integral part of the region around us.
Let me turn now from Australia to the issues of this wider region, and to the
question of regionalism itself. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 07' i:
7
1 want to use this lecture to say some things about the region, about what
regionalism means in the post-Cold War world, and especially for the
Asia-Pacific. Finally, I want to look ahead at some of the issues we will have to
address in the next decade or so.
The fact that we describe the present International scene as the post-Cold War
world in terms of what came before us rather than what we have become
underlines how fluid the International environment is at present and how
uncertain we are about the shape it Is taking.
We are living through the greatest period of change In the world since the
emergence of the nation state, arnd we have a very limited time in which to
shape the new international structures before nations and institutions settle into
new grooves from which It will be very difficult to dislodge them. What we. 1
mean all of us do now will lay the foundations for prosperity and security In the
21 st century just as fatefully and Inevitably as the actions of Europe's leaders
did a century ago.
And unles~, get it rght now, our failure might be no less calamitous then
theirs. When the Berlin Wall came down, when President Yeltsin and his supporters
later stood on the tanks outside the White House In Moscow to defy the coup
plotters and brought down the Soviet Union, they also brought down the post
war international order.
The expectations of a new International order, based on a concert of powers
opetating to a large extent through a revived and renewed United Nations, have
not been fulfilled.
In part. I believe, this Is because our global international structures are
Incomplete and immature. They still reflect too directly the world into which
most of them emerged at the end of the 1940s.
Japan and Germany. the world's second and third-largest economies are selfconstrained
from playing their full part In the International system.
Russia will always be one of the world's great powers, but now and over the
next few years it will be preoccupied with the consequences of the end of the
Soviet Union.
China is emerging into the world, and the way that happens will dominate the
Asia Pacific like no other Issue over the coming decades. But for the time being
China, too, is largely preoccupied with domestic issues and especially
developing t economy. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 08/ 19
Meanwhile, in the United States, the world's only remaining superpower, the
struggle goes on as it has since the foundation of the Republic between those
who believe the United States should avoid foreign entanglements and those
who want it to be engaged with the wider world. This, as always In the United
States, is not only a debate among the politicians and the political elite. Its
outcome depends, In the and, on what t American people think. and we
should not be surprised If it is harder to engage them with foreign policy now
than it was for the high moral struggle of the Cold War.
At another level, too, global structures are often too large and rigid to permit
productive discussion. The sheer weight of numbers In the United Nations, for
example, means that complex negotiations often have to be conducted through
increasingly out-of-date groupings which often fall to reflect current economic
and political realities.
Australia can speak with feeling on this matter. For United Nations purposes,
we are relegated to the category of ' others', as part of a Western European and
Others grouing.
it Is not Juit the absurdity of this classification which Irritates but the practical
consequences. More and more clearly, Australia's Interests cannot be properly pursued in such
framework. It Is a structure which emphasises North/ South divisions. This
tends to generate on the side of the North a strongly Eurocentric perspective
on global problems. But the ' South' is where Austraria's neighbours are, and it
Is with the ' South' that our Interests often coincide rather than diverge.
For all these reasons, the present global structure is inadequate.
This is not an unchangeable state of affairs. There is much that can be done
about it.
For example, Australia supports permanent membership of the United Nations
Security Council for both Germany and Japan, a position for which Japan's
excellent chairmanship of the Osaka APEC meeting further justified It.
And we believe it is essential to encourage the United States to play an active
and engaged role In the world not just in the Asia Pacific, but globally. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 09/ 19
9
We hope that such outside encouragement like the Joint declaration which
Singapore and Australia issued this morning will strengthen the position of
those Americans who share our conviction that US Interests, as well as ours,
are advanced by their continuing active engagement in East Asia. Nothing is
more likely to generate security tensions In this part of the world, or threaten the
region's continuing economic and social development, than uncertainty in
countries like Japan and Korea about the continued US security commitment.
One of the main reasons behind Australia's support for APEC has been our
conviction that closer American economic engagement in Asia and the Pacific
win reinforce the essential political underpinnings of Its security relationships.
The other great uncertainty about the interational situation In the coming
decades, as I said earlier, is China.
The economic reforms introduced by Deng Xlaoping and President Jiang Zemin
have brought profound benefits for the international community as a whole, not
just for China. There have been few more significant developments in the past
half century.
I do not bel( eve China is an expansionist or aggressive power, or that it is likely
to become so. It is an essential and central part of the regional community.
However, the sheer size of its population and economy raises questions for the
rest of us about how we deal with it,
For my part, I think there is little doubt about what the broad approach should
be. Above all, the answer Is to ensure that China is engaged comprehensively in
global and regional institutions. This has been a major aim of APEC and the
ASEAN Regional Forum to engage China, not to contain it or Isolate it.
But the answer also lies In China's neighbours making their own way in the
region and taking responsibility for their own future. It Is the responsibility of all
of us to build what ASEAN calls our national and regional resilience: a region
which is self-confident and cooperative, rather than apprehensive and self.
absorbed, will be better for an of us including China.
And, In part, that means building institutions and structures which engage all the
countries of the region in a dialogue about the future.
ts ar hrIin ht hnOk fram the to the regional. It Is a sign of
the times the most important sign oI the oeneve. 
TEL 1-. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 10/ 19
For the time being, at least, the role of the great powers in shaping the
development of the International system Is less dominant than it might otherwise
be. And this, as I said earlier, 13 happening at the very time when we are
moulding the Institutions and processes and ways of resoMng problems which
will form the pattern of the next period In International relations.
I think that one outcome of this situation 1s that regionalism and regional
approaches will come Into their own as never before.
This century, was dominated by global struggles. Imperialism and later
Communism were of their nature global. Two world wars and the Ideoiogical
struggle of the Cold War taught us to structure our ways of thinking about the
world In essentially global terms.
Regional approaches were usually subordinated to this broader competition.
The multilateral defence pacts of the 1950~ s were an example. Even the
development of the EEC was driven in part by the need to strengthen western
Europe economically and politically against the Soviet threat
But with the-breakdown of the bipolar structure of the Cold War, regional
problems nI&amp; longer automatically form a metaphor for a wider global and
Ideological struggle as they did In Afghanistan and Angola and Central America.
Instead, it Is easier now to address regional Issues on their own terms.
And a degree of flexibility Is possible In regional Institution building which has
never been possible before. Vietnam's membership of ASEAN and the
common membership of APEC by the three Chinese economies are Important
examples. So, for alt these reasons, I think that In the Immediate future regionalism offers
the capacity to generate new Ideas, subsume old enmites and provide new
ways of doing things. It can let the light in in a way which global structures are
too large or unwieldy or rigid to do.
Thi3, In turn, means that the opportunities for small and medium sized countries
to shape the International agenda are greater than they have ever been In the
post. So long as they know what they want and where they are heading.
I am sure that one of the reasons for the success of the Asia Pacific In global
terms Is the creative way In which regionalism has been embraced in this part of
the world.
It Is not a new phenomenon. of course. ASEAN has been an enormous
success in transforming the tensions of the confrontation era In Southeast Asia
Into a habit of working together. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 11/ 19
11
But the next burst of regionalism, including within ASEAN, is growing in range
and ambition.
APEC has made huge strides In a few short years.
When I first proposed the idea of meetings of APEC leaders In 1992, I did so
because I was convinced that unless APEC could begin to draw upon the
executive authority of national leaders it would remain a modest and essentially
peripheral organisation, making progress only at the pace of Its slowest officials.
It Is leaders who have the political authority to commit a country to a certain
course in pursuit of certain outcomes, and leaders who are charged with the
responsibility to recognise the bigger picture and the bigger opportunities that
come with it.
Once leaders were involved In the development and formulation of policy in
APEC, a different dynamic evolved and the pace of action quickened.
Most leaders believe that any event In which they participate should deliver a
good result so, from Seattle on, the pressure was on to formulate a strategy
and then dive it.
At the same time, once the leaders met and don't forget that the Seattle
meeting was the first time leaders from across the Asia Pacific had ever met
the pressing reality of our interdependence generated a new momentum for
cooperation. The very feeling of co-operation generated even more goodwill.
This happened in Seattle, where we set out the vision of an Asia Pacific
community. Then the following year in Indonesia. President Soeharto gave this
vision a concrete form in the Bogor Declaration's historic commitment to free
trade and Investment in the region by 2010 and 2020. And finally, last year, In
Osaka, where we put together the plan of action for reaching our objective as
well as offering specific downpayments on our Bogor commitments.
APEC was conceived as an organisation of economies and It is vital that its
main function continues to be economic. If the East Asian economic miracle is
not to run out of steam to end up, as some European commentators wishfully
predict, as a short-term and unsustainable phenomenon It Is essential that the
trade and Investment arteries within the region are kept open. It is essential that
we do all we can to help the activities of our business people, who make the
trade happen.
So the pressure on APEC will not diminish. Every meeting, every year has to
make progress. Later this year in Subic Bay we will need to take the first steps
to implement our Individual plans of action. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 12/ 1_
12
Such progress is critical not only for the Asia Pacific's continuing economic
growth, but for its security as well.
Because, although APEC's purpose Is economic, It will have, like ASEAN before
it, important political and strategic consequences.
It is already having them. No-one who has participated in those three
successive leaders meetings, or in the Ministerial meetings, can fail to notice the
increasing ease with which leaders representing half the world's production now
deal with each other. And no one can be blind to the amount of business which
Is now conducted In the corridors and related bilateral meetings.
APEC is in many critical respects a new model for regional cooperation and I
believe It shows the way forward. It is " new" in at least three ways.
First, its development has been driven as much by the small and medium
powers as by the large ones a fact that has been one of its strengths given the
global situation I described earlier. Of course President Clinton's decision to
invite APEC leaders to the informal meeting in Seattle was critical, as was the
support wh) ph the Japanese Government and Prime Minister Murayama gave
the free trade agenda during their chairmanship of the Osaka meeting. But
ideas and energy have come just as powerfully from economies like Korea and
Singapore and Indonesia and Australia.
In other words, the sense of ownership and participation Is broadly spread
throughout the organisation. APEC gives the smaller and middle sized
countries of the region a very direct say in shaping its future.
Second, APEC is possibly the best practical example the world has yet seen of
cooperation between countries at different levels of development.
Developing countries are not just participants, they are at the core of the
organisation's activities. President Soeharto's chairmanship of the Bogor
meeting was a critical moment for APEC, but it was also an example to the
world of the new sort of partnership between developed and developing
countries which will be essential as the process of globalisation and
Interationalisation proceeds. The world's fifteen most dynamic trading nations
between 1980 and 1993 were all developing countries.
Third, APEC has offered an approach different from the formal structures and
legalisms of other regional approaches like the European Union or NAFTA or, at
the global level, from the Uruguay Round and the WTO. Unlike earlier models of
trade liberallsation. APEC first announced its end point that is, free trade and
investment by 2010 or 2020 and left the getting there to a process of
concerted Ilberalisation between members rather than to direct negotiation. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 13/ 1
13
This approach is not only new, it has aroused considerable scepticism,
especially from those whose experience of International trade negotiations has
been in the heavyweight boxing ring of the Uruguay Round and its
predecessors. I can understand this scepticism, but I am also convinced It is misplaced. The
drag out/ knock down approach to trade negotiations has surely reached the end
of its useful life In an environment where almost every country in the world,
rather than just a handful of industrialised countries, has a stake in global trade.
Few even among the hardiest trade negotiators can relish the idea of another
seven year Round conducted like the last one. And one where the real offers,
the real impetus to llberalisation, were too often left in the negotiator's pocket to
take back home.
So I remain an optimist that APEC will be able to deliver on the promises it has
made, and that, in doing so, it will offer an example which will be useful to the
rest of the world.
Drawing on these experiences with APEC, as well as other regional
organlsatior it Is becoming possible to draw up a number of rules for the new
regionalism in the Asia/ Pacific. Let me try to enumerate them.
The first rule; there are no rules. Or, at least there are no fixed approaches and
as far as possible we should avoid the nightmare of a bureaucratic and legalistic
approach to what we are doing. The Asia Pacific needs to be a small ' c'
community If It Is to succeed.
For the approach to work, however, a high degree of trust will be required not
a commodity which is thought to flow freely through intematlonal discourse.
The best way of encouraging trust as ASEAN has shown and APEC will Is
through close personal contact between leaders and Ministers and with officials
and, beyond that, their counterparts in business.
As 20th century European history vividly testifies, contact does not rule out
conflict but it Is certainly impossible to develop trust between countries and
cultures without It.
The second rule is that we need to avoid closing Asia and the Pacific off to the
outside world.
My argument in favour of regionalism is not an argument against global
multilateral approaches when these are most appropriate, as they often will be. 
TEL: ~ 17. Jan. 9b 15: 58 No. ul 14i
14
Indeed, they are often essential. A comprehensive test ban treaty or a chemical
weapons convention, must be negotiated globally. And although Intra-regional
trade in East Asia has grown much more rapidly and Is of greater volume than
extra regional trade, we all have a deep anid growing Interest In the world
trading system. We need a regional approach which can be reconciled with the
development and strengthening of that system. This Is one of the challenges for
the first WTO Ministerial meeting, when it meets, very appropriately, In
Singapore lsaer this year.
The final rule Is that the region must not become complacent with success.
The challenges to economic growth and to security In this part of the world
remain serious. We will only have a chance of overcoming them If we confront
them directly and with a clear-eyed sense of what they mean for us.
Let me end by speaking In particular about two of those challenges which I
believe should be placed more prominently on the agenda of regionalism In Asia
and the Pacific.
The first of them Is the environment.
Sooner thian many people expect, environmental problems winl begin to affect
not only the degree to which people in Asia and the rest of the APEC region can
enjoy the fruits of recent economic growth, but, more fundamentally, will begin
to impede the extent of that growth.
Demand for food and energy in the region will grow disproportionately as
standards of living rise and expectations Increase. China's demand for food, for
example, is growing so fast that Its shortage within 15 years could be three to
six times Australia's total annual wheat production: just feeding chickens to
vatistY China's demand by 2000 will take more grain than Australia currently
produces. World food production will have to Increase by more than 75 per cent over the
next 30 years if global food security is to be assured.
But significant questions exist about whether the green revolution responsible
for 90 per cent of the great growth in food production over recent decades can
be sustained, and whether we can afford environmentally to sustain It. Heavy
use of fertilisers, Irrigation and pesticides has caused major problems In many
countries. Soil erosion, sallity and pollution of water resources Increasingly
accompany pressure for greater agricultural productivity. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 15/ 1' I
The region's ability to sustain high levels of economic growth will also depend
on its capacity to meet the growing demand for energy. By 2010. electricity
demand across the APEC economies Is expected to Increase by between
per cent and 80 per cent. East Asia's demand for energy is doubling every 12
years, compared with 28 years for the world as a whole.
Few people now question the judgement that we are seeing a discernible
human influence on global climate. While to date developed countries have
contributed disproportionately to this problem, by the year 2000 developing
countries are expected to contribute more than half of global C02 emissions,
And much of this will be in Asia.
Today's global population Is expected to grow by 2.6 billion 45 per cent-by
the year 2025. 90 per cent of this increase will take place in developing
countries and 90 per cent of this will be urban. By the end of the century for
the first time in history more people will live in cities and towns than In rural
areas.
The absolute growth of urban environments will be greatest In Asia. The United
Nations estinates that cities in the region will gain 500 million Inhabitants in the
next ten years. By 2025 the Asian region is expected to be predominantly
urban.
This demographic shift will put huge strain on basic services such as water,
sanitation and shelter. Only half the urban populations In Asia currently have
access to water supplies and 42 per cent to sanitation.
The growth of urbanisatlon is being accompanied by a disproportionate growth
in the incidence of poverty In urban areas. Across the Asia-Pacific region,
some 25-35 per cent of urban dwellers are thought to be squatters. To
compound the problem, marginalised urban dwellers often live in ecologically
vulnerable areas.
The environment has become a sensitive Issue in Asia because environmental
arguments have sometimes been used as a disguised form of protectionism by
developed countries. And developing countries have understandably resented
being told by developed countries that they should not do what developed
countries did namely, pass through their period of industrialisatlon without
having to consider the impact on the environment
But we cannot deny the reality of the environmental challenges facing the
region.
We must see protection of the environment in the Asia-Pacific not as an
alternative to economic growth, but as the only thing that will ensure its
continuation. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 .61
16
Sustainable development was neatly defined by the Brundtiand Commission on
the Environment and Development as ' meeting the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs'. At its
heart this is or should be a very Asian Issue.
Because if there Is one characteristic which has underpinned Asia's recent
economic growth it has been the willingness of current generations to work for
the future good of the community and postpone Immediate reward. So the Idea
of Inter-generational equity a key to the environment debate is very Asian.
With the environment, as with economic liberailsatlon, we will get further In this
part of the world if we use a flexible and cooperative approach which takes
account of the particular development needs of all the countries In the region.
With its mix of developed and developing country members which have already
demonstrated the political Wil1 to cooperatively tackle some difficult Issues,
APEC may help us find a way through the developing/ developed country divde
which has t Indered progress on environment issues at the international level.
The advalntge we have Is a set of goals and aspirations shared by both
developed and developing countries.
A regional approach to environmental management will also help us to respond
effectively In International forums to European approaches which, while
appropriate to their economic and environmental circumstances, too often
ignore the environmental differences In the Asia Pacific and the different
demands of Industrialising and fast growing economies. It Is important that we
work together to ensure outcomes on International negotiations reflect not only
northern but southern hemisphere realities.
APEC has already adopted framework principles for integrating environmental
considerations into Its overall program and Into the activities of its working
groups and committees. This integrated approach Is essential If environmental
Issues are not to be marginalised,
This was the thinking of the leaders at Osaka when they decided on joint action
to deal with the demand for food and energy and the pressures that will be put
on the environment. 
TEL: 17. Jan. 96 15: 58 No. 012 P. 17/ 1l
17
The region's economic expansion and accompanying high rates of Investment
are taking place at a point in history when energy efficient technologies and
processes are widely available. This presents a unique opportunity to get it
right the first time to put in place up-to-date technologies that use materials
and energy efficiently, minimise emissions, improve product quality and reduce
costs. Developing APEC economies currently use 50 per cent more energy to
produce a unit of GDP than developed APEC economies. So, clearly, the
potential gains from Improving efficiency are very substantial.
And significantly, If the region doesn't take up this opportunity It will face not only
an investment bill exceeding SUS1.6 trillion to build the Infrastructure for Its
growth in energy demand by 2010, but the additional costs of fixing avoidable
environmental damage.
Australia is committed to working with countries in the region to avoid this for
example, by addressing emissions, including through the use of energy efficient
or renewable energy technologies. One area with considerable potential Is the
replacement of fossil fuel-based power with photovoltaic ( solar) energy systems.
We are already cooperating with Indonesia on solar energy and the feasibility of
using Aus ralia's leading edge clean coal technology and HI Smelt technology
for its future steel plants.
Integrated management of our natural and urban environments will become
more important as urbanisation intensifies, particularly where hazardous and
Industrial wastes have the potential to Impact on marine and coastal
environments and fisheries. Managing urbanisation in a way which is
ecologically and socially sustainable is one of the key challenges confronting
the region. If we succeed, we will see continued Improvements in our quality of
life. If we fail, we risk slowing economic growth and having to divert resources
to deal with waste and pollution, increased vulnerability to natural disasters and,
eventually, social unrest.
In preparation for the UN's Habitat II conference in June, Australia Is looking at
how we can better utilise our aid program to address the challenges of
urbanisation. Key issues include low cost housing, assistance for squatter
settlements, land use planning, human resource development, support for
micro-enterprises, and Infrastructure development
We need in general to have a much better sense of what is happening to our
land cover. The preparation of Australia's first National Greenhouse Gas
Inventory showed that we were still clearing substantial areas of native
vegetation for agriculture, and thus contributing significantly to our greenhouse
gas emissions. This came as a surprise. It would not have had we been
monitoring overall changes in land coverage. 
18
We have now embarked on a major project to monitor agricultural land cover
change using remote sensed data from the Landsat satellite. As far as I know it
Is the biggest project of its type undertaken anywhere. The data, including
maps, resulting from this project will improve our greenhouse gas emission
calculations, providing a basis for better catchment planning, dryland salinity
management and conservation of biodiversity. This is something that should be
done region-wide If we are to improve the quality of global data and provide a
more accurate and comprehensive Information base for global policy making on
climate change.
No Australian Prime Minister is going to claim that getting the balance right
between the Immediate needs of economic growth and the longer-term
requirements of the environment is easy or painless. We have been wrestling
with it In many areas, most recently in our forest policy. But It has to be done
and it will be easier if we can cooperate regionally not just because so many
environmental problems have no regard to national borders, but because we
can make greater progress if we lear from and draw on the experiences of our
neighbours.
A second cfallenge the region faces is in meeting its human resource
developnient needs. President Ramos has already spoken of his hope that
APEC will address this challenge directly during the year of his chairmanship.
The Asia Pacific already faces serious shortages of skilled workers who are vital
for economies that are moving Into export-oriented manufacturing and service
Industries. Thailand, for example, produces only half of the 10,000 engineers it requires
each year. Malaysia estimates it has a shortage of 9,000 engineers and 18,000
engineering assistants. China needs to find two million technically qualified
workers each year, but produces only one million.
Many APEC Governments are already addressing these problems Individually.
Malaysia, for example, is reviewing its entire education structure. And
Hong Kong and Singapore as well as Malaysia are giving higher prionty to
vocational training In secondary schools.
Australia, too, has dramatically increased its investment in education. More
than three quarters of young Australians now complete twelve years of
schooling, and since 1983 we have Increased the number of students at
university by 70 per cent. We are linking education much more closely to
Industry through a new nationwide vocational education and training system.
A regional approach can help strengthen what each of us is doing nationally.
1?. Jan. 6 15: 583 NO-012 P. 18/ 1 
15 NO U 12
19
We can make the temporary movement of professional people easier.
We can strengthen existing exchange schemes and cross-accreditation
arrangements for students In different countries.
We can Improve the mutual recognition of professional qualifications, and
Australia has proposed the establishment of an APEC regional skills centre to
facilitate this.
More fundamentally, the resources Invested in education and training will need
to grow throughout the region. And this will be easier If we can encourage cross
investment in education and training among APEC members, as Malaysia Is
doing now.
As I noted eariler, I am quite convinced that we are living through the period of
the most fundamental change in the world for the past century and a half, and
possibly longer,
We may IlVe at the end of the millennium, but we do not live at the end of
history.* And that history the world in the twenty first century the structure and shape
of its International system, the nature of its conflicts, the forms of its cooperation
is being decided now. And here. 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION UNION ANNUAL FEDERAL CONFERENCE
MELBOURNE, 19 JANUARY 1996
" CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you for Inviting me to address you today. I spoke at this Conference three years ago and then, as
now, we were facing an election. It was a profoundly Important election then and it will be just as important
this lime.
Some peopie are saying the lines are not as sharply drawn: that without the deeply ideological Mr Hewson,
and the deeply iniquitous GST, Australians this time will have some kind of tweedle dumn tweedle dee choice
confronting them.
Nothing of course could be further than the truth. Last time we faced a right wing Ideologue, a man who put
his policies and Ideas on the tabie and challenged us to persuade Australian voters that our policies and
ideas were better.
This time we are facing a right wing Ideologue who will not put his policies and ideas on the table.
John Howard has been shadowing me for a quarter of a century: we are the oldest political opponents still
practising, I know him so well and his beliefs so well that if I close my eyes I can hear them playing like a
broken record In my head and it is the voice of the most conservative politician in the last quarter of a
century.
Or, to use his own words, the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had. And if anybody tells
you that John Howard has suddenly become a cuddly small Liberal who has seen the error of his
reactionary ways, you can tell them that I am a Rastafarian and Tim Fischer is a Trotskyist,
So iet's be in no doubt about this sometime In the next two or three months Australians will make a
decision about the basic nature of their society and the basic direction it will take into the 21 st century.
Tndi: y I arldrarc ynei in a Irv% 14I onvironmont whki~ to undamontolly tho camo oo it woo throo yearo Q89.
What hits changed Is that we have moved on as a nation. We have moved on as a community. We have
moved on in our social policy, our foreign policy, our Industrial relations policy, our labour market programs,
our cultural policy, our Idea for an Australian republic, our superannuation policy, our policy on the
environment, our policy for Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders. The economy has moved on.
In everyone of these areas we have made5 dramatic strides In the past three years.
And, with your cooperation, we have made them in education.
Now you will remember that when I was here three years ago, Mr Hewson had committed the Opposition to
shifting resources to wealthy private schools, introducing vouchers for vocational education and fees for
undergraduate courses, and slashing $ 10 billion from the social wage, Including education.
Today Mr Howard says nothing about those nasty things. He offers none of the specific policy details, just
nebulous policy directions things he believes In, he says. 
You don't have to be a political genius to know why John Howard is not giving us any details. My dog knows
why. John Howard is giving us no policy detail because as we found with John Howson and Jeff Kennett
the devil is In the detail. And John Howard hopes that if he leaves the detail out, and just keeps smiling as
cutely as he can, Australians won't see the devil lurking.
I know what he will say there's that Keating trying to scare people, talking about lurking devils and John
Howard being just like John Howson. " Massive scare campaign", he will say.
Well let's look at just one of John Howard's policy principles. Let's see if there Is a devil lurking in what he
says he'll do about education.
John Howard has committed a Coalition Government to winding back specific purpose grants to the States.
The States, he says, " will have greater freedom of choice when deciding their programs and priorities".
Now the Commonwealth Government provIdas over $ 4 billion in funding for school and vocational
education In the form of specific grants to the States -nearly one quarter of all specific purpose payments to
the States goes to education.
These grants help meet the costs of teachers' salaries, curriculum development and the professional
development of teachers. Grants to build and maintain schools and TAFEs. Grants to improve educational
opportunities for Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders, students with disabilities, children living in isolated
regions and children who suffer sodao-economic disadvantage. Grants to Improve the quality of schooling
and access to vocational education.
Mr Howard says he would wind back these grants.
And what would he put In their place?
The State's " programs and priorities".
So where is the devil lurking in this? Well, it just could be recognisable In the " programns and priorities" of
certain States.
Victoria, for instance, where the education " priorities" of the Ken nett Government have closed nearly 300
schools, reduced teacher numbers by 8,000, and cut the level of spending per student by
Or Tasmania, where real spending per student has fallen by 7 per cent.
And South Australia. The South Australian Government's priorities have seen the education budget
slashed by $ 40 million.
Where is the devil lurking in this particular Liberal Party policy " principle"? Answer in getting the States to
do the details. In getting the States to do the dirty work.
A little later I will be talking about another fundamental area of national policy where the Liberal Party is
similarly attempting to impose their old agenda by new means.
In fact, the more of these policy " principles" we look at the more we will see that, under John Howard's
leadership, the Liberal Party Is attempting to do by stealth what last time they attempted to do by open
debate. For the Australian public, not getting to see the detail means not getting to see the fundamental difference
between the Government and the Opposition. It means they don't get to see the choice.
In fact the choice is very much the same as It was the last time John Howard led the Coalition in an election
campaign. It is very much the chioice Australian voters have faced ever since the Liberal Party bought the
Idea that " small government" and a market free-for-all is the best means of governing a country.
For a decade or more, John Howard has been chief spokesman for this position and in successive elections
the Australian people have rejected him and his ideology. This election is his last stand this is John
Howard's Little Big Horn and there is nothing he won't do to escape the fate of Custer. 
If it means renouncing policies he has espoused all his political life, he will do it. If he can hide them he will.
And if he can get the States to practise them on his behalf well, what could suit him better?
Why you would give the States more responsibilities when many of them are walking away from their
existing responsibilities is beyond me. It is beyond Labor,
We say education is too important to leave to the States.
We say that the interests of our children are the Interest of the Commonwealth Government; the Interests of
those millions of Australians who need vocational training are the interests of the Commonwealth
Government. The interests of social equity and economic efficiency are the interests of the Commonwealth
Government. We say all these issues concern the national Interest and the national interest is the interest
of the Commonwealth Government.
Through its funding decisions, a government demnonstrates its priorities and interests and where it believes
Its responsibilities lie.
Through the provision of real Increases in funding for school education 54 per cent since we came to office
the Labor Government has supported access to education for all Australians.
In establishing the National Professional Development Fund, we have worked with teachers to strengthen
and widen their professional knowledge and expertise, acknowledging that teachers are the main agents of
educational reform.
Through support for EdNa, we have Identified the national significance of ensuring our schools are equipped
to take advantage of new technology.
In our suppoit for Aboriginal education, students from disadvantaged and isolated areas, students with
disabilities and students from non-English speaking backgrounds, we have put a premium on access and
equity. With funding for the new civics and citizenship education program, we are recognising that our young
people should understand our democratic institutions and participate in the civic life of the nation.
In Implemreniting the National Strategy on Asian Languages and Studies, we have recognised the need to
improve Australia's capacity to understand, interact and trade with our key Asian neighbours.
Through our $ 1.5 billion Increase in funding tor vocational education, we are signalling that a world-class
vocational education system is essential for building a competitive nation, and we are demonstrating that
this Government has a rock solid commitment to a public vocational education system which creates life
opportunities and allows access for all.
The Federal Labor Government has a deep interest in the shape of the nation's education system and the
education of our young people. But this interest would be hollow if it were not backed up by funding to
sustain and improve the education system. This is just what specific grants to the States are for. And this is
just what the Liberals would hand over to the States.
I have said before that education and especially public education is a wealth transfer. It is a profoundly
democratic and just investment and it is essential to the maintenance of the social fabric. It is also
essential to a healthy economy. A better trained workforce Is a more productive and innovative workforce.
Because education Is fundamental to our aspirations as a nation and as a people, because It goes to the
core of our egalitarian values, because it is an essential means of creating social cohesion, because it is a
basic right of all Australians, the Commonwealth Government has a duty to provide for it.
As teachers I expect you will have some sympathy with this attitude. As teachers you have professional
aspirations and interests an Interest in the people you teach, the quality of your schools and colleges, the
quality of curricula, the standards of your profession. 
But you also have aspirations as citizens as Australians with ambitions for yourselves and for your
children, with expectations that the reward for the work you do will allow a reasonabie amount of time for
leisure and recreation, and a reasonable salary to buy a reasonable life style now and in retirement. As
people who dedicate your labour, skills and knowledge to educating others, you expect, and have a right to
expect, decent pay and conditions of employment, including security of employment.
That is why as well as your interest In what Governments do about education, you have an interest In what
they do or propose to do about industrial relations.
When we talk about Industrial relations we are talking about more than the level of wages and salaries
although we are certainly talking about them too. When we talk about industrial relations, we are talking
about the welfare of individuals and families and their children. We are talking about the distribution of
wealth and opportunity in our society.
The Industrial relations system, broadly speaking, is the framework in which opportunity and wealth are
delivered. It is the basic mechanism of social justice. And, like education, it sets the boundaries for the sort
of society we are and want to be.
That is why, like education, It is an arena in which governments have a proper Interest. In education we
accept our responsibility to provide schools, equipment, technology, teachers. In industrial relations we
accept responsibility to provide a system that works fairly, efficiently and delivers security. That means we
accept responsibility to provide a safety net and an umpire.
And If you look at how our Industrial relations system has worked in the last decade and a half, and consider
the improvements which are still being made, you would have to ask why anyone would want to tear it down.
Why you would want to walk away from your responsibility to provide the umpire and the safety net?
The systemn we presently have and the one we have been developing for the last twelve years or so has
delivered results which were unimaginable in the days when the Coalition was in office.
It delivers a safety net for all workers. It delivers real wage increases. It delivers more than twice the labour
productivity of the country whose Individual contract system the Coalition most admires, New Zealand. It
delivers the lowest rate of strikes since 1940. It delivers employment growth. It delivers low inflation; and
Increasingly It delivers flexibility, skilling, and work place reform.
It delivers an Industrial culture of cooperation rather than conflict. It delivers an environment In which
fundamental, and fundamentally necessary, economic reform can take place without the social damage
which has accompanied such reform In other countries.
It delivers the means by which Australia has become a competitive and open economy, and yet retained its
social cohesion and the social values which have traditionally underpinned it.
In view of all this, you have to ask why would you tear it down?
Because despite their most recent efforts to pretend otherwise, tear it down is what the Coalition would do.
Labor market reform has been John Howard's passion for a decade.
What's tihe first thing the Coalition would do? They would throw away the Accord.
John Howard yearns for the pre-Accord days. We should remember what those days were like.
Australia was strike-prone.
The best measure of Industrial unrest, working days lost per 1000 employees, stood at 590 per annum under
Fraser and Howard in 1994 the number was 76. The average under the Accord is 67 per cent lower than It
was pre-Accord.
The change since 1983 has not been a slight variation to the industrial weather It has been a major change
In the climate.
But in the last resort, thle umpire still prevails. 
In the CRA conflict of last November an industrial disaster was averted because the system worked: the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission stepped in.
The same Commission that John Howard wants to do away with. " We will stab the Commission in the
stomach" he said in his braver days of 1992 when the Coalition thought they would win by being honest
about their intentions.
John Howard supported Comaico the same John Howard who last week said he believed in equal pay for
work of equal value!
Ask yourself, whiat would have happened, without the Commission.
Comalco was paying workers up to $ 20,000 less than their feliow workers performing identical tasks, just
because the latter signed individual contracts.
Ask yourself how long that dispute would have gone on, and what the casualties would have been If it hadn't
been fixed quickly. The country would have been brought to its knees.
The costs would have been extreme, and the consequences would go on for a long time.
Our reputation as a low strike country has taken more than a decade or mature perseverance. But it would
all be lost in a few weeks with the Howard hostility to unions and without an umpire to sort it out.
Our Industrial stability is under even greater threat from the Coalition than first appears. The deplorable
strike record delivered under John Howard in 1975-82 occurred under relatively favourable circumstances
compared to what will happen under the Coalition of the present.
At least in the 1975-82 period the Liberal Government did not directly seek conflict with the union
movement, as Its current policy does. It was more an approach of benign antipathy; today it is one of
aggressive hostility they talk about " breaking" union power.
At least in the 1975-82 period the Liberal Government did not sideline the umpire, the Industrial Relations
Commission, as Its current policy does.
So under the Coalition there would be a much bigger fight than before, and there would be no referee.
The Accord processes are more than about cooperation and Industrial peace. They reflect a consensual
view on the importance of the link between labour cost changes and national economic performance.
When the Government came to office In 1983, we Inherited double-digit inflation and double-digit
unemployment an Australian first.
In the period of the Accord we have had macro-economic outcomes foreseen by no economist and
unimaginable under the previous approach.
Real GOP growth has averaged 3.7 per cent growth per year under the Accord. It was 1.9 per cent In the
seven years before the Labor Government. That is, the Accord has delivered nearly a doubling of growth.
And It's continuing we now have had a record 17 successive quarters of GDP growth.
Economic growth means jobs growth. The Accord has delivered average employment growth of 2.3 per cent
per year; when Mr Howard was Treasurer the figure was 0.8 per cent.
In absolute numbers, the job growth figures are even starker: 184,514 per year under the Accord, 50,199
per year under Mr Howard.
If employment had continued to grow at the same rate as it did under Howard, there would be 1.4 million
fewer jobs today. 
Inflation has been reduced to an average of 5.2 per cent a year under the Accord: Mr Howard's record: 9.9
per cent. For the last 4 years It has averaged 2.25 per cent, a figure that 13 years ago would have been
Incredible. Real average weekly earnings for full-time adults has Iricreascd by 8.8 per cent under the Accord. The
Coalition says wages have failcn, but that's because they are using shonky data a point explained In the
document I am launching today.
The rapid employment growth and the higher real wages have influenced the best total measure or
economic welfare: real disposable household Income per capita. Under the Accord it has increased by 22.3
per cent, or nearly 2 per cent a year. For the previous pre-Accord period the total increase was only 6 per
cent less than 1 per cent a year.
Moreover, the Accord has provided a mechanism for transforming workplaces. It is not an accident, nor Is it
an international phenomenon, that our workplaces are being transformed significantly In terms of skiling
and flexibility.
And Is not an accident, nor Is It an International phenomenon, that the transition Is being accomplished In a
cooperative and peaceful way.
it is the Accord.
The Accord has delivered and it is continuing to deiiver.
In Accord Viii the partners committed to the creation of 000,000 additional jobs up to March, 1999. This
promise builds on the Accord VII commitment of 500,000 jobs in the three years after the 1993 election.
The time Is nealy up and already 720,000 jobs have been created.
In this Accord the ACTU and the Government also committed to a 2-3 percent rate of underline Inflation on
average over the course of the cycle. It Is unprecedented to have a union movement endorsing an Inflation
target of the Central Bank.
This Accord also supported a Special Case being brought before the Commission for teachers and nurses
who had been unable to obtain wage justice from conservative State Governments.
What would have happened to teachers' pay without the Accord and capacity Of the Commission to
Intervene when pay and conditions are being eroded by Governments not sympathetic to teachers? A large
number of people in this room would be much worse off without this process.
We shouldn't forget the micro-economnic reforms underway In Australian workplaces, with an emphasis on
collective bargaining at the enterprise level. Well over half of all federal omployoes are now on
agreements, many of them extremely Innovative. And the number Is growing quickly.
Workplace agreements collectively bargained are only possible If the total value of the award conditions
Is not reduced.
This Is the real " no disadvantage" test, In which the agreements are closely scrutinised by the highly expert
and respected Industrial Relations Commission before they become law.
The process of certifying agreements Is a public one. Agreements are negotiated collectively; union
representation Is welcomed; no Individuals have to bargain by themselves with the employer. There Is not a
large powor imbalance and industrial relations inspectors are checking that agreements are fair and legal in
practice. Every worker Is protected. The system looks after those whose bargaining position Is weak. It Is fair and Is
seen to be.
These Issues and more are described, explained and analysed In the Government document Flexibilty and
Fairness at Work, which I am launching today with the minister for industrial Relations, Laurie Brereton. 
Flexibility and Fairness at Work is a broad statement of the Government's Industrial relations stance. We
are very proud of it. We are confident it will reassure Australians that there is every reason to maintain our
Industrial relations approach and institutions because this system delivers flexible change and protects
workers. So, in summary, what do we get with the Accord? Industrial stability, a highly effective macro-economic
Instrument to deliver low Inflationary economic and employment growth, a framework for protected
workplace reform. A tested and proved way of operating.
Why would we want to put our social and economic security at risk by throwing it out?
What else does John Howard really want in Industrial relations?
One thing is not In doubt. He has been absolutely consistent in advocating radical change for the Australian
labour market.
It has been one of the few things we could rely on. As he said himself in July last year:
" As you know, of all the Issues I have been committed to over the last ten years, none has boen
more important, none has been more prominent, than my absolute commitment to the need to free
Australia's Industrial relations system."
If he's said It once, he's said it a hundred times. He must have said it a dozen times last year.
When economic policy reforms have been accepted as being good for the country, he has always said
things like, " yes but they won't do the most important thing they won't change our inflexible wages system".
John Howard has always stood for one thing: he wants Australia to be a low labour cost country. He wants
employers to have the upper hand with workers, because he says work contracts should be negotiated
Individually and not collectively.
Any fair assessment of his record leads Inexorably to this conclusion only: he wants workers' pay and
conditions to be cut.
How do we know this to be true?
As Treasurer in 1982 he Initiated the wages freeze which ensured that the real value of workers' pay would
fall. He has opposed riot been quiet about, not Ignored, he has opposed every proposed wage increase for
Australian worker's since 1978, bar two.
He wrote Jobsback! for the last election in which there were no protections for workers, and no way of
guaranteeing workers' pay and conditions. Hie has said on several occasions since the 1993 election that
Jobsbeck' was the right policy. He said it right up until I11 days ago.
He has referred to overtime and penalty rates as " absurd job destroying imposts", and told us for a decade
or more that labour market flexibility is the modern approach for Australia. Not having Governments, or
unions, Or Commissions Involved in industrial relations Is his panacea, his holy grail.
He looks with envy and admiration to the New Zealand changes in industrial relations which have totally
removed the awards and pushed workers into individual contracts.
The Victorian approach to Industrial relations, In which there have been significant pay reductions for
Victorian State award workers, he describes as excellent policy.
When 400,000 Victorian workers chose to move to the federal award system to escape, he has said less
and less about how good the Victorian model Is. But Jeff Kennett has said that with a Howard government,
these people would have " nowhere to hide".
John Howard has said that the Western Australian State industrial relations system is his preferred model.
For West Australian workers there are individual contracts with just a few minimum conditions, and the
certainty that employers can reduce pay legally. 
8
He advocated a youth wage of $ 3 an hour in the last election, and has only dropped it now because he
argues that it Is hard to explain the benefits. Nevertheless, he says that it is right.
He continually attacks the Government for its active support of the Accord, the Industrial Relations
Commission, and bargaining processes that protect workers.
And, with these views and this line of attack, he is essentially saying two things: that ' flexibility" meaning
pay cuts Is the solution; and that he is not prepared to support a system which genuinely protects the pay
and conditions of workers.
The finest policy contribution that could be made by government in John Howard's view is the " freeing up"
of the labour market with its attendant pay cuts and loss of conditions.
Simply, he wants another, way.
It Is his deepest philosophical commitment, the definition and framework of his policy position his reason
for being.
But then a strange thing happened just 11 days ago.
In the speech to the Young Liberals Annual Convention on January 8 he announced a complete change in
his direction. He said things he had never said or thought, or felt, or countenanced for a moment in his
entire political career.
What was his oldest anathema suddenly became his newest desideratumn.
He said things that he had fought against in the Liberal party back rooms for a decade. Among young
Liberals at least the very young it might not have raised a youthful eyebrow. But old Liberals must have
been reaching for the smelling salts, and in boardrooms across the country the level of whiskey bottles fell
by an average 8 centimetres.
Had their man gone mad? They give him one last chance and this is what he does.
" Under a Howard Government you cannot be worse off but you can be better off", he said. " I give this rock
solid guarantee", he said. " Our policy will not cause a cut in the take-home pay of Australians", he said.
He then went on to outl ine some changes to the Industrial relations system, including listing 10 so-called
minimum conditions of employment. One of these was that take-home pay would be at least the same as
the value of the award conditions.
How could this amazing turn-around be understood?
Has he radically changed? Have his previous commitments and principles now gone?
Is he entitled to be believed?
By the time they got the corks back In the bottles In the boardrooms and the beter clubs, they knew the
answer and were reassured.
They knew that this new system of his can't and won't actually deliver what he says. They knew that he still
wants radical changes and his new system will deliver this.
That instead of being straight, like Dr Hewson was, it can all be achieved by stealth. That his speech was a
ruse. The truth is, he still wants radical change.
It i5 simply not credible that John Howard, by his own definition the most conservative Liberal leader ever,
has now become an advocate of worker protections in the labour market.
He Is not entitled to be believed. 
And if he is not entitled to be believed he is weak, because he doesn't have the courage to stand up for and
argue his beliefs.
And if he still wants radical labour market reform but seek it by Stealth, then he is sneaky.
John Howard won't be the first Liberal leader to promise no reductions in workers remuneration and then cut
pay and conditions Immediately on winning government. In fact, It's becoming quite fashionable.
Jeff Kennett was the first in recent times. He said Victorian workers will not suffer " any loss of wages and
conditions", but then abolished all State awards and took away holiday loadings.
Richard Court was next, saying he was no Jeff Kennett and that workers had " nothing to fear. When
elected, he out youth wages to $ 3.77 an hour and removed all Income guarantees from the Western
Australian system.
John Howard's promise that " under Coalition policy... . employees cannot be worse off* has a very familiar
ring. Kennett, Court and Howard have one thing strongly in common: an absolute conviction that labour mariket
change for which read lower wages is essential.
It is more than just the comparison with his fellow Liberals that tells us that Howard is not entitled to be
believed. It is the process of his new system that will make It Inevitable.
Under the proposed system the Industrial Relations Commission will be made redundant. There will be no
public testing or assessment of the fairness of contracts. Workers will have to bargain, as Individuals, with
the employer.
The Australian Workplace Agreement will be filed and that just means put in a cabinet with the new socalled
Employment Advocate, It will not be looked at unless the worker asks for this to be so.
Let's think about the circumstances in which a worker would ask for an inspection of their contract.
If asked to sign an Australian Workplace Agreement would a job applicant say, " let me show It to the union,
or to a lawyer first", when they know that some other more compliant applicant will then get the job? The
answer is, of course not. Job applicants will have no effective choice.
Thus job mobility will ensure that the system must quickly and Inevitably reflect the law of the jungle. Under
the Coalition's approach new workers will be forced onto agreements that will not be scrutinised by an
effective or even expert body.
And job mobility is a huge Issue. Over 1.7 million workers face a new employer each year. 400,000
married women returning to work; 250,000 tertiary education graduates; several hundred thousand year I11
and 12 leavers; and 600,000 workers who change jobs every year.
In 1994 a total of 28,258 school teachers took a job with a new employee 7675 men and 18583 women.
Some of them might be sitting in this room. That's over 10 per cent of all teachers each year without any
effective protection.
The system will change radically, and quickly, because somebody wanting a job will sign up even if they are
unhappy with the contract. And no one apart from the worker and the employer will know what has
transpired because, as In Victoria and Western Australia, the contracts will be secret.
Existing employees are also not going to challenge their employer if they think the contract Is unfair. This
would amount to publicly questioning the employers honesty and credibility.
The employer can make this costly in all sorts of ways by not offering overtime hours, by not all owing
holidays when they are wanted, by not giving promotions, and even by the sack under the Coalition's
changed unfair dismissals laws. You'd have to be a mug to want to take on the boss publicly In this way. 
And why would an Individual worker bother to bring a complaint to the Employment Advocate when it has no
judicial power, and no way of enforcing a decision, other than to take it to court where it Gould stay for many
months, and where the outcome is uncertain?
Even if the Workplace Agreement seems unthreatening at first, the Coalition has no process to up-date
them, and says that even if the awards are Improved this will not effect tihe Workplace Agreement. So over
time the Agreements must become of lower value, with no mechanism to alter this, and no right for a worker
to strike if an employer changes any aspect of them.
John Howard knows all this. And so do his political supporters.
It is instructive that neither the BCA nor the ACCI took John Howard to task for his appaient conversion to
the cause of worker protection. It is instructive that Jeff Kennett and the WA industrial relations Minister,
Kierath, both applauded Howard's policy announcement even though on paper It contradicts much of what
they stand for.
The reason is that conservative business groups and other Liberals know what John Howard knows: he can
achieve by stealth exactly what he and they have always wanted.
The conservatives saw the meaning of John Howard's speech, knowing It to be a ruse, camouflage from a
leader without the leadership to admit where he wants to take Australia.
Camouflage from a leader who won't stand and articulate that which he passionately believes.
The bottom line is that John Howard Is committed to radical labour market change nothing Is clearer. But
he has now also revealed himself as someone who is prepared to publicly repudiate his most strongly held
position because he knows that, properly understood, his industrial relations policy would lose him the
election. He Is willing to wear the charge that he stands for nothing because he hopes to win by cunning what he has
never won by advocacy.
Under Howard's system wages must fail. Conditions must be lost. And It will all happen quickly because
the labour market has so much mobility, and it is the new job takers who will be most disadvantaged initially.
But, over time, everybody will be affected.
The question Is why do it? Why throw away the Accord and put in place a system that must cut pay and
conditions and take away basic rights of workers?
It can't be for profits. Industrial peace, jobs or Inflation. And it's not for productivity as the dismal
performance of New Zealand has shown,
It can only be because he wants a radically different Australia, with considerably more employer power and
considerably less employee protections.
It can only be because he wants a low wage cost country. Make no mistake, this obsession still rules him.
Under John Howard's arrangements the Australian industrial system will be changed In favour of employers,
the bargaining will swing In their favour, the onus will fall on Individual workers and as a recent poll
indicates, they know workers' Incomes will be cut.
The real John Howard won't be standing up in this election, but we've seen enough from the last quarter
century to know exactly what to expect.
He will leave education to the States. He will leave the wages and conditions of Australian workers not to
the IRC and the system of awards and the principle of no disadvantage but to the law of the jungle and the
survival of the fittest.
With the processes of his industrial relations system his rock-solid guarantee of workers take home pay Is a
sham and a ruse. 
11
With John Howard we have once again reached a fork In the road. His path leads Inexorably to a reduced
social wage, reduced educational opportunity, the end of the Accord, and the end of an industrial relations
system which levels up the playing field of our national life.
Since I last spoke to you, we have had three highly productive years. There have been major economic and
social reforms. We have maintained the environment of cooperation and tolerance which has taken us so
far in recent years. In 1996, just about the only thing which hasn't changed for the better is the Coalition.
Even the recent change in rhetoric is no change if you remember this time in 1993, they were attempting
to sell a new cuddly version of Fightback.
We are seeing it all again. And with your support, we will see the same result at the election.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH LAURIE BRERETON, MINISTER FOR
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT,
MELBOURNE, 19 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: Today, Laurie Brereton and I are publishing a statement on our policy
on Industrial Relations. It's called Flexibility and Fairness At Work, it's
a hIstory of the process of consensual iincomes policy, a history of the
Accor4 from 1983 about how the labour market has worked in the
years, what each Accord did, how it has produced a competitive
outward looking, low inflation, high growth economy, strong growth in
fact, and increased real wages. And we're doing it to make clear how
novel and unique this policy Is in the world, that no other developed
country has pursued such a policy and when one looks at the rates of
growth which we've had during these twelve years compared with the
previous seven years of the Coalition, we've doubled the rate of
economic growth in Australia and yet we've had a very large decline in
inflation. This Is an almighty achievement. Show me any country
where the rate of growth picks up to twice the speed and you'll see a
country with a lot of prosperity, and you can see that now in the stock
market, we can see it in the general sense of employment growth, we
can see it around the world.
In recent months I've quoted Robert Reich, the US Labour Secretary,
who talked about the conundrum of US policy, saying we've had a lot
of job growth in the United States but we've got an army of working
poor because there's no gatekeeper, there's no-one looking out for the
low paid, there are no standards and he made the point that in Europe
they've got rigidities and standards but the rigidities are such that they
can't get the aggregate employment growth, so there's very low
employment growth In Europe, quite high employment growth in
America but quite low wages growth, falling real wages. In Australia,
we've had the best of both worlds. Strong employment growth, rising
real wages and rising household disposable income so we must be
doing something right, we think we're doing something very right here.
And as the Coalition and their leader has this month made clear that
industrial relations and their view of it is a major issue for them so too 
have we taken the opportunity to say exactly were the Government
stands in terms of the labour market, what our philosophy is, what the
record is and where we'll be going in the future.
I might invite Laurie at this point to add to and complement my own
words of introduction.
LIS: Thank you Paul. There is no doubt this statement reveals in detail the
Labor way, the way we've gone about pursuing industrial relations
through the life of the Government and it's really the reality of the
Labor way In contrast with the rhetoric of the last couple of weeks of
John Howard and Peter Reith.
The Labor way of course is known to everyone, it's embodied in the
Accord, every Accord from 1 through to Accord Mark 8 and it's
embodied In the Industrial Relations Reform Act which has now been
operating for law of this nation for almost two years. Everything you
need to know about the Labor way is in this document, everything that
the electorate needs to know about their security in employment is
raised in this document and the Industrial Relations Reform Act. It's
the forrula that has given us high growth, given us high productivity,
Its gil~ en us low inflation and its given us record low industrial
disputation. It's a system that the Opposition of course, as the Prime
Minister said this morning, now wish to radically after. They won't give
us more than the rhetoric but I think this document makes a very stark
contrast between the reality of Labor and the unknown and the
uncertainty of what you would have with a change to the system with
the removal of the role of the industrial umpire with this new world of
John Howard's of Australian workplace agreements which are now
revealed not as agreements at all, not collectively reached but simply
individual contracts under another name.
J* Prime Minister you suggested In your speech today that you gave the
example of where the IRC would not be able to operate under a
Coalition government, yet my understanding of their policy is that the
role of the IRC has been downgraded in wage fixation but it would still
be there In terms of industrial disputes. On what basis'do you suggest
this and are you saying that's what will happen under a Howard
government?
LB: If I could answer that. It's very clear that under a system of Australian
workplace agreements outlined by John Howard re individual
contracts, there is no role whatsoever for the Industrial Relations
Commission because their role of vetting agreements, as they do at
the moment. by applying a specific set of quite strict tests, to make
sure workers are not disadvantaged in that the no disadvantage test is
fully applied before the agreement comes into existence, would be out
the window. This is a power that is being removed from the
Commission, it's one thing to say.. 
PM: About conditions, wages and conditions, it's a different basis, what
he's making is a different basis on which they will be set in which the
Commission does not have a role.
LB: That's right and if the Commission cannot deal with the totality of the
problem and we have a Commission that fortunately today can, can
deal with the dispute, can use It's arbitral powers in this area of
contract employment, if it sees fit on a special case basis then what
have you got, you've got Industrial mayhem and you've got no solution
to what this nation faced in December of last year.
J: Mr Brereton will you be changing this policy or refining in any way in
the lead up to the election or would you
LB: I think our policy is absolutely clear, it's outlined in this document and
of course it's embodied in the Industrial Relations Reform Act. Where
it's been necessary, we've made a number of amendments to that Act,
one of which was to simplify the dealings With unfair dismissal so as to
make them as non-legalistic as possible and I might say that that was
a chanqe welcomed by employer groups in Australia, but it's a change
that of course does not satisfy John Howard who said even as altered,
he would remove those safeguards and destroy the protections
avallable to Australian working men and women.
So not only would we have on the one hand individual contracts, but
on the other, we'd have the right of the Commission to deal with unfair
dismissals using the powers, the external affairs power, greatly
reduced.
J: So that's...?
LB: This is our policy and the Industrial Relations Act is our way.
J: Mr Keating if the Opposition Will continually hammer the theme that
one of the costs of the Accord in relation to business the Government
Is continually kowtowing to the ACTU, how do you feel of that issue, on
ANL and things like that?
PM: How many Heads of Government around the world would like to, as Mr
Howard put it, kowtow to their unions for a two and a half per cent
Inflation rate? This is the sort of nonsense he goes on with about the
Government kowtowing to unions as if there is some sort of runaway
trade union movement. I mean it's a contradiction in terms to say
there is some sort of runaway power In the trade union movement with
the inflation rate between 2 and 3 per cent. It was 11I under him and
you see, they won't step back and recognise the fact, the ideology Is
so strong, they won't say well look maybe the Government's come up
with something In a decade. Twice the rate of economic growth is a 
big achievement, I mean look at Germany, they're starting to slow
down now they think somewhere between I and 2 per cent for the
coming year. Look at a lot of these industrial economies, they're
growing in Australian terms quite slowly, yet we have doubled the rate
of growth that existed under the Coalition and we've cut inflation
markedly. Now these things can only be consistent with good wage
setting and wage fixing procedures. Ones which have an eye to
productivity and I gave the details in the speech, since 1991, since the
New Zealand individual wage contract legislation was introduced, New
Zealand productivity has gone up by I per cent, labour productivity in
Australia by 2 and a half. In New Zealand there has been I per cent
wages growth in Australia there has been 5 and I think you'd think the
Coalition would sit back and say well something good is happening
here, I mean something novel is being done, but they want to tip it out
and they want to go back to a system without collectivity, without the
right of people to bargain in a collective way. They want to push
people back to a labour market were the employers have the
bargaining strength and an individual person is left to the vagaries of
the courts.
J: Prime f1inister, following the last election that when you suggested
you Were going to move further on the labour market deregulation, are
you pledging and Mr Brereton that this is the policy, it will not be
changing after the election and you will not be moving to free up the
labour market any further than it is?
PM: I think that some of the people who Will write about that speech read
Into it things that they want to see, in fact what was there was the
policy we now have and what we've seen under this Government is a
movement away from a centralised system to firstly a big change to the
structure of awards, a radical restructuring of awards and then
amalgamation of unions and then to a system of enterprise bargains
which are productivity based with the safety net underpinning it, that's
where we've moved. If you go through this document you'll see in the
various Accords where we started to move away from the centralised
system In a sort of evolutionary way towards an enterprise bargaining
based system. This is the point that John Howard has never
understood, to get wage flexibil ' ity you must have it in a way which is
non-disruptive anid ' where all of the community feel they're
stakeholders in the process, that's what we have done. This idea that
you can cold turkey the system, that's what he tried to do and said he
was doing in the late 1970' s, and early 1980' s, letting it rip. Well it
ripped all right, what we had was a wage explosion and then a wages
collapse and double digit inflation and double digit unemployment.
What the Government has done has moved the system towards an
enterprise bargaining based system, wbat we're saying in here when
we talk about the future, on page 3 of the document, we're saying in
the future we Will see continuing workplace reform to improve
efficiency and flexibility through the extension of bargaining and further 
reform of awards, sustained commitment to ensuring fairness and
effective protection through to the safety net etc. In other words we
are seeing tremendous sophistication in our enterprise bargains and I
just don't think the Coalition knows about this or understands it and
that's why such a high proportion of federal employees covered by
federal awards are now part of a bargain so the consistency, I think it's
worth just looking through at page 10 of this document where under
the Accords 1, 2, 3, 4, you can see where we're starting to shift away
from centralised system to an enterprise bargaining system and that's
going to continue but we're getting there without industrial disruption
and we're getting there with all the appropriate sensible protections.
J: In some areas, Prime Minister, wages in fact are starting to grow too
fast now under this system, are you sharing that view?
PM: Well, no, what we want is a high wage low inflation economy, what
John Howard wants is a low wage low inflation economy, that's the
difference and I mean I just spent a day or two in Singapore and there,
the average wage, that's national income per capita Is running at
$ 31,000. Now they haven't run a low inflation country by pushing
wages Pown, they haven't decided to deal with competitors in Asia by
having a low labour cost country, that's Mr Howard's view, it's always
been his view, what we've always said lers educate our people,
produce innovative products, get a premium for them and increase our
wages. Real wage Increasing but we're seeing still the control of
underlying inflation which means there is productivity in the middle.
J: Now that
PM: I think it's very hard to say, some of it has been the fact of the relative
growth of the services sector of the economy which has been more
difficult to organise I think, but certainly the growth is there. The most
telling statistic I used this morning was household disposable Income
per capita at 21 per cent over the period, I mean that's the most telling
statistic I think about the history of Labor in Government in terms of
Incomes in Australia.
J: Should the Government be paying attention to Union membership
declining so rapidly?
PM: No, I think that is for employees and their organisations to attend to
and to worry about and you know, in some of the areas, in hospitality
for instance which had enormous growth in employment in the 80' s it
was largely unorganised, I mean they were not, those people were not
joined up, and as a consequence In that part of the economy it
dropped.
J: But doesn't that mean, we have declining union membership, doesn't
that mean that many of these people are not covered by any 
agreement registered before the Commission the only alternative
they have is the Court system anyway?
LB: No, on the contrary, under the Federal system almost 60 per cent are
in agreements and all are covered by an award so they've got the
comprehensiveness of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
overseeing the whole of their working arrangements.
J. The Liberals that with the IRC and the award system..
LB: Not at all because they'll introduce an alternative which they call
Australian Workplace Agreements which are in reality individual
contracts which will be optional and will be used to undermine the
whole Integrity of the system because any new employee will be faced
with the choice ' take the contract or you don't get the job' and as the
Prime Minister said in his speech this morning, with 1.7 million
Australian workers facing a new employer every year with 40 per cent
of the whole Australian workforce facing a new employer in the course
of one 3 year term of Parliament, It won't be very long at all before not
only new employees but all employees would find themselves under
contracl arrangements rather than the* comprehensive safeguards of
the Australian Industrial Relations System.
J: Independent research indicates that up to a third of workplaces have
Informal agreements anyway as the situation works and you've only
got about a 100 EFA's so isn't that the situation in any case in reality
LB: No because we've got a comprehensive award system, one indeed
that's being updated at the moment, as you well know the Commission
have started their review, the insertion of flexibility clauses into the
award system of facilitative clauses into the award system, of majority
clauses into that award system as well as the vehicles of certified
agreement making and enterprise flexibility agreement making so
you've got a totally comprehensive system but one which would have
the guts ripped out of it by individual contracts being introduced on a
widespread basis as the norm for the first time. Now certainly, I don't
deny there are many workplaces who have chosen to provide
overaward payments and we welcome that and we've never said quite
frankly that there's no place at all for some sorts of contracts in the
workplace but the integrity of the system needs to have the
Commission overseeing all of the bargain making and it needs to
have the award system providing the essential underpinning and the
application of a strong no disadvantage test.
J: Prime Minister, we've listened to obviously a campaign speech, why
don't you put the election on what are you waiting for? 
PM: You mean the election, you said, and others said Laurie, we were
going to have eighteen months ago.
J: I don't think I said that Prime Minister.
PMV: Well many did, the election budget, the election we were going to have
when we were clearing the decks with a republic, the Accord Mark 8
election, you mean that election.
J: I mean the one that's due now, when are you going to put it on?
PM: When it suits the country and the Government.
J: When will that be?
PM: W~ hen it suits the country and the Government.
J: Well you said in your speech this morning that that we're going to
face an election In between 2 and 3 months, the 2 and 3 months, does
that mean that you regard it as potentially legitimate for the
Govempinent to run to May?
PM: Absolutely, I mean I'm the one on the record all the time saying that we
should get the maximum value from these Parliaments, most of you are
on the record saying there's going to be any early election.
PMV: Well, not all of you, some of you, some noisy ones of you.
J: Is industrial relations going to be the major issue?
PMV: I think, it's very interesting that where the Coalition saw themselves
vulnerable In the runup to 1993, In the last week of Parliament, if my
recollection serves me correctly, or it might have been the last
business week of the year, John Howson Introduced Fightback Mark 11,
a more cuddly version of it because he thought he had major
problems with Flghtback. John Howard has done exactly the same
thing, instead of doing it In the last week of December he's done in the
first week of January. He's come off his leave, made a statement and
gone back on leave. He said Industrial relations is one of the key
issues of the election It not the key issue, he's made it such an issue
by doing that and we're entitled as a Government to respond.
J: Does it surprise you that he actually went so far in changing the policy
PM: You can't take it seriously, that's the point we're making, I mean he
either takes the position that he terms the high moral ground of saying 
Labors taken Australia a long way in internationalising the economy,
in changing the whole culture of the country but it can't take the last
step of labour market reform, I will take it. That's the ground he saw
himself standing on, the high ground he's seen himself standing on.
He's now saying he doesn't stand on that high ground at all and his
supporters are entitled to ask, well in that case Mr Howard, on what
ground do you stand on. That is if you accept it but why did the ACCI
and the Business Council remain mute, because they know what they'll
get is what they got with Mr Kennett and Mr Court, they'll get the full
version, they'll get labour market flexibility downwards, they'll get the
cuts in the bottom 40 per cent of the workforce that they've always
been looking for and that's what will come. You can Imagine the
ebullience of a Coalition Government in office being held to account
for something they said in January of this year. John Howard has
always said people know what I stand for, people know the team and
they know what we stand for and what they stand for is radical labour
market change.
J: Prime Minister, the Court and Kennett strategies, does it worry you that
it might work again?
PM: No, because I think as the polls indicated quite eloquently during the
week, I think people can spot that kind of behaviour. I don't think
given Mr Howard's consistent, continued advocacy of this course of
action and for well over a decade, to find him now seeking to portray
himself as the manager of a policy similar to the Governments is
Incredible and unbelievable and that sort of twerpish behaviour Is I
think well spotted by the public.
J: Do you think it will take you three months to get that across or can you
do It in a three week
PM: The fact that we've got much of that across now brought him out in
January.
J: Inaudible
PM: Oh well, there are no easy political tasks are there, I mean none of
them are easy but again the results speak for themselves. We open
the new year with all the bald headlines in the financial press about
the stockmarket and In the end what is the stockmarket saying, they're
imputing higher profits into their calculations in terms of the all
ordinaries Index and that's coming from growth and restraint in wages
and Inflation and at the same time we had very strong employment
numbers. You know, you don't need a microscope to work out which
way the economy is going, that's strongly and forward. 
J: The polling this week shows that more than 63 per cent of people
didn't support Howard but also thought you had been In office for
too long
PM-Yes but I mean the point about it is, as I always tell you about the
stubby pencils, you know they have their own particular aura about
them and when people get one in their hand they think about the future
and about their lives. I think it was very telling that after the
Government has been in office for 13 years, succession of Labor
government's for 13 years, such a high proportion of people thought
the Government had done well.
J: That's more important than the level of support?
PM: Absolutely, absolutely.
J1 Given that the polls have shown you consistently behind the Coalition
through the last 12 months, do you think the campaign will bridge that
gap
PM: I'm not ' about to say, you know what I say about polls, I'm always
offending the press gallery talking about only politicians can decipher
the polls and they can it's true. There are very few people in Australia
who can read polls, not just a pol but the public mood.
J: Can you start a campaign this far behind?
PM: Well, I'm sure John Major is going to start his campaign much further
behind than we are.
J: Everyone says he may not win...?
PM: No, but we are, he may not but we are.
J: Prime Minister has Jeff Kennett's industrial policies your campaign
PM: Well, I gave the figures today, the closure of the schools, the 8,000
teachers that have been dismissed and in the end what's happening. I
mean Jeff Kennett is putting chains on public toilets on railway
stations, he is turning the ambulance service out to private contractors,
he's lost sight of what his responsibilities are in running a civilised
society and I think Victorians understand this well.
Ends. 



( 7)
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
LAUNCH OF OUR NATION
SYDNEY, 20 JANUARY 1996
* CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**
Even allowing for this years rel atively awful weather everywhere from here to
Bass Strait and beyond, there are things about Australia in the summer
holidays which never fail to remind us that to live in this country is to be very
fortunate. The long warnm days, the beaches, the barbecues, the family, the friends; the
sport, the arlts, the space it's generally enough to help wind down from the
year gone by and to wind up for the one ahead, even one which contains an
election. You stop reading the papers, give up on the evening news It is a
nag-free environment.
We take the good things pretty much for granted. But sometimes all of a
sudden its hits you, that we are profoundly lucky to have a country as good
as this a continent as big and wonderful, and a society as strong, free,
democratic, rich and unpretentious.
I think it's a time of the year when, in an entirely understated way of course,
we celebrate the country and the pleasure we take in being Australian.
There are even times when I think we should all stop and drink a toast to the
place, to the fact that we are here, and to our fellow Australians.
And just as quickly go back to whatever we were doing or not doing.
This may be an unconscious reflection of a Celtic heritage. The Celts love
toasts. But I don't think it's got much to do with the Irish. It takes a lot less time than
my family have been In Australia to develop a purely Australian form of
sentimentality. We might retain a certain self-conscious pride or interest in.
our ethnic origins, but after a generation or two it is not much more than a
hobby. Yet in an immigrant society the knowledge of where we came from is
knowledge worth having. 
Even after several generations of experience has made us incorrigibly
Australian, we old Anglo, Celtic Australians retain a certain affectionate
curiosity about our ancestral seats, and almost certainly reflect a little of the
culture from which we are derived not to say the physical characteristics.
A hundred years ago there were plenty of people in this country who knew
exactly what Henry Lawson meant when he said: " I am Australian. I know no
other land".
And I have met Australians who migrated as children in the 1940s and
who would say exactly the same thing. Even as they eat dolmades and
gefillte fish and tabouli and toad-in-the-hole and tagliatelle.
Eve * n as they practise their traditional religions, observe their traditional
rituals and celebrations and display, in all sorts of nearly imperceptible ways,
their traditional culture and habits of mind.
In other words, we are all to a greater or lesser extent, Immigrants. And we
are all equally Australians. That is the reason for celebrating.
There have been many reasons advanced -for the success of Australia's
Immigrant sodiety. I think most of them are valid and none of them are
sufficient reason to be complacent about it. All of them put together are no
reason to be complacent about it.
There seems to me no doubt that the great physical spaces of Australia al so
create psychological space and this helps the cause of peace in a diverse
society.
And that is also a reason to bear in mind the need to plan our development in
clever ways which use the space and its resources optimally.
Immigration always teaches us things about ourselves.
The old democratic fabric and institutions of this country, and the egalitarian
traditions, have also helped us accommodate the cultural difference. The
Idea of the " fair go" has been a real force in shaping Australia, including
multicultural Australia.
And that is also a reason to insist that all Australians, and especially our
children, know -the-value of the democracy. and the democratic traditions they
have Inherited.
If there Is a third substantial reason for the success of multiculturalism in
Australia, it may be that we have been multicultural since the beginning of
European settlement. The First Fleet was multicultural and every generation
since has lived with significant cultural, religious and political difference not
the least of them of course the difference between the Irish and the English.
And that Is another reason not to be complacent our generations are not the
first to live successfully with diversity, we inherited a lot of our knowledge. 
3
If these are three broad reasons for the success of modern multicultural
Australia the fact of our environment, the fact of our democracy, and the fact
of our experience in cultural diversity they tend to suggest that to keep
succeeding we need to keep working and take nothing for granted.
Above all, we should remember what all free immigrants to Australia had in
common and that was the search for a better life. Nothing so effectively
made the cultural differences seem unimportant as the common pursuit of
prosperity and freedom.
It follows that if we want this diverse modern Australia to remain harmonious,
productive and cohesive we have to maintain both the standards of our
democracy and the energy of our economy and our society. Whatever
sophisticated multicultural programs we devise, these are the most important
prerequisites of success.
I think the essential thing to understand about a society like ours an
Immigrant society is that immigration is a two-way street. It involves a
cultural exchange.
When I was'gowing up;, I worked for a while in Pyrmont and I would often go
down and watch the ships from P&amp; O and the Orient Line come in and dock,
loaded with immigrants; families crowded to the rails looking at the city with
who knows what sort of feelings.
And who knows what sorts of feelings were felt by those of us who watched.
But 1 am sure that not all the fear and apprehension were on the other side of
the ship's rail. 1 am sure there was some kind of exchange of feelings. I think
whatever hope they felt was matched by our admiration for their courage in
crossing the world and, perhaps even more admirable, to have come among
US. In retrospect you can see how It was a leap of faith on both sides. That's the
great strength of Australia's post-war Immigration policy. It took courage on
both sides and I believe the experience has given Australia that much more
courage. It gave us many things and I don't think this audience needs me to tell them
what they are,.. But I do think-that-this.-is-a point worth making: when you
open yourself up to the world, when you are brave enough to look cultural
difference in the eye, you learn a great deal. And half of what you learn is
about yourself. And you are made stronger by that and more mature.
That is what I mean by immigration being essentially an exchange. For
everything we have given to the people from 160 countries who have come
here, we have been repaid. For a new start in life, they repaid Australia in
their energy, ideas and ambitions, in their skills and in their culture. But, just
as Importantly, In the greater maturity, self-knowledge and the courage they
have given us. 
In the global environment we now find ourselves in, and amid the intense
competition, these qualities have a value for us which is beyond measure.
We can define multiculturallsm In any number of ways. Some people like the
concept but hate the word so much they would like to define it out of
existence. Yet, as I have said before, so long as it is not mistaken for an
ideology or a bureaucracy or a set of rules in political correctness, the word is
a perfectly accurate description of what we are, what we must be and what
we want to be.
I think we should live with the word and enjoy the reality. Above all, we
should recognise that this multicultural ism massively enlarges our democracy
and our democratic traditions, It adds to our freedom as well as to the
richness of our lives.
That Is why we should enshrine the principle of tolerance among our most
basic democratic principles.
And that is why the suggestion made in the statement we are launching
today, that we begin to think of our country in terms of a Multicultural
Compact seeifns to me ' such a good one, Essentially it gives expression to
thb idea of Immigration as an exchange.
The Multicultural Compact states that we share this land with the first
Australians, whose cultures are oldest of all; and that, as a result of
Immigration, we also share a wealth of diverse histories and traditions.
The Compact asks of all Australians, irrespective of background and
generation, that they Invest their main allegiance in Australia; that they
accept the basic structures of Australian society the rule of law, tolerance,
equality of opportunity, parliamentary democracy, freedom of speech and
religion, English as the national language and equality of the sexes and
races; and that they extend to others the same freedoms they claim for
themselves. And the Australian community is asked in exchange: to ensure equality of
access, opportunity and participation, unimpeded by barriers of race,
language or country of birth; to ensure that our institutions reflect and
respond to the diversity of the population; to ensure that the potential
-contribution of-all Australians is recognised, and to provide opportunities for
all Australians to learn both English and another language.
I will be writing to Premiers and Chief Ministers seeking endorsement by all
Australian governments of the principles contained within the Multicultural
Compact. A healthy multicultural society has no need for rules and sanctions. But there
is value In describing the logic by which the country works, and in defining
the minimum standards required in a civil society. 
4. And this is the time to begin that process of definition.
Because in the last decade of the twentieth century, for the first time in our
history, we have a real chance to decide our own destiny to pull together all
the strands of Australian identity.
We have dismantled all the barriers which quarantined us from the rest of the
world and we are becoming ever more deeply engaged in our own region.
These are exciting times and we need Australians to engage in them. I
believe this statement will help that process. We have derived immeasurable
benefits from immigration and from the multicultural programs of the last two
decades. These days we tend to think in terms of the economic and cultural
benefits, and there is no question that they are immense.
However, I am inclined to think that the greatest benefits are literally without
measure; and that they go not only to governments, nations and communities
but to every one of us. They make all Australians, whatever their
backgrounds, a little bit richer and a little bit stronger.
In part, Our Nation is a response to the report of the National Multicultural
Advisory Co~ ncil, an&amp;~ I would like to thank the Council for its work in
reviewing the architecture of multicultural Australia.
I want especially to thank Mick Young for his great work as Chair of the
Council. Mick comes from the same ethnic group as myself.
But and I'm sure you will excuse my using the word in this context we are
both thoroughly assimilated.
In his own way Mick Young is proof of the greatness of this democracy: in
not every country is it possible for a shearer to reach the highest rungs of
office; but then not every country produces shearers like Mick.
Mick is stepping down for health reasons; and I hope he will forgive me for
reminding him that everyone in this room wishes him well.
* I must also welcome the new Chair of the National Multicultural Advisory
* CounciyMr Neville Roach,. who is with us today..
I am now delighted to launch Our Nation.
ends 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH NOTES BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRIME MINISTER'S WELCOME LUNCH FOR MEMBERS OF
THE CANBERRA COMMISSION, MONDAY 22 JANUARY 1996
ADMIRALTY HOUSE, SYDNEY
* May I begin by formally thanking each of you for accepting my invitation
to join this Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons
0 I am very conscious of how busy you are, and far you have come to
participate in this meeting
I am very grateful to you
0 However, I am sure from your presence here that you all agree there can
be few comimitments more worth making than this
I would not have set up this Commiission or asked you to take part if I
did not believe your combined efforts will1 be able to make a
significant contribution to one of the most pressing issues facing the
international community
that is, how the world can remove the threat of nuclear weapons
weapons of mass destruction so powerful that their use could
destroy our civilization
The Australian Government begins from what seems to us to be the
unarguable proposition that the world would be a better, safer, saner
place without such weapons
that is, if they did not exist
* But we have them and only three possibilities follow from that:
first, that they will be used 
second, that they will not be used but will be managed forever by
wise, prudent and well-meaning governments and military forces
or, third, that somehow we can agree to eliminate them
* The first possibility offers catastrophe to the human race
T he second requires us to make assumptions about the future which run
completely counter to logic and experience
-because if there is one thing of which we can be utterly confident, it
is that the present relatively benign global situation in which only five
countries have declared nuclear weapons, and are unlikely to use
them offensively, will not obtain forever
far more probable over time is the emergence of a more
fractured, dangerous, world in which the restraints which have
governed the strategic outlook since these weapons were
invented no longer apply, and the possession of such weapons
proliferates more generally to other states and possibly even
beyond state control
* That leaves only the third possibility
that somehow we begin, with care and caution and a clear-eyed
sense of all the difficulties it involves, to move to eliminate such
weapons completely
* That is a massively difficult task and the Australian Government is not
naive about it
we have no illusions about the technical difficulties of solving the
central problems of verification
and we acknowledge the political problems involved: uncertainty
about the future and the accretion of fifty years of nuclear doctrine
nor do we imagine that a world without nuclear weapons will be a
world without conflict
so serious issues of security also need to be addressed along
with the technical and diplomatic issues 
3
So it is in pursuit of that third possibility,-what seemrs to us to be the
only real option for the world that we have invited you to join this
Commission Because if the aim of a world without nuclear weapons is ever to be
realised the issue has to be placed more firmly and centrally on the
international agenda
if that does not happen, we will inevitably see the familiar
allowed to drift unchallenged into the future
so that objective to ensure that this issue is widely debated,
and in depth Is one of the aims of this Commission
But if that debate is to move ahead, the onus is on those favouring
abolition to provide practical and serious ideas about how it can be done
-and, most importantly, how it can be done in a way which actually
enhances global security
That Is the other reason for establishing the Commission
It is why we have invited all of you from differentt backgrounds and
different approaches to participate in it
you bring to this task, collectively and individually, an unmatched
experience in statesmanship, in nuclear and scientific issues, in
diplomacy and in strategic analysis
we are convinced that if any group can address these issues in a
fresh, persuasive and unconventional way, it exists here in this room
We are not looking for easy statements of principle in your report, or for
words which are agreed for the sake of getting agreement
* what we hope for is that you will come to grips with the hardest, and
most intractable issues, and show how these must be addressed
Many of you have spent much of your professional lives engaged with
these Issues and I don't intend to offer you advice now about them
But I do want to say something about " why now?" and " why here in
Australia? 
0 In Singapore last week, I gave a speech in which I said that it seemed to
me that we were living through the greatest period of change in the
world since the emergence of the nation state
The end of the Cold War has freed up the global system in an
unprecedented and unexpected way
0 What comes next is very uncertain but it will not be uncertain for long
0 Within a very short time, the world will adjust and settle into new
grooves, from which it will be very difficult to dislodge it
0 But for the time being we have an unparalleled opportunity and an
unprecedented responsibility to look afresh at what have seemed to be
intractable problems
9 And, of these, possibly the most intractable has been the threat of
nuclear weapons
0 When the Cold War ended, most people in the world breathed a sigh of
relief and assumed that the nightmare of the nuclear threat had
disappeared along with the Berlin Wall
-the strength of the international reaction to the French Government's
decision to lift its moratorium on nuclear testing stemmed in large
measure from this unexpected and unwelcome reminder of a danger
which many people assumed had passed
We in Australia believed it was important for all countries to focus
attention not just on the symptom continued nuclear testing by France
and China but on this larger cause
Why should Australia be involved in an exercise like this?
we are not a nuclear power
we are geographically distant from the major areas of nuclear tension
and we are an old and committed ally of the United Sates and have
benefitted from the protection of extended deterrence
The answer is that we are convinced that in the new international
environment our security and the security of our friends, as well as the
people of the world at large, will be better served if we can eliminate 
nuclear weapons, as we have moved to eliminate other weapons of mass
destruction
9 Australia does not have any proprietorial or exclusive interest in nuclear
disarmament or any preconceived outcome in mind from the deliberations of this
group * because if progress is to be made and I believe it can be it will be
by the combined and relentless efforts of many governments and
groups and individuals
-not just expressing by our hopes and fears, but by coming to grips
rigorously with all the difficult issues involved
1 am convinced the time is right and, of course, the people are right
for the Canberra Commission to make a major intellectual and political
contribution to this work
6 Gareth Evans, personally, and the Australian Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade, including Ambassador Richard Butler, the convenor of
this Commission, have a long record of achievement on global and
regional arms control issues, Including their contribution to the
conclusion of the Chemnical Weapons Convention and the work on the
CTBT They will be ready, through your Secretariat, to give you whatever
assistance you require
a Let me end by again expressing my personal thanks to all of you for your
participation in the Commission and let me welcome you formally to
Australia
ends. 



22. Jan. 96 16: 1o No. 014 P. 01/ 1S
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, RADIO 2UE 22 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
JL: Paul Keating, good morning and welcome.
PM: How are you John nice to be back.
JL: It's gopo to be here, having been in Singapure for a couple of nights and
hearing about your visit there. You impressed the people In Singapore
PM: Well, I think they are very interested in Australia nuw, and it's Interesting
to see how much they had changed. Two weeks agu they were declared
a developed country. Their average per capita theie is now around
$ US30,000 I think it's a lesson to everyone that if a nation focuses on
its option, and pursues them, how far they can go. But I think Singapore
sees Australia importantly as part of its security picture, they have a lot
of regard for the economic changes we have made here, and in fact, just
on 2000 paid to come and here the so-called " Singapore Lecture", so I
was pleased to be able to give them an Australion perspective.
JL: You got very good reviews in the Singapore newspopcrs because I
checked it out while I was there. Listen, this has got to be the longest
election campaign in the history of the world, and the election hasn't
evun been set yet. Do you think this ele. tion speculation is damaging?
PM; I don't think so. I meari for a year I had John Hewson in this parliament
saying Keating is going to call an election. Then I had Alexander
Downer saying Keating Is guing to call an election, John Howard the
same. We had the newspapers saying when we brought the Budget
down in May it's an election Budget, and of course, It wasn't. Then when
we introduced Accord Mark VIII and the Republic. they said clearing the
decks for an election, and it wasn't. I have always said consistently,
TEL* 
22. Jan. 96 16: 19 No. 014 P. 02/ 19
2
right through I think the public don't like trickiness out of politici. iis and
the political system, they expect the parliament to run its full time. And
that's always been an old-fashioned view of mine, but I think that is as it
should be, and I think the public are correct in it.
JL: So, a May election Is not beyond the realms of possibility?
PM: Well, just that May Is technically the end point of this parliament.
JL: Yeah, well, if you want to run the length, that's it then?
PM: Yes, but John Mvwdrd saying " come on, bring it on, bring it on, bring it
on I have got no puli. ies. I have got no hands" He's a bit like the
Black Knight out of the Munty Python show " come on, I've got no arms,
I've got no legs, but give me a punch, give me a punch" And I say hang
on John we'll get there. Doi't worry we will get therA, all in good time.
JL: What was that film, when the fella got his dains cut off, and then his legs
cut off?
PM. That was the Monty Python one The Holy Grail.
JL: That was a funny film.
PM: " I got no policies come and fight me, fight me, fight me." And I say, well
all right, we'll get down to it just don't get yourself flustered there.
JL: Does this mean then that we can wait till May?
PM: Well, look, there's a natural sort of again, it's very hard to beat the
natural order of things. The thing has its own sort of drum beat, and I
think at the right point, it will become clear to us what the best thing is to
do. Anyway, at the most WA are talking about a couple of months a
couple of months In three years
JL: So, in other wurds, it's more likely May than anything else?
PM: No, not necessarily. It's nut necessarily May than anything else.
JL: I though I had you there for a minute.
PM: It's just that May is the end point.
JL: Come on, give us a break I need all the help I can get.
TEL:* 
T2E2L:. Jan. 96 16: 18 No. 014 P. 03.
3
PM. Oh no, you have gone well without a lot of help, I have got to say.
J L: While on the subject of John Howard, I'm not sure if it's one of your
favourites or not, but he's going to make some changes to the unfair
dismissal laws. And I think that the majority would welcome those
changes.
PM: Yeah, but I mean, he was out there the other day saying after 15 years
of espousal of policies to, as he calls it, reform the labour market, which
is code for basically cutting wages for the bottom half of the work force.
That is, removing award protections, removing overtime penalty rates
and the rest holiday leave loadings and all the other things. He is now
saying " I didn't mean all that -didn't mean all that. I have really got a
policy the same as the Government's I'm out there for workers' rights".
And what I said was well, if you believe that, you will believe anything.
But I think an important thing to say about this, is if this was the United
States, if a senior national politician held a strong view for 15 years, and
then just before an election, changed it, the debate wouldn't be about the
policy matter, but about their character. I mean, it would be just a
discussion more about their character than policy. And I think what John
Howard -has got to recognise is this both as Treasurer and as Prime
Ministerf, I have run a system here which has produced an inflation rate
between 2 which has seen a strong real increase in real wages,
which has seen a 20% increase in household disposable income per
capita, which has seen the lowest level of industrial disputes since 1940.
I'm the fellow who has been sitting on that running that system,. He's
the one that wants to run the system he is the one who has got to
propose something better.
JL: Do you think that, although the things you are saying in your mind are
true, and in the minds of many are true, that after 13 years some voters
assume that Labor is tired, that you're tired, and do you think voters are
ready for a change just for the sake of change?
PM: Well, there could be a bit of that around, but I think the energy the
Government has shown in the last three years, John I mean, just look
at the last six or eight weeks. I mean, we put together this Treaty
between Australia and Indonesia, we have brought down the most
important forest policy the country I think has ever seen, in terms of
those Regional Forest Agreements, and Deferred Forest Areas 6
million hectares of forest put away. Today, I'm meeting the Canberra
Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons...
JL: Yeah, I wanted to talk to you about this this is something that is very
important, and should be very important to all Australians whether you
TEL 
TEL: 22. Jan .96 16: 18 No .014 P. 04,
4
are Prime Minister or not Prime Minister as far as this is concerned, it is
immaterial it's something that is important for the world. Do you believe
that a country like Australia can lead the world to rid itself of nuclear
armaments?
PM. Well, I think we have got to Start somewhere. I mean, we have got a
fortuitous lapse in the nuclear arms race the Soviet Union collapsed,
the Warsaw Pact countries in Europe the Warsaw Pact evaporated.
Nato's traditional enemy has folded its tent. So, there is a window of
opportunity to get in and say well, look, this bi-polarity between the US
and the Soviet Union is gone this bi-polar game is gone. But what we
have to be careful of is that we don't get into a multi-polar game that is,
with many other countries, the likes of Iraq, perhaps Iran, Pakistan,
North Korea, Israel that are developing nuclear weapons....
JL: But do you believe that a group of people led by Australia, and not in
any way wanting to be demeaning of my own country, but Australia is not
the biggest or most powerful county in the world. But do you believe that
a group of people led by Australia could actually cause this to happen?
PM.' Well, I think we can make a very good start. It may take decades to
happen," but we have to make a beginning. And if you look at the
countries in, if you like, the first rung of economies, we associate
ourselves with and have done strategically the United States, Britain
and for instance in the Second World War, France these are all
nuclear weapon states. If you go to countries like Australia, which are
not nuclear weapon states, we are at least as important and as
significant among those, and as capable among those, as any of doing
it, given the fact that this initiative is unlikely to come from the nuclear
weapons states themselves. And I think the other thing to bear in mind,
John we were a leading part of the move to the Chemical Weapon
Convention. We have put in place a convention for the elimination of a
whole category of weapons with chemical weapons biological weapons
and so we have already proven our abilities there. And you can also
look at our effort at the peace accords in Cambodia, the development of
APEC, our role in the GATT round I mean, Australia has always
punched above its weight, particularly in the years of this Government.
And this is something there is an opportunity here, and I think we have
LW. It,. tu14L* Q ulyti otivuIImlIem itib : 6izea it, ano we nave
these distinguished people from around the world to help is.
JL: Well, when you look at the list of people former US Defence Secretary,
a Nobel Peace Prize winner, a former French Prime Minister, and others.
When you look at this group of people, there are many people who are
obviously serious about it, but did they come here at your invitation, 
T2EL2:. Jan. 96 16: 18 No. Ola
were they prepared to come because they have the same belief as you,
or because they wanted to discuss it with you?
PM: Because I think they realise this is an issue. You see, both the major
weapon states Russia and the Untied States have declaratory
statements about the removal of nuclear weapons, and the Nonproliferation
Treaty has at its end point ' the removal of nuclear weapons,
but these are simply long-term declarations they don't have any policy
force. But you see, we have got people here like Leigh Butler the
Commander-In-Chief of the US Strategic Air Command in 1981-82, and
then after that, the US Strategic Command in 1992-94, where he had
responsibility for all US Air Force and Navy nuclear deterrent forces, and
was closely involved in the development of US nuclear doctrine. And
then there is Field Marshall Lord Carver, who was Commander-In-Chief
of the British Forces in the Far East, and then Chief of the Defence
Force from 1973-76.
JL: And all these people have come because they believe this is worth
discussing?
PM: These people have actually run the system. I mean, they are not just
people from outside you know, well-intentioned academics who want to
make a contribution they run the system. And they have come
because I think they see the value of taking the opportunity now of
looking at the possibility of going beyond all the start treaties, down to
the removal of nuclear weapons.
JL: And all this begins at lunchtime today?
PM: Yes it's actually beginning now. Gareth Evans opened the Commission
meeting this morning, and I am meeting the members of the Commission
for lunch, and then they are going to Canberra for the week, and I will be
seeing them again on Thursday.
JL: Just back to this Asia trip that you did the Singapore Lecture, as it is
called. Probably, it was the most important foreign speech of your
career why did you tie in so much domestic issues; labour skills and
environment. The cynics are saying that you threw in the environment
because you recalled in 1990 the green vote took care of you, and put
you back into power?
PM. I No. I mentioned the environment... well, first of all, the basic philosophy I
put there was that with the Cold War over, and as I say, there is tension
between the two super-powers gone, it's now possible for regions to
TEL 
TEL: 22. Jan .96 16 : 18 No .014 P. OE
6
actually organise themselves and actually do some good and clever
things together.
JL: Do you think that tension between the two super-powers has gone
temporarily, or permanently? I mean, Russia doesn't look too stable at
the moment, does it?
P M. No. well, you know, one can never know which way the Russian political
system is going. But what has happened is that, you know, we have seen
this amazing change since 1989. 1 mean what was then East Germany,
Poland, they have gone and become Separate states and we are seeing
this change across a number of the former Russian republics. So we are
not talking about the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact as we were.
Whatever happens with the vagaries of Russian politics, it will be Russia
and they have still got, of course, a nuclear arsenal and there will still be
those tensions there.
But what the economic development in South East Asia and North Asia
means in Singapore, in Malaysia, in Thailand, in the Philippines and,
for instance, even in countries like Vietnam, along with Japan and the
great emerging economic power, China is that we are able to look at
things regionally. And Australia has put essentially APEC together as an
economic body to deal with regional economic problems, opening up
trade opportunities and fuelling and resourcing the East Asian growth
phase. So what I was doing in this lecture was to say there is a possibility now for
regional organisation where if we threw everything into the great melting
pot of the UN, all these issues these ones I am speaking of would be
largely lost. But here we can actually meet in a cooperative way in APEC,
for instance, or in ASEAN the Association of South East Asian Nations
and get things done.
Now I mentioned the environment for this reason and I gave some
statistics. The Chinese shortfall of food in about ten years time is going to
be about six times Australian wheat production just in grain. The green
revolution which has produced so much food has relied on fertilisers, has
relied on things which have essentially attacked the environment and we
can't believe or rely upon the fact that we can continue to yield this sort of
productivity from the earth.
The demand for energy is doubling in East Asia every 12 years. It
doubles in the world every 28 years. So finding the coal, the petroleum,
the energy, the food and then, of course, the pollution in the air, the
urbanisation, the sanitation, the water quality, the impact on the fisheries, 
TEL: 22.. Jan. 96 16: 18 No. 014 P. 07.
7
these are real issues for the developing world of East Asia and the East
Asian hemisphere which Australia is a part of the East Asian economies
which Australia is a part of. So that is why I mentioned the environme nt.
The real challenge to keep the growth going in East Asia is really food
security, energy and water.
JL: This, that I am about to read to you, is a description of your pluses and
minuses as a leader. I am not sure if you want to hear them.
PM: Who has written this?
JL: Michael Gordon in The Australian.
PM: A Canberra correspondent.
JL: Okay, now tell me if you agree? " A focus on big picture ideas", you would
have to agree with that because you are telling me constantly about the
big picture?
PM: Well, I mean, the thing that I just spoke to you about is about that very
thing because if you get those things right, the other things tend to look
after therfiselves.*
JL: Okay, so these are the pluses. " A focus on big picture ideas, charm."
PM:-Well I am like you I can be charming when I wish to be. Just like you
were with that Mortein ad a bit earlier.
JL: It wasn't Mortein, Prime Minister.
PM: What was it?
JL: Raid.
PM: Raid. Sorry, sorry. I have gone and done it now.
JL: You see, but you have got a very good memory because it is 14 years
since I did one for Morte in.
PM: Well that is right, I mean, it is a bit like Valvoline you can't, sort of, forget
them.
JL: Okay, you are back on equal terms now. Let's listen to more of your
pluses. " The ability to form close and constructive bonds with regional
leaders." 
TEL: 22. Jan. 96 16: 18 No .014 P. 08/'
8
PM. Yes, I think you can form bonds with the people who lead the region by
trying to see the region through their eyes and understanding their
problems and then put the argument about Australia's relevance and how,
together, we can do more and end up with a stronger, better regional
society.
JL: And also, " the capacity for sustained bouts of serf discipline".
PM: Oh yes, well we are all I hope into that sustained bouts.
JL: Is it difficult?
PM: Do we have lapses? Well, of course, we do. We all have lapses in
self discipline.
JL: Do you regret the lapses?
PM: Well you can't be an automaton. You know, one of these people who are
wound up in the morning you know programmed and wound up and
they go out there like a parrot and say things. I mean any political leader
that workt like thatyou will never get anything from. I mean there will be
no creativity, no spontaneity, no ideas, no real leadership. In the end, the
one thing that people want you to provide in this business is leadership
and any leader providing it must have the capacity to think themselves,
generate their own ideas not from a department, not in a brief, not from
personal staffs, out of your own head and that means having the sort of
creativity to do it. I don't believe anybody who is doing those things can
run like a wind up person. You know, wound up and sort of disciplined
and stays on the lines.
JL: Well I tell you what, you went a hell of a long way around there to not
answer the question.
PM: No, I am just saying that..
JL: That that was self discipline?
PM: we have self discipline, I hope. We have lapses off it.
JL: Yes.
PM: We do because we are not wound up.
JL Do you regret the lapses? 
TEL: 22 . Jan .96 16 : 18 No .014 P. OS
9
PM: Oh, some I do. Yes, some I do. But in the big swim of things what I am
most interested in is making the policy changes. You see, in the end, the
value of people in the political system, in political leadership, is to make
changes. The system basically runs itself. What doesn't run itself are the
new directions.
JL: Let's look at what he said on the negative side because it is interesting.
There is " a short fuse", he says. You would agree with that?
PM: Oh, no, that is not quite right. I am very understanding of why people say
and do things. I make big allowances, I have big discounts in their
behaviour, If you didn't, you couldn't stay in public life a long time.
JL: So you don't think you have a short fuse?
PM. No, well, look, I have been a Minister for 13 years. I think if you ask any
person, or anyone who knows any person on my staff, I have never been
sharp with them or abused them in that time. Not ever.
JL: Street fighter instincts?
PM: I don't believe in rudeness. I don't believe in personal effrontery and
rudeness. I would rather go through life without that sort of behaviour
JL: I know that you believe that personally. But there would be people out
there who would be saying, wow, well what about the stuff he says in
Parliament?
PM: But Parliament Is the clearing house of national pressures. This is where
people fight about whether we have Medicare, or we don't have Medicare,
you know whether you have protection of awards, or you don't. I mean
they are things that matter to people and we are not just going to trade
them away politely and say, yes, you want to be rid of them? You can
have them. You know?
JL:-But you do get a bit abusive there in Parliament?
PM: Yes, but what I don't get is personal. You see I have got the Liberal Party
up there now saying what's her name, the Senator from South Australia
I am like Goebbels. Then I have got Senator Bishop reading extracts
from a psychiatric manual on radio saying I have got psychiatric
tendencies. And John Howard has got Michael Baume every day in the
Senate trying to say I am corrupt. I mean these are the things I have
never done against Howard, Hewson, or any of my political opponents. I 
TEL: 22. Jan. 96 16: 18 No. Ola
might, occasionally, give them~ a corporate slur. But one that doesn't
matter, like knuckleheads, or something like that. But that is different to
saying you are corrupt, psychotic, or you are a fascist, which is the sort of
stuff they do to me. I mean the personal attacks I have taken from the
Liberal Party. If there is anyone who stands up who can actually defeat
them, like Whitlam did, is in for it. Like Wran did, is in for it. Like I have,
is in for it.
But the Labor Party has always taken the wider, I think more decent view,
that you don't go after people, personally, under the privilege of
Parliament and I don't. I don't and that is the point I made earlier. But we
are talking about two points here. We are talking about political points
and personal behaviour short fuses. I don't believe in rudeness. There
is no place for it and it is not needed and people say, oh well I am working
under pressure. Well look we all work under pressure. But it doesn't help
for people to go off the handle and I don't like it. I don't like it when it is
done to me and I don't do it to others.
JL: Michael Gordon also says that you have " a capacity for vindictiveness".
PM: No, I am-not vindictive. Look, I would say this. I have been in politics
now sinc4 1969 -1I have been in the Parliament. I have been attacked by
all sorts of people. I don't wish ill of any of them. You know that? I could
say both in the Labor Party and in the Parliament and we have had
factional battles in the Labor Party over 20 or 30 years, I have had, you
know, Party battles in the Parliament over the same period I must say I
have no real enmity, no enmity, towards anyone.
JL: What are the polls showing at the minute because I have been away and
that? Are you looking good in the polls?
PM: Well we are on the published polls, on two-party preferred terms
behind the Liberal Party. But I think that the community has not yet got
down to focus on the issues of an election.
JL: Why do you think you are behind?
PM; I think all incumbent governments are behind these days. I mean we are
something like, on the published polls, 5 to 6 percentage points behind.
But look at the British government, it is 30 percentage points behind, or
percentage points behind. The government is in a winning position.
But I have always said, John, the only place to be in an election is one out
and one back.
J L: Explain that to me? 
T2E2L:. 3an. 96 16: 18 No. 014 P. 11
11
PM: Well, like in a horse race one off the rails and one back.
JL I didn't know you were into horse racing.
PM: Well I am not. But I know the place to be in a poll and rather than being
1m. e an going to an election out in front is a difficult position to hold all
the way through. The key point, I think, for me and the government is that
the government has had a huge energy over these three years, it has got
a real vision for Australia it puts it into place, and the burden on John
Howard is going to be to put an alternative philosophy. So far he hasn't.
The headland speeches have been empty and voids. He hasn't
articulated policies and he is really saying, look, if I wait long enough, will
you give me the Prime Ministership. He is really saying this, look, I will
tell you what I will do with you. I won't say anything you don't like, I won't
propose policies you think might hurt you, I will keep my head down, I will
cuddle up and look as much like the government, if only you will vote for
me. Whereas what I am saying is I believe Australia has an unparalleled
opportunity, we are the only nation in~ the world with a continent to
ourselvet, we live in the fastest growing part of the world, we have now
opened the Australian economy up, we are integrated with East Asia as
never before. we have got a period of excitement and opportunity ahead
of us, and the government is articulating the policies.
Anyone that wants to knock the government off its perch, has got to have
an alternatively lucid strategy. And I think when the voters, when the
community, when Australian men and women, focus on those issues
when an election is actually on I think then the polls will change.
J L: When do you think that John Howard might start to articulate some
policies'?
PM: Well I think it is too late for him. I mean I think it is the height of.. it is
rude, I think. Rude to say to people I have been hiding my policies from
Mr Keating, where really he has been hiding them from them. It is they
who vote. I get one vote. It is they who vote. He has been hiding them
from them and then say, I am going to play you all off a break and I will
drop some little tid-bits in the last couple of weeks of an election and that
is good enough for you. If you don't pick it up then, bad luck.
Whereas what the government has said is, look this is our strategy and
these are the fine print of our policies and they are all in place. They are
there all the time. It doesn't matter whether you are talking about, you
TEL 
TEL: 22. Jan. 96 16: 18 No. Ola P. 12.
12
know, trade with Asia, or the environment, or forests, or our strategic
situation, or wages, or the Accord, or the Budgets, they are all there.
They are not just in the mind where you get a quick look at them from the
sleeve you know, the sleeve policy that is pulled out of the sleeve,
waved for a couple of weeks and then say have a vote. John Howard
thinks that because the government has been in office for 13 years, all he
has to do is sit there and say nothing and slide into office.
Well I think people have got to remember that he has been there longer
than most of the Ministers in this government. He was a Treasurer before
I was ever a Minister and Australia was an industrial backwater and
Industrial archaeological museum. It had, in the end, no future, high
inflation and high unemployment. So I was just saying, market himself as
a new person. I mean, new person John Howard, Tim Fischer, have a
look at Tim's antics in the last week or two, Alexander Downer. I mean
Tim will be the Deputy Prime Minister, Alexander Downer would be the
Foreign Minister, Mr Costello would be the Treasurer. This is the new
team.
JL: Well if all this is as bad as you are intimating to me it is, why is he in front
in the polls?
PMV: Well it is the old point about incumbency. I think the public are also quite
clever about polls. It is a bit like by-elections, they see them as an
opportunity to needle the government and push it along and good on
them. In other words, they are not going to say, oh yes, no, no, the
government is fine, that is alright we are going to vote for the government.
But others say, well I am thinking about it, I am undecided, or I am against
them at this point. And they see that, I am sure, as actually encouraging
governments to do better and good on them for that.
JL: Good luck with the meeting that you have at lunch time today. I know it is
very important not just to you, but to the entire world.
PM: Well, I think, we have a strategic lull. I mean this is very rare in the world.
I mean we didn't have nuclear weapons before 1945.
JL: So if it is going to be done, it must be done now?
PM: There have been 130,000 nuclear weapons produced. At the moment,
there are 50,000 warheads..
JL Lying around. 
T2EL2:. Jan. 96 16: 18 No. 014 P. 13
13
PM: 50,000 warheads lying around and I think what we have got to tell people,
including the nuclear powers. It Is not just the five of them the
United States, Russia, Britain, France and China. It won't be just five of
them. As countries get more wealthy and they think their strategic
position is deteriorating, they will all consider having a nuclear weapon
too. And, then, the discipline that the Soviet Union and the United States
had through the Cold War years won't be the sort of discipline and threat
assessments that all these other smaller states will have in the future.
So it is not just five and nothing it is heaps of countries having nuclear
weapons.
JL Yes.
PM: So if a country like Australia doesn't stand up and say, well listen we are
going to have a go and try and get the best people and pull the best
thoughts together and drive some of these lessons home, well you know
we have got nothing to lose other than our confidence in ourselves and
our regard for what we think is an important international contribution.
JL: Okay, well as I say, good luck not just for your sake, but for the sake of
everybody and I mean the world because it is a pretty important issue.
PM: Well chemical weapons, now, we have got a convention to eliminate
them. Australia was principally involved in eliminating a whole category
of weapons. If we had done it with something which is much harder to
verify chemical weapons and biological weapons it can be done with
nuclear weapons.
J L: And should be. I trust we will have time to talk to each other before the
election in May?
PM: I hope so. I hope so. If you'll have me on.
JL: You didn't deny May.
PM: Well, I mean, I opened up with a Raid ad, I suppose I can absorb any
culture.
JL: Good to see you. I am glad I am back and I hope that we talk to each
other soon.
PM: Good on you, John.
ends TEL 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOORSTOP AT 4 TREASURY PLACE, MELBOURNE, 23 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Well it took 100 hundred years to build Telstra, Telecom. It is Australia's
greatest business. It is the largest business in the country. It is the
business with the greatest potential in Australia. It is the one Australian
business with the greatest potential in Asia. It has a chance of being the
great East Asian communications company the great East Asian phone
business. John* Howard wants to now sell it and he is going to let foreigners buy one
third of each tranche. He says he will let them buy one third of the first
part and then he will decide about the next two bits, he says, if he were to
be the Government after this election and before the next. I will come to
that in a moment because he couldn't sell more than one third of it and
would be flat out selling one third of it now anyway.
But the key point is why is he selling it. He is selling for some money for
election bribes. So he is about to sell, and allow foreigners to own, a
business that we began to build -a century ago. With rudimentary
exchanges in Sydney and Melbourne and telegraph lines on poles across
the Nullarbor Plain, the one indigenous great business, he now says he
will let foreigners own 35 per cent of the first tranche. And then he has
got a minimum requirement, but what it would mean is a corporate force,
or a foreign telephone company perhaps, would then be able to exercise
control. And the people who represent the remaining government
interest, who are only people appointed by the government, would stand
there tryir'g to argue against then a set of private shareholders.
Now let me say this about Telstra. In every country I go to I raise
Telstra's interests. I did with President Soeharto to help them secure a
licence in Java, which they now have. I did last week with Prime Minister
Mahathir. I have done so with President Ramos. I have done it with the
Thai Prime Minister. I regard it as Australia's one great business the
one business where we can have a brand name in the world the way
when you think of Germany you think of Mercedes Benz and you think of
BMW or Japan, Toyota and Sony. Australia's does not have a great
brand name. The one great brand name we can have in the fastest
growing area of business in the world, is Telstra in the business of
telecommunications. 
Yet the Liberal Party in their bankruptcy, bereft of policy, with what he
thinks now is an easy resort to money, wants to sell one third of the
business, which is roughly valued at around $ 10 billion. Now you know
this market was flat out digesting the Qantas float which was $ 1500
million. John Howard is telling you, trying to make a virtue of the fact, I
am only selling one third first. One third first is $ 10 billion. $ 10 billion is
six times the size of Qantas.
I mean the market would choke on a privatisation of this size. That is why
he wants the foreigners in and this is at a time when you see the
scramble for telecommunications resources going on all around the world.
MCA buying into the News Corporation because they know that the
transmission of pay television and content and film product and other on
line services are going to be used, are going to go below the medium of
phone companies and you have got British Telecom then buying into
MCA. British Telecom and MCA and particularly British Telecom and if
the American regulators will' let them, the American phone companies and
IT&amp; T and the likes of IT&amp; T, will be out there bidding to control our phone
company, our great telecommunications business.
In otherwords, you know, the tragedy of. the Howard view is that it took us
a cent'Ey to build-it and he is going to let it at this point just as it is about
to blossom, when the greatest potential we have ever had is opening up
for fibre optics and phone businesses and the traffic of digital information.
Then he wants to sell it after a century to foreigners and that is why what
he is proposing is cheap, it is cheap jack and it is unconscionable. And
every Australian who has got any pride in this country, any belief in
Australian enterprise, any imagination about building a big and great
business, should be utterly devastated by the bankruptcy of the Coalition
and their Leader.
Can I also say that our great electronics industries, every electronics
industry in Australia, the fastest growing part of our elaborately
transformed manufactures, lives off essentially the body of Telstra.
Where it goes, they go and if foreign owners favour foreign suppliers,
foreign owners of Telstra, and invariably foreign owners start siphoning
work off to foreign suppliers, that even this core of our electronics
industry will change.
And you might ask the question, as I did earlier, what is this for? What
does selling one third of Telstra and allowing foreigners to own a piece of
it do and why? So he can get some money to try and buy his way into
office. Nothing more, nothing less. No thought, no plan, no strategy,
nothing about building the great East Asian phone business, nothing
about the fact that we have actually got a technically competent large
business with a huge cash flow, that we can actually for the first time ever
build a great world business with, no imagination, no invention just a
sort of hand-me-down sale policy for an asset which has such strategic
significance. 
J: Prime Minister, what is the difference between the Coalition's plan to sell
per cent of Teistra and your Government's plan to sell 49 per cent of
Qantas?
PM: Well Qant as has no chance of being a dominant world business in a part
of the woirld. If you go to Melbourne Airport or Sydney Airport, you will
notice, if you haven't already, all of the other carriers who compete and
bring people in and out of Australia. I mean this is a business which has
had a monopoly in Australia for a century. This is one of those things
nations build once in their history and the thing about Qantas is that
Qantas is just another airline. But worse than that, Qantas was just
another airline that didn't have enough government capital to keep it
running and we put the capital into it. The thing about Telstra is that it
generates its own capital. It is actually a big producer of revenue for the
Budget and that big production of revenue for the Budget would then start
to move off shore, part of it would move off shore or go to Australian
private hands.
J: Mr Howard says that you would sell off Telstra on returning to office after
the election
PM: Mr Hovard has got no right to say that. He knows that and every
Australian commentator knows and the public I am sure knows, that
whenever the Labor Party has agreed to sell any major asset, we have
had a production bigger than Ben Hur. It has gone to each
National Conference for Australian Airlines, for Qantas, for the
Commonwealth Bank and you know our traditional position and what it
has always been. Telecom is simply not for sale.
J: In what time frame?
PM: I've just told you.
J: It is not for sale then?
PM: It is not for sale.
J: Why should the Government be running telecommunications?
PM: Because at the time we had a continent with very few people and we built
a business. And as we have, we built a very profound and good business
and one that is technically very competent. We find ourselves now in the
fastest growing part of the world, which we were never in before at any
other time in our history, where all our markets are here, not in Europe or
north America, and now the phone companies the telecommunication
companies are basically the avenue, the highway upon which the digital
information will flow.
The roll out of the cable is the information highway. The information
highway here, or a very big chunk of it other than Optus, belongs to the
people of Australia. In other words, we have by developing and holding
this business for a century built a great business so it becomes a 
strategic national asset. To give it now to foreigners, to let British
Telecom go and get their foot on this or a group of international investors
who would then operate the policy, you know if this thing is sold in a
broadly spread company, anyone holding 35 per cent of the stock or
per cent of the stock is in control.
J: Won't the of Telstra hinder Telstra when the market is deregulated in
1997?
PM: What it will do is do what it has already. What Optus has done under the
Government's communications competition policy ' and that is to lower
phohie tariffs, lifted efficiency. The efficiencies of Telstra have grown
enormously and with it, of course, its revenues. It is a big revenue earner
for the Government and it has enough internally generated funds to fund
a massive capital expansion program. Let me just remind you, it is laying
out the fibre optic cable without any budgetary contributions.
J: Prime Minister, after having sold icons like the Commonwealth Bank and
Qantas, having broken an earlier adopted Telecom?
PM: No, look, that is not true what you have just said. All of the things the
Governo~ ent has done it has done with the big notice, the big public
panopJl'iof coverage of its national conferences, it has been a most public
process. Let me just say about the Commonwealth Bank, the
Commonwealth Bank used to be the Reserve Bank of Australia. It had
the Reserve Bank function. When the R eserve Bank Act came in it was
just another savings bank and then just another trading bank and there
are now three major trading banks and with it four. And, there is a host of
private housing banks out there. So, the Commonwealth Bank had no
special role..
J: But as an icon, surely?
PM: What does the word ' icon' mean? What do you mean an icon?
The Government is not into romanticism, we are into actual utility.
I mean, the Commonwealth Bank when now no longer a central bank,
was just another bank and I might just say that because the Government
successfully sold it here, the last 49 per cent of it was worth more than we
valued it at at the start. So, it was a very successful thing for the people
of Australia and they have got a brand new institution out of it another
premium, first class, well funded, well capitalised bank, It is all the world
of difference to the strategic opportunity of Telstra.
J: Do the Opposition undertakings on community service obligations
address your concerns about foreign ownership?
PM: All that goes, it might stay there a year or two years, but what people in
rural Australia have got to know and people who live with some of the
community some of the cross subsidies within Telstra is once it's in the
hands of a private business, private owners particularly foreign owners
and particularly foreign telephone companies they will operate it like a
business. That is, they will move to all the things that make it like a 
business and this question regarding some pledge by the Government to
keep community services obligations, they'll just say to the Government
you want it you pay for it.
J: ( inaudible) which foreigners?
PM: I don't know, I have got no idea where that would end up or what the likely
ownership would be. One thing is for sure, this nation has basically got a
major asset. It has got a major phone company with a huge cash flow
sitting right in the middle of the biggest growth telephone market in the
world and wouldn't we be complete fools to give it to foreigners.
J: The Coalition also plans to review the Government's cross media rules,
the Government may change the rules if re-elected.
PM: Governments maintain the rules, but gradually you are starting to see
John Howard's policy. What he believes in is you can own the television
station and major capital city dailies in the same city. What he calls
reviews are simply ways of moving to take the cross media rules out. So,
we have now got diversity in television ownership, diversity in radio
ownership, diversity in print ownership, that would change. Journalists,
for instance, can go and work for Network Seven or Network Nine or
Network Ten or the ABC or Austereo or Southern Cross or Prime or the
Sydney Morning Herald Fairfax or News Limited, this was not the case
before the Government's policy. And, where journalists can go and get
independent work, there will be independent news and views for the
Australian nation, ie diversity.
J: Mr Howard said this morning that if Mr Carr can change the Governor of
NSW without consulting the people, you could do the same thing on the
Australian flag.
PM: What else would you like to get in to? I mean, play a game of Ludo while
we are at it? Maybe snakes and ladders.
ends i 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
" OUR LAND" STATEMENT
ALBURY, 24 JANUARY 1996
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
First, let me thank Professor Blake, the Vice-Chancellor of Charles Sturt
University, and Professor Cullen, the Director of the Cooperative Research
Centre for Freshwater Ecology, for their invitation to open this research
facility for the Murray Darling Freshwater Research Centre.
There is great work being done in Australian research, and I sincerely hope
that this event will help to advertise that fact.
Research of the kind being done here is essential because it seeks solutions
to the problems of living on this continent which we simply must solve. It
adds to our body of knowledge, and thus contributes vitally to Australia's
future. The work here is unique, but there are parallels across the country. We are
doing a great deal in the field of environmental research, we are doing a
great deal to restore and protect the environment, and each year we do more.
Since 1988/ 89 the Commonwealth has spent nearly $ 350 million on
vegetation-related projects alone. Nearly 700,000 hectares have benefited.
Nearly 200,000 Australians have been involved.
Or, to quote another example, since 1989 the Commonwealth together with
State Governments have spent over $ 300 million to address the damage to
our greatest river system, the Murray-Darling Basin and this investment has
leveraged an even greater contribution from the community and private
sector. I am continually impressed by the quality of the people involved in the handson
environmental effort in Australia. 
It is easy enough to be passionate about the environment, and we need
people to be passionate. But to succeed we need to be wise and passionate.
We need to be practical. And, because we won't repair the damage of two
centuries and we won't create a sustainable Australia overnight, we need to
be dedicated.
No one should imagine this is a task for the short term, any more than they
imagine that governments and dollars alone are the solutions. Success
requires a sustained national effort a communal, generalised effort.
If after all the expenditure of money and energy and expertise in recent years,
we feel daunted by the task that still lies ahead, there are only two remedies.
The first is broaden the effort: involve more people and communities, more
companies, more landowners make it a more coordinated nationwide drive,
make it inseparable from the nation's progress, build the energy of private
interest into the public environmental good. That's the first remedy.
The second is more of a spiritual cure. Go to Daintree, go to the Franklin
River or Kakadu, or Shoalwater Bay or Jervis Bay. Go to the places which
have been saved. Go to the environment itself. Go to the places up the
Murray from~ here which Greening Australia and the local communities are
making a corridor of green; or walk along the Hawkesbury or the Yarra which
unemployed people with local communities are renovating under REEP
schemes financed through Working Nation; or go to any of the thousands of
Australian farms where Landcare has made a visible difference.
As works in progress go, this is more rewarding than most: the evidence of
each step we take is so gratifying. This huge continent throws up a huge
challenge, and at times it will look like we are not making progress but we
are. And as a nation it would be disastrous if we were to lose our nerve.
Today we take some more steps big steps. And most importantly, we pull
all the elements of the national effort, into step.
This is a very big policy initiative. All up, it involves expenditure in the region
of almost half a billion dollars.
It is also very good policy: it goes to the heart of the problem, it builds on
proven programs, and in the longer term it will produce far more savings and
far more national wealth than we intend to spend.
In a real sense it will be the test: when these programs are fully implemented,
we will have a very clear idea of whether the concept of sustainable Australia
can be made a reality.
If it can, the rewards will be immense: for our prosperity, for our quality of life,
for our relationship with this land, for our farmers, for our children. 
It is a statement in two interrelated parts: the first concerns the task of
creating a sustainable rural Australia; the second is directed at meeting our
responsibility to conserve our natural environment. It is a statement about
the relationship between our natural riches and the economic wealth that we
create from it. It constitutes by far the most dramatic single response any
Australian government has ever made to the challenge of protecting the land.
Australia is an environmentally rich nation.
We have diverse biological capital: numerous species that are not found
anywhere else; ecosystems in coral reefs, rainforests, wetlands and deserts
which are things of wonder for the whole world.
We also have huge and diverse areas of farmland which provide high quality
produce over long seasons. Over the years, this has helped us build
considerable national wealth through the export of our commodities.
But Australia is also environmentally fragile.
Recent assessments have shown us just how fragile and how difficult is the
task of repair-
In Singapore recently, I drew attention to the environmental challenges facing
a rapidly growing Asia. Many of these challenges are shared by Australia.
Soil erosion, salinity, water pollution and loss of biodiversity are all too well
known to us.
The challenge of protecting our land is inextricably linked to our economic
well being. The two go hand in hand. That is sustainable development. The
links are obvious, but always worth re-stating.
Our farms must be profitable if we are to maintain the capacity to invest in the
conservation of our environmental assets. To be profitable, we must add
maximum value to our produce and link producers and processors closely
with consumer demands.
Maximum value can only be added over the long haul if our produce is clean,
as our consumers will demand, and if our resource base remains productive.
Our resource base can only remain productive if ecological processes and
biological diversity are maintained. And that demands a strategic network of
nature reserves joined with conservation measures on and off farms.
And so the circle is closed. With this Statement we enlarge the circle
hugely.
Today, we make another very significant down payment on securing the
future of our land a major investment in our capacity to profit economically
from the land and protect the diverse life the land itself supports. 
Some 60 per cent of the land is managed by our farming families. Last year a
great many of these families depended on us to survive the drought. The
much more common reality is, of course, that Australia depends on them.
At present our agricultural industries are finely balanced. They face
substantial opportunities for growth and prosperity. But they also face
significant environmental challenges if they are to remain productive.
Farming families are already seeing an increasing proportion of their produce
being processed in Australia, or being packed and exported quickly and
reliably to premium price foreign markets. That is the way they will improve
profitability and so be well placed to manage our natural resources in a
sustainable manner.
In turn, sustainable farming is essential if our products are to find favour with
the burgeoning consumer classes across Asia. By the year 2000, spending
on food in Asia will have increased by around $ US160 billion per annum from
the 1990 level.
Asian consumers will increasingly demand quality, and increasingly be
subject to fAshion and.' market presentation.
For Australian suppliers, continued product innovation, market development
and reliable distribution will be essential to increased market share.
The success of the rural sector in adjusting to change is demonstrated by the
record of exports of high value added food products. In 1991-92, the year
before the commencement of the Government's Agri-Food Strategy, these
exports totalled $ 2.5 billion. We set an ambitious target of $ 7 billion of
exports by the year 2000. Last year our high value exports had risen by
per cent to over $ 3.7 billion, and we are clearly on track to meet and exceed
our Year 2000 target.
The Government will build on the success to date by pulling together the
threads of natural resource management, on-farm performance, product
development, market identification, transport, distribution, and consumer
servicing. Industry leaders have suggested to me that the next phase of development
should cement Australia as a major food exporter to Asia. I have agreed that
the Government will join with and support strong private sector leadership in
this endeavour.
As part of this, we will energise the Agri-Food Council to develop and drive
an Asia Food 2000 Strategy. The Council will report to me and I will chair at
least one meeting a year. 4 
Further details of these reforms will be announced on Friday. For now I can
say that the Council's general aims will be to improve linkages across the full
production, processing, marketing and transport chain with the objective of
promoting high value food exports.
Yet the greatest imperative in the long run is sustainability.
By the early 1 990s around 6 per cent or $ 1.5 billion of annual agricultural
production was being lost to natural resource degradation. This is the legacy
we are tackling in partnership with rural Australia at the level of individual
farms, local communities and broader regions. It is only through such a
comprehensive strategy that we can succeed.
The Government cannot solve these major environmental problems in
isolation. What is more, to attempt to do so, is to squander by far the largest
source of energy and inspiration at our disposal. I mean communities, the
people of Australia.
Community involvement is a theme of this Statement the Government can
set the policy goals and framework and provide the bulk of the funds, but the
maximum return depends on how well we engage the community.
The massive investment we are making today will help us arrest and begin to
reverse the equally massive land and water degradation our land has
suffered over the last 200 years.
It will not mean the end of the problem. Only that we are not daunted by it.
Unfortunately, much of the burden of turning this situation around has fallen
to the current generation of farming families. In November 1994, I
established the Land Management Task Force to investigate ways to improve
land management in rural Australia. It reported that property management
planning is an effective and essential tool in improving the financial and
natural resource management performance of Australian farms.
The National Property Management Planning Campaign we initiated in 1992
has laid the foundations for a major expansion of more strategic farm
planning practices.
Property management planning helps farming families manage farms in an
integrated manner, as both businesses and environmental assets. Through it
they identify their goals, assess the productive capacity of their farms, create
business plans for their properties, and allow for normal contingencies such
as commodity cycles or drought.
In response to the Task Force's recommendations, the Government will
extend the National Property Management Planning Campaign for four years
from 1996-97 at a cost of $ 35 million. 
In addition, the implementation of property planning on farms will be
supported through the Rural Adjustment Scheme, which will be strengthened
with the introduction of a new sustainable farming component costing $ 12
million dollars over 4 years.
Planning at the individual property level by farming families will be most
effective if it is supported at the community level in a broader geographical
context. And that is where Landcare comes in.
Landcare is a particularly successful, innovative and, I think, uniquely
Australian approach to sustainable resource management. The concept was
relatively new when the Government announced in 1989 that $ 320 million
would be allocated to Landcare over the next decade.
We said we hoped to have 1000 Landcare groups across the country by the
year 2000. Today we have 2500 groups. Thirty per cent of broadacre farm
families are involved. Awareness of Landcare in rural Australia grew from
per cent in 1991 to 85 per cent in 1994, and in urban Australia from 10 per
cent to more than 60 per cent. What Landcare did the genius of it was to
tap the resilience of Australian farmers, their passion for the land and their
determination to stay on it, and turn these qualities to the goal of
environmenfal sustain-ability.
Landcare has been one of Australia's most spectacular national successes.
With the new spending in this Statement, total expenditure on Landcare since
1989 will exceed $ 1 .1 billion more than three times our original commitment.
Today's announcement not only substantially increases the Government's
support for Landcare, it also directs more of those resources to community
Landcare groups. The rapid embrace of Landcare has seen the funds often
spread too thinly and many worthwhile projects inadequately supported.
Importantly, the Government will provide $ 128 million to assist with the
development and implementation of catchment plans by local communities.
Changes will be made to the Regional Environmental Employment Program
to improve linkages with Landcare activities and address national
environmental priorities. We will appoint 10 environmental employment
coordinators to increase the take-up of REEP.
The REEP initiatives are just part of the Government's efforts to increase the
positive environmental impacts of labour market programs. The Government
has allocated more than $ 1 billion, through Working Nation programs,
towards the development of green jobs. In 1994-95 there were approximately
25,000 placements in Landcare, environment, conservation and cultural
heritage projects at a cost of $ 252m. In the following three years these will
increase by 90,000 placements at a cost of $ 936m. 6
J. 7r 7. I 7 77rm 
While many issues need a regional focus, some of the environmental
challenges must be addressed across several States.
Most notably, the Murray Darling Basin is Australia's largest and most
important agricultural area. It contains 26 per cent of all Australian
agricultural land, almost 75 per cent of irrigated agricultural land and
accounts for over 40 per cent of Australian agricultural production by value.
The value of agricultural exports from the Basin is around $ 6 billion per
annum. In 1988 the Government, together with the relevant state governments,
established the Murray-Darling Basin Commission, and the combination of
significant funding, science and community effort has led to substantial
progress in many areas. Witness the growth of the wine industry in
Sunraysia or the dairy industry in the Goulburn Valley.
However, it is all too clear that the Murray-Darling is still in trouble. It is
sufficient to note that we have lost 500,000 hectares of land to salinity.
Unless decisive action is taken now, around 1,500,000 hectares, much of it
prime agricultural land, will be under threat by around 2040.
The scale of the probl~ m clearly requires a national response, and the
Government is prepared to meet that responsibility.
The Government, in partnership with the relevant States through the Murray
Darling Basin Council, has commenced a comprehensive natural resource
management and rehabilitation program of the Murray Darling Basin. To
reinvigorate this we will provide an additional $ 98 million over the next four
years as part of the Murray-Darling Basin Sustainability Initiative. We will
expect matched funding from the States.
Comprehensive priority action will be taken on reducing waterway pollution
arising from towns and cities, increasing salinity control, addressing land
degradation and erosion, reducing the effect of agricultural run-off on
waterways and protecting native animal habitat and remnant vegetation.
For example, we estimate that through this and other initiatives we can
reduce the amount of nutrients entering the river systems by a massive
per cent. Over 1,600 kms of the most sensitive riparian zones on the major
rivers will be rehabilitated. Dry land salinity will be tackled on a catchment
basis including through extensive farm forestry.
Let me now turn to the broader issues of nature conservation. In our largest
program for this ever for the protection of biodiversity both on or off reserves,
the Government will provide a $ 175 million program to expand the National
Reserve System and to ensure that conservation is a priority outside that
Reserve System. 7. 
To this end, the Government will provide $ 70 million to maintain and extend
the range of Landcare programs which have nature conservation as their
primary objective. These programs, such as Save the Bush, National
Corridors of Green and Waterwatch, have galvanised community action to
protect our environment. Some 1200 grants have been made to community
groups under Save the Bush. And more than 30 000 people have
participated in Waterwatch.
Funding for Save the Bush will be doubled and targeted to four key areas;
namely, support for community activities, training Landcare facilitators,
research into techniques of regeneration and conservation of grasslands.
Funding for Waterwatch will be increased by 50 per cent and the program will
be extended through to the year 2000. A priority will be community
monitoring in the catchments of Australia's Ramsar Wetlands.
The River Murray Corridor of Green program has deployed 90,000 hours of
community labour to protect or re-establish over 4000 hectares of vegetation.
We will provide $ 8.1 million to establish a National Corridors of Green
program for similar projects in all States and Territories. The program will
assist communities to enlarge and connect remaining patches of bushland
and link thege with ne w plantings establishing a biodiverse " web of life".
The driving force will be communities, and the advantages will flow to them as
well as to the environment. They will flow particularly to young people.
These programs have a multiplying effect; they raise understanding and
awareness of environmental issues as they go, and that in itself is a
substantial guarantee that future generations will not make the mistakes
made by previous generations including ours.
We have only recently become fully aware of the rate at which we are losing
our native vegetation. That rate is ecologically unsustainable and has been a
primary cause of many of our most difficult problems, including salinity, soil
erosion and the lost of species.
Fortunately, State and Territory governments are now addressing this
important issue. To provide additional national momentum and a regional
focus, I will convene a National Native Vegetation Conservation and
Management Forum.
This will bring together all governments, the farming, scientific and
conservation communities and other relevant parties in a series of national
and regional meetings and consultative processes around the country.
The objective will be to seek a consensus on effective native vegetation
management strategies. 8 
We will also increase our efforts to combat feral pests and weeds with the
provision of an additional $ 13 million to create a comprehensive framework
for the management of invasive species.
This audience more than most will recognise the importance of our wetlands
and waterways as the lifeblood of the system and as indicators of its health.
We will allocate $ 15.3 million to establish a new National River Health
program to create a scientific basis for understanding the flow requirements
of our river systems. This work will feed into the reform agenda being
pursued by the Council of Australian Governments.
In March Australia will host the largest international environment conference
ever held in this country. Representatives from around 100 countries will
gather in Brisbane for the Ramsar Conference on Wetlands of International
Importance.
Wetlands are one of our most important ecosystems. To improve their
management and conservation, we will expand the National Wetlands
Program with extra funding of $ 6 million.
The Governfrent accepts that management of land, including parks and
reserves, is primarily a State responsibility. But in the case of World Heritage
areas, there is obviously a role for the Commonwealth.
million will be provided to improve management of priority areas,
including Fraser Island, the Willandra Lakes, the Central East Coast
Rainforest Reserves, Lord Howe Island and Shark Bay.
While our World Heritage areas are the jewels in our crown, protecting the
most rare and vulnerable species and examples of our major ecosystems,
demands a comprehensive network of representative nature reserves.
Through the National Reserves Program we started in 1992, the Government
is working with the States and Territories, Aboriginals and Torres Strait
Islanders, and the wider community to create this network.
There have been some major acquisitions including areas like the Starke and
Silver Plains properties in North Queensland and the Anglesea heathlands in
Victoria. But the main focus of the first phase has been on planning and
identification of ecological priorities.
The Government will now provide $ 80 million to fund the second phase of
establishing the National Reserves System. With matching contributions
from the States, this should provide the momentum to develop by the turn of
the century a system of parks and reserves second to none in the world. 
The objective is to protect prime examples of our major ecosystems and the
most important representative areas of biological diversity and wilderness.
Protection of these areas will create havens for a range of endangered
species. The Government recognises that we will need a range of measures to fully
protect our biological diversity.
In order to identify these strategies, I will propose that the Council of
Australian Governments institute a major review process associated with the
National Reserves System with the aim of removing unnecessary
impediments to best practice in biological diversity conservation.
It should also develop innovative means to complete the National Reserves
System and increase the conservation effort off reserves. The review could
cover the regulatory framework, economic instruments and voluntary
measures.
We will also establish, as part of the National Reserves Program, a
million revolving Australian Nature Conservation Trust Fund for innovative
and cooperative initiatives which may involve States, private sector and
community 6ontributions. For example, this will provide opportunities to place
conservation covenants on land which the Fund may purchase and on-sell.
If it is true, and it surely is, that conservation of the environment represents a
challenge for all Australians, this fund represents an opportunity for all
Australians to respond. It is an opportunity for communities and individuals.
It is an opportunity for private companies both big and small to play their
part. It is not unreasonable to entertain the hope that the Government's
million will be the seed of something much bigger.
Of course some 15 per cent of Australia is currently owned by Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Government will consult with the land
owners, as part of the National Reserves System Program, to develop an
Indigenous Protected Areas Initiative. This will aim to establish reserve-level
nature conservation management in areas of high conservation value, while
maintaining indigenous ownership and control.
The National Reserve Program will protect the habitats of many endangered
species and ecological communities but attention needs to be given to
individual species and particular communities.
More than eighty per cent of Australian endangered and vulnerable species
do not yet have a completed recovery plan in place. To respond to this need
the Government will provide an additional $ 13.4 million to tackle the threats
facing the most critically endangered species, both inside and outside the
reserve system.
So there it is.
1, 1 1. f. or T. 7 T I 11, I I I V 17. yw 1 I I MM lql. tqt 
A sweep of integrated measures, with new funding totalling $ 463 million, from
the pure nature conservation of a world class National Reserves System,
through Landcare and property management planning, to export market
access for premium food products. Integrated, because the policy problems
we are facing can only be properly understood by making these connections.
This is the substance which underpins the concept of ecologically sustainable
development. Historically we have not been kind to our environment. Nor have we
observed the connection between the environment and production. Over the
last decade, however, we have begun to see how thoroughly they are
interwoven and, once we see them, we begin to see how urgent it is to
repair the broken threads.
Our economic health and environmental well-being cannot be separated.
Treated apart, we are bound to fall short of success in both causes. Treated
together, we have a chance of succeeding a chance to repair the damage
done in the last two centuries and give to the Australians of the next century
their birthright, a flourishing, natural Australian environment.
At the same time, it will do them no harm to have flourishing rural industries
and a rural culture and communities. Among other things, that will mean
Australia is realising its unique potential.
And it will mean that we have done the right thing by the future.
We can be the generation which turned the tide. We have to be and I am
certain that we want to be.
ENDS 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP,
THE MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT, SPORT AND TERRITORIES,
SEN THE HON JOHN FAULKNER AND MINISTER FOR PRIMARY
INDUSTRIES AND ENERGY, SEN THE HON BOB COLLINS, JOINT
PRESS CONFERENCE, ALBURY, WEDNESDAY, 24 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I'll begin by saying that it is a great pleasure to be here in Albury and
to be -here making a major statement with my colleagues on the
envirp6ment and. sustainable land management in Australia and to be
doing it at a place where we have a role and a commitment we
meaning the Commonwealth in a Cooperative Research Centre on
water ecosystems and water management and quality ' ery nicely
dovetails in with the strategy and the philosophy and the policies that
we have articulated today.
There is no doubt that the magnitude of the challenge in dealing with
the environment in Australia is a very great one because, I think, those
with environmental consciousness in Australia realise that to deal with
it we are dealing not only with the big icon areas such as Shoalwater
Bay and Jervis Bay and the Gordon Below Franklin and Kakadu and
the rest or beyond that to the big issue of the forests but that the
environment in Australia also means tackling difficult issues such as
biodiversity and land management, knowing as we all know that the
land has been degraded over the 200 years since European
settlement. Now it is the responsibility of this generation to actually deal with the
problem, not to wait to put it off any longer, but to actually look at it on
an integrated basis as a whole. So questions such as land use
management, dry land salinity, the problems of the rivers, river flows,
endangered species, biodiversity all of these issues are issues which
this government is prepared to tackle and that we believe must be
tackled. So, I think, this is an outstanding package in anyone's language. It is
the biggest environmental policy that any Commonwealth government ' I 
has, as an integrated whole, ever introduced, It signals meeting the
environmental challenge, that it must be met and will be met and that
the problems of the environment will remain a central priority of the
Labor government that will be returned after the coming election. It
means that just on half a billion dollars will be spent, I think in a way
which now builds on the existing programs we have had and the
existing successes we have had and they are many, including
involving the community through great movements such as Landcare,
in getting farmers interested in whole of farm property management, in
focusing on these really intractable problems like long term salinity and
rising water tables. These can't be done by governments and by
departments. They can be done only with governments and the
community, drawing the community in. And, of course, going beyond
that to making clear where we stand on one of the big issues and that
is, of course, pulling a more comprehensive reserve system together in
Australia and with the Australian states. This is something we are very
committed to.
I'd like to take this opportunity of complimenting my colleagues. If we
look back at the problems of recent memory, the drought and in
dealing with it, support of the rural economy and rural communities, the
chatldge of the environment, the forests, and bringing all this together
in this statement, I don't think any two ministers have ever done more
together, have been able to present a more comprehensive package, a
more comprehensive approach to the real problems of the Australian
environment, threading them together, weaving them together, making
them work as an -integrated whole. That is what I hope the community
will see from this package today. I want to thank them and compliment
them and I know, on behalf of all those people out there that are
interested in the environment in this country today, a very good thing
has been done.
BC: Can I just say briefly that after the work that was actually put into this
package and because he is here, I must say I was delighted to hear
this morning the comments made, that I know were off-the-cuff, by a
scientist with the research credentials of the Director of this CIRC who
picked up the major policy underpinning this package. And that is, he
is quite right in fact, it is the first time that any government has ever put
together an integrated package that links together the economic
sustainability of rural Australia with environmental sustainability.
The point the Prime Minister made in his speech is very salient one in
that respect. Sixty per cent of our entire land mass in Australia is
managed by farmers. You can't, in the real world, expect farmers with
the best will in the world to introduce what are expensive
environmental programs unless they are economically viable. That is
really the underpinning of this package. It is a $ 176 million boost to
Landcare which, I'm sure everyone that is involved in Landc-re will be
delighted to hear today. It could effectively be called Landcare Mark 1I. 
That, in fact, is what everybody has been talking about. We are five
years through the decade. Our original commitment was $ 320 million
for the whole 10 years, this package in fact, increases the total
commitment to over $ 1 billion, but it does one very important thing.
The Landcare response has been overwhelming. We were
anticipating 1000 groups maybe by the year 2000. It is 2500 already.
What the demand is from farmers, from environmental groups is to
provide resources for on ground works now that we have got that
network of people out there. That is what this does. It actually
provides enough funding in here.
Our experience has shown us since we started Landcare, that in order
to get a result on the ground you have got to seed about half a million
dollars of Commonwealth money into a particular catchment. This
funding provides enough funding to fund that level of funding for every
major catchment in Australia. One hundred and forty catchments
across Australia will be able to have integrated plans developed with
this package that will actually deliver on ground works. It is a very
substantial advance on Landcare.
The property management planning part of it, I know, is going to be
warmIy welcomed by farmers. This effectively provides, just to give
you one bit of detail about it, up to a 75 per cent subsidy on interest
rates for farmers who want to borrow money to improve the
sustainability of their property. For example, in Shepparton just near
here, last year I went to a dairy were a young farmer who had taken
aver the property from his parents completely reorganised all of the
water effluent from the diary and so on. So it was a completely self
contained diary with nothing going into the streams, everything
contained on the farm. It was an expensive thing to do and this
package will actually encourage a-whole lot more young farmers like
him and give them a real economic incentive to go ahead and do that.
So, it is a very integrated package.
On the Murray-Darling and I'll finish on this point, I know that Don
Blackmore is like a dog with two tails today, that Council over the last
two years, the Murray-Darling, initiative was an initiative of this
Government. The Commission was established by this Government in
1988 and this has been a substantial boost to the work that was done.
This package, in fact, has come out of a water audit in which there was
some publicity earlier this year, you may recall it. The water audit was
commenced two years ago and the Murray-Darling Basin Ministerial
Council took the most important decision we have ever taken in July
last year where we stopped all further diversionary flows from the
Murray-Darling system. This package is a direct result of that. It will
enable something like 1600 kilometres of river banks and stream
banks, riparian zones as they are called, to be rehabilitated. It will
enable the complete management catchment plans for every major 
catchment in the Murray-Darling Basin to be completed. It will enable
a substantial decrease, we estimate in the vicinity of 40 per cent
reduction, in the amount of nutrients and chemical pollutants that are
going into the river. It is a major advance of the Murray-Darling which
will give us the tools to actually arrest the degradation.
I want to conclude on one final point. Both of these schemes
Landcare and the Murray-Darling are marked by one thing they have
in common. They both leave enormous additional funds from both the
community groups and industry. Landcare does that spectacularly, but
so does the Murray-Darling and, in fact, the Murray-Darling Basin
Commission. has formally advised me since the package was
announced that they estimate that with this level of Commonwealth
government seeding a total package of $ 600 million will, in fact, result
on the experience since 1988 from both State, local governments and
industry.
JF: If I can just say that ther is no doubt about this being a tremendous
boost to biodiversity conservation in this country. The sort of
integration that you have heard about is just a magnificent
achievement in my view for the government. These programs, they
have , vo elements protection and production. That is what Landcare
is all about and with it in relation to the environmental aspects of this
package, we have really been able to deliver on protection of
Australia's biodiversity and we have done that through the most
creative set of measures in relation to the expansion of our national
reserve system as well as dealing with those very important issues in
relation to off reserve conservation.
So, I think, this is a great result for the environment. A terrific result for
the protection of Australia's biodiversity.
PM: Thank you John. I think any one of us are happy to deal with your
questions.
J: Senator Collins, what about the problem of sewerage and I know steps
were taken last year as you said in terms of irrigation, but is there
more to be done there, some have been critical, saying that these are
the sorts of really hard decisions?
BC: Yes, a lot more needs to be done and I might add I guess it is a
degradation of euphemisms, I suppose, I used an even softer
euphemism I called it nutrient and you called it sewerage, you could
call it something else I guess if you wanted to, but when I said that this
package will be able to reduce by a very large percentage the amount
of nutrients into the system we are also talking about the sewerage
outflows. People don't appreciate, and they don't, the extent to which
the Murray-Darling basin is actually managed today. We are pumping
800 tonnes of salt a day out of the Murray-Darling Basin now. The fact
7-1 R 4 y
j~-S 
is, that if we weren't engaged in the massive management practices
we are now that Basin would be unsustainable now. The significance
of that, of course, is that it produces almost half the total agricultural
output of this country and when you have got an audit that took two
years to complete, that says to you in black and white, that if the
existing practices continue then the use of water, and I am almost
quoting, it exactly in that Basin will become unsustainable by the turn
of the century that is five years from now it does attract your
attention. I am very pleased to say that, acting on the advise of the Commission
and that is where this package came from, we can confidently say that
this level of Commonwealth funding will actually result in arresting that
degradation. I might also say on a personal note and I have got to say
this here today sometime, after 18 years in this business I am really
tickled by this constant theme that because you have been in
government for 13 years that somehow or other that means that you
have run out of ideas. Well, for people who actually have that view
chew on this.
J: Prime ' Minister, true is it not that there is on these subjects a certain
degrei of bipartisanship. The Coalition has also said that they think
that land care is important, they have announced funding for
revegetation. Why is your plan so much better?
PM: Because it is the plan of the conceivers and authors of the policy that
is why. The flippant press statements published by the Opposition,
John Howard's appalling statement which he made and I have it, Bob
responded to it, in October 1995, there is a South Australian
Employers Chamber of Commerce mentioning the Murray-Darling,
talking about catch up politics. It was a plight on Australian journalism
that that media release was ever reported. The Government
established the Murray-Darling Commission in 1988. We have spent
$ 400 million so far on it. I have committed myself as Prime Minister
very much to the problems of land management in Australia. I had the
pleasure of visiting the Sunraysia district to look at drip irrigation some
time ago, a couple of years ago now I think, and also on the very point
that Senator Collins mentioned about salt in the river, of pressing the
button on one of the pumping stations just up river from Mildura, taking
one of the underground aquifers and pumping it into a salt pan. A part
of that 800 tonnes a day which is changing the nature and quality of
the river.
It has only been the Labor Party that has made these commitments to
the environment. You have got John Howard and his party now saying
the external affairs power shouldn't be used, the world heritage powers
which have flowed from that constitutional authority have, of course,
been an important part of the development of an integrated
environment policy. They have no policy on forests, none, and we
-U r--i 
have introduced with that target of 15 per cent of the reserve system
that reflected what obtained before European settlement. I mean the
Labor Party will be the only party going into this election with an
environment policy total environment policy and this goes, also, for
the Greens and for others.
It is only a party of government that can make environmental policy
stick. This is not something that individuals can do individual people
in the Senate, or the House of Representatives, or minor parties.
This is a business for the parties of government and the only party of
government interested in the environment in this comprehensive,
whole way is the Labor Party. It only ever has been the Labor Party.
And if we are living now with the problems of massive land clearance,
and what have you, it is because of the view taken over many years.
In fact, the first thing I did as Treasurer, the very first thing I did, was to
remove deductions for land clearing in the year of expenditure,
the very first thing I did 13 years ago.
J: But, Prime Minister, a few months ago John Howard made a speech
about Asia and he talked about Australia becoming a supermarket into
Asia:. " Now, today, you are talking about something called the Asia
Food 2000 Strategy. He is going to say you pinched his idea.
PM: Oh, cut it out, cut it out.
BC: Fair go.
PM: Now I don't mind being questioned. But I do object to being offended
with silly questions. It is an impertinence for this reason: that the
Agri-Food Council was established by the government for this very
purpose. I mean you might recall me attending a meeting with it in Orange last
year about these very subjects. You might recall that I have
established an inquiry with Bob Collins and Laurie Brereton about how
we get time-sensitive exports air freighted out of Australia, what the air
freight impediments might be, how we can actually bring whole land in
production and not see it lost to salinity or water table problems.
I mean dealing with the problems of the Sunraysia, or the water table
problems of the Goulbumrn Valley our success there in managing
water table issues in the dairy production areas of the
Goulbum Valley.
Cheap press statements by oppositions who have no thought for these
issues at all. Bear in mind there were 23 years of Coalition
government where the National Party had a major influence and did
they do anything about dry land salinity, water tables, land clearance,
t 7. jk'. 
you know? Has John Howard got any record on these issues ever?
None. No where.
J: Is the Federal Government committed to funding the Research Centre
here?
PM: Well the whole Cooperative Research Centre programs are funded by
the Commonwealth, they are our programs.
BC: Wouldn't have got off the ground without us.
PM: Wouldn't be here without us. The whole CRC movement is ours.
We have put now I think, from memory, about $ 800 million and we now
have about $ 1600 million, from memory, of private funding which has
joined us. So we have got a very large amount of money now going
into Cooperative Research Centres. I mean this one here, which I was
very pleased to be involved today in the laboratory, on water
eco-systems. You know you can find other ones on hard wood
technology, or remote sensing, or whatever it might be.
BC: I mi~ 1t just add too in respect of those previous questions.
Commbnwealth ' Ministers have chaired the Murray-Darling Ministerial
Council ever since it was set up. It was a Commonwealth initiative.
I have chaired it for the last two years and you know the reality of
John Howard's contribution to this debate. He told somebody in his
office to draft a press statement. That is it. You find anything else.
In fact, I took the trouble to have a look at the Parliamentary Database,
I pushed the button on it and I typed in Murray-Darling and
John Howard and it came up with a blank screen. And you do the
same. John Howard, in fact, has said nothing about the
Murray-Darling Basin since he has been in Parliament. Now I only
went back to 1981, you can go back beyond that if you like.
J: Prime Minister, there is an election coming up. $ 463 million worth of
funding. What would you say to voters who would simply dismiss this
as an election ploy?
PM: Simply that it builds on existing programs. I mean Landcare was
developed by this government.
BC: It has been two years in the making.
PM: It has brought people to it. We have brought this policy together from
the policy structures we have built and the success of them. So there
is the continuity here and this is announced by a government and
things we announce, of this kind, wAil of course be as would announce
things in a Budget, or if we were to announce things in any other
context. 
But, I think, the success of it is we know that no matter how committed
a government is to these issues, you need the community to do it.
You need it in land management, you need it in whole farm
management and planning, you need it with the States in respect of
Reserves Systems, etc. And the real world nature of this statement is
not only the funding commitments, but the fact that we are building on
that community support we have already garnered and which is now
growing at a pace.
J: Prime Minister, the government has had a few spats with the
environment movement. You have underlined the size and scope of
this policy, particularly the innovation work. Do you expect this policy
to overcome the individual differences you may have had with green
groups over forests or other isolated issues and win unambiguous
support from the environment movement in the coming election?
PM: Well, I think, if the ACF's release today is an indication of that, the
answer will be yes. But, of course, you won't win everyone in the
environment movement. There are the people with an environment
consciousness in the environment movement, and there are political
people looking for seats in Parliament who are calling themselves
green' They are not the environment movement. They are a political
party trying to draw down the public support of environment movement
policies, or the imperatives of the environment movement.
So for those who are conscientiously committed, who know that only a
government can do these things, who know that to deal with the
forests, or to deal with the landscape, or to deal with biodiversity, or
the reefs, or any of it, can only be done by a government. It is to those
people, those conscientious Australians, interested appropriately
interested in the environment that, I think, this package has the
integrity and the appeal. The truth, the belief about it that is not going
to be there with someone trying to find a seat in the Senate or in a
minor party.
J: But, surely, Prime Minister you can't say that Bob Brown after his
record on the Franklin hasn't got a conscientious record on the
environment?
PM: He has got now a much more conscientious interest in getting into
Parliament and that is the problem. If Bob Brown was really committed
to the environment, he would be seeking the further development of
policy such as this, rather than compromising any standing he has had
to his own place in the Senate. I mean he is the one who has put his
environmental credentials asunder by seeking political office, rather
than being part of a broad movement which is looking for broad
solutions such as this. 
J: Are you going to be relying on the preferences from the Australian
Greens in a lot of Lower House seats and in terms of Senate
negotiations if that is the case?
PM: Well I don't know how strong the Greens will be. But, again, what is
their option: to give it to a party, the Coalition that has no belief in
these policies at all.
J: It worked in the Queensland State election.
PM: Well that was for a number of reasons. This has not happened
federally.
JF: There have been a number of examples and perhaps the most recent
and best example from a federal perspective, the by-election in
Canberra where, in fact, there has been a recommendation from
environment groups for a preference vote against Labor. And Labor
still, of course, won the vast majority of Green preferences in that seat.
From our perspective, look, we are very confident that those voters
who will go to the polls later this year with the environment as a very
high'. piority, or their highest priority, are going to look at the record of
the parties, they will certainly compare the policies of the major parties,
they are going to compare the records of the major parties on the
environment and, I think, this government has an extraordinarily strong
record and we are very confident that those voters with an
environmental commitment are going to strongly support the return of
this government.
But we are not taking that for granted. We are going to continue
throughout this period to point out very strongly the very clear
differences that exist between the Labor Party and the Liberal Party on
the environment issue and they are very stark.
J: Prime Minister, you quoted before the Australian Conservation
Foundation. In their release today they site a list of things yo&amp; u get to
do, they say energy in greenhouse, forest World Heritage for key sites,
legislative reform, clean industry initiatives, and a framework for
ecologically sustainable development. Are they too greedy?
JF: Let me make this point in relation to the release from the Australian
Conservation Foundation. What you have is a very strong
endorsement of this biodiversity conservation package which has been
announced today. The ACF makes the point that there are a range of
other environmental issues. No one can deny that.
In the last Budget, you saw this government for the first time take the
responsibility to really do something about protecting Australia's
coasts. Late last year, you saw this government deliver the best ever
4-0: 
package to protect Australia's forests. Now, you have seen this
government produce a package that undoubtedly is the best ever in
terms of protection of Australia's biodiversity. I don't think anyone can
argue that and I don't think anyone will argue that.
There are other environment issues. They will all be important and we
will be, of course, pointing out the strong differences that exist
between the government and the Opposition on those issues as well.
And issues like World Heritage, a commitment to protect World
Heritage Areas and exercise our World Heritage obligations there is
an enormous difference between ourselves and the party that
John Howard leads. And we are going to demonstrate and show and
expose those differences as the election campaign develops.
J: Mr Keating, just from a local media's point of view is there anything
more that you can tell us about the Asia Food Strategy and what it
might mean for farmers and country towns?
PM: Well on Friday we will be saying more about it. I think Senator Collins
could probably tell you now.
J: Is thef6 anything more that you can tell us though as far as like will
you be talking about [ inaudible] for exports for farmers, can they
expect more market technology?
BC: Yes, we are. But those detailed proposals are going to be announced
in a far more detailed way on Friday. And, in fact, I was very pleased
to see that very senior members of the Australian business community,
Reg Clews is here for example, as well as John Claringbolt, members
of the Agri-Business Council are actually here today.
J: Is there any possibility of the inland air freight terminal at say Parkes,
or the Narrandera region?
BC: There is nothing of that kind of detail in it. These are broad initiatives
to assist the Council in substantially increasing the global amount of
exports into Asia. You should never, ever, overlook the fact that we
are extremely successful in that market and this is building on the
success. It is not as if we haven't already succeeded, we have.
There has been an enormous boost in exports into that region. And as
the Prime Minister mentioned today in his speech, we know from what
has been achieved already that that original target of $ 7 billion can be
exceeded and this package is designed to achieve that.
J: [ inaudible] air freight terminal. Would that have the
government's support?
PM: Well one of the studies which Bob Collins and Laurie Brereton are
looking at now is what are the air freight needs, how do we handle 
perishable commodities, time-sensitive perishable commodities, how
do we get the linkages working better, what is the capacity like, where
should it be? These are the issues we are currently studying.
J: Prime Minister, how is it going to be paid for, the $ 460 million?
PM: Well we will be making announcements as we do in the course of any
budgetary year, in the course of certainly the forthcoming election
campaign commitments we make, how they will be funded will be made
very clear to you, clear to the media, clear to everybody and they will
be, of course.
And need I say, you know, we are sitting in the position with a Budget
in surplus, we have got today confirmation of the underlying inflation
rate, again, at the bottom end of market expectations, making it very
clear that the target for inflation of 2 to 3 per cent over the cycle is well
within our grasp, the government is sitting with a relatively strong low
inflation economy and a Budget surplus. So it is a pretty good position
to be in.
And I *' mightju st say, I don't know whether someone has doled out
some ( ruth serum to John Howard or not but today he made a very
revealing commitment uncharacteristically revealing he said " I mean
nobody can guarantee that somebody, for example, won't lose their job
somewhere in the economy over a three year period and have to
accept another job at a lower rate of pay." What he has done is
confirm exactly what the government has been saying, and that is that
the 1.7 million people who change jobs in a three year period under
the policies of the Coalition will lose their award protections and would
have to take jobs at lower rates of pay. And that is why 63 per cent of
Australians said they didn't believe. John Howard when he made claims
of the contrary. Now he has corrected his own claims.
ends 7j 



.1
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SPEECH AT THE YOUNG AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR AWARDS,
DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY, 25 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
I think it is a wonderful thing that once a year we take time out to celebrate
our young Australians and what more appropriate day than for Australia Day
as we celebrate it by naming an Australian of the Year and a Young
Australian of. the Year. And it is always a good occasion too because I am
always a sug Ier for a bit of entertainment.
I thought those Tap Brothers were just terrific. I remember seeing the
Tap Dogs, but hairy legs and working boots are not quite the same as those
knee tights and spats. And I saw in some of the routines, being an old
Fred Astaire fan, some of the work of his great choreographer, Hermes Pann
and there is a name for you. Of course his mother and father were Mr and
Mrs Pann and they just loved Hermes. But he was the best choreographer in
the business and obviously some of it has rubbed off and, of course, the
spats you know, the white tops on the black shoes give you all the
movement.
And, of course, in the twenties, spats were all the go with the well-to-do.
I mean one of my predecessors, Stanley Melbourne Bruce, always had them
on. But what I worry about is if the Tap Brothers get very famous, half the
Coalition will put them back on again. I mean if they look anything like
becoming a fad, they will slip them on so quickly I mean half of that front
bench. But I will tell you this, they might have them on but one thing they
won't do is tap or dance I can tell you that. There is certainly no rhythm in it.
And, of course, John Williamson. Isn't he a star at getting that ethos and
sense of Australia out there. And James Morrison I mean the one authentic
form of American music, of course, is jazz and I don't know that we have ever
had a better exponent of it here than James Morrison.
So apart from the essential importance of our function today. It was good to
come just to be entertained. If you know that old video 
' That's Entertainment", I have rearranged all the magnetic particles on that
over the years because it does you good, it warms you up.
Well, I think, that one of the things worth saying about young people is that
I don't think any experience I have had as a Minister, or as a Member of
Parliament, or as Prime Minister with young Australians hasn't been
positive.
Always you get from them the hope, the expectations, the up-lifting spirits
they have, the belief, the hope and the faith they have scepticism but not
cynicism, interested, keen, and it is our duty to, I think, understand what a
great joy it is to have them around us, what a great strength they provide our
country and to invest in them.
In the last couple of days I have been thinking about that and I did this
morning in thinking about this question of, it's called, inter-generational trust,
or the inter-generational inheritance. And this morning I met the Canberra
Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons. Without a doubt,
I think, the most distinguished group of people in the world saying of how the
world would be a better and safer place if those 50,000 nuclear warheads
laying around, arsenals, were taken away. And, I tell you what, it almost
brings a tear to the eye to hear the Strategic Air Commander of the
United Statds just three years ago say there is no place for nuclear weapons
today, that they have no military use, that essentially they are a dead weight
on the world and they are making the world an unsafer place.
Or to hear similar views expressed by the former Prime Minister of France, or
the Nobel Prize Winner Joseph Rotblat or any of the other distinguished
people there. And if we Australians can be just that much influential in being
the first government to take this issue up and start moving against the view
that in the post-Cold War world we need a stock of nuclear weapons to keep
it safe, then we will have done something for our children that, I think, we can
be proud of.
And we won't be leaving them with the inheritance we have lived with, all of
us, through our young years, the tyranny of knowing that the world could be
annihilated at any moment by accident, or by design. And so that is one thing
that in this last 24 hours I have been thinking about in terms of
inter-generational trust.
The other is the environment and yesterday the government announced a
very large package of measures to deal with some of the real environmental
problems of this country land degradation, dry land salinity, destruction of
bio-diversity, developing a National Reserves System. And you might recall
before Christmas where the government announced a big policy of putting
6 million hectares of Australian forests away for posterity into deferred forest
areas. And looking at the commitment we are getting now from Landcare, where we
hoped in 1989 when we started it we would have 1,000 Landcare groups. 
We have now got 2,500 Landcare groups and we are going on. The big
commitment of that is coming from young Australians. They are the ones who
are interested in the environment. They know that we don't have to spoil the
place to have a good life. And yet we know that if we don't manage it well, by
the time our generation is no longer managing this country's fortunes we
will have left them a degraded place, a place that they can't be proud of.
So in just these two things, in the environment where we have got this great
inheritance of this old continent of ours and where we have a chance to hold
some of its pristine quality and repair the damage of 200 years since
European settlement. These are things that, I think, we must think about in
terms of the inter-generational inheritance, or cleaning the world up of
nuclear weapons, making life safer and better.
There are things that we can do, all of us, I think both with and for our young
people and our question of who we are and our identity; the fact that we are
now an open, modem economy trading into the world; the fact that we have
made the linkages with Asia. I mean I know, as you know from just a week
ago, the people who manage Malaysia, and Singapore, or Indonesia.
But I didn't know them when I was young and young Australians will know
them and they will know their counterparts in these countries. They will have
that interest and excitement and opportunity that we didn't have.
And I notice this debate in the press about now, you know, the pundits sitting
back saying well you haven't jumped the TER hurdle. It is sitting up there in
so many universities having not filled up their places, this is shocking. Well
we want to see the places filled up. In fact the government just about
doubted, in fact we have added 70 per cent of places, to universities taking
them through from 300,000 to 560,000 places. So there are more places and
that is why it is taking more time, perhaps, to fill them.
But the fact of the matter is, eight youn g people in ten now complete a
secondary education. Ten years ago, it was three in ten and now they have a
secondary education we want to invest in them the confidence of knowing
that we are interested in them, that we will take their education further, that
we offer them the promise of an interesting and secure life in a country that is
nice to live in, in an international society that is sane.
Now, I think, these are some of the things that we have to think about.
And on this occasion we have these awards to acknowledge the contribution
of some young Australians, so that when we honour them we honour all
young Australians and to say that we love them, that we are interested in
them, that we will put our arm around them and that we celebrate their
victories and their successes and their joys.
That is what today is about and a nation that cares about its young people, is
a nation with a soul, it is a nation that has got its values properly fixed and
that is what we are doing here today. 
So it is my very pleasant duty to announce the Young Australian of the Year
in 1996. And I suppose what makes it, for me, a double pleasure is to dwell
on the point I made earlier about entertainment and to celebrate the
successes of our young people who can perform the way those Tap Brothers
performed earlier, or the other artists today.
And the winner, at 20 years of age, is already one of Australia's busiest
concert pianists. She has won numerous awards and is currently studying for
her Masters Degree at the Manhattan School of Music and about to make her
debut with the New York Symphony Orchestra. It is, of course,
Rebecca Chambers and Poppy King will escort her to the stage.
ends -j'; R 



PRIME MINISTER 4/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MNISTER, THE HON PJ KEATING MP
JANET HOLMES a COURT TO CHAIR CENTENARY OF FEDERATION COUNCIL
I am delighted to announce that Janet Holmes a Court has agreed to chair the
Centenary of Federation Council.
The Council will coordinate centenary-related planning across the nation in the years
leading up to and including the centenary of federation in 2001, and administer grants to
community activities and projects commemorating and celebrating the first hundred
years of the federation of the Australian States in 1901.
The Council is being established as a result of consideration by the Council of Australian
Governments of the report of the Centenary of Federation Advisory Committee, chaired
by Joan Kirner. It will comprise a nominee from each State and Territory and up to six
Commonwealth nominees, including a local government representative. The
membership will be announced shortly.
The Council will be pivotal in the lead up to the celebration and commemoration of a
great democratic achievement.
Janet Holmes a Court is a very distinguished Australian. Her wide experience in
cultural, business and community activities will be of great value to the Centenary of
Federation Council as it begins its task. It will direct activities that include all
Australians, are community focussed and, wherever possible, are of lasting significance
into the next millennium.
( Janet Holmes a Court is Chair of Heytesbury Holdings and all companies in the
Heytesbury Group including the John Holland Group and Heytesbury Pastoral Group; a
member of the Reserve Bank Board; Chair of the Australian Children's Television
Foundation; and Chair of the Black Swan Theatre Company.)
CANBERRA JANUARY 1996 



PRIME MINISTER
** EMBARGOED UNTIL 6.45PM, 25 JANUARY 1996*
*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
PRESENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIA DAY AWARDS
OLD PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, 25 JANUARY 1996
Thank you for coming to this 1996 presentation of the Australia Day Awards
and thank you to the Australia Day Council for staging them. And thank you
for inviting nfM along to present the Awards.
Australia Day provides us with a chance to reflect on the country we live in:
on the year past and the one which lies ahead.
Because it falls just a few weeks after New Year it is, in a sense, a second
chance. A chance, maybe, to make a few adjustments if not grand new
resolutions. It is a day when all around the country Australians offer up their assessments
of where the nation stands and what direction it should go.
But on the whole, there is relatively little pomp and ceremony, and a great
deal of general enjoyment.
There have been various efforts down the years to give it more formal shape
and meaning, but it has evolved as essentially an expression of our freedom,
and a quite unselfconscious celebration of our way of life.
At all sorts of sporting fixtures; in lounge rooms, gardens and backyards; in
the bush, on beaches; in pubs and clubs and cafes; in city streets and
country towns in a thousand different ways, we commune with each other
and the continent.
And no amount of official direction or attempts to invest the day with more
formalities can resist the popular sentiment and nor should they. 
Perhaps across the country we should all stop at a prearranged moment,
pause for a second or two, and give thanks to our fellow Australians of all
generations. Because we do all depend upon each other.
And, if we are to make the best of the great gifts and opportunities we have,
we always will depend on each other.
Few years in our recent history have demonstrated this as clearly as the last
one. In many profound ways, 1995 was a great year for Australia. In economic
terms, no country in the developed world did better. We made great strides
among the countries of the region where our future largely lies. On this
Australia Day there can be no argument that Australia has advanced our
economy is a little stronger, our future a little more assured, our horizons a
little wider. As a nation and as a society, we have made real progress.
And there can hardly be a better reason to celebrate than that.
Yet, I think the events of last year from which we have most to learn and
most to celebrate occurred in a different sphere of our national life.
H
It was not in economics or any other area of national policy, or arts, or
science, or sport, or any of the other things in which Australians continue to
excel. It was in the area of what might be called the spirit the national spirit.
Last year we celebrated a whole generation of Australians the Australians
who loved this country and their freedom and cared enough about Australia's
future to give everything, even their lives, in its defence.
In celebrating them, we learned a lot about ourselves. Our children learned a
lot about their parents and grandparents, and thus a lot more about what
Australian means. They learned, and we were reminded, that we are all part
of the same story.
We all learned a bit more about Australia. And most gratifying of all we
learned that the spirit which inspired that generation is alive in our own.
The enthusiasm with which Australia Remembers was taken up all over
Australia was a reassuring statement that all the great changes of the past
fifty years have not dampened our affections.
And, of course, in remembering the war we were also reminded that nothing
about our freedom and the way of life we enjoy can be taken for ever granted.
It was hard won and it will always have to be defended. 
Similar lessons were there to be learned from the nation's response, to the
worst drought in living memory.
In rural Australia we saw scenes of environmental devastation and human
hardship which most people in the cities certainly most young people
never imagined possible in their own country.
And, again, the response was overwhelming and immensely reassuring to
anyone who might have doubted that the old spirit lives on. From one end of
the country to the other, Australians pitched in to help farming families and
farming communities to survive.
It became a great national cause. And, as a result, when the rains finally
came to most of the farms, most of the farmers had survived.
In the process a lot of Australians learned something about the resilience of
rural Australians. They leaned how much they had in common with them.
Perhaps most importantly, we were all reminded again that our good
fortune can never be taken for granted.
That's why' ( think 1995 was such a very good year for Australia. It was proof
of the spirit of the place: if you like, proof that the values of Arthur Boyd's
generation, including his love of the landscape, still inspire us in this post
modern, globalising, information age.
It couldn't be more timely.
If the lesson was that there are times when only our own collective effort will
see us through, then the lesson is a good one for now because this is one
of those times.
I believe we have begun a whole new chapter in our history.
It used to remind me of that earlier one, before the long overdue arrival of the
Second Fleet when, cut off from Europe, unable to adapt to the environment
and feed themselves, at odds with the Aboriginal people and unwilling to
learn from them, horribly conscious that they were alone and adrift, the
survivors of the First Fleet waited helplessly at Port Jackson for supplies.
And while we are not in any way abandoned and starving, we are in every
essential respect dependent on our own efforts and ingenuity.
And, if we needed any reassurance, last year should have provided it we
have learned the lessons of experience and we know what it takes.
The challenge is to enter the next century economically strong and dynamic,
at home with both the rapidly changing realities of technology and the modem
world, and thoroughly engaged with that part of it in which we live. 
And because, obviously, it will make us more able to succeed in this, the
challenge is also to enter the next century strong as a community; confident
that the cultural and social differences between us, like the physical
distances, are no impediment to our common purpose.
At the same time, and for much the same reasons, we need to come to just
terms, once and for all. with the original inhabitants of this continent, the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People.
And also come to terms with the natural environment on which our future
prosperity and our way of life significantly depends.
In both cases, we need to repair the damage of 200 years. We need to find a
way to live in harmony with the continent and the people who have lived on it
for more than 40,000 years.
These are challenging and exciting times. No previous generation of
Australians ever had such an opportunity. No other country in the world has
such an opportunity now.
So long as ( e retain faith in ourselves, practise tolerance and reward
initiative, we should be in no doubt about succeeding.
That is why Australia Day is so important it is an expression of the essential
things about our national life.
And it is why Australians of the Year are such important people by their
achievements they give us a clue to what we all can be.
And it is now my great pleasure to announce that the Australian of the Year
for 1996 is Dr John Yu. 



PRIME MINISTER 3/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MESSAGE OF CONGRATULATIONS TO THE PRIME MINISTER OF
GREECE I have sent a message of congratulations in the following terms to
Mr Constantine Sinutis, Prime Minister of the Hellenic Republic, on his
election to office.
' May I extend to you personally, and on behalf of the Government and people
ofAustralia, my warmest congratulations on your election as Prime Minister Of
Greece. Greece itself and the 300,000 Australians who were born in Greece or are of
Greek descent, have played a vital role in shaping the modern Australian
nation. They are part of the essence of our society.
These deep links between our people provide the firm foundation on which the
relationship between our two governments rest. I believe there is more we can
do to use these links to develop our relations and I look forward to working
closely with you in this task
In this regard, I hope very much that you will find it possible to visit Australia
as a guest of the Australian Government at some early time. You would be a
very welcome guest here.-
You have my very best wishes, and those of all Australians, as you continue the
process of change and reform on which you have embarked"
CANBERRA January 1996 



PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MURRAY-DARLING BASIN
Mr Howard's claim to ownership of the sustainable
agriculture/ landcare/ Murray-Darling Basin agenda is a sure sign that once
again, the Coalition is struggling to put together anything credible in a key
policy area.
If you can't develop a decent policy of your own, just claim that someone who
can has stotlen yours.
Mr Howard must have been hoping that everyone else h ad been asleep just
like him until late 1995 when he first discovered the Murray-Darling Basin or
that no one had kept any records.
Unfortunately, the rest of us have been aware of the Murray Darling and
land degradation and the potential of food exports to Asia for quite some
time and actually doing something about it as the attached records shows.
Unlike Mr Howard, Labor has an unparalleled record of achievements on
Landcare, and the Murray -Darling. We don't need to go scratching around in
the empty Coalition policy cupboard for a good idea.
The record speaks for itself.
CANBERRA January 1996 6/ 96 
Some Key Dates
1788-1983: Years of neglect.
1983 Labor Government establishes a Commonwealth/ State
taskforce for drought management. The results included the
removal of fodder subsidies which exacerbate land degradation
by encouraging overstocking during drought.
1983 Removal of tax incentives for land clearing by Treasurer
Keating
1983 Establishment of the National Soil Conservation Program
( NSCP)
1988 Establishment of the Murray Darling Basin Commission and
Ministerial Council.
1988 Commonwealth and States develop and endorse the National
Soil Conservation Strategy.
1988 Establishment of the Community Landcare component of the
NSCP.
1989 The launch of the Decade of Landcare with funding of $ 320
million over ten years
1990 Establishment of the Land and Water Research and
Development Corporation
1990 National Drought Policy which for the first time ensured that
drought assistance took proper regard for environmental
factors.
July 1992
Aug 1992
Dec 1992 Establishment of the Agri-Food Council with its goal to increase
high value-added food exports to more than $ 7 billion per year
by the end of the decade.
Establishment of the Agriculture and Resource Management
Council of Australia and New Zealand ( ARMCANZ) with the
objective of developing integrated and sustainable and natural
resource management policies and practices.
Prime Ministers Environment Statement incorporating a
substantial increases in funding for native vegetation, inland
rivers and land and water management. 
1993-1995
June 1994
Nov 1994
June 1995
Sept 1995 Prime Minister has numerous visits to regional Australia to
discuss the drought and the state of our natural resources.
Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council discusses its
report " Food into Asia: The Next Steps"
Establishment of the Prime Minister's Land Management
Taskforce Prime Minister's Science and Engineering Council discusses its
report " Sustaining the Agricultural Resource Base."
Prime Minister during a visit to Orange announces an inquiry
into " Removing Impediments to the Export of Perishable
Produce."
Oct 1995 Prime Minister meets with Industry Leaders in Canberra to
discuss agriculture and our food industries.
Oct 1995 Prime Minister receives the report of the Land Management
. Taskforce during a visit to Eyre Peninsula.
John Howard's Record
1974-1994
Jan 1995 Years of neglect.
Ian McLachlan's pamphlet " A Clean Australia" is released with
unfunded commitments of between $ 5 billion and $ 15 billion.
Key elements are quickly disowned by the Leader of the
National Party, other coalition members, the NFF and others in
industry.
Oct 1995 John Howard expresses general support, but with no details, for
the rehabilitation of the Murray Darling system.
Jan 1996The nation continues to await details of John Howard's support
for the environment and agriculture. 



PRIME MINISTER 5/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF AUSTRALIA
The next major extension stage of the National Museum of Australia will be
the development of the social, political and constitutional theme at Old
Parliament House.
A national competition to build the environmental component of the National
Museum network at Yarramundi in Canberra will also be held.
The National Museum of Australia will be a museum which reaches all
Australians in their own communities, their schools and libraries and on their
own computers and in Canberra, other capitals and regional centres.
Exhibition sites will be developed in Old Parliament House, at Yarramundi
and at the Gallery of Aboriginal Australia on Acton Peninsula. The Museum
will also produce on-line and interactive material which will be widely
available in all schools and libraries and will develop partnerships with State
and regional museums to operate an extensive program of travelling
exhibitions and educational projects.
As part of the first stage of the physical network of the National Museum of
Australia, Creative Nation announced that the Government will build the
Gallery of Aboriginal Australia on Acton Peninsula. A new facility for the
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander studies is to be colocated
with the Gallery. Building will commence on the site later this year.
Old Parliament House holds great significance for all Australians and the
Government will provide $ 12 million over 3 years to extend exhibition areas
for the National Museum of Australia, the National Portrait Gallery and the
Australian Archives. This will allow the Museum to develop exhibitions which
are specifically designed to explore Australia's social, political and
constitutional history in the Old Parliament House context.
A similar extension of the National Portrait Gallery and the Australian
Archives will complement the National Museum presence and confirm Old
Parliament House as a vibrant celebration of our history. 
The Government is also foreshadowing the stage three development of the
National Museum at Yarramundi in Canberra. The site and nature of the
facility is such that the Government will organise a design competition for this
building and site landscaping.
The Yarramundi facility will provide an environmental focus on our history
and contemporary life. This will be developed so as to provide links with the
National Botanical Gardens and to develop public programs in conjunction
with bodies such as the CSIRQ, the Australian Heritage Commission and
Greening Australia. The 88 hectare site at Yarramundi provides an
outstanding opportunity to explore, illustrate and educate on environmental
issues.
To further extend access to the Museum beyond Canberra, $ 6 million will be
allocated to the Museum over the next three years to facilitate the funding of
a number of specific partnership projects with State and regional museums, to
increase the rate of their digitising program to enable more Australians to get
in touch with their cultural heritage and to extend the range of travelling
exhibitions developed and toured by the Museum.
It is critical thit in addition to a strong Canberra base, the Museum should
work collaboratively with State and selected regional museums to develop a
national network which maximises the effective use of the distributed national
collection and recognises the significant and active role which regional
centres have to play in Australia's cultural life.
Since the Creative Nation commitment to extend access to our national
collections through new communications technology, the National Museum
has worked within the Australia on CD program and will have a critical role in
the recently announced $ 10 million program, Australia's Story Our National
Collections On Line, which will begin the task of digitising the collections of
our national cultural institutions.
The Government believes that a modern National Museum must go beyond
the notion of a single facility in the National Capital. The National Museum of
Australia will give all Australians everywhere the opportunity to experience
their country's cultural heritage.
CAN BERRA
January 1996 



PRIME MINISTER 7/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR BURGESS AND MR HOWARD
On the very day we celebrate our nationhood and social harmony, the
National party candidate for Leichhardt has chosen to make remarks which
are deeply offensive to the great majority of Australians and to the values by
which we live.
His remarks are a particular insult to all those Australians who have ever
attended a citizenship ceremony and all those who may be contemplating it.
They make a racist mockery of Australian citizenship ceremonies and
procedures and in doing so also mock the principle of tolerance on which
modern Australia depends.
Mr Burgess would be a member of a coalition government and it is therefore
Mr Howard's duty to disown these comments and call on Mr Burgess to
withdraw and publicly apologise. Passing that responsibility to his Deputy,
Mr Fischer, is an unacceptable response from a man who aspires to lead the
government. If Mr Howard fails this test of leadership, Australians will have a
right to wonder how loud a voice the likes of Mr Burgess would have in a
Coalition government.
CANBERRA 26 JANUARY 1996 



30/ 01 12: 11 PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MVP
ELECTION, MARCH 2
Today I called upon the Governor-General and recommended that the House
of Representatives be dissolved, with a view to holding an Election for the
House and half the Senate on March 2, and he has accepted my
recommendation. The proper thing has been done: the Parliament has run its full term and the
Australian people will make their decision in full knowledge of the
Govemnment' 4 record and the directions we have set for the country. They
will know exactly where we stand and where we intend to go.
This will be an Election about leadership. We seek a further mandate for the
Government that has given Australia an increasingly creative role in the
world; that has created an outward looking, diverse, competitive and
successful trading economy; and provided strong economic growth and
record growth in employment.
It will be an Election about both domestic an d foreign policies, because the
two cannot be separated.-
At stake is Australia's continuing emergence as a successful partner and
player in Asia and the Pacific. Therefore, the continued growth of the
Australian economy, the prosperity of Australian society, and the jobs and
opportunities of Australians in the next century are at stake.
Three years ago we said we would re-start economic growth and
employment. ' And we have. Australia has recorded an unprecedented 17
quarters of continuous growth and 720,000 new jobs have been created.
This will be an Election to decide whether the authors of these policies will
continue to guide Australia's progress.
For all the success of the last three years, much remains to be done if we are
to continue to reduce unemployment and the Government will be seeking a
mandate to continue the policies and programs which are working for us now.
30Vi08 196 162 : 12 73 2923 PM PRESS OFFICEZ~ 001 
30/ 01 ' 96 12: 12 ' 061 6 273 2923 P RS FIEI 0
2
The future of Australia's universal health care will be at stake in this Election.
So will the Accord and our flexible and fair industrial relations system which is
delivering high labour productivity, low inflation and the lowest incidence of
strikes in 55 years.
The Election will also determine the prospects for our having an Australian as
our head of state Australians will have to decide between a Labor
government which will guarantee they have a vote on this issue, and a
Coalition which is divided on it and led by a man who is passionately opposed
to an Australian republic.
Also at stake will be the environment. The Coalition's appalling record gives
every reason to believe that Labor's massive investment in repairing and
conserving our environment is at risk.
These and many other differences add up to a profound philosophical gulf
between the Government and the Coalition about what kind of society
Australia should be, and what kind of nation we can be.
Whatever the present tactics of the Coalition, the fact remains that most of Mr
Howard's front bench were, just three years ago, avid supporters of the most
radically right wing program ever put to an Australian electorate and none
was more avid than Mr Howard.
Australian voters have a right to know in detail the choice they face the
policies and the people responsible for them.
I am therefore asking Mr Howard to engage in 2 head to head public debates
with me on ABC Television. In addition I will be asking the Coalition to join in
further public debates on more specific policy issues. I am seeking debates
between me and my three most senior ministers the Deputy Prime Minister
Mr Beazley, the Treasurer Mr Willis and the Foreign Minister Senator Evans
and Mr Howard and those who would fill these portfolios in a Coalition
government, namely Mr Fischer, Mr Costello and Mr Downer.
Labors platform will be constructed on a proven record of achievement. We
have detailed policies to address the continuing needs of Australia an
Australians. We have a strong team of leaders. And we have above all a
desire to continue the remarkable progress and stability which is Australia's
story as we approach the 21 st century.
CANBERRA
27 January 1996 -a
PX PRESS OFFICEZ002 



TEL: 28. Jan. 96 10: 43 No. 004 P. 01'.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON PJ KEATING MP
WILL MR HOWARD AND HIS SENIOR SHADOW MINISTERS DEBATE
THEIR LABOR COUNTERPARTS?
Yesterday, I challenged Mr Howard to two head-to-head debates, and to
other debates which will give electors a chance to judge in more detail both
the policy differences and the leadership differences between Labor and the
Coalition. Mr Howard agreed to the head-to-head debates, but he appeared to baulk at
the idea of debates which would pit himself and the Coalition's three most
senior shadow ministers against their counterparts in the Government
namely, himself, Mr Fischer, Mr Costello and Mr Downer against myself, Mr
Beazley, Mr Willis and Senator Evans.
There can be no good reason to refuse these debates. Yesterday,
Mr Howard suggested debates between junior ministers instead If this is
really what he Is offering it is a lame excuse for not exposing to public
scrutiny the people who would be most powerful in a Howard government.
I renew the challenge to Mr Howard:
Will the man who would be Prime Minister, and the man who would be
Deputy Prime Minister, and the man who would be Treasurer, and the
man who would be Minister for Foreign Affairs in a Coalition, publicly
debate the future of Australia with the people who presently fill these
roles in the Labor Government?
CANBERRA 28 January 1996 9/ 96 



.9,
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
PRESS CONFERENCE, PARUAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
28 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PMV: I'll just open up with a few introductory remarks and then let you ask some
questions. There is a hint in the commentary now that now the Government
has got the Australian economy in pretty good shape, it is growing quite
strongly, as you know stronger than, I think, any other western economy.
That it has got very strong job growth, three quarters of a million jobs since
the last election. We have got low inflation with the underlying inflation rate
at around three per cent. So, there is a hint from the commentators that the
public have got now a bit are in a position to make a choice. The hint
being a bit of a cavalier one saying well, now the Government has got us in
this good position, you can sit back and make a choice about where you
want to go now.
The point of much of what I said in the advertisement, which will be run on
the ABC, is to say that we have got a remarkable opportunity, but now is the
time to consolidate it. The point I made yesterday at the opening press
conference of this campaign, that is, no other country, no other nation has
been invested with a continent. We are in the lucky position of sharing a
border with no one, but we will have to unlock the opportunities ourselves. I
made the point that no one out there is against us, but no one out there is
especially for us. We are on our own and we will have to behave as if we
are on our own. That means making every post a winner in terms of
domestic cohesion, in terms of competitiveness, in terms of the environment,
in terms of making the connection with Asia, in terms of unlocking markets,
in terms of building free trade structures in the region, in terms of our
strategic arrangements, in terms of our people to people contacts and that
now is not the time to go back and hanker for some other period when we
had the economy managed on a conflict basis where the so called ruling
group managed by press statement, where our trade arguments were to be
had in the OECD and our strategic conversation exclusively with north
America. These are all very much the symptoms of the view that the
Coalition took in the past.
Now, we have come a long way. In the last three years the economy is well
and truly up and running. The fact that we have been having growth
between six per cent and three per cent and we have kept inflation between
one and three per cent is something the Coalition is incapable of. They have
proved that it is not simply a claim by me. They have proved that in their
seven years of office with high inflation and high unemployment and that this 
is an era full of promise for Australia. We are living at the foot of the fastest
growing markets in the world. We have now got a much more highly
educated workforce than we have ever had and we have the added
opportunity of being able to build the country in our own image and put the
premium we wish on the environment. So, we do not just have a good
economic life, but we enjoy all of the bounties of nature that it can offer us.
In other words, we take the full opportunity of the position we are in, but it
has to be consolidated. It is not just going to happen. The inflation rate is
not just going to stay there. The growth won't just there, it is not there by
accident. The employment growth, three times the average rate per year
under the Labor Government than under the Coalition is not there by
accident. The trade relationships with Asia are not there by accident. The
security treaty with Indonesia is not there by accident. APEC is not there by
accident. It is there by design and it is there by design from a competent
government which has taken its mandate seriously and had the imagination
and the courage to get these things done.
I don't think now is the time for any commentator to give the view, well look,
we are really in a pretty good economic position. We now have the luxury of
some sort of caviller choice because the Coalition has no strategy. It has no
coherent philosophy. Mr Howard has had a year in this term as Opposition
leader to give all of you a coherent philosophy and he hasn't. The headland
speechtis have all been flops, every one of them. There has been no policy
detail and as a consequence the notion that they are prepared, he said
yesterday that they were in a position, they had the solutions. Well, he could
have fooled me. I haven't seen the policies or the solutions. He said they
had the drive again, I'm sure it would have escaped all of you in the press
gallery, where the drive was and the team. So, instead of having Kim
Beazley out there, he would have Tim Fischer. Instead of having Gareth
Evans in foreign policy, we would have Alexander Downer. Instead of
having Ralph Willis, we would have Mr Costello. This is not an election for
other than the consolidation of Australia's best interests. And there is only
one way that's going to happen, a further mandate for the government. I'd
be glad to take questions.
J: Mr Keating, you start this election behind by almost a record margin.
PM: Last time I think we started 12 points behind, supposedly.
J: Well, why do you think you are so far behind given all of the things that you
are spelling out to us now, which you claim are positive achievements of the
Government?
PM: Again, I think, the polls as a number of commentators are now agreeing, give
people the opportunity to put some pressure on the government. I don't
think they are an accurate reflection of public opinion, that the weight really
comes on when people have to make a choice and I think that will happen
again.
J: Andrew Robb criicised you for attacking John Howard on a personal basis.
In this second ad here certainly reflects that, what is your reaction to that?
PM: John Howard said yesterday in his opening statement, that I was
untrustworthy. In his opening press statement that I was untrustworthy. He
has called me a liar almost every off day in the last 12. months. As you
know, he has Senator Baume sitting in the Senate every day attacking me 
and my private life. I have never engaged in these things and I don't need
to, but the references to me yesterday explicitly being untrustworthy, I think,
need to be picked up and understood. I made no such references to him.
J: Prime Minister, the line in the commercial where the person says that they
may not like you, but at least they trust you is that recognition by you that
you accept that Australian's don't necessarily like you?
PM: Well, John Howard got down to 18 per cent. Remember that famous cover
in The Bulletin Why Does This Man Bother, Mr 18%. On that basis, 82 per
cent of the public presumably didn't like him. I just think anyone who goes
through a long public life like I have or like John Howard has, having the
community say yippee thank goodness we have got them, really! I mean
really, is that what you expect?
J: Nevertheless given it is a very negative line put about you in an ad, what is
the rationale?
PM: The rationale is, I think, to make very clear that Australia has got this far with
leadership, commitment, passion, energy. The very things that John Howard
and his Coalition don't have. That is what the point of it is. In other words, if
you want to keep the great change going, that is the fact that Australia is
now a. completely different country for the better than it was from the
industial archaeology of the early 1980s, of our declining competitiveness,
of the fact that we were no where in Asia, that we had virtually little standing
in the world anywhere and that we are now a competitive outward looking
place with huge growth in exports and elaborately transformed things. In
other words, very much a country and a society completely different than
that which we had, that it has come by leadership. It has come by horse
power. It has come by belief. It has come by passion. It has come by
energy. You can call all that leadership. That is the point of the ad.
J: Mr Keating, the emphasis on Asia and your push into Asia and opening
Australia up to Asia, obviously it is the -key part of your pitch. Do you think
ordinary Australians think about it, that they might share that desire, they are
more concemned and would rather you were home here trying to get them
jobs and certainly not inviting more Asians in to take their jobs, that kind of
feeling.
PM: The growth in Australia's exports since the great reformation of the economy
in the 1980s is now employing one million Australians. There is one million
extra jobs there because of the things the Government has done to make
Australia competitive and to open up market opportunities. When you see
the big Australian farms looking at the wheat markets of the world and
seeing our grain prices harden and improve, that is going to continue as the
Uruguay Round starts to pull back subsidies for grain exports. Market
access is now what it is all about for us. When we say Asia, read two things,
employment and jobs and engagement and security. Security in Asia, not
security from Asia which is the view of the Coalition.
J: John Howard said this morning that there is no law against changing your
mind In politics and that in fact it can be a sign of strength to reassess what
you think. Given that the Labor Party has also changed its mind on some
crucial policy issues over the past years, why shouldn't the Liberal Party be
able to do so as well? 
PM: Well, you would have to believe in fairies at the bottom of the garden to
believe what the Liberal's are saying now on Medicare and on wages. After
years of pressing huge declaratory statements, well lets go through just
take 1995 on industrial relations. I will give you some quotations, Mr Howard
is our role in areas like industrial relations which remains the great
undone area of reform in the Australian economy" March 1995.
Because of all of the things that remain to be done in Australia, none is more
important than reforming Australia's old fashioned, out of date industrial
relations system" April 1995. As you know, of all the issues I have been
committed to over the last 10 years, none has been more important, none
more prominent than my absolute commitment to the need to free Australia's
industrial relations system and of all the on costs and above accrued wage
costs, many of these are a direct function of our outdated industrial relations
system", and above accrued wage costs, of course, is code for penalties and
over time et cetera. He said that in July 1995. Not 1985, 1995. He went on
to say on another occasion in the same month you don't even deserve to
be taken seriously on the innovation and the futuristic stakes unless you are
prepared to embrace the 21 st century industrial relations system". Then he
said on 28 July 1995 it will come as no surprise that of all the unfinished
business of economic reform in Australia, none is more important, none
more blindingly in need of action than the area of industrial relations." And
then finally in August he said it is imperative that we undertake
fundamental reforms in industrial relations" to the Cattleman's Union on 28
August' 1 995.
That is a reflection. I could read quotes here for an hour stretching back to
the early 1980s and then because he is advised by his pollsters to go out
and say look, I didn't really mean all that, I'm just a cuddly small TIlib eral who
will now no longer stand for any of those positions I have taken, I am making
a new declaration and you now are required to believe that. The point is on
that matter, John Howard is not entitled to be believed. Is it any wonder,
have you seen any hand wringing from the Business Council or the ACCI
because you know what the word around town is from them: " look, they are
going to do it anyway, he just has to say things to get over the line".
I know that, you all know that so why would you believe that we are going to
accept Mr Howard's policy, but not the policies and philosophies he stood on
for all those years. Or on Medicare, for instance, where he says the
Medicare system is a total disaster. We'll pull it right apart. The second
thing we will do is get rid of bulk billing, it is an absolute rort. The best thing
we could do is to go back, back to pre-Medicare." There is an absolute feast
of quotes. Medicare is a failure. " We will end bulk billing which is a
scandalous waste of money" and it just goes on page after page. That has
been his position. The Liberal Party position is to support private health.
They believe in a private health system for the well-off which gives the
incomes the specialists believe they deserve. That is what they have always
stood for. That is what they still stand for. That is what they would do in
office. So, are we to say after remember this John Howard has opposed every
wage increase since 1987, bar two. He has opposed all the Medicare
changes. A fair and decent industrial relations system and an umpire
wouldn't be there if John Howard had his way. Medicare wouldn't be there if
John Howard had his way. And you are not really asking us to say, at this
point for the most shallow of political reasons because he wants to become
a political chameleon and change his tune that I should after 13 years of
my life fighting him on these things concede the point that he really wasn't 
an opponent afterall. He was really in it with us and, of course, he never
was.
J: Prime Minister, there is a problem with health especially with the number of
people dropping out to take private health insurance.
PM: But, Nikki, look, I am not here to go through the whole campaign, the
campaign manifesto, a discussion on the health scheme. I am here today to
talk about, essentially, what the Labor Party and what I have said on behalf
of the Party in that advertisement about the broader portents in the
campaign. I am not here to fill up columns.
J: Mr Keating, over the past several months you have announced several
billion dollars worth of new spending initiatives. When are you going to tell
us how you are going to pay for them?
PM: Like we have done in every campaign. You will always know from us I
mean dare I have the temerity to remind you that we have a surplus Budget.
I know a mere bagatelle, I know.
J: Mr Keating, the Liberal Party today is indicating that they would write to the
Electoral Commission to put a halt to the distribution of statements like the
multicultural statement and your environment statement, saying that it is now
not authiorised election material. What is your reaction to that?
PM: Look I haven't seen that at all. I haven't seen that.
inaudible] on their behalf?
PM: Look I would like to find out what they said before I respond to it.
J: Mr Keating, are you going to address health as an issue during the
campaign?
PM: Well you asked me that a minute ago, Nikki, and I gave you the answer.
J: Prime Minister, what do you mean when you talk about consolidation? You
have mentioned it yesterday and today. Do you mean that the pace of
reform would slow down?
PM: No, well look at the front we are moving on. In the middle 80s we had the
worst terms of trade since the depression, our national income was
dramatically cut, we were massively uncompetitive, we had double digit
inflation and double digit unemployment thanks to Mr Howard. We had no
position of substance in the traded goods sectors of Asia, other than the big
bulk trades to Japan.
Since that, and might I say we had three young people in ten completing
secondary school. That is how much they cared about young people. Three
young people in ten completed secondary school. That is now eight young
people in ten and we have taken university places from 320,000 to 560,000.
So we have now got a much more highly educated society. We are 40 per
cent more competitive than we were then.
Exports have gone from 13 per cent of GDP to 22 per cent an increase of
9 per cent of GDP, or $ 45 billion a year. The fastest growing component of
those exports is elaborately transformed goods. We have got a services 
sector like we have never had before in tourism, in financial services, in
education services, and the like. We are now relevant in the region around
us. We now have bilateral and multilateral structures which this government
has largely developed and that whole picture of promise, that integration,
has to be completed.
We have to establish the educational institutions like Monash which was up
there last week with me in Malaysia or the University of Melbourne, or any
of the other institutions which are going there of the great teaching hospitals,
of the product markets, of wholesaling, of specialised products. Developing
those things so that they count as assets for Australia forever, i. e.
consolidation. In other words, you can't be driving along in top gear and then throw the car
into neutral and just hope it might drift over the line. It is not going to drift
over the line, it is going to stop. We are going to lose the momentum of it.
It's going to go and what will go with it is, of course, the cooperation at home,
the low inflation, the decent wage outcomes, and we will go back to the sort
of conflict model that we had in the past.
J: Mr Keating, [ inaudible] are you going to provide during the campaign
details of how particular policies would be paid for, say offset the savings,
and so -on?
I
PM: Michelle, I produced for the government, at one time or another,
21 statements that is Budget reviews and May statements and
Prime Ministerial statements, which all had those costings as part of them. I
mean we have raised accountability and public financing to probably the
highest point in the OECD. We publish estimates of outlays and receipts.
We don't only publish estimates of outlays and receipt, we publish trends.
When the Coalition, when John Howard was the Treasurer, he didn't even
publish beyond the next years forward estimates and he never published
them in receipts.
J: Mr Keating, do you see Australia's move towards a republic being part of this
campaign particularly in enhancing our image in Asia?
PM: Well I don't think the Liberals understand at all the strength of the Australian
identity and it is one of the things I made clear in that advertisement. They
don't see the importance of it to ourselves, to what we have become, to our
esteem for ourselves, or our relevance and how we are viewed in the region
around us, or in the world at large.
And so anything that gives a further expression to our culture, to what we
have become, to the sort of society we now are, will only make us stronger.
And the republic, of course, is a central part of that.
J: Mr Howard said that if in government he would reduce the uplift factor for
provisional tax for small business. Does he have a valid point?
PM: Oh well, that would have rated maybe half a line in a 3000 lines statement.
That is not policy. That is just, simply, a technical point in the tax system.
We have varied the uplift factor for provisional tax as the years have gone.
Sometimes it has been ten, sometimes it has been eight, it depends what
the economic conditions are. But let him not market that to you as policy
and let you not be so gullible as to receive it as policy. 
Policies are about where you go with fiscal policy, whether you have a
cooperative incomes policy, how you then integrate that with monetary
policy. That is what policy is. That is a detail and if he can occupy you to
the point that you even ask a question about it, then I think you have got to
look at his press statements a lot harder.
J: Mr Keating, do you concede that the blowout in foreign debt to $ 180 billion,
the fact that there is still 750,000 Australians unemployed, and the fact that
one third of young people who aren't in education or training can't find a job,
that they are the factors that are going to weigh you down in this election
campaign?
PM: No, because for this reason. We have roughly the same population as The
Netherlands, roughly. But you can drive across The Netherlands in about
three hours. Three hours will take you from Sydney to Canberra.
In this country, we have got 300 mile railway lines, the biggest in the world,
the heaviest gauges in the world, four locomotives upfront, two at the back,
one railway system after another through Western Australia, through
Queensland. We have dams all over the country, we have major mining
projects, we have major agricultural investments. These don't happen in
countries of that size. They happen in a few isolated places. Australia
happdrfs to be one of them. That is, we have a continent, but there is only
18 million of us.
If there were 260 million of us in a similar sized land mass as there is in the
United States, we may have a savings base large enough to fund the capital
requirements of that sort of country. We don't and even though we are
trying very hard with superannuation and public savings, the chances are we
will always need private investment. This is a good thing for Australia. A
good thing for Australia that Australian companies can borrow abroad to
develop Australia faster and the loans are forthcoming.
The key matter is whether we can service them and as you know our
servicing capacity has doubled doubled. I mean eight years ago 22 per
cent of our export proceeds went to servicing our debt. Today it is 11 per
cent and what is the Commonwealth's debt in all this, 5 per cent. It is largely
private debt borrowed by private companies for good investments in a huge
continent and that is why comparisons with OECD countries, like The
Netherlands and that, are just way, way beyond the mark.
J: Should there be a televised debate on health?
PM: Well, at this point, John Howard and Andrew Robb have made clear well
let me just make our position clear. I am prepared to join John Howard in
two debates with a moderator in two debates managed by the Australian
Broadcasting Corporation, with a moderator of their choice.
They have written to the parties and have said their choice is Kerry O'Brien.
Andrew Robb has told our Federal Secretary today that the Liberal Party he
and John Howard won't have Kerry O'Brien and we are saying well look, as
far as we are concerned, this is up to the ABC. If the ABC wish to nominate
someone else, that is fine with us. But we want two debates and two
debates between myself, the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Beazley, and the
Treasurer, Mr Willis, and another debate between myself, the Deputy Prime
Minister, Mr Beazley and the Foreign Minister, Senator Evans, and their 
counterparts who would be Mr Howard, Mr Fischer and Mr Costello; Mr
Howard, Mr Fischer and Mr Downer.
At this point, the Coalition have rejected that proposal. They have rejected
that proposal. They have said they would only have a debate between
Shadow Ministers because I think Mr Howard does not want to be seen
sitting in company with Mr Fischer and Mr Downer.
J: But considering that health is such an important issue and the decline in
private health insurance and all that sort of stuff. Do you support a debate
on health?
PM: I don't think we have got time to debate every single issue. You could have
one on health, Aboriginal policy. You could have one on all sorts of areas.
Governments are run by a core group of Ministers Prime Minister, Deputy
Prime Minister, the Treasurer, the Foreign Minister are the first among them.
Therefore, the appropriate format are debates between the Prime Minister
and the alternative Prime Minister and between the Deputy Prime Minister,
the Foreign Minister and the Treasurer. Now, at this point, the Liberal Party
has only agreed to a debate between Mr Howard and me, but not with Mr
O'Brien.
ends 



EL: 28. Jan. 96 10: 43 No .004 P-Q2/
PRIME MINISTER 10/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
THE SIXTH FRENCH NUCLEAR TEST
The French Government is to be strongly condemned for this latest test at
Fangataufa and for conducting it during negotiations for a Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty, which are entering the final critical stages in Geneva.
Such an Irresponsible action sends the worst possible signal to nations that aspire to
possess nuclear weapons, and damages efforts to advance nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation.
Australia will continue to press France to end its testing program immediately and
respond to the legitimate demands of South Pacific nations as expressed in the
declaration of the meeting of South Pacific Environment Ministers, which Australia
Initiated and hosted, on 17 August 1995.
This declaration called for an immediate end to testing of nuclear weapons in the
South Pacific and the closing of associated facilities, except thope required for future
environmental monitoring; for France to accept full and exclusive responsibility for
any adverse impacts from French testing on the South Pacific environment and
people; and to provide access by the international community to all French scientific
data and to the testing sites themselves to enable an independent and
comprehensive assessment of the effects of testing. If, as the French Government
claims, It seeks to retain a role in the South Pacific then it must respond positively to
the demands of the nations which it would call neighbours and friends.
I call on the French Government to announce immediately the cessation of its testing
program, In line with statements by President Chirac; to sign without delay the
protocols of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty:, and to put all of its energy
towards the successful conclusion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty this year.
CANBERRA 28 January 1996 TEL 



PRIME MINISTER 11/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
MR HOWARD OBFUSCATES WITH TELEVISION DEBATES
Mr Howard is now obfuscating with my proposal for nationally televised
debates. The Federal Director of the Liberal Party, Mr Robb, has told the ALP's National
Secretary, Mr Gray, that Mr Howard will not debate me with the ABC's choice of
moderator. I have told the ABC through Mr Gray that I am prepared to have two
head-to-head debates with Mr Howard telecast by the ABC and moderated by a
person nominated by the ABC.
Mr Howard and Mr Robb are also backing away from debates between me, the
Deputy Prime Minister, and the Treasurer with our opposite numbers in the
Coalition and between me, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister
and our opposite numbers.
Mr Howard does not want to be seen on national television in the company of
Mr Fischer, Mr Downer and Mr Costello because of what it would reveal about
the weakness of any government led by him.
If Mr Howard says he has the team to lead Australia he should not be afraid to
be seen with them; to show them to the public with him.
CANBERRA 28 January 1996 



4f
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
AND THE MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION AND TRAINING, THE HON SIMON
CREAN MP, PRESS CONFERENCE, FRANKSTON CULTURAL CENTRE, FRANKSTON,
29 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: Thanks very much for coming along. What we have done here today with Young
Australia is, again, another extension of the policies and the commitment we have had
to the unemployed, the long term unemployed and the young unemployed. You may
recall I said at the time of the last election that we wouldn't be leaving the unemployed
behind. You know what happens in societies, that people who are particularly long
term unemployed tend to drift towards the outer edges of the pool of unemployed
persons and as the economy starts producing new jobs, the people who take them are
the new entrants to the Labor force school leavers, migrants et cetera. So, these
people in some countries are just completely sidelined, they are cast aside, they don't
get their training back, they don't get their skills back, of course, they never get their
esteem back, they don't have any experience so they stay unemployed.
In the last 12 months we have had the biggest fall in unemployment on record and as I
made clear and Simon Crean made clear today, we are now seeing unemployment
amongst 15 to 19 year olds drop to 88,000 that is 88,000 of the age group of young
people 15 to 19 which is 1 .3 million.
In our initiative today in Young Australia, what we are doing is looking at the application
of resources and new resources and fine tuning some of the programs we have had
and trying to make some existing ones stronger. And what we are saying is that by the
tumn of the century we should be at a position where every 15 to 19 year old will have
the opportunity of a job or an education or training place. You know that with youth
training initiatives in Working Nation, we have tried to get this focussed now on young
people in years 11 and 12 looking at what they might do in the work force and getting
some vocational training while they are in years 11 and 12. The Jobs Pathway
Guarantee under which year 12 school leavers will have successfully completed
vocational subjects while at school, will get a guaranteed job within three months of
leaving and we will expand that by 12,000 placements per year in 1997/ 98.
Perhaps I might just finish my remarks and invite Simon to open his. That is, that
again this is a further commitment which the Govemnment has been working up now for
months to focus another program of roughly $ 200 million towards this particular
problem of young people and their job opportunities and seeking to get that
unemployment rate down amongst young people 15 to 19 and much better streaming
out of years 11 and 12 into work. Simon and I had the pleasure of launching the Youth
Training Initiative in NSW about a year ago and we are starting to really see now,
employers starting to find young people in years 11 and 12 and getting them vocational
experience so that they can know that there is a career path for them. In fact, a couple
of major companies have come our way actually now with shortages of skills in some
places, looking in years 11 and 12 to get young people interested, give them some
vocational training and get them started. 
So, this is part of the general view the Government has had. That for those of the age
of between 15 and 19, there is a period of vocational preparation and you know that
when we took office, only three in ten young Australians completed year 12. This year
it is around eight in ten. We have taken the number of university places from 320,000
to 560,000 and we have now invested $ 1.5 billion into vocational education through the
Australian National Training Authority and through our grouping arrangements with the
States in TAFE. So, building the TAFE system up so that it can sit beside the
universities as an alternative system and at the same time strengthening the
traineeships where on the job training marks out a career path, plus the case
management and all of the other things which have come with Working Nation and
these changes mean that for the group 15 to 19 the transformation is quite profound
compared to a decade ago when I might say, the last Coalition Government was quite
happy to leave only three young people in ten completing secondary school. Any
claims that they thought they might have had to a clever country, how can you have a
clever country when seven out of ten young people didn't even complete secondary
school? This is why all of this has been important, we think, for the transformation of Australian
education and the opportunities for young people in that important age group of
preparation 15 to 19. 1 will invite Simon to add to my remarks.
SC: Thanks very much. I think that one thing that should be said that we have both been
able to do that most countries can't do is to combine labour market programs with
education programs and we have that ability because they are under one portfolio in
this country. The Jobs Pathway guarantee in essence is no more than linking an
existing labour market program with programs being offered through schools. But, by
linking them, we can meet the question that many young people ask, will the training
lead to a job. Many of the initiatives that we have announced tries to address that
question, by a more effective linkage between what they do in schools, getting
employers more committed to giving direction about what schools should provide and
at the same time making a commitment to take them on. We have opened up the
options by which employers can now employ. So, between the ABTS pathway, the
Jobs Pathway guarantee, the part time traineeships and structured traineeships
employers in this country now have the ability to take on someone on a regular basis in
their employment for between one hour or full time a week. It is a huge flexibility that
we are offering employers, so it is not just new options for young people enabling them
to pursue their interests in a number of vocations that they have a passion about, be it
the environment, the arts media entertainment, those sorts of areas. It is also about
offering and encouraging wider choice and opportunity on the part of employers.
The other point that I would make is that I have heard John Howard saying that his
solution is that you free up small business and that creates the employment. Of the
740,000 jobs created under this Government 70 per cent have been created by small
business. Traineeships; now demanded by small business didn't exist before Working
Nation, we set a target for Victoria of 1000 trainees in small business traineeships, it is
now 1500. There have been 200 new traineeships; in this area already this year. So, lI
believe we have got the product right, it is the reason why the demand for traineeships
now is at record levels. We have a commitment in this document, not only to the
34,000 traineeships that businesses will take on this financial year, but to build on that
thereafter. You will see a little table in one of the press releases that indicates where
that extra 17,000 traineeships might come from and they are all industry. They are all
jobs which before Working Nation, simply didn't have a traineeship.
You have heard Cindy today, she is one of many examples. Look at the statistics, 83
per cent of people that go through a traineeship get a job. It is one of the most
successful labour market programs, but it has not been widely enough available. It
hasn't covered the industries in which the job growth has occurred and it hasn't been
integrated back into the school area.
Another salutary point, I think, is that if you look at the participation rates, there has
been a slight drop in the participation rates in secondary school. I think this is a bit of a
problem for us because it would appear that young people are seeking to chance their
armn in the labour market because they see the opportunity has grown. But we know 
the chances of being unemployed are twice as high for people who don't have the year
12 equivalent qualifications than for someone who does. That is the reason why we
simply have to make school much more relevant in providing options to young people
to prepare themselves for the work place and these pathways go in that direction.
Again, these initiatives aren't just about encouraging young people to take on vocations
as employees, again, we have a major new initiative called Youth Enterprise Scheme
the YES program which encourages them to set up in small business. I believe, that
if there is a demand for small business skills, then it is clearly in evidence by the
trainesships that we should be using the schools to more effectively prepare people to
start their own business.
I am confident that with the initiatives we have taken to date, the building on those
initiatives that these programs represent, that the guarantees that we are making that
by the turn of the century every 15 to 19 year old will have the opportunity of an offer in
employment, in training or in education. That if we can get these initiatives together,
we will achieve a target of five per cent unemployment for unemployed people seeking
full time work. Again, it is our preparedness to set the targets, to back them with
resources, to show that the programs have been worked and built upon, that
distinguishes us in a very significant way from the Opposition.
J: Prime Minister, you have identified your speech as the most important policy of the
campaign what do you see as the other defining issues of the campaign?
PM: I think the defining issues are the fact that we maintain a cooperative environment in
Australia. That in the labour market where we have seen high productivity growth and
low inflation and high employment growth, that that model of cooperation, of good
spiritedness remains. That means commitments to people by the Government to run
the economy faster than it otherwise would: to produce more employment than it
otherwise would in return for a sensible wage outcomes and commitments to the
unemployed. That is the model that my colleagues have worked on now for over a
decade. It is a model that has given Australia 40 per cent more competitiveness than it
had a decade ago. It has given us three times the rate of employment growth as their
was under the Liberal's and it has given us twice the rate of economic growth. The
commitment today is a commitment to social cohesion, it is a commitment to Australia
moving on together, that one group will not be left out. The last group we want to see
left out is young people.
J: Are you promising with this commitment to create the precondition for negligible youth
unemployment by the turn of the century?
PM: What we are trying to do
J: and if so ( inaudible)..
PM: We are the only people in the business. You don't hear the Liberal Party talking about
targets for unemployment. We are the people who are saying we want to get all those
in the labour market looking for work down to around five per cent by the turn of the
century. That is what we are about and that is why we put Working Nation into play.
You will remember the assault Alexander Downer made on it, he said it was a waste of
money and it was the exact fulfilment of an election commitment, not to leave the
unemployed behind. As a consequence, with the job growth and the targeting of these
programs and the case management, we have now got, I think and Simon may correct
me, but I think we have got now 580,000 people who were this year case managed.
that is 580,000 Australians younger and older Australians who were individually
spoken to and with, who were part of a smaller group who were case managed back
into training and work.
It is that sort of commitment that has come from the Government, from the Labor Party
that believes in the breadth of the Australian family. That is, we move on together, we
take jobs together and if anyone falls off the trolley, we get them back onto it. That is
what Working Nation is about. That is what these policies are about. 
J: ( inaudible) is it simply an election pledge and if it is an election pledge, why are
departmental staff being used and taxpayers funds..
PM: This is something we have been developing for a long time and if the election had
been called next weekend it would be a policy statement of the Government's like the
environment statement was last week.
J: So you see nothing wrong?
PM: Well, the Parliament isn't prorogued until 6: 00pm this evening and no doubt you have
had the Liberal's whispering that in your ear. Let me just say here we are trying to look
after young Australians when Peter Costello is saying he will put criminal prosecutions
against the Secretary of the Department of Employment, Education and Training for
daring to facilitate the development of such a policy. It would be a lovely little
government Mr Howard's government with his Shadow Treasurer threatening criminal
prosecutions on the Secretary of department introducing the youth program,
threatening artists yesterday in the Sunday Age, threatening the Australia Council.
This is the nice, cuddly, warm, sweet government we would see.
J: $ 171 million mentioned here is to be redirected from existing resources can you tell
us what sort of existing programs might the Government..
SC: $ 171 million is the combination of Working Nation programs for the next two years
because it has only got two more financial years to run after this. Labor market
programs in the forward estimates for the years thereafter and they ANTA funding in
relation to the ASTF. So, this is money that is in the system. The ANTA funding, by
the way, from an index growth which we allocate to national programs of
significance. This is where we have highlighted it. It does not detract from the other
growth funds that we are committed to provide to States provided they maintain their
effort. So that is where the $ 171 million comes from.
J: Sorry, there was one acronym there I missed.
SC: ASTF, the Australian Student Traineeship Foundation, which is the body that has
responsibility for the 15,000 places which was three times what the Working Nation
target is. VECCI and the MTIA have committed themselves in New South Wales and
Victoria to helping secure something like 5,000 of those. So this is a body which we
have directly funded because we have tried to put pressure on the States to lift their
game in terms of delivering vocational subjects on a broader scale in schools.
We still expect them to do that and this statement clearly puts the pressure on them.
But one of the leverages that we have had is this extra funding through the ASTF. The
additional funding that we are committing today will enable workplace coordinators to
be attached through schools to find the placements that business is looking for on the
basis of delivering the training that business wants.
J: Mr Keating, you have set your 5 per cent target for youth unemployment, which seems
like quite an ambitious target. Are you saying there is no inherent difference between
the youth labour market and the adult labour market which can contribute to youth
unemployment being naturally somewhat higher?
PM: I think there may be. The obvious one is lack of any work experience. People 15 to 19
are joining the labour market for the first time and I might add just bear in mind that 3/ 4
million of them, in that group, face a new employer every year in the group 15 to 24
3/ 4 million and, of course, under the Coalition, even under their stated policy, they
would have no award protections whatsoever. They would have to go out and
negotiate with an employer all by their lonesome and take what comes.
J: Also, they sometimes want to change jobs more.
PM: That is right.
J: And that will remain surely? 
PM: That is right. They will want to change jobs more. It is what is called frictional
unemployment people between jobs. But the main thing is to try and deal with the
group and in the most substantial way what we have sought to do is to increase
dramatically the completion rates in secondary school which, as I have said, has gone
from three in ten to just under eight in ten today. And in that way we have set young
people up better than they would have been set up in days gone by.
J: Mr Keating, who are these big profitable companies who aren't pulling their weight in
terms of youth traineeships?
PM: Well there are stacks of companies who, if they did what some other companies have
done, we would be making very large inroads into unemployment amongst this group
of young people and not only that providing, you know, a group to source employment
from for meeting the needs of these companies. And, of course, under the
government's policies we help them as well.
So it is just really a matter of trying to get companies interested in the traineeships.
We have got many already interested and we have made substantial inroads already.
But we need more. If we could double it, we would make a very big difference.
J: Are you prepared to name the ones who you think are not doing their bit?
PM: Oh well what is the point in that. I mean go and get me the Business Council list and
do you want me to tick them off for you? I might meet you on the footpath later and go
through that.
J: Prime Minister, this Labor campaign is built around leadership your leadership in
particular that makes you pretty important. Can you now give us a guarantee, in that
context, that you will stay on for a full term if you are re-elected?
PM: Look, Glenn, I have been in public life for 26 years. I am in my 27th year. I have been
asked this question by journalists all the way through. In 1980, will you be staying after
we lost the 1980 election and at other times. My commitment is to another term of
office and beyond.
But I do want to see a continuing change of personnel in the government and I said the
other day, it is worth repeating, in 1983 the average age of the Labor Ministry was 47.
13 years later it is still 47. It is 47 because there has been such a turnover of people
and a lot of younger Ministers joining the Ministry. And so it is had the energy that that
displacement brings you and it has had, I think, also the long straight lines of logic and
policy directions coming from the leadership myself included and the experience
which has come from senior Ministers who have been involved.
I mean Simon joined the Ministry as formerly President of the ACTU and not long
thereafter the Cabinet. So we have always added to the stock of our common
knowledge and our experience and that is why the government is so focussed and has
been so effective. I mean this government has changed Australia from an industrial
backwater essentially going nowhere, industrial archaeology, rust-belt industries, no
linkages to Asia, falling employment, double digit unemployment and double digit
inflation. That is where we were. Look at it today. It is a transformation, a massive
transformation that has come by one thing leadership.
J: Another personal term in office, are you saying, Mr Keating?
PM: Well I don't have a shadow, Michelle. There is no one else there. I am not Dorian
Gray with a picture. I mean who jumps out of the frame and does it for me.
J: Mr Keating, the Coalition often charges that the whole youth training and the numbers
that you put forward of those training that smoke and mirrors, it is about hiding the
unemployed. Youth groups too say that they are not trying instant training without the
guarantee of a job. I mean if you are talking about offering companies access to
schemes that will allow up to one hour training week. I mean what use is that to young 
people and what is your guarantee to young people in terms of full time training leading
to full time work?
SC: In terms of offering the one hour a week to an employer, we wouldn't expect that that is
the limit of the commitment to the young person. You will see in this set of initiatives
that we have expanded funding for group training companies. I happen to believe
group training companies have a major ongoing role to play. They are already
interested in contracting for the eight pilots under the Jobs Pathway Guarantee.
But, essentially, what you do through a group training company is the company
becomes the employer. So a small business looking for flexibility to suit seasonable
patterns or, you know, weekly requirements doesn't actually do the employing, it
contracts from the group training -company. The group training company's
responsibility is to pay the award base rate of pay, to access the subsidies where they
are available and to deliver training. So what we are trying to do is to match up again
that structure that is group training to deliver the linkages. So that whilst we are
offering employers the ability to employ someone for as little as one hour a week, the
person who would be employed through the group training company would be
employed full time through a traineeship.
J: Prime Minister, there was a young unemployed person quoted in The Age this morning,
I think, prior to this launch saying that they had never experienced a Liberal
government, so they might give them a go. Does that loss of political memory worry
you and how do you counter it?
PM: Well they will give them a go by junking Working Nation for a start because Mr Costello
said that he would cut the commitments under Working Nation. They will give them a
go by, as Mr Howard said in 1992, one of the reasons why over 30 per cent of our
young people are out of work is because youth wages in this country are too high.
They will give them a go by 3/ 4 million of them every year facing an employer for the
first time and having to fend for themselves without the protections of the award
system or the Arbitration Commission. That is the sort of go they will get.
They would very quickly find out what a harsh little world Mr Howard has in store for
them and that is why, I think, when these issues have come under focus at very
elections people always think twice. The thing about the Liberals is they have opposed
this style of Australia for years a cooperative model where people are brought in, an
inclusive model.
They have taken the view that it is basically a survival of the fittest operation is the best
one. And the commitments like we are making in Working Nation to training, to case
management, to traineeships, they regard as so much dross along the way, which can
be cut away for a neater budgetary outcome. They simply don't have the
compassionate commitment to those who are unemployed and particularly the young
people and we have seen that right through the period.
J: Do you accept that the young people are being attracted to some of the minor parties,
to the Green parties, those kind of special interest parties that are appealing to the
young?
PM: Well some are I think. But, again, as I said the other day on the big issues. Just take
those two big issues of last week. The environment. It is only a party of government
that is going to change the environment. You know before Christmas we put away six
million hectares of forest in Deferred Forest Areas. It must be the biggest policy
undertaking of its kind in any country of the world. Last week, we announced
commitments to a National Reserve System, even buying back those bits of private
land which are important to those Reserve Systems. Putting further commitments into
the Murray-Darling system. Dealing with degradation of the landscape and salinity.
These things can not be done by Independents and the only party in Australia
interested and committed to that course of action is the Labor Party. It has been the
only one. 
7
Take nuclear weapons. Alexander Downer said it was a stunt when I announced the
Canberra Commission for the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons. There are 50,000
nuclear warheads lying around those arsenals in the world rotting. We say that nuclear
weapons are no longer a viable military option and that they don't serve a viable
strategic purpose and we are better without them, that the world is safer without them.
Those initiatives can only be undertaken by a government and that is why, I think
while some young people may look at Independents in the end they will come back to
the party which does care about the issues they care about and that is a better world, a
safer world, a more secure world, a cleaner world, a better environment to live in and a
premium on their own importance through employment etc.
J: It would seem though that the polls aren't going your way. So all these initiatives that
you have announced in the past few months are not washing with the electorate. How
are you going to turn that around?
PM: But are they working?
J: Well they are not being..
PM: But have they got intrinsic worth and value like today's? Of course they do. Of course
they do and I mean we have seen this phenomena after elections have been called in
the past where the poll has shifted against the government. Well that just means we
have got to work in the course of the campaign to tell our story and to get the
differences up closely.
At this stage, I can't even get Mr Howard into a debate. He won't be in the debate next
Sunday. He is saying, " look, I will debate the Prime Minister anywhere". Andrew Robb
says, " I won't make the arrangements." He says, " I will debate the Prime Minister
anywhere". Andrew Robb says, " I won't make the arrangements". They don't want to
debate and basically what they are now saying is I am saying, look, let's have a
debate next Sunday with the national broadcaster as we have had in every election
campaign since one can remember. And they are now making these points of
technical objection about who it might be. Well I don't care who it is as long as it is
nominated by the national broadcaster.
So the fact of the matter is that until the Liberal Party faces up to the fact that it can't
hide all the way, it has tried to run past the media now for a year and that it can't hide,
that it has got to expose its philosophy and that will be exposed best under scrutiny and
in debate and when these things happen I think we will have reasonable opportunities
to not only put our policies but put our arguments too.
J: inaudible].. where do you think you are going to have to work hardest, which
States?
PM: Oh I just think overall, Peter. It is a national media so overall.
J: Yesterday you spoke about economic commentators being a bit cavalier about the
choice because the economy is in good shape. Do you believe that the biggest threat
to the government is a view in the electorate that things are pretty good and that it is a
safe time to make a choice?
PM: Well it will just all fall away. It will just all fall away. The whole cooperative model will
fall away, the inflation rate will get away from us, the competitiveness will get away
from us, the wage market would be chaotic again, the labour market and..
J: Do you acknowledge that attitude and is it the biggest problem for the government?
PM: Well I am saying I think it is more an attitude of mind amongst commentators than it is
in the community. That is, they have always been very careful, the Australian
community, and reasonably so. When it comes to policies of importance that affect
them and who runs the national government of Australia, affects them very closely. 
8
So all of the great reformation of the economy, the social policies, the big block
changes like Medicare, or the participation in education, or cooperation in the labour
market, or the leap into Asia, the linkages to the bilateral and multilateral linkages in
Asia, all the things that are going to give us jobs and growth and security in the future,
they are going to think about who manages those.
J: Prime Minister, this morning John Howard has pledged to cap movements at
Kingsford-Smith at 80 movements per hour, to extend the noise proofing program and
also to have an EIS for Badgerys Creek, effectively putting that off further. Isn't that
going to make it harder for you to hold onto seats, like Lowe and also places like
Macarthur as well?
PM: Well he is worried about his seat in Bennelong. He has been worried about it all along.
Here he is, he is leading a national election campaign and what is he worred about, his
own seat of Bennelong. He wants to cut Kingsford-Smith's capacity by 40 per cent, the
gateway to Australia, the principal airport, the airport upon which our tourism industry
depends. He wants to cut it back and he wants to cut it back by opening up traffic on
the east/ west runway and over those electorates of Barton and Watson and
Kingsford-Smith so that he can relieve what he sees to be the traffic coming over his
own electorate.
Bearing in mind, that he was all the time at the government to build the third runway.
Over and over again saying it was an absence of political courage that the government
hadn't decided to build a third runway at Mascot. We built the third runway and who is
the first to run away from it.
He talks about microeconomic change, he talks about the brave new world of
microeconomic change under him. The biggest micro change in air transportation in
Australia is that third runway and the first time he runs into electoral pressure, he
abandons it.
J: Prime Minister, what is in this for people from non-English speaking backgrounds in
your Young Australia policy?
PM: Well, generally, those who are disadvantaged come more obviously under the eye of
case managers. But many young Australians of that period, of course, have been bom
here and they have picked up the language. It is only with young people of that age
group who have come as migrants, or some may have some very obvious language
disabilities, in which case we have all the English language training courses. But, by
and large, it is the case managment, the fact that we have got one person dealing with
a limited number of people, getting to know them and understand them, being the most
important element of the Job Compact we announced with Working Nation and with
these policies too.
ends 



fi&gt;
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING
DOORSTOP, MYUNA COMMUNITY FARM, DOVETON, VICTORIA,
29 JANUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Well, there you are, Gareth is as at home at Myuna Farm as he is with the
Cambodian peace accords, or chemical weapons. And what Mr Howard
would do, of course, is say " no, no, Mr Downer is better at this than he is".
Yes, sure, sure, sure he is.
ends 



si,
S
4
PRIME MINISTER ' 4
M Bob M
MT21
14/ 96 BIC
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
DOES THIS MAN REALLY WANT TO BE PRIME MINISTER?
Mr Howard's press release of today on Small Business includes the following:
A Coalition Government will:
reduce the number of surveys and rationalise the role of all
Government agencies in the collection and collation of statistical data
from the small business sector;, and
establish a comprehensive small business data series on all aspects of
the Australian small business sector.
As a well known waiter from Barcelona might have said, Que? More than I
at CeBIT tJ
fair the M
" The combir
highly succe:
McMullan sa.
" Australian fi
IT&amp; T industr
" Australia wi
from the Asia.
CeBIT attract:
every year.
Australia was
Austrade, wit
again coordinz
" There is a grc
export market,
McMullan saic
" Last year's res
" By the end of
in sales in Euro
another 45 wen
" There were als
follow-up visits
Asia. " Two Korean 1-
Pariament
CANBERRA January 1996
4412 



A
is position under a
iar olds take a new
these it will be their
nd will really need
24. About 380,000
gher education and
world of work under
Nvith the dice loaded
ainst them and take
fthem will easily be
it's unfair dismissals
. i far less protection
it claims on unfair
under Howard, the
ecial assistance in
ivemnment allocated
a better information PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP 13/ 95
CONCLUSION OF THE FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING PROGRAM
The announcement by the French Government that it has concluded its nuclear
testing program in the South Pacific brings to an end a program which should never
have started.
Those six tests put at grave risk the cause of international disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation, flew in the face of France's international obligations and posed
unacceptable risks to the people of the South Pacific.
I welcome President Chirac's renewed commitment to sign the South Pacific Nuclear
Free Zone Treaty and a genuinely Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996.
But these measures and the conclusion of its testing program do not end France's
obligations to the nations of the South Pacific.
Like the other members of the South Pacific Forum, Australia wants France to close
its testing facilities, retaining only those required for environmental monitoring.
Australia also wants France to provide access for the international community to all
data and sites so an independent and comprehensive assessment of the effects of
its testing can be made.
Australia's opposition to the French tests, as I have consistently said, is not the
result of any hostility to France itself or the people of France, or to France's role in
the Pacific. We have been opposed to this single indefensible decision to abandon
its own moratorium on nuclear testing.
Beyond the immediate and urgent need to conclude a Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty this year, Australia now looks for a new commitment from France and the
other nuclear weapon states to meet their obligations under Article VI of the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty for genuine steps towards complete nuclear disarmament.
No-one who heard any of the members of the Canberra Commission on the
Elimination of Nuclear Weapons speak last week can doubt how urgent that need is,
nor that, with the Cold War over, it is now an achievable goal which can increase
global security for all countries. y 



J4STALIA
PRIME MINISTER
iities for STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
issue for
to HOWARD TO CUT 22,000 GREEN JOBS
it of
lisitions, John Howard proposed today to set up a new program to enable young people to
work on environmental projects. He claims the program would provide placements
support it for up to 2,000 people.
. iberUnfortunately for Mr Howard, this proposal mimics a far more comprehensive set of
! me initiatives already in place through Working Nation namely:
9,000 Landcare and Environment Action Plan ( LEAP) places
onatio 5,000 Jobskills places
of policy. 10,000 Regional Environment Employment ( REEP) and New Work
Opportunities places.
. nt wil These programs are funded through the $ 9 billion, four-year Workng Nation
initiative an initiative that the Coalition is committed to cuttina.
Since the Coalition is cutting Working Nation, in which there are 24,000 environment
~ Arroll jobs, the net effect of Mr Howard's plan would -appear to be a decrease in green
4988 employment of 22,000.
Mr Howard has been reported as saying that the source of the money for this
proposal will be announced later in the campaign. This can only mean through cuts
to LEAP and other successful Government job programs either that, or he plans to
return to the Telstra magic pudding.
Through LEAP a community-based program the Commonwealth vill be spending
$ 106 million in 1995-96 to help young unemployed people to gain practical
experience in Landcare, environment conservation and cultural heritage.
Importantly, LEAP is open to young unemployed people aged 15 to 20 years. Mr
Howard's proposal ignores 15 to 16 year olds. Early school leavers in this age
group are among the most disadvantaged in our community.
In addition, by restricting his proposal to 17 to 20 year olds, he is making a mockery
of his promise to remove " rigid age requirements" from labour market programs. 
2
On Monday this week the Prime Minister announced a new Green Volunteers
initiative as part of Young Australia. This initiative will enable at least 2 000 young
-ust ali-pe. year to Participate in environmental projects on a voluntary basis.
They can do so on a full-time basis on projects up to a month's duration or part time
on projects that require 1 to 3 days work per week over four weeks. MPS 8/ 96
In Young Australia we also announced:
making LEAP available to small employers and farm families by allowing single Australian
LEAP placements ( in addition to the existing project-based placements) involved v
linking LEAP programs with traineeships to turn green jobs into permanent ' A new b,
employment, that the L
available
Mr Howard's second foray into the environment is no more credible than his first. The introc
In truth, after a lifetime of never going near it, Mr Howard is not at home with the maternity
environment. And it shows. His new plan is a miniature version of government ( Matemit4
programs which are already operating: programs which are already employing many More thar
thousands of Australians in the essential business of caring for our environment families h,
programs which the Coalition is determined to cut. The payrr,
MELBOURNE It will be p
1 FEBRUARY 1996 adopted t
the baby'E
Families'
Allowanc, ' The inco
to $ 63,76
higher tot
Mr Baldw
Maternity Parentinc Consume Mr Baldw
claim forr
For more
of a local
charged; MELBOL MEDIA It
4478 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
CAPE YORK AGREEMENT A TRIUMPH FOR RECONCILIATION AND THE
ENVIRONMENT
Today's announcement of an historic landuse agreement on Cape York
represents a watershed in the reconciliation process and a major boost for
environmental protection of one of our most pristine regions.
It lays a foundation of consensus for the creation of one of the world's truly
great protected areas from the reef, through the rainforests of the wet
tropics to the vast wilderness of the Cape itself.
Importantly, it points the way ahead for resolving landuse issues through
negotiation and consultation, rather than by confrontation and suspicion.
It embodies within it an act of recognition by each of the parties of each
other's rights and aspirations to the land, to the environment and -to
economic security through ecologically sustainable development.
This is what the reconciliation process is all about Coming together,
recognising that beyond our differences we share a common purpose and a
common interest in a special land, a land in which all our futures are
intertwined and inseparable.
It would never have been possible without this Government's recognition of
the essential truth of the Mabo judgement, without the Native Title Act which
provides for just such negotiated settlements and the Indigenous Land Fund
and the enormous shift in attitudes that have come with these things.
When the Coalition labelled the passage of the Native Title Act " a day of
shame", they forever disqualified themselves from any constructive role in a
process that is fundamental to our future as a nation. They underestimated
the genuine goodwill and decency of the Australians.
4558 
The rest of us have shown them that we are moving ahead and none more
so than the people of Cape York who, with a genuine sense of goodwill and
common purpose, have come together to frame this agreement.
I welcome their achievement and congratulate them on it. A Labor
Government will support the agreement including, subject to consensus
among the interested parties in the region, the establishment of a fund to
facilitate the protection of areas of high conservation value including World
Heritage. Labor's support for this agreement will bring to fruition a very longstanding
and significant commitment to the pr~ pection of the North Queensland
environmen-,. The Federal and State Labor Governments have committed $ 7.65 million
since 1990 to assess the environmental values of the Cape through the Cape
York Land Use Strategy ( CYPLUS). The agreement represents a culmination
of that work and a framework within which those values can be protected.
It also builds on other significant environmental achievements of this
Government in North Queensland including the protection of the rainforests
of the wet tropics, and the Daintree rescue package.
I look forward to meeting with the parties at the earliest opportunity to discuss
the agreement and to determine a process for co-operatively achieving their
stated aspirations including the size of any conservation fund, World Heritage
assessment and listing, traditional access rights and settlement of native title
issues, and pastoral industry security and development.
CANBERRA February 1996 ' 1559 



I PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
HEALTH POLICY LAUNCH, MELBOURNE, 6 FEBRUARY 1996
At this election as in every election the Government seeks a new mandate
from the people of Australia. We seek to re-establish the trust of the people
of Australia to govern for another three year term.
We are very proud of what we have done in the past three years. It has been
a Government, I think, of great enterprise and purpose. And we have
delivered those things we said we would deliver.
But we know that, once again, we must convince the Australian people that
the policies we have implemented, and the policies we propose, are the best
policies for Australia. And that they will be delivered by the people who are
best able to deliver them.
A crucial element of the new mandate we seek is a mandate to maintain and
extend Australia's universal health care system a health care system for all
Australians. We ask Australians to invest their trust in us to protect and
extend Medicare.
And. as the pioneers of Medicare, we believe that Australians can extend
their trust to us with confidence. We will defend Medicare. We will extend
and improve it.
Between now and March 2 the Australian people must make a decision about
the kind of health system they want.
Because health care is fundamental to the well-being of every Australian and
every Australian family, because a fair and effective health care system is
fundamental to our aspirations as a civilised society it will be a momentous
decision.
45~ 8.4 
Health care is an immensely complex issue in modem society and
immensely expensive. In Australia it consumes more than 8 per cent of
Gross Domestic Product. But the system we have developed is efficient. In
the United States health care accounts for more than 14 per cent of GDP.
and yet it leaves millions of peoole with no health insurance, or inadequate
health insurance and. as a consequence, without decent health care.
The Australian system is a good one and Labor will protect it.
Countries have choices in health care. In Australia the choices have been
argued for the last 20 years.
The major political parties have come to the debate with two entirely different
perspectives. More than twenty years ago, a Labor government made its
andateposition clear when it introduced a system of universal health insurance
. ndate kno'., vn as Medibank. The Coalition. in turn. showed its preference for a
. eopleprivate system by ripping Meoibank down. When they left office in 1983,
more than two million Austraiians had no health insurance.
3s been The same divisions have characterised the debate ever since. Labor has
rebuilt a universal health care system. Medicare is not perfect no system
ever will be. But there are few better systems in the world. And we can make
3 thatours better.
-ie best The crucial thing is that all Australians are covered. That has been the
ici areessential choice should all Australians be covered in a universal system, or
should there be a two tiered system? A system with gilt edged services for
iin andthose who can afford it and much poorer and less reliable services for those
i no ad on lower incomes.
, id Until now the Coalition has never disguised its preference for the two tiered
system and its contempt for Medicare. At successive elections they have
and vowed to pull Medicare apart and no one more consistently or virulently
: tnd than John Howard.
In fact they were the very words Mr Howard used in 1987 " I will pull it right
) n about apart", he said. He would do things " that amount to its dle facto dismantling".
He made no attempt to hide the fact of his ambitions for it. 1I would love to go
back" to the pre-Medicare days, he said.
* mi s ian andThat mistawkea, s iht iiss haims baimtiobnit ioinn 1n9o8w7.. It was his ambition in 1993. And, make no
ientous This time he says he will keep Medicare. But we all know he won't. Jeff
Kennett \-. ill turn his casiio into an Anclican mission before John Howard
supports Medicare. 
Over the last decade. Australians have said again and again that they want a
universal system. and not an American style system. They have said it at five
nationai elections. In the most recent Doils of cuolic ocinion over 85 oer cen:
of them say they want Meoicare retaineo.
And it is only for this reason that the Coalition are saying they will keep_
Medicare. There it was in the newspaper advertisement placed by the Liberal candidate
for Fremantle this week: Medicare is " a medical and moral scandal", he said.
Anid there it was in the Financial Review yesterday:
Coalition sources [ the report says] privately concede that Medicare is
financially unsustainable in the medium term and that it is being
embraced by the Coalition mainly because it is electorally popular.
Not because they believe in it. Not because they will keep it. But because
they think it will help them win the election if they pretend to support it.
That is why we say the decision Australians make about health in this
election will be a momentous one. This is the same fight to the death for
Medicare as it has been at every election since 1984.
Once again the election will decide the kind of health care system we will
have over the next generation, and in so doing it will decide in large part the
kind of society we leave our children. It will substantially determine the kind
of country Australia will be.
John Howard is saying that we are running a scare campaign on Medicare.
Apparently we should take him at his word when he says he won't harm it.
Well let me say even if we half believed him, or a quarter believed him we
would be issuing the most dire warnings. But in fact we don't believe him at
all. We pioneered Medicare. We nurtured and built it into one of the best health
systems in the world. It was our baby and now it is Australia's health system.
So no one should be surprised if we are passionate about defending it. N.
Erect the two-tiered system Mr Howard wants; put the weight of the well-off
into the pnivate health system, make the private system stronger than the * i
public, and the public health system will start to crumble.
Australia will then have an entirely different kind of health system a SNVV
flourishing first rate pnivate industry for those who can afford it, and a second
rate public system for those who ican't.
45586 
.4
Lose universality, and essentially we lose Medicare.
' hey want a
aid it at five Lose Medicare, and we lose one of the great building blocks of fairness and
per cent cohesion in Australian society.
And it will not be a temporary loss. It will not be a little experiment which we
keep can abandon if we don't like the way it's going. Pull away the universality of
our health care system and you pull Medicare down.
I candidate Fail to support it, say you support it while leaving the states to rip into the
ihe said. health system, and you pull Medicare down. And when it's down, we will
have lost one of our great social achievements and our children will inherit a
very different Australia.
edicare is It's a free choice. That's what an election is. But there must be no doubt
eing about what the choice is between. At this election the Coalition are not
opular. presenting policies, they are presenting tactics.
because Their environment proposal was not a policy it was a tactic. A tactic to sell
rt it. Telstra by bribing the environmental vote.
: his Their industrial relations proposal was not a policy, it was a tactic a tactic to
aath for drive wages and conditions down and undermine job security by embracing
enough of the Government policy to neutralise the debate.
we will Their health proposal is also a tactic a tactic to create the health system
le part the they want by pretending to keep the health system they hate.
e thekindBut even if we believed them, even if we believed that they had undergone a
change of heart and were not merely heeding the polls for the purpose of
/ ledicare. winning the election. even if we ignored the mountain of evidence from the
harm it. past, their health proposal still constitutes a critical attack on the foundations
of Medicare.
. v him at The fact is they neither understand it nor like it. Medicare is hostile to the
very basis of their thinking. And it is hostile to their friends in the private
health care system.
et heystm Mr Howard says he will leave Medicare alone. But leaving it alone is not
ilth sstem. supporting Medicare. Leaving it to Jeff Kennett is not supporting Medicare.
ng it. Nor is introducing tax rebates for private health insurance by itself supporting
a well-off Medicare. Their tax rebates are designed to encourage people out of the
ian the Medicare system. They are designed as much to be an industry policy as a
health policy a policy for a private health care industry.
. a Supporting Medicare demands that you believe in Medicare. Supporting
J a second IMedicare demahds that we see it as a rock on which our future will be built. 4,587 
Ano supporting Medicare means building on that rock. Ohr
P-at is n doinc in naamt'c.' ' Ae are building on the rock, just ne
to c~ ai.
Meoicare gives all Australians access to free first rate treatment in a public visit to
hospital and affordable medical care from general practitioners. chiidre
But Medicare generally does not help with the costs of dental and orthodontic The La
treatment, or other services such as physiotherapy, speech therapy or public,
chiropractic treatment. These health services can be very expensive for familie,.
families, particularly the cost of dental care for children. But the only way Rebate
families can get help with these costs is to take out private health insurance. childre familie
Today I am announcing a new way for families to get assistance with these The Li
costs. ak
The new Family Health Rebate will be a cash payment from Medicare Offices Theirr
to help meet the costs of dental and orthodontic treatment. physiotherapy, aoi
speech therapy and other health services for children. mantor
Families who receive Family Payments will be eligible for the rebate that is for thei
about 80 per cent of all Australian families. Fra
The maximum rebate in a year will be $ 350 for a family with one child and would
$ 500 for a family with two or more children. hospitF
Families will be able to claim 50 per cent of the cost of dental and other The acheaith
services for children up to the maximum rebates. choice take u
The Medicare system is a balanced system providing for people who take outAsIz
private insurance. Because private heaith insurance is a major cost to As. I s
famrilies, a flat rebate of $ 350 will be available towards the cost of health i. Yi
insurance premiums. T his S350 will te countec towards a family's maximumUne
rebate. billion
An important element of the new rebate is that, if a family does not claim their hospit;
maximum rebate in one year. they will be able to carry over unused rebatesOvrt
for up to seven years. This will help families plan ahead and cope with large Ovce f
bills, for orthodontic treatment for example. flrm4
The strength of the Family Health Rebate is the choice it gives families in
meeting the health needs of their children. Howev
servic(
Many families around 40 per cent already take out health insurance and
these families will be able to claim $ 350 towards this cost. The pr
their e
Many other families would like to take out health insurance to better manage Comm
health costs, but--find the premiums too high. A rebate of $ 350 will be a past tt
substantial help.
88 
Other families will be happy to remain in the public system. These families
just need help with the costs not covered by Medicare. They will now be able
to claim a rebate of 50 per cent of the cost of these services whether it is a
Ic visit to the dentist or a physiotherapist or other health services so that their
children can get the help they need when they need it.
) ntic The Labor approach to health care is built on Medicare. We start with the
public health system and ask how can we make it better. We start with
families' needs and ask how can we best meet them. The Family Health
Rebate extends public insurance to cover dental and health services for
ice. children not presently picked up by Medicare. but at the same time allows
families the choice to insure privately if they prefer.
ie The Liberal approach to health care starts with the private health system and
asks how they can give it more business, how they can boost its profits.
: ices Their policy of tax rebates for private health insurance does nothing for the
majority of families who do not have private health insurance and who do not
want to take it up. These families will get no help with the extra health costs
t is for their children.
For families who choose to have private health insurance, the Liberals' policy
would push up premiums by blowing out costs as specialists and private
hospitals simply increase their fees to take advantage of the rebates.
The advantage of Labor's Family Health Rebate is that, by giving families a
choice, if health insurance premiums go up, people will vote will their feet and
take up the alternative of the family health rebate.
9 out As I said. it is not enough to say you support Medicare. You need to defend
it. You need to extend it. And you need to protect it.
ium Under the Medicare agreements, the Commonwealth provides about
billion a year to the States and Territories for free patient care in public
their hospitals.
. re Over the past few years, under the agreements, the Commonwealth has
3rge increased its funding by 26 per cent, which has taken our share of funding
from 47 per cent to 55 per cent.
However, this has not resulted in the reduced waiting times and improved
services we intended and the Australian people have every right to expect.
rid The principal reason for this shortfall hos been t'-e Staes' 0 pe-: tcut in
their expenditure on public hospitals-l10 per cent in real terms. VVrnile the
age Commonwealth has put in an extra $ 800 million to public hospitals over the
past three years,-Ahe States have taken out $ 700 million from public health. I 0,1 
The problem is that the Medicare agreements are basically " gentlemen's It is PC
agreements". by which I mean they are not tied to performance or achieving make
better results for their oatients. We neec a new caninershio cetweer. the With
States and the Commonwealt., on iinairg for puolic nospitals. We need zo
relate funding to performance, to better results in health care. We want to To str(
see what we are paying for. haer
The most important result we want to see is Australians having to wait no " L1awbaotcrhlonger
for surgery than their doctors recommend.
A Labor Government will offer the States and Territories an additional $ 150 TeA
million over the next two years to reduce substantially the number of patients ties. c
waiting longer than the time deemed clinically appropriate. trivati
But to be eligible for the new funding, the States will need to achieve a protec
reduction in the number of patients waiting too long for surgery. We will only I beg
pay on performance, on results. States will only qualify for their full share of tegait
the $ 150 million if they ensure patients are treated within times recommendedthvi
by doctors. Toa
This new approach to funding will form the basis of new Medicare the wa
Agreements to be negotiated with the States. The new Agreements will look Electic
at the overall performance of public hospitals, with performance on waiting
lists being one very important area. A h
But attacking waiting lists without looking more generally at performance abolitik
could be counter-productive. For example, hospitals could reduce waiting $ 1.3 b
lists quite easily by forcing patients out of hospitals too soon in order to save per ce
money. Just tv.
The new funding arrangements will include other targets for quality health
care, such as how long patients wait for emergency treatment: the number of
unplanned readmissions to hospital: and the links between hospital and other
services such as community care and general practitioners.
The new approach to funding will particularly benefit older people who are In othe
the main users of hospital services. were n
Understandably, many in the community are cynical about government And M,
promises to tackle waiting lists and to improve health services. Many are entecti
confused about the role of the Commonwealth and the States. has hai
But it is important to emphasise that we can make our public hospitals better. He ask
But this can only be achieved if the Federal Government plays its role and is yia
willing to fight to protect Medicare. The fa(
Medicz
11590 
It is possible to reduce waiting lists. The number of patients on waiting lists
wing make up only about 3 per cent of the total load of the public hospital system.
3vingWith a new approach to paying on results. a target to ensure all patients are
to treated in the time recommended by doctors is achievable.
To strengthen confidence in the public hospitals. the community needs to
have reliable, independent information about public hospital performance.
Labor will establish an independent Hospital Services Authority to be a
" watchdog" of the public hospital system for the public interest.
150 The Authority will monitor hospitals' performance and, in particular, report on
150t the achievement of targets for better care, including the reduction in waiting
tentstimes. It will also report on the effect on patients of any proposed
privatisation of the public hospital services. The public interest must be
protected in any contracting out and privatisation.
only I began by saying that in this election we ask Australians to entrust us with
* e of
indled the vital task of protecting Medicare and our universal health care system.
Today we ask to be given the opportunity to extend it and make it stronger in
the ways I have outlined.
look Elections are about choices. On health the choice could not be clearer.
ng At the last election our opponents went to the people with a policy for the
abolition of bulk billing for more than 13 million Australians, a cut of at least
-lig $ 1.3 billion in Commonwealth funding for public hospitals and a more than
save per cent cut in the Medicare rebate.
Just two months ago Mr Howard said this:
, h I don't accept for a moment that we went to the last election as Paul
er of Keating alleges promising to abolish Medicare: that is wrong, we
other didn't. We promised to make changes but not to abolish it, he said.
re In other words, we were going to remove Medicare's heart and soul but we
were not going to abolish it. We did not intend to kill it only to make it dead.
And Mr Howard asks to be believed about Medicare. He asks Australians to
e entrust their health care system to him. He asks us to believe he will deal
effectively with State Governments. He asks us to believe that on health he
has had a change of heart and not just a change of tactic.
sitter. He asks us to believe that his proposal for the people's health is not simply a
d~ is cyr. tcal deceit.
The fact is they cannot with a skerrnck of credibility ask to be trusted with
I Medicare and the health of the Australian people. ' 1F 9) 1 
9
With the release of this policy, Labor asks Australians to continue to put their
trust with the people and the party who dreamed of Medicare. who made it a
reaity, who are still expanding and imoroving it and who believe it is
funcam= ntal to our gooc society. Ne1
lMinister for
TI 1/
The F
Minis, Coalit " Tod.
statin said. " In sh
line oi
advoc. " Whilt
' borrc
MrBr the EI(
Gover " First
Gover copiec " Next
millic to con
" And s
travel annour
" But h
advoca " In the
to his
April I
up ope
1592 



TEL: 6. Feb. 96 9: 13 No. 002 P. 01
PRIME MINISTER 17/ 96
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
FUNDING FOR QUEEN VICTORIA MUSEUM AND ART GALLERY, LAUNCESTON
I am delighted to announce that the Government will provide $ 1.15 million over the next
three years($ 350, OOO per year) to assist in the exhibition and conservation program of
Launceston's Queen Victoria Museum and Art Gallery.
This will be a partnership project with the National Museum of Australia, assisting in
sharing of expertise and resources, and providing links to increase the national profile of
the Queen Victoria Museum and Art Gallery. It flows from the Government's
commitment to support regional museums through the National Museum's Regional
Access Program.
The Government believes that the Queen Victoria Museum and Art Gallery has the
potential to become a cultural institution of outstanding national significance, in addition
to its role as a catalyst in the intellectual and cultural life of Launceston and Tasmania.
Of particular importance is the re-development by the Queen Victoria Museum and Art
Gallery of the adjacent Launceston railway yards as one of the most important industrial
heritage sites in Australia. The active exhibition plro~ rarn ana conservalton work , hop
planned for the site will expand on the theme of innovation, creativity and achievement,
linking the successes of the past with current developments and experiences, in the
arts, sciences and other areas.
On 25 January 1996, the Government announced a program of additional funding for
the National Museum of Australia to develop State and regional partnership projects, to
increase travelling exhibitions and to produce on-line cultural material.
While the National Museum has worked closely with other regional and State Museums,
Launceston's will be the first partnership project under the new program. This
recognises the importance of the Queen Victoria Museum's collection, its commitment to
community and regional history and the national significance of the Launceston railway
yards project. 



S
44
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
JTUSTICE WOOD EXPOSES JOHN FAHEY
The interim report of the by Mr Justice James Wood, the Police Royal Commissioner
in New South Wales, provides ample reason why John Fahey, the former Premier of
New South Wales, should not be elected to the House of Representatives.
As Premier, John Fahey did everything possible to prevent the Royal Commission from
being established. When the former independent UP in New South Wales, John
Hatton, proposed it, John Fahey's line was that the Independent Commission Against
Corruption ( ICAC), was the best equipped body to deal with corrupt police.
As yesterday's Sydney Morning Herald reports, Mr Fahey told the New South Wales
Parliament in May 1994 that the Police Service should be allowed to get on with the
job. He said that it was " not in the best interests of this State" to suggest that endemic
corruption existed in the New South Wales police force.
Mr Justice Wood's interim report proves precisely the opposite endemic corruption
does exist in the New South Wales police and ICAC has failed to prevent it.
John Fahey's successor as leader of the Coalition in New South Wales, Peter Collins,
has endorsed the Royal Commissioner's interim findings.
John Fahey is a failed Premier of New South Wales.-The Liberal Party is doing no
favours to the people of Mlacarthur by seeking to send this faure to Canberra.
PERTH 7 FEBRUARY 1996
41638 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P. J. KEATING, MP
ALEXANDER HEIGHTS COMMUNITY CENTRE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
8 FEBRUARY 1996
I am very pleased to be here to support Carolyn in her effort to win Cowan for
the ALP and to come to Perth in support of all our candidates.
It will be hard work. but I think we can hold all our seats and even pick up one
or two including Cowan.
We have exceptional candidates in the West and we've had them for some
time. Old hands like Kim Beazley have always had to work very hard. It has
become a way of life.
I was in Canning yesterday, where George Gear is going to have to work as
hard as Kim has had to, and I left confident that George will come through too.
This election will be hard. But we're used to that. None of them has ever
been easy.
But we must win this one. We have achieved so much in the last three years.
We have got to a point where Australia is so much stronger and has so much
to look forward to we can't give it to John Howard. Or Tim Fischer, or
Alexander Downer. Or Peter Costello. Or Peter Reith and Bronwyn Bishop.
We can't leave the future to people who live in the past. We can't hand
Australia's future over to their conservative creed.
And, however much they are hiding it and pretending that they're new-born
social democrats and progressive thinkers, it is a backward and backwardlooking
creed.
Look at it its antecedents every reactionary fashion of the last fifteen years
Thatcherism, Reaganism, the New Right, the HR Nicholls society, Joh for
Canberra. the Greed is Good brigade. John Hewson. Fightback, John and
Andrew, Andrew and John and Alexander and John again, and some hybrid
now of John Howard, Newt Gingrich and the Fabian socialists.
4662 To t
year
And him. s
The and Coa last The still hatE able The and relat And disg Of C
legi! peo use The UbF
des labc
Joh Last
said hist labc
And sai war Sol
juck to 4 
To help distinguish this Mr Howard from the one I have known for the past
years, in my own mind I call him Jack Howard.
And I think it is only reasonable that Mr Howard do something to distinguish
himself in the same way for the people of Australia.
The point is that for all the changes of leadership, and the changes of rhietoric,
and the changes of tactics and the changes of ideological fashion the
Coalitions intentions today are essentially the same as they have been for the
last decade.
They still want to privatise the health system. They still hate Medicare. They
still can't concede the value of a social safety net and a social wage. They still
hate the Accrd. They still have a problem with tMe idea, that people should be
able to combine to protect their common interests in the work place.
The real nature of the Coalition, the real unreformed nature of their thinking
and their intentions is nowhere revealed more clearly than in their industrial
relations proposals.
And, of course, nowhere have they made a more thoroughgoing effort to
disguise thir real intentions.
Of course there are some very obvious signs of what they have in mind. The
legislation brought down by Jeff Keninett in Victoria is one example and for
people who might think that we should not judge them by their record, it is a
useful one.
Their rcrd shows and John Howard's record particularly shows that the
Liberal and National parties want nothing in the world so much as the
destruction of the Accord. the breaking of the unions and the creation of a
labour market in which the balance of power shifts heftily to the employers.
John Howard has beern the most consistent advocate of these policies for the
last 20 years. He has opposed all but two wage rises in that period. He has
sdagain and again that tabour market reform of the kind he has in mind is
his great mission in life. He was a passionate advocate of the draconian
labour market proposals contained in lFightback.
And so thoroughly is it understood within the Liberal Party that Jeff Kennett
said recently when John Howard gets eklced those 400,000 Victorian
workers who escaped from his legislation will have nowhere to hide. In other
words, the Kennett legislation will become Commonwealth legislation.
So we have their record to judge them by and Jeff Kennetfs legislation to
judge themi by. And we also have the West Australian government by which
to judge them. 466,3 
What the WA Government has been doing in public health, education, in their Un
approach to nurses' oay and industnrial relations generally is wholly lin
consiste.: with Joh:. Howard's .;. inkng over the past two dEcades. fal en
Don't be fooled by the cardboard cut-out John Howard. Th
Last time they fought a savage ideological battle. This time it's a battle of inc
tactics. But the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had is still the
the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had. wo
But his policy on industrial relations exposes the truth. And you don't even Le
have to draw comparisons between Mr Howard and Mr Kennett and Mr Court in,
to prove it. You don't even have to draw the logical inference from his past. If;
Remember how Jeff Kennett said that there would be nQ " loss of wages and sh
conditions" end then when he was elected abolished all state awards and took rrm
away holiday loadings? Th
Remember when Richard Court said that he was no Jeff Kennett and that
workers had nothing to fear and then when he was elected removed all Ne
income guarantees from the West Australian system and cut youth wages to eff
S3.77 an hour? W,
And remember any one of hundreds of statements made by John Howard over m;
the past dozen years. Jo
There is no doubting their intentions. 0
If John Howard is elected the Commonwealth industrial relations legislation will
become the same as Kennett's and Court's. an
But it will also be distinctly and expressly John Howard's. He hasn't waited Ethis
long to look like he's imitating someone else. Tr La
John Howard's industrial relations package in 1996 will deliver the same
results as the package contained in Fightback. The only difference is that the Th
Fghtback package spelt it out. jot fro
In the new 8 January 1996 package you have to look at the fine print and in
when you do you see that the " rock solid guarantee" that " employees cannot
be worse off" is cynical nonsense. MI
of
Look behind the veil of comforting rhetoric shrouding his most recent policy
announcement, and you can see the distinct shape of the old ideological M
obsessions lower wages, less security, weaker unions: in short a labour rru
market much more closely resembling the US labour market, and much less Ev
our own labour traditions. ME
The proof of the pudding is in the proposal itself. ye
4664 
Under the Coalition's system the Industrial Relations Commission will be sidelined
and made impotent. There will be no public testing or assessment of the
fairness of contracts. Workers will have to bargain, as individuals, with the
employer, in secret
The Australian Workplace Agreement, which is what the Coalition is calling
I, individual contracts, will be filed and that just means put in a cabinet with
the new so-called Employment Advocate. It will not be looked at unless the
Lets think about the circumstances in which a worker would ask for an
inspection of their contract.
If asked to sign a Workplace Agreement would a job applicant say, " let me
show it to the union, or to a lawyer first", when they know that some other
more compliant applicant will then get the job?
The answer is of course not. Job applicants will have no effective choice.
New workers will be forced onto agreements that will not be scrutinised by an
effective or even expert body.
With the high levels of job mobility which characterise our modemn labour
maket. the system must quickly and inevitably reflect the law of the jungle.
Job mobility is an issue with huge implications for the Howard legislation.
Over 1.7 mnillion Australian workers face a new employer each year about
300,. 000 tertiary education graduates: up to 150. 000 year 11 and 12 leavers:
and 600.000 workers who change jobs every year.
Every year 220,000 Western Australian workers take a new job. 33,000 are in
Trades, 45,000 are Sales or Personal Service workers, and 55.000 are
Labourers. The system will change radically, and quickly, because somebody wanting a
job will sign up even if they are unhappy with the contract. And no one apart
from the worker and the employer will know what has transpired because, as
in Victoria and Western Australia, the contacts will be secret
Many of these workers will be young around 750,000 people under the age
of 25 take a new job every year.
Many of them~ will be immobile and without much choice around 225,000
marred women return to the workforce to new jobs after iooking after children.
Every year.
Many of them will have a poor understanding of Australian practices about
150,000 people born in non-English speaking countries take a new job every
year. 4665 
T,.
Many of themn w.: l te taking their f si ever jot-about 2730 000 Australians W
expenence, this every year.
In proportionate terms, the figures are similarly striking. The number of new
job takers over a year is about 40 per cent of all employees in Sales and
Personal Assistant occupations, and the same for Labourers. Twenty five per
cent of all all wage and salary earners take a new job every year. n
Ask the most batsic question: how can an inexperienced jobseeker, possibly It
with litte confidence, surel without a good understanding of the award 4
system, and without doubt little recourse to the Australian Industrial Relations OL
Commission, unions, or the government's award inspectors how can they
expect to strike a fair and balanced agreement with an employer about the pay If
and conditions of a secret individual contract? -cc
Just taking the fact that over 40 per cent of workers have been in their current TI
job for less thani 3 years, it must follow that over the first term of a Hoard PC
government at least 3.2 million workers will be on individual contracts. SIC
Secret indivdual c ontracts.
Contracts that the applicant won't challenge, because if they do they won't get SI'
the job. ba
Contracts that the existing employee won't challenge. biecause if they do there Ir
will be big and adverse personal and professional consequences. M
Contracts that will change the nature of Australian workplaces and pay, and W
with this the social fabric.
Existing employees are also not going to challenge their employer if they think a,.
the contract is unfair. This would amount to publicly questioning the W
employer's honesty and credibility. ac
The employer can make this costly in all sorts of ways -by not offering Jo
overtime hours. by niot allowing holidays when they are wanted, by not giving 58.
promotions, and even by the sack under the Coalition's impotent new unfair
dismissals laws. T
jus
How can an individual worker resist? Th
Why would an individual worker bring a complaint to the Employment $ 2
Advocate when it has no judicial power, and no way of enforcing a decison, be
othe than to take it to court where it could stay for many monfths and where AL
the outcome is uncertain? ca pn
4 666 
The eenI issues concerning the Coalition's new agenda in comrbination
with the mobility in the Australian labour market are a profound part of this
debate. They are explained in more detail in the Statement issued from my
Office today.
But for all the detail in that Statement and all the details of the Coalition's
many statements, the industrial relations system has more fundamental
meanings. It goes to the core of society. If the conditions in which we negotiate our
working lives are unbalanced, our society is unbalanced. If they are unfair,
our sciety is unfair unfairness will be built in.
if intimidation of the weak is built into our workplaces it is built into the
Tcohme mCuonaitlyit. on's industrial relations proposals are atac tic to disguise their real
policy. And their real policy would make a monumental change not just to
something abstract called the industrial relations system it will make a
monumental change to the balances in Australian society.
It will, effectively by stealth, take away the one means. by which workers have
always been able to level up the social equation the right to join together and
bargain collectively.
In other words the Coalition's agenda is not just about low wages it is about
moving the balance towards employers and away from workers.
We can see it in the fine print of the infamous January 8th sech
We can see it in their planned legislation on strike activity. They want to take
away from workers any capacity for industrial action. They want the world of
work to be defined by employers on the one hand, and individual workers
acting alone on the other.
John Howard said this just two days ago " individual contracts are lerrific!', he
said. The Coalition applauded the actions of CRA in the recent dispute at Weipa,
just because they were individual contracts.
They did not mind that workers doing the same jobs as others were paid up to
$ 20,000 a year more suiply because they weren't ass ated with collective
bargains. The government believed strongly that this was wrong, and the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission brought down exacly that ruling.
There is dlearly a place for individual contracts. But we say there must be the
capacity to negotiate conftras without discimination against collective 4667 
We say that an industrial relations system that denies workers freedom of
assciation and . ollective action is unnalanced. urtair. and ultimately Fo
Sworkabje. grt
And yet that is the gist of the legislation. It is hidden but it is unmistakably Yo.
there. del 001
Consider this: Th;
The Coalition said that strikes would be illegal for the duration of a Workplace are
Agreement. wit
Now imagine some of the circumstances that might justify workers taking It i;
industrial action when the contract is in place. W1
Imagine a workplace in which asbestos becomes a threat to the health of me
workers and the employer is not prepared to take corrective action.
Imagine a workplace in which safety procedures are poor and the employer is oft
not prepared to take corrective action. wa
Imagine a boss persistently engaging in harrassment. WIr in
Even under these extreme circumstances. according to the Coalition, a strike war
would be illegal. And illegal means just that time in prison for those taking ind.
industrial action. Yo
When Peter Reith was asked about this aspect of the Coalition's policy in yok
1993, he admitted that a gaol sentence for the striking worker could follow. Th,
There is more. in i
of
Because the Coalition's policy makes it illegal to strike while an agreement is
in place, for many employers the strategic thing would be to stagger individual It i:
contracts so that a disgruntled co-worker could never have other employee val
support for action. to t
What the Coalition has in mind is legislation for employers, pure and simple. Ant
Legislation that will make it close to impossible for workers to bargain or chi
negotiate or protest collectively. Ark
So what does the Opposition hope to achieve by these proposals? Iib
Higher labour productivy? But labour productivity in Australia has been more ow
than twice that of New Zealand in the four years since they introduced an
individual contract system. WE orm
Less strikes? But wev had less strikes in the last year than in any year since
1940. Under the Acrol te number of working days lost per 1.000 workers An
has been cut by 67 per cent since the Coalition was last in power.
4668 
For economic growth? But we've got growth. For inflation? But we've got
growth with low inflation.
You can run through half a dozen hypothetical reasons why they are so
determined on this course. And you can't find a plausible answer until you
come to the question of lower wages and insecure jobs.
That is the Coalition model and it always has been the Coalition model. They
are utterly obsessed with the notion that Australian business cannot prosper
without a scramble in the labour market for low paid jobs.
It is part of the Coalition vision as much a part now as it always was.
What the Coalition means by labour market reform is wage cutting. They
mean ripping away job security from hundreds of thousands of Australians.
What they mean by labour market reform is a fundamental shift in the balance
of the most fundamental of social relationships the relationship between
workers and employers.
What their proposals will also mean although they refuse to consider the
implications is a direct assault on thousands of workers' families. Reduce
wages, worsen conditions. cut penalty rates. reduce security and
4iependence and you hurt families.
You hurt their income, your hurt the opportunities available to their children,
you hurt communities.
Theywilcall what wesay ascare campanof course -but noone oudbe
in any doubt that this debate on industrial relations goes to the very essence
of the diffierence between Labor and the Coalition.
It is about the soit of society we want Australia to be. It's about how much we
value each other. It's about how deep the feeling runs that we are all entitled
to fair treatment in Australia.
And in ths campaign it is also about the truth: the Coalition hias not had a
change of heart, it has had a change of tactic.
And Australian workers and thewiryiles stand to be the losers.
It is fundamental to Labors cause that we resist this and that we re-affirm our
own vision and our own record.
We have a very good story to tell of the last four years, and an even better
one to tell about the future of this country.
And in the next three weks across the country we are going to tef. l it. 4669 



08: 3r, NO. W9 9W.
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMEN4T BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P. J. KEATING, MP
DEBATES When the election campaign began, I proposed two head to head debates
between Mr Howard and myself at the ABC with a moderator of the ABC's choice.
The Coalition have been unrwilling to accept this proposal and I'm sure that the
impasse has become a source of irritation to the Australian people.
Australians are entitled to hear what the parties are offering and who is offering
themi. That is the fundamental point. And we owe it to them to end the impasse.
I propose, therefore, that one debate be held, as Labor first proposed, at the ABC
with a moderator of the ABC's choice. And that another debate be held, as the
Coalition proposed, at Channel 9 with Mr Ray Martin as moderator.
And to decide which debate shall occur first I propose that we toss a coin.
8 February 1996
4670 MPS* I wek(
the rE
rema .' On 1.
Work.
is woi
" Follc
is nov
" This
with tt
recev paidI under " Ever
' This
housi
and n
" More
searc, " But t]
level incom
Altem healtt " How(
family 



PRIME MINISTER
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP
ALP CAMPAIGN LAUNCH
MELBOURNE, 14 FEBRUARY 1996
Three years ago I asked the people of Australia to entrust to Labor the most
important responsibility a government can have I asked Australians for a
mandate to create jobs, and help the unemployed.
To create jobs, I asked Australians to give Labor the task of creating
sustainable economic growth on which jobs depend.
To create jobs, I sought a mandate to make Australia stronger; to find our place
in Asia and the Pacific; to encourage the industries of the future; to massively
expand education and training: to increase our national savings.
I sought a mandate to protect our environment.
I asked Australians to entrust to Labor the guardianship of the social safety net.
I asked for a mandate to make the arrangements governing our workplaces
both more flexible and fair: a mandate to encourage more enterprise bargaining
while maintaining awards and the right of Australian workers to bargain
collectively. I asked that arrangements with the trade union movement be such as to ensure
low inflation and thus sustainable economic and employment growth; I asked
for more of the Accord.
I asked that Labor be entrusted to act upon the decision of the High Court of
Australia which recognised that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
had occupied this continent for thousands of years before Europeans came.
I asked that Australian women put their faith in us to make it easier to combine
work and families.
I asked Australians to trust us to maintain the principles of tolerance and
diversity on which the cohesion of modem Australia depends and on which it
is flourishing.
4824 
I asked to be entrusted with the task of resisting that radical conservative
assault on our social values and our national aspirations which then went
under the name of Fightback, and presently goes under the various disguises
of John Howard.
Today I ask for a renewal of that mandate in every detail, including the last.
I ask for it on two grounds: for what we have done in the past three years, and
for what we must do in the next three.
The Australian people gave us that mandate in 1993 at a time when they might
easily have chosen to reject us. Australia was just emerging from recession.
There were a million people unemployed. Australians might easily have
chosen to punish the Labor Government and abandon Labor~ s social
democratic model for the conservative alternative.
lost Our responsibility was therefore all the greater when they chose not to. For the
) r a past three years we have governed in that knowledge.
ting And we have worked, I think, at least as hard as any government in our history
to repay that trust.
ace We aimed at 500,000 new jobs and we have delivered 714,000 500,000 of
M~ Y them in small business. We aimed at sustained and sustainable economic
growth and we are now benefiting from the longest period of sustained growth
in Australia's history. And with low inflation and rapidly growing exports into the
fastest growing region in the world, we can at last say with confidence Ohat the
growth is sustainable.
iet. We said we would find a place for Australia in Asia and the Pacific, and we
ces have surprised even ourselves by the progress we have made. The APEC
ing agenda now agreed will add another half million new jobs for Australians.
lain We said we would expand education and training to prepare young Australians
for the modern workforce and a world in which knowledge is a nation's most
ure important commodity and through Working Nation we are injecting $ 1.5 billion
ked into it.
With 2 million new jobs since 1983, employment growth under Labor has been
t Of virtually unrivalled in the world. The Department of Education and Training
) ple estimates that if we lift our skills and grow our information and service
industries if we keep to our present policies we can create another 2 million
jobs in the next 10 years.
ine Working Natiun deveaops skills which enaole people to compete for the new
jobs. Only Working Nation has the strategy and resources to do this. And only
3nd Labor is committed to Working Nation.
: h it ,1825 
3
Working Nation does something else, of course it looks after unemployed
Australians. \ Ve :" ave introduced a Jot Com-act wihich, when fLuiy implemented. will mean
that any Australian who has been unemployed for 18 months or more will be
offered a job. We are personally case managing 377,000 Australians to help
them find their way into jobs, or training for jobs.
We have reduced the number of young unemployed by nearly 20 per cent. We
have reduced the total number of unemployed by 230,000.
94,000 young Australians are still looking for work, and the unemployed still
number more than 750,000, so there is no cause for self-congratulation.
But there is cause to be confident that we can reach our target of 5 per cent
unemployment by the turn of the century and the other target we have set
ourselves, of another 600,000 new jobs over the life of the current Accord.
And there is every reason to defend the policies and programs which are taking
us towards these objectives.
We have substantially increased our national savings, as we said we would.
The figure presently stands at $ 230 billion; under the new superannuation
measures it is anticipated to grow to one trillion by the year 2000 and
two trillion by 2020. f
It is worth considering Australias foreign debt in this context. Total fbreign
debt, of which 5 per cent is Commonwealth Government debt, stands at
$ 180 billion. The vast majority is private debt, and much of that is invested in
major national projects which will be of considerable long term value to
Australia.
At the same time as foreign debt has accumulated, so has our capacity to pay.
And now secured against the debt, and providing an alternative pool of capital
from which to barrow, are national savings already much bigger and growing
infinitely faster.
Our superannuation changes will increase national savings and the savings oft
all Australians; such that an Australian couple now in their mid 30s with
average earnings will receive, on their retirement, an income 75 per cent higher
than the age pension. c
We asked that we be entrusted with the care of the Australian environment, v
and we have taken that responsibility very seriously.
In 1996 our natural environment has a better future than it has had at any timeE
in the past 200 years. Perhaps most importantly, we are all beginning to see
that environmental values are not only consistent with economic success, but a
precondition of it.
4826 
oyed Shoalwater Bay and Jervis Bay have joined the Franklin River and Kakadu and
the rainforests; of the wet tropics, and are now protected forever.
-nean ill be The Cape York Agreement has the potential to deliver the second largest
help World Heritage area in the world with the support of the communities in the
region.
We Landcare, which Labor started in 1989, has been given support to match the
great enthusiasm with which Australian farming communities have adopted it.
i still Major community participation programs like Save the Bush and Coastcare are
flourishing.
cent We have put aside six million hectares of forest for potential inclusion in a
3 set world class system of forest reserves.
Last month we delivered an environment statement which contained the
iking biggest commitment in our history for the protection of our land, its productive
capacity and its biodiversity. That environment statement takes the programs
we have conceived and nurtured over the past five to ten years to a new level.
ould. ation And the statement is fully funded. It is not contingent upon the sale of Telstra.
and We have delivered on the environment in the past and we will deliver in the
future and we wAil deliver policy, not political blackmail.
reign is at We said we would maintain and expand the social safety net and we have not
ed in least through Medicare, Australia's universal health care system.
ie to And with our new family health rebate, which will extend and strengthen
Medicare, Australian families will have more choice and greater security and
pay. assistance than ever before.
, pital
. wing We have made life for working women easier by establishing thousands more
child care places and paying a child care rebate through Medicare offices. We
introduced an $ 840 maternity allowance, and for parents who want to stay
gs of home with their children, a parenting allowance.
with
gher We asked for a mandate to preserve the principle that decent wages and
conditions based on the right of working men and women to bargain collectively
and openly in the workplace are the basic requirements of a fair society, and
nent, we have preserved that principle.
We have preserved the jurisdiction ol che Industrial Reiarior-s Cor" mission to
time act as the umpire to ensure fair agreements between firms and their workers.
see
but a 4827 
We are transforming our workplaces. We are making them more flexible.
creative and productive in the last four years. labour productivity has been
more than twice that of New Zealand. which, has been touted by our ooponents
as a shining exzrnpie of the benefits o~ the syste cf; d' contrac* ts.
Labor will not shift the essential balance in the relationship between employers
and employees: we will make the relationship more flexible, we will make it
more productive, we will offer more choice, but we will not sacrifice a hundred
years of progress and leave Australian working men and women at the mercy
of a market free-for-all. F
We will not adopt the fantastic hypocrisy of modem conservatism whichr
preaches the values of families and communities, while conducting a direct
assault on them through reduced wages and conditions and job security.
We respect every legitimate right of employers, including the right to dismiss
employees, but not a right to unfairly dismiss them. We don't think we help r
young Australians by making it easier to sack them or their parents.
Three years ago Australians relied upon the Labor Government to maintain c
unswerving commitment to cultural and racial tolerance and to continue to
invest in the multicultural fabric of the nation. And we have done this. 1
We have invested in the cultural diversity of this country and we have
legislated to protect the victims of prejudice. We have not turned a blind eye to
racism and we will not compromise the principle of non-discriminatibn in C
immigration by erecting new barriers which discriminate against family reunion r
for our Non-English Speaking Background communities.
We introduced and passed legislation that ensured the right to sexual privacy
for all Australians. C
The mandate we sought to give legal expression to the Mabo judgement we
have fulfilled, and it gives me great pride to be able to say so. The long battle
to win the day has dramatically raised the level of understanding between black 1
and white Australians. We were brought together and we learned a lot. We
proved we could find solutions. r
There is still a long way to go before we can say that we have done what must
be done. But the will to do it is there. The next term of a Labor government wAil h
see an unprecedented effort to solve the distressing problems of Aboriginal fE
health and morale which are the continuing legacies of dispossession and
neglect. I. v I; f
Three years ago we promised to invest the arts with a new stature and k
direction, and with Creative Nation we made good our promise. g
4828 
 ible, Three years ago we promised Australians that we would develop a model for
been an Australian republic, and that is what we have done. We appointed an expert
ients group and we set in motion a broad community debate.
In June last year we presented the Government's preferred model to the
) yers Australian parliament and people.
ike it
idred The Government never suggested that its model was the only one. We want to
iercy see the widest possible discussion and consultation. We have issued nonpartisan
educational materials to schools, libraries and community groups
across the country. We welcome and support the Australia Consults program
vhich recently launched by the National Australia Day Council.
firect We believe that Australia's head of state should be one of us. We believe that
an Australian head of state should welcome in the new century, should open
miss the Olympic Games in the year 2000, should represent us abroad in this
help nation's second century.
If re-elected we will ask the Australian people what they think about the
, itain question: do you want an Australian to be Australia's head of state?
e to The Government will conduct a plebiscite a non-binding popular vote within
twelve months of the first sitting of the new parliament.
have ye to If the plebiscite is carried, the Government will then propose that a Joint Select
) n in Committee, representative of both Houses of the Parliament, be appointed to
inion make recommendations for a constitutional amendment to be put to the people
at a referendum.
vacy The joint committee would be established in such a way that neither the
Government nor the Opposition would possess a majority. It would conduct
extensive consultations with the states and the community and would consider
twe submissions.
attle
) lack~ To succeed, the constitutional amendment necessary to create the republic
We would need to be carried at the referendum by a majority of electors and in a
majority of states.
must The question of the republic has been one of several controversial issues we
t Will have confronted in recent times. But we believe that not to confront them is a a
ginal failure of our duty to lead the nation conscientiously.
and We are very much aware that the great progress we have made in the last
three years the unprecedented econimic groWn',. th; lovv inflatic-tfh? Ic,' st
and level of strikes since 1940, the huge growth in joos, ie growth ir 3x; p'. rts and
productivity has not translated automatically into material benefits, or a
greater sense of security among many Australians. 4829 
But that is not an argument for throwing out the policies which have given us
strikingly good results. It is an argument for listening harder and doing better.
It is : nErefore not arcurnent ' C . n cc e
They have opposed us at every step.
Never has there been a more negative Opposition; or, since John Hewson's
departure, an Opposition less willing to honestly state what it believes in.
Never, I believe, has there been an Opposition so weak on policy and direction.
And as we have led, our opponents have been busy changing leaders.
John Hewson has gone he went abusing us for Working Nation and the
Native Title Act and even more loudly cursing his colleagues for their
dishonesty and faint-heartedness. Alexander Downer came and just as quickly
went in a thick fog of confusion and embarrassment.
They now offer, as an alternative Prime Minister, their own third choice as
leader of the Liberal Party.
They have changed their leaders but not themselves.
They present him as a new man; they ask us to believe that all his previous
political life had been one gigantic mistake.
They ask us to believe that he will now support all those things he has devoted
his life to opposing.
They ask us to believe that he supports Medicare,-that his passionate life-long
opposition to universal health insurance was just a passing phase; that when,
over two decades, he was opposing every wage rise bar two and declaring that
award protections were the greatest blight on the country, he was just
rehearsing for the moment when he could say they were essential.
They ask us to believe that while for two decades he never raised a finger in
the interests of our environment, he was at heart an environmentalist.
Apparently we are to interpret his deeply reactionary record as just youthful
exuberance. It is too much to ask anyone to believe.
They ask us to believe that he has a vision for Australia. But, after 20 years in
politics, can any Australian say what it is?
4830 
Ius The fact is. while Labor has a vision for Australia in the 21st century, John
Howard's vision extends no further than 2 March 1996. While Labor has been
repositioning Australia for the future, John Howard has been repositioning
himself to escape his past.
For 13 years we have resisted radical free market ideology in all its guises
including the guises of John Howard.
on's in. Now he is back, and with him a shadow ministry which presents a truly
: ion. disconcerting prospect.
Mr Fischer as Trade Minister a man who has publicly canvassed the idea that
Australia could institute a trade war with Japan, our largest trading partner, by
the not selling our primary products into their markets; a man who has said that the
heir Israeli secret service stole Malcolm Frasers trousers in Memphis.
-: ky Alexander Downer as Minister for Foreign Affairs the man who says we are
", obsessed" with Asia the region where we do 75 per cent of our trade; the
as man who says he would re-focus Australia on Europe and on what he calls our
" Western allies" in North America;-and who said two days before the historic
security agreement with Indonesia was signed that the " relationship was in
tatters".
ots We have a Shadow Treasurer who has yet to make a single constructive
contribution to the economic debate in this country. Can anyone remember
Mr Costello saying something positive or interesting about the futu re of
) led Australia?
And the Minister for selling Telstra in a Coalition government will be Bronwyn
ong Bishop.
len, , hat And they talk about arrogance.
just Australia's greatest enterprise and the one with the greatest potential, the one
on which every Australian in some sense depends Telstra is to be given to
r in Mrs Bishop to sell.
-hfulLet me repeat that Telstra is to be given to Mrs Bishop to sell.
And if she fails in this task, as she is bound to, Australians will not get their
environment policy from the Coalition.
Let's be very clear about this. One party will sell Telstra if they win this
s in election, the other Darty wi'l no! The Cof' tion wi!! sell it. The L~ t'r Party wil
not. Yet, for all the alarming inadequacies of his most senior colleagues, none of
them presents greater cause for alarm than the man who would be Prime
Minister. ' 18.31.
I 
Mr Howard has always opposed those things which Australians are committed
to thinas like Medicare. the environment and the social safety net. He now
piasacs : that he has seen now A-, st,:-rac-like them. and has the! elOre char;: ed
his mind.
Even if we accepted this explanation, we would still have to query his
On foreign policy he has almost without exception chosen the wrong side on
every issue. He supported Ronald Reagan's Star Wars program but opposed
the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone. He thought Gorbachev's perestroika
program was a plot to disarm the West. He agreed with the opponents of
Nelson Mandela and vociferously opposed economic sanctions against South
Africa. When he mistakenly anticipated some political advantage, he
questioned the non-discriminatory principles of our immigration program. Last
year he gave every indication that he is still fighting the Vietnam War by
refusing to see Vietnam's most important political leader during his visit to
Australia. He is truly the most conservative leader the Liberal Party has ever had.
The truth is Mr Howard has never been able to drag his feet from the sands of
the past. He once said about Medicare that he knew we could never go back
entirely to the privatised health system of the 50s and 60s but, he said, " I
would love to go back".
As with Medicare. so with so much else.
That is why we say leadership is a major issue in this election because we
cannot go back. We cannot drift. We cannot take the risk.
If we are bold and have confidence in ourselves, we can grasp the opportunity
that now presents itself. No country in the world just now has such an
opportunity. What is happening now in East Asia is without precedent in world history.
Consider the wealth generated by the Industrial Revolution, and then consider
the relative size of the populations which produced it
East Asia has 2.5 billion people. The consistently high rates of economic
growth coupled with higher education is producing new and rising levels of
wealth and opportunity that knows no parallel in history.
And Australia is right in the middle of it.
Through most of our history, we have been remote from the big markets of the
world. But not any more.
41832 
nitted If we recognise the opportunity and truly seek to integrate ourseives with it our
noweconomic future is assured. And with that integration will come the trade and
. nged wealth to further develop Australia and put us firmly in charge of our future.
The last ten years have seen us prepare for this opportunity, the last three
y his years have seen us beginning to come to grips with it.
But we will only succeed in the region around us if we truly want to be there. If
Je on we regard it as our natural place to be, with the people around us as real and
) osed genuine neighbours.
troika its of Our children will receive the inheritance we ourselves have been given, but
; outh they will employ it not as an enclave marooned on an abundant island but as a
he nation with a destiny flowing from the most generous benefaction of history; a
Last continent of our own, a border with no one, a deep democracy, an egalitarian
3r by ethic.
; it to The challenge is to harness our confidence;, to make ourselves stronger at
home and more enterprising abroad.
We have been preparing well, with higher levels of education and training, a
ds of premium on creativity and innovation, the development of a productivity culture,
back a commitment to competitiveness.
iid " I In a decade our exports are well on the way to doubling, our service industries
are growing dramatically and there is now a constellation of Australian
companies all over the world.
* e we Australians and their children will increasingly live lives caught up in the
phenomenon of our intemationalisation and find jobs in the industry of our
region. And their income growth will be guaranteed.
unity ian We can enter the new century a unique country with a unique future. We can
enter it prosperous and dynamic: a diverse and tolerant society, trading actively
in Asia and the rest of the world; secure in our identity, the more so because
we know that we have met the challenge of our times.
sider It is the greatest challenge we have ever faced as a nation. By the year 2000
we should be able to say that this predominantly British and European country
has learned to live securely, in peace and mutual prosperity among our Asian
omic and Pacific neighbours.
Is of We will not be cut off from our British and Eiuropean c~. es 2-:-do c
from those economies. On the contrary, the More engaged re
economically and politically with the region around us, the more value and
relevance we bring to those old relationships.
, f the 48.33 
Far from putting our identity at risk, our relationships with the region will it
energise it. c E
We wili have Thnis unio-ue , ced.. We&amp; w e made sense
of our future.
But it will only happen if we make it.
If we hesitate; if we look back and say: well, there is the past on the one hand,
and on the other hand there is the future, and the choice is not exclusive; let us .1L
ponder, let us form a committee, let us have a convention, let us listen to whata
our rump has to say, let us drift if we do that, we will lose the chance, a0
Because our neighbours are not drifting; our competitors are not drifting, the
modem world is not drifting the tide of change in the modern world is greater E
and more rapid now than at any time in our history. To drift would be 1
disastrous. The truth is we either grasp the opportunity now, or fail. The pace and V
momentum must not be lost; for if the fire goes out, not only is it unlikely to be
re-lit, but the opportunity will be lost and we will repent in leisure. T if,
The Asian economies are a huge field but the gateways are narrow and wAilb
rapidly close. tc
ar
The same might be said of another great opportunity which we simply'ms
grasp. T
Our ability to meet the challenge of the information revolution will significantly C.
determine how many jobs we can create in the near future, and what sort of
jobs they will be. A
How we meet it will also have a large say in the kind of country we become i
over the next half decade: whether, for instance, we continue to grow as a ft
clever and creative country; whether we innovate for ourselves or borrow from C
others; whether we generate our own films, television, information services of
and scientific and educational materials; whether our kids watch Playschool or
a Hollywood equivalent. P
It all depends on decisions we have made being followed through. And on the ar
right decisions being made in the near future. I V
If we move quickly we can create a major new Australian industry worth many At
billions of dollars which will create many thousands of jobs. fo
4834 H 
will It can be Australian hospitals, not Californian ones, which deliver on-line
diagnostic services to Vietnam; Monash University, not the London School of
Economics, which delivers on-line education services to Malaysia; Australian
ise banks, Australian insurance companies, Australian businesses and agencies
vastly expanding their operations through on-line services abroad. There really
is no limit.
So long as we move quickly.
uds Let me ask one more question flowing from the information revolution. Does
' hat anyone believe that the current Coalition is equipped to deal with it? If the
answer is ' I'm not sure' that is as good a reason as any other not to vote for
them.
the
iter Because if Mr Howard and his colleagues dither if they drop the baton we
be have carried for the past four years the race will be over. And Australia will
be the loser.
ind We will lose a potentially massive industry and much else with it.
be The ability of our schools to take advantage of this revolution is particularly
important. A Labor Government will not support a school system divided
will between the information rich and the information poor. Our first priority must be
to provide computers on the basis of need, especially the needs of those who
are economically disadvantaged or in remote and rural areas.
ust The digitisation program, along with commitments made by Telstra and Optus,
will deliver network access to over 97 per cent of schools by the turn of the
ritly century.
t Of And today I am happy to announce that Labor will provide a new $ 300 million
information technology strategy for schools: $ 240 million over four years for
me hardware for computer learning centres for Australia's schools, and. $ 60 million
a for professional development for teachers. The $ 240 million will buy 150,000
omn computers and might I say, because of last year's Innovation Statement, many
; es of them will be made in Australia.
I or This is essential spending if we are to succeed in the information revolution
the and our children are to have a first rate chance in a first rate country.
J What we do over the next few years will have profound implications for schools,
businesses, homes and hospitals. It will have profound implications for
3ny Australia in the 21st century. It cannot be left to chance. I truly believe it
cannot be left to the Liberal and National parties.
I have chosen not to announce a swag of new policies in this speech today.
Unlike the Coalition, we have had our policies before the Australian people
for their examination for some time now. i the Innovation Statement, the
Housing Statement, the Environment Statement, the National Forest Policy 4835 
Statement, the health policy, the Accord, APEC. the Security Agreement with
Indonesia the republic.
In this soeech. what I have been concerned with are the challenges we face as
a naticri ana the way Labor is going about meeting them. I think that is what
Austraiians need to be sure about just now the direction we are going, how we
are coping with the change all around us, how their families, communities and
their country are going to fare in all this.
I believe they are going to fare very well.
Much of what I have said has concerned our future, our kids, the Australians of
next century.
But change also affects older Australians. It was in part to protect them against
change that the Government has fulfilled Labor's historic promise to ensure that
the aged pension is pegged at 25 per cent of average weekly earnings.
Last year, and right through the commemorations marking the 50th anniversary
of the Second World War, Australians have paid tribute to the heroic
generation who defended our liberty and freedom everywhere.
A generation which contributed so much to this country deserve all the benefits
that we can provide.
At the same time, we must meet the needs of those members of today's'older
generation who too often find themselves out of the workforce but still-willing
and able to make vital contributions to this country.
Today we are releasing some initiatives a Labor Government will take to help
them to make these contributions. These may be taken as the beginning of
what will be a major government undertaking to come to terms with the new
realities of modern society as they apply to older people and to develop
programs which will tap their skills and knowledge and, where they wish,
engage them in the social and economic mainstream.
Ladies and gentlemen
At the end of three years we face the people of Australia confident that we have
earned their trust once more. I think we can say these things.
That we strenuously pursued the goals we set and that sometimes we
exceeded our own expectations. That we have been willing to lead, at home
and abroad, and that we have led with success. That we have looked after the
national interest and that we have looked after our fellow Australians when they
needed looking after. We have been conscientious. We have been active. We
have honoured the trust that was placed in us.
11836 
wvith It is for the Australian people to judge us. If they judge us on our record I
believe they will decide that we have earned their trust again. And not just for
what we have done. but for what we are determined to do for what we believe
3ce as in, for the future of Australia.
3 what
ow we Our opponents, who have refused to present the people with their policies until
3s and well into the campaign itself, are talking about honesty, and trust.
But there can be no honesty without the honest presentation of policies. And it
is not honest to offer one policy as a bribe to win support for another. And it is
difficult to trust a man who denies his past, who says he supports a health care
ans of system he has always opposed, promises an industrial relations system of the
kind he has always abhorred, or declares himself something he has never
been.
gainst
* e that Our opponents say that it is time for Labor to go, as if there was a natural order
to elections, and not the need to prove credentials, prove ideas, demonstrate
capacity, show the people of Australia where you intend to take the country.
3rsary ieroic These years are too important to risk.
Let me tell you this: Labor's vision never burned so brightly, we were never
mefits more determined, never was the sense of mission stronger.
We Australians have a remarkable future within our grasp, a future which other
oldercountries can only dream of. We have this great goal and Labor has a great
wvilling passion to reach it.
ihelp
ng of
new
velop wish, have
3 we
iome r the
they We 4837 



r
~ 4u
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
1996 PRIME MINISTERIAL WOMEN AND SPORT AWARDS
There has been a suggestion that Samantha Riley has been exciuded from
the Prime Ministeriai Women and Sport Awards.
Winners of these awards are selected by a committee under the auspices of
the Australian Sports Commission and are not decided by the Prime Minister
or the Office of the Prime Minister.
Reports of intervention by my Office following publicity surrounding the
unfortunate incident involving Samantha Riley are completely without
foundation, as confirmed by the Australian Sports Commission.
As in previous years, the committee will decide the winners of this year's
awards and I will be delighted to honour the achievements of those selected.
All Australians feel great sympathy for the predicament Samantha Riley has
found herself in as a result of the inadvertent use of a banned substance.
She remains one of a number of outstanding Australian sportswomen and
teams in contention for the Prime Ministerial Women and Sport Awards and
for my own part I would be more than happy to present her with this award
should she be the committee's choice.
I confess to being a great fan of hers and I wish her well.
MELBOURNE 14 FEBRUARY 1996
41822 L S1 S/ St Pt As
ch Sa
Th th. th,
Jo us to CA 14 



S
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIM MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
SAMANTHA RILEY, AND A LIBERAL PARTY DIRTY TRICK
Tonight I have seen television reports of allegations made against me by Liberal
Senator Ian Campbell, suggesting I had attempted to exclude Samnantha Riley from the
Prime Ministerial Women and Sport Awards.
As I have already made clear today, this claim is totally false and malicious. It is also
an inappropriate and cynical use by the Coalition of a young Australian sporting
champion who is facing an extremely difficult time in her career.
Samantha is already under extreme pressure, and I resent the Liberal Party's
use of incorrect rumours to add to her burden.
This is typical of John Howard's leadership style. He spruiks integrity and honesty, and
then authorises his shadow ministers to tell shameless downright lies.
I was delighted to be advised tonight that the independent commnittee which decides
these awards has in fact confirmed that Samiantha Riley will be a recipient when the
awards are announced on Monday 26 February.
John Howard and Senator Campbell both owe Samantha Riley an apology for trying to
use her name for the most rancid political motives. The man firom Bennelong is going
to use every dirty trick in the book to try to make himself Prime Minister.
CANBERRA 14 February, 1996 ' 1823 2 6/ 96 



PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
INTERVIEW WITH PAUL MURPHY, " DATELINE", SBS TV, 17 FEBRUARY
1996 E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Prime Minister, welcome to Dateline.
PM: Thank you, Paul.
J: If I can start with foreign policy which is as close to your heart,
of course, as domestic matters and can I start first with Indonesia?
Now the recent treaty/ agreement that you negotiated was done in
secret, nobody knew anything about it, the voters didn't, and no
Parliamentary scrutiny and now your critics say, ' It was undemocratic'.
Why do it that way?
PM: Well they are all done that way and the Liberal Party would have
people I mean they couldn't have done it and they wanted everyone
to think that there was then something wrong with it. In fact, you might
recall, that one of the things I said when I challenged Bob Hawke was
I wanted to put the relationship with Indonesia on a proper footing.
It is our largest nearest neighbour. Their security outlook has great
similarities with our own and in proposing this idea to
President Soeharto and the two of us having thought about it over
time, we needed time and he needed time to discuss this with the
army, with the defence forces there.
In other words, this is not something that can be negotiated in public
and in this country we have elections every three years you give a
Government a mandate. Our mandate was closer integration with
East Asia and particularly with Indonesia. All this is within the
mandate.
J: But what does it actually mean, the military aspect of it? Does it mean,
for instance, that Australians might find themselves in potential trouble
spots like East Timor, Aceh, Irian Jaya? 
PM: No, I think, it means that we are declaring, first of all, trust in one
another. More than anything else, it is a declaration of trust to say that
Indonesia has no territorial designs on Australia and vice versa.
And not only do we trust one another, but we do recognise that we
have a common strategic outlook and that we will consult if our
security interests are threatened.
J: Well what is in it for the Indonesians?
PM: I think what is in it for them is knowing that the largest continental
power near it is a declared friend, so much so that it has a treaty of
security common between us, common to us, and that it will take from
us what it thinks it has in our maturity in foreign policy, in our defence
structure, in our strategic outlook, in our strategic judgements.
I think it gets all of that.
J: Does it mean that we are a bit more cautious in criticising Indonesia on
their human rights record?
PM: No, it doesn't mean that all. I think this, again, is the benefit of a
quality relationship, a real relationship, rather than just a thin foreign
policy relationship is that you can speak about all of the difficult issues
and I have always done this with President Soeharto.
J: A bit of a sidelight, the democratic politician in Hong Kong, Martin Lee,
has said that you ' put trade before human rights'.
PM: That is completely untrue and we have supported Christopher Patten
in his democratic attempts at democratisation, though I will say for the
British, at exactly one minute to midnight, they had 100 years of course
to do some of this and didn't do it. But wherever someone wants to
keep democratic structures or improve them, of course, we are always
supporting them and we have supported him in Hong Kong.
J: Now your thrust into Asia, especially APEC, is very obvious. Although
you say, of course, we are Australians, we are not Asians, but we are
part of the region and the Opposition seems to go along with that and
yet Alexander Downers says, that you seem obsessed with Asia at the
expense of Europe and the rest of the world.
PM: Yes, well, of course, this is just code for them keeping their old
allegiances and while we, in the Government, have good relationships
better than good with the United States. We are one of its, I think,
key partners in the region and also with Europe. This is where we live.
per cent of our exports go to the Asia-Pacific. This is the place
where we have to find our future and they are very uncomfortable
about that. They want security from Asia. The Labor Government
wants security in Asia.
J: Right. 
PM: And there is all the world of difference in security from Asia and
security in Asia.
J: But how seriously do the Asians, and particularly giants like China,
take us?
PM: I think seriously indeed, Paul. Just take APEC. Before APEC there
was no forum where the Chinese leadership would meet the Japanese
leadership, or the Korean leadership, or any one of them would meet
others. The one forum which has been developed Australia has had a
major role in and that is APEC. When I first proposed that we should
develop a Heads of Government body, very few people gave it a
chance. But gradually we built a consensus for it and President Clinton then
issued the invitation and the first meeting was held in Seattle, the
second in Indonesia, and the third in Osaka. As a consequence, we
have now built the primary and I emphasise primary piece of
political architecture in the Asia-Pacific for the region. And I think
China appreciates that, I think the Japanese appreciate that, I think the
Indonesians appreciate that.
J: Even Dr Mahathir? Because your relations are now correct, if not
warm, but he still wants his EAEC his Caucus and, of course, he
doesn't want us in that.
PM: Well the EAEC, so called, has never met. But, I think, the Malaysians
take the view too that APEC offers such opportunities. And the thing
about it is, Paul, not just economic opportunities. When you have a
set of leaders for instance, before the Osaka meeting, President
Jiang Zemin of China visited South Korea.
Now it is very hard to imagine, you know, the President and Chief of
the military of China visiting South Korea and I spoke to him about it.
And a large part of that is APEC. He sees President Kim Young Sam
at APEC meetings, they sit beside one another, they speak, so why not
visit? In other words, APEC is changing the whole strategic
environment.
J: Okay, and you are saying that you are having quite an influence with
Asian leaders. You also have said that they have no interest in
dealing with John Howard. Now who has told you that?
PM: Well just examine this point. Do Muoi, the Leader of Vietnam, the
General Secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party, who is turning
Vietnam into a market economy, visited this country, his first visit ever
to the West. 
John Howard would not see him. Tim Fischer wouldn't see him.
Alexander Downer wouldn't see him. And I accompanied him along
the Queensland coast for two days, because they have a lot of bauxite,
took him to see the aluminium smelters, took him to see the tourism
projects. He was continually being embarrassed by questions:
Why won't Mr Howard see you? And some other ASEAN leaders have
asked me: Why didn't Mr Howard see Do Muoi?
J: Which leaders?
PM: Well I am not here to tell you all the conversations I have, but I assure
you it was noticed because they are full members of ASEAN and when
Mr Howard decided not to meet the leadership of a full member of
ASEAN, this raises eyebrows around the region. Paul, I made this
clear in this remark, of course the leadership of the region would see
the Australian Prime Minister whoever that might be. But what the
Australian Prime Minister has got to be able to do is to get them to
deal, in this case, with him.
J: And you are saying you can do that better than John Howard?
PM: Well, I think, that is proven to be the case.
J: Look, just on another related topic. Australia has been excluded from,
or not invited to, the Asia-European Union's Summit. Does that
concern you?
PM: Not particularly, Neither Gareth Evans, nor 1, put very great store in
this. I think the first meeting will be a get-to-know-you meeting..
I think the likelihood is the region would like us at the second. This
has certainly been the view of Japan and that is fine, we would be
happy to go along. I
J: And now you see, just before we go to domestic issues, APEC
building, getting stronger all the time and particularly our relationship
with China being of principal importance?
PM: Well, Paul, what is happening in East Asia is without precedent in
history. When you think of the wealth of the 19th century and the
industrial revolution, the English who built abbeys for themselves
across the English countryside, the great American families the
Camnegies, the Melons, the railway barons, the coal barons, the Fricks
it came from relatively small populations, you know, 15 million or so
in Britain, 50 or 60 million in the United States.
There is 2.5 billion people in Asia. The economies are growing at 8
and 10 per cent a year. It is going to be a wealth phenomenon
unprecedented in human history and we are in the middle of it.
And to not understand that, to say that we are obsessed with it as
Mr Downer says, or to be looking as Mr Howard says to Whitehall and 
to Washington and not understanding that we are in the centre of the
biggest growth phenomenon in history..
J: Yes.
PM: is not to be able to lead this country properly.
J: Okay, Prime Minister, let's turn to domestic matters and plenty has
been happening in the past few days. But, overall, this is a
competition of promises, expensive ones too, and I know you have
been asked this before and it may irritate you, but why won't you throw
open the books as your opponents are asking you so that we can see
whether a surplus really does exist?
PM: Well let me just put the question this way. Let's say it was a November
election, the Budget is introduced into Parliament in October and it is
passed in November, so what would we do in a November election
go and re-do the whole Budget, wind the Treasury up into another
huge forecasting round? You know, would the Budget, just two months
old, not be good enough?
So what does that tell us? It tells us there should be a principle here
and the principle here should be the publication of the forward
estimates of receipts and outlays, publication of the forward estimates
of the Budget balance, and the within year reconciliations and at the
appropriate time because the forecasting round is a very large
undertaking, it takes a long time and it requires huge resources.
And let's say with this election, I called it for 2 March. From the day
I called it to the development of a forecasting round, the election would
just about be over probably over before it was complete.
J: But can you fund your promises? Are you confident of what Treasury
has been telling you and Ralph Willis and Mr Beazley?
PM: When I was the Treasurer, I was the first Treasurer in history ever to
produce a Budget surplus. I produced four of them. Mr Willis has
produced this Budget surplus and the Budget, in prospect, for the
out-years is in surplus.
By contrast, Mr Howard left me, as Treasurer, the equivalent today of a
Budget deficit of $ 22 billion.
J: He says you exaggerate that.
PM: Well it was 4 1/ 2 per cent of GDP. Go and pick up the Treasury
documents from 1983/ 84. 4 1/ 2 per cent of GDP. GDP this year, Paul,
is $ 520 billion. What is 4 1/ 2 per cent of $ 520 billion about
$ 22 billion. 
J: Okay.
PM: So, in other words, in his sly trickiness he sat mum on the real
numbers in the critical days of an election campaign and then left the
Government of the day, us, saddled with a $ 22 billion problem.
J: He is saying that you might be sitting mum in the same way?
PM: But what is the debate whether the Budget is in surplus or not, not
$ 22 billion in deficit. I mean the debate is a joke of a debate. I mean
he is out there saying, ' I will legislate to stop this'. I said yesterday it is
like Ronald Biggs saying he won't rob trains anymore. I mean this is a
man who has the singular distinction of producing the largest fiscal
deterioration in the history of our federation.
J: These 100 very wealthy, allegedly, tax avoiders who will net you
$ 800 million, I think, extra in revenue. Why suddenly discover them
during a campaign?
PM: Because we gave the Tax Office the resources to do enhanced audits
and surveillance of individuals and ran these massive computer
programs to find the commonality of these hundreds of trusts.
Some taxpayers have six or seven hundred trusts, ostensibly all
independent and different and not having common names.
It is not easy, Paul, and the Tax Office found that and first notified the
Government first notified the Government in November.
So we have taken the obvious steps. It took John Howard three years
to deal with tax avoidance and in the 1970s and the early 1980s, the
tax avoidance wasn't avoidance, it was criminal evasion and it took
him three years to do something about it and he only did it when he
had a Royal Commission report around his ears.
J: You have made the point this week that we have got a growing
economy. Do you fear that inflation will take off and, the old cycle
again, you will have to raise interest rates?
PM: No. Well, Paul, let me just go back to what we promised last election.
We would start growth. What have we had on average for three
years, 4 1/ 2 per cent. We said we would go to 500,00 jobs.
What have we got to 713,000. We said we would produce low
inflation. What have we had 2 1/ 2 per cent. In other words, we have
had the trifecta and been right at the top of the western world league
table.
J: And yet that awful problem of youth unemployment remains. What can
you do about that?
PM: Let's try and get this into perspective again because there is so much
confusion put about it. There are 1.3 million young Australians 
between the age of 15 and 19. 88,000 now are out of work. That is
6.78 per cent.
J: It is a lot.
PM: I know, but it is not 30 per cent. What the Liberals try and imply is that
per cent of the 15 to 19 year olds are out of work. It is only
per cent when I say, only, it is 20-odd per cent which is again
too high of the group looking for work.
J: Yes.
PM: But if you take it as a group there is 1.3 million young Australians in
the 15 to 19 group, the numbers looking for work are less than the
unemployment rate in the general population.
J: So you can assure parents, concerned parents, desperately
concerned parents, that you are going to get results on this?
PM: Well young people are taking jobs up at a rate of knots, Paul, and we
are getting there were 158,000 young people 15 to 19 unemployed
when John Howard left office. There are 88,000 this day, this month.
Now, I think, those clear statistics make it very clear. But the more
general point is there are 1.3 million young Australians in this group
and 6.78 per cent are unemployed.
J: Prime Minister, how do you answer the jibe from many critics, not just
your political opponents, that 13 years hard Labor is long enough?
That even your Cabinet must be tired and jaded, even possibly
yourself?
PM: Well over half the Cabinet were not there three years ago.
The Government is, in fact, four years old. It was a new Government
when I became Prime Minister, with a new policy direction and we
used the opportunity in 1993 to turn over half the Cabinet. In fact, in
1983 the average age of the Government was 47 years.
Now, 13 years on, the average age is still 47 years and why is it still
47 years, because so much new blood has come into the Government,
come into the Cabinet.
J: Sure, but then how do you counteract that feeling that might well be
out there in the electorate, give John Howard a go?
PM: Yes, a change.
J: Why not give him a go because that wily old campaigner and former
colleague of yours, Graham Richardson, thinks that they are coasting
to victory? 
PM: Well they say a change, time for a change. But a change to what?
To John Howard, to Tim Fischer, to Alexander Downer, to
Peter Costello, to Bronwyn Bishop?
J: So you are saying there is no reason to change?
PM: I mean how could anyone believe that John Howard, and Tim Fischer,
and Alexander Downer, and Peter Costello, and Bronwyn Bishop
would run this country and understand the issues better than I, who
have been there in a ministerial office for this time; Kim Beazley, my
Deputy; Gareth Evans, the Foreign Minister; Ralph Willis, the
Treasurer. I mean there is something very valuable here and, I think, the nation
will be very careful before they destroy it for something of much less
value.
J: Do you think the nation is getting sick of your personal style? I mean
I know you think that arrogance is a stupid charge, but I mean do you
think they are getting sick of it?
PM: Well it is a stupid charge. I mean real arrogance is not showing
people your policies, not telling people what you will do and that is
what Mr Howard has shown right through the period he has been
Opposition Leader. ' I won't show that Mr Keating my policy', he says.
But I only get one vote, Paul. What he is really doing is not showing
the Australian people and that is real arrogance. I mean that is rancid
arrogance and it may suit the Liberals to say, ' They don't like my
debating style'. But my democratic style is exceptionally democratic.
And you know the day before yesterday when I said, we would have a
plebiscite to see whether Australians wanted an Australian Head of
State, wanted an Australian person as their Head of State...
J: And yet Bill Hayden says we have got one already?
PM: Mr Howard said it was cheap populism. In other words, if we ask each
Australian elector to cast a vote, it is cheap. But we have 300 people
appointed by him, locked in a room, as a convention, that is all
democratic.
J: But he says your plebiscite is just a toy one.
PM: Well they always have these elite, anti-democratic sentiments.
What I am trying to say to you is we put our policies out there, we
explain ourselves, if we want to move to something like a republic we
will ask the nation. It is the biggest poll you could ever have. It is the
most democratic expression you could ever give and for Mr Howard to
say it is cheap, reflects I think very poorly on him. 
J: Alright, Prime Minister. Let's get on to multicultural ism and, of course,
that has been much in the news over the past few days and
immigration and, of course, it means recognising the marvellous
diversity of Australia. But how do you allay the fears of some
Australians, dare I suggest it Graeme Campbell, that in some way it is
a fad?
PM: I think the event of great significance to Australia in this century has
been the post-war migration program. It has made Australia a
stronger, more diverse, more interesting, more vibrant place. It has,
if anything, strengthened our own democratic fabric and what the
Coalition did this week, in terms of their costings, in terms of their cuts,
they are going to take about 10 per cent of their total cuts
$ 600-odd million off migrants, off the children of migrants.
Mr Howard says he is a family man, but he is not for the dependants of
migrants and after a couple of years here, migrants slip into the same
unemployment patterns as the rest of the country. So why would you
not support them with Social Security or unemployment benefits if
other than for callous reasons? Why wouldn't you support their
children? Why are they now altering the family reunion category so
now they are making English a prime requirement for family reunion?
That means for most families, a lot of families, that mothers and
fathers, and sisters, and brothers, will not be joining them here.
J: Right and, of course, none of this you would do, all your commitments
will stay the same. You don't think you are being a bit savage on
Mr Howard though do you?
PM: Oh, well, Paul, let me just go to the details, let me not leave you with
any impression that 370,000 people born outside Australia take a
new job. Under Mr Howard, they are to end up in jobs with poor pay
and conditions and there will be no alternative support in the Social
Security system.
per cent of Mr Howard's savings, a huge part of his Budget, relies
on attacking these most vulnerable people, that is those who have
been here for less than two years and their children.
On immigration he is saying that he ' would be much tougher in respect
of imposing an English language requirement across the board for the
concessional family component', making it much tougher for families to
reunite and the funding for citizenship education he will slash by
$ 16 million.
So you have got the candidate in Leichhardt for the National Party in a
derogatory remark saying that they are de-wogging ceremonies and
then you have in the expression of their Budget cuts, $ 16 million being
cut away for citizenship. In other words, they won't be encouraging
citizenship. At the same time if people are here, they will attack the 
cohesion, the social cohesion, and family values of the country by
leaving them to fend for themselves.
J: Okay, well, that is what you are saying. We are coming to the end and
I want to put it to you that you have said that if John Howard were to
win, progress in this country would stop. I mean how can you justify
that?
PM: Because he is always looking backwards. He has no faith, really, in
what we have created here, no belief that Australians can do as good
as anyone else in the world. We are sitting in the highest growth area
of the world, he wants to walk around it. He wants to walk back to the
low growth areas of the world, to Westemrn Europe and to
North America. He just doesn't understand the imperatives of
leadership. He is not thoughtful about the sort of society we ought to
be. He says, for instance, a republic is a diversion where, in fact, it is
completely central to how we see ourselves. That is why I believe a
move to Mr Howard is a step back down the time tunnel.
J: Alright then, Prime Minister, we must leave it there. Many thanks
indeed for coming on to Dateline.
PM: Thank you, Paul.
ends 



TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MPD
ARTS POLICY LAUNCH, PLAYHOUSE VICTORIAN ARTS CENTRE,
MELBOURNE, 17 FEBRUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
Thank you indeed. One has always got to think laterally. There arb cures!!
You know, through that dreadful experience of the 1993 election -mpaign
when the Huns and Visigoths were out there before us nothing so brightened
me up or cheered me up as the support you gave me and us in 1993 and
I think you have done it again. I can't tell you how moved I was by your
reception of Annita and me and the things that Wendy ( Harmer) and
Jacki ( Weaver) and Hugo ( Weaving) have said about the Labor Party and
also about me and my colleagues. Fred Astaire once said if I had a tear
drop, I could just cry'. But, I could have done one better than Fred, I could
have cried without one.
At any rate we are all here, I think, celebrating the same thing. This is not so
much a celebration of 13 years of Labor and what it has done for the arts, but
as much a celebration of what the arts mean to everyone of us. To all of you,
who are part of the arts in this country or who support them, to me, to my
colleagues, to all of us who know just how important it is.
I think, that it was one of the things that Wendy said that, I think, I was very
happy to hear and that is that now in this country people appreciate the arts
as though they are entirely central to our life. Entirely central to our national
life, not just some thing off on a tangent on the side, but a manifestation of
the way we are. And that they are not just something the government gives
grants to or has bodies for or supports companies of, but that they are, of
their essence, central to the way we are. Because, I think, all of us feel that it
is only in a free society, it is only in a truly democratic one that has got good
values in that space and intellectual freedom does the richness bubble to the
top and we get the distilled essence of ourselves and the celebration of what
we are and what we have become.
Those words that Jefferson once used and wrote in that great American
document about human happiness life, liberty and human happiness
human happiness is the core and central objective of government. There can
be no manifestation of human happiness if our mood is crestfallen, if we are
downcast, if we are subjugated, if we are intimidated, if our creativity and our
expression is not allowed to move, we will never see the manifestation in
what we call the arts.
So, when we see a country that has vitality and vibrance in the arts we know
that we are truly making it as a society. That we have got that happiness
there and that we have got that creativity and that space that a deep
democracy does give everybody. I think that is what we are really
celebrating. We are celebrating all of that and we are celebrating the
manifestation of it in celebrating the arts. 
I
My opponents say of me " you only want to give things back to the arts, you
only want to pay back the arts." I say too right I do, and I will never repay
them. I will never repay them. When I say ' I I mean it in the plural. We will
never repay them because you can't recompense, in monetary terms,
something which is central to the spirit of the nation and it is about a
celebration of the spirit and the understanding of the spiritualism of the arts is
the reason we will never repay them. We will try and we may do some things
better than others, but we will never repay them because of their essence
that richness and spirituality is something that comes from people, from
institutions, it comes from their up spiritedness, their good naturedness, it
doesn't come because of a government cheque. I am an indefatigable
warrior for the arts and I always will be. And we will resist our opponents
when they attack us.
But I think the proof of the importance of the arts is there with our Aboriginal
people who were here before all of us. For against the ravages of 40,000
years dance and music and history and religion and story telling kept them
together as a civilisation, as a community and even withstood the ravages of
the rest of us. That is where I think our lesson is and if we can do, as a
society, as they have done with that sense of belief in themselves, in
ourselves and pride in ourselves as they have then our arts in this country
will have succeeded.
I don't know of any country that has been so singularly blessed as we have.
To think that just four times our life time ago there was this large continent
inhabited by this old people who have now bequeathed us, shared this with
us, is one of the great perhaps accidents of history, one of the great
benefactions of history. We are now appreciating, I think, what a great
benefaction is as population growth and the pressures of modern life change
the way people live in the world we just the 18 million of us have inherited
this vast continent. We have got a chance to do something with it, we have
taken the great change in the post war years, the greatest risk but the
greatest reward of our time here and that was the post war migration policy
and as a consequence we now celebrate our diversity, our strength, we
rejoice in the vitality it has given us. It has made us new. This diverse
nation, this vibrant group on this continent with this old society, in this old
place, in this country we love has a chance to make us, as a nation state,
unique in the world.
Now for the first time in our history, we are living with other peoples around
us as we have never lived before. I often, when you look at the Liberals and
their subliminal messages about the good old days of the 1950s and 1960s,
the days of the monoculture, the days when all around us, when the sun
might have been shining on Australia and on Britain, maybe, and on the
United States and on Canada but there wasn't much sun shining on Burma or
on Indonesia or on Indochina, on Vietnam or on China itself. I mean these
were dark days with the Burmese in their utter subjugation. The Indonesians
and their desperate poverty. The Vietnamese fighting back the yoke of
colonialism and the Chinese trying to organise themselves into a nation with
some bounty. Now we look around us and we find their freedom emerging, 
their income growth rising, their pride in themselves, the celebration of their
cultures and their invitation to us to join them. For the first time in our life
time, the sun is really shining brightly on the whole world, not just on a couple
of places. That is what is on offer to us. To be part of that because what is
happening around us in east Asia is a phenomenon without precedence in
human history.
I said the other day at the Policy Launch, you just might recall that the
industrial revolution created so much wealth in Britain the British built abbeys
to themselves across the English countryside and it came from somewhere
between 10 and 20 million people. In the United States when the Fricks and
the Carnegies and the Rockefellers put their fortunes together and built the
great businesses of America and the railroads opened up the country and the
mines created the wealth and the mansions were built all along Fifth Avenue
and in Baltimore and in Pennsylvania, right through the United States, it was
done of a population of somewhere between 40 and 70 million. Just imagine
what is going to happen with 2.5 billion people, with economies growing at
8 and 10 per cent a year. The revolution, the production of wealth, the flux
that is going to come from that will have no precedence in human history.
The emergence of China into the world economy all 1.2 billion of them
knows no historic precedence and we are right in the middle of it. Right in
the centre and we have got a gilt edged invitation to come to the party, to be
part of the life of this.
But, imagine going there without a strategy. Imagine going there without a
sense of yourself. Imagine having the great inheritance of this continent and
this people and going there uncertainly. Going there almost as though you
shouldn't be there. That is why it is entirely central, it is fundamental to our
future both economically, socially, culturally that we know who we are and
that we celebrate who we are and we express ourselves and why it is
important that we define ourselves and why the arts do these things for us.
Why it is important to have an Australian as our head of state, because we
can't go as some derivative society with the head of state the monarch of
another country and present ourselves as a unique people.
Yet, the Liberal Party says that the republic is a distraction. They say that
I use it only to get away from the big issues. But when I say hang on we said
we would produce 500,000 jobs and we have produced 713, 000. We said
we would make the economy again, we have grown faster than any other
western world economy, we have done it with three per cent inflation. What
do you think I am distracting from?
The other day when I said we would put a plebiscite to the Australian people
to ask them the question: do they want an Australian as the Australian head
of state? John Howard, quick as a flash, came out and said it was cheap
populism. To ask each Australian what their opinion is he says is cheap, but
to have 300 people boxed up in a room appointed by him in some convention
is democratic. So, they attacked the notion that we should know who we are
and that we could only proceed if we are completely certain of our identity 
and our strength and that we celebrate ourselves and that we take something
to this great change in the world and that we are part of it.
The arts is not just something for our quiet enjoyment. It is not just something
that governments do because it is the right thing to do. It is entirely
meaningful about the sort of country we are, the kind of democracy we have,
why we should invest in our creativity because without it, we will wander
around as waifs in a world of opportunity when it is really ours to claim.
We are now back, again, talking about these things. We are talking about
the importance of these things. The importance of the arts, its importance to
the country and what the Government has done for them.
I know three years ago that people thought that the arts were gravely
threatened. We had Fightback, we had John Hewson. They thought in the
deprivation of the economy, with a recession and high unemployment we
were dead meat and so instead of being subtle, they were unsubtle. They
said how about this, a Goods and Services Tax, we will rip up Medicare, we
will cut $ 10 billion out of the social wage, we will knock around the ABC, we
will gut the arts, what do you reckon about that? People gave them the
answer at the end. A lot of artists, I think, thought the game is really up for
grabs here. We are going to have to tuck in and defend the things we
believe in. But, in some respects, there was a boyish naivety shall we say
about John Hewson. You know, rushing in there with a document seeking a
mandate, in many respects quite an honourable thing to do. Seeking support
for the model he believed in.
But, in some respects, this election is far more dangerous for the people who
have belief in this country, who have faith in it. Because now you have a
campaign organised by cynics. You know, the warped intellect of Staley, that
absolute canister of cynicism in Robb their Federal Secretary and a Federal
Leader in John Howard who just wants to be himself and they won't let him.
He said ' look, I want to do the things I I want to cut wages.' No, no you
can't, no, no, John you can't do that. ' But that Medicare, I want to rip it up'.
And they say ' no, not yet John, not yet, not yet.' He went out there and they
put him in the forest and he said ' I thought we got rid of all of these'. They
have made him into another person and he is unhappy about it. He is waiting
to break out. He is waiting to break out. But when he does, all of their
cynicism about Australia, their belief in other places really, the fact that they
don't have much faith in us they have always seen us as some sort of
derivative place that they can get a quid from, make a buck from, live the
comfortable life from, perched in some good suburb, or on some harbour
foreshore and taking the occasional trips back to the places that they really
have their commitments to.
This is the sort of thing they will try and do and yet we say, look, for years we
have been saying these things: universal health is good, trees are good,
wages are good, the Arbitration Commission is good, the arts are good and
they don't believe us. They don't believe us. 
And here he is like Indiana Jones in some exotic place, in places he has
never trod Medicare, industrial relations, forests, the environment
discovering it all for the first time and we are supposed to be grateful, say, we
have humanised them, we are grateful.
I am sure when I came on here today I thought this was the set from
' Future Directions', you remember that thing which was published. But that is
them, isn't it? I mean that is them. In a sense, they define the rest of us by
being around. We don't mind them being around, we only mind them being in
charge. I mean Peter Costello said this when we launched the first ever Cultural
Policy for the country in Creative Nation he said, ' It has got to be' I mean
he is such a berk isn't he ' It has got to be a contradiction in terms, hasn't it?
I mean a Government arts policy. It has got to be a bit of a joke, doesn't it, to
run around and say at a time when everybody says you should be reducing
your expenditure. Here is another $ 250 million, some of it for people who are
quite wealthy or getting these artist grants.'
You see it is so perceptive, isn't it? It is so perceptive. And then, of course,
Mr Downer our little curly headed mate he said when he was the Leader,
when he was a Shadow Arts Minister, ' That a Coalition Government would
have the power to veto Australia Council grants'. Well there we are, cop that
one. And the Council be reduced to an advisory body, advising people like
Alexander Downer and Peter Costello and Tim Fischer and John Howard.
And Howard, back in the 1980s, when he was actually leading the Liberal
Party on that occasion, he then announced plans to abolish the Department
of the Arts, Heritage and the Environment and with it the Australian Film
Commission. I mean they are such a sweet little group, aren't they?
But now he is a convert. He says he is going to agree. He has ticked
Creative Nation, $ 250 million, he will have that. He said he is going to kick in
more money $ 21 million of it actually from that funded by the Government's
Budget last year and these sorts of things.
Well we really know about them and I suppose reciting their form gives us a
bit of fun, but not much joy. But let's recite some of the things, I think, we
have done and tried to do with you and for you.
We have put the Arts into Cabinet and Michael Lee, our Minister, is with us
today. We have also joined it up with the Department of Communications.
So it is Arts and Communications because we know how central this matter is
communications, the growth of communications and how it can never be
untwined from the arts.
We have bolstered the Australia Council and we have extended its brief to
Hillary Macphee and Michael Lynch who are bravely turning it into the
responsive and innovative organisation it should be and, I think, they are
doing well. 
We have set up a whole new set of important cultural institutions the
National Academy of Music, the Foundation for Culture and Humanities here
in Melbourne, and there is a lot of money around in this country now a lot of
bread. You can see with that change we are going to make to the tax system
on trusts. I mean how mean-spirited they are, some of these characters.
If they just gave any of that sort of money to the Foundation for Culture and
Humanities, the arts would get a gigantic kick along.
The National Indigenous Performing Arts Academy in Brisbane, the Gallery of
Aboriginal Australia in Canberra, the National Museum of Australia, the
Production Fund in Melbourne for the mini-series and the telemovies, and we
have got some other things to say and I would just like to mention a few of
those. We are setting up an Independent Music Development Corporation to
encourage independent production of contemporary music and develop a
touring circuit for bands. Now we should do this.
We are investing another $ 12.8 million in new regional cultural facilities, or in
the refurbishment of existing buildings and we will establish a series of
fellowships for outstanding regional arts groups, or companies, and provide
funding to promote regional artists and bring them into the national audience.
We will extend copyright protection for artists working to life, plus 70 years.
So it is life, plus 70 years. We will set up an Australian Copyright Office and
implement arrangements for performers copyright and indigenous copyright.
And here in Melbourne beyond the changes we have made already with the
Production Fund and the National Academy of Music on the site of
Essendon Airport, we will establish a National Film and Multimedia Centre, a
world-class precinct comprising film, television and multimedia development
studios; contemporary music video production facilities; operating officers for
local and international writers and publisher, creators and producers; and
laboratories and support facilities.
Now this is a mighty site that has been reserved to us by just the
development of airports in this city. It is about 340 hectares and it is
kilometres from the city and it offers a great opportunity and I am very
pleased to announce today that Mr Jack Smorgon has agreed to Chair the
new Essendon Centre Development Authority which will oversee the
development. We are giving $ 4 million to establish a Youth Programming Unit in the ABC in
Melbourne. We will provide another $ 1.6 million through the Australia
Council to establish a National Theatre of Cultural Diversity in Melbourne.
And we are going to build a home for the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra in
Hobart. 
And as we have been one of the prime movers in establishing APEC, which is
now the primary piece of political architecture in the Asia-Pacific, we are
going to invite the 17 other members of APEC to participate in an inaugural
festival of the Asia-Pacific in Brisbane in 1997.
I think these things will tend to round out what we have been doing, what we
have been able to accomplish, and we will of course be, as implied they are
not only maintaining our financial commitments to the arts in general, but
improving them.
But I am very pleased about those initiatives and especially with the last one,
inviting the APEC countries to come here because that gets back to the point
we have got a gilt edged invitation and we will be, I think, carried along by
the excitement and the growth of this region. And the opportunities we will
have to enjoy their culture and they ours because we have got so much to
give and we want to show people what we have got to give and as we have
been pretty much the architects of this, we can be the architects of an
international cultural festival of this kind and, I think, this is going to be
important to us.
Could I just say that, you know, the dear old French we have been fighting
them for years over various things. But we do some good things with them
too. They have been letting off nuclear weapons in the Pacific for years and
we set up the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and they are now
going to sign it.
We have been arguing with them about agriculture in Europe, in the
Uruguay Round, for years and we basically had a victory over them there.
But they are capable of some very good things as we all know. In fact, some
of us rather like them. And a couple have come to my mind. One is, that
when Michel Rocard first became Prime Minister, it was really a funny day.
Don Russell and I Don is with me today, you can't miss him when he comes
into a crowd Don and I were in Paris and we had this appointment to see
Michel Rocard. He had been Prime Minister for six weeks, no Australian
Minister had met a French Premier for, I think, ten or twelve years to this
point.
And I said to Don, we have got an hour and a half and we may as well knock
over the shops around the Rue de Bac and those places. And I dragged Don
in and out of all these places and I said we have got a quarter of an hour to
get there, we had better go.
We got in the car and we are heading for the Hotel Matignon and down the
street, I can't recall its name now, the Rue de Lauren I think it is, there was a
traffic jam and the time was passing, and the appointed time had arrived and
I said, we are going to have to hot-foot-it. So out of the car we got, down the
street we got, and we walked in the gate of the Hotel Matignon and the guard
said, ' No, no, you can't pass. Who are you?' I said, well I am the Australian
Finance Minister and this is my Adviser and after some trouble we got past
them to a waiting Michel Rocard at the door and we sat down and we talked 
about the Matignon Accords in French Polynesia and then he said to me,
' You know, the President and I want to do something for the bicentenary of
the Revolution next year.' And he said, ' We thought about setting up an
environmental protection agency, an international one.' And I said, well that
is a noble idea, Michel, but you and I will be very old people before that ever
happens. And he said, ' Well you are a fraternal party, what about thinking of something
we can do together'. And I said, well I have got an idea for you, but I am in a
minority of two in my Cabinet and that is to turn Antarctica into a wilderness
park. And five days later they, the French, were to sign after ten years of
negotiation, the Minerals Convention in Antarctica, which would have seen all
the big powers ripping it apart, mining for oil, looking for minerals, and we
stopped them and we signed it as it turned out and we put Antarctica away for
years until we understand more about it. That is one good thing we did
with them.
The other good thing is at the end of this acrimonious Uruguay Round when
our friends, the Americans, put the weights on us from Hollywood, we joined
with the French in refusing the Americans their wish on audio visual. And
having, sort of, thrown off the colonial culture that pervaded so much of the
arts in Australia for so much of our history, having succeeded in that, we were
not to have then laid upon us the culture of the United States, or worse
simply caught up in the global homogenisation of culture. And that is a threat
to us, it is a real threat to us. But you won't meet the threat by shying away
from it, you will only join it by meeting it.
And really, I suppose, in many respects, this is what we are doing. We know
it is coming. But with all of these countries around us, in APEC, in the
Pacific, in Asia, they want their cultures too and we have got in APEC half the
world's population, over half the world's population and 60 per cent of the
world's GDP. And that means we can, basically, keep our cultural freedom if
we are good at it, if we are quick enough. And if we are committed enough to
the things we believe our culture, about the unique quality of it, about its
peculiarly Australian characteristics and how important that is to us as a
country. So many of these institutions that I am speaking of today and the ones we
have created and the ones we are using well already, and whether it is a
celebration of our pigs, or our dance, or whatever it might be, it is ours and
we are out there and we are going to keep it. It is important that we put,
indelibly, our own stamp on the arts and that they are ours and when people
see them they know they represent this unique nation, this country
Australia. Now I have talked for too long, but I want to finish on these points. Never has
there been a time when it has been more important to have belief in
ourselves, to have faith in who we are and what we have created here. And
to be contemplating now, looking back, or trying to embrace a group that do
not want to celebrate it, don't quite understand what it is, and for the 
opportunity of the greatest economic phenomenon in history, to say as they
are saying now they don't want to be in it. They really say, we are obsessed
with Asia. ' The Government is obsessive', says Downer about Asia.
They are saying, they want to make relationships stronger with our Western
allies, meaning they really want the drive down Whitehall again and they
want the limo on Pennsylvania Avenue. And we have all done that and that
has its particular joys for the moment. In fact, when Hawkey went around to
see Reagan in a big black limo, I told him it would have been easier to go in a
Yellow Cab and he said, ' That is the thing about you, you have got no
understanding of protocol.'
But, at any rate, this is where our conservative colleagues want to be and we
like these countries, we have cultural affinities with them, we will always keep
them. But our future is here, our future is in this part of the world, and our
heritage is this great old place, and we will only really succeed if we celebrate
it in a way which reflects upon the creativity and the democracy and the
intellectual freedom we have created here and take it and transport it into the
countries around us where it will be received with great joy.
This is really the role of the arts in this country, the defining role and this is
what we are really here celebrating today. Not just 13 years of support by the
Labor Party, but the fact that the Labor Party understands this and that you
understand it and that, together, we are all part of it. Thank you for today.
ends 



19/ 02 ' 96 07: L5 1 ' 61 6 273 2923 PMl PRESS OFFICE @ l~ l
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MiP
PRESS CONFERENCE W) ITH PARTIES TO THE CAPE YORK AGREEMENT. RAW~ SON
HOTEL, CAIRNS, SUNDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
PM: I have had a meeting today with my colleagues who are with me who-are the parties
to the Cape York Land Use Agreement. and .1 must say, I have beoti tremendously
impressed with the attitudes which have been expressed in the meeting. The
decjarations of good wi1 which people have had and, I think, the recognition that to try
to give people the benefts of the Cape and the quiet enjoyment of iffe free of
perpetual litigation, free of arguments about land use, free of conflicting pressures
over its heritage values, but rather to come together and see this as a way in which
all the parties can secure something greater for themselves and the country is the
way lo proceed.
It is the very: essence of an act of regional. reconciliation and the whole process of
reconciliation which. I think, has been mightily advanced by Mabo and the Native Title
Act. In a sense by empowering Aboriginal people and giving them legal rights over
lands for which they have traditional soiaio has meant that this has started to
move the log ) amn In some of these regions so that we can perhaps approach them
now on a regional basis.
You might know that under the Native Title Act there is a provision there for regional
agreements. What we have here is not a regional agreement as under the Native
Title Act, but a movement a long way towards one with the land use agreement within
which the interests of the pastoralists represented here by the Cattlemen's' Union, the
Aboriginal people by the Cape Yorki Land Council and the ATSIC Regional Council
and also by, of course, the conservation foundation and The Wilderness Society in
terms of the w~ orld heritage values.-it offers us a very uplifting opportunity to actually
see the Cape being developed on a sustainable basis, operated on a sustainable
basis where the heritage values are protected and where we have a secure pastoral
industry. but one which itself operates in a way which is harmonious with the
aspirations of Aboriginal people on the Cape.
This is the very essence of what the Commonwealth Government has sought to do
with the recnciliation process and with the Native Title Act and also with those other
policies such as Landcare land use programs such as Landcare and the Rural
Adjustment Scheme which we have introduced as more general programs which will
aiso have application on the Cape. Looking at property planning, whole of farm
management sustainable agriculture and then later if we are to head towards 8 full 
1% 9/ Y0~ 61' 96 607 : 52 73 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE02
2
regional agreement whiere we would, at that point need to inrvolve the State of
Queensland we* can took then at the proper resourting of the area in terms of
sewerage, environmental health issues, roas, housing, et cetera.
For the moment. -I think this is if you like, a cofltfion of very significant concessions
which have been made to accommodate each of the parties aspirations and I am
very happy to Support the agreement and we will jupport the agreement on the basis
of an assessme. nt of the Worid Heritage values ' and establsh a fund of $ 40 million
over four years which, of course, we have provided funding for In the Labor ParIs
funding arrangements for the ensuing Parliament But it will be $ 40 million in a fund
for over four years for the non-compulsor acquisifon of high conservation value
pastoral hoidings and alao using part of the fund to support sustainable management.
Theme is no one " uhortty that can speak for this region. There is no one group and It
we are to reafise its great heritage potential and underline its sustanablity, at the
same time provide for the more adequate enjoyment and use of the land by
Aboriginail people then this I'm sure, is the way to go and I would like to take the
opportunfity of very sincerely congratulating the parties on this very great initiative. It
is an -absolute model of reconciition of differences and advancement of a common
interest and I hope it can be a model to be used -further in Australia and hopefully, at
some point~ move down the road of a full regional agreement under the Native Title
* Act Perhaps I could also say with the tourism assets in this region that ame also so
manifest and with the World Heritage area the Daintree that which the Government
has already undertken in funding the Daintree and World Heritage area back in the
1980s and now committing another, with the State of Queensland, $ 22 million to
buying back the properties in the hoie-ir-the-heart. It rually means from Mo~ man to
the top of Cape York we can onceive of an area where with somne recognition of
everyone's irnterests, Gupport for the heritage values, understanding the importance
of sustabity and some financWa support from the Commonwealth through this and
with more generaffy fta other Landceare programs we can conceive an area whc very
few courdries would ever have the opportunity of ever being able to consider for the
ntational heritage of their country as wse can this for Australia.
I am very happy to finish my remarks there. I am not sure whether my colleagues
would likte to add. to them, If they do they are welcom, otherwise I am happy as 1 am
sure they are, to take questions.
J: Mr Keating, do you think that this process implicitly recognises that resolution of
Native Tis issues through the tribunal process is flawed, that it isn't working?
PM: No, no, rnotatell-It isjutttevenwhen UWyare wrng tey are going to take
time and even if they take time there is going to be a legal process which is not
necessxarily going to suit all of the parties. Wheres what is being offered here is a
process which is one where all of the parties interests are beinmg met and this is the
beat way to advance it That is why in the Native Title Artwedcid conceive of the
notion of regional agreements. This Is a regional land use agreement, but part of that
land use agreement wl go to resolution of some of the native title issues which win
more adequately and expeditiously resolve some if the outstanding issues of which,
of course, on the Cape there are many.
19/ 02 ' 96 07: 51U012 
19'/ 2V 6' 16 60: 522 73 2923 PJ1 PRESS OFFICEQ~ 013
3
J: Do you think there is a better way forward than relying on the native title
PM: No. AIis just a case of both because in some places such agreements wi" not be
entered. I mean, such good-wil will not be shown where it can't be conceived that
interests can be met and they will be resolved by the proces of the Native Tide Act.
Part of the aft, ~ ton, the claity and strength of the Native Tifte Act is to let people
know that Aboriginal people do have rights aod they are going to need to be
accmmodted and to bring people to this sort o'a, process.
J. How do you expec the Stale Government to regad to this and how important is their
ag reemeit to it?
PM: I don't know. I don't know wtat a Borbidge governments, attitude would be to this. I
think we will consult wfth them over the agreement arnd plans for World Herltage
asessmenit and nomination, we wfi do that. I would like to think that like the Goss
government they will recognise. the considerable regional benefits for people here on
the Cape. In the end, it is not simply about the heritage vakues, but rather about the
communities on the Cape and that is important to. us and I should imagine it would be
important to the Borbidge government too. BuA in the end, in respect of these issues
the ultimate determinants of the issues here are the parties because we are not
seeking from the Borbidge government a full reqional Agreement. Not at this point
anyway.
J: Mr Howard has announced this morning that not only will he commit up to $ 40 rrullion
to protevting the high conservation areas of the Cape, but he will m~ so, engage in
discussion with Bob Borbidge and the Federal and Queensland Coalitons to work
together, to best implement the protection of these regions. * Has he stolen your
thunder and would he be better equipped to gain agreement from a Queensland
Coeon government
PM. He doesn't befieve in these issues, you know that. He has discmvered the
er-vronmerlt about two weeks ago. I mean, the Natie Title Act, his party said was a
' day of shame' when we passed iL It is the strength of the Native Title Act and also
our inter" s in the World Herftage areas from the -1980s onwards and our continuing
inrin theCape, think, whic providsao to fnanarement ofthis kind.
It is not just money it i3 commitment Mr Howard has neither the money nor the
commitment because he has said, apparently, that any funding of Cape York would
be dependent on the sate of Teistre and he knows that is not going to happen. It is
not going to proceed. He will not get the sale a( Telecom through the Senate.
Thefefvrehe has no funding for Ktand a3Mr Beazley made carlast week. he has a
$ 3 billion deflency in the funding he has already provided. So, he can afford to do
none of the things he is saying he will do.
J: Mr Kesting, would you not proceed with World Heritage nomination without the
agreement of the State government?
PM: I wouid firstly, raRther than jump at that, baulk at that particular propoaition, pay the
State goverme~ nt the courtesy, as I would any State governmeMt of seeking to
interest them in these values, If are tatking about en area whiich~ has the potential
of a World Heritage listing we are talking about something very unique and you have
got to be a very strange government not to be interested in somethin like that. I
qnvfImothat thay wuni IdheV
1 19/ 02 ' 96 07: 52 
19/ 26 1' 66 0: 2537~ 3 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE
4
J: unnecessary precondition though for proceeding?
PM: I would crtainly, beore I did anything else, have a very real and meaningful
discussion with the Borbidge government about ita
J: Does this agreement need to have legislative backing either at the State or Federal
level and what are the implications on both fronts?
PM: It would need, obviousty, an appropriation from the Commonwealth and it would be
for these World Heritage and management purposes here on the Cape. We would
make that clear because of its unique character and because what the parties have
done here is. I think. unique. We would propose to both houses of Parfiament an
appropriation to fund the agreement because the agreement is something in the
Commonwealth's imterest, in the nation's interest and worthy of that funding.
J: What agency. Mr Keating, do you im-egine managing the $ 40 milion fund and
carrying out the environ mental assessment?
PM: That is somnething we would need to think about. As you know we already have a
World Heritage Admini~ stration here Wert Tropics Adminiatrwtion " e ame speaking
here not of Wet Tropics, but we are spealing of sornethIng simiar. So, we would
need to think about that, whether Aist under the Department of the Environment or to
what edent we engage the Deparment of Primary Industries and Energy because of
a very large component of this Is the sustainability of pastoral practices and the
patoral industry, the development and growth of the pastoral industry on the Cape.
J: You were saying that there would be non compulsory acquiltn, but if theme was an
area of particularly high conservation value, potentially World Heritage value, do you
think there is a case for compulsory acquisition?
PM: It depends on whiethier they have been managed sustains* l. No one is going to cit
the land off, excise it off and floatit out to sea. ltI ging tobe threandIt is just a
matte of whether It is being managed sustainably. Therefore, I just don't thnk the
notion of compulion is appropriate here, It is a huge area of Australia and it can only
really be preserved if all the parties are interested in at. There is no government
authortty, no one authority can do this, It has got to be done by the people who live
there. Mr Diowney,-does the comments made by the Prime Minister today, bring the ACF
firmly boa in behind the Labor Patty, pertirularty in light of the commitments of Mr
Howard also seems to have made..
JO: That might be a point for me to make a couple of introductory comments if you don't
mind and I'll get to that question. About 10 minutes ago, I don't know wther people
are aware, but today is adluaty the highest tie in North Queenisland and it ooure
at 10: 30amn and ( think there are parallels we can* draw and say that the fide has also
turned for one of Austraba's natural and cultural areas and that is Cape Yorkc
Peninsula. In an age, as I have said before, when so many of this countys wild plae have
hman Ine anoq qwrfVarat itne4. a tho efPctrtinn thsat 1% 4 rnm u&amp;* k w*, n' 0m Zi014
1 19/ 02 ' 96 07: 53 
19/ 6' 019 0 76: 42 73 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE l 1
industia~ tion ' and in an age where 70 per cent of the country is in some form of
degradation and in an age where those greet wild p~ aces that haven't been protected
in the last deae and are not protected in the* no~ decada will almost certainly be
lost. Australians have stood up and said they want their icn 2reas protected. Over
the last decade we have had the big ones Kakadu, the Wet Tropics and the
Dainre, Frasr Island, the western forests of Tasmania and let's make no mistake
about it, Cape York Peninsula is also one of those big ones that ranks up there with
those. Whether it is because Cape York Peninsula contains one fift of Austrea's rain forest
including the largest low land tropical rain forest left in the country, whether it is
because it contains and significant vast amounts of old growth forest. tropical
savanna woodland that is probably the largest outside of Africa in the world, whiether
it is because ft contains the largest and richest and most diverse wetlands and
mangrove com munities in this county, 60 per . cent of Australia's butterflies. 80 per
cent of our orchard species, one pastoral lease on Cape York Peninsula contains a
quarter of all Austratlian frogs, all those natural values Cumulatively can only draw one
conclusion. That Cape York is, in fact, one of our great icon natural areas.
For that reason, today's announcement is a momentous occson. It does rank up
there with~ the big ones, the Kakedu the Wet Tropics and the Dahinre and the Fraser
island. I guess what I would like to say in conclusion and this drws me to your question, I'd
like to put out a call as the Executive Director of the Australian Conservation
Foundiation to al people in the conservation movement, to other groups and
environmerntaly. conscious voters out there in the community to get behind what will
be one of Australias greatest conservation achievements and that is the protection of
the nature and culture of Cape York Peninsula.
At the mwment, at least on one side of politics, I have seen the words, from the Prime
Minister as to what the ALP is prepared to commit Itseff to. I haven't seen the
Coalitions words, but what I would say is that there is one issue that is not a small
mater, andthati io u aa elTestato raisethe dough to pay for what yousay
you are going to do, then there is no way in my investigations over the last week and
a half and discussions with the Democrats, the Australian Greens and the Western
Australian Greens, that Teistra is gOng to be sold in the next term of the Parliament.
it is just not going to happen. This has to call into question the ability of the Coalition
to fund not only the $ 1.1 billion, by our calculations there Is $ 993 million, that won't
happen when Telstra isn't sold that it also means that the funding, I think, at this point
unless. there is a dramatic turn in the next week and a half of the protection of one of
Australia's great natural and cultural areas woon't happen either.
So, in condluding and I hope that has answered your question. In conclusion I would
like to say agpin that I am putting a call out to anl environmentally consckous people in
the community and the conservation movement to get right behind what will be one of
Australia's greatest conservation achievements
J: Mr Downey, when Mr Howard announced hMs policy a couple of wveeks ago in the
Dandenong you were standing in front of a microphone saying that the Coalition
policy was fantastic and that it puts both parties on equal footing. If in fadt Mr Howard
19/ 02 ' 96 07: 54Q 0 is 
19/ 2 61' 66 7.: 52 73 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE
6
has offered a similar amount of monery for a Cape York agreement. where are you
placed now?
JD: On the day that Mr Howard announced his policy I said three things. I can't help it ly
people just want to report one of the three, but the three were that there was some
excellence In the content of the poliy, there was significant uncrtinty as to whether
it could ever be delivered because of the Jink with Telstra and there was
disappointmnent -The disappointment being therabandonment of the Three Mines
Uranium policy which wigt almost cettainly mnean a big hole, in the middle of Kakadu
National Park.
Now, those three things were made very clear on the day. The next day we wrote to
Mr Howard expressing our serious concern about the ink with Teistra and the
uncattainty thiat that meant for the funding of his environment package, he hasn't
withdrawn that As Isay f there is o change in the next two weekstenour view s
that his environment package can't be defrered.*
J: So therefore, you are still holding out to the last minute to decide where your
allegiance will fie?
JD: What Ilil say isthat flt of all, Idon't got avote# asto the position of the ACF in the
election. that is up to my 37 eledted councllors. They will be holding a ballot on
Wednesday and we will make an announcement as to our position in the eleio on
Thursday. At the moment I can say without pre-empting that announcement that as
we stand here there is at least three major differences between the major perties as
we go into this assessment process that we will complete in the next three clays.
They are certainty for the protecton of one of Australia's great natural and cultural
areas ie Cape York Peninsula, the issue of the: abandonrnerit of the Three Mines
Uranium Policy which wa3 confirmed yesterday with the Coalition's release of their
Energy and Resources Policy and if you believe ERA Ltd that means a big hole in the
middle of Kakadu National Park and the undeierablity of the Coafition's environment
package while it stays linked to Teistra. Unless there is a change In the next week,
that is the basis upon which we will be prooedng up to our announcement on
Thurdy.
J: Mr Downey, is Cape York in your view the d~ tning environmental issue of this
election campaign?
JO: I would have to say that the field has been narrowed down a fair bit. Look, I really
-think tiat we made it clear 12 months ago that Cape York Peninsula waS going to be
a priority of ours in the lead up to the election. On behalf of the Australian
Conservationi Foundation it has been a campaign that has at least been running for
years and moved through mining at Shellboume Bay to the proposed space
station in the late 1980s with The Wilderness Society, Starcke and Silver Plains etc,
the land use strategy. It has been a long campaign. And for that reason, anid
coupled with its significant heritage values, it is definitely a priority.
As the field has got narroed down and as we have got into the eled~ ion, I think, from
the ACF's perspective it has emerged as the major priority. But. let's not forget a big
hole in the middle of Kakadu National Park i3 ilso a priority and whether or not
$ 993 million of a Party's policies can acually be defivered is a major issue as well.
1 19/ 02 ' 96 07: 55 
1' 9U/' 2660 1: 566 273 2923 PM1 PRESS OFFICE j01
7
J1: You seemed to be saying before that you think Labor is better equipped to deliver on
Cape York, than the Uiberai Party or the Caartion.
JD: Well, you see, the Coalition has got three problems, until they unhook from Telstra
they can't fund it that is number one. Number two, they have got to get it past the
Queensland National Party Federal Senators and Members, they have got to get it
past Mr Borbidge who is on the record as saying ' That World Heritage is nothing but a
disguise for a black land grab',-when referrng to Aboriginal people. And, thirdly,
Mr Howard has got to hold some pretty, I wouid suggest, meaningful disaissions with
the mining industry to be able to fund the heritage protecion in Cape York Peninsula.
For those three or four reasons, not the least of which is the funding issue, I think the
ALP is in front in terms of being able to deliver what will be a great conservation
outcome.
4: You almost seem to be advocating now a vote for Labor, don't you?
JD: Well I am not advocaing a vote for Labor, I am drawing attention to the differences
between the major parties. As I say, our announcement as to the elcto will be
trade on Thursday, I don't get a vote, there are 37 other people who do. But I know
weighing heavily in their minds, from discussions over the Last couple of days. the
three things I have mentiooed Te~ sre, uranium, and Cape York are weighing
heavily in their thin king.
J: The Prime Minister was just sayin that Atis a big step forward. How far are we? Are
we sort of half way there, a quarter of the way there? Is it achieving what soft of
goals you would eventualy like to achieve? It is a long process. Obviously, these
talks started in 1994
JD: Well the argy bargy over Cape York. really, in terms of land use decisio making, has
probably been going on for 20 years. To implement the agreemett I mean, therm are
a number of steps that have to be done the funding is over four years. I think that is
a reasonable amnount of time to progress the agreement, it is a reasonable amnount of
time to get the pastoral Industry seurity on a sustainatle basis, to get te Woold
Heritage assessments done, to get the nomigation in accss agreements for
Aboriginal people. sorted out. You know, we do ha ve some time to go.
This is a significant agreement and I am certainty, from the ACF's perspectie not
going to suggest we rush the whole thing and got It over and done with in so: months.
But, you know, we can spend a bit of time.
J: What is the rough timnetable? Are you looking at, say, by 2000 and have the issues of
Cape York resolved?
JD; Look, I think, in the next term of the Parliamnent wouid be a fair timeframne, over the
next three years.' I mean we are going to continue our discussions with Aboriginal
fraditional owners and the Catiernen's Union. World Heritage assessments arm not
small matters in themselves again. I rnean the World Heritage Bureau knocks back
morm listings than wh~ at it accepts at the momenta. nd it has got to be done property
and it has to be rigorous and that takes a bit of time.
19/ 02 ' 96 07: 56Q017 
19/ 02 ' 96 07: 57 % Y õ 273 2923PM RESOFC 408
J: I don't know if it is potsible. but can the Prime Minster respond to that as well? Does
he expect it to be done in the term of the next Parliament?
PM: The World Herftage risting. do you mean?
J: To have the issues finalised yes, the nomination?
PMV: Oh, I think. that is a reasonable aspiraton. -As Jim said, this is a matter which has
drawn owtain peoples attention now over a couple of decades and there has been
some substantial progress already been made. The other thing is, I( think, larnd care
and suxtainable land use has become, you know, so broadly accepted now flowing
from the Landcare program and the interests of people in agriculture in Australia that
we are not dealing with the same sort of issues, I think, we were deal'ing with half a
dozen years ago.
In other words, I think, people now believe sustainability [ s important, it is an objective
in itself, and Nf it is sustainable then proper land use management means that any
heritae task becomes that much more achiSvable. And dt you have got agruement
to do this you know, not just agreement, not just somne resigned agreement, but an
actual w~ firngnes. s to do this and to be party to an arrangement like this I think, then it
makes a very great difference about how quickly you can actually get these
utrucu458 into place.
J: Can I ask Noel Pearson a question? This agreement involved a lot of trust building
between all the parties. Do you think the approach taken hems Is applicable in, say,
WA and the NT where sorme of the disputes between parties have perhaps been
even mome bitter there than they have been here?
NP: Yes. . Iwant tosay thatIhave got agretdeal ofoptimism about thsgeementand
about the direction, I think, we are leading the country in. When we passed the
Native Title Act in late 1993, folowing the High Court's decision on, Mabo, I thought
this is areybgopportun havnCaeYork e w rk hard. We havesa big
opportunity, we have an apparatus in place that provides for claims to the National
Nativ Title Tribunal and for a process of regional agreement if we can get the major
players to come to common positions.
So we had thi apparatus put in place in late 1993 that Provided so much promise, so
much opportunity, so much cause for optimism. But I have got to say we are not
Ongfl to capitallse on those opportunities and possibilities until the parties on the
ground State Governments, regional Governments, Local Governments, industry
organizations, loby groups, and Aboriginal people are prepared to put the wor pu. t
the elbows the wheel, to make these opportunities materialise.
And the Prime Minister said to me some timne ago,. that you know you are gOng to get
agreement vrith these people if you frorit them, and you talk to them, and you come to
compromises with them because that is the framework of the legislation that has
been put in place.
So I gave that route a try because we had a iigation grinding on in the courts with the
Wick action and I gave the option of getting agreement with the Cattlemen's Union
and the conservation groups, I gave that option a try, and I fronted at Musgrave a
gmaiI rdftlp ntq$ nn in thp ri&amp; n Lf r~ f ~ rm PeriinattIn in tho m~ 1xrtf R fho
. PM PRESS OFFICEQ018 
19/ 6' 019 0 76: 72 73 2923 PMX PRESS OFFICE 1
9
turmoil after th Qlueensland Government's -announcement of the East Coast
conservation zone, a great deal of anxiety, confusion, anger, frustration, and on the
Pori oi pasoralist and Abio mi-ai ' eo* i And fiew jio Mus~ rave and i rernember
the charter ffying around and there was one hundred Toyotas parked out the front.
And I was about the only Aboriginal person in that gathering.
And by the end of -that meeting we had an unequivcl resolution from the
Cattlemen's Union that we ' wre going to settle these things by negotiation. We were
going to settle fthse things by negotiation founded on the principlee that the
Cattlemen's Union had set out a year earlier. Those piinoiples were about mutual
securtty, mutual benefit and mutual guarantee of rffesyle and culture.
And we got Rick Farley involved, and we worked -over a two to three month period to
put together the Heads of Agreemoent that we are now all conmitted to.
I have gotto syttaksa great dea ofwork, ittakes agreat dealf goowl1 and I
am just very pleased that the ldnd of promise and fah and optimism I had about the
Mabo decision and about the enactment of the Native Title Legislation, has yielded
fruit positive fruit in Far North Queensland. And it is fruit that we, as organisations,
on the ground are determined to hold, notwithstanding an of the politcal vagaries.
I have got to say that It is the route of agreement, rather than litigation is just one of
the two routes available under the Native Tie apparatus. We now need to go
through the next step of forrmalising agreements between lease holders and
traditional owners for accss arrangements and for the settlement of these issues
relating to Native Titie.
Two weeks ago, ithere was a High Court Decision in yaspedt of the Wasnyi peoples in
the Gulf a( Carpentaria where the High Court was asked by the Aboriginal dlaimants
and by the various parties to the litigation, asked' to determine the question of pastoral
leases and Native Titie. And the High Couts view wa that we have an apparatus in
the Native Title Act that provides for mediation and negotiation. An apparatus that
doesn't arbitrarily extinguish Native Title, it leaves that question for the court, to
determine. But it provide a proes of mediation and negotiation to settle these
issues. So, basicaly, the leadership of the High Court has been to you hrave an
apparatus, you have a process, go and work out those things through compromise
I use N you are going to come through litigation to the High Court. there will be
losers. if you are -going to come through litigation in the High Court, there will be
losers.
So there was a sieven-rul judgment in favour of the negotiation and compromise route
and I beleve that we have identified in this Heads of Agreement a compromise that
wil work best onf the ground In Cape York Peninsula, that provides security for John
Purceirs mob, for my mob and also secures the national interest in conseration
hefit" g.
So. I think, that I suppose not having participated In the debate down sot and
over the past two years, I have been buried up heme tyng to work on this agreement
am a bit dismayed about the cynidsm that seems to pervade the country, about the
19/ 02 ' 96 07: 57Q019 
19/ 02 ' 96 07: 58 V~ 61 6 273 2923PM RESOFC02
real possibilities that lie within our grasp, the real potentials and possibilities that lie
within our grasp.
And I have got to say that those possibilities .0aim
prelared to butt heads and come to corn prrni~ c* arid, i thiink, U-ic C-Opc York
agrevitr coming around a torturous route to answer your question I think this
agreement can be a model for other areas in. the country. Bt one of the great
impediments to reaching the stage where we have reached, is the political reluctance
of regional Governments.
I mean had we had intervention at the Stete Government level, we would never have
reached the stage we have reached now. We have come to this point because for
commercial, social, cultural reasons, just the, relationship with people who Wie in
Cowan, blein and white people who have to live with each other in Cooktowri. Those
are the imperatives that have led to us coming to this compromise and Kf we had
listened to the machintions and advice of people living in Brisbane, then I don't think
we would have reached this mzge.
And, I think, that it does involve leaerhip, it does involve leadership from the
Aborlglnsai community, from the pstoral industry community, end importantly, I think.
from the conservation movement We have taught the conservationists something
about coming to compromise because we are not going to secure a comprehensive
conservation and sustainble development reguie for the Peninsula unbi we
understand. in the rest of Australia, that these things need to be done in cooperation
with the land owners and the people who live in the region.
So I am extrem* l pleased to see that the country and I could never have imagined
this could have been the case two or three years ago, and I am very pleased that
here in Far Nofth Queensland notwithstanding anything that might happen outside
of the region that we have reached this state -of affairs with the Cattlemen's Union,
The Wilernes Society' and the Australian Conservation Foundation.
I think that issues in the Kinberleys in Western Australia, etsewhere in Queensland.
that we provife at an example of the way to settle these land use questkons.
Isu~ ppose the issue that I am most concerned about in terms of the implementation of
this agreem ent, relate to two questions. One is, what will happen with mining in a few
key regions in Cape York Peninsula. They are really key questionts of great concern
to the Aboriginal community.
Mining at Shellboumne Bay, in particular, is an Issue of great concern. We would be
concerned that, all politial parties commit themnselves to rullng out minoing on
Sheliboumne Bay.
Secondly, the other question we ae very concerned about 13 the arbitrary wthoWlee
extinguishment of Native Title in pastoral leases. We believe that the question of
Native Title in pastoral looses can and should be addressed as the High Court said at
could be through the apparatus of the Native Trtle Act, through mediation and
negotiation. I am extremely coincered by comments from Richard Court that there is a Coaliton
PX PRESS OFFICEa02O 
19/' 6019 0 76: 92 73 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE j2
11
concerned about Mr ichers recent statements that seem to confirm the existence
of this bidden agenda.
I can tell you that the Catflemen showed the fakh in Cape York Peninsula that we can
settle this question of Native Title through negotiation and we accepted tha good
faith. And it was an agreement that came to pas notwithstanding the legal change
and the political changes. Like one week, we had a negative decision from Juctice
Drummond this was about three Yweeks, ago. -Justice Drummond said, There is no
Native Title in pastoral leases'. And I thought, oh, shit. John Purcell is going to walk
away from this agreemnent now. He has got what he wants. he is gone. Butno, he
said, ' We are sticking by the termis of this agreement.
The next week, the High Court ruled that the whole question is still afive. The whole
question of Native Title and pastoral leases was still allve. So I immediately wrote to
John and said, listen, we are sticking to the terms of this agreement, there is no kind
of grabbing ours and running. And I have got to say thet I want to publy commit
myself to sticking by the terms of this agreement, notwithstanding the legal and
political changes that might happen. Thank you.
J lIam just wondering 9f 1culd ask you Mr Purcell hoW does tlIs oompare with the
regional proposal of the Goes Government that involved 11 properties? Is this a
wider thing now, are there more properties involved and will this make the task more
compficated, can you get their agreement? 7
JP: Yes, just to answe r your question. Obviusly, the East Coast wlderness, as proposed
by Premier Goss prior to the election on 15 July, is somnething that we couldn't come
to agreement amongst the parties, it was set " sdo-But wm have been able to
resolve to our sabtiadion the situetion as far as the people we repreit and the
Department of the Environment, Herftae, and Lands. Mu what the attitude of the
incom ing Government is on that zone I don't know.
Burt I guess in common with others, I would like to address the broader question
about this agreement. The firvt thing I would say is we~ are not about party polfdcs, we
aro-not about saying this side is better than the other side we are about an outcome
for the people within the Cape York Peninsula area.
And as Noel Pearson has said, we have achieved by the signing of this Heads of
Agreement a situation that spells out the principles of the pastoralists, of the
Aboriginal communities, and of the environmentalists, that is above poitics and is
above the decision of the High Court, the Federal Court, or any other court of appeal.
The catle industry in Cape York Peninsula is currentty in a state of declne. The
signing of this agreement, in my view. brings a much brighter fute for the cattle
industry. What we have* got to reconise in this country is that we have got to
genierate export income and we have got to pay our bill internatinally and,
therefore, vm have got to have export earning capacity.
Cape York Peninsula with its d~ ose proximity to South East Asia olfers that to the
cattle industry and if we can exercise live cattl trade through the port at Weipa. that
is crtainly one way to go, and that is supplemented by the increase in consumption
of manufactured and proesed beef out of this country.
19/ 02 ' 96 07: 59[ a 021 
19/ 0 619 6 068 : 02 73 2923 PH PRESS OFFICElih 022
12
The other thing I would rike to say. probabl the most contentious issue that we have
had to face in this whole debate, is the question of World Heritage. World Heritage, in
my view, has a place but the stments that have been made Irrespnalbty by some
peopthattewhoe ofe apewasing tobe locked upand put under Word
Heritage is just so much rot.
The process of ahieving registration of World Heritage, has to go through a torturous
program. -There are areas. of significant conservartion values In the.. Cape. we
recognise that, and they should be protected. I think you have also got to realise that
there is a very firmn commitmient in the Heads of Agrerement that outlines that World
Heritage itseff does not necessarily mean the exclusion of the livestock industry. In
our notes accmpanyig that Heeds of Agreement, multiple land use is crty speft
out. Now just in condlusion, I think, that what this has done is brought together parties with
diverging views, we have done it in a very short period of time, whereas the courts
haven't been able to decide it, whereas the pliticins :. with all due raspedt have not
also been eble to-tie ittogether, I thinkthat wat whav done is set in place a
principle that will have application in other areas: lB. A the factors in other arees are
going to be very. different than that in Cape York. u
The Heads of Agreement thst we have come to in [ Cape York Peninsula, address the
various problems and challenges that we have got tq fae in the Cape and, I think.
that all of the signatories have said here today that we are all clearly going to stick
that agreemeit and the safeguards for all of the parties are built in.
And I would just, again, like to put on recrd the fedt that all of us enitered theme
discussions in good-faith and with trust In spite of mischief from outside sources that
tried to divie tesignatodes, we are rock solid on what we have signed and there is
a lot of mrischief based on misunderstanding and I hope that we can get the message
out to people that thssnot about Wcing up the Cape, itis notabout ocking out the
beef cate industry. But, rather, it is something that we have put together for the wvelbeing
of the people in the Cape and tha is our bottom fine and we are happy to party
to the agreemient:
4: Mr Purcel, would you agree with Mr Pearson th; t this could be a model for other
areas of Australia?
JP: Yes, I do. But I would again agree vrith Noei that particular circumstances in the
Cape Wil probably differ to cirumstances that exist in the Gulf region of Queensland,
or in, the Kimberteys. There are differenit players, there are different attitudes and
there wre also differenit problems.
J: Mr Keating, can I just ask you a question on another subject? Mr Howard has today
made an enormous pith for families with a $ 1 billoi tax bonus for families. Can
Labor match this?.
PM: Well that is cynical and unacrpulous because he is happy to play a confidence trick
on Australian families with promises he knows he can't possibl fun~ d. He has no
hope of ever delivering and to be doing this at this point in his politicatl career, in
desperation to try and win an elecion, says nothing I think about the integrity of him
rnr $ ha I O) tamI Pat~ v
19/ 02 ' 96 08: 00 
'' 61 6 273 2923 PM PRESS OFFICE
13
J: So is this a lest minute ditch by him to grab the family vote?
PM: Yes, well it is a very late policy speech adkiti; eYt rh.-last minute ditch around
a cynical ploy that has no chance of, ever, woming to rcality.
J: Can I just ask Mr Purcell another question? Does the Native Title Act still need
amending then to dcear up whet have been called anomalies, difficulties, with regard
to pastoral leases?
JP: My understanding is, and I am not into the politics of course, but both the
Government and the Opposition have said that the Native Tfitle does require some
amendments.
ends
19/ 02 ' 96 08: 01U023 



We,
~. Z(~' coulc of itF
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
FOOD EXPORTS TO ASIA
I am pleased to announce thaot we wiln establish six Regional Export Freight
Councils throughout Australia to co-ordinate strategies aimed at our greatly
expanding exports of perishable goods to the rapidly growing Asian markets.
In addition, we will fund a special study to provide a commercial and
independent assessment of the potential of inland New South Wales to be a
major source of food for Asia. This study will evaluate the potential demand for
air freight and the need to improve aviation infrastructure in the region.
Background
When I visited Orange in September last year, I was pleased to be able to
discuss with industry leaders and the local community the enormous potential
the APEC markets provide for our food exports. To date our efforts have been
rather uncoordinated -for every success there has been another story of
frustration. But those successes highlight just how rich the rewards could be with a smarter
and more focussed effort. It was with this in mind that I established a Working
Group to review impediments to the export of perishable produce. The Working
Group reported to Government at the end of last year. Their advice proved to
be an important input into the food export strategy that my colleagues, Senators
Collins, Cook and McMullan, announced at the end of January.
The essence of the Workin Group's recommendations was that the overrding
need was to improve the communication and focus of all links in the export
freight chain. That is, we have to get the software of the system right and have
all players focussed on a comnmon objective.
The Report considered in detail a number of proposals that have aimed to
encourage the developmnent of air freight hubs throughout the country. There is
lWte doubt that the demand for dedicated air freight will increase considerabl
over the coming few years and that we must ensure that we have suitable
policies and infrastructure to support At.
5060 Woil prop, regic, deve beca The prop But, neec prod prac
throt. It is z
year throi.
Agri-Itis
Corp comr Sout and inve! Mudl How SPP
deve PAR 
We already have first-class aviation facilities in most of our major cities that
could support 747 freighters. Adelaide will join this list following the extension
of its runway. This is not the case, however, for much of inland Australia. The
Working Group's Report accordingly provides some preliminary assessment of
proposals for aviation infrastructure to support international freight from the
region. The Inland Marketing Corporation's proposal to have the Parkes Airport
developed into an international transport hub warranted particular attention
because it had been advanced more than any others.
The Working Group's Report concluded, however, that on present trends the
proposal may not be a commercial proposition for some time.
But, of course, we should not be relying solely on present trends. Rather we
need to take a strategic view of how to greatly expand our exports of food
products tailored to the new markets in Asia. We need to look beyond current
practice and analyse the commercial potential of focussing producers
throughout the region on these opportunities.
It is against this background that we have decided to provide $ 2.7 million over 3
years to set up six Regional Export Freight Councils that will co-ordinate action
throughout the country. These Councils will operate under the umbrella of the
Agri-Food Council which now has transport as a high priority.
It is also clear that current proposals, including the Inland Marketing
Corporation's proposal, are not sufficiently advanced for the Government to
commit infrastructure funds unconditionally. We have thus decided to provide
$ 300,000 for a special comprehensive study into the potential of inland New
South Wales as a source of food for Asia. The study will provide a commercial
and independent assessment of the opportunities as well as particular
investment and infrastructure needs.
Much of the investment can be expected to be funded by the private sector.
However, based on this study, the Government will look favourably on
supporting any strategic infrastructure funding, including the possible
development of an inland international airport.
PARKES FEBRUARY 1996 5061 



TEL
PF-1 41 ge. 05-J91P14 taHIqAJ MIHI I VLDE W MeJOJ545. L 22. Feb. 96 12: 37 No. 005 P. 02
F. 1œ
PRIME MINISTER
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THE MON P J KEATING MWP
DOORSTOP, BATHURSTr RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB, BATHURST,
FEBRUARY 1996
E&amp; OE PROOF COPY
J: Mr Keating, the Newspoll today shows that the Labor Party Is closing the
gap. Are you confident that you can pick up saeats like Calare, or hold on
to seats like Cala re?
PM; I think so, We think the feeling In Celare Is pretty good. That people,
I think, are now starting to focus on the election campaign Issues. They
have had a look at the policy speeches, they have had a look at the
leaders, they have seen the debate between John Howard and me, and
they are starting now to make their minds up. And, I think, as they make
their minds up, we are starting to see a shift of opinion.
J Mr Keating, what do you know about the privatisation of the Information
Technology Group within Teistra?
PMV: I don't know much about it at all. But I got a question earlier today about
whether some of these things amount to the de facto privatIsation of
Telstra and, of course, they don't. That Is the same proposition that has
been put to me about Foxtel. I mean Teistra is a telephone company, a
communications company. It is not a news producer, it is not a movie
producer, Atis not an entertainment business, It has to do these things
coflaboratively and this Is the way, I think, the business will grow.
It is one of the reasons why phone companies are now buying Into
entertainment companies and why, for instance, MCA has bought into
British Telecom, which has bought into News Corporation, for the same
reasons that entertnment, news and oommunications are all much part of
the one business now.
J: But is it tnue that you asked for the privatisation of that particular unit to be
put off until after the election? 
TEL
ILS1 g~ ' 9bz &amp; 1-5H1 6K4J HTHI I I'ILLIJ O % 5OzJY1 22. Feb. 96 12: 37 No. 005 P. 03
2
PM: I don't know anything about it.
J: You didn't speak to the unions about it?
PM: I have not spoken to anyone about ft.
J: You have never heard about that at all?
PM: I have never heard about it.
J: The Coalition Is accusing the Government of politicising the Finance
Department for costing their promises?
PM: Well that is just outrageous. John Howard, In fact, asked us, challenged
Ralph Willis and Kim Beaziey to actually have his policies costed in the
course of this Parliament and when we do it he then cries foul upon his
own invitatlon. And, at any rate, this ought to be a matter of factual
information. What has he got to fear about having the Departments that
he says he wants to operate having them cost his promises? When,
In fact, all Governments have done this right through the period, including
his own back in the 0980s.
J: Can you give the Australian people a guarantee, when the election Is
finished and the books are opened, that the Budget will be in surplus?
PM: Well I have answered that question 20 times.
J: But can you give them a pledge?
PM: I have answered it 20 times. I mean we have put more data out there than
anyone In Australian Federal history. But the key point is that either party
will have to face the starting point. It is a matter of whether we are adding
to the Budget task or subtracting from it.
Labor Is subtracting from the Budget task because we have introduced
measures which have, of course, already been costed by our
Departments, which show that there will be a very big net contribution to
the Budget.
John Howard will have a very big net deficiency and yesterday, when
Ralph Willis and I articulated some commentary on Mr Howard's promises,
what they showed Is that there was a $ 5.8 billion deficiency so far, without
at this point dealing with some of their other things such as Incentives for
savings which we have not yet seen. 
TEL:
ILYW I ' 2 Ild!! dWU LNR4U HYWI I ML WJ Y1i4&gt;, Y1 22. Feu. 9 12: C' No. 005 P. 04
P. 2
J: Mr Keating, Mr Howard says he will only have a deficiency if your Budget
surplus doesn't emerge?
PM: Well he knows he is facing like, for Instance, he never even costed his
commitment to give the States a fixed share of income tax, which will cost
about $ 3 billion over three years. That was not even in his coatings.
I mean the Liberals have learned nothing and they have forgotten nothing.
This is just Box Hill 1987 all over again. They think to win an election they
have to win it on the basis of some sort of bribe, rather than on their own
Intrinsic merits or their philosophy and these sorts of bribes are expensive.
And what they would do is derail a Budget process, they would derail a
Budget's figuring.
J: But the Opposition says that they are not going to give the States any
more money, that that is not going to cost anything.
PM: Well why make the promise? What does the promise mean? What does
It mean? If it is not going to cost anything, what does it mean? Of course
It Is going to cost something.
J: Does New South Wales need a third international airport at Parkes?
UPM: We are not talking about a third international airport. I think what is being
viewed here is whether, in time sensitive cargoes, perishable goods, there
Is the capacity to have some substantial, you know using the standard
vehicles for freight, which are basically 747 freighters. An international
airport is a horse of another colour that Is all of the facilities that go with
It. But we are prepared here to look and see whether there is a viable
option of essentially covering the cost of the extension of a strip and some
of the ancillary support facilities you would need for freight and whether
that can be paid for by the generation of the business.
J: coatings [ inaudible]?
PM: There are airports built, I think, In this region. Some of the extensions
have been put down to around $ 20 million In some of the preliminary work
that has been done.
J: Have you broached this with the airlines as to whether they are happy to
move their freight operations to areas like Parkes?
PM: They wouldn't necessarily be airlines either, I mean, I think, you see quite
a lot of charter operations as well as airlines. But if they could get some
business, obviously, they would come here, getting caught in the
congestion In Sydney Is not really, I think, in their best interests. 
I LU L I -JJ VL IJU III W^ IRI~ I I. L. Ii V4~ jUA) Z4.1 P. 4
4
J, On Sunday, will there be a debate?
PM: Of course there will.
J: Where?
PM: I As we agreed last Sunday week. That was Channel Nine In Sydney next
Sunday night.
J: The same fiormat?
PMV: The same format.
J: Mr Keating, Mr Button said today that whoever wins Government on
March 2nd, is going to have to dishonour some of their election promises
that they can't afford,
PM. No, that is not true of our case. We have got, as I said our spending
commitments are hall the Coslition's and they are funded tWice over and it
is not our claims. 1 mean all of our funding, of course, all of those figures
that we have produced, are produced with Departments they are
Departmental figures. So our commitments are modest compared to the
Opposition's and they are funded twice over. But it Is a very real problemn
for John Howard. I mean the Liberals have made their classic mistake
they think they have got to buy peoples' votes, they have picked the mood
wrong, they now have a set of grab beg promises they can't fund.
J: So why would Mr Button be making that sort of comment?
PMV; John has always been noted for his philosophical approach to public life.
J* On super what is wrong with older workers taking monley [ inaudible)
PM: Lower income workers? I think there is a lot wrong with it. It is,
essentially, playing themn off a break. It Is saying that they can choose to
lose their retirement benefit some choice taking them out of a scheme
that has universality, it busts the principle of universality, it busts the
principle of compulsion and, of course, At removes the obligation of a
Howard Government to pay the tax cuts to match their contributions. All in
all it is a very miserable view and one that, I think, In the senior echelons
of Australian business, would be a very worrying one. And. I think, In the
financial institutions and for anyone who is Interested in seeing a pool of
savings In this country and a set of retirement savings8, to watch the
Coalition willfully dismembering and dismantling a universal
superannuation systemn is, I think, a very silly thing to be doing, 
TEL
M~ IDe M, W11I'l LUR49J RIHI I I'LLB 18.5Y-b5VkJJ1 22. Feb. 96 12: 3? No. 005 P. 06
6
J: Mr Howard appears to have backed away from' his promise of an
underlying surplus in 1996/ 97. Do you still think you can get an underlying
surplus In 1998/ 971
PMV: Well I got asked that question earlier. Mr Howard Is backing away
because he has made oommitments he can't keep. So he " et given a
choice, doesn't he either keep the commitments or back away from the
underlying surplus. So ho has backed away from the underlying surplue
and, I think, economic journalists and those who write about these things
should take note this is the choice he has made.
JSo, yes, you can get an underlyng surplus in 1996/ 97?
PM: I have made It clear before. We have published three years forward
estimates of outlays and receipts, and three years forward estimates of the
Budget balance In surplus.
J: Mr Howard has released his youth policy today and he has taken a
substantial amount of money out of traineeships and put it towardis
apprenticeships saying that that is the only way to create real jobs.
PM: Oh, what would he know. Really, what would he know. I mean when he
left office only three young people In ton completed secondary school
three In ten. Seven In ten were not even there left to complete years I11
and 12. That is John Howard's regard for our young Australians,
We have now got nearly eight in ten, we have just about doubled tertiary
places, and we have already put, now since One Nation S1t6 billion Into
ANTA, Into TAFE, for vocational education. And we have developed a
system of tralneeships for people and you can see those traineeships
today with Mc~ onald,% in Orange, and with Email in Orange. That is the
sort of support. We regard 15 to 19 years of age Is a period of vocational
preparatin and we don't want young people dropping out of school.
If we do, we try and get them back Into school or back into structured
training and a subsidised job place.
So, you know, we have got that comprehension and we have got that very
large commitment. And I might remind people, again, that when we
introduced Working Nation a $ 1.5 blillion program Mr Howard's
predecessor In office, the man who would be his Foreign Minister,
Mr Downer, said it was a waste of money.
J: But that is not real jobs, that is training, that Is not employing people? 
ILIU L 4 iU ñ I 9VII I I Ul'II l TI IEJHL : I I IIL. L. 1 1U. J JUAJJL4 JIF. b22. Feb. 96 12: 37 No. 005 P. 07
a
PRM: No, they are real jobs. Those jobs are one year jobs. it is one year
tratneeship for people...
J: But an apprenticeship Is a real job too, Isn't it?,
PM: Oh, there are apprenticeshipo too. But we have apprenticeships and we
have traineeships.
J: He has offered $ 18 million for youth suicide. What are you offering except
more of the same,
PM: What, more of the same of what?
J: In that area, you haven't exactly been a success.
PM. Well you are a gloomy person, you are. I mean, what, did you take a
gloom tablet this morning?
J: Well Australia does have one of the highest rates of youth sulcide In the
world.
PM: Look, what we are offering Is young Australians a place In the scheme of
arrangements of this country a full place In education, a big Investment
by the nation, a big investment in their secondary education, a big
investment in tertiary education, a big Investment in vocational education,
and support for them In such areas as traineeships, apprenticeship's and
structured training, where they actually walk away with an accreditation.
In other words, we are trying to give young people not just hope, but
prospects and also for those who, for some reason, drop right out of the
system In terms of homelessness, we have got a large package of
funding to support them; and in terms of counselling, we have with the
States a program to deal with some of these problems of moral@ which do
lead to these environments.
J: Are you doing anything specifically to address though the teenage suicide
rate?
PM: Well, I mean, we have..
J: $ 18 million Is quite a lot of money to address to a specific issue?
PM: But this is notsa static picture. We have got programs already out there
and we are already doing those things. The truth is the Liberal Party has
never Invested in our young people never. T Ihey didn't invest In them
when they were in office and what was their attitude at the last eleiOn 
TEL -ei.' it: 1. z 1,40 U u
EA21i'~ l: 2PH ORN HYATT mELA M Y. 503491 P. 7
7
put them on $ 3 an hour wages $ 3 an hour, Now, In Western Australia, It
Is $ 3.77. They have taken the laat three years inflation and topped it up to
$ 3.77, 1 mean that Is where they stand.
J: You said in your campaign launch that there would be an unprecedented
effort on Aboriginal health were you to be re-elected. What would that
involve?
PM: Well we have already made very large commitments, we are transferring
funds from ATSIC to the Commonwealth Department of Health and the
Commonwealth Department of Health wil be settig up and managing
direct health programs In Aboriginal communities across the country. We
will be winding that program up over the course of the next three years.
But we will also be looking to tialking with the States about environmental
health In such things as water, sewerage, housing, etc, because this Is not
just a problem of the Incidence of disease. But, rather, as well, is that the
environment in which all of this Is created with over-crowding in housing,
poor sanitation, and that requires a commitment with the States.
This cannot be dome without the States being Involved and that is why
I said the other day at the regional agreement signed in Cape, York in
respect of land that has the prospect of going to a full regional agreement
under ATSIC, which would then have commitments by the State of
Queensland In that case for say roads, housing, sewerage, etc.
ends 



1996 the
eral ) hfl
the
irer
. ary ing
ven te's veilia Om
igh ' act PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON P J KEATING MP
MEMORIES MEMORIES: JOHN HOWARD AND THE COSTING OF
OPPOSITION PROMISES
In expressing synthetic outrage at the Government's decision to have the
Opposition's program costed by the Department of Finance, Mr Howard said
to John Laws on Monday:
" I did hear him say, incidentally, that in 1983 1 used the Treasury and
the Department of Finance to cost the Labor Party's promises. That is
not correct. I remember 1983 very clearly. I used staff in my office to
cost that document."
By Tuesday he was saying to Pru Goward:
' Well Pru, my recollection is that the castings of the Opposition's
promises in 1983 was in fact done in my office, I'm having that matter
checked...
I have had the matter checked. The attached excerpts from Mr Howard's
press conference transcript of 21 February 1983 make it quite clear that the
Public Ser-vice was extensively used by Mr Howard to cost the then
Opposition's election program. They also make it clear that he publicly
advocated that using the Public Service in this way was perfectly appropriate.
SYDNEY 22 February 1996 5141 



1
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE MRME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
HOWARD'S CONFIDENCE TRICK ONl SAVINGS
John Howard's mail out of hNs plan to tinker with fte tax rate on savings Is more
t~ i'n Just a serious campaign blunder. It Is also seriously dishonest
Wr Hoard's letter apparently sent to mrilions of voters trumpets the
aJncouragemrent of savings ' by cutting the tax on savir43s interest bry up to 2-5 per
cant*" WhAen asked today to detail this hitheio secret policy. Mr Howard refused, saying
the detail would be relesed asoon". Mir Howard may havw got away with this
tactic eight monits trom the electon but eight days from t election it is a
national disgraice, and an insult to the voters of Austalia.
In his fumbling ellouls, to cover his error today, Mr Howard revealed the planned
tax break on savings will be means-tee Yet his Wete to hundreds of
thousands at voters made no mnention of this. Indeed, to compound the
confidece trick. the letter described the pokiy as being part of a " plan for all of
us. Moct of the people who received Mr Howard's shifty letter would reme" v no tax
break whatever on their savings. Mr Howard has tried to play than off, and he
has bean cauight out.
Television news reports tonight have suggested the tax break will be a ftve per
cent reduction In the tax rate on interest income for those on incomes below
about $ 35,000. Why were these details omitted frn, Ilk Hmwdrs letter?
At his amgingly em'banrassing media conference today, the following uncmplete
question Was put lo AN Howard by a journalist " If you're telling voters you're
going to give them savings up to 25 per cent but yours not tWing them ifs meanis
tad isnm that..? r
Let me complae the sentence: Isn't that dishonest?
% Wa maks all of this worse is tOa Mr Howard knows he canrnot pay for such a
Schieme at any price.
MELBOURNE 23 FEBRUARY 1996
23 FEB * 96 18: 52 The Coalitior.
discuss educa
Vocational EL
" The Coalitiot
that Simon Cr
" Then, the Lit
" I am reliably
around the iflC
" None of the c
" As a result,
Commonweal " Senator Hfill
delivered. Ac
PAGE . eei
5202Media contact:
TOTAL PAGE. 001 N E 



port ustnies long-STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING MP
VICTORIAN INDIVIDUAL CONTRACT STUDY
116 Victorian contracts have been analysed in a thesis in the Law Faculty at
the ANU by Jocelyn Bell.
She found strong evidence that workers on these contracts have experienced
lost conditions and/ or lower pay. She found:
0 only 1/ 5 stated that there was a wage increase
the majority had penalty rates/ shift loadings reduced or removed
0 1/ 3 had abolished overtime rates, and the majority reduced them
0 half omitted reference to an employee representative in negotiations.
She said Victorian workers on contracts gave more concessions and
appeared to make fewer gains than those protected by the industrial umpire.
She estimated that a retail sales worker who worked Thursday night and
Saturday mornings would have lost around $ 50 a week or 15 per cent of pay
from being on a contract. New entrants were particularly vulnerable.
CAIRNS 28 February 1996 6329
Ijr S LI( A 



U
PRIME MINISTER N
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON P J KEATING, MP G
HOWARD FAILS THE TULLY-MILLSTREAM TEST P1
Earlier today I issued a challenge to Mr Howard to unequivocally rule out the A
Tully-Millstream hydro-electric project which will flood significant areas of WorldA
Heritage listed rainforest in the Wet Tropics World Heritage area. T
Mr Howard has now failed this most fundamental test of his born-again green N
credentials. When asked by a journalist to respond to my challenge, Mr S
Howard refused to rule out the dam, saying: p1
" As far as the Tully-Millstream is concerned, I give you an undertaking, H,
that we will ensure, in considering that proposal, all of the environmental
concernis that ought to be taken into account will be taken into account
and that it will not go ahead if it is going to do significant damage to the SU
environment". eq
Mr Howard knows that this project cannot be built without significant damage to -7
the environment, including to World Heritage values.
And yet he has refused to rule it out. 11
re
His response reveals the John Howard of old. The same John Howard who
was implacably opposed to the use of Commonwealth powers to protect the M
Franklin River. V
The only thing that has changed is John Howard's willingness to say what he1
really believes.
He has now proven conclusively that if elected, he will allow the fabric of e
environmental protection that Labor has put in place, in the national interest, ha
over the past 13 years, to be torn apart. 1
John Howard will sit on his hands while the National Party and conservativein
State governments unravel years of work by Federal Labor and communitiesIc
across Australia to protect our rich environmental heritage for the future.
Environmentally concerned voters should take the Tully-Millstream as a
warning. Don't trust John Howard on the environment.
CAIRNS ( 3330
28 February 1996 


The global AIDS epidemic recognizes neither borders nor political ideologies; it respects no nationality, race or creed yet It has the potential to touch the lives of every person in the world. 
The size of the HIV pandemic is already staggering with global predictions indicating that as many as 30 to 40 million men, women, and children will be infected by the year 2000 with 12 to 18 million living with AIDS. 
In the face of this alarming prospect, events such as this, the lXth International Conference on AIDS, are crucial to the continuation and efficacy of the worldwide effort to minimise the impact of HIV and AIDS. Through the exchange of our experience and wisdom we are better equipped to meet the challenges posed by this disease. 
In Australia a decade has passed since the first case of AIDS was diagnosed. Those ten years have been a time of challenge and commitment as Australian governments, community based organisations, scientists, health professionals and Individuals have developed a strong partnership responding to the HIV pandemic. Australia was one of the first countries in the world to develop a nationally coordinated response to HIV and to embody this in an agreed National HIV/ AIDS Strategy. 
This national strategy embraces the range of medical, scientific, social, legal, education, political and most importantly human responses that are inextricably linked with HIV and AIDS. 
We are confident that Australia's approach is one of which we can be justly proud. Our presence here is evidence of our firm commitment to support and co-operate with other countries so that together we can continue to strengthen our efforts to combat this pandemic. 
My thoughts and best wishes are with you during this conference. 
CANBERRA,
9 JUNE 1993 


